<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B.
P A B
The ſecond letter of the Engliſh alphabet, is pro-
nounced as in moſt other European languages, by
preſſing the whole length of the lips together, and
forcing them open with a ſtrong breath. It has a
near affinity with the other labial letters, and is con-
founded by the Germans with P, and by the Gaſcons with /;
from which an epigrammatiſt remarks, that libere and vivºre
are in Gaſcony the ſame. The Spaniards, in moſt words, uſe
B or Windifferently.
BAA. m. ſ. [See the verb.] The cry of a ſheep.
To BAA. v. n. [bal, Lat..] To cry like a ſheep.
Or like a lamb, whoſe dam away is ſet,
He treble baas for help, but none can get. Sidney.
To BA/BBLE. v. n. [Fabiºlen, Germ. babiller, Fr.]
1. To pratle like a child; to prate imperfectly.
My labbling praiſes I repeat no more,
But hear, rejoice, ſtand ſilent, and adore. Prior.
2. To talk idly, or irrationally.
John had conned over a catalogue of hard words; theſe he
uſed to battle indifferently in all companies. Arbuthn. j. Bull.
- Let the filent ſančtuary ſhow,
What from the babbling ſchools we may not know. Prior.
3. To talk thoughtleſsly; to tell ſecrets.
There is more danger in a reſerved and ſilent friend, than in
a noiſy babbling enemy. L’E/ºrange.
4. To talk much.
The hallling echo mocks the hounds,
Replying ſhrilly to the well tun'd horns,
As if a double hunt were heard at once. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
And had I pow'r to give that knowledge birth,
In all the ſpeeches of the babbling carth. Prior.
The babbling echo had deſcry’d his face;
She, who in others words her filence breaks. Addison's Ovid.'
BA'BBLE. n.ſ.. [balil, Fr.] Idle talk; ſenſeleſs prattle.
This babble ſhall not henceforth trouble me;
Here is a coil with proteſtation Shakespeare Two G. ºf Verona.
Come, no more,
This is mere moral babble. Milton.
With volleys of eternal ball',
And clamour more unanſwerable. Hudibras.
The babble, impertinence, and folly, I have taken notice of in
diſputes. Glanville's Scepſis Scientifica.
BABBLEMENT. m. ſ. [from ball/..] Senſeleſs prate.
Deluded all this while with ragged notions and babblements,
while they expected worthy and delightful knowledge. Milton.
BA'BBLER. m. ſ. [from babble.]
I. An idle talker; an irrational prattler.
We hold our time too precious to be ſpent
With ſuch a babbler. Shakespeare. King john.
Great babblers, or talkers, are not fit for truſt. L’Eſtrange.
The apoſtle of my text had no ſooner propoſed it to the
greater maſters at Athens, but he himſelf was ridiculed as a
babbler. Rogers.
2. A teller of ſecrets.
Utterers of ſecrets he from thence debarr'd;
Babblers of folly, and blazers of crime. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
BABE. m. ſ. [/aban, Welch; ballaerd, Dutch..] An infant; a
child of either ſex.
Thoſe that do teach your babes,
Do it with gentle means, and eaſy tasks;
He might have chid me ſo: for, in good faith,
I am a child to chiding. Shakespeare Othello.
Nor ſhall Schaftian's formidable name -
Belonger us'd, to lull the crying labe. Dryden's Don Seb.
The bale had all that infant care beguiles,
And early knew his mother in her ſmiles. Dryden.
BAEERY. m.ſ.. [from late.] Finery to pleaſe a babe or child.
So have I ſeen trim books in velvet dight,
With golden leaves and painted ballery
Of ſcely boys, pleaſe unacquainted fight. Sidney.
BA's Is H. adj. [from labc..] Childiſh.
If he be baſhful, and will ſoon bluſh, they call him a baliſh
and ill brought up thing. Aſcham's Schoolmaſier.
BA goos. m. ſ. ['aiguin, Fr. It is ſuppoſed by Skinner to be the
augmentation of babe, and to import a great bale..] A monkey
of the largeſt kind. -
You had locked through the grate like a geminy of balooms.
Shaºff. Merry Jºves of Jºindſor.
He caſt every human feature out of his countenance, and
became d buſ.com. 4&amp;ſºn. Spec. N- I 4.
BABY. m. ſ. [See BAEE.]
1. A child ; an infant.
The lay beats the nurſe, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum. Sºft. A ſeaſure fºr Meaſure.
The child muſt have ſºgar pluſhº, ather than make the
poor lay cry. Lºc.
B A C
He muſt marry, and propagate: the father cannot ſtay for
the portion, nor the mother for babies to play with. Locke.
2. A ſmall image in imitation of a child, which girls play with.
The archduke ſaw that Perkin would prove a runnagate;
and that it was the part of children to fall out about babies.
- Bacon's Henry VII.
Since no image can repreſent the great Creator, never think
to honour him by your fooliſh puppets, and babies of dirt and
clay. Stillingfleet's Def. { Diſc. on Rom. Idolatry.
BA'ccATED. adj. [baccatus, Lat.] Beſet with pears; having
many berries. Dići.
BAccHANA'LIAN. n.ſ.. [from lacchanaſia, Lat..] A riotous per-
ſon; a drunkard.
BA'ccHANALs. m. ſ. ſtacchanaſia, Lat.] The drunken feaſts and
revels of Bacchus, the god of wine.
Ha, my brave emperor, ſhall we dance now the Egyptian
bacchanals, and celebrate our drink Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
What wild fury was there in the heathen bacchanals, which
we have not ſeen equalled. Decay of Piety.
Both extremes were baniſhed from their walls,
Carthuſian faſts, and fulſome tacchanals. Pºpe.
BAccHus Bol. E. m. ſ. A flower not tall, but very full and
broad-leaved; of a ſad light purple, and a proper white; hav-
ing the three outmoſt leaves edged with a crimſon colour,
bluiſh bottom, and dark purple. AMortimer.
BAccI'FERous. adj. [from bacca, a berry, and fero, to bear, Lat.]
Berry-bearing.
Bacciferous trees are of four kinds.
1. Such as bear a caliculate or naked berry; the flower and ca-
lix both falling off together, and leaving the berry bare; as the
faſſafras trees.
2. Such as have a naked monoſpermous fruit, that is, contain-
ing in it only one ſeed; as the arbutes.
3. Such as have but polyſpermous fruit, that is, containing two or
more kernels or ſeeds within it; as the jaſminum, liguſtrum.
. Such as have their fruit compoſed of many acini, or round ſoft
balls ſet cloſe together like a bunch of grapes; as the uva ma-
rina. Ray.
BAcci'yoRous. adj. [from bacca, a berry, and voro, to devour,
Lat.] A devourer of berries. Dić.
BA'chelor. m. ſ. [This is a word of very uncertain etymology,
it not being well known what was its original ſenſe. junius
derives it from £32.2°, fooliſh; Menage, from las chevalier, a
knight of the loweſt rank; Spelman, from baculus, a ſtaff; Cu-
jas, from buccella, an allowance of proviſion. The moſt pro-
bable derivation ſeems to be from bacca laurus, the berry of a
laurel or bay; bachelors being young, are of good hopes, like
laurels in the berry. In Latin, baccalaureus.]
1. A man unmarried.
Such ſeparation
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid.
Shakespeare. Midſummer Night's Dream.
The haunting of thoſe diſſolute places, or reſort to courte-
fans, are no more puniſhed in married men than in bachelors.
Bacon's New Atlantis.
A true painter naturally delights in the liberty which be-
longs to the bachelor’s eſtate. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Let finful bachelors their woes deplore, -
Full well they merit all they feel, and more. Pope.
2. A man who takes his firſt degrees at the univerſity in any pro-
feſſion.
Being a boy, new lackelor of arts, I chanced to ſpeak againſt
the pope. Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
I appear before your honour, in behalf of Martinus Scrible-
rus, bachelor of phyſick. Arbuthn. and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
2. A knight of the loweſt order. This is a ſenſe now little uſed.
BA'ch ELoRs Button. [See CAMPION, of which it is a ſpecies.]
All the ſorts of this plant are hardy; they grow above two foot,
and produce their flower in June and July. Millar.
BA'ch ELoRSHIP. n.ſ.. [from bachelor.] The condition of a
bachelor.
Her mother, living yet, can teſtify,
She was the firſt fruit of my bachelorſhip. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
BACK. m. ſ. [bac, bac, Sax. bach, Germ.]
1. The hinder part of the body, from the neck to the thighs.
As the voice goeth round, as well towards the back as to-
wards the front of him that ſpeaketh, ſo likewiſe doth the echo:
for you have many back echoes to the place where you ſtand.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 247.
Part following enter, pºrt remain without,
With envy hear their fellow's conqu'ring ſhout;
And mount on others backs, in hope to ſhare. Dryden.
2. The outer part of the hand when it is ſhut; oppoſed to the
Salin.
f Methought love pitying me, when he ſaw this,
Gave me your hands, the lacks and palms to kiſs. Donne.
3 - - 3. i He
:
&gt;.
–
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A C
B A C
l
3. The outward part of the body; that which requires cloaths;
oppoſed to the belly.
Thoſe who, by their anceſtors, have been ſet free from a
conſtant drudgery to their backs and their bellies, ſhould beſtow
ſome time on their heads. Locke.
4. The rear; oppoſed to the van.
He might conclude, that Walter would be upon the king's
lack, as his majeſty was upon his. Clarendon, b. viii.
5. The place behind.
Antheus, Sergeſtus grave, Cleanthus ſtrong,
And at their backs a mighty Trojan throng. Dryden.
6. The part of any thing out of ſight.
Trees ſet upon the backs of chimneys do ripen fruit ſooner.
Bacon’s Nat. Hiſł. N° 856.
7. The thick part of any tool, oppoſed to the edge; as the back
of a knife or ſword; whence backſword, or ſword with a
back; aS3
Bull dreaded not old Lewis either at backſword, ſingle faul-
chion, or cudgel-play. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of j. Bull.
8. To turn the back on one, is to forſake him, or neglect him.
At the hour of death, all the friendſhips of the world ſhall
bid him adieu, and the whole creation turn its back upon him.
South.
9. To turn the back, is to go away; to be not within the reach of
taking cognizance. -
His back was no ſooner turned, but they returned to their
former rebellion. Sir j. Davies on Ireland.
BAck. adv. [from the noun.]
1. To the place from which one came.
Back you ſhall not to the houſe, unleſs
You undertake that with me. Shakeſp. ºft Night.
He ſent many to ſeek the ſhip Argo, threatening that if they
brought not back Medea, they ſhould ſuffer in her ſtead.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
But where they are, and why they came not back,
Is now the labour of my thoughts. Milton.
Back to thy native iſland might'ſt thou ſail,
And leave half-heard the melancholy tale. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. Backward; from the preſent ſtation.
I’ve been ſurpriſed in an unguarded hour,
But muſt not now go back; the love that lay
Half ſmother'd in my breaſt, has broke through all
Its weak reſtraints. Addiſon's Cato.
3. Behind; not coming forward.
I thought to promote thee unto great honour; but lo the
Lord hath kept thee back from honour. Numb. xxiv. I 1.
Conſtrains the glebe, keeps back the hurtful weed.
Blackmore's Creation, b. ii.
4. Toward things paſt.
I had always a curioſity to look back unto the ſorrows of
things, and to view in my mind the beginning and progreſs of
a riſing world. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
5. Again ; in return.
The lady's mad; yet if 'twere ſo,
She could not ſway her houſe, command her followers,
Take and give back affairs, and their deſpatch,
With ſuch a ſmooth, diſcreet, and ſtable bearing.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night,
6. Again; a ſecond time.
This Caeſar found, and that ungrateful age,
With loſing him, went back to blood and rage. Waller.
The epiſtles being written from ladies forſaken by their lov-
ers, many thoughts came back upon us in divers letters. Dryd.
To BAck. v. a. Aft the noun back.]
1. To mount on the back of a horſe.
That roan ſhall be my throne.
Well I will back him ſtrait. O Eſperance 1
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park. Shakespeare Henry IV,
2. To break a horſe; to train him to bear upon his back.
Direct us how to back the winged horſe;
Favour his flight, and moderate his courſe. Roſcommon.
3. To place upon the back.
As I ſlept, methought
Great Jupiter, upon his eagle back'd,
Appear'd to me. -
4. To maintain; to ſtrengthen.
Belike, he means,
Back'd by the pow'r of Warwick, that falſe peer,
T'aſpire unto the crown. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
You are ſtrait enough in the ſhoulders, you care not who
ſees your back: call you that backing of your friends? a plague
upon ſuch backing 1 give me them that will face me. Shakespeare H. VI.
Theſe were ſeconded by certain denilaunces, and both
backed with men at arms. Sir j. Hayward.
Did they not ſwear, in expreſs words,
To prop and lack the houſe of lords :
And after turn'd out the whole houſeful. Hudibras.
A great malice, backed with a great intereſt, can have no ad-
vantage of a man, but from his expectations of ſomething with-
out himſelf. South.
How ſhall we treat this bold aſpiring man 2
Succeſs ſtill follows him, and backs his crimes. Addſ Cato.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
5. To juſtify; to ſupport.
The patrons of the ternary number of principles, and thoſe
that would have five elements, endeavour to talk their experi-
ments with a ſpecious reaſon. Boyle.
We have I know not how many adages to lack the reaſon of
this moral. L'//irange.
6. To ſecond.
Fačtious, and fav'ring this or t'other ſide,
Their wagers back their wiſhes. Dryden's Fables.
To BA'cKBITE. v. a. [from back and bite.] To cenſure or re-
proach the abſent.
Moſt untruly and maliciouſly do theſe evil tongues backbite
and ſlander the ſacred aſhes of that moſt juſt and honourable
perſonage. Spenser's Ireland.
I will uſe him well; a friend i' th' court is better than a
penny in purſe. Uſe his men well, Davy, for they are arrant
knaves, and will backbite. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
BA'cKBITER, n.ſ.. [from backbite.] A privy calumniator; a
cenſurer of the abſent.
No body is bound to look upon his lackbiter, or his under-
miner, his betrayer, or his oppreſſor, as his friend. South.
BA'cKBONE. m. ſ. [from back and bone.] The bone of the back.
The backbone ſhould be divided into many vertebres for com-
modious bending, and not be one entire rigid bone. Ray.
BA'ckcARRY. Having on the back.
Manwood, in his foreſt laws, noteth it for one of the four
circumſtances, or caſes, wherein a foreſter may arreſt an offen-
der againſt vert or veniſon in the foreſt, viz. ſtable-ſtand, dog-
draw, backcarry, and bloody hand. • Cowel.
BA'ckDoor. m. ſ. [from back and door.] The door behind the
houſe; privy paſlage.
The proceſſion durſt not return by the way it came ; but,
after the devotion of the monks, paſſed out at a backdoor of the
ConVent. -
Popery, which is ſo far ſhut out as not to re-enter openly, is
ſtealing in by the backdoor of atheiſm. Atterbury.
BA'cKED. adj. [from back.] Having a back.
Lofty-neck'd,
Sharp headed, barrel-belly'd, broadly back'd. Dryd. Virgil.
BA'cKFRIEND... n.ſ.. [from back and friend..] A friend back-
wards; that is, an enemy in ſecret.
Set the reſtleſs importunities of talebearers and backfriends
againſt fair words and profeſſions. L’Eſtrange.
Far is our church from encroaching upon the civil power;
as ſome who are backfriends to both, would maliciouſly inſinu-
atc. South.
BAcKGA'MMON. n.ſ.. [from bach gammon, Welch, a little battle.]
A play or game at tables, with box and dice.
In what eſteem are you with the vicar of the pariſh can
you play with him at backgammon P Swift.
BA'ck House. n.ſ.. [from back and houſe.] The buildings be-
hind the chief part of the houſe.
Their backhouſes, of more neceſſary than cleanly ſervice, as
kitchens, ſtables, are climbed up unto by ſteps.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
BA'ckpiece. n.ſ.. [from back and piece.] The piece of armour
which covers the back.
The morning that he was to join battle, his armourer put on
his backpiece before, and his breaſtplate behind. . Camden.
BA'cKRoom. n.ſ.. [from back and room.] A room behind; not
in the front.
If you have a fair proſpect backwards of gardens, it may be
convenient to make backrooms the larger. AMox. Mech. Exerc.
BA'cks IDE. n.ſ.. [from back and ſide.]
1. The hinder part of any thing.
If the quickſilver were rubbed from the backſide of the ſpe-
culum, the glaſs would cauſe the ſame rings of colours, but
more faint; the phaenomena depends not upon the quickſilver,
unleſs ſo far as it encreaſes the refle&amp;ion of the backſide of the
glaſs. Newton's Opticks.
2. The hind part of an animal.
A poor ant carries a grain of corn, climbing up a wall with
her head downwards and her bacºſide upwards. Addison.
3. The yard or ground behind a houſe.
The waſh of paſtures, fields, commons, roads, ſtreets, or
backſides, are of great advantage to all ſorts of land. Mortimer.
To BAcksl1/DE. v. n. [from back and ſlide.] To fall off; to
apoſtatize: a word only uſed by divines.
Haſt thou ſeen that which bácſiding Iſrael hath done? She
is gone up upon every high mountain, and under every green
tree. jeremiah, iii. 6.
BAcksl1'DER. m. ſ. [from backſlide.]. An apoſtate;
The backſlider in heart ſhall be filled. Prov. xiv. I 4:
BA'ckst AFF. n.ſ.. [from back and ſióſ : becauſe, in taking an
obſervation, the obſerver's back is turned towards the ſun.]
An inſtrument uſeful in taking the ſun's altitude at ſea; in-
vented by Captain Davies. - -
BA'ckstairs. n.ſ.. [from back and ſtairs..] The private ſtairs
in the houſe.
I condemn the pračice which hath lately crept into the court
at the la jairs, that ſome pricked for ſheriffs get out of the
bill. Bacon’s Advice to Sir George Killieri.
b Ack-
Addiſon on Italy.
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A C
B A F
Backstays. n.ſ.. [from lack and ſtay.] Ropes or ſays which
keep the maſts of a ſhip from pitching forward or overboard.
BA'cksworD. m. ſ. [from *a*4 and ſword..] A ſword with one
ſharp edge.
Bull dreaded not old Lewis at lackſword. Arbuth. j. Bull.
RA'ckw ARD. łº [from back and Pea, b, Sax. that is, to-
BA'ckw ARDs. wards the back.]
1. With the back forwards.
They went lackward, and thcir faces were lackward. Gen.ix.
2. Towards the back.
In leaping with weights, the arms are firſt caſt backwards,
and then forwards, with ſo much the greater force ; for the
hands go backward before they take their riſe. Bacon's Nat. H.
3. On the back.
Then darting from her malignant eyes,
She caſt him backward as he ſtrove to riſe. Dryden's ABheid.
4. From the preſent ſtation to the place behind the back.
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them bac'ward home. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The monſtrous ſight
Struck them with horrour backward; but far worſe
Urg'd them behind. A.iiton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi.
5. Regreſſively.
Are not the rays of light, in paſſing by the edges and fides of
bodies, bent ſeveral times lackward, and forwards with a mo-
tion like that of an eel Newton's Opticks.
6. Towards ſomething pºſt.
To prove the poſſibility of a thing, there is no argument to
that which looks backwards; for what has been done or ſuffer-
ed, may certainly be done or ſuffered again. South.
7. Out of the progreſſive ſtate; reflex.
No, doubtleſs; for the mind can backward caſt
Upon herſelf, her underſtanding light. Sir j. Davies.
8. From a better to a worſe ſtate.
The work went backward; and the more he ſtrove
Tº advance the ſuit, the farther from her love.
9. Paſt; in time paſt.
They have ſpread one of the worſt languages in the world,
if we look upon it ſome reigns backwards. Locke.
+ o. Perverſely ; from the wrong end.
I never yet ſaw man,
But ſhe would ſpell him backward; if fair-fac'd,
She'd ſwear the gentleman ſhould be her ſiſter;
If black, why, nature, drawing of an antick,
Made a foul blot; if tall, a launce ill-headed. -
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
D ryden-
BA'ckw ARD. ad).
1. Unwilling; averſe.
Cities laid waſte, they ſtorm'd the dens and caves;
For wiſer brutes are backward to be ſlaves. Pope.
We are ſtrangely backward to lay hold of this ſafe, this only
method of cure. Atterbury.
Our mutability makes the friends of our nation backward to
engage with us in alliances. Addison. Freeholder.
2. Heſitating. -
All things are ready, if our minds be ſo;
Periſh the man, whoſe mind is backward now. Shakespeare H. V.
3. Sluggiſh; dilatory.
The mind is backward to undergo the fatigue of weighing
every argument. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
4. Dull; not quick or apprehenſive.
It often falls out, that the lackward learner makes amends
another way. South.
BAckward. n.ſ. The things or ſtate behind or paſt.
What ſect thou elſe
In the dark backward or abyſm of time *
BA'ckw ARDLY. adv. [from lackward.]
1. Unwillingly ; averſely; with the back forward.
Like Numid lions by the hunters chas'd,
Though they do fly, yet backwardly do go
Shakeſp. Tempg/?.
With proud aſpect, diſdaining greater haſte. Sidney.
2. Perverſely.
I was the firſt man
That cer receiv'd gift from him;
And does he think ſo lackwardly of me,
That I’ll requite it laſt Shakespeare Tºmon.
BA'ckwa RDN Ess. n.ſ. [from lackward.] Dulneſs; unwilling-
neſs; ſluggiſhneſs.
The thing by which we are apt to excuſe our backwardieſ;
to good works, is the ill ſucceſs that hath been obſerved to at-
tend well deſigned charities. Atterbury.
BA'con. n.ſ. [probably from laken, that is, dried fleſh.]
1. The fleſh of a hog ſaited and dried.
High o'er the hearth a chine of lacon hung,
Good old Philemon ſeiz'd it with a prong,
Then cut a ſlice. Dryden's Fables.
2. To ſave the bacon, is a phraſe for preſerving one's ſelf from
being unhurt; borrowed from the care of houſewives in the
sountry, where they have ſeldom any other proviſion in the
houſe than dried bacon, to ſecure it from the marching ſoldiers.
What frightens you thus? my good ſon ſays the pricit;
You murder'd, are ſorry, and have been confeſt,
Q father! my ſorrow will ſcarce ſave my bacon;
For 'twas not that I murder'd, but that I was taken. Prior.
BAculo'METRY. m. ſ. [from baculus, Lat. and air;”.] The art
of meaſuring diſtances by one or more ſlaves. Dićf.
BAT2. adj. [quqad, Dutch; compar. worſe; ſuperl, worſ.]
1. Ill; not good; a general word uſed in regard to phyſical or
moral faults, either of men or things.
Moſt men have politicks enough to make, through violence,
the beſt ſcheme of government a bad one. Pope.
2. Vitious; corrupt.
Thou may’ſ repent,
And one badačt, with many deeds well done,
May'ſ cover. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. 1.256.
Thus will the latter, as the former, world
Still tend from bad to worſe. A/ilton's Parad. Lºſt, b. xii.
- Our unhappy fates
Mix thee amongſt the bad, or make thee run
Too near the paths, which virtue bids thee ſhun. Prior.
3. Unfortunate; unhappy.
The ſun his annual courſe obliquely made,
Good days contracted, and enlarg’d the bad. Dryden.
4. Hurtful; unwholeſome.
Reading was bad for his eyes,writing made his head ake. Addison
5. Sick.
BAD. }The preterite of lid.
BADE.
And, for an earneſt of greater honour,
He bad me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawder. Mach.
BADGE, n.ſ. [A word of uncertain etymology; derived by ju-
nius from bode or bade, a meſſenger; and ſuppoſed to be cor-
rupted from ladage, the credential of a meſſenger: but taken
by sº and 4-in/lew from bagghe, Dut. a jewel, or bague, a
ring, Fr.] - -
I. A mark or cognizance worn to ſhew the relation of the wearer
to any perſon or thing.
But on his breaſt a bloody croſs he bore,
The dear remembrance of his dying lord;
For whoſe ſweet fake that glorious badge he wore. Stenſºr.
The outward ſplendour of his office, is the badge and token
of that glorious and ſacred character which he inwardly bears.
Atterbury's Sermons.
2. A token by which one is known.
A ſavage tygreſs on her helmet lies;
The famous badge Clarinda us’d to bear.
3. The mark of any thing.
There appears much joy in him; even ſo much, that joy
could not ſhew itſelf modeſt enough, without a badge of bit-
terneſs. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge. Shakespeare. Tit. Andron.
Let him not bear the badges of a wreck,
Norbeg with a blue table on his back. Dryden's Perſus.
To BADGE. v. a... [from the noun..] To mark as with a badge,
Your royal father's murder'd.
Oh, by whom
Thoſe of his chamber, as it ſeem’d, had don't ;
Their hands and faces were all badg’d with blood,
So were their daggers. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
BADGER. m. ſ. [bedour, Fr.] An animal that earths in the
ground, uſed to be hunted.
That a brock, or badger, hath legs of one ſide ſhorter than the
other, is very generally received not only by theoriſts and unex-
perienced believers, but moſt who behold them daily.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii.
BADGER LEGGFD. adj. [from badger and legged.] Having legs
of an unequal length, as the badger is ſuppoſed to have.
His body crooked all over, big bellied, badger lºgged, and his
complexion ſwarthy. L'E/irange.
BA'DGER. m. ſ. [perhaps from the Latin bajulus, a carrier; but,
by Junius, derived from the badger, a creature who ſtows up
his proviſion.] One that buys corn and victuals in one place,
and carries it unto another. Cowel.
BA'DLY. adv. [from bad..] In a bad manner; not well.
How goes the day with us? Oh telline, Hubert.—
Badly, I fear. How fares your majeſty? Shakespeare King john.
BA'DNEss. n ſ [from bad.] Want of good qualities, either na-
tural or moral.
It was not your brother's evil diſpoſition made him ſeek his
death ; but a provoking merit, ſet awork by a reprovable bad-
neſs in himſelf. Shakeſp. King Lear.
There is one convenience in this city, which makes ſome
amends for the ladneſs of the pavement. Addiſon on Italy.
I did not ſce how the ladieſ of the weather could be the
king's fault. Addison. Freeholder.
To BA/FFLE. v. a. [ºffer, Fr.]
1. To elude.
They made a ſhift to think themſelves guiltleſs, in ſpite of all
their fins; to break the precept, and at the ſame time to baffe
the curſe. South.
He hath deſcrwcd to have the grace withdrawn, which he
hath ſo long baſica and defied. Atterbury.
2. To confound; to defeat with ſome confuſion, as by perplex-
ing or an uſing ; to lºfte is ſometimes leſs than to conquer.
Mezen-
Fairfax, b. ii.
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A G
B A H
Etruria ſoft,
He brings to Turnus' aid his baſid hoſt. Dryºn's Zºneid.
When the mind has brought itſelf to cloſe thinking, it may
go on roundly. Every abſtruſe problem, every intricate queſ-
tion will not tºfflº, diſcourage, or break it. Locke.
3. To cruſh; to bring to nothing.
A foreign potentate trembles at a war with the Engliſh na-
tion, ready to cºmploy againſt him ſuch revenues as ſhall baſe
his deſigns upon their country. Addison. Freeholder, N° 2C.
BAFFLE. m. ſ. [from the verb...] A defeat. -
It is the ſkill of the diſputant that keeps off a baffle. South.
The authors having miſſed of their aims, are fain to retreat
with fruſtration and a lºffic. South.
BAFFLER. m. ſ. [from lºfte.] He that puts to confuſion, or
defeats.
Experience, that great offer of ſpeculation, aſſures us the
thing is too poſſible, and brings, in all ages, matter of fact to
confute our ſuppoſitions. Government of the Tongue, Š 2.
BAG. r. ſ. [be];e, Sax. from whence perhaps by dropping, as is
uſual, the harſh conſonant, came bege, lage, lag.]
1. A ſack, or pouch, to put any thing in, as money, corn.
Couſin, away for England; haſte before,
And, ere our coming, ſee thou ſhake the bags
Of hoarding abbots; their impriſon'd angels
Set thou at liberty. Shakespeare King jºhn.
What is it that opens thy mouth in praiſes : Is it that thy
bags and thy barns are full - South.
Thoſe waters were incloſed within the carth as in a bag.
- Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
Once, we confeſs, beneath the patriot's cloak,
From the crack'd tag the dropping guinea ſpoke. Pope.
2. That part of animals in which ſome particular juices are con-
tained, as the poiſon of vipers.
The ſwelling poiſon of the ſeveral ſe&amp;ts,
Which, wanting vent, the nation's health infects,
Shall burſt its lag. Dryden.
Sing on, ſing on, for I can ne'er be cloy'd ;
So may thy cows their burden'd bags diſtend. Dryden.
3. An ornamental purſe of ſilk tied to men's hair. ...,
We ſaw a young fellow riding towards us full gallop, with
a bob wig and black ſilken bag tied to it. Addiſon. Speciator.
4. A term uſed to fignify different quantities of certain commodi-
ties; as a bag of pepper; a bag of hops.
To BAG. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To put into a bag.
Accordingly he drain'd thoſe marſhy grounds,
And bagg’d them in a blue cloud. Dryden's King Arthur.
Hops ought not to be lagged up hot. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. To load with a bag. -
Like a bee lagg'd with his honey'd venom,
Hebrings it to your hive. Dryden's Don Selaſtian.
To BAG. v. r. To ſwell like a full bag. -
The ſlin ſeemed much contracted, yet it lagged, and had a
porringer full of matter in it. . JWiſeman's Surgery.
Two kids that in the valley ſtray'd,
I found by chance, and to my fold convey'd :
They drain two tagging udders every day. Dryden's Wirgil.
BA'GATELLE. n ſ. [lagatelle, Fr.] A trifle; a thing of no im-
portance.
Heaps of hair rings and cypher'd ſeals;
Rich trifles, ſerious bagatelles. Prior.
BA'GG AGF. n.ſ.. [from bag, bagage, Fr.]
1. The furniture and utenſils of an army.
The army was an hundred and ſeventy thouſand footmen,
and twelve thouſand horſemen, beſide the baggage. Judith, vii. 2.
Riches are the baggage of virtue; they cannot be ſpared, nor
left behind, but they hinder the march. Bacon.
They were probably always in readineſs, and carried among
the baggage of the army. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
2. The goods that are to be carried away, as bag and baggage.
Dolabella deſigned, when his affairs grew deſperate in Egypt,
to pack up hag and baggage, and ſail for Italy. Arbuth. on Coins.
3. A worthleſs woman; in French lagºſie ; ſo called, becauſe
ſuch women follow camps.
A ſpark of indignation did riſe in her, not to ſuffer ſuch a
tagga e to win away any thing of hers. Sidney.
When this hag-age meets with a man who has vanity to cre-
dit relations, ſhe turns him to account. Spečiat. No 2c 5.
BA'GNio. ii. ſ. ['agito, Ital, a bath..] A houſe for bathing, ſweat-
ing, and otherwiſe cleanſing the body.
I have known two inſtances of malignant fevers produced by
the hot air of a lagnio. Arbuthnot on Air.
EA'GPIPE. m. ſ. [from haſ and fipe; the wind being received in
a bag..] A muſical inſtrument, conſiſting of a leathern bag,
which blows up like a foot-bail, by means of a port vent or
little tube fixed to it, and ſtopped by a valve; and three pipes
or flutes, the firſt called the great pipe or drone, and the ſecond
the little one; which paſs the wind out only at the bottom ;
the third has a reed, and is plaid on by compreſſing the bag
under the arm, when full; and opening or ſtopping the holes,
which are cight, with the fingers. The la pipe tºkes in the
°ompaſs of three octaves. Cºlºrſ.
Vol. I.
No banners but ſhirts, with ſome bad a pºte: inſtead of
drum and flie. Sidney, h; i.
He heard a bagpipe, and ſaw a general animated with the
ſound. Addison. Freeholder, N° 27.
BACPI PER. m. ſ. [from bagpipe.] One that plays on a bagpipe.
Some that will evermore peep thro’ their eyes,
And laugh, like parrots, at a happer. Shakespeare Aſ ºf Venice:
BAGUETTE. m.ſ. [Fr. a term of archite&amp;ure.] A little round
moulding, leſs than an aſtragal; ſometimes carved and en-
riched.
To BAIGN.E. v. a. ſiagner, Fr.] To drench; to ſoak: a word
out of uſe. -
The women forſlow not to Haigne them, unleſs they plead
their heels, with a worſe perfume than Jugurth found in the
dungeon. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
BAIL. m. ſ. [of this word the etymologiſts give many derivations;
it ſeems to come from the French tailler, to put into the hand;
to deliver up, as a man delivers himſelf up in ſurety.]
Bail is the freeing or ſetting at liberty one arreſted or im-
priſoned upon action either civil or criminal, under ſecurity ta-
ken for his appearance. There is both common and ſpecial
bail; common bail is in actions of ſmall prejudice, or ſlight proof,
called common, becauſe any ſureties in that caſe are taken:
whereas, upon cauſes of greater weight, or apparent ſpeciality,
ſºccial bail or ſurety muſt be taken. There is a difference be-
tween bail and mainpriſe; for he that is mainpriſed, is at large,
until the day of his appearance: but where a man is bailed, he
is always accounted by the law to be in their ward and cuſtody
for the time: and they may, if they will, keep him in ward or
in priſon at that time, or otherwiſe at their will. Cowel.
Worry'd with debts, and paſt all hopes of bail,
The unpity'd wretch lies rotting in a jail. Roſcommon.
And bribe with preſents, or when preſents fail,
They ſend their proſtituted wives for bail. Dryden.
To BAIL. v a. [from the noun.]
1. To give bail for another.
Let me be their bail—
They ſhall be ready at your highneſs’ will,
To anſwer their ſuſpicion
Thou ſhalt not tail them.
2. To admit to bail.
When they had bailed the twelve biſhops, who were in the
Tower, the houſe of commons, in great indignation, cauſed
them immediately again to be recommitted to the Tower.
Clarendon.
BA'ILABLE. adj. [from bail.] That may be ſet at liberty by
bail or ſureties.
BA'ILIFF. m. ſ. [a word of doubtful etymology in itſelf, but bor-
rowed by us from baillie, Fr.]
I. A ſubordinate officer.
Lauſanne is under the canton of Berne, and governed by a
bailiff ſent them every three years from the ſenate of Berne.
Addiſon on Italy.
2. An officer whoſe buſineſs it is to execute arreſts. -
It many times happeneth, that, by the under-ſheriffs and
their bailiffs, the owner hath incurred the forfeiture, before he
cometh to the knowledge of the proceſs that runneth againſt
Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
him. Bacon.
A hailiff, by miſtake, ſeized you for a debtor, and kept you
the whole evening in a ſpunging-houſe. Swift.
Swift as a bard the bailiff leaves behind. Pope.
3. An under-ſteward of a manor.
BA'ILI wick. m. ſ. [of baillie, Fr. and pic, Sax.] The place of
the juriſdićtion of a bailiff within his hundred, or the lord's
franchiſe. It is that liberty which is exempted from the ſhe-
riff of the county, over which the lord of the liberty appointeth
a bailiff. Cowel.
A proper officer is to walk up and down his bailiwick.
- Spenser on Ireland.
There iſſued writs to the ſheriffs, to return the names of the
ſeveral land-owners in their ſeveral bailiwicks.
- Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To BAIT. v. a. [batan, Sax. baitzen, Germ.j
1. To put meat upon a hook, in ſome place, to tempt fiſh or
other animals.
Oh, cunning enemy, that to catch a ſaint,
With ſaints doſt bait thy hook moſt dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To fin in loving virtue. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
Let's be revenged on him; let's appoint him a meeting,
give him a ſhow of comfort in his ſuit, and lead him on with a
ſure baited delay, till he hath pawned his horſes to mine hoſt of
the garter. Shakespeare. A ſºrry //ives of Windſºr.
Many ſorts of fiſhes feed upon infºts, as is well known to
anglers, who lait their hooks with them. Ray.
How are the ſex improv’d in am’rous arts'
What new-found ſhares they bait for human hearts : Gay.
2. To give meat to one's ſelf, or horſes, on the road.
What ſo ſtrong,
But wanting reſt, will alſo wait of might?
The ſun, tº t ºrcs heaven all day lorg,
At night dot tº his Reed the ocean waves amoºg. F. 2.
2 O 1 *
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A K
B A L
To Bait. v.a. [from battre, Fr. to beat..] To attack with vio-
- lence; to ſet dogs upon. -
Who ſeeming ſorely chaffed at his band,
As chained bear, whom cruel dogs do bait,
With idle force did fain them to withſtand. Fairy Qgren.
I will not yield
To kiſs the ground before young Malcolm's feet;
- And ſo be baited with the rabble's curſe. Shakespeare Macbeth.
To BAIt. v. n. To ſtop at any place for refreſhment; per-
haps this word is more properly bate; to abate ſpeed.
But our deſires, tyrannical extorſion
Doth force us there to ſet our chief delightfulneſs,
Where but a baiting place is all our portion. Sidney.
As one who on his journey baits at noon,
Tho' bent on ſpeed: ſo here the archangel paus'd. Par. Loft.
In all our journey from London to his houſe, we did not ſo
much as lait at a whig inn. Addiſon. Speciat. Nº. 1 26.
To BAIT. V. n. [as an hawk.] To clap the wings; to make an
offer of flying; to flutter.
All plum'd like eſtridges, that with the wind
Raited like eagles having lately bath'd;
Glittering in golden coats like images. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Hood my unman'd blood baiting in my cheeks
With thy black mantle; till ſtrange love, grown bold,
Thinks true love acted ſimple modeſty. Shakespeare. Rom. and jul.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come, and know her keepers call;
That is, to watch her as we watch theſe kites,
That bait and beat, and will not be obedient.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
BAIT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Meat ſet to allure fiſh, or other animals, to a ſhare.
The pleaſant'ſt angling is to ſee the fiſh
Cut with her golden oars the filver ſtream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait.
Shakeſp. Much ad alout Nothing.
2. A temptation; an enticement.
And that ſame glorious beauty's idle boaſt,
Is but a bait ſuch wretches to beguile. Spenſ ſonnet xli.
Taketh therewith the ſouls of men, as with certain baits.
Hooker, b. v. § 35.
Sweet words I grant, baits and allurements ſweet
But greateſt hopes of greateſt croſſes meet. Fairfax, b. ii.
Fruit, like that
Which grew in paradiſe, the bait of Eve
Us’d by the tempter. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. x. l. 551:
Secure from fooliſh pride's affected ſtate,
And ſpecious flattery's more pernicious bait.
Her head was bare,
But for her native ornament of hair,
Which in a ſimple knot was ty’d above:
Sweet negligence! unheeded bait of love Dryden's Fab.
Grant that others could with equal glory,
Look down on pleaſures, and the baits of ſenſe. Addison Cato.
3. A refreſhment on a journey.
BA1ze. m. ſ. A kind of coarſe open cloth ſtuff, having a long
nap; ſometimes frized on one ſide, and ſometimes not frized,
according to the uſes it is intended for. This ſtuff is without
wale, being wrought on a loom with two treddles, like flan-
nel. Chambers.
To BAKE. v. a. participle paſſive, baked, or baken. [baecan, Sax.
becken, Germ. ſuppoſed by //achter to come from bec, which,
in the Phrygian language, ſignified bread.]
1. To heat any thing in a cloſe place; generally in an oven.
He will take thereof, and warm himſelf; yea, he kindleth it,
and baketh bread. Iſaiah, xliv. 15.
The difference of prices of bread proceeded from their de-
licacy in bread, and perhaps ſomething in their manner of bak-
ing. - - Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To harden in the fire.
The work of the fire is a kind of baking; and whatſoever
the fire baketh, time doth in ſome degree diſſolve. Bacon.
3. To harden with heat.
With vehement ſuns
When duſty ſummer bakes the crumbling clods,
How pleaſant is’t, beneath the twiſted arch,
Roſcommon.
To ply the ſweet carouſe ! Philips.
The ſun with flaming arrows pierc'd the flood,
And, darting to the bottom, bak'd the mud. Dryden.
To BAK E. v. m.
1. To do the work of baking.
I keep his houſe, and I waſh, wring, brew, bake, ſcour, dreſs
meat, and make the beds, and do all myſelf.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
2. To be heated or baked.
Fillet of a fenny ſnake,
In the cauldron boil and lake.
BAKED A ſeats. Meats dreſſed by the oven.
There be ſome houſes, wherein ſweetmeats will relent, and
baked meats will mould, more than others. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
º n.ſ.. [from bake and horſe.] A place for baking
I Cºl(i.
Shakeſp. Macleth.
I have marked a willingneſs in the Italian artizans, to diſtri-
bute the kitchen, pantry, and bakehouſe, under ground. J/otton.
BA'KEN. The participle from to bake.
There was a cake laken on the coals, and a cruſe of water at
his head. 1 Kings, xix. 6.
BA'KER. m. ſ. [from to bake..] He whoſe trade is to bake.
In life and health, every man muſt proceed upon truſt, there
being no knowing the intention of the cook or baker. South.
BA'LANcE. m. ſ. ſalance, Fr. bilanx, Lat.]
1. One of the ſix ſimple powers in mechanicks, uſed principally
for determining the difference of weight in heavy bodies. It
is of ſeveral forms. ^ Chambers.
2. A pair of ſcales. -
A balance of power, either without or within a ſtate, is beſt
conceived by conſidering what the nature of a balance is. It
ſuppoſes three things; firſt, the part which is held, together
with the hand that holds it; and then the two ſcales, with
whatever is weighed therein. Swift.
For when on ground the burden'd balance lies,
The empty part is lifted up the higher. Sir john Davies.
3. A metaphorical balance, or the mind employed in comparing
one thing with another.
I have in equal balance juſtly weighed,
What wrong our arms may do, what wrongs we ſuffer:
Griefs heavier than our offences. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
4. The act of comparing two things, as by the balance.
Comfort ariſes not from others being miſerable, but from this
inference upon the balance, that we ſuffer only the lot of na-
ture. - L’E/irange's Fables.
Upon a fair balance of the advantages on either ſide, it will
appear, that the rules of the goſpel are more powerful means of
conviction than ſuch meſſage. Atterbury.
5. The overplus of weight; that quantity by which, of two
things weighed together, one exceeds the other.
Care being taken, that the exportation exceed in value the
importation ; and then the balance of trade muſt of neceſſity
be returned in coin or bullion. Bacon's Adv. to Sir G. Willier.
6. That which is wanting to make two parts of an account even;
as, he ſtated the account with his correſpondent, and paid the
balance.
7. Equipoiſe; as balance of power. See the ſecond ſenſe.
Love, hope, and joy, fair pleaſure's ſmiling train,
Hate, fear, and grief, the family of pain;
Theſe mixed with art, and to due bounds confin'd,
Make and maintain the balance of the mind. Pope.
8. The beating part of a watch.
It is but ſuppoſing that all watches, whilſt the balance beats,
think; and it is ſufficiently proved, that my watch thought all
laſt night. Locke.
9. In aſtronomy. One of the twelve ſigns of the zodiack, com-
monly called Libra.
To BA/LANce. v. a. [valancer, Fr.]
1. To weigh in a balance, either real or figurative; to compare
by the balance.
If men would but balance the good and the evil of things,
they would not venture ſoul and body for a little dirty intereſt.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
2. To regulate the weight in a balance. -
Heav'n that hath plac'd this iſland to give law,
To balance Europe, and her ſtates to awe. J/aller.
3. To counterpoiſe; to weigh equal to.
The attraction of the glaſs is balanced, and rendered ineffec-
tual by the contrary attraction of the liquor. , Newton's Opt.
4. To regulate an account, by ſtating it on both ſides.
Judging is, balancing an account, and determining on which
ſide the odds lie. Locke.
5. To pay that which is wanting to make the two parts of an ac-
count equal.
Give him leave
To balance the account of Blenheim's day. Prior.
Though I am very well ſatisfied, that it is not in my
power to balance accounts with my Maker, I am reſolved, how-
ever, to turn all my endeavours that way. Addiſon. Spectator.
To BA/LANce. v. n. To heſitate; to fluêtuate between equal
motives, as a balance plays when charged with equal weights.
Were the ſatisfaction of luſt, and the joys of heaven, offered
at any one's preſent poſſeſſion, he would not balance, or err in
the determination of his choice. Locke.
Since there is nothing that can offend, I ſee not why you
ſhould balance a moment about printing it. Atterbury to Pope.
BA/LANce R. m. ſ. [from balance.] The perſon that weighs any
thing. -
BA'Aºs Ruby. m. ſ. [balas, Fr. ſuppoſed to be an Indian term.]
A kind of ruby.
Balaſ ruly is of a crimſon colour, with a caſt of purple, and
ſeems beſt to anſwer the deſcription of the ancients.
//codward on Foſſils.
To BALBU'cINATE. v. n. [from ballutio, Lat.] To ſtammer in
ſpeaking. Dić7.
To BALBU'TIATF. v. n. The ſame with ballucinate. Dić7.
BAlco'NY. n.ſ.. [balcon, Fr. balcone, Ital.] A frame of iron,
wood, or ſtone, before the window of a room,
-
s
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
I Then
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A L
\
Then pleaſure came, who, liking not the faſhion,
Began to make balconies, terraces,
Till ſhe had weaken'd all by alteration. Herberi.
When dirty waters from balconies drop, -
And dextrous damſe's twirl the ſprinkling mop. Gay.
BALD. adj. [bal, Welch.]
I. Without hair.
Neither ſhall men make themſelves bald for them.jer.xvi.6.
I find it remarked by Marchetti, that the cauſe of baldneſs
in men is the dryneſs of the brain, and its ſhrinking from the
ſkull; he having obſerved, that in bald perſons, under the bald
part, there was a vacuity between the ſkull and the brain. Ray.
He ſhould imitate Caeſar, who, becauſe his head was bald,
covered that defe&amp;t with laurels. Addiſon. Speci. N° 232.
2. Without natural covering.
Under an oak, whoſe boughs were moſs'd with age,
And high top bald with dry antiquity. Shakeſp. As you like it.
3. Without the uſual covering.
He is ſet at the upper end o' th' table; but they ſtand bald
before him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
4. Unadorned; inelegant.
Hobbes, in the preface to his own bald tranſlation of the
Ilias, begins the praiſe of Homer when he ſhould have ended it.
Dryden's Fables, Preface.
And that, though labour'd, line muſt bald appear,
That brings ungrateful muſick to the ear. Creech.
5. Stripped; naked; without dignity; without value; bare.
What ſhould the people do with theſe bald tribunes
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To th’ greater bench. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
6. Bald was uſed by the northern nations, to ſignify the ſame as
audax, bold; and is ſtill in uſe. So Baldwin, and by inverſion
Winbald, is bold conqueror; Ethelbald, nobly bold; Eadlald, hap-
pily bold; which are of the ſame import as Thraſeas, Thraſyma-
chus, and Thraſybulus, &amp;c. Gibſon's Camden.
BA'LD AcHIN. m. ſ. [baldachino, Ital.] A piece of architecture,
in form of a canopy, ſupported with columns, and ſerving as a
covering to an altar. It properly ſignifies a rich ſilk, du cange,
and was a canopy carried over the hoſt. Build. Dići.
BA'LDERDASH. n.ſ. [probably of balb, Sax. bold, and daſh, to
mingle.] Any thing jumbled together without judgment;
rude mixture; a confuſed diſcourſe.
To BA'LDERDAsH. v. a. [from the noun..] To mix or adulte-
rate any liquor.
BA'LDLY. adv. [from bald.] Nakedly; meanly; inelegantly.
BA'LDMon Y. n.ſ. The ſame with GENTIAN ; which ſee.
BA'LDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from bald.]
1. The want of hair.
2. The loſs of hair.
Which happen'd on the skin to light,
And there corrupting to a wound,
Spreads leproſy and baldneſs round. Swift.
. Meanneſs of writing; inelegance.
A'LDR1ck. m. ſ. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. A girdle. By ſome Dićtionaries it is explained a bracelet; but
I have not found it in that ſenſe.
Athwart his breaſt a baldrick brave he ware,
That ſhin'd like twinkling ſtars, with ſtones moſt precious
rare. Fairy Queen, b. i.
A radiant baldrick, o'er his ſhoulders ty'd,
Suſtain'd the ſword, that glitter'd at his ſide. Pºpe.
2. The zodiack.
That like the twins of Jove, they ſeem'd in fight,
Which deck the baldrick of the heavens bright. Sponſºr.
BALE. n.ſ.. [balle, Fr.] A bundle or parcel of goods packed up
for carriage.
One hired an aſs in the dog-days, to carry certain bales of
goods to ſuch a town. L’Eſtrange.
It is part of the bales in which bohea tea was brought over
from China. Woodward on Foſſils.
BALE. m. ſ. [ball, Sax. laſe, Dan. tal, bol, Icelandiſh.] Miſery;
calamity.
She look’d about, and ſeeing one in mail,
Armed to point, ſought back to turn again;
For light ſhe hated as the deadly bale. Fairy Queen, b. i.
To BALE. v. a. A word uſed by the ſailors, who bid bale out the
water ; that is, lave it out, by way of diſtinétion from pump-
ing. Skinner.
To BAL.E. v. n. [embeller, Fr. imballure, Ital.] To make up in-
to a bale.
BATEFUL. adj. [from bale J
I. Full of miſèry; full of grief; ſorrowful; ſad ; woful.
Ah! luckleſs babe, born under cruel ſtar,
And in dead parents baleful aſhes bred. Fairy Queen, b. i.
But when I feel the bitter baleful ſmart,
Which her fair eyes unwares do work in me,
I think that I a new Pandora ſee. Spenſer, ſonnet xxiv.
Round he throws his lalful eyes, -
That witneſs'd huge affliction and diſmay,
Mix'd with obdurate pride and ſtedfaſt hate. Par. Lºft, b. i.
2. Full of miſchief; deſtructive.
But when he ſaw his threat'ning was but vain,
He turn’d about, and ſearch'd his taleful books again. F. Q.
- Boiling choler chokes, ---
By ſight of theſe, our baleful enemies. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Unſeen, unfelt, the firy ſerpent skims
Betwixt her linen and her naked limbs; -
His halful breath inſpiring, as he glides. Dryden's Áneid.
Happy ICrne, whoſe moſt wholeſome air
Poiſons envenom'd ſpiders, and forbids
The baleful toad, and vipers from her ſhore. Philips.
BA'leFULLY. adv. [from balefill.] Sorrowfully; miſchievouſly.
BALK. n.ſ.. [balk, Dut. and Germ.] A great beam, ſuch as is
uſed in building; a rafter over an outhouſe or barn.
BAL.K. n.ſ. [derived by Skinner from valicare, Ital. to paſs over.]
A ridge of land left unploughed between the furrows, or at the
end of the field.
To BAI.K. v. a. [See the noun.]
1. To diſappoint; to fruſtrate.
Another thing in the grammar ſchools I ſee no uſe of, unleſs
it be to balk young lads in the way to learning languages. Locke.
Every one has a deſire to keep up the vigour of his facultics;
and not to balk his underſtanding by what is too hard for it. Locke.
But one may bal; this good intent,
And take things otherwiſe than meant. Prior.
The prices muſt have been high ; for a people ſo rich would
not talk their fancy. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Balº'd of his prey, the yelling monſter flies,
And fills the city with his hideous cries. Pope's Odyſſey.
Is there a variance enter but his door,
Balº'd are the courts, and conteſt is no more. Pope,
2. To miſs any thing.
By griſly Pluto he doth ſwear,
He rent his clothes, and tore his hair;
And as he runneth here and there,
An acorn cup he greeteth;
Which ſoon he taketh by the ſtalk,
About his head he lets it walk,
Nor doth he any creature talk,
But lays on all he meeteth.
3. To omit, or refuſe any thing.
This was looked for at your hand, and this was balt.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
4. To heap, as on a ridge. This, or ſomething like this, ſeems
to be intended here.
Ten thouſand bold Scots, three and twenty knights,
Balá'd in their own blood, did Sir Walter ſee -
On Holmedon's plains. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
BA'LKERs. n.ſ.. [In fiſhery.] Men who ſtand on a cliff, or high
place on the ſhore, and give a ſign to the men in the fiſhing-
boats, which way the paſſage or ſhole of herrings is. Cowel.
The pilchards are purſued by a bigger fiſh, called a pluſher,
who leapeth above water, and bewrayeth them to the balker.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
BALL. m. ſ. [bol, Dan. bol. Dut.]
Bel, diminutively Belin, the ſun, or Apollo of the Celtae, was
called by the ancient Gauls Abellio. Whatever was round, and
in particular the head, was called by the ancients either Bál,
or Bel, and likewiſe Bºl and Bill. Among the modern Per-
ſians, the head is called Pole; and the Flemings ſtill call the
head Bolle. II:23 is the head or poll, and Toxº, is to turn.
Bºx3- likewiſe ſignifies a round ball, whence bowl, and Hell, and
ball, which the Welch term bé!. By the Scotch alſo the head
is named hºl; whence the Engliſh lillis derived, ſignifying the
beak of a bird. Figuratively, the Phrygians and Thurians, by
£2xº, underſtood a king. Hence alſo, in the Syriack diale&amp;ts,
£adº, 8vº, and likewiſe B2, ſignifies lord, and by this name
alſo the ſun; and, in ſome dialects, "Ha and 12, whence "Ixº,
and "HAG", Fºº, and EzA3-, and alſo in the Celtick diminu-
tive way of expreſſion, “Exº, Fiºs., and Biawā-, ſignified the
ſun; and Exiºn, Fixiºn, and Bixiº, the moon. Among the Teu-
tonicks, hol and heil have the ſame meaning; whence the ad-
jećtive holig, or heilig, is derived, and ſignifies divine or holy;
and the aſpiration being changed intoſ, the Romans form their
Sol. - Baxter.
1. Anything made in a round form.
The worms with many feet, which round themſelves into
balls under logs of timber, but not in the timber. Bacon.
Nor arms they wear, nor ſwords and bucklers wield,
But whirl from leathern ſtrings huge balls of lead. Dryden.
Like a ball of ſnow tumbling down a hill, he gathered ſtrength
as he paſſed. Howel's Wocal Foreſt.
Still unripen'd in the dewy mines,
Within the ball a trembling water ſhines,
That through the chryſtal darts. Addison's Rem. on Italy.
Such of thoſe corpuſcles as happened to combine into one
maſs, formed the metallick and mineral balls, or nodules, which
we find. J/codward’s Natural Hiſtory.
2. A round thing to play with, either with the hand or foot, or
a racket.
Balls to the ſtars, and thralls to fortune's reign,
Turn'd from themſelves, infected with their cage,
Where death is fear'd, and life is held with pain. Sidney.
Thoſe I have ſeen play at tail, grow extremely earneſt who
ſhould have the ball, Sidney.
3. A
Drayt. Nymphid.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º B A L B A L
3. A ſmall round thing, with ſome particular mark, by which
votes are given, or lots caſt. -
Lºt lots decide it.
For ev’ry number'd captive put a ba"
Into an urn ; three only black be there,
The reſt, all white, are ſafe. Dºn's Don Sclaſſian.
Minos, the ſtrict inquiſitor, appears;
Round in his urn the blended ſº.'s he rowls;
Abſolves the juſt, and dooms the guilty ſouls. Dryden.
4. A globe; as, the (all of the earth
Julius and Antony, thoſe lords of all,
Low at her feet preſent the conquer'd ball. Granville.
Ye gods, what juſtice rules the tal. 2 -
Freedom and arts together fall. Pºpe.
5. A globe borne as an cnſign of ſovereignty.
Hear the tragedy of a young man, that by right ought to
hold the fall of a kingdom; but, by fortune, is made himſelf
a ball, toſſed from miſery to miſery, and from place to place.
Bacon's Henry VII.
6. Any part of the body that approaches to roundneſs; as the
lower and ſwelling part of the thumb, the apple of the eye.
Be ſubject to no fight but mine; inviſible
To every eye lall clie. Shakespeare. Tºmfº/?.
To make a ſtern countenance, let your brow bend ſo, that
that it may almoſt touch the fall of the eye. Peacham.
7. The parchment ſpread over a hollow piece of wood, ſtuffed
with hair or wool, which the printers dip in ink, to ſpread it
on the ictters.
BALL. m.ſ. ['a', Fr. from laſare, low Lat. from 22xxºn, to
dance..] An entertainment of dancing. at which the prepara-
tions are made at the expence of ſome particular perſon.
If golden ſconces hang not on the walls,
To light the coſtly ſuppers and the fall. Dryden.
He would make no extraordinary figure at a hall; but I can
aſſure the ladies, for their conſolation, that he has writ better
verſes on the ſix than any man. Swift.
BALL AD. m. ſ. ['alade, Fr.] A ſong.
Balad once ſignifică a ſolemn and ſacred ſong, as well as
trivial, when Solomon's Song was called the ballad of ballads;
but now it is applied to nothing but trifling verſe. JWatts.
An' I have not ballads made on you all, and ſung to filthy
tunes, may a cup of ſack be my poiſon. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Like the ſweet balad, this amuſing lay
Too long detains the lover on his way. Gay's Trivia.
To BALL AD. v. n. [from the noun..] To make or ſing bal-
lads.
Saucy lićtors
Will catch at us like ſtrumpets, and ſcall'd rhimers *
Ballad us out o' tune. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
BA'LLAD-si Nc ER. m. / [from hallad and ſing..] One whoſe em-
ployment it is to fing ballads in the ſtreets.
No ſooner 'gan he raiſe his tuneful ſong,
But lads and laſſes round about him throng.
Not ballad-ſinger, plac'd above the crowd,
Sings with a note ſo ſhrilling, ſweet and loud. Gay.
BA'LLAST. m. ſ. ſtallaſie, Dutch..]
1. Something put at the bottom of the ſhip to keep it ſteady
to the center of gravity.
There muſt be ſome middle counſellors to keep things
ſteady; for, without that tally, the ſhip will roul too much.
- Bacon's Eſſays.
As for the aſcent of it, this may be eaſily contrived, if there
be ſome great weight at the bottom of the ſhip, being part of
its allºſt; which, by ſome cord within, may be looſened from
it. - Jºkins's Afathematical Aſagick.
As when empty barks or billows float,
With ſandy talk:/; ſilors trim the bot;
So becs bear gravel ſtones, whoſe poiſing weight
Steers through the whiſtling winds their fieddy flight. Dryd.
2. That which is uſed to make any thing ſteady. -
Why ſhould he fink where nothing ſecºn'd to preſs?
His lading little, and his ball/? leſs. Swift.
To BA/L. As T. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. To put weight at the bottom of a ſhip, in order to keep her
ſtcady.
Af this ark be ſo halºſed, as to be of cqual weight with the
like magnitude of water, it will be moveable.
12...Kins’. Azathematical Magick.
2. To keep any thing ſteady.
Whilſt thus to alºft love, I thought,
And ſo more ſtcddly tº have gone,
I ſlºw, I had love's pinnace overfraught. IX2::::e.
Now you have given me virtue for my guide,
And with true honour layºed my pride. Dryºcº's Aureº.
BALLETTE. m. ſ. [allette, Fr.] A dance in which ſome hiſtory
is repreſented.
BA LLIAR ps. n.ſ.. [from all and yard, or flick to puſh it with.]
A play at which a ball is driven by the end of a ſtick; now
corruptly called hilliards.
With dice, with cards, with "a"`ard, fºr unfit,
With ſhuttlecocks miſcerning manly wit. Hºcrá's Tºle
is ºw. -
Bº, L.L. 91 ER. See BALust R.E.
** -
J
BALLO'N.
#. }ºf [Hallon, Fr.]
1. A large round ſhort-necked veſſel uſed in chymiſtry.
2. In architecture; a ball or globe placed on the top of a pillar.
3. In fireworks; a ball of paſteboard, ſtuffed with combuſtible
matter, which, when fired, mounts to a conſiderable height in
the air, and then burſts into bright ſparks of fire, reſembling
ſtars.
BA'llot. m. ſ. ['alºte, Fr.]
1. A little ball or ticket uſed in giving votes, being put privately
into a box or urn.
2. The act of voting by ballot.
To BAI Lot. v. n. [ball-ter, Fr.] To chooſe by ballot, that is, by
putting little balls or tickets, with particular marks, privately in
a box; by counting which it is known what is the reſult of the
poll, without any diſcovery by whom each vote was given.
No competition arriving to a ſufficient number of balls, they
fell to ballot ſome others. J/otton.
Giving their votes by alloting, they lie under no awe. Swift.
BALLot A+ ion. m. ſ. [from allot..] The act of voting by ballot.
The election is intricate and curious, conſiſting of ten fe-
veral ballotations. //otton.
BALM. m. ſ. [laume, Fr. Jaſºmum, Lat.]
1. The ſap or juice of a ſhrub, remarkably odoriferous.
Balm trickles through the bleeding veins
Of happy ſhrubs, in Idumcan plains.
2. Any valuable or fragrant ointment.
Thy place is filled, thy ſceptre wrung from thee;
Thy laſm waſh'd off wherewith thou waſt anointed.
Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Dryden's Wirgil.
3. Anything that ſooths or mitigates pain.
You were conducted to a gentle bath,
And laſms apply'd to you. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Your praiſe's argument, lalm of your age;
Deareſt and beſt. Shakespeare. King Lear.
Fºr {* / ſmelſä, Lat.] The name of a plant.
It is a verticillate plant, with a labiated flower, conſiſting of
one leaf, whoſe upper lip is roundiſh, upright, and divided into
two ; but the under lip, into three parts: out of the flower-
cup riſes the pointal, attended, as it were, with four embryos;
theſe afterwards turn to ſo many ſeeds, which are roundiſh, and
incloſed in the flower-cup ; to theſe notes may be added, the
flowers are produced from the wings of the leaves, but are not
whorled round the ſtalks. The ſpecies are, 1. Garden balm.
2. Garden balm, with yellow variegated flowers. 3. Stinking
Roman alºn, with ſofter hairy leaves. The firſt of theſe ſorts
is cultivated in gardens for medicinal and culinary uſe: it is
propagated by parting the roots either in ſpring or autumn.
When they are firſt planted, if the ſeaſon proves dry, you muſt
carefully water them until they have taken root. Millar.
BALM of Gilead. -
1. The juice drawn from the balſam tree, by making inciſions in
its bark. Its colour is firſt white, ſoon after green; but when
it comes to be old, it is of the colour of honey. The ſmell of
it is agreeable, and very penetrating; the taſte of it bitter, ſharp
and aſtringent. As little iſſues from the plant by inciſion, the
!alm ſold by the merchants, is made of the wood and green
branches of the tree, diſtilled by fire, which is generally adul-
terated with turpentine. Cahnet.
It ſeems moſt likely to me, that the zori of Gilead, which we
render in our Engliſh bible by the word baſin, was not the ſame
with the balſam of Mecca, but only a better ſort of turpentine,
then in uſe for the cure of wounds and other diſeaſes.
Prideaux’s Conne?ion.
2. A plant remarkable for the ſtrong balſamick ſcent, which its
leaves emit, upon being bruiſed; whence ſome have ſuppoſed,
erroneouſly, that the talm ºf Gilead was taken from this plant.
AMillar.
To BALM. v. a. [from laſm j
1. To anoint with balm.
Balm his foul head with warm diſtilled waters,
And burn ſweet wood. Shakºp. Tºing of the Shrew.
2. To ſooth; to mitigate; to aſſuage.
Oppreſt nature ſleeps:
This reſt might yet have alm'd thy ſenſes,
Which ſtand in hard cure. Shaſºſº. King Lear.
BA'LM Y. adj. [from bahn J
I. Having the qualitics of balm.
Soft on the flow'ry herb I found melaid,
In balmy ſweat; which with his beams the ſun
Soon dry’d. A ſilton's Paradiſ? Loº, b. viii.
2. Producing balm.
3. Soothing; ſoft; mild.
Conye, Deſdemona, ’tis the ſoldier's life
To have their alºy ſlumbers wak'd with ſtrºſe. Shah.Cºsſo.
Such viſions hourly paſs ºcłore my fight,
Which from my eyes their laſhy ſlumbers fright. Dryden.
4. Fragrant; odoriferous.
Thoſe rich perfumes which, from the happy ſhore,
The winds upon their alºy winds convey'd, -
Whoſe guilty ſweetneſs firſt the world betray’d. Pº
Firſ
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A N
Firſt Eurus to the riſing morn is ſent,
The regions of the balny continent.
5. Mitigating; aſſuaſive.
Oh balmy breath, that doſt almoſt perſuade
Juſtice to break her ſword Shakeſp. Othello.
BA'LNEARY. n.ſ.. [balnearium, Lat.] A bathing-room.
The balnearies, and bathing-places, he expoſeth unto the ſum-
mer ſetting. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. vi. c. 7.
BALNEA"rion. n.ſ.. [from balueum, Lat. a bath.] The act of
bathing.
As the head may be diſturbed by the ſkin, it may the ſame
way be relieved, as is obſervable in balneations, and fomenta-
‘tions of that part. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 6.
BA'LNEATORY. adj. [balneatorius, Lat..] Belonging to a bath
or ſtove.
BA'lotADE. m. ſ. The leap of an horſe, ſo that when his
fore-feet are in the air, he ſhews nothing but the ſhoes of his
hinder-feet, without yerking out. A balotade differs from a
capriole; for when a horſe works at caprioles, he yerks out his
hinder legs with all his force. Farrier’s Dićt.
BALsAM. m. ſ. [AEaſamum, Lat.] Ointment; unguent; an unc-
tuous application thicker than oil, and ſofter than ſalve.
Chriſt's blood's our balſam ; if that cure us here,
Him, when our judge, we ſhall not find ſevere. Denham.
BALsAM Apple. [momordica, Lat..] An annual Indian plant.
The fiower conſiſts of one leaf is of the expanded bell-ſhaped
kind, but ſo deeply cut, as to appear compoſed of five diſtinct
leaves: the flowers are ſome male, or barren ; others female,
growing upon the top of the embryo, which is afterwards
changed into a fruit, which is fleſhy, and ſometimes more or
leſs tapering and hollow, and, when ripe, uſually burſts, and
caſts forth the ſeeds with an elaſticity; which ſeeds are wrap-
ped up in a membranous covering, and are, for the moſt part,
indented on the edges. AMillar.
BALSAM Tree.
This is a ſhrub which ſcarce grows taller than the pomegra-
nate tree; it ſhoots out abundance of long ſlender branches,
with a few ſmall rounding leaves, always green; the wood of
it is gummy, and of a reddiſh colour; the bloſſoms are like
ſmall ſtars, white, and very fragrant; whence ſpring out little
pointed pods, incloſing a fruit like an almond, called carpobal-
ſamum, as the wood is called xylobalſamum, and the juice opo-
balſamum ; which ſee. This tree is cultivated in Arabia and
Judea; but it is ſorbid to be ſown or multiplied without the per-
miſfion of the grand ſignior. Calmet. Chambers.
BALsA'Mical. U adj. [from balſam.] Having the qualities of
BALSA'Mick. } balſam ; unctuous; mitigating; ſoft; mild ;
oilv.
}; there be a wound in my leg, the vital energy of my ſoul
thruſts out the baſſamical humour of my blood to heal it.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
The aliment of ſuch as have freſh wounds ought to be ſuch
as keeps the humours from putrefaction, and renders them oily
and baſamick. Arbuthnot on Diet.
BA'luster. n.ſ.. [according to du Cange, from balauſirium, low
Lat. a bathing place..] A ſmall column or pilaſter, from an inch
and three quarters to four inches ſquare or diameter. Their di-
menſions and forms are various; they are frequently adorned
with mouldings; they are placed with rails on ſtairs, and in
the fronts of galleries in churches.
This ſhould firſt have been planched over, and railed about
with baluſters. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
BA'LUSTRADE. m. ſ. [from baluſter.] An aſſemblage of one or
more rows of little turned pillars, called baluſters, fixed upon a
terras, or the top of a building, for ſeparating one part from an-
other.
BAM, BEAM, being initials in the name of any place, uſually
imply it to have been woody; from the Saxon beam, which we
uſe in the ſame ſenſe to this day. Gibſon's Camden.
BA'MBoo. m. ſ. An Indian plant of the recd kind. It has ſe-
veral ſhoots, much larger than our ordinary reeds, which are
knotty, and ſeparated from ſpace to ſpace by joints. They
are ſaid by ſome, but by miſtake, to contain ſugar; the bam-
too being much larger than the ſugar-cane. The leaves grow
out of each knot, and are prickly. They are four or five inches
long, and an inch in breadth, ſomewhat pointed, and ribbed
through the whole length with green and ſharp fibres. Its
flowers grow in ears, like thoſe of wheat.
To BAMBo'ozle. v.a. [a cant word not uſed in pure or in grave
writings.] To deceive ; to impoſe upon; to confound.
After Nick had bamboozled about the money, John called for
COunters. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
**. m. ſ. [from bamboozle.] A tricking fellow ; a
Cheat.
There are a ſet of fellows they call banterers and bamboozlers,
that play ſuch tricks. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
AN. n.ſ.. [ban, Teut. a publick proclamation, as of proſcrip-
tion, interdićtion, excommunication, publick ſale.]
1. Publick notice given of any thing, whereby anything is pub-
ſickly commanded or forbidden. This word we uſe eſpecially
in the publiſhing matrimonial contračts in the church, before
marriage, to the end that if any man can ſay againſt the inten-
Vol. I.
Dryden's Ovid.
tion of the parties, either in reſpect of kindred or otherwiſe,
they may take their exception in time. And, in the canon law,
banna ſunt proclamationes ſponſ &amp; ſponſe in eccleſis fieri ſoliti.
owel.
I bar it in the intereſt of my wife; *
'Tis ſhe is ſubcontracted to this lord,
And I her huſband contradict your bans. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Our bans thrice bid and for our wedding-day
To draw her neck into the bans. Hudibras.
2. A curſe; excommunication.
My kerchief bought ! then preſs'd, then forc'd away ! Gay.
In th’ interim, ſpare for no trepans
Thou mixture rank of midnight weeds colle&amp;ted,
With Hecate's ban thrice blaſted, thrice infected. Hamlet.
A great overſight it was of St. Peter, that he did not accurſe
Nero, whereby the pope might have got all; yet what need of
ſuch a ban, ſince friar Vincent could tell Ataſalipa, that king-
doms were the pope's. Raleigh's Eſſays.
3. Interdiction.
Much more to taſte it, under ban to touch. Parad Loff.
4. Ban of the Empire; a publick cenſure by which the privileges
of any German prince are ſuſpended.
He proceeded ſo far by treaty, that he was proferred to have
the imperial ban taken off Altapinus, upon ſubmiſſion. Howel.
To BAN. v. a. [bannen, Dut. to curſe.] To curſe; to execrate.
Shall we think that it baneth the work which they leave
behind them, or taketh away the uſe thereof. Hooker, b. v.
It is uncertain whether this word, in the foregoing ſenſe, is
to be deduced from ban, to curſe, or bane, to poiſon.
In thy cloſet pent up, rue my ſhame, º
And ban our enemies, both mine and thine. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Before theſe Moors went a Numidian prieſt, bellowing out
charms, and caſting ſcrowls of paper on each ſide, wherein he
curſed and banned the Chriſtians. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
BANA'NA Tree. See PLANTAIN ; of which it is a ſpecies.
BAND. m. ſ. [bende, Dut. band, Saxon.]
1. A tye; a bandage; that by which one thing is joined to an-
other.
You ſhall find the hand, that ſeems to tie their friendſhip to-
gether, will be the very ſtrangler of their amity.
Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
2. A chain by which any animal is kept in reſtraint. This is
now uſually ſpelt, leſs properly, bond.
So wild a beaſt, ſo tame ytaught to be,
And buxom to his bands, is joy to ſee. Hubberd’s Tale.
Since you deny him entrance, he demands
His wife, whom cruelly you hold in bands. Dryd. Aurengz.
3. Any means of union or connexion between perſons.
Here's cight that muſt take hands,
To join in Hymen's bands. Shakeſp. As you like it.
4. Something worn about the neck; a neckcloth. It is now re-
ſtrained to a neckcloth of particular form worn by clergymen,
lawyers, and ſtudents in colleges.
For his mind I do not care,
That's a toy that I could ſpare: .
Let his title be but great,
His cloaths rich, and band ſit neat. Benjohnſon's Underwoods.
He took his preſent lodging at the manſion-houſe of a taylor's
widow, who waſhes and can clear-ſtarch his bands. Addiſon.
. Anything bound round another.
In old ſtatues of ſtone in cellars, the feet of them being bound
with leaden bands, it appeared that the lead did ſwell. Bacon.
6. A company of perſons joined together in any common deſign.
And, good my lord of Somerſet, unite
Your troops of horſemen with his bands of foot.
Shakeſp. Henry VI p. i.
We few, we happy few, we hand of brothers. Shakespeare H. V.
The queen in white array before her band,
Saluting took her rival by the hand. Dryden's Fables.
On a ſudden, methought this ſelect band ſprang forward,
with a reſolution to climb the aſcent, and follow the call of
that heavenly muſick. Tatler, Nº. 8 1.
Strait the three bands prepare in arms to join,
Each band the number of the ſacred Nine. Pºpe.
7. In architecture. Any flat low member or moulding, called
alſo faſcia, face, or plinth.
To BAND. v. a. [from band.]
1. To unite together into one body or troop.
The biſhop, and the duke of Glo'ſter's men,
Have fill'd their pockets full of pebble ſtones,
And banding themſelves in contrary parts,
Do pelt at one another's pates. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. i.
Some of the boys banded themſelves as for the major, and
others for the king; who, after, ſix days ſkirmiſhing, at laſt
made a compoſition, and departed. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
To live exempt
From heav'n's high juriſdiction, in new league
Banded againſt his throne. A4ilton's Par. Lºft, b. ii.
2. To bind over with a band.
And by his mother ſtood an infant lover,
With wings unfledg'd, his eyes were banded over. Dryden.
2 P BANDs
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">E A N
IB A N
BAsps ºf a ſºlik, are two pieces of iron nailed upon the bows
of the ſaddle, to hold the bows in the right ſituation.
BANDAGE. n.ſ.. [Handage, Fr.]
1. Something bound over another.
Zeal too had a place among the reſt, with a bandage over
her eyes; though one would not have expected to have ſeen
her repreſented in ſnow. Addison. Freeholder, Nº. 27.
Cords were faſtened by hooks to my landages, which the
workmen had girt round my neck. Gulliver's Travels.
2. It is uſed, in ſurgery, for the fillet or roller wrapped over a
wounded member; and, ſometimes, for the act or practice of
applying bandages.
BAND Box. m. ſ. [from band and box.] A ſlight box uſed for
band and other things of ſm ll weight.
My friends are ſurprized to find two handbºxer among my
books, till I let them ſee that they are lined with deep erudition.
Addison. Spectator, N° 85.
With empty handlox ſhe delights to range,
And feigns a diſtant errand from the 'Change. Gay's Trivia.
BANDELET, n.ſ. (landelet, Fr. In architecture.] Any little band,
flat moulding, or fillet.
BANDIT. m. ſ. [andito, Ital.] A man outlawed.
No ſavage fierce, bandit, or mountaineer,
Will dare to ſoil her virgin purity. Milton's Poems.
No bandit fierce, no tyrant mad with pride,
No cavern'd hermit, reſts ſelf ſatisfy'd. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
BANDi’tto. m.ſ. in the plural banditti. [banito, Ital.]
- A Roman ſworder, and banditto ſlave,
Murder'd ſweet Tully. Shakespeare. Henry VI. p. ii.
BA'NDog. m. ſ. [from ban or band, and dºg. The original of this
word is very doubtful. Caius, de canibus Britannicis, derives it
from hand, that is, a dºg chained up. Skinner inclines to deduce
it from bana, a murderer. May it not come from ban a curſe,
as we ſay a cuſ' cur; or rather from laund, ſwelled or large, a
Daniſh word; from whence, in ſome counties, they call a great
nut a han-nut..] A kind of large dog.
The time of night when Troy was ſet on fire,
The time when ſcreech-owls cry, and bandºgs howl.
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
Or privy, or pert, if any bin,
We have great land-gs will tear their ſkin. Spenſ. Paſłoral.
BA'NDol E FRs. n ſ. [handauliers, Fr. J Small wooden caſes co-
vered with leather, each of them containing powder that is a
ſufficient charge for a musket.
BA'NDRol. n.ſ.. [banderol, Fr.] A little flag or ſtreamer; the
little fringed ſilk flag that hangs on a trumpet.
BA'NDY. n.ſ. (from bander, Fr.] A club turned round at bot-
tom for ſtriking a ball at play.
To BAND Y. v. a. [probably from bandy, the inſtrument with
which they ſtrike balls at play, which being crooked, is named
from the term lander un arc, to ſtring or bend a bow.]
1. To beat to and fro, or from one to another.
They do cunningly, from one hand to another, band, the
ſervice like a tennis-ball. Spenſer's Ireland.
And like a ball handy'd 'twixt pride and wit,
Rather than yield, both ſides the prize will quit. Denham.
What, from the tropicks, can the earth repel?
What vigorous arm, what repercuſſive blow,
Bandies the mighty globe ſtill to and fro Blackmore.
2. To exchange; to give and take reciprocally.
Do you bandy looks with me, you raſcal ? Shakeſp. K. Lear.
'Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleaſures, to cut off my train,
To bandy haſty words. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. To agitate; to toſs about.
This hath been ſo bandical amongſt us, that one can hardly
miſs books of this kind, Locke.
Ever ſince men have been united into governments, the en-
deavours after univerſal monarchy have been landied among
thcm. Swift.
Let not obvious and known truths, or ſome of the moſt plain
and certain propoſitions, be bandical about in a diſputation.
//atts's Improvement of the Mind.
To BANDY. v. m. To contend, as at ſome game, in which
each ſtrives to drive the ball his own way.
No ſimple man that ſees
This factious bandying of their favourites,
But that he doth preſage ſome ill event. Shakespeare. Henry VI,
A valiant ſon in law thou ſhalt enjoy:
One fit to bandy with thy lawleſs ſons,
To ruffle in the commonwealth. Shakeſp. Tit. Andron.
Could ſet up grandee againſt grandce,
To ſquander time away, and landy,
Make lords and commoners lay ſieges
To one another's privileges. Hudibras.
After all the bandying attempts of reſolution, it is as much a
queſtion as ever. Glanville's Scepſis, c. iv.
BAND LEG. m.ſ.. [from bander, Fr.] A crooked leg.
. . He tells aloud your greateſt failing,
Nor makes a ſcruple to expoſe
Your handylºg, or crooked noſe. Swift.
BA's DYLEGG ED. adj. [from landykg.: Having crooked legs.
The Ethiopians had an one-eyed handlºgged prince; ſuch a
perſon would have made but an odd figure. Collier on Duelling.
BANE. m. ſ. [bana, Sax, a murderer.] o
1. Poiſon.
Begone, or elſe let me.
The ſame air with thee.
All good to me becomes
Bane; and in heav'n much worſe would be my ſtate.
Milton's Par. Lº/?, b. ix. l. 122.
They, with ſpeed,
Their courſe through thickeſt conſtellations held,
Spreading their bane. 41ſton's Par. Loft, b. x. 1. 4. I2.
Thus, am I doubly armed; my death and life,
My lane and antidote, are both before me:
This, in a moment, brings me to an end;
But that informs me [ſhall never die.
2. That which deſtroys; miſchief; ruin.
. Inſolency muſt be repreſt, or it will be the lane of the Chriſ.
tian religion. Hooker, b. ii. §7.
I will not be afraid of death and bane,
Till Birnam foreſt come to Dunfinane.
Suffices that to me ſtrength is my bane,
And proves the ſource of all my miſeries. Milton's S. Agon.
So entertain'd thoſe odorous ſweets the fiend,
Who came their bane. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. iv. l. 167.
Who can omit the Gracchi, who declare
The Scipios' worth, thoſe thunderbolts of war,
The double lane of Carthage Dryden, AEmeid vi.
Falſe religion is, in its nature, the greateſt bane and deſtruc-
tion to government in the world. South.
To BASF, w a [from the noun..] To poiſon.
What if my houſe be troubled with a rat,
And I be pleas'd to give ten thouſand ducats
To have it ban'd. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
BANFFUL. adj. [from bane and full.]
1. Poiſonous.
For voyaging to learn the direful art,
To taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart;
Obſervant of the gods, and ſternly juſt,
Ilus refus’d tº impart the baneful truſt.
2. Deſtructive.
The ſilver eagle too is ſent before,
Which I do hope will prove to them as baneful,
As thou conceiv'ft it to the commonwealth. B. Johnſ Catil.
The nightly wolf is baneful to the fold,
Storms to the wheat, to buds the bitter cold. Dryden's Pirgil.
BANFFULNEss. n.ſ.. [from langful..] Poiſonouſneſs; deſtric.
tiveneſs.
BANEwok T. n.ſ.. [from lane and wort.] A plant, the ſame
with deadly nightſhade. See NIGHTs HADe.
To BANG. v. a. [vengolem, Dutch.]
1. To beat; to thump; to cudgel: a low and familiar word.
One receiving from them ſome affronts, met with them
handſomely, and hanged them to good purpoſe. Howe's / Fr.
He having got ſome iron out of the earth, put it into his ſer-
vants hands to fence with, and bang one another. Locke.
Formerly I was to be banged, becauſe I was too ſtrong, and
now, becauſe I am too weak to reſiſt; I am to be brought down,
when too rich, and oppreſſed, when too poor. Arbuth. j, Bull.
2. To handle roughly ; to treat with violence in general.
The deſperate tempeſt hath ſo bang'd the Turks,
That their deſignment halts. Shakeſp. Othello.
You ſhould accoſt her with jeſts fire-new from the mint;
you ſhould have langed the youth into dumbneſs.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
BANG. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A blow; a thump; a ſtroke a
low word.
I am a bachelor.—That's to ſay, they are fools that marry;
you'll bear me a bang for that. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
With many a ſtiff twack, many a bang,
Hard crabtree and old iron rang. Hudibras, cant. ii.
I heard ſeveral bangs or buffets, as I thought, given to the
eagle that held the ring of my box in his beak. Gulliv. Travel».
To BANISH. v. a. [banir, Fr. banio, low Lat. probably from
lan, Teut. an outlawry, or proſcription.]
1. To condemn to leave his own country.
Oh, fare thee well !
Thoſe evils thou repeat'ſt upon thyſelf,
Have baniſh'd me from Scotland.
2. To drive away.
It is for wicked men only to dread God, and to endeavour to
baniſh the thoughts of him out of their minds. Tilliſon.
Succeſsleſs all her ſoft careſſes prove,
To baniſh from his breaſt his country's love. Pºpe's Odyſ:
BA'Nish ER. m. ſ. [from baniſh..] He that forces another from
his own country.
'Tis bane to draw
Ben Johnſºn's Catiline.
Addison's Cats.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
In mere ſpite,
To be full quit of thoſe my baniſhers,
Stand I before thee here.
BA'N is HMENT. n.ſ.. [banniſºment, Fr.]
1. The act of baniſhing another; as, he ſecured himſelf by the
baniſhment of his enemies.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
E.
&gt;
-
-
2. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A N
13 A N
2. The ſtate of being baniſhed; exile.
Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to baniſhment. Shakespeare. As you like it.
Round the wide world in baniſhment we roam,
Forc'd from our pleaſing fields and native home. Dryden.
BANK. m. ſ. [banc, Saxon.]
1. The earth riſing on each ſide of a water. We ſay, properly,
the ſhore of the ſea, and the banks of a river, brook, or ſmall
Water.
Have you not made an univerſal ſhout,
That Tyber trembled underneath his bank. Shał, jul. Caſ:
Richmond, in Devonſhire, ſent out a boat
Unto the ſhore, to ask thoſe on the banks, -
If they were his aſſiſtants. Shakeſp. Richard III.
A brook whoſe ſtream ſo great, ſo good,
Was lov'd, was honour’d as a flood:
Whoſe banks the Muſes dwelt upon. Craſhaw.
'Tis happy when our ſtreams of knowledge flow,
To fill their banks, but not to overthrow. Denham.
O early loſt what tears the river ſhed,
When the ſad pomp along his banks was led ! Pope.
2. Any heap of earth piled up. \
They beſieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and they caſt up
a bank againſt the city; and it ſtood in the trench.
2 Samuel, xx. 15.
3. [from banc, Fr. a bench.] A ſeat or bench of rowers.
Plac'd on your banks, the luſty Trojans ſweep
Neptune's ſmooth face, and cleave the yielding deep. JValler.
Mean time the king with gifts a veſſel ſtores,
Supplies the banks with twenty choſen oars. Dryd. Homer.
That banks of oars were not in the ſame plain, but raiſed
above one another, is evident from deſcriptions of ancient ſhips.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
4. A place where money is laid up to be called for occaſionally.
Let it be no bank, or common ſtock, but every man be maſ-
ter of his own money. Not that I altogether miſlike banks, but
they will hardly be brooked in regard of certain ſuſpicions.
Bacon's Eſſays,
This maſs of treaſure you ſhould now reduce;
But you your ſtore have hoarded in ſome bank. Denham.
Their pardons and indulgences, and giving men a ſhare in
ſaints merits, out of the common bank and treaſury of the
church, which the pope has the ſole cuſtody of. South.
5. The company of perſons concerned in managing a bank.
To BANK. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To lay up money in a bank.
2. To incloſe with banks.
- Amid the cliffs
And burning ſands, that bank the ſhrubby vales. Thomſon.
BA'NK-BILL, n.ſ.. [from bank and bill] A note for money laid
up in a bank, at the ſight of which the money is paid.
Let three hundred pounds be paid her out of my ready mo-
ney, or bank-bills. Swift's Laſ I/ill.
BANKER. n.ſ.. [from bank.] One that trafficks in money; one
that keeps or manages a bank.
Whole droves of lenders croud the banker's doors,
To call in money. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
By powerful charms of gold and ſilver led,
The Lombard bankers and the change to waſte. Dryden.
BA'NKRUpcy. m. ſ. [from bankrupt.]
1. The ſtate of a man broken, or bankrupt.
2. The act of declaring one's ſelf bankrupt; as, he ſilenced the
clamours of his creditors by a ſudden bankrupcy.
BA'NKRUpt, adj. [banqueroute, Fr. bancorupto, Ital.] In debt
beyond the power of payment.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
Sir, if you ſpend word for word with me,
I ſhall make your wit bankrupt. Shakespeare Two Gent. of Werona.
BA'NKRUPT. n.J. A man in debt beyond the power of pay-
ment.
Perkin gathered together a power, neither in number nor in
hardineſs contemptible; but, in their fortunes, to be feared;
being bankrupts, and many of them felons. Bacon's Henry VII.
It is with wicked men as with a bankrupt: when his credi-
tors are loud and clamorous, and ſpeak big, he giveth them
many good words. Calamy.
In vain at court the bankrupt pleads his cauſe;
His thankleſs country leaves him to her laws. Pope.
To BANKRUpt. v. a. To break; to diſable one from ſatisfy-
ing his creditors.
We caſt off the care of all future thirſt, becauſe we are al-
ready bankrupted. Hammond’s Fundamentals.
BA'NNER. n.ſ.. [banniere, Fr. banair, Welch.]
1. A flag; a ſtandard; a military enſign.
From France there comes a power,
Who already have ſecret ſeize
In ſome of our beſt ports, and are at point
To ſhew their open banner. Shakeſp. King Lear.
All in a moment through the gloom were ſeen
Ten thouſand banners riſe into the air,
With orient colours waving. A ſilton's Par. Loft, b. i.
- He ſaid no more;
But left his ſiſter and his queen behind,
And wav'd his royal banner in the wind. Dryden.
Fir’d with ſuch motives, you do well to join -
With Cato's foes, and follow Caeſar's banners. Addison's Cato.
2. A ſtreamer borne at the end of a lance, or elſewhere.
BA'NNERET. n.ſ.. [from banner.] A knight made in the field,
with the ceremony of cutting off the point of his ſtandard, and
making it a banner. They are next to barons in dignity; and
were anciently called by ſummons to parliament. Blount.
A gentleman told king Henry, that Sir Richard Croftes,
made banneret at Stoke, was a wiſe man; the king anſwered,
he doubted not that, but marvelled how a fool could know.
Cambden's Remains.
BA'NNEROL, more properly BANDERol. n.ſ.. [from banderole,
Fr.] A little iſ. ſtreamer.
King Oſwald had a bannerol of gold and purple ſet over his
tomb. Camden’s Remains.
BA'NNIAN. m. ſ. A man's undreſs, or morning-gown; ſuch as
is worn by the Bannians in the Eaſt Indies.
BA'NNock. m. ſ. A kind of oaten or peaſe meal cake, mixed
with water, and baked upon an iron plate over the fire; uſed
in the northern counties, and in Scotland.
BANGUET. n.ſ.. [banquet, Fr. banchetto, Ital. vanqueto, Span.]
A feaſt.
If a faſting day come, he hath on that day a banquet to make.
Hooker, b. v. § 41.
In his commendations I am fed;
It is a banquet to me. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
You cannot have a perfeót palace, except you have two ſe-
veral ſides; a ſide for the banquet, and a fide Å. the houſhold;
the one for feaſts and triumphs, and the other for dwelling.
Bacon's Eſſays.
Shall the companions make a banquet of him Shall they
part him among the merchants : job, xli. 6.
At that taſted fruit,
The ſun, as from Thyeſtean banquet, turn'd
His courſe intended. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x. l. 688.
That dares prefer the toils of Hercules
To dalliance, banquets, and ignoble eaſe. Dryden's juvenal.
To *Sºrr. v. a. [from the noun..] To treat any one with
feaſts.
Welcome his friends,
Viſit his countrymen, and banquet them.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
They were banqueted by the way, and the nearer they ap-
proached, the more encreaſed the nobility. Sirj. Hayward.
To BA/NQUET. v. n. To feaſt; to fare daintily.
The mind ſhall banquet, tho' the body pine:
Fat paunches make lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but banker out the wits.
Shakespeare. Love's Labour Loff.
So long as his innocence is his repaſt, he feaſts and banquets
upon bread and water. South.
I purpos'd to unbend the evening hours,
And banquet private in the women's bow'rs. Prior.
BA'NQUETER. n.ſ.. [from banquet.]
1. A feaſter; one that lives deliciouſly:
2. He that makes feaſts.
BA'NQUET-House. n. ſ. [from banquet and houſe..] A
BA'NQUETING-House. houſe where banquets are kept.
In a banqueting-houſe, among certain pleaſant trees, the table
was ſet near to an excellent water-work. Sidney.
But at the walk's end behold, how rais'd on high
A banquet-houſe ſalutes the ſouthern ſky. Dryden's juvenal.
BAN2UETTE. n.ſ. [Fr. in fortification.] A ſmall bank at
the foot of the parapet, for the ſoldiers to mount upon when
they fire.
BA'Nsticle. n.ſ. A ſmall fiſh, called alſo a ſtickleback.
To BANTER. v. a. [a barbarous word, without etymology,
unleſs it be derived from badiner, Fr.] To play upon ; to rally;
to turn to ridicule; to ridicule.
The magiſtrate took it that he bantered him, and bad an offi-
cer take him into cuſtody. L'Eſtrange.
It is no new thing for innocent ſimplicity to be the ſubject
of bantering drolls. L’Eſtrange.
Could Alcinous' gueſts withold
From ſcorn or rage Shall we, cries one, permit
His leud romances, and his bant'ring wit? Tate's juvenal.
BA'NtER. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Ridicule; raillery.
This humour, let it look never ſo filly, as it paſſes many times
for frolick and banter, is one of the moſt pernicious ſnares in
human life. L’Eſtrange.
Metaphyſicks are ſo neceſſary to a diſtinét conception, ſolid
judgment, and juſt reaſoning on many ſubjects, that thoſe who
ridicule it, will be ſuppoſed to make their wit and banter a re-
fuge and excuſe for their own lazineſs. Watts's Logick.
BA'NTERER. m. ſ. [from lanter.]. One that banters; a droll.
What opinion have theſe religious banterers of the divine
power? or what have they to ſay for this Inockery and con-
tempt L’E/irange.
BANTLING. m. ſ. [if it has any etymology, it is perhaps corrup-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2 tºd
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">P A R
B A R
ted from the old word bairn, bairmling, a little child.] A little
child: a low word.
If the obječt of their love
Chance by Lucina's aid to prove,
Thev ſeldom let the bantling roar,
In baſket, at a neighbour's door. Prior.
BA'PTISM. n.f. [baptiſmus, Lat. 32 ºz. ..]
1. An external ablution of the body, with a certain form of
words, which operates and denotes an internal ablution or
waſhing of the ſoul from original fin. . Ayſſº's Parergon.
Baptiſºn is given by water, and that preſcript form of words
which the church of Chriſt doth uſe. Hooker, b. iv. § 1.
To his great baptiſm flock'd,
With awe, the regions round, and with them came
From Nazareth the ſon of Joſeph deem’d,
Unmarkt, unknown. Paradiſe Regained, b. i. 1. 21.
2. Bgºtiſm is often taken in Scripture for ſufferings.
I have a baptiſm to be baptized with, and how am I ſtrait-
ened till it be accompliſhed? Luke, xii. 15.
Pºwai. adj. [from baptiſºn.] Of or pertaining to bap-
tlin.
When we undertake the baptiſmal vow, and enter on their
new life, it would be apt to diſcourage us. I ammond.
BAPTIST. n.ſ.. [baptiſt, Fr. Ezzº...] He that adminiſters
baptiſm.
Him the Baptiſ; ſoon
Deſcry’d, divinely warn'd, and witneſs bore
As to his worthier Parad. Regained, b. i. 1 2 5.
BA'PT1st ERY. m. ſ. ['aptiſterium, Lat.] The place where the
ſacrament of baptiſm is adminiſtred.
The great church, baptiſery, and leaning tower, are well
worth ſeeing. Addiſon on Italy.
To BAPTIZE. v. a. [baptiſºr, Fr. from 22:...] To chriſten;
to adminiſter the ſacrament of baptiſm.
He to them ſhall leave in charge,
To teach all nations what of him they learn'd,
And his ſalvation ; them who ſhall believe,
Baptizing in the profluent ſtream, the ſign
Of waſhing them from guilt of ſin, to life
Pure, and in mind prepar'd, if ſo befal,
For death, like that which the Redeemer dy’d.
Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Let us refle&amp;t that we are chriſtians; that we are called by
the name of the Son of God, and baptized into an irreconcilé-
able enmity with fin, the world, and the devil. Rogers.
BAPTI'z ER. m. ſ. [from to laptize.] One that chriſtens; one
that adminiſters baptiſm.
BAR. m. ſ. [barre, Fr.]
1. A piece of wood, iron, or other matter, laid croſs a paſſage
to hinder entrance.
And he made the middle bar to ſhoot through the boards
from the one end to the other. Exodus, xxxvi. 33.
2. A bolt; a piece of iron or wood faſtened to a door, and en-
tering into the poſt or wall to hold it.
The fiſh-gate did the ſons of Haſſenaah build, who alſo laid
the beams thereof, and ſet up the doors thereof, the locks there-
of, and the bars thereof. Nehem. iii. 3.
3. Any obſtacle which hinders or obſtrućts.
I brake up for it my decreed place, and ſet bars and doors,
and ſaid, hitherto ſhalt thou come, and no farther.
- job, xxxviii. I c.
And had his heir ſurviv'd him in due courſe,
What limits, England, hadſt thou found what bar?
What world could have reſiſted Daniel’s Civil J/ar.
Hard, thou know'ſt it, to exclude
Spiritual ſubſtance with corporeal bar. Parad. Lºft, b. iv.
Muft I new bars to my own joy create,
Refuſe myſelf, what I had forc'd from fate? Dryd. Aureng.
Fatal accidents have ſet
A moſt unhappy bar between your friendſhip.
Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother.
4. A rock, or bank of ſand, at the entrance of a harbour or ri-
ver, which ſhips cannot ſail over at low water.
5. Any thing uſed for prevention. • *
Leſt examination ſhould hinder and lett your proceedings,
behold, for a bar againſt that impediment, one opinion newly
added. Hooker, Prºface.
Which Salique land the French unjuſtly gloze to be
The founder of this law, and female bar. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
6. The place where cauſes of law are tried, or where criminals
are judged; ſo called from the bar placed to hinder crouds
from incommoding the court.
The great duke
Came to the bar, where, to his accuſations,
He pleaded ſtill not guilty. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Some at the bar with ſubtlety defend,
Or on the bench the knotty laws untye. Dryd, juvenal.
7. An incloſed place in a tavern or coffeehouſe, where the houſe-
keeper fits and receives reckonings.
I was under ſome apprehenſion that they would appeal to
me; and therefore laid down my penny at the bar, and made
the beſt of my way. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 423.
8. In law. A peremptory exception againſt a demand or plea
brought by the defendant in an action, that deſtroys the action
of the plaintiff for ever. It is divided into a bar to common
intent, and a bar ſpecial: a bar to a common intent, is an or-
dinary or general bar, that diſables the declaration or plea of the
plaintif: a bar ſpecial, is that which is more than ordinary,
and falls out in the caſe in hand, upon ſome ſpecial circum-
ſtance of the fact. Cowel.
Baſtardy is laid in bar of ſomething that is principally com-
menced. Ayliffe's Parergon.
9. Any thing by which the compages or ſtructure is held to-
ether.
£ I went down to the bottoms of the mountains: the earth,
with her lars, was about me for ever. Jonah, ii. 6.
Io. Anything which is laid acroſs another, as lars in heraldry.
I 1. Bar of gold or ſilver, is a lump or wedge from the mines,
melted down into a ſort of mould, and never wrought. .
12. Bars ºf a horſe. The upper part of the gums between the
tusks and grinders, which bears no teeth, and to which the
bit is applied, and, by its frićtion, the horſe governed.
13. "ars, in muſik, are ſtrokes drawn perpendicularly acroſs
the lines of a piece of muſick; uſed to regulate the beating or
meaſure of muſical time. t
BAR shot. n.ſ. Two half bullets joined together by an iron
bar ; uſed in ſea engagements for cutting down the maſts and
rigging.
To . v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten or ſhut anything with a bolt, or bar.
My duty cannot ſuffer
Tº obey in all your daughter's hard commands;
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
When you lar the window-ſhutters of your lady's bedcham-
ber at nights, leave open the ſaſhes to let in the air.
Swift's Directions to the Chambermaid.
2. To hinder; to obſtrućt.
When law can do no right,
Let it be lawful, that law lar no wrong. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
3. To prevent.
The houſes of the country were all ſcattered, and yet not ſo
far off as that it barred mutual ſuccour. Sidney, b. i.
Doth it not ſeem a thing very probable, that God doth pur-
poſely add, Do after my judgments; as giving thereby to un-
derſtand, that his meaning in the former ſentence was but to bar
ſimilitude in ſuch things as were repugnant to his ordinances,
laws, and ſtatutes ? PHooker.
4. To ſhut out from.
Hath he ſet bounds between their love and me?
I am their mother; who ſhall bar them from me?
Shakeſp. Richard III.
Our hope of Italy not only loſt,
But ſhut from ev’ry ſhore, and barr'd from ev’ry coaſt. Dryd.
5. To exclude from a claim.
God hath abridged it, by barring us from ſome things of
themſelves indifferent. Hooker, b. ii. § 4.
Give my voice on Richard's ſide,
To lar my maſter's heirs in true deſcent!
God knows I will not. Shakeſp. Richard III.
His civil ačts do bind and bar them all;
And as from Adam, all corruption take,
So, if the father's crime be capital,
In all the blood, law doth corruption make. Sirj. Davies.
It was thought ſufficient not only to exclude them from that
benefit, but to bar them from their money. Clarendon.
If he is qualified, why is he barred the profit, when he only
performs the ...} Collier on Pride.
6. To prohibit.
For though the law of arms doth bar
The uſe of venom'd ſhot in war. Hudibras.
What is a greater pedant than a mere man of the town 2
Bar him the playhouſes, and you ſtrike him dumb. Addiſon.
7. To except; to make an exception.
Well, we ſhall ſee your bearing.—
—Nay, but I bar to-night; you ſhall not gage me
By what we do to-night. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
8. In law. To hinder the proceſs of a ſuit.
But buff and belt men never know theſe cares;
No time, nor trick of law, their action bars :
Their cauſe they to an eaſier iſſue put. Dryden's juvenal.
From ſuch delays as conduce to the finding out of truth, a
criminal cauſe ought not to be barred. Ayliffe's Parergon.
If a biſhop be a party to a ſuit, and excommunicates his ad-
verſary, ſuch excommunication ſhall not diſable or bar his ad-
verſary. - Aylºff's Parergon.
9. To bar a vein.
This is an operation performed upon the veins of the legs of
a horſe, and other parts, with intent to ſtop the malignant hu-
mours. It is done by opening the skin above it, diengaging
it, and tying it both above and below, and ſtriking between
two ligatures.
BARB.
-
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A R
BARB. m. ſ. ſharia, a beard, Lat.]
1. Any thing that grows in the place of the beard.
he barbel, ſo called by reaſon of his barb or wattels at his
mouth, under his chaps. //alton's Angler.
2. The points that ſtand backward in an arrow, or fiſhing-hook,
to hinder them from being extracted.
Nor leſs the Spartan fear'd, before he found
The ſhining harb appear above the wound.
3. The armour for horſes.
Their horſes were naked, without any barl's for albeit ma-
ny brought barbs, few regarded to put them on. Hayward.
BARB. n.ſ. [contracted from Barbary J A Barbary horſe.
Theſe horſes are brought fron Barbary; they are commonly
of a ſlender light ſize, and very lean and thin, uſually choſen
for ſtallions. Harbs, as it is ſaid, may die, but never grow old;
the vigour and mettle of barbs never ceaſe, but with their
life. Farrier's Dié?.
To BARB. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhave ; to dreſs out the beard.
Shave the head, and tie the beard, and ſay it was the deſire
of the penitent to be ſo barbed before his death.
Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
- Pope's Iliad.
2. To furniſh horſes with armour.
A warriour train
That like a deluge pour'd upon the plain;
On barled ſteeds they rode in proud array,
Thick as the college of the bees in May. Dryden's Fables.
3. To jag arrows with hooks.
The twanging bows
Send ſhowers of ſhafts, that on their barbed points
Alternate ruin bear. Philips.
BA'RBAcAN. m. ſ. [barbacane, Fr. barbacana, Span.]
1. A fortification placed before the walls of a town.
Within the barbacan a porter ſate,
Day and night duly keeping watch and ward:
Nor wight, nor word mote paſs out of the gate,
But in good order, and with due regard.
2. A fortreſs at the end of a bridge.
3. An opening in the wall through which the guns are levelled.
BARBADoes Cherry. [malphigia, Lat.]
It has a ſmall quinquefid calix, of one leaf, having bifid ſeg-
ments; the flower conſiſts of five leaves, in form of a roſe,
having ſeveral ſtamina colle&amp;ted in form of a tube; the ovary,
in the bottom of the flower-cup, becomes a globular, fleſhy,
ſoft fruit; in which is a ſingle capſule, containing three ſtony
winged nuts. In the Weſt Indies, it riſes to be fifteen or ſix-
teen feet high, where it produces great quantities of a pleaſant
tart fruit; propagated in gardens there, but in Europe it is a
curioſity. Millar.
BA'RBA'Does Tar. A bituminous ſubſtance, differing little from
the petroleum floating on ſeveral ſprings in England and Scot-
land. I/?odward's Method of Foſſils.
BARBA'RIAN. m.ſ. [barbarus, Lat. It ſeems to have ſignified at
firſt only fºreign, or a fºreigner; but, in time, implied ſome de-
gree of wildneſs or cruelty.]
1. A man uncivilized; untaught; a ſavage.
Proud Greece, all nations elſe barbarians held,
Boaſting, her learning all the world excell’d. Denham.
There were not different gods among the Greeks and barba-
rians. Stillingfiest's Defence of Diſc. on Romiſh Idolatry.
But with deſcending ſhow’rs of brimſtone fir’d,
The wild barbarian in the ſtorm expir’d. Addison.
2. A foreigner.
I would they were barbarians, as they are,
Though in Rome litter'd. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
3. A brutal monſter; a man without pity: a term of reproach.
Thou fell barbarian /
What had he done what could provoke thy madneſs
To aſſaſſinate ſo great, ſo brave a man A. Philips D. Mat.
BARBA'RIAN. adj. Belonging to barbarians; ſavage.
Some felt the ſilent ſtroke of mould'ring age,
Barbarian blindneſs. Pope's Epiſtles.
BARBA'Rick. adj. [barbarius, Lat.] Foreign; far-fetched.
The gorgeous Eaſt, with richeſt hand,
Show'rs on her kings barbarick pearl and gold. Par. Loſt.
The eaſtern front was glorious to behold,
With diamond flaming, and barbarick gold. Pope.
BA'RBARIs M. n.ſ.. [barbariſmus, Lat.]
1. A form of ſpeech contrary to the purity and exačineſs of any
language.
The language is as near approaching to it, as our modern
barbariſm will allow; which is all that can be expected from
any now extant. Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
2. Ignorance of arts; want of learning.
I have for barbariſm ſpoke more
Than for that angel knowledge you can ſay.
Shakeſp., Love's Lalour Lºft.
The genius of Raphael having ſucceeded to the times of
barbariſm and ignorance, the knowledge of painting is now ar-
rived to perfection. Dryd. Dufreſnoy, Prºſace.
3. Brutality; ſavageneſs of manners; incivility.
Moderation ought to be had in tempering and managing the
Vol. I.
Fairy Qween.
Iriſh, to bring them from their delight of licentious larlariſh
unto the love of goodneſs and civility. Spenſer's State of Irel.
Divers great monarchies have riſen from barbariſºn to civi-
lity, and fallen again to ruin Sir J. Davies on Ireland.
4. Cruelty; barbarity; unpitying hardneſs of heart. -
They muſt per force have melted,
And barbariſºn itſelf have pity'd him. Shakespeare, Richard II.
BARBA'RIT Y. m.ſ.. [from barbarous.]
1. Savageneſs; incivility.
2. Cruelty; inhumanity.
And they did treat him with all the rudencſ, reproach, and
barbarity imaginable. Clarendon, b. viii.
3. Barbariſm; impurity of ſpeech.
Next Petrarch followed, and in him we ſee
What rhime improv’d in all its height, can be
At beſt a pleaſing ſound, and ſweet barbarity. Dryden,
Latin often expreſſes that in one word, which either the bar-
barity or narrowneſs of modern tongues cannot ſupply in more.
Dryden.
Affected refinements, which ended by degrees in many lar-
barities, before the Goths had invaded Italy. Swift.
BARBAROUS. adj. [barbare, Fr. 33:22:6.]
1. Stranger to civility; ſavage; uncivilized.
What need I ſay more to you? What car is ſo barbarous,
but hath heard of Amphialus * Sidney.
The doubtful damſel dare not yet commit
Her ſingle perſon to their barbarous truth. Fairy Q. h. i.
Thou art a Roman; be not barbarous. Shakeſp. T. Andron.
And he left governour, Philip, for his country a Phrygian,
and for manners more barbarous than he that ſet him there.
2 Macc. v. 22.
A barbarous country muſt be broken by war, before it be ca-
pable of government; and when ſubdued, if it be not well
planted, it will eſtſoons return to barbariſm. Davies on Ireland.
2. Ignorant; unacquainted with arts.
They who reſtored painting in Germany, not having thoſe
reliques of antiquity, retained that barbarous manner. Dryden.
3. Cruel; inhuman.
By their barbarous uſage, he died within a few days, to the
grief of all that knew him. Clarendon, b, viii.
BARBA Rously. adv. [from barbarous.]
1. Ignorantly; without knowledge or arts.
2. In a manner contrary to the rules of ſpeech.
We harbarouſly call them bleſt,
Whilſt ſwelling coffers break their owner's reſt. Stepney,
3. Cruelly; inhumanly.
But yet you barbarouſly murder'd him. Dryd. Span. Friar.
She wiſhes it may proſper; but her mother uſed one of her
nieces very barbarouſly. Speciator, N° 483.
BARBARous Ness. n.ſ.. [from barbarous.]
1. Incivility of manners.
Excellencies of muſick and poetry are grown to be little
more, but the one fiddling, and the other rhiming; and are
indeed very worthy of the ignorance of the friar, and the bar-
barouſneſs of the 8. Temple.
2. Impurity of language.
It is alſo much degenerated and impaired, as touching the
pureneſs of ſpeech ; being overgrown with barbarouſneſs.
- Brerewood on Languages.
3. Cruelty.
The barbarouſeſ of the trial, and the perſuaſives of the
clergy, prevailed to antiquate it. Hale's Common Law of Engl.
To BA/R BEcu E. v. a. A term uſed in the Weſt-Indies for dreſ-
ſing a hog whole; which, being ſplit to the backbone, is laid
flat upon a large gridiron, raiſed about two foot above a char-
coal fire, with which it is ſurrounded. . .
Oldfield, with more than harpy throat endu'd,
Cries, ſend me, gods, a whole hog barbecu'd. Pºpe.
BA'RBEcu E. m. ſ. A hog dreſt whole, in the Weſt Indian manner.
BARBED. participial adj. [from to barb.]
1. Furniſhed with armour. -
His glittering armour he will command to ruſt,
His barbed ſteeds to ſtables. Shakeſp. Richard II.
2. Bearded; jagged with hooks or points.
If I conjecture right, no drizzling ſhow'r,
But rattling ſtorm of arrows harb’d with fire.
Milton's Par. Lºft, b. vi. l. 544.
BA'RBEL. m. ſ. [from barb.]
1. A kind of fiſh found in rivers, large and ſtrong, but coarſe.
The barbel is ſo called, by reaſon of the barb or wattels at
his mouth, or under his chaps. //alton’s Angler.
2. Knots of ſuperfluous fleſh growing up in the channels of the
mouth of a horſe. Farrier's Dići.
BARBER. m. ſ. [from to harb.] A man who ſhaves the beard.
His chamber being ſtived with friends or ſuitors, he gave his
legs, arms, and breaſts to his ſervants to dreſs; his head and
face to his barber; his eyes to his letters, and his ears to peti-
tioners. //otton.
With thoſe thy boiſt'rous locks, no worthy match
For valour to aflail
But by the barber's razor beſt ſubdu'd. Milton's Samſ. Agon.
2 Q- What
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A R
B A R
What ſyſtem, Dick, has right averr'd
The cauſe, why woman has no beard?
In points like theſe we muſt agree, -
Our barber knows as much as we. Prior.
To BARBER. v. a. [from the noun..] To dreſs out; to powder.
Our courteous Antony,
Whom ne'er the word of No, woman heard ſpeak,
Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feaſt.
Shakespeare Antony and C. ºfatra.
BARBER-cHIR URGEoN. m. ſ. A man who joins the practice of
ſurgery to the barber's trade; ſuch as were all ſurgeons for-
merly, but now it is uſed only for a low practiſer of ſurgery.
He put himſelf into barber-hirurgeons hands, who, by unfit
applications, ratified the tumour. J//eman's Surgery.
BARBER-Moscº R. m. ſ. A word of reproach in Shakeſpeare,
which ſeems to ſignify a fop ; a man decked cut by his barber.
Draw, you rogue; for though it be night, the moonſhines;
I'll make a ſop of the moonſhine of you; you whoreſon, cul-
lionly, barber-monger, draw. Shakeſp. King Lear.
BARBERRY. m. ſ. [verberis, Lat..] Pipperidge buſh.
It is ſet with ſharp prickles; the leaves are long, and ſerrat-
cd on the edges; the flowers conſiſt of ſix leaves, which ex-
pand in form of a roſe, and are of a yellow colour; the fruit
is long, of an acid taſte, and, for the moſt part, of a red colour,
and grows in cluſters; the bark of the tree is whitiſh. The
ſpecies are, 1. The common barberry. 2. Barberry without
ſtones. The firſt of theſe forts is very common in England,
and often planted for hedges. A,illar.
Barberry is a plant that bears a fruit very uſeful in houſe-
wifery; that which beareth its fruit without ſtones is counted
beſt. Martimer's Husbandry.
BARD. m. ſ. [bardi, Welch.] A poet.
There is amongſt the Iriſh a kind of people called lard,
which are to them inſtead of poets; whoſe profeſſion is to ſct
forth the praiſes or diſpraiſes of men in their poems or rhimes;
the which are had in high regard and eſtimation among them.
Spenser on Ireland.
And many hard, that to the trembling chord,
Can tune tº cir timely voices cunningly. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The Ward who firſt adorn'd our native tongue,
Tun'd to his Britiſh lyre this ancient ſong,
Which Homer might without a bluſh rehearſe. Dryden.
BARE. adj. [bare, Sax. bar, Dan.]
1. Naked ; without covering.
The trees are bare and naked, which uſe both to cloath and
houſe the kern. Spenſer on Ireland.
Then ſtretch'd her arms tº embrace the body bare ;
Her claſping hands incloſe but empty air. Dryden.
In the old Roman ſtatues, theſe two parts were always hare,
and expoſed to view, as much as our hands and face at preſent
Addiſon's Travels.
2. Uncovered in reſpect.
Though the lords uſed to be covered whilſt the commons
were bare, yet the commons would not be bare before the Scot-
tiſh commiſſioners; and ſo none were covered. Clarendon.
3. Unadorned; plain; ſimple; without ornament.
Yet was their manners then but lare and plain ;
For th’ antique world exceſs and pride did hate. Fairy Q.
4. Detected ; without concealment. -
Theſe falſe pretexts and varniſh'd colours failing,
Bare in thy guilt, how foul muſt thou appear :
A ſilton's Sampſon Agoniſes, l. go 1.
5. Poor; without plenty.
Were it for the glory of God, that the clergy ſhould be left
as bare as the apofiles, when they had neither ſtaff nor ſcrip;
God would, I hope, endue them with the ſelf-ſame affection.
Hooker, Preface.
Even from a lare treaſury, my ſucceſs has been contrary to
that of Mr. Cowley. Dryden's Epiſtles, Dedication.
6. Mere.
It was a bare petition of a ſtate
To one whom they had puniſh'd. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
You have an exchequer of words, and no other treaſure for
your followers; for it appears, by their bare liveries, that they
live by your bare words. Shakeſp. Two Gent. of /erona.
Nor are men prevailed upon by lare words, only through a
defect of knowledge; but carried, with theſe puffs of wind,
contrary to knowledge. South.
7. Threadbare ; much worn ; as, bare liveries, in the laſt quota-
tion from Shakeſpeare.
8. Not united with any thing elſe. -
A deſire to draw all things to the determination of lare and
naked Scripture, hath cauſed much pains to be taken in abating
the credit of man. Hooker, b. ii. § 7.
That which offendeth us, is the great diſgrace which they
offer unto our cuſtom of bare reading the word of God. Hooker.
9. Sometimes it has of before the thing taken away.
Tempt not the brave and needy to deſpair;
For, tho' your violence ſhould leave them bare
Of gold and ſilver, ſwords and darts remain. Dryden's juv.
Making a law to reduce intereſt, will not raiſe the price of
land; it will only leave the country barer of money. Locke.
To Bar E. v. a. [from the adjective.] To ſtrip; to make barc
or naked.
The turtle on the lared branch,
Laments the wounds that death did launch. Spenser.
There is a fabulous narration, that an herb groweth in the
likeneſs of a lamb, and feedeth upon the graſs, in ſuch ſort as it
will bare the graſs round about. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Eriphyle here he found
Baring her breaſt, yet bleeding with the wound. Dryden.
He lar'd an ancient oak of all her boughs: -
Then on a riſing ground the trunks he plac'd. Dryden.
For virtue, when I point the pen,
Bare the mean heart that lurks beneath a ſtar;
Can there be wanting to defend her cauſe,
Lights of the church, or guardians of the laws Pºpe.
BARE, or Bor E. The preterite of to bear. See To BEAR.
BARE BONE. m. ſ. [from bare and bone..] Lean, ſo that the bones
appear. -
Here comes lean Jack, here comes lar-lºne; how long is it
ago, Jack, ſince thou ſaweſt thy own knee : Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
BAREF AcFD. adj. [from lare and face.]
1. With the face naked ; not maſked. -
Your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will
play barefaced. Shakeſp. Midſummer's Night's eam.
2. Shameleſs; unreſerved ; without concealment; without diſ-
guiſe.
The animoſities encreaſed, and the parties appeared bare-
faced againſt each other. Clarendon, b. viii.
It is moſt certain, that largſaced bawdry is the pooreſt pre-
tence to wit imaginable. Dry len.
BAREFA'cºol Y. adv. [from barºſaced.] Openly; ſhamefully;
without diſguiſe.
Though only ſome profigate wretches own it too barºſaced-
4, yet, perhaps, we ſhould hear more, did not fear tie people's
tongues. Locke.
BA REFA'ced N Ess. n.ſ.. [from barºſaced.] Effrontery; aſlu-
rance; audaciouſneſ.
BA'REFoot. adj. [from bare and ſect.] Without ſhoes.
She muſt have a huſband;
I muſt dance barefoot on her wedding day. Shakeſp.
Going to find a barefºot brother out,
One of our order. Shakespeare. Romeo and Juliet.
Ambitious love hath ſo in me offended,
That barefºot plod I the cold ground upon
With ſainted vow. Shakeſpeare.
Envoys deſcribe this holy man, with his Alcaydes about
him, ſtanding barefºot, bowing to the earth. Addiſon.
BARE Fo'ot Ed. adj. Without ſhoes.
He himſelf, with a rope about his neck, barºfoted, came to
offer himſelf to the diſcretion of Leonatus. Sidney, b. ii.
BA'REGNAws. adj. [from bare and gnawn..] Eaten bare.
Know my name is loſt;
By treaſon's tooth baregnawn and cankerbit. Shakespeare K Lear.
BA'RE HEADED. adj. [from bare and head..] Uncovered in re-
ſpect.
He, larcheaded, lower than his proud ſleed's neck,
Beſpoke them thus. Shakeſp. Richard II.
Next, before the chariot, went two men lareheaded. Eacon.
The victor knight had laid his helm aſide,
Bareheaded, popularly low he bow’d. Dryden's Falks.
BA'RELY. adv. [from bare.]
1. Nakedly.
2. Merely; only; without any thing more.
The external adminiſtration of his word is as well by read-
ing are; the Scripture, as by explaining the ſame. Iłooker.
The duke of Lancaſter is dead; -
And living too, for now his ſon is duke—
Parely in title, not in revenue. Shakespeare. Richard II.
He larcy nam'd the treet, promis'd the wine;
But his kind wife gave me the very ſign. Donne.
Where the balance of trade barely pays for commodities with
commodities, there money muſt be ſent, or elſe the debts can-
not be paid. Locke.
RARENEss. n. ſ. [from tare.]
1. Nakedneſs.
So you ſerve us,
Till we ſerve you ; but when you have our roſes,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourſelves,
And mock us with our bareneſs. Shakespeare All's well that end, we'.
2. Leanneſs.
For their poverty, I know not where they had that; and
for their lareneſ, they never learned that of me. Shakespeare Hen.IV.
3. Poverty.
Were it ſtript of its privileges, and made as like the primi-
tive church for its bareneſ, as its purity, it could legally want
all ſuch privileges. South.
4. Meanneſs of clothes.
BARGAIN. m. ſ. [bargen, Welch; bargaigne, Fr.]
1. A contraćt or agreement concerning the ſale of ſomething.
What is marriage but a very bargain P wherein is ſought al-
liance, or portion, or reputation, with ſome deſire of iſſue;
and not the faithful nuptial union of man and wife. Bacon.
- 2. No
I
-
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A R.
B A R
No more can be due to me,
Than at the bargain made was meant. Donne.
2. The thing bought or ſold.
Give me but my price for the other two, and you ſhall even
have that into the bargain. L’E/irange.
He who is at the charge of a tutor at home, may give his
ſon a more genteel carriage, with greater learning into the bar-
gain, than any at ſchool can do. Locke.
3. Stipulation. -
There was a difference between courteſies received from
their maſter and the duke; for that the duke's might have ends
of utility and bargain ; whereas their maſter's could not.
Bacon's Henry VII.
4. An unexpected reply, tending to obſcenity.
Where ſold he bargains, whipſtitch Dryden's Maftechnoe.
As to bargains, few of them ſeem to be excellent, becauſe
they all terminate in one ſingle point. Swift.
No maid at court is leſs aſham’d,
Howe'er for ſelling bargains fam'd. Swift.
5. An event; an upſhot: a low ſenſe.
I am ſorry for thy misfortune; however we muſt make the
beſt of a bad bargain : thou art in jeopardy, that is certain.
Arbuthnot's Hylory of j. Bull.
6. In law.
Bargain and ſale is a contract or agreement made for ma-
nours, lands, &amp;c. alſo the transferring the property of them
from the bargainer to the bargainee. Corvel.
To BA'RGAIN. v. n. [from the noun..] To make a contract for
the ſale or purchaſe of any thing; often with for.
Henry is able to enrich his queen;
And not to ſeek a queen to make him rich.
So worthleſs peaſants bargain for their wives,
As market men for oxen, ſheep, or horſe. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
For thoſe that are like to be in plenty, they may be largained
fºr upon the ground. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 675.
The thrifty ſtate will bargain ere they fight. Dryden.
It is poſſible the great duke may bargain for the republick of
Lucca, by the help of his great treaſures. Addiſon on Italy.
BARGAINEE'. n.ſ.. [from bargain..] He or ſhe that accepts a
bargain.
BARGAIN ER. m. ſ. [from bargain.] The perſon who profers,
or makes a bargain.
BARGE. m. ſ. [bargie, Dut. from barga, low Lat.]
1. A boat for pleaſure.
The large ſhe ſat in, like a burniſh'd throne,
Burnt on the water. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
It was conſulted, when I had taken my barge, and gone a-
ſhore, that my ſhip ſhould have ſet fail and left me there.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
Plac’d in the gilded large, -
Proud with the burden of ſo ſweet a charge;
With painted oars the youths begin to ſweep
Neptune's ſmooth face. Waller.
2. A boat for burden. -
BA'RGER. m. ſ. [from barge.] The manager of a barge.
Howſoever, many wafarers make themſelves glee, by put-
ting the inhabitants in mind of this privilege; who again,
eſpecially the women, like the Campellians in the north, and
the London largers, forſlow not to baigne them.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
BARK. m.ſ.. [barck, Dan.]
1. The rind or covering of a tree.
Trees laſt according to the ſtrength and quantity of their ſap
and juice; being well munited by their lar againſt the inju-
ries of the air. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 583.
Wand'ring in the dark, -
Phyſicians for the tree have found the bark. Dryden.
2. A ſmall ſhip. [from barca, low Lat.]
Things, I ſay, being in this ſtate, it came to paſs, that the
duke of Parma muſt have flown, if he would have come into
England; for he could neither get bark nor mariner to put to
ſea. Bacon on the J/ar with Spain.
It was that fatal and perfidious bark,
Built in th’ eclipſe, and rigg'd with curſes dark,
That ſunk ſo low that ſacred head of thine. Milton.
Who to a woman truſts his peace of mind,
Truſts a frail bark with a tempeſtuous wind.
To BARK. v. m. [beoncan, Saxon.]
1. To make the noiſe which a dog makes, when he threatens or
purſues.
Granville.
- Sent before my time
Into this breathing world, ſcarce half made up,
And that ſo lamely and unfaſhionably,
That dogs bark at me. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Why do your dogs bark ſo be there bears i' th' town
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
In vain the herdman calls him back again;
The dogs ſtand off afar, and bark in vain. Cowley.
2. To clamour at; to purſue with reproaches.
Vile is the vengeance on the aſhes cold,
And envy baſe, to bark at ſleeping fame.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. viii.
You dare patronage
The envious barking of your ſaucy tongue, - - -
Againſt my lord the duke of Somerſetſ Sha’ſp. Hºry VI,
Tººk. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtrip trees of their
ark.
The ſevereſt penalties ought to be put upon barking any tred
that is not felled. Temple,
Theſe trees, after they are baried, and cut into ſhape, are
tumbled down from the mountains into the ſtream.
Addiſon's Remar's ºn Italy.
Bº *** adj. [from bark and bare.] Stripped of the
aſ K.
Excorticated and bark-hared trees may be preſerved, by nou-
riſhing up a ſhoot from the foot, or below the ſtripped place,
cutting the body of the tree ſloping off a little above the ſhoot,
and it will quickly heal, and be covered with bark.
Aaortimer's Art of Husbandry.
BA'RKER. n.ſ.. [from bar{..]
I. One that barks or clamours.
What hath he done more than a baſe cur : barked and made
a noiſe had a fool or two to ſpit in his mouth But they are
rather enemies of my fame than me, theſe barkers.
Ben. jºhnſºn's Diſcovery.
2. [from bark of trees.] One that is employed in ſtripping
trec.S. -
BARKY. adj. [from bark.] Conſiſting of bark; containing
bark.
Ivy ſo enrings the larly fingers of the elm. -
Shakeſp. Merry //ſves ºf JWindſºr.
BARLEY. m. ſ. [derived by junius from ..]
It hath a thick ſpike ; the calyx, huſk, awn, and flower, are
like thoſe of wheat or rye, but the awns are rough , the ſeed is
ſwelling in the middle, and, for the moſt part, ends in a ſharp
point, to which the husks are cloſely united. The ſpecies are,
1. Common long-eared barley. 2. Winter or ſquare larly, by
ſome called big. 3. Sprat barley, or battledoor barley. All theſe
ſorts of barley are ſown in the ſpring of the year, in a dry time.
In ſome very dry light land, the barly is ſown early in March;
but in ſtrong clayey ſoils it is not ſown till April. The ſquare
barley, or lig, is chiefly cultivated in the north of England, and
in Scotland; and is hardier than the other ſorts. Where larly
is ſown upon new broken up land, the uſual method is to
plough up the land in March, and let it lie fallow until June;
at which time it is ploughed again, and ſown with turneps,
which are eaten by ſheep in winter, by whoſe dung the land is
greatly improved; and then, in March following, the ground
is ploughed again, and ſown with barley. Alſillar.
Barley is emollient, moiſtening, and expectorating; lar'y
was choſen by Hippocrates as proper food in inflammatory diſ-
tempers. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
BA'RLEY BRAKE. m. ſ. A kind of rural play.
By neighbours prais'd ſhe went abroad thereby,
At barleybrake her ſweet ſwift feet to try. Sidney.
BARLEY BROTH. n.ſ.. [from barley and by oth..] A low word,
ſometimes uſed for ſtrong beer.
Can ſodden watcr;
A drench for ſurreyn'd jades, their larly broth,
Decoct their cold blood to ſuch valiant heat Shakespeare Hen.V.
BARLEY coRN. m. ſ. [from barley and corn.] A grain of bar-
ley; the beginning of our meaſure"of length; the third part
of an inch.
A long, long journey, choak'd with brakes and thorns,
Ill meaſur’d by ten thouſand larly corns. Tickell.
BARLEY Mow. n.ſ.. [from barley and ſnow..] The place where
reaped barley is ſtowed up.
Whenever by yon barley mow I paſs,
Before my eyes will trip the tidylaſs. Gay's Paſtorals.
BARM. n.ſ.. [burn, Welch; bec) in, Sax.] Yeaſt ; the ferment
put into drink to make it work, and into bread, to lighten and
ſwell it.
Are you not he
That ſometimes make the drink to bear no harm,
Miſlead light wand'rers, laughing at their harm Shakespeareer.
You may try the force of imagination, upon ſtaying the
working of beer when the larm is put into it.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſºry, N° 992.
BA'RMY. adj. [from barm.] Containing barn.
Their jovial nights in frolicks and in play
They paſs, to drive the tedious hours away :
And their cold ſtomachs with crown'd goblets cheer, ** *
Of windy cider, and of barºny bear. Dryden's Pirgil.
BARN. m. ſ. [bern, Sax.] A place or houſe for laying up any
ſort of grain, hay, or ſtraw, &amp;c. -
In vain the barns expect their promis'd load,
Nor barns at home, nor recks are heap'd abroad. Pryden.
- I took notice of the make of ſeveral barns here: after hav-
ing laid a frame of wood, they place, at the four corners of it,
four blocks, in ſuch a ſhape as neither mice nor vermin caſ,
creep up. Addison 07: Italy.
BA/RNAci. E. n. ſ. [probably of bearin, Sax, a child, and aac, Sax.
an oak..]
;
3. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">". A bird like a gooſe, fabulouſly ſuppoſed to grow on trees.
Surely it is beyond even an atheiſt's credulity and impu-
dence, to affirm that the firſt men might grow upon trees, as
the ſtory goes about barnacles; or perhaps might be the lice of
ſome vaſt prodigious animals, whoſe ſpecies is now extinct.
Bentley's Sermons.
And from the moſt refind of ſaints,
As naturally grow miſcreaſts,
As barracles turn ſolan geeſe
In th’ iſlands of the Orcades. Hudibras, p. iii. c. ii.
2. An inſtrument made commonly of iron for the uſe of farriers,
to hold a horſe by the noſe, to hinder him from ſtruggling when
any inciſion is made. - Farrier's Dić?.
BARO METER. m.ſ.. [from 24.3, weight, and cirgº, meaſure.]
A machine for meaſuring the weight of the atmoſphere, and
the variations in it, in order chiefly to determine the changes
of the weather. It differs from the baroſcope, which only
ſhews that the air is heavier at one time than another, without
ſpecifying the difference. The barometer is founded upon the
Torricellian experiment, ſo called from Torricelli the inyentor
of it, at Florence, in 1643; which is a glaſ, tube filled with
mercury, horizontally ſealed at one end; the other open and
immerged in a baſon of ſtagnant mercury; ſo that, as the
weight of the atmoſphere diminiſhes, the mercury in the tube
will deſcend, and, as it encreaſes, the mercury will aſcend; the
column of mercury ſuſpended in the tube, being always equal to
the weight of the incumbent atmoſphere. Many attempts have
been made to render the changes in the barometer more ſenſible,
in order to meaſure the atmoſphere more accurately; and hence
aroſe a great number of barometers, of different ſtructures. Dr.
Halley obſerves, in the Philoſºphical Trafaélions, that in calm
weather, when the air is inclined to rain, the mercury is com-
monly low; in ſerene good ſettled weather, high. On great
winds, though unaccompanied with rain, the mercury is loweſt
of all, with regard to the point of the compaſs the wind blows
on. The greateſt heights of the mercury are on eaſterly and
north-eaſterly winds, cateris pariºus. After great ſtorms of
wind, when the mercury has been low, it riſes again very faſt.
In calm froſty weather, it ſtands high. The more northerly
places find greater alterations than the more ſouthern ; and
within the tropicks, and near them, there is little or no varia-
tion of the height of the mercury. The riſing of the mercury
forebodes fair weather after foul, and an eaſterly or north-
caſterly wind; its falling portends ſoutherly or weſterly winds,
or both. In a ſtorm, the mercury beginning to riſe, is a pretty
ſure ſign that it begins to abate. But there are frequently great
changes in the air, without any perceptible alteration in the ba-
rom-ter. The alterations of the weight of the air, are gene-
rally allowed to be the cauſe of thoſe in the laromºter; but
“ philoſophers cannot eaſily determine whence thoſe alterations
riſe in the atmoſphere. - -
The meaſuring the heights of mountains, and finding the
elevation of places above the level of the ſea, hath been much
promoted by barometrical experiments, founded upºn that eſ-
ſential property of the air, its gravity or preſſure, . As the co-
lumn of mercury in the Harameter is counterpoiſed by a column
of air of equal weight, ſo whatever cauſes make the air heavier
of lighter, the preſſure of it will be thereby encreaſed or leſſºn-
ed, and of conſequence the mercury will riſe or fall. Again,
the air is condenſed or expanded, in propºrtion to the weight or
force that preſſes it. Hence it is, that the higher from the ſea,
in the midland countries, the mercury deſcends the lower; be-
cauſe the air becomes more rarified and lighter, and it falls
loweſt upon the tops of the higheſt mountains. Harris.
Gravity is another property of air, whereby it counterpoiſes
a column of mercury from twenty-ſeven inches and one half
to thirty and one half, the gravity of the atmoſphere varying
one tenth, which are its utmoſt limits; ſo that the exačt ſpeci-
fick gravity of the air cannot be determined when the barometer
ſtands at thirty inches, with a moderate heat of the weather.
Arbuthnot on Air.
BARoy E"r RIcAL. adj. [from barometer.] Relating to the baro-
Inetcr. - -
He is very accurate in making barometrical and thermome-
trical inſtruments. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
BARON. m. ſ. [The etymology of this word is very uncertain.
Baro, among the Romans, ſignified a brave warriour, or a bru-
tal man; and, from the firſt of theſe ſignifications, Menage de-
rives baron, as a term of military dignity. Others ſuppoſe it
originally to ſignify only a man; in which ſenſe baron, or va-
ran, is ſtill uſed by the Spaniards; and, to confirm this conjec-
ture, our law yet uſes baron and femme, huſband and wife.
Others deduce it from her, an old Gauliſh word, ſignifying
commander; others from the Hebrew ºniº, of the ſame im-
port. Some think it a contraction of par hamme, or peer, which
ſeems leaſt probable.]
1. A degree of nobility next to a viſcount. It may be probably
thought, that anciently, in England, all thoſe were called ba-
rons, that had ſuch ſigniories as we now call court barons. And
it is ſaid, that, after the conqueſt, all ſuch came to the parlia-
ment, and ſat as nobles in the upper houſe. But when, by ex-
perience, it appeared, that the parliament was too much clouded
with ſuch multitudes, it became a cuſtom, that none ſhould
come, but ſuch as the king, for their extraordinary wiſdom or
quality, thought good to call by writ; which writ ran hac vice
tantºn. After that, men, ſeeing that this ſtate of nobility was
but caſual, and depending merely on the prince's pleaſure, ob-
tained of the king letters patent of this dignity to them and
their heirs male : and theſe were called barons by letters patent,
or by creation; whoſe poſterity are now thoſe barons that are
called lords of the parliament; of which kind the king may
create more at his pleaſure. It is nevertheleſs thought, that there
are yet barons by writ, as well as barons by letters patent, and that
they may be diſcerned by their titles; the larons by writ being
thoſe, that to the title of lord have their own ſurnames annex.
ed; whereas the larons by letters patent, are named by their
baronies. Theſe larons which were firſt by writ, may now
juſtly alſo be called barons by preſcription; for that they have
continued barons, in themſelves and their anceſtors, beyond the
memory of man. There are alſo barons by tenure, as the bi-
ſhops of the land, who, by virtue of baronies annexed to their
biſhopricks, have always had place in the upper houſe of parlia-
ment, and are called lords ſpiritual.
2. Baron is an officer, as barons of the exchequer to the king: of
theſe the principal is called lord chief baron, and the three others
are his aſſiſtants, between the king and his ſubjects, in cauſes
of juſtice, belonging to the exchequer.
3. There are alſo barons of the cinque ports; two to each of the
ſeven towns, Haſtings, Winchelſea, Rye, Rumney, Hithe, Do-
yer, and Sandwich, that have places in the lower houſe of par-
liament. Cowel.
They that bear
The cloth of ſtate above, are four larons
Of the cinque ports. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
4. Baron is uſed for the huſband in relation to his wife. Cºwel.
5. A baron of beef is when the two firloins are not cut aſunder,
but joined together by the end of the backbone. Die?.
BA'Ron AGF. n.ſ.. [from baron.]
1. The body of barons and peers.
His charters of the liberties of England, and of the foreſt,
were hardly, and with difficulty, gained by his baronage at
Staines, A.D. 1215. Hale's Cºmmon Law ºf England.
2. The dignity of a baron.
3. The land which gives title to a baron.
BA'Rosess. n.ſ.. [baroneſa, Ital baroniſh, Lat J A baron's lady.
BARoSET. m. ſ. [ºf baron and et, diminutive termination.] The
loweſt degree of honour that is hereditary; it is below a baron
and above a knight; and has the precedency of all other knights,
except the knights of the garter. It was firſt founded by king
James I. A. D. 1611. Cºwel. But it appears by the following
paſſ ge, that the term was in uſe before, though in another
ſenſe.
King Edward III. being bearded and croſſed by the clergy,
they being too ſtrong for him, ſo as he could not order and
reform things, was adviſed to direét out his writs to certain
gentlemen of the beſt abilities, entitling them therein barons
in the next parliament. By which means he had ſo many ba-
rons in his parliament, as were able to weigh down the cler-
gy ; which barons were not afterwards lords, but baronets, as
fundry of then do yet retain the name. Spenser on Ireland.
BA'Ros Y. m. ſ. [baronnie, Fr. beojny, Sax.] That honour or
lordſhip that gives title to a baron. Such are not only the fles
of temporal barons, but of biſhops alſo. Cºwel.
BA'Roscope. n.ſ. (245. and exº~...] An inſtrument to ſhow
the weight of the atmoſphere. Sce BAROMETER.
If there was always a calm, the equilibrium could only be
changed by the contents; where the winds are not variable,
the alterations of the baroſiºpe are very ſmall. Arºuth. on Air.
BARRA can. m. ſ. [louracán, or barracan, Fr.] A ſtrong thick
kind of camelot.
BARRACK. m. ſ. ſharracca, Span.]
1. Little cabins made by the Spaniſh fiſhermen on the ſea ſhore;
or little lodges for ſoldiers in a camp.
2. It is generally taken among us for buildings to lodge ſoldiers.
BA'RRATOR. m.ſ.. [from barat, old Fr. from which is ſtill retained
barateur, a cheat..] A wrangler, and encourager of law ſuits.
Will it not reflect as much on thy character, Nic, to turn
barrator in thy old days, a ſtirrer up of quarrels amongſt thy
neighbours. Arbuthnot's Hiffery off. Ball.
BARRA TRY. m. ſ. [from barrator.] The practice or crime of
a barrator; foul practice in law. - -
'Tis arrant barratry, that bears - -
Point blank an action gainſt our laws. Hidilras.
BA'RREL. m.ſ.. [bari, Welch.]
I. A round wooden veſſel to be ſtopped cloſe.
It hath been obſerved by one of the ancients, that an empty
barrel knocked upon with the finger, giveth a diapaſon to the
ſound of the like barrel full. Bacon's Nat. Hiſłory, N° 186.
Trembling to approach
The little barrel, which he fears to broach. Dryden's Pºſas.
2. A particular meaſure in liquids. A barrel of wine is thirty
one gallons and a half; of ale, thirty two gallons; of beer,
thirty ſix gallons, and of beer vinegar, thirty four gallons.
3. In dry meaſure. A barrel of Eſſex butter cºntains one hº
ath,
º
-
º
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">#3 A R
and fix pounds; of Suffolk butter, two hundred and fifty ſix. A
barrel of berrings ſhould contain thirty two gallons wine
meaſure, holding uſually a thouſand herrings.
Several colleges, inſtead of limiting their rents to a certain
ſum, prevailed with their tenants to pay the price of ſo many
barrels of corn, as the market went. Swift.
4. Any thing hollow, as the barrel of a gun ; that part which
holds the ſhot. - -
Take the barrel of a long gun perfectly bored, ſet it upright
with the breech upon the ground, and take a bullet exactly fit
for it; then if you fuck at the mouth of the barrel ever ſo
gently, the bullet will come up ſo forcibly, that it will hazard
the ſtriking out your teeth. Digly on Bodies.
5. A cylinder; frequently that cylinder about which anything is
wound.
Your ſtring and bow muſt be accommodated to your drill;
if too weak, it will not carry about the barrel.
Mºxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
6. Barrel ºf the car, is a cavity behind the tympanum, covered
with a fine membrane. Dict.
To BARREL. v. a. [from the noun..] To put any thing in a
barrel for preſervation.
I would have their beef beforehand barrelled, which may be
uſed as it is necded. Spenser on Ireland.
Barrel up earth, and ſow ſome ſeed in it, and put it in the
bottom of a pond. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 531.
BARREL-BELLIED. adj. [from barrel and belly..] Having a large
belly.
*Dundº at empty noiſes; lofty neck'd, -
Sharp headed, barrel-belly'd, broadly back'd. Dryd. Wirgil.
BARREN. adj. [bane, Sax, naked; properly applied to trees
or ground unſruitful.] - - - -
1. Without the quality of producing its kind; not prolifick; ap-
plied to animals. - -
They hail'd him father to a line of kings.
Upon my head they plac'd a fruitleſs crown,
And put a barren ſceptre in my gripe,
No ſon of mine ſucceeding. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
There ſhall not be male or female barren among you, or
among your cattle. Deuter. vii. 14.
2. Unfruitful; not fertile; ſterile.
- The ſituation of this city is pleaſant, but the water is naught,
and the ground barren. 2 Kings, ii. 19.
Telemachus is far from exalting the nature of his country;
he confeſſes it to be barren. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv. notes.
From his far excurſion thro’ the wilds
Of larren ether, faithful to his time,
They ſee the blazing wonder riſe anew. Thomſºn's Summer.
3. Not copious; ſcanty. -
Some ſchemes will appear barren of hints and matter, but
prove to be fruitful. Swift.
4. Unmeaning; uninventive; dull.
There be of them that will make themſelves laugh, to ſet on
ſome quantity of barren ſpectators to laugh too. Shakeſpeare.
BARRENLY. adv. [from barren.] Unfruitfully.
BARRENNEss. m. ſ. [from barren.] -
1. Want of offspring; want of the power of procreation. ,
I pray'd for children, and thought barrenneſs
In wedlock a reproach. Milton's Agoniſłes, l. 350.
No more be mention'd then of violence
Againſt ourſelves; and wilful barrenneſ,
That cuts us off from hope. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
2. Unfruitfulneſs; ſterility; infertility.
Within the ſelf ſame hamlet, lands have divers degrees of
value, through the diverſity of their fertility or barrenneſs.
Bacon on Alienations.
3. Want of invention; want of the power of producing any
thing new. -
The adventures of Ulyſſes are imitated in the Æneis; though
the accidents are not the ſame, which would have argued him
of a total barrenneſs of invention. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
4. Want of matter.
The importunity of our adverſaries hath conſtrained us
longer to dwell than the barrenneſs of ſo poor a cauſe could
have ſeemed either to require or to admit. Hooker, b. v. § 22.
5. In theology: aridity; want of emotion or ſenſibility.
The greateſt ſaints ſometimes are fervent, and ſometimes feel
a larreireſ of devotion. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
BARREN wo: T. m. ſ. [epimedium, Lat.] The name of a plant.
The ſtalks are divided into three branches, each ſuſtaining
three leaves, ſhaped like ivy; the calyx conſiſts of four leaves;
the flower, of four petals, hollow, and expanded in form of a
croſs; the pointal of the flower becomes a pod with one cell,
having two valves, in which are contained round flat ſeeds.
41illar.
BA'RRFul. a j. [from lar and full.] Full of obſtructions.
A lar ful ſtrife
Whoe'er I woo, myſelf would be his wife. Shakespeare Tw. Night.
ARRica'D e. m. ſ. ſtarricadº, Fr. )
1. A fortification made in haſte, of trees, cºrth, waggons, or any
thing elſe, to keep cff an attack.
* Any ſtop; bar; obſtruction.
\ oi... I
There muſt be ſuch a barricade, as would greatly annoy, of
rather abſolutely ſtop, the currents of the atmoſphere.
- Derham's Phyſico-Teolºgy.
To BARRICA'pe. v. a. ſharricader, Fr.] To ſtop up a pañage.
A new vulcano continually diſcharging that matter, which
being till then barricaded up, and impriſoned in the bowels of
the earth, was the occaſion of very great and frequent calami-
tics. //oodwards Natural Hiſtºry.
Now all the pavement ſounds with trampling feet,
And the mixt hurry barricades the ſtreet,
Entangled here, the waggon's lengthen'd team. Gay.
BARRig Apo. m. ſ. ſharricada, Span.j A fortification; a bar;
anything fixed to hinder entrance.
The acceſs of the town was only by a neck of land, between
the ſea on the one part, and the harbour water, or inner ſea on
the other; fortified clean over with a ſtrong rampier and Harri-
cada. Bacon's I/ar with Spain.
To BARRICADo. v. a. [from the noun..] To fortify; to bar;
to ſtop up.
Faſt we found, faſt ſhut -
The diſmal gates, and barricadº'd ſtrong! Paradiſ; Lºft.
He had not time to barricado the doors; ſo that the enemy
entered. - Clarendon, b. viii.
The truth of cauſes we find ſo obliterated, that it ſeems al-
moſt barricaded from any intelle&amp;tual approach.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
BARRIER. m. ſ. ſharriere, Fr. It is ſometimes pronounced with
the accent on the laſt ſyllable, but it is placed more properly
on the firſt.]
I. A barricade; an entrenchment.
Safe in the love of heav'n an ocean flows
Around our realm, a barrier from the foes. Pope', Odyſſey.
2. A fortification, or ſtrong place, as on the frontiers of a coun-
try.
The queen is under the obligation of being guarantee of the
Dutch having poſſeſſion of the ſaid barrier, and the revenues
thereof, before a peace. Swift.
3. A ſtop; an obſtrućtion.
If you, value yourſelf as a man of learning, you are build-
ing a moſt unpaſſable barrier againſt all improvement.
//atts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
4. A bar to mark the limits of any place.
For juſts, and tourneys, and barriers, the glories of them
are chiefly in the chariots, wherein the challengers make their
entries. Bacon's Eſſays.
Pris'ners to the pillar bound,
At either larrier plac'd ; nor, captives made,
Be freed, or arm'd anew. Dryden's Falles,
5. A boundary.
But wave whate'er to Cadmus may belong,
And fix, O muſe, the barrier of thy ſong,
At Oedipus. Pºpe's Statius,
How inſtinét varies in the groveling ſwine,
Compar'd, half reas'ning elephant! with thine:
*Twixt that and reaſon, what a nice barrier /
For ever ſep'rate, yet for ever near. Pºpe's Eſly on Man.
BA'RRISTER. m. ſ. [from bar.] A perſon qualified to plead the
cauſes of clients in the courts of juſtice, called an advocate or
licentiate in other countries and courts. Barriſºers, now uſu-
ally denominated counſellors at law, were formerly obliged to
ſtudy eight years before they were paſſed, now only ſeven, and
ſometimes fewer. Outer barri/iers are pleaders without the
bar, to diſtinguiſh them from inner barri/iers; ſuch are the
benchers, or thoſe who have been readers, the council of the
king, queen, and princes, who are admitted to plead within
the bar. Blount. Chambers.
BA'RRow. n.ſ.. [benepe, Sax. ſuppoſed by Skinner to come from
bear.] Any kind of carriage moved by the hand, as a hand-
barrow; a frame of boards, with handles at each end, carried
between two men; a wheelbarrow, that which one man puſhes
forward, by raiſing it upon one wheel. -
Have I lived to be carried in a baſket, like a larrºw of
butcher's oftal, and to be thrown into the Thames?
Shakespeare. A ſerry I/ives ºf Hindſºr,
No barrow's wheel
Shall mark thy ſtocking with a miry trace. Gay's Trivia.
BA'RRow. n.ſ.. [berg, Saxon.] A hog; whence barrow greaſe,
or hog's lard.
BARRow, whether in the beginning or end of names of places, fig-
nifies a grove ; from beamye, which the Saxons uſed in the ſame
ſenſe. Gilſºn's Camden.
BARRow is likewiſe uſed in Cornwal for a hillock, under which,
in old times, bodies have becn buried, -
To BARTER. v. n. [laratºr, Fr. to trick in traffick; from
#arat, craft, fraud..] To traffick by exchanging one commo-
dity for another, in oppoſition to purchaſing with money.
As if they ſcorn'd to trade and hºrter,
By giving or by taking quarter. Judiºras, p. iii. e. i.
A man has not every thing growing upon his ſoil, and there-
fore is wiłłing to barter with his neighbour. Collier.
To SA is rºº R. v. &amp;.
1. To give any thing in excharge for ſomething Cſe.
2 : Fº:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A S
B A S
For him was I exchang'd and ranſom'd;
But with a baſer man of arms by far,
Once, in contempt, they would have barter'd me. -
Shakeſp. Henry VI, p. i.
Then as thou wilt diſpoſe the reſt,
To thoſe who, at the market rate, -
Can barter honour for citate. Priºr.
I ſee nothing left us, but to truck and barter our goods, like
the wild Indians, with each other. Swift.
2. Sometimes it is uſed with the particle away before the thing
1 Ven.
£ If they will barter away their time, methinks they ſhould at
leaſt have ſome eaſe in exchange. Decay of Piety.
He alſo bartered away plums that would have rotted in a
a week, for nuts that would laſt good for his eating a whole
Caſ. Locke.
BARTER. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The aët or practice of traf-
ficking by exchange of commodities; ſometimes the thing gi-
ven in exchange.
From England they may be furniſhed with ſuch things as
they may want, and, in exchange or barter, ſend other things,
with which they may abound. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
He who corrupteth Engliſh with foreign words, is as wiſe as
ladies that change plate for china; for which, I think, the lau-
dable traffick of old cloaths is much the faireſt barter.
Feltou on the Claſſicks.
BA'RTERER. m.ſ.. [from barter.] He that trafficks by exchange
of commodities.
BA'RTERY. n.ſ.. [from barter.] Exchange of commodities.
It is a received opinion, that, in moſt ancient ages, there
was only bartery or change of commodities amongſt moſt na-
tions. Camden's Remains.
BARTRAM. n.ſ. A plant; the ſame with pellitory; which ſee.
BARTON. m.ſ. The demeſne lands of a manour; the manour-
houſe itſelf; and ſometimes the out-houſes. Blount.
BASE. adj. [bas, Fr. baſo, Ital. laxo, Span. baſis, low Latin ;
£zoº.]
1. Mean; vile; worthleſs.
The harveſt white plumb is a boſ, plumb, and the white
date plumb are no very good plumbs. Bacon's Natural Hiſł.
Pyreicus was only famous for counterfeiting all baſe things,
as earthen pitchers, a ſcullery; whereupon he was ſurnamed
Rupographus. Peacham.
2. Of mean ſpirit; diſingenuous; illiberal; ungenerous; low;
without dignity of ſentiment.
Since the perfections are ſuch in the party I love, as the feel-
ing of them cannot come unto any unnoble heart; ſhall that
heart, lifted up to ſuch a height, be counted baſe ? Sidney.
It is baſe in his adverſaries thus to dwell upon the exceſſes of
a paſſion. Atterbury.
I might be baſe enough to ſuſpect, that you ačted like ſome
philoſopher, who writ much better upon virtue than he prac-
tiſed it. Swift.
3. Of low ſtation; of mean account; without dignity of rank;
without honour.
If the lords and chief men degenerate, what ſhall be hoped
of the peaſants and baſer people : Spenser on Ireland.
If that rebellion
Came like itſelf, in baſe and abjećt routs,
You reverend father, and theſe noble lords,
Had not been here. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
It could not elſe be, I ſhould prove ſo baſe,
To ſue and be denied ſuch cºmmon grace. Shakespeare. Timon.
And I will yet be more vile than this, and will be baſe in
mine own fight. 2 Sam. vi. 22.
Inſurrections of baſe people are commonly more furious in
their beginnings. Bacon's Henry VII.
He whoſe mind
Is virtuous, is alone of noble kind;
º poor in fortune, of celeſtial race,
nd he commits the crime who calls him baſe. Dryden.
4. Baſe-born; born out of wedlock, and by conſequence of no
honourable birth.
Why baſtard wherefore haſ 2
When my dimenſions are as well compact º
As honeſt madam's iſſue. Shakeſp. King Lear.
This young lord loſt his life with his father in the field, and
with them a baſe ſon. Camden’s Remains.
5. Applied to metals: without value; it is uſed in this ſenſe of all
metal except gold and ſilver.
A guinea is pure gold, if it has nothing but gold in it, with-
out any alloy or laſer metal. //atts's Logick.
6. Applied to founds, deep; grave. It is more frequently writ-
ten baſs, though the comparative laſer ſeems to require baſe.
In pipes, the lower the note holes be, and the further from
the mouth of the pipe, the more baſe ſound they yield.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 178.
BASE-Bors. adj. Born out of wedlock.
But ſee thy baſe-lºrn child, thy babe of ſhame,
Who, left by thee, upon our pariſh came. Gay.
BA's E-court. "... ſ. Lower court; not the chief court that leads
to the houſe.
My lord, in the baſ-court he doth attend, -
To ſpeak with you. Shakeſp. Richard II.
BASE-MINDED. adj. Mean ſpirited; worthleſs.
It ſignifieth, as it ſeemeth, no more than abject, baſ-minded,
falſe hearted, coward, or nidget. Camden's Remains.
BASE-viol. n.ſ.. [uſually written baſ, viol.] An inſtrument
which is uſed in concerts for the baſe ſound.
At the very firſt grin he caſt every human feature out of his
countenance; at the ſecond, he became the head of a baſ-viol.
Addison. Speciator, N° 174.
BASE. m. ſ. ſbas, Fr. boſs, Lat.] ſºn. Sp &gt; 74
1. The bottom of any thing; commonly uſed for the lower part
of a building, or column.
What if it tempt thee tow'rd the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful ſummit of the cliff,
That beetles o'er his baſe into the ſea. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
. ... Firm Dorick pillars found your ſolid baſe;
The fair Corinthian crowns the higher ſpace. Dryden.
Columns of poliſh'd marble firmly ſet
On golden baſes, are his legs and feet. Priºr.
2. The pedeſtal of a ſtatue.
Men of weak abilities in great place, are like little ſtatues
ſet on great baſes, made the leſs by their advancement. Bacon.
Mercury was patron of flocks, and the ancients placed a ram
at the baſe of his images. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
3. That part of any ornament which hangs down, as houſings.
Phalantus was all in white, having his baſes and capariſon
embroidered. Sidney.
4. The broad part of any body; as the bottom of a cone.
5. Stockings, or perhaps the armour for the legs, from bas, Fr.
Nor ſhall it e'er be ſaid that wight,
With gauntlet blue and baſes white,
And round blunt truncheon by his ſide,
So great a man at arms defy’d. Hudibras.
6. ſº place from which racers or tilters run; the bottom of the
eld. -
He ſaid; to their appointed baſe they went;
With beating heart th' expecting ſign receive,
And, ſtarting all at once, the barrier leave. Dryden's Wirg.
7. The ſtring that gives a baſe ſound.
At thy well ſharpen'd thumb, from ſhore to ſhore,
The trebles ſqueak for fear, the baſes roar. Dryden's Mac{f'.
8. An old ruſtick play; written by Skinner, bays.
He with two ſtriplings (lads, more like to run
The country baſe, than to commit ſuch ſlaughter) -
Made good the paſſage. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To BASE. v. a. [baſier, Fr.] To embaſe; to make leſs valu-
able by admixture of meaner metals.
I am doubtful whether men have ſufficiently refined metals,
which we cannot baſe; as, whether iron, braſs, and tin be re-
fined to the height? Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 849.
BA's ELY. adv. [from baſe.] -
1. In a baſe manner; meanly; diſhonourably.
The king is not himſelf, but loſely led
By flatterers. Shakespeare. Richard II.
A lieutenant baſily gave it up, as ſoon as Eſſex in his paſ-
ſage demanded it. - Clarendon.
With broken vows his fame he will not ſtain,
With conqueſt baſey bought, and with inglorious gain.
Dryden.
2. In baſtardy.
Theſe two Mitylene brethren, baſily born, crept out of a
ſmall galliot unto the majeſty of great kings... .
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
BA's ENEss. m. ſ. [from baſe.]
1. Meanneſs; vileneſs; badneſs. *
Such is the power of that ſweet paſſion,
That it all ſordid baſenºſ doth expel. Spe'ſ Hymn on Lºve.
when a man's folly muſt be ſpread open before the angels,
and all his baſinºſ; ript up before thoſe pure ſpirits, this will be
a double hell. South.
Your ſoul's above the baſineſ of diſtruſt:
Nothing but love could make you ſo unjuſt. Dryd. Aarºng.
2. Vileneſs of metal. - - -
we alleged the fraudulent obtaining and executing his par
tent, the baſenºſ of his metal, and the prodigious ſum to be
coined. Swift.
3. Baſtardy.
- Why brand they us -
With baſe? with bºSpenser, 2 baſtardy ? Shakespeare. King Lear.
4. Deepneſs of ſound. -
The juſt and meaſured proportion of the air percuſſed to:
wards the baſingſ, or trebleneſs of tones, is one of the greateſt
ſecrets in the contemplation of founds. Bacon's Nat. Hiſlºy.
To BASH. v. n. [probably from baſe.] To be aſhamed ; to be
confounded with ſhame.
His countenance was bold, and baſh'd not
For Guyon's looks, but ſcornful eye-glance at him ſhot.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. iv.
BASHA'w. n.ſ. [ſometimes written baſa.] A title of honour
and command among the Turks; the viceroy of a province ;
the general of an army.
3 - The -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A S
B A S
The Turks made an expedition into Perſia; and becauſe of
the ſtraits of the mountains, the baſhaw conſulted which way
they ſhould get in. Bacon's Apophthegms.
BA's HFUL. adj. [This word, with all thoſe of the ſame race,
are of uncertain etymology. Skinner imagines them derived
from baſe, or mean; Minſhew, from verbagſen, Dut. to ſtrike
with aſtoniſhment; junius, from 32-k, which he finds in He-
ſchius to ſignify ſhame. The conječture of Minſhew ſeems
moſt probable.]
1. Modeſt; ſhamefaced.
I never tempted her with word too large;
But, as a brother to his ſiſter, ſhew’d
Baſhful ſincerity, and comely love. Shakeſp. M. ado about N.
2. Sheepiſh; vitiouſly modeſt.
He looked with an almoſt baſ' ful kind of modeſty, as if he
feared the eyes of man. - Sidney.
Hence, baſſal cunning ! -
And prompt me plain and holy innocence. Shakeſp. Tempºff.
Our authour, anxious for his fame to night,
And laſhful in his firſt attempt to write,
Lies cautiouſly obſcure. Addiſon's Drummer, Prologue.
BA's HFULLY. adv. [from baſºftl.] Timorouſly; modeſtly.
BA's HFULNEss. n.ſ. [from baſhful.]
1. Modeſty, as ſhewn in outward appearance.
Philoclea a little muſed how to cut the thread even, with
eyes, cheeks and lips, whereof each ſang their part, to make
up the harmony of baſhfulneſs. Sidney.
Such looks, ſuch baſhfulneſs might well adorn
The cheeks of youths that are more nobly born.
2. Vitious or ruſtick ſhame.
For fear had bequeathed his room to his kinſman baſhfulneſs,
to teach him good manners. Sidney, b. i.
There are others who have not altogether ſo much of this
fooliſh baſhfulneſs, and who aſk every one's opinion. Dryden.
BA's IL. m. ſ. [ocymum, Lat.] The name of a plant.
This plant hath a labiated flower of one leaf, whoſe creſt is
upright, roundiſh, notched, and larger than the beard, which
is generally curled, or gently cut. Out of the flower cup riſes
the pointal, attended by four embryos, that become ſo many
ſeeds incloſed in a husk, which was before the flower cup; the
husk is divided into two lips, the upper one growing upright,
and is ſplit into two; but the under one is cut into ſeveral parts.
The ſpecies are eight; 1. Common baſil. 2. Common baſil,
with dark green leaves, and white flowers. 3. Leſſer baſil,
with narrow ſerrated leaves. 4. The leaſt baſil, commonly
called buſh-baſil, &amp;c. Theſe annual plants are propagated
from ſeeds in March, upon a moderate hot bed. In Auguſt
they perfect their ſeeds. The firſt ſort is preſcribed in medi-
cine; but the fourth is moſt eſteemed for its beauty and ſcent.
º Millar.
BA's IL. n.ſ. The angle to which the edge of a joiner's tool is
ground away.
BA'sil. n.ſ. The skin of a ſheep tanned. Diff.
To BA's IL. v. a. To grind the edge of a tool to an angle.
Theſe chiſels are not ground to ſuch a baſil as the joiners
chiſſels on one of the fides, but are loſed away on both the
flat ſides; ſo that the edge lies between both the ſides in the
middle of the tool. foxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
BAs I'lic A. m. ſ. [3.2.2.2%.] The middle vein of the arm ſo
called, by way of pre-eminence. It is likewiſe attributed to
many medicines for the ſame reaſon. &amp;uincy.
BASI'LICAL. }*. [from baſilica. Sce Basilic A.] Belonging
BASI'LIck. to the baſilick vein.
Theſe aneuriſms following always upon bleeding the baſ-
lick vein, muſt be aneuriſms of the humeral artery. Sharp.
BASILICK. n.ſ.. [baſílique, Fr. 32.7%izz.] A large hall, having
two ranges of pillars, and two iſles or wings, with galleries
over them. Theſe baſilicks were firſt made for the palaces of
princes, and afterwards converted into courts of juſtice, and
laſtly into churches; whence a baſilick is generally taken for a
magnificent church, as the baſilick of St. Peter at Rome.
BASI'lico N. m. ſ. [322.2.1.x.] An ointment called alſo tetra-
pharmacon. Quincy.
I made inciſion into the cavity, and put a pledget of baſili-
licon over it. J/ſeman's Surgery.
BA'silisk. m. ſ. ſhaftliſcus, Lat. of £zzºuzº, of Żazºº, a king.]
1. A kind of ſerpent, called alſo a cockatrice, which is ſaid to
drive away all others by his hiſing, and to kill by looking.
Make me not fighted like the baſilisk;
I’ve look'd on thouſands who have ſped the better
By my regard, but kill'd none ſo. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
The baſiliſk was a ſerpent not above three palms long, and
differenced from other ſerpents by advancing his head, and
ſome white marks or coronary ſpots upon the crown.
Erown's ſugar Errours.
Dryden.
2. A ſpecies of cannon or ordnance.
There we imitate and practiſe to make ſwifter motions than
any you have: and to make them ſtronger and more violent
than yours are; exceeding your greateſt cannons and baſiliſks.
Jacox’s New Atlantis.
*Asis. n.ſ. [loſin, Fr. Jacil, facinº, Ital. It is often written
*ſºn, but not according to cºyºnology.]
1. A ſmall veſſel to hold water for waſhing, or other uſes.
Let one attend him with a ſilver baſin,
Full of roſewater, and beſtrew’d with flowers.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
We have little wells for infuſions, where the waters take the
virtue quicker and better, than in veſſels and baſins. Bacon.
We behold a piece of ſilver in a baſin, when water is put up-
on it, which we could not diſcover before, as under the verge
thereof. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
2. A ſmall pond.
On one ſide of the walk you ſee this hollow baſin, with its
ſeveral little plantations lying conveniently under the eye of the
beholder. Speciator, N° 477.
3. A part of the ſea incloſed in rocks, with a narrow entrance.
The jutting land two ample bays divides;
The ſpacious baſins arching rocks incloſe,
A ſure defence from ev’ry ſtorm that blows. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
4. Any hollow place capacious of liquids.
If this rotation does the ſeas affect,
The rapid motion rather would eječt
The ſtores, the low capacious caves contain,
And from its ample baſin caſt the main. Blackmore's Creat.
5. A dock for repairing and building ſhips.
6. In anatomy, a round cavity ſituated between the anterior ven-
tricles of the brain.
7. A concave piece of metal by which glaſs grinders form their,
convex glaſſes.
8. A round ſhell or caſe of iron placed over a furnace, in which
hatters mould the matter of a hat into form.
9. Baſins of a balance; the ſame with the ſcales; one to hold the
weight, the other the thing to be weighed.
BA's Is. n.ſ.. [baſís, Lat.]
1. The foundation of any thing, as of a column or a building.
It muſt follow, that paradiſe, being raiſed to this height,
muſt have the compaſs of the whole earth for a baſis and foun-
dation. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
Aſcend my chariot, guide the rapid wheels
That ſhake heav'n's baſis. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. vi.
In altar-wiſe a ſtately pile they rear;
The baſis broad below, and top advanc'd in air. Dryden.
2. The loweſt of the three principal parts of a column, which
are the baſis, ſhaft, and capital.
Upon our coming to the bottom, obſerving an Engliſh in-
ſcription upon the baſis, we read it over ſeveral times.
Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 47.
3. That on which anything is raiſed.
Such ſeems thy gentle height, made only proud
To be the baſis of that pompous load,
Than which a nobler weight no mountain bears. Denham.
4. The pedeſtal. -
How many times ſhall Caeſar bleed in ſport,
That now on Pompey's baſis lies along
No worthier than the duſt 2 Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
5. The groundwork or firſt principle of anything.
Build me thy fortune upon the baſis of valour. -
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
The friendſhips of the world are oft
Confederacies in vice, or leagues of pleaſure;
Ours has ſevereſt virtue for its baſis. Addison's Cato.
To BASK. v. a. [backeren, Dut. Skinner.] To warm by laying
out in the heat; uſed almoſt always of animals.
And ſtretched out all the chimney's length,
Baſks at the fire his hairy ſtrength. Milton.
He was baſking himſelf in the gleam of the ſun. L'E/ºrange.
'Tis all thy buſineſs, buſineſs how to ſhun,
To baſk thy naked body in the ſun. Dryden's Perſus.
To BASK. v. n. To lie in the warmth.
About him, and above, and round the wood,
The birds that haunt the borders of his flood;
That bath'd within, or baſk'd upon his ſide,
To tuneful ſongs their narrow throats apply'd.
Unlock'd, in covers let her freely run,
To range thy courts, and baſk before the ſun. Tickell.
Some in the fields of pureſt aether play,
And baſk and whiten in the blaze of day. Pope.
BA's KET. n.ſ. [baſed, Welch ; baſcauda, it. Barbara depictis
venit baſcauda Britannis. Martial.] A veſſel made of twigs,
ruſhes, or ſplinters, or ſome other ſlender body interwoven.
Here is a baſket; he may creep in, and throw foul linen up-
on him, as if going to bucking. Shakespeare A ſºrry //ives ºf //indſ.
Thus while I ſung, my ſorrows I deceiv'd,
And bending offers into baſkets weav'd. Dryden.
Poor Peg was forced to go hawking and peddling; now and
then carrying a baſſet of fiſh to the market. , Arbuth. j. Bull.
BA's KET-HILT. n. J. [from boſºrt and hilt..] A hit of a weapon
ſo made as to contain the whole hand, and defend it from be-
ing wounded.
His puiſſant ſword unto his ſide, .
Near his undaunted heart, was ty’d:
With baſket-hilt, that would hold broth,
And ſerve for fight and dinner both.
Dryden.
Hudºlras, cant, i.
Their
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A S
B A T
Their beef they often in their murrions flew’d,
And in their lºſº its their bev'rage brew d.
King's 4t ºf Cºry,
BA's KET-woº. A N. m. ſ. [from hiſ et and woman.] A woºlan
that plies at markets with a basket, ready to carry home any
thing that is bought.
Pass. adj. [See BAS3.] In muſick; grave; deep.
BAss-viol. See BASE-viol. -
On the ſweep of the arch lies one of the Muſes, playing on
a laſ-viol. - - Dºylen.
Bass. n / [ſuppoſed by Yarius to be derived, like laſet, from
ſome Britiſh word ſignifying a rºſh; but perhaps mºre properly
written lºſs, from the French bºſs.) A mat uſed in churches.
Having woollen yarn, laſs mat, or ſuch like, to bind them
withal. Alfrtimer's Husbandry.
Bass-RELIEF. m.ſ.. [from las, and relif, raiſed work, Fr.]
Sculpture, the figures of which do not ſtand out from the
ground in their ſtill proportion. Felibien diſtinguiſhes three
kinds of baſ-relif; in the firſt, the front figures appear a moſt
with the full relićf; in the ſecond, they ſland out no mºre than
one half; and, in the third, much leſs, as in coins.
BA'ss A. See BASHA w.
BA'ss Er. n.ſ. [AEaſt, Fr.] A game at cards, invented at V e-
In ICC.
Gameſters would no more blaſpheme; and lady Dabcheck's
baſſºt bank would be broke. Dennis.
BASSO RELIEVO. [Ital.] See Bass-R E1.1FF.
BAsso'N. Un. ſ. [aſºn, Fr.] A muſical inſtrument of the wind
BAsso'o N. ; kind, blown with a reed, and furniſhed with eleven
holes, which are flopped like other large flutes; its diameter at
bottom is nine inchcs, and it ſerves for the baſs in concerts of
hautboys, &amp;c. Trevoux.
BA'ssock. m. ſ. The ſame with baſs.
BASTARD. n.ſ.. [haſ]ardd, Welch, of low birth; baſſard, Fr.]
1. Pºſiard, according to the civil and canon law, is a perſon
born of a woman out of wedlock, or not married; ſo that, ac-
cording to order of law, his father is not known. Aylºff.
Him to the Lydian king Lycimnia bare,
And ſent her boaſted la/?ard to the war. Dryden.
2. Anything ſpurious or falſe.
It lies on you to ſpeak to th’ people;
Not by your own inſtruction, but with words
But rooted in your tongue; ba/#ards and ſyllables
Of no allowance to your boſom's truth. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
BA's TARD. adj. [from the noun.]
1. Begotten out of wedlock.
Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy, inſenſible, a getter of
more bºyfard children than war's a deſtroyer of men.
Shakespeare Cºriolanus.
2. Spurious; not genuine; ſuppoſititious ; falſe; adulterate. In
this ſenſe, any thing which bears ſome relation or reſemblance to
another, is called ſpurious or bºy?ard.
You may partly hope that your father got you not, that you
are not the Jew’s daughter.—That were a kind of ba/#ard hope
indced. Shakeſp. Merchant of /-nice.
Men who, under the diſguiſe of publick good, purſue their
own deſigns of power, and ſuch la/lard honours as attend
them. Temple.
BA's TARD Cºdar Tree. [called guazuma in the Weſt Indies.]
The characters are ; It hath a regular flower, conſiſting of
five leaves, hollowed like a ſpoon at their baſe; but, at their
tops, divided into two parts, like a fork. The flower cup con-
fifts of three leaves, from whence ariſes the pointal, which af-
terwards becomes a roundiſh warted fruit, which has five cells,
incloſing many ſeeds.
It grows pientifully in the low lands in Jamaica, where it
riſes to the height of forty or fifty feet, and has a large trunk.
The timber of this tree is cut into ſtaves, for caſes of all ſorts,
and uſed for many other purpoſes. The fruit is eat by cattle,
as it falls from the trees, and is eſteemed very good to fitten
them ; ſo that the planters often leave theſe trees ſtanding in
their ſavannas, when they clear them from all other wood.
- - Millar.
To BA's FARD, v. a. [from the noun..] To convićt of being a
baſtard; to ſtigmatize with baſtardy.
She lived to ſee her brother beheaded, and her two ſons de-
poſ. d from the crown, la/larded in their blood, and cruelly
murdered. Bacon's Henry VII.
To BA's TARDIz F. v. a. [from baſſard.]
1. To convićt of being a baſtard.
2. To beget a baſtard.
I ſhould have been what I am, had the maidenlieſt ſtar in the
firmanent twinkled on my baſardizing. Shakeſp. King 1 car.
BA's :A: ply. al... [fr m lºyard.] In the manner of a baſtard;
ſºuriouſly.
Cóed ſled degenerates, and oſt obeys
‘; he ſoil's diſeaſe, and into cockle ſtrays;
Let the mind's thoughts but be tranſplanted ſo
into the body, and ºily they grow. Doºne.
3A 3-r. Roº. M.J. [from bay'ard.] An unlawful ſtate of birth,
wº. J.ſ. 5'-8 tºe bºard, both according to the laws of God
and aui, from ſucceeding to an inheritance. Ælff's Parcºg.
Once ſhe ſunder'd me with Hyºry;
But whether I be true begot, or no,
That ſtill I lay upon my mother's head. Sºº. K. Yohn.
In reſpect of the evil conſequents, the wife's adultºry is worſe,
as bringing bºard, into a family. Taylºr's 11 y Living.
No more of to/farº, in heirs of crowns. Pºpe's Epſilº.
To BAST E. v. a. participle pºſſ. Jaſłº, or *q/en. [la/?oºner, Fr.
Bazata, in the Armorick dialect, ſignifies to ſtrike with a ſtick;
from which perhaps baſºn a ſtick, and all its derivatives, or
collaterals, may be deduced.]
1. To beat with a ſtick.
Quoth ſhe, I grant it is in vain
For one’s that laſted to feel pain,
Becauſe the pangs his bones endure,
Contribute nothing to the cure. Hudibrar.
Tir'd with diſpute, and ſpeaking Latin,
As well as loſing, and bear bating. Iłudibras.
Boſtings heavy, dry, obtuſe,
Only dulneſs can produce;
While a little gentle jerking
Scts the ſpirits all aworking. Swift.
2. To drip butter, or any thing ciſe, upon meat as it turns upon
the ſpit.
Sir, I think the meat wants what I have, a baſing.
Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
3. To moiſten meat on the ſpit by filling upon it.
The fat of roaſted mutton falling on the birds, will ſerve to
baſe them, and ſo ſave time and butter.
Swift's Dire&amp;ions to the Cº.
4. To ſew flightly. [baſer, Fr. to ſtitch..]
#. {m. ſ. [hºſenmad, Fr.]
1. The act of beating with a cudgei; the blow given with a
cudgel.
But this courteſy was worſe than a loftial to Zelmane;
ſo that again, with rageful eyes, ſhe bad him defend himſelf.
Sidney, b. ii.
And all thoſe harſh and rugged ſounds
Of laſtinados, cuts and wounds. Hidilras.
2. It is ſometimes taken for a Turkiſh puniſhment of beating an
offender on the ſoals of his feet. -
To BASTINA'D.E. lv. a. [from the noun; baſſonner, Fr.] To
To BASTINA'Do. ; beat ; to give the baſtinado.
Nick ſeized the longer end of the cudgel, and with it began
to baſtinado old Lewis, who had flunk into a corner, waiting the
event of the ſquabble. Arbuthnot's Liſtory ºf j. Bull.
BA's rios. n.ſ.. [aftion, Fr.]. A huge maſs of earth, uſually
faced with ſods, ſometimes with brick, rarely with ſtone, ſtand-
ing out from a rampart, of which it is a principal part, and
was anciently called a belwark. Izarris.
Toward: but how? ay there's the queſtion;
Ficroe the aſſault, unarm'd the baſſion. Prior.
BAT. n.ſ.. [bat, Sax. This word ſeems to have given riſe to a
great number of words in many languages; as, battre, Fr. to
beat ; laton, battle, beat, batty, and others. It probably ſigni-
fied a weapon that did execution by its weight, in oppoſition to
a ſharp cage; whence whirlbat and lnick/a:..] A heavy ſtick or
club.
A handſome bat he held,
On which he leaned, as one far in eld. J'uhlerd's Tale.
They were fried in arm chairs, and their bones broken with
bats. Jiaºewell on Providence.
B.A.T. n.ſ.. [the etymology unknown.] . An animal having the
body of a mouſe and the wings of a bid; not with feathers,
but with a ſort of skin which is extended. It lays no eggs, but
brings forth its young alive, and ſuckles them. It never grows
tame, feeds upon flies, infects, and faty ſubſtances, ſuch as
candles, oil, and cheeſe; and appears only in the ſummer even-
ings, when the weather is fine. Calmict.
When owls do cry,
On the Pat's back I do fly. Shakeſp. Tºps/?.
But then grew reaſon dark; that fair ſtar no more
Could the fair forms of good and truth diſcern;
Bats they became who eagles were before;
And this they got by their deſire to learn. Sir j. Davies.
Some animals are placed in the middle betwixt two kinds, as
bats, which have ſomething of birds and beaſts. Locke.
Where ſwallows in the winter ſeaſon keep,
And how the drowſy bat and dorinoiſe ſleep. Gay.
BAT-Fow LING. m. ſ. [from lat and ſººl.] A particular manner
of birdcatching in the night time, while they are at rooſt upon
perches, trees, or hedges. They light torches or ſtraw, and
then beat the buſhcs; upon which the birds flying to the flames,
are caught cither with nets, or otherwiſe.
You would liſt the moon out of her ſº here, if ſhe would
continue in it five weeks without changing – We ſhould ſo,
and then go a bat-fowling. Shaft. Tºmºg/?.
Bodies lighted at night by fire, muſt have a brightér luſtregi-
ven them than by dº; ; as ſacking of cities tºne, &amp;c.
*…an on Drawing.
BA"TABLE. adj. [from Wate.] Diſputable,
Ecºle<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B A T .
B A T
Batable ground ſeems to be the ground heretofore in queſ-
tion, whether it belonged to England or Scotland, lying be-
tween both kingdoms. Cowel.
BATCH. n.ſ.. [from lake.]
1. The quantity of bread baked at a time.
The joiner puts the boards into ovens after the batch is
drawn, or lays them in a warm ſtable. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. Any quantity of anything made at once, ſo as to have the
ſame qualities.
Except he were of the ſame meal and batch. Ben. Johnſon.
BA'Tchelor. See BAcHe lor.
BATE. m. ſ. [perhaps contracted from debate.] Strife; conten-
tion; as a make-bate.
To BATE. v. a. [contračted from abate.]
1. To leſſen anything; to retrench.
Shall I bend low, and in a bondman's key,
With hated breath, and whiſp'ring humbleneſs,
Say this Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Nor envious at the fight will I forbear
My plenteous bowl, nor bate my plenteous cheer. Dryden.
2. To ſink the price.
When the landholder's rent falls, he muſt either bate the la-
bourer's wages, or not employ, or not pay him. Locke.
. To leſſen a demand.
Bate me ſome, and I will pay you ſome, and, as moſt debt-
ors do, promiſe you infinitely. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
4. To cut off; to take away.
Bate but the laſt, and 'tis what I would ſay. Dryd.Sp. Friar.
To BATE. v. m.
1. To grow leſs.
Bardolph, am not I fallen away vilely ſince this laſt elec-
tion ? Do I not bate P do I not dwindle * Why, my skin
hangs about me like an old lady's looſe gown. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
2. To remit; with of before the thing.
Abate thy ſpeed, and I will bate of mine. Dryden.
BATE ſeems to have been once the preterite of bite, as Shakeſpeare
uſes biting faulchion; unleſs, in the following lines, it may be
rather deduced from beat.
Yet there the ſteel ſtaid not, but inly bate
Deep in his fleſh, and open'd wide a red flood gate. F. Queen.
BA'TEFUL. adj. [from bate and full.] Contentious.
He knew her haunt, and haunted in the ſame,
And taught his ſheep her ſheep in food to thwart;
Which ſoon as it did bateful queſtion frame,
He might on knees confeſs his guilty part. Sidney.
BA'TEMENT. n.ſ.. [from abatement..] Diminution; a term only
uſed among artificers.
To abate, is to waſte a piece of ſtuff; inſtead of asking how
much was cut off, carpenters ask what batement that piece of
{tuff had. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
BATH. n.ſ.. [ba's, Saxon.]
1. A bath is either hot or cold, either of art or nature. Artificial
baths have been in great eſteem with the ancients, eſpecially in
complaints to be relieved by revulſion, as inveterate headaches,
by opening the pores of the feet, and alſo in cutaneous caſes.
But the modern practice has greateſt recourſe to the natural
baths; moſt of which abound with a mineral ſulphur, as ap-
pears from their turning ſilver and copper blackiſh. The cold
baths are the moſt convenient ſprings, or reſervatories, of cold
water to waſh in, which the ancients had in great eſteem; and
the preſent age can produce abundance of noble cures perform-
ed by them. $2iſincy.
Why may not the cold bath, into which they plunged them-
ſelves, have had ſome ſhare in their cure ? Addiſon. Speciator.
2. A ſtate in which great outward heat is applied to the body, for
the mitigation of pain, or any other purpoſe.
In the height of this bath, when I was more than half ſtewed
in greaſe like a Dutch diſh, to be thrown into the Thames.
º Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives of Windſor.
Sleep, the birth of each day's life, fore labour's bath,
Balm of hurt minds. - Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. In chymiſtry, it generally ſignifies a veſſel of water, in which
another is placed that requires a ſofter heat than the naked fire.
Palileam Mariac is a miſtake, for balneum maris, a ſea or water
bath. A ſand heat is ſometimes called balneum ſiccum, or cine-
7 Czz777. 3uincy.
We ſee that the water of things diſtilled in water, which
they call the bath, differeth not much from the water of things
diſtilled by fire. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº 684.
4. A ſort of Hebrew meaſure, containing the tenth part of an
homer, or ſeven gallons and four pints, as a meaſure for things
liquid; and three pecks and three pints, as a meaſure for things
dry. Calmet.
Ten acres of vineyard ſhall yield one lath, and the ſeed of an
homer ſhall yield an ephah. Iſaiah, v. Io.
To B^+H.E. v. a. ſbarian, Saxon.]
1. To waſh in a bath.
Others, on ſilver lakes and rivers, bath'd
Their downy breaſt. Milton's Paradiſ? I off, b. x. 1. 437.
Chancing to fathe himſelf in the river Cydnus, through the
ºcciive coldneſs of theſe waters, he fell ſick, near unto death,
for three days. South.
Vol. I.
2. To ſupple or ſoften by the outward application of warm ſi-
quours. º
Bathe them and keep their bodics ſoluble the while by clyſ-
ters, and lenitive boluſes. //jcman's Surgery.
I'll bathe your wounds in tears for my offence. Dryden.
3. To waſh with any thing.
Phoenician Dido ſtood,
Freſh from her wound, her boſom bath'd in blood. Dryden.
Mars could in mutual blood the centaurs bathe,
And Jove himſelf give way to Cinthia's wrath. Dryden.
To BATH.E. v. n. To be in the water, or in any thing reſem-
bling a bath.
Except they meant to late in recking wounds,
I cannot tell. Macbeth.
The delighted ſpirit
To bathe in firy floods, or to reſide
In thrilling regions of thick ribbed ice. Shakespeare. Meaſ for Meaſ.
The gallants dancing by the river ſide,
They bathe in ſummer, and in winter ſlide. JWaller.
But bathe, and, in imperial robes array'd,
Pay due devotions. Pope's Odyſſey.
BA'TING, or ABA't ING. prep. [from bate, or abate. This word,
though a participle in itſelf, ſeems often uſed as a prepoſition.]
Except. -
The king, your brother, could not chooſe an advocate,
Whom I would ſooner hear on any ſubject,
Bating that only one, his love, than you. Rowe's R. Conv.
If we conſider children, we have little reaſon to think, that
they bring many ideas with them, bating, perhaps, ſome faint
ideas of hunger and thirſt. Locke.
BA't LET. m. ſ. [from hat..] A ſquare piece of wood, with a
handle, uſed in beating linen when taken out of the buck.
I remember the kiſſing of her batlet, and the cow's dugs that
her pretty chopt hands had milked. Shakeſp. As you like it.
BATo'on, n.ſ. [laſton, or bâton, Fr. formerly ſpelt befton.]
I. A ſtaff or club.
We came cloſe to the ſhore, and offered to land; but
ſtraightways we ſaw divers of the people with baſions in their
hands, as it were, forbidding us to land. Bacon’s N. Atlantis.
That does not make a man the worſe,
Although his ſhoulders with batoon
Be claw’d and cudgell'd to ſome tune. Hudibras.
2. A truncheon or marſhal's ſtaff; a badge of military honour.
BA'tt AILlous. adj. [from battaille, Fr.] Having the appear-
ance of a battle ; warlike ; with military appearance.
He ſtarted up, and did himſelf prepare
In ſun bright arms and battailous array. Fairfax, b. i.
The French came foremoſt battailºus and bold. Fairf. b. i.
A firy region, ſtretch'd
In battailous aſpect, and nearer view
Briſtled with upright beams innumerable
Of rigid ſpears, and helmets throng’d. Paradiſ. Loft, b. vi.
BATTA'LIA. m. ſ. [battaglia, Ital.] The order of battle.
Next morning the king put his army into lattalia. Clarend.
BATTA'LION. n.ſ.. [bataillon, Fr.] -
1. A diviſion of an army; a troop; a body of forces. It is now
confined to the infantry, and the number is uncertain, but ge-
nerally from five to eight hundred men. Some regiments conſiſt
of one battalion, and others are divided into two, three, or more.
When ſorrows come, they come not ſingle ſpies,
But in battalions. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
In this battalion there were two officers, called Therſites and
Pandarus. Tatler, N° 56.
The pierc’d battalions diſunited fall,
In heaps on heaps: one fate o'erwhelms them all. Pºpe.
2. An army. This ſenſe is not now in uſe.
Six or ſeven thouſand is their utmoſt power.
—Why, our battalion trebles that account. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
To BATTEN. v. a. [a word of doubtful etymology.]
1. To fatten, or make fat; to feed plenteouſly.
We drove afield, -
Batt'ning our flock with the freſh dews of night. Miſion.
2. To fertilize.
The meadows here, with lattning ooze cnrich'd,
Give ſpirit to the graſs; three cubits high
The jointed herbage ſhoots. Philips.
To BATTEN. v n. To grow fat; to live in indulgence.
Follow your funétion, go and latten on cold bits. Shakesp. Criol.
Burniſh'd and latt'ſſing on their food, to ſhow
The diligence of careful herds below. Dryden's H. and P.
The lazy glutton ſafe at home will keep,
Indulge his ſloth, and batten on his ſleep. Dryden.
As at full length the pamper'd monarch lay,
Batt'ning in caſe, and ſlumb'ring life away. Garth.
Tway mice, full blythe and amicable,
Batten beſide er!c Robert’s table. Prior.
While paddling ducks the ſtanding lake deſire,
Or batt'ning hogs roll in the ſinking mire. Gay's Pºora';.
BATTEN. m. ſ. A word uſed only by workmen.
A atten is a ſcantlin of wooden ſtuff, two, three or ſour
inches bread, fºldom above one thick, and the length unlimºei.
4…on's 4 ſcº.i.al ºx.” “j”.
2 S To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">D A T
B A W
To BATTER. v. a. [battre, to beat, Fr.]
1. To beat; to beat down; frequently uſed of walls thrown
down by artillery, or of the violence of engines of war.
To appoint battering rams againſt the gates, to caſt a mount,
and to build a fort. Ezek. xxi. 22.
Theſe haughty words of hers
Have batter'd me like roaring cannon ſhot,
And made me almoſt yield upon my knees. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Britannia there, the fort in vain
Had batter'd been with golden rain:
Thunder itſelf had fail'd to paſs. Waller.
Be then, the naval ſtores, the nation's care,
New ſhips to build, and batter'd to repair. Dryden.
2. To wear with beating.
Crowds to the caſtle mounted up the ſtreet,
Batt’ring the pavement with their courſers feet. Dryden.
If you have a ſilver ſaucepan for the kitchen uſe, let me ad-
viſe you to batter it well; this will ſhew conſtant good houſe-
keeping. Swift's Directions to the Cook.
3. Applied to perſons: to wear out with ſervice.
The batter'd veteran ſtrumpets here,
Pretend at leaſt to bring a modeſt ear. Southern.
I am a poor old battered fellow, and I would willingly end
my days in peace. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory off. Bull.
As the ſame dame, experienc'd in her trade,
By names of toaſts retails each batter'd jade.
To BATTER. v. n. A word uſed only by workmen.
The fide of a wall, or any timber, that bulges from its bot-
tom or foundation, is ſaid to batter. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſes.
BATTER. m. ſ. [from to batter.] A mixture of ſeveral ingredi-
ents beaten together with ſome liquour; ſo called from its be-
ing ſo much beaten.
One would have all things little, hence has try’d
Turkey poults freſh'd from th' egg in batter fry’d.
King's Art of Cookery.
BA'TTERER. m.ſ.. [from batter.] He that batters.
BA'tt ERY. n.ſ.. [from batter, or batterie, Fr.]
1. The aët of battering,
Strong wars they make, and cruel battery bend,
'Gainſt fort of reaſon, it to overthrow. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Earthly minds, like mud walls, reſiſt the ſtrongeſt batteries.
Locke.
2. The inſtruments with which a town is battered, placed in or-
der for ačtion.
Where is beſt place to make our batt’ry next 2
— I think at the north gate. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
It plants this reaſoning and that argument, this conſequence
and that diſtinétion, like ſo many intellectual batteries, till at
length it forces a way and paſſage into the obſtinate incloſed
Pope.
truth. South.
Sce, and revere th’ artillery of heav'n,
Drawn by the gale, or by the tempeſt driv'n:
A dreadful fire the ſtoating batt’ries make,
O'erturn the mountain, and the foreſt ſhake. Blackmore.
3. The frame, or raiſed work, upon which cannons are mounted.
4. In law, a violent ſtriking of any man. In treſpaſs for aſſault
and battery, one may be found guilty of the aſſault, yet acquit-
ted of the battery. There may therefore be aſſault without
battery; but battery always implies an aſſault. Chambers.
Why does he ſuffer this rude knave now to knock him about
the ſconce with a dirty ſhovel, and will not tell him of his ac-
tion and battery P Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Sir, quo' the lawyer, not to flatterye,
You have as good and fair a battery,
As heart can wiſh, and need not ſhame
The proudeſt man alive to claim.
BATTLE. m. ſ. [bataille, Fr.]
1. A fight; an encounter between oppoſite armies. We gene-
rally ſay a battle of many, and a combat of two.
The Engliſh army that divided was
Into two parts, is now conjoin'd in one;
And means to give you battle preſently. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
The battle done, and they within our power,
She’ll never ſee his pardon. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The race is not to the ſwift, nor the battle to the ſtrong.
- - Eccleſ. ix. I 1.
So they joined battle, and the heathen being diſcomfited fled
into the plain. I 44accab. iv. 14.
2. A body of forces, or diviſion of an army.
The king divided his army into three battles; whereof the
vanguard only, well ſtrengthened with wings, came to fight.
Bacon's Henry VII.
3. The main body, as diſtinét from the van and rear.
The earl of Angus led the avant-guard, himſelf followed with
the battle a good diſtance behind, and after came the arrier.
- Hayward.
Hudibras, p. iii. c. iii.
4. We ſay to join battle; to give battle.
To BATTLE. v. n. [batailler, Fr.] To join battle; to contend
in fight.
'Tis ours by craft and by ſurprize to gain:
'Tis yours to meet in arms, and battle in the plain. Prior.
We daily receive accounts of ladies battling it on both ſides.
Addison. Freeholder, N° 23.
I own, he hates an ačtion baſe,
His virtues battling with his place. Swift.
BA'ttle-ARRAY. n.J. [See BATTLE and ARRAY.] Array,
or order of battle. -
Two parties of fine women, placed in the oppoſite ſide boxes,
ſeemed drawn up in battle-array one againſt another. Addiſon.
BA'ttle-Axe. m. ſ. A weapon uſed anciently, probably the
ſame with a bill.
Certain tinners, as they were working, found ſpear heads,
battle-axes, and ſwords of copper, wrapped in linen clouts.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
BA'ttle Door. m. ſ. [ſo called from door, taken for a flat board,
and battle, or ſtriking.] An inſtrument with a handle and a flat
blade, uſed in play to ſtrike a ball, or ſhuttlecock.
Play-things, which are above their skill, as tops, gigs, battle-
doors, and the like, which are to be uſed with labour, ſhould
indeed be procured them. Locke.
BA'ttle MENT. n.ſ. [generally ſuppoſed to be formed from
battle, as the parts from whence a building is defended againſt
affailants; perhaps only corrupted from batiment, Fr.] A wall
raiſed round the top of a building, with embraſures, or inter-
ſtices, to look through, to annoy an enemy.
He fix’d his head upon our battlements. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Thou ſhalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring
not blood upon thine houſe, if any man fall from thence.
Deut. xxii. 8.
Through this we paſs
Up to the higheſt battlement, from whence
The Trojans threw their darts.
Their ſtandard planted on the battlement,
Deſpair and death among the ſoldiers ſent. Dryd. Aurengz.
No, I ſhan't envy him, whoe'er he be,
That ſtands upon the battlements of ſtate;
Denham.
I'd rather be ſecure than great. Norris.
The weighty mallet deals reſounding blows,
Till the proud battlements her tow’rs incloſe. Gay's Trivia.
BATTY. adj. [from bat.] Belonging to a bat.
Till o'er their brows death counterfeiting ſleep,
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
BA'v ARoy. m. ſ. A kind of cloke, or ſurtout.
Let the loop'd bavarºy the fop embrace,
Or his deep cloke be ſpatter'd o'er with lace. Gay's Trivia.
BA'UBE E. m. ſ. A word uſed in Scotland, and the northern
counties, for a halfpenny.
Tho' in the draw’rs of my japan bureau,
To lady Gripeall I the Caeſars ſhow,
'Tis equal to her ladyſhip or me,
A copper Otho, or a Scotch baubee. Bramſ?. Man of Taffe.
BA'v IN. n.ſ. [of uncertain derivation.] A ſtick like thoſe bound
up in faggots; a piece of waſte wood.
He ambled up and down
With ſhallow jeſters and raſh bavin wits,
Soon kindled, and ſoon burnt. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
For moulded to the life in clouts,
Th’ have pick'd from dunghills thereabouts,
He's mounted on a hazel bavin,
A crop'd malignant baker gave him. Hudibras, p. iii. c. iii.
The ſmaller truncheons make billet, bavin, and coals.
Mortimer's Art of Husbandry.
To BAUlk. See BAlk.
BA'w Ble. n.ſ. [Baubellum, in barbarous Latin, ſignified a jewel,
or any thing valuable, but not neceſſary. Omnia baubella ſua
dedit Othoni. Howden. Probably from beau, Fr.] A gew-
gaw; a trifling piece of finery; a thing of more ſhow than uſe;
a trifle. It is in general, whether applied to perſons or things,
a term of contempt.
She haunts me in every place. I was on the ſea bank with
fome Venetians, and thither comes the bawble, and falls me
thus about my neck. Shakeſp. Othello.
It is a paltry cap,
A cuſtard coffin, a bawble, a ſilken pie. Shakespeare Tam. Shrew.
If, in our conteſt, we do not interchange uſeful notions, we
ſhall traffick toys and bawbles. Government of the Tongue.
This ſhall be writ to fright the fry away,
Who draw their little bawbles, when they play. Dryden.
A lady's watch needs neither figures nor wheels;
'Tis enough that 'tis loaded with bawbles and ſeals. Prior.
Our author then, to pleaſe you in your way,
Preſents you now a bawble of a play,
In gingling rhyme.
A prince, the moment he is crown'd,
Inherits every virtue round,
As emblems of the ſov’reign pow'r;
Like other lawbles of the Tow’r. Swift.
BA'w BLING. adj. [from bawble.] Trifling; contemptible: a
word not now in uſe, except in converſation.
A bawbling veſſel was he captain of,
For ſhallow draught and bulk unprized;
With which ſuch ſcathful grapple did he make,
With the moſt noble bottom of our fleet.
Shakespeare . Twelfth Night.
BA'w-
Granville.
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">BA'wcock. n.iſ [perhaps from beau, or baude, and cock.] A
familiar word, which ſeems to ſignify the ſame as fine fºllºw.
Why, how now, my bawcock? how doſt thou, chuck?
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
BAWD. m. ſ. [baude, old Fr.] A procurer, or procureſs; one
that introduces men and women to each other, for the promo-
tion of debauchery. -
If your worſhip will take order for the drabs and the knaves,
you need not to fear the bawds. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſ,
This commodity,
This bawd, this broker, this all changing word,
Hath drawn him from his own determin’d aid. Shakesp.K. john.
Our author calls colouring lena ſororis, the bawd of her ſiſter
deſign ; ſhe dreſſes her up, ſhe paints her, ſhe procures for the
deſign, and makes lovers for her. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To BAwd. v. n. [from the noun..] To procure; to provide
gallants with ſtrumpets.
Leucippe is agent for the king's luſt, and bawds, at the ſame
time, for the whole court. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 266.
And in four months a batter'd harridan;
Now nothing's left, but wither'd, pale, and ſhrunk,
To bawd for others, and go ſhares with punk.
BA'wdily. adv. [from bawdy..] Obſcenely.
BA'wdiness. n.ſ.. [from bawdy.] Obſceneneſs.
BA'wd Rick. n.ſ. [See BALDR1ck.] A belt.
Freſh garlands too, the virgin's temples crown'd;
The youth's gilt ſwords wore at their thighs, with filver baw-
dricks bound. Chapman's Iliad, b. xviii.
BA'w DR; n, f: [contračted from bawdery, the pračtice of a
bawd.
1. A wicked pračtice of procuring and bringing whores and
rogues together. Ayliff's Parergon.
Cheating and bawdry go together in the world. L'Eſtrange.
2. Obſcenity; unchaſte language.
Pr'ythee, ſay on; he's for a jig, or a tale of bawdry, or he
ſleeps. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
I have no ſalt: no bawdry he doth mean:
For witty, in his language, is obſcene. B. johnſon.
It is moſt certain, that barefaced bawdery is the pooreſt pre-
tence to wit imaginable. Dryden.
BA'wd Y., adj. [from bawd..] Obſcene; unchaſte; generally ap-
lied to language.
The bawdy wind that kiſſes all it meets,
Is huſh'd within the hollow mine of earth,
And will not hear’t.
Only they,
That come to hear a merry bawdy play,
, Will be deceiv'd. Shakeſp. Henry VIII. Prologue.
Not one poor bawdy jeſt ſhall dare appear;
For now the batter'd veteran ſtrumpets here
Pretend at leaſt to bring a modeſt ear. Southern.
BA'wdy-House. m. ſ. A houſe where traffick is made by wic-
kedneſs and debauchery.
Has the pope lately ãº up the bawdy-houſes, or does he con-
tinue to lay a tax upon ſin Dennis.
To BAwl. v. n. [balo, Lat.]
1. To hoot; to cry with great vehemence, whether for joy or
pain. A word always ... in contempt.
They bawl for freedom in their ſenſeleſs mood,
And ſtill revolt, when truth would ſet them free. Par. Reg.
To cry the cauſe up heretofore,
And bawl the biſhops out of door. Hudibras.
. Through the thickſhades th’ eternal ſcribbler bawls,
And ſhakes the ſtatues on their pedeſtals. Dryd, juvenal.
From his lov’d home no lucre him can draw;
The ſenate's mad decrees he never ſaw ; }
Nor heard at bawling bars corrupted law. Dryden.
Loud menaces were heard, and foul diſgrace, }
Swift.
Shakeſp. Othello.
And hawling infamy, in language baſe,
Till ſenſe was loſt in ſound, and ſilence fled the place.
Dryden's Fables.
So on the tuneful Margarita's tongue
The liſt'ning nymphs, and raviſh'd heroes hung;
But citts and fops the heav'n born muſick blame,
And bawl, and hiſs, and damn her into fame.
Smith on j. Philips.
I have a race of orderly elderly people, who can bawl when I
*m deaf, and tread ſoftly when I am only giddy and would
eep. Swift.
• To cry as a froward child.
A little child was bawling, and an old woman chiding it.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
If they were never ſuffered to have what they cried for, they
would never, with bawling and peeviſineſs, contend for maſ-
tery. Locke.
My huſband took him in, a dirty boy; it was the buſineſs of
the ſervants to attend him, the rogue did bawl and make ſuch a
noiſe. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
° Bawl. v. a. To proclaim as a crier.
It grieved me, when I ſaw labours which had coſt ſo much,
%ivid about by common hawkers. Swift.
^ WREL. n.ſ. A kind of hawk. Dić.
BA'wsIN. n.ſ. A badger.
BAY. adj. [badius, Lat.] -
A bay horſe is what is inclining to a cheſnut ; and this co-
lour is various, either a light bay or a dark bay, according as it
is leſs or more deep. There are alſo coloured horſes, that
are called dappled bays. All bay horſes are commonly called
brown by the common people.
All bay horſes have black manes, which diſtinguiſh them
from the ſorrel, that have red or white manes. --
There are light bays and gilded bays, which are ſomewhat of
a yellowiſh colour. The cheſnut bay is that which comes
neareſt to the colour of the cheſnut. Farrier's Dić.
I remember, my lord, you gave good words the other day of
a bay courſer I rode on. 'Tis yours becauſe you liked it.
Shakeſp. Timon.
Poor Tom ' proud of heart, to ride on a bay trotting horſe
over four inch'd bridges. Shakeſp. King Lear.
His colour grey,
For beauty dappled, or the brighteſt bay.
BAY. m.ſ.. [baye, Dutch.] --
I. An opening into the land, where the water is ſhut in on all
ſides, except at the entrance.
- A reverend Syracuſan merchant, - -
Who put unluckily into this bay. Shakespeare. Comedy ºf Err.
We have alſo ſome works in the midſt of the ſea, and ſome
bays upon the ſhore for ſome works, wherein is required the air
Disi.
Dryden's Virgil.
and vapour of the ſea. Bacon,
Here in a royal bed the waters ſleep,
When tir’d at ſea, within this bay they creep. Dryden.
Some of you have already been driven to this bay.
Dryden's Epiſile to the J7%igs.
Hail, ſacred ſolitude! from this calm lay
I view the world's tempeſtuous ſea. Roſcommon.
2. A pond head raiſed to keep in ſtore of water for driving a mill.
BAY. m. ſ. [abboi, Fr. ſignifies the laſt extremity; as, Innocence
£ff aux alboins. Boileau. Innocence is in the utmºſt diſtreſ. It
is taken from abboi, the barking of a dog at hand, and thence
ſignified the condition of a ſtag when the hounds were almoſt
upon him.] The ſtate of any thing ſurrounded by enemies,
and obliged to face them by an impoſſibility of eſcape.
This ſhip, for fifteen hours, ſate like a ſtag among hounds
at the bay, and was ſieged and fought with, in turn, by fifteen
great ſhips. Bacon's War with Spain.
Fair liberty purſu'd, and meant a prey
To lawleſs power, here turn'd, and ſtood at bay. Denham,
Nor flight was left, nor hopes to force his way;
Embolden'd by deſpair, he ſtood at lay;
Reſolv’d on death, he diffipates his fears,
And bounds aloft againſt the pointed ſpears. Dryden's Áneid.
All, fir’d with noble emulation, ſtrive;
And, with a ſtorm of darts, to diſtance drive
The Trojan chief; who held at bay, from far - -
On his Vulcanian orb, ſuſtain'd the war. Dryden's Pirgil.
We have now, for ten years together, turned the whole force
and expence of the war, where the enemy was beſt able to hold
us at a bay. wift.
He ſtands at bay,
And puts his laſt weak refuge in deſpair. Thomſºn.
BAY. n.ſ. In architecture, a term uſed to ſignify the magni-
tude of a building; as if a barn conſiſts of a floor and two
heads, where they lay corn, they call it a barn of two bays.
Theſe bays are from fourteen to twenty feet long, and floors,
from ten to twelve broad, and uſually twenty feet long, which
is the breadth of the barn. Builder's Dić7.
If this law hold in Vienna ten years, I'll rent the faireſt
houſe in it after threepence a bay. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſ.
There may be kept one thouſand buſhels in each bay, there
being ſixteen bays, each eighteen foot long, about ſeventeen
wide, or three hundred ſquare feet in each Bay. Mortimer.
BAY Tree. [laurus, Lat.] This tree hath a flower of one leaf,
ſhaped like a funnel, and divided into four or five ſegments.
The male flowers, which are produced on ſeparate trees from
the female, have eight ſtamina, which are branched into arms;
the ovary of the female flowers becomes a berry, incloſing a
ſingle ſeed within an horny ſhell, which is covered with a skin.
The ſpecies are, 1. The common lay with male flowers. 2.
The common fruit bearing bay tree. 3. The gold ſtriped bay
tree, &amp;c. The firſt and ſecond ſorts are old inhabitants of the
Engliſh gardens; and as there are varieties obtained from the
ſame ſeeds, they are promiſcouſly cultivated, and are not to be
diſtinguiſhed aſunder until they have produced flowers. Theſe
plants are propagated either from ſeeds, or by laying down the
tender branches, which will take root in one year's time. Mill.
I have ſeen the wicked in great power, and ſpreading himſelf
like a green bay tree. Pſalm xxxvii 35.
BAY. m. ſ. A poetical name for an honorary crown or garland,
beſtowed as a prize for any kind of victory or excellence.
Beneath his reign ſhall Euſden wear the bays. Pºpc.
To BAY. v. n. [alboyer, Fr.]
1. To bark as a dog at a thief, or at the game which he purſues.
And all the while ſhe ſtood upon the ground,
The wakeful dogs did never ceaſe to way. Fairy Queen, l. i.
The
.
&amp; “”<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">P. E.
B E A
The hounds at nearer diſtance hoarſely lºy'd;
The hunter cloſe purſu'd the viſionary maid; . .
She rent the heav'n with loud laments, imporing aid.
Dryden's Falls.
2. [from lay, an incloſed place.} To encompaſs about; to ſhut in.
We arc at the ſtake, -
And bayd about with many enemics. Shaft. julius Caſar.
To BAY. v. a. To follow with barking; to bark at.
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in the wood of Crete they lºy'd the bear.
with hounds of Sparta. haſ ſp. Midſum. Night's Dream.
If he ſhould do ſo,
He leaves his back unarm’d, the French and Welch
Paying him at the heels. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Bay Sait. Salt made of ſea water, which receives its conſiſt-
ence from the heat of the ſun, and is ſo called from its brown
colour. The greateſt quantities of this ſalt are made in France,
on the coaſt of Bretagne, Saintonge, &amp;c., from the middle of
May to the end of Auguſt, by letting the ſea water into ſquare
pits or baſons, where its ſurface being ſtruck and agitated by
the rays of the ſun, it thickens at firſt imperceptibly, and be-
comes covered over with a ſlight cruſt, which hardening by
the continuance of the heat, is wholly converted into ſalt.
The water in this condition is ſcalding hot, and the cryſtalli-
zation is perfeóted in eight, ten, or at moſt fifteen days. Chamb.
All eruptions of air, though ſmall and ſlight, give ſound:
which we call crackling, puffing, ſpitting, &amp;c. as in bay ſalt and
bay leaves caſt into the fire. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 1 2 3.
BAY I/indºw. A window jutting outward, and therefore form-
ing a kind of bay or hollow in the room.
It hath lay windºws tranſparent as barricadoes.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
BAY Yarm. A denomination ſometimes uſed promiſcuouſly with
woollen yarn. Chambers.
BA'y ARD. m. ſ. [from lay.] ... A bay horſe.
BA's on ET. n.ſ.. [bayonettº, Fr.]. A ſhort ſword or dagger fixed
at the end of a musket, by which the foot hold off the horſe.
One of the black ſpots is long and ſlender, and reſembles a
dagger or bayonet. J/oodward on Foſſils.
BAYze. Sce BAIze. -
BDELLIUM. m. ſ. [ºxo; ; H---.] An aromatick gum
brought from the Levant, uſed as a medicine and a perfume.
Bdellium is mentioned both by the ancient naturaliſts and in
ſcripture; but it is doubtful whether any of theſe be the ſame
with the modern kind. Chambers.
This baellium is a tree of the bigneſs of an olive, whereof
Arabia hath great plenty, which yieldeth a certain gum, ſweet
to ſmell to, but bitter in taſte, called alſo bdelliºm. The He-
brews take the loadſtone for balellium. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
To EE. v. n. [This word is ſo remarkably irregular, that it is
neceſſary to ſet down many of its terminations.
Preſent. I am, thou art, he is, we are, &amp;c.
e Om, eanz, 1ſ, anon, Sax.
Preter. I was, thou wert, he was, we were, &amp;c.
paer, paejle, par, Paeron, Sax.
The conjunétive mood.
I be, thou begſ?, he he, we be, &amp;c.
beo, birt, bed, be on, Sax.]
1. To have ſome certain ſtate, condition, quality, or accident;
as, the man is wife.
Seventy ſenators died
By their proſcriptions, Cicero leing one. Shakespeare. J. Caſar.
He hath to night been in unuſual pleaſure. Macbeth.
Be what thou hop'ſt to be, or what thou art,
Reſign to death, it is not worth cnjoying. Sha'sſp. H. VI.
Be but about
To ſay, ſhe's a goodly lady, and
The juſtice of your hearts will add thereto,
”I is pity ſhe's not honeſt, honourable. Shakespeare Jºint, r's Tale.
Let them ſhew the former things what they le, that we may
conſider them. Iſaiah, xli. 22.
Therefore he ſure,
Thou, when the bridegroom with his feaſtful friends
Paſſes to bliſs at the mid hour of night,
Haſt gain'd thy entrance, virgin wife and pure. Par. Reg.
Is it not eaſy to diſcern what ſuch men would be at. Stillingſ.
To ſay a man has a clear idea of quantity, without knowing
how great it is, is to ſay, he has the clear idea of the number
of the ſands, who knows not how many they be. Locke.
2. It is the auxiliary verb by which the verb paſſive is formed.
The wine of life is drawn, and the meer lees
Is left this vault to brag of. Shakespeare. Macketh.
3. To exiſt; to have exiſtence.
The times have been,
That when the brains were out the man would die. Mac' eth.
Here ceaſe, ye pow'rs, and let your vengeance end,
Troy is no more, and can no more offend. Dryden.
All th’ impoſſibilities, which pocts
Count to extravagance of looſe deſcription,
Shall ſooner be. Rºwe's Ambitious Stepmother.
To be contents his natural deſire;
He asks no angel's wing, nor ſcraph's fire. Pºp.'s Eff, on M.
4. To have ſomething by appointment or rule.
If all political power be derived only from Adam, and le to
deſcend only to his ſucceſſive heirs, by the ordinance of God,
and divine inſtitution, this is a right antecedent and paramount
to all government. Locke.
BEACH. n.ſ. The ſhore; particularly that part that is daſhed
by the waves; the ſtrand.
The fiſhermen, that walk upon the beach,
Appear like mice. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Deep to the rocks of hell, the gather'd beach
They faſten'd, and the mole immenſe wroughton,
Over the foaming deep. Milton's Par. Lºſt, b. x. l. 299.
They find the waſhed amber further out upon the beaches and
ſhores, where it has been longer expoſed. Iſºodward on Foſſils.
BE'AcHF D. adj. [from beach..] Expoſed to the waves.
Timon hath made his everlaſting manſion
Upon the beached verge of the ſalt flood;
Which once a day, with his embofled froth,
The turbulent ſurge ſhall cover.
BE'AcHY. adj. [from beach..] Having beaches.
Other times, to ſee
The brachy girdle of the ocean
Too wide for Neptune's hips. Shałoff. Henry IV.
Be'Acos. m. ſ. [beacon, Sax. from becn, a ſignal, and becnan,
whence beckon, to make a ſignal.]
1. Something raiſed on an eminence, to be fired on the approach
of an enemy, to alarm the country.
His blazing eyes, like two bright ſhining ſhields,
Did burn with wrath, and ſparkled living fire;
As two broad beacons ſet in open ſickls,
Send forth their flames.
Modeſt doubt is called
The beacon of the wiſe. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
The king ſeemed to account of the deſigns of Perkin as a
may-game; . had given order for the watching of beacons
upon the coaſts, and erecting more where they ſtood too thin.
Bacon's Henry VII.
No flaming beacons caſt their blaze afar,
The dreadful ſignal of invaſive war. Gay's Rural Sports
2. Marks erected, or lights made in the night, to direct naviga-
tors in their courſes, and warm them from rocks, ſhallows and
ſandbanks.
BEAD. m. ſ. [beabe, prayer, Saxon.]
1. Small globes or balls of glaſs or pearl, or other ſubſtance,
ſtrung upon a thread, and uſed by the Romaniſts to count their
prayers; from whence the phraſe to tell beads, or to be at one's
beads, is to be at prayer. -
That aged dame, the lady of the place,
Who all this while was buſy at her beads. Fairy Q. b. 1.
Thy voice I ſeem in every hymn to hear,
With ev'ry head I drop too ſoft a tear. Pºpe's El to Alel.
2. Little balls worn about the neck for ornament.
With ſtarfs and fans, and double change of brav'ry,
With amber bracelets, beads, and all ſuch knav’ry.
Shaºff. Taming ºf a Shrew.
Shakeſp. Timon.
Fairy Queen, b. i.
3. Any globular bodies.
Thy ſpirit within thee hath been ſo at war,
That head of ſweat have flood upon thy brow. Shakespeare H. IV.
Several yellow lumps of amber, almoſt like heads, with
onc fide flat, had faſtened themſelves to the bottom. Boyle.
BEAD Tree. [AzEDARAcH.]
It hath pennated leaves like thoſe of the aſh; the flowers
conſiſt of five leaves, which expand in form of a roſe; in the
centre of the flower is a long fimbriated tube, containing the
ſtyle; the fruit is roundiſh and fleſhy, containing a hard fur-
rowed nut, divided into five cells, each containing one oblong
broadiſh ſeed. The outſide pulp of the fruit in ſome countries
is eaten ; but the nut is, by religious perſons, bored through,
and ſtrung as beads; whence it takes its name. It produces
ripe fruits in Italy and Spain. A ſillar.
BEADLE. m. ſ. [bybel, Sax, a meſſenger; bedeau, Fr. ledel, Sp.
bedelle, Dutch..]
1. A meſſenger or ſervitor belonging to a court. Cowel.
2. A petty officer in pariſhes, whoſe buſineſs it is to puniſh petty
offenders.
A dog's obey'd in office.
Thou raſcal headle, hold thy bloody hand:
Why doſt thou laſh that whore ? Shakeſp. King Icar.
They ought to be taken care of in this condition, either by
the leade or the magiſtrate. Speciator, N° 130.
Their common loves, a lewd abandon'd pack,
The tead's laſh ſtill flagrºnt on their back. Prior.
BE'ADROLL. m. ſ. [from bead and roll.] A catalogue of thoſe
who are to be mentioned at prayers.
The king, for the better credit of his eſpials abroad, did
uſe to have them curſed by name amongſt the leadroll of the
king's enemies. Pacon’s Henry VII,
BEADSMAN. m. ſ. ſſrom lead and man.] A man employed in
praying, generally in praying for another.
An holy hoſpital, -
In which ſeven 'radfinch, that had vowed all
Ticiniife to ſervice of high heaven's king. Fairy Queen, "...i.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3
In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E A
i
- In thy danger,
Commend thy grievance to my holy prayer; - º
For I will be thy leadſman, Valentine. Shakespeare t. Gentl. of %r.
BE'AGLE. n.ſ.. [bigle, Fr.]. A ſmall hound with which hares
are hunted. - - *
- The reſt were various huntings.
The graceful goddeſs was array'd in green;
About her feet were little beagles ſeen,
That watch'd with upward eyes the motions of their queen.
Dryden's Fables.
To plains with well bred beagles we repair,
And trace the mazes of the circling hare.
BEAK. m. ſ. [bec, Fr. pig, Welch.]
1. The bill or horny mouth of a bird.
- His royal bird
Prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his beak,
As when his god is pleas'd. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
He ſaw the ravens with their horny beaks
Food to Elijah bringing. Milton's Par. Regained, b. ii.
The magpye, lighting on the ſtock,
Stood chatt’ring with inceſſant din, -
And with her beak gave many a knock. Swift.
2. A piece of braſs like a beak, fixed at the head of the ancient
gallies, with which they pierced their enemies.
With boiling pitch another, near at hand,
From friendly Sweden brought, the ſeams inſtops;
Which, well laid o'er, the ſalt ſea waves withſtand,
And ſhakes them from the riſing beak in drops. Dryden.
3. A beak is a little ſhoe, at the toe about an inch long, turned
up and faſtened in upon the forepart of the hoof. Farrier’s D.
4. Anything ending in a point like a beak; as the ſpout of a
cup ; a prominence of land.
Cuddenbeak, from a well advanced promontory, which en-
titled it beak, taketh a proſpect of the river. Carew's Survey.
BE'AKED. adj. [from beak.] Having a beak; having the form
of a beak. -
And queſtion'd every guſt of rugged winds,
That blows from off each beaked promontory. Milton.
Be'AKER. n.ſ.. [from beak.] A cup with a ſpout in the form of
a bird's beak. -
And into pikes and muſqueteers
Stampt beakers, cups and porringers. Hudibras, cant. ii.
With dulcet bev'rage this the beaker crown'd, -
Fair in the midſt, with gilded cups around. Pope's Odyſſey.
BEAl. n.ſ.. [bolla, Ital.] A whelk or pimple.
To Be AL. v. n. [from the noun..] To ripen; to gather mat-
ter, or come to a head, as a fore does. ' -
BEAM. n.ſ.. [beam, Sax: a tree; runnebeam, a ray of the ſun.]
1. The main piece of timber that ſupports the houſe.
A beam is the largeſt piece of wood in a building, which al-
ways lies croſs the building or the walls, ſerving to ſupport
the principal rafters of the roof, and into which the feet of the
principal rafters are framed. No building has leſs than two
beams, one at each head. Into theſe, the girders of the garret
floor are alſo framed; and if the building be of timber, the
teazel-tenons of the poſts are framed. The proportions of
beams in or near London, are fixed by act of parliament. A
beam fifteen feet long, muſt be ſeven inches on each ſide its
fauare, and five on the other; if it be ſixteen feet long, one
fide muſt be eight inches, the other ſix; and ſo proportionable
to their lengths. Builder's Dić?.
The building of living creatures is like the building of a
timber houſe; the walls and other parts have columns and
beams, but the roof is tile, or lead, or ſtone. Bacon’s N. Hiſt.
He heav'd, with more than human force, to move
A weighty ſtone, the labour of a team,
And rais'd from thence he reach'd the neighb'ring beam. Dryd.
2. Any large and long piece of timber: a beam muſt have more
. than thickneſs, by which it is diſtinguiſhed from a
ock.
Pope,
But Lycus, ſwifter,
Springs to the walls and leaves his foes behind, -
And ſnatches at the beam he firſt can find. Dryden's AFneid.
3. That part of a balance, at the ends of which the ſcales are ſuſ-
pended.
Poiſe the cauſe in juſtice’ equal ſcales,
Whoſe beam ſtands ſure, whoſe rightful cauſe prevails. ,
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
If the length of the ſides in the balance, and the weights at
the ends be both equal, the beam will be in a horizontal ſitua-
tion: but if either the weights alone be equal, or the diſtances
alone, the team will accordingly decline. Wilk. Mathem. Mag.
4. The horn of a ſtag.
And taught the woods to echo to the ſtream
His dreadful challenge, and his claſhing beam. Denham.
5. The pole of a chariot; that piece of wood which runs between
the horſes. -
Juturna heard, and ſeiz'd with mortal fear,
Forc’d from the beam her brother's charioteer. Dryden.
ong weavers, a cylindrical piece of wood belonging to the
loom, on which the web is gradually rolled as it is wove.
º * of his ſpear was like a weaver's beam. 1 Chr. xi. 23.
OL. -&gt;
7. The ray of light emitted from ſome luminous body, or receiv-
ed by the eye.
Let them preſent me death upon the wheel,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpcian rock,
That the precipitation might downſtretch
Below the beam of fight: Shaftºff. Cºriolanuſ.
Pleaſing, yet cold, like Cynthia's ſilver brain. Dryden.
As heav'n's bleſt beam turns vinegar to four. Pože.
BEAM of an anchor. The ſtraight part or ſhank of an anchor,
to which the hobks are faſtened. -
BEAM Compaſſes. A wooden or braſs inſtrument, with ſliding
ſockets, to carry ſeveral ſhifting points, in order to draw cir-
cles with very long radii; and uſeful in large projećtions, for
drawing the furniture on wall dials. Harris.
To BEAM. v. n. [from the noun..] To emit rāys of beams.
Each emanation of his fires
That beams on earth, each virtue he inſpires.
BEAM Tree. See WILDs ER vice, of which it is a ſpecies.
BE'AMY. adj. [from beam.]
1. Radiant; ſhining; emitting beams.
His double-biting axe, and beamy ſpear;
Each asking a gigantick force to rear.
All-ſeeing ſun 1
Pope,
Dryden's Fałki.
Hide, hide in ſhameful night, thy beamy head. Smith,
2. Having horns or antlers.
Rouze from their deſert dens the briſtled rage -
Of boars, and beamy ſtags in toils engage. Dryden's Virgil.
BeAN. m. ſ. [faba, Lat.]
It hath a papilionaceous flower, ſucceeded by a long pod, filled
with large flat kidney-ſhaped ſeeds; the ſtalks are firm and
hollow ; the leaves grow by pairs, and are faſtened to a mid-
rib. The ſpecies are, 1. The common garden bean. 2. The
horſe bean. There are ſeveral varieties of the garden beans,
differing either in colour or ſize. The principal ſorts which
are cultivated in England, are the Mazagan, the ſmall Liſbon,
the Spaniſh, the Tokay, the Sandwich, and Windſor leans.
The Mazagan bean is brought from a ſettlement of the Portu-
gueſe on the coaſt of Africa, of the ſame name; and is by far
the beſt ſort to plant for an early crop, a great bearer, and al-
ſo an excellent taſted beam. The broad Spaniſh, Tokay, Sand-
wich, and Windſor beans are for the latter crops. Millar'.
His allowance of oats and beans for his horſe was greater than
his journey required. Swift.
BEAN Caper. [fabago.] -
The leaves of this plant are produced by pairs upon the ſame
footſtalk, and the footſtalks grow oppoſite at the joints of the
ſtalks ; the cup of the flower conſiſts of five leaves; and the
flowers have alſo five leaves, expanded like a roſe, with ſta-
mina ſurrounding the ſtyle, in the center of the flower cup.
This ſtyle becomes a cylindrical fruit, five cornered, divided
into five cells, each containing many flat ſeeds. Millar.
BEAN Treſſel. An herb.
To BEAR. v. a. pret. I bore, or bare; part. paſſ bore, or born.
[beonan, benan, Sax. bairan, Gothick. It is ſounded as bare,
as the are in care and dare. - -
1. This is a word uſed with ſuch latitude, that it is not eaſily ex-
plained. -
We ſay to bear a burden, to bear ſorrow or reproach, to
bear a name, to bear a grudge, to bear fruit, or to bear chil-
dren. The word bear is uſed in very different ſenſes.
- Hatti's Logick.
2. To carry as a burden. *
They bear him upon the ſhoulder; they carry him and ſet
him in his place. Iſaiah, xlvi. 7.
And Solomon had threeſcore and ten thouſand that bare
burdens. 1 Kings, v. 15.
As an eagle ſtirreth up her neſt, fluttereth over her young,
ſpreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her
wings. Deuteronomy, xxxii. 1 1.
We ſee ſome, who, we think, have born leſs of the burden,
rewarded above ourſelves. Decay of Piety.
3. To convey or carry.
My meſſage to the ghoſt of Priam bear;
Tell him a new Achilles ſent thee there. Dryden's &amp;neid.
A gueſt like him, a Trojan gueſt before,
In ſhew of friendſhip, ſought the Spartan ſhore, {
And raviſh'd Helen from her huſband bore. Dryd.
4. To carry as a mark of authority.
I do commit into your hand
Th’ unſtained ſword that you have us’d to bºar.
Shakesp. Henry IV. p. ii.
5. To carry as a mark of diſtinétion.
He may not bear ſo fair and ſo noble an image of the divine
glory, as the univerſe in its full ſyſtem. Hale's Orig. of Mank.
His pious brother, ſure the beſt
Who ever bore that name. Dryden.
The ſad ſpectators ſtiffen'd with their fears,
She ſees, and ſudden every limb ſhe ſmears; }
Then each of ſavage beaſts the figure bears. Garth.
His ſupreme ſpirit or mind will bear its beſt reſemblance,
when it repreſents the ſupreme infinite. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
So we ſay, to lear arms in a coat.
2 T 6. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E A
B E A
6. To carry as in ſhow.
- Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue; look like the innocent flower,
But be the ſerpent under’t. Shakeſp. King Lear,
7. To carry as in truſt.
He was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put
therein. - - john, xii. 6.
8. To ſupport; to keep from falling.
Under colour of rooting out popery, the moſt effectual means
to bear up the ſtate of religion may be removed, and ſo a way
be made either for paganiſm, or for extreme barbariſm to enter.
Hooker, b. iv. § 1. .
And Samſon took hold of the two middle pillars, upon which
the houſe ſtood, and on which it was born up. judges, xvi. 29.
A religious hope does not only bear up the mind under her
ſufferings, but makes her rejoice in them. Addiſon. Speciat.
Some power inviſible ſupports his ſoul,
And bears it up in all its wonted greatneſs. Addison's Cato.
9. To keep afloat.
The waters encreaſed, and bare up the ark, and it was lifted
up above the earth. Geneſs, vii. 17.
10. To ſupport with proportionate ſtrength.
Animals that uſe a great deal of labour and exerciſe, have
their ſolid parts more elaſtick and ſtrong; they can bear, and
ought to have ſtronger food. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
11. To carry in the mind, as love, hate.
How did the open multitude reveal
The wond’rous love they bear him under hand 1
Daniel's Civil J/ar.
They bare great faith and obedience to the kings. Bacon.
Darah, the eldeſt bears a generous mind,
But to implacable revenge inclin'd. Dryden's Aurengz.
The coward bore the man immortal ſpite. Dryden's Ovid.
As for this gentleman, who is fond of her, ſhe beareth him an -
invincible hatred. Swift.
That inviolable love I lear to the land of my nativity, pre-
vailed upon me to engage in ſo bold an attempt. Swift.
J2. To endure, as pain, without ſinking.
It was not an enemy that reproached me, then I could have
born it. Pſalm liv. 12.
13. To ſuffer; to undergo.
I have born chaſtiſements, I will not offend any more.
job, xxxiv. 31.
That which was torn of beaſts, I brought not unto thee, I
I bare the loſs of it; of my hand didſt thou require it.
Genºſis, xxxi. 39.
14. To permit; to ſuffer without reſentment.
Not the gods, nor angry Jove will bear
º lawleſs wand'ring walks in upper air. Dryd. Æneid.
15. To be capable of; to admit.
To reject all orders of the church which men have eſtabliſh-
ed, is to think worſe of the laws of men in this reſpect, than
either the judgment of wiſe men alloweth, or the law of God
itſelf will bear. Hooker, b. iii.
Being the ſon of one earl of Pembroke, and younger brother
to another, who liberally ſupplied his expence, beyond what his
annuity from his father would bear. Clarendon.
Give his thought either the ſame turn, if our tongue will
bear it, or, if not, vary but the dreſs. Dryden.
Do not charge your coins with more uſes than they can bear.
It is the method of ſuch as love any ſcience, to diſcover all
others in it. Addiſon on Medals.
Had he not been eager to find miſtakes, he would not have
ſtrained my words to ſuch a ſenſe as they will not bear. Atterb.
In all criminal caſes, the moſt favourable interpretation
ſhould be put upon words that they poſſibly can bear. Swift.
16. To produce, as fruit.
There be ſome plants that bear no flower, and yet bear fruit:
there be ſome that bear flowers, and no fruit: there be ſome
that bear neither flowers nor fruit. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
They wing'd their flight aloft; then ſtooping low,
Perch'd on the double tree that bears the golden bough.
Dryden's Aeneid.
Say, ſhepherd, ſay, in what glad ſoil appears
A wond’rous tree that ſacred monarchs bearſ. Pope's Paſ?.
17. To bring forth, as a child.
The queen that bore thee,
Oftner upon her knees than on her feet,
w
!)ied every day ſhe liv'd. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Ye know that my wife bare two ſons. Geneſis, xliv, 27.
What could that have done?
What could the muſe herſelf that Orpheus bore,
The muſe herſelf, for her enchanting ſon 2 Milton.
The ſame Æneas, whom fair Venus bore
To fam'd Anchiſes on th' Idean ſhore. Dryden's Aneid.
18. To give birth to.
Here dwelt the man divine whom Samos bore,
But now ſelf-baniſh’d from his native ſhore. Dryden.
19. To poſſeſs, as power or honour.
When vice prevails, and impious men bear ſway,
The poſt of honour is a private ſtation. Addiſon's Cato.
20. To gain ; to win.
ſ
As it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile queſtion bear it;
For that it ſtands not in ſuch warlike brace. Shakeſp. Othell.
Becauſe the Greek and Latin have ever born away the pre-
rogative from all other tongues, they ſhall ſerve as touchſtones
to make our trials by. Camden.
Some think to bear it by ſpeaking a great word, and being
peremptory; and go on, and take by admittance that which
they cannot make good. Bacon.
2I. To maintain; to keep up.
He finds the pleaſure and credit of bearing a part in the con-
verſation, and of hearing his reaſons approved. Locke.
22. To ſupport any thing good or bad.
I was carried on to obſerve, how they did bear their for-
tunes, and principally, how they did employ their times.
Bacon's Holy War.
23. To exhibit.
Ye Trojan flames, your teſtimony bear,
What I perform'd and what I ſuffer'd there. Dryden.
24. To be anſwerable for.
If I bring him not unto thee, let me bear the blame for ever.
Geneſis, xliii. 9.
O more than madmen l you yourſelves ſhall bear
The guilt of blood and ſacrilegious war. Dryden.
25. To ſupply.
What have you under your arm 2 Somewhat, that will
bear your charges in your pilgrimage : Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
26. To be the object of.
I'll be your father and your brother too;
Let me but bear your love, I'll bear your cares.
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
27. To behave; to act in charaćter.
Some good inſtruction give,
How I may bear me here. Shakeſp. Tempg/?.
Hath he born himſelf penitent in priſon º
Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
28. To hold; to reſtrain. ºff. Meaſureſ iſ:
Do you ſuppoſe the ſtate of this realm to be now ſo feeble,
that it cannot bear off a greater blow than this? Hayward.
29. To impel; to urge; to puſh.
The reſidue were ſo diſerdered as they could not conveni-
ently fight or fly, and not only juſtled and bore down one an-
other, but, in their confuſed tumbling back, brake a part of
the avant-guard. Sir j. Hayward.
Contention, like a horſe *
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke looſe,
And bears down all before him. Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. ii.
Their broken oars, and floating planks, withſtand
Their paſſage, while they labour to the land; }
And ebbing tides bear back upon th' uncertain ſand.
Dryden's Aneid.
Now with a noiſeleſs gentle courſe
It keeps within the middle bed;
Anon it lifts aloft the head,
And bears down all before it with impetuous force. Dryden.
Truth is born down, atteſtations neglected, the teſtimony
of ſober perſons deſpiſed. Swift.
The hopes of enjoying the abbey lands would ſoon bear
down all conſiderations, and be an effectual incitement to their
perverſion. Swift.
30. To conduct; to manage.
My hope is
So to bear through, and out, the conſulſhip,
As ſpite ſhall ne'er wound you, though it may me. -
Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
31. To preſs.
Caeſar doth bear me hard; but he loves Brutus.
Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
Though he bear me hard,
I yet muſt do him right. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
Theſe men bear hard upon the ſuſpected party, purſue her
cloſe through all her windings. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 17'o.
32. To incite; to animate. -
But confidence then bore thee on; ſecure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. i. 1. 175.
33. To bear a body. A colour is ſaid to bear a body in painting,
when it is capable of being ground ſo fine, and mixing with
the oil ſo entirely, as to ſeem only a very thick oil of the ſame
colour.
34. To bear date. To carry the mark of the time when anything
WaS Written.
35. To bear a price. To have a certain value:
36. To bear in hand. To amuſe with falſe pretences; to deceive.
Your daughter, whom ſhe bore in hand to love
With ſuch integrity, ſhe did confeſs,
Was as a ſcorpion to her ſight.
- . He griev'd,
That ſo his ſickneſs, age, and impotence,
Was falſely born in hand, ſends out arreſts
On Fortinbras. . Shakespeare Hamlet.
He repaired to Bruges, deſiring of the ſtates of Bruges, to
- enter
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E A -
B E A
|
|
enter peaceably into their town, with a retinue fit for his eſtate;
and bearing them in hand, that he was to communicate with
them of divers matters of great importance, for their good.
Bacon's Henry VII.
It is no wonder, that ſome would bear the world in hand,
that the apoſtle's deſign and meaning is for preſbytery, though
his words are for epiſcopacy. South.
37. To tear ºff. . To carry away by force.
I will reſpect thee as a father, if
Thou bear'ſ my life off hence. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
The ſun views half the earth on either way,
And here brings on, and there bears off the day. Creech.
Give but the word, we'll ſnatch this damſel up,
And bear her off. . Addiſon's Cato.
My ſoul grows deſperate.
I'll bear her off. A. Philips's Diſtreſ Mother.
38. To bear out. To ſupport; to maintain; to defend.
I hope your warrant will bear out the deed. Shakespeare K.john.
I can once or twice a quarter bear out a knave againſt an ho-
neſt man. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Changes are never without danger, unleſs the prince be able
to bear out his aétions by power. Sir j. Hayward.
Quoth Sidrophel, I do not doubt
To find friends that will bear me out: Hudibras.
It is company only that can bear a man out in an ill thing. h
South.
I doubted whether that occaſion could bear me out in the
confidence of giving your ladyſhip any further trouble. Temple,
To BEAR. v. n.
1. To ſuffer pain.
Stranger, ceaſe thy care;
Wiſe is the ſoul; but man is born to bear:
Jove weighs affairs of earth in dubious ſcales, -
And the good ſuffers while the bad prevails. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To be patient.
I cannot, cannot bear; ’tis paſt, 'tis done;
Periſh this impious, this deteſted ſon. Dryden's Fables.
3. To be fruitful or prolifick.
A fruit tree hath been blown up almoſt by the roots, and ſet
up again, and the next year bear º Bacon.
Betwixt two ſeaſon comes th’ auſpicious air,
This age to bloſſom, and the next to bear. Dryden.
Melons on beds of ice are taught to bear,
And, ſtrangers to the ſun, yet ripen here.
4. To take effect; to ſucceed.
Having pawned a full ſuit of cloaths for a ſum of money,
which, my operator aſſured me, was the laſt he ſhould want to
bring all our matters to bear. Guardian, N° 166.
5. To act in chara&amp;ter. -
Granville.
Inſtrućt me
How I may formally in perſon bear,
Like a true friar. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
6. To tend; to be direéted to any point.
The oily drops ſwimming on the ſpirit of wine, moved
reſtleſsly to and fro, ſometimes bearing up to one another, as
if all were to unite into one body, and then falling off, and
continuing to ſhift places. Boyle.
Never did men more joyfully obey,
Or ſooner underſtood the fign to fly:
With ſuch alacrity they bore away. Dryden's Annus Mirab.
Whoſe navy like a ſtiff-ſtretch'd cord did ſhew,
Till he bore in, and bent them into flight. Dryden.
On this the hero fix’d an oak in fight,
The mark to guide the mariners aright:
To bear with this, the ſeamen ſtretch their oars, -
Then round the rock they ſteer, and ſeek the former ſhores.
Dryden's AFneid.
In a convex mirrour, we view the figures and all other
things, which bear out with more life and ſtrength than nature
itſelf. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
7. To aët as an impellent, or as a reciprocal power; generally
with the particles apon or againſt.
We were encounter'd by a mighty rock,
Which being violently born upon,
Our helpleſs ſhip was ſplitted in the midſt. Shakeſpeare.
Upon the tops of mountains, the air which bears againſt the
reſtagnant quickſilver, is leſs preſſed. Boyle.
The ſides hearing one againſt the other, they could not lie ſo
cloſe at the bottoms. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
As a lion bounding in his way, -
With force augmented bears againſt his prey,
Sideling to ſeize. Dryden's Fables.
Becauſe the operations to be performed by the teeth, require
a conſiderable ſtrength in the inſtruments which move the
ower jaw, nature hath provided this with ſtrong muſcles, to
make it bear forcibly againſt the upper jaw. Ray.
. The weight of the body doth bear moſt upon the knee-joints,
ºn raiſing itſelf up, and moſt upon the muſcles of the thighs, in
coining down. Wilkins's Mathematical Magick.
he waves of the ſea lear violently and rapidly upon ſome
ores, the waters being pent up by the land.
Broome on the Odyſſey.
8. To act upon.
Spinola, with his ſhot, did bear upon thoſe within, who ap-
peared upon the walls. Hayward.
9. To be ſituated with reſpećt to other places.
Io. To bear up. To ſtand firm without falling.
So long as nature
Will bear up with this exerciſe, ſo long -
I daily vow to uſe it. Shakesp. Jºinter's Tale.
Perſons in diſtreſs may ſpeak of themſelves with dignity; it
ſhews a greatneſs of ſoul, that they bear up againſt the ſtorms
of fortune. - Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
The conſciouſneſs of integrity, the ſenſe of a life ſpent in
doing good, will enable a man to bear up under any change of
circumſtances. Atterbury.
When our commanders and ſoldiers were raw and unexpe-
rienced, we loſt battles and towns; yet we bore up then, as the
French do now; nor was there any thing deciſive in their ſuc-
ceſſes. - Swift.
11. To bear with. To endure an unpleaſing thing.
They are content to bear with my abſence and folly. Sidney.
Though I muſt be content to lear with thoſe that ſay you
are reverend grave men; yet they lie deadly, that tell you, you
have good faces. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Look you lay home to him; -
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with.
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask. Paradiſe Lºft.
BEAR. m. ſ. [bena, Saxon.]
1. A rough ſavage animal.
Every part of the body of theſe animals is covered with
thick ſhaggy hair, of a dark brown colour, and their claws
are hooked, which they uſe in climbing trees. They feed upon
fruits, honey, bees, and fleſh. Some have falſely reported, that
bears bring their young into the world ſhapeleſs, and that their
dams lick them into form. The dams go no longer than thirty
days, and generally produce five young ones. In the winter,
they lie hid and aſleep, the male forty days, and the female four
months; and ſo ſoundly for the firſt fourteen days, that blows
will not wake them. In the ſleepy ſeaſon, they are ſaid to
have no nouriſhment but from licking their feet; for it is cer-
tain they eat nothing, and, at the end of it, the males are very
fat. This animal has naturally an hideous look, but when en-
raged it is terrible; and, as rough and ſtupid as it ſeems to be,
it is capable of diſcipline; it leaps, dances, and plays a thou-
ſand little tricks at the ſound of a trumpet. The fleſh of bears
was much eſteemed by the ancients. They abound in Poland,
Muſcovy, Lithuania, and the great foreſts in Germany; and
alſo in the remote northern countries, where the ſpecies is white.
Calmet.
Call hither to the ſtake my two brave bears,
Bid Saliſbury and Warwick come to me.—
—Are theſe thy bears 2 we'll bait thy bears to death,
And manacle the bearward in their chains. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Thou'dſt ſhun a bear;
But if thy flight lay tow'rd the roaring ſea,
Thou'dſt meet the beari' th' mouth. Shakeſp. King Lear.
2. The name of two conſtellations, called the greater and leſſºr
bear; in the tail of the leſſºr bear, is the pole ſtar.
E’en then when Troy was by the Greeks o'erthrown,
The bear oppos'd to bright Orion ſhone. Creech.
BEAR-BIND. m. ſ. A ſpecies of bindweed; which ſee:
BEAR-FLY. m. ſ. [from bear and fly.] . An inſect.
There be of flies, caterpillars, canker-flies, and bear-flies.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
BeAR-GARDEN. m. ſ. [from bear and garden.]
1. A place in which bears are kept for ſport.
Hurrying me from the playhouſe, and the ſcenes there,
to the bear-garden, to the apes, and aſſes, and tygers. Stillingſ.
I could not forbear going to a place of renown for the gal-
lantry of Britons, namely to the bear-garden. Spect, N° 436.
2. Any place of tumult or miſrule.
BEAR-GARDEN. adj. A word uſed in familiar or low phraſe for
rude or turbulent; as, a bear-garden fellow; that is, a man rude
enough to be a proper frequenter of the bear-garden. Bear-
garden ſport, is uſed for groſs inelegant entertainment.
BEAR’s-BREEcH. n.ſ.. [acanthus...] The name of a plant.
The leaves are like thoſe of the thiſtle; the flowers labiated; -
the under lip of the flower is divided into three ſegments, which,
in the beginning, is curled up in the form of a tube; in the
place of the under lip are produced the ſtanina, which ſupport
the pointals; the cup of the flowers is compoſed of prickly
leaves, the upper part of which is bent over, like an arch, and
ſupplies the defe&amp;t of the upper lip of the flower ; the fruit is of
an oval form, divided in the middle into two cells, each con-
taining one ſmooth ſeed. The ſpecies are, I. The ſmooth-
leaved garden bear’s-breech. 2. The prickly bear’s-breech. 3. The
middle bear’s-breech, with ſhort ſpines, &amp;c. The firſt is uſed
in medicine, and is ſuppoſed to be the mollis acanthus of Virgil.
The leaves of this plant are cut upon the capitals of the Corin-
thian pillars, and were formerly in great eſteem with the Ro-
mans. They are eaſily propagated by paring the roots in Fe-
bruary or March, or by the ſeeds ſown at the ſame *::::::::
E. A R S-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">|B E A
B E A
BEAR’s-EAR, or Auricula. [auricula urſi, Lat.] The name of
a plant.
'i. hath a perennial root; the leaves are thicker and ſmoother
than thoſe of the primroſe; the cup of the flower is ſhorter, ſo
that the tube appears naked; the flower is ſhaped like a funnel;
the upper part is expanded, and divided into five ſegments; this
is ſucceeded by a globular ſeed-veſſel, containing many ſmall
ſeeds; every year it produces vaſt quantities of new flowers,
differing in ſhape, ſize, or colour; and there is likewiſe a great
variety in the leaves of theſe plants. They flower in April,
and ripen their ſeeds in June. Millar.
BEAR’s-EAR, or Sanicle. [cortuſa, Lat.]
This plant hath a perennial root; the leaves are roundiſh,
rough, and crenated on the edges, like thoſe of ground ivy;
the cup of the flower is ſmall, and divided into ſix parts; the
flowers are ſhaped, like a funnel, cut at the top into many ſeg-
ments, and diſpoſed in an umbel; the fruit is roundiſh, ter-
minating in a point, and is cloſely fixt in the cup, in which are
contained many ſmall angular ſeeds. We have but one ſpecies
of this plant, which is nearly allied to the auricula urſ; but the
flowers are not quite ſo large and fair. It loſes its leaves in
winter, but puts out new ones early in the ſpring; and, in A-
pril, it produces flowers, which are ſometimes ſucceeded by
ſeed pods; but it is very rare that they perfect their ſeeds with
uS. Millar.
BEAR's-foot. n.ſ. See HELLE Bor E, of which it is a ſpecies.
BEAR's-wort. n.ſ. An herb.
BEARD. m. ſ. [beanb, Saxon.]
1. The hair that grows on the lips and chin.
Ere on thy chin the ſpringing beard began
To ſpread a doubtful down, and promiſe man. Prior.
2. Beard is uſed for the face; as, to do anything to a man's beard,
is to do it in defiance, or to his face.
Rail'd at their covenant, and jeer'd
Their rev'rend parſons to my beard. Hudibras.
3. Beard is uſed to mark age or virility; as, he has a long beard,
means he is old.
This ancient ruffian, Sir, whoſe life I have ſpared at ſuit of
his grey beard. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Some thin remains of chaſtity appear'd,
Ev’n under Jove, but Jove without a heard. Dryden.
Would it not be an inſufferable thing, for a profeſſor to have
his authority, of forty years ſtanding, confirmed by general tra-
dition, and a reverend beard, overturned by an upſtart nove-
liſt 2 * Locke.
4. Sharp prickles growing upon the ears of corn.
The ploughman loſt his ſweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere its youth attain’d a beard.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
A certain farmer complained, that the beard of his corn cut
the reapers and threſhers fingers. L'E/ºrange.
5. A barb on an arrow.
6. The beard or chuck of a horſe, is that part which bears the
curb of the bridle. Farrier's Dići.
To BEARD. v. a. [from beard.]
1. To take or pluck by the beard, in contempt or anger.
No man ſo potent breathes upon the ground,
But I will beard him. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
2. To oppoſe to the face ; to ſet at open defiance.
He, whenſoever he ſhould ſwerve from duty, may be able to
beard him. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The deſign of utterly extirpating monarchy and epiſcopacy,
the preſbyterians alone begun, continued, and would have
ended, if they had not been bearded by that new party, with
whom they could not agree about dividing the ſpoil. Swift.
BE'ARDED. adj. [from beard.]
1. Having a beard.
Think every bearded fellow, that's but yok'd,
May draw with you. Shakeſp. Othello.
ld prophecies foretel our fall at hand,
When hearded men in floating caſtles land. Dryden.
2. Having ſharp prickles, as corn.
As when a field
Of Ceres, ripe for harveſt, waving bends
Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft, b. iv. l. 982.
The fierce virago
Flew o'er the fields, nor hurt the bearded grain. Dryden.
3. Barbed or jagged.
Thou ſhouldſt have pull'd the ſecret from my breaſt,
Torn out the bearded ſteel to give me reſt. Dryd. Aurengz.
BE'ARDLEss. adj. [from beard.]
1. Without a beard.
There are extant ſome coins of Cunobelin, king of Eſſex
and Middleſex, with a beardleſs image, inſcribed Cunobelin.
Cambden's Remains.
2. Youthful.
And, as young ſtriplings wheep the top for ſport,
On the ſmooth pavement of an empty court,
The wooden engine flies and whirls about,
Admir'd with clamours of the beardleſ; rout. Dryden,
BE'AR ER. m. ſ. [from to bear.]
I
1. A carrier of any thing, who conveys any thing from one place
or perſon to another.
He ſhould the bearers put to ſudden death,
Not ſhriving time allow'd. Shaky?, Hamlet.
Forgive the bearer of unhappy news;
Your alter'd father openly purſues
Your ruin. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
No gentleman ſends a ſervant with a meſſage, without en-
deavouring to put it into terms brought down to the capacity of
the bearer. Swift.
2. One employed in carrying burthens.
And he ſet threeſcore and ten thouſand of them to be learer;
of burdens. 2 Chron. ii. 18.
3. One who wears anything.
- O majeſty!
When thou doſt pinch thy bearer, thou doſt fit
Like a rich armour worn in heat of day,
That ſcalds with ſafety. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
4. One who carries the body to the grave.
5. A tree that yields its ſº: -
This way of procuring autumnal roſes, in ſome that are good
bearers, will ſucceed. Boyle.
Reprune apricots and peaches, ſaving as much of the young
likelieſt ſhoots as are well placed; for the raw bearer; com:
monly periſh the new ones ſucceeding. Evelyn's Kalendar.
6. In architecture. A poſt or brick wall raiſed up between
the ends of a piece of timber, to ſhorten its bearing; or to
prevent its bearing with the whole weight at the ends only.
7. In heraldry. See Support E.R.
BEARHERd. n. ſ. [from lear and herd; as /*pherd, from ſhºp.]
A man that tends bears.
He that is more than a youth, is not for me; and he that is
leſs than a man, I am not for him; therefore I will even take
fixpence in earneſt of the bearherd, and lead his apes into hell.
- - Shakeſp. 4/uch ado about Noting.
BEARING. m.ſ.. [from bear.] . .
I. The ſite or place of any thing with reſpect to ſomething elſe.
But of this frame, the bearings and the ties,
The ſtrong connections, nice dependencies,
Gradations juſt, has thy pervading ſoul
Look'd through or can a part contain the whole Pºpe.
2' Geſture; mien ; behaviour.
That is Claudio; I know him by his bearing.
Shakespeare. Much ado alout Nothing.
3. In architecture. Bearing of a piece of timber, with carpen-
ters, is the ſpace either between the two fixt extremes thereof,
or between one extreme and a poſt, brick-wall, &amp;c. trimmed up
between the ends, to ſhorten its bearing. Builder's Dict.
BEARWARD. m. ſ...[from bear and ward.] A keeper of bears.
We'll bait thy bears to death,
And manacle the bearward in their chains. Shakespeare Henry VI.
The bear is led after one manner, the multitude after an-
other; the bearward leads but one brute, and the mountebank
leads a thouſand. L'E/irange.
BEAST. n.ſ.. [heſle, Fr. bºſia, Lat.]
1. An animal diſtinguiſhed from birds, inſects, fiſhes, and man.
The man that once did ſell the lion's ſkin,
While the beaſt liv'd, was kill'd with hunting him. Shakeſp.
Beaſis of chaſe are the buck, the doe, the fox, the martern,
and the roe. Beaſis of the foreſt are the hart, the hind, the
hare, the boar, and the wolf. Beaſts of warren are the hare
and cony. Cowel.
2. An irrational animal, oppoſed to man; as man and legſ.
I dare do all that may become a man;
Who dares do more, is none.
What beaſt was’t then
That made you break this enterprize to me?
Medea's charms were there, Circean feaſts,
With bowls that turn'd enamour'd youths to beaſis. Drydºn.
3. A brutal ſavage man, a man acting in any manner unworthy
of a reaſonable creature.
Be'Ast INGs. See BEEst INGs.
BEASTLINEss. n.ſ.. [from beaſily.] Brutality; practice of any
kind contrary to the rules of humanity.
They held this land, and with their filthineſs
Polluted this ſame gentle ſoil long time;
That their own mother loath'd their beaſilineſ,
And 'gan abhor her brood's unkindly crime. Fairy Queen.
Be'Ast LY. adj. [from beaſt.]
1. Brutal; contrary to the nature and dignity of man. It is uſed
commonly as a term of reproach.
Wouldſt thou have thyſelf fall in the confuſion of men, or
remain a beaſt with beaſts?–Ay—a beaſily ambition. Shakeſp.
You beaſily knave, know you no reverence King Lear.
With lewd, prophane, and beaſily phraſe,
Macbeth.
To catch the world's looſe laughter or vain gaze. B. johnſ.
Vain idols, -
It is commonly charged upon the gentlemen of the army,
that the bea/ly vice of drinking to exceſs, hath been lately, from
their example, reſtored among us. Swift.
2. Having the nature or form of beaſts.
Beaſily divinities, and droves of gods, Prior.
To
lº
II.
!
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">To BEAT. v. a. preter. beat, part, paſſ, beat, or beaten. [latire,
French.]
1. To ſtrike; to knock; to lay blows upon.
So fight I, not as one that beateth the air.
He rav'd with all the madneſs of deſpair;
He roar'd, he beat his breaſt, he tore his hair.
2. To puniſh with ſtripes or blows.
They've choſe a conſul that will from them take
Their liberties; make them of no more voice
Than dogs, that are as often beat for barking,
And therefore kept to do ſo. Shakeſp. Coriolanus,
Miſtreſs Ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that you
cannot ſee a white ſpot about her. Shakeſp. M. Wives of I/indſ.
There is but one fault for which children ſhould be beaten ;
and that is obſtinacy or rebellion. Iocke.
3. To ſtrike an inſtrument of muſick.
Bid them come forth and hear,
Or at their chamber door I'll beat the drum,
Till it cry, ſleep to death. Shakeſp. King Lear.
4. To break to powder, or comminute by blows.
The people gathered manna, and ground it in mills, or beat
it in a mortar, and baked it. Numbers, xi. 8.
They did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires,
to work it. Exodus, xxxix. 3.
They ſave the laborious work of beating of hemp, by making
the axletree of the main wheel of their corn mills longer than
ordinary, and placing of pins in them, to raiſe large hammers
like thoſe uſed for paper and fulling mills, with which they beat
moſt of their hemp. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Neſtor, we ſee, furniſhed the gold, and he beat it into leaves,
ſo that he had occaſion to make uſe of his anvil and hammer.
Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
5. To ſtrike buſhes or ground, or make a motion to rouze game.
It is ſtrange how long ſome men will lie in wait to ſpeak,
and how many other matters they will beat over to come near
it. Bacon's Eſſays.
When from the cave thou riſeſt with the day,
To beat the woods, and rouze the bounding prey.
Together let us beat this ample field,
Try what the open, what the covert yield. Pope.
6. To threſh; to drive the corn out of the huſk.
She gleaned in the field, and beat out that ſhe had gleaned.
- Ruth, ii. 17.
1 Cor. ix. 26.
Dryden.
Prior.
7. To mix things by long and frequent agitation.
By long beating the white of an egg, you may bring it into
white curds. Boyle.
8. To batter with engines of war.
And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and ſlew the men of
the city. judges, viii. 17.
9. To daſh, as water, or bruſh as wind.
Beyond this flood a frozen continent
Lies dark and wild; beat with perpetual ſtorms
Of whirlwind and dire hail. Milt. Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
With tempeſts beat, and to the winds a ſcorn. Roſcommon.
While winds and ſtorms his lofty forehead beat,
The common fate of all that's high or great.
As when a lion in the midnight hours,
Beat by rude blaſts, and wet with wintry ſhow’rs,
Deſcends terrifick from the mountain's brow. Pope.
Io. To tread a path.
While I this unexampled taſk eſſay,
Paſs awful gulfs, and beat my painful way,
Celeſtial dove, divine aſſiſtance bring.
11. To make a path by marking it with tracks.
He that will know the truth of things, muſt leave the com-
mon and beaten track. Locke.
12. To conquer; to ſubdue; to vanquiſh.
If Hercules and Lichas play at dice,
Which is the better man The greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand: -
So is Alcides beaten by his page. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
- You ſouls of geeſe,
That bear the ſhapes of men, how have you run
From ſlaves that apes would beat 2 Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Five times, Marcius,
I have fought with thee, ſo often haſt thou beat me. Shakeſp.
I have diſcern'd the foe ſecurely lie,
Too proud to fear a beaten enemy. Dryden's Indian Emp.
The common people of Lucca are firmly perſuaded, that one
Lucqueſe can beat five Florentines. Addiſon on Italy.
Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, joining his ſhips to thoſe of the Sy-
racuſans, beat the Carthaginians at ſea. Arbuthnot on Coins.
* 3. To harraſs; to over-labour.
It is no point of wiſdom for a man to heat his brains, and
ſpend his ſpirits about things impoſſible. Hakewell on Providence.
And as in priſons mean rogues beat
Hemp, for the ſervice of the great;
So Whacum beat his dirty brains
Tº advance his maſter's fame and gains, Hudibras.
I know not why any one ſhould waſte his time, and beat his
head about the Latin grammar, who does not intend to be a
critick. - Locke.
Vol. I.
Denham.
Blackmore.
14. To lay, or preſs, as ſtanding corn by hard weather.
Her own ſhall bleſs her;
Her foes ſhake, like a field of beaten corn, -
And hang their heads with ſorrow. Shakeſp. Henry VIIt.
15. To depreſs; to cruſh by repeated oppoſition; uſually with
the particle down. -
. Albeit a pardon was proclaimed, touching any ſpeech tend-
ing to treaſon, yet could not the boldneſs be beaten down either
with that ſeverity, or with this lenity be abated. Hayward.
. Our warriours propagating the French language, at the ſame
time they are beating down their power. Addiſon. Spect. Nº 165.
Such an unlook'd for ſtorm of ills falls on me,
It beats down all my ſtrength. Addiſon's Cato.
16. To drive by violence. -
Twice have I ſally'd, and was twice beat back. Dryden.
He that proceeds upon other principles in his inquiry, does
at leaſt poſt himſelf in a party, which he will not quit, till he
be beaten out. Locke.
He cannot beat it out of his head, but that it was a cardinal
who picked his pocket. Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 44.
The younger part of mankind might be beat off from the be-
lief of the moſt important points even of natural religion, by
the impudent jeſts of a profane wit. Watts's Impr. of the Mind.
17. To move with fluttering agitation.
Thrice have I beat the wing, and rid with night
About the world. , Dryden's State of Innocence.
18. To beat down. To endeavour by treaty to leſſen the price
demanded.
• Surveys rich moveables with curious eye,
Beats down the price, and threatens ſtill to buy. Dryden:
She perſuaded him to truſt the renegado with the money he
had brought over for their ranſom; as not queſtioning but he
would beat down the terms of it. Addiſon. Speciat. Nº 1 99.
19. To beat down. To ſink or leſſen the value.
Uſury beats down the price of land; for the employment of
money is chiefly either merchandizing or purchaſing; and uſury
way-lays both. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 42.
20. To beat up. To attack ſuddenly; to alarm.
They lay in that quiet poſture, without making the leaſt im-
preſſion upon the enemy, by beating up his quarters, which
might eaſily have been done. Clarendon, b. viii.
Will. fancies he ſhould never have been the man he is, had
not he broke windows, knocked down conſtables, and beat up
a lewd woman's quarters, when he was a young fellow. Addison
21. To beat the hºof. To walk; to go on foot.
To Be AT. v. n.
1. To move in a pulſatory manner.
I would gladly underſtand the formation of a ſoul, and ſee
it beat the firſt conſcious pulſe. Collier on Thought.
2. To daſh, as a flood or ſtorm.
This publick envy ſeemeth to beat chiefly upon miniſters.
Bacon's Eſſays, N° 9.
Your brow, which does no fear of thunder know,
Sees rowling tempeſts vainly beat below. Dryden.
And one ſees many of the like hollow ſpaces worn in the
bottoms of the rocks, as they are more or leſs able to reſiſt the
impreſſions of the water that beats againſt them. Addiſon.
3. To knock at a door. -
The men of the city beſet the houſe round about, and beat
at the door, and ſpake to the maſter of the *...ſ.”
4. To move with frequent repetitions of the ſame act or ſtroke.
No pulſe ſhall keep -
His nat'ral progreſs, but ſurceaſe to beat. Sh, Rom, and jul.
... My temp'rate pulſe does regularly beat ;
Feel, and be ſatisfy'd. Dryden's Perſius, Sat. iii:
A man's heart beats, and the blood circulates, which it is not
in his power, by any thought or volition, to ſtop. Locke.
5. To throb ; to be in agitation, as a ſore ſwelling.
A turn or two I'll walk,
To ſtill my beating mind. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
6. To flučtuate; to be in agitation.
The tempeſt in my mind
Doth from my ſenſes take all feeling elſe,
Save what beats there. Shakeſp. King Lear.
7. To try different ways; to ſearch.
I am always beating about in my thoughts for ſomething that
may turn to the benefit of my dear countrymen. Addiſon. Guard.
To find an honcſt man, I beat about, -
And love him, court him, praiſe him in or out. Pope.
8. To act upon with violence.
The ſun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and
wiſhed in himſelf to die. joiah, iv. 48.
9. To ſpeak frequently; to repeat; to enforce by repetition.
We are drawn on into a larger ſpeech, by reaſon of their ſo
great earneſtneſs, who beat more and more upon theſe laſt al-
leged words. Hocker, b. ii., § 4.
How frequently and ſervently doth the ſcripture beat upon
this cauſe: Hakewell on Providence.
10. To beat up; as, to beat up for ſoldiers. The word up ſeems re-
dundant.
BEAT. part, paſſve. [from the verb.]
2 U - Like
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E A
B E A
|
* *
Like a rich veſſel beat by ſtorms to ſhore,
*Twere madneſs ſhould I venture out once more. Dryden.
BEAT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Stroke.
2. Manner of ſtriking.
Albeit the baſe and treble ſtrings of a viol be turned to an
uniſon; yet the former will ſtill make a bigger or broader
ſound than the latter, as making a broader beat upon the air.
Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. ii. c. 2.
With a careleſs beat,
Struck out the mute creation at a heat. Dryd. Hind and P.
3. Manner of being ſtruck; as, the beat of the pulſe, or a drum.
BEATEN. particip. adj. [from to beat.]
What makes you, Sir, ſo late abroad,
Without a guide, and this no beaten road Dryd. IP. of Bath.
Be'At ER. m. ſ. [from beat.]
1. An inſtrument with which anything is comminuted or ming-
led.
Beat all your mortar with a beater three or four times over,
before you uſe it; for thereby you incorporate the ſand and
lime well together. Mºxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
2. A perſon much given to blows.
The beſt ſchoolmaſter of our time, was the greateſt beater.
Aſham's Schoolmaſter.
BEATI'fical. lad. [heatificus, low Lat. from beatus, happy.]
BEATI'Fick. } That which has the power of making happy,
or compleating fruition; bliſsful. It is uſed only of heavenly
fruition after death.
Admiring the riches of heav'n's pavement
Than ought divine or holy elſe, enjoy'd -
In viſion beatifick. Milton's Par. Loft, b, i. 1. 684.
It is alſo their felicity to have no faith; for, enjoying the
beatifical viſion in the fruition of the object of faith, they have
received the full evacuation of it. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i.
We may contemplate upon the greatneſs and ſtrangeneſs of
the beatifick viſion; how a created eye ſhould be ſo fortified, as
to bear all thoſe glories, that ſtream from the fountain of un-
created light. South.
BEATI'FIcAll Y. adv. [from beatifical.] In ſuch a manner as to
compleat happineſs. - -
Beatifically to behold the face of God in the fulneſs of wiſ-
dom, righteouſneſs and peace, is bleſſedneſs no way incident un-
to the creatures beneath man. Hakewell on Providence.
BEAtification. n.f. [from beatifick.] A term in the Romiſh
church, diſtinguiſhed from canonization. Beat; cation. is an
acknowledgment made by the pope, that the perſon beatified is
in heaven, and therefore may be reverenced as bleſſed; but is
not a conceſſion of the honours due to ſaints, which are con-
ferred by canonization.
To BEATIFY. v. a. [heatifica, Lat.]
1. To make happy; to bleſs with the completion of celeſtial en-
joyment. -
I wiſh I had the wings of an angel, to have aſcended into pa-
radiſe, and to have beheld the forms of thoſe beatified ſpirits,
from which I might have copied my archangel. Dryden.
The uſe of ſpiritual conference is unimaginable and un-
ſpeakable, eſpecially if free and unreſtrained, bearing an image
of that converſation which is among angels and beatified ſaints.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
We ſhall know him to be the fulleſt good, the neareſt to us,
and the moſt certain; and, conſequently, the moſt beatifying
of all others. Brown's Coſmologia Sacra, b. iii. c. 4.
2. To ſettle the charaćter of any perſon by a publick acknow-
ledgment that he is received in heaven, though he is not in-
veſted with the dignity of a ſaint.
Over-againſt this church ſtands a large hoſpital, erected by a
ſhoemaker, who has been beatified, though never ſainted.
Addiſon on Italy.
BEATING. m.ſ.. [from beat..] Correótion; puniſhment by blows.
Playwright, convict of publick wrongs to men,
Takes private beatings, and begins again. Ben. Johnſºn.
BEA't ITUDE. m. ſ. [beatitude, Lat.]
1. Bleſſedneſs; felicity; happineſs: commonly uſed of the joys
of heaven.
The end of that government, and of all man's aims, is agreed
to be beatitude, that is, his being completely well. Digby.
This is the image and little repreſentation of heaven; it is
beatitude in pićture. Taylor's Holy Living.
He ſet out the felicity of his heaven, by the delights of ſenſe;
ſlightly paſſing over the accompliſhment of the ſoul, and the
pºtitide of that part which earth and viſibilities too weakly
affect. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. z. z.
2. A declaration of bleſſedneſs made by our Saviour to particular
virtucs.
BEAU. n.ſ.. [beau, Fr. It is ſounded like bo, and has often the
French plural beaux.] A man of dreſs; a man whoſe great
care is to deck his perſon. -
What, will not beaux attempt to pleaſe the fair Dryden.
The water nymphs are too unkind
To Vill'röy; are the land nymphs ſo
And fly they all, at once combin’d -
To ſhame a general, and a beau? Prior.
You will become the delight of nine ladies in ten, and the
envy of ninety-nine beaux in a hundred. Swift'. Direct. to Foºtn.
BEAVER. m. ſ. [bievre, Fr.]
1. An animal, otherwiſe named the caſior, amphibious, and re-
markable for his art in building his habitation; of which many
wonderful accounts are delivered by travellers. His ſkin is
very valuable on account of the fur.
The leaver being hunted, biteth off his ſtones, knowing that
for them only his life is ſought. Hakewell on Providence.
They placed this invention upon the beaver, for the ſaga-
city and wiſdom of that animal; indeed from its artifice in
building. Brown's Pulgar Errours, c. 4.
2. A hat of the beſt kind; ſo called from being made of the für
of beaver.
You ſee a ſmart rhetorician turning his hat, moulding it in-
to different cocks, examining the lining and the button during
his harangue: A deaf man would think he was cheapening a
beaver, when he is talking of the fate of a nation. Addiſon. Sp.
The broker here his ſpacious beaver wears,
Upon his brow ſit jealouſies and cares. Gay's Trivia.
3. The part of a helmet that covers the face. [haviere, Fr.]
His dreadful hideous head
Cloſe cºuched on the beaver, ſeem'd to throw,
From flaming mouth, bright ſparkles firy red. Fairy Queen.
Big Mars ſeems bankrupt in their beggar'd hoſt,
And faintly through a ruſty beaver peeps. Shakeſp. H. V.
He was ſlain upon a courſe at tilt, the ſplinters of the ſtaff
going in at his beaver. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 36.
BE'Av ER ED. adj. [from beaver.] Covered with a beaver; wear-
ing a beaver.
His beaver'd brow a birchen garland bears,
Dropping with infant's blood, and mother's tears:
,All fleſh is humbled. Pope's Dunciad.
BFAU'Is H. adj. [from beau.] Befitting a beau; foppiſh.
BEAUTEous, adj. [from beauty..] Fair; elegant in form;
pleaſing to the # ; beautiful. This word is chiefly poetical.
I can, Petrucio, help thee to a wife,
With wealth enough, and young, and beauteous.
Shakespeare. Taming of the Shrew.
Alas! not hoping to ſubdue,
I only to the flight aſpir’d;
To keep the beauteous foe in view,
Was all the glory I deſir'd. Prior.
BEAU'Teously. adv. [from beauteous.] In a beauteous man-
ner; in a manner pleaſing to the fight; beautifully.
Look upon pleaſures not upon that fide that is next the ſun,
or where they look beauteouſly; that is, as they come towards
you to be enjoyed. Taylor's Holy Living.
BEAUTEousNTss. n.ſ.. [from beauteous.] The ſtate or quality
of being beauteous; beauty.
From ieſs virtue, and leſs beauteouſneſ,
The gentiles fram'd them gods and goddeſſes. Donne.
BEAUTIFUL. adj. [from beauty and fill.] Fair; having the
qualities that conſtitute beauty.
He ſtole away and took by ſtrong hand all the beautiful wo-
men in his time. Raleigh's Hiſł. of the World.
The principal and moſt important parts of painting, is to
know what is moſt beautiful in nature, and moſt proper for
that art; that which is the moſt beautiful, is the moſt noble
ſubject: ſo, in poetry, tragedy is more beautiful than comedy,
becauſe the perſons are greater whom the poet inſtructs, and
conſequently the inſtructions of more benefit to mankind.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Preface.
Beautiful looks are rul’d by fickle minds,
And ſummer ſeas are turn'd by ſudden winds. Prior.
BEAUTIFULLY. adv. [from beautiful..] In a beautiful manner.
No longer ſhall the boddice aptly lac'd,
From thy full boſom to thy ſlender waiſt,
That air and harmony of ſhape expreſs,
Fine by degrees, and beautifully leſs. Prior.
BEAUTIFULNEss. n.ſ.. [from beautiful J The quality of being
beautiful; beauty; excellence of form.
To BEAUTIFY. v. a. [from beauty..] To adorn; to cmbelliſh;
to deck; to grace; to add beauty to.
Never was ſorrow more ſweetly ſet forth, their faces ſeeming
rather to beautify their ſorrow, than their ſorrow to cloud the
beauty of their faces. Hayward on Edward VI.
Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome,
To beautify thy triumphs and return,
Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke. Shałºff. T. Andron.
Theſe were not created to beautify the earth alone, but for
the uſe of man and beaſt. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
How all conſpire to grace
Th’ extended earth, and beautify her face. Blackmore's Creat.
There is charity and juſtice; and the one ſerves to heighten
and beautify the other. Atterbury.
T; BEAUTIFY. v. n. To grow beautiful; to advance in
cauty.
It muſt be a proſpect pleaſing to God himſelf, to fee his
creation for ever beautifying in his eyes, and drawing nearer to
hiº, by greatºr degrees of reſemblance. Addiſon. Speciator.
BEAUTY, n.ſ. ſºciate, Fr.]
I. That
*.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E C
B E C
1, That aſſemblage of graces, or proportion of parts, which
pleaſes the eye.
Beauty conſiſts of a certain compoſition of colour and figure,
cauſing delight in the beholder. Locke.
Your beauty was the cauſe of that effect,
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my ſleep.–
—If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
Theſe nails ſhould rend that beauty from my cheeks.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
Beauty is beſt in in a body that hath rather dignity of pre-
ſence than beauty of aſpect. The beautiful prove accompliſh-
ed, but not of great ſpirit, and ſtudy for the moſt part rather
behaviour than virtue. Bacon.
The beſt part of beauty is that which a pićture cannot ex-
preſs. Bacon's Ornament. Ration. Nº 64.
Of the beauty of the eye I ſhall ſay little, leaving that to
oets and orators; that it is a very pleaſant and lovely obječt to
behold, if we conſider the figure, colours, ſplendour of it, is the
leaſt I can ſay, Ray on Creation.
He view'd their twining branches with delight,
And prais'd the beauty of the pleaſing fight. Pope.
2. A particular grace, feature, or ornament.
The ancient pieces are beautiful, becauſe they reſemble the
beauties of nature; and nature will ever be beautiful, which re-
ſembles thoſe beauties of antiquity. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Wherever you place a patch, you deſtroy a beauty. Addiſon.
3. Anything more eminently excellent than the reſt of that with
which it is united.
This gave me an occaſion of looking backward on ſome
beauties of my author in his former books. Dryd. Fab. Prºf.
With incredible pains have I endeavoured to copy the ſeveral
beauties of the ancient and modern hiſtorians. Arbuthnot.
4. A beautiful perſon.
Remember that Pellean conquerour,
A youth, how all the beauties of the eaſt *-
He ſlightly view'd, and ſlightly overpaſs'd. Paradiſe Loft.
What can thy ends, malicious beauty, be?
Canhe, who kill'd thy brother, live for thee? Dryden.
To BEAU't Y. v. a. [from the noun..] To adorn; to beautify;
to embelliſh.
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plaſt’ring art,
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it,
Than is my deed to your moſt painted word. Shakespeare Hamlet.
BEAUTY-spot. n.ſ.. [from beauty and ſpot.] A ſpot placed to
direct the eye to ſomething elſe, or to heighten ſome beauty; a
foil; a patch.
The filthineſs of ſwine makes them the beauty-ſpot of the ani-
mal creation. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. iii. c. 2. § 49.
Becafi'co. n.ſ.. [becafigo, Span.] A bird like a nightingale,
feeding on figs and grapes; a fig-pecker. Pineda.
The robin-redbreaſt, till of late, had reſt,
And children ſacred held a martin's neſt;
Till becaficos ſold ſo dev'liſh dear,
To one that was, or would have been, a peer. Pope.
To Beca'LM. v. a. [from calm.]
1. To ſtill the elements.
The moon ſhone clear on the becalmed flood. Dryden.
2. To keep a ſhip from motion.
A man becamed at ſea, out of ſight of land, in a fair day,
may look on the ſun, or ſea, or ſhip, a whole hour, and per-
ceive no motion. Locke.
3. To quiet the mind.
Soft whiſpring airs, and the lark's mattin ſong,
Then woo to muſing, and becalm the mind
Perplex'd with irkſome thoughts. Philips.
Baniſh his ſorrows, and becalm his ſoul
With eaſy dreams. Addiſon's Cato.
4. To becahn and to calm differ in this, that to calm is to ſtop mo-
tion, and to becalm is to with-hold from motion.
Beca'ME. The preterite of become; which ſee.
Beca'Use. conjunct. [from by and cauſe.]
1. For this reaſon that; on this account that; for this cauſe that.
How great ſoever the fins of any perſon are, Chriſt died for
him, becauſe he died for all; and he died for thoſe fins, becauſe
he died for all fins; only he muſt reform. Hammond's Fundam.
- Men do not ſo generally agree in the ſenſe of theſe as of the
other, becauſe the intereſts, and luſts, and paſſions of men,
are more concerned in the one than the other. Tillotſ. Preface.
2. It has, in ſome fort, the force of a prepoſition; but, becauſe it
is compounded of a noun, has of after it.
Infancy demands aliment, ſuch as lengthens fibres without
breaking, becauſe of the ſtate of accretion. Arbuth, on Aliments.
To BechA'nce. v. . [from be and chance.] To befal; to hap-
pento: a word proper, but now in little uſe.
My ſons, God knows what has bechanced them. -
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
All happineſs bechance to thee at Milan. .
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Werona.
Be'chicks. n.ſ. [3%zz, of 2%, a cough..] Medicines proper
for relieving coughs. IDict.
To BECK. J. a. Übeach, Sax. bec, Fr. head..] To make a ſign
with the head.
Bell, book, and candle, ſhall not drive me back,
When gold and ſilver beck me to come on. Shakeſp K. john.
Oh, this falſe ſoul of Fgypt, this gay charm,
Whoſe eye beck'd forth my wars, and called them home.
Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Beck. m. ſ. [from the verb.] ºff, J p
1. A ſign with the head; a nod. . - -
Haſte thee, nymph, and bring with thee
Quips, and cranks, and wanton wiles,
Nods, and becks, and wreathed ſmiles. Mºon. -
2. A nod of command.
Neither the luſty kind ſhewed any roughneſs, nor the eaſier
any idleneſs; but ſtill like a well obeyed maſter, whoſe beck is
enough for diſcipline. Sidney, b. ii.
Then forthwith to him takes a choſen band
Of ſpirits, likeſt to himſelf in guile,
To be at hand, and at his beck appear. Milton's Par. Rºg.
The menial fair, that round her wait;
At Helen's beck prepare the room of ſtate. Pope's Odyſſ. h. iii.
To Beckos. v. a. [from beck, or beach, Sax, a ſign.] ‘īo make
a ſign to. c
With her two crooked hands ſhe figns did make,
And beckon'd him. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. iv. Jianz, 13.
It beckons you to go away with it,
As if it ſome impartment did deſire
To you alone. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
With this his diſtant friends he beckons near,
Provokes their duty, and prevents their fear. Dryden.
To Be'ckon. v. m. To make a ſign.
Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made his
defence unto the people. Aëts, xix. 33.
When he had raiſed my thoughts by thoſe tranſporting airs,
he beckoned to me, and, by the waving of his hand, directed
me to approach. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 159.
Sudden you mount you beckon from the ſkies,
Clouds interpoſe, waves roar, and winds ariſe. Pope.
. To BEcli'p. v. a. [of be clyppan, Sax.] To embrace. Die?.
To BEco'M E. v. a. pret. I became ; comp. pret. I have become.
[from by and come.]
I. º enter into ſome ſtate or condition, by a change from ſome
Other.
The Lord God breathed into his noſtrils the breath of life,
and man became a living ſoul. Gen. ii. 7.
And unto the Jews I became a Jew, that I might gain the
Jews. - I Cor. ix. 20.
A ſmaller pear, grafted upon a ſtock that beareth a greater
pear, will become great. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 453.
My voice thou oft haſt heard, and haſt not fear'd,
But ſtill rejoic’d ; how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. x. l. 125.
So the leaſt faults, if mix'd with faireſt dead,
Of future ill become the fatal ſeed. Pºior.
2. To become of. To be the fate of; to be the end of; to be the
final condition of. It is obſervable; that this word is never, cr
very ſeldom, uſed but with the interrogative what.
JWhat is then 'ecome of ſo huge a multitude, as would have
overſpread a great part of the continent? . . Raleigh's Eſſays.
Perplex'd with thoughts, what would become
Of me, and all mankind. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii. l. 275.
he firſt hints of the circulation of the blood were taken
from a common perſon's wondering what became of all the
blood which iſſued out of the heart. Graunt's Hills of Mortality.
l/hat will become of me them for when he is free, he will
infallibly accuſe me. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
I/hat lecame of this thoughtful buſy creature, when removed
from this world; has amazed the vulgar, and puzzled the wiſe.
Rogers's Sermont.
3. In the fllowing paſſage, the phraſe, where is he become, is uſed
for what is become of him.
I cannot joy, until I be reſolved
Iſ'here our right valiant father is be ome. Shakespeare. Hºn. VI.
To Beco'ME. v.a. [from be or ly, and cremen, Sax, to pleaſe.]
1. Applied to perſons; to appear in a manner ſuitable to ſome-
thing
If I become not a cart as well as another man, a plague on
my bringing up. Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. i.
Why would I be a queen becauſe my face
Would wear the title with a better grace;
If I became it not, yet it would be
Part of your duty, then, to flatter me. Dryd. Conq. of Gran,
2. Applied to things; to be ſuitable to the perſon 3 to befit; to
be congruous to the appearance, or character, or circumſtancess
in ſuch a marmer as to add grace; to be graceful.
She to her fire made humblé reverence,
And bowed low, that her right well lºane,
And added grace unto her excellence: Fairy Queen, b, i.
I would #. ſome flowers of the ſpring that might
Become your time of day; and yours, and your’s,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet. z-
Your maidenheads growing: Shakespeare. If inter's Tak.
Yet be ſad, good brothers;
For, to ſpeak truth, it very well becomes you, Shakesp. iſº,IV.
couf<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E D
Your diſhonour he ſt
Mangles true judgment, and bereaves the tºº. . . -
*::::::... ſhould become it. Shakespeare. Cºrial.
Wicherly was ºf my opinion, or, rather, I of his : for it be-
comes me ſo to ſpeak of ſo excellent a poet, Dryd. Dufr. Prºf.
He utterly rejected their fables concerning their gods, as .
becoming good men, much leſs thoſe which Were worſhipps
for gods. Stillingſ. Def of Di º, on Rom. Idolatry.
Beco'MING. particip: adj. [from become.] T hat which pleaſes
by an elegant propriety; graceful; It is ſometimes uſed with
the particle of; but generally without any government of the
ring words.
º: . kind boy, I aſk no red and white
To make up my delight,
No odd becoming graces, - -
Black eyes, or little know not what, in faces. Suckling.
Their diſcourſes are ſuch as belong to their age, their call-
ing, and their breeding; ſuch as are becoming ºf them, and of
them only. Dryd. Fables, Preface.
Yet ſome becoming boldneſs I may uſe ;
I've well deſerv'd, nor will he now refuſe. Dryd, Aurengz.
Make their pupils repeat the action, that they may cºrrect
what is conſtrained in it, till it be perfected into an habitual
and becoming eaſineſs. Locke.
Becoming. n.ſ.. [from become.] Behaviour: a word not now
in uſe.
Sir, forgive me,
Since my becomings kill me, when they do not
Eye well to you. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
Beco'MINGly. adv. [from becoming.] After a becoming or pro-
per manner.
BEco'MING Ness. n.ſ.. [from becoming. See To BEcoMe..] De-
cency; elegant congruity; propriety.
N. is the majeſty of the divine government greater in its
extent, than the becomingneſs hereof is in its manner and form.
Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. iii. c. 1.
BED. m. ſ. [beb, Sax.]
1. Something made to ſleep on.
Lying not erect, but hollow, which is in the making of the
bed; or with the legs gathered up, which is in the poſture of
the body, is the more wholſome. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 738.
Rigour now is gone to bed,
And advice with ſcrupulous head. Milton.
Thoſe houſes then were caves, or homely ſheds,
With twining oziers fenc'd, and moſs their beds. Dryden.
2. Lodging; the convenience of a place to ſleep in.
On my knees I beg,
That you'll vouchſafe me, raiment, bed, and food.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. Marriage.
George, the eldeſt ſon of this ſecond bed, was, after the
death of his father, by the ſingular care and affection of his
mother, well brought up. Clarendon.
4. Bank of earth raiſed in a garden.
Herbs will be tenderer and fairer, if you take them out of
beds, when they are newly come up, and remove them into
pots, with better earth. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 459.
5. The channel of a river, or any hollow.
So high as heav'd the tumid hills, ſo low
Down ſunk a hollow bottom, broad, and deep,
Capacious bed of waters. Milt. Par. Loſt, b. vii. 1. 288.
The great magazine for all kinds of treaſure is ſuppoſed to be
the bed of the Tiber. We may be ſure, when the Romans lay
under the apprehenſions of ſeeing their city ſacked by a barba.
rous enemy, that they would take care to beſtow ſuch of their
riches that way, as could beſt bear the water. Addiſon.
6. The place where any thing is generated, or repoſited.
See hoary Albula's infected tide
O'er the warm led of ſnoaking ſulphur glide.
7. Alayer; a ſtratum; a body ſpread over another.
I ſee no reaſon, but the ſurface of the land ſhould be as re-
gular as that of the water, in the firſt production of it; and
the ſtrata, or bed, within, lie as even. Burnet's Theory.
8, Tº bring to BED. To deliver of a child. It is often uſéd
with the particle ºf; as, ſhe was brought to bed of a daughter.
Ten months after Florimel happen'd to wed,
And was brought in a laudable manner to bed. Prior.
9. * the BED. To put the bed in order after it has been
uſed.
I keep his houſe, and I waſh, wring, brew, bake, ſcour, dreſs
meat, and make the beds, and do all myſelf.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of JWindſºr.
BED of a Mortar. [with gunners.] ſº j piece ſ'. §:
lowed in the middle, to receive the breech and half the trun-
Illons. Dić7.
BED of a great gun. That thick plank which lies immediately
* the piece, being, as it were, the body of the car.
To BED. v. a. [from the noun.] Die?.
1. To go to bed with.
- They have married me:
I'll to the Tuſcan Wars, and never bed her.
Shakespeare. All's well that ends well.
Addiſon.
2. To be placed in bed. -
She was publickly contračted, ſtated as a bride, and ſolemnly
Hedled; and, after ſhe was laid, Maximilian's ambaſſadour put
his leg, ſtript naked to the knee, between the eſpouſal ſheets.
Bacon's Henry VII.
3. To be made partaker of the bed. -
There was a doubt ripped up, whether Arthur was bedded
with his lady. Bacon's Henry VII.
4. To ſow, or plant in earth.
Lay the turf with the graſs-ſide downward, upon which lay
ſome of your beſt mould to bed your quick in, and lay your
quick upon it. Mortiºner's Husbandry.
5. To lay in a place of reſt, or ſecurity.
Let coarſe bold hands, from ſlimy neſt,
The bedded fiſh in banks outwreſt. Donne.
A ſnake bedded himſelf under the threſhold of a country-
houſe. L'E/irange's Fables.
6. To lay in order; in ſtrata.
And as the ſleeping ſoldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
Start up, and ſtand on end.
To Bed. v. n. To cohabit.
If he be married, and bed with his wife, and afterwards re-
lapſe, he may poſſibly fancy that ſhe infected him.
Wiſeman's Surgery.
To Be DA'bble. v. a. [from dabble.] To wet; to beſprinkle.
It is generally applied to perſons, in a ſenſe including inconve-
In 12nce.
Never ſo weary, never ſo in woe,
Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briars,
I can no further crawl, no further go.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
To Be DA'Gole. v. a. [from daggle.] To bemire; to ſoil
cloaths, by letting them reach the dirt in walking.
To BEDA's H. v. a. [from daſh..] To bemire by throwing dirt;
to beſpatter; to wet with throwing water.
When thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the ſad ſtory of my father's death,
That all the ſtanders by had wet their cheeks,
Like trees bedaſh'd with rain. Shakeſp. Richard III.
To BEDA'w B. v. a. [from dawb.] To dawb over; to beſmear;
to ſoil, with ſpreading any viſcous body over it.
A piteous coarſe, a bloody piteous coarſe,
Pale, pale as aſhes, all bedawb'd in blood,
All in gore blood. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
To BEDA'zzle. v. a. [from dazzle.] To make the fight dim
by too much luſtre.
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
My miſtaken eyes,
That have been ſo bedazzled by the ſun,
That every thing I look on ſecmeth green.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Bedch A'MBER. m. ſ. [from bed and chamber.] The chamber
appropriated to reſt.
They were brought to the king, abiding then in his bed-
chamber. Hayward.
He was now one of the bedchamber to the prince. Clarendon.
BED clo'ATHs. n.ſ.. [from bed and cleaths. It has no ſingular.]
Coverlets ſpread over a bed.
For he will be ſwine drunk, and, in his ſleep, he does little
harm, ſave to his bedcloaths about him.
Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
Be'DDER. n.ſ [from bed.] The nether-ſtone of an oil-
BEDE't TER. } mill. Dić7.
BE'DDING.. n.ſ.. [from bed.] The materials of a bed; a bed.
There be no inns where meet bedding may be had ; ſo that
his mantle ſerves him then for a bed. Spenſer's Ireland.
Firſt, with affiduous care from winter keep,
Well fother'd in the ſtalls, thy tender ſheep;
Then ſpread with ſtraw the bedding of thy fold,
With fern beneath, to fend the bitter cold. Dryd. Georg.
Arcite return'd, and, as in honour ty'd,
His foe with bedding, and with food ſupply'd, Dryden.
To Bede'ck. v. a. [from deck.] To deck; to adorn; to grace.
Thou ſham'ſt thy ſhape, thy love, thy wit,
And uſeſt none in that true uſe indeed, -
Which ſhould bedeck thy ſhape, thy love, thy wit. -
Shakesp. Romeo and juliet.
Female it ſeems,
That ſo bedeck'd, ornate, and gay, -
Comes this way. Milton's Samſ. Agoniſter, l. 710.
With ornamental drops bedeck'd I ſtoºd, -
And writ my victory with my enemy's blood. Norris.
Now Ceres, in her prime,
Smiles fertile, and with ruddieſt freight bedeckt. Philips.
Be'de House. n.f [from bebe, Sax, a prayer, and howſ.] An
hoſpital or almshouſe, where the Poor people prayed for their
founders and benefactors.
BE DETTER. See BEDDER. -
To Bede'w. v. a. [from dew.] To moiſten gently, as with the
fall of dew.
Bedew her paſture's graſs with faithful Engliſh blood.
Shakeſp. Richard II.
Let
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E D
B E. E.
|
Let all the tears that ſhould bedev my herſe, -
Be drops of balm to ſanétify thy head. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
The counteſs received a letter from him, whereunto all the
while ſhe was writing her anſwer, ſhe bedeved the paper with
her tears. //atton.
What ſlender youth, bedev'd with liquid odours,
Courts thee on roſes, in ſome pleaſant cave Milton.
Balm from a ſilver box diſtill'd around,
Shall all bedev the roots, and ſcent the ſacred ground. Dryd.
He ſaid: and falling tears his face bedev. Dryd. Æneid.
BE'DFEllow. n.ſ.. [from bed and fellow.] One that lies in the
ſame bed.
He loves your people,
. But tie him not to be their bedfellow. Shakeſp. Coriolanus:
Miſery acquaints a man with ſtrange bedfellows.
Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
And how doth my couſin, your bedfellow *
And your faireſt daughter, and mine : Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
Being ſo troubleſom a bedfellow P Shakeſp. Henry IV.
A man would as ſoon chooſe him for his bedfellow as his play-
fellow. L’Eſtrange.
What charming bedfellows, and companions for life, men
chooſe out of ſuch women Addiſon. Guardian, N° 120.
To BEDI'GHT. v. a. [from dight.] To adorn; to dreſs; to
fet off.
A maiden fine bedight he hapt to love;
The maiden fine bedight his love retains,
And for the village he forſakes the plains. Gay.
To BEDI'M. v. a. [from dim.] To make dim; to obſcure; to
cloud; to darken.
I have bedimm'd
The noontide ſun, call'd forth the mutinous winds,
And 'twixt the green ſea and the azur'd vault
Set roaring war. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
To BEDI'z.E.N. v. a. [from dizen.] To dreſs out.
BEDLAM. n.ſ.. [corrupted from Bethlehem, the name of a reli-
gious houſe in London, converted afterwards into an hoſpital
for the mad and lunatick.]
1. A madhouſe; a place appointed for the cure of lunacy.
2. A madman; a lunatick.
Let's follow the old earl, and get the bedlam
To lead him where he would ; his roguiſh madneſs
Allows itſelf to any thing. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Be'DLAM. adj. [from the noun..] Belonging to a madhouſe;
fit for a madhouſe.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numb’d and mortify’d bare arms,
Pins, wooden pricks. Shakeſp. King Lear.
BE'DLAMIT.E. n.ſ.. [from bedlam.] An inhabitant of Bedlam;
a madman.
If wild ambition in thy boſom reign,
Alas! thou boaſt'ſt thy ſober ſenſe in vain;
In theſe poor bedlamites thyſelf ſurvey. Lewis's Miſcel.
BE'DMAKER. n.ſ.. [from bed and make..] A perſon in the uni-
verſities, whoſe office it is to make the beds, and clean the
chambers.
I was deeply in love with my ledmaier, upon which I was
ruſticated for ever. Speciator, N° 598.
Be'DMATE. n.ſ.. [from bed and mate.] A bedfellow; one that
partakes of the ſame bed. -
Had I ſo good occaſion to lie long -
As you, prince Paris, nought but heav'nly buſineſs
Should rob my bedmate of my company. Shakespeare Tr. and Crºſſ.
BE'DMoULDING. n. ſ. [from bed and mould..] A term
BE'DDING MoULDING. } uſed by workmen, to ſignify thoſe
members in the cornice, which are placed below the coronet.
- . Builder's Dić.
Be'DPost. n. ſ. [from bed and pºſſ J The poſt at the corner of
the bed, which ſupports the canopy. -
I came the next day prepared, and placed her in a clear light,
her head leaning to a bedpoſt, another ſtanding behind, hold-
ing it ſteady. Wiſeman's Surgery.
BE'DPREsse R. m. ſ. [from bed and preſs.] A heavy lazy fellow.
This ſanguine coward, this bedpreſer, this horſeback-break-
er, this huge hill of fleſh. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
o BEDRA'GGLE. v. a... [from be and draggle.] To ſoil the
cloaths, by ſuffering them, in walking, to reach the dirt.
Poor Patty Blount, no more be ſeen
Bedraggled in my walks ſo green. Swift.
o BEDRE'Nch. v. a. {. be and drench..] To drench ; to
ſoak; to ſaturate with moiſture.
- Far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
It is, ſuch crimſon tempeſt ſhould bedrench
The freſh green lap of fair king Richard's land.
Shakespeare. King Richard III.
Be'DRID. adj. [from led and rid.] Confined to the bed by age
or ſickneſs.
Norway, uncle of young Fontinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, ſcarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpoſe.
Shaiºſ. Hamlet,
OL. I.
Lies he not bedrid P and, again, does nothing,
But what he did being childiſh Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
Now, as a myriad
Of ants durſt th' emperor's lov’d ſnake invade:
The crawling galleys, ſeagulls, finny chips,
Might brave our pinnaces, our bedrid ſhips. Domine:
Hanging old men, who were bedrid, becauſe they would not
diſcover where their money was. Clarendon, b. viii.
Infirm perſons, when they come to be ſo weak as to be fixed
to their beds, hold out many years; ſome have lain bedrid
twenty years. - Ray.
Be'DRITE. m. ſ. [from bed and rite.] The privilege of the mar-
riage bed. • ,
Whoſe vows are, that no bedrite ſhall be paid
Till Hymen's torch be lighted. Shakespeare Tempeſt.
To BEDRo'P. v. a. [from be and drop.] To beſprinkle; to
mark with ſpots or drops; to ſpeckle.
Not ſo thick ſwarm'd once the ſoil
Pedrop'd with blood of Gorgon. Milt. Par. Lºft, b. x. l. 527.
Our plenteous ſtreams a various race ſupply;
The ſilver eel in ſhining volumes roll'd,
The yellow carp, in ſcales bedrop'd with gold. Pope's W. For.
BE'DSTEAD. n. ſ. [from bed and ſtead..] The frame on which
the bed is placed.
Chimnies with ſcorn rejecting ſmoak;
Stools, tables, chairs, and bed/leads broke. Swift.
BE'Dst RAw. m. ſ. [from bed and ſtraw.] The ſtraw laid un-
der a bed to make it ſoft.
Fleas breed principally of ſtraw or mats, where there hath
been a little moiſture; or the chamber or bedſtraw kept cloſe,
and not aired. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 696.
BEDs we'Rv ER. m. ſ. [from bed and ſwerve.] ‘ One that is falſe
to the bed; one that ranges or ſwerves from one bed to an-
other. - -
She's a bedſwerver, even as bad as thoſe,
That vulgars give bold'ſt titles to. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
BE'DTIME. m. ſ. [from bed and time.] The hour of reſt; ſleep-
ing time. - - - - -
What maſks, what danees ſhall we have,
To wear away this long age of three hours,
Between our after-ſupper and bedtime * - -
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream:
After evening repaſts, till bedtime, their thoughts will be beſt
taken up in the eaſy grounds of religion. Milt. on Education.
The ſcouring drunkard, if he does not fight
Before his bedtime, takes no reſt that night. Dryden's juv.
To BEDU'NG. v. a. [from be and dung.] To cover, or manure
with dung. - - -
To BE DU'st. v. a. [from be and duff.] To ſprinkle with duſt.
Be'Dw ARD. adv. [from bed and ward.] Toward bed.
In heart
As merry, as when our nuptial day was done, -
And tapers burnt to bedward. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
To Bedwa'RF. v. a. [from be and dwarf.] To make little;
to hinder in growth; to ſtunt.
'Tis ſhrinking, not cloſe weaving, that hath thus
In mind and body both bedwarfed us. . . Donné.
BE'Dwork. m. ſ. [from bed and work ] Work done in bed;
work performed without toil of the hands.
- The ſtill and mental parts,
That do contrive how many hands ſhall ſtrike,
When fulneſs call them on, and know, by meaſure
Of their obſervant toil, the enemy's weight;
Why this hath not a finger's dignity,
They call this bedwork, mapp'ry, cloſet war.
Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida,
BEE. n.ſ.. [beo, Saxon.] ºff ºff.
1. The animal that makes honey, remarkable for its induſtry
and art. -
- So work the honey bees,
Creatures that, by a ruling nature, teach
The art of order to a peopled kingdom. Shakeſp. Hen. V:
From the Mooriſh camp,
There has been heard a diſtant humming noiſe,
Like bees diſturb'd, and arming in their hives. Dryden.
A company of poor inſects, whereof ſome are bees, delight-
ed with flowers, and their ſweetneſs; others beetles, delighted
with other viands. - - - Locke.
2. An induſtrious and careful perſon. This ſignification is only
uſed in familiar language. -
BEE-EATER. n. ſ. [from bee and eat..] A bird that feeds upon
bees.
BEE-Flow ER. m. ſ. [from bee and flower.] A ſpecies of fool-
ſtones; which ſee. It grows upon dry places, and flowers in
April. Millar.
BEE-GARDEN. m. ſ. [from bee and garden.] A place to ſet hives
of bees in.
A convenient and neceſſary place ought to be made choice
of, for your apiary, or bee-garden. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
BEE-HIVE. m. ſ. [from bee and hive..] The caſe, or box, in which
bees are kept.
BEE-MASTER. m. ſ. [from lee and maſter.] One that keeps bees.
2 X They
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E. E.
B E F
They that are bee-maſters, and have not care enough of
them, muſt not expect to reap any conſiderable advantage by
them. Martiner's Husbandy.
BEECH. n.ſ.. [bece, or boc, Saxon.]
This tree hath leaves ſomewhat reſembling thoſe of the horn-
beam; the male flowers grow together in a round bunch, at
remote diſtances from the fruit, which conſiſts of two triancu-
lar nuts, incloſed in a rough hairy rind, divided into four parts.
There is but one ſpecies of this tree at preſent known, except
two varieties, with ſtriped leaves. It will grow to a confide-
rable ſtature, though the ſoil be ſtony and barren; as alſo, up-
on the declivities of mountains. The ſhade of this tree is very
injurious to moſt ſorts of plants, which grow near it; but is
generally believed to be very ſalubrious to human bodies. The
timber is of great uſe to turners and joiners. The maſt is very
good to fatten ſwine and deer; and affords a ſweet oil, and has
ſupported ſome families with bread. Millar.
Black was the foreſt, thick with beech it flood. Dryden.
Nor is that ſprightly wildneſs in their notes,
Which, clear and vigorous, warbles from the beech.
Thomſºn's Spring.
Be'echEN. adj. [bucene, Sax.] Conſiſting of the wood of the
beech; belonging to the beech.
With diligence he'll ſerve us when we dine,
And in plain beechen veſſels fill our wine. Dryden's juv.
BEEF. n.ſ. [hæuſ, French.]
1. The fleſh of black cattle prepared for food.
What ſay you to a piece of beef and muſtard 2
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
The fat of roaſted beef falling on the birds, will baſte them.
- Swift.
2. An ox, bull, or cow, conſidered as fit for food. In ſ:
ſenſe it has the plural beeves; the fingular is ſeldom found.
A pound of man's fleſh
Is not ſo eſtimable or profitable,
As fleſh of muttons, beeves, or goats. Shakespeare. M. of Pan.
Alcinous ſlew twelve ſheep, eight white-tooth'd ſwine,
Two crook-haunch'd beeves. Chapman's Odyſſy.
There was not any captain, but had credit for more victuals
than we ſpent there; and yet they had of me fifty beeves among
them. Sir I/alter Raleigh's Apolºgy.
On hides of beeves, before the palace gate,
Sad ſpoils of luxury ! the ſuitors fate. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
BEEF, adj. [from the ſubſtantive..] Conſiſting of the fleſh of
black cattle.
If you are employed in marketing, do not accept of a treat
of a beef ſtake, and a pot of ale, from the butcher. Swift.
BEEF-EATER. m.ſ.. [from beef and eat, becauſe the commons is
beef when on waiting.] A yeoman of the guard.
Be'e Mol. n.ſ. This word I have found only in the example,
and know nothing of the etymology, unleſs it be a corruption
of hymodule, from by and modulus, a note; that is, a note out of
the regular order.
There be intervenient in the riſe of eight, in tones, two bee-
mols, or half notes; ſo as, if you divide the tones equally, the
eight is but ſeven whole and equal notes. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
BEEN. [beon, Saxon.] The participle preterite of To BE; which
ſee.
BEER. m. ſ. [bir, Welch.] Liquour made of malt and hops. It
is diſtinguiſhed from ale, either by being older or ſmaller.
Here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour; drink.
Shakespeare. Henry VI. p. ii.
It were good to try clarifying with almonds in new heer.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 768.
Flow, Welſted' flow, like thine inſpirer, beer;
Tho' ſtale, not ripe; tho’ thin, yet never clear;
So ſweetly mawkiſh, and ſo ſmoothly dull;
Heady, not ſtrong; and foaming, tho’ not full. Pope.
BE'est INGs. See BIESTINGs.
BEET. n.ſ. [heta, Lat.] The name of a plant.
It hath a thick, fleſhy root; the flowers have no viſible
leaves, but many ſtamina, or threads, collected into a globe;
the cup of the flower is divided into five ſegments; the ſeeds
are covered with an hard outer coat, and grow two or three
together in a bunch. The ſpecies are; 1. The common white
beet. 2. The common green heet. 3. The common red
beet. 4. The turnep-rooted red bett. 5. The great red beet.
6. The yellow beet. 7. The Swiſs or Chard hºt. The two
firſt mentioned are preſerved in gardens, for the uſe of their
leaves in pot herbs. The other ſorts are propagated for their
roots, which are boiled as parſneps. The red bert is moſt com-
monly cultivated and uſed in garniſhing diſhes. The Swiſs
beet is by ſome much eſteemed. Millar.
BEETLE, n.ſ.. [byzel, Saxon.]
1. An inſect diſtinguiſhed by having hard caſes or ſheaths, under
which he folds his wings.
They are as ſhards, and he their becile. Shakespeare. Ant. and Cleºp.
The poor beetle, that we tread upon,
In corporal ſuffrance finds a pang as great,
As when a giant dies. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Maſºre.
Others come in place, ſharp of fight, and too provident for
that which concerned their own intereſt; but as blind as
bettles in foreſeeing this great and common dancer,
Knolles's Hiſlory of the Turks.
A grott there was with hoary moſs o'ergrown,
The claſping ivies up the ruins creep,
And there the bat and drowſy beetle ſleep. Garth.
The butterflies and bectles are ſuch numerous tribes, that I
believe, in our own native country alone, the ſpecies of each
kind may amount to one hundred and fifty, or more. Ray.
2. A heavy mallet, or wooden hammer, with which wedges are
driven.
If I do, fillip me with a three-man hºrtle. Shakespeare Henry IV.
When, by the help of wedges and beetles, an image is cleft
out of the trunk of ſome well grown tree; yet, after all the
ſkill of artificers to ſet forth ſuch a divine block, it cannot,
one moment, ſecure itſelf from being eaten by worms, or de-
filed by birds, or cut in pieces by axes. Stillingfleet.
To Be'Erle. v. n. [from the noun..] To jut out; to hang
OW cr.
What if it tempt you towºrd the flood, my lord
Or to the dreadful ſummit of the cliff,
That beetles o'er his baſe into the ſea.
Or where the hawk,
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
High in the beetling cliff, his airy builds. Thomſºn's Spring.
BEFTLEBRowed. adj. [from beetle and brow.] Having prº-
minent brows.
BEETLEHE'ADED. adj. [from beetle and head..] Loggerheaded;
sº headed; having a head ſtupid, like the head of a wooden
cetle.
A whoreſon, beetleheaded, flap-ear'd knave.
Shakeſp Taming ºf the Shrew:
Bºrces. n. ſ. [from beetle and ſtock.] The Handle of a
eetle.
To crouch, to pleaſe, to be a beetlºff-ck
Of thy great maſter. Shakespeare.
Be'e TRAve. See B
BE'Et RADISH. } ce i3 EET.
BEEves, n. ſ. [The plural of bref] Black cattle; oxen.
One way, a band ſelect from forage drives
A herd of beeves, fair oxen, and fair kine,
From a fat meadow ground. Milton's Parad'ſ Loft, b xi.
Others make good the paucity of their breed with the length
and duration of their days; whereof there want not examples
in animals uniparous: firſt, in biſulcous or cloven-hoofed, as
camels and beeves ; whereof there is above a million annually
ſlain in England. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 6.
Beeves, at his touch, at once to jelly turn, -
And the huge boar is ſhrunk into an urn. Poºr's Dunciad.
To BEFA'll. v. m. [from fall. It bºſºl, it hath bºfallen.]
1. To happen to: uſed generally of ill.
Let me know
The worſt that may befall me in this caſe.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
Other doubt poſſeſſes me, left harm
Befall thce, ſever'd from me. Milton's Parad Lºft, H. ix.
This venerable perſon, who probably heard our Saviour's
prophecy of the deſtruction of Jeruſalem, drew his congrega-
tion out of thoſe unparalleled calamities, which befºl his coun-
trymen. Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
This diſgrace has befallen them, not becauſe they deſerved it,
but becauſe the people love new faces. Addiſon's Freeholder.
2. To happen to, as good.
Bion aſked an envious man, that was very ſad, what harm
had befallen unto him, or what good had befallen unto another
man : Bacon's Apophthegms.
No man can certainly conclude God's love or hatred to any
perfon, from what befalls him in this world. Tillotſon.
3. To happen; to come to paſs.
But ſince th' affairs of men are ſtill uncertain,
Let's reaſon with the worſt that may befall. Shakespeare j. Caſºr.
I have reveal’d
This diſcord which beſell, and was in heav'n
Among th' angelick pow'rs. Milton's Parad. Ioſº, b. vi.
4. It is uſed ſometimes with to before the perſon to whom any
thing happens.
Some great miſchief hath befallºn
Tº that meek man. Milton's Paradiſ? Loft, b. xi.
5. To befall of. To become of ; to be the ſtate or condition of:
a phraſe little uſed.
Do me the favour to dilate at full,
What hath befall’n of them, and thee, till now.
Shakeſpeare's Comedy of Errours.
To BEFI'T. v. a. [from be and fit.] To ſuit; to be ſuitable to ;
to become.
Blind is his love, and beſt befit; the dark.
Shakeſp. Romeo andjuliet.
Out of my fight, thou ſerpent —That name beſt
Befits thee, with him leagu'd ; thyſelf as falſe. Parad. Lºft.
I will bring you where ſhe ſits,
Clad in ſplendour, as befits
Her deity. Milton.
Thou, what hºſts the new lord mayor,
Art anxiouſly inquiſitive to know. Dryden.
To
II.
I 2
º:
1
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E F
B E G
To Befo'ol. v. a. [from be and fºol.] To infatuate; to fool;
to deprive of underſtanding; to lead into errour.
Men befool themſelves infinitely, when, by venting a few
fighs, they will needs perſuade themſelves that they have re-
pented. South.
Jeroboam thought policy the beſt piety, though in nothing
more befooled; the nature of fin being not only to defile, but
to infatuate. South.
BEFo'RE. prep. [biponan, Sax.]
1. Farther onward in place.
Their common practice was to look no further befºre them
than the next line; whence it will ſollow, that they can drive
to no certain point. Dryden.
2. In the front of; not behind.
Who ſhall go
Before them in a cloud, and pillar of fire:
By day a cloud, by night a pillar of fire,
To guide them in their journey, and remove
Behind them, while th' obdurate king purſues. Par, Loft.
3. In the preſence of; noting authority or conqueſt.
Great queen of gathering clouds,
See, we fall befºre thee!
Proſtrate we adore thee! Dryden's Albion.
The Alps and Pyreneans ſink before him. Addiſon's Cato.
4. In the preſence of; noting reſpect.
We ſee that bluſhing, and the caſting down of the eyes
both, are more when we come before many. Bacon.
They repreſent our poet betwixt a farmer and a courtier,
when he dreſt himſelf in his beſt habit, to appear before his
patron. Dryden's Wirgil, Dedication.
5. In ſight of.
Before the eyes of both our armies here,
Łet us not wrangle. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar,
6. Under the cognizance of; noting juriſdićtion.
If a ſuit be begun before an archdeacon, the ordinary may
licenſe the ſuit to an higher court. Ayliffe's Parergon.
7. In the power of; noting the right of choice.
Give us this evening; thou haſt morn and night,
And all the year before thee, for delight. Dryden."
He hath put us in the hands of our own counſel. Life and
death, proſperity and deſtruction, are before us. Tillotſon.
8. By the impulſe of ſomething behind.
Her part, poor ſoul! ſeeming as burdened
With leſſer weight, but not with leſſer woe,
Was carried with more ſpeed before the wind. Shakesp.Com.of Err.
Hurried by fate, he cries, and born before
A furious wind, we leave the faithful ſhore. Dryden.
9. Preceding in time.
Particular advantages it has before all the books which have
appeared before it in this kind. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
10. In preference to.
We ſhould but preſume to determine which ſhould be the
fitteſt, till we ſee he hath choſen ſome one, which one we may
then boldly ſay to be the fitteſt, becauſe he hath taken it before
the reſt. Hooker, b. iii.
We think poverty to be infinitely deſirable befºre the tor-
ments of covetouſneſs. Taylor’s Holy Living.
11. Prior to; nearer to anything; as, the eldeſt ſon is before the
younger in ſucceſſion.
12. Superiour to ; as, he is before his competitors both in right
and power.
BEFoR.E. adv.
I. Sooner than ; earlier in time:
Heav'nly born,
Before the hills appear'd, or fountain flow'd,
Thou with eternal wiſdom didſt converſe. Par. Loft, b.vii.
Befºre two months their orb with light adorn,
If heav'n allow me life, I will return. Dryden's Falks.
2. In time paſt.
Such a plenteous crop they bore
Of pureſt and well winnow'd grain,
As Britain never knew before. Dryden,
3. In ſome time lately paſt.
I ſhall reſume ſomewhat which hath been before ſaid, touch-
ing the queſtion beforegoing. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
4. Previouſly to ; in order to:
Befºre this elaborate treatiſe can become of uſe to my coun-
try, two points are neceſſary. Swift.
5. To this time; hitherto.
The peaceful cities of th’ Auſonian ſhore,
Lull'd in their eaſe, and undiſturb’d before,
Are all on fire.
6. Already.
You tell me, mother, what I knew before,
The Phrygian fleet is landed on the ſhore. Dryden's AFneid.
7. Farther onward in place.
Thou'rt ſo far befºre,
The ſwifteſt wing of recompence is ſlow
To overtake.
EFo'REHAND. adv. [from bºſºre and hand.]
* In a ſtate of anticipation, or preoccupation; ſometimes with
e particle with.
Dryden's Aeneid.
Shakeſpeare.
Quoth Hudibras, I am befºrehand
In that already, with your command. Hudibrar.
Your ſoul has been befºrehand with your body,
And drunk ſo deep a draught of promis'd bliſs,
She ſlumbers o'er the cup. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
I have not room for many reflections; the laſt cited author
has been beforehand with me, in its proper moral. Addison.
2. Previouſly; by way of preparation, or preliminary.
His profeſſion is to deliver precepts neceſſary to eloquent
ſpeech; yet ſo, that they which receive them, may be taught
beforehand the ſkill of ſpeaking. Hooker, b. i.
It would be reſiſted by ſuch as had befºrehand reſiſted the ge-
neral proofs of the goſpel. Atterbury.
When the lawyers brought extravagant bills, Sir Roger uſed
to bargain beforehand, to cut off a quarter of a yard in an
part of the bill. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of J. Bull.
3. In a ſtate of accumulation, or ſo as that more has been receiv-
ed than expended. -
Stranger's houſe is at this time rich, and much beforehand;
for it hath laid up revenue theſe thirty-ſeven years. Bacon.
4. At firſt ; before anything is done.
What is a man's contending with inſuperable difficulties,
but the rolling of Siſyphus's ſtone up the hill, which is ſoon
befºrehand to return upon him again? L’Eſtrange's Fables.
BEFo'RETIME. adv. [from before and time.] Formerly; of old
time.
Beforetime in Iſrael, when a man went to enquire of God,
thus he ſpake. I Sam. ix. 9.
To Befo'RTUNE. v. m. [from be and fºrtune.] To happen to;
to betide.
I give conſent to go along with you;
Recking as little what betideth me,
As much I wiſh all good befortune you.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Wºrona.
To BEFo'UL. v. a. [from be and foul..] To make foul; to ſoil;
to dirt.
To BEFR1'END. v. a. [from be and friend..] To favour; to be
kind to ; to countenance; to ſhew friendſhip to ; to benefit.
If it will pleaſe Caeſar -
To be ſo good to Caeſar, as to hear me,
I ſhall beſeech him to befriend himſelf. Shakeſp. j. Caſar.
Now if your plots be ripe, you are befriended
With opportunity. Denham's Sophy.
See them embarked, -
And tell me if the winds and ſeas befriend them. Addiſon:
Be thou the firſt true merit to befriend;
His praiſe is loſt, who ſtays till all commend. Pope:
Brother-ſervants muſt always befriend one another. Swift.
To BEFR1'NGE. v. a. [from be and fringe.] To decorate, as
with fringes.
When I flatter, let my dirty leaves
Cloath ſpice, line trunks, or, flutt'ring in a rowe,
Befringe the rails of Bedlam and Soho. Pope.
To BEG. v. m. [beggeren, Germ.] To live upon alms; to live
by aſking relief of others.
I cannot digs to beg I am aſhamed.
To Beg. v. a. -
1. To aſk; to ſeek by petition. -
He went to Pilate, and begged the body. Matth. xxvii. 58.
2. To take any thing for granted, without evidence or proof.
We have not begged any principles or ſuppoſitions, for the
proof of this ; but taking that common ground, which both
Moſes and all antiquity preſent. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
To BEGE'T. v. a. I begot, or begat; I have begotten, or begot.
[begezzan, Saxon; to obtain. See To GET.]
1. To generate; to procreate ; to become the father of children.
But firſt come the hours, which were begot
In Jove's ſweet paradiſe, of day and night,
Which do the ſeaſons of the year allot. Spenſer's Epithal,
I talk of dreams, -
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain phantaſy. Shakeſp. Romeo andjul.
Who hath begotten me theſe, ſeeing I have loſt my children,
and am deſolate. Iſaiah, xlix. 21.
'Twas he the noble Claudian race begat. Dryden's Aneid.
Love is hegot by fancy, bred
By ignorance, by expectation fed. Granville.
2. To produce, as effects.
B If to have done the thing you gave in charge,
cget you happineſs, be happy then ;
F. #. ...? ppy Shakespeare Richard II.
My whole intention was to beget, in the minds of men, mag-
nificent ſentiments of God and his works. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
3. To produce, as accidents. -
Is it a time for ſtory, when each minute
Begets a thouſand dangers? Denham's Sophy.
4. It is ſometimes uſed with on, or upon, before the mother.
Bºgot upon
His mother Martha by his father John. Spºłator.
BEGE'TTER. m. ſ. [from tºget.] He that procreates, or begets ;
the father.
Luke, xvi. 3.
For<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E G
For what their proweſs gain'd, th: law declare
Is to themſelves alone, and to thºſ heirs:
No ſhare of that goes back to the begetter,
fit ºne ſon fights well, and plunders ºf . Drydºn.
Men continue the race of mankind, commonly without the
- - - d will of the beget-
intention, and often againſt the conſent and will of the f.t’.
Bº AR. m. ſ. [from bºg. It is more properly written begger;
but the common orthography is retained, becauſe the deriva-
ives all preſerve the a..] - -
I '. º lives upon alms; one who has nothing but what is
sº º up the . Out t . duſt, and liſteth up the
he dunghill, to ſet them among princes.
beggar from t - gniiſ, g r Samuel, ii. 8.
We ſee the whole equipage of a beggar ſo drawn by Homer,
as even to retain a nobleneſs and dignity. Broome on the Odyſſey.
2. One who ſupplicates for any thing; a petitioner; for which,
beggar is a harſh and contemptuous term.
What ſubjects will precarious kings regard?
A beggar ſpeaks too ſoftly to be heard. Dryd. Conq. ºf Gran.
3. One who aſſumes what he does not prove. - -
Theſe ſhameful bºggars of principles, who give this preca-
rious account of the original of things, aſſume to themſelves to
be men of reaſon. Tillotſon.
To Be'G GAR. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To reduce to beggary; to impoveriſh.
whoſe heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave,
And beggar'd your's for ever. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
They ſhall ſpoil the clothiers wool, and bºggar the preſent
ſpinners. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
If the miſer durſt his farthings ſpare,
with heav'n, for twopence, cheaply wipes his ſcore, . . .
Liſts up his eyes, and haſtes to beggar more. Gay's Trivia.
2. To deprive.
Neceſſity, of matter beggar'd, -
Will nothing ſtick our perſons to arraign
In ear and ear.
3. To exhauſt.
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
For her perſon,
It beggar'd all deſcription; ſhe did lie
In her pavilion, cloth of gold, of tiſſue,
O'er-pićturing Venus. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
Be'ccARLINess. n.ſ.. [from beggarly.] The ſtate of being beg-
garly; meanneſs; poverty. -
BE'GóARLY. adj. [from beggar..] Mean; poor; indigent; in
the condition of a beggar : uſed both of perſons and things.
* I ever will, though he do ſhake me off
To beggarly divorcement, love him dearly. Shakeſp. Othello.
Who, that beheld ſuch a bankrupt beggarly fellow as Crom-
well entering the parliament houſe, with a thread bare torn
cloak, and a greaſy hat, could have ſuſpected, that he ſhould,
by the murder of one king, and the baniſhment of another,
aſcend the throne : South.
The next town has the reputation of being extremely poor
and beggary. Addiſon on Italy.
Coruſodes, by extreme parſimony, ſaved thirty-four pounds
out of a beggarly fellowſhip. Swift.
BE'GGARLY. adv. [from beggar..] Meanly; deſpicably; indi-
gently.
Touching God himſelf, hath he revealed, that it is his de-
light to dwell beggarly 2 and that he taketh no pleaſure to be
worſhipped, ſaving only in poor cottages : Hooker, b. v.
BE'GGARY. m. ſ. [from beggar.] Indigence; poverty in the ut-
moſt degree.
On he brought me into ſo bare a houſe, that it was the pic-
ture of miſerable happineſs and rich beggary. Sidney, b. ii.
While I am a beggar, I will rail,
And ſay there is no fin, but to be rich:
And being rich, my virtue then ſhall be,
To ſay there is no vice, but beggary. Shakeſp. King john.
We muſt become not only poor for the preſent, but reduc-
ed, by further mortgages, to a ſtate of beggary for endleſs years
to COme. Swift.
To BEGIN. v. n. I began, or begun; I have begun. [beginnin,
Sax. from be, or by to, and Kangan, Xaan, or gan, to go.]
I. To enter upon ſomething new : applied to perſons.
Begin every day to repent ; not that thou ſhouldſt at all de-
fer it; but all that is paſt ought to ſeem little to thee, ſeeing it
is ſo in itſelf. Begin the next day with the ſame zeal, far,
and humility, as if thou hadſt never begun before. Taylor.
I'll ſing of heroes and of kings; -
Begin my muſe. - Cowley.
2. To commence any action or ſtate; to do the firſt ad, or fiſt
Part of an act; to make the firſt ſtep from not doing to doing.
They began at the ancient men which were before the houſ.
Ezekiel, ix. 6.
Of theſe no more you hear him ſpeak; , ix. 6
He now begins upon the Greek:
Theſe rang'd and ſhow'd, ſhall, in their turns,
Remain obſcure as in their urns. Prior.
wº from the rural gods, his hand
as libral to the Pow’rs of high command. Dryden's Fak.
Rapt into future times, the bard began,
A virgin ſhall conceive. Pope's Mºffah.
3. To enter upon exiſtence; as, the world began ; the practice
began.
4. To have its original.
And thus the hard and ſtubborn race of man,
From animated rock and flint began. Blackmore.
From Nimrod firſt the ſavage chaſe began ;
A mighty hunter, and his game was man. Pope.
5. To take riſe.
Judgment muſt begin at the houſe of God. I Pet. iv. 17.
The ſong begun from Jove. Dryden.
All began,
All ends in love of God, and love of man. Pope.
6. To come into act.
Now and then a figh he ſtole,
And tears began to flow. Dryden.
To BEGIN. v. a.
1. To do the firſt act of any thing; to paſs from not doing to do-
ing, by the firſt act.
Ye nymphs of Solyma, begin the ſong. Pope's Mºffah.
They have been awaked, by theſe awful ſcenes, to begin re-
ligion; and, afterwards, their virtue has improved itſelf into
more refined principles, by divine grace. //atts.
2. To trace from any thing as the firſt ground.
The apoſtle begins our knowledge in the creatures, which
leads us to the knowledge of God. Locke.
3. To begin with. To enter upon; to fall to work upon.
A leſſon which requires ſo much time to learn, had need be
early begun with. Government of the Tongue.
BEGI'NN.E.R. m. ſ. [from begin.]
1. He that gives the firſt cauſe, or original, to any thing.
Thus heaping crime on crime, and grief on grief,
To loſs of love adjoining loſs of friend,
I meant to purge both with a third miſchief,
And, in my woe's beginner, it to end. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Socrates maketh Ignatius, the biſhop of Antioch in Syria, the
firſt beginner thereof, even under the apoſtles themſelves. Hook.
2. An unexperienced attempter; one in his rudiments; a young
practitioner.
Palladius, behaving himſelf nothing like a beginner, brought
the honour to the Iberian ſide. Sidney, b. i.
They are, to beginners, an eaſy and familiar introdućtion; a
mighty augmentation of all virtue and knowledge in ſuch as
are entered before. Hooker, b. v. S. 37.
I have taken a liſt of ſeveral hundred words in a ſermon of
a new beginner, which not one hearer could poſſibly under-
ſtand. Swift.
BEGI'NNING.. n.ſ.. [from begin.]
1. The firſt original or cauſe.
Wherever we place the beginning of motion, whether from .
the head or the heart, the body moves and acts by a conſent of
all its parts. Swift.
2. The entrance into act, or being.
Alſo in the day of your gladneſs, and in your ſolemn days,
and in the beginnings . months, you ſhall blow the trum-
pets over your burnt offering. Numbers, x. 10.
Youth, what man's age is like to be, doth ſhow ;
We may our end by our beginning know. Denham.
3. The ſtate in which any thing firſt is.
By viewing nature, nature's handmaid, art
Makes mighty things from ſmall beginnings grow:
Thus fiſhes firſt to ſhipping did impart,
Their tail the rudder, and their head the prow. Dryden.
4. The rudiments, or firſt grounds or materials.
The underſtanding is paſſive; and whether or not it will
have theſe beginnings, and materials of knowledge, is not in its
own power. Locke.
5. The firſt part of any thing. -
The cauſes and deſigns of an action, are the beginning; the
effects of theſe cauſes, and the difficulties that are met with in
the execution of theſe deſigns, are the middle; and the unra-
velling and reſolution of theſe difficulties, are the end.
Pope on Epick Poetry.
To BEGI'RD. v. a. I begirt, or legirded; I have begirt. [from be
and gird.]
1. To bind with a girdle.
Or ſhould ſhe confident,
As fitting queen ador'd on beauty's throne,
Deſcend, with all her winning charms begiſt,
Tº enamour. AMilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ii. 1. 213.
2. To ſurround; to encircle; to encompaſs.
Begird th’ almighty throne,
Beſeeching, or beſieging. Miltºn's Paradiſe Lºft, b. v. 1.868.
At home ſurrounded by a ſervile croud, -
Prompt to abuſe, and in detraction loud:
Abroad begirt with men, and ſwords, and ſpears;
His very ſtate acknowledging his fears. Prior.
3. To ſhut in with a fiege; to beleaguer; to block up.
It was ſo cloſely begirt before the king's march into the weſt,
that the council humbly deſired his majeſty, that he would re-
lieve it. Clarendon, b. viii.
To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">To Broi'Rt. v. a. [This is, I think, only a corruption of be-
gird; perhaps by the printer.] To begird. See BEGIRD.
And, Lentulus, begirt you Pompey's houſe,
To ſeize his ſons alive; for they are they
Muſt make our peace with him. *:::/. Catiline.
BE'GLERBEG. m. ſ. [Turkiſh.] The chief governour of a
province among the Turks.
To Beg NA'w. v. a. [from be and gnaw.] To bite; to eat a-
way; to corrode; to nibble. -
His horſe is ſtark ſpoiled with the ſtaggers, begnawn with the
bots, waid in the back, and ſhoulder ſhotten.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
The worm of conſcience ſtill begnaw thy ſoul.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
BEGo'NE. interječ. [only a coalition of the words be gone..] Go
away; hence; haſte away.
Begone / the goddeſs cries, with ſtern diſdain;
Bºgane! nor dare the hallow'd ſtream to ſtain. }
She fled, for ever baniſh’d from the train. Addiſon.
f
Hºrs. }The participle paſſive of the verb beget.
Remember that thou waſt begot of them. Ecclus, vii. 28.
The firſt he met, Antiphates the brave,
• But baſe begotten on a Theban ſlave. Dryden’s AFneid.
To BEGRE'Ase. v. a. [from be and greaſe.] To ſoil or dawb
with unétuous or fat matter.
To Be GR1'ME. v.a. [from be and grime. See GRIME and GRIM.]
To ſoil with dirt deep impreſſed; to ſoil in ſuch a manner that
the natural hue cannot eaſily be recovered.
Her name, that was as freſh
As Dian's viſage, is now begrim’d, and black
As my own face. Shakeſp. Othello.
To BEGUI'LE. v. a. [from be and guile.]
1. To impoſe upon ; to delude; to cheat.
This I ſay, leſt any man ſhould beguile you with enticing
words. - Coloſ. ii. 4.
The ſerpent me leguil'd, and I did eat!
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x.
Whoſoever ſees a man, who would have beguiled, and im-
poſed upon him, by making him believe a lie, he may truly
ſay, that is the man who would have ruined me, South.
2. To deceive; to evade.
Is wretchedneſs depriv'd that benefit,
To end itſelf by death 'Twas yet ſome comfort,
When miſery could beguile the tyrant's rage,
And fruſtrate his proud will. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. To deceive pleaſingly; to amuſe.
With theſe ſometimes ſhe doth her time beguile;
Theſe do by fits her phantaſy poſſeſs. Sirj. Davies.
Sweet leave me here a while;
My ſpirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with ſleep. Hamlet.
BEGU'N. The participle paſſive of begin.
But thou bright morning ſtar, thou riſing ſun,
Which in theſe latter times haſt brought to light
Thoſe myſteries, that, ſince the world begun,
Lay hid in darkneſs and eternal night. Sirj. Davies.
BEHA'LF. n.ſ.. [This word Skinner derives from half, and inter-
prets it, for my º,; as, for my part. It ſeems to me rather
corrupted from behoºf, profit; the pronunciation degenerating
eaſily to behafe; which, in imitation of other words ſo ſound-
cd, was written, by thoſe who knew not the etymology, be-
half.]
r. Favour; cauſe.
He was in confidence with thoſe who deſigned the deſtruc-
tion of Strafford; againſt whom he had contračted ſome pre-
judice, in the behalf of his nation. Clarendon, b. viii.
Were but my heart as naked to thy view,
Marcus would ſee it bleed in his behalf. Addiſon's Cato.
Never was any nation bleſſed with more frequent interpoſi-
tions of divine providence in its behalf. Atterbury.
2. Vindication; ſupport.
He might, in his preſence, defy all Arcadian knights, in the
behalf of his miſtreſs's beauty. Sidney.
Leſt the fiend,
Or in behalf of man, or to invade
Vacant poſſeſſion, ſome new trouble raiſe. Paradiſ, Loft.
Others believe, that, by the two Fortunes, were meant pro-
fperity or afflićtion; and produce, in their behalf, an ancient
Thonument. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
º: v. a. [from be and have.]
i.
o carry; to condućt: uſed almoſt always with the recipro-
cal pronoun.
We behaved not ourſelves diſorderly among you.
2 Theſſal. iii. 7.
... Manifeſt ſigns came from heaven, unto thoſe that behaved
themſelves maníully. 2 Macc. ii. 21.
To their wills wedded, to their errours ſlaves, -
No man, like them, they think, himſelf behaves. Denham.
We ſo live, and ſo act, as if we were ſecure of the final iſſue
*nd event of things, however we may behave ourſelves.
Atterbury,
Vol. I.
2. It ſeems formerly to have had the ſenſe of, to govern; td ſub-
due ; to diſcipline: but this is not now uſed.
But who his limbs with labours, and his mind --
Behaves with cares, cannot ſo eaſy miſs. Fairy Queen; b. ii.
With ſuch ſober and unnoted paſſion;
He did behave his anger ere 'twas ſpent,
As if he had but prov’d an argument. Shakespeare Timon.
To BE HAVE. v. m. #. aćt; to condućt one's ſelf. It is taken
either in a good or a bad ſenſe; as, he behaved well or ill.
BEHA'viour. m. ſ. [from behave.j . -
1. Manner of behaving one's ſelf, whether good or bad; man-
mers.
Mopſa, curious in anything but her own good behaviour,
followed Zelmane. Sidney.
2. External appearance. - - -
And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned him-
ſelf mad in their hands. 1 Sam xxi. 13.
3. Geſture; manner of ačtion, adapted to particular occaſions.
Well witneſfing the moſt ſubmiſſive behaviour, that a thralled
heart could expreſs. - - - Sidney.
When we make profeſſion of our faith, we ſtand; when we
acknowledge our fins, or ſeek unto God for favour, we fall
down; becauſe the geſture of conſtancy becometh us beſt in
the one, in the other the behaviour of humility. Hooker, b. v.
One man ſees how much another man is a fool, when he
dedicates his behaviour to love. Shakeſp. Much ad, about Noth.
4. Elegance of manners; gracefulneſs. -
He marked, in Dora's dancing, good grace and handſome be-
haviour. Sidney, b. i.
The beautiful prove accompliſhed, but not of great ipirit;
and ſtudy, for the moſt part, rather behaviour than virtue.
Bacon's Ornam Rational. Nº 63:
He who adviſeth the philoſopher, altogether devoted to the
Muſes, ſometimes to offer ſacrifice to the altars of the Graces,
thought knowledge imperfect without behaviour. J/otion.
5. Condućt; general practice; courſe of life.
To him, who hath a proſpect of the ſtate that attends men af-
ter this life, depending on their behaviour here, the meaſures of
good and evil are changed. Locke.
6. To be upon one's behaviour. A familiar phraſe, noting ſuch a
ſtate as requires great caution; a ſtate in which a failure in be-
behaviour will have bad conſequences.
Tyrants themſelves are upon their behaviour to a ſuperiour
power. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
To BEHE'AD. v. a. [from be and head..] To deprive of the
head; to kill by cutting off the head.
See a reverend Syracuſan merchant
Beheaded publickly. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
His beheading he underwent with all chriſtian magnanimity.
Clarendon, b. vii.
On each ſide they fly,
By chains connext, and, with deſtructive ſweep,
Behead whole troops at once. Philips.
Mary, queen of the Scots, was beheaded in the reign of queen
Elizabeth. Addiſon on Italy.
BEHe'ld. particip. paſſive, from behold; which ſee.
All hail! ye virgin daughters of the main
Ye ſtreams, beyond my hopes beheld again Pope's Odyſſey:
BE'HeMoth. n.ſ. Behemoth, in Hebrew, ſignifies beaſts in ge-
neral, particularly the larger kind, fit for ſervice. But Job
ſpeaks of an animal, which he calls behemoth, and deſcribes its
particular properties at large, in chap. xl. 15. Bochart has ta-
ken much care to make it appear to be the hippopotamus, or
river-horſe. Sanélius thinks it is an ox. The Fathers ſuppoſe
the devil to be meant by it. But we agree with the generality
of interpreters, in their opinion, that it is the elephant. Calmet.
Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth
graſs as an ox.
Behold ! in plaited mail
Behemoth rears his head. Thomſon's Summer, 1.69;.
BE'HEN. n.ſ. Valerian roots. Alſo a fruit reſembling the tama-
BEN. } riſk, from which perfumers extract an oil. Dić.
BEHE's T. n.ſ.. [from be and heft; haer, Saxon.] Command;
precept; mandate.
Her tender youth had obediently lived under her parents
beheſis, without framing, out of her own will, the forechooſing
of anything. Sidney, b. ii.
uch joy he had their ſtubborn hearts to quell,
And ſturdy courage tame with dreadful awe,
That his beheſt they fear'd as proud tyrant's law. Fairy Q,
I, meſſenger from everlaſting Jove,
In his great name thus his beheſ; do tell. Fairfax, b. i. ſ. 17.
To viſit oft thoſe happy tribes,
On high beheſ's his angels to and fro
Paſs'd frequent. AMilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi. l. 153.
Reign thou in hell, thy kingdom; let me ſerve
In heav'n God ever bleſt, and his divine
Beheſis obey, worthieſt to be obey'd Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi.
To Behi'GHT. v. a. pret. behot, part, behight. [from hazan, to
promiſe, Sax.] - -
1. To promiſe.
2 Y Sir
job, xl. 15.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E H
B E I
..*:
º
º
-
:
. Sir Guyon, mindful of his vow yplight,
Up roſe from drowſy couch, and him addreſt,
Unto the journey which he had belight.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. ii.
2. To entruſt; to commit.
That moſt glorious houſe that gliſt’reth bright,
Whereof the keys are to thy hand belight
By wiſe Fidelia. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. x. ſtanz. Fo.
3. Perhaps to call; to name; hight being often put, in old au-
thors, for named, or was named.
Behi'ND. prep. [hinban, Saxon.]
1. At the back of another. -
Acomates haſted with two hundred harquebuſers, which he
had cauſed his horſemen to take behind them upon their horſes.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
2. On the back part; not before.
She came in the preſs behind, and touched.
3. Towards the back.
The Benjamites looked behind them.
4. Following another.
Her huſband went with her, weeping behind her. 2Sam.iii. 16.
5. Remaining after the departure of ſomething elſe.
He left behind him, myſelf, and a ſiſter, both born in one
hour. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Piety and virtue are not only delightful for the preſent, but
they leave peace and contentment behind them. Tillºtſºn.
6. Remaining after the death of thoſe to whom it belonged.
What he gave me to publiſh, was but a ſmall part of what he
left behind him. Pope's Letters.
7. At a diſtance from ſomething going before.
Such is the ſwiftneſs of your mind,
That, like the earth's, it leaves our ſenſe behind. Dryden.
8. Inferiour to another; having the poſteriour place with regard
to excellence.
After the overthrow of this firſt houſe of God, a ſecond was
erected; but with ſo great odds, that they wept, which beheld
how much this latter came behind it. Hooker, b. 5. § 1.
9. On the other ſide of ſomething.
From light retird, behind his daughter's bed,
He, for approaching ſleep, compos'd his head.
BEH1'ND. adv.
1. Out of fight; not yet produced to view; remaining.
We cannot be ſure, that we have all the particulars before
us; and that there is no evidence behind, and yet unſeen, which
may caſt the probability on the other ſide. Locke.
2. Moſt of the former ſenſes may become adverbial, by ſuppreſ-
ſing the accuſative caſe; as, # left my money behind, or be-
hind me.
BEH1'NDHAND. adv. [from behind and hand.]
1. In a ſtate in which rents or profits, or any advantage, is anti-
cipated; ſo that leſs is to be received, or more performed, than
the natural or juſt proportion. -
Your trade would ſuffer, if your being behindhand has made
the natural uſe ſo high, that your tradeſman cannot live upon
his labour. Locke.
2. Not upon equal terms, with regard to forwardneſs. In this
ſenſe, it is followed by with.
Conſider, whether it is not better to be half a year behindland
with the faſhionable part of the world, than to ſtrain beyond
his circumſtances. Speciator, N° 488.
3. Shakeſpeare uſes it as an adjećtive, but licentiouſly, for back-
ward; tardy.
Mark, v. 27.
judges, xx. 40.
Dryden.
And theſe thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behindhand ſlackneſs. Shakespeare. Iſ?nter's Tale.
To BEHOLD. v. a. pret. I beheld, I have lºheld, or beholden.
[behealban, Saxon.] To view ; to ſee; to look upon.
Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine
ears. - - Ezek. xl. 4.
When ſome young Theſſalians, on horſeback, were beheld
afar off, while their horſes watered, while their heads were de-
preſſed, they were conceived by the ſpectators to be one animal.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. c. 4.
Man looks aloft, and, with erected eyes,
Teholds his own hereditary ſkies.
At this, the former tale again he told,
With thund'ring tone, and dreadful to behold. Dryden's Fah.
BFHo'LD. interječ. [from the verb.] See; lo: a word by which
attention is excited, or admiration noted.
Behold ! I am with thee, and will keep thee. Gen. xxviii. 15.
When out of hope, behold her not far off,
Such as I ſaw her in my dream, adorn'd
With what all earth or heaven could beſtow,
... To make her amiable. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. viii. 1.481.
BEHO'LDEN. particip. adj. [gehouden, Dutch ; that is, held in ob-
ligation. It is very corruptly written beholding.] Obliged;
bound in gratitude; with the particle to.
Horns, which ſuch as you are fain to be beholden to your
wives for. - Shakesp. As you like it.
Little are we beholden to your love, -
And little looked for at your helping hands. Shakespeare R. III.
I found you next; in reſpect of bond both of near alliance,
Dryden.
and particularly of communication in ſtudics: wherein I muſt
acknowledge myſelf behºlden to you. Bacon's Eſſays.
I think myſelf mightily beholden to you for the reprehenſion
you then gave us. Addiſon. Guardian, Nº. 109.
We, who ſee men under the awe of juſtice, cannot conceive,
what ſavage creatures they would be without it; and how
much beholden we are to that wiſe contrivance. Atterbury.
BEHo'LDER. m. ſ. [from behold.] Spectator; he that looks up-
on any thing. -
Was this the face,
That, like the ſun, did make beholders wink? Shakespeare. R. II.
Theſe beaſts among
Beholders rude, and ſhallow to diſcern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who ſees thee * Milton's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. ix. l. 543.
Things of wonder give no leſs delight
To the wife Maker's, than beholder's fight. Denham.
The juſtling chiefs in rude encounters join,
Each fair beholder trembling for her knight. Granville.
The charitable foundations in the church of Rome, exceed
all the demands of charity, and raiſe envy, rather than compaſ-
ſion, in the breaſts of beholders. Atterbury.
BEHo'LDING. adj. [corrupted from leholden.] Obliged. See
BE Hold EN.
Becauſe I would not be beholding to fortune for any part of
the vićtory, I deſcended. Sidney, b. ii.
BEHO'LDING. m. ſ. Obligation.
Love to virtue, and not to any particular beholdings, hath ex-
preſſed this my teſtimony. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
BEHo'LDING NEss. m. ſ. [from beholding, miſtaken for leholden.]
The ſtate of being obliged.
The king invited us to his court, ſo as I muſt acknowledge
a beholdingneſ; unto him. Sidney, b. ii.
In this my debt I ſeem'd loth to confeſs,
In that I ſhunn'd beholdingneſ. Donne,
BE Ho'of. m. ſ. [from behoove.] That which behooves ; that
which is advantageous; profit; advantage.
Her majeſty may alter any thing of thoſe laws, that may be
more both for her own tehoof, and for the good of the people.
Spenſer on Ireland.
No mean recompence it brings
To your behoof: if I that region loſt,
All uſurpation thence expell'd, reduce
To her original darkneſs, and your ſway.
Wer’t thou ſome ſtar, which, from the ruin’d roof
Of ſhak'd Olympus, by miſchance didſt fall;
Which careful Jove, in nature's true behoof,
Took up, and in fit place did reinſtate. Milton.
Becauſe it was for the behoof of the animal, that, upon any
ſudden accident, it might be awakened, there were no ſhuts or
ſtopples made for the ears. Ray on the Creation.
It would be of no behoof, for the ſettling of government, un-
leſs there were a way taught, how to know the perſon to whom
belonged this power and dominion. Locke.
To BEHOOVE. v. n. [behorap, Saxon; it is a duty..] To be
fit; to be meet; either with reſpect to duty, neceſſity, or con-
venience. It is uſed only imperſonally with it.
For better examination of their quality, it behooveth the very
foundation and root, the higheſt wellſpring and fountain of
them, to be diſcovered. Hooker, b. i. § 1.
He did ſo prudently temper his paſſions, as that none of them
made him wanting in the offices of life, which it behooved, or
became him to perform. Atterluny.
But ſhould you lure the monarch of the brook,
Behooves you then to ply your fineſt art, Thomſon's Spring.
BEHo'ove FUL. adj. [from behoof..] Uſeful; profitable; advan-
tageous. This word is ſomewhat antiquated.
It is very behooveful in this country of Ireland, where there
are waſte deſerts full of graſs, that the ſame ſhould be eaten
down. - Spenser on Ireland.
Laws are many times full of imperfeótions; and that which
is ſuppoſed behooveful unto men, proveth oftentimes moſt per-
nicious. - Hacker, b. iv. §. 14.
Madam, we have culled ſuch neceſſaries
As are behoovgful for our ſtate tomorrow. Shakespeare. Rom. and jul.
It may be moſt behooveful for princes, in matters of grace, to
tranſact the ſame publickly: ſo it is as requiſite, in matters of
judgment, puniſhment, and cenſure, that the ſame be tranſ-
acted privately. Clarendon.
BE Ho'oy EFULLY. adv. [from behooveful..] Profitably; uſefully.
Tell us of more weighty diſlikes than theſe, and that may
more behoovefully import the reformation. Spenser on Ireland,
BEHO'T. [preterite, as it ſeems, of behight, to promiſe.]
With ſharp intended ſting ſo rude him ſmote,
That to the earth him drove as ſtriken dead,
Ne living wight would have him life behot. Fairy Q. t. i.
To BE Ho'wl. v. a. [from be and howl.]
1. To howl at. . - . . "
Now the hungry lion roars, -
And the wolf behowls the moon. Shakeſp. Midſum, N. Dr.
2. Perhaps, to howl over, or lament clamorouſly.
BEING. particip. [from be..]
Miltºn.
Thoſe,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">Thoſe, who have their hope in another life, look upon
, themſelves as being on their paſſage through this. Atterbury.
13E'ING. m. ſ. [from be.]
1. Exiſtence; oppoſed to nonentity. -
Of him all things have both received their firſt being, and
their continuance to be that which they are. Hooker, b. v.
Yet is not God the author of her ill,
Though author of her being, and being there.
There is none but he,
Whoſe being I do fear: and under him
My genius is rebuked. Shakeſp. Macbeth,
Thee, Father, firſt they ſting, omnipotent,
Immutable, immortal, infinite,
Eternal king ! Thee, author of all being,
Fountain of light ! Milton's Par. Loft, b. iii. l. 374.
Merciful and gracious, thou gaveft us being, raiſing us from
nothing to be an excellent creation. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
Conſider every thing as not yet in being ; then examine, if
it muſt needs have been at all, or what other ways it might
Davies.
have been. Bently.
2. A particular ſtate or condition.
Thoſe happy ſpirits, which ordain’d by fate
For future being, and new bodies wait. Dryden's ºneid.
Heav'n from all creatures hides the book of fate;
From brutes what men, from men what ſpirits know ;
Or who could ſuffer being here below Pope's Eſſay on Man.
3. The perſon exiſting.
Ah, fair, yet falſe; ah, being form'd to cheat,
By ſeeming kindneſs, mixt with deep deceit. Dryden.
It is folly to ſeek the approbation of any being, beſides the
ſupreme; becauſe no other being can make a right judgment of
us, and becauſe we can procure no conſiderable advantage
from the approbation of any other being. Addiſon. Spectator.
As now your own, our beings were of old,
And once inclos'd in woman's beauteous mold. Pope.
BE'ING. conjungl. [from be..] Since. Dić?.
BE IT so. A phraſe of anticipation, ſuppoſe it be ſº ; or of per-
miſſion, let it be ſo.
My gracious duke,
Be’t ſo ſhe will not here, before your grace,
Conſent to marry with Demetrius;
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens. Shakespeare. Midſ. N. Dream.
To BELA'bour. v. a. [from be and labour.] To beat; to
thump: a word in low ſpeech.
What ſeveral madneſſes in men appear:
Oreſtes runs from fancy’d furies here;
Ajax belabours there an harmleſs ox,
And thinks that Agamemnon feels the knocks. Dryden, jun.
He ſees virago Nell belabour,
With his own ſtaff, his peaceful neighbour. Swift.
To BELA'cE. v. a. [Sea term.] To faſten; as to belace a rope. D.
BE'LAMIE. m. ſ. [bel amie, Fr.] A friend; an intimate. This
word is out of uſe.
Wiſe Socrates
Pour'd out his life, and laſt philoſophy,
To the fair Critias, his deareſt belamie. Fairy Q. b. ii. c. vii.
BE'LAMoUR. m. ſ. [bel amour, Fr.] Gallant; conſort; para-
mour: obſolete. - - -
Lo, lo, how brave ſhe decks her bounteous bow'r,
With filken curtains, and gold coverlets,
Therein to ſhrowd her ſumptuous beamour. Fairy Q. b. ii.
BELATED. adj. [from be and late.] Benighted; out of doors
late at night.
Fairy elves,
Whoſe midnight revels, by a foreſt ſide,
Or fountain, ſome beated peaſant ſees,
Or dreams he ſees. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. i. 1.781.
* . Or near Fleetditch's oozy brinks,
Belated, ſeems on watch to lie. - Swift.
To BELAY. v. a. [from le and lay; as, to waylay, to lie in wait,
to lay wait for.]
r. To block up ; to ſtop the paſſage.
The ſpeedy horſe all paſſages belay,
And ſpur their ſmoaking ſteeds to croſs their way. Dryden.
2. To place in ambuſh. -
'Gainſt ſuch ſtrong caſtles needeth greater might,
Than thoſe ſmall forces ye were wont belay. Spenſ, ſonn. xiv.
†o BELAY a rope. [Sea term.] To ſplice; to mend a rope, by
- laying one end over another.
To BELCH. v. n. [bealcan, Saxon.]
r. To eječt the wind from the ſtomach; to erućt.
The waters boil, and, belching from below,
Black ſands as from a forceful engine throw. Dryden's Wirg.
The ſymptoms are, a four ſmell in their feces, belchings, and
diſtenſions of the bowels. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To iſſue out by erućtationi. . -
A triple pile of plumes his creſt adorn'd,
On which with helihing flames Chimaera burn'd. Dryden.
To Belch. v. a. To throw out from the ſtomach; to eječt
from any hollow place. It is a word implying coarſeneſs;
hatefulneſs; or horrour.
They are all but ſtomachs, and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and, when they're full, - -
They’ll helch us. - - Shakespeare.
The bitterneſs of it I now belch from my heart. Shakesp. Cymbel.
- Immediate in a flame,
But ſoon obſcur'd with ſmoke, all heav'n appear'd,
From thoſe deep-throated engines belºhd. Parad. Lºft, b. vi.
- - - The gates that now
Stood open wide, lekhing outrageous flame -
Far into chaos, ſince the fiend paſs'd through. Parad. Lºft.
Rough as their ſavage lords who rang'd the wood,
And, fat with acorns, belch'd their windy food. . Dryden.
There belcht the ming'd ſtreams of wine and blood,
And human fleſh, his indigeſted food. Pope's Odyſſey, b. ix.
When I an am’rous kiſs deſign'd,
I belch'd an hurricane of wind. Swift.
BELCH. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The aët of erućtation. -
2. A cant term for malt liquour. - - - -
A ſudden reformation would follow, among all ſorts of peo-
ple; porters would no longer be drunk with belch. Dennis.
BELDA'M. n.ſ. [Helle dame, which, in old French, ſignified pro-
bably an old woman, as belle age, old age.]
1. An old woman; generally a term of contempt, marking the
laſt degree of old age, with all its faults and miſeries.
Then ſing of ſecret things that came to paſs,
When beldam nature in her cradle was. Milton.
2. A hag. -
Why, how now, Hecat, you look angerly —
—Have I not reaſon, tedamſ, as you are : , - .
Saucy and overbold 2 - Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The reſty fieve wagg'd ne'er the more; -
I wept for woe, the teſty beldam ſwore. Dryden.
To BELEAGUER. v. a. ſheleggeren, Dutch..] To beſiege; to
block up a place; to lie before a town. - -
Their buſineſs, which they carry on, is the general concern-
ment of the Trojan camp, then teleaguer'd by Turnus and the
Latins. Dryden'ſ Dufrºſtoy, Prºſace.
Againſt beleaguer'd heav'n the giants move:
Hills pil'd on hills, on mountains mountains lie,
To make their mad approaches to the ſky. Dryden. Ovid.
BELE'AGURER. m. ſ. [from beleaguer..] One that beſieges a place.
BELEMNI'TEs. m. ſ. [from 3ixo, a dart or arrow, becauſe of its
reſemblance to the point of an arrow.] Arrowhead, or finger-
ſtone, of a whitiſh and ſometimes a gold colour.
BELFlo'wer... n.ſ.. [from bell and flower, becauſe of the ſhape of
its flower; in Latin campanula..] A plant.
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, ſhaped like a bell, and, be-
fore it is blown, is of a pentagonal figure; and, when fully
opened, cut into five ſegments at the top. The ſeed veſſel is
divided into three cells, each having a hole at the bottom, by
which the ſeed is emitted. There is a vaſt number of the ſpe-
cies of this plant. 1. The talleſt pyramidal belftower. 2. The
blue peach-leaved beft-wer. 3. The white peach-leaved, bel-
flower. 4. Garden beflower, with oblong leaves and flowers;
commonly called Canterbury tells. 5. Canary beftower, with
orrach leaves and a tuberoſe root. 6. Blue beflower, with edible
roots, commonly called rampions. 7. Venus looking-glaſs bel-
flower, &amp;c. The firſt ſort is commonly cultivated to adorn
chimnies, halls, &amp;c. in ſummer. It produces ſometimes
twelve branches, four or five feet high, with large beautiful
flowers, almoſt the whole length of the ſtalks. The peach-
leaved telflowers are very hardy, and may be planted in open
beds or borders, where they will flower very ſtrong. The Can-
terbury bells are biennial. The Canary helflower is one of the
moſt beautiful plants of the greenhouſe, yielding its flowers
in December, January, and February. The rampion is propa-
qated for its root, which was formerly in greater eſteem in Eng-
land than at preſent. The ſorts of Wenus looking-glaſs are an-
nual plants. Millar.
BELFo'UNDER. m. ſ. [from bell and fºund.] He whoſe trade it
is to found or caſt bells.
Thoſe that make recorders know this, and likewiſe bel-
founders, in fitting the tune of their bells. Bacon's Natural Hiſt.
BE'LFR Y. m.ſ. [Bºffroy, in French, is a tower; which was per-
haps the true word, till thoſe, who knew not its original, cor-
rupted it to belfry, becauſe bells were in it..] The place where
the bells are rung. -
Fetch the leathern bucket that hangs in the lefty; that is cu-
riouſly painted before, and will make a figure.
- - Gay's I/hat d'ye call it.
BELGA'RD. m. ſ. ſhelle egard, Fr.] A ſoft glance; a kind re-
gard: an old word, now wholly diſuſed.
Upon her eyelids many graces fat,
Under the ſhadow of her even brows,
Working belgards, and amorous retreats. Fairy Q. b. ii. c. iii.
To BELI'E. v. a. [from he and lie.]
1. To counterfeit, to feign ; to mimick.
Which durſt, with horſes hoofs that beat the ground,
And martial braſs, belie the thunder's ſound. Dryden.
The ſhape of man, and imitated beaſt
The walk, the words, the geſture could ſupply,
The habit mimick, and the mien leſir. Dryden's Faller.
3 2. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E L
B E L
- - - - d.
2. To give the lie to ; to charge with falſehog -
'Sure there is none but . º º: not
d when the moſt obdurate ſwear ". • "an ºf .x
#. hearts beſie their boaſtful tongues. Dryden.
-&gt; -
Paint, patches, jewels laid aſide,
At night aſtronomers agº.”. .
+. evening has the day belied, Pr;
And Phyllis is ſome forty-three. f riºr.
`-- ~. iate; to raiſe falſe reports of any man.
3. To calumniate; 'Tis ſlander, whoſe breath
Rides on the poſting winds, and doth belie
All corners of the world. - - - -
Thou doſt hºlie him, Piercy, thou belift him :
He never did encounter with Glendower. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
4. To give a falſe repreſentation of anything.
Incle, for heav'n's ſake, comfortable words.-
—shouláI do ſo, I ſhould belie my thoughts. Shakespeare. R. II.
Tuſcan Valerus by force o'ercame,
And not belied his mighty father's name.
In the diſpute whate'er I ſaid, -
My heart was by my tongue belied;
And in my looks you might have read, -
How much I argu'd on your ſide. Prior.
Bell'EF. m. ſ. [from believe.]
1. Credit given to ſomething which we know not of ourſelves,
on account of the authority by which it is delivered.
Thoſe comforts that ſhall never ceaſe, r
Future in hope, but preſent in belief. Hºtton.
Faith is a firm belief of the whole word of God, of his goſ-
pel, commands, threats, and promiſes. Wake's Prep. jor Death.
2. The theological virtue of faith, or firm confidence of the truths
of religion. -
Noman can attain belief by the bare contemplation of heaven
and earth; for that they neither are ſufficient to give us as
much as the leaſt ſpark of light *; very principal
myſteries of our faith. ooker, b. v. § 22.
3. Religion; the body of tenets held by the profeſſors of faith.
- In the heat of general perſecution, whereunto chriſtian be-
lieſ was ſubject upon the firſt promulgation, it much confirm;
ed the weaker minds, when relation was made how God had
been glorified through the ſufferings of martyrs. Hººker, b. v.
4. Perſuaſion; opinion. -
He can, I know, but doubt to think he will;
Yet hope would fain ſubſcribe, and tempts belief Milton.
All treatics are grounded upon the belief, that ſtates will be
found in their honour and obſervance of treaties. Temple.
5. The thing believed; the obječt of belief. -
Superſtitious prophecies are not only the belief of fools, but
the talk ſometimes of wiſe men. Bacon.
6. Creed; a form containing the articles of faith.
BELI'ev Able. adj. [from believe..] Credible; that which may
be credited or believed.
To BELIEVE. v. a. [xelypan, Saxon.]
1. To credit upon the authority of another, or from ſome other
reaſon than our perſonal knowledge.
A propoſition, which they are perſuaded, but do not know
to be true, it is not ſeeing, but believing. Locke.
Ten thouſand things there are, which we believe merely up-
on the authority or credit of thoſe who have ſpoken or writ-
ten of them. J/atts's Logick.
2. To put confidence in the veracity of any one.
The people may hear when I ſpeak with thee, and believe
thee for ever. Exodus, xix. 9.
To BF LIF w E. v. m.
1. To have a firm perſuaſion of anything.
They may believe that the Lord God of their fathers, the
God of Abraham, the God of Iſaac, and the God of Jacob,
hath appeared unto thee. Geneſis, xlv.
2. To exerciſe the theological virtue of faith.
Now God be prais'd, that, to believing ſouls,
Gives light in darkneſs, comfort in deſpair. Shakeſp. H. VI.
For with the heart man believeth unto righteouſneſs, and with
the mºuth confeſſion is made unto ſalvation. Romans, x. 10.
3. With the particle in ; to hold as an object of faith.
Believe in the Lord your God, ſo ſhall you be eſtabliſhed.
Dryden's A: neid.
- 2 Chron. xx. 20.
4. With the particle upon ; to truſt; to place full confidence in ;
to reſt upon with faith.
To them gave he power to become the ſons of God, even
to them that believe on his name. john, i. 12.
5. I believe, is ſometimes uſed as a way of ſlightly noting ſome
want of certainty or exactneſs.
!hough they are, I believe, as high as moſt ſteeples in Eng-
land, yet a perſon, in his drink, fell down, without any other
hurt than the breaking of an arm. Addiſon on Italy.
Bºey ER, n.ſ. [from believe.]
1. He that believes, or gives credit.
. Piſcipline began to enterinto conflict with churches, which,
tº extremity, had been believers of it. Hooker, Prof.
2. A profeſſour of chriſtianity.
- Infidels themſelves did diſcern in matters of life, when be-
Fºr did well, when otherwiſe, Hooker, b. 2. § 2.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
If he which writeth, do that which is forcible, how ſhould
he which readeth, be thought to do that, which, in itſelf, is of
no force to work belief, and to ſave believers * Hooker, b. v.
Myſterics held by us have no power, pomp, or wealth, but
have been maintained by the univerſal body of true believers,
from the days of the apoſtles, and will be to the reſurrection;
neither will the gates of hell prevail againſt them. Swift.
BELI'evi NGLY. adv. [from to believe..] After a believing man-
ner.
BEli'ke. adv. [from like, as by likelihood.]
1. Probably ; likely ; perhaps.
There came out of the ſame woods a horrible foul bear,
which fearing, belike, while the lion was preſent, came furi-
ouſly towards the place where I was. Sidney:
Belike fortune was afraid to lay her treaſures, where they
ſhould be ſtained with ſo many perfeótions. Sidney.
Lord Angelo, belike, thinking me remiſs in my office, awa-
kens me with this unwonted putting on. Shakeſp. M. for Meaſ.
Joſephus affirmeth, that one of them remained even in his
time; meaning, belike, ſome ruin or foundation thereof.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the JP'orld.
2. It is ſometimes uſed in a ſenſe of irony; as, we are ...ſºſ.
We think, belike, that he will accept what the meaneſt of
them would diſdain. Hooker, b. viii. § 15.
God appointed the ſea to one of them, and the land to the
other, becauſe they were ſo great, that the ſea could not hold
them both; for elſe, belike, if the ſea had been large enough, we
might have gone a fiſhing for elephants. Brerew. on Languages.
BE LI'v E. adv. [bilive, Sax. probably from bi and lipe, in the
ſenſe of vivacity; ſpeed; quickneſs.] Specdily; quickly: a
word out of uſe.
By that ſame way the direful dames do drive
Their mournful chariot, fill'd with ruſty blood,
And down to Pluto's houſe are come helive. Fairy Q. b. i.
BELL. m. ſ. [bel, Saxon; ſuppoſed, by Skinner, to come from
pelvis, Lat. a baſin. See Ball.]
1. A veſſel, or hollew body of caſt metal, formed to make a noiſe
by the act of a clapper, hammer, or ſome other inſtrument
ſtriking againſt it. Bells are always in the towers of churches,
to call the congregation together.
Your flock, aſſembled by the bell,
Encircled you, to hear, with rev'rence. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Get thee gone, and dig my grave thyſelf,
And bid the merry bells ring to thy ear,
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Four bells admit twenty four changes in ringing, and five
bells one hundred and twenty.
He has no one neceſſary attention to anything, but the bell,
which calls to prayers twice a day. Addiſon. Spect. Nº 264.
2. It is uſed for any thing in the form of a bell, as the cups of
flowers.
Where the bee ſucks, there ſuck I,
In a cowſlip's bell I lie. Shakespeare. Tempg/?.
The humming bees that hunt the golden dew,
In ſummer's heat on tops of lilies feed,
And creep within their bell, to ſuck the balmy ſeed. Dryden.
3. A ſmall hollow globe of metal perforated, and containing in it
a ſolid ball; which, when it is ſhaken by bounding againſt the
ſides, gives a ſound.
As the ox hath his yoke, the horſe his curb, and the faulcon
his bells, ſo hath man his deſire. Shakeſp. As you like it.
4. To bear the bell. To be the firſt, from the wether, that car-
ries a bell among the ſheep, or the firſt horſe of a drove that has
bells on his collar.
5. The Italians have carried away the bell from all other nations,
as may appear both by their books and works.
Hakewell on Providence.
To ſhake the bells. A phraſe, in Shakeſpeare, taken from the bells
of a hawk.
Neither the king, nor he that loves him beſt,
The proudeſt he that holds up Lancaſter,
Dares ſtir a wing, if Warwickſhakes his bells. Shakespeare.H.VI.
To Bell. v. n. [from the noun..] To grow in buds or flowers,
in the form of a bell. -
Hops, in the beginning of Auguſt, bell, and are ſometimes
ripe. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Bell-FAshioned. adj. [from bell and faſhion.] Having the
form of a bell. -
The thorn apple riſes with a ſtrong round ſtalk, having large
bell-faſhioned flowers at the joints. Mortine's Art ºfHusbandry.
Belle. n.ſ.. [beau, belle, Fr.] A young lady.
What motive could compel
A well-bred lord t aſſault a gentle belle;
O ſay, what ſtranger cauſe yet unexplor’d,
Could make a gentle belle reject a lord? Pope's R. of the Lock.
BELLES LETTRES. n.ſ. [Fr.] Polite literature. It has no
ingular.
§. exactneſs of the other, is to admit of ſomething like
diſcourſe, eſpecially in what regards the belles lettres. Tatler.
Be'llibone. n.ſ.. [from bellus, beautiful, and bonus, good, Lat:
belle &amp; bonne, Fr.] A woman excelling both in beauty and
goodneſs. A word now out of uſe.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
.
2 Pan
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E L
B E L
Pan may be proud, that ever he begot
Such a bellibone,
And Syrinx rejoice, that ever was her lot
To bear ſuch a one. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
BELLI'GERous. adj. [belliger, Lat.J Waging war. Dić?.
BE'LLING. m. ſ. A hunting term, ſpoken of a roe, when ſhe
makes a noiſe in rutting time. - Dić7.
1BELLI'potent. adj. [bellipotens, Lat.] Puiſſant; mighty in
War. Dići.
To Be'llow. v. n. [bellan, Saxon.]
4. To make a noiſe as a bull.
Jupiter became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune
A ram, and bleated. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
What bull dares bellow, or what ſheep dares bleat
Within the lion's den f Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
But now, the huſband of a herd muſt be
Thy mate, and bellowing ſons thy progeny. Dryden.
2. To make any violent outcry.
He faſten’d on my neck, and bellow'd out,
As he'd burſt heav'n. Shakeſp. King Lear:
contempt.
The dull fat captain, with a hound's deep throat,
Would bellow out a laugh in a baſe note. Dryd. Perſ' ſat. v.
This gentleman is accuſtomed to roar and bellow ſo terribly
loud, that he frightens us. Tatler, N° 54.
. To roar as the ſea in a ſtorm; or as the wind; to make any
continued noiſe, that may cauſe terrour.
Till, at the laſt, he heard a dreadful ſound,
Which through the wood loud bellowing did rebound.
Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 7. ſtanz. 7.
The riſing rivers float the nether ground;
And rocks the bellowing voice of boiling ſeas rebound. Dryd.
BE'llows. n.ſ.. [biliz, Sax. perhaps it is corrupted from bellies,
the wind being contained in the hollow, or belly. It has no ſin-
gular; for we uſually ſay a pair of bellows; but Dryden has
uſed bellows as a ſingular.]
I. The inſtrument uſed to blow the fire.
Since fighs into my inward furnace turned,
For bellows ſerve to kindle more the fire.
One, with great bellows, gather'd filling air,
And, with forc'd wind, the fuel did inflame. Fairy Q. b. ii.
The ſmith prepares his hammer for the ſtroke,
While the lung'd bellows hiſing fire provoke. Dryden's juv.
The lungs, as bellows, ſupply a force of breath; and the aſ-
pera arteria is as the noſe of bellows, to colle&amp;t and convey the
breath. Holder's Elements of Speech.
2. In the following paſſage, it is ſingular.
Thou neither, like a bellows, ſwell'ſt thy face,
As if thou wert to blow the burning maſs
Of melting ore. Dryden's Perſius, ſat. v.
BE'llu1Ne. adj. [belluinus, Lat.] Beaſtly; belonging to a beaſt;
ſavage; brutal.
If human actions were not to be judged, men would have
no advantage over beaſts. At this rate, the animal and belluine
life would be the beſt. Atterbury's Preface to his Sermons.
BEDLY. n.ſ.. [balg, Dutch; bol, bola, Welch.]
1. That part of the human body which reaches from the breaſt
to the thighs, containing the bowels.
The body's members
Rebell'd againſt the belly; thus accus’d it;-
That only like a gulf it did remain,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Sidney.
Like labour with the reſt. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. In beaſts, it is uſed, in general, for that part of the body next
the ground.
And the Lord ſaid unto the ſerpent, upon thy belly ſhalt thou
go, and duſt ſhalt thou eat all the days of thy life. Gen. iii. 14.
3- The womb; in this ſenſe, it is commonly uſed ludicrouſly or
familiarly.
I ſhall anſwer that better, than you can the getting up of the
| - raegro's belly: the Moor is with child by you.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
The ſecret is grown too big for the pretence, like Mrs. Prim-
Iy's big belly. Congreve's JWay of the World.
4.-- Pº. part of man which requires food, in oppoſition to the
&amp;ack, or that which demands cloaths.
They were centent with a licentious and idle life, wherein
they might fill their bellies by ſpoil, rather than by labour.
Sir j. Hayward.
Whoſe god is their belly. Phil. iii. 19.
He that ſows his grain upon marble, will have many a hun-
sºry belly before harveſt. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of j. Bull.
5- The part of any thing that ſwells out into a larger capacity.
Fortune ſometimes turneth the handle of the bottle, which
is eaſy to be taken hold of; and, after, the belly, which is hard
to graſp. Bacon's Ornament. Ration.
An Iriſh harp hath the concave, or belly, not along the ſtrings,
but at the end of the ſtrings. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 146.
6. Any place in which ſomething is incloſed.
Out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardſt my voice.
jonah, ii. 2.
Vol. I, 2
3- To vociferate; to clamour. In this ſenſe, it is a word of.
To Be'lly. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſwell into a larger ca-
pacity ; to hang out; to bulge out.
Thus by degrees day waſtes, ſigns ceaſe to riſe,
For bellying earth, ſtill riſing up, denies
Their light a paſſage, and confines our eyes.
Creech's Manilius.
The pow'r appeas'd, with winds ſuffic’d the ſail,
The bellying canvas ſtrutted with the gale. Dryden's Fables.
Loud ratt'ling ſhakes the mountains and the plain,
Heav'n bellies downwards, and deſcends in rain. Dryden.
'Midſt theſe diſports, forget they not to drench
Themſelves with bellying goblets. Philips.
Be'lly AcHE. m. ſ. [from belly and ache.] The colick; or pain
in the bowels. -
BE'LLYBound. adj. [from belly and bound..] Diſeaſed, ſo as to
be coſtive, and ſhrunk in the belly.
BE'LLY-FRETTING.. n.ſ.. [from belly and fret.]
1. [With farriers.] The chafing of a horſe's belly with the fore-
1rt.
2. º great pain in a horſe's belly, cauſed by worms. D#7.
BE'LLY Ful. n.ſ.. [from belly and full.] As much food as fills
the belly, or ſatisfies the appetite. -
Be'lly Go D. m. ſ. [from belly and god..] A glutton; one who
makes a god of his belly.
What infinite waſte they made this way, the only ſtory of
Apicus, a famous bellygod, may ſuffice to ſhew.
Hakewell on Providence.
BE'LLY-PINcHED. adj. [from belly and pinch.] Starved.
This night, wherein the cubdrawn bear would couch,
The lion, and the belly-pinched wolf,
Keep their furr dry; unbonnetted he runs. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
BE'LLYRoll. n. ſ. [from belly and roll.] A roll ſo called, as it
ſeems, from entering into the hollows.
They have two ſmall harrows that they clap on each ſide of
the ridge, and ſo they harrow right up and down, and roll it
with a bellyroll, that goes between the ridges, when they have
ſown it. Mortimer's Husbandry.
BE'LLY-TIMBER. m. ſ. [from belly and timber.] Food; mate-
rials to ſupport the belly.
Where belly-timber, above ground
Or under, was not to be found.
The ſtrength of every other member
Is founded on your belly-timber. Prior.
BE'lly-worm. m. ſ. [from belly and worm.] A worm that
breeds in the belly.
BE'LMAN. m.ſ.. [from bell and man.] He whoſe buſineſs it is to
º anything in towns, and to gain attention by ringing
his bell.
It was the owl that ſhriek'd, the fatal belman
Which gives the ſtern'ſt good night. Shakeſp. Macbeth,
Where Titian's glowing paint the canvas warm’d,
Now hangs the belman's ſong, and paſted here
The colour'd prints of Overton appear. Gay's Trivia:
The belman of each pariſh, as he goes his circuit, cries out
every night, Paſt twelve o’clock. Swift.
BE'LMETAL. n.ſ.. [from bell and metal.] The metal of which
bells are made; being a mixture of five parts copper with one
of pewter.
Belmetal has copper one thouſand pounds, tin from three
hundred to two hundred pounds, braſs one hundred and fifty
pounds. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
Colours which ariſe on belmetal, when melted and poured on
the ground, in open air, like the colours of water bubbles, are
changed by viewing them at divers obliquities. Newton's Opt.
To Belo'ck. v. a. [from be and lock.] To faſten, as with a
lock.
This is the hand, with which a vow’d contračt
Was faſt belock'd in thine. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
BE'LoMANcy. n.ſ.. [from 3ixº and waſia.]
Belomancy, or divination by arrows, hath been in requeſt
with Scythians, Alans, Germans, with the Africans and Turks
of Algier. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 22.
To Belo'NG. v. n. [belangen, Dutch.]
1. To be the property of
To light on a part of a field belonging to Boaz.
2. To be the province or buſineſs of.
There is no need of any ſuch redreſs;
Or if there were, it not belongs to you. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
The declaration of theſe latent philoſophers belongs to an-
other paper. Boyle.
To Jove the care of heav'n and earth belongs. Dryd. Wirg.
3. To adhere, or be appendent to. -
He went into a deſart belonging to Bethſaida. Luke, ix.1o.
4. To have relation to.
To whom belongeſ; thou? whence art thou? I Sam. xxx. 13:
5. To be the quality or attributes of.
The faculties belonging to the ſupreme ſpirit, are unlimited
and boundleſs, fitted and deſigned for infinite objects.
Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
Hudibrar, cant. i.
Ruth, ii. 3.
6. To be referred to.
He careth for things that belong to the Lord. I Cor. vii. 32.
Belo've D. participle. [from belove, derived of love. It is ob-
2. ſervable,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E M
B E N
ſervable, that, though the participle be of very frequent uſe, the
verb is ſeldom or never admitted; as we ſay, yºu are much
beloved by me, but not, I tºe you..] Loved; dear.
I think, it is not ſ'.
Mark Anthony, ſo well belºv'd of Caeſar, -
jº.cº. Shakeſp. Julius Caſar.
In likeneſs of a dove -
The ſpirit deſcended, while the father's voice
From heav'n pronounc'd him his belºved ſon. -
Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b. i. 1. 32.
Belo'w. prep. [from be and low.]
1. Under in place; not ſo high.
He'll beat Aufidius' head belºw his knee,
And tread upon his neck.
2. Inferiour in dignity.
The noble Venetians think themſelves equal at leaſt to the
electors of the empire, and but one degree below kings.
Addiſon on Italy.
. Inferiour in excellence. -
His Idylliums of Theocritus are as much below his Manilius,
as the fields are below the ſtars. Felton on the Claſſicks.
4. Unworthy of; unbefitting.
'Tis much below me on his throne to fit;
But when I do, you ſhall petition it. Dryden's Indian Emp.
BE Lo'w. adv.
1. In the lower place; in the place neareſt the center.
To men ſtanding below on the ground, thoſe that be on the
top of Paul's, ſeem much leſs than they are, and cannot be
known ; but, to men above, thoſe below ſeem nothing ſo much
leſſened, and may be known. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 205.
.The upper regions of the air perceive the collection of the
matter of the tempeſts and winds before the air here below;
and therefore the obſcuring of the ſmaller ſtars, is a ſign of tem-
peſt following. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 818.
His ſultry heat infects the ſky;
The ground below is parch'd, the heav'ns above us fry. Dryd.
This ſaid, he led them up the mountain's brow,
And ſhews them all the ſhining fields below.
2. On earth; in oppoſition to heaven.
And let no tears from erring pity flow,
For one that's bleſs'd above, immortaliz'd below.
Smith, To the Memory of j. Philips.
The faireſt child of Jove,
Below for ever ſought, and bleſs'd above. Prior.
3. In hell; in the regions of the dead; oppoſed to heaven and
earth.
The gladſome ghoſts in circling troops attend,
Delight to hover near; and long to know
What busineſs brought him to the realms below. Dryd. Æn.
When ſuff'ring ſaints aloft in beams ſhall glow,
And proſprous traitors gnaſh their teeth below. Tickell.
To BELow T. v. a. [from be and lowt, a word of contempt.]
To treat with opprobrious language; to call names.
Sieur Gaulard, when he heard a gentleman report, that, at a
ſupper, they had not only good cheer, but alſo ſavoury epi-
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Dryden.
grams, and fine anagrams, returning home, rated and belowted
his cook, as an ignorant ſcullion, that never dreſſed him either
epigrams or anagrams. Camden’s Remains.
BELsw A'GGER. m. ſ. A cant word for a whoremaſter.
You are a charitable beſwagger; my wife cried out fire, and
ou called out for engines. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
BEl T. n.ſ.. [belt, Sax. baltheus, Lat.] . A girdle; a cinéture in
which a ſword, or ſome weapon, is commonly hung.
He cannot buckle his diſtemper'd cauſe
Within the belt of rule. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Ajax ſlew himſelf with the ſword given him by Hector, and
Hector was dragged about the walls of Troy by the belt given
him by Ajax. South.
Then ſnatch'd the ſhining belt, with gold inlaid;
The belt Eurytion's artful hands had made. Dryden's AFneid.
BELw E"THER... n.ſ.. [from bell and wether.] A ſheep which leads
the flock with a bell on his neck.
The fox will ſerve my ſheep to gather,
And drive to follow after their belwether. Spenſ. Hub. Tale.
To offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle; to
be a bawd to a belwether. Shakeſp. As you like it.
The flock of ſheep, and belwether, thinking to break into
another's paſture, and being to paſs over another bridge, juſt-
led till both fell into the ditch. Howel's England's Tears.
To BELY'. See BELIE.
To BEMA'D. v. a. [from be and mad] To make mad; to turn
the brain.
Making juſt report
Qf how unnatural and bemadding ſorrow,
The king hath cauſe to plain. Shakespeare. King Lear:
* BºMi'R.E. v. a. [from be and mire.] To drag, or incumber
in the mire; to ſoil by paſſing through dirty places.
Away they rode in homely ſort,
Their journey long, their money ſhort,
The loving couple well bemir’d;
The horſe and both the riders tir’d.
To BEMo'AN. v. a. [from to moan..] To lament;
to expreſs ſorrow for.
Swift.
to bewail;
He falls, he fills the houſe with heavy groans,
Implores their pity, and his pain bemoans. Dryden's AFneid.
The gods themſelves the ruin’d ſeats bemoan,
And blame the miſchiefs that themſelves have done. -
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
BEMo'ANER. n ſ [from the verb.] A lamenter; the perſon
that laments.
To Be Mo'il. v. a. [be and moil, from mouiller, Fr.] To be-
draggle; to bemire; to encumber with dirt and mire.
Thou ſhouldſt have heard in how miry a place, how ſhe was
bemoiled, how he left her with the horſe upon her. Shakeſp.
To Be Mo'Nster. v. a. [from be and monſter.] To make mon-
ſtrous. -
Thou chang'd, and ſelf-converted thing' for ſhame,
Bemonſter not thy feature. Shakeſp. King Lear.
BEMU's ED. adj. [from to muſ...] Overcome with muſing;
dreaming: a word of contempt.
Is there a parſon much bemus’d in beer,
A maudlin poeteſs, a rhiming peer *
BEN. See BE HEN. -
BENCH. m. ſ. [benc, Sax. banc, Fr.]
1. A ſeat, diſtinguiſhed from a ſicº. 'y its greater length.
The ſeats and benches ſhone of ivory,
An hundred nymphs ſat ſide by fide about. Spenſ Pºſ ºf Belſay.
All Rome is pleas'd, when Statius will rehearſe,
And longing crouds expect the promis'd verſe;
His lofty numbers, with ſo great a guſt,
They hear, and ſwallow with ſuch eagerluſt:
But while the common ſuffrage crown'd his cauſe,
And broke the benches with their loud applauſe,
His muſe had ſtarv'd, had not a piece unread, `
And by a player bought, ſupply'd her bread. Dryd.juvenal.
2. A ſeat of juſtice; the ſeat where judges fit.
A ſon ſet your decrees at naught:
To pluck down juſtice from your awfullench;
To trip the courſe of law, and blunt the ſword
That guards the peace and ſafety of your perſon.
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Cyriac, whoſe grandſire on the royal bench
Of Britiſh Themis, with no mean applauſe,
Pronounc'd, and in his volumes taught our laws, -
Which others at their bar ſo often wrench. Milton.
3. º: perſons ſitting on a bench; as, the whole bench voted the
anne,
Pope's Epiſtles.
Fools to popular praiſe aſpire,
Of publick ſpeeches, which worſe fools admire;
While, from both benches, with redoubl’d ſounds,
Th’ applauſe of lords and commoners abounds. Dryd. Wirg.
To BENcH. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To furniſh with benches.
'Twas bench'd with turf, and, goodly to be ſeen,
The thick young graſs aroſe in freſher green. Dryden's Fal."
2. To ſeat upon a bench. -
His cupbearer, whom I from meaner form
Have bench'd, and rear'd to worſhip. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
BE'Nch ER. m. ſ. [from bench..] Thoſe gentlemen of the inns of
court are called benchers, who have been readers; they being
admitted to plead within the bar, are alſo called inner barriſters.
The benchers, being the ſeniors of the houſe, are intruſted with
its government and dire&amp;tion, and out of them is a treaſurer
yearly choſen. Blount. Chambers.
I was taking a walk in the gardens of Lincoln’s-Inn, a fa-
vour that is indulged me by ſeveral benchers, who are grown old
with me. Tatler, N° 1 co.,
To BEND. v. a. pret. Hended, or bent; part, paſſ, tended, or bent."
º Saxon; lander, Fr. as Skinner thinks, from pandare,
at.
I. To make crooked; to crook; to infle&amp;t.
The rainbow compaſſeth the heaven with a glorious circle,
and the hands of the Moſt High hath bended it. Ecclus, xliii. 1 2.
They bend their bows, they whirl their ſlings around:
Heaps of ſpent arrows fall, and ſtrew the ground; }
And helms, and ſhields, and rattling arms reſound.
Dryden's AFneid.
2. To direét to a certain point. -
Oćtavius, and Mark Anthony,
Came down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition tow’rd Philippi. Shakeſp. J. Cſár.
Why doſt thou bend thy eyes upon the earth,
And ſtart ſo often, when thou ſitt'ſt alone. Shakeſp.
Your gracious eyes upon this labour bend. Fairfax, b, i.
To that ſweet region was our voyage bent,
When winds, and ev'ry warring element,
Diſturb’d our courſe. Dryden's Virgil.
Then, with a ruſhing ſound, th'aſſembly bend - -
Diverſe their ſteps: the rival rout aſcend
The royal dome. Pope's Odſey, b. ii. 1. 295.
3. To apply.
Men will not bend their wits to examine, whether things,
wherewith they have been accuſtomed, be good or evil. Hoo ºr.
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation, Shakeſp, Richard III.
When<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E N
B E N
When he fell into the gout, he was no longer able to bend
his mind or thoughts to any publick buſineſs. Temple.
4. To put any thing in order for uſe; a metaphor taken from
bending the bow.
I’m ſettled, and bend up -
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. Shakespeare. King Lear.
As a fowler was bending his net, a blackbird aſked him what
he was doing. L'E/irange, fab. xcvi.
5. To incline.
But when to miſchief mortals bend their will,
How ſoon they find fit inſtruments of ill? Pope's R. of the L.
6. To ſubdue ; to make ſubmiſſive; as, war and famine will bend
Our enemieS.
7. To bend the brow. To knit the brow; to frown.
Some have been ſeen to bite their pen, ſcratch their head,
bend their brows, bite their lips, beat the board, and tear their
paper. Camden's Remains.
To BeND. v. m. º
1. To be incurvated.
2. To lean or jut over.
There is a cliff, whoſe high and bending head
*
Looks fearfully on the confined deep. Shakeſp.
Earth ſeems
Far ſtretch'd around, to meet the bending ſphere. Thomſºn.
3. To reſolve; to determine. - - -
Not ſo, for once, indulg'd they ſweep the main,
Deaf to the call, or, hearing, hear in vain;
But, bent on miſchief, bear the waves before.
While good, and anxious for his friend,
He's ſtill ſeverely bent againſt himſelf;
Renouncing ſleep, and reſt, and food, and eaſe. Addiſ Cato.
A ſtate of ſlavery, which they are bent upon with ſo much
eagerneſs and obſtinacy. Addiſon. Freeholder.
He is every where bent on inſtruction, and avoids all manner
of digreſſions. Addiſon's Eſſay on the Georgicks.
4. To be ſubmiſfive; to bow.
The ſons of them that afflićted thee, ſhall come bending unto
thee. Iſaiah, lx. 14.
BEND. n.ſ.. [from to bend.]
1. Flexure; incurvation.
'Tis true, this god did ſhake;
His coward lips did from their colour fly;
And that ſame eye, whoſe bend doth awe the world,
Dryd. Fables.
Did loſe its luſtre. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
2. The crooked timbers which make the ribs or ſides of a ſhip.
Skinner.
3. With heralds. One of the eight honourable ordinaries, con-
taining a fifth when uncharged; but when charged, a third part
of the eſcutcheon. It is made by two lines, drawn thwart-
ways from the dexter chief to the finiſter baſe point. Harris.
BE'NDABLE. adj. [from bend..] That may be incurvated; that
may be inclined.
BE'NDER. n.ſ.. [from to bend.]
| 1. The perſon who bends.
2. The inſtrument with which anything is bent.
Theſe bows, being ſomewhat like the long bows in uſe a-
mongſt us,were bent only by a man's immediate ſtrength, with-
out the help of any bender, or rack, that are uſed to others.
Wilkins's Mathematical Magick.
BE'NDwitH. n.ſ. An herb. IDić?.
BENE'APED. adj. [from neap..] A ſhip is ſaid to be beneaped,
when the water does not flow high enough to bring her off the
* ground, over a bar, or out of a dock. Dići.
BENE'Ath. prep. [beneop, Sax. beneden, Dutch.]
I. Under ; lower in place.
Their woolly fleeces, as the rites requir’d,
He laid beneath him, and to reſt retir’d. Dryden, AEn. vii.
Ages to come might Ormond's pićture know;
And palms for thee beneath his laurels grow.
2. Under, as overborn or overwhelmed by ſome preſſure.
Our country ſinks beneath the yoke;
It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gaſh
Is added to her wounds. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
And oft on rocks their tender wings they tear,
And ſink beneath the burdens which they bear. Dryden's Virg.
3- Lower in rank, excellence, or dignity.
We have reaſon then to be perſuaded, that there are far more
ſpecies of creatures above us, than there are beneath. Locke.
+- Unworthy of; unbeſeeming; not equal to. -
He will do nothing that is beneath his high ſtation, nor omit
doing anything which becomes it. Atterbury.
+BENEATH adv. -
º * - In a lower place; under.
I deſtroyed the Amorite before them; I deſtroyed his fruits
from above, and his roots from beneath. Amos, ii. 9.
The earth which you take from beneath, will be barren and
unfruitful. Mortimer's Art of Husbandry.
2, Below, as oppoſed to heaven.
Any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
- beneath. Exodus, xx. 4.
| Be'nedict, adj. [benedicius, Lat.] Having mild and ſalubrious
qualities: an old phyſical term.
Prior.
!
It is not a ſmall thing won in phyſick, if you can make rhu-
barb, and other medicines that are benedić', as ſtrong purgers
, as thoſe that are not without ſome malignity. Bacon's N. Eff.
BENE DI'ction. n. f: [benediºio, Lat.] . . . . . .
1. Bleſſing; a decretory pronunciation of happineſs.
. A ſov’reign ſhame ſo bows him; his unkindneſs,
That ſtript her from his benediciion, turn'd her
To foreign caſualties, gave her dear rights -
To his doghearted daughters. Shakeſp. King Lear.
From him will raiſe
A mighty nation; and upon him ſhow'r
His benedićion ſo, that, in his ſeed,
All nations ſhall be bleſt. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii. 1, 125:
2. The advantage conferred by bleſſing.
Proſperity is the bleſfing of the Old Teſtament; adverſity is
the bleſfing of the New ; which carrieth the greater benedic-
tion, and the clearer revelation of God's favour. Bacon's Eſſays.
3. Acknowledgments for bleſfings received; thanks.
Could he leſs expect
Than glory and benedi. ion, that is, thanks 2 Parad. Reg.
Such ingenious and induſtrious perſons are delighted in
ſearching out natural rarities; reflecting upon the Creator of
them his due praiſes and benedićions. Ray on the Creation.
4. The form of inſtituting an abbot.
What conſecration is to a biſhop, that benedićion is to an
abbot; but in a different way: for a biſhop is not properly
ſuch, till conſecration; but an abbot, being elected and con-
firmed, is properly ſuch before benediction. Ayliffe's Parergon.
BENEFA'ction. n.ſ.. [from benefacio, Lat.]
1. The act of conferring a benefit.
2. The benefit conferred; which is the more uſual ſenſe.
One part of the benefactions, was the expreſſion of a gene-
rous and grateful mind. Atterbury.
BENEFA'ctor. n.ſ.. [from benefacio, Lat.] He that confers a
benefit; frequently he that contributes to ſome publick cha-
rity.
Then ſwell with pride, and muſt be titled gods,
Great benefactors of mankind, deliverers,
Worſhipp'd with temple, prieſt, and ſacrifice.
Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b. iii. l. 82.
From that preface he took his hint, though he had the baſe-
neſs not to acknowledge his benefactor. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
I cannot but look upon the writer as my benefactor, if he
conveys to me an improvement of my underſtanding.
Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 46.
Whoever makes ill returns to his benefaclor, muſt needs be
a common enemy to mankind. Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
BENEFA'cTREss. n.ſ.. [from benefactor.] A woman who con-
fers a benefit.
BE'NEFIce. n.ſ.. [from beneficium, Lat.] Advantage conferred
on another. This word is generally taken for all eccleſiaſtical
livings, be they dignities or others. Cowel.
And of the prieſt eftſoons 'gan to enquire,
How to a benefice he might aſpire. Spenser's Hubb. Tale.
Much to himſelf he thought, but little ſpoke,
And, undepriv'd, his benefice forſook. Dryden's Fables:
BE'NEFIce D. adj. [from benefice.] Poſſeſſed of a benefice, or
church preferment.
The uſual rate between the beneficed man and the religious
perſon, was one moiety of the benefice. Ayliffe's Parergon.
BENEFIcENcE. m. ſ. [from beneficent.] The practice of doing
good; active goodneſs.
You could not extend your beneficence to ſo many perſons;
yet you have loſt as few days as that excellent emperour.
Dryden's juvenal, Dedicat.
Love and charity extends our beneficence to the miſeries of
our brethren. Rogers.
BENE'FIce NT. adj. [from beneficus, beneficentior, Lat.] Kind ;
doing good. It differs from benign, as the act from the diſpo-
ſition; beneficence being kindneſs, or benignity, exerted in action.
Such a creature could not have his origination from any leſs
than the moſt wiſe and beneficent being, the great God.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
But Phoebus, thou, to man beneficent,
Delight'ſt in building cities.
BENEFI'cIAL. adj. [from beneficium, Lat.] -
1. Advantageous; conferring benefits; profitable; uſeful; with
to before the perſon benefited.
Not that any thing is made to be beneficial to him, but all
things for him, to ſhew beneficence and grace in them.
- Hooker, b. i. § 8.
This ſuppoſition grants the opinion to conduce to order in
the world, and conſequently to be very beneficial to mankind.
Tillotſon, ſermon i.
The war, which would have been moſt beneficial to us, and
deſtructive to the enemy, was neglected. Swift.
Are the preſent revolutions in circular orbs, more beneficial
than the other would be Bently's Sermons.
2. Helpful; medicinal.
In the firſt acceſs of ſuch a diſeaſe, any deobſtruent, without
much acrimony, is beneficial. Arbuthnot on Diet.
BENEFI'cIAL. n. ſ. An old word for a benefice,
Prizr.
For
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E N
B E N
For that the groundwork is, and end of all; -
How to obtain # beneficial. - Spenser's ſº º:
Bes:... odo. (from beneficial.] Advan“4” P
fitably; helpfully.
BENEFI'cIALN ESS. m.
helpfulneſs.
Though -
for their contentati
f. [from lºftial.] Uſefulneſs; profit;
ge of theſe obječts be commendable
the ... ... they do not .
- n the account of their uſefulneſs
. º; to us, upo Halº's Origin of Mankind.
Beneficiary, adj. [from benefice.] Holding ſomething in º:
ordination to another; having a dependent and ſecondary poſ-
º - overeign power.
tº: ...; º tempted by no leſs promiſe, than
to be made a feudatory, or beneficiary king of England, under
the ſeignory in chief of the pope. Bacon's War with Spain.
Bºx. n.ſ. He that is in poſſeſſion of a benefice.
A benefice is either ſaid to be a benefice with the cure of
ſouls, or otherwiſe. In the firſt caſe, if it be annexed to an-
other benefice, the beneficiary is obliged to ſerve the pariſh church
in his own proper perſon. Ayliff's Parergon.
BENEFIT. n.ſ.. [beneficium, Lat.]
1. Akindneſs; a favour conferred; an act of love.
When noble benefits ſhall prove t
Not well diſpos'd, the mind grown once corrupt,
They turn . vicious forms. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Bleſs the Lord, O my ſoul, and forget not all his benefit.
Pſalm ciii. 2.
As many as º
Neglect not, and the benefit embrace --
i. not void of : Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii. l. 426.
2. Advantage; profit; uſe.
The creature abateth his ſtrength for the benefit of ſuch as
put their truſt in thee. JWiſdom, xvi. 24.
3. In law. -
Benefit of clergy is an ancient liberty of the church, when a
prieſt, or one within orders, is arraigned of felony before a ſe-
cular judge, he may pray his clergy; that is, pray to be de-
i. . º, . purge himſelf of the offence objected
to him: and this might be done in caſe of murder. The an-
cient law, in this point of clergy, is much altered; for clerks
are no more delivered to their ordinaries to be purged, but now
every man, though not within orders, is put to read at the bar,
being found guilty, and convićted of ſuch felony as this benefit
is granted for; and ſo burnt in the hand, and ſet free for the
firſt time, if the ordinary's commiſſioner, or deputy, ſtanding
by, do ſay, Legit ut clericus; or, otherwiſe, ſuffereth death for
his tranſgreſſion. Cowel.
To Be"NEFIT. v. a. [from the noun..] To do good to ; to ad-
vantage.
What courſe I mean to hold,
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge. Shakeſp. Wint. Tale.
He was ſo far from benefiting trade, that he did it a great in-
jury, and brought Rome in danger of a famine. Arbuthnot.
To BENEFIT. v. n. To gain advantage.
To tell you therefore what I have benefited herein, among old
renowned authors, I ſhall ſpare. Milton on Education.
BENE'MPt. adj. [See NEMPT.] Appointed; marked out; an
obſolete word.
Much greater gifts for Guerdon thou ſhalt gain,
Than kid or coffet, which I thee benempt;
Then up, I ſay. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
To BENE"t. v. a. [from net.] To enſnare; to ſurround as
with toils.
Being thus benetted round with villains,
Ere I could mark the prologue, to my bane,
They had begun the play. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
BENEvolencs. n. ſ. [benevolentia, Lat.]
1. Diſpoſition to do good; kindneſs; charity; good will.
Graſp the whole worlds of reaſon, life, and ſenſe,
In one cloſe ſyſtem of benevolence. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
. The good done; the charity given.
. A kind of tax.
This tax, called a benevolence, was deviſed by Edward IV. for
i which he ſuſtained much envy. It was aboliſhed by Richard
III. - Bacon's Henry VII.
BEN Evol. ENT: adj. [benevolens, benevolentia, Lat..] Kind; hav-
ing good will, or kind inclinations.
:
Thou good old man, benevolent as wiſe. Pope's Odyſſey.
- Nature all
Is blooming and benevolent like thee. Thomſºn.
Nºvgles' Ness. n. ſ. The ſame with benevolence.
BENGA L. m. ſ. [from Bengal in the Eaſt Indies.] A ſort of thin
flight tuff, made of filk and hair, for womens apparel.
**}^*N. m. ſ. [Benzoin.] The name of a tree.
l **on a calyx, which conſiſts of four leaves, are produced
three ſmall flowers, which have an oblong tube; the upper
. ". is expanded, is divided into eight ſegments; be-
tub .." * are ſeveral ſhort threads, and, in the middle of the
f º * 9%rium, which becomes a fruit. It was brought
* Vºgºnia into England, and is propagated by laying down
the tender branches in the ſpring of the year. 44illar.
Be'NJAMIN. n.ſ. A gum. See BeNzoin.
To Be N1'GHT. v. a. [from night.]
1. To involve in darkneſs; to embarraſs by want of light; to
bring on night.
He that has light within his own breaſt,
May fit i' th' centre, and enjoy bright day;
But he that hides a dark ſoul, and foul thoughts,
Benighted walks under the mid-day ſun;
Himſelf is his own dungeon. Milton.
Thoſe bright ſtars that did adorn our hemiſphere, as thoſe
dark ſhades that did benight it, vaniſh. Boyle.
But what ſo long in vain, and yet unknown
By poor mankind's benighted wit, is ſought,
Shall in this age to Britain firſt be ſhown. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
A ſtorm begins, the raging waves run high,
The clouds look heavy, and benight the ſky. Garth's Ovid.
The miſerable race of men, that live
Benighted half the year, benumm'd with froſts
Under the polar Bear. Philips.
2. To ſurpriſe with the coming on of night.
Being benighted, the fight of a candle I ſaw a good way off,
dircéted me to a young ſhepherd's houſe. Sidney, b, i.
Or ſome benighted angel, in his way,
Might eaſe his wings; and, ſeeing heav'n appear
In its beſt work of mercy, think it there. Dryden.
BENIGN. adj. [benignus, Lat. It is pronounced without the g,
as if written benine; but the g is preſerved in benignity.]
1. Kind; generous; liberal; ačtually good. See BENEFIcent.
This turn hath made amends! Thou haſt fulfill’d
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign /
Giver of all things fair. Milton's Parad. Loft, b. viii. 1.492.
So ſhall the world go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign. Par. Loft, b. xii.
We owe more to heav'n than to the ſword,
The wiſh'd return of ſo benign a lord. Waller.
What heaven beſtows upon the earth, in kind influences and
benign aſpects, is paid it back again in ſacrifice and adoration.
South.
They who delight in the ſuffering of inferiour creatures, will
not be very compaſſionate or benign. Locke.
Diff'rent are thy names,
As thy kind hand has founded many cities,
Or dealt benign thy various gifts to men. Prior.
2. Wholeſome; not malignant.
Theſe ſalts are of a benign mild nature, in healthy perſons;
but, in others, retain their original qualities, which they diſ-
cover in cachexies. Arluthnot on Aliments.
BENIGN Diſeaſe, is when all the uſual ſymptoms appear in the
ſmallpox, or any acute diſeaſe, favourably, and without any ir-
regularities, or unexpected changes. Quincy.
Be Ni'GNess. n.ſ.. [from benign.] The ſame with benignity.
BfNI'GN1TY. m. ſ. [from benign.]
1. Graciouſneſs; goodneſs; actual kindneſs.
He which uſeth the benefit of any ſpecial benignity, may en-
joy it with good conſcience. Hooker, b.v. $9.
The king was deſirous to eſtabliſh peace rather by benignity
than blood. Hayward.
It is true, that his mercy will forgive offenders, or his benig-
nity co-operate to their converſions. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Although he enjoys the good that is done him, he is uncon-
cerned to value the benignity of him that does it. South.
2. Salubrity; wholeſome quality; friendlineſs to vital nature.
Bones receive a quicker agglutination in ſanguine than in
cholerick bodies, by reaſon of the benignity of the ſerum, which
ſendeth out better matter for a callus. Jºſeman's Surgery.
BENI'GNLY. adv. [from benign.] Favourably; kindly; gra-
ciouſly.
'Tis amazement more than love,
Which her radiant eyes do move ;
If leſs ſplendour wait on thine,
Yet they ſo benignly ſhine,
I would turn my dazled fight
To behold their milder light. Waller.
Oh truly good, and truly great -
For glorious as he roſe, benignly ſo he ſet. Prior.
Be'Nison. n.ſ.. [benir, to bleſs; beniSpenser, Fr.] Bleſſing; bene-
dićtion.
We have no ſuch daughter; nor ſhall ever ſee
That face of hers again; therefore, begone
Without our grace, our love, our beniſºn. Shakespeare. K. Lear.
Unmuffle, ye fair ſtars, and thou, fair moon,
That wont'ſt to love the traveller's beniſon. Milton.
BE'NNET. n.ſ. An herb; the ſame with avens, which ſee.
BENT. n.ſ.. [from the verb to bend.]
1. The ſtate of being bent; a ſtate of flexure; curvity.
Strike gently, and hold your rod at a bent a little while.
Walton's Angler.
2. Degree of flexure.
There are divers ſubtle inquiries concerning the ſtrength re-
quired to the bending of them; the force they have in the diſ-
charge, according to the ſeveral bents; and the ſtrength required
to be in the ſtring of them. Wilkins's Mathematical **:
3. Lo-
t
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E N
:
R E R
A mountain ſtood,
Threat'ning from high, and overlook'd the wood:
Beneath the lowring brow, and on a bent, -
The temple ſtood of Mars armipotent. Dryd. Pal. and Arc.
4- Utmoſt power, as of a bent bow.
Then let thy love be younger than thyſelf, -
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent. Shakespeare Tw. Night.
We both obey,
And here give up ourſelves, in the full bent,
To lay our ſervice freely at your feet. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
. Application of the mind; ſtrain of the mental powers.
5- “H. underſtanding ſhould be brought to the knotty parts of
1&lt;nowledge, that try the ſtrength of thought, and a full bent of
the mind, by inſenſible degrees. Locke.
6. Inclination; diſpoſition towards ſomething.
O who does know the bent of womens fantaſy " .
- Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. iv. ſtanz. 24.
To your own lent; diſpoſe you; you'll be found,
Be you beneath the ſky. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
. He knew the ſtrong bent of the country towards the houſe of
York. Bacon's Henry VII.
- Soon inclin'd t'admit delight,
The bent of natureſ Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi. l. 597.
The golden age was firſt; when man, yet new,
No rule but uncorrupted reaſon knew; -
And, with a native bent, did good purſue. Dryden. Ovid.
Let there be the ſame propenſity and bent of will to religion,
and there will be the ſame ſedulity and indefatigable induſtry.
South.
'Tis odds but the ſcale turns at laſt on nature's ſide, and the
evidence of one or two ſenſes gives way to the united bent and
tendency of all the five. Atterbury.
7. Determination; fixed purpoſe.
Their unbelief we may not impute unto inſufficiency in the
mean which is uſed, but to the wilful bent of their obſtinate
hearts againſt it. Hooker, b. v. § 22.
Yet we ſaw them forced to give way to the bent, and current
humour of the people, in favour of their ancient and lawful go-
Vernment. Temple.
8. Turn of the temper, or diſpoſition; ſhape, or faſhion, ſuper-
induced by art.
3. Declivity.
Not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the king's look, but hath a heart that is -
Glad at the thing they ſcoul at. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Two of them hath the very bent of honour.
- Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
Then thy ſtreight rule ſet virtue in my fight,
The crooked line reforming by the right;
My reaſon took the bent of thy command, - -
Was form'd and poliſh’d by thy ſkilful hand. Dryden's Perſ:
9- Tendency; flexion; particular direétion.
. The exerciſing the underſtanding, in the ſeveral ways of rea-
ſoning, teacheth the mind ſuppleneſs, to apply itſelf more dex-
terouſly to bents and turns of the matter, in all its reſearches.
ro. A ſtalk of graſs, called bent-graſs.
His ſpear, a bent both ſtiff and ſtrong;
And well near of two inches long;
The pile was of a horſe-fly's tongue, -
Whoſe ſharpneſs naught reverſed. Drayt. Nymphid.
Then the flowers of the vines; it is a little duſt, like the
duſt of a bent, which grows upon the cluſter, in the firſt com-
ing forth. Bacon's Eſſays.
June is drawn in a mantle of dark graſs-green, upon his
head a garland of bents, kingcups, and maidenhair.
- Peacham on Drawing.
BENTING Time. [from bent.] The time when pigeons feed on
bents before peas are ripe. - . . *
... Bare benting times, and moulting months, may come,
When, lagging late, they cannot reach their home.
Dryden's Hind and Panther.
To BENU'M. v. a. [benumen, Saxon.]
*- To make torpid ; to take away the ſenſation and uſe of any
part by cold, or by ſome obſtruction. -
So ſtings a ſnake that to the fire is brought,
Which harmleſs lay with cold benumm'd before.
Fairfax; b. ii. ſtanz. 85.
The winds blow moiſt and keen, which bids us ſeek
Some better ſhroud, ſome better warmth, to cheriſh
Our limbs benumm'd. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b, x. l. 1 of 9.
, My finews ſlacken, and an icy ſtiffneſs
Benums my blood. Denham's Sºphy.
It ſeizes upon the vitals, and benums the ſenſes; and where
there is no ſenſe, there can be no pain. South.
Will they be the leſs dangerous, when warmth ſhall bring
them to themſelves, becauſe they were once frozen and benum-
med with cold L’Eſtrange, fab. ix.
2. To ſtupify.
Theſe accents were her laſt: the creeping death
V Benumm'd her ſenſes firſt, then ſtopp'd her breath. Dryden.
ol. I.
Locke. -
BFszo'IN. m. ſ. A medicinal kind of reſin imported from the
Eaſt Indies, and vulgarly called benjamin. It is procured by
making an inciſion in a tree, whoſe leaves reſemble thoſe of the
lemon tree. It is of a yellowiſh colour, an agre able ſcent,
it melts eaſily, and is of three ſorts. The firſ, which is
eſteemed the beſt, comes from Siam, and is called amygdalºides,
being interſperſed with white ſpots, reſemblingbroken almonds.
The ſecond is black, and very odoriferous; it drops from
young trees, and comes from Sumatra. The third is alſo
black, but leſs odoriferous, and is found in Java and Sumatra.
- Trevoux. Chambers.
The liquor we have diſtilled from lºnzoin, is ſubject to fre-
; quent viciſſitudes of fluidity and firmneſs. Boyle.
BENzoin Tree. See BENJAMIN Tree.
To Be PA'INT. v. a. [from paint..] To cover with paint.
Thou know'ſt, the maſk of night is on my face,
Elſe would a maiden bluſh bºpaint my cheek.
- - Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet,
To Bepi'Nch. v. a. [from pinch..] To mark with pinches.
In their fides, arms, ſhoulders, all bepincht,
Ran thick the weals, red with blood, ready to ſtart out.
- Chapman's Iliad.
To Bepi'ss. v. a. [from piſ...] To wet with urine.
One cauſed, at a feaſt, a bagpipe to be played, which made
the knight bepiſ himſelf, to the great diverſion of all then pre-
ſent, as well as confuſion of himſelf. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
To BEQUE'ATH. v. a. ſcpy, Sax. a will.] To leave by will
to another. -
She had never been diſinherited of that goodly portion,
which nature had ſo liberally bequeathed to her. Sidney.
Let's chooſe executors, and talk of wills;
And yet not ſo—for what can we bequeath,
Save our depoſed bodies to the ground? Shakeſp. Richard II.
My father bequeath'd me by will but a poor thouſand crowns.
ºft. As you like it.
Methinks this age ſeems reſolved to bequeath poſterity ſome-
what to remember it. Glanville's Scepſis, c. 21.
For you, whom beſt I love and value moſt, -
But to your ſervice I bequeath my ghoſt. Dryden's Falles.
Beque’Athm ENT. n.ſ.. [from bequeath.] A legacy. Dić.
Begg'est. m. ſ. [from bequeath.] Something left by will; a
legacy. - - -
ſºclaimed the crown to himſelf; pretending an adoption,
or bequeſt, of the kingdom unto him by the Confeſſor.
- Hale's Common Law of England.
To BERA'ttle. v. a. [from rattle.] To rattle off; to make
a noiſe at in contempt. - -
Theſe are now the faſhion, and ſo berattle the common ſtage,
ſo they call them, that many, wearing rapiers, are afraid of
gooſequills, and dare ſcarce come thither. . . Shakeſp. Hamlet.
BE’RBERRY. n. ſ. [berberir, ſometimes written barberry, which
fee..] A berry of a ſharp taſte, uſed for pickles.
ome never ripen to be ſweet, as tamarinds, berberries, crabs,
ſloes, &amp;c. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 644.
To BEREAVE. v. n. preter. I bereaved, or bereft. [beneoplan,
Saxon.]
1. To ſtrip of; to deprive of. It has generally the particle of:
before the thing taken away.
Madam, you have bereſt me of all words, .
Only my blood ſpeaks to you in my veins. Shakespeare. M. of V.
That when thou com'ſt to kneel at Henry's feet,
Thou may'ſt bereave him of his wits with wonder.
. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. i.
There was never a prince hereaved of his dependences by
his council, except there hath been either an overgreatneſs in
one counſellor. Bacon's Eſſays.
... The ſacred prieſts with ready knives bereave -
The beaſts of life. Dryden's AEneid.
To deprive us of metals, is to make us mere ſavages; it is
to bereave us of all arts and ſciences, of hiſtory and letters, nay
of revealed religion too, that ineſtimable favour of heaven.
- Bentley's Sermons.
2. Sometimes it is uſed without of:
- - - Bereave me not,
Whereon I live! thy gentle looks, thy aid, -
Thy counſel, in this uttermoſt diſtreſs. Parad. Loft, b. x.
3. To take away from.
All your intereſt in thoſe territories
Is utterly bereft you, all is loſt. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
BERE'Av EMENT. m. ſ. [from bereave..] Deprivation. Dići.
BERE'FT. part, paſſ of bereave.
The chief of either ſide, bºrºft of life, -
Or yielded to the foe, concludes the ſtrife. Dryden's Foč.
BERG. See BURRow.
Be'RGAMot. n. ſ. [bergamotte, Fr.j
1. A ſort of pear, commonly called bargamot. See PeAR. -
2. A ſort of effence, or perfume, drawn from a fruit produced by
ingrafting a lemon tree on a bergamot pear ſtock.
3. A ſort of ſnuff, which is only clean tobacco, with a little of the
eſſence rubbed into it. -
BE'RGM Ast ER. m. ſ. [from ben;, Sax. and maſter.] The bai-
liff, or chief officer, among the Derbyſhire miners.
3. A BE'Ro-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E S
B F S
f
:-i
---
-
º
!
PE'rc Mote. n.ſ. [of benz, a mountain, and more, a mºtº
Saxon.] A court held upon a hill for deciding contrºłº
among the Derbyſhire miners. - Blount.
To BERHY's E. v.a. (from rhyme.] To celebrate in rhyme, or
verſes: a word of contempt. -
Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flow'd in: Laura to
his lady was but a kitchen wench; marry, ſhe had a better
love to berhyme her. Shakeſp. R ne, and Juliet.
I ſought no homage from the race that write ;
I kept, like Aſian monarchs, from their fight:
Poems I heeded, now berhymed ſo long, -
No more than thou, great George' a birthday ſong. Pºpe.
BERLI'N. m. ſ. [from Berlin, the city where they were firſt made.]
A coach of a particular form.
Beware of Latin authors all!
Northink your verſes ſterling,
Though with a golden pen you ſcrawl, * *
And ſcribble in a berlin. Swift.
BERME. n.ſ. [Fr. In fortification.] A ſpace of ground three,
four, or five feet wide, left without between the foot of the
rampart and the ſide of the mote, to prevent the earth from
falling down into the mote; and ſometimes it is paliſadoed.
Harris.
To BERob. v. a. [from rob.] To rob ; to plunder; to wrong
any, by taking away ſomething from him by ſtealth or vio-
lence.
She ſaid, ah deareſt lord ' what evil ſtar
On you hath frown'd, and pour'd his influence bad, , ,
That of yourſelf you thus berobbed are. Fairy Queen, b. viii.
BERRY... n.). [beniş, Sax. from beſian, to bear.] Any ſmall
fruit, with many ſeeds or ſmall ſtones. -
She ſmote the ground, the which ſtraight forth did yield
A fruitful olive tree, with berries ſpread,
That all the gods admir’d. Spenſ. Mui-patmos.
The ſtrawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholeſome berries thrive and ripen beſt,
Neighbour’d by fruit of baſeſt quality. Shakeſp. Henry V.
To BE'RR Y. v. n. [from the noun..] To bear berries.
BERRY-BEARING Cedar. [cedrus baccifera.]
The leaves are ſquamoſe, ſomewhat like thoſe of the cypreſs.
The katkins, or male flowers, are produced at remote diſtances
from the fruit on the ſame tree. The fruit is a berry, incloſ-
ing three hard ſeeds in each. The ſpecies are, 1. The yellow
berry-bearing cedar. 2. The Phoenician cedar. Theſe trees are
propagated by ſowing their berries, which are brought from the
Streights, in boxes of light ſandy earth; but they are at pre-
ſent very rare, and only to be found in ſome curious old collec-
tions. The wood is of great uſe in the Levant, is large tim-
ber, and may be thought the ſhittim-wood mentioned in the
Scripture, of which many of the ornaments to the famous tem-
ple of Solomon were made. It is accounted excellent for carv-
ing, and eſteemed equal almoſt to any ſort of timber for its
durableneſs. Millar.
RE'RRY-BEARING Orach. See MULBERRY BLIGHT.
BERT, is the ſame with our bright; in the Latin, illuſtris and
clarus. So Ecbert, eternally famous, or bright; Sigbert, famous
conquerour. And ſhe who was termed by the Germans Bertha,
was by the Greeks called Eudoxia, as is obſerved by Lintº randus.
Of the ſame ſort were theſe, Phaedrus, Epihanius, Photius,
Lampridius, Fulgentius, Illuſirius. Gibſon's Camden.
BFRTH. m. ſ. [with ſailors.] See BIRTH.
BE'RTRAM. m. ſ. [pyrethrum, Lat..] A ſort of herb, called alſo
ba/lard pellitory.
BE'RY L. m. ſ. [beryllus, Lat.] A kind of precious ſtone.
May thy billows roul aſhore
The heryl and the golden ore. Milton.
The bery! of our lapidaries is only a fine ſort of cornelian,
of a more deep bright red, ſometimes with a caſt of yellow,
and more tranſparent than the common cornelian.
I/oodward's Method of F.ſ.l.
To BF scr E'EN. v. a. [from ſcreen.] To cover with a ſcreen;
to ſhelter; to conceal. -
What man art thou, that thus befºreen’d in night,
So ſtumbleſt on my counſel ? Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
To BESE'EcH. v. a. pret. I bºſought, I have bºſaught. [from re-
can, Sax. verſacken, Dutch.]
1. To entreat; to ſupplicate; to implore; ſometimes before a
perſon. :
I beſeech you, Sir, pardon me; it is only a letter from my
brother, that I have not all over-read. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I beſeech thee for my ſon Oneſimus, whom I have begotten in
my bonds. Philemon, Io.
I, in the anguiſh of my heart, beſech you
To quit the dreadful purpoſe of your ſoul.
* To beg; to aſk; before a thing.
- But Eve fell humble, and hºſºught
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint. Par. Loſº, b. x.
Before I come to them, I beſeech your patience, whilſt I
T ſpeak ſºmething to ourſelves here preſent. Sprat.
o BESE'EM. v. n. [*ziemen, Dutch..] To become; to be fit;
to be decent for.
What form of ſpeech, or behaviour, lºftencih us in our pray-
Addiſon's Cato.
ers to Almighty God?
Th’s overſcht
Bºſtoms thcc not, in whom ſuch virtues ſpring.
Pºiºſº, b. i. Aarz. 78.
Verona's ancient citizens
Caſt by their brave beſeeming ornaments. -
Shakeſp. Romeo an et.
What thoughts he had, beſem; not . to ſay; d Juliet
Though ſome ſurmiſe he went to faſt and pray. Dryder.
BESE'EN. particip: [from bºſſe. Skinner. This word I have only
found in Spenser.] Adapted; adjuſted; becoming.
Forth came that ancient lord and aged queen,
Armed in antique robes down to the ground,
And ſad habiliments, right well heſeen. Fairy Q:ren, h. i.
To BESET. v. a. pret. I lºſt; I have lºſt. [berºan, Sax.]
1. To beſiege; to hem in; to incloſe, as with a ſiege.
Follow him that's fled;
The thicket is lºſt, he cannot ſcape. Słakºſ. T. G. ºf Jºr.
Now, Caeſar, let thy troops beſet our £4tCS,
And bar each avenue—
Cato ſhall open to himſelf a paſſage. Addison’s Cato.
I know thou look'ſt on me, as on a wretch
Pºſt with ills, and cover'd with misfortunes. Addison Catc.
2. To embarraſs; to perplex; to entangle without any means of
eſcape.
Now, daughter Sylvia, you are hard hºſt.
Shakespeare. Twº Gertiºren of Wºrona.
Thus Adam, fore lºſt, reply'd. A ſilton's Par. Lºft, b. x.
Sure, or I read her viſage much amiſs, &gt;
Or grief beſts her hard. Rowe's jane Shore.
We be in this world beſet with ſundry uneaſineſſes, diſtracted
with different deſires. Locke.
3. To waylay ; to ſurround.
Draw forth thy weapon; we're lºſt with thieves; -
Reſcue thy miſtreſs. Shakeſp. Taming ºf the Shrew.
The only righteous in a world perverſe,
And therefore hated, therefore ſo beſet
With foes, for daring ſingle to be juſt. Paradiſ Lºft, b. xi.
True fortitude I take to be the quiet poſſeſſion of a man's ſelf,
and an undiſturbed doing his duty, whatever evil beſets, or dan-
ger lies in his way. Locke.
4. To fall upon ; to harraſs. -
But they him ſpying, both with greedy force
At once upon him ran, and him beſet
With ſtrokes of mortal ſteel. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. ii.
To BESHRE'w.v. a. [The original of this word is ſomewhat ob-
ſcure ; as it evidently implies to wiſh ill, ſome derive it from
beſchryen, Germ. to enchant. Tºſºl, in his Book of Animals,
deduces it from the ſhrew mouſe, an animal, ſays he, ſo poiſo-
nous, that its bite is a ſevere curſe. A ſhrew likewiſe ſignifies
a ſcolding woman; but its origin is not known.]
1. To wiſh a curſe to.
Nay, quoth the cock; but I heſhrew us both,
If I believe a faint upon his oath. Dryden's Falles.
2. To happen ill to.
Bºſhrew thee, couſin, which did'ſt lead me forth
Of that ſweet way I was in to deſpair. Shakeſp. Richard II.
Now much bºſhrew my manners, and my pride, -
If Hermia meant to ſay Lyſander lied. Shakespeare.
BESI'D E. ! f b d d
Eºsings. ** [from be and ſide.]
1. At the ſide of another; near. .
Beſide the hearſe a fruitful palmtree grows,
Ennobled ſince by this great funeral. Fairfax, b. iii. ſ. 72.
He cauſed me to fit down hºſide him. Bacon’s N. Allantis.
- At his right hand, Victory
Sat eagle-wing’d: beſide him hung his bow. Par. Lºſº, b. vi.
Fair Lavinia fled the fire
Before the gods, and ſtood beſide her fire. Dryden's Żneid.
Fair is the kingcup that in meadow blows ;
Fair is the daiſy that beſide her grows. Gay's Pºfforals.
Now under hanging mountains, -
Reſide the falls of fountains,
Unheard, unknown,
He makes his moan.
2. Over and above. -
Doubtleſs, in man there is a nature found,
Beſide the ſenſes, and above them far. Sir J. Davies.
In brutes, beſides the exerciſe of ſenſitive perception and
imagination, there are lodged inſtinčts antecedent to their ima-
ginative faculty. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
We may be ſure there were great numbers of wiſe and
learned men, beſide thoſe whoſe names are in the chriſtian re-
cords, who took care to examine our Saviour's hiſtory.
Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
Precepts of morality, beſides the natural corruption of our
tempers, are abſtraćted from ideas of ſenſe.
Addiſon's Eſſay on the Georgiºs.
I'.…r, b. V. § 34.
Pope's St. Caecilia.
3. Not according to, though not contrary; as we ſay, ſome
* things are beſide nature, ſome are contrary to nature.
The Stoicks did hold a neceſſary connexion of cauſes; but
they believed, that God doth act prater &amp; contra naturam, fe-
2 Ades<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E S
B E S
2.
files and againſt nature. Bramhall againſ Hºlbe;.
..To ſay a thing is a chance, as it relates to ſecond cauſes, fig-
niñes no more, than that there are ſome events bºſide the know-
ledge, purpoſe, expectation, and power of ſecond cauſes. South.
Providence often diſpoſes of things by a method beſide, and
above the diſcoveries of man's reaſon. South.
. It is beſide my preſent buſineſs to enlarge upon this ſpecula-
tion. Locke.
4. Out of ; in a ſtate of deviating from.
You are too wilful blame,
And, ſince your coming here, have done
Enough to put him quite beſides his patience. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Of vagabords we ſay,
That they are ne'er beſide their way. Hudibras, cant. i.
Theſe may ſerve as landmarks, to ſhew what lies in the di-
rect way of truth, or is quite beſides it. Locke.
. Before a reciprocal pronoun, out of ; as, beſide himſelf; out of
the order of rational beings; out of his wits.
They be carried beſides themſelves, to whom the dignity of
publick prayer doth not diſcover ſomewhat more fitneſs in men
of gravity, than in children. Hooker, b. ii. § 31.
Only be patient, till we have appeas'd
The multitude, beſide themſelves with fear. Shakespeare.j. Caſ
Feſtus ſaid with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beſide thyſelf:
much learning doth make thee mad. Acis, xxvi. 24.
ESID E.
łºń. łady.
1. More than that; over and above.
If Caffio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life,
That makes me ugly; and, beſides, the Moor
May unfold me to him ; there ſtand I in peril. Othello.
Beſides, you know not, while you here attend,
Th’ unworthy fate of your unhappy friend. Dryden's Żn.
That man that doth not know thoſe things, which are of ne-
ceſſity for him to know, is but an ignorant man, whatever he
may know beſides. Tillotſon, ſerm. i.
Some wondered, that the Turk never attacks this treaſury.
But, beſides, that he has attempted it formerly with no ſucceſs,
it is certain the Venetians keep too watchful an eye.
Addison's Remarks on Italy.
2. Not in this number; beyond this claſs; not included here.
And the men ſaid unto Lot, haſt thou here any beſides 2
Genºſis, xix. 12.
Outlaws and robbers, who break with all the world beſides,
muſt keep faith among themſelves. Locke.
All that we feel of it, begins and ends
In the ſmall circle of our foes or friends;
To all beſide as much an empty ſhade,
An Eugene living, as a Caeſar dead. Pope’s Eſſay on Man.
And dead, as living, 'tis our author's pride
Still to charm thoſe who charm the world beſide. Pope.
Besi'DERY. n.ſ. A ſpecies of pear, which ſee.
To BF si's G.E. v. a. [from ſiege.] To beleaguer; to lay ſiege
to; to beſet with armed forces; to endeavour to win a town
or fortreſs, by ſurrounding it with an army, and forcing the
defendants, either by violence or famine, to give admiſſion.
And he ſhall beſige thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
fenced walls come down. Deut. xxviii. 52.
The queen, with all the northern earls and lords,
Intend here to bºſige you in your caſtle. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Besi'EGER. m. ſ. [from beſiege.] One employed in a ſiege.
There is hardly a town taken, in the common forms, where
the beſiegers have not the worſe of the bargain. Swift.
To BEslu'BBER. v. a. [from ſlubber.] To dawb; to ſmear.
He perſuaded us to tickle our noſes with ſpeargraſs, and make
them bleed; and then beffabler our garments with it, and ſwear
it was the blood of true men. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
To BFsM E/AR. v. a. [from ſmear.]
1- To bedawb; to overſpread with ſomething that ſticks on.
He lay as in a dream of deep delight,
Peſmear'd with precious balm, whoſe virtuous might
Did heal his wounds. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. ii.
That face of his I do remember well;
Yet when I ſaw it laſt, it was beſmear'd
As black as Vulcan. Shakespeare. Twelfth Night.
Firſt Moloch horrid king' beſnear'd with blood
Of human ſacrifice, and parents tears. Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
Her fainting hand let fall the ſword, beſnear'd
With blood. Sir j. Denham.
Her guſhing blood the pavement all beſmear'd. Dryden.
o ſoil; to foul.
My honour would not let ingratitude
So much beſmear it. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
'NSYS sºrch. v. a. To ſoil; to diſcóſour.
Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no ſoil of cautel doth beſmirch
The virtue of his will. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Our gayneſs, and our gilt, are all beſmirch'd
With rainy marching in the painful field. Shakeſp, Henry V.
To Bes'Mo'k E. v. a. [from ſnake.]
1. To foul with ſmoke,
2. To harden or dry in ſmoke. -
To BFsMu'r. v. a. [from ſºut..] To ticken with ſmoke or foºt.
B. m. ſ. [be]'m, beyma, Saxon.] An inſtrument to ſweep
W1th.
Bacon commended an old man that ſold hºſºn; ; a proud
young fellow came to him for a bººm upon truſt; the old man
ſaid, Borrow of thy back and belly, they will never aſk thee a-
gain; I ſhall dun thee every day. Bacon's Apºlºgns.
I will ſweep it with the beſºn of deſtruction, faith the Lord
of hoſts, Iſaiah, xiv. 22.
To BEso'RT. v. a. [from ſºrt.] To ſuit; to fit; to become.
Such men as may beſºrt your age, -
And know themſelves and you. Shakespeare. King Lear.
B Eso'RT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Company; attendance; train.
I crave fit diſpoſition for my wife,
With ſuch accommodation and ſº t,
As levels with her breeding.
To Beso"t. v. a. [from ſet.]
1. To infatuate; to ſtupify ; to dull; to take away the ſenſes.
Swiniſh gluttony
Ne'er looks to heav'n amidſt his gorgeous feaſt,
But, with beſºtted baſe ingratitude,
Crams and blaſphemes his feeder. Milton.
Or fools bºſºtted with their crimes,
That know not how to ſhift betimes. Hudºras, p. iii. c. ii.
He is beſotted, and has loſt his reaſon; and what then can
there be for religion to take hold of him by. South.
2. To make to doat.
Shakespeare Othº.
Paris, you ſpeak
Like one beſotted on your ſweet delights. -
Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºffda.
Truſt not thy beauty; but reſtore the prize,
Which he, bºſotted on that face and eyes,
Would rend from us. Dryden's Fables.
BEso'UGHT. [part. paſſive of beſeech; which ſee.]
Haſten to appeaſe
Th’ incenſed Father, and th’ incenſed Son,
While pardon may be found, in time beſºught.
Milt. Paradiſe Lºſt, b. v. l. 848.
To BESPA'NGLE. v. a. [from ſpangle.] To adorn with ſpan-
gles; to beſprinkle with ſomething ſhining. -
Not Berenice's locks firſt roſe ſo bright, -
The heav'ns beſpangling with diſhevell'd light. Pope.
To BESPA'TTER. v. a. [from ſpatter.] To ſoil by throwing
filth; to ſpot or ſprinkle with dirt or water.
Thoſe who will not take vice into their boſoms, ſhall yet
have it beſpatter their faces. Government of the Targue, $ 5.
His weapons are the ſame which women and children uſe;
a pin to ſcratch, and a ſquirt to bºſpatter. Swift, lett. lxix.
Fair Britain, in the monarch bleſt,
Whom never faction could beſpatter. Swift.
To BESPA'wl. v. a. [from ſpawl.] . To dawb with ſpittle.
To BESPE'AK. v. a. I beſpoke, or beſpake ; I have beſpoke, or be-
ſpoken. [from ſpeak.]
1. To order, or entreat any thing beforehand, or againſt a future
tlne.
If you will marry, make your loves to me;
My lady is beſpoke. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Here is the cap your worſhip did beſpeak.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
When Baboon came to Strutt's eſtate, his tradeſmen waited
upon him, to hºſpeak his cuſtom. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of Ž Bull.
A heavy writer was to be encouraged, and accordingly many
thouſand copies were beſpoke. Swift.
2. To make way by a previous apology.
My preface looks as if I were afraid of my reader, by ſote-
dious a beſpeaking of him. Dryden.
3. To forebode; to tell ſomething beforehand.
Thy ſtarted fears beſpoke dangers, and formed ominous prog-
noſticks, in order to ſcare the allies. Swift, Examin. N° 45.
4. To ſpeak to ; to addreſs. This ſenſe is chiefly poetical.
With hearty words her knight ſhe 'gan to chear,
And, in her modeſt manner, thus beſpake, -
Dear knight. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. i. ſtanz. 8.
At length with indignation thus he broke
His awful ſilence, and the powers beſpoke. Dryden.
Then ſtaring on her with a ghaſtly look,
And hollow voice, he thus the queen beſpoke. Dryden.
5. To betoken; to ſhew.
When the abbot of St. Martin was born, he had ſo little of
the figure of a man, that it beſpoke him rather a monſter. Locke.
He has diſpatch'd me hence,
With orders that beſpeak a mind compos'd. . Addison's Cato.
BEspe/AKER. m. ſ. [from beſpeak.] He that beſpeaks anything.
They mean not with love to the beſpeaker of the work, but
delight in the work itſelf. J/otton’s Archite&amp;ure.
To BEspeckle. v. a. [from ſpeckle.] To mark with ſpeckles,
or ſpots. -
To Bés PE'w. v. a. [from ſpew.] To dawb with ſpew or vomit.
To BESP1’c E. v. a. [from ſpice.] To ſeaſon with ſpices.
Thou might'ſt beſpice a cup
To give mine enemy alaſting wink, Shakeſp. //inter's 7%
o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E S
B E S
To BEspí'r. v. a. I beſºat, or leſbit; I have lºſpit, or bºſpitten.
[from ſhit..] To dawb with ſpittle. -
He spoke. [irreg. particip. from beſpeak; which ſee.]
To Bespo"t. v. a. [from ſpot.] To mark with ſpots.
Mildew reſts on the wheat, bºſpotting the ſtalks with a dif-
ferent colour from the natural. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To BESPRE'AD. v. a. [from ſpread..] To ſpread over; to co-
"ver OWer.
His nuptial bed,
With curious needles wrought, and painted flowers beſpread.
Dryden.
The globe is equally beſpread; ſo that no place wants proper
inhabitants. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
*To Be spri'NKLE. v. a. [from ſprinkle.] To ſprinkle over; to
ſcatter over.
He indeed, imitating the father poet, whoſe life he had alſo
written, hath beſprinkled his work with many fabuloſities.
- Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 8.
A purple flood
Flows from the trunk, that welters in the blood:
The bed beſprinkles, and bedevs the ground. Dryden.
To Bespu'rt ER. v. a...[from ſºutter.] To ſputter over ſome-
thing; to dawb any thing by ſputtering, or throwing out ſpit-
tle upon it. -
Best. adj. theſº from good. [bet, betena, betrº, good,
better, beſt, Saxon.] - - - -
1. Moſt good; that which has good qualities in the higheſt de-
ree.
g And he will take your fields, even the beſt of them, and give
them to his ſervants. 1 Samuel, viii. 14.
When the beft things are not poſſible, the beſt may be made
of thoſe that are. Hooker, b.v. § 9.
When he is beſ?, he is a little more than a man; and when
he is worſt, he is a little better than a beaſt. Shakeſp. M. of /en.
I think it a good argument to ſay, the infinitely wiſe God
hath made it ſo : and therefore it is beſt. But it is too much
confidence of our own wiſdom, to ſay, I think it beft, and
therefore God hath made it ſo. Locke.
An evil intention perverts the beſt ačtions, and makes them
fins. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 213.
2. The beſt. The utmoſt power; the ſtrongeſt endeavour; the
moſt ; the higheſt perfection.
I profeſs not talking: only this, -
flet each man do his beſt. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
The duke did his beft to come down. Bacon's War with Sp.
He does this to the beſt of his power. ... Lockº.
My friend, ſaid he, our ſport is at the beft. Addison Ovid.
3. To make the beft. To carry to its greateſt perfeótion; to im-
prove to the utmoſt,
Let there be freedom to carry their commodities where they
may make the beſt of them, except there be ſome ſpecial cauſe
of caution. Bacon.
His father left him an hundred drachmas; Alnaſchar, in or-
der to make the beſt of it, laid it out in glaſſes. Addiſon. Spect.
We ſet ſail, and made the beſt of our way, till we were
forced, by contrary winds, into St. Remo. Addiſon on Italy.
Best. adv...[from well.] In the higheſt degree of goodneſs.
He ſhall dwell in that place where he ſhall chooſe in one of
thy gates, where it liketh him beft. Deut. xxiii. 16.
Best is ſometimes uſed in compoſition.
Theſe latter beſt-be-truſt-ſpies had ſome of them further in-
ſtructions, to draw off the beſt friends and ſervants of Perkin,
by making remonſtrances to them, how weakly his enterprize
and hopes were built. Bacon's Henry VII.
By this law of loving even our enemies, the chriſtian religion
diſcovers itſelf to be the moſt generous and beſinatured inſtitu-
tion that ever was in the world. º V.
To BESTA'IN. v. a. [from ſain..] To mark with ſtains; to
ſpot.
p We will not line his thin bºſłained cloke
With our pure honours. Shakeſp. King john.
To BestE'AD. v. a. I beſied; I have beſied. [from ſtead.]
1. To profit.
Hence vain deluding joys,
The brood of folly, without father bred,
How little you beſtead,
Or fill the fixed mind with all your toys.
2. To treat; to accommodate.
And they ſhall paſs through it hardly leſlead, and hungry.
Iſaiah, viii. 21.
Milton,
BE'st1AL. adj. [from bedſ.]
1. Belonging to a beaſt, or to the claſs of beaſts.
His wild diſorder'd walk, his haggard eyes,
Did all the leftial citizens ſurprize. Dryden's Hind and P.
2. Having the qualities of beaſts ; brutal; below the dignity of
reaſon or humanity; carnal.
I have loſt the immortal part of myſelf, and what remains is
bºſłial. Shakeſp. Othello.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury, -
And hºſtial appetite, in change of luſt. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
For thoſe, the race of Iſrael oft forſook
Their living ſtrength, and, unfrequented, left
His righteois altar, bowing lowly down -
To bº/ial gods. 447tan's Paradiſ Lºſº, b. i. 1. 435.
The things promiſed are not groſs and carnal, ſuch as may
court and gratify the moſt beſial part of us. Decay of Piety.
BESTIA'LIIT ... n.ſ.. [from hºſtial.] The quality of beaſts; dé-
generacy from human nature.
What can be a greater abſurdity, than to affirm beftality to
be the effence of humanity, and darkneſs the center of light
Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
BE'stially, adv. [from lºftial.] Brutally; in a manner be-
low humanity.
To BEST!'ck. v. a. preter. I lºftuck, I have lºſłuck. [from ſick.]
To ſtick over with any thing; to mark any thing by infixing
points or ſpots here and there.
Truth ſhall retire,
Beſ?uck with ſland’rous darts; and works of faith
Rarely be found. Milt. Par. Lºft, b. xii. l. 536.
To Best I'R. v. a. [from ſºir.]
1. To put into vigorous action. It is ſeldom uſed otherwiſe than
with the reciprocal pronoun.
As when men wont to watch
Qn duty, ſleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouze and beſtir themſelves ere well awake.
Bºſłirs her then, and from each tender ſtalk
Whatever earth, all-bearing mother, yields,
She gathers.
But, as a dog that turns the ſpit,
Bºſtirs himſelf, and plies his feet
To climb the wheel, but all in vain,
His own weight brings him down again. Hudibras, p. ii. c. iii.
What aileth them, that they muſt needs beftir themſelves to
get in air, to maintain the creature's life? Ray on Creation.
2. It is uſed by Shakeſpeare with a common word.
I am ſcarce in breath, my lord.—No marvel you have ſo be-
ſtirred your valour, you cowardly raſcall Shakeſp. King Lear.
To BESTO.W. v. a. [beſieden, Dutch.]
1. To give ; to confer upon.
All men would willingly have yielded him praiſe; but his
nature was ſuch as to beſtow it upon himſelf, before any could
give it. Sidney.
All the dedicate things of the houſe of the Lord did they be-
Jīow upon Baalim. 2 Chron. xxiv. 7.
Sir Julius Caeſar had, in his office, the diſpoſition of the fix
clarks places; which he had beſtowed to ſuch perſons as he
thought fit. Clarendon.
2. To give as charity.
Our Saviour doth plainly witneſs, that there ſhould not be
as much as a cup of cold water beſtowed for his ſake, without re-
ward. Hooker, b. ii. § 8.
And though he was unſatisfied in getting,
Which was a ſin; yet in be/lowing, madam,
He was moſt princely. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Spain to your gift alone her Indies owes;
For what the pow'rful takes not, he beſtows. Dryden.
You always exceed expectations: as if yours was not your
own, but to be/low on wanting merit. Dryden's Fables, Ded.
3. To give in marriage.
Good rev'rend father, make my perſon yours;
And tell me how you would beſtow yourſelf. Shakespeare.
I could have beſtowed her upon a fine gentleman, who ex-
tremely admired her. Tatler, N° 75.
4. To give as a preſent.
§. oil and incenſe on the fire they throw,
And fat of vićtims which his friends beſtow.
5. To apply.
The ſea was not the duke of Marlborough's element; other-
wiſe the whole force of the war would infallibly have been be-
fowed there. Swift.
6. To lay out upon.
And thou ſhalt bytow that money for whatſoever thy ſoul
luſteth after, for oxen, for ſheep, or for wine. Deut. xiv. 26.
7: To lay up; to ſtow ; to place.
And when he came to the tower, he took them from their
hand, and beſtowed them in the houſe. 2 Kings, v. 24.
BEsto'w ER. n.ſ.. [from bytow.] Giver; he that confers any
thing; diſpoſer.
They all agree in making one ſupreme God; and that there
are ſeveral beings that are to be worſhipped under him; ſome as
the bºffewers of thrones, but ſubordinate to the Supreme.Stillingſ.
BESTRA'UGHT. particip. [Of this participle I have not found the
verb ; by analogy we may derive it from beſirač; ; perhaps it is
corrupted from diſtraught.] Diſtraćted; mad; out of one's
ſenſes; out of one's wits.
Aſk Marian, the fat alewife, if ſhe knew me not. What I
I am not beftraught. Shakeſp. Tam, the Shrew.
To BESTRE'w.v. a. particip, paſſ bºſſrewed, or bºſſrown. [from
firew.] To ſprinkle over.
So thick beſ?rown,
Abjećt and loſt lay theſe, covering the flood. Par. Leſ, h. i.
To * v. a lºſtrid; I have beſirid, or leſłridden. [from
t ide.
,'. ſtride over anything; to have anything between one's legs.
Why
Milton.
Par. Lºft, b. v.
Dryden:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E. T.
Why, man, he doth by ride the narrow world
Like a coloſſus. Shakeſp. Julius Caſar.
Make him beftride the ocean, and mankind
Aſk his conſent, to uſe the ſea and wind.
2. To ſtep over,
Jſ aller.
That I ſee thee here,
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart,
Than when I firſt my wedded miſtreſs ſaw
Bºſłride my threſhold. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
3- It is often uſed of riding.
He beſirides the lazy pacing clouds,
And ſails upon the boſom of the air. Shakeſp. Rom, andjul.
That horſe, that thou ſo often haſt beſirid: -
That horſe, that I ſo carefully have dreſs'd. Shakeſp. R. II.
Venetians do not more uncouthly ride,
Than did their lubber ſtate mankind beſtride. Dryden.
The bounding ſteed you pompouſly beſiride,
Shares with his lord the pleaſure and the pride. Pope.
A- It is uſed ſometimes of a man ſtanding over ſomething which
he defends.
He beftrid
An o'erpreſs'd Roman, and i' th' conſul’s view
Slew three oppoſers: Tarquin's ſelf he met,
And ſtruck him on his knee. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Let us rather
Hold faſt the mortal ſword; and, like good men,
Bºſłride our downfaln birthdom. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
If thou ſee me down in the battle, and bºſtride me, ſo ; ’tis
a point of friendſhip. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
He doth beſtride a bleeding land,
Gaſping for life, undergreat Bolingbroke. Shakespeare Henry IV.
To BESTU'D. v. a. [from ſlud.] To adorn with ſtuds, or ſhin-
ing prominences.
Th’ unſought diamonds
Would ſo emblaze the forehead of the deep,
And ſo beftud with ſtars, that they below
Would grow inur'd to light. Milton.
BET. n.ſ. [pebbian, to wager; peb, a wager, Sax. from which
the etymologiſts derive bet. I ſhould rather imagine it to come
from bezan, to mend, encreaſe, or better, as a bet encreaſes the
original wager.] A wager; ſomething laid to be won upon
certain conditions.
The hoary fool, who many days
Has ſtruggl’d with continu'd ſorrow,
Renews his hope, and blindly lays
The deſp'rate bet upon tomorrow.
His pride was in piquette,
Newmarket fame, and judgment at a bet. Pope.
To Bet. v. a. [from the noun..] To wager; to ſtake at a
wager.
He drew a good bow: and dead? John of Gaunt loved him
well, and betted much upon his head. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
He flies the court for want of clothes,
Cries out 'gainſt cocking, ſince he cannot bet. B. Johnſon.
The god, unhappily engag’d,
Complain'd, and ſigh'd, and cry’d, and fretted,
Loſt ev'ry earthly thing he betted.
BET. The old preterite of beat.
He ſtaid for a better hour, till the hammer had wrought and
bet the party more pliant. Bacon's Henry VII.
To BETA'ke. v. a. preter. I betook; part, paſſ, betaken. [from
take.]
I. To take ; to ſeize: an obſolete ſenſe.
Then to his hands that writ he did betake,
Which he diſcloſing read. Fairy Queen, b. i. c. xii. ſ. 25.
2. To have recourſe to ; with the reciprocal pronoun.
The adverſe party betaking itſelf to ſuch practices as men em-
brace, when they behold things brought to deſperate extremi-
ties. Hooker, b. iv. § 14.
Thou tyrant!
Do not repent theſe things; for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can ſtir: therefore betake thee
To nothing but deſpair. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
The reſt, in imitation, to like arms
Betook them, and the neighb'ring hills up tore.
Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi. l. 663.
3. To apply; with the reciprocal pronoun.
With eaſe ſuch fond chimeras we purſue,
As fancy frames for fancy to ſubdue:
But when ourſelves to action we betake,
It ſhuns the mint, like gold that chymiſts make. Dryden.
As my obſervations have been the light whereby I have hi-
therto ſteer'd my courſe, ſo I here betake myſelf to them again.
Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Prior.
Prior.
4. To move; to remove.
Soft ſhe withdrew ; and, like a wood nymph light,
Oread or Dryad, or of Delia's train,
Betook her to the groves. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ix. l. 389.
They both betoo; them ſeveral ways;
Both to deſtroy. 44ilton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. l. 610.
To BETEEM. v. a. [from teen.] To bring forth; to beſtow ;
to give.
Vol. I.
So would I, ſaid th' enchanter, glad and fain
Beteen to you his ſword, you to defend;
But that this weapon's pow'r I well have kend,
To be contrary to the work that ye intend. Fairy Q. b. ii.
Belike for want of rain; which I could well
Beteen them from the tempeſt of mine eyes.
- Shakespeare Midſummer Night's Dream.
To BETH1'NK. v. a. Ibethought; I have bethought. [from think.]
To recal to reflection; to bring back to conſideration, or re-
collection. It is generally uſed with the reciprocal pronoun,
and ºf before the ſubject of thought.
They were ſooner in danger than they could almoſt lethink
themſelves of change. Sidney, b. ii.
I have bethqught me of another fault. Shakespeare Meaſ fºr M.
I, better bethinking myſelf, and miſliking his determination,
gave him this order. - Raleigh's Eſſays.
He himſelf,
Inſatiable of glory, had loſt all: -
Yet of another plea bethought him ſoon. Parad. Regained.
The nets were laid, yet the birds could never bethink them-
ſºlves, till hamper'd, and paſt recovery. L’Eſtrange.
Cherippus, then in time yourſelf bethink,
And what your rags will yield by auction ſink. Dryden.
A little conſideration may allay his heat, and make him be-
think himſelf, whether this attempt be worth the venture. Locke.
BE/I HLEHEM. m.ſ. [See BEDLAM.] An hoſpital for lu-
naticks. -
BETHLEHEMITE. m. ſ. [See BEDLAMIT E.] A lunatick; an
inhabitant of a madhouſe. -
BETHo'UGHT. particip. [from bethink; which ſee.]
To BETHRA'l. v. a. [from thrall.] To enſlave; to conquer;
to bring into ſubjection.
Ne let that wicked woman 'ſcape away,
For ſhe it is that did my lord bet/ral, Shakespeare. King john.
To BETHu'MP. v. a. [from thump.] To beat; to lay blows
upon : a ludicrous word.
I was never ſo lethumpt with words, -
Since firſt I call'd my brother's father dad. Shaft. King jºhn.
To Be TI'DE. v. m. pret. It hetided, or betid; part, paſſ betid.
[from cib, Sax. See Tide.]
1. To happen to ; to befal; to bechance; whether good or bad.
Said he then to the Palmer, reverend fire,
"What great misfortune hath betid this knight? Fairy Queen.
But ſay, if our deliverer up to heav'n
Muſt reaſcend, what will hetide the few,
His faithful, left among th' unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth? Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xii. 1. 480.
2. Sometimes it has to.
Neither know I,
What is betid to Cloten; but remain
Perplext in all.
3. To come to paſs; to fall out; to happen.
She, when her turn was come her tale to tell,
Told of a ſtrange adventure that betided,
Betwixt the fox and th’ ape by him miſguided. Spenſ. Hulb.
In winter's tedious nights, ſit by the fire
With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales -
Of woful ages, long ago betid. Shakeſp. Richard II.
Let me hear from thee by letters,
Of thy ſucceſs in love; and what news elſe
Betideth here in abſence of thy friend. Shakespeare. Two Gent. of War.
4. To become. .
If he were dead, what would betide of thee? Shakespeare. Rich. III.
BETI'ME. adv. [from by and time; that is, by the proper
BET I'MEs. ; time.]
I. Seaſonably; early.
Send ſuccours, lords, and ſtop the rage betime.
Shakespeare Henry VI.p. ii.
To meaſure life, learn thou betimes, and know
Toward ſolid good what leads the neareſt way. Par. Reg.
2. Soon; before long time has paſſed.
Whiles they are weak, betimes with them contend;
For when they once to perfect ſtrength do grow,
Strong wars they make. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. iv. ſ. 34.
He tires betimes, that ſpurs too faſt betimes. Sh Rich. Iſ.
There be ſome have an over early ripeneſs in their years,
which fadeth betimes : theſe are firſt, ſuch as have brittle wits,
the edge whereof is ſoon turned. Bacon's Eſſays.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; that is,
enter upon a religious courſe betimes. Tillotſon, ſermon i:
Short is the date, alas! of modern rhymes;
And 'tis but juſt to let them live begimes. Pope's Eſſay on Crit.
3. Early in the day.
He that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in the morn-
ing, may ſleep the ſounder next day. Shakespeare. Meaſure for Meaſure.
They roſe betimes in the morning, and offered ſacrifice.
1 4 ſacc. iv. 52.
B6/T L E. An Indian plant, called Lic?
BETR E. } m. ſ. An Indian plant, called water pepper. ! Cº.
To BF 1 o'k E.N. v. a. [from token.]
1. To ſgnify; to mark; to repreſent.
We know not wherefore churches ſhould be the worſº, if, at
3 B this
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B. F. T
f} E. T.
-
this time, when they are delivered into God's own poſſeſſion,
ceremonies fit to betaken ſuch intents, and to accompany ſuch
aćtions, be uſual. Hooker, b. v. § 12:
2. To foreſhew ; to preſignify.
The kindling azure, and the mountain's brow,
Illum'd with fluid gold, his near approach
Betoken glad. Thomſºn's Summer, 1.86.
Be'ron Y. n.ſ.. [betanica, Lat.] A plant.
The leaves are green, rough, and crenated on the edges: the
flowers are diſpoſed in a ſpike; the upper creſt of the flower is
advanced, and divided into two ſegments; the beard, or lower
part of the flower, is divided into three, and the middle ſeg-
ment is bifid; each flower is, for the moſt part, ſucceeded by
four naked ſeeds. The ſpecies are, 1. Common or wood be-
tony. 2. Betony, with a white flower. 3. Greater Daniſh betony.
The firſt is very common in woods and ſhady places, and is
greatly eſteemed as a vulnerary herb. Millar.
BEto'ok. [irreg. pret. from betake; which ſee.]
To BEto'ss. v. a. [from toſs.] To diſturb; to agitate; to put
into violent motion.
What ſaid my man, when my heteſd ſoul
Did not attend him as we rode : Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
To BETRAY. v. a. [trahir, Fr.]
I. * give into the hands of enemies by treachery, or breach of
truſt.
If ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, ſeeing there is
no wrong in mine hands, the God of our fathers look thereon,
and rebuke it. 1 Chron. xii. 17.
Jeſus ſaid unto them, the Son of man ſhall be betrayed into
the hands of men. Matt. xvii. 22.
For fear is nothing elſe but a betraying of the ſuccours which
reaſon offereth. J/iſdom, xvii. 1 2.
He was not to be won, either by promiſe or reward, to be-
tray the city. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
2. To diſcover that which has been entruſted to ſecrecy.
3. To make known ſomething that were better concealed.
Be ſwift to hear, but be cautious of your tongue, leſt you
betray your ignorance. J/atts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
4. To make liable to fall into ſomething inconvenient.
His abilities created in him great confidence; and this was
like enough to betray him to great errours, and many enemies.
King Charles.
The bright genius is ready to be ſo forward, as often betrays
itſelf into great errours in judgment. //atts.
5. To ſhow ; to diſcover; in a neutral ſenſe.
The Veian and the Gabian tow’rs ſhall fall,
And one promiſcuous ruin cover all;
Nor, after length of years, a ſtone betray
The place where once the very ruins lay. Addison on Italy.
BETRA'YER. m. ſ. [from betray.] He that betrays; a traitor.
The wiſe man doth ſo ſay of fear, that it is a betrayer of the
forces of reaſonable underſtanding. Hocker, b. v. § 3.
You caſt down your courage through fear, the betrayer of
all ſuccours which reaſon can afford. Sirj. Hayward.
They are only a few betrayers of their country; they are to
purchaſe coin, perhaps, at half price, and vend it among us to
the ruin of the publick. - Swift.
To BETRI'M. v. a. [from trim.] To deck; to dreſs; to grade;
to adorn ; to embelliſh ; to beautify; to decorate.
Thy banks with pionied and tulip'd brims,
Which ſpungy April at thy heſt betrims,
To make cold nymphs chaſte crowns. Shakeſp. Tºmpºſ.
To Betro'TH. v. a. [from troth; betrowen, Dutch.j
1. To contract to any one, in order to marriage; to affiance.
He, in the firſt flower of my freſheſt age,
Betrothed me unto the only heir -
Of a moſt mighty king, moſt rich and ſage. Fairy Q. b. i.
* To her, my lord,
Was Ibetrathed, ere I Hermia ſaw. Shakespeare. Midſum. N. Dr.
By ſoul's publick promiſe ſhe
Was ſold then, and betroth'd to Victory. Cowley's Davidºis.
2. To unite any one to another by promiſe of marriage.
And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath
not taken her let him go and return unto his houſe.
Deut. xx. 7.
3. To nominate to a biſhoprick, in order to conſecration.
If any perſon be conſecrated a biſhop to that church, where-
unto he was not before betrothed, he ſhall not receive the habit
of conſecration, as not being canonically promoted. Ayliff.
To BETRU'st. v. a. [from truſt.] To entruſt; to put into the
power of another, in confidence of fidelity.
Betruſi him with all the good, which our own capacity will
allow us, or his ſufficiency encourage us to hope for, either in
this life, or that to come. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. iii. c. 5.
...Whatſoever you would betruſ to your memory, let it be
diſpoſed in a proper method. Watts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
BETTER. adj. The comparative of good. [bet, good, becera, better,
Sax.] Having good qualitics in a greater degree than ſome-
thing elſe. See GOOD.
He has a horſe better than the Neapolitan's; a better bad
habit of frowning than the count Palatine.
Shakeſp. /l/archant of Wenice.
I have ſeen better faces in my time,
Than ſtand on any ſhoulders that I ſee
Before me at this inſtant. Slakºff. King Izar.
Having a deſire to depart, and be with Chriſt; which is far
better. Phil. i. 23.
The BETTER.
1. The ſuperiority; the advantage; with the particle of before
him, or that, over which the advantage is gained.
The Corinthians that morning, as the days before, had the
better. Sidney, b. ii.
The voyage of Drake and Hawkins was unfortunate; yet,
in ſuch ſort, as doth not break our preſcription, to have had
the better { the Spaniards. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
Dionyſius, his countryman, in an epiſtle to Pompey, after
an expreſs compariſon, affords him the better of Thucydides.
- Brown's Vulgar Erreurs, b. i. c. 8.
You think fit
To get the better of me, and you ſhall;
Since you will have it ſo—I will be yours. Southern”.
The gentleman had always ſo much the better of the ſatyriſt,
that the perſons touched did not know where to fix their re-
ſentment. Prior, Preface to his Poems.
2. Improvement; as, for the better, ſo as to improve it.
If I have altered him any where fºr the better, I muſt at the
ſame time acknowledge, that I could have done nothing with-
out him. Dryden's Fab. Preface.
BETTER. adv. [comparative of well.] Well, in a greater degree.
Then it was better with me than now. Hoſ. vii.
Better a mechanick rule were ſtretched or broken, than a
great beauty were omitted. Dryd. Wirg. Dedication.
The better to underſtand the extent of our knowledge, one
thing is to be obſerved. Locke.
He that would know the idea of infinity, cannot do better,
than by conſidering to what infinity is attributed. Lake.
To Be"TTER. v. a. [from the noun J
1. To improve; to meliorate.
The very cauſe of his taking upon him our nature, was to
better the quality, and to advance the condition thereof.
Hooker, b. viii. § 54.
He is furniſhed with my opinion, which is bettered with his
own learning. - Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
Heir to all his lands and goods, -
Which I have better'd, rather than decreas'd.
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
But Jonathan, to whom both hearts were known,
With well-tim'd zeal, and with an artful care, -
Reſtor'd, and better'd ſoon, the nice affair. Cowley's David.
The church of England, the pureſt and beſt reformed
church in the world; ſo well reformed, that it will be found
eaſier to alter than to better its conſtitution. South.
The Romans took pains to hew out a paſſage for theſe lakes,
to diſcharge themſelves, for the bettering of the air. Addiſon.
2. To ſurpaſs; to exceed.
The works of nature do always aim at that which cannot
be bettered. Hooker, b. i. § 5.
He hath born himſelf beyond the promiſe of his age; he
hath, indeed, better bettered expectation, than you muſt expect
of me to tell you. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
What you do
Still betters what is done; when you ſpeak ſweet,
I'd have you do it ever. Shakeſp. // inter's Tak.
3. To advance. -
The king thought his honour would ſuffer, during a treaty,
to better a party. Bacºn's Henry VII.
BETTER. n.ſ. [from the adječtive..] Superiour in good-
neſs.
Their betters would be hardly found, if they did not live a-
mong men, but in a wilderneſs by themſelves. Hooker, t. i.
The courteſy of nations allows you my better, in that you
are the firſt-born. Shakeſp. As you like it.
That ye thus hoſpitably live,
Is mighty grateful to your letters,
And makes e'en gods themſelves your debtors. Pyºr.
I have ſome gold and ſilver by me, and ſhall be able to make
a ſhift, when many of my letters are ſtarving. Swift.
BE'ſ roR. m. ſ. [from to bet..] One that lays betts or wa-
rerS.
I obſerved a ſtranger among them, of a genteeler behaviour
than ordinary ; but notwithſtanding he was a very fair bettor,
nobody would take him up. Addison. Speciator, N° 126.
BETT Y. m. ſ. [probably a cant word, without etymology.] An
inſtrument to break open doors.
Record the ſtratagems, the arduous exploits, and the noćtur-
nal ſcalades of needy heroes, deſcribing the powerful bitty, or
the artful picklock. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of 7. Biºl.
BET we'EN. trºp. [bet peonan, betpınan, Saxon; from the ori-
ginal word Tya, two.]
1. In the intermediate ſpace.
What modes
Of ſmell the headlong lioneſs between,
And hound ſagacious on the tainted green 2 Pfe.
f 2. Fron
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B E W
B E Y
2. From one to another; noting intercourſe. -
He ſhould think himſelf unhappy, if things ſhould go ſo he-
tween them, as he ſhould not be able to acquit himſelf of in-
gratitude towards them both. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Belonging to two in partnerſhip.
I aſk, whether Caſtor and Pollux, with only one ſoul between
them, which thinks and perceives in one what the other is
never conſcious of, are not two diſtinét perſons 2 Locke.
4. Bearing relation to two.
If there be any diſcord or ſuits between them and any of the
family, they are compounded and appeaſed. Bacon's Atlantis.
Friendſhip requires, that it be between two at leaſt; and there
can be no friendſhip where there are not two friends. South.
5. In ſeparation, or diſtinétion of one from the other.
Their natural conſtitutions put ſo wide a difference between
ſome men, that art would never maſter. Locke.
Children quickly diſtinguiſh between what is required of
them, and what not. Locke.
6. Between is properly uſed of two, and among of more; but per-
haps this accuracy is not always preſerved.
Betwixt, prep. [betpyx, Saxon. It has the ſame ſignification
with between, and is indifferently uſed for it.]
1. In the midſt of two:
Hard by, a cottage chimney ſmokes,
From betwixt two aged oaks. Milton.
Methinks, like two black ſtorms on either hand,
Our Spaniſh army and your Indians ſtand;
This only place betwixt the clouds is clear. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
If contradićting intereſts could be mixt,
Nature herſelf has caſt a bar betwixt. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
2. From one to another. -
Five years ſince there was ſome ſpeech of marriage
Betwixt myſelf and her. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Bºys. }": In maſonry and joinery, a kind of ſquare, one
BE'vil.
ſweep of an arch or vault. It is moveable on a point or cen-
tre, and ſo may be ſet to any angle. An angle that is not
ſquare, is called a bevil angle, whether it be more obtuſe, or
more acute, than a right angle. Builder's Dić.
Their houſes are very ill built, their walls bevil, without one
right angle in any apartment. Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
To Be'vel. v. a. [from the noun..] To cut to a bevel angle.
Theſe rabbets are ground ſquare; but the rabbets on the
groundſel are bevelled downwards, that rain may the freclier
fall off. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Be've R. See BEAVER.
Bi:'ver AGE. m. ſ. [from bevere, to drink, Ital.]
1. Drink; liquour to be drank in general.
I am his cupbearer;
If from me he have wholeſome beverage,
Account me not your ſervant. Shakeſp. Winter’s Tale.
Grains, pulſes, and all ſorts of fruits, either bread or beverage,
may be made almoſt of all. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii.
A pleaſant beverage he prepar'd before;
Of wine and honey mix’d. - Dryden's Fables.
The coarſe lean gravel on the mountain ſides,
Scarce dewy bev'rage for the bees provides. Dryden's Virgil.
2. Beverage, or water cyder, is made by putting the mure into a
fat, adding water, as you deſire it ſtronger or ſmaller. The
water ſhould ſtand forty eight hours on it, before you preſs it;
when it is preſſed, turn it up immediately. Mortimer's Hufb.
3. A treat upon wearing a new ſuit of cloaths.
4. A treat at firſt coming into a priſon, called alſo garniſh.
BE'vy. n.ſ.. [beva, Ital.]
I. A flock of birds.
2. A company; an aſſembly. - -
And in the midſt thereof, upon the floor,
A lovely bevy of fair ladies ſat,
Courted of many a jolly paramour. Fairy Queen; b. ii. c. ix.
They on the plain
Long had not walk'd, when, from the tents, behold
A bevy of fair women. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi. 1.582.
Nor rode the nymph alone,
Around a bevy of bright damſels ſhone. Pope's Odyſſey.
To Bew A'il. v. a. [from wail.] To bemoan; to lament; to
expreſs ſorrow for.
In this city he
Hath widow’d and unchilded many a one, - -
Which to this hour bewail the injury. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Thy ambition,
Thou ſcarlet ſin, robb'd this bewailing land -
Of noble Buckingham, my father in law. Shakespeare. H. VIII.
Yet wiſer Ennius gave command to all
His friends, not to bewail his funeral. Sir j. Denham.
I cannot but bewail, as in their firſt principles, the miſeries
and calamities of our children. Addison. Spºtator, Nº. 127.
To BEwA'R.E. v. n. [from be and ware, or wºry; that is, cau-
tious : thus, in an old treatiſe, I have found, be ye ware. See
WARY. Iſeparian, Saxon; warer, Daniſh.]
i. To regard with caution; to be ſuſpicious of danger from : ge-
nerally the particle ºf goes before the thing which excites cau-
tion.
leg of which is frequently crooked, according to the
You muſt beware of drawing or painting clouds, winds, and
thunder, towards the bottom of your piece. Dryden's Dufreſ.
Every one ought to be very careful to beware what he ad-
mits for a principle. Locke.
Warn’d by the ſylph, oh, pious maid, beware /
This to diſcloſe is all thy guardian can ;
Beware of all, but moſt beware of man. Pope's Rape of the L.
2. It is obſervable, that it is only uſed in ſuch forms of ſpeech as
admit the word be : thus we ſay, he may beware, let him beware,
he will beware; but not, he did beware, or he has been ware.
To Bew E'EP. v. a. [from werp..] To weep over or upon; to
bedev with tears.
Old fond eyes,
Bºwerp this cauſe again; I'll pluck ye out,
And caſt you, with the waters that you loſe,
To temper clay. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Larded all with ſweet flowers, -
Which bewept to the grave did go, ,
With true love ſhowers. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
To Bewe'r. v. a. [from wet.] To wet; to moiſten; to be-
dew; to water.
His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,
Can do no ſervice on her ſorrowful cheeks.
- - Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
To Bewi'LDER. v. a. [from wild.] To loſe in pathleſs places;
to confound for want of a plain road; to perplex; to entangle;
to puzzle. -
We parted thus; I homeward ſped my way,
Bewilder'd in the wood till dawn of day. Dryden's Fables.
We no ſolution of our queſtion find;
Your words bewilder, not direct the mind. Blackmore.
Our underſtanding traces 'em in vain,
Loſt and bewilder'd in the fruitleſs ſearch. Addison's Cato.
It is good ſometimes to loſe and bewilder ourſelves in ſuch
ſtudies. Hatti's Improvement of the Mind.
To Bewi'tch. v. a. [from witch.]
I. To injure by witchcraft, or faſcination, or charms.
Look how I am bewitch'd; behold, mine arm
Is like a blaſted ſapling wither'd up. Shakeſp. Richard III.
I have forſworn his company hourly this twenty year, and
yet I am bewitched with the rogue's company. If the raſcal
has not given me medicines to make me love him, I'll be
hang'd. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
My flocks are free from love, yet look ſo thin;
What magick has bewitch'd the woolly dams,
And what ill eyes beheld the tender lambs Dryden's Wirgil.
2. To charm; to pleaſe to ſuch a degree, as to take away the
power of reſiſtance.
Doth even beauty beautify,
And moſt bewitch the wretched eye. Sidney, b. ii.
The charms of poetry our ſouls bewitch;
The curſe of writing is an endleſs itch. Dryden's juvenal.
I do not know, by the character that is given of her works,
whether it is not for the benefit of mankind that they were
loſt; they were filled with ſuch bewitching tenderneſs and rap-
ture, that it might have been dangerous to have given them a
reading. Addison. Spectator, N° 223.
Bewi'tch ERY. n.ſ.. [from bewitch..] Faſcination; charm; re-
fiſtleſs prevalence.
There is a certain bewitchery, or faſcination in words, which
makes them operate with a force beyond what we can give an
account of. South.
BEwi'tchMENT. m. ſ. [from bewitch..] Faſcination; power of
charming.
I will counterfeit the bewitchment of ſome popular man, and
give it bountifully to the deſirers. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
To BEWRA'Y. v. a. ſpnegan, bepnezan, Saxon.j
1. To betray; to diſcover perfidiouſly. -
Fair feeling words he wiſely 'gan diſplay,
And, for her humour fitting purpoſe, fain
To tempt the cauſe itſelf for to bewray. Fairy Queen, b, i.
2. To ſhew ; to make viſible: this word is now little in uſe.
She ſaw a pretty bluſh in Philodea's checks hewray a modeſt
diſcontentment. Sidney.
Men do ſometimes bewray that by deeds, which to confeſs
they are hardly drawn: Hooker, b. i. § 7.
Next look on him that ſeems for counſel fit,
Whoſe ſilver locks bewray his ſtore of days. Fairfax, b. iii.
BEw RA'YER. m.ſ.. [from bewray.] Betrayer; diſcoverer; di-
vulger.
Wien a friend is turned into an enemy, and a bewrayer of ſe-
crets, the world is juſt enough to accuſe the perfidiouſneſs of
the friend. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 225.
Beyo'N D. prep. [be;conb, bezconban, Saxon.]
1. Before; at a diſtance not yet reached.
What's fame a fancy'd life in others breath,
A thing beyond us, ev'n before our death
Juſt what you hear, you have. Pope's Eſſay on Min.
2. On the farther ſide of. -
Neither is it layond the ſea, that thou ſhouldſt ſay, who ſha.
go over the ſea for us, and bring it unto us. Deut. xxx. 13.
No-º:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I C
Now we are on land, we are but between death and life;
beyond the old world and the nºw. * A 7" -
for we are beyond Bacon’s New Atlantis.
we cannot think men beyond ſea will part with their monºy
for nothing. d th Locke.
. Farther onward than.
3. Far "ß. ſees a dark and ſhady grove,
Stays not, but look; beyond it on the ſky. Herbert,
- ... out of the reach of
4. Paſt º the infinite and boundleſs reach
if thou did'ſt this deed of death,
. ãº, Hubert. Shakeſp. King john.
Yet theſe declare
odneſ; beyond thought, and pow'r divine.
Thy go y i. Paradiſe Loft, b. v. l. 158.
The juſt, wiſe, and good God, neither does, nor can require
of man any thing that is impoſſible, or naturally bºyº his
ower to do. - South.
Confider the ſituation of our earth; it is placed ſo conve-
niently, that plants flouriſh, and animals live; this 1. matter of
fact, and beyond all diſpute. Bently’s Sermons.
5. Above; exceeding to a greater degree than.
Timotheus was a man both in power, riches, parentage,
goodneſs, and love of his people, beyond any of the great men
of my country. - - Sidney.
One thing, in this enormous accident, is, I muſt confeſs, to
me beyond all wonder. //otton.
To his expences, beyond his income, add debauchery, idle-
neſ, and quarrels amongſt his ſervants, whereby his manufaç-
tures are diſturbed, and his buſineſs neglected. Lºcke.
As far as they carry conviction to any man's underſtanding,
my labour may be of uſe: beyond the evidence it carries with it,
Iádviſe him not to follow any man's interpretation. Locke. ,
6. Above in excellence.
His ſatires are incomparably beyond Juvenal's ; if to laugh
and rally, is to be preferred to railing and declaiming. Dryden.
7. Remote from ; not within the ſphere of
With equal mind, what happens, let us bear;
Nor joy, nor grieve too much for things beyond our care.
Dryden's Fables.
8. Tº go beyond, is to deceive ; to circumvent.
She made earneſt benefit of his jeſt, forcing him to do her
ſuch ſervices, as were both cumberſome and coſtly ; while he
ſtill thought he went beyond her, becauſe his heart did not com-
mit the idolatry. Sidney.
That no man go beyond, and defraud his brother in any mat-
ter. 1 Thºſ. iv. 6.
BE'zEL. “ſ That part of a ring in which the ſtone is
BE'zIL. } xed.
BEZOAR. m. ſ. [from pa, againſt, and zahar, poiſon, Perſick.]
A medicinal ſtone, formerly in high eſteem as an antidote, and
brought from the Eaſt Indies, where it is ſaid to be found in
the dung of an animal of the goat kind, called pazan; the
ſtone being formed in its belly, and growing to the ſize of an
acorn, and ſometimes to that of a pigeon's egg. Were the
real virtues of this ſtone anſwereable to its reputed ones, it
were doubtleſs a panacea. Indeed its rarity, and the peculiar
manner of its formation, which is now ſuppoſed to be fabu-
lous, have perhaps contributed as much to its reputation as its
intrinſick worth. At preſent, it begins to be diſcarded in the
practice of medicine, as of no efficacy at all. There are alſo
ſome occidental bezoars brought from Peru, which are reckon-
ed inferiour to the oriental. The name of this ſtone is alſo ap-
plied to ſeveral chymical compoſitions, deſigned for antidotes,
or counter-poiſons; as mineral, ſolar, and jovial bezoars.
- Savary. Chambers.
Bººks. adj [from bezoar.] Medicines compounded with
e2.2/??".
The bezºardicks are neceſſary to promote ſweat, and drive
forth the putrefied particles. Floyer on the Humours.
BIA'NGULATED. }*. [from binus and angulus, Lat..] Having
BIA'NGULous. corners or angles. Djº.
BIAS. m. ſ. [biais, Fr. ſaid to come from bihay, an old Gauliſh
word, ſignifying croſs, or thwart.]
1. The weight lodged on one ſide of a bowl, which turns it from
the ſtrait line.
Madam, we'll play at bowls
—'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
And that my fortune runs againſt the bias. Shakeſp. R. II.
2. Anything which turns a man to a particular courſe; or gives
the direction to his meaſures.
You have been miſtook :
But * to her bias drew in that. Shakespeare. Twºff Night.
This is that boaſted bias of thy mind,
*...º. to dulneſs 'tis inclin'd. Dryden's Macià.
ačtions. Yºtuences mens lives, and gives a bias to all their
Wit and humour, t - - Locke.
diverſions i. that expoſe vice and folly, furniſh uſeful
- *Y, under ſuch regulations, unbends the
mind from ſeverer contemplations, without throwing it off
from its proper bias.
Addison's Freeholder, N° 45.
Thus nature gives us, let it check our pride,
The virtue neareſt to our vice ally’d ;
Reaſon the bias turns to good or ill. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
3. Propenſion ; inclination.
As for the religion of our poet, he ſecms to have ſome little
bias towards the opinions of Wickliff. Dryd. Fab. Preface.
To B1'As. v. a. [from the noun..] To incline to ſome ſide; to
balance one way; to prejudice.
Were I in no more danger to be miſled by ignorance, than I
am to be biaſed by intereſt, I might give a very perfect ac-
Count. Locke.
A deſire leaning to either fide, biaſes the judgment ſtrange-
ly; by indifference for every thing but truth, you will be ex-
cited to examine. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
B1'As, adv. It ſeems to be uſed adverbially in the following paſ-
ſige, conformably to the French, mettre une choſe de liais, to
give any thing a wrong interpretation.
Every action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have record, trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not anſwering the aim. -
Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
BIB. m.ſ. A ſmall piece of linen put upon the breaſts of chil-
dren, over their cloaths.
I would fain know, why it ſhould not be as noble a taſk, to
write upon a bib and hanging-ſleeves, as on the bulla and pre-
texta. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
To BIB. v. n. [bibo, Lat.] To tipple; to fip; to drink fre-
quently. .
He playeth with bibling mother Meroë, as though ſhe were
ſo named, becauſe ſhe would drink mere wine without water.
Camden.
To appeaſe a froward child, they gave him drink as often as
he cricd; ſo that he was conſtantly bibling, and drank more in
twenty four hours than I did. Locke.
BIBA'cious. adj. [bibax, Lat.] Much addićted to drinking. D.
BiBA'city. n.ſ.. [bilatitas, Lat..] The quality of drinking
much.
BI'BBER. m. ſ. [from to bil.] A tippler; a man that drinks
often.
BI'Ble. n.ſ.. [from 2:32.0, a book; called, by way of excellence,
The Book.] The ſacred volume in which are contained the re-
velations of God.
If we paſs from the apoſtolic to the next ages of the church,
the primitive chriſtians looked on their bibles as their moſt im-
portant treaſure. Government of the Tongue, $ 3.
We muſt take heed how we accuſtom ourſelves to a ſlight
and irreverent uſe of the name of God, and of the phraſes and
expreſſions of the holy bible, which ought not to be applied up-
on every ſlight occaſion. Tillotſon, ſermon i.
In queſtions of natural religion, we ſhould confirm and im-
prove, or connect our reaſonings, by the divine aſſiſtance of
the bible. //atts's Logick.
Biblio'GRAPHER. m. ſ. [from £º, and y:zºw, to write.J. A
writer of books; a tranſcriber. Dić7.
BIBLIoT HE'cAL. adj. [from libliotheca, Lat.] Belonging to a
library. Dić:
BI'Eulous. adj. [bibulus, Lat.] That which has the quality of
drinking moiſture; ſpungy.
Strow'd bibulºus above, I ſce the ſands,
The pebbly gravel next, and guttur'd rocks. Thºmſºn.
Bicapsu LAR. adj. [bicapſularis, Lat..] A plant whoſe ſced veſ-
is divided into two parts.
Bice. n.ſ. The name of a colour uſed in painting. It is either
green or blue. -
Take green bice, and order it as you do your blue lice, you
may diaper upon it with the water of deep green. Peacham.
#: ... }a}. [Hºpi, iiifiti, Lt.
1. Having two heads. -
While men believe hicipitous conformation in any ſpecies,
they admit a gemination of principal parts. Brown's Puig. Err.
2. It is applied to one of the muſcles of the arm. . . .
A piece of fleſh is exchanged from the bicipital muſcle of
either party's arm. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 3-
To BICKER. v. n. [hicre, Welſh, a conteſt.] -
1. To ſkirmiſh; to fight without a ſet battle; to fight off
and on. -
They fell to ſuch a biºfering, that he got a halting, and loſt
his pićture. Sidney.
In thy face
I ſee thy fury; if I longer ſtay, .
We ſhall begin our ancient bickerings. Shakespeare Henry VI.
2. To quiver; to play backward and forward.
And from about him fierce effuſion rowl'd
Of ſmoke, and bickering flame, and ſparkles dire.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi. l. 674.
An icy gale, oft ſhifting o'er the pool,
Breathes a blue film, and, in its mid career,
Arreſts the bickering ſtream. Thomſon's I/inter, 1.730.
BI'ckeRER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A ſkirmiſher. -
Bi'ck ERN. n.ſ.. [apparently corrupted from brakiron..] An iron
ding in a point.
ending in a poiſ 3 A black-
ſ:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I D
B I G
A blackſmith's anvil is ſometimes made with a pike, or hi-
Hern, or beakiron, at one end. Moxon's Mechan. Exerciſes.
Bico'RNE. łaj [bicornis, Lat j Having two h
Bico'RNous. !/. tº, - aving two horns.
We ſhould be too critical, to queſtion the letter Y, or l;-
cormous element of Pythagoras; that is, the making of the horns
equal. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. v. c. 19.
Bico'RPoRAL. adj. [bicorpor, Lat..] Having two bodies.
To BID. v. a. pret. I bid, bad, bade, I have bid, or bidden. [bib-
ban, Saxon.]
1. To deſire; to aſk; to call; to invite.
I am bid forth to ſupper, Jeffica; -
There are my keys. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Go ye into the highways, and, as many as you ſhall find, bid
to the marriage. Matt. xxii. 9.
We ought, when we are bidden to great feaſts and meetings,
to be prepared beforehand. Hakewell on Providence.
2. To command; to order; before things or perſons.
Saint Withold footed thrice the wold,
He met the nightmare, and her name told,
Bid her alight, and her troth plight. Shakeſp. King Lear.
He chid the ſiſters,
When firſt they put the name of king upon me,
And bade them ſpeak to him. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Haſte to the houſe of ſleep, and bid the god,
Who rules the nightly viſions with a nod,
Prepare a dream. Dryden's Fables.
Curſe on the tongue that bids this general joy.
—Can they be friends of Antony, who revel
When Antony's in danger? Dryd. All for Love.
Thames heard the numbers, as he flow'd along,
And bade his willows learn the moving ſong. Pope.
Acquire a government over your ideas, that they may come
when they are called, and depart when they are bidden.
- Watts's Logick.
3. To offer; to propoſe; as, to bid a price.
Come, and be true.—
—Thou bidſt me to my loſs: for true to thee,
Were to prove falſe. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
When a man is reſolute to keep his ſins while he lives, and
yet unwilling to relinquiſh all hope, he will embrace that pro-
feſſion, which bids faireſt to the reconciling thoſe ſo diſtant in-
tereſts. Decay of Piety.
As when the goddeſſes came down of old,
With gifts, their young Dardanian judge they try’d,
And each bade high to win him to their ſide. Granville.
To give intereſt a ſhare in friendſhip, is to ſell it by inch of
candle; he that bids moſt ſhall have it: and when it is merce-
nary, there is no depending on it. Collier on Friendſhip.
4. To proclaim; to offer; or to make known by ſome publick
WOICe.
Our bans thrice bid! and for our wedding day
My kerchief bought! then preſs'd, then forc'd away.
Gay's What dye call it,
5. To pronounce; to declare.
You are retir’d,
As if you were a feaſted one, and not
The hoſteſs of the meeting; pray you, bid
Theſe unknown friends tos welcome. Shakeſp. Wint. Tale.
Divers of them, as we paſſed by them, put their arms a little
abroad; which is their geſture, when they bid any welcome.
- Bacon’s New Atlantis.
How, Didius, ſhall a Roman, ſore repuls'd,
Greet your arrival to this diſtant iſle
How bid you welcome to theſe ſhatter'd legions A. Philips.
6. To denounce.
Thyſelf and Oxford, with five thouſand men,
Shall croſs the ſeas, and bid falſe Edward battle.
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
She bid war to all that durſt ſupply
The place of thoſe her cruelty made die. J/aller.
The captive cannibal, oppreſt with chains,
Yet braves his foes, reviles, provokes, diſdains;
Of nature fierce, untameable, and proud,
He kids defiance to the gaping croud,
And ſpent at laſt, and ſpeechleſs as he lies,
With ficry glances mocks their rage, and dies.
F - To pray. See BE AD.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doćtrine, re-
ceive him not into your houſe, neither bid him God ſpeed.
- - 2 john, 10.
When they deſired him to tarry longer with them, he con-
iſented not, but bade them farewel. Aéis, xviii. 21.
By ſome haycock, or ſome ſhady thorn,
He bid, his beads both even ſong and morn. Dryd. W. of B.
$1'DALE. m. ſ. [from bid and ale.] An invitation of friends to
drink at a poor man's houſe, and there to contribute cha-
Granville.
rity. - Dićf.
Bi'Die N. part. paſſ. [from to bid.]
1. Invited. -
There were two of our company bidden to a feaſt of the fa-
mily. Bacon.
Vol. I.
- Madam, the lidden gueſts are come:
2. Commanded.
'Tis theſe that early taint the female ſoul,
Inſtrućt the eyes of young coquettes to roll,
Teach infants cheeks a hidden bluſh to know, .
And little hearts to flutter at a beau. Pope's R. of the Lock.
Bi'DDER. n.ſ.. [from to bid.] Cne who offers or propoſes a
price.
He looked upon ſeveral dreſſes which hung there, and ex-
poſed to the purchaſe of the beſt bidder. Addiſon. Spectator.
Bi'DDING.. n.f. [from bid.] Command; order.
. How, ſay'ſt thou, that Macduff denies his perſon
At our great bidding P . . . Shakeſp. Macbeth,
At his ſecond bidding, darkneſs fled,
Light ſhone, and order from diſorder ſprung.
Milton's Parad. Loft, b. iii. l. 712.
To BPDE. v. a. [bibán, Sax.] To endure; to ſuffer.
Poor naked wretches, wherefoe'er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitileſs ſtorm. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
The wary Dutch this gathering ſtorm foreſaw,
And durſt not bide it on the Engliſh coaſt. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
To BIDE. v. m.
I. To dwell; to live; to inhabit. - -
All knees to thee ſhall bow, of them that bide -
In heav'n, or earth, or under earth in hell. Par. Loft, b. iii.
2. To remain in a place. -
Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gaſhes on his head; -
The leaſt a death to nature. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. To continue in a ſtate.
And they alſo, if they bide not ſtill in unbelief, ſhall be graf-
fed in. Romans, xi. 23.
4. It has probably all the fignifications of the word abide ; which
ſee: but it being grown ſomewhat obſolete, the examples of
its various meanings are not eaſily found. -
BIDE'NTAL. adj. [bidens, Lat.] Having two teeth.
Ill management of forks is not to be helped, when they are
only bidental. Swift.
BI'DING.. n.ſ.. [from bide.] Reſidence; habitation.
At Antwerp has my conſtant biding been. Rowe's j. Shakespeare
BIE'NNIAL. adj. [biennis, Lat..] Of the continuance of two
ears.
y Then why ſhould ſome be very long lived, others only an-
nual or biennial 2 Ray on the Creation.
BIER. m.ſ.. [from to bear, as fºretrum, in Latin, from fero..] . A
carriage, or frame of wood, on which the dead are carried to
the grave.
And now the prey of fowls he lies,
4. Philºſ.
Nor wail'd of friends, nor laid on groaning bier. Fairy Q:
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
And on his grave remains many a tear." Shakeſp. Hamlet:
He muſt not float upon his wat'ry bier,
Unwept. Milton.
Griefs always green, a houſhold ſtill in tears:
Sad pomps, a threſhold throng'd with daily biers,
And liveries of black. Dryden's juvenal, ſat. x.
Make as if you hanged yourſelf, they will convey your bo:
dy out of priſon in a bier. Arbuthnot's j. Bull.
BI'Éstings. n.ſ.. [byrcing, Saxon.] The firſt milk given by a
cow after calving, which is very thick.
And twice beſides, her bieſłings never fail .
To ſtore the dairy with a brimming pale. Dryden's Virgil.
BIFA'Rious. adj. [bifarius, Lat.] Twofold; what may be un-
derſtood two ways. Dićf.
BI'FERous. adj. [biferens, Lat..] Bearing fruit twice a }.
BI'FID. adj. [bifidus, Lat, a botanical term.] Divided
BI'FIDATED. } in two; ſplit in two; opening with a cleft.
BIFo'LD. adj [from binus, Lat, and fold.] Twofold; double.
If beauty have a ſoul, this is not ſhe:
If ſouls guide vows, if vows are ſančtimony,
If ſančtimony be the gods delight,
If there be rule in unity itſelf,
This is not ſhe ; O madneſs of diſcourſe !
That cauſe ſets up with and againſt thyſelf!
Bifold authority. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſidad
BIFo'RMED. adj. [biformis, Lat..] Compounded of two forms,
or bodies.
BIFU'RcATED. adj. [from binus, two, and furca, a fork, Lat.]
Shooting out, by a diviſion, into two heads.
A ſmall white piece, bifurcated, or branching into two, and
finely reticulated all over. Iſoodward on Foſſils.
BIFURcation. n.ſ.. [from binus and furca, Lat.] Diviſion in-
to two; opening into two parts.
The firſt catachreſtical and far derived ſimilitude, it holds
with man; that is, in a bifurcation, or diviſion of the root into
two parts. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 6.
BIG. adj. [This word is of uncertain, or unknown etymology;
junius derives it from 3-yaro. 3 Skinner, from bug, which, in
Daniſh, ſignifies the belly.]
1. Great in bulk; large.
Both in addition and diviſion, either of ſpace or duration,
when the idea under conſideration becomes very big, or very
3 C ſmall,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
i
“
t
*
º
ſmall, its preciſe bulk becomes very obſcure and tºº.
Øckt'.
A troubled ocean, to a man who ſails in it, is, I think, the
biggeſt object that he can ſee in motiºn. , Spectatºr, Nº. 489.
Then commerce brought into the publick walk
The buſy merchant, the big warehouſe built. Thomſºn.
2. Teeming; pregnant; great with young; with the particle
ith. *
ity A bear big with young hath ſeldom been ſeen. Bacon.
Lately on yonder ſwelling buſh,
Big with many a common roſe,
This early bud began to bluſh. - J/aller.
3. Sometimes with of ; but rarely.
His gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman, our theam, deceas'd
As he was born. Shakespeare. Cymbeline.
4. Full of ſomething; and deſirous, or about, to give it vent.
The great, th’ important day,
Big with the fate of Cato and of Rome. Addison's Cato.
Now big with knowledge of approaching woes,
The prince of augurs, Halithreſes, roſe. Pope's Odyſſey.
5. Diſtended; ſwoln; ready to burſt; uſed often of the effects of
paſſion, as grief, rage.
Thy heart is big ; get thee apart, and weep.
Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
6. Great in air and mien ; proud; ſwelling; tumid; haughty ;
ſurly.
y How elſe, ſaid he, but with a good bold face,
And with big words, and with a ſtately pace. Hub. Tale.
To the meaner man, or unknown in the court, ſeem ſome-
what ſolemn, coy, big, and dangerous of look, talk, and an-
ſwer. Aſtham's Schoolmaſier.
If you had but looked big, and ſpit at him, he'd have run.
Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Or does the man i' th' moon look big,
Or wear a huger perriwig,
Than our own native lunaticks. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. iii.
Of governments that once made ſuch a noiſe, and looked ſo
big in the eyes of mankind, as being founded upon the deepeſt
counſels, and the ſtrongeſt force; nothing remains of them but
a naſtle. - South.
In his moſt proſperous ſeaſon, he fell under the reproach of
being a man of big looks, and of a mean and abjećt ſpirit.
Clarendon.
Thou thyſelf, thus inſolent in ſtate,
Art but perhaps ſome country magiſtrate,
Whoſe power extends no farther than to ſpeak
Big on the bench, and ſcanty weights to break. Dryden.
To grant big Thraſo valour, Phormio ſenſe,
Should indignation give, at leaſt offence. Garth.
7. Great in ſpirit; lofty; brave.
What art thou ? have not I
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big º'
Thy words, I grant, are bigger: for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
B1'G AM 1st. n.ſ.. [bigamius, low Lat..] One that has commit-
ted bigamy. See BIG AM Y.
By the papal canons, a clergyman, that has a wife, cannot
have an eccleſiaſtical benefice; much leſs can a higamiſt have
ſuch a benefice, according to that law. Ayliffe's Parergon.
BI'G AM Y. m. ſ. [bigamia, low Latin.]
1. The crime of having two wives at once.
A beauty-waining and diſtreſſed widow
. Seduc’d the pitch and height of all his thoughts,
To baſe declenſion, and loath'd bigamy. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Randal determined to commence a ſuit againſt Martin, for
bigamy and inceſt. Arbuthnot and Pope's Martinus Scriblerus.
2. In the canon law. The marriage of a ſecond wife, or of a
widow, or a woman already debauched; which, in the church
of Rome, were conſidered as bringing a man under ſome in-
capacities for eccleſiaſtical offices.
B1GBE'LLIED. adj. [from big and belly..] Pregnant; with child;
great with young.
When we have laught to ſee the ſails conceive,
And grow bigbellied with the wanton wind.
-* - Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
Children, and bigbellied women require antidotes ſomewhat
more grateful to the palate. Harvey on the Plague.
So many well ſhaped innocent virgins are blocked up, and
waddling up and down like bigbellied women. Addiſon. Spect.
We purſued our march, to the terrour of the market peo-
ple, and the miſcarriage of half a dozen bigbellied women.
Addiſon's Freeholder.
Bi'cGIN. m. ſ. ſhºguin, Fr.] A child's cap.
Sleep now !
Yet not ſo ſound, and half ſo deeply ſweet,
As he, whoſe brow with homely biggin bound,
Snores out the watch of night. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
BIGHT. m. ſ. It is explained by Skinner, the circumference of a
a coil of rope. -
Bi'GLY. adv. [from big.] Tumidly; haughtily; with a bluſ-
tering manner. -
2
f
Would'ſt thou not rather chooſe a ſmall renown,
To be the mayºr of ſome poor paltry town;
Bigly to look, and barb'rouſly to ſpeak;
To pound falſe weights, and ſcanty meaſures break
Dryden's juvenal, ſit. x.
BI'GN Ess. n.ſ.. [from big.]
1. Bulk; greatneſs of quantity.
If panicum be laid below, and about the bottom of a root,
it will cauſe the root to grow to an exceſſive tigueſ. Facon.
People were ſurpriſed at the bigny, and uncoutſ, deformity
of the camel. L’E/ºrange's Pales.
The brain of man, in reſpect of his body, is much larger
than in any other animal's; exceeding in bigneſs three oxens
brains. Ray on the Creation.
2. Size; whether greater or ſmaller.
Several ſorts of rays make vibrations of ſeveral biºmeſºs,
which, according to their bigneſſes, excite ſenſations of ſeveral
colours; and the air, according to their bignºſes, excites ſen-
ſations of ſeveral ſounds. - Newton's Opticks.
BI'GOT. n.&amp; [The etymology of this word is unknown; but
it is ſuppoſed, by Camden and others, to take its riſe from ſome
occaſional phraſe.] A man devoted to a certain party; pre-
judiced in favour of certain opinions ; a blind zealot. It is
uſed often with to before the object of zeal; as, a bigot to the
Carteſian tenets.
Religious ſpite, and pious ſpleen bred firſt
This quarrel, which ſo long the bigots nurſt. Tate, juvenal.
In philoſophy and religion, the bigots of all parties are gene-
rally the moſt poſitive. J/atts's Improvement ſ the Mind.
Bı'cote D. adj. [from bigot.] Blindly prepoſleiled in favour
of ſomething; irrationally zealous; with to.
Bigotted to this idol, we diſclaim
Reft, health, and eaſe, for nothing but a name. Garth.
Preſbyterian merit, during the reign of that weak, bigotted,
and ill adviſed prince, will eaſily be computed. Swift.
BI'GotRY. n ſ. [from bigot.]
1. Blind zeal; prejudice; unreaſonable warmth in favour of
party or opinions; with the particle to.
Were it not for a bigotry to our own tenets, we could hardly
imagine, that ſo many abſurd, wicked, and bloody principles,
ſhould pretend to ſupport themſelves by the goſpel. //atts.
2. The practice or tenct of a bigot.
Our ſilence makes our adverſaries think we perſiſt in thoſe
bigotries, which all good and ſenſible men deſpiſe. Pope.
BI'Gswoln, adj. [from big and ſwoln.] Turgid; ready to burſt.
Might my bigſwoln heart
Vent all its griefs, and give a looſe to ſorrow. Addiſ Cato.
Bi'G-UDDERED. adj. [from big and udder.] Having large ud-
ders; having dugs ſwelled with milk.
Now driv'n before him, through the arching rock,
Came, tumbling heaps on heaps, th' unnumber'd flock,
Big-udder'd evs, and goats of female kind. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
Bi'LANDER. m. ſ. [helandre, Fr.] A ſmall veſſel of about eighty
tons burden, uſed for the carriage of goods. It is a kind of
hoy, manageable by four or five men, and has maſts and fails
after the manner of a hoy. They are uſed chiefly in Holland,
as being particularly fit for the canals. Savary. Trevoux.
ike bilanders to creep - *
Along the coaſt, and land in view to keep. Dryden.
Bi'LBERRY. m. ſ. [from billy, Sax. a bladder, and berry; accord-
ing to Skinner.] The ſame with whortleberry; which ſee.
Cricket, to Windſor chimneys ſhalt thou leap;
There pinch the maids as blue as liſherries.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
BI'l Bo. m. ſ. [corrupted from Bilboa, where the beſt weapons are
made..] A rapier ; a ſword. -
To be compaſſed like a good biſho, in the circumference of a
peck, hilt to point, heel to head. Shakeſp. M. Jº. of I/indſºr.
BI'l Boes, n. ſ. A ſort of ſtocks, or wooden ſheckles for the
feet, uſed for puniſhing offenders at ſea.
Methought I lay,
Worſe than the mutines, in the bilboes. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
BILE. m. ſ. [bilis, Lat..] A thick, yellow, bitter liquour, ſepa-
rated in the liver, collečted in the gall-bladder, and diſcharged
into the lower end of the duodenum, or beginning of the jeju-
num, by the common dućt. Its uſe is to ſheathe or blunt the
acids of the chyle; becauſe they, being entangled with its ſul-
phurs, thicken it ſo, that it cannot be ſufficiently diluted by
the ſuccus pancreaticus, to enter the lačteal veſſels. Sºny.
In its progreſſion, ſoon the labour’d chyle
Receives the confluent rills of bitter bile;
Which, by the liver ſever'd from the blood,
And ſtriving through the gall-pipe, here unload
Their yellow ſtreams. Blac{more.
BII.E. m. ſ. Tbile Sax. perhaps from bilis, Lat. This is generally
ſpelt boil; but, I think, leſs properly.] A fore angry ſwelling.
But yet thou art my fleſh, my blood, my daughter;
Or, rather, a diſeaſe that's in my fleſh; *-* -
Thou art a hile in my corrupted blood. Shakespeare. King Lear.
Thoſe biles did run-ſay ſo—did not the general run? were
not that a botchy fore ? Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
A furun-
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I L
\
A furunculus is a painful tubercle, with a broad baſis, ariſ-
ing in a cone. It is generally called a bile, and, in it its ſtate,
is accompanied with inflammation, pulſation, and tenſion.
JWiſeman's Surgery.
. BILGE in a ſhip. The compaſs or breadth of the ſhip's bottom.
Skinner.
To BILG.E. v. m. [from the noun..] To ſpring a leak; to let in
water, by ſtriking upon a rock: a ſea term. Skinner.
B1'LARy. adj. [from bilis, Lat.] Belonging to the bile.
Voracious animals, and ſuch as do not chew, have a great
quantity of gall; and ſome of them have the biliary dućt in-
ſerted into the pylorus. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
B1'l:NGsgate. m. ſ. [A cant word, borrowed from Bilingſgate
in London, a place where there is always a croud of low peo-
ple, and frequent brawls and foul language.] Ribaldry; foul
language. -
| There ſtript, fair rhet'ritk languiſh'd on the ground,
And ſhameful bilingſgate her robes adorn. Dunciad, b. iv.
1511.1'NGuous. adj. [bilinguis, Lat.] Having, or ſpeaking two
tongues. -
B1/Lious. adj. [from bilis, Lat.] Conſiſting of bile; partaking
cf bile.
Why bilious juice a golden light puts on,
And floods of chyle in ſilver currents run. Garth.
When the taſte of the mouth is bitter, it is a ſign of redun-
dance of a bilious alkali. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To BILK. v. a. [derived by Mr. Lye from the Gothick, bilai-
can.] To cheat; to defraud, by running in debt, and avoid-
ing payment.
Bilk'd ſtationers for yeomen ſtood prepard.
What comedy, what farce can more delight,
Than grinning hunger, and the pleaſing fight
Of your biºd hopes? Dryden's juvenal, ſat. v.
BILL. m.ſ.. [bile, Sax. See BALL.] The beak of a fowl.
Their bills were thwarted croſsways at the end, and, with
theſe, they would cut an apple in two at one ſnap.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
It may be tried, whether birds may not be made to have
i greater or longer bill, or greater and longer talons.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 757.
- In his bill
An olive leaf he brings, pacifick ſign' Paradiſ Loft, b. xi.
No crowing cock does there his wings diſplay, -
Nor with his horny bill provoke the day. Dryden's Fables.
BILL. n.ſ.. [bille, Sax. epibille, a two j axe.]
1. A kind of hatchet with a hooked point, uſed in country work,
as a hedging bill; ſo called from its reſemblance in form to the
beak of a bird of prey.
Standing troops are ſervants armed, who uſe the lance and
ſword, as other ſervants do the ſickle, or the bill, at the com-
mand of thoſe who entertain them. - Temple.
2. A kind of weapon anciently carried by the foot; a battle axe.
Yea diſtaff women manage ruſty bills;
Againſt thy ſeat both young and old rebel.
BILL. n.ſ.. [billet, French.]
1. A written paper of any kind.
He does receive
Particular addition from the bill
That writes them all alike.
2. An account of money. - - -
Ordinary expence ought to be limited by a man's eſtate, and
ordered to the beſt, that the bills may be leſs than the eſtima-
tion abroad. - Bacon's Eſſays.
3. A law preſented to the parliament, not yet made an ačt.
No new laws can be made, nor old laws abrogated or alter-
ed, but by parliament; where bills are prepared, and preſented
to the two houſes. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
How now, for mitigation of this bill, -
Urg'd by the commons? Doth his majeſty -
Incline to it, or no? Shakeſp. Henry V.
4- An act of parliament.
There will be no way left for me to tell you, that I remem-
ber you, and that I love you; but that one, which needs no
open warrant, or ſecret conveyance; which no bills can pre-
clude, or no kings prevent. Atterbury to Pope.
5 - A phyſician's preſcription.
Like him that took the doćtor's bill,
And ſwallow’d it inſtead o' th' pill. Hudibras, p. i. cant. ii.
The medicine was prepar'd according to the bill.
L’Eſtrange, fab. 183.
Let them, but under your ſuperiours, kill, º
Dryden.
Shakeſp. R. II.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
When doctors firſt have ſign'd the bloody bill. Dryden.
*- An advertiſement. r
And in deſpair, their empty pit to fill, -
Set up ſome foreign monſter in a bill. Dryden.
7. In law. - - -
1. An obligation, but without condition or forfeiture for
nonpayment, 2. A declaration in writing, that expreſſeth ei-
ther the grief and the wrong, that the complainant hath ſuffer-
ed by the party complained of; or elſe ſome fault, that the
party complained of, hath committed againſt ſome law. This
bill is ſometimes offered to juſtices errants in the general aſ-
Bi'LLET. n.ſ.. [billet, French.]
1. A ſmall paper; a note.
ſizes; but moſt to the lord chancellor. It containeth the ſaä
complained of, the damages thereby ſuffered, and petition of
proceſs againſt the defendant for redreſs. Cowel.
The fourth thing very maturely to be conſulted by the jury,
is, what influence their finding the bill may have upon the
kingdom, Swift.
8. A bill of mortality. An account of the numbers that have died
in any diſtrict. - -
Moſt who took in the weekly bill of mortality, made little
other uſe of them, than to look at the foot, how the burials en-
creaſed or decreaſed. Graunt's Bills ºf Mortality,
So liv'd our fires, ere doćtors learn'd to kill
And multiply'd with theirs the weekly bill. Dryden:
9. 4 bill ºf fare. An account of the ſeaſon of proviſions, or of
the diſhes at a feaſt.
It may ſeem ſomewhat difficult to make out the bill; of fare
for ſome of the forementioned ſuppers. Arbuthnot on Coins.
10. A bill ºf exchange. A note ordering the payment of a ſum of
money in one place, to ſome perſon aſſigned by the drawer or
remitter, in conſideration of the value paid to him in another
place.
The comfortable ſentences are our bills of exchange, upon the
credit of which we lay our cares down, and receive proviſions.
Taylor's Rule of living holy.
All that a bill of exchange can do, is to direét to whom mo-
ney is due, or taken up upon credit, in a foreign country, ſhall
be paid. - - Locke.
To Bill. v. n. [from bill, a beak.] To careſs, as doves by
joining bills; to be fond. -
Doves, they ſay, will bill, after their pecking, and their mur-
muring. Ben johnſºn's Catiline.
Still amorous, and fond, and billing,
Like Philip and Mary on a ſhilling. Hudibras, p. iii. c. i.
They bill, they tread; Alcyone compreſs'd,
Seven days fits brooding on her floating neſt.
- He that bears th’ artillery of Jove,
The ſtrong pounc'd eagle, and the billing dove. Dryden.
To Bill. v. a. [from bill, a writing.] To publiſh by an adver-
tiſement: a cant word. -
His maſterpiece was a compoſition that he billed about under
the name of a ſovereign antidote. L’Eſtrange.
&gt;
Dryden.
When he found this little billet, in which was only written,
Remember Caſar, he was exceedingly confounded. Clarendon.
2. A ticket directing ſoldiers at what houſe to lodge.
3. Billet doux, or a ſoft billet; a love letter.
_’Twas then, Belinda! if report ſay true,
Thy eyes firſt open'd on a billet doux. Pope's Rape of the L.
Bawds and pimps will be carrying about billet doux.
Arbuthnot and Pope's Martinus Scriblerus.
4. A ſmall log of wood for the chimney.
Let us then calculate, when the bulk of a faggot or billet, is
dilated and rarified to tha degree of fire, how vaſt a place it
muſt take up. Digby on Bodies.
Their billet at the fire was found. Prior.
To BI'LLet. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To direct a ſoldier by a ticket, or note, where he is to lodge.
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted:
Away, I ſay.
2. To quarter ſoldiers. -
They remembered him of *; the kingdom, by billeting
ſoldiers. aleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
The counties throughout the kingdom were ſo incenſed, and
their affections poiſoned, that they refuſed to ſuffer the ſoldiers
to be billeted upon them. Clarendon.
Shakeſp. Othello.
Billiards. n. f, without a ſingular. [billard, Fr. of which that
language has no etymology; and therefore they probably de-
rived from England both the play and the name; which is cor-
rupted from balyards; yards or ſticks with which a ball is dri-
ven along a table. Thus Spenser:
: Balyards much unfit,
And ſhuttlecocks miſſeeming manly wit. Hubb. Tale.]
A game at which a ball is forced againſt another on a table.
Let it alone ; let's to billiards. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleop.
Even noſe and cheek, withal,
Smooth as is the billiard ball. Ben. johnſºn's Underwood.
Some are forced to bound or fly upwards, almoſt like ivory
balls meeting on a billiard table. . . . Boyle.
When the ball obeys the ſtroke of a liliard ſtick, it is not
any action of the ball, but bare paſſion. Locke.
BILLOW. m. ſ. [bilge, Germ. bºg, Dan. probably of the ſame
original with blig, Sax. a bladder.] A wave ſwoln, and
hollow. -
From whence the river Dee, as ſilver cleen,
His tumbling billºws roll with gentle rore. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Billows fink by degrees, even when the wind is down that
firſt ſtirred them. - - J/otton.
Chafing Nereus with his trident throws
The billows from the bottom. Sir j. Denham.
But when loud billows laſh the ſounding ſhore,
The hoarſe rough verſe ſhould like the torrent roar. Fº
Q
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I N
B I O
ºc Bºltow. v. M. (from the noun.J. To ſwell, or roll, as a
WaW ºrie hillºwing ſnow, and violence of the ſhow'r,
That from the hills diſperſe their dreadful ſtore, -
And o'er the vales collected ruin Pour. - Prior.
BI'llowy, adj. [from billow.] Swelling: turgid ; wavy.
And whitening down the moſſy-tinétur'd ſtream,
Deſcends the billowy foam. Thomſon's Spring, l. 380.
BiN. n.ſ.. [binne, Sax.] A place where bread, or corn, or wine,
is repoſited. - - - - -
The moſt convenient way of picking hops, is into a long
ſquare frame of wood, called a bin. 442ntimer's Husbandry.
As when from rooting in a bin,
All pouder'd o'er from tail to chin,
A lively maggot fallies out, -
You know him by his hazel ſnout. - Swift.
Bi'NARY. adj. [from binus, Lat.] Two; dual; double.
BI'NARY Arithmetick. A method of computation propoſed by
Mr. Leibnitz, in which, in lieu of the ten figures in the
common arithmetick, and the progreſſion from ten to ten, he
has only two figures, and uſes the ſimple progreſſion from two
to two. This method appears to be the ſame with that uſed
Chineſe four thouſand years ago. Chambers.
To BIND. v. a. pret. I bound; particip. paſſ bound, or bounden.
[binban, Saxon.]
1. To confine with bonds; to enchain.
Wilt thou play with him as with a bird 2 or wilt thou hind
him for thy maidens? job, xli. 5.
2. To gird; to enwrap; to involve.
Who hath bound the waters in a garment.
3. To faſten to anything. -
Thou ſhalt bind this line of ſcarlet thread in the window,
which thou didſt letus down by. jºſhua, ii. 18.
Keep my commandments, and live : and my law, as the
apple of thine eye. Bind them upon thy fingers, write them
upon the table of thine heart. Prov. vii. 3, 4.
4. To faſten together.
Gather ye tºº, firſt the tares, and bind them in bundles,
to burn them. 44att. xiii. 20.
5. To cover a wound with dreſfings and bandages.
When he ſaw him, he had compaſſion on him, and went to
him, and bound up his wounds. Luke, x. 34.
Having filled up the bared cranium with our dreſſings, we
bound up the wound. J/ſeman's Surgery.
6. To compel; to conſtrain.
Thoſe canons, or imperial conſtitutions, which have not
been received here, do not bind. Hale's Common Law of Engl.
7. To oblige by ſtipulation, or oath.
If a man vow a vow, or ſwear an oath to bind his ſoul with
a bond, he ſhall not break his word. Numbers, xxx. 2.
Swear by the ſolemn oath, that binds the gods. Pope.
8. To oblige by duty or law.
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not lound to that, all ſlaves are free to. Shakeſp. Othello.
Duties expreſsly required in the plain language of Scripture,
ought to bind our conſciences more than thoſe which are but
dubiouſly inferred. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
9. To oblige by kindneſs.
10. To confine; to hinder.
Now I'm cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in
To ſaucy doubts and fears. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
You will ſooner, by imagination, bind a bird from ſinging,
than from eating or flying. Bacon's Natural Hiſł. Nº.385.
Though paſſion be the moſt obvious and general, yet it is
not the only cauſe that binds up the underſtanding, and con-
: º: the time, to one object, from which it will not be
taken Off. Locke,
- In ſuch a diſmal place,
Where joy ne'er enters, which the ſun ſie'er cheers,
Rºund in with darkneſs, overſpread with damps. Dryden.
11. To hinder the flux of the bowels ; to make coſtive.
Rhubarb hath manifeſtly in it parts of contrary operations;
Parts that purge, and parts that bind the body. Bacon.
The whey of milk doth looſe, the milk doth hind. H.,
12. To reſtrain. -
The more we are bound up to an exačt narration, we want
more life, and fire, to animate and inform the ſtory. Felton.
*3, 7% tind a book. To put it in a cover.
Wa: cyer book, containing ſuch vile matter,
So fairly bound? Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Thoſe who could never read the grammar,
When my dear volumes touch the hammer,
May think books beſt, as richeſt bºund. Prior
14. To bind to. To oblige to ſerve ſome one, -
If ſtill thou doſt retain
The ſame ill habits, the ſame follies too,
I j} thou art lound to vice, and ſtill a ſlave. Dryden's Perſ:
'5' 7" hind to. To contrači with any body.
16. Åº *to a wife ſeek not to be looſed. I Cor. vii.
Sir ..". i. oblige to make appearance. -
woman, and º . with the reports concerning this
toº.” ould have bound her over to the country ſeſ-
- 4adiſºn. Speciator, N° 117.
Prov. xxx. 4.
To BIRD. ºv. n.
1. To contračt the parts together; to grow ſtiff and hard.
If the land riſe full of clots, and if it is a binding land, you
muſt make it fine by harrowing of it. Mortimer's Husbandy.
2. To make coſtive.
3. To be obligatory.
The promiſes and bargains for truck, between a Swiſs and
an Indian, in the woods of America, are binding to them,
though they are perfectly in a ſtate of nature, in reference to
one another. Locke.
BiND. m. ſ. A ſpecies of hops.
The two beſt ſorts are the white and the grey bind; the
latter is a large ſquare hop, and more hardy. 4Martimer.
B1'NDER. m.ſ.. [from to bind.]
1. A man whoſe trade it is to bind books.
2. A man that binds ſheaves.
Three binders ſtood, and took the handfuls reapt
From boys that gather'd quickly up. Chapman's Iliad.
A man, with a binder, may reap an acre of wheat in a day,
if it ſtand well. Mortimer's Husbandy.
3. A fillet; a ſhred cut to bind with.
Upon that I laid a double cloth, of ſuch length and breadth
as might ſerve to encompaſs the fračtured member; which I
cut from each end to the middle, into three binders. Wiſeman.
Bi'NDING.. n.ſ.. [from bind.] A bandage.
This beloved young woman began to take off the binding of
his eyes. Tattler, N° 55.
Bi'NDweed. n.ſ.. [convolvulus, Lat.] The name of a plant.
It hath, for the moſt part, trailing ſtalks; the leaves grow
alternately on the branches; the flower conſiſts of one leaf,
ſhaped like a bell, whoſe mouth is widely expanded; the ovary
becomes a roundiſh membraneous fruit, wrapped up within the
flower cup ; and is generally divided into three cells, each con-
taining one angular ſeed. The ſpecies are thirty ſix. 1. The
common white great bindweed, vulgarly called bearbind 2.
Leſſer field bindweed, with a roſe coloured flower, vulgarly call-
edgravelbind. 3. Common ſea bindweed, with round leaves.
4. Great American bindweed, with ſpacious yellow ſweet ſcen-
ted flowers, commonly called Spaniſh arbour vine, or Spaniſh
woodbine. 5. White and yellow Spaniſh potatoes. 6. Red
Spaniſh potatoes. 7. The jalap, &amp;c. The firſt of theſe ſpe-
cies is a very troubleſome weed in gardens; and the ſecond
ſort is ſtill a worſe weed than the former. The third ſort is
found upon gravelly or ſandy ſhores, where the ſalt water over-
flows: this is a ſtrong purge, and, as ſuch, is often uſed in me-
dicine. The fourth ſort is common in the hot parts of Ame-
rica, and is planted to cover arbours and ſeats: one of theſe
plants will grow to the length of ſixty or an hundred feet, and
produce great quantities of ſide branches, and large fragrant
yellow flowers, ſucceeded by three large angular ſeeds. The
two kinds of potatoes are much cultivated in the Weſt Indies,
for food ; and, from the roots, a drink is made, called mobby,
ſtronger or weaker: it is a ſprightly liquour, but not ſubject
to fly into the head; nor will it keep beyond four or five days.
Theſe roots have been brought from America, and are culti-
vated in Spain and Portugal; but, in general, they are not ſo
well liked as the common potato, being too ſweet and luſ-
cious. The jalap, whoſe root has been long uſed in medicine,
is a native of the province of Italapa, about two days journey
from La Vera Cruz. A/illar.
Bindweed is of two ſorts, the larger and the ſmaller; the
firſt ſort flowers in September, and the laſt in June and July.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
Bi'Nocle. n.ſ.. [from linus and oculus.] A kind of dioptrick tele-
ſcope, fitted ſo with two tubes joining together in one, as that
a diſtant objećt may be ſeen with both eyes together. Harris.
BINo'cular. adj. [from binus and oculus, Lat..] Having two
eVeS.
- *Moſt animals are binocular, ſpiders, for the moſt part, o&amp;to-
nocular, and ſome ſenocular. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
BINo'MIAL Root. [in algebra.] A root compoſed of only two
parts or members, connected with the ſigns plus or minus.
Harris.
BINo'MINous, adj. [from binus and nomen, Lat.] Having two
IlanneS. - -
Bro'GRAPHER... n.ſ. [3.2. and y:z:...] A writer of lives; a re-
lator not of the hiſtory of nations, but of the actions of parti-
cular perſons.
Our Grubſtreet biographers watch for the death of a great
man, like ſo many undertakers, on pur poſe to make a penny
of him. Addison. Freeholder, N° 35.
Bio'GRAPHY. m. ſ. [3,3, and yºzºa.] -
In writing the lives of men, which is called biography, ſome
authors place every thing in the preciſe order of time when it
occurred. J/atts's Logicæ.
BI'ov Ac. ) m. ſ. [Fr. from wey wach, a double guard, Germ.
Bi'How Ac. } in war.] A guard at night performed by the whole
BI'vou Ac. ) army; which, either at a ſiege, or lying before an
enemy, every evening draws out from its tents or huts, and con-
tinues all night in arms before its lines or camp, to prevent any
ſurpriſe. To raiſe the biovac, is to return the army to their
tents at break of day, Trevoux. Harris.
3 w B1'PARous,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I R.
B I R.
Bºp ARous. adj. [from binus and pario, Lat.] Bringing forth
two at a birth.
BI'partite. adj. [from binus and partior, Lat..] Having two
correſpondent parts; divided into two.
BiPARTI'TION. m. ſ: [from bipartite.] The ačt of dividing into
two; or of making two correſpondent parts.
Brred. n.ſ.. [bipes, Lat.] An animal with two feet.
No ſerpent, or fiſhes oviparous, have any ſtones at all; nei-
ther biped nor quadruped oviparous, have any exteriourly.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 4.
Bipedal. adj. [lipedalis, Lat..] Two feet in length; or having
two feet. -
Birg'NNATED. adj. [from binus and penna, Lat.] Having two
lingS.
W Å. lipinnated inſects have poiſes joined to the body.
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Bipe'ſ Alous. adj. [of bis, Lat, and z1xx….] A flower conſiſt-
ing of two leaves. Dić7.
BI'QUADRATE. }"/ [in algebra.] The fourth power, ariſing
BigADRA'tick. from the multiplication of a ſquare num-
ber, or quantity by itſelf.
BIRCH Tree. [bijic, Sax. betula, Lat.]
The leaves are like thoſe of the poplar; the ſhoots are very
ſender and weak; the katkins are produced at remote diſ-
tances from the fruits, on the ſame tree; the fruit becomes a
little ſquamoſe cone; the feeds are winged, and the tree caſts its
outer rind every year. This tree is propagated by ſuckers,
which may be tranſplanted either in October or February; it
delights in a poor ſoil. The timber of this tree is uſed to make
chairs, &amp;c. It is alſo planted for hop poles, hoops, &amp;c. and it
is often uſed to make brooms. Millar.
BirchEN. adj. [from birch..] Made of birch.
His beaver'd brow a birchen garland bears. Dunciad, b. iv.
BIRD. m.ſ.. [bnb, or brub, a chicken, Saxon.] A general term
for the feathered kind; a fowl. In common talk, fowl is uſed
for the larger, and bird for the ſmaller kind of feathered ani-
mals. -
Harris.
The poor wren,
The moſt diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her neſt, againſt the owl. Macbeth.
Sh' had all the regal makings of a queen;
As holy oil, Edward confeſſor's crown,
The rod and bird of peace, and all ſuch emblems,
Laid nobly on her. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
The bird of Jove, ſtoop'd from his airy tour,
Two birds of gayeſt plume before him drove.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi. l. 186.
Hence men and beaſts the breath of life obtain,
And birds of air, and monſters of the main. Dryden's AFn.
There are ſome birds that are inhabitants of the water, whoſe
blood is cold as fiſhes, and their fleſh is ſo like in taſte, that
the ſcrupulous are allowed them on fiſh days. Locke.
Some ſquire perhaps you take delight to rack,
Who viſits with a gun, preſents with birds. Pope.
To BIRD. v. n. [from the noun..] To catch birds.
I do invite you tomorrow morning to my houſe, to break-
faſt; after, we'll a birding together. Shakeſp. M. J/, of Windſ.
Bi'RD Bolt. m. ſ. [from bird and bolt, or arrow.] A ſmall ſhot,
or arrow, to be ſhot at birds.
To be generous, guiltleſs, and of free diſpoſition, is to take
thoſe things for birdbolts, that you deem cannon bullets.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
BI'RDcAGE. m. ſ. [from bird and cage. See CAGE.]
Birdcages taught him the pulley, and tops the centrifugal
force. Arbuthnot and Pope's Martinus Scriblerus.
BI'RDCATCHER. m. ſ. [from bird and catch..] One that makes
it his employment to take birds.
- A poor lark entered into a miſerable expoſtulation with a
birdcatcher, that had taken her in his net. L’Eſtrange.
Bi'RDER. n.ſ. [from bird..] A birdcatcher.
Bi'RDING PIECE. m. ſ. [from bird and piece..] A fowling piece;
a º to ſhoot birds with.
... I'll creep up into the chimney.—There they always uſe to
diſcharge their birding pieces; creep into the kill hole.
Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of Windſºr.
Bi'RDLIME. n.ſ.. [from bird and lime.] A glutinous ſubſtance,
which is ſpread upon twigs, by which the birds that light upon
them are entangled.
Birdline is made of the bark of holly, boiled for ten or twelve
hours; and when the green coat is ſeparated from the other,
they cover it up for a fortnight, in a moiſt place, and pound it
into a tough paſte, that no fibres of the wood be left; then it is
waſhed in a running ſtream, till no motes appear, and put up
to ferment for four or five days, and ſcummed as often as any
thing ariſes, and then laid up for uſe; at which time they in-
corporate with it a third part of nut oil, over the fire. The
*irdline brought from Damaſcus is ſuppoſed to be made of ſe-
beſiens, the kernels being frequently found in it; but this will
19tendure the froſt or wet. That brought from Spain is of an
"ºncil; but the bark of our lantone, or wayfaring ſhrub,
will make very good birdline. Chambers.
Vol. H.
Holly is of ſo viſcous a juice, as they make birdlime of the
bark of it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 592.
- With ſtores of gather'd glue, contrive
To ſtop the vents and crannies of their hive;
Not birdline, or Idean pitch, produce
A more tenacious maſs of clammy juice. Dryden's Wirgi.
I’m enſnar'd ;
Heav'ns birdline wraps me round, and glues my wings,
Dryden's King Arthur.
The woodpecker, and other birds of this kind, becauſe they
Prey, upon, flies which they catch with their tongue, have a
couple of bags filled with a viſcous humour, as if it were a
natural birdlime, or liquid glue.
f . Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. i. e. 5.
BI'RDMAN. n.ſ.. [from bird and man.] A birdcatcher; a
fowler.
As a fowler was bending his net, a blackbird aſked him what
he was doing; why, ſays he, I am laying the foundations of a
city; and ſo the birdman drew out of fight. L’Eſtrange.
Bi'RDSEYE. m. ſ. [Adonis, Lat..] The name of a plant.
The leaves are like fennel or chamomile; the flowers con-
fift of many leaves, which are expanded in form of a roſe; the
ſeeds are collected into oblong heads. The ſpecies are, 1. The
common red bird eye. 2. The long leaved yellow birds eye,
&amp;c. The firſt ſort is ſown in open borders, as an annual
flower plant. The yellow ſort is uncommon in England.
Millar.
BI'RDsfoot. [ornithopodium, Lat.] The name of a plant.
It has a papilionaceous flower; the ovary, which riſes out of
the flower cup, afterwards becomes a pod, ſometimes diſtin-
guiſhed into bells by tranſverſe partitions, full of ſeeds, for the
moſt part roundiſh ; the leaves grow by threes, but have two
wings, or little leaves, at the origin of their foot ſtalks. The
ſpecies are, 1. The talleſt hairy birdsfoot trefoil, with a glome-
rated flower. , 2. Upright hoary bird foot trefoil, &amp;c. The
firſt of theſe plants is, by ſome, ſuppoſed to be the cytiſis of Vir-
gil; it dies to the ground with us every winter, and riſes again
the ſucceeding ſpring; and, when the roots are ſtrong, the
ſhoots will riſe to four or five feet high, and produce flowers in
great plenty; if it be cut while young, the cows are very fond
of it, but horſes will not eat it, unleſs they are very hungry.
A Millar.
BI'RDSNEST. n.ſ. An herb. Dić7.
BI'RDstonGUE. m. ſ. An herb. Dić7.
BI'RGANDER. m. ſ. A fowl of the gooſe kind. Dić7.
BIRT. n.ſ. A fiſh; the ſame with the turbot; which ſee.
BIRTH. n.ſ.. [beon), Sax.]
1. The act of coming into life.
But thou art fair, and, at thy birth, dear boy,
Nature and fortune join'd to make thee great. Shakespeare. K.j.
In Spain, our ſprings like old mens children be,
Decay’d and wither'd from their infancy;
No kindly ſhowers fall on our barren earth,
To hatch the ſeaſons in a timely birth. Dryden.
2. Extraćtion; lineage.
Moſt virtuous virgin, born of heav'nly birth. Fairy Q.
All truth I ſhall relate: nor firſt can I
Myſelf to be of Grecian birth deny.
3. Rank which is inherited by deſcent.
He doth object, I am too great of birth.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
Be juſt in all you ſay, and all you do ;
Whatever be your birth, you're ſure to be
A peer of the firſt magnitude to me. Dryden's juvenal.
4. The condition, or circumſtances, in which any man is born.
High in his chariot then Haleſus came,
A foe by birth to Troy's unhappy name. Dryden's Virgil.
5. Thing born; produćtion. -
The people fear me; for they do obſerve
Unfather'd heirs and loathly births of nature. Shakespeare. H. IV.
That poets are far rarer births than kings,
Your nobleſt father prov’d. Ben. johnſon's Epigrams.
Who of themſelves
Abhor to join: and, by imprudence mix’d,
Produce prodigious births, of body, or mind.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xi. 1. 687.
She, for this many thouſand years,
Seems to have practis'd with much care,
To frame the race of woman fair;
Yet never could a perfect birth
Sirj. Denham.
Produce before, to grace the earth. JWaller.
His eldeſt birth -
Flies, mark'd by heav'n, a fugitive o'er earth. Prior.
The vallies ſmile, and, with their flow y face,
And wealthy births, confeſs the flood's embrace. Blackmore.
Others hatch their eggs, and tend hº birth, till it is able to
ſhift for itſelf. Addison. Speciator, N° 120.
6. The aët of bringing forth.
That fair Syrian ſhepherdeſs,
Who after years of barrenneſs,
The highly favour’d Joſeph bore
To him that ſerv'd for her before ;
3 D And<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I S
B I T
And at her next birth, much like thee, • 1
Through pangs fled to felicity. . - Miliºn.
7. The ſeamen call a due or proper diſtance between ſhips lying
at an anchor, or under ſail, a birth. Alſo the proper place a:
board for a meſs to put their cheſts, &amp;c. is called the birth of
Alſo a convenient place to moor a ſhip in, is called
that meſs. -
Harris.
irth. -
nº. Y. º ſº birth sº day.]
ay on which any one is born.
1. The day Orient light,
Exhaling firſt from darkneſs, they beheld - --
Hirthday of heaven and earth. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vii.
2. The day of the year in which any one was born, annually ob-
ſerved.
This is my birthday; as this very day
Was Caſſius born. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
They tell me, ’tis my birthday, and I'll keep it
With double pomp of ſadneſs:
'Tis what the day deſerves, which gave me breath. Dryden,
Your country dames,
Whoſe cloaths returning birthday claims. Prior.
BI'rthdom. n.ſ. [This is erroneouſly, I think, printed in
Shakeſpeare, birthdoom. It is derived from birth and dom. See
Dom; as Kingdom, dukedom.] Privilege of birth.
Let us rather
Hold faſt the mortal ſword; and, like good men,
Beſtride our downfaln birthdom. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Bi'RTHNIGHT. n.ſ.. [from birth and night.]
1. The night in which any one is born.
Th’ angclick ſong in Bethlehem field,
On thy birthnight, that ſung the Saviour born. Par. Regain.
2. The night annually kept in memory of any one's birth.
A youth more glitt'ring than a birthnight beau. Pope.
BI'RTHPLACE. n.ſ.. [from birth and place.J Place where any
one is born.
My birthplace have I and my lovers left;
This enemy's town I'll enter. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
A degree of ſtupidity beyond even what we have been ever
charged with, upon the ſcore of our birthplace and climate.
Swift's Addreſ to Parliament.
Bi'RTHRIGHT. n.ſ.. [from birth and right.] The rights and
privileges to which a man is born ; the right of the firſt born.
Thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodneſs
Shares with thy birthright. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
And haſt been found
By merit, more than birthright, Son of God.
Milton's Parad. Loft, b. iii. 1, 308.
I lov’d her firſt, I cannot quit the claim,
But will preſerve the birthright of my paſſion. Otway's Orph.
While no bafeneſs in this breaſt I find,
I have not loſt the birthright of my mind. Dryden's Aurangz.
To ſay, that liberty and property are the birthright of the
Engliſh nation, but that if a prince invades them by illegal me-
thods, we muſt upon no pretence reſiſt, is to confound govern-
ments. Addiſon's Whig Examiner.
BIRTH STRA'NGLED. adj. [from birth and/ºrangle.] Strangled
or ſuffocated in being born.
Finger of birthſtrang!'d babe,
Ditch deliver'd by a drab. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Brºthyor T. n.ſ. [from birth and wort; I ſuppoſe from a qua-
º of haſtening delivery. Ariſtolochia, Lat..] The name of a
plant.
The ſtalks are flexible; the leaves are placed alternately on
the bºhes; the flowers conſiſt of one leaf, are of an ano-
malous figure, hollowed like a pipe, and ſhaped like a tongue,
generally hooked; the flower cup turns to a membraneous,
ºal ſhaped fruit, divided into five cells, and full of flat ſeeds.
The ſpecies are, 1. The round rooted birthwort. 2. The climi.
ing ºrthwºrt. 3. Spaniſh birthwort, &amp;c. The firſt and ſecºnd
2re ſometimes uſed in medicine, and are eaſily propagated by
Pºng their roots. A/illar.
P/SCOI/N. n.ſ. [French..] A confection made of flour, ſugar,
marmalade, eggs, &amp;c. S
Bisºr, n.ſ.. [from his, twice, Lat. and cuil, baked, Fr.]
1. A kind of hard dry bread, made to be carried tº ſea; it is
baked for long voyages four times. &gt;
. The biſcuit alſo in the ſhips, eſpecially in the Spaniſh gal-
lies, was grown hoary, and unwholeſomé.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the -
.Many have been cured by abſtinence #. *:::*
*ifuit, which creates no thirſt, and ſtrong frićtions four or five
2. º mº of fine fl almond Arbuthnot on Diet.
confectioners. • flour, almonds, and ſugar, made by the
To Biseſ - - -
iº. º [from tiºn and ſeco, to cut, Lat.] To divide
The rational horizon *iſºeth the globe into two equal parts.
f ... Brown's Pulgar Erreurs, h. vi. e. g.
*º. ſº [from the verb.] A geometrical term, ń.
Biº e diviſion of any quantity into two equal parts.' "
... m. ſ. [from ºſcºpus, Lat, the Saxons formed bircop,
which was afterwards ſoftened into liftop.] One of the head
order of the clergy.
A biſhop is an overſeer, or ſuperintendant, of religious mat-
ters in the chriſtian church. Aylºffe's Parergon.
You ſhall find him well accompany’d
With reverend fathers, and well learned hiſºps.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
Their zealous ſuperſtition thinks, or pretends, they cannot
do God a greater ſervice, than to deſtroy the primitive, apoſto-
lical, and anciently univerſal government of the church by bi-
ſhops. R. Charles.
In caſe a biſhop ſhould commit treaſon and felony, and forfeit
his eſtate, with his life, the lands of his biſhoprick remain ſtill
in the church. South.
On the word biſhop, in French ev.?ue, I would obſerve, that
there is no natural connexion between the ſacred office and the
letters or ſound; for ev. Aue, and biſhop, ſignify the ſame office,
though there is not one letter alike in them. //atti's Logick.
Bi'shop. m. ſ. A cant word for a mixture of wine, oranges, and
ſugar.
Fine oranges,
Well roaſted, with ſugar and wine in a cup,
They'll make a ſweet biſhop, when gentle folks ſup. Swift.
To BI's Hop. v. a. [from the noun..] To confirm; to admit ſo-
lemnly into the church.
They are prophane, imperfeót, oh! too bad,
Except confirm'd and biſhoped by thee. Donne.
BI's Hoprick. m. ſ. [bircopnice, Saxon.] The dioceſe of a bi-
ſhop; the diſtrict over which the juriſdićtion of a biſhop ex-
tends.
It will be fit, that, by the king's ſupreme power in cauſes ec-
cleſiaſtical, they be ſubordinate under ſome biſhop, and biſhop-
rick, of this realm. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
A virtuous woman ſhould rejećt marriage, as a good man
does a biſhoprick; but I would adviſe neither to perfiſt in refuſ-
ing. Addiſon. Speater, Nº 89.
Thoſe paſtors had epiſcopal ordination, poſſeſſed prefer-
ments in the church, and were ſometimes promoted to biſhop-
ricks themſelves. Swift on the Sentiments of a Church of E. man.
Bishopsweep. [Ammi, Lat..] The name of a plant.
This is an umbelliferous weed, with ſmall ſtriated ſeeds;
the petals of the flowers are unequal, and ſhaped like a heart.
The ſeeds of the greater biſhopsweed are uſed in medicine, and
ſhould be ſown in an open ſituation, early in the ſpring. Mill.
Bisk. n.ſ.. [biſºue, Fr.] Soup; broth made by boiling ſeveral
ſorts of fleſh.
A prince, who in a foreſt rides aſtray,
And, weary, to ſome cottage finds the way,
Talks of no pyramids, or fowl, or bisks of fiſh,
But hungry ſups his cream ſerv'd up in earthen diſh.
King's Art of Cookery.
BI'sket. See Biscuit. -
Bi's Muth. n.ſ. The ſame as marcaſte; it properly ſignifies
a hard, white, brittle, mineral ſubſtance, of a metalline na-
ture, found at Miſnia; though ſuppoſed to be only a recre-
mentitious matter thrown off in the formation of tin, as unfit
to enter its compoſition. There are ſome, however, who
eſteem it a metal ſui generis; though it uſually contains ſome
filver. There is an artificial biſºniith made, for the ſhops, of
tin. Quincy.
BI'ss Extile. m. ſ. [from bis, and ſixtilis, Lat.] Leap year ; ,
&gt;
the year in which the day, ariſing from ſix odd hours in each
year, is intercalated.
The year of the ſun conſiſteth of three hundred and fixty
five days and ſix hours, wanting eleven minutes; which ſix
hours omitted, will, in time, deprave the compute; and this
was the occaſion of liffextile, or leap year.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
Towards the latter end of February is the biſextile or inter-
calar day; called biſºxtile, becauſe the ſixth of the calends of
March is twice repeated. Hºlder on Time.
BI'sson. adj. [derived by Skinner from by and ſºn J Blind.
But who, oh who hath ſeen the mobled queen,
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
With hiſon rheum. Shakeſp. Hamlet:
What harm can your biſºn conſpectuities glean out of this
chara&amp;ter. Shakſº. Coriolanus.
BISTRE. m. ſ. [French.] A colour made of chimney footboil-
ed, and then diluted with water; uſed by painters in waſhing
their deſigns. Tºroux.
Bi'stort. m.ſ. ſhifforta, Lat.] The name of a plant called alſo
ſnakeweed; which ſee. - -
Bistoury. n.ſ. [liftouri, Fr.] A ſurgeon's inſtrument uſed in
making inciſions, of which there are three ſorts; the blade of
the firſt turns like that of a lancet; but the ſtraight hiſłoury has
the blade fixed in the handle; the crooked by oury is ſhaped
like a half moon, having the edge on the inſide. Chambers.
Bisu'l cous. adj. [biſulcus Lat.] Clovenfooted.
For the ſwine, although multiparous, yet being liftikous, and
only clovenhoofed, are farrowed with open eyes, as other liſtil-
cous animals. Brown's Pulgar Errow , b iii. c. 26.
BIT. n.ſ.. [bitol, Saxon ] Signifies the whole machine of all the
iron
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I T
B I T
iron appurtenances of a bridle, as the bit-mouth, the branches,
the curb, the ſevil holes, the trancheffl, and the croſs chains;
but ſometimes it is uſed to ſignify only the bit-mouth in parti-
cular. Farrier’s Dić7.
They light from their horſes, pulling off their bits, that they
might ſomething refreſh their mouths upon the graſs. Sidney.
We have ſtrict ſtatutes, and moſt biting laws,
The needful bits and curbs of headſtrong ſteeds.
Shakeſp. A ſeaſure for Meaſure.
He hath the bit faſt between his teeth, and away he runs.
Stillingfleet.
- Unus’d to the reſtraint
Of curbs and bits, and fleeter than the winds. Addison Cata.
BIT. n.ſ.. [from bite.]
1. As much meat as is put into the mouth at once.
How many prodigal bits have ſlaves and peaſants
This night englutted Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
Follow your function, go and batten on cold bits. Shakeſp.
The mice found it troubleſome to be ſtill climbing the oak
for every bit they put in their bellies. L’Eſtrange.
By this the boiling kettle had prepar’d,
And to the table ſent the ſmoaking lard,
A ſav'ry bit, that ſerv'd to reliſh wine. Dryden's Fables.
John was the darling; he had all the good bits, was cram-
med with good pullet, chicken, and capon. Arbuthnot's j. Bull.
2. A ſmall piece of any thing.
Then clap four ſlices of pilaſter on't,
That, lac'd with bits of ruſtick, makes a front. Pope.
He bought at thouſands, what with better wit
You purchaſe as you want, and bit by bit. Pope's Epiſtles.
His majeſty has power to grant a patent for ſtamping round
lits of copper, to every ſubject he hath. Swift.
3. A Spaniſh Weſt Indian filver coin, valued at ſevenpence half-
enny.
4. A bit the better or worſe. In the ſmalleſt degree.
There are few that know all the tricks of theſe lawyers;
for aught I can ſee, your caſe is not a bit clearer than it was
ſeven years ago. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of j. Bull.
To BIT. v. a. [from the noun..] To put the bridle upon a
horſe.
Bitch. n.ſ.. [brege, Saxon.]
1. The female of the canine kind; as the wolf, the dog, the fox,
the otter.
And at his feet a bitch wolf ſuck did yield
To two young babes. Spenſ. Viſion of Bellay.
I have been credibly informed, that a bitch will nurſe, play
with, and be fond of young foxes, as much as, and in place of
her puppies. Locke.
2. A name of reproach for a woman.
John had not run a madding ſo long, had it not been for an
extravagant bitch of a wife. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory #. j. Bull.
To BITE. v. a. pret. I bit; part. paſſ. I have bit, or bitten. [bi-
tan, Saxon.]
1. To cruſh, or pierce with the teeth.
My very enemy's dog,
Though he had bit me, ſhould have ſtood that night
Againſt my fire. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe,
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords in twain,
Too intricate t'unlooſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Theſe are the youths that thunder at a playhouſe, and fight
for bitten apples. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
He falls; his arms upon his body ſound,
And with his bloody teeth he bites the ground. Dryden.
There was lately a young gentleman bit to the bone, who has
now indeed recovered. Tatler, No 62.
Their foul mouths have not opened their lips without a fal.
fity; though they have ſhowed their teeth as if they would tite
off my noſe. Arbuthnot and Pope's Martinus Scriblerus.
2. To give pain by cold.
Here feel we the icy phang,
And churliſh chiding of the winter's wind;
Which when it bites and blows upon my body,
Ev’n till I ſhrink with cold, I ſmile. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Full fifty years harneſs'd in rugged ſteel,
I have endur'd the biting winter's blaſt,
And the ſeverer heats of parching ſummer.
Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother.
3. To hurt or pain with reproach.
Each poet with a diff'rent talent writes; -
One praiſes, one inſtructs, another lites. Rºſcommon.
4. To cut; to wound.
I've ſeen the day, with my good biting faulchion,
I would have made them ſkip. Shakeſp. King Lear.
5. To make the mouth ſmart with an acrid taſte.
It may be the firſt water will have more of the ſcent, as
more fragrant; and the ſecond more of the taſte, as more bit-
ter, or biting. Pacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 21.
6. To cheat; to trick; to defraud : a low phraſe.
Aſleep and naked as an Indian lay,
An honeſt factor ſtole a gem away :
He pledg'd it to the knight; the knight had wit,
So kept the diamond, and the rogue was bit, Pope.
If you had allowed half the fine gentlemen to have converſed
With you, they would have been ſtrangely bit, while they
thought only to fall in love with a fair lady. Pope's Letters.
BITE. n: / [from the verb.]
1. The ſeizure of any thing by the teeth.
Dºes he think he can endure the everlaſting burnings, or
arm Rimſelf againſt the lites of the never dying worm South.
Nor dogdays parching heat, that ſplits the rocks,
Are half ſo harmful as the greedy flocks; ;
Their venom'd lite, and ſcars indented on the flocks.
Dryden's Wirgil's Georgicks, b. ii. l. 5.22.
2. The aët of a fiſh that tº the # gicks, &gt;
I have known a very good fiſher angle diligently four or ſix
hours for a river carp, and not have a hite. I/alton's Angler.
3. A cheat; a trick; a fraud; in low and vulgar language.
Let a man be ne'er ſo wiſe,
He may be caught with ſoberlies;
For take it in its proper light, -
'Tis juſt what coxcombs call a bite. Swift.
4. A ſharper; one who commits frauds.
BI'TER. m. ſ. [from bite.]
I. He that bites.
Great barkers are no biters.
2. A fiſh apt to take the bait.
He is ſo bold, that he will invade one of his own kind, and
you may therefore eaſily believe him to be a boldbiter. Iſalton.
3. A tricker; a deceiver.
A liter is one who tells you a thing, you have no reaſon to
diſbelieve in itſelf, and perhaps has given you, before he bit
you, no reaſon to diſbelieve it for his ſaying it; and, if you
give him credit, laughs in your face, and triumphs that he has
deceived you. He is one who thinks you a fool, becauſe you
do not think him a knave. Speciator, N° 5 oA.
BITT Acle. n.ſ. A frame of timber in the ſteerage of a ſhip,
where the compaſs is placed. Dić.
BITTEN. particip. paſſ. [from to bite; which ſee.]
BITTER. adj. [breen, Saxon.]
1. Having a hot, acrid, biting taſte, like wormwood.
Bitter things are apt rather to kill than engender putrefac-
tion. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 696.
Though a man in a fever ſhould, from ſugar, have a bitter
taſte, which, at another time, produces a ſweet one; yet the
idea of bitter in that man's mind, would be as clear and diſ-
tinct from the idea of ſweet, as if he had taſted only gall.
Locke.
-
Camden's Remains.
2. Sharp; cruel; ſevere.
Friends now faſt ſworn,
Unſeparable, ſhall within this hour,
On a diſſenſion of a doit, break out
To bittereſt enmity. Shakespeare Coriolanus:
Huſbands, love your wives, and be not bitter againſt them.
Colºſ. iii. 19.
The word of God, inſtead of a bitter, teaches us a charitable
zeal. Sprat.
3. Calamitous; miſerable.
Noble friends and fellows, whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying;
Go with me, like good angels, to my end. Shakeſp. H. VIII.
A dire induction am I witneſs to ;
And will to France, hoping, the conſequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Tell him, that if I bear my bitter fate,
'Tis to behold his vengeance for my ſon. Dryden's Áncis,
4. Painful; inclement.
And ſhun the bitter conſequence: for know,
The day thou eat'ſt thereof, my ſole command
Tranſgreſt, inevitably thou ſhalt die. Paradiſe Lºft, b. viii.
The fowl the borders fly,
And ſhun the bitter blaſt, and wheel about the ſky. Dryden,
5. Sharp; reproachful; ſatirical.
Go with me,
And, in the breath of bitter words, let's ſmother
My damned ſon. Shakeſp. Richard III.
6. Mournful; afflićted. -
Wherefore is light given unto him that is in miſery, and life
unto the bitter in ſoul ? job, iii. 29.
7. In any manner, unpleaſing or hurtful. -
Bitter is an equivocal word; there is bitter wormwood,
there are litter words, there are litter cnemies, and a *... cºld
morning. JWatts’s Logick.
BI'TTERGour D. m.ſ.. [colocynthis, Lat.) The name of a plant.
It is, in all reſpeas, like the gourd, excepting the leaves ºf
the plant being deeply jagged, and the tº being exceſſively
bitter, and not eatable. There aſ: ſeveral varieties of this
plant, which are very common in divers parts of the Eaſt and
Weſt Indies. Millar.
BITTERLY. adv. [from bitter.]
1. With a bitter taſte. -
2. In a bitter manner; ſorrowfully; calamitouſly.
I ſo lively acted with my tears,
That my poor miſtreſs, moved therewithal,
Wept bitterly. Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen ºf ſº:
1 crly
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B I V
B L A
ºrk haſt thou paid, and ſtill art paying -
º paid, Milton's Agoniſles, l. 432.
3. Sharply; ſeverely.
His behaviour is not to cenſure bittery the errours of their
Sprat.
zeal. - - or 1 d a
- but Fr.] A bird with lon legs, and
B. * "...". º fiſh ; remarkable ior the noiſe
ong bill, ally called bumping. See BitTour.
- 's- uſu
wº: enemies cnough, beſides ſuch unnatural
fiſhermen as otters? º* the bittern. J/alton.
tºrn knows his time, with billingulpht, -
º: the ſounding marſh. - Thomſºn's Spring.
BITTERN. m. ſ. [from hitter.] A very bitter liquour, which
drains off in making of common ſalt, and uſed in the Prepara-
tion of Epſom faſt. - &amp;incy.
Bºrter Ness. n.ſ.. [from bitter.]
. A bitter taſte. - - - -
I +jº of whiteneſs, or bitterneſ, is in the mind, exačtly
anſwering that power which is in any body to produce it there.
Locke.
2. Malice; grudge; hatred; implacability. -
The biernºſ; and animoſity between the chicſ commanders
was ſuch, that a great part of the army was marched. Clarend.
3. Sharpneſs; ſeverity of temper. - - - - - -
His ſorrows have ſo overwhelm º Wits,
hall we be thus afflićted in his wreaks, -
i. fits, his frenzy, and his bitterneſs P, Shakeſp. Tit. Andr.
Pierpoint and Crew appeared now to have contračted more
bitterneſ; and ſourneſs than formerly, and were more reſerved
towards the king's commiſſioners. Clarendon, b. viii.
4. Satire; piquancy; keenneſs of reproach.
Somethink their wits have been aſleep, except they dart out
ſomewhat piquant, and to the quick: men ought to find the
difference between ſaltneſs and bitternºſ. Bacon, Eſſay 33.
5. Sorrow; vexation; afflićtion. - -
There appears much joy in him, even ſo much, that joy
could not ſhew itſelf modeſt enough, without a badge of bitter-
meſ. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
They ſhall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only ſon,
and ſhall be in bitterneſ for him, as one that is in bitterneſ for
his firſtborn. Zech. xii. 1 o.
Moſt purſue the pleaſures, as they call them, of their natures,
which begin in ſin, are carried on with danger, and end in
bitterneſs. J/ake's Preparation for Death.
I oft, in bitterneſ of ſoul, deplor’d
My abſent daughter, and my dearer lord. Pope's Odyſſey.
BI'TTERsw EET. m. ſ. [from bitter and ſweet.] The name of
an apple, which has a compound taſte of ſweet and bitter.
It is but a bitterſweet at beſt, and the fine colours of the ſer-
pent do by no means make amends for the ſmart and poiſon of
his ſting. South.
When I expreſs the taſte of an apple, which we call the
bitterſweet, none can miſtake what I mean. J/atts's Logick.
BITTER v Etch. m. ſ. [orobus, Lat.]
This plant hath a papilionaceous flower, out of whoſe em-
palement riſes the pointal, wrapt up in the membrane, which
becomes a round pod, full of oval ſhaped ſeeds; two leaves,
joined together, grow upon a rib that terminates in a point.
Millar.
B1'ttou R. n.ſ.. [butour, Fr.] The name of a bird, commonly
called the bittern; [See BitterN.] but perhaps as properly
bittour.
Then to the waters brink ſhe laid her head;
And, as a bitiour bumps within a recd,
To thee alone, O lake, ſhe ſaid, I tell. Dryden's IV of Bath.
BITU'ME. m. ſ. [from bitumen.] Bitumen. See BITUMEN.
Mix with theſe
Idaean pitch, quick ſulphur, ſilver's ſpume,
Sea onion, hellebore, and black bitume. May's Virgil.
BITUMEN. m. ſ. [Lat..] A fat unctuous matter dug out of
the earth, or ſcummed off lakes, as the Aſphaltis in Judaea, of
various kinds; ſome ſo hard as to be uſed for coals; others ſo
glutinous as to ſerve for mortar. Savary.
It is reported, that bitumen mingled with lime, and put un-
der water, will make, as it were, an artificial rock, the ſub-
ſtance becometh ſo hard. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 783.
The fabrick ſeem’d a work of riſing ground,
With ſulphur and bitumen caſt between Dryden's Fºllº.
Bitumen is a body that readily takes fire, yields an oil, and is
ſoluble in water. Hºodward's Method of Foſſils.
Brru'MINous, adj. [from bitumen.] Having the nature and
qualities of bitumen; compounded of bitumen.
Naphtha, which was the lituminous mortar uſed in the walls
* *ylon, grows to an entire and very hard matter, like a
Olle. - Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
The fruitage fair to fight, like that which grew
Near that "ituminous lake, where Sodom flamid.
- 44ilton's Par. Loft, b. x. l. 562.
Biv A'Lve. adj. [from binus and valva, iſſ"; º
* : º * term uſed of thoſe fiſh that have two
• *9)/ters; and of thoſe plants whoſe ſeed Pods open
their whole length, to diſcharge their ſeeds, as peas.
In the cavity lies looſe the ſhell of ſome ſort of bivalve, lar-
ger than could be introduced in at either of thoſe holes.
J/ºodward on Fºſſils.
Biv A'LvULAR. adj. [from bivalve..] Having two valves. Dići.
BI'xwort. m. ſ. An herb. Die?.
BI'zANTINº. m. ſ. [more properly ſpelt byzantine; from Byzan-
tium.] A great piece of gold valued at fifteen pound, which the
king offereth upon high feſtival days; it is yet called a bizam-
time, which anciently was apiece of gold coined by the empe-
rours of Conſtantinople. Camden's Remains.
To BLAB. v. a. [liabberen, Dutch.]
1. To tell what ought to be kept ſecret; it uſually implies rather
thoughtleſſneſs than treachery; but may be uſed in either ſenſe.
The gaudy, blabbing, and remorſ ful day,
Is crept into the boſom of the ſea. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Thy dues be done, and none left out,
Ere the blabbing eaſtern ſcout
The nice morn on the Indian ſteep,
From her cabin'd loophole peep. Miltºn.
Nature has made man's breaſt no windores,
To publiſh what he does within doors;
Nor what dark ſecrets there inhabit,
Unleſs his own raſh folly blab it. Hudibras, p. ii. º. ii.
Sorrow nor joy can be diſguis’d by art,
Our foreheads blab the ſecrets of our heart. Dryden's juv.
It is unlawful to give any kind of religious worſhip to a crea-
ture; but the very indices of the fathers cannot eſcape the in-
dex expurgatorius, for blabbing ſo great a truth. Stillingfleet.
Nor whiſper to the tattling reeds
The blackeſt of all female deeds;
Nor blab it on the lonely rocks,
Where echo ſits, and liſt’ning mocks. Swift.
2. To tell; in a good ſenſe.
That delightful engine of her thoughts,
That blahl'd them with ſuch pleaſing eloquence,
Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage.
Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
To BLAB. v. n. To tattle; to tell tales.
Your mute I’ll be ;
When my tongue bals, then let mine eyes not ſee.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
BLAB. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A teltale; a thoughtleſs babbler;
a treacherous betrayer of ſecrets.
The ſecret manpeareth many confeſſions; for who will open
himſelf to a blab, or babbler Bacon, Eſſay 6.
To have reveal’d
Secrets of man, the ſecrets of a friend,
Contempt and ſcorn of all, to be excluded
All friendſhip, and avoided as a blab. Mihon's Agoniſter:
Whoever ſhews me a very inquiſitive body, I'll ſhew him a
*ab, and one that ſhall make privacy as publick as a proclama-
tion. L’Eſtrange.
I ſhould have certainly gone about ſhewing my letters, under
the charge of ſecrecy, to every blab of my acquaintance.
Swift's Letters.
BLA'BBER. m. ſ. [from blah..] A tattler; a teltale.
To BLA*BER. v. m. To whiſtle to a horſe. Skinner.
BLABBERLIPPED. Skinner. See Blobberlipped.
BLACK. adj. [blac, Saxon.]
1. Of the colour of night.
In the twilight in the evening, in the lack and dark night.
Prov. vii. Q.
By Ariſtotle it ſeems to be implied, in theſe problems which
enquire why the ſun makes man black, and not the fire, why it
whitens wax, yet blacks the ſkin. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
2. Dark. -
The heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a
great rain. 1 Kings, xviii. 45.
3. Cloudy of countenance; ſullen.
She hath abated me of half my train;
Look'd black upon me.
4. Horrible; wicked; atrocious.
Either my country never muſt be freed, -
Or I conſenting to ſo black a deed. Dryden's Indian Emp:
5. Diſmal; mournful.
A dire induction am I witneſs to;
And will to France, hoping, the conſequence, -
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
6. Black and blue. The colour of a bruiſe; a ſtripe.
Miſtreſs Ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that you
cannot ſee a white ſpot about her. Merry Wives of J/indſºr.
And, wing'd with ſpeed and fury, flew -
To reſcue knight from black and blue. Hudibras, cant. ii.
BLAck-BRow ED. adj. [from black and brow.] Having black
eyebrows; gloomy; diſmal; threatening. -
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow’d night,
Give me my Romeo. Shakeſp. Romeo and Juliet.
Thus when a black-brow'd guſt begins to riſe,
White foam at firſt on the curl’d ocean fries,
Then roars the main, the billows mount the ſkies.
- Dryden, Ancid vii. ſ. 736.
S BLAck-
Shakeſp. King Lear.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L A
B L A
T-º-º:
BLAck-BRYon Y. n.ſ. ſtamnus, Lat.] The name of a plant.
It is male and female in different plants; the flowers of the
male plant conſiſt of one leaf, and are bell ſhaped; but theſe
are barren; the embryos are produced on the female plants,
which become oval berries, including roundiſh ſeeds. Theſe
plants have no claſper, as the white bryony hath. The ſpe-
cies are, 1. The common black-bryony. 2. Black-bryony of Crete,
with a trifid leaf, &amp;c. The firſt is rarely cultivated in gar-
dens, but grows wild under hedges, and is gathered for medi-
cinal uſe. It may be eaſily propagated by ſowing the ſeeds,
ſoon after they are ripe, under the helter of buſhes; where, in
the ſpring, the plants will come up, and ſpread their branches
over the buſhes. Millar.
Black-cATTLE. Oxen; bulls; and cows.
The other part of the grazier's buſineſs is what we call
black-cattle, producing hides, tallow, and beef, for exportation.
Swift.
BLAck-EARTH. m. ſ. It is every where obvious on the ãº.
of the ground, and what we call mould. Woodw. on Foſſils.
Black-GUARD. adj. [from black and guard.] A cant word a-
mongſt the vulgar; by which is implied a dirty fellow ; of the
meaneſt kind.
Let a black-guard boy be always about the houſe, to ſend on
your errands, and go to market for you on rainy days. Swift.
BLAck-LEAD. n.ſ.. [from black and lead..] A mineral found in
the lead-mines, much uſed for pencils; it is not fuſible, or not
without a very great heat.
You muſt # get your black-lead ſharpened finely, and put
faſt into quills, for your rude and firſt draught. Peacham.
Black-MAIL. n.ſ. A certain rate of money, corn, cattle, or
other conſideration, paid to men allied with robbers, to be by
them protećted from the danger of ſuch as uſually rob or ſteal.
Cowel.
Black-pudding. m. ſ. [from black and pudding.] A kind of
food made of blood and grain.
Through they were lin'd with many a piece
Of ammunition bread and cheeſe,
And fat black-puddings, proper food
Forwarriours that delight in blood. Hudibras, p. i. cant. i.
BLAck-Rod. n.ſ.. [from black and red.] The uſher belonging to
the order of the garter; ſo called from the black rod he carries
in his hand. He is of the king's chamber, and likewiſe uſher
of the parliament. Cowel.
Black. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive.]
I. A black colour.
Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons, and the ſcowl of night.
Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loſt.
For the produćtion of black, the corpuſcles muſt be leſs than
any of thoſe which exhibit colours. Newton's Opticks.
2. Mourning.
Riſe, wretched widow, riſe; nor, undeplor’d,
Permit my ghoſt to paſs the Stygian ford: }
But riſe, prepar'd in black, to mourn thy periſh'd lord.
Dryden's Fables.
3. A blackamoor.
4. That part of the eye which is black.
It ſuices that it be in every part of the air, which is as big
as the black or fight of the eye. Digly.
To BLACK. v. a. [from the noun..] To make black; to blacken.
Blacking over the paper with ink, not only the ink would be
quickly dried up, but the paper, that I could not burn before,
would be quickly ſet on fire. Boyle on Colours.
Then in his fury black'd the raven o'er,
And bid him prate in his white plumes no more.
Addison's Ovid's Metamorph. b. ii.
BLA'ck AMooR. m. ſ. [from black and Moor.] A man by na-
ture of a black complexion; a negro.
They are no more afraid of a blackamoor, or a lion, than of
a nurſe, or a cat. Locke on Education, $ 115.
BLA'ckBERRIED Heath. [empctrum, Lat..] The name of a plant.
It hath leaves like thoſe of the heath; the flowers are male
and female, which grow in different parts of the ſame plant;
the male flowers have no petals; the female are ſucceeded by
blackberries, in each of which are contained three or four hard
ſeeds. This little ſhrub grows wild upon the mountains in
Staffordſhire, Devonſhire, and Yorkſhire. Millar.
BLA'cKBERRY Buſh. m. ſ. A ſpecies of bramble; which ſee.
BLA'cKBERRY. n.ſ. The fruit of the blackberry buſh.
The policy of theſe crafty ſneering raſcals, that ſtale old
mouſe eaten checſe Neſtor, and that ſame dogfox Ulyſſes, is
not proved worth a blackberry. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Then ſad he ſung the children in the wood;
How blackberries they pluck'd in deſarts wild,
And fearleſs at the glittering faulchion ſmil’d. Gay's Paſº.
BLA'cKBIRD. m. ſ. [from black and bird..] The name of a bird.
Of ſinging birds, they have linnets, goldfinches, blackbirds,
thruſhes, and divers others. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
A ſchoolboy ran unto’t, and thought
The crib was down, the blackbird caught.
To BLA'ck EN. v. a [from black.]
1. To make of a black colour.
Vol. I.
Swift.
Bleſs'd by aſpiring winds, he finds the ſtrand
Blacken'd by crouds. Prior,
... While the long fun'rals blacken all the way. Pºpé.
2. To darken.
. That little cloud that appear'd at firſt to Elijah's ſervant, no
igger than a man's hand, but preſently after grew, and ſpread,
and blackened the face of the whole heaven. South.
3. To defame; or make infamous. -
Let us blacken him what we can, ſaid that miſèreant Harri-
ſon, of the bleſſed king, upon the wording and drawing up his
charge againſt his approaching trial.
- - South.
...The morals bla.{en'd, when the writings 'ſcape
The libell'd perſon, and the pictur'd ſhape. Pope.
To BLA'cKEN. v. n. To grow black.
The hollow ſound
Sung in the leaves, the foreſt ſhook around,
Air blacken'd, roll'd the thunder, groan'd the ground. Dryden.
BEA'ckish. adj. [from black..] Somewhat black.
...Part of it all the year continues in the form of a blackiſh
oil. Boyle.
BLA'ckMooR. m.ſ.. [ſtom black and Mºor.] A negro.
The land of Chus makes no part of Africa; nor is it the ha-
bitation of blackmoors; but the country of Arabia, eſpecially the
happy and ſtony. Brown's Vulgar Errours; b. vi. c. 11.
More to weſt
The realm of Bacchus to the blackmoor ſea, Par. Rºg. h. iv.
BLA'ckNEss. n.ſ.. [from black.]
1. Black colour.
Blackneſs is only a diſpoſition to abſorb, or ſtifle, without re-
flection, moſt of the rays of every ſort that fall on the bodies.
Locke's Elements of Natural Philoſºhy, c. ii.
There would emerge one or more very black ſpots, and,
within thoſe, other ſpots of an intenſer blaðineſs. Newt. Opt.
His tongue, his prating tongue, had chang'd him quite,
To ſooty blackneſs from the pureſt white. Addison's Ovid.
2. Darkneſs.
His faults in him ſeem as the ſpots of heav'n,
More fiery by night's blackneſs. Shakespeare . Ant. and Cleopatra.
BLA'cksMITH. n.ſ.. [from black and ſmith..] A ſmith that works
in iron; ſo called from being very ſmutty.
The blackſmith may forge what he pleaſes. Howel's E. Tars.
Shut up thy doors with bars and bolts; it will be impoſſible
for the blac{ſmith to make them ſo faſt, but a cat and a whore-
maſter will find a way through them. Speciator, N° 2 os.
Black TAIL. m. ſ. [from black and tail.] A fiſh; a kind of
perch, by ſome called ruff, or popes. See Pope. Dić?.
BLA'ckTHoRN. m. ſ. [from black and thorn.] The ſame with
the ſloe. See PLUM, of which it is a ſpecies.
BLA'DDER. nº ſ. [blabbre, Saxon; blader, Dutch.]
1. That veſſel in the body which contains the urine.
The bladder ſhould be made of a membranous ſubſtance, and
extremely dilatable for receiving and containing the urine,
till an opportunity of emptying it. Ray on the Creation.
2. It is often filled with wind, to which alluſions are frequently
made.
That huge great body which the giant bore,
Was vanquiſh’d quite, and of that monſtrous maſs
Was nothing left, but like an empty bladder was. Fairy 9,
A bladder but moderately filled with air, and ſtrongly tied,
being held near the fire, grew exceeding turgid and hard; but
afterwards being brought nearer to the fire, it ſuddenly broke,
with ſo loud a noiſe as made us for a while after almoſt deaf.
Boyle,
3. It is uſual for thoſe that learn to ſwim, to ſupport themſelves
with blown bladders.
I have ventur'd,
Like little wanton boys, that ...m on bladders,
Theſe many ſummers, in a ſea of glory;
But far beyond my depth: my highblown pride
At length broke under me. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
4. A bliſter; a puſtule.
BLA'DDER-NUT. n.ſ. [/?aphylodendron, Lat.] A plant.
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, which are placed circu-
larly, and expand in form of a roſe; out of whoſe many headed
flower cup riſes the pointal, which becomes a membranaceous
fruit, ſomewhat like the inflated bladder of fiſhes, and divided
into two or three cells, containing ſeeds in form of 3 ſºull.
The ſpecies are, 1. The common wild bladder-nut. 2. Three
leaved Virginian bladder-nut. 3, Bladder-nut, with ſingle ſhining
leaves. 4. Bladder-nut, with narrow bay leaves. . . Three
leaved American bladder-nut, with cut leaves. The firſt of theſe
trees is found wild in the woods, and other ſhady places, in the
northern parts of England. The ſecond ſºrt is a native of A-
merica, but is ſo hardy as to endure the ſevereſt cold of our
climté, in the open air. Both theſe kind. Inay be propagated,
by ſowing their ſeeds early in the ſpring. They will commonly
grow in England to the height of twelve or fourteen feet. Mill.
BIApper-sºn A. m. ſ. [colutea, Lat..] The name of a plant.
It hath a papilionageous flower, ſucceeded by pods, reſemb-
bling the inflated bladder of fiſhes, in which are contained ſº-
verdikidney ſhaped ſeeds. The ſpecies are five. Theſe ſhrubs
grow to the height of eight or ten feet; and, among flowering
3 E trec.S.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L A
B L A
trees, the oddneſ of their flowers and pods will make a}.
'anictv. - - l lar.
Bº m. ſ. [blas, bleo, Sax. lººd, Fr.] The ſpire of graſs
before it grows to ſeed; the green ſhoots of corn which riſe
from the fied. This ſeems to me the primitive ſignification of
the word had ; from which, I believe, the blade of a ſword
was firſt named, becauſe of its ſimilitude in ſhape; and, from
the blade of a ſword, that of ºther weapons or tools. . . .
There is hardly found a plant that yieldeth a red juice in the
blad, or ear, except it be the tree that beareth ſanguis f:
- - dºº?!.
#11.J. Sends in his feeding flocks betimes, t' invade
The riſing bulk of the luxuriant blade. Dryden's Georg.
If we were able to dive into her ſecret receſſes, we ſhould
find that the ſmalleſt blade of graſs, or moſt contemptible weed,
has its particular uſe. . Swift on the Faculties of the Mind.
Hung on every ſpray, on every blade
Of graſs, the myriad dewdrops twinkle round. Thomſºn.
Blade. n.ſ.. [blatte, Germ. blad, Dutch.] - - -
1. The ſharp or ſtriking part of a weapon or inſtrument, diſtinét
from the handle. It is uſually taken for a weapon, and ſo call-
cd probably from the likeneſs of a ſword blade to a blade of graſs.
He ſought all round about, his thirſty blade
To bathe in blood of faithleſs enemy. Fairy Queen, b. i.
She knew the virtue of her blade, nor would
Pollute her ſabre with ignoble blood. Dryden's Hind and P.
Be his this ſword, whoſe blade of braſs diſplays
A ruddy gleam; whoſe hilt a ſilver blaze. Pºpe.
2. A briſk man, either fierce or gay, called ſo in contempt. So we
ſay mettle for courage.
You'll find yourſelf miſtaken, Sir, if you'll take upon you to
judge of theſe blades by their garbs, looks, and outward ap-
pearance. L’Eſtrange.
Then turning about to the hangman, he ſaid,
Diſpatch me, I pri'thee, this troubleſome blade. Prior.
BLADE of the Shoulder. }" ſ. The bone called by anatomiſts the
Bla'Debone. ſcapula, or ſcapular bone.
He fell moſt furiouſly on the broiled relicks of a ſhoulder of
mutton, commonly called a bladebone. Pope.
To BLADE. v. a. [from the noun..] To furniſh, or fit with a
blade.
BLA'DED, adj. [from blade.] Having blades or ſpires.
Her ſilver viſage in the wat'ry glaſs,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed graſs.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
As where the lightning runs along the ground,
Nor bladed graſs, nor bearded corn ſucceeds,
But ſcales of ſcurf and putrefaction breeds. Drydºn.
BLAIN. m. ſ. [blesene, Sax, blayne, Dutch..] A puſtule; a botch;
a bliſter.
Itches, blains,
Sow all th’ Athenian boſoms, and the crop
Be general leproſy. Shakeſp. Timon,
Botches and blains muſt all his fleſh imboſs,
And all his people. A4ilton's Par. Lºft, b. xii. 1, 180.
Whene'er I hear a rival nam'd,
I feel my body all inflam'd;
Which breaking out in boils and blains,
With yellow filth my linen ſtains. Swift.
BLA'MABLE, adj. [from blame.] Culpable; faulty.
Virtue is placed between two extremes, which are on both
ſides equally blamable. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
BLAMARLENEss. n.ſ.. [from llamall...] Fault; the flaté of bº.
ing liable to blame.
B.AMABLY. adv. [from blamable.] Culpable; in a manner
liable to cenſure.
- º: ". . on againſt a perſon, that is mali-
°19′"Y9 blamiably abſent, even to a definitive ſentence. Aft
Tºšić"...?. e. Ayliffe.
1. Tº cenſure; to charge with a fault: it generally implies a
ſlight cenſure.
Our pow'r
Shall do a court’ſy to our wrath, which men
My blame, but not controul. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Porphyrius, you too far did tempt your fate;
'Tis true, your duty to me it became s
But Praiſing that, I'muſt your conduct lame.
Dryden's Tyrannick Love.
- Each finding, like #, J
Something to blame, and ſomething to commend. Pope.
2. To blame has uſually the particle fºr before the fault.
The reader muſt not blame me fºr making uſe here, all along
of the word ſentiment. Lº:
3. Sometimes, but rarely, of
WO i. *d ºf inconfiderate raſhneſs, for that he
* buſy himſelf in matters not belonging to his vocation.
Knolles's Hi -
ºr ºf ſºmeº, “*” “Tº
* Fºult; inputation ºf . fault.
In ar - -
dº. *...the praiſe of ſucceſs is ſhared amongſt many; yet
**ºne of Iniſadventures is charged upon one.
Sir J. Hayward.
They lay the llame on the poor little ones, ſometimes paſ-
ſonately enough, to divert it from themſelves. Locke.
2. Crime; that which produces or deſerves cenſure.
Who would not judge us to be diſcharged of all blame,
which are confeſt to have no great fault, even by their very
word and teſtimony, in whoſe eyes no fault of ours hath ever
hitherto becn accuſtomed to ſeem ſmall. Hooker, b. v. § 27.
I unſpeak mine own detraction ; here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myſelf,
For ſtrangers to my nature.
3. Hurt.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Therewith upon his creſt,
With rigour ſo outrageous he ſmit,
That a large ſhare it hew'd out of the reſt,
And glancing down his ſhield, from ſame him fairly bleſt.
Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. ii. ſſanz. 18.
4. There is a peculiar ſtrućture of this word, in which it is not
very evident whether it be a noun or a verb ; but I conceive it
to be the noun. To blame, in French, a tort.
You were to blame, I muſt be plain with you,
To part ſo ſlightly with your wife's firſt gift.
Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
I do not aſk whether they were miſtaken; but, on ſuppoſi-
tion they were not, whether they were to blame in the manner.
Stillingfleet.
Now we ſhould hold them much to llame,
If they went back before they came. Prior.
BLA'MF FUL. adj. [from blame and fall.] Criminal; guilty;
meriting blame.
Is not the cauſer of theſe timeleſs deaths,
As blameful as the executioner * Shakespeare. Richard III.
Bluntwitted lord, ignoble in demeanour,
If ever lady wrong'd her lord ſo much, -
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some ſtern untutor'd churl. Shakespeare Henry VI. p. ii.
BLA'M El Ess. adj. [from blame.]
1. Guiltleſs; innocent; exempt from cenſure or blame.
She found out the righteous, and preſerved him blame'ſ un-
to God. Hiſdºn, x. 5.
The flames aſcend on either altar clear,
While thus the blameleſ, maid addreſs'd her pray’r. Dryden.
Such a leſſening of our coin will deprive great numbers of
blameleſ; men, of a fifth part of their eſtates. Locke.
2. Sometimes it is uſed with of.
We will be blamelſ of this thine oath. jºſhua, ii. 17.
BLA'MELESLY. adv, [from blameleſ...] Innocently; without
Crime.
It is the wilful oppoſing explicit articles, and not the not
believing them when not revealed, or not with that convićtion,
againſt which he cannot blamelſ, without pertinacy, hold out,
that will bring danger of ruin on any. Hammond's Fundamentals.
BLA'ME less Ess. m. ſ. [from blamelºft.] Innocence; exemp-
tion from cenſure.
Having reſolved, with him in Homer, that all is chargeable
on Jupiter and fate, they infer, with him, the blamelſ, ſs of
the inferiour agent. Hammond’s Fundamentals.
BLA'MER. m. ſ. [from llame.] One that blames or finds fault;
a cenſurer.
In me you've hallowed a pagan muſe,
And denizon'd a ſtranger, who, miſtaught
By blamers of the times they marr'd, hath ſought
Virtues in corners. Donne.
BLAME wo'RTHY, adj. [from llame and worthy.J Culpable;
blameable; worthy of blame or cenſure.
Although the ſame ſhould be blameworthy, yet this age hath
reaſonably well forborn to incur the danger of any ſuch blame.
Hooker, b. v. § 12.
To BLANCH. v. a. [himchir, Fr.]
1. To whiten; to change from ſome other colour to white.
You can behold ſuch ſights,
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
When mine is blanch'd with fear. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
A way of whiting wax cheaply may be of uſe; and we have
ſet down the practice of tradeſmen who blanch it. Boyle.
And fin's black dye ſeems blanch'd by age to virtue. -
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
2. To ſtrip or peel ſuch things as have huſks. -
Their ſuppers may be bisket, raiſins of the ſun, and a few
blanched almonds. //iſeman’s Surgery.
3. To obliterate; to waſh out; to balk; to paſs over.
The judges thought it dangerous to admit iſs and ands, to
qualify treaſon; whereby every one might expreſs his malice,
and blanch his danger. Bacon's Henry VII.
You are not tranſported in an aétion that warms the blood
and is appearing holy, to blanch, or take for admitted, the point
of lawfulneſs. Bacon’s Hºly J/ar.
To BLANch. v. m. To evade; to ſhift; to ſpeak ſoft.
Optimi conſiliarii mortui; books will ſpeak plain, when coun-
ſellors blanch. Bacon.
BLA'Nch ER. m. ſ. [from blanch.] A whitener. Dići.
BLAND, adj. [blandus, Lat.] Soft; mild; gentle.
!
3 In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L A
In her face excuſe
Came prologue; and apology too prompt;
Which, with bland words at will, ſhe thus addreſs'd.
44ilton's Par. Lºft, b. ix. 1, 8; 5.
An even calm
Perpetual reign'd, ſave what the zephyrs band -
Breath'd o'er the blue expanſe. Thomſºn's Spring:
To Bla'NDISH. v. a. [blandior, Lat.] To ſmooth; to ſoften.
I have met with this word in no other paſſage.
Muſt’ring all her wiles,
With blandiſh'd parleys, feminine aſſaults,
Tongue-batteries, ſhe ſurceas'd not day nor night,
To ſtorm me over-watch'd, and weary'd out.
- Milton's Agoniſłes, l. 4oz.
Bla'NDISHMENT. n.ſ.. [from blandiſh; blanditia, Lat.]
1. Aët of fondneſs; expreſſion of tenderneſs by geſture.
The little babe up in his arms he hent,
Who, with ſweet pleaſure and bold blandiſhment,
'Gan ſmile. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. ii. ſtanz. I.
Each bird and beaſt, behold -
Approaching two and two; theſe cow'ring low
With blandiſhment. A4iii. Paradiſe Loft, b. viii. 1 351.
2, Soft words; kind ſpeeches.
He was both well and fair ſpoken, and would uſe ſtrange
ſweetneſs and blandiſhment of words, where he deſired to effect
or perſuade anything that he took to heart. Bacon's H. VII.
3. Kind treatment; careſs. -
Him Dido now with blandiſhment detains;
But I ſuſpect the town where Juno reigns. Dryden's Wirgil.
In order to bring thoſe infidels within the wide circle of
whiggiſh community, neither blandiſhments nor promiſes are
omitted. Swift's Examiner, N° 47.
BLANK, adj. [blanc, Fr. derived by Manage from Allianus, thus:
Albianus, allianicus, bianicus, biancus, bianco, blanicuſ, blancus,
blanc ; by others, from blanc, which, in Daniſh, ſignifies ſhin-
ing; in conformity to which, the Germans have blancker, to
ſhine; the Saxons, blaccan ; and the Engliſh, bleach, to whiten.]
I. White.
To the blank moon
Her office they preſcrib'd: to th' other five
Their planetary motions. Parad. Loſt, b. x. l. 656.
2. Without writing; unwritten; empty of all marks.
Our ſubſtitutes at home ſhall have blank charters,
Whereto, when they know that men are rich,
They ſhall ſubſcribe them for large ſums of gold.
Shakeſp. Richard II.
Upon the debtor ſide, I find innumerable articles; but, upon
the creditor ſide, little more than blank paper. Addiſon. Speciat.
3. Confuſed; cruſhed; diſpirited; ſubdued; depreſſed.
- There without ſuch boaſt, or ſign of joy,
Solicitous and blank, he thus began. Par. Regained, b. ii.
Adam ſoon as he heard
The fatal treſpaſs done by Eve, amaz'd,
Aſtonied ſtood, and blank, while horrour chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relax’d.
Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. ix. l. 888.
But now no face divine contentment wears;
'Tis all blank fadneſs, or continual fears.
4. Without rhime; where the rhime is blanched, or miſſed.
The lady ſhall ſay her mind freely, or the blank verſe ſhall
halt for it. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Long have your ears been fill'd with tragick parts;
Blood and blank verſe have harden’d all your hearts.
Addiſon's Drummer, Prolºgue.
Our blank verſe, where there is no rhime to ſupport the ex-
preſſion, is extremely difficult to ſuch as are not maſters in the
tongue. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
BLANK. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive.]
I. A void ſpace.
I cannot write a paper full as I uſed to do; and yet I will
not forgive a blank of half an inch from you. Swift.
2. A lot, by which nothing is gained; which has no prize mark-
ed upon it.
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
My name hath touch'd your ears. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
In fortune's lottery lies
Aheap of blanks, like this, for one ſmall prize.
The world the coward will deſpiſe,
When life’s a blank, who pulls not for a prize.
3. A paper from which the writing is effaced.
She has left him
The blank of what he was ;
I tell thee, eunuch, ſhe has quite unmann'd him. Dryden.
4. A paper unwritten; anything without marks or characters.
For him, I think not on him; for his thoughts,
Would they were blanks, rather than fill'd with me.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Pope.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Omiſſion to do what is neceſſary,
Seals a commiſſion to a blank of danger. Shakeſp, Tr. and Cr.
For the book of knowledge fair,
Preſented with an univerſal blank
Of nature's works, to me expung'd and ras'd,
Par, Lºft,
A life ſo ſpent is one great blººk, which, though not biotted
with fin, is yet without any characters of grace or virtue.
- Rºgers, fºrm. xii.
5. The point to which an arrow is direéted; ſo called, becauſe;
to be more viſible, it was marked with white. -
Slander,
Whoſe whiſper o'er the world's diameter;
As level as the cannon to his blank,
Tranſports its poiſon'd ſhot.
6. Aim ; ſhot.
Shikºff. Hå iki.
- . The harlot king -
| Quite beyond my aim; out of the lºr; -
And level of my brain. - Shafſ, IV inter's Tāl.
I have ſpoken for you all my beft,
And ſtood within the liai of his diſpºſure,
For my free ſpeech. Shakespeare. Othº.
7. Object to which any thing is direaed.
See better, Leaf, and let me ſtill remain -
The true blank of thine. Shnkºff. King Lar.
To BLANK. v. a. [from blank; blanchir, Fr.] ~ -&gt;
1. To damp; to confuſe; to diſpirit. -
Each oppoſite, that blanks the face of joy;
Meet what I would have well, and it deſtroy. Shakespeare. Hamil.
Dagon muſt ſtoop, and ſhallere long receive
Such a diſcomfit, as ſhall quite deſpoil him
Of all theſe boaſted trophies won on me, * * -
And with confuſion bank his worſhippers. Milion's Agºniſi.
If the atheiſt, when he dies, ſhould find that his ſoul remaiºs;
how will this man be amazed and blanked * Tillotſºn:
2. To efface; to annul.
All former purpoſes were blanked, the goveriiour at a bay,
and all that charge loſt and cancelled. Speyer on Irela:4.
BLA'NKET, n.ſ.. [blanchette, Fr.]
1. An woollen cover, ſoft, and looſely woven, ſpread commonly
upon a bed, over the linen ſheet, for the procurement of ---,
warmth. &amp;
Nor heav'n peep through the llan'et of the dark,
To cry, hold hold Shakespeare, King Lear:
The abilities of man muſt fall ſhort on one ſide or other, like
too ſcanty a blanket when you are abed ; if you pull it upon
your ſhoulders, you leave your feet bare; if you thruſt it down
upon your feet, your ſhoulders are uncovered. Temple.
Himſelf among the ſtoried chiefs he ſpies,
As from the blanket high in air he flies.
2. A kind of pear, ſometimes written banquet.
To BLA'NKET. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover with a blanket.
My face I'll grime with filth; -
Blanket my loins; tie all my hair in knots. Shakesp. King Lear:
2. To toſs in a blanket, by way of penalty or contempt.
Ah, oh! he cry'd, what ſtreet, what lane, but knows
Our purgings, pumpings, blanketings, and blows: Pºpe.
BLA'N tº LY. adv. [from blank.] In a blank manner; with white-
neſs; with paleneſs; with confuſion. -
To BLARE. v. n. [blaren, Dutch..] To bellow; to roar. Skinn.
To BLASPHEME. v. a. [blaſphemo, low Lat.]
1. To ſpeak in terms of impious irreverence of God.
2. To ſpeak evil of
The trueſt iſſue of thy throne, -
By his own interdićtion ſtands accurs'd, - r
And does blaſpheme his breed. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Thoſe who from our labours heap their board,
Blaſpheme their feeder, and forget their lord. Pope's Odyſſey,
To BLASPHE'ME. v. n. To ſpeak blaſphemy.
Liver of blaſpheming Jew,
Gall of goat, and ſlips of yew. Shakſ). Macbeth.
I puniſhed them oft in every ſynagogue, and compelled them
to blaſpheme. Acts, xxvi. I 1.
B1. Asphe'MER. n.ſ.. [from blaſpheme.] A wretch that ſpeaks of
God in impious and irreverent terms.
Who was before a blaſphemer, and a perſecutor, and inju-
rious. 1 Tim. i. 13.
Even that blaſphemer himſelf would inwardly reverence him,
as he in his heart really deſpiſes him for his cowardly baſe
ſilence. outh.
Deny the curſt blaſphemer's tongue to rage;
Pºpe's Dunciad:
See PEAR.
And turn God's fury from an impious age. Tic (cll.
Should each blaſphemer quite eſcape the rod; -
Becauſe the inſult's not to man, but God. Pºte:
BLA'sphemous. adj. [from bioſphºne. It is uſually ſpoken with
the accent on the firſt ſyllable, but uſed by A ſilton with it on
the ſecond..] Impiouſly irreverent with regard to God.
O man, take heed how thou the gods do moves
To cauſe full wrath, which thou can't not refift; - --
Boſphemous words the ſpeaker vajº do prove. Sidney, b. ii.
Ánd dar'ſt thou to the Son of God propound,
To worſhip thee accurſt; now more ºccurſt
For this attempt, bolder than that on Eve . . . -
And more blaff hemots 44ilton's Paradiſe Regained, h. iii.
A man can hardly paſs the ſtreets, without having his ears
grated with ſuch horrid and blaſphemous oaths and curſes. Tº int.
That anything that wears the name of a chriſtian, cr but of
many
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L A
B L A
enture to own ſuch a villainous, impudent, and
Yº... in the face of the world, as this! . . South.
Bia's phºtously. adv. [from blaſpheme.] Impiouſly; with
wº jit uſe of his reaſon, while he would b 'aſh-
mouſly ſet up to controul the commands of the Almighty Swift.
Blasphe MY. m. ſ. [fºo" baſpheme.] fering of ſome indig
Blaſphemy, ſtrictly and properly, is an offeringº; ſºmeº
into God himſelf, cither by words or writing.
Ayliff's Parergon.
But that my heart's on º: º ſet,
*.. aſphemy, ere bid you fly 5
ºº:: y, ere y sº Henry V I. p. ii.
Intrinſick goodneſs conſiſts in accordance, and fin in contra-
riety, to the ſecret will of God; or elſe God could not be is:
fined good, ſo far as his thoughts and ſecrets, but only ſuperſ-
cially good, as far as he is pleaſed to reveal himſelf, which is
perfect blaſphemy to imagine. Hammºnd s Fundamentals.
BLAST, n.ſ.. [from blaerº, Saxon; blaſºn, Germ. to blow.]
1. A guſt, or puff of wind.
They that ſtand high, . . llaſ's to ſhake them;
if they fall, they daſh themſelves to pieces.
And, if they fall, they º, Riara III.
Welcome, then,
Thou unſubſtantial air, that I embrace;
The wretch that thou haſt blown unto the worſt, ---
Owes nothing to thy blaſts. Shakespeare. King Lear.
Perhaps thy fortune doth controul the winds... . -
Doth looſe or bind their blaſts in ſecret cave. Fairfax, b. i.
Three ſhips were hurry'd by the ſouthern lºſ', -
And on the ſecret ſhelves with fury caſt. Dryden's Żheid.
2. The ſound made by blowing any inſtrument of wind muſick.
In peace there's nothing ſo becomes a man,
As modeſt ſtilneſs and humility;
But when the blaſt of war blows in our cars,
Then imitate the action of the tyger. Shakespeare. Henry V.
He blew his trumpet—the angelick blaſt
Fill'd all the regions. Milt. Par. Loſt, b. xi. 1.76.
The Veline fountains, and ſulphureous Nar,
Shake at the baleful blaſt, the fignal of the war. Dryden's ºn.
Whether there be two different goddeſſes called Fame, or
one goddeſs ſounding two different trumpets, it is certain, vil-
lainy has as good a title to a blaſt from the proper trumpet, as
nity, or injury,
virtue has from the former. Swift.
3. The ſtroke of a malignant planet; the infection of any thing
peſtilential.
By the blaſt of God they periſh.
To BLAST. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſtrike with ſome ſudden plague or calamity.
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her ſcornful eyes! infect her beauty,
You fenſuck'd fogs, drawn by the powerful ſun,
To fall and blaſt her pride. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Oh! Portius, is there not ſome choſen curſe,
Some hidden thunder in the ſtore of heaven,
Red with uncommon wrath, to blaſt the man,
Who owes his greatneſs to his country's ruin. Addiſon. Cato.
2. To make to wither.
Upon this bloſſed heath you ſtop our way. Macbeth.
And behold ſeven thin ears, and blaſted with the eaſtwind
ſprung up after them. Gen. xli. 6.
She that like lightning ſhin'd, while her face laſted,
The oak now reſembles, which lightning had bloſed.
- //aller.
To his green years your cenſures you would ſuit,
Not blaſt that bloſſom, but expect the fruit. Dryden.
Agony unmix'd, inceſſant gall
Corroding every thought, and blaſting all
Love's paradiſe. Thomſon's Spring, l. 1675.
3. To injure; to invalidate.
He ſhews himſelf either very weak, if he will take my word,
when he thinks I deſerve no credit; or very malicious, if he
knows I deſerve credit, and yet goes about to blaſt it.
- Stillingfleet's Defence of Diſcourſes on Romiſh Idolatry.
4. To cut off; to hinder from coming to maturity.
This commerce, Jeſhophat king of Juda endeavoured to re-
new; but his enterprize was blaſted by the deſtruction of veſſels
in the harbour. - - Arbuthnot on Coins.
5. To confound; to ſtrike with terrour.
Trumpeters,
With brazen din, blaſt you the city's ears;
Make mingle with your rattling tábourines. r
Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
BEA'stment. n: ſ [from blaſt.] Blaſt; ſudden ſtroke of in-
fection.
job, iv. 9.
In the morn, and liquid dew of youth,
Sontagious blºſiments are moſt imminent. Shakespeare Hamlet.
BLA º adj. ſºlatitant, Fr.] Bellowing as a calf.
To B .* learn'd this language from the blatant beaſt. Dryden.
9 ****ER. v. n. [from blatero, Lat..] To roar; to make
a ſenſeleſs noiſe. It is a word not now uſed.
She rode at Peace, through his only pains and excellent en-
durance, however envy liſt to latter againſt him. Stenſ Ire'.
BLATTERATION. m. ſ. [blateratio, Lat..] Noiſe; ſenſeleſs roar.
BLAY. n.ſ. A ſmall white river fiſh; called alſo a bleak, which
ſce.
BLAZE. n.ſ.. [blare, a torch, Saxon.]
1. A flame; the light of the fiame: blaze implies more the light
than the heat.
They are in a moſt warlike preparation, and hope to come
upon them in the heat of their diviſion.—The main blaze of it
is paſt; but a ſmall thing would make it flame again.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Thy throne is darkneſs in th’ abyſs of light,
A blaze of glory that forbids the ſight. Dryden's Hind and P.
What groans of men ſhall fill the martial field !
How ficrée a blaze his flaming pile ſhall yield !
What fun'ral pomp ſhall floating Tiber ſee Dryden's ºn.
2. Publication; wide diffuſion of report.
For what is glory but the blaze of fame;
The people's praiſe, if always praiſe unmixt?
Milton's Paradiſe Lºſ', b. iii. l. 47.
3. Blaze is a white mark upon a horſe, deſcending from the fore-
head almoſt to the noſe. Farrier's Lici.
To BLAze. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To flame; to ſhew the light of the flame.
Thus you may long live an happy inſtrument for your king
and country; you ſhall not be a meteor, or a blazing ſtar, but
fiella fixa; happy here, and more happy hereafter.
Bacon's Advice to Williers.
The third fair morn now blaz'd upon the main, -
Then gloſſy ſmooth lay all the liquid plain. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To be conſpicuous.
To BLAze. v. a.
1. To publiſh ; to make known; to ſpread far and wide.
The noiſe of this fight, and iſſue thereof, being blazed by the
country people to ſome noblemen thereabouts, they came thi-
ther. Sidney, b. ii.
My words, in hopes to blaze a ſtedfaſt mind,
This marble choſe, as of like temper known. Sidney,
Thou ſhalt live, till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of thy prince, and call thee back.
Shakeſp. Romeo and ju'ict,
When beggars die, there are no comets ſeen;
The heav'ns themſelves blaze forth the death of princes:
Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
But he went out, and began to publiſh it much, and to blaze
abroad the matter. Mark, i. 45.
Such muſick worthieſt were to blaze -
The peerleſs height of her immortal praiſe,
Whoſe luſtre leads us. Milton.
Far beyond
The ſons of Anak, famous now and blaz'd,
Fearleſs of danger, like a petty god
I walk'd about. Mi ton’s Agoniſes, 1.527.
Whoſe follies, blaz'd about, to all are known,
And are a ſecret to himſelf alone.
But, mortals, know, 'tis ſtill our greateſt pride
To blaze thoſe virtues, which the good would hide. Pope.
2. To blazon; to give an account of enſigns armorial in proper
terms. This is not now uſed.
This, in ancient times, was called a fierce; and you ſhould
then have blazed it thus: he bears a fierce, ſable, between two
fierces, or. Peacham on Drawing.
3. To inflame; to fire. This is not a proper uſe.
Pall'd thy blazed youth
Becomes aſſuag'd, and doth beg the alms
Of palſied cla. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
BLA'zer. m. ſ. [from blaze.] One that ſpreads reports.
Utterers of ſecrets he from thence debarr'd,
Babblers of folly, and blazers of crime;
His larum-bell might loud and wide be heard,
When cauſe requir’d, but never out of time;
Early and late it rung, at evening and at prime. Fairy &amp;c.".
To BLA'zoN. v. a. [biaſonner, Fr.] -
1. To explain, in proper terms, the figures on enſigns armorial.
King Edward gave to them the coat of arms, which I am
not herald enough to blazon into Engliſh. Addison. Guardian.
2. To deck; to embelliſh ; to adorn. - -
- Then blazons in dread finiles her hideous form;...
So lightning gilds the unrelenting ſtorm. Garth's Diffe'ſat.
3. To diſplay; to ſet to ſhow.
O thougoddeſs,
Thou divine nature! how thyſelf thou blazon'ſ
In theſe two princely boys' they are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet, -
Not wagging his ſweet head. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. To celebrate; to ſet out.
One that excels the quirk of blazoning pens,
And, in terreſtrial veſture of creation,
Does bear all excellency.
5. To blaze about; to make publick.
Granville.
siałff. Olle".
What's
HLF
t
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L E
B L E
What's this but libelling againſt the ſenate,
And blazºning our injuſtice every where : Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
BLA'zoN. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The art of drawing or explaining coats of arms.
Proceed unto beaſts that are given in arms, and teach me
what I ought to obſerve in their blazºn.
2. Show; divulgation; publication.
But this eternal blazºn muſt not be
To ears of fleſh and blood.
3. Celebration; proclamation of ſome quality.
I am a gentleman.—ill be ſworn thou art;
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, action, and ſpirit,
Do give thee five-fold blazon. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Men con over their pedigrees, and obtrude the blazon of their
exploits upon the company. Collier on Pride.
BLA’zoNRY. m. ſ. [from blazon.] The art of blazoning.
Give me certain rules as to the principles of blazonry.
- Peacham on Drawing.
To BLEACH. v a. [bleechen, Germ.] To whiten; common-
ly to whiten by expoſure to the open air.
When turtles tread, and rooks and daws;
And maidens bleach their ſummer ſmocks.
Shakeſp. Love's Lalour Loft.
Peacham.
Saſſp. Hamlet.
Should I not ſeek
The clemency of ſome more temp'rate clime,
To purge my gloom; and, by the ſun refin'd,
Baſk in his beams, and bleach me in the wind 2 Dryden.
For there are various penances enjoin'd;
And ſome are hung to l leach upon the wind;
Some plung'd in waters. Dryden's Zneid.
To BLEACH. v. n. To grow white; to grow white in the
open air. -
The white ſheet bleaching in the open field. Shakespeare. W. Tale.
- On every nerve
The deadly winter ſeizes; ſhuts up ſenſe;
Lays him along the ſnows, a ſtiffen'd corſe,
Stretch'd out, and bleaching in the northern blaſt. Thomſon.
BLEAK, adj. [blac, blac, Saxon.]
1. Pale.
2. Cold; chill.
Intreat the north
To make his bleak winds kiſs my parched lips,
And comfort me with cold. Shakespeare. King john.
The goddeſs that in rural ſhrine
Dwell'ſt here with Pan, or Sylvan, by bleſt ſong
Forbidding every bleak unkindly fog
To touch the proſperous growth of this tall wood. Milton.
Her deſolation preſents us with nothing but bleak and barren
proſpects. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 477.
Say, will ye bleſs the bleak Atlantick ſhore,
Or bid the furious Gaul be rude no more. Pope.
PLEAk. n.ſ. [from his white or bleak colour.] A ſmall river fiſh.
The bleak, or freſhwater ſprat, is ever in motion, and there-
fore called by ſome the river ſwallow. His back is of a plea-
ſant, ſad ſea water green; his belly white and ſhining like the
mountain ſnow. #. are excellent meat, and in beſt ſeaſon
in Auguſt. J/alton's Angler.
Ble’AKN Ess. n.ſ. [from bleak.] Coldneſs; chilneſs.
The inhabitants of Nova Zemblago naked, without com-
plaining of the bleakneſs of the air in which they are born; as
the armies of the northern nations keep the field all winter.
Addison. Guardian, N° 102.
Ble’AKY. adj. [from bleak.] Bleak; cold; chill.
On ſhrubs they browze, and, on the bleaky top
Of rugged hills, the thorny bramble crop.
BLEAR. adj. [blaer, a bliſter, Dutch.]
1. Dim with rheum or water; ſore with rheum.
It is an ancient tradition, that blear eyes affect ſound eyes.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 923.
It is no more in the power of calumny to blaſt the dignity
of an honeſt man, than of the blear eyed owl to caſt ſcandal
on the ſun. L’Eſtrange.
His blear eyes ran in gutters to his chin;
Dryden.
His beard was ſtubble, and his cheeks were thin. Dryden.
When thou ſhalt ſee the blear ey’d fathers teach
Their ſons this harſh and mouldy ſort of ſpeech. Dryden,
2. Dim; obſcure in general; or that which makes dimneſs.
Thus I hurl
My dazling ſpells into the ſpungy air,
Of power to cheat the eye with blear illuſion,
And give it falſe preſentments. Milton.
To BLEAR. v. a. [from the adjective.]
1. To make the eyes watry, or fore with rheum.
All tongues ſpeak of him, and the beared fights
Are ſpectacled to ſee him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus,
- The Dardanian wives,
With bleared viſages, come forth to view
Th’ iſſue of th’ exploit. Shakespeare. Merchant of Venice.
When I was young, I, like a lazy fool,
Would bear my eyes with oil, to ſtay from ſchool;
Averſe to pains. Dryden's Perſius, ſat. iii.
2. To dim the eye.
Vol. I,
This may ſtand for a pretty ſuperficial argument, to blear
our eyes, and lull us aſleep in ſecurity. Raleigh's Eſſays.
BLEARepNess. n.ſ.. [from bleared.]. The ſtate of being blear-
ed, or dimmed with rheum.
The defluxion falling upon the edges of the eyelids, makes a
blearedneſs. //iſeman's Surgery.
To BiºA.T. v. n. [blaccan, Sax.] To cry as a ſheep.
We were as twinn’d lambs, that did friſk i' th' ſun,
And bleat the one at th' other. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
You may as well uſe queſtion with the wolf,
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb. -
- Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
While on ſweet graſs her bleating charge does lie,
Our happy lover feeds upon her eye. Roſcommon.
What bull dares bellow, or what ſheep dares bleat
Within the lion's den ; Dryden's Spaniſh Friar,
BLEAT, n.ſ. [from the verb.] The cry of a ſheep or lamb.
Set in my ſhip, mine ear reach'd, where we rod,
§. of oxen, and the beat
eecy ineep. Chapman's Odyſſey, b. xii.
The #. and their hills around, p lyſºy, -
With lowings, and with dying blºats reſound.
BLEB. m. ſ. [blaen, to ſwell, Germ..] A bliſter.
BLED. particip. [from to bleed.]
To BLEEp. v. m. pret. I bled; I have bed. [bleban, Saxon.]
I. To loſe blood; to run with blood.
I bleedinwardly for my lord.
Bleed, bleed, poor country ! -
Great tyranny, lay thou thy baſis ſure;
For goodneſs dare not check thee! Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Many, upon the ſeeing of others bleed, or ſtrangled, or tor-
tured, themſelves are ready to faint, as if they bled.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N°795.
Dryden.
Skinner.
Shakeſp. Timon.
2. To die a violent death.
The lamb thy riot dooms to bleed today;
Had he thy reaſon, would he ſkip and play ? Pope.
3. To drop, as blood. It is applied to any thing that drops from
ſome body, as blood from an animal.
For me the balm ſhall bleed, and amber flow,
The coral redden, and the ruby glow. Pope's Windſ. Foreſt.
To BLEED. v. a. To let blood; to take blood from.
That from a patriot of diſtinguiſh’d note,
Have bled, and purg'd me to a ſimple vote. Pope.
BLEIT. }*. Baſhful. It is uſed in Scotland, and the border-
BLATE. 5 ing counties.
To BLE'MISH. v. a. [from blame, junius; from blºme, white,
Fr. Skinner.] -
1. To mark with any deformity.
Likelier that my outward face might have been diſguiſed,
than that the face of ſo excellent a mind could have been thus
blemiſhed. Sidney.
2. To defame; to tarniſh, with reſpect to reputation.
Not that my verſe would blemiſh all the fair;
But yet if ſome be bad, 'tis wiſdom to beware. Dryden.
Thoſe, who, by concerted defamations, endeavour to blemiſh
his charaćter, incur the complicated guilt of ſlander and per-
jury. Addison. Freeholder.
Bie/MISH. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A mark of deformity; a ſcar; a diminution of beauty.
As he hath cauſed a blemiſh in a man, ſo ſhall it be done to
him again. Lev. xxiv. 2 o.
Open it ſuch a diſtance off from the eyelid, that you divide
not that ; for, in ſo doing, you will leave a remedileſs blemiſh.
Jºſeman's Surgery.
2. Reproach; diſgrace; imputation.
Live thou, and to thy mother dead atteſt,
That clear ſhe died from blemiſh criminal. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
That you have been earneſt, ſhould be no blemiſh or diſcredit
at all unto you. Hooker, Preface.
And if we ſhall negle&amp;t to propagate theſe bleſſed diſpoſitions,
what others can undertake it, without ſome blemiſh to us? ſome
reflection on our negligence 2 Sprat.
None more induſtriouſly publiſh the blemiſhes of an extraor-
dinary reputation, than ſuch as lie open to the ſame cenſures;
raiſing applauſe to themſelves, for reſembling a perſon of an ex-
alted reputation, though in the blamable parts of his chº-
raćter. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 256.
3. A ſoil; turpitude; taint; deformity. . .
Firſt ſharvirtue be vice, and beauty be counted a ***,
Ere that Wleave with ſong of praiſe her praiſe to ſºmni”.
Sidney, b. i.
Is conformity with Rome a hºmiſh unto º, church of Eng-
hur ad an ornamentſ
land, and unto c * abro Hooder, b. iv. S. 6.
Not a hair periſh'd : .
On their ſuſtaining garments not a blemiſh,
But freſher than before. -
Evadne's huſband 'tis a fault
To love, a blemiſh to my thought.
That your duty may no blºniſh take, .
I will myſelf your father's captive make. Dryd. Indian Emp.
3 F
Shakeſp, Tempeſt.
J/aller’s M. Trag.
Such<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L I
|B L E
le of making a beauty, as well
as a biºmſ, the ſubject of deriſion. Addiſon. º § 29 I.
To Blench. v. n. To ſhrink; tº ſtart back; to fly off.
I’ll obſerve his looks:
I'll tent him to the quick; if he but blanch,
I know my courſe. § cre ſhe be,
- herſelf, what goddeſ
pº !. * fiftince than Ido. Shakeſp. Tr. and Cr.
Hold you ever to ºur ſpecial driſt;
- iſes vou do blench from this to that, *
T º: Shakap. Merry Hives of Windſor.
To Blench. v. a. Tº hinder; to obſtruct. h
The rebels beſieged them, winning the even ground on the
top, by carrying up great truſſes of hay before them, to blench
iºdefendants fight, and dead their ſhot. Carew's Survey.
To BLEND. v. a. preter. I blended; anciently, blent. [blenban,
Saxon.]
1. To mingle together. -
'Tis beauty truly blent, whoſe red and white
Nature's own ſweet and cunning hand hath laid on.
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
The miſtion taught by the ancients is too ſlight or groſs;
for bodies, mixed according to their hypotheſis, would not ap-
pear ſuch to the acute eyes of a lynx, who would diſcern the
elements, if they were no otherwiſe mingled, than but blended,
Such a mirth as this is capab
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
but not united. Boyle.
He had his calmer influence, and his mien
Did love and majeſty together blend. Dryden.
The grave, where even the great find reſt,
And blended lie th' oppreſſor and th’ oppreſs'd. Pope.
2. To confound.
The moon ſhould wander from her beaten way, the times
and ſeaſons of the year blend themſelves by diſordered and con-
fuſed mixture. Hooker, b. i. § 3.
3. To pollute; to ſpoil; to corrupt. This ſignification was an-
ciently much in uſe, but is now wholly obſolete.
Which when he ſaw, he burnt with jealous fire;
The eye of reaſon was with rage yblent. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Regard of worldly muck doth foully blend,
And low abaſe the high heroick ſpirit. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
The whilſt thy kingdom from thy head is rent,
And thy throne royal with diſhonour blent. Spenſ. Hubb.
BLE'NDER. m. ſ. [from to blend..] The perſon that mingles.
BLENT. The obſolete participle of blend. See BLEND.
To BLESS. v. a. [blerrian, Saxon.]
1. To make happy; to proſper.
- The quality of mercy is not ſtrain'd;
It droppeth as the gentle rain of heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blºſ'd;
It bleſ:th him that gives, and him that takes.Merch. of Wen.
Had Ibut died an hour before this chance,
I had liv'd a bleſſed time: for, from this inſtant,
There's nothing. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
This kingdom enjoyed the greateſt calm, and the fulleſt mea-
ſure of felicity, that any people, in any age for ſo long time to-
gether, have been blºſed with. Clarendon.
Happy this iſle, which ſuch a hero bleſ?;
What virtue dwells not in his loyal breaſt JValler.
In vain with folding arms the youth affay'd
To ſtop her flight, and ſtrain the flying ſhade;
But ſhe return’d no more, to bleſ; his longing eyes. Dryden.
O hoſpitable Jove we thus invoke,
Blºſs to both nations this auſpicious hour. Dryden’s AEm.
2. # wiſh happineſs to another; to pronounce a bleſſing upon
1nn.
And this is the bleſfing wherewith Moſes the man of God
blºſed the children of Iſrael, before his death. Deut. xxxiii. 1.
3. To praiſe; to glorify for benefits received; to celebrate.
Unto us there is one only guide of all agents natural, and he
both the creator and worker of all in all, alone to be bleſſed,
adored, and honoured by all for ever. Hooker, b. i. § 3.
But bleſs'd be that great pow'r, that hath us bleſs'd
With longer life than earth and heav'n can have. Davies.
4. It ſeems, in one place of Spenſer, to ſignify the ſame as to
wave; tº brandiſh; to flouriſh.
Whom when the prince to battle new addreſt,
And threat'ning high his dreadful ſtroke did ſee,
His ſparkling blade about his head he blºſ,
And ſmote off quite his right leg by the knee. Fairy Q. b. i.
BLE'ss ED. particip, adj. [from to blºſs.J. Happy; enjoying hea-
venly felicity.
BLE'ssed Thiſtle. [cnicus, Lat.] The name of a plant.
The characters are; It hath floſculous flowers ; conſiſting of
may florets, which are multifid, and ſtand upon the embryo;
theſe florets are incloſed in a Icaly cup, ſurrounded with leaves.
The ſpecies are, 1. The blºſſed thiſtle. 2. The yellow diſtaff
thſil. - The 'ºff' thiſtle is cultivated in gardens for the herb,
which is dried and preſerved for medicial uſes; but of late
, Yºars it hath been leſs uſed than formerly. Millar.
BLE'ssEply, adv. [from blºſſed.] Happily.
This accident of Clitophon. ino
their meeting. itophon's taking had ſo º º
.72 v. i-
BLE'ssed Ness. n.ſ.. [from bleſſed.]
1. Happineſs; felicity.
Many times have I, leaning to yonder palm, admired the
bleſºdneſs of it, that it could bear love without the ſenſe of
pain. Siday.
His overthrow heap'd happineſs upon him;
For then, and not till then, he felt himſelf,
And found the blºſſedneſs of being little. Shakespeare. Hºn. VIII.
2. Sanétity.
Earthlier happy is the roſe diſtill'd,
Than that, which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies in ſingle bleſſedneſs.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
3. Heavenly felicity.
It is ſuch an one, as, being begun in grace, paſſes into glory,
bleſſedneſs, and immortality. South.
4. Divine favour.
BLE'sser. n.ſ.. [from bleſ...] He that bleſſes, or gives a bleſ.
ſing; he that makes anything proſper.
When thou receiveſt praiſe, take it indifferently, and return
it to God, as the giver of the gift, or the ºleffer of the action.
- Taylor's Holy Living.
Ble'ss ING.. n.ſ.. [from bleſs.]
1. Benediction; a prayer by which happineſs is implored for any
One.
2. A declaration by which happineſs is promiſed in a prophetick
and authoritative manner.
The perſon that is called, kneeleth down before the chair,
and the father layeth his hand upon his head, or her heal, and
giveth the ºleffing. Pacon's New Atlantis.
3. º of the means of happineſs; a gift; an advantage; a be-
Inclit. -
Nor are his blºſings to his banks confin'd,
But free, and common, as the ſea and wind. Denham.
Political jealouſy is very reaſonable in perſons perſuaded of
the excellency of their conſtitution, who believe that they de-
rive from it the moſt valuable blºſings of ſociety. Add ſon.
A juſt and wiſe magiſtrate is a cºffing as extenſive as the
community to which he belongs: a / ºffing which includes all
other bleſſings whatſoever, that relate to this life. Atterbury.
4. Divine favour.
My pretty couſin,
Bleſſing upon you !
I had moſt need of bleſſing, and amen,
Stuck in my throat. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Honour thy father and mother, both in word and deed, that
a blºſing may come upon thee from them. Ecclus, iii. 8.
He ſhall receive the blºſing from the Lord. Pſalm xxix. 5.
5. The Hebrews, under this name, often underſtand the preſents
which friends make to one another; in all probability, becauſe
they are generally attended with bleſſiºgs and compliments both
from thoſe who give, and thoſe who receive. Calmet.
And Jacob ſaid, receive my preſent at my hand; take, I
pray thee, my blºſing that is brought to thee. Gen. xxxiii. 1 o.
BLEst. particip. ad. [from bleſ.]
Peace to thy gentle ſhade, and endleſs reſt !
Blºft in thy genius, in thy love too bleſ? / Pope.
BLEw. The preterite from blow; which ſee.
The reſt fled into a ſtrong tower, where, ſeeing no remedy,
they deſperately blew up themſelves, with a great part of the
caſtle, with gunpowder. Knolley's Hiſtory ºf the Tur's.
Bley M.E. m. ſ. An inflammation in the foot of a horſe, pro-
ceeding from bruiſed blood, between the ſole and the bone.
Farrier's Dić?.
Shakespeare Macbeth.
Blight. m.ſ. [The etymology unknown.]
1. Mildew; according to Skinner; but it ſeems taken by moſt
writers, in a general ſenſe, for any cauſe of the failure of
fruits.
I complained to the oldeſt and beſt gardeners, who often fell
into the ſame misfortune, and eſteemed it ſome light of the
ſpring. - Temple.
2. Any thing nipping, or blaſting. -
When you come to the proof once, the firſt light of froſt
ſhall moſt infallibly ſtrip you of all your glory. L'E/ºrange.
To BLIGHT. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To corrupt with mildew. - -
This vapour bears up along with it any noxiºus mineral
ſteams; it then blaſts vegetables, blights corn and fruit, and is
ſometimes injurious even to men. Hºodward's Natural Hiſł.
2. In general, to blaſt; to hinder from fertility. ..., -
My country neighbours do not find it impoſſible to think of
a lame horſe they have, or their lighted corn, till they have run
over in their minds all beings. Locke.
But left harſh care the lover's peace deſtroy,
And roughly hlight the tender buds of joy,
Let reaſon teach.
BLIND. adj. [blinb, Saxon.]
1. Without fight; deprived of the ſenſe of ſeeing; dark.
The blind man that governs his ſteps by feeling, in defečt of
eyes, receives advertiſement of remote things through a ſtaff.
Digły on the Soul.
Thoſe
Lyttleton.
E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L I
B L I
Thoſe other two equall'd with me in fate,
So were I equall'd with them in renown
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides;
And Tireſias, and Phineus, prophets old. Par. Loft, b. iii.
2. Intellectually dark; unable to judge; ignorant; with to be
fore that which is unſeen.
All authors to their own defe&amp;ts are blind;
Hadſt thou, but Janus like, a face behind,
To ſee the people, what ſplay mouths they make;
To mark their fingers, pointed at thy back. Dryden's Perſ.
3. Sometimes of
Blind of the future, and by rage miſled,
He pulls his crimes upon his people's head. Dryden's Fab.
. Unſeen; out of the publick view; private ; generally with
ſome tendency to ſome contempt or cenſure.
To grievous and ſcandalous inconveniencies they make
themſelves ſubječt, with whom any blind or ſecret corner is
judged a fit houſe of common prayer. Hooker, b. v. § 25.
5. Noteaſily diſcernible; hard to find; dark; obſcure ; unſeen.
There be alſo blind fires under ſtone, which flame not out;
but oil being poured upon them, they flame out. Bacon.
Where elſe
Shall I inform my unacquainted feet
In the blind mazes of this tang!'d wood Milton.
How have we wander'd a long diſmal night,
Led through blind paths by each deluding light. Roſcommon.
Part creeping underground, their journey blind,
And climbing from below, their fellows meet. Dryden.
So mariners miſtake the promis'd guſt,
And, with full ſails, on the blind rocks are loſt. Dryden.
A poſtern door, yet unobſerv'd and free,
Join'd by the length of a blind gallery,
To the king's cloſet bed. Dryden's Aeneid.
6. Blind Weſſels. [with chymiſts.] Such as have no opening but
on one ſide.
To Blind. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To make blind; to deprive of fight.
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her ſcornful eyes | Shakeſp. King Lear.
Of whoſe hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith ? and I will reſtore it. I Sam. xii. 3.
A blind guide is certainly a great miſchief; but a guide that
blind; thoſe whom he ſhould lead, is undoubtedly a much
greater. - South.
2. To darken; to obſcure to the eye.
So whirl the ſeas, ſuch darkneſs blind; the ſky,
That the black night receives a deeper dye. Dryden's Fab.
3. To obſcure to the underſtanding.
The ſtate of the controverſy between us he endeavoured,
with all his art, to blind and confound. Stillingfleet,
BLIND. m.ſ.
I. Something to hinder the fight.
Hardly any thing in our converſation is pure and genuine;
civility caſts a blind over the duty, under ſome cuſtomary
words. L’Eſtrange.
2. Something to miſlead the eye, or the underſtanding.
Theſe diſcourſes ſet an oppoſition between his commands
and decrees; making the one a blind for the execution of the
other. Decay of Piety.
To Bli'NDFCL.D. v. a. [from blind and fold.] To hinder from
ſeeing, by blinding the eyes.
... When they had blindfolded him, they ſtruck him on the
face. Luke, xxii. 64.
BLI'NDFol D. adj. [from the verb.] Having the eyes covered.
And oft himſelf he chanc'd to hurt unwares,
Whilſt reaſon, blent through paſſion, nought deſcried,
But, as a blindfold bull, at random fares,
And where he hits, nought knows, and where he hurts,
nought cares. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. iv. ſtanz. 7.
Who blindfºld walks upon a river's brim,
When he ſhould ſee, has he deſerv'd to ſwim Dryden.
When lots are ſhuffled together, or a man blindfold caſts a
dye, what reaſon can he have to preſume, that he ſhall draw a
white ſtone rather than a black * South.
They will look into the ſtate of the nation with their own
eyes, and be no longer led blindfold by a male legiſlature.
. Freeholder, N° 32.
Bll'NDLY. adv. [from blind.]
1. Without fight.
2. Implicitely; without examination.
The old king, after a long debate,
By his imperious miſtreſs blindly led,
Has given Cydaria to Orbellan's bed. . Dryd. Indian Emp.
How ready zeal for intereſt and party, is to charge atheiſm
on thoſe, who will not, without examining, ſubmit, and blindly
ſwallow their nonſenſe. Locke.
2. Without judgment or direction. -
How ſeas, and earth, and air, and ačtive flame,
Fell through the mighty void; and, in their fall,
Were blindly gather'd in this goodly ball. Dryden's Silenus.
BLI's DMAN's BUFF. n.ſ. A play in which ſome one is to have
his eyes covered, and hunt out the reſt of the company,
- - - - -
- -
Diſguis'd in all the maſk of night,
We left our champion on his flight:
At blindman's buff to grope his way,
In equal fear of night and day. Hadibras, p. iii. c. ii.
He imagines I ſhut my eyes again; but ſurely he fancies I
play at blindman's buff with him; for he thinks I never have
my eyes open. Stillingfieet's Dºſence of Diſ. on Romiſh Idolatry.
Blindness. n.ſ. [from blind.]
1. Want of fight. - -
Nor can we call it choice, when what we chuſe,
Folly and blindneſ; only could refuſe. Dealam:
2. Ignorance; intellectual darkneſs. - -
All the reſt as born of ſavage brood,
But with baſe thoughts are into blindneſs led,
And kept from looking on the lightſome day. Spenser.
Whenſoever we would proceed beyond theſe ſimple ideas,
we fall preſently into darkneſs and difficulties, and can diſcove:
nothing farther but our own blindneſs and ignorance. Locke.
Bli'NRside. n.ſ.. [from blind and ſide..] weakneſs; foible;
weak part.
He is too great a lover of himſelf; but this is one of his
blindſides; and the beſt of men, I fear, are not without them.
f Swift's Wonderful I/2nder of Iſanders.
BLI'NPworM. n.ſ.. [from blind and worm.] A ſmall viper, the
leaſt of our Engliſh ſerpents, but venemous.
You ſpotted ſnakes, with double tongue,
Thorny hedgehogs, be not ſeen;
Newts and blindworms, do no wrong;
Come not near our fairy queen. Shakeſp. Mid N. Dr.
The greater ſlow worm, called alſo the blindworm, is com-
monly thought to be blind, becauſe of the littleneſs of his eyes.
Grew's Muſicum.
To BLINK. v. n. [blincken, Daniſh.]
1. To wink, or twinkle with the eyes.
So politick, as if one eye
Upon the other were a ſpy;
That to trepan the one to think -
The other blind, both ſtrove to blink. Hudibras, p. iii. c. ii.
2. To ſee obſcurely.
What's here ! the portrait of a blinking idiot. -
Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Sweet and lovely well,
Shew me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
His figure ſuch as might his ſoul proclaim;
One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame: Pope’s Iliad.
BLI'NKARD. m. ſ. [from blink.]
1. One that has bad eyes.
2. Something twinkling. - -
In ſome parts we ſee many glorious and eminent ſtars, in
others few of any remarkable greatneſs, and, in ſome, none
but blinkards, and obſcure ones. Hakewell on Providence.
BLISS. m. ſ. [blurre, Sax. from blºsarian, to rejoice.]
1. The higheſt degree of happineſs; bleſſedneſs; felicity; gene-
rally uſed of the happineſs of bleſſed ſouls.
A mighty Saviour hath witneſſed of himſelf, I am the way;
the way that leadeth us from miſery into bliſs. Hooker, b. i.
Dim ſadneſs did not ſpare
That time celeſtial viſages; yet, mix'd
With pity, violated not their biſ.
With me -
All my redeem'd may dwell, in joy and bliſs. Par. Loſt, b. xi.
2. Felicity in general.
Condition, circumſtance is not the thing;
Bliſs is the ſame in ſubjećt or in king. Pºpe.
BLI'ssFUL. adj. [from bliſs and full.] Full of joy; happy in
the higheſt degree. - -
Yet ſwimming in that ſea of bliſſful joy,
He nought forgot. Fairy Ç. b. i. e. i. ſtan. 41.
The two ſaddeſt ingredients in hell, are deprivation of the
blisful viſion, and confuſion of face. - Hammond.
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrival’d love,
Par. Loft, b. x. l. 25.
In #: ſolitude. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b, iii. l. 89.
Firſt in the fields I try the filvan ſtrains,
Nor bluſh to ſport in Windſor's bliſſful plains. Pope.
BLI'ssfully. adv. [from bliſſful..] Happily. - -
Bli'ssful Ness. n.ſ.. [from biſfitſ.] Happineſs; fulneſs %.
To Bli'sso M. v. m. To caterwauſ; to be ſuſtful. Dià.
BLISTER. m. ſ. [bluyſler, Dutch..] •
1. A puſtule formed by raiſing the cuticle from the cuts, and
filled with ſerous blood. - -
In this ſtate ſhe gallops, night by night,
O'er ladies lips, who ſtrait on kiſſes dream,
Which of the angry mob with lifter Plagues,
Becauſe their breaths with ſweetmeats tainted are: -
Shakespeare. Romeo and julist.
I found a great bliſler drawn by the gaſſick, but had it cut,
which run a good deal of water, but filled again by next
night. Temple.
2. Any ſwelling made by the ſeparation of a film or ſkin from
r parts,
the out, p Upon
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L O
B L O
Upon the leaves there riſeth a tumouſ hº
To Bli's rer. v. m. [from the noun.J To jº bliſters.
If I prove honeymouth, let my tongue ſfer,
And never to my red look'd anger be x - c.7’’.
The trumpet any more. Sºft. //?nter’s Tale.
with loathing hands,
Ernbrace thy knees - *
Which hºſier º touch thee. Dryden's Don Sebø/?.
To BLI's TER. v. a. -
1. To raiſe bliſters by ſome hurt, * * burn, or rubbing.
Look, here comes one, º 3. mine,
jing in the flames of her own youth,
}º, her report. . . Sha' off. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
2. To raiſe biſters with a medical intention. -
I hyfered the legs and thighs; but was too late, he died
howling. I/ſeman's Surgery.
Biff HE, 4}. [blºc, Saxon.] Gay; airy; merry; joyous ;
ſprightly; mirthful.
We have always one eye fixed upon the countenance of our
enemies; and, according to the blithe or heavy aſpect thereºf,
our other eye ſheweth ſome other ſuitable token either of diſlike
Or approbation. Hocker, b. iv. § 9.
Then figh not ſo, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bonny. Shakespeare. M. ado abºut Noth.
For that fair female troop thou ſaw'ſt, that ſeem'd
Of goddeſſes, ſo blithe, ſo ſmooth, ſo gay; - -
Yet empty of all good. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
To whom the wily adder, lithe and glad: -
Empreſs the way is ready, and not long. Par. Lºft, b. ix.
And the milkmaid ſingeth blithe, -
And the mower whets his ſcythe. Milton.
Should he return, that troop ſo blithe and bold,
Precipitant in fear, would wing their flight. Pope.
PLI'THLY. adv. [from blithe..] In a blithe manner. -
BLI'THN Ess. m. ſ. [from blithe..] The quality of being
B1.1'TH so MNEss. ; blithe.
B11'THsoME. adj. [from blithe..] Gay; cheerful.
Froſty blaſts deface
The blithſºme year: trees of their ſhrivell'd fruits ---
Are widow’d. Philips.
To Bloat. ... a. [probably from blow.] To ſwell, or make
turgid with wind.
r like a bliſler. Bacon.
His rude eſſays
Encourage him, and bloat him up with praiſe,
That he may get more bulk before he dies. Dryden.
The ſtrutting petticoat ſmooths all diſtinétions, levels the
mother with the daughter. I cannot but be troubled to ſee
ſo many well-ſhaped innocent virgins bloated up, and waddling
up and down like bigbellied women. Addiſon. Spectator.
To Bloat. v. n. To grow turgid.
If a perſon of a firm conſtitution begins to bloat, from be-
ing warm grows cold, his fibres grow weak. Arbuthnot.
Blo'ATEDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from bloat.] Turgidneſs; ſwelling; tu-
In Our.
Laſſituée, lazineſs, bloatedneſs, and ſcorbutical ſpots, are ſym-
ptoms of weak fibres. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Blo'BBER. m. ſ. [from blob.] A word uſed in ſome counties for
a bubble. -
There ſwimmeth alſo in the ſea a round ſlimy ſubſtance,
called a blobber, reputed noiſome to the fiſh. Carew.
Blo'BBERLIP. n.ſ.. [from blob, or baller, and lip.] A thick lip.
They make a wit of their inſipid friend,
His blobberlips and beetlebrows commend. Dryden's juvenal.
Blo'BLIPPED.
Blo'BBERLIPPED.
A blollipped ſhell, which ſeemeth to be a kind of muſſel.
Grew's Muſæum.
His perſon deformed to the higheſt degree; flat noſed, and
blobberlipped. L'Eſtrange.
BLOCK. n.ſ.. [blºck, Dutch; bloc, Fr.]
I. A heavy piece of timber, rather thick than long.
2. A maſs of matter.
Homer's apotheoſis conſiſts of a groupe of figures, cut in the
ſame blºck of marble, and riſing one above another. Addiſon.
3. A maſſy body.
Small cauſes are ſufficient to make a man uneaſy, when great
ones are not in the way: for want of a block, he will ſlumble
at a ſtraw. Swift's Thoughts on various Subjects.
4. A rude piece of timber; in contempt.
When, by the help of wedges and beetles, an image is cleft
out of the trunk of ſome tree, yet, after all the ſkill of artifi-
cers to ſet forth ſuch a divine block, it cannot one moment fe-
cure itſelf from being eaten by worms. Stilingfleet.
5. The piece of wood on which hats are formed.
He wears his faith but as the faſhion of his hat; it ever
changes with the next block. Shakeſp. Much ado alout Nothing.
°. The wood on which criminals are iºnºiºd.
Some guard theſe traitors to the block of death,
º strue bed, and yielder up of breath. Shakespeare HIV.
h y the inſtant of his death, having a long beard, after his
i. . . the hock, he gently drew his beard aſide, and
tº this hath not offended the king. Bacon’s Apºphthegms.
E I'll drag him thence,
ven from the holy altar to the blºck. Dryden's IV of B.
łaj. Having ſwelled or thick lips.
7. An obſtruction; a ſtop.
Can he ever dream, that the ſuffering for righteouſneſs ſake
is our felicity, when he ſees us run ſo from it, that no crime
is block enough in our way, to ſtop our flight : Decay of Piety.
8. A ſea term for a pully.
9. A blockhead; a fellow remarkable for ſtupidity.
The country is a deſert, where the good
Gain'd, inhabits not; born's not underſtood;
There men become beaſts, and prone to all evils;
In cities, blocks. Domne.
What tongueleſs blocks were they, would they not ſpeak 2
Shakeſp. Richard III.
To Block. v. a. [bloquer, Fr.] To ſhut up; to incloſe, ſo as
to hinder egreſs.
The ſtates about them ſhould neither by encreaſe of domi-
nion, nor by blocking of trade, have it in their power to hurt
or annoy. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
Recommend it to the governour of Abingdon, to ſend ſome
troops to block it up, from infeſting the great road. Clarendon.
They block the caſtle kept by Bertram ;
But now they cry, down with the palace, fire it. Dryden.
The abbot raiſes an army, and blocks up the town on the
ſide that faces his dominions. Addiſon on Italy.
Block-Hous E. m. ſ. [from block and houſe..] A fortreſs built to
obſtruct or block up a paſs.
His entrance is guarded with block-houſes, and that on the
town's ſide fortified with ordnance. Carew's Survey of Cornw.
Rocheſter water reacheth far within the land, and is under
the protećtion of ſome lock-houſes. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Block-TIN. m. ſ. [from block and tin.] So the tradeſmen call
that which is moſt pure or unmixed, and as yet unwrought.
- Boyle.
Blocka'pp. n.ſ. [from blºck.] A ſiege carried on by fiti.
up the place.
The enemy was neceſſitated wholly to abandon the blockade
of Olivenza. Tatler, N° 51.
Round the goddeſs roll
Broad hats and hoods, and caps, a ſable ſhoal;
Thick, and more thick, the black blockade extends. Pope.
To Block A'DE. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſhut up.
Huge bales of Britiſh cloth blockade the door,
A hundred oxen at your levee roar. Pope.
Blo'ck HEAD. m. ſ. [from toºk and head..] A ſtupid fellow; a
dolt; a man without parts.
Your wit will not ſo ſoon out as another man's will; it is
ſtrongly wedged up in a blockhead. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Weidly ſit like ſtupid blockhead,
Our hands committed to our pockets. Hudibras, p. iii. c. ii.
A blockhead rubs his thoughtleſs ſkull,
And thanks his ſtars he was not born a fool. Pºpe.
Blo'cKHEADED. adj. [from blockhead..] Stupid ; dull.
Says a blockheaded boy, theſe are villainous creatures.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Blo'ckish. adj. [from block.] Stupid; dull.
Make a lott'ry,
And, by decree, let blockiſh Ajax draw
The ſort to fight with Hector. Shakespeare. Troilus and Crºſſ.
Blo'ckish LY. adv. [from blockiſh.] In a ſtupid manner.
Blockish Ness. n.ſ.. [from blockiſh.] Stupidity.
Blo'MARY. m. ſ. The firſt forge in une iron mills, through
which the metal paſſes, after it has been firſt melted from the
mine. Dićf.
Blo'NKET. n.ſ. [I ſuppoſe for blanket.]
Our blonket livery's been all too fad
For thiſke ſame ſeaſon, when all is yelad
With pleaſance.
BLOOD. n.ſ.. [blob, Saxon.]
1. The red liquour that circulates in the bodies of animals.
But fleſh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof,
ſhall you not eat. Gen. ix.4.
2. Child; progeny.
We'll no more meet, no more ſee one another:
But yet thou art my fleſh, my blood, my daughter.
Spenser's Paſtorals.
Shakeſp. King Lear. .
3. Family; kindred.
As many and as well born bloods as thoſe,
Stand in his face, to contradict his claim. Shakespeare. K. John.
O ! what an happineſs is it to find &gt;
A friend of our own blood, a brother kind. - Iſailºr.
According to the common law of England, in adminiſtra-
tions, the whole blood ought to be preferred to the half blood.
Ayºffe's Parergon,
4. Deſcent; lineage.
Epithets of flattery, deſerved by few of them; and not run-
ning in a blºod, like the perpetual gentleneſs of the Ormond
family. Dryden's Fab. Dedication.
5. Blood royal; royal lineage:
They will almoſt
Give us a prince o' th' blood, a ſon of Priam,
In change of him. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
6. Birth; high extračtion.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding, Shakespeare. K. #.
- 7. Viur-
*.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L O
—
7. Murder;. violent death. -
It will have blood; they ſay, blood will have blood.
- Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto . from the
ground. Gen. iv. Io.
8. Life.
When wicked men have ſlain a righteous perſon in his own
houſe, upon his bed, ſhall I not therefore now require his blood
at your hand? 2 Sam. iv. 1 1.
9. For blood. Though his blood or life was at ſtake: a low phraſe.
Acrow lay battering upon a muſcle, and could not, for his
blood, break the ſhell to come at the fiſh. L’Eſtrange.
10. The carnal part of man.
Fleſh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee,
ther which is in heaven.
11. Temper of mind; ſtate of the paſſions.
Will you, great ſir, that glory blot,
In cold blood, which you gain'd in hot?
12. Hot ſpark; man of fire.
The news put divers young bloods into ſuch a fury, as the
Engliſh ambaſſadors were ... peril, to tº:
Bacon's Henry VII.
but my fa-
Aſatt. xvi. 17.
Hudibras.
13. The juice of any thing. -
He waſhed his garments in wine, and his cloaths in the had
of grapes. Gen. xlix. 11.
To Bloop. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſtain with blood.
When the faculties intelle&amp;tual are invigour, not drenched,
Or, * *re, blooded by the affections. Bacon's Apophth.
** **proach the ſlain with vaſt ſurpriſe,
And, ſcarce ſecure, i.e.-hout their ſpears afar,
And blood their points, to pro. "...i. partnerſhip in war
He was blooded up to his elbows by a couple #3. F.;
he had been butchering with his own imperial haº”.”
2. To enter; to enure to blood, as a hound. *ddiſon.
Fairer than faireſt, let none ever ſay,
That ye were blooded in a yielded prey. Spenser, ſonn. xx.
3. To blood, is ſometimes to let blood medically.
4. To heat; to exaſperate. ---
By this means, matters grew more exaſperate; the auxiliary
forces of French and En #. were much oſooded one againſt an-
other. Bacon's Henry VII.
Blood-boltered. adj. [frca. blood and bolter.] Blood-ſprinkled.
The blood-bolter’d Banquo ſmiles upon me. AMacbeth.
Blood-Hor. ad;. ſºom blood and hot..] Hot in the ſame de-
gree with bloºd- --- - - -
A piece of bread firſt to be eaten, will gain time to
warm the beer blood-hot, which then he may drink ſafely. Locke.
To Blood-let. v. a. [from blood and let.] To bleed; to open
a vein medicinally.
The chyle is not perfeótly aſfimilated into blood, by its cir-
culation through the lungs, as is known by experiments of
blood-letting. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Blood-letter. n.ſ.. [from blood-let.] A phlebotomiſt; one
that takes away blood medically.
This miſchief happening to aneuriſms, proceedeth from the
ignorance of the blood-letter, who, not confidering the errour
committed in letting blood, binds up the arm careleſsly.
JWiſeman's Surgery.
Blood-stone. n.ſ.. [from blood and ſtone..] The name of a
ſtone.
There is a ſtone, which they call the blood-ſtone, which, worn,
is thought to be good for them that bleed at the noſe; which,
no doubt, is by aſtrićtion, and cooling of the ſpirits. Bacon.
The blood-ſtone is green, ſpotted with a bright blood-red.
- Woodward on Foſſils.
Blood-thirsty. adj. [from blood and thirff.] Deſirous to ſhed
blood.
And high advancing his blood-thirſty blade,
Struck one of thoſe deformed heads. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The image of God the blood-thirſty have not; for God is cha- .
rity and mercy itſelf. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Blood-vessel. n.ſ.. [from blood and veſſel.] A veſſel appropri-
ated by nature to the conveyance of the blood.
The ſkins of the forehead were extremely tough and thick,
and had not in them any blood-veſſel, that we were able to diſ-
Cover. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 275.
Blo'odflower. m. ſ. ſhamanthus, Lat.j A plant.
This plant was originally brought from the Cape of Good
Hope, and has been many years preſerved in the curious gar-
Jens in Holland, where they now have many ſorts; but in
England it is ſtill very rare. Millar.
Blood Gui'ltiness. n.ſ.. [from blood and guilty.] Murder;
the crime of ſhedding blood.
And were there rightful cauſe of difference,
et were’t not better, fair it to accord,
Than with bloodguiltineſ to heap offence,
And mortal vengeance join to crime abhorr'd. Fairy Q. b. ii.
Blo'odhound. n: ſ [from blood and hound..] A hound that
follows by the ſcent, and ſcizes with great fierceneſs,
Vol. I,
Hear this, hear this, thou tribune of the people:
Thou zealous, publick bloodhound, hear, and met.
Where are theſe rav'ning bloodhounds, that purſue
In a full cry, gaping to ſwallow me? Southerne's Inn. Alºft.
A lºodhound will follow the tract of the perſon he purſues
and all hounds the particular game they have in chace. ~ *
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
And though the villain 'ſcape a while, he feels Aliments
low vengeance, lik -
Bloodily. . , like a bloodhound, at his heels.
cruelly.
Dryden.
- Swift.
[from bloody..] With diſpoſition to ſhed bloºd 3.
- I told the purſuivant
#.º "...; how mine enemies,
*Y* Pomfret, bloodily were butcher'd. Shak
This day, the poet, bloodily j er Shakeſp. R. III.
Has made me die, full fore againſt my mind. Dryden
Lo'opiness. n.ſ.. [from bloºd -
- - - - - - %] The ſtate of being bi
. It will manifeſt itſelf by its bloodinºſ; , ;tº: tº
is ſo thin as not to admit of any. Sharp's Surgery.
Bloodless. adj. [from blood.]
I. wº blood; dead.
*Cheer'd my ſorrows, and, for films of gold
The bloodleſ carcaſe of m - gºld, - -
2. Without ń. y Hector ſold. Dryden's AFneid.
War brings ruin where it ſhould amend 3.
But beauty, with a bloodleſ, conqueſt, finds
A welcome ſov’reignty in rudeſt minds.
Bloodshed. n.ſ.. [from blood and fhed.]
1. The crime of blood, or murder.
Full many miſchiefs follow cruel wrath;
ë. b º and tumultuous ſtrife,
nmanly murder, and unthrifty ſcath. Fair -
All murders paſt do ſtand . in this; y &amp;leen, b, i.
And this ſo ſole, and ſo unmatchable,
Shall prove a deadly bloodſhed but a jeſt,
Exampled by this heinous ſpectacle. Shakeſp. King john.
o,4 man, under the tranſports of a vehement rage, paſſes a
does whejidgment upon murder and bloodſhed, from what he
2. Slaughter. "enge is over. South.
So by him Caeſar got the vićtory,
Through great bloodjº, and many a ſad aſſay. Pa., J. ...
Qi wars and bloodſhed, and of dire events,
I could ...: - -
Bloº"; certainty foretel. Dryden's Tyran. Love.
...am bloodſhed.] Murderer.
He that taketh away his fie. * - - - -
he that defraudeth ğ labour: of'; livi ng: ſlayeth him : and
†:hºdºdder.
Blo'opshot. adj. [from blood and ſhot..] Filled with
Bloods Ho'TTEN. } blood burſting from its proper veſſels.
And that the winds their bellowing throats would try,
When redd'ning clouds reflect his bloodſhot eye. Garth.
Blo'odsucker. n.f. [from blood and ſuck.]
1. A leech; a fly; any thing that ſucks blood.
2. A cruel man; a murderer.
God keep the prince from all the pack of you;
A knot you are of damned bloodſuckers. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The nobility cried out upon him, that he was a bloodſucker,
a murderer, and a parricide. Hayward.
Blo'ody. adj. [from blood.]
1. Stained with blood. -
2. Cruel; murderous; applied either to men or faās.
By continual martial exerciſes, without blood, ſhe made
them perfect in that bloody art. Sidney, b. ii.
Falſe of heart, light of ear, bloºdy of hand. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, falſe, deceitful.
Thou bloodier villain, -
Than terms can give thee out. Shakeſp. Macleth.
Alas! why gnaw you ſo your nether lip :
Some bloody paſſion ſhakes your very frame;
Theſe are portents: but yet I hope, I hope; -
They do not point on me. Shakeſp. Othela.
The bloody fact
Will be aveng’d; and th’ other's faith approv’d,
Loſe no reward; though here thou ſee him die, . . . .
Rolling induſt and gore. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi. A 457.
The bloodieſ vengeance which ſhe could puſ fue. -
Would be a trifle to my loſs of you. Dryden's Indian Frºp.
Proud Nimrod firſt the bloody chace began; , , -
A mighty hanter, and his prey was man. Pºpº'; '''. For?.
BlooDY-FLUx. See FLUx.
Cold, by retarding the motion of the blood, and ſuppreſſing
perſpiration, produces giddineſs, fleepineſs, pains in the bow-
els, looſeneſs, bloody-fluxes. r 4-lathºt on .#r.
Bloody-MINDED. adj. [from bloody and mind.] Cruel; in-
clined to bloodſhed. * º
I think you'll make me mad : truth has been at my tongue's
end this half hour, and I have not the power to bring it cut, for
fear of this bloody-minded colonel. Dryden’s Spaniſh /riar.
BLOOM. n.ſ. [jium, Germ. ºocm, Dutch..]
1. A bloſſom ; the flower which precedes the fruit.
3 G How
Waller.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L O
ints her colours how the bee
all ſitS cting iºd fºct. Par. Loft, b. v.
S planted by ;
dº a goodly ſhow,
IHow nature p
Slts on the bloom,”
A medlar tree W*
-- ading branches" *
The ſpreading ning blooms was “... bough.
vden.
And full of 9P* Dryden
aſt
Haſtc t
The turf with rural d
O yonder woodbine bow'rs;
aintics ſhall be crown'd, d P
- ning bloºms diffuſe their ſweet arº". ope.
2 º º the ſtate of anything improvºº and
, i.ening to high" perfectiºn. .
tiºnſ. I no queen, did you my beauty weigh, *
My youth in bloom, your agº in its decay. Dryden's Aurengz.
The blue colour upº" plums and grapes newly gathered.
- [In the iron works.] A piece of iron wrought into a maſs,
two feet ſquare.
To Bloom. v. ". [from the noun.]
1. To bring or yield bloſſoms.
The rod of Aaron for the hou -
brought forth buds, and blºomed bloſſoms, and yi
ſe of Levi was budded, and
elded almonds.
Numb. xvii. 8.
It is a common experience, that if you do nºt pull off ſome
bloſſoms the firſt time a tree blometh, it will bloſſom itſelf to
death. fº, Natural Hył. Nº 449.
. To produce, as bloſſoms. -
2 º and ºuſtoms, now ſuperſtitious, when the ſtrength of
virtuous, devout, or charitable affection bloomed them, no man
could juſtly have condemned as evil. Hooker, b. v. § 3.
3. To be in a ſtate of youth and improvement.
Beauty, fail flów'r, that ev'ry ſeaſon fears, -
Blººms in thy colours for a thouſand years. Pope's Epſiles.
O greatly bleſs'd with every blooming grace' -
with equal ſteps the paths of glory trace. Pºpe's Odyſ. b. i.
Bloomy, adj. [from *] Full of blooms; flowery.
O nightingale! that on yon bloomy ſpray
wºleń at lºve, when all the woods ºf ſtill. Milton.
Departing ſpring could only º to ſhed
Her blºomy beauties on the genial bed, r.”
put left the manly ſummer in her ſtead.
Hear how the birds, on ev'ry tº ſº; y Pope.
With joyous mºj Act of blowing; blaſt.
BloRE. m. ſ. Aſ ruſht, with an unmeaſur’d roar, -
1 hoſe two winds, tumbling clouds in hº uſhers to e-
thcr's blore. ºapman's Iliads.
BLOSSOM. m. ſ. ſblorme, Saxº - ie flower that grows on
any plant, º t ... ºd or fruit. We generally call
thoſ "titas ...}}, which are not much regarded in them-
§§§,"$ut as a token of ſome following production.
- Cold news for me:
Thus are my bloſſºms blaſted in the bud,
And caterpillars eat my leaves away. Shakespeare Henry IV.
U * º ſhall I live now,
nder the blºſſºm that hangs on the bough. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
The pulling off many of the bloſſºms | 2. #: §
make the fruit fairer. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 449.
To his green years your cenſure you would ſuit,
Not blaſt the bloſſom, but expect the fruit. Dryden
Sweeter than ſpring, -
Thou ſole ſurviving blºſſºn from the root,
That nouriſh’d up my fortune. Thomſºn's Autumn.
To Blºssos. v. n. [from the noun..] To put forth bloſſoms.
This is the ſtate of man: to day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope; tomorrow blºſſoms,
And bears his bluſhing honours thick upon him. Sh, H. VIII.
Although the figtree ſhall not blººm, neither ſhall fruit be in
º yet º rejoice in #. Habb. iii. 1 7
e want of rain at bloſſºming time, often occaſion -
Tºft off of the *:::: &amp; of ºp. #.
I º . v. a. [from blºttir, Fr. to hide.] -
- iſ: obliterate; to make writing inviſible, by covering it with
H * 1 1 - You that are king,
º: caus'd him, by new act of parliament,
#. out me, and put his own ſon in. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
T v'n copious Dryden wanted, or forgot,
º laſt and greateſt art, the art to blot. Pope.
mak º tº: moſt underſtanding will find it impoſſible to
all f f e beſt uſe of it, while he writes in conſtraint, perpetu-
y ſoftening, correcting, or blotting out expreſſions. Swift.
2. To efface; to eraſe.
o” º oh no more my foe, but brother:
Th ſº like this lists out a thouſand crimes. Dryden.
Can n . m º ideas, offered to the mind, the underſtanding
refuſe, º º nor alter, nor lot out, than a mirroun can
duce. , or obliterate, the images which the objects pro-
3. T * black ſº on a paper; to blur. Lºcke.
with º of matter, be like pens over full of ink
ooner biot, than make any fair letter at all. 2
Aſcham's Schoolmaſter. -
O ſweet Portial
Here are a few of the unpleaſant'ſt words
That
at ever blotted paper. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
4. To diſgrace; to disfigure.
Unknit that threat'ning unkind brow ;
It blots thy beauty, as froſtbites the meads,
Confounds thy fame. shºff. Taming ºf the Shrew.
My guilt thy growing virtues did defame;
My blackneſs blotted thy unblemiſh’d name. Dryden's AFn.
For mercy's ſake, reſtrain thy hand,
Blot not thy innocence with guiltleſs blood. Rowe.
5. To darken.
He ſung how earth blot; the moon's gilded wane,
whilſt fooliſh men beat ſounding braſs in vain. Cowley.
Blot. m. ſ. [from the verb.] *
1. An obliteration of ſomething written.
Let flames on your unlucky Papers Rºº
Your wars, your loves, your praiſes, be forgot,
Ajmake of all an univerſal bat. Pry" juven, ſat. vii.
2. A blur; a ſpot upon paper.
3. A ſpot in reputation; ſtain; a diſgrace; a reproach.
Make known,
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulneſs,
That hath depriv'd me. Shakespeare King Lear.
A lie is a foul blot in a man; yet it is continually in the
mouth of the untaught. Ecclus; xx. 24-
A diſappointed hope, a *. of honour, a ſtrain of cºnſci-
ence, an unfortunate love, will ſerve the turn. Temple.
4. [At backgammon.] When a ſingle man lies open to be ta-
ken up; whence to hit a blº;
He is too great a maſter of his art, tº make a blot which "“Y
ſo eaſily be hit. Dryden's Dedica” Æneid.
Blotch. m. ſ. [from blot.] A ſpot or puſh", "F." the ſkin.
S d blotch f'ſeveral cºnd figures, ſtragglin
pots and blotcheſ, o evera thers yellow, livid, % r black. g
- e2, Ol
over the body; ſome are r Harvey on Conſumptions.
To Blot E.: ". To ſmoke, or dry by the ſmoke; as bloted
herrinr’ ; É.º l
sº v. 77. /* 2 Lutch.
BIA ſtroke.
A moſt poor man, made tame to fortune's blows,
Who, by the art of known and feeling ſorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Shakeſp. King Lear.
- A woman's tongue,
That gives not ºf ſo great a lºw to thear,
As will a cheſnut. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew;
words of great contempt, sommonly finding a return of
equal ſcorn, blows were faſtened upon the moſt pragmatical of
the crew. Clarendon.
2. The fatal ſtroke; the ſtroke of death.
Aſſuage your thirſt of blood, and ſtrike the bi- -
3. A ſingle . ; a ſudden event. w. Dryd.
Every year they gain a victory, and a town; but if they are
once defeated, they loſe a province at a blºw. Dryden.
4. The act of a fly, by which ſhe lodges eggs in fleſh.
I much fear, left with the blows of flies,
His braſs inflicted wounds are fill’d. Chapman's Iliads.
To Blow. v. m. pret, blew; particip, paſſ blown. [b]apan, Sax.]
1. To move with a current of air.
At his fight the mountains are ſhaken, and at his will the
ſouth wind bloweth. Ecclus, xliii. 16.
Fruits, for long keeping, gather before they are full ripe; and
in a dry day, towards noon, and when the wind bloweth not
fouth, and when the moon is in decreaſe. Bacon's Nat: Hiſł.
By the fragrant winds that blow
O'er th' Elyſian flow’rs.
2. This word is uſed ſometimes imperſonally with it.
It blew a terrible tempeſt at ſea once, and there W.9 ° ſea-
man praying. L’Eſtrange:
If it low, a happy gale, we muſt ſet up all our ſails, though
it ſometimes happens, that our natural heat is mº, Pº
than our care and correctneſs. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. To pant; to puff; to be breathleſs.
Hère's Mrs. Page at the door, ſweating and blowing, and
looking wildly. Shakeſp. Merry Wives ºf Windſor.
Each aking nerve refuſe the lance to throw,
And each ſpent courſer at the chariot blºw. Pºpe's Iliad.
4. To breathe.
Says the ſatyr, if you have gotten a trick of blowing hot and
cold out of the ſame mouth, I've e'en done with ye. L'E/irange.
5. To ſound by being blown.
Nor with leſs dread the loud
Ethereal trumpet from on high 'gan blow. Par. Lºft, b. vi.
There let the prating organ blow,
To the full-voic’d quire below. Milton.
6. To ſound, or play muſically by wind.
When ye blow an alarm, thén the camps that lie on the eaſt
parts ſhall go forward. Numb, x. 5.
7. Tº blow over. To paſs away without effect.
Storms, though they blow over divers times, yet may fall at
laſt. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 16.
When the ſtorm is blown over,
How bleſt is the ſwain,
Who begins to diſcover
An end of his pain. Granville.
5 But
Pope's St. Cacilia. -
!
;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L U
But thoſe clouds being now happily blown over, and our ſun
clearly ſhining out again, I have recovered the relapſe. Denham.
8. To blow up. To fly into the air by the force of gunpowder.
On the next day, ſome of the enemy's magazines blew up;
and it is thought they were deſtroyed on purpoſe by ſome of
their men. º Tatler, N° 59.
To Blow. v. a.
1. To drive by the force of the wind.
Though you unty the winds,
Though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down,
Though caſtles topple on their warders heads. Macbeth.
Fair daughter, blow away thoſe miſts and clouds,
And let thy eyes ſhine forth in their full luſtre. Denham.
Theſe primitive heirs of the chriſtian church, could not ſo
eaſily llºw off the doctrine of paſſive obedience. South.
2. To inflame with wind.
I have created the ſmith that bloweth the coals in the fire.
Iſaiah, liv. 16.
3. To ſwell; to puff into ſize.
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our ag’d father's right. King Lear.
4. To form by blowing them into ſhape.
Spherical bubbles, that boys ſometimes blow with water, to
which ſoap hath given a tenacity. Boyle.
5. To ſound an inſtrument of wind muſick.
Where the bright ſeraphim, in burning row,
Their loud uplifted angel trumpets blow. Milton.
6. To warm with the breath.
When ificles hang by the wall,
And Dick the ſhepherd blows his nail,
And Tom bears logs into the hall,
And milk comes frozen home in pail. Shakespeare L. Lab. Loſt.
7. To ſpread by report.
But never was there man of his degree,
So much eſteem’d, ſo well belov’d as he .
So gentle of condition was he known,
That through the court his courteſy was blown.
8. To blow out. To extinguiſh by wind or the breath.
Your breath firſt kindled the dead coal of war,
And brought in matter, that ſhould feed this fire:
And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out,
With that ſame weak wind which enkindled it. Shakespeare K. john.
Moon, ſlip behind ſome cloud, ſome tempeſt, riſe,
And: low out all the ſtars that light the ſkies. Dryden.
9. To blow up. To raiſe or ſwell with breath.
A plague of fighing and grief! it blows a man up like a blad-
der. - Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
Blown up with the conceit of his merit, he did not think he
had received good meaſure from the king. Bacon's Hen. VII.
Before we had exhauſted the receiver, the bladder appeared
as full as if blown up with a quill. Boyle.
It was my breath that blew this tempeſt up,
Upon your ſtubborn uſage of the pope. Shakeſp. K. john,
His preſence ſoon blows up the unkindly fight,
And his loud guns ſpeak thick like angry men. Dryden.
An empty bladder gravitates no more than when blown up,
but ſomewhat leſs; yet deſcends more eaſily, becauſe with leſs
reſiſtance. Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. ii. c. 6.
When the mind finds herſelf very much inflamed with de-
votion, ſhe is too much inclined to think that it is blown up
with ſomething divine within herſelf. Addison Spect. Nº 2 oi.
º blow up. To deſtroy with gunpowder; to raiſe into
e alſ.
The captains hoping, by a mine, to gain the city, approach-
ed with ſoldiers ready to enter upon blowing up of the mine.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Their chief blown up in air, not waves, expir’d,
To which his pride preſum'd to give the law. Dryden.
Not far from the ſaid well, blowing up a rock, he formerly
obſerved ſome of theſe. //codward on Foſſils.
11. To infect with the eggs of flies.
I would no more endure
This wooden ſlavery, than I would ſuffer
The fleſh-fly blow my mouth. Shakeſp. Tempºff.
Rather at Nilus' mud
Lay me ſtark naked, and let the water flies
Plow me into abhorring. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
12. To blow upon. To make ſlale.
I am wonderfully pleaſed, when I meet with any paſſage in
an old Greek or Latin author, that is not town upon, and
which I have never met with in any quotation. Addiſon.
He will whiſper an intrigue that is not yet blown upon by
common fame. Addiſon. Speciator, N° to 5.
To Blow. v. n. [blopan, Saxon.] To bloom; to bloſſom.
We loſe the prime to mark how ſpring
Our tended plants, how blows the citron grove,
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy recd.
Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. v. l. 22.
This royal fair
Shall, when the bloſſom of her beauty's ſlown,
Dryden.
See her great brother on the Britiſh throne. Waller.
Fair is the kingcup that in meadow blows,
Fair is the daiſy that beſide her grows, Gay's Paſtorals.
For thee Idume's ſpicy foreſts blow,
And ſeeds of gold in Ophir's mountains glow.
Blow ER. m.ſ. [from blow.j A melter of tin.
Add his care and coſt in buying wood, and in fetching the
ſame to the blowing-houſe, together with the blowers, two or
three months extreme and encreaſing labour. Carew's Survey.
BlowN. The participle paſſive of blow.
All the ſparks of virtue, which nature had kindled in them,
were, ſo blºwn to give forth their uttermoſt heat, that juſtly it
may be affirmed, they inflamed the affections of all that knew
them. Sidney, b. ii.
The trumpets ſleep, while cheerful horns are blown,
Pope.
And arms employ'd on birds and beaſts alone. Pope.
Blo'wpoint. n.ſ. A child's play. .
Shortly boys #. not play
At ſpancounter or blºwpoint, but ſhali pay
Toll to ſome courtier. Donne:
Blow TH. n.ſ.. [from blow.] Bloom, or bloſſom.
Ambition and covetouſneſs being but green, and newly
grown up, the ſeeds and effects were as yet but potential, and
in the blowth and bud. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Blowze. n.ſ. A ruddy fat-faced wench.
Blowzy...adj. [from blowze.]. Sun burnt; high coloured.
BLU'BBER. m. ſ. [See Blob.] The part of a whale that con-
tains the oil.
To BLU'BBER. v. n. [from the noun..] To weep in ſuch a
manner as to ſwell the cheeks.
Even ſo lies ſhe,
Blull'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb'ring.
Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
A thief came to a boy that was blubbering by the fide of a
well, and aſked what he cried for. L’Eſtrange.
Soon as Glumdalclitch miſs'd her pleaſing care,
She wept, ſhe blubber'd, and ſhe tore her hair. Swift.
To BLU'BBER. v. a. To ſwell the checks with weeping.
Fair ſtreams repreſent unto me my blubbered face; let tears
procure your ſtay. Sidney.
The wild wood gods arrived in the place,
There find the virgin doleful, deſolate,
With ruffled raiment, and fair blubber'd face,
As her outrageous foe had left her late. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Tir'd with the ſearch, not finding what ſhe ſeeks,
With crucl blows ſhe pounds her blubber'd cheeks. Dryden.
Blu'BBERED. particip. adj. [from to blubber.] Swelled; big 3
applicq commonly to the lip. -
Thou ſing with him, thou boobyl never pipe
Was ſo profan'd, to touch that buller'd lip. Dryden.
BLU'DC EoN. m. ſ. A ſhort ſtick, with one end loaded, uſed as
an offenſive weapon. -
BLUE. adj. [blasp, Sax. lieu, Fr.] One of the ſeven original
colours. -
There's gold, and here,
My blueſ? veins to kiſs; a hand that kings
Have lipt. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra:
Where fires thou find'ſt unrak'd, and hearths unſwept,
There pinch the maids as llue as bilberry.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
O coward conſcience how doſt thou afflićt me?
The lights burn blue—Is it not dead midnight?
Cold fearful drops ſtand on my trembling fleſh.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
Why does one climate, and one ſoil endue
The bluſhing poppy with a crimſon hue; }
Yet leave the lily pale, and tinge the violet blue? Prior.
There was ſcarce any other colour ſenſible, beſides red and
blue; only the blues, and principally the ſecond blue, inclined a
little to green. . Newton's Opticks.
BLUE Bo'ttle. n.ſ.. [from blue and bottle.]
1. A flower of the bell ſhape; a ſpecies of bottlºftower; which ſee.
If you put bluebottles, or other blue flowers, into an ant-hill,
they will be ſtained with red; becauſe the ants thruſt their
ſtings, and inſtil into them their ſtinging liquour. Ray.
2. A fly with a large blue belly.
Say, ſire of inſects, mighty Sol,
A fly upon the chariot-pole
Cries out, what bluebottle alive -
Did ever with ſuch fury drive? - Prior.
BLUE-EYE D. adj. [from blue and eye.] Having blue eyes.
Riſe then, fair blue-ey'd maid, riſe and diſcover
Thy filver brow, and meet thy golden lover. Craſhaw.
Nor to the temple was ſhe gone, to move,
With prayers, the blue-ey'd progeny of Jove. Dryden.
BLUEHA'IRED. adj. [from blue and hair.] Having blue hair.
This place, .
The greateſt and the beſt of all the malº..., -
He quarters to his jachaird deities. Milton's Par. Regain.
Blu'ely adv. [from blue.J. With : blue colour.
This fºre he drop'd his pen full ſoon, -
while as the light burnt buºy. - - Swift,
Blu'EN ess. m. ſ. [from blue.] The quality of being blue.
In a moment our liquour may be deprived of its bleneſ, and
reſtored to it again, by the affuſion of a few drops of liquºr.
Bºyle on Colºrs.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B L U
B L U
Bruff, adj. Big; ſurly; bluſtering. - .
I'UFF 1:. º: whom ſtature did to crowns preſer,
Black-browd and bluff, like º: #. Dryden,
1sti, adj. [from blue.] Blue in a ſmall degree. . . . . .
Blºg. &amp; and ſkirts, round underborne, with a bluiſh tinſel.
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
At laſt, as far as I could caſt my eyes ... .
Upon the ſea, ſomewhat, methought, did riſe
Like bluiſh miſts. Dryden's Indian Emperour.
Here, in full light, the ruſſet plains extend,
There wrapt in clouds the bluiſh hills aſcend. Pope.
ruºss, hiſ [from blue.] A ſmall degree of blue colour.
fºuld maké, with crude copper, a ſolution without the
pºiſºneſ, that is wont to accompany its vulgar ſolutions. Boyle.
To BílýndER. v. n. [blunderen, Dutch; perhaps from blind.]
1. To miſtake groſsly; to err very widely; to miſtake ſtu-
pidly. It is a word implying contempt,
It is one thing to forget matter of fačt, and another to blun-
der upon the reaſon of it. L’Eſtrange.
The grandees and giants in knowledge, who laughed at all
beſides themſelves, as barbarous and inſignificant, yet blunder-
ed, and ſtumbled, about their grand and principal *;
atup.
2. To flounder; to ſtumble.
He who now to ſenſe, now nonſenſe leaning,
Means not, but blunders round about a meaning. Pope.
To Blunder. v. a. To mix fooliſhly or blindly.
He ſeems to underſtand no difference between titles of re-
ſpea and acts of worſhip; between expreſſions of eſteem and
devotion; between religious and civil worſhip: for he blunders
and confounds all theſe together; and whatever proves one,
he thinks, proves all the reſt. Stillingfeet.
Blunder. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]. A groſs or ſhameful miſtake.
It was the advice of Schomberg to an hiſtorian, that he
ſhould avoid .# particular in the drawing up of an army,
and other circumſtances in the day of battle; for that he had
obſerved notorious blunders and abſurdities committed by writ-
ers not converſant in the art of war. Addiſon. Freeholder.
It is our own ignorance that makes us charge thoſe works of
the Almighty, as defects or blunders, as ill-contrived or ill-
made. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Blu'NDERbuss. n.ſ.. [from blunder.] A gun that is charged
with many bullets, ſo that, without any exact aim, there is a
chance of hitting the mark.
There are blunderbuſes in every loop-hole, that go off of
their own accord, at the ſqueaking of a fiddle. Dryden.
Blu'NDERER. n.ſ.. [from blunder.] A man apt to commit blun-
ders; a blockhead.
Another ſort of judges will decide in favour of an authour,
or will pronounce him a mere blunderer, according to the com-
pany they have kept. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
BLU'NDER HEAD. n. ſ. [from blunder and head..] A ſtupid
fellow.
At the rate of this thick-skulled blunderhead, every plow-
jobber ſhall take upon him to read upon divinity. L'E/irange.
Bºr adj. [etymology uncertain.]
1. Dull on the edge or point; not ſharp.
If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then muſt
he put to more ſtrength. Eccleſ x. 1 o.
Thanks to that beauty, which can give an edge to the blunt-
eft ſwords. Sidney, b, i.
2. Dull in underſtanding; not quick.
Valentine being gone, I'll quickly croſs,
By ſome ſly trick, blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
Whitehead, a grave divine, was of a blunt ſtoic nature;
one day the queen happened to ſay, I like thee the better, be:
cauſe thou liveſt unmarried. He anſwered; Madam, I like you
the worſe. Bacon's Apophthegms.
3. Rough ; not delicate; not civil.
The mayor of the town came to ſeize them in a blunt man-
ner, alleging a warrant to ſtop them. //otton.
'Tis not enough your counſel ſtill be true;
Blunt truths more miſchief than nice falſehoods do. Pope.
4. Abrupt; not elegant.
. To uſe too many circumſtances, ere one come to the matter,
is weariſome; to uſe none at all, is blunt. Bacon.
5. Hard to penetrate. This uſe is improper.
I find my heart hardened and blint to new impreſſions; it
will ſcarce receive or retain affections of yeſterday.
- Po t. lxxxiii. ºff.
To BLUNT. v. a. [from the noun.] pe, Lett. lxxxiii. to Swift
I. To dull the edge or point.
Sºficken waining moons too near the ſun,
And blunt their creſcents on the edge of day. Dryden.
l Earthly limbs, and groſs allay,
Blunt not the beams of heav'n, and edge of day. Dryden.
A. He had ſuch things to urge againſt our marriage,
A...". º would blunt my ſword in battle,
ºardize my courage. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. To repreſs -
º, * Weaken any appetite, defire, or power of the
Blunt not his love;
Nor looſe the good advantage of his grace, *
By ſeeming cold. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. 2.
Blu'NTLY. adv. [from blunt.]
1. In a blunt manner; without ſharpneſs.
2. Coarſely ; plainly ; roughly. -
I can keep honeſt counſels, marr a curious tale in telling it,
and deliver a plain meſſage bluntly. Shakespeare. King Lear.
A man of honeſt blood,
Who to his wife, before the time affign'd
For childbirth came, thus blunty ſpoke his mind. Drydºn.
BLU'Nt Ness. n.ſ.. [from blunt.]
1. Want of edge or point; dulneſs ; obtuſeneſs; want of
ſharpneſs.
The crafty boy, that had full of eſſay’d
To pierce my ſtubborn and reſiſting breaſt,
But ſtill the bluntneſs of his darts betray'd. Suckling.
2. Coarſeneſs; roughneſs of manners; rude fincerity.
His ſilence grew wit, his bluntneſs integrity, his beaſtly ig-
norance, virtuous ſimplicity. Sidney, b, i.
Manage diſputes with civility; whence ſome readers will be
aſſiſted to diſcern a difference betwixt bluntneſs of ſpeech and
ſtrength of reaſon. Boyle.
Falſe friends, his deadlieſt foes, could find no way,
But ſhows of honeſt bluntneſs to betray. Dryd H. and Pan.
Blu'N'Twitted, adj.. [from blunt and wit..] Dull; ſtupid.
Bluntwitted lord, ignoble in demeanour. Shakeſp. H. VI.
BLUR. n.ſ.. [borra, Span, a blot. Skinn.] A blot; aftain; a ſpot.
Man, once fallen, was nothing but a great blur; a total uni-
verſal pollution. South.
To BluR. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To blot; to efface; to obſcure.
Such an act,
That blurs the grace and bluſh of modeſty,
Calls virtue hypocrite. $º. King Lear.
Long is it ſince I ſaw him;
But time hath nothing blurr'd thoſe lines of favour,
Which then he wore. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Concerning innate principles, I deſire theſe men to ſay,
whether they can, or cannot, by education and cuſtom, be blur-
red and blotted out. Locke.
2. To blot; to ſtain.
Sarcaſms may eclipſe thine own,
But cannot blur my loſt renown. Hudibras, p. i. cant. iii.
To Blurt. v. a. [without etymology.] To ſpeak inadvert-
ently; to let fly without thinking.
&amp;#: caſt out bloody and deadly ſpeeches at random, and
cannot hold, but blurt out thoſe words, which afterwards they
are forced to eat. Hakewell on Providence.
They had ſome belief of a Deity, which they, upon ſur-
prizal, thus blurt out. Government of the Tongue, § 5.
To BLUSH. v. n. [bleſºn, Dutch.]
1. To betray ſhame or confuſion, by a red colour in the cheek.
I have mark'd
A thouſand bluſhing apparitions
To ſtart into her face; a thouſand innocent ſhames,
In angel whiteneſs, bear away theſe bluſhes.
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
Pale and bloodleſs,
Being all deſcended to the lab'ring heart,
Which with the heart there cools, and ne'er returneth
To bluſh and beautify the cheek again. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
I will go waſh:
And when my face is fair, you ſhall perceive
Whether I bluſh, or no. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
All theſe things are graceful in a friend's mouth, which are
bluſhing in a man's own. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
Shame cauſeth bluſhing; bluſhing is the reſort of the blood
to the face; although bluſhing will be ſeen in the whole breaſt,
yet that is but in paſſage to the face. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
Bluſh then, but bluſh for your deſtrućtive ſilence,
That tears your ſoul. Smith's Phaedr. and Hippolitus.
2. To carry a red colour, or any ſoft and bright colour.
To day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope; tomorrow bloſſoms,
And bears his bluſhing honours thick upon him. Sh, H. VI.
Along thoſe bluſhing borders, bright with dew. 77*ſºn.
3. It has at before the cauſe of ſhame.
He whin'd, and roar'd away your vićtory,
That pages bluſh'd at him; and men of heart -
Look'd wond'ring at each other. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
You have not yet loſt all your natural modeſty, but bluſh at
your vices. Calamy's Sermons.
Blush. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The colour in the cheeks, raiſed by ſhame or confuſion.
The virgin's wiſh, without her fears, impart,
Excuſe the bluſh, and pour out all the heart. Pope.
2. A red or purple colour.
But here the roſes bluſh ſo rare,
Here the mornings ſmile ſo fair,
As if neither cloud, nor wind,
But would be courteous, would be kind. Craſhaw.
3. Sudden
º's
hu
t;
* A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O A
B O A
- T
3. Sudden appearance; a ſignification that ſeems barbarous, yet
uſed by good writers.
All purcly identical propoſitions, obviouſly and at firſt lºſſ,
appear to contain no certain inſtruction in them. Locke.
Elü's HY., adj. [from bliſh.] Having the colour of a bluſh.
Bloſſoms of trees, that are white, are commonly inodorate;
thoſe of apples, crabs, and peaches, are lºſſy, and ſmell ſweet.
Bacon's Natural Hiſł. N° 507.
Stratonica entering, moved a bluſhy colour in his face; but,
deſerting him, he relapſed into the ſame paleneſs and languour.
* Harvey on Corſiumptions.
To BLUSTER. v. n. [ſuppoſed from blaſt.]
1. To roar as a ſtorm; to be violent and loud.
Earth his uncouth mother was,
And bluftring Æolus his boaſted fire. Spenser.
So now he ſtorms with many a ſturdy floure;
So now his bluff'ring blaſt each coaſt doth ſcour. Spenser.
2. To bully; to puff; to ſwagger; to be tumultuous.
My heart's too big to bear this, ſays a bluffering fellow; I'll
deſtroy myſelf. Sir, ſays the gentleman, here's a dagger at
your ſervice; ſo the humour went off. L’Eſtrange.
Either he muſt ſink to a downright confeſſion, or elſe he
muſt huff and bluffer, till perhaps he raiſe a counter-ſtorm.
Government of the Tongue.
Virgil had the majeſty of a lawful prince, and Statius only
the bluffering of a tyrant. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar, Dedication.
There let him reign the jailor of the wind;
With hoarſe commands his breathing ſubjects call,
And boaſt and blufter in his empty hall. Dryden's AFneid.
BLU'stER. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Roar; noiſe; tumult.
The ſkies look grimly,
And threaten preſent blu/lers. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
To the winds they ſet
Their corners; when with bluffer to confound
Sea, air, and ſhore. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. l. 665.
So, by the brazen trumpet's bluffer,
Troops of all tongues and nations muſter. Swift.
2. Boaſt; boiſterouſneſs; turbulence; fury.
Spare thy Athenian cradle, and thoſe kin,
Which in the blufter of thy wrath muſt fall
With thoſe that have offended. Shakespeare. Timon.
A coward makes a great deal more bluffer than a man of ho-
nour. L’Eſtrange.
Blu's TERER. m. ſ. [from bluffer.] A ſwaggerer; a bully; a tu-
multuous noiſy fellow.
Blu's TRous. adj. [from buſier.] Tumultuous; noiſy.
The ancient heroes were illuſtrious
- For being benign, and not bluftrous.
BMI. m. ſ. A note in muſick.
Gamut I am, the ground of all accord,
Bmi, Bianca, take him for thy lord. Shakeſp. Tam. Shrew.
Bo. interj. A word of terrour; from Bo, an old northern cap-
tain, of ſuch fame, that his name was uſed to terrify the
cnein.W. Temple.
BOAR. m. ſ. [bar, Saxon; beer, Dutch..] The male ſwine.
To fly the boar, before the boar purſues, -
Were to incenſe the boar to follow us. Shakespeare . Rich. III.
She ſped the boar away;
His eyeballs glare with fire, ſuffus'd with blood;
His neck ſhuts up a thickeſt thorny wood;
His briſtled back a trench impal'd appears. Dryden's Fables.
Bo'AR-speaR. m. ſ. [from boar and ſpear.] A ſpear uſed in
hunting the boar.
And in her hand a ſharp boar-ſpear ſhe held,
And at her back a bow and quiver gay,
Stuff’d with ſteel-headed darts. Fairy Queen, b. i. e. iii.
Echion threw the firſt, but miſs'd his mark,
And ſtruck his boar-ſpear on a maple bark. Dryden's Ovid.
BOARD. m. ſ. [laurd, Goth. braed, Saxon.]
1. A piece of wood of more length and breadth than thickneſs.
With the ſaw they have ſundred trees in boards and planks.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
Every houſe has a board over the door, whereon is written
the number, ſex, and quality of the perſons living in it. Temple.
Go now, go truſt the wind's uncertain breath,
Remov’d four fingers from approaching death;
Or ſeven at moſt, when thickeſt is the board. Dryden's juv.
2. A table. [from burdd, Welch.]
Soon after which, three hundred lords he ſlew,
Of Britiſh blood, all ſitting at his board. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
In bed he ſlept not, for my urging it;
At board he fed not, for my urging it. Shakespeare Com. of Err.
I'll follow thee in fun'ral flames; when dead,
My ghoſt ſhall thee attend at board and bed. Sir j. Denham.
Cleopatra made Antony a ſupper, which was ſumptuous and
royal; howbeit there was no extraordinary ſervice upon the
board. Hakewell on Providence.
May ev'ry god his friendly aid afford;
Pan guard thy flock, and Céres bleſs thy board.
3. Entertainment; food.
Hudibras, p. i. e. iii.
4. A table at which a council or court is held.
Vol. I.
Prior.
Both better acquainted with aſſairs, than any other who ſt
then at that bºard. - Clarendor:
5. An aſſembly ſeated at a table; a court of juriſłićlion.
I wiſh the king would be pleaſed ſometimes to be preſent at
that bºard; it adds a majcity to it. Pacºn's Advice to Pili.rs.
6. The deck or floor of a {hip; on hard ſignifics in a ſhip.
Now board to board the rival veſſes row,
The billows lave the ſkies, and occan groans below. Dryd.
Our Captain thought his ſhip in ſo great danger, that he
coºfed himſelf to a capuchin, who was on loard. Aſºſº.
He ordered his men to arm long poles with ſharp hooks,
wherewith they took hold of the tackling, which beld the main-
yard to the maſt of their enemy's ſhip; then, rowing their own
ſhip, they cut the tackling, aid brought the mainyard by the
board. - A luthnot on Cºins.
To BoARD. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To enter a ſhip by force; the ſame as to form, uſed of a city:
I bºarded the king's ſhip: now on the beak,
Now in the waſte, the deck, in every cabin,
I flam'd amazement. Shakespeare. Tºmpºſ'.
Yet not inclin'd the Engliſh ſhip to bºard,
More on his guns relics than on his ſword,
From whence a fatal volley we receiv'd;
It miſs'd the duke; but his great heart it griev'd. If aller,
Arm, arm, ſhe cry’d, and lºt our Tyrians board
With our's his fleet, and carry fire and ſword. Denham.
2. To attack, or make the firſt attempt upon a man ; al ºrder
quelqu'un, Fr.
Whom thus at gaze, the Palmer 'gan to loard
With goodly reaſon, and thus far beſpake. Fairy Q. b. ii.
Away, I do beſeech you, both away;
I'll board him preſently. Shakſº. Hamlet.
Sure, unleſs he knew ſome ſtrain in me, that I knew not my-
ſelf, he would never have boarded ºne in this fury. Shakeſpeare.
They learn what aſſociates and correſpondents they had,
and how far every one is engaged, and what new ones they
meant afterwards to try or board. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. To lay or pave with boards. -
Having thus boarded the whole room, the edges of ſome
boards lie higher than the next board; therefore they peruſe
the whole floor; and, where they find any irregularities, plane
them off. Afºxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
To BoA.R.D. v. n. To live in a houſe, where a certain rate is
paid for eating.
- That we might not part,
As we at firſt did hoard with thee, -
Now thou wouldſt taſte our miſery. - Herbert.
We are ſeveral of us, gentlemen and ladies, who board in the
ſame houſe; and, after dinner, one of our company ſtands up,
and reads your paper to us all. Speciator, N° 961.
To BoARD. v. a. To place as a boarder in another's houſe.
BoARD-w AGES. m. ſ. [from board and wages...] Wages allowed
to ſervants to keep themſelves in vićtuals.
What more than madneſs reigns,
When one ſhort ſitting many hundreds drains,
And not enough is left him, to ſupply -
Bºard-wages, or a footman's livery Dryden's jav. ſ.t. i.
Bo'ARDER. m. ſ. [from board.] A tabler; one that cats with an-
other at a ſettled rate.
Bo'ARDING-school. n.ſ.. [from board and ſºool.] A ſchool
where the ſcholars live with the teacher.
A blockhead, with melodious voice,
In boarding-ſchools can have his choice. -
Bo'ARISH. adj. [from boar.] Swiniſh; brutal; cruel.
I would not ſee thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes; northy fierce fiſter, -
In his anointed fleſh ſtick beariſh phangs. Shakespeare. K. Lear
To BOAST. v. m. ſhº, Welch.]
1. To brag ; to diſplay one's own worth, or 23ions, in great
words; to taſk oftentatiouſly ; with of
For I know the forwardneſs of your mind, for which I lºoſ'
of you to them of Macedonia. 2 Cor. ix. 2.
2. Sometimes it is uſed with in.
Some ſurgeons I have met, carrying bones about in their
pockets, boaſting in that which was their ſhame. //jewiań.
3. To exalt one's ſelf.
Thus with your mouth you have lºſſed againſt me, and ſnu'-
tiplied your words againſt me. Ezek. xxxv. 13.
To BoAs T. v. a.
1. To brag of; to diſplay with oſtentatious language;
For if I have boo/led any thing to him of you, I am not a-
ſhamed. 2 Cor. vii. 14.
If they vouchſafed to give god the praiſe of his goodneſs;
yet they did it only, in order to lºg/f the intereſt they had in
him. - Atterbury.
2. To magnify; to exalt. . t -
They that truſt in their wealth, and loºſ themſelves in the
multitude of their riches. Pſalm xlix. 6.
Confounded be all them that ſerve graven images, that boaſt
themſelves of idols: Pſalm xcvii. 7.
Boast. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A cauſe of boaſting; an occaſion of pride; the thing boaſted.
3 H Not.
Swift.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
B O B
Not Tyro, nor Mycene, match her name,
Nor great Alcmena, the proud boaſts of fame. Pºpe's Odſ.
2. An expreſſion of oſtentation; a proud ſpeech.
Thou that makeſt thy lºſt of the law, through breaking
the law diſhonoureſt thou God? Rom. ii. 23.
The world is more apt to find fault than to commend ; the
boaſt will probably be cenſured, when the great action that oc-
caſioned it, is forgotten. Spectator, N° 255.
Bo'Ast ER. m. ſ. [from leaſt.] A bragger; a man that vaunts
any thing oftentatiouſly.
Complaints the more candid and judicious of the chymiſts
themſelves are wont to make of ** bººſters, that confidently
pretend, that they have extracted the faſt or ſulphur of quick-
ſilver, when they have diſguiſed it by additaments, wherewith
it reſembles the concretes. Boyle.
No more delays, vain boaſter / but begin;
I propheſy beforehand I ſhall win:
I'll teach you how to brag another time. Dryden's Wirgil.
He the proud boaſters ſent, with ſtern aſſault,
Down to the realms of night. Philips.
Bo'Astful. adj. [from boºſt and full.] Oſtentatious; inclined
to brag.
Hoaſ'ſul, and rough, your firſt ſon is a 'ſquire;
The next a tradeſman, meek, and much a liar. Pope.
Bo'Ast INGly. adv. [from boaſting.] Oſtentatiouſly.
VVe look on it as a pitch of impiety, loatingly to avow our
ſins; and it deſerves to be conſidered, whether this kind of con-
feſting them, have not ſome affinity with it. Decay of Piety.
BOAT, n.ſ. ſbar, Saxon.]
1. A veſſel to paſs the water in. It is uſually diſtinguiſhed from
other veſſels, by being finaller and uncovered, and commonly
mºved by rowing.
I do not think that any one nation, the Syrian excepted, to
whom the knowledge of the ark came, did find out at once
the device of either ſhip or boat, in which they durſt venture
themſelves upon the ſeas. Kaleigh's Eſſays.
An effeminate ſcoundrel multitude 1
Whoſe utmoſt daring is to croſs the Nile,
In painted boats, to fright the crocodile. Tate. juv. ſat. xv.
2. A ſhip of a ſmall ſize; as, a paſſage boat, facquet boat, advice
boat, fy boat.
#3o AT10N. m. ſ. [from boare, Lat.] Roar; noiſe; loud ſound.
In Meſſina inſurreótion, the guns were heard from thence
as far as Auguſta and Syracuſe, about an hundred Italian miles.
Theſe diſtances being, in a ſhort time, in loud boations.
Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
IBo'AT MAN. }'ſ [from loat and man.] He that manages a
Bo'Ats MAN. ; boat.
Boatſmen through the cryſtal water ſhow,
To wond'ring paſſengers, the walls below. Dryden.
That booby Phaon only was unkind,
An ill-bred boatman, rough as waves and wind. Prizr.
Bo'Atsw AIN. m. ſ. [from boat and ſwain..] An officer on board
a ſhip, who has charge of all her rigging, ropes, cables, anchors,
ſails, flags, colours, pendants, &amp;c. He alſo takes care of the
long-boat and its furniture, and ſteers her either by himſelf or
his mate. He calls out the ſeveral gangs and companies to the
execution of their watches, works, and ſpells; and he is alſo a
kind of provoſt marſhal, ſeizes, and puniſhes all offenders, that
are ſentenced by the captain, or court martial of the whole
fleet. - Harris.
Sometimes the meaneſt boatſwain may help to preſerve the
ſhip from finking. Howel's Pre-eminence of Parliament.
To BOB. v. a. [of uncertain etymology; Skinner deduces it
from bobo, fooliſh, Span.]
1. To cut. ‘funius. -
2. To beat; to drub ; to bang.
Thoſe baſtard Britons, whom our fathers
Have in their own land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
3. To cheat; to gain by fraud.
I have bobbed his brain more than he has beat my bones.
Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Live, Rodorigo!
He calls me to a reſtitution large,
Of gold and jewels, that I bobb'd from him,
As gifts to Deſdemona. Shakeſp. Othell.
Here we have been worrying one another, who ſhould have
the booty, till this curſed fox has bobbed us both on't. L’E/ºr.
To Bob. v. n. To play backward and forward; to play looſely
againſt any thing.
And ſometimes lurk I in a goffip's bowl,
In very likeneſs of a roaſted crab;
And when ſhe drinks, againſt her lips I lab,
And on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale. Miſſºm. N. Dr.
They comb, and then they order ev'ry hair;
A birthday jewel balling at their ear. Dryd. Perſus, ſt. i.
You may tell her,
I'm rich in jewels, rings, and bobbing pear's,
Pluck’d from Moors cars. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
Bob. n.ſ.. [from the verb neuter.]
1. Something that hangs ſo as to play looſely; generally an orna-
ment at the ear; a pendant; an car-ring.
B O D
The gaudy goſſip, when ſhe's ſet agog,
In jewels dreſt, and at each ear a bob. Dryd. jaw. ſat. vi.
2. The word repeated at the end of a ſtanza.
To bed, to bed, will be the lol of the ſong. L'Iſlrange.
3. A blow.
I am ſharply taunted, yea, ſometimes with pinches, rips,
and bobs. Aſham's Schoolina/iºr.
Bo'BBIN. n.ſ.. [boline, Fr. from bombyx, Lat..] A ſmall pin of
wood, with a notch, to wind the thread about, when womea
weave lace.
The things you follow, and make ſongs on now, ſhould be
ſent to knit, or ſit down to bobbins, or bone-face. Tatler-
Bo'Bein work. m. ſ [from lollin and work.] Work woven with
bobbins.
Not netted nor woven with warp and woof, but after the
manner of boblinwork. Grew's 4/uſa-um-
Bobch ERRY. m.ſ.. [from bob and cherry..] A play among chil-
dren, in which the cherry is hung ſo as to bob againſt the
mouth.
Botcherry teaches at once two noble virtues, patience and
conſtancy; the firſt, in adhering to the purſuit of one end ;
the latter, in bearing a diſappointment. Arb. and Pop. M. Scr-
Bo'BTAil. [from lab, in the ſenſe of cut.] Cut tail; ſhort tail.
Av.unt, you curs!
Be thy mouth or black or white,
Or bobtail like, or trundle tail,
Tom will make him weep and wail. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Bo'BTAILED. adj. [from bobtail.] Having a tail cut, or ſhort-
There was a boltailed cur cried in a gazette, and one that
found him, brought him home to his maſter. L'E/irange-
Boswig. n.ſ.. [from bob and wig.] A ſhort wig.
A young fellow riding towards us full gallop, with a bobwig
and a black ſilken bag tied to it, ſtopt ſhort at the coach, to aſk
us how far the judges were behind. Speciator, N° 129.
Bo'cASINE. m. ſ. A ſort of linen cloth; a fine buckram. Dići.
#:::::::: }nſ. A kind of long-winged hawk. IXićf.
To BODE. v. a. [bobian, Sax.] To portend; to be the omen
of. It is uſed in a ſenſe of either good or bad.
This bodes ſome ſtrange eruption to our ſtate. Hamlet.
By this deſign, you have oppoſed their falſe policy, with
true and great wiſdom; what they boded would be a miſchief to
us, you are providing, ſhall be one of our principal ſtrengths.
Sprat's Sermons-
It happen'd once, a boding prodigy'
A ſwarm of bees that cut the liquid ſky,
Upon the topmoſt branch in clouds alight. Dryden's Enei-I.
If firy red his glowing globe deſcends,
High winds and furious tempeſts he portends:
But if his checks are ſwoln with livid blue,
He bodes wet weather by his watry hue. Dryden's Georg-
To BoDE. v. n. To be an omen; to foreſhew.
Sir, give me leave to ſay, whatever now
The omen prove, it loded well to you. Dryden's Aurengz.
Bo'DEMENT. n.ſ.. [from bode.j Portent; omen; prognoſtick.
This fooliſh, dreaming, ſuperſtitious girl
Makes all theſe bodements. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſia.
Macbeth ſhall never vanquiſht be, until
Great Birnam wood to Dunfinane's high hill
Shall come againſt him.
That will never be :
Sweet bodements, good. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To BoDGE. v. n. [a word in Shakespeare, which is perhaps co-
rupted from boggle.] To boggle; to ſtop; to fail.
With this we charg’d again ; but out! alas,
We lodg’d again; as I have ſeen a ſwan,
With bootleſ, labour, ſwim againſt the tide. Shakespeare. H. Vi.
Bo'nic E. n.ſ.. [from bodies.] Stays; a waiſtcoat quited with
whalebone, worn by women.
Her bºdice halfway ſhe unlac'd,
About his arms ſhe ſlily caſt
The ſilken band, and held him faſt. Prior.
This conſideration ſhould keep ignorant nurſes and 22.2°
makers from meddling. Locke on Education, $ 1 = -
Bo DILEss. adj. [from body.] Incorporeal; without a body.
Which bodileſ, and immaterial are,
And can be only lodg’d within our minds. IXavie-r-
This is the very coinage of your brain,
This bodileſ creation ecſtaſy
Is very cunning in. Shakesp. Hazl-r.
Theſe are but ſhadows,
Phantoms bodileſ, and vain,
Empty viſions of the brain. Swºrz-
Bo'BILY. adj. [from body.]
1. Corporeal; containing body. -
What reſemblance could wood or ſtone bear to a ſpirit vez -a
of all ſenſible qualities, and badily dimenſions : Sz:22°
2. Relating to the body, not the mind.
Of ſuch as reſorted to cur Saviour Chriſt, being preſent o zº
earth, there came not any unto him with better ſucceſs, for tº *
benefit of their ſouls everlaſting happineſs, than they whoſe 4, 2 "
diy neceſſities gave occaſion of ſeeking relief. *::::er, 2. ~~<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O D
B O I
Virtue atones for bodily defects; beauty is nothing worth,
without d mind. - L’Eſtrange.
As clearneſs of the bodily eye doth diſpoſe it for a quicker
fight, ſo doth freedom from luſt and paſſion, diſpoſe us for the
moſt perfect ačts of reaſon. Tillotſon.
I would not have children much beaten for their faults, be-
cauſe I would not have them think bodily pain the greateſt pu-
niſhment. Locke on Education, $ 115.
3. Real; actual.
Whatever hath been thought on in this ſtate,
That could be brought to bodily act, ere Rome
Had circumvention? Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Bobily. adv. Corporeally; united with matter.
It is his human nature, in which the godhead dwells bodily,
that is advanced to theſe honours, and to this empire. Watts.
Bodkis. n. J. [boddiken, or ſmall body, Skinner.]
1. An inſtrument with a ſmall blade and ſharp point, uſed to bore
holes. t
Each of them had bodkins in their hands, wherewith conti-
nually they pricked him.
2. An inſtrument to draw a thread or ribbond through a loop.
Or plung'd in lakes of bitter waſhes lie,
Or wedg’d whole ages in a bodkin's eye. Pope's R. of the L.
3. An inſtrument to dreſs the hair.
You took conſtant care
The bodkin, comb, and eſſence to prepare:
For this your locks in paper-durance bound. Pope.
BODY. m. ſ. [bobº, Saxon; it originally ſignified the height or
ſtature of a man.]
1. The material ſubſtance of an animal, oppoſed to the immate-
rial ſoul.
All the valiant men aroſe, and went all night, and took the
bºdy of Saul, and the bodies of his ſons, from the wall.
1 Sam. xxxi. 12.
Take no thought for your life, what ye ſhall eat, or what ye
ſhall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye ſhall put on.
Matt. vi. 25.
By cuſtom, pračtice, and patience, all difficulties and hard-
ſhips, whether of body or of fortune, are made eaſy to us.
L'Eſtrange.
2. Matter; oppoſed to ſpirit.
3. A perſon; a human being; whence ſomebody, and nobody.
Surely, a wiſe body's part it were not, to put out his fire, be-
cauſe his fooliſh neighbour, from whom he borrowed where-
with to kindle it, might ſay, were it not for me, thou wouldſt
freeze. Hooker, b. iv. § 9.
A deflowred maid |
And by an eminent body, that enforc'd
The law againſt it ! Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
'Tis a paſſing ſhame,
That I, unworthy body as I am,
Should cenſure thus one lovely gentleman. Shakespeare. Two G. of Wer.
No body ſeeth me; what need I to fear? the Moſt High will
not remember my fins. Ecclus, xxiii. 18.
All civility and reaſon obliged every body to ſubmit. Clarend.
Good may be drawn out of evil, and a body's life may be
ſaved, without having any obligation to his preſerver. L’Eſir.
4. Reality; oppoſed to repreſentation.
A ſhadow of things to come; but the body is of Chriſt.Coloſ.
5. A collective maſs ; a joint power.
There is in the knowledge both of God and man this cer-
tainty, that life and death have divided between them the whole
body of mankind. Hooker, b. v. § 49.
There were ſo many diſaffected perſons of the nobility, that
there might a body ſtart up for the king. Clarendon, b. viii.
When theſe pigmies pretend to form themſelves into a body,
it is time for us, who are men of figure, to look about us.
Addiſon. Guardian, N° 108.
6. The main army; the battle; diſtinét from the wings, van
and rear.
The van of the king's army was led by the general and
Wilmot; in the body was the king and the prince; and the
rear conſiſted of one thouſand foot, commanded under colonel
Thelwell. Clarendon, b. viii.
7. A corporation; a number of men united by ſome common
tye.
I ſhall now mention a particular, wherein your whole body
will be certainly againſt me, and the laity, almoſt to a man,
on my ſide. Swift.
Nothing was more common, than to hear that reverend body
charged with what is inconſiſtent, deſpiſed for their poverty,
and hated for their riches. Swift.
8. The outward condition. -
I verily, as abſent in body, have judged. I Cor. v. 3.
9. The main part; the bulk; as, the body, or hull, of a ſhip;
the body of a coach; the body of a church; the body, or trunk,
of a man; the bºdy, or trunk, of a tree.
Thence ſent rich merchandizes by boat to Babylon, from
whence, by the body of Euphrates, as far as it bended weſt-
ward, and, afterward, by a branch thereof. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
This city has navigable rivers, that run up into the bºdy of
Italy, by which they might ſupply many countries with fiſh.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
-
Sidney's Arcadia. .
Io. A ſubſtance.
Even a metalline body, and therefore much more a vegetable
or animal, may, by fire, be turned into water. Boyle.
II. [In geometry.] Any ſolid figure.
12. A pandect; a general colle&amp;ion; as, a body of the civil law;
a body of divinity. - -
#3. Strength; as, wine of a good body.
Bopy-cLöAths. n.ſ.. [from body and cloaths.] Cloathing for
horſes that are dieted.
However it be, I am informed, that ſeveral aſſes are kept in
body-cleaths, and ſweated every morning upon the heath.
- 7.-- Addiſon. Speciator, Nº. 173.
To Bo'DY. v. a. [from the noun..] To produce in ſome form.
As imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
... Turns them to ſhape. Shakespeare Midſummer Night's Dream.
BOG.. n.ſ.. [bog, ſoft, Iriſh.] A mariſh; a moraſs; a ground
too ſoft to bear the weight of the body. -
Through fire and through flame, through ford and whirl-
pool, o'er log and quagmire. . . Shakeſp. King Lear.
A gulf profound ! as that Serbonian bog,
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Caſius old. Par. Loſº, b. ii.
He walks upon bogs and whirlpools; whereſoever he treads,
he ſinks. - - South.
Learn from ſo great a wit, a land of bogs
With ditches fenc'd, a heaven fat with fogs: Dryden.
He is drawn, by a ſort of ignis fatwas, into logs and mire, al-
moſt every day of his life. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Bog-TRott ER. n.ſ.. [from bog and trot.j One that lives in a
boggy country.
To BO'GGLE. v. n. [from bogil, Dutch, a ſpeare; a bugbear;
a phantom.] -
I. To ſtart; to fly back; to fear to come forward.
You boggle ſhrewdly; every feather ſtarts you. -
Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
We ſtart and boggle at every unuſual appearance, and cannot
endure the ſight of the bugbear. Glanville's Scepſ, c. 16.
Nature, that rude, and in her firſt eſſay,
Stood boggling at the roughneſs of the way;
Us'd to the road, unknowing to return,
Goes boldly on, and loves the path when worn.
2. To heſitate; to be in doubt.
And never boggle to reſtore
The members you deliver o'er,
Upon demand. Hudibras, p. iii. e. i.
The well-ſhaped changeling is a man that has a rational
ſoul, ſay you. Make the ears a little longer, and more point-
ed, and the noſe a little flatter than ordinary, and then you be-
gin to boggle. Docke:
3. To play faſt and looſe; to diſſemble. -
When ſummoned to his laſt end, it was no time for him to
boggle with the world. Howel's Vocal Forg/?.
Bo'GGLER. n.ſ.. [from boggle.] A doubter; a timorous man.
You have been a boggler ever. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
Bo'cC. Y. adj. [from bog.] Marſhy; ſwampy. -
Their country was very narrow, low, and boggy, and, by
great induſtry and expences, defended from the ſea. Arbuthnot.
Bo'GHouse. n.ſ.. [from bog and houſe..] A houſe of office.
Bohe’A. m. ſ. [an Indian word.] A ſpecies of tea, of higher
colour, and more aſtringent taſte, than green tea.
Coarſe pewter, appearing to conſiſt chiefly of lead, is part of
the bales in which bohea tea was brought from China. J/oodw:
As ſome frail cup cf China's faireſt mold,
The tumults of the boiling behea braves,
And holds ſecure the coffee's ſable waves.
She went from op'ra, park, aſſembly, play,
To morning walks, and pray'rs three hours a day;
To part her time 'twixt reading and bohea, --
To muſe, and ſpill her ſolitary tea. . Pope.
To BOIL. v. n. [bouiller, Fr. bullio, Lat.]
1. To be agitated by heat; to fluctuate with heat.
He ſaw there boil the firy whirlpools. Chapman's Odyſſey.
Suppoſe the earth removed, and placed nearer to the fun, in
the orbit of Mercury, there the whole occan would beil with
extremity of heat. Bentley.
2. To be hot; to be fervent, or efferveſcent.
That ſtrength with which my boiling youth was fraught,
When in the vale of Balaſor I fought. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
Well I knew, -
What perils youthful ardour would purſue, y
That boiling blood would carry thee too far. Pryden', ºr,
3. To move with an agitation like that of boiling water.
Then headlong ſhoots beneath the daſhing tide,
The trembling fins the boiling waves divide. Gay.
In the dubious point, where, with the Pool,
Is mixt the trembling ſtream, or where it bºil; -
Around the ſtone. Thomſºn's Spring.
4. To be in hot liquour, in order to be made tender by the heat.
Fillet of a fenny ſnake,
In the cauldron bºil and bake.
5. To cook by boiling. - -- --- -
If you live in a rich family, roaſting and boiling are bé!ow
- tiº
Dryden,
Tickell.
Shakeſp. Machºth.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O L
B O H,
º
*
• {
º º
* = .
º
i
* º
-
* r
t 4.
* -- º
s .*
* º -
s -
. . . . .
. . . ;
: ; :
. . . .
º . . . .
. . .
‘. . . º
s
. .
º
. . . "
. .
a
º * * tº
the dignity of your office, and which it becomes you to be ig-
norant of. Swift's Direétiºns to the Cook.
6. Tº boil over. To run over the veſic with heat.
A few ſoft words and a kiſs, and the good man melts; ſee
how nature works and boils over in him. Congreve's Old Batchel.
This hollow was a vaſt cauldron, filled with melted matter,
which, as it boiled over in any part, ran down the ſides of the
mountain. Addiſon on Italy.
To Boil. v. a. To heat, by putting into boiling water; to ſeeth.
To try whether feeds be old or new, the ſenſe cannot in-
form; but if you boil them in water, the new ſeeds will ſprout
ſooner. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
- In eggs boiled and roaſted, into which the water entereſh not
at all, there is ſcarce any difference to be diſcerned.
BoIL. m. ſ. See Bile.
Bo'IL ARY. m. ſ. [from to boil.] A place at the ſalt-works where
the ſalt is boiled.
Bo'Ile R. m. ſ. [from boil.]
1. The perſon that boils anything.
That ſuch alterations of terreſtrial matter are not impoſſible,
ſeems evident from that notable practice of the boilers of ſalt-
petre. - Bºyle.
2. The veſſel in which anything is boiled.
This coffee-room is much frequented; and there are gene-
rally ſeveral pots and boilers before the fire. //oodward.
BOISTEROUS. adj. [ºffer, furious, Dutch.]
I. Violent; loud; roaring; ſtormy.
By a divine inſtinct, men's minds miſtruſt
Inſuing danger; as by proof we ſee
"I he waters ſwell before a boiſterous ſtorm. Shakeſp. R. III.
As when loud winds a well-grown oak would rend
Up by the roots, this way and that they bend
His reeling trunk, and with a boiſ"rous ſound
Scatter his leaves, and ſtrew them on the ground.
2. Turbulent; tumultuous; furious.
Spirit of peace,
Wherefore do you ſo ill tranſlate yourſelf
Out of the ſpeech of peace, that bears ſuch grace,
Into the harſh and bºrous tongue of war : Shakespeare. H. IV.
His ſweetneſs won a more regard
Unto his place, than all the boiſ"rous moods
That ignorant greatneſs practiſeth. Ben. johnſºn's Catiline.
God, into the hands of their deliverer,
Puts invincible might,
To quell the mighty of the earth, th’ oppreſſor,
The brute and boiſ"rous force of violent men.
Still muſt I beg thee not to name Sempronius:
Lucia; I like not that loud bojſłerous man. Addison's Cato.
3. Unwieldy. - -
- His boi/?erous club, ſo buried in the ground,
He could not rearen up again ſo light,
But that the knight him at avantage found. Fairy Q. b. i.
4. It is uſed by Woodward of heat. -
When the ſun hath gained a greater ſtrength, the heat be-
comes too powerful and boiſ'erous for them. Natural Hi/?ºry.
Bo'Is TERously. adv. [from boiſterous.] Violently; tumultu-
ouſly. -
‘’A ſceptre ſnatch'd, with an unruly hand,
Muſt be as hoiſteroiſſy maintain'd, as gain'd. Shakespeare. King jºhn.
Thoſe are all remains of the univerſal deluge, when the wa-
ter of the ocean, being boiſſerouſly turned out upon the earth,
bore along with it all moveable bodies. Wºodward's N. Hiſł.
Another faculty of the intellect comes beifferouſly in, and
wakes me from ſo pleaſing a dream. Swift's Letters.
Bo'1st ERouss Ess. n.ſ.. [from hoiſterous.] The ſtate or quality
of being boiſterous; tumultuouſneſs; turbulence.
Bo'LARY, adj. [from bole..] Partaking of the nature of bole, or
clay.
Å weak and inanimate kind of loadſtone, with a few mag-
netical lines, but chiefly conſiſting of a holary and clammy ſub-
ſtance. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 3.
BOLD. adj. [balb, Saxon.]
1. Daring; brave; ſtout; courageous; magnanimous; fearleſs;
intrepid. -
The wicked flee when no man purſueth ; but the righteous
are bold as a lion. Prov. xxviii. 1.
I have ſeen the councils of a noble country grow bold, or ti-
morous, according to the fits of his good or ill health that ma-
naged them. - - - Temple.
2. Executed with ſpirit, and without mean caution.
Theſe, nervous, bold; thoſe, languid and remiſs. Roſſom.
The cathedral church is a very bold work, and a maſter-
piece in Gothick architecture. Addiſon on Italy.
3. Confident; not ſcrupulous; not timorous. -
We were bold in our God to ſpeak unto you the goſpel of
God with much contention. 1 Thºſ. ii. 2.
I can be bold to ſay, that this age is adorned with ſome men
of that judgment, that they could open new and undiſcovered
ways to knowledge. Locke.
4. Impudent; rude. -
In thy proſperity he will be as thyſelf, and will be hold over
thy ſervants. If thou be brought low, he will be againſt thee.
1...ſus, vi. 1 1.
Bacon.
J/aller.
Milton.
5. Licentious; ſuch as ſhew great liberty of flºtion.
Which no bold tales of Gods or monitors ſwell,
But human paſſions, ſuch as with us dwell.
6. Standing out to the view ; ſtriking to the eye
Catechreſes and hyperboles are to be uſed judiciouſly, and
placed in poetry, as heightenings and ſhadows are in pºinting,
to make the figures tºlder, and cauſe it to ſtand c; to fight.
Dryden’s State ºf Innºcence, 1 rºſace-
7. Open; ſmooth; even; level: a ſailor's torm.
Her dominions lie ſcattered, and have bold acceſſible coaſts.
Hºwel's lºcal Foreſt.
8. Tº make bold. To take freedoms: a phraſe not grammatical,
though common. To be lold is better; as, I was told tº ſºak-
I have made bold to ſend to your wife;
My ſuit is, that ſhe will to Deſdemona
Procure me ſome acceſs.
4. aking ſo hold,
My fears forgetting manners, to unſeal
Their grand commiſſion.
And were y” as good as George a Green,
I ſhall make bold to turn agen. Hudibras, p. ii. e. ii.
I durſt not make thus told with Ovid, leſt ſome future Mil-
bourn ſhould ariſe. 1), wen's Fables, Prºſace-
Some men have the fortune to be cfteemed wits, only for
making bºld to ſcoff at theſe things, which the greateſt part of
r-
J. ºr.
Shakespeare. Othello.
Sašºff. Hamlet.
mankind reverence. Jillzºn.
To Bo'LDEN. v. a. [from lold.] To make bold; to give con-
fidence.
Quick inventers, and fair ready ſpeakers, being 'o','oned with
their preſent abilitics, to ſay more, and perchance better toº,
at the ſudden, for that preſent, than any cther can do, uſe I eſs
help of diligence and ſtudy. Aſchain's Schoºlmoſt cr-
I m much too vint’rous,
In tempting of your patience; but am loºden’d
Under your promis'd pardon. Shakeſp. Iºnry VIII.
Bo'LDFACE. m.ſ.. [from bold and face..] Impudence; ſaucíncis ;
a term of reproach and reprehenſion.
How now, boldface / cries an old trot ; firrah, we eat our
own hens, I'd have you to know ; and what you cat, you fle-a!.
Lºſirange.
Bo'LDFA.cFD. adj. [from hold and face..] Impudent.
I have ſeen thoſe ſillieſt of creatures; and, ſeeing their rare
works, I have ſeen enough to confute all the haſ faced atheiſts
of this age. Branchall againſt Hail-es-
Bo'LDLY. adv. [from bold.]
1. In a bold manner; with courage; with ſpirit.
Thus we may boldly ſpeak, being ſtrengthened with the ex-
ample of ſo reverend a prelate. Hºoker, b. v. § r 9-
I ſpeak to ſubjects, and a ſubjećt ſpeaks,
Stirr'd up by heav'n thus lolly for his king. Shakespeare. R. III.
2. It may perhaps be ſometimes uſed in a bad ſenſe, for impudently.
Bo'LDN Ess. m. ſ. [from bold.]
1. Courage; bravery ; intrepidity; ſpirit; fortitude; magnani-
mity; daringneſs.
Her horſe ſhe rid ſo, as might ſhow a fearful lºſs, daring,
to do that, which ſhe knew not how to do. Sidney, b- ii.
2. Exemption from caution, and ſcrupulous nicety,
The boldneſ of the figures is to be hidden, ſometimes by the
addreſs of the poet, that they may work their effect upon the
mind. Dryden's State ºf Innocence, Prºſace.
3. Freedom ; liberty.
Great is my fift of ſpeech toward you; great is my glo-
rying in you. 2 Cºr. vii. 4.
4. Confident truſt in God..
Our fear excludeth not that lolineſ, which becometh ſaints.
Hoºker, b. v. § 47.
We have boldnſ, and acceſs with confidence, by the faith
of him. Epheſ. iii. 1 2.
Having therefore lolingſ to enter into the holieſt by the
blood of Jeſus. - Heb. x. a 9-
5. Aſiurance; freedom from ſcar.
Wonderful is the caſe of boldneſ in civil buſineſs; what fir tº
Boldºgſ. What ſecond, and third Baldºſ. And yet ſold, zºſs
is a child of ignorance and baſeneſs, far inferiouſ to ot: ***
parts. Bacon's Eſſays, Nº = **
Sure if the guilt were theirs, they could not charge the e
With ſuch a gallant boldneſs: if 'twere thine,
Thou couldſt not hear’t with ſuch a ſilent ſcorn. JXeº, 2 *.
His diſtance, though it does not inſtrućt him to think wa ſer
than other princes, yet it helps him to ſpeak with more Zola'-- eſ;
what he thinks. - 7 enz” it.
Bolingſ is the power to ſpeak or do what we intend, beſ, are
others, without fear or diſorder. Lee-ºr.
6. Impudence.
- ‘ihat moderation, which uſeth to ſuppreſs lºſs, and tº
make them conquer that ſuffer. 1100Xer, ZXe...cazzº 2".
BOLE. m. ſ.
1. The body or trunk of a tree.
All fell upon the high-hair'd oaks, and down their cur- 12d
brows
Fell buſtling to the carth; and up went all the ſº 2 = Ed
boughs. Cºia.’s //~ *
3 __0/
l<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">But when the ſmoother bole from knots is free,
We make a deep inciſion in the tree. Dryden's Virgil, Georg.
View well this tree, the queen of all the grove;
How vaſt her bole, how wide her arms are ſpread;
How high above the reſt ſhe ſhoots her head Î
2. A kind of earth.
Bole Armeniack is an aſtringent earth, which takes its name
from Armenia, the country from which we have it. Woodward.
3. A meaſure of corn, containing fix buſhels.
Of good barley put eight boles, that is, about ſix Engliſh
uarters, in a ſtone trough. Mortimer.
BOLIS. m. ſ. [Lat.]
Bolis is a great firy ball, ſwiftly hurried through the air, and
generally drawing a tail after it. Ariſtotle calls it capra. There
have often been immenſe balls of this kind. Muſchenbrock.
Boll. n.ſ. A round ſtalk or ſtem; as, a boll of flax.
To Boll. v. n. [from the noun..] To riſe in a ſtalk.
And the flax and the barley was ſmitten: for the barley was
in the ear, and the flax was bolled. Exodus, ix. 31.
BOLSTER. n.ſ.. [bolrºne, Sax. bolſter, Dutch.]
1. Something laid on the bed, to raiſe and ſupport the head;
commonly a bag filled with down or feathers.
Perhaps ſome cold bank is her bolſter now,
Or 'gainſt the rugged bark of ſome broad elm,
Dryden.
Leans her unpillow'd head. Milton.
This arm ſhall be a bolſter for thy head;
I'll fetch clean ſtraw to make a ſoldier's bed: Gay.
2. A pad, or quilt, to hinder any preſſure, or fill up any vacuity.
Up goes her hand, and off ſhe ſlips
Swift.
The bolſters that ſupply her hips.
3. A pad, or compreſs, to be laid on a wound.
The bandage is the girt, which hath a bolſter in the middle,
and the ends tacked firmly together. Wiſeman's Surgery.
4. In horſemanſhip.
The bolſters of a ſaddle are thoſe parts raiſed upon the bows,
to hold the rider's thigh. Farrier’s Dić7.
To Bolster. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſupport the head with a bolſter.
2. To afford a bed to.
Mortal eyes do ſee them bolſter,
More than their own.
3. To hold wounds together with a compreſs.
The practice of bºlſtering the cheeks forward, does little ſer-
vice to the wound, and is very uneaſy to the patient. Sharp.
4. To ſupport; to hold up; to maintain. This is now an ex-
preſſion ſomewhat coarſe and obſolete.
We may be made wiſer by the publick perſuaſions grafted in
men's minds, ſo they be uſed to further the truth, not to bolſter
Crnour. Hooker, b. iii. § 4.
The lawyer ſets his tongue to ſale for the bolſtering out of
unjuſt cauſes. Hakewell on Providence.
It was the way of many to bolſter up their crazy, doating
conſciences with confidences. South.
BOLT, n.ſ.. [boult, Dutch; 33..]
1. An arrow ; a dart ſhot from a croſsbow.
Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell;
It fell upon a little weſtern flower;
Before milk white, now purple with love's wound.
Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
The blunted bolt againſt the nymph he dreſt;
But, with the ſharp, transfix’d Apollo's breaſt.
2. Lightning; a thunderbolt.
Sing'd with the flames, and with the bolts transfix’d,
With native earth your blood the monſters mix’d. Dryden.
3. Bolt upright; that is, upright as an arrow.
Bruſh-iron, native or from the mine, conſiſteth of long
friae, about the thickneſs of a ſmall knitting needle, bolt upright,
like the briſtles of a ſtiff bruſh. Grew's Muſeum.
As I ſtood bolt upright upon one end, one of the ladies burſt
Out. Addison. Spectator, N° 90.
4. The bar of a door, ſo called from being ſtrait like an arrow;
we now ſay, ſhoot the bolt, when we ſpeak of faſtening or open-
ing a door.
'Tis not in thee, to oppoſe the bolt
Againſt my coming in.
5. An iron to faſten the legs of a priſoner.
Away with him to priſon; lay bolts enough upon him.
Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
6. A ſpot or ſtain. See Bloop-BoI.T FRED.
That ſupernal judge, that ſtirs good thoughts
In my breaſt, of ſtrong authority,
To look into the holts and ſtains of right.
To Bolt. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To ſhut or faſten with a bolt.
The bolted gates flew open at the blaſt;
Shakeſp. Othello.
Dryden.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Shakeſp. K. john.
The ſtorm ruſh'd in, and Arcite ſtood aghaſt. Dryden.
2. To blurt out, or throw out precipitantly.
I hate when vice can bolt her arguments,
And virtue has no tongue to check her pride. Milton.
3. To faſten, as a bolt or pin; to pin; to keep together.
That I could reach the axel, where the pins are,
V yº bolt this frame; that I might pull them out. B. Johnſ.
OL. 1.
4. To fetter; to ſhackle.
It is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which ſhackles accidents, and bolts up change.
Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
5. To ſift; or ſeparate the parts of anything with a fieve. [blu-
ter, Fr.]
Saying, he now had boulted all the flour,
And that it was a groom of baſe degree,
Which of my love was partner. Fairy Queen, b. ii. e. 4.
In the bolting and fifting of fourteen years of power and fa-
vour, all that came out could not be pure meal. //otton.
I cannot bºlt this matter to the bran,
As Bradwardin and holy Auſtin can. Dryden's Falks.
6. To examine by ſifting; to try out; to lay open.
It would be well %lted out, whether great refračtions may
not be made upon reflections, as well as upon direct beams.
- - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº 762.
The judge, or jury, or parties, or the council, or attornies,
propounding occaſional queſtions, beats and boh, out the truth
much better than when the witneſs delivers only a formal ſeries.
Hale's Hiſtory of the Common Law.
Time and nature will bolt out the truth of things, through
all diſguiſes. 1. Efirang.
7. To purify; to purge.
The fanned ſnow
That's bolted by the northern blaſt twice o’er. II/Inter's Tale.
To Bolt. v. n. To ſpring out with ſpeed and ſuddenneſs; to
ſtart out with the quickneſs of an arrow.
This Puck ſeems but a dreaming dolt,
Still walking like a ragged colt,
And oft out of a buſh doth bolt,
Of purpoſe to deceive us. Drayton's Nymphid.
They erected a fort, and from thence they bolted like beaſts
of the foreſt, ſometimes into the foreſt, ſometimes into the
woods and faſtneſſes, and ſometimes back again to their den.
Bacon's War with Spain.
As the houſe was all in a flame, out bolts a mouſe from the
ruins, to ſave herſelf. L’Eſtrange.
I have reflečted on thoſe men, who, from time to time, have
ſhot themſelves into the world. I have ſeen many ſucceſſions
of them; ſome bolting out upon the ſtage with vaſt applauſe,
and others hiſſed off. Dryden.
The birds to foreign ſeats repair’d,
And beaſts, that bolted out, and ſaw the foreſt bar'd. Dryd.
Bolt-RoPE. n.ſ.. [from bolt and rope.] The rope on which
the ſail of a ſhip is ſewed and faſtened. Sea Dićf.
Bo'lt ER. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A fieve to ſeparate meal from
bran or huſks; or to ſeparate finer from coarſer parts.
Theſe hakes, and divers others of the fore-cited, are taken
with threads, and ſome of them with the bolter, which is a
ſpiller of a bigger ſize. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Dowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away to bakers
wives, and they have made bolters of them. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
With a good ſtrong chopping-knife mince the two capons,
bones and all, as ſmall as ordinary minced meat; put them in-
to a large neat bolter. Bacon's Natural Hiſt. Nº 46.
When ſuperciliouſly he fifts
Through coarſeſt bolter others gifts. Hudibras, p i. e. iii.
Bo'LTHE AD. m. ſ. A long ſtrait-necked glaſs veſſel, for chymi-
cal diſtillations, called alſo a matraſ, or receiver.
This ſpirit abounds in ſalt, which may be ſeparted, by put-
ting the liquour into a bolthead, with a long and narrow neck.
Boyle's Sceptical Chymiſtry.
Bo'LTING-House. n.ſ.. [from bolt and houſe.] The place where
meal is fifted.
The jade is returned as white, and as powdered, as if ſhe
had been at work in a bolting-houſe. Dennis’s Letters.
Bo'LT's PRIT. }". A maſt running out at the head of a ſhip,
Bo'wsPRIT. § not ſtanding upright, but aflope. The but-end
of it is generally ſet againſt the foot of the foremaſt; ſo that
they are a ſtay to one another. The length without board is
ſufficient to let its ſails hang clear of all incumbrances. If the
boltſprit fail in bad weather, the foremaſt cannot hold long after.
Bowſprit is perhaps the right ſpelling. Sea Dièſionary.
Sometimes I'd divide,
And burn in many places; on the topmaſt,
The yards, and boltſprit, would I flame diſtinctly. S}.7-mp.
Bo'lus. n.ſ. [2.2°.] A form of medicine, in which the ingre-
dients are made up into a ſoft maſs, larger than Pills, to be
ſwallowed at once. - -
Keep their bodies ſoluble the while by clyſters, lenitive lo-
luſcs of caſia and manna, with ſyrup of violets, //iſeman,
By poets we are well aſſur’d, -
That love, alas ! can ne'er be cur d;
A complicated heap of ills,
Deſpiſing boluſes and pills.
Swift.
BOMB. m / [bombus, Lat.] -
1. A loud noiſe.
*...". an upper chamber, which being thought weak,
was ſupported by a pillar of iron, of the bigneſs of one's arm
in the midſt; which, if you had ſtruck, would make a little flat
3 I noiſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O N
B O N
Jon, in the chamber beneath.
Bacon's Natural º N. º I.
iron ball, or ſhell, filled with gunpowder, and fur-
2. *... venºr a fuſee, or wooden tube, filled with
combuſtible matter; to be thrown Out from a mortar, which
had its name from the noiſe it makes. The fuſee, being ſet on
fire, burns ſlowly till it rºach the gunpowder, which gºes off
at once, burſting the ſhell to pieces with incredible violence;
whence the uſe of bºmbs in beſieging towns. The largeſt are
about eighteen inches in diameter. By whom they were in-
J, is not known, and the time is uncertain, ſome fixing it
to 1588, and others to 1495. . - Chambers.
The loud cannon miſſive iron pours,
And in the ſlaught'ring bomb Gradivus roars. - Rowe.
To Boºs. v. a. [from the noun..] To fall upon with bombs;
to bombard.
Our king thus trembles at Namur,. . .
Whilſt Villeroy, who ne'er afraid is,
To Bruxelles marches on ſecure, -
To bomb the monks, and ſcare the ladies. Priºr.
Bomb-chest. n.ſ. [from bomb and chºſt.] A kind of cheſt fill-
ed uſually with bombs, and ſometimes only with gunpowder,
placed under ground, to tear and blow it up in the air, with
thoſe who ſtand on it. They are now much diſuſed.
Chambers.
BoMB-ketch. A n.ſ. A kind of ſhip, ſtrongly built, to bear
Bomb-vesse L. } the ſhock of a mortar, when bombs are to be
fired into a town.
Nor could an ordinary fleet, with bomb-veſſels, hope to ſuc-
ceed againſt a place that has in its arſenal gallies and men of
War. Addiſon dºz Italy.
Bo'MBARd. n.ſ.. [hombardus, Lat.] A great gun ; a cannon:
it is a word now obſolete.
They planted in divers places twelve great bombard, where-
with they threw huge ſtones into the air, which, falling down
into the city, might break down the houſes. Knolles's Hiſtory.
To BoMBA'Rd. v. a. [from the noun..] To attack with
bombs.
A medal is ſtruck on the Engliſh failing in their attempts
on Dunkirk, when they endeavoured to blow up a fort, and
bombard the town. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
BoMBARDI'E.R. n.ſ.. [from bombard.] The engineer whoſe em-
ployment it is to ſhoot bombs.
The bombardier toſſes his balls ſometimes into the midſt of a
city, with a deſign to fill all around him with terrour and com-
buſtion. Tatler, N° 88.
BoMBA'RDMENT. n.ſ.. [from bombard.] An attack made upon
any city, by throwing bombs into it.
Genoa is not yet ſecure from a bombardment, though it is not
ſo expoſed as formerly. Addiſon on Italy.
Bo'MBAs.IN. m. ſ. [bombaſin, Fr.. from bombycinus, ſilken, Lat.]
A ſlight filken ſtuff, for mourning.
Bo'MBAst. m. ſ. [This word ſeems to be derived from Bombaſ:
tius, one of the names of Paracelſus; a man remarkable for
ſounding profeſſions, and unintelligible language.] Fuſtian; big
words, without meaning.
Not pedants motley tongue, ſoldiers bombaſſ,
Mountebanks drug-tongue, nor the terms of law,
Are ſtrong enough preparatives to draw
Me to hear this. Donne.
Are all the flights of heroick poetry to be concluded bombaſt,
unnatural, and mere madneſs, becauſe they are not affected with
their excellencies 2 Dryden's State of Innocence, Preface.
Bo'MBAst adj. [from the ſubſtantive..] High ſounding; of big
ſound without meaning. -
He, as loving his own pride and purpoſe,
Evades them with a bombaſt circumſtance,
Horribly ſtuff'd with epithets of war. Shakeſp. Othello.
BoMBILA'tion. n.ſ.. [from bombus, Lat..] Sound; noiſe; re-
port.
How to abate the vigour, or filence the bombilation of guns,
a way is ſaid to be by borax and butter, mixt in a due proporº
tion, which will almoſt take off the report, and alſo the force of
the charge. Brown's Pulgar Errours, h. ii. c. 5.
BoMBY'cINous, adj. [lomlycinus, Lat..] Silken; made of ſilk.5.
BONA ROBA. m.ſ.. [Ital, a fine gown.] A whore.
We knew where the bona robas were. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
BONASUS. m. ſ. [Lat..] A kind of buffalo, or wild bull.
BONCHRETIEN. n.f. [French.] A ſpecies of pear, ſo call-
ed; probably, from the name of a gardener. See PEAR.
BOND. m. ſ [bono, Sax. bound; it is written indifferently, in
many of its ſenſes, bond, or band. See BAND..]
I. Cords, or chains, with which any one is bound.
There left me, and my man, both bound together;
Till, gnawing with my teeth my bond, aſunder,
I gain'd my freedom. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errors.
2. Ligament that holds any thing together.
Let any one ſend his contemplation to the extremities of the
univerſe, and ſee, what conceivable hoops, what bond he can
*gine to hold this maſs of matter in ſo cloſe a preſſure to-
gºther. . . Locke.
3. Union; connexion.
noiſe in the room, but a great
Obſerve, in working up the walls, that no ſide of the houſe,
nor any part of the walls, be wrought up three feet above the
other, before the next adjoining wall be wrought up to it, ſo
that they may be all joined together, and make a good bond.
AMortimer's Husbandry.
4. Chains; impriſonment; captivity.
Whom I perceived to have nothing laid to his charge, wor-
thy of death, or of bonds. 4:/s, xxiii. 29.
5. Cement of union ; cauſe of union ; link of connexion.
Wedding is great Juno's crown;
O bleſſed bond of board and bed Shakeſp. A you like it.
Love cools, brothers divide, and the bond is cracked 'twixt
ſon and father. Shakeſp. King Lear.
6. A writing of obligation to pay a ſum, or perform a contract.
Go with me to a notary, ſeal me there
Your ſingle bond. Shakeſp. Mºrchant ºf Wenice.
What if I ne'er conſent to make you mine;
My father's promiſe ties me not to time;
And bonds without a date, they ſay are void.
7. Obligation; law by which any man is obliged.
Unhappy that I am I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth: I love your majeſty
According to my bond, no more nor leſs. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Take which you pleaſe, it diſſolves the bonds of government
and obedience. Locke.
Bon D. adj. [from lind, perhaps for bound; from zebonben,
Saxon.] Captive; in a ſervile ſtate.
Whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be hord or
free. I Cor. xii. 13.
Bo'NDAG e. m. ſ. [from bond.] Captivity; impriſoninent; ſtate
of reſtraint.
You only have overthrown me, and in my bondage conſiſts
my glory. Sidney, b. ii.
Say, gentle princeſs, would you not ſuppoſe
Your bondage happy, to be made a queen —
—To be a queen in bondage, is more vile
Than is a ſlave in baſe ſervility. Shakespeare. Henry VI. p. i.
Our cage
We make a choir, as doth the priſon'd bird,
And fing our bondage freely. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
He muſt reſolve by no means to be enſlaved, and brought
under the bondage of obſerving oaths, which ought to vaniſh,
when they ſtand in competition with eating or drinking, or
taking money. South.
The king, when he deſign'd you for my guard,
Reſolv’d he would not make my bondage hard. Dryden.
If ſhe has a ſtruggle for "honour, ſhe is in a bondage to love;
which gives the ſtory its turn that way. Pope; notes on Iliad.
Bo'NDMAID. n.ſ.. [from bond, captive, and maid.] A woman
ſlave.
Good ſiſter, wrong me not, nor wrong yourſelf,
To make a bondmaid and a ſlave of me. Shakeſp. T. Shrew.
Bo'NDMAN. m. ſ. [from bond and man.] A man ſlave.
Amongſt the Romans, in making of a bondman free, was it
not wondered wherefore ſo great ado ſhould be made; the
maſter to preſent his ſlave in ſome court, to take him by the
hand, and not only to ſay, in the hearing of the publick ma-
giſtrate, I will that this man become free; but, after thoſe ſo-
lemn words uttered, to ſtrike him on the cheek, to turn him
round, the hair of his head to be ſhaved off, the magiſtrate to
touch him thrice with a rod; in the end, a cap and a white gar-
ment given him. Hooker, b. iv. § 1.
O freedom | firſt delight of human kind;
Not that which bondmen from their maſters find. Dryden.
Bondse'R v ANT. n.ſ.. [from bond and ſervant.] A ſlave; a ſer-
vant without the liberty of quitting his maſter.
And if thy brother, that dwelleth by thee, be waxen poor,
and be ſold unto thee; thou ſhalt not compel him to ſerve as a
bondſervant. Lev. xxv. 39.
Bondse'Rv1&amp;E. n.ſ.. [from bond and ſervice.] The condition of
a bondſervant; ſlavery. - -
Upon thoſe did Solomon levy a tribute of lendºrvice.
1 Kings, ix. 21.
Bo'NdsLAve. m. ſ. [from bond and ſave..] A man in ſlavery;
a ſlave.
Love enjoined ſuch diligence, that no apprentice, no, no
bondſlave, could ever be, by fear, more ready at all command-
ments, than that young princeſs was. Sidney, b. 1.
All her ornaments are taken away; of a freewoman ſhe IS
become a bondſlave. - I Mac. ii. 1 1.
Commonly the bondſave is fed by his loº, but here the lord
was fed by his bondſlave. Sir J. Davies on Ireland.
Bo'NDSMAS. n.ſ.. [from land and man.]
1. A ſlave.
Carnal greedy people, withºut ſuch a precept, would have
no mercy upon their poºr ºn and beaſts. Derb. Ph. Theol.
2. A perſon bound, or giving ſecurity for another.
Bo'NDswom AN. m. ſ. [from bond and wºman.] A woman
ſlave.
Dryden.
My lords, the ſenators
Arc ſold for ſlaves, and their wives for bondſwºmen. ---
Ben. jºhnſºn's Cºe.
BONE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O O
NONE, n.ſ.. [ban, Saxon.] - - -
1. The ſolid parts of the body of an animal are made up of hard
fibres, tied one to another by ſmall tranſverſe fibres, as thoſe
of the muſcles. In a foetus they are porous, ſoft, and eaſily diſ-
cerned. As their pores fill with a ſubſtance of their own na-
ture, ſo they increaſe, harden, and grow cloſe to one another.
They are all ſpongy, and full of little cells, or are of a conſide-
rable firm thickneſs, with a large cavity, except the teeth; and
where they are articulated, they are covered with a thin and
ſtrong membrane, called the perioſteum. Each bone is much
bigger at its extremity than in the middle, that the articula-
tions might be firm, and the bones not eaſily put out of joint.
But, becauſe the middle of the bone ſhould be ſtrong, to ſuſtain
its alloted weight, and reſiſt accidents, the fibres are there more
cloſely compacted together, ſupporting one another ; and the
lone is made hollow, and conſequently not ſo eaſily broken, as
it muſt have been, had it been ſolid and ſmaller. 9aincy.
Thy bones are marrowleſs, thy blood is cold. Macbeth.
There was lately a young gentleman bit to the bone. Tatler.
2. A fragment of meat; a bone with as much fleſh as adheres
to it.
Like AEſop's hounds, contending for the bone,
Each pleaded right, and would be lord alone. Dryden.
3. Tº be upon the bones. To attack.
Puſs had a month's mind to be upon the bones of him, but was
not willing to pick a quarrel. L'E/irange.
4. Tº make no bones. To make no ſcruple; a metaphor taken
from a dog, who readily ſwallows meat that has no bones.
5. Bones. A ſort of bobbins, made of trotter bones, for weav-
ing bonelace.
6, Bon Fs. Dice.
But then my ſtudy was to cog the dice,
And dext'rouſly to throw the lucky fice:
To ſhun ames ace that ſwept my ſtakes away;
And watch the box, for fear they ſhould convey
Falſe bones, and put upon me in the play. Dryden's Perſ
To Bone. v. a. [from the noun..] To take out the bones from
the fleſh.
Bo'NElAce. m.ſ.. [from bone and lace; the bobbins with which
lace is woven being frequently made of bones.J Flaxen lace,
ſuch as women wear on their linen.
The things you follow, and make ſongs on now, ſhould be
ſent to knit, or ſit down to bobbins or bonelace. Tatler.
We deſtroy the ſymmetry of the human figure, and fooliſhly
contrive to call off the eye from great and real beauties, to
childiſh gewgaw ribbands and bonelace. Spectator, N° 99.
Bo'NELEss. adj. [from bone..] Without bones.
I would, while it was ſmiling in my face,
Have pluckt my nipple from his bonelſ, gums,
And daſht the brains out. Shakeſp. King Lear.
To Bo'NESET, v. n. [from bone and ſet.] To reſtore a bone
out of joint to its place; or join a bone broken to the other
part.
A fraćtured leg ſet in the country by one pretending to bone-
fitting. //iſeman's Surgery.
Bo'NESETTER. m. ſ. [from boneſt.] A chirurgeon; one who
rºy profeſſes the art of reſtoring broken or luxated
OneS.
At preſent my deſire is only to have a good boneſºtter.
Denham's Sophy.
Bo'NFIRE. m. ſ. [from bon, good, Fr. and fire.] A fire made for
ſome publick cauſe of triumph or exultation.
Ring ye the bells to make it wear away,
And bonfires make all day. Sperſºr's Epithalamium.
How came ſo many bonfires to be made in queen Mary's
days : Why, ſhe had abuſed and deceived her people. South.
Full ſoon by bonfire, and by bell,
We learnt our liege was paſſing well. Gay.
Bo'NGRAce. n.ſ.. [home grace, Fr.] A forehead-cloth, or co-
vering for the forehead. Skinner.
I have ſeen her beſet all over with emeralds and pearls, rang-
ed in rows about her cawl, her peruke, her bongrace, and chap-
let. Hakewell on Providence.
Bo'NNET. n.ſ. [onet, Fr.] A covering for the head; a hat;
a cap.
Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
And thus far having ſtretch'd it, here be with them,
Thy knee buſing the ſtones; for, in ſuch buſineſs,
Action is eloquence. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
- They had not probably the ceremony of veiling the bonnet
in their ſalutations; for, in medals, they ſtill have it on their
heads. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
Bo'NNET. [In fortification.] A kind of little ravelin, without
Any ditch, having a parapet three feet high, anciently placed
before the points of the ſaliant angles of the glacis; being pal-
liſadoed round: of late alſo uſed before the angles of baſtions,
and the points of ravelins.
“NNET a preſire, or prieſt's cap, is an outwork, having at the
head three ſaliant anºles, and two inwards. It differs from the
double tenaille, becauſe its fides, inſtead of being parallel, grow
narrow at the gorge, and open wider at the front.
9NNETs. [In the ſea language.] Small ſails ſet on the courſes
J
on the mizzen, mainſail, and foreſail of a ſhip, when theſe are
too narrow or ſhallow to cloath the maſt, or in order to hake
more way in calm weather. - Chambers.
Bo'NNILY. adv. [from bonny.] Gayly; handſomely; plumply.
Bo'NNINEss. n. J. [from bonny..] Gayety; handſomentſ,
plumpneſs. - -
BONNY, adj. [from bon, bonne, Fr. It is a word now almoſt
confined to the Scottiſh dialect.]
I. Handſome; beautiful. - -
Match to match I have encounter'd him,
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows,
Ev’n of the honny beaſt he lov’d ſo well. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
Thus wail'd the louts in melancholy ſtrain, -
, Till bonny Suſan ſped acroſs the plain. Gay's Paſtoral.
2. Gay; merry; frolickſome; cheerful ; blithe.
Then figh not ſo, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bonny. Shakespeare. Much ad, about N.
3. It ſeems to be generally uſed in converſation for plump.
BoNNY-cLABBER. m. ſ. A word uſed in ſome counties for ſour
buttermilk.
We ſcorn, for want of talk, to jabber,
Of parties o'er our bonny-clabber;
Nor are we ſtudious to enquire,
Who votes for manours, who for hire. Swift.
BO'NUM MAGNUM, n.ſ. See PLUM ; of which it iſ a
ſpecies. -
Bo'N.Y. adj. [from bone.]
1. Conſiſting of bones. - - -
At the end of this hole is a membrane, faſtened to a round
bony limb, and ſtretched like the head of a drum ; and there-
fore, by anatomiſts, called tympanum. Ray on the Creation.
2. Full of bones.
Bo'ob Y. n.ſ.. [a word of no certain etymology; Henſhaw thinks
it a corruption of bull-beef ridiculouſly; Skinner imagines it
to be derived from bobo, fooliſh, Span. junius finds howbard to
be an old Scottiſh word for a coward, a contemptible fºllow ;
from which he naturally deduces booby; but the original of
bowhard is not known..] A dull, heavy, ſtupid fellow ; a
lubber. -
But one exception to this fact we find,
That booly Phaon only was unkind,
An ill-bred boatman, rough as waves and wind. Prior.
Young maſter next muſt riſe to fill him wine,
And ſtarve himſelf to ſee the booby dine. King.
BOOK. m. ſ. [boc, Sax. ſuppoſed from boc, a beech; becauſe
they wrote on beechen boards, as liber in Latin, from the rind
of a tree.]
1. A volume in which we read or write.
See a book of prayer in his hand; -
True ornaments to know a holy mari. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Receive the ſentence of the law for ſins,
Such as by God's book are adjudg’d to death.
Shakespeare Henry IV.
But in the coffin that had the books, they were found as freſh
as if they had been but newly written; being written on parch-
ment, and covered over with watch candles of wax. Bacon.
Books are a ſort of dumb teachers; they cannot anſwer ſud-
den queſtions, or explain preſent doubts: this is properly the
work of a living inſtructor. J/atts.
2. A particular part of a work.
The firſt book we divide into ſe&amp;tions; whereof the firſt is
theſe chapters paſt. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
3. The regiſter in which a trader keeps an account of his debts.
This life
Is nobler than attending for a check;
Prouder, than ruſtling in unpaid for ſilk:
Such gain the cap of him that makes them fine,
Yet keeps his hook uncroſs'd. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. In books. In kind remembrance.
I was ſo much in his books, that, at his deceaſe, he left me
the lamp by which he uſed to write his lucubrations. Addison.
5. Without book. By memory; by repetition; without reading.
Sermons read they abhor in the church; but ſermons with-
out book, ſermons which ſpend their life in their birth, and may
have publick audience but once. Hooker, b. v. § 2 I.
To Book. v. a. [from the noun..] To regiſter in a book: . . .
I beſeech your grace, let it be booked with the reſt of this
day's deeds; or I will have it in a particular ballad elſe, with
mine own picture on the top of it. Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. ii.
He made wilful murder high treaſon; he cauſed the march-
ers to book their men, for whom they ſhould make anſwer.
Davies on Ireland.
Book-KEEPING. m. ſ. [from book and Hºp.] The art of keep-
ing accounts, or recording the tranſačtions of a man's affairs,
in ſuch a manner, that at any time he may thereby know the
true ſtate of the whole, or any part, of his affairs, with clear-
neſs and expedition. - Harris.
Bookbin DER. n.ſ.. [from * and bind..] A man whoſe pro-
feſſion it is to bind books.
Book Fu L. adj. [from ſº and full.] Full of notions gleancă
from books; crouded with undigeſted knowledge.
The
+
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B o o
B O O
The lºſul blockhead, ignorantly rº",
with loads of learned |...}. º head,
ith his own tongue ſtill edifies his “a” • -
... ſº. to himſelf appears. Pope's Eſ. . ;
Bookish. adj. [from *l Given to books; acquainted only
with books. It is generally uſed contemptuouſly.
I'll make him yield ; º:
.. hath pull'd fair England down.
Whoſe bookiſh rule hath P Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
&gt; %, vet I can read waiting gentlewomen in the
º: not bookiſh, y š. Winter's Tale.
Xantippe follows the tº: º: her º | º
- ſº man, who has no knowledge of the world.
ried to a bookiſh man, *... N° 482.
Bookish Ness. n.ſ.. [from bookiſh.] Much application to books;
over-ſtudiouſneſs. -
Book learned. adj. [from book and learned.] Verſed in books,
or literature: a term implying ſome ſlight contempt.
Whate'er theſe booklearn'd blockheads ſay,
Solon's the veri'ſt fool in all the play. Dryden's Perſus.
He will quote paſſages out of Plato and Pindar, at his own
table, to ſome booklearned companion, without bluſhing. Swift.
Bookle'ARNING. m. ſ. [from book and learning.] Skill in lite-
rature; acquaintance with books; a term of ſome contempt.
They might talk of booklearning what they would; but, for
his part, he never ſaw more unfeaty fellows than great clerks.
Sidney.
Neither does it ſo much require booklearning and ſcholarſhip,
as good natural ſenſe, to diſtinguiſh true and falſe; and to diſ-
cern what is well proved, and what is not. Burnet's Th. Earth.
BookMAN. m. ſ. [from book and man.] A man whoſe profeſſion
is the ſtudy of books.
This civil war of wits were much better us'd
On Navarre and his bookmen; for here 'tis abus’d.
Shakeſp. Love's Labour Lºſ!.
BookMAt E. m.ſ.. [from book and mate.] Schoolfellow.
This Armado is a Spaniard that keeps here in court,
A phantaſm, a monarch, and one that makes ſport
To the prince and his bookmates. Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loſt.
Bookselle R. m. ſ. [from book and ſell.] He whoſe profeſſion it
is to ſell books.
He went to the bookſeller, and told him in anger, he had ſold
a book in which there was falſe divinity.
I/alton's Lift of Biſhop Saunderſºn.
Bookwor M. m. ſ. [from book and worm.]
1. A worm or mite that eats holes in books, chiefly when damp.
My lion, like a moth or bookworm, feeds upon nothing but
paper, and I ſhall beg of them to diet him with wholeſome and
ſubſtantial food. Guardian, N° 114.
2. A ſtudent too cloſely given to books; a reader without judg-
ment.
Among thoſe venerable galleries and ſolitary ſcenes of the
univerſity, I wanted but a black gown, and a ſalary, to be as
mere a bookworm as any there. Pope's Letters.
Bo'oly. m. ſ. [an Iriſh term.]
All the Tartarians, and the people about the Caſpian ſea,
which are naturally Scythians, live in herds; being the very
ſame that the Iriſh boolies are, driving their cattle continually
with them, and feeding only on their milk and white meats.
Spenſer's Ireland.
Boom. n.ſ.. [from boom, a tree, Dutch.]
1. [In ſea language.] A long pole uſed to ſpread out the clue of
the ſtudding ſail; and ſometimes the clues of the mainſail and
foreſail are boomed out.
2. Apole with buſhes or baſkets, ſet up as a mark to ſhew the ſail-
ors how to ſteer in the channel, when a country is overflown.
Sea Dić7.
3. A bar of wood laid croſs a harbour, to keep off the enemy.
As his heroick worth ſtruck envy dumb,
Who took the Dutchman, and who cut the boom. Dryden.
To BooM. v. n. [from the noun. A ſea term.] To ruſh with
violence; as a ſhip is ſaid to come booming, when ſhe makes all
the ſail ſhe can.
Forſook by thee, in vain I ſought thy aid,
When bººming billows clos'd above my head. Pope's Odſ.
Boos. n ſ [from bene, Sax, a petition.]. A gift; a grant, d
benefaction; a preſent. &gt;
Vouchſafe me for my meed but one fair look:
A ſmaller boon than this I cannot beg,
And leſs than this, I'm ſure, you cannot give.
- Shakespeare. Two Gentlemen of Pºrona.
That courtier, who obtained a ſºon of the emperour, that he
might every morning whiſper him in the ear, and ſay nothing,
aſked no unprofitable ſuit for himſelf. Bºi.
T he bluſtring fool has ſatisfy'd his will;
His hoon is giv'n, his knight has gain'd the day,
But loſt the prize. Dryden's Fables.
To gain thi Whº rhetorick didſt thou uſe,
° ſº this mighty loan * ſhe pities me! Addison's Catz.
Boon, adj. [lon, Fr.] Gay 3 merry; as, a boon sº
- Satiate at length,
#. heigh-end * with wine, jocund and boon,
hus to herſelf ſhe Pleaſingly began. Parad. Loft, b. ix.
I know the infirmity of our family; we are apt to play the
boon companion, and throw our money away in our cups.
Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of j. Buil.
BOOR. m.ſ.. [beer, Dutch ; zebune, Sax.] A ploughman; a
country fellow ; a lout; a clown.
The bare ſenſe of a calamity is called grumbling; and if a
man does but make a face upon the boor, he is preſently a male-
content. L'E/range.
He º live as well as a boor of Holland, whoſe cares of
growing ſtill richer waſte his life. Temple.
To one well-born, th’ affront is worſe and more,
When he's abus’d and baffl'd by a boor. Dryden.
Bo'oRish. adj. [from boor.] Clowniſh; ruſtick; untaught;
uncivilized.
Therefore, you clown, abandon, which is in the vulgar,
leave the ſociety, which, in the bouriſh, is, company of this fe-
male. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Bo'orishly. adv. [from booriſh.] In a booriſh manner; after
a clowniſh manner.
Bo'orishNess. n.ſ.. [from booriſh.] Clowniſhneſs; ruſticity;
coarſeneſs of manners.
Boose. m. ſ. [borix, Sax.] A ſtall for a cow or an ox.
To BOOT. v. a. [baten, to profit, Dutch ; bor, in Saxon, is re-
compence, repentance, or fine paid by way of expiation; botan
is, to repent, or to compenſate; as,
He r pir? brº and bote,
Anb bet bivoren bome.]
1. To profit; to advantage.
It ſhall not boot them, who derogate from reading, to excuſe
it, when they ſee no other remedy; as if their intent were only
to deny, that aliens and ſtrangers from the family of God are
won, or that belief doth uſe to be wrought at the firſt in them,
without ſermons. Hooker, b. v. § 22.
For what I have, I need not to repeat;
And what I want, it boots not to complain. Shakeſp. R. II.
If we ſhun
The purpos'd end, or here lie fixed all,
What boots it us theſe wars to have begun.
What boºts the regal circle on his head,
That long behind he trails his pompous robe 2 Pope.
2. To enrich; to benefit.
And I will boot thee with what gift beſide,
That modeſty can beg. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Boot. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Profit; gain; advantage.
Fairfax, b. i.
My gravity,
Wherein, let no man hear me, I take pride,
Could I, with boot, change for an idle plume,
Which the air beats for vain. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſ
2. To boot. With advantage; over and above.
Canſt thou, O partial ſleep, give thy repoſe
To the wet ſeaboy, in an hour ſo rude:
And, in the calmeſt and the ſtilleſt night,
With all appliances, and means to boot,
Deny it to a king Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Man is God's image; but a poor man is
Chriſt's ſtamp to boot: both images regard. Herbert.
He might have his mind and manners formed, and he be in-
ſtructed to boot in ſeveral ſciences. Locke.
3. It ſeems, in the following lines, uſed for boºty, or plunder.
Others, like ſoldiers, armed in their ſtings,
Make boot upon the ſummer's velvet buds. Shakespeare. Henry V.
BOOT. n.ſ.. [bottas, Armorick; betes, a ſhoe, Welch ; bºtte,
French.]
1. A covering for the leg, uſed by horſemen.
That my leg is too long-
—No ; that it is too little.—
—I’ll wear a boot, to make it ſomewhat rounder.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
Shew'd him his room, where he muſt lodge that night,
Pull'd off his boots, and took away the light. Milion.
Biſhop Wilkins ſays, he does not queſtion, but it will be as
uſual for a man to call for his wings, when he is going a jour-
ney, as it is now to call for his boots. Addison. Guardian.
2. A kind of rack for the leg, formerly uſed in Scotland for tor-
turing criminals.
Boot of a Cºach. The ſpace between the coachman and the
coach.
To Boot. v. a. [from the noun..] To put on boots. -
Boot, boot, Maſter Shallow; I know the young king is fick
for me: let us take any man's horſes: Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Boot-Hose. n.ſ.. [from loot and hye. Stockings to ſerve for
boots; ſpatterdaſhes.
His lacquey with a linen ſtock on one leg, and a boºt-hoſe on
the other, gartered with a red and blue liſt. . .
- Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Boot-tREE. m. ſ. [from boºt and tree..] Two pieces of wood,
ſhaped like a leg, to be driven into boots, for ſtretching and
widening them. -
Bootcatcher. n.ſ.. [from boot and catch..] The perſon whoſe
buſineſs at an inn is to pull off the boots of paſſengers. -
i The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O R
B O R
The oſtler and the boºtcatcher ought to partake. Swift.
Boot ED. adj. [from boºt.] In boots; in a horſeman's habit.
A boºted judge ſhall fit to try his cauſe,
Not by the ſtatute, but by martial laws. Dryden's juvenal.
Booth. n.ſ.. [bord, Dutch; bºth, Welch.] A houſe built of
boards, or boughs, to be uſed for a ſhort time. *
The clothiers found means to have all the queſt made of the
northern men, ſuch as had their bºth; ſtanding in the fair.
Camden’s Remains.
Much miſchief will be done at Bartholomew fair, by the fall
of a lººth. Swift's Predićtions.
Boorless. adj. [from bott.]
1. Uſeleſs; unprofitable; unavailing; without advantage.
When thoſe accurſed meſſengers of hell
Came to their wicked man, and 'gan tell
Their bootleſs pains, and ill ſucceeding night. Fairy Q. b. i.
God did not ſuffer him, being deſirous of the light of wiſ-
dom, with bottleſs expence of travel, to wander in darkneſs.
Hooker, b. i. p. 36.
Bºtleſ ſpeed,
When cowardice purſues, and valour flies.
Let him alone;
I'll follow him no more with boºtleſ, pray'rs:
He ſeeks my life. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
2. Without ſucceſs; perhaps without booty; Shakeſpeare having,
in another place, uſed the word boot for booty.
Thrice from the banks of Wye,
And ſandy bottom'd Severn, have I ſent
Him bººtleſs home, and weatherbeaten back. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Booty. n. f. [buyt, Dutch ; butin, Fr.]
1. Plunder ; pillage; ſpoils gained from the enemy.
One way a band ſelect from forage drives
A herd of beeves, fair oxen, and fair kine,
Their booty. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. 1.650.
His conſcience is the hue and cry that purſues him; and
when he reckons that he has gotten a bºoty, he has only caught
a Tartar. L'E/ºrange.
For, ſhould you to extortion be inclin'd,
Your cruel guilt will little booty find. Dryden's juv. ſat. viii.
2. Things gotten by robbery.
If I had a mind to be honeſt, I ſee, fortune would not ſuffer
me; ſhe drops bo ties in my mouth. Shakeſp. Jºinter’s Tale.
3. To play hºoty. To play diſhoneſtly, with an intent to loſe. The
French uſe, je ſuis bette, when they mean to ſay, I will not go.
We underſtand what we ought to do; but when we delibe-
rate, we play booty againſt ourſelves: our conſciences direct us
one way, our corruptions hurry us another. L’Eſlrange.
Shakespeare.
I have ſet this argument in the beſt iight, that the ladies may
not think I write boºty. Dryden.
Bope'EP. m.ſ.. [from bo and peep.] To look out, and draw back
as if frighted, or with the purpoſe to fright ſome other.
Then they for ſudden joy did weep, .
And I for ſorrow ſung,
That ſuch a king ſhould play boperp,
And go the fools among.
Rivers,
That ſerve inſtead of peaceful barriers,
To part th' engagements of their warriours,
Where both from ſide to ſide may ſkip, - -
And only encounter at hopeep. Hudibras, p. iii. c. iii.
There the devil plays at boprºp, puts out his horns to do miſ-
chief, then ſhrinks them back for ſafety. Dryden's Span. Friar.
BORACHIO. m. ſ. [horracº, Span.] A drunkard.
How you ſtink of wine! D'ye think my niece will ever en-
dure ſuch a barachio / you're an abſolute borachio.
Congreve's I/ay of the World.
Bo'RABLE. adj. [from bore.] That may be bored.
Bo'RAGE. m. ſ. [from barago, Lat..] A plant.
The leaves are broad and rough; the flowers conſiſt of one
leaf; are of a wheel ſhape, and divided into five ſegments, al-
moſt to the bottom, which end in ſharp points, like a ſtar; the
apices, in the middle of the flower, are ſharp-pointed, and ad-
here together; the ſeeds are rough, and appear like a viper's
head. This plant is often uſed in the kitchen, and for a cool
tankard in the ſummer time; and the flowers are uſed in me-
dicinal cordials. Millar.
BORA.M.E.Z. m. ſ. The Scythian lamb, generally known by
the name of Agnus Scythicus. -
Much wonder is made of the baramcz, that ſtrange plant-
animal, or vegetable lamb of Tartary, which wolves delight to
feed on; which hath the ſhape of a lamb, affordeth a bloody
juice upon breaking, and liveth while the plants be conſumed
about it. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 27.
H0 K.A.Y. n.ſ. ſhorax, low Latin.] An artificial ſalt, prepared
from ſal armoniac, nitre, calcined tartar, ſea ſalt, and alum,
diſſolved in wine. It is principally uſed to ſolder metals, and
ſometimes an uterine ingredient in medicine. &amp;iſincy.
Bordel. n.ſ. [borderl, Teut. bordel, Armorick.] A brothel;
a bawdyhouſe.
Making even his own houſe a ſtews, a bordel, and a ſchool
of lewdneſs, to inſtil vice into the unwary years of his poor
children. South.
, Vol. I.
Shaieff. King Lear,
BORDER. m. ſ. ſhord, Germ. hord, Fr.]
I. The outer part or edge of anything. *
. They have, of Paris work, looking-glaſſes, bordered with
broad borders of cryſtal, and great counterfeit precious ſtones.
Bacon's Natural Hiſt. No 960.
, The light muſt ſtrike on the middle, and extend its greateſt
clearneſs on the principal figures; diminiſhing by degrees, as
it comes nearer and nearer to the borders. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. The march or edge of a country; the confine.
. If a prince keep his reſidence on the border of his domi-
mons, the remote parts will rebel; but if he make the centre
his ſeat, he ſhall eaſily keep them in obedience. . Spenſer.
3. The outer part of a garment, generally adorned with needle-
work, or ornaments.
4. A bank, raiſed round a garden, and ſet with flowers; a nar-
row rank of herbs or flowers.
There he arriving, round about doth fly
From bed to bed, from one to other border;
And takes ſurvey, with curious buſy eye, -
Of every flower and herb there ſet in order. Spenſer's Muip,
All with a bºrder of rich fruit trees crown'd,
Whoſe loaded branches hide the lofty mound:
Such various ways the ſpacious alleys lead,
My doubtful muſe knows not what path to tread.
To Bo'RDER. v. n. [from the noun.] -
1. To confine upon ; to touch ſomething elſe at the fide or edge.
It bordereth upon the province of Croatia, which, in time
paſt, was continual wars with the Turks garriſons.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Virtue and Honour had their temples bºrdering on each
other, and are ſometimes both on the ſame coin. Addiſon.
2. To approach nearly to.
All wit, which borders upon profaneneſs, and makes bold
with thoſe things to which the greateſt reverence is due, de-
ſerves to be branded with folly. Tillºtſºn.
To Bo'RDER. v. a. -
1. To adorn with a border of ornaments.
2. To reach; to touch; to confine upon.
Sheba and Raamah are thoſe parts of Arabia, which bºrder
the ſea called the Perſian gulf. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Bo'RDERER. m. ſ. [from border.] He that dwells on the bor-
ders, extreme parts, or confines.
They of thoſe marches, gracious ſovereign I
Shall be a wall ſufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering borderers. Shakeſp. Henry V.
An ordinary horſe will carry two ſacks of ſand; and, of
ſuch, the borderers on the ſea do beſtow ſixty, at leaſt in every
acre; but moſt huſbands double that number. Carew's Survey.
The eaſieſt to be drawn
To our ſociety, and to aid the war:
The rather for their ſeat, being next bord’rers
On Italy; and that they abound with horſe. B. johnſ. Catil.
The king of Scots in perſon, with Perkin in his company,
entered with a great army, though it chiefly conſiſted of bor-
derers, being raiſed ſomewhat ſuddenly. Bacon's Henry VII.
Volga's ſtream
Sends oppoſite, in ſhaggy armour clad, .
Her borderers; on mutual ſlaughter bent, -
They rend their countries. - Philips.
To Bo'RDRAGE. v. m. [from border.] To plunder the borders.
Long time in peace his realm eſtabliſhed,
Yet oft annoy'd with fundry bordragings -
Of neighbour Scots, and foreign ſcatterlings. Fairy Q. b. ii.
To BORE. v. a. [bonian, Sax.] To pierce in a hole.
I'll believe as ſoon, -
This whole earth may be bor’d; and that the moon
May through the centre creep. Shakºp. Midſum. Night's Dr.
Mulberries will be fairer, if you bºre the trunk of the tree
through, and thruſt, into the places bored, wedges of ſome hot
trees. - Bacon's Natural Hiſł. N° 456.
Take the barrel of a long gun, perfectly bored, and ſet it up-
right, and take a bullet exactly fit for it; and then if you fuck
at the mouth of the barrel never ſo gently, the bullet will come
up ſo forcibly, that it will hazard the ſtriking out your teeth.
* Digby on Bºdieſ.
But Capys, and the graver ſort, thought fit
The Greeks ſuſpected preſent to commit
To ſeas or flames; at leaſt, to ſearch and bore
The fides, and what that ſpace contains t'explore. Denham.
Theſe diminutive caterpillars are able, by degrees, to Pierce
or bºre their way into a tree, with very ſmall holes; which, af-
Iłaller.
ter they are fully entered, grow together. Ray.
Confider, reader, what fatigues I've known,
what riots ſeen, what buſtling crouds' ºr 4, -
How of I croſs'd where carts and coaches roard. Gay,
To Bor E. v. m. ,
1. To make a hole. - ' ' ' . -
A man may make an inſtrument to bore a hole an inch wide;
or half an indh, and ſo leſs; not to ºr a hole of a foot.
//i/ ins's Mathematical Magick.
2. To puſh forward towards a certain point,
3 K Thoſe
i<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O S
B O R
Thoſe milk paps,
s eyes,
- - - at men'
That through the window lawn º' " Sl. 1...ſº, ‘T.’
Are not within the leaf of pity wº. Shakespeare Timon.
Nor ſouthward to the raining º run 5
- - 'ring thcre,
But joring to the weſt, and how"; - */rº
With º: mouths they draw ..". - º:
...th farrie Whcºn a hOf IC Caſſ 1CS IllS
To Borº ºn. Twith arriers] * * Dićf.
near the ground.
Bor E. º: the verb.]
* de by boring.
1. The hole ". ii. engines long and round,
ick ramm’d, at th' other bore with touch of fire -
#. and inmate. Milton’s Paradiſe Loſt, h. vi.
we took a cylindrical pipe of glaſs, whoſe bore was about a
quarter of an inch in diameter. Bºyle.
2. ‘I he inſtrument with which a hole is bored.
So ſhall that hole be fit for the file, or ſquare bore, if the cu-
rioſity of your propoſed work cannot allow it to paſs without
filing. AMºxon's Mechanical Exerciſcº.
3. The ſize of any hole.
Our careful monarch ſtands in perſon by,
This new-caſt cannon's firmneſs to explore;
The ſtrength of big-corn'd powder loves to try,
And ball and cartridge ſorts for every lºre; Dryden.
It will beſt appear in the bores of wind inſtruments; there-
fore cauſe pipes to be made with a ſingle, double, and ſo on, to
a ſextuple hore; and mark what tone every one giveth. Bacon.
Bore. The preterite of bear.
The father bore it with undaunted ſoul,
Like one who durſt his deſtiny controul;
Yet with becoming grief he bore his part,
Reſign'd his ſon, but not reſign'd his heart. Dryden.
'Twas my fate
To kill my father, and pollute his bed, -
By marrying her who bºre me. Dryden and Lee's OEdipus.
Bo'REAL. adj. [borealis, Lat..] . Northern.
Crete's ample fields diminiſh to our eye ;
Before the boreal blaſts the veſſels fly.
BOREA.S. n.ſ. [Lat.] The north wind.
Boreas, and Caerias, and Argeſtas loud,
And Thraſcias, rend the woods, and ſeas up-turn.
Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x. l. 699.
Bo'R.E.E. n.ſ. A kind of dance.
Dick could neatly dance a jig,
But Tom was beſt at borees. Swift.
Bo'RER. m. ſ. [from bore.] A piercer; an inſtrument to make
holes with.
The maſter-bricklayer muſt try all the foundations, with a
borer, ſuch as well-diggers uſe, to try what ground they have.
Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Born. The participle paſſive of bear.
Their charge was always born by the queen, and duly paid
out of the exchequer. Bacon.
The great men were enabled to oppreſs their inferiours; and
their followers were born out and countenanced in wicked ac-
Pope's Odyſſey.
tions. Sirjohn Davies on Ireland.
Upon ſome occaſions, Clodius may be bold and inſolent,
bºrn away by his paſſion. Swift.
To be BoF N. v. m. paſſ. [derived from the word to bear, in the
ſenſe of bringing forth; as, my mother bore me twenty years
ago; or, I was bºrn twenty years ago.]
1. To come into life.
When we are bºrn, we cry, that we are come
To this great ſtage of fools. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Nor nature's law with fruitleſs ſorrow mourn,
But die, O mortal man for thou waſt born. Prior.
All that are born into the world, are ſurrounded with bodies,
that perpetually and diverſly affect them. Locke.
2. It is uſually ſpoken with regard to circumſtances; as, he was
bºrn a prince; he was bºrn to empire; he was born for great-
neſs; that is, formed at the birth.
The ſtranger that dwelleth with you, ſhall be unto you as
one born amongyou, and thou ſhalt love him as thyſelf.
- Levit. xix. 34.
Yet man is born unto trouble, as the ſparks fly upward.
- - job, v. 7.
A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adver-
ſity. Prov. xvii. 17.
The new born babe by nurſes overlaid. Dryden.
Either of you knights may well deſerve
A princeſs born ; and ſuch is ſhe you ſerve. Dryden's Fal.
Two riſing creſts his royal head adorn;
Born from a god, himſelf to godhead bºrn. Dryden's Aºn.
Both muſt like from heav'n derive their light;
Theſe bºrn to judge, as well as thoſe to write. Pope.
For all mankind alike require their grace;
All born to want; a miſèrable race! Pºpe's Odyſſey.
I was born to a good eſtate, although it now turneth to ſittie
account. Swift's Story of an injured Lady.
Their lands are let to lords, who never deſigned to be te-
ants, naturally murmur at the payment of rents, as a ſub-
“rviency they were not born to. Swift
3. It has uſually the particle of before the mother.
Be bloody, bold, and reſolute, laugh to ſcorn
The pow'r of man; for none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
I being born of my father's firſt wife, and ſhe of his third, ſhe
converſes with me rather like a daughter than a ſiſter. Tatler.
Bo'Roug H. n.ſ.. [bonhoe, Saxon.]
1. It ſignified anciently a ſurety, or a man bound for others.
A borough, as I here uſe it, and as the old laws ſtill uſe, is
not a borough town, that is, a franchiſed town; but a main
pledge of an hundred free perſons, therefore called a free hº-
rough, or, as you ſay, ſº." F.or borth, in old Saxon,
ſignifieth a pledge or ſurety; and yet it is ſº uſed with us in
ſome ſpeeches, as Chaucer faith, St. John to Borch; that is, for
aſſurance and warranty. Spenser's Ireland.
2. A town with a corporation. -
Bo'Rough Engliſh, is a cuſtomary deſcent of lands or tenements,
whereby, in all places where this cuſtom holds, lands and te—
nements deſcend to the youngeſt ſon; or, if the owner have
no iſſue, to his youngeſt brother. Cowel.
Bo'RREL. m.ſ.. [it is explained by junius without etymology.]
A mean fellow.
Siker thou ſpeak'ſt like a lewd ſorrel,
Of heaven, to deemen ſo:
Howbe I am but rude and lorrel,
Yet nearer ways I know. Spenser's Pºſt.
To BORROW. v. a. [burgen, Dutch ; borzan, Saxon.]
1. To take ſomething from another upon credit.
He borrowed a box of the ear of the Engliſhman, and ſwore
he would pay him again when he was able.
Shakeſp. Marchant ºf Penice.
We have borrowed money for the king's tribute, and that
upon our lands and vineyards. Nch. v. 4.
2. To aſk of another the uſe of ſomething for a time. .
Then he ſaid, go, borrow thee veſſels abroad of all thy neigh-
bours. 2 Kings, iv. 3.
Where darkneſs and ſurprize made conqueſt cheap!
Where virtue borrowed the arms of chance,
And ſtruck a random blow ! Dryden's Span. Friar.
3. To take ſomething of another,
A bºrrºw'd title haſt thou bought too dear;
Why didſt thou tell me that thou wert a king? Shakespeare H. IV.
They may barrow ſomething of inſtruction even from their
paſt guilt. Decay of Piety.
I was engaged in the tranſlation of Virgil, from whom I have
borrowed only two months. Dryden's Diſºft.
Theſe verbal ſigns they ſometimes bºrrow from others, and
ſometimes make themſelves; as one may obſerve among the
new names children give to things. Locke.
Some perſons of bright parts have narrow remembrance; for
having riches of their own, they are not ſolicitous to horrºw.
J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
4. To uſe as one's own, though not belonging to one.
Unkind and cruel, to deceive your ſon
In borrow'd ſhapes, and his embrace to ſhun. Dryden's AFn.
Bo'RRow. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The thing borrowed.
Yet of your royal preſence I'll adventure
The borrow of a week. Shakespeare. Winter's Tale.
Bo'RRow ER. m. ſ. [from bºrrow.]
1. He that borrows; he that takes money upon truſt.
His talk is of nothing but of his poverty, for fear belikeleſ,
I ſhould have proved a young bºrrower. Sidney, b. ii.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
For loan oft loſes both itſelf and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of huſbandry. Hamlet,
Go not, my horſe, the better;
I muſt become a borrower of the night -
For a dark hour or twain. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
But you invert the cov'nants of her truſt,
And harſhly deal, like an ill horrower,
With that which you receiv'd on other terms. Milton.
2. He that takes what is another's, and uſes it as his own.
Some ſay, that I am a great borrower; however, none of my
creditors have challenged me for it. Pope.
Boscace. n.ſ.. [hºſtage, Fr.] Wood, or woodlands; repre-
ſentation of woods.
We bent our courſe thither, where we ſaw the appearance of
land; and, the next day, we might plainly diſcern that it was
a land flat to our fight, and full of lºſtage, which made it ſhew
the more dark. Bacon’s N. Atlantis.
Chearful paintings in feaſting and banqueting rooms; graver
ſtories in galleries; landſkips and hoſtage, and ſuch wild works,
in open terraces, or ſummer-houſes. J/cttºn.
Bo'sky, adj. [bſue, Fr.] Woody.
And with each end of thy blue bow do'ſt crown
My boſſy acres, and my unſhrub'd down. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Í know each land, and every alley green,
Dingle, or buſhy dell, of this wild wood,
And every bºſky bourn from ſide to ſide. Milton,
BO'SOM. m. ſ. [borme, borom, Saxon.]
1. The embrace of the arms holding anything to the breaſt.
2. The breaſt; the heart. Q
ur<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O S
B O T
Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your boſom; and beſtow
Your needful counſel to our buſineſſes. Shakeſp. King Lear.
. The incloſure.
Unto laws thus made and received by a whole church, they
which live within the bºſºn of that church, muſt not think it a
matter indifferent, either to yield, or not to yield, obedience.
Hooker, b. ii.
4. The folds of the dreſs that cover the breaſt.
Put now thy hand into thy bºſºm ; and he put his hand into
his bºſom ; and when he took it out, behold his hand was le-
rous as ſnow. - Exodus, iv. 6.
5. The tender affections; kindneſs; favour.
Whoſe age has charms in it, whoſe title more,
To pluck the common boſoms on his fide. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
To whom the great Creator thus reply'd:
O Son, in whom my foul hath chief delight;
Son of my boſºm, Son who art alone
My word, my wiſdom, and effectual might. Par. Loft, b. iii.
6. Inclination; deſire.
If you can pace your wiſdom
In that good path that I could wiſh it go,
You ſhall have your boſom on this wretch.
Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Bosom, in compoſition, implies intimacy; confidence; a fond-
neſs.
No more that thane of Cawder ſhall deceive
Our bºſºm-int’reſ?; go, pronounce his death. Macbeth.
This Antonio,
Being the boſºm-lºver of my lord,
Muſt needs be like my lord. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
Thoſe domeſtick traitors, bºſom-thieves,
Whom cuſtom hath call'd wives; the readieſt helps
To betray the heady huſbands, rob the eaſy.
Ben.johnſºn's Catiline.
He ſent for his boſºm-friends, with whom he moſt confidently
conſulted, and ſhewed the paper to them; the contents where-
of he could not conceive. Clarendon.
The fourth privilege of friendſhip is that which is here ſpe-
cified in the text, a communication of ſecrets. A bºſom-ſecret,
and a bºſom-friend, are uſually put together. South.
She who was a boſºm-friend of her royal miſtreſs, he calls an
inſolent woman, the worſt of her ſex. Addison's Whig Exam.
To Bo'soM. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To incloſe in the boſom.
Bºſºm up my counſel;
You'll find it wholeſome.
I do not think my fifter ſo to ſeek,
Or ſo unprincipl’d in virtue's book,
And the ſweet peace that bºſoms goodneſs ever. JMilton,
2. To conceal in privacy.
The groves, the fountains, and the flow'rs,
That open now their choiceſt boſom'd ſmells,
Reſerv'd for night, and kept for thee in ſtore. Par. Loſº, b. v.
Towers and battlements it ſees,
Boſom'd high in tufted trees,
Where perhaps ſome beauty lies,
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The cynoſure of neighbouring eyes. Milton.
To happy convents, bºſºm'd deep in vines,
Where ſlumber abbots, purple as their wines. Pope.
Bo'son, n.ſ.. [corrupted from boatſwain.]
The barks upon the billows ride,
The maſter will not ſtay;
The merry boſon from his ſide
His whiſtle takes, to check and chide
The ling ring lad's delay.
Boss. m. ſ. [baſe, Fr.]
1. A ſtud; an ornament raiſed above the reſt of the work; a
ſhining prominence.
What ſignifies beauty, ſtrength, youth, fortune, embroidered
furniture, or gaudy baſes P L’Eſtrange.
This ivory was intended for the boſſes of a bridle, was laid up
for a prince, and a woman of Caria or Maeonia dyed it.
Pope's Notes on Iliad.
2. The part riſing in the midſt of anything.
He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick
bºſſes of his bucklers. job, xv. 26.
3. A thick body of any kind.
A boſs made of wood, with an iron hook, to hang on the
laths, or on a ladder, in which the labourer puts the mortar at
the britches of the tiles. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
If a cloſe appuiſe be made by the lips, then is framed M ; if
by the boſs of the tongue to the palate, near the throat, then K.
- Hºlder's Elements of Speech.
Dryden's Albion.
Bo'ss Acf. n.ſ. [in archite&amp;ure.]
1. Any ſtone that has a projecture, and is laid in a place in a
building, to be afterwards carved.
2. Ruſtick work, which conſiſts of ſtones, which ſeem to advance
beyond the naked of a building, by reaſon of indentures or
channels left in the joinings: theſe are chiefly in the corners
of edifices, and called ruſtick quoins. Builder's Dicſ.
Bo'sv EL. m. ſ. A ſpecies of crowfºot; which ſce.
BotA'Nical. Radj. [from 244, an herb.] Relating to herbs?
BotA'Nick. } ſkilled in herbs,
Some botanical criticks tell us, the poets have not rightly fol-
lowed the traditions of antiquity, in metamorphoſing theſiſters
ºf Phaeton into poplars. Addiſon on Italy.
Bo'TANIst. m. ſ [from botany.] One ſkilled in plants; one
whº ſtudies the various ſpecies of plants.
The uliginous lačteous matter, taken notice of by that dili-
gent botaniſł, was only a collection of corals. //oodward.
Then ſpring the living herbs, beyond the power
Of bºtaniſt to number up their tribés. Thomſon's Spring.
B9TANo'Lody. m. ſ. [3%ravoazza.] A diſcourſe upon plants. D.
º f: º ſº an herb.] The ſcience of plants;
at part of natural hiſto hi -
BOTARGO. m. ſ. [beta,. §: "...º.º. food,
made ºf the roes of the mullet fiſh; much uſed on the coaſts
of the Mediterranean, as an incentive to drink. Chambers.
BOTCH. n.ſ.. [bozza, pronounced batza, Ital.]
I. A ſwelling, or eruptive diſcoloration of the ſkin.
Time, which rots all, and makes batches pox,
And, plodding on, muſt make a calf an ox,
Hath made a lawyer. Donne,
Botches and blains muſt all his fleſh imboſs,
And all his people. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii. 1, 180.
It proves far more incommodious, which, if it were propelled
in boils, botches, or ulcers, as in the ſcurvy, would rather con-
duce to health. - - Harvey on Conſumptions.
2. * in any workill finiſhed, ſo as to appear worſe than the
ICit.
With him,
To leave no rubs or botches in the work,
Fleance, his ſon, muſt embrace the fate. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. An adſcititious, adventitious part clumſily added.
If both thoſe words are not notorious botches, I am much de-
ceived; though the French tranſlator thinks otherways. AEncid
Dryden's Dedication, Æneid.
A comma ne'er could claim
A place in any Britiſh name;
Yet, making here a perfect botch,
Thruſts your poor vowel from his notch. Swift.
To Botch. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To mend or patch cloaths clumſily.
Their coats, from botching newly brought, are torn. Dryden.
2. To mend any thing awkwardly.
To botch up what th' had torn and rent,
Religion and the government. Hudibras, p. iii. c. ii.
3. To put together unſuitably, or unſkilfully; to make up of un-
ſuitable pieces.
P Go with me to my houſe,
And hear thou there, how many fruitleſs pranks
This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
May ſmile at this. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night,
Her ſpeech is nothing,
Yet the unſhaped uſe of it doth move
The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts. Hamlet.
For treaſon botch'd in rhyme will be thy bane;
Rhime is the rock on which thou art to wreck. Dryden.
4. To mark with botches.
Young Hylas, bºtch'd with ſtains too foul to name,
In cradle here renews his youthful frame. Garth's Diſpenſ.
Bo'TchER. m. ſ. [from botch..] A mender of old cloaths; the
ſame to a taylor as a cobler to a ſhoemaker.
He was a botcher's prentice in Paris, from whence he was
whipt for getting the ſheriff's fool with child.
Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
Botchers leſt old cloaths in the #.
And fell to turn and patch the church. Hudibras, c. ii.
Bo'Tchy. adj. [from botch..] Marked with botches.
And thoſe boils did run—ſay ſo—Did not the general run ?
Were not that a botchy ſore ? Shakespeare. Troilus and Crºſſ.
Bote. n.ſ.. [bote, Sax. a word now out of uſe.] -
1. A compenſation or amends for a man ſlain, which is bound
to another. Cowel.
2. It was uſed for any payment.
Both. adj. [bazu, batja, Sax.] The two; as well the one as
the other. Et l'un &amp; l'autre, Fr. It is uſed only of two.
And the next day, both morning and afternoon, !. ;
bv our party. taney, b. 11.
'. º the prophets, Chriſt and his apoſtles, were in their
times all preachers of God's truth; ſome by, word, ſome by
writing; ſome by both. Hooker, b. v. § 19.
Which of them ſhall I take? -
Both 2 one? or neither neither can be enjoy', ...
If both remain alive. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Two lovers cannot ſhare a ſingle bed;
As therefore both are equal in degree,
The lot of both he left to deſtiny.
A Venus and a Helen have been ſeen,
Both perjur'd wives, the goddeſs and the queen. Granville.
Both. coºj, (from the adjective..] As well; it has the conjunc=
tion and to correſpond with it.
5 JBot;
Dryden's Fables.
•
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O T
B O U
-
* :
:
º
t
º
-
:
i
º
+. .
- Bil, the boy was worthy to be prais'd,
And Stimichon has often made me long, •
To hear, like him, ſo ſoft, ſo ſweet a ſong. Dryden's Paſº.
BotRyoid. adj. […] Having the form of a bunch of
- grapes. - *
The outſide is thick ſet with º º º
- iſh. . urple; all of a ſhining metallic
º, yellow, bluiſh, and Puri jºrd of Fºſſils.
Bors. n.ſ. [without a ſingular.] A ſpecies of ſmall worms in the
entrails of horſes; anſwering, perhaps, to the aſcarides in hu-
- S. -
º beans are as dark here º º º that the
ext way to give poor jades the bots ; this houſe is turtled "P-
#. ãº, .. fº * oftier died. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
BOTTLE. m.ſ. ſhoºteille, Fr.] -
1. A ſmall veſſel of glaſs, or other matter, with a narrow mouth,
to put liquour in.
The ſhepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bºttle, ---
Is far beyond a prince's delicates. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
Many have a manner, after other men's ſpeech, to ſhake
their heads. A great officer would ſay, it was as men thake a
battle, to ſee if there was any wit in their heads, or no. Bacon.
Then if thy ale in glaſs thou wouldſ confine,
Let thy clean b till be entirely dry. King's 44:ly ºf Mºunt.
He threw into the enemy's ſhips earthen attles filled with
ferrents, which put the crew in diſorder, and made them fly.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. A quantity of wine uſually put into a bottle; a quart.
Sir, you ſhall ſtay, and take t'other bottle. Speci. Nº 462.
3. A quantity of hay or graſs bundled up.
Methinks I have a great deſire to a bºttle of hay 5 good hay,
ſweet hay, hath no fellow. Shakeſp. Midſtºn. Night's Dream.
But I ſhould wither in one day, and paſs
To a lock of hay, that am a bºttle of graſs. Donne.
To Bottle. v. a. [from the noun..] To incloſe in bottles.
You may have it a moſt excellent cyder royal, to drink or to
&amp;artle. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
When a hogſhead of wine is to be b.ttled off, waſh your
Bottles immediately before you begin; but be ſure no to drain
them. Swift's Directions to the Butler.
Bo'+ T L E is often compounded with other words; as, bottle-friend,
a drinking friend; bottle-companion.
Sam, who is a very good bºttle-companion, has been the di-
verſion of his friends. Addison. Speci. Nº 89.
Bo'+'rl EF low ER. m. ſ. [cyanus, Lat.] A plant.
It hath a ſquamoſe hairy calyx; the diſk of the flower is al-
moſt plain, but the outer florets, round the borders, are large,
tubulous, and deeply cut in ; theſe outer florets are always bar-
ren; but the inner florets have a ſingle naked ſeed ſucceeding
each. The ſpecies are, 1. The greater broad-leaved blue-bottle,
commonly called globe-flower. 2. The greater narrow-leaved
blue bottle, or globe-flºwer. 3. The purple ſweet ſultan. 4. Corn-
bottle, with a white flower. The firſt and ſecond ſorts are a-
biding plants, which increaſe greatly by their creeping roots.
The ſweet ſultans will begin to flower, and continue till the froſt
prevents them. The corn-bottles were alſo annuals, which, for
the diverſity of thcir flowers, were propagated in gardens; but
of late years they are almoſt excluded. Millar.
Bo'rt L'EscREw. n.ſ. [from bottle and ſcrew.] A ſcrew to pull
out the cork.
A good butler always breaks off the point of his bottleſ rew
in two days, by trying which is hardeſt, the point of the ſcrew,
or the neck of the bottle, Swift.
BOTTOM. m. ſ. [botm, Saxon; lodºm, Germ.]
1. The loweſt part of any thing.
2. The ground under the water. -
Shallow brooks that flow'd ſo clear,
The bottom did the top appear. Dryden.
3. The foundation; the ground-work.
On this ſuppoſition my reaſonings proceed, and cannot be
affected by objections which are far from being built on the
ſame bottom. Atterbury.
4. A dale; a valley; a low ground.
In the purlieus ſtands a ſheep-cote,
Weſt of this place; down in the neighbour bottom.
Shakeſp. As you like it.
On both the ſhores of that fruitful bottom, which I have be-
fore mentioned, are ſtill to be ſeen the marks of ancient edifices.
Addiſon on Italy.
Equal convexity could never be ſeen : the inhabitants of
ſuch an earth could have only the proſpect of a little circular
plane, which would appear to have an acclivity on all ſides; ſo
that every man would fancy himſelf the loweſt, and that he al-
ways dwelt and moved in a bottom. Bentley.
5. The part moſt remote from the view; the deepeſt part.
His propoſals and arguments ſhould with freedom be exa-
mined to the bottom, that, if there be any miſtake in them, no
body may be miſled by his reputation. Locke.
6. Bound; limit. -
But there's no bottom, none,
In my voluptuºſºſ. Shakespeare Macbeth.
7. The utmoſt extent or profundity of any man's capacity, whe-
ther deep or ſhallow. -
As I return, I will fetch off theſe juſtices: I do ſee the hot-
tom of Juſtice Shallow; how ſubject we old men are to the vice
of lying ! Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
8. The laſt reſort; the remoteſt cauſe; firſt motion.
He wrote many things which are not publiſhed in his name;
and was at the bottom of many excellent counſels, in which he
did not appear. Addison.
9. A ſhip; a veſſel for navigation.
A bawbling veſſel was he captain of,
With which, ſuch ſcathful grapple did he make
With the moſt noble bottom of our fleet. Shakespeare. T. Night.
My ventures are not in one bottom truſted;
Nor to one place. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
We have memory, not of one ſhip that ever returned, and
but of thirteen perſons only, at ſeveral times, that choſe to re-
turn in our bottons. Bacon's New Atlantis.
He's a fooliſh ſeaman,
That when his ſhip is ſinking, will not
Unlade his hopes into another bottom. Denham's Sºphy.
He puts to ſea upon his own bottom; holds the ſtern himſelf;
and now, if ever, we may expect new diſcoveries. Norris.
He ſpreads his canvas, with his pole he ſteers, -
The freights of flitting ghoſts in his thin bºttom bears. Dryd.
10. A chance; an adventure; or ſecurity.
He began to ſay, that himſelf and the prince were too much
to venture in one bºttom. Carendon, b. viii.
We are embarked with them on the ſame bottom, and muſt
be partakers of their happineſs or miſery. Speci. N° 273.
11. A ball of thread wound up together.
This whole argument will be like bºttoms of thread, cloſe
wound up. Bacon's Jºar with Spain.
The ſilkworms finiſh their bottoms in about fifteen days.
Martimer's Husbandry.
Each Chriſtmas they accounts did clear,
And wound their bottom round the year. Prior.
12. Bottom of a lane. The loweſt end.
13. Botto M ºf beer. The grounds, or dregs.
To Botto M. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To build upon ; to fix upon as a ſupport.
They may have ſomething of obſcurity, as being lºttomed
upon, and fetched from the true nature of the things. Hale.
Pride has a very ſtrong foundation in the mind; it is bºttomed
upon ſelf-love. Collier on Pride.
The grounds upon which we bºttom our reaſoning, are but
a part; ſomething is left out, which ſhould go into the reckon-
*; Locke.
very ačtion is ſuppoſed to be bºttomed upon ſome principle.
Atterbury.
2. To wind upon ſomething; to twiſt thread round ſomething.
Therefore, as you unwind your love for him,
Left it ſhould ravel, and be good to none,
You muſt provide to bºttom it on me. Shakeſp. T. G. of Per.
To Bo'TTom. v. m. To reſt upon as its ſupport.
Find out upon what foundation any propoſition, advanced,
bºttoms ; and obſerve the intermediate ideas, by which it is join-
ed to that foundation upon which it is erected. Locke.
Bo'ttom ED. adj. [from bottom.] Having a bottom; it is uſu-
ally compounded. -
There being prepared a number of flat-bottomed boats, to
tranſport the land-forces, under the wing and protećtion of the
great navy. Bacon's //ar with Spain.
BottomL Ess. adj. [from lettom.] Without a bottom ; fa-
thcmleſs.
Wickedneſs may well be compared to a lºttºmlºſ, pit, into
which it is eaſier to keep one's ſelf from falling, than, being
fallen, to give one's ſelf any ſtay from falling infinitely. Sidney.
Is not my ſorrow deep, having no bottom
Then be my paſſions bottomleſs with them. Shakespeare. T. Andr.
Him the Almighty pow'r
Hurl’d headlong, flaming from th' etherial ſky,
To lettºmlºſ perdition. A4ilton's Par. Lºſſ, h. i. 1, 47.
Bottox R Y. m. ſ. [in navigation and commerce.] The ačt of
borrowing money on a ſhip's bottom ; that is, by engaging the
veſſel for the repayment of it, ſo as that, if the ſhip miſcarry,
the lender loſes the money advanced; but, if it arrives ſafe at
the end of the voyage, he is to repay the money lent, with a
certain premium or intereſt agreed on ; and this on pain of ſor-
feiting the ſhip. - IHarris.
BOUCHET. n.ſ. [French..] A ſort of pear. Dići.
Bou D. m. ſ. An infect which breeds in malt ; called alſo a
weevil. Dici.
To Bouc E. v. n. [bouge, Fr.] To ſwell out.
Bog GH. m. ſ. ſbox, Saxon ; the ghis mute.] An arm or large
ſhoot of a tree, bigger than a branch, yet not always diſtin-
guiſhed from it.
He ſaw a vine-labourer, that, finding a bºugh brokcn, took
a branch of the ſame bough, and tied it about the place broken.
- Sidney, p. ii.
Their lord and patron loud did him proclaim,
And at his feet their laurel b.igh; did throw. Fairy &amp; B. i.
From
!.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O Ú
From the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit. Parad. Loft, i. ix.
As the dove's flight did guide AEneas, now
---
May thine conduct me to the golden bºugh. Denham.
tº: ſome favºrite myrtle's ſhady boughs,
They ſpeak their paſſions in repeated vows. Rºſcommon.
See how, on every bough, the birds expreſs,
In their ſweet notes, their happineſs. Dryden's Indian Emp.
'Twas all her joy the rip'ning fruits to tend,
And ſee the !º with happy burdens bend.
Boucht. preter of to buy; which ſée.
Bought. n.ſ.. [from to bow.]
1. A twiſt; a link; a knot. -
His huge long tail wound up in hundred folds,
Whoſe wreathed boughts whenever he unfolds,
And thick entangled knots adown does ſlack. Fairy Q. b. i.
Immortal verſe,
Such as the meeting ſoul may pierce
In notes, with many a winding bought
Of linked ſweetneſs, long drawn out.
2. A flexure. -
The flexure of the joints is not the ſame in elephants as in
cther quadrupeds, but nearer unto thoſe of a man; the bought
Poºe.
I
Milton.
of the fore-legs not directly backward, but laterally, and ſome-.
what inward. Brown's Wulgar Errours, t. iii, c. i.
FOUILLON. m. ſ. [French. Broath; ſoup; any thing made
to be ſuppºd: a term uſed in cookery.
Bould ER l; als. [in architecture.] Wil, built of round flints or
pebbles, laid in a ſtrong mortar; uſed where the ſea has a beach
caſt up, or where there are plenty of flints. Builder's Dić.
To Boult. v. a. See To Bor. T. *
To BOUNCE. v. n. [a word formed, ſays Skinner, from the
found.
1. To # or fly againſt any thing with great force, ſo as to re-
bound.
The fright awaken'd Arcite with a ſtart,
Againſt his boſom ºtºica his heaving heart. Dryden.
Juſt as I was putting out my light, another bounces as hard as
he can knock. Swift's Bickerſtaff detected.
2. To ſpring; to make a ſudden leap.
High nonſenſe is like beer in a bottle, which has, in reality,
no ſirength and ſpirit, but frets, and flies, and bounces, and imi-
tates the pºſions of a much nobler liquour. Addison Whig Exam.
&amp;ous d by the noiſe,
And muſical clatter,
They hºurce from their neſt,
No longer will tarry. Swift.
Outbºunc'd the maſtiff of the triple head;
Away the hare with double ſwiftneſs fled. Swift.
3. To boaſt; to bully: a ſenſe uſed only in familiar ſpeech.
4. To be bold, or ſtrong.
Forſooth the bouncing Amazon,
Your buſkin'd miſtreſs, and your warriour love,
To Theſeus muſt be wedded. Shakeſp. Midſum. Night's Dr.
Bounce. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſtrong ſudden blow.
The boºnce burſt ope the door; the ſcornful fair
Relentleſs look'd, and ſaw him beat his quiv'ring feet in air.
Dryden.
2. A ſudden crack or noiſe.
What cannoneer begot this luſty blood
He ſpeaks plain cannon fire, and ſmoke, and bounce;
He gives the baſtinado with his tongue. Shakeſp. K. john.
Two hazel-nuts I threw into the flame,
And to each nut I gave a ſweetheart's name;
This with the loudeſt bounce me fore amaz'd,
That in a flame of brighteſt colour blaz'd.
3. A boaſt; a threat; in low language.
Bo'UNcER. m.ſ.. [from launce..] A boaſter; a bully; an empty
threatner.
BOUND. n.ſ.. [from bind.]
I. A limit; a boundary; that by which anything is terminated.
- Illimitable ocean' without bound;
Without dimenſion; where length, breadth, and height,
And time, and place, are loſt. Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii. 1. 892.
Thoſe vaſt Scythian regions were ſeparated by the common
natural bounds, of rivers, lakes, niountains, woods, or marſhes.
Temple.
Gay.
Indus and Ganges, our wide empire's bound,
Swcil their dy'd currents with their natives wounds. Dryden.
Through all th’ infernal bounds,
Which flaming Phlegethon ſurrounds,
Sad Orpheus fought his conſort loſt. Pope's St. Cacilia.
* A limit by which any excurſion is reſtrained.
Hath he ſet bounds between their love and me?
I am their mother, who ſhall bar me from them. Rich. III.
Stronger and fiercer by reſtraint he roars,
And knows no bound, but makes his pow'r his ſhores. Denh.
Any bºunds made with body, even adamantine walls, are far
from putting a ſtop to the mind, in its farther progreſs in ſpace.
Locke.
3 from tº laund, v. n.) A leap; a jump; a ſpring.
Vol. I.
- Do but note a wild and wanton herd,
Qr race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bound, bellowing, and neighing loud. . .
Shakeſp. 44 rehant ºf Panić.
The horſes ſtarted with a ſudden bound,
And flung the reins and chariot to the ground. Alºſ. Ovid.
Dext'rous he 'ſcapes the coach with nimble tour.ds,
Whilſt ev'ry honeſt tongue ſtop thief reſounds. Gay:
4. A rebound; the leap of ſomething flying back by the force of
the blow. -
Theſe inward diſguſts are but the firſt bound of this ball of
Contchtion. Decay of Piety;
To Bou ND. v. a. [from the noun.] y ºf Piety
1. To limit; to terminate.
A lofty tow'r, and ſtrong on every ſide,
With treble walls, which Phleºethon ſurrounds,
Whoſe firy flood the burning empire loud. Dryden's Żn.
2. To reſtrain; to confine. -
Take but degree away, untune that ſtring,
The bounded waters c
Would lift their boſoms higher than the ſhores,
And make a ſop ºf all this ſolid globe. Shakespeare. T. and Cr;
To BOUND. v. n. [ºndº, Fr.] -
1. To jump 5 to ſpring; to move forward by leaps.
My mother's blood -
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this finiſter -
Bounds in my fire's. Shakespeare. Troilus and Creºla;
Torriſmond appeard.
Gave me his hand, and led me lightly o'er,
Leaping and bounding on the billºws heads. Dryden.
Before his lord the ready ſpaniel bound, -
Panting with hope, he tries the furrow'd grounds. Pope.
When ſudden through the woods a bounding flag
Ruſh'd headlong down, and plung'd amidſt the river. Rowe.
Warbling to the vary'd ſtrain, advance
Two ſprightly youths, to form the bounding dance. Pope.
2. To rebound; to fly back by repercuſſion. - -
Mark then a bounding valour in our Engliſh,
That being dead, like to the bullets grazing,
Breaks out into a ſecond courſe of miſchief. Shakespeare. H. V.
To Bou ND. v. a. To make to bound.
If I might buffet for any love, or bound my horſe for her fa-
vours, I would lay on like a butcher, and fit like a jackanapes,
never off. Shakeſp. Henry V.
If love, ambitions, ſought a match of birth,
Whoſe veins bound richer blood than lady Blanch. Rich. III.
Boun D. participle paſſive of bind.
Nay, ſaid Pamela, none ſhall take that office from myſelf,
being ſo much bound as I am for my education. Sidney, b. ii.
- This is Antonio,
To whom I am ſo infinitely bound.— *
—You ſhould in all ſenſe be much bound to him;
For, as I hear, he was much bound for you. Merch. of Wen.
The gentleman is learn'd, a moſt rare ſpeaker,
To nature none more bound. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The biſhops of Hungary, being wonderfully rich, were bound
to keep great numbers of horſemen, which they uſed to brin
into the field. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
They ſummoned the governour to deliver it to them, or elſe
they would not leave one ſtone upon another. To which the
governour made no other reply, than that he was not bound to
repair it; but, however, he would, by God’s help, keep the
ground afterwards. Clarendon, b. viii.
Bou ND. adj. [a word of doubtful etymology.] Deſtined; in-
tending to come to any place.
His be that care, whom moſt it doth concern,
Said he; but whither with ſuch haſty flight
Art thou now bound P for well might I diſcern
Great cauſe, that carries thee ſo ſwift and light. Fairy Q. b. ii.
To be bound for a port one deſires extremely, and ſail to it,
with a fair gale, is very pleaſant. - Temple.
Willing we ſought your ſhores, and hither bound,
The port ſo long deſir'd, at length we found. Dryden.
Bo'UND ARY. n.ſ.. [from bound..] Limit; bound.
He ſuffers the confluence and clamours of the people to paſs
all loundaries of laws, and reverence to his authority. K. Charks.
Senſation and reflection are the boundaries of our thoughts ;
beyond which the mind, whatever efforts it would make is not
able to advance. - - Lake.
Great part of our fins confiſt in the irregularities attending
the ordinary purſuits of life; ſo that our reformation muſt ap-
pear, by purſuing them within the land” of duty. Rogers.
Bous DEN. participle paſſive of bind. -
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I ſhall deſire more love and knowledge of yºu-
—I reſt much bounden to you : fare you well. Shakespeare .
We alſo moſt humbly befought him to accept of us as his true
'ants, b juſt a right as ever men on earth were bounden.
ſervants, by as ju £ Bacon’s New Atlantis.
To be careful for a proviſion of all neceſſaries for ourſelves,
and thoſe who depend on us, is a bounden duty. Rogers.
3 L
Bo'UNDING-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O U
-
º- ii
*
}*ſ A ſtone to play with.
I am paſt a boy;
A ſceptre’s but a play-thing, and a globe -
A bigger bounding-ſlone. Dryden's Don Selaſian,
Bo'UNDLESN Ess. n.ſ.. [from boundleſ.] Exemption from limits.
God has corrected the boundlyneſs of his voluptuous deſires,
by ſtinting his capacities. South.
Boſt. NDLEss. adj. [from laund..] Unlimited; unconfined; im-
meaſurable; illimitable.
Beyond the infinite and boundleſ reach
Of mercy, iſ thou didſt this deed of death, **
Art thou damn'd, Hubert. Shakespeare King john.
Heav'n has of right all vićtory deſign'd ;
Whence loundſ; power dwells in a will confin'd. Dryden.
Man ſeems as boundleſ in his deſires, as God 1S in his being;
and therefore nothing but God himſelf can ſatisfy him. South.
Though we make duration boundleſ, as it is, we cannot ex-
tend it beyond all being. God fills eternity, and it is hard to
find a reaſon, why any one ſhould doubt that he fills º:
fity. - cºe.
y Some guide the courſe of wand'ring orbs on high,
Or roll the planets through the bºndſ.ſky. Pope.
Bounteous. adj. [from lounty.] Liberal; kind; generous;
munificent; beneficent: a word uſed chiefly in poetry for
bountiful.
Bo'UN DINo-stos E.
Bou ND-sºros E.
Every one,
According to the giſt, which bounteous nature
Hath in him inclos'd. - Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Her ſoul abhorring avarice,
Bounteous; but almoſt bounteous to a vice. Dryden.
Bo'UNTEously. adv. [from bounteous.] Liberally; generouſly;
largely.
É. bounteouſly beſtow'd unenvy'd good
On me. Dryden's State of Innocence.
Bo'UNTeousness. m. ſ. [from lounteous.] Munificence; libe-
rality; kindneſs.
He filleth all things living with bounteouſneſs.
Bo'UNTIFUL. adj. [from bounty and full.]
1. Liberal; generous; munificent. -
As bountiful as mines of India. , Shakespeare. Henry IV. p. i.
If you will be rich, you muſt live frugal; if you will be po-
pular, you muſt be lountiful. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
I am obliged to return my thanks to many, who, without
conſidering the man, have been bountiful to the poet. Dryden.
God, the bountiful authour of our being. Locke.
2. It has of before the thing given, and to before the perſon re-
celving.
ößing ſpares nothing, to give them the ſhare of that feli-
city, of which he is ſo bountiful to his kingdom. Dryden's Dufr.
Bo'UNTIFULLY. adv. [from bountiful..] Liberally ; in a boun-
tiful manner; largely.
And now thy alms is giv'n,
And thy poor ſtarving bountifully fed. Donne.
It is affirmed, that it never raineth in Egypt; the river boun-
tifully requiting it in its inundation. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Bo'UNTI: U.NEss. n.ſ.. [from bountiful..] The quality of being
bountiful; generoſity.
Enriched to all bountfulneſs. 2 Cor. ix. II.
Bo'UNTIHEAD. { m. ſ. [from º and head, or hood. See
Pſalms,
Bo'UNTIHEDE. Hoop.] Goodneſs; virtue. It is now
Bo'UNTIHoop. wholly out of uſe.
This goodly frame of temperance,
Formerly grounded, and faſt ſettled
On firm foundation of true lountihead. Fairy Q. b. ii.
How ſhall frail pen, with fear diſparaged,
Conceive ſuch ſovereign glory, and great bountihood P F. Q.
BOUNTY. n.ſ. [onté, Fr.]
1. Generoſity; liberality; muniſcence.
We do not ſo far magniſy her exceeding bounty, as to affirm,
that ſhe bringeth into the world the ſons of men, adorned with
gorgeous attire. Hooker, b. iii. § 4.
If you knew to whom you ſhew this honour,
I know you would be prouder of the work,
Than cuſtomary bounty can enforce you. Shakeſp.
Such moderation with thy bounty join,
That thou may’ſt nothing give, that is not thine. Denham.
Thoſe godlike men, to wanting virtue kind,
Bºunty well plac'd preferr'd, and well deſign'd,
To all their titles. Dryden's juv. ſat. v.
2. It ſeems diſtinguiſhed from charity, as a preſent from an alms;
being uſed, when perſons, not abſolutely neceſſitous, receive
gifts; or when gifts are given by great perſons.
Tell a miſer of bounty to a friend, or mercy to the poor, and
he will not underſtand it. South.
Her majeſty did not ſee this aſſembly ſo proper to excite cha-
O that I had the fruitful heads of Hydra,
That one might bourgeon where another fell'ſ
Still would I give thee work Dryden's Don Selaſian,
Bour N. n.ſ.. [borne, Fr.]
1. A bound; a limit.
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none. Shakespeare. Tºmpſ?-
That undiſcover'd country, from whoſe tourn
No traveller eer returns, Shakeſp. Hamlf.
Falſe,
As dice are to be wiſh'd, by one that fixes
No bourn 'twixt his and mine. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
I know each lane, and every alley green,
And every boſky bourn from ſide to ſide. Milton-
2. [from burn, Saxon.] A brook; a torrent: whence many
towns, ſeated near brooks, have names ending in bourn. It is
not now uſed in either ſenſe; though the ſecond continues in
the Scottiſh diale&amp;t.
Ne ſwelling Neptune, ne loud thund'ring Jove,
Can change my cheer, or make me ever mourn;
My little boat can ſafely paſs this perilous bourn. Fairy 2.
To BOUSE. v. n. [buyſen, Dut..] To drink laviſhly; to tope-
As he rode, he ſomewhat ſtill did eat,
And in his hand did bear a bouſing can,
Of which he fipt. Fairy &amp;#een, b. iii. c. iv.
Bo'Usy, adj. [from bouſ...] Drunken.
he gueſts upon the day appointed came,
Each hºuſy farmer, with his fimpring dame.
With a long legend of romantick things,
Which in his cups the bouſ poet fings. Dryden's juv.ſt. x.
BouT. n.ſ.. [botta, Ital.] A turn; as much of an action as is
performed at one time, without interruption; a ſingle part of
any action carried on by ſucceſſive intervals.
The play began : Pas durſt not Coſma chace;
King-
But did intend next bout with her to meet. Sidney.
Ladies, that have your feet
Unplagu'd with corns, we'll have a bout. Shakeſp.
When in your motion you are hot,
As make your bouts more violent to that end,
He calls for drink. Shakespeare. Hamler.
If he chance to 'ſcape this diſmal bout,
The former legatees are blotted out. Dryden's juv. ſat. xii.
A weaſel ſeized a bat; the bat begged for life: ſays the wea-
ſel, I give no quarter to birds: ſays the bat, I am a mouſe;
look on my body: ſo ſhe got off for that bout. L’Eſtrange.
We'll ſee when 'tis enough,
Or if it wants the nice concluding bout. King.
BOUTEFEU. n.ſ. [French..] An incendiary; one who kindles
feuds and diſcontents.
Animated by a baſe fellow, called John a Chamber, a very
bout feu, who bore much ſway among the vulgar, they entered
into open rebellion. Bacon's Henry VII.
Nor could ever any order be obtained impartially to puniſh
the known bout frus, and open incendiaries. King Charles.
Beſides the herd of bout frus,
We ſet on work without the houſe. Hudibrar.
Bo'Utis ALE. m. ſ. [I ſuppoſe from bouty, or booty, and ſale.] A
ſale at a cheap rate; as booty or plunder is commonly ſold.
To ſpeak nothing of the great boutiſale of colleges and chan-
tries. Sir j. Hayward.
BOUTS RIMEZ. [French.] The laſt words or rhimes of a
number of verſes given to be filled up.
To BOW. v. a. [buzen, Saxon.]
I. To bend, or infle&amp;t.
A threepence bow'd, would hire me,
Old as I am, to queen it. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Orpheus, with his lute, made trees,
And the mountain tops, that freeze,
Bow themſelves when he did fing. Shakeſp. HenryVIII.
Some bow the vines, which bury'd in the plain,
Their tops in diſtant arches riſe again. Dryden's Pirgil.
The mind has not been made obedient to diſcipline, when at
firſt it was moſt tender, and moſt eaſy to be bowed. Locke-
2. To bend the body in token of reſpect or ſubmiſſion.
They came to meet him, and bowed themſelves to the ground
before him. 2 Kings, ii. 15.
Is it to bow down his head as a bulruſh, and to ſpread ſack-
cloth and aſhes under him wilt thou call this a faſt, and an
acceptable day to the Lord Iſaiah, lviii. 5.
3. To bend, or incline, in condeſcenſion. . .
Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor,
and give him a friendly anſwer. Ecclus, iv. §
4. To depreſs; to cruſh.
Are you ſo goſpell'd,
To pray for this good man, and for his iſſue,
Whoſe heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave,
And beggar'd yours for ever. Shakesp. Macf.e.”
º: rity and compaſſion; though I queſtion not but her royal Now waſting years my former ſtrength confound,
:: beinty will extend itſelf to them. Addiſon. Guardian, N° 165. And added woes may bow me to the ground. P. 4t.
º To Bouko EoN. v. n. [bourgeonner, Fr.j To ſprout; to ſhoot To Bow. v. n.
- into branches; to put forth buds. 1. To bend; to ſuffer flexure.
| Long may the dew of heaven diſtil upon them, to make them 2. To make a reverence.
º kºrgeon, and propagate among themſelves. Płowel. h
* - 3 - Rar- er<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B O VV
|-
i.
Rather let my head
Stoop to the block, than theſe knees bow to any, -
Save to the God of heav'n, and to my king. Shakespeare H. VI.
This is the great idol to which the world bows; to this we
pay our devouteſt homage. Decay of Piety.
Admir’d, ador'd by all the circling crowd,
For wherefoe'er ſhe turn'd her face, they bowd.
. To ſtoop.
The people bowed down upon their knees, to drinkwater.
judges, vii. 6.
Dryden.
4. To fink under preſſure.
They ſtoop, they bow down together; they could not de-
liver the burden. Iſaiah, xlvi. 2.
Bow. n.ſ.. [from the verb. It is pronounced, like the verb, as now,
how.] An act of reverence or ſubmiſſion, by bending the body.
Some clergy too ſhe wou'd allow,
Nor quarrel'd at their awkward bow. Swift.
Bow. n.ſ. [pronounced as grow, no, lo, without any regard to
the w.
1. An Hºme of war, made by holding wood or metal bent
with a ſtring, which, by its ſpring, ſhoots arrows with great
force.
Take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow,
and go out to the field, and take me ſome veniſon. Gen. xxvii. 3.
The white faith of hiſt'ry cannot ſhow,
That e'er the muſket yet could beat the bow.
Alleyne's Henry VII.
Twining woody haunts, or the tough yew
To bows ſtrong-ſtraining. Thomſon's Autumn.
2. A rainbow.
I do ſet my bow in the cloud, and it ſhall be for a token of
a covenant between me and the earth. Gen. ix. 13.
3. The inſtrument with which ſtring-inſtruments are ſtruck.
Their inſtruments were various in their kind;
Some for the bow, and ſome for breathing wind:
The ſwtry, pipe, and hautboy's noiſy band,
And the ſoft lute trembling beneath the touching hand.
Dryden's Fables.
4. The doubling of a ſtring in a ſlip-knot.
Make a knot, and let the ſecond knot be with a bow.
- JWiſeman's Surgery.
5. A yoke.
As the ox hath his bow, Sir, the horſe his curb, and the faul-
con his bells, ſo man hath his deſire. Shakeſp. As you like it.
6. Bow of a ſaddle. The bows of a ſaddle are two pieces of wood
laid archwiſe, to receive the upper part of a horſe's back, to
give the ſaddle its due form, and to keep it tight. Farrier's D.
7. Bow of a ſhip. That part of her which begins at the loof,
and compaſſing ends of the ſtern, and ends at the ſternmoſt
parts of the forecaſtle. If a ſhip hath a broad bow, they call
it a bold bow; if a narrow thin bow, they ſay ſhe hath a lean
bow. The piece of ordnance that lies in this place, is called
the bowpiece; and the anchors that hang here, are called her
great and little bowers.
8. Bow is alſo a mathematical inſtrument, made of wood, for-
merly uſed by ſeamen in taking the ſun's altitude.
9. Bow is likewiſe a beam of wood or braſs, with three long
ſcrews, that direct a lath of wood or ſteel to any arch; uſed
commonly to draw draughts of ſhips, projections of the ſphere,
or wherever it is requiſite to draw long arches. Płarris.
Bow-BEARER. m.ſ.. [from bow and bear.] An under-officer of
the foreſt. - Cowel.
Bow-BENT. adj. [from bow and bent.] Crooked.
A ſibyl old, bow-bent with crooked age,
That far events full wiſely could preſage. Milton.
Bow-HAND. n.ſ.. [from bow and hand.] The hand that draws
the bow.
Surely he ſhoots wide on the bow-hand, and very far from
the mark. Spenſer’s Ireland.
Bow-leg GED. adj. [from bow and leg.J Having crooked legs.
Bow-shot. n.ſ.. [from bow and ſhot..] The ſpaee which an ar-
row may paſs in its flight from the bow.
Though he were not then a bow-ſhot off, and made haſte;
yet, by that time he was come, the thing was no longer to be
ſeen. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
To Bo'wel. v. a. [from the noun..] To pierce the bowels.
But to the bowell'd cavern darting deep
The mineral kinds confeſs thy mighty power.
BOWELS. n.ſ.. [boyaux, Fr.]
1. Inteſtines; the veſſels and organs within the body.
He ſmote him therewith in the fifth rib, and ſhed out his
bowels. 2 Sam. xx. Io.
2. The inner parts of anything.
Had we no quarrel elſe to Rome, but that
Thou art thence baniſh'd, we would muſter all
From twelve to ſeventy; and pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood appear. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
His ſoldiers ſpying his undaunted ſpirit,
A Talbot ' Talbot! cried out amain,
And ruſh'd into the bowels of the battle. Shakespeare. Henry VI.
As he ſaw drops of water diſtilling from the rock, by fol-
Thomſon.
lowing the veins, he has made himſelf two or three fountails
in the bowels of the mountain. Addiſon on Italy.
3. Tenderneſs; compaſſion. -
He had no other confideration of money, than for the ſup-
port of his luſtre; and whilſt he could d6 that, he cared not
for money; having no bowels in the point of running in debt,
or borrowing all he could. Clarendon.
4. This word ſeldom has a ſingular, except in writers of ana-
- tomy.
º n.ſ.. [from bough of branch, or from the verb to low or
tºtal.
I. An arbour; a ſheltered
and bent.
But, O ſad virgin, that thy power -
Might raiſe M. from lº. - Milton.
To Gods appealing, when I reach their bow'r,
With loud complaints, they anſwer me in ſhow’rs. Iłżller.
Refreſh'd, they wait them to the bow'r of ſtate,
Where, circl’d with his peers, Atrides fat. Pºpe.
2. It ſeems to ſignify, in Spenſer, a blow; a ſtroke: burrºr, Fr.
to fall upon.
His rawbone arms, whoſe mighty brawned lºwer;
Were wont to rive ſteel plates, and helmets hew,
Were clean conſum’d, and all his vital powers
Decay’d. ... Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b.i. cant. viii. ſtanz. 41.
Bº: n: ſ [from the bow of a ſhip.] Anchors ſo called. Šće
OW.
To Bo'w ER. v. a. [from the notin.] To embower; to incloſe.
Thou didſt bower the ſpirit,
place covered with green trees, twined
In mortal paradiſe of ſuch ſweet fleſh. Shakespeare
Bo'w ERY. adj. [from bower.] Full of bowers.
Landſkips how gay the bow'ry grotto yields,
Which thought creates, and laviſh fancy builds. Tickell.
Snatch'd through the verdant maze, the hurried eye
Diſtraćted wanders: now the bowery walk
Of covert cloſe, where ſcarce a ſpeck of day
Falls on the lengthen’d gloom, protracted ſweeps. Thomſºn.
To Bowge. See To Boug E.
BOWL. m. ſ. ſhuelin, Welch; which ſignifies, according to ju-
nius, any thing made of horn, as drinking cups anciently
were. It is pronounced bole.]
1. A veſſel to hold liquids, rather wide than deep; diſtinguiſhed
from a cup, which is rather deep than wide.
Give me a bowl of wine;
I have not that alacrity of ſpirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have. Richard III.
If a piece of iron be faſtened on the ſide of a bowl of water,
a loadſtone, in a boat of cork, will preſently make into it.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. iii.
The ſacred prieſts, with ready knives, bereave
The beaſts of life, and in full bowls receive
The ſtreaming blood.
While the bright Sein, t’ exalt the ſoul,
With ſparkling plenty crowns the bowl,
And wit and ſocial mirth inſpires. Fenton to Lord Gower.
2. The hollow part of any thing.
If you are allowed a large filver ſpoon for the kitchen, let
half the bowl of it be worn out with continual ſcraping.
Swift's Directions to the Cook.
Dryden's Áneid.
3. A baſin, or fountain.
But the main matter is ſo to convey the water, as it never
ſtay either in the bowl or in the ciſtern. Bacon's Eſſays.
BOWL. m. ſ. [boule, Fr. It is pronounced as cow, howl.] A
round maſs, which may be rolled along the ground.
Like to a bowl upon a ſubtle ground,
I’ve tumbl’d paſt the throw. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
How finely doſt thou times and ſeaſons ſpin'ſ
And make a twiſt checker'd with night and day !
Which, as it lengthens, winds, and winds usin, -
As bowls go on, but turning all the way. Herbert.
Like him, who would lodge a bowl upon a precipice, either
my praiſe falls back, or ſtays not on the top, but rowls over.
Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
Men may make a game at bowls in the ſummer, and a game
at whiſk in the winter. Dennis's Letters.
Though that piece of wood, which is now a bºwl, may be
made ſquare, yet, if roundneſs be taken away, it is no longer
a bowl. //atts's Logick,
To Bowl. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To play at bowls.
2. To throw bowls at anything. . .
Alas! I had rather be ſet quick i' th' earth... . .
And bowl'd to death with turnips. Merry ſº. of Iłżndſºr.
Bo'wlDER-stones. m. ſ. Lumps or fragments of ſtones Or mar-
ble, broke from the adjacent cliffs, rounded by being tumbled to
and again by the action of the water; whence their name.
- Woodward on Fºſſils.
Bo'wler. n.ſ.. [from bowl.] He that plays at bowls.
Bowline. Un.J. [ſea term..] . A rope faſtened to the middle
Bo'w LING. ; part of the outſide of a ſail; it is faſtened in three
or four parts of the ſail, called the bowling bridle. The uſe of the
bowling is to make the ſails ſtand ſharp or cloſe to a wind. Harr.
Bo'wl ING-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
i
º
\
|
- -* a .-
ºº --f
-- --*--
|
|
-
;
ºº-
:
!º-
:
*
g
*
B O X
Bowl inc-cºres. m. ſ. [from bowl and green.] A level piece
of ground, kept ſmooth for bowlers.
A bowl equally poiſed, and thrown upon a plain bowling-
green, will run neceſſarily in a direct line. Bently.
Bow MAN. m. ſ. [from bºw and man.] An archer; he that ſhoots
with a bow. -
The whole city ſhall flee, for the noiſe of the horſemen and
bºw”.en. jºrem. iv. 20.
Bo'wsPRIT. n.ſ. (from the hort of the ſhip.] This word is ge-
nerally ſpel: vºltſ, it ; which ſce
To Bo'wss EN. v. a. [prob: ..y of the ſame original with louſ,
but found in no other paſſ ge.] I o drench; to ſoak.
The water ſell into a cloſe wall xi plot; upon this wall was
the frantick perſon ſet, and from thence tumbled headlong in-
to the pond; where a ſtrong fellow toſſed him up and down,
until the patient, by foregoing his ſtrength, had ſomewhat for-
got his fury: but if there appeared ſmall amendment, he was
bouffºned again and again, while there remained in him any
hope of life, for recovery. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Bo'wsTRING. m. ſ. [from bow and ſtring.] The firing by which
the bow is kept bent.
He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bow/ºring, and the little
hangman dare not ſhoot at him. Shakeſp. Much ado about Noth.
Sound will be conveyed to the ear, by ſtriking upon a bow-
ſiriºg, if the horn of the bow be held to the ear. Bacon.
Bowy ER. m. ſ. [from bow.]
1. An archcr; one that uſes the bow.
Call for vengeance from the bowyer king.
2. One whoſe trade is to make bows.
BCX. n.ſ.. [box, Saxon; luxus, Lat.] A tree.
The characters are; The leaves are pennated, and evergreen;
it hath male flowers, that are produced at remote diſtances
from the fruit, on the ſame tree; the fruit is ſhaped like a por-
ridge-pot inverted, and is divided into three cells, containing
Dryden.
two ſeeds in each, which, when ripe, are caſt forth by the cla-
fticity of the veſſels. The ſpecies are ; 1. The box-tree. 2.
The narrow-leaved box-tree. 3. Striped box. 4. The golden
edged box-tree. , 5. The dwarf box. 6. The dwarf ſtriped box.
7. The ſilver edged box. On Boxhill, near Darking in Sur-
rey, were formerly many large trees of this kind; but, of late
years, their number is pretty much decreaſed; yet ſome re-
main of a conſiderable bignCſs. The wood is very uſeful for
engravers and mathematical inſtrument-makers; being ſo hard,
cloſe, and ponderous, as to ſink in water. Alſillar.
Bºx, there are two ſorts of it; the dwarf box, and a taller ſort,
that grows to a conſiderable height. The dwarf box is very
good for borders, and is eaſily kept in order, with one clipping
in the year. It will increaſe of ſlips ſet in March, or about
Bartholomew-tide, and may be raiſed of layers and ſuckers, and
will proſper on the declivity of cold, dry, barren, chalky hills,
where nothing elſe will grow. Mortimer.
Box. m. ſ. ſbox, Sax. bºſº, Germ.]
1. A caſe made of wood, or other matter, to hold any thing. It
is diſlinguiſhed from chºſł, as the leſs from the greater. It is
ſuppoſed to have its name from the box wood.
A perfect magnet, though but in an ivory box, will, through
the box, ſend forth his embracing virtue to a beloved needle.
* Sidney, b. ii.
About his ſhelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes. Shakespeare. Rom, and ful.
This head is to open a moſt wide voracious mouth, which
ſhall take in letters and papers. There will be under it a box,
of which the key will be kept in my cuſtody, to receive ſuch
papers as are dropped into it. Addison. Guard. Nº 98.
This caſket India's glowing gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box. Pope.
2. The caſe of the mariners compáſs.
3. The cheſt into which money given is put.
So many more, ſo every one was uſed,
That to give largely to the box refuſed. Spenser.
4. The ſeats in the playhouſe, where the ladies are placed.
'Tis left to you, the boxes and the pit
Are ſovercign judges of this ſort of wit. Dryden.
She glares in balls, front boxes, and the ring,
A vain, unquiet, glittering, wretched thing. Pope.
To Box. v. a. [from the noun..] To incloſe in a box.
Box'd in a chair, the beau impatient fits,
While ſpouts run clatt'ring o'er the roof by fits. Swift.
BOX. m. ſ. ſhock, a cheek, Welch.] A blow on the head given
with the hand.
... For the box o' th' ear that the prince gave you, he gave it
like a rude prince. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
If one ſhould take my hand perforce, and give another a box
on the ear with it, the law puniſheth the other.
Bramhall againſt Hobbes.
There may happen concuſſions of the brain from a box on the
ear. . . //iſeman's Surgery.
9phis, the fiſherman, received a box on the car from ſhef.
tylis. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 233.
To Box. v. m. [from the noun..] To fight with the fiſt.
The aſs very fairly looked on, till they had boxed themſelves
a-weary, and then left them fairly in the lurch, L'Eſtrange.
- - - -
B R A
A leopard is like a cat; he ºxes with his forefect, as a cat
doth her kitlins. Grew.
The fighting with a man's ſhadow conſiſts in brandiſhing
two ficks, loaden, with plugs of lead; this gives a man all
the pleaſure of boxing, without the blows. Steffat. Nº 115.
He hath had ſix duels, and four and twenty bºxing matches,
in defence of his majeſty's title. Spectator, Nº. 629.
To Box. v. a. To ſtrike with the fiſt.
Bo'xEN. adj. [from box.]
1. Made of box.
The young gentlemen learned, before all other things, to de-
ſign upon tablets of boxen wood. Dryden's Dyrºſnoy.
As lads and laſtes ſtood around,
To hear my boxen hautboy ſound.
2. Reſembling box.
Her faded cheeks are chang'd to boxen hue,
And in her eyes the tears are ever new. Dryden.
Pox.E.R. m. ſ. [from box.] A man who fights with his fiſt.
BOY. m.ſ.. [bul, Germ. the etymology is not agreed on.]
I. A male child; not a girl.
2. One in the ſtate of adoleſcence; older than an infant, yet not
arrived at puberty or manhood.
Speak thou, boy;
Perhaps thy childiſhneſs will move him more
Than can our reaſons. - Shakeſp. Corizlarus.
Sometimes forgotten things, long caſt behind,
Ruſh forward in the brain, and come to mind:
The nurſe's legends are for truths receiv'd,
And the man dreams but what the bºy believ'd. Dryden.
3. A word of contempt for young men, as noting their imma-
turity.
Men of worth and parts will not eaſily admit the familiarity
Gay's Paſtorals.
of boys, who yet need the care of a tutor. Locke.
The pale by ſenator yet tingling ſtands,
And holds his breeches cloſe with both his hands. Pope.
To Boy. v. n. [from the noun..] To act apiſhly, or like aboy.
Anthony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I ſhall ſee
Some ſqueaking Cleopatra boy my greatneſs, -
I' th' poſture of a whore. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Bo'y HooD. m. ſ. [from boy..] The ſtate of a boy; the part of
life in which we are boys.
If you ſhould look at him, in his boyhood, through the magni-
fying end of a perſpective, and, in his manhood, through the
other, it would be impoſſible to ſpy any difference; the ſame
air, the ſame ſtrut. Swift.
Bo'y Is H. adj. [from boy.]
1. Belonging to a boy.
I ran it through, e'en from my boyiſh days,
To th’very moment that he bade me tell it. Shakespeare. Othello.
2. Childiſh; trifling.
This unheard ſaucineſs, and boyiſh troops,
The king doth ſmile at, and is well prepar'd
To whip this dwarfiſh war, theſe pigmy arms. Shakespeare K. john.
Young men take up ſome Engliſh poet for their model, and
imitate him, without knowing wherein he is defective, where
he is boyiſh and trifling. Dryden.
Boyishly. adv. [from boyiſh.J. Childiſhly; triflingly:
Bo'yish Ness. m. / [from boyiſh.] Childiſhneſs; trivialneſs."
Bo'y IsM. m.ſ.. [from boy..] Puerility; childiſhneſs.
He had complained he was farther off, by being ſo near, and
a thouſand ſuch boyiſms, which Chaucer rejected as below the
ſubječt. Dryden's Fab. Preface.
BP. An abbreviation of biſhop.
BRABBLE. m. ſ. [brallelen, Dutch..] A clamorous conteſt; a
ſquabble; a broil.
Here in the ſtreets, deſperate in ſhame and ſtate,
In private brabble did we apprehend him. Shakeſp. T. Night.
To BRA'eBLE. v. n. [from the noun..] To clamour; to con-
teſt noiſily. -
BRA'BBLER. n.f. [from trabble.] A clamorous, quarrelſome,
noiſy fellow.
To BRACE. v. a. [embraſſºr, Fr.]
1. To bind; to tie cloſe with bandages.
The women of China, by bracing and binding them from
their infancy, have very little feet. Locke.
2. To intend; to make tenſe; to ſtrain up.
The tympanum is not capable of tenſion that way, in ſuch
a manner as a drum is braced. Holder's Elements of Speech:
The diminution of the force of the preſſure of the extermal
air, in bracing the fibres, muſt create a debility in muſcular
motion. Arbuthnot on Air.
BB AcE. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Cinéture ; bandage.
2. That which holds any thing tight.
The little bones of the ear-drum do the ſame office in ſtrain-
ing and relaxing it, as the braces of the war drum do in that.
- Derham’s Plyſko-Theology.
3. BRAce...[in archite@ure.] Is a piece of timber framed in
with bevil joints, uſed to keep the building from ſwerving ei-
ther way. Builder's Dic?.
4, BRAGés. [a ſea term.] Ropes belonging to all the yards, ex-
2 cept
2<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">cent the mizen. They have a pendant ſeized to the yard-arm,
two braces to each yard; and, at the end of the pendant, a
block is ſeized, through which the rope called the brace is
reeved. The braces ſerve to ſquare and traverſe the yards.
Sea Dić7.
; ERActs ºf a coach. Thick ſtraps of leather on which it
hangs. -
6. Harneſs.
7. BRACE. [in printing.] A crooked line incloſing a paſſage,
which ought to be taken together, and not ſeparately; as in a
triplet.
p Charge Venus to command her ſon,
Wherever elſe ſhe lets him rove,
To ſhun my houſe, and field, and grove; }
Peace cannot dwell with hate or love. Priºr.
8. Warlike preparation ; from bracing the armour; as we ſay,
girded for the battle.
As it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile queſtion bear it;
For that it ſtands not in ſuch warlike brace,
But altogether lacks th’ abilitics
That Rhodes is dreſs'd in. Shakeſp. Othello.
9. Tenſion; tightneſs.
The moſt frequent cauſe of deafneſs is the laxneſs of the
tympanum, when it has loſt its brace or tenſion. Holder.
BRAce. n.f. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. A pair; a couple. It is not braces, but brace, in the plural.
Down from a hill the beaſts that reign in woods,
Firſt hunter then, purſu'd agentle brace,
Goodlieſt of all the foreſt, hart and hind. Par. Loft, b. xi.
Ten brace and more of greyhounds, ſnowy fair,
And tall as ſtags, ran looſe, and cours'd around his chair.
Dryden's Fables.
2. It is uſed generally in converſition as a ſportſman's word.
He is ſaid, this ſummer, to have ſhot with his own hands
fifty brace of pheaſants. Addison. Freeholder, N° 36.
3. It is applied to men in contempt.
But you, my brace of lords, were Iſo minded,
I here could pluck his highneſs frown upon you. Shakesp. Tempſ?.
BRA'celet. m. ſ. [bracelet, Fr.]
1. An ornament for the arms.
Both his hands were cut off, being known to have worn
bracelets of gold about his wriſts. Sir j. Hayward.
Tie about our tawny wriſts
Bracelets of the fairy twiſts. Ben. johnſºn's Fairy Prince.
A very ingenious lady uſed to wear, in rings and bracelets,
ſtore of thoſe gems. Boyle.
2. A piece of defenſive armour for the arm.
BRA'ceR. n.ſ.. [from brace.]. A cinéture; a bandage.
When they affect the belly, they may be reſtrained by a
bracer, without much trouble, J/ſeman's Surgery.
BRAcH. m.ſ.. [braque, Fr.] A bitch hound.
Truth's a dog muſt to kennel; he muſt be whipped out,
when the lady brach may ſtand by the fire, and ſtink. Shakeſp.
BRA'chi AL. adj. [from brachium, an arm, Lat.] Belonging to
the arm.
BRACHY'GRAPHY. m. ſ. [3-2xº-, ſhort, and yeapo, to write.]
The art or pračtice of writing in a ſhort compaſs.
All the certainty of thoſe high pretenders, bating what they
have of the firſt principles, and the word of God, may be cir-
cumſcribed by as ſmall a circle as the creed, when braćh;graphy
had confined it within the compaſs of a penny. Glanville.
BRAck. n.ſ.. [from break.] A breach; a broken part.
The place was but weak, and the bracks fair; but the defen-
dants, by reſolution, ſupplied all the defects. Hayward.
Let them compare my work with what is taught in the
ſchools, and if they find in theirs many bracks and ſhort ends,
which cannot be ſpun into an even piece, and, in mine, a fair
coherence throughout, I ſhall promiſe myſelf an acquieſcence.
Digby on the Soul, Dedicat.
BRA'cKET. n.ſ. A piece of wood fixed for the ſupport of ſome-
thing.
Let your ſhelves be laid upon brackets, being about two feet
wide, and edged with a ſmall lath. Mortimer.
BRACKISH. adj. [brack, Dutch..] Salt; ſomewhat ſalt: it is
uſed particularly of the water of the ſea.
Pits upon the ſea ſhore turn into freſh water, by percolation
of the ſalt through the ſand : but it is farther noted, after a time,
the water in ſuch pits will become brackiſh again. Bacon.
When I had gain'd the brow and top,
A lake of brackiſh waters on the ground,
Was all I found. Herbert.
The wiſe contriver, on his end intent,
Mix'd them with ſalt, and ſeaſon’d all the ſea.
What other cauſe could this effect produce
The brackiſh tincture through the main diffuſe Blackmore.
RA'ckish Ness. n.ſ. [from brackiſh.] Saltneſs.
All the artificial ſtrainings, hitherto diſcovered, leave a brack-
iSpenser; in ſalt water, that makes it unfit for animal uſes.
- Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles.
BRAD, being an initial, ſignifies broad, ſpacious, from the Saxon
". º * Gothick braid. Gibſon's Camden
V CL. I. -
BRAD. m. ſ. A ſort of nail to floor rooms with. They are about
the ſize of a tempenny nail, but have not their heads made with
a ſhoulder over their ſhank, as other nails, but are made pretty
thick towards the upper end, that the very top may be driven
intº and buried in the board they nail down; ſo that the tops
ºf thºſe trad, will not catch the thrums of the mops, when the
floor is waſhing. Moxon's 44-chanical Exerciſes.
To BRAG. v. n. I braggeren, Dutch.] - -
I. To bººſt; to diſplay oſtentatiouſly; to tell boaſtful ſtorics.
Thou cowardſ art thou bragging to the ſtars :
Telling the buſhes that thou loºk’ſ for wars,
And wilt not come Shakespeare. Midſum. Night's Dream.
Mark me, with what violence ſhe firſt ſoved the Moor, but
for bragging, and telling her fantaſtical lics. Shakeſp. Othello.
In bragging out ſome of their private tenets, as if they were
the received eſtabliſhed doctrine of the church of England.
Sanderſon’s Pax Eccleſiae.
- The rebels were grown ſo ſtrong there, that they intended
º F. they already bragged, to come over, and make this the
tat Of War. Clarendon.
Mrs. Bull's condition was looked upon as deſperate by all the
men of art; but there were thoſe that bragged they had an in-
fallible ointment. Artuthnot's Hiji. ºf j. Bull.
2. It has of before the thing boaſted.
Knowledge being the only thing whereºf we poor old men
can brag, we cannot make it known but by utterance. Sidney,
Verona brags of him,
To be a virtuous and well govern'd youth.
Ev'ry buſy little ſcribbler now,
Swells with the praiſes which he gives himſelf,
And taking ſanctuary in the croud,
Brags of his impudence, and ſcorns to mend.
3. On is uſed, but improperly.
Yet lo! in me what authors have to brag on,
Reduc’d at laſt to hiſ in my own dragon. Pºpe's Danti-3.
BRAG. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A boaſt; a proud expreſſion. -
A kind of conqueſt
Caeſar made here; but made not here his brag
Of came, and ſaw, and overcame. Shakeſp. Cºnteſire.
It was ſuch a new thing for the Spaniards to receive ſo little
hurt, upon dealing with the Engliſh, as Avellancóa made great
brags of it, for no greater matter than the waiting upon the
Engliſh afar off. Bacon's ſº ar with Spain.
2. The thing boaſted.
Beauty is nature's trag, and muſt be ſhewn
In courts, at feaſts, and high ſolemnities,
Where moſt may wonder. - Milton.
BRAGGADo'cio. n.ſ.. [from brag..] A puffing, ſwelling, boaſt-
ing fellow.
The world abounds in terrible fanfarons, in the maſque of
men of honour; but theſe braggadocios are eaſy to be ;:
L’Eſtrange.
By the plot, you may gueſs much of the characters of the per-
ſons; a braggadocio captain, a paraſite, and a lady of º
ryden.
BRA'Gc ARt. adj. [from brag..] Boaſtful; vainly oſtentatious.
Shall I, none's ſlave, of high-born or rais'd men
Fear frowns; and my miſtreſs, truth, betray thee
To th’ huffing, braggart, puft nobility ?
BRA'Go ART. n.ſ.. [from brag..] A boaſter.
Who knows himſelf a braggart,
Let him fear this; for it will come to paſs,
That every braggart ſhall be found an aſs.
- Shakeſp. A", well that ends well.
BRA'GGER. m. ſ. [from brag..] A boaſter; an oſtentaticus
fellow.
Such as have had opportunity to found theſe brºggers tho-
roughly, by having ſometimes endured the penance of their ſof-
tiſh company, have found them, in converſe, empty and in-
fipid. South.
BRAGLEss. adj. [from brag..] Without a boaſt; without click-
tat 10n.
The bruit is, Heółor's ſlain, and by Achilies.—
If it is ſo, braglºſs let it be, - ,-
Great Hector was as good a man as he. Shaº. 7. and Creſ.
BRA'GLY. adv. [from brag..] Finely ; ſo as it may be bragged.
Seeſt not thilk hawthorn ſtud, -
How bragy it begins to bud,
And utter his tender head 2 fl
Flora new calleth frth each flower,
And bids make ready Maia's bower. Spenser's Py?.
To BRAID. v. a. [bravan, Saxon.] To weave together.
Cloſe the ſerpent fly,
Infinuating, wove with gordian twine
His braida train, and of his fatal gºi; -
Gave proof unheeded. Milton's Par. Lºft, i. iv. l. 347.
Oſier wands, lying looſely, my each of them bec. ſil, iſ-
ſociated from the reſt; but when braided into a º
ongly. 9 it'.
cº did the braided treſſes bind,
The reſt was looſe, and wanton'd in the wind.
3 M
Shakeſp.
Rºſcommºn.
Dzºne.
Dryden.
Since<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">f} R A
B R A
Since in braided gold her foot is bound,
And a long trailing manteau ſweeps the ground, x - crº. . . . .
Her ſhoe diſdains the ſtreet. Gay's Trivia.
BRAID. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A texture; a knot, or compli-
cation of ſomething woven together.
Liſten where thou art fitting,
Under the gloſſy, cool, tranſlucent wave,
In twiſted braids of lilies knitting
The looſe train of thy amber-dropping hair. A ſilton.
No longer ſhall thy comely traces break
In flowing ringlets on thy ſnowy neck,
Or fit behind thy head, an ample round, -
In graceful braids, with various ribbon bound. Prior.
BRA1D. adj. [To bred, in Chaucer, is to deceive..] An old word,
which ſeems to ſignify deceitful.
Since Frenchmen are ſo braid,
Marry'em that will. I’ll live and die a maid.
Shakeſp. All's well that end, well.
BRAILs. m. ſ. [Sea term.] Small ropes reeved through blocks,
which aré ſeized on either fide the ties, a little off upon the
yard; ſo that they come down before the ſails of a ſhip, and
are faſtened at the ſkirt of the ſail to the crengles. Their uſe is,
when the ſail is furled acroſs, to hale up its bunt, that it may
the more readily be taken up or let fall. Płarris.
BRAIN. n ſ. [bjæren, Sax. bryne, Dutch..]
1. That collection of veſſels and organs in the head, from which
ſenſe and motion ariſe. .
The brain is divided into cerebrum and cerebellum. Cerebrum
is that part of the brain, which poſſeſſes all the upper and fore-
part of the cranium, being ſeparated from the cerebellum by the
fecond proceſs of the dura mater, under which the cerebellum is
ſituated. The ſubſtance of the brain is diſtinguiſhed into outer
and inncr; the former is called corticalis, cinerea, or glandulºſa;
the latter, medullaris, alla, or nerved. Cheſºlder.
If I be ſerved ſuch another trick, I'll have my brains ta'en
out, and buttered, and give them to a dog for a new year's gift.
Shakeſp. Merry Hººves of I/indſºr.
That man proportionably hath the largeſt brain, I did, I con-
feſs, ſomewhat doubt, and conceived it might have failed in
birds, eſpecially ſuch as having little bodies, have yet large cra-
nics, and ſeem to contain much brain, as ſnipes and woodcocks;
but, upon trial, I find it very true. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2 - That part in which the underſtanding is placed; therefore ta-
ken for the underſtanding.
The force they are under is a real force, and that of their
fate but an imaginary conceived one ; the one but in their
brains, the other on their ſhoulders. Hammond's Fundamentals.
A man is firſt a geometrician in his brain, before he be ſuch
in his hand. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
3. Sometimes the affections.
My ſon Edgar ! had he a hand to write this, a heart and
brain to breed it in 2 Shakeſp. King Lear.
To BRAIN. v. a. [from the noun.] To daſh out the brains;
to kill by beating out the brains.
Why, as I told thee, 'tis a cuſtom with him i' th' afternoon
to ſleep ; there thou may’ſt brain him. Shakeſp. Tempſf.
Outlaws of nature,
Fit to be ſhot and brain'd, without a proceſs,
To ſtop infection; that's their proper death. Dryden.
Next ſeiz'd two wretches more, and headlong caſt,
Brain'd on the rock, his ſecond dire repaſt. Pope's Odyſſey.
BRA'1N1sh. adj. [from brain.] Hotheaded; furious; as, cere-
brºſus in Latin.
In his lawleſs fit,
Behind the arras hearing ſomething ſtir,
He whips his rapier out, and cries, a rat!
And, in his brainiſh apprehenſion, kills
The unſeen good old man. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
BRA'1N LEss. adj. [from brain..] Silly; thoughtleſs; witleſs.
Some brainleſs men have, by great travel and labour, brought
to paſs, that the church is now aſhamed of nothing more than
of ſaints. Hooker, b.v. § 20.
If the dull brainleſ, Ajax come ſafe off,
We'll dreſs him up in voices. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
The ſº ſtripling, who, expell'd the town,
Damn'd the ſtiff college, and pedantick gown,
Aw'd by thy name, is dumb. Tickell.
BRA'INPAN. m.ſ.. [from brain and pan.] The ſkull containing
the brains.
With thoſe huge bellows in his hands, he blows
New fire into my head : my brainpan glows. Dryden.
BRA'issick. adj. Ifrom brain and ſick.] Diſeaſed in the under-
ſtanding; addleheaded; giddy; thoughtleſs.
Nor once deject the courage of our minds,
Becauſe Caſſandra's mad; her brainſick raptures
Cannot diſtaſte the goodneſs of a quarrel. Shakespeare. Troilus and Creſ.
They were brainſick men, who could neither endure the go-
vernment of their king, nor yet thankfully receive the authours
of their deliverance. Knollº’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
BRAINsickly. adv. [from braiſick.] Weakly; headily.
Why, worthy thane,
You do unbend your noble ſtrength to think
So brainſckly of things. Shakespeare. Macleth.
BRA'INsickness. n.J. [from brainſ...}.] Indiſcretion; gidd:
neſs.
BRAIt. m. ſ. A term uſed by jewellers for a rough diamond. D.
BRAKE. The preterite of break.
He thought it ſufficient to correå the multitude with ſharp
words, and brake out into this cholerick ſpeech. Knolle;', Hiſt.
BRAKE. m. ſ. [of uncertain etymology.] A thicket of bram-
bles, or of thorns.
A dog of this town uſed daily to fetch meat, and to carry
the ſame unto a blind maſtiff, that lay in a brake without the
to Wn. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
If I’m traduc’d by tongues, which neither know
# facultics nor perſon; let me ſay,
is but the fate of place, and the rough Hrake
That virtue muſt go through. .# Henry VIII.
In every buſh and brake, where hap may find
The ſerpent ſleeping. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix. l. 16c.
Full little thought of him the gentle knight,
Who, flying death, had there conceal’d his flight; {
In brakes and brambles hid, and ſhunning mortal fight.
Dryden's Falks.
BRAKE. m. ſ.
1. An inſtrument for dreſſing hemp or flax.
2. The handle of a ſhip's pump.
3. A baker's kneading trough.
4. A ſharp bit or ſnaffle for horſes. Diff.
BRA'KY; adj. [from brake.] Thorny; prickly; rough.
Redeem arts from their rough and braky ſeats, where they lie
hid and overgrown with thorns, to a pure, open light, where
they may take the eye, and may be taken by the hand.
Ben. johnſºn's Diſcovery.
BRAMBLE. m. ſ. [bremlar, Sax. rubus, Lat.]
1. This plant hath a flower conſiſting of five leaves, which are
placed circularly, and expand in form of a roſe; the flower-cup.
is divided into five parts, containing many ſtamina, or chives,
in the boſom of the flower; in the centre of which riſes the
pointal, which afterwards becomes the fruit, conſiſting of many
protuberances, and full of juice. The ſpecies are; 1. The
common bramble, or blackberry buſh. 2. The dewberry buſh.
or leſſer bramble. 3. The common greater bramble buſh, with
white fruit. 4. The greater brantle buſh, with a beautiful
ſtriped leaf. 5. The raſpberry buſh, or hindberry. 6. The
raſpberry buſh, with white fruit. 7. The raſpberry buſh, with
late red fruit. 8. The raſpberry buſh, without thorns. 9. The
Virginian raſpberry buſh, with black fruit. The firſt and ſe–
cond forts are very common in hedges, and upon dry banks.
in moſt parts of England, and are rarely cultivated in gardens-
The third ſort was found by Mr. Jacob Bobart in a hedge, not
far from Oxford. The fourth ſort is a variety of the common
bramble, differing therefrom only in having ſtriped leaves. The
raſpberry buſh is alſo very common in divers woods, in the nor-
thern counties of England; but is cultivated in all curious gar-
dens, for the ſake of its fruit. All theſe plants are eaſily pro-
pagated by ſuckers, which they ſend from the roots in great
plenty. The beſt time to take them off, and tranſplant them,
is in Očtober. Millar.
2. It is taken, in popular language, for any rough prickly ſhrub.
c
The buſh my bed, the bramble was my bow'r,
The woods can witneſs many a woful ſtore. Spenser's Paſ?.
There is a man haunts the foreſt, that abuſes our young
plants with carving Roſalind on their barks; hangs odes upon
hawthorns, and elegies on brambles; all, forſooth, deifying the
name of Roſalind. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Content with food, which nature freely bred,
On wildings and on ſtrawberries they fed :
Cornels and bramble berries gave the reſt,
And falling acorns furniſh'd out a feaſt. Dryden's Ovid.
Thy younglings, Cuddy, are but juſt awake,
No thruſtles ſhrill the bramble buſh forſake. Gay's Paſł.
BRA'MBLING.. n.ſ. A bird, called alſo a mountain chaffnch. Dief.
BRAN. n.ſ.. [brenna, Ital.] The huſks of corn ground; the re-
fuſe of the ſieve.
From me do back receive the flow'r of all,
And leave me but the bran. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The citizens were driven to great diſtreſs for want of vic-
tuals; bread they made of the coarſeſt bran, moulded in cloaths;
for otherwiſe it would not cleave together. Hayward.
In the fifting of fourteen years of power and favour, all that
came out, could not be pure meal, but muſt have, among it, a
certain mixture of padar and bran, in this lower age of human
fragility. J%tton.
I cannot bolt this matter to the bran,
As Bradwardin and holy Auſtin can. Dryden's Fab/2:
Then water him, and, drinking what he can, -
Encourage him to thirſt again with bran. Dryden's Pirza
BRANCH. n.ſ.. [branche, Fr.]
l.
1. The ſhoot of a tree from one of the main boughs. Sº cº
Bou GH. -
Why grow the branches, when the root is gone?
Why wither not the leaves that want their ſp? Shaft, 23.
2. Any member or part of the whole; any diſtinét article; a rºy
ſection or ſubdiviſion,
Yo- ºr<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R A
IB R A
Your oaths are paſt, and now ſubſcribe your names,
That his own hand may ſtrike his honour down,
That violates the ſmalleſt branch herein.
- Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loſt.
The belief of this was of ſpecial importance, to confirm our
hopes of another life, on which ſo many branches of chriſtian
picty does immediately depend. Hammond's Fundamentals.
In the ſeveral branches of juſtice and charity, comprehended
in thoſe general rules, of loving our neighbour as ourſelves,
and of doing to others as we would have them do to us, there
is nothing but what is moſt fit and reaſonable. Tillºtſºn.
This precept will oblige us to perform our duty, according
to the nature of the various branches of it. Rogers.
3. Any part that ſhoots out from the reſt. -
And fix branches ſhall come out of the ſides of it; three
branches of the candleſtick out of the one ſide, and three
branches of the candleſtick out of the other ſide. Exod. xxv. 32.
His blood, which diſperſeth itſelf by the branches of veins,
may be reſembled to waters carried by brooks. Raleigh's Hiſt.
. A ſmaller river running into, or proceeding from a larger.
If, from a main river, any branch be ſeparated and divided,
then, where that branch doth firſt bound itſelf with new banks,
there is that part of the river where the branch forſaketh the
main ſtream, called the head of the river. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
5. Any part of a family deſcending in a collateral line.
His fathcr; a younger branch of the ancient ſtock planted in
Somerſetſhire, took to wife the widow. Carew's Survey.
6. The offspring; the deſcendant.
Great Anthony | Spain's well-beſeeming pride,
Thou mighty branch of emperours and kings |
7. The antlers or ſhoots of a ſtag's horn.
8. The branches of a bridle are two pieces of bended iron, that
bear the bit-mouth, the chains, and the curb, in the interval be-
tween the one and the other. Farrier's Dićf.
9. [In archite&amp;ture.] The arches of Gothick vaults; which arches
tranſverſing from one angle to another, diagonal ways, form a
croſs between the other arches, which make the ſides of the
ſquare, of which the arches are diagonals. Harris.
To BRANCH. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To ſpread in branches.
They were trained together in their childhoods, and there
rooted betwixt them ſuch an affection, which cannot chooſe
but branch now. Shakeſp. //inter’s Tale.
The cauſe of ſcattering the boughs, is the haſty breaking
forth of the ſap ; and therefore thoſe trees riſe not in a bod
of any height, but branch near the ground. The cauſe of the
Pyramis, is the keeping in of the ſap, long before it branch,
and the ſpending of it, when it beginneth to branch by equal
degrees. Bacon's Natural Hiſt. Nº 588.
Plant it round with ſhade
Of laurel, ever-green, and branching plain. Milt. Agonſles.
Straight as a line in beauteous order ſtood,
Of oaks unſhorn a venerable wood;
Freſh was the graſs beneath, and ev'ry tree
At diſtance planted, in a due degree,
Their branching arms in air, with equal ſpace,
Stretch'd to their neighbours with a long embrace. Dryden.
One ſces her thighs transform’d, another views
- Her arms ſhot out, and branching into boughs. Addiſon. Ovid.
2. Tº ſpread into ſeparate and diſtinčº parts and ſubdiviſions.
The Alps at the one end, and the long range of Appenines
that paſſes through the body of it, branch out, on all ſides, into
ſeveral different diviſions. Addiſon on Italy.
If we would weigh, and keep in our minds, what it is we
are conſidering, that would beſt inſtruct us when we ſhould,
or ſhould not, branch into farther diſtinétions. Locke.
3. To ſpeak diffuſively, or with the diſtinétion of the parts of a
diſcourſe.
I have known a woman branch out into a long diſſertation
upon the edging of a petticoat. Speciator, N° 247.
4. To have horns ſhooting out into antlers.
The ſwift ſtag from under ground
Bore up his lºanching head. Milton's Par. Lºſt, b. vii. l. 470.
To BRANch. v. a.
1. To divide as into branches.
The ſpirit of things animate are all continued within them-
ſelves, and are branched in canals, as blood is ; and the ſpirits
have not only branches, but certain cells or ſeats, wher: the
principal ſpirits do reſide. Bacon's Natural Hiſł.
2. To adorn with needlework, repreſenting flowers and ſprigs.
In robe of lily white ſhe was array'd, c
That from her ſhoulder to her heel down raught,
The train whereof looſe far behind her ſtray'd,
Branch'd with gold and pcarl, moſt richly wrought.
Spenser's Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. o.
BRANCHER. m. ſ. [from ºf y &amp;een, 9
* One that ſhoots out into branches.
If their child be not ſuch a ſpeedy ſpreader and brancher, like
the vine, yet he may yield, with a little longer expectation, as
uſeful and more ſober fruit than the other. * //otton.
2. In falconry, a young hawk. [branchºr, Fr.]
I enlarge my diſcourſe to the obſervation of the eircs, the
- 5
Craſhaw,
brancher, and the two ſorts of lentners. Halton's Angler,
BRA'Nchisess. m. ſ. [from branchy..] Fulneſs of branches.
BRA'Nchless. adj. [from branch.J
1. Without ſhoots or boughs.
2. Without any valuable produćt; naked.
If I loſe mine honour,
I loſe myſelf; better I were not ours,
Than yours ſo branchleſs. Shakespeare. Antony and Cleopatra.
BRA'Nchy adj. [from branch.] Full of branches; ſpreading.
Trees on trees o'erthrown,
Fall crackling round him, and the foreſts groan;
Sudden full twenty on the plain are ſtrow'd,
And lopp'd, and lighten’d of their branchy load. Pope.
What carriage can bear away all the various, rude, and un-
wieldy loppings of a branchy tree at once /Watts.
BRAND. n.ſ.. [bnanb, Saxon.]
1. A ſtick lighted, or fit to be lighted in the fire.
Have I caught thee
He that parts us ſhall bring a brand from heav'n,
And fire us hence. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Take it, ſhe ſaid, and when your needs require,
This little brand will ſerve to light your fire. Dryden's Fab.
If, with double diligence they labour to retrieve the hours
they have loſt, they ſhall be ſaved; though this is a ſervice of
great difficulty, and like a brand plucked out of the fire. Rogers.
2. A ſword, in old language. [brandar, Runick.]
They looking back, all the eaſtern ſide beheld
Of paradiſe, ſo late their happy ſeat!
Wav'd over by that flaming brand; the gate
With dreadful faces throng'd, and firy arms.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii. 1.643.
3. A thunderbolt.
The fire omnipotent prepares the brand,
By Vulcan wrought, and arms his potent hand;
Then flaming hurls it. Granville.
4. A mark made by burning a criminal with a hot iron, to note
him as infamous.
Clerks convićt ſhould be burned in the hand, both becauſe
they might taſte of ſome corporal puniſhment, and that they
might carry a brand of infamy. Bacon's Hen. VII.
The rules of good and evil are inverted, and a brand of in-
famy paſſes for a badge of honour. L’Eſtrange.
Where did his wit on learning fix a brand,
And rail at arts he did not underſtand Dryden’s Macffec{ng.
To BRAND. v. a. [branden, Dutch..] To mark with a brand,
or note of infamy.
Have I liv'd thus long a wife, a true one,
Never yet branded with ſuſpicion Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The king was after branded, by Perkin's proclamation, for
an execrable breaker of the rights of holy church. Bacon.
Brand not their actions with ſo foul a name;
Pity, at leaſt, what we are forc'd to blame. Dryden,
Ha! dare not for thy life, I charge thee, dare not
To brand the ſpotleſs virtue of my prince. Rowe.
Our Punick faith
Is infamous, and branded to a proverb. Addiſon's Cato.
The ſpreader of the pardons anſwered him an eaſier way, by
branding him with hereſy. Atterbury.
BRA'NDGoose. m. ſ. A kind of wild fowl, leſs than a common
gooſe, having its breaſt and wings of a dark colour. Dićf.
To BRA'Ndish. v. a. [from brand, a ſword.]
I. To wave, or ſhake, or flouriſh, as a weapon.
Brave Macbeth,
Diſdaining fortune, with his brandiſh'd ſteel,
Like valour's minion, carved out his paſſage.
He ſaid, and brandiſhing at once his blade,
With ºf: pace purſu'd the flaming ſhade.
et me march their leader, not their prince;
And, at the head of your renown'd Cydonians,
Brandiſh this fam'd ſword. Smith's Phadr, and Hippol.
2. To play with; to flouriſh.
He, who ſhall employ all the force of his reaſon, only in
brandiſhing of ſyllogiſms, will diſcover very little. Locke.
BRANDLING.. n.ſ. The name for a particular worm.
The dew-worm, which ſome alſo call the lob-worm, and
the brandling, are the chief. //alton’s Angler.
BRA'NDY. n.ſ.. [contraćted from brandewine, or burnt wine.] A
ſtrong liquour diſtilled from wine. -
If he travels the country, and lodgeth at inns, every dram of
brandy extraordinary that you drink, raiſeth his character.
Swift's Directions to the Footman:
BRA'NDY-wine. The ſame with brandy.
It has been a common ſaying, A hair of the ſame dºg; and
thought, that brandy-wire is a common relief to ſuch. Wiſeman.
BRANGLE. m. ſ. [uncertainly derived.] Squabble; wrangle.
The payment of tythes in this kingdom, is ſubject to many
frauds, brangles, and other difficulties, not only from papiſts
and diſſenters, but even from thoſe who profeſs themſelves pro-
teſtants. Swift.
To BRA/NGLE. v. n. [from the noun..] To wrangle; to
ſquabble. - -
When polite converſing ſhall be improved, company will be
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R A
B R A
:
no longer peſtered with dull ſtory-tellers, nor lºgging diſ.
puters. Swift's Introduct. tº genteel Converſation.
BRA No LEMENT. m. ſ. [from brangle.] The ſame with brangle.
BRANK. n.ſ. Buckwheat, or brané, is a grain very uſ;ful and
advantagious in dry barren lands. Mºrtimer.
BRANNY. adj. [from bran.J Having the appearance of bran.
- It became ſerpiginous, and was, when I ſaw it, covered with
white branny ſcales. ///ºman.
BRA's ER. m. ſ. [from braſ.]
1. A manufacturer that works in braſs.
There is a fellow ſomewhat near the door, he ſhould be a
braſier by his face. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Tºroſ. rs that turn andirons, pots, kettles, &amp;c. have their lathe
made different from the common turners lathe. A1.xºn.
2. A pan to hold coals. [probably from embraſer, Fr.]
It is thought they had no chimneys, but were warmed with
coals on braſiers. Arbuthnot on Cºins.
BRASI'l. n.ſ. An American wood, commonly ſuppoſed to have
BRAzi'i. } been thus denominated, becauſe firſt brought from
J}raſil: though Huet ſhews it had been known by that name,
many years before the diſcovery of that country; and the beſt
ſort comes from Fernambuc. The tree ordinarily grows in dry
barren rocky places, is very thick and large, uſually crooked
and knotty; its flowers, which are of a beautiful red, exhale
an agreeable ſmell, which ſtrengthens the brain. The bark is
ſo thick, that when the trunk is peeled, which might before be
equal in circumference to the body of a man, it is reduced to
that of his leg. The wood is heavy, and ſo dry, that it ſcarce
raiſes any ſmoke. It is uſed by turners, and takes a good poliſh;
but chiefly in dying, though it gives but a ſpurious red. Chamb.
ERASS. m.ſ.. [bray, Sax prés, Welch.),
1. A yellow metal, made by mixing copper with lapis calaminaris.
It is uſed, in popular language, for any kind of metal in which
copper has a pºrt.
Braſs is made of copper and calaminaris.
Men's cºil manners live in braſ, their virtues
We write in water. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
ſet others mold the running maſs
Of metals, and inform the breathing braſ.
2. Impudence.
BRA'ss INFss. m. ſ. [from braſ).] An appearance like braſs;
ſome quality of braſs.
BRA'ss Y. adj. [from braſs.]
1. Partaking of braſs.
The part in which they lie, is near black, with ſome ſparks
Dryden.
of a braſ, pyrites in it. //oodward.
2. Hard as braſs.
- J Loſſes,
Enough to preſs a royal merchant down,
And pluck commiſeration of his ſtate
From braſſ, boſoms, and rough hearts of flint. Shakespeare
2. Impudent.
BRAs r. particip. adj. [from burſ?..] Burſt; broken.
There creature never paſt,
That back returned without heavenly grace,
ISut dreadful furies which their chains have bra/?,
And damned ſprights ſent forth to make ill men agaſt.
Fairy Queen, b. v. c. v. /fanz. 31.
BRAT. m. ſ. [Its etymology is uncertain ; brazz, in Saxon, fig-
nifies a blanket; from which, perhaps, the modern ſignifica-
tion may have come.]
1. A child, ſo called in contempt.
He leads them like a thing
Made by ſome other deity than nature,
That ſhapes man better; and they follow him,
Againſt us brats, with no leſs confidence,
Than boys purſuing ſummer butterflies. Shakeſp. Coriolants.
This brat is none of mine :
IIence with it, and, together with the dame,
Commit them to the fire. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
The friends, that got the brats, were poiſon'd too;
In this fad caſe what could our vermin do? Roſcommon.
Jupiter ſummoned all the birds and beaſts before him, with
their brats and little ones, to ſee which of them had the pret-
tieſt children. L’Eſtrange.
I ſhall live to ſee the inviſible lady, to whom I was obliged,
and whom I never behclá, ſince ſhe was a brat in hanging-
flecyes. Swift.
I give command to kill or ſave,
Can grant ten thouſand pounds a year,
And make a beggar's bra: a peer. Swift.
2. The progeny; the offspring. - -
The two late conſpiracies were the brats and offspring of
two contrary factions. South,
BRAya'po. r. ſ. [from bravada, Span.]. A boaſt; a brag.
Spain, to make good the bravado,
Names it the invincible armado.
BRAVE. adj. [brave, Fr.]
1. Courageous; daring; bold; generous; high-ſpirited.
An Egyptian ſoothſayer made Antonius believe, that his ge-
nius, which otherways was brave and confident, was, in the
preſence of Octavius Cæſar, poor and cowardly. . Bacon.
Anonymous.
---
Bacon.
From armed foes to bring a royal prize,
Shows your brave heart victorious as your eyes.
2. Gallant; having a noble mien ; lofty; graceful.
I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with a braver grace.
3. Magnificent; grand.
Rings put upon his fingers,
And brave attendants near him, when he wakes;
Would not the beggar then forget himſelf? Shakeſp.
But whoſoe'er it was nature deſign'd
Firſt a brave place, and then as brave a mind. Denham.
4. Excellent; noble: it is an indeterminate word, uſed to ex-
º the ſuperabundance of any valuable quality in men or
1112 S. - -
Let not old age diſgrace my high deſire,
O heavenly ſoul, in human ſhape contain'd;
Qld wood inflam'd doth yield the bravºſt fire,
When younger doth in ſmoke his virtue ſpend. Sidney.
If there be iron-ore, and mills, iron is a brave commodity
where wood aboundeth. Bacon.
If a ſtateſman has not this ſcience, he muſt be ſubject to a
braver man than himſelf, whoſe province it is to direct all his
actions to this end. Digly on the Soul, Dedication.
BRAVE. n.ſ. [brave, Fr.]
1. A hector; a man daring beyond decency or diſcretion.
Hot braves, like thee, may fight, but know not well
To manage this, the laſt great ſtake. Drydºn.
Morat's too inſolent, too much a brave,
His courage to his envy is a ſlave. Dryden’s Aurengz.
2. A boaſt; a challenge; a defiance.
There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace; -
We grant thou canſt outſcold us. Shakeſp. Aing john.
To BRAVE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To defy; to challenge; to ſet at defiance.
He upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch. Shakespeare. Othello.
My nobles leave me, and my ſtate is brav'd,
J/alier.
Shakeſp.
Ev’n at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers. Shakeſp.
The ills of love, not thoſe of fate I fear;
Theſe I can brave, but thoſe I cannot bear. Dryden.
Like a rock unmov’d, a rock that braves
The raging tempeſt, and the riſing waves. Dryden's AEmeid.
2. To carry a boaſting appearance of.
Both particular perſons and factions are apt enough to flatter
themſelves, or, at leaſt, to brave that which they believe not.
Bacon's Eſſays, N° 16.
BRA'v FLY. adv. [from brave..] In a brave manner; courage-
ouſly; gallantly; ſplendidly.
Martin Swart, with his Germans, performed bravely. Bacon.
No fire, nor foe, nor fate, nor night,
The Trojan hero did affright, {
Who bravely twice renew'd the fight. Denham.
Your valour bravely did th’ aſſault ſuſtain,
And fill'd the moats and ditches with the ſlain. Dryden
BRA'v ERY. m. ſ. [from brave.]
1. Courage; magnanimity; generoſity; gallantry.
Certainly it denotes no great bravery of mind, to do that
out of a deſire of fame, which we could not be prompted to
by a generous paſſion for the glory of him that made us.
Spectator, N° 255.
Juba, to all the bravery of a hero,
Adds ſofteſt love, and more than female ſweetneſs. Addison.
2. Splendour; magnificence.
Where all the bravery that eye may ſce,
And all the happineſs that heart deſire,
Is to be found. Spenser’s Hubberd's Tale.
3. Show; oftentation.
Let princes chooſe miniſters more ſenſible of duty than of
riſing, and ſuch as love buſineſs rather upon conſcience than-
upon bravery.
4. Bravado; boaſt. TS-
Never could man, with more unmanlike bravery, uſe his
tongue to her diſgrace, which lately had ſung ſonnets of her
praiſes. Sidney's Arcadia.
For a bravery upon this occaſion of power, they crowned
their new king in the cathedral church of Dublin. Bacozz.
There are thoſe that make it a point of bravery, to bid de-
fiance to the oracles of divine revelation. L'E/ºrange.
BRA'vo. m. ſ. [bravo, Ital.] A man who murders for hire. -
For boldneſs, like the bravoes and banditti, is ſeldom employ-
ed, but upon deſperate ſervices. Government of the Tongzz-.
No bravoes here profeſs the bloody trade, -
Nor is the church the murd’rer's refuge made. Gay's Tri-zºa.
To BRAW L. v. n. [brouiller, or brawler, Fr.]
1. To quarrel noiſily and indecently.
She troubled was, alas ! that it might be,
With tedious brawlings of her parents dear. Side-ty.
Here comes a man of comfort, whoſe advice
Hath often ſtill'd my brawling diſcontent. Słaż2%.
How now, Sir John what, are you brawling here 2
Does this become your place, your time, your buſineſs *
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
# The ir
S
s
Bacon's Eſſays, No 37 - N
s
t º:
\t.
!. Tº mº
W
§:
Cº.
-- -
haſ<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R E
ºt.
º:
hat
to
Their battring cannon charged to the mouths,
Till their ſoul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down
The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city. Shakeſp. K. john.
In council ſhe gives licence to her tongue
Loquacious, brawling, ever in the wrong. Dryden's Fables.
Leave all noiſy conteſts, all immodeſt clamours, brawling
language, and eſpecially all perſonal ſcandal and ſcurrility to the
meaneſt part of the vulgar world. J/atts.
2. To ſpeak loud and indecently.
His diviſions, as the times do brawl,
Are in three heads; one pow'r againſt the French,
And one againſt Glendower. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
3. To make a noiſe. -
- As he lay along
Under an oak, whoſe antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood. Shakeſp.
BRAwl. n.f. [from the verb.] Quarrel; noiſe; ſcurrility.
He findeth, that controverſies thereby are made but brawls;
and therefore wiſheth, that, in ſome lawful aſſembly of churches,
all theſe ſtrifes may be decided. Hooker, Preface.
Never ſince that middle ſummer's ſpring
Met we on hill, in dale, foreſt, or mead,
But with thy brawls thou haſt diſturb’d our ſport.
- Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
That bonum is an animal,
Made good with ſtout polemick brawl. Hudibras.
BRA'w LER. n.ſ.. [from brawl.] A wrangler; a quarrelſome,
noiſy fellow. -
An advocate may incur the cenſure of the court, for being a
brawler in court, on purpoſe to lengthen out the cauſe. Ayliffe.
BRAWN. m. ſ. [of uncertain etymology.] -
1. The fleſhy or muſculous part of the body. ; -
The brawn of the arm muſt appear full, ſhadowed on one
fide, then ſhew the wriſt-bone thereof. Peacham.
But moſt their looks on the black monarch bend,
His riſing muſcles and his brawn commend;
His double biting ax, and beamy ſpear,
Each aſking a gigantick force to rear.
2. The arm, ſo called from its being muſculous.
I’ll hide my ſilver beard in a gold beaver,
And in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn. Shakeſp.
I had purpoſe
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn: Shakeſp.
3. Bulk; muſcular ſtrength.
Thy boiſt'rous hands are then of uſe, when I,
With this directing head, thoſe hands apply;
Brawn without brain is thine. Dryden's Fables.
4. The fleſh of a boar.
The beſt age for the boar is from two years to five years old,
at which time it is beſt to geld him, or ſell him for brawn.
Mortimer.
Dryden's Fables.
: A boar. - * -
RA'wNER. m.{ [from brawn..] A boar killed for the table.
At Chriſtmas time be careful of your fame,
See the old tenant's table be the ſame;
Then if you would ſend up the brawnerhead,
Sweet roſemary and bays around it ſpread. King.
BBRA'w NINEss. n.ſ.. [from brawny.] Strength; hardneſs.
This brawningſ; and inſenſibility of mind, is the beſt armour
we can have againſt the common evils and accidents of life.
Locke.
IERA'w NY. adj. [from brawn..] Muſculous; fleſhy; bulky; of
great muſcles and ſtrength.
The brawny fool, who did his vigour boaſt,
In that preſuming confidence was loſt. Dryden's juven.
The native energy
Turns all into the ſubſtance of the tree,
Starves and deſtroys the fruit, is only made
For brawny bulk, and for a barren ſhade. Dryden's Virgil.
To BRAY. v. a. [bnacan, Sax. braier, Fr.] To pound; or
#Erind ſmall.
I'll burſt him; I will bray
His bones as in a mortar. Chapman's Iliads.
Except you would bray chriſtendom in a mortar, and mould
It into a new paſte, there is no poſſibility of a holy war. Bacon.
Tc- BRAY. v. n. [broire, Fr. barrio, Lat.]
II - To make a noiſe as an aſs.
Laugh, and they
Return it louder than an aſs can bray, Dryden's juvenal.
= - To make an offenſive or diſagreeable noiſe.
What, ſhall our feaſt be kept with ſlaughter'd men P
Shall braying trumpets, and loud churliſh drums,
Clamours of hell, be meaſures to our pomp : Shakeſp.
Arms on armour claſhing, bray'd
Horrible diſcord. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi. l. 209.
*Agad if he ſhould hear the lion roar, he'd cudgel him into
|HE Fairn aſs, and to his primitive braying. Congreve's Old Batchelor.
-&gt; Y. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Noiſe; ſound.
Boiſt’rous untun'd drums,
Es is And harſh reſounding trumpets dreadful bray. Shakeſp.
^'YER. m. ſ. [from bray.]
T SDne that brays like an aſs,
* ol. I.
... Hold! cry'd the queen; a cat-call each ſhall win;
Rqual your merits, equal is your din
But that this well-diſputed gaine may end,
Sound forth, my brayers 1 and the welkin rend. Pope.
2. [With printers; from to bray, or leat..] An inſtrument to
temper the ink.
To BRAZE. v. a. [from braſs.]
I. To ſolder with braſs.
If the nut be not to be caſt in braſs, but only hath a worm
brazed into it, this niceneſs is not ſo abſolutely neceſſary, be-
cauſe that worm is firſt turned up, and bowed into the grooves
of the ſpindle, and you may try that before it is brazed in the
nut. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
2. To harden to impudence.
I have ſo often bluſhed to acknowledge him, that now I am
brazed to it. Shakeſp. King Lear.
If damned cuſtom hath not braz'd it ſo,
That it is proof and bulwark againſt ſenſe. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
BRA'ze N. adj. [from braſs.]
1. Made of braſs. - -
Get alſo a ſmall pair of brazen compaſſes, and a fine ruler,
for taking the diſtance. Peacham,
A bough his brazen helmet did ſuſtain;
His heavier arms lay ſcatter'd on the plain. Dryden's AFn.
2. Proceeding from braſs: a poetical uſe.
Trumpeters
With brazen din blaſt you the city's ear,
ake mingle with your rattling tabourines. Shakeſp.
3. Impudent. -
To BRA'z EN. v. n. To be impudent; to bully. -
When I uſed to reprimand him for his tricks, he would talk
ſaucily, lye, and brazen it out, as if he had done nothing amiſs.
Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of j. Bull.
BRA'zen Face. m. ſ. [from brazen and face..] An impudent
wretch.
You do, if you ſuſpect me in any diſhoneſty. Well
ſaid, brazenface; hold it out. Shakeſp. Merry Wivesſ //indſ.
BRA'ze NFAcED. adj. [from brazenface..] Impudent; ſhameleſs.
What a brazenfaced varlet art thou, to deny thou knoweſt
me? Is it two days ago, ſince I tript up thy heels, and beat thee
before the king? Shakeſp. King Lear.
Quick-witted, brazemfac'd, with fluent tongues,
Patient of labours, and diſſembling wrongs. Dryden,
RA'zenNEss. n.ſ.. [from brazen.]
1. Appearing like braſs.
2. Impudence.
BRA'ziER. n.ſ. See BRASIER. - - -
The halfpence and farthings in England, if you ſhould ſell
them to the brazier, you would not loſe above a penny in a
ſhilling. Swift's Draper's }...
BREAch. n.ſ.. [from break; breche, Fr.]
1. The act of breaking anything.
- This tempeſt -
Daſhing the garment of this peace, aboded . . .
The ſudden breach on't. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
2. The ſtate of being broken. -
O you kind gods !
Cure this great breach in his abuſed nature. Shakespeare.
3. A gap in a fortification made by a battery, , , ,
The wall was blown up in two places; by which breach the
Turks ſeeking to have entered, made bloody fight. Knolles.
Till mad with rage upon the breach he fir’d,
Slew fiends and foes, and in the ſmoke retir’d. Dryden.
4. The violation of a law or contračt.
That oath would ſure contain them greatly, or the breach of
it bring them to ſhorter vengeance. Spenſer's Ireland.
What are thoſe breaches of the law of nature and nations,
which do forfeit all right in a nation to govern ? Bacon.
Breach of duty towards our neighbours, ſtill involves in it a
breach of duty towards God. South.
The laws of the goſpel are the only ſtanding rules of mora-
lity; and the penalties affixed by God to the breach of thoſe
laws, the only guards that can effectually reſtrain men within
the true bounds of decency and virtue. Rogers.
5. The opening in a coaſt. - -
But th' heedful boatman ſtrongly forth did ſtretch
His brawny arms, and all his body ſtrain,
That th' utmoſt ſandy breach they ſhortly fetch,
While the dread danger does behind remain. Fairy Queen.
6. Difference; quarrel; ñº of kindneſs.
It would have been long before the jealoufies and breaches
betwen the armies, would have been compoſed. Clarendºn.
7. Infračtion; injury. -
This breach upon his kingly power was without a precedent.
Clarendºn.
BREAD. m. ſ. [breob, Saxon.] -
1. Food made of ground corn.
Mankind have found the means to make them into brºad,
which is the lighteſt and propereſt aliment for human bodies.
Arbuthnºt on 4 incut:,
Bread that decaying man with ſtrength ſupplies,
And gen’rous wine, which thoughtful ſorrow flies. Pºz.
3 N 2. Food
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R. E.
B R E
º
º
2. Foºd in general, ſuch as nature requires; to get bread, im-
pſie, to get ſufficient for ſupport without luxury.
In the ſweat of thy face ſhalt thou eat bread. Gen. iii. 19.
If theſe pretenders were not ſupported by the fimplicity of
the inquiſitive fools, the trade would not find them bread.
L'Eſtrange.
This dowager on whom my tale I found,
A ſimple ſober life in patience led,
And had but juſt enough to buy her bread. Dryden.
When I ſubmit to ſuch indignities,
Make me a citizen, a ſenator of Rome;
To ſell my country, with my voice, for bread. Philips.
I neither have been bred a ſcholar, a ſoldier, nor to any kind
of buſineſs; this creates uncaſineſs in my mind, fearing I ſhall
in time want bread. Speciator, N° 203.
3. Support of life at large.
God is pleaſed to try our patience by the ingratitude of thoſe,
who, having eaten of our brºad, have lift up themſelves againſt
ll.S. King Charles.
But ſometimes virtue ſtarves, while vice is fed;
What then Is the reward of virtue bread 2 Pºpe.
BREAD-cHIPPER. m. ſ. [from bread and chip.] One that chips
bread ; a baker's ſervant.
No abuſe, Hal, on my honour; no abuſe. Not to diſ-
praiſe me, and call me pantler, and bread-chipper, and I know
not what ” Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
BREAD-corn. n.ſ.. [from bread and corn.] Corn of which bread
is made.
There was not one drop of beer in the town; the bread,
and bread-corn, ſufficed not for ſix days. Hayward.
When it is ripe, they gather it, and, bruiſing it among
bread-corn, they put it up into a veſſel, and keep it as food for
their ſlaves. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey, b. viii.
BREAD-Room. n.ſ. [In a ſhip.] A part of the hold ſeparated by
a bulk-head from the reit, where the bread and bisket for the
men are kept. Sea Dić.
BREADTH. n. ſ. [from bnab, broad, Saxon.] The meaſure of
any plain ſuperficies from ſide to ſide.
There is in Ticinum, in Italy, a church that hath windows
only from above: it is in length an hundred feet, in breadth
twenty, and in height near fifty; having a door in the midſt.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 704.
The river Ganges, according unto later relations, if not in
length, yet in breadth and depth, may be granted to excel it.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 7.
Then all approach the ſlain with vaſt ſurprize,
Admire on what a breadth of earth he lies. Dryden.
In our Gothick cathedrals, the narrowneſs of the arch makes
it riſe in height; the lowneſs opens it in breadth. Addison.
To BREAK. v. a. pret. I broke, or brake; part. paſſ broke, or
broken. [bjeccan, Saxon.]
1. To part by violence.
When I brake the five loaves among five thouſand, how
many baſkets of fragments took ye up Mark, viii. 10.
Let us break their bands aſunder, and caſt away their cords
from us. Pſalm ii. 3.
See, ſaid the ſire, how ſoon 'tis done;
Then took and broke them one by one :
So ſtrong you'll be in friendſhip ty'd;
So quickly broke, if you divide. Swift.
2. To burſt, or open by force.
Moſes tells us, that the fountains of the earth were broke
open, or clove aſunder. Burnet's Theory.
3. To pierce; to divide, as light divides darkneſs.
By a dim winking lamp, which feebly broke
The gloomy vapours, he lay ſtretch'd along. Dryden.
4. To deſtroy by violence. -
This is the fabrick, which, when God breakºth down, none
can build up again. Burmet's Theory.
5. To overcome ; to ſurmount.
Into my hand he forc'd the tempting gold,
While I with modeſt ſtruggling broke his hold. Gay.
6. To batter; to make breaches or gaps in.
I'd give bay Curtal, and his furniture,
My mouth no more were broken than theſe boys,
And writ as little beard. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
7. To cruſh or deſtroy the ſtrength of the body.
O father abbot'
An old man, broken with the ſtorms of ſtate,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye;
Give him a little carth for charity. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The breaking of that parliament
Bro'e him; as that diſhoneſt victory,
At Chaeronea, fatal to liberty,
Kill'd with report that old man eloquent. Milan.
Hºve not ſome of his vices weakened his body, and broke his
health have not others diſſipated his eſtate, and reduced him
to want? Tillºtſºn,
8. To fink or appal the ſpirit.
I'll brave her to her face;
Tº give my anger its free courſe againſt her:
Thou ſhalt ſce, Phoenix, how I'll break her pride. Philips,
9. To ſubdue.
Why, then, thou can'ſ not break her to the lute.—
-Why, no ; for ſhe hath broke the lute to me.
Shakeſp. I aming the Shrew,
Behold young Juba, the Numidian ſº &amp; Sh,
With how much care he forms himſelf to glory,
And breaks the fierceneſs of his native temper. Addison's Cato,
10. To cruſh; to diſable; to incapacitate.
The defeat of that day at Cropredy was much greater than
it then appeared to be ; and it even lººſe the heart of his army.
Carendon.
Your hopes without are vaniſh'd into ſmoke;
Your captains taken, and your armics broke. Dryden.
I 1. To weaken the mind.
Oppreſt nature ſleeps:
This reſt might yet have balm'd thy brºken ſenſes,
Which, if conveniency will not allow,
Stand in hard cure. Shakeſp. King Lear.
If any dabler in poetry dares venture upon the experiment,
he will only break his brains. Felton on the Claſſicks.
12. To tame; to train to obedience.
What boots it to break a colt, and to let him ſtreight run
looſe at random * Speºſer's State of Ireland.
So fºld before he's broke, he'll bear
Too great a ſtomach patiently to feel
The laſhing whip, or chew the curbing ſteel. May's Pirgil.
That hot-mouth'd beaſt that bears againſt the curb,
Hard to be broken even by lawful kings. Drydºn.
No ſports but what belong to war they know,
To break the ſtubborn colt, to bend the bow. Dryden.
Virtues like theſe,
Make human nature ſhine, reform the ſoul,
And break our fierce barbarians into men. Ad’ſºn's Cato.
13. To make bankrupt.
For this few know themſelves: for merchants broke,
View their eſtate with diſcontent and pain. JDavies.
The king's grown bankruſt, ſke a bººker man. Shakespeare.
With arts like theſe, rich Maho, when he ſpeaks,
Attracts all fees, and little a is brea/s. Dryden.
A command or call to be liberal, all of a ſudden impoveriſhes
the rich, breaks the merchant, and ſhuts up every private man's
exchequer. South.
14. To crack or open the ſkin, ſo as that the blood comes.
She could have run and waddled all about ; even the day be-
fore ſhe broke her brow ; and then my huſband took up the
child. Shakeſp. Romeo and Juliet.
Weak ſoul and blindly to deſtruction led:
She break her heart! ſhe'll ſooner break your head. Dryden.
I5. To violate a contračt or promiſe.
Lovers break not hours,
Unleſs it be to come before their time. Shakespeare. T. G. of War.
Pardon this fault, and, by my ſoul I ſwear,
I never more will break an oath with thee. Shakſº.
Did not our worthies of the houſe,
Before they broke the peace, break vows? IIudibras.
16. To infringe a law.
Unhappy man to break the pious laws
Of nature, pleading in his children's cauſe. Dryden.
17. To intercept; to hinder the effect of.
Break their talk, miſtreſs, quickly; my kinſman ſhall ſpeak
for himſelf. Shakeſp. Merry //ives of //indſºr.
Spirit of wine, mingled with common water, yet ſo as if the
firſt fall be broken, by means of a ſop, or otherwiſe, it ſtayeth
above. Bacon’s Phyſical Remains.
Think not my ſenſe of virtue is ſo ſmall;
I'll rather leap down firſt, and break your fall. Drydºz.
As one condemn’d to leap a precipice,
Who ſees before his eyes the depth below,
Stops ſhort, and looks about for ſome kind ſhrub,
To break his dreadful fall. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
She held my hand, the deſtin’d blow to break,
Then from her roſy lips began to ſpeak. Dryden.
18. To interrupt.
Some folitary cloiſter will I chooſe,
Coarſe my attire, and ſhort ſhall be my ſleep,
Broke by the melancholy midnight belſ. Dryden's Sp. Fria”.
The father was ſo moved, that he could only command his
voice, broke with ſighs and ſobbings, ſo far as to bid her pro-
ceed. - Addiſon. Speiator, N° 164.
The poor ſhade ſhiv'ring ſtands, and muſt not break
His painful ſilence, till the mortal ſpeak. ‘ſickel'.
Sometimes in broken words he figh’d his care,
Look'd pale, and tumbled when he view'd the air. Gay.
19. To ſeparate company.
Did not Paul and Barnabas diſpute with that vehemence,
that they were forced to break company? Atterbury.
20. To diſſolve any union.
It is great folly, as well as injuſtice, to break off ſo noble a
relation. Collier of F, iendſhip.
21. To reform ; with of
The French were not quite brºn ºf it, until ſome time after
they became chriſtians, Grºw's Cºlºgia Sacra, b. iii. c. 6.
§<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
22. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R E
B R E
-H -
22. To open ſomething new ; to propound ſomething by an
OVerture.
When any new thing ſhall be propounded, no counſellor
ſhould ſuddenly deliver any poſitive opinion, but only hear it,
and, at the moſt, but to break it, at firſt, that it may be the
better underſtood at the next meeting. Bacon.
I, who much deſir'd to know
Of whence ſhe was, yet fearful how to break
My mind, adventur'd humbly thus to ſpeak. Dryden's Fab.
23. To break the back. To ſtrain or diſlocate the vertebrae with
too heavy burdens.
I'd rather crack my finews, break my back,
Than you ſhould ſuch diſhonour undergo. Shakeſp. Tempſ!.
24. To break the back. To diſable one's fortune.
- O, many
Have broke their backs, with laying manors on 'em,
For this great journey. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
25. Tº break a deer. To cut it up at table.
26. To breakfaſt. To eat the firſt time in the day.
27. To break ground. To plow.
When the price of corn falleth, men generally give over
ſurplus tillage, and break no more ground than will ſerve to ſup-
ply their own turn. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
The huſbandman muſt firſt break the land, before it be made
capable of good ſeed. Sir J. Davieſ on Ireland.
28. To break ground. To open trenches.
29. To break the heart. To deſtroy with grief.
Good my lord, enter here.
—Will't break my heart?
I’d rather break mine own.
Should not all relations bear a part?
It were enough to break a ſingle heart.
30. To break a jeft. To utter a jeſt unexpected.
31. To break the neck. To lux, or put out the neck joints.
I had as lief thou didſt break his neck, as his fingers. Shakeſp.
32. To break off. To put a ſudden ſtop.
33. ſº off. To preclude by ſome obſtacle ſuddenly inter-
poled. -
To check the ſtarts and ſallies of the ſoul,
Shakespeare, King Lear,
Dryden.
And break off all its commerce with the tongue. Addiſon.
34. To break up. To diſſolve; to put a ſudden end to.
Who cannot reſt till he good fellows find;
He breaks up houſe, turns out of doors his mind. Herbert:
He threatened, that the tradeſmen would beat out his teeth,
if he did not retire immediately, and break up the meeting.
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of j. Bull.
35. To break up. To open ; to lay open.
The ſhells being thus lodged amongſt this mineral matter,
when this comes now to be broke up, it exhibits impreſſions of
the ſhells. - JWoodward on Foſſils.
36. To break up. To ſeparate or diſband.
After taking the ſtrong city of Belgrade, Solyman returning
to Conſtantinople, broke up his army, and there lay ſtill the
whole year following. Knºles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
37. To break upon the wheel. To puniſh by ſtretching a criminal
upon the wheel, and breaking his bones with bats.
38. To break wind. To give vent to wind in the body.
To BREAK. v. n.
1. To part in two:
Give ſorrow words, the grief that does not ſpeak,
Whiſpers the o'erfraught heart, and bids it break. Shakeſp.
2. To burſt.
The clouds are ſtill above; and, while I ſpeak,
A ſecond deluge o'er our heads may break. Dryden.
The Roman camp
Hangs o'er us black and threatning, like a ſtorm
Juſt breaking on our heads. Dryden's All fºr Love.
3 - To burſt by daſhing, as waves on a rock.
He could compare the confuſion of a multitude to that tu-
mult in the Icarian ſea, daſhing and breaking among its crowd
of iſlands. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
At laſt a falling billow ſtops his breath,
Breaks o'er his head, and whelms him underneath. Dryden.
To break as a ſwelling; to open, and diſcharge matter.
Some hidden abſceſs in the meſentery, breaking ſome few
&lt;days after, was diſcovered to be an apoſteme. Harvey.
Aſk one who hath ſubdued his natural rage, how he likes the
schange, and undoubtedly he will tell you, that it is no leſs
It happy than the eaſe of a broken impoſtume, after the painful
sathering and filling of it. Decay of Piety.
I'o open as the morning.
The day breaks not, it is my heart,
Becauſe that I and you muſt part.
Stay, or elſe my joys will die,
And periſh in their infancy. Donne.
When a man thinks of any thing in the darkneſs of the
**ight, whatever deep impreſſions it may make in his mind,
*hey are apt to vaniſh as ſoon as the day breaks about him.
Addison. Speciator, N° 465.
To burſt forth; to exclaim.
Every man,
After the hideous ſtorm that follow'd, was
3
A thing inſpir’d ; and, not conſulting, lºc - - -
Into a general prophecy. Slakºff. Hºy VIII.
7. To become bankrupt.
I did mean, indeed, to pay you with this; which, iſ, like an
i!! venture, it come unluckily home, I break, and you, my
gentle creditors, loſe. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii. Epiſºgº.
He that puts all upon adventures, doth oſtentimes break, and
come to poverty. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 35.
Cutler ſaw tenants break, and houſes fail,
For very want he could not build a wall. P:2.
8. To decline in health and ſtrength.
Yet thus, methinks, I hear them ſpeak;
Sce how the dean begins to break:
Poor gentleman he droops apace. Swift.
9. To iſſue out with vehemence. - -
Whoſe wounds, yet freſh, with bloody hands he flrook,
While from his breaſt the dreadful accents broke. Pºpe.
1c. To make way with ſome kind of ſuddeneſs, impetuoſity, or
violence. -
Calamities may be neareſt at hand, and readieſt to trea; in
ſuddenly upon us, which we, in regard of times or circum-
ſtances, may imagine to be fartheſt off. Hooter, h. v. § 4 I.
The three mighty men broke through the hoſt of the Philiſ-
tines. 2 Sazi. xxiii. 16.
They came into Judah, and brake into it. 2 Clººn. xxi. I 7.
Or who ſhut up the ſea within doors, when it braſe forth, as
iſ it had iſſued out of the womb jo', xxxviii. 8.
This, this is he ſoftly awhile,
Let us not break in upon him. Milton’s Azani/les, l. 1 i 8.
He reſolved, that Balfour ſhould uſe his utinoſt endeavour to
break through with his whole body of horſe. Clarendon, b. viii.
When the channel of a river is overcharged with water,
more than it can deliver, it neceſſarily breaks over the banks,
to make itſelf room. }. Origin of Mankind.
Sometimes his anger breaks through all diſguiſes,
And ſpares not gods nor men. Denham's Sophy.
Till through thoſe clouds the ſun of knowledge lyaſe,
And Europe from her lethargy did wake. Denham.
Oh! could'ſt thou break through fate's ſevere decree,
A new Marcellus ſhall ariſe in thee. Dryden's A, neid.
At length I’ve ačted my ſevereſt part;
I feel the woman breaking in upon me,
And melt about my heart, my tears will flow. Addison's Cato.
How does the luſtre of our father's actions,
Through the dark cloud of ills that cover him,
Break out, and burn with more triumphant blazel Addison.
- And yet, methinks, a beam of light breaks in,
On my departing ſoul. Addison’s Cº.
There are not wanting ſome, who, ſtruck with the uſeful-
neſs of theſe charities, break through all the difficultics and ob-
ſtructions that now lie in the way towards advancing them.
Auerbary.
Almighty pow'r, by whoſe moſt wiſe command,
Helpleſs, forlorn, uncertain here I ſtand;
Take this faint glimmering of thyſelf away,
Or break into my ſoul with perfect day ! Arbuthnct.
Heav'n its ſparkling portals wide diſplay,
And break upon thee in a flood of day ! Pºpe’s Mºſah.
I muſt pay her the laſt duty of friendſhip wherever ſhe is,
though I break through the whole plan of life which I have
formed in my mind. Swift's Letters.
11. To come to an explanation.
But perceiving this great alteration in his friend, he thought
fit to break with him thereof. Sidney, v. i.
Stay with me awhile;
I am to break with thee of ſome affairs,
That touch me near. Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Perona.
Break with them, gentle love,
About the drawing as many of their huſbands
Into the plot, as can ; if not, to rid 'em,
That'll be the eaſier practice. B. Johnſºn's Catili.e.
12. To fall out; to be friends no longer.
- Be not afraid to break
With murd’rers, and traitors, for the ſaying
A life ſo near and neceſſary to you,
As is your country's. B. Jºhnſºn's Catºne.
To break upon the ſcore of danger or expence, is to be mean
and narrow-ſpirited. Collier on Friendſhip.
Sighing, he ſays, we muſt certainly break,
And my cruel unkindneſs compels him to ſpeak. Prizr.
13. To break from. To ſeparate from with ſome vehemence.
How didſt thou ſcorn life's meaner charms,
Thou who cou’dſt break from Laura's arms? Roſſommon.
Thus radiant from the circling crowd he broke;
And thus with manly modeſty he ſpoke. Dryden's Jºrgil.
This cuſtom makes bigots and ſcepticks; and thoſe that
break from it, are in danger of hereſy. Locłe.
14. To break in. To enter unexpectedly, without proper prepa-
ration.
The doćtor is a pedant, that, with a deep voice, and a nº-
giſterial air, breaks in upon converſation, and drives down ałł
before him. Adººr cº ſº.
15.
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R E
º
i
's. 7% break. To diſcard. -
When I ſee a great officer broke, a change made in the court,
or the miniſtry, and this under the moſt gracious princeſs that
ever reigned. - - Swift.
16. To break loºſe. To eſcape from captivity. . . -
Who would not, finding way, break loºſe from hell,
And boldly venture to whatever place,
Fartheſt from pain : A ſilton's Par. Loft, b. iv. l. 889,
17. Tº break lººſe. To ſhake off reſtraint. -
If we deal falſely in covenant with God, and break looſe from
all our engagements to him, we releaſe God from all the pro-
miſes he has made to us. Tillaſon.
18. To break off. To deſiſt ſuddenly.
Do not peremptorily break off, in any buſineſs, in a fit of
anger; but howſoever, you ſhew bitterneſs, do not act any
thing that is not revocable. Bacon.
Pius Quintus, at the very time when that memorable vic-
tory was won by the Chriſtians at Lepanto, being then hearing
of cauſes in conſiſtory, broke off ſuddenly, and ſaid to thoſe a-
bout him, it is now more time we ſhould give thanks to God.
Bacon.
When you begin to conſider, whether you may ſafely take
one draught more, let that be accounted a ſign late enough to
break off. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
19. To break off from. To part from with violence.
I muſt from this enchanting queen break off. Shakespeare.
20. To break out. To diſcover itſelf in ſudden effects.
Let not one ſpark of filthy luſtful fire
Break out, that may her ſacred peace moleſt. Spenser.
They ſmother and keep down the flame of the miſchief, ſo
as it may not break out in their time of government; what
comes afterwards, they care not. Spenſer's Ireland.
Such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour, that
ballad-makers cannot be able to expreſs it. Shakeſp.
As fire breaks out of flint by percuſſion, ſo wiſdom and truth
iflueth out of the agitation of argument. Howel. ,
Fully ripe, his ſwelling fate breaks out,
And hurries him to mighty miſchiefs on. Dryden.
All turn'd their ſides, and to each other ſpoke;
I ſaw their words break out in fire and ſmoke. Dryden.
Like a ball of fire, the further thrown,
Still with a greater blaze ſhe ſhone,
And her bright ſoul broke out on ev'ry ſide. Dryden.
There can be no greater labour, than to be always diſſem-
bling; there being ſo many ways by which a ſmothered truth is
apt to blaze, and break out. South.
They are men of concealed fire, that doth not break out in the
ordinary circumſtances of life. Addiſon on the J/ar.
A violent fever broke out in the place, which ſwept away great
multitudes. Addiſon. Spectator, N° 164.
21. To break out. To have eruptions from the body, as puſtules
or ſores.
22. To break out. To become diſſolute.
He broke not out into his great exceſſes, while he was re-
ſtrained by the counſels and authority of Seneca. Dryden.
23. To break up. To ceaſe; to intermit.
It is credibly affirmed, that, upon that very day, when the
river firſt riſeth, great plagues in Cairo uſe ſuddenly to break up.
Bacon's Natural Hiſt. Nº 743.
24. To break up. To diſſolve itſelf.
Theſe, and the like conceits, when men have cleared their
underſtanding, by the light of experience, will ſcatter and break
up, like miſt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 124.
The ſpeedy depredation of air upon watery moiſture, and
verſion of the ſame into air, appeareth in nothing more viſible,
than the ſudden diſcharge or vaniſhing of a little cloud of
breath, or vapour, from glaſs, or any poliſhed body; for the
Iniſlineſs ſcattereth, and breaketh up ſuddenly. Bacon.
But, ere he came near it, the pillar and croſs of light brake
up, and caſt itſelf abroad, as it were, into a firmament of many
ſtars. Bacon’s New Atlantis.
What we obtain by converſation, is oftentimes loſt again,
as ſoon as the company breaks up, or, at leaſt, when the day va-
niſhes. - J/atts.
25. Tº break up. To begin holidays; to be diſmiſſed from bu-
ſineſs.
Our army is diſpers'd already:
Like youthful ſteers unyok'd, they took their courſe
Eaſt, weſt, north, ſouth : or, like a ſchool broke up,
Each hurries tow'rds his home and ſporting-place. Shakſ).
20. To break with. To part friendſhip with any.
There is a ſlave whom we have put in priſon,
Reports, the Volſcians, with two ſeveral powers,
Arg entered in the Roman territories.—
...Gººg this rumourer whipt. It cannot be,
The Volſcians dare break with us. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Can there be any thing of friendſhip in ſnares, hooks, and
traPans ? Whoſoever break, with his friend upon ſuch terms,
has enough to warrant him in ſº, doing, both before God and
and man. *-* South.
Invent ſome apt pretence,
To break with Bertran. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
27. It is to be ºbſerved of this extenſive and perplexed ver, that,
in all its fignifications, whether ačive or neutral, it has ſome re-
ference to its primitive meaning, by implying either detriment,
ſuddenneſs, or violence.
BREAK. *{ [from the verb.]
1. State of being broken; opening.
From the break of day until noon, the roaring of the can-
non never ceaſed. Knºlles's Hiſ of the Turks.
For now, and ſince firſt break of day, the fiend,
Mere ſerpent in appearance, forth was come. Párad. Loſt.
They muſt be drawn from far, and without breaks, to avoid
the multiplicity of lines. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The fight of it would be quite loſt, did it not ſometimes diſ-
cover itſelf through the breaks and openings of the woods that
grow about it. Addison.
2. A pauſe ; an interruption.
3. A line drawn, noting that the ſenſe is ſuſpended.
All modern traſh is
Set forth with num'rous breaks and daſhes. Swift.
BREAKER. m. ſ. [from break.]
1. He that breaks anything.
Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law. Shakespeare. H. IV:
If the churches were not employed to be places to hear
God’s law, there would be need of them, to be priſons for the
breakers of the laws of men. South.
2. A wave broken by rocks or ſandbanks.
To BREAK FAst. v. n. [from break and faſt.] To eat the firſt
meal in the day. -
As ſoon as Phoebus' rays inſpect us,
Firſt, Sir, I read, and then I breakfaſt.
BREAK FAst. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
1. The firſt meal in the day.
The duke was at breakfaſt, the laſt of his repaſts in this
Prior.
world. //otton.
2. The thing eaten at the firſt meal.
Hope is a good breakfaſt, but it is a bad ſupper. Bacon.
A good piece of bread would be often the beſt breakfaſt for
my young maſter. - Locke.
3. A meal, or food in general.
Had I been ſeized by a hungry lion,
I would have been a breakfaſt to the beaſt. Shakeſp.
I lay me down to gaſp my lateſt breath,
The wolves will get a breakfy? by my death,
Yet ſcarce enough their hunger to ſupply. Dryden.
BRE'AkNEck. n.ſ.. [from break and neck.] A fall in which the
neck is broken; a ſteep place endangering the neck.
I muſt
Forſake the court; to do.'t or no, is certain
To me a breakneck. Shakespeare. Winter's Tale.
BRE'AkpRomise. n. ſ. [from break and promiſe.] One that
makes a pračtice of breaking his promiſe.
I will think you the moſt atheiſtical breakpromiſe, and the
moſt hollow lover. Shakeſp. As you like it.
BREAK vow. m. ſ. [from break and vow.] He that practiſes the
breach of vows.
That daily break vow, he that wins of all,
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids.
i Shakeſp. King jºhn.
BREAM. m. ſ. ſhrame, Fr.] The name of a fiſh.
The bream being at full growth, is a large fiſh; he will breed
both in rivers and ponds, but loves beſt to live in ponds. He
is, by Geſner, taken to be more elegant than wholſome. He is
long in growing, but breeds exceedingly in a water that pleaſes
him, and, in many ponds, ſo faſt as to overſtock them, and
flarve the other fiſh. He is very broad, with a forked tail, and
his ſcales ſet in excellent order. He hath large eyes, and a
narrow ſucking mouth, two ſets of teeth, and a lozing bone,
to help his grinders. The male is obſerved to have two large
melts, and the female two large bags of eggs or ſpawn.
J/alton's Angler:
A broad bream, to pleaſe ſome curious taſte,
While yet alive in boiling water caſt,
Vex'd with unwonted heat, boils, flings about.
BREAST. m. ſ. [bneore, Saxon.]
1. The middle part of the human body, between the neck and
the belly. -
2. The dügs or teats of women which contain the milk.
The ſubſtance of the breaſts is compoſed of a great number
of glands, of an oval figure, which lie in a great quantity of
fat. Their excretory ducts, as º approach the nipple, join
and unite together, till at laſt they form ſeven, eight, or more,
ſmall pipes, called tubuli ladiſºri, which have ſeveral croſs ca-
nals, by which they communicate with one another, that if any
of them be ſtopped, the milk, which was brought to it, might
not ſtagnate, but paſs through by the other pipes, which all ter-
minate in the extremity of the nipple. They have arteries and
veins from the ſubclavian and intercoſtal. They have nerves
from the vertebral pairs, and from the fixth pair of the brain.
Their uſe is to ſeparate the milk for the nouriſhment of the
foetus. The tubes, which compoſe the glands of the breaſ? in
maids, like a ſphinéter muſcle, contračt ſo cloſely, that no part
of the blood can enter them; but when the womb grows big
J/aller.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
+ with
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">* with a fetus, and compreſſes the deſcending trink of the great
artery, the blood flows in a greater quantity, and with a greater
force, through the arteries of the bred/ls, and forces a paſſage
into their glands, which, being at firſt narrow, admits only of
a thin water; but growing wider by degrees, as the womb
grows bigger, the glands receive a thick ſerum, and, after
- birth, they run with a thick milk; becauſe that blood, which
• before did flow to the foetus, and, for three or four days after-
wards, by the uterus, beginning then to ſtop, does more dilate
7. the mamillary glands. - 9tuincy.
d They pluck the fatherleſs from the breaff. job, xxiv. 9.
º 3. The part of a beaſt that is under the neck, between the fore-
|\\- legs.
hat g
4. The heart; the conſcience; the diſpoſition of the mind.
ſºn, Needleſs was written law, where none oppreſt;
The law of man was written in his breaſi. Dryden's Ovid.
5. The paſſions; the regard.
Margarita firſt poſſeſs'd,
If I remember well, my breaft. Cowley.
To BREAst. v. a. [from the noun..] To meet in front; to op-
poſe breaſt to breaſt.
The threaden ſails
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrow'd ſea,
Breaſing the lofty ſurge. Shakeſp. Henry V.
BRE'AstBone. n.ſ.. [from breaſ? and bone.] The bone of the
breaſt; the ſternum.
The belly ſhall be eminent by ſhadowing the flank, and un-
der the brea/?bone. Peacham.
BRE'AstcAskE.T. n.ſ.. [from breaft and caſket.] With mari-
ners. The largeſt and longeſt caſkets, which are a ſort of
ſtrings placed in the middle of the yard.
BRE'Asr FAST, n.ſ.. [from breaſ, and faſt.] In a ſhip. A rope
faſtened to ſome part of her forward on, to hold her head to a
warp, or the like. Harris.
\ BRE'Ast HIGH. adj. [from breaft and high.] Up to the breaſt.
N The river itſelf gave way unto her, ſo that ſhe was ſtraight
bred/?high. Sidney.
Lay madam Partlet baſking in the ſun,
Brea/high in ſand. Dryden's Fables.
BRE'Ast Hooks. m. ſ. [from breaſ? and hook.] With ſhipwrights.
The compaſſing timbers before, that help to ſtrengthen the
ſtem, and all the forepart of the ſhip. Harris.
BRE'Ast kNot. n.ſ.. [from breaſ? and knot..] A knot or bunch
of ribbands worn by women on the breaſt.
Our ladies have ſtill faces, and our men hearts, why may we
n not hope for the ſame atchievements from the influence of this
breaſiknot * Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 1 1.
IRE'Ast PLATE. n.ſ.. [from breaſ? and plate.] Armour for the
breaſt.
als. What ſtronger breaſ plate than a heart untainted:
hat Thrice is he arm’d, that hath his quarrel juſt. Shakeſp.
'Gainſt ſhield, helm, breaſ plate, and, inſtead of thoſe,
te Five ſharp ſmooth ſtones from the next brook he choſe.
º Cowley.
This venerable champion will come into the field, armed
only with a pocket-piſtol, before his old ruſty brea/plate could
be ſcoured, and his cracked headpiece mended. Swift.
*. IERE'Ast Ploug H. m. ſ. [from breaſt and plough..] A plough uſed
for paring turf, driven by the breaſt.
The breaſ plough, which a man ſhoves before him. Mortim.
IERE'Astropes. n. ſ. [from breaſt and rope.] In a ſhip. Thoſe
ropes which faſten the yards to the parrels, and, with the par-
rels, hold the yards faſt to the maſt. Harris.
TE RE'AstwoRk. m. ſ. [from breaft and work.] Works thrown
up as high as the breaſt of the defendants; the ſame with pa-
2^a fief.
Sir John Aſtley caſt up breaſ works, and made a redoubt for
the defence of his men. - Clarendon, b. viii.
* E REATH. n ſ. [brače, Saxon.]
r - The air drawn in and ejected out of the body by living ani-
rrnals.
Whither are they vaniſh'd?
Into the air: and what ſeem'd corporal
Melted, as breath into the wind.
Life.
No man has more contempt than I of breath;
But whence haſt thou the pow'r to give me death Dryden.
The ſtate or power of breathing freely; oppoſed to the con-
&lt;dition in which a man is breathleſs and ſpent.
At other times, he caſts to ſue the chace
Of ſwift wild beaſts, or run on foot a race,
Tº enlarge his breath, large breath in arms moſt needful,
Or elſe, by wreſtling, to wax ſtrong and heedful. Spenſer.
What is your difference ſpeak.-
—I am ſcarce in breath, my lord. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Spaniard, take breath; ſome reſpite I'll afford;
y cauſe is more advantage than your ſword.
Shakespeare King Lear.
* &gt; -
~3 -
Dryden.
_ Our ſwords ſo wholly did the fates employ,
hat they, at length, grew weary to deſtroy;
Refus’d the work we brought, and out of breath,
-ā- Made ſorrow and deſpair attend for death. Dryden's Aurong.
- ſ
-DERs
V
piration; the pºwer of breathing.
oL. I.
***
Reſt, that gives all men life, gave him his death,
And too much breathing put him out of b, cath.
5. Reſpite ; pauſe; relaxation.
Give me ſome breath; ſome little pauſe, dear lord,
Before I poſitively ſpeak. Shaftºff. Kichard III,
6. Breeze; moving air.
Vent all thy paſſion, and I’ll ſtand its ſhock,
Calm and unruffled as a ſummer's fea,
When not a breath of wind flies o'er its ſurface. Addison Catc.
A ſliºn.
7. A ſingle act; an inſtant.
You menace me, and court me in a breath,
Your Cupid looks as dreadfully as death. Dryden,
BRF'ATH ABLE. adj. [from breath.] That may be breathed;
as, breathable air. -
To BREATHE. v. n. [from breath.]
1. To draw in and throw out the air by the lungs.
Safe return'd, the race of glory paſt, o
New to his friends embrace, had braib'd his laſt.
2. To live.
Let him breathe, between the heav'ns and carth,
A private man in Athens. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
3. To take breath; to reſt.
He preſently followed the vićtory ſo hot upon the Scots, that
Pope.
he ſuffered them not to breathe, or gather themſelves together
again. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Three times they breath'd, and three times did they drinks
Upon agreement. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
When France had breath'd, after inteſtine broils,
And peace and conqueſt crown'd her foreign toils. Roſcomm.
4. To paſs by breathing.
Shall I not then be ſtifled in the vault,
To whoſe foul mouth no healthſome air breathe; in;
And there be ſtrang!'d ere my Romeo comes
To BREATHE. v. a.
1. To inſpire, or inhale into one's own body, and ejećt or expire
out of it.
Shakeſp.
They wiſh to live,
Their pains and poverty deſire to bear, -
To view the light of heav'n, and breatke the vital air. Dryd.
They here began to breathe a moſt delicious kind of aether,
and ſaw all the fields about them covered with a kind of purple
light. Tatler, N° 81.
2. To injećt by breathing.
He breathed into us the breath of life, a vital ačtive ſpirit;
whoſe motions, he expects, ſhould own the dignity of its ori-
ginal. Decay of Piety.
I would be young, be handſome, be belov’d,
Could I but breathe myſelf into Adraſtus. Dryden.
3. To expire; to eject by breathing. -
She is called, by ancient authours, the tenth muſe; and, by
Plutarch, is compared to Caius, the ſon of Vulcan, who
breathed out nothing but flame. Spectator, N° 223.
4. To exerciſe; to keep in breath.
Thy greyhounds are as ſwift as breathed ſtags. Shakesp.
5. To inſpire; to move or actuate by breath.
The artful youth proceed to form the quire;
They breathe the flute, or ſtrike the vocal wire. Prior.
6. To exhale; to ſend out as breath.
His altar breather
Ambroſial odours, and ambroſial flow’rs. Milton's Par. Lºft.
7. To utter privately. º
I have tow’rd heaven breath'd a ſecret vow, -
To live in prayer and contemplation. Shakeſp. Mer, of Wen
8. To give air or vent to.
The ready cure to cool the raging pain,
Is underneath the foot to breathe a vein.
BREATHER. m.ſ.. [from breathe.]
I. One that breathes, or lives.
She ſhows a body rather than a life,
A ſtatue than a breather. Shakespeare. Antony and Cleofatra:
I will chide no breather in the world but myſelf. Shakeſp.
2. One that utters any thing.
No particular ſcandal once can touch,
But it confounds the breather. Shakeſp Meaſ for Maſºre.
3. Inſpirer; one that animates or infuſes by inſpiration.
The breather of all life does now expire:
Dryden's Virgil.
His milder father ſummons him away. Nºrris.
BRE'ATHING.. n.ſ.. [from breathe.]
1. Aſpiration; ſecret prayer.
While to high heav'n his pious breathings turn'd,
Weeping he hop'd, and ſacrificing mourn'd. Prior.
2. Breathing place; vent.
The warmth diſtends the chinks, and makes
New breathings, whence new nouriſhment ſhe takes. Dryd.
BRE'ATHLEss. adj. [from breath.]
1. Out of breath; ſpent with labour.
Well knew
The prince, with patience and ſufferance fly,
So haſty heat ſoon cooled to ſubdue ;
Tho' when he breathleſs wax, that battle 'gan renew. Fairy 2.
I remember when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage, and extreme toil,
3 O Breatºſ,
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R. E.
B R E º
|
l
Breathleſ, and faint, leaning upon my ſword,
Came there a certain lord.
Breathl'ſ, and tird, is all my fury ſpent,
Or does my glutted ſpleen at length relent? Dryden's AFn.
2. Dead.
Kneeling before this ruin of ſweet life,
And breathing to this breathleſ, excellence,
The incenſe of a vow, a holy vow.
Yielding to the ſentence, breathleſs thou
And pale ſhalt lie, as what thou burieſt now. Prior.
BRED. particip. paſſ. [from to breed.]
Their malice was bred in them, and their cogitation would
//iſdom, xii. to.
never be changed.
BREDE. n.ſ. See BRAID.
In a curious brede of needle-work, one colour falls away by
ſuch juſt degrees, and another riſes ſo inſenſibly, that we ſee
the variety, without being able to diſtinguiſh the total vaniſh-
ing of the one, from the firſt appearance of the other. Addiſon.
BREECH. m. ſ. [ſuppoſed from braican, Sax.]
1. The lower part of the body; the back part.
When the king's pardon was offered by a herauld, a lewd
boy turned towards him his naked breech, and uſed words ſuit-
Hayward.
The ſtorks devour ſnakes and other ſerpents; which when
they begin to creep out at their breeches, they will preſently clap
Grew's Muſæum.
able to that geſture.
them cloſe to a wall, to keep them in.
2. Breeches.
Ah! that thy father had been ſo reſolv’d l—
—That you might ſtill have worn the petticoat,
And ne'er have ſtoln the breech from Lancaſter. Shakespeare.
3. The hinder part of a piece of ordnance.
So cannons, when they mount vaſt pitches,
Are tumbl’d back upon their breeches. Anonym.
To BREEch. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To put into breeches.
2. To fit any thing with a breech; as, to breech a gun.
BRE'EchFs. n.ſ. ſbrac, Sax, from bracca, an old Gauliſh word;
ſo that Skinner imagines the name of the part covered with
breeches, to be derived from that of the garment. In this ſenſe
it has no ſingular.]
1. The garment worn by men over the lower part oft e body.
Petrachio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, and a
pair of old breeches, thrice turned. Shakeſp. Taming the Shrew.
Rough ſatires, ſly remarks, ill-natur'd ſpeeches,
Are always aim'd at poets that wear breeches. Prior.
Give him a ſingle coat to make, he'd do't ;
A veſt, or breeches, ſingly; but the brute
Cou'd ne'er contrive all three to make a ſuit.
King's Art of Cookery.
2. To wear the breeches, is, to uſurp the authority of the huſ-
bands.
The wife of Xanthus was proud and domineering, as if her
fortune, and her extraction, had entitled her to the breeches.
L’Eſtrange.
To BREED. v. a. preter. I bred, I have bred. [braeban, Sax.]
1. To procreate; to generate; to produce more of the ſpecies.
None fiercer in Numidia bred,
With Carthage were in triumph led.
2. To occaſion; to cauſe; to produce.
Thereat he roared for exceeding pain,
That, to have heard, great horrour would have bred. F. Q.
Our own hearts we know, but we are not certain what hope
the rites and orders of our church have bred in the hearts of
others. Hooker, b. iv.
What hurt ill company, and overmuch liberty, ircedeth in
youth ! Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
Intemperance and luſt breed infirmities and diſeaſes, which,
being propagated, ſpoil the ſtrain of a nation. Tillotſon.
3. To contrive ; to hatch; to plot. -
My ſon Edgar' had he a hand to write this! a heart and
brain to breed it in Shakeſp. King Lear.
4. To produce from one's ſelf.
- Children would breed their teeth with much leſs danger.
Locke on Education.
Roſcommon.
5. To give birth to ; to be the native place.
Mr. Harding, and the worthieſt divine chriſtendom hath bred
for the ſpace of ſome hundreds of years, were brought up toge-
ther in the ſame univerſity. Hooker.
- Hail, foreign wonder'
Whom, certain, theſe rough ſhades did never breed. Milton.
6. To educate; to qualify by education.
Whoc'er thou art, whoſe forward years are bent
On ſtate-affairs to guide the government;
Hear firſt what Socrates of old has ſaid
To the lov'd youth, whom he at Athens bred. Dryden.
To breed up the ſon to common ſenſe,
Is evermore the parent's leaſt expence. Dryden's juvenal.
And left the pillagers, to rapine bred,
Without controul, to ſtrip and ſpoil the dead. Dryden.
His farm may not remove his children too far from him, or
the trade he breed; them up in. Locke.
Shakºp. Henry IV. p. i.
Many ſo ſtrained themſelves in their race, that they fell
down breathleſ, and dead. Hayward.
Shakeſp. King john.
7: To bring up; to take care of from infancy.
Bºed up in grief, can pleaſure be our theme
Our endleſs anguiſh, does not nature claim ;
Reaſon and ſorrow are to us the ſame. Prior.
Ah, wretched me! by fates averſe decreed
To bring thee forth with pain, with care to breed. Dryden.
To BREED. v. n.
1. To bring young.
Lucina, it ſeems, was breeding, and ſhe did nothing but en-
tertain the company with a diſcourſe upon the difficulty of rec-
koning to a day. Spectator, N° 431.
2. To encreaſe by new produćtion.
But could youth laſt, and love ſtill breed,
Had joys no date, and age no need;
Then theſe delights my mind might move
To live with thee, and be thy love. Raleigh.
3. To be produced; to have birth. º
Where they moſt breed and haunt, I have obſerv’d,
The air is delicate. Shakeſp. King Lear.
There is a worm that breedeth in old ſnow, and dieth ſoon
after it cometh out of the ſnow. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 696.
The caterpillar is one of the moſt general of worms, and
breedeth of dew and leaves. - Bacon.
It hath been the general tradition and belief, that maggots
and flies breed in putrefied carcaſes. Bentley.
4. To raiſe a breed.
In the choice of ſwine, chooſe ſuch to breed of as are of
long large bodies. AMortimer.
BREED. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A caſt; a kind; a ſubdiviſion of ſpecies.
I bring you witneſſes,
Twice fifteen thouſand hearts of England's breed. Shakespeare .
The horſes were young'and handſome, and of the beſt breed
in the north. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Walled towns, ſtored arſenals, and ordnance; all this is but
a ſheep in a lion's skin, except the breed and diſpoſition of the
people be ſtout and warlike. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 3 o.
Infectious ſtreams of crowding ſins began,
And through the ſpurious breed and guilty nation ran.
Roſcommon.
Rode fair Aſcanius on a firy ſteed,
Queen Dido's gift, and of the Tyrian breed. Dryden.
A couſin of his laſt wife's was propoſed; but John would
have no more of the breed. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of j. Bull.
2. Progeny; offspring.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friend; for when did friendſhip take
A breed of barren metal of his friend ? Shakeſp. Mer. of Wen.
3. A number produced at once; a hatch.
She lays them in the ſand, where they lie till they are hatch-
ed; ſometimes above an hundred at a breed. Grew's Muſeum.
BRE'EDBATE. n.ſ.. [from breed and bate.] One that breeds
quarrels; an incendiary.
An honeſt, willing, kind fellow, as ever ſervant ſhall come
in houſe withal; and, I warrant you, no teltale, nor no breed-
bate. Shakeſp. Merry I/ives ºf JWindſºr.
BRE'EDER. m. ſ. [from breed.]
1. That which produces anything.
Time is the nurſe and breeder of all good. Shakespeare .
2. The perſon which brings up another.
Time was, when Italy and Rome have been the beſt breeders
and bringers up of the worthieſt men. Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
3. A female that is prolifick.
Get thee to a nunnery; why wouldſt thou be a breeder of
ſinners ? Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Here is the babe, as loathſome as a toad,
Amongſt the faireſt breeders of our time. Shakeſp. Tit. Azdr.
Let there be an hundred perſons in London, and as many in
the country, we ſay, that if there be ſixty of them breeders in
London, there are more than fixty in the country.
Yet if a friend a night or two ſhould need her,
He'd recommend her as a ſpecial breeder. Pope.
4. One that takes care to raiſe a breed.
The breeders of Engliſh cattle turned much to dairy, or elſe
kept their cattle to fix or ſeven years old. Temple.
BRE'EDING. m. ſ. [from breed.]
1. Education; inſtruction; qualifications.
She had her breeding at my father's charge,
A poor phyſician's daughter. Shakeſp. All's well that end, well.
I am agentleman of blood and breeding. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
I hope to ſee it a piece of none of the meaneſt breeding, to be
acquainted with the laws of nature. Glanville's Scepſis, Pref.
2. Manners; knowledge of ceremony.
As men of breeding, ſometimes men of wit,
Grazzºit.
Tº avoid great errours, muſt the leſs commit. Pope.
The Graces from the court did next provide
Breeding, and wit, and air, and decent pride. Swift.
3. Nurture; care to bring up from the infant ſtate.
Why was my breeding order'd and preſcrib'd,
As of a perſon ſeparate to God,
Deſign'd for great exploits. Milton's Agoniſłes, l. 3 o.
BREESE. n.ſ.. [bplora, Saxon.] A ſtinging fly; the sºr
he<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R I
The learned write, the infect breeſe
Is but the mongrel prince of bees. Hudibras,
A fierce loud buzzing breeſ, their ſtings draw blood,
And drive the cattle gadding through the wood;
Seiz'd with unuſual pains, they loudly cry;
Tanagrus haſtens thence, and leaves his channels dry. Dryd.
BREEZE. m. ſ. [brezza, Ital.] A gentle gale; a ſoft wind.
- We find, that theſe hotteſt regions of the world, feated un-
- der the equinočtial line, or near it, are ſo refreſhed with a daily
- gale of eaſterly wind, which the Spaniards call breeze, that doth
ever more blow ſtrongeſt in the heat of the day. Raleigh.
From land a gentle breeze aroſe by night,
Serenely ſhone the ſtars, the moon was light, !
r And the ſea trembled with her ſilver light. Dryden.
Sø. Gradual ſinks the breeze
Into a perfeót calm : that not a breath
Is heard to quiver through the cloſing wood. Thomſºn.
BRE'EzY. adj. [from breeze.] Fanned with gales.
The ſeer, while zephyrs curl the ſwelling deep,
Baſks on the breezy ſhore, in grateful ſleep,
His oozy limbs. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iii. l. 545.
BRE'HoN. n.ſ. An Iriſh word.
In the caſe of murder, the brehon, that is, their judge, will
compound between the murderer and the party murdered,
which proſecute the action, that the malefactor ſhall give unto
them, or to the child or wife of him that is ſlain, a recom-
pence, which they call an eriach. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
BREME. adj. [from briemman, Sax. to rage or fume.] Cruel;
ſharp; ſevere.
And when the ſhining ſun laugheth once,
You deemen the ſpring come at once:
But eft, when you count, you freed from fear,
Comes the breme winter, with chamfred brows,
Full of wrinkles, and froſty furrows. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
BRENT. adj. [from bnennan, Sax. to burn.] Burnt.
What flames, quoth he, when I thee preſent ſee
In danger rather to be drent than brent P Fairy Queen, b. ii.
ISREST. m. ſ. [In architecture.] That member of a column, called
alſo the torus, or tore.
IBREst Summers. The pieces in the outward parts of any tim-
ber building, and in the middle floors, into which the girders
are framed. Harris.
IBRET. n.ſ. A fiſh of the turbut kind, called alſo burt or brut.
Diff.
IBRE'THREN. m.ſ. [The plural of brother.] See BRother.
All theſe ſects are brethren to each other in faction, igno-
rance, iniquity, perverſeneſs, pride. Swift.
—ZłREWE. m. ſ. [In muſick.] A note or chara&amp;ter of time, equi-
valent to two meaſures or minims. Harris.
IERE'v1ARY. n.ſ.. [breviaire, Fr. breviarium, Lat.]
II. An abridgment; an epitome; a compendium.
Creſconius, an African biſhop, has given us an abridgment,
or breviary thereof. Ayliffe's Parergon.
-&gt;. The book containing the daily ſervice of the church of Rome.
—ERE'v1A.T. n.ſ.. [from brevis, brevio, Lat..] A ſhort compen-
dium.
It is obvious for the ſhalloweſt diſcourſer to infer, that the
whole counſel of God, as far as it is incumbent for man to
know, is compriſed in that one breviat of evangelical truth.
Decay of Piety.
IESRE'v1ATURE. m. ſ. [from brevio, Lat.] An abbreviation.
ER evi'ER. m. ſ. A particular ſize of letter uſed in printing;
ſo called, probably, from being originally uſed in printing a
&amp;reviary; as,
Nor love thy life, nor hate, but what thou liv'ſt,
Live well, how long or ſhort, permit to heav'n, Milton,
ly in E. R. E'vity. m. ſ. [brevitas, Lat.] Conciſeneſs; ſhortneſs; con-
lºn trađtion into few words. -
}rdºu. Virgil, ſtudying brevity, and having the command of his
&lt;&gt;wn language, could bring thoſe words into a narrow com-
Pºt. Paſs, which a tranſlator cannot render without circumlocu-
*: tions. Dryden.
2-&amp; TcP. BREW. v. a. [brouwen, Dutch; brawen, German; brupan,
º, Saxon.]
x - To make liquours by mixing ſeveral ingredients. -
We have drinks alſo brewed with ſeveral herbs, and roots,
== rid ſpices. Bacon.
Z tºº. Mercy guard me !
Hence with thy brew'd enchantments, foul deceiver. Milton.
= - To prepare by mixing things together.
Here's neither ruſh nor ſhrub to bear off any weather at all,
===d another ſtorm brewing. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Take away theſe chalices; go, brew me a pottle of ſack
firely. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
Or brew fierce tempeſts on the watry main,
Cr o'er the globe diſtil the kindly rain. Pope's R. of the L.
o contrive; to plot.
found it to be the moſt malicious and frantick ſurmiſe, and
*** e moſt contrary to his nature, that, I think, had ever been
*T-eved from the beginning of the world, howſoever counte-
****nced by a libellous pamphlet of a fugitive phyſician, even in
E-rint. J? atton.
~5: –
To BREw. v. m. To perform the office of a brewer.
I keep his houſe, and waſh, wring, brew, bake, ſcour, dreſs
meat, and make the beds, and do all myſelf. Shakeſp.
BREw. n.ſ.. [from the verb.j Manner of brewing; or thing
brewed.
Trial would be made of the like brew with potato roots, or
burr roots, or the pith of artichokes, which are nouriſhing
In Cats. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 47.
BRE'w A Ge. n.ſ.. [from brew.] Mixture of various things.
Go, brew me a pottle of ſack finely.
With eggs, Sir
—Simple of itſelf: I’ll no pullet-ſperm in my brewage:
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
BRE'wer. n.ſ.. [from brew.] A man whoſe profeſſion it is to
make beer.
When brewers marr their malt with water. Shakesp. King Lear.
Men every day eat and drink, though I think no man can
demonſtrate out of Euclid or Apollonius, that his baker, or
brewer, or cook, has not conveyed poiſon into his meat or
drink. Tillotſon.
BRE'whouse. m. ſ. [from brew and hºuſe,] A houſe appropri-
ated to brewing.
In our brewhouſes, bakehouſes, and kitchens, are made divers
drinks, breads, and meats. Bacon’s New Atlantis.
BRE'w ING. m. ſ. [from brew.J. Quantity of liquour brewed.
A brewing of new beer, ſet by old beer, maketh it work
again. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N° 314.
BRE'wis. n.ſ. A piece of bread ſoaked in boiling fat pot-
tage, made of ſalted meat.
BRI'AR. m. ſ. See BRIER. "
BRIBE, n.ſ.. [Bribe, in French, originally ſignifies a piece of
bread, and is applied to any piece taken from the reſt ; it is
therefore likely, that a bribe originally ſignified, among us, a
ſhare of anything unjuſtly got.] A reward given to pervert
the judgment, or corrupt the conduct.
You have condemn’d and noted Lucius Pella,
For taking bribes here of the Sardians. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
Nor leſs may Jupiter to gold aſcribe,
When he turn'd himſelf into a bribe. JValler.
If a man be covetous, profits or bribes may put him to the
teſt. L’Eſtrange.
There's joy when to wild will you laws preſcribe,
When you bid fortune carry back her bribe. Dryden,
To BRIBE. v. a. [from the noun..] To gain by bribes; to give
bribes, rewards, or hire, to bad purpoſes. It is ſeldom, and .
not properly, uſed in a good ſenſe.
How pow'rful are chaſte vows the wind and tide
You brib'd to combat on the Engliſh ſide. Dryden.
BRI'BeR. m. ſ. [from bribe..] One that pays for corrupt practices.
Affection is ſtill a briber of the judgment; and it is hard for
a man to admit a reaſon againſt the thing he loves; or to con-
feſs the force of an argument againſt an intereſt. South.
BR1'BERY. n.ſ.. [from bribe.] The crime of taking rewards for
bad pračtices.
There was a law made by the Romans, againſt the bribery
and extortion of the governours of provinces: before, ſays Ci-
cero, the governours did bribe and extort as much as was
ſufficient for themſelves; but now they bribe and extort as
much as may be enough not only for themſelves, but for judges,
jurors, and magiſtrates. Bacon.
No bribery of courts, or cabals of fačtions, or advantages of
fortune, can remove him from the ſolid foundations of honour
and fidelity. Dryden's Aurengz. Preface.
BRICK. n.ſ.. [brick, Dutch; brique, Fr. according to Menage,
from imbrex, Lat, whence brica.]
1. A maſs of burnt clay, ſquared for the uſe of builders.
For whatſoever doth ſo alter a body, as it returneth not a-
gain to that it was, may be called alteratio major; as coals
made of wood, or bricks of earth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
They generally gain enough by the rubbiſh and bricks, which
the preſent archite&amp;ts value much beyond thoſe of a modern
make, to defray the charges of their ſearch. Addiſon.
But ſpread, my ſons, your glory thin or thick, -
On paſſive paper, or on ſolid brick. Pope's Dunciad.
2. A loaf ſhaped like a brick.
To BRick. v. a. [from the noun..] To lay with bricks.
The ſexton comes to know where he is to be laid, and whe-
ther his grave is to be plain or bricked. Swift.
BRi'ckB.A.T. n. ſ. [from brick and bat.] A piece of brick.
Earthen bottles, filled with hot water, do provoke in bed a
ſweat more daintily than brickbats hot. Bacon's Natural Hiff.
BR1'ckcLAY. m. ſ. [from brick and clay.] Clay uſed for mak-
ing brick. - -
I have obſerved it only in pits wrought for tile and brickclay.
J/oodward on Foſſils.
BR1'ckbust. n.ſ.. [from brick and dy?..] Duſt made by pound-
ing bricks.
This ingenious authour, being thus ſharp ſet, got together a
convenient quantity of brickduff, and diſpoſed of it into ſeveral
papers. Speciator, NS 283.
BR1'ck EARTH. m. ſ. [from brick and earth..] Earth uſed in
making bricks.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5 They
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R I
B R I
º zell brik th and
They grow very well both on the hazel y zº “...
ſ: [from brick and kiln.] A kiln; a place to
on gravel.
BRick-KILN. M.
º iſºclites in the brick-kilns, they multiplied the more
- - in refilon. Decay of Piety.
º º [from brick and lay.] A man whoſe trade
it is to build with bricks; a brick-maſon.
The elder of º º º: to .
jonorant of his birth and parentage,
#. when he came to age. Shałºff. H. VI.
If you had liv'd, Sir,
Time enough to have been interpreter
To Babel's bricklayers, ſure the tow’r had ſtood. Donne,
BR1'ckMAKER. m. ſ. [from brick and make..] One whoſe trade
it is to make bricks. - -
They are common in clay-pits; but the brickmaker, pick
them out of the clay. ſtoodward on Pºſis.
BRIDAL. adj. [from bride..] Belonging to a wedding; nuptial;
connubial.
Our wedding chear to a ſad fun'ral feaſt,
Our ſolemn hymns to ſullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers ſerve for a buried corſe. Shakespeare
Come, I will bring thce to thy bridal chamber. Shakesp.
The amorous bird of night
sung ſpouſal, and bid haſte the ey'ning ſtar, ---
On his hill-top to light the bridal lamp. Parad. Lºft, b.viii.
Your ill-meaning politician lords,
Under pretence of bridal friends and gueſts, -
Appointed to await me thirty ſpies. Milton's Mºoniſł. l. 1105.
When to my arms thou brought'ſt thy virgin love,
Fair angels ſung our bridal hymn above. Dryden.
With all the pomp of woe, and ſorrow's pride!
Oh, early loſt! oh, fitter to be led
In chearful ſplendour to the bridal bed! //a/.
For her the ſpouſe prepares the bridal ring,
For her white virgins hymenaeals fing. Pope's Eliſa to Abel.
BRI'd Al. n.ſ. The nuptial feſtival.
Nay, we muſt think, men are not gods;
Nor of them look for ſuch obſervance always,
As fits the bridal. Shakesp. Othello,
Sweet day, Yb cool, ſo calm, ſo bright,
The bridal of the earth and ſky,
Sweet dews ſhall weep thy fall to-night;
For thou muſt die. Herbert.
In death's dark bow'rs our bridal; we will keep,
And his cold hand
Shall draw the curtain when we go to fleep. Dryd, n.
BRIDE. n.ſ.. [bryo, Saxon; brudur, in Runick, ſignifies a beau-
tiful woman.] A woman new married.
Help me mine own love's praiſes to reſound,
Ne let the fame of any be envy'd ;
So Orpheus did for his own bride. Spenser's Epithalamium.
The day approach'd, when fortune ſhould decide
Th’ important enterprize, and give the bride. Dryden's Fab.
Theſe are tributes due from pious brides,
From a chaſte matron, and a virtuous wife. Smith's Phaedr.
BR1'DEBED. m. ſ. [from bride and bed.] Marriage-bed.
Now until the break of day,
Through this houſe each fairy ſtray;
To the beſt bridehed will we,
Which by us ſhall bleſſed be. Shakespeare Midſum. Night's Dr.
Would David's ſon, religious, juſt, and brave,
To the firſt brid-bed of the world receive }
A foreigner, a heathen, and a ſlave? Prior.
XR1'DEcAKE.. n.ſ.. [from bride and cake.] A cake diſtributed to
the gueſts at the wedding.
With the phant fies of hey-troll,
Troll about the bridal bowl,
And divide the broad bridecake
Round about the bride's ſtake. Ben. johnſºn's Underwood.
The writer, reſolved to try his fortune, º all day, and,
that he might be ſure of dreaming upon ſomething at night,
procured an handſome ſlice of brid-cake, which he placed very
conveniently under his pillow. Speciator, N° 597
BR1'DEGRoom. n.ſ. [from bride and º , N° 597;
- it - i. groom..] A new married
IIld.I.1.
As are thoſe dulcet ſounds in break of day,
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom’s éâr,
And ſummon him to marriage. Shakeſp. Merch, of Venice.
- Why, happy bridegroom /
why doſt thou ſteal ſo ſoon away to bed: Dryden.
| - BR1'DEMEN. n. ſ. The attendants on the bride and bride-
BRI'DEMAIDs. groom.
BRiºstake. m.ſ.. [from bride and ſake.] It ſeems to be a
Poſt ſet in the ground, to dance round, like a maypole.
R º º: the broad bridecake,
ound about the brid/lake. Ben. Johnſºn’s Underwºod;.
BRITEWELL. m. ſ. #. palace built º or Brid-
get#well, was turned into a workhouſe..] A houſe of correction.
hºº º: to reformation than all the work-
3 3 in Europe. Speciator, N° 157.
BRIDGE. n.ſ.. [bric, Saxon.)
1. A building raiſed over water for the conveni, nce of paſſige.
What need the bridge much broader than the flood , -
Shakeſp. Aſiah agº gºt Nº.
And proud Araxes, whom no bridge could bind. Drydºn.
2. The upper part of the noſe.
The raiſing gently the bridge of the noſe, 'oth prevent the
deformity of a ſaddle noſe. Bacon's Nat: al tºy, Nº 28.
3 The ſupporter of the ſtrings in ſtringed inſtruments of muſick.
To BRIDGE. v. a. [from the noun..] I o raiſe a bridge over &amp;ny
place.
Came to the ſea; and over Helleſpont
Bridging his way, Europe with Aſia join'd. Par. I?, b. x.
BRTDLE. n.ſ. [bride, Fr.]
1. The headſtall and reins by which a horſe is reſtrained and go-
verned.
Creeping and crying, till they ſeiz'd at laſt
His courſer's bride, and his feet embrac'd. Dryden's Faller.
2. A reſtraint; a curb ; a check.
The king reſolved to put that place, which ſome men fancied
to be a bridle upon the city, into the hands of ſuch a man as
he might rely upon. Clarendon.
A bright genius often betrays itſelf into many errours, with-
out a continual bridle on the tongue. J/atts.
To BR1'DL E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To reſtrain, or guide by a bridle.
I bridle in my ſtruggling muſe with pain,
That longs to launch into a bolder ſtrain.
2. To put a bridle on any thing.
The queen of beauty ſtop'd her briºd doves;
Approv'd the little labour of the Loves. Prior.
3. To reſtrain ; to govern.
The diſpoſition of theſe things is committed to them, whom
law may at all times bridle, and ſuperiour power controul.
Jºo, ºr, b. v. § 9.
With a frong, and yet a gent', hand,
You bridle faction, and our hearts command.
To BRI'ple. v. n. To hold up the head.
BRI'LLEH AND. m. ſ. [from bridle and hand.] The hand which
holds the bridle in riding.
In the turning, one might perceive the bride' and ſomething
gently ſtir; but, indeed, ſo gently, as it did rather diſtil virtue
than uſe violence. Sidºy, b. ii.
The heat of ſummer put his blood into a ferment, which
affected his bridlehand with great pain.
BRIEF. adj. [brevis, Lat. brief, Fr.]
1. Short; conciſe. It is now ſeldom uſed but of words.
A play there is, my lord, ſome ten words long,
Which is as briſ as I have known a play;
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious. Shaſ, ſp. Mºſim. Night's Dream.
I will be mild and gentle in my words.-
—And brief, good mother, for I am in hºſte. Shakespeare. R. III.
I muſt begin with rudiments of art,
To teach you gamut in a briefer ſort,
More pleaſant, pretty, and effectual. Shałºff. Tam. Shrew.
They nothing doubt prevailing, and to make it brief wars.
º Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The brief ſtile is that which expreſſ-th much in little.
Bºn. johnſºn's Diſºvery.
If I had quoted more words, I had quoted more profane-
neſs; and therefore Mr. Congreve has reaſon to thank me for
being brief. Collier's Wiew ºf the Stage.
2. Contračted; narrow.
The ſhrine of Venus, or ſtraight pight Minerva,
Poſtures beyond brief nature. Sla’ſp. Cymbeline.
BRIEF. m. ſ. [brief, Dutch, a letter.]
1. A writing of any kind.
There is a brief, how many ſports are ripe:
Make choice of which your highneſs will ſee firſt Shakespeare
The apoſtolical letters are of a twofold kind and difference,
viz, ſome are called brigſ, becauſe they are compriſed in a
a ſhort and compendious way of writing. A jº's Parcrgot.
2. A ſhort extract, or epitome.
But how you muſt begin this enterprize, - --
I will your highneſs thus in brief adviſe. Fairy ºften, b. ii.
I doubt not but I ſhall make it plain, as far as a ſum or if
can make a cauſe plain. Baº's Hºly ſºar.
The brief of this tranſačtion is, theſe ſprings that ariſe here,
are impregnated with vitriol. . J/oodward on Fºſſils.
3. In law.
A writ whereby a man is ſummoned to anſwer to any ac-
tion; or it is any precept of the king in writing, iſſuing out of
any court, whereby he commands any thing to be done. Coweſ.
4. The writing given the pleaders, containing the caſe.
The brief with weighty crimes was charg’d, -
On which the pleader much enlargd. Swift.
5. Letters patent, giving licence to a charitable colle&amp;ion for any
publick or private loſs. -
6. [In muſick.] A meaſure of quantity, which contains two
ſtrokcs down in beating time, and as many up. Harris.
BRI'EFly, adv. [from brief.] Conciſcly ; in few words. I will
Wºl
Addison.
J/aller.
J/jº's Surgery.
M
º
---,
*1.
sº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R I
B R I - ***
*
I will ſpeak in that manner which the ſubječt requires; that
The blazing brightneſ of her beauty's beam,
is, probably, and moderately, and briefly. Bacon. And glorious light of her ſun-ſhining face,
The modeſt queen a while, with downcaſt eyes, To tell, were as to ſtrive againſt the ſtream. Fairy Q. h. Ł.
Ponder'd the ſpeech; then briefly thus replies. Dryden. A ſword, by long lying ſtill, will contract a ruſt, which ſhall
BRI'EFNEss. n.ſ.. [from brief.] Conciſeneſs; ſhortneſs.
They excel in grandity and gravity, in ſmoothneſs and pro-
priety, in quickneſs and briefneſs. Camden's Remains.
BRIER. n.ſ.. [bnaen, Sax.] A plant.
The ſweet and the wild ſorts are both ſpecies of the rºſe ;
which ſee.
What ſubtle hole is this,
Whoſe mouth is cover'd with rude growing briers 2 Shakespeare .
Then thrice under a brier doth creep,
Which at both ends was rooted deep,
And over it three times doth leap ;
Her magick much availing. Drayton's Nymphid.
BR4'ERY. adj. [from brier.] Rough; thorny; full of briers.
Brig, and poſſibly alſo BRIx, is derived from the Saxon brucz,
a bridge; which, to this day, in the northern counties, is called
a brigg, and not a bridge. Gibſon's Camden.
BRIGADE. m. ſ. [brigade, Fr. It is now generally pronounced
with the accent on the laſt ſyllable.] A diviſion of forces; a
body of men, conſiſting of ſeveral ſquadrons of horſe, or bat-
talions of foot.
Or fronted brigades form. Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
Here the Bavarian duke his brigades leads,
Gallant in arms, and gaudy to behold. Philips.
BRIGA'DE 43ajor. An officer appointed by the brigadier to aſ-
ſiſt him in the management and ordering of his brigade; and
he there acts as as a major general does in an army. Harris.
BRIGADI’ER General. An officer who commands a brigade of
horſe or foot in an army; next in order below a major general.
BR1'G AND... n.ſ.. [brigand, Fr.] A robber; one that belongs to
a band of robbers.
There might be a rout of ſuch barbarous theeviſh brigands
in ſome rocks; but it was a degeneration from the nature of
man, a political creature. Bramhal againſt Hobbes.
JBRI'G ANDINE. -
_PRI'GANTINE. "...ſ. [from brigand.]
1. A light veſſel; ſuch as has been formerly uſed by corſairs or
pirates.
Like as a a warlike brigandine, apply'd
To fight, lays forth her threatful pikes afore
The engines, which in them ſad death do hide. Spenſer.
Scarce five years are paſt,
Since in your brigantine you ſail'd to ſee
The Adriatick wedded. Otway's ſenice Preſerved.
The conſul obliged him to deliver up his fleet, and reſtore
the ſhips, reſerving only to himſelf two brigantines. Arbuthnot.
-2. A coat of mail.
Then put on all thy gorgeous arms, thy helmet
And brigandine of braſs, thy broad habergeon,
Wantbraſs, and greves. Milton's Agoniſłes, l. 1 119.
IERIGHT. adj. [beone, Saxon.]
ir. Shining; glittering; full of light:
Through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant ſhrine,
Dark, with exceſſive bright, thy ſkirts appear. Par. L. b. iii.
Then ſhook the ſacred ſhrine, and ſudden light
Sprung through the vaulted roof, and made the temple bright.
* Dryden.
-z - Clear; evident.
He muſt not proceed too ſwiftly, that he may with more Af
eaſe, with brighter evidence, and with ſurer ſucceſs, draw the
learner on. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
3 - Illuſtrious; as, a bright reign, a bright action.
-- Witty; acute; ſubtle ; as a bright genius.
To BRI'GHTEN. v. a. [from bright.]
deface its brightneſs, South.
, Vex'd with the preſent moment's heavy gloom,
Why ſeek we brightneſs from the years to come Prior,
2. Acuteneſs. -
The brightneſs of his parts, the ſolidity of his judgment, and
the candour and generoſity of his temper, diſtinguiſhed him in
an age of great politeneſs. Prior.
BRILLIANcy. n.ſ.. [from brilliant..] Luſtre; ſplendour.
BRIELIANT: adj. [brillant, Fr.] "Shining; ſparkling; ſplen-
did ; full of luſtre.
So have I ſeen in larder dark
Of veal a lucid loin,
Replete with many a brilliant ſpark,
As wiſe philoſophers remark,
At once both ſtink and ſhine. Dorſet.
BRI'LLIANT. n.ſ. A diamond of the fineſt cut, formed into
angles, ſo as to refract the light, and ſhine more.
In deference to his virtues, I forbear
To ſhew you what the reſt in orders were ;
This brilliant is ſo ſpotleſs and ſo bright,
He needs not foil, but ſhines by his own proper light. Dryd.
BRI'LLIANTNESS. n.ſ.. [from brilliant..] Splendour; luſtre.
BRILLs. n.ſ. The hair on the eyelids of a horſe. Dić?.
BRIM. n.ſ.. [brim, lcelandiſh.]
1. The edge of anything.
His hat being in the form of a turban, daintily made, the
locks of his hair came down about the brims of it. Bacon.
2. The upper edge of any veſſel.
To make the coming hours o'erflow with joy,
And pleaſure down the brim. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
How my head in ointment ſwims
How my cup o'erlooks her brims / Craſhaw.
So when with crackling flames a cauldron fries,
The bubbling waters from the bottom riſe,
Above the brims they force their firy way. Dryden's ACn:
Thus in a baſon drop a ſhilling,
Then fill the veſſel to the brim,
You ſhall obſerve, as you are filling,
The pond’rous metal ſeems to ſwim. Swift.
3. The top of any liquour.
The feet of the prieſts that bare the ark, were dipped in the
brim of the water. jaſh. iii. 15.
4. The bank of a fountain.
It told me it was Cynthia's own,
Within whoſe cheerful brims
That curious nymph had oft been known
To bathe her ſnowy limbs. Drayton;
To BRIM. v. a. [from the noun..] To fill to the top,
May thy brimmed waves, for this,
Their full tribute never miſs,
From a thouſand rills. Milton;
This ſaid, a double wreath Evander twin'd;
And poplars black and white his temples bind:
Then brims his ample bowl; with like deſign
The reſt invoke the gods, with ſprinkled wine. Dryden.
To BRIM. v. m. To be full to the brim.
Now horrid frays
Commence, the brimming glaſſes now are hurl’d
With dire intent. - Philips.
BRI'MFUL. adj. [from brim and full.] Full to the top; over-
charged. -
Meaſure my caſe, how by thy beauty's filling,
With ſeed of woes my heart brimful is charg’d. Sidney, b, i.
We have try’d the utmoſt of our friends;
r — To make bright; to make to ſhine. Our legions are brimful, our cauſe is ripe. Shakeſp. j. Caſ.
"...'s The purple morning riſing with the year, Her brimful eyes, that ready ſtood,
º: Salutes the ſpring, as her celeſtial eyes And only wanted will to weep a flood, •
* Adorn the world, and brighten all the ſkies. Dryden. Releas'd their watry ſtore. - Dryden's Fables.
...) \º 2- To make luminous by light from without. The good old king at parting wrung my hand,
…º. An ecſtaſy, that mothers only feel, His eyes brimful of tears; then fighing, cry’d,...
Plays round my heart, and brightens up my ſorrow, Prithee, be careful of my ſon. ... Addiſon's Cato,
* * Like gleams of ſunſhine in a louring ſky. Philips's D. Moth, BRi'MFulness. n.ſ.. [from brimful..] Fulneſs to the top.
º: 3 - To make gay, or alert. - The Scot, on his unfurniſh'd kingdom,
"Ž. Hope elevates, and joy Came pouring like a tide into a breach,
* fºr, Brightens his creſt. 44ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix. l. 634. With ample and brimfulneſs of his force. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
ºs. +- TI'o make illuſtrious. BR1'MMER. n.ſ.. [from brim.] A bowl full to the top.
- The preſent queen would brighten her charaćter, if ſhe would When healths go round, and kindly brimmers flow,
2C- &lt;=&gt;&lt;ert her authority to inſtil virtues into her people. Swift. Till the freſh garlands on their foreheads glow. Dryden.
or Yet time ennobles, or degrades each line; BR1'MMING. adj. [from brim.] Full to the brim.
.. It brighten’d Craggs's, and may darken thine. Pope. And twice beſides her beeſtings never fail,
5 - Tº o make acute, or witty. - - To ſtore the dairy with a brimming pail. Dryden.
+T--&gt; Esroºten. … n. To grow bright; to clear up; as, the BR1'Mston E. m. ſ. [corrupted from brin or brenſtone, that is,
**x ºrightens. firy ſtone..] Sulphur. See SULPHUR.
1= += r^3, HTLY. adv. [from bright.] Splendidly; with luſtre. From his infernal furnace forth he threw.
Safely I ſlept, till brightly dawning ſhone Huge flames, that dimmed all the heaven's light, -
IE rºse ar The morn conſpicuous on her golden throne. Pope. Enroll’d in duſkiſh ſmoke and brimſtone blue. Fairy Q. b. i.
T_** * * : HTN Ess. n.ſ. [from bright.] This vapour is generally ſuppoſed to be ſulphureous, though
- *-ūţire; ſplendour ; glitter. I can ſee no reaſon for ſuch a ſuppoſition: I put a whole bundle
N- J. I. 3 P ef<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R I
B R I +
. . . . . .
º
º :
º -
•
; : .
* . .
º i.
• a
*
: -
-
. .
- e
º
* .
-
*
º
-
- —º
of lighted brimſtone matches to the ſmoke, they all went out in
an inſtant. - Addiſon on Italy.
BRI'M ston Y. adj. [from brimſtone..] Full of brimſtone; con-
taining ſulphur; ſulphureous.
BR1'NDED. adj. [brin, Fr. a branch..] Streaked; tabby; mark-
cd with branches.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mew’d.
She tam'd the brinded lioneſs,
And ſpotted mountain pard. Milton.
My brinded heifer to the ſtake I lay;
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Two thriving calves ſhe ſuckles twice a day. Dryden.
BR1'Ndle. n.ſ.. [from brinded.] The ſtate of being brinded.
A natural brindle. Clariſſa.
BRI'NDLED. adj. [from brindle.] Brinded; ſtreaked.
The boar, my ſiſters! aim the fatal dart,
And ſtrike the brindled monſter to the heart. Addiſon's Ovid.
BRINE. n.ſ.
1. Water impregnated with ſalt.
The encreaſing of the weight of water, will encreaſe its
power of bearing; as we ſee brine, when it is ſalt enough, will
bear an egg. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 790.
Diſſolve the ſheeps dung in water, and add to it as much ſalt
as will make it a ſtrong brine, in this liquour, to ſteep your
corn. Mortimer.
2. The ſea.
All, but mariners,
Plung'd in the foaming brine, did quit the veſſel,
Then all afire with me. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
The air was calm, and, on the level brine,
Sleek Panope, with all her ſiſters, play’d. Milton.
As when two adverſe winds
Engage with horrid ſhock, the ruffled brine
Roars ſtormy. Philips.
3. Tears.
What a deal of brine
Hath waſh'd thy fallow cheeks for Roſaline ! Shakeſp.
BRI'NEPIT. n.ſ.. [from brine and pit.] Pit of ſalt water.
Then I lov'd thee,
And ſhew'd thee all the qualities o' th' iſle,
The freſh ſprings, brinepits, barren place, and fertile.
Shakeſp. Tempeſ?.
To BRING. v. a. [b]ungan, Sax. preter. I brought; part. paſſ.
brought ; bnoht, Sax.]
1. To fetch from another place; diſtinguiſhed from to carry, or
convey, to another place.
I was the chief that rais'd him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again. Shakeſp. H. VI.
And as ſhe was going to fetch it, he called to her, and ſaid,
Bring me, I pray thee, a morſel of bread in thy hand.
I Kings, xvii. 11.
A regiſtry of lands may furniſh eaſy ſecurities of money,
that ſhall be brought over by ſtrangers. Temple.
2. To convey in one's own hand; not to ſend by another.
And if my wiſh'd alliance pleaſe your king,
Tell him he ſhould not ſend the peace, but bring. Dryden.
3. To produce; to procure.
There is nothing will bring you more honour, and more eaſe,
than to do what right in juſtice you may. Bacon.
4. To cauſe to come.
He proteſts he loves you,
And needs no other ſuitor, but his liking
To bring you in again. Shakespeare . Othello.
There is but one É. who made heaven and earth, and ſea
and winds; but the folly and madneſs of mankind brought in
the images of gods. Stillingfleet.
The fountains of the great deep being broke open, ſo as a
general deſtruction and devaſtation was brought upon the earth,
and all things in it. - Burnet's Theory.
Bring back gently their wandering minds, by going before
them in the train they ſhould purſue, without any rebuke. Locke.
The great queſtion, which, in all ages, has diſturbed man-
kind, and brought on them thoſe miſchiefs. Locke.
5. To introduce.
Since he could not have a ſeat among them himſelf, he would
bring in one, who had more merit. Tatler, N° 81.
6. To reduce; to recal.
Nathan's fable had ſo good an effect, as to bring the man af-
ter God's own heart to a right ſenſe of his guilt. Speci. Nº 83.
7. To attract; to draw along.
In diſtillation, the water aſcends difficultly, and brings over
with it ſome part of the oil of vitriol. Newton's Opticks.
8. To put into any particular ſtate or circumſtances, to make
liable to any thing.
Having got the way of reaſoning, which that ſtudy neceſſa-
rily brings the mind to, they might be able to transfer it to other
parts of knowledge, as they ſhall have occaſion. Locke.
The queſtion for bringing the king to juſtice was immediately
put, and carried without any oppoſition, that I can find.
- Swift's Presbyterian Pla.
9. To condućt.
A due conſideration of the vanities of the world, will natu-
rally bring us to the contempt of it; and the contempt of the
world will as certainly bring us home to ourſelves. L'E/ºrange.
The underſtanding ſhould be brought to the difficult and
knotty parts of knowledge, by inſenſible degrees. Lºcke.
10. To recal; to ſummons.
But thoſe, and more than I to mind can brinº,
Menalcas has not yet forgot to ſing. ~ Dryden.
11. To induce; to prevail upon.
The nature of the things, contained in thoſe words, would
not ſuffer him to think otherwiſe, how, or whenſoever, he is
brought to refle&amp;t on them. - Lºcke.
It ſeems ſo prepoſterous a thing to men, to make themſelves
unhappy in order to happineſs, that they do not eaſily bring
themſelves to it. Locke.
Profitable employments would be no leſs a diverſion than any
of the idle ſports in faſhion, if men could but be brºught to de-
light in them. Locke.
12. 2 a bring about. [See About..] To bring to paſs; to effect.
This he conceives not hard to bring about,
If all of you would join to help him out. Dryºn's Ind. Emº.
This turn of mind threw off the oppoſitions of envy and
competition; it enabled him to gain the moſt vain and im-
practicable into his deſigns, and to bring about ſeveral great
events, for the advantage of the publick. Allſºn's Prºſer.
13. To bring forth. To give birth to ; to produce.
The good queen,
For ſhe is good, hath brought you forth a daughter:
Here 'tis; commends it to your bleſfing. Shakeſp.
- More wonderful
Than that which, by creation, firſt brought fºrth
Light out of darkneſs' Paradiſe Loft, b. xii. 1. 4.72:
Bewail thy falſehood, and the pious works
It hath brought forth, to make thee memorable
Among illuſtrious women, faithful wives. Milton's Mºnſ?.
Bellona leads thee to thy lover's hand,
Another queen brings forth another brand, {
To burn with foreign fires her native land
Dryden, Æneid vii. 1 444.
Idleneſs and luxury bring forth poverty and want; and this
tempts men to injuſtice; and that cauſeth enmity and animo–
ſity. Tillºtſºn.
The value of land is raiſed, when it is fitted to bring forth a
greater quantity of any valuable product. Locke.
14. To bring forth. To bring to light.
The thing that is hid, bringeth he forth to light.
job, xxviii. 1 1.
15. To bring in. To reduce.
Send over into that realm ſuch a ſtrong power of men, as
ſhould perforce bring in all that rebellious rout, and looſe peo-
ple. Spenser on Ireland.
16. Tº bring in. To afford gain.
The ſole meaſure of all his courteſics is,what return they will
make him, and what revenue they will bring him in. South.
Trade brought us in plenty and riches. Locke.
17. To bring in. To introduce.
Entertain no long diſcourſe with any; but, if you can, bring
in ſomething to ſeaſon it with religion. Taylor.
The fruitfulneſs of Italy and the like, are not brought in by
force, but naturally riſe out of the argument. Addison.
Quotations are beſt brought in, to confirm ſome opinion
controverted. Swft.
18. To bring off. To clear; to procure to be acquitted; to
cauſe to eſcape. -
I truſted to my head, that has betrayed me; and I found
fault with my legs, that would otherwiſe have brought me off.
- L’E/ºrange.
Set a kite upon the bench, and it is forty to one he'll bring
off a crow at the bar. L’Eſtrarige.
The beſt way to avoid this imputation, and to bring off the
credit of our underſtanding, is to be truly religious. Tillof/37.
19. To bring on. To engage in action.
If there be any that would reign, and take up all the time,
let him find means to take them off, and bring others on.
Bacon, Eſſºy 36.
20. To bring over. To convert; to draw to a new party.
This liberty ſhould be made uſe of upon few occaſions, of
ſmall importance, and only with a view of bringing ºver his
own ſide, another time, to ſomething of greater and more
publick moment. Swift on the Sentiments of a Cº. ºf Engl. ma".
The proteſtant clergy will find it, perhaps, no difficult mat-
ter to bring great numbers over to the church. Swift.
21. To bring cut. To exhibit; to ſhew.
If I make not this cheat bring out another, and the ſhearers
prove ſheep, let me be unrolled. Shakeſp. // inter's Tale.
Which he could bring out, where he had,
And what he bought them for, and paid.
Theſe ſhake his ſoul, and, as they boldly preſs,
Bring out his crimes, and force him to confeſs. Dryden.
Another way made uſe of, to find the weight of the dena-
rii, was by the weight of Greek coins; but thoſe experiments
bring out the denarius heavier. Zººt.
22. To bring under. To ſubdue ; to repreſs.
That ſharp courſe which you have ſet down, for the bringing
tender
Hºdºras.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">|B R I
|B R O
under of thoſe rebels of Ulſter, and preparing a way for their
perpetual reformation. Spenser’s Ireland.
To ſay, that the more capable, or the better deſerver, hath
ſuch right to govern, as he may compulſorily bring under the
leſs worthy, is idle. Bacon's Holy //ar.
23. Tº bring up. To educate; to inſtruct; to form.
The well bringing up of the people, ſerves as a moſt ſure
bond to hold them. Sidney, b. i.
He that takes upon him the charge of bringing up young
men, eſpecially young gentlemen, ſhould have ſomething more
in him than Latin. Locke.
They frequently converſed with this lovely virgin, who had
been brought up by her father in the ſame courſe of knowledge.
Addiſon. Guardian, N° 107.
24. Tº bring ºp. To bring into practice.
Several obliging deferences, condeſcenſions, and ſubmiſſions,
with many outward forms and ceremonies, were firſt of all
brought up among the politer part of mankind, who lived in
courts and cities. Speciator, N° 119.
25. To bring up. To cauſe to advance.
Bring up your army; but, I think, you'll find,
They've not prepar'd for us. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
BRINGER. n.ſ.. [from bring.] The perſon that brings anything.
Yet the firſt bringer of unwelcome news
Hath but a loſing office: and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a ſullen bell,
Remember'd tolling a dead friend. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Beſt you ſee ſafe the bringer
Out of the hoſt: I muſt attend mine office. Shakeſp.
BRI'NGER UP. Inſtructor; educator.
Italy and Rome have been breeders and bringers up of the
worthieſt men. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
BRI'Nish. adj. [from brine.] Having the taſte of brine; ſalt.
Nero would be tainted with remorſe
To hear and ſee her plaints, her briniſh tears. Shakeſp.
For now I ſtand, as one upon a rock,
Environ'd with a wilderneſs of ſea,
Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave;
Expecting ever when ſome envious ſurge -
Will, in his briniſh bowels, ſwallow him. Shakeſp. T. Andr.
BRI'NISHNess. n.ſ.. [from briniſh..] Saltneſs; tendency to ſalt-
neſs.
BRINK. m. ſ. [brink, Daniſh.] The edge of any place, as of a
precipice or a river.
Th'amazed flames ſtand gather'd in a heap,
And from the precipice's brink retire,
Afraid to venture on ſo large a leap. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
We ſtand therefore on the brinks and confines of thoſe ſtates
at the day of doom. Atterbury.
So have I ſeen, from Severn's brink,
A flock of geeſe jump down together ;
Swim where the bird of Jove wou'd ſink,
And, ſwimming, never wet a feather. Swift.
BR1'NY. adj. [from brine.] Salt.
He, who firſt the paſſage try’d,
In harden'd oak his heart did hide;
Or his, at leaſt, in hollow wood,
Who tempted firſt the briny flood. Dryden.
Then, briny ſeas, and taſteful ſprings, farewel,
Where fountain nymphs, confus'd with Nereids, dwell.
- - Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
A muriatick or bliny taſte ſeems to be produced by a mixture
of an acid and alkaline ſalt; for ſpirit of ſalt, and ſalt of tartar,
mixed, produce a ſalt like ſea ſalt. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
BRI'on Y. See BRYon Y.
BRISK. adj. [bruſque, Fr.]
1. Lively; vivacious; gay; ſprightly; applied to men.
Pr'ythee, die, and ſet me free,
Or elſe be
Kind and briſk, and gay like me. Sir j. Denham.
A creeping young fellow, that had committed matrimony
with a briſ' gameſome laſs, was ſo altered in a few days, that he
was liker a ſceleton than a living man. L’Eſtrange.
Why ſhou'd all honour then be ta'en
From lower parts, to load the brain:
When other limbs we plainly ſee,
Each in his way, as briſk as he Prior.
2. Powerful; ſpirituous.
Our nature here is not unlike our wine;
Some forts, when old, continue briſk and fine. Denham.
Under ground, the rude Riphaean race
Mimick briſk cyder, with the brake's produćt wild,
Sloes pounded, hips, and ſervis' harſheſt juice. Philips.
It muſt needs be ſome exteriour cauſe, and the briſk ačting of
fome objects without me, whoſe efficacy I cannot reſiſt. Locke.
3. Vivid; bright.
Objećts appeared much darker, becauſe my inſtrument was
overcharged; had it manificd thirty or twenty five times, it
would have made the object appear more briſk and pleaſant.
Newton's Opticks.
To BRisk Up. v. n. To come up briſkly.
Bºsket. n.ſ. [oright, Fr.] The breaſt of an animal.
See that none of the wool be wanting, that their gums be
red, teeth white and even, and the briºt ſkin red. Airtimer.
BRI'skl''... adv. [from briſ.] Actively; vigorouſly.
We have ſeen the air in the bladder fuddenly expand itſ ºf ſo
much, and ſo briſky, that it manifeſtly lifted up ſome light bo-
dies that leaned upºn it. Boyle,
I could plainly perceive the creature to ſuck in many of the
moſt minute animalcula, that were ſwimming ºr iſly about in
the Water. Ray on the Creation.
Brisks Ess. n: ſ [from briſ...]
1. Livelineſs; vigour; quickneſs.
Some remains of corruption, though they do not conquer
and extinguiſh, yet will ſlacken and allay the vigour and briſk-
% of the renewed principle. - South
2. Gayety. -
But the moſt diſtinguiſhing part of his charaaer ſeems to
ºf his ºf his jollity, and his good humour. Dºi.
BRI'STLE, n.ſ. [brirºl, Sãx.] The ſtiff hair of ſºin.
I will not open my lips ſo wide as a briſk may enter. Shakespeare.
He is covered with hair, and not, as the boar, with briſtles
which probably ſpend more upon the ſame matter which i.
other creatures, makes the horns; for briſłles ſeem to be 'nº.
thing elſe but a horn ſplit into a multitude of little ones. Grø.
Two boars whom love to battle draws,
With riſing briſtles, and with frothy jaws,
Their adverſe breafts with tuſks oblique they wound. Dryd.
To BRI's TLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To erect in briſtles.
Now for the bare-pickt bone of majeſty,
Doth dogged war briſtle his angry creſt,
And ſnarleth in the gentle eyes of peace. Shakespeare K. john.
Which makes him plume himſelf, and briſtle up
The creſt of youth againſt your dignity. Shakespeare. H. IV.
To BRI's TL.E. v. m. To ſtand erect as briſtles.
Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
Pard, or boar with triſtled hair,
In thy eye that ſhall appear,
When thou wak'ſt, it is thy dear. Shakespeare Mijim. N. Dr.
Stood Theodore ſurpriz'd in deadly fright,
With chatt’ring teeth, and briſtling hair upright;
Yet arm'd with inborn worth. Dryden's Fables.
Thy hair ſo briſtles with unmanly fears,
As fields of corn that riſe in bearded ears. Dryden's Perſus.
To BRISTLE a thread. To fix a briſtle to it.
BR1'stLY. adj. [from briſle.] Thick ſet with briſtles.
The leaves of the black mulberry are ſomewhat briſ',
which may help to preſerve the dew. Bacon's Natural Hiji.
If the eye were ſo acute as to rival the fineſt microſcope, the
ſight of our own ſelves would affright us; the ſmootheſt ſkin
would be beſet all over with rugged ſcales and briſly hairs.
Bentley.
Thus maſtful beech the briſly cheſnut bears,
And the wild aſh is white with bloomy pears. Dryden's Wirg.
The careful maſter of the ſwine,
Forth haſted he to tend his briftly care. Pope's Odyſſ. b. xiv.
BR1's Tol ston E. A kind of ſoft diamond found in a rock near
the city of Briſtol.
Of this kind of cryſtal are the better and larger ſort of Briſſol
fones, and the Kerry ſtones of Ireland. J%odward.
BRIT. n.ſ. The name of a fiſh.
The pilchards were wont to purſue the h it, upon which
they feed, into the havens. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
To BRIT E. v. n. Barley, wheat, or hops, are ſaid to brite,
To BRIGHT. $ when they grow over-ripe. Dićf.
BRITTLE. adj. Ibnrttan, Saxon.] Fragile; apt to break; not
tough.
The wood of vines is very durable; though no tree hath the
twigs, while they are green, ſo brittle, yet the wood dried is
extremely tough. Bacon's Natural Hiſt, Nº. 622.
From earth all came, to earth muſt all return,
Frail as the cord, and brittle as the urn. Prior.
Of airy pomp, and fleeting joys,
What does the buſy world conclude at beſt,
But brittle goods, that break like glaſs? Granville.
If the ſtone is brittle, it will often crumble, and paſs in the
form of gravel. Arbuthnot on Diet.
BR1'ttle Ness. n.ſ.. [from blittle..] Aptneſs to break; fra-
ility.
§ Kºi. quick without brightneſs, ſharp without brittleneſs.
Aſham's schoolina ter.
Artificers, in the tempering of ſteel, by holding it but a mi-
nute or two longer or leſſer in the flame, give it vºy differing
tempers, as to brittlenºſ, or toughneſs. Boyle.
BR1ze. n.ſ. The gadfly.
A brize, a ſcorned little creature,
Through his fair hide his angry ſting did threaten. Speſſºr.
BROACH. n.ſ.. [broche, Fr. J
I. *"... taken into ſervice in his court, to a baſe office in his
kitchen; ſo that he turned a broach, that had worn a crown.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Whoſe offered entrails ſhall his crime reproach,
And drip their fatneſs from the hazle broach. Dryden's Kirgi'.
i 2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B. R O
B. R O
!
2. A muſical inſtrument, the ſounds of which are made by turn-
ing round a handle. Dić.
3. [With hunters.] A ſtart of the head of a young ſtag, growing
ſharp like the end of a ſpit. Dići.
To BRoach. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſpit; to pierce as with a ſpit. º
As by a low but loving likelihood,
Were now the general of our gracious empreſs,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing rebellion breached on his ſword. Shakeſp. Henry V.
He felled men as one would mow hay, and ſometimes
broached a great number of them upon his pike, as one would
carry little birds ſpitted upon a ſtick. Hakewell on Providence.
2. To pierce a veſſel in order to draw the liquour; to tap.
3. To open any ſtore.
I will notably provide, that you ſhall want neither weapons,
vićtuals, nor aid; I will open the old armouries, I will broach
my ſtore, and bring forth my ſtores. Knolles's Hiſtory.
4. To give out, or utter any thing,
This errour, that Piſon was Ganges, was firſt broached by Jo-
ſephus. Raleigh.
Thoſe who were the chief inſtruments of raiſing the noiſe,
made uſe of thoſe very opinions themſelves had brºached, for
arguments to prove, that the change of miniſters was dange-
I Ous. Swift's Examiner, N° 45.
5. To let out any thing. -
And now the field of death, the liſts,
Were enter'd by antagoniſts,
And blood was ready to be broach'd,
When Hudibras in haſte approach'd.
BRO'AcHER. a. ſ. [from broach.]
1. A ſpit.
The youth approach'd the fire, and, as it burn'd,
On five ſharp broachers rank'd, the roaſt they turn'd ;
Theſe morſels ſtay'd their ſtomachs.
2. An opener, or utterer of any thing; the firſt authour.
There is much pride and vanity in the affectation of being
the firſt broacher of an heretical opinion. L'Eſtrange.
Numerous parties denominate themſelves, not from the grand
Authour and Finiſhcr of our faith, but from the firſt broacher
of their idolized opinions. Decay of Piety.
This opinion is commonly, but falſely, aſcribed to Ariſtotle,
not as its firſt broacher, but as its ableſt patron. Cheyne.
BROAD. adj. [brab, Saxon.]
1. Wide; extended in breadth; diſtinguiſhed from length.
The weeds that his broad ſpreading leaves did ſhelter,
Are pull'd up root and all by Bolingbroke. Shakeſp. R. II.
The top may be juſtly ſaid to grow broader, as the bottom
Hudibras, cant. ii.
Dryden.
narrow.cr. - Temple.
Of all your knowledge this vain fruit you have,
To walk with eyes broad open to your grave. Dryden.
So lofty was the pile, a Parthian bow,
With vigour drawn, muſt ſend the ſhaft below,
The bottom was full twenty fathom broad. Dryden's Fables.
He launch'd the firy bolt from pole to pole,
Broad burſt the lightnings, deep the thunders roll. Pope.
As cloath'd in cloudy ſtorm,
Weak, wan, and broad, he ſkirts the ſouthern ſky. Thomſºn.
2. Large.
T., keep him at a diſtance from falſehood and cunning, which
has always a broad mixture of falſehood; this is the fitteſt pre-
paration of a child for wiſdom. Locke.
3. Clear; open.
In mean time he, with cunning to conceal
All thought of this from others, himſelf bore
In broad houſe, with the wooers us before. Chapman's Odyſſ.
It no longer ſeeks the ſhelter of night and darkneſs, but ap-
pears in the broadeſ? light. Decay of Piety.
If children were left alone in the dark, they would be no
more afraid than in broad ſunſhine. Locke.
4. Groſs ; coarſe. -
The reeve and the miller are diſtinguiſhed from each other,
as much as the lady prioreſs and the broad ſpeaking gap-toothed
wife of Bath. Dryden's Falles, Pref.
Love made him doubt his broad barbarian ſound;
By love, his want of words and wit he found.
If open vice be what you drive at,
A name ſo broad will ne'er connive at.
The broadc/? mirth unfeeling folly wears,
Dryden.
Dryden's Albion.
Leſs pleaſing far than virtue's very tears. Pope.
Room for my lord! three jockeys in his train;
Six huntſmen with a ſhout precede his chair;
He grins, and looks broad nonſenſe with a ſtare. Pope.
5. Obſcene; fulſom ; tending to obſcenity.
As chaſte and modeſt as he is eſteemed, it cannot be denied,
but in ſome places he is broad and fulſome. Dryden's juv. Ded.
Though, now arraign'd, he read with ſome delight;
Becauſe he ſeems to chew the cud again,
When his broad comment makes the text too plain. Dryden.
6. Bold; not delicate; not reſerved.
Who can ſpeak broader than he that has no houſe to put his
head in Such may rail againſt great buildings. Shakeſp.
From brºad words, and 'cauſe he fail'd
His preſence at the tyrant's feaſt, I hear,
Macduff lives in diſgrace. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
BROAD as long. Equal upon the whole.
The mobile are ſtill for levelling; that is to ſay, for advanc-
ing themſelves: for it is as broad is long, whether they riſe to
others, or bring others down to them. L’É/irange.
Bºº. 7. / [from broad and cloth.] A fine kind of
CIOath.
Thus, a wiſe taylor is not pinching;
But turns at ev'ry feam an inch in :
Or elſe, be ſure, your broad-cloth breeches
Will ne'er be ſmooth, nor hold their ſtitches. Swift.
BROAD-Eyed adj. [from road and eye.] Having a wide ſurvey.
In deſpite of broad-ey'd watchful day,
I would into thy boſom pour my thoughts:
But, ah I will not. Shakespeare. King john.
Bºra VED. adj. [from broad and leaf.] Having broad
taWCS.
Narrow and broad-leaved cyprus-graſs of the ſame ſort.
- J/oadward on Fºſſils.
To BRo'ADEN. v. n. [from broad.] To grow broad. I know
not whether this word occurs, but in the following paſſage.
Low walks the ſun, and broadens by degrees,
Juſt o'er the verge of day. Thomſon's Summer, i. 1665.
Broadly. adv. [from broad.] In a broad manner.
Bko'ADNEss. m. ſ. [from broad.]
1. Breadth; extent from ſide to ſide.
2. Coarſeneſs; fulſomneſs.
I have uſed the cleaneſt metaphor I could find, to palliate
the broadneſs of the meaning. Dryden.
BRoapshoulper ED. adj. [from broad and ſhoulder.] Having
a large ſpace between the ſhoulders.
Big-bon'd, and large of limbs, with ſinews ſtrong,
Brºad/ºldered, and his arms were round and long. Dryden.
I am a tall, broadſhouldered, impudent, black fellow; and, as
I thought, cvery way qualified for a rich widow. Speciator.
BR2ADSIDE. n.ſ.. [from broad and ſide.]
1. The ſide of a ſhip, diſtinét from the head or ſtern.
From vaſter hopes than this he ſeem'd to fall,
That durſt attempt the Britiſh admiral:
From her broadſides a ruder flame is thrown,
Than from the firy chariot of the ſun. //aller.
2. The volly of ſhot fired at once from the fide of a ſhip.
3. [In printing.] A ſheet of paper containing one large page.
BRo'ADsworp., n.ſ.. [from broad and ſword..] A cuttingſword,
with a broad blade.
He, in fighting a duel, was run through the thigh with a
broadſword. //?ſeman.
BR9'Apwise, adv. [from broad and wift.] According to the
direction of the breadth.
If one ſhould, with his hand, thruſt a piece of iron broadwiſe
againſt the flat cieling of his chamber, the iron would not fall
as long as the force of the hand perſeveres to preſs againſt it.
Boyle.
BROCA'DE. m. ſ. [brocado, Span.] A ſilken ſtuff, variºi
with colours of gold or ſilver.
I have the conveniency of buying and importing rich bro-
cades. Speciator, N° 288.
Or ſtain her honour, or her new brocade,
Forget her pray'rs, or miſs a maſquerade. Pope.
BRocA'DED. adj. [from brocadº.] -
1. Dreſt in brocade.
2. Woven in the manner of a brocade.
Should you the rich brocaded ſuit unfold,
Where riſing flow’rs grow ſtiff with froſted gold. Gay.
BR o'cAGE. m. ſ. [from broke.]
I. The gain gotten by promoting bargains.
Yet ſure his honeſty
Got him ſmall gains, but ſhameleſs flattery,
And filthy brocage, and unſeemly ſhifts,
And borrow baſe, and ſome good ladies gifts. Spenser.
2. The hire given for any unlawful office.
As for the politick and wholeſome laws, they were inter-
preted to be but brocage of an uſurer, thereby to woo and win
the hearts of the people. Bacon's Henry VI 1.
3. The trade of dealing in old things.
Poor poet ape, that would be thought our chief,
Whoſe works are e'en the frippery of wit,
From brocage is become ſo bold a thief,
As we, the rob'd, leave rage, and pity it. Ben. johnſºr.
So much as the quantity of money is leſſened, ſo much muſt
the ſhare of every one that has a right to this money be the leſs,
whether he be landholder, for his goods, or labourer, for his
hire, or merchant, for his brocage. Locke.
BROCCOL.I. m. ſ. [Ital.] See CABBA GE ; of which it is a ſpecies.
Content with little, I can piddle here,
On broccoli and mutton round the year;
But ancient friends, tho' poor or out of play,
That touch my bell, I cannot turn away.
Pope-
To BR och E. See To BRoach.
So
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B. R O
B R O
So Geoffry of Boullion, at one draught of his bow, ſhoot-
ing againſt David's tower in Jeruſalem, broched three feetleſs
birds. Camden’s Remains.
Brock. n.ſ [bnoc, Saxon.] A badger.
BRo'cket. n.ſ. A red deer, two years old.
Brocue. n. ſ. ſbrog, Iriſh.]
1. A kind of ſhoe.
I thought he ſlept; and put
My clouted bragues from off my feet, whoſe rudeneſs
Anſwer'd my ſteps too loud. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Sometimes it is given out, that we muſt either take three
halfpence, or eat our brogues. Swift.
2. A cant word for a corrupt dialeót, or manner of pronuncia-
tion
To BROTDER. v. a. [brodir, Fr.] To adorn with figures of
needle-work.
A robe and a broidered coat, and a girdle. Exodus, xxviii. 4.
Infant Albion lay
In mantles broider'd o'er with gorgeous pride. Tickell.
Bro'IDERY. n.ſ.. [from broider.] Embroidery; flower-work;
additional ornaments wrought upon cloath.
The golden broidery tender Milkah wove,
The breaſt to Kenna ſacred, and to love,
Lie rent and mangled. Tickell.
BROIL. n.ſ.. [brouiller, Fr.] A tumult; a quarrel.
Say to the king thy knowledge of the broil,
As thou didſt leave it. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He has ſent the ſword both of civil broils, and publick war,
amongſt us. //ake.
Rude were their revels, and obſcene their joys,
The hroils of drunkards, and the luſt of boys. Granville.
To BROIL. v. a. ſhruler, Fr.] To dreſs or cook by laying on
the coals, or before the fire.
Some ſtrip the ſkin, ſome portion out the ſpoil,
Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil. Dryden's Aeneid.
To BRoil. v. n. To be in the heat.
Where have you been broiling 2–
—Among the croud i' th' abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedg'd in more. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Long ere now all the planets and comets had been broiling in
the ſun, had the world laſted from all eternity. Cheyne.
To BROKE. v. n. [of uncertain etymology. Skinner ſeems in-
clined to derive it from to break, becauſe broken men turn fac-
tors or brokers. Caſanbon, from w;&amp;#sw. Skinner thinks, again,
that it may be contračted from procurer. Mr. Lye more pro-
bably deduces it from bnuccan, Sax. to be buſy..] To tranſačt
buſineſs for others, or by others. It is uſed generally in re-
proach.
He does, indeed,
And brokes with all that can, in ſuch a ſuit, -
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid. Shakeſp.
The gains of bargains are of a more doubtful nature, when
men ſhould wait upon other's neceſſity; broke by ſervants and
inſtruments to draw them on. Bacon.
BRO'KING. particip. adj. In the broker's hands.
Redeem from broking pawn the blemiſh'd crown,
Wipe off the duſt that hides our ſceptre's gilt.
BRo'ken. [particip, paſſ of break.]
Preſerve men's wits from being broken with the very bent of
ſo long attention. Hooker.
BRO'KEN MEAT. Fragments; meat that has been cut.
Get three or four chairwomen to attend you conſtantly in
the kitchen, whom you pay at ſmall charges; only with the
broken meat, a few coals, and all the cinders. Swift.
BRO'KENHEARTED. adj. [from broken and heart..] Having the
ſpirits cruſhed by grief or fear.
He hath ſent me to bind up the brokenhearted. Iſa. lxi. 1.
Bro'keNLY. adv. [from broken.] Without any regular ſeries.
Sir Richard Hopkins hath done ſomewhat of this kind, but
brokenly and glancingly; intending chiefly a diſcourſe of his
own voyage. Hakewell on Providence.
BRO'KER. m.ſ.. [from to broke.]
I. A factor; one that does buſineſs for another; one that makes
bargains for another.
Brokers, who, having no ſtock of their own, ſet up and trade
with that of other men; buying here, and ſelling there, and
commonly abuſing both ſides, to make out a little paultry gain.
Temple.
Shakeſp.
Some South-ſea broker, from the city,
Will purchaſe me, the more's the pity;
Lay all my fine plantations waſte,
To fit them to his vulgar taſte.
2. One who deals in old houſhold goods.
3. A pimp ; a match-maker.
A goodly broker/
Dare you preſume to harbour wanton lines 2
To whiſper and conſpire againſt my youth Shakeſp.
In chufing for yourſelf, you ſhew'd your judgment;
Which being ſhallow, you ſhall give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Bro'keRAGE. n.ſ. [from broker.] The pay or reward of a
broker. See BRocAGE.
Vol. I.
Swift.
BRO'Nchocele. n.ſ. ſºyºº...] A tumour of that part of
B the aſpera arteria, called the bronchus. Kºinºy.
#. {a}. [º.] Belonging to the throat.
Inflammation of the lungs may happen either in the bronchial
* Pulmonary veſſels, and may ſoon be communicated from one
to the other, when the inflammation affects both the lobes.
Arbuthnot on Diet.
Broncho'rom Y. m. ſ. [3.3/k^- and rigº..] That operation
which opens the windpipe by inciſion, to prevent ſuffocation in
a quinſey. Quincy.
The operation of bronchotomy is an inciſion made into the
aſpera arteria, to make way for the air into the lungs, when re-
fpiration is obſtructed by any tumour compreſſing the larynx.
'arp’ ge?”.
BROND. m.ſ. See BRAND. Sharp's sugar
Fooliſh old man, ſaid then, the pagan wroth,
That weeneſt words or charms may force withſtond,
Soon ſhalt thou ſee, and then believe for troth,
That I can carve with this enchanted brand. Fairy 9, p. ii.
BRONtology. n.ſ. [3;orth and *Y*..] A diſſertation upon
thunder. Dići.
BRONze. n.ſ.. [bronze, Fr.]
1. Braſs. -
Imbrown'd with native bronze, lo! Henley ſtands,
Tuning his voice, and balancing his hands. Pope's Dune,
2. A medal.
I view with anger and diſdain,
How little gives thee joy or pain;
A print, a bronze, a flower, a root,
A ſhell, a butterfly can do’t.
BROOCH. n.ſ. [broke, Dutch.]
1. A jewel ; an ornament of jewels.
Ay, marry, our chains and our jewels.-
Your brooches, pearls, and owches. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Richly ſuited, but unſeaſonable; juſt like the brooch and the
toothpick, which we wear not now. Shakeſp.
I know him well; he is the brooch, indeed,
And gem of all the nation. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. [With painters.] A painting all of one colour. Dićf.
To Brooch. v. a. [from the noun..] To adorn with jewels.
Not th’ imperious ſhew
Of the full-fortun’d Caeſar, ever ſhall
Be brooch'd with me. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
To BROOD. v. m. [braedan, Saxon.]
1. To ſit on eggs; to hatch them.
Thou from the firſt
Waſt preſent, and, with mighty wings outſpread,
Dove-like ſat'ſt brooding on the vaſt abyſs,
And mad'ſt it pregnant. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. i. 1. 21.
Here nature ſpreads her fruitful ſweetneſs round,
Breathes on the air, and broods upon the ground.
2. To cover chickens under the wing.
Exalted hence, and drunk with ſecret joy,
Their young ſucceſſion all their cares employ;
They breed, they brood, inſtruct and educate, -
And make proviſion for the future ſtate. Dryden's Virgil.
Find out ſome uncouth cell,
Where brooding darkneſs ſpreads his jealous wings,
And the night raven ſings.
3. To watch, or conſider any thing anxiouſly.
Defraud their clients, and, to lucre ſold,
Sit brooding on unprofitable gold,
Who dare not give.
As rejoicing miſers
Broad o'er their precious ſtores of ſecret gold. Smith's Phadr.
4. To mature any thing by care.
It was the opinion of Clinias, as if there were ever amongſt
nations a brooding of a war, and that there is no ſure league but
impuiſiance to do hurt. Bacon's War with Spain.
To BRood. v. a. To cheriſh by care; to hatch.
Of crouds afraid, yet anxious when alone,
You'll ſit and brood your ſorrows on a throne.
BrooD. n. ſ [from the verb.]
1. Offspring; progeny.
The heavenly father keep his brood - -
From foul infection of ſo great a vice. Fairfax, b, i.
With terrours, and with clamours compaſs'd round, --
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed. Par. L. b. ii.
Or any other of that heav'nly brood,
Let down in cloudy throne to do the world ſome good.
Milton.
AElian diſcourſes of ſtorks, and their affectiºn toward their
brood, whom they inſtruct to fly. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. Generation. -
Have you forgotten Libya's burning waſtes, ,
Its barreñ rocks, parch'd earth, and hills of ſand.
Its tainted air, and all its brººd; of poiſon Addison's Cato.
3. A hatch; the number hatched at once. - -
I was wonderfully pleaſed to ſee the different workings of
inſtinct in a hen followed by a brood of ducks. Spee’. Nº 121.
4. Something brought forth ; a produćtion.
3 Q-
Prior.
Dryden.
Milton.
Dryden’s AEncid.
Dryden.
Stich
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B. R O
B R O
-
º
º
r.
º
º
-
t
Such things become the hatch and broºd of time.
5. The act of covering theºgº.
Something's in his ſoul,
O'er which his melancholy ſits on lººd;
And I doubt the hatch and the diſcloſe
Will be ſome danger. an Shaft. Hamlet.
BRo'o DY. a6!?. [from broad.] In a ſtate of ſitting on the eggs;
inclined to fit. - -
The common hen, all the while ſhe is troº, fits, and leads
her chickens, and uſes a voice which we call clocking. Ray,
BRook. n.ſ.. [bnog, or broca, Saxon.] A running watcrº leſs
than a river; a rivulet.
A ſºbſtitute ſhines brightly as a king,
Until a king be by ; and then his ſtate
Empties itſelf, as doth an inland brººk
Into the main of waters. Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Penice.
Or many grateful altars I would rear,
Of graſſy turf; and pile up every ſtone,
Of aſtré, from the brook; in memory,
Of monument to ages. Milton's Par. I ºff, b. xi. 1.325.
And to Cephifus' brook their way purſue :
The ſtream was troubled, but the ford they knew. Dryden.
Springs make little rivulets; thoſe united, make brooks; and
thoſe coming together, make rivers, which empty themſelves
into the ſea. Locke.
To BROOK. v. a. [b]ucan, Sax.] To bear; to endure; to
ſupport.
Kven they, which look it worſt, that men ſhould tell them
of their duties, when they are told the ſame by a law, think
very well and reaſonably of it. Hooker, b. i.
A thouſand more miſchances than this one,
Piave learn'd me to brook this patiently. Shakeſp. T. G. ºf Wer.
How uſe doth breed a habit in a man!
This ſhadowy deſart, unfrequented woods,
I better brºok than flouriſhing peopl’d towns.
Heav'n, the ſcat of bliſs,
Brooks not the works of violence, and war. Par. Loft, b. vi.
Moſt men can much rather brook their being reputed knaves,
Shakesp.
Shakesp.
than for their honeſty be accounted fools. South.
Reſtraint thou wilt not brook; but think it hard,
Your prudence is not truſted as your guard. Dryden.
To BRook. v. n. To endure; to be content.
He, in theſe wars, had flatly refuſed his aid; becauſe he
could not look, that the worthy prince Plangus was, by his
choſen Tiridates, preferred before him. Sidney's Arcadia.
BRo'ok LIME. m. ſ. [becabunga, Lat..] A ſort of water ſpeed-
well; very common in ditches.
BROOM. n.ſ.. [bnom, Saxon.]
1. This tree hath a papilionaceous flower, whoſe pointal, which
riſes from the flower-cup, afterward becomes a ſhort, roundiſh,
ſwelling pod, containing, for the moſt part, one kidney-ſhaped
ſecd in each. Millar.
Ev’n humble broom, and oſiers, have their uſe,
And ſhade for ſheep, and food for flocks, produce. Dryden.
2. A beſom; ſo called from the matter of which it is made.
Not a mouſe
Shall diſturb this hallow'd houſe;
I am ſent with broom before,
To ſweep the duſt behind the door. Shakesp. Midſum. Night's Dr.
If they came into the beſt apartment, to ſet anything in or-
der, they were ſaluted with a broom. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
Bão'9MLAND. m. ſ. [broom and land.] Land that bears broom.
I have known ſheep cured of the rot, when they have not
been far gone with it, only by being put into broonſands.
- Mortimer’s Husbandry.
BRO'oMSTAFF. n: ſ [from broom and/aff.] The ſtaff to which
the broºm is bound; the handle of a beform.
They fell on ; I made good my place; at length they came
to the brººftºff with me; I deficd'em ſtill. Shakeſp. H. VIII.
From the age,
That children tread this worldly ſtage,
Broomſºft, or poker, they beſtride,
And round the parlour love to ride. Prior.
Sir Roger pointed at ſomething behind the door, which I
found to be an old broºmſ'aff. Speciator, N° 117.
Exo'o M. Y. adj. [from broom.j Full of broom.
If it grow moſſy or broomy, which theſe lands are inclined to,
then break it up again, and order it as you did before, laying
of it down again from the wheat-ſtubble. AMortimer.
The youth with broomy ſtumps began to trace
The kennel edge, where wheels had worn the place. Swift.
BR or H. ii. ſ. [bnoë, Sax.] Liquour in which fleſh is boiled.
You may make the broth for two days, and take the one
half every day. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
Inſtead of light deſerts, and luſcious froth,
Our authour treats to-night with Spartan broth. Southerne:
If a nurſe, after being ſucked dry, eats broth, the infant will
fuck the lºroth almoſt unaltered. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
BRo"THEL. m. ſ. [bordel, Fr.] A houſe of lewd enter-
y -
!; Ro'THE LHouse. tainment; a bawdyhouſe.
Perchance
I ſaw him enter ſuch a houſe of ſale,
Yidelicct, a brothel. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
Then courts of kings were held in high renown,
Fre made the common brºthel; of the town:
There, virgins honourable vows receiv'd,
But chaſe as maids in monaſteries liv'd. Dryden's. II. ºf B.
From its old ruins brothe/houſes riſe,
Scene: of lewd !cycs, and of poiluted joys. Pryden’s 27,ºff.
The libertige retires to the flews, and to the ºthel. Recº.
BROTHER... n.ſ.. [bºoseſ, brocon, Saxon.j Plural, brothers
or brethren. &gt;
1. One born cf the ſame father and mother.
Be ſad, good brothers s
Sorrow ſo royally in you appears,
That I will de-ply put the faſhion on. Sº...?. I r
Whilſt kin thcir kin, brother the Arzher ...? II.m. IV.
Like enfºgº sº, againſt like enſigns bend. » Daniel
T” whºm Michael ! thus, he alſo mov’d, reply'd : -
Theſe two are brethren, Adam, and to comé
". . . . . . / 2...” - - - -
tºº ::::::::::: 16/?, b. xi. 1. 454.
- - •. o one common parent, it
is very eaſy to form the ideas of brothers. Locke.
2. Any one cloſely united.
We few, we happy few, we band of brºthers;
For he, to day that ſheds his blood with me,
Shall be my brother. Shakespeare. Henry V.
3. Any one reſembling another in manner, form, or profeſſion.
He alſo that is ſlothful in his work, is lºother to him that is
a great waſter. Prov. xviii. 9.
4. Brother is uſed, in theological language, for man in general.
BRO'THER Hood. n.ſ. [from brother and hººd.]
I. The ſtate or quality of being a brother.
This deep diſgrace of brotherhood
Touches me decper than you can imagine. Shakespeare R. II.
Finds brotherhood in thee no ſharper ſpur Shºp. R. II.
So it be a right to govern, whether you call it ſupreme father-
hood, or ſupreme brotherhood, will be all one, provided we know
who has it. Locke.
2. An aſſociation of men for any purpoſe; a fraternity.
There was a fraternity of men at arms, called the brother-
hood of St. George, crečted by parliament, conſiſting of thir-
teen the moſt noble and worthy perſons. Davies on Ireland.
3. A claſs of men of the ſame kind.
He was ſometimes ſo engaged among the wheels, that not
above half the poct appeared; at other times, he became as
conſpicuous as any of the brotherhoºd. Addiſon. Guardian.
BRO'THERLY. adj. [from brother.] Natural; ſuch as becomes
or beſecns a brother.
He was a prieſt, and looked for a prieſt's reward; which was
our brotherly love, and the good of our ſouls and bodies. Bacon.
Though more our money than our cauſe, -
Their brotherly afiſtance draws. Denharn.
They would not go before the laws, but follow them; obey-
ing their ſuperiours, and embracing one another in brotherly
piety and concord. Addison's Freeholder, N° 33.
BR o'THERLY. adv. After the manner of a brother; with kind-
neſs and affection. --
I ſpeak but brotherly of him; but ſhould I anatomize him to
thee as he is, I muſt bluſh and weep, and thou look pale and
wonder. Shakeſp. As you like it.
BRought. [participle paſſive of bring.]
The Turks, poſſeſſed with a needleſs fear, forſook the walls,
and could not, by any perſuaſions or threats of the captains, be
brought on again to the aſſault. Knolles's Hiſtory.
The inſtances brought by our authour are but ſlender proofs.
Locke.
BROW. n.ſ.. [bºopa, Saxon.] 1.
1. The arch of hair over the eye.
'Tis now the hour which all to reſt allow,
And ſleep fits heavy upon every brow. Dryden's Ind. Emºp.
2. The forehead.
She could have run, and waddled about;
For even the day before ſhe broke her brow. Shakespeare
So we ſome antique hero's ſtrength,
Learn by his launce's weight and length;
As theſe vaſt beams expreſs the beaſt,
Whoſe ſhady brows alive they dreſt. Waller.
3. The general air of the countenance.
Then call them to our preſence, face to face,
And frowning brow to brow. Słakºff. Richard II.
Though all things foul would bear the brows of grace,
Yet grace muſt look ſtill ſo. Shakespeare, AZacbeth.
4. The edge of any high place.
The earl, nothing diſmayed, came forwards that day unto a
little village, called Stoke, and there cncamped that night, upon
the hrow or hanging of a hill. Bacon's Henry VII.
On the brow of the hill beyond that city, they were ſome-
what perplexed by eſpying the French embaſſador, with the
king's coach, and others, attending him. //otton.
Them with fire, and hoſtile arms,
Fearleſs aſſault; and, to the brow of heav'n
Purſuing, drive them out from God and bliſs. Par. L. h. vi.
To BRow. º. a. Iſrom the noun..] To bound; to limit; to
be at the edge of.
Tending
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R U
B R U
Teading my flocks hard by iſ th’ hilly Crofts,
That brow this bottom glad. Milton.
To BRow RFAT. v. a. [from brow and beat J. To depreſs with
ſevere brows, and ſtern or lofty looks.
It is not for a magiſtrate to frown upon, and browłcat thoſe
who are hearty and exačt in their miniſtry; and, with a grave,
inſignificant nod, to call a reſolved zeal, want of prudence.
South.
What man will voluntarily expoſe himſelf to the imperious
browbeatings and ſcorns of great men f L’Eſtrange.
Count Tariff endeavoured to browbeat the plaintiff, while he
was ſpeaking; but though he was not ſo imprudent as the
count, he was every whit as ſturdy. Addison.
I will not be browteaten by the ſupercilious looks of my ad-
verſaries, who now ſtand check by jowl by your worſhip.
Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
BRø'w poux D. adj. [from brow and bound.] Crowned ; having
the head encircled with a diadem.
In that day’s ſeats,
He prov’d the beſt man i' th' field, and, for his meed,
Was browbound with the oak. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Browsick. adj. [from brow and ſick.] Dejećted ; hanging the
head.
But yet a gracious influence from you,
May alter nature in our brºwſick crew. Suckling.
EROWN. adj. [brun, Saxon.] The name of a colour, com-
pounded of black and any other colour.
Drown, in High Dutch, is called braun; in the Netherlands,
bruyn ; in French, colºur brune; in Italian, bruno; in Greek,
*:::::w &amp;.S., from the colour of the Ethiopians; for 3.92 is to
burn, and 34, a face; for that blackneſs or ſwarthineſs in their
faces, is procured through heat. In Latin it is called fuſcus,
qºoſ. 23, 22.2+2, that is, from darkening or overſhadowing the
light; or of Cazzi, which is to burn or ſcorch. Peacham.
I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a little
brºwſer. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
From whence high Ithaca overlooks the floods,
Brown with o'ercharging ſhades and pendent woods. Pope.
Long untravell'd heaths,
With deſolation brown, he wanders waſte. Thomſon.
BRoºwN BILL. m. ſ. [from brown and bill.] The ancient weapon
of the Engliſh foot; why it is called brown, I have not diſco-
vered; but we now ſay brown musket from it.
And brownhills, levied in the city,
Made bills to paſs the grand committee.
BRow NISH. adj. [from brown.] Somewhat brown.
A brawniſh grey iron-ſtone, lying in thin ſtrata, is poor, but
i- runs freely. JWoodward on Foſſils.
BRows Ness. n.ſ. [from brown.] A brown colour.
!. She would confeſs the contention in her own mind, between
!- that lovely, indeed moſt lovely, brownneſs of Muſidorus's face,
i and this colour of mine. Sidney, b. ii.
3- Brown study. m. ſ. [from brown and ſtudy.] Gloomy medi-
i- tations; ſtudy in which we direct our thoughts to no certain
Oint.
P They live retired, and then they doze away their time in
drowſineſs and browſiudies; or, if brisk and ačtive, º lay
themſelves out wholly in making common places. orris.
To BROWSE. v. a. [brouſer, Fr.] To eat branches, or ſhrubs.
-- And being down, is trod in the durt
Of cattle, and brouſed, and ſorely hurt. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
Thy palate then did deign
The rougheſt berry on the rudeſt hedge:
Yea, like the ſtag, when ſnow the paſture ſheets,
The barks of trees thou browſ.dſ., . Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
- To BRows E. v. m. To feed: it is uſed with the particle on.
They have ſcared away two of my beſt ſheep; if any where
#. I have them, 'tis by the ſea-ſide, browſing on ivy. Shakeſp.
A goat, hard preſſed, took ſančtuary in a vineyard; ſo ſoon as
* he thought the danger over, he fell preſently a browſing upon
** the leaves. - L’Eſtrange.
Could eat the tender plant, and, by degrees,
Prºwſ on the ſhrubs, and crop the budding trees. Blackm.
The Greeks were the deſcendants of ſavages, ignorant of
-- 2griculture, and brºwſing on herbage, like cattle. Arbuthnot.
BRowsF. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Branches, or ſhrubs, fit for the
food of goats, or other animals,
The greedy lioneſs the wolf purſues,
\
Hudibras.
The wolf the kid, the wanton kid the browſ. IDryden.
On that cloud-piercing hill,
Plinlimmon, from afar the traveller kens,
Aſtoniſh'd, how the goats their ſhrubby browſe
Gnaw pendent. Philips.
To BRUISE. v. a. ſhriſer, Fr.] To cruſh or mangle with the
heavy blow of ſomething not edged or pointed; to cruſh by
any weight; to beat into groſs powder; to beat together
coarſely.
Fellows in arms, and my moſt loving friends,
Bruis’d underneath the yoke of tyranny. Shakeſp. R. III.
And fix far deeper in his head their ſtings,
Than temporal death ſhall bruiſe the vićtor's heel,
Qr theirs whom he redeems. Par. Lºft, b. xii l. 433.
As in old chaos heav'n with carth conſº'd,
And ſtars with rocks together cruſh'd and traig'd. Iſaler.
They bcat their breaſts with many a bruiſing blow,
Till they turn’d livid, and corrupt the ſhow. Dryden's Fab.
BRUISE. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A hurt with fomething blunt
and heavy.
One arm'd with metal, th’ other with wood,
This fit for bruiſe, and that for blood.
I ſince have labour'd
To bind the bruiſes of a civil war,
And ſtop the iſſues of their waſting blood. Dryden.
BRU'isewort. m. ſ. An herb ; the ſame with Cox1F ſex;
which ſee.
BRUIT. n.ſ.. [bruit, Fr.] Rumour; noiſe; report.
Wherewith a bruit ran from one to the other, that the king
was ſlain. Sidney, b. ii.
Upon ſome bruits he apprehended a fear, which moved him
Hudºras.
to ſend to Sir William Herbert to remain his friend. Hayw.
I am not
One that rejoices in the common wreck,
As common bruit doth put it. Shakespeare. Timon.
To BRUIT. v. a. [from the noun..] To report; to noiſé abroad;
to rumour. Neither the verb nor the noun are now mach
in uſe.
His death,
Being bruited once, took fire and heat away
From the beſt temper'd courage in his troops. Shakespeare Hen. V.
It was bruited, that I meant nothing leſs than to go to Gui-
ana. Raleigh's Eſſayſ:
BRU'MAL. adj. [lrumalis, Lat.] Belºnging to the winter.
About the brumal ſolſtice, it hath been obſerved, even unto a
proverb, that the ſea is calm, and the winds do ceaſe, till the
young ones are excluded, and forſake their neſts.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 1C.
BRUN, BRAN, BRow N, Bourn, BURN, are all derived from
the Sax. bonn, bounn, brunna, bujina; all ſignifying a river or
brook. Gilſºn's Camden.
BRUNE'TT. n.ſ.. [brunette, Fr.] A woman with a brown com-
plexion.
Your fair women therefore thought of this faſhion, to inſult
the olives and the brunctres. Addiſon. Guardian, N° 109.
BRU'NIon. n.ſ.. [brugnon, Fr.] A ſort of fruit between a plum
and a peach. Trevoux.
BRUNT. n.ſ.. [brum/?, Dutch.]
1. Shock; violence.
Erona choſe rather to bide the brunt of war, than venture
him. Sidney, b. ii.
God, who caus'd a fountain, at thy pray'r, -
From the dry ground to ſpring, thy thirſt tº allay
After the brunt of battle. Milton's Agoniſtes, l. 581.
Faithful miniſters are to ſtand and endure the brunt : a com-
mon ſoldier may fly, when it is the duty of him that holds the
ſtandard to die upon the place. South.
2. Blow ; ſtroke.
A wicked ambuſh, which lay hidden long
In the cloſe covert of her guileful eyen,
Thence breaking forth, did thick about me throng,
Too feeble It’ abide the brunt ſo ſtrong. Spenſer's Sonnets.
The friendly rug preſerv'd the ground,
And headlong knight, from bruiſe or wound,
Like featherbed betwixt a wall,
An heavy brunt of cannon-ball.
BRUSH. m. ſ. [broſ., Fr. from bruſus, Lat.]
1. An inſtrument to clean anything, by rubbing off the dirt or
ſoil. It is generally made of briſtles ſet in wood.
2. It is uſed for the larger and ſtronger pencils uſed by painters.
Whence comes all this rage of wit? this arming all the pen-
cils and bruſhes of the town againſt me? Stillingfeet.
With a ſmall bruſh you muſt ſmear the glue well upon the
joint of each piece. Maxin's Mechanical Exerciſes.
3. A rude aſſault; a ſhock; rough treatment; which, by the
ſame metaphor, we call a ſcouring.
Let grow thy finews till their knots be ſtrong,
And tempt not yet the bruſhes of the war. Shakespeare
It could not be poſſible, that, upon ſo little a bruſh as Waller
had ſuſtained, he could not be able to follow and diſturb the
king. Clarendon, b. viii.
Elſe when we put it to the puſh,
They had not giv'n us ſuch a bruſh. Hudibras.
To BRUSH. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſweep or rub with a bruſh.
If he be not in love with ſome woman, there is no believing
old ſigns; he bruſhes his hat o' morning; what ſhould that
bode * Shakeſp. Much ado about Nºthing.
2. To ſtrike with quickneſs, as in bruſhing.
The wrathful beaſt about him turned light,
And him ſo rudely paſſing by, did bruſh
With his long tail, that horſe and man to ground did ruſh.
Spenſer's Fairy Qiºn, b. i. cant. ii. ſianz, 16.
Has Somnus bruſh'd thy eyelids with his rod? Dryden.
His ſon Cupavo bruſh'd the briny flood, -
Upon his ſtern a brawny centaur ficed. Drydº.’, Zºeid.
2 High
Hu dilras.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B R U
-
-
-
*
, - .
* *
h
- |
|
, - .
º -
; :
| | |
* , i.
f :
º
º
º
º
-
High o'er the billows flew the maſſy load,
And near the ſhip came thund'ring on the flood, -
It almoſt bruſh'd the helm. Pope's Odyſſey, b, ix.
3. To paint with a bruſh.
You have commiſſioned me to paint your ſhop, and I have
done my belt to briſh you up like your neighbours. Pope.
4. To carry away, by an act like that of bruſhing.
And from the boughs bruſh off the evil dew,
And heal the harms of thwarting thunder blew. Milton.
The receptacle of waters, into which the mouths of all ri-
vers muſt empty themſelves, ought to have ſo ſpacious a fur-
face, that as much water may be continually bruſhed off by the
winds, and exhaled by the ſun, as, beſides what falls again, is
brought into it by all the rivers. Lently.
5. To move as the bruſh.
A thouſand nights have bruſh'd their balmy wings
Over theſe eyes. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
To BRUSH. v. n.
1. To move with haſte: a ludicrous word, applied to men.
Nor wept his fate, nor caſt a pitying eye,
Nortook him down, but bruſh'd regardleſs by. Dryden.
The French had gather'd all their force,
And William met them in their way;
Yet off they bruſh'd, both foot and horſe. Prior.
2. To fly over; to ſkim lightly.
Nor love is always of a vicious kind,
But oft to virtuous acts inflames the mind,
Awakes the ſleepy vigour of the ſoul,
And, bruſhing o'er, adds motion to the pool. Dryden's Fab.
BRU's HER. m. ſ [from bruſh.] He that uſes a bruſh.
Sir Henry Wotton uſed to ſay, that criticks were like bruſh-
ers of noblemens cloaths. Bacon's Apºphthegms.
BRU'shwood. m. ſ. [from bruſh and wood. I know not whether
it may not be corrupted from browſewood.] Rough, low, cloſe,
ſhrubby thickets; ſmall wood fit for fire. -
It ſmokes, and then with trembling breath ſhe blows,
Till in a cheerful blaze the flames aroſe.
With bruſhwood, and with chips, ſhe ſtrengthens theſe,
- And adds at laſt the boughs of rotten trees. Dryden's Fab.
BRU'shy, adj. [from bruſh.] Rough or ſhaggy, like a bruſh.
I ſuſpected, that it might have proceeded from ſome ſmall
unheeded drop of blood, wiped off by the bruſhy ſubſtance of
the nerve, from the knife wherewith it was cut. Boyle.
To BRU'stle. v. n. [bnarchan, Saxon.] To crackle; to make
a ſmall noiſe. Skinner.
BRU'TAL. adj. [brutal, Fr. from brute.]
1. That which belongs to a brute; that which we have in com-
mon with brutes.
There is no oppoſing brutal force to the ſtratagems of human
reaſon. L’Eſtrange.
2. Savage; cruel; inhuman.
The brutal bus'neſs of the war
Is managd by thy dreadful ſervants' care. Dryden.
BRurality. n.f. [brutalité, Fr.] Savageneſs; churliſhneſs;
inhumanity. ' -
Courage, in an ill-bred man, has the air, and eſcapes not
the opinion of brutality. Locke.
To BRut'alize. v. n. [brutaliſer, Fr.] To grow brutal or ſa-
vage.
Upon being carried to the Cape of Good Hope, he mixed,
in a kind of tranſport, with his countrymen, brutalized with
them in their habit and manners, and would never again return
to his foreign acquaintance. Addiſon's Freeholder.
To BRUTA'LizE. v. a. To make brutal or ſavage.
BRUT ALLY. adv. [from brutal.] Churliſhly, inhumanly; cru-
elly.
Mrs. Bull aimed a knife at John, though John threw a bot-
tle at her head, very brutally indeed. Arbuthnot.
BRUTE, adj. [brutus, Lat.]
1. Senſeleſs; unconſcious.
Nor yet are we ſo low and baſe as their atheiſm would de-
preſs us ; not walking ſtatues of clay, not the ſons of brute
earth, whoſe final inheritance is death and corruption. Bentl.
2. Savage; irrational ; ferine.
Even brute animals make uſe of this artificial way of mak-
ing divers motions, to have ſeveral ſignifications to call, warn,
chide, cheriſh, threaten. Holder's Elements of Speech.
In the promulgation of the Moſaick law, if ſo much as a
brute beaſt touched the mountain, it was to be ſtruck through
with a dart. South.
3. Beſtial; in common with beaſts.
Then to ſubdue, and quell, through all the earth, -
Brute violence, and proud tyrannick pow'r. Par. Regained.
4. Rough ; ferocious ; uncivilized.
The brute philoſopher, who ne'er has prov’d
The joy of loving, or of being lov’d. Pºpe.
BRU'r E. m. ſ [from the adjective..] A brute creature; a creature
without reaſon; a ſavage.
What may this mean? Language of man pronounc'd
By tongue of brute, and human ſenſe expreſs'd? Par. Lºft.
To judgment he proceeded, on th’ accurs'd
Serpent, tho' brute; unable to transfer
The gºt on him, who made him inſtrument
Of miſchief. 44 tº Paradiſ Loſº, b. x. i. 163.
Brute; may be conſidered as either, aerial, terreſtrial, aqua-
tick, or amphibious. I call thoſe aerial, which have wings,
wherewith they can ſupport themſelves in the air, terreñai
are thoſe, whoſe only place of reſt is upon the earth; aquatick
are thoſe, whoſe conſtant abode is upon the water. Lºcłe.
To thoſe three preſent impulſes, of ſenſe, memory, and in-
ſtinct, moſt, if not all, the ſagacities of bruſe, may be reduced.
Hale's Origin ºf Åſawkind.
Heav'n from all creatures hides the book ºf fate.
All but the page preſcrib'd, this preſent flate; &gt;
From brutes what men, from men what ſpirits know ;
Or who could ſuffer being here below jº', Eff on Aſan.
To BRute. v. a. [written ili for trait..] To report.
This, once bruted through the army, filled them all with
heavineſs. Kºzie's Hiſtory ºf the Tarks.
Bºstº. n: ſ [from brute.] Brutality; a word not now
uled.
Thou dotard vile,
That with thy bruteneſ; ſhend ſt thy comely age. Fairy Q.
To BRU'TIFY. v. a. [from brute.] To make a man a brute.
O thou ſalacious woman I am I then brutified ? Ay; feel
it here; I ſprout, I bud, I bloſſom, I am ripe horn mad.
Congreve's Old Batchelor.
BRU'rish. adj. [from brute.] -
1. Beſtial; reſembling a beaſt.
Oſiris, Iſis, Orus, and their train,
With monſtrous ſhapes and ſorceries abus'd
Fanatick Egypt, and her prieſts, to ſeek
Their wand'ring gods diſguis'd in brutiſh forms. Par. I off.
2. Having the qualities of a brute; rough; ſavage; ferocious.
Brutes, and brutiſh men, are commonly more able to bear
pain, than others. Grew's Cºſmolºgia Sacra, b. ii. c.6.
3. Groſs; carnal.
For thou thyſelf haſ been a libertine,
As ſenſual as the brutiſh ſting itſelf. Shakespeare A you like it.
After he has ſlept himſelf into ſome uſe of himſelf, by much
ado he ſtaggers to his table again, and there acts over the ſame
brutiſh ſcene. South.
4. Ignorant; untaught; uncivilized.
They were not ſo brutiſh, that they could be ignorant to
call upon the name of God. Hooker, b. v. § 35.
BRU'Tis HLY. adv. [from brutiſh..] In the manner of a brute;
of a ſavage and unnatural man.
I am not ſo diffident of myſelf, as brutiſhly to ſubmit to any
man's dićtates. - K. Charles.
For a man to found a confident pračtice upon a diſputable
principle, is brutiſhly to outrun his reaſon. South-
BRU'tish N Ess. n.ſ. Ifrom brutiſh.] Brutality; ſavageneſs; in-
ſenſibility.
All other courage, beſides that, is not true valour, but bru-
tiſhneſs. Sprat.
BRY'on Y. n ſ [bryonia, Lat.] A plant.
It has a climbing ſtalk, with ſpines; the leaves are like thoſe
of the vine; the flowers conſiſt of one leaf, which is expanded
at the top, and divided into five parts, and, in the female plants,
ſucceeded by round berries, growing on footſtalks; the flowers
of the male plants have five apices in each, but are barren. The
ſpecies are, 1. The common white bryony. 2. Smooth African
bryony, with deep cut leaves, and yellow flowers, &amp;c. The
firſt ſort grows upon dry banks, under hedges, in many parts of
England; but may be cultivated in a garden for uſe, by ſowing
the berries in the ſpring of the year, in a dry poor ſoil. The
roots of this plant have been formerly cut into a human ſhape,
and carried about the country, and ſhewn as mandrakes. 41ill.
BuB. n.ſ.. [a cant word.] Strong malt liquour.
Or if it be his fate to meet
With folks who have more wealth than wit,
He loves cheap port, and double bub,
And ſettles in the humdrum club. Prior.
BUBBLE. m. ſ. [bobbel, Dutch..]
1. A ſmall bladder of water; a film of water filled with wind.
Bubbles are in the form of a hemiſphere; air within, and a
little ſkin of water without: and it ſeemeth ſomewhat ſtrange,
that the air ſhould riſe ſo ſwiftly, while it is in the water, and,
when it cometh to the top, ſhould be ſtayed by ſo weak a cover
as that of the bubble is. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 24.
The colours of bubbles, with which children play, are va-
rious, and change their ſituation variouſly, without any reſpect
to confine or ſhadow. - Newton's Optiks.
2. Any thing which wants ſolidity and firmneſs; any thing that
is more ſpecious than real.
The earl of Lincoln was induced to participate, not lightly
upon the ſtrength of the proceedings there, which was but a
bubble, but upon letters from the lady Margaret. Bacon.
Then a ſoldier,
Seeking the bubble, reputation,
Even in the cannon's mouth.
War, he ſung, is toil and trouble,
Honour but an empty bubble, -
Fighting ſtill, and ſtill deſtroying. Dryden.
3 - 3. A
Shakespeare. As yºu'like it.
}
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U C
B U C
3. A cheat; a falſe ſhow. * - -
The nation then too late will find,
Directors promiſes but wind, -
South-ſea at beſt a mighty bubble. Swift.
4. The perſon cheated. - . . . . .
Ceaſe, deareſt mother, ceaſe to chide;
Gany's a cheat, and I’m a bubble;
Yet why this great exceſs of trouble. Priºr.
He has been my bubble theſe twenty years, and, to my cer-
tain knowledge, underſtands no more of his own affairs, than
a child in ſwaddling clothes. Arbuthnot's Hiff. of j. Bull.
To Bu'PBLE. v. m. [from the noun..] To riſe in bubbles.
Alas! a crimſon river of warm blood,
Like to a bubbling fountain ſtirr'd with wind,
Doth riſe and fall. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
Adder's fork, and blindworm's ſting,
Lizard's leg, and owlet's wing:
For a charm of pow'rful trouble, -
Like a hellbroth boil and bubble. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Still bubble on, and pour forth blood and tears. Dryden.
2. To run with a gentle noiſe.
For thee the bubbling ſprings appear'd to mourn,
And whiſpering pines made vows for thy return. Dryden.
The ſame ſpring ſuffers at ſome times a very manifeſt remiſ-
ſion of its heat: at others, as manifeſt an increaſe of it; yea,
ſometimes to that exceſs, as to make it boil and bubble with ex-
treme heat. - Woodward's Nat. Hiſł.
Not bubbling fountains to the thirſty ſwain,
Not ſhow’rs to larks, or ſunſhine to the bee,
Are half ſo charming as thy ſight to me. Pope.
To BU'bble. v. a. To cheat: a cant word.
He tells me, with great paſſion, that ſhe has bubbled him out
of his youth; and that ſhe has drilled him on to five and fifty.
Addiſon. Spectator, N°89.
Charles Mather could not bubble a young beau better with a
tov. º; Hiſt. of j. Bull.
Bu'BBLER. m. ſ. [from bubble.] A cheat.
What words can ſuffice to expreſs, how infinitely I eſteem
you, above all the great ones in this part of the world; above
all the Jews, jobbers, and bubblers. Digby to Pope.
BU'BBY. m. ſ. A woman's breaſt.
Foh ! ſay they, to ſee a handſome, brisk, genteel, young fel-
low, ſo much governed by a doating old woman; why don't
you go and ſuck the bubby P Arbuthnot's john Bull.
BU'Bo. n.ſ. [Lat. from 3932, the groin.] That part of the groin
from the bending of the thigh to the ſcrotum; and therefore all
tumours in that part are called buboes. Quincy.
I ſuppurated it after the manner of a bubo, opened it, and en-
deavoured deterſion. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Bubonoce'le. m. ſ. [Lat. from 3932, the groin, and zºn, a rup-
ture.] A particular kind of rupture, when the inteſtines break
down into the groin. $2uincy.
When the inteſtine, or omentum, falls through the rings of
the abdominal muſcles into the groin, it is called hernia inguina-
Iis, or, if into the ſcrotum, ſcrotalis : theſe two, though the firſt
only is properly ſo called, are known by the name of bubonocele.
Sharp's Surgery.
BucANI'ers. n.ſ. A cant word for the privateers, or pirates, of
America.
Buccella'tion. m. ſ. [buccella, a mouthful, Lat.] In ſome chy-
mical authours, ſignifies a dividing into large pieces. Harris.
BUCK. n.ſ.. [bauche, Germ. ſuds, or lye.]
1. The liquour in which cloaths are waſhed.
Buck P I would I could waſh myſelf of the buck: I warrant
you, buck, and of the ſeaſon too it ſhall appear. Shakeſp.
2- The cloaths waſhed in the liquour.
Of late, not able to travel with her furred pack, ſhe waſhes
bucks here at home. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
JGUCK. m.ſ.. [bwch, Welch; bock, Dutch; b%ic, Fr.] The male
of the fallow deer; the male of rabbets, and other animals.
Bucks, goats, and the like, are ſaid to be tripping or ſaliant,
that is, going or leaping. Peacham.
o Buck. v. a. [from the noun..] To waſh clothes.
Here is a baſket; he may creep in here, and throw foul linen
upon him, as if it were going to bucking. Shakeſp.
* Buck. v. n. [from the noun..] To copulate as bucks and
Oes,
The chief time of ſetting traps, is in their lucking time.
Mortimer.
DFB = 7'ck basket. n.f. The baſket in which cloaths are carried to
the waſh. *
They conveyed me into a buckbasket; rammed me in with
foul ſhirts, foul ſtockings, and greaſy napkins. Shakeſp.
** "ckBEAN. n.ſ.. [backiboonen, Dutch..] A plant; a ſort of trºfil.
The bitter nauſeous plants, as centaury, buckbane, gentian, of
Yhich tea may be made, or wines by infuſion. Floyer.
*-* Sket. n.ſ. [laquet, Fr.]
The veſſel in which water is drawn out of a well.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well,
That owes two buckett, filling one another;
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
- º other down unſcen, and full of water. Shaeff. R. II.
OL. 1.
- -, i. 3
Is the ſea ever likely to be evaporated by the ſun, or to be em-
ptied with bucket; 2 - - Bently.
2. '. veſſels in which water is carried, particularly to quench
a fire.
Now ſtreets grow throng'd, and, buſy as by day,
Some run for bickets to the hallow'd quire;
Some cut the pipes, and ſome the engines play;
And ſome, more bold, mount ladders to the fire. Dryden:
The porringers, that in a row -
Hung high, and made a glitt'ring ſhow,
To a leſs noble ſubſtance chang'd,
... Were now but leathern bucket; rang'd. - - Swift.
BUCKLE. a. ſ. [lwcci, Welch, and the ſame in the Armoričk;
boucle, Fr.]
1. A link of metal, with a tongue or catch made to faſten one
thing to another. -
Fair lined ſlippers for the cold,
With buckles of the pureſt gold. - . . . Shakespeare.
The chlamys was a ſort of ſhort cloak tied with a bucº,
commonly to the right ſhoulder. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Three ſeal-rings; which after, melted down,
Form'd a vaſt bucºle for his widow’s gown. Pope.
2. The ſtate of the hair criſped and curled, by being kept long in
the ſame ſtate.
The greateſt beau was dreſſed in a flaxen periwig; the wearer
of it goes in his own hair at home, and lets his wiglie in buckle
for a whole half year. Speciator, N° 129.
That live-long wig, which Gorgon' ſelf might own,
Eternal buckle takes in Parian ſtone. Popc.
To BU'ckle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten with a buckle. -
Like ſaphire, pearl, in rich embroidery, • .
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knce. Shakeſp.
France, whoſe armour conſcience buck!'d on,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field. Shakeſp.
Thus, ever, when I buckle on my helmet,
Thy fears afflićt thee. Philips.
When you carry your maſter's riding-coat, wrap your own
in it, and buckle them up cloſe with a ſtrap. Swift.
2. To prepare to do any thing: the metaphor is taken from buck-
ling on the armour.
The Saracen, this hearing, roſe amain,
And catching up in haſte his three ſquare ſhield,
And ſhining helmet, ſoon him buckled to the field. Fairy Q.
3. To join in battle.
The Lord Gray, captain of the men at arms, was forbidden
to charge, until the foot of the avantguard were buckled with
them in front. Hayward.
4: To confine.
How brief the life of man
Runs his erring pilgrimage 1
That the ſtretching of a ſpan
Buckles in his ſum of age.
To Bu'ckle. v. n. [bucken, Germ.]
1. To bend; to bow.
As the wretch, whoſe fever-weaken'd joints,
Like ſtrengthleſs hinges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper's arms. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Now a covetous old crafty knave,
At dead of night, ſhall raiſe his ſon, and cry,
Turn out, you rogue ! how like a beaſt you lie;
Go buckle to the law. Dryden.
2. To buckle to. To apply to ; to attend. See ačfive, ſecond ſenſe.
This is to be done in children, by trying them, when they
are by lazineſs unbent, or by avocation bent another way, and
endeavouring to make them buckle to the thing propoſed. Locke.
3. To buckle with. To engage with ; to encounter.
- For ſingle combat, thou ſhalt buckle with me. Shakeſp.
Yet thou, they ſay, for marriage doſt provide;
Is this an age to buckle with a bride : . Dryden's juv. ſat. vi.
BUCKLER. m.ſ.. [bwccled, Welch; bouclier, Fr.] A ſhield; a
defenſive weapon buckled on the arm. -
He took my arms, and, while I forc'd my way,
Through troops of foes, which did our paſſage ſtay;
My buckler o'er my aged father caſt,
Still fighting, ſtill defending as I paſt. Dryden’s Aarongzebe.
This medal compliments the emperour in the ſame ſenſe as
the old Romans did their dictator Fabius, when they called him
the buckler of Rome. Addison on ancient Medals.
To BU'ckLER. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſupport; to defend.
Fear not, ſweet wench, they ſhall not touch thee, Kate;
I'll buckler thee againſt a million. Shakespeare. Tam, the Shrew.
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
. . Now buckler falſhood with a pedigree ? Shakespeare. Henry VI.
BU'ckLER-thor N. n.ſ. Chriſt’s-thorn. - -
Bu'ckMast. n.ſ. The fruit or maſt of the beech tree.
Bu'ckRAM. n.ſ.. [bougran, Fr.]. A ſort of ſtrong linen cloth,
ſtiffened with gum, uſed by taylors and ſtaymakers.
I have peppered two of them ; two, I am ſure, I have paid,
two rogues in buckram ſuits. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
BU'cKRAMs. m. ſ. The ſame with wild garlick, Sce GAR Lick.
3 R Bu'cks-
Shakespeare. A you like it.
º
.º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U D
B U F
t
º
º|
Bu'cks HoRN PLANTAIN. m. ſ. [coronopus, Lat. from the form
of the leaf.] A plant.
It agrees in flower and fruit with the plantain; but its leaves
are deeply cut in on the edges; whereas the leaves of the plan-
tain are either entire, or but ſlightly indented. The ſpecies are
four; 1. Garden buckshorn plantain, or hartſhorn, &amp;c. The
firſt ſpecies, though entitled a garden plant, yet is found wild up-
on moſt commons, and barren heaths; where, from the poor-
neſs of the ſoil, it appears to be very different from the garden
kind, as being little more than a fourth part ſo large. This
ſpecies was formerly cultivated in gardens as a ſalad herb, but,
at preſent, is little regarded, and wholly diſuſed. Miller.
Bu'ckTHoRN. m. ſ. [rhamnus, Lat, ſuppoſed to be ſo called from
bucc, Sax, the belly.]
It hath a funnel-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of one leaf, divided
toward the top into four or five ſegments; out of the flower-
cup riſes the pointal, which becomes a ſoft roundiſh berry,
very full of juice, incloſing four hard ſeeds. The ſpecies are,
Common purging buckthorn. 2. Leſſer purging buckthorn. 3.
Buckthorn, with long ſpines, and a white bark of Montpelier.
The firſt of theſe trees is very common in hedges; the berries
of which are uſed in medicine, particularly for making a ſyrup,
which was formerly in great uſe; though, of late, other ſorts of
berries have either been mixed with thoſe of the buckthorn, or
wholly ſubſtituted in their place; which mixture hath ſpoiled
the ſyrup, and rendered it leſs eſteemed. The buckthorn ber-
ries may be diſtinguiſhed whether they are right or not, by
opening them, and obſerving the number of ſeeds in each; for
theſe have commonly four. The ſecond ſort is leſs common
in England. Both theſe ſorts may be propagated, by laying
down their tender branches in autumn. The firſt ſort will grow
to the height of eighteen or twenty feet; the ſecond ſort ſel-
dom riſes above eight feet high. They may alſo be propagated
by ſeeds. Miller.
Buckwh EAT. n.ſ.. [buckweitz, Germ. figºpyrum, Lat.]
The flowers grow in a ſpike, or branched from the wings of
the leaves; the cup of the flower is divided into five parts, and
reſembles the petals of a flower; the ſeeds are black, and three
cornered. The ſpecies are, 1. Common upright buckwheat.
2. Common creeping buckwheat. The firſt is cultivated in
England, and is a great improvement to dry barren lands. The
ſecond grows wild, and is ſeldom cultivated. Miller.
BU co"Lick. adj. [300x0xxx, from 8 wºº, a cowherd..] Paſtoral.
BUD. m. ſ. ſhouton, Fr.] The firſt ſhoot of a plant; a gem.
Be as thou waſt wont to be ;
See as thou waſt wont to ſee:
Dian's bid o'er Cupid's flower
Hath ſuch force and bleſſed power. Shakespeare Midſ. N. Dr.
Writers ſay, as the moſt forward bud
Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
Even ſo by love the young and tender wit
Is turn'd to folly, blaſting in the bud,
Loſing his verdure even in the prime. Shakeſp. T. G. of War.
When you the flow'rs for Chloe twine,
} Prior.
Why do you to her garland join,
The meaneſt bud that falls from mine 2
Infects wound the tender buds, with a long hollow trunk, and
depoſit an egg in the hole, with a ſharp corroding liquour, that
cauſeth a ſwelling in the leaf, and cloſeth the orifice. Bently.
To BUD. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To put forth young ſhoots, or gems.
Bud forth as a roſe growing by the brook of the field.
* Ecclus, xxxix. 13.
There the fruit, that was to be gathered from ſuch a con-
flux, quickly budded out. Clarendon, b. ii.
Heav'n gave him all at once, then ſnatch'd away,
Ere mortals all his beauties could ſurvey; {
Juſt like the flow'r that bud; and withers in a day. Dryd.
Tho' lab’ring yokes on their own necks they fear'd,
And felt for budding horns on their ſmooth foreheads rear'd.
Dryden's Silenus.
2. To be in the bloom, or growing. - -
Young budding virgin, fair and freſh and ſweet,
Whither away, or where is thy abode : Shakeſp.
To BUD., v. a. To inoculate; to graff by inſerting a bud into
the rind of another tree.
Of apricocks, the largeſt maſculine is much improved by
budding upon a peach ſtock. Temple.
To BUDGE. v. m. [botger, Fr.] To ſtir; to move off the
place: a low word. -
All your priſoners
In the lime grove, which weatherſends your cell,
They cannot budge till your releaſe. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
The mouſe ne'er ſhun'd the cat, as they did budge
From raſcals worſe than they. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I thought th' hadſt ſcorn'd to budge
For fear. - Hudibras, cant. ii.
Bu Do E. adj. [of uncertain etymology.] Surly; ſtiff; formal.
O fooliſhneſs of men I that lend their ears
To thoſe budge doćtors of the ſtoicks. Milton.
BUDGE. m. ſ. The dreſſed ſkin or fur of lambs. IXić7.
BU'DG ER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] One that moves or ſtirs from
his place,
Let the firſt budger die the other's ſlave,
And the gods doom him after. Shakespeare. Coriolanies.
BU'Do ET. n.ſ.. [bagette, Fr.]
1. A bag, ſuch as may be eaſily carried.
If tinkers may have leave to live,
And bear the ſowſkin budget;
Then my account I well may give,
And in the ſtocks avouch it. Shakeſp. //inter’s Tale.
Sir Robert Clifford, in whoſe boſom, or budget, moſt of Perl
kin's ſecrets were laid up, was come into England. Bacon.
His budget with corruptions cramm’d,
The contributions of the damn'd. Swift.
2. It is uſed for a ſtore, or ſtock.
It was nature, in fine, that brought off the cat, when the
fox's whole budget of inventions failed him. L'E/ºrange-
BUFF., n.ſ.. [from buffalo.]
I. A ſort of leather prepared from the ſkin of the buffalo; uſed
for waiſt belts, pouches, &amp;c.
A ropy chain of rheums, a viſage rough, -
Deform’d, unfeatur'd, and a skin of buff. Dryden's juvenal.
2. The ſkins of elks and oxen dreſſed in oil, and prepared after
the ſame manner as that of the buffalo.
3. A military coat made of thick leather, ſo that a blow cannot
eaſily pierce it.
A fiend, a fury, pitileſs and rough,
A wolf, nay worſe, a fellow all in buff.
To BUFF. v. a. [buffe, Fr.] To ſtrike: it is a word not in uſe.
There was a ſhock,
To have buff"d out the blood
From ought but a block. Pen. Johnſºn's Underwood.
BUFFALO. n.ſ.. [Ital.] A kind of wild ox.
Become th' unworthy browſe
Of buffalºes, ſalt goats, and hungry cows. Dryden's Wirgil.
Bu'FFET. n.ſ.. [buffetto, Ital.] A blow with the fiſt; a box on
the ear.
Q, I could divide myſelf, and go to buffets, for moving ſuch
a diſh of skimmed milk with ſo honourable an action. Shakeſp. -
A man that fortune's buffets and rewards
Haſt ta'en with equal thanks.
Go, baffl'd coward, left I run upon thee,
And with one bºffet lay thy ſtructure low. Milton's Agonſ?.
Round his hollow temples, and his ears,
His buckler beats; the ſon of Neptune, ſtunn'd
With theſe repeated buffets, quits the ground. Dryden.
BUFF E't. m. ſ [buffette, Fr.] A kind of cupboard; or ſet of
ſhelves, where plate is ſet out to ſhew, in a room of entertain-
Inent.
The rich bufft well-colour'd ſerpents grace,
And gaping Triton's ſpew to waſh your face. Pope.
To Bu'FF ET. v. n. [from the noun.] To ſtrike with the hand;
to box; to beat.
Why, woman, your huſband is in his old lunes again; he ſo
buffets himſelf on the forehead, crying, peer out, peer out! that
any madneſs I ever yet beheld, ſeemed but tameneſs. Shakeſp.
Our ears are cudgell'd ; not a word of his
But buffets better than a fiſt of France. Shakeſp. K. john.
The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
With luſty finews; throwing it aſide. Shakeſp. jul. Caſar.
Inſtantly I plung'd into the ſea, -
And, buffeting the billows to her reſcue,
Redeem'd her life with half the loſs of mine.
To BU'FFET. v. n. To play a boxing-match.
If I might buffet for my love, I could lay on like a butcher.
Shakespeare. Henry V.
Bu'FFFT ER. m. ſ. [from lifft.] A boxer; one that buffets.
BU'FFLE. m. ſ. [beuffe, Fr.] The ſame with buffalº ; a wild ox.
To BU'FFLE. v. n. [from the noun..] To puzzle; to be at a
loſs.
This was the utter ruin of that poor, angry, buſing, well-
meaning mortal, Piſtorides, who lies equally under the con-
tempt of both parties. - Swift.
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Otway.
Bu'FFLE HEADED. adj. [from buffe and head..] A man with &amp;
large head, like a buffalo; dull; ſtupid; fooliſh. ~
BUFFOON. m. ſ. [buffon, Fr.]
1. A man whoſe profeſſion is to make ſport, by low jeſts and an-
tick poſtures; a jackpudding.
No prince would think himſelf greatly honoured, to have his
proclamation canvaſed on a publick ſtage, and become the ſport –
J/.atts-
of buffoons.
2. A man that pračtiſes indecent raillery.
It is the nature of drolls and buffºons, to be inſolent to thoſe
PE/irange-
that will bear it, and ſlaviſh to others.
The bold buffºon, whene'er they trade the green,
Their motion mimicks, but with geſt obſcene.
BUF Fo'on ERY. m. ſ. [from buffoon.]
1. The practice or art of a buffoon.
Courage, in an ill-bred man, has the air, and eſcapes not th
opinion of brutality; learning becomes pedantry, and wit be
Lock on }...S.
2. Low jeſts; ridiculous pranks; ſcurrile mirth. Dryden place
foonery.
the accent, improperly, on the firſt ſyllable.
Where publick miniſters encourage buffºonery, it is no won,
*w
Shakespeare *
Gart/*-
tº
* --
e flowe,
* obtuſe (e.
** are).
fºr.... - -
º: divir ſº
-ºil Cordº,
1//2 : &amp;
º To miſ. • a pº
º font.
ſº tººk •
``‘sº
\'ss.
Sºmeº
wº
§ss
`s<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">R U I
B U I,
der if buffoons ſet up for publick miniſters. L’Eſtrange.
And whilſt it laſts, let buffoonery ſucceed,
To make us laugh; for never was more need. Dryden.
BUG. n.ſ. A ſinking inſect bred in old houſhold ſtuff. In the
following paſſage, wings are erroneouſly aſcribed to it.
Yet let me flap this bug with gilded wings,
This painted child of dirt, which ſtinks and ſtings. Pope.
BUG. {". [It is derived by ſome from big, by others from
Bu'GREAR. 5 pig 5 bug, in Welch, has the ſame meaning...] A
frightful object; a walking ſpectre, imagined to be ſeen; ge-
nerally now uſed for a falſe terrour to frighten babes.
Each trembling leaf and whiſtling wind they hear,
As ghaſtly bug their hair on end does rear,
Yet both do ſtrive their fearfulneſs to feign.
Sir, ſpare your threats;
The bug which you would fright me with, I ſeek. Shakeſp.
Haſt not ſlept to-night? would he not, naughty man, let it
ſleep? a bugbear take him. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
We have a horrour for uncouth monſters; but, upon cuſtom
and experience, all theſe bugs grow familiar and eaſy to us.
L’Eſtrange.
Such bugbear thoughts, once got into the tender minds of
children, ſink deep, ſo as not eaſily, if ever, to be got out
again. Locke.
Fairy Q. b. ii.
To the world, no bugbear is ſo great,
As want of figure, and a ſmall eſtate. Pope.
Bu'GGINEss. n.ſ.. [from buggy.] Being infected with bugs.
Buggy. adj, [from bug. 3 Abounding with bugs.
BU GLE. n.ſ.. [from bugen, Sax. to bend, Skinner; from
BU'GLEHORN. ; bucala, Lat, a heifer, junius; from bugle, the
bonaſus. Lye.] A hunting horn.
Then took that ſquire an horny bugle ſmall,
Which hung adown his ſide in twiſted gold,
And taſſels gay. Fairy Queen, b. i. e.viii. ſtanz. 3.
That I will have a recheate winded in my forehead, or hang
my bugle in an inviſible baldrick, all women ſhall pardon me.
Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
He gave his buglehorn a blaſt,
That through the woodland echo’d far and wide.
BU'GLE. m. ſ. A ſhining bead of black glaſs.
Bugle bracelets, necklace amber,
Perfume for a lady's chamber. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
'Tis not your inky brows, your black ſilk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
That can entame my ſpirits to your worſhip.
Bu'GLE. m. ſ. [from bugula, Lat..] A plant. ...
It hath a flower conſiſting of one leaf, divided into three
parts; out of the flower-cup ariſes the pointal, fixed like a
nail, attended by four embryos, which become ſo many ob-
longſeeds, ſhut up in a husk; the flowers are placed in whorles
round the ſtalk. The ſpecies are, 1. Common bugle. 2. The
greateſt bugle of the Alps. 3. Hairy eaſtern bugle, with an in-
verted blue flower, ſpotted with white. 4. Eaſtern bugle, with a
purpliſh violet coloured flower, &amp;c. The firſt and ſecond ſorts
grow wild in moiſt woods and meadows, and continue in
flower from May to September. The bugle is greatly eſteemed
as a vulnerary herb, and is uſed both externally and internally.
They are very hardy plants, and propagate greatly by their
trailing ſtalks. Miller.
Bu'GLE. n.ſ. A ſort of wild ox. Philips's World of Words.
Bu'GLoss. [from buglaſſium, Lat.] The herb ox-tongue.
The flowers are ſmall and tubulous, divided at the top into
five obtuſe ſegments, and are expanded in a round form; the
ſeeds are like the head of a viper. They may be cultivated by
ſowing their ſeeds in the ſpring; its flowers are uſed in medi-
cinal cordials. Miller.
To BUILD. v. a. preter. I built, I have built. [hilden, Dutch.]
1. To raiſe from the ground; to make a fabrick, or an edifice.
Thus ſaith the Lord, thou ſhalt not build me an houſe to
dwell in. Hooker, b. ii. § 6.
When uſurers tell their gold in the field,
And whores and bawds do churches build. Shakeſp.
When the head-dreſs was built up in a couple of cones and
ſpires, which ſtood ſo exceſſively high on the ſide of the head,
that a woman, who was but a pigmy without her head-dreſs,
appeared like a coloſſus upon putting it on. Speciator, N° 98.
To build, to plant, whatever you intend,
Tickell.
Shakeſp.
To rear the column, or the arch to bend. Pope.
2. To raiſe any thing on a ſupport or foundation.
Love built on beauty, ſoon as beauty, dies;
Chooſe this face, chang'd by no deformities. Donne.
I would endeavour to deſtroy thoſe curious, but groundleſs
ſtructures, that men have built up of opinions alone. Boyle.
To BUILD. v. n. To depend on; to reſt on. -
By a man's authority, we here underſtand the force which
his word hath for the aſſurance of another's mind, that build-
eth upon it. - Hooker.
Some build rather upon the abuſing of others, and putting
tricks upon them, than upon ſoundneſs of their own proceed-
ings. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 23.
Even thoſe who had not taſted of your favours, yet built ſo
much on the ſame of your beneficence, that they bemoaned the
loſs of- their expectations. Dryden's Falles, Dedicatiºn,
This is certainly a much ſurer way, than to build on the in-
tºrpretations of an authour, who does not conſider how the an-
cºnts uſed to think. Addison on ancient Medals,
BUI'LDER. n: ſ [from build.] He that builds; an architect.
But fore-accounting oft makes builders miſs;
They found, they felt, they had no leaſe of bliſs. Sidney.
When they, which had ſeen the beauty of the firſt temple
built by Solomon, beheld how far it excelled the ſecond, which
had not builders of like abilities, the tears of their grieved eyes
the Prophets endeavoured, with comforts, to wipe away.
Hooker, h. v. § 14.
Mark'd out for ſuch an uſe, as if 'twere meant § 14
T invite the builder, and his choice prevent. Denham.
Her wings with lengthen’d honour let her ſpread,
And, by her greatneſs, ſhew her builder's fame.
Bui'iDING. m. ſ. [from build.] A fabrick; an ºffice.
Thy ſumptuous buildings, and thy wife's attire,
Have coſt a maſs cf publick treaſury. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
View not this ſpire by meaſure giv'n
To buildings rais'd by common hands:
That fabrick riſes high as heav'n,
Whoſe baſis on devotion ſtands. Prior.
Among the great variety of ancient coins which I ſaw at
Rome, I could not but take particular notice of ſuch as relate
to any of the buildings or ſtatues that are ſtill extant. Addison.
BUILT. n.ſ.. [from build.] The form; the ſtructure.
As is the built, ſo different is the fight;
Their mounting ſhot is on our ſails deſign'd;
Deep in their hulls our deadly bullets light,
And through the yielding planks a paſſage find. Dryden.
There is hardly any country, which has ſo little ſhipping as
Ireland; the reaſon muſt be, the ſcarcity of timber proper for
this built. Temple.
BULB. m. ſ. [bullus, Lat.] A round body, or root.
Take up your early autumnal tulips, and bulbs, if you will
remove them. Evelyn's Kalend.
If we confider the bulb, or ball of the eye, the exteriour
membrane, or coat thereof, is made thick, tough, or ſtrong,
that it is a very hard matter to make a rupture in it. Ray.
BULBA'ceous, adj. [bulbaceus, Lat.] The ſame with bulbous. D.
Bu'LBous. adj. . [from bulb.] Containing bulbs; conſiſting of
bulbs.
There are of roots, bulbous roots, fibrous roots, and hirſute
roots. And I take it, in the bulbous, the ſap haſteneth moſt to
the air and ſun. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 616.
Set up your traps for vermin, eſpecially amongſt your bulbous
roots. Evelyn's Kalendar.
There leaves, after they are ſwelled out, like a bulbous root,
to make the bottle, bend inward, or come again cloſe to the
ſtalk. Ray on the Creation.
The beginning of the internal jugularshave a bullous cavity.
Ray on the Creation.
To BUL.G.E. v. n. [It was originally written bilge; bilge was the
lower part of the ſhip, where it ſwelled out; from billº, Sax, a
bladder.]
1. To take in water; to founder.
Thrice round the ſhip was toſt,
Then bulg’d at once, and in the deep was loſt.
2. To jut out.
The ſide, or part of the ſide of a wall, or any timber that
bulges from its bottom or foundation, is ſaid to batter, or hang
over the foundation. Moxºn's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Bu'LIMY. m. ſ. [8&lt;xua, from £º, an ox, and xºr, hunger.]
An enormous appetite, attended with fainting, and coldneſs of
the extremities. Diff.
BULK. n.ſ.. [bukke, Dutch, the breaſt, or largeſt part of a man.]
1. Magnitude; ſize; quantity.
Againſt theſe forces there were prepared near one hundred
ſhips; not ſo great of bulk indeed, but of a more nimble mo-
tion, and more ſerviceable. Bacon’s Hºar with Spain.
The Spaniards and Portugueſe have ſhips of great hulk, but
fitter for the merchant than the man of war; for burden than
for battle. Raleigh's Effyi.
Though an animal arrives at its full growth, at a certain
age, perhaps it never comes to its full bulk till the laſt period of
life. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Greatneſs; largeneſs.
Things, or objects, cannot enter into the mind, as they ſub-
fiſt in themſelves, and, by their own natural tºº, paſs intº the
apprehenſion; but they are taken in by their ideas. South.
3. The groſs; the majority. - -
Thoſe very points, in which theſe wiſe men diſagreed from
the bulk of the people, are points in which they agreed with the
received doctrines of our nature. . Addison. Freeholder, N° 51.
Change in property, through, the bulk of a nation, makes
ſlow marches, and its due power always attends it. Swift.
The bulk of the debt muſt be leſſened gradually. Swift.
4. Main fabrick. -
He rais'd a figh, ſo piteous and profound,
That it did ſeem to ſhatter all his bulk,
And end his being,
Prior.
Dryden.
Shakespeare. King #.
5. I he
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">*
º
|
B U L
5. The main part of a ſhip's cargo; as, to break bulk, is to open
the cargo. - -- - -
Bulk. nj [from bickie, Dan, a beam.] A part of a building
jutting out. - - -
Here ſtand behind this bulk. Straight will he come:
wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. Shakespeare. Othel.
The keeper coming up, found Jack with no life in him; he
took down the body, and laid it on a bulk, and brought out the
rope to the company. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Bu'Lºk HEAD. n.ſ. A partition made acroſs a ſhip, with boards,
whereby one part is divided from another. Harris.
Bu'LKINEss. n.ſ.. [from bulky.] Greatneſs of ſtature, or ſize.
Wheat, or any other grain, cannot ſerve inſtead of money,
becauſe of its bulkingſ, and too quick change of its quantity.
Locke.
Bu'LKY. adj. [from lulk.] Of great fize or ſtature.
Latreus, the bulkieſ of the double race,
Whom the ſpoil'd arms of ſlain Haleſus grace. Dryden.
Huge Telephus, a formidable page,
Cries vengeance; and Oreſtes' bulky rage,
Unſatisfy'd with margins cloſely writ,
Foams o'er the covers. Dryden's juvenal, ſat. i.
The manner of ſea engagements, which was to bore and
ſink the enemy's ſhips with the roſtra, gave bulky and high ſhips
a great advantage. Arbuthnot on Coins.
BULL. n.ſ.. [bulle, Dutch.]
I. The male of black cattle; the male to a cow.
A proper gentlewoman, Sir, and a kinſwoman of my maſ-
ter's.-Even ſuch kin as the pariſh heifers are to the town hull.
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Bulls are more criſp upon the forehead than cows. Bacon.
Beſt age to go to bull, or calve, we hold,
Begins at four, and ends at ten years old.
. The nobler herds,
Where round the lordly bull, in rural eaſe,
They ruminating lie. Thomſon's Summer, l. 920.
2. In the ſcriptural ſenſe, an enemy powerful, fierce, and violent.
Many bulls have compaſſed me: ſtrong bulls of Baſhan have
beſet me round. Pſalm xxii. 12.
3. One of the twelve ſigns of the zodiack.
At laſt from Aries rolls the bountedus ſun,
And the bright Bull receives him. Thomſºn's Spring.
4. A letter publiſhed by the pope.
A bull is letters called apoſtolick by the canoniſts, ſtrength-
ened with a leaden ſeal, and containing in them the decrees and
commandments of the pope or biſhop of Rome. Ayliffe.
There was another ſort of ornament wore by the young no-
bility, called bullae; round, or of the figure of a heart, hung
about their necks like diamond croſſes. Thoſe bullae came af-
terwards to be hung to the diplomas of the emperours and
popes, from whence they had the name of bulls. Arbuthnot.
It was not till after a freſh bull of Leo's had declared how in-
flexible the court of Rome was in the point of abuſes. Atterb.
5. A blunder; a contradićtion. -
I confeſs it is what the Engliſh call a bull, in the expreſſion,
though the ſenſe be manifeſt enough. Pope's Letters.
BULL, in compoſition, generally notes the large ſize of an
thing, as bull-head, bulruſh, bull-trout; and is therefore only an
incluſive particle, without much reference to its original ſignifi-
cation.
Bull-BAITING. m. ſ. [from bull and bait..] The ſport of baiting
bulls with doogs.
What am I the wiſer for knowing that Trajan was in the
fifth year of his tribuneſhip, when he entertained the people
with a horſe-race or bull-baiting * Addiſon on ancient Medals.
BULL-BEEF. n.ſ.. [from bull and beef.] Coarſe beef; the fleſh of
bulls.
They want their porridge and their fat bull-beeves. Shakeſp.
BULL-BEGGAR. m. ſ. [This word probably came from the info-
lence of thoſe who begged, or raiſed money by the pope's bull.]
Something terrible; ſomething to fright children with.
Theſe fulminations from the Vatican were turned into ridi-
cule; and, as they were called bull-beggars, they were uſed as
words of ſcorn and contempt. Ayliffe's Parergon.
BULL-CALF. n.ſ.. [from bull and calf.] A he-calf; uſed for a
ſtupid fellow : a term of reproach.
And, Falſtaff, you carried your guts away as nimbly, and
roared for mercy, and ſtill ran and roared, as ever I heard bull-
calf. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Bull-Dog. n.ſ.. [from bull and dog..] A dog of a particular
form, remarkable for his courage. He is uſed in baiting the
bull; and this ſpecies is ſo peculiar to Britain, that they are
ſaid to degenerate when they are carried to other countries.
All the harmleſs part of him is no more than that of a bull-
dºg ; they are tame no longer than they are not offended.
Addison. Speciator, N° 438.
BULL-Fisch. m. ſ. A ſmall bird, that has neither ſong nor
whiſtle of its own, yet is very apt to learn, if taught by the
mouth. Philips's Hºrld of I/ord.
The blackbird whiſtles from the thorny brake,
The mellow bullfinch anſwers from the groves.
#: ; n.ſ. An Inſea.
May's Virgil.
Thomſºn.
Philips's I/ºrld of Iłord.
B U L rº
Boll-HEAD. n.ſ.. [from tulland head.] - º: Tom
1. A ſtupid fellow ; a blockhead. Ariº
2. The name of a fiſh. A my
The miller's thumb, or bull-head, is a fiſh of no pleaſing * * *
ſhape; it has a head big and flat, much greater than ſuitable to Tº
its body; a mouth very wide, and uſually gaping; he is with- T-cº
out teeth, but his lips are very rough, much like a file; he hath *::-
two fins near to his gills, which are roundiſh or creſted; two º
fins under his belly, two on the back, one below the vent, and . !---
the fin of his tail is round. Nature hath painted the body of --- - .
this fiſh with whitiſh, blackiſh, browniſh ſpots. They are uſu- º -
ally full of ſpawn all the ſummer, which ſwells their vents in º
the form of a dug. The tºll-head begins to ſpawn in Apri; ; i. º
in winter we know no more what becomes of them than of ecle :-
or ſwallows. J/alton's Angler-
3. A little black water vermin. Philips's // crld of // ords. -
Bull-tRout. m. ſ. A kind of trout. T.
There is, in Northumberland, a trout called a bull-trout, of a T .
much greater length and bigneſs than any in theſe ſouthern tº : :
parts. J/alton's Angler.
Bull-weed. n ſ. The ſame with knapweed; which ſee. 7-
BULL-wort, or Bishops-web D. n.ſ.. [ammi, Lat..] An um- C.
belliferous plant with ſmall ſtriated ſeeds; the petals of the
flowers are unequal, and ſhaped like a heart. Its ſeeds are uſed . . .
in medicine. Miller- s
BU'LL Ace. m. ſ. A wild ſour plum. See PLUM. --
In October, and the beginning of November, come ſervices, 3
medlars, bullaces; roſes cut or removed, to come late; holy- º
oaks, and ſuch like. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 47-
Bu'll ET. n.ſ. [boulet, Fr.] A round ball of metal, uſually ſhot :
out of guns. - - º
As when the deviliſh ironengine wrought º
In deepeſt hell, and fram'd by furies skill,
With windy nitre and quick ſulphur fraught,
And ramm'd with bullet round, ordain'd to kill. Fairy.º. b. i- º
Giaffer, their leader, deſperately fighting amongſt the fore– - ..
moſt of the janizaries, was at once ſhot with two bullets, and *:
ſlain. Knollº's Hiſtºry of the Turks- |
And as the built, ſo different is the fight; • *.
Their mounting ſhot is on our fails deſign'd: --
Deep in their hulls our deadly bullets light, -
And through the yielding planks a paſſage find. Dryden. :
BU'llion. n. / [billon, Fr. J Gold or ſilver in the lump; un- :
wrought; uncoined. - *
The balance of trade muſt of neceſſity be returned in coin º
or bullion. Bacon's Advice to Williers. -
A ſecond multitude, - *---
With wond’rous art, found out the maſſy ore, sº
Severing each kind, and ſcumm'd the bullion droſs. G.
Aſilion's Paradiſ. Left- sº
Bullion is ſilver, whoſe workmanſhip has no value. And -- ºf
thus foreign coin hath no value here for its ſtamp, and our coin Sºº-
is bullion in foreign dominions. - Locłe. I
In every veſſel there is ſtowage for immenſe treaſures, when L.
the cargo is pure hullion. Addiſon on the State ºf the //ar. -
BULLI'tion, n. ſ. [from bullio, Lat..] The act or ſtate of boiling. ****
There is to be obſerved in theſe diſſolutions, which will not ºth I
eaſily incorporate, what the effects are, as the bullītion; the menuor
precipitation to the bottom; the ejaculation towards the top; **, 2*
the ſuſpenſion in the midſt; and the like. Bacon's Phyſical Rez. 1. A cloth
Bu'llock. n.ſ.. [from bull.] A young bull. Że z
Why, that's ſpoken like an honeſt drover: ſo they ſell buſ- fighth wº
locks. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
* Lºcº ſº.
Some drive the herds; here the fierce bullock ſcorns We haſ
Th' appointed way, and runs with threat'ning horns. Cowley. 44% on
Until the tranſportation of cattle into England was prohi- * courtſ,
bited, the quickeſt trade of ready money here was driven by the
ſale of young bullocks. Temple.
BU'LLY. m. ſ. [Skinner derives this word from burly, as a cor-
%2
ºp ... º
s. Fº
*
…
s: 4 Droº...
ruption in the pronunciation; which is very probably right: or º *º
from bulky, or bull-eyed; which are leſs probable. May it no *lºsks,
come from bull, the pope's letter, implying the inſolence of *s. sº
who came inveſted with authority from the papal court 2] *~ º
noiſy, bluſtering, quarrelling fellow : it is generally taken for :
man that has only the apperance of courage. %
Mine hoſt of the garter.—What ſays my bºdy rock Speaks
ſcholarly and wiſely. Shakespeare. Merry //ives of I/indſºr. =&gt;
All on a ſudden the doors flew open, and in comes a crew of = *
roaring bullies, with their wenches, their dogs, and their bottles.
- 4. Aſtraige's Fables-
'Tis ſo ridic'lous, but ſo true withal,
A bully cannot ſleep without a brawl. Tryden's jºv ſ.t. iii-
A ſcolding hero is, at the worſt, a more tolerºſe charađºr-
than a bully in petticoats. Addison's Freeholder, No 33-
The little man is a bully in his nature, but, when he grow’s
cholerick, I confine him till his wrath is over. Mºſºn. Szczz.
To BU'LLY. v. a. [from the noun..] To overbcar with noiſe K//,
menaces, - / .
Prentices, pariſh clerks, and heótors meet,
He that is drunk, or bºdy'd, pays the treat.
To BU'LLY. v. m. To be noiſy and quarrelſome.
Bu'LRUs H. m. ſ. [from bu'l and ruſh. j. A large ruſh, ſuch R
grow” S.
grow, &gt; → –
–,
− s.
ts T %
King’s Cooker-
*\<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">ows in rivers, without knots; though Dryden has given it
the epithet knotty, confounding it, probably, with the reed.
To make fine cages for the nightingale,
And baſkets of bulruſhes, was my wont. Spenſer.
All my praiſes are as but a bulruſh caſt upon a ſtream; they
are born up by the ſtrength of the current. Dryden.
The edges were with bending oſiers crown'd ;
The knotty bulruſh next in order ſtood,
And all within of reeds a tremblingwood. Dryden's Fables.
BULWARK. m. ſ. [belwercke, Dutch ; probably only from its
ſtrength and largeneſs.]
1. A fortification; a citadel.
But him the ſquire made quickly to retreat,
Encountering fierce with ſingle ſword in hand,
And 'twixt him and his lord did like a bulwark ſtand.
Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. viii. ſtanz. 12.
Who oft repair
Their earthen bulwarks 'gainſt the ocean flood. Fairfax, b. i.
Taking . needleſs bulwarks, divers were demoliſhed up-
on the ſea coaſts. Hayward.
We have bulwarks round us;
Within our walls are troops enur'd to toil. Addiſon's Cato.
Our naval ſtrength is a general bulwark to the Britiſh nation.
- Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 42.
2: A ſecurity.
Some making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored
the gentle boſom of peace with pillage and robbery. , Shakeſp.
To Bulwark. v. a. [from the noun..] To fortify; to ſtrengthen
with bulwarks.
And yet no bulwark'd town, or diſtant coaſt,
Preſerves the beauteous youth from being ſeen.
BUM. n.ſ.. [bomme, Dutch.]
1. The buttocks; the part on which we ſit.
The wiſeſt aunt telling the ſaddeſt tale,
Sometime for threefoot ſtool miſtaketh me,
Then ſlip I from her bum, down topples ſhe.
This ſaid, he gently rais'd the knight,
And ſet him on his bum upright.
From duſty ſhops neglected authours come,
Martyrs of pies, and relicks of the bum. Dryden's Mackſ.
The learned Sydenham does not doubt,
But profound thought will bring the gout;
And that with bum on couch we lie,
Becauſe our reaſon's ſoar'd too high. W–n.
2. It is uſed, in compoſition, for anything mean or low, as bum-
bailiff. - -
tºwn. n. ſ. [from bum and bailiff.]. A bailiff of the
meaneſt kind; one that is employed in arreſts. -
Go, Sir Andrew, ſcout me, for him at the corner of the
orchard, like a bumbailiff. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Bu'MBARD. m. ſ. [wrong written for bombard; which ſee.]. A
great gun; a great barrel,
Yond ſame black cloud, yond huge one looks
Like a foul bumbard, that would ſhed his liquour.
- - Shakeſp. Temptſ.
Bu'MEast. m. ſ. [falſely written for bombaſſ : the etymology of
which I am now very doubtful of; bombóſi and bombaſine being
mentioned, with great probability, by junius, as coming from
boºm, a tree, and ſein, ſilk; the ſilk or cotton of a tree.]
1. A cloth made by ſewing one ſtuff upon another; patchwork.
The uſual bumbaſt of black bits ſewed into ermine, our
Engliſh women are made to think very fine.
2. Linen ſtuffed with cotton; ſtuffing.
We have received your letters full of love,
And, in our maiden council, rated them
As courtſhip, pleaſant jeſt, and courteſy,
As bumba/#, and as lining to the time. Shakeſp.
BUMP. n.ſ. [perhaps from buin, as being prominent.] A ſwell-
ing; a protuberance.
It had upon its brow a bump as big as a young cockrel's ſtone;
a perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. Shakeſp. Rom. and ful.
Not though his teeth are beaten out, his eyes
Hang by a ſtring, in bumps his forehead riſe. Dryden's juv.
To BUMP. v. a. [from bombus, Lat.] To make a loud noiſe, or
bomb. [See BoM.B.] It is applied, I think, only to the bittern.
Then to the water's brink ſhe laid her head,
And as a bittour bumps within a reed,
To thee alone, O lake, ſhe ſaid Dryden.
Bu'MPER. m. ſ. [from bump.] A cup filled till the liquour ſwells
over the brims.
Addiſon.
Shakeſp.
Hudibras.
Places his delight
All day in plying bumpers, and at night
Reels to the bawds. Dryden's juv. ſat. viii.
UMPKIN. m. ſ. [This word is of uncertain etymology; Hen-
, ſhaw derives it from pumpkin, a kind of worthleſs gourd, or
melon. This ſecms harſh. Bump is uſed amongſt us for a
knob, or lump; may not bumpkin be much the ſame with clod-
fate, loggerhead, block, and blockhead..] An awkward heavy ruſ-
tick; a country lout.
. The poor ºpkin, that had never ſeen nor heard of ſuch de-
lights before, bleſied herſelf at the change of her condition.
L'Aſirange's Fables.
Vol. I.
Grew.
... A heavy bumpkin, taught with daily care, -- *
Can never dance three ſteps with a becoming air. Dryden:
In his white cloak the magiſtrate appears,
The country bumpkin the ſame liv'ry wears. Dryden.
.." was a favour to admit them to breeding; they might be
e.gnorant bumpkins and clowns, if they pleaſed. Locke.
Bu'MPKINLY. adj. [from bumpkin..] Having the manners or
*PP arance of a clown; clowniſh. . -
. He is a ſimple, blundering, and yet conceited fellow, who,
*ºing at deſcription, and the ruſtick wonderful, gives an air
of hºmpkinſ, romance to all he tells, Clariſſa.
BUNCH. n.ſ.. [buncher, Daniſh, the crags of the mountains.]
I. A hard lump; a knob. &amp;
They will carry their treaſures upon the bunches of camels, to
a people that ſhall not profit them. joſh. xxx. €.
He felt the ground, which he had wont to find even and
ſoft, to be grown hard with little round balls or bunches, like
hard boiled eggs. Boyle.
2. A cluſter; many of the ſame kind growing together.
Vines, with cluſtring bunches growing. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Titian ſaid, that he knew no better rule for the diſtribution
of the lights and ſhadows, than his obſervations drawn from a
bunch of grapes. Dryden's Dufreſnoy,
For thee, large bunches load the bending Vine,
And the laſt bleſfings of the year are thine.
3. A number of things tied together. -
And on his arms a bunch of keys he bore. Fairy Q, i.i.
All? I know not what ye call all; but if I fought not with
fifty of them, I am a bunch of radiſh. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
Ancient Janus, with his double face,
And bunch of keys, the porter of the place. Dryden.
The mother's bunch of keys, or any thing they cannot hurt
themſelves with, ſerves to divert little children. Locke.
4. Anything bound into a knot.
Upon the top of all his lofty creſt,
A bunch of hairs diſcolour’d diverſly,
With ſprinkled pearl and gold full richly dreſt. Fairy Q. b. i.
To BUNCH. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſwell out in a bunch;
to grow out in protuberances.
It has the reſemblance of a large champignon before it is
opened, bunching out into a large round knob at one end.
//oodward on Fºſſils.
BUN.cHBA'cKED. adj. [from bunch and back.] Having bunches
on the back.
The day ſhall come, that thou ſhalt wiſh for me,
To help thee curſe this pois'mous lunchback'd toad. Shakeſp.
BU'Nch INEss. n.ſ.. [from bunchy..] The quality of being bunchy,
, or growing in bunches. "
BU'Nchy. adj. [from bunch..] Growing into bunches; knotty.
He is more eſpecially diſtinguiſhed from other birds, by his
bunchy tail, and the ſhortneſs of his legs. Grew's Muſeum.
BUNDLE. n.ſ.. [bynble, Sax. from bynb.]
1. A number of things bound together.
As to the bundles of petitions in parliament, they were, for
the moſt part, petitions of private perſons. Hale's Law of Engl.
Try, lads, can you this bundle break;
Then bids the youngeſt of the ſix
Take up a well-bound heap of ſticks. º Swift.
In the north, they bind them up in ſmall bundles, and make
ſmall ricks of them. Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. A roll; any thing rolled up cylindrically.
She carried a great bundle of Flanders lace under her arm;
but finding herſelf overloaden, ſhe dropped the good man, and
brought away the bundle. , Speciator, N° 499.
To BU'NDLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To tie in a bundle; to
tie together; with up. - -
We ought to put things together, as well as we can, doğrinae
cauſi; but, after all, ſeveral things will not be bundled up to-
Dryden,
gether, under our terms and ways of ſpeaking, Locke.
See how the double nation lies,
Like a rich coat with skirts of frize;
As if a man, in making poſics,
Should bundle thiſtles up with roſes. Swift.
BUNG. n.ſ.. [bing, Welch.] A ſtopple for a barrel.
After three nights are expired, the next morning pull out the
hung ſtick, or plug. . . AMortimer.
To BUN G. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtop; to cloſe up.
Bu'NGHole. n.ſ.. [from lung and hole.] The hole at which the
barrel is filled, and which is afterward ſtopped up.
Why may not imagination trace the noble duſt of Alº,
till he find it ſtopping a bunghole. Shakeſp.
To BUNGLE. J. n. [See BUNGLER.] To perform clumſily.
When men want light, &gt; ... - .
They make but hunging work. Drydºn. Sº ºar.
Letters to me are not ſeldom opened, and then ſealed in a
bungling manner before they come to my hands. Swift to Pope.
To Bü'Nºle. … a. To botch; to manage clumſily; to con-
dućt awkwardly.
Other devils, that ſuggeſt by-treaſons
Do botch and bungle up damnation,
with patches, colours, and with forms being fetcht
From gliſt ring ſemblances of gº. Shakeſp. Hºly-
3 S They
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">E U R tº
º
-
They make lame miſchief, though they mean it well :
Their int’reſt is not finely drawn, and hid, &gt;
But ſeams are coarſely bungled up, and ſeen. Dryden’s D. Seb.
BU'NGLE. n.ſ. [from the verb.] A botch; an awkwardneſs; an
inaccuracy; a clumſy performance. t - -
Erroers and bungles are committed, when the matter is inäpt
or contumacious. * Ray on the Cºfie".
Bu'Ndler. n.ſ. ['wnzler, Weich; 4, lºny glºr, i.e. the lºſt ºr
loweſt of the profeſſion. Davies.] A bad workman; a clumſy
performer ; a man without skill.
Painters, at the firſt, were ſuch bunglers, and ſo rude, that,
when they drew a cow or a hog, they were fain to write over
the head what it was ; otherwiſe the beholder knew not what to
make of it. Peacham on Drawing.
Hard features every bungler can command;
To draw true beauty ſhews a maſter's hand.
A bungler thus, who ſcarce the nail can hit, -
With driving wrong will make the pannel ſplit. Swift.
BU'NGLINGly. adv. [from bungling.] Clumſily; awkwardly.
To denominate them monſters, they muſt have had ſome
ſyſtem of parts, compounded of ſolids and fluids, that executed,
though but bunglingly, their peculiar functions. Bently.
BUN.N. m. ſ. [bunelo, Span.] A kind of ſweet bread.
Thy ſongs are ſweeter to mine ear,
Than to the thirſty cattle rivers clear;
Or winter porridge to the lab'ring youth,
Or bunns and ſugar to the damſel's tooth. Gay's Paſtorals.
BuNT. n.ſ. [corrupted, as Skinner thinks, from bent.] A ſwell-
ing part ; an increaſing cavity.
The Wear is a frith, reaching ſlopewiſe through the ooze,
from the land to low water mark, and having in it a bunt or
cod, with an eye-hook, where the fiſh entering, upon the com-
ing back with the ebb, are ſtopped from iſſuing out again, for-
ſaken by the water, and left dry on the ooze. Carew.
To BUNt. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſwell out, as the ſail
&amp;unts out. -
Bu'N TER. m. ſ. A cant word for a woman who picks up rags
about the ſtreet; and uſed, by way of contempt, for any low
vulgar woman.
Bu’NTING.. n.ſ. The name of a bird.
Then my dial goes not true; I took this lark for a hunting.
Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
BUCY. n.ſ. [louf, or boye, Fr. boya, Span.] A piece of cork or
wood floating on the water, tied to a weight at the bottom.
The fiſhermen, that walk upon the beach,
Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark
Diminiſh'd to her cock; her cock a buoy,
Almoſt too ſmall for fight. - Shakeſp. King Lear.
Like buoys, that never ſink into the flood,
On learning's ſurface we but lie and nod. Pope's Dunciad.
To Buo Y. v. a. [from the noun. The u is mute in both.] To
keep afloat; to bear up by ſpecifick lightneſs.
All art is uſed to fink epiſcopacy, and launch preſbytery in
England; which was lately buoyed up in Scotland, by the like
artifice of a covenant. K. Charles.
. . . The water which riſes out of the abyſs, for the ſupply of
ſprings and rivers, would not have ſtopped at the ſurface of the
earth, but marched directly up into the atmoſphere, wherever
there was heat enough in the air to continue its aſcent, and
buoy it up. J/oodward's Nat. Hiſł.
To BUoy. v. m. To float.
Riſing merit will buoy up at laſt. Pope's Effy on Crit.
Buo'y ANCY. n.ſ.. [from buoyant..] The quality of floating.
All the winged tribes owe their flight and bioyancy to it.
- Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
Buo'y ANT. adj. [from buoy.] Floating ; light; that which will
not ſink.
I ſwom with the tide, and the water under me was buoyant.
Dryden.
Dryden.
His once ſo vivid nerves,
So full of buoyant ſpirit, now no more
Inſpire the courſe. Thomſon's Autumn, 1.455.
BUR, Bour, Bor, come from the Sax. bun, an inner-chamber,
or place of ſhade and retirement. Gibſon's Camden.
BUR. n.ſ.. [bourre, Fr. is down; the bur being filled with a ſoft
tomentum, or down..] A rough head of a plant, which ſticks to
the hair or cloaths.
Nothing teems,
But hateful docks, rough thiſtles, keckſies, burs,
Loſing both beauty and utility. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Hang off, thou cat, thou bur; vile thing, let looſe;
Or I will ſhake thee from me like a ſerpent. Shakeſp.
Dependents and ſuitors are always the burs, and ſometimes
the briers of favourites. //otton.
- Whither betake her
From the chill dew, amongſt rude burs and thiſtles. Milton.
And where the vales with violets once were crown'd,
Now knotty burs and thorns diſgrace the ground. Dryden.
A fellow ſtuck like a bur, that there was no ſhaking him off.
Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of j. Ball.
BU'RBor. m. ſ. A fiſh full of prickles. IJičí.
Bu'RDELAIS. m. ſ. A ſort of grape. See WINE.
BURDEN. m.ſ. (bºr Sen, Sax, and therefore properly written Lºndº'
burthen. It is ſuppoſed to come from burdo, Lat, a male, as **
onus from ºre-, an aſs.] º *
I. A load; ſomething to be carried. Fº
Camels have their provender -
Only for bearing burdens, and fore blows :
For ſinking under them. Shakeſp. Coriºus. Shou.
It is of uſe in lading of ſhips, and may help to ſhew what Hist
bºrden in the ſeveral kinds they will bear. Eacon', Phyſ. Rem. Aſ ºf
2. Something grievous or weariſome. rººt
Couldſt thou ſupport tax
That ºrden, heavier than the earth to bear? Par. Lºft, b. x. trºs
None of the things they are to learn, ſhould ever be made a F. : CH:
burden to them, or impoſed on them as a taſk. Locke. 3.
Deaf, giddy, helpleſs, left alone, Fº
To all my friends a hurden grown. Swi/?. tº.
3. A birth: now obſolete.
Thou hadſt a wife once, called Æmilia, º
That bore thee at a bºrden two fair ſons. Shaſeſ? . Yº
- O fºalſ. . p. I. :
4. The verſe repeated in a ſong. --
At ey'ry cloſe ſhe made, th’ attending throng - -:
Reply'd, and bore the rurden of the ſong. Dryden's Fab. º
5. The quantity that a ſhip will carry; or the capacity of a ſhip- T.
To BU's DEN. v. a. [from the noun..] To load; to incumber. C.
Bºrden not thyſelf above thy power. Ecclus, xiii. 2-
I mean not that other men be eaſed, and you buraº...
Cor. viii. 13. º
Bur DENER. m. ſ. [from burder.] A loader; an oppreflour. 2-
BURDENous. adj. from burden.] º
1. Grievous; oppreſſive; weariſome.
Make no jeſt of that which hath ſo earneſtly pierced me :
through, nor iet that be light to thee, which to me is ſo purzº- º
723 tºº. Siamey, b-i- t
2. Uſeleſs. -
To what can I be uſeful, wherein ſerve, º
But to fit idle on the houſhold hearth, I
A burd'nous drone; to viſitants a gaze. Milton's Agoniſes.
Bu'RDENsome, adj. [from burden.] Grievous ; troubleſome to
be born. W
His leiſure told him, that his time was come, 1
And lack of load made his life burderſome. Miltozz-
Could I but live till burdenſºme they prove, -
My life would be immortal as my love. Dryden's Ind. Emp- : Th
Aſſiſtances always attending us, upon the eaſy condition of W
our prayers, and by which the moſt burderſome duty will be- ir
come light and eaſy. Rogers. th
BU'RDENsoMEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from burdenſome.] Weight; heavi- ; Tº
neſs; uneaſineſs to be born. T
BU'RDock. m. ſ. See Dock. z:
BURE AU'. m. ſ. [bureau, Fr.] A cheſt of drawers. It is pro- tºº
nounced as if it were ſpelt buro. rus
For not the desk with ſilver nails, Brz.
Nor bureau of expence, * ,
Nor ſtandiſh well japan'd, avails tº:
To writing of good ſenſe. Swift. R.
BURG. m. ſ. See BURRow. o:
BURGAGE. n.ſ.. [from burg, or burrow.] A tenure proper to 4.
cities and towns, whereby men of cities or burrows hold their EU is
lands or tenements of the king, or other lord, for a certain yearly ii.
Irent. Cove/. i ſt
The groſs of the borough is ſurveyed together in the begin- A. of
ning of the county; but there are ſome other particular bar- '' *zer
gages thereof, mentioned under the titles of particular mens poſ- U Riaci. -
ſeſſions. Hale's Origin of Mankind. **. See
BURGAMot. n.ſ [bergamotte, Fr.] A ſpecies of pear. sº º
BURGANET. N. n.ſ.. [from bourginote, Fr.] A kind of hel- ºccº
BU'RGoNET. } Inet. - ºrgt.,
Upon his head his gliſtering hurganet, - º
The which was wrought by wonderous device, - !. Hºme. in Å.
And curiouſly engraven, he did fit. Spenſer's Muipotmos—. º Jºe
- Tisages
This day I'll wear aloft my bargonet, *** cºs-
Ev’n to affright thee with the view thereof. Shakeſp. H. VRs *
The demy Atlas of this earth, the arm - \
And burgonet of man. Shakespeare Antony and Cºpatra– \
I was page to a footman, carrying after him his pike anes. Tº
burganet. Hakewell on Providing---&gt;\
BURGEO'IS. n.ſ.. [bourgeois, Fr.] ~~~~
1. A citizen; a burgeſs. - __2–
It is a republick itſelf, under the protećtion of the eight an—--~ \,
cient cantons. There are in it an hundred burgeois, and ab, e^S-
a thouſand ſouls. Addison on ita ly ~~ º
2. A type of a particular ſort, probably ſo called from him whica” ! iſ
firſt uſed it; as, *::::
Laugh where we muſt, be candid where we can,
But vindicate the ways of God to man. Paz-e- sº sº
BU'RG Ess. n.ſ. ſhourgeois, Fr.] º º
1. A citizen; a freeman of a city, or corporate town. jº
2. A repreſentative of a town corporate. º y
The whole caſe was diſperſed by the knights of ſhires, a - º
burgeſſes of towns, through all the veins of the land. //art.
BURGH. n.ſ. [See BURRow.] A corporate town or burro
Many towns in Cornwal, when they were firſt allowed t
2 ſe
R -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U R
B U R -
Saj?.
to
noº º
—ºn wearif
*::::.
the begin-
cular bº
mens po
: Aſank? ad.
aſ .
ind of Yel-
Mººtrº -
º:
; ike
º
eight”.
njabout
* /h/.
im wº
A*,
ſend burgeſſes to the parliament, bore another proportion to
London than now ; for ſeveral of theſe burghs ſend two bur-
geſſes, whereas London itſelf ſends but four. Graunt.
BURGHeR. n.ſ.. [from burgh.] One who has a right to certain
privileges in this or that place. Locke.
It irks me, the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this deſart city,
Should in their own confines, with forked heads,
Have their round haunches gord. Shakeſp. As you like it.
After the multitude of the common people was diſmiſſed,
and the chief of the burghers ſent for, the imperious letter was
read before the knights of the order, and the better ſort of ci-
tizens. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Eu'RGHERSHIP. m. ſ. [from burgher.] The privilege of a bur-
cher.
ty
IPu'RGHMASTER. See BURGoM. As TER.
Bu'RGLAR. m. ſ. [See Burci, ARY..] The crime of houſe-
breaking.
EURGLARY. m. ſ [from hurg, a houſe, and larron, a thief.]
In the natural ſignification of the word, is nothing but the rob-
bing of a houſe; but as it is a term of art, our common lawy-
ers reſtrain it to robbing a houſe by night, or breaking in with
an intent to rob, or do ſome other felony. The like offence
committed by day, they call houſe-robbing, by a peculiar name.
Cowel.
What ſay you, father? Burglary is but a venial fin anong
ſoldiers. Dryden's Staniſh Friar.
IE U R Gom Ast ER. m. ſ. [from burg and maſter.] One employed
in the government of a city.
They chuſe their councils and burgomaſters out of the bur-
geois, as in the other governments of Switzerland. Addiſon.
FE URH, is a tower; and from that, a defence or protećtion ; ſo
Cwenburh is a woman ready to aſſiſt; Cuthbur, eminent for aſ-
ſiſtance. Gibſon's Camaen.
IE U RIAL. m. ſ. [from to bury.]
II - The act of burying; ſepulture; interment.
Nor would we deign him burial of his men. Shakeſp.
ce my wealthy Andrew dock'd in ſand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs,
To kiſs her burial. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Your body I ſought, and had I found
Deſign'd for burial in your native ground. Dryden's AFneid.
2. The act of placing any thing under earth or water.
- We have great lakes, both ſalt and freſh; we uſe them for
burials of ſome natural bodies: for we find a difference of
things buried in earth, and things buried in water. Bacon.
3. The church ſervice for funerals.
The office of the church is performed by the pariſh prieſt,
at the time of his interment, if not prohibited unto perſons ex-
communicated, and laying violent hands on themſelves, by a
rubrick of the bºrial ſervice. Ayliffe's Parergon.
JBU'RIER. n.ſ.. [from bury.] He that buries; he that performs
the aët of interment.
Let one ſpirit of the firſtborn Cain
Reign in all boſoms, that, each heart being ſet
On bloody courſes, the rude ſcene may end,
And darkneſs be the burier of the dead. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
BU'RINE. m. ſ. [French.] A graving tool; a graver.
- Wit is like the graver's burine upon copper, or the corrod-
ings of aquafortis, which engrave and indent the characters,
that they can never be defaced. Government of the Tongue.
|BU'RLAce. n. ſ. [corruptly written for ...? A ſort of
grape. See VINE. -
To BURL. v. a. To dreſs cloth as fullers do. Dić7
#3URLESQūE ad, Fr. from hurlar, ital to jeſt.] Jocular,
tending to raiſe laughter, by unnatural or unſuitable language
or images.
| Homer, in his chara&amp;ter of Vulcan and Therſites, in his
ſtory of Mars and Venus, in his behaviour of Irus, and in
other paſſages, has been obſerved to have lapſed into the bur-
leſque character, and to have departed from that ſerious air,
which ſeems eſſential to the magnificence of an epick poem.
Addiſon. Speciator, N° 279.
→E URLE'sque. n.ſ. Ludicrous language, or ideas; ridicule.
When a man lays out a twelvemonth on the ſpots in the
ſun, however noble his ſpeculations may be, they are very apt
to fall into burleſque. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
o BURLE'soy E. v. a. [from the adječtive.] To turn to ridi-
cule.
Would Homer apply the epithet divine to a modern ſwine-
herd if not, it is an evidence, that Eumeus was a man of con-
ſequence; otherwiſe Homer would burleſque his own poetry.
Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
= y.º.º.ſ.º.º.) Bºº.
URLY. adj. [junius has no etymology; Skinner imagines it
to come from boorlike, clowniſh..] Great of ſtature; great of
ſize; bulky; tumid.
Steel, if thou turn thine edge, or cut not out the bury boned .
clown in chines of beef, ere thou ſleep in thy ſheath, I beſeech
Jove on my knees, thou may’ſt be turned into hobnails.
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
It was the orator's own bury way of nonſenſe. Cowley.
Away with all your Carthaginian ſtate, -
Let vanquiſh'd Hannibal without doors wait, }
Too burly and too big to paſs my narrow gate. Dryden,
Her huſband, it ſeems, being a very burly man, ſhe thought
it would be leſs trouble for her to bring away iittle Cupid.
Addiſon, Spectator, N° 499.
To BURN. v. a. [bennan, Saxon.]
I. To conſume with fire.
That where ſhe fed his amorous deſires
With ſoft complaints, and felt his hotteſt fires,
There other flames might waſte his earthly part,
And burn his limbs, where love had burn’d his heart. Dryden.
O that I could but weep, to vent my paſſionſ
But this dry ſorrow burns up all my tears. Dryden's Sp. Fr.
A fleſhy excreſcence, becoming exceeding hard, is ſuppoſed
to demand extirpation, by burning away the induration, or
amputating. Sharp's Surgery.
2. To wound or hurt with fire or heat.
Hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound
for wound, ſtripe for ſtripe. - Exodus, xxi. 25.
To BURN. v. n.
1. To be on fire; to be kindled.
The barge ſhe ſat in, like a burniſh'd throne,
Burnt on the water. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
O coward conſcience how doſt thou afflict me !
The light burns blue – Is it not dead midnight?
Cold trembling drops ſtand on my trembling fleſh. Shakeſp.
Oh! prince, oh' wherefore bºrn your eyes and why
Is your ſweet temper turn'd to fury Rowe's Royal Convert:
2. To be inflamed with paſſion.
When I burnt in deſire to queſtion them further, they made
themſelves air, into which they vaniſhed. Shakeſp. 43acbeth.
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I periſh Tranio,
If I atchieve not this young modeſt girl. Shakeſp.
3. To act as fire.
Theſe things ſting him
So venomouſly, that burning ſhame detains him
From his Cordelia. Shakeſp. King Lear.
In Raleigh mark their every glory mix’d;
Raleigh, the ſcourge of Spain whoſe breaſt with all
The ſage, the patriot, and the hero burn'd. Thomſon.
4. To be hot
I had a glimpſe of him; but he ſhot by me
Like a young hound upon a turning ſcent. Dryden's Sp. Fr.
BURN. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A hurt cauſed by fire.
We ſee the phlegm of vitriol is a very effectual remedy
againſt burns. Boyle.
BURNER. n.ſ.. [from burn.] A perſon that burns anything.
Bu'RNet. n.ſ. [pimpinella, Lat.] The name of a plant.
The common burnet is found wild in great plenty upon dry
chalky hills; yet is often cultivated in gardens for medicinal
uſes. AMillar.
The even mead that erſt brought ſweetly forth
The freckled cowſlip, burnet, and green clover. Shakespeare :
Bu'RNING. m. ſ. [from burn..] Fire; flame; ſtate of inflamma-
tlOn.
The mind ſurely, of itſelf, can feel none of the burnings of a
fever. - South.
In liquid burnings, or on dry to dwell,
Is all the ſad variety of hell. Dryden's State of Innocence.
BU'RNING-GLAss. n.ſ [from burning and glaſs.] A glaſs which
colle&amp;ts the rays of the ſun into a narrow compaſs, and ſo in-
creaſes their force.
The appetite of her eye did ſeem to ſcorch me up like a
burning-glaſs. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
Love is of the nature of a burning-glaſs, which, kept ſtill in
one place, fireth; changed often, it doth nothing. Suckling.
O diadem, thou centre of ambition,
Where all its different lines are reconciled,
As if thou wert the burning-glaſs of glory. Dryden and Lee.
To BURNISH. v. a. [burnir, Fr.] To poliſh; to give a
gloſs to.
The barge ſhe ſat in, like a burniſh'd throne,
Burnt on the water. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
Miſlike me not for my complexion,
The ſhadow’d livery of the burniſh’d ſun,
To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred. Shakeſp.
Make a plate of them, and burniſh it as they do iron. Hacon.
The frame of burniſh’d ſteel, that caſt a glare -
From far, and ſeem'd to thaw the freezing air. Dryden.
To BU'RNISH. v. n. To grow bright or gloſſly.
I’ve ſeen a ſnake in human form,
All ſtain'd with infamy and vice,
Leap from the dunghill in a trice,
Burniſh, and make a gawdy ſhow,
Become a gen'ral, peer, and beau. Swift.
To Bu'RN1sh v. n. [of uncertain etymology.] To grow; to
ſpread out. -
This they could do, while Saturn fill'd the throne,
Ere Juno burniſh'd, or young Jove was grown.
- Dryden's jaw. ſat. xiii.
To ſhoot, and ſpread, and burniſh into man. Pº
(11 S.
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U R
:
|--
.
• * * - - it down before, but
Mrs. Primly's great belly; ſhe may lace t }.
it burniſhes .# lips. ... , Congreve's Iłay of the //ºrld.
BU'RNIsſier. m. ſ. [from burniſh.]
1. The perſon that burniſhes or poliſhes.
: 4. £º which bookbinders give a gloſs to the leaves of
books; it is commonly a dog's tooth ſet in a ſtick.
BURNT. [particip, paſſ of burn;]
I find it very difficult to know,
who, to refreſh th' attendants to a grave, • -
Burnſ claret firſt, or Naples biſket gave. King's Cookery.
Burr. m. ſ. [See BUR.] The lobe or lap of the ear. - Dict.
Buss Pºp. [In a ſhip.] A pump by the ſide of a ſhip, into
which a ſtaff ſeven or eight foot long is put; having a burr or
knob of wood at the end, which is drawn up by a rope faſten-
ed to the middle of it, called alſo a bilge pump. Harris.
Bu'RRAs Pipe. [With ſurgeons.] An inſtrument or veſſel uſed to
keep corröding powders in, as vitriol, precipitate. Harris.
Bu'RREl. n.ſ. Å fort of pear, otherwiſe called the red butter
pear, from its ſmooth, delicious, and ſoft pulp, which is ºpe in
the end of September. Phillips's JP'orld of Iłżrds.
Bu'RREl Fly. [from baurrekr, Fr. to execute; to torture.] An
inſect, called alſo oxfy, gadbee, or breeze. Dićf.
BU'RREl Shot. [from bourreler, to execute, Fr. and ſhot..] In gun-
nery. Small bullets, nails, ſtones, pieces of old iron, &amp;c. put
into caſes, to be diſcharged out of the ordnance; a ſort of caſe-
ſhot. Harris.
BU'RRock. n.ſ. A ſmall wear or dam, where wheels are laid in
a river for catching of fiſh. Phillips's I/orld of Iłords.
Bu’rrow, BERG, BURG, BURGH. n.ſ. [derived from the Saxon
bung, byriz, a city, tower, or caſtle. Gilſon's Camden.]
-1. A corporate town, that is not a city, but ſuch as ſends burgeſſes
All places that, in former days, were called
to the parliament.
Cowel.
borough, were ſuch as were fenced or fortified.
King of England ſhalt thou be proclaim'd
In ev'ry burrow, as we paſs along. Shakespeare. Henry VI. p. iii.
Poſſeſſion of land was the original right of election among
the commons; and burrows were entitled to fit, as they were
poſicided of certain tracts. Temple.
2. The holes made in the ground by conies.
VVhen they ſhall ſee his creſt up again, and the man in
blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies after rain, and
revel all with him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
To Bu'RRow. v. n. [from the noun..] To make holes in the
ground; to mine, as conies or rabbits.
Some ſtrew ſand among their corn, which, they ſay, pre-
vents mice and rats burrowing in it; becauſe of its falling into
their ears. * Mortimer.
Little ſinuſes would often form, and burrow underneath.
Sharp's Surgery.
BU'R's AR. m. ſ. [burſarius, Lat.]
1. The treaſurer of a college. - - -
2. Students ſent as exhibitioners to the univerſities in Scotland
by each preſbytery, from whom they have a ſmall yearly allow-
ance for four years.
Bu Rs E. m. ſ. [bourſe, Fr. burſa, Lat. a purſe; or from byrſa, Lat.
the exchange of Carthage.] An exchange where merchants
meet, and ſhops are kept ; ſo called, becauſe the ſign of the
purſe was anciently ſet over ſuch a place; whence the Exchange
in the Strand was termed Britain's Burſe by James I. Phillips.
To BURST. v. n. I burſ!; I have burſt, or burſten. [bunrean,
Saxon.]
1. To break, or fly open. -
So ſhall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy preſſes ſhall
bur/? out with new wine. Prov, iii. 10.
2. To fly aſunder.
Yet am I thankful; if my heart were great,
'Twould burſt at this. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
3. To break away; to ſpring.
You burſt, ah cruel! from my arms,
And ſwiftly ſhoot along the mall,
Or ſoftly glide by the canal. Pope.
4. To come ſuddenly. -
, A reſolved villain,
Whoſe bowels ſuddenly burſ? out; the king
Yet ſpeaks, and, peradventure, may recover. Shakeſp.
If the worlds
In worlds inclos'd, ſhou'd on his ſenſes burſ?,
He wou’d abhorrent turn. Thomſon's Summer, l. 310.
5. To come by violence. . .
Well didſt thou, Richard, to ſuppreſs thy voice;
For had the paſſions of thy heart burſt out,
I fear, we ſhould have ſeen decypher'd there
More ranc'rous ſpight. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. i.
Where is the notable paſſage over the river Euphrates, burſ?-
ing out by the vallies of the mountain Antitaurus; from whence
the plains of Meſopotamia, then part of the Perſian kingdom,
begin to open themſelves. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Young ſpring protrudes the bur/ſing gems. Thomſºn.
6. To begin an action violently.
She barſ into tears, and wrung her hands. Arbuthnot.
To Burst... w. a. To break ſuddenly; to make a quick and
violent diſruption.
My breaſt I'll burſt with ſtraining of my courage,
And from my ſhoulders crack my arms aſunder,
But I will chaſtiſe this high-minded ſtrumpet.
He faſten’d on my neck, and bellow'd Out,
As if he would burſt heav'n. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Moſes faith alſo, the fountains of the great abyſs were bºr
aſunder, to make the deluge; and what means this abyſs, and
the burſting of it, if reſtrained to Judea what appearance is
there of this diſruption there Burnet's Theory.
If the juices of an animal body were, ſo as by the mixture
of the oppoſites, to cauſe an ebullition, they would Burſt the
veſſels. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Burst... m. ſ [from the verb.] A ſudden diſruption; a ſudden
and violent action of any kind.
Since I was man, -
Such ſheets of fire, ſuch burſt of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
Remember to have heard. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Down they came, and drew
The whole roof after them, with burſt of thunder,
Upon the heads of all. Milton's Agoniſies, l. 165c.
Impriſon'd fire, in the cloſe dungeons pent,
Roar to get looſe, and ſtruggle for a vent,
Eating their way, and undermining all,
Till with a mighty burſt whole mountains fäll. Addison.
BUR st. łº, adj. [from buy?..] Diſeaſed with a her—
BU'RST EN. 3 nia, or rupture.
BURST EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from burſt.] A rupture, or hernia.
Bu'RSTwok T. n.ſ.. [from burſt and wort; hermiaria, Lat..] An
herb good againſt ruptures. Dicf.
#. n. ſ. A flat fiſh of the turbot kind. -
o BU'RTHEN. v. a. T
Bu'RTHEN. m. ſ. } See BURDEN.
Sacred to ridicule his whole life long,
And the ſad hurthen of ſome merry ſong. Pºpe.
Bu'Rton, n.ſ. [In a ſhip.] A ſmall tackle to be faſtened any
where at pleaſure, conſiſting of two ſingle pullies, for hoiſting
ſmall things in or out. Phillips's ſºon ld of I/ords.
BURY. l n ſ [from bung, Sax.] A dwelling-place; a termina-
BE'RY. } tion ſtill added to the names of ſeveral places; as, Al-
dermanbury, St. Edmund's bury. Philips's //orld of // ords.
Bu'RY. m.ſ.. [corrupted from borough.]
It is his nature to dig himſelf buries, as the coney doth;
which he doth with very great celerity. Crew.
To BURY. v. a. [byružean, Saxon.]
1. To inter; to put into a grave.
When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounc'd, ſhall bury
His reaſons with his body. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. To inter, with the rites and ceremonies of ſepulture.
Slave, thou haſt ſlain me !
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body. Shakeſp. King Lear.
If you have kindneſs left, there ſee me laid;
To bury decently the injur'd maid,
Is all the favour.
3. To conceal; to hide.
This is the way to make the city flat,
And bury all, which yet diſtinétly ranges,
In heaps and piles of ruin. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
4. To place one thing within another.
A tearing groan did break
The name of Antony; it was divided
Between her heart and lips; ſhe render'd life,
Thy name ſo bury'd in her. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
BU'RYING-PLAce. n.ſ. A place appointed for the ſepulture of
dead bodies.
The place was formerly a church-yard, and has ſtill ſeveral
marks in it of graves and burying-places. Speciator, N° 1 Io.
BUSH. n.ſ.. [bois, Fr.]
1. A thick ſhrub.
Eft through the thick they heard one rudely ruſh,
With noiſe whereof, he, from his lofty ſteed,
Down fell to ground, and crept into a buſh,
To hide his coward head from dying dread. Fairy Q. b. ii.
The poller, and exactor of fees, juſtifies the reſemblance of
the courts of juſtice to the buſh, whereunto while the ſheep flies
for defence from the weather, he is ſure to loſe part of the fleece,
Bacon's Eſſays, N- 4-7.
Her heart was that ſtrange buſh, whoſe ſacred fire,
Religion did not conſume, but inſpire
Such piety, ſo chaſte uſe of God's day,
Shake?.
JValler.
That what we turn to feaſt, ſhe turn'd to pray. IDonne-
With ſuch a care,
As roſes from their ſtalks we tear,
When we would ſtill prefer them new,
And freſh as on the buſh they grew. J/aller--
The ſacred ground
Shall weeds and pois'nous plants refuſe to bear;
Each common buſh ſhall Syrian roſes wear. Dryden’s Jºrg
2. A bough of a tree fixed up at a door, to ſhew that liquours aſſº
ſold there. I
3. The Ž
Care.
You are
are i
º An fight,
*: Poçº.
C ºr
hurt great /
4. º: W.A.”
* ATCus thºgen
Ilfºr&amp;eir 0.
* ss.
‘s tº
- S
Tºº,
\ess
~ss
`ss
– sº \\
~\ \\\
= \ | | |<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U S
-- B U S
If it be true, that good wine needs no buſh, 'tis true that a
good play needs no epilogue. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Tô Bush. v. n. [from the noun..] To grow thick.
The roſes buſhing round
About her glow'd ; half ſtooping to ſupport
Each flow'r of tender ſtalk. A/ilton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
A guſhing fountain broke
Around it, and above, for ever green,
The buſhing alders form'd a ſhady ſcene.
Bu'shel. n.ſ.. [buiſſeau, Fr. buffellus, low Lat.]
1. A meaſure containing eight gallons; a ſtrike.
His reaſons are as two grains of wheat hid in two buſhels of
chaff; you ſhall ſeek all day ere you find them; and when you
have them, they are not worth the ſearch. Shakeſp.
2. It is uſed, in common language, indefinitely for a large quan-
tity. -
"the worthies of antiquity bought the rareſt pićtures with
buffel, of gold, without counting the weight or the number of
pieces. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. Buſhel, ºf a cart-wheel. Irons within the hole of the nave, to
preſerve it from wearing [from bauche, Fr. a mouth.J. Dić.
Bushiness. n.ſ.. [from buſhy.] The quality of being buſhy.
BushMENT. n.ſ.. [from biſh.] A thicket; a cluſter of buſhes.
Princes thought how they might diſcharge the earth of woods,
briars, buſhments, and waters, to make it more habitable and fer-
tile. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Bu'shy. adj. [from buſh.]
1. Thick; full of ſmall branches, not high.
The gentle ſhepherd ſat befide a ſpring,
All in the ſhadow of a buſhy brier. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
Generally the cutting away of boughs and ſuckers at the root
and body, doth make trees grow high; and, contrariwiſe, the
polling and cutting of the top, make them ſpread and grow
buſhy. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, N° 424.
2. Thick like a buſh.
Statues of this god, with a thick buſhy beard, are ſtill many
of them extant in Rome. Addiſon on Italy.
3. Full of buſhes.
The kids with pleaſure browſe the buſhy plain;
The ſhow’rs are grateful to the ſwelling grain. Dryden.
Bu'siless. adj. [from buſy..] At leiſure; without buſineſs; un-
employed.
Theſe ſweet thoughts do even refreſh my labour,
Moſt buſilſ; when I do it. Shakeſp.
Bu'sily. adv. Ifrom buſy..] With an air of importance; with
an air of hurry; ačtively; importunately.
Or if too buſly they will enquire
Into a vićtory, which we diſdain,
Then let them know, the Belgians did retire,
Before the patron ſaint of injur'd Spain. Dryden.
Bu'siness. n.ſ.. [from buſy.]
1. Employment; multiplicity of affairs.
Muſt buſineſ; thee from hence remove 2
Pope's Odſey.
Oh I that's the worſt diſeaſe of love. Donne:
2. An affair. In this ſenſe it has the plural.
Beſtow
. Your needful counſel to our buſineſs,
Which crave the inſtant uſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. The ſubječt of buſineſs; the affair or obječt that engages the
care.
You are ſo much the buſineſ of our ſouls, that while you
are in fight, we can neither look nor think on any elſe; there
are no eyes for other beauties. Dryden.
The great buſineſ of the ſenſes, being to take notice of what
hurts or advantages the body. Locke.
4. Serious engagement, in oppoſition to trivial tranſactions.
I never knew one, who made it his buſineſs to laſh the faults
of other writers, that was not guilty of greater himſelf. Addison
He had buſineſ; enough upon his hands, and was only a poet
by accident. Prior's Preface.
When diverſion is made the buſineſ; and ſtudy of life, though
the actions choſen be in themſelves innocent, the exceſs will
render them criminal. Rogers.
5. Right of action.
What buſingſ, has a tortoiſe among the clouds L’Eſtrange.
6. A point; a matter of queſtion; ſomething to be examined or
conſidered.
Fitneſs to govern, is a perplexed buſineſs; ſome men, ſome
nations, excel in the one ability, ſome in the other. Bacon.
7. Something to be tranſacted.
They were far from the Zidonians, and had no buſingſ; with
any one. judges, xviii. 7.
8. Something required to be done.
To thoſe people that dwell under or near the equator, this
ſpring would be moſt peſtilent; as for thoſe countries that
are nearer the poles, in which number are our own, and the
moſt confiderable nations of the world, a perpetual ſpring will
not do their luftneſs; they muſt have longer days, a nearer ap-
proach of the ſun. - Bentley.
9. To do one's buſineſs. To kill, deſtroy, or ruin him.
Busk. n.ſ. [hºſque, Fr.] A piece of ſteel or whalebone, worn
by women to ſtrengthen their ſtays.
Vol. I.
Off with that happy buſ, which I envy,
f That ſtill can be, and ſtill can ſtand ſo nigh. Donne,
Bu'skin... n.ſ.. [broſºfen, Dutch.]
I. Akind of half boot; a ſhoe which comes to the midleg,
. The foot was dreſſed in a ſhort pair of crimſon velvet buſ-
*in: ; in ſome places open, to ſhew the fairneſs of the ſkin.
- Sidney.
Sometimes Diana he her takes to be,
But miſſeth º and ſhafts, and buskins to her knee.
- . Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. vi. ſtanz, 16.
There is a kind of º º all thoſe º: verſes;
ſomewhat of a holiday ſhepherd ſtrutting in his country buſ-
Åins. Dryden.
2. A kind of high ſhoe wore by the ancientadors of tragedy, to
raiſe their ſtature.
Great Fletcher never treads in busiºns here,
Nor greater Johnſon dares in ſocks appear. Dryden.
In her beſt light the comick Muſeº pears,
When ſhe, with borrow'd pride the buskin wears. Smith.
Bu's KINED. adj. [from buskin..] Dreſſed in buſkins.
Or what, though rare, of later age,
Ennobl’d hath the buskin'd ſtage 2 Milton.
Here, arm'd with ſilver bows, in early dawn,
Her buskin’d virgins trac'd the dewy lawn. Pope.
BU'sky, adj. [written more properly by Milton, bosky. See
Bosky.] Woody } ſhaded with woods; overgrown with
trees.
How bloodily the ſun begins to peer -
Above yon busky hill! Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
BUSS. n.ſ.. [bus, the mouth, Iriſh; baiſer, Fr.]
1. A kiſs; a ſalute with the lips.
Thou doſt give me flattering buſes.—By my troth, I kiſs
thee with a moſt conſtant heart. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
Some ſquire perhaps you take delight to rack,
Who viſits with a gun, preſents with birds,
Then gives a ſmacking buſ. Pope.
2. A boat for fiſhing. [buſe, German.]
If the king would enter towards building ſuch a number of
boats and buſes, as each company could eaſily manage, it would
be an encouragement both of honour and advantage. Temple.
To Buss. v. a. [from the noun..] To kiſs; to ſalute with the
lips.
p Yonder walls, that partly front your town,
Yond towers, whoſe wanton tops do buſ, the clouds,
Muſt kiſs their feet. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
Thy knee buſing the ſtones; for, in ſuch buſineſs,
Aćtion is eloquence. Shakeſp. Coriolanuſ,
Fº ſ [buſio, Ital.] A ſtatue repreſenting a man to his
breaſt.
Agrippa, or Caligula, is a common coin, but a very extra-
ordinary buſ'; and a Tiberius, a rare coin, but a common buff.
Addiſon on Italy.
Ambition figh'd; ſhe found it vain to truſt
The faithleſs column, and the crumbling buſt. Pope.
BU's TARD. m. ſ. [biſłarde, Fr.] A wild turkey.
His ſacrifices were phenicopters, peacocks, buffards, turkeys,
pheaſants; and all theſe were daily offered. Hakewell.
To Bu'stle. v. n. [of uncertain etymology; perhaps from buſy.]
To be buſy; to ſtir; to be active.
Come, buffle, buſtle—capariſon my horſe. Shakespeare R. III.
God take king Edward to his mercy,
And leave the world for me to buſtle in. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Sir Henry Vane was a buſy and buſtling man, who had credit
enough to do his buſineſs in all places. Clarendon, b. ii.
A poor abjećt worm,
That crawl'd awhile upon a buſtling world,
And now am trampled to my duſt again. Southerne's Oroonoko.
Ye ſov’reign lords, who ſit like gods in ſtate,
Awing the world, and buſtling to be great! Granville.
Bu'stle. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A tumult; a hurry; a com-
buſtion.
Wiſdom's ſelf
Oft ſeeks to ſweet retired ſolitude;
She plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings,
That, in the various buſtle of reſort, -
Were all too ruffl’d. Milton,
This is the creature that pretends to knowledge, and that
makes ſuch a noiſe and buſtle for opinions. Glanville's Scºpſis.
Such a doćtrine made a ſtrange buſtle and diſturbance in the
world, which then ſat warm and eaſy in a free enjoyment of
their luſts. South.
If the Count had given them a pot of ale after it, all would
have been well, without any of this buſtle. Stefator, N° 481.
Bu'stler. n.ſ.. [from buffle.] An active ſtirring man.
BUSY. adj. [byrgian, Sax. It is pronounced as biſ).]
1. Employed with earneſtneſs.
My miſtreſs ſends you word, that ſhe is buſ, and cannot
Conne. Shakeſp. Taming the Shr.
The chriſtians, ſometimes valiantly receiving the enemy, and
ſometimes charging them again, repulſed the proud enemy, ſtill
buſy with them. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
3 T 2. Buſtling;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U T
B U T
--
i
!
-
2. Buſtling; ative; meddling.
The next thing which ſhe waking looks upon,
On meddling monkey, or on buſ; ape,
She ſhall purſue it with the ſoul of love.
This buſy pow'r is working day and night;
For when the outward ſenſes reſt do take,
A thouſand dreams, fantaſtical and light,
With flutt'ring wings, do keep her ſtill awake.
The coming ſpring would firſt appear,
And all this place with roſes ſtrow,
If buſ, feet would let them grow. J/aller.
All written ſince that time, ſeem to have little more than
events we are glad to know, or the controverſy of opinions,
wherein the bºy world has been ſo much employed. Temple.
Religious motives and inſtincts are ſo buſy in the heart of
every reaſonable creature, that no man would hope to govern a
ſociety, without regard to thoſe principles. Addison. Freeholder.
To Buſsy. v. a. [from the noun..] To employ; to engage; to
make or keep buſy.
He in great paſſion all this while did dwell,
More buſying his quick eyes her face to view,
Than his dull ears to hear what ſhe did tell. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The pleaſure which I took at my friend's pleaſure herein,
idly buſied me thus to expreſs the ſame. Carew's Survey.
My Harry,
Be it thy courſe to buſy giddy minds
With foreign quarrels. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. ii.
While they were buſied to lay the foundations, their build-
ings were overthrown by an earthquake, and many thouſands
of the Jews were overwhelmed. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
The points which buſed the devotion of the firſt ages, and
the curioſity of the later. Decay ºf Piety.
The ideas it is buſied about, ſhould be natural and congenial
Shakespeare.
Davies.
ones, which it had in itſelf. Locke.
The learning and diſputes of the ſchools have been much bu-
ſea about genus and ſpecies. Locke.
For the reſt, it muſt be owned, he does not buſ himſelf, by
entering deep into any party, but rather ſpends his time in acts
of hoſpitality. Swift.
BU's Y Body. m. ſ. [from buſy and body..] A vain, meddling, fan-
taſtical perſon.
Going from houſe to houſe, tatlers and buſybodies, 'are the
canker and ruſt of idleneſs, as idleneſs is the ruſt of time.
Taylor’s Holy Living.
Buſylodies and intermeddlers are a dangerous ſort of people
to have to do withal. L'E/?range.
She is well acquainted with all the favourite ſervants, buſy-
bodies, dependants, and poor relations of all perſons of condi-
tion in the whole town. Speciator, N° 437.
BUT. conjunct. [bute, butan, Saxon.]
1. Except.
An emiſſion of immateriate virtues we are a little doubtful to
propound, it is ſo prodigious: but that it is ſo conſtantly a-
vouched by many. Bacon.
Who can it be, ye gods ! but perjur’d Lycon
Who can inſpire ſuch ſtorms of rage, but Lycon 2
Where has my ſword left one ſo black, but Lycon :
Smith's Phaedra and Hippºlitus.
Your poem hath been printed, and we have no objection but
the obſcurity of ſeveral paſſages, by our ignorance in facts and
perſons. Swift.
2. Yet; nevertheleſs. It ſometimes only enforces yet.
Then let him ſpeak, and any that ſhall ſtand without, ſhall
hear his voice plainly ; but yet made extreme ſharp and exile,
like the voice of puppets: and yet the articulate founds of the
words will not be confounded. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº 155.
Our wants are many, and grievous to be born, but quite of
another kind. Swift.
3. The particle which introduces the minor of a ſyllogiſm; now.
If there be a liberty and poſſibility for a man to kill himſelf
today, then it is not abſolutely neceſſary that he ſhall live till
tomorrow ; but there is ſuch a liberty, therefore no ſuch ne-
ceſſity. Bramhall againſ? Hobbes.
God will one time or another make a difference between the
good and the evil. But there is little or no difference made in
this world : therefore there muſt be another world, wherein
this difference ſhall be made. J/atts's Logick, Introduct.
4. Only ; nothing more than.
If my offence be of mortal kind,
That not my ſervice, paſt or preſent ſorrows,
Can ranſom me into his love again ;
But to know ſo, muſt be my benefit. Shakeſp. Othell.
And but infirmity,
Which waits upon worn times, hath ſomething ſeiz'd
His wiſh'd ability, he had himſelf
The lands and waters meaſurd. Shakeſp. //inter's Tak.
What nymph foe'er his voice but hears,
Will be my rival, though ſhe have but ears.
No, Aurengzebe, you merit all my heart,
And I’m too noble bit to give a part. Dryden.
Did but men conſider the true notion of God, he would ap-
pcar to be full of goodneſs. Tillotſon.
Ben. Johnſºn.
If we do but put virtue and vice in equal circumſtances, the
advantages of eaſe and pleaſure will be found to be on the ſide
of religion. Tillotſon.
The miſchiefs or harms that come by play, inadvertency, or
ignorance, are not at all, or but very gently, to be taken notice
of. Locke on Education.
If a reader examines Horace's art of poetry, he will find ºut
very few precepts in it, which he may not meet with in Ari-
ſtotle. Addison. Speciator-
Prepar'd I ſtand: he was but born to try
The lot of man, to ſuffer and to die. Pºpe's Odžy-
5. Than.
The full moon was no ſooner up, and ſhining in all its
brightneſs, but he privately opened the gate of paradiſe.
- Guardian, N° 167.
6. But that ; without this conſequence that. -
Froſts that conſtrain the ground,
Do ſeldom their uſurping power withdraw,
But raging floods purſue their haſty hand.
7. Otherwiſe than that.
It cannot be but nature hath ſome director, of infinite
power, to guide her in all her ways. Hooker, b. i. § 3-
Who ſhall believe,
But you miſuſe the reverence of your place
8. Not otherwiſe than.
A genius ſo elevated and unconfined as Mr. Cowley's, was
but neceſſary to make Pindar ſpeak Engliſh. Drydezz-
9. By any other means means than. -
Qut of that will I cauſe thoſe of Cyprus to mutiny: whoſe
qualification ſhall come into no true taſte again, but by tranſ-
planting of Caſio. Shakeſp. Othel/2-
Io. If it were not for this; if this were not.
Believe me, I had rather have loſt my purſe
Full of cruzades. And but my noble Moor
Is true of mind, and made of no ſuch baſeneſs,
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill-thinking.
I here do give thee that with all my heart,
Which, but thou haſt already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee. Shakespeare. Othello.
II. However; howbeit.
I do not doubt but I have been to blame;
But, to purſue the end for which I came,
Unite your ſubjects firſt, then let us go,
And pour their common rage upon the foe. Dryden-
12. It is uſed after no doubt, no queſtion, and ſuch words, and fig-
nifies the ſame with that. It ſometimes is joined with that.
They made no account, but that the navy ſhould be abſolute-
ly maſter of the ſeas. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
I fancied to myſelf a kind of eaſe in the change of the pa-
roxyſm; never ſuſpecting but that the humour would have
waſted itſelf. Dryder.
There is no queſtion but the king of Spain will reform moſt
of the abuſes. Addiſon on Italy.
13. That. This ſeems no proper ſenſe in this place.
It is not therefore impoſſible, but I may alter the complexion
of my play, to reſtore myſelf into the good graces of my fair
criticks. Dryden's Aurengzebe, Preface.
14. Otherwiſe than.
Dryden.
Shakeſ”.
Shakeſp. Othello.
I ſhould ſin
To think but nobly of my grandmother. Shakeſp. Temº/?.
15. Even; not longer ago than. -
Beroe but now I left; whom, pin'd with pain,
Her age and anguiſh from theſe rites detain. Dryden.
It is evident, in the inſtance I gave but now, the conſciouſ-
neſs went along. Locke.
16. A particle by which the meaning of the foregoing ſentence is
bounded or reſtrained.
Thus fights Ulyſſes, thus his fame extends,
A formidable man, but to his friends.
17. An objective particle; yet it may be obječted.
But yet, madam
I do not like but yet; it does allay
The good precedence; fie upon but º !
But yet is as a jaylour, to bring fort
Some monſtrous malefactor. Shakespeare Antºny and Cleopatra.
Muſt the heart then have been formed and conſtituted, be-
fore the blood was in being But here again, the ſubſtance of
the heart itſelf is moſt certainly made and nouriſhed by the
blood, which is conveyed to it by the coronary arteries. Bentſ.
18. But for; without; had not this been. -
Raſh man forbear, but for ſome unbelief,
My joy had been as fatal as my grief.
Her head was bare,
But for her native ornament of hair,
Which in a ſimple knot was ty’d above. Dryden’s Falles,
when the fair boy receiv'd the gift of right,
And, but for miſchief, you had dy'd for ſpight.
BUT. n.ſ.. [bout, French..]. A boundary.
Dryden.
//aller-
Dryden.
I mean this or that thing, you cannot tell which ; but if I join S
it with the words in conſtruction and ſenſe, as, but I will not,
d
&gt; S &gt;
But, if I aſk you what I mean by that word, you will #ºs
tº ſº.
:
º
.
i
4, 2.
0m *::::, }
n -
!º 4.
“ss
Butler. º:
Sºs
Wº, c
`Nº.
s &amp;
, sº
-?
-E-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U T -
--&gt; w- B U T
a but of wine, but and boundary, the ram will but, ſhoot at but,
the meaning of it will be as ready to you as any other word.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
BUT. n.ſ.. [In ſea language.] The end of any plank which joins
to another on the outſide of a ſhip, under water. Harris.
But-e ND. m. ſ. [from but and end..] The blunt end of any
thing; the end upon which it reſts.
The reſerve of foot galled their foot with ſeveral vollies, and
then fell on them with the but-end of their muſkets. Clarendon.
Thy weapon was a good one when I wielded it, but the but-
end remains in my hands. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
Some of the ſoldiers accordingly puſhed them forwards with
the but-ends of their pikes, into my reach. Gulliver's Travels.
BUTCHER. m. ſ. [boucher, Fr.]
1. One that kills animals to ſell their fleſh.
The ſhepherd and the butcher both may look upon one ſheep
with pleaſing conceits. Sidney.
Hence he learnt the butcher's guile,
How to cut your throat, and ſmile;
Like a butcher doom'd for life,
In his mouth to wear his knife. Swift.
2. One that is delighted with blood.
Honour and renown are beſtowed on conquerours, who, for
the moſt part, are but the great bitchers of mankind. Locke.
To Bu'rchER. v. a. [from the noun..] To kill; to murder.
In ſuff'ring thus thy brother to be ſlaughter'd,
Thou ſheweſt the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching ſtern murder how to butcher thee. Shakeſp. R. II.
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And ſhamefully by you my hopes are hutcher'd. Shakeſp.
The poiſon and the dagger are at hand to butcher a hero,
when the poet wants brains to ſave him. Dryden's Don Sebaſt.
ButchERs-BRoom, or KNEE Holly, n.ſ. [ruſcus, Lat.]
The flower-cup conſiſts of one leaf, cut into ſeveral divi-
viſions, out of which is produced a globular bell-ſhaped flower,
conſiſting alſo of one leaf, in the center of which riſes the poin-
tal, which afterwards becomes a ſoft roundiſh fruit, in which
are incloſed one or two hard ſeeds. It is very common in the
woods, in divers parts of England, and is rarely cultivated in
gardens. The roots are ſometimes uſed in medicine, and the
green ſhoots are cut and bound into bundles, and ſold to the
butchers, who uſe it as beſoms to ſweep their blocks; from
whence it had the name of butchers-broom. Millar.
Bu'rchERLINEss. n.ſ.. [from butcherly.] In a butcherly manner.
BU'Tcher LY. adj. [from butcher.] Cruel; bloody; barbarous.
There is a way, which, brought into ſchools, would take a-
way this butchery fear in making of Latin. Aſham's Schoolm.
What ſtratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget! Shakeſp. Henry VI.
BU'tchERY. m.ſ.. [from butcher.]
1. The trade of a butcher.
Yet this man, ſo ignorant in modern butchery, has cut up half
an hundred heroes, and quartered five or fix miſerable lovers, in
every tragedy he has written. Pope.
2. Murder; cruelty; ſlaughter.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy bitcheries. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The butchery, and the breach of hoſpitality, is repreſented in
this fable under the maſk of friendſhip. L’Eſtrange.
Can he a ſon to ſoft remorſe incite,
Whom goals, and blood, and butchery delight? Dryden.
3. The place where blood is ſhed.
This is no place, this houſe is but a butchery;
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it. Shakeſp. As you like it.
BUTLER. n.ſ [bouteiller, Fr. boteler, or botiller, old Engliſh,
from bottle; he that is employed in the care of bottling li-
quours..] A ſervant in a family employed in furniſhing the
table.
Butlers forget to bring up their beer time enough. , Swift.
BU't LERAGE. m. ſ. [from butler.] The duty upon wines im-
ported, claimed by the king's butler.
Thoſe ordinary finances are caſual or uncertain, as be the
eſcheats, the cuſtoms, butlerage, and impoſt. Bacon.
Bu'rlERSHIP. n.ſ.. [from butler.] The office of a butler.
Bu'TMENT. m. ſ. [aboutement, Fr.] That part of the arch which
joins it to the upright pier.
The ſupporters or butments of the ſaid arch cannot ſuffer ſo
much violence, as in the precedent flat poſture. Wotton.
BUTT. n.ſ.. [but, Fr.]
1. The place on which the mark to be ſhot at is placed.
He calls on Bacchus, and propounds the prize;
The groom his fellow groom at butts defies, }
And bends his bow, and levels with his eyes. Dryd.
2. The point at which the endeavour is direéted.
Be not afraid though you do ſee me weapon'd ;
Here is my journey's end; here is my butt,
The very ſea-mark of my journey's end. Shakespeare. Othello,
3. The object of aim; the thing againſt which any attack is di-
rećted.
The papiſts were the moſt common-place, and the butt
againſt whom all the arrows were directed. Clarendon.
4. A man upon whom the company break their jeſts.
- - - -
I played a ſentence or two at my butt, which I thought very
ſmart, when my ill genius ſuggeſted to him ſuch a reply as got
all the laughter on his ſide. Spectator, No 175.
5. A ſtroke given in fencing.
If diſputes ariſe
Among the champions for the prize;
To prove who gave the fairer butt,
John ſhews the chalk on Robert's coat. Prizr.
Butt. n.ſ.. [butt, Saxon.] A veſſel; a barrel containing one
hundred and twenty ſix gallons of wine; a butt contains one
hundred and eight gallons
two hundred weight, is a butt of Currans.
I eſcaped upon a butt of ſack, which the ſailors heaved over-
board.
- Shakeſp. T. -
To BUTT. v. a. ſhotten, Dutch..] To ſtrike with º
Come, leave your tears: a brief farewel: the beaſt
With many heads butts me away. Shakespeare -
Nor wars are ſeen, y 'akºff. Coriolanus.
Unleſs, upon the green,
Two harmleſs lambs are butting one the other. ſtation
A ſnow-white ſteer, before thy altar led, -
Butts with his threat'ning brows, and bellowing ſtands.
Dryden’ id.
A ram will butt with his head, though he . ::::::
tame, and never ſaw that manner of fighting. Ray on the Cr.
BUTTER. m. ſ. [buzzene, Sax, butyrum, Lat..]
1. An unctuous ſubſtance made by agitating the cream of milk,
till the oil ſeparates from the whey.
And he took butter and milk, and the calf which he had
dreſſed, and ſet before them. Gen. xviii. 8.
2. Butter of antimony. A chymical preparation, made by unit-
ing the acid ſpirits of ſublimate corroſive with regulus of anti-
mony. It is a great cauſtick. Harris.
3. Butter of tin, is made with tin and ſublimate corroſive. This
preparation continually emits fumes. Harris.
To BU'TTER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſmear, or oil with butter.
'Twas her brother, that, in pure kindneſs to his horſe, but-
tered his hay. Shakespeare King Lear.
Words butter no parſnips. L’Eſtrange.
2. To encreaſe the ſtakes every throw, or every game: a cant
term among gameſters.
It is a fine ſimile in one of Mr. Congreve's prologues, which
compares a writer to a buttering gameſter, that ſtakes all his
winning upon one caſt; ſo that if he loſes the laſt throw, he
is ſure to be undone. Addiſon. Freeholder, N° 40.
BU'tt ERBUMP. m. ſ. A fowl; the ſame with bittourn.
BU'TTER BUR. m. ſ. [petaſites, Lat.]
It is a plant with a floſculous flower, conſiſting of many flo-
rets, divided into many parts, ſitting on the embryo, and con-
tinued in a cylindrical empalement, divided alſo into man
parts; the embryo becomes afterwards a ſeed furniſhed with
down, and the flowers appear before the leaves. It is uſed in
medicine, and grows wild in great plenty by the fides of
ditches. Millar.
BU'TTERFLow ER. m. ſ. A yellow flower, with which the fields
abound in the month of May.
Let weeds, inſtead of butterflow’rs, appear,
And meads, inſtead of daiſies, hemlock bear. Gay.
BU'TTER FLY. m. ſ. [butterplexe, Saxon.] A beautiful inſe&amp;#,
ſo named becauſe it firſt appears at the leginning of the ſeaſon
for butter.
Eſtſoons that damſel, by her heav'nly might,
She turned into a winged butterfly,
In the wide air to make her wand'ring flight. Spenser.
Tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies; and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news. Shakºſº. King Lear.
And ſo befel, that as he caſt his eye
Among the colworts on a butterfly,
He ſaw falſe Reynard. Dryden's Fables.
That which ſeems to be a powder upon the wings of a bat-
terfly, is an innumerable company of extreme ſmall feathers,
not to be diſcerned without a microſcope. Grew.
Bu'tt ER1s. n.ſ. An inſtrument of ſteel ſet in a wooden handle,
uſed in paring the foot, or cutting the hoof of a horſe, Farr. P.
BU'ttERMilk. n.ſ.. [from butter and milk.] The whey that is
ſeparated from the cream when butter is made -
A young man, who was fallen into an ulcerous conſumption,
devoted himſelf to buttermilk, by which ſole dict he recovered.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
The ſcurvy of mariners is cured by acids; as ripe fruits, le-
mons, oranges, buttermilk; and alkaline ſpirits hurt them. -
Arbuthnot on Oief.
Bu'tterprint. n.ſ. [from butter and print..] A piece of carved
wood, uſed to mark butter.
A butterprint, in which were engraven figures of all ſorts and
ſizes, applied to the lump of butter, left on it the figure. Locke.
Butter Tooth. n.ſ [from butter and tooth..] The great broad
foreteeth.
Bu'rter woman. n.ſ.. [from butter and woman.] A woman
that ſells butter.
Tongue,
of beer; and from fifteen to twenty
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B U X
B U Z
:
Tongue, I muſt put you into a tutºrisman's mouth, and
buy myſelf another of Bajazet's mute, if you praſtle me into
theſe perils. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
Bu'rter worr. m. ſ. A plant; the ſame with ſºnicle.
Bu'rte Ry. adj. [from butter.] Having the appearance or qua-
lities of butter. -
Nothing more convertible into hot cholerick humours, than
its buttery parts. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The beſt oils, thickened by cold, have a white colour; and
milk itſelf has its whiteneſs from the caſeous fibres, and its but-
tery oil. Foyer on the Humours.
Bu'Tºre RY. m. ſ. [from butter; or, according to Skinner, from
bouter, Fr. to place or lay up.] The room where proviſions are
laid up. -
Go, ſirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one. Shakeſp.
All that need a cool and freſh temper, as cellars, pantries,
and butteries, to the north. J%tton.
My guts ne'er ſuffer'd from a college-cook,
My name ne'er enter'd in a buttery book.
Brampſºn's Man of Taſte.
BU'ttock. m. ſ. [ſuppoſed, by Skinner, to come from aboutir,
Fr. inſerted by junius without etymology.] The rump; the
part near the tail.
It is like a barber's chair that fits all the butts:#. Shakeſp.
Such as were not able to ſtay themſelves, ſhould be holden
up by others of more ſtrength, riding behind them upon the
buttocks of the horſe. Knolles's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
The tail of a fox was never made for the buttocks of an ape.
- L'E/irange's Fables.
BUTTON. m. ſ. [bottwm, Welch; bouton, Fr.]
1. A catch, or finall ball, by which the dreſs of man is faſtened.
Pray you, undo this button. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I mention thoſe ornaments, becauſe, of the ſimplicity of the
ſhape, want of ornaments, buttons, loops, gold and ſilver lace,
they muſt have been cheaper than ours. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. Any knob or ball faſtened to a ſmaller body.
VVe faſtened to the upper marble certain wires, and a button.
Boyle.
Fair from its humble bed I rear'd this flow'r,
Suckled and chear'd, with air, and ſun and ſhow'r;
Soft on the paper ruff its leaves I ſpread,
Bright with the gilded button tipt its head. Pºpe's Dunciad.
3. The bud of a plant.
The canker galls the infants of the ſpring,
Too oft before their buttons be diſclos'd. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Bu’rroN. m. ſ. The ſea urchin, which is a kind of crabfiſh that
has prickles inſtead of feet. Ainſworth,
To BU't to N. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To dreſs; to cloath.
One whoſe hard heart is button'd up with ſteel. Shakespeare .
He gave his legs, arm, and breaſt, to his ordinary ſervant, to
button and dreſs him. J/otton.
2. To faſten with buttons.
Bu'r-roNHole. n.ſ. [from button and hole.] The loop in which
the button of the cloaths is caught.
Let me take you a buttonhole lower. Shakeſp. Love's Lab. L.
I'll pleaſe the maids of honour, if I can:
Without black velvet breeches, what is man
I will my ſkill in buttonholes diſplay,
And brag, how of Iſhift me ev'ry day. Bramſ. M. ºf Tºſe.
BUTTRESS. n.ſ.. [from aboutin, Fr.]
1. A prop; a wall built to ſupport another wall.
No jutting frize,
Puttreſ, nor coigne of vantage, but this bird,
Hath made his pendant bed, and progreant cradle. Shakespeare
Fruit trees, ſet upon a wall againſt the ſun, between elbows
or buttreſſes of ſtone, ripen more than upon a plain wall. Bacon.
But we inhabit a weak city here,
Which buttreſſes and props but ſcarcely bear. Dryden's juv.
2. A prop; a ſupport.
It will concern us to examine the force of this plea, which
our adverſaries are ſtill ſetting up againſt us, as the ground pil-
lar and buttreſ of the good old cauſe of nonconformity. South.
To Bu't TREss. v. a. [from the noun...] To prop; to ſupport.
Bu'rwink. m. ſ. The name of a bird. Dić7.
Buty RA'ceous. adj. [butyrum, Lat, butter.] Having the qua-
lities of butter.
Chyle has the ſame principles as milk; a viſcidity from the
caſeous parts, and an oilineſs from the butyraceous parts.
Floyer on the Humours.
Bºots. adj. [butyrum, Lat.] Having the properties of
utter.
Jºly red part is from the butyrous parts of chyle. Fºr.
BUXOM: adj. *. Sax. #. bu;an, to ºi. It .
ginally ſignified obeſient, as john de Treviſa, a clergyman, tells
}. P* that he is obedient and buxom to all his command.
. old form of marriage uſed before the Reformation, the
* Pºiſed to be obedient and buxom in had and a board;
from which expreſſion -
- • not well underſtood, its pre 2 11-
ing ſeems to be derived.] &gt; preſent mean
H. Obedient; obſequious.
He did tead down, and diſgrace all the Engliſh, and ſet up
and countenance the Iriſh; thinking thereby to make them
more tractable and buxom to his government. Spenser's Ireland.
He, with broad ſails,
Winnow'd the buxom air. A4ilton.
2. Gay; lively; briſk.
I’m born
Again a freſh child of the buxom morn,
Heir of the ſun's firſt beams.
Zephyr, with Aurora playing,
As he met her once a maying,
Fill'd her with thee, a daughter fair,
So buxom, blithe, and debonnair.
Sturdy ſwains,
In clean array, for ruſtick dance prepare,
Mixt with the buxom damſels, hand in hand,
They friſk and bound.
3. Wanton ; jolly.
Almighty Jove deſcends, and pours
Into his buxom bride his fruitful ſhow’rs. Dryden's Virgil.
She feign'd the rites of Bacchus ! cry’d aloud,
And to the buxom god the virgin vow’d. Dryden's AEmeia.
RuxoMLY. adv. [from buxom.] I Wantonly; amorouſly.
B9'xoMNEss. m.ſ.. [from buxom.J Wantonneſs; amorouſneſs.
To BUY. v. a. preter. I bought; T have bought. [biczean, Sax.]
1. To purchaſe; to acquire by paying a price; to obtain for
º or ſomething cquivalent; to gain by ſale, not gift or
theft.
They muſt buy up no corn growing within twelve miles
of Geneva, that ſo the filling of their magazines may not pre-
judice their market. Addiſon on Italy.
2. To procure ſome advantage by ſomething that deſerves it, or
at ſome price.
Crºſſaw.
Milton.
Philips.
I have bought
Golden opinions from all ſorts of people. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word. Shakeſp. Corial.
Pleaſure with praiſe, and danger they would buy,
And with a foe that would not only fly. Denham.
3. To manage by money.
You, and all the kings of chriſtendom,
Are led ſo groſsly by this meddling prieſt,
Dreading the curſe that money may buy out. Shakeſp. K. j.
What pitiful things are power, rhetorick, or riches, when
they would terrify, diſſuade, or buy off conſcience? South.
To Buy. v. n. To treat about a purchaſe.
I will buy with you, ſell with you, talk with you, walk with
you, and ſo following. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
Bu'YER. n.ſ.. [from to buy..] He that buys; a purchaſer.
When a piece of art is ſet before us, let the firſt caution be,
not to aſk who made it, left the ſame of the authour do capti-
vate the fancy of the buyer. J/atton's Architeåure.
To BUZZ. v. n. [bizzen, Teut. to growl. junius.]
1. To hum; to make a noiſe like bees, flies, or waſps.
And all the chamber filled was with flies, -
Which buzzed all about, and made ſuch ſound,
That they encumber'd all men's ears and eyes,
Like many ſwarms of bees aſſembled round. Fairy Q. b. ii.
There be more waſps, that buzz about his noſe,
Will make this ſting the ſooner. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Herewith aroſe a buzzing noiſe among them, as if it had been
the ruſtling ſound of the ſea afar off. Hayward.
For ſtill the flowers ready ſtand,
One buzzes round about,
One lights, one taſtes, gets in, gets out. Suckling.
What though no bees around your cradle flew,
Nor on your lips diſtill'd their golden dew;
Yet have we oft' diſcover'd, in their ſtead,
A ſwarm of drones that buzz'd about your head. Pºpe.
We join, like flies and waſps, in buzzing about wit. Swift.
2. To whiſper; to prate.
There is ſuch confuſion in my pow'rs,
As after ſome oration fairly ſpoke
By a beloved prince, there doth appear
Among the buzzing multitude. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
To Buzz. v. a. To whiſper; to ſpread ſecretly.
Where doth the world thruſt forth a vanity,
That is not quickly buzz'd into his ears Shakespeare. Rich. II.
I will buzz abroad ſuch prophecies,
That Edward ſhall be fearful of his life. Shakespeare. Hen. VI.
Did you not hear
A buzzing of a ſeparation
Between the king and Catherine? Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
They might buzz and whiſper it one to another, and, tacite-
ly withdrawing from the preſence of the apoſtles, they then lift
their voices, and noiſe it about the city. Bentley.
Buzz. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A hum; a whiſper; a talk.
The hive of a city or kingdom, is in beſt condition, when
there is leaſt noiſe or buzz in it. Bacon's Apophthegns.
Where I found the whole outward room in a buzz of poli-
ticks. Addiſon. Speciator, N° 403.
5 BU'zzARE.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">Buzz ARD. m. ſ. [hºſard, Fr.]
1. A degenerate or mean ſpecies of hawk.
More pity that the eagle ſhould be mawl’d,
While kites and buzzards prey at liberty. Shakeſp. R. III.
The noble bºzzard ever pleas'd me beſt;
Of ſmall renown, 'tis true: for, not to lie,
We call him but a hawk by courteſy. Dryden's Hind and P.
2. A blockhead : a dunce.
Thoſe blind buzzards, who, in late years, of wilful malici-
ouſneſs, would neither learn themſelves, nor could teach others
any thing at all. - Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
Buzz ER. m. ſ. [from buzz." A ſecret whiſperer.
Her brother is in ſecret come from France,
And wants not buzzers to infeft his ear
With petulant ſpeeches of his father's death. Shakespeare Hamlet.
BY. prºp. [bi, bº, Saxon.] - -
1. It notes the agent.
The Moor is with child by you, Launcelot. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
The grammar of a language is ſometimes to be carefully ſtu-
died by a grown man. Locke.
2. It notes the inſtrument, and is always uſed after a verb neuter,
where with would be put after an active; as, he was killed with
a ſword; he died by a ſword.
But by Pelides' arms when Hečtor fell,
He choſe AEneas, and he choſe as well.
3. It notes the cauſe of any event.
This fight had the more weight with him, as by good luck
not above two of that venerable body were fallen aſleep.
Addiſon. Freeholder.
4. It notes the means by which any thing is performed.
You muſt think, if we give you any thing, we hope to gain
by you. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Happierſ had it ſuffic’d him to have known
Good by itſelf, and evil not at all. Parad. Loft, b. xi. 1. 89.
The heart knows that by itſelf, which nothing in the world
beſides can give it any knowledge of. South.
We obtain the knowledge of a multitude of propoſitions by
ſenſation and reflection. Watts's Logick.
5. It ſhews the manner of an action.
I have not patience; ſhe conſumes the time
In idle talk, and owns her falſe belief: -
Seize her by force, and bear her hence unheard.
Dryden, AEm. vi.
Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
By chance, within a neighbouring brook, -
He ſaw his branching horns, and alter'd look. Addison.
6. It has a ſignification, noting the method in which any ſucceſ-
five action is performed, with regard to time or quantity.
The beſt for you, is to re-examine the cauſe, and to try it
even point by point, argument by argument, with all the exact-
neſs you can. Hooker, Preface,
We are not to ſtay all together, but to come by him where
he ſtands, by ones, by twos, and by threes. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
He calleth them forth by one, and by one, by the name, as he
pleaſeth, though ſeldom the order be inverted. Bacon.
The captains were obliged to break that piece of ordnance,
and ſo by pieces to carry it away, that the enemy ſhould not get
ſo great a ſpoil. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Turks.’
Common prudence would direct me to take them all out,
and examine them one by one. Boyle.
Others will ſoon take pattern and encouragement by your
building; and ſo houſe by houſe, ſtreet by ſtreet, there will at
laſt be finiſhed a magnificent city. Sprat.
Explor'd her, limb by limb, and fear'd to find
So rude a gripe had left a livid mark behind. Dryden's Fab.
Thus year by year they paſs, and day by day,
Till once, ’twas on the morn of chearful May,
The young AEmilia Dryden's Fab.
I'll gaze for ever on thy god like father,
Tranſplanting one by one into my life,
His bright perfections, till I ſhine like him. Addiſon's Cato.
Let the blows be by pauſes laid on. Locke.
7. It notes the quantity had at one time.
Bullion will ſell by the ounce for ſix ſhillings and fivepence
unclipped money. Locke.
What we take daily by pounds, is at leaſt of as much impor-
tance as of what we take ſeldom, and only by grains and ſpoon-
fuls. Arbuthnot on Aliments, Preface.
The North, by myriads, pours her mighty ſons;
Great nurſe of Goths, of Alans, and of Huns. Pope.
8. At, or in ; noting place.
We ſee the great effects of battles by ſea; the battle of Ac-
tium decided the empire of the world. Bacon's Eſſays.
Arms, and the man, I ſing, who, forc’d by fate,
Expell’d, and exil'd, left the Trojan ſhore;
Long labours both by ſea and land he bore. Dryden's ACn.
I would have fought by land, where I was ſtronger:
You hinder'd it; yet, when I fought at ſea,
Forſook me fighting. Dryden's All fºr Love.
9. According to ; noting permiſſion.
It is lawful, both ºy the laws of nature and nations, and by
the law divine, which is the perfestion of the other two.
Bacon's Holy J/ar.
Vol. I.
IO. According to ; noting proof.
The preſent, or like, ſyſtem of the world cannot poſſibly
have been eternal, by the firſt propoſition; and, without Goi,
it could not naturally, nor fortuitouſly, emerge out of a chaos,
by the third propoſition. . Bently.
The faculty, or deſire, being infinite, by the preceding
propoſition, may contain, or receive both theſe. Cheyne.
II. After; according to ; noting imitation or conformity.
The goſpel gives us ſuch laws, as every man, that under-
ſtands himſelf, would chuſe to live by. Tillotſºn.
In the diviſions I have made, I have endeavoured, the beſt I
- could, to govern myſelf by the diverſity of matter. Locke.
This ſhip, by good luck, fell into their hands at laſt, and
- ſerved as a model to build others by. Arbuthnot on Coins.
12. From; noting judgment or token. -
Thus, by the muſick, we may know,
When noble wits a hunting go, --
Through groves that on Parāffus grow. J/aller.
By what he has done, before the war in which he was en-
gaged, we may expect what he will do after a peace. Dryden.
The ſon of Hercules he juſtly ſeems,
By his broad ſhoulders and gigantick limbs. Dryden.
Who's that ſtranger ? By his warlike port, J.
His fierce demeanour, and erected look,
He's of no vulgar note. Dryden's All for Love.
Judge the event * *
By what has paſs'd. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
The puniſhment is not to be meaſured by the greatneſs or
ſmallneſs of the matter, but by the oppoſition it carries, and
ſtands in, to that reſpect and ſubmiſſion that is due to the fa-
ther. Locke
By your deſcription of the town, I imagine it to lie under
ſome great enchantment. Pope's Letters.
By what I have always heard and read, I take the ſtrength
of a nation— - Swift.
13. It notes the ſum of the difference between two things coin-
pared.
Meantime ſhe ſtands provided of a Laius,
More young and vigorous too by twenty ſprings. Dryden.
Her brother Rivers,
Ere this, lics ſhorter by the head at Pomfret.
...ſ. Shore.
By giving the denomination to leſs quantities of ſilver by one
twentieth, you take from them their due. Locke.
14. It notes co-operation, or cohabitation.
By her he had two children at one birth. Shakespeare. Hen. VI.
15. For; noting continuance of time. This ſenſe is not now in
uſe.
Ferdinand and Iſabella recovered the kingdom of Granada
from the Moors; having been in poſſeſſion thereof by the ſpace
of ſeven hundred years. Bacon's Henry VII.
16. As ſoon as ; not later than; noting time.
By this, the ſons of Conſtantine which fled,
Ambriſe and Uther, did ripe years attain. Fairy Q. b. ii.
Hećtor, by the fifth hour of the ſun,
Will, with a trumpet, 'twixt our tents and Troy,
Tomorrow morning call ſome knight to arms.
SShakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
He err'd not; for, by this, the heav'nly bands
Down from a sky of jaſper lighted now
In paradiſe. Milton's Paradiſ? Loft, b. x. l. 208.
Theſe have their courſe to finiſh round the earth
By morrow ev’ning. Paradiſe Loft, b. iv. l. 662.
The angelick guards aſcended, mute and ſad
For man: for, of his ſtate by this they knew. Par. L. b. x.
By that time a ſiege is carried on two or three days, I am al-
together loſt and bewildered in it. Addiſon. Spect. Nº 165.
By this time, the very foundation was removed. Swift.
By the beginning of the fourth century from the building of
Rome, the tribunes proceeded ſo far, as to accuſe and fine the
conſuls. Swift.
17. Beſide; noting paſſage.
Many beautiful places ſtanding along the ſea-ſhore, make
the town appear much longer than it is, to thoſe that ſail ºy it.
Addison on Italy.
18. Beſide; near to; in preſence; noting proximity of place.
So thou may’ſt ſay, the king lies by a beggar, if a beggar
dwell near him; or the church ſtands by thy tabour, if thy ta-
bour ſtand by the church. Shakeſp. Twºfth Night.
Here he comes himſelf;
If he be worth any man's good voice, , , , , , • *.
That good man ſit down by him. Ben. jºyºn's Catilize.
A ſpacious plain, whereon
Were tents of various hue: by ſome, Wºłº herds -
Of cattle grazing. AMilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi. 1. 557.
Stay by me; thou art reſolute and faithful; &gt;
I have employment worthy of thy arm. Dryden’s D. Selaſ.
10. Before himſelf, he/ſ, or themſelveſ, it notes the abſence of all
*. in ſome place, ly biºſºf, let him tranſlate into En-
gliſh his former lcſion. T. Aſham's Schoolmaſter
Solyman reſolved to aſſault the breach, after he had, ly him;
3 U fif
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F} Y
P. Y S
in a melancholy l, walked up and down in his tent.
ſelf, in a melancholy mood, wa %. Hiſt- of the Turks.
- - his diſcourſe to his appen-
know not whether he will annºx » - -
º º publiſh it by itſelf, or at all. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
He will imagine, that the king, and his miniſters, ſat down,
anji by themſelves, and then ſent them to their ºl.
lies, to ſign. - - - - ir friend ld Swift.
More pleas'd to keep it, till their friends could come,
Thºm eat the ſweeeteſt by themſelves at home. Pope.
- mn form of ſwearing.
2c. It #. I invoke, by .# I ſwear. Dryden's Fab.
2.I. *'. then ſome of the ſpirit by him, to verify what he
believes. Boyle,
The merchant is not forced to keep ſo much money by him,
as in other places, where they have not ſuch a ſupply. Locke.
22. It is uſed in forms of adjuring, or obteſting.
Which, O ! avert by yon etherial light,
Which I have loſt for this º night;
Or if, by dearer ties, you may be won, -
By º fire, and by your living ſon. . Dryden s AEn.
Now by your joys on earth, your hopes in heav'n,
O ſpare this great, this good, this agºd king ! Dryden.
O, cruel youth !
By all the pain that wrings my tortur’d ſoul !
By all the dear deceitful hopes you gave me,
O, ceaſe! at leaſt, once more delude my ſorrows. ... .
Smith's Phaedrus and Hippolita.
23. It ſignifies ſpecification and particularity.,
Upbraiding heav'n, from whence his lineage came,
And cruel calls the gods, and cruel thee, by name. Dryden.
24. By proxy of ; noting ſubſtitution. . . . -
The gods were ſaid to feaſt with Ethiopians; that is, they
were preſent with them by their ſtatues. Broome, notes on Odyſſ.
25. In the ſame direction with.
They are alſo ſtriated, or furrowed, by the length, and the
ſides curiouſly punched, or pricked. Grew.
BY. adv.
1. Near; at a ſmall diſtance.
And in it lies, the god of ſleep;
And, ſhorting ly,
We may deſcry
The monſters of the deep. Dryden's Albion.
2. Beſide; paſſing.
I did hear
The galloping of horſe. Who was’t came by ?
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. In preſence.
The ſame words in my lady Philoclea's mouth, as from one
woman to another, ſo as there was no other body by, might
have had a better grace. Sidney.
I'll not be by, the while, my lieges, farewel :
What will become hereof, there's none can tell.
Shakeſp. Richard III.
There while I fing, if gentle youth be by,
That tunes my lute, and winds the ſtrings ſo high. JWaller.
Pris'ners and witneſſes were waiting by;
Theſe had been taught to ſwear, and thoſe to die.
Roſcommon.
You have put a principle into him, which will influence his
actions, when you are not by. Locke.
BY AND BY. In a ſhort time.
He overtook Amphialus, who had been ſtaid here, and by and
by called him to fight with him. Sidney.
The noble knight alighted by and by,
From lofty ſteed, and bad the lady ſtay,
To ſee what end of fight ſhould him befall that day.
Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. viii. ſtanz. 2,
In the temple, by and by, with us,
Theſe couples ſhall eternally be knit.
Shakeſp. Midſummer's Night's Dream.
O how this ſpring of love reſembleth
Th’ uncertain glory of an April day;
Which now ſhews all the beauty of the ſun,
And by and by a cloud takes all away.
Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
Now a ſenſible man, by and by a fool, and preſently a beaſt.
Shakeſp. Othello.
BY, n.ſ...[from the prepoſition.] Something not the direct and
immediate object of regard.
In this inſtance, there is, upon the by, to be noted, the perco-
lation of the verjuice through the wood.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, No 70.
This wolf was forced to make bold, ever and *. º
ſheep in private, by the by. L’Eſtrange.
Hence we may underſtand, to add that upon the by, that it
As not neceſſary. Boyle.
So, while my lov’d revenge is full and high,
I'll give you back your kingdom by the by.
- . * - Dryden's Conqueſt of Granada.
By, º compoſition, implies ſomething out of the ãº way;
and, conſequently, ſome obſcurity, as a by-road; ſomething
irregular, as a by-end; or ſomething collateral, as a by-concern-
ment; or private, as a by law. This compoſition is uſed at
pleaſure, and will be underſtood by the examples following.
By-coffeehouse. m. ſ. A coffeehouſe in an obſcure place.
I afterwards entered a by-coffeehouſe, that ſtood at the upper
end of a narrow lane, where I met with a nonjuror.
Addiſon. Speciator, N° 46 3.
By-concerNMENT. n.ſ. An affair which is not the main bu-
neſs.
Our plays, beſides the main deſign, have under-plots, or by-
concernments, or leſs conſiderable perſons and intrigues, which
are carried on with the motion of the main plot.
Dryden on Dramatick Poetry.
By-dependence. n.ſ. An appendage; ſomething accidentally
depending on another.
Theſe,
And your three motives to the battle, with
I know not how much more, ſhould be demanded;
And all the other by-dependences,
From chance to chance.
By-DESIGN... n.ſ. An incidental purpoſe.
And if ſhe miſs the mouſe-traplines,
They'll ſerve for other by-dºſiºns,
And make an artiſt underſtand,
To copy out her ſeal or hand;
Or find void places in the paper,
To ſteal in ſomething to entrap her. Hudºras, p. iii. º. iii.
By-END. n.ſ. Private intereſt; ſecret advantage.
All people that worſhip for fear, profit, or ſome other ly-
end, fall within the intendement of this fable. L'//ºrange.
BY-Gone, adj. [a Scotch word.] Paſt.
Tell him, you're ſure
All in Bohemia's well: this ſatisfaction
The by-gone day proclaim'd. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
As we have a conceit of motion coming, as well as lygºne ;
ſo have we of time, which dependeth thereupon.
Grew's Coſmologia Sacra, b. ii. c. iii.
BY-INTERest. m. ſ. Intereſt diſtinct from that of the publick.
Various factions and parties, all aiming at by-intereſ?, with-
out any ſincere regard to the publick good. Atterbury.
BY-LAw. n.ſ. -
By-laws are orders made in court-leets, or court-barons, by
common aſſent, for the good of thoſe that make them, farther
than the publick law binds. Cowel.
There was alſo a law, to reſtrain the by-laws and ordinances
of corporations. Bacon's Henry VII.
In the beginning of this record is inſerted the law or inſtitu-
tion; to which are added two by-laws, as a comment upon the
general law. Addiſon. Spectator, N° to8.
BY-MAtter. n.ſ. Something incidental.
I knew one, that, when he wrote a letter, he would put that
which was moſt material into the poſtſcript, as if it had been a
by-matter. Bacon's Eſſays, N° 23.
BY-NAME. m. ſ. A nickname; name of reproach, or acciden-
tal appellation.
Robert, eldeſt ſon to the Conquerour, uſed ſhort hoſe, and
thereupon was by-named Court-hoſe, and ſhewed firſt the uſe of
them to the Engliſh. Camden's Remains.
By-Past. adj. Paſt; a term of the Scotch dialect.
Wars, peſtilences, and diſeaſes, have not been fewer for theſe
three hundred years by-paſt, than ever they have been ſince wc
have had records. Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
By-PATH. n.ſ. A private or obſcure path.
Heav'n knows, my ſon,
By what by-paths, and indire&amp;t crooked ways, --
I got this crown. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
BY-RESPEct. n.ſ. Private end or view. -
It may be, that ſome, upon by-reſpects, find ſomewhat friend-
ly uſage in uſance, at ſome of their hands.
Carew's Survey of Corvival.
The archbiſhops and biſhops, next under the king, have the
government of the church: be not you the mean to prefer any
to thoſe places, for any by-rºſpecis, but only for their leºning,
gravity, and worth. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Auguſtus, who was not altogether ſo good as he was wife,
had ſome by-reſpects in the enacting of this law; for to do any
thing for nothing, was not his maxim. - -
Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
By-RoAD. m. ſ. An obſcure unfrequented Path.
Through ſlipp'ry by-rºads, dark and deep, -
They often climb, and often creep. Swift.
By-RooM. n.ſ. A private room within another. . . -
I pr’ythcé, do thou ſtand in ſome by-room, while I queſtion
my puny drawcr to what end he gave the ſugar. - -
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
By-speech. m.ſ. An incidental or caſual ſpeech, not directly
relating to the point.
When they come to allege what word and what law they
meant, their common ordinary practice is to quote by -ſpeeches
in ſome hiſtorical narration or other, and to uſe them as if they
were written in moſt exact form of law. Hooker, b. iii. § 4.
By-stand ER. m. ſ. A looker one; one unconcerned. Sl
le
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">B Y W.
B Y Z
She broke her feathers againſt the frame of the piðure, and,
falling to the ground upon it, was taken up by the by-/landers.
- L’Eſtrange's Fables.
The by-ſtanders aſked him, why he ran away, his bread being
weight? That was more than I ſº ſays he. Locke.
By-street. n.f. An obſcure ſtreet.
The broker here his ſpacious beaver wears,
Upon his brow ſit jealouſies and cares;
Bent on ſome mortgage, to avoid reproach,
He ſeeks by ſtreets, and ſaves th' expenſive coach.
Gay's Trivia.
By-view. m. ſ. Private ſelf-intereſted purpoſe.
No by-views of his own ſhall miſlead him.
By-walk. n.ſ. A private walk; not the main road.
All which he moves afterwards in by-walks, or under-plots,
as diverſions to the main deſign, left it ſhould grow tedious;
though they are ſtill naturally joined. Dryden.
The chief avenue ought to be the moſt ample and noble;
but there ſhould be by-walks, to retire into ſometimes, for eaſe
and refreſhment. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
By-way. m. ſ. A private and obſcure way.
Night ſtealths are commonly driven in by-ways, and % blind
fords, unuſed of any but ſuch like. Spenſer on Ireland.
Other by-ways he himſelf betook,
Where never foot of living wight did tread.
Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. vii. ſtanz. 50.
Wholly abſtain, or wed: thy beauteous Lord
Allows thee choice of paths; take no by-ways,
But gladly welcome what he doth afford;
Not grudging that thy luſt hath bounds and ſtays. Herbert.
Atterbury.
- A ſervant, or a favourite, if he be in want, and no other
*PParent cauſe of eſteem, is commonly thought but a ly-way to
cloſe corruption. Bacon's Eſſays, No 1 1.
This is wonderfully diverting to the underſtanding, thus to
receive a precept, that enters, as it were, through a by-way, and
to apprehend an idea that draws a whole train after it.
- Addiſon's Eſſay on the Georgicks.
BY-west. Weſtward; to the weſt º: :/ay gi
Whereupon grew that by-word, uſed by the Iriſh, that they
iwelt by-weſt the law, which dwelt beyond the river of the
Barrow. Sir john Davies on Ireland.
BY-word. n. ſ. A ſaying; a proverb.
Duke of York, be king;
And baſhful Henry be depoſed; whoſe cºwardice
Hath made us by-words to our enemies.
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
I knew a wiſe man, that had it for aſ -word, when he ſaw
men haſten to a concluſion, Stay a little, that we may make an
end the ſooner. Baron's Eſſays, N° 26,
We are become a by-word among the nations of our ridi-
culous feuds and animoſities. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 50:
It will be his lot often, to look fingular, in looſe and licen-
tious times, and to become a by-word and a reproach, on that
account, among the men of wit and pleaſure. Atterbury.
BY'Ass. n.ſ. See BIAs.
Every inordinate luſt is a falſe byaſ, upon men's underſtand-
ings, which naturally draws towards atheiſm. Tillotſon.
Bye, Bee, come immediately from the Saxon, by, bying, i.e. a
dwelling.
BY'zANTINE.
Gibſon's Camden.
See BizANTINE,
