<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 416</div><p class="Text">F.
F A B
A conſonant generally reckoned by authors, and
admitted by Scaliger, among the ſemi-vowels, and
according to that opinion diſtinguiſhed in the enu-
meration of the alphabet by a name beginning with
- 9 a vowel, yet has ſo far the nature of a mute,
that it is eaſily pronounced before a liquid in the ſame ſyl-
lable. It has in Engliſh an invariable ſound, formed by com-
preſſion of the whole lips and a forcible breath. Its kindred
letter is V, which, in the Iſlandick alphabet, is only diſtin-
guiſhed from it by a point in the body of the letter.
FABA'ceous. adj. [fabaceus, Latin J. Having the nature of a
bean. Die?.
FA’BLE, n.ſ. [fable, French; fabula, Latin.]
1. A feigned ſtory intended to enforce ſome moral precept.
Jotham's fable of the bees is the oldeſt extant, and as beau-
tiful as any made ſince. Addiſon's Spectator.
2. A fiction in general.
Triptolemus, ſo ſung the nine,
Strew'd plenty from his cart divine;
But, ſpite of all thoſe fable makers,
He never ſow'd on Almaign acres.
3. A vitious or fooliſh fiction.
But refuſe profane and old wives fables. 1 Tim. iv. 7.
4. The ſeries or contexture of events which conſtitute a poem
epick or dramatick.
The moral is the firſt buſineſs of the poet: this being
formed, he contrives ſuch a deſign or fable as may be moſt
ſuitable to the moral. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The firſt thing to be conſidered in an epick poem is the
fable, which is perfect or imperfect, according as the action,
which it relates, is more or leſs ſo. Addiſon's Spectator.
5. A lye. This ſenſe is merely familiar. -
To FA'BLE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To feign; to write not truth but fićtion.
That Saturn's ſons receiv'd the three-fold reign
Of heav'n, of ocean, and deep hell beneath,
Dryden.
Old poets mention, fabling. Prior.
Vain now the tales which fabling poets tell,
That wav'ring conqueſt ſtill deſires to rove
In Marlbro's camp the goddeſs knows to dwell. Prior.
2. To tell falſhoods; to lye.
He fables not: I hear the enemy.
Shakeſp. Henry VI.
To FA’BLE. v. a.
To feign; to tell of falſety.
- We mean to win,
Or turn this heav’n itſelf into the hell
Thou fableſ. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. vi. l. 292.
Ladies of th' Heſperides, that ſecm'd
Fairer than feign'd of old, or fabl’d ſince
Of fairy damſels met in foreſt wide,
By knights. Milton's Parad. Loft.
FA'ſ LED. adj. [from fable.] Celebrated in fables.
Hail, fabled grotto! hail, Elyſian ſoil!
Thou faireſt ſpot of fair Britannia's iſle ! Tickell.
FA'B1. F R. n.ſ.. [from ſable.] A dealer in fiction; a writer of
feigned ſtories.
To FABRICATE. v. a. ſ fabricor, Latin. J
1. To build; to conſtruct.
2. To forge; to deviſe falſely. This ſenſe is retained among
the Scottiſh lawyers; for when they ſuſpect a paper to be
forged, they ſay it is fabricate.
FABRic A't los. m. ſ. [rom fabricate.] The ačt of building;
conſtrućtion.
This fabrication of the human body is the immediate work
the firſt rudiments of the
of a vital principle, that formeth
- Hale's Origin of Alankind.
human nature.
FA/BRick. m. ſ. ſ fabrica, Latin.]
1. A building ; an edifice.
There muſt be an exquiſite care to place the columns, ſet
in ſeveral ſtories, moſt preciſely one over another, that ſo the
ſolid may anſwer to the ſolid, and the vacuities to the vacui-
ties, as well for beauty as ſtrength of the fabrick. J/ot on.
2. Any ſyſtem or compages of matter; any body formed by the
conjunction of diſſimilar parts.
Still will ye think it ſtrange,
That all the parts of this great fabrick change;
Quit their old ſtation and primeval frame. Prior.
FA C
To FA'Brick. v. a. [from the noun..] To build; to form;
to conſtruct.
Shew what laws of life
The cheeſe inhabitants obſerve, and how
Fabrick their manſions. Phillips.
FA'BU list. m. ſ. [fabuliffe, French.] A writer of fables.
Quitting Eſop and the fabuliſts, he copies from Boccace.
Croxal.
Our bard's a fabuliff, and deals in fićtion. Garrick.
FABU lo's IT Y. n ſ. [fabuloſitas, Latin.] Lyingneſs; fulneſs
of ſtories; fabulous invention. -
In their fabuloſity they would report, that they had obſerva-
tions for twenty thouſand years.
- Abbot's Deſcription ºf the Iſorld.
FA'BU lous. adj. [fabuloſus, Latin.] Feigned; full of fables,
or invented tales. -
A perſon terrified with the imagination of ſpe&amp;tres, is more
reaſonable than one who thinks the appearance of ſpirits fabu-
lous and groundleſs. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. . . o.
FA'BUlously. adv. [from fabulous.] In fiction; in a fabulous
manner.
There are many things fabulºuſly delivered, and are not to
be accepted as truths. Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 8.
FACE. m. ſ. [face, French, from facies, Latin.]
1. The viſage.
The children of Iſrael ſaw the face of Moſes, that the
ſkin of Moſes's face ſhone. Exod. xxxiv. 35.
A man ſhall ſee faces, which, if you examine them part by
part, you ſhall never find good; but take them together, are
not uncomely. Bacon, Eſſay 44.
From beauty ſtill to beauty ranging,
In ev'ry face I found a dart. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. Countenance; caſt of the features; look; air of the face.
Seiz'd and ty’d down to judge, how wretched I |
Who can't be filent, and who will not lye:
To laugh, were want of goodneſs and of grace;
And to be grave, exceeds all pow'r of face. Pope's Epiſtles.
3. The ſurface of any thing.
A miſt watered the whole face of the ground.
4. The front or forepart of anything.
The breadth of the face of the houſe, towards the Eaſt, was
an hundred cubits. - Ezek. xli. 14.
4. State of affairs. -
He look'd, and ſaw the face of things quite chang'd,
The brazen throat of war had ceas'd to roar;
All now was turn'd to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feaſt and dance. Milton's Par. I off.
This would produce a new face of things in Europe. Addison
5. Appearance; reſemblance.
Keep ſtill your former face, and mix again
With theſe loſt ſpirits; run all their mazes with 'em ;
For ſuch are treaſons. Ben. johnſºn.
'At the firſt ſhock, with blood and powder ſtain'd,
Nor heav'n, nor ſea, their former face retain'd ;
Fury and art produce effects ſo ſtrange,
They trouble nature, and her viſage change. Waller.
His dialogue has ſo much the face of probability, that ſome
have miſtaken it for a real conference. Baker.
6. Preſence; ſight.
Ye ſhall give her unto Eleazar, and one ſhall ſlay her before
his face. Numb. xix. 3.
Jove cannot fear; then tell me to my face, -
That I of all the gods am leaſt in grace. Dryden's Iliad.
7. Confidence; boldneſs.
Thinking, by this face,
To faſten in our thoughts that they have courage;
Put 'tis not ſo. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
How many things are there which a man cannot, with any
face or comlineſs, ſay or do himſelf? A man can ſcarce allege
his own merits with modeſty, much leſs extol them: a man
cannot ſometimes brook to ſupplicate or beg.
Bacon, Eſſay 28.
Gen. ii. 6.
You'll find the thing will not be done
With ignorance and face alone. Hudibras, p. ii.
You, ſays the judge to the wolf, have the face to challenge
R that
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 417</div><p class="Text">F A C
F A C
Face"TIOUSLY. adv. [from facetious.]
that which you never loſt; and you, ſays he to the fox, have
the confidence to deny that which you have certainly ſtolen.
L’Eſtrange, Fable 415.
This is the man that has the face to charge others with falſe
citations. Tillotſon, Preface.
8. Diſtortion of the face.
Shame itſelf!
Why do you make ſuch faces * Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
FAce to FAce. [An adverbial expreſſion.]
1. When both parties are preſent.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to
die, before that he which is accuſed have his accuſers face to
face. Acts xxv. 16.
2. Nakedly; without the interpoſition of other bodies.
Now we ſee through a glaſs darkly; but then face tº face.
I Cor. X111. I2.
To FAce. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To carry a falſe appearance; to play the hypocrite.
hou needs muſt learn to laugh, to lye,
To face, to forge, to ſcoff, to company. Hubberd's Tale.
2. To turn the face; to come in front.
Face about, man; you a ſoldier, and afraid of the enemy!
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Then thrice the mounted ſquadrons ride around
The fire, and Arcite's name they thrice reſound;
Hail and farewel they ſhouted thrice amain,
Thrice facing to the left, and thence they turn’d again. Dry.
To F Ace. v. a.
1. To meet in front; to oppoſe with confidence and firmneſs.
I'll face
This tempeſt, and deſerve the name of king. Dryden.
We get intelligence of the force of the enemy, and
caſt about for a ſufficient number of troops to face the
enemy in the field of battle. Addison on the I/ar.
They are as loth to ſee the fires kindled in Smithfield as his
lordſhip; and, at leaſt, as ready to face them under a popiſh
perſecution. Swift.
2. To oppoſe with impudence.
We trapann'd the ſtate, and fac’d it down
With plots and projećts of our own. Hudibras, p. iii. c. 2.
Becauſe he walk’d againſt his will,
He fac'd men down that he ſtood ſtill. Priºr.
3. To ſtand oppoſite to.
On one ſide is the head of the emperor Trajan; the reverſe
has on it the circus Maximus, and a view of the ſide of the
Palatine mountain that faces it. Addiſon on Italy.
The temple is deſcribed to be ſquare, and the four fronts
with open gates, facing the different quarters of the world.
Pope's Temple of Fame.
4. To cover with an additional ſuperficies; to inveſt with a
covering.
The whole fortification of Soleurre is faced with marble.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Where your old bank is hollow, face it with the firſt ſpit of
earth that you dig out of the ditch. Mortimer's Huſſandry.
FA'celess. adj. [from face.] Without a face. Bailey.
FACEPA1'NTER. m. ſ. [face and painter.] A drawer of por-
traits; a painter who draws from the life.
Face PAI'NTING.. n.ſ.. [face and painting.] The art of draw-
ing portraits.
Georgione, the cotemporary of Titian, excelled in portraits
or facepainting. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
FA'ce r. n ſ [facette, French..] A ſmall ſurface; a ſuper-
ficies cut into ſeveral angles.
Honour that is gained and broken upon another, hath the
quickeſt reflection, like diamonds cut with facets. Bacon.
FACE/TIOUS.. adj. [facetieux, French; facetia, Lat.] Gay;
cheerful; lively ; merry; witty. It is uſed both of perſons
and ſentiments.
Socrates, informed of ſome derogating ſpeeches uſed of him
behind his back, made this facetious reply, Let him beat me
too when I am abſent. º the Tongue, ſ. 6.
ayly; cheerfully ;
wittily; merrily.
FACE"tiousness. m. ſ. [from facetious.] Cheerful wit; mirth;
gaiety.
FA'cILF. adj. [facile, French ; facilis, Latin.]
1. Faſy; not difficult; performable or attainable with little
labour.
Then alſo thoſe poets, which are now counted moſt hard,
will be both facile and pleaſant. Milton on Education.
To confine the imagination is as facile a performance as the
Goteham's deſign of hedging in the cuckoo. Glanv. Scºpſ.
By dividing it into parts ſo diſtinct, the order in which they
ſhall find each diſpoſed, will render the work facile and de-
lightful. Evelyn's Kalendar.
This may at firſt ſeem perplexed with many difficulties, yet
many things maybe ſuggeſted to make it more facile and com-
modious. It ilkins's Math. Magic.
2. Eaſily ſurmountable; eaſily conquerable.
The facile gates of hell too ſlightly barr'd. Mill. P. Lºft.
2 -
3. Eaſy of acceſs or converſe; not haughty; not ſupercilious;
not auſtere. -
I meant ſhe ſhould be courteous, facile, ſweet,
Hating that ſolemn vice of greatneſs, pride;
I meant each ſofteſt virtue there ſhould meet,
Fit in that ſofter boſom to reſide. Ben. johnſon's Epigrams.
Raphael now, to Adam's doubt propos'd,
Benevolent and facile, thus reply'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
4. Pliant; flexible; eaſily perſuaded to good or bad; dućtile to
a fault.
Too facile then, thou did'ſt not much gainſay;
Nay did'ſt permit, approve, and fair diſmiſs. Milt. P. Loft.
Since Adam and his facile conſort Eve
Loſt Paradiſe, deceiv'd by me. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
Some men are of that facile temper, that they are wrought
upon by every obječt they converſe with, whom any affec-
tionate diſcourſe, or ſerious ſermon, or any notable accident,
ſhall put into a fit of religion, which yet uſually laſts no
longer than till ſomewhat . comes in their way. Calamy.
To FAci'litat E. v. a. [faciliter, French..] To make eaſy;
to free from difficulty; to clear from impediments.
Choice of the likelieſt and beſt prepared metal for the ver-
ſion will facilitate the work. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
They renewed their aſſault two or three days together, and
planted cannon to facilitate their paſſage, which did little hurt;
but they ſtill loſt many men in the attempt. Clarendon, b. viii.
. . Though perſpective cannot be called a certain rule, or a
finiſhing of the pićture, yet it is a great ſuccour and relief to
art, and facilitates the means of execution. Dryden's Dufreſn.
What produceth a due quantity of animal ſpirits, neceſſarily
facilitates the animal and natural motions. Arbuthnot on Diet.
A war on the fide of Italy would cauſe a great diverſion of
the French forces, and facilitate the progreſs of our arms in
Spain. - Swift.
FAc'ILity. m. ſ. [facilità, French; facilitas, Latin.]
1. Eaſineſs to be performed; freedom from difficulty.
Yet reaſon ſaith, reaſon ſhould have ability
To hold theſe worldly things in ſuch proportion,
As let them come or go with even facility. Sidney, b. ii.
Piety could not be diverted from this to a more commo-
dious buſineſs by any motives of profit or facility. Raleigh.
A war upon the Turks is more worthy than upon any other
Gentiles, both in point of religion and in point of honour;
though facility and hope of ſucceſs might invite ſome other
choice. Bacon's holy War.
2. Readineſs in performing; dexterity.
They who have ſtudied have not only learned many excel-
lent things, but alſo have acquired a great facility of profiting
themſelves by reading good authors. Dryden's ...;
The facility which we get of doing things, by a cuſtom of
doing, makes them often paſs in us without our notice. Locke.
3. Vitious dućtility; eaſineſs to be perſuaded to good or bad; to
ready compliance.
Facility is worſe than bribery; for bribes come now and
then: but if importunity or idle reſpects lead a man, he ſhall
never be without. Bacon, Eſſay 1.
'Tis a great error to take facility for good-nature; tender-
neſs, without diſcretion, is no better than a more pardonable
folly. L’Eſtrange, Fable 30.
4. Eaſineſs of acceſs; complaiſance; condeſcenſion; affability.
He opens and yields himſelf to the man of buſineſs with
difficulty and reluctancy; but offers himſelf to the viſits of a
friend with facility, and all the meeting readineſs of appetite
and deſire. South's Sermons.
FACINE’Rious. adj. [corrupted by Shakeſpeare from facinorous;
facinus, facinoris, Latin.] Wicked; facinorous.
'Tis ſtrange, ’tis very ſtrange, that is the brief and the
tedious of it; and he's of a moſt facinerious ſpirit that will not
acknowledge it. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
FA'cING.. n.ſ.. [from Tº face.] An ornamental covering; that
which is put on the outſide of anything by way of deco-
ration.
Theſe offices and dignities were but the facings and fringes
of his greatneſs. Waton.
FACI’NOROUS, adj. [facinora, Latin.] Wicked; atro-
cious; deteſtably bad.
FA.c1(Norous Ness. m. ſ [from facinorous J Wickedneſs in a
high degree. -
FACT. n.ſ.. [fačium, Latin J
1. A thing done; an effect produced; ſomething not barely ſup-
poſed or ſuſpected, but really done."
In matter of fact there is ſome credit to be given to the
teſtimony of man; but not in matter of opinion and judg-
ment: we ſee the contrary both acknowledged and univerſally
pračtiſed alſo throughout the world. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
As men are not to miſtake the cauſes of theſe operations,
ſo much leſs are they to miſtake the faā or effect, and raſhly
to take that for done which is not done. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Matter of fact breaks out and blazes with too great an evi-
dence to be denied. South's Sermony.
2. Reality; not ſuppoſition; not ſpeculation.
&gt; p &gt; P Thoſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 418</div><p class="Text">F A C
F A D
Thoſe effects which are wrought by the percuſſion of the
ſenſe, and by things in fact, are produced likewiſe in ſome
degree by the imagination: therefore if a man ſee another eat
four or acid things, which ſet the teeth on edge, that objećt
tainteth the imagination. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 795.
If this were true in fact, I do not ſee any colour for ſuch
a concluſion. Addiſon on the State of the J/ar.
Manifold ſins, though in ſpeculation they may be ſeparable
from war, in reality and fact never fail to attend it. Smalridge.
3. Aćtion; deed.
Unhappy man to break the pious laws
Of nature, pleading in his children's cauſe:
Howe'er the doubtful fact is underſtood,
'Tis love of honour and his country's good; }
The conſul, not the father, ſheds the blood. Dryden.
FACTION. m. ſ. [faction, French; facio, Latin.]
1. A party in a ſtate.
The queen is valued thirty thouſand ſtrong;
If ſhe hath time to breathe, be well aſſur’d -
Her faſiion will be full as ſtrong as ours. Shakespeare Henry VI.
e has been known to commit outrages,
And cheriſh factions. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Their hatred went ſo far, that by one of Simon's faction
murders were committed. 2 Mac. iv. 9.
By the weight of reaſon I ſhould counterpoiſe the over-
balancings of any factiºns. King Charles.
2. Tumult; diſcord; diſſenſion. .
They remained at Newbery in great fačlion among them-
ſelves. Clarendon.
FA’ction ARY. m.ſ.. [fallionaire, French.] One of a faction;
a party man. A word not in uſe.
Pr'ythee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius; always
factionary of the party of your general. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
FA'ctious. adj. [fadieux, French.]
1. Given to faction; loud and violent in a party; publickly
diffenſious; addićted to form parties and raiſe publick diſ-
turbances.
He is a traitor; let him to the Tower,
And crop away that factious pate of his. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Befactious for redreſs of all theſe griefs. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
2. Proceeding from publick diſſenſions; tending to publick
diſcord. - -
Grey-headed men and grave, with warriors mix’d,
Aſſemble; and harangues are heard; but ſoon
In facious oppoſition. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. l. 664.
Fa&amp;#ious tumults overbore the freedom and honour of the
two houſes. King Charles.
Why theſe facious quarrels, controverſies, and battles
amongſt themſelves, when they were all united in the ſame
deſign : - Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
FA(criously. adv. [from fadious.] In a manner criminally
diſſenſious or tumultuous.
I intended not only to oblige my friends, but mine ene-
mies alſo ; exceeding even the deſires of thoſe that were fac-
tiouſly diſcontented. King Charles.
FA'ctious Ness. n.ſ.. [from faāious.] Inclimation to publick
diffenſion; violent clamourouſneſs for a party.
FAct 1'tious. adj. [faditius, Latin.] Made by art, in oppo-
ſition to what is made by nature.
In the making and diſtilling of ſoap, by one degree of fire
the ſalt, the water, and the oil or greaſe, whercof that facti-
tious concrete is made up, being boiled up together, are eaſily
brought to incorporate. Boyle.
Hardneſs wherein ſome ſtones exceed all other bodies, and
among them the adamant all other ſtones, being exalted to that
degree that art in vain endeavours to counterfeit it; the facſi-
tious ſtones of chymiſts, in imitation, being eaſily detected by
an ordinary lapidiſt. Ray on the Creation.
FACTOR. m. ſ. [fasteur, French; faāor, Latin.] n
1. An agent for another; one who tranſačts buſineſs for an-
other. Commonly a ſubſtitute in mercantile affairs.
Take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land;
Not as protector, ſteward, ſubſtitute, -
Or lowly facior for another's gain. Shakespeare Richard III.
Percy is but my facier, good my lord,
Tº engroſs up glorious deeds on my behalf. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
You all three,
The ſenators alone of this great world,
Chief fatfors for the gods. , Shakespeare Anthony and Cleºpatra.
We agreed that I ſhould ſend up an Engliſh factor, that
whatſoever the iſland could yield ſhould be delivered at a rea-
ſonable rate, Raleigh's Apology.
It was conceived that the Scots had good intelligence,
having ſome factors doubtleſs at this mart, albeit they did not
openly trade. Hayward.
Vije arts and reſtleſs endeavours are uſed by ſome ſly and
venomous factors for the old republican cauſe. South's Sermons.
All the reaſon that I could ever hear alleged, by the chief
factors for a general intromiſſion of all ſorts, ſe&amp;ts and perſua-
|ſions, into our communion, is, that thoſe who ſeparate from
us are ſtiff and obſtinate, and will not ſubmit to the rules and
orders of our church, and that therefore they ought to be takch
away. - South's Sermons.
Forc'd into exile from his rightful throne,
He made all countries where he came his own;
And viewing monarchs ſecret arts of ſway,
A royal factor for their kingdoms lay. Dryden.
2. [In arithmetick.] The multiplicator and multiplicand. Harris.
FA'ctory. n.ſ.. [from factor.]
1. A houſe or diſtriët inhabited by traders in a diſtant country.
2. The traders embodied in one place.
FAct o'tu M. n.ſ.. [factotum, Latin. It is uſed likewiſe in
burleſque French..] A ſervant employed alike in all kinds of
buſineſs: as Scrub in the Stratagem.
FACTURE. m. ſ. [French.] The aët or manner of making
anything.
FA'culty. n.ſ.. [faculté, French; facultas, Latin.]
1. The power of doing anything; ability whether corporal or
intellectual.
There is no kind of faculty or power in man, or any crea-
ture, which can rightly perform the functions allotted to it
without perpetual aid and concurrence of that ſupreme cauſe
of all things. . Hooker, b. i. ſ. 8.
Orators may grieve; for in their ſides,
Rather than heads, their faculty abides. Denham.
Reaſon in man ſupplies the defeat of other faculties where-
in we are inferior to beaſts, and what we cannot compaſs by
force we bring about by ſtratagem. L’Eſtrange.
2. Powers of the mind, imagination, reaſon, memory.
For well I underſtand in the prime end
Of nature, her the inferior; in the mind -
And inward faculties, which moſt excel. Milt. Parad. Loft,
In the ordinary way of ſpeaking, the underſtanding and
will are two facalties of the mind. Docke.
Neither did our Saviour think it neceſſary to explain to us
the nature of God, becauſe it would be impoſſible, without
beſtowing on us other faculties than we poſſeſs at preſent. Swift.
3. [In phyſick.] A power or ability to perform any action na-
tural, vital, and animal: by the firſt they underſtand that by
which the body is nouriſhed and augmented, or another like
it generated: the vital faculty is that by which life is preſerved,
and the ordinary functions of the body performed; and the
animal faculty is what condućts the operations of the mind.
&amp;uincy.
4. A knack; habitual excellence; dexterity.
He had none of thoſe faculties, which the other had, of re-
conciling men to him. Clarendon, b. viii.
A ſober man would have wondered how our author found
out monarchical abſolute power in that text, had he not had
an exceeding good faculty to find it himſelf where he could not
ſhew it others. Locke.
He had an excellent faculty in preaching, if he were not
too refined. Swift.
5. Quality; diſpoſition or habit of good or ill.
I’m traduc’d by tongues which neither know
My faculties nor perſon, yet will be
The chronicles of my doing. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
6. Power; authority.
This Duncan
Hath born his faculties ſo meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues .
Will plead like angels. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
7. Privilege; right to do anything.
Law hath ſet down to what perſons, in what cauſes, with
what circumſtances, almoſt every faculty or favour ſhall be
granted. Hooker, b. v.
8. Faculty, in an univerſity, denotes the maſters and profeſſors
of the ſeveral ſciences: as, a meeting of the faculty or
faculties.
FA cu Nd, adj. [facundus, Latin.] Eloquent. Diff.
To FA'DDL.E. v. n. [corrupted from To fiddle, or toy with the
fingers J To trifle; to toy; to play.
To FADE. v. n. [fade, French, inſipid, languid.]
1. To tend from greater to leſs vigour; to grow weak; to lan-
uiſh.
2. sº tend from a brighter to a weaker colour.
The greenneſs of a leaf ought to paſs for apparent, becauſe
ſoon fading into a yellow, it ſcarce laſts at all, in compariſon
of the greenneſs of an emerald. Boyle on Colours.
The ſpots in this ſtone are of the ſame colour throughout,
even to the very edges; there being an immediate tranſition
from white to black, and the colours not fading or declining
gradually. /oodward on Foſſils.
3. To wither: as a vegetable.
Ye ſhall be as an oak whoſe leaf fadeth, and as a garden
that hath no water. Iſ, i. 30.
4. To die away gradually; to vaniſh; to be worn out.
Where either through the temper of the body, or ſome
other default, the memory is very weak, ideas in the mind
quickly fade. - Locke.
The ſtars ſhall fade away, the ſun himſelf
Grow dim with age, and nature fink in years. Addiſ Cº.
5. 1 &amp;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 419</div><p class="Text">F A I
F A I
;. To be naturally not durable; to be tranſient; eaſily to loſe
vigour or beauty:
The glorious beauty on the head of the fat valley ſhall be a
'ading flower. - - - - Iſ XXV111. 4.
The pictures drawn in our minds are laid ºſ. colours,
and, if not ſometimes refreſhed, vaniſh and diſappear. Locke.
Narciſſus’ change, to the vain virgin ſhows -
who truſts to beauty, truſts the fading roſe. Gay's Fan.
To Fapp. º. a. To wear away; to reduce to languor; to de-
prive of freſhneſs or vigour; to wither. -
This is a man old, wrinkled, faded, withered ;
And not a maiden, as thou ſay'ft he is. Shakeſpeare.
His palms, though under weights they did not ſtand,
Still thriv'd ; no Winter could his laurels fade. Dryden.
Reſtleſs anxiety, forlorn deſpair, -
And all the faded family of care. Garth's Diſ; enſ.
To Fang E. v. m. [xerczan, Saxon; fugen, German.]
1. To ſuit; to fit; to have one part conſiſtent with another.
How will this fadge P. my maſter loves her dearly,
And I, poor monſter, fond as much on him;
And ſhe, miſtaken, ſeems to dote on me. Shakeſpeare.
2. To agree; not to quarrel; to live in amity.
When they thriv'd they never fadg’d,
But only by the ears engag'd ;
Like dogs that ſnarl about a bone, - ---
And play together when they've none. Hudibras, p. iii.
3. To ſucceed; to hit. -
The fox had a fetch ; and when he ſaw it would not fadge,
away goes he preſently. L'Eſtrange's Fablº.
4. his is a mean word not now uſed, unleſs perhaps in ludi-
crous and low compoſitions.
F}^CES. m. ſ. [Latin.] Excrements; but often uſed to expreſs
the ingredients and ſettlings after diſtillation and infuſion.
$21,incy.
To FAG. v. a. [fatigo, Latin.] To grow weary; to faint
with wearineſs. -
Creighton witheld his force ’till the Italian begun to fag,
and then brought him to the ground. 41ackenzie's Lives.
FA GE'ND. m. ſ. [from fag and end.]
1. The end of a web of cloath, generally made of coarſer ma-
terials.
2. The refuſe or meaner part of any thing.
In the world's fugend
A nation lies. Fanſhaw.
When they are the worſt of their way, and fixt in the
foºend of buſineſs, they are apt to look not kindly upon thoſe
who go before them. Collier ºf Envy.
FAGOT. n ſ. [fagod, Welſh and Armorick; fagot, French.]
1. A bundle of ſticks bound together for the fire.
About the pile of fagot, ſticks and hay,
The bellows raiſed the newly kindled flame. Fairfax, b. ii.
Spare for no fagots, let there be enow;
Place pitchy barrels on the fatal ſtake. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Mitres or fagots have been the rewards of different perſons,
according as they pronounced theſe conſecrated ſyllables or
110t. IPatty's Improvement of the Mind.
2. A bundle of ſticks for any purpoſe.
The black prince filled a ditch with fagots as ſucceſsfully as
the generals of our times do it with faſcines. Addison Speciator.
3. A º: numbered in the muſter-roll, but not really
exiſting.
To FA'Gºt. v. a. [from the noun J. To tie up; to bundle
together.
He was too warm on picking work to dwell,
But fagoted his notions as they fell, }
. . And if they rhym'd and rattled, all was well. Dryden.
To FAIL. v. n. I failer, French; faeln, Welſh. Pezron.]
1. To be deficient; to ceaſe from former plenty ; to fall ſhort;
not to be equal to demand or uſe.
The waters fail from the ſea, and the flood decayeth and
drich up. job xiv. I 1.
Where the credit and money fail, barter alone muſt
do. 1ocke.
2. To be extinét to ceaſe to be produced.
Help, Lord, for the godly man ceaſºth; for the faithfulfil
from among the children of men. Pſ. xii. 1.
... [...et there not fail from the houſe of Joab one that hath an
iſſue. 2 Sa. iii. 29.
3. To ceaſe ; to periſh ; to be loſt.
For Titan, by the mighty loſs diſmay’d,
Among the heavens th’ immortal fact diſplay’d,
- Left the remembrance of his grief ſhould fail. Addison.
4. To die; to loſe life.
Had the king in his laſt ſickneſs fail'd,
Their heads ſhould have gone off. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Both he that helpeth ſhall fall, and he that is holpen ſhall
fall down, and they all ſhall fail together. 1ſ. Xxxi. 3.
5. To fink; to be torn down; to languiſh through re-
ſiſtance. &amp;
Neither will I be always wroth; for the ſpirit ſhould fail
before me. Iſ. lvii. 16.
6. To decay; to decline; to languiſh.
Mine eyes fail. Pſ. cxix. 82.
I perceive
Thy mortal fight to fal: obječts divine
Muſt needs impair and weary human ſenſe. Milt. Par. Left.
7. To miſs; not to produce its effect.
Conſider of deformity not as a ſign which is deceiveable,
but as a cauſe which ſeldom faileth of the effect. Bacon's Eſſayſ.
This jeſt was firſt of th’ other houſe's making,
And, five times try’d, has never fail'd of taking. Dryden,
A perſuaſion that we ſhall overcome any difficulties, that we
meet with in the ſciences, ſeldom fails to carry us through
them. Locke.
He does not remember whether every grain came up or
not; but he thinks that very few failed. Mortimer's Husiand.
8. To miſs; not to ſucceed in a deſign.
I am enjoin'd, by oath, if I fail
Of the right caſket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage. Shakespeare Merch. of Penice:
In difficulties of ſtate, the true reaſon of failing proceeds
from failings in the adminiſtration. L'Eſtrange.
Men who have been buſied in the purſuit of the philoſo-
pher's ſtone, have failed in their deſign. Addiſon's Giardian.
9. To be deficient in duty.
Endeavour to fulfill God's commands, to repent as often as
you fail of it, and to hope for pardon and acceptance of him.
//ake's Preparation f.r Death.
To FAIL. v. a.
1. To deſert; not to continue to aſſiſt or ſupply.
The ſhip was now left alone, as proud lords be when for-
tune fail; them. Sidney, b. ii.
So haſt thou oft. with guile thine honour blent;
But little may ſuch guile thee now avail,
If wonted force and fortune do not much me fail. Fai. Qu.
There ſhall be ſigns in the ſun, the moon, and the ſtars,
mens hearts failing them for fear. Lu. xxi. 26.
Her heart failed her, and ſhe would fain have compounded
for her life. L’Eſtrange.
He preſumes upon his parts that they will not fail him at
time of need, and ſo thinks it ſuperfluous labour to make any
proviſion beforehand. Locke.
2. Not to aſſiſt ; to neglect; to omit to help.
Since nature fails us in no needful thing,
Why want I means my inward ſelf to ſee : Davies,
3. To omit; not to perform.
The inventive god who never fail his part,
Inſpires the wit, when once he warms the heart. Dryden,
4. To be wanting to.
There ſhall not fail thee a man on the throne. 1 King; ii. 4.
FAIL. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Miſcarriage; miſs; unſucceſsfulneſs.
2. Omiſſion; non-performance.
Mark and perform it, ſeeſt thou? for the fail
Of any point in't ſhall not only be
Death to thyſelf, but to thy lewd-tongu'd wife. Shakespeare.
He will without fail drive out from before you the Ca-
naanites. joſ. iii. 19.
3. Deficience; want.
4. Death; extinction.
How grounded he his title to the crown
Upon our fail? Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
FAI'll Ng. n.ſ.. [from fail] Deficiency; imperfection; faults
not atrocious; lapſe. -
Beſides what failings may be in the matter, even in the
expreſſions there muſt often be great obſcurities. Digby.
Toſº mild, but zealous for deſert;
The cleareſt head, and the ſincereſt heart. Pºpe.
Even good men have many temptations to ſubdue, many
conflicts with thoſe enemies which war againſt the ſoul, and
many failings and lapſes to lament and recover. Rogers.
FAILURE. m.ſ.. [from fail.]
1. Deficience; ceſſation.
There muſt have been an univerſal failure and want of
ſprings and rivers all the Summer ſeaſon. Woodward’s N. Hi/.
2. Omiſſion; non-performance; ſlip. -
He that, being ſubject to an apoplexy, uſed ſtill to carry hi:
remedy about him; but upon a time ſhifting his cloaths, and
not taking that with him, chanced upon that very day to be
ſurpriſed with a fit: he owed his death to a mere accident, to
a little inadvertency and failure of memory. South's Sermons.
3. A lapſe; a ſlight fault.
FAIN. adj. [rea;n, Saxon.] -
1. Glad; merry; chearful; fond. It is ſtill retained in Scot-
land in this ſenſe.
And in her hand ſhe held a mirrour bright,
Wherein her face ſhe often viewed fain. Fairy Queen.
My lips will be fain when I fing unto thee, and ſo will my
ſoul whom thou haſt delivered. Pſalm lxxi.
2. Forced; obliged; compelled. [This ſignification ſeems to
have ariſen from the miſtake of the original ſignification in
ſome ambiguous expreſſions; as, I was fain to do this, would
- equally
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 420</div><p class="Text">F A i
F A H
cqually ſuit with the reſt of the ſentence, whether it was uſi-
derſtood to mean / was com: clied, or / was glad to dº it fºr fear
of worſe. Thus the primary meaning ſeems to have been early
loſt.] * * -
Every weight to ſhroud it did conſtrain; r
And this fair couple eke to ſhroud themſelves were fain.
Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 1. ſtan. 6.
Whoſoever will hear, he ſhall find God; whoſoever will
ſtudy to know, ſhall be alſo fin to believe. Hooker, b. v.
I was fain to forſwear it; they would elſe have married me
to the rotten medlar. " Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
When Hildebrand had accurſed Henry IV, there were none
ſo hardy as to defend their lord; wherefore he was fain to
humble himſelf before Hildebrand. Raleigh's Eſſays.
The learned Caſtalio was fain to make trenchers at Baſle,
to keep himſelf from ſtarving. Locke.
FAIN. adv. [from the adjećtive..] Gladly; very deſirouſly; ac-
cording to earneſt wiſhes.
Now I would give a thouſand furlongs of ſea for an acre
of barren ground: I would fain die a dry death. Shakeſpeare.
Why would'ſt thou urge me to confeſs a flame
I long have ſtifled, and would fain conceal. Addiſon’s Cato.
Fain wou'd I Raphael's godlike art rehearſe,
And ſhow th’ immortal labours in my verſe. Addiſon.
The plebeians would fain have a law enacted to lay all mens
rights and privileges upon the ſame level. Swift.
To FAIN. v. n."[from the noun..] To wiſh; to deſire fondly.
Fairer than faireſt, in his faining eye,
Whoſe ſole aſpect he counts felicity.
To FAINT. v. n. [famer, French.]
1. To decay; to wear or waſte away quickly.
Thoſe figures in the gilded clouds, while we gaze upon
them, faint before the eye, and decay into confuſion. Pope.
2. To loſe the animal functions; to ſink motionleſs and ſenſe-
leſs.
Their young children were out of heart, and their women
and young men fainted for thirſt, and fell down in the ſtreets.
- judith vii. 22.
We are ready to faint with faſting. 1 Mac. iii. 17.
Upon hearing the honour intended her, ſhe fainted away,
and fell down as dead. Guardian, N°. 167.
3. To grow feeble.
They will ſtand in their order, and never faint in their
watches. Eccluſ xliii. Io.
The imagination cannot be always alike conſtant and ſtrong,
and if the ſucceſs follow not ſpeedily it will faint and loſe
ſtrength. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 953.
4. To #. into dejećtion.
Spenſer on Love.
Leſt they faint
At the ſad ſentence rigorouſly urg’d,
All terror hide. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. l. 108.
To FAINT. v. a. To deject; to depreſs; to enfeeble. A
word little in uſe.
It faints me
To think what follows.
FAINT. adj. [fane, French.]
1. Languid; weak; feeble.
In the more intemperate climates the ſpirits, either exhaled
by heat or compreſt by cold, are rendered faint and ſlug-
giſh. - Temple.
2. Not bright; not vivid; not ſtriking.
The blue compared with theſe is a faint and dark colour,
and the indigo and violet are much darker and fainter. Newt.
The length of the image I meaſured from the fainteſt and
utmoſt red at one end, to the fainteſt and utmoſt blue at the
other end, excepting only a little penumbra. Newton's Opt.
From her naked limbs of glowing white,
In folds looſe floating, fell the fainter lawn.
3. Not loud; not piercing.
The pump after this being employed from time to time,
the ſound grew fainter and fainter. Boyle.
4. Feeble of body.
Two neighbouring ſhepherds, faint with thirſt, ſtood at
the common boundary of their grounds. Rambler.
5. Cowardly; timorous; not vigorous; not ardent.
Faint heart never won fair lady. Proverb in Camden's Rem.
Our faint Egyptians pray for Antony;
But in their ſervile hearts they own Octavius. Dryden.
6. Dejećted; depreſſed.
Conſider him that endureth ſuch contradićtion againſt him-
Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Thomſon.
ſelf, leſt ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Hebr. xii. 3.
. Not vigorous; not active.
The defects which hindered the conqueſt, were the faint
proſecution of the war, and the looſeneſs of the civil go-
Vernment. Davies on Ireland.
FAIN THE ARTED. adj. [faint and heart.] Cowardly; timo-
rous; dejećted; eaſily depreſſed. -
Fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of theſ
ſmoaking firebrands. Iſ, vii. 4.
They ſhould reſolve the next day as vićtorious conquerors
to take the city, or elſe there as fainthcarted cowards to end
their days. Knolles's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
tuſions.
Now the late fainthearted rout,
O'erthrown and ſcatter'd round about,
Chac'd by the horrour of their fear,
From bloody fray of knight and bear,
Took heart again and fac'd about, -
As if they meant to ſtand it out. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
Villain, ſtand off baſe, groveling, worthleſs wretches,
, Mongrils in faction; poor fainthearted traitors. Addison Cato.
FAINTHEA'RTEDly. adv. [from faintlearted.] Timorouſly;
in a cowardly manner. -
FAINTHEA'R'Ted NEss. n.ſ.. [from fainthearted.] Cowardice;
timorouſneſs; want of courage.
FA'INTING. m. ſ. [from faint..] Deliquium; temporary loſs
of animal motion.
Theſe ſaintings her phyſicians ſuſpect to proceed from con-
- //iſeman's Surgery. .
FAINtish Ness. n. ſ. ſ from faint. J Weakneſs in a flight
degree; incipient debility.
A certain degree of heat lengthens and relaxes the fibres;
whence proceeds the ſenſation of faintſhneſ; and debility in a
hot day. Arbuthnot on Air.
FAINTLING. adj. [from faint.] Timorous; feebleminded.
A burleſque or low word.
There's no having patience, thou art ſuch a fainting filly
Creature. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
FA'INTLY. adv. [from faint.]
1. Feebly ; languidly. *
Love's like a torch, which, if ſecur'd from blaſts,
Will faintly burn; but then it longer laſts:
Expos'd to ſtorms of jealouſy and doubt, .
The blaze grows greater, but 'tis ſooner out. Walſh.
2. Not in bright colours.
Nature affords at leaſt a glimm'ring light;
The lines, tho’ touch'd but faintly, are drawn right. Pope.
3. Without force of repreſentation.
I have told you what I have ſeen and heard but faintly ;
nothing like the image and horrour of it. Shakespeare King Lear.
An obſcure and confuſed idea repreſents the obječt ſo
faintly, that it doth not appear plain to the mind. JWatts.
4. Without ſtrength of body.
With his loll'd tongue he faintly licks his prey,
‘His warm breath blows her flix up as ſhe lies. Dryden,
5. Not vigorouſly; not actively.
Though ſtill the famiſh’d Engliſh, like pale ghoſts,
Faintly beſiege us one hour in a month. Shakespeare Henry VI.
6. Timorouſly; with deječtion; without ſpirit.
Loth was the ape, though praiſed, to adventure;
Yºſhi, 'gan into his work to enter. Hubberd's Tale.
e faintly now declines the fatal ſtrife;
So much his love was dearer than his life. Denham:
FA'INTN Ess. n.ſ.. [from faint.]
1. Languour; feebleneſs; want of ſtrength.
If the prince of the lights of heaven, which now as a giant
doth run his unwearied courſes, ſhould through a languiſhing
faintneſs begin to ſtand. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
This proceeded not from any violence of pain, but from a
general languiſhing and faintneſs of ſpirits, which made him
think nothing worth the trouble of one careful thought. Temp.
2. Inactivity; want of vigour.
* This evil proceeds rather of the unſoundneſs of the coun-
ſels laid for the reformation, or of faintneſs in following and
effecting the ſame, than of any ſuch fatal courſe appointed of
God. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
3. Timorouſneſs; dejećtion.
The paleneſs of this flow'r
Bewray'd the {...} of my maſter's heart. Shakespeare Hen.VI.
FA'INTY. adj. [from faint.] Weak; feeble; languid; debi-
litated ; enfeebled.
When Winter froſts conſtrain the field with cold,
The fainty root can take no ſteady hold. Dryd. Wirg. Georg.
The ladies gaſp'd, and ſcarcely could reſpire;
The breath they drew, no longer air, but fire:
The fainty knights were ſcorch'd, and knew not where
To run for ſhelter; for no ſhade was near. Dryden.
FAIR. adj. [paegen, Saxon; faur, Daniſh.]
1. Beautiful; elegant of feature; handſome. Foir ſeems in the
common acceptation to be reſtrained, when applied to wo-
men, to the beauty of the face.
Thou art a fair woman to look upon.
My decay’d fair,
A ſunny look of his will ſoon repair. Shakespeare Comed ºf Err.
2. Not black; not brown; white in the complexion.
I never yet ſaw man,
But ſhe would ſpell him backward; if fair fac'd,
She'd ſwear the gentleman ſhould be her fifter;
If black, why, nature, drawing of an antick,
Made a foul blot. Shakespeare Much Ado about Nothing.
Let us look upon men in ſeveral climates: the Ethiopians
are black, flat-noſed, and criſp-haired : the Moors tawny the
Northern people large, and fair complexioned. . Hale.
Gen. xii. 11.
8 S .. - 3 Pleaſing
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 421</div><p class="Text">F A I
F A I
3. Pleaſing to the eye; beautiful in general.
Carry him gently to my fairºft chamber, -
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures. Shakeſpeare.
Thus was he fair in his greatneſs, and in the length of his
branches. Ezek. xxxi. 7.
4. Clear; purc. - -
A ſtandard of a damaſk-roſe, with the root on, was ſet in
a chamber where no fire was, upright in an earthen pan, full
of fair water, half a foot under the water. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
yen fair water, falling upon white paper, or linnen, will
immediately alter the colour of them, and make it ſadder than
that of the unwetted parts. Boyle on Colºurs.
5. Not cloudy; not foul; not tempeſtuous.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair;
Hover through the fog and filthy air. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Fair weather cometh out of the earth. job xxxvii. 22.
About three of the clock in the afternoon the weather was
very fair and very warm. Clarendon, b. viii.
6. Favourable; proſperous: as, a fair wind.
In vain you tell your parting lover,
You wiſh fair winds may waſt him over.
7. Likely to ſucceed.
Yourſelf, renowned prince, ſtood as fair
As any comer I have look'd on yet, - - -
For my affection. Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice.
The Caliphs obtained a mighty empire, which was in a fair
way to have cnlarged, until they fell out. Raleigh's Eſays.
O pity and ſhame! that they who to live well
Enter'd ſo fair, ſhould turn aſide to tread
Paths indirect, or in the midway faint. Miſt. Paradſe Lºft.
8. Equal; juſt.
The king did ſo much deſire a peace, that no man need
adviſe him to it, or could divert him from it, if fair and
honourable conditions of peace were offered to him. Clarendon.
9. Not effected by any inſidious or unlawful methods; not
foul.
After all theſe conqueſts he paſſed the reſt of his age in his
own native country, and died a fair and natural death. Temple.
lo. Not practiſing any fraudulent or inſidious arts: as, a fair
rival, a fair diſputant.
Virtuous and vicious ev'ry man muſt be,
Few in th’ extreme, but all in the degree; *
The rogue and fool by fits is fair and wiſe,
And ev'n the beſt, by fits, what they deſpiſe.
11. Open; direét.
For ſtill, methought, ſhe ſung not far away;
At laſt I found her on a laurel-ſpray:
Cloſe by my ſide ſhe ſat, and fair in fight,
Full in a line, againſt her oppoſite.
2. Gentle; mild; not compulſory.
All the lords came in, and, being by fair means wrought
thereunto, acknowledged king Henry. Spenser on Ireland.
For to reduce her by main force,
Is now in vain; by fair means, worſe.
13. Mild; not ſevere.
Not only do'ſ degrade them, or remit
To life obſcur'd, which were a fair diſmiſſion;
But throw'ſt them lower than thou did'ſt exalt them high.
Milton's Agoniſies.
Prior.
Pope.
Dryden.
Hudibras, p. iii.
14. Pleaſing; civil.
Good ſir, why do you ſtart, and ſeem to fear
Things that do ſound ſo fair Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
When fair words and good counſel will not prevail upon
us, we muſt be frighted into our duty. L'E/irange.
15. Equitable; not injurious.
His doom is fair,
That duſt I am, and ſhall to duſt return.
16. Commodious ; eaſy.
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice,
- A ſtand where you may make the fairſt ſhoot. Shakeſpeare.
FAIR, adv. [from the adjećtive.]
1. Gently ; decently; without violence.
He who fair and ſoftly goes ſteadily forward, in a courſe
that points right, will ſooner be at his journey's end than he
that runs after every one, though he gallop. Locke.
2. Civilly; complaiſantly.
Well, you muſt now ſpeak fir John Falſtaff fair. Shakeſp.
One of the company ſpoke him fair, and would have ſtopt
his mouth with a cruſt. L’Eſtrange, Fable 2 1.
In this plain fable you th' effect may ſee
Of negligence, and fond credulity;
And learn beſides of flatt’rers to beware,
Then moſt pernicious when they ſpeak too fair.
His promiſe Palamon accepts ; but pray'd
To keep it better than the firſt he made:
Thus fair they parted 'till the morrow's dawn;
For each had laid his plighted faith to pawn.
Kalib aſcend, my fair ſpoke ſervant riſe,
And ſooth my heart with pleaſing prophecies. Dryd. In. Emp.
- This promiſed fair at firſt. Addiſon on Italy.
3. Happily; ſucceſsfully.
- O, princely Buckingham, I'll kiſs thy hand,
Mit. Parad Lºft.
Dryden.
Dryden.
In ſign of league and amity with thee:
Now fair befal thee and thy noble houſe!
Thy garments are not ſpotted with our blood. Shakespeare R. III.
4. On good terms.
There are other nice, though inferior caſes, in which a
man muſt guard, if he intends to keep fair with the world,
and turn the penny. Collier of Popularity.
FAIR. m. ſ. -
1. A beauty; elliptically a fair woman.
Of ſleep forſaken, to relieve his care,
He ſought the converſation of the fair. Dryden's Fabic.
Gentlemen who do not deſign to marry, yet pay their de-
voirs to one particular fair. Spectator, Nº. 288.
2. Honeſty; juſt dealing.
I am not much for that preſent; we'll ſettle it between our.
ſelves: fair and ſquare, Nic, keeps friends together. Aſ, buthnº.
FAIR... n.ſ.. [faire, French; frie, or fºrum, Latin.] An an-
nual or ſtated mecting of buyers and ſellers; a time of traſ.
fick more frequented than a market. The privilege of hold.
ing fairs in England is granted by the king.
With ſilver, iron, tin and lead they traded in thy fairs.
ºft. xxvii. 12.
His corn, his cattle, were his only care,
And his ſupreme delight a country fair. Dryden.
The ancient Nundinae, or fairs of Rome, were kept every
ninth day: afterwards the ſame privileges were granted to the
country markets, which were at firſt under the power of the
conſuls. Arbuthnºt on Coins.
FAIR ING. m. ſ. [from fºir.] A preſent given at a fair.
Sweetheart, we ſhall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in. Shakespeare Love's Lal. Left.
What pretty things they are, we wonder at I
Like children that eſteem every trifle,
And prefer a fairing before their fathers:
What difference is between us and them
That we are dearer fools, cockſcombs at
A higher rate. Ben johnſºn's Diſcoveries.
Now he goes on, and ſings of fairs and ſhows;
For ſtill new fairs before his eyes aroſe: -
How pedlars ſtalls with glitt'ring toys are laid, r
The various fairings of the country maid. Gay's Paſtoral.
FA'IRLY. adv. [from fair.]
1. Beautifully: as, a city fairly ſituated.
2. Commodiouſly; conveniently; ſuitably to any purpoſe or
deſign. -
"waiting 'till willing winds their ſails ſupply'd,
Within a trading town they long abide, }
Full fairly ſituate on a haven's ſide.
3. Honeſtly; juſtly ; without ſhift; without fraud.
To the firſt advantages we may fairly lay claim; I wiſh we
had as good a title to the latter. Atterbury's Sermons.
It is a church of England man's opinion, that the freedom
of a nation conſiſts in an abſolute unlimited legiſlative power,
wherein the whole body of the people are fairly repreſented,
and in an executive duly limited. Swift-
4. Ingenuouſly; plainly; openly.
The ſtage how looſely does Aſtrea tread,
Who fairly puts all characters to bed. Pope's Epſi. ºf Hor.
5. Candidly; without finiſtrous interpretations.
As I interpret fairly your deſign,
So look not with ſeverer eyes on mine. Dryden's Aurengz.
6. Without violence to right reaſon.
Where I have enlarged them, I deſire the falſe criticks
would not always think that thoſe thoughts are wholly mine;
but that either they are ſecretly in the poet, or may be fairy
deduced from him. Dryden.
This nutritious juice being a ſubtile liquor, ſcarce obtain-
able by a human body, the ſerum of the blood is fairly ſub-
ſtituted in its place. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
7. Without blots.
Here is th’ indićtment of the good lord Haſtings,
Which in a ſet hand fairy is engroſs'd. Shakespeare Rich. III.
8. Completely; without any deficience.
All this they fairly overcame, by reaſon of the continual
preſence of their king. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Let them ſay, 'tis groſsly done; ſo it be fairly done, no
matter. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives ºf I/indſor.
Our love is not ſo great, Hortenſio, but we may blow our
nails together, and faſt it fairly out. Shakespeare Tam. of the Shrew.
FAIRN ess. n.ſ.. [from fair.]
1. Beauty; elegance of form.
That which made her fairneſ, much the fairer, was that it
was but a fair embaſſador of a moſt fair mind, full of wit,
and a wit which delighted more to judge itſelf than to ſhow
itſelf. Sidney.
2. Honeſty; candour; ingenuity. .
There may be ſomewhat of wiſdom, but little of goodneſs
or fairneſ, in this conduct. Atterbury's Sermons, Preface.
FA'1R spok EN. adj. [from fair and ſpeak.] Bland and civil in
language and addreſs. -
Arius, a prieſt in the church of Alexandria, a ſubtlewitted
5 and
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 422</div><p class="Text">F A I
F A L
and a marvellous fairſpoken man, but diſcontented that we
ſhould be placed before him in honour, whoſe ſuperior he
thought himſelf in deſert, becauſe through envy and ſtomach
prone unto contradićtion. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
FAl'RY. m. ſ. [perhö, Saxon; fee, French.]
Ab £2, terra, fit &amp; réz Macedonum diale&amp;to ; unde iyºol
fºrsºo, 3. Romanis inferi, qui Scoto-Saxonibus dicuntur feries,
noſtratiq; vulgo corruptius fairies, xzraxávio. 3xtuovts, five
dii manes. Baxter's Gloſſary.
1. A kind of fabled beings ſuppoſed to appear in a diminutive
human form, and to dance in the meadows, and reward clean-
lineſs in houſes; an elf; a fay.
Nan Page, my daughter, and my little ſon,
And three or four more of their growth, we'll dreſs
Like urchins, ouphes, and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands. Shakespeare Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
Then let them all encircle him about,
And fairy like too pinch the unclean knight;
And aſk him, why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their ſo ſacred paths he dares to tread
In ſhape prophane. . Shakeſp. Merry IPves ºf Iłindſºr,
By the idea any one has of fairies, or centaurs, he can-
not know that things, anſwering thoſe ideas, exiſt. Locke.
Fays, fairies, genii, elves, and demons hear. Pope.
2. Enchantreſs. J/arburton.
To this great fairy I’ll commend thy asts,
Make her thanks bleſs thee. Shakespeare Anth. and Cleopatra.
FA'1RY. adj.
1. Given by fairies.
Be ſecret and diſcrete; theſe fairy favours
Are loſt when not conceal’d. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Such borrowed wealth, like fairy money, though it were
gold in the hand from which he received it, will be but leaves
and duſt when it comes to uſe. locke.
2. Belonging to fairies. - -
This is the fairy land: oh, ſpight of ſpights,
We talk with goblings, owls, and elviſh ſprights. Shakeſp.
FA'iRystone. n.J. [fairy and ſtone..] It is found in gravel-
pits, being of an hemiſpherical figure; hath five double lines
ariſing from the centre of its baſis, which meet in the pole.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
FAITH. n.ſ.. [fi, French; fide, Italian ; fides, Latin.]
1. Belief of the revealed truths of religion.
The name of faith being properly and ſtrićtly taken, it
muſt needs have reference unto ſome uttered word, as the ob-
jećt of belief. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 4.
Faith, if it have not works, is dead. jam. ii. 17.
Viſion in the next life is the perfecting of that faith in this
life, or that faith here is turned into viſion there, as hope into
enjoying. - Hammond’s Prač7. Catech.
Then faith ſhall fail, and holy hope ſhall die;
One loſt in certainty, and one in joy. Prior.
2. The ſyſtem of revealed truths held by the Chriſtian church;
the crederida.
Felix heard Paul concerning the faith.
This is the catholick faith.
3- Truſt in God.
Faith is an entire dependence upon the truth, the power, the
juſtice, and the mercy of God; which dependence will cer-
tainly incline us to obey him in all things. Swift.
4. Tenet held.
Aé's Kxiv. 24.
Commºn Prayer.
Which to believe of her,
Muſt be a faith, that reaſon, without miracle,
Should never plant in me. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
r. Truſt in the honeſty or veracity of another.
6. Fidelity; unſhaken adherence.
Her failing, while her faith to me remains,
I ſhould conceal, and not expoſe to blame
By my complaint. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. l. 129.
7. Honour; ſocial confidence.
For you alone
I broke my faith with injur'd Palamon. Dryd. Knight's Tale.
8. Sincerity; honeſty; veracity.
Sir, in good faith, in meer verity. Shakespeare King Lear.
They are a very froward generation, children in whom is
no faith. Deutr. xxxii. 20.
9. Promiſe given.
- I have been forſworn,
In breaking faith with Julia whom I lov’d. Shakeſpeare.
FAITHEREAch n.f. [faith and breach. J Breach of fidelity;
diſloyalty; perfidy.
Now minutely revolts upbraid his faithbreach;
Thoſe he commands, move only in command,
Nothing in love. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
FAI'rhED. adj. [from faith..] Honeſt; ſincere. A word not
in uſe.
Thou baſtard! would the repoſal
Of any truſt, virtue, or worth in thee,
Make thy words faith d ? Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
FA'it HFUL. adj. [faith and full.]
1. Firm in adherence to the truth of religion.
To the ſaints which are at Epheſus, and the faithful in-
Chriſt Jeſus. Eph. i. 1.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life. Rev. ii. 1 o.
2. #* fidelity; loyal; true to the allegiance or duty pro-.
I have this day receiv'd a traitor's judgment,
And by that name muſt die; yet, heav'n bear witneſs,
And, if I have a conſcience, let it ſink me,
Ev’n as the axe falls, if I be not faithful. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
So ſpake the ſeraph Abdiel, faithful found;
Among the faithleſs, faithful only he. Milton's Parad. Loff.
3. Honeſt; upright; without fraud.
My ſervant Moſes is faithful in all mine houſe. Numb. xii.
4. Obſervant of compact or promiſe; true to his contract; fin-
Cere ; Veracious. -
Well I know him;
Of eaſy temper, naturally good,
And faithful to his word.
FAI'THFully adv. [from faithful.]
1. With firm belief in religion.
2. With full confidence in God.
3. With ſtrict adherence to duty and allegiance.
His noble grace would have ſome pity
Upon my wretched women, that ſo long -
Have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully. Shakespeare H. VIII.
4. Without failure of performance; honeſtly ; exactly.
If on my wounded breaſt thou drop a tear, -
Think for whoſe ſake my breaſt that wound did bear;
And faithfully my laſt deſires fulfil, &gt;
As I perform my cruel father's will. Dryden's Ovid.
5. Sincerely; with ſtrong promiſes.
For his own part, he did faithfully promiſe to be ſtill in the
king's power. Bacon’s H. VII.
6. Honeſtly; without fraud, trick, or ambiguity.
. They ſuppoſe the nature of things to be truly and faithfully
ſignified by their names, and thereupon believe as they hear, aná
practiſe as they believe. South's Sermons.
7. In Shakeſpeare, according to Mr. JWarburton, fervently, per-
haps rather confidently; ſteadily.
If his occaſions were not virtuous,
I ſhould not urge it half ſo faithfully.
FA'ithfulness. n.ſ.. [from faithful.]
1. Honeſty; veracity.
For there is no faithfulneſ; in your mouth; your inward
part is very wickedneſs. - Pſ. lix.
The band that knits together and ſupports all compacts, is
truth and faithfulneſ. South's Sermons.
2. Adherence to duty; loyalty.
The ſame zeal and faithfulneſs continues in your blood,
which animated one of your noble anceſtors to ſacrifice his
life in the quarrel of his ſovereign. Dryden
FA'1thless, adj. [from faith.] -
1. Without belief in the revealed truths of religion; uncon-
verted.
Whatſoever our hearts be to God and to his truth, believe
we, or be we as yet faithleſs, for our converſion or confirma-
tion, the force of natural reaſon is great. Hºofer, b. iii. ſ. 8.
Never dare misfortune croſs her foot,
Unleſs ſhe doth it under this excuſe,
That ſhe is iſſue to a faithleſ; Jew. Shakeſp March of Venice.
2. Perfidious ; diſloyal ; not true to duty, profeſſion, promiſe,
or allegiance.
Dryden', Don Sebaſtian.
SShakeſp. Timon.
Both
Fell by our ſervants, by thoſe men we lov'd moſt ;
A moſt unnatural and faith'ſ ſervice. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
So ſpake the ſeraph Abdiel, faithful found;
Among the faithleſs, faithful only he, Milton's Parad, Loft.
FA’ITH lessNess. n.J. [from faithlºſs.]
1. Treachery; perfidy.
2. Unbelief as to revealed religion.
FA'itou R. m. ſ. [faitard, French J A ſcoundrel; a raſcal; a
mean fellow ; a poltron. An old word now obſolete.
To Philemon, falſe faitour, Philemon,
I caſt to pay, that I ſo dearly bought. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Into new woes unweeting I was caſt,
By this falſe faitour. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 4. ſtan. 47.
FAKE... n.ſ. [Among ſeamen.] A coil of rope. Harris.
FAlca'DE. n.ſ.. [from falx, falcis, Latin.]
A horſe is ſaid to make falcades, when he throws himſelf
upon his haunches two or three times, as in very quick cur-
vets, which is done in forming a ſtop, and half a ſtop; there-
fore a falcade is that ačtion of the haunches and of the legs,
which bend very low, when you make a ſtop and half a
ſtop. Farrier's Dić.
FA'lcAted. adj. [falcatus, Latin.] Hooked; bent like a
reaping hook or ſcythe.
The enlightened part of the moon appears in the form
of a ſickle, or reaping hook, which is while ſhe is
moving from the conjunction to the oppoſition, or from the
new moon to the full; but from full to a new again, the en-
lightened part appears gibbous, and the dark falcated. Harris.
FALcA'tion.
---
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 423</div><p class="Text">F A L
-
rare res. n, ſ. [ ſalciº, Latin-J Crookedneſs; form like
that of a reaper's hook. -
The locuſis have antennae, or long horns before, with a
long falcation or forcipated tail behind. Brown's Wulgar Err.
FAidºſion. n.ſ. ſenſº falcatus; in French fauchon.] A ſhort
crooked ſword; a cymeter.
I've ſeen the day, with my good biting falchion,
I would have made them ſkip: I am old now. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Old falchions are new temper'd in the fires;
The ſounding trumpet ev'ry ſoul inſpires. Dryden's AEn.
What ſighs and tears
Hath Eugene cauſed how many widows curſe ----
His cleaving falchion / Phillips.
FALCON. n.J. [faukon, French; falconne, Italian ; falco,
Latin. Credº, a roſtro falcato five adunco, from the falcated or
crooked bill.]
1. A hawk trained for ſport.
As Venus' bird, the white, ſwift, lovely dove,
O ! happy dove that art compar'd to her,
- Doth on her wings her utmoſt ſwiftneſs prove, ...
Finding the gripe of falcon fierce not far. Sidney.
Air ſtops not the high ſoaring of my noble generous falcon.
l/alton's Angler.
Apulian farms, for the rich ſoil admir’d,
And thy large fields where falcons may be tir’d. Dryd. juv.
Say, will the falcon, ſtooping from above,
Smit with her varying plumage, ſpare the dove? Pºpe.
2. A ſort of cannon, whoſe diameter at the bore is five inches
and a quarter, weight ſeven hundred and fifty pounds, length
ſeven foot, load two pounds and a quarter, ſhot two inches
and a half diameter, and two pounds and a half weight. Harris.
FAlco's ER. m. ſ. [faulconnier, French.J. One who breeds and
trains hawks; one who follows the ſport of fowling with
hawks. -
Hiſt! Romeo, hiſt! O for a falº'ner's voice,
To lure this taſſel gentle back again. Shakespeare. Rom, and jul.
The univerſal remedy was ſwallowing of pebbleſtones, in
imitation of falconers curing hawks. Temple.
I have learnt of a falconer never to feed up a hawk, when
I would have him fly. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Afalº'ner Henry is, when Emma hawks; -
With her of tarſels and of lures he talks. Prior.
FA'lcon ET. n.ſ.. [falconette, French.] A ſort of ordnance,
whoſe diameter at the bore is four inches and a quarter, weight
four hundred pounds, length ſix foot, load one pound and a
quarter, ſhot ſomething more than two inches diameter, and
one pound and a quarter weight. ... Harris.
Mahomet ſent janizaries and nimble footmen, with certain
falconets and other ſmall pieces, to take the ſtreights. Knºlles.
FA'LDAGE. n.ſ.. [faldagium, barbarous Latin. J. A privilege
which anciently ſeveral lords reſerved to themſelves of ſetting
up folds for ſheep, in any fields within their manors, the bet-
ter to manure them; and this not only with their own, but
their tenants ſheep, which they called ſetta faldar. This fal-
dage in ſome places they call a foldcourſe, or freefold; and in
ſome old charters’tis called foldſoca, that is, libertas foldar, or
a'dagii. Harris.
FÅ(LDFEE. n.ſ.. [fald and fee.] A compoſition paid anciently
by tenants for the privilege of faldage. Dićf.
FA'LDING.. n.ſ. A kind of coarſe cloth. Dićf.
FA'ldstool. n.ſ.. [fald or fold and ſtool. J. A kind of ſtool
placed at the ſouth-ſide of the altar, at which the kings of
England kneel at their coronation.
To FÅLL. v. m. pret. I fell; compound pret. I have fallen,
or faln. [peallan, Saxon; fallen, German.] -
1. To drop from a higher place. *
Thou ſhalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring
not blood upon thine houſe, if any man fall from thence. Deut.
I was walking in the open fields 'till the night inſenſibly fell
upon me. -
* I ſhall fall
Like a bright exhalation in the evening, .
And no man ſee me more. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
2. To drop from an erect to a prone poſture.
Saul fell all along on the earth. 1 Sa. xxviii. 20.
Where he bowed, there he fell down dead, judg. v. 27.
That is a ſtep, -
On which I muſt fall down, or elſe o'erleap ;
For in my way it lies. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
3. To drop ; to be held no longer.
His chains fell off from his hands. A:is xii. 7.
4. To move down any deſcent.
All liquid bodies are diffuſive; for their parts being in mo-
tion, have no connexion one with another, but glide and fall
off any way, as gravity and the air preſſeth them. Burnet.
5. To drop ripe from the tree.
As the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig
from the fig-tree. Aſ. Xxxiv. 4.
6. To paſs at the outlet: as a river. -
Caeſar therefore gave orders to build his gallies on the Loir,
and the rivers that fall into it. Arbuthnot on Coins.
7. To be determined to ſome particular direétion.
Spectator, Nº. 565. .
Birds and fowls that reſt one foot to eaſe the other, natu-
rally lay their heads under their wings, that the center of gra-
vity may fall upon the foot they ſtand on. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
8. To apoſtatiſe; to depart from faith or goodneſs.
Labour to enter into that reſt, left any man ſail after the
: ſame example of unbelief. Feb. iv. 11.
They brought ſcandal
To Iſrael, diffidence of God, and doubt
In feeble hearts, propenſe cnough before
To waver or fall off, and join with idols. Milton's Agonſ'.
Whether ſome ſpirit on holy purpoſe bent,
Or ſome fall'n angel from below broke looſe,
Who comes with envious eyes, and curſt intent,
To view this world and its created. Lord. Dryden.
9. To die by violence.
God and good angels fight on Richmond's ſide,
And Richard fall in height of all his pride. Shakespeare Rich. III.
If one ſhould be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the lion than the wolf Shakeſpeare.
What other oath,
Than honeſty to honeſty engag'd?
That this ſhall be, or we will fall for it. Shać. jºl. Caſar.
A thouſand ſhall fall at thy ſide, and ten thouſand at thy
right hand; but it ſhall not come nigh thee. Pſ, xci. 7.
Ye ſhall chaſe your enemies, and they ſhall fall before you
by the ſword. Lev. xxvi. 7.
They not obeying,
Incurr'd, what could they leſs the penalty;
And manifold in ſin, deſerv'd to fall Milton's Parad. Loft.
Almon fall, old Tyrrheus' eldeſt care,
Pierc'd with an arrow from the diſtant war. Dryden's Án.
10. To come to a ſudden end.
The greatneſs of theſe Iriſh lords ſuddenly fell and vaniſhed,
when their oppreſſions and extortions were taken away. Davies.
He firſt the fate of Caeſar did foretell,
And pity'd Rome, when Rome in Caeſar fell;
In iron clouds conceal’d the publick light,
And impious mortals fear'd eternal night. Dryd, Pirg, Geºr.
11. To be degraded from an high ſtation; to ſink into mean-
neſs or diſgrace; to be plunged into ſudden miſery.
They ſhall fall among them that fall; at the time that I
viſit them they ſhall be caſt down. jer. vi. 15.
What can be their buſineſs
With a poor weak woman fall'n from favour! Shakespeare H.VIII.
12. To decline from power or empire; to be overthrown.
What men could do,
Is done already : heaven and earth will witneſs,
If Rome muſt fall, that we are innocent. Addiſon's Cato.
13. To enter into any ſtate worſe than the former.
He fell at difference with Ludovico Sfortia, who carried the
keys which brought him in, and ſhut him out. Bacon's H. VII.
Some of the ableſt painters taking precepts in too literal
a ſenſe, have fallen thereby into great inconveniencies.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
14. To come into any ſtate of weakneſs, terrour, or miſery.
Theſe, by obtruding the beginning of a change for the en-
tire work of new life, will fall under the former guilt Hamm.
One would wonder how ſo many learned men could fall
into ſo great an abſurdity, as to believe this river could pre-
ſerve itſelf unmixt with the lake. Addison on Italy.
The beſt men generally fall under the ſevereſt preſſures.
J/ake's Preparation for Death.
15. To decreaſe; to be diminiſhed.
From the pound weight, as Pliny tells us, the as fel to
two ounces in the firſt Punick war: when Hannibal invaded
Italy, to one ounce; then, by the Papirian law, to half an
Oun Ce. Arbut not on Coins.
16. To ebb; to grow ſhallow.
17. To decreaſe in value; to bear leſs price.
When the price of corn falſeth, men generally break no
more ground than will ſupply their own turn. Carew.
But now her price is fall'n. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
His rents will fall, and his income every day leſſen, 'till
induſtry and frugality, joined to a well ordered trade, ſhall
reſtore to the kingdom the riches it had formerly. Locke.
18. To ſink; not to amount to the full.
The greatneſs of an eſtate, in bulk and territory, doth fall
under meaſure; and the greatneſs of finances and revenue doth
all under computation. Bacon, Eſſay 30.
19. To be rejected; to become null.
This book muſt ſtand orfall with thee; not by any opinion
I have of it, but thy own. Locke.
20. To decline from violence to calmneſs, from intenſeneſs to
remiſſion. - -
He was ſtirr'd,
And ſomething ſpoke in choler, ill and haſty;
But he fell to himſelf again, and ſweetly
In all the reſt ſhew’d a moſt noble patience. Shakeſp H.VIII.
At length her fury fell, her foaming ceas'd ;
And ebbing in her ſoul, the god decreas'd. Dryden's &amp;n.
21. To enter into any new ſtate of the body or mind.
3 In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 424</div><p class="Text">F A L
F A L.
In ſweet muſick is ſuch art,
Killing care and grief of heart, -- - :
Fall aſleep, or hearing die. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Solyman, chafed with the loſs of his gallies and beſt ſol-
diers, and with the double injury done unto him by the Vene-
tians, fell into ſuch a rage that he curſed Barbaroſla. Knollº.
When about twenty, upon the falſeneſs of a lover, ſhe
fell diſtraćted. Temple.
A ſpark like thee, of the man-killing trade,
Fell ſick; and thus to his phyſician ſaid:
Methinks I am not right in ev’ry part,
I feel a kind of trembling at my heart;
My pulſe unequal, and my breath is ſtrong;
Beſides a filthy furr upon my tongue. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
And have you known none in health who have pitied you ;
and behold, they are gone before you, even ſince you fell into
this diſtemper ? Iſake's Preparation for Death.
He died calmly, and with all the eaſineſs of a man falling
aſleep. Atterbury.
Portius himſelf oftfall; in tears before me,
As if he mourn’d his rival's ill ſucceſs. Addiſon's Cato.
For as his own bright image he ſurvey'd,
He fell in love with the fantaſtick ſhade. Addison Ovid Met.
I fell in love with the character of Pomponius Atticus: I
longed to imitate him. Blount to Pope.
22. To ſink into an air of diſcontent or dejećtion.
If thou perſuade thyſelf that they ſhall not be taken, let
not thy countenance fall: I have ſpoken it, and none of my
words ſhall be in vain. judith vi. 9.
If you have any other requeſt to make, hide it not; for ye
fhall find we will not make your countenance to fall by the
anſwer ye ſhall receive. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Syphax, I joy to meet thee thus alone; -
I have obſerv'd of late thy looks are fallen,
O'ercaſt with gloomy cares and diſcontent.
23. To ſink below ſomething in compariſon.
Fame of thy beauty and thy youth,
Among the reſt, me hither brought:
Finding this fame fall ſhort of truth,
Made me ſtay longer than I thought.
24. To happen; to befall.
Addiſon's Cato.
Waller.
For ſuch things as do fall ſcarce once in many ages, it did
ſuffice to take ſuch order as was requiſite when they fell. Hook.
Oft it falls out, that while one thinks too much of his
doing, he leaves to do the effečt of this thinking. Sidney, b. i.
A long advertent and deliberate connexing of conſequents,
which fall, not in the common road of ordinary men. Hale.
Since this fortune falls to you,
Be content and ſeek no new. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
If the worſt fall that ever fell, I hope, I ſhall make ſhift
to go without him. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Wenice.
O, how feeble is man's power,
That if good fortune fall,
Cannot add another hour,
Nor a loſt hour recall !
Since both cannot poſſeſs what both purſue,
I’m griev'd, my friend, the chance ſhould fall on you. Dry.
I had more leiſure, and diſpoſition, than have ſince fallen
to my ſhare. Swift.
25. To come by chance; to light on.
I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyſelf about the field;
But ſeeing thou fall/? on me ſo luckily,
I will aſſay thee. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
The Romans fell upon this model by chance, but the Spar-
tans by thought and deſign. - Swift.
26. To come in a ſtated method.
The odd hours at the end of the ſolar year, are not indeed
fully ſix, but are deficient 1 o'44"; which deficiency, in 134
years, colle&amp;ted, amounts to a whole day: and hence may be
feen the reaſon why the vernal equinox, which at the time of
the Nicene council fºll upon the 21ſt of March, falls now
about ten days ſooner. Holder on Time.
It does not fall within my ſubjećt to lay down the rules of
odes. Felton on the Claſſicks.
27. To come unexpe&amp;tedly.
I am fallen upon the mention of mercuries. Boyle.
It happened this evening that we fell into a very pleaſing
walk, at a diſtance from his houſe. Addison's Speciator.
28. To begin any thing with ardour and vehemence.
The king underſtanding of their adventure, ſuddenly falls
to take pride in making much of them with infil
Donne.
hite praiſes.
- - Sidney, b. ii.
Each of us fell in praiſe of our country miſtreſſes. Shakeſp.
And the mixt multitude fell a Juſting. Num. ii. 4.
It is better to ſound a perſon aſar off, than to fall upon the
point at firſt ; except you mean to ſurprize him by ſome ſhort
queſtion. 1 acon, Eſſay 48.
When a horſe is hungry, and comes to a good paſture, he
fall; to his food immediately. A ale's Origin of Aſankind.
They fell to blows, inſomuch th: the Argonauts ſlew the
moſt part of the Deliones, with their king Cyzicus. L'E/ir.
4.
29. To handle or treat direétly.
We muſt immediately fall into our ſubjećt, and treat every
part of it in a lively manner. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 124.
30. To come vindićtively: as a puniſhment.
There fºll wrath for it againſt Iſrael. 2 Chron. xv. 9.
3. To co me by any miſchance to any new poſſeſſor.
... The ſtout biſhop could not well brook that his province
ſhould fall into their hands. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
32. To drop or paſs by careleſneſs or imprudence.
Ulyſſes let no partial favours fall,
The people's parent, he protećted all. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
Some expreſions fell from him, not very favourable to the
people of Ireland. Swift.
33. To come forcibly and irreſiſtibly.
Fear fell on them all.
A kind refreſhing ſleep is fallen upon him:
I ſaw him ſtretcht at eaſe, his fancy loſt
In pleaſing dreams. Addiſon's Cato.
34. To become the property of any one by lot, chance, inhe-
ritance, or otherwiſe.
All the lands, which will fall to her majeſty thereabouts,
are large enough to contain them. Spenſer on Ireland.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Then 'tis moſt like
The ſovereignty will fall upon Macbeth. Shakespeare Macbeth.
After the flood, arts to Chaldea ſe/;
The father of the faithful there did dwell,
Who both their parent and inſtructor was. Denham:
You ſhall ſee a great eſtate fall to you, which you would
have loſt the reliſh of, had you known yourſelf born to it.
Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 1 2 3.
If to her ſhare ſome female errours fºll,
Look on her face, and you'll forget them all. Pope.
In their ſpiritual and temporal courts the labour fall; to their
vicars-general, ſecretaries, proctors, apparitors and ſeneſchals.
* Swift's Conſiderations on two Billr.
35. To languiſh ; to grow faint.
Their hopes or fears for the common cauſe roſe or fell with
your lordſhip's intereſt. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
36. To be born ; to be yeaned. -
Lambs muſt have care taken of them at their firſt falling,
elſe, while they are weak, the crows and magpies will be apt
to pick out their eyes. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
37. To FALL away. To grow lean.
Watery vegetables are proper, and fiſh rather than fleſh: in
a Lent diet people commonly fall away. Arbuthnot on Diet.
38. To FALL away. To revolt; to change allegiance.
The fugitives fell away to the king of Babylon. 2 Kings xxv.
39. To FAll away. To apoſtatiſe; to fink into wickedneſs.
Theſe for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall
atuay. Luke viii. 13.
Say not thou it is through the Lord that I fell away; for
thou oughteſt not to do the things that he hateth. Eccluſ xv.
The old giants fell away in the ſtrength of their fooliſh-
neſs. Eccluſ xvi.
40. To FALL away. To periſh ; to be loſt.
Still propagate; for ſtill they fall away;
'Tis prudence to prevent th' entire decay. Dryd. Wirg. Geo.
How can it enter into the thoughts of man, that the ſoul,
which is capable of ſuch immenſe perfections, and of receiving
new improvement to all eternity, ſhall fall away into nothing,
almoſt as ſoon as it is created Addiſon's Spectator, N°. I 11.
4 I. ** away. To decline gradually; to fade ; to lan-
ll 11ſl.
£ In a curious brede of needlework one colour falls away by
ſuch juſt degrees, and another riſes ſo inſenſibly, that we ſee
the variety, without being able to diſtinguiſh the total vaniſh-
ing of the one from the firſt appearance of the other. Audſon.
42. To FA LL back. To fail of a promiſe or purpoſe.
We have often fallen back from our reſolutions,
43. To FAll back. To recede; to give away.
44. To FA Ll down. [down is ſometimes added to fall, though it
adds little to the ſignificatión.] To proſtrate himſelf in ado-
ration. - -
All kings ſhall fall down before him; all nations ſhall ſerve
him. - Pſ. lxxii. 1.
Shall I fall down to the ſtock of a tree? iſ xliv, 19.
45. To F A Ll down. To ſink; not to ſtand.
As ſhe was ſpeaking, ſhe fell down for faintneſs. Efth. xv.
Down fell the beauteous youth; the yawning wound
Guſh'd out a purple ſtream, and ſtain'd the ground. Dryden.
46. 7 o FALL down. To bend as a ſuppliant. t
They ſhall fall down unto thee; they ſhall make ſupplica-
tion unto thee. * * Iſ.. xlv. 14.
47. To FAll from. To revolt; to depart from adherence.
Clarence.
Is very likely now to fall from him. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
The emperor being much ſolicited by the Scots not to be a
help to ruin their kingdom, fell by degrees from the king of
England. Hayward.
Aéïs xix. 17.
-
Taylor.
8 T 48. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 425</div><p class="Text">F A L
F A L
48. To FAll in. To concur ; to coincide.
Objections fall in here, and are the cleareſt and moſt con-
vincing arguments of the truth. //codward's Nat. Hiſtory.
His reaſonings in this chapter ſeem to fall in with each
other; yet, upon a cloſer examination, we ſhall find them
propoſed with great variety and diſtinétion. Atterbury.
Any ſingle paper that ſal's in with the popular taſte, and
pleaſes more than ordinary, brings one in a great return of
letters. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 482.
When the war was begun, there ſoon fell in other inci-
dents at home, which made the continuance of it neceſ-
ſary. Swift.
49. To comply; to yield to.
Our fine young ladies readily fall in with the direétion of
the graver ſort. S; ediator, Nº. 536.
It is a double misfortune to a nation, which is thus given
to change, when they have a ſovereign that is prone to fall in
with all the turns and veerings of the people. Addison's Freeh.
You will find it difficult to perſuade learned men to fall in
with your projećts. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
That prince applied himſelf firſt to the church of England;
and, upon their refuſal to fall in with his meaſures, made the
like advances to the diſſenters. Swift.
5.o. To FALL off. To ſeparate; to be broken.
Love cools, friendſhip fall off, brothers divide; in cities,
mutinies; in countries, diſcord. Shakespeare King Lear.
51. To FAll ºff. To periſh; to die away.
Languages need recruits to ſupply the place of thoſe words
that are continually fall ng ºff through diſuſe. Fe ion.
52. To FAll off. To apoſtatiſe; to revolt; to forſake.
Oh, Hamlet, what a falling off was there! Shakespeare Haml.
Revolted Mortimer ?
—He never did fall off, my ſovereign liege,
But by the chance of war. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
They, accuſtomed to afford at other times either ſilence or
ſhort aſſent to what he did purpoſe, did then fall off and for-
ſake him. Hayward.
What cauſe
Mov'd our grand parents, in that happy ſtate,
Favour'd of heav'n ſo highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and tranſgreſs his will Milt, P. Lyſ. -
As for thoſe captive tribes, themſelves
Who wrought their own captivity, fell off
From God to worſhip calves. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Were I always grave, one half of my readers would fall off
from me. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 179.
53. To FAll on. To begin eagerly to do any thing.
Some coarſe cold ſallad is before thee ſet;
Bread with the bran perhaps, and broken meat;
Fall on, and try thy appetite to eat. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
54. To FAll on. To make an aſſault; to begin the attack.
They fell on, I made good my place: at length they came
to th' broomſtaff with me; I defied 'em ſtill. Shakespeare Hen.VIII.
Fall on, fall on, and hear him not;
But ſpare his perſon for his father's ſake. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
Draw all; and when I give the word fall on. Oedipus.
He pretends, amongſt the reſt, to quarrel with me, to have
fallen foul on prieſthood. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
55. To FALL over. To revolt; to deſert from one ſide to the
other.
And do'ſt thou nowfall over to my foes?
Thou wear a lion's hide | doff it, for ſhame,
And hang a calve's ſkin on thoſe recreant limbs. ShakespeareK.john.
56. To FAll out. To quarrel; to jar; to grow contentious.
Little needed thoſe proofs to one who would have fallen out
with herſelf, rather than make any conjećtures to Zelmane's
ſpeeches. Sidney, b. ii.
How fell you out, ſay that? .
—No contraries hold more antipathy,
Than I and ſuch a knave. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking ſweet favours for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her, and fall out with her. Shakeſpeare.
The cedar, by the inſtigation of the loyaliſts, fºll out with
the homebians, who had elečted him to be their king. Hºwel.
A ſoul exaſperated in ills, falls out
With every thing, its friend, itſelf. Addison's Cato.
It has been my misfortune to live among quarrelſome neigh-
bours: there is but one thing can make us fall out, and that is
the inheritance of lord Strut's eſtate... Arbuthnot's john Bull.
57. To FALL out. To happen; to befall.
Who think you is my Dorus fallen out to be 2 Sidney.
Now, for the moſt part, it ſo falleth out, touching things
which generally are received, that although in themſelves they
be moſt certain, yet, becauſe men preſume them granted of all,
we are hardlieſt able to bring proof of their certainty. Hooker.
It ſo fell out, that certain players
We o'er-rode on the way; of thoſe we told him. Shakeſp.
Yet ſo it may fall out, becauſe their end
Is hate, not help to me. Milton's Agoniſes.
There fell out a bloody quarrel betwixt the frogs and the
nice. L'E/irange, Fable 41.
If it ſo fall out that thou art miſerable for ever, thou haſt
no reaſon to be ſurpriſed, as if ſome unexpected thing had
happened. Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
58. To FALL to. To begin eagerly to eat.
The men were faſhion'd in a larger mould,
The women fit for labour, big and bold;
Gigantick hinds, as ſoon as work was done,
To their huge pots of boiling pulſe would run;
Fall tº, with eager joy, on homely food. Dryden's juven.
59. To FAll to. To apply himſelf to.
They would needs fall to the practice of thoſe virtues which
they before learned. Sidney, b. ii.
I know thee not, old man; fall to thy prayers:
How ill white hairs become a fool and jeſter | Shakespeare H. IV.
Having been brought up an idle horſeboy, he will never
after fall to labour; but is only made fit for the halter. Spenſer.
They fell to raiſing money under pretence of the relief of
Ireland. Clarendon.
My lady falls to play: ſo bad her chance,
He muſt repair it. Pope's Epiſt.
60. To FAll under. To be ſubjećt to; to become the objećt
of. -
We know the effects of heat will be ſuch as will ſcarce fall
wnder the conceit of man, if the force of it be altogether
kept in. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 99.
Thoſe things which are wholly in the choice of another,
fall under our deliberation. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
The idea of the painter and the ſculptor is undoubtedly
that perfect and excellent example of the mind, by imitation
of which imagined form all things are repreſented, which fall
under human fight. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
61. To FAll under. To be ranged with ; to be reckoned with:
No rules that relate to paſtoral can affect the Georgicks,
which fall under that claſs of poetry which conſiſts in giving
plain inſtructions to the reader. Addiſon on the Georgicks.
62. To FAll upon. To attack; to invade; to aſſault.
Auria falling upon theſe gallies, had with them a cruel and
deadly fight. Knolles.
An infection in a town firſt falls upon children, weak con-
ſtitutions, pr thoſe that are ſubjećt to other diſeaſes; but,
ſpreading flºº. ſeizes upon the moſt healthy. Temple.
Man falls upon every thing that comes in his way; not a
berry or a muſhrome can eſcape him. Addiſon's Speciator.
To get rid of fools and ſcoundrels was one part of my de-
ſign in falling upon theſe authors. Pope to Swift.
63. To FAll upon. To attempt.
I do not intend to fall upon nice philoſophical diſquiſitions
about the nature of time. Holder on Time.
64. To FAI’l upon. To ruſh againſt.
At the ſame time that the ſtorm bears upon the whole ſpe-
cies, we are falling foul upon one another. Addiſon's Spectator.
This is one of thoſe general words of which it is very dif-
ficult to aſcertain or detail the full ſignification. It retains in
moſt of its ſenſes ſome part of its primitive meaning, and
implies either literally or figuratively deſcent, violence, or ſud-
denneſs. In many of its ſenſes it is oppoſed to riſe; but in
others has no counterpart, or correlative.
To FAll. v. a.
1. To drop; to let fall.
To-morrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgeleſs ſword, deſpair and die. Shakespeare Rich. III.
If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
Each drop, ſhe falls, would prove a crocodile. Shakespeare Othell.
Draw together;
And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
To fall it on Gonzalo. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
I am willing to fall this argument: 'tis free for every man
to write or not to write in verſe, as he thinks it is or is not
his talent, or as he imagines the audience will receive it. Dryd.
2. To ſink; to depreſs.
If a man would endeavour to raiſe or fall his voice ſtill by
half notes, like the ſtops of a lute, or by whole notes alone
without halfs, as far as an eight, he will not be able to frame
his voice unto it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
3. To diminiſh in value; to let ſink in price. -
Upon leſſening intereſt to four per cent. you fall the price of
your native commodities, or leſſen your trade, or elſe prevent
not the high uſe. Locke.
4. To yean; to bring forth. -
They then conceiving, did in yearling time
Fall party-colour'd lambs, and thoſe were Jacob's. Shakeſp.
FALL. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The act of dropping from on high.
High o'er their heads a mould ring rock is plac'd,
That promiſes a fall, and ſhakes at ev'ry blaſt. Dryd. Æn.
2. The act of tumbling from an erect poſture.
I ſaw him run after a gilded butterfly ; and when he caught
it, he let it go again, and after it again; and over and over he
comes, and up again, and caught it again; or whether his fall
enraged him, or how it was, he did ſo ſet his teeth, and did
tear it. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A L
F A L
3. The violence ſuffered in dropping from on high.
My ſon coming into his marriage-chamber, happened to
have a fall, and died. 2 Eſdr. x. 48.
Spirit of wine, mingled with common water, if the firſt
fall be broken, by means of a ſop, or otherwiſe, ſtayeth
above; and if once mingled, it ſevereth not again, as oil
doth. Bacon’s Phyſ. Rem.
A ſever or full may take away my reaſon. Locke.
Some were hurt with the falls they got by leaping upon the
ground. Gulliver's Travels.
4. T)eath; overthrow; deſtruction incurred.
Wail his fall, A
Whom I myſelf ſtruck down. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Our fathers were given to the ſword, and for a ſpoil, and
had a great fall before our enemies. judith viii. 9.
I will begin to pray for myſelf and for them ; for I ſee the
falls of us that dwell in the land. 2 Eſdr. viii. 17.
5. Ruin ; diſſolution.
Paul's, the late theme of ſuch a muſe, whoſe flight
Has bravely reach'd and ſoar'd above thy height;
Now ſhalt thou ſtand, though ſword, or time, or fire,
Orzeal more fierce than they, thy fall conſpire. Denham.
6. Downfal; loſs of greatneſs; declenſion from eminence; de-
gradation; ſtate of being depoſed from a high ſtation; plunge
from happineſs or greatneſs into miſery or meanneſs.
Her memory ſerved as an accuſer of her change, and her
own handwriting was there to bear teſtimony againſt her
fall. Sidney, b. ii.
Perhaps thou talk'ſt of me, and do'ſt enquire
Of my reſtraint; why here I live alone; -
And pitieſt this my miſerable fall. Daniel’s Civil War.
He, careleſs now of int’reſt, fame, or fate,
Perhaps forgets that Oxford e'er was great;
Or deeming meaneſt what we greateſt call,
Beholds thee glorious only in thy fall. Pope to Parnel.
. Declenſion of greatneſs, power, or dominion.
*Till the empire came to be ſettled in Charles the Great,
the fall of the Romans huge dominion concurring with other
univerſal evils, cauſed thoſe times to be days of much afflic-
tion and trouble throughout the world. Hooker, b. v. ſ.41:
8. Diminution; decreaſe of price.
That the improvement of Ireland is the principal cauſe
why our lands in purchaſe riſe not, as naturally they ſhould,
with the fall of our intereſt, appears evidently from the effect
the fall of intereſt hath had upon houſes in London. Child.
9. Declination or diminution of ſound; cadence; cloſe of
muſick.
That ſtrain again; it had a dying fall:
O, it came o'er my ear, like the ſweet South
That breathes upon a bank of violets,
Stealing and giving odours. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
How ſweetly did they float upon the wings
Of ſilence, through the empty-vaulted night,
At ev'ry fall ſmoothing the raven down
Of darkneſs 'till it ſmil'd - Milton.
10. Declivity; ſteep deſcent.
Waters when beat upon the ſhore, or ſtraitned, as the falls
of bridges, or daſhed againſt themſelves by winds, give a
roaring noiſe. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 115.
11. Cataraćt; caſcade; ruſh of water down a ſteep place.
There will we ſit upon the rocks,
And ſee the ſhepherds feed their flocks
By ſhallow rivers, to whoſe falls
Melodious birds ſing madrigals. Shakeſpeare.
A whiſtling wind, or a melodious noiſe of birds among the
ſpreading branches, or a pleaſing fall of water running vio-
lently, theſe things made them to ſwoon for fear. Wiſd. xvii.
Down through the crannies of the living walls
The cryſtal ſtreams deſcend in murm'ring falls. Dryd, Virg.
The ſwain, in barren deſerts, with ſurprize
Sees lilies ſpring, and ſudden verdure riſe;
And ſtarts, amidſt the thirſty wilds, to hear
New falls of water murm'ring in his ear. Pope's Meſſiah.
Now under hanging mountains,
Beſide the falls of fountains,
He makes his moan;
And calls her ghoſt,
For ever, ever, ever loſt! Pope's St. Cecilia.
12. The outlet of a current into any other water.
Before the fall of the Po into the gulph, it receives into its
channel the moſt conſiderable rivers of Piedmont, Milan, and
the reſt of Lombardy. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
13. Autumn; the fall of the leaf; the time when the leaves
drop from the trees.
What crowds of patients the town-dočtor kills,
Or how laſt fall he rais'd the weekly bills. Dryden's juven.
14. Any thing that falls in great quantities.
Upon a great fall of rain the current carried away a huge
heap of apples. - L'Eſtrange.
5. The act of felling or cutting down: as, the fall of timber.
FALLA'CIOUS. adj. [fallax, Latin; fallacieux, French.]
1. Producing miſtake; ſophiſtical. It is never uſed of men, but
of writings, propoſitions, or things. -
They believed and aſſented to things neither evident nor
certain, nor yet ſo much as probable, but actually falſe and
fallacious ; ſuch as were the abſurd doctrines and ſtories of
their rabbies. - - South's Sermons.
2. Deceitful ; mocking expe&amp;tation. *
Soon as the force of that fallacious fruit,
That with exhilerating vapour bland . - -
About their ſpirits had play’d, and inmoſt pow'r -*
Made err, was now exhal’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
Falſe philoſophy inſpires
Fallacious hope. - - Milton.
FALLA'ciously. adv. [from fallacious.] Sophiſtically; with
purpoſe to deceive ; with unfound reaſoning.
We ſhall ſo far encourage contradićtion, as to promiſe not
to oppoſe any pen that ſhall fallaciouſly refute us. Brown.
We have ſeen how fallaciouſly the author has ſtated the cauſe,
by ſuppoſing that nothing but unlimited mercy, or unlimited
puniſhment, are the methods that can be made uſe of. Addison
FALLA’cious Ness. n.ſ.. [from fallacious.] Tendency to de-
ceive ; inconcluſiveneſs. - - * *
FA'LL Acy. m. ſ. [fallacia, Latin ; fallace, French.] Sophiſm ;
logical artifice; deceit; deceitful argument; deluſory mode of
IſatioCIIlation. - - -
Moſt princes make themſelves another thing from the
people by a fallacy of argument, thinking themſelves moſt
kings when the ſubječt is moſt baſely ſubjected. Sidney, b. ii.
Until I know this ſure uncertainty,
I'll entertain the favour’d fallacy. Shakespeare Comedy of Errours.
It were a mere fallacy, and miſtaking to aſcribe that to the
force of imagination upon another body, which is but the
force of imagination upon the proper body. Bacon's Na. Hiſt-
All men, who can ſee an inch before them, may eaſily de-
tect groſs fallacies. - ... Dryden.
FALLIBI'lity. n.ſ.. [from fallible.] Liableneſs to be deceived;
uncertainty; poſſibility of errour. - - - -
There is a great deal of fallibility in the teſtimony of men;
yet there are ſome things we may be almoſt as certain of as
that the ſun ſhines, or that five twenties make an hundred.
* * //atts's Logick.
FALLIBLE, adj. [falo, Latin. J Liable to errour; ſuch
as may be deceived. r
Do not falſify your reſolution with hopes that are# :
to-morrow you muſt die. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
He that creates to himſelf thouſands of little hopes, uncer-
tain in the promiſe, fallible in the event, and depending upon
a thouſand circumſtances, ſhall often fail in his expectations.
- Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Our intelle&amp;tual or rational powers need ſome aſſiſtance,
becauſe they are ſo frail and fallible in the preſent ſtate. Watts.
FA'LLING. m. ſ. [from fall.] Indentings oppoſed to promi-
nence.
It ſhows the noſe and eyebrows, with the ſeveral premi-
nencies and fallings in of the features, much more diſtinétly
than any other kind of figure. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
FA'LLINGsickness. n.ſ.. [fall and ſickneſs.] The epilepſy;
a diſeaſe in which the patient is without any warning deprived
at once of his ſenſes, and falls down. r
Did Caeſar ſwoon?—He fell down in the market-place, and
foam’d at mouth, and was ſpeechleſs.-He hath the falling-
ſickneſs. - Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
The dogfiſher is good againſt the fallinſickneſs. Walton.
FALLOW. adj. [palepe, Saxon.]
1. Pale red, or pale yellow. -
How does your fallow greyhound, fir
I heard ſay, he was out-run at Cotſale. Shakeſpeare.
The king, who was exceſſively affected to hunting, had a
great deſire to make a great park for red as well as fallow deer
between Richmond and Hampton-court. Clarendon.
2. Unſowed; left to reſt after the years of tillage. [Suppoſed
to be ſo called from the colour of naked ground.]
The ridges of the fallow field lay traverſed, ſo as the Eng-
liſh muſt croſs them in preſenting the charge. Hayward.
3. Plowed, but not ſowed; plowed as prepared for a ſecond
aration.
Her predeceſſors, in their courſe of government, did but
ſometimes caſt up the ground; and ſo leaving it fallow, it be-
came quickly overgrown with weeds. Howel's Vocal Forreſt,
4. Unplowed; uncultivated.
Her fallow lees -
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
Doth root upon. Shakespeare's Hºnry V.
5. Unoccupied; negle&amp;ted. -
Shall ſaints in civil bloodſhed wallow
Of ſaints, and let the cauſe lie fºllow. Hudibras, p. i. c. 2,
FALLow... n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive.]
1. Ground plowed in order to be plowed again.
The plowing of fallows is a very great benefit to land.
- Mortimer's Husbandry.
They are the beſt ploughs to plow up Summer fallow with.
- AMortimer's Husbandry.
7 2. Ground
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A L
F A L
2. Ground lying at reſt.
Within an ancient foreſt's ample verge,
There ſtands a lonely but a healthful dwelling,
Built for convenience, and the uſe of life;
Around it fallows, meads, and paſtures fair,
* A little garden, and a limpid brook, -
By nature's own contriyance ſeems diſpos'd. Row', j. Shºre.
To FA'llow. v. n. To plow in order to a ſecond plowing.
Begin to plow up fallows: this firſt fallowing ought to be
very ſhallow. Mortimer's Husbandry.
But the ground ought to be well plowed and fallowed the
Summer before. 4/or timer.
FA'llow Ness. n.ſ.. [from fallow.] Barrenneſs; an exemp-
tion from bearing fruit.
Like one, who, in her third widowhood, doth profeſs
Herſelf a nun, ty'd to retiredneſs,
S’ affects my muſe now a chaſte fallowneſ.
FALSE. adj. [falſus, Latin; faux, fauſe, French.]
1. Not morally true; expreſſing that which is not thought.
Innocence ſhall make
Falſe accuſation bluſh, and tyranny
Tremble at patience. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
There are falſe witneſſes among men. L’Eſtrange.
2. Not phyſically true; conceiving that which does not exiſt.
For how can that be falſe, which ev'ry tongue
Of ev'ry mortal man affirms for true
Which truth hath in all ages been ſo ſtrong,
As, loadſtone like, all hearts it ever drew. Davies.
A farce is that in poetry which groteſque is in a picture:
the perſons and action of a farce are all unnatural, and the
manners falſe; that is, inconſiſting with the characters of
mankind. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. Suppoſitious ; ſuccedaneous.
Take a veſſel, and make a falſe bottom of coarſe canvaſs:
fill it with earth above the canvaſs.
4. Deceiving expectation. -
The heart of man looks fair to the eye; but when we
come to lay any weight upon’t, the ground is falſe under us.
L'Eſtrange, Falle 54.
Donne.
5. Not agreeable to rule, or propriety.
Now, fy upon my falſe French; by mine honour, in true
Engliſh, I love thee, Kate. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
6. Not honeſt; not juſt.
What thou would'ſt highly,
That thou would'ſt holily; would'ſt not play falſe,
And yet would'ſt wrongly win. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The true prince may, for recreation ſake, prove a falz
thief; for the poor abuſes of the times want countenance.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
, Men are ſpunges, which, to pour out, receive;
Who know falſe play, rather than loſe, deceive. Donne.
7. Treacherous; perfidious; traiterous; deceitful; hollow.
- I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, falºe, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, ſmacking of ev'ry ſin
That has a name. Shakeſpeare's Machath.
Fale of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand. Shakeſpeare.
A man to whom he had committed the truſt of his perſon,
in making him his chamberlain; this man, no ways diſgraced,
no ways diſcontent, no ways put in fear, turns faſe unto
him. Bacon's 11&amp;nry VII.
So haſt thou cheated Theſeus with a wile,
Againſt thy vow, returning to beguile
Under a borrow'd name; as falſe to me,
So falſe thou art to him who ſet thee free. Dryden.
The ladies will make a numerous party againſt him, for
being falſe to love in forſaking Dido. Dryd, Virg. Æn. Ded.
8. Counterfeit; hypocritical; not real.
Falſe tears true pity moves: the king commands
To looſe his fetters. Dryden's Aºn. b. ii.
9. In all theſe ſenſes true is the word oppoſed.
To FALSE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To violate by failure of veracity.
Is’t not enough that to this lady mild,
Thou falſed haſt thy faith with perjury. Fairy Queen, b. i.
2. To deceive. -
Fair ſeemly pleaſance each to other makes,
With goodly purpoſes there as they fit;
And in his falſed fancy he, her takes
To be the faireſt wight that lived yet. Fairy Queen, h i.
3. To defeat; to balk; to ſhift; to evade, as fencers commonly
do.
But, Guyon, in the heat of all his ſtrife,
Was wary wiſe, and cloſely did await
Advantage, whilſt his foe did rage moſt rife;
Sometimes athwart, ſometimes he ſtrook him ſtrait,
And falſed oft his blows t’ illude him with ſuch bait. F. Q4.
4. This word is now out of uſe.
FALSE HEA'RTED. adi, [falſe and heart.]
I. Treacherous; perfidious; deceitful; hollow.
The traitorous or treacherous, who have miſled others,
are ſeverely puniſhed; and the neutrals and falſehearted friends
Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory. .
and followers, who have ſtarted aſide like a broken bow, he
noted. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
FA'ls E Hood. m. ſ. [from ſale.]
1. Want of truth ; want of veracity.
All deception in the courſe of life is, indeed, nothing elſe
but a lie reduced to practice, and falſehood paſſing from words
to things. South's Sermons.-
2. Want of honeſty; treachery; deceitfulneſs; perfidy.
3. A lie; a falſe affertion.
FA'LSELY. adv. [from falſe.]
1. Contrarily to truth; not truly.
Simeon and Levi ſpake not only falſely but infidiouſly, nay
hypocritically, abuſing proſelytes and religion. Gov. of Tongue.
Already were the Belgians on our coaſt, -
Whoſe fleet more mighty every day became
By late ſucceſs, which they did falſely boaſt,
And now by firſt appearing ſeem'd to claim. Dryd. Ann Mir.
Tell him, I did in vain his brother move,
And yet he falſº ſaid he was in love;
Falſely; for had he truly lov’d, at leaſt
He would have giv'n one day to my requeſt. Dryd. Aureng.
Such as are treated ill, and upbraided falſely, find out an
intimate friend that will hear their complaints, and endeavour
to ſooth their ſecret reſentments. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. Erroneouſly; by miſtake.
He knows that to be inconvenient which we falſely think
convenient for us. Smalridge's Sermons.
2. Perfidiouſly; treacherouſly; deceitfully.
FA'ls E N Ess. n.ſ.. [from falſ...]
1. Contrariety to truth.
2. Want of veracity; violation of promiſe.
Suppoſe the reverſe of virtue were ſolemnly ena&amp;ted, and
the practice of fraud and rapine, and perjury and fºlſeneſs to
a man's word, and all vice were eſtabliſhed by a law, would
that which we now call vice gain the reputation of virtue, and
that which we now call virtue grow odious to human na-
ture ? Willºtſon, Sermon 3.
3. Duplicity; deceit ; double dealing.
Piety is oppoſed to hypocriſy and infincerity, and all falſe-
meſ, or foulneſs of intentions, eſpecially to perſonated devo-
tion. Hammond's Fundamentals.
4. Treachery; perfidy; traitorouſneſs.
King Richard might create a perfeót gueſs,
That great Northumberland, then falſe to him,
Would of that ſeed grow to a greater falſeneſs. Shakespeare H IV:
The prince is in no danger of being betrayed by the falſe-
meſ, or cheated by the avarice of ſuch a ſervant. Rogers.
FA'LSER. m. ſ. [from falſe..] A deceiver; an hypocrite. Now
obſolete.
Such end had the kid; for he would weaned be
Of craft coloured with ſimplicity;
And ſuch cnd, pardie, does all them remain,
That of ſuch falſers friendſhip been fain. Spenſer's Paſłºrals.
FALSIFIA' L E. aav, (from ſa/ſy. J Liable to be counter-
feited or corrupted. - -
Falsific Aºtion. n ſ. ſ faftatiºn, French, frºm falſ;..]
I. The act of counterfeiting any thing ſo as to make it appear
what it is not.
Concerning the word of God, whether it be by miſcon-
ſtruction of the ſenſe, or by falºftiation of the words, witting-
ly to endeavour that any thing may ſeem divine which is not,
is very plainly to abuſe, and even to falſify Divine evidence,
which injury, offered but unto men, is moſt worthily counted
heinous. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 5.
To counterfeit the dead image of a king in his coin is an
high offence; but to counterfeit the living image of a king in
his perſon, exceedeth all falſifications; except it ſhould be that
of a Mahomet, that counterfeits divine honour. Bacon.
2. Confutation. .
The poet invents this fiction to prevent poſterity from
ſearching after this iſle, and to preſerve his ſtory from detection
of falſification. Notes on the Odyſſey.
FA'ls1} . ER. m.ſ.. [from falſify.]
1. One that counterfeits; one that makes any thing to ſeem
what it is not.
It happens in theories built on too obvious or too few ex-
periments, what happens to fi/fiers of coin ; for counterfeit
money will endure ſome one proof, others another, but none
of them all proofs. Boyle.
2. A liar; one that contrives falſhoods.
Boaſters are naturally falſifiers, and the people, of all others,
that put their ſhams the worſt together. L’Éirange's Patles.
To FA'lsify. v. a. [ ſaſſier, French. J
1. To counterf it; to forge; to produce ſomething for that
which in reality it is not.
We cannot excuſe that church, which either through cor-
rupt tranſlations of Scripture, delivereth, inſtead of divine
ſpeeches, any thing repugnant unto that which God ſpeak-
eth ; or, through falſified additions, propoſeth that to the
people of God as Scripture which is in truth no Scripture.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 19.
The Iriſh bards uſe to forge and fifty every thing as they
liſt, to pleaſe or diſpleaſe any inan. Spenſer on Iºland.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A M
F A M
2. To confute; to prove falſe. - - - -
Our Saviour's prophecy ſtands good in the deſtrućtion of
the temple, and the diſſolution of the Jewiſh oeconomy, when
Jews and Pagans united all their endeavours, under Julian the
apoſtate, to baffle and falſify the prediction. Addiſon.
3. To violate; to break by falſehood.
It ſhall be thy work, thy ſhameful work, which is in thy
power to ſhun, to make him live to ſee thy faith falſified, and
his bed defiled. Sidney, b. ii.
He ſuddenly falſified his faith, and villainouſly ſlew Selymes
the king, as he was bathing himſelf, miſtruſting nothing leſs
than the falſehood of the pyrate. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
This ſuperadds treachery to all the other peſtilent ingre-
dients of the crime; 'tis the falſifying the moſt important
truſt. Decay of Piety.
4. To pierce; to run through.
His creſt is raſh'd away, his ample ſhield
Is falſiff'd, and round with jav'lins fill’d. Dryden's Aºn.
Of this word Mr. Dryden writes thus. My friends quar-
relled at the word falſified, as an innovation in our language.
The fact is confeſſed; for I remember not to have read it in
any Engliſh author; though perhaps it may be found in Spen-
ſer's Fairy Queen. But ſuppoſe it be not there: why am I
forbidden to borrow from the Italian, a poliſhed language, the
word which is wanting in my native tongue Horace has
given us a rule for coining words, ſº graco fonte cadant, eſpe-
cially when other words are joined with them which explain
the ſenſe. I uſe the word faſſy, in this place, to mean that
the ſhield of Turnus was not of proof againſt the ſpears and
javelins of the Trojans, which had pierced it through and
through in many places. The words which accompany this
new one, makes my meaning plain:
Maſſ 1' Ubergo d'Ambi era perfetto,
Che mai poter falſarlo in neſum canto. Arioſto, cant. xxvi.
Falſar cannot otherwiſe be turned than by falſified; for his
ſhield was falſed, is not Engliſh. I might indeed have con-
tented myſelf with ſaying his ſhield was pierced, and bored,
and ſtuck with javelins. Dryden.
Dryden, with all this effort, was not able to naturaliſe the
new ſignification, which I have never ſeen copied, except
once by ſome obſcure nameleſs writer, and which indeed de-
ſerves not to be received.
To FA'ls IFY. v. n. To tell lies; to violate truth.
This point have we gained, that it is abſolutely and uni-
verſally unlawful to lie and falſify. South's Sermons.
FA'LSITY. m. ſ. [faſtas, Latin. J
1. Falſehood; contrariety to truth.
Neither are they able to break through thoſe errours,
wherein they are ſo determinately ſettled, that they pay unto
falſity the whole ſum of whatſoever love is owing unto God's
truth. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 49.
Can you on him ſuch falſities obtrude :
And as a mortal the moſt wiſe delude Sandy's Paraphraſe.
Probability does not properly make any alteration, either in
the truth or falſity of things; but only imports a different de-
gree of their clearneſs or appearance to the underſtanding.
South's Sermons.
2. A lye ; an errour; a falſe aſſertion or poſition.
That Danubius ariſeth from the Pyrenean hills, that the
earth is higher towards the North, are opinions truly charged
on Ariſtotle by the reſtorer of Epicurus, and all eaſily con-
futable falſities. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 20.
To FA'LTER. v. n. [faltar, to be wanting, Spaniſh; vault-
tur, a ſtammerer, Iſlandick, which is probably a word from
the ſame radical.]
1. To heſitate in the utterance of words.
With faltering tongue, and trembling ev'ry vein,
Tell on, quoth ſhe. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The pale affiſtants on each other ſtar'd,
With gaping mouths for iſſuing words prepar’d;
The ſtill-born ſounds upon the palate hung,
And dy'd imperfeót on the falt'ring tongue. Dryden.
He changes, gods ! and falters at the queſtion:
His fears, his words, his looks declare him guilty. Smith.
2. To fail in any act of the body.
This earth ſhall have a feeling; and theſe ſtones
Prove armed ſoldiers, ere her native kin
Shall fater under foul rebellious arms. Shakespeare Richard II.
3. To fail in any act of the underſtanding.
How far ideots are concerned in the want or weakneſs of
any or all faculties, an exact obſervation of their ſeveral ways
of faltering would diſcover. Locke.
To FA'LTER. v. a. To ſift; to cleanſe. This word ſeems to
be merely ruſtick or provincial.
Barley for malt muſt be bold, dry, ſweet, and clean faltered
from foulneſs, ſeeds and oats. Mortimer's Husbandry.
FALTER ING.I.Y. adv. [from falter. J. With heſitation; with
difficulty; with feebleneſs.
To FA'MBLE. v. a. [famler, Daniſh. J. To heſitate in the
ſpeech. This word I find only in Skinner.
FAME. n. ſ. [fama, Latin; ſpawa, Dorick.]
1. Celcbrity; renown. 2
The houſe to be builded for the Lord muſt be exceeding
magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout all countries.
1 Chro. xxii. 5.
The deſire of fame will not ſuffer endowments to lie uſe-
leſs. Addiſon's Speciator.
What is this fame, for which we thoughts employ,
The owner's wife, which other men enjoy Pºpe.
2. Report; rumour.
We have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in
Egypt. joſ. ix. 9.
I ſhall ſhew what are true fames. Bacon.
FA'MED. adj. [from fame. J Renowned; celebrated; much
talked of.
He is fam'd for mildneſs, peace and prayer. Shakespeare H. VI.
He purpoſes to ſeek the Clarian god,
Avoiding Delphos, his more fam'd abode, }
Since Phlegyan robbers made unſafe the road. Dryden.
Ariſtides was an Athenian philoſopher, famed for his learn-
ing and wiſdom; but converted to Chriſtianity. Addiſon.
FA'MEless. adj. [from fame.] Without fame; without re-
nown. .
Then let me, fameleſ, love the fields and woods,
The fruitful water'd vales and running floods. May's Virgil.
FAMILIAR adj. [familiaris, Latin.]
1. Domeſtick; relating to a family.
They range familiar to the dome. Pope.
2. Affable; not formal; eaſy in converſation.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Be not too familiar with Poins; for he miſuſes thy favours
ſo much, that he ſwears thou art to marry his ſiſter Nell. Shakespeare
3. Unceremonious; free, as among perſons long acquainted.
Kalandar ſtreight thought he ſaw his niece Parthenia, and
was about in ſuch familiar ſort to have ſpoken unto her; but
ſhe, in grave and honourable manner, gave him to underſtand
that he was miſtaken. Sidney.
4. Well known; brought into knowledge by frequent practice
or cuſtom.
I ſee not how the Scripture could be poſſibly made familiar
unto all, unleſs far more ſhould be read in the people's hear-
ing than by a ſermon can be opened. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
Let us chuſe ſuch limbs of noble counſel,
That the great body of our ſtate may go
In equal rank with the beſt govern'd nation;
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Our ſweet
Receſs, and only conſolation left
Familiar to our eyes | Miltºn's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
One idea which is familiar to the mind, connected with
others which are new and ſtrange, will bring thoſe new ideas
into eaſy remembrance. JWatts's Improvement of the Mind.
5. Well acquainted with ; accuſtomed; habituated by cuſtom.
Or chang'd at length, and to the place conform'd
In temper and in nature, will receive º
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain. Milton’s P. Loff.
The ſenſes at firſt let in particular ideas; and the mind, by
degrees, growing familiar with ſome of them, they are lodged
in the memory, and names got to them. Locke.
He was amazed how ſo impotent and groveling an inſect
as I could entertain ſuch inhuman ideas, and in ſo familiar a
manner, as to appear wholly unmoved at all the ſcenes of
blood and deſolation. Gulliver's Travels.
Patient permit the ſadly-pleaſing ſtrain;
Familiar now with grief, your tears refrain. Pope's Odſey.
6. Common; frequent.
To a wrong hypotheſis, may be reduced the errors
that may be occaſioned by a true hypotheſis, but not rightly
underſtood: there is nothing more familiar than this. Locke.
7. Eaſy; unconſtrained.
He unreins
His muſe, and ſports in looſe familiar ſtrains: Addiſon.
8. Too nearly acquainted.
A poor man found a prieſt familiar with his wife, and be-
cauſe he ſpake it abroad, and could not prove it, the prieſt
ſued him for defamation. - Camden.
FA'MILIAR. m. ſ.
1. An intimate; one long acquainted.
The king is a noble gentleman, and myČ. Shakeſp.
When he finds himſelf avoided and neglected by his fami-
liars, this affects him. Rogers, Sermon Io.
2. A demon ſuppoſed to attend at call. *
Love is a familiar; there is no evil angel but love. Shakeſp.
FAMILIA'RITY.. n.ſ.. [familiarité, French, from familiar.]
1. Eaſineſs of converſation; omiſſion of ceremony; affability.
2. Acquaintance; habitude.
We contračt at laſt ſuch an intimacy and familiarity with
them, as makes it difficult and irkſome for us to call off our
minds. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. Eaſy intercourſe. -
They ſay any mortals may enjoy the moſt intimate familia-
rities with theſe gentle ſpirits. Pope.
8 U. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A M
F A N
|
To FAMILIAR1'ze. v. a. [familiariſer, French. J
1. To make familiar; to make eaſy by habitude.
2. To bring down from a ſtate of diſtant ſuperiority.
The genius ſmiled upon me with a look of compaſſion and
affability that familiarized him to my imagination, and at once
diſpelled all fear and apprehenſions.
FA'MILIARLY. adv. [from familiar.]
1. Unceremoniouſly; with freedom like that of long ac-
quaintance. -
Becauſe that I familiarly ſometimes
Do uſe you for my fool, and chat with you, .
Your ſawcineſs will jeſt upon my love. Shakespeare Comed of Err.
He talks as familiarly of John of Gaunt as if he had
been ſworn brother to him; and I’ll be ſworn he never ſaw
him but once in the Tiltyard, and then he broke his head. Shakespeare
The governour came to us, and, after ſalutations, ſaid fami-
liarly, that he was come to viſit us, and called for a chair and
ſat him down. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Addiſon's Speciator.
2. Commonly; frequently; with the unconcernedneſs or eaſi-
neſs of long habitude or acquaintance.
Leſſer miſts and fogs than thoſe which covered Greece with
ſo long darkneſs, do familiarly preſent our ſenſes with as great
alterations in the ſun and moon. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the World.
3. Eaſily; without ſolemnity; without formality.
Horace ſtill charms with graceful negligence,
And without method talks us into ſenſe;
Will, like a friend, familiarly convey
The trueſt notions in the eaſieſt way. Pope's Eſ on Critic.
FAMILLE. en famille, French. É a family way; do-
meſtically.
Deluded mortals, whom the great
Chuſe for companions tete a tete;
Who at their dinners, en famille,
Get leave to fit whene'er you will. Swift.
FA'MILY. m. ſ...[familia, Latin; famille, French.]
1. Thoſe who live in the ſame houſe; houſehold.
The night made little impreſſion on myſelf; but I cannot
anſwer for my whole family; for my wife prevailed on me to
take ſomewhat. Swift.
2. Thoſe that deſcend from one common progenitor; a race; a
tribe ; a generation.
3. A claſs; a tribe; a ſpecies.
There be two great families of things, ſulphureous and
mercurial, inflammable and not inflammable, mature and
crude, oily and watry. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 354.
FA'MINE, n.ſ.. [famine, French; fames, Latin.] Scarcity of
food; dearth; diſtreſs for want of vićtuals.
Our caſtle's ſtrength
Will laugh a ſiege to ſcorn: here let them lie,
'Till famine and the ague eat them up. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Famines have not been of late obſerved, partly becauſe of
the induſtry of mankind, partly by thoſe ſupplies that come
by ſea to countries in want, but principally by the goodneſs
of God. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
This city never felt a ſiege before,
But from the lake receiv'd its daily ſtore;
Which now ſhut up, and millions crowded here,
Famine will ſoon in multitudes appear. Dryd. Indian Emp.
To FAMISH. v. a. [from fames, Latin; famis, old French.]
1. To kill with hunger; to ſtarve; to deſtroy by want of food.
What, did he marry me to famiſh me? Shakeſpeare.
The pains of famiſh’d Tantalus he'll feel,
And Siſyphus, that labours up the hill
The rowling rock in vain; and curſt Ixion's wheel. Dryd.
*. kill by deprivation or denial of any thing neceſſary to
l C,
Thin air
Above the clouds will pine his entrails groſs,
And famiſh him of breath, if not of bread. Milt. P. Loff.
To FA'Mish. v. n. To die of hunger. -
You are all reſolved rather to die than to famiſh. Shakesp. Coriol.
FA'MishMENT. n.ſ.. [from famiſh.] The pain of hunger;
want of food.
Apicius, thou did'ſt on thy gut beſtow
Full ninety millions; yet, when this was ſpent,
Ten millions ſtill remain'd to thee; which thou,
Fearing to ſuffer thirſt and famiſhment,
In poiſon'd potion drank'ſt. Hakewill on Providence.
FAMo'sit Y., n.ſ.. [from famous.] Renown; celebrity. Dići.
FA'Mous. adj. [fameux, French; famoſus, Latin.]
1. Renowned; celebrated; much talked of and praiſed.
Henry the fifth, too famous to live long;
England ne'er loſt a king of ſo much worth. Shakespeare Hen.VI.
There roſe up before Moſes two hundred and fifty princes
of the aſſembly, famous in the congregation, men of re-
in Own. Num. xvi. 2.
She became famous among women; for they had executed
judgment upon her. Ezek. xxiii. Io.
Pyreius was only famous for counterfeiting all baſe things;
as earthen pitchers, a ſcullery, rogues together by the ears,
and ſwine tumbling in the mire; whereupon he was firnamed
Rupographus. - Peacham on Drawing.
I ſhall be nam'd among the famºuſ/?
Of women, ſung at ſolemn feſtivals. Milton's Agoniſes.
Many, beſides myſelf, have heard our famous Waller own,
that he derived the harmony of his numbers from the Godfrey
of Bulloign, which was turned into Engliſh by Mr. Fairfax.
Dryden’s Fables, Dedication.
2. It has ſometimes a middle ſignification, and imports fame
whether for good or ill.
Menecrates and Menas, famous pyrates,
Make the ſea ſerve them. Shakeſp. Anthony and Cleºpatra.
FA'Mously. adv. [from famous.] With great renown; with
great celebration.
Then this land was famºuſly enriched
With politick grave counſel; then the king
Had virtuous uncles to protećt his grace. Shakespeare Rich. III.
They looked on the particulars as things famouſly ſpoken of,
and believed, and worthy to be recorded and read. Grew's Coſ.
FA'MousN Ess. n.ſ.. [from famous.] Celebrity; great fame.
FAN. n.ſ. [vannus, Latin.j
1. An inſtrument uſed by ladies to move the air and cool
themſelves.
With ſcarfs, and fans, and double change of brav'ry,
With amber bracelets, beads, with all this knav'ry. Shakespeare.
Flavia, the leaſt and ſlighteſt toy
Can with reſiſtleſs art employ:
In other hands the fan would prove
An engine of ſmall force in love;
But ſhe, with ſuch an air and mien,
Not to be told or ſafely ſeen,
Dire&amp;ts its wanton motions ſo,
That it wounds more than Cupid's bow;
Gives coolneſs to the matchleſs dame,
To every other breaſt a flame.
The modeſt fan was lifted up no more,
And virgins ſmil’d at what they bluſh’d before. Pope.
2. Anything ſpread out like a woman's fan into a triangle with
a broad baſe. -
As a peacock and crane were in company, the peacock
ſpread his tail, and challenged the other to ſhew him ſuch a
fan of feathers. L’E/irange.
3. The inſtrument by which the chaff is blown away when corn
is winnowed. [Wan, French.]
Flaile, ſtrawfork, and rake with a fan that is ſtrong. Tuff.
Aſſes ſhall eat clean provender, winnowed with the ſhovel
and with the fan. Iſ, xxx. 24.
In the wind and tempeſt of fortune's frown,
Diſtinétion, with a broad and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away. Shakespeare. Troil. and Cr.
For the cleanſing of corn is commonly uſed either a wicker-
fan, or a fan with ſails. Mortimer's Husbandry.
4. Anything by which the air is moved; wings. *
The pris’ner with a ſpring from priſon broke;
Then ſtretch'd his feather'd fans with all his might,
And to the neighb'ring maple wing'd his flight. Dryden.
5. An inſtrument to raiſe the fire.
Nature worketh in us all a love to our own counſels: the
contradićtion of others is a fan to inflame that love. Hooker.
To FAN. v. a.
1. To cool or recreate with a fan.
She was fanned into ſlumbers by her ſlaves. Spectator.
2. To ventilate; to affect by air put in motion.
Let every feeble humour ſhake your hearts;
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into deſpair. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
The Norweyan banners flout the ſky,
And fan our people cold. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
- The air
Floats as they paſs, fann'd with unnumber'd plumes:
From branch to branch the ſmaller birds with ſong
Solac'd the woods, and ſpread their painted wings,
*Till ev'n. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vii. l. 432.
The fanning wind upon her boſom blows;
To meet the fanning wind the boſom roſe:
The fanning wind and purling ſtreams continue her repoſe.
Dryden's Cymon and Iphigena.
Calm as the breath which fans our eaſtern groves,
And bright, as when thy eyes firſt lighted up our loves. Dryd.
And now his ſhorter breath, with ſultry air,
Pants on her neck, and fans her parting hair. Pºpe.
3. To ſeparate, as by winnowing.
I have colle&amp;ted ſome few, therein fanning the old, not
omitting any. Bacon's Apophthegms.
Not ſo the wicked; but as chaff, which, fann'd,
The wind drives, ſo the wicked ſhall not ſtand
Atterbury.
In judgment. t Milton.
FANA'ticism. n. ſ. [from fanatick.] Enthuſiaſm; religious
frenzy.
A church whoſe doćtrines are derived from the clear foun-
tains of the Scriptures, whoſe polity and diſcipline are formed
upon the moſt uncorrupted models of antiquity, which has
ſtood unſhaken by the moſt furious aſſaults of popery on the
one hand, and fanaticiſm on the other ; has triumphed º
al
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A N
F A N
all the arguments of its enemies, and has nothing now to con-
tend with, but their ſlanders and calumnies. Rogers's Sermons.
FANATICK. adj. [fanaticus, Latin; fanatique, Fr.] En-
thuſiaſtick; ſtruck with a ſuperſtitious frenzy.
After theſe appear'd
A crew. who, under names of old renown,
Oſiris, Iſis, Orus, and their train,
With monſt'rous ſhapes and ſorceries abus'd
Fanatick Egypt, and her prieſts, to ſeek
Their wand'ring gods diſguis'd in brutiſh forms, Milt. P. L.
FANA'tick. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive..] An enthuſiaſt; a man
mad with wild notions of religion. -
The double armature of St. Peter is a more deſtructive en-
gine than the tumultary weapon ſnatcht up by a fanatick.
Decay of Piety.
FA'Nc IFUL. adj. [fancy andſº
1. Imaginative; rather guided by imagination than reaſon.
Some fanciful men have expečted nothing but confuſion and
ruin from thoſe very means, whereby both that and this is
moſt effectually prevented. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Direéted by the imagination, not the reaſon; full of wild
images.
What treaſures did he bury in his ſumptuous buildings?
and how fooliſh and fanciful were they? Hayward.
It would ſhow as much ſingularity to deny this, as it does a
fanciful facility to affirm it. Garth's Preface to Ovid.
FA'Ncifully. adv. [from fanciful..] According to the wild-
neſs of imagination.
FA'Nciful Ness. n.ſ.. [from fanciful..] Addićtion to the plea-
ſures of imagination ; habit of following fancy rather than
reaſon.
Albertus Magnus, with ſomewhat too much curioſity, was
ſomewhat tranſported with too much fancifulneſs towards the
influences of the heavenly motions, and aſtrological calcula-
tions. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
FA'NCY. m. ſ. [contračted from phantaſy, phantaſia, Latin;
(payrzaſz.]
1. Imagination; the power by which the mind forms to itſelf
images and repreſentations of things, perſons, or ſcenes of
being.
Šuteja, fancy's ſweeteſt child ! Milton.
In the ſoul
Are many leſſer faculties, that ſerve
Reaſon as chief: among theſe fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful ſenſes repreſent,
She forms imaginations, airy ſhapes,
Which reaſon joining, or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm, or what deny, and call
Our knowledge, or opinion. , Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
Though no evidence affects the fancy ſo ſtrongly as that of
ſenſe, yet there is other evidence, which gives as full ſatiſ-
fačtion and as clear a convićtion to our reaſon. Atterbury.
Love is by fancy led about,
From hope to fear, from joy to doubt :
Whom we now a goddeſs call,
Divinity grac'd in every feature,
Strait's a deform'd, a perjur’d creature;
Love and hate are fancy all. Granville,
2. An opinion bred rather by the imagination than the reaſon.
Mens private fancies muſt give place to the higher judgment
of that church which is in authority over them. Hooker.
A perſon of a full and ample fortune, who was not diſ-
turbed by any fancies in religion. Clarendon, b. viii.
I have always had a fancy, that learning might be made a
play and recreation to children. Locke.
3. Taſte; idea; conception of things.
The little chapel called the Salutation is very neat, and built
with a pretty fancy, Addiſon on Italy.
4. Image; conception; thought.
How now, my lord, why do you keep alone;
Of ſorrieſt fancies your companions making,
Uſing thoſe thoughts which ſhould indeed have died
With them they think on Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
5. Inclination; liking; fondneſs.
Tell me where is fancy bred,
Or in the heart, or in the head 2
How begot, how nouriſhed :
It is engender'd in the eyes,
With gazing fed, and fancy dies -
In the cradle where it lies. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
His fancy lay extremely to travelling. L'Eſtrange.
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourſelf,
To fit your ſ. to your father's will;
Or elſe the law of Athens yields you up
To death, or to a vow of ſingle life. Shakeſpeare.
A reſemblance in humour or opinion, a fancy for the ſame
bufineſs or diverſion, is oftentimes a ground of affection.
Collier of Friendſhip.
6. Caprice; humour; whim.
True worth ſhall gain me, that it may be ſaid
Deſert, not fancy, once a woman led. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
The ſultan of Egypt kept a good correſpondence with the
Jacobites towards the head of the Nile, for fear they ſhould
take a fancy to turn the courſe of that river. Arbuthnot.
7. Frolick; idle ſcheme; vagary.
One that was juſt entring upon a long journey, took up a
fancy of putting a trick upon Mercury. L’Eſtrange.
8. Something that pleaſes or entertains.
The altering of the ſcent, colour, or taſte of fruit, by in-
fuſing, mixing, or cutting into the bark or root of the tree,
herb, or flower, any coloured, aromatical, or medicinal ſub-
ſtance, are but fancies: the cauſe is, for that thoſe things have
paſſed their period, and nouriſh not. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
London-pride is a pretty fancy, and does well for borders.
Mortimer's Huſandry.
To FA'Ncy. v. n. [from the noun..] To imagine; to believe
without being able to prove.
All are not always bound to hate and puniſh the true ene-
mies of religion, much leſs any whom they may fancy to be
ſo: all are always obliged to love its true friends, and to pray
for its very enemies. Spratt's Sermons.
If our ſearch has reached no farther than ſimile and me-
taphor, we rather fancy than know, and are not yet pene-
trated into the inſide and reality of the thing; but content
ourſelves with what our imaginations furniſh us with. Locke.
To FA'Ncy. v. a.
1. To portray in the mind; to image to himſelf; to imagine.
But he whoſe noble genius is allow'd,
Who with ſtretch'd pinions ſoars above the crowd;
Who mighty thought can clothe with manly dreſs,
He whom Ifancy, but can ne'er expreſs. Dryd, juven. Sat.
2. To like; to be pleaſed with.
Ninus both admiring her judgment and valour, together
with her perſon and external beauty, fancied her ſo ſtrongly,
as, neglecting all princely reſpects, he took her from her
huſband. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
It is a little hard that the queen cannot demoliſh this town
in whatever manner ſhe pleaſeth to fancy. Swift.
FANcyMo'NGER. m. ſ. [from fancy..] One who deals in tricks
of imagination.
There is a man haunts the foreſt, that abuſes our young
plants with carving Roſalind on their barks; hangs odes upon
hawthorns, and elegies on brambles; all, forſooth, º
the name of Roſalind. If I could meet that fancymonger,
would give him ſome good counſel; for he ſeems to have the
quotidian of love upon him. Shakeſp. As you like it.
FA'Ncy sick, adj. [fancy and ſick.] One whoſe imagination
is unſound; one whoſe diſtemper is in his own mind.
'Tis not neceſſity, but opinion, that makes men miſerable;
and when we come once to be fancyſick, there's no cure for
it. L’Eſtrange.
FANE. n.ſ.. [fane, French; fanum, Latin.] A temple; a place
conſecrated to religion.
Norfane, nor capitol,
The prayers of prieſts, nor times of ſacrifice,
Embarments all of fury, ſhall lift up
Their rotten privilege.
Old Calibe, who kept the ſacred fane
Of Juno, now ſhe ſeem'd. Dryden's Aen. b. vii. l. 589.
Yet ſome to fanes repair'd, and humble rites
Perform'd to Thor and Woden, fabled gods, -
Who with their vot’ries in one ruin ſhar'd. Phillips.
A ſacred fane in Egypt's fruitful lands,
Hewn from the Theban mountain's rocky womb. Tickell.
The fields are raviſh'd from th’ induſtrious ſwains,
From men their cities, and from gods their fanes. , Pope.
FANFARON. n.ſ. [French, from the Spaniſh. Originally in
Arabick it ſignifies one who promiſes what he cannot per-
form. Menage.]
1. A bully; a hector. .
2. A º a boaſter of more than he can perform.
There are fanfarons in the trials of wit too, as well as in
feats of arms; and none ſo forward to engage in argument or
diſcourſe as thoſe that are leaſt able to go through with it. L’Eſ’.
Virgil makes AEneas a bold avower of his own virtues,
which, in the civility of our poets, is the character of ºſ.
faron or hector. Dryden on Dramatick Poeſy.
FÅNFARonA'DE. n.ſ.. [from fanfaron, French..] A bluſter ;
a tumour of fićtitious dignity.
The biſhop copied this proceeding from theſº of
monſieur Bouffleurs, when the earl of Portland and that ge-
neral had an interview. Swift.
To FANG. v. a. [Fangan, Saxon; vangen, Dutch..] To ſeize;
to gripe; to clutch.
Deſtruction fang mankind!
FANG. m.ſ.. [from the verb ]
1. The long tuſks of a boar or other animal; anything like 'em.
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
The ſeaſon's difference; as the icy fang
And churliſh chiding of the Winter's wind; -
Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,
Ev’n’till I ſhrink with cold, I ſmile and ſay
This is no flattery. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Some
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Shakeſpeare's Timon.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A N
t
j
Some creatures have overlong or outgrowing teeth, which
we call ſongs, cr tuſks; as boars, pikes, ſalmons, and dogs,
though leſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 752.
Prepar'd to fly,
The fatal ſang drove deep within his thigh,
And cut the nerves: the nerves no more ſuſtain
The bulk; the bulk, unprop'd, falls headlong on the plain.
Dryden's Ovid, b. viii.
Then charge him cloſe, provoke him to the rage
Of fangs and claws, and, ſtooping from your horſe,
Rivet the panting ſavage to the ground. Addiſon's Cato.
2. The nails; the talons. - *
3. Any ſhoot or other thing by which hold is taken.
The protuberant fangs of the yuca are to be treated like
the tuberoſes. Evelyn's Kalendar.
FA'NG ED. adj. [from fang.] Furniſhed with fangs or long
teeth; furniſhed with any inſtruments of deſtruction, which
can be exerciſed in imitation of fangs.
* My two ſchoolfellows,
Whom I will truſt as I will adders fang'd,
They bear the mandate. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Not Scythians, nor fierce Dacians, onward ruſh
With half the ſpeed, nor half ſo ſwift retreat:
In chariots, fang'd with ſcythes, they ſcour the field,
Drive through our wedg’d battalions with a whirl,
And ſtrew a dreadful harveſt on the plain. Phillips's Briton.
FA'NGLE. m. ſ. [from renzan, Saxon, to attempt. Skinner.]
Silly attempt; trifling ſcheme. It is never uſed, or rarely,
but in contempt with the epithet new ; as, new fangles, new
fangleneſs.
FA'NGLED. adj. [from fangle.] This word ſeems to ſignify
gaudy; ridiculouſly ſhewy ; vainly decorated. This is ſtill
retained in Scotland: as, he's new fangled, or whimſical, and
very fond of novelty.
Quick wits be in deſire new fangled, and in purpoſe un-
conſtant. Aſcham.
A book! oh, rare one |
Be not, as in this fangled world, a garment
Nobler than that it covers. Shakeſpeare’s Cymbeline.
FA'NG less. adj. [from fang.] Toothleſs; without teeth.
- The king hath waſted all his rods
On late offenders, that he now doth lack
The very inſtruments of chaſtiſement;
So that his pow'r, like to a fangleſ, lion,
May offer, but not hold. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
FA'NGot. n.ſ. [. J A quantity of wares: as raw
ſilk, &amp;c. containing from one or two hundred weight three
quarters. JDić7.
FA'NNEL. n.ſ.. [fanon, French. J A ſort of ornament like a
ſcarf, worn about the left arm of a maſs-prieſt when he of.
ficiates. Die?.
FA'NNER. m. ſ. [from fan.] One that plays a fan.
I will ſend unto Babylon fanners that ſhall fan her. Jerem.
FA'NtAsie D. adj. [from fantaſy J Filled with fancies or wild
imaginations.
As I travell'd hither through the land,
I found the people ſtrangely fantaſied. Shakespeare King john.
FANTA's M. m. ſ. [See PHANTAs M.]
/~.
º }a} [fantaſiu, Fr. from fantaſ.)
1. Irrational; bred only in the imagination.
The delight that a man takes from another's ſin, can be
nothing elſe but a fantaſtical, preternatural complacency,
ariſing from that which he really has no feeling of. South.
2. Subſiſting only in the fancy; imaginary. w
- Preſent feats
Are leſs than horrible imaginings:
My thought, whoſe murther yet is but fantaſtical,
Shakes ſo my ſingle ſtate of man, that function
Is ſmother'd in ſurmiſe; and nothing is,
But what is not. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Men are ſo poſſeſſed with their own fancies, that they take
them for oracles; and are arrived to ſome extraordinary reve-
lations of truth, when indeed they do but dream dreams, and
amuſe themſelves with the fantaſtick ideas of a buſy imagi-
nation. Decay of Piety.
3. Unreal; apparent only; having the nature of phantoms
which only aſſume viſible forms occaſionally.
Are ye fantaſical, or that indeed
Which outwardly ye ſhew Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
4. Capricious; humourous; unſteady; irregular.
Nor happineſs can I, nor miſery feel,
From any turn of her fantaſtick wheel. Prizr.
5. Whimſical; fanciful; indulgent to one's own imagination.
They put ſuch words in the mouths of one of theſe fantaſ-
tical mind-infected people, that children and muſicians call
lovers. Sidney.
I’ll knit it up in ſilken ſtrings,
With twenty odd conceited true love knots:
To be fantaſtick, may become a youth
Of greater time than I. Shakespeare Two Gentlemen ºf Verona.
Duumvir is provided with an imperious, expenſive and fan-
foſtick miſtreſs; to whom he retires from the converſation of
a diſcreet and affectionate wife. Tatler.
We are apt to think your medalliſ's a little fantaſſical in the
different prices they ſet upon their coins, without any regard
to the metal of which they are compoſed. Addſ.n.
FANTA's Tically, adj. [from fantaſtical.]
1. By the power of imagination.
2. Capriciouſly; humourouſly; unſteadily.
England is ſo idly king’d,
Her ſceptre ſo fantaſticaly borne,
By a vain, giddy, ſhallow, humourous youth,
That fear attends her not. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
3. Whimſically; in compliance with mere imagination.
One cannot ſo much as fantº/lically chuſe, even or odd, he
thinks not why. Grew's Coſmol. b. ii. c. 4.
NTA' LN ESS. -
#º. ºf ſomfºntſial]
1. Humourouſneſs; mere compliance with fancy.
2. Whimſicalneſs; unreaſonableneſs.
- I dare not aſſume to myſelf to have put him out of conceit
with it, by having convinced him of the fantaſticalneſs of
it. Tilotſon, Preface.
3. Caprice; unſteadineſs. -
FAN TASY. n.ſ. [fantaſie, Fr. phantaſia, Latin; ©2vrarſ..]
1. Fancy; imagination; the power of imagining. See FANCY.
How now, Horatio you tremble and look pale !
Is not this ſomething more than fantaſy 2 Shakespeare Hamlet.
I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantaſy;
Which is as thin of ſubſtance as the air,
And more unconſtant than the wind, Shakespeare. Rom, andjuliet.
He is ſuperſtitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantaſy, of dreams, and ceremonies. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
Go you, and where you find a maid,
That ere ſhe ſleep hath thrice her prayers ſaid,
Rein up the organs of her fantaſy,
Sleep ſhe as ſound as careleſs infancy. Shakeſpeare.
Theſe ſpirits of ſenſe, in fantaſy's high court,
Judge of the forms of objećts, ill or well;
And ſo they ſend a good or ill report
Down to the heart, where all affections dwell. Davier.
By the power of fantaſy we ſee colours in a dream, or "a
mad man ſees things before him which are not there. Newton.
2. Idea; image of the mind.
And with the ſug'ry ſweet thereof allure,
Chaſte ladies ears to fantaſies impure.
3. Humour; inclination.
I would wiſh that both you and others would ceaſe from
drawing the Scriptures to your fantaſies and affections. Whitg.
FA'N to M. m. ſ. [See PHANToM.]
FAP. adj. Fuddled; drunk. It ſeems to have been a cant
word in the time of Shakeſpeare.
The gentleman had drunk himſelf out of his five ſenſes;
and being ſap, fir, was, as they ſay, caſhiered. Shakeſpeare.
FAR. adv. [peon, Saxon; fatt, Erſe.
1. To great extent in length.
'Pay ſacred rev'rence to Apollo's ſong,
Leſt wrathful the far-ſhooting god emit
His fatal arrows. Prior.
2. To a great extent every way. This leſs proper:
Vaſt and great
Is what I love: the far extended ocean
To a little riv'let I prefer. Prior.
With coſtly cates ſhe ſtain’d her frugal board;
Then with ill-gotten gold ſhe bought a lord:
Corruption, diſcord, luxury combin'd,
Down ſunk the far fam'd miſtreſs of mankind. Arbuthnot.
From the ſame lineage ſtern AEastes came,
The far fam'd brother of th’ enchantreſs dame. Pope.
3. To a great diſtance progreſſively.
Be factious for redreſs of all theſe griefs,
And I will ſet this foot of mine as far -
As who goes fartheſt. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
Is it far you ride?
—As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
'Twixt this and ſupper. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Far from that hated face the Trojans fly;
All but the fool who ſought his deſtiny. Dryden's Aºn.
4. Remotely ; at a great diſtance. - - - - - -
He meant to travel into far countries, until his friends af-
fe&amp;tion either ceaſed or prevailed. Sidney.
In a kingdom rightly ordered, after a law is once publiſhed,
it preſently takes effect far and wide; all ſtates framing them-
ſelves thereunto. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
And after that long ſtrayed here and there, -
Through every field and forreſt far and near. , Hubb. 7ale.
Far be it from me to juſtify the cruelties which were at
firſt uſed towards them, which had their reward ſoon after.
- Bacon's Holy War.
He ſent light horſemen into Meſopotamia with a guide, be-
cauſe
Hubberd’s Tale.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A R.
F A R
uſe the country was unto him beſt known 3. following not
}. after ...”. all his army. Knulle's Hiſ of the Turks.
And yet the lights which in my tower do ſhine,
Mine eyes, which view all obječis nigh and far,
Look not into this little world of mine.
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not moleſt us; unleſs we ourſelves - -
Seek them with wand'ring thoughts, and notions vain. Milt.
I have been hunting up and down, far and near, ſince your
Davieſ.
unhappy indiſpoſition, to find out a remedy. L'Eſtrange.
The nations far and near contend in choice,
And ſend the flow'r of war by publick voice. Dryden.
The painted lizard and the birds of prey, * . Ty-
Foes of the frugal kind, be far away. Dryden's Wirg. Geor.
. But from the reading of my book and me,
Pe far, ye foes of virtuous poetry!
Who fortune's fault upon the poor can throw,
Point at the tatter'd coat and ragged ſhoe. Dryden's Perſ.
Far off you view'd them with a longing eye
Upon the topmoſt branch. - - - Dryden.
Theſe words are ſo far from eſtabliſhing any dominion,
that we find the quite contrary. Loske.
*Till on the Po his blaſted corps was hurl’d, -
Far from his country, in the weſtern world. Addiſon's Ovid.
5. To a diſtance.
Asſar as the Eaſt is from the Weſt, ſo far hath he removed
our tranſgreſſions from him. Pſ. ciii. 12.
Neither did thoſe that were ſent, and travelled far off, un-
dertake ſo difficult enterprizes without a conductor. Raleigh.
But all in vain which when he ſaw, he ceas'd
Contending, and remov’d his tents far off. Milt. Par. Loft.
I had always a curioſity to look back into the ſources of
things, and view in my mind, ſo far as I was able, the be-
ginning and progreſs of a riſing world. Burn. Th. of the World.
A lion's hide around his loins he wore ;
The well-poiz'd javelin to the field he bore,
Inur'd to blood; the far deſtroying dart, - -
And the beſt weapon, an undaunted heart. Addiſon's Ovid.
6. In a great part. -
when i. were by Jebus the day was far ſpent, judg.
7. In a great proportion; by many degrees. - -
Who can find a virtuous woman for her price is far above
rubies. Prov. xxxi. Io.
Such a communication paſſeth far better through the water
than air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 134.
- - Thoſe countries have far greater rivers, and far higher
mountains to pour down waters, than any part of the old
world. Bacon's New Atlantis.
!. The face of war,
In ancient times, doth differ far
º From what our fiery battles are. Waller.
of negatives we have far the leaſt certainty, and they are
uſually hardeſt, and many times impoſſible to be proved. Tillot.
Latin is a more ſuccinét language than either the Italian,
Spaniſh, French, or even than the Engliſh, which, by reaſon
of its monoſyllables, is far the moſt compendious of them.
Dryden.
Beſides, he's lovely far above the reſt,
with you immortal, and with beauty bleſt.
Ah hope not yet to breathe thy native air;
Far other journey firſt demands thy care. Pope's Odſey.
8. To a great height; magnificently. This is perhaps only in
Shakeſpeare.
Pope.
I do not think -
So fair an outward, and ſuch ſtuff within,
Endows a man but him.
You ſpeak him far. -
——I don't extend him, ſir. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
. To a certain point; to a certain degree.
9 The i. of the ſervice of God, ſo far forth as it
hath in it any thing more than the law of reaſon, doth teach,
may not be invented of men, as it is amongſt the heathen;
but muſt be received from God himſelf. Hooker, b. i.
Anſwer them
How far forth you do like their articles. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Not to reſolve, is to reſolve ; and many times it breeds as
many neceſſities, and engageth as far in ſome other ſort, as
to reſolve. Bacºn.
Of this I need not many words to declare how far it is
from being ſo much as any part of repentance. Hammond.
My diſcourſe is ſo far from being equivalent to the poſition
he mentions, that it is a perfect contradićtion to it. Tillotſon.
The cuſtom of theſe tongues ſometimes ſo far influences
the expreſſions, that in theſe epiſtles one º; obſerve the
force of the Hebrew conjugations. Locke on St. Paul's Epiſtles.
1c. It is uſed often in compoſition: as farſhoºting, farſeeing: ,
FAR-FE'Tch. m. ſ. [far and fetch..] A deep ſtratagem. A ludi-
crous word.
But Jeſuits have deeper reaches,
! In all their politick farfetches; ..
And from their Coptick prieſt, Kircherus,
Found out this myſtick way to jeer us.
Hudibrag. p. iii.
FAR-FE'tched, adj. [far and fetch..] .
1. Brought from places remote.
...Qf theſe things others quickly will diſpoſe,
Whoſº pains have earn'd the farfetch'd ſpoil Mil. Pe. Lyt.
By his command we boldly croſs'd the line,
And bravely fought where ſouthern ſtars ariſe:
We trac'd the farfetch'd gold unto the mine,
And that which brib'd our fathers made our prize. Drydºn,
2. Studiouſly ſought; elaborately ſtrained; not eaſily or natural-
ly introduced. -
York, with all his farfetch'd policy. Shakespeare Henry VI.
For ſafetch'd rhymes make puzzled angels ſtrain,
And in low proſe dull Lucifer complain. Smith.
Under this head we may rank thoſe words, which ſignify
different ideas, by a ſort of an unaccountable farfetched analo-
gy, or diſtant reſemblance, that fancy has introduced between
one thing and another; as when we ſay, the meat is green
when it is half roaſted. //atts's Logick.
FAR-pie's cing. adj. [far and pierce.] Striking, or penetrating
a great way.
Atlas, her fire, to whoſe farpiercing eye
The wonders of the deep expanded lie;
Th’ eternal columns which on earth he rears,
End in the ſtarry vault, and prop the ſpheres. Pope's Odſ.
FAA-shootino, adj. [far and ſhoot. J Shooting to a great
diſtance.
Then loud he call'd /Eneas thrice by name;
The loud repeated voice to glad AEneas came;
Great Jove, he ſaid, and the farſhooting god,
Inſpire thy mind to make thy challenge good. Dryd. Æn.
FAR. adj.
1. Diſtant; remote.
But we muſt beg our bread in climes unknown,
Beneath the ſcorching or the freezing zone;
And ſome to far Oaxis ſhall be ſold,
Or try the Lybian heat, or Scythian cold. Dryden's Virgil.
2. It was formerly uſed not only as an adverb but an adjeaive,
with off.
%. things ſeem ſmall and undiſtinguiſhable,
Like far off mountains turned into clouds. Shakeſpeare.
If we may behold in any creature any one ſpark of that
eternal fire, or any far off dawning of God's glorious bright-
neſs, the ſame in the beauty, motion, and virtue of this light
may be perceived. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the ſºorld.
3. From FAR. In this ſenſe is uſed elliptically for a far or re-
mote place.
The Lord ſhall bring a nation againſt thee from far, from
the end of the earth. Deutr. xxvii. 49.
4. Remoter of the two; in horſemanſhip, the right ſide of the
horſe, which the rider turns from him when he mounts.
No true Egyptian ever knew in horſes . -
The far ſide from the near. Dryden's Cleomenes.
FAR. n.ſ...[contračted from farrow.] The offspring of a ſow;
young pigs.
Sows, ready to farrow this time of the year,
Are for to be made of and counted full dear;
For now is the loſs of the far of the ſow
More great than the loſs of two calves of the cow.
To FARCE. v. a... [farcio, Latin; farcir, French.]
1. To ſtuff; to fill with mingled ingredients.
Wreſtling is a paſtime which either the Corniſhmen de-
rived from Corineus, their firſt pretended founder, or at leaſt
it miniſtred ſome ſtuff to the farcing of that fable. Carew.
2. To extend; to ſwell out. - -
'Tis not the balm, the ſceptre and the ball,
The ſword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The entertiſſu’d robe of gold and pearl,
The farced title running 'fore the king. Shakespeare Henry V.
FAR ce. n. ſ. [from the verb; or from Jarcer, French, to
mock.] A dramatick repreſentation written without regu-
larity, and ſtuffed with wild and ludicrous conceits.
There is yet a lower ſort of poetry and painting, which is
out of nature; for a farce is that in poetry which groteſque
is in a pićture; the perſons and ačtions of a farce are all un-
natural, and the manners falſe; that is, inconſiſtent with the
charaćters of mankind: groteſque painting is the juſt reſem-
blance of this. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
What ſhould be great, you turn to farce. rior.
They object againſt it as a farce, becauſe the irregularity of
the plot ſhould anſwer to the extravagance of the characters,
which they ſay this piece wants, and therefore is no farce. Gay.
FA'R cical. adj. [from farce..] Belonging to a farce; appro-
priated to a farce.
They deny the characters to be farcical, becauſe they are
aćtually in nature. Gay's Preface to the What dye Call it.
FARCY, m ſ [farcina, Italian; farcin, French.] The leproſy
of horſes. It is probably curable by antimony.
FA's DEL. n.ſ.. [fardello, Italian ; fardeau, Fr.] A bundle;
a little pack.
, Let us to the king: there is that in this fardel will make
him ſcratch his beard. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Yale.
8 X
Tuſ.
Wh9
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A R
F A R
Who would fardels bear,
To groan and ſweat under a weary life? Shakesp, Hamlet.
To FARE. v. n. [ panan, Saxon; varen, Dutch..]
1. To go; to paſs; to travel.
At laſt, reſolving forward ſtill to fare,
Until the bluſtring ſtorm is overblown. Fairy Queen, b. i.
His ſpirits pure were ſubjećt to our fight,
Like to a man in ſhew and ſhape he fared. Fairfax.
So on he fares, and to the border comes
Of Eden. . Milton's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. iv. l. 131.
Sadly they far'd along the ſea-beat ſhore;
Still heav'd their hearts. Pope.
2. To be in any ſtate good or bad.
So bids thee well to fare thy nether friend. Fairy Queen.
A ſtubborn heart ſhall fare evil at the laſt. Eccluſ. iii. 26.
Well fare the hand, which to our humble fight
Preſents that beauty, which the dazzling light
Of royal ſplendor. -
So in this throng bright Sachariſſa far'd,
Oppreſs'd by thoſe who ſtrove to be her guard:
As ſhips, though never ſo obſequious, fall
Foul in a tempeſt on their admiral. J/aller.
So fares the ſtag among th’ enraged hounds;
Repels their force, and wounds returns for wounds. Denh.
But as a barque, that in foul weather,
Toſs'd by two adverſe winds together,
Is bruis’d and beaten to and fro,
And knows not which to turn him to ;
So far'd the knight between two foes, -
And knew not which of them tº oppoſe. Hudºras, p. i.
If you do as I do, you may fare as I fare. L’Eſtrange.
Thus fares the queen, and thus her fury blows
Amid'ſt the crowd. Dryden's AEm.
Engliſh miniſters never fare ſo well as in a time of war
with a foreign power, which diverts the private feuds and ani-
moſities of the nation, and turns their cfforts upon the com-
mon enemy. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 49.
Some give out there is no danger at all ; others are com-
forted that it will be a common calamity, and they ſhall fare
no worſe than their neighbours. Swift.
3. To proceed in any train of conſequences good or bad.
Thus it fareth when too much defire of contradićtion
cauſeth our ſpeeches rather to paſs by number than to ſtay for
weight. - Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 5.
So fare; it when with truth falſehood contends. Milton.
4. To happen to any one well or ill. With it preceding in an
imperſonal form.
When the hand finds itſelf well warmed and covered, let it
refuſe the trouble of feeding the mouth, or guarding the head,
'till the body be ſtarved or killed, and then we ſhall ſee how it
will fare with the hand. South's Sermons.
5. To feed ; to eat; to be entertained with food.
The rich man fared ſumptuouſly every day. Luke.
Feaſt your ears with the muſick awhile, if they will fare ſo
harſhly as on the trumpet's ſound. Shakeſpeare's ſimon.
Men think they have fared hardly, if, in times of extre-
mity, they have deſcended ſo low as dogs; but Galen deli-
vereth, that, young, fat, and gelded, they were the food of
many nations. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. iii. c. 25.
FAR E. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Price of paſſage in a vehicle by land or by water. Uſed only
of that which is paid for the perſon, not the goods.
He found a ſhip going to Tarfiſh; ſo he paid the fare there-
of, and went down into it to go with them unto Tarfiſh. jon.
He paſſage begs with unregarded pray’r,
And wants two farthings to diſcharge his fare. Dºyd. Juv.
2. Food prepared for the table; proviſions.
But come, ſo well refreſh'd, now let us play,
As meet is, after ſuch delicious fare. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
But when the weſtern winds with vital pow'r
Call forth the tender graſs and budding flow'r,
Then, at the laſt, produce in open air
Both flocks, and ſend them to their Summer's fare. Dryden.
This is what nature's want may well ſuffice;
He that would more is covetous, not wiſe:
But ſince among mankind ſo few there are,
Who will conform to philoſophick fare,
This much I will indulge thee for thy eaſe,
And mingle ſomething of our times to pleaſe. Dryd, juv.
Upon his riſing up he ordered the peaſant to ſet before him
whatever food he had in his houſe: the peaſant brought out a
great deal of coarſe fare, of which the emperor eat very
heartily. - Addſon's Guardian, Nº. 99.
FAR Ew (LL. adv. [This word is originally the imperative of
the verb fare well, or fore you well; ſº felix, abi in bonam
rem ; or bene ſit tibi; but in time uſe familiariſed it to an ad-
verb, and it is uſed both by thoſe who go and thoſe who are
left.
I. T parting complinent; adieu.
futſarewell, king; fith thus thou wilt appear,
Freedom lives hence, and baniſhment is here. Shakespeare K. Lear.
J/aller.
Farewell, maſter Silence: I will not uſe many words with
you; fare you well, gentlemen, both. Shakespeare Henry V.
hether we ſhall meet a ſain, I know not,
Therefore our everlaſting farewell take;
For ever, and for ever, farewell, Caſſius. Sºak. Ya'. Caſºr.
Be not amazed, call all your ſenſes to you; defend you re-
putation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever. Shaº.
An iron ſlumber ſhuts my ſwimming eyes; -
And now fºrewel, involv’d in ſhades of night,
For ever I am raviſh'd from thy fight. Dryden's Pirg, G, 2.
Farewell, ſays he , the parting found ſcarce fell
From his faint lips, but ſhe replied farewel. Dryden.
- O queen, farewell / be ſtill poſſeſ:
Qf dear remembrance, bleſing ſtill and bleſ Pope's Odſ.
2. It is ſometimes uſed only as an expreſſion of ſeparation with-
out kindneſs.
Farewell the year which threaten’d ſo
The faireſt light the world can ſhow. J/aller.
Treading the path to nobler ends,
A long farewell to love I gave;
Reſolv'd my country and my friends
All that remain'd of me ſhould have. JJ aller.
FAR Ewe’ll. m. ſ.
1. Leave; ačt of departure.
See how the morning opes her gºlden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious ſun. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
If chance the radiant ſun, with farewell ſweet,
Fxtend his ev’ning beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Atteſt their joy, that hill and valley ring. Milt. Par. Lº?.
As in this grove I took my laſt farewel,
As on this very ſpot of e-rth I fell. Dryden.
Before I take my farewell of this ſubječt, I ſhall adviſe the
author for the future to ſpeak his meaning more plainly. Addison
2. It is ſometimes uſed as an adjećtive; leave-taking.
Several ingenious writers, who have taken their leave of
the publick in farewell papers, will not give over ſo, but in-
tend to appear again ; though perhaps under another form, and
with a different title. Spectator, Nº. 445.
FARINA'ceous, adj. [from farina, Latin.] Mealy; taſting
like meal or flower of corn.
. The propereſt food of the vegetable kingdom for mankind,
is taken from the farinaceous or mealy ſeeds of ſome culmi-
ferous plants; as oats, barley, wheat, rice, rye, maize,
panick, and millet. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
FARM. n.ſ.. [ferme, French; reorm, proviſion, Saxon.]
1. Ground let to a tenant; ground cultivated by another man
upon condition of paying part of the profit to the owner or
landlord. *
Touching their particular complaint for reducing lands and
farms to their ancient rents, it could not be done without a
parliament. Hayward.
2. The ſtate of lands let out to the culture of tenants.
The lords of land in Ireland do not uſe to ſet out their land
in farm, for term of years, to their tenants; but only from
year to year, and ſome during pleaſure. Spenſer on Ireland.
To FARM. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To let out to tenants at a certain rent.
We are enforc'd to farm our royal realm,
The revenue whereof ſhall furniſh us
For our affairs in hand. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
2. To take at a certain rate.
They received of the bankers ſcant twenty ſhillings for thirty,
which the earl of Cornwall farmed of the king. Camden's Rem.
3. To cultivate land.
FA'R.M.E.R. m.ſ. [fºrmier, French; or from farm.]
1. One who cultivates hired ground.
Thou haſt ſeen a far me,’s dog bark at a beggar, and the
creature run from the cur: there thou might'ſt behold the
great image of authority; a dog's obey'd in office. Shakeſp.
2. One who cultivates ground, whether his own or another's.
Nothing is of greater prejudice to the farmer than the ſtock-
ing of his land with cattle that are larger than it will bear.
AMortimer's Huſbandry.
FA'RMost. n.ſ. [ ſuperlative of far. J. Moſt diſtant; re-
moteſt.
A ſpacious cave, within its farmoſt part,
Was hew’d and faſhion’d by laborious art,
Through the hill's hollow ſides. Dryden's 42n. b. vi.
FA'RN Ess. n.ſ.. [from far..] Diſtance; remoteneſs.
Their nearneſs on all quarters to the enemy, and their far-
meſ from timely ſuccour by their friends, have forced the com-
manders to call forth the uttermoſt number of able hands to
fight. - Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
FARRA'GINous. adj. [from far ago, Latin.] Formed of dif-
ferent materials.
Being a confuſion of knaves and fools, and a farra-
ginºus concurrence of all conditions, tempers, ſexes and ages,
it is but natural if their determinations be monſtrous, and
many ways inconſiſtent with truth. Brown's Pulgar Erroars.
FARRA GO. m. ſ. [ Latin. J A maſs formed confuſedly of
ſeveral ingredients; a medley. -
FA'RRIER.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A R
F A S
FA'RR ER. m. ſ. [ferrier, French; ferrarius, Latin.]
1. A ſhoer of horſes.
But the utmoſt exactneſs in theſe particulars belong to far-
riers, ſaddlers, ſmiths, and other tradeſmen. Digby.
2. One who profeſſes the medicine of horſes.
If you are a piece of a fairier, as every good groom ought
to be, get ſack, brandy, or ſtrong-beer to rub your horſes.
Swift's Directions to the Groom.
To FA'RRIER. v. n. [from the noun.] To practiſe phyſick
or chirurgery on horſes.
Though there are many pretenders to the art of farriering
and cowleeching, yet many of them are very ignorant. Mort.
FA'RRow. m. ſ. [peaſh, Saxon.] A little pig.
Pour in ſow's blood that hath litter'd
Her nine farrow. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To FAR Row. v. a. To bring pigs. It is uſed only of ſwine.
Sows ready to farrºw this time of the year, .
Are for to be made of. Tuſſ. Hush.
The ſwine, although multiparous, yet being biſuicous, and
only cloven-hoofed, is farrowed with open eyes, as other bi-
ſulcous animals. Brown.
Ev’n her, who did her numerous offspring boaſt,
As fair and fruitful as the ſow that carry'd
The thirty pigs, at one large litter farrºw'd Dryd, juven.
FART. n.ſ. ſ renº, Saxon.] Wind from behind.
Love is the fart -
Of every heart;
It pains a man when 'tis kept cloſe;
And others doth offend. when 'tis let looſe. Suckling.
To FART. v. a. [from the noun..] To break wind behind.
As when we a gun diſcharge,
Although the bore be ne'er ſo large,
Before the flame from muzzle burſt,
Juſt at the breech it flaſhes firſt ;
So from my lord his paſſion broke,
He farted firſt, and then he ſpoke. Swift.
FARTHER. adv. [This word is now generally confidered as
the comparative degree of far; but by no analoger can far
make farther or fartheft it is therefore probable, that the an-
cient orthography was nearer the true, and that we ought to
write further and furtheft, from forth, fºrther, fortheft, Fon-
*Son, punter, Saxon; the o and u, by reſemblance of ſound,
being firſt confounded in ſpeech, and afterwards in books.]
At a greater diſtance; to a greater diſtance; more remotely;
beyond; moreover. s
To make a perfeót judgment of good pićtures, when com-
pared with one another, beſides rules, there is farther required
a long converſation with the beſt pieces. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
They contented themſelves with the opinions, faſhions and
things of their country, without looking any farther. Locke.
FARTHER. adj. [ſuppoſed from far, more, probably from forth.]
1. More remote. -
Let me add a farther truth, that without thoſe ties of gra-
titude, I have a moſt particular inclination to honour you.
Dryden's juven. Dedication.
2. Longer ; tending to greater diſtance. -
Before our farther way the fates allow,
Here muſt we fix on high the golden bough. Dryden's AFn.
FA'RTHER ANCE. m. ſ. [ more properly furtherance, from fur-
ther.] Encouragement; promotion.
That was the foundation of the learning I have, and of all
the fartherance that I have obtained. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
FARTHERMo'R.E. adv. [more properly furthermore.] Beſides;
over and above; likewiſe.
Farthermore the leaves, body and boughs of this tree, by
ſo much exceed all other plants, as the greateſt men of power
and worldly ability ſurpaſs the meaneſt. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
To FA'RTHER. v. a. [more proper To further.] To promote;
to facilitate ; to advance.
If he had farthered or hindered the taking of the town,
- Dryden's Dedicat. to the Æn.
FA'RTHE T. adu. [more properly furthſ. See FARTHER..]
1. At the greateſt diſtance. .
2. To the greateſt diſtance.
FA'RTHEST. adj. Moſt diſtant; remoteſt. -
Yet it muſt be withal conſidered, that the greateſt part of
the world are they which be farth'ſ from perfection. Hooker.
FA'RTHING. m. ſ. [peorºlinx, Saxon, from peopen, four, that
is, the fourth part of a penny..] -
1. The fourth of a penny the ſmalleſt Engliſh coin.
A farthing is the leaſt denomination or fraćtion of money
uſed in England. Cocker's Arithmetick.
Elſe all thoſe things we toil ſo hard in,
Would not avail one ſingle farthing. Prior.
2. Copper money. -
The pariſh find, 'tis true; but our church-wardens
Feed on the ſilver, and give us the farthings. Gay.
You are not obliged to take money not of gold or ſilver;
not the halfpence or farthings of England. Swift.
3. It is uſed ſometimes in a ſenſe hyperbolical: as, it is not
worth a ſarthing; or proverbial.
His ſon builds on, and never is content,
*Till the laſt farthing is in ſtructure ſpent. Dryden's juven.
FA'RTHING Ale. n.ſ. [This word has much exerciſed the ety-
mology of Skinner, who at laſt ſeems to determine that it is
derived from vertu garde: if he had conſidered what vert ſig-
nifies in Dutch, he might have found out the true ſenſe..] A
hoop; circles of whalebone uſed to ſpread the petticoat to a
wide circumference. -
With ſilken coats, and caps, and golden rings,
With ruffs, and cuffs, and farthingales, and things. Shakeſp.
Tell me,
What compaſs will you wear your farthingale? Shakeſp.
Arthur wore in hall
Round table, like a farthingal. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
Some will have it that it portends the downfal of the French
king; and obſerve, that the farthingale appeared in England
a little before the ruin of the Spaniſh monarchy. Addiſon.
She ſeems a medley of all ages,
With a huge farthingale to ſwell her fuſtian ſtuff,
A new commode, a topknot, and a ruff. Swift.
FA'RTHINGsworth. m. ſ. [farthing and worth.] As much as
is ſold for a farthing.
They are thy cuſtomers; I hardly ever ſell them afarthings-
worth of any thing. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
FASCES. n.ſ. [Latin.] Rods anciently carried before the con-
ſuls as a mark of their authority.
The duke beheld, like Scipio, with diſdain,
That Carthage, which he ruin'd, riſe once more;
And ſhook aloft the faſces of the main,
To fright thoſe ſlaves with what they felt before. Dryden.
FASCIA. m. ſ. [Latin.] A fillet; a bandage.
FA'scIAtED. adj. [from faſcia.] Bound with fillets; tied with
a bandage. - Dić?.
Fasci Aºtion. m. ſ. [from faſcia.] Bandage; the aët or man-
ner of binding diſeaſed parts.
Three eſpecial ſorts of faſciation, or rowling, have the wor-
thies of our profeſſion commended to poſterity. //ſeman.
To FASCINATE. v. a. [faſcino, Latin.] To bewitch; to
enchant; to influence in ſome wicked and ſecret manner.
There be none of the affections which have been noted to
faſcinate or bewitch, but love and envy. Baco', Eſſay 9.
Such a faſcinating fin this is, as allows men no liberty of
conſideration. Decay of Piety.
FAscINA'tion. m. ſ. [ from faſcinate.] The power or act of
bewitching; enchantment; unſeen inexplicable influence.
He had ſuch a crafty and bewitching faſhion, both to move
pity and to induce belief, as was like a kind of faſcination and
enchantment to thoſe that ſaw him or heard him. Bacon.
The Turks hang old rags, or ſuch like ugly things, upon
their faireſt horſes, and other goodly creatures, to ſecure them
againſt faſcination. J/aller.
There is a certain bewitchery or faſcination in words,
which makes them operate with a force beyond what we can
naturally give an account of. South's Sermons.
FASCINE. n.ſ. [French.J. A faggot. Military cant.
The black prince paſſed many a river without the help of
pontoons, and filled a ditch with faggots as ſucceſsfully as the
generals of our times do with faſcines. Addiſon's Spectator.
FA'scINous, adj. [faſcinum, Latin. J. Cauſed or acting by
witchcraft, or enchantment.
I ſhall not diſcuſs the poſſibility of faſcinous diſeaſes, farther
than refer to experiment. Harvey on Conſumptions.
FASHION. m. ſ. [fagon, French ; facies, Latin.]
1. Form; make ; ſtate of any thing with regard to its outward
appearance.
They pretend themſelves grieved at our ſolemnities in erect-
ing churches, at their form and faſhion, at the ſtatelineſs of
them and coſtlineſs, and at the opinion which we have of
them. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 17.
The faſhion of his countenance was altered. Luke ix. 29.
Stand theſe poor people's friend.
—I will,
Or let me loſe the faſhion of a man: Shakespeare Henry VIII.
2. The make or cut of cloaths.
I’ll be at charges for a looking-glaſs,
And entertain a ſcore or two of taylors,
To ſtudy faſhiºns to adorn my body. , Shakespeare Richard HI.
You, ſir, I entertain for one of my hundred ; only, I do
not like the faſhion of your garments. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. Manner; ſort; way.
For that I love your daughter
In ſuch a righteous faſhion as I do,
Perforce againſt all checks, rebukes, and manners,
I muſt advance. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſºr.
Pluck Caſca by the ſleeve,
And he will, after his ſour faſhion, tell you
What hath proceeded. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
The commiſſioners either pulled down or defaced all images
in churches; and that in ſuch unſeaſonable and unſeaſoned
faſhion, as if it had been done in hoſtility againſt them. Hayw.
4. Cuſtom operating upon dreſs, or any domeſtick ornaments.
Here's
2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A S
F A S
Here's the note
How much your chain weighs to the utmoſt carat,
- The fineneſ of the gold, the chargeful faſhion. Shakeſpeare,
5. Cuſtom; general practice. . . . . . .
Zelmane again, with great admiration, begun to ſpeak of
him; aſking whether it were the faſhion or no, in Arcadia,
that ſhepherds ſhould perform ſuch valorous enterprizes. Sidn.
Though the truth of this hath been univerſally acknow-
ledged, yet becauſe the faſhion of the age is to call every thing
into queſtion, it will be requiſite to ſatisfy mens reaſon about
it. Tillotſon, Sermon 3.
why truly, wife, it was not eaſily reconciled to the com-
mon method; but then it was the faſhion to do ſuch things.
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
6. Manner imitated from another; way eſtabliſhed by precedent.
Sorrow ſo royally in you appears,
That I will deeply put the faſhion on,
And wear it in my heart.
'7. General approbation; mode. - -
A young gentleman accommodates himſelf to the innºcent
diverſions in faſhion. Locke.
His panegyricks were beſtowed only on ſuch perſons as he
had familiarly known, and only at ſuch times as others ceaſe
to praiſe, when out of power, or out of faſhion. . . Pope.
8. Rank; condition above the vulgar. It is uſed in a ſenſe
below that of quality.
It is ſtrange that men of faſhion, and gentlemen, ſhould ſo
groſy belie their own knowledge. Raleigh.
9. Any thing worn. -
Now, by this maiden bloſſom in my hand,
I ſcorn thee, and thy faſhion, peeviſh boy. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
1o. The farcy; a diſtemper in horſes; the horſes leproſy. A
barbarous word. - -
His horſe is poſſeſt with the glanders, infected with the
faſhions, and full of windgalls. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
Tº Fa'sition. v. a. [façonner, French, from the noun.]
1. To form; to mould; to figure.
He loves me well, and I have giv'n him reaſons;
Send him but hither, and I'll faſhion him. Shakespeare juſ, Caſar.
Did not he that made me in the womb, make him And
did not one faſhion us in the womb? jab xxxi. 15.
The graves of the rebellious generations were already
faſhiºned in the clouds, which ſoon after ſhould ſwallow up all
living creatures. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
The rib he form’d, and faſhion'd with his hands:
Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Man like, but different ſex. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii.
Inability will every one find in himſelf, who ſhall go about
to faſhiºn in his underſtanding any ſimple idea, not received by
his ſenſes from external objects, or by reflection from the ope-
rations of his mind about them. Locke.
How could this noble fabrick be deſign'd,
And faſhion'd, by a maker brute and blind
Could it of art ſuch miracles invent}
And raiſe a beauteous world of ſuch extent : Blackm, Creat.
A different toil another forge employs,
Here the loud hammer faſhions female toys;
Each trinket that adorns the modern dame,
Firſt to theſe little artiſts ow'd its frame.
2. To fit; to adapt; to accommodate.
Laws ought to be faſhioned unto the manners and conditions
of the people to whom they are meant, and not to be im-
poſed upon them according to the ſimple rule of right. Spenſer.
Ne do, I doubt, but that ye well can faſhion
Yourſelves thereto, according to occaſion. Hubb. Tale.
Nature, as it grows again tow'rds earth,
Is faſhion'd for the journey, dull and heavy. Shakeſp. Timon.
- This cardinal,
: Though from an humble ſtock undoubtedly,
- Was (... to much honour from his cradle. Sh, H. VIII.
3. To caſt into external appearance,
It better fits my blood to be diſdained of all, than to faſhion
a carriage to rob love from any. Shakesp. Much Ado about Nothing.
4. To make according to the rule preſcribed by cuſtom.
The value of the labour employed about one parcel of ſilver
more than another, makes a difference in their price; and
thus faſhioned plate ſells for more than its weight. Locke.
FA's Hion ABLE. adj. [from faſhion.]
1. Approved by cuſtom ; eſtabliſhed by cuſtom; modiſh.
The eminence of your condition, and the gallantry of
your principles, will invite gentlemen to the uſeful and en-
nobling ſtudy of nature, and make philoſophy faſhionable. Glan.
Examine how the faſhionable practice of the world can be
reconciled to this important doćtrine of our religion. Rºgers.
'Tis prevailing example that hath now made it faſhion-
able. Bentley.
2. Made according to the mode.
Rich, faſhionable robes her perſon deck;
Pendants her ears, and pearls adorn her neck. Dryd. Ovid.
3. Obſervant of the mode.
Time is like a faſhionable hoſt,
Shakeſpeare.
Gay's Fan.
That ſlightly ſhakes his parting gueſt by th’ hand;
But with his arms outſtretch'd, as he would fly,
Graſps in the comer: welcome ever ſmiles,
And farewell goes out ſighing. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
4. Having rank above the vulgar, and below nobility.
FA's HIon A BLEN Ess. m. ſ. [from foſſionable. J Ki-in ele-
gance; ſuch appearance as is according to the preſent cuſtom.
Why ſhould they not continue to value themſelves for this
outſide faſhionableneſ of the taylor or tirewoman's making,
zºn their parents have ſo early inſtructed them to jº,
o Locke.
Fa'shionABLY. adv, [from faſhiºnable.] In a manner con-
formable to cuſtom; with modiſh elegance.
He muſt at length die dully of old age at home, when here
he might ſofaſhionably and genteelly have been duelled or fluxed
into another world. - South's Sermons.
FA's HIonist. m. ſ. [from faſhion.] "A follower of the mode;
a fop; a coxcomb. Dić.
To FAST. v. n. [faſtan, Gothick; an, Saxon.
1. To abſtain H.;; paerzan, J
Our love is not ſo great, Hortenſio,
But we may blow our nails together,
And faſt it fairly out. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
I had rather faſt from all four days than drink ſo much in
One. Shakespeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
We have ſome meats, and breads, and drinks, which taken
by men enable them to faſt long after. Bacon's New Atlantii.
2. To mortify the body by religious abſtinence.
When thoufoſºft, anoint thy head and waſh thy face, that
thou appear not unto men to faſt, Mat. vi.
I Laſt night the very god ſhew'd me a viſion:
aſ, and pray'd for their intelligence. Shakespeare Cymbelin
FA ...ſº/ [from the verb.] g 'ſ C; 4.
1. Abſtinence from food.
A thouſand men have broke their faſts to-day,
That ne'er ſhall dine, unleſs thou yield the crown. Shakesp.
Where will this end? Four times ten days I’ve paſs'd,
Wand'ring this woody maze, and human food
Nortaſted, nor had appetite; that faſt
To virtue I impute not, or count part
Of what I ſuffer here. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii.
Happy and innocent were the ages of our fore-fathers, who
broke their faſt, with herbs and roots; and when they were
permitted fleſh, eat it only dreſſed with hunger and fire. Taylor.
She's gone unkindly, and refus’d to caſt
Qne glance to feed me for ſo long a ſºft. Dryd Tyran. Love.
2. Religious mortification by abſtinence; religious humiliation.
We humble ourſelves before God this day, not merely by
the outward ſolemnities of a fly?, but by afflićting our ſouls as
well as bodies for our ſins. Atterbury’s Sermons.
Nor pray'rs nor fo/is its ſtubborn pulſe reſtrain;
Nor tears, for ages, taught to flow in vain. Pope.
Fast, adj. [ paert, Saxon. J
1. Firm; immoveable.
He by his ſtrength ſetteth faſt mountains. Pſ. lxv. 6,
Laſt, the fire and his three ſons,
With their four wives; and God made faſt the door. Milt,
Be ſure to find,
What I foretold thee, many a hard aſſay
Of dangers and adverſities, and pains,
Ere thou of Iſrael's ſceptre get faſt hold. Milt. Par. Rºg,
2. Strong; impregnable.
England, by report of the chronicles, was infeſted with
robbers and outlaws; which, lurking in woods and fo/?places,
* ºften to break forth to rob and ſpoil. Spenſer on Ireland.
3. 1XCC1.
Lodronius, with the breaking in and force of the horſemen,
was driven into a marſh; where, after that he, being ſore
wounded, and almoſt faſt in the deep mud, had done the ut-
termoſt of that his laſt endeavour, he yielded himſelf. Knolles.
A man in a boat, who tugs at a rope that's ſoft to a ſhip,
looks as if he reſolved to draw the ſhip to him. Temple:
4. Deep; ſound.
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, take paper, fold it, ſeal
it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a moſt faſt
ſleep. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
5. Firm in adherence.
Quick wits be in deſire new-fangled; in purpoſe, uncon-
ſtant; light to promiſe any thing, ready to forget everything,
both benefit and injury; and thereby neither faſt to friend,
nor fearful to foe. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
6. [from ſºft, Welſh, quick J Speedy; quick; ſwift.
This work goeth faſt on, and proſpereth in their hands.
Ezra v. viii. ,
Skill comes ſo ſlow, and life ſofaſ doth fly,
We learn ſo little, and forget ſo much. Davier.
The prince groweth up fo/? to be a man, and is of a ſweet
and excellent diſpoſition: it would be a ſtain upon you if you
ſhould miſlead, or ſuffer him to be miſled. Bacon to Williers.
7. FAST and lºſ. Uncertain; variable; inconſtant; de-
ceitful.
!
5 If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A S
F A T
A rope of fair pearl, which now hiding, now hidden by
the hair, did, as it were, play at faſt and loſe each with other,
giving and receiving richneſs. Sidney.
if ſhe perceived by his outward chear,
That any would his love by taſk bewray,
* Sometimes ſhe heard him, ſometimes ſtopt her ear,
And play’d fº/? and loºſe the live-long day. Fairfax, b. v.
The folly and wickedneſs of men, that think to play faſt
and looſe with God Almighty L’E/irange.
lf they cohered, yet by the next conflićt with other atoms
they might be ſeparated again; and ſo on in an eternal viciſſi-
tude of faſt and ſo ſº, without ever conſociating into the huge
condenſe bodies of planets. Bentley’s Sermºns.
FAs T. adv. º
1. Firmly ; immoveably.
Eind the boy, which you ſhall find with me,
Foſſ to the chair. Shakeſpeare's King john.
This love of theirs myſelf have often ſeen,
Haply when they have judg’d me ſoft aſleep. Shakeſpeare.
2. Cloſely ; nearly. -
Barbaroſła left fourteen galleys in the lake; but the tack-
lings, ſails, oars, and ordnance he had laid up in the caſtle
faſt by. Knºlles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Siloa's brook, that flow'd
Faſt by the oracle of God. AMilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
Let purling ſtreams be in her fancy ſeen, -
And flow'ry meads, and vales of chearful green;
And in the midſt of deathleſs groves
Soft ſighing wiſhes lie,
And finiling hopes faſt by,
And juſt ..". * loves. Dryd. Tyr. Love.
Foſt by the throne obſequious fame reſides,
And wealth inceſſant rolls her golden tides. Pope's Odyſſey.
Well known to me the palace you inquire ;
- Fºſſ. beſide it dwells my honour'd fire. Pope's Odyſſey.
ere o'er the martyr-king the marble weeps,
And faſt beſide him once-fear'd Edward ſleeps.
3. Swiftly ; nimbly. f
I would give a thouſand pound I could run as faſt as thou
can'ſt. Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. i.
There ſtreams a ſpring of blood ſo foſt,
From thoſe deep wounds, as all embru'd the face. Daniel.
The heavieſt muſe the ſwifteſt courſe has gone,
As clocks run faſteſt when moſt lead is on. Pope.
You are to look upon me as one going faſt out of the
world. Swift to Pope.
4. Frequently.
Being tried only with a promiſe, he gave full credit to that
promiſe, and ſtill gave evidence of his fidelity as faſt as occa-
ſions were offered. Hammond's Prači. Catech.
To FA's TEN. v. a. [from faſt J
1. To make faſt; to make firm; to fix immoveably.
A mantle coming under her right arm, and covering moſt
of that ſide, had no faſtening on the left ſide. , Sidney.
Moſes reared up the tabernacle, and faſtened his ſockets. Ex.
By chance a ſhip was faſten’d to the ſhore,
Which from old Cluſium king Oſinius bore. Dryden's AEn.
2. To hold together; to cement; to link.
She had all magnetick force alone,
To draw and faſlen fundred parts in one. Donne.
In the ſea-coaſt of India there is no iron, which flies not
like a bird unto thoſe mountains, and therefore their ſhips are
faſtened with wood. Brown's Wigar Errours, b. ii. e. 8.
3. To affix; to conjoin.
The words Whig and Tory have been preſſed to the ſervice
of many ſucceſſions of parties, with very different ideas faſt-
ened to them. Swift's Examiner, Nº. 43.
4. To ſtamp; to impreſs.
Thinking, by this face,
To faſlen in our thoughts that they have courage;
But 'tis not ſo. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
5. To ſettle; to confirm.
Their oppreſſors have changed the ſcene, and combated the
opinions in their true ſhape, upon which they could not ſo
well aſlen their diſguiſe. Decay of Piety.
6. To lay on with ſtrength.
Could he fºſłen a blow, or make a thruſt, when not ſuf-
fered to approach Dryden's AFn. Dedication.
To FA's T EN. v. n. To fix himſelf.
This paucity of blood may be obſerved in other ſorts of
lizards, in frogs, and other fiſhes; and therefore an horſe-
leech will hardly ſyſtem upon a fiſh. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
He fºylen'd on my neck; and bellow'd out,
As he'd but ſt heaven. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The wrong judgment that miſleads us, and makes the will
often faſten on the worſe ſide, lies in miſreporting upon
compariſons. Locłe.
FA'st ENER. m. ſ. [ from fly?en. J One that makes faſt or
firm.
FA's rer. m. ſ. [from fºſ!..]. He who abſtains from food. Ainſ.
FA's THAN DE D. adj. [faſt and hand. J Avaricious; cloſe-
handed ; cloſefited; covetous,
Pope.
The king being faſhanded, and loth to part with a ſecond
dowry, prevailed with the prince to be contracted with the
princeſs Cathari. e. Ba Ji's Henry VII.
FAST 1D10'sity. n ſ. [from foſſidiots.] Liſdainfulneſs; con-
temptuouſneſs. Sºviſt. .
FASTI’DIOUS. adj. [faſtidioſis, Latin; fº/?idje. X, faſlidi, uſe,
French..] Diſdainful; ſqueamiſh; delicate to a vice; into-
lently nice.
Reaſons plainly delivered, and always after one manner,
eſpecially with fine and fyl dious minds, enter but heavily and
dully. Bacon's Collection of Good and Evil.
Let their faſidious vain
Commiſſion of the brain,
Run on and rage, ſweat, cenſure, and condemn,
They were not made for thee, leſs thou for them. B.johnſ
A ſqueamiſh faſtidious niceneſs, in meats and drinks, muſt
be cured by ſtarving. L’Eſtrange.
All hopes, raiſed upon the promiſes or ſuppoſed kindneſſes
of the foſtidious and fallacious great ones of the world, ſhall
fail. - South’s Sermons.
Fast I'd lously. adv. [from faſidious.] Diſdainfully; con-
temptuouſly; ſqueamiſhly.
Their ſole talent is pride and ſcorn: they look fºſſidio'ſ',
and ſpeak diſdainfully, on any one who want them; con-
cluding, if a man ſhall fall ſhort of their garniture at the knees
and elbows, he is much inferior to them in the furniture of
his head. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 7.
FASTIGI’ATED. adv. [faſtigiatus, Latin. J Roofed; nar-
rowed up to the top. Dićf.
FA'stiNG DAY. m. ſ [ſoft and day.] Day of mortification by
religious abſtinence.
Do not call it a faſlingday, unleſs alſo it be a day of extra-
ordinary devotion and of alms. Taylor’s Guide to Devotion.
FA's TN Ess. n. ſ. [from faſt J
1. Firmneſs; firm adherence.
Such as had given the king any diſtaſte, did content by their
forwardneſs to ſhew it was but their faſtneſ to the former
government, and that thoſe affections ended with the time.
Bacon's Hiſtory ºf Great Britain.
2. Strength; ſecurity.
All the places are cleared, and places of faſheſ laid open,
which are the proper walls and caſtles of the Iriſh, as they
were of the Britiſh in the times of Agricola. Davies on Ireland.
The foes had left the faſtneſs of their place,
Prevail'd in fight, and had his men in chace. Dryden’s AEn.
3. A ſtrong place; a place not eaſily forced.
If his adverſary be not well aware of him, he entrenches
himſelf in a new flyineſ, and holds out the ſiege with a new
artillery. Watt’s Improvement of the Mind.
4. Cloſeneſs; conciſeneſs; not diffuſion.
Bring his ſtile from all looſe groſſneſs to ſuch firm ſºftneſ; in
Latin, as in Demoſthenes. Aſcham’s Scºoolmaſter.
FA'stuous. adj. [faſtu ſus, Latin; ſylueux-ſe, Fr. J Proud;
haughty. Dić?.
FAT. adj. [ paet, Saxon. 1
1. Fullfed; plump; fleſhy; the contrary to lean.
When gods have hot backs, what ſhall poor men do For
me, I am here a Windſor ſtag, and the fatteſt, I think, i' th'
foreſt. Shakeſpeare's Merry //ives of Hindſor.
Let our wives
Appoint a meeting with this old fit fellow. Shakeſpeare.
'Tis a fine thing to be fat and ſmooth. L'Aſirange.
Spare diet and labour will keep conſtitutions, where this
diſpoſition is the ſtrongeſt, from being fat: you may ſee in
an army forty thouſand foot-ſoldiers without a fat man; and I
dare affirm, that by plenty and reſt twenty of the forty
ſhall grow fat. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Coarſe; groſs; dull. [fat, French.]
O ſouls in whom no heav'nly fire is found,
Fat minds, and ever-grov'ling on the ground. Dryd Perſ.
3. Wealthy; rich.
Some are allured to law, not on the contemplation of
equity, but on the promiſing and pleaſing thoughts of liti-
gious terms, fat contentions, and flowing fees. Milton.
A fat benefice is that which ſo abounds with an eſtate and
revenues, that a man may expend a great deal in delicacies of
eating and drinking. Ayliff's Parergon.
FAT. n.ſ. An oily and ſulphurcous part of the blood, depo-
ſited in the cells of the membrana adipoſa, from the innu-
merable little veſſels which are ſpread amongſt them. The
fat is to be found immediately under the ſkin, in all the parts
of the body, except in the forehead, eyelids, lips, upper part
of the ear, yard, and ſcrotum. In ſome the veſicles of the
membrana adipoſa are ſo full, that the fat is an inch or more
thick; and in others they are almoſt flat, containing little or
no fat. There are two ſorts of fat; one yellow, ſoft, and lax,
which is eaſily melted, called pinguedo; another firm, white,
brittle, and which is not ſo eaſily melted, called ſebum, ſuet,
or tallow. Some reckon the marrow of the bones for a third
ſort of fat. $2; incy.
In this ointment the ſtrangeſt and hardeſt ingredients to
come by, are the moſs upon the ſkull of a dead man unburied,
and
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A T
F A T
and the fats of a boar and a bear, killed in the act of gencra-
tion. - Ba on's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 998.
This membrane ſeparates an oily liquor called fat: when
the fibres are lax, and the aliment too redundant, great part
of it is converted into this oily liquor. A huthnot on diments.
FAT. n.ſ. [ paez, Saxon ; watte, Dutch. This is generally
written var.] A veſſel in which anything is put to ſerment
or be ſoaked.
The fats ſhall overflow with wine and oil. Joel ii. 24.
A white ſtone uſed for flagging floors, for ciſterns, and tan-
ners fats. ! codward on Foyls.
To FAT. v. a. [from the noun.J. To make fat; to fatten ;
to make plump and fleſhy with abundant food.
Oh how this villany
Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it! Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
- - - Ere this
I ſhould have fatted all the region kites
With this ſlave's offal. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
They fat ſuch enemies as they take in the wars, that they
may devour them. Abbot's Deſription of the I/orld.
The Caribbees were wont to geld their children, on purpoſe
to fat and eat them. Locke.
Cattle falted by good paſturage, after violent motion, ſome-
times die ſuddenly. Arbuthnit on Diet.
To FAT. v. n. To grow fat; to grow full fleſhed.
Clarence, he is well repaid ;
He is frank'd up to fitting for his pains. Shakespeare Rich. III.
The one labours in his duty with a good conſcience; the
other, like a beaſt, but fatting up for the ſlaughter. L’E/irange.
An old ox ſat, as well, and is as good, as a young one.
- Mortimer's Husbandry.
FATAL. adj. [fatalis, Latin; fatal, French J
1. Deadly; mortal; deſtructive; cauſing deſtruction.
O fatal maid' thy marriage is endow’d
With Phrygian, Latian, and Rutilian blood. Dryden's Aºn.
A palſy in the brain is moſt dangerous; when it ſeizeth the
heart, or organs of breathing, fatal. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. Proceeding by deſtiny; inevitable; neceſſary. .
Others delude their trouble by a graver way of reaſoning,
that theſe things are fatal and neceſſary, it being in vain to
be troubled at that which we cannot help. Tillotſºn's Sermons.
3. Appointed by deſtiny.
It was fatal to the king to fight for his money; and though
he avoided to fight with enemies abroad, yet he was ſtill en-
forced to fight for it with rebels at home. Bacon's Henry VII.
Fatal courſe
Had circled his full orb.
It was
Still fatal to ſtout Hudibras,
In all his feats of arms, when leaſt
He dreamt of it, to proſper beſt. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
Behold the deſtin'd place of your abodes;
For thus Anchiſes prophecy’d of old,
And this our fatal place of reſt foretold. Dryden's Zn. b.vii.
O race divine !
For beauty ſtill is fatal to the line. Dryden.
FA'TALIST. m. ſ. [from fate.] One who maintains that all
things happen by invincible neceſſity.
Will the obſtinate fataliſ's find ſufficient apology. Iſatts.
FATA'LITY. m. ſ. [fatalite, French, from fatal.]
1. Predeſtination ; predetermined order or ſeries of things and
events ; preordination of inevitable cauſes ačting invincibly
in perpetual ſucceſſion.
The ſtoicks held a fatality, and a fixed unalterable courſe of
events; but then they held alſo, that they fell out by a neceſ-
fity emergent from and inherent in the things themſelves,
which God himſelf could not alter. South's Sermons.
2. Decree of fate.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. v.
By a ſtrange fatality men ſuffer their diſſenting to be drawn
into the ſtream of the preſent vogue. King Charles.
All the father's precaution could not ſecure the ſon from the
fatality of dying by a lion L’Eſtrange's Fables.
3. Tendency to danger; tendency to ſome great or hazardous
e Vent.
Seven times ſeven, or forty-nine, nine times nine, or
cighty-one, and ſeven times nine, or the years ſixty-three, is
conceived to carry with it the moſt conſiderable fatality. Bro.
FAT ALLY. adv. [from fatal.]
1. Mortally ; deſtructively; even to death.
The ſtream is ſo tranſparent, pure and clear,
That had the ſelf-enamour'd youth gaz'd here,
So fatally deceiv'd he had not been,
While he the bottom, not his face had ſeen.
'Tis the proceſſion of a funeral vow,
Which cruel laws to Indian wives allow,
When fataly their virtue they approve;
Cheerful in flames, and martyrs of their love Dryd. Auren.
2. By the decree of fate; by inevitable and invincible deter-
Ill!!hat! On.
To ſay that the world was made caſually by the concur-
rence of atoms, is to affirm that the atoms compoſed the
world mechanically and fataly; only they were not ſenſible
of it. Bentley's Sermons.
Denham.
FATALN Ess. n.ſ [frºm fatal.] Invincible neceſſity.
FATE. n.ſ.. [fatum, Latin.]
1. Lcitiny; an eternal ſeries of ſucceſſive cauſes.
Neceility or chance
Approach not me; and what I will is fate. ..] ſitcº.
There is a neceſſity in fate
Why ſtill the brave bold man is fortunate. Dryden.
You muſt obey me ſoon or late;
Why will you vainly ſtruggle with your fate / Dryden.
- When empire in its childhood firſt appears,
A watchfulfate o'erſees its riſing years. Dryden.
Random chance, or wilful fate,
Guides the ſhaft from Cupid's bow.
2. Event predetermined.
Tell me what fates attend the duke of Suffolk
By water ſhall he die, and take his end. Shakespeare care.
3 c. th; deſtruction.
Viewing a neighbouring hill, whoſe top of late
A chapel crown'd, 'till in the common fate
Th’ adjoining abbey fell.
Looking, he feeds alone his famiſh'd eyes;
Feeds ling'ring death, but looking not he dies;
Yet ſtill he choſe the longeſt way to fate,
Waſting at once his life and his eſtate. Dryden.
Courage uncertain dangers may abate;
But who can bear th' approach of certain fate / Dryden.
The whizzing arrow ſings,
And bears thy fate, Antinous, on its wings. Pope.
4. Cauſe of death.
With full force his deadly bow he bent,
And feather'd fate; among the mules and ſumpters ſent. Dry.
FA't ED. adj. [from fate.]
1. Decreed by fate.
She fled her father's rage, and with a train
Driv'n by the ſouthern blaſts was futed here to reign Dryd.
2. Determined in any manner by fate. -
Bright Vulcanian arms,
Fated from force of ſteel by Stygian charms,
Suſpended, ſhone on high.
3. Endued with any quality by fate.
Her aukward love indeed was oddly faird;
She and her Polly were too near related. Prior.
4. Inveſted with the power of fatal determination. Peculiar to
Shakeſpeare,
4. Phillips.
Denham.
Dryden's AEn.
Thy fated ſky
Gives us free ſcope. Shakespeare.
FATHER.. n.ſ. [ paesen, Saxon; aaher, Erſe. This word is
found likewiſe in the Perſian language.]
1. He by whom the ſon or daughter is begotten.
Father is a notion ſuperinduced to the ſubſtance, or man,
and refers only to an act of that thing called man, whereby
he contributed to the generation of one of his own kind. Locke.
Son of Benſalem, thy father faith it ; the man by whom
thou haſt breath and life ſpeaketh the word. Bacon.
He ſhall forget
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere. Miſt. Pa. Loff.
2. The firſt anceſtor. -
It was ſaid
It ſhould not ſtand in thy poſterity;
But that myſelf ſhould be the root and father
Of many kings Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Abraham is the father of us all. Rom. iv. 16.
3. The appellation of an old man. -
A poor blind man was accounted cunning in prognoſti-
cating weather: Epſom, a lawyer, ſaid in ſcorn, Tell me,
father, when doth the ſun change : The old man anſwered,
when ſuch a wicked lawyer as you goeth to heaven. Camden.
4. The title of any man reverend for age, learning, and piety.
You ſhall find one well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well learned biſhops. Shakesp. R III.
5. One who has given original to any thing good or bad.
Jubal was the father of all ſuch as handle the harp and
organ. Gen. iv. 21.
6. The eccleſiaſtical writers of the firſt centuries.
Mcn may talk of the fathers, and magnify the fathers, and
ſeem to make the authority of the fathers next to infallible;
and yet none expoſe them more to contempt than they which
give ſuch anſwers as theſe. Stilingfiert.
7. One who acts with paternal care and tenderneſs.
I was a father to the poor. jºb xxix. 16.
He hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his
houſe - Gen. xlv. 8.
8. The title of a popiſh confeſſor, particularly of a Jeſuit.
Formal in apparel,
In gait and countenance ſurely like a father. Shakeſpeare.
There was in this place a father of a convent, who was
very much renowned for his piety and exemplary life; and as
it is uſual, under any great afflićtion, to apply themſelves to
the moſt eminent confeſſors, our beautiful votary took the
opportunity cf confeſting herſelf to this celebrated juker. ...d.
9. The title of a ſenator of old Rome.
From hence the race of Alban fithers come,
And the long glorics of majeſtick Rome. Lºyden's Pirgil.
I C.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A T
F A T
12. The appellation of the firſt perſon of the adorable Trinity.
The eternal ſon of God eſteemed it his mcat and drink to
do the will of his Father, and for his obedience alone obtained
the greateſt glory. Taylor s Rule of living holy.
11. The compellation of God as Creator.
We have one Father, even God. john viii. 41.
Almighty and moſt merciful Father. Common Prayer.
FArr; ER-IN-Law. m. ſ. [ from father. J The father of one's
huſband or wife.
I muſt make my father-in-law a viſit with a great train and
equipage. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 547.
To FA' | HER. v. a.
1. To take; to adopt as a ſon or daughter.
Ay, good youth,
And rather father thee than maſter thee. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
2. To ſupply with a father.
I am no ſtronger than my ſex,
Being ſo father'd and ſo huſbanded. Shakeſp julius Caſar.
How light and portable my pain ſeems now,
When that which makes me bend makes the king bow ;
He childed as I father'd. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. To adopt a compoſition.
Men of wit,
Often father'd what he writ. Swiſt.
4. To aſcribe to any one as his offspring, or produćtion.
And left we ſeem to father any thing upon them more than
is their own, let them read. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 4.
My name was made uſe of by ſeveral perſons, one of which
was pleaſed to father on me a new ſet of productions. Swift.
Magical relations comprehend effects derived and fathered
upon hidden qualities, whereof, from received grounds of art,
no reaſons are derived. Brown's ſugar Frrours, b. ii. c. 3.
FA't H E R HooD. m. ſ. [ from father. J The character of a
father; the authority of a father.
Who can abide, that againſt their own doćtors, both of
the middle and lateſt age, ſix whole books ſhould by their
fatherhoods of Trent be under pain of a curſe, imperiouſly
obtruded upon God and his church. Hall.
We might have had an entire notion of this fatherhoºd, or
fatherly authority. Locke.
FATHER less. adj. [from father.] Without a father; deſti-
tute of a father.
Ye ſhall not afflićt any widow, or fatherleſ child. Ex. xxii.
Our fatherleſ diſtreſs was left unmoan'd ;
Your widow dolours likewiſe be unwept. Shakespeare R. III.
The fatherleſ had no friend. Sandys.
He caught his death the laſt county-ſeſſions, where he
would go to ſee juſtice done to a poor widow woman and her
fatherleſ children. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 517.
FATHERLINEss. m. ſ. [from father.] The tenderneſs of a
father; parental kindneſs.
FATHERLY. adj. [from father. J Paternal; like a father;
tender; protecting; careful.
Let me but move one queſtion to your daughter,
And, by that fatherly and kindly power
That you have in her, bid her anſwer truly. Shakeſpecre.
The part which deſcribes the fire, I owe to the piety and
fatherly affection of our monarch to his ſuffering ſubjects. Dry.
FÅ'THERLY, adv. In the manner of a father.
Thus Adam, fatherly diſpleas'd :
O execrable ſon' ſo to aſpire
Above his brethren' Milton.
FATHOM. m. ſ. [ Faeem, Saxon ]
1. A meaſure of length containing ſix foot, or two yards; the
ſpace to which a man can extend both arms.
The extent of this fathom, or diſtance between the extre-
mity of the fingers of either hand upon expanſion, is equal
unto the ſpace between the ſole of the foot and the crown.
- Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 5.
The arms ſpread croſs in a ſtreight line, and meaſured from
the end of the long finger on one hand to that of the other,
made a meaſure equal to the ſtature, and is named a fathom.
Holder on Time.
2. It is the uſual meaſure applied to the depth of the ſea, when
the line for ſounding is called the fathon-line.
Dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where futham-line could never touch the ground. Shakespeare H. IV.
3. Reach; penetration; depth of contrivance; compaſs of
thought.
Another of his fathom they have none
To lead their buſineſs. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
To FA't Hox1. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To encompaſs with the arms extended or encircling.
2. To reach ; to maſter.
Leave, leave to fath m ſuch high points as theſe ;
Nor be ambitious, ere the time, to pleaſe. Drydºn's Perſ.
3. To ſound; to try with reſpect to the depth.
'Tis too ſtrong for weak heads to try the heights and fatham
the depths of his flights. Felton on the Clafficks.
Our depths who fathoms 2 Pope.
4. To penetrate into; to find the bottom or utmoſt extent: as,
I cannºt fathom his deſign.
FA'ſ Hox:Less adj. [from fathom J
1. That of which no bottom can be found.
2. That of which the circumference cannot be embrated.
Will you with counters ſun
The vaſt proportiºn of his infinite;
And buckle in a waſte moſt fatham leſ,
With ſpans and inches ſo diminutive
As fears and reaſons f Shaft ſpeare's T oilus and Creſcºt,
FA : I'pical. adj. [ſatidicus, Latin; ſatidique, French.) pro-
phetick; having the power to foretell future events.
The oak, of all other trees only faſidica', told them what
a fearful unfortunate buſineſs this would prove. Hºwel,
FAT 1 FF Rous. adj. [ſatiſer, Latin. J Deadly; mortal; de-
ſtructive. 1) is?.
FA"rigABLE, adj. [fatigo, Lat.] Eaſily wearied; ſuſceptible
of wearineſs.
To FA"TIGATE. v. a. [fatigo, Latin.] To weary; to fatigue;
to tire; to exhauſt with labour; to oppreſs with laffitude.
By and by the din of war 'gan to pierce
His ready ſenſe, when ſtraight his doubled ſpirit
Requicken'd what in fleſh was fatigate,
Faſº.tº: the battle came he. Shakeſpeare's Coriolants.
*I/ . m. ſ. ſ fatigue, French ; fatigº, Latin.
1. Wearineſs; ſº * fatigº, J
2. The cauſe of wearineſs; labour; toil.
The great Scipio fought honours in his youth, and endured
the fatigues with which he purchaſed them. Dryden.
To FA'rigue. v. a. [fatigue, French ; fatigo, Latin.] To
tire; to weary; to harraſs with toil; to exhauſt with labour.
The man who ſtruggles in the fight,
Fatigues left arm as well as right. Prior.
FAtki'DNEY Ed. adj. [fat and kidney..] Fat: by way of re-
proach or contempt.
Peace, ye fatkidneyed raſcal; what a brawling do'ſt thou
keep ! Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
FA't LING.. n.ſ.. [from fat..] A young animal fed fat for the
ſlaughter.
The calf and the young lion, and the fatling ſhall lie down
together, and a little child ſhall lead them. Iſ xi. 6.
FA't NE R. n.ſ.. [from fat..] That which gives fatneſs.
The wind was weſt, on which that philoſopher beſtowed
the encomium of fatner of the earth. Arbuthn, Mart. Scribl.
FA't N Ess. n.ſ.. [from fat..]
1. The quality of being fat, plump, or full-fed.
2. Fat; greaſe; fulneſs of fleſh.
And by his ſide rode loathſome gluttony,
Deformed creature, on a filthy ſwine;
His belly was upblown with luxury, -
And eke with fatniſs ſwollen were his eyen. Fai, Queen, b, i.
. Unétuous or greaſy matter.
Earth and water, mingled by the help of the ſun, gather a
nitrous fatneſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 355.
4. Oleaginouſneſs; ſlimineſs.
By reaſon of the fatneſs and heavineſs of the ground, Egypt
did not produce metais, wood, pitch, and ſome fruits. Arbuth.
5. Fertility; fruitfulneſs.
God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatneſs of
the carth, and plenty of corn and wine. Gen. xxvii. 28.
6. That which cauſes fertility.
When around
The clouds drop fatneſs, in the middle ſky
The dew ſuſpended ſtaid, and left unmoiſt
The execrable glebe. Phillips.
Vapours and clouds feed the plants of the earth, with the
balm of dews and the fatneſs of ſhowers. Bentley's Sermoni.
To FATTEN. v. a. [from fat..] -
1. To feed up; to make fleſhy; to plump with fat.
Frequent blood-letting, in ſmall quantities, often increaſeth
the force of the organs of digeſtion, and fatteneth and in-
creaſeth the diſtemper. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. To make fruitful.
Town of ſtuff to fatten land.
Dare not, on thy life,
Touch aught of mine;
This falchion elſe, not hitherto withſtood,
Theſe hoſtile fields ſhall fatten with thy blood. Dryden.
3. To feed groſly; to increaſe.
Obſcene Orontes
Conveys his wealth to Tyber's hungry ſhores,
And fitten, Italy with foreign whores. Dryden's juvenal.
To FAſti EN. v. n. [from fat..] To grow ſat ; to be pampered;
to grow fleſhy.
All agree to ſpoil the publick good,
And villains fatten with the brave man's labour, Otway.
Apollo check'd my pride, and bad me feed
My fatt'ning flocks, nor dare beyond the reed. Dryden.
Yet then this little ſpot of earth well till'd,
A num’rous family with plenty fill’d,
The good old man and thrifty houſewife ſpent
Their days in peace, and fatten’d with content;
Enjoy'd the dregs of life, and liv'd to ſee
A long-deſcending healthful progeny. Dryden's juvenal.
Tygers
Lib. Londinienſt.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A U
F A V
*
.
Tygers and wolves ſhall in the ocean breed,
The whale and dolphin fatten on the mead,
And every element exchange its kind,
when thriving honeſty in cºurs we find.
FATUOUS. adj. [fatuus, Latin J
1. Stupid; fooliſh ; feeble of mind. hile y
We pity or laugh at thoſe fatuºus extravagants, while yet
ourſelves have a conſiderable doſe of what makes them ſo. Gan.
z. Impotent; without force; illuſory; alluding to an igni;
ſº when that flame finds combuſtible earth,
Thence fatuous fires and meteors take their birth. Denham.
Farvity. a. ſ. [ſtuité, French; from fatuºus.] Fooliſh-
neſs; weakneſs of mind; ſome degree of frenzy.
It had argued a very ſhort fight of things, and extreme
fatuity of mind in me, to bind my own hands at their re-
queſt. King Charles.
Theſe ſymptoms were ſo high in ſome as to produce a ſort
of fatuity or madneſs. Arbuthnot ºn Air.
FA’rwitt Ed. adj. [fat and wit..] Heavy; dull; ſtupid.
Thou art ſo fatwitted with drinking old ſack, and unbot-
toning thee after ſupper, and ſleeping upon benches in the
afternoon, that thou haſt forgotten. Sharºſ. Henry IV.
FAtty. adj. [from fat]. Unétuous; oleaginous; greaſy;
partaking of the nature of fat.
The like cloud, if oily or fatty, will not diſcharge; not
becauſe it ſticketh faſter, but becauſe air preyeth upon water,
and flame and fire upon oil. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
- The gourd
And thirſty cucumber, when they perceive
Th' approaching olive, with reſentment fly
Her fatty fibres, and with tendrils creep
Diverſe, deteſting conta&amp;t. Phillips.
The common ſymptoms of the muriatick ſcurvy are, a
ſaline taſte in the ſpittle, and a lixivial urine, ſometimes with
a fatty ſubſtance like a thin ſkin a-top. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Fa’uce T. n.ſ.. [fauſt, French; fauces, Latin.] . The pipe
inſerted into a veſſel to give vent to the liquor, and ſtopped up
by a peg or ſpigot. It is ſometimes improperly written
foſet.
You were out a good wholeſome forenoon in hearing a
cauſe between an orange-wife and a fºſet-ſeller, and adjourned
a controverſy of three-pence to a ſecond audience. Shakeſp.
If you are ſent down to draw drink, and find it will not
run, blow ſtrongly into the faucet, and it will immediately
pour into your mouth. Swift's Direct. to the Butler.
FA'uchion. n.ſ. [See FAlchion.] A crooked ſword.
But good AEneas order'd on the ſhore
A ſtately tomb, whoſe top a trumpet bore; }
A ſoldier's fauchion, and a ſeaman's oar. Dryden’s AEm.
F4UPEI. n.f. [French..] The fruit of a ſpecies of the palm-
tree. See PALM.
Favillous, adj. [favilla, Latin. J. Conſiſting of aſhes.
As to foretelling of ſtrangers, from the fungous particles
about the wicks of the candle, it only ſignifieth a moiſt air
about them, hindering the avolation of light and the favillous
Granville.
particles. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. v. c. 22.
FA'ulcon. See Falco N.
FA'ulcon Ry. FAlco NRY.
FAULT. n.ſ. [faut, faute, Fr. faltar, to be deficient, Spaniſh.
The l is ſometimes founded, and ſometimes mute. In con-
verſation it is generally ſuppreſſed.]
*: Offence; ſlight crime; ſomewhat liable to cenſure or ob-
jećtion.
The prºphet chuſeth rather to charge them with the fault
of making a law unto themſelves, than the crime of fanſ.
greſſing a law which God had made. Hoºker, b. iii. ſ. 6.
He finds no fault with their opinion about the true God,
but only that it was not clear and diſtina enough. Stillingfect.
He that but conceives a crime in thought,
Contracts the danger of an actual fault ſe
Then what muſt he expect that ſtill proceeds
To commit fin, and work up thoughts to deeds. Dryden.
If you like not my poem, the fault may poſſibly be in my
writing; but more probably 'tis in your morals, which can-
not bear the truth of it. Dryden.
. They wholly miſtake the nature of criticiſm, who think
its buſineſs is principally to find fault. Dryden.
To be deſirous of a good name, and careful to do every
thing, that we innocently may, to obtain it, is ſo far from
being a ſault, even in private perſons, that it is their great and
indi: penſible duty. Atterbury's Sermons.
Before his ſacred name flies ev'ry fault,
- And ash exalted ſtanza teems with thought. Połe.
Which of our thrum-cap'd anceſtors found fault, I
ºf want of ſugar-tongs or ſpoons for ſalt King.
*ing void of all friendſhip and enmity, they never com-
plain, nor find fault with the times. Swift.
* Defect; want; abſence.
I could teſ to thee, as to one it pleaſes me, forfault of a
better, to call my friend, I could be ſad, and fid indeed
to O. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
There is no ſtraw given unto thy ſervants, and they ſay
unto us, make brick; and behold, thy ſervants are beiten,
but the fault is in thine own people **. v. 6.
2. Puzzle; difficulty : as, the enquirer is at a fault.
To F.A. L.T. v. n. [from the noun..] To be wrong; to fail.
Which moved him rather in eclogues than otherwiſe to
write, minding to furniſh our tongue in this kind wherein it
faulteth. Speſſºr.
To FAU I.T. v. a. To charge with a fault; to accuſe,
For that I will not fault thee,
But for humbleneſs exalt thee. Old Song.
FA'ULT E R. n. ſ. [from fault..] An offender; one who com-
mits a fault.
Then ſhe, behold the faulter here in fight;
This hand committed that ſuppoſed offence. Fairfax, b. ii.
FA'Ult FINDER. n.ſ.. [fault and find.] A cenſurer; an ob-
jector.
FAULTIly. adv. [from faulty J Not rightly; improperly;
defectively; erroneouſly.
FA'Ult in Ess. n.ſ.. [from faulty J
1. Badneſs; vitiouſneſs; evil diſpoſition.
When her judgment was to be practiſed in knowing faulti-
meſ by his firſt tokens, ſhe was like a young fawn, who
coming in the wind of the hunters, doth not know whether
it be a thing or no to be eſchewed. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Delinquency; ačtual offences.
The inhabitants will not take it in evil part, that theſaulti-
neſ of their people heretofore is by us ſo far forth laid open.
Hooker, Prºf.cº.
FA'ultless. adj. [from fault..] Without fault; perfect; Com-
pletely excellent.
Where for our fins he faultleſ, ſuffered pain, -
There where he died, and where he liv'd again. Fairfax.
Who durſt thy faultleſs figure thus deface Dryden's En.
Whoever thinks a faultleſs piece to ſee,
Thinks what ne'er was, nor is, nor e'er ſhall be. Pºpe.
FA'ulty. adj. [fautiſ, French, from fault.]
1. Guilty of a fault; blameable; criminal; not innocent.
The king doth ſpeak as one which is faulty. 2 Sa. xiv. 13.
Can thus
Th’ image of God in man, created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty ſinceſ
To ſuch unſightly ſufferings be debas'd Milton's Par. Lºft.
2. Wrong; erroneous.
The form of polity by them ſet down for perpetuity, is
three ways faulty; faulty in omitting ſome things which in
Scripture are of that nature, as, namely, the difference that
ought to be of paſtors, when they grow to any great multi-
tude; faulty in requiring doćtors, deacons, and widows, as
things of perpetual neceſſity by the law of God, which in
truth are nothing leſs; faulty alſo in urging ſome things by
Scripture mutable, as their lay-elders. Hooker, b. iii.
3. Defective; bad in any reſpect; not fit for the uſe intended.
By accident of a faulty helmet that Parker had on, he was
ſtricken into the mouth at the firſt courſe, ſo that he died pre-
ſently. Bacon's Henry VII.
To FA(VOUR. v. a. [ ſaveo, Latin.]
1. To ſupport; to regard with kindneſs; to be propitious to ;
to COuntenance.
Of all the race of ſilver-winged flies
Was none more favourable, nor more fair,
Whilſt heaven did favour his felicities,
Than Clarion, the eldeſt ſon and heir
Of Muſcarol. - Spºſer.
The ſelf-ſame gods that arm'd the queen of Troy,
May favour Tamora the queen of Goths. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
Men favour wonders. Bacon's Natural Hi/ory, Nº. 495.
Fortúne ſo favoured him, that the town at his firſt coming
ſurrendered unto him. Knolley's Hiſtory ºf the Turki.
The good AEneas am I call’d; a name,
While fortune favour’d, not unknown to fame. Dryden.
Oh happy youth ! and favour’d of the ſkies, ---
Diſtinguiſh'd care of guardian deities. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iii.
2. To aſſiſt with advantages or conveniences.
No one place about it is weaker than another, to favºur an
enemy in his approaches. Addison's Iſ'hig Examiner.
3. To reſemble in feature. -
The porter owned that the gentleman favºured his
maſter. Speciator.
4. To conduce to ; to contribute.
FA'vour. n ſ. [favor, Latin ; favetr, French.]
1. Countenance; kindneſs; kind regard; propitious aſpect.
It pleas'd your majeſty to turn your looks :
Of favºur from myſelf, and all our houſe. Shakespeare H. IV.
The child Samuel was in favour both with the Lord and
alſo with men. - I Sa. ii. 26.
The race is not to the ſwift, not yet frvoir to men of
ſkill. Eccl. ix. I 1.
His
-
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F A V
His dreadful navy, and his lovely mind, -- " -
Gave him the fear and favour of mankind. Waller.
This favour, had it been employed on a more deſerving
ſubjećt, had been an effect of juſtice in your nature; but, as
placed on me, is only charity. Dryden's Aurengzebe, Preface.
At play, among ſtrangers, we are apt to find our hopes and
wiſhes engaged on a ſudden in favour of one ſide more than
another. Swift.
2. Support; defence; vindication. - -
The pleaſures which theſe Scriptures aſcribe to religion, are
of a kind very different from thoſe in favour of which they
are here alleged. Rogers, Sermon 15.
3. Kindneſs granted. -
All favours and puniſhments paſſed by him, all offices and
places of importance were diſtributed to his favourites. Sidney.
O, my royal maſterſ
The gods, in favour to you, made her cruel.
4. Lenity; mildneſs; mitigation of puniſhment.
I could not diſcover the lenity and favour of this ſentence;
but conceived it rather to be rigorous than gentle. Gulliv. 7+av.
5. Leave; good will; pardon.
Worthy Macbeth, we ſtay upon your leiſure.
—Give me your favour; my dull brain was wrought
With things forgot. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Yet e're we enter into open act,
With favour, 'twere no loſs if 't might be inquir'd -
What the condition of theſe arms would be. B.johnſ. Cat.
They got not the land by their own ſword; but thy right
hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, be-
cauſe thou haſt a favour unto thern. Pſ xliv. 3.
Come down, ſaid Reynard, let us treat of peace:
A peace, with all my ſoul, ſaid Chanticleer;
But, with your favour, I will treat it here.
6. Objećt of favour; perſon or thing favoured.
All theſe his wond’rous works, but chiefly man,
His chief delight and favour; him, for whom
All theſe his works ſo wond’rous he ordain'd.
7. Something given by a lady to be worn.
And every one his loveſuit will advance
Unto his ſeveral miſtreſs, which they'll know
By favours ſeveral which they did beſtow. Shakeſpeare.
It is received that it helpeth to continue love, if one wear
the hair of the party beloved; and perhaps a glove, or other
like favour, may as well do it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A blue ribband tied round the ſword-arm, I conceive to be
the remains of that cuſtom of wearing a miſtreſs's favour on
ſuch occaſions of old. Spectator, Nº. 436.
8. Anything worn openly as a token.
Here, Fluellen, wear thou this favour for me, and ſtick it
in thy cap: when Alanſon and myſelf were down together, I
pluck'd this glove from his helm. Shakeſp. Henry V.
9. Feature; countenance.
That is only ſuitable in
A. Phillips.
Pryden.
Mit. P. L.
laying a foul complexion upon a
filthy favour, ſetting forth both in ſluttiſhneſs. Sidney.
Young though thou art, thine eye
Hath ſtaid upon ſome favour that it loves. Shakeſpeare.
Diſſeat thy favour with an uſurped beard. Shakespeare Othello.
There's no goodneſs in thy face: if Antony
Be frce and healthful, why ſo tart a favour
To trumpet ſuch good tidings. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
Yet well I remember
The favours of theſe men: were they not mine?
Did they not ſometime cry, all hail! to me? Shakespeare R. II.
A youth of fine favour and ſhape. Bacon's Henry VII.
By their virtuous behaviour they compenſate hardneſs of their
favour, and by the pulchritude of their ſouls, make up what
is wanting in the beauty of their bodies. South.
FA've URABLE. adj. [favorable, French; favorabilis, Latin.]
1. Kind; propitious ; affectionate -
Famous Plantagenet! moſt gracious prince,
Lend favourable ear to our requeſts. Shakespeare Richard III.
2. Palliative ; tender; averſe from cenſure.
None can have the favourable thought,
That to obey a tyrant's will they fought. Dryden's juvenal.
3. Conducive to ; contributing to ; propitious.
People are multiplied in a country by the temper of the
climate, favºurable to generation, to health, and long life.
Timple.
4. Accommodate; convenient.
Many good officers were willing to ſtay there, as a place
very favorable for the making levies of men. Clarendon.
5- Beautiful; well favoured; well featured. Obſoletc.
Of all the race of ſilver-winged flies
Which do poſſeſs the empire of the air,
Betwixt the centred earth and azure ſkies
Was none more favourable, nor more fair,
Than Clarion, the eldeſt ſon and heir
Of Muſcarol. Spenſer.
FA'vour ABLE N Ess. m. ſ. [from favourable.] Kindneſs; be-
nignity. -
FA'vour ABLY. adv. [from favºurable.] Kindly; with favour;
with tenderneſs; with kind regard. -
Touching actions of common life, there is not any defence
more favourably heard than theirs who allege fincerely for
themſelves, that they did as neceſſity conſtrained them. Hook.
She goeth about ſeeking ſuch as are worthy of her, and
ſheweth herſelf favourably unto them in the ways. Iſºſd. vi.
The violent will condemn the charaćter of Abſalom, as
either too favourably or too hardly drawn. Dryden.
We are naturally inclined to think favourably of thoſe we
love. Rogers's Sermons.
FA'vour Ed. participial adj. [from favour.]
1. Regarded with kindneſs.
Oft with ſome favour'd traveller they ſtray, -
And ſhine before him all the deſert way. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. [From favour, the noun.J Featured. ‘Always conjoincil
with well or ill. -
Of her there bred
A thouſand young ones, which ſhe daily fed;
Sucking upon her poiſonous dugs, each one
Of ſundry ſhape, yet all ill-favoured. Fairy Queen, b. i.
FA'vour Emly, adv. [from favoured J Always joined with
well or ill, in a fair or foul way.
FA'vourer. n.ſ. [from favour.] One who favours; one who
regards with kindneſs or tenderneſs; a wellwiſher; a friend.
If we ſhould upbraid them with irreligious, as they do us
with ſuperſtitious favºurers, the anſwer which herein they
would make us, let them apply unto themſelves. Hooker, b. iv.
Do I not know you for a favourer
Of this new ſe&amp;t? ye are not ſound. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Being now a favourer to the Briton. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Conjure their friends they had, labour for more,
Solicit all reputed favourers. Daniel’s Civil War.
All the favourers of magick were the moſt profeſt and bit-
ter enemies to the Chriſtian religion. Addiſ on the Chriſt. Rel.
FA'vourite. n.ſ.. [favori, favorite, French; fav.rita, Ital.]
1. A perſon or thing beloved; one regarded with favour; any
thing in which pleaſure is taken ; that which is regarded with
particular approbation or affection.
Every particular maſter in criticiſm has his favourite paſ-
ſages in an author. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 262.
So fathers ſpeak, perſuaſive ſpeech and mild !
Their ſage experience to the favºrite child. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. One choſen as a companion by his ſuperiour; a mean wretch
whoſe whole buſineſs is by any means to pleaſe.
All favours and puniſhments paſſed by him, all offices and
places of importance were diſtributed to his favourites. Sidney.
I was a Theſſalian gentleman, who, by miſchance, having
killed a favourite of the prince of that country, was purſued
ſo cruelly, that in no place but by favour or corruption they
would obtain my deſtruction. Sidney, b. i.
The great man down, you mark, his favºrite flies;
The poor advanc'd, makes friends of enemies. Shakespeare Haml.
Bid her ſteal into the plaſhed bower,
Where honeyſuckles, ripen'd by the ſun,
Forbid the ſun to enter; like to favourites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Againſt that power that bred it. Shakeſpeare.
Nothing is more vigilant, nothing more jealous than a fa-
vourite, eſpecially towards the waining time, and ſuſpect of
ſatiety. J/otton.
This man was very capable of being a great favourite to a
great king. - - Clarendon.
What favºrites gain, and what the nation owes,
Fly the forgetful world.
FA'vov R Less. adj. [from favour.]
1. Unfavoured; not regarded with kindneſs; without pa-
tronage; without countenance.
2. Unfavouring; unpropitious.
Of that goddeſs I have ſought the fight,
Yet no where can her find; ſuch happineſs
Heaven doth me envy, and fortune favourleſ. Fairy Queen.
FA/USEN. m. ſ. A ſort of large eel.
He left the waves to waſh ;
The wave ſprung entrails, about which fauſen, and other fiſh
Did ſhole. Chapman's Iliads, b. xxi.
FA'usseBRAYE. n.ſ. A ſmall mount of earth, four fathom
wide, erected on the level round the foot of the rampart,
made uſe of to fire upon the enemy, when he is ſo far ad-
vanced that you cannot force him back; and alſo to receive
the ruins which the cannons make in the body of the place.
Harris.
FA'utoR. m.ſ. [Latin; fauteur, French..] Favourer; countc-
nancer; ſupporter.
I am neither author or fautor of any ſe&amp;t: I will have no
man addićt himſelf to me; but, if I have any thing right, de-
fend it as truth's, not mine. Ben. johnſon.
The new mountain in the Lucrine lake, which is alleged,
by the fautors of this opinion, as an inſtance in behalf of it,
was not raiſed thus. - J/oodward.
FA'UTR ess. m. ſ. [fautrix, Latin ; fautrice, Fr. J A woman
that favours, or ſhows countenance.
It made him pray, and prove
Minerva's aid his fautreſs ſtill. Chatman's Iliads.
He comes from baniſhment to the ſoutreſs of hiberty, from
the barbarous to the politc. Garth's Dedicat. to Ovid.
8 Z w
Pope.
F º, -
*::::: * , - -
: º, . . . . .” - , --
* . . . .'; ; ; º
t<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E A
F E A
FAwN. m. ſ. [ſãon, French, from fan, in old French a child,
probably from infans, Latin.] A young deer.
Looking my love, I go from place to place,
Like a young fawn that late hath loſt the hind;
And ſeek each where, where laſt I ſaw her face,
Whoſe image yet I carry freſh in mind. Spenſer's Sonnets.
The buck is called the firſt year a fawn, the ſecond year a
pricket. Shakespeare's Love's Labour Lºſt.
The colt hath about four years of growth; and ſo the fawn,
and ſo the calf. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 759.
Who for thy table feeds the wanton fawn,
For him as kindly ſpreads the flow'ry lawn. Pope.
To FAWN. v. n. [of uncertain original. Perhaps a contrac-
tion of the ...ſº a term of fondneſs for children.
1. To court by friſking before one: as a dog.
The dog ſtraight fawned upon his maſter for old know-
ledge. Sidney.
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
2. To court by any means. Uſed by animals.
Inſtead thereof he kiſs'd her weary feet,
And lick'd her lily hands with fawning tongue, -
As he her wrong'd innocence did weet. Fair, Queen, b. i.
Is it not ſtrange that a rational man ſhould worſhip an
ox? that he ſhould fawn upon his dog? bow himſelf before a
cat? and adore leeks and garlick : South's Sermons.
3. To court ſervilely.
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns;
What danger or what ſorrow can befal thee,
So long as Edward is thy conſtant friend ? Shakespeare Henry VI.
And thou, fly hypocrite, who now would it be
Patron of liberty, who more than thou
Once fawn'd, and cring'd, and ſervilely ador'd
Heav'n's awful monarch A/iltºn's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
Whom Ancus follows, with a fawning air ;
But vain within, and proudly popular. Dryden's Aºn. b. vi.
Dext'rous the craving fawning crowd to quit,
And pleas'd to 'ſcape from flattery to wit. Pope.
4. To bring forth a fawn.
FA'wn E.R. n.ſ.. [from fawn..] One that fawns; one that pays
ſervile courtſhip.
By ſoftneſs of behaviour we have arrived at the appella-
tion of fawners. Spectator, N°. 304.
FA'w NINGLY. adv. [from fawn..] In a cringing ſervile way.
FA'xED. adj. [from Fax, Saxon, hair. J Hairy. Now ob-
ſolete.
They could call a comet a faxed ſtar, which is all one with
ſtella crinita, or cometa. Camden's Remains.
FAY. m. ſ. [fee, French.]
1. A fairy; an elf.
And the yellow-ſkirted ſays
Fly after the night-ſteeds, leaving their moon-lov'd maze.
Milton.
Ye ſylphs and ſylphids, to your chief give ear;
Fays, fairies, genii, elves and demons hear ! Pope.
2. [from foi, French.] Faith. Wholly obſolete.
! hey plainly to ſpeak of ſhepherds moſt what,
Bad is the beſt, this Engliſh is flat;
Their ill 'haviour garres men miſſay,
Both of their doćtrine and the r fay. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
FE'A B E R R.Y. m. ſ. A gooſeberry. Dić?.
To FEAGUE v. a. [Gower uſes To frige, free to cenſure; fºgen,
German, to ſweep; f, Ken, Dutch, to ſtrike.] To whip; to
chaſtiſe; to beat. In Scottiſh fake, to ſlutter; to be idly or
officiouſly buſy. -
FEALT Y. m. ſ. [fault?, French. J Duty due to a ſuperior
lord; fidelity to a º, loyalty.
I am in parliament pledge for his truth,
And laſting fealty to the new-made king. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Let my ſovereign *
Command my eldeſt ſon, nay all my ſons,
As pledges of my falty and love. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. ii.
Man diſobeying,
Diſloyal, breaks his fealty, and ſins
Againſt the high ſupremacy of heav'n, Miltºn's Par. Loft.
Each bird and beaſt hehold
After their kinds : I bring them to receive
From thee their names, and pay theefally
With low ſubjećtion. AMilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. viii.
Whether his firſt deſign be to withdraw
Our fealty from God, or to diſturb
Conjugal love. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
FEAR, n.ſ. ſpearan, Sax. to fear; vaer, Dut. fake, Erſe.]
1. Dread; horrour; painful apprehenſion of danger.
Fear is an uneaſineſs of the mind, upon the thought of
future evil likely to befalus. locke.
Trembling ſcar ſtill to and fro did fly, -
And found no place where ſafe ſhe ſhrowd him might. F. Q.
For fear was upon them, becauſe of the people of thoſe
countries. - Ezra iii. 3.
What then remains Are we depriv'd of will
Muſt we not wiſh, for fear of wiſhing ill Dryden's juv.
7 -
Fear, in general, is that paſſion of our nature whereby we
are excited to provide for our ſecurity upon the approach of
evil. Rºgers, Sermon I.
2. Awe ; deječtion of mind at the preſence of any perſon or
thing.
Aid the fear of you, and the dread of you, ſhall be upon
every beaſt. Gen. ix. 2.
3. Anxiety; ſolicitude.
The greateſt and principal fear was for the holy temple.
2 Mac. xv. 18.
4. That which cauſes fear. -
Antony, ſtay not by his ſide:
Thy demon, that's the ſpirit that keeps thee, is
Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
Where Caeſar's is not; but near him, thy angel
Becomes a fear, as being o'erpower'd. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleop.
5. The object of fear.
Except the God of Abraham and the fear of Iſaac had
been with me. Gen. xxxi. 42.
6. Something hung up to ſcare deer by its colour or noiſe.
He who fleeth from the noiſe of the fear ſhall fall into the
pit, and he that cometh up out of the midſt of the pit ſhall be
taken in the ſnare. Jſ. Xxiv. 18.
FEAR. m. ſ. ſ roena, Saxon.] A companion. Obſolete:
- But fair Chariſia to a lovely fear
Was linked, and by him had many pledges dear. Fairy Qu.
To FFAR. v. a. ſpearan, Saxon J
1. To dread; to conſider with apprehenſions of terrour; to be
afraid of.
Now, for my life, Hortenſio fears his widow.
—Then never truſt me if I be afraid.
---You are very ſenſible, yet you miſs my ſenſe;
I mean Hortenſio is afraid of you. Shakespeare Tam. of the Shrew.
To fear the foe, ſince fear oppreſſeth ſtrength,
Gives, in your weakneſs, ſtrength unto your foe. Shakespeare. R. II.
There ſhall riſe up a kingdom, and it ſhall be frared above
all the kingdoms before it. 2 Eſdr. xii. 13.
When I view the beauties of thy face,
I fear not death, nor dangers, nor diſgrace. Dryden.
2. To fright; to terrify; to make afraid.
The inhabitants, being feared with the Spaniards landing
and burning, fled from their dwellings. Carew.
If he be taken, he ſhall never more
Be fear'd of doing harm: make your own purpoſe
How in my ſtrength you pleaſe. Shakespeare King Lear.
We muſt not make a ſcarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey. Shakesp. Meaſ for Meaſ.
Some, fitting on the hatches, would ſeem there,
With hideous gazing, to fear away fear. Donne:
To F.E.A.R. v. n.
1. To live in horrour; to be afraid.
Well you may fear too far.
---Safer than truſt too far:
Let me ſtill take away the harms I fear,
Not fear ſtill to be harm'd. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. To be anxious.
If any ſuch be here, if any fear
Leſs for his perſon than an ill report;
If anythink brave death outweighs bad life. Shakespeare Criolan.
Then let the greedy merchant fear
For his ill-gotten gain;
And pray to gods that will not hear,
While the debating winds and billows bear
His wealth into the main. Dryden's Horace.
See, pious king, with diff'rent ſtrife,
Thy ſtruggling Albion's boſom torn:
So much ſhe fears for William's life,
That Mary's fate ſhe dare not mourn. Prior.
FE'AR Ful. adj. [fear and fall.]
1. Timorous; timid; eaſily made afraid.
He's gentle, and not fearful. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
2. Afraid. It has of before the objećt of fear.
The Iriſh are more fearful to offend the law than the
Engliſh. - Davie on Ireland.
I have made my heroine fearful of death, which neither
Caſſandra nor Cleopatra would have been. Dryd, Auren. Prºf.
3. Awful; to be reverenced.
Who is like thee, glorious in holineſs, fearful in praiſes.
Ex. xv. 11.
4. Terrible; dreadful; frightful; impreſſing fear.
Neither faſt to friend, nor fearful to foe. Aſcham's Schoolm.
Againſt ſuch monſters God maintained his own, by farful
execution of extraordinary judgment upon them. Hooker.
What God did command touching Canaan, concerneth not
us any otherwiſe than only as a fearful pattern of his juſt diſ-
pleaſure. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 17.
All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement
Inhabits here: ſome heav'nly power guide us
Out of this fearful country. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
Hebr. x. 31.
Lay down by thoſe pleaſures the fearful and dangerous
thunders
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E A
F E A
thunders and lightnings, the horrible and frequent earthquakes,
and then there will be found no compariſon. Kaleigh.
This is the natural fruit of ſin, and the preſent revenge
which it takes upon ſinners, beſides that fearful puniſhment
which ſhall be inflićted on them in another life. Tilotſon.
Fe’ARFULLY. adv. [from fearful J
1. Timorouſly; in fear.
In ſuch a night
Did Thiſbe fearfully o’ertrip the dew, -
And ſaw the lion's ſhadow. Sha ſp. Merchant of Venice.
2. Terribly; º: -
There is a cliff, whoſe high and bending head
Looks fearfully on the confined deep. Shakespeare King Lear.
Fe(ARFULNEss. n. / [from fearful J
1. Timorouſneſs; habitual timidity.
2. State of being afraid; awe; dread. -
ls it credible that the acknowledgment of our own un-
worthineſs, our profeſſed fearfulneſs to aſk any thing, other-
wiſe than only for his ſake to whom God can deny nothing,
that this ſhould be noted for a popiſh errour. Hooker, b.v.
A third thing that makes a government juſtly deſpiſed, is
fea fulneſs of and mean compliances with bold popular of.
fenders. South's Sermons.
FE'Arlesly. adv. [from fearlſ; J Without terrour.
'Tis matter of the greateſt aſtoniſhment to obſerve the ſtu-
pid, yet common boldneſs of men, who ſo feareſy expoſe
themſelves to this moſt formidable of perils. Decay of Piety.
FE'A' L sNEss. n. ſ. [from fearieſ; J Exemption from fear;
intrepidity.
He gave inſtances of an invincible courage, and fearleſſneſ;
in danger. Clarendon, b. viii.
Fe‘AR less. adj. [from fear.] Free from fear; intrepid; cou-
rageous; bold.
From the ground ſhe feareſ, doth ariſe,
And walked forth without ſuſpect of crime. Fairy Queen.
The flaming ſeraph, fearleſs, though alone
Encompaſs'd round with foes, thus anſwer'd bold. Milton.
A nation, whoſe diſtinguiſhing chara&amp;ier it is to be more
fearleſs of death and danger than any other. Temple.
FE"As I B 1 LITY. m. ſ. [from feaſible.] A thing pračicable.
Men often ſwallow falſities for truths, dubioſities for cer-
tainties, poſſibilities for feaſibilities, and things impoſſible for
poſſibilities themſelves. B own’s Wugar Errours, b. i. c. 5.
FE/ASIBLE, adj. [faiſible, French. J Practicable; ſuch as
may be effected; ſuch as may be done.
We conclude many things in poſſibilities, which yet are
eaſy feaſibles. Glanville's Scepſ, c. 14.
Things are feaſible in themſelves; elſe the eternal wiſdom
of God would never have adviſed, and much leſs have com-
manded them. South's Sermons.
FE'Asibly. adv. ſº Praćticably.
FEAST. n.ſ.. [feſſe, French ; fe'um, Latin.]
1. An entertainment of the table; a ſumptuous treat of great
numbers.
Here's our chief gueſt.
----If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great feaſt. Shakeſp Macbeth.
On Pharaoh's birthday he made a feaſt unto all his ſer-
wants. Gen. xl. 20.
The lady of the leaf ordain’d a faſt,
And made the lady of the flow'r her gueſt;
When lo! a bow'r aſcended on the plain,
With ſudden ſeats ordain'd, and large for either train. Dry.
2. An anniverſary day of rejoicing either on a civil or religious
occaſion. Oppoſed to a faſt.
This day is call'd the faſt of Criſpian. Shakſ. Hen. V.
3. Something delicious to the palate.
Many people would, with reaſon, prefer the griping of an
hungry belly to thoſe diſhes which are a feaſt to others. Locke.
To FEAST v. n. [from the noun..] To eat ſumptuouſly; to
eat together on a day of joy.
Richard and Northumberland, great friends,
Dºº together. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
he pariſh finds, indeed; but our church-wardens
Feaſt on the ſilver, and give us the farthings. Gay.
To FEAST. v. a.
1. To entertain ſumptuouſly; to entertain magnificently.
He was entertained and feaſied by the king with great ſhew
of favour. Hayward.
2. To delight; to pamper.
All theſe are our's, all nature's excellence,
Whoſe taſte or ſmell can bleſs the feaſted ſenſe. Dryden.
FE'Aster. n. ſ. [from feaff.]
1. One that fares deliciouſly.
. Thoſe feaſiers could ſpeak of great and many excellencies
In Inanna. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
2. One that entertains magnificently.
FE'Astful... adj. [feaſt and full.]
1. Feſtive; joyful. -
The virgins alſo ſhall on faſful days
Viſit his tomb with flowers, only bewailing
His lot unfortunate in nuptial choice,
From whence captivity and loſs of eyes. Milton's Agoniſies,
- Therefore be ſure 's
Thou, when the bridegroom with his fºſful friends
Paſies to bliſs at the mid hour of night, '-
Haſt gain'd thy entrance, virgin wife and pure. Milon,
2. Luxurious; riotous.
- The ſuitor train - *
Who crowd his palace, and with lawleſs pow'r
His herds and flocks in ſto/ful rites devour. Pope's Odiſſy:
Fe‘ASTRITE. n.ſ. (feaſt and rite.] Cuſtom obſerved in en-
tertal IlmentS.
- His hoſpitable gate,
Unbarr'd to all, invites a num rous train . . . .
Qf daily gueſts; whoſe board with plenty crown'd,
Revives the feaſt, ites old. Phillips.
FEAT. n.ſ [fait, French..] .
1. Aćt; decd; action; exploit.
Pyrocles is his name, renowned far
For his bold feats, and hardy confidence; :
Full oit approved in many a cruel war. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Tarquin's ſelf he met,
And ſtruck him on his knee: in that day's feats,
When he might ačt the woman in the ſcene,
He prov'd th' beſt man i' th' field. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Our ſoldiers are men of ſtrong heads for action, and per-
form ſuch feats as they are not able to expreſs. Addison Speciat.
2. A trick; a feſtive or ludicrous performance. - -
The joints are more ſupple to all feats of ačtivity and mo-
tion in youth than afterwards. facon's Eſſays.
FeA.T. adj. [fait, bien fait, French; homo fadius ad unguem.]
1. Ready ſkilful; ingenious.
Never maſter had
A page ſo kind, ſo duteous, diligent;
So tender over his occaſions, true, -
So feat, ſo nurſe like. Shakeſpeare’s Cymbeline.
2. It is now only uſed in irony and contempt. - -
That feat man at controverſy. Stillingfleet.
3. Nice; neat.
Look how well my garments ſit upon me, -
Much feater than before. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
FE/ATEous. adj. [from feat..] Neat; dexterous. Obſolete.
FE'A' Eously. adu. [from feateous.] Neatly; dexterouſly.
And with fine fingers cropt full feateouſly * .
The tender ſtalks on high. Stenſer.
FEATH.R. m. ſ. [Feden, Saxon; feder, German.]
1. The plume of birds.
Look, as I blow this father from my face. Shakespeare H. VI.
The brave eagle does with ſorrow ſee
The foreſt waſted, and that lofty tree,
Which holds her neſt, about to be o’erthrown,
Before the fathers of her young are grown ;
º She will not leave them, or ſhe cannot ſtay,
But bears them boldly on her wings away. Waller:
When a man in the dark preſſes either corner of his eye
with his finger, and turns his eye away from his finger, he
will ſee a circle of colours like thoſe in the ſeat'ers of a pea-
cock's tail. Nºwton's Opt.
I am bright as an angel, and light as a feather. Swift.
2. Kind; nature; ſpecies: from the proverbial expreſſion, birds
of a feather ; that is, of a ſpecies.
The proud inſulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the eaſy-melting king, like wax. Sh H. VI.
I am not of that father to ſhake off
My friend, when he moſt needs me.
3. An ornament; an empty title.
4. [Upon a horſe.] A ſort of natural frizzling of hair, which,
in ſome places, riſes above the lying hair, and there makes a
figure reſembling the tip of an ear of corn. Farrier's Diét.
To FE'At HER v a [from the noun J
1. To dreſs in feathers.
2. To fit with feathers.
3. To tread as a cock. -
Dame Partlet was the ſovereign of his heart;
Ardent in love, outrageous in his play, - -
He feather'd her a hundred times a day. ! Dryden,
4. To enrich; to adorn; to exalt. . . . - .
They ſtuck not to ſay, that the king cared not to plume his
nobility and people, to feather himſelf. , Bacon's Henry VII.
5. To FEATHER ºne's Aji. Alluding to birds which collect
feathers, among other materials, for making their neſts; to
get riches together. - - - - - . . .
FFATHERBED. m. ſ. [feather and bed.] A bed ſtuffed with
feathers; a ſoft bed. - :
The huſband cock looks out, and ſtrait is ſped, .
And meets his wife, which brings her featherbed. Denne.
FE'ath RdRiver. m. ſ. [feather and drive. l One who
cleanſes feathers by whiſking them about. . . -
A fatherdriver had the reſidue of his lungs filled with the
fine duſt or down of feathers' D. rham's Phyſico-Theology.
FE'A I HERE D. adj. [from feather.]
Shakeſp. Timon.
1. Cloathed<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E E
F. E. C
1. Cloathed with feathers. -
... I ſaw young Harry with his º: .
His cuiſſes on his thighs, gallantly arm"; -
tº. the .#. Jeather'd Mercury. Shakespeare H. IV.
So when the new-born phoenix firſt is ſeen,
Her father'd ſubjećts all adºre their queen. Dryden.
Darkºning the ſky, they hover º'er, and ſhroud -
The wanton ſailors with a feather'd cloud. - Prior.
Then ſhips of uncouth form ſhall ſtem the tide,
And father'd people crowd my wealthy ſide. Pope.
Vultures, harpies, ravens, cormorants, and, among many
other fathered creatures, ſeveral little winged boys perch upon
the middle arches. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 159.
2. Fitted with feathers; carrying feathers.
An eagle had the ill hap to be ſtruck with an arrow, fea-
ther'd from her own wing. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Not the bow they bend, nor boaſt the ſkill
To give the feather'd arrow wings to kill. Pope's Odyſſey.
FE'At HE REDGE. n.ſ.
Boards or planks that have one edge thinner than another,
are called featheredge ſtuff. . Moxon's Mech. Exer.
FE'At He REDGED. adj. [feather and edge. J Belonging to a
feather edge. -
The cover muſt be made of featheredged boards; in the na-
ture of ſeveral doors with hinges fixed thereon. Mortimer.
FE’ATHE RF Ew. n.ſ. A plant both ſingle and double: it is
increaſed by ſeads or ſlips, and alſo by dividing the roots: it
flowereth moſt part of the Summer. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
FE'At HER less adj. [from feather.] Without feathers.
This ſo high grown ivy was like that featherleſ, bird, which
went about to beg plumes of other birds to cover his naked-
neſs. Howel's Wocal Forreſt.
FE"ATHER sell ER, n ſ. [father and ſeller.] One who ſells
feathers for beds.
FE"ATHER Y. adj. [from frat’er.] Cloathed with feathers.
. Or whiſtle from the lodge, or village cock
Count the night-watches to his feathery dames. Milton.
FE'Arly, adv. [from feat. J. Neatly; nimbly; dexterouſly.
Foot it featly here and there,
And ſweet ſprites the burthen bear. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
The moon was up, and ſhot a gleamy light;
He ſaw a quire of ladies in a round,
That ſeaty footing ſeem'd to ſkim the ground. Dryden.
There haply by the ruddy damſel ſeen,
Or ſhepherd boy, they featly foot the green. Tickell.
FE"At Ness. n.ſ. [ſrom feat. J Neathcſs; nicety; dexte-
rity.
FEATURE. m.ſ.. [faiture, old French.]
1. The caſt or make of the face.
Report the feature of Octavia, her years. Shakeſpeare.
2. Any lineament or ſingle part of the face.
Though ye be the faireſt of God's creatures,
Yet think that death ſhall ſpoil your goodly features. Spenser.
We may compare the face of a great man with the
chara&amp;ter, and try if we can find out in his looks and features
the haughty, cruel, or unmerciful temper that diſcovers itſelf
in the hiſtory. Addison on ancient Medal.
Though various fatures did the fiſters grace,
- A ſiſter's likeneſs was in every face. Addiſon's Ovid's Met.
To FEATURE. v. a. To reſemble in countenance; to favour.
He liv'd in court moſt prais'd, moſt lov’d,
A ſample to the young'ſ ; to th’ more mature,
A glaſs that fatir'd them. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
º *... a. [See FAx = p, perhaps from Fax, Saxon,
a 1 r.
” To untwiſt the end of a rope, and reduce it again to its firſt
ſtamina.
2. To beat ; to whip with rods. Ainſw.
To Fr. BR lºcit Are... v. n. [febricitor, Latin. J. To be in a
fever. Dić7
Fr P &amp; "culos E. adj. [fºr iculºſiº, Latin. J Troubled with a
fever. Dić7
Fºr truct. * f [febris and ſign, Latin; febrifuge, Fr.]
Any medicine ſerviceable in a ſever. $2:tincy.
Bitters, like choler, are the beſt ſanguiñers, and alſo the
be ſt ſetrifuges. -
FEBRifuge. 44. Having the power to cure fevers.
* Feb. ifige draughts had a moſt ſurpriſing good effect. Arluth.
FE'BRII.E. adj. [febri it, Latin; feºrile, Fr.] Conſtituting a
fever ; proceeding from a fever. C
The ſpirits, “mbroiled with the malignity in the blood, and
turgid and tumified by the febrile fermentation, are by phlebo-
F ºny relieved. - - - Harvey on Conſumptions.
******* *ſ [felrºarius, Latin J The name of the
ſecond month in the year.
You have ſuch a February face,
FE” so full ºf froſt, of ſtorm, and cloudineſs? Shakeſpeare.
*S*S. m. ſ. [fºrce, Latin ; fºres, French.]
1. Dregs; lees; ſediment; ſubſidence.
Hence the ſurface of the ground with mud
And ſlime beſmear'd, the feces of the flood,
Receiv'd the rays of heav'n ; and ſucking in
The ſeeds of heat, new creatºr. did begin. Dryden.
Floyer on the Humours.
2. Excrement.
The ſymptoms of ſuch a conſtitution are a ſour ſmell in
their feces. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
f
#... }n. ſ [feculentia, Latin.]
1. Muddineſs; quality of abounding with lees or ſediment.
2. Lees; feces; ſediment; dregs.
Pour upon it ſome very ſtrong lee, to facilitate the ſepara-
tion of its feculencies. Boyle.
Whether the wilding's fibres are contriv'd
To draw th’ earth's pureſt ſpirit, and reſiſt
Its feculence, which in more porous ſto.ks
Of cyder plants finds paſſage free. Philips.
FE'culeNT. adj. [faculentus, Lat. ſeculent, French..] Foul;
dreggy; excrementitious.
#, both his hands, moſt filthy feculent,
Above the water were on high extent,
And fain'd to waſh themſelves inceſſantly,
Yet nothing cleaner were for ſuch intent. Fairy Queen.
We may affirm them to be to the body as the light of a
candle to the groſs and feculent ſnuff, which as it is not pent
up in it, ſo neither doth it partake of its ſtench and im-
purity. - Glanv. Apology.
FECUND. adj. [forcundus, Latin; frcond, Fr.] Fruitful;
prolifick.
The more fickly the years are, the leſs fecund or fruitful of
children alſo they be. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
FEcu NDA'tion. m. ſ. [forcundo, Latin.] The act of making
fruitful or prolifick.
She requeſted theſe plants as a medicine of fecundation, or
to make her fruitful. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vii. c. 7.
To Fecu'NDIFY. v. a. To make fruitful; to make pro-
lifick. Dići.
Fecu'Ndity. n.ſ.. [from fecund; ſeconditſ, French.]
1. Fruitfulneſs; quality of producing or bringing forth in great
abundance.
I appeal to the animal and vegetable produćtions of the
earth, the vaſt numbers whereof notoriouſly teſtify the ex-
treme luxuriance and fecundity of it. J/oodward's Nat. Hiſt.
2. Power of producing or bringing forth.
Some of the ancients mention ſome ſeeds that retain their
fecundity forty years; and I have found, from a friend, that
melon-ſeeds, after thirty years, are beſt for raiſing of melons.
Ray on the Creation.
He could never create ſo ample a world, but he could have
made a bigger; the fecundity of his creative power never grow-
ing barren, nor being exhauſted. Bentley's Sermoni.
FEd. Preterite and participle paſſ of To feed.
For on the graſſy verdure as he lay,
And breath'd the freſhneſs of the early day,
Devouring dogs the helpleſs infant tore,
Fed on his trembling limbs, and lapp'd the gore. Pºpe.
Fa‘DARY. n.ſ.. [fordus, Latin, or from feudum.] This word,
peculiar to Shakeſpeare, may ſignify either a confederate; a
partner; or a dependant.
Damn'd paper'
Black as the ink that's on thee, ſenſeleſs bauble!
Art thou a fedary for this ačt, and lookeſt -
So virgin-like without? Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Fe'd ERAL. adj. [from ſadus, Latin.] Relating to a league or
contračt.
It is a federal rite betwixt God and us, as eating and drink-
ing, both among the Jews and Heathens, was wont to be.
Hammond's Fundamental.
The Romans compelled them, contrary to all federal right
and juſtice, both to part with Sardinia, their lawful territory,
and alſo to pay them for the future a double tribute: Grew.
FEDERARY. n.ſ.. [from faedus, Latin.] A confederate; an
accomplice.
She's a traitor, and Camillo is
A federary with her. Shakeſp are:
FedERAt E. adj. [federatus, Latin.] Leagued; joined in
confederacy. -
FEE., n.ſ. [peoh, Saxon; fee, Daniſh, cattle; feuda", low
Latin ; feu, Scottiſh.]
1. [In law.] All lands and tenements that are held by any ac:
knowledgment of ſuperiority to a higher lord. All lands and
tenements, wherein a man hath a perpetual eſtate to him an
his heirs, &amp;c. are divided into allºdium and feudum; all dº"
is every man's own land, which he poſſeſſes merely in his own
right, without acknowledgment of any ſervice, or payment
of any rent to any other. Feudum, or fee, is that which we
hold by the benefit of another, and in name whereof we ow:
ſervices, or pay rent, or both, to a ſuperior lord. And al
our land in England, the crown-land, which is in the king's
own hands, in right of his crown, excepted, is in the nature
of feudum: for though a man have land by deſcent from hº
anceſtors, or bought it for his money; yet is the land of ſuch
a nature, that it cannot come to any, either by deſcent or
purchaſe, but with the burthen that was laid upon him who
had novel fee, or firſt of all received it as a benefit from his
lord, to him and to all ſuch to whom it might dºg
- c
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">".
F E. E.
F E E
*
º
:
-
be any way conveyed from him. So that no man in England
has directum dºminium, that is, the very property or demeſne
in any land, but the prince in right of his crown: for though
he that has ſee has jus perpetuum &amp; utile dominium, yet he
owes a duty for it, and therefore it is not ſimply his own;
Fee is divided into two ſorts; fee-abſolute, otherwiſe called
fee fimple, and fee-conditional, otherwiſe termed fee-tail:
fee-fimple is that whereof we are ſeized in thoſe general words,
To us and our heirs for ever: fee-tail is that whereof we are
feiſed to us and our heirs, with limitation; that is, the heirs
of our body, &amp;c. And fee-tail is either general or ſpecial:
general is where land is given to a man, and the heirs of his
body: fee-tail ſpecial is that where a man and his wife are
ſeiſed of land to them and the heirs of their two bodies. Cowel.
Now like a lawyer, when he land would let,
Or ſell fre-ſimples in his maſters name. Hºllard's Tal.
Here's the lord of the ſoil come to ſeize me for a ſtray, for
entering his fee-ſimple without leave., Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
2. Property; peculiar.
roperty; p What concern they
The general cauſe; or is it a fee-grief, -
-* Due É. ſome ſingle breaſt 2 Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
- * 3. Reward; gratification; recompenſe.
Theſe be the ways by which, without reward,
Livings in courts be gotten, though full hard;
For nothing there is done without a fee. Hubberd's Tale.
Not helping, death's my ſee;
But if I help, what do you promiſe me? Shakeſpeare.
4. Payments occaſionally claimed by perſons in office.
Now that God and friends
• Have turn'd my captive ſtate to liberty,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees P Shakespeare Hen. VI.
5. Reward paid to phyſicians or lawyers.
He does not reječt the perſon's pretenſions, who does not
know how to explain them; or, refuſe doing a good office for
a man, becauſe he cannot pay the fee of it. Addiſon's Speciat.
6. Portion; pittance; ſhare. Obſolete.
In pruning and trimming all manner of trees,
Reſerve to each cattle their property feet. Tuff. Husbandry.
FE'EFARM. m. ſ [fee and farm.] Tenure by which lands are
held from a ſuperiour lord.
John ſurrendered his kingdoms to the pope, and took them
back again, to hold in frefarm; which brought him into ſuch
hatred, as all his lifetime after he was poſſeſt with fear. Davies.
To F.E. E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To reward; to pay.
No man fºes the ſun, no man purchaſes the light, nor errs
- South's Sermons.
if he walks by it. - - -
Watch the diſeaſe in time; for when within
The dropſy rages and extends the ſkin,
In vain for hellebore the patient cries,
And fees the doćtor; but too late is wiſe.
2. To bribe.
I have king loved her, and ingroſſed opportunities to meet
her; feed every ſlight occaſion, that could but niggardly give
Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
me ſight of her.
3. To keep in hire. - - -
There's not a thane of them but in his houſe
I have a ſervant fee’d.
infirm; without ſtrength of body or mind.
The men carried all the feeble upon aſſes to Jericho. 2 Chron.
Command th'aſſiſtance of a faithful friend,
But feeble are the ſuccours I can ſend.
ow I have lov’d, excuſe my falt'ring tongue;
My ſpirits feeble, and my pains are ſtrong. Dryden.
We carry the image of God in us, a rational and immor-
tal ſoul; and though we be now miſerable and feeble, yet we
aſpire after eternal happineſs, and finally expect a great exal-
Bentley’s Sermons.
tation of all our natural powers.
A crutch that helps the weak along,
Supports the feeble, but retards the ſtrong. Smith.
To º ſ from the noun..] To weaken; to en-
feeble; to deprive of ſtrength or power, . Not in uſe.
Or as a caſtle reared high and round, -
By ſubtile engines and malicious ſlight
Is undermined from the loweſt ground,
And her foundation forc'd and feebled quite. Fairy Queen.
Shall that vistorious hand be feebled here,
That in your chambers gave you chaſtiſement? Shakesp. Kjohn.
FEE ble M1'NDED. adj. [feeble and mind.] Weak of mind;
defe&amp;tive in reſolution and conſtancy.
Warn them that are unruly, comfort the feebleminded, ſup-
1 Theſſ. v. 14.
FEE ples Ess. m. ſ [from feeble.] Weakneſs; imbecility; in-
port the weak, be patient toward all men.
firmity; want of ſtrength. . . .
A better head Rome's glorious body fits,
Than his that ſhakes for age and feebleneſs. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
Some in their latter years, through the feebleneſs of their
limbs, have been forced to ſtudy upon their knees. South.
FE'E bly, ad. [from frcble.] Weakly; without ſtrength.
Dryden's Perſ.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
FEEBLE adj. [fºible, French.]. Weak; debilitated; ſickly;
Dryden's AEm.
Like ſhine, thy gentle numbers feebly creep;
Thy tragick muſe gives ſmiles, thy comick ſleep. Dryden.
To FEED. v. a. [fºdan, Gothick; Feban, Foeban, Saxon.]
1. To ſupply with food.
Her heart and bowels through her back he drew,
And fed the hounds that help'd him to purſue. Dryden.
Boerhaave fed a ſparrow with bread four days, in which
time it eat more than its own weight. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. To ſupply; to furniſh. -
A conſtant ſmoke ariſes from the warm ſprings that feed
the many baths with which this iſland is flocked. Addiſon.
The breadth of the bottom of the hopper muſt be half the
length of a barleycorn, and near as long as the rollers, that it
may not feed them too faſt. 44ortimer’s Husbandry.
3. To graze; to conſume by cattle.
Once in three years feed your mowing lands, if you can-
not get manure conſtantly to keep them in heart. A ſortiºner.
The froſt will ſpoil the graſs; for which reaſon take care to
feed it cloſe before Winter. Mºrtimer's Huſſandry.
4. To nouriſh; to cheriſh.
How oft from pomp and ſtate did I remove,
To feed deſpair, and cheriſh hopeleſs love? Prior.
5. To keep in hope or expectation.
Barbaroſla learned the ſtrength of the emperor, craftily
feeding him with the hope of liberty. Knoller's Hj. of the Turks.
6. To delight; to entertain; to keep from ſatiety.
The alteration of ſcenes, ſo it be without noiſe, feeds and
relieves the eye, before it be full of the ſame object. Bacon.
To FEED. v. m.
1. To take food. Chiefly applied to animals food.
To feed were beſt at home;
From thence the ſawce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. To prey; to live by eating.
I am not covetous of gold;
No care I, who doth feed upon my coſt. Shakespeare Hºn. V.
You cry againſt the noble ſenate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which elſe -
Would feed on one another. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Galen ſpeaketh of the curing of the ſcirrhus of the liver by
milk of a cow, thatfeedeth upon certain herbs. Bacon.
Some birds feed upon the berries of this vegetable. Brown.
He feeds on fruits, which, of their own accord,
The willing grounds and laden trees afford. Dryden', Wirg.
The Brachmans were all of the ſame race, lived in fields
and woods, and fed only upon rice, milk, or herbs. Temple.
All feed on one vain patron, and enjoy
Th’ extenſive bleſfing of his luxury. Pºpe's Eſſay on Man.
3. To paſture ; to place crttle to feed.
If a manſhall cauſe a field to be eaten, and ſhall put in his
beaſt, and ſhall feed in another man's field, he ſhall make
reſtitution. Ex. xxii. 5.
4. To grow fat or plump.
FEED. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Food; that which is eaten.
A fearful deer then looks moſt about when he comes to the
beſt feed, with a ſhruging kind of tremor through all her
principal parts. - Sidney, b. ii.
An old worked ox fats as well as a young one: their feed
is much cheaper, becauſe they eat no oats. Mortimer', Husb.
2. Paſture. -
Beſides his cote, his flocks and bounds of feed
Are now on ſale. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
FE'Eder. n.ſ. [from feed.]
1. One that gives food. -
The beaſt obeys his keeper, and looks up,
Not to his maſter's but his feeder's hand. Denham.
2. An exciter; an encourager. - * .
When thou do'ſt hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou ſhalt be as thou was’t, -
The tutor and the feeder of my riots. Shakespeare Henry IV.
3. One that eats.
With eager feeding, food doth choak the feder. Shakespeare
We meet in Ariſtotle with one kind of thruſh, called the
miſſel-thruſh, or feeder upon miſſeltoe. Brown's Vulgar Err.
4. One that eats nicely; one that lives luxuriouſly.
But that our feaſts
In every meſs have folly, and the feders
Jeſt with it as a cuſtom, I ſhould bluſh
To ſee you ſo attired. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
But ſuch fine feeders are no gueſts for me;
Riot agrees not with frugality:
Then, that unfaſhionable man am I,
With me they'd ſtauve for want of ivory. Dryden's juven.
To FEEL. pret, felt; part paſſ felt. v. n. [relan, Saxon.]
1. To have perception of things by the touch.
The ſenſe of feeling can give us a notion of extenſion,
ſhape, and all other ideas that enter at the eye, except co-
lours. Addiſon's Spectatºr, Nº. 411.
2. To ſearch by feeling. See FF Flf R.
3. To have a quick ſenſibility of good or evil, right or wrong.
Man, who feels for all mankind. Pope.
9 A - 4. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E. E.
F E L
i
4. To appear to the touch.
The difference of theſe tumours will be diſtinguiſhed by
the feel: one feels flaccid and rumpled; the other more even,
flatulent and ſpringy. Sharp's Surgery.
To F E E L. v. a.
1. To perceive by the touch.
Suffer me that I may feel the pillars.
2. To try; to ſound.
He hath writ this to feel my affection to your honour. Shakespeare
3. To have ſenſe of pain or pleaſure.
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel? Miltºn.
But why ſould thoſe be thought to 'ſcape, who feel
Thoſe rods of ſcorpions and thoſe whips of ſteel?
Creech's juvenal.
The well ſung woes ſhall ſooth my penſive ghoſt ;
He beſt can paint them who can feel them moſt. Pope.
Not youthful kings in battle ſeiz'd alive,
E’er felt ſuch grief, ſuch terrour, and deſpair. Pope.
4. To be affeited by.
Would had never trod this Engliſh earth,
Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
5. To know; to be acquainted with.
His overthrow heap'd happineſs upon him;
For then, and not 'till then, he felt himſelf,
And found the bleſſedneſs of being little. Shakeſp Hen. VIII.
Feel. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The ſenſe of feeling; the touch.
The difference of theſe tumours will be diſtinguiſhed by
the fºl: one feels flaccid and rumpled, the other more even,
flatulent, and ſpringy. Sharp's Surgery.
FE'El ER. m. ſ. [from feel.]
1. One that feels.
judg. xxvi. 26.
This hand, whoſe touch,
whoſe ev'ry touch would force the feeler's ſoul
To th' oath of loyalty. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
2. The horns or antennae of inſe&amp;ts.
Inſeas clean their eyes with their forelegs as well as an-
tennae; and as they aré perpetually feeling and ſearching be-
fore them with their feelers or antennae, I am apt to think that
beſides wiping and cleaning the eyes, the uſes here named may
be admitted. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
FEE/linc. participial adj. [from feel.]
1. Expreſſive of great ſenſibility.
O wretched ſtate of man in ſelf-diviſion
O well thou ſay'ſt a feeling declaration -
Thy tongue hath made of Cupid's deep inciſion. Sidney.
Thy wailing words do much my ſpirits move,
They uttered are in ſuch a feeling faſhion. Sidney, b. ii.
Write ’till your ink be dry, and with your tears
Moiſt it again; and frame ſome feeling line,
That may diſcover ſuch integrity. Shakesp. Twº Gent. of Werona.
2. Senſibly felt. This ſenſe is not ſufficiently analogical.
A moſt poor man made tame to fortune's blows,
Who, by the art of known and feeling ſorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
I had a feeling ſenſe
Of all your royal favours; but this laſt
Strikes through my heart. . Southerne.
FE'ELING.. n.ſ.. [from feel.]
1. The ſenſe of touch.
Why was the fight
To ſuch a tender ball as th’ eye confin'd?
So obvious and ſo eaſy to be quench'd,
And not, as feeling, through all parts diffus'd,
That ſhe might look at will through ev'ry pore. Milton.
a. Senſibility; tenderneſs.
The apprehenſion of the good,
Gives but the greater feeling to the worſe. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Their king, out of a princely feeling, was ſparing and com-
paſſionate towards his ſubjects. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Perception.
Great perſons had need to borrow other men's opinions to
think themſelves happy; for if they judge by their own feeling,
they cannot find it. Bacon's Eſſays.
As we learn what belongs to the body by the evidence of
ſenſe, ſo we learn what belongs to the ſoul by an inward con-
ſciouſneſs, which may be called a ſort of internal feeling. //atls.
Fee'll NGly. adv. [from feeling.]
1. With expreſſion of great ſenſibility. -
The pinceſ, might judge that he meant himſelf, who ſpake
ſo feelingly. Sidney.
He would not have talked ſo feelingly of Codrus's bed, if
there had been room for a bedfellow in it. Pºpe.
2. So as to be ſenſibly felt.
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
The ſeaſon's difference; as the icy phang,
And churliſh chiding of the Winter's wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body,
Ev’n 'till I ſhrink with cold, I ſmile and ſay,
This is no flattery: theſe are counſellors,
That ſeeingº Perſuade me what I am. Shakeſp. A you like it.
He feelingly knew, and had trial of the late good, and of
the new purchaſed evil. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the World.
FEET. n.ſ. The plural of fºot.
His brother's image to his mind appears, -
Inflames his heart with rage, and wings his feet with fears.
Pope's Statius.
Fee'rless, adj. [from feet.] Without feet.
Geoffrey of Boulloin broched three feetleſ; birds, called Al-
lerions, upon his arrow. Camden.
To FEIGN. v. a. [feindre, French; fingo, Latin.]
1. To invent.
And theſe three voices differ; all the things done, the doing
and the doer; the thing feigned, the feigning and the feigner?
ſo the poem, the poeſy and the poet. Ben.johnſºn's Diſcover.
No ſuch things are done as thou ſayeſt, but thou feigneſi
them out of thine own heart. Neh. vi. 8.
2. To make a ſhow of.
Both his hands, moſt filthy feculent,
Above the water were on high extent,
And ſigned to waſh themſelves inceſantly. Spenſ. Fairy Qu,
3. To make a ſhew of ; to do upon ſome falſe pretence.
Me gentle Delia beckons from the plain,
Then, hid in ſhades, eludes her eager ſwain;
But feigns a laugh to ſee me ſearch around. Pope.
4. To diſſemble; to conceal. Now obſolete.
Each trembling leaf and whiſtling wind they hear,
- As ghaſtly bug their hair on end does rear;
Yet both do ſtrive their fearfulneſs to feign. Fairy Queen.
To FEIGN. v. n. To relate falſely; to image from the in-
VentlOn.
Therefore the poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, ſtones, and floods;
Since nought ſo ſtockiſh, hard and full of rage,
But muſick for the time doth change his nature. Shakespeare.
Fe(IGNEDLY. adv. [from ſei, n.] In fićtion; not truly.
Such is found to have been falſely and feignedly in ſome of
the heathens. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
FE/IGN ER. n.ſ. [ from feign. J Inventer; contriver of a
fićtion.
And theſe three voices differ; all the things done, the
doing and the doer; the thing feigned, the feigning and the
feigner; ſo the poem, the poeſy and the poet. Ben. johnſºn.
FEINT. participial adj. [from feign, forfeigned; or feint, Fr.]
The mind by degrees loſes its natural reliſh of real, ſolid
truth, and is reconciled inſenſibly to anything that can be but
dreſſed up into any feint appearance of it. Locke.
FEINT. n.ſ.. [feint, French.]
I. : falſe appearance; an offer of ſomething not intended to
e.
Courtly's letter is but a feint to get off. Speciator, No. 286.
2. A mock aſſault; an appearance of aiming at one part when
another is intended to be ſtruck.
But, in the breaſt encamp'd, prepares
For well-bred frints and future wars. Prior.
Fe'l.AND ERs. n.ſ. Worms in hawks. Ainſworth.
FE'LDFARE n.ſ. See FIELL FARE. -
To FELI'CITATE. v. a. [feliciter, French; felicita, Latin.j
1. To make happy.
I profeſs
Myſelf an enemy to all other joys;
And find I am alone felicitate
In your dear highneſs' love. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
What a glorious entertainment and pleaſure would fill and
felicitate his ſpirit, if he could graſp all in a ſingle ſurvey. Watts.
2. To congratulate. +
They might proceed unto forms of ſpeeches, flicitating the
good, or deprecating the evil to follow. Brown's Vulgar Err.
Felicitation. n.ſ. [French, from felicitate.] Congratula-
tion. Dićf.
FEI.I'CITOUS. adj. [flix, Latin.] Happy. Dići.
FEL, citously. adv. from felicitous.] Happily. Dić7.
FELI(c1 | Y. n.ſ.. [felicita, Latin ; felicité, Fr.] Happineſs;
proſperity; bliſsfulneſs; bleſſedneſs.
ºf he joyous day, dear Lord, with joy begin,
And grant that we, for whom thou dideſt die,
Being with thy dear blood clean waſh'd from fin,
May live for ever inflicity. Spenſer, Sannet 68.
Others in virtue plac'd fºli ity;
But virtue join'd with riches and long life, -
In corporal pleaſure he, and careleſs eaſe. Milt. Par. Reg.
So the felicities of her wonderful reign may be complete.
Atterbury’s Sermons.
How great, how glorious a felicity, how adequate to the
deſires of a reaſonable nature, is revealed to our hopes in the
goſpel ! Rogers, Sermon iii.
FE LINE. adj. [felinus, Latin J. Like a cat; pertaining to a
Cat.
Even as in the beaver; from which he differs principally in
his teeth, which are canine, and in his tail, which is feline,
or a long taper. Grew's Muſaeum,
FELL adj. [relle, Saxon.]
I. Cruel; barbarous; inhuman.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2
It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E L
- F E L
It ſeemed fury, diſcord, madneſs fell, -
Flew from his lap when he unfolds the ſame. Fairfax, b. ii.
So felleft foes,
Whoſe paſſions and whoſe plots have broke their ſleep,
To take the one the other, by ſome chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, ſhall grow dear friends. Shakespeare
That inſtant was I turn'd into a hart,
And my deſires, like fell and cruel hounds,
E’er finee purſue me. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
2. Savage; ravenous; bloody.
I know thee, love wild as the raging main,
More fell than tygers on the Lybian plain. Pope's Autumn.
Scorning all the taming arts of man,
The keen hyena, fellºſt of the# Thºmſon's Spring.
FELL. n. ſ. [Felle, Saxon.] The ſkin; the hide.
Wipe thine eye;
The goujers ſhall devour them, fleſh and fell, -
Ere they ſhall make us weep. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The time has been my ſenſes would have cool’d
To hear a night-ſhriek; and my fell of hair
Would at a diſmal treatiſe rouze and ſtir. Shakespeare Macbeth.
To Fell. v. a. [fellen, German.]
1. To knock down; to bring to the ground.
Villain, ſtand, or I'll fell thee down. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Up and down he traverſes his ground; -
Now wards a felling blow, now ſtrikes again. Daniel.
Taking the ſmall end of his muſket in his hand, he ſtruck
him on the head with the ſtock, and felled him. Raleigh.
His fall, for the preſent, ſtruck an earthquake into all
minds; nor could the vulgar be induced to believe he was
felled. - Howel's Wocal Forreſt.
On their whole hoſt I flew
Unarm’d, and with a trivial weaponſ.
Their choiceſt youth: they only liv'd who fled. Milt. Agon.
Whom with ſuch force he ſtruck he fºll'd him down,
And cleft the circle of his golden crown. Dryden.
I fell'd along a man of bearded face,
His limbs all cover'd with a ſhining caſe. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
2. To hew down; to cut down.
Then would he ſeem a farmer that would ſell º
Bargains of woods, which he did lately fell. Hubb. Tale.
Proud Arcite and fierce Palamon,
In mortal battle, doubling blow on blow;
Like lightning flam'd their fauchions to and fro,
And ſhot a dreadful gleam; ſo ſtrong they ſtruck,
There ſeem'd leſs force requir'd to fell an oak. Dryden.
Fell. The preterite of To fall.
None on their feet might ſtand,
Though ſtanding elſe as rocks; but down they fell
By thouſands, angel on archangel roll’d. Milton.
FE'LLER. n.ſ.. [from fell.] One that hews down.
Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up againſt us.
Iſ. xiv. 8.
FELLI'Fluous. adj. [fel and fuo, Latin.] Flowing with
gall. Dić7.
Fe'll Monger, n.ſ.. [from fell] . A dealer in hides.
FE'll Ness, n.ſ.. [from fell.] Cruelty; ſavageneſs; fury; rage.
When his brother ſaw the red blood trail
Adown ſo faſt, and all his armour ſteep,
For very felneſ; loud he'gan to weep. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
FE'llo.e. n.f. [felge, Daniſh. J The circumference of a
wheel; the outward part. It is often written fally or felly.
Out, out, thou ſtrumpet fortune! all you gods,
In general ſynod, take away her power;
Break all the ſpokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heav'n. Shakeſp.
Their axle-trees, naves, felloes, and ſpokes were all molten.
1 Kings vii. 33.
FELLOW, n.ſ. [quaſi, to follow, Minſhew; from Fe, faith,
and las, bound, Saxon, junius; fallow, Scottiſh.]
1. A companion; one with whom we conſort.
In youth I had twelve fellows like unto myſelf, but not one
of them came to a good end. Aſcham's Schºolmaſter.
To be your fellow,
You may deny me; but I'll be your ſervant,
Whether you will or no. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Have we not plighted each our holy oath,
That one ſhould be the common good of both ;
One ſoul ſhould both inſpire, and neither prove
His fºllow's hindrance in purſuit of love Dryden.
2. An aſſociate; one united in the ſame affair.
Each on his fºllow for aſſiſtance calls;
At length the fatal fabrick mounts the walls. Dryden's Virg.
3. One of the ſame kind.
Let partial ſpirits ſtill aloud complain,
Think themſelves injur'd that they cannot reign;
And own no liberty, but where they may
Without controul upon their fºllows prey. Waller.
A ſhepherd had one favourite dog: he fºld him with his own
hand, and took more care of him than of any of his flows.
- L'4/irange's Fables.
4. Equal; peer. -
Chieftain of the reſt
I choſe him here: the earth ſhall him allow; º
His fellows late, ſhall be his ſubječts now. Fairfax, b, i.
So you are to be hereafter fellows, and no longer ſer-
Wants. Sidney.
5. One thing ſuited to another; one of a pair.
When virtue is lodged in a body, that ſeems to have been
prepared for the reception of vice: the ſoul and the body do
not ſeem to be (* Addiſon’s Speciator, Nº. 86.
6. One like another: as, this knave hath not his fºllºw. -
7. A familiar appellation uſed ſometimes with fondneſs; ſome
times with eſteem; but generally with ſome degree of con
tempt.
This is Cthello's ancient, as I take it.
—The ſame indeed; a very valiant fellow. Shakespeare Othello.
An officer was in danger to have loſt his place, but his
wife made his peace ; whereupon a pleaſant fºllow ſaid, that he
had been cruſhed, but that he ſaved himſelf upon his horns.
* - Bacon, Apophthegm
Full fifteen thouſand luſty fºllows pºphthegm 4.
With fire and ſword the fort maintain;
Each was a Hercules, you tell us,
Yet out they march'd like common men. Prior.
8. A word of contempt: the fooliſh mortal; the mean wretch ;
the ſorry raſcal.
Thoſe great fellºws ſcornfully receiving them, as fooliſh
birds fallen into their net, it pleaſed the eternal juſtice to make
them ſuffer death by their hands. Sidney, b. ii.
Caſio hath here been ſet on in the dark -
By Rodorigo, and fellows that are 'ſcap'd:
He's almoſt ſlain, and Rodorigo dead. Shakeſp. Othello.
I have great comfort from this fellow : methinks he hath
no drowning mark about him; his complexion is perfeót
gallows. Shakespeare's lemp'ſ.
Opinion, that did help me to the crown, r
Had ſtill kept loyal to poſſeſſion; -
And left me in reputeleſs baniſhment,
A fºllºw of no mark nor likelihood. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
How oft the fight of means, to do ill deeds,
Makes deeds ill done for had'ſt not thou been by,
A fellow by the hand of nature mark'd,
Quoted, and ſign'd to do a deed of ſhame,
This murder had not come into my mind. Shakeſp K. john.
The Moor's abus’d by ſome moſt villainous knave,
Some baſe notorious knave, ſome ſcurvyfellow. Shakespeare Othell.
The fellow had taken more fiſh than he could ſpend while
they were ſweet. L’Eſtrange.
As next of kin, Achilles' arms I claim;
This fellow would ingraft a foreign name
Upon our ſtock, and the Siſyphian ſeed
By fraud and theft aſſerts his father's breed. Dryden.
You will wonder how ſuch an ordinary fellow, as this Mr.
Wood, could have got his majeſty's broad ſeal. Swift.
You'll find, if once the monarch ačts the monk,
Or, cobler like, the parſon will be drunk,
Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow;
The reſt is all but leather and prunella. Pope's Eſ on Man.
9. Sometimes it implies a mixture of pity with contempt.
The provoſt commanded his men to hang him up on the
neareſt tree: then the fellow cried out that he was not the
miller, but the miller's man. Hayward.
10. A member of a college that ſhares its revenues.
To Fe'llow. v. a. To ſuit with; to pair with ; to match.
Fellow is often uſed in compoſition to mark community of
nature, ſtation, or employment. -
Imagination,
With what's unreal, thou co-aētive art,
And fellow'ſ nothing. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
Fellow-co'M Mon E.R. n ſ.
1. One who has the ſame right of common.
He cannot appropriate, he cannot incloſe, without the con-
ſent of all his fellowcommoners, all mankind. Locke.
2. A commoner at Cambridge of the higher order, who dines
with the fellows.
Fellow-cRE at TURE. m. ſ. One that has the ſame creator.
Reaſon is the glory of human nature, and one of the chief
eminencies whereby we are raiſed above our fellowcreatures the
brutes in this lower world. //atts's Logick, 1ntrodućtion.
Fellow-Heir. n.ſ. Coheir ; partner of the ſame inheri-
tailCC.
The Gentiles ſhould be fellowheirs. Eph. iii.6.
FE L Low-H E(LPER. m. ſ. Coadjutor; one who concurs in the
ſame buſineſs.
We ought to receive ſuch, that we might befellowhepers to
the truth. 3 jo. viii.
Fellow-LA'Bourer. n.ſ. One who labours in the ſame
deſign.
My fellowlabourers have likewiſe commiſſioned me to per-
form in their behalf this office of dedication. Dryd, juv. Ded.
FELLow-SE'RVANT. n. ſ. One that has the ſame maſter. N
of
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E f,
F E M
Nor leſs think we in heav'n of thee on earth,
Than of our fellowſerva's and inquire -
Gladly into the ways of God with man. Milt. Parad, Loff.
Fair fºllowſe vant ! may your gentle ear
Prove more propitious to my ſlighted care
Than the bright dame's we ſerve. J/aller.
Their fathers and yours were fellowſervants to the ſame
heavenly maſter while they lived; nor is that relation diſ-
ſolved by their death, but ought ſtill to operate among their
ſurviving children. Atterbury's Sermons.
Fellow-soldie R. m. ſ. One who fights under the ſame com-
mander. An endearing appellation uſed by officers to their
inen. -
Come, fºllºwſoldier, make thou proclamation. Shakespeare .
Epaphroditus, my brother and companion in labour, and
fºllow/oldier. Phil. ii. 25.
F Ellow-stu'DENT. n. f. One who ſtudies in company with
another.
I pr’ythee, do not mock me, fºllowſtudent;
I think it was to ſee my mother's wedding. Shakespeare Hamlet.
If you have no fºllow/iudent at hand, tell it over with your
acquaintance. J/atts's Logick.
Fellow-su'Bject. n.ſ. One who lives under the ſame go-
Vernment.
The bleeding condition of their fellowſ/ječis was a feather
in the balance with their private ends. Swift.
Fellow-su'FFERER. m.ſ. One who ſhares in the ſame evils;
one who partakes the ſame ſufferings with another.
How happy was it for thoſe poor creatures, that your grace
was made their fell wſufferer? And how glorious for you, that
you choſe to want rather than not relieve the wants of others?
- Dryden's Fable, Dedicatiou.
We in ſome meaſure ſhare the neceſſities of the poor at the
ſame time that we r lieve them, and make ourſelves not only
their patrons but fºllowſtºfferers. Addiſon's Spectator.
Fellow-wri TER. m.ſ. One who writes at the ſame time, or
on the ſame ſubjećt.
Since they cannot raiſe themſelves to the reputation of their
*low-writers, they muſt fink it to their own pitch, if they
would keep themſelves upon a level with them. Addison Spectat.
Fellow FE'Eli NG. m. ſ. [fºllºw and feeling.]
1. Sympathy. -
It is a high degree of inhumanity not to have a fºllowfeel-
ing of the misfortune of my brother. L'E/irange.
2. Combination ; joint intereſt. -
Even your milkwoman and your nurſerymaid have a fel-
lowfeeling. Z, buthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
FE'Liow like. adj. [fellow and like. J Like a companion ;
Fe'llow LY. } on equal terms; companionable.
All which good parts he graceth with a good fellowlike,
kind, and reſpectful carriage. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
One ſeed for another, to make an exchange,
With fellowly neighbourhood ſeemeth not ſtrange. Tiffer.
FE'Llows HIP. m. ſ. [from fellºw.]
1. Companionſhip; conſort; ſociety.
This boy cannot tell what he would have,
But kneels and holds up hands for fellowſhip. Shakespeare Coriolan.
From bliſsful bow’rs
Of amarantine ſhade, fountain, or ſpring,
By the waters of life, where'er they ſat
In fellowſhips of joy, the ſons of light
aſted. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. xi. 1.80.
There is no man but God puts excellent things into his
poſſeſſion, to be uſed for the common good ; for men are
made for ſociety and mutual fellowſhip. Calamy's Sermons.
God having deſigned man for a ſociable creature, made him
not only with an inclination and under the neceſſity to have
fºllowſhip with thoſe of his own kind, but furniſhed him alſo
with language, which was to be the great inſtrument and ce-
menter of ſociety. Locke.
2. Aſſociation; confederacy; combination. -
We would not die in that man's company,
That fears his fellowſhip to die with us. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Thoſe laws do bind men abſolutely, even as they are men,
although they have never any ſettled fellowſhip, never any ſo-
lemn agreement amongſt themſelves what to do, or not to
do. Hooker, b i. ſ. Io.
Moſt of the other Chriſtian princes were drawn into the
fºllowſhip of that war. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
3. Equality.
4. Partnerſhip; joint intereſt.
Nearer acquainted, now I feel by proof
That fellowſhip in pain divides not ſmart,
Nor lightens aught each man's peculiar load. Parad. Reg.
O love! thou ſternly do'ſt thy pow'r maintain,
And wilt not bear a rival in thy reign; :
Tyrants and thou all fellºwſhip diſdain. Dryden.
5. Company; ſtate of being together.
The great contention of the ſea and ſkies
Parted our fellowſhip. But hark, a ſail! Shakeſp. Othello.
6. Frequency of intercourſe; ſocial pleaſure. -
: In a great town friends are ſcattered, ſo that there is not
that fellowſhip which is in leſs neighbourhoods. Bacon's Eſſays.
7. º and fondneſs for feſtal entertainments, with good pre-
xed.
He had by his exceſſive goºd fºllºwſhip, which was grateful to
all the company, made himſelf popular with all the officers of
the army. Clarendon, b. viii.
8. An eſtabliſhment in the college with ſhare in its revenue.
Coruſodes having, by the moſt extreme parſimony, ſaved
thirty-four pounds out of a beggarly fºllowſhip, went up to
London. Swift.
9. [In arithmetick.] That rule of plural proportion whereby
we balance accompts, depending between divers perſons,
having put together a general ſtock, ſo that they may every
man have his proportional gain, or ſuſtain his proportionál
part of loſs. Cocker’s Arithmetick.
10. A rule in arithmetick, by which two or more independent
operations of the rule of three may divide any given number
into unequal parts, proportional to certain other numbers.
It is ſo called, becauſe the more common and uſeful application
thereof is in the diviſion of gains, loſſes, or other things,
among partners in company. 44alcolm.
FELLY. adv. [from ſell.] Cruelly; inhumanly; ſavagely;
barbarouſly. - c
Fair ye be ſure, but cruel and unkind;
As is a tyger, that with greedineſs
Hunts after blood, when he by chance doth find
A feeble beaſt, doth felly him oppreſs. Spºnſer's Sonnets.
FELo-D E-SE. n.ſ. [In law.] He that committeth felony by
murdering himſelf.
FELON., n.ſ.. [felºn, French; fel, low Latin; rel, Saxon.]
1. One who has committed a capital crime. *
I apprehend thee for a felon here. Shakespeare. Romeo anajula.
And often have you brought the wily fox,
Chas'd even amid’ the folds; and made to bleed,
Like felons, where they did the murd’rous deed. Dryden.
2. A whitlow ; a tumour formed between the bone and its in-
veſting membrane, very painful.
The malign paronychia is that which is commonly called a
felon. // iſºman's Surgery.
FE'LoN. adj. Cruel; traitorous; inhuman.
Ay me', what thing on earth, that all things breeds,
Might be the cauſe of ſo impatient plight !
What fury, or what fiend with felon deeds,
Hath ſtirred up ſo miſchievous deſpight! Spenser.
Then bids prepare th’ hoſpitable treat,
Vain ſhews of love to veil his felon hate. Pope's Odſey.
Fe'lonious. adj. [ from felon. J. Wicked; traitorous; villa-
nous; malignant; perfidious ; deſtructive.
This man conceived the duke's death; but what was the
motive of that felonious conception is in the clouds. Iſºtton.
O thieviſh night ! º
Why ſhould'ſ thou, but for ſome felonious end,
In thy dark lanthorn thus cloſe up the ſtars
That nature hung in heav'n, and fill'd the lamps
With everlaſting oil, to give due light
To the miſled and lonely traveller - Milton.
In thy felonious heart though venom lies,
It does but touch thy Iriſh pen and dies. Dryden.
FELo'Niously, adj. [from felonious.]. In a felonious way.
FE'Lonous. adj. [from flon.] Wicked; felonious.
I am like for deſperate dole to die,
Through felongus force of mine enemy. Spenser's Paſtoral.
FE'LoNY. m. ſ. [felonie, Fr. felonia, low Latin, from felon.] A
crime denounced capital by the law; an enormous crime.
I will make it felony to drink ſmall beer. Shakespeare Henry VI.
FF Lt. The preterite of FEEL, which ſee.
FELT. n.ſ. [Feltt, Saxon.]
1. Cloath made of wool united without weaving.
It were a delicate ſtratagem to ſhoe
A troop of horſe with felt. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. A hide or skin.
To know whether ſheep are ſound or not, ſee that the felt
be looſe. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
To FELt. v. a. [from the noun.J. To unite without weaving.
The ſame wool one man felts into a hat, another weaves it
into cloath, another into kerſey. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
To Fe'l.T.R.E. v. a. [from felt J. To clot together like felt.
His feltred locks, that on his boſom fell,
On rugged mountains briers and thorns reſemble. Fairfax.
Felu'ccA. m. ſ. [fleu, Fr. frºn, Arab.] A ſmall open boat
with ſix oars. Dić7.
FEMALE. m. ſ. [female, French; ſºmella, Latin.] A ſhe;
one of the ſex which brings young.
God created man in his own image, male and female created
he them. Gen. i. 27.
Man, more divine,
Lord of the wide world, and wide wat'ry ſeas,
Indu'd with intellectual ſenſe and ſoul,
Are maſters to their females, and their lords. Shakespeare.
FF'MAL E. adi.
1. Not maſculine; belonging to a ſhe.
If by a female hand he had foreſeen
He was to die, his wiſh had rather been
The lance and double ax of the fair warrior queen. Dryd.
2. FEMALE
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E N
F E N
º
º
º
,
2. Fr.: A E Rhºnes Double rhymes ſo called, becauſe in
French, from which the term is taken, they end in e weak or
feminine. heſe rhymes are female :
Th’ exceſs of heat is but a fable;
We know the torrid zone is now ſound habitable. Cºwley.
The female rhymes are in uſe with the Italian in every line;
with the Spaniard promiſcuouſly, and with the French alter-
nately, as appears from the Alarique, the Pucelle, or any of
their later poems. Dryden's Preface to Ann. Mirab.
Fe Me Covert. n ſ. [French.] A married woman; who is alſo
ſaid to be under covert baron. Blount.
FEME Sole, n. ſ. [French. J A ſingle woman; an unmarried
woman.
FEMINA'lity. n ſ [from femina, Latin.] Female nature.
If in the minority of natural vigour the parts of feminality
take place, upon the increaſe or growth thereof the maſculine
appears. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs, b. iii. c. 17.
FE'MIN IN E adj. [fa mininus, Latin J
1. Of the ſex that brings young; female.
Thus we chaſtiſe the god of wine
' With water that is feminine,
Until the cooler nymph abate
His wrath, and ſo concorporate.
2. Soft; tender; delicate.
Her heav'nly form
Angelick, but more ſoft and feminine. Milton's Parad. Loft.
3. Effeminate; emaſculated.
Ninias was no man of war at all, but altogether feminine
and ſubjećted to eaſe and delicacy. Raleigh's Hi/f. of the ſºorld.
Fe/MININ E. m. ſ. A ſhe , one of the ſex that brings young;
a female.
Cleaveland.
O why did God create at laſt
This novelty on earth, this fair defect
Of nature ? And not fill the world at once
With men, as angels, without feminine º Milt. Par. Lºft.
FE'MoRAL. adj. [femoralis, Latin J. Belonging to the thigh.
The largeſt crooked needle ſhould be uſed in taking up the
emoral arteries in amputation. Sharp's Surgery.
PEN. n. ſ [Fenn, Saxon; venne, Dutch..] A marſh; low flat
and moiſt ground; a moor; a bog.
Mexico is a city that ſtands in the midſt of a great marſh or
fen. - Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than ſeen. Shakeſp Coriolan.
Yon common cry of curs, whoſe breath I hate,
As reek o' th' rotten fems. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
The ſurface is of black fen earth. Woodward on Fºſſils.
He to Portina's wat'ry marſhes went; -
A long canal the muddyfrn divides,
And with a clear unſully'd current glides. Addiſon.
FF'N BERRY. n. ſ. [fen and berry. ]. A kind of black-
berry. Skinner.
FENce. n. ſ. [from defence.]
1. Guard; ſecurity; outwork; defence.
That proved not fence enough to the reputation of their
oppreſſors. Decay of Piety.
There's no fence againſt inundations, earthquakes, or hur-
ricanes. : L’E/irange, Fable 167.
To put them out of their parents view, at a great diſtance,
is to expoſe them to the greateſt dangers of their whole life,
when they have the leaſt fence and guard againſt them. Locke.
Let us bear this awful corps to Caſar,
And lay it in his ſight, that it may ſtand
A fence betwixt us and the victor's wrath. Addiſon's Cato.
2. Incloſure; mound ; hedge.
In vain did nature's wiſe command
Divide the waters from the land,
If daring ſhips, and men prophane,
Invade th' inviolable main;
Th' eternal fences overleap,
And paſs at will the boundleſs deep.
Shall I mention make
Of the vaſt mound that binds the Lucrine lake
Or the diſdainful ſea, that, ſhut from thence,
Roars round the ſtructure, and invades the fence 2 Dryden.
Employ their wiles and unavailing care,
To paſs the fences and ſurpriſe the fair. Pope.
3. The art of fencing; defence. . -
I bruiſed my ſkin th' other day, with playing at ſword and
dagger with a maſter of fence. Shakespeare . Merry hºves of Windſ.
4. Skill in defence.
I’ll prove it on his body, if he dare,
Deſpite his nice fence and his active pračtice. Shakeſpeare.
To F.E.Nc E. v. a.
1. To incloſe; to ſecure by an incloſure or hedge.
Th’ inhabitants each paſture and each plain
Deſtroyed have, each field to waſte is lade;
In fenced towers beſtowed is their grain,
Before thou cam'ſt this kingdom to invade. Fairfax, b. ii.
He hath fenced up my way that I cannot paſs, and ſet dark-
neſs in my paths. job xix, 8.
Dryden’s Horace.
Thou haſ cloathed me with ſkin and fleſh, and haſ ſented
me with bones and ſincws. job x. , i.
He went about to make a bridge to a ſtrong city, which
was fenced about with walls. 2 Mac. xii. 13.
See that the churchyard be fenced in with a decent rail, or
other incloſure. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. To guard. - -
§. much of adders wiſdom I have learnt,
To fence my ear againſt thy ſorceries. Milton's Agoniſłcs.
With love to friend, th’ impatient lover went,
Fenc'd from the thorns, and trod the deep deſcent. Dryden.
To Fe Nc E. v. m.
1. To pračtiſe the arts of manual defence; to practiſe the uſe of
weapons. -
He having got ſome iron, ſhould have it beaten into ſwords,
and put into his ſervants hands to fence with, and bang one
another. - Locke.
2. To guard againſt; to ačt on the defenſive.
Vice is the more ſtubborn as well as the more dangerous
evil, and therefore in the firſt place to be fenced againſt. Locke.
3. To fight according to art.
If a throſtle fing, he falls ſtrait a capering:
He will fence with his own ſhadow. Shakespeare Merch. of Venice.
A beauteous heifer in the wood is bred;
The ſtooping warriors, aiming head to head,
Engage their claſhing horns ; with dreadful ſound
The foreſt rattles, and the rocks rebound;
They fence and puſh, and, puſhing, loudly roar,
Their dewlaps and their ſides are bath'd in gore. Dryden.
A man that cannot fence will keep out of bullies and game-
fters company. Locke.
Theſe, being polemical arts, could no more be learned
alone than fencing or cudgelplaying. Arbuth, and Pope's Ma. Sc.
FE'Ncel Ess. adj. [from fence..] Without incloſure; open.
Each motion of the heart riſes to fury,
And love in their weak boſoms is a rage
As terrible as hate, and as deſtructive:
So the wind roars o'er the wide fenceleſ, ocean,
And heaves the billows of the boiling deep,
Alike from North, from South, from Eaſt, from Weſt.
- Rowe's jane Shore.
FE'nce R. m. ſ. [from fence.] One who teaches or practiſes the
uſe of weapons, or ſcience of defence.
Calmneſs is great advantage: he that lets
Another chafe, may warm him at his fire,
Mark all his wand'rings, and enjoy his frets;
As cunning fencers ſuffer heat to tire. Herbert.
A nimble fencer will put in a thruſt ſo quick, that the foil
will be in your boſom when you thought it a yard off. Digby.
Fa‘Ncible. adj. [from fence.] Capable of defence. Addiſon.
FE'NcING MASTER. n.ſ.. [fence and maſter.] One who teaches
the uſe of weapons. -
FE'NcINGschool. n.ſ.. [fence and ſchool.] A place in which
the uſe of weapons is taught.
If a man be to prepare his ſon for duels, I had rather mine
fhould be a good wreſtler than an ordinary fencer, which is
the moſt a gentleman can attain to, unleſs he will be con-
ſtantly in the fencingſchool, and every day exerciſing. Locke.
To Fe ND. v. a. [from de end..] To keep off; to ſhut out.
Spread with ſtraw the bedding of thy fold,
With fern beneath, to fend the bitter cold. Dryden's Pirgii.
To FEND. v. n. To diſpute; to ſhift off a charge.
The dexterous management of terms, and being able to
fend and prove with them, paſſes for a great part of learning;
but it is learning diſtinct from knowledge. Locke.
FE'NDER. m. ſ. [from ſend J
1. An iron plate laid before the fire to hinder coals that fall from
rolling forward to the floor.
2. Any thing laid or hung at the ſide of a ſhip to keep off
violence.
FENERA'tion. m. ſ. [feneratio, Latin.] Uſury; the gain of
intereſt; the pračtice of increaſing money by lending.
The hare figured not only puſilanimity and timidity from
its temper, but feneration and uſury from its fecundity and
ſuperfetation. Brown’s Vulgar Errours, b iii. c. 17.
FE'NUGREE K. n ſ. [frnum Graecum, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a papilionaceous flower, out of whoſe empalement
riſes the pointal, which afterwards becomes a pod, ſomewhat
plain, ſhaped like a horn, and full of ſeeds, for the moſt part
rhomboid or kidney-ſhaped. AMiller.
FE'NNEl. n.ſ.. [feniculum, Latin.] A plant of ſtrong ſcent.
It is an umbelliferous plant, whoſe leaves are divided into
capillaceous jags: the petals of the flower are intire, and placed
orbicularly, expanding in form of a roſe: each flower is ſuc-
ceeded by two oblong thick gibbous ſeeds, chaucled on one
ſide, and plain on the other. AMiller.
A ſav'ry odour blown, more pleas'd my ſenſe
Than ſmell of ſweeteſt ſºnnel, or the teats
Of ewe, or goat, dropping with milk at ev'n: Milton.
FE'NNELFlow zR. m. ſ. A plant.
FE'NNELGIANT. m. ſ. A plant.
9 B It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E. R
F E R
|
T. hath a large ſucculent milky root: the ſiliks are ſpongy,
at,d filled with pith: the flowers conſiſt of many leaves, ex-
panded in form of a roſe, growing in an umbel: each flower
is ſucceeded by two large oval-ſhaped flat ſeeds, which are
very thin, and turn black when ripe: the leaves are like thoſe
of fennel. 4/iller.
FE'N N.Y. adj. [from ſºn.]
1. Marſhy; boggy ; mooriſh.
Driving in of piles is uſed for ſtone or brick houſes, and
that only where the ground proves ſººny or mooriſh. 41.xon.
The hungry crocodile, and hiſſing ſnake,
Lurk in the troubl’d ſtream and finny brake. Prior,
2. Inhabiting the marſh.
Fillet of a fenny ſnake,
In the caudron boil and bake.
FE'N syston Es. n.ſ. A plant.
FE NSuck E.D. adj. [fen and ſºck.] Sucked out of marſhes.
Infect her beauty,
You ſenſack'd fogs, drawn by the pow'rful ſun. Shakespeare K. Lear,
FEOD. m. J. [frodum, low Latin J Fee; tenure. Dicſ.
FE'od Al. adj. [fe-dal, French, from feed.] Held from another.
FE'op'ARY. n ſ. [from frodum, Latin.] One who holds his
Čſtate under the tenure of ſuit and ſervice to a ſuperiour
, lord. Hanmer.
To FEOFF. v. a. [fief, fifer, French; fºſſare, low Latin.]
To put in poſſeſſion; to inveſt with right.
FEof FEE. n.ſ. [feoffatus, Latin ; fift, French. J One put
in poſſeſſion.
The late earl of Deſmond, before his breaking forth into
rebellion, conveyed ſecretly all his lands to ſcºffee in truſt, in
hope to have cut off her majºity from the eſcheat of his
lands. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
FE'off f R. m. ſ. [ ſ fator, low Latin J One who gives poſ-
ſeſſion of any thing. See FF of FMENT.
FE"off MENT. n.ſ. [..fºffamentum, Latin.] The act of grant-
ing poſſeſſion. -
Any gift or grant of any honours, caſtles, lands, or other
immoveable things, to another in fee-ſimple, that is, to him
and his heirs for ever, by the delivery of ſeiſin of the thing
given : when it is in writing, it is called a deed of feºffment;
and in every feaffnent the giver is called the feoffor, feoffater,
and he that receiveth by virtue thereof the fedffee, feºffatus.
The proper difference between a feoffor and a donor is, that
the feoffor gives in fee-ſimple, the donor in fee-tail, , Cowel.
The aët of parliament cut off and fruſtrated all ſuch con-
veyances as had, by the ſpace of twelve years before his rebel-
lion, been made; within the compaſs whereof the fraudulent
ſºftment of others, his accomplices and fellow-traytors, were
contained. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
FERA'city. n.ſ.. [fºracitas, Lat.] Fruitfulneſs; fertility. Dići.
Fe'r AL. adj. [fºralis, Latin.] Funereal; mournful; deadly.
- Dić7.
FERIA'ſ 10 N. m. ſ. [ friati, Lat. J The act of keeping holi-
day; ceſſation from work.
As though there were any friation in nature, this ſeaſon is
commonly termed the phyſicians vacation. Brown's Pug. Err.
FERINE, adj. [ſerinus, Latin J Wild; ſavage.
The only difficulty that remains is touching thoſe ferine,
noxious, and untameable beaſts; as lions, tygers, wolves and
bears. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
FER 1'NEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from ferine.] Barbarity; ſavageneſs ;
wildneſs.
A ferine and neceſſitous kind of life, a converſation with
thoſe that were fallen into a barbarous habit of life, would
aſſimilate the next generation to barbariſm and ferineneſs. Hale.
FE'RITY. m. ſ. [ſeritas, Latin.] Barbarity; cruelty; wild-
neſs; ſavageneſs.
He reduced him from the moſt abject and ſtupid ſerity to
his ſenſes, and to ſober reaſon. J/oodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
To FERMENT. v. a. [fºrmento, Latin ; fermenter, French. J
To exalt or rarify by inteſtine motion of parts.
Ye vigºrous ſwains ! while youth ferments your blood,
And purer ſpirits ſwell the ſprightly flood,
Now range the hills, the thickeſt woods beſet, -
Wind the ſhrill horn, or ſpread the waving net. Pºpe.
To FER ME/NT. v. n. To have the parts put into inteſtine
IIl Cti OI). - º
FER MENT. m. ſ. [ſerment, French ; fermentum, Latin.]
1. That which cauſes inteſtine motion.
The ſemen puts females into a fever, upon impregnation;
and all animal humours which poiſon, are putrefying ſerment.
Iloyer on the Humours.
Subdue and cool the ferment of deſire. Rogers'; Sermºns.
2. I he inteſtine motion ; tuniult.
fi. R \le's TABLE. adj. [from fºrment.] Capable of fermen-
tº it iOn.
FER-1E's TAL. adj. [from ferment.] Having the power to
cauſe fermentation
Cucumbers, being wateriſh, fill the veins with crude and
windy ſeroſities, that contain little ſalt or ſpirit, and debilitate
the vital acidity and fºrmental faculty of the ſtomach. Br. wi.
FER MENT A/TICN. n.ſ. [ fermentatio, Latin. J A ſlow
r of the inteſtine particles of a mixt bºdy, ariſing
uſually from the operation of ſome active acid incºter, which
rarifics, exalts, and ſubtilizes the ſoft and ſulphureous par-
ticles: as when leaven or yeſt rarifies, lightens, and fern.cnts
bread or wort, &amp;c And this motion differs much from that
uſually called cbullition or efferveſcence, which is a violent
boiling and ſtruggling between an acid and an alkali, when
mixed together. Harris.
The juice of grapes, after fºrmentation, will yield a ſpirituſ
arden. Boyle.
A man, by tumbling his thoughts, and forming them into
expreſſions, gives them a new kind of fermentation; which
works then into a finer body, and makes them much clearer
than they were before.
The ſap, in fluent dance,
And lively fermentation, mounting, ſpreads
All this innumerous colour'd ſcene of things. Thomſºn.
FERM 'N T A + v E. adj. [from fºrment J Cauſing fermenta-
tion; having the power to cauſe fermentation. -
Aromatical ſpirits deſtroy by their firmentative heat. Arlić.
FERN. m. ſ. [Fearn, Saxon.] A plant.
The male fºrm is common on the ſtumps of trees in woods,
and on the banks of ditches: the leaves are formed of a num-
ber of ſmall pinnules, dentated on the edges, and ſet cloſe by
one another on ſlender ribs. On the back of theſe pinnules
are produced the ſeeds, ſmall and extremely numerous. De-
cočtions of the root and diet drinks have been uſed in chro-
nick diſorders and obſtructions. The country people eſteem
it a ſovereign remedy for the rickets in children. Hill.
Black was the foreſt, thick with beech it ſtood,
Horrid with fºrm, and intricate with thorn;
Few paths of human feet or tracks of beaſts were worn.
- - Dryden's Aneid.
There are great varieties of fern in different parts of the
world; but they are ſeldom cultivated in gardens. Miller.
FE/RN.Y. adj. [from fe' m.) Overgrown with fern.
The held ſuffic'd, did late repair
To ferny heaths, and to their foreſt-lare. Dryden.
FERo'cio Us, adj. [ſerox, Latin ; feroce, French J
1. Savage; fierce. .
2. Ravenous; rapacious.
The hare, that becometh a prey unto man, unto beaſts and
fowls of the air, is fruitful even unto ſuperfetation; but the
lion and ferociºus animal hath young ones but ſeldom, and but
one at a time. Brºwn's ſugar Errours, b. iii. c. 16.
Smedley roſe in majeſty of mud;
Shaking the horrors of his ample brows,
And each ferocious feature grim with ooze.
Pope's Dunciad, b. ii.
FER o'city. n.ſ. [ferocitas, Lat. ferocité, Fr. from ferocious.j
Savageneſs; wildneſs; fierceneſs.
An uncommon ferocity in my countenance, with the re-
markable flatneſs of my noſe, and extent of my mouth, have
procured me the name of lion. Addiſon's Guardian.
Untaught, uncultivated, as they were
Inhoſpitable, full of ſero, ity. Philips's Briton.
FL'RR Eous. adi. [ferreus, Latin.] Irony; of iron.
In the body of glaſs there is no firrezus or magnetical na-
, ture. Brown's ſugar Errours, b. ii. c. 3.
FE/RRET, n.ſ.. [ſured, Welſh; faret, French; fºret, Dutch;
viverra, Lat.]
1. A kind of rat with red eyes and a long ſnout, uſed to catch
rabbits. -
With what an eager earneſtneſs ſhe looked, having threat-
ning not only in her ferret eyes, but while ſhe ſpoke her noſe
ſeemed to threaten her chin. Sidney, b. ii.
Cicero
Looks with ſuch ferret and ſuch firy eyes,
As we have ſeen him. Shakeſpeare's julºus Caſar.
Coneys are deſtroyed or taken either by ferrets or purſe-
nets. Martimer's Husbandry.
2. A kind of narrow ribband. -
To FE'RRET. v. a. [from the noun J. To drive out of lurking
places, as the ferret drives the coney.
The archbiſhop had fºrreted him out of all his holds. Heylºn.
FE/RM ET | R. m. ſ. [from ferret.] One that hunts another in
his privacies. * -
FE(RRIAGE. m. ſ. [from fºrry..] The fare paid at a ferry.
FERRU'GINo Us, adj. . [ferrugineux, Fr. ferrugineus, Latin.]
Partaking of the particles and qualities of iron.
They are cold, hot, purgative, diuretick, ferruginºus, ſa-
line, petrefying and bituminous. Ray on the Creation.
FERRULE. m. ſ. [from ſerrum, iron, Latin.] An iron ring
put round any thing to keep it from cracking.
The fingers ends are ſtrengthened with nails, as we fortify
the ends of our ſtaves or forks with iron hoops or ferrules. Ray.
To FERRY. v. a. [payan, to paſs, Saxon ; fahr, German, a
paſſage. Skinner imagines that this whole family of words
may be deduced from the Latin veho. I do not love Latin
originals; but if ſuch muſt be fought, may not theſe words
be more naturally derived from firri, to be carried ?) To
carry over in a boat,
gCymocles
-
Collier of Friendſhip.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E R
F É S
º
g-
º
- . . Cymocles heard and ſaw;
He loudly call'd to ſuch as were aboard,
The little bark unto the ſhore to draw, - -
And him to ferry over that deep ford. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To Fe’R &amp; Y. v. n. To paſs over water in a veſſel of carriage.
Thence hurried back to fire,
They ferry over this Lethaean ſound
Both to and fro, their ſorrow to augment. Milt. Par. Loſł.
FE's R Y. m. ſ [from the verb.]
1. A veſſel of carriage; a veſſel in which goods or paſſengers
are carried over water.
By this time was the worthy Guyon brought
Unto the other ſide of that wide ſtrand,
Where ſhe was rowing, and for paſſage ſought:
Him needed not long call, ſhe ſoon to hand
Her ferry brought. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 6.
There went a ferryboat to carry over the king's houſhold.
- 2 Sa. xix. 18.
Bring them with imagin'd ſpeed
Unto the Traject, to the common ferry
Which trades to Venice. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice,
I went down to the river Brent in the ordinary ferry. Addison
2. The paſſage over which the ferryboat paſſes.
FE'RRY MAN. n.ſ. [ferry and man.]. One who keeps a ferry;
one who for hire tranſports goods and paſſengers over the
Water.
I paſt, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman, which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night. Shakespeare Richard III.
The common ferryman of Egypt, that waſted over the
dead bodies from Memphis, was made by the Greeks the
ferryman of hell, and ſolemn ſtories raiſed after him. Brown.
The griſly ferryman of hell deny'd
AEneas entrance, ’till he knew his guide. Roſcommon.
Fe RTH, or forth. Common terminations are the ſame as in
Engliſh an army; coming from the Saxon word pyrë. Gibſon.
FE/RTILE. adj. [fertile, French; fertilis, Latin.]
1. Fruitful; abundant; plenteous. -
I had hope of France,
As firmly as I hope forſº England. Shakespeare Henry VI.
I have had a large, a fair, and a pleaſant field; ſo fertile,
that it has given me two harveſts in a Summer. Dryden.
I aſk whether in the uncultivated waſte of America, left to
nature, without any improvement, a thouſand acres yield the
needy inhabitants as many conveniencies of life as ten acres
of equally fertile land do in Devonſhire Locke.
- View the wide earth adorn'd with hills and woods,
Rich in her herds, and fertile by her floods. Blackm. Creat.
2. With of before the thing produced.
The earth is fertile of all kind of grain. Camden's Remains.
This happy country is extremely fertile, as of thoſe above,
ſo likewiſe of its produćtions under ground. //o3dward.
FE'RTILE Ness. n. ſ. [from fertile.] Fruitfulneſs; fecundity.
To FERTI'll TATE. v. a. [from fertile.] To fecundate; to
fertilize; to make fruitful or produćtive.
A cock will in one day fertilitate the whole racemation or
cluſter of eggs, which are not excluded in many weeks after. -
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
FERTI'lity. n.ſ.. [fertilitas, Latin. J Fecundity; abun-
dance ; fruitfulneſs; plenteduſneſs.
I will go root away
The noiſom weeds, that without profit ſuck
The ſoil's fertility from wholeſome flowers. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Paradiſe itſelf exceeded in beauty and fertility; and theſe
places had but a reſemblance thereof. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
To inundations Egypt, through which the Nile flows, and
the Indies owe their extraordinary fertility, and thoſe mighty
crops they produce after theſe waters are withdrawn. JWoodw.
To FERT ilize. v. a. ſ fertiliſer, French..] To make fruit-
ful; to make plenteous ; to make productive; to fecundate.
Rain-water carries along with it a ſort of terreſtrial matter
that fertilizes the land, as being proper for the formation of .
vegetables. //oodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
FE'RTILY. adv. [from fertile.] Fruitfully; plenteouſly; plen-
tifully; abundantly.
FERVENCY. n.ſ.. [ſervens, Latin.]
1. Heat of mind; ardour; eagerneſs.
- Your diver
Did hang a ſaltfiſh on his hook, which he
With fervency drew up. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
2. Pious ardour; flame of devotion; zcal.
We have on all ſides loſt much of our firſt fºrwency towards
God. Hooker, Ded cation.
There muſt be zeal and fervency in him which propoſeth
for he reſt thoſe ſuits and ſupplications, which they by their
joyful acclamations muſt ratify. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 25.
When you pray, let it be with attention, with fººvency,
and with perſeverance. //a/e's Preparation fºr Death.
FERVENT. adj. [ſervens, Latin ; fervent, French.]
1. Hot ; boiling.
From the phlegmatick humour, the proper allay of fervent
blood, will flow a future quietude and ſerenitude. //otton,
2. Hot in temper; vehement. - "...,
They that are more ſervent to diſpute, be not always the
moſt able to determine. H.oker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
3. Ardent in piety; warm in zeal; flaming with devotion.
This man being fervent in the ſpirit, taught diligently the
things of the Lerd. A: 3 xviii. 25.
So ſpake the fervent angel; but his zeal
None ſeconded, as out of ſeaſon judg’d,
Or ſingular and raſh. A/ilton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. v.
Let all enquiries into the myſterious points of theology be
carried on with fervent petitions to God, that he would diſ-
poſe their minds to direct all their ſkill to the promotion of a
good life. - - South's Sermºns.
FE/Rv ENTLY. adv, [from ſervent.]
1. Eagerly ; vehemently. -
They all that charge did ferventy apply,
With greedy malice and importune toil. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
2. With pious ardour; with holy zeal.
Epaphras ſaluteth you, labouring fervently for you in
prayers. Col. iv. 12.
He cares not how or what he ſuffers, ſo he ſuffer well, and
be the friend of Chriſt; nor where nor when he ſuffers, ſo he
may do it frequently, ſervent}, and acceptably. Taylºr.
FERVID. adj [ſervidus, Latin J
1. Hot; burning ; boiling.
2. Vehement; eager; zealous.
FERV1'DITY.. n.ſ.. [from ſervid.]
1. Heat.
2. Zeal; paſſion ; ardour. f) &amp;#.
FE's vid Ness. n.ſ.. [from fervid.] Ardour of mind; zeal;
paſſion. - º
As to the healing of Malchus's ear, in the aët of the meek
lamb of God, it was a kind of injury done to him by the
fervidneſs of St. Peter, who knew not yet what ſpirit he was
Of. Bentley's Sermons.
FERULA. m. ſ. [ferule, Fr. from ferula, giant fennel, Lat..] An
inſtrument of correction with which young ſcholars are beaten
on the hand: ſo named becauſe anciently the ſtalks of fennel
were uſed for this purpoſe. -
Theſe differ as much as the rod and ferula. Shaw's Gramm.
To FE/RULE. v. a. To chaſtiſe with the ferula.
FE/Rvour. n.ſ.. [ſervor, Latin; ferveur, French.]
1. Heat ; warmth.
Were it an undeniable truth that an effećtual fervour pro-
ceeded from this ſtar, yet would not the ſame determińe the
opinion. - Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv.
Like bright Aurora, whoſe refulgent ray
Foretells the fervour of enſuing day,
And warns the ſhepherd with his flocks retreat
To leafy ſhadows, from the threatned heat. l/aller.
Theſe filver drops, like morning dew,
Foretell the fervºur of the day;
So from one cloud ſoft ſhow’rs we view,
And blaſting lightnings burſt away. Pope.
2. Heat of mind; zeal; ardour of devotion.
Odious it muſt needs have been to aboliſh that which all
had held for the ſpace of many ages, without reaſon ſo great
as might in the eyes of impartial men appear ſufficient to clear
them from all blame of raſh proceedings, if inſervour of zeal
they had removed ſuch things. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
Haply deſpair hath ſeiz'd her;
Or, wing'd with fervºur of her love, ſhe's flown
To her deſir’d Poſthumus. Sºakeſ care's Cymbeline.
There will be at Loretto, in a few ages more, jewels of
the greateſt value in Europe, if the devotion of its princes
continues in its preſent fervour. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
Fescue. n.ſ. [vesſe, Dutch ; ſºftu, French..] A ſmall wire by
which thoſe who teach to read point out the letters.
Teach him an alphabet upon his fingers, making the points
of his fingers of his left hand both on the inſide to ſignify
ſome letter, when any of them is pointed at by the fore-
finger of the right hand, or by any kind of feſcue. Holder.
Teach them how manly paſſions ought to move;
For ſuch as cannot think, can never love;
And fince they needs will judge the poet's art,
Point ’em with fºcues to each ſhining part. Dryden.
FE's Els. m. ſ. A kind of baſe grain.
Diſdain not fº/el; or poor vech to ſow,
Or care to make Egyptian lentils thrive. May's Pirg, Georg.
Fess E. m. ſ. [in heraldry.]
The ſºft is ſo calid of the Latin word fºſia, a band or
girdle, poſſeſſing the third part of the eſcutcheon over the
middle: if there be above one, you muſt call them bars; if
with the field there be odd picces, as ſeven or nine, then you
muſt name the field, and ſay ſo many bars; if even, as fix,
eight, or ten, you muſt ſay barwiſe, or barry of ſix, eight,
or ten, as the king of Hungary bears argent and gules barry
of eight. Pea ham on Blazning.
To FE'stE R. v. m. ſ fºſſ?, in Bavarian, a ſwelling corrupted,
junius.j To rankle; to corrupt ; to grow virulent.
I might, even in my lady's preſence, diſcover the fore
which had deeply fiftered within me. Sidny, b. ii.
How<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E T
How ſhould our feſtered ſores be cured :
Inward corruption and º º ſtill
'd, not heal’d, behind rena º -
..}; ſore did rinkle yet within. Fairy Queen, b, i.
I have ſome wounds upon nº and they ſmart
To hear themſelves remember 4. -
— well might they feſter 'gainſt ingratitude, * -
And tent themſelves with death. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Mind that their ſouls
e a peaceful and a ſweet retire -
#.º. fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies
Muſt lie and fºſter. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
There was imagination, that between a knight whom
the duke had taken into ſome good degree of favour, and
Felton, there had been ancient quarrels not, yet well
healed, which might perhaps be fºſtering in his breaft, and
by a certain inflammation produce this effect. //otton.
Paſſion, anger, and unkindneſs may give a wound that
ſhall bleed and ſmart; but it is treachery only that makes it
2/?er. South's Sermon:
#inate adj. [fºſſinatus, Latin.] Haſty; hurried. A
word not in uſe. -
Adviſe the duke, where you are going, to a moſt fºſſinate
preparation: we are bound to the like. Shakeſp, King Lear.
Fé'stinately. adv. [from f/linate. J Haſtily; ſpeedily ;
with ſpeed. Not in uſe. - -
Take this key; give enlargement to the ſwain, and bring
him f/timately hither. Shakeſp. Lºve's Labour Loſt.
Festis a 'tion. n.ſ.. [feſtinatiº, Latin.] Haſte; hurry.
FESTIVAL. adj. [jºivus, Latin. J Pertaining to feaſts;
OVous,
J '. appeared at great tables, and feſtival entertainments,
that he might manifeſt his divine charity to men. Atterbury.
FE'stival. n.ſ. Time of feaſt; anniverſary-day of civil or
religious joy.
Hºr, b, i.
So tedious is this day,
As is the night before ſome feſtival,
To an impatient child that hath new robes, -
And may not wear them. Shakespeare. Romeo and juliet.
Th’ invited ſiſters with their graces bleſt
Their feſtivals. Sandys.
The morning trumpets feſtival proclaim'd
Through each high ſtreet. Milton's Agoniſłes.
Follow, ye nymphs and ſhepherds all,
Come celebrate this feſtival,
And merrily ſing, and ſport, and play;
For ’tis Oriana's nuptial day. Granville.
By ſacrifice of the tongues they purged away whatever
they had ſpoken amiſs during the feſtival. Notes on the Odyſſey.
The feſtival of our Lord's reſurrečtion we have celebrated,
and may now conſider the chief conſequence of his reſurrec-
tion, a judgment to come. Atterbury's Sermons.
Fº adj. [feſtivus, Latin.] Joyous ; gay; befiting a
Call.
The glad circle round them yield their ſouls
To f/tive mirth and wit that knows no gall. Thomſon.
Festivity. n.ſ.. [feſtivitas, Latin, from f/live.]
1. Feſtival; time of rejoicing.
The daughter of Jephtha came to be worſhipped as a deity,
and had an annual fºſſivity obſerved unto her honour. Brown.
There happening a great and ſolemn fºſſivity, ſuch as the
ſheep-ſhearings uſed to be, David condeſcends to beg of a rich
man ſome ſmall repaſt. South.
2. Gaiety; joyfulneſs; temper or behaviour befitting a feaſt.
To thoſe perſons there is no better inſtrument to cauſe the
remembrance, and to endear the affection to the article, than
the recommending it by feſtivity and joy of a holyday. Taylor.
FE's Toon. n.ſ. [fººm, French.) In architecture, an orna-
ment of carved work in the form of a wreath or garland of
flowers, or leaves twiſted together, thickeſt at the middle,
and ſuſpended by the two extremes, whence it hangs down
perpendicularly. Harris.
FE'stuc in E. adj. [ſ/luca, Latin. J Straw-colour between
green and yellow. -
Therein may be diſcovered a little inſe&amp;t of a fºſfucine or
pale green, reſembling a locuſt or graſhopper. Brown.
FESTU'cous, adj. [fº/iuca, Latin.] Formed of ſtraw.
We ſpeak of traws, or f/fucous diviſions, lightly drawn
, over with oil. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To FF r. v. a. To fetch; to go and bring.
Get home with thy fewel, made ready to ſet,
The ſooner the eaſier carriage to get. Tuſſ. Husbandry.
He in a chair was ſet,
Tofting and turning them withouten end;
But for he was unable them to fet,
A little boy did on him ſtill attend. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
And they ſet forth Urijah out of Egypt to Jehoiakim, who
flew him with the ſword. jer. xxvi. 23.
FET. "...ſ. (I ſuppoſe from fait, French, a part or portion. J
A picce,
+ The bottom clear,
Now laid with many a fet
Of ſeed-pearl, ere ſhe bath'd her there
- Was known as black as jet. Draytºn.
To FETCH. v. a. preter, fetched; anciently fit, unleſs it rather
came from To ſet. [reccan, Fettan, Saxon.]
1. To go and bring.
They have devis'd a mean
How he her chamber-window will aſcend,
And with a corded ladder fetch her down. Shakeſpeare.
We will take men to fetch vićtuals for the people. judg. xx.
Go to the flock, and fetch me from thence two kid goats.
Gen. xxvii. 9.
The ſeat of empire, where the Iriſh come,
And the unwilling Scotch, to fetch their doom. Waller.
Draw forth the monſters of th’ abyſs profound,
Or fetch th' aerial eagle to the ground. Pope's Eſ, on Man.
2.- To derive; to draw.
On, you nobleſt Engliſh,
Whoſe blood is fetcht from fathers of war-proof. Shakespeare H. V.
3. To ſtrike at a diſtance.
The conditions of weapons, and their improvements, are
the ſetching afar off; for that outruns the danger, as it is ſeen
in ordnance and muſkets. Bacon's Eſſays.
4. To bring to any ſtate by ſome powerful operation.
In ſmells we ſee their great and ſudden effect in fetching
men again, when they ſwoon. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
At Rome any of thoſe arts immediately thrives, under the
encouragement of the prince, as may be fetched up to its per-
fection in ten or a dozen years, which is the work of an age
or two in other countries. Addiſon on Italy.
5. To draw within any confinement or prohibition.
General terms may ſufficiently convey to the people what
our intentions are, and yet not fetch us within the compaſs of
the ordinance. Sanderſºn.
6. To produce by ſome kind of force.
Theſe ways, if there were any ſecret excellence among
them, would fetch it out, and give it fair opportunities to ad-
vance itſelf by. Milton on Education.
An human ſoul without education is like marble in the
quarry, which ſhews none of its beauties 'till the ſkill of the
poliſher fetches out the colours. Addiſon's Speciator.
7. To perform any excurſion.
I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
The pangs of barr'd affections; though the king
Hath charg'd you ſhould not ſpeak together. Shakespeare Cymbel.
When evening grey doth riſe, I fetch my round
Qver the mount, and all this hollow ground. Milton.
To come to that place they muſt fetch a compaſs three miles
on the right hand through a foreſt. Knolles's Hiſtory.
8. To perform with ſuddenneſs or violence.
Note a wild and wanton herd,
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud: Shakespeare
The fox fetched a hundred and a hundred leaps at a delicious
cluſter of grapes. L'Eſtrange.
Talk to her of an unfortunate young lady that loſt her
beauty by the ſmall-pox, ſhe fetches a deep figh. Addiſon.
9. To reach; to arrive at ; to come to.
Mean time flew our ſhips, and ſtreight we fetcht
The ſyrens iſle; a ſpleenleſs wind ſo ſtretcht
Her wings to waft us, and ſo urg'd our keel. Chapman.
It needs not thy belief,
If earth, induſtrious of herſelf, fetch day
Travelling Eaſt; and with her part averſe
From the ſun's beam, meet night; her other part ---
Still luminous by his ray. Milton's Paradije Lºft, b. viii.
The hare laid himſelf down, and took a nap; for, ſays he,
I can fetch up the tortoiſe when I pleaſe. L’Eſtrange.
Io. To obtain as its price.
During ſuch a ſtate, filver in the coin will never fetch as
much as the ſilver in bullion. Lºcke.
To FEtch. v. n. To move with a quick return.
Like a ſhifted wind unto a ſail,
It makes the courſe of thoughts to fitch about. Shakespear.
Fetch. n.ſ.. [from the verb..] A ſtratagem by which any
thing is indirectly performed; by which one thing ſeems in-
tended and another is done; a trick; an artifice.
An envious neighbour is eaſy to find,
His cumberſome fetches are ſeldom behind:
His fetch is to flatter, to get what he can ;
His purpoſe once gotten, a pin for thee than. Tuſ H***
It is a fetch of wit:
You laying theſe ſlight fullies on my ſon, r º
As 'twere a thing a little ſoil'di' th' working, Shaº. Hamlet.
But Sidrophel, as full of tricks
As rota men of politicks,
Streight caſt about to over-reach . . . . . .
Th'unwary conqu'ror with a fetch. Hudibrat, p. 'i
With this fetch he laughs at the trick he hath plaid me. Stilt.
The fox had a fetch in't. L'Eſtrange, Fab. 4”
From theſe inſtances and ſet. hes
Thou mak’ſt of horſes, clocks and watches,
Quoth
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F E V
º - - • * *
* F E VV
º
Quoth Mat, thou ſeemſ to meat
That Alma is a mere machine. - Prior.
Fe"rcHER... n. ſ. [from fetch..] One that fetches any thing.
FE"TID. adj. (fetidus, Latin ; fºtide, Fr.] Stinking; ran-
cid; having a ſmell ſtrong and offenſive.
Moſt putrefactions are of an odious ſhell; for they ſmell
either fetid or mouldy. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
In the moſt ſevere orders of the church of Rome, thoſe who
praśliſe abſtinence, feel after it fetid hot erućtations. Arbuth.
Plague, fierceſt child of Nemeſis divine, -
Deſcends from Ethiopia's poiſon'd woods; -
From ſtifled Cairo's filth and fetid fields. Thomſºn's Summer.
FE'TIDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from fetid.] The quality of ſtinking.
FE'TLock. n.ſ. i}! and lock.] A tuft of hair as big as the
hair of the mane that grows behind the paſtern-joint of many
horſes: horſes of a low ſize have ſcarce any ſuch tuft.
Farrier's Didž.
Their wounded ſteeds
Fret fetlºck deep in gore, and with wild rage - - -
'erk out their armed heels at their dead maſters. Shakespeare H. V.
White were the fetlocks of his feet before,
And on his front a ſnowy ſtar he bore. Dryd. Virg. Æn.
FE"Tor. m. ſ. [factor, Latin.] A ſlink; a ſtench; a ſtrong
and offenſive ſmell
The fºtor may diſcover itſelf by ſweat and humour. Brown.
When the ſymptoms are attended with a fetar of any kind,
ſuch a diſeaſe will be cured by aceſcent ſubſtances, and
none better than whey. Arbuthnot on Diet.
FE/TTER. m. ſ. It is commonly uſed in the plural fetters.
[from feet; peccene, Saxon.) Chains for the feet; chains by
which walking is hindered.
Dočtrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet, and like ma-
nacles on the right hand. Eccluſ xxi. 19.
Drawing after me the chains and fetters whereunto I have
been thirteen years tied, I have by other mens errours failed.
Raleigh's Apology.
Paſfion's too fierce to be in fetters bound,
And nature flies him like enchanted ground. Dryden.
The wretch in double fetters bound,
Your potent mercy may releaſe. Prior.
- I thought her pride
Had broke your ſetters, and aſſur'd your freedom. A. Phill.
To FE'rter, v. a. [from the noun..] To bind; to enchain;
to ſhackle; to tie.
Neither her great worthineſs nor his own ſuffering for her,
could fetter his fickleneſs. Sidney.
My conſcience! thou art fitter'd
More than my ſhanks and wriſts. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
, Fetter ſtrong madneſs in a ſilken thread;
Charm ach with air, and agony with words. Shakeſpeare.
Doth a maſter chide his ſervant becauſe he doth not come,
yet knows that the ſervant is chained and fettered, ſo as he can-
not move Bramhall againſt Hobbes.
. A chain which man to fetter man has made;
By artifice impos'd, by fear obey'd. Prior.
To Fé'ttle. v. n. [A cant word from feel J. To do triflng
buſineſs; to ply the hands without labour.
When your maſter is moſt buſy in company, come in and
pretend to ſettle about the room; and if he chides, ſay you
thought he rung the bell. Swift's Direct. to the Footman.
Fe’t Us. n.ſ.. [foºtus, Latin.] Any animal in embrio; any
thing yet in the womb ; anything unborn.
Nor are we at leiſure to examine that paradox of Hippo-
crates, which ſome learned phyſicians have of late revived,
that the fetus reſpires in the womb. Boyle.
FE UD. n ſ, ſpeahb, enmity, Saxon.] Quarrel; contention;
:- oppoſition; war. f
- Though men would find ſuch mortal feuds
In ſharing of their publick goods. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 1.
In former ages it was a conſtant policy of France to raiſe
and cheriſh inteſtine feuds and diſcords in the iſle of Great
Britain. Addison's Freeholder.
Scythia mourns
Our guilty wars, and earth's remoteſt regions
Lie half unpeopled by the feuds of Rome. Addiſon's Cato.
FEUDAL. adj [feudalis, low Latin. J Pertaining to fees,
feus, or tenures by which lands are held of a ſuperiour lord.
FE'UDAL. m. ſ. A dependance; ſomething held by tenure;
a fee; a fu.
Wales, that was not always the feudal territory of England,
having been governed by a prince of their own, had laws
utterly ſtrange to the laws of England. Hale.
FEU'DA toRY... n.ſ.. [from feudal.] One who holds not in chief,
but by ſome conditional tenure from a ſuperiour.
The duke of Parma was reaſonably well tempted to be
true to that enterprize, by no leſs promiſe than to be made a
feudatary, or beneficiary king of England, under the ſeignory
in chief of the pope, and the protećtion of the king of Spain.
Bacon's War with Spain.
FEVER. m. ſ. ſ fevre, French; febris, Latin.] A diſeaſe in
which the body is violently heated, and the pulſe quickened,
or in which heat and cold prevail by turns. It is ſometic.
continual, ſometimes intermittent.
Think'ſt thou the firy fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation - * * -
Will it give place to flexure and low bending? Shakespeare H. W.
. . . . . Duncan is in his grave; º,
After life's fitful fever he ſleeps weſi. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Should not a ling ring ſever be remov’d,
Becauſe it long has ragd within my blood? Dryden.
He had never dreamed in his life, 'till he had the ſever he
was then newly recovered of. º Locke.
To Fe'v ER. v. a. [from the noun.J. To put into a ſever.
The white hand of a lady fever thee! .
Shake to look on't. Shake peare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
Fe’ve RET. n.ſ. [from fever.] A ſlight fever; febricula.
A light feveret, or an old quartan ague, is not a ſufficient
excuſe for non-appearance. - Ayliffe's Parergon.
FE've RFew. n.ſ.. [febris and ſugo, Latin.] - - :
It has a fibroſe root: the leaves are conjugated, and divided
into many ſegments: the cup of the flower is ſquamoſe and
hemiſpherical: the flowers grow in an umbel upon the top of
the ſtalks, and the rays of the flower are generally white.
The ſpecies are nine; but the firſt, called common feverfew,
is the ſort uſed in medicine, and is found wild in many parts
of England; but is, however, cultivated in medicinal gar-
dens. 44iller.
Fe’ve Rush. adj. [from fever.]
1. Troubled with a fever.
To other climates beaſts and birds retire;
And feveriſh nature burns in her own fire. Creech.
When an animal that gives ſuck turns feveriſh, that is, its
juices more alkaline, the milk turns from its native genuine
whiteneſs to yellow. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Tending to a fever.
A feveriſh diſorder diſabled me.
3. Uncertain; inconſtant; now hot, now cold.
We toſs and turn about our feveriſh will,
When all our eaſe muſt come by lying ſtill;
For all the happineſs mankind can gain, -
Is not in pleaſure, but in reſt from pain. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
4. Hot; burning.
And now four days the ſun had ſeen our woes,
Four nights the moon beheld th’ inceſlant fire;
It ſeem'd as if the ſtars more ſickly roſe,
And farther from the feveriſh North retire. Dryd. Ann, Mir.
Fever Ishness. n.ſ.. [from feveriſh.] A ſlight diſorder of the
feveriſh kind.
FE'verous. adj. [fevreux-ſe, French, from fever.]
1. Troubled with a fever or ague.
Thou mad'ſt thine enemies ſhake, as if the world
Were feverous, and did tremble. Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
2. Having the nature of a fever.
All ſºv’rous kinds,
Convulſions, epilepſies, fierce catarrhs. Milton's Par. Loff.
. Having a tendency to produce fevers.
It hath been noted by the ancients, that ſouthern winds,
blowing much, without rain, do cauſe a fevertus diſpoſition of
the year; but with rain, not. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Fa’very, adj. [from fever.] Diſeaſed with a fever.
O Rome, thy head
Is drown'd in ſleep, and all thy body fev'ry B. Johnſ Catil.
FE'UILLAGE. n.ſ. [French..] A bunch or row of leaves.
I have done Homer's head; and I incloſe the outline, that
you may determine whether you would have it ſo large, or
reduced to make room for feuillage or laurel round the oval.
jervas to Pope.
FEUILLEMORT. n.ſ. [French..] The colour of a faded
leaf, corrupted commonly to philemot.
Fe'uteRE R. m. ſ. A dogkeeper: perhaps the cleaner of the
kennel.
FEW, adj. [reo, peopa, Saxon; fua, Daniſh )
1. Not many; not in a great number.
We are left but few of many. jer.
So much the thirſt of honour fires the blood;
So many would be great, ſo few be good ;
For who would virtue for herſelf regard,
Or wed without the portion of reward Dryd, juvenal.
On Winter ſeas we fewer ſtorms behold,
Than foul diſeaſes that infect the fold. Dryden's Pig. Geor.
Men have fewer or more ſimple ideas from without, accord-
ing as the objects they converſe with afford greater or leſs
variety. Locke.
The fewer ſtill you name, you wound the more; . .
Bond is but one, but Harpax is a ſcore. Pope's Hor. Imitat.
Party is the madneſs of many, for the gain of a few. Swit.
The imagination of a poet is a thing ſo nice and delicate,
that it is no eaſy matter to find out images capable of giving
pleaſure to one of the few, who, in any age, have come up
to that chara&amp;ter. Berkley to Pope.
2. Sometimes elliptically ; not many words.
To anſwer both allegations at once, the very ſubſtance of
that they contain is in few but this. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
9 C $9
Swift to Pope.
|<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">t F I C
F I D
-
---
s
So having ſaid, he thus to Eve in few:
Say, woman, what is this which thou haſt done? Milton.
Thus Jupiter in few unfolds the charge. Dryden's An.
The firm reſolve I here in few diſcloſe. Pope's Odyſſey.
Fewel. m. ſ. [feu, French J. Combuſtible matter; ma-
terials for keeping fire: as firewood, coal.
If a ſpark of error have thus far prevailed, falling even
where the wood was green, and fartheſt off from any inclina-
tion unto furious attempts, muſt not the peril thereof be
greater in men, whoſe minds are as dry fewel, apt beforehand
unto tumults, ſeditions and broils f Hºoker, Dedication.
Others may give the fewel or the fire;
But they the breath, that makes the flame, inſpire. Denham.
A known quantity of fewel, all kindled at once, will cauſe
water to boil, which being lighted gradually will never be
able to do it. Bentley's Sermons.
To FE'wel. v. a. [from the noun..] 'To feed with fewel.
Never, alas ! the dreadful name,
That fewels the infernal flame. Cowley.
FE'wNEss. n.ſ.. [from few.]
I. Paucity; ſmalneſs of number.
Theſe, by reaſon of their fewneſ, I could not diſtinguiſh
from the numbers of the reſt with whom they are embodied.
Dryden's Preface to the Hind and Panther.
2. Paucity of words; brevity; conciſeneſs.
Fewneſ, and truth, 'tis thus. Shakeſp Meaf for Meaſure.
To F.E.Y. v. a. [veghen, Dutch..] To cleanſe a ditch of mud.
Such muddy deep ditches and pits in the field,
That all a dry Summer no water will yield,
By fºying and caſting that mud upon heaps,
Commodities many the huſbandman reaps. Tuſ. Husband.
FIB. m. ſ [A cant word among children.] A lye; a falſehood.
Deſtroy his fib or ſophiſtry; in vain,
The creature's at his dirty work again.
I ſo often lie,
Pope's Epiſiles.
Scarce Harvey's ſelf has told more fibs than I. Pope.
To FIB. v. n. [from the noun..] To lie; to tell lyes; to ſpeak
falſely.
If you have any particular mark, whereby one may know
when you fib, and when you ſpeak truth, you had beſt tell it
ne: - Arbuthnºt's Hiſtory of john Bull.
F1'BBER. m. ſ. [from £h..] A teller of fibs.
FI'BRE. m. ſ. [fibre, Fr. fibra, Latin.] A ſmall thread or
ſtring; the firſt conſtituent parts of bodies.
Now ſliding ſtreams the thirſty plants renew,
And feed their fibres with reviving dew. Pope.
2. A fibre, in phyſick, is an animal thread, of which there are
different kinds: ſome are ſoft, flexible, and a little elaſtick;
and theſe are either hollow, like ſmall pipes, or ſpongious and
full of little cells, as the nervous and fleſhy fibres : others are
more ſolid, flexible, and with a ſtrong elaſticity or ſpring, as
the membranous and cartilaginous fibres ; and a third ſort are
hard and flexible, as the fibres of the bones. Now of all thoſe
ſome are very ſenſible, and others deſtitute of all ſenſe: ſome
ſo very ſmall as not to be eaſily perceived; and others, on the
contrary, ſo big as to be plainly ſeen; and moſt of them,
when examined with a microſcope, appear to be compoſed of
ſtill ſmaller fibres : theſe fibres firſt conſtitute the ſubſtance of
the bones, cartilages, ligaments, membranes, nerves, veins,
arteries and muſcles. And again, by the various texture and
different combination of ſome or all of thoſe parts, the more
compound organs are framed ; ſuch as the lungs, ſtomach,
liver, legs and arms, the ſum of all which make up the
body. &amp;ſincy.
My heart ſinks in me while I hear him ſpeak,
And every ſlacken'd fibre drops its hold,
Like nature letting down the ſprings of life:
The name of father awes me ſtill. Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
FI's RIL. m. ſ. [fibrille, French..] A ſmall fibre or ſtring.
The muſcles conſiſt of a number of fibres, and each fibre
of an incredible number of little fibril; bound together, and
divided into little cells. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
F1's Rous. adj. [foreux, French, from fibre..] Compoſed of
fibres or ſtamina.
The difference between bodies fibrous and bodies viſcous is
plain ; for all wool and tow, and cotton and ſilk, have a
greedineſs of moiſture. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
I ſaw Petraeus' arms employ'd around
A well-grown oak, to root it from the ground;
This way and that he wrench'd the fibrous bands,
The trunk was like a ſapling in his hands. Dryden.
The film aws and ſolid parts of plants paſs unaltered through
the inteſtines. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
F/BUL.A. n ſ. [ Latin. J . The outer and leſſer bone of the
leg, much ſmaller than the tibia: it lies on the outſide of the
leg ; and its upper end, which is not ſo high as the knee, re-
ceives the lateral knob of the upper end of the tibia into a
finall ſinus, which it has in its inner ſide. Its lower end is
received into the ſmall ſinus of the tibia, and then it extends
into a large proceſs, which forms the outer ankle. Quincy.
| "Cº L1. adj. ſ rico', Saxon.]
1. Changeable; unconſtant; irreſolute; wavering; unſteady ;
mutable; changeful; without ſteady adherence.
Remember where we are,
In France amongſt a fºe wavering nation. Sak. Hen. VI.
A ſlave, whoſe eaſy borrow'd pride -
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows. Shać. K. Lear.
Or likeſt hovering dreams,
The fickle penſioners of Morpheus' train. Milton.
They know how fickle common lovers are ;
Their oaths and vows are cautiouſly believ'd ;
For few there are but have been once deceiv'd. Dryden.
We in vain the fickle ſex purſue,
Who change the conſtant lover for the new. Prior.
2. Not fixed; ſubject to viciſſitude.
He would be loth
Us to aboliſh; left the adverſary
Triumph, and ſay, fickle their ſtate, whom God
Moſt favours | Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
F1'ckle Ness. n.ſ.. [from fickle..] Inconſtancy; uncertainty;
unſteadineſs.
Neither her great worthineſs, nor his own ſuffering for her,
could fetter his fickleneſs; but, before his marriage-day, he had
taken to wife that Baccha of whom ſhe complained. Sidney.
Beware of fraud, beware of fickleneſs,
In choice and change of thy dear loved dame. Fairy Queen.
I am a ſoldier, and unapt to weep,
Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleneſs. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Inſtability of temper ought to be checked, when it diſ-
poſes men to wander from one ſcheme of government to
another, ſince ſuch a fickleneſs cannot but be attended with
fatal conſequences. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 25.
Whether out of fickleneſ, or deſign I can't tell, I found
that what ſhe liked one day ſhe diſliked another. Addiſon.
F1'ckly. adv. [from fickle.j Without certainty or ſtability.
Do not now,
Like a young waſteful heir, mortgage the hopes
Of godlike majeſty on bankrupt terms,
To raiſe a preſent pow'r that's fickly held
By the frail tenure of the people's will. Southern.
FI'CO. m. ſ. [Italian. J. An act of contempt done with the
fingers, expreſſing a fig for you.
Having once recovered his fortreſs, he then gives the fico
to all that his adverſaries can by ſiege, force, or famine at-
tempt againſt him. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
FI’ct IL E. adj. [fielilis, Latin.] Moulded into form; manu-
fačtured by the potter.
The cauſe of fragility is an impotency to be extended;
and therefore ſtone is more fragil than metal, and ſo fêtile
earth is more fragil than crude earth. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
Fi’ction. m. ſ. [fiélio, Latin; fiction, French.]
1. The aët of feigning or inventing.
If the preſence of God in the image, by a mere fiction of
the mind, be a ſufficient ground to worſhip that image, is not
God’s real preſence in every creature a far better ground to
worſhip it Stillingfleet.
Fićſion is of the eſſence of poetry, as well as of painting:
there is a reſemblance in one of human bodies, things, and
aćtions, which are not real; and in the other of a true ſtory
by a fiction. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. The thing feigned or invented.
If through mine ears pierce any conſolations,
By wiſe diſcourſe, ſweet tunes, or poets fictions;
If ought I ceaſe theſe hideous exclamations,
While that my ſoul, ſhe, ſhe lives in afflićtion. Sidney.
So alſo was the ſiężion of thoſe golden apples kept by a
dragon, taken from the ſerpent, which tempted Evah. Raleigh.
3. A falſehood; a lye. -
F1'ctious. adj. [ficius, Latin J. Fićtitious; imaginary; in-
vented. A word coined by Prior.
With fancy'd rules and arbitrary laws
Matter and motion man reſtrains,
And ſtudy’d lines and fictious circles draws. Prior.
FICTITIOUS. adj. [ficiitius, Latin.]
1. Counterfeit ; falſe; not genuine.
Draw him ſtrictly ſo,
That all who view the piece may know
He needs no trappings of fictiious fame. Dryden.
2. Feigned ; imaginary.
The human perſons are as ſºlitious as the airy ones; and
Belinda reſembles you in nothing but in beauty. Pope.
3. Not real; not true.
Milton, ſenſible of this defect in the ſubječt of his poem,
brought into it two characters of a ſhadowy and fiºſitiºus na-
ture, in the perſons of ſin and death, by which means he has
interwoven in his fable a very beautiful allegory. Addiſ Specz.
Fict I'tiously. adv. [ from fictitious. J Falſely 5 counter-
feitly.
Theſe pieces are fºlitiouſy ſet down, and have no copy in
nature. Brown's Wulgar Erroars, b. v. c. 2 c.
FID. m.ſ.. [fitta, Italian.] A pointed iron with which ſeamen
untwiſt their cords. - Skinner.
FPDDLE. m. ſ. [Freele, Saxon; vedel, Dutch ; fidel, German ;
fidicula, Latin; full, Erſe.]
1. A ſtringed inſtrument of Rufick; a violin. I
n
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I E
F I E
In trials of muſical ſkill the judges did not crown the fille,
but the performer. Stillingfleet.
The adventure of the bear and fiddle
Is ſung ; but breaks off in the middle. Hudibras.
She tried the fiddle all over, by drawing the bow over every
part of the ſtrings; but could not, for her heart, find where-
about the tune lay. Addison's Guardian, N°. 98.
To FI'd DLE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To play upon a fiddle.
Themiſtocles being deſired at a feaſt to touch a lute, he
ſaid he could not fiddle, but he could make a ſmall town a
great city. Bacon's Eſſays.
Others import yet nobler arts from France,
Teach kings to fiddle, and make ſenates dance. Pope.
2. To trifle; to ſhift the hands often, and do nothing, like a
fellow that plays upon a fiddle.
A cunning fellow obſerved, that old Lewis had ſtole away
part of the map, and ſaw him fiddling and turning the map,
trying to join the two pieces together. Arbuth. H of j. Bull.
Good cooks cannot abide what they juſtly call fiddling work,
where abundance of time is ſpent, and little done. Swift.
F1'DDLEFAD ple. n ſ. [A cant word.] Trifles.
She ſaid that their grandfather had a horſe ſhot at Edgehill,
and their uncle was at the ſiege of Buda; with abundance of
fiddleſaddle of the ſame nature. Spectator, N°. 299.
F1'DDLE FADD le. adj. Trifling; giving trouble, or making a
buſtle about nothing.
She was a troubleſome fiddleſaddle old woman, and ſo cere-
monious that there was no bearing of her. Arbuthn. j. Bull.
F1'DDLe R. m. ſ. [from fiddle. J A muſician; one that plays
upon the fiddle.
Let no ſawcy fiddler preſume to intrude,
Unleſs he is ſent for to vary our bliſs. Ben. johnſon.
Nero put the fiddlers to death, for being more ſkilful in the
trade than he was. Taylor’s Rule of living holy.
Theſe will appear ſuch chits in ſtory,
'Twill turn all politicks to jeſts,
To be repeated like John §
ory
When fiddlers ſing at feaſts. &gt; Dryden.
When miſs delights in her ſpinnet,
A fiddler may a fortune get. Swift.
F1'DDLestick. n.ſ.. [fiddle and ſtick.] The bow and hair
which a fiddler draws over the ſtrings of a fiddle.
His griſly beard was long and thick, -
With which he ſtrung his fiddleſtick. Hudibras, p. i.
F1'pplest RING... n.ſ.. [fiddle and ſiring.] The ſtring of a
fiddle ; that which makes the noiſe.
A fiddleſłring, moiſtened with water, will ſink a note in a
little time, and conſequently muſt be relaxed or lengthened
one ſixteenth. - Arbuthnot on Air.
FIDE'LITY.. n.ſ.. [fidelitas, Latin; fidelité, French.J
1. Honeſty; veracity.
The church, by her publick reading of the book of God,
preached only as a witneſs; now the principal thing required
in a witneſs is a fidelity. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 19.
2. Faithful adherence.
They miſtake credulity for fidelity. Clarke.
To FIDGE. R. v. n. [A cant word.] To move nimbly and
To F1'DGet. } irregularly. It implies in Scotland agitation.
Tim, thou'rt the Punch to ſtir up trouble in ;
You wriggle, fidge, and make a rout,
Put all your brother puppets out;
Run on in a perpetual round,
To teaze, perplex, diſturb, confound. Swift.
FIDU'cIAL. adj. [fiducia, Latin.] Confident; undoubting.
Faith is cordial, and ſuch as God will accept of, when it
affords fiducial reliance on the promiſes, and obediential ſub-
miſſion to the commands. Hammond's Prači. Catech,
FIDU'cI ARY. n.ſ.. [fiduciarius, Latin.]
1. One who holds any thing in truſt.
2. One who depends on faith without works.
The ſecond obſtructive is that of the fiduciary, that faith
is the only inſtrument of his juſtification; and excludes good
works from contributing any thing toward it. Hammond.
FIDU'cIARY. adj.
1. Confident; ſteady : undoubting; untouched with doubt.
That faith, which is required of us, is then perfect, when
it produces in us a fluciary aſſent to whatever the Goſpel has
revealed. J/ake's Preparation for Death.
2. Not to be doubted.
Elaiana can rely no where upon mere love and fiduciary
obedience, unleſs at her own home, where ſhe is exemplarily
loyal to herſelf in a high exact obedience. Howel's Woc. Foreſ.
FIEF. m. ſ. [fief, French..] A fee; a manor; a poſſeſſion
held by ſome tenure of a ſuperiour.
- To the next realm ſhe ſtretch'd her ſway,
For painture near adjoining lay,
A plenteous province and alluring prey;
A chamber of dependencies was fram’d,
And the whole ſcſ, in right of poetry, ſhe claim'd. Dryd.
As they were honoured by great privileges, ſo their lands
were in the nature of fief, for which the poſſeſſors were
obliged to do perſonal ſervice at ſea. Arbuthnºt on Coins.
Field. n.ſ. [rcle, Saxon; fºll, German; vell, Dutch.j
1. Ground not inhabited; not-built on.
Live with me, and be my love,
And we will all the pleaſure prove,
That hills and vallies, dale and field,
And all the craggy mountains yield. Raleigh.
By the civil law the corpſe of perſons deceaſed were buried
out of the city in the fields. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Ground not encloſed. - -
Field lands are not exempted from mildews, nor yet from
ſmut, where it is more than in incloſed lands. Martin. Husb.
3. Cultivated tract of ground.
Or great Oſiris, who firſt taught the ſwain
In Pharian fields to ſow the golden grain.
4. The open country: oppoſed to quarters.
Since his majeſty went into the field,
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
5. The ground of battle. , ,
What though the field be loſt, -
All is not loſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b, i.
When a man is in the field, a moderate ſkill in fencing ra-
ther expoſes him to the ſword of his enemy than ſecures him
from it. Locke.
6. A battle ; a campaign; the ačtion of an army while it keeps
the field.
Pope's Statius.
You maintain ſeveral factions;
And whilſt a field ſhould be diſpatch'd and fought, -
You are diſputing of your generals. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
7. A wide expanſe. - -
The god a clearer ſpace for heav'n deſign'd;
Where fields of light and liquid ether flow, -
Purg'd from the pond’rous dregs of earth below. Drydın.
Aſk of yonder argent fields above, -
Why Jove's ſatellites are leſs than Jove. Pope's Eſ: on Man.
8. Space; compaſs; extent.
The ill-natured man gives himſelf a large field to expatiate
in : he expoſes failings in human nature. Addiſon's Spectator.
I ſhould enter upon a field too wide, and too much beaten,
if I ſhould diſplay all the advantages of peace. Smalridge.
Who can this field of miracles ſurvey,
And not with Galen all in rapture ſay,
Behold a God, adore him and obey. Blackmore's Creation.
9. The ground or blank ſpace on which figures are drawn.
Let the field or ground of the pićture be clean, light, and
well united with colour. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
10. [In heraldry.] The ſurface of a ſhield.
F1'elded. adj. [from field.] Being in field of battle.
Now, Mars, I pr’ythee, make us quick in work;
That we with ſmoking ſwords may march from hence,
To help our fielded friends. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
FIELD-BAsil. n.ſ. [field and baſil.] A plant with a labiated
flower, conſiſting of one leaf, whoſe upper lip is upright,
roundiſh, and generally ſplit in two ; but the beard, or under
lip, is divided into three ſegments: theſe flowers are diſpoſed
in whorles round the ſtalks, and are ſucceeded by oblong
ſeeds. Miller.
Fi’eld be D. m. ſ. [field and bed ). A bed contrived to be ſet up
eaſily in the field. . .
Romeo, good-night; I'll to my trucklebed,
This fieldbed is too cold for me to ſleep. Shakespeare. Rom, andjul.
FI’Eld FARE. m. ſ. [pelo and pajan, to wander in the fields.]
A bird.
Winter birds, as woodcocks and fieldfares, if they come
early out of the northern countries, with us ſhew cold
Winters. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 816.
F1'eld MARSHAL. m.ſ.. [feld and marſhal..] Commander of
an army in the field. -
F1'eld Möuse. n. / [field and mouſe. J A mouſe that bur-
rows in banks, and makes her houſe with various apart-
mentS.
The fieldmºuſ builds her garner under ground. Dryden.
Fieldmice are apt to gnaw their roots, and kill them in hard
Winters. . - - Mortimer's Husbandry.
F1'Eldor FIceR. m. ſ. [field and ºffer.] An officer whoſe
command in the field extends to a whole regiment; as the
colonel, lieutenant-colonel, and major. -
FI'eldpiece adj. [field and piece..] Small cannon uſed in
battles, but not in ſieges.
The baſſa planting his firſdpieces upon the hills on the
North-ſide, did from thence grievouſly annoy the defendants.
- Knolles's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
FIEND. m. ſ. ſpicnb, Font, Saxon, a foe.] -
1. An enemy; the great enemy of mankind; ſatan; the devil.
Tom is followed by the foul find. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
2. Any infernal being.
What now, had I a body again, I could,
Coming from hell; what ſends would wiſh ſhould be,
And Hannibal could not have wiſh'd to ſee. B. johnſ. Cat.
The hell-hounds, as ungorg'd with fleſh and blood,
Purſue their prey, and ſeek their wonted food;
The fend remounts his courſer. Dryden'. Theo. and Hon.
O woman I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I E
F I G
O woman woman' when to ill thy mind
Is bent, all hell contains no foul-r fiend. Pope's Odyſſy.
FIERCE. adj. [fier, French ; fºr ox, Latin J
1. Savage; ravenous ; eaſily enraged.
Thou hunteſt me as a fierce lion. job.
2. Vehement in rage; eager of miſchief.
Deſtruction enters in the treacherous wood,
And vengeful ſlaughter, fierce for human blood. Pope.
Tyrants fierce, that unrelenting die Pope.
With that the god, whoſe earthquakes rock the ground,
Fierce to Phoeacia croſt the vaſt profound. Pope's Odſey.
. Violent; outrageous.
Curſed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath,
for it was cruel. Gen. xlix. 7.
4. Paſſionate; angry ; furious.
This fierce abridgment
Hath to it circumſtantial branches, which
Diſtinétion ſhould be rich in. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
A man brings his mind to be poſitive and fierce for poſitions
whoſe evidence he has never examined. Locke.
5. Strong; forcible.
The ſhips, though ſo great, are driven of fierce winds;
yet are they turned about with a very ſmall helm. , ja. iii. 2.
FI’ER cely, adv. [from fierce J. Violently; furiouſly.
Battle join'd, and both ſides fiercely fought. Shakespeare H. VI.
The defendants, fiercely aſſailed by their enemies before,
and beaten with the great ordnance behind, were grievouſly
diſtreſſed. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The air, if very cold, irritateth the flame, and maketh it
burn more fiercely, as fire ſcorcheth in froſty weather, and ſo
furthereth the conſumption. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
F1'E.Rce N Ess. n.ſ.. [from fierce. J
1. Ferocity; ſavageneſs.
The ſame defect of heat which gives a fierceneſ to our
natures, may contribute to that roughneſs of our language.
Swift's Letter to the Lord High Treaſurer.
2. Eagerneſs for blood; fury.
Suddenly there came out of a wood a monſtrous lion, with
a ſhe-bear not far from him, of little leſs fierceneſs. Sidney.
3. Quickneſs to attack; keenneſs in anger and reſentment.
The Greeks are ſtrong, and ſkilful to their ſtrength,
Fierce to their ſkill, and to their fierceneſ valiant. Shakespeare
4. Violence; outrageous paſſion.
His pride and brutal fierceneſ, I abhor;
But ſcorn your mean ſuſpicions of me more. Dryd. Aureng.
FIERIFA'cIAs. [In law. J A judicial writ, that lies at all
times within the year and day, for him that has recovered in
an ačtion of debt or damages, to the ſheriff, to command
him to levy the debt, or the damages of his goods, againſt
whom the recovery was had. Cºwel.
F1'ERINess. n.ſ...[from fiery.]
1. Hot qualities; heat; acrimony.
The aſhes, by their heat, their fierineſ, and their dryneſs,
belong to the element of earth. Boyle.
2. Heat of temper; intelle&amp;tual ardour.
The Italians, notwithſtanding their natural fierineſ of tem-
per, affect always to appear ſober and ſedate. Addiſon.
FI’ERy. adj. [from fire.]
1. Conſiſting of fire.
Scarcely had Phoebus in the gloomy Eaſt
Yet harneſſed his fiery footed team,
Ne rear'd above the earth his flaming creſt,
When the laſt deadly ſmoak aloft did ſteam. Fairy Queen.
• I know, thou’dſt rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulph
Than flatter him in a bower. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
2. Hot like fire.
Hath thy fiery heart ſo parcht thy entrails,
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death Shakespeare H. VI.
3. Vehement; ardent; ačtive.
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king. Shakespeare Rich. III.
I drew this gallant head of war,
And cull'd theſe fiery ſpirits from the world,
To outlook conqueſt, and to win renown
Ev’n in the jaws of danger and of death. Shakespeare K. john.
4. Paſſionate; outrageous; eaſily provoked.
You know the fiery quality of the duke;
How unremoveable, and fixt he is
In his own courſe.
5. Unreſtrained ; fierce.
Then, as I ſaid, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery ſteed,
Which his aſpiring rider ſeem'd to know,
With ſlow but ſtately pace kept on his courſe. Shakespeare R. II.
Through Elis and the Grecian towns he flew ;
Th’ audacious wretch four fiery courſers drew. Dryden.
‘. Heated by fire.
The ſword which is made fiery doth not only cut, by rea-
ſon of the ſharpneſs which fimply it hath, but alſo burn by
means of that heat which it hath from fire. Hooker, b. v. 54.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
See from the brake the whirring pheaſant ſprings,
And mounts exulting on triumphant wings:
Short is his joy; he feels the fiery wound,
Flutters in blood, and panting beats the ground. Pºte.
FIFE. m. ſ. [ffre, French..] A pipe blown to the drum ; mi-
litary wind-muſick. *
Farewell the plumed troops, and the big war
That make ambition virtue oh farewell !
Farewell the neighing ſteed and the ſhrill trump,
The ſpirit-ſtirring drum, th’ ear-piercing fife. Shakespeare Othelio.
Thus the gay victim, with freſh garlands crown'd,
Pleas'd with the ſacred fift's enlivening ſound,
Through gazing crowds in ſolemn ſtate proceeds. Phillips.
F1'FTEEN. adj. [Fy) tyne, Saxon.] Five and ten.
I have dreamed and ſlept above ſome fifteen years and
more. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
FI'FTEENTH. adj. ſpirzeoča, Sax j The ordinal of fifteen;
the fifth after the tenth.
A fifteenth part of filver incorporate with gold, will not be
recovered by any water of ſeparation, except you put a greater
quanty of ſilver to draw up the leſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
London ſends but four burgeſies to parliament, although
it bear the fifteenth part of the charge of the whole nation in
all publick taxes and levies. Graunt's Blls ºf 44 ortality.
FIFTH, adj. [Firza, Saxon.]
1. The ordinal of five; the next to the fourth.
With ſmiling aſpect you ſerenely move,
In your fifth orb, and rule the realm of love. Dryden.
Juſt as I wiſh'd, the lots were caſt on four,
Myſelf the fifth. Poºe's Odyſſey, b ix.
2. All the ordinals are taken elliptically for the part which they
expreſs: a fifth, a fifth part; a third a third part. º
The publick ſhall have loſt four fifths of its annual income
for ever. - Swift.
F1'Fºr HLY. adv. [from f/th.] In the fifth place.
Fifthy, living creatures have a more exact figure than
plants. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 607.
F1'FTIETH. adj. [ Flpteozopa, Saxon.] The ordinal of fifty.
If this medium be rarer within the ſun's body than at its
ſurface, and rarer there than at the hundred part of an inch
from its body, and rarer there than at the fiftieth part of an
inch from its body, and rarer there than at the orb of Saturn,
I ſee no reaſon why the increaſe of denſity ſhould ſtop any
where. Newton's Opt.
F1'FT Y. adj. [riptiš, Saxon.] Five tens.
A wither'd hermit, five ſcore Winters worn,
Might ſhake off fifty looking in her eye. Shakeſpeare.
Judas ordained captains over thouſands, hundreds, fifties,
and tens. 1 44ac. iii. 55.
The breadth of the ark ſhall be fifty cubits. Gen. vi. 15.
In the Hebrew there is a particle conſiſting but of one let-
ter, of which there are reckoned up above fifty ſeveral ſigni-
fications. - Locke.
FIG. m. ſ. [ficus, Latin ; figo, Spaniſh; figue, French.)
1. A tree that bears figs
The characters are: the flowers, which are always incloſed
in the middle of the fruit, conſiſt of the leaf, and are male
and female in the ſame fruit: the male flowers are ſituated
towards the crown of the fruit and the female, growing
near the ſtalk, are ſucceeded by ſmall hard ſeeds: the intire
fruit is, for the moſt part, turbinated and globular, or of an
oval ſhape, is fleſhy, and of a ſweet taſte. AMiller.
Full on its crown a fg's green branches riſe,
And ſhoot a leafy foreſt to the ſkies. Pope's Odyſſey, b. xii.
Or lead me through the maze,
Embowering endleſs of the Indian fig. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. A luſcious ſoft fruit; the finit of the figtree.
It maketh figs better, if a figtree, when it beginneth to
put forth leaves, have his top cut off. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Figs are great ſubduers of acrimony. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To FIG. v. a. [See FCO.] -
1. To inſult with fico's or contemptuous motions of the fingers.
When Piſtol lies, do this, and fig me like
The bragging Spaniard. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
2. To put ſomething uſeleſs into one's head. Low cant.
Away to the ſow ſhe goes, and figs her in the crown with
another ſtory. L'Eſirange.
F1'cAPPLE. m. ſ. A fruit.
A figapple hath no core or kernel, in theſe reſembling a fg,
and differing from other apples. Mortimer's Husbandry.
F1'G MARI Go I.D. m. ſ. A plant. It is ſucculent, and has the ap-
pearance of houſeleek: the leaves grow oppoſite by pairs. Mill.
To FIGHT. v. n. preter. fought; part, paſſ fight. [reohtan,
Saxon.] . -
1. To contend in battle; to war; to make war; to battle ; to
contend in arms. It is uſed both of armies and ſingle com-
batants.
King Henry, be thy.title right or wrong,
Lord Ciifford vows to fght in thy defence. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds
In ranks and ſquadrons, and right form of war. Shakeſp.
The common queſtion is, if we muſt now ſurrender Spain,
what
w 3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I G
F I G
what have we been fighting for all this while; The anſwer is
ready: we have been fighting for the ruin of the publick in-
tereſt, and the advancement of a private. - Swift.
For her confederate nations fºught, and kings were ſlain,
Troy was o'erthrown, and a whole empire fell. Phillips.
2. To combat; to duel; to contend in ſingle fight. - - -
One ſhall undertake to fight againſt another. 2 Eſdr. xiii.
The poor ºf ht
The moſt diminutive of birds, will fight,
The young ones in her neſt, againſt the owl. Sha'ſ Macb.
3. To act as a ſoldier in any caſe. -
Richard, that robb'd the º º his heart,
nd fought the holy wars in Paleſtine,
§ iſ. tº: ãº º º . Shakespeare K. john.
Greatly unfortunate, he fights the cauſe -
Of . virtue, liberty and Rome. Addſon's Cato.
4. It has with before the perſon oppoſed.
- contend.
5. To The hot and cold, the dry and humid fight. - Sandys.
To FIGHT. v. a. To war againſt; to combat againſt.
Himſelf alone, an equal match he boaſts,
Tofight the Phrygian and the Auſonian hoſts. Dryd. Æn.
FIGHT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Battle. duel
. Combat; duel.
2. Co 'Herius in ſingle fight I ſlew,
Whom with three lives Feronia did endue ;
And thrice I ſent him to the Stygian ſhore, •
*Till the laſt ebbing ſoul return’d no more. Dryden’s AEm.
3. Something to ſcreen the combatants in ſhips. ...
#1'ghtes. n.ſ.. [from fight.] Warriour; duelliſt.
I will return again into the houſe, and deſire ſome conduá
of the lady: I am no fighter. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
O, 'tis the coldeſt youth upon a charge, &gt;
The moſt deliberate fghter / Dryden's All for Love.
F1'GHTING. participial adj. [from fght.]
1. Qualified for war; fit for battle.
An hoſt of fighting men went out to war by bands. 2 Chro.
2. Occupied by war; being the ſcene of war.
In fighting fields, as far the ſpear I throw y
As flies the arrow from the well-drawn bow. Pope's Odyſ.
From ENT. n.ſ.. [figmentum, Latin J. An invention; a fic-
tion; the idea feigned. - -
Upon the like grounds was raiſed the figment of Briareus,
who, dwelling in a city called Hecatonchiria, the fancies of
thoſe times aſſigned him an hundred hands. Brown's Vulg. Err.
The moſt frightful paſſages, probably ſo ſtrange as to be
hardly credible; it carried rather an appearance of figment
- tion, in thoſe that handed down the memory of it,
*:::‘. and reality. Iłoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Fropecker. n.ſ.. [fig and peck.] . A bird.
F1'culate. adj. [from figulus, Latin.] Made of potters
Fºrable adj. [from figuro, Latin.] Capable of being
brought to certain form, and retained in it. Thus lead is
!e, but not water.
*... of impreſſible and not impreſſible, figurable
and not figurable, ſciſſible and not ſciſſible, are plebeian In O-
tions. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Flour Abi'lity, n.ſ [from figurable.] The quality of being
capable of a certain and ſtable form.
F1'Gu RAL. adj. [from figure J
1. Repreſented by delineation. - -
Incongruities have been committed by geographers in the
figural reſemblances of ſeveral regions. , Brown's Pulg. Err.
a. Figural Numbers. Such numbers as do or may repreſent
ſome geometrical figure, in relation to which they are always
conſidered, and are either lineary, ſuperficial, or ſolid, Harris.
F1'our At E. adj. [figuratus, Latin.]
1. Of a certain and determinate form. . - - - -
Plants are all figurate and determinate, which inanimate
bodies are not; for look how far, the ſpirit is able to ſpread
and continue itſelf, ſo far goeth the ſhape or figure, and then
is determined. - Bacon.
2. Reſembling any thing of a determinate form ; as, figurate
ſtones retaining the forms of ſhells in which they were formed
by the deluge.
3. #. Counterpºint. [In muſick.] That wherein there
is a mixture of diſcords along with the concords. Harris.
5. Figurate Deſtant...[In muſick.] That wherein diſcords
are concerned, as well, though not ſo much, as concords;
and may well be termed the ornament or rhetorical part of
muſick, in regard that in this are introduced all the varieties
of points, figures, ſyncopes, diverſities of meaſures, and
whatever elſe is capable of adorning the compoſition. Harris.
FigurA'tion, n. ſ. [figuratus, Latin.]
1. Determination to a certain form. . - - -
Neither doth the wind, as far as it carrieth a voice, with
motion thereof confound any of the delicate and articulate
figurations of the air in variety of words. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
2. The aët of giving a certain form.
If motion be in a certain order, there followeth vivification
and/guratiºn in living creatures perfect. Bacºn's Nat. Hiſt.
F1's URATIVE. adj. [figuratif-ve, Fr. from figura, Latin.]
1. Repreſenting ſomething elſe; typical; repreſentative.
This, they will ſay, was figurative, and ſerved by God's
appointment but for a time, to ſhadow out the true éverlaſt-
ing glory of a more divine ſanétity; where into Chriſt being
long ſince entered, it ſeemeth that all theſe curious exornations
ſhould rather ceaſe. Płºcker, b. v. ſ. 15.
2. Changed by rhetorical figures from the primitive meaning;
not literal. -
How often have we been railcd at for underſtanding words
in a fgurative ſenſe, which cannot be literally underſtood
without overthrowing the plaineſt evidence of ſenſe and
reaſon. Stilingſleet's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
This is a fgurative expreſfión, where the words are uſed in
a different ſenſe from what they ſignify in their firſt ordinary
intention. Rºgers, Sermon 14.
3. Full of figures; full of rhetorical exornations; full of
changes from the original ſenſe.
Sublime ſubjects ought to be adorned with the ſublimeſt and
with the moſt ſºurative expreſſions. Dryden's juvenal, Prof.
Fi'GURATIVELY., adj. [from figurative.] By a figure; in a
ſenſe different from that which words originally imply ; not
literally. -
The cuſtom of the apoſtle is figurative', to transfer to him-
ſelf, in the firſt perſon, what belongs to others. Hammond.
The words are different, but the ſenſe is ſtill the ſame; for
therein are ſºuratively intended Uziah and Ezechias. Brown.
Satyr is a kind of poetry in which human vices are repre-
hended, partly dramatically, partly ſimply; but, for the moſt
part, ſiguratively and occultly. Dryden's juvenal, Dedicat.
FI'GURE. n.ſ. Ifgura, Latin.] -
1. The form of anything as terminated by the outline.
Flowers have all exquiſite figures, and the flower numbers
are chiefly five and four; as in primroſes, briar-roſes, ſingle
muſkroſes, ſingle pinks and gilliflowers, &amp;c. which have five
leaves; lilies, flower-de-luces, borage, buglaſs, &amp;c. which
have four leaves. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Men find green clay that is ſoft as long as it is in the wa-
ter, ſo that one may print on it all kind of figures, and give it
what ſhape one pleaſes. Boyle.
Figures are properly modifications of bodies; for pure ſpace
is not any where terminated, nor can be: whether there be
or be not body in it, it is uniformly continued. Ilocke.
2. Shape; form; ſemblance.
He hath borne himſelf beyond the promiſe of his age,
doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion, Shakeſpeare.
3. Perſon; external form; appearance graceful or inelegant,
mean or grand. -
The blue German ſhall the Tigris drink,
F’er I, forſaking gratitude and truth,
Forget the figure of that godlike youth. Dryden's Virgil.
I was charmed with the gracefulneſs of his figure and deli-
very, as well as with his diſcourſes. Addiſon's Speciator.
A good/gure, or perſon, in man or woman, gives credit
at firſt fight to the choice of either. Clariffa.
4. Diftinguiſhed appearance; eminence; remarkable charaćter.
While fortune favour'd, while his arms ſupport
The cauſe, and rul'd the counſels of the court,
I made ſome/gure there; nor was my name
Qbſcure, nor I without my ſhare of fame. Dryden's En.
The ſpeech, I believe, was not ſo much deſigned by the
knight to inform the court, as to give him aftgure in my eye,
and keep up his credit in the country. Addiſon's Speziator.
Not a woman ſhall be unexplained that makes a figure either
as a maid, a wife, or a widow. Addison's Guardian.
Whether or no they have done well to ſet you up for
making another kind of figure, time will witneſs. Addison.
Many princes made very ill figures upon the throne, who
before were the favourites of the people. Addison's Freeholder.
5. A ſtatue; an image; ſomething formed in reſemblance of
ſomewhat elſe.'
The ſeveral ſtatues, which ſeemed at a diſtance to be made
of the whiteſt marble, were nothing elſe but ſo many figures
in ſnow. \ Addiſon's Freeholder.
6. Repreſentations in painting; perſon; exhibited in colours.
In the principal figure of a pićture the painter is to em-
ploy the finews of his art; for in them conſiſts the principal
beauty of his work. Dryden's Dufrºſ.oy.
My favourite books and pićtures ſell;
Kindly throw in a little figure,
And ſet the price upon the bigger. Prior.
7. Arrangement; diſpoſition; modification.
The figure of a ſyllogiſm is the proper diſpoſition of the
middle term with the parts of the queſtion. If atts's Logick.
8. A character denoting a number.
Hearts, tongues, figures, ſcribes, bards, poets cannot
Think, ſpeak, caſt, write, ſing, number
His love to Anthony. Shakespeare's Ant, and Cleop tra.
He that ſeeketh to be eminent amongſt able men, hith a
9 D great
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I E
F I G
O woman woman when to ill thy mind
Is bent, all hell contains no foul-r fiend. Pope's Odyſſy.
FIERCE. adj. [fier, French ; fºr ox, Latin J
1. Savage; ravenous ; eaſily enraged.
Thou hunteſt me as a fierce lion. job.
2. Vehement in rage; eager of miſchief.
Deſtruction enters in the treacherous wood,
And vengeful ſlaughter, fierce for human blood. Pope.
Tyrants fierce, that unrelenting die Pope.
With that the god, whoſe earthquakes rock the ground,
Fierce to Phoeacia croſt the vaſt profound. Pope's Odſey.
3. Violent; outrageous
Curſed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath,
for it was cruel. Gen. xlix. 7.
4. Paſſionate; angry ; furious.
This fierce abridgment
Hath to it circumſtantial branches, which
Diſtinétion ſhould be rich in. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
A man brings his mind to be poſitive and fierce for poſitions
whoſe evidence he has never examined. Locke.
5. Strong; forcible.
The ſhips, though ſo great, are driven of fierce winds;
yet are they turned about with a very ſmall helm. , ja. iii. 2.
FI’ER cely adv. [from fierce J. Violently; furiouſly.
Battle join'd, and both ſides fiercely fought. Shakespeare H. VI.
The defendants, fiercely aſſailed by their enemies before,
and beaten with the great ordnance behind, were grievouſly
diſtreſſed. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The air, if very cold, irritateth the flame, and maketh it
burn more fiercey, as fire ſcorcheth in froſty weather, and ſo
furthereth the conſumption. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
F1'E.Rce N Ess. n.ſ.. [from fierce. J
1. Ferocity; ſavageneſs.
The ſame defect of heat which gives a fierceneſ to our
natures, may contribute to that roughneſs of our language.
Swift's Letter to the Lord High Treaſurer.
2. Eagerneſs for blood; fury.
Suddenly there came out of a wood a monſtrous lion, with
a ſhe-bear not far from him, of little leſs fierceneſs. Sidney.
3. Quickneſs to attack; keenneſs in anger and reſentment.
The Greeks are ſtrong, and ſkilful to their ſtrength,
Fierce to their ſkill, and to their fierceneſ valiant. Shakespeare
4. Violence; outrageous paſſion.
His pride and brutal fierceneſ I abhor;
But ſcorn your mean ſuſpicions of me more. Dryd. Aureng.
FIERIFA'cIAs. [In law. J A judicial writ, that lies at all
times within the year and day, for him that has recovered in
an ačtion of debt or damages, to the ſheriff, to command
him to levy the debt, or the damages of his goods, againſt
whom the recovery was had. Cºwel.
F1'ERINess. n.ſ...[from fiery.]
1. Hot qualities; heat; acrimony.
The aſhes, by their heat, their fierineſ, and their dryneſs,
belong to the element of earth. Boyle.
2. Heat of temper; intelle&amp;tual ardour.
The Italians, notwithſtanding their natural fierineſ of tem-
per, affect always to appear ſober and ſedate. Addiſon.
FI’ERy. adj. [from fire.]
1. Conſiſting of fire.
Scarcely had Phoebus in the gloomy Eaſt
Yet harneſſed his fiery footed team,
Ne rear'd above the earth his flaming creſt,
When the laſt deadly ſmoak aloft did ſteam. Fairy Queen.
• I know, thou’dſt rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulph
Than flatter him in a bower. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
2. Hot like fire.
Hath thy fiery heart ſo parcht thy entrails,
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death Shakespeare H. VI.
3. Vehement; ardent; active.
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king. Shakespeare Rich. III.
I drew this gallant head of war,
And cull'd theſe fiery ſpirits from the world,
To outlook conqueſt, and to win renown
Ev’n in the jaws of danger and of death. Shakespeare K. john.
4. Paſſionate; outrageous; eaſily provoked.
You know the fiery quality of the duke;
How unremoveable, and fixt he is
In his own courſe.
. Unreſtrained ; fierce.
Then, as I ſaid, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery ſteed,
Which his aſpiring rider ſeem'd to know,
With ſlow but ſtately pace kept on his courſe. Shakespeare R. II.
Through Elis and the Grecian towns he flew ;
Th’ audacious wretch four fiery courſers drew. Dryden.
‘. Heated by fire.
The ſword which is made fiery doth not only cut, by rea-
ſon of the ſharpneſs which ſimply it hath, but alſo burn by
means of that hºt which it hath from fire. Hooker, b. v. 54.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
5
See from the brake the whirring pheaſant ſprings,
And mounts exulting on triumphant wings:
Short is his joy; he feels the fiery wound,
Flutters in blood, and panting beats the ground. Pºte.
FIFE. m. ſ. [ffre, French..] A pipe blown to the drum ; tı, i-
litary wind-muſick. - *
Farewell the plumed troops, and the big war
That make ambition virtue oh farewell !
Farewell the neighing ſteed and the ſhrill trump,
The ſpirit-ſtirring drum, th’ ear-piercing fife. Shakespeare Othel.o.
Thus the gay victim, with freſh garlands crown'd,
Pleas'd with the ſacred fift's enlivening ſound,
Through gazing crowds in ſolemn ſtate proceeds. Phillips.
F1'FTEEN. adj. [ry) tyne, Saxon.] Five and ten.
I have dreamed and ſlept above ſome fifteen years and
more. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
FI'FTEENTH. adj. [pir:eoča, Sax J. The ordinal of fifteen;
the fifth after the tenth.
A fifteenth part of ſilver incorporate with gold, will not be
recovered by any water of ſeparation, except you put a greater
quanty of ſilver to draw up the leſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
. London ſends but four burgeſies to parliament, although
it bear the fifteenth part of the charge of the whole nation in
all publick taxes and levies. Graunt's Blls of 440, tulity.
FIFTH. adj. [Firza, Saxon.]
1. The ordinal of five; the next to the fourth.
With ſmiling aſpect you ſerenely move,
In your fifth orb, and rule the realm of love. Dryden.
Juſt as I wiſh'd, the lots were caſt on four,
Myſelf the fifth. Poe's Odyſſey, b ix.
2. All the ordinals are taken elliptically for the part which they
expreſs: a fifth, a fifth part; a third a third part. z
The publick ſhall have loſt four fifths of its annual income
for ever. * Swift.
F1'FTHLY. adv. [from f/th.] In the fifth place.
Fifth y, living creatures have a more exact figure than
plants. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 607.
F1'FTIETH. adj. [Flpteogoja, Saxon.] The ordinal of fifty.
If this medium be rarer within the ſun's body than at its
ſurface, and rarer there than at the hundred part of an inch
from its body, and rarer there than at the fiftieth part of an
inch from its body, and rarer there than at the orb of Saturn,
I ſee no reaſon why the increaſe of denſity ſhould ſtop any
where. Newton's Opt.
F1'FT Y. adj. [riptiš, Saxon.] Five tens.
A wither'd hermit, five ſcore Winters worn,
Might ſhake off fifty looking in her eye. Shakeſpeare.
Judas ordained captains over thouſands, hundreds, ffties,
and tens. I 44ac. iii. 55.
The breadth of the ark ſhall be fifty cubits, Gen. vi. 15.
In the Hebrew there is a particle conſiſting but of one let-
ter, of which there are reckoned up above fifty ſeveral ſigni-
fications. - Locke.
FIG. m. ſ. [ficus, Latin ; figo, Spaniſh; figwe, French.)
1. A tree that bears figs
The characters are: the flowers, which are always incloſed
in the middle of the fruit, conſiſt of the leaf, and are male
and female in the ſame fruit: the male flowers are ſituated
towards the crown of the fruit ; and the female, growing
near the ſtalk, are ſucceeded by ſmall hard ſeeds: the intire
fruit is, for the moſt part, turbinated and globular, or of an
oval ſhape, is fleſhy, and of a ſweet taſte. AMiller.
Full on its crown a fg's green branches riſe,
And ſhoot a leafy foreſt to the ſkies. Pope's Odyſſey, b. xii.
Or lead me through the maze,
Embowering endleſs of the Indian fig. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. A luſcious ſoft fruit; the fruit of the figtree.
It maketh figs better, if a figtree, when it beginneth to
put forth leaves, have his top cut off. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Figs are great ſubduers of acrimony. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To FIG. v. a. [See FCO.] -
1. To inſult with fico's or contemptuous motions of the fingers.
When Piſtol lies, do this, and fig me like
The bragging Spaniard. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
2. To put ſomething uſeleſs into one's head. Low cant.
Away to the ſow ſhe goes, and figs her in the crown with
another ſtory. L'Eſirange.
F1'GAPPLE. m. ſ. A fruit.
A figapple hath no core or kernel, in theſe reſembling a fg,
and differing from other apples. Mortimer's Husband y.
F1'GMARI Go I.D. m. ſ. A plant. It is ſucculent, and has the ap-
pearance of houſeleek: the leaves grow oppoſite by pairs. Mill.
To FIGHT. v. m. preter. fought; part, paſſ fight. [peohtan,
Saxon.] -
1. To contend in battle; to war; to make war; to battle; to
contend in arms. It is uſed both of armies and ſingle com-
batants,
King Henry, be thy.title right or wrong,
Lord Ciifford vows to ſight in thy defence. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds
In ranks and ſquadrons, and right form of war. Shakeſp.
The common queſtion is, if we muſt now ſurrender Spain,
what
—-
* 3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I G
º
† : -
. . . wh -
‘‘ſº at have web
º ready: we . een fightin
- g for all thi
º tereſt, have been - all this while * *
*: je ?
#. the i::::::: for the . i The anſwer is -
T er confed t of a priv the publick i If moti -
º, 2. roy was o'ert erate hº ate. - in- and ſº tion be in a -
ºiſ, . To combat: hrown, and a ºught, and kings w Swift. Frºg /guratiºn in livi certain order - -
- * O ; to duel; whole empi Igs were ſlai RATI living cr , theref
ſº ne ſhall ; to contend i mpire fell n, I. R V.E. ad eatures olloweth vivi
º undertake to fight . nd in fingle fight . Phillips. #. º [figuratifive º: Bacºn' vivification
* †: moſt dimi The poor º another." Eiſi º they tº: elſe; º:... ſº fº.
ſº. 'h nutive - • Eſdr. xiii - ne ay, w ; re Latin.
l, e youn tive of birds, wi 1. 1.In nt but f was figurati preſentat
- 3. To aćt g ones in her 2 will fight g glory of Or a time tive, and ſ 1Vc.
* \tº t as a ſoldier i neſt, agai s”? longſi a more divinº to ſhad erved b w
º A #. caſe. gainſt the owl. Shakespeare Macb ..". *: ſanétity º: the true ..
ºis. nd fought the hol d the lion of hi . ...'...". ..º.º. -
*- º brave i. wars in ºil. heart, not literal by rhetorical fi *; ...
~ c - 10. 1O
*** Of reatly i." early to his gray . How often I figures from the ºr, b. v. ſ. *
º 4. It fººt. virtue i. he fights the . Shakespeare K. john in a figurati º we been rail primitive ºft,
º - with before the iberty and Rom - without ive ſenſe, whi railcd at fo 5
5. To #. e perſon oppoſed. €. Addſon's Cato reaſon. overthrowing º º i. º: word
º To Fº hot and cold, the d . - This is a fgurati §º ... } º:
-je. #io To war ..º. humid fight. Sand *::::::::: #. º º:ſº of Diſc. on º: ;
ne ; to C …~ : ar 1 On. n 2. ret - m. Idol
FIG Tº the Phy an equal match ºinſ. ndys. 3. Full of fig at they ſignify jº *::::
H.T. n.ſ.. [fro ygian and the Auſoni oaſts, chan gures; full their firſt ord; in
. 3. m the verb.] onian hoſts. Dryd. Æ j. from the origin º rhetorical Rogers º
* - 'a. l : guna ... 77
: w", ombat; duel. 77. with º: ought ſº exornations; fi'i
º Wh Herilus in ſingle figh º: º with the ſ
* Lº - . o - - - ". -- 1.O. e - -
* Yº... #º ſº º *...*. £º
ºt *Till the laſt nt him to the S ld enque; T ly. which w J By a fi , try.
- - bbin tygian ſh he cuſto ords origina gure; in
tº ºr §: Something to º g ſoul return'd Ore., ſelf. i om of the - ginally imply: a
º F1'GHTER. m. ſ. creen the combatan no more. Dryden' #. the firſt perſon apoſtle is figurative' ply; not
I will return [from fight.] W ts in ſhips. yden's Aen. ther he words are diff. what belongs ive', to transfer to hi
of the lady: again into th arriour; duelliſt rein are figurati - !erent, but th to others. O nim-
O, #. no . hº and dºme hº is a kind º º º: is ſtill afº
FI' The moſt º: youth upon ...” ſº part ... †† in which º: Ezechias. ...
I'GHT - - ſate ºghter / arge 1ght. FI/ ?,*($ wrative' y, an vices -
I. ği participial ſ: †. #. - º n.ſ. P and º ſimply; tºº.
ified for war : j. [from fgh jden's All fº . The f figura, Lati Dryden' , for the
...'...} ºff.ſ.º.) for Love. #... ." ...] yden's juvenal .
2. Occupied b ghting men we - wers have g as termi &gt; uéat.
war : bei nt out are ch - all exqui inated b - -
In jº. #. being the ſcene .. war by bands. 2 Ch # five and º ...} º: outline.
FI'G As flies the #: as far the ſpear 1. Oro. leaves: º; pinks * | º: i flower numbers
- MENT. m. f rom the well d row have f its, flower-d gi iflowers &gt; riar-roſes, ſi
tion; the id - [figmentum, Lati -drawn bow. Pope' M our leaves. e-luces, bora , &amp;c. which hº fingle
IT, Upon th ea feigned. in J. An inventi ope's Odyſſ. te en find green cl ge, buglaſs, &amp; we five
--- - - -- B → c. whi
fºr. who, d e like grounds was rai ion; a fic- r, ſo that one clay that is ſof acon's Natural Hi ich |
: - thoſe *::::::: city ...ſ.º. ºº iº% º: |
Liaº The moſt n im an hund atonchiria, the f lareus, is n res are properl .. gures, and gi a-
Gr hardly credi frightful paſſa red hands. Brown' ancies of ot any wher y modification give it
º - ible: i aſſages, probab own's Vulg. or be not re terminat s of bodies: Boyle.
º ...” i. º: : º: ſtrange *:::: * Shape; º: *:::::: : "...". º:
5 ºn: F}. truth and realit at handed down . of figment d He hath "..."; rmly continued. er there be
- FI' KER. m. ſ. [. y. Woodw e memory of i oing in th e himſelf b Ilocke
º, *** * {{..."; i. tº Aawa #: *::::::: ...”.” ... . -
ay. - m figulus, Lati - y. Inca ernal for e feats of a li e of his
- - - FIGUR , Latin.] M n or grand In 3 a of a lion, S age, |
lºmº ABLE. ad; ade of fº ppearance Shakeſpear
----- brough - adj. [from potters &gt; e blue G graceful or i Č.
I. :: * ght to certai figuro, Lati E’er I e German ſh inelegant
ºr ºr fº #. ...” and ãº, sº of being fº $º º drink, 2
Tit, ſº e differences of i - - hus 1 - was ch ure of that - truth,
- and not figu of impreſfibl ead is ve armed wi godlike
… º.º. -- ar - e - r ith th youth.
º f tionS. fgurable, ſciſſible and .."; impreſſible, fi Kº: as with his º of hi Dryden's Virgil.
Figur Abi'lity, n.ſ [f º are º: at firſt §§ or º courſes. % and deli-
º capable of . . . . rom figurab acon's Natural Hi no- 4. Diſtingui to the choi , in man or w ſon's Specia
ºf º: "º º:
º • epºnteſt deli gure J - ing The fortune favou'd minence; rem Clariſſa
-- * Incongruiti y delineation. I cauſe, and rul’ r'd, while hi arkable charact -
... ." f gruities have b made ſon d the co is arms ſu CF.
- gural reſe een commi Obſ he/gure there; unſels of th pport
3. . IGURAL º: º, ſeveral º º ers in th #..."' º: ºftwas my .º
onne geometric l - uch number - rown's Vul - e knight to i &gt; believe are of fam
conſidered al figure, in relati s as do or ma 'g. Err. andſ. o inform the c , was not ſo m e. Dryden's £
Fº and are either li tion to which th y repreſent eep up his credi ourt, as to give hi uch deſigned by 77.
TE. adi ineary, ſuperfici they are al Not a credit in th give him a figure i by the
- 1. Of a certai j. [figuratus, Lati , ſuperficial, or ſolid ways as a mai woman ſhall b e country. gure in my ey
*:::::: Plants *: * dºminate i. id. Harris. *. a wife, or ºn- aurº sº.
- bodies are n all figurate and † - makin ether or no the º: . es a figure either |
* , and :*:º: #. how far ºate, which inanim . kind º: done well º: Guarian. - |
is determined , ſo far goeth th pirit is able ate before rinces made uré, time will wi et you up for
ºf: 2. Reſembli - the ſhape or figu to ſpread 5. A ſt were the favo very ill /gures witneſs. Addi r
º ſt ing any thin gure, and then atue; an i urites of the p upon the thr iſon.
…” . . ãº ºß. form Bacon. º: º ... nº ſomething . Addison's º:
… ." ge. s in whi : as c lever, 2Cl ill ſcic - -
º 3:...º.º.º. [I which they ...fºº #: ...'... reſemblance of
**** ixt - 71/7t. I In 3. - d at -
º 5. º along ...] That wherei 6. '... - ible, were nothing i. º to be made
º are concerned Kant. [In muſick.] e concords. }. In º in painti Addi o many figures
. . . and , as well, th ..] That Harris. e principalſ, ng; perſon; exhibi iſon's Freehol
º may well , though n wherein di plo ipal figur * exhibited i holder.
- muſick, in r . termed the or ot ſo much, as c diſcords º: finews of ; ſ: º a pićture the p d in colours
- - º egard that i 3 ornament , “ . oncords : of hi rt; for i ainter i -
*::::: ‘...." figures, f º this are introdº. º part º My º: in then conſiſts i. .. em-
.º.º. atever elſe is yncopes, d - ed all th - - Kind urite books - Dryden' p incipal
** FIGURA'TIO c 1s capable of ado iverſities of me . Varieties A. ly throw in a littl and pićtures ſell; yaen 3 Dufreſno
łºś º: º and 7. A ...'...'. e figure, 2 º/izzy.
º s. to a certain . Latin.] ition. Harris - º ... the bigger
C. V. er - III. - he ºn nº
ſº motion ... the wind, as far as i - mid *: figure of al §. º Prior.
sº figurations of ...; *ś s".º. parts ... *%.
wº- . 2. The act of º in variety of wº elicate and iº. #: denoting a number e queſtion. }. of the
- - - - ul • * - • • *
g a certain form. s. Bacon's Nat. ; Think, º ſcribes, bard s's Logick.
- His love to º , write, ſing, ſº S, poets canno
He that ſeeketh ony. Shakesp ber t
Scth t - ſpear •
9 D o be eminent *::::: and Cleop trº
o able m al.
en, hith a
great<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I G
F I L
for the publick: but he that
g cyphers, is the decay of a
1 alon's Eſſays.
As in accounts cyphºº and figures paſs for real ſumº ſo in
s in ffairs words paſs for things themſelves. South's Serm.
"...º. the diagram of the aſpects of the aſtrolo-
9
sical houſes.
tiº do not know what's brought to paſs under the profeſ-
fºunetelling: ſhe works by charms, by ſpells, by
Shakeſpeare.
at taſk; but that is ever good
plots to be the only ſigure amo"
whole age.
ſon o
the figure, and dawbry beyond our element.
He ſet a figure to diſcover - - ---
If you were fied to Rye or Dover. Hudibras, p. iii tant: 1.
Figure flingers and ſtar-gazers pretend to. foretell the for-
tunes of kingdoms, and have no forefight in what cocerns
themſelves. - L’Eſtrange, Fable 94.
1c. [In theology.] Type repreſentative.
who was the figure of him that is to come. R many.
11. [In rhetorick.] Any mode of ſpeaking in which words are
deported from their ſiteral and primitive ſenſe. In ſtrict ac-
ceptation, the change of a word is a trope, and any affection
of a ſentence a fg, re; but they are generally confounded by
the exacteſt writers.
Silken terms preciſe,
Three pil'd hyperboles, ſpruce affectation,
Figure; pedantical, theſe Summer flies
Håve blºwn me full of maggot offentation. Shakºſºfare.
Here is a ſtrange figure invented againſt the plain and na-
tural ſenſe of the words; for by praying to beſtow, muſt be
underſtood only praying to pray. Stillingfleet.
They have been taught rhetorick, but yet never taught to
expreſs themſelves in the language they are always to uſe; as
if the names of the figures that embelliſhed the diſcourſe of
thoſe, who underſtood the art of ſpeaking, were the very art
and ſkill of ſpeaking well. Lºcke.
1... [In gramma;..] Any deviation from the rules of analogy or
ſyntax.
To F1'GURE. v. a [figuro, Latin J
1. To form into any determinate ſhape.
Trees and herbs, in the growing forth of their boughs and
branches, are not fgured, and keep no order. Hacon,
Accept this goblet, rough with fgur'd gold. Dryd. Wirgil.
2. To ſhow by a corporeal reſemblance: as in picture or ſta-
tuary.
Arachne fgur’d how Jove did abuſe
Europa like a bull, and on his back
Her through the ſea did bear ; ſo lively ſeen,
That it true ſea, and true bull ye would ween. Spenſer.
Now marks the courſe of rolling orbs on high,
O'er figur'd worlds now travels with his eye. Pope.
3. To cover or adorn with figures.
I'll give my jewels for a ſet of beads,
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
My gay apparel for an almſman's gown,
My figur’ā goblets for a diſh of wood. Shakespeare Richard II.
4. To diverſify; to variegate with adventitious forms or
matter.
But this effuſion of ſuch manly drops,
Startle mine eyes, and makes me more amaz'd
Than had I ſeen the vaulty top of heav'n
Figur’d quite o'er with burning meteors. Shakeſp. K. John.
5. To repreſent by a typical or figurative reſemblance.
When ſacraments are ſaid to be viſible ſigns of inviſible
grace, we thereby conceive how grace is indeed the very end
for which theſe heavenly myſterics were inſtituted; and the
matter whereof they conſiſt is ſuch as ſignificth, fgureth, and
repreſenteth their end. - - Hooker, b. v.
There is a hiſtory in all mens lives,
Figuring the nature of the times deceaſed. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Marriage rings are not of this ſtuff:
Oh! why ſhould ought leſs precious or leſs tough
Figure our lovcs? Donne.
The emperor appears as a riſing ſun, and holds a globe in
his hand to figure out the earth that is enlightened and actuated
by his beams. - Addiſon on ancient Medals.
6. To image in the mind.
None that fecis ſenſibly the decays of age, and his life
wearing off, can figure to himſelf thoſe imaginary charms in
riches and praiſe, that men are apt to do in the warmth of
their blood. 7 emple.
If love, alas! be pain, the pain I bear -
No thought can figure, and no tongue declare. Prior.
7. To prefigure; to foreſhow.
Three glorious ſuns, each one a perfeót ſun,
In this the heaven fgures ſome event. Shakespeare Henry VI.
8. To form figuratively; to uſe in a ſenſe not literal.
Figured and metaphorical expreſſions do well to illuſtrate
more abſtruſe and unfamiliar ideas, which the mind is not yet
thoroughly accuſtomed to. Locke.
F1GUR E-F ING FR. n, f [/gure and fing J A pretender to
aſtrology and prediction.
Quacks, fºre fingers, pettifoggers, and republican plot-
ters cannot well live without it. Collier of Confidence.
F1'Gwon r. n.ſ.. [fg and wort.] A plant.
It hath an anomalous flower, conſiſting of one leaf, gaping
at both ſides, and generally globular, cut as it were into twº
lips, under the upper one of which are two ſmall leaves. Mill.
Fil'A' E. Us. ad. [from filum, Lat.] Conſiſting of threads;
compoſed of threads.
They make cables of the bark of lime-trees: it is the flak
that maketh the ſlaceous matter commonly, and ſometimes
the down that groweth above. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
FILACER. m. ſ. [flazarius, low Lat. filum.] An officer in the
Common Pleas, ſo called becauſe he files thoſe writs whereon
he makes proceſs. There are fourteen of them in their ſeveral
diviſions and counties: they make out all original proceſs, as
well real as perſonal and mixt. Harris,
F1'la MENT. n.ſ.. [f ament. Fr. filamenia, Latin.] A ſlender
thread; a body ſlender and long like a thread.
The effluvium paſſing out in a ſmaller thread, and more
enlightened flament, it ſtirreth not the bodies interpoſed. Bro.
The lungs of conſumptives have been conſumed, nothing
remaining but the ambient membrare, and a number of
withered veins and filaments. Harvey on Conſumptions,
The ever-rolling orb's impulſive ray
On the next threads and ºlaments does bear,
Which form the ſpringy texture of the air
And thoſe ſtill ſtrike the next, till to the fight
The quick vibration propagates the light. Blackm. Creation
The dung of horſes is nothing but the filaments of the hay,
and as ſuch combuſtible. Arbuthnot ºn Aliments.
F1'LBERT. n.ſ.. [This is derived by junius and Skinner from
the long beards or huſks, as corrupted from full leard, or full
of beard. It probably had its name, like many other fruits,
from ſome one that introduced or cultivated it; and is there.
fore corrupted from Filbert or Filibert, the name of him who
brought it hither.] A fine hazelnut with a thin ſhell.
In Auguſt comes fruit of all ſorts; as plumbs, pears, apri-
cots, barberrics, filberts, muſkmelons, monkſhoods of all
colours. Bacon, Eſſay 47.
Thou haſt a brain, ſuch as it is indeed
On what elſe ſhould thy worm of fancy ſeed?
Yet in a filbert I have often known -
Maggots ſurvive, when all the kernel's gone, Dorſet.
There is alſo another kind, called the filbert of Conſtan-
tinople; the leaves and fruit of which are bigger than either
of the former : the beſt are thoſe of a thin ſhell. Mortimer.
To FILCH. v. a. [A word of uncertain etymology. The
French word filer, from which ſome derive it, is of very late
produćtion, and therefore cannot be its original.] To ſteal;
to take by theft; to pilfer; to pillage; to rob 5 to take by
robbery. It is uſually ſpoken of petty thefts.
He ſhall find his wealth wonderfully enlarged by keeping
his cattle in incloſures, where they Hi always have ſafe
being, that none are continually filthed and ſtolen. Spenſer.
The champion robbeth by night,
And prowleth and fiſcheth by daie. Tiſſºr's Husbandy.
Who ſteals my purſe, ſteals traſh; ’tis ſomething, nothing;
'Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been ſlave to thouſands;
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed. Shakespeare'. Othell,
His thefts were too open; his fishing was like an unſkilful
ſinger, he kept no time. Shakespeare Merry Hive; of Windſºr.
He could diſcern cities like hives of bees, wherein every
bee did nought elſe but ſting; ſome like hornets, ſome like
fiſching waſps, others as drones. Burton on Melancholy.
What made thee venture to betray,
And filch the lady's heart away. Hudibra, p. iii. (ant. .
The piſmire was formerly a huſbandman, that ſecretly
flihed away his neighbour's goods. L'E/irange's Fables.
Fain would they fleh that little food away,
While unreſtrain'd thoſe happy gluttons prey.
So ſpeeds the wily fox, alarm'd by fear, - -
Who lately filth'd the turkey's callow care. Gay's Trivia.
FI'lcHE R. m. ſ. [from filch. J A thief; a petty robber.
FILE, n.ſ.. [ſie, French ; filum, a thread, Latin.]
1. A thread.
3ut let me reſume the file of my relation, which this ob-
ject of books, beſt agree.ble to my courſe of life, hath a little
interrupted. JWotton.
2. A line on which papers are ſtrung to keep them in order.
All records, wherein there was any memory of the king's
attainder, ſhould be cancelled and taken off the file. Bacºn.
The petitions being thus prepared, do you continually ſet
apart an hour in a day to peruſe thoſe, and then rank them
Dryden.
into ſeveral fleſ, according to the ſubjećt matters. Bacon,
Th' apothecary-train is wholly blind;
From files a random recipe they take,
- And many deaths of one preſcription make. Dryden,
3. A catalogue; roll; ſeries.
Our preſent muſters grow upon the fle
To five and twenty thouſand men of choice. Shaleſ H. IV.
The valu'd fie
Diſtinguiſhes the ſwift, the ſlow, the ſubtle. Shakespeare Math.
2. 4. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">icº.
4. A line of ſoldiers ranged one behind another.
Thoſe goodly eyes,
That o'er the files and muſters of the war
Have glow'd like plated Mars, now bend, now turn
Upon a tawny front. Shakespeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
So ſaying, on he led his radiant files,
Dazzling the moon. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. iv.
5. [reol, Saxon; viºle, Dutch..] An inſtrument to rub down
prominences.
The rough or coarſe-toothed file, if it be large, is called a
rubber, and is to take off the unevenneſs of your work which
the hammer made in the forging: the baſtard-toothed file is to
take out of your work the deep cuts, or file-ſtrokes, the rough
file made: the fine-toothed file is to take out the cuts, or fié-
ſtrokes, the baſtard fie made ; and the ſmooth file is to take
out thoſe cuts, or file-ſtrokes, that the fine file made. Mºxon,
Yet they had a file for the mattocks and for the coulters.
Sa. xiii. 21.
The ſmiths and armourers on palfreys ride,
File: in their hands and hammers at their fide,
And nails for looſen'd ſpears, and thongs for ſhields provide.
Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Filegg'TTER. ſ. n. [file and cutter.] A maker of files.
Gad-ſteel is a tough ſort of fleei: flecutters uſe it to make
their chiffels, with which they cut their files. Moxon.
To FIL E. v. a. [from filum, a thread.]
1. To ſtring upon a thread or wire. Whence to file a bile is to
offer it in its order to the notice of the judge.
From the day his firſt bill was filed he began to colled
reports. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
2. [from Feolan, Saxon.] To cut with a file.
They which would fle away moſt from the largeneſs of that
offer, do in more ſparing terms acknowledge little leſs.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 27.
His humour is lofty, his diſcourſe peremptory, his tongue
filed, and his eye ambitious. Shakespeare Love's Labour Loft.
Let men be careful how they attempt to cure a blemiſh by
fling or cutting off the head of ſuch an overgrown tooth. Ray.
3. [from Pilan.] To foul; to ſully; to pollute. This ſenſe is
retained in Scotland.
For Banquo's iſſue have I fil'd my mind,
For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd. Shałoff.
His weeds, divinely faſhioned,
All fil'd and mang!'d. Chapman's Iliads, b. xviii.
To FILE. v. n. [from the noun..] To march in a file, not
abreaſt, but one behind another.
All ran down without order or ceremony, 'till we drew up
in good order, and filed off. Tatler, Nº. 86.
Did all the groſſer atoms at the cell
Of chance file off to form the pond’rous ball,
And undetermin'd into order fall: Blackmore's Creation.
F1'L E Mot. n.ſ.. [corrupted from ſeueille morte, a dead leaf,
French.) A brown or yellow-brown colour.
The colours you ought to wiſh for are blue or filemot,
turned up with red. Swift's Direct to the Footman.
F1'LER. m. ſ. [from file.] One who files; one who uſes the
file in cutting metals.
FILIAL. adj. [filial-le, French; flius, Latin.]
1. Pertaining to a ſon ; befitting a ſon. -
My miſchievous proceeding may be the glory of his filial
piety, the only reward now left for ſo great a merit. Sidney.
From impoſition of ſtrićt laws, to free
Acceptance of large grace; from ſervile fear
To filial; works of law, to works of faith. Milt. Pa. Loft.
He griev'd, he wept, the ſight an image brought
Of his own filial love; a ſadly pleaſing thought. Dryden,
2. Bearing the charaćter or relation of a ſon. -
And thus the filial godhead anſw'ring ſpoke. Milt. P. L.
Where the old myrtle her good influence ſheds,
Sprigs of like leaf erect their filial heads;
And when the parent roſe decays and dies,
With a reſembling face the daughter buds ariſe. Prior.
FIL1A"Tio N. m. ſ. [from flius, Latin.] The relation of a ſon
to a father; correlative to paternity.
The relation of paternity and filiation, between the firſt and
fecond perſon, and the relation between the ſacred perſons of
the Trinity, and the denomination thereof, muſt needs be
eternal, becauſe the terms of relation between whom that
relation ariſeth were eternal. tale's Origin of Mankind.
FI'll NGs. n.f. [without a ſingular; from file.] Fragments
rubbed off by the aëtion of the file.
The filings of iron infuſed in vinegar, will, with a decoc-
tion of galls, make good ink, without any copperoſe at all.
Brºwn's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 12.
The chippings and filings of thoſe jewels are of more value
than the whole maſs of ordinary authors. Felton on the Claſſ.
To FII.L. v m. [rylan, Saxon.]
1. To ſtore 'till no more can be admitted.
Fill thine horn with oil. I Sa. xvi. 1.
Fil the waterpots with water, and they filled them up to the
brim. jo. ii. 7.
º
i
The earth is ſled with violence through them. Gºn. vi., 3.
2. To ſtore abundantly.
Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the ſeas. Gen.
3. To ſatisfy; to content.
Nºthing but the ſupreme and abſolute Infinite can ade.
Quately fill and ſuper-abundantly ſatisfy the infinite deſires of
intelligent beings. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
4. To glut; to ſurfeit.
Thou art going to lord Timon's feaſt. -
-Ay, to ſee meat fill knaves, and wineheat fools. Shakespeare
5. Tº Fill out. To pour out liquor for drink.
6. To Fill out. To extend by ſomething contained.
I only ſpeak of him
Whom pomp and greatneſs ſits ſo looſe about,
That he wants majeſty to fill them out. Pryden.
7 ******* [% is ºften uſed without much addition tº the
force of the verb.] To make full.
Hope leads from goal to goal,
And opens ſtill, and opens on his foul;
'Till lengthen’d on to faith, and unconfin'd,
It pours the bliſs that fill up all the mind. Pope's Eff on Man.
8. 72 FILL up. To ſupply.
When the ſeveral trades and profeſſions are ſupplied, you
will find moſt of thoſe that are proper for war abſolutely ne-
ceſſary for filing up the laborious part of life, and carrying on
the underwork of the nation. Addiſon ºn the iſ ar.
9. Tº Fill up. To occupy by bulk.
There would not be altogether ſo much water required for
the land as for the ſea, to raiſe them to an equal height; be.
cauſe mountains and hills would fill up part of that ſpace upon
the land, and ſo make leſs water requiſite. Burnet.
no. To Fill up. To engage; to employ.
Is it far you ride
-As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
*Twixt this and ſupper. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To Full. v. n.
1. To give to drink.
In the cup which ſhe hath filled, fill to her double. Rev. xviii.
We fill to th’ general joy of the whole table,
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miſs. Shakespeare Mac.
2. To grow full.
3. To glut; to ſatiate.
Things that are ſweet and fat are more filling, and do ſwim
and hang more about the mouth of the ſtomach, and go not
down ſo ſpeedily. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. To FILL up. To grow full.
Neither the Palus Meotis nor the Euxine, nor any other
ſeas, fill up, or by degrees grow ſhallower. Woodward.
The firſt ſtage of healing, or the diſcharge of matter, is
by ſurgeons called digeſtion; the ſecond, or the filling up with
fleſh, incarnation; and the laſt, or ſkining over, cicatri-
zation. - Sharp's Surgery.
FILL. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. As much as may produce complete ſatisfačtion.
Her neck and breaſts were ever open bare,
That aye thereof her babes might ſuck their fill. Fairy Qu.
But thus inflam'd befooke the captain,
Who ſcorneth peace ſhall have his fill of war. Fairfax, b. ii.
When ye were thirſty, did I not cleave the rock, and wa-
ters flowed out to your fill P 2 Eſd. i. 20.
Mean while enjoy
Your fill, what happineſs this happy ſtate.
Can comprehend, incapable of more. Milton's Par. Loft.
Amid’ the tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting ſo nigh, to pluck and eat my fill .
I ſpar'd not. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix,
Which made me gently firſt remove your fears,
That ſo you might have room to entertain
Your fill of joy, Denham's Sºphy.
Your barbarity, which I have heard ſo long exclaimed
againſt in town and country, may have its fill of deſtruc-
tion. Pope.
2. [More properly thill.] The place between the ſhafts of a
carriage. -
This mule being put in the fill of a cart, run away with
the cart and timber. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
FI'll E.R. m. ſ. [from fill.] - -
1. Anything that fills up room without uſe.
'fis a meer filler, to ſtop a vacancy in the hexameter, and
connect the preface to the work of Virgil. Dryd ºn. Dedić.
A mixture of tender gentle thoughts. and ſuitable expreſ-
fions, of forced and inextricable conceits, and of needleſs
fillers up to the reſt. - - - Pope.
2. One whoſe employment is to fill veſſels of carriage.
They commonly have three, four, five or fix hewers or
diggers to four fillerſ, being proportioned ſo as to keep the
fillers always at work. A49 timer's Husbandry.
FPLLET. m. ſ. [filet, French; filum, Latin.]
1. A band tied round the head or other part.
His baleful breath inſpiring, as he glides,
Now like a chain around her neck he rides;
Now<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I L
F I N.
Now like a fillet to her head repairs,
And with his circling volumes folds her hairs. Dryd. Æn.
She ſcorn'd the praiſe of beauty, and the care;
A belt her waiſt, a fillet binds her hair. Pope's Windſ. For.
z. The fleſhy part of the thigh; applied commonly to veal.
The youth approach'd the fire, and as it burn'd,
On five ſharp broachers rank'd, the roaſt they turn'd :
Theſe morſels ſtay'd their ſtomachs; then the reſt -
They cut in legs and fillets for the feaſt. Dryden's Iliad.
3. Meat rolled together, and tied round.
Fillet of a fenny ſnake,
In the cauldron boil and bake.
The mixture thus, by chymick art
United cloſe in every part,
Infillets roll’d, or cut in pieces, -
Appear'd like one continu'd ſpecies. Swift.
4. [In architeśture.] A little member which appears in the or-
naments and mouldings, and is otherwiſe called liſtel. Harris.
To FI’llet. v a. [from the noun.]
1. To bind with a bandage or fillet.
2. To adorn with an aſtragal.
He made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters
and filletted them. Ex. xxxviii. 28.
To Fi’llip. v. a. [A word, ſays Skinner, formed from the
ſound. This reſemblance I am not able to diſcover, and there-
fore am inclined to imagine it corrupted from fill up, by ſome
combination of ideas which cannot be recovered.] To ſtrike
with the nail of the finger by a ſudden ſpring or motion.
If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the ſtars: then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars 'gainſt the fiery ſun. Shakespeare Corio'.
We ſee, that if you fillip a luteſtring, it ſheweth double or
treble. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 183.
FI'llip. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A jerk of the finger let go
from the thumb.
FI'lly. m. ſ. [filey, Welſh; file, French.]
1. A young horſe or mare.
Geld fillies, but tits, yer a nine days of age,
They die elſe of gelding, or gelders do rage:
Young fillies ſo likely of bulk and of bone,
Keep ſuch to be breeders, let gelding alone. Tuſſ. Husband.
A well-wayed horſe will convey thee to thy journey's end,
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
when an unbacked filly may give thee a fall. Suckling.
2. A young mare, oppoſed to a colt or young horſe.
I jeſt to Oberon, and make him ſmile,
When I a fat and bean-fed horſe beguile,
Neighing in likeneſs of a filly foal. Shakeſpeare.
I am joined in wedlock, for my ſins, to one of thoſe fillies
who are deſcribed in the old poet. Addison's Speciator.
FILM. n.ſ. [Eylmepa, Saxon.] A thin pellicle or ſkin.
While the filver needle did work upon the fight of his eye,
to remove the film of the cataraćt, he never ſaw any thing
more clear or perfeót than that white needle. Bacon's N. Hiſł.
Michael from Adam's eyes the film remov’d,
Which that falſe fruit that promis'd clearer fight
Had bred. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii. 1. 412.
A ſtone is held up by the films of the bladder, and ſo kept
from grating or offending it. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
There is not one infidel ſo ridiculous as to pretend to ſolve
the phaenomena of ſight, fancy, or cogitation, by thoſe fleet-
ing ſuperficial films of bodies. Bentley's Sermons.
He from thick films ſhall purge the viſual ray,
And on the fightleſs eyeballs pour the day. Pope's Meſſiah.
To FILM. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover with a pellicle or
thin ſkin. -
It will but ſkin and film the ulcerous place,
Whilſt rank corruption, mining all within,
Infe&amp;ts unſeen. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
F1'LMY. adj. [from fim.] Compoſed of thin membranes or
pellicles: -
So the falſe ſpider, when her nets are ſpread,
Deep ambuſh'd in her ſilent den does lie;
And feels, far off, the trembling of her thread,
Whoſe filmy cord ſhould bind the ſtruggling fly.
They with fruitleſs toil
Flap filmy pinions oft, to extricate
Their feet in liquid ſhackles bound, 'till death
Bereave them of their worthleſs ſouls; ſuch doom
Dryden.
Waits luxury, and lawleſs love of gain. Phillips.
Looſe to the winds their airy garments flew,
Thin glitt'ring textures of the filmy dew;
Dipt in the richeſt tinčture of the ſkies,
Where light diſports in ever-mingling dyes. Pope.
To FILTER. v. a. [filtro, low Latin; per filum trahere.]
1. To defecate by drawing off liquor by depending threads.
2. To ſtrain; to percolate.
Dilute this liquor with fair water, filtre it through a paper,
and ſo evaporate it. Grew's Muſa um.
Fl'LT ER. m. ſ. [filtrum, Latin.]
1. A twiſt of thread, of which one end is dipped in the liquor
to be deſecated, and the other hangs below the bottom of the
- - - - *
veſſel, ſo that the liquor drips from it. See New Disprx-
SATORY.
2. A ſtrainer; a ſearce.
That the water, paſſing through the veins of the earth,
ſhould be rendered freſh and potable, which it cannot be by
any percolations we can make, but the ſaline particles will
paſs through a tenfold filter. Aay on the Creation.
FILFTH. n.ſ [Fils, Saxon.]
1. Dirt; naſtineſs; anything that ſoils or fouls.
When we in our viciouſneſs grow hard,
The wiſe gods ſeal our eyes;
In our own filth drop our clear judgments.
Wiſdom and goodneſs to the vile ſeem vile;
Filthy favour but themſelves. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Neither may you truſt waters that taſte ſweet; for they are
commonly found in riſing grounds of great cities, which muſt
needs take in a great deal of filth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
How perfect then is man From head to foot
Shakeſpeare.
Defil'd with filth, and rotten at the root. Sandys,
Though perhaps among the rout
He wildly flings his filth about;
He ſtill has gratitude and ſap'ence,
To ſpare the folks that give him ha'pence. Swift.
2. Corruption; groſſneſs; pollution.
. Such do likewiſe exceedingly diſpoſe us to piety and reli-
giºn, by purifying our ſouls from the droſs and filth of ſenſual
delights. Tilºſon's Sermons.
F1'LTH Ly, adv. [from filthy J Naſtily; foully; groſsly.
It ſtuck filthily in the camel's ſtomach that bulls, bears, and
the like, ſhould be armed, and that a creature of his ſize
ſhould be left defenceleſs. L’Eſtrange, Fable 78.
Fl'ETHINEss. n.ſ.. [from filthy.]
I. Naſtineſs; foulneſs; dirtineſs. -
Men of virtue ſuppreſſed it, left their ſhining ſhould diſco-
ver the others filthingſ. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Corruption; pollution.
They held this land, and with their filthingſ,
Polluted this ſame gentle ſoil long time,
That their own mother loath'd their beaſtlineſs,
And 'gan abhor her brood's unkindly crime,
All were they born of her own native ſlime. Fairy Queen.
They never duly improved the utmoſt of ſuch a power,
but gave themſelves up to all the filthings and licentiouſneſs of
life imaginable. South's Sermons.
Fi'k'ſ HY. adj. [from filth.] -
1. Naſty; foul; dirty.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair;
Hover through the fog and filthy air.
2. Groſs; polluted.
As all ſtories are not proper ſubjećts for an epick poem or
a tragedy, ſo neither are they for a noble pićture: the ſubjećts
both of the one and of the other, ought to have nothing of
immoral, low, or filthy in them. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To FPLTRATE. º. a. [ from filter. J. To ſtrain; to perco-
late; to filter.
The extract obtained by the former operation, burnt to
aſhes, and thoſe aſhes boiled in water and filtrated, yield a
fiery ſalt. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
F11tration. n.ſ.. [from fitrate J A method by which
liquors are procured fine and clear. The filtration in uſe is
ſtraining a liquor through paper, which, by the ſmallneſs of
its, pores, admits only the finer parts through, and keeps the
reſt behind. $ºuincy.
We took then common nitre, and having, by the uſual way
%f ſolution, filtration, and coagulation, reduced it into cry-
itals, we put four ounces of this purified nitre into a ſtrong
new crucible. Boyle.
F1'MBLE Hemp. n.ſ.
The ſeaſon of pulling of it is firſt about Lambas, when
good part of it will be ripe; that is, the light Summer hemp,
that bears no ſeed, which is called fimble hemp. Mºrtim. Hub.
Good flax and good hemp, for to have of her OWn,
In May a good houſewife will ſee it be ſown;
And afterwards trim it, to ſerve at a need,
The firible to ſpin, and the carle for her ſeed. 7aff. Hºl.
FIN. m. ſ. ſpin, Saxon; vin, Dutch..] The wing of a fiſh;
the limb by which he balances his body, and moves in the
Water. -
Shakeſp. Macketh.
He that depends
Upon your favours, ſwims with fins of lead,
And hews down oaks with ruſhes. Shakeſpeare’. Othell.
Their fins conſiſt of a number of griftly bones, long and
ſlender, like pins and needles. Mºrº Antid. againſt Atheiſin.
Thus at half-ebb a rowling ſea
Returns, and wins upon the ſhore;
The watry herd, affrighted at the roar,
Reſt on their fins awhile, and ſtay,
Then backward take their wond'ring way.
Still at his oar th’ induſtrious Libys plies;
But as he plies, each buſy arm ſhrinks in,
And by degrees is faſhión'd to a fin. Aidſ. Ovid's Matam.
FIN-Foot Ep.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I R
F I R.
Fis-rooted, adj. [fin and fºot J Palmipedois; having feet
- The torrid zone is now fºund habitablé. &amp;#:
with membranes between the toes. 5. To diſcover by ſtudy,
*) It is deſcribed like fiſſipedes, or birds which have their feet * - - Phyſicians. º
"J's or claws divided; whereas it is palmipedous or fin-fosted, like With ſharpen'd fight ſome remedies may find. Dryden.
ſwans and geeſe, according to the method of nature in lati- ...Thy maid ah, find ſome nobler theme, ,”
# roſtrous or flat-billed birds; which being generally ſwimmers, . . Whereon thy doubts to place. Cowº).
º the organ is wiſely contrived unto the action, and they are 6. To diſcover what is hidden. -
º framed with fins or oars upon their feet. Brown's Vulg. Err. A curſe on him who found the oar. Cowley.
* F1'NA Ble. adj. [from fine.] That admits a fine.
7. To hit on by chance; to perceive by accident.
º
º
:
-iſ:
cº,
--
tº.
This is the order for writs of covenant that be finable. Bac.
He ſent letters to the council, wherein he acknowledged
himſelf favoured in bringing his cauſe finable: Hayward.
FINAL. adj. [final, French; finalis, Latin J • .
1. Ultimate; laſt. - - - -
And over them triumphant death his dart
Shook; but delay'd to ſtrike, though oft invok'd . . .
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope. Milt. P. L.
2. Concluſive; deciſive.
There be many examples where ſea-fights have been final
to the war. Bacon, Eſſay 30.
Henry ſpent his reign in eſtabliſhing himſelf, and had
neither leiſure nor opportunity to undertake the final conqueſt
of Ireland. Davies on Ireland.
3. Mortal; deſtructive.
At laſt reſolv'd to work his final ſmart,
He lifted up his hand, but back again did ſtart. Fai. Queen.
4. Reſpecting the end or motive.
Some things in ſuch ſort are allowed, that they be alſo re-
quired as neeeſſary unto ſalvation, by way of direct, imme-
diate, and proper neceſſity final; ſo that, without performance
of them, they cannot by ordinary courſe be ſaved, nor by any
means be excluded from life, obſerving them. Hooker, b. ii.
By its gravity fire raiſes the water in pumps, ſiphons, and
other engines; and performs all thoſe feats which former phi-
loſophers, through ignorance of the efficient cauſe, attributed
to a final, namely, nature's abhorrence of a vacuity. Ray.
Your anſwering in the final cauſe, makes me believe you
are at a loſs for the efficient. Collier on Thought.
F1'NALLY. adv. [from final.]
1. Ultimately; laſtly ; in concluſion.
Sight bereav'd
May chance to number thee with thoſe
Whom patience finally muſt crown.
2. Completely; without recovery.
Their houſes were many times in danger of ruin; yet was
there not any houſe of noble Engliſh in Ireland utterly de-
ſtroyed, or finally rooted out by the hand of juſtice, but the
houſe of Deſmond only. Davies on Ireland.
Doubtleſsly many men are finally loſt, who yet have no
mens ſins to anſwer for but their own. South's Sermons.
F1'NANce. n. ſ. [French. J Revenue; income; profit. It
is ſeldom uſed in the ſingular. -
This ſort of finance hath been increaſed by this new device.
Bacon's Off of Alienation.
The reſidue of theſe ordinary finances be caſual or uncer-
tain; as be the eſcheats and forfeitures. Bacon.
His pretence for making war upon his neighbours was their
pyracies, though he practiſed the ſame trade when he was
ſtraitened in his finances at the ſiege of Byzantium. Arbuthnot.
FINANCIER. m. ſ. [French. J One who colle&amp;ts or farms
the publick revenue. -
F1'NARY. n.ſ.. [from To fine.] In the iron works, the ſecond
forge at the iron mills. Dićf.
FINch. m. ſ. [pinc, Saxon.] A ſmall bird of which we have
three kinds, the goldfinch, chaffinch, and bulfinch.
To FIND. v. a. [Finban, Saxon; vinden, Dutch.]
1. To obtain by ſearching or ſeeking.
Aſk, and it ſhall be given you; ſeek, and ye ſhall find.
Matt. vii. 7.
Whereas thou haſt ſearched all my ſtuff, what haſt thou
Milton's Agoniſtes.
fºund of all thy houſhold ſtuff? Gen. xxxi. 37.
A bird that flies about,
And beats itſelf againſt the cage,
Finding at laſt no paſſage out,
It ſits and ſings. Cowley.
2. To obtain ſomething loſt.
When he hath found his ſheep, he layeth it on his ſhoul-
ders rejoicing. Luke xv. 5.
In my ſchool days, when I had loſt one ſhaft,
I ſhot his fellow of the ſelf-ſame flight
The ſelf-ſame way, with more adviſed watch,
To find the other forth; by vent'ring both,
I oft found both. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
3. To meet with ; to fall upon.
There watchful at the gate they find
Suſpicion with her eyes behind. Dodſley's Miſch.
In woods and foreſts thou art fºund Cowley.
The bad muſt miſs, the good unſought ſhall find. Pope.
4. To know by experience.
How oft will he
Of thy chang'd faith complain!
And his fortunes find to be
So airy and ſo vain! Cowley.
They build on ſands, which if unmow d they find,
'Tis but becauſe there was no wind. - º
Cºwley,
8. To ;" by any menta! endeavour. - wity
... If we for happineſs could leiſure find,
And wand'ring time into a method bind, -
We ſhould not then the great mens favour need. Cºwly.
We oft review, each finding like a friend -
... Something to blame, and ſomething to commend. Pºp.
9. To remark; to obſerve. . - -
Beauty or wit in all I find. Cowly.
io. To detect; to deprehend; to catch. . . "
When firſt found in a lie, talk to him of it as a ſtrange
monſtrous matter, and ſo ſhame him out of it.
- Lºcke.
i 1. To reach; to attain.
They aſ: glad when they can find the grave, jºiii. 22.
He did the utmoſt bounds of knowledge find,
. Yet found them not ſo large as was his mind. Cowley.
12. To meet. . . . -
A clear conſcience and heroick mind,
In ills their buſineſs and their glory find. * Cowley.
13. To ſettle; to fix anything in one's own opinion.
Some men
The marks of old and catholick would find. Cowley.
14. To determine by judicial verdićt. . . . . .
- His peers, upon this evidence, -
Have found him guilty of high treaſon. Shakeſp. Hºn. VIII.
15. To ſupply; to furniſh: as, he find me in money and in
vićtuals. -
16. [In law.] To approve: as, to find a bill. -
17. To FIND himſelf. To be; to fare with regard to eaſe or
pain, health or ſickneſs. . . - " . .
Pray, fir, how d'ye find yourſelf? ſays the doćtor. L'Eſr.
18. To FIND out. To unriddle; to ſolve. -
The finding out of parables is a weariſome labour of the
mind. - Eccuſ xiii. 26.
19. To FINd out. To diſcover ſomething hidden.
Can'ſt thou by ſearching find out God? Can'ſ thou find out
the Almighty unto perfection? ob ii. 7.
There are agents in nature able to make the particles of
bodies ſtick together by very ſtrong attractions, and it is the
buſineſs of experimental philoſophy to find them out. Newton.
What hinders then, but that thouſind her oºt,
And hurry her away by manly force? Addiſon's Cato.
20. To FIND out. To obtain the knowledge of. - - -
The principal part of painting is to find out and thoroughly
to underſtand what nature has made moſt beautiful. Dryden.
21. To FIND out. To invent; to excogitate. -
A man of Tyre, ſkilful to work in gold, and to find out
every device which ſhall be put to him. 2 Chron. ii. 14.
22. The particle out is added often without any other uſe than
that it adds ſome force or emphaſis to the verb.
While ſhe proudly march'd about,
Greater conqueſts to find out,
She beat out Suſan by the by. Cowley.
It is agreeable to compare the face of a great man with the
charaćter, and to try if we can find out in his looks and fea-
tures either the haughty, cruel, or merciful temper. Addison.
He was afraid of being inſulted with Greek; for which rea-
ſon he deſired a friend to find him out a clergyman rather of
plain ſenſe than much learning. Addiſon's Spectator.
Fi'NDER. m. ſ. [from find.]
1. One that meets or falls upon anything. -
We will bring the device to the bar, and crown thee for a
finder of mad men. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
2. One that picks up anything loſt. -
Some lewd ſqueaking cryer, -
well pleas'd with one lean thread-bare groat for hire,
May like a devil roar through every ſtreet,
And gall the finder's conſcience, if they incet.
O yes! if any happy eye º
This roving wanton ſhall deſcry,
Let the finder ſurely know -
Mine is the wag; ’tis I that owe
The winged wand’rer. - - Croſław.
Findra'ult. n.ſ.. [find and full.] A cenſurer; a caviller,
We are the makers of manners, Kate; and the iberty that
follows our places, flops the mouth ºf all findſakº Shºp.
Frºpy, adj. "[zynols, Saxon. J Plump weighty; firm ;
ſolid. Thus the proverb,
A cold May and a windy,
Makes the barn fat and findy.
means that it ſtores the barn with plump and firm grain. jan.
9 E
Donne.
FINE.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I N
FäNE. adj. Iſhne, French; ſin, Dutch and Erſe, perhaps from
finitus, completed, Latin.] -
1. Not coarſe. -
Not any ſkill'd in loops of fingering fine, -
With this ſo curious net-work might compare, Spenſer.
He was arrayed in purple and fine linen. Luke.
2. Refined; pure; free from droſs.
Two veſſels of five copper, precious as gold. Ezra viii. 27.
3. Subtle; thin ; tenuous: as, the fine ſpirits evaporate.
#. Refined; ſubtilely excogitated.
In ſubſtance he promiſed himſelf money, honour, friends,
and peace in the end ; but thoſe things were too fine to be for-
tunate, and ſucceed in all parts. Bacon.
Whether the ſcheme has not been purſued ſo far as to draw
it into practice, or whether it be too fine to be capable of
it, I will not determine. . . Temple.
5. Keen; thin ; ſmoothly ſharp.
Great affairs are commonly too rough and ſtubborn to be
wrought upon by the finer edges or points of wit. Bacon.
6. Clear; pellucid; tranſparent: as, the wine is fine.
7. Nice; exquiſite; delicate.
Are they not ſenſeleſs then, that think the ſoul
Nought but a fine perfection of the ſenſe. Davies.
The irons of planes are ſet fine or rank: they are ſet fine,
when they ſtand ſo ſhallow below the ſole of the plane, that
in working they take off a thin ſhaving Moxon's 44-ch. Exer.
8. Artful; dexterous.
The wiſdom of all theſe latter times, in princes affairs, is
rather fine deliveries, and ſhiftings of dangers and miſchiefs,
than ſolid and grounded courſes to keep them aloof. Bacon.
9. Fraudulent; ſly; knaviſhly ſubtle. . .
Through his fine handling, and his cleanly play,
He all thoſe royal ſigns had ſtol’n away. Hubberd's Ta'e.
10. Elegant; with elevation.
To call the trumpet by the name ofthe metal was fine. Dry.
11. Applied to perſon, it means beautiful with dignity.
12. Accompliſhed; elegant of manners.
He was not only the fineſ? gentleman of his time, but one
of the finſ ſcholars. Felon on the Claſſicks.
13. Showy ; ſplendid.
It is with a fine genius as with a fine faſhion; all thoſe are
diſpleaſed at it who are not able to follow it. Pope.
The ſatirical part of mankind will needs believe, that it is
not impoſſible to be very fine and very filthy. Swift.
14. [Ironically..] Something that will ſerve the purpoſe; ſome-
thing worth contemptuous notice.
That ſame knave, Ford, her huſband, hath the fineſ mad
devil of jealouſy in him, maſter Brook, that ever governed
frenzy. Shakeſpeare's Merry //ives of //indſor.
They taught us, indeed, to cloath, to dwell in houſes,
To feaſt, to ſleep on down, to be profuſe:
A fine exchange for liberty.
FIN E. m. ſ. [ ſºn, Cimbr.]
1. A mulét; a pecuniary puniſhment.
The killing of an Iriſhman was not puniſhed by our law,
as manſlaughter, which is felony and capital; but by a fine or
pecuniary puniſhment, called an ericke. Davies on Ireland.
2. Penalty.
Ev’n this ill night your breathing ſhall expire,
Paying the fine of rated treachery. Shakeſp. King john.
. Forfeit ; money paid for any exemption or liberty.
The ſpirit of wantonneſs is ſure ſcared out of him : if the
devil have him not in fee-ſimple, with fine and recovery, he
will never, I think, in the way of waſte, attempt us again.
Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſºr.
Beſide fines ſet upon plays, games, balls and feaſting, they
have many cuſtoms which contribute to their ſimplicity. Addison
How vain that ſecond life in others breath,
Th' eſtate which wits inherit after death !
Eaſe, health, and life for this they muſt reſign,
Unſure the tenure, but how vaſt the fine ! Pope.
4. [From finis, Latin; fin, enfin, French. The end; conclu-
flon. It is ſeldom uſed but adverbially, in fine.
In fine, whatſoever he was, he was nothing but what it
pleaſed Zelmane, the powers of his ſpirit depending of her. Sid.
His reſolution, in fine, is, that in the church a number of
things are ſtrictly obſerved, whereof no law of ſcripture
maketh mention one way or other. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 5.
Still the fine's the crown;
Whate'er the courſe, the end is the renown. Shakespeare.
Your daughter, ere ſhe ſeems as won,
Deſires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herſelf moſt chaftly abſent. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
The bleſfings of fortune are the loweſt : the next are the
bodily advantages of ſtrength and health; but the ſuperlative
bleſfings, in fine, are thoſe of the mind. L’Eſtrange.
In fine, he wears no limbs about him ſound,
With ſores and ſickneſſes beleaguer'd round. Dryden’s juv.
In fine, let there be a perfeót relation betwixt the parts and
the whole, that they may be entirely of a piece. Dryden.
Phillips's Briton.
To FINE. v. a. [from fine, the adjećtive.]
1. To refine; to purify. - -
The fining pot is for ſilver, and the furnace for gold. Prºv.
There is a vein for the ſilver, and a place for gold, where
they fine it. jol xxviii. i.
2. To embelliſh ; to decorate. Now not in uſe.
Hugh Capet alſo, who uſurp'd the crown,
To fine his title with ſome ſhews of truth,
Convey'd himſelf as heir to th’ lady Lingare. Shakeſp H.V.
3. To make leſs coarſe.
It fines the graſs, but makes it ſhort, though thick. Mortim.
4. To make tran'parent.
It is good alſo for fuel, not to omit the ſhavings of it for
the fining of wine. 440 timer’s Husſandry.
5. [From the ſubſtantive.] To puniſh with pecuniary penalty.
To fine men one third of their fortune, without any crime
committed, ſeems very hard. Locke.
To FIN E. v. n. To pay a fine.
What poet ever fin’d for ſheriff or who
By rhymes and verſe did ever lord mayor grow Oldham.
To FINEDRA’w. v. a. [fine and daw.] To ſow up a rent
with ſo much nicety that it is not perceived.
FINE pRA'w ER. m. / [from finedraw.] One whoſe buſineſs is
to low up tents. -
Fis F 'No ER ED. adj. [fine and finger.] Nice; artful; ex-
quiſite. , -
The moſt finfºrer'd workman on the ground,
Arachne, by his means was vanquiſhed. Spenser.
F1'NELY. adv. [from fine.]
1. Beautifully ; elegantly ; more than juſtly.
Plutarch ſays very finely, that a man ſhould not allow him-
ſelf to hate even his enemies; becauſe, ſays he, if you indulge
this paſſion on ſome occaſions, it will riſe of itſelf in others.
Addiſon's Spréiator, Nº. 125.
The walls are painted, and repreſent the labours of Her-
cules: many of them look very finely, though a great part of
the work has been cracked. Addſon on Italy.
2. Keenly; ſharply; with a thin edge or point.
Get you black lead, ſharpened finely, and put it into quills.
Peacham on Drawing.
3. Not coarſely; not meanly; gaily.
He was alone, ſave that he had two perſons of honour, on
either hand one, finely attired in white. Lacon's New Atlantis.
4. In ſmall parts; ſubtilly; not groſsly.
Saltpetre was but groſsly beaten; for it ſhould not be finely
powdered. Boyle.
5. [Ironically..] Wretchedly; in ſuch a manner as to deſerve
contemptuous notice.
Let laws be made to obey, and not to be obeyed, and you
will find that kingdom finely governed in a ſhort time. South.
- For him ſhe loves: -
She nam'd not me; that may be Torriſmond,
Whom ſhe has thrice in private ſeen this day:
Then I am finely caught in my own ſnare. Dryd. Sp. Fryar.
F1'N EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from fine.]
1. Elegance; beauty; delicacy.
Every thing was full of a choice finneſ, that, if it wanted
any thing in majeſty, it ſupplied with increaſe in pleaſure;
and if at the firſt it ſtruck not admiration, it raviſhed with
dclight. - Sidney.
The ſoftneſs of her ſex, and the finemeſ of her genius, con-
ſpire to give her a very diſtinguiſhing character. Prior.
2. Show; ſplendour; gaiety of appearance.
The finentſ of cloaths deſtroys the eaſe: it often helps men
to pain, but can never rid them of any : the body may lan-
guiſh under the moſt ſplendid cover. Decay ºf Piety.
3. Subtility ; artfulneſs; ingenuity.
Thoſe, with the finemeſ of their ſouls,
By reaſon guide his execution. Shakeſp. Troil, and Crºſſida.
4. Purity; freedom from droſs or baſe mixtures.
Our works are, indeed, nought elſe
But the protračtive tryals of great Jove,
To find perſiſtive conſtancy in men;
The fineneſs of which metal is not found
In fortune's love. Shakeſpeare’s Troilus and Creſda.
I am doubtful whether men have ſufficiently refined metals;
as whether iron, braſs, and tin be refined to the height: but
when they come to ſuch a fineneſ; as ſerveth the ordinary uſe,
they try no farther. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
The ancients were careful to coin their money in due
weight and fineneſ, only in times of exigence they have dimi-
niſhed both the weight and fineneſs. Arbuthnot on Coins.
F1'NERY. n.ſ.. [from fine.] Show; ſplendour of appearance ;
gaiety of colours.
Dreſs up your houſes and your images,
And put on all the city's finery,
To conſecrate this day a feſtival. Southern.
The capacities of a lady are ſometimes apt to fall ſhort in
cultivating cleanlineſs and finery together. Swift.
Don't chuſe your place of ſtudy by the finery of the proſpects,
or the moſt various ſcenes of ſenſible things. l/&amp;tts.
FINE/SSE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I N
F I N
* *'.
º
FINESSE ºf Iſrench..] Artifice; ſtratigºm: an unneceſ.
ſary word which is creeping into the language.
A circumſtance not much to be ſtood upon, in caſe it were
not upon ſome fineſs. Hayward.
F1's ER., n ſ. [from fine.] One who purifics metals.
Take away the droſs from the filver, and there ſhall come
forth a veſſel for the fier. Prºv, xxv. 4.
FINGER. m. ſ. ſ ringen, Saxon, from fangen, to hold.]
I. tº. flexible member of the hand by wich men catch and
OIC1. w -
The fingers and thumb in each hand conſiſt of fifteen bones,
there being three to each finger: they are a little convex and
round towards the back of the hand, but hº’ow and plain
towards the palm, except the laſt, where the nails are. The
9rder of their diſpoſitions is called firſt, ſecond, and third pha-
lanx: the firſt is longer than the ſecond, and the ſecond longer
than the third. The upper extremity of the firſt bone on
each finger has a little ſinus, which receive the round head of
the bones of the metacarpus. The upper extremity of the
ſecond and third bones of each figer hath two ſin: li finuſes,
parted by a ſmall protuberance; and the lower extremity of
the firſt and ſecond bones of each finger ha, two protuberances,
divided by a ſmall finus: the two protuberances are received
into the two ſinuſes of the upper extremity of the ſecond and
third bones; and the ſmall ſinus receives the little protube-
rance of the ſame end of the ſame bones. The firſt bone of
the thumb is like the bones of the metacarpus, and it is joined
to the wrift and ſecond of the thumb, as they are to the wriſt
and firſt of the fingers. The ſecond bone of the thumb is
like the firſt bones of the finger, and it is joined to the firſt
and third, as they are to the bones of the metacarpus and
ſecond of the finers. The fingers are moved ſideways only
Upon their firſt joint. Beſides theſe there are ſome ſmall
bones, called ſº ſeſamoidea, becauſe they reſemble ſeſamum
grains: they are reckoned about twelve in each hand : they
are placed at the joint of the fingers, under the tendons of
the flexors, to which they ſerve as pullies. &amp;#incy.
t You ſeem to underſtand me,
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her ſkinny lips. Sha'ſfeare's Macbeth.
Diogenes, who is never ſaid, -
For aught that ever I could read,
To whine, put finger i' th' eye and ſob,
Becauſe h’ had ne'er another tub. Hudibras.
The band is divided into four fingers bending forward, and
one oppoſite to them bending backwards, and of greater
itrength than any of them ſingly, which we call the thumb,
to join with them ſeverally or united; whereby it is fitted to
lay hold of objects of any ſize or quantity. Ray on the Creat.
A hand of a vaſt extenſion, and a prodigious number of
fingers playing upon all the organ pipes of the world, and
making every one ſound a particular note. Keil againſt Burnet.
Poor Peg ſewed, ſpun, and knit for a livelihood, 'till her
finger ends were fore. Arbuthnot's Hijº. ºf john Bull.
2. A ſmall meaſure of extenſion. -
Go now, go truſt the wind's uncertain breath,
Remov’d four fingers from approaching death;
Or ſeven at moſt, when thickeſt is the board. Dryd. Yuv.
One of theſe bows with a little arrow did pierce through a
piece of ſteel three fingers thick. ///ºns's Math. Aag.
3. The hand; the inſtrument of work; manufacture; art.
Fool, that forgets her ſtubborn look
This ſoftneſs from thy finger took. //aller.
To F1'N GER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To touch lightly; to toy with. -
Go, get you gone, and let the papers lie;
You would be fingering them to anger me. Shakespeare.
One that is covetous is not ſo highly pleaſed with the meer
fight and fingering of money, as with the thoughts of his
being conſidered as a wealthy man. Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
2. To touch unſeaſonably or thieviſhly.
His ambition would necds be fingering the ſcepter, and
hoiſting him into his father's throne. South's Sermºns.
3. To touch an inſtrument of muſick.’
She hath broke the lute;
I did but tell her ſhe miſtook her frets,
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering. Shakeſpeare.
4. To perform any work exquiſitely with the fingers.
Not any ſkill'd in loops of fingering fine,
With this ſo curious net-work might comparc. Spenser.
F’INGLE ANGLE, n.ſ. [from fangle J A trifle: a burleſque
word.
We agree in nothing but to wrangle,
About the ſlighteſt figſ, fang!'. Hadibya;, p. iii. cau. 3.
FI’s IcA. adj. [from fine.] Nice; foppiſh ; pretending to
ſuperfluous elegance.
A whorſon, glaſſgazing, ſuperſerviceable, finical rorue.
- Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
I cannot hear a finical fop romancing, how the king took
him aſide at ſuch a time; what the queen ſaid to him at an-
other. L'Iº ange, Fulle 34.
F1's ic A1). Y., adv. [from ſinical.] Foppiſhly.
- * *
Fisicº is Ess. n.ſ. [from finia...] Superfluous nicety; ſº-
pery. -
To I'NISH. v. a. [finir, French ; ſº, Latin.]
1. To bring to the end purpoſed; to conplete.
For which of you, intending to build a tower, ſitteth not
down firſt and counteth the coſt, whether he have ſufficient to
finiſh it? Luke xiv. 28.
As he had begun, ſo he would alſo ſuiſ' in you the ſame
grace. 2 Cºr. viii. 6.
A poet uſes epiſodes; but epiſodes, taken ſeparately, f, ſh
nºming. - Note: on the (Jºy.
2. To pºrted; to poliſh to the excellency intended. -
Thºugh here you all perfection ſhould not find,
Yet is it all th’ Eternal Will deſign'd;
It is a flººd work, and perfect in his kind... Blackmore.
I would make what bears your name as finiſhed as my laſt
wºrk o' gºt to be ; that is, more finiſhed than the reſt. Pºpe.
2. To cnd; to put an end to.
F1'Nish ER. m.ſ. (from finiſh.]
1. Performer; accompliſher.
He that of greateſt works is finiſher,
Oft does them by the weakeſt miniſter.
2. One that puts an end"; ender.
This was the plain condition of thoſe times; the whole
world againſt Athanaſius, and Athanaſius againſt it: half an
hundred of years ſpent in doubtful trials which of the two, in
the end, would prevail; the ſide which had all, or elſe that
part which had no friend but God and death, the one a de-
fender of his innocency, the other a finiſher of all his troubles.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
Shakeſpeare.
3. One that completes or perfeółs.
The author and finiſher of our faith. Hebrews.
O prophet of glad tidings finiſher
Of utmoſt hope AMſton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. xii.
TPN1 E. adj. [finitus, Latin.] Limited; bounded; termi-
nated.
Servius conceives no more thereby than a finite number for
indefinite. Brown's Pugar Ærrours, b. iv. c. 12.
Finiſe of any magnitude holds not any proportion to infi-
nite. Lºcke.
That ſuppoſed infinite duration will, by the very ſuppoſi-
tion, be limited at two extremes, though never ſo remote
aſunder, and conſequently muſt need, beft ite. Bentley’s Serm.
FI's IT E less. adj. [from finite.] Without bounds; unlimited.
It is ridiculous unto reaſon, and finite'ſ as their de-
ſires. - Brown's ſu'a, Er, ours.
FI'Nite LY. adv. [from finite. J Within certain imits; to a
certain degree.
They are creatures ſtill, and that ſets them at an infinite
diſtance from God; whereas all their excellencies can make
them but finitely diſtant from us. Stilingficet.
F1'NITEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from finite.] Limitation; confinement
within certain boundaries.
I ought now to unbay the current of my paſſion, and love
without other boundary than what is ſet by the finite ºft of .
my natural powers. - Nºrris.
F1'NIT UD E. n.ſ. [ from finite. J Limitation; confinement
within certain boundaries.
Finitude, applied to natural or created things, imports the
proportions of the ſeveral degrees of affections, or properties
of theſe things to one another ; infinitude, the unboundedneſs
, of theſe degrees of affections, or properties. Cºyne.
F1'NLEss. adj. [from fin.] Without fins.
He angers me
With telling of the moldwarp and the ant, -
And of a dragon and a ſinlºſ, fiſh. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
F1'NLIKE, adj. [Jin and like..] Formed in imitation of fins.
In ſhipping ſuch as this, the Iriſh kern
And untaught Indian, on the ſtream did glide;
Ere ſharp-keel'd boats to ſtem the flood did learn,
Or ſalike oars did ſpread from either ſide. Dryd Ain. Mir.
F1'N's ED. adj. [from fin.] Having broad edges ſpread out on
either ſide. -
They plow up the turf with a broad finned plough. Mortiºn.
F1'NNY. adj. [ from fin. J. Furniſhed with fins; formed for
the element of water. -
High o'er the main in wat'ry pomp he rides,
His azure car and finny courſers guides ; ; -
Proteus his name. Dryden's Pirg Georg. b. iv.
New herds of beafls he ſends the plains to ſhare;
New colonies of birds to people air; . - ;
And to their oozy beds the ſºny fiſh repair. Dºyd. Ovid.
while black with ſtorms the ruffled ocean rolls,
And from the fiſher's art defends her finny ſholes. Blackmºre.
with hairy ſpringes we the birds betray;
Slight lines of hair ſurprize the ſnºy prey. - Pope.
F1'N Toe D. adj. [ ſºn and toe. J Palmipedous ; having a mem-
brane between the toes.
Such creatures as are whole footed, or finterd, viz, ſome
birds and quadrupeds, are naturally directed to go into the
water and ſwim there. Ray on the Creatiºn.
I F. 'Nocłiſ o.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I R.
F I R
F1'Nochio. n. ſ. See FENNEL, of which plant it is a
ſpecies.
F1'pple. n.ſ. [from fibula, Latin.] A ſtopper.
You muſt know, that in recorders, which go with a gentle
breath, the concave of the pipe, were it not for the fipple that
ſtraitneth the air, much more than the ſimple concave, would
yield no ſound. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
FIR. m.ſ [firr, Welſh; runb, Saxon; fºr, Daniſh.] The
tree of which deal-boards are made. w
It is ever green: the leaves are ſingle, and for the moſt part
produced on every ſide of the branches: the male flowers, or
catkins, are placed at remote diſtances from the fruit on the
ſame tree. The ſeeds are propagated on cones, which are
ſquamoſe. See PIN E-TREE. Miller.
He covered the floor of the houſe with planks of fir. 1 Kings.
The 'ſpiring fir and ſtately box adorn. Pope.
FIRE. m. ſ. ſpyn, Saxon; fewr, German.]
1. The igneous element.
2. Anything burning.
A little fire is quickly trodden out, -
Which, being #. rivers cannot quench. Shakespeare H. VI.
Where two raging fires meet together,
They do conſume the thing that feeds their fury. Shakeſp.
So contraries on Etna's top conſpire;
Here hoary froſts, and by them breaks outfire. Cowley.
3. A conflagration of towns or countries.
There is another liberality to the citizens, who had ſuf-
fered damage by a great fire. Arbuthnot on Coins,
Though ſafe thou think'ſt thy treaſure lies,
Conceal’d in cheſts from human eyes,
A fire may come, and it may be
Bury'd, my friend, as far from thee. Granville.
4. Flame; light; luſtre.
Stars, hide your fires /
Let not night ſee my black and deep deſires! Shakespeare Macb.
5. Torture by burning. -
Did Shadrach's zeal my glowing breaſt inſpire,
To weary tortures, and rejoice in fire * Prior.
6. The puniſhment of the damned.
Who among us ſhall dwell with the devouring fire * Who
among us ſhall dwell with everlaſting burnings Iſa. xxxiii.
7. Anything provoking; anything that inflames the paſſions.
What fire is in my ears 2 Can this be true?
Stand I condemn'd for pride and ſcorn ſo much Shakeſp.
8. Ardour of temper; violence of paſſion.
He had fire in his temper, and a German bluntneſs; and,
upon provocations, might ſtrain a phraſe. Atterbury.
9. Livelineſs of imagination; vigour of fancy; intelle&amp;tual ac-
tivity; force of expreſſion; ſpirit of ſentiment.
Nor can the ſnow that age does ſhed
Upon thy rev'rend head,
Quench or allay the noble fre within, -
But all that youth can be thou art. Cowley.
They have no notion of life and fire in fancy and in words,
and any thing that is juſt in grammar and in meaſure is good
oratory and poetry to them. • Felton on the Claſſi. #s.
He brings
The reaſoner's weapons and the poet's fire. Blackmore.
Exačt Racin, and Corneille's noble fre,
Taught us that France had ſomething to admire. Pope.
The bold Longinus all the nine inſpire,
And warm the critick with a poet's fire. Pope.
Oh may ſome ſpark of your celeſtial fire,
The laſt, the meaneſt of your ſons inſpire. Pope.
Ic. The paſſion of love.
Love various hearts does variouſly inſpire,
It ſtirs in gentle boſoms gentle fire,
Like that of incenſe on the altar laid;
But raging flames tempeſtuous ſouls invade;
A fire which every windy paſſion blows,
With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows. Dryden.
The fire of love in youthful blood,
Like what is kindled in bruſh-wood,
But for a moment burns. Shadwell.
The god of love retires;
Dim are his torches, and extinét his fires. Pope.
New charms ſhall ſtill increaſe deſire,
And time's ſwift wing ſhall fan the fire. Moore's Falles.
11, Eruptions or impoſthumations: as, St. Anthony’s fire.
12. Tº ſet FIRE on, or ſet on FIRE. To kindle; to inflame.
Hermoſilla courageouſly ſet upon the horſemen, and ſet fire
alſo upon the ſtables where the Turks horſes ſtood. Knoles.
He that ſet a fire on a plane-tree to ſpite his neighbour, and
the plane-tree ſet on his neighbour's houſe, is bound to pay
all the loſs, becauſe it did all riſe from his own ill intention.
- Tayl.r's Rule of living holy.
Fr'REARMs. m. ſ. [fire and arms. J Arms which owe their
efficacy to fire; guns.
Nor had they ammunition to ſupply their few firearms:
horſes they had, and officers they had, which made all their
ſhew. Carendon, b. ii.
Before the uſe of firearms there was infinitely more ſcope
for perſonal valour than in the modern battles, Pe.
FIRE PA11. /.. n. [fre and ball. J Grenado; ball filled with
combuſtibles, and burſting where it is thrown.
Judge of thoſe inſolent boaſts of conſcience, which, like
ſo many fireball, or mouth grenadoes, are thrown at our
church. - - South's Sermon'.
The ſame great man hath ſworn to make us ſwallow his
coin in fireballs. Swift.
FIREHRusH. n.ſ. [fire and bruſh.] The bruſh which hangs
by the fire to ſweep the hearth. - -
When you are ordered to ſtir up the fire, clean away the
aſhes from betwixt the bars with the firebruſh. Swift.
Fi'REDRAke. n.ſ.. [fire and drake..] A fiery ſerpent: I ſup-
poſe the preſter.
By the hiſſing of the ſnake,
The ruſtling of the firedrake,
I charge thee thou this place forſake, , -
Nor of queen Mlab be prattling. Drayton's Nymphia.
F1'Re New, adj. [fire and new.] New from the forge; new
from the melting-houſe.
Armado is a moſt illuſtrious wight,
A man of firenew words, faſhion's own knight. Shakespeare
Some excellent jeſts, firenew from the mint. Shakeſpeare.
Upon the wedding-day I put myſelf, according to cuſtom,
in another ſuit frenew, with ſilver buttons to it. Addison Guard.
Fi'REPAN. n.ſ.. [fire and pan.J. Veſſel of metal to carry fire.
His firepans, and all the veſſels thereof, thou ſhalt make of
braſs. Ex. xxvii. 3.
Pour of it upon a firepan well heated, as they do roſe-
water and vinegar. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Fi'RER... n.ſ.. [from fire.] . An incendiary.
Others burned Mouſſel, and the reſt marched as a
guard for defence of theſe firers. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
F1'Reside. n.ſ.. [fire and ſide.] The hearth; the chimney;
the focus.
My judgment is, that they ought all to be deſpiſed, and
ought to ſerve but for Winter talk by the fireſide. Bacon.
By his fireſide he ſtarts the hare,
And turns her in his wicker chair:
His feet, however lame, you find,
Have got the better of his mind. Prior.
What art thou aſking of them, after all Only to ſit quietly
at thy own fireſide. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of john Bull.
F1'Restick. n. ſ. [fire and ſick.] A lighted ſtick or brand.
Children, when they play with freſhicks, move and whirle
them round ſo faſt, that the motion will cozen their eyes, and
repreſent an intire circle of fire to them. Digly on Bodies.
F1'Rework. m. ſ. [fire and work.] Shows of fire; pyrotech-
nical performances.
The king would have me preſent the princeſs with ſome
delightful oftentation, or pageant, or antick, or firewºrk. Shakespeare
We repreſent alſo ordnance, and new mixtures of gun-
powder, wildfires burning in water and unquenchable; and
alſo fireworks of all variety. Bacºn's New Atlantis.
The ancients were imperfeót in the doctrine of meteors,
by their ignorance of gunpowder and fireworks. Brown.
In fireworks give him leave to vent his ſpite ;
Thoſe are the only ſerpents he can write. Dryden.
Our companion propoſed a ſubječt for a firework, which he
thought would be very amuſing. Addiſon's Guardian.
Their fireworks are made up in paper. Tatler, Nº. 88.
To FIRE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſet on fire; to kindle.
They ſpoiled many parts of the city, and fired the houſes
of thoſe whom they eſteemed not to be their friends; but the
rage of the fire was at firſt hindered, and then appeaſed by
the fall of a ſudden ſhower of rain. Hayward.
The breathleſs body, thus bewail'd, they lay,
And fire the pile. -
A ſecond Paris, diff'ring but in name,
Shall fire his country with a ſecond flame. Dryden's Zn.
2. To inflame the paſſions; to animate.
Yet, if deſire of fame, and thirſt of pow'r,
A beauteous princeſs, with a crown in dow'r,
So fire your mind, in arms aſſert your right. Drydºn.
3. To drive by fire.
He that parts us, ſhall bring a brand from heav'n
And fire us hence. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To FIRE. v. n.
1. To take fire; to be kindled.
2. To be inflamed with paſſion.
3. To diſcharge any firearms.
FIREBRA'ND. m.ſ.. [fire and brand.]
1. A piece of wood kindled.
I have eaſed my father-in-law of a fielnaud, to ſet my own
houſe in a flame. - L'Aſtrange.
2. An incendiary; one who inflames factions; one who cauſes
miſchief.
Troy muſt not be, nor goodly llion ſtand ;
Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all. Shakeſpeare.
He ſent Surrey with a competent power againſt the rebels,
who fought with the principal band of them, and defeated
thein, and took alive John Chamber, their fºr ela and Bacon.
- F1'ſ E. Ross.
Dryden.
r
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I R.
F I R.
F.'P Ec Ross. m. ſ. ſ fire and croſs.] A token in Scotland for the
nation to take arms: the ends thereof burnt black, and in
ſome parts ſmeared with blood. It is carried like lightning
from one place to another. Upon refuſal to ſend it forward,
or to riſe, the laſt perſon who has it ſhoots the other dead.
He ſent his heralds through all parts of the realm, and com-
manded the firecroſs to be carried; namely, two firebrands ſet
in faſhion of a croſs, and pitched upon the point of a
ſpear. Haywood.
F1'RELock. n.ſ.. [fire and lock.] A ſoldier's gun; a gun diſ-
charged by ſtriking ſteel with flint.
Prime all your firelocks, faſten well the ſtake. Gay.
F1'r F MAN. n ſ [fire and man.]
1. One who is employed to extinguiſh burning houſes.
The fireman ſweats beneath his crooked arms;
A leathern caſque his vent’rous head defends,
Boldly he climbs where thickeſt ſmoke aſcends. Gay,
2. A man of violent paſſions.
I had laſt night the fate to drink a bottle with two of theſe
firemen. - Tatler, N°, 61.
Fi’R EPAN n.ſ.. [fire and pan.]
1. A pan for holding fire.
2. [In a gun.] The receptacle for the priming powder.
F1'RESHIP. m. ſ. [fire and ſhip.] A ſhip filled with combuſtible
matter to fire the veſſels of the enemy.
Our men bravely quitted themſelves of the fireſhip, by
cutting the ſpritſail tackle. //ijeman's Surgery.
F1'Reshovel. n.ſ.. [fire and ſhovel. J. The inſtrument with
which the hot coals are thrown up in kitchens.
Nim and Bardolph are ſworn brothers in filching; and in
Calais they ſtole a fireſhovel. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Culinary utenſils and irons often feel the force of fire; as
tongs, freſhovels, prongs, and irons. Brown's Valgar Errours.
The neighbours are coming out with forks and fireſhove's,
and ſpits, and other domeſtick weapons. Dryd Span. Fryar.
F1'REstone. n.ſ.. [fire and ſtone.]
The fireſtone, or pyrites, ‘is a compound metallick foſſil,
compoſed of vitriol, ſulphur, and an unmetallick earth, but
in very different proportions in the ſeveral maſſes. The moſt
common ſort, which is uſed in medicine, is a greeniſh ſhape-
leſs kind found in our clay-pits, out of which the green vitriol
or copperas is procured. It has its name of pyrites, or fire-
ſtone, from its giving fire on being ſtruck againſt a ſteel much
more freely than a flint will do; and all the ſparks burn a
longer time, and grow larger as they fall, the inflammable
matter ſtruck from off the ſtone burning itſelf out before the
ſpark becomes extinguiſhed. Hill's Mat. Med.
Frºftone is a kind of ſtone called alſo Rygate ſtone, from
the place whence it is chiefly brought, being very good for
firehearths, ovens, and ſtoves. Builder's Dić?.
Firſtone, if broke ſmall, and laid on cold lands, muſt be
of advantage. Mortimer's Husband y.
Fi'Rt wood. r. ſ [fe and wood.] Wood to burn; fewel.
F1'RING.. n.ſ.. [from fire.] . Fewel.
They burn the cakes, firing being there ſcarce. Mortimer.
To FIR K. v. a. [from ſerio, Latin.] To whip ; to beat; to
correct; to chaſtiſe.
Beſides, it is not only foppiſh,
But vile, idolatrous and popiſh,
For one man out of his own ſkin
To firé and whip another's ſin. Hudibras, p. ii. can. 2.
F1'Rki N. m.ſ.. [from Peopen, Saxon, the fourth part of a veſſel.]
r. A veſſel containing nine gallons.
Strutt's ſervants get ſuch a haunt about that ſhop, that it
will coſt us many a firkin of ſtrong beer to bring them back
again. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
2. A ſmall veſſel.
You heard of that wonder of the lightning and thunder,
Which made the lye ſo much the louder;
Now lift to another, that miracle's brother,
Which was done with a firkin of powder. Denham.
FIRM. adj. [firmus, Latin.]
1. Strong; not eaſily pierced or ſhaken; hard, oppoſed to ſoft.
The flakes of his fleſh are joined together: they are firm
in themſelves, and they cannot be moved. job xli. 23.
Love's artillery then checks
The breaſtworks of the firmeſ: ſex. Cleaveland.
There is nothing to be left void in a firm building; even
the cavities ought to be filled with rubbiſh. Dryden.
That body, whoſe parts are moſt firm in themſelves, and
are by their peculiar ſhapes capable of the greateſt contacts, is
the moſt firm; and that which has parts very ſmall, and ca-
pable of the leaſt contact, will be moſt ſoft. P/oodward.
2. Conſtant; ſteady; reſolute; fixed; unſhaken.
We hold firm to the works of God, and to the ſenſe which
is God's lamp. Bacon's Natural H/lory.
He ſtraight obeys; -
And firm believes. Mlt. Paradiſe I off.
The great encouragement is the aſſurance of a future re-
ward, the firm perſuaſion whereof is enough to raiſe us above
any thing in this world. ºf ill tſon, Sermon 6.
The man that's reſolute and juſt,
Firm to his principles and truſt,
Nor hopes nor fears can blind. j/aft.
To Fir M. v. a. [firmo, Latin.]
1. To ſettle; to confirm; to eſtabliſh; to fix.
He declared the death of the emperor; which aſter they
had ſeen to be true, they by another ſecret and ſpeedy meſ-
ſenger advertiſed Solyman again thereof, firming thoſe letters
with all their hands and ſeals. Knoles'. Hiſtory ºf the Türks.
'Tis ratify’d above by every god,
And Jove has firm'd it with an awful nod. Dryd Albion.
The pow'rs, ſaid he,
To you, and your's, and mine, propitious be, -
And firm our purpoſe with their augury. Dryden's AEn.
Oh, thou, who free'ſt me from my doubtful ſtate,
Long loſt and wilder'd in the maze of fate
Be preſent ſtill: oh goddeſs, in our aid
Proceed, and firm thoſe omens thou haſ made. Pope's Stat.
2. To fix without wandering.
He on his card and compaſs firm; his eye,
The maſters of his long experiment. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
FIRMAVENT. n.ſ. [firmamentum, Latin.] The ſky; the
heavens.
Even to the heavens their ſhouting ſhrill
Doth reach, and all the firmament doth fill. Spenſer.
I am conſtant as the northern ſtar,
Of whoſe true, fixt, and reſting quality, -
There is no fellow in the firmament. Shakespeare. jul. Caſar.
The Almighty, whoſe hieroglyphical characters are the
unnumbered ſtars, ſun and moon, written on theſe large
volumes of the firmament. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the IWorld.
The firmament expanſe of liquid, pure, -
Tranſparent, elemental air, diffus'd
In circuit to the uttermoſt convex -
Of this great round. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
The ſteeds climb up the firſt aſcent with pain;
And when the middle firmament they gain,
If downward from the heavens my head I bow,
And ſee the earth and ocean hang below,
Ev’n I am ſeiz'd with horror. Addiſon's Ovid's Metamorph.
What an immenſurable ſpace is the firmament, wherein a
great number of ſtars, leſſer and leſſer, and conſequently far-
ther and farther off, are ſeen with our naked eye, and many
more diſcovered with our glaſſes! Derham's Aſtro-Theology.
FIRMAME'Ntal. adj. [from firmament.] Celeſtial; of the
upper regions. - *
An hollow cryſtal pyramid he takes, -
In firmamental waters áipt above. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
F1'RM ly, adv. [from firm.] -
1. Strongly; impenetrably; immoveably.
- Thou É. come of force, -
Though thou art firm ier faſten’d than a rock. Milt. Agoniſt.
How very hard particles, which touch only in a few points,
can ſtick together ſo firmly, without ſomething which cauſes
them to be attracted towards one another, is difficult to con-
ceive. Newton's Opt.
2. Steadily; conſtantly. -
Himſelf to be the man the fates require; , , -
I firmly judge, and what ſjudge deſire . Dryden's Æn. b. vii.
The common people of Lucca are firmly perſuaded, that
one Lucqueſe can beat five Florentines. Addiſin on Italy.
F1'RMN ss. n.ſ.. [from firm J
1. Stability; hardneſs; compačtneſs; ſolidity. -
It would become by degrees of greater conſiſtency and
firmieſ, ſo as to reſemble an habitable earth. Burnet.
2. Durability. - - - - - -
Both the eaſineſs and firmneſ of union might be conject
tured, for that both people are of the ſame language. Hayw.
3. Certainty ; ſoundneſs. - - -
In perſons already poſſeſſed with notions of religion, the
underſtanding cannot be brought to change them, but by gºt
examination of the truth and firmneſs of the one, and the
flaws and weakneſs of the other. South's Sermons.
4. Steadineſs; conſtancy; reſolution. -
‘ihat thou ſhould'ſt my firinneſs doubt
To God, or thee, becauſe we have a foe. , - r
May tempt us, I expected not to hear. Milt. Paradiſ: Loſł.
Nor can th' Egyptian patriarch blame my muſe,
Which for his firmleſs does his heat excuſe. Rºſcommon.
This armed Job with firmneſs and fortitude. Atterbury.
IRS I. adi. ſ. ſºrt, Saxon.)
f The gº º one, that which is in order before any
other. -
- Thy air, like the fift
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the Jºſ’.
—A third is ºke the former. Sha ſpeare's Macbeth,
In the ſix but dreth and fiſ' year, in the firſt month, the
firſ' day of the neath, the waters were dried up from off the
earth - Gen. viii. 13.
Arms and the man I fing, the firſt who bore
His courſe to Latium from the Trojan ſhore. Aºn.
2. Earlieſt in time. - - -
Theft, covenant had alſo ordinances of divine ſervice.
- Heb. ix. i.
9 F I fixiº,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I S
F I S
. . . rain
I find, quoth Mat, reproof is vain
Who firſt offend, will firſt complain. Pr; r.
. Higheſt in dignity. -
3 i. º, of whom Daniel was fºſ!. - Dam.
Firſ; with the dogs, and king among the ſquires. Spect.
- ellent.
4, Great; exc My fift ſon, - -
where will you go? Take good Cominius -
With thee. Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
FIRST. adv.
fore any thing elſe; earlieſt.
1. Be He, #! º of his uſual art,
Firſt in diſſembled fire attempts to part; -
Then roaring beaſts and running ſtreams he tries. Dryden.
Thy praiſe, and thine was then the publick voice,
Firſt recommended Guiſcard to my choice. Dryden.
Heav'n, ſure, has kept this ſpot of earth uncurſt, -
To ſhew how all things were created firſt. Prior.
2. Before any other conſideration.
Firſt, metals are more durable than plants; ſecondly, they
are more ſolid and hard; thirdly, they are wholly ſubterra-
neous; whereas plants are part above earth, and part under the
earth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 603.
3. It has often at before it, and means at the beginning.
At firſt the ſilent venom ſlid with eaſe,
And ſeiz'd her cooler ſenſes by degrees. Dryden's An.
Excepting fiſh and inſeóts, there are very few or no crea-
tures that can provide for themſelves at firſt, without the
aſſiſtance of parents. entley's Serm.ns.
4. FIRST or laſt. At one hour or other.
But ſure a general doom on man is paſt,
And all are fools and lovers firſt or loft. Dryden.
First-begot. n.ſ.. [from firſt and begt.] The eldeſt
FIRST-BEGoTTEN. } of children.
His firſt-begot, we know ; and ſore have felt,
When his fierce thunder drove us to the deep. Parad. Reg.
First-bor N. m. ſ. [firſt and born.] Eldeſt; the firſt by the
order of nativity.
Laſt, with one midnight ſtroke, all the firſt-born
Of Egypt muſt lie dead. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
Hail, holy light, offspring of heav'n firſt-born 7 Milton.
The firſt-born has not a ſole or peculiar right, by any law
of God and nature; the younger children having an equal
title with him. Locke.
FIRST-FRUITs. m. ſ. [firſt and fruits.]
1. What the ſeaſon firſt produces or matures of any kind.
A ſweaty reaper from his tillage brought
Firſt-fruits, the green ear, and the yellow ſheaf Miſt. P. L.
The blooming hopes of my then very young patron have
been confirmed by moſt noble firſt-fruits, and his life is going
on towards a plentiful harveſt of all accumulated virtues. Prior.
2. The firſt profits of any thing.
Although the king loved to employ and advance biſhops,
becauſe, having rich biſhopricks, they carried their reward upon
themſelves; yet he did uſe to raiſe them by ſteps, that he
might not loſe the profit of the firſ' fruits, which by that
courſe of gradation was multiplied. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. The earlieſt effect of anything.
See, Father, what %, on earth are ſprung,
From thy implanted grace in man! Milton’, Parád. Loft.
F1'RSTLING, adj [from fift.] That which is firſt produced
or brought forth.
All ...ſº males that come of thy herd, and of thy
flock, thou ſhalt ſanctify unto the Lord thy God. Deutr, XV.
F1's ºf LING.. n.ſ.. [from firſt.]
1. The firſt produce or offspring.
A ſhepherd next,
More meek, came with the firſtlings of his flock,
Choiceſt and beſt. A/ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
The tender fiftings of my woolly breed,
Shall on his holy altar often bleed. Dryden's Wirg. Paſº.
The firſtlings of the flock are doom'd to die ;
Rich fragrant wines the cheering bowl ſupply. Pop., Ojºſ.
2. The thing firſt thought or done.” upply. Pope's Odyſſ.
Our play
Leaps o'er the vaunt and fir/lings of theſe broils,
'Ginning i' th' middle. Shakeſp I, oil, and Creſſ. Pro'ogue.
The flighty purpoſe works o'erlook,
Unleſs the deed go with it: from this moment,
The very fºllings of my heart ſhall be
The fºilings of my hand. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Fisca L. m.ſ. Iſrom ſju, a treaſury, Latin J Exchequer;
revenue.
War, as it is entertained by diet, ſo can it not be long
ºntained by the ordinary fºal and receipt. - Bacon.
Flº H. A.J. [Fire, Saxon, viſch, Putch. An animal that
inhabits the water. -
The beats, the fºes, and the winged fowls,
Are their males fubjects. Shakespeare. Comedy of Errours.
I fight when I cannot chuſe, and I eat no/fſhl. Shakespeare K. Lear.
º
And now the fiſh ignoble fates eſcape,
Since Venus ow'd her ſafety to their ſhape. Creeh.
There are fiſhes, that have wings, that are not ſtrangers to
the airy region; and there are ſome birds that are inhabitants
of the water, whoſe blood is cold as fiſhes; and their fleſh is
ſo like in taſte, that the ſcrupulous are allowed them on fiſh.
days. Locke.
To FIs H. v. n.
1. To be employed in catching fiſhes.
2. To endeavour at any thing by artifice.
While others fiſh, with craft, for great opinion,
I, with great truth, catch meer ſimplicity. Shakeſpeare.
To FIs H. v. a. To ſearch water in queſt of fiſh, or any thing
elſe.
Some have fiſhed the very jakes for papers left there by men
of wit. Swift.
Oft, as he fiſh'd her nether realms for wit,
The goddeſs favour'd him, and favours yet. Pope's Dunciad.
Fish-Hook. n.ſ.. [ſſ, and hºok.] A hook baited, with which
fiſh are caught.
A ſharp point, bended upward and backward, like a fiſh-
hoºk. Grew's Muſaum.
F1s H-pon D. m. ſ. [ſ/h and pond..] A ſmall pool for fiſh.
Fiſh-ponds are no ſmall improvement of waty boggy
lands. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Fiſh-pºnds were made where former foreſts grew,
And hills were levell'd to extend the view. Prior.
After what I have ſaid of the great value the Romans put
upon fiſhes, it will not appear incredible that C. Hirrius ſhould
ſell his fiſh-pond; for quadragies H. S. 32,291 l. 13 s. 4d.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
F1's Her. n ſ [from f/h.] One who is employed in catching
fiſh.
In our fight the three were taken up
By fiſhermen of Corinth, as we thought:
At length another had ſeiz'd on us,
And would have reſt the fiſhers of their prey,
Had not they been very ſlow of ſail. Shakespeare Comedy of Err.
We know that town is but with fiſhers fraught,
Where Theſeus govern'd and where Plato taught. Sandy.
Left he ſhould ſuſpect it, draw it from him,
As fiſhers do the bait, to make him follow it. Denham.
A ſoldier now he with his coat appears;
A fiſher now, his trembling angle bears;
Each ſhape he varies. Pºpe.
F1's HER BoA.T. m. ſ. [fiſher and boat.] A boat employed in
catching fiſh.
F1's HERMAN. m.ſ.. [ſ/her and man J One whoſe employment
and livelihood is to catch fiſh.
How fearful
And dizzy'tis to caſt one's eyes ſo low !
The fiſhermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
At length two monſters of unequal ſize,
Hard by the ſhore, a fiſh, rman eſpies. JWaller.
Do ſcales and fins bear price to this exceſs?
You might have bought the fiſherman for leſs. Dryd juven.
FI's H E R tow N. m. ſ. [filer and town. J A town inhabited by
fiſhermen.
Others of them, in that time, burned that f/hertown
Mouſehole. Carew's Survey ºf Cºrnwal.
Lime in Dorſetſhire, a little ſhertown. Clarendon, b. vii.
Fish ERS-coA.T. n. / [ſ/her and coat J A coat worn by a
fiſher.
. When Simon-Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his
fiſhers-coat unto him, for he was naked, and did caſt himſelf
into the ſea. jo. xxi. 7.
F1's HERY. n.ſ. [from f/her J The buſineſs of catching fiſh.
We ſhall have plenty of mackerel this ſeaſon: our fiſhery
will not be diſturbed by privateers. Addiſon's Spectatº
F1'shful. adj. [from fiſh.j Abounding with fiſh; ſtored with
fiſh.
Thus mean in ſtate, and calm in ſprite,
My f/ful pond is my delight. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
It is walled and guarded with the ocean, moſt commodious
for traffick to all parts of the world, and watered with plea-
ſant, fiſhful and navigable rivers. Camden's Remainſ.
To F1's HiFY. v a. [from f/.] To turn to fiſh: a “*
word.
Here comes Romeo.
—Without his roe, like a dried herring: ~y 1:
O fleſh, fleſh, how art thou fiſhire. Shakesp Rºm. and julist.
F.'sſiing. m. ſ. [from fiſh.] Commodity of taking fiſh.
There alſo would be planted a good town, having both a
good haven and a plentiful fiſhing. Spºnſer on Ireland.
F.’s H K E r le. n.ſ.. [fº aid ºrite.] A cadron made loº
for the fiſh to be boiled without bending. -
It is probable that the way of embalming amongſt the Egyp-
tians was by boiling the body, in a long caidron like a fiſh-
Kettle, in ſome kind of liquid balſam, Grew's Miſawm.
- FI’s HM HAL.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I T
F I T
Fººt. n, f: [fiſh and meal.] Diet of fiſh; abſemious
ict.
Thin drink doth overcool their blood, and making many
fiſhmeals, they fall into a kind of male greenfickneſs. Sharp.
- Fish Monge R. m. ſ. [from fiſh.] A dealer in fiſh; a ſeller of
fiſh
I fear to play the fiſhmonger; and yet ſo large a commodity
may not paſs in ſilence. E. Survey of Cornwal.
The ſurgeon left the fiſhmonger to determine the controverſy
between him and the pike. L’Eſtrange.
F1'sHY., adj. [from fiſh.j
1. Conſiſting of fiſh.
My abſent mates
Roam the wild iſle in ſearch of rural cates,
Bait the barb’d ſteel, and from the fiſhy flood
Appeaſe th' afflićtive fierce deſire of food. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. Having the qualities of fiſh.
Few eyes have eſcaped the pićture of mermaids, that is,
according to Horace, a monſter with a woman's head above,
and fiſhy extremity below. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
FI'SSILE. adj. [fiſſilis, Latin.] 'Having the grain in a certain
direction, ſo as to be cleft - -
This cryſtal is a pellucid fiſſile ſtone, clear as water or cryſtal
of the rock, and without colour; enduring a red heat without
loſing its tranſparency, and in a very ſtrong heat calcining
without fuſion. Newton's Opt.
Fissi'LITY.. n.ſ. from fiſſile.[ The quality of admitting to be
cloven.
F1'ssure. n.ſ.. [fiſſura, Latin; fiſſure, French.] A cleft; a
narrow chaſm where a breach has been made.
The ſtone and other terreſtrial matter was diſtinguiſhed
into ſtrata or layers, as it is in England: thoſe ſtrata were
divided by parallel fiſſures, that were incloſed in the
ſtone. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
I ſee
The gaping fiſſures to receive the rain. Thomſon's Autumn.
To F1'ssure. v. a. [from the noun..] To cleave; to make a
fiſſure.
By a fall or blow the ſkull may be fiſſured or fraćtured. Wiſe.
FIST. n.ſ. [Fire, Saxon.] The hand clenched with the fin-
gers doubled down, in order to give a blow, or keep hold.
She quick and proud, and who did Pas deſpiſe,
Up with her fift, and took him on the face;
Another time, quoth ſhe, become more wiſe;
Thus Pas did kiſs her hand with little grace. Sidney.
And being down, the villain ſore did beat
And bruiſe with clowniſh fifts his manly face. Fairy Queen.
Anger cauſeth paleneſs in ſome; in others trembling,
ſwelling, foaming at the mouth, ſtamping, and bending the
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 716.
And the ſame hand into a fift may cloſe,
Which inſtantly a palm expanded ſhows. Denham.
Tyrrheus, the foſter-father of the beaſt,
Then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fift. Dryden's Aºn.
To Fist. v. a.
1. To ſtrike with the fiſt.
I ſaw him ſpurning and fifting her moſt unmercifully. Dryd.
2. To gripe with the fiſt. -
We have been down together in my ſleep,
Unbuckling helms, fifting each other's throat,
And wak'd half dead with nothing. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Fi'st INU r. n.ſ. A piſtachio nut. -
FI's ricuffs. n.ſ.. [fift and cuff] Battle with the fiſt; blows
with the fiſt.
Naked men belabouring one another with ſnagged ſticks,
or dully falling together by the ears at fifticuffs. More.
She would ſeize upon John's commons; for which they
were ſure to go tofficuffs. Arbuthn. Hiſtory of john Bull.
My invention and judgment are perpetually at fifticuff, 'till
they have quite diſabled each other. Swift.
FI'STULA. m. ſ. [Latin; fiftule, French.]
1. A ſinuous ulcer callous within ; any ſinuous ulcer.
That fiftula which is recent is the eaſieſt of cure: thoſe of
a long continuance are accompanied with ulcerations of the
gland and caries in the bone. - Jºſeman's Surgery.
2. Fistula Lachrimalis. A diſorder of the canals leading
from the eye to the noſe, which obſtructs the natural progreſs
of the tears, and makes them trickle down the cheek; but
this is only the firſt and mildeſt ſtage of the diſeaſe: in the
next there is matter diſcharged with the tears from the puncia
lachrimalia, and ſometimes from an orifice broke through the
ſkin between the noſe and angle of the eye. The laſt and
worſt degree of it is when the matter of the eye, by its long
continuance, has not only corroded the neighbouring ſoft
parts, but alſo affected the ſubjacent bone. Sharp's Surgery.
F1'st tº I.A.R. adj. [from ſ/luia.] Hollow like a pipe. -
F1's rulous. adj [from fiſtula; fiſtuleux, French.J Having
the nature of a fiſtula; callous or ſinuous like a fiſtula.
How theſe ſinuous ulcers become fiſtuleus, I have ſhewn
you. ///eman's Surgery.
FIT. n ſ. [from fight, Skinner, every fit of a diſeaſe being a
ſtruggle of nature ; from viit, in Flemiſh, frequent, judius.]
4.
1. A parºxyſm or exacerbation of any intermittent diſtemper.
Small ſtones and gravel collect and become very large in
the kidneys, in which caſe a fit of the ſtone in that part is the
Cure. Sharp's Surgery.
2. Any ſhort return after intermiſſion; interval.
Sometimes 'tis grateful to the rich to try
A ſhort viciſſitude, and fit of poverty. Dryden's Horace.
Men that are habitually wicked may now and then, by fits
and ſtarts, feel certain motions of repentance. L'//?range.
By fit; my ſwelling grief appears,
In riſing fighs and falling tears. Addiſon on Italy.
Thus o'er the dying lamp th’ unſteady flame
Hangs Quivering on a point, leaps off by fits,
And falls again as loth to quit its hold. Addison's Cato. .
Religion is not the buſineſs of ſome fits only and intervals
of our life, to be taken up at certain days and hours, and laid
aſide for the reſt of our time; but a ſyſtem of precepts to be
regarded in all our condućt. Rogers's Sermons.
All ſits of pleaſure we balanced by an equal degree of pain
or languor; 'tis like ſpending this year part of the next year's
revenue. Swift.
3. Any violent affection of mind or body.
The life did flit away out of her neſt,
And all his ſenſes were with deadly fit oppreſt. Fairy Queen.
. An ambitious man ſubjects himſelf to others, and puts it
in the power of every malicious tongue to throw him into a
fit of melancholy. Addiſon's Speciator.
4. Diſorder ; diſtemperature.
For your huſband,
He's noble, wiſe, judicious, and beſt knows
The fits o' th' ſeaſon. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
5. It is uſed, without an epithet of diſcrimination, for the hyſ-
terical diſorders of women, and the convulſions of children;
and by the vulgar for the epilepſy.
Mrs. Bull was ſo much enraged, that ſhe fell downright
... into a fit. . Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
FIT. adj. [witten, Flemiſh, junius J
1. Qualified ; proper: with for before the noun, and to before
the verb.
Mighty men of valour, fit to go out for war and battle.
I Chron. vii. 1 1.
He lends him vain Goliah's ſacred ſword,
The fitteſt help juſt fortune could afford. Cowley's David's.
This fury fit for her intent ſhe choſe,
One who delights in wars and human woes. Dryden's An.
It is a wrong uſe of my underſtanding to make it the rule
and meaſure of another man's; a uſe which it is neither fit
for, nor capable of. Locke.
2. Convenient; meet; proper; right.
Since we have ſaid it were good not to uſe men of ambi-
tious natures, except it be upon neceſſity, it is fit we ſpeak in
what caſes they are ſo. Bacon, Eſſay 37.
See how thou could'ſt judge of fit and meet. Mili. P. L.
It is fit for a man to know his own abilities and weak-
neſſes, and not think himſelf obliged to imitate all that he
thinks fit to praiſe. Boyle.
If our forefathers thought fit to be grave and ſerious, I hope
their poſterity may laugh without offence. Addiſon.
To Fit. v. a. [vitten, Flemiſh, juniºs.]
1. To accommodate to any thing; to ſuit one thing to another.
The carpenter marketh it out with a line: he fitteth it with
planes. - If xliv, 13.
Would fate permit
To my deſires I might my fortune fit,
Troy I would raiſe. Denham.
2. To accommodate a perſon with anything: as, the taylor fits
his cuſtomer. - *
A truſſmaker fitted the child with a pair of boddice, ſtiffened
on the lame ſide JWiſeman's Surgery.
, To be adapted to ; to ſuit anything.
She ſhall be our meſſenger to this paultry knight: truſt me
I thought on her; ſhe'll fit it. Shakeſpeare.
As much of the ſtone as was contiguous to the marcaſite,
fitted the marcaſte ſo cloſe as if it had been formerly liquid. Bo.
4. To Fit out. To furniſh; to equip; to ſupply with neceſia-
ries or decoration. -
A play, which if you dare but twice fit out,
You'll aſ be ſlander'd, and be thought devout . Prydºn.
The Engliſh ſeet could not be paid and manned, and ſited
zut, unleſ, we encouraged trade and navigation. Adai. Freeh.
5. Tº Fir wº. To furniſh; to make proper for the uſe or re-
ception of any.
He has ſued up his farm.
To Fit. v. A. To be proper; to be fit.
Norfts it to prolong the heavenly feaſt, &gt; - ---
Time;&amp;is, indecent, but retire to reſt. Pºp. J Odyſſey, b. 111.
Fitch. , ſ: [A colloquial corruption of vetº.] A ſmall kind
of wild pea.
Pope to Swift.
Now is the ſeaſon
For ſowing of fit, he, of beans, and of peaſon. ... Tºſºr.
Fºrchar. , , / [ſſau, French ; fſe, Dutch..] A ſtinking
Fitchew. } little Leaſt, that robs the henrooſt and warrer.
Skinner<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I X
F I X
Skinner ealls him the ſlinking ferret; but he is much larger,
at leaſt as ſome provinces diſtinguiſh them, in which the pole-
cat is termed a fitchat, and the ſtinking ferret a ſtoat.
'Tis ſuch another fitchew 1 marry, a perfum'd one:
What do you mean by this haunting of me? Shakespeare.
The fitchat, the fulimart, and the like creatures, live upon
the face and within the bowels of the earth. //alton's Angler.
F1'rful. adj. [fit. and full.] Varied by paroxyſms; diſor-
dered by change of maladies.
Duncan is in his grave;
After life's fitful fever he ſleeps well.
FI’tly. adv. [from fit.]
1. Properly; juſtly ; reaſonably.
Mutinous parts
That envied his receit, even ſo moſt fitly
As you malign our ſenators. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Where a man cannot fitly play his own part, if he have not
a friend, he may quit the ſtage. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
I cannot fitlier compare marriage than to a lottery; for, in
both, he that ventures may ſucceed, and may miſs; and if
he draw a prize, he hath a rich return of his venture: but
in both lotteries there lie pretty ſtore of blanks for every
prize. - Boyle.
The whole of our duty may be expreſſed moſt fity by de-
parting from evil. Tillotſ n's Sermons.
An animal, in order to be moveable, muſt be flexible; and
therefore is fitly made of ſeparate and ſmall ſolid parts, replete
with proper fluids. Arluthnot on Alinents.
2. Commodiouſly; meetly.
To take a latitude,
Sun or ſtars are fillieſt view'd
At their brighteſt; but to conclude
Of longitudes, what other way have we
But to mark when, and where the dark eclipſes be. Donne.
F1't Ness. n.f [from fit.]
1. Propriety; meetneſs; juſtneſs; reaſonableneſs.
In things the fitneſ, whereof is not of itſelf apparent, nor
- eaſy to be made ſufficiently manifeſt unto all, yet the judg-
ment of antiquity, concurring with that which is received,
may induce them to think it not unfit. H.oker, b. v. ſ. 7.
The queen being abſent, 'tis a needful fitneſs
That we adjourn this court. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
Wer’t my fitneſ;
To let theſe hands obey my boiling blood,
They're apt enough to diſlocate and tear
Thy fleſh and bones. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. Convenience; commodity; the ſtate of being fit.
Nor time nor place
Did then cohere, and yet you would make both :
They've made themſelves, and that their fitneſ; now
Does unmake you. Shakeſpeare's Macb th:
F1't MENT. n.ſ.. [from fit J Something adapted to a particular
purpoſe.
Poor beſeeming: 'twas a ſtinent for
The purpoſe I then follow'd. Shakeſpeare's Cymb line.
F1'ſ TER. m. ſ. (from fit.] .
1. The perſon or thing that confers fitneſs for any thing.
Sowing the ſandy gravelly land in Devonſhire and Cornwal
with French furze-feed, they reckon a great improver of their
land, and after of it for corn. A ſortimer's Husbandry.
2. (from ſetta, Italian : ſet en, German.] A ſmall piece: as, to
cut into fitters. Skinner.
Fitz n.ſ. [Norman, from fils, a ſon, Fr.] A ſon. Only
uſed in law and genealogy: as Fitzherb, rt, the ſon of Herbert;
Fitzthomas, the ſon of Thomas; Fitzroy, the ſon of the king.
It is commonly uſed of illegitimate children.
FIVE. adj. [rip, Saxon.] Four and one; half of ten.
And five of them were wiſe, and five were fooliſh. Mat.
. No perſon, no incident, but muſt be of uſe to carry on
the main deſign: all things elſe are like fix fingers to the
hand, when nature, which is ſuperfluous in nothing, can do
her work with five. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Five herds, five bleating flocks, his paſtures fill’d;
His lands a hundred yoke of oxen tili’d. Dr den’s AEm.
Our Britiſh youth loſe their figure by that time they are
five and twenty. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 1 1.
Five LF A v EP G. aft. m. ſ. Cinq:efoil; a ſpecies of clover.
; F1 v Es. m. ſ.
1. A kind of play with a bowl.
2. A diſeaſe of horſes.
His horſe ſped with ſpavins rayed with the yellows, paſt
cure of the fºes, and ſtark ſpoiled with the faggers. Shakeſp.
To J'IX. v. a. ſ fixer, French; fºus, flatin.]
1. I o make faſt, firin, or ſtable.
He! heard the unſufferable noiſe, briſ ſaw
Heav'n 'aining irom heav'n, and would have fled
A:lighted, but that fate had ſix’a too deep
Her dark foundations, and too faſt had bºund. Aſ It. P. L.
2. To ſettle; to eſtabliſh invariably.
Brighteſt ſcraph tell
In which of all theſe orbs hath man
Shaº. Madah.
His fixed ſºat, or fixed ſeat hath none, -
But all theſe ſhining orbs his choice to dwell Mill. P. J.
One loves fixed laws, and the other arbitrary power. Temple.
When cuſtom hath fixed his eating to certain ſtated periods,
his ſtomach will expect vićtuals at the uſual hour. Locke.
3. To direct without variation.
Why are thine eyes fixt to the ſullen earth,
Gazing at that which ſeems to dim thy fight ! Shakespeare H. VI.
Thus while the Trojan prince employs his eyes,
Fix'd on the walls with wonder and ſurprize. Dryden's AEm.
4. To deprive of volatility.
We pronounce concerning gold, that it is fixed. Locke.
5. To pierce; to transfix. A ſenſe purely Latin.
While from the raging ſwoºd he vainly flies,
A bow of ſteel ſhall fix his trembling thighs. Sandys.
6. To withold from motion.
To Fix. v. n.
1. To ſettle the opinion; to determine the reſolution.
If we would be happy, we muſt fix upon ſome foundation
that can never deceive us. L’Eſtrange.
He made himſelf their prey,
Tº impoſe on their belief and Troy betray;
Fix'd on his aim, and obſtinately bent
To die undaunted, or to circumvent.
Here hope began to dawn; reſolv'd to try,
She fa’d on this her utmoſt remedy, }
Death was behind; but hard it was to die. Dryden.
In moſt bodies, not propagated by ſeed, it is the colour we
Dryden's AEn.
muſt ſix on, and are moſt led by. Locke.
2. To reſt; to ceaſe to wander.
Your kindneſs baniſhes your fear,
Reſolv’d to far for ever here. J/aller.
3. To loſe volatility, ſo as to be malleable.
In the midſt of molten lead, when it beginneth to congeal,
make a little dent, and put quickſilver, wrapped in a piece of
linen, in that hole, and the quickſilver will fix and run no
more, and endure the hammer. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
FIX.4? ION. n ſ [French. J
1. Stability; firmneſs; ſteadineſs.
Your fixation in matters of religion will not be more neceſ-
ſary for your ſoul's than your kingdom's peace. King Charles.
2. Reſidence in a certain place.
To light, created in the firſt day, God gave no proper place
or fixatiºn. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
3. Confinement; forbearance of excurſion.
They are ſubject to errors from a narrowneſs of ſoul, a
fivation and confinement of thought to a few obječts. IVatts.
4. Want of volatility; deſtruction of volatility.
Upon the compound body three things are chiefly to be ob-
ſerved ; the colour, the fragility or pliantneſs, and the volati-
lity or fixation, compared with the ſimple bodies. Bacon.
It is more difficult to make gold ºf other metals leſs pon-
derous and leſs materiate, than, via versä, to make ſilver of lead
or quickſilver, both which are more ponderous than ſilver; ſo
that they need rather a degree of fixation than any conden-
ſation. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
5. Reduction from fluidity to firmneſs.
Salt diſſolved, upon a fixation returns to its affected cubes.
Glanv. Scºpſ, c. 7.
Fi'xEDLY, adv. [from fred.] Certainly; firmly ; in a man-
ner ſettled and eitabliſhed.
If we pretend that the diſtinction of ſpecies, or ſorts, is
fixedly eſtabliſhed by the real and ſecret conſtitutions of
things. Locke.
F1'x EDNess. m. ſ. [from fived.]
1. Stability; firmneſs.
2. Want or loſs of volatility.
Fixedneſ, or a power to remain in the fire unconſumed, is
an idea that always accompanics our complex idea ſignified
by the word gold. Locke.
3. Solidity; coherence of parts.
All matter is either fluid or ſolid, to comprehend all the
middle degrees between extreme fixedneſs and coherency, and
the moſt rapid inteſtine motion of the particles of bodies.
Bently's Sermons.
4. Steadineſs; ſettled opinion or reſolution.
A fixedneſs in religion will not give my conſcience leave to
conſent to innovations. King Charles.
Fix1'DITY. m / [from fixed.] Coherence of parts, oppoſed to
volatility. A word of Boyle
Bodies mingled by the fire are differing as to fixidity and
volatility, and yet are ſo combined by the firſt operation of the
fire, that itſelf does ſcarce afterwards ſeparate them. Bo, le.
F1'x1T Y. m. ſ. [ ſ it, French. J Coherence of parts, oppoſed
to volatility.
And are not the ſun and fixed ſtars great earths vehemently
hot, whoſe heat is conſerved by the greatneſs of the bodies,
and the mutual action and reaction between them, and the
light which they emit, and whoſe parts are kept from fuming
away, not only by their fixity, but alſo by the vaſt weight and
denſity of the atmoſpheres incumbent upon them Newt. Oft.
FI'xus E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L A
F I, A
*
mſ: "tº
º:
ſº tº
, *. 5.
*:::::::
* Iºn
it ºr
frºm
Wººl
* -
*
* 1:...'.
tº a
re:
axtº:
y tº:
ºn ºf
Mººr
F1'rt R. E. m. ſ. [from ſy.]
1. Poſition.
The fixure of her eye hath motion in't, -
As we were mock'd with art. Shakespeare. I/inter's Tale.
2. Stable preſſure.
The firm fixure of thy foot would give an excellent motion
to thy gait. Shakespeare. AMerry ſºlves of I/indſor.
3. Firmneſs; ſtable ſtate. -
Frights, changes, horrours,
Divert and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity and married calm of ſtates .
Quite from their fixure. Shakeſpeare's Troil. and Creſſida.
F1'zGIG. m. ſ. A kind of dart or harpoon with which ſeamen
ſtrike fiſh.
FLA/BBY. adj. [faccidus, Latin.] Soft ; not firm; eaſily
ſhaking or yielding to the touch.
Paleneſs, a weak pulſe, palpitations of the heart, fably
-
and black fleſh, are ſymptoms of weak fibres. Arbuthnot.
Pulls out the rags contriv'd to prop
Her flabby dugs, and down they drop. Swift.
Fla'bi i E. adj. [jiabilis, Latin.] Blown about by the wind;
ſubječt to be blown. Dićf.
FLA(CCID. adj. [flaccidus, Latin J Weak; limber; not
{tiff; lax; not tenſe.
The bowing and inclining the head is found in the great
flower of the ſun; the cauſe I take to be is, that the part
againſt which the ſun beateth waxeth more faint and ſaccid in
the ſtalk, and thereby leſs able to ſupport the flower. Bacon.
They whoſe muſcles are weak or flaccid, are unapt to pro-
nounce the letter r. Holder's Elements of Speech:
The ſurgeon ought to vary the diet as he finds the fibres
are too flaccid and produce funguſes, or as they harden and
produce calloſities. Arbuthnot on Diet.
FLAcci'DITY. m. ſ. [from fiaccid.] Laxity; limberneſs; want
of tenſion; want of ſtiflineſs.
There is neither fluxion nor pain, but flaccidity joined with
inſenſibility. //iſeman's Surgery.
To FLAG. v. n. [flaggeren, Dutch; pleogan, Saxon, to fly.]
1. To hang looſe without ſtiffneſs or tenſion.
Beds of cotton wool hung up between two trees, not far
from the ground; in the which, flagging down in the middle,
men, wives and children lie together. Abbot.
The jades
That drag the tragick melancholy night,
Who with their drowſy, ſlow, and flagging wings
Clip dead men's graves. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
It keeps thoſe ſlender aerial bodies ſeparated and ſtretched
out, which otherwiſe, by reaſon of their flexibleneſs and
weight, would flag or curl. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
Like a fiery meteor ſunk the ſun,
The promiſe of a ſtorm; the ſhifting gales
Forſake by fits, and fill the flagging fails. Dryden.
2. To grow ſpiritleſs or deječted.
My fagging ſoul flies under her own pitch,
Like fowl in air too damp, and lags along
As if ſhe were a body in a body:
My ſenſes too are dull and ſtupify'd,
Their edge rebated: ſure ſome ill approaches. Dryd. D. Seb.
The pleaſures of the town begin to flag and grow languid,
giving way daily to cruel inroads from the ſpleen. Swift.
3. To grow feeble; to loſe vigour.
Juice in language is ſomewhat leſs than blood; for if the
words be but becoming and ſignifying, and the ſenſe gentle,
there is juice: but where that wanteth, the language is thin,
fagging, poor, ſtarved, ſcarce covering the bone, and ſhews
like ſtones in a ſack: ſome men, to avoid redundancy, run
into that; and while they ſtrive to hinder ill blood or juice,
they loſe their good. Ben. johnſon's Diſoveries:
His ſtomach will expect vićtuals at the uſual hour, and grow
pceviſh if he paſſes it; either fretting itſelf into a troubleſome
exceſs, or flagging into a downright want of appetite. Locke.
There muſt be a noble train of ačtions to preſerve his fame
in life and motion; for, when it is once at a ſtand, it naturally
flags and languiſhes. Addison's Spectator, N°. 256.
If on ſublimer wings of love and praiſe,
My love above the ſtarry vault I raiſe,
Lur'd by ſome vain conceit of pride or luſt,
# , I drop, and flutter in the duſt. Arbuthnot.
e ſees a ſpirit hath been raiſed againſt him, and he only
watches 'till it begins to flag: he goes about watching when
to devour us. Swift.
To Flag. v. a.
1. To let fall ; to ſuffer to droop.
Take heed, my dear, youth flies apace;
As well as Cupid, Time is blind:
Soon muſt thoſe glories of thy face
The fate of vulgar beauty find:
The thouſand loves, that arm thy potent eye, - -
Muſt drop their quivers, flag their wings, and die. Prior.
2. [From flag, a ſpecies of ſtone..] To lay with broad ſtone.
The ſides and floor are all flagged with excellent marble. Sandys.
... A white flore tº fºr fºr floors. Izz..., ºr
º n. f. |..." the verſ.j § º:d ard on T. "..
1. ^ water plant with a broad bla, rº-
called º its motion in º leaf and yellow flower, ſo
º º ark of bulruſhes, and laid it is the ſags by the
- £2, ii. 3.
Can bulruſhes but by the river grow
Sanfºg, there flouriſh where no water, flow. Sandys.
a..." be divers fiſhes that caſt their ſpawn on. fag; or
Cut flag root J/alton 3.Angler.
3 * and the roots of other weeds. Ažrt.
2. *: colours or enſign of a ſhip or land forces, by which
º * made at ſea, or regiments are diſtinguiſhed in the
Theſe flags of France that are advanced here
Before the eye and proſpect of your town &gt;
Have hither march'd to your endanaºmºit. Shakespeare K. 7 ºn.
- He hangs 9; as many ſtag, as he deſcryeth veſſels; ſquare
if ſhips; if gallies, pendants. Saºzº.
Let him be girt w tº -
With all the griſly legions that troop
Under the ſooty fag of Acheron,
Harpies and hydras, or all the monſtrous forms
'Twixt Africa and Inde, I'll find him out,
And force him to reſtore his purchaſe back,
Or drag him by the curls to a foul death. Milion
The French and Spaniard, when your flag; appear -
Forget their hatred, and conſent to §. iſſal,
The interpretation of that article about the flag is a ground
at pleaſure for opening a war. Temple
In either's flag the golden ſerpents bear, * -
Erecting creſts alike, like volumes rear,
And mingle friendly hiſſings in the air. Dryden's Marengz.
Then they, whoſe mothers, frantick with their fºr.”
In woods and wilds the flags of Bacchus bear, 3.
A. lead * dances . diſhevell'd hair. Dryden's Æn
3. cies of ſtone uſed for ſmooth p. - -
- F. J pavements. [ſiache, old
Ot* of two flags ſtriated, but deeper on one ſide than the
er. - J/oodward on Fºſſils.
- Flagſtone will not ſplit, as ſlate does, being found formed
#. Pagi, or thin plates, which are no other than ſo many
rata. Wºodward's Met. Fºſſ.
FLAG. Broom. n.ſ. ſ from ſag and broom J. A ...'ſ
ſweeping flags or pavements, commonly made of birch-twigs,
or of the leaves of the dwarf palm, inported from Spain.
Fºers. n: ſ [/kg and ºfficer.] A commander of a
quadron. -
Her grandfather was a fag-officer. Addiſon's Señator.
FLAG-ship. m.ſ.. [fag and ſhip.] The ſhip in which the
commander of a fleet is.
FLAG-worm. n.ſ.. [flag and worm.] A grub bred in watry
places among flags or ſedge.
He will in the three hot months bite at a flag-worm, or
a green gentle. Iłalion's Ander.
FLA'Gelet. n.ſ.. [flageolet, French..] A ſmall flute; a ſmall
inſtrument of wind muſick.
Play us a leſſon on your fagelet. More's Divine Dialºgues.
FLAGELLATION. n.ſ.. [from ſtagello, Latin.] The uſe of the
ſcourge,
By Bridewell all deſcend,
As morning pray’r and flagellation end. Garth's Diſpenſ.
FLA'GGINEss. n.ſ.. [from flaggy.J Laxity ; limberneſs; want
of tenſion.
Fla'Go Y. adj. [from flag.]
1. Weak; lax; limber; not ſtiff; not tenſe.
His flaggy wings, when forth he did diſplay,
Were like two ſails, in which the hollow wind
Is gather'd full, and worketh ſpeedy way. Fairy Queen, b, i.
That baſking in the ſun thy bees may lye,
And reſting there, their flaggy pinions dry. Dryden's Wirgil.
2. Weak in taſte; inſipid.
Graft an apple-cion upon the ſtock of a colewort, and it
will bear a great flaggy apple. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
FLAGITIOUS. adj. [from fagitius, Latin.] Wicked; vil-
lainous; atrocious.
No villany or flagitious ačtion was ever yet committed, but,
upon a due enquiry into the cauſes of it, it will be found that
a lye was firſt or laſt the principal engine to effe&amp;t it. South.
There's no working upon a flag:tious and perverſe nature by
kindneſs and diſcipline. L'E/irange.
Firſt, thoſe flagitious times,
Pregnant with unknown crimes,
Conſpire to violate the nuptial bed. Roſcommon.
Perjury is a crime of ſo flagitious a nature, we cannot be
too careful in avoiding every approach towards it. Addiſon.
But if in noble minds ſome dregs remain,
Not yet purg'd off, of ſpleen and ſour diſdain,
Diſcharge that rage on more provoking crimes,
Nor fear a dearth in theſe ſagitious times. Pope.
9 G Flag"tiousness.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L A
F L A
Flag'tiousness. n.ſ. [from fagitius.J Wickedneſs; vil-
lany.
Fºs. n.ſ.. [facced, Welſh; Flaxe, Saxon; foſke, Daniſh ;
fiacon, French; fiaſcº, Italian ; flaſ, 2, Spaniſh..] A veſſel of
drink with a narrow mouth.
A mad rogue! he pour'd a fagon of Rheniſh on my head
once. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
More had ſent him by a ſuitor in Chancery two ſilver
fagon; Bacon's Apophth.
Did they coin piſpots, bowls, and fagons
Int' officers of horſe and dragoons : Hudibras, p. i. cant. 2.
His truſty fagon, full of potent juice,
Was hanging by, worn thin with age and uſe. Rºſcommon.
One flagon walks the round, that none ſhould think
They either change, or ſtint him of his drink. Dryd. juv.
Fla'GRANcy, n.ſ. [fagrantia, Latin. J. Burning; heat;
fire.
Luſt cauſeth a fagranty in the eyes, as the ſight and the
touch are the things deſired, and therefore the ſpirits reſort to
thoſe parts. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Fla'GRANT. adj. [fagrani, Latin.]
1. Ardent; burning; eager.
A thing which filleth the mind with comfort and heavenly
delight, ſtirreth up fagrant deſires and affections, correſpon-
dent unto that which the words contain. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 39.
2. Glowing; fluſhed.
See Sapho, at her toilet's greaſy taſk,
And iſſuing flagrant to an evening maſk:
So morning inſects, that in muck begun, -
Shine, buz, and fly-blow in the ſetting ſun. Pope's Epiſtleſ.
3. Red; imprinted red.
Their common loves, a lewd abandon'd pack,
The beadle's laſh ſtill flagrant on their back. Prior.
4. Notorious; flaming. -
when fraud is great, it furniſhes weapons to defend itſelf;
and at worſt, if the crimes be ſo flagrant that a man is laid
aſide out of perfeót ſhame, he retires loaded with the ſpoils of
the nation. Swift.
With equal poize let ſteddy juſtice ſway,
And flagrant crimes with certain vengeance pay; ;
But,’till the proofs are clear, the ſtroke delay. Smith.
Flag RA’tion. n.ſ.. [flagro, Latin.] Burning. Dić?.
Flagstaff. n.ſ.. [fag and ſtaff.] The ſtaff on which the
flag is fixed.
The duke, leſs numerous, but in courage more,
On wings of all the winds to combat flies:
His murdering guns a loud defiance roar,
And bloody croſſes on his flagſtaff; riſe. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
Flail. n.ſ.. [flagellum, Latin; fiegel, German.] . The inſtru-
ment with which grain is beaten out of the ear; the tool of the
threſher.
Our ſoldiers, like the night owl's lazy flight,
Or like a lazy threſher with a fail,
Fell gently down as if they ſtruck their friends. Shakespeare H. VI.
When in one night, ere glimpſe of morn,
His ſhadowy fail hath threſh'd the corn,
That ten day-labourers could not end. Milton.
In this pile ſhould reign a mighty prince,
Born for a ſcourge of wit, and flail of ſenſe. Dryden.
The dextrous handling of the flail, or the plough, and
being good workmen with theſe tools, did not hinder Gideon's
and Cincinnatus's ſkill in arms, nor make them leſs able in
the arts of war and government. Locke.
The threſher, Duck, could o'er the queen prevail;
The proverb ſays, no fence againſt a flail. Swift.
FLAKE.. n.ſ.. [foccus, Latin.]
1. Any thing that appears looſely held together, like a flock of
wool.
Crimſon circles, like red flakes in the element, when the
weather is hotteſt. Sidney, b. ii.
And from his wide devouring oven ſent
A flake of fire, that fluſhing in his beard,
Him all amaz'd, and almoſt made affear'd. Fairy Queen.
The earth is ſometimes covered with ſnow two or three
feet deep, made up only of little flakes or pieces of ice. Burn.
Small drops of a miſling rain, deſcending through a freezing
air, do each of them ſhoot into one of thoſe figured icicles;
which, being ruffled by the wind, in their fall are broken, and
cluſtered together into ſmall parcels, which we call flakes of
ſnow. Grew's Coſmolog. Sacr. b. i. c. 3.
Upon throwing in a ſtone the water boils for a conſiderable
time, and at the ſame time are ſeen little flakes of ſcurf riſing
up. Addiſon on Italy.
2. A ſtratum ; layer; film; lamina.
The fakes of his tough fleſh ſo firmly bound,
As not to be divorced by a wound. Sandys.
A labourer in his left hand holding the head of the center-
pin, and with his right drawing about the beam and teeth,
which cut and tore away great flakes of the metal, 'till it re-
ceived the perfect form the teeth would make. Moxºn.
To Flake. v. a. [from the noun..] To form in flakes or bo-
dies looſely connected.
From the bleak pole no winds inclement blow,
Mold the round hail, or fake the fl. ecy ſhow. Pope's O, ºſſ.
To FLAK E. v. n. To break into laminae; to part in looſe
bodies. -
Fla’k Y. adj. Iſrom fake J
1. Locſely hanging together.
The ſilent hour ſteals on,
And flaky darkneſs breaks within the Eaſt. Shakespeare . Rih. III.
The trumpet roars, long faky flames expire,
With ſparks that ſeem to ſet the world on fire.
Hence, when the ſnows in Winter ceaſe to weep,
And undiſſolv'd their faty texture keep,
The banks with caſe their humble fireams contain,
Which ſwell in Summer, and thoſe banks diſdain. Blackm.
2. Lying in layers or ſtrata; broken into laminae.
FLAM. m. ſ. [A cant word of no certain etymology.] A falſe-
hood; a lye an illuſory pretext. -
A fan more ſenſeleſs than the rog’ry
Of old aruſpicy and aug'ry. Hudibrai, p. ii. cant. 3.
'Till theſe men can prove the things, ordered by our church
to be either intrinſically unlawful or indecent, all pretences *
pleas of conſcience to the contrary are nothing but cant and
cheat, fam and deluſion.
What are moſt of the hiſtories of the
Lyes immortalized and conſigned over as
and fem upon poſterity.
To FLAM. v. a. [from the noun..] To decei
Merely cant.
For ſo our ignorance was famm’d,
To damn ourſelves tº avoid being damn'd. Hudikras, p. iii
God is not to be flammed off with lyes, who knows ex:
aćtly what thou can'ſt do, and what not. South's Sermans.
FLA'MBEAU, n ſ. [French..] A lighted torch.
The king ſeiz'd a flambeau with zeal to deſtroy. Dryden
As the attendants carried each of them a famleau in their
hands, the ſultan, after having ordered all the lights to be put
out, gave the word to enter the houſe, find out the criminal
and put him to death. Addison's Guaria.
FLAME. n.ſ. ſ flamma, Latin; famme, French J
1. Light emitted from fire.
Is not fame a vapour, fume, or exhalation heated
that is, ſo hot as to ſhine : For bodies do not flame ...
emitting a copious fume, and this fume burns in the fame.
Mewton's Opt.
Pope.
South's Sermons.
world but lyes?
a perpetual abuſe
South's Sermons.
ve with a lye.
What fame, what lightning e'er
So quick an active force did bear ! Cowle
2. Fire. y.
Jove, Prometheus' theft allow;
The fame, he once ſtole from thee, grant him now. Cowley.
3. Ardour of temper or imagination; brightneſs of fancy. .
gour of thought. ; Orig or fancy; vi
Of all our elder plays,
. and º: have the loudeſt fame;
reat are their faults, and glorious is their fi -
In both our Engliſh º expreſt, rfame:
Lofty and bold, but negligently dreſt. Waller:
4. Ardour of inclination. -
Smit with the love of kindred arts we came,
And met congeneal, mingling flame with
5. Paſſion of love. 2 glingſ. ith flame. Pºpe.
My heart's on flame, and does like fire
To her aſpire.
Come arm'd in flames; for I would prove
All the extremities of love.
No warning of th’ approaching flame:
s...'..."...ſº
I lov'd the moment I beheld.
To Flame. v. n. [from the noun J
1. To ſhine as fire; to burn with emiſſion of light.
Can you think to blow out the intended fire your city is
ready to fame in, with ſuch weak breath as this P Shakeſp.
He fell faming through th' ethereal ſky
Cowky.
Cowly.
Granville.
To bottomleſs perdition. Milton.
Hell all around
As one great furnace fam'd Milton.
2. To ſhine like flame.
Behold it like an ample curtain ſpread,
Now ſtreak'd and glowing with the morning red;
Anon at noon in flaming yellow bright,
And chufing ſable for the peaceful night. Prior.
3. To break out in violence of paſſion.
FLAMEcolourED. adj. [fame and colour.] Of a bright yel-
low colour. C
ſt º ſtrong, and it does indifferent well in flame chured
ockings. Sºakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Auguſt ſhall bear the form of a young man of #. j
cholerick aſpect, in a flamecºloured garment. Peacham.
Flº A/BN. m. ſ. [Latin. J A prieſt; one that officiates in
ſolemn offices.
Then firſt the flamen taſted living food;
Next his grim idol ſmear'd with human blood. Pope.
FLAMMA’ſ Ion.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L A
F L A
º:
l
4,
º
º
º
º
*,
Fla Mºtºrios. m.ſ...[fa'imatio, Latin.] The act of ſetting
on flatne. - -
\º hite or cryſtalline arſenick, being artificial, and ſublimed
with ſalt, will not endure /ammation. Brown's ſugar Err.
FLAMX AB 'Lity. n ſ Iſlamma, Latin J The quality of ad-
mitting to be ſet on fire.
In the ſulphur of bodies torrified, that is, the oily, fat and
unétuous parts, conſiſt the principles of fla , znašility. Brown.
FLAM M Eous. adj. [/ammeus, Latin.] Conſiſting of flame;
reſembling flame.
This famºneºus light is not over all the body. Brown.
FI AM.M.'FF Rous. adj. [f ammifer, Lat..] Bringing flame. Dić.
FLAM M I'vo MoUs, adj. If amma and vomo, Latin..] Vomiting
out flame. Dicf.
FLA/M.Y. adj. [from fame.]
1. Inflamed; burning; flaming.
My thoughts impriſon'd in my ſecret woes,
With famy breaths do iſſue oſt in ſound.
2. Having the nature of flame.
The vital ſpirits of living creatures are a ſubſtance com-
pounded of an airy and flamy matter; and though air and
flame, being free, will not well mingle, yet bound in by a
body they will Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
FLANK. m. ſ. [ flanc, French, according to Menage, from
Azydºy ; more probably ſrom latus, Latin.] f
1. That part of the ſide of a quadruped near the hinder thigh.
The belly ſhall be eminent by ſhadowing the flank. Peach.
2. [In mcm.] The lateral part of the lower belly.
He ſaid, and, pois'd in air, the jav'lin ſent:
Through Paris ſhield the forceful weapon went,
His corſlet pierces, and his garment rends,
And glancing downward near his flank deſcends. Pope.
3. The ſide of any army or fleet. -
Great ordnance and ſmall ſhot thundered and ſhowered
upon our men from the rampier in front, and from the gallies
that lay at ſea in flank. Bacon's War with Spain.
* The other half of the battle, and the whole flank of the
Sidney, b. ii.
rear, was cloſed by the carriages. Hayward.
Gray was appointed to ſtand on the left ſide, in ſuch ſort
as he might take the flank of the enemy. Hayward.
To right and left the front
Divided, and to either flank retird. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
4. [In fortification.] That part of the baſtion which reaches
from the curtain to the face, and defends the oppoſite face,
the flank and the curtain. • Harris.
To FLANK. v. a.
3. To attack the ſide of a battalion or fleet.
2. To be poſted ſo as to overlook or command any paſs on the
ſide; to ſecure on the ſide.
With fates averſe, againſt their king's command,
Arm'd on the right, and on the left they ſtand,
And flank the paſſage. Dryden's Aen.
By the rich ſcent we found our perfum’d prey,
Which, flank'd with rocks, did cloſe in covert lay. Dryden.
FLA'N KER. n.ſ. [from flank.] A fortification jutting out ſo
as to command the ſide of a body marching to the aſſault.
The Turks, diſcouraged with the loſs of their fellows, and
fore beaten by the Spaniards out of their flankers, were enforced
to retire. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
To Fla'NKER. v. a. [ſlanquer, French..] To defend by late-
ral fortifications. -
FLA'NNEL. n.ſ. [gwlanen, Welch, from gwan, wool, Davies.]
A ſoft nappy ſtuff of wool.
I cannot anſwer the Welch fannel.
FLAP. m. ſ. [loeppe, Saxon.]
1. Anything that hangs broad and looſe, faſtened only by one
ſide.
There is a peculiar proviſion for the windpipe, that is, a
cartilaginous flap upon the opening of the larinx, which hath
an open cavity for the admiſſion of the air. Brown's Vulg. Err.
Some ſurgeons make a crucial inciſion, upon the ſuppoſi-
tion that the wound will more eaſily heal by turning down the
flaps. Sharp's Surgery.
2. The motion of anything broad and looſe.
3. [A diſeaſe in horſes.]
When a horſe is ſaid to have the flaps, you may perceive his
lips to be ſwelled on both ſides of his mouth; and that which
is in the bliſters is like the white of an egg: you muſt, to
cure it, cut ſome ſlaſhes with a knife, and rub it once with
ſalt, and it will cure. Farrier’s Diéf.
To FLA P. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To beat with a flap, as flies are beaten. -
A hare, hard put to it by an eagle, took ſanétuary in a
ditch with a beetle : the eagle flapt off the former, and de-
voured the other. L’Eſtrange.
Yet let me flap this bug with gilded wings,
This painted child of dirt, that ſtinks and ſtings. Pope.
2. To move with a flap or noiſe made by the ſtroke of anything
broad.
Shakeſpeare.
With fruitleſs toil
Flap filmy pinions oft, to extricate
Their feet in liquid ſhackles bound: Phillips,
Three times, all in the dead of night,
A bell was heard to ring;
And ſhrieking at her window thrice --
The ravenſ.aſp'd his wing. Tickell.
To FLAP. v. n. -
1. To ply the wings with noiſe. . . .
'Tis common for a duck to run flopping and fluttering away,
as if maimed, to carry people from her young. L'É a je,
The dira fla ing on the ſhield of Turnus, and fluttering abºut
his head, diſheartened him in the duel. JXryden's 4; n. Deai.at.
2. To fall with flaps, or broad parts depending.
. When ſuffocating miſts obſcure the morn;
Let thy worſt wig, long us'd to ſtorms, be worn ;
This knows the powder'd tootinan, and with care -
Beneath his flºpping hat ſecures his hair. day'. T vſ.
LA'PDRAgon, n. J. [from a dragon ſuppoſed to breathe fic.)
I. A play in which they catch raiſins out of burning brai, y,
and, extinguiſhing them by cloſing the mouth, eat them.
2. The thing eaten at flapdragon. -
He plays at quoits well, and cats conger and fennel, and
drinks candles ends for flapdrago-s, and rides the wild mare
with the boys. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
To FLA'PDRAGon. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſwallow; to
devour. Low cant.
But to make an end of the ſhip, to ſee how the ſea ſap-
dragoned it. Shakeſpeare's Jºinter's Tale.
FLA'PEARED. adj. [fop and ear.] Having looſe and broad
cars.
A whorſeſon, beetleheaded, flapeared knave. Shakeſpeare.
To FLAR E. v. n. [from federen, to flutter, Dutch, Skinner;
perhaps accidentally changed from glare.]
1. To flutter with a ſplendid ſhow.
She ſhall be looſe enrob'd, -
With ribbands pendant flºring 'bout her head. Shakeſpeare.
2. To glitter with tranſient inſtre.
Dočtrine and life, colours and light, in one
When they combine and mingle, bring
A ſtrong regard and awe; but ſpeech alone
Doth vaniſh like a flaring thing, -
And in the car, not conſcience, ring, FHerbert.
3. To glitter offenſively.
When the ſun begins to fling
His faring beams, me, goddeſs, bring -
To arched walks of twilight groves. Milton.
4. To be in too much light.
I cannot ſtay
Flaring in ſunſhine all the day. Prior.
FLASH. n.ſ. [(px?:, Minſhew.]
1. A ſudden, quick, tranſitory blaze.
When the croſs blue lightning ſeem'd to open
The breaſt of heav'n, I did preſent myſelf
Ev’n in the aim and very flaſh of it. Shakeſp. jul. Ceſar.
We ſee a flaſh of a piece is ſeen ſooner than the noiſe is
heard. . Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 210.
One with a flaſh begins, and ends in ſmoak ;
The other out of ſmoak brings glorious light. Rºſcommon.
And as AEgeon, when with heaven he ſtrove, -
Defy'd the forky lightning from afar,
At fifty mouths his flaming breath expires, -
And fiaſh for flaſh returns, and fires for fires. Dryd. Aºn.
2. Sudden burſt of wit or merriment.
Where be your gibes now your gambols? your ſongs?
your flaſhes of merriment, that were won to ſet the table in
a roar Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Wicked men prefer the light faſhes of a wanton mirth,
which for a while ſuſpend reflection, and hide the ſinner from
himſelf, to ſuch diſcourſes as awaken conſcience. Rºgers.
3. A ſhort tranſient ſtate.
The Perſians and Macedonians had it for a faſh, Bacºn,
4. A body of water driven by violence.
To Flash. v. n. -
1. To glitter with a quick and tranſient flame.
This ſalt powdered, and put into a crucible, Was, by the
injećtion of well kindled charcoal, made to ſwº divers tlines
almoſt like melted nitre. . Boyle,
2. To burſt out into any kind of violence. &gt;
By day and night . ne; i. ry hour
He flaſhes into one groſs crime or ºther. , i.
#. ź. us all at j. Shakeſpeare s King Lear.
. To break out into wit, merriment, or . º ſs of
etimes into an irregular greatneſs o
º flaſh out ſom Felton on the Cafficks.
To Flºsh. v. a. To ſtrike up large bodies of water from the
urface.
ſ with his raging arms he rudely faſ'd
The waves about, and all his armour ſwept - .
That all the blood and filth away was waii’d. Fairy Queen.
If the ſea-water be flaſhed with a ſtick or oar, the ſame
caſteth a ſhining colour, and the drops reſemble ſparkles of
fire, Carew's Survey ºf Cornwal.
3. - FLA's HER.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L A
F L A f
tº , ºr R. m. ſ. [from flaſh.J A man of more *;
tº than reality. - 41cf.
rº. º [from faſy.J. With empty fhow; without
real power of wit or º of thought.
* - - / 2. d;. ſſrom /a/.
º ." º ; ſhowy without ſubſtance. : ".
Fifty wits cannot fathom the whºle extent of a large diſ.
Digby on the Soul, Dedicat.
- when they liſt, their lean and ſºy ſongs - -
Grate on their ſcrannel pipes of wretched ſtraw. Milton.
This mean conceit, this darling myſtery,
which thou think'ſt nothing, friend' thou ſhalt not buy;
Nor will I change for all the fºſſy wit. Dryden's Perſ. Sat.
2. [From faſciduſ; Skinner.] Inſipid; without force or ſpirit.
" * Diſtiſed books are, like common diſtilled waters, fº/y
things. Bacon, Eſſay 51.
The taſtes that moſt offend in fruits, herbs and roots, are
bitter, harſh, ſour, wateriſh or faſhy. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
FLASK. m. ſ. [faſte, French.J
1. A bottle; a veſſel.
Then for the Bourdeaux you may freely aſk; -
But the Champaigne is to each man his flaſk. King,
- owder-horn.
2. A p Powder in a ſkilleſs ſoldier's faſt
Is ſet on fire. - - Shakespeare.
Flasket. n.ſ. [from faſt.] A veſſel in which viands are
ſerved.
courſe.
Another plac'd
The ſilver ſtands, with golden faſtets grac'd. Pºe's Odyſ,
FLAT. adj. [ plat, French-l -
1. Horizontally level without inclination.
Thou all-ſhaking thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world. Shakespeare K. Lear.
The houſes are flat roofed to walk upon, ſo that eyery
bomb that fell on them would take effect. Addiſon on Italy.
2. Smooth; without protuberances. -
In the dawning of the next day we might plainly diſcern
it was a land flat to our ſight, and full of boſcage. Bacon.
3. Without elevation.
Ceaſe t'admire, and beauty's plumes
Fall flat, and ſhrink into a trivial toy,
At every ſudden ſlighting quite abaſht. Milton's Par. Lºft.
4: Level with the ground.
In them is plaineſt taught, and eaſieſt learnt,
What makes a nation happy, and keeps it ſo,
What ruins kingdoms, and lays cities flat. Milt. Par. Reg.
..That Chriſt-church ſtands above ground, and that the
church of Weſtminſter lies not flat upon it, is your lordſhip's
commendation. South.
5. Lying horizontally proſtrate; lying along.
The wood-born people fall before her fat,
And worſhip her as goddeſs of the wood. Fairy Queen, b, i.
That lamentable wound,
Which laid that wretched prince flat on the ground. Daniel.
6. [In painting.] Without relief; without prominence of the
figures.
7. Taſteleſs; inſipid; dead. -
He, like a puling cuckold, would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece. Shakespeare Trail, and Crſ.
Taſte ſo divine ! that what of ſweet before
Hath touch'd my ſenſe, flat ſeems to this and harſh. Milton.
The miry fields,
Rejoicing in rich mold, moſt ample fruit
Of beauteous form produce; pleaſing to fight,
But to the tongue inelegant and fat.
8. Dull; unanimated ; frigid.
Short ſpeeches fly abroad like darts, and are thought to be
ſhot out of ſecret intentions; but as for large diſcourſes, they
are fat things, and not ſo much noted. Bacon, Eſſay 16.
Some ſhort excurſions of a broken vow
He made indeed, but fat inſipid ſtuff. Dryd. Don Sebaſtian.
9. Depreſſed; ſpiritleſs; dejećted. -
My hopes all fat, nature within me ſeems
In all her functions weary of herſelf. Milton's Agºniſes.
10. Unpleaſing; taſteleſs.
How weary, ſtale, flat and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uſes of this world! Shakespeare Hamlet.
To one firmly perſuaded of the reality of heavenly happi-
neſs, and earneſtly deſirous of obtaining it, all earthly ſatiſ-
fačtions muſt needs look little, and grow fat and unſa-
voury. Atterbury's Sermons.
II. Peremptory; abſolute; downright.
His horſe with flat tiring taught him, that diſcrete ſtays
make ſpeedy journeys. Sidney.
. It is a fat wrong to puniſh the thought or purpoſe of any
before it be enaëted; for true juſtice puniſheth nothing but
the evil act or wicked word. Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
As it is in the nature of all men to ſove liberty, ſo they
become fat libertines, and fall to all licentiouſneſs. Spenſer.
And lend You ſtart away,
* end no car unto my purpoſes;
Thoſe priſoners you ſhall * y S
—I will, that's fat. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Phillips.
Thus repuls'd, our final hope
Is fat deſpair: we muſt exaſperate
Th' Almighty Vićtor to ſpend all his rage,
And that muſt end us. AM tº's Parad, I-7 b. ii
If thou fin in wine or wantonneſs, 2 * * * * &gt; v. ii.
Boaſt not thereof, nor make thy ſhame thy glory;
Frailty gets pardon by ſubmiſſiveneſs:
But he that boaſts, ſhuts that out of his ſtory:
He makes flat war with God, and doth defy
With his meer clod of earth the ſpacious ſky. Herbert
You had broke and robb'd his houſe, -
And ſtole his taliſmanique louſe;
And all his new-found old inventions, -
With flat felonious intentions. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. I
12. Not ſhrill; not acute; not ſharp in ſound. .
If you ſtop the holes of a hawk's bell it will make no
ring: but a fat noiſe or rattle. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The upper end of the windpipe is endued with ſeveral Car-
tilages and muſcles to contračt or dilate it, as we would have
our voice fat or ſharp. Bay on the Creation.
FLAT. n.ſ.
1. A level; an extended plane.
The ſtrings of a lute, viol, or virginals, give a far greater
ſound, by reaſon of the knot, board and concave under-
neath, than if there were nothing but only the fat of a
board to let in the upper air into the lower. Bacon', Wat Hiſł.
Becauſe the air receiveth great tinéture from the earth, ex.
poſe fleſh or fiſh, both upon a ſtake of wood ſome height above
the earth, and upon the fiat of the earth. Bacºn', Nat. Hiſſ.
It comes near an artificial miracle to make divers diſtiãº
eminences appear a fat by force of ſhadows, and yet the ſha-
dows themſelves not to appear. J/otton's Architeciure.
He has cut the ſide of the rock into a flat for a garden;
and by laying on it the waſte earth, that he has found in
ſeveral of the neighbouring parts, furniſhed out a kind of
luxury for a hermit. Addison on Italy.
2. Even ground; not mountainous.
Now pile your duſt upon the quick and dead,
Till of this fat a mountain you have made,
To'ertopold Pelion, or the ſkyiſh head
Of blue Olympus. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
The way is ready and not long,
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a fat,
Faſt by a mountain. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix.
3. A ſmooth low ground expoſed to inundations.
The ocean, overpeering of his liſt,
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haſte,
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O'erbears your officers. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
All the infections, that the ſun ſucks up
From bogs, fens, flats, on Proſpero fall. Shakespeare, Tempºff.
Half my pow'rs this night,
Paſſing theſe flats, are taken by the tide;
Theſe Lincoln waſhes have devoured them. Shakespeare K. john.
4. Shallow; ſtrand; place in the ſea where the water is not deep
* for ſhips.
ſhould not ſee the ſandy hour-glaſs run,
But I ſhould think of ſhallows and of fats. Shaºffear.
The difficulty is very great to bring them in or out through
ſo many flats and ſands, if wind and weather be not very ,
favourable. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Having newly left theſe grammatick fats and ſhallows,
where they ſtuck unreaſonably, to learn a few words with
lamentable conſtructions, we are now on the ſudden turmoiled
with their unballaſted wits in fathomleſs and unquiet deeps. of
controverſy. Mſton on Education.
Full in the prince's paſſage hills of ſand,
And dang'rous fats, in ſecret ambuſh lay,
Where the falſe tides ſkim o'er the cover'd land,
And ſeamen with diſſembled depths betray. Dryden.
The ſea could not be narrower than it is, without a great
loſs to the world; and muſt we now have an ocean of mere
ats and ſhallows, to the utter ruin of navigation : Bentley.
5. The broad ſide of a blade.
A dartcd mandate came
From that great will which moves this mighty frame,
Bid me to thee, my royal charge, repair,
To guard thee from the da mons of the air;
My flaming ſword above 'em to diſplay,
All keen and ground upon the edge of day,
The fat to ſweep the viſions from thy mind,
The edge to cut 'em through that ſtay behind. Dryden.
6. Depreſſion of thought or language. -
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt is admirable; but am I therefore
bound to maintain, that there are no flats amongſt his eleva-
tions, when 'tis evident he creeps along ſcnctimes for, above
an hundred lines together Dryden.
7. A ſurface without relief, or prominences. -
Are there then ſuch raviſhing charms in a dull unvaried
flat, to make a ſufficient compenſation for the chief things of
the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the laſt-
ing hills. Bentley's sº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L A
:
To Flat. v. a. [from the noun.]... . . . . .
1. To level; to depreſs; to make broad and ſmooth.
The ancients ſay, if you take two twigs of ſeveral fruit-
trees, and fiat them on the ſides, and bind them cloſe, and
ſet them in the ground, they will come up in one ſtock. Bacon.
With horrid ſhapes ſhe does her ſons expoſe,
Diſtends their ſwelling lips, and flats their noſe. Creech.
2. To make vapid. * * -
An orange, lemon ând apple, wrapt in a linen cloth, being
buried for a fortnight four foot deep within the earth, though
in a moiſt place and rainy time, were become a little harder
than they were ; otherwiſe freſh in their colour, but their juice
ſomewhat flatted. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 377.
To Flat. v. n, -
i. To grow flat: oppoſed to ſwell. ... " -
I burnt it the ſecond time, and obſerved the ſkin ſhrink,
and the ſwelling to flat yet more than at firſt. Temple.
2. To obſtrućt; retard; hinder; to render unanimated or evanid.
Nor are conſtant forms of prayer more likely to flat and
hinder the ſpirit of prayer and devotion, than unpremeditated
and confuſed variety to diſtraćt and loſe it. K. Charles.
Flatlong. adv. [flat and long.] With the flat downwards;
not edgewiſe.
What a blow was there given
... —An it had not fallen flatlong.
FLATLY. adv. [from flat.j
1. Horizontally; without inclination.
2. Without prominence or elevation.
3. Without ſpirit; dully; frigidly.
4. Peremptorily ; downright. -
He in #. wars had flatly refuſed his aid.
- Thereupon they flat y diſavouch
To yield him more obedience, or ſupport. Daniel’s Ci. War.
Unjuſt, thou ſay'ſt,
Fatly unjuſt, to bind with laws the free. Milt. Parad. Loft.
Not any interpreters allow it to be ſpoken of ſuch as flatly
deny the being of God; but of them that believing his exiſ-
tence, do yet ſeclude him from directing the affairs of the
world. Bentley's Sermons.
FLA’t Ness. n.ſ.. [from fat J
1. Evenneſs; level extenſion.
2. Want of relief or prominence. -
It appears ſo very plain and uniform, that one would think
the coiner looked on the flatneſs of a figure, as one of the
greateſt beauties in ſculpture. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
3. Deadneſs; inſipidity; vapidneſs.
Deadneſs or fatneſs in cyder is often occaſioned by the too
free admiſſion of air into the veſſel. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
4. Dejećtion of ſtate.
The emperor of Ruſſia was my father:
Oh, that he were alive, and here beholding
His daughter's trial that he did but ſee
The flatneſs of my miſery Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
5. Dejećtion of mind; want of life; want of ſpirit.
6. Dulneſs; inſipidity; frigidity.
How faſt does obſcurity, flatneſ, and impertinency flow in
upon our meditations : 'Tis a difficult taſk to talk to the pur-
poſe, and to put life and perſpicuity into our diſcourſes. Collier.
Some of Homer's tranſlators have ſwelled into fuſtian, and
others ſunk into fatneſs. Pope's Preface to Homer.
7. The contrary to ſhrilneſs or acuteneſs of ſound.
Take two ſaucers, and ſtrike the edge of the one againſt
the bottom of the other within a pail of water, and you ſhall
find the ſound groweth more flat, even while part of the ſaucer
is above the water; but that flatneſ; of ſound is joined with a
harſhneſs. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 157.
To Flatten. v. a... [ſatir, French, from flat.]
1. To make even or level, without prominence or elevation.
2. To beat down to the ground.
If they ſhould lie in it, and beat it down, or flatten it, it
will riſe again. Martimer's Husbandry.
3. To make vapid.
4. To dejećt; to depreſs; to diſpirit.
To FLATTEN. v. n.
1. To grow even or level.
2. To grow dull and inſipid. -
Here joys that endure for ever, freſh and in vigour, are op-
poſed to ſatisfačtions that are attended with ſatiety and ſurfeits,
and flatten in the very taſting. L'Eſtrange, Fable 161.
Flat TER... n.ſ.. [from flat..] The workman or inſtrument by
which bodies are flattened. -
To FLATTER. v. a. [fater, French.]
1. To ſooth with praiſes; to pleaſe with blandiſhments; to gra-
tify with ſervile obſequiouſneſs; to gain by falſe compliments.
When I tell him he hates flatterers,
He ſays he does; being then moſt flattered. Shakespeare jul. Caſ
His nature is too noble for the world;
He would not fatter Neptune for his trident,
Or Jove for’s power to thunder: his heart's his mouth;
What his breaſt forges, that his tongue muſt vent. Shakeſp.
He that flattereth his neighbour, ſpreadeth a net for his
%
º
feet. º Prov. xxix. 5.
R
Shalºftware, Timºſ.
Sidney, b. ii.
! He fitterith himſelf in his own eyes, until his iniquity be
found hateful. Pſ xxxvi. 2.
After this way of flattering their willing benefaéiors out of
part, they contrived another of forcing their unwilling neigh-
bours out of all their poſſeſſions. ecay ºf Piety.
Averſe alike to flatter or offend. - Pope.
They flatter'd ev'ry day, and ſome days eat. Pope.
I ſcorn to flºtter you or any man. Dr. Newton's Ded to Milt.
2. To praiſe falſely.
Flutter'd crimes of a licentious age,
... Provoke our cenſure. - 1%ung.
3. To pleaſe; to ſooth. This ſenſe is purely Gallick. -
A conſort of voices ſupporting themſelves by their different
parts make a harmony, pleaſingly fills the ears and fatters
them. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
4. To raiſe falſe hopes. .
He always vacant, always amiable,
Hopes thee, of flatt’ring gales
| Unmindful. Milton.
FLATTE RER. n ſ. [ from fatter. J One who flatters; a
fawner; a wheedler; one who endeavours to gain favour by
pleaſing falſities. -
When I tell him he hates fatterers, .
He ſays he does; being then moſt flattered. Shakespeare jul. Caeſ.
Some praiſes proceed merely of flattery; and if he be an
ordinary flatterer, he will have certain common attributes,
which may ſerve every man: if he be a cunning flatterer,
he will follow the arch flatterer, which is a man's ſelf. But
if he be an impudent flatterer, look wherein a man is con-
ſcious to himſelf that he is moſt defective, and is moſt out
of countenance in himſelf, that will the fatterer entitle him
to perforce. - Bacon, Eſſay 54.
lf we from wealth to poverty deſcend,
Want gives to know the flatt'rer from the friend. Dryden.
After treating her like a goddeſs, the huſband uſes her like a
woman: what is ſtill worſe, the moſt abjećt fatterers degene-
rate into the greateſt tyrants. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 13.
. The publick ſhould know this of your ladyſhip; yet who-
ever goes about to inform them, ſhall be cenſured for a flat-
terer. Swift.
Flatt ERY. n.ſ.. [from flatter; faterie, French J Falſe praiſe;
artful obſequiouſneſs; adulation.
Minds, by nature great, are conſcious of their greatneſs,
And hold it mean to borrow aught from fattery. Rowe.
Simple pride for flatt'ry makes demands. Pope.
See how they beg an alms of fattery!
They languiſh, O! ſupport them with a lye. 1%ung.
FLA’ttish. adj. [from flat...] Somewhat flat; approaching to
flatneſs.
Theſe are from three inches over to ſix or ſeven, and of a
flattiſh ſhape. Woodward on Foſſils.
FLA’Tule Ncy. n.ſ. (from flatulent.]
1. Windineſs; fulneſs of wind; turgeſcence by wind confined.
Vegetable ſubſtances contain a great deal of air, which ex-
pands itſelf, producing all the diſorders of flatulency. Arbuthn.
2. Emptineſs; vanity; levity; airineſs.
Whether moſt of them are not the genuine derivations of
the hypotheſis they claim to, may be determined by any that
confiders the natural fatulency of that airy ſcheme of no-
tions. Glanville.
FLATULENT. adj. [flatulentius, flatus, Latin J
1. Turgid with air; windy. -
Peaſe are mild and demulcent; but being full of aerial par-
ticles, are fatulent, when diſſolved by digeſtion. Arbuthnot.
Flatulent tumours are ſuch as eaſily yield to the preſſure of
the finger; but readily return, by their elaſticity, to a tumid
ſtate again: theſe are ſo light as ſcarce to be felt by the par
tient, and no otherwiſe incommodious than by their unſight-
lineſs or bulk. Quincy.
2. Empty; vain; big without ſubſtance or reality; puffy.
To talk of knowledge, from thoſe few indiſtinct repreſen-
tations which are made to our groſſer faculties, is a ſlatulent
vanity. Glanv Scepſ. 6. 23.
Hów many of theſe flatulent writers have ſunk in their re-
putation, after ſeven or eight editions of their works. Pryden:
Fiatuo'sity. n.ſ.. [fatuºſité, French, from fiatus, Latin. J
Windineſs; fulneſs of air.
The cauſe is fatuoſity; for wind ſtirred, moveth to expel;
and all purgers have in them a raw ſpirit or wind, which is the
principal cauſe of tenſion in the ſtomach and belly, . Bacon.
FEaſtuous. adj. [from flatus, Latin.] Windy; full of wind.
Rhubarb in the ſtomach, in a ſmall quantity, doth digeſt
and overcome, being not fatuous nor loathſome; and ſo ſend-
eth it to the meſentery veins, and, being opening, it helpeth
down urine. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 44.
FLATUS. n.ſ. [Latin.] Wind gathered in any cavities of
the body, cauſed by indigeſtion and a groſs internal perſpira-
tion; which is therefore diſcuſſed by warm aromaticks. Quinc.
FLA'twis E. adj. [fat and wiſe ; ſo it ſhould be written, not
fatways.] With the flat downwards; not the edge.
Its poſture in the earth was fatwiſe, and parallel to the ſite
of the ſtratum in which it was repoſited. Hºodward ºn Fºſſils.
9 H To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">* F L A
F L A
- UNT. v. M.
Tº. a fluttering ſhow in apparel.
- with ivy canopy’d, and interwove
with faunting honeyſuckle. - Milton.
Theſe courtiers of applauſe deny themſelves things conve-
nient to flaunt it out, being frequently enough fain to immo-
i.e. their own deſires to their vanity. Boyle.
Here, attir'd beyond our purſe, we go,
For uſeleſs ornament and flaunting ſhow:
we take on truſt, in purple robes to ſhine: y
And poor, are yet ambitious to be fine. Dryden's juvenal.
You 'ſot, you loiter about alehouſes, or ſaunt about the
ſtreets in your new-gilt chariot, never minding me nor your
numerous family. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of jºhn Bull.
2. To be hung with ſomething looſe and flying. This ſeems
be proper.
not ‘... men has ſome ſmall diff'rence made;
One faunts in rags, one flutters in brocade. Pope's Eſſays.
FLAUNT, n.ſ. Anything looſe and airy.
How would he look to ſee his work ſo noble,
Wildly bound up, what would he ſay! or how
Should I in theſe my borrow'd faunts behold
The ſternneſs of his preſenceſ Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale,
FLAVOUR. m. ſ.
1. Power of pleaſing the taſte. -
They have a certain favour, at their firſt appearance, from
ſeveral accidental circumſtances, which they may loſe, if not
taken early. Addſºn's Spectator, N°. 488.
2. Sweetneſs to the ſmell; odour; fragrance.
Myrtle, orange, and the bluſhing roſe, -
with bending heaps, ſo nigh their bloom diſcloſe, }
Each ſeems to ſmell the flavour which the other blows. Dry.
FLA'vourous. adj. [from favour.]
1. Delightful to the palate. - ---&gt;
Sweet grapes degen'rate there, and fruits declin'd
From their firſt flav’rous taſte, renounce their kind. Dryden.
2. Fragrant; odorous.
FLAW, n.ſ. [paga, to break; Floh, Saxon, a fragment;
fauw, Dutch, broken in mind.]
1. A crack or breach in anything.
This heart ſhall break into a thouſand flaws,
Or ere I weep. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Wool, new-ſhorn, being laid caſually upon a veſſel of ver-
juice, after ſome time had drunk up a great part of the ver-
juice, though the veſſel were whole, without any flaw, and
† not the bunghole open. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
We found it exceeding difficult to keep out the air from
getting in at any imperceptible hole or flaw. Boyle.
A flaw is in thy ill-bak'd veſſel found ;
'Tis hollow, and returns a jarring ſound. Dryden's Perſ.
As if great Atlas, from his height,
Should ſink beneath his heavenly weight;
And with a mighty flaw the flaming wall, as once it ſhall,
Should gape immenſe, and, ruſhing down, o'erwhelm this
nether ball. Dryden.
Whether the nymph ſhall break Diana's law,
Or ſome frail China-jar receive a flaw. Pope.
He that would keep his houſe in repair, muſt attend every
little breach or flaw, and ſupply it immediately, elſe time
alone will bring all to ruin. Swift.
2. A fault; defect.
Yet certain though it be, it hath flaws; for that the ſcri-
veners and brokers do value unſound men to ſerve their own
turn. Bacon's Eſſays.
Traditions were a proof alone,
Could we be certain ſuch they were, ſo known:
But ſince ſome faws in long deſcents may be,
They make not truth, but probability.
And laid her dowry out in law,
To null her jointure with a flaw. Hudibras, p. iii. c. 1.
Their judgment has found a faw in what the generality
of mankind admires. Addison's Spectator.
So many flaws had this vow in its firſt conception. Alterb.
3. A ſudden guſt; a violent blaſt. [from fo, Latin.]
Being incens'd, he's flint; -
As humourous as Winter, and as ſudden
Asſaws congealed in the ſpring of day. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Should patch a wall, t' expel the Winter's flaw. Shakespeare Ham.
As a huge fiſh, laid
Near to the cold weed-gathering ſhore, is with a north flaw
Dryden.
Shoots back; ſo, ſent againſt the ground, [fraid,
Was foil'd Eurialus. Chapman's Iliads.
Burſting their brazen dungeon, arm'd with ice,
And ſnow, and hail, and ſtormy guſt, and flaw,
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argeſtes loud,
And Thraſcias rend the woods, and ſeas upturn. Milton.
I heard the rack,
{\; earth and ſky would mingle; but myſelf
Was diſtant; and theſe flaws, though mortals fear them,
As dangerous to the pillar'd frame of heav'n,
Or to the earth's dark baſis underneath,
Are to the main inconſiderable. A4ilton's Paradiſ. L9/?.
4. A tumult; a tempeſtuous uproar.
And this fell tempeſt ſhall not ceaſe to rage,
Until the golden circuit on my head
Do calm the fury of this madbrain'd ſaw. Shaft. Hen. VI.
The fort's revolted to the emperor,
The gates are open'd, the portcullis drawn,
And deluges of armies from the town
Came pouring in : I heard the mighty flaw;
When firſt it broke, the crowding enſigns ſaw
Which choak'd the paſſage. Dryden's Murengzºle.
5. A ſudden commotion of mind. &amp;
Oh theſe flaws and ſtarts,
Impoſtors to true fear, would become -
A woman's ſtory at a Winter's fire. Slakeſ care', Macial.
To Flaw. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To break; to crack; to damage with fiſſure.
But his flaw'd heart,
Alack, too weak the confliº to ſupport,
'Twixt two extremes of paſſion, joy and grief,
Burſt ſmilingly. Sha ſpeare's King Lear.
The cup was flawed with ſuch a multitude of little cracks,
that it looks like a white, not like a cryſtalline cup. Boyle.
The brazen cauldrons with the froſts are faw'd,
The garment ſtiff with ice, at hearths is thaw'd. Dryden.
2. To break; to violate. Out of uſe.
France hath faw'd the league, and hath attach'd
Our merchants goods. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
FLA'wless. adj. [from ſaw.] Without cracks; without de-
feóts.
A ſtar of the firſt magnitude, which the more high, more
vaſt, and more flawleſ, ſhines only bright enough to make
itſelf conſpicuous. Boyle on Colouri.
FLAwn, n.ſ. [plena, Saxon; fan, French ; vlaeye, Dutch.]
A ſort of cuſtard; a pie baked in a diſh. Dići.
To FLA'wt ER. v. a. To ſcrape or pare a ſkin. Ainſworth.
FLA'w Y. adj. [from flaw.] Full of flaws. -
FLAX. n. / [Fleax, rlex, Saxon; vlas, Dutch.]
1. The fibrous plant of which the fineſt thread is made.
The leaves, for the moſt part, grow alternately on branches:
the cup of the flower conſiſts of one leaf, is tubulous, and
divided into five parts at the top: the flower conſiſts of five
leaves, which expand in form of a clove gilliflower: the ova-
ry, which riſes from the centre of the flowercup, becomes an
almoſt globular fruit, which is generally pointed, and com-
poſed of many cells, in which are lodged many plain ſmooth
ſeeds, which are blunt at one end, and generally ſharp at the
other. The ſpecies are ſix. The firſt ſort is that which is
cultivated for uſe in divers parts of Europe, and is reckoned an
excellent commodity. It ſhould be cultivated. Miller.
2. The fibres of flax cleanſed and combed for the ſpinner.
I'll fetch ſome flax, and whites of eggs,
T’apply to's bleeding face. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Then on the rock a ſcanty meaſure place
Of vital flax, and turn'd the wheel apace, , ---
And turning ſung. Dryden's Ovid, b. viii.
FLA(xcomb. n.ſ.. [fax and comb. ) The inſtrument with
which the fibres of flax are cleanſed from the brittle parts.
FLA's DR Esse R. n.ſ.. [fax and dreſs.] He that prepares flax
for the ſpinner.
FLA's EN. adj. [from fax.]
1. Made of flax.
The matron, at her nightly taſk, --
With penſive labour draws the ſaxen thread. Thorſ. Hinter.
The beſt materials for making ligatures are the flaxen thread
that ſhoemakers uſe. Sharp's Surgery.
2. Fair, long and flowing, as if made of flax. -
I bought a fine faxen long wig, that coſt me thirty guineas.
Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 97.
FLA’zweep. m. ſ. A plant.
To FLAY. v. a. ſad flaa, Iſlandick; fae, Daniſh; vlaen, Dut]
1. To ſtrip of the ſkin.
I muſt have ſuffered famine, been eaten with wild beaſts, or
have fallen into the hands of the Spaniards, and been fººd
alive. Raleigh's Apolºgy:
While the old levitical hierarchy continued, it was part ºf
the miniſterial office to ſay the ſacrifices. South.
Then give command the ſacrifice to haſte;
Let the ſay'd vićtims in the plains be caſt;
And ſacred vows, and myſtick ſong, apply'd
To griſly Pluto and his gloomy bride. Pope's Odſey, *.x.
2. To take off the ſkin or ſurface of anything.
They fay their ſkin from off them, break their bones, and
chop them in pieces. Aaac. iii. 3.
Neither ſhould that odious cuſtom be allowed of cutting
ſcraws, which is fiaying off the green ſurface of the ground,
to cover their cabins, or make up their ditches Swift.
FLA'YER. n.ſ.. [from ſay..] He that ſtrips off the ſkin of any
thing.
Fº m. ſ. [Flea, Saxon; vkye, Dutch ; feach, Scottiſh J . A
ſmall red infect remarkable for its agility in leaping, which
ſucks the blood of larger animals.
While wormwood hath ſeed, get a handful or twan,
To ſave againſt March to make y ea to refrain :
Whºſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L E
F L E
º,
2-4
º:
º
."
2%
ºt
sº
* *
ſº
;:
º
it.
... }
gº;
ſº
º'
| |
º
Where chamber is ſweeped, and wormwood is ſtrown,
No flea for his life dare abide to be known. Tuff. Haſland.
Fleas breed principally of ſtraw or mats, where there hath
been a little moiſture. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A valiant fiea, that dares eat his breakfaſt on the lip of a
lion. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
To FLEA. v. a. [from the noun..] To clean from fleas.
Fle’A BANE. n.ſ.. [flea and bane..] A plant.
It hath undivided leaves, which, for the moſt part, are glu-
tinous, and have a ſtrong ſcent: the cup of the flower is for
the moſt part ſcaly, and of a cylindrical form : the flower is
compoſed of many florets, which are ſucceeded by ſeeds with
F a downy ſubſtance adhering to them. AMiller.
LE'A BITE. -
FL E(ABITING. }n.ſ. [flea and bite.]
1. Red marks cauſed by fleas.
The attendance of a cancer is commonly a breaking out all
over the body, like a fleabiting. //iſeman's Surgery.
2. A ſmall hurt or pain like that cauſed by the ſting of a flea.
A gout, a cholick, a cutting off an arm or leg, or fearing
the fleſh, are but feabites to the pains of the ſoul. Harvey.
The ſame expence that breaks one man's back, is not afted-
biting to another. L'E/irange, Fable 229.
Fle’AB 17 teN. adj. [ffea and bite.]
1. Stung by fleas
2. Mean ; worthleſs.
Fleabitten ſynod, an aſſembly brew’d
Of clerks and elders ana, like the rude
Chaos of preſbyt'ry, where laymen guide,
With the tame woolpack clergy by their fide. Cleaveland.
Fle’Ak. v. a. [from fºccus, Latin. See Flake..] A ſmall
lock, thread, or twiſt.
The buſineſſes of men depend upon theſe little long fleaks
or threads of hemp and flax. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
FLEAM. m. ſ. [corrupted from pasſ}}rouoy, the inſtrument uſed
in phlebotomy.] An inſtrument uſed to bleed cattle, which
is placed on the vein, and then driven by a blow.
Fle'A wort. n. ſ. [ſica and wort J A plant.
This plant agrees with plantain and buckſhorn-plantain in
every reſpect, excepting that this riſes up with leafy ſtalks,
and divides into many branches; whereas both the others pro-
duce their flowers upon naked pedicles. Miller.
To FLECK. v. a. [fleck, German, a ſpot, Skinner: perhaps it
is derived from fleak, or fleke, an old word for a grate, hurdle,
or any thing made of parts laid tranſverſe, from the Iſlandick
flake.] To ſpot; to ſtreak; to ſtripe; to dapple; to varie-
te.
ga Let it not ſee the dawningfieck the ſkies,
Nor the grey morning from the ocean riſe. Sandys.
Fleck'd in her face, and with diſorder'd hair,
Her garments ruffled, and her boſom bare. Dryden's juven.
Both flºck'd with white, the true Arcadian ſtrain. Dryden.
To FLE'ck ER. v. a. [from feck.] To ſpot; to mark with
ftrokes or touches of different colours; to mark with red
whelkes. -
The grey-ey'd morn ſmiles on the frowning night,
Check ring the eaſtern clouds with ſtreaks of light;
And darkneſs fecker'd, like a drunkard, reels
From forth day's path, and Titan's burning wheels. Shakeſp.
FLED. The preterite and participle not properly of fly, to uſe
the wings, but of flee, to run away.
The truth is fied far away, and leaſing is hard at hand.
2 Eſdr. xiv. 18.
In vain for life he to the altar fied;
Ambition and revenge have certain ſpeed. Prior.
FLEDGE. adj. [federen, to fly, Dutch..] Full-feathered; able
to fly; qualified to leave the neſt.
We did find
The ſhells of fledge ſouls left behind.
His locks behind,
Illuſtrious on his ſhoulders, fledge with wings,
Lay waving round. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
Herbert.
To Fled GE. v. a. [from the adjećtive.] To furniſh with
wings; to ſupply with feathers.
The birds were not as yet fledged enough to ſhift for them-
ſelves. L’Eſtrange, Fable 72.
The ſpeedy growth of birds that are hatched in neſts, and
fed by the old ones 'till they be fledged, and come almoſt to
full bigneſs in about a fortnight, ſeems to me an argument of
providence. Ray on the Creation.
The ſandals of celeſtial mould,
Fledg'd with ambroſial plumes, and rich with gold,
Surround her feet. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
To FLE E. v. m. pret, fled. [This word is now almoſt univer-
ſally written fly, though properly to fly, Eleozan, is to move
with wings, and fice, plean, to run away. They are now con-
founded.] To run from danger; to have recourſe to ſhelter.
Behold, this city is near to flee unto. Gen. xix. 20.
Were men ſo dull they could not ſee
That Lyce painted; ſhould they fee
5
Like ſimple birds into a net,
So groſly woven and ill ſet; Iła'lºr.
There are none of us fall into thoſe circumſtances of in.
§ºr, Want, or pain, that we can have hopes of relief but
from God alone; none in all the world to fee to, but him.
Tillotſon, Sermon I.
FLEECE. n.ſ. [Flyr, Fler, Saxon; vleeſ, É As much
wool as is ſhorn from one ſheep.
Giving account of the annual increaſe
Both of their lambs and of their woolly fleece. Hubb. Tale.
So many days my ewes have been with young,
° many months ere I ſhall ſheer the ſize. Shai. Hen. VI.
I am ſhepherd to another man,
And do not ſheer the fleeces that I graze. Shakespeare As you like it.
Her ſunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golde
Sailors have uſed ever golden fleece.
ſides of their ſhips,
- Shakeſpeare.
y night to hang feeces of wool on the
towards the water; and they have cruſhed.
freſh water out ºf them in the morning. Baconi, Nat. Hiſtory.
The ſheep will prove much to the advantage of the woollen
manufacture, by the fineneſs of the fºrces. Čuljivºr, Traº...
To FLEE cº. v. a. [from the noun.
1. To clip the fleece off a ſheep. -
2. lººp, to pull; to plunder, as a ſheep is robbed of his
Wool.
Courts of juſtice have a ſmall penſion, ſo that they are
tempted to take bribes, and to feece the people. Addſon.
FLE'Ecº D. adj. [from ſleece J Having fleeces of wool.
. As when two rams, ſtirr'd with ambitious pride,
Fight for the rule of the rich feared flock,
Their horned fronts ſo fierce on either ſide
Do meet, that with the terror of the ſhock -
Aſtonied both ſtand ſenſeleſs as a block. Fairy Queen, b. i.
FLE'Ecy. adj. [from fleece..] Woolly; covered with wool.
Not all the flee y wealth
That doth enrich theſe downs, is worth a thought
To that my errand. Milton.
From eaſtern point
Of Libra, to the feecy ſtar, that bears
Andromeda far off Atlantic ſeas. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
Let her glad valleys ſmile with wavy corn;
Let fleecy flocks her fiſing hills adorn. Prior.
The good ſhepherd tends his fleecy care,
Seeks freſheſt paſture, and the pureſt air;
Explores the loſt, the wand'ring ſheep dire&amp;s. Pope's Mºſſ.
To FLEER. v. n. [Eleanbian, to trifle, Saxon; ficardan, Scot-
tiſh. Skinner thinks it formed from leer.] -
1. To mock; to gibe; to jeſt with inſolence and contempt.
You ſpeak to Caſca, and to ſuch a man
That is no fleering tell-tale. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar,
Dares the ſlave
Come hither, cover'd with an antick face,
To fleer and ſcorn at our ſolemnity | Shakespeare. Rom. and juliet.
Do I, like the female tribe,
Think it well to feer and gibe Swift.
2. To leer; to grin with an air of civility. -
How popular and courteous; how they grin and ficer upon
every man they meet ! Burton on Melanch:ly.
FLEER. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Mockery expreſſed either in words or looks.
Encave yourſelf,
And mark the feers, the gibes, and notable ſcorns,
That dwell in ev'ry region of his face. Shakeſp. Othello.
2. A deceitful grin of civility. -
If a man will but obſerve ſuch perſons exactly, he ſhall ge-
nerally ſpy ſuch falſe lines, and ſuch a ſly treacherºus fleer upon
their face, that he ſhall be ſure to have a caſt of their eye to
warn him, before they give him a caſt of their nature to betray
him. South's Sermons.
Fle’ERER. m.ſ.. [from ſeer.] A mocker; a fawner. Dić7.
FLEET. Fle ot. Flot. Are all derived from the Saxon Fleof,
which ſignifies a bay or gulph. Gilſon's Camden.
FLEET. n.J. [Flota, Saxon.] A company of ſhips; a navy.
Our pray'rs are heard; our maſter's fleet ſhall go , .
As far as winds can bear, or waters flow. Prior.
FLEET. n. ſ. [pleot, Saxon, an eſtuary, or arm of the ſea. ] A
creek; an inlet of water. A provincial word, from which
the Fleet-priſon and Fleet-ſtreet are named. . . .
They have a very good way in Eſſex of draining of lands
that have land-floods or feet; running through them, which
make a kind of a ſmall creek. Martimer's Hºſandry.
Fleet. adj. [fictur, Iſlandick J Swift of pace; quick; nim-
ble; ačtive. -
Upon that ſhore he ſpied Atin ſtand ; º
There by his maſter left, when late he far'd
In Phaedria's feet bark. Fairy Qween.
I take him for the better dog:
Thou art a fool: if Echo were as feet,
I would eſteem him worth a dozen ſuch. Shakespeare care.
He had in his ſtables one of the fleeteſt horſes in England. Clar
His fear was greater than his haſte, - For<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L É
F L E
º
For fear, though fleeter than the wind, - --- *
Believes 'tis always left behind. Hudibrat, p. iii. cant. 3.
. So fierce they drove, their courſers were ſofleet,
That the turf trembled underneath their feet. Dryden.
He told us, that the welkin would be clear
When ſwallows fleet ſoar high and ſport in air. Gay.
Ten thouſand thouſand fleet ideas -
Croud faſt into the mind. Thomſon's Autumn.
2. [In the huſbandry of ſome provinces.] Light; ſuperficially
fruitful. -
Marl cope-ground is a cold, ſtiff, wet clay, unleſs where it
is very fleet for paſture. - 2Mortimer.
3. Skimming the ſurface. -
Thoſe lands muſt be plowed feet. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To Fleet. v n. [Flozan, Saxon.]
1. To fly ſwiftly; to vaniſh.
How all the other paſſions feet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and raſh embrac'd deſpair! Shakuſp.
A wolf, who, hang'd for human ſlaughter,
Ev’n from the gallows did his fell ſoul feet. Shakeſpeare.
2. To be in a tranſient ſtate; the ſame with fit.
Our underſtanding, to make a complete notion, muſt add
ſomething elſe to this feeting and unremarkable ſuperficies,
that may bring it to our acquaintance. Digby on Bodies.
Ofeeting joys
Of Paradiſe, dear-bought with laſting woes! Milt, P. Loft.
While I liſten to thy voice,
Chloris I feel my life decay:
That powerful noiſe
Calls my fleeting ſoul º //aller.
As empty clouds by riſing winds are toſt,
Their feeting forms ſcarce ſooner found than loſt. Prizr.
To Fleet. v. a.
1. To ſkim the water.
Who ſwelling ſails in Caſpian ſea doth croſs,
And in frail wood an Adrian gulph doth feet,
Doth not, I ween, ſo many evils meet. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
2. To live merrily, or paſs time away lightly.
Many young gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet
the time careleſly as they did in the golden age. , Shakeſpeare.
3. [In the country.] To ſkim milk; to take off the cream:
whence the word feeting diſh.
Flee"TING dish. n.ſ.. [from fleet and diſh.] A ſkimming
bowl.
Fle'Etly. adv. [from fleet.] Swiftly; nimbly; with ſwift
pace.
Fle ETNEss. n. ſ. [from feet.] Swiftneſs of courſe; nimble-
neſs; celerity; velocity; ſpeed; quickneſs.
FLESH. n.ſ. [rloec, Floerc, Saxon; vleeſh, Dutch; fºol, Erſe.]
1. The body diſtinguiſhed from the ſoul.
As if this fleſh, which walls about our life,
Were braſs impregnable. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
A diſeaſe that's in my feſh,
Which I muſt needs call mine. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
And thou, my ſoul, which turn'ſt with curious eye
To view the beams of thine own form divine,
Know, that thou can'ſt know nothing perfectly,
While thou art clouded with this fiſh of mine. Davies.
2. The muſcles diſtinguiſhed from the ſkin, bones, tendons.
A ſpirit hath not fiſh and bones. New Tºſłament.
3. Animal food diſtinguiſhed from vegetable.
Fleſh ſhould be forborne as long as he is in coats, or at leaſt
'till he is two or three years old. Locke.
Fleſh, without being qualified with acids, is too alkaleſcent
a diet. • * Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Acidity in the infant may be cured by a fleſh diet in the
nurſe. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
4. #: body of beaſts or birds uſed in food, diſtinct from
es.
There is another indićtment upon thee, for ſuffering fleſh
to be eaten in thy houſe, contrary to the law. Shakespeare. H.I.V.
We mortify ourſelves with the diet of fiſh; and think we
fare coarſely, if we abſtain from the fiſh of other animals.
- Brown's Wugar Errours.
5. Animal nature.
The end of all fleſh is come before me.
6. Carnality; corporal appetites,
Name not religion; for thou lov'ſt the fleſh. Shakespeare
Faſting ſerves to mortify the fleſh, and ſubdue the luſts
thereof. Smalridge's Sermons.
7. A carnal ſtate; worldly diſpoſition.
They that are in the fleſh cannot pleaſe God. Rom. viii. 8.
The fleſh luſteth againſt the ſpirit, and the ſpirit againſt the
fiſh. Gal. v. 16.
8. Near relation.
Let not our hand be upon him; for he is our fleſh. Gen.
When thou ſeeſt the naked, cover him; and hide not thy-
ſelf from thine own fiſh. Iſa. lviii. 7.
9. The outward or literal ſenſe. The Orientals termed the
immediate or literal ſignification of any precept or type the
fiſh, and the remºte or typical meaning the ſpirit. This is
i.equent in St Paul.
Y c judge after the fºſh.
Gen. vi. 13.
john viii. 15.
To Flesh. v. a.
1. To initiate: from the ſportſman's pračiſe of feeding his
hawks and dogs with the firſt game that they take, or train-
ing them to purſuit by giving them the fleſh of animals.
Good man boy, if you pleaſe; come, I'll fleſh ye. Shakespeare
Every puny ſwordſman will think him a good tame quarry
to enter and fleſh himſelf upon. Government of the Tongue.
2. To harden; to eſtabliſh in any practice, as dogs by often
feeding on any thing.
Theſe princes finding them ſo fºſſed in cruelty, as not to be
reclaimed, ſecretly undertook the matter alone. Sidney, b. ii.
The women ran all away, ſaving only one, who was ſo
fiſhed in malice, that neither during nor after the fight ſhe
gave any truce to her cruelty. Sidney, b. ii.
3. To glut; to ſatiate. -
Harry from curb’d licence plucks
The muzzle of reſtraint; and the wild dog -
Shall fleſh his tooth on every innocent. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman, and this night he
fºſhes his will in the ſpoil of her honour. Shakeſpeare.
The kindred of him hath been foſh’d upon us;
And he is bred out of that bloody ſtrain,
That hunted us in our familiar paths.
Full bravely haſt thou fiſht
Thy maiden ſword. Shakeſpeare’s Henry IV.
Shakespeare Henry V.
FLE'sHP Roºt H. n.ſ.. [fºſh and lºroath.] Broath made by
decočting fleſh.
Her leg being emaciated, I adviſed bathing it with fiſ2-
breath, wherein had been decoded emollient herbs. Jºſeman.
Fle's H.Colour. m. ſ. [feſh and colour.] The colour of fleſh.
A complication of ideas together makes up the ſingle com-
plex idea, which he calls man, whereof white or fºccolºur in
England is one. Lº e.
A looſe earth of a pale fleſhcolour, that is, white with a
bluſh of red, is found in ſmall fiſſures of a brown ſoft ſtone in
the Skrees, a mountain in Cumberland. Woodward on Foji's.
Fle'shfly. n.ſ. [fºſh and fly.] A fly that feeds upon fleſh,
and depoſites her eggs in it.
I would no more endure
This wooden ſlavery, than I would ſuffer -
The foſºfty blow my mouth. Shakespeare's Tempe?.
It is a wonderful thing in fº/ffies, that a fly-maggot, in five
days ſpace after it is hatched, arrives at its full growth and
perfect magnitude. Ray on the Creation.
FLE’s H Hook. n.ſ.. [feſh and hook.] A hook to draw fleſh
from the caldron.
All that the fleſhhook brought up the prieſt took. I Sa. ii. 12.
Fle's Hless. adj. [from fleſh..] Without fleſh.
Fle's Hliness. m. ſ. [from feſhly..] Carnal paſſions or ap-
tites. -
pe When ſtrong paſſions or weak fleſhlineſ;
Would from the right way ſeek to draw him wide,
He would, through temperance and ſtedfaſtneſs,
Teach him the weak to ſtrengthen, and the ſtrong ſuppreſs.
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 4. ſtan. 2.
Corrupt manners in living, breed falſe judgment in doc-
trine: fin and fleſhlineſs bring forth ſcèts and hereſies. Aftham.
Fle's Hly. adj. [from fiſh.]
1. Corporeal.
Nothing reſembles death ſo much as ſleep;
Yet then our minds themſelves from ſlumber keep,
When from their fiſhly bondage they are free. Denham:
2. Carnal; laſcivious.
From amid'ſt them roſe
Belial, the diſſoluteſt ſpirit that fell,
The ſenſualeſt; and, after Aſmodai,
The fiſhliſt incubus. Paradiſe Regained, b. ii.
3. Animal; not vegetable.
'Tis then for nought that mother earth provides
The ſtores of all ſhe ſhows, and all ſhe hides,
If men with fiſhly morſels muſt be fed,
And chaw with bloody teeth the breathing bread. Dryden.
4. Human; not celeſtial; not ſpiritual.
Elſe, never could the force of fiſhly arm
Ne molten metal in his fleſh embrue. Fairy Queen, b. i.
What time th' eternal Lord in fleſhly ſhrine
Enwombed was, from wretched Adam's line,
To purge away the guilt of ſinful crime.
Much offentation, vain of fleſhly arm,
And of frail arms, much inſtrument of war
Before mine eyes thou'ſt ſet. Milton's Par. Regained, b. iii.
FLE’s HMEAT. m. ſ. [fleſh and meat..] Animal food; the fleſh
of animals prepared for food.
Fairy Queen.
The moſt convenient diet is that of feſhmeats. Floyer.
In this prodigious plenty of cattle and dearth of human
creatures, feſhmeat is monſtrouſly dear. Swift.
FLE's HM ENT. n.ſ. [from f/h.] Eagerneſs gained by a ſuc-
ceſsful initiation.
He got praiſes of the king,
For him attempting who was ſelf-ſubdued;
And in the fiſhment of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
FLE's HMosc ER.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L E
F L I
:
Fle's H.Mos GER. m. ſ. [from fiſh...] One who deals in fleſh; a
lin D.
W. the duke a fleſhmonger, a fool, and a coward, as you
then reported him : Shakeſpeare's Meaſure fºr *...".
FLE'shpot. m. ſ. [fleſh and pot.] A veſſel in which fleſh is
cooked; thence plenty of fleſh. r
If he takes away the feſhpºts, he can alſo alter the ap-
petite. - - Taylor's Rule fºr living holy.
Fle's HQUAKE.. n. ſ. [ feſh and quake..] A tremor of the body:
a word formed by johnſon in imitation of earthquake.
They may, blood-ſhaken then,
Feel ſuch a fe/hquake to poſſeſs their powers,
As they ſhall cry like ours:
In ſound of peace or wars,
No harp e'er hit the ſtars.
Fle's HY. adj. [from fleſh.]
1. Plump; full of fleſh; fat; muſculous.
All Ethiopes are fleſhy and plump, and have great lips; all
which betoken moiſture retained, and not drawn out. Bacon.
We ſay it is a fleſhy ſtile when there is much periphraſes and
circuit of words, and when with more than enough it grows
ſat and corpulent. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
The ſole of his foot is flat and broad, being very fleſhy, and
covered only with a thick ſkin; but very fit to travel in ſandy
places. - - Ray.
2. Pulpous; plump: with regard to fruits. -
Thoſe fruits that are ſofleſhy, as they cannot make drink
by expreſſion, yet may make drink by mixture of water. Bacon.
Fletcher. n.ſ.. [from fische, an arrow, French..] A manu-
fačturer of bows and arrows.
It is commended by our fetchers for bows, next unto yew.
- - Mortimer's Husbandry.
FLET. participle paſſive of To fleet. Skimmed; deprived of the
cream.
They teach them to drink ſet milk, which they juſt warm.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
Ben. johnſºn's New-Inn.
Flew. The preterite of fly.
The people flew upon the ſpoil.
O'er the world of waters Hermes flew,
*Till now the diſtant iſland roſe in view. Pope's Odyſſey, b. v.
I Sa. xiv. 32.
FLEw. n.ſ. The large chaps of a deep-mouthed hound. Hanm.
FLEwen, adj. [from fiew.J. Chapped; mouthed.
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So fiew'd, ſo ſanded, and their heads are hung
With ears that ſweep away the morning dew. Shakeſpeare.
Flex A(NiMous, adj. [flexanimus, Latin.] Having power to
change the diſpoſition of the mind. IDić7.
FlexI B1'LITY. m. ſ. [flexibilité, French, from flexible.]
1. The quality of admitting to be bent; pliancy.
Do not the rays which differ in refrangibility differ alſo in
flexibility 2 And are they not, by their #. inflexions, ſe-
parated from one another, ſo as after ſeparation to make the
colours ? Newton's Opt.
Corpuſcles of the ſame ſet agree in every thing; but thoſe
that are of diverſe kinds differ in ſpecifick gravity, in hard-
neſs, and in flexibility, as in bigneſs and figure. Woodward.
2. Eaſineſs to be perſuaded; dućtility of mind; compliance;
facility.
Adviſe me to reſolve rather to err by too much flexibility
than too much perverſeneſs, by meekneſs than by ſelf-love.
Hammond's Prači. Catech.
FLEXIBLE, adj. [flexibilis, Latin; flexible, French.]
1. Poſſible to be bent; not brittle; eaſy to be bent; pliant;
not ſtiff.
When ſplitting winds
Make flexible the knees of knotted oaks. Shakespeare. Troil, and Creſ.
Take a ſtock-gillyflower and tie it upon a ſtick, and put
them both into a ſtoop glaſs full of quickſilver, ſo that the
flower be covered: after four or five days you ſhall find the
flower freſh, and the ſtalk harder and leſs flexible than it was.
Bacon's Natural §: Nº. 796.
2. Not rigid; not inexorable; complying; obſequious.
Phocyon was a man of great ſeverity, and no ways flexible
to the will of the people. Bacon.
3. Dućtile; manageable.
Under whoſe care ſoever a child is put to be taught, during
the tender and flexible years of his life, it ſhould be one who
thinks Latin and language the leaſt part of education. Locke.
4. That may be accommodated to various forms and purpoſes.
This was a principle more flexible to their purpoſe. Rogers.
FLE'x1BLENEss. n.ſ. [from flexible.] - -
I. Poſſibility to be bent; not brittleneſs; eaſineſs to be bent;
not ſtiffneſs; pliantneſs; pliancy.
I will rather chuſe to wear a crown of thorns, than to ex-
change that of gold for one of lead, whoſe embaſed flexibleneſ;
ſhall be forced to bend. King Charles.
Keep thoſe ſlender aerial bodies ſeparated and ſtretched out,
which otherwiſe, by reaſon of their flexibleneſ; and weight,
would flag or curl. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
. Facility; obſequiouſneſs; compliance.
, Dućtility; manageableneſs. -
The fixiblenºſ of the former part of a mah's age, not yet
grown up to be headſtrong, makes it more governable. Loºke.
2
3
Fie'xii.e. adj. [flexilis, Latin, Pliant; eaſily bent; obſe-
quious to any power or impulſe. -
Every fiexile wave
, Obeys the blaſt, th’aerial tumult ſwells. Thomſºn's Summer.
Fi Exion. n.ſ.. [flexio, Latin.]
1. The act of bending. -
2. A double; a bending; part bent; joint.
Of a ſinuous pipe that may have ſome four flexions, trial
would be made. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 222.
3. A turn towards any part or quarter.
Pity cauſeth ſometimes tears, and a flexion or caſt of the eye
aſide. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 71.
FLEXOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] The general name of the muſéles
which ačt in contračting the joints. -
Flatterers, who have the fiexor muſcles, ſo ſtrong that they
are always bowing and cringing, might in ſome meaſure be
corrected by being tied down upon a tree by the back. Arºuth.
FLE'xuous, adj. [ſexuoſus, Latin.]
1. Winding; full of turns and meanders; tortuous.
In regard of the ſoul, the numerous and crooked narrow
cranies, and the reſtrained flexuous rivulets of corporeal things
are all contemptible. Digby on the sil.
2. Bending; not ſtrait; variable; not ſteady. -
The trembling of a candle diſcovers a wind, that otherwiſe
we do not feel; and the flexuous burning of flames doth ſhew
the air beginneth to be unquiet. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
FLEXURE. n.ſ.. [flexura, Latin.] - -
1. The form or direction in which any thing is bent.
. . Contrary is the flexure of the joints of our arms and legs
to that of quadrupeds: our knees bend forward, whereas the
ſame joint of their hind legs bends backward. Ray.
2. The aët of bending.
The elephant hath joints, but none for courteſy;
His legs are for neceſſity, not ſexure. Shakespeare. Troil, and Crºſſ.
3. The part bent; the joint.
His mighty ſtrength lies in his able loins,
_And where the flexure of his navel joins. Sandyt.
4. Obſequious or ſervile cringe. -
Think'ſt thou the fiery fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation ? -
Will it give place to flexure and low bends Shakespeare Hen. V.
To FL1'cker. v. a. [figheren, Dutch; pliccenlan, Saxon.]
To flutter; to play the wings; to have a fluttering motion.
Under th’ allowance of your grand aſpect,
Whoſe influence, like the wreath of radiant fire,
On flickering Phoebus' front. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
'Twas ebbing darkneſs, paſt the mid’ of night,
And Phoſpher, on the confines of the light,
Promis'd the ſun, ere day began to ſpring; -
The tuneful lark already ſtretch'd her wing, - }
And flick’ring on her neſt, made ſhort eſſays to fing. Dry.
At all her ſtretch her little wings ſhe ſpread,
And with her feather'd arms embrac'd the dead;
Then flickering to his pallid lips, ſhe ſtrove
To print a kiſs, the laſt eſſay of love. Dryden.
Fli’ER. m. ſ. [from fly.] - -
1. One that runs away; a fugitive ; a runaway. .
Cam'ſt thou from where they made the ſtand?
I did ; - -
Though you, it ſeems, came from the fiers. Shakespeare Cymbel.
The gates are ope, now prove good ſeconds;
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fiers. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Now the fiers from and forſakers of their places, carry the
parliamentary power along with them. King Charles.
2. That part of a machine which, by being put into a more
rapid motion than the other parts, equalizes and regulates the
motion of the reſt; as in a jack.
The fier, tho't had leaden feet, , ,
Turn'd ſo quick, you ſcarce could ſee’t. Swift.
FLIGHT. n.ſ.. [from To fly.]
1. The aët of flying or running from danger. . .
And now, too late, he wiſhes for the fight, -
That ſtrength he waſted in ignoble fight. Denham.
He thinks by fight his miſtreſs muſt be won,
And claims the prize becauſe he beſt did run. Pryd, Ind. Em.
As eager of the chace, the maid -
Beyond the foreſt's verdant limits ſtray'd;
Pan ſaw and lov’d, and, burning with deſire, -
Purſu'd her flight; her fight increas'd his fire. Pope.
2. Removal to another place. -
The fury ſprang above the Stygian flood ; , , ,
And on her wicker wings, ſublime through night,
She to the Latian palace took her fight. Dryden’s Aºn.
3. The act of uſing wings; volation. ---
For he ſo ſwift and nimble was of fight,
That from this lower tract he dar'd to fly
Up to the clouds, and thence with pinions light
To mount aloft unto the cryſtal ſky. Spenſer's Muiopºtnos.
Winds that tempeſ's brew,
When through Arabian groves they take their fight,
Made wanton with rich odours, loſe their ſpite, Dryden.
9 I 4. Removal
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I, f
4. Removal from place to place by means of wings.
Ere the bat hath flown
His cloyſter'd flight. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The fowls ſhall take their flight away together. 2 Eſd. v. 6.
Fowls, by Winter forc'd, forſake the floods,
And wing their haſty fight to happier lands. Dryden's Aen.
5. A flock of birds flying together.
Fights of angels wing thee to thy reſt. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
They take great pride in the feathers of birds; and this
they took from their anceſtors of the mountains, who were
invited unto it by the infinite flights of birds that came up to
the high grounds. Bacon's New Atlantii.
I can at will, doubt not,
Command a table in this wilderneſs;
And call ſwift fights of angels miniſtrant,
Array'd in glory, on my cup tº attend. Milton's Par. Loft.
6. The birds produced in the ſame ſeaſon: as, the harveſt flight
of pigeons.
7. A volley; a ſhower; as much ſhot as is diſcharged at once.
At the firſt flight of arrows ſent, -
Full threeſcore Scots they ſlew. Chevy Chaſe.
Above an hundred arrows diſcharged on my left hand,
pricked me like ſo many needles; and beſides they ſhot ano-
ther fight into the air, as we do bombs. Gulliver's Travels.
8. The ſpace paſt by flying.
9. Heat of imagination; ſally of the ſoul.
Old Pindar's fights by him are reacht,
When on that gale his wings are ſtretcht. Denham.
He ſhewed all the ſtretch of fancy at once; and if he has
failed in ſome of his fights, it was but becauſe he attempted
every thing. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
Strange graces ſtill, and ſtranger flights ſhe had;
Was juſt not ugly, and was juſt not mad. Pope, Epiſtle ii.
Truſt me, dear! good humour can prevail,
When airs and fights, and ſcreams and ſcolding fail. Pope.
10. Excurſion on the wing.
If there were any certain height where the fights of ambi-
tion end, one might imagine that the intereſt of France were
but to conſerve its preſent greatneſs. Temple.
It is not only the utmoſt pitch of impiety, but the higheſt
fight of folly, to deride theſe things. Tillotſon, Sermon 2.
11. The power of flying.
In my ſchool-days, when I had loſt one ſhaft,
I ſhot his fellow of the ſelf-ſame fight
The ſelf-ſame way. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
Fli'GHTY. adj. [from fight.]
1. Fleeting; ſwift. *
Time, thou anticipat'ſt my dread exploits:
The fighty purpoſe never is o'ertook,
Unleſs the deed go with it. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. Wild; full of imagination.
FL1'Ms Y. adj. [Of this word I know not any original, and
ſuſpect it to have crept into our language from the cant of
manufačturers.]
1. Weak; feeble; without ſtrength of texture.
2. Mean; ſpiritleſs; without force.
Proud of a vaſt extent of flimſy lines. Pope, Epiſtle ii.
To FLIN cR. v. n. [corrupted from fing. Skinner.]
1. To ſhrink from any ſuffering or undertaking; to withdraw
from any pain or danger.
Every martyr could keep one eye ſteadily fixed upon im-
mortality, and look death and danger out of countenance
with the other; nor did they finch from duty, for fear of
martyrdom. South's Sermons.
A child, by a conſtant courſe of kindneſs, may be accuſ-
tomed to bear very rough uſage without finching or com-
plaining. Locke.
Oh ingratitude, that John Bull, whom I have honoured
with my friendſhip, ſhould flinch at laſt, and pretend that he
can diſburſe no more money. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſignifies to fail.
If I break time, or finch in property
Of what I ſpoke, unpitied let me die. Shakeſpeare.
Fli'Ncher. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] He who ſhrinks or fails in
any matter. -
To FLING. preter. flung; part, fºung or ſong. v. a. [from
fligo, Latin, Skinner: according to others from flying; ſo to
fling is to ſet flying.]
1. To caſt from the hand; to throw.
The matrons flung their gloves,
Ladies and maids their ſcarfs and handkerchiefs
Upon him. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
'Tis fate that ſings the dice; and as ſhe flings,
Of kings makes peaſants, and of peaſants kings. Dryden.
2. To dart; to caſt with violence.
How much unlike that Hečtor who return’d
Clad in Achilles' ſpoils; when he, among
A thouſand ſhips, like Jove, his lightning flung. Denham.
3. To ſcatter.
Ev'ry beam new tranſient colours fings,
Colours that change whene'er they wave their wings. Pope,
4. To drive by violence.
n
~
A heap of rocks, falling, would expel the waters oºt of
their places with ſuch a violence as to fing them among the
higheſt clouds. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
5. To move forcibly. -
The knight ſeeing his habitation reduced to ſo ſmall com-
º, paſs, ordered all the apartments to be fºung open. Adſ. Speci.
6. To ejećt; to diſmiſs.
Cromwell, I charge thee fling away ambition;
By that fin fell the angels. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
7. To caſt reproach. º
I know thy gen’rous temper:
Fling but the appearance of diſhonour on it,
It ſtrait takes fire. Addison's Catz.
8. To force into another condition, properly into a worſe.
Squalid fortune, into baſeneſs ſong,
Doth ſcorn the pride of wonted ornaments. Spenser.
9. To FLING down. To demoliſh; to ruin.
Theſe are ſo far from raiſing mountains, that they over-
turn and fing down ſome of thoſe which were before ſtand-
ing. //ocaward's Natural Hiſtory.
10. To FLING off. To baffle in the chace; to defeat of a prey.
Theſe men are too well acquainted with the chace to be
fºung off by any falſe ſteps or doubles. Addison's Spectator.
o FLING. v. m.
1. To flounce; to wince; to fly into violent and irregular
In OtionS. -
The angry beaſt
Began to kick, and fling, and wince, -
As if h’ had been beſide his ſenſe. Hudibras, p. i. cant. z.
Their conſciences are galled by it, and this makes them
wince and fling as if they had ſome mettle. Tillotſon's Sermons.
2. To Fling out. To grow unruly or outrageous: from the
act of any angry horſe that throws out his legs.
Duncan's horſes,
Turn'd wild in nature, broke their ſtalls, fºung out,
Contending 'gainſt obedience. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
FLING. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A throw ; a caſt.
2. A gibe ; a ſneer; a contemptuous remark.
No little ſcribbler is of wit ſo bare,
But has his fing at the poor wedded pair.
I, who love to have a fling
Both at ſenate-houſe and king,
Thought no method more commodious
Than to ſhow their vices odious. Swift.
Fli'NGER. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. He who throws.
2. He who jeers.
FLINT. n.ſ. [Fline, Saxon.]
1. A ſemi-pellucid ſtone, compoſed of cryſtal debaſed, of a
blackiſh grey, of one ſimilar and equal ſubſtance, free from
veins, and naturally inveſted with a whitiſh cruſt. It is ſome-
times ſmooth and equal, more frequently rough : its ſize is
various. It is well known to ſtrike fire with ſteel. It is uſe-
ful in glaſſmaking. Hill on Fºſſils.
Searching the window for aftint, I found
This paper. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar,
Love melts the rigour which the rocks have bred;
A flint will break upon a featherbed. Cleaveland.
There is the ſame force and the ſame refreſhing virtue in
fire kindled by a ſpark from a fint, as if it were kindled by a
beam from the ſun. South's Sermons.
Take this, and lay your fint edg’d weapon by. Dryden.
I'll fetch quick fuel from the neighb'ring wood,
And ſtrike the ſparkling flint, and dreſs the food. Prior.
2. Anything eminently or proverbially hard.
Your tears, a heart of flint
Might tender make. Spenser.
Throw my heart
Againſt the flint and hardneſs of my fault. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleop.
FLI'NTY. adj. [from fint.]
1. Made of flint; ſtrong.
Tyrant cuſtom
Hath made the flinty and ſteel couch of war
My thrice-driven bed of down. Shakeſp. Othello.
A pointed flinty rock, all bare and black,
Grew gibbous from behind the mountain's back. Dryden.
2. Full of ſtones.
The gathering up of flints in flinty ground, and laying them
on heaps, is no good huſbandry. Bacon's Natural Hylory.
3. Hard of heart; cruel; ſavage; inexorable.
I did him a deſired office,
Dear almoſt as his life; which gratitude,
Through flinty Tartar's boſom, would peep forth,
And anſwer thanks. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
FLIPP. m. ſ. [A cant word.] A liquor much uſed in ſhips, made
by mixing beer with ſpirits and ſugar. -
The tarpawlin and ſwabber is lolling at Madagaſcar, with
ſome drunken ſunburnt whore, over a can of fip. Dennis.
FLIPPA'NT. adj. [A word of no great authority, probably de-
rived from flip-flap.]
Addison.
I. Nimble;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L f
F L O
1. Nimble; moveable. It is uſed only of the act of ſpeech.
An excellent anatomiſt promiſed to diffect a woman's tongue,
and examine whether there may not be in it certain juices,
which render it ſo wonderfully voluble or flippant. Addiſon.
2. Pert; talkative.
Away with fippant epilogues. Thomſon.
Fli'PPANTLY. adv, [from the adjective..] In a flowing prating
way.
To FLIRT. v. a. [SKinner thinks it formed from the ſound.]
1. To throw anything with a quick elaſtick motion.
Dick the ſcavenger
Flirts from his cart the mud in Walpole's face. Swift. .
2. To move with quickneſs.
Permit ſome happier man
To kiſs your hand, or firt your fan. Dorſet.
To FLIRT. v. n.
1. To jeer; to gibe at one.
2. To run about perpetually; to be unſteady and fluttering.
FLIRT. n.ſ [from the verb.]
1. A quick elaſtick motion.
In unfurling the fan are ſeveral little flirts and vibrations,
as alſo gradual and deliberate openings. Addiſon's Speciator.
Before you paſs th’ imaginary fights
While the ſpread fan o'erſhades your cloſing eyes,
Then give one flirt, and all the viſion flies.
2. A ſudden trick.
Have licence to play,
At the hedge a flirt,
For a ſheet or a ſhirt.
3. A pert young huſſey.
Scurvy knave, I am none of his firt gills; I am none of
his ſkains mates. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Several young flirts about town had a deſign to caſt us out
of the faſhionable world. Addiſon's Guardian, N°. 109.
FLIRTA’t Ion. n.ſ. [ from flirt. ) A quick ſprightly mo-
tion. A cant word among women.
A muſlin flounce, made very full, would give a very agree-
able firtation air. Pope.
To Fijit. v. n. [from To fleet; or from fitter, Daniſh, to re-
move.] -
1. To fly away.
Likeſt it ſeemeth, in my ſimple wit,
Unto the fair ſunſhine in Summer's day,
That when a dreadful ſtorm away is fit, -
Through the broad world doth ſpread his goodly ray. Spenſ.
f His grudging ghoſt did ſtrive
With the frail fleſh; at laſt it fitted is,
Whither the ſouls do die of men that live amiſs. Fairy Qu.
2. To remove; to migrate. In Scotland it is ſtill uſed for re-
moving from one place to another at quarter-day, or the uſual
term.
So hardly he the fitted life does win,
Unto her native priſon to return. Fairy Queen, cant. 7.
It became a received opinion, that the ſouls of men, de-
parting this life, did fit out one body into ſome other. Hooker.
3. To flutter; to rove on the wing.
He made a glancing ſhot, and miſs'd the dove;
Yet miſs'd ſo narrow, that he cut the cord
Which faſten’d, by the foot, the fitting bird.
Fear the juſt gods, and think of Scylla's fate
Chang'd to a bird, and ſent to fit in air.
4. To be flux or unſtable.
Himſelf up high he lifted from the ground,
And with ſtrong flight did forcibly divide
The yielding air, which nigh too feeble found
Her fitting parts, and element unſound. Fairy Queen, b, i.
He ſtopt at once the paſſage of his wind,
And the free ſoul to fitting air reſign'd.
Flit. adj. [from fleet.] Swift; nimble; quick.
And in his hand two darts exceeding fit,
And deadly ſharp, he held; whoſe heads were dight,
In peiſon and in blood, of malice and deſpight. Fairy Qu.
FLItch. n.ſ. [plicce, Saxon; flycke, Daniſh; feche, floche,
French. Skinner.] The ſide of a hog ſalted and cured. .
But heretofore 'twas thought a ſumptuous feaſt,
On birthdays, feſtivals, or days of ſtate,
A ſalt dry fitch of bacon to prepare;
If they had freſh meat, 'twas delicious fare. Dryden's juv.
While he from out the chimney took
A fitch of bacon off the hook,
Cut out large ſlices to be fry'd. Swift.
He ſometimes accompanics the preſent with a fitch of
bacon. Addiſon.
Fliºtt ERMouse, n.ſ. The bat.
FLI'TTING. m. ſ. [pliz, Saxon, ſcandal. J. An offence; a
fault.
Thou telleſt my fittings, put my tears into thy bottle.
Pſalm lwi.
Flix. m. ſ. [corrupted from flax.] Down; fur; ſoft hair.
With his loll'd tongue he faintly licks his prey;
His warm breath blows her fix up as ſhe lies:
She trembling creeps upon the ground away,
Pope.
Ben. johnſon's Gypſies.
Dryd. Æn.
Pope.
Dryden's AEn.
And looks back to him with beſeeching eyes.
FLI's wooD. m. ſ. See HEDGE-Must ARD.
To FLOAT. v. n. [flotter, French.]
1. To ſwim on the ſurface of the water.
When the ſea was calm, all boats alike
Shew'd maſterſhip in floating. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus,
The ark no more now floats, but ſeems on ground,
Faſt on the top of ſome high mountain fix’d. Miſt. P. L.
That men, being drowned and ſunk, do float the ninth
day, when their gall breaketh, are popular affirmations. Brown,
Three bluſtring nights, born by the ſouthern blaſt,
I floated; and diſcover'd land at laſt. Dryden's A.m. b. vi.
His roſy wreath was dropt not long before,
Born by the tide of wine, and floating on the floor. Dryden.
On frothy billows thouſands float the ſtream,
In cumb'rous mail, with love of farther ſhore. Phillips.
Carp are very apt to float away with freſh water. Mortimer.
2. To move without labour in a fluid.
What divine monſters, O ye gods, were theſe
That float in air, and fly upon the ſeas Dryd. Ind. Emp.
Swift they deſcend, with wing to wing conjoin'd,
Stretch their broad plumes, and fat upon the wind. Pope,
3. To paſs with a light irregular courſe.
Floating viſions make not deep impreſſions enough to leave
Drydºn.
in the mind clear, diſtinét, laſting ideas. Locke.
To Flo AT. v. a. To cover with water.
Proud Pačtolus floats the fruitful lands,
And leaves a rich manure of golden ſands. Dryden's AFm.
Venice looks, at a diſtance, like a great town half floated
by a deluge. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Now ſmoaks with ſhow’rs the miſty mountain-ground,
And floated fields lie undiſtinguiſh’d round. Pope's Statius.
The vaſt parterres a thouſand hands ſhall make:
Lo! Cobham comes, and floats them with a lake.
Flo AT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] *
I. The act of flowing; the flux; the contrary to the ebb. A
ſenſe now out of uſe.
Our truſt in the Almighty is, that with us contentions are
now at their higheſt float. Hooker, Preface.
Of this kind is ſome diſpoſition of bodies to rotation, par-
ticularly from Eaſt to Weſt; of which kind we conceive the
main float and refloat of the ſea is, which is by conſent of the
univerſe, as part of the diurnal motion. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. Any body ſo contrived or formed as to ſwim upon the water.
They took it for a ſhip, and, as it came nearer, for a boat;
but it proved a flat of weeds and ruſhes. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
A paſſage for the weary people make;
With oſier floats the ſtanding water ſtrow, -
Of maſſy ſtones make bridges, if it flow. Dryden's Virgil.
3. º cork or quill by which the angler diſcovers the bite of
a hill,
You will find this to be a very choice bait, ſometimes caſt-
ing a little of it into the place where your foat ſwims. Wait.n.
4. A cant word for a level.
Banks are meaſured by the float or floor, which is eighteen
foot ſquare, and one deep. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Flo'ATY. adj. Buoyant and ſwimming a-top.
The hindrance to ſtay well is the extreme length of a ſhip,
eſpecially if ſhe be floaty, and want ſharpneſs of way for-
wards. Raleigh's Eſſayſ.
FLOCK. n.ſ. [Flocc, Saxon.]
1. A company; uſually a company of birds or beaſts.
She that hath a heart of that fine frame,
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
How will ſhe love when the rich golden ſhaft
Hath kill'd the fock of all affections elſe
That live in her. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night,
2. A company of ſheep, diſtinguiſhed from herds, which are of
Oxen.
The cattle in the fields, and meadows green,
Thoſe rare and ſolitary; theſe in focks
Paſturing at once, and in broad herds upſprung. Milton.
France has a ſheep by her, not only as a ſacrifice, but to
ſhew that the riches of the country conſiſted chiefly in flocks
and paſturage. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
3. A body of men.
The heathen that had fled out of Judea came to Nicanor by
ocks. - 2 Mac. xiv. 14.
4. [From flotcus.] A lock of wool.
A houſe well furniſh'd ſhall be thine to keep;
And; for a flock bed, I can ſheer my ſheep. Dryden:
To Flock. v. n. [from the noun..] To gather in crowds or
large numbers. -
Many young gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet
the time careleſly. Shakespeare As you like it.
Upon the return of the ambaſſadors, the poor of all ſorts
flieſ, a together to the great maſter's houſe. Knoller's Hiſtºry.
Others ran focking out of their houſes to the general º;
plication. 2 Mac. iii. 18.
Stilpo, when the people flocked about him, and that one
ſaid, The people come wondering about you, as if it wº
&amp;G
Pope.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L O
|
fee ſome ſtrange beaſt; no, faith he, it is to ſee a man which
Diogenes ſought with his lanthorn at noon-day. Bacon.
Seeing the ſpirits ſwelling the nerves cauſe the arm's mo-
tion, upon its reſiſtance they fock from other parts of the
body to overcome it. Digby on Bodies.
The wits of the town came thither;
'Twas ſtrange to ſee how they flock'd together;
Each ſtrongly confident of his own way,
Thought to gain the laurel that day. . Suckling.
Friends daily flock. Dryden's Aen.
The Trojan youth about the captive fock,
To wonder, or to pity, or to mock. Denham:
People do not flock to courts ſo much for their majeſties
ſervice, as for making their fortunes. L’Eſtrange.
To Floo. v. a. [from flagrum, Latin.] To laſh; to whip;
to chaſtiſe.
The ſchoolmaſter's joy is to fog. Swift.
Flong. particip. paſſive, from To fing, uſed by Spenſer. See
Fling.
FLOOD. m. ſ. [Flob, Saxon; flot, French.]
1. A body of water; the ſea; a river.
What need the bridge much broader than the flood? Shakespeare
His dominion ſhall be alſo from the one ſea to the other, and
from the flood unto the world's end. Pſalm lxxii. 8.
Or thence from Niger flood to Atlas mount,
The kingdoms of Almanzor, Fez, and Sus,
Morocco, and Algiers, and Tremiſen. Milton's Par. Loſt.
All dwellings elſe
Flood overwhelm’d, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water roll'd; ſea cover'd ſea,
Sea without ſhore. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi.
Arcadia's flow'ry plains and pleaſing foods. Dryden's Wirg.
2. A deluge; an inundation.
When went there by an age ſince the great food,
But it was fam'd with more than with one man? Shakeſp.
You ſee this confluence, this great flood of viſiters. Shakespeare
By ſudden foods, and fall of waters,
Buckingham's army is diſpers'd and ſcatter'd. Shakespeare R. III.
3. Flow; flux; not ebb; not reflux; the ſwelling of a river by
rain or inland flood.
We ſeek to know the moving of each ſphere,
And the ſtrange cauſe o' th' ebbs and floods of Nile. Davies.
4. Catamenia.
Thoſe that have the good fortune of miſcarrying, or being
delivered, eſcape by means of their floods revelling the hu-
mours from their lungs. Harvey on Conſumptions.
To Flood. v. a. [from the noun..] To deluge; to cover with
Waters.
Where meadows are flooded late in Spring, roll them with a
large barley-roller. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Flo'odgate. n.ſ.. [flood and gate.] Gate or ſhutter by which
the watercourſe is cloſed or opened at pleaſure.
As if the opening of her mouth to Zelmane had opened
ſome great flºodgate of ſorrow, whereof her heart could not
abide the violent iſſue, ſhe ſunk to the ground. Sidney.
Yet there the ſteel ſtaid not; but inly bate
Deep in his fleſh, and opened wide a red floodgate. Fai. Qy.
His youth, and want of experience in maritime ſervice,
had ſomewhat been ſhrewdly touched, even before the ſluices
and foodgates of popular liberty were yet ſet open. Wotton.
The rain deſcended for forty days, the cataraćts or flood-
gates of heaven being opened. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Flook. n.ſ. [pfiug, a plow, German.] The broad part of the
anchor which takes hold of the ground.
FLOOR. m. ſ. [plon, Flore, Saxon.] -
1. The pavement: a pavement is always of ſtone, the floor
of wood or ſtone; the part on which one treads.
His ſtepmother, making all her geſtures counterfeit afflic-
tion, lay almoſt groveling upon the foor of her chamber. Sidn.
He rent that iron door
With furious force, and indignation fell;
Where entered in, his foot could find no floor,
But all a deep deſcent as dark as hell. Fairy &amp;ueen, b, i,
Look how the flºor of heav'n
Is thick inlay'd with patens of bright gold:
There's not the ſmalleſt orb which thou behold'ſt,
But in his motion like an angel ſings,
Still quiring to the young ey'd cherubims. Shakeſpeare.
The ground lay ſtrewed with pikes ſo thick as a floor is
uſually ſtrewed with ruſhes. Hayward.
He winnoweth barley to-night in the threſhing floor. Ruth.
2. A ſtory; a flight of rooms.
He that building ſtays at one
Floor, or the ſecond, hath erected none. Johnſºn's Catiline.
To Floor. v. a. [from the noun..] To cover the bottom with
a floor.
Hewn ſtone and timber to floor the houſes. 2 Chro. xxxiv.
Floor ING. m. ſ. [from flºor.] Bottom; floor.
The flooring is a kind of red plaiſter made of brick, ground
to powder, and afterwards worked into mortar. Addiſon.
To F LOP. º.º. [from flap.] To clap the wings with noiſe;
to play with any noiſy motion of a broad body.
A blackbird was frighted almoſt to death with a huge flºp.
ing kite that ſhe ſaw over her head. L'E/irange.
Flo'RAL. adj. [ſioralis, Latin. J Relating to Flora, or to
flowers. -
Let one great day
To celebrated ſports and floral play
Be ſet aſide. Prior.
Flo'RENce. n.ſ. [ from the city Florence. J A kind of
cloath. Dif”.
Flo'ReN. n.ſ.. [ſo named, ſays Camden, becauſe made by Flo-
rentines.] A gold coin of Edward III. in value fix ſhillings.
Flo'RET. n.ſ.. [feurette, French.] A ſmall imperfect flower.
FLORID. adj. [floridus, Latin.]
1. Produćtive of flowers; covered with flowers.
2. Bright in colour; fluſhed with red.
Our beauty is in colour inferiour to many flowers; and
when it is moſt florid and gay, three fits of an ague can change
it into yellowneſs and leanneſs. , Taylor's Rule of living hoſ.
The qualities of blood in a healthy ſtate are to be ſlorid,
when let out of the veſſel, the red part congealing ſtrongly
and ſoon. Arbuthnot on Alimenti.
3. Embelliſhed; ſplendid; brilliant with decorations.
The florid, elevated, and figurative way is for the paſſions;
for love and hatred, fear and anger, are begotten in the ſoul,
by ſhewing their objećts out of their true proportion. Dryden.
How did, pray, the florid youth offend,
Whoſe ſpeech you took, and gave it to a friend ? Pºpe.
Flori'Dity. m. ſ. [from florid.] "Freſhneſs of colour.
There is a flºridity in the face from the good digeſtion of
the red part of the blood. Floyer on the Humours.
Flo'RIDNess. n.ſ.. [from florid.]
1. Freſhneſs of colour.
2. Embelliſhment; ambitious elegance.
Though a philoſopher need not delight readers with his
floridneſs, yet he may take a care that he diſguſt them not
by flatneſs. Boyle.
Flori'FERous. adj. [forfer, Latin.] Produćtive of flowers.
FLORIN. m. ſ. [French.] A coin firſt made by the Floren-
tines. That of Germany is in value 2 s. 4d. that of Spain
4s. 4d. halfpenny; that of Palermo and Sicily 2 s. 6d.
that of Holland 2 s.
In the Imperial chamber the proëtors have half a firin
taxed and allowed them for every ſubſtantial receſs. Ayliff.
Flo'R1st. n.ſ.. [feuriſle, French..] A cultivater of flowers.
Some botaniſts or floriſ's at the leaſt. Dunciad, b. iv.
And while they break
On the charm'd eye, th’ exulting floriſt marks
With ſecret pride the wonders of his hand. Thomſ. Spring.
Flo'RwleNT. adj. [ fioris, Latin. J. Flowery; bloſ-
ſoming. - -
Flo'sculous. adj. [fºſculuſ, Latin.] Compoſed of flowers;
having the nature or form of flowers.
The outward part is a thick and carnous covering, and the
ſecond a dry and foſculous coat. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
To Flote. v. a. [See To fleet.] To ſkim.
Such cheeſes, good Ciſley, ye foted too nigh. Taſſºr.
Flo'Tso N. m. ſ. [from flote.] Goods that ſwim without an
owner on the ſea.
Flo'tte N. part. [from flote.] Skimmed.
To FLOUNCE. v. n. [plonſen, Dutch, to plunge.]
1. To move with violence in the water or mire; to ſtruggle or
daſh in the water.
With his broad fins and forky tail he laves
The riſing ſurge, and founces in the waves. Addiſon's Ovid.
2. To move with weight and tumult.
Six founcing Flanders mares
Are e'en as good as any two of theirs. Prior.
3. To move with paſſionate agitation.
When I’m duller than a poſt,
Nor can the plaineſt word pronounce,
You neither fume, nor fret, nor founce. Swift.
To Flou Nce. v. a. To deck with flounces.
She was founced and furbelowed from head to foot; every
ribbon was crinkled, and every part of her garments in
curl. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 129.
They have got into the faſhion of founcing the petticoat ſo
very deep, that it looks lke an entire coat of luteſtring. Pope.
Flou Nce. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Anything ſewed to the gar-
ment, and hanging looſe, ſo as to ſwell and ſhake.
Nay, oft in dreams invention we beſtow,
Skinner.
To change a founce, or add a furbelow. Pºpe.
A muſlin founce, made very full, would be very agree-
able. Pope.
Flo'UNDER. n.ſ.. [fynder, Daniſh; fluke, Scottiſh.] The name
of a ſmall flat fiſh.
Like the founder, out of the frying-pan into the fire. Camd.
Flounders will both thrive and breed in any pond. Mortimer.
To Flo'UNDER. v. n. [from founce.] To ſtruggle with vio-
lent and irregular motions: as a horſe in the mire.
Down goes at once the horſeman and the horſe;
That courſer ſtumbles on the fallen ſteed,
And found'ring throws the rider o'er his head. Dryden.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F I, O
F L O
º,
The more inform’d, the leſs he underſtood, -
And deeper ſunk by flund'ring in the mud. Dryden.
He champs the bit, impatient of his loſs,
And ſtarts aſide, and founders at the croſs. Dryden.
He plung'd for ſenſe, but found no bottom there ;
- Then writ and ſounder'd on, in mere deſpair. Pope's Dunc.
To FLO URISH. v m. [foreo, foreſco, Latin.]
1. To be in vigour; not to fade.
The righteous ſhall flºuriſh like the palm-tree. Pſ, xcii. 12.
Where e'er you tread, the bluſhing flow’rs ſhall riſe,
And all things flºuriſh where you turn your eyes. Pope.
2. To be in a proſperous ſtate.
If I could find example
Of thouſands, that had ſtruck anointed kings,
And ſouriſh'd after, I’d not do't: but ſince
Nor braſs, nor ſtone, nor parchment, bears not one,
Let villany itſelf forſwear’t. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Harry, that propheſied thou ſhould'ſt be king,
Doth comfort thee in ſleep; live thou and ſouriſh. Shakeſp.
He was the patron of my manhood, when I flouriſhed in the
opinion of the world, though with ſmall advantage to my
fortune. Dryden's Dedicat. to Lord Cliffºrd.
3. To uſe florid language; to ſpeak with ambitious copiouſneſs
and elegance.
Whilſt Cicero ačts the part of a rhetorician, he dilates and
fºuriſhes, and gives example inſtead of rule. Baker.
You ſhould not affect to flouriſh in a copious harangue and
a diffuſive ſtyle in company. J/atts's Improvement ºf the A4ind.
They dilate ſometimes, and flouriſh long upon little inci-
dents, and they ſkip over and but lightly touch the drier part
of their theme. - Pºatts's Logick.
4. To deſcribe various figures by interſe&amp;ting lines; to play in
wanton and irregular motions.
Impetuous ſpread
The ſtream and ſnoaking, flouriſh’d o'er his head. Pope.
- 5. To boaſt; to brag.
6. [In muſick.] To play ſome prelude.
To Flo'UR ISH. v. a.
1. To adorn with vegetable beauty.
With ſhadowy verdure fouriſh’d high,
A ſudden youth the groves enjoy. Fenton,
2. To adorn with figures of needle work.
3. To work with a needle into figures. - -
All that I ſhall ſay will be but like bottoms of thread cloſe
wound up, which, with a good needle, perhaps may be fou-
riſhed into large works. Bacon's War with Spain.
4. To move anything in quick circles or vibrations by way of
ſhow or triumph. -
And all the powers of hell in full applauſe
Fouriſh'd their ſnakes, and toſs'd their flaming brands. Cra.
Againſt the poſt their wicker ſhields they cruſh,
Flouriſh the ſword, and at the plaſtron puſh. Dryden's juv.
5. To adorn with embelliſhments of language; to grace with
eloquence oftentatiouſly diffuſive.
We ſhould add the labours of Hercules, though fouriſhed
with much fabulous matter; yet it doth notably ſet forth the
conſent of all nations and ages in the approbation of the ex-
tirpating and debellating giants, monſters and tyrants. Bacon.
6. To adorn; to embelliſh; to grace.
To bring you thus together, 'tis no ſin,
Sith that the juſtice of your title to him
Doth flouriſh the deceit. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
Flo'URIs H. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Bravery ; beauty.
I call'd thee then vain flouriſh of my fortune;
I call'd thee then poor ſhadow, painted queen,
The preſentation of but what I was. Shakespeare. Richard III.
The flouriſh of his ſober youth, -
Was the pride of naked truth. - Craſhaw.
2. An oſtentatious embelliſhment; ambitious copiouſneſs; far-
fetched elegance.
This is a fouriſh : there follow excellent parables. Bacon.
We can excuſe the duty of our knowledge, if we only
beſtow the flouriſh of poetry thereon, or thoſe commendatory
conceits which popularly ſet forth the eminence of this crea-
ture. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 5.
The apprehenſion is ſo deeply rivetted into my mind, that
ſuch rhetorical flouriſhes cannot at all looſen or bruſh it out.
More's Divine Dialogues.
Villanies have not the ſame countenance, when there are
great intereſts, plauſible colours, and flouriſhes of wit and
rhetorick interpoſed between the fight and the objećt. L’E/fr.
The ſo much repeated ornament and flouriſh of their for-
mer ſpeeches was commonly the trueſt word they ſpoke, tho’
leaſt believed hy them. - South's Sermons.
Studious to pleaſe the genius of the times,
With periods, points, and tropes he ſlurs his crimes;
He lards with flouriſhes his long harangue;
'Tis fine, ſay'ſt thou; what to be prais'd, and hang? Dryd.
3. Figures formed by lines curiouſly or wantonly drawn.
A child with delight looks upon emblems finely drawn and
painted, and takes ſome pleaſure in beholding the neat cha-
raēters and ſouriſhes of a bible curiouſly printed. Boyle.
They were intended only for ludicrous ornaments of na-
ture, like the flouriſhes about a great letter that ſignify nothing,
but are made only to ...; the eye. More againſt Atheiſm.
Flo'UR ISHER. m.ſ.. [from flouriſh.] One that is in primé or
in proſperity.
They count him of the green-hair'd eld, they may, or in
his flow'r ;
For not our greateſt fouriſher can equal him in pow'r,
Chapman's Iliad;.
To FLOUT. v. a. [fluyten, Dutch ; fouwe, Friſick. J. To
mock; to inſult; to treat with mockery and contempt.
You muſt flout my inſufficiency. Shakeſpeare.
The Norweyan banners flout the ſky,
And fan our people cold. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices;
Certainly he flouted us downright. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
She railed at her, that ſhe ſhould be ſo immodeſt to write to
one ſhe knew would flout her. Shakeſpeare.
Phillida ſouts me. //alton's Angler.
To Flout. v. n. To pračtiſe mockery; to behave with con-
tempt; to ſneer.
Though nature hath given us wit to flout at fortune, hath
not fortune ſent in this fool to cut off this argument : Shakespeare
With talents well endu'd
To be ſcurrilous and rude;
When you pertly raiſe your ſnout,
Fleer and gibe, and laugh and flout. Swift.
Flout. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A mock; an inſult; a word
or act of contempt.
He would aſk of thoſe that had been at the other's table,
Tell truly, was there never a flout or dry blow given Bacon.
She opened it, and read it out,
With many a ſmile and leeringiſ. Hudibras, p. iii.
Their doors are barr'd againſt a bitter fout ;
Snarl, if you pleaſe; but you ſhall ſnarl without. Dryden.
How many flouts and jeers muſt I expoſe myſelf to by this
repentance How ſhall I anſwer ſuch an old acquaintance
when he invites me to an intemperate cup Calamy’s Serm.
Flo'UT R. m. ſ. [from flout...] One who jeers.
To FLOW. v. n. [ Floyan, Saxon.]
1. To run or ſpread as water.
The god am I, whoſe yellow water flows
Around theſe fields, and fattens as it goes. Dryden's Zn.
Fields of light and liquid ºr ſºw,
Purg'd from the pond rou, d. egs of earth below. Dryden:
Endleſs tears flow down in ſtreams. Swift.
2. To run : oppoſed to ſtanding waters.
With oſter floats the ſtanding water ſtrow;
Of maſſy ſtones make bridges, if it flow. Dryden.
2. To riſe; not to ebb.
This river hath thricef.owd, no ebb between. Shakeſp.
3. To melt.
Oh that thou wouldſt rent the heavens, that the mountains
might flow down at thy preſence. Iſ, lxiv. 1.
4. To proceed; to iſſue.
I'll uſe that tongue I have: if wit flow from 't,
I ſhall do good. Shakeſpeare's JWinter's Tale.
The knowledge drawn from experience is quite of another
kind from that which flows from ſpeculation or diſcourſe. South.
5. To glide ſmoothly without aſperity: as, a flowing period.
This diſcourſe of Cyprian, and the flowers of rhetorick in
it, ſhew him to have been of a great wit and flowing elo-
quence. Hakewill on Prºvidence.
6. To write ſmoothly; to ſpeak volubly.
Virgil is ſweet and flowing in his hexameters. Dryden.
Did ſweeter ſounds adorn my flowing tongue
Than ever man pronounc'd, or angel ſung. Priºr:
7. To abound; to be crowded.
The dry ſtreets flow’d with men.
8. To be copious; to be full.
Then ſhall our names,
Be in their flowing cups freſhly remember'd. Shakespeare Hen. V.
There ev'ry eye with ſlumb'rous chains ſhe bound,
And daſh'd the flowing goblet to the ground. Pope's Odyſſey:
9. To hang looſe and waving.
He was cloathed in a flowing mantle of green ſilk, inter-
woven with flowers. Spectator, Nº. 425.
To Flow. v. a. To overflow; to deluge. *
In a hot dry Summer watering would be a very great ad-
vantage to hops; but it is ſcarce pračticable, º: have
a ſtream at hand to flow the ground. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
Flow. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The riſe of water; not the ebb.
Some, from the diurnal and annual motion of the earth,
endeavour to ſolve the fow, and motions of theſe ſeas, illuſ-
trating the ſame by water in a bowl, that riſes or falls accord-
ing to the motion of the veſſel. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The ebb of tides, and their myſterious flow,
We as arts elements ſhall underſtand. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
2. A ſudden plenty or abundance.
The noble power of ſuffering bravely is as far above that
9 K of
Chapman.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L O
F L O
of enterpriſing greatly, as an unblemiſhed conſcience and in-
flexible reſolution are above an accidental ſºw of ſpirits, or a
ſudden tide of blood. Pºpe.
3. A ſtream of diction; volubility of tongue.
Teaching is not a fow of words, nor the draining of an
hour-glaſs; but an effectual procuring that a man know ſome-
thing which he knew not before, or to know it better. South.
FLO! WER. m. ſ. [ſieur, French ; fos, fores, Latin. J
1. The part of a plant which contains the ſceds.
Such are reckoned perfect ſizwers which have petala, a
ſtamen, apex and ſtylus; and whatever fi wer wants either of
theſe is reckoned in perfeół. Perfect fowers are divided into
ſimple ones, which are not compoſed of other ſmaller ones,
and which uſually have but one ſingle ſtyle; and compounded,
which conſiſt of many floſculi, all making but one ſower.
Simplefowers are monopetalous, which have the body of the
flower all of one intire leaf, though ſometimes cut or divided
a little way into many ſeeming petala, or leaves; as in borage,
bugloſs, &amp;c. or polypetalous, which have diſtinct petala, and
thoſe falling off ſingly, and not all together, as the ſeeming
petala of monopetalous flºwers always do; but thoſe are ſur-
ther divided into uniform and difform fowers : the former
have their right and left hand parts, and the forward and back-
ward parts all alike; but the difform have no ſuch regularity,
as in the flºwers of ſage, deadnettle, &amp;c. A monopetalous
difform fower is likewiſe further divided into, firſt, ſemi-fiſtu-
lar, whoſe upper part reſembles a pipe cut off obliquely, as in
the ariloſłochia: 2d, labiate; and this either with one lip
only, as in the acanthum and ſcordium, or w thrwolips, as
in the far greater part of the labiate flowers: and here the up-
per lip is ſometimes turned upwards, and ſo turns the convex
part downwards, as in the chamaeciſius, &amp;c. but moſt com-
monly the upper lip is convex above, and turns the hollow
part down to its fellow below, and ſo repreſents a kind of
helmet, or monkſhood; and from thence theſe are frequently
called galeate, cucullate, and galericulate flowers; and in this
form are the flowers of the lamium, and moſt verticillate plants.
Sometimes alſo the lamium is intire, and ſometimes jagged or
divided. 3d, Corniculate; that is, ſuch hollowſ wers as Jhave
on their upper part a kind of ſpur, or little horn, as in the
linaria, delphinum, &amp;c. and the carniculum, or calcar, is al-
ways impervious at the tip or point. Compounded flowers
are either, firſt, diſcous or diſcoidal; that is, whoſe floſculi
are ſet together ſo cloſe, thick, and even, as to make the ſur-
face of the flºwer plain and flat, which therefore, becauſe of
its round form, will be like a diſcus; which diſk is ſome-
times radiated, when there is a row of petala ſtanding round
in the diſk, like the points of a ſtar, as in the matricaria,
chamaemelum, &amp;c. and ſometimes naked, having no ſuch
radiating leaves round the limb of its diſk, as in the tanace-
tum : 7d, planifolious, which is compoſed of plain flowers,
ſet together in circular rows round the centre, and whoſe face
is uſual y indented, notched uneven and jagged, as the hiera.
cia, &amp;c. 3d, fiſtular, which is compounded of many
long hollow little flowers, like pipes, all divided into large jags
at the ends. Imperfect f wr, becauſe they want the petala,
are called ſtamineous, apetalous, and capillaceous; and thoſe
which hang pendulous by fine threads, like the juli, are by
Tournefort called amentaceous, and we call them cats-tail.
The term campaniformis is uſed for ſuch as are in the ſhape of
a bell, and infundibuliformis for ſuch as are in the form of a
funnel. Miller.
Good men's lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they ſicken. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
With flow'r inwoven treſſes torn,
The nymphs in twilight ſhade of tangled thickets mourn.
4.ilton.
Beauteous flow’rs why do we ſpread
Upon the monuments of the dead Cowley.
Though the ſame ſun with all-diffuſive rays
Bluſh in the roſe and in the diamond blaze,
We praiſe the ſtronger effort of his power,
And always ſet the gem above the flower. Pope.
If the bloſſom of the plant be of moſt importance, we call
it a flower; ſuch are daiſies, tulips, and carnations. J/atts.
2. An ornament; an embelliſhment.
This diſcourſe of Cyprian, and the excellent flowers of rhe-
torick in it, ſhew him to have been a ſweet and powerful
Orator. - Hakewill on Providence.
Truth needs no flºw’rs of ſpeech. Pope.
3. The prime; the flouriſhing part.
Alas! young man, your days can ne'er be long :
In 'low'r of age you periſh for a ſong. Pope's Horace Impr.
4 The edible part of corn; the meal.
The bread I would have in flºwer, ſo as it might be baked
ſtill to ſerve their neceſſary want. Spenſer on Ireland.
I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flºw'r of all,
And leave me but the bran. Shakeſpeare's Criolanus.
The ſºr of grains, mixed with water, will raake a ſort
of gº- Arbuthnot on Aliment.
Flower de 1 wer, n.ſ. A bulbous iris.
But by thy care twelve urns of wine be filrd,
Next theſe in worth, and firm thoſe urns be ſcal d,
Be twice ten meaſures of the choiceſt four
Prepard, ere yet deſcends the evening hour. Poºr's Odºy.
5. The moſt excellent or valuable part of any thing; quin-
teſſence.
The choice and flower of all things profitable the Pſalms
do more briefly contain, and more movingly expreſs, by rea-
ſon of their poetical form. Hooker.
Thou haſt ſlain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry. Shakespeare Henry VI.
The French monarchy is exhauſted of its braveſt ſubjeas:
the ſizwer of the nation is conſumed in its wars. Aidſon.
6. That which is moſt diſtinguiſhed for anything valuable
He is not the fower of courteſy; but, I warrant him, as
gentle as a lamb. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
It hath a lily flower of one leaf, ſhaped like that of the
common iris: the pointal has three leaves, and the empale-
ment turns to a fruit ſhaped like that of the common iris. Its
root is bulbous. Aºil ºr ſpecifies thirty-four ſpecies of this
plant; and among them the Perſian fower de luce is greatly
eſteemed for the ſweetneſs and beauty of its variegated flowers,
which are in perfection in February, or the beginning of
March.
Crop'd are the flºwer de ’uces in your arms;
Qf England's coat one half is cut away. Shakespeare Henry VI.
The iris is the flower de luce. Peacham.
To Flowe R. v. n. [flºurir, French, or from the noun.]
1. To be in flower; to be in bloſſom ; to bloom; to put forth
flowers.
So forth they marched in this goodly ſort,
To take the ſolace of the open air,
And in freſh flowering fields themſelves to ſport. Fairy Qy.
Sacred hill, whoſe head full high,
Is, as it were, for endleſs memory
Of that dear Lord, who oft thereon was found,
For ever, with a flowring garland crown'd. Fairy Queen.
Then herbs of every leaf, that ſudden flower'd,
Op'ning their various colours. Milton's Paradiſe Lø/º, b. vii.
Mark well the fow'ring almonds in the wood,
If od’rous blooms the bearing branches load. Dryd. Georg.
To leafleſs ſhrubs the flowring palms ſucceed,
And od’rous myrtle to the noiſome weed. Pope's Mºffah.
2. To be in the prime; to flouriſh.
Whilome in youth, when flower'd my youthful ſpring,
Like ſwallow ſwift, I wandered here and there;
For heat of heedleſs luſt me did ſo ſting,
That I of doubted danger had no fear. Spenſer's Paſłral,
This cauſe detain'd me all my flow'ring youth,
Within a loathſome dungeon there to pine Shakesp Hen. VI.
3. To froth ; to ferment; to mantle, as new bottled beer.
Thoſe above water were the beſt, and that beer did flower
a little; whereas that under water did not, though it were
freſh - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 385.
An extreme clarification doth ſpread the ſpirits ſo ſmooth
that they become dull, and the drink dead, which ought to
have a little flowering. Bacon's Natural Hilory.
4. To come as cream from the ſurface.
If you can accept of theſe few obſervations, which have
flowered off, and are, as it were, the burniſhing of many ſtu-
dious and contemplative years, I here give you them to diſpoſe
of. AMilton cn Education.
To Flower. v. a. [from the noun..] To adorn with fiéti-
tious or imitated flowers.
Flow RAGE. m. ſ. [from flower..] Store of flowers. Dić.
Flow FRET. n.ſ. [ſieuret, French. ) A flower; a ſmall
flower.
Sometimes her head ſhe fondly would aguiſe
With gaudy garlands, or freſh flow'rets dight,
About her neck, or rings of ruſhes plight. Fairy Queen.
No more ſhall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruiſe her flow'rets with the armed hoofs
Of hoſtile pacer. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
That ſame dew, which ſometime on the buds
Was wont to ſwell, like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty ſlow'ret's eyes,
Like tears that did their own diſgrace bewail. Shakespeare care.
So to the ſylvan lodge
They came, that like Pomona's arbour ſmil’d,
With flºw'rets deck'd, and fragrant ſmells. Mit. Par. Ioff.
Then laughs the childiſh year with flºw'rets crown'd,
And laviſhly perfumes the fields around;
But no ſubſtantial nouriſhment receives,
Infirm the ſtalks, unſolid are the leaves. Dryden's Fables.
FLO'we R GARDEN. m. ſ. [..ſ.ower and garden.] A garden in
which flowers are principally cultivated.
Obſerving that this manure produced flowers in the field, I
made my gardener try thoſe ſhells in my flowergarden, and I
never ſaw better carnations or flowers. AMortimer’s Husbandry.
Flow ER IN Ess. m. ſ. [from flowery.]
1. The ſtate of abounding in flowers.
4. 2. Floridneſs
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L U
F L U
*-
**-
º
s
• * ,
:-
}.
2. Floridneſs of ſpeech.
Flow ER ING BUSH. n.ſ. A plant. -
The leaves are triangular and graſſy, the ſtalks naked, and
the flowers diſpoſed in an umbella upon the top of the ſtalk,
each conſiſting of ſix leaves: three of them are large, and
three ſmall, which are expanded in form of a roſe. A ſile.
Flow: Ry. adj. [from flower.] Full of flowers; adorned with
flowers real or fićtitious. -
My mother Circe, with the ſyrens three, -
Amid'ſt the flow'ry kirtl’d Naiades. Milton.
Day's harbinger
Comes dancing from the Eaſt, and leads with her
The flow'ry May, who from her green lap throws -
The yellow cowſlip and the pale primroſe. . . Milton.
O'er his fair limbs a ſlow'ry veſt he threw. Pope's Odyſſey.
To her the ſhady grove, the flow'ry field,
The ſtreams and fountains, no delight could yield. Pope.
Flowingly. adv. [ ſrom flow. J. With volubility ; with
abundance.
Flowk. n.ſ. [fluke, Scott.] A flounder; the name of a fiſh.
Amongſt theſe the flowk, ſole, and plaice follow the tide up
into the freſh waters. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Flowkwort. m. ſ. The name of a plant.
Flow N. Participle of fly, or fee, they being confounded.
1. Gone away.
For thoſe,
Appointed to ſit there, had left their charge, ...
Flown to the upper world. Milton's Paradiſe. Lºft, b. x.
Where, my deluded ſenſe ! was reaſon flown #
Where the high majeſty of David's throne * Prior.
2. Puffed; inflated; elate.
- And when night 4. -
Darkens the ſtreets, then wander forth the ſons .
Of Beliah, flown with inſolence and wine. Milton's P. L.
Flu"ctuant. adj. [fuciuans, Latin.] Wavering; uncertain.
To be longing for this thing to-day, and for that thing to-
morrow ; to change likings for loathings, and to ſtand wiſh-
ing and hankering at a venture, how is it poſſible for any man
to be at reſt in this fluctuant wandering humour, and opi-
nion ? - L'Eſtrange.
To FLUCTUATE. v. n. [fuciuc, Latin.]
1. To roll to and again as water in agitation.
The fluctuating fields of liquid air, -
With all the curious meteors hov'ring there,
And the wide regions of the land, proclaim
The Pow'r Divine, that rais'd the mighty frame. Blackmore.
2. To float backward and forward, as with the motion of water.
3. To move with uncertain and haſty motion.
The tempter -
New part puts on; and, as to paſſion mov’d,
Flučjuates diſturb’d. ... Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
4. To be in an uncertain ſtate; to feel ſudden viciſſitudes.
As the greateſt part of my eſtate has been hitherto of an
unſteady and volatile nature, either toſt upon ſeas, or fluc-
tuating in funds, it is now fixed and ſettled in ſubſtantial acres
and tenements. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 549.
5. i o be irreſolute; to be undetermined. -
Fluct UA’tion. n.ſ.. [fuciuatio, Latin ; fluéluation, French,
from flučiuate.]
1. The alternate motion of the water.
Its fluºuations are but motions ſubſervient, which winds,
ſtorms, ſhores, ſhelves, and every interjacency irregulates.
Brown's }. Errours, b. vii. c. 17.
They were cauſed by the impulſes and fučiuation of water
in the bowels of the earth. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Uncertainty; indetermination. -
It will not hinder it from making a proſelyte of a perſon,
that loves fuciuation of judgment little enough to be willing
to be eaſed of it by any thing but errour. Boyle.
FLUE. m. ſ. [A word of which I know not the etymology, un-
leſs it be derived from few of fly.] -
1. A ſmall pipe or chimney to convey air, heat, or ſmoke.
2. Soft down or fur, ſuch as may fly in the wind.
FLUE'LLIN. m. ſ. The herb SPEEDwell.
Flu'ENc Y. m. ſ. [from fluent.] - - - - -
1. The quality of flowing; ſmoothneſs; freedom from harſh-
neſs or aſperity. -
Fuency of numbers, and moſt expreſſive figures for the
poet, morals for the ſerious, and pleaſantries for admirers of
points of wit. - Garth's Preface to Ovid.
2. Readineſs; copiouſneſs; volubility.
Our publick liturgy muſt be caſhiered, the better to pleaſe
thoſe men who gloried in their extemporary, vein and
Juency. - - - King Charles.
Th’ unthinking vićtors vainly boaſt their pow'rs;
Be their’s the muſquet, while the tongue is our's :
We reaſon with ſuch fluency and fire,
The beaux we baffle, and the learned tire. Tickell.
The common fuency of ſpeech in many men, and moſt wo-
men, is owing to a ſcarcity of matter, and a ſcarcity of words;
for whoever is a maſter of language, and hath a mind full of
ideas, will be apt, in ſpeaking, to heſitate upon the choice of
both. Swift's Thºughts on various Subjects.
3. Affluence; abundance. This ſenſe is obſolete.
Thoſe who grow old in ſºuency and eaſe,
Behold him toſt on ſeas. Sandys's Paraphraſe on job
God riches and renown to men imparts,
Even all they wiſh; and yet their narrow hearts
Cannot ſo great a fluency receive, * * *
But their fruition to a ſtranger leave. Sandy.
FLUENT. adj. [fluens, Latin.]
1. Liquid. •
It is not malleable; but yet is not fluent, but ſtupified. Bac.
2. Flowing; in motion; in flux. -
Motion being a fluent thing, and one part of its duration
being abſolutely independent upon another, it doth not follow
that becauſe any thing moves this moment, it muſt neceſſarily
continue to do ſo the next. Ray on the Creation.
3. Ready; copious ; voluble. - - -
Thoſe have ſome natural diſpoſitions, which have bet-
ter grace in youth than in age, ſuch as is a fuent and luxu-
rious ſpeech. Bacon.
I ſhall lay before you all that's within me, -
And with moſt fluent utterance. Denham's Sophy.
FLU'ENT. m. ſ. Stream; running water.
Confiding in their hands; that ſed’lous ſtrive
To cut th' outrageous fluent; in this diſtreſs, -
_2 . Ev’n in the fight of death. - Phillips.
FLUID. adj. . [fuidas, Latin; fuide, French.] Having parts
eaſily ſeparable; not ſolid. . . . .
Or ſerve they as a flow'ry verge to bind
The fluid ſkirts of that ſame wat'ry cloud, -
Leſt it again diſſolve, and ſhow'r the earth Milt. P. Loft.
If particles ſlip eaſily, and are of a fit ſize to be agitated by
heat, and the heat is big enough to keep them in agitation,
the body is fluid; and if it be apt to ſtick to things, it is
humid. Newton's Opt.
Flu'ſ p. n.ſ. [In phyſick.] Any animal juice: as the blood.
Conſider how luxury hath introduced new diſeaſes, and
with them, not improbably, altered the whole courſe of the
fluids. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
Fluidity... n.ſ. [fluidits, Fr. from fluid.]. The quality in bo-
dies oppoſite to ſolidity; want of adherence between the parts.
Heat promotes fluidity very much, by diminiſhing the tena-
city of bodies: it makes many bodies fluid, which are not fluid
in cold, and increaſes the fluidity of tenacious liquids; as of
oil, balſam and honey; and thereby decreaſes their re-
ſiſtance. - Newton's Opt.
A diſeaſe oppoſite to this ſpiffitude is too great (i. rb.
FLU'IDNEss. n.ſ.. [from fluid..] That quality in bodies oppo-
ſite to ſtability.
What if we ſhould ſay that fluidneſ, and ſtability depends
ſo much upon the texture of the parts, that, by the change of
that texture, the ſame parts may be made to conſtitute either a
fluid or a dry body, and that permanently too : Boyle.
FLU'MMERY. m. ſ. A kind of food made by coagulation of
wheatflower or oatmeal. - -
Milk and flummery are very fit for children. Lºcke.
FLUNG. participle and prete, its of fing. Thrown; caſt.
Several ſtatues the Romans themſelves fºung into the river,
when they would revenge themſelves. Addiſon on Italy.
FLU'OR. m. ſ. [Latin. J
I. A fluid ſtate. - - - -
The particles of fluids which do not cohere too ſtrongly,
and are of ſuch a ſmallneſs as renders them moſt ſuſceptible of
thoſe agitations which keep liquors in a fluor, are moſt eaſily
ſeparated and rarified into vapours. Newton's Opt.
2. Catamenia.
Flu'RRY. n.ſ. -
1. A guſt or ſtorm of wind; a haſty blaſt.
The boat was overſet by a ſudden flurry from the North.
- - Gulliver's Travels.
2. Hurry; a violent commotion. -
To FLUSH. v. n. [fluyſen, Dutch, to flow; fus, or flux, Fr.j
1. To flow with violence.
The pulſe of the heart he attributes to an ebullition and
ſudden expanſion of the blood in the ventricles, after the man-
ner of the milk, which, being heated to ſuch a degree, doth
ſuddenly, and all at once, fluſh up and run over the veſſel. Ray.
It fiſhes violently out of the cock for about a quart, and
then ſtops. . . AMortimer's Husbandry.
2. To come in haſte. -
If the place but affords
Any ſtore of lucky birds,
As I make 'em to fluſh, .
Each owl out of his buſh. Ben. johnſºn's Owſ.
. To glow in the ſkin; to produce a colour in the face by a
ſudden afflux of blood -
Ere yet the ſalt of moſt unrighteous tears
Had left the fluſhing in her gauled eyes;
She married. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Thus Eve with count'nance blithe her ſtory told,
But in her cheek difiemper fluſhing glow'd. A ſilt. Par. Loff.
What can be more ſignificant than the ſudden fiſhing and
confuſion of a bluſh Collier ºf the Aſpect.
What<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L U
F L Y
- eans that lovely fruit? What means, alas !
Tº. which jº, in your face? Dryden.
- At ". º: year
rs of the flu º -
º Thomſºn's Spring, 1.95.
- olete.
4. To º that fluſhing in his beard,
Him all amaz'd. Spenſer.
To FLUs H. v. a. dden
: to redden.
1. To º: dames of Zama's royal court, -
Have fates fººd with more exalted charms. Addison Cato.
Some court, or ſecret corner ſeek, -
Norfuſh with ſhame the paſſing virgin's cheek. Gay's Triv.
elate; to elevate.
2. T; proſperous people, fluſhed with great vićtories and ſuc-
ceſſes, are rarely known to confine their joys within the
bounds of moderation and innocence. Atterbury's Sermons.
FLUs H. adj.
1. Freſh; full of vigour.
He took my father groſly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, and fº/h as May;
And how his audit ſtands, who knows, ſave heav'n Shakespeare
I love to wear cloths that are fluſh,
Not prefacing old rags with pluſh. Cleaveland.
2. Affluent; abounding. A cant word. -
Lord Strut was not very fluſh in ready, either to go to law
or clear old debts; neither could he find good bail. Arbuthnot.
Flush. n.ſ Afflux; ſudden impulſe; violent flow. -
Never had any man ſuch a loſs, cries a widower, in the
fluſh of his extravagancies for a dead wife. L’Eſtrange.
The pulſe of the arteries is not only cauſed by the pulſation
of the heart, driving the blood through them in manner of a .
wave or fluſh, but by the coats of the arteries themſelves. Ray.
Succeſs may give him a preſent fluſh of joy; but when the
ſhort tranſport is over, the apprehenſion of loſing ſucceeds to
the care of acquiring. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Cards all of a ſort.
To FLU's TER. v. a. [from To fu/.] To make hot and roſy
with drinking; to make half drunk.
Three lads of Cyprus, noble ſwelling ſpirits,
Have I to-night fºſter'd with flowing cups,
And they watch too. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
FLUTE., n.ſ.. [fuſe, flute, French; fuyte, Dutch.]
1. A muſical pipe; a pipe with ſtops for the fingers.
Th' oars were ſilver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept ſtroke. Shaft. Ant, and Cº.
The ſoft complaining flute
In dying notes diſcovers
The woes of hopeleſs lovers,
Whoſe dirge is whiſper’d by the warbling lute. Dryden.
2. A channel or furrow in a pillar, like the concave of a flute
ſplit.
To FLUTE. v. a. To cut columns into hollows.
To FLU'TTER. v. m. [ Flore;an, Saxon; fotter, French.]
1. To take ſhort flights with great agitation of the wings.
As an eagle ſtirreth up her neſt, futterethover her young, and
ſpreadeth abroad her wings, ſo the Lord aloné did lead
him. Deutr. xxxii. 11.
When your hands untie theſe ſtrings,
Think you've an angel by the wings;
One that gladly will be nigh,
To wait upon each morning-figh;
To flutter in the balmy air
Of your well-perfuméd pray’r. Craſ/aw.
They fed, and, flutt'ring, by degrees withdrew. Dryden.
2. To move about with great ſhow and buſtle without con-
ſequence.
Hºſs, muddies the beſt wit, and only makes it flutter and
froth high. - Grew.
No rag, no ſcrap of all the beau or wit,
That once ſo flutterd, and that once to wiit. Poſe's Dunc.
3. To be moved with quick vibrations". undulations.
Ye ſpirits! to your charge repair; -
The flutt’ring fan be Zephyretta's care. Pope.
They the tall maſt abovč the veſ: rear,
Or teach the flutt'ring ſail to float in air. Pºpe's Odſ.
4. To be in agitation; to move irregularly ; to be in a ſtate of
uncertainty.
The relation being brought him what a glorious vićtory
Yºº and with what difficulty, and how long ſhe fluttered
upon the wings of doubtful ſucceſs, he was not ſurpriſed.
- Howel's Pocal Fºreſt.
* is impoſſible that men ſhould certainly diſcover the agree-
"ent or diſagreement of ideas, whilſt their thoughts flutter
* or flick only in founds ºf jº ſignification. Locke.
ſteem we theſe, my friends ! event and chance,
Produc’d by atoms frºm thi. ſutt’ring dance Prior.
Some never arrive at any deep, ſolid, or valuable know-
ledge, becauſe they are Perpetually fluttering over the ſurface
of things.
- //atts.
His thoughts are very fluttering and wandering, and cannot
be fixed attentively to a few ideas ſucceſſively. // atts.
To Fºurt E.R. v. ...
I. To drive in *iſorder, like a flock of birds ſuddenly rouſed.
Like an eagle in a dovecoat, I
Futter'd your Volſcians in Corioli.
2. To hurry the mind.
3. To diſorder the poſition of anything.
Flu (TTER. m. ſ. [from the verb. 3
1. Vibration; undulation; quick and irregular motion.
An infinite variety of motions are to be majº uſe of in the
flutter of a fan: there is the angry futter, the modeſ flutter
and the timorous flutter. Addſºn's Spectator, Nº. i.
2. Hurry; tumult; diſorder of mind.
3. Confuſion; irregular poſition.
FFUVIATIck, adj [filviaticus, Latin.] Belonging to rivers,
FLUX. m. ſ. [ fluxus, Latin ; flux, French..]
1. The act of flowing; paſſage.
The moſt ſimple and primary motion of fire is a fux, in a
direct line from the centre of the fuel to its circumference.
Digly on Bodia.
By the perpetual flux of the liquids, a great part of them.
thrown out of the body. - Arbuthnot,
2. The ſtate of paſſing away and giving place to others.
The heat of the ſun in animals whoſe parts are ſucceſſive,
and in a continual flux, can produce a deep and perfect gloſs
of blackneſs. Brown's Pagar Errours, b. vi. c. 10.
What the ſtated rate of intereſt ſhould be, in the conſtant
change of affairs, and flux of money, is hard to deter-
mine. Locke.
In the conſtituent matter of one bod y, turning naturally to
another like body, the ſtock or fund can never. exhauſted,
nor the flux and alteration ſenſible. Woodward.
Languages, like our bodies, are in a perpetual flux, and
ſtand in need of recruits to ſupply the place of thoſe words
that are continually falling through diſuſe. Felton on the Claſſ.
3. Any flow or iſſue of matter.
Quinces ſtop fluxes of blood. Arbuthnot on Diet.
4. Pyſentery; diſeaſe in which the bowels aſ: excoriated and
bleed; bloody flux.
Eat eaſtern ſpice, ſecure
*a*ſ, Cºrizºna.
From burningfuxes and hot calenture. Halifax,
5. Excrement; that which falls from bodies.
Civet is the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Shakeſpeare,
6. Concourſe; tº:
Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends;
'Tis right, quoth he ; thus miſery doth part
The flux of company. Shakeſp. As you like it,
7. The ſtate of being meſted. -
8. That which mingled with a body makes it melt.
*Lux: ağ (fuxus, Latin.] Unconſtant; not durable ; main-
tained by a conſtant ſucceſſion of parts.
To Flux. v. a.
1. To melt.
2. Tº ſalivate ; to evacuate by ſpitting.
He might faſhionably and genteelly have been duelled or
fuxed into another world. South.
Fluºxility. n.ſ.. [fuxus, Latin.J Eaſineſs of ſeparation of
Parts; poſſibility of liquefaction. -
Experiments ſeem to teach, that the ſuppoſed averſation of
nature to a vacuum is but accidental, or in conſequence, partly
of the weight and fluidity, or at leaſtfexility of the bodies here
below. Bºyle.
Flºxion, n.ſ.. [fluxio, Latin.]
1. The act of flowing.
2. The matter that flows. - - -
3. [In mathematicks.] The arithmetick or analyſis of infinitely
ſmall variable quantities; or it is the method of finding all
infinite ſmall of infinitely ſmall quantity, which, being taken
an infinite number of times, becomes equal to a quantity
given. Harris.
A penetration into the abſtruſe difficulties and depths of
modern algebra and fluxions, are not worth the labour of thoſe
who deſign the learned profeſſions as the buſineſs of life. Watts.
To FLY. pret few or fººd; part. fedorfown. v. n. [Fleogan:
Saxon. To jºy is properly to ºf wingſ, and gives flew and
Jººn. To ſite is to eſcape, or go away, plean, Saxon, and
makesfied. They are now confounded.]
I. To move through the air with wings.
Ere the bat hath flown
His cloiſter'd flight. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Fowl that may jºy above the earth in the open firmament
of heaven. Gen. i. 20.
Theſe men's haſtineſs the warier ſort of you do not com-
ºnend: ye wiſh they had held themſelves longer in, and not
A*, ſo dangerouſly abroad before the feathers of the cauſe
had been grown. Hooker.
2. To paſs through the air.
Man is born unto trouble, as the ſparks ſy upward, job v.
3. To paſs away.
Ev’n a romance, a tune, a rhime,
Help thee to paſs the tedious time,
Which elſe would on thy hand remain; -
Though , own, it ne'er looks back again. Prior.
4. To paſs ſwiftly.
The ſcouts with fing ſpeed
Return, and through the city ſpread the news. Dryden.
Barth rolls back beneath the Ajing fleed. Pope.
2 5- To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F L Y
F O A
º
5. To ſpring with violence; to fall on ſuddenly.
A ſervant that he bred, thrill'd with reinotſe,
Oppos'd againſt the act, bending his ſword
To his great maſter; who, thereat enrag’d, -
Flew on him, and amongſt them fell’d him dead. Shakeſp.
Though the dogs have never ſeen the dog killer, yet they
will come forth, and bark and fly at him. Eacon's Nat. Hiſſ.
No honour, no fortune, can keep a man from being miſe-
rable, when an enraged conſcience ſhall fly at him, and take
him by the throat. South's Sermons.
6. To move with rapidity. .
Glad to catch this good occaſion,
Moſt thoroughly to be winnow'd, where my chaff
And corn ſhah fly aſunder.
A fair example to his maſter gave ;
He baſſas heads, to ſave his own, made fly;
And now, the ſultan to preſerve, muſt die. Waller.
7. To burſt aſunder with a ſudden exploſion.
Behold, a frothy ſubſtance riſe; -
Becautious, or your bottle flies. Swift.
8. To break; to ſhiver.
9. [Flean, Saxon; fliehen, German.] To run away; to attempt
eſcape. [In this ſenſe the verb is properly to flee, when fied
is formed; but the following examples ſhew that they are
confounded.]
Which when the valiant elf perceiv'd, he leapt,
As lion fierce, upon the flying prey. Spenſer.
Macduff is fied to England. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Ye ſhall flee, as ye fed from before the earthquake.
Zech. xiv. 5.
Abiathar eſcaped, and fied after David. I Sa. xxii. 20.
What wonder if the kindly beams he ſhed,
Reviv'd the drooping arts again;
If ſcience rais'd her head,
And ſoft humanity, that from rebellion fled. Dryden.
He oft deſir'd to fly from Iſrael's throne,
And live in ſhades with her and love alone. Prior.
I'll fly from ſhepherds, flocks, and flow'ry plains;
From ſhepherds, flocks, and plains I may remove,
Forſake mankind, and all the world but love. Pope.
ro. To FLY in the face. To inſult.
This would diſcourage any man from doing you good, when
you will either neglect him, or fly in his face ; and he muſt ex-
pećt only danger to himſelf. Swift's Drapier's Letters.
11. To act in defiance.
Fly in nature's face:
—But how, if nature fly in my face firſt
—Then nature's the aggreſſor. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
12. To FLY off. To revolt.
Deny to ſpeak with me? They're ſick, they're weary,
They have travell'd all the night! mean fetches;
The images of revolt, and flying off. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The traytor Syphax
Few off at once with his Numidian horſe. Addiſon's Cato.
13. To Fly out. To burſt into paſſion.
How eaſy is a noble ſpirit diſcern'd,
From harſh and ſulphurous matter that files out
In contumelies, makes a noiſe, and ſtinks. Ben johnſ. Catil.
Paſſion is apt to ruffle, and pride will fly out into contumely
and negle&amp;t. Collier of Friendſhip.
14. To Fly out. To break out into licence.
You uſe me like a courſer ſpurr'd and rein'd :
If I fly out, my fierceneſs you command. Dryden.
Papiſts, when unoppoſed, fly out into all the pageantries of
worſhip; but in times of war, when they are hard preſſed by
arguments, lie cloſe intrenched behind the council of Trent.
Dryden's Medal, Dedicat.
15. Tº Fly out. To ſtart violently from any direction.
All bodies, moved circularly, have a perpetual endeavour
to recede from the centre, and every moment would fly out in
right lines, if they were not reſtrained. Bentley's Sermons.
16. To let FLY. To diſcharge.
The noiſy culverin, o'ercharg’d, lets fly,
And burſts, unaiming, in the rended ſky. Granville,
17. To be light and unencumbered: as, a flying camp.
To FLY. v. a.
1. To ſhun; to avoid; to decline.
Love like a ſhadow flies, when ſubſtance love purſues;
Purſuing that which flies, and flying what purſues. Shakeſp.
O Jove, I think
Foundations fly the wretched; ſuch I mean,
Where they ſhould be relieved. Shakeſpeare.
If you fly phyſick in health altogether, it will be too ſtrange
for your body when you ſhall need it. Bacon's Eſſays.
O whither ſhall I run, or which way -
The fight of this ſo horrid ſpectacle. Milton's Agoniſies.
2. To refuſe aſſociation with.
Sleep flies the wretch; or when with cares oppreſt,
And his toſs'd limbs are weary'd into reſt,
Then dreams invade. Dryden's juvenal, Sat. 13.
Nature flies him like enchanted ground. Dryden.
3. To quit by flight.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
- Dedalus, to fly the Cretan ſhore,
His heavy limbs on jointed pinions bore,
The firſt who ſail'd in air. Dryden's ºn. h. vi.
4. To attack by a bird of prey.
a man can taine this monſter, and with her fly other
ravening fowl, and kill them, it is ſomewhat worth. Bacon.
5. It is probable that few was originally the preterite of fy,
when it ſignified volation, and fled when it ſignified eſcape:
f ºvn ſhould be confined likewiſe to volation; but theſe diſ-
tinctions are now confounded.
FLY. m. ſ. ſpleoge, Saxon.]
1. A ſmall winged inſect of many ſpecies.
As flies to wanton boys, are we to th’ gods;
They kill us for their ſport. Shakeſpeare's King Lear:
My country neighbours begin to think of being in general;
before they come to think of thefty in their ſheep, or the tares
in their corn. Locke.
. . To prevent the fly, ſome propoſe to ſow aſhes with the
ſeed. - - - - Mortimer's Husbandry.
To heedleſs flies the window proves
A conſtant death. Thºmſºn's Summer.
2. That part of a machine which, being put into a quick mo-
tion, regulates and equaliſes the motion of the reſt.
If we ſuppoſe a man tied in the place of the weight, it
were eaſy, by a ſingle hair faſtened unto the fly or balance of
the jack, to draw him up from the ground. JWilkins.
3. FLY, in a compaſs. That part which points how the wind
blows.
To Fly'blow. v. a. [fly and blow.] To taint with flies; to
fill with maggots.
I cannot diſcern any labyrinth, unleſs in the perplexity of
his own thoughts; for I am unwilling to believe that he doth
it with a deſign to play tricks, and to flyblow my words, to
make others diſtaſte them. - Stillingfieet.
Like a flyblown cake of tallow ;
Or, on parchment, ink turn'd yellow. Swift.
So morning inſects, that in muck begun, -
Shine, buz, and ſi blow in the ſetting ſun. Pope's Epiſtler.
FLY'BoA.T. n.ſ.. [fy and boat.] A kind of veſſel nimble and
light for ſailing. -
FLYcA'tcher. n.ſ.. [fy and catch..] One that hunts flies.
There was more need of Brutus in Domitian's days, to
redeem or mend, than of Horace, to laugh at aſſycatcher. Dry.
The ſwallow was a flycatcher as well as the ſpider. L'Eſtrº
FLYER. m. ſ. [from fly.] -
1. One that flies or runs away.
They hit one another with darts, as the others do with
their hands, which they never throw counter, but at the back
of *iº. Sandy's journey.
e grieves ſo many Britons ſhould be loſt;
Taking more pains, when he beheld them yield,
To ſave the flyers than to win the field. Waller.
2. One that uſes wings.
3. The fly of a jack.
4. [In archite&amp;ture.] Stairs made of an oblong ſquare figure,
whoſe fore and backfides are parallel to each other, and ſo are
their ends: the ſecond of theſe flyers ſtands parallel behind
the firſt, the third behind the ſecond, and ſo are ſaid to fly off
from one another. AMoxon's Mech. Exer.
To FLY'Fish. v. n. [fly and fiſh.] To angle with a hook
baited with a fly.
I ſhall next give you ſome other direétions for fly-
iſhing. l/alton's Angler.
FOAL. n.ſ. [pola, Saxon.] The offspring of a mare, or other
beaſt of burthen. The cuſtom now is to uſe colt for a young
horſe, and foal for a young mare; but there was not origi-
nally any ſuch diſtinétion.
Alſo flew his ſteed, -
And with his winged heels did tread the wind,
As he had been a fal of Pegaſus's kind. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Twenty ſhe aſſes and ten foals. Gen. xxxii. 15.
To Foal. v. a. [from the noun..] To bring forth a foal,
Give my horſe to Timon: it foal me ſtraight
Ten able horſes. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Such colts as are
Of generous race, ſtraight, when they firſt are fal’d, -
Walk proudly. May's Georgicks.
About September take your mares into the houſe, where
keep them ’till they foal. 4/ortimer's Huſbandry,
Fo'AL BIT. } Plants
Fo'ALFoot. m. ſ. Plants. -
FOAM. n.ſ. [ram, Saxon.] The white ſubſtance which agita-
tion or fermentation gathers on the top of liquors; froth; ſpume.
The foam upon the water. Hoſ. x. 7.
Whitening, down their moſſy tinétur'd ſtream -
Deſcends the billowy foam. Thomſon's Spring.
To FoAM v. n. [from the noun.] -
1. To froth; to gather foam.
What a beard of the general's cut will do among foaming
bottles and ale-waſh'd wits, is wonderful. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Caeſar fell down in the market-place, and foam'd at mouth,
and was ſpeechleſs. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
9 L To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O I
- -
-º
-s!
2. To be in rage; to be violently agitated.
To Pallas high the faming bowl he crown'd, &gt;
And ſprinkl’d large libations on the ground. Pope's Odyſſey.
- Upon a faming horſe
There follow'd ſtrait a man of royal port. Rowe.
He ſameth, and gnaſheth with his teeth. Mar. ix. 18.
Fo'Amy, adj. [from fºam.] Covered with foam; frothy.
More white than Neptune's foamy face, -
when ſtruggling rocks he would embrace. Sidney, b. ii.
Behold how high the foamy billows ride! -
The winds and waves are on the juſter ſide. Dryden.
FOB. m. ſ. [ſuppe, fupſacke, German.]. A ſmall pocket.
Who pick'd a fab at holding forth,
And where a watch for half the worth
May be redeem'd. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 3.
When were the dice with more profuſion thrown
The well-fill’d fab, not empty'd now alone. Dryd, juven.
He put his hand into his fab, and preſented me in his name
with a tobacco-ſtopper. Addiſon's Speciator.
There were two pockets which we could not enter; theſe
he called his fabs: they were two large ſlits cut into the top of
his middle cover, but ſqueezed cloſe by the preſſure of his
belly. Gulliver's Travels.
Orphans around his bed the lawyer ſees,
And takes the plaintiff’s and defendant's fees;
His fellow pick-purſe, watching for a jobs -
Fancies his fingers in the cully's fab. Swift:
To Fob. v. a. [fuppen, German.]
1. To cheat; to trick; to defraud. - -
I think it is ſcurvy, and begin to find myſelf fobb'd in
• ** º: Othello.
Shall there be a gallows ſtanding in England when thou art
king, and reſolution thus fobb’d as it is with the ruſty curb of
old father antick the law. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
He goes preſfing forward, 'till he was fobbed again with
another ſtory. L'Érange.
2. To Fob off. To ſhift off; to put aſide with an artifice; to
delude by a trick.
You muſt not think
Tº off our diſgraces with a tale. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
or they, poor knaves, were glad to cheat,
To get their wives and children meat;
• But theſe will not be folb'd off ſo, - -
They muſt have wealth and power too. Hudibraſ; p. i.
By a Ravenna vintner once betray'd,
So much for wine and water mix'd I paid;
But when I thought the purchas'd liquor mine,
The raſcal fºbb'd me off with only wine. Addison.
Being a great lover of country-ſports, I abſolutely deter-
mined not to be a miniſter of ſtate, nor to be fobb'd off with a
garter. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 3.
Foſca L. adj. [from focus. I Belonging to the focus. See
Focus.
Schelhammer demandeth whether the convexity or conca-
vity of the drum collects rays into a focal point, or ſcatters
them. - Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Fo'cil. n.ſ. [ ſºcile, French.] The greater or leſs bone between
the knee and ankle, or elbow and wriſt.
The fraćture was of both the ſocils of the left leg. Wiſem.
Focillation. m. ſ. [focillo, Lat..] Comfort; ſupport. Diét.
FOCUS. m. ſ. [Latin.]
1. [In opticks.] The focus of a glaſs is the point of convergence
or concourſe, where the rays meet and croſs the axis after their
refračtion by the glaſs. . Harris.
The point from which rays diverge, or to which they con-
verge, may be called their focus. Newton's Opt.
2. Focus ºf a Parabola. A point in the axis within the figure,
and diſtant from the vertex by a fourth part of the parameter,
or latus reëlum. - Harris.
3. Focus of an Ellipſis. A point towards each end of the
longer axis; from whence two right lines being drawn to any
point in the circumference, ſhall be together equal to that
longer axis. Harris.
4. Focus of the Hyperbola. . A point in the principal axis,
within the oppoſite hyperbola's; from which if any two right
lines are drawn, meeting in either of the oppoſite hyperbolas,
the difference will be equal to the principal axis. Dić7.
FO'DDER. n.ſ. ſpoºne, počen, Saxon.] Dry food ſtored up
for cattle againſt Winter.
Their cattle, ſtarving for want of fodder, corrupted the
air. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Being not to be raiſed without wintering, they will help to
force men into improvement of land by a neceſſity of
fodder. - Temple.
Of graſs and f der thou defraud'ſt the dams,
And of their mothers dugs the ſtarving lambs. Dryd. Wirgil.
To Fo'DDER. v. a. [from the noun..] To feed with dry food.
Natural earth is taken the firſt half ſpit from juſt under the
turf of the beſt paſture ground, in a place that has been well
foddered on. Evelyn's Kalendar.
it
From Winter keep,
Well ſodder'd in the ſtalls, thy tender ſheep. Dryd, Wirgil.
A farm of fifty pound hath commonly three barns, with as
many cowyards to fodder cattle in. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Straw will do well enough to fºdder with. Mortim. Hub.
Fo’DDE RER. m. ſ. [from fodder.] He who fodders cattle.
FOE. m. ſ. [pah, Saxon; fae, Scottiſh.]
1. An enemy in war.
Ere he had eſtabliſhed his throne,
He fought great battles with his ſavagefºne,
In which he them defeated ever more. Fairy Sueen, b. ii.
Never but one more was either like
To meet ſo great a foe. Miltºn.
2. A perſecutor; an enemy in common life.
God's beniſon go with you, and with thoſe -
That would make good of bad, and friends of fºes. Shakespeare
Forc’d by thy worth, thy foe in death become;
Thy friend has lodg’d thee in a coſtly tomb. Dryden's Fab:
- Thy defects to know,
Make uſe of ev'ry friend, and ev'ry fºe. Pope.
3. An opponent; an illwiſher.
He that conſiders and enquires into the reaſon of things, is
counted a foe to received doctrines. Iſatts's Imp. of the 41ind.
Fo'EMAN. n.ſ.. [from fe and man.] Enemy in war; antago-
niſt. An obſolete word.
Here haunts that fiend, and does his daily ſpoil;
Therefore henceforth be at your keeping well,
And ever ready for your forman fell. Fairy Queen, b, i.
What valiant foemen, like to Autumn's corn,
Have we mow’d down in top of all their pride? Shakespeare H. VI.
FOETUS. n.ſ. [Latin.] The child in the womb after it is
perfeótly formed: but before, it is called embryo. 3uincy-
A factur, in the mother's womb, differs not much from the
ſtate of a vegetable. - Locke.
FOG... n. ſ. [fog, Daniſh, a ſtorm J A thick miſt; a moiſt
denſe vapour near the ſurface of the land or water.
Infect her beauty,
You fenſuck'd fºgs, drawn by the pow'rful ſun,
To fall and blaſt her pride. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Leſſer miſts and fogs than thoſe which covered Greece with
ſo long darkneſs, preſent great alterations in the ſun and
moon. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the World.
Fly, fly, prophane fgs' far hence fly away;
Taint not the pure ſtreams of the ſpringing day
With your dull influence: it is for you
To fit and ſcoule upon night's heavy brow. Craſaw:
Fogs we frequently obſerve after ſun-ſetting, even in
our hotteſt months. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory:
Fog. n.ſ.. [fogagium, low Latin. Gramen in frºſta regis locatur
pro fogagio. Lºges foreſt. Scotice..] Aftergraſs; graſs which
grows in Autumn after the hay is mown.
Fo'GGILY. adv. [from foggy.] Miſtily; darkly; cloudily.
Fo'GGINEss. n.ſ.. [from foggy.] The ſtate of being dark or
miſty; cloudineſs; miſtineſs.
Fo’GGY, adj. [from fog.]
1. Miſty; cloudy ; dank; full of moiſt vapours.
Alas! while we are wrapt in ſoggy miſt
Of our ſelf-love, ſo paſſions do deceive,
We think they hurt, when moſt they do affiſt. Sidney, b, ii.
And Phoebus flying ſo, moſt ſhameful fight,
His bluſhing ſace in foggy cloud implys,
And hides for ſhame. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 6.
Whence have they this mettle
Is not their climate fºggy, raw and dull? Shakespeare Henry V.
Let not air be too groſs, nor too penetrative; not ſubječt
to any foggy noiſomeneſs, from fens or marſhes near adjoin-
ing. - //otton’s Architecture.
About Michaelmas, the weather fair, and by no means
foggy, retire your rareſt plants. Evelyn's Kalendar.
2. Cloudy in underſtanding; dull.
Foh. interječ. [from pah, Saxon, an enemy..] An interjećtion
of abhorrence: as if one ſhould at fight of any thing hated
cry out a foe /
Not to affect many propoſed matches
Of her own clime, complećtion and degree,
Whereto we ſee in all things nature tends,
Foh one may ſmell in ſuch a will moſt rank,
Foul diſproportions, thoughts unnatural. Shakespeare Othello.
FO'IBLE, n. / [French. J A weak ſide; a blind ſide; a
failing.
He knew the fible of human nature. Freind's Hiſ ºf Phyſ.
The witty men ſometimes have ſenſe enough to know their
own foible, and therefore they craftily ſhun the attacks of
argument. JWatts's Logick.
To FOIL. v. a. [affoler, to wound, old French.] To put to
the worſt; to defeat, though without a complete vićtory.
Amazement ſeiz’d -
The rebel thrones; but greater rage to ſee
Thus foil'd their mightieſt. Milton's Paradſe Loſº, b. vi.
Leader of thoſe armies bright,
Which but th' omnipotent none could have fil"d! Milton.
Yet theſe ſubjećt not : I to thee diſcloſe
What inward thence I feel, not thereforefºil"d:
Who meet with various objećts, from the ſenſe
5 Variouſly
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O I -
F O L
Variouſly repreſenting; yet ſtill free, : -
Approve the beſt, and follow what I approve. Milt. P. Loft.
Strange, that your fingers ſhould the pencil foil,
Without the help of colours or of oil J/aller.
He had been foiled in the cure, and had left it to nature.
Wiſeman's Surgery.
In their conflićts with fin they have been ſo often fºiled,
that they now deſpair of ever getting the day. Calamy's Serm.
Virtue, diſdain, deſpair, I oft have try'd;
And, fail'd, have with new arms my foe defy'd.
But I, the conſort of the Thunderer,
Have wag'd a long and unſucceſsful war;
With various arts and arms in vain have toil'd,
And by a mortal man at length am foil'd, Dryden's Án.
Foil. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A defeat; a miſcarriage; an advantage gained without a
complete conqueſt.
We of thy cunning had no diffidence;
One ſudden fºil ſhall never breed diſtruſt. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Whoſoever overthroweth his mate in ſuch ſort, as that either
his back, or the one ſhoulder, and contrary heel do touch the
ground, ſhall be accounted to give the fall: if he be endan-
gered, and make a narrow eſcape, it is called a foil. Carew,
So after many a foil the tempter proud,
Renewing freſh aſſaults, amidſt his pride, º
Fell whence he ſtood to ſee his vićtor fall. Milton's P. Loft.
When age ſhall level me to impotence,
Dryden.
And ſweating pleaſure leave me on the ſºil. Southern.
Death never won a ſtake with greater toil,
Nor e'er was fate ſo near a ſoil. Dryden.
2: [Feuille, French.J Leaf; gilding.
A ſtately palace, built of ſquared brick,
Which cunningly was without mortar laid,
Whoſe walls were high, but nothing ſtrong nor thick,
And golden foil all over them diſplay'd. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Fame is no plant that grows on mortal ſoil,
Nor in the gliſtering foil -
Set off to th’ world, nor in broad rumour lies. Milton.
3. Something of another colour near which jewels are ſet to
raiſe their luſtre.
As ſhe a black ſilk cap on him begun
To ſet for foil of his milk-white to ſerve. Sidney.
Like bright metal on a ſullen ground,
My reformation glittering o'er my fault,
Shall ſhew more goodly, and attract more eyes,
Than that which hath no foil to ſet it off. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
The ſullen paſſage of thy weary ſteps
Eſteem a foil, wherein thou art to ſet
The precious jewel of thy home. Shakeſpeare.
'Tis the property of all true diamonds to unite the fºil
cloſely itſelf, and thereby better augment its luſtre: the fil is
a mixture of maſtich and burnt ivory. Grew's Muſæum.
Heótor has a fºil to ſet him off: we are perpetually op-
poſing the incontinence of Paris to the temperance of He&amp;tor.
- Notes on the Odyſſey.
4. [From fºuiller, French..] A blunt ſword uſed in fencing.
He that plays the king ſhall be welcome; his majeſty ſhall
have tribute of me: the adventurous knight ſhall uſe his foil
and target. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Fo'ILeR. m. ſ. [from foil.] One who has gained advantage
over another.
To FOIN. v. n. [poindre, Fr. Skinner.] To puſh in fencing.
He hew'd, and laſh'd, and foin'd, and thunder'd blows,
And every way did ſeek into his life;
Ne plate, ne mail, could ward ſo mighty throws,
But yielded paſſage to his cruel knife. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
He cares not what miſchief he doth, if his weapon be out:
he willfoin like any devil; he will ſpare neither man, woman,
nor child. Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Then both, no moment loſt, at once advance
Againſt each other, arm'd with ſword and lance:
They laſh, they foin, they paſs, they ſtrive to bore
Their corſlets, and the thinneſt parts explore. Dryden.
Forn. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A thruſt; a puſh.
Fo'INING LY. adv. [from foim.] In a puſhing manner.
Fo'Ison. m. ſ. ſpoiron, Saxon.] Plenty; abundance. A word
now out of uſe.
Pay juſtly thy tithes, whatſoever thou be,
That Č. may in bleſſing ſend foiſºn to thee. Tuff. Husb.
Be wilful to kill, and unſkilful to ſtore,
And look for no foiſºn, I tell thee before. Tuffer's Husband.
Nature ſhould bring forth,
Of its own kind, all fºiſºn, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt,
As thoſe that feed grow full, as bloſſoming time
That from the ſeedneſs the bare fallow brings
To teeming fºiſon; ſo her plenteous womb
Expreſſeth his full tilth and huſbandry. Shakespeare Meaſ fºr Meaſ.
To Foist. v. a. [ ſaſſer, French..] To inſert by forgery.
Leſt negligence or partiality might admit or foiſt in abuſes
and corruption, an archdeacon was appointed to take account
of their doings. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Forge law, and foiſt it into ſome by-place . .
. . . Of ſome old rotten roll. Dryden's Dºn Selºftion,
Fo’istiNess. n.ſ.. [from foiſty.j, Fuſtineſs; mouldineſs.
Dreſs muſtard, and lay it in cellar up ſweet, .
Left foiſtineſ, make it for table unmeet. Tuff. H. ſtandy.
Fo'Isty, adj. . [See Fusty.] Mouldy; fuſty.
FOLD. m. ſ. [palaeb, pals, Saxon.]
I. The ground in which ſheep are confined.
His eyes he open'd, and beheld a field
Part arable and tilth; whereon were ſheaves -
New reap'd; the other part, ſheepwalks and ſºld. Milºn,
In thy book record their groans,
Who were thy ſheep, and in their ancient ſºld -
Slain. - Miltºn.
2. The place where ſheep are houſed.
..Time drives the flocks from field to ſ.l.,
When rivers rage and rocks grow cold ;
And Philomel becometh dumb,
And all complain of cares to come.
3. The flock of ſheep. -
And this you ſee I ſcarcely drag along,
Who yearling on the rocks has left her young,
The hope and promiſe of my failingfold. Dryden's Virgil.
4. A limit; a boundary.
Secure from meeting, they're diſtinétly roll’d;
Nor leave their ſeats, and paſs the dreadful fºld. Creºch.
5. [From Filb, Saxon.] A double; a complication; an invo-
lution; one part added to another; one part doubled upan
another.
Ra'egh.
She in this trice of time
Commits a thing ſo monſtrous, to diſmantle
So many folds of favour ! Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
. The ancient Egyptian mummies were ſhrowded in a num-
ber of folds of linen, beſmeared with gums. Bacon's N. Hiſł.
Not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as ſince; but on his rear
Circular baſe of riſing fold, that tower'd
Fold above fold, a ſurging maze! Milton's Paradiſ, Loft,
Let the draperies be nobly ſpread upon the body, and let
the folds be large: the parts ſhould be often traverſed by the
flowing of the ſoldi. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
With fear and wonder ſeiz'd, the crowd beholds
The gloves of death, with ſeven diſtinguiſh’d ſolds
Of tough bull hides. Dryden's Wirg. Æn.
The inward coat of a lion's ſtomach has ſtronger folds than
a human, but in other things not much different. Arbuthnot.
6. From the foregoing ſignification is derived the uſe of fold in
compoſition. Fold ſignifies the ſame quantity added: as, two
fold, twice the quantity; twenty fold, twenty times repeated.
But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit;
ſome an hundred ſold, ſome ſixty fºld, ſome thirtyfold. Matt.
At laſt appear
Hell bounds, high reaching to the horrid roof,
And thrice three ſold the gates: three folds were braſs,
Three iron, three of adamantine rock. Milt. Parad. Left.
Their martyr'd blood and aſhes ſow
O'er all th’Italian fields, where ſtill doth ſway
The triple tyrant; that from theſe may grow
A hundred fold. Milton;
To Fold. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To ſhut ſheep in the fold.
The ſtar that bids the ſhepherd ſold,
Now the top of heav'n doth hold. Milton.
We ſee that the folding of ſheep helps ground, as well by
their warmth as by their compoſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
She in pens his flocks will fold,
And then produce her dairy ſtore,
With wine to drive away the cold, -
And unbought dainties of the poor. Dryden's Horace.
2. [ralban, Saxon.J. To double; to complicate.
As a veſture ſhalt thou fold them up. Heb. i. 12.
Yet a little ſleep, a little ſlumber, a little fºlding of the
hands to ſleep. Prov. vi. I c.
They be fºlden together as thorns. Nah. i. 1 o.
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, unlock her cloſet, take
forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, ſeal it, and again
return to bed. Shakeſpeare.
Conſcious of its own impotence, it fold; its arms in deſpair,
and ſits curſing in a corner. Collier of Envy.
Both furl their ſails, and ſtrip them for the fight;
Their fºlded ſheets diſmiſs the uſeleſs air. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
3. To incloſe; to include; to ſhut. -
We will deſcend and fºld him in our arms. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Witneſs my ſon, now in the ſhade of death,
Whoſe bright outſhining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkneſs folded up. , Shakeſp. Richard III.
The fires i' th' loweſt hell fºld in the people! Shakespeare Coriol.
To Fold. v. n. To cloſe over another of the ſame kind; to
join with another of the ſame kind.
The two leaves of the one door were fºlding, and the two
leaves of the other door were folding. I King; vi. 34.
FOLIACEOUS.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O L
.
:
foLIACEOUS. adj. [foliaceus, from folium, Latin.] Con-
ſiſting of laminºe or leaves.
A piece of another, conſiſting of an outer cruſt, of a ruddy
talky ſpar, and a blue talky fºliaceous ſpar. ſ/oodward on Faſſ,
Fo’li AGE. m.ſ.. [folium, Latin; feuillage, French.] Leaves;
tufts of leaves; the apparel of leaves to a plant.
The great columns are finely engraven with fruits and ſo-
liage, that run twiſting about them from the very top to the
bottom. Addiſon on Italy.
When ſwelling buds their od’rous foliage ſhed,
And gently harden into fruit, the wiſe
Spare not the little offsprings, if they grow
Redundant. Phillips.
To Fo'liate. v. a. [foliatus, folium, Latin.] To beat into
laminas or leaves.
Gold foliated, or any metal foliated, cleaveth. Bacon.
If gold be foliated, and held between your eyes and the
light, the light looks of a greeniſh blue. Newton's Opt.
Folia'tion. n.ſ.. [foliatio, folium, Latin.]
1. The aët of beating into thin leaves.
2. Foliation is one of the parts of the flower of a plant, being
the collection of thoſe fugacious coloured leaves called petala,
which conſtitute the compaſs of the flower; and alſo ſome-
times to ſecure and guard the fruit which ſucceeds the folia-
tion, as in apples, pears, &amp;c. and ſometimes ſtands within it,
as in cherries, apricots, &amp;c. for theſe, being of a tender and
pulpous body, and coming forth in the colder parts of the
Spring, would be often injured by the extremities of weather,
if they were not thus protećted and lodged up within their
flowers. &amp;uincy.
Fo'llature, n.ſ.. [from folium, Latin.] The ſtate of being
hammered into leaves. Dići.
FO'LIO. m.ſ.. [in fºlio, Latin.] A large book, of which the
pages are formed by a ſheet of paper once doubled.
lumbinus and Plumeo made leſs progreſs in knowledge,
though they had read over more fºliº's. IPatti's Improvement.
Fo'LIoMoRT. adj. [folium mortuum, Latin.] A dark yellow;
the colour of a leaf faded: vulgarly called philmot.
A flinty pebble was of a dark-green colour, and the exte-
riour cortex of a foliomert colour. JWoodward on Fºſſils.
FOLK. m. ſ. [ polc, Saxon; volk, Dutch.]
1. People, in familiar language.
Never troubling him, either with aſking queſtions, or find-
ing fault with his melancholy, but rather fitting to his dolor
dolorous diſcourſes of their own and other folks misfor-
tune. Sidney.
Dorilaus having married his ſiſter, had his marriage in ſhort
time bleſt, for ſo are folk wont to ſay, how unhappy ſoever the
children after grow, with a ſon. Sidney.
When with greateſt art he ſpoke,
You'd think he talk'd like other folk;
For all a rhetorician's rules
Teach nothing but to name his tools.
2. Nations; mankind.
Thou ſhaſt judge the folk righteouſly, and govern the na-
tions upon earth. Pſalm lvii. 4.
3. Any kind of people as diſcriminated from others.
The river thrice hath flow'd, no ebb between ;
And the old folk, time's doting chronicles,
Say it did ſo a little time before. Shakespeare
Anger is a kind of baſeneſs; as it appears well in the weak-
neſs of children, women, old folk, and ſick folks. Bacon's Eff.
4. It is now uſed only in familiar or burleſque language.
Old good man Dobſon of the green,
Remembers he the tree has ſeen,
Hudibras, p. i.
And goes with folks to ſhew the fight. Swift.
He walk'd, and wore a threadbare cloak;
He din’d and ſupp'd at charge of other folk. Swift.
Fo'LKMoTE. n ſ. [from folk and mote.]
Thoſe hills were appointed for two ſpecial uſes, and built
by two ſeveral nations: the one is that which you call folk-
m teſ, built by the Saxons, and ſignifies in the Saxon a meeting
of folk. Spenſer on Ireland.
Fo'llicl E. n.ſ.. [folliculus, Latin.]
1. A cavity in any body with ſtrong coats.
Although there be no eminent and circular follicle, no round
bag or veſicle, which long containeth this humour; yet is
there a manifeſt receptacle of choler from the liver into the
guts. Brown's Vulgar Erreurs, b. iii. c. 2.
2. Follicle is a term in botany ſignifying the ſeed-veſſels, capſula
ſeminalis, or caſe, which ſome fruits and ſeeds have over
them ; as that of the alkengi, pedicularis, &amp;c. $2:/inty.
To FOLLOW. v. a. [Folxian, Saxon; volgen, Dutch.]
1. To go after; not before or fide by ſide.
I had rather, forſooth, go before you like a man, than follow
lim like a dwarf. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indor.
2. To purſue as an enemy.
Wherever guilt can fly, revenge can fºllow. Irene.
3. To attend as a dependant.
And the three eldeſt ſons of Jeſſe went and fºllowed Saul to
the battle. i Sa. xvii. 13.
Such finiling rogues as theſe ſooth every paſſion,
4.
That in the nature of their lords rebels:
As knowing nought, like dogs, but following. Shał. K. Lear.
Let not the muſe then flatter lawleſs ſway,
Nor follow fortune where ſhe leads the way. Pope.
4. To purſue.
Not yielding over to old age his country delights, he was at
that time following a merlin. Sidney, b. ii.
Some pious tears the pitying hero paid,
And follow'd with his eyes the fleeting ſhade. Dryden’s AEn.
We follow fate, which does too faſt purſue. Dryden.
. To ſucceed in order of time.
. To be conſequential, as effects to cauſes.
7. To imitate; to copy.
Where Rome keepeth that which is ancienter and better,
others, whom we much more affect, leaving it for newer, and
changing it for worſe, we had rather follºw the perfections of
them whom we like not, than in defects reſemble them whom
we love. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 28.
Ill patterns are ſure to be followed more than good rules.
Locke on Education.
;
8. To obey; to obſerve.
If all who do not follow oral tradition as their only rule of
faith are out of the church, then all who follow the council
of Trent are no Chriſtians. Tillºtſon, Preface.
Moſt men admire
Virtue, who follow not her lore. Paradiſe Regain'd, b. vii.
9. To confirm by new endeavours; to keep up indefatigably.
They bound themſelves to his laws and obedience; and in
caſe it had been followed upon them, as it ſhould have been,
they ſhould have been reduced to perpetual civility. Spenſer.
Io. To attend to; to be buſied with.
He that undertaketh and followeth other mens buſineſs for
gain, ſhall fall into ſuits. Eccluſ xxix. 9.
To Fo'llow. v. n.
1. To come after another.
Peter fºllowed afar off. Luke xxii. 54.
The famine ſhall fºllow cloſe after you. jer. xlii. 16.
Welcome all that lead or fºllow
To the oracle of Apollo.
2. To be poſteriour in time.
3. To be conſequential, as effe&amp;t to cauſe.
If the negle&amp;t or abuſe of liberty to examine what would
really and truly make for his happineſs miſleads him, the miſ-
carriages that follow on it muſt be imputed to his own elec-
tion. Docke.
To tempt them to do what is neither for their own nor the
good of thoſe under their care, great miſchiefs cannot but
follow. Locke.
4. To be conſequential, as inference to premiſes.
Though there are or have been ſometimes dwarfs, and ſome-
tlmes giants in the world; yet it does not fºllow that there
muſt be ſuch in every age, nor in every country. Temple.
This dangerous doctrine muſt neceſſarily follºw, from
making all political power to be nothing elſe but Adam's pa-
ternal power. Locke.
5. To continue endeavours.
Then ſhall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. Hoſ.
Fo'llow ER. m. ſ. [from fºllow.]
1. One who comes after another; not before him, or ſide by
ſide.
Little gallant, you were wont to be a follower; but now you
are a leader: whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye
your maſter's heels? Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Iłindſor.
No ſtop, no ſtay, but clouds of ſand ariſe,
Spurn’d and caſt backward on the fºllower's eyes. Dryden.
. A dependant. -
. An attendant.
No follower, but a friend. . Pope.
4. An aſſociate; a companion.
How accompanied, can'ſt thou tell that
—With Poins, and other his continual fºllowers. Shakespeare H. IV.
. One under the command of another.
I hold it no wiſdom to leave unto them too much command
over their kindred, but rather withdraw their followers from
them as much as may be, and gather them under the com-
mand of law. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The underſtanding that ſhould be eyes to the blind faculty
of the will, is blind itſelf; and ſo brings all the inconve-
niences that attend a blind follower, under the conduct of a
Ben. johnſon.
:
5
blind guide. South's Sermons.
And forc’d AEneas, when his ſhips were loſt,
To leave his follºwers on a foreign coaſt. Dryden's Aºn.
6. A ſcholar; an imitator; a copyer; one of the ſame ſort.
Beye followers of me, even as I am of Chriſt. I Cor. xi. 1.
The true profeſſion of Chriſtianity inviolably engages all its
followers to do good to all men. Sf ra.'s Sermºns.
Every one's idea of identity will not be the ſame that Pytha-
goras and thouſands of his followers have. }.
The ſtudious head or gen’rous mind,
Follow'r of God, or friend of human kind,
Poet or patriot, roſe but to reſtore
The faith and moral nature gave before. Pope's Eſſays.
Fo'll Y.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">* F O N
F O N
º
º
º:
Fo'lly, n.ſ.. [flie, French.]
1. Want of underſtanding; weakneſs of intelle&amp;t.
2. Criminal weakneſs; depravity of mind.
Think'ſt thou, that duty ſhall have dread to ſpeak,
When pow'r to flattery bows? To plainneſs honour
Is bound, when majeſty to foly falls. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. Act of negligence or paſſion unbecoming gravity or deep
wiſdom. In this ſenſe it has a plural.
Love is blind, and lovers cannot ſee
The pretty follies that themſelves commit;
For if they could, Cupid himſelf would bluſh
To ſee me thus transformed to a boy Shakeſpeare.
Leave ſuch to trifle with more grace and eaſe,
Whom folly pleaſes, or whoſe folie, pleaſe. Pope's Horace.
To FOMENT. v. a. [fomentor, Latin; fomenter, French.]
1. To cheriſh with heat.
Every kind that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power, and warm'd. Milton's P. L.
2. To bathe with warm lotions.
He fomented the head with opiates to procure ſleep, and a
ſolution of opium in water to foment the forehead. A buthnot.
3. To encourage; to ſupport; to cheriſh. -
They love their givings, and foment their deeds no leſs than
parents do their children. Wotton.
Blame then thyſelf, as reaſon's law requires,
Since nature gave, and thou fomen'ſ my fires. Dryden.
They are troubled with thoſe ill humours, which they
themſelves infuſed and fºmented in them. Locke.
Fom ENTA"rion. n.ſ.. [fºmentation, Fr. from ſoment J
1. A fomentation is partial bathing, called alſo ſtuping, which is
applying hot flannels to any part, dipped in medicated decoc-
tions, whereby the ſteams breathe into the parts, and diſcuſs
obſtrućted humours. Quincy.
Fomentation calleth forth the humour by vapours; but yet,
in regard of the way made by the poulti-, draweth gently the
humours out: for it is a gentle fºmentation, and hath withal a
mixture of ſome ſtupefactive. Bacon's Natural Hiſłry.
2. The lotion prepared to foment the parts.
The medicines were prepared by the phyſicians, and the
lotions or fomentations by the nurſes. Arbuthnot on Coins.
FoME'N TER. n.ſ. [ from foment. J. An encourager; a ſup-
rfer.
Theſe fatal diſtempers, as they did much hurt to the body
politick at home, being like humours ſtirred in the natural
without evacuation, ſo did they produce diſadvantageous
effects abroad; and better had it been, that the raiſers and
fomenters of them had never ſprung up in Druina. Hºwel.
Fon. n.ſ. [Scott. A word now obſolete.] A fool; an ideot.
Sicker I hold him for a greater fon,
That loves the thing he cannot purchaſe. Spenſ r's Paſº.
FOND. n.ſ [fonn, Scottiſh. A word of which I have found
no ſatisfactory etymology. To ſonne is in Chaucer to doat, to
be fooliſh.] .
1. Fooliſh; filly; indiſcreet; imprudent; injudicious.
This we know that the Grecians or Gentiles did account
fooliſhneſs; but that they ever did think it a fond or unlikely
way to ſeek men's converſion by ſermons, we have not
heard. Hoºker, b. v. ſ. 22.
He was beaten out of all love of learning by a fond ſchool-
maſter. Aſcham.
Tell theſe ſad women,
*Tis fond to wail inevitable ſtrokes,
As 'tis to laugh at them.
Grant I may never prove ſo fond
To truſt man on his oath or bond. Shakeſpeare's Timºn.
I am weaker than a woman's tear,
Tamer than ſleep, fonder than ignorance.
Fond thoughts may fall into ſome idle brain;
But one belief of all, is ever wiſe. Davies.
Thou ſee'ſt
How ſubtly to detain thee I deviſe,
Inviting thee to hear while I relate;
Fondſ were it not in hope of thy reply. Milt. Paradiſ. Loft.
Sofºnd are mortal men,
Fall’n into wrath divine,
As their own ruin on themſelves tº invite. Milton's Agoniſies.
'Twas not revenge for griev'd Apollo's wrong
Thoſe aſs's ears on Midas' temples hung;
But fond repentance of his happy wiſh. Waller.
But reaſon with your fond religion fights;
For many gods are many infinites. Dryden's Tyran. Love.
This is fond, becauſe it is the way to cheat thyſelf. Tillotſºn.
2. Trifling; valued by folly.
Not with fond ſhekles of the teſted gold,
Or ſtones, whoſe rate are either rich or poor
As fancy values them. Shakeſpeare's Meaſ for Meaſure.
3. Fooliſhly tender; injudiciouſly indulgent.
Shakeſpearés Coriolanuſ.
Shakeſpeare.
I'm a fooliſh fond wife. Addiſon.
Like Venus I’ll ſhine,
Be find and be fine. Addison.
4. Pleaſed in too great a degree; fooliſhly delighted.
Fame is in itſelf a real good, if we may believe Cicero,
who was perhaps too fond of it ! :yden's jiv.nal, Dedication.
I, fond of my well-choſen ſeat,
My pićtures, medals, books complete. Prior.
Some are ſo fond to know a great deal at once, and love to
talk of things with freedom and boldneſs before they
thoroughly underſtand them //atts's Improvem. of the Aſind.
To Fon D. v. a. [from the noun..] To treat with great
To Fo'NDLE. { indulgence; to careſs ; to cocker.
Howe'er unjuſt your jealouſy appear,
It does my pity, not my anger move:
I'll fond it as the froward child of love. Dryden's Aurengz.
When amidſt the fervour of the feaſt,
The Tyrian hugs, and fon's thee on her breaſt,
And with ſweet kiſſes in her arms co: {trains,
Thou may’ſ infuſe thy venom in her veins. Dryden's Zn.
They are allowed to kiſs the child at meeting and parting;
but a profeſſor, who always ſtands by, will not ſuffer them to
uſe any fondling expreſſions. Gułiver’s ºf ravels.
To Fon D. v. n. To be fond of; to be in love; to doat
Oil.
How will this fidge My maſter loves her dearly;
And I, poor monſter, fond as much on him;
And ſhe, miſtaken, ſeems to dote on me.
Fo'NDLER. m.ſ.. [from fond..] One who fondles.
Fo'Ni, LING, n.ſ. from fondle.]. A perſon or thing much fondled
or careſſed; ſomething regarded with great affection.
Partiality in a parent is commonly unlucky; for fºndlings
are in danger to be made fools, and the children that are leaſt
cockered make the beſt and wiſeſt men. L'E/irange.
The bent of our own minds may favour any opinion or
.ačtion, that may ſhew it to be a fondling of our own. Locke.
Any body would have gueſſed miſs to have been bred up
under a cruel ſtepdame, and John to be the ſºdling of a ten-
der mother. Arbuthnt's Hylory of john Bull.
Bred a fºnd ing and an heireſs.
Dreſs'd like any lady may’reſs;
Cocker'd by the ſervants round,
Was too good to touch the ground. Swift.
Fo'NDLY. adv. [from fond.]
1. Fooliſhly ; weakly; imprudently; injudiciouſly.
Moſt ſhallowly did you theſe arms commence,
Fondly brought here, and fooliihly ſent hence. Shakespeare H. IV.
Sorrow and grief of heart
Makes him ſpeak fondy, like a frantick man. Shakespeare R. II.
Ficinus f ndl, adviſeth, for the prolongation of life, that a
vein be opened in the arm of ſome wholeſome yºung man,
and the blood to be ſucked. Jacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The military mound
The Britiſh files tranſcend, in evil hour
For their proud foes, that foal brav'd their fate Phillips.
Some valuing thoſe of their own ſide or mind,
Still make themſelves the meaſure of mankind :
Fondly we think we merit honour then,
When we but praiſe ourſelves in other men. Pope's Criticiſm.
Under thoſe ſacred leaves, ſecure
From common lightning of the ſkies,
He fºndly thought he might endure
The flaſhes of Ardelia's eyes. Swift.
2. With great or extreme tenderneſs.
Ev’n before the fatal engine clos'd,
A wretched ſylph too fondly interpos'd :
Fate urg'd the ſheers, and cut the ſylph in twain. Pope.
Fordly or ſeverely kind. Savage.
Fo'NDN Ess. n.f [from find.]
1. Fooliſhneſs; weakneſs; want of ſenſe ; want of judgment.
Fondneſ; it were for any, being free,
To covet fetters, though they golden be. Spenſer's Sonnets.
2. Fooliſh tenderneſs. -
My heart had ſtill ſome fooliſh fondneſs for thee;
But hence ’tis gone: I give it to the winds. Addiſ Cato.
- Hopeleſs mother!
Whoſe fºndneſ could compare her mortal offspring
To thoſe which fair Latona bore to Jove. Prior,
3. Tender paſſion. - -
Your jealouſy perverts my meaning ſtill ;.... . .
My very hate is conſtrued into fondneſs. 4. Phill Diff. Moth.
Corinna, with that youthful air,
Is thirty and a bit to ſpare:
Her fondneſ for a certain earl -
Began when I was but a girl. Swift.
4. Unreaſonable liking. • -
They err that either through indulgence to others, or fºndneſ;
to any fin in themſelves, ſubſtitute for repentance anything
that is leſs than a fincere reſolution of new obedience, attended
with faithful endeavour, and meet fruits of this chan e
Hammond's Fºndam ntals.
Font. n.ſ. [ Spenser, Latin; fonte, French..] A ſtone veſſel in
which the water for holy baptiſm is contained in the church.
The preſenting of infants at the holy yout is by their god-
fathers. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
9 M I have
Shakeſpeare.
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O O
F O O
f
I have no name, no title;
No, not that name was given me at the fºnt. Shah'ſ R. II.
Fo'NT ANEL n. ſ. [fºntaneſe, French J An iſſue; a diſcharge
opened in the body. - -
A perſon plethorick, ſubject to hot defluxions, was adviſed
to a fontanel in her arm. J/ſeman ºf Inflammation.
PONTANGE. m. ſ. [from the name of the firſt wearer. J
A knot of ribbonds on the top of the head-dreſs. Out
of uſe.
Theſe old-faſhioned fontanges roſe an ell above the head:
they were pointed like ſteeples, and had long looſe pieces of
crape, which were fringed, and hung down their backs. Addison
FOOD. m. ſ [papan, Sax. voeden, Dut. to feed; feed, Scott.]
1. Vićtuals; proviſion for the mouth.
On my knees I beg,
That you'll vouchſafe me raiment, bed, and fºod. Shakeſp.
Much foºd is in the tillage of the poor. Prov, xiii. 23.
Under whoſe lowly roof thou haſt vouchſaf’d
To enter, and theſe earthly fruits to taſte;
Food not of angels, yet accepted ſo, -
As that more willingly thou could'ſt not ſeem
At heav'n's high feaſts tº have fed. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
They give us food, which may with nećtar vie,
And wax that does the abſent ſun ſupply. J/aller.
2. Anything that nouriſhes.
Give me ſome muſick: muſick, moody fºod
Of us that trade in love. Shakespeare Antony and Cleºpatra.
O dear ſon Edgar,
The fºod of thy abuſed father's wrath,
Might I but live to ſee thee in my touch, -
I'd ſay, I had eyes again. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
FoodFul. adj. [food and full.] Fruitful; full of food; plen-
to Ou.S.
There Tityus was to ſee, who took his birth
From heav'n, his nurſing from the foodful earth. Dryden.
Foo'DY. adj. [from food.] Eatable; fit for food.
To veſſels, wine ſhe drew;
And into well ſew'd ſacks pour'd fºody meal. Chapman.
FOOL. n.ſ.. [ſº, Welſh; fºl, Iſlandick; fol, French.]
1. Cne whom nature has denied reaſon; a natural ; an idiot.
Do'ſt thou call me fºol, boy?
—All thy other titles thou haſt given away that thou waſt
born with. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The fºol multitude, that chuſe by ſhow,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
Which pry not to the interior. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
It may be aſked, whether the eldeſt ſon, being a fºol, ſhall
inherit paternal power before the younger, a wiſe man. Locke.
He thanks his ſtars he was not born a fool. Pope.
2. [In Scripture.] A wicked man.
The fºol hath ſaid in his heart there is no God. Pſ. xiv. 1.
3. A term of indignity and reproach. -
To be thought knowing, you muſt firſt put the fºol upon all
mankind. Dryden's juvenal, Preface.
4. One who counterfeits folly; a buffoon; a jeſter.
Where's my knave, my fool º Go you, and call my fool
hither. Shakeſpeare's King / ear.
I ſcorn, although their drudge, to be their fool or jeſter. Milt.
If this diſguiſe ſit not naturally on ſo grave a perſon, yet it
may become him better than that fool's coat. Denham.
5. To play the Fool. To play pranks like a hired jeſter; to
jeſt; to make ſport.
I returning where I left his armour, found another inſtead
thereof, and armed myſelf therein to play the fool. Sidney.
6. To play the Fool. To act like one void of common under-
ſtanding.
Well, thus we play the fººl, with the time,
And the ſpirits of the wiſe fit in the clouds
And mock us. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Is it worth the name of freedom to be at liberty to play the
fºol, and draw ſhame and miſery upon a man's ſelf? Locke.
7. To make a Fool. To diſappoint; to defeat.
*Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's a-hungry,
to challenge him to the field, and then to break promiſe with
him, and make a fºol of him. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
To Fool. v. n. [from the noun..] To trifle; to toy; to play;
to idle; to ſport.
I, in this kind of merry fooling, am nothing to you; ſo you
may continue and laugh at nothing ſtill. Shakeſp. Temptſ?.
Fool not; for all may have,
If they dare try, a glorious life, a grave. Herbert.
If you have the luck to be court-fools, thoſe that have either
wit or honeſty, you may fºol withal, and ſpare not. Denham:
It muſt be an induſtrious youth that provides againſt age;
and he that fools away the one, muſt either beg or ſtarve in
the other. L’Eſtrange.
He muſt be happy that knows the true meaſures of fool-
ing. L’Eſtrange, Fable 74.
Is this a time for £oling 2
To Fool. v. a.
1. To treat with contempt; to diſappoint; to fruſtrate; to de-
feat.
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
And ſhall it in more ſhame be further ſpoken,
That you are fold, diſcarded, and ſhook off? Shakespeare H.IV.
If it be you that ſtir theſe daughters hearts
Againſt their father, fool me not ſo much
To bear it tamely. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
When I am read, thou feign'ſ a weak applauſe,
As if thou wert my friend, but lackeſt a cauſe:
This but thy judgment fools; the other way -
Would both thy folly and thy ſpite betray. Ben. Johnſºn.
Him over-weaning
To over-reach; but with the ſerpent meeting,
Fool'd and beguil’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
If men loved to be deceived and fooled about their ſpiritual
eſtate, they cannot take a ſurer courſe than by taking their
neighbour's word for that, which can be known only from
their own heart. South's Sermoni.
When I conſider life, ’tis all a cheat;
For ſoil'd with hope, men favour the deceit.
I'm tir'd with waiting for this chemick gold,
Which fools us young, and beggars us when old. Dryden.
I would adviſe this blinded ſet of men not to give credit to
thoſe, by whom they have been ſo often fooled and impoſed
upon. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 7.
2. To infatuate.
It were an handſome plot,
But full of difficulties, and uncertain;
And he's ſo fool'd with downright honeſty,
He'll ne'er believe it. Denham's Sophy.
A long and eternal adieu to all unlawful pleaſures: I will
no longer be ſooed or impoſed upon by them. Calamy's Serm.
A boor of Holland, whoſe cares of growing ſtill richer
and richer, perhaps fool him ſo far as to make him enjoy
leſs in his riches than others in poverty. Temple.
3. To cheat: as, to fool one of his money.
Foo'l bor N. adj. [fool and born.] Fooliſh from the birth.
Reply not to me with a foolborn jeſt. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Foo'LERY... n.ſ.. [from fool.] -
1. Habitual folly.
Foºlery, fir, does walk about the orb like the ſun; it ſhines
every where : I would be ſorry, ſir, but the fool ſhould be as
oft with your maſter as with my miſtreſs. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
2. An act of folly; trifling practice
It is mere foolery to multiply diſtinét particulars in treating
of things, where the difference lies only in words. A/atts.
3. Objećt of folly.
That Pythagoras, Plato, or Orpheus believed in any of
theſe fooleries, it cannot be ſuſpected. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
We are tranſported with fooleries, which, if we underſtood,
we ſhould deſpiſe. L’Eſtranse's falles.
FoolHA'PPY., adj. [fºol and happy.J Lucky without contri-
vance or judgment.
As when a ſhip, that flies fair under ſail,
An hidden rock eſcaped unawares,
That lay in wait her wreck for to bewail;
The mariner, yet half amazed, ſtares
At perils paſt, and yet in doubt ne dares
To joy at his foolhappy overſight. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 6.
Fool HA'RDIN Ess. n.ſ. [from foolhardy..] Madraſhneſs; cou-
rage without ſenſe.
A falſe glozing paraſite would call his follardineſ valour,
and then he may go on boldly, becauſe blindly. South's Serm.
There is a difference betwixt daring and foolhardingſ, Lu-
can and Statius often ventured them too far, our Virgil
never. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Fool. HA'R Dise. n.ſ.. [fool and hardieſe, French.J Foolhardi-
neſs; adventurouſneſs without judgment. Obſolete.
More huge in ſtrength than wiſe in works he was,
And reaſon with foolhardiſe over-ran;
Stern melancholy did his courage paſs,
And was, for terror more, all arm'd in ſhining braſs, F. Q.
FoolHA'RDY, adj. [fool and hardy..] Daring without judg-
ment; madly adventurous ; fooliſhly bold.
One mother, when as her foolhardy child
Did come too near, and with his talons play,
Half dead through fear, her little babe revil’d. Fairy Queen.
Some would be ſo foolhardy as to preſume to be more of the
cabinet-council of God Almighty than the angels. Hºwel.
If any yet be ſo foolhardy,
Tº expoſe themſelves to vain jeopardy;
If they come wounded off, and lame,
No honour's got by ſuch a maim. Hudihras, p. i. cant. I.
Foo'LTRAP. m. ſ. [fºol and trap.] A ſnare to catch fools in:
as a flytrap.
Betts, at the firſt, were fºoltra's, where the wiſe
Like ſpiders lay in ambuſh for the flies. Dryden,
Foo'LISH. adj. [from fºol.]
1. Void of underſtanding; weak of intelle&amp;t.
Thou fooliſh woman, ſeeſt thou not our mourning 2 Eſdr.
He, of all the men that ever my fooliſh eyes looked upon,
was the beſt deſerving a fair lady. Shakespeare 41crchant ºf Penice.
2. Imprudent; indiſcreet.
We are come off
6
Like
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O O
F O O -
!
Like Romans; neither ſoliſh in our ſtands,
Nor cowardly in retire. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. Ridiculous; contemptible.
It is a fooliſh thing to make a long prologue, and to be ſhort
in the ſtory itſelf. 2 Mac. ii. 32.
Pray do not mock me;
I am a very fooliſh fond old man:
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
What could the head perform alone,
If all their friendly aids were gone :
A foo iſh figure he muſt make ;
Do nothing elſe but ſleep and ake. Prior.
4 [In Scripture.] Wicked ; ſinful.
Foo LisHLY. adv. [from foliſh..] Weakly; without under-
ſtanding. In Scripture, wickedly.
Although we boaſt our Winter ſun looks bright,
And fooliº y are glad to ſee it at its height;
Yet ſo much ſooner comes the long and gloomy night. Swift,
Foo' is HNess. n. ſ. [from fooliſh.]
1. Folly; want of underſtanding.
2. Fooliſh practice; actual deviation from the right.
Fooli/neſs being properly a man's deviation from right rea-
ſon, in point of pračtice, muſt needs conſiſt in his pitching
upon ſuch an end as is unſuitable to his condition, or pitching
upon means unſuitable to the compaſſing of his end. South.
Charm'd by their eyes, their manners I acquire,
And ſhape my fºoliſhneſs to their deſire. Prior.
Foo'ls on Fs. n. ſ. A plant.
The chara&amp;ters are: it hath an anomalous flower,” conſiſt-
ing of ſix diſlimilar leaves; the five uppermoſt of which are
ſo diſpoſed as to imitate in ſome manner a helmet. Miller.
FOOT. n.ſ. plural feet. [pot, Saxon; voet, Dutch 3 fut,
Scottiſh.]
1. The part upon which we ſtand.
The queen that bore thee,
Oft ner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died ev'ry day ſhe liv'd. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
His affection to the church was ſo notorious, that he never
deſerted it ’till both it and he were over-run and trod under
a f. Clarendon.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
2. That by which any thing is ſupported in the nature of a foot.
3. The lower part; the baſe.
Yond' towers, whoſe wanton tops do buſs the clouds,
Muſt kiſs their own feet. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Fretting, by little and little, waſhes away and eats out both
the tops and ſides and feet of mountains. Hakewill on Provid.
4. The end; the lower part.
What diſmal cries are thoſe 2
—Nothing ; a trifling ſum of miſery,
New added to the fºot of thy account:
Thy wife is ſeiz'd by force, and born away. Dryd. Cleomen.
5. The act of walking. -
Antiochus departed, weening in his pride to make the land
navigable, and the ſea paſſable by foot. 2.44ac. v. 21.
6. On Foot. Walking; without carriage.
Iſrael journeyed about ſix hundred thouſand on foot. Ex. xii.
7. A poſture of action.
The centurions and their charges diſtinétly billeted, already
in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning.
- Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
8. Infantry; footmen in arms. In this ſenſe it has no plural.
Luſias gathered threeſcore thouſand choice men of fºot, and
five thouſand horſemen. 1 Mac. iv. 28.
Himſelf with all his fºot entered the town, his horſe being
quartered about it. Clarend.n, b. viii.
Thrice horſe and fºot about the fires are led, t
And thrice with loud laments they wail the dead. Dryden.
9. State; charaćter; condition.
See on what fºot we ſtand; a ſcanty ſhore,
The ſea behind, our enemies before. Dryden's 42n.
In ſpecifying the word Ireland, it would ſeem to inſinuate
that we are not upon the ſame foot with our fellow ſubječts in
England. Swift's Drapier's Letters.
What colour of excuſe can be for the contempt with which
we treat this part of our ſpecies, that we ſhould not put them
upon the common fºot of humanity, that we ſhould only ſet
an inſignificant fine upon the man who murders them : Addison
10. Scheme; plan; ſettlement. -
There is no wellwiſher to his country without a little hope,
that in time the kingdom may be on a better fººt. Swift.
I aſk, whether upon the foot of our conſtitution, as it ſtood
in the reign of the late king James, a king of England may
be depoſed ? Swift.
11. A ſtate of incipient exiſtence. -
If ſuch a tradition were at any time ſet on ſººt, it is not
eaſy to imagine how it ſhould at firſt gain entertainment; but
much more difficult how it ſhould come to be univerſally pro-
pagated Tilotſon's Sermons.
12. It ſeems to have been once proverbially uſed for the level,
the ſquare, par. -
neceſſities would draw upon them a moſt ſudden undoing, in
that they would be forced to ſell their means, be it lands or
goods, far under foot. Bacon's Eſſays.
13. A gain number of ſyllables conſtituting a diſtinct part of
a Veríc.
Žeet, in our Engliſh verſifying, without quantity and joints,
be ſure ſigns that the verſe is either born deformed, unnatural,
or lame. Afthan's Schoolmaſter.
Did'ſt thou hear theſe verſes 2
-O yes, I heard them all, and more too; for ſome o' them
had in them more feet than the verſes would bear. Shakeſpeare.
14. Motion; action.
While other jeſts are ſomething rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to ſlip
Away with Slender to marry. Shakespeare Mer. IP?ves of I/indſ.
In the government of the world the number and variety of
the ends on foot, with the ſecret nature of moſt things to which
they relate, muſt make a diſtinét remark of their congruity,
in ſome caſes very difficult, and in ſome unattainable. Grew.
15. A meaſure containing twelve inches.
When it ſignifies meaſure it has often, but vitiouſly, fºot in
the plural.
An orange, lemon, and apple, wrapt in a linnen cloth,
being buried for a fortnight's ſpace four fºot deep within the
earth, came forth no ways mouldy or rotten, Bacon.
16. Step.
This man's ſon would, every foot and anon, be taking ſome
of his companions into the orchard. L'Eſtrange.
To Foot. v. n. [from the noun.]
I. To dance; to tread wantonly; to trip.
Lonely the vale and full of horror ſtood,
Brown with the ſhade of a religious wood;
The moon was up, and ſhot a gleamy light;
He ſaw a quire of ladies in a round,
That featly footing ſeem'd to ſkim the ground.
2. To walk; not ride; not fly.
By this the dreadful beaſt drew nigh to land,
Half flying, and half footing in his haſte. Fairy Queen.
Take heed, have open eye; for thieves do foot by night. Shakespeare
The man ſet the boy upon the aſs, and foted it him-
ſelf. L’Eſtrange.
With them a man ſometimes cannot be a penitent, unleſs
he alſo turns vagabond, and foots it to Jeruſalem ; or wanders
over this or that part of the world, to viſit the ſhrine of ſuch
Dryden.
or ſuch a pretended ſaint. South.
If you are for a merry jaunt, I'll try, for once, who can
foot it fartheſt. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
To Foot. v. a.
1. To ſpurn; to kick.
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard, and fºot me
as you ſpurn a ſtranger cur over your threſhold. Shakeſpeare.
2. To ſettle; to begin to fix.
What confed'racy have you with the traitors
Late footed in the kingdom? Shakespeare's King Lear.
3. To tread. -
Saint Withold footed thrice the wold:
He met the night-mare, and her name told;
Bid her alight, and her troth plight,
And aroynt thee, witch, aroynt thee right. Shakespeare K. Lear.
There haply by the ruddy damſel ſeen,
Or ſhepherd boy, they featly foot the green. Tickell.
Football. n.ſ.. [fºot and ball.] A ball commonly made of a
blown bladder caſed with leather, driven by the foot.
Am I ſo round with you as you with me,
That like a football you do ſpurn me thus: Shakeſpeare.
Such a Winter-piece ſhould be beautified with all manner
of works and exerciſes of Winter; as footballs, felling of
wood, and ſliding upon the ice. Peacham.
As when a ſort of luſty ſhepherds try
Their force at football, care of vićtory
Makes them ſalute ſo rudely, breaſt to breaſt,
That their encounter ſeems too rough for jeſt. Waller.
One rolls along a football to his foes,
One with a broken truncheon deals his blows. Dryden:
He was ſenſible the common fotball was a very imperfect
imitation of that exerciſe. Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scribl.
Footboy. m.ſ.. [fºot and boy..] A low menial; an attendant
in livery.
Was it diſcretion, lords, to let this man,
This honeſt man, wait like a lowſy footboy
At chamber-door Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Though I had no body to aſſiſt but a fºotboy, yet I made
ſhift to try a pretty number of things. Boyle on Colours.
whenéver he imagines advantage will redound to one of
his fºotboy, by oppreſſion of me, he never diſputes it, Swift.
Foo/*BR1 ge. . . [fºot and bridge.] A bridge on which
paſſengers walk; a narrow bridge. -
Palºmon's ſhepherd, fearing the footbridge was not ſtrong
enough, loaded it ſo long, 'till he broke that which would have
born a bigger burden. Sidney.
Were it not for this eaſy borrowing upon intereſt, men's Foo'ſ cloar H. n.ſ. [fot and cleath.] A ſumpter cloath:
Three
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O O
F O P
i
l
Three times to-day my fºot-loath horſe did ſtumble,
And ſtarted when he look'd upon the Tower, . . . .
As oth to bear me to the ſlaughterhouſe. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Footed, adj. [from foot..] Shaped in the foot.
Snouted and tailed like a boar, and footed like a goat. Grew.
Foo/TFIGHT. n.ſ. [fºot and fight.] A fight made on foot, in
oppoſition to that on horſeback.
So began our footfight in ſuch ſort, that we were well en-
tered to blood of both ſides. Sidney, b. ii.
Foothold... n ſ. [foot and he'd] , Space to hold the foot;
ſpace on which one may tread ſurely. -
So they all fell to work at the roots of the tree, and left it
ſo little fºotho.d, that the firſt blaſt of wind laid it flat upon the
ground. L' ſtrange.
He's never well 'till he's at the top: he has nothing above
him to aſpire to, nor any ſo thoid left him to come down by:
- L’Eſtrange, Fable 6.
Foo'ſ ING. m. ſ [from foot.]
1. Ground for the foot.
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous;
As full of peril and advent'rous ſpirit
As to o'erwalk a current, roaring loud,
On the unſteadfaſt fºoting of a ſpear. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
As Noah's pigeon, which return’d no more, -
Did ſhew ſhe foting found, for all the flood. Davies.
In aſcents, every ſtep gained is a ſo ting and help to the
next. Holder's Elments of Speech.
2. Foundation ; baſis; ſupport; root.
Cloven ſtakes; and, wond’rous to behold,
Their ſharpen'd ends in earth their footing place,
And the dry poles produce a living race. Dr d. Virg. Georg.
All thoſe ſublime thoughts take their riſe and footing here:
the mind ſtirs not one jot beyond thoſe ideas which ſenſe or
refle&amp;tion have offered. Locke.
The reaſoning faculties of the ſoul would not know how
to move, for want of a foundation and foºting in moſt men,
who cannot trace truth to its fountain and original. Lºcke.
3. Place.
Whether they unétuous exhalations are,
Fir’d by the ſun, or ſeeming ſo alone;
Or each ſome more remote and ſlippery ſtar,
Which loſes f_ting when to mortals ſhewn. Dryden.
4. Tread; walk.
I would outnight you did no body come:
But hark, I hear the fºoting of a man. Shakespeare Merch. of Wen.
Break off, break off; I feel the different ſound
Of ſome chaſte footing near about this ground:
Run to your ſhrouds, within theſe brakes and trees;
Our number may affright. Milton.
5. Dance.
Make holyday: your ryeſtraw hats put on, -
And theſe freſh nymphs encounter every one
In country footing. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
6. Steps; road; track.
He grew ſtrong among the Iriſh; and in his fºoting his ſon
continuing, hath increaſed his ſaid name. Spenſer on Ireland.
Like running weeds, that have no certain root; or like
footings up and down, impoſſible to be traced. Bacon's H. VII.
7. Entrance; beginning; eſtabliſhment.
Ever ſince our nation had any footing in this land, the ſtate
of England did deſire to perfect the conqueſt. Davies.
The defeat of colonel Bellafis gave them their firſt footing
in Yorkſhire. Clarendon, b. viii.
No uſeful arts have yet found footing here;
But all untaught and ſavage does appear. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
8. State; condition; ſettlement.
Gaul was on the ſame footing with Egypt, as to taxes. Arb.
Foot Lick ER. m. ſ. [fºot and lick.] A ſlave; an humble
fawner; one who licks the foot.
Do that good miſchief which may make this iſland
Thine own for ever; and I, thy Caliban,
For ay thy footſicker. Shakeſpeare’s Tempſf.
Foot MAN. n.ſ.. [foot and man.]
1. A ſoldier that marches and fights on foot.
The numbers levied by her lieutenant did conſiſt of fºotmen
three millions, of horſemen one million. Raleigh's Hylory.
2. A low menial ſervant in livery.
He was carried in a rich chariot, litterwiſe, with two horſes
at either end, and two footmen on each ſide. Bacon.
Like footmen running before coaches,
To tell the inn what lord approaches. Prizr.
3. One who pračtiſes to walk or run.
Foot MANship. m. ſ. [from footman.] The art or faculty of
a runner
The Iriſh archers eſpying this, ſuddenly broke up, and
committed the ſafety of their lives to their nimble footman-
Jhip. Hayward.
Yet, ſays the fox, I have baffled more of them with my
wiles and ſhifts than ever you did with your ſo.tmarſhip. L'E/?.
Foot PA E. m. ſ. [fºot and pace.]
1. Part of a Pair of ſtairs, whereon, after four or five ſteps,
you arrive to a broad place, where you make two or three
paces before you aſcend another ſtep, thereby to eaſe the legs
in aſcending the reſt of the ſtairs. Mixon's Mech Exerciſes.
2. A pace no faſter than a ſlow walk.
Foo'TPAD m. ſ. [foºt and pad J A highwayman that robs on
foot, not on horſeback. -
Foo"TPATH. m. ſ. [foot and fath, J A narrow way which
will not admit horſes or carriages.
Know'ſt thou the way to Dover ?
—Both ſtile and gate, horſeway and footpath. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Foo'ſ post. n.ſ.. [foot and pºſt.] A poſt or meſſenger that
travels on foot.
For carrying ſuch letters, every thoroughfare weekly ap-
pointeth a footpºſt, whoſe diſpatch is well near as ſpeedy as the
horſes. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Footst All. n.ſ.. [foot and /fall.] A woman's ſtirrup.
Foo"rst EP. m. ſ. [foot and ſtep.]
1. Trace; track; impreſſion left by the foot.
Clear-fighted reaſon wiſdom's judgment leads,
And ſenſe, her vaſſal, in her footſteps treads Denham.
A man ſhall never want crooked paths to walk in, if he
thinks that he is in the right way, where ever he has the fºot-
Jeps of others to follow. Locke.
2. Token ; mark; notice given.
Let us turn our thoughts to the frame of our ſyſtem, if
there we may trace any viſible footſteps of Divine Wiſdom and
Beneficence. Bentley's Sermons.
3. Example.
Footstool. m. ſ [foºt and ſtool J Stool on which he that
ſits places his feet.
Thus have we ſwept ſuſpicion from our ſeat,
• And made our foot/tool of ſecurity. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
They whoſe ſacred office ’tis to bring
Kings to obey their God, and men their king,
By theſe myſterious links to fix and tye
Men to the fol/fºol of the Deity. Denham's Sophy.
Let ecchoing anthems make his praiſes known
On earth, his foot/?o l, as in heav'n his throne Rºſcommon.
By the phraſe of worſhipping his foot/to:l, no more is meant
than worſhipping God at his foot/tool. Stillingfect.
FOP. n.ſ. [A word probably made by chance, and therefore
without etymology.] A ſimpleton; a coxcomb; a man of
ſmall underſtanding and much oſtentation; a pretender; a
man fond of ſhow, dreſs, and flutter; an impertinent.
A whole tribe of fop,
Got 'tween aſleep and wake. Shakeſpeare's King Lear:
When ſuch a poſitive abandon'd fop,
Among his numerous abſurdities,
Stumbles upon ſome tolerable line,
I fret to ſee them in ſuch company. Roſommon.
The leopard's beauty, without the fox's wit, is no better
than a fºp in a gay coat. L’Eſtrange.
In a dull ſtream, which moving ſlow,
You hardly ſee the current flow;
When a ſmall breeze obſtrućts the courſe,
It whirls about for want of force,
And in its narrow circle gathers
Nothing but chaff, and ſtraws, and feathers:
The current of a female mind
Stops thus, and turns with ev'ry wind;
Thus whirling round, together draws
Fools, fps, and rakes, for chaff and ſtraws. Swift.
Fo'PDoodle. m. ſ. [ſop and doodle..] A fool; an inſignificant
wretch.
Where ſturdy butchers broke your noddle,
And handled you like a ſopdoodle. Hudibras, p. ii.
Fo'PPERY. n.ſ. [from fºp.]
1. Folly; impertinence.
Let not the ſound of ſhallow fºppery enter
My ſober houſe. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
I was three or four times in the thought they were not fai-
ries; and yet the guiltineſs of my mind, the ſudden ſurpriſe
of my powers, drove the groſſneſs of the foppery into a re-
ceived belief, in deſpight of the teeth of all rhime and reaſon,
that they were fairies. Shakespeare Merry I/ives ºf Windſor.
This is the excellent fºppery of the world, that when we
are ſick in fortune, often the ſurfeits of our own behaviour,
we make guilty of our diſaſters the ſun, the moon and ſtars,
as if we were villains on neceſſity. Shakespeare King Lear.
2. Affectation of ſhow or importance; ſhowy folly.
3. Foolery; vain or idle practice; idle affectation.
They thought the people were better let alone in their fºp-
peries, than to be ſuffered to break looſe from that ſubjection
which your ſuperſtition kept them in. Stillingfeet.
But though we fetch from Italy and France
Our fopperies of tune, and mode of dance,
Our ſturdy Britons ſcorn to borrow ſenſe. Granville.
I wiſh I could ſay quaint fºppe, ies were wholly abſent from
graver ſubjects. Swift to the Lord High a reaſurer-
Fo'PP1sh. adj [from fºp.] -
1. Fooliſh; idle ; vain.
Fools
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- - * *
* * t
: Fools ne'er had leſs grace in a year;
For wiſe men are grown foppiſh,
And know not hew their wits to wear, º
Their manners are ſo apiſh. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. Vain in ſhow; fooliſhly oſtentatious; vain of dreſs.
With him the º: ſtill ſome virtues have;
The vain are ſprightly, and the ſtupid grave;
The ſlothful negligent, the foppiſh neat; -
The lewd are airy, and the fly diſcreet. Garth's Diſpenſat.
The Romans grew extremely expenſive and foppiſh in this
article ; ſo that the emperor Aurelian forbid men that variety
of colours on their ſhoes, allowing it ſtill to women. Arbuth.
Fo'PP1sh LY. adv. [from foppiſh..] Vainly ; oſtentatiouſly.
Fo'PrishNess. n.f. [from ſppiſh.] Vanity; ſhowy or oſten-
tatious vanity. - * - .
Fo'prling. n.ſ.. [from ſp.] A petty ſop; an under-rate
coxcomb. - - -
, Thy works in Chloe's toilet gain a part, ,
And, with his tailor, ſhare the foppling's heart. Tickell.
FOR. prep. [pon, Saxon; voor, Dutch.]
1. Becauſe of. - - -
That which we for our unworthineſs are afraid to crave, our
prayer is, that God for the worthineſs of his ſon would not-
withſtanding vouchſafe to grant. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 47.
Edward and Richard,
With fiery eyes ſparkling for very wrath, ...
Are at our backs. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI, p. iii.
-- Speak, good Cominius; -
Leave nothing out for length. Shakeſp.
For as much as the queſtion cannot be ſcanned, unleſs the
time of Abraham's journey be conſidered of, I will ſearch into
a tradition concerning his travels. Raleigh's Hi/ſ. of the I/orld.
An aſtrologer ſaith, if it were not for two things that are
conſtant, no individual would laſt one moment. . Bacon.
For as much as it is a fundamental law in the Turkiſh em-
pire, that they may, without any other provocation, make
war, upon Chriſtendom for the propagation of their laws;
ſo the Chriſtians may at all times, as they think good, be
upon the prevention. Bacon's War with Spain.
The governour, ſallying out, took great ſtore of vićtual
and warlike proviſion, which the Turks had for haſte left be-
hind them. Knoller's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Their offer he willingly accepted, knowing that he was not
able to keep that place three days, for lack of vićtual. Knolles,
Quit, quit, fºr ſhame; this will not move,
This cannot take her:
If of herſelf ſhe will not love,
Nothing can make her. | Suckling.
Care not for frowns or ſmiles. Denham's Sophy, Prol.
The hypocrite or carnal man hopes, and is the wickeder
for hoping. Hammond’s Prakt. Catech.
Let no man, fºr his own poverty, become more oppreſſ-
ing in his bargains; but quietly recommend his eſtate to God,
and leave the ſucceſs to him. Taylor.
Perſons who have loſt moſt of their grinders, having been
compelled to uſe three or four only in chewing, wore them
ſo low that the inward nerve lay bare, and they would no longer
for pain make uſe of them. Ray on the Creation.
I but revenge my fate; diſdain'd, betray'd,
And ſuff'ring death for this ungrateful maid. Dryden.
Sole on the barren ſands, the ſuff'ring chief
Roar'd out for anguiſh, and indulg’d his grief. Dryden.
For his long abſence church and ſtate did groan,
Madneſs the pulpit, faction ſeiz'd the throne. Dryden.
Nor with a ſuperſtitious fear is aw’d
For what befalls at home, or what abroad. Dryd. Wirg. Geo.
I, my own judge, condemn'd myſelf before;
For pity, aggravate my crime no more. Dryden's Aurengz.
Matrons of renown, .
When tyrant Nero burnt th' imperial town,
Shriek'd for the downfal in a doleful cry, -
For which their guiltleſs lords were doom'd to die. Dryden.
Children, diſcountenanced by their parents for any fault,
find a refuge in the careſſes of fooliſh flatterers. Locke.
A ſound mind in a ſound body is a ſhort but full deſcription
of a happy ſtate in this world: he that has theſe two has lit-
tle more to wiſh for, and he that wants either of them will be
but little the better for anything elſe. - Locke.
The middle of the gulph is remarkable fºr tempeſts. Addison
My open'd thought to joyous proſpect raiſe,
And for thy mercy let me fing thy praiſe. Prior.
Which beſt or worſt, you could not think;
And die you muſt, for want of drink. Prior.
lt is a moſt infamous ſcandal upon the nation, to reproach
them for treating foreigners with contempt. Swift.
We can only give them that liberty now for ſomething,
which they have ſo many years exerciſed for nothing, of rail-
ing and ſcribbling againſt us. Swift.
Your ſermons would be leſs valuable, fºr want of
time. Swift.
2. With reſpect to ; with regard to.
º
Rather our ſtate's defe&amp;tive for requital,. . . . . . .
Than we to ſtretch it out. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
- A paltry ring -
That ſhe did give me, whoſe poeſy was,
For all the world, like cutlers poetry . . tº
Upon a knife; love me and leave me not. Shakeſpears.
- For all the world, • . . .
As thou art at this hour, was Richard then. Shakeſp H. IV.
. It was young counſel for the perſons, and violent
counſel for the matters. . Bacon, Eſſay 2 i.
Authority followeth old men, and favour and popularity
youth; but for the moral part, perhaps, youth will have the
pre-eminence, as age hath for the politick. Bacon's Eſſays.
Comets are rather gazed upon than wiſely obſerved in their
effects; that is, what kind of comet for magnitude or colour,
produceth what kind of effects. Bacon, Eſſay 54.
For me, if there be ſuch a thing as I. J/aller.
He faith theſe honours conſiſted in preſerving their memo-
ries, and praiſing their virtues; but for any matter of wor-
ſhip towards them, he utterly denies it. Stillingfect.
Our laws were for their matter foreign. Hales.
Now for the government, it is abſolute monarchy; there
being no other laws in China but the king's command. Tempſe.
For me, no other happineſs I own,
Than to have born no iſſue to the throne. Dryd. Tyr. Love.
For me, my ſtormy voyage at an end, -
I to the port of death ſecurely tend. Dryden's Aºn. b. xii.
After death, we ſprights have juſt ſuch natures
We had, for all the world, when human creatures. Dryden.
| Such littie waſps, and yet ſo full of ſpite;
For bulk mere infects, yet in miſchief ſtrong. Tate's juv.
Hobbes has given us a correół explanation of the ſenſe in
general ; but for particulars and circumſtances, he continually
lops them. t Pope's P, face to the Iliad.
Lo, ſome are vellom, and the reſt as good,
For all his lordſhip knows, but they are wood. Pope.
3. In this ſenſe it has oſten as before it.
As for Maramaldus the general, they had no juſt cauſe to
miſlike him, being an old captain of great experience. Knolles.
4. In the charaćier of.
If a man can be fully aſſured of any thing for a truth,
without having examined, what is there that he may not em-
brace for truth? Locke.
She thinks you favour'd :
Butlet her go, fºr an ungrateful woman. A. Phillips.
Say, is it fitting in this very field,
This field, where from my youth I’ve been a carter,
I, in this field, ſhould die for a deſerter Gay,
. With reſemblance of.
I hear for certain, and do ſpeak the truth,
The gentle York is up. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii:
Now, now fºr ſure, deliverance is at hand,
The kingdom ſhall to Iſrael be reſtor'd. Paradiſe Regain'd.
The ſtartling ſteed was ſeiz'd with ſudden fright,
And, bounding, o'er the pommel caſt the knight:
Forward he flew, and pitching on his head,
He quiver'd with his feet, and lay fºr dead.
6. Conſidered as ; in the place of.
Our preſent lot appears
For happy, though but ill; for ill, not worſt,
If we procure not to ourſelves more woe. Milton's Pa. Loſſ.
The council-table and ſtar-chamber held for honourable
that which pleaſed, and for juſt that which profited. Carendon.
Read all the prefaces of Dryden,
For thoſe our criticks much confide in ;
Though meerly writ at firſt fºr filling,
To raiſe the volume's price a ſhilling. Swift.
7. In advantage of ; for the ſake of. -
An ant is a wife creature for itſelf; but it is a ſhrewd thing
in an orchard. * Bacon, Eſſay 24.
He refuſed not to die fºr thoſe that killed him, and ſhed his
5
Dryden.
blood for ſome of thoſe that ſpilt it. Boyle.
Whether ſome hero's fate,
In words worth dying for, he celebrate. Cowley.
Shall I think the world was made fºr one,
And men are born fºr kings, as beaſts for men,
Not for protećtion, but to be devour'd : Dryd, Span. Fryar.
8. Conducive to; beneficial to.
It is for the general good of human ſociety, and conſe-
quently of particular perſons, to be true and juſt ; and it is for
mens health to be temperate. Tillotſon, Sermon i.
It can never be fºr the intereſt of a believer to do me a miſ-
chief, becauſe he is ſure, upon the balance of accounts, to
find himſelf a loſer by it. Addison's Speciatºr, N°. 18.6.
9. With intention of going to a certain place.
We ſailed from Peru, where we had continued for the ſpace
of one whole year, fºr China and Japan, taking with us vic-
tuals for twelve months. Bacon's New Atlantis.
As ſhe was brought fºr England, ſhe was caſt away near
Harwich haven. Hayward.
We ſailed direétly fºr Genoa, and had a fair wind. Adžijan.
9 N - 1 c. In<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R.
10. In comparative reſpect. -
For tuſks with Indian elephants he ſtrove,
And Jove's own thunder from his mouth he drove. Dryden.
11. In proportion to - -
As he could ſee clear, fºr thoſe times, through ſuper-
ſłition; ſo he would be blinded, now and then, by human
policy. - Bacon's Henry VII.
Your underſtandings are not bright enough for the exerciſe
of the higheſt ačts of reaſon. Tillotſºn, Sermon 4.
12. With appropriation to. -
Shadow will ſerve for Summer : prick him ; for we have a
number of ſhadows to fill up the muſter-book. Shakeſp H. V.
13. After O an expreſſion of deſire.
O fºr a muſe of fire, that would aſcend
The brighteſt heaven of invention Shakespeare H. V. Prolºgue.
14. In account of ; in ſolution of
Thus much fºr the beginning and progreſs of the deluge.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
*
-
15. Inducing to as a motive.
There is a natural, immutable, and eternal reaſon fºr that
which we call virtue, and againſt that which we call vice. Till.
16. In expectation of.
He muſt be back again by one and twenty, to marry and
propagate: the father cannot ſtay any longer for the portion,
nor the mother for a new ſet of babies to play with. Locke.
17. Noting power or poſſibility.
For a holy perſon to be humble, frone whom all men
eſteem a ſaint, to fear leſt himſelf become a devil, is as hard
as fºr a prince to ſubmit himſelf to be guided by tutors. Taylºr.
18. Noting dependence. -
The colours of outward objećts, brought into a darkened
room, depend fºr their viſibility upon the dimneſs of the light
they are beheld by. Boyle on Colours.
19. In prevention of ; for fear of
Corn being had down, any way ye allow,
Should wither as needeth for burning in mow. Tuſ Huſſ.
And, fºr the time ſhall not ſeem tellious,
I'll tell thee what befel me on a day.
In this ſelf place. Shakespeare's Henry VI, p. iii.
There muſt be no alleys with hedges at the hither end, for
letting your proſpect upon this fair hedge from the green; nor
at the farther end, for letting your proſpect from the hedge
through the arches upon the heath. Bacon, Eſſay 47.
20. In remedy of.
Sometimes hot, ſometimes cold things are good for the
toothach. Garretſon.
21. In exchange for.
He made conſiderable progreſs in the ſtudy of the law, be-
fore he quitted that profeſſion for this of poetry. Dryden.
22. In the place of; inſtead of.
To make him copious is to alter his character; and to
tranſlate him line fºr line, is impoſſible. Dryden.
We take a falling meteor for a ſtar. Cowley.
23. In ſupply of; to ſerve in the place of.
Moſt of our ingenious young men take up ſome cried-up
Engliſh poet for their model, adore him, and imitate him, as
they think, without knowing wherein he is defective. Dryden.
24. Through a certain duration.
Some pleaſe for once, ſome will for ever pleaſe. Roſcom.
Thoſe who ſleep without dreaming, can never be convinced
that their thoughts are for four hours buſy, without their
knowing it. Locke.
The adminiſtration of this bank is for life, and partly in the
hands of the chief citizens. Addi on's Remarks on Italy.
Since, hir'd fºr life, thy ſervile muſe muſt ſing
Succeſſive conqueſts, and a glorious king;
And bring him laurels, whatſoe'er they coſt. Prior.
The youth tranſported, aſks without delay
To guide the ſun's bright chariot for a day. Garth's Ovid.
25. In ſearch of ; in queſt of. -
Some of the philoſophers have run ſo far back for argu-
ments of comfort againſt pain, as to doubt whether there were
any ſuch thing; and yet, for all that, when any great evil has
been upon them, they would cry out as loud as other men.
- - Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
26. According to.
Chymiſts have not been able, for aught is vulgarly known,
by fire alone to ſeparate true ſulphur from antimony. Bºyle.
27. Noting a ſtate of fitneſs or readineſs.
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you. Shakeſpeare.
If he be brave, he's ready for the ſtroke. Drydºn.
28. In hope of ; for the ſake of; noting the final cauſe.
- How quickly nature
Falls to revolt, when gold becomes her obječt
For this the fooliſh, over-careful fathers,
Have broke their ſleeps with thought, their brains with care,
Their bones with induſtry: for this, engroſs'd
The canker'd heaps of ſtrong atchieved gold :
For this they have been thoughtful to inveſt
Their ſons with arts and martial exerciſes. Shakeſp H. IV.
The kingdom of God was firſt rent by ill counſel; upon
4.
which counſel there are ſet, for our inſtruction, two marks.
- Bacon.
For he writes not for money, nor for praiſe, -
Nor to be call'd a wit, nor to wear bays. Denham.
There we ſhall ſee, a fight worthy dying fºr, that bleſled
Saviour, who ſo highly deſerves of us. Boyle.
He is not diſpoſed to be a fool, and to be miſerable fºr
company. Tillotſon, Sermon I.
Even death's become to me no dreadful name;
In fighting fields, where our acquaintance grew,
I ſaw him, and contemn'd him firſt fºr you Dºyd. Aureng.
For this, ’tis needful to prevent her art,
And fire with love the proud Phoenician's heart Dryd, Virg.
Some pray for riches; riches they obtain;
But watch'd by robbers, for their wealth are ſlain. Dryden.
Let them, who truly would appear my friends,
Employ their ſwords like mine for noble ends. Dryd Auren.
Scholars are frugal of their words, and not willing to let
any go for ornament, if they will not ſerve for uſe. Feltºn.
29. Of tendency to ; towards.
It were more for his honour to raiſe his fiege, than to ſpend
ſo many good men in the winning of it by force. Anoles.
The kettle te the top was hoiſt;
But with the upſide down, to ſhow -
Its inclination for below. Swift.
30. In favour of; on the part of; on the ſide of.
Ye ſuppoſe the laws for which ye ſtrive are found in Scrip-
ture; but thoſe not againſt which we ſtrive. Hoºker, Preface.
It becomes me not to draw my pen in the defence of a bad
cauſe, when I have ſo often drawn it for a good one. Dryden.
Jove was for Venus; but he fear'd his wife. Dryden.
He fir the world was made, not us alone. Cowley.
They muſt be void of all zeal for God's honour, who do
not with fighs and tears intercede with him. Smalridge's Serm.
Ariſtotle is for poetical juſtice. Dennis.
They are all for rank and foul feeding. Felton.
31. Noting accommodation or adaptation.
Fortune, if there be ſuch a thing as ſhe,
Spies that I bear ſo well her tyranny, {
That ſhe thinks nothing elſe ſo fit fºr me. Domne.
A few rules of logick are thought ſufficient, in this caſe, fºr
thoſe who pretend to the higheſt improvement. Locke.
It is for wicked men to dread God; but a virtuous man
may have undiſturbed thoughts, even of the juſtice of God.
Tillotſ,n, Sermºn 4.
His country has good havens, both for the Adriatick and
Mediterranean. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Perſia is commodiouſly ſituated for trade both by ſea and
land. - Arbuthnot on Coins.
32. With intention of.
And by that juſtice haſt remov’d the cauſe
Of thoſe rude tempeſts, which, for rapine ſent
Too oft, alas, involv'd the innocent. Waller.
Here huntſmen with delight may read
How to chuſe dogs for ſcent or ſpeed. J/a/er.
God hath made ſome things for as long a duration as they
are capable of. Tillotſon, Sermore 1.
For this, from Trivia's temple and her wood,
Are courſers driv'n, who ſhed their maſters blood. Dryden.
Such examples ſhould be ſet before them, as patterns fºr
their daily imitation. Locke.
The next queſtion uſually is, what is it for 2 Locke.
Achilles is for revenging himſelf upon Agamemnon, by
means of Hector. Pope's View of Epick Poem.
33. Becoming; belonging to.
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Nºſ. my manhood, honeſty, and wiſdom,
To let you know my thoughts. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Th' offers he doth make,
Were not for him to give, nor them to take. Daniel.
Jeſts for Dutchmen and Engliſh boys. Cowley.
Is it for you to ravage ſeas and land,
Unauthoriz'd by my ſupreme command ' Dryd. Wirg. Æn.
His fire already figns him for the ſkies,
And marks the ſeat amidſt the deities. Dryden's A.m.
It is a reaſonable account for any man to give, why he does
not live as the greateſt part of the world do, that he has no
mind to die as they do, and periſh with them. Tilioiſon.
34. Notwithſtanding. -
This, for any thing we know to the contrary, might be the
ſelf-ſame form which Philojudieus expreſſeth Hooker, b. v.
God's deſertion ſhall, for ought he knows the next
minute, ſupervene. Delay of Piety.
Probability ſuppoſes that a thing may, or may not be ſo,
for anything that yet is certainly determined on either ſide.
South's Sermons.
For any thing that legally appears to the contrary, it may
be a contrivance to fright us. Swift's Drapier's Letters.
If ſuch vaſt maſſes of matter had been ſituated nearer to the
ſun, or to each other, as they might as eaſily have been, for
any mechanical or fortuitous agent, they muſt neceſſarily have
cauſed a conſiderable diſorder in the whole ſyſtem. Bentley.
s - 35. For
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R.
F O R
º
35. For all. Notwithſtanding. . . . . . .
Neither doubt you, becauſe I wear a woman's apparel, I
will be the more womaniſh; ſince I aſſure you, fºr all my
apparel, there is nothing I deſire more than fully to prove
myſelf a man in this enterprize. Sidney.
For all the carefulneſs of the Chriſtians the Engliſh bulwark
was undermined by the enemy, and upon the fourth of Sep-
tember part thereof was blown up. Knolles's Hiſtory.
But as Noah's pigeon, which return’d no more,
Did ſhew ſhe footing found fºr all the flood. Davies.
They reſolute, for all this, do proceed -
Unto that judgment. Daniel.
For all his exact plot, down was he caſt from all his great-
neſs, and forced to end his days in a mean condition. South.
If we apprehend the greateſt things in the world of the
emperor of China or Japan, we are well enough contented,
for all that, to let them govern at home. Stillingfleet.
Though that very ingenious perſon has anticipated part of
what I ſhould ſay, yet you will, for all that, expect that I
ſhould give you a fuller account. Boyle on Colours.
She might have paſſed over all ſuch petty buſineſſes; but the
raiſing of my rabble is not to be mumbled up in ſilence, for
all her pertneſs. - Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
36. To the uſe of ; to be uſed in.
The oak for nothing ill,
The oſier good for twigs, the poplar for the mill. Spenser.
37. In conſequence of. -
For love they force through thickets of the wood,
They climb the ſteepy hills and ſtem the flood. Dryden.
38. In recompenſe of.
Now, for ſo many glorious ačtions done,
For peace at home, and for the publick wealth,
I mean to crown a bowl for Caeſar's health;
Beſides, in gratitude for ſuch high matters,
Know I have vow'd two hundred gladiators. Dryden's Perſ:
Firſt the wily wizard muſt be caught;
For unconſtrain'd, he nothing tells for naught. Dryd. Wirg.
39. In proportion to.
He is not very tall, yet for his years he's tall. Shakeſpeare,
Exalted Socrates! divinely bravel
Injur'd he fell, and dying he forgave;
Too noble for revenge. Dryden's juven. Sat. 13.
40. By means of; by interpoſition of
Moral conſideration can no way move the ſenſible appetite,
were it not for the will. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Of ſome calamity we can have no relief but from God
alone; and what would men do in ſuch a caſe, if it were not
fr God? . . Tillotſon's Sermons.
41. In regard of; in preſervation of. I cannot for my life, is, I
cannot if my life might be ſaved by it.
I bid the raſcal knock upon your gate;
But could not get him for my heart. Shakeſpeare.
I cannot fºr my heart leave a room, before I have thorough-
ly examined the papers paſted upon the walls. Addiſon's Spect.
42. For to. In the language uſed two centuries ago, for was
commonly uſed before to the figrof the infinitive mood, to
note the final cauſe. As, I come for to ſee you, for I love to
ſee you: in the ſame ſenſe with the French pour. Thus it is
uſed in the tranſlation of the Bible. But this diſtinétion was
by the beſt writers ſometimes forgotten; and for, by wrong uſe,
appearing ſuperfluous, is now always omitted.
- Who ſhall let me now
On this vile body for to wreak my wrong? Fairy 9teen.
A large poſterity
Up to your happy palaces may mount,
Of bleſſed ſaints for to increaſe the count. Spenſer.
Theſe things may ſerve fºr to repreſent how juſt cauſe of
fear this kingdom may have towards Spain. Bacon.
For , conj.
1. The word by which the reaſon is given of ſomething ad-
vanced before.
Heav'n doth with us as we with torches deal,
Not light them for themſelves ; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
As if we had them not. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Old huſbandmen I at Sabinum know,
Who for another year dig, plough, and ſow;
For never any man was yet ſo old,
But hop'd his life one Winter more would hold. Denham,
Tell me what kind of thing is wit?
For the firſt matter loves variety leſs. Cowley.
Thus does he who, for fear of any thing in this world,
ventures to diſpleaſe God; for in ſo doing he runs away from
men, and fal's into the hands of the living hand. Tillotſon.
2. Becauſe ; on this account that.
I doubt not but great troops would be ready to run; yet
for that the worſt men are moſt ready to remove, I would wiſh
them choſen by diſcretion of wiſe men. Spenſer on Ireland.
Jealous ſouls will not be anſwer'd ſo:
They are not ever jealous for a cauſe,
But jealous for they're jealous. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Heaven defend your good ſouls, that you think
I will your ſerious and great buſineſs ſcant;
For ſhe is with me.
Nor ſwell'd his breaſt with uncouth pride,
That heav'n on him above his charge had laid;
But, for his great Creator would the ſame, -
His will increas'd; ſo fire augmenteth flame. Fairfax.
Many excreſcences of trees grow chiefly where the tree is
dead or faded; for that the natural ſap of the tree corrupteth
into ſome preternatural ſubſtance. Bacon's Natural Hijiory.
3. For as much. In regard that ; in confideration of.
Aor as much as in publick prayer we are not only to conſi-
der what is needful, in reſpect of God; but there is alſo in
men that which we muſt regard: we ſomewhat incline to
length, leſt overquick diſpatch ſhould give occaſion to deem,
that the thing itſelf is but little accounted of. Hooker, b.v.
Por a much as the thirſt is intolerable, the patient may be
indulged the free uſe of ſpaw water. Arbuthnot on Diet.
4. For why. Becauſe; for this reaſon that.
Solyman had three hundred fieldpieces, that a camel might
well carry one of them, being taken from the carriage; for
why, Solyman purpoſing to draw the emperor unto battle, had
brought no greater pieces of battery with him. Knolles.
To Fo'RAGE. v. m. [from foris, abroad, Latin.]
1. To wander far; to rove at a diſtance.
Forage, and run -
To meet diſpleaſure farther from the doors,
And grapple with him, ere he come ſo nigh. Shakespeare K.john.
2. To wandel in ſearch of ſpoil, generally of proviſions.
- As in a ſtormy night,
Wolves, urged by their raging appetite,
Forage for prey. Denham.
There was a brood of young larks in the corn, and the dam
went abroad to forage for them. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Nor dare they ſtray
When rain is promis'd, or a ſtormy day;
But near the city walls their wat'ring take,
Norforage far, {. ſhort excurſions make, Dryden's Wirgil.
3. To ravage; to feed on ſpoil.
His moſt mighty father on a hill
Stood ſmiling, to behold his lion's whelp
Forage in blood of French nobility. Shakeſp. Henry V.
To Fo'RAGE. v. a. To plunder; to ſtrip; to ſpoil.’
They will both ſtrengthen all the country round, and alſo
be as continual holds for her majeſty, if the people ſhould re-
volt; for without ſuch it is eaſy to forage and over-run the
whole land. Spenſer on Ireland.
FORAGE. n.ſ.. [ſourage, German and French, from fºris,
Latin.]
1: Search of proviſions; the ačt of feeding abroad.
One way a band ſelečt from forage drives
A herd of beeves, fair oxen, and fair kine,
From a fat meadow ground; or fleecy flock,
Ewes, and their bleating lambs, over the plains -
Their booty. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
2. Proviſions ſought abroad. - -
Some o'er the publick magazines preſide,
And ſome are ſent new forage to provide. Dryden's Georg.
3. Proviſions in general.
Provided forage, our ſpent arms renew’d. Dryd. Fables.
For A'MINous. adj. [from foramen, Latin.] Full of holes;
perforated in many places; porous. - -
Soft and foraminous bodies, in the firſt creation of the
ſound, will deaden it; but in the paſſage of the ſound they
will admit it better than harder bodies. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
To FORBEAR. v. n. pret. I forbore, anciently forbare; part.
forborn. [Fonbænan, Saxon. For has in compoſition the
power of privation ; as, forbear: or depravation; as forſwear,
and other powers not eaſily explained.] -
1. To ceaſe from anything; to intermit.
The wolf, the lion, and the bear,
When they their prey in pieces tear, - ;
To quarrel with themſelves forbear. Denham,
2. To pauſe; to delay.
I pray you, tarry: pauſe a day or two,
Before you hazard; for in chufing wrong, , ,
Iloſe your company; therefore forbear a while. Shakeſp.
3. To omit voluntarily; not to do ; to abſtain.
He forbare to go forth.
At this he ſtarted, and forbore to ſwear;
Not out of conſcience of the fin, but fear. Dryden's juv.
Who can ſorbear to admire and adore him who weighed
the mountains in ſcales, and the hills in a balance. Cheyne.
4. To reſtrain any violence of temper; to be patient.
By long forbearing is a prince perſuaded, and a ſoft tongue
breaketh the bone. Prov, xxv. 15.
To Fo'R BEAR. v. a. -
1. To decline; to omit voluntarily,
Forbear his preſence, until time hath qualified the heat of his
A.
1 Sa. xxiii. 13.
diſpleaſure. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
So angry bulls the combat do forbear, -
When from the wood a lion does appear. Waller.
2. To abſtain from ; to ſhun to do." T
{f
Shakeſpeare's Othelh.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
If it paſſed only by the houſe of peers, it ſhould be
looked upon as invalid and void, and execution ſhould be
thereupon forborn or ſuſpended. Clarendon, b. viii.
There is not any one action whatſoever which a man ought
to do, or to forbear, but the Scripture will give him a clear
precept or prohibition for it. South's Sermons.
3. To ſpare; to treat with clemency.
With all lowlineſs and meekneſs, with long ſuffering, for-
bearing one another in love. , Eph. iv. 2.
4. To withold.
Forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me,
that he deſtroy thee not. 2 Chro. xxxv. 21.
For BEARANce. n.ſ.. [from forbear.]
1. The care of avoiding or ſhunning anything; negation of
pračtice.
True nobleneſs would
Learn him forbearance from ſo foul a wrong, Shakeſp R. III.
This may convince us how vaſtly greater a pleaſure is con-
ſequent upon the forbearance of ſin, than can poſſibly accom-
pany the commiſſion of it. South's Sermons.
Liberty is the power a man has to do, or forbear doing, any
particular action, according as its doing or forbearance has the
aćtual preference in the mind. Lºcke.
2. Intermiſſion of ſomething.
3. Command of temper. -
Have a continent fºrbearance, 'till the ſpeed of his rage
goes ſlower. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. Lenity; delay of puniſhment; mildneſs.
Nor do I take notice of this inſtance of ſeverity in our own
country to juſtify ſuch a proceeding, but only to diſplay the
mildneſs and forbearance made uſe of under the reign of his
preſent majeſty. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 52.
He applies to our gratitude by obligations of kindneſs and
.beneficence, of long ſuffering and for bearance. Rogers.
For BEARER. m. ſ. [from forbear.] An intermitter; inter-
ceptor of anything.
The Weſt as a father all goodneſs doth bring,
The Eaſt a forbearer, no manner of thing. Tuff. Huſſandry.
To FORBID. v. a. pret. I forbade; part. forbidden or forbid.
[Fonbeoban, Saxon; verbieden, Dutch.]
1. To prohibit; to interdićt anything.
A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean; have I not for-
bid her my houſe : Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
By taſting of that fruit forbid,
Where they ſought knowledge, they did error find. Davies.
The voice of reaſon, in all the dićtates of natural morality,
ought carefully to be attended to, by a ſtrićt obſervance of
what it commands, but eſpecially of what it forbids. South.
All hatred of perſons, by very many Chriſtian principles,
we are moſt ſolemnly and indiſpenſably forbid. Spratt's Serm.
The chaſte and holy race
Are all forbidden this polluted place. Dryden's £n. b. vi.
2. To command to forbear anything.
She with ſo ſweet a rigour forbad him, that he durſt not
rebel. Sidney, b. ii.
It is the ſhameful work of Hubert's hand,
The pračtice and the purpoſe of the king,
From whoſe obedience I forbid my ſoul. Shakeſpeare.
They have determined to conſume all thoſe things that
God hath forbidden them to eat by his laws. Judith xi. 12.
3. To oppoſe; to hinder.
The moiſture being forbidden to come up in the plant, ſtay-
eth longer in the root, and ſo dilateth it. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The plaiſter alone would pen the humour, and ſo exaſperate
it as well as forbid new humour. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Thy throne is darkneſs in th' abyſs of light,
A blaze of glory that fºrbid; the fight!
O teach me to believe thee thus conceal’d,
And ſearch no farther than thyſelf reveal’d. Dryden.
4. To accurſe; to blaſt. Now obſolete. To bid is in old lan-
guage to pray; to forbid therefore is to curſe.
Sleep ſhall neither night nor day
Hang upon his penthouſe lid;
He ſhall live a man forbid. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To Fo'RBID. v. n. To utter a prohibition.
Now the good gods forbid,
That our renowned Rome
Should now eat up her own | Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
For B1'DDANCE. m.ſ.. [from forbid.] Prohibition; edićt againſt
any thing, -
How haſt thou yielded to tranſgreſs
The ſtrićt forbiddance 1 how to violate
The ſacred fruit forbidden Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. ix.
Fo'RBIDDENLY. adv. [from forbid.] In an unlawful manner.
With all confidence he ſwears, as he had ſeen’t,
That you have touch'd his queen forbiddenly. Shakeſpeare.
Fo'RBIDDER. m. ſ. [from forbid.] One that prohibits; one
that enaëts a prohibition.
This was a bold accuſation of God, making the foun-
tain of good the contriver of evil, and the forbidder of
the crime an abettor of the fact prohibited. Brown's Wul. Err.
Other care, perhaps,
May have diverted from continual watch
. . Our great forbidder / Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ix.
Fo'Rhidding, participial adj. [from forbid.] Raiſing abhor-
rence; repelling approach ; cauſing averſion.
Tragedy was made{...” and horrible. A. Hill.
FORCE. n.ſ.. [force, French; fortis, Latin.]
1. Strength; vigour ; might; active power.
He never could maintain his part but in the fºrce of his
will. - Shakespeare 44uch Ado about Nothing.
A ſhip, which hath ſtruck ſail, doth run
By force of that force which before it won. Donne.
2. Violence. - -
Thus got the houſe of Lancaſter the crown,
Which now they hold by force, and not by right. Shakespeare H.VI.
The ſhepherd Paris bore the Spartan bride
By force away, and then by force enjoy’d;
But I by free conſent. Dryden.
3. Virtue ; efficacy. -
Manifeſt it is, that the very majeſty and holineſs of the
place where God is worſhipped, hath, in regard of us, great
virtue, force and efficacy for that it ſerveth as a ſenſible help
to ſtir up devotion. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 16.
No definitions, no ſuppoſitions of any ſect, are of fºrce
enough to deſtroy conſtant experience. Locke.
4. Validneſs; power of law. -
A teſtament is of force after men are dead. Heb. ix. 17.
Not long inforce this charter ſtood;
Wanting that ſeal, it muſt be ſeal’d in blood. Denham.
5. Armament; warlike preparation. Often forces in the plural.
O Thou! whoſe captain I account myſelf,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye. Shakeſp Richard III.
The ſecret of the power of Spain conſiſteth in a veteran
army, compounded of miſcellany forces of all nations. Bacon.
A greater force than that which here we find,
Ne'er preſs'd the ocean, nor employ'd the wind. Waller.
Thoſe victorious forces of the rebels were not able
to ſuſtain your arms. Dryden.
6. Deſtiny; neceſſity; fatal compulſion.
To Force. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To compel; to conſtrain.
Dangers are light, if they once ſeem light; and more
dangers have deceived men than forced them. Bacon.
I have been forced to uſe the cant words of Whig and
Tory. Swift's Examiner.
The actions and operations did fºrce them upon dividing
the ſingle idea. Pope's Wiew of Epick Pocm.
2. To overpower by ſtrength.
O that fortune
Had brought me to the field where thou art fam'd
To have wrought ſuch wonders with an aſs's jaw,
I ſhould have fºre'd thee ſoon with other arms. Milton.
With fates averſe, the rout in arms reſort,
To force their monarch and inſult the court. Dryden's Żn.
3. To impel; to preſs.
Thou ſhalt not deſtroy the trees by forcing an ax againſt
them. Deutr. 20. 19.
4. To draw or puſh by main ſtrength.
Stooping, the ſpear deſcended on his chine,
Juſt where the bone diſtinguiſh’d either loin:
It ſtuck ſo faſt, ſo deeply bury'd lay,
That ſcarce the vićtor forc'd the ſteel away. Dryden's Żn.
5. To enforce; to urge.
Three bluſtring nights, born by the ſouthern blaſt,
I floated, and diſcover'd land at laſt:
High on a mounting wave my head I bore,
Forcing my ſtrength, and gath'ring to the ſhore. Dryd. Æn.
6. To drive by violence or power.
This way of flattering their willing benefaa.ors out of part,
contrived another of forcing their unwilling neighbours out of
all their poſſeſſions. Decay of Piety.
To free the ports, and ope the Punique land
To Trojan gueſts; leſt, ignorant of fate,
The queen might force them from her town and ſtate. Dryd.
7. To gain by violence or power.
My heart was your's; but, oh! you left it here
Abandon'd to thoſe tyrants hope and fear:
If they forc'd from me one kind look or word,
Could you not that, nor that ſmall part afford * Dryden.
8. To ſtorm; to take or enter by violence.
Troy wall'd ſo high,
Atrides might as well have for 'd the ſky. Jſ allºr.
Heav'n from all ages wiſely did provide
This wealth, and for the braveſt nation hide;
Who with four hundred foot, and forty horſe,
Dare boldly go a new-found world to fºrce. Dryd, Ind. Brp.
9. To raviſh ; to violate by force.
Force her.—I like it not. Dryden.
IO. º conſtrain; to diſtort; not to obtain naturally or with
cale.
Our general taſte in England is for epigram, turns of wit,
and forced conceits. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 4C3.
I 1. To man; to ſtrengthen by ſoldiers; to garriſon. H
ere
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R.
º
5. Done by force.
Here let them lye,
'Till famine and the ague eat them up : -
ere they not ſorc'd with thoſe that ſhould be our's,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard. Shakeſp.
If you find that any great number of ſoldiers be newly
ſent into Oroonoque, and that the paſſages be already forced,
then be well adviſed how you land. Raleigh's Apology.
1 1. Jo Force out. To extort.
The tricks uſed in convening ſynods might force out an ex-
preſſion from him, that did not carry all the reſpect due to
thoſe great names. Atterbury.
The heat of the diſpute had forced out from him expreſſions
that ſeemed to make his doćtrine run higher than really it
did. Atterbury.
To Force. v. n. To lay ſtreſs upon. This word I have only
found in the following paſſage.
That morning that he was to join battle with Harold, his
armorer put on his backpiece before, and his breaſtplate be-
hind ; the which being eſpied by ſome that ſtood by, was
taken among them for an ill token, and therefore adviſed him
not to fight that day; to whom the duke anſwered, I force not
of ſuch fooleries; but if I have any ſkill in ſoothſaying, as in
ſooth I have none, it doth prognoſticate that I ſhall change
copy from a duke to a king. Camdºn's Remains.
Fo'Rée DLY. adv. [from force. J Violently; conſtrainedly ;
unnaturally. -
This foundation of the earth upon the waters doth moſt
aptly agree to that ſtructure of the abyſs and antediluvian
earth; but very improperly and forcedly to the preſent form of
the earth and the waters. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Fo'RcEFUL. adj. [force and full. J. Violent; ſtrong; driven
with great might; impetuous.
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our frceful inſtigation ? Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Againſt the ſteed he threw
His forceful ſpear, which, hiſſing as it flew,
Pierc'd through the yielding planks. Dryden's Aºn.
Were it by chance, or forceful deſtiny,
Which forms in cauſes firſt whate'er ſhall be,
Affiſted by a friend, one moonleſs night,
This Palamon from priſon took his flight. , Dryden.
He pois'd in air, the jav'lin ſent,
Through Paris' ſhield the forceful weapon went. Pope.
Fo'Rce Full Y. adv. [ from forceful. J. Violently ; impetu-
ouſly.
Fºrs. adj. [from force. J Without force; weak;
feeble; impotent.
FORCEPS. n.ſ. [Latin.]
Force's properly ſignifies a pair of tongs; but is uſed for
an inſtrument in chirurgery, to extract any thing out of
wounds, and the like occaſions. - &amp;uincy.
Fo'RceR. m. ſ. [from force.]
1. That which forces, drives, or conſtrains.
2. The embolus of a pump working by pulſion, in contradiſtinc-
tion to a ſucker, which acts by attraction.
The uſual means for the aſcent of water is either by ſuckers
or forcers. J%ilkins's Dadalus.
Fo'Rc1BLE. adj. [from force.] -
1. Strong; mighty : oppoſed to weak.
That puniſhment, which hath been ſometimes forcible to
bridle ſin, may grow afterwards too weak and feeble. Hooker.
2. Violent; impetuous.
3. Efficacious; ačtive; powerful.
Sweet ſmells are moſt forcible in dry ſubſtances, when
broken; and ſo likewiſe in oranges, the ripping of their rind
giveth out their ſmell more. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. Prevalent; of great influence.
God hath aſſured us, that there is no inclination or temp- -
tation ſo forcible which our humble prayers and deſires may
not fruſtrate and break aſunder. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the IWorld.
Jerſey, belov’d by all; for all muſt feel
. The influence of a form and mind, -
Where comely grace and conſtant virtue dwell,
Like ming!'d ſtreams, more fºrcible when join'd:
Jerſey ſhall at thy altars ſtand,
Shall there receive the azure band. Prior.
The abdication of king James, the advocates on that ſide
look upon to have been frcible and unjuſt, and conſequently
void. Swift.
6. Valid; binding; obligatory.
Fo'Rc1 bleNEss. m. ſ. [from forcible.] Force; violence.
Fo'RcIBLY. adv. [from forcible.]
1. Strongly ; powerfully.
The Goſpel offers ſuch conſiderations as are fit to work
very forcibly upon two of the moſt ſwaying and governing
paſſions in the mind, our hopes and our fears. Tillotſon.
2. Impetuouſly.
3. By violence; by force.
He himſelf with greedy great deſire
Into the caſtle enter'd forcibly. Fairy &amp;ueen, b. i. cant. 8.
The taking and carrying away of women fºrcibly, and
againſt their will, except female wards and bond women, was
made capital. - Bacon's Henry VII.
This doctrine brings us down to the level of horſe and mule,
whoſe mouths are forcibly holden with bit and bridle. Hamm.
Fo'RcipATED. adj. [from forcºps.] Formed like a pair of
pincers to open and incloſe.
The locuſts have antennae, or long horns before, with a
long falcation or forcipated tail behind. Brown's Vulgar Err.
When they have ſeized their prey, they will ſo tenaciouſly
hold it with their forcipated mouth, that they will not part
therewith, even when taken out of the waters. Derham.
FORD. m. ſ. [ Fono, Saxon, from panan, to paſs.]
1. A ſhallow part of a river when it may be paſſed without
ſwimming.
Her men the paths rode through made by her ſword;
They paſs the ſtream, when ſhe had found the ford Fairfax.
2. It ſometimes ſignifies the ſtream, the current, without any
conſideration of paſſage or ſhallowneſs.
Meduſa with Gorgonian terror guards
The ford, and of itſelf the water flies
All taſte of living wight. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
Riſe, wretched widow ! riſe; nor undeplor’d
Permit my ghoſt to paſs the Stygian for d.
But riſe, prepar'd in black to mourn thy periſh'd lord. Dry.
To For D. v. a. [from the noun J. To paſs without ſwim-
IIllil
Adam's ſhin-bones muſt have contained a thouſand fathom,
and much more, if he had forded the ocean. Raleigh's Hiſt.
Fo'RDABLE, adj. [from ford] Paſſable without ſwimming.
Pliny placeth the Schenitae upon the Euphrates, where the
ſame beginneth to be fordable. Raleigh's Hi/l. of the J/orld.
A countryman ſounded a river up and down, to try where
it was moſt fordable ; and where the water ran too ſmooth, he
found it deepeſt ; and, on the contrary, ſhalloweſt where it
made moſt noiſe. L’Eſtrange.
FORE. adj. [Fone, Saxon.] Anterior; that which comes
firſt in a progreſſive motion. -
Reſiſtance in fluids ariſes from their greater preſfing on the
fore than hind part of the bodies moving in them. Cheyne.
For e. adv. '
1. Anteriorly; in the part which appears firſt to thoſe that meet
it.
Each of them will bear ſix demiculverins and four ſaikers,
needing no other addition than a ſlight ſpar deck fore and aft,
which is a ſlight deck throughout. Raleigh's Eſſays.
2. Fore is a word much uſed in compoſition to mark priority of
time, of which ſome examples ſhall be given.
To For EADVI's E. v. n. [fore and adviſe.] To counſel early;
to counſel before the time of ačtion, or the event.
Thus to have ſaid,
As you were foreadvis'd, had touch'd his ſpirit,
And tried his inclination. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To For EAPPo’ſ NT. [fore and appoint..] To order beforehand.
To For EA'R.M. v. a... [fore and arm.] To provide for attack
or reſiſtance before the time of need.
A man ſhould fix and forearm his mind with this perſuaſion,
that, during his paſſion, whatſoever is offered to his imagina-
tion tends only to deceive. South's Sermons.
He forearms his care
With rules to puſh his fortune, or to bear. Dryden's &amp;n.
To For E BO'DE. v. n. [fore and bode.]
1. To prognoſticate; to foretell.
An ancient augur, ſkill'd in future fate, -
With theſe foreboding words reſtrains their hate. Dryden.
2. To foreknow ; to be preſcient of ; to feel a ſecret ſenſe of
ſomething future.
Fate makes you deaf, while I in vain implore:
My heart forebodes I ne'er ſhall ſee you more. Dryd, In, Emp.
My ſoul foreboded I ſhould find the bow'r
Of ſome fell monſter, fierce with barb'rous pow'r. Pope.
For e Bo'DER. m. ſ. [from forebode.]
1. A prognoſticator; a ſoothſayer.
Your raven has a reputation in the world for a bird of omen,
and a kind of ſmall prophet: a crow that had obſerved the
raven's manner and way of delivering his predićtions, ſets up
for a foreboder. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
2. A foreknower.
For eby'. prep. [fore and by..] Near; hard by ; faſt by.
Not far away he hence doth won
Forehy a fountain, where I late him left. Fairy Queen, b. i.
To For EcA'st. v. a. [fore and caſt.]
1. To ſcheme; to plan before execution. -
He ſhall fºrecaſt his devices againſt the ſtrongholds. Dan. xi.
2. To adjuſt , to contrive.
The feaſt was ſerv'd ; the time ſo well forecaſt,
That juſt when the deſſert and fruits were plac'd,
The fiend's alarm began. Dryden's Theod, and Honoria.
3. To foreſee; to provide againſt.
It is wiſdom to conſider the end of things before we em-
bark, and to forecaſt conſequences. L'E/irange, I able 83.
9 O To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
To Foreca's r. v. n. To form ſchemes; to contrive before-
hand. -
And whatſo heavens in their ſecret doom
Ordained have, how can frail fleſhy wight a-
Fºrecaſ, but it muſt needs to iſſue come 3 Spenſer.
When broad awake, ſhe finds in troublous fit, -
Fºrecaſting how his foe he might annoy. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Fo'Recast. n.f. [from the verb...] Contrivance beforehand;
ſcheme; plan; antecedent policy.
Alas that Warwick had no more forecaſt,
But while he thought to ſteal the ſingle ten,
The king was flily finger'd from the deck! Shakespeare Hen. VI.
He makes this difference to ariſe from the forecaſt and pre-
determination of the gods. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
The laſt, ſcarce ripen'd into perfect man,
Saw helpleſs him from whom their life began:
Mem'ry and forecaſt juſt returns engage;
That pointed back to youth, this on to age. Pope.
For EcA'st ER. n.ſ.. [from forecaſt.] One who contrives be-
forehand.
Fo'R E castle. m. ſ. ſº and ca?le ] In a ſhip, is that part
where the foremaſt ſtands, and is divided from the reſt of the
floor by a bulk-head: that part of the forecaſtle which is aloft,
and not in the hold, is called the prow. Harr is.
The commodity of the new cook-room the merchants
have found to be ſo great, as that, in all their ſhips, the cook-
rooms are built in their forecaſtles, contrary to that which had
been anciently uſed. - Kaleigh's Eſſays.
For Echo's EN. partic. [fore and choſen.] Pre-elected.
For ech'TED part. [fºre and cite.J. Quoted before, or above.
Greaves is of opinion, that the alteration mentioned in
that forecited paſſige is continued. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To For Eclo's E. v. a. [fore and cloſe.]
1. To ſhut up ; to preclude; to prevent.
The embargo with Spain forecloſed this trade. Carew.
2. Tº For Eclose a Mortgage, is to cut off the power of re-
demptiºn.
Fo'REDEck, n ſ. [fºre and deck.] The anterior part of the
ſhip.
p I to the ſoredeck went, and thence did look
For rocky Scylla - Chapman's Odyſſey, b xii.
To For e Desi'GN. v. a. [fore and deſign. J. To plan before-
hand.
All the ſteps of the growth and vegetation both of animals
and plants, have been foreſeen and foredeſigned by the wiſe
Author of nature. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
To For Edo'. v. a. [from for and do, not fore.]
1. To ruin; to deſtroy. A word obſolete. Oppoſed to making
happy. ,
Beſeeching him, if either ſalves or oils,
A forcáone wight from door of death might raiſe,
He would at her requeſt prolong her nephew's days. Fa. Sºu.
That drew on men God’s hatred and his wrath, -
And many ſouls in dolours had foredone. Fairy Queen, b. i.
- This doth betoken,
The corſe they follow did with deſperate hand
Foredo its own life. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
- * This is the night -
That either makes me, or foredoes me quite. Shakeſpeare.
2. To overdo; to weary; to harraſs.
Whilſt the heavy plowman ſnoars,
All with weary taſk forcdone. Shakeſpeare.
To For Epo'o M. v. a. [fore and doom.] To predeſtinate; to
determine beforehand.
Through various hazards and events we move
To Latium, and the realms foredoom'd by Jove. Dryd. Æn.
The willing metal will obey thy hand,
Following with eaſe: if favour’d by thy fate,
Thou art foredoom'd to view the Stygian ſtate. Dryden.
Fate foredoom'd, and all things tend
By courſe of time to their appointed end. Dryden.
Here Britain's ſtateſmen oft the fall ſoredoom
Of foreign tyrants, and of nymphs at home. Pope.
For EE'ND. m. ſ. [fore and end..] The anteriour part.
I have liv'd at honeſt freedom ; paid
More pious debts to heaven than in all
The fore-end of my time. º Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
In the fore-end of it, which was towards him, grew a ſmall
green branch of palm ; and when the wiſe man had taken it
into his boat, it opened of itſelf, and there were found in it
a book and a letter. Bacon's New Atlantis.
For EFA’ſ H.E.R. m. ſ. [fore and father.] Anceſtor; one who
in any degree of aſcending genealogy precedes another.
The cuſtom of the people of God, and the decrees of our
forefathers, are to be kept, touching thoſe things whereof the
Scripture hath neither one way or other given us charge. Hook.
if it be a generous deſire in men to know from whence
their own fº efathers have come, it cannot be diſpleafing to
underſtand the place of our firſt anceſtor. Raleigh's Hijiory.
Conceit is ſtill deriv'd
From ſome fºrefather grief; mine is not ſo. Shakespeare Rich. II,
Shall I not be diſtraught,
And madly play with my forefathers joints? Shakespeare Ro, andjul.
Our great forefathers -
Had left him rought to conquer but his country. Addiſon.
When a man ſees the prodigious pains our forefathers have
been at in theſe barbarous buildings, one cannot but fancy
what miracles of archite&amp;ture they would have left us, had
they been inſtructed in the right way. Addiſon on Italy.
Bleſt peer his great fºrefathers ev'ry grace
Refle&amp;ting, and reflected in his race. Pope, Epift. i.
To For EFF'ND. v. a. [fore and defend.]
1. To prohibit; to avert.
I would not kill thy unprepared ſpirit;
No, heav'ns foreſend I would not kill thy ſoul. Shakeſp.
Perhaps a fever, which the gods foreſend,
May bring your youth to ſome untimely end. Dryden.
2. To provide for; to ſecure.
Down with the noſe,
Down with it flat: take the bridge quite away
Of him, that, his particular to foreſend,
Smells from the gen'ral weal. Shakeſp Timon of Atheni.
For EF1'NGER. m. ſ. [fºre and ſinger.] The finger next to the
thumb; the index.
An agate-ſtone
On the forefinger of an alderman. Shakespeare. Romeo and juliet.
Polymnia ſhall be drawn, as it were, acting her ſpeech with
her forefinger. Peacham on Drawing.
Some wear this on the middlefinger, as the ancient Gauls
and Britons; and ſome upon the forefinger. Brown's Wul. Err.
For E Foot. n.ſ. plur. forfect. [fºre and foot.] The anterior
foot of a quadruped: in contempt, a hand.
Give me thy fiſt, thy forefoot to me give. Shakespeare Hen. V.
He ran fiercely, and ſmote at Heliodorus with his fºre-
feet. 2 Mac. iii. 25.
I continue my line from thence to the heel; then making
the breaſt with the eminency thereof, bring out his near fore-
foot, which I finiſh. Peacham on Drawing,
To For ego'. v. a. ſ.fr and go.]
I. To quit; to give up ; to reſign.
Is it her nature, or is it her will,
To be ſo cruel to an humbled foe:
If nature, then ſhe may it mend with ſkill;
If will, then ſhe at will may will forego. Spenſer, Son. 41.
Having all before abſolutely in his power, it remaineth ſo
ſtill, he having already neither foregiven nor foregone any
thing thereby unto them, but having received ſomething from
them. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
He is a great adventurer, ſaid he,
That hath his ſword through hard aſſay forgone;
And now hath vowed, 'till he avenged be -
Of that deſpite, never to wearen none. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Special reaſon oftentimes cauſeth the will to prefer one good
thing before another; to leave one for another's ſake, tofore-
go meaner for the attainment of higher degrees. Hooker, b. v.
Muſt I then leave you? Muſt I needs forgo
So good, ſo noble, and ſo true a maſter: Shakespeare H. VIII.
Let us not forgo
That for a trifle which was bought with blood. Shakeſpeare.
How can I live without thee ſhow forego
Thy ſweet converſe, and love ſo dearly join'd,
To live again in theſe wild woods forlorn 1 Milt. Pa. Loft.
This argument might prevail with you to forego a little
of your repoſe for the publick benefit. Dryd, juv. Dedic.
What they have enjoyed with great pleaſure at one time,
has proved inſipid or nauſeous at another; and therefore they
ſee nothing in it, for which they ſhould forego a preſent enjoy-
Inent. cke.
2. To go before; to be paſt. [from fore and go.]
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults: O! then we thought them not. Shakespeare
It is to be underſtood of Cain, that many years foregone,
and when his people were increaſed, he built the city of
Enoch. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
Leſt what has been ſaid of the differences between true and
apparent colours be interpreted in too unlimited a ſenſe, refle&amp;t
upon the two foregoing obječtions. Boyle on Colours.
This foregoing remark gives the reaſon why imitation
pleaſes. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
I was ſeated in my elbow-chair, where I had indulged the
foregoing ſpeculations, with my lamp burning by me as uſual.
Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 463.
In the foregoing part of this work I promiſed further proofs.
Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
i
3. To loſe.
This is the very ecſtaſy of love,
Whoſe violent property forgoes itſelf,
And leads the will to deſp'rate undertakings. Shakespeare Haml.i.
Fo’RE GoFR. m.ſ.. [from forego.] Anceſtor; progenitor.
Honours beſt thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers. Shakespeare's All's well that end, well.
Fo'REGaou Nd.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
2.
Fo’REGRoun D. m.ſ.. [fºre and ground..] The part of the field
or expanſe of a pićture which ſeems to lie before the figures.
All agree that white can ſubſiſt on the foreground of the
pićture: the queſtion therefore is to know, if it can equally
be placed upon that which is backward, the light being uni-
verſal, and the figures ſuppoſed in an open field. Dryden.
Fo'RE HAND. m.ſ.. [fore and hand]
1. The part of a horſe which is before the rider.
2. The chief part.
The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns
The ſinew and the ſº. of our hoſt.
Fo'REHAND. adj. A thing done too ſoon.
You'll ſay ſhe did embrace me as a huſband,
And ſo extenuate the forehand ſin.
For e HA'NDED. m. ſ. [from fore and hand.]
1. Early ; timely.
If by thus doing you have not ſecured your time by an early
and forehanded care, yet be ſure, by a timely diligence, to re-
deem the time. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
2. Formed in the foreparts. -
Bauble, do you call him : He's a ſubſtantial true-bred beaſt,
bravely forehanded: mark but the cleanneſs of his ſhapes too.
Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
Fo’REHEAD. m.ſ.. [fore and head.]
1. That part of the face which reaches from the eyes upward
to the hair.
The breaſt of Hecuba,
When ſhe did ſuckle Hector, look’d not lovelier
Than Hettor's forehead, when it ſpit forth blood
At Grecian ſwords contending. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Some angel copy'd, while I ſlept, each grace,
And molded ev'ry feature from my face:
Such majeſty does from her forehead riſe,
Her checks ſuch bluſhes caſt, ſuch rays her eyes. Dryden.
2. Impudence; confidence; aſſurance ; audaciouſneſs; au-
dacity. -
A man of confidence preſſeth forward upon every appear-
ance of advantage, and thinks nothing above his manage-
ment or his merit: where his force is too feeble, he prevails
by dint of impudence: theſe men of forehead are magnificent
in promiſes, and infallible in their preſcriptions. Collier.
I would fain know to what branch of the legiſlature they
can have the forehead to apply. Swift's Presbyterian Pea.
Forehold in G. m. ſ. [fore and hold.] Predićtions; ominous
accounts; ſuperſtitious prognoſtications.
How are ſuperſtitious men hagged out of their wits with
the fancy of omens, foreholdings, and old wives tales' L’Eſtr.
FOREIGN. adj. [forain, French; forano, Spaniſh, from fori,
Latin.]
1. Not of this country; not domeſtick.
Your ſon, that with a fearful ſoul
Leads diſcontented ſteps in foreign ſoil,
This fair alliance quickly ſhall call home. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The learned correſpondence you hold in foreign parts. Milt.
The poſitions are ſo far from being new, that they are
commonly to be met with in both ancient and modern, domeſ-
tick and foreign writers. Atteriury's Serm. Prºf.
The parties and diviſions amongſt us may ſeveral ways
bring deſtruction upon our country, at the ſame time that our
united force would ſecure us againſt all the attempts of a
foreign enemy. Addiſon's Freeholder, N9. 34.
2. Alien ; remote; not allied; not belonging; without relation.
It is often uſed with to ; but more properly with from.
I muſt diſſemble,
And ſpeak a language foreign to my heart. Addiſon's Cato.
Fame is a good ſo wholly foreign to our natures, that we
have no faculty in the ſoul adapted to it, nor any organ in the
body to reliſh it, placed out of the poſſibility of fruition. Addison
This deſign is not foreign from ſome people's thoughts.
Swift on the Sacramental Tºft.
3. Excluded; not admitted; held at a diſtance.
They will not ſtick to ſay you envied him;
And fearing he would riſe, he was ſo virtuous,
Kept him a foreign man ſtill; which ſo griev'd him,
That he ran mad and died. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
4. [In law.] A foreign plea, plantum forinſecum ; as being a plea
out of the proper court of juſtice.
5. Extraneous; adventitious in general.
There are who, fondly ſtudious of increaſe,
Rich freign mold in their ill-natur'd land
Induce. - Philips.
Fo’RE IGNER. m. ſ. [from foreign.] A man that comes from
another country; not a native; a ſtranger. -
Joy is ſuch a foreigner,
So mere a ſtranger to my thoughts, I know
Not how to entertain him. Denham's Sophy.
To this falſe fºreigner you give your throne,
And wrong a friend, a kinſman, and a ſon:
Reſume your ancient care. Dryd. Æn.
Water is the only native of England made uſe of in punch;
%ut the lemons, the brandy, the ſugar, and the nutmegs, are
all foreigners. - Addiſon's Freeholder.
Nor could the majeſty of the Engliſh crown appear in a
greater luſtre, either to foreign, ri or ſubječis. Swift.
Fo'REIGNN Ess. n.ſ.. [from foreign.] Kemoteneſs; want of
relation to ſomething.
Let not the foreignneſs of the ſubjećt hinder you from en-
deavouring to ſet me right. Locke.
To For £IMA'GINE. v. a. [fore and imagine.] To conceive
or fancy before proof.
We are within compaſs of a foreimagined poſſibility in that
behalf. - Camden's Remains.
To For EJU'DGE. v. a... [fore and judge.] To judge before-
hand; to be prepoſſeſſed.
To For EKNow. v. a. [fore and know..] To have preſcience
of; to foreſee.
We foreknow that the ſun will riſe and ſet, that all men
born in the world ſhall die again; that after Winter the Spring
ſhall come ; after the Spring, Summer and harveſt; yet is not
our foreknowledge the cauſe of any of thoſe. Raleigh.
He foreknew John ſhould not ſuffer a violent death, but go
into his grave in peace. Brown's Pulgar Erraurs, b. vii. c. 10.
Calchas the ſacred ſeer, who had in view -
Things preſent and the paſt, and things to come fºreſnew.
- Dryden's Iliad:
Who would the miſeries of man fºre (now 2
Not knowing, we but ſhare our part of woe. Dryden.
For EKNoºw ABLE. adj. [from fºreknow..] Poſſible to be known
before they happen.
It is certainly fºreknowable what they will do in ſuch and
ſuch circumſtances. 44-re's Divine Dialogues.
For EKNo'w LEDGE. m. ſ. [fore and knowledge.] Preſcience;
knowledge of that which has not yet happened.
Qur being in Chriſt by eternal foreknowledge, ſaveth us not
without our actual and real adoption into the fellowſhip of
his ſaints in this preſent world. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 56.
I told him you was aſleep; he ſeems to have a foreknowledge
of that too, and thcrºfore chuſes to ſpeak with you. Shakeſp.
If I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no leſs prov’d certain unforcknown. Milton.
I hope the foreknowledge you had of my eſteem for you, is
the reaſon that you do not diſlike my letters. Pope.
Fo'RELAND. m. ſ. [fore and land.] A promontory; headland;
high land jutting into the ſea; a cape.
As when a ſhip, by ſkilful ſteerſman wrought,
Nigh river's mouth, or freland, where the wind
Veers oft, as oft ſo ftecrs, and ſhifts her ſails. Milt. P. L.
To For ELA'Y. v. a. [fore and lay.] To lay wait for ; to in-
trap by ambuſh.
- A ſerpent ſhoots his ſting at unaware;
An ambuſh'd thief forelays a traveller:
The man lies murder'd, while the thief and ſnake,
One gains the thickets, and one thrids the brake. Dryden.
To For Eli'Fr. v. a. [fore and liſt J. To raiſe aloft any ante-
rior part. -
So dreadfully he towards him did paſs,
Forelifting up aloft his ſpeckled breaſt;
And often bounding on the bruiſed graſs,
As for great joy of his new comen gueſt. Fairy Q: een, b. i.
Fo’RELock. n.ſ. lfare and lock.] The hair that grows from
the forepart of the head. -
Tell her the joyous time will not be ſtaid,
Unleſs ſhe do him by the forelock take. Spenſer, Sonnet 70.
- Hyacinthine locks :
Round from his parted forelock manly hung, -
Cluſtring, but not beneath his ſhoulders broad. Milton.
Zeal and duty are not ſlow,
But on occaſion's forelock watchful wait. Milt. Parad. Reg.
Time is painted with a lock before, and bald behind, ſigni-
fying thereby that we muſt take time by the forelock; for,
when it is once paſt, there is no recalling it. Swift.
Fo'REMAN. n.ſ.. [fore and man.] . The firſt or chief perſon.
He is a very ſenſible man, ſhoots flying, and has been
ſeveral times foreman of the petty jury. Addiſon's Spectator.
For EME’NTIon ED. adj. [fore and mentioned.] Mentioned or
recited before. It is obſerveable that many participles are
compounded with fore, whoſe verbs have no ſuch compoſi-
tl On.
Dacier, in the life of Aurelius, has not taken notice of the
forementioned figure on the pillar. Addiſon on Italy.
Fo'REMosT. adj. [from fore.]
1. Firſt in place.
Our women in the foremoſt ranks appear;
March to the fight, and meet your miſtreſs there. Dryden.
I ſtand aſtoniſh’d what, the bold Sempronius,
That ſtill broke foremoſt through the crowd of patriots,
As with a hurricane of zeal tranſported,
And virtuous ev'n to madneſs
2. Firſt in dignity. -
All three were ſet among the foremoſ! ranks of fame, for great
minds to attempt, and great force to perform what they did
Addiſon's Cato.
attempt. Sidney, b. ii.
Theſe ride fºremoſ in the field,
As they the foremºſt rank of honour held. Dryden.
- Fo'RENAME D.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
:
For ENA'MED. adj. [fore and name ] Nominated before.
And ſuch are ſure ones, -
As Curius, and the forenam'd Lentulus. Ben. Johnſ Catil.
Fo’RE Noon n.ſ.. [fºre and noon ] The time of day reckoned
from the middle point, between the dawn and the meridian,
to the meridian : oppoſed to afternoon. f
The manner was, that the forenown they ſhould run at tilt,
the afternoon in a broad field in manner of a battle, ’till either
the ſtrangers or the country knights won the field. Sid ey. '
Curio, at the funeral of his father, built a temporary thea-
tre, conſiſting of two parts turning on hinges, according to
the poſition of the ſun, for the conveniency of for enoon's and
afternoon's diverſion. Arbuthnot on Coins.
For E Noºric E. m. ſ. [fore and notice.] Information of an
event before it happens.
So ſtrange a revolution never happens in poetry, but either
heaven or earth gives ſome forenotice of it. Rymer’s Tragedies.
For £"Nsick, adj. [fºrenſis, Latin.] Belonging to courts of
judicature.
Perſon is a forenſick term, appropriating actions and their
merit; and ſo belongs only to intelligent agents, capable of a
law, and happineſs and miſery. This perſonality extends it-
ſelf beyond preſent exiſtence to what is paſt, only by conſci-
ouſneſs. Lºcke.
The forum was a publick place in Rome, where lawyers
and orators made their ſpeeches before the proper judges in
matters of property, or in criminal caſes: thence all ſorts of
diſputations in courts of juſtice, where ſeveral perſons make
their diſtinét ſpeeches, may come under the name of ſo-
renſick diſputes. Wats's Improvement of the Mind.
To For Eo RDA'1N. v. a. [fore and ordain..] To predeſtinate;
to predetermine; to preordain. -
The church can diſcharge, in manner convenient, a work
of ſo great importance; by for eordaining ſome ſhort collect
wherein briefly to mention thanks. Hooker, b. v.
Fo’R = PA t n.f. [fore and part.] The anteriour part.
Had it been ſo raiſed, it would deprive us of the ſun's
light all the forepart of the day. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the IWorld.
The ribs have no cavity in them, and towards the forepart
or breaſt are broad and thin, to bend and give way without
danger of fracture. Ray on the Creation.
For EPA's r. adj [fore and paſt.] Paſt before a certain time.
Now ceaſe, ye damſels, your º
Enough it is that all the day is your's. Spenſer's Epiha'am.
My forepaſt proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly fear'd too little. Shakeſpeare.
Such is the treaty which he negotiates with us, an offer and
tender of a reconciliation, an act of oblivion, of all forepaſt
ſins, and of a new covenant. Hammond on Fundamentals.
For EPosse'ss ED. adj. [fore and pºſſeſ...] Preoccupied; pre-
poſſeſſed; pre-engaged. -
The teſtimony either of the ancient fathers, or of other
claſſical divines, may be clearly and abundantly anſwered,
to the ſatisfaction of any rational man, not extremely
forepoſſeſſed with prejudice. Sanderſon's judgment.
Fó'RERANK. m.ſ.. [fore and rank.] Firſt rank; front.
Yet leave our couſin Catharine here with us;
She is our capital demand, compris'd
Within the forerank of our articles. Shakespeare Henry V.
For ERECI'TED. adj. [fore and recite.] Mentioned or enume-
rated before.
Bid him recount
The forerecited practices, whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
To For ERU'N. v. a. [fore and run.] -
1. To come before as an earneſt of ſomething following; to in-
troduce as an harbinger. - -
Againſt ill chances men are ever merry :
But heavineſs foreruns the good event. Shakespeare Henry IV.
The ſun
Was ſet, and twilight from the Eaſt came on,
Forerunning night. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
She bids me hope: oh heav'ns, ſhe pities me !
And pity ſtill foreruns approaching love,
As lightning does the thunder. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. To precede; to have the ſtart of.
I heard it to be a maxim at Dublin to follow, if not fore-
run, all that is or will be pračtiſed in London. Graunt.
For ERU'NNER. m.ſ.. [from forerun.]
1. An harbinger; a meſſenger ſent before to give notice of the
approach of thoſe that follow.
The ſix ſtrangers ſeek for you, madam, to take their leave;
and there is a forerunner come from a ſeventh, the prince of
Morocco. Shakeſpeare's Azerchant of Penice.
A cock was ſacrificed as the fºrerunner of day and the ſun,
thereby acknowledging the light of life to be derived from
the divine bounty, the daughter of providence. Stilling/eat.
My elder brothers, my forerunners came,
Rough draughts of nature, ill deſign'd, and lame:
Blown off, like bloſſoms, never made to bear;
*Till I came finiſh'd, her laſt labour'd care. Dryd. Aurengz.
Already opera prepares the way,
The ſure forerunner of her gentle ſway.
2. A prognoſtick; a ſign foreſhowing anything.
O Eve' ſome further change awaits us nigh,
Which heav'n, by theſe mute ſigns in nature, ſhews
For erunners of his purpoſe. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi.
Loſs of fight is the miſery of life, and uſually the forerunner
of death. South's Sermons.
The keeping inſenſible perſpiration up in due meaſure is the
cauſe as well as ſign of health, and the leaſt deviation from
that due quantity, the certain forerunner of a diſeaſe. Arbuthn.
To For Es A'Y. v. a. [fore and ſay..] To predict; to propheſy;
to foretell.
Pºpe's Dunciad.
Let ordinance
Come as the gods foreſay it. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
o For E SE/E. v. a. [fore and ſee.] To ſee beforehand; to ſee
what has not yet happened ; to have preſcience; to fore-
know.
With Cupid ſhe ſorºſe, and goes god Vulcan's pace. Sidney.
The firſt of the in could things to come foreſee;
The next, could of things preſent beſt adviſe;
The third, things paſt could keep in memory. Fairy Queen.
If there be anything for ſeen that is not uſual, be armed
for it by any hearty though a ſhort prayer, and an ea neſt re-
ſolution b forehand, and then watch when it comes. Taylor.
At his foreſcen approach, already quake
The Caſpian kingdoms and Meotian lake:
Their ſeers behold the tempeſt from afar,
And threat'ning oracles denounce the war. Dryden’s AEn.
To For Esh A“ME. v. a. [for and ſame.] To ſhame; to
bring reproach upon.
Oh bill, foreſ, aming
Thoſe rich-left heirs, that let their fathers lie
Without a monument. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To Fo'REs Hew. v. a. [See For Eshow.]
Fºur. n: ſ [fore and ſhip.] The anteriour part of the
1p.
The ſhipmen would have caſt anchors out of the fºre-
/hip. Acts xxvii. 32.
To For Esho'RTEN. v. a. [fºre and ſhorten.] To ſhorten
figures for the ſake of ſhewing thoſe behind.
The greateſt parts of the body ought to appear foremoſt ;
and he forbids the for ſhºrtenings, becauſe they make the parts
appear little. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To FC Resho'w. v. a. [fore and ſhow.]
1. To diſcover before it happens; to predićt; to prognoſticate.
Chriſt had called him to be a witneſs of his death, and re-
- ſurrection from the dead, according to that which the prophets
and Moſes had foreſhowed. H.oker, b. iii. ſ. 8.
Next, like Aurora, Spenſer roſe,
Whoſe purple bluſh the day for ſhows. Denham.
You choſe to withdraw yourſelf from publick buſineſs,
when the face of heaven grew troubled, and the frequent
ſhifting of the wind foreſhowed a ſtorm. Dryden.
2. To repreſent before it comes.
What elſe is the law, but the goſpel freſhowed 2 What
other the goſpel than the jaw fulfilled : Hooker, b. v.
Fo'RESIGHT. m. ſ. [fore and ſight.]
1. Preſcience; prognoſtication; foreknowledge. The accent
anciently on the laſt ſyllable. -
Let Eve, for I have drench'd her eyes,
Here ſleep below; while thou to fºreſight wak'ſt;
As once thou ſlept'ſt, whilſt ſhe to life was form'd. Miltºn.
2. Provident care of futurity. -
He had a ſharp foreſight, and working wit, -
That never idle was, ne once could reſt a whit. Fai. Qu.
In matters of arms he was both ſkilful and induſtrious, and
as well in forg/ight as reſolution preſent and great. Hayward.
Difficulties and temptations will more eaſily be born or
avoided, if with prudent foreſight we arm ourſelves againſt
then. Rogers's Sermons.
For ESI'GHTFUL. adj. [forſight and full.] Preſcient; pro-
vident.
Death gave him no ſuch pangs as the foreſghtful care he
had of his filly ſucceſſor. Sidney, b. ii.
To For FSI'GNIFY. v. a. [fore and ſigniff.] To betoken be-
forehand; to foreſhow; to typify.
Diſcoveries of Chriſt already preſent, whoſe future
coming the Pſalms did but foreſignify. Hoºker, b. v.
Yet as being paſt times noxious, where they light
On man, beaſt, plant, waſteful and turbulent,
They oft foreſignify, and threaten ill. A/lton's Par. Rºg.
Fo'RESK1 N. a. ſ. [fore and ſkin..] The prepuce.
Their own hand
An hundred of the faithleſs foc ſhall ſlay,
And for a dow'r their hundred foreſkins pay,
Be Michel thy reward. Cowley’s Davideis.
Fo'R Eski RT. n.ſ.. [fore and ſkirt.]. The pendulous or looſe
part of the coat before. º
A thouſand
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
A thouſand pounds a year for pure reſpectſ
No other obligation :
That promiſes more thouſands: honour's train -
Is longer than his foreſkirt. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To Foresla'ck. v. a. Ifºre and ſlack.] To neglect by idle-
neſs. -
It is a great pity that ſo good an opportunity was omitted,
and ſo happy an occaſion foreſacked, that might have been the
eternal good of the land. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
To For Eslo’w, v, a [fre and ſlow.]
1. To delay; to hinder; to impede; to obſtrućt.
No ſtream, no wood, no mountain could foreſaw
Their haſty pace. Fairfax, b. i.
Now the illuſtrious nymph return’d again,
Brings every grace triumphant in her train :
The wond'ring Nereids, though they rais'd no ſtorm,
Foreſlow'd her paſſage, to behold her form. Dryden.
2. To neglečt; to omit.
When the rebels were on Blackheath, the king knowing
well that it ſtood him upon, by how much the more he had
hitherto protracted the time in not encountering them, by ſo
much the ſooner to diſpatch with them, that it might appear
to have been no coldneſs in fore/lowing, but wiſdom in chufing
his time, reſolved with ſpeed to aſſail them. Bacon's Hen. Vll.
Chremes, how many fiſhers do you know
That rule their boats and uſe their nets aright,
That neither wind, nor time, nor tide fore/low *
Some ſuch have been: but, ah! by tempeſts ſpite
Their boats are loſt; while we may fit and moan
- That few were ſuch, and now theſe few are none. P. Fletch.
To For Eslow. v. n. To be dilatory; to loiter.
This may plant courage in their quailing breaſts,
For yet is hope of life and vićtory: -
For ſlow no longer, make we hence amain. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
To For Espe’AK. v. n. [fore and ſpeak )
1. To predićt; to foreſay 5 to foreſhow ; to foretell.
Old Godfrey of Wincheſter, thinketh no ominous foreſteaking
to lie in names. Camden's Remains.
2. To forbid.
Thou haſt foreſpoke my being in theſe wars,
And ſay'ſt it is not fit. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
For espe'N'r. adj. [fore and ſpent.] -
1. Waſted; tired; ſpent.
After him came ſpurring hard
A gentleman, almoſt frºſpent with ſpeed. Shakespeare Henry IV.
2. Forepaſſed; paſt. -
is not enough thy evil life foreſpent P Fairy Queen, b, i.
You ſhall find his vanities foreſpent;
Were but the outſide of the Roman Brutus,
Covering diſcretion with a coat of folly. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
3. Beſtowed before.
We muſt receive him
According to the honour of his ſender;
And towards himſelf, his goodneſs foreſpent on us,
We muſt extend our notice. Shakeſpeare.
For Espu’R RER. m.ſ. [fore and ſpur.] One that rides before.
A day in April never came ſo ſweet,
To ſhow how coſtly Summer was at hand,
As this frºſpurrer comes before his lord. Shakeſpeare.
FO’REST. n.ſ. [[forſ, French; foreſta, Italian.]
1. A wild uncultivated tract of ground, with wood.
By many tribulations we enter into the kingdom of heaven,
becauſe, in a foreſ of many wolves, ſheep cammot chuſe but
feed in continual danger of life. Aſocker, b. v. ſ. 48.
Macbeth ſhall never vanquiſh'd be, until
Great Birnam-wood to Dunfinane's high hill
Shall come againſt him.
That will never be :
Who can impreſs the fºreft, bid the tree
Unfix his earth-bound root ” Shakespeare's Macleth.
There be airs which the phyſicians adviſe their patients to
remove unto, which commonly are plain champaigns, but
grafing, and not overgrown with heath; or elſe timber-ſhades,
as in #. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 936.
ow the firſt foreſ! rais'd its ſhady head. Roſcommon.
... [In law.] A certain territory of woody grounds and fruitful
paſtures, privileged for wild beaſts, and fowls of foreſt, chaſe,
and warren, to reſt and abide in, in the ſafe protećtion of the
king, for his pleaſure; which territory of ground is bounded
with irremoveable marks, and repleniſhed with beaſts of venery
or chaſe, and with great coverts of vert for their ſuccour and
abode: for the preſervation of which place, vert, and veniſon,
there are certain particular laws. The manner of makin
foreſts is this: the king ſends out his commiſſion, under the
broad ſeal of England, direéted to certain diſcreet perſons,
for viewing, perambulating, and bounding the place that he
has a mind to afforeſt: which returned into Chancery, pro-
clamation is made throughout all the country where the ground
lies, that none ſhall hunt or chaſe any wild beaſts within that
precinét, without the king's ſpecial licence; after which he
appoints ordinances, laws, and officers for the preſervation
of the vert and veniſon; and this becomes a foreſt by matter
of record. The properties of a foreſt are theſe: a foreſt, as
it is ſtrictly taken, cannot be in the hands of any but the king,
who hath power to grant commiſfion to a juſtice in eyre for
the foreſt; the courts; the officers for preſerving the Vert and
veniſon, as the juſtices of the foreſt, the warden or keeper,
the verders, the foreſters, agiſtors, regarders, bailiffs, and
beadles. The chief property of a foreſt is the ſwainmote,
which is no leſs incident to it than the court of pyepowders
to a fair. - * Cowel.
To Fos Esta’ll. v. a... [ronerallan, Saxon 1
1. To anticipate; to take up beforehand.
If thou be maſter-gunner, ſpend not all
That thou can'ſt ſpeak at once; but huſband it,
And give men turns of ſpeech: do not forſall
By laviſhneſs thine own and others wit,
As if thou mad'ſt thy will.
What need a man fºreſtall his date of grief,
And run to meet what he would moſt avoid.
2. To hinder by preoccupation or prevention.
And though good luck prolonged hath thy date,
Yet death then would the like miſhap foreſall. Fairy £ueen,
'What's in prayer, but this twofold force
To be foreſtated ere we come to fall,
Or pardon'd being down.
May
This night foreſtall him of the coming day. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
But for my tears,
I had foreſall'd this dear and deep rebuke,
Ere you with grief had ſpoke. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
If thou covet death, as utmoſt end
Of miſery, ſo thinking to evade
The penalty pronounc'd, doubt not but God
Hath wiſelier arm'd his vengeful ire, than ſo -
To be foreſtall’d. Milton's Paradiſe I off, b. x.
I will not foreſtall your judgment of the reſt.
3. To ſeize or gain poſſeſſion of before another; to buy before
another in order to raiſe the price. - -
He bold ſpake, Sir knight, if knight thou be,
Abandon this foreſtalled place at erſt,
For fear of further harm, I counſel thee. Fairy Queen.
For esta'i LeR. m. ſ. [from foreſtall.] One that anticipates
the market; one that purchaſes before others to raiſe the
price.
Commodities, good or bad, the workman muſt take at his
maſter's rate, or ſit ſtill and ſtarve; whilſt, by this means, this
new ſort of ingroſſors or foreſtallers having the feeding and
ſupplying this numerous body of workmen, ſet the price upon
the poor landholder. Locke.
Forest Bo'RN. adj. [foreſ? and born.] Born in a wild.
This boy is freſhorn,
And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
Of deſperate ſtudies. Shakespeare As you like it.
Fo'Rest ER. n.ſ.. [foreſtier, French, from foreſt.]
I. An officer of the foreſt.
Foreſler, my friend, where is the buſh
That we may ſtand and play the murtherer in
—Here by, upon the edge of yonder copice. Shakeſpeare.
2. An inhabitant of the wild country.
Fo’RE sw A.T. }*. [from fore and ſwat, from ſweat..] Spent
Fo' R Eswart. W. with heat.
Miſo and Mopſa, like a couple of foreſwat melters, were
getting the pure filver of their bodies out of the ore of their
garments. Sidney, b, ii.
To For ETA'st E. v. a. [fore and taſe.] -
1. To have antepaſt of ; to have preſcience of.
2. To taſte before another.
Perhaps the fačt
Is not ſo heinous now, foretaſted fruit,
Profan'd firſt by the ſerpent, by him firſt
Made common, and unhallow'd, ere our taſte. Milt, P. L.
Fo'RET Ast E. m. ſ. Anticipation of
A pleaſure that a man may call as properly his own as his
ſoul and his conſcience, neither liable to accident, nor ex-
poſed to injury: it is the foretoſle of heaven, and the earneſt
of eternity. South's Sermons.
To For ETÉ'll. v. a. [fore and tell.]
1. To predićt; to propheſy.
What art thou, whoſe heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful ſtory hanging on thy tongue? Shakespeare H. VI.
I found
The new-created world, which fame in heaven
Long had foretold.
Herbert.
AM:ltont
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet,
Mercia's king,
Warn'd in a dream, his murder did fortell,
From point to point, as after it befell.
when great Ulyſſes fought the Phrygian ſhores,
Deeds then undone my faithful tongue foretold ;
Heaven ſea!'d my words, and you thoſe deeds behold. Pote.
9 P 2. To
Dryden.
Pope.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x. .
Fºº { º, ºut<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R.
2. To foretoken; to foreſhow,
To For ETE’ll. v. n. To utter prophecy.
All the prophets from Samuel, and thoſe that follow after,
have likewiſe fretold of theſe days. Acts iii. 24.
For ETE'll ER. n.ſ. ſº foretell.] Predićter ; foreſhower.
Others are propoſed, not that the foretold events ſhould be
known; but that the accompliſhment that expounds them
may evince, that the freteller of them was able to foreſee
-- thee, Boyle on Colours.
º To For ethi'Nk. v. a. ſ.fore and think.] To anticipate in
the mind; to have preſcience of.
The ſoul of every man
Prophetically does forethink thy fall.
I do pray to thee,
Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom -
Foreth ught by heav'n. Shakespeare's King john.
Adam could not be ignorant of the puniſhments due to
neglect and diſobedience; and felt, by the proof thereof, in
himſelf another terror than he had forethought, or could ima-
gine. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Hºorld.
Friday, the fatal day ! when next it came,
Shakespeare Henry IV.
To For ETH1'Nk. A. m. To contrive beforehand.
With this you blot my name, and clear your own;
And what's my frenzy will be call'd my crime:
What then is thine Thou cool deliberate villain!
Thou wiſe, forethinking, weighing politicianſ
For etho'UGHT. n.ſ.. [from freihink.]
1. Preſcience; anticipation.
He that is undone, is equally undone, whether it be by ſpite-
- fulneſs of forethought, or by the folly of overſight, or evil
counſel. L’Eſtrange.
2. Provident care.
To For ero'ken. v. a. [fore and taken.] To foreſhow; to
prognoſticate as a ſign.
The king from Ireland haſtes; but did no good;
- Whilſt ſtrange prodigious figns foretoken blood. , Daniel.
Foreto'ken, n.ſ.. [from the verb...] Prevenient ſign; prog-
noſtick.
It may prove ſome ominous foretoken of misfortune. Sidney.
They miſliked nothing more in king Edward the Confeſſor,
than that he was Frenchified; and accounted the deſire of
foreign language then to be a foretoken of bringing in of fo-
reign powers, which indeed happened. Camden's Remains.
Foreto'oth. n.ſ.. [fore and tooth.] The tooth in the ante-
rior part of the mouth; the inciſor.
The foreteeth ſhould be formed broad, and with a thin ſharp
edge like chizzles. Ray on the Creation.
Fo'RETop. n.ſ.. [fore and top.] That part of a woman's head-
dreſs that is forward, or the top of a periwig.
So may your hats your foretops never preſs,
Untouch'd your ribbons, ſacred be your dreſs. Dryden.
For evou'chED. part. [fire and vouch..] Affirmed before;
formerly told.
Smith.
i
Sure her offence
Muſt be of ſuch unnatural degree,
That monſters it 5 or your forevouch'd affection
Fall’n into taint. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Fo'Reward. n.ſ.. [fore and ward.] The van; the front.
They that marched in the foreward were all mighty men.
I 41ac. ix. 1 i.
To For EwA'RN. v. a. [fºre and warn.]
1. To admoniſh beforehand.
I will forewarn you whom you ſhall fear: fear him which,
after he hath killed, hath power to caſt into hell. Lu. xii. 5.
2. To inform previouſly of any future event.
Divine interpreter, by favour ſent
Down from the empyrean, to forewarn
Us timely of what might elſe have been our loſs
Unknown. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
3. To caution againſt any thing beforehand.
- Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd. Shakespeare H.VI.
- Thy pride,
And wand'ring vanity, when leaſt was ſafe,
Rejećted my yrewarning, and diſdain'd
Not to be truſted. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. x.
Tho' Phoebus had forewarned him of ſinging wars, yet the
ſearch of nature was free. Dryd. Wirg. Dedic, to Ld. Clifford.
Young Choraebus, who by love was led
To win renown and fair Caſſandra's bed,
Had lately brought his troops to Priam's aid;
Forewarn’d in vain by the prophetick maid. Dryden's Aºn.
To For EwA'st E. v. a. [fore and waſte. J To deſolate; to
deſtroy. Out of uſe.
Veſpaſian, with great ſpoil and rage,
Forewaſhed all, until Gemiſſa gent
Perſuaded him to ceaſe.
High time 'gan it wer for Una fair,
To think of thoſe her captive parents dear,
And their forewoſted kingdom to repair. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Her ſoul ſcretbought the fiend would change his game. Dryd.
To For ewi's H. part. [fore and wiſh.] To deſire beforehand.
The wiſer ſort ceaſed not to do what in them lay, to pro-
cure that the good commonly forewiſhed might in time come
to effect. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
For Ewo"RN. part. [fore and worn, from wear.] Worn out;
waſted by time or uſe. -
Neither the light was enough to read the words, and the
ink was already foreworm, and in many places blotted. Sidney.
FORFEIT. n.ſ.. [forfait, French ; forfed, Welſh.J
1. Something loſt by the commiſfion of a crime; ſomething
paid for expiation of a crime; a fine; a mulét.
Thy ſlanders I forgive, and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits. Shakespeare 4.eaſure fºr Meaſure.
Th’ execution leave to high diſpoſal,
And let another hand, not thine, exact
Thy penal fo feit from thyſelf. Milton's Agoniſter, 1,506.
Thy life, Melantius ! I am come to take,
Of which foul treaſon does a forfeit make. Waller.
2. A perſon obnoxious to puniſhment; one whoſe life is for-
feited by his offence. Now obſolete.
Your brother is afrſfit of the law,
And you but waſte your words. Shakespeare Meaſ fºr Meaſure.
Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no
greater forfeit to the law than Angelo, who hath ſentenced
him. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
To Fo'RFrit. v. a. [from the noun..] To loſe by ſome breach
of condition; to loſe by ſome offence.
If then a man, on light conditions, gain
A #. eſtate to him, and his, for ever;
f wilfully he forfeit it again,
Who doth bemoan his heir, or blame the giver? Davies.
Men diſpleaſed God, and conſequently fºrfeited all right to
happineſs. oyle.
A father cannot alien the power he has over his child: he
may perhaps to ſome degrees fºrfeit it, but cannot transfer
it Locke.
Fo'RFE it. participial adj. [from the verb.] Liable to penal
ſeizure; alienated by a crime; loſt either as to the right
or poſſeſſion, by breach of conditions.
All the ſouls that are, were forfeit once;
And he that might the 'vantage beſt have took,
Found out the remedy. Shake p. Meaſure fºr Maſºrt.
Beg that thou may’ſt have leave to hang thyſelf;
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the ſtate,
Thou haſt not left the value of a cord.
This now fenceleſs world,
Forfeit to death. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. l. 303.
Straight all his hopes exhal'd in empty ſmoke,
And his long toils were forfeit for a look. Dryd, Virg. Geor.
Methought with wond’rous eaſe he ſwallow'd down
His forfeit honour, to betray the town. Dryd. Indian Emp.
How the murd’rer paid his forfeit breath;
What lands ſo diſtant frºm that ſcene of death,
But trembling heard the fame ! Pope's Odyſſey, b. iii.
Fo'RFEITABLE. adj. [from forfeit.] Poſſeſſed on conditions,
by the breach of which any thing may be loſt. -
Fo'RFEiture, n.ſ.. [forfaiture, French, from forfeit.]
1. The act of forfeiting; the puniſhment diſcharged by loſs of
ſomething poſſeſſed.
2. The thing forfeited; a mulét; a fine. -
The court is as well a Chancery to ſave and debar for.
feitures, as a court of common law to decide rights; and there
would be work enough in Germany and Italy, if Imperial
forfeitures ſhould go for good titles. Bacon's War with Spain.
Ancient privileges and acts of grace indulged by fermer
kings, muſt not, without high reaſon, be revoked by their
fucceſſors; nor forfeitures be exacted violently, nor penal
laws urged rigorouſly. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
He fairly abdicates his throne,
He has a forfeiture incurr'd.
To For FE'ND. v. a. To prevent; to forbid.
For GA’ve. The preterite of forgive.
FORGE. m. ſ. [forge, French.]
1. The place where iron is beaten into form. In common lan-
guage we uſe forge for large work, and ſmithy for ſmall; but
in books the diſtinétion is not kept. -
Now behold,
In the quick forge and working-houſe of thought,
How London doth pour out her citizens. Shakespeare Henry V.
In other part ſtood one, who at the fºrge
Labouring, two maſſy clods of iron and braſs
Had melted. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
Th' o'er-labour'd Cyclop from his taſk retires,
Th’AEolian forge exhauſted of its fires. Pope's Statiuſ.
2. Any place where anything is made or ſhaped.
From no other forge hath proceeded a ſtrange conceit, that
to ſerve God with any ſet form of common prayer is ſuper-
ſtitious. - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 26.
To For Ge. v. a. [forger, old French.]
1. To form by the hammer; to beat into ſhape.
The queen of martials,
Shakeſpeare.
Swift.
Hanmer.
And<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
*}.
is
*:
*
º:
º:
r; 3
zºr
º
e.
.
And Mars himſelf condućled them ; both which being
fºrg'd of gold,
Muſt needs have golden furniture. Chapman's Jiad, b. xviii.
Tyger with tyger, bear with bear you'll find
In leagues offenſive and defenſive join'd ;
But lawleſs man the anvil dares profane,
And forge that ſteel by which a man is ſlain,
Which earth at firſt for plough-ſhares did afford,
Nor yet the ſmith had learn'd to form a ſword. Tate's Juv.
2. To make by any means.
He was a kind of nothing, titleleſs,
*Till he had forg'd himſelf a name i' th' fire
Of burning Rome. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
His heart's his mouth:
What his breaſt forges, that his tongue muſt vent. Shakeſp.
Thoſe few names that the ſchools forged, and put into the
mouths of their ſcholars, could never yet get admittance into
common uſe, or obtain the licence of publick approba-
tion. Locke.
3. To counterfeit ; to º
Were I king,
. I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands:
My more having would be as ſauce
To make me hunger more, that I ſhould forge
Quarrels unjuſt againſt the good and loyal,
Deſtroying them for wealth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Fo'RC ER. y [from forge.]
1. One who makes or forms.
2. One who counterfeits any thing; a falſifier.
As in ſtealing, if there were no receivers there would be no
thieves ; ſo in ſlander, if there were fewer ſpreaders there
would be fewer forgers of libels. Government of the Tongue.
No forger of lyes willingly and wittingly furniſhes out the
means of his own detection. ///? on the Reſurrection.
Fo'RGERY. m. ſ. [from forge.] The crime of falſification.
Has your king married the lady Gray
And now, to ſooth your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to perſuade me patience. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Nothing could have been eaſier than for the Jews, the ene-
mies of Jeſus Chriſt, to have diſproved theſe fačts, had they
been falſe, to have ſhewn their falſhood, and to have convićted
them of forgery. - Stephens's Sermons.
A forgery, in ſetting a falſe name to a writing, which may
prejudice another's fortune, the law puniſhes with the loſs of
ears; but has inflićted no adequate penalty for doing the ſame
thing in print, though books ſold under a falſe name are ſo
many forgeries. Swift.
2. Smith's work; fabrication; the aët of the forge.
He ran on embattl'd armies clad in iron,
And weaponleſs himſelf,
Made arms ridiculous, uſeleſs the forgery
Of brazen ſhield and ſpear, the hammer'd cuiraſs,
Chalybean temper'd ſteel, and frock of mail
Adamantean proof. Milton's Agºniſes, l, 179.
To FORGET. v. a. preter, forgot; part. forgotten, or forgot.
[Fonzycan, Saxon ; vergeten, Dutch.]
1. To loſe memory of; to let go from the remembrance.
That is not fºrgot
Which ne’er I did remember; to my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him. Shakeſp. Richard II.
When I am forgotten, as I ſhall be,
And ſleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Of me muſt more be heard. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Oh, my oblivion is a very Anthony,
And I am all forgotten. Shakespeare Anthºny and Cleopatra.
Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not unmindful
of him in thy riches. Eccluſ. xxxvii. 6.
No ſooner was our deliverance compleated, but we frºot
our danger and our duty. Atterbury's Sermons.
Alive, ridiculous; and dead, forgot. Pope.
2. Not to attend; to negle&amp;t. -
Can a woman forget her ſucking child? Yea, they may far-
get; yet will I not forget thee. Iſa. xlix. 5.
The maſs of mean forgotten things. Anon.
Forgetful, adj. [from forget.] -
1. Not retaining the memory of.
2. Cauſing oblivion; oblivious.
But when a thouſand rolling years are paſt,
So long their puniſhments and penance laſt,
Whole droves of minds are by the driving god
Compell'd to drink the deep Lethean flood,
In large forgetful draughts to ſteep the cares
Of their paſt labours, and their irkſome years. Dryd. Æn.
3. Inattentive; negligent; neglectful; careleſs.
Be not forgetful to entertain ſtrangers. Hebr. xiii. 2.
The queen is comfortleſs, and we fºrgetſul
In our long abſence. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Have you not love enough to bear with me,
When that raſh humour, which my mother gave me,
Makes me forgetſu!? Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
I, in fact, a real intereſt have,
Which to my own advantage I would ſave;
And, with the uſual courtier's trick, intend .
To ſerve myſelf, forgetful of my friend. Priºr,
FoRGETFULNEss. n.ſ. [from forgetful.]
1. Oblivion; ceſſation to remember; loſs of memory.
O gentle ſleep!
Nature's ſoft nurſe, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down,
And ſteep my ſenſes in forgetſu neſ; 1 Shakeſp. Henry IV.
All birds and beaſts lie huſh'd; ſleep ſteals away
The wild deſires of men and toils of day;
And brings, deſcending through the filent air,
A ſweet forgetflneſs of human care. Pope's Statius,
2. Negligence; neglect; inattention. -
The church of England is grievouſly charged with forgetful.
neſ of her duty. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 13.
For GE'tte R, n.ſ.. [from forget.]
1. One that forgets.
2. A careleſs perſon.
To FORGI'VE. v. a. ſpongipan, Saxon.]
1. To pardon a perſon; not to puniſh,
Then heaven forgive him too ! Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I do beſeech your grace for charity;
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid againſt me, now forgive me frankly.
—Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you,
As I would be firgiven: I forgiº all, "Shakespeare Henry VIII,
Slowly provok'd, ſhe eaſily forgives. Prior.
2. To pardon a crime. -
The people that dwell therein ſhall be fºrgiven their ini-
quity. Aſ xxxiii. 24-
3. To remit; not to exact debt or penalty.
The lord of that ſervant was moved with compaſſion, looſed
him, and forgave him the debt. - Mat. xviii. 27.
For GrºveNess. m. ſ. [Fonzipennirre, Saxon.]
1. The act of forgiving.
To the Lord our &amp;d belong mercies and forgiveneſſer. Dam,
2. Pardon of an offender.
Thou haſt promiſed repentance and fºrgiveneſs to them that
have finned againſt thee. Prayer of Manaſ,
Exchange forgiveneſ, with me, noble Hamlet;
Mine and my father's death come not on thee, -
Nor thine on me. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Forgiveneſ, to the injur'd does belong;
But they ne'er pardon who commit the wrong. Dryden.
3. Pardon of an offence.
God has certainly promiſed forgiveneſ of ſin to every one
who repents. South's Sermont.
4. Tenderneſs; willingneſs to pardon.
Here are introduced more heroick principles of meekneſs,
forgiveneſs, bounty and magnanimity, than all the learning of
the heathens could invent. Sprat's Sermons.
Mercy above did hourly plead
For her reſemblance here below ;
And mild fºrgiveneſ intercede -
To ſtop the coming blow. Dryden.
5. Remiſfion of a fine or penalty.
Forgi’ver. n.ſ.. [from forgive..] One who pardons.
Fºrs. } part, paſſ of firget. Not remembered.
This ſong ſhall not be forgºtten. Deutr. xxxi. 21.
Great Strafford ' worthy of that name, though all
Of thee could be forgºtten, but thy fall. Denham.
The ſoft ideas of the cheerful note, -
Lightly receiv'd, were eaſily forgot. Prior.
To For ha'il. v.a.[An old word. Probably for forhaul, from
for and haul.] To harraſs; tear; torment.
All this long tale -
Nought eaſeth the care that doth meſºrhail. §. Poſt.
FORK. n.ſ.. [furca, Latin; forch, Welſh; fourthe, French.]
1. An inſtrument divided at the end into two or more points or
prongs, uſed on many occaſions.
At Midſummer down with the brembles and brakes,
And after abroad with thy forks and thy rakes. Tu/. Hub.
The vicar firſt, and after him the crew,
With forks and ſtaves the felon to purſue, -
Ran Coll our dog. Dryden's Nun's Prieſ.
I dine with forks that have but two prongs. Swift.
2. It is ſometimes uſed for the point of an arrow.
The bow is bent and drawn: make from the ſhaft.
—Let it fall rather, though the fork invade -
The region of my heart. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. A point of a fork. -
Several are amazed at the wiſdom of the ancients that re-
preſented a thunderbolt with three fºrks, ſince nothing could
have better explained its triple quality of piercing, burning,
and melting. Addiſon on ancient Medal.,
To Fork. J. n. [from the noun..] To ſhoot into blades, as
corn does out of the ground.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
The corn beginneth to fork.
Forged, adj. [from fork.J. QP
When he was naked he was,
radiſh, with a head fantaſtically
Mºrtirer's Husbandry.
ening into two or more parts:
for ill the world, like a frked
carved upon it with a knife.
Shakeſpeare'sº IV. p. ii.
- e ſee a cloud that's dragoniſh,
Ajº, or blue promontory. 2 Shakeſpeare.
Čome, ſhall we go and kill us veniſon:
And yet it irks me the Poor dappled fools
Should, in their own confines, with forked heads, ... .
Have their round haunches goar'd. Shakeſp. A you like it.
He would have º; d
iſs for hiſs return'd, with forked tongue
#:}.} tongue. #; Paradiſe Loſt, b. x.
Ye dragons, whoſe contagious breath
Peoples the dark retreats of death,
Change your fierce hiſſing into joyful ſong,
And praiſe your maker with your forked tongue. Roſcommon.
Forkedly. adv. [from fºrked..] . In a forked form. -
Foºkedness. n.). [from forked.] The quality of opening
into two parts. -
Forkheap. n.ſ.. [fºrk and head] Point of an arrow.
It ſeizing, no way enter might;
Put back rebounding, left the forkhead keen,
Eftſoons it fled away, and might no where be ſeen. Fa. &amp;u.
Forky, adj. [from fork ] Forked; furcated; opening into
two parts.
The ſmiling infant in his hand ſhall take
The creſted baſiliſk and ſpeckled ſnake;
Pleas'd the green luſtre of the ſcales ſurvey,
And with their fºrty tongue and pointleſs ſting ſhall play:
* - - Pope's Miffiah.
Forlo're. [The preterite and participle of the Saxon Forleonan,
in Dutch verloren.] Deſerted; forſook; forſaken.
Such as Diana by the ſandy ſhore
Of ſwift Eurotas, or on Cynthus' green, --
Where all the nymphs have her forlore. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
That wretched world he 'gan for to abhor,
And mortal life 'gan loath, as thingfºrlore. Fairy Queen.
Thus fell the trees, with noiſe the deſarts roar;
The beaſts their caves, the birds their neſts fºrelore. Fairf.
FORLO'RN. adj. [Fonlonen, from ponleonan, Saxon; ver-
loren, Dutch..]
1. Deſerted; deſtitute; forfaken; wretched; helpleſs; ſoli-
tary.
ry Make them ſeek for that they wont to ſcorn;
Of fortune and of hope at once forlorn. Hubberd's Tale.
Tell me, good Hobinol, what gars thee greet
What! hath ſome wolf thy tender lambs ytorn ?
Or is thy bagpipe broke, that ſounds ſo ſweet?
Or art thou of thy loved laſs forlorne P Spenſer's Paſtorals.
In every place was heard the lamentation of women and
children; every thing ſhewed the heavineſs of the time, and
ſeemed as altogether loſt and forlorn. Knolles's Hiſtory.
How can I live without thee! how forego
Thy ſweet converſe, and love ſo dearly join'd,
To live again in theſe wild woods forlorn? Milt. Par. Loft.
Their way
Lies through the perplex'd paths of this drear wood;
The nodding horrour of whoſe ſhady brows,
Threats the forlorn and wand'ring paſſenger. Milton.
My only ſtrength and ſtay ! forlorn of thee,
Whither ſhall I betake me, where ſubſiſt! Milt. Par. Loft.
Like a declining ſtateſman, left forlorn
To his friends pity and purſuers ſcorn. Denham.
The good old man, forlorn of human aid,
For vengeance to his heav'nly patron pray'd. Dryd. Iliad.
Philomel laments forlorn. Fenton.
As ſome ſad turtle his loſt love deplores,
Thus, far from Delia, to the winds I mourn;
Alike unheard, unpity'd, and forlorn. Pope's Autumn.
2. Loſt; deſperate. -
What is become of great Acrates' ſon
Or where hath he hung up his mortal blade,
That hath ſo many haughty conqueſts won 2
Is all his º and all his glory done Fairy Queen.
3. Small; deſpicable: in a ludicrous ſenſe.
He was ſo forlorn, that his dimenſions to any thick fight
were invincible. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
For Lo'RN. n.ſ. A loſt, ſolitary, forſaken man.
Henry
Is of a king become a baniſh'd man,
And forc'd to live in Scotland a forlorn. Shakespeare Henry VI.
2. Forlor N Hope. The ſoldiers who are ſent firſt to the at-
tack, and are therefore doomed to periſh.
Criticks in plume,
Who lolling on our foremoſt benches ſit,
And ſtill charge firſt, the true fºrlorn of wit. Dryden.
FoRºo'RN's ess. n.ſ. (from forlºrn.] Deſtitution; miſery;
- ſolitude.
Men diſpleaſed God, and conſcquently forfeited all right
to happineſs; even whilſt they compleated the forbrunºff of
their condition by the lethargy of not being ſenſible of it. Boyle.
To Fo'RLY E. v n. [from for and lye.] To lye acroſs.
Knit with a golden baldric, which fray
Athwart her ſnowy breaft, and did divide
Her dainty paps, which, like young fruit in May,
Now little 'gan to ſwell; and being ty'd,
Through her thin weed, their places only ſignify'd. Fa. &amp;#.
FORM. m. ſ. [forma, Latin; forme, French.]
1. The external appearance of any thing; repreſentation;
ſhape.
Nay, women are frail too.
Ay, as the glaſſes where they view themſelves,
Which are as eaſy broke as they make fºrms. Shakeſpeare.
It ſtood ſtill; but I could not diſcern the form thereof. job.
Gold will endure a vehement fire, without any change, and
after it has been divided by corroſive liquors into inviſible
parts; yet may preſently be precipitated, ſo as to appear again
in its form. Grew's Coſmol. Sac. b.i.
Matter, as wife logicians ſay, -
Cannot without a form ſubſiſt;
And form, ſay I as well as they,
Muſt fail, if matter brings no griſt. Swift.
2. Being, as modified by a particular ſhape.
When noble benefits ſhall prove
Not well diſpos'd, the mind grown once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugl
Than ever they were fair. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII,
Here toils and death, and death's half-brother, ſleep,
Forms terrible to view, their ſentry keep;
With anxious pleaſures of a guilty mind,
Deep frauds before, and open force behind. Dryden's En.
3. Particular model or modification. º
He that will look into many parts of Aſia and America,
will find men reaſon there perhaps as acutely as himſelf, who
yet never heard of a ſyllogiſm, nor can reduce any one argu-
ment to thoſe forms. Locke,
It lengthens out every ačt of worſhip, and produces more
laſting and permanent impreſſions in the mind, than thoſe
which accompany any tranſient form of words that are ut-
tered in the ordinary method of religious worſhip. Addison.
4. Beauty; elegance of appearance.
He hath no form nor comelineſs. - Ja, liii. 2:
5. Regularity ; method; order.
What he ſpoke, though it lack'd form a little,
Was not like madneſs. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
6. External appearance without the eſſential qualities; empty
ſhow.
Then thoſe whom form of laws
Condemn'd to die, when traitors judg’d their cauſe. Dryden.
They were young heirs ſent only for form from ſchools,
where they were not ſuffered to ſtay three months in the year.
Swift's Eſſay on Modern Education.
. Ceremony; external rites.
Though well we may not paſs upon his life,
Without the form of juſtice; yet our pow'r
Shall do a court’ſy to our wrath, which men -
May blame, but not controul. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
A long table, and a ſquare table, or ſeat about the walls,
ſeem things of form, but are things of ſubſtance; for atalong
table, a few at the upper end, in effect, ſway all the buſineſs;
but in the other form, there is more uſe of the counſelors ºpi-
nions that ſit lower. Bacon, Eſſay 21.
That the parliaments of Ireland might want no decent or
honourable fºrm uſed in England, he cauſed a particu-
lar act to paſs that the lords of Ireland ſhould appear in Pºº.
liament robes. Davies in Ireland.
Their general uſed, in all diſpatches made by himſelf.”
obſerve all decency in their ſo ms. Clarendon, b. viii.
How am I to interpret, ſir, this viſit 2 -
Is it a compliment of form, or love? A. Phill. Diff. Moth.
8. Stated method; eſtabliſhed practice.
He who affirmeth ſpeech to be neceſſary amongſt all, men,
throughout the world, doth not thereby import that all men
muſt neceſſarily ſpeak one kind of language; even ſo the ne-
ceflity of polity and regimen in all churches may be held,
without holding any one certain form to be neceſſay in them
all. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 2:
Nor are conſtant fºrms of prayer more likely to flat and
hinder the ſpirit of prayer and devotion, than unpremeditated
and confuſed variety to diſtraćt and loſe it. King Charles.
Nor ſeek to know
Their proceſs, or the forms of law below. Dryden's Aºn.
9. A long ſeat. -
If a chair be defined a ſeat for a fingle perſon, with a back
belonging to it, then a ſtool is a ſeat for a ſingle perſon with:
out a back; and a form is a ſeat for ſeveral perſons, without
a back. Watts's Lºgicº.
I was ſeen with her in the manorhouſe, fitting with hº
upon the form, and taken following her into the park. Shakeſp,
10. A claſs; a rank of ſtudents.
It will be neceſſary to ſee and examine thoſe works which
3 - have
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
have given ſo great a reputation to the maſters of the firſt
***1. * Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
II. The ſeat or bed of a hare.
Now for a clod-like hare in ſ." they peer;
Now bolt and cudgel ſquirrels leap do move;
Now the ambitious lark, with mirrour clear,
They catch, while he, fool! to himſelf makes love. Sidn.
Have you obſerv'd a ſitting hare,
Liſt’ning, and fearful of the ſtorm
Of horns and hounds, clap back her ear,
Afraid to keep or leave her form. Prior.
12. Form is the eſſential, ſpecifical, or diſtinguiſhing modifica-
tion of the matter of which any thing is compoſed, ſo as
thereby to give it ſuch a peculiar manner of exiſtence. Harris.
In definitions, whether they be framed larger to augment,
or ſtrićter to abridge the number of ſacraments, we find grace
expreſly mentioned as their true eſſential form, and elements as
the matter whereunto that form doth adjoin itſelf. Hooker.
They inferred, if the world were a living creature, it had
a ſoul and ſpirit, by which they did not intend God, for they
did admit of a deity beſides, but only the ſoul or eſſential
form of the univerſe. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
13. A formal cauſe; that which gives eſſence.
To Fox M. v. a. [formo, Latin.]
1. To make out of materials.
God fºrmed man of the duſt of the ground.
She form'd the phantom of well-bodied air.
2. To model to a particular ſhape.
3. To modify; to ſcheme; to plan.
, Lucretius taught him not to form his heroe, to give him
piety or valour for his manners. J}ryden's AEm. Dedicat.
4. To arrange; to combine in any particular manner: as, he
formed his troops. -
5. To adjuſt ; to ſettle. -
ith the Romaniſts are thus formed into an
Gen. ii. 7.
Pope.
Our differences wi
intereſt, and become the deſign not of ſingle perſons, but of
corporations and ſucceſſions. Decay of Piety.
6. To contrive; to coin.
The defeat of the deſign is the routing of opinions fºrmed
for promoting it. - Decay ºf Piety.
He dies too ſoon;
And fate, if poſſible, muſt be delay'd:
The thought that labours in my fºrming brain,
Yet crude and immature, demands more time.
7. To model by education or inſtitution.
, Let him to this with eaſy pains be brought,
And ſeem to labour when he labours hot:
Thus form'd for ſpeed, he challenges the wind,
And leaves the Scythian arrow far behind. Dryd. Wirg. Geo.
FORMAL. adj. [formel, French; formalis, Latin.]
1. Ceremonious; ſolemn; preciſe; exact to affectation:
The juſtice,
In fair round belly, with good capon lin'd,
With eyes ſevere, and beard of formal cut,
Full of wiſe ſaws and modern inſtances,
And ſo he plays his part. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Formal in apparel, -
In gait and countenance ſurely like a father. Shakeſpeare.
Ceremonies eſpecially be not to be omitted to ſtrangers and
formal natures ; but the exalting them above the mean is not
• only tedious, but doth diminiſh the credit of him that ſpeaks.
Bacon, Eſſay 53.
Rowe.
2. Done according to eſtabliſhed rules and methods; not irre-
gular; not ſudden; not extemporaneous.
There is not any poſitive law of men, whether it be gene-
ral or particular, received by formal expreſs conſent, as in
councils; or by ſecret approbation, as in cuſtoms it cometh to
paſs, but the ſame may be taken away, if occaſion ſerve.
Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
As there are formal and written leagues, reſpective to cer-
tain enemies; ſo there is a natural and tacit confederation
amongſt all men againſt the common enemy of human ſociety,
ſo as there needs no intimation or denunciation of the war;
but all theſe formalities the law of nature ſupplies, as in the
caſe of pyrates. Bacon's Holy Iſ ar.
3. Regular; methodical. -
The formal ſtars do travel ſo,
As we their names and courſes know ;
And he that on their changes looks,
Would think them govern'd by our books.
4. External; having the appearance but not the eſſence.
Of formal duty, make no more thy boaſt;
Thou diſobey'ſt where it concerns me moſt. Dryd, Aureng.
5. Depending upon eſtabliſhment or cuſtom.
Still in conſtraint your ſuffering ſex remains,
Or bound in formal or in real chains. Pote.
6. Having the power of making any thing what it is ; conſti-
tuent ; eſſential.
Of letters the material part is breath and voice: the fºrmal
is conſtituted by the motions and figure of the organs of ſpeech
affecting breath with a peculiar found, by which each letter is
diſcriminated. Holdr's Elements of Speech.
J/aller.
-
Bellarmine agrees in making the fºrmal ačt of adoration to
be ſubjection to a ſuperior; but withal he makes the mere ap-
prehenſion of excellency to include the formal reaſon of it:
whereas mere excellency, without ſuperiority, doth not require
any ſubjection, but only eſtimation. Stillingfleet.
The very life and vital motion, and the fºrmal effence and
nature of man, is wholly owing to the power of God. Bentl.
7. Retaining its proper and eſſential characteriſtick.
Thou ſhou'dſt come like a fury cover'd with ſnakes,
Not like a fºrmal man. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
I will not let him ſtir,
*Till I have us’d th’ approved means I have;
With wholſome ſyrups, drugs, and holy prayers,
To make of him a formal man again. Sºakeſp. Com. of Err.
Fo'RMALIST. n.ſ.. [fºrmaliſie, French, from fºrm.] One who
practiſes external ceremony; one who preers appearance to
reality; one who ſeems what he is not,
It is a ridiculous thing, and fit for a ſatyr to perſons of
judgment, to ſee what ſhifts formali/s have, and what
proſpectives to make ſuperficies to ſeem a body that hath depth
and bulk. Bacon, Eſſay 27.
A grave, ſtanch, ſkilfully managed face, ſet upon a graſp-
ing aſpiring mind, having got many a ſly formaliſt the reputa-
tion of a primitive and ſevere piety. South's Sermons.
For MA'lity. n.ſ.. [formalité, French, from form.] .
1. Ceremony; eſtabliſhed mode of behaviour.
The attire, which the miniſter of God is by order to uſe
at times of divine ſervice, is but a matter of mere fºrma-
lity, yet ſuch as for comelineſs ſake hath hitherto been judged
not unneceſſary. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 29.
Formalities of extraordinary zeal and piety are never more
ſtudied and elaborate than in deſperate deſigns. King Charles. .
Many a worthy man ſacrifices his peace to fºrmalities of
compliment and good manners. L’E/irange, Fable 184.
Nor was his attendance on divine offices a matter of forma-
lity and cuſtom, but of conſcience. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. Solemn order, habit, or dreſs.
If men forſwear the deeds and bonds they draw,
Though ſign'd with all fºrmality of law;
And though the ſigning and the ſeal proclaim
The barefac'd perjury, and fix the ſhame. Dryden's juven.
The pretender would have infallibly landed in our northern
parts, and found them all ſat down in their formalities, as the
Gauls did the Roman ſenators. Swift.
3. Effence; the quality by which anything is whº: it is. -
To fix on God the firmality of facultics, or affections, is
the impoſture of our fancies, and contradićiory to his divi-
nº Glar.” &amp;epſ. c. 13.
ay not a man vow to A. and B. that he will give a hun-
dred pound to an hoſpital? Here the vow is made both to God
and to A. and B. But here A and B. are only witneſſes to
the vow; but the form...it of the vow lies in the promiſe
made to God. Stiling ret's Def ºf Diſc on Rom. Idol.
To Fo'RMAlize. v. a. [formal, , , French, from fºrmal.]
1. To model; to modify. A word ... t , º, in uſe.
The ſame ſpirit which anointed the bieńed toul of our Sa-
viour Chriſt, doth ſo formalize, unite, and actuate his whole
race, as if both he and they were ſo many limbs compacted
into one body. faceker, b. v. ſ. 56.
2. To affect formality; to be fond of ceremony.
Fo'RMALLY. adv. [from fºrmal.]
1. According to eſtabliſhed rules, methods, ceremonies or rites.
Formally, according to our law,
Depoſe him.
2. Ceremoniouſly; ſtifly; preciſely.
To be ſtiff and fºrmaly reſerved, as if the company did
not deſerve our familiarity, is a downright challenge of
homage. - Callier on Pride.
3. In open appearance; with viſible and apparent ſhow.
You and your followers do ſtand formally divided againſt
the authoriſed guides of the church, and the reſt of the
people. - Hooker.
4. Eſſentially; charaćteriſtically.
This power and dominion is not adequately and fºrmally
the image of God, but only a part of it. South's Sermons.
The Heathens and the Chriſtians may agree in material
aćts of charity; but that which fºrmally makes this a Chriſtian
grace, is the ſpring from which it flows. Smalridge's Sermons.
ForMATIon. n.ſ. [formation, French, from firmo, Latin.]
1. The act of forming or generating.
The matter diſcharged forth of vulcano's, and other ſpiracles,
contributes to the fºrmation of meteors. # oodward's Nat. Hiſł.
The ſolids are originally formed of a fluid, from a ſmall
point, as appears by the gradual formation of a foetus. Arbuth.
Complicated ideas, growing up under obſervation, give not
the ſame confuſion, as if they were all offered to the mind at
once, without your obſerving the original and formation of
them. - J/atts's 'mprovement ºf the Mind.
2. The manner in which a thing is formed.
The chorion, a thick membrane obſcuring the fºrmation,
the dain doth tear aſunder. Brown's Wugar Errours.
9 Q-
Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
Fo'RM ATiye,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F. O R
!
Fo'RMAtive. adj. [from fºrmo, Latin.] Having the power
of giving form; plaſtick. -
Ås we have eſtabliſhed our aſſertion of the ſeminal pro-
dućtion of all kinds of animals; ſo likewiſe we affirm, that
the meaneſt plant cannot be raiſed without ſeed, by any fºr-
motive power reſiding in the foil. Bentley's Sermons.
Fo's MER. n.ſ.. [from frn.] He that forms; maker; con-
triver; planner. - -
The wonderful art and providence of the contriver and
frner of our bodies, appears in the multitude of intentions
he muſt have in the formation of ſeveral parts for ſeveral
uſes. - Ray on the Creation.
Fo’R MER. adj. [from ponma, Saxon, firſt; whence fºrmer, and
fºrmºſt now commonly written fºremºſt, as if derived from
tfire. Formoſi is generally applied to place, rank, or degree,
and fºrmer only to time; for when we ſay, the laſt rank of
the proceſſion is like the fºrmer, we reſpect time rather than
place, and mean that which we ſaw lºſore, rather than that
which had precedence in place J
1. Before another in time.
Thy air,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the firſt :
— A third is like the fºrmer. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
2. Mentioned before another.
A bad author deſerves better uſage than a bad critick: a
man may be the former merely through the misfortune of an
ill judgment; but he cannot be the latter without both that
and an ill temper. Pope.
3. Paſt: as, thi, was the cºſom in former times.
Fo'R MERLY. adv. [from former.] In times paſt.
The places mentioned were all of them formerly the cool
retirements of the Romans, where they uſed to hide them-
ſelves among the woods and mountains, during the exceſſive
heats of their Summer. Addiſon on Italy.
As an animal degenerates by diſeaſes, the animal ſalts, for-
merly benign, approach towards an alkaline nature. Arbuthnot.
FORMIDABLE. adj. [formidali is, Latin; formidable, Fr.]
Terrible; dreadful; tremendous; terrifick; to be feared.
I ſwell my preface into a volume, and make it fºrmidable,
when you ſee ſo many pages behind. Dryden's 4 n. Dedicat.
They ſeem'd to fear the formidable ſight,
And roll'd their billows on, to ſpeed his flight. Dryden.
Fo'RM DABLE N Ess. m. ſ [from fºrmidable.]
1. The quality of exciting terror or dread.
2. The thing cauſing dread.
They rather chuſe to be ſhewed the fºrmidabºneſ of their
danger, than, by a blind embracing it, to periſh in it. ...
Decay of Piety.
Fo'RMIDA BI.Y. adv. [from formidable ] In a terrible Inanner.
Behold ! e'en to remoter ſhores,
A conquering navy proudly ſpread ;
The Britiſh cannon formidably roars. Dryden.
Fo'RML Ess. adj. [from form.] Shapeleſs; without regularity
of form.
All form is formlſ, order orderleſs,
Save what is oppoſite to England's love. Shakeſp. K. john.
Fo'R.MUL.A.R.Y. m. ſ. [formulaire, French, from fºr nule.] A
book containing ſtated and preſcribed models or ſet forms.
FORMULE, n.ſ. [formule, French; formula, Latin.] A ſet
or preſcribed model.
To FO'RNICATE. v. a. [from formix, Latin.] To commit
lewdneſs.
It is a new way to fºrnicate at a diſtance. Brown's Wul. Err.
FoRN1cA"tion. n.ſ.. [fornication, French ; fornicatio, Latin.]
1. Concubinage or commerce with an unmarried woman.
Bleſs me! what a fry of fornication is at the door. Shakespeare
The law ought to be ſtrićt againſt fornications and adulte-
ries; for, if there were univerſal liberty, the increaſe of man-
kind would be but like that of foxes at beſt. Graunt.
2. In Scripture, ſometimes idolatry.
Thou didſt truſt in thine own beauty, and playedſt the
harlot, becauſe of thy renown, and pouredſt out thy fºrmica-
tiºns, on every one that paſſed by. Ezek. xvi. 15.
For Nicator. n ſ. [fornicateur, French, from formix, Latin.]
One that has commerce with unmarried women.
A fºrniator or adulterer ſteals the ſoul as well as diſhonours
the body of his neighbour. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
For Nic A^T REss. m. ſ. [from frn'cator.] A woman who with-
out marriage cohabits with a man.
See you the fºnicatrºſ, be remov’d;
Let her have needful but not ſlaviſh means. Sha'ſ earc.
To FORSA'KE. v. a. preter. ſ. ſºft ; part, paſſ forſok, or fºr-
faken. [verſaekºn, Dutch.]
1. To leave in reſentment, neglect, or diſlike.
’1 was now the time when firſt Saul God ſº ſºo!,
God Saul; the room in's heart wild paſſions took. Cowley.
Oreſtes comes in time
To ſave your honour: Pyrrhus cools apace;
Prevent his falſhood, and fºſſake him firſt:
I know you hate him. A. Phillips's Di/?reſ Mºther.
Daughter of Jove' whoſe arms in thunder wield
Th’ avenging bolt, and ſhake the dreadful ſhield,
Fºrſo; by thee, in vain I ſought thy aid. Pºp’, Odſey.
2. To leave; to go away from ; to depart from.
Unwilling I forſook your friendly ſtate, -
Commanded by the gods, and forc'd by ſate. Dryden's Żn.
3. To deſert; to fail.
Truth, modeſty, and ſhame the world fºrſºok;
Fraud, avarice, and force their places took. Dyd. Ovid.
When ev'n the flying ſails were ſeen no more,
Forſaken of all fight ſhe left the ſhore. Dryden.
Their purple majeſty,
And all thoſe outward ſhows which we call greatneſs,
Languiſh and droop, ſeem empty and fºrſa&amp;n,
And draw the wond'ring gazers eyes no more. Rowe.
For sA'ke R. m. ſ. [from fºrſake.) Deſerter; one that forſakes.
Thou did'ſt deliver us into the hands of lawleſs enemies,
moſt hateful fºrſaker, of God. Apºcrypha.
FoR soot H. adv (Forrobe, Saxon.]
1. In truth; certainly ; very well. It is uſed almoſt always in
an ironical or contemptuous ſenſe.
Wherefore doth Lyſander
Deny your love, ſo rich within his ſoul,
And tender me, fºrſooth, affection? Shakeſpeare.
A fit man, forſºoth, to govern a realm, who had ſo goodly
government in his own eſtate. Hayward.
Unlearned perſons uſe ſuch letters as juſtly expreſs the
power or ſound of their ſpeech; yet fºrſooth, we ſay, write
not true Engliſh, or true French. Häder's Elem, ºf Speech.
In the Eaſt-Indies a widow, who has any regard to her
character, throws herſelf into the flames of her huſband's
funeral pile, to ſhew, forſooth, that ſhe is faithful to the me-
mory of her deceaſed lord. Addiſon's Freeholder.
She would cry out murder, and diſturb the whole neigh-
bourhood; and when John came running down the ſtairs to
enquire what the matter was, nothing, fºrſºoth, only her maid
had ſtuck a pin wrong in her gown. Arbuthn. Hiſſ. of j. Bull.
Some queſtion the genuineneſs of his books, becauſe, for-
fººth, they cannot diſcover in them that fumen oralini, that
Cicero ſpeaks of. Baker', Rºſie'ſſions on Learning.
2. It is ſuppoſed to have been once a word of honour in addrés
tº women. It is probablethat an inferior, being called, ſhewed
his attention by anſwering in the word yes, forſooth, which
in time loſt its true meaning; and inſtead of a mere exclama-
tory interjection, was ſuppoſed a compellation. It appears in
Shakeſpeare to have been uſed likewiſe to men.
Our old Engliſh word forſooth has been changed for the
French madam. Guardian.
To FORSWE/AR. v. a. pret ſºftware; part, ſºftcorn. [ron-
rpaenian, Saxon.]
I. To renounce upon oath.
* I firmly vow -
Never to wooe her more; but do ſºftwear her,
As one unworthy all the former favours, -
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.
2. To deny upon oath.
And that ſelf chain about his neck,
Which he ſºftware moſt monſtrouſly to have. Shai'ſ car.
Obſerve the wretch who hath his faith forſook,
How clear his voice, and how aſlur'd his look
Like innocence, and as ſerenely bold -
As truth, how loudly he fºſwears thy gold Dryd. juven.
3. With the reciprocal pronoun; as, to foſwear himſelf; to be
perjured; to ſwear ſalſely.
To leave my Julia, ſhall I befºrſwºrn ?
To love fair Silvia, ſhall I beforſworn ?
To wrong my friend, ſhall 1 be much fºrſworn ?
And ey’n that power which gave me firſt my oath,
Provokes me to this threefold perjury. Shakespeare.
One ſays, he never ſhould endure the fight
Of that fºrſworn, that wrongs both land and laws. Daniel.
I too have ſworn, ev’n at the altar ſworn,
Eternal love and endleſs faith to Theſeus;
And yet am falſe, forſworn ; the hallow'd ſhrine,
That heard me ſwear, is witneſs to my falſhood. Smith.
To For swe’AR. v. n. To ſwear falſely ; to commit perjury.
Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hand,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.
– And that ſame vengeance doth hurl on thee,
For falſe foſwearing, and for murder too. Shakeſp Rich. III.
F9RSWEARER, a ſ (from fºrſwear.] One who is perjured.
FORT. n / [ſort, French..] A fortified houſe; a caſtle.
They erected a fort, which they called the ſort de l'or; and
Shakespeare care.
from thence they bolted like beaſts of the ſorºſt. Bacon.
Now to their frt they are about to ſend .
For the loud engines which their iſle defend. J/aller.
He that views a fºrt to take it, -
Plants his artillery gainſt the weakeſ part. Denham's Sºpy.
My fury does, like jealous ſºrts, purſue
With death, ev'n ſtrangers who but come to view. Dryden.
Foºt ED, a j. [from ſºrt.J Furniſhed or garded by forts.
Not uſed now.
Your
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R.
Your deſert ſpeaks loud, and I ſhould wrong
To lock it in the wards of covert boſom,
When it deſerves with chara&amp;ters of braſs
A fºrted reſidence, ‘gainſt the tooth of time
And raſure of oblivion. Shakespeare Aſcoſure fºr Maſure.
FORTH. adv. [ropº, Saxon; whence further and furthºſt.]
1. Forward; onward in time.
From that day for th I lov'd that face divine;
From that day fºrth I caſt in careful mind
To ſeek her out. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 9.
2. Forward in place or order.
Look at the ſecond admonition, and ſo forth, where they
ſpeak in moſt unchriſtian manner. - //hitgifte.
Mad Pandarus ſteps for th; with vengeance vow'd
For Bitias’ death. . Dryden's 42n.
3. Abroad ; out of doors.
Uncle, I muſt come frth. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
I have no mind of feaſting fºrth to-night. Shakeſpeare.
Attend you here the door of our ſtern daughter?
Will ſhe not forth? Shakespeare.
When Winter paſt, and Summer ſcarce begun,
Invites them forth to labour in the ſun. Dryden's Wirg. Æn.
4. Out away , beyond the boundary of any place.
They will privily relieve their friends that are forth; they
will ſend the enemy ſecret advertiſements; and they will not
alſo ſtick to draw the enemy privily upon them. Spenſer.
Even that ſunſhine brew’d a ſhow'r for him,
That waſh'd his father's fortunes frth of France. Shakeſp.
5. Out into publick ſtate; rublick view.
You may ſet foºth the ſame with farmhouſes. Peacham.
But when your troubled country call'd you fºrt',
Your flaming courage, and your matchleſs worth,
To fierce contention gave a proſp'rous end. //a'ler.
6. Throughly ; from beginning to end.
You, couſin,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter fºrth,
Do with your injuries as ſeems you beſt. Shakeſp.
7. To a certain degree.
Hence we learn, how .." we may expe&amp;t juſtification
and ſalvation from the ſufferings of Chriſt; no further than
we are wrought on by his renewing grace. Hammond.
8. On to the end.
In his paſſace thither one put into his hand a note of the
whole conſpiracy, deſiring him to read it forthwith, and to
remember the giver of it as long as he lived. South's Sermons.
Fo'Rt ETH. ad. [from frty J The fourth tenth; next after
the thirty-ninth.
What doth it avail
To be the fortieth man in an entail? Donne.
Burnet ſays, Scotland is not above a fortieth part in value
to the reſt of Britain; and, with reſpect to the profit that Eng-
land gains from hence, not the forty thouſandth part. Swift.
Fo'Rt if IABLE. adj. [from fortiff.] What may be fortified.
For TIFICATICN. n.ſ. [fortification, French, from fortſ).]
1. The ſcience of military architecture.
Fortification is an art ſhewing how to fortify a place with
ramparts, parapets, moats, and other bulwarks; to the end
that a ſmall number of men within may be able to defend
themſelves, for a confiderable time, againſt the aſſaults of a
numerous army without; ſo that the enemy, in attacking
them, muſt of neceſſity ſuffer great loſs. It is either regular
or irregular; and, with reſpect to time, may be diſtinguiſhed
into durable and temporary. - Harris.
The Phoeacians, tho' an unwarlike nation, yet underſtood
the art of fortification. Notes on the Odyſſey.
2. A place built for ſtrength.
Excellent devices were uſed to make even their ſports pro-
fitable; images, battles, and fºrtifications being then delivered
to their memory, which, after ſtronger judgments, might
diſpenſe ſome advantage. Sidney, b. ii.
Fo'RTIFIER. m. ſ. [from fºrtiff J
1. One who erects works for defence.
The fºrtifier of Pendennis made his advantage of the com-
modity afforded by the ground. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
2. One who ſupports or ſecures; one who upholds.
He was led forth by many armed men, who often had been
the fortifiers of wickedneſs, to the place of execution. Sidney.
To FORTIFY. v. a. [fºrtiſer, French.]
1. To ſtrengthen againſt attacks by walls or works.
Great Dunfinane he ſtrongly fortifies. Shakespeare Macbeth.
He fortified the city againſt beſieging. Bccluſ. l. 4.
2. To confirm; to encourage.
It greatly fºrtified her deſires, to ſee that her mother had the
like deſires. Sidney, b. ii.
I repeated the Ave Maria: the inquiſitor bad me ſay frth; 3. To fix; to eſtabliſh in reſolution.
I ſaid I was taught no more.
Fort H. prop. Out of.
And here's a prophet, that I brought with me
From fath the ſtreets of Pomfret. Shakeſpeare:
Some forth their cabbins peep,
And trembling aſk what news, and do hear ſo
As jealous huſbands, what they would not know. Donne.
For THco’ MI's G. adj. [forth and coming.] Ready to appear;
not abſconding; not loſt.
Carry this mad knave to jail : I charge you ſee that he be
forthcoming. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
We'll ſee your trinkets here fºrthcoming all. Shakespeare H. VI.
For TH1'ss U ING. adi. [frth and iſſue..] Coming out; coming
forward from a covert.
Fºrthiſſuing thus, ſhe gave him firſt to wield
A weighty axe, with trueſt temper ſteel'd,
And double edg’d. Pºpe's Odiſſy, h. v.
For THR!'GHT. adv. [fºrth and right ] Strait forward; with-
out flexions. -
He ever going ſo juſt with the horſe, either fºrthright or
turning, that it ſeemed as he borrowed the horſe's body, ſo he
lent the horſe his mind. Sidney, b. ii.
The river not running forthright, but almoſt continually
winding, as if the lower ſtreams would return to their ſpring,
or that the river had a delight to play with itſelf. Sidney, b. ii.
Arrived there, they paſſed in forthright;
For ſtill to all the gate ſtood cpen wide. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Here's a maze trod, indeed,
Through fºrthrights and meanders. , Shakeſpeare's Yampºff.
Thither frthricht he rode to rouſe the prey,
That ſhaded y the fern in harbour lay,
And thence diſlodg’d. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Fort Hwi't H. adv [fºrth and with..] Immediately; without
delay; at once; ſtrait.
Forthwith he runs, with feigned faithful haſte,
Unto his gueſt; who, after troublous fights
And dreams, 'gan now to take more ſound repaſt. Fa. Qu.
Few things are ſo reſtrained to any one end or purpoſe, that
the ſame being extinct, they ſhould forthwith utterly become
fruſtrate. Hoo er, b. v. ſ. 42.
Neither did the martial men dally or proſecute the ſervice
faintly, but did fº thwith quench that fire. Davies on Ireland.
Fort with be an theſe fury-moving ſounds,
The notes of wrath, the muſick brought from hell,
The rattling drums. Daniel's Civil War.
The winged heralds, by command
Cºf ſov’reign pow'r, throughout the hoſt proclaim
A ſolemn council frth with to be held
At Pandæmonium. Milton's Paradiſ: Lyſ, b.i.
Ajemoir in Strype.
But in-born worth that fortune can controul,
New-ſtrung and ſtiffer bent her ſofter ſoul:
The heroine aſſum'd the woman's place,
Confirm'd her mind, and fortify’d her face. Dryden.
A young man, before he leaves the ſhelter of his father's
houſe, ſhould be fortified with reſolution to ſecure his vir-
tueS. - Locke.
For Tila'Ge. m. ſ. [from fort J A little fort; a blockhouſe.
In all ſtraights and narrow paſſages there ſhould be ſome
little fortilage, or wooden caſtle ſet, which ſhould keep and
command the ſtraight. . Spenſer on Ireland.
FO'RT IN. m / [French. J A little fort raiſed to defend a
camp, particularly in a ſiege. Hanmer.
Thou haſt talk'd
Of paliſadoes, fortins, parapets. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
Fo'RTITUDE. .m. ſ. [fortitudo, Latin.]
1. Courage; bravery; magnanimity; greatneſs of mind; power
of ačting or ſuffering well.
The king-becoming graces,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no reliſh of them. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The better fortitude
Of patience, and heroick martyrdom
Unſung. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
Fortitude is the guard and ſupport of the other virtues; and
without courage, a man will ſcarce keep ſteady to his duty,
and fill up the character of a truly worthy man. Locke.
2. Strength; force. Not in uſe.
He wrongs his fame,
Deſpairing of his own arm's fortitude,
To join with witches and the help of hell! Shakeſp H. VI.
Fortiºr. n.ſ. [from fort.] A little fort.
Fo'RT NIGHT. n.J. [contracted from fourteen nights, reopneryne
night, Saxon. It was the cuſtom of the ancient northern
nations to count time by nights: thus we ſay, this day ſeven-
night. So Tacitus, Non dierum numerum ut nos, ſed noćiium
computant.] The ſpace of two weeks.
She would give her a leſſon for walking ſo late, that ſhould
make her keep within doors for one fortnight. Sidney, b. ii.
Hanging in a deep well, ſomewhat above the water, for
ſome fortnights ſpace, is an excellent means of making drink
freſh and quick. Baſn's Natural Hiſtory.
About a fortnight before I had finiſt, his majeſty's de-
claration for liberty of conſcience came abroad Dryden.
He often had it in his head, but never, with much appre-
henſion, 'till about a fortnight before. * Swift.
Fo"RTR Ess. n.ſ.. [forte effe, French J A ſtrong hold; a forti-
fied place; a caſtle of defence.
Breaking
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O R
F O R
Breaking forth like a ſudden tempeſt, he over-ran all, break-
ing down all the holds and fortreſſes. . Spenser on Ireland.
The trump of death ſounds in their hearing ſhrill; .
Their weapon, faith; their £3. Was the grave. Fairfax.
God is our fortreſs, in whoſe conqu'ring name
Let us º É their flinty bulwarks. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
There is no ſuch way to give defence to abſurd doćtrines,
as to guard them round about with legions of obſcure and
undefined words ; which yet makes theſe retreats more like
the dens of robbers, or holes of foxes, than the fortreſſes of
fair warriors. - 1ocke.
FORTUITOUS. adj. [fºrtuit, French; fortuitus, Lat.] Ac-
cidental; caſual; happening by chance.
A wonder then it muſt be, that there ſhould be any man
found ſo ſtupid as to perſuade himſelf that this moſt beautiful
world could be produced by the fortuitous concourſe of atoms.
Ray on the Creation.
If caſual concourſe did the world compoſe,
And things and acts fortuitous aroſe, -
Then anything might come from anything;
For how from chance can conſtant order ſpring. Blackmºre.
Fortuitously. adv. [from fortuitous.] Accidentally; caſual-
ly; by chance. - - - -
It is partly evaporated into air, and partly diluted into wa-
ter, and frtuitouſly ſhared between all the elements. Rogers.
ForTu'itousness. n.ſ.. [from fortuitous.] Accident; chance;
hit: - -
Fortunate. adj. . [fortunatuſ, Latin. J ... Lucky; happy;
ſucceſsful; not ſubject to miſcarriage. Uſed of perſons or
aćtions. - -
I am moſt fºrtunate thus accidentally to encounter you:
you have ended my buſineſs, and I will merrily accompany
you home. Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
He figh'd; and could not but their fate deplore,
So wretched now, ſo fºrtunate before. Dryd. Knight's Tale.
No, there is a neceſſity in fate
why ſtill the brave bold man isº :
He keeps his object ever full in fight,
And that aſſurance holds him firm and right:
True, ’tis a narrow path that leads to bliſs, }
But right before there is no precipice; -
Fear makes men look aſide, and ſo their footing miſs. Dry.
Fo'RTUNATELY. adv. [from fortunate.] Happily; ſucceſſ-
fully.
y Bright Eliza rul’d Britannia's ſtate,
And boldly wiſe, and fortunately great. -
Fo'RTUNATENEss. n.ſ. Ifrom fortunate.] Happineſs; good
luck; ſucceſs. -
Ome, ſaid ſhe, whoſe greateſt fortunateneſ is more unfor-
tunate than my ſiſter's greateſt unfortunateneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
FORTUNE. m. ſ. [fºrtuna, Latin; fºrtune, French.] -
1. The power ſuppoſed to diſtribute the lots of life according to
her own humour.
Fortune, that arrant whore, . '
Ne'er turns the key to th’ poor. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Though fortune's malice overthrow my ſtate,
My mind exceeds the compaſs of her wheel. Shakespeare H. VI.
2. The good or ill that befals man.
Rejoice, ſaid he, to-day;.
In you the fºrtune of Great Britain lies:
Among ſo brave a people you are they
Whom heav'n has choſe to fight for ſuch a prize. Dryden.
The adequate meaning of chance, as diſtinguiſhed from
fºrtane, in that the latter is underſtood to beſal only rational
agents, but chance to be among inanimate bodies. Bentºry.
. I he chance of life; means of living. . . .
His fathcraying, he was driven to London to ſeek his
fºrtune. Swift.
4. Event; ſucceſs good or bad.
This terreſtrial globe has been ſurrounded by the fortune
and boldneſs of many navigators. iſ emple.
No, he ſhall eat, and die with me, or live ; --
Our equal crimes ſhall equal fortune give. Dryd, Innocence.
. Eſtate; poſſeſſions.
5 ; PO If thou do'ſt
As this inſtructs thee, thou do'ſt make thy way
To noble fortunes. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
That eyeleſs head of thine was firſt fram'd fleſh.
To raiſe my fortunes. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
But tell me, Tityrus, what heav'nly power
Preſerv'd your fortunes in that fatal hour? Dryd Wirg. Paſſ.
The fate which governs poets, thought it fit
He ſhould not raiſe his fortunes by his wit. Dryden.
He was younger ſon to a gentleman of a good birth, but
ſmall fºrtune. Swift.
6. The portion of a man or woman : generally of a woman.
I am thought ſome heireſs rich in lands,
Fied to eſcape a cruel guardian's hands;
Which may produce a ſtory worth the telling,
Of the next parks that go a fºrtune ſtealing. Prol, to Orſham.
The fºrtune hunters have already caſt their eyes upon her,
ańd take care to plant themſelves in her view. Speºſator.
Prior.
When miſs delights in her ſpinnet,
A fiddler may a fortune get.
7. Futurity; future events.
You who mens fortunes in their faces read,
To find out mine, look not, alas, on me:
But mark her face, and all the features heed;
For only there is writ my deſtiny. Cowley's Miſ?reſ:
To Fo'RTUNE. v. n. [from the noun.J. To befall; to fall
out; to happen ; to come caſually to paſs.
It fortuned, as fair it then befell,
Behind his back, unweeting, where he ſtood,
Of ancient time there was a ſpringing well,
From which faſt trickled forth a filver flood. Fairy Queen.
It fortuned the ſame night that a Chriſtian, ſerving a Turk
in the camp, ſecretly gave the watchmen warning that the
Turks prepared the next day to give a general aſſault. Knolles.
I'll tell you as we paſs along,
That you will wonder what hath fºrtuned.
Here fortun'd Curl to ſlide.
Fo’RTUNED. adj. Supplied by fortune.
Not th' imperious ſhew
Of the full fºrtun’d Caeſar ever ſhall
Be brook'd with me. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Fo'RTUNE Book. n.ſ.. [fortune and book.] A book conſulted
to know fortune or future events. -
Thou know'ſt a face, in whoſe each look
Beauty lays ope love's fortunebook;
On whoſe fair revolutions wait
The obſequious motions of love's fate. Craſhaw.
For TUNE HU’NTER. m. ſ. [fortune and hunt.] A man whoſe
employment is to enquire after women with great portions to
enrich himſelf by marrying them.
We muſt, however, diſtinguiſh between fortunehunters and
fortuneſtealers. Speciatar, Nº. 312.
To Fo'RTUNE TELL. v. n. [fortune and tell.]
1. To pretend to the power of revealing futurity.
We are ſimple men; we do not know what's brought to
paſs under the profeſſion of fortunetelling. Shakeſpeare.
I'll conjure you, I'll fºrtunetell you. Shakeſpeare.
The gypſies were to divide the money got by ſtealing lin-
men, or by fortunetelling. J/alton's Angler.
2. To reveal futurity.
Here, while his canting drone-pipe ſcan'd
The myſtick figures of her hand,
He tipples palmeſtry, and dines -
On all her fºrtunetelling lines. Cleaveland.
Fo'RTUNE TELLER. n.ſ. [fortune and teller.] One who cheats
common people by pretending to the knowledge of futurity.
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-fac’d villain,
A thread-bare juggler, and a fortuneteller. Shakeſpeare.
A Welchman being at a ſeſſions-houſe, and ſeeing the pri-
ſoners hold up hands at the bar, related to ſome of his ac-
quaintance that the judges were good fortunetellers; for if they
did but look upon their hand, they could certainly tell whether
they ſhould live or die. - Bacon's Apophthegms.
• Haft thou given credit to vain predićtions of men, to dreams
or fortunetellers, or gone about to know any ſecret things by
lot? Duppa's Rules for Devºtion.
There needs no more than impudence on one ſide, and a
ſuperſtitious credulity on the other, to the ſetting up of a fºr-
tuneteller. L'Eſtrange, Fable 94.
Long ago a fortunetel'er -
Exačtly ſaid what now befell her.
FO'RTY. adj. [peopertig, Saxon.] Four times ten.
On fair ground I could beat ſºry of them. Shakespeare Coriol.
He that upon levity quits his ſtation, in hopes to be better,
'tis forty to one loſes. L'Eſtrange.
FORUM. n.ſ. [Latin.] Any publick place.
The fºrum was a publick place in Rome, where lawyers
and orators made their ſpeeches before the proper judge in
matters of property, or in criminal caſes, to accuſe or excuſe,
to complain or defend. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Cloſe to the bay great Neptune's fane adjoins,
And near a fºrum flank'd with marble ſhines,
Where the bold youth, the num’rous fleets to ſtore,
Shape the broad ſail, or ſmooth the taper oar. Poºr.
To Forwa'NDER. v. a. [for and wander.] To wander wildly
and wearily.
The better part now of the ling’ring day
They travelled had, when as they far eſpy’d
A weary wight forwand'ring by the way. Fairy Queen, b. i.
FO'RWARD. adv. Ironpearb, Saxon.] Towards; to a part
or place before; onward; progreſſively. -
When fervent ſorrow ſlaked was,
She up aroſe, reſolving him to find
Alive or dead, and forward forth doth paſs. Fairy Queen.
From ſmaller things the mind of the hearers may go for-
ward to the knowledge of greater, and climb up from the
loweſt to the higheſt things. - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 20.
He that is uſed to go fºrward, and findeth a ſtop, falleth of
his own favour, and is not the thing he was. Bacon's Eſſays.
Fo'Rw A R D.
Swift.
Shakeſpeare.
Pope's Dunciad.
Swift.
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O S
F O S
*
º
"... [...”
*.º
Fo'Rw ARD. adj. [from the adverb.]
1. Warm.; earneſt.
They would that we ſhould remember the poor, which I
alſo was forward to do. Gal. ii. 10.
2. Ardent; eager; hot; violent.
You'll ſtill be too forward. Shakeſp. Two Gent. of Verona,
Unſkill'd to dart the pointed ſpear,
Or lead the fºrward youth to noble war. Prior.
3. Ready ; confident ; preſumptuous.
Old Butes' form he took, Anchiſes' ſquire,
Now left to rule Aſcanius by his fire;
And thus ſalutes the boy, too forward for his years. Dryd.
4. Not reſerved; not over modeſt.
'Tis a per’lous boy, *
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable;
He's all the mother's from the top to toe. Shakeſp Rich. III.
5. Premature; early ripe. -
Short Summer lightly has a forward Spring, Shakespeare. R. III.
6. Quick; ready; haſty. -
The mind makes not that benefit it ſhould of the informa-
tion it receives from civil or natural hiſtorians, in being too
3rward or two ſlow in making obſervations on the particular
fačts recorded in them. Locke.
Had they, who would perſuade us that there are inhate
principles, confidered ſeparately the parts out of which theſe
propoſitions are made, they would not perhaps have been ſo
forward to believe they were innate. Locke.
7. Antecedent; anterior: oppoſed to poſterior.
Let us take the inſtant by the forward top;
For we are old, and on our quick'ſt decrees
Th’ inaudible and noiſeleſs foot of time
Steals, ere we can effect them.
8. Not behindhand; not inferiour.
My good Camillo, -
She is as forward of her breeding, as
She is i' th' rear o' our birth. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
To Fo'Rw ARD. v. a. [from the adverb.] .
1. To haſten; to quicken; to accelerate in growth or improve-
Inent. - -
As we houſe hot country plants, as lemons, to ſave them ;
ſo we may houſe our own country plants to forward them,
and make them come in the cold ſeaſons. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Whenever I ſhine, .
I forward the graſs and I ripen the vine. Swift.
Shakeſpeare.
2. To patroniſe; to advance.
Fo'Rw ARDER. n.ſ.. [from forward.] He who promotes any
thing. - -
Fºxbºx. adv. [from the adječtive..] Eagerly; haſtily;
quickly.
The ſudden and ſurpriſing turns we ourſelves have felt,
ſhould not ſuffer us too forwardly to admit preſumption. Atter.
Fo'Rw ARDNess. n.ſ.. [from fºrward.] -
1. Eagerneſs; ardour; readineſs to act.
Abſolutely we cannot diſcommend, we cannot abſolutely
approve either willingneſs to live, or forwardneſs to die. Hook.
Is it ſo ſtrange a matter to find a good thing furthered by ill
men of a finiſter intent and purpoſe, whoſe forwardneſs is not
therefore a bridle to ſuch as favour the ſame cauſe with a bet-
ter and ſincere meaning.
If the great ones were in forwardneſs, the people were in
fury, entertaining this airy phantaſm with incredible affeótion.
Bacon's Henry VII.
2. Quickneſs; readineſs. -
He had ſuch a dextrous proclivity, as his teachers were
fain to reſtrain his forwardneſs; to the end that his brothers,
who were under the ſame training, might hold pace with
him. Wotton.
3. Earlineſs; early ripeneſs.
4. Confidence; aſſurance; want of modeſty.
In France it is uſual to bring their children into company,
and to cheriſh in them, from their infancy, a kind of for-
wardneſs and aſſurance. Addiſon on Italy.
Fo'Rw ARDS. adv. Straight before; progreſſively.
The Rhodian ſhip paſſed through the whole Roman fleet,
backwards and forwards ſeveral times, carrying intelligence
to Drepanum. Arbuthnot on Coins.
FOSSE. n.ſ.. [foſſa, Latin; fs, Welch J A ditch; a moat;
an intrenchment thrown up by the ſpade.
Fo'ss ET. See FAucet.
Fo'ss Ew AY. m. ſ. [foſſe and way.] One of the great Roman
inroads through England, ſo called from the ditches on each
fide.
FO'SSIL. adj. [foſſilis, Latin; fºſſile, French..] That which is
dug out of the earth.
The fºſſil ſhells are many of them of the ſame kinds with
thoſe that now appear upon the neighbouring ſhores; and the
reſt ſuch as may be preſumed to be at the bottom of the adja-
cent ſeas: //oodward’s Natural Hiſtºry.
Foſſil or rock ſalt, and ſal gemm, differ not in nature from
each other; nor from the common ſalt of ſalt ſprings, or that
of the ſea, when pure, J%odward's Natural Hiſtory.
Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 9.
It is of a middle nature, between foſſil and animal, being
produced from animal excrements, intermixed with vegetable
ſalts. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Fo'ssil. n.ſ.
In this globe are many other bodies, which, becauſe we diſ-
éover them by digging into the bowels of the earth, are called
by one common name foſſils; under which are comprehended
metals and minerals. Locke.
Many kinds of foſſils are very oddly and elegantly ſhaped.
Bentley's Sermons:
By the word foſſil, uſed as a denomination of one of three
general diviſions of natural produćtions, we underſtand bodies
formed uſually within the earth, ſometimes on its ſurface, and
ſometimes in waters; of a plain and ſimple ſtrućture, in which
there is no viſible difference of parts, no diſtinétion of veſſels
and their contents, but every portion of which is ſimilar to
and perfeót as the whole. Hill's Mat. Med.
To FO'STER. v. a. [Forenian, Saxon.]
1. To nurſe; to feed ; to ſupport; to train up:
Thy threat'ning colours now wind up,
And tame the ſavage ſpirit of wild war;
That, like a lion foſter'd up at hand,
It may lie gently at the foot of peace. Shakeſp. King john.
Some ſay that ravens foſter forlorn children. Shakeſpeare.
Our kingdom's earth ſhould not be ſoil'd
With that dear blood, which it hathfſtered. Shakespeare R. II.
That baſe wretch,
Bred on alms, and fºſter'd with cold diſhes,
With ſcraps o' th' court. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Foſtering has always been a ſtronger alliance than blood.
Davies on Ireland.
No more let Ireland brag her harmleſs nation
Foſters no venom, fince that Scots plantation. Cleaveland.
The ſon of Mulciber,
Found in the fire, and fºſter'd in the plains,
A ſhepherd and a king at once he reigns. Dryd. Æn. b.vii.
2. To pamper; to encourage.
A prince of great courage and beauty, but fºſtered up in
blood by his naughty father. Sidney, y ii.
3. To cheriſh ; to forward.
... , Ye foſtering breezes, blow ;
Ye ſoftening dews, ye tender ſhowers deſcend. Thomſon.
Fo'ster AGE. n.ſ.. [from foſter.] The charge of nurſing; al-
terage. -
Some one adjoining to this lake had the charge and fºſterage
of this child, who being, perchance, but ſome baſe and ob-
ſcure creature, was caſt from the top of her temple into the
lake adjoining; and, as the poets have feigned, changed by
Venus into a fiſh, all but her face. Raleigh's Hiſtory:
Fost ER BROTHER... n.ſ. [porten bnočen, Saxon.] One bred
at the ſame pap; one fed by the ſame nurſe.
FosterchI'ld. n.ſ. [Forcencilb, Saxon.] A child nurſed
by a woman not the mother, or bred by a man not the father.
The foſterchildren do love and are beloved of their foſter-
fathers. Davies on Ireland.
- The goddeſs thus beguil'd,
With pleaſant ſtories, her falſe foſterchild. Addison Ov. Met.
FosterDA'M. m. ſ. [foſter and dam..] A nurſe; one that per-
forms the office of a mother by giving food to a young child.
There, by the wolf, were laid the martial twins:
Intrepid on her ſwelling dugs they hung;
The foſterdam loll'd out her fawning tongue. Dryden's Án.
Foster ea'RTH. n.ſ.. [fºſter and earth.] Earth by which the
plant is nouriſhed, though it did not grow at firſt in it.
- In vain, the nurſling grove
Seems fair a while, cheriſh’d with foſterearth;
But when the alien compoſt is exhauſt,
Its native poverty again prevails! Phillips.
Fo's TERER. m. ſ. [from foſter.] A nurſe; one who gives food
in the place of a parent.
In Ireland they put their children to foſterers; the rich men
ſelling, the meaner ſort buying the alterage of their children:
in the opinion of the Iriſh foſtering has always been a ſtronger
alliance than blood ; and the foſterchildren do love, and are
beloved of their foſterfathers and their ſept, more than of their
own natural parents and kindred. Davies on Ireland.
Fost ERFA'THER... n.ſ. [Forcenpaben, Saxon. J One who
gives food in the place of the father.
In Ireland foſterchildren do love and are beloved of their
fºſterfathers, and their ſept, more than of their own natural
parents and kindred. f)avies on Ireland.
The duke of Bretagne having been an hoſt and a kind of
parent or ſo/fºrfather to the king, in his tenderneſs of age and
weakneſs of fortune, did look for aid this time from king
Henry. - Bacon’s Henry VII.
Tyrrheus, the fºſterfather of the beaſt,
Then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fift. Dryden’s AEm.
Fost ERMo'THER... n.ſ.. [foſfer and mother.] A nurſe.
Fost ERN U'Rs E. m. ſ. [fºſter and nurſe.] This is an improper
compound, becauſe fºſter and nurſe mean the ſame.] A
nurſe.
.
i
9 R. - Our<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O U
F O U
Our fºſternurſe of nature is repoſe,
The which he lacks. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Fo'sterson. n.ſ.. [foſier and ſon.] One fed and educated,
though not the ſon by nature. -
Mature in years, to ready honours move;
O of celeſtial ſeed! Offferſon of Jovel Dryd. Virg. Paſº.
FOUGADE. n.ſ. [French..] In the art of war, a ſort of lit-
tle mine in the manner of a well, ſcarce more than ten feet
wide and twelve deep, dug under ſome work or fortification,
and charged with barrels or ſacks of gunpowder to blow it
up, and covered over with earth. Dićf.
Fought. The preterite and participle of fight. -
Foughten. [The paſſive participle of fight. Rarely uſed.]
Conteſted; diſputed by arms.
On the foughten field
Michael and his angels, prevalent
Encamping, plac’d in guard their watches round
Cherubick waving fires. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi.
FOUL. adj. [ful, Gothick; Ful, Saxon.]
1. Not clean; filthy; dirty ; miry. Through moſt of its ſig-
nifications it is oppoſed to fair. -
My face is É. with weeping.
It's monſtrous labour when I waſh my brain,
And it grows fouler. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleºpatra.
He that can travel in deep and foul ways, ought not to ſay
that he cannot walk in fair. Tillotſon's Sermons.
The ſtream is ſoul with ſtains
Of ruſhing torrents and deſcending rains.
2. Impure; polluted; full of filth.
With foul mouth,
And in the witneſs of his proper ear,
To call him villain. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
Kill thy phyſician, and the fee beſtow
Upon the foul diſeaſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Intemperance and ſenſuality debaſe mens minds, clog their
ſpirits, and make them groſs, foul, liſtleſs and unactive. Tillotſ.
3. Wicked; deteſtable; abominable.
jºb xvi. 16.
Addison.
Jeſus rebuked the fºul ſpirit. Mar. ix. 25.
He hates foul leaſings and vile flattery, -
Two filthy blots in noble gentery. Hubberd's Tale.
This is the groſſeſt and moſt irrational ſuppoſition, as well
as the fouleſ atheiſm, that can be imagined. Plale.
Satire has always ſhone among the reſt,
And is the boldeſt way, if not the beſt,
To tell men truly of their fouleft faults,
To laugh at their vain deeds, and vainer thoughts. Dryden.
4. Not lawful; not according to the eſtabliſhed rules.
By foul play were we heav'd thence,
But bleſſedly help'd hither.
5. Hateful; ugly; loathſome.
Th' other half did woman's ſhape retain,
Moſt loathſom, filthy, ſoul, and full of vile diſdain. F. Qu.
Haſt thou forgot
The fºul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
Was grown into a hoop 2
Foul ſights do rather diſpleaſe, in that they excite the me-
mory of foul things than in the immediate objects; and there-
fore, in pictures, thoſe foul fights do not much offend. Bacon.
6. Diſgraceful; ſhameful.
Too well I ſee and rue the dire event,
That with ſad overthrow and foul defeat
Hath loſt us heav'n. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. i.
Who firſt ſeduc’d them to that foul revolt? Milt. P. Loft.
Reaſon half extinct,
Or impotent, or elſe approving, ſees
The fºul diſorder.
7. Coarſe; groſs.
You will have no notion of delicacies, if you table with
them: they are all for rank and foul feeding, and ſpoil the beſt
proviſions in cooking. Felton on the Claſſicks.
8. Full of groſs humours, or bad matter; wanting purgation
or mundification.
, You perceive the body of our kingdom,
How foul it is ; what rank diſeaſes grow,
And with what danger near the heart of it. Shakespeare H. IV.
9. Not bright; not ſerene.
Who's there beſides ful weather?
One minded like the weather, moſt inquietly. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Be fair or fowl, or rain or ſhine,
The joys I have profeſs'd, in ſpite of fate are mine. Dryd.
10. With rough force; with unſeaſonable violence.
So in this throng bright Sachariſſa far'd,
Oppreſs'd by thoſe who ſtrove to be her guard:
As ſhips, though never ſo obſequious, fall
Foul in a tempeſt on their admiral. JWaker.
In his fallies their men might fall foul of each other. Clarend.
The great art of the devil, and the principal deceit of the
heart, is to keep fair with God himſelf, while men fall foul
upon his laws. South's Sermons.
1 1. [Among ſeamen.] Entangled: as, a rope is fºul of the
anchor.
Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?. -
Thomſºn's Spring.
To Foul. v. a. ſ rulan, Saxon, J To daub; to bemire; to
make filthy; to dirty.
Sweep and cleanſe your walks from autumnal leaves, leſt
the worms draw them into their holes, and foul your gardens.
Evelyn's Kalendar.
While Traulus all his ordure ſcatters,
Tofoul the man he chiefly flatters. . . Swift.
She fouls a ſmock more in one hour than the kitchen-maid
doth in a week. Swift's Directions to Servants.
Fo'ULFACED. adj. [foul and faced.] Having an ugly or hate-
ful viſage.
If black ſcandal, or foulſac'd reproach,
Attend the ſequel of your impoſition,
Your mere enforcement ſhall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and ſtains thereof. Shakespeare R. III.
Fowlly. adv. [from foul. J Filthily ; naſtily; odiouſly;
hatefully; ſcandalouſly ; diſgracefully ; ſhamefully.
We in the world's wide mouth
Live ſcandaliz'd, and foul, ſpoken of Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The letter to the protector was gilded over with many
ſmooth words; but the other two did fully and foully ſet forth
his obſtinacy, avarice and ambition. Hayward.
O brother, brother | Filbert ſtill is true;
I fouly wrong'd him: do, forgive me, do. Gay.
Foul Mou"THED. adj. [foul and mouth.] Scurrilous; habi-
tuated to the uſe of opprobrious terms and epithets.
My lord, he ſpeaks moſt vilely of you, like a foulmouth'd
man as he is, and ſaid he would cudgel you. Shakespeare H. IV:
It was allowed by every body, that ſo foulmouthed a witneſs
never appeared in any cauſe. Addiſon.
My reputation is too well eſtabliſhed in the world to re-
ceive any hurt from ſuch a foulmouthed ſcoundrel as he. Arbuth.
Now ſinging ſhrill, and ſcolding oft between,
Scolds anſwer foulmouth'd ſcold. ; bad neighbourhood I
Ween. Swift.
Fo'ULNEss; n.ſ.. [from foul.]
1. The quality of being foul; filthineſs; naſtineſs. -
The ancients were wont to make garments that were not
deſtroyed but purified by fire; and whereas the ſpots or foul-
neſ of other cloaths are waſhed out, in theſe they were uſually
burnt away. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
2. Pollution; impurity.
It is no vicious blot, murder, or fºulneſs,
No unchaſte action, or diſhonour’d ſtep,
That hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour. Shakeſp.:
There is not ſo chaſte a nation as this, nor ſo free from all
pollution or foulneſs: it is the virgin of the world. Bacon.
3. Hatefulneſs; atrociouſneſs:
He by an affection ſprung up from exceſſive beauty, ſhould
not delight in horrible foulneſs. Sidney.
Conſul, you are too mild:
The foulneſ of ſome facts takes thence all mercy:
Report it to the ſenate. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
It is the wickedneſs of a whole life, diſcharging all its filth
and foulneſs into this one quality, as into a great ſink or com-
mon ſhore. South's Sermons.
4. Uglineſs; deformity.
He's fallen in love with your foulneſs, and ſhe'll fall in love
with my anger. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
The fury laid aſide
Her looks and limbs, and with new methods tried
The foulneſs of th’ infernal form to hide. Dryden's Án.
5. Diſhoneſty; want of candour.
Piety is oppoſed to hypocriſy and infincerity, and all falſe-
neſs or fouln'ſs of intentions; eſpecially to that perſonated
devotion, under which any kind of impiety is wont to be diſ-
guiſed. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Found. The preterite and participle paſſive of find.
I am ſought of them that aſked not for me: I am found of
them that ſought me not. Iſ, lxv. 1.
To FOUND. v. a. [fundare, Latin; fºnder, French.]
1. To lay the baſis of any building.
It fell not; for it was fºunded upon a rock. Alſath. vii.
He hath founded it upon the ſeas, and eſtabliſhed it upon the
floods. Pſ, xxiv. 2.
2. To build ; to raiſe.
Theſe tunes of reaſon are Amphion's lyre,
Wherewith he did the Theban city fºund.
They Gabian walls, and ſtrong Fidenae rear,
Nomentum, Bola with Pometia found,
And raiſe Colatian tow’rs on rocky ground. Dryde.” &amp;n.
3. To eſtabliſh; to erect. -
This alſo ſhall they gain by their delay
In the wide wilderneſs; there they ſhall found
Their government, and their great ſenate chuſe,
Through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordain'd. Aſir.
He founding a library, gathered together the acts of the
kings and prophets. 2 Mac. ii. 13.
4. To give birth or original to ; as, he funded an art; he
fºunded a family. .
5. To raiſe upon, as on a principle or ground.
Though ſome have made uſe of the opinion of ſome
ſchºolmen,
Davies.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F O U
F O U
ſchoolmen, that dominion is founded in grace; yet as that is
but an opinion, ſo were it admitted as the moſt certain truth,
it could never warrant any ſuch ſanguinary method,
Decay of Piety.
A right to the uſe of the creatures is fºunded originally in
the right a man has to ſubſiſt. Lºcke.
Power, founded on contract, can deſcend only to him who
has right by that contračt. Locke.
The reputation of the Iliad they found upon the ignorance
of his times. Pºpe's Preface to the Iliad.
6. To fix firm.
Fleance is eſcap'd.
—Then comes my fit again: I had elſe been perfeót, -
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock. Shakespeare Macbeth.
To Found. v. a. [fundere, Latin; fondre, French..] To form
by melting and pouring into moulds; to caſt.
Foun DATION. m. ſ. [fondation, French.]
1. The baſis or lower parts of an edifice.
The ſtatelineſs of houſes, the goodlineſs of trees, when we
behold them, delighteth the eye; but that foundation which
beareth up the one, that root which miniſtreth unto the other
nouriſhment and life, is in the boſom of the earth concealed.
Hºoker, b. i. ſ. 1.
That is the way to make the city flat,
To bring the roof to the foundation,
To bury all." - Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
O Jove, I think,
Fundations fly the wretched; ſuch, I mean,
Where they ſhould be reliev'd. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
- I draw a line along the ſhore;
I lay the deep foundations of a wall,
And Enos, nam'd from me, the city call.
2. The act of fixing the baſis.
Ne'er to theſe chambers where the mighty reſt,
Since their foundation, came a nobler gueſt. Tickel.
3. The principles or ground on which any notion is raiſed.
If we give way to our paſſions, we do but gratify ourſelves
for the preſent, in order to our future diſquiet; but if we reſiſt
and conquer them, we lay the foundation of perpetual peace in
our minds. Tillotſon, Sermon 6.
That ſhe ſhould be ſubjećt to her huſband, the laws of man-
kind and cuſtoms of nations have ordered it ſo; and there is
a8." in nature for it. Locke.
riginal; riſe. -
Throughout the world, even from the firſt foundation there-
of, all men have either been taken as lords or lawful kings in
their own houſes. - Hooker, b. i. ſ. Io.
5. A revenue ſettled and eſtabliſhed for any purpoſe, particularly
charity.
He 'ud an opportunity of going to ſchool on a foun-
dation. Swift.
6. Eſtabliſhment; ſettlement.
Fo’UNDER. m. ſ. [from found.]
1. A builder; one who raiſes an edifice; one who preſides at
the erection of a city.
Of famous cities we the founders know ;
But rivers, old as ſeas to which they go,
Are nature's bounty: 'tis of more renown
To make a river than to build a town.
Nor was Proeneſte's fºunder wanting there,
Whom fame reports the ſon of Mulciber;
Found in the fire, and foſter'd in the plains;
A ſhepherd and a king at once he reigns.
2. One who eſtabliſhes a revenue for any purpoſe.
The wanting orphans ſaw with wat'ry eyes
Their funders charity in the duſt laid low. Dryden.
This hath been experimentally proved beyond contradic-
tion, by the honourable founder of this le&amp;ture in his treatiſe
of the air. - Bentley.
3. Onc from whom anything has its original or beginning.
And the rude notions of pedantick ſchools
Blaſpheme the ſacred founder of our rules. Rºſcommon,
When Jove, who ſaw from high, with juſt diſdain,
The dead inſpir'd with vital breath again,
Struck to the center with his flaming dart
Th’ unhappy fºunder of the godlike art. Dryden's Żn.
King James 1. the fºunder of the Stuart race, had he not
confined all his views to the peace of his own reign, his ſon
had not been involved in ſuch fatal troubles. Addison Freehold.
Nor can the ſkilful herald trace
The fºunder of thy ancient race. Swift.
4. [Fºndeur, French..] A caſter; one who forms figures by
caſting melted matter into moulds.
Founders add a little antimony to their bell-metal, to make
it more ſonorous; and ſo pewterers to their pewter, to make
it ſound more clear like ſilver. Grew's/Muſeum.
To Fo'UNDER. v. a [fondre, French..] To cauſe ſuch a ſore-
neſs and tenderneſs in a horſe's foot, that he is unable to ſet it
to the ground.
Phoebus' ſteeds are founder'd,
Or night kept chain'd below. Shakeſpeare's Tempg/?.
Dryden's AEn.
4.
Waller.
Dryden's Aen.
I have foundered nine ſcore and odd poſts; and here, travel-
tainted as I am, have, in my pure and immaculate valour,
taken Sir John Colevile of the Dale, a moſt furious knight:
but what of that? he ſaw me and yielded. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Thy ſtumbling founder'd jade can trot as high -
As any other Pegaſus can fly;
So the dull eel moves nimbler in the mud,
Than all the ſwift-finn'd racers of the flood.
Brutes find out where their talents lie:
A bear will not attempt to fly;
A fºunder'd horſe will oft debate,
Before he tries a five-barr'd gate. Swift.
If you find a gentleman fond of your horſe, perſuade your
maſter to ſell him, becauſe he is vicious, and foundered into
the bargain. Swift's Dire: ions to the Groom.
Men of diſcretion, whom people in power may with little
ceremony load as heavy as they pleaſe, drive them through the
hardeſt and deepeſt roads, without danger of fºundering or
breaking their backs, and will be ſure to find them neither
reſty nor vicious. Swift.
To Fo'UNDER. v. m. [from fºnd, French, the bottom.]
1. To ſink to the bottom.
New ſhips, built at thoſe rates, have been ready to fºunder
in the ſeas with every extraordinary ſtorm. Raleigh's Eſſays,
2. To fail; to miſcarry.
In this point
All his tricks founder; and he brings his phyſick -
After his patient's death. Sak ſpeare's Henry VIII.
Fo'UNDERY. n.ſ. [fonderi, Fr. from found..] A place where
figures are formed of melted metal; a caſtinghouſe.
Fo'UNDLING. m. ſ. [from fºund of find J A child expoſed to
chance; a child found without any parent or owner.
We, like baſtards, are laid abroad, even as foundlings, to
be trained up by grief and ſorrow. Sidney,
I paſs the foundling by, a race unknown,
At doors expos'd, whom matrons make their own,
And into noble families advance
A nameleſs iſſue; the blind work of chance. Dryd juven.
I ſhall mention a piece of charity which is practiſed by moſt
of the nations about us : I mean a proviſion for foundings, or
for thoſe children who, for want of ſuch a proviſion, are ex-
poſed to the barbarity of crucl and unnatural parents. Addiſon.
- The goddeſs long had mark'd the child's diſtreſs,
And long had ſought his ſuff'rings to redreſs;
She prays the gods to take the ſoundling's part,
To teach his hands ſome beneficial art
Pračtis'd in ſtreets. -
Fo'UNDR Ess. m. ſ. [from founder.]
1. A woman that founds, builds, eſtabliſhes, or begins any
thing. *
2. A woman that eſtabliſhes any charitable revenue.
For of their order ſhe was patroneſs,
Albe Chariſſa was their chiefeſt ſoundreſs. Fairy Queen, b, i.
For zeal like her’s, her ſervants were to ſhow ;
She was the firſt, where need requir'd to go; } -
Herſelf the fºund eſs, and attendant too. Dryden. ).
º:AIN. }n. ſ. [fons, Latin; fontaine, French.]
1. A well; a ſpring.
He ſet before him ſpread
A table of celeſtial food divine,
Ambroſial fruits, fetcht from the tree of life;
And from the fount of life ambroſial drink. Milt, Par. Reg.
2. A ſmall baſon of ſpringing water.
Proofs as clear as founts in July, when
We ſee each grain of gravel. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Can a man drink better from the funtain when it is finely
paved with marble, than when it ſwells over the green tuff?
Taylor's Rule of living haly.
Narciſſus on the graſſy verdure lies;
But whilſt within the cryſtal fount he tries - }
To quench his heat, he feels new heat ariſe. Addison.
3. A jet; a ſpout, of water. -
Fountains I intend to be of two natures: the one that
ſprinkleth or ſpouteth water; the other a fair receipt ºf water,
without fiſh, or ſlime, or mud. Bacon, Eſſay 47.
4. The head or firſt ſpring of a river.
All ačtions of your grace are of a piece, as waters keep
the tenor of their fountains’; your compaſſion is general, and
has the ſame effect as well on enemies as friends. Dryden.
5. Original; firſt principle ; firſt cauſe. -
Almighty God, the fountain of all goodneſs. Comm. Prayer:
You may reduce many thouſand bodies to theſe few general
figures, as unto their principal heads and funtainſ. Peacham,
This one city may well be reckoned not only the ſeat of
trade and commercé, not only the fountain of habits and
faſhions, and good breeding, but of morally good or bad
manners to all England. S; ratt's Sermons.
Fo'UNTAINLEss. adj. [from fluntain.] Without a fountain ;
without a ſpring.
3 Se
Dorſet 4.
Gay's Trivia,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R A
So large -
The proſpect was, that here and there was room
For barren deſert fºuntainleſ, and dry: Milton's Parad. Reg
Fount FUL. adj. [fºunt and full.] Full of ſprings.
But when the fºuntful Ida's top they ſcal'd with utmoſt
haſte,
All fell upon the high-hair'd oaks. Chapman's Iliads.
To Foup E. v. a. To drive with ſudden impetuoſity. A word
out of uſe.
we pronounce, by the confeſſion of ſtrangers, as ſmoothly
and moderately as any of the northern nations, who foupe
their words out of the throat with fat and full ſpirits. Camden.
FOUR. adj. [ Feopen, Saxon.] Twice two.
Juſt as I wiſh'd, the lots were caſt on four; -
Myſelf the fifth. Pope's Odyſſey, b. ix.
FOURBE. n.ſ. [French.] A cheat; a tricking fellow. Not
in uſe.
Jove's envoy, through the air,
Brings diſmal tydings; as if ſuch low care
Could reach their thoughts, or their repoſe diſturb |
Thou art a falſe impoſtor, and a fourbe. Denham.
Four Fo’i. D. adj. [four and fold.] Four times told.
He ſhall reſtore the lambfourfold, becauſe he had no pity.
2 Sa. xii. 6.
Four foot Ed. adj. [four and ſoot. J Quadruped; having
twice two feet.
Augur Aſtylos, whoſe art in vain
From fight diſſuaded the fourfºoted train, ;
Now beat the hoof with Neſſus on the plain. Dryden.
Four sco'RE. adj. [four and ſcore.]
1. Four times twenty; eighty.
When they were out of reach, they turned and croſſed the
ocean to Spain, having loſt fourſcore of their ſhips, and the
greater part of their men. Bacon's War with Spain.
The Chiots were firſt a free people, being a common-
wealth, maintaining a navy of fourſcore ſhips. Sandys.
' The Liturgy had, by the piaétice of near fourſcore years,
obtained great veneration from all ſober Proteſtants. Clarend.
2. It is uſed elliptically for fourſcore years in numbering the
age of man.
At ſeventeen years many their fortunes ſeek;
But at fourſore it is too late a week. Shakespeare As you like it.
Some few might be of uſe in council upon great occaſions,
'till after threeſcore and ten; and the two late miniſters in
Spain were ſo 'till fourſcore. Temple.
Foursqua'R.E. adj. [fºur and ſquare.] Quadrangular; having
four ſides and angles equal.
The temple of Bel was invironed with a wall carried fºur-
Jquare, of great height and beauty; and on each ſquare cer-
tain brazen gates curiouſly engraven. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Fourte’EN. adj. [peopentyn, Saxon.] Four and ten; twice
ſeven. -
She ſays I am not fourteen pence on the ſcore for ſheer ale.
Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
FourTE'ENT H. adj. [from fºurteen.] The ordinal of fourteen;
the fourth after the tenth.
I have not found any that ſee the ninth day, few before the
twelfth, and the eyes of ſome not open before the fourteenth
day. ' Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 26.
Fourt H. adj. [from four.] The ordinal of four; the firſt
after the third. -
A third is like the former: filthy hags!
..Why do you ſhew me this? A furth 2 ſtart eyeſ
What will the line ſtretch out to th’ crack of doom? Shakespeare
Fo'URTHLY. adv. [from fourth..] . In the fourth place.
Fourthly, plants have their ſeed and ſeminal parts uppermoſt,
and living creatures have them lowermoſt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Four whe'ELED. adj. [four and wheel..] Running upon twice
two wheels.
Scarce twenty fourwheel'd cars, compačt and ſtrong,
The maſſy load could bear, and roll along. Pope's Odyſſey.
Fo'UTRA. m. ſ. [from foutre, French..] A fig; a ſcoff; an act
of contempt.
A ſoutra for the world, and worldlings baſe. Shakespeare H. IV.
FOWL. m. ſ. [Eugel, Fuhl, Saxon; vogel, Dutch..] A winged
animal; a bird. It is colloquially uſed of edible birds, but in
books of all the feathered tribes.
The beaſts, the fiſhes, and the winged fºwls,
Are their males ſubjects, and at their controuls. Shakespeare.
Lucullus entertained Pompey in a magnificent houſe: Pom-
pey ſaid, this is a marvellous houſe for the Summer; but me-
thinks very cold for Winter. Lucullus anſwered, do you not
think me as wiſe as divers fowls, to change my habitation in
the Winter ſeaſon. Bacon's Apophthegms.
This mighty breath
Inſtructs the fowls of heaven. Thomſon's Spring.
To Fowl. v. n. [from the noun..] To kill birds for food or
anne.
Fo'w LER. m. ſ. [from fowl.] A ſportſman who purſues birds.
The fºwler, warn’d
By thoſe good omens, with ſwift early ſteps
Treads the crimp earth, ranging through fields and glades,
Cffenſive to the birds. Phillips.
With ſlaught'ring guns th' unweary'd fowler roves,
When froſts have whiten’d all the naked groves. Pope.
Fow LINGPIEce. n.ſ.. [fowl and piece..] A gun for birds.
'Tis neceſſary that the countryman be provided with a good
fwlingpiece, to deſtroy and ſcare them away. AMortimer.
FOX. m. ſ. [Fox, Saxon; vos, voſch, Dutch.]
1. A wild animal of the canine kind, with ſharp ears and a
buſhy tail, remarkable for his cunning, living in holes, and
preying upon fowls or ſmall animals.
The fox barks not when he would ſteal the lamb. Shakespeare
He that truſts to you,
Where he ſhould find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geeſe. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Theſe retreats are more like the dens of robbers, or holes
of foxes, than the fortreſſes of fair warriours. Locke.
2. By way of reproach, applied to a knave or cunning fellow.
Foxcas E. m. ſ. [fox and caſe..] A fox's ſkin.
One had better be laughed at for taking a fºxcaſe for a fox,
than be deſtroyed by taking a live fox for a caſe. L’Eſtrange.
Foxchase. n. ſ. [ fox and chaſe.] The purſuit of the fox
with hounds.
See the ſame man, in vigour, in the gout;
Alone, in company; in place or out;
Early at buſineſs, and at hazard late; -
Mad at a foxchaſe, wiſe at a debate. Pope, Epiſtle i.
Foxe vil. n.ſ. [ſox and evil J A kind of diſeaſe in which the
hair ſheds. -
Foxgloves. n. ſ. A plant.
The leaves are produced alternately on the branches: the
cup of the flower conſiſts of one leaf, which is divided into
ſix ample long ſegments: the flower conſiſts of one leaf, is
tubuloſe and compreſſed, and a little reflexed at the brim :
theſe flowers are diſpoſed in a long ſpike, and always grow
upon one ſide of the ſtalk: the ovary of the flower becomes a
roundiſh fruit, which ends in a point, and opens in the mid-
dle: it has two cells, in which many ſmall ſeeds are con-
tained. Miller.
FoxHU’NTER. m. ſ. [fox and hunter.] A man whoſe chief am-
bition is to ſhew his bravery in hunting foxes. A term of
reproach uſed of country gentlemen.
The foxhunters went their way, and then out ſteals the
fox. L’Eſtrange, Fable 1.c4.
John Wildfire, foxhunter, broke his neck over a fix-bar
gate. Speciator, Nº. 561.
Foxship. m. ſ. [from fox.] The charaćter or qualities of a
fox; cunning; miſchievous art.
Had'ſt thou foxſhip
To baniſh him that ſtruck more blows for Rome,
Than thou haſt ſpoken words. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Fo'XTRAP. m. ſ. [fox and trap.] A gin or ſnare to catch
foxes.
Anſwer a queſtion, at what hour of the night to ſet a
foxtrap. Tatler, Nº. 56.
Fox. n.ſ.. [foi, French..] Faith; allegiance. An obſolete
word.
He Eaſterland ſubdued, and Denmark won,
And of them both did foy and tribute raiſe. Fairy Queen.
To FRAct. v. a. [fračius, Latin.] To break; to violate; to
infringe. Found perhaps only in the following paſſage.
His days and times are paſt,
And my reliance on his fracted dates
Has ſmit my credit. Shakeſpeare's Timºn.
FRACTION. n.ſ.. [frađion, Fr. frađio, Latin.]
1. The aët of breaking ; the ſtate of being broken.
It hath becn obſerved by ſeveral, that the ſurface of the
earth hath been broke, and the parts of it diſlocated; but more
particularly ſeveral parcels of nature retain ſtill the evident
marks of fraćion and ruin. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. A broken part of an integral.
Neither the motion of the moon, whereby months are
computed, nor the ſun, whereby years are accounted, con-
ſiſteth of whole numbers, but admits of fraćions and broken
artS. - Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 13.
Pliny put a round number near the truth, rather than a
fračiion. - Arbuthnot on Coins.
FRA/ction AL. adj. [from fraćlion.] Belonging to a broken
number. -
We make a cypher the medium between increaſing and
decreaſing numbers, commonly called abſolute or whole num-
bers, and negative or fraćional numbers. Cocker's Arithmetick.
FRACTURE. m. ſ. [fračiura, Latin.]
1. Breach ; ſeparation of continuous parts.
That may do it without any great frađure of the more
ſtable and fixed parts of nature, or the infringement of the
laws thereof. Hale's Origin of Mankind,
2. The ſeparation of the continuity of a bone in living bodies.
But thou wilt fin and grief deſtroy,
That ſo the broken bones may joy,
And tune together in a well-ſet ſong,
Full of his praiſes,
Who dead men raiſes ;
Fračures well cur'd, make us more ſtrong. Herbert.
4. Praciures
t<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R A
Fračiures of the ſcull are dangerous, not in conſequence of
the injury done to the cranium itſelf, but as the brain becomes
affected. Sharp's Surgery.
To FRA’cture. v. 4. [from the noun..] To break a bone.
The leg was dreſſed, and the fractured bones united toge-
ther. - Wiſeman's Surgery.
FRAGILE. adj. [fragile, French; fragilis, Latin.]
1. Brittle; eaſily finapped or broken.
To eaſe them of their griefs,
Their pangs of love, and other incident throes,
That nature's fragile veſſel doth ſuſtain
In life's uncertain voyage. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
The ſtalk of ivy is tough, and not fragile. Bacon's N. Hiſt,
When ſubtle wits have ſpun their threads too fine,
'Tis weak and fragile, like Arachne's line. Denham.
A dry ſtick will be eaſily broken, when a green one will
maintain a ſtrong reſiſtance; and yet in the moiſt ſubſtance
there is leſs reſt than in what is drier and more fragile. Glanv.
2. Weak; uncertain; eaſily deſtroyed.
Much oſtentation, vain of fleſhly arms,
And fragile arms, much inſtrument of war,
Long in preparing, ſoon to nothing brought,
Before mine eyes thou'ſt ſet. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
FRAG1'LITY. m. ſ. [from fragile.] t
1. Brittleneſs; eaſineſs to be broken. -
To make an induration with toughneſs, and leſs fragility,
decočt bodies in water for two or three days. Bacon's N. Hiſt.
2. Weakneſs; uncertainty; eaſineſs to be deſtroyed.
Fearing the uncertainty of man's fragility, the common
chance of war, the violence of fortune. Knolles's Hiſtory.
3. Frailty; liableneſs to fault.
All could not be right, in ſuch a ſtate, in this lower age of
ragility. - Wotton.
FRAGMENT. n.ſ.. [fragmentum, Latin.] A part broken
from the whole; an imperfe&amp;t piece. -
He who late a ſceptre did command,
Now graſps a floating fragment in his hand. Dryden.
Cowley, in his unfiniſhed fragment of the Davideis, has
ſhewn us this way to improvement. Watts's Improvement.
If a thinned or plated body, which, being of an even thick-
neſs, appears all over of one uniform colour, ſhould be ſlit
into threads, or broken into fragments of the ſame thickneſs
with the plate, I ſee no reaſon why every thread or fragment
ſhould not keep its colour. - Newton's Opt.
FRA'GMENTARY., adj. [from fragment.] Compoſed of frag-
ments. A word not elegant, nor in uſe. -
She, ſhe is gone; ſhe's gone: when thou know'ſt this,
What fragmentary rubbiſh this world is,
Thou know'ſt, and that it is not worth a thought; .
He knows it too too much that thinks it nought. Donne,
FRAGOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] A noiſe; a crack; a craſh.
Purſu'd by hideous fragors, as before
The flames deſcend, they in their breaches roar. Sandys.
FRA'GRANce. }" J. [fragrantia, Lat.] Sweetneſs of ſmell;
FRA'GRANCY. § pleaſing ſcent; grateful odour.
Eve ſeparate he ſpies,
Veil'd in a cloud of fragrance, where ſhe ſtood -
Half-ſpy’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
I am more pleaſed to ſurvey my rows of coleworts and cab-
bages ſpringing up in their full fragrancy and verdure, than to
ſee the tender plants of foreign countries kept alive by artifi-
cial heats. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 47.
Not lovelier ſeem'd Narciſſus to the eye;
Nor, when a flower, could boaſt more fragrancy.
Such was the wine; to quench whoſe fervent ſteam
Scarce twenty meaſures from the living ſtream
To cool one cup ſuffic’d: the goblet crown'd,
Breath'd aromatick fragrancies around. Pope's Odyſſey, b. ix.
FRAGRANT, adj. [fragrams, Latin.] Odorous; ſweet of
ſmell.
The nymph vouchſaf'd to place
Upon her head the various wreath:
The flow’rs, leſs blooming than her face;
Their ſcent, leſs fragrant than her breath. Prior.
FRA'GR ANTLY. adv. [from fragrant..] With ſweet ſcent.
As the hops begin to change colour, and ſmell fragrantly,
you may conclude them ripe.
FRAIL. n.ſ.
1. A baſket made of ruſhes.
2. A ruſh for weaving baſkets.
FRAIL. adj. [fragilis, Latin.]
1. Weak ; eaſily decaying; ſubječt to caſualties; eaſily de-
ſtroyed.
I know my body's of ſo frail a kind,
As force without, fevers within can kill. Davies.
When with care we have raiſed this imaginary treaſure of
happineſs, we find, at laſt, that the materials of the ſtructure
are frail and periſhing, and the foundation itſelf is laid in the
fand. Rogers, Sermon 5.
2. Weak of reſolution; liable to errour or ſeduction.
The truly virtuous do not eaſily credit evil that is told them
Garth. -
44ortimer's Huſbandry.
theſe alſo ſpeak amiſs: man is frail, and prone to evil, and
therefore may ſoon fail in words. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
FRA'Il Ness. n.ſ. [from frail.] Weakneſs; inſtability.
There is nothing among all the frailneſſes and uncertainties
of this ſublunary world ſo tottering and unſtable as the virtue
of a coward. Norris.
FRA'ILTY. n.ſ.. [from frail.] - * .
1. Weakneſs of reſolution; inſtability of mind; infirmity.
Though Page be a ſecure fool, and ſtands ſo firmly on his
wife's frailty, yet I cannot put off my opinion ſo eaſily. Shakespeare
Nor ſhould'ſt thou have truſted that to woman's fraity:
Ere I to thee, thou to thyſelf waſ cruel. Milton's Agonies.
God knows our frailty, pities our weakneſs, and requires
of us no more than we are able to do. Locke.
2. Fault proceeding from weakneſs; fins of infirmity.
Love did his reaſon blind,
And love's the nobleſt faity of the mind. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
Kind wits will thoſe light faults excuſe;
Thoſe are the common frailties of the muſe. Dryden,
Death, only death, can break the laſting chain;
And here, ev'n then, ſhall my cold duſt remain ;
Here all its frailties, all its flames reſign,
And wait, 'till 'tis no ſin to mix with thine. Pope.
FRA"ISCHEUR. m. ſ. [French. J Freſhneſs; coolneſs. A
word fooliſhly innovated by Dryden.
Hither in Summer-ev’nings you repair,
To taſte the fraſcheur of the purer air. Dryden.
FRAISE. n.ſ. [French, the caul of an animal.] A pancake
with bacon in it.
To FRAME. v. a. . -
1. To form or fabricate by orderly conſtruction and union of
various parts. -
The double gates he findeth locked faſt;
The one fair fram'd of burniſh’d ivory,
The other all with ſilver overcaſt. Spºnſer.
2. To fit one to another. -
They rather cut down their timber to frame it, and to do
other ſuch neceſſaries to their convenient uſe, than to fight.
Abbot's Deſcription of the I/orld.
Hew the timber, ſaw it out, frame it, and ſet it together.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
-
3. To make ; to compoſe. -
Then chufing out few words moſt horrible,
Thereof did verſes frame. Spenſer,
Fight valiantly to-day;
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it;
For thou art fram'd of the firm truth of valour. Shakeſp.
4. To regulate; to adjuſt.
Let us not deceive ourſelves by pretending to this excellent
knowledge of Chriſt Jeſus our Lord, if we do not frame our
lives according to it. Tillotſon.
5. To form to any rule or method by ſtudy or precept.
Thou art their ſoldier, and, being bred in broils,
Haſt not the ſoft way; but thou wilt frame
Thyſelf forſooth hereafter theirs. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I have been a truant to the law;
I never yet could frame my will to it, ... ."
And therefore frame the law unto my will. Shakeſp. H. VI:
6. To form and digeſt by thought.
The moſt abſtruſe ideas are only ſuch as the underſtanding
frames to itſelf, by joining together ideas that it had either from
objećts of ſenſe, or from its own operations about them. Locke.
Full of that flame his tender ſcenes he warms,
And frames his goddeſs by your matchleſs charms. Granv.
Urge him with truth to frame his ſure replies;
And ſure he will; for wiſdom never lies. Pope's Odyſſey.
How many excellent reaſonings are framed in the mind of a
man of wiſdom and ſtudy in a length of years? Watts.
7. To contrive; to plan. - - - -
Unpardonable the pieſumption and inſolence in contriving
and framing this letter was. Clarendon, b. viii.
8. To ſettle; to ſcheme out.
Though I cannot make true wars, -
I'll frame convenient peace. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
9. To invent; to fabricate, in a bad ſenſe: as, to frame a ſtory
or lie.
Aſtronomers, to ſolve the phaenomena, framed to their con-
ceit eccentricks and epicycles. Bacon.
FRAME. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] - -
1. A fabrick; any thing conſtructed of various parts or mem-
bers.
If the frame of the heavenly arch ſhould diſſolve itſelf, if
celeſtial ſpheres ſhould forget their wented motions, and by
irregular volubility turn themſelves any way, as it might
happen. - Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
Caſtles made of trees upon frames of timber, with turrets
and arches, were anciently matters of magnificence. Baccn.
Theſe are thy glorious works, parent of good!
Almighty! thine this univerſal frame. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
Divine Cecilia came,
Inventreſs of the vocal frame. JDryden.
of their neighbours; for if others may do amiſs, then may
l
9 S We
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R A
w
º The gate was adamant; eternal frame,
Which, hew’d by Mars himſelf, from Indian quarries came,
The labour of a god , and all along
Tough iron plates were clench'd to make it ſtrong. Dryd.
We ſee this vaſt frame of the world, and an innumerable
multitude of creatures in it; all which we, who believe a
God, attribute to him as the author, Tillotſon, Sermon 1.
2. Anything made ſo as to incloſe or admit ſomething elſe.
Put both the tube and the veſſel it leaned on into a conve-
nient wooden frame, to keep them from miſchances. Boyle.
His pićture ſcarcely would deſerve a frame. Dryden's juvenal.
A globe of glaſs, about eight or ten inches in diameter,
being put into a frame where it may be ſwiftly turned round
its axis, will, in turning, ſhine, where it rubs againſt the palm
of one's hand. - Newton's Opt.
3. Order; regularity; adjuſted ſeries or diſpoſition.
A woman, that is like a German clock,
Still a repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright.
Your ſteddy ſoul preſerves her frame;
In good and evil times the ſame. Swift.
4. Scheme; order. .
Another party did reſolve to change the whole frame of
the government in ſtate as well as church. Clarendon.
5. Contrivance ; proječtion.
John the Baſtard,
Whoſe ſpirits toil in frame of villanies.
6. Mechanical conſtruction.
7. Shape; form; proportion.
A bear's a ſavage beaſt,
Whelp'd without form, until the dam
Has lick'd it into ſhape and frame. Hudibras.
FRAME R. n.ſ.. [from fame; Fremman, Saxon.] Maker;
former ; contriver; ſchemer.
The forger of his own fate, the framer of his fortune,
ſhould be improper, if all his actions were predetermined.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
There was want of accurateneſs in experiments in the
firſt original framer of thoſe medals. Arbuthnot on Coins.
FRA'MP'old. m.ſ. [This word is written by Dr. Hacket fram-
‘pul. I know not its original.] Peeviſh; boiſterous; rugged;
croſſgrained. -
Her huſband' Alas, the ſweet woman leads an ill life with
him: ſhe leads a very frampold life with him. Shakeſpeare.
The frampul man could not be pacified.
Hacket's Life of Williams.
FRANCHISE. n.ſ.. [franchiſe, French J
1. Exemption from any onerous duty.
2. Privilege; immunity; right granted.
They granted them markets, and other franchiſes, and
erected corporate towns among them. Davies on Ireland.
His gracious edićt the ſame franchiſe yields
To all the wild increaſe of woods and fields.
3. Diſtrićt; extent of juriſdićtion.
There are other privileges granted unto moſt of the corpo-
rations, that they ſhall not be travelled forth of their own
franchiſes. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
To FRANchi'se. v. a [from the noun..] To enfranchiſe; to
make free; to keep free.
I loſe no honour
In ſeeking to augment it; but ſtill keep
... My boſom franchis'd, and allegiance clear. Shakespeare Macbeth.
FRA'NóIBLE, a j. Iſrang, Latin.] Fragile ; brittle; eaſily
broken.
Though it ſeem the ſolideſt wood, if wrought before it be
well ſeaſoned, it will ſhew itſelf very frangible. Boyle.
FRA'Nios. m. ſ. [Of this word-I know not the derivation.]. A
paramour; a boon companion. .
Firſt, by her ſide did fit the bold Sanſoy,
Fit mate for ſuch a mincing minion,
Who in her looſeneſs took exceeding joy,
Might not be found a franker franion. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
FRANK, adj. [franc, French.]
1. Liberal ; generous; not niggardly.
The moiſter ſorts of trees yield little moſs, which is for
the reaſon of the frank putting up of the ſap into the boughs.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
They were left deſtitute, either by narrow proviſion, or
by their frank hearts and their open hands, and their charity
towards others. Spratt's Sermons.
”I is the ordinary praćtice of the world to be frank of civi-
Shakeſpeare,
Shakeſpeare,
-
Dryden.
lities that coſt them nothing. L’Eſtrange.
2. Open ; ingenuous; ſincere; not reſerved. -
3. Without conditions; without payment.
Thou haſt it won; for it is of frank gift,
And he will care for all the reſt to ſhift. Hubberd’s Tale,
4. Not reſtrained; licentious. -
Might not be found a franker franion. Spenſer.
FRANK. r.ſ [from the adječtive.]
1. A place to feed hogs in ; a ſty: ſo called from liberality of
food.
Where ſups here Doth the old boar feed in the old
flank P Shakeſheare's Henry IV.
2. A letter which pays no poſtage.
You'll have immediately, by ſeveral franks, my epiſtle to
lord Cobham. Pope to Swift.
3. A French coin.
To FRANK. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhut up in a frank or ſty. Hammer.
Tell Richmond this from me,
That in the fly of this moſt bloody boar,
My ſon George Stanly is frank'd up in hold:
If I revolt, off goes young George's head. Shakespeare Rich. III.
2. To feed high; to fat; to cram. junius and Ainſworth.
3. [From the adjective.] To exempt letters from poſtage.
My lord Orrery writes to you to-morrow ; and you ſee I
ſend this under his cover, or at leaſt franted by him. Swift.
Gazettes ſent gratis down, and frank'd,
For which thy patron's weekly thank'd. - Pope.
FRANKALMoi'GN.E. n.ſ. The ſame which we in Latin call
libera eleemoſ;na, or free alms in Engliſh; whence that tenure
is commonly known among our Engliſh lawyers by the name
of a tenure in frank aumone, or frankalmoigne, which, accord-
ing to Britton, is a tenure by divine ſervice. Ayliffe's Parerg.
FRA'NKINCENse. m. ſ. [frank and incenſe; ſo called perhaps
from its liberal diſtribution of odour.]
Frankincenſe is a dry refinous ſubſtance in pieces or drops,
of a pale yellowiſh white colour; a ſtrong ſmell, but not diſ-
agreeable, and a bitter, acrid, and reſinous taſte. It is very
inflammable. The earlieſt hiſtories inform us, that frankin-
cenſe was uſed among the ſacred rites and ſacrifices, as it ſtill
continues to be in many different parts of the world. As well
however as the world has at all times been acquainted with
the drug itſelf, we are ſtill uncertain as to the place whence
frankincenſe is brought, and much more ſo as to the tree
which produces it. It is commended againſt diſorders in the
head and breaſt, and againſt diarrhoeas and dyſenteries. Hill.
Take unto thee ſweet ſpices, with pure frankincenſe. Exod.
I find in Dioſcorides record of frankincenſe gotten in
India. Brerewood on Languages.
Black ebon only will in India grow,
And ...ſ.l., on the Saboean bough. Dryd. Wirg.
Cedar and frankintenſe, an od’rous pile,
Flam'd on the hearth, and wide perfum'd the iſle. Pope.
FRA'NK LIN. n.ſ.. [from frank.] A ſteward; a bailiff of land.
It fignifies originally a little gentleman, and is not improperly
Engliſhed a gentleman ſervant. -
A ſpacious court they ſee,
Both plain and pleaſant to be walked in,
Where them does meet afranklin fair and free. Fai. Queen.
FRANKLY. adv. . [from frank.]
1. Liberally; freely; kindly; readily.
Oh, were it but my life,
I'd throw it down for your deliverance,
As frankly as a pin. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid againſt me, now forgive me frankly. Shakespeare H. VIII.
When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them
both. Lu. vii. 42.
By the toughneſs of the earth the ſap cannot get up to
ſpread ſo frankly as it ſhould do. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
I value my garden more for being full of blackbirds than
cherries, ...} very frankly give them fruit for their ſongs. Spect.
2. Without conſtraint; without reſerve.
The lords mounted their ſervants upon their own horſes ;
and they, with the voluntiers, who frankly liſted themſelves,
amounted to a body of two hundred and fifty horſe. Clarend.
He entered very franky into thoſe new deſigns, which were
contrived at court. Clarendon, b. viii.
FRANKN Ess. m. ſ. [from frank J
1. Plainneſs of ſpeech; openneſs; ingenuouſneſs.
When the conde duke had ſome eclairciſſment with the
duke, in which he made all the proteſtations of his ſincere
affection, the other received his proteſtations with all con-
tempt; and declared, with a very unneceſſary frankneſs, that
he would have no friendſhip with him. Clarendon.
Tom made love to a woman of ſenſe, and always treated
her as ſuch during the whole time of courtſhip: his natural
temper and good breeding hindered him from doing anything
diſagreeable, as his ſincerity and frankneſs of behaviour made
him converſe with her before marriage in the ſame manner he
intended to do afterwards. Addiſon's Guardian.
2. Liberality; bounteouſneſs.
3. Freedom from reſerve.
Upon occaſion of the pićtures preſent, he delivered with the
rankneſs of a friend's tongue, as near as he could, word by
word, what Kalander had told him touching the ſtrange
ſtory. Sidney.
The ableſt men that ever were, have had all an openneſs
and frankmºſ of dealing, and a name of certainty and ve-
racity. Bacon, Eſſay 6.
FRA'NKPL E D C F.
º
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R A
F R E
FRANKPLE'DC e. n.ſ.. [franciplegium, Latin, of franc, i. e.
liter &amp; pleige, i.e. firiju/ºr.] A pledge or ſurety for free-
In en.
tion of the publick peace, was that every freeborn man at
fourteen years of age, religious perſons, clerks, knights and
their eldeſt ſons excepted, ñould find ſecurity for his fidelity
to the king, or elſe be kept in priſon: whence it became
cuſtomary for a certain number of neighbours to be bound
for one another, to ſee each man of their pledge forthcoming
at all times, or to anſwer the trangreſſion of any one abſent-
ing himſelf. This was called frankpledge, and the circuit
thereof was called decenna, becauſe it commonly conſiſted of
ten houſholds; and every particular perſon, thus mutually
bound, was called decennier. This cuſtom was ſo ſtrićtly ob-
ſerved, that the ſheriffs, in every county, did from time to
time take the oaths of young ones as they grew to the age of
fourteen years, and ſee that they combined in one dozen or
other: whereupon this branch of the ſheriff's authority was
called viſus franciplegii, view of frankpledge. Cowel.
FRANTICK. . adj. [ corrupted from phrenetick, phreneticus,
Latin ; ©esvilizęs.]
1. Mad; deprived of underſtanding by violent madneſs; out-
rageouſly and turbulently mad.
Far off, he wonders what makes them ſo glad;
Of Bacchus merry fruit they did invent,
Or Cebel's frantick rites have made them mad. Fairy Queen.
2.Tranſported by violence of paſſion; outrageous; turbulent.
Eſteeming, in the frantick error of their minds, the great-
eſt madneſs in the world to be wiſdom, and the higheſt wiſ-
dom fooliſhneſs. - Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 8.
The lover, frantick,
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt. Shakeſpeare.
- To ſuch height their frantick paſſion grows,
That what both love, both hazard to deſtroy. Dryden.
She tears her hair, and, frantick in her griefs,
Calls out Lucia. Addiſon's Cato.
FRA'NTickly, adv. [from frantick.] Madly; outrageouſly.
Fie, fie, how frantickly I ſquare my talk! Shakeſpeare,
FRA’NTickNEss. n.ſ.. [from frantick. J Madneſs; fury of
paſſion. w
FRATERNAL. adj. [fraternel, French; fraternu, Latin.]
Brotherly ; pertaining to brothers; becoming brothers.
One ſhall riſe
Of proud ambitious heart; who, not content
With fair equality, fraternal ſtate,
Will arrogate dominion undeſerv'd,
Over his brethren. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
The admonitions, fraternal or paternal, of his fellow Chriſ-
tians, or of the governors of the church, then more publick
reprehenſions; and upon their unſucceſsfulneſs, the cenſures of
the church, until he reform and return. Hammond's Fundam.
- Plead it to her, -
With all the ſtrength and heats of eloquence
Fraternal love and friendſhip can inſpire. Addiſon's Cato,
FRAte'RNA ly, adv. [from fraternal.] In a brotherly manner.
FRATE'RNIT Y. m.ſ.. [fraternité, French; fraternitas, Latin.]
1. The ſtate or quality of a brother.
2. Body of men united; corporation; ſociety; aſſociation;
brotherhood.
'Tis a neceſſary rule in alliances, ſocieties, and faternities,
and all manner of civil contračts, to have a ſtrićt regard to
the humour of thoſe we have to do withal. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
3. Men of the ſame claſs or chara&amp;ter.
With what terms of reſpect knaves and ſots will ſpeak of
their own fraternity. - - South's Sermons.
FRATRIcid E. m.ſ.. [fratricide, French; fratricidium, Latin.]
The murder of "a brother.
FRAUD. n.ſ.. [fraus, Latin; fraude, Fr.] Deceit; cheat;
trick; artifice ; ſubtility; ſtratagem.
None need the frauds of ſly Ulyſſes fear.
If ſucceſs a lover's toil attends,
Who aſks if force or fraud obtain'd his ends. Pope.
FRA'UDFu L. adj. [fraud and full.] Treacherous; artful;
trickiſh; deceitful; ſubtle.
The welfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting ſhort that fraudful man. Shakespeare H. VI.
He, full of fraudful arts,
This well-invented tale for truth imparts. Dryden's AFn,
FRA'UDFull Y. adv. [from fraudful..] Deceitfully; artfully;
ſubtilly; treacherouſly; by ſtratagem. -
FRA/UDULE Nc6. U n.ſ.. [fraudulentia, Latin.] Deceitfulneſs;
FRA/UDULENcy. } trickiſhneſs; proneneſs to artifice.
We admire the providence of God in the continuance of
Scripture, notwithſtanding the endeavours of infidels to abo-
lſh, and the fraudulence of hereticks always to deprave the
ſame. - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
FRA'u DUL ENT. adj. [frauduleux, Fr. fraudulentus, Latin.]
1. Full of artifice; trickiſh; ſubtle; deceitful.
- He with ſerpent tongue
Dryden's AEn.
His fraudulent temptation thus began. Milton.
She mix'd the potion, fraudulent of ſoul;
The potion mantled in the golden bowl.
Pope's Odſey.
For the ancient cuſtom of England, for the preſerva-
2. Performed by artifice; deceitful; treacherous,
Now thou haſt aveng'd
Supplanted Adam, -
... And fruſtrated the conqueſt fraudulent. Milt. Parad. Rºg,
FRAUDULENTLY. adv. [from fraudulent.] By fraud; by de-
ceit ; by artifice; deceitfully. -
He that by fact, word, or ſign, either fraud'ently or vio-
lently, does hº to his neighbour, is bound to make reſti-
tution. Taylor's Rule ºf living holy.
FRAUGHT. particip, paſſ [from fraight, now written freight.]
1. Laden; charged. - -, ... " * *
In the narrow ſeas that part
The French and Engliſh, there miſcarried
A veſſel of our country, richly faught.
With joy -
And tidings fraught, to hell he now return'd. Mill. P. Loft.
And now approach'd their fleet from India, fraught
With all the riches of the riſing ſun,
And precious ſand from ſouthern climates brought. Dryden,
2. Filled; ſtored; thronged.
The Scripture is fraught even with laws of nature. Hooker.
By this ſad Una, fraught with anguiſh ſore,
Arriv'd, where they in earth their fruitleſs blood had ſpilt.
- Fairy Q: een, b. i cant. 6.
I am ſo fraught with curious buſineſs, that leave out cere-
mony. Shakeſpeare’s ſpºinter's Tale.
Whoſoever hath his mind fraught with many thoughts, his
wits and underſtanding do clarify and break up in the commu-
nicating and diſcourſing with another. tacon, Eſſay 28.
Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the houſe of woe and pain. i.ilt Par. Loff,
Abdallah and Balfora were ſo fraught with all kinds of
knowledge, and poſſeſſed with ſo conſtant a paſſion for each
other, that their ſolitude never lay heavy on them. Gua dian.
FRAUGHT. n.ſ.. [from the participle..] A freight; a cargo.
Yield up, oh love, thy crown and parted throne
To tyrannous hate ſwell, boſom, with thy fraught;
For ’tis of aſpicks tongues. Shakeſpeare's Otheliº.
The bark that all our bleſfings brought,
Charg’d with thyſelf and James, a doubly royal fraught. Dry.
To FRAU, HT. v. a. [for freight, by corruption.] To load;
to crowd.
Shakeſpeare.
Hence from my fight:
If after this command thou fraught the court .
With thy unworthineſs, thou dy'ſt. Shakſh. Cymbeline:
FRA'UGHT AGE. n.ſ.. [from fraught.] Lading; cargo. A bad
word. -
Our fraughtage, ſir,
I have convey’d aboard. Shałgſ. Comedy of Erreurſ,
FRAY. m. ſ. [effrayer, to fright, French.]
1. A broil; a battle ; a fight.
Time tells, that on that ever bleſſed day,
When Chriſtian ſwords with Perſian blood were dy'd,
The furious prince Tancredie from that fray
His coward foes chaſed through foreſts wide.
I'll ſpeak between the change of man and boy
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing ſteps
Into a manly ſtride; and ſpeak of frays, -
Like a fine bragging youth. Shaº. Merchant of Penice.
After the bloody jay at Wakefield fought. Shakespeare H. VI.
He left them to the fates in bloody fray,
Fairfax,
To toil and ſtruggle through the well-fought day. Pope.
2. A duel; a combat.
Since, if we fall before th' appointed day,
Nature and death continue long their fray. Denham.
The boaſter Paris oft deſir'd the day -
With Sparta's king to meet in ſingle fay. Pope's Iliad.
To FRAY. v. a. [ºffrayer, French..] To fright; to terrify.
The panther, knowing that his ſpotted hide
Doth pleaſe all beaſts, but that his looks them fray,
Within a buſh his dreadful head doth hide,
To let them gaze, whilſt he on them may prey. Spenſer.
So diverſely themſelves in vain they fray, , ,
Whilſt ſome more bold to meaſure him ſtand nigh. Pa. Qº.
Fiſhes are thought to befrayed with the motion cauſed by
noiſe upon the water. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Theſe vulturs prey only on carcaſes, on ſuch ſtupid minds
as have not life and vigour enough to fray them away. -
Government of the Tongue.
2. [frayer, French.] To rub.
FREAK. m.ſ.. [fresh, German, ſaucy, petulant; Praec, Saxon,
fugitive.]
1. A ſudden and cauſeleſs change of place. - -
2. A ſudden fancy; a humour; a whim; a capricious prank.
O! but I fear the fickle freaks, quoth ſhe,
Of fortune, and the odds of arms in field. Fairy Queen.
When that freak has taken poſſeſſion of a fantaſtical head,
the diſtemper is incurable. L’Eſtrange, Fable ico.
She is ſo reſtleſs and peeviſh that ſhe quarrels with all about
her, and ſometimes in a freak will inſtantly change her habi-
tation, Sºséiator, N°. 427.
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R. E.
F R. E.
:
fop.
ſomely.
mourſomneſs; whimſicalneſs.
or grunt as a boar.
reckle.]
w 2. Any ſmall ſpot or diſcoloration.
*
-
loured with ſmall ſpots.
The freckled trout to take
With ſilken worms.
The freckled cowſlip,
Conceives by idleneſs.
!
Spotted over like a leopard;
Envy breeds in ev'ry maid.
peace ; Reinfred, ſincere peace.
dependant.
All which we pine for now.
--º-
to do what he will 2
This wretched body trembles at your pow'r:
Thus far could fortune; but ſhe can no more:
Free to herſelf my potent mind remains,
Nor fears the vićtor's rage, nor feels his chains.
Set an unhappy priſºner free,
. . - Who ne'er intended harm to thee.
2. Uncompelled; unreſtrained.
Their uſe of meats was not like unto our ceremonies, that
being a matter of private action in common life, where every
man was free to order that which himſelf did; but this is a
publick conſtitution for the ordering of the church. Hooker.
It was free, and in my choice whether or no I ſhould pub-
liſh theſe diſcourſes; yet the publication being once reſolved,
the dedication was not ſo indifferent.
3. Not bound by fate; not neceſſitated.
Freely they ſtood who ſtood, and fell, who fell:
Not free, what proof could they have giv'n fincere
Of true allegiance, conſtant faith, or love,
f - Where only what they needs muſt do, appear'd;
Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. iii.
Not what they would?
4. Perinitted; allowed.
Why, fir, I pray, are not the ſtreets asfree
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure; and commands to ſome, leaves free to all. Milion.
For me as for you ?
5. Licentious; unreſtrained.
O conſpiracy!
Sham'ſt thou to ſhew thy dång'rous brow by night,
Shakespeare julius Cæſar.
When evils are moſt fee?
To vex me more, he took a freak
To ſlit my tongue, and make me ſpeak. -
To FR EAK. v. a. TA word, I ſuppoſe, Scotch, brought into
England by Thomſon.]. To variegate; to checquer.
There furry nations harbour:
Sables of gloſſy black, and dark embrown'd,
Or beauteous, freak'd with many a mingled hue.
FRE'Akish. adj. [from freak..] Capricious ; humourſome.
It may be a queſtion, whether the wife or the woman was
the more freakiſh of the two; for ſhe was ſtill the ſame uneaſy
L’Eſtrange, Fable 173.
FRE'Akishly, adv. [from freakiſh.] Capriciouſly; humour-
FRE'Akish Ness. n.ſ...[from freakiſh.] Capriciouſneſs; hu-
To FREAM. v. n. [f emere, Lat. fremir, French.] To growl
FRE'CKLE. n.ſ.. [flech, a ſpot, German; whence feckle,
1. A ſpot raiſed in the ſkin by the ſun.
Ruddy his lips, and freſh and fair his hue;
Some ſprinkled freckles on his face were ſeen,
Whoſe duſk ſet off the whiteneſs of the ſkin.
The cowſlips tall her penſioners be;
In their gold coats ſpots you ſee:
- Thoſe be rubies fairy favours;
In thoſe freckles live their ſavours. Shakespeare Midſ. Night's Dream.
The farewel froſts and eaſterly winds now ſpot your tulips;
therefore cover ſuch with mats, to prevent freckles.
FRE'ckLED. adj. [from freckle..] Spotted; maculated; diſco-
Sometimes we'll angle at the brook,
Drayton's Cynthia.
The even mead, that erſt brought ſweetly forth
Wanting the ſcythe, all uncorreóted, rank,
Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Now thy face charms ev'ry ſhepherd,
And, thy freckled neck diſplay'd,
FRE'ckly, adj. [from freckle..] Full of freckles.
FRED. The ſame with peace; upon which our forefathers
called their ſanétuaries fredſole, i. e. the ſeats of peace. So
Winfred, vićtorious
Frederic is powerful, or wealthy in peace; J.
ibſon's Camden.
FREE, adj. [rneah, Saxon; vry, Dutch.]
I. At liberty; not a vaſſal; not enſlaved; not a priſoner; not
Do faithful homage, and receive free honours,
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
A free nation is that which has never been conquered, or
thereby entered into any conditions of ſubječtion.
Free, what, and fetter'd with ſo many chains Dryden.
How can we think any one freer than to have the power
'Tis not to make me jealous;
To ſay my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of ſpeech, ſings, plays, and dances well,
Where virtue is, theſe make more virtuous. Shakespeare Othel.
Caſtalio, I have doubts within my heart; -
Will you be free and candid to your friend ? Otway's Orth.
7. Acquainted; converſing without reſerve.
Being one day very free at a great feaſt, he ſuddenly broke
6. Open; ingenuous.
forth into a great ſlaughter. Hakewill on Providence.
Free and familiar with misfortune grow,
Be us’d to ſorrow, and inur'd to woe. Prior.
8. Liberal; not parſimonious.
Glo'ſter too, a foe to citizens,
Q'ercharging your free purſes with large fines,
That ſeeks to overthrow religion. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
No ſtatute in his favour ſays,
How free or frugal I ſhall paſs my days;
I, who at ſometimes ſpend as others ſpare. Pope's Hºrace.
Alexandrian verſes, of twelve ſyllables, ſhould never be
allowed but when ſome remarkable beauty or propriety in them
atones for the liberty: Mr. Dryden has been too free of theſe
in his latter works. Pope.
9. Frank; not gained by importunity; not purchaſed.
We wanted words to expreſs our thanks: his noble free
offers left us nothing to aſk. Bacon's New Atlantis,
Io. Clear from diſtreſs.
Who alone ſuffers, ſuffers moſt i' th' mind,
Leaving free things and happy ſhows behind. Shakespeare K. Lear.
II. Guiltleſs; innocent.
Make mad the guilty, and appall the free,
Confound the ign'rant. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
My hands are guilty, but my heart is free. Dryden.
12. Exempt.
Theſe
Are ſuch allow'd infirmities, that honeſty
Is never free of. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Talk.
Who fears not to do ill, yet fears the name;
And free from conſcience, is a ſlave to fame. Denham.
Let envy, then, thoſe crimes within you ſee,
From which the happy never muſt be free. Dryden.
Their ſteeds around,
Free from the harneſs, graze the flow'ry ground. Dryden.
The will, free from the determination of ſuch deſires, is
left to the purſuit of nearer ſatisfactions. Locke.
13. Inveſted with franchiſes; poſſeſſing any thing without vaſ-
ſalage ; admitted to the privileges of any body.
He therefore makes all birds of every ſect
Free of his farm, with promiſe to reſpect }
Their ſeveral kinds alike, and equally protećt. Dryden.
Friend!
What do'ſt thou make a-ſhipboard To what end
Art thou of Bethlem's noble college free ?
Stark-ſtaring mad, that thou ſhou'dſt tempt the ſea? Dryd.
14. Without expence; by charity, as afreeſchool.
To FREE. v. a. [from the adjećtive.]
1. To ſet at liberty; to reſcue from ſlavery or captivity; to
manumit; to looſe.
The child was priſoner to the womb, and is
By law and proceſs of great nature thence
Free’d and enfranchis'd ; not a party to
The anger of the king, nor guilty of,
If any be, the treſpaſs of the queen. Shakespeare Winter's 7aſe.
He recovered the temple, freed the city, and upheld the
laws which were going down. 2 Mac. ii. 22.
Can'ſt thou no other maſter underſtand,
Than him that freed thee by the pretor's wand Dryden.
Should thy coward tongue
Spread its cold poiſon through the martial throng,
My jav'lin ſhall revenge ſo baſe a part,
And free the ſoul that quivers in thy heart. Pope.
2. To rid from ; to clear from anything ill.
It is no marvail, that he could think of no better way to
be free’d of theſe inconveniencies the paſſions of thoſe meet-
ings gave him, than to diſſolve them. Clarendon.
Hercules
Free’d Erymanthus from the foaming boar. Dryden.
Our land is from the rage of tygers freed. Dryden's Wirg.
3. To clear from impediments or obſtructions.
The chaſte Sibylla ſhall your ſteps convey,
And blood of offer'd victims free the way. Dryden.
Fierce was the fight; but haſt'ning to his prey,
By force the furious lover free’d his way. Dryden.
4. To baniſh; to ſend away; to rid.
We may again
Give to our tables meat, ſleep to our nights,
Free from our feaſts and banquets bloody knives. Shakespeare care.
Phyſicians are too free upon the ſubject, in the converſation 5. To exempt. R -
cm. vi. 7.
of their friends.
The criticks have been very free in their cenſures.
I knºw there are to whoſe preſumptuous thoughts
Thoſº/” beauties, ev’n in them, ſeem faults.
Pope.
Temple. For he that is dead is freed from fin.
Felton.
6. To unlock; to open.
This maſter-key
Frees every lock, and leads us to his perſon. Dryden.
FREE Bo'ot ER.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R. E.
-
J.
º
:
-
º
*
*
FREE Ro'ot ER. n.ſ.. [free and booty.] A robber; a plunderer;
a pillager.
The Kentiſhmen, perceiving that Perkin was not followed
by any Engliſh of name, and that his forces conſiſted moſtly
of baſe people and freebooters, fitter to ſpoil a coaſt than to
recover a kingdom, profeſſed their loyalty to the king. Bacºn.
The earl of Warwick had, as often as he met with any
Iriſh frigates, or ſuch freebooters as ſailed under their com-
miſſion, taken all the ſeamen who became priſoners to them
of that nation, and bound them back to back, and thrown
them overboard into the ſea. Clarendon, b. viii.
FREE Boo'TING.. n.ſ. Robbery; plunder; the act of pil-
laging.
Under it he may cleanly convey any fit pillage, that cometh
handſomely in his way; and when he goeth abroad in the
night on freebooting, it is his beſt and ſureſt friend. Spenser.
FRE'Ebor N. m. ſ. [free and born J Not a ſlave; inheriting
liberty. -
ö baſeneſs, to ſupport a tyrant's throne,
And cruſh your freeborn brethren of the world ! Dryden.
I ſhall ſpeak my thoughts like a freeborn ſubjećt, ſuch
things perhaps as no Dutch commentator could, and I
am ſure no Frenchman durſt. Dryden's Aºn. Dedication.
Shall freeborn men, in humble awe,
Submit to ſervile ſhame;
Who from conſent and cuſtom draw
The ſame right to be rul’d by law,
Which kings pretend to reign : Dryden.
FREEcHA(PPEL n.ſ. [free and chappel.] Such champ. As are
of the king's foundation, and by him exempted from the ºuriſ-
dićtion of the ordinary. The king may alſo licenſ a ſ, ject
to found ſuch a chappel, and by his charter exempt it from
the ordinary's viſitation. Cowel.
FR E'Ecost. n.ſ.. [free and coff.] Without expence; free from
charges.
We muſt not vouch any man for an exačt maſter in the
rules of our modern policy, but ſuch a one as has brought
himſelf ſo far to hate and deſpiſe the abſurdity of being kind
upon freeco/?, as not ſo much as to tell a friend what it is
o'clock for nothing. - South's Sermons.
FREEDMAN. m. ſ. [freed and man.] A ſlave manumitted.
Libertus. -
The freedman joſtles, and will be preferr'd;
Firſt come, firſt ſerv'd, he cries. Dryden's juv. Sat.1.
FREEDOM. m. ſ. [from free.)
I. Liberty; exemption from ſervitude; independence.
The laws themſelves they do ſpecially rage at, as moſt re-
pugnant to their liberty and natural freedom. Spenſer on Ireland.
O freedom / firſt delight of human kind
Not that which bondmen from their maſters find,
The privilege of doles; nor yet t' inſcribe
Their names in this or t'other Roman tribe:
That falſe enfranchiſement with eaſe is found;
Slaves are made citizens by turning round. Dryden's Perſ.
2. Privileges; franchiſes; immunities.
By our holy Sabbath have I ſworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond: -
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter, and your city's freedom.
3. Power of enjoying franchiſes. -
This prince firſt gave freedom to ſervants, ſo as to become
citizens of equal privileges with the reſt, which very much
increaſed the power of the people. Swift.
Shakeſpeare.
4. Exemption from fate, neceſſity, or predetermination.
I elſe muſt change
Their nature, and revoke the high decree
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordain’d
Their freedom; they themſelves ordain'd their fall. Milton.
In every fin, by how much the more free will is in its
choice, by ſo much is the ačt the more ſinful; and where there
is nothing to importune, urge, or provoke the will to any ačt,
there is ſo much an higher and perfecter degree of freedom
about that ačt. South's Sermons.
5. Unreſtraint. -
I will that all the feaſts and ſabbaths ſhall be all days of
immunity and freedom for the Jews in my realm. 1 Mac. x.
6. The ſtate of being without any particular evil or inconve-
In 1Cn Ce,
7. Eaſe or facility in doing or ſhowing any thing.
FR FEFo'oted. adj. [free and foot..] Not reſtrained in the
march.
We will fetters put upon this fear,
Which now goes too frefºoted. Shakeſheare's Hamlet.
FREEHe’ARTED. adj. [free and heart. J iberal; unre-
ſtrainca.
Love muſt freehearted be, and voluntary;
And not inchanted, or by fate conſtrain'd. Davies.
FR E E HO'L D. m. ſ. [free and hold.] I hat land or tenement
which a man holdeth in fee, fee-tail, or for term of life.
Fr. elºld in decd is the real poſſeſſion of lands or tenements in
-
fee, fee-tail, or for life. Freehold in law is the right that a
man has to ſuch land or tenements before his entry or ſeiſure.
Freehold is ſometimes taken in oppoſition to villenage. Land,
in the time of the Saxons, was called either bockland, that is,
holden by book or writing, or foleland, that is, holden with-
out writing. The former was held by far better conditions,
and by the better ſort of tenants, as noblemen and gentlemen,
being ſuch as we now call freehold. The latter was commonly
in the poſſeſſion of clowns, being that which we now call at
the will of the lord. - Cowel.
No alienation of lands holden in chief ſhould be available,
touching the freehold or inheritance thereof, but only where it
were made by matter of record, to be found in ſome of her
mº, treaſuries. • Bacon's Office of Alienation.
here is an unſpeakable pleaſure in calling any thing one's
own : a freehold, though it be but in ice and ſnow, will make
the owner pleaſed in the poſſeſſion, and ſtout in the defence of
it. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 1.
My friends here are very few, and fixed to the freehºld,
from whence nothing but death will remove them. Swift.
I ſhould be glad to poſſeſs a freehold that could not be taken
from me by any law to which I did not give my own conſent.
Swift to Lord Middleton.
FREEHO'LDER. n.ſ.. [from freehold J One who has a free-
hold.
As extortion did baniſh the old Engliſh freeholder, who
could not live but under the law; ſo the law did baniſh the
Iriſh lord, who could not live but by extortion. Davies.
FREE/L). adv [from free.] -
I. At liberty; without vaſſalage; without ſlavery; without de-
pendance.
2. Without reſtraint; laviſhly.
If my ſon were my huſband, I would freelier rejoice in that
abſence wherein he won honour, than in the embracements
of his bed, where he would ſhew moſt love. Shakeſp. Coriolan.
I pledge your grace; and if you knew what pains
I have beſtow'd to breed this preſent peace, -
You would drink freely. Shakespeare Henry IV.
3. Without ſcruple; without reſerve.
- Let ſuch teach others who themſelves excel,
And cenſure freely who have written well. Pope's Eſ on Crit.
4. Without impediment.
To follow rather the Goths in rhyming than the Greeks in
true verſifying, were even to eat acorns with ſwine, when we
may freely eat wheat-bread among men. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
The path to peace is virtue: what I ſhow,
Thyſelf may freely on thyſelf beſtow:
Fortune was never worſhipp'd by the wiſe;
But, ſet aloft by fools, uſurps the ſkies. Dryden's juv. Sat.
5. Without neceſſity; without predetermination.
Freely they ſtood who ſtood, and fell who fell. Milton.
He leaves us to chuſe with the liberty of reaſonable beings:
they who comply with his grace, comply with it freely; and
they who rejećt it, do alſo freely rejećt it. Rogers's Sermons.
6. Frankly ; liberally.
By nature all things have an equally common uſe: nature
freely and indifferently opens the boſom of the univerſe to all
mankind. South's Sermons.
7. Spontaneouſly; of its own accord.
FREEMAN. n.ſ.. [free and man.]
1. One not a ſlave; not a vaſſal.
Had you rather Caeſar were living, and die all ſlaves, than
that Caeſar were dead, to live all freemen P Shakeſp. jul. Caeſar.
If to break looſe from the condućt of reaſon, and to want
that reſtraint of examination and judgment which keeps us
from chufing or doing the worſe, be liberty, true liberty, mad
men and fools are only the freemen. . . Locke.
2. One partaking of rights, privileges, or immunities.
He made us freemen of the continent, -
Whom nature did like captives treat before. Dryden.
What this union was is expreſſed in the preceding
verſe, by their both having been made Á. on the
ſame day. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
FREEMI'NDED. adj. [free and mind.] Unconſtrained; without
load of care.
To ..ſ.” and cheerfully diſpoſed at hours of meat,
ſleep, and exerciſe, is one of the beſt precepts of long laſting.
- Bacon, Eſſay 31.
FRE'EN f ss. n.ſ.. [from free.]
1. The ſtate or quality of being free.
2. Openneſs; unreſervedneſs; ingenuouſneſs; candour.
The reader may pardon it, if he pleaſe, for the freeneſ of
the confeſſion. Dryden.
3. Generoſity; liberality. -
I hope it will never be ſaid that the laity, who by the clergy
are taught to be charitable, ſhall in their corporations exceed
the clergy itſelf, and their ſons, in Feeneſ, of giving. Sprat.
FREE school. n.ſ. [free and ſch:ol.] A ſchool in which learn-
ing is given without pay.
To give a civil education to the youth of this land in the
9 T time
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R. E.
F R. E.
*
-
time to come, proviſion was made by another law, that there
ſhould be one freeſ hool at leaſt erected in every dioceſs. Davieſ.
Two clergymen ſtood candidates for a ſmall freeſchool in
——ſhire, where a gentleman of intereſt in the country,
who happened to have a better underſtanding than his neigh-
bours, procured the place for him who was the better
ſcholar. Swift.
FREEspoºk EN. adj. [free and ſpoken.] Accuſtomed to ſpeak
without reſerve.
Nerva one night ſupped privately with ſome ſix or ſeven ;
amongſt whom there was one that was a dangerous man, and
began to take the like courſes as Marcellus and Regulus had
done: the emperor fell into diſcourſe of the injuſtice and
tyranny of the former time, and, by name, of the two ac-
cuſers; and ſaid, what ſhould we do with them, if we had
them now One of them that was at ſupper, and was a free-
ſpoken ſenator, ſaid, Marry, they ſhould ſup with us. Bacon.
FRE'Estone. n ſ. [free and ſtone..] Stone commonly uſed in
building.
#. is ſo named from its being of ſuch a conſtitution
as to be wrought and cut freely in any direétion. Woodward.
I ſaw her hand: ſhe has a leathern hand, a freeſtone-
coloured hand. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
The ſtreets are generally paved with brick or freeſtone, and
always kept very neat. Addiſon on Italy.
FREETH1'Nker. n.ſ.. [free and think.] A libertine; a con-
temner of religion.
Atheiſt is an old-faſhion'd word: I'm a freethinker, child.
- Addison's Drummer.
Of what uſe is freedom of thought, if it will not produce
freedom of a&amp;ion, which is the ſole end, how remote ſoever
in appearance, of all objećtions againſt Chriſtianity ? And
therefore the freethinkers confider it as an edifice, wherein all
the parts have ſuch a mutual dependance on each other, that
if you pull out one ſingle nail, the whole fabrick muſt fall to
the ground. Swift's Argument againſt aboliſhing Chriſtianity.
FREE will. n.ſ.. [free and will.]
1. The power of directing our own ačtions without conſtraint
by neceſſity or fate.
We have a power to ſuſpend the proſecution of this or that
deſire: this ſeems to me the ſource of all liberty; in this ſeems
to conſiſt that which is improperly called freewill. Locke.
2. Voluntarineſs; ſpontaneity.
I make a decree, that all they of the people of Iſrael in my
realm, which are minded of their own freewill to go up to
Jeruſalem, go with thee. Ezr. vii. 13.
FREEwo'MAN. n.ſ.. [free and woman.] A woman not en-
ſlaved. -
All her ornaments are taken away of a freewoman ; ſhe is
become a bondſlave. 1 Mac. ii. 11.
To FREEze. v. n. preter. froze. [vriſen, Dutch.]
1. To be congealed with cold.
The aqueous humour of the eye will not freeze, which is
very admirable, ſeeing it hath the perſpicuity and fluidity of .
common Water. Ray on the Creation.
The freezing of water, or the blowing of a plant, return-
ing at equidiſtant periods in all parts of the earth, would as
well ſerve men to reckon their years by as the motions of the
ſun. Locke.
2. To be of that degree of cold by which water is congealed.
Orpheus with his lute made trees
And mountain tops, that freeze,
Bow themſelves when he did fing. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Thou art all ice, thy kindneſs freezes. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Heav'n froze above ſevere, the clouds congeal,
And thro’ the cryſtal vault appear'd the ſtanding hail. Dryd.
To FREEze. v. a. pret. froze; part frozen or froze,
1. To congeal with cold.
2. To kill by cold.
hen we both lay in the field,
Frozen almoſt to death, how did he lap me,
Ev’n in his garments' Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
My maſter and miſtreſs are almoſt frozen to death. Shakeſp.
3. To chill by the loſs of power or motion.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almoſt freezes up the heat of life. Shakespeare. Rom, and Juliet.
Death came on amain,
And exercis'd below his iron reign;
Then upward to the ſeat of life he goes;
Senſe fled before him, what he touch'd he froze. Dryden.
To FREIGHT. v. a. preter, freighted; part. fraught ; which
being now uſed as an adjećtive, freighted is adopted. [fretter,
French.]
1. To load a ſhip or veſſel of carriage with goods for tranſ-
portation.
- The princes
Have to the port of Athens ſent their ſhips,
Fraught with the miniſters and inſtruments
Of cruel war. Shakespeare. Troilus and Crºffda, Prol gue.
Nor is, indeed, that man leſs mad than theſe,
Who freights a ſhip to venture on the ſeas;
* ,
With one frail interpoſing plank to ſave
From certain death, roll'd on by ev'ry wave. Dryden's juv.
Freighted with iron, from my native land
I ſteer my voyage. Pote's Od ſy, b i.
2. To load as the burthen; to be the thing with which a veſſel
is freighted. -
I would
Have ſunk the ſea within the earth, or ere
It ſhould the good ſhip ſo have ſwallow'd, and
The freighting ſouls within her. Shakeſpeare's Tempe/?.
FREIGHT. n.ſ.
I. Anything with which a ſhip is loaded.
He clears the deck, receives the mighty freight;
The leaky veſſel groans beneath the weight. Dryden's Zn.
2. The money due for tranſportation of goods. -
F *** n: ſ [fretteur, French.J He who freights a
Veſſel. -
FR EN. n.ſ. A worthleſs woman. An old word wholly for-
gotten.
But now from me his madding mind is ſtart,
And wooes the widow's daughter of the glen;
And now fair Roſalind hath bred his ſmart,
So now his friend is changed for a fren. Spenſer's Paſſ.
FRENCH Chalk, n.ſ.
French chalk is an indurated clay, extremely denſe, of a
ſmooth gloſſy ſurface, and ſoft and unduous to the touch; of
a greyiſh white colour, variegated with a duſky green. Hill.
French chalk is unctuous to the touch, as ſteatites is, but
harder, and nearer approaching the conſiſtence of ſtone. If?:d.
To FRE'Nchi F.Y. v. a. [from French.] To infect with the
manner of France; to make a coxcomb.
They miſliked nothing more in king Edward the Con-
feſſor than that he was Frenchifted; and accounted the deſire
of foreign language then to be a foretoken of bringing in
foreign powers, which indeed happened. Camden's Remains.
Has he familiarly diſlik'd
Your yellow ſtarch, or ſaid your doublet
Was not exactly Frenchifted. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
FRE'NETick. adj. [frenetique, French; £etwºrx?s; generally
therefore written phrenetick.] Mad; diſtraded.
He himſelf impotent,
By means of his frenetick malady. Daniel's Civil War.
FRE'Nzy... n.ſ. ſºftwº j phrenitis, Latin: whence phrenetiſ),
phrenetſy, phrenzy, or frenzy..] Madneſs; diſtraćtion of mind;
alienation of underſtanding; any violent paſſion approaching
to madneſs.
That knave, Ford, hath the fineſt mad devil of jealouſy in
him that ever governed frenzy. Shakespeare Mer. Iſive of Hindſ.
True fortitude is ſeen in great exploits,
That juſtice warrants, and that wiſdom guides;
All elſe is touring frenzy and diſtraćtion. Addiſon's Cats.
Why ſuch a diſpoſition of the body induceth ſleep, another
diſturbs all the operations of the ſoul, and occaſions a lethargy
or frenzy: this knowledge exceeds our narrow faculties. Bent.
FRE'QUENCE. n.ſ.. [frequence, Fr. frequentia, Latin.J Crowd;
concourſe; aſſembly.
The frequence of degree,
From high to low throughout.
He, in full frequence bright
Of angels, thus to Gabriel ſmiling ſpake.
FRE'QUENCY. n.ſ.. [frequentia, Latin.]
“ºwn occurrence; the condition of being often ſeen or
One.
Should a miracle be indulged to one, others would
think themſelves equally intitled to it; and if indulged to
many, it would no longer have the effect of a miracle; its
force and influence would be loſt by the frequency of it. Atterb.
2. Concourſe; full aſſembly.
Thou cam'ſt ere while into this ſenate: who
Of ſuch a frequency, ſo many friends -
And kindred thou haſt here, ſaluted thee Ben. johnſ Catil.
FRE'QUENT, adj. [frequent, French; frequens, Latin.]
I. Often done; often ſeen; often occurring.
An ancient and imperial city falls;
The ſtreets are fill'd with frequent funerals. Dryden's Zn.
Frequent herſes ſhall beſiege your gates. Pope.
2. Uſed often to pračtiſe any thing.
Every man thinks he may pretend to any employment, pro-
vided he has been loud and frequent in declaring himſelf
hearty for the government. Swift.
3. Full of concourſe.
Frequent and full. Milton.
To FR E QU'ENT. v. a. ſ frequento, Latin ; frequenter, French. J
To viſit often ; to be much in any place; to reſort often to.
Latter day,
Finding in it fit ports for fiſhers trade,
'Gan more the ſame frequent, and further to invade. F. 3.
There were ſynagogues for men to reſort unto: our Sa-
viour himſelf, and after him the apoſtles, frequented them.
Hocker, b. v. ſ. 1 1.
This fellow here, this thy creature,
By nightſ, cquent, my houſe. S ałºſ earl’s Timon.
Af
Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Paradiſe Rºg.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R. E.
F R E
At that time this land was known and frequented by the
fhips and veſſels. Bacon.
With tears . -
Wat'ring the ground, and with our fighs the air ,
Frequenting, ſent from hearts contrite, in ſign
Of ſorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Mill. P. L.
To ſerve my friends, the ſenate I frequent ;
And there what I before digeſted, vent. Denham.
That he frequented the court of Auguſtus, and was well re-
, ceived in it, is moſt undoubted. Dryden's Ovid, Preface.
FREQUE'NTABLE. adj. [from frequent.]. Converſable; acceſ-
ſible. A word not now uſed, but not inelegant.
While youth laſted in him, the exerciſes of that age and
his humour, not yet fully diſcovered, made him ſomewhat
the more frequentable and leſs dangerous. Sidney, b. ii.
REQUE'NtAtive. adj. [frequentatiſ, French; frequentativus,
Latin.] A grammatical term applied to verbs ſignifying the
frequent repetition of an action.
FREQUE'NTER. m. ſ. [from frequent.] One who often reſorts
to any place. -
Perſons under bad imputations are no great frequenters of
churches. Swift.
FRE'QUENTLY. adv. [frequenter, Latin.] Often ; commonly;
not rarely; not ſeldom ; a conſiderable number of times;
manifold times.
I could not, without much grief, obſerve how frequently
both gentlemen and ladies are at a loſs for queſtions and an-
fwers. Swift's Introduction to Genteel Converſation.
FRESCO. m. ſ. [Italian. J
1. Coolneſs; ſhade; duſkineſs, like that of the evening or
morning.
Helliſh ſprites
Love more the freſco of the nights.
2. A pićture not drawn in glaring light, but in duſk.
Here thy well-ſtudy'd marbles fix our eye;
A fading freſco here demands a figh.
FRESH, adj. T Enerc, Saxon; fraiche, French.]
1. Cool; not vapid with heat.
I’ll cull the fartheſt mead for thy repaſt;
The choiceſt herbs I to thy board will bring,
And draw thy water from the freſheft ſpring.
2. Not ſalt
They keep themſelves unmixt with the ſalt water; ſo that,
a very great way within the ſea, men may take up as freſh
water as if they were near the land. Abbot's Deſc. of the World,
3. New ; not impaired by time.
This ſecond ſource of men, while yet but few,
And while the dread of judgment paſt remain
Freſh in their minds, fearing the Deity,
With ſome regard to what's juſt and right,
Shall lead their lives. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
That love which firſt was ſet, will firſt decay;
Mine of a freſher date will longer ſtay. Dryd. Indian Emp.
4. In a ſtate like that of recentneſs.
We will revive thoſe times, and in our memories
Preſerve and ſtill keep freſh, like flowers in water. Denham.
With ſuch a care
As roſes from their ſtalks we tear,
When we would ſtill preſerve them new,
And freſh as on the buſh they grew.
Thou ſun, ſaid I, fair light!
And thou enlighten’d earth, ſo freſh and gay! Milt. P. L.
5. Recent; newly come.
Amidſt the ſpirits Palinurus preſs'd;
Yet freſh from life, a new admitted gueſt.
Freſh from the fact, as in the preſent caſe,
The criminals are ſeiz'd upon the place;
Stiff in denial, as the law appoints,
Prior.
Pope.
Prior,
Iſaler.
Dryden's Aen.
On engines they diſtend their tortur’d joints. Dryden.
6. Repaired from any loſs or diminution.
Nor lies ſhe long; but, as her fates ordain,
Springs up to life, and freſh to ſecond pain; }
Is ſav'd to-day, to-morrow to be ſlain. Dryden.
7. Florid; vigorous ; chearful ; unfaded; unimpaired.
This pope is decrepid, and the bell goeth for him: take or-
der that when he is dead there be choſen a pope of freſh years,
between fifty and threeſcore. Bacon's holy War.
Two ſwains,
Freſh as the morn, and as the ſeaſon fair.
8. Healthy in countenance; ruddy.
Tell me,
Haſt thou beheld a freſher gentlewoman,
Such war of white and red within her cheeks? Shakeſpeare.
It is no rare obſervation in England to ſee a freſh coloured
luſty young man yoked to a conſumptive female, and him
foon after attending her to the grave. Harvey on Conſumptions.
They repreſent to themſelves a thouſand poor, tall, inno-
cent, freſh coloured young gentlemen. Addiſon's Spetſator.
9. Briſk; ſtrong; vigorous. -
As a freſh gale of wind fills the ſails of a ſhip. Holder.
16. Faſting: oppoſed to eating or drinking. A low word.
11. Sweet : oppoſed to ſtale or ſtinking.
Pope.
FRESH. n.ſ. Water not ſalt. -
He ſhall drink nought but brine; for I'll not ſhew him
Where the quick freſhes are. Shakespeare's Tempeſt.
To FRE's HEN. v. a. [from fºſ!..] To make freſh.
Preluſive drops let all their moiſture flow º
In large effuſion o'er the freſhen'd world. Thomſºn's Spring.
To FRE's HEN. v. n. To grow freſh.
A freſhening breeze the magick power ſupply'd,
While the wing'd veſſel flew along the tide Pºpe's Odiſ).
FRE's HET. n.ſ.. [from freſh.] A pool of freſh water.
- All fiſh from ſea or ſhore, - º
Prºſet or purling brook, or ſhell or fin. Milt. Parad, Loft.
FRE'shly, adv. [from froſh.]
I. Coolly. -
2. Newly; in the former ſtate renewed.
The weeds of hereſy being grown unto ſuch ripeneſs as
that was, do, even in the very cutting down, ſcatter often-
times thoſe ſeeds which for a while lie unſeen and buried in
the earth; but afterwards frºſhly ſpring up again, no leſs per-
nicious than at the firſt. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
Then ſhall our names,
Familiar in their mouth as houſhold words,
Be in their flowing cups freſhly remember'd. Shakespeare Hen. V.
They are now freſhly in difference with them. Bacon.
3. With a healthy ſook; ruddily.
Looks he as freſhly as he did the day he wreſtled: Shakespeare
FRE's HNess. n.ſ.. [from frºſh.] -
1. Newneſs; vigour; ſpirit; the contrary to vapidneſs.
Moſt odours ſmell beſt broken or cruſhed; but flowers
Preſſed or beaten, do loſe the freſhneſ; and ſweetneſs of their
odour. Bacon's Natural Hiſt-ry.
2. Freedom from diminution by time; not ſtaleneſs.
For the conſtant freſhneſs of it, it is ſuch a pleaſure as can
never cloy or overwork the mind; for ſurely no man was ever
weary of thinking that he had done well or virtuouſly. South.
3. Freedom from fatigue; newneſs of ſtrength.
The Scots had the advantage both for number and freſhneſs
of men. Hayward.
4. Coolneſs. -
There are ſome rooms in Italy and Spain for freſhneſ, and
gathering the winds and air in the heats of Summer; but they
be but pennings of the winds, and enlarging them again, and
making them reverberate in circles. Bacon.
Say, if ſhe pleaſe, ſhe hither may repair,
And breathe the freſhneſs of the open air. Dryden's Aureng,
She laid her down to reſt,
And to the winds expos'd her glowing breaſt,
To take the freſhneſs of the morning air. Addiſon on Italy.
5. Ruddineſs; colour of health. -
The ſecret venom, circling in her veins, -
Works through her ſkin, and burſts in bloating ſtains;
Her cheeks their freſhneſs loſe and wonted grace,
And an unuſual paleneſs ſpreads her face.
6. Freedom from ſaltneſs.
FRESHwa’t ER. [A compound word of freſh and water, uſed as
an adjećtive..] Raw ; unſkilled; unacquainted. A low term
borrowed from the ſailors, who ſtigmatiſe thoſe who come
firſt to ſea as freſhwater men or novices.
The nobility, as freſhwater ſoldiers which had never ſeen
but ſorhe light ſkirmiſhes, in their vain bravery made light
account of the Turks. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
FRET. n.ſ. [Of this word the etymology is very doubtful:
ſome derive it from pnecan, to eat; others from pnexpan, to
adorn; ſome from Četrto; Skinner more probably from fremo,
or the French frtiller: perhaps it comes immediately from
the Latin fretum.]
1. A frith, or ſtrait of the ſea, where the water by confinement
is always rough.
Euripus generally ſignifieth any ſtrait, fret, or channel of
the ſea, running between two ſhores. Brown's Vulg, Errouri.
2. Any agitation of liquors by fermentation, confinement, or
other cauſe.
The channel of this river is white with rocks, and the ſur-
face covered with froth and bubbles; for it runs along upon
the fret, and is ſtill breaking againſt the ſtones that oppoſe its
aſſage. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
The blood in a fever, if well governed, like wine upon
the fret, diſchargeth itſelf of all heterogeneous mixtures.
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
3. That ſtop of the muſical inſtrument which cauſes or regulatas
the vibrations of the ſtring.
It requireth good winding of a ſtring before it will make
any note; and in the tops of lutes, &amp;c. the higher they go,
thé leſs diſtance is between the frets. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The harp
Had work, and reſted not : the ſolemn pipe
And dulcimer, all organs of ſweet ſtop,
All ſounds on fret by ſtring or golden wire,
Temper’d ſoft tunings, intermix'd with voice
Choral or uniſon. Milton's Parad'ſ Loft, b. vii.
They are fitted to anſwer the moſt variable harmony: two
CI
Granville.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R. E.
F R I
or three pipes to all thoſe of a church-organ, or to all the
ſtrings and frets of a lute. Grew's Coſmolog. Sac. b i.
4. Work riſing in protuberances.
The fret, of houſes, and all equal figures, pleaſe; whereas
unequal figures are but deformities. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
We take delight in a proſpect well laid out, and diverſified
with fields and meadows, woods and rivers, in the curious
fret works of rocks and grottos. Spectator, N°. 414.
5. Agitation of the mind; commotion of the temper; paſſion.
Calmneſs is great advantage: he that lets
Another chafe, may warm him at his fire,
Mark all his wand'rings, and enjoy his frets,
As cunning fencers ſuffer heat to tire.
The incred'lous Pheac, having yet
- Drank but one round, reply'd in ſober fet. Tate's juven.
You, too weak the ſlighteſt loſs to bear,
Are on the fret of paſſion, boil and rage. Creech's juven.
Yet then did Dennis rave in furious fret ;
I never anſwer'd, I was not in debt.
To FRET. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To rub againſt anything; to agitate violently.
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops, and to make a noiſe
When they are fretted with the guſts of heav'n. Shakeſpeare.
2. To wear away by rubbing.
Drop them ſtill upon one place,
*Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
Within the earth. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
In the banks of rivers, with the waſhing of the water,
there were divers times fretted out big pieces of gold. Abbot.
Before I ground the obječt metal on the pitch, I always
ground the putty on it with the concave copper, 'till it had
done making a noiſe; becauſe, if the particles of the putty
were not made to ſtick faſt in the pitch, they would, by roll-
ing up and down, grate and fret the obječt metal, and fill it
full of little holes. Newton's Opt.
3. To hurt by attrition.
The better part with Mary and with Ruth
Choſen thou haſt; and they that over-ween,
And at thy growing virtues fret their ſpleen,
No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth. Milton.
4. To corrode; to eat away.
- It is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.
Lev. xiii. 55.
The painful huſband, plowing up his ground,
Shall find all fret with ruſt, both pikes and ſhields, -
And empty helms under his harrow ſound. PHakewill.
5. To form into raiſed work.
Nor did there want -
Cornice or freeze, with boſſy ſculptures grav'n ;
The roof was fretted gold. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loft, b, i.
6. To variegate; to diverſify. -
Yon grey lines,
That fret the clouds, are meſſengers of day. Shakespeare jul. Caſ,
*7. To make angry; to vex.
Antony
Is valiant and dejećted; and, by ſtarts,
His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
Of what he has and has not. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
Becauſe thou haſt fretted me in all theſe things, behold I
will recompenſe thy way upon thine head. Ezek. xvi. 43.
Such an expe&amp;tation, cries one, will never come to paſs:
therefore I'll even give it up, and go and fret myſelf. Collier.
Injuries from friends fret and gall more, and the memory of
them is not ſo eaſily obliterated. Arbuthn. Hiſt. of john Bull.
To FRET. v. m.
1. To be in commotion; to be agitated.
No benefits whatſoever ſhall ever alter or allay that diabo-
- lical rancour, that frets and ferments in ſome helliſh breaſts,
but that upon all occaſions it will foam out at its foul mouth
in ſlander and invečtive. - South's Sermons.
Th’ adjoining brook, that purls along
The vocal grove, now fretting o'er a rock,
Now ſcarcely moving through a reedy pool. Thomſ. Summ.
2. To be worn away; to be corroded.
Take a piece of glovers leather that is very thin, and put
your gold therein, binding it cloſe, and then hang it up : the
fal armoniack will fret away, and the gold remain behind.
/ Peacham on Drawing.
3. To make way by attrition.
Theſe do but indeed ſcrape off the extuberances, or fret
into the wood, and therefore they are very ſeldom uſed to
ſoft wood. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
It inflamed and ſwelled very much; many wheals aroſe,
and fretted one into another with great excoriation. //?ſeman.
4. To be angry; to be peeviſh ; to vex himſelf.
They trouble themſelves with fretting at the ignorance of
ſuch as withſtand them in their opinion. Hooker, h. v. ſ. 22.
We are in a fretting mind at the church of Rome, and with
angry diſpoſition enter into cogitation. Hocker.
Helpleſs, what may it boot
Herbert,
Pope, Epiſtle ii.
To fret for anger, or for grief to moan
Their wounded ſteeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead maſters Shakespeare H. V.
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conſpirers are Shakespeare Macbeth.
His heart fretteth againſt the Lord. Prºv. xix. 3.
Hudibras fretting
Conqueſt ſhould be ſo long a getting,
Drew up his force. Hudibras, b. i. cant. 2.
He ſwells with wrath, he makes outrageous moan,
He frets, he fumes, he ſtares, he ſtamps the ground. Dryd.
How ſhould Iſret to mangle ev'ry line,
In rev'rence to the ſins of thirty-nine. Pote.
FRETFUL. adj. [from fret.] Angry; peeviſh; in a ſtate of
Vcxation.
Thy knotty and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to ſtand on end,
Like quills upon the fretful porcupine.
Where's the king
—Contending with the fretful elements;
Bids the wind blow the earth into the ſea. Shakeſp K. Lear.
They are extremely fretful and peeviſh, never well at reſt;
but always calling for this or that, or changing their poſture
of lying or fitting. Harvey on Cºnſumptions.
Are you poſitive and fretful?
Heedleſs, ignorant, forgetful?. Swift.
FRE't fully, adv. [from fretful J. Peeviſhly.
FRETFULNEss. n.ſ.. [from freſul] Paſſion; peeviſhneſs.
FRETTY. adj. [from fret.] Adorned with raiſed work.
FRIABILITY. m. ſ. [from friable.] Capacity of being reduced
to powder. -
Hardneſs, friability, and power to draw iron, are qualities
to be found in a loadſtone. - Locke.
FRIABLE. adj. [friable, French; friabilis, Latin.] Eaſily
crumbled; eaſily reduced to powder.
A ſpongy excreſcence groweth upon the roots of the laſer-
tree, and ſometimes on cedar, very white, light, and friable,
which we call agarick. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The liver, of all the viſcera, is the moſt frialſe, and eaſily
crumbled or diſſolved. Arbuthnºt on JXiet.
FRIAR. m. ſ. [A corruption of frere, French..] A religious;
a brother of ſome regular order.
Hºly Franciſcan friar ! brother ho! Shakespeare. Rom. and jul.
All the prieſts and friars in my realm,
Shall in proceſſion ſing her endleſs praiſe. Shakeſp. H. VI.
He ſays he's but afriar, but he's big enough to be a pope.
- - - Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Many jeſuits and friars went about, in the diſguiſe of Preſ-
byterian and Independent miniſters, to preach up rebel-
lion. Swift.
Afriar would needs ſhew his talent in Latin. Swift.
FRIAR like. adj. [from friar. J Monaſtick; unſkilled in
the world. -
Their friarlike general would the next day make one holy-
day in the Chriſtian calendars, in remembrance of thirty thou-
ſand Hungarian martyrs ſlain of the Turks. Knoles', iſ ty.
FR1'Akly adv. [friar and like..] Like a friar, or man un-
taught in life.
Seek not proud riches, but ſuch as thou may’ſ get juſtly,
uſe ſoberly, diſtribute cheerfully, and leave contentedly; yet
have no abſtraćt nor friarly contempt of them. Bacon', A/ays.
FR1'ARscowl. n.ſ. (friar and cowl.] A plant.
- It agrees with the dragon and arum, from both which it
differs only in having a flower reſembling a cowl.
Fº RY. m.ſ. [ from friar. J A monaſtry or convent of
Tlars.
FR1'ARY. adj. Like a friar.
Francis Cornfield did ſcratch his elbow when he had ſweet-
ly invented to ſignify his name, St. Francis, with a friary cowl
in a cornfield. Camden's Remains.
To FRI'BBLE. v. m. To trifle.
Though cheats, yet more intelligible
Than thoſe that with the ſtars dofribble. Hudibras, p. ii.
FRI'BBLeR. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A trifler.
A frilbler is one who profeſſes rapture for the woman, and
dreads her conſent. Speciator, N°. 288.
FRICASSEB. m. ſ. [French. J . A diſh made by cutting
chickens or other ſmall things in pieces, and dreſſing them
with ſtrong ſauce. - -
Oh, how would Homer praiſe their dancing dogs,
Their ſtinking cheeſe, and fricacy of frogs!
He'd raiſe no fables, ſing no flagrant lye,
Of boys with cuſtard choak'd at Newberry. King.
FRICATION n.ſ.. [fricatio, Latin.] The act of rubbing one
thing againſt another.
Gentle frication draweth forth the nouriſhment, by making
the parts a little hungry, and heating them: this frication I wiſh
to be done in the morning. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
Reſinous or unétuous bodies, and ſuch as will fame, attract
vigorouſly, and moſt thereof without friation, as good hard
Fairy Queen.
…
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Wax,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R. I
F R. I
wax, which will convert the needle almoſt as a&amp;ively as the
loadſtone. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 4.
FR1'ction, n.ſ.. [friðion, Fr. frićlio, from frico, Latin.] .
1. The act of rubbing two bodies together.
Do not all bodies which abound with terreſtrial parts, and
eſpecially with ſulphureous ones, emit light as often as thoſe
parts are ſufficiently agitated, whether the agitation be made
by heat, friction, percuſſion, putrefaction, or by any vital
motion ? Newton's Opt.
2. The reſiſtance in machines cauſed by the motion of one body
upon another. -
3. Medical rubbing with the fleſhbruſh or cloaths.
Frićlions make the parts more fleſhy and full, as we ſee
both in men and in the currying of horſes; for that they draw
a greater quantity of ſpirits to the parts. Bacon.
FR1'DAY. n.ſ. [prize baez, Saxon.] The ſixth day of the
week, ſo named of Freya, a Saxon deity.
An' ſhe were not kin to me, ſhe would be as fair on Friday
as Helen is on Sunday.
For Venus, like her day, will change her cheer,
And ſeldom ſhall we ſee a Friday clear. Dryden.
FRIEND. m. ſ. [vriend, Dutch; pneonb, Saxon. This word,
with its derivatives, is pronounced frend, frendly : the i totally
neglected.
1. One joined to another in mutual benevolence and intima-
cy: oppoſed to foe or enemy.
Friend of my ſoul, you twain
Rule in this realm, and the gºr'd ſtate ſuſtain. Shakeſp.
Some man is a friend for his own occaſion, and will not
abide in the day of thy trouble. Eccluſ. vi. 8.
God’s beniſon go with you, and with thoſe -
That would make good of bad, and friends of foes. Shakespeare
Wonder not to ſee this ſoul extend
The bounds, and ſeek ſome other ſelf, a friend. Dryden.
2. One without hoſtile intentions. -
Who comes ſo faſt in filence of the night?
—Afriend. -
—What friend ? your name : Shakespeare. Merchant of Venice.
3. One reconciled to another : this is put by the cuſtom of the
language ſomewhat irregularly in the plural number.
He's friends with Caeſar,
In ſtate of health thou ſay'ſt, and thou ſay'ſt free. Shakeſp.
My ſon came then into my mind; and yet my mind
Was then ſcarce friends with him. Shakespeare King Lear.
4. An attendant, or companion. - -
The king ordains their entrance, and aſcends
His regal ſeat, ſurrounded by his friend. Dryden's AFn.
5. Favourer; one propitious.
Aurora riding upon Pegaſus, ſheweth her ſwiftneſs, and how
ſhe is a friend to poetry and all ingenious inventions. Peacham.
6. A familiar compellation.
Friend, how cameft thou in hither ?
What ſupports me, do'ſt thou aſk?
The conſcience, friend, t'have loſt mine eyes o'erply'd
In liberty's defence. Milton.
To FRIEND. v. a. [from the noun..] To favour; to befriend;
to countenance; to ſupport.
I know that we ſhall have him well to friend. Shakespeare
When vice makes mercy, mercy's ſo extended,
That, for the fault's love, is th’ offender friended. Shakeſp.
FR1'ENDLESS. adj. [from friend.]
1. Wanting friends; wanting ſupport; without countenance;
deſtitute; forlorn.
Alas! I am a woman, friendleſs, hopeleſs. Shakespeare H. VIII.
Woe to him that is alone, is verified upon none ſo much as
upon the friendleſ; perſon. South's Sermons.
To ſome new clime, or to thy native ſky,
Oh friendleſ, and forſaken virtue fly. , Dryden's Aurengzebe.
To what new clime, what diſtant ſky,
Forſaken, friendleſs, will ye fly
Say, will ye bleſs the bleak Atlantick ſhore,
Or bid the furious Gaul be rude no more ? Pope.
2. FRIENDLESS Man. The Saxon word for him whom we call
an outlaw, becauſe he was, upon his excluſion from the king's
peace and protećtion, denied all help of friends.
FRI'ENDLINEss. m. ſ. [from friendy.]
1. A diſpoſition to friendſhip.
Such a liking and friendlineſ, as hath brought forth the
effects. Sidney.
2. Exertion of benevolence. -
Let all the intervals be employed in prayers, charity, friend-
lineſ, and neighbourhood, and means of ſpiritual and corporal
health. Taylºr's Rule of holy living.
FRI'ENDLY. adj. [from friend.] * .
1. Having the temper and diſpoſition of a friend; kind; fa-
vourable; benevolent. -
They gave them thanks, deſiring them to be friendly ſtill
unto them. 2 Mac. xii. 31.
Mat. xxii. 12.
Thou to mankind
Be good, and friendy ſtill, and oft return 1 Milton's P. Loft.
How art thou
To me ſo ſri, idy grown above the reſt
Qf brutal kind ; 4.ilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix.
Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºffida.
Let the Naſſau-ſtar in riſing majeſty appear,
And guide the proſp'rous mariner
With everlaſting beams of friendy light. Prior.
2. Diſpoſed to union.
Like friendy colours found our hearts unite,
And each from each contract new ſtrength and light. Pºpe.
3. Salutary; homogeneal. ' -
Not that Nepentes, which the wife of Thone
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena,
Is of ſuch power to ſtir up joy as this,
To life ſo friendly, or ſo cool to thirſt. Miltºn.
FR1'ENDLY, adv. In the manner of friends; with appcarance
of kindneſs.
Here between the armies,
Let's drink together fiendl, and embrace;
That all their eyes may bear thoſe tokens home
9 our reſtored love and amity. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
FRIE’NDSHIP. m. ſ. [vriendſcap, Dutch.]
1. The ſtate of minds united by mutual benevolence.
There is little fiendſhip in the world, and leaſt of all be-
tween equals, which was wont to be magnified: that that is,
is between ſuperior and inferior, whoſe fortunes may com-
prehend the one the other. Bacon, Eſſay 49.
He lived rather in a fair intelligence than any friendſhip
with the favourites. Carendon.
My ſons, let your unſeemly diſcord ceaſe,
If not in friendſhip, live at leaſt in peace. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
2. Higheſt degree of intimacy.
His friendſhips, ſtill to few confin'd, º
Were always of the middling kind. Swift.
3. Favour; perſonal kindneſs. -
Raw captains are uſually ſent only preferred by friendſhip,
and not choſen by ſufficiency. Spenſer on Ireland. .
4. Aſſiſtance; help.
racious, my lord, hard-by here is a hovel:
Some friendſhip will it lend you’gainſt the tempeſt;
Repoſe you there. Shakespeare's King Lear.
5. Conformity; affinity; correſpondence; aptneſs to unite.
We know thoſe colouq, which have a fiendſhip with each
other, and thoſe which are incompatible, in mixing together
thoſe colours of which we would make trial. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
FRIEZE. m. ſ. [ drap de frieze, French. J A coarſe warm
cloath, made perhaps firſt in Frieſ'and.
If all the world
Should in a pet of temperance feed on pulſe,
Drink the clear ſtream, and nothing wear but frieze,
The All-giver would be unthank'd. * Milton.
The captive Germans, of gigantick ſize,
Are rank'd in order, and are clad in frieze. Dryd. Perſ.
He could no more live without his frieze coat than without
his ſkin. - Addison's Guardian, N°. 1 oz.
See how the double nation lies,
Like a rich coat with ſkirts of frieze;
As if a man, in making poeſies, -
Should bundle thiſtles up with roſes. Swift.
FRIEze. }*ſ [In architecture.] A large flat member which
FR 1zE. ſeparates the architrave from the cornice; of which
there are as many kinds as there are orders of columns. Harr.
No jutting frieze,
Buttrice, nor coigne of 'vantage, but this bird
Hath made his pendant-bed, and procreant cradle. Shakespeare ,
Nor did there want
Cornice or frieze with boſſy ſculptures grav'n ; -
The roof was fretted gold. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. i.
Polydore deſigned admirably well, as to the practical part,
having a particular genius for friezes. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
FR1'ezED. adj. [from frieze.] Shagged or napped with frieze.
FR1'Eze lik E. adj. [frieze and like. J Reſembling a frieze.
I have ſeen the figure of Thalia, the comick muſe, ſome-
times with an entire headpiece and a little frieze.ike tower,
running round the edges of the face, and ſometimes with a
maſk for the face only. . . Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
FR1'GAT. m. ſ. [frigate, French; frºgata, Italian.]
1. A ſmall ſhip. "Ships under fifty guns are generally termed
frigats. . . . .
The treaſure they fought for was, in their view, embezzled
in certain frigats. - Raleigh's Apology.
On high-rais'd decks the haughty Belgians ride,
- Beneath whoſe ſhade our humble figuts go. Dryden.
2. Any ſmall veſſel on the water,
º Behold the water work and play
- About her little figat, therein making way. Fairy Queen.
FRIG E FA’ction. n.f. [frigus and fa.iº, Latin.] The act of
making cold.
To FRIGHT. v. a ſpru;p-an, Saxon. J. To terrify 5 to
diſturb with fear; to ſhock with fear ; to daunt.
- The herds :
were ſtrongly clam’rous in the frighted fields. Shakespeare H. IV.
Nor exile or danger can fight a brave ſpirit, -
With innocence guarded,
With virtue rewarded,
I make of my ſufferings a merit. Tryden's Albiºn.
9 U The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R I
F R I
*
The mind frights itſchſ with any thing reflečted on in groſs,
and at a diſtance: things thus offered to the mind, carry the
ſhew of nothing but difficulty. Locke.
Whence glaring oft with many a broaden'd orb, ,
He frights the nations. Thomſon's Autumn.
FRIGHT. n.ſ [from the verb.] A ſudden terrour.
You, if your goodneſs does not plead my cauſe,
May think I broke all hoſpitable laws,
To bear you from your palace-yard by might,
And put your noble perſon in a fright. Dryden.
To FR1'GHT EN. v. a. To terrify; to ſhock with dread.
The rugged bear's, or ſpotted lynx's brood,
Frighten the valleys and infeſt the wood. Prior.
FR1'GHT FUL. adj. [from fright.]
I. Terrible; dreadful; full of terrour.
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy,
Thy ſchooldays frightful, deſp'rate, wild, and furious. Shakespeare
Without aid you durſt not undertake
This frightful paſſage o'er the Stygian lake. Dryden's Aen.
2. A cant word among women for any thing unpleaſing.
FRI'ghtfully, adv. [from frightful.]
1. Dreadfully ; horribly.
This will make a prodigious maſs of water, and looks fright-
fully to the imagination; 'tis huge and great. turnet.
2. Diſagreeably; not beautifully. A woman's word.
... Then to her glaſs; and Betty, pray,
Don't I look frightfully to-day? Swift.
FR1'GHtfulness. n.J. [from frightful.] The power of im-
preſſing terrour. -
FRIGID. adj. [ frigidus, Latin.]
1. Cold; without warmth. In this ſenſe it is ſeldom uſed but
in ſcience.
In the torrid zone the heat would have been intolerable, .
and in theY. zones the cold would have deſtroyed both
animals and vegetables. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
2. Without warmth of affection. -
3. Impotent; without warmth of body.
4. Dull; without fire of fancy.
If juſtice Phillip's coſtive head
Some frigid rhymes diſburſes,
They ſhall like Perſian tales be read,
And glad both babes and nurſes. Swift.
FR1'GI pity. n.ſ.. [frigiditas, Latin.]
1. Coldneſs; want of warmth.
2. Dulneſs; want of intelle&amp;tual fire.
Driving at theſe as at the higheſt elegancies, which are but
the frigidities of wit. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 9.
Of the two extremes, one would ſooner pardon phrenzy
than frigidity. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
3. Want of corporeal warmth.
The boiling blood of youth agitating the fluid air, hinders
that ſerenity which is neceſſary to ſo ſevere an intentneſs; and
the frigidity of decrepit age is as much its enemy, by reaſon
of its dulling moiſture. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 14.
4. Coldneſs of affection.
FRI'GIDLY. adv. [from frigid.] Coldly; dully; without af-
fe&amp;tion.
FR1'GIDNEss. n.ſ.. [from frigid.] Coldneſs; dulneſs; want
of affection.
FRIGoRI'Fick. adj. [frigorificus, frigus and facio, Lat..] Cauſing
cold. A word uſed in ſcience.
Frigorifick atoms or particles mean thoſe nitrous ſalts which
float in the air in cold weather, and occaſion freezing. Quincy.
To FR1LL. v. a. [frilleux, French.] To quake or ſhiver with
cold. Uſed of a hawk; as, the hawk frills. Dić7.
FRINGE. n.ſ.. [friggio, Italian; frange, French.] Orna-
mental appendages added to dreſs or furniture.
Thoſe offices and dignities were but the facings or fringes
of his greatneſs. 'Wotton.
The golden fringe ev'n ſet the ground on flame,
And drew a precious trail. Dryden's Flower and Leaf.
The ſhadows of all bodies, in this light, were bordered
with three parallel fringes, or bands of coloured light, where-
of that which was contiguous to the ſhadow was broadeſt and
moſt luminous; and that which was remoteſt from it was nar-
roweſt, and ſo faint as not eaſily to be viſible. Newton's Opt.
To Fr INGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To adorn with fringes;
to decorate with ornamental appendages.
Either ſide of the bank, fringed with moſt beautiful trees,
reſiſted the ſun's darts. Sidney, b. ii.
Of ſilver wings he took a ſhining pair, r
Fringed with gold. Fairfax, ſtan. 14.
Here, by the ſacred bramble ting’d,
My petticoat is doubly fring'd. Swift.
FR1'PPERE R. n.f. [from fippier, French.] One who deals in
old things vamped up.
FR1'PPERY. m. ſ. [fripperie, French; fripperia, Italian.]
1. The place where old cloaths are ſold.
Oh, oh, monſter, we know what belongs to a fritpery.
Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ.
Lurana is a frippery of bankrupts, who fly thither from
Druina to play their after-game. Howe's Vocal Forreſt,
2. Old cloaths; caſt dreſſes; tattered rags.
Poor poet ape, that would be thought otir chief,
Whoſe works are e'en the frippery of wit;
From brocage is become ſo bold a thief,
As we, the robb'd, leave rage, and pity it. Ben, johnſon.
The fighting-place now feamens rage ſupply, -
And all the tackling is a frippery. Donne.
Ragfair is a place near the Tower of London, where old
cloaths and frippery are ſold. Notes to Pope's Dunciad.
To FRISK. v. n. [frizzare, Italian.]
1. To leap; to ſkip.
Put water into a glaſs, and wet your finger, and draw it
round about the lip of the glaſs, preſfing it ſomewhat hard;
and after drawing it ſome few times about, it will make the
water friſk and ſprinkle up in a fine dew. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The fiſh fell a friſking in the net. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Whether every one hath experimented this troubleſome
intruſion of ſome friſking ideas, which thus importune the
underſtanding, and hinder it from being better employed, I
know not. Locke.
2. To dance in frolick or gaiety.
We are as twinn’d lamb, that did friſk i' th' ſun,
And bleat the one at the other: what we chang'd,
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
The doćtrine of ill-doing. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
About them friſking play'd
All beaſts of th’ earth. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. iv.
A wanton heifer friſked up and down in a meadow, at eaſe
and pleaſure. L'Aſirange.
Watch the quick motions of the friſting tail,
Then ſerve their fury with the ruſhing male. Dryd. Virgil.
So Bacchus through the conquer'd Indies rode,
And beaſts in gambols friſk'd before their honeſt god, Dryd.
Oft to the mountains airy tops advanc'd,
The friſking ſatyrs on the ſummits danc'd. Addison.
- Thoſe merry blades,
That friſk it under Pindus' ſhades. Prior.
Peg faints at the ſound of an organ, and yet will dance and
friſk at the noiſe of a bagpipe. Arbuthn. Hiſt. of john Bull.
Sly hunters thus, in Borneo's iſle,
To catch a monkey by a wile,
The mimick animal amuſe;
They place before him gloves and ſhoes;
Which when the brute puts aukward on,
All his agility is gone:
In vain º or climb he tries;
The huntſmen ſeize the grinning prize: Swift.
FRISK. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A frolick; a fit of wanton
gaiety.
FRº m. ſ. [from friſk.] A wanton; one not conſtant or
ttled.
Now I will wear this, and now I will wear that;
Now I will wear I cannot tell what:
All new faſhions be pleaſant to me:
Now I am a friſker, all men on me look;
What ſl.ould I do but ſet cock on the hoop 2 Camden,
FR1's KIN ess. n.ſ.. [from friſk.] Gaiety ; livelineſs. A low
word.
FR1'sky. adj. [ſ, ſue, French, from friſk.] Gay; airy. A
low word.
FR1T, n.ſ. [Among chymiſts.] Aſhes or ſalt baked or fried
together with ſand. Dić7.
FRIt H. n.ſ.. [fretum, Latin.] -
1. A ſtrait of the ſea where the water being confined is rough.
What deſp'rate madman then would venture o'er
The frith, or haul his cables from the ſhore? Dryd Wirg.
Batavian fleets
Defraud us of the glittering finny ſwarms
That heave our friths, and crowd upon our ſhores. Thomſon.
2. A kind of net. "I know not whether this ſenſe be now
retained.
The Wear is a frith, reaching through the Cſe, from the
land to low water mark, and having in it a bunt or cod v. th
an eye-hook; where the fiſh entering, upon their coming back
with the ebb, are ſtopt from iſſuing out again. Carew.
FRITI'll ARY. m. ſ. [fritillaire, French..] A plant.
The flower conſiſts of ſix leaves, and is of the bell-ſhaped
lily flowers, pendulous, naked, and, for the moſt part, che-
quered: the ſtyle of the flower becomes an oblong fruit,
divided into three cells, and filled with flat ſeeds, lying in a
double row: the root conſiſts of two fleſhy knobs, for the
moſt part ſemi-globular, betwixt which ariſes the flower-
ftalk, - AMiller.
FRITINANCY. m. ſ. [from fitinnio, Latin.] The ſcream of
an infect, as the cricket or cicada.
The note or fritinancy thereof is far more ſhrill than that of
the locuſt, and its life ſhort. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs.
FRITTER. m. ſ. [friture, French.]
1. A ſmall piece cut to be fried.
Maids, fritters and pancakes ynow ſee ye make;
Let Slut have one pancake for company ſake. Tuſ Husb.
2. A fragment; a ſmall piece. -
3 Scnſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R O
F R O
Senſe and putter! have I lived to ſtand in the taunt of one
that makes fritters of Engliſh | Shakespeare Merry Wives of Iłindſ.
If you ſtrike a ſolid body that is brittle, as glaſs or ſugar,
it breaketh not only where the immediate force is, but break-
eth all about into ſhivers and fritters; the motion, upon the
preſſure, ſearching all ways, and breaking where it findeth
the body weakeſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
The ancient errant knights.
Won all their ladies hearts in fights;
And cut whole giants into fritters,
To put them into amorous twitters,
3. A cheeſecake; a wigg.
To FR1'TTER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cut meat into ſm ll pieces to be fried.
2. To break into ſmall particles or fragments.
Joy to great chaos' let diviſion reign!
My racks and tortures ſoon ſhall drive them hence,
Break all their nerves, and fritter all their ſenſe. Dunciad.
How prologues into prefaces decay,
And theſe to notes are fritter'd quite away. Pope's Dunciad.
FRI'VOLOUS. adj. [frivolui, Latin; frivole, Fr.] Slight;
trifling; of no moment.
It is frivolous to ſay we ought not to uſe bad ceremonies of
the church of Rome, and preſume all ſuch bad as it pleaſeth
themſelves to diſlike. , Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 4.
Theſe ſeem very frivolous and fruitleſs; for, by the breach of
them, little damage can come to the commonwealth. Spenſer.
She tam'd the brinded lioneſs,
And ſpotted mountain pard; but ſet at nought
The frivolous bolt of Cupid. Milton.
Thoſe things which now ſeem frivolous and ſlight,
Will be of ſerious conſequence to you,
When they have made you once ridiculous. Roſcommon.
All the impeachments in Greece and Rome ſeem to have
agreed in a notion they had of being concerned, in point of
honour, to condemn whatever perſon they impeached, how-
ever frivolous the articles, or however weak the ſurmiſes,
whereon they were to proceed in their proofs. Swift.
I will not defend any miſtake, and do not think myſelf
obliged to anſwer every frivolous objection. Arbuthnot.
Frivolousness. n.ſ.. [from frivolous.] Want of importance;
triflingneſs.
FRI'volously. adv. [from frivolous.] Triflingly; without
weight.
To Frizie. v.a. [friſer, Fr.] To curl in ſhort curls like
nap of frieze.
Th’ humble ſhrub
And buſh, with frizid hair implicit. Milton's Parad. Loft.
They frizled and curled their hair with hot irons. Hakewill.
I doff'd my ſhoe, and ſwear
Therein I ſpy'd this yellow frized hair.
FR1'zleR. n.ſ.. [from frizle.]
FRO. adv. [of pna, Saxon.] -
1. Backward; regreſſively. " It is only uſed in oppoſition to the
word to ; to and fro, backward and forward.
The Carthaginians, in all the long Punick war, having
ſpoiled all Spain, rooted out all that were affected to the Ro-
mans; and the Romans, having recovered that country, did
cut off all that favoured the Carthaginians: ſo betwixt them
both, to and fro, there was ſcarce a native Spaniard left. Speºſ.
As when a heap of gather'd thorns is caſt, -
Now to, now fro, before th’ autumnal blaſt,
Together clung, it rolls around the field. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. It is a contračtion of from : not now uſed.
They turn round like grindleſtones,
Which they dig out fro’ the delves,
For their bairns bread, wives and ſelves.
FRock. n.ſ.. [froe, French.]
1. A dreſs; a coat.
That monſter, cuſtom, is angel yet in this,
That to the uſe of ačtions fair and good,
He likewiſe gives a frock or livery,
That aptly is put on. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Chalybean temper'd ſteel, and frock of mail
Adamantean proof. Milton's Agoniſtes, l. 129.
2. A kind of cloſe coat for men.
I ſtrip my body of my ſhepherd's frock.
3. A kind of gown for chikiren.
FRog. m. ſ. [rno;5a, Saxon.]
1. A ſmall animal with four feet, living both by land and water,
and placed by naturaliſts among mixed animals, as partaking
of beaſt and fiſh. There is likewiſe a ſmall green frog that
perches on trees, ſaid to be venomous.
Poor Tom, that eats the ſwimming frog, the toad, the tod-
pole. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Auſter is drawn with a pot or urn, pouring forth water,
with which ſhall deſcend frogs. Peacham on Drawing.
2. The hollow part of the horſe's hoof. ..
. Fro'a bit. n.ſ...[frºg and bit.]. An herb. Ainſworth.
FRo'o FIs H. *{{ſ} and fiſh.] A kind of fiſh. Ainſworth.
FR o' Go RAss. n.f. [frog and graſs.] A kind of herb.
FRo'o lettuce. n.f. [frºg and lettuce.] A plant.
FRois E. m. ſ. [from the French froiſſer, as the pancake is criſped
Hadira', . iii.
Ainſworth.
Gay's Paſtorals.
One that makes ſhort curls.
Ben. johnſon.
Dryden.
Fro'Lickly. adv [from friick.] Gally; wildly.
2. Noting reception.
or crimpled in frying.] A kind of food made by frying bacon
incloſed in a pancake. -&gt;
FROLICK. adj. [vrolijck, Dutch..] Gay ; full of levity; full
of pranks.
We fairies, that do run
By the triple Hecate's team,
From the preſence of the ſun;
Following darkneſs like a dream,
Now are frolick, Shakeſpeare's Midſum: Night's Dream,
Whether, as ſome ſages fing,
The frolick wind that breathes the Spring,
Zephyr with Aurora playing,
As he met her once a Maying;
There on beds of violets blue,
And freſh-blown roſes waſh’d in dew,
Fill'd her with thee a daughter fair,
So buxom, blithe, and debonnair. Milton,
Who ripe, and froick of his full-grown age,
Roving the Celtick and Iberian fields,
At laſt betakes him to this ominous wood. Milton,
The gay, the frclick, and the loud. J/aller.
FRoliçk, n.ſ.. [from the adječtive..] A wild prank; a flight
of whim and levity.
He would be at his frolick once again,
And his pretenſions to divinity, Roſſommon.
Alcibiades, having been formerly noted for the like froicks
and excurſions, was immediately accuſed of this, Swift.
While rain depends, the penſive cat gives o'er
Her frošicks, and purſues her tail no more. Swift.
To FRo'Lick. v. n. [from the noun..] To play wild pranks;
to play tricks of levity and gaiety.
Then to her new love let her go,
And deck her in golden array;
Be fineſt at ev'ry fine ſhow,
And frolick it all the long day.
-
Rowe,
FRo'licksom E. adj. [from frºlick.] Full of wild gaiety.
FRoſlicksome Ness. n.ſ.. [from frolickſome J Wildneſs of
gaiety; pranks.
FRoſlicksom Fly, adv. [ from frolic ſome. I
gaiety.
From. prºp. [Enam, Saxon and Scottiſh.]
1. Away; noting privation.
Your ſlighting Zulema, this very hour
Will take ten thouſand ſubječts from your power, Dryden,
In fetters one the barking porter ty'd,
And took him trembling from his ſov’reign's ſide. Dryden,
Clariſſa drew, with tempting grace,
A two-edg’d weapon from the ſhining caſe. ,
With wild
P ope.
What time would ſpare from ſteel receives its date. Pope,
3. Noting proceſſion, deſcent, or birth.
Thus the hard and ſtubborn race of man
From animated rock and flint began. Blackmore's Creation,
The ſong began from Jove. Dryden,
Succeeding kings riſe from the happy bed. Irene,
4. Noting tranſmiſſion. r
The meſſengers from our ſiſter and the king. Shakespeare.
5. Noting abſtraction; vacation from.
I ſhall find time
Frºm this enormous ſtate, and ſeek to give -
Loſſes their remedies. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
6. With to following; noting ſucceſſion.
Theſe motions we muſt examine from firſt to laſt, to find
out what was the form of the earth. Burn. Theo of the Earth.
He bid her from time to time be comforted. Addison Speciat.
7. Out of ; noting emiſſion.
When the moſt high
Eternal Father, from his ſecret cloud
Amidſt, in thunder utter'd thus his voice. Milt. Par. Ig?.
Then pierc'd with pain, ſhe ſhook her haughty head,
Sigh’d from her inward ſoul, and thus ſhe ſaid. Dryd. Æn.
8. Noting progreſs from premiſſes to inferences.
If an objection be not removed, the concluſion of expe:
rience from the time paſt to the time preſent will not be ſound
and perfeót. Bacon's I/ar with Spain.
This is evident from that high and refined morality, which
ſhined forth in ſome of the ancient heathens. South's Sermons.
9. Noting the place or perſon from whom a meſſage is brought.
The king is coming, and I muſt ſpeak with him from the
bridge. How now, Fluellen, cam'ſt thou from the bridge?
Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
10. Out of: noting extraction.
From high Meonia's rocky ſhores I came,
Of poor deſcent; Acastes is my name. Addison Ovid. Met.
11. Becauſe of. Noting the reaſon or motive of an act or
effect.
You are good, but from a nobler cauſe ;
Fºom your own knowledge, not from nature's laws. Dryden.
David celebrates the glory of God from the conſideration
of the greatneſs of his works. Tillotſon, Sermon 4.
We ficken ſoon from her contagious care ;
Grieve for her ſorrows, groan for her deſpair. Prior.
Relaxations
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R O
F R O
Relaxations fom plenitude is cured by ſpare diet, and from
any cauſe by that which is contrary to it. Arbuthnot on dim.
12. Out of. Noting the ground or cauſe of anything.
They who believe that the praiſes, which ariſe from valour
are ſuperiour to thoſe which proceed from any other virtues,
have not conſidered. Dryden's Wirg. Æn. Dedication.
What entertainment can be raiſed from ſo pitiful a machine?
We ſee the ſucceſs of the battle from the very beginning. Dryd.
'Tis true from force the ſtrongeſt titles ſpring. Dryden.
13. Not near to. Noting diſtance.
His regiment lies half a mile at leaſt
South from the mighty power of the king. Shakespeare Rich. III.
14. Noting ſeparation or receſſion.
To die by thee, were but to die in jeſt;
From thee to die, were torture more than death. Sh, H. VI.
By the ſacred radiance of the ſun,
The myſteries of Hecate, and the night;
By all the operations of the orbs,
From whom we do exiſt, and ceaſe to be,
Here I diſclaim all my paternal care. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Haſt thou beheld, when fom the goal they ſtart,
The youthful charioteers, with heaving heart,
Ruſh to the race, and, panting, ſcarcely bear
Th’ extremes of feveriſh hope and chilling fear. Dryd. Wirg.
15. Noting exemption or deliverance.
From jealouſy's tormenting ſtrife, -
For ever be thy boſom free. Prior.
16. At a diſtance. Noting abſence.
Our father he hath writ, ſo hath our ſiſter,
Of diff'rences, which I beſt thought it fit
To anſwer from our home. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
17. Noting derivation.
I lay the deep foundations of a wall,
And Enos, nam'd from me, the city call. Dryden's AEn.
18. Since. Noting diſtance from the paſt.
The flood was not the cauſe of mountains, but there were
mountains from the creation. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the I/orld.
I had, from my childhood, a wart upon one of my fingers.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 997.
The other had been trained up from his youth in the war
of Flanders. Clarendon, b. viii.
The milk of tygers was his infant food,
Taught from his tender years the taſte of blood. Dryden.
Were there, from all eternity, no memorable actions done
'till about that time * Tillºtſon, Sermon I.
19. Contrary to.
Any thing ſo overdone is from the purpoſe of playing;
whoſe end, both at the firſt and now, was and is to hold, as
'twere, the mirrour up to nature. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Do not believe,
That from the ſenſe of all civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence. Shakeſp.
• Did you draw bonds to forfeit? Sign, to break?
Or muſt we read you quite from what we ſpeak,
And find the truth out the wrong way : Donne.
20. Noting removal.
Thrice from the ground ſhe leap'd. Dryden's Żn. b. ii.
21. From is very frequently joined by an ellipſis with adverbs:
as, from above, from the parts above; from below, from the
places below; of which ſome are here exemplified.
22. FROM above.
He, which gave them from above ſuch power, for miraculous
confirmation of that which they taught, endued them alſo
with wiſdom from above, to teach that which they ſo did con-
firm. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 8.
No ſooner were his eyes in ſlumber bound,
When, from above, a more than mortal ſound
Invades his ears. Dryden’s AEn. b. viii.
23. FROM afar.
Light demilances from afar they throw. Dryden's Ain.
24. FROM beneath.
With whirlwinds from beneath ſhe toſs'd the ſhip,
And bare expos'd the boſom of the deep. Dryden's Wirgil.
An arm ariſes of the Stygian flood,
Which, breaking from beneath with bellowing ſound,
Whirls the black waves and rattling ſtones around. Dryden.
25. From behind.
See, to their baſe reſtor'd, earth, ſeas, and air,
And joyful ages from behind, in crowding ranks appear. Dry.
26. FRo M far.
The train, proceeding on their way,
From far the town and lofty tow’rs ſurvey. Dryden's AEn.
27. FRom high.
Then heav'n's imperious queen ſhot down from high. Dryd.
28. From thence. Here from is ſuperfluous.
In the neceſſary differences which ariſe from thence, they
rather break into ſeveral diviſions than join in any one publick
intereſt; and from hence have always riſen the moſt dangerous
factions, which have ruined the peace of nations. Clarendon,
29. FRoM whence. From is here ſuperfluous.
While future realms his wand'ring thoughts delight,
His daily viſion, and his dream by night, w
Forbidden Thebes appears before his eye, -
From whence he ſees his abſent brother fly. Pºpe's Statius.
30. FROM where.
from where high Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
Brown with o'er-arching ſhades and pendent woods, .
Us to theſe ſhores our filial duty draws. Pope's Odyſſey.
31. FR M without.
When the plantation grows to ſtrength, then it is time to
plant it with women as well as with men, that it may ſpread
into generations, and not be pieced from without. Bacon.
If native power prevail not, ſlall I doubt
To ſeek for needſui ſuccour from without. Dryden's Án.
32 Iron is ſometimes followed by another prepoſition, with its
proper caſe. -
33. FROM amidſ?.
Thou too ſhalt fall by time or barb’rous foes,
Whoſe circling walls the ſev’n fam'd hills encloſe;
And thou, whoſe rival tow'rs invade the ſkies,
And, from amidſt the waves, with equal glory riſe. Addison.
34. From among,
Here had new begun
My wand'ring, had not he, who was my guide
Up hither, from among the trees appear'd,
Preſence divine ! Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. viii.
35. From beneath.
- My worthy wife our arms miſlaid,
And from beneath my head my ſword convey'd. Dryd. Æn.
36. FROM beyond.
There followed him great multitudes of people from Gali-
lee, and from beyond Jordan. 44at. iv. 25.
37. FROM forth.
Young Arctus, from forth his bridal bow'r,
Prought the full laver o'er their hands to pour, ;
And caniſters of conſecrated flour. Pope's Odyſſey.
38. FROM off.
The ſea being conſtrained to withdraw from off certain
tracts of lands, which lay ’till then at the bottom of it. J/codw.
Knights, unhors'd, may riſe from off the plain,
And fight on foot, their honour to regain. Dryden.
39. From out.
The king with angry threatnings from out a window, where
he was not aſhamed the world ſhould behold him a beholder,
commanded his guard and the reſt of his ſoldiers to haſten
their death. Sidney, b. ii.
And join thy voice unto the angel-quire,
From out his ſecret altar touch'd with hallow'd fire. Milton.
Now ſhake, frºm out thy fruitful breaſt, the ſeeds
Of envy, diſcord, and of cruel deeds. Dryden's Án. b. vii.
Strong god of arms, whoſe iron ſceptre ſways
The freezing North and hyperborean ſeas,
Terror is thine; and wild amazement, flung
From out thy chariot, withers ev'n the ſtrong. Dryden.
40. FROM out ºf:
Whatſoever ſuch principle there is, it was at the firſt found
9ut by diſcourſe, and drawn from out of the very bowels of
heaven and earth. Ho-ker, b. i. ſ. 8.
41. FRosſ under.
He, though blind of fight,
Deſpis'd, and thought extinguiſh’d quite,
With inward eyes illuminated,
His fiery virtue rous'd
From under aſhes into ſudden flame. Miltºn's Agoniſłes.
42. From within. -
From within
The broken bowels, and the bloated ſkin,
A buzzing noiſe of bees his ears alarms. Dryd. Pirg, Geor.
FR9'Mw ARD, prep. [ Fram and peano, Saxon.] Away from ;
the contrary to the word tºwards.
As chearfully going towards as Pyrocles went froward
fromward his death. Sidney.
The common horizontal needle is continually varying
towards Eaſt and Weſt; and ſo the dipping or inclining néedle
is varying up and down, towards or fromward; the zenith,
Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
FRONDI'FF Rous. adj. [frondifer, Lat..] Bearing leaves. Diff.
FRONT. n.ſ.. [frons, Latin; front, French.]
1. The face.
His front yet threatens, and his frowns command. Prior.
They ſtand not front to front, but each doth view
The other's tail, purſu'd as they purſue. Creech's Manilius.
The patriot virtues that diſtend thy thought,
Spread on thy front, and in thy boſom glow. Thomſºn:
2. The face, in a ſenſe of cenſure or diſlike: as, a hardened
front; a fierce front. This is the uſual ſenſe.
3. The face as oppoſed to an enemy.
His forward hand, inur'd to wounds, makes way
Upon the ſharpeſt frºnts of the moſt fierce. Daniel's C. J.P.
4. The part or place oppoſed to the face, -
The
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R O
Tra
F R O
..
The acceſs of the town was only by a neck of land: our
men had ſhot that thundered upon them from the rampier in
front, and from the gallies that lay at ſea in flank. Bacon.
5. The van of an army.
*Twixt hoſt and hoſt but narrow ſpace was left,
A dreadful interval' and frºnt to front
Preſented, ſtood in terrible array. A filton's Paradiſe Loft.
6. The forepart of any thing, as of a building. -
Both theſe ſides are not only returns, but parts of the fromt ;
and uniform without, though ſeverally partitioned within, and
are on both ſides of a great and ſtately tower, in the midſt of
the front. Bacon, Eſſay 46.
Palladius adviſeth ºf. of his edifice ſhould ſo reſpect
the South, that in its firſt angle it receive the riſing rays of the
Winter ſun, and decline a little from the Winter ſetting
thereof. Brºwn's Wugar Errours, b. vi.
The prince approach'd the door,
Poſſeſs'd the porch, and on the front above
He fix'd the fatal bough. Dryden's AFn. b. vi.
Cae ſees the front of a palace covered with painted pillars of
different orders. - Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
7. The moſt conſpicuous part or particular.
To Fros T. v. a. from the noun J
1. To oppoſe directly, or face to face; to encounter.
You four ſhall front them in the narrow laſte; we will walk
lower: if they 'ſcape from your encounter, then they light on
US. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Can you, when you have puſh'd out of your gates the very
defender of them, think to front his revenges with eaſy
groans. Shakeſpeare's floriolanus.
Some are either to be won to the ſtate in a faſt and true
manner, or fronted with ſome other of the ſame party that
may oppoſe them, and ſo divide the reputation. Bacon's Ljays.
I ſhall front thee, like ſome flating ghoſt,
With all my wrongs about me. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. To ſtand oppoſed or overagainſt any place or thing.
The ſquare will be one of the moſt beautiful in Italy when
this ſtatue is erected, and a townhouſe built at one end to front
the church that ſtands at the other. Addiſon on ſtay.
To F.Ron T. v. n. To ſtand foremoſt.
I front but in that file,
Where others tell ſteps with me. Shakeſheare's Henry VIII.
FRo'NTAL. n.ſ.[frontale, Lat. frontal, Fr.] Any external form of
medicine to be applied to the forehead, generally compoſed
amongſt the ancients of coolers and hypnoticks. &amp;ºincy.
We may apply intercipients upon the temples of mafick:
frontales may alſo be applied. Wiſema!.'s Surgery.
The torpedo, being alive, ſtupifies at a diſtance; but after
death produceth no ſuch effect; which had they retained, they
might have ſupplied opium, and ſerved as frontal; in pºrenſies.
Brown's Pulgar Errou's, b. iii.
FRO'NtATED. adj. [from frons, Latin. J. In botany, the
frontated leaf of a flower grows broader and broader, and
at laſt perhaps terminates in a right line: uſed in oppoſition
to cuſpated, which is, when the leaves of a flower end in a
point. &amp;Mincy.
FRO'NtBox. m.ſ. ſyrºnt and box.] The box in the playhouſe
from which there is a direct view to the ſtage.
How vain are all theſe glories, all our pains,
Unleſs good ſenſe preſerve what beauty gains !
That men may ſay, when we the frontºx grace,
Behold the firſt in virtue, as in face. Pope's Ra. of the Lock.
FRO'NTED. adj. [from front.] Formed with a front.
Part fronted brigades form. Milton.
FRO'NTIER. n.ſ. . [frontiere, French. J The marches; the
limit; the utmoſt verge of any territory; the border: proper-
ly that which terminates not at the ſea, but fronts another
country.
Draw all the inhabitants of thoſe borders away, or plant
garriſons upon all thoſe frontiers about him. Spenſer on Ireland.
I upon my frontiers here -
Keep reſidence,
That little which is left ſo to defend. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
FRO'NTIER. adj. Bordering.
A place thcre lies on Gallia's utmoſt bounds,
Where riſing ſeas inſult the frontier grounds. Addison.
FRO'NTISPIE ce. n.ſ.. [frontiſpicium, id quod in frante conſpi-
citur ; frontiffice, French.) That part of any building or
other body that dire&amp;ly meets the eye.
With frontifficer of diamond and gold
Embelliſh'd, thick with ſparkling orient gems
The portal ſhone. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. iii.
Who is it has informed us that a rational ſoul can inhabit
no tenement, unleſs it has juſt ſuch a ſort of frontiſpice P Locke.
The frontſpiece of the townhouſe has pillars of a beautiful
black marble, ſtreaked with white. Addiſon on Italy.
FRO'N TL Ess. adj. [from front.] Without bluſhes; without
ſhaine; without diffidence.
Thee, front'ſ man, we follow'd from afar,
Thy inſtruments of death and tools of war. Dryd. Iliad.
For vice, though frontleſ; and of harden’d face,
Is daunted at the ſight of awful grace. Dryden.
Strike a bluſh through frontºſ, flattery. Pºpe.
Fro's T : E.T. n.ſ.. [from frºns, flatin ; fronteau, French..] A
bandage worn upon the forehead. -
How now, daughter, what makes that f ontlet on You are
too much of late i' th' frown. Shakeſpeare's King f car.
They ſhºi be as frontlets between thine eyes. Desir. vi. 8.
To the forehead frontlets were applied, to reſtrain and inter-
cept the influx. Wiſeman's Surgery.
FRONTRoo'M. n.ſ.. [front and room.] An apartment in the
forepart of the houſe.
If your ſhop ſtands in an eminent ſtreet, the fromirooms are
commonly more airy than the backrooms; and it will be in-
convenient to make the frontroom ſhallow. Moxon's Mech. Ex.
FR.R.E. adj. [bevroren, Dutch, frozen.] Frozen. This word
is not uſed ſince the time of 44ilton.
The parching air
Burns frare, and cold performs th' effect of fire Mih. P. L.
FRoRNE adj. [hevroren, frozen, Dutch..] Frozei, ; congealed
with cold. Obſolete.
O, my heart-blood is well nigh fronne I feel,
And my galage grown faſt to my heel. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
FROST. n.ſ.. [Enore, Saxon.]
1. The laſt effe&amp;t of cold; the power or ačt of congelation. .
This is the ſtate of man: to-day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow bloſſoms,
And bears his bluſhing honours thick upon him;
The third day comes a fioſº, a killing fro/,
And when he thinks, good eaſy man, full ſurely
His greatneſs is a ripening, nips his root, - -
And then he fails. Shakºſłeare's Henry VIII.
When the froſt teizes upon wine, only the more wateriſh
parts are congealed : there is a mighty ſpirit which can retreat
into itſelf, and within its own compaſs lie ſecure from the
freezing impreſſion. Svu.h's Sernions.
2. The appearance of plants and trees parkling with congela-
tion of dew.
Behold the groves that ſhine with filver fro?,
Their beauty wither'd, and their verdure loſt. Pope's Hinter.
FRo's TBI TEN. adj. [/r/ and bitten..] Nipped or withered
by the froſt.
The leaves, gathered ſomewhat before they are too much
frºſthitten, make excellent matrefles. A ſortimer.
Fro's red, adj [from f ºff.] Laid on in inequalities like thoſe
of the hoar froſt upon plants.
The rich brocaded ſilk unfold,
Where riſing flow’rs grow ſtiff with frºſſed gold. Gay,
FKo's ºr 11 Y. adv. [from frºßy.]
1. With froſt; with exceſſive cold.
2. Without warmth of affection. -
Courtling, I rather thou ſhould'ſt utterly
Diſpraiſe my work, than praiſe it foſſi'y. Pen. johnſºn,
Fro's TiNess. If ſ [from f :/ly Cold ; frºzing cold.
FRO's T N Ail. n. ſ. [froſi and mail.] A nail with a prominent
head driven into the horic's ...oes, that it may pierce the
ice.
The claws are ſtrait only to take hold, for better progreſ-
ſion; as a horſe that is ſhod with ºrg/?nais. Grew's C /mol.
Fro's twork. m. ſ [f off and wºrk.] Work in which the
ſubſtance is laid on with inequalities, like the dew congealed
upon ſhrubs.
By nature ſhap'd to various figures, thoſe
The fruitful rain, and theſe the hail compoſe;
The ſnowy fleece and curious ſºftwork theſe,
Produce the dew, and thoſe the gentle breeze.
FRO'sty. adj. [from froſt.] -
1. Having the power of coºgelation; exceſſive cold.
For all my blood in Rome's great quarrel ſhed,
For all the froſy nights that I have watch'd,
Be pitiful to my condemned ſons. Shaespeare. Titus Andronicus.
The air, if very cold, irritateth the flame, and maketh it
burn more fiercely; as fire ſcorcheth in fºſy weather. Bacon.
A gnat, half ſtarved with cold and hunger, went out one
froſy morning to a bee-hive. L'Eſtrange.
2. Chill in affection; without warmth of kindneſs or courage.
what afrº, ſpirited rogue is this! Shakespeare. Henry IV.
3. Hoary; gray-haired; reſembling froſt.
Where is loyalty
If it be baniſh’d from the froſty head,
Where ſhall it find a harbour in the earth?
Blackmºre,
Shakespeare H. VI.
FROTH. n.ſ. [froe, Daniſh and Scottiſh.)
1. Spume; foam; the bubbles cauſed in liquors by agitation.
His hidcous tail then hurled he about,
And therewith all envrapt the nimble thighs
Of his froth foamy ſteed. Fairy Q: een, b. i. eant. 1 r.
When wind expireth from under the ſea, as it cauſed ſome
reſounding of the water, ſo it cauſeth ſome light motions of
bubbles, and white circles of froth. Lacon’s Nat. Hiſtory.
Surging waves againſt a ſolid rock,
Though all to ſhivers daſh'd, th'aſſault renew;
Vain batt'ry, and in fºoth or bubbles end. Milton's Pa. Rºg:
The uſeleſs ſºoth ſwims on the ſurface, but the pearl lies
covered with a maſs of waters, Glanv. Scepſ, c. 9.
9 X The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">ſ
F R U
F R O
The ſcatter'd ocean flies;
Black ſands, diſcolour'd froth, and mingled mud ariſe. Dry.
They were the froth my raging foily mov’d
When it boil'd up; 1 knew not then I lov’d,
Yet then lov'd moſt. 1 ryden’s Aurengzebe.
If now the colours of natural bodies are to be mingled, let
water, a little thickened with ſoap, be agitated to raiſe af, oth;
and after that f oth has ſtood a little, there will appear, to one
that ſhall view it intently, various colours every where in the
ſurfaces of the ſeveral bubbles; but to one that ſhall go ſo far
off that he cannot diſtinguiſh the colours from one another,
the whole froth will grow white, with a perfect whiteneſs.
Newton's Opt.
A painter, having finiſhed the pićlure of a horſe, excepting
the looſe froth about his mouth and his bridle; and after many
unſucceſsful eſſays, deſpairing to do that to his ſatisfaction, in
a great rage threw a ſpunge at it, all beſmeared with the co-
lours, which fortunately hitting upon the right place, by one
bold ſtroke of chance moſt exactly ſupplied the want of ſkill
in the artiſt. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Any empty or ſenſeleſs ſhow of wit or eloquence.
3. Anything not hard, ſolid, or ſubſtantiai.
Who eateth his veal, pig and lamb being froth,
Shall twice in a week go to bed without broth. Tiff. Husb.
To FRoth. v. n. [from the noun..] To foam ; to throw out
ſpume ; to generate ſpume. -
He frets within, froths treaſon at his mouth,
And churns it through his teeth. Dryden's Don Sebaſſian.
FRoºthily. adv. [from frothy.]
1. With foam ; with ſpume.
2. In an empty trifling manner.
FROTHY, adj. [from froth.]
1. Full of foam, froth, or ſpume.
The ſap of trees is of differing natures; ſome watery and
clear, as vines, beeches, pears; ſome thick, as apples; ſome
gummy, as cherries; and ſome frothy, as elms. Bacon.
Behold a fathy ſubſtance riſe;
Becautious, or your bottle flies. Swift.
2. Soft; not ſolid; waſting.
Their bodies are ſo ſolid and hard as you need not fear that
bathing ſhould make them fathy. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
3. Vain; empty; trifling.
What's a voluptuous dinner, and the fro:/y vanity of diſ-
courſe that commonly attends theſe pompous entertainments 2
What is it but a mortification, to a man of ſenſe and
virtue 2 L’Eſłrange, Fable 185.
Though the principles of religion were never ſo clear and
evident, yet they may be made ridiculous by vain and frothy
men; as the graveſt and wiſeſt perſon in the world may be
abuſed by being put in a fool's coat. Tillotſon, Sermon i.
FROUNCE. n.ſ. A word uſed by falconers for a diſtemper,
in which white ſpittle gathers about the hawk's bill.
Skinner and Ainſworth.
To FRounce. v. a. [from the noun.] To frizzle or curl the
hair about the face. This word was at firſt probably uſed in
contempt.
Some frounce their curled hair in courtly guiſe,
Some prank their ruffs, and others timely dight
Their gay attire. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 4.
Some warlike ſign muſt be uſed; cither a ſlovenly buſkin,
or an overſtaring frounced head. Aſtham's Schoolmaſter.
Thus, night, oft ſee me in thy pale career,
*Till civil ſuited morn appear;
Not trick'd and frounc'd as ſhe was wont,
With the Attick boy to hunt. Milton.
FRo'UzY. adj. [A cant word.] Dim; foetid; muſly.
Petticoats in frowzy heaps. - Swift.
When firſt Diana leaves her bed,
Vapours and ſteams her looks diſgrace;
Afrcuzy dirty-colour'd red
Sits on her cloudy wrinkled face. Swift.
FROWARD. adj. [Frampears, Saxon. J Peeviſh; ungo-
vernable; angry; perverſe: the contrary to toward.
The froward pain of mine own heart made me ſo delight
to puniſh him, whom I eſteemed the chiefeſt let in the
way. Sidney.
She's not froward, but modeſt as the dove:
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn. Shakeſpeare.
Whoſe ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths.
Prov. ii. 15.
Time moveth ſo round, that a froward retention of cuſtom
is as turbulent a thing as innovation. Bacon, Eſſay 25.
'Tis with froward men, and froward factions too, as 'tis
with froward children; they’ll be ſooner quieted by fear than
by any ſenſe of duty. L’Eſtrange.
They help or occaſion ſleep, as we find by the common
uſe and experience of rocking froward children in cradles.
Temple.
Fro'WARDLY. adv. [from froward.J Peeviſhly; perverſely.
I hid me and was wroth, and he went frºwardly in the way
of his heart. Iſ, lvii. 17.
F *** n: ſ [from frºward.] Peeviſhneſs; perverſe-
inclS
How many frowardneſſes of ours does he ſmother ? how
many indignities does he paſs by ? how many affionts does he
put up at our hands South's Sermons.
We'll mutually forget
The warmth of youth and frowardneſs of age. Addison Cato:
FRO'w ER. m. ſ. [I know not the etymology.] A cleaving
tool.
A frower of iron for cleaving of lath,
With roll for a ſawpit, good huſbandry hath. Tuff. Hush.
To FROWN. v. a. [frºgner, old French, to wrinkle. Skin-
nºr.] To expreſs diſpleaſure by contračting the face to
wrinkles; to look ſtern.
Say, that ſhe frowns; I'll ſay, ſhe looks as clear
As morning roſes newly waſh’d with dew. Shakeſpeare.
They chuſe their magiſtrate;
And ſuch a one as he, who puts his inall,
His popular ſhall, againſt a graver bench
Than everſrown'd. Shakeſpeare's Coriºlanus.
How now, daughter, what makes that frontlet on You
are too much of late i' th' frown.
Thou waſt a pretty fellow, when thou hadſt no need to
care for her frowning. Sº a ſpeare's King lear.
Heroes in animated marble frown. Pope.
The wood,
Whoſe ſhady horrors on a riſing brow
Wav'd high, and frºwn'd upon the ſtream below. Pope.
Frow N. m. ſ. [ſrom the verb..] A wrinkled look; a look of
diſpleaſure.
Patiently endure that frown of fortune, and by ſome notable
exploit win again her favour. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Turks.
In his half-clos'd eyes -
Stern vengeance yet and hoſtile terror ſtand;
His front yet threatens, and his frowns command. Prior.
FRow NINGLY. adv. [from frown j Sternly ; with a look of
diſpleaſure. -
What, look'd he frowningly?
—A count'nance more in ſorrow than in anger. Shakespeare Ham.
FRO'w Y. adj. Muſty; moſſy. This word is now not uſed;
but inſtead of it ſrouzy.
But if they with thy gotes ſhould yede,
They ſoon might be corrupted;
Or like not of the frowy fede,
Or with the weeds be glutted.
FRo'ZEN. part, paſſ of freeze.
Againſt whom was the fine frozen knight, frºzen in deſpair;
but his armour ſo naturally repreſenting ice, and all his furni-
ture ſo lively anſwering thereto, as yet did I never ſee anything
that pleaſed me better. Sidney, b. ii.
How dire a tempeſt from Mycenae pour’d,
Our plains, our temple, and our town devour'd:
What was the waſte of war, what fierce alarms
Shook Aſia's crown with European arms;
Ev’n ſuch have heard, if any ſuch there be,
Whoſe earth is bounded by the frozen ſea. Dryden's Án.
Fierce Boreas, with his off pring, iſſues forth
Tº invade the frozen waggon of the North. Dryd. Ovid.
A cheerful blaze aroſe, and by the fire
They warm'd their frozen feet, and dry'd their wet attire.
Dryden's Flower and Leaf.
F. R. S. Fellow of the Royal Society.
Who this profeſs,
Shine in the dignity of F. R. S. Pope.
FRU'cTIFF Rous. ad. [fručijer, Latin.] Bearing fruit. Anſ.
To FRUCTIFY. v. a. If uglier, French..] i o make fruit-
ful; to fertiliſe.
The legal levies the ſovereign raiſes, are as vapours which
the ſun exhales, which fall down in ſweet ſhowers to fruºiſy
the earth. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
Where e'er ſhe looks, behold ſome ſudden birth
Adorns the trees, and fructifies the earth. Granville.
To FRU'cTIFY. v. n. To bear fruit.
It watereth the heart, to the end it may fruđiſy; maketh
the virtuous, in trouble, full of magnanimity and courage;
and ſerveth as a moſt approved remedy againſt all doleful and
heavy accidents which befall men in this preſent life. Hºoker.
Thus would there nothing fruºiff, either near or under
them, the ſun being horizontal to the poles. Brown'. Wu. Err.
FRUCTIF IcA'tion. m. ſ. [from frućliſy.) The act of cauſing
or of bearing fruit; fecundation; fertility.
That the ſap doth powerfully riſe in the Spring, to put the
plant in a capacity of frucification, he that hath beheld how
many gallons of water may be drawn from a birch-tree, hath
ſlender reaſon to doubt. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii.
FRU’ctuous. adj. [fručiueux, Fr. from frucify.] Fruitful;
fertile; impregnating with fertility.
- Here to the fight
Apples of price, and plentecus ſheaves of corn
Oft interlac'd occur; and both imbibe
Fitting congenial juice, ſo rich the ſoil,
So much does fructuous moiſture o'erabound ! Phillips.
FRUGAL.
Spenſer's Paſtorals.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R U
F R U
FRU’GAL. adj. [frugali, Latin; frugal, Fr.] Thriſty; ſpar-
ing; parſimonious ; not prodigal; not profuſe; not laviſh.
If through miſts he ſhoots his ſullen beams,
Frugal of light, in looſe and ſtraggling ſtreams,
Suſpect a driſling day. Dryden's Wirgil's Geºrgicks.
FRU'GALLY. adv. [from frugal.] Parſimoniouſly; ſparingly ;
thriftily.
Mean time young Paſmond his marriage preſs'd,
And frugally reſolv'd, the charge to ſhun,
To join his brother's bridal with his own. Pryden.
FRUGA'LITY. . m / [frugalité, French; frugalitas, Latin.]
Thrift; parſimony; good huſbandry.
As for the general ſort of men, fugality may be the cauſe
of drinking water ; for that is no ſmall ſaving, to pay nothing
for one's drink - Bacon.
Frºgality and bounty too,
Thoſe diff’ring virtues, meet in you. Waller.
In this frugality of your praiſes, ſome things I cannot
omit. Dryden's Fables, Dedicatiºn.
The boundaries of virtues are indiviſible lines: it is impoſ-
ſible to march up cloſe to the frontiers of frugality, without
entering the territories of parſimony Arbuthnot's join fºul.
FRu'GIFerous. adj. [frugife, Latin.] Bearing fruit, Ainſ.
FRUIT. n.ſ.. [fručius, Latin; frvyth, Welſh; fruit, French J
1. The produćt of a tree or plant in which the ſeeds are con-
tained.
The ſtrawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholſome berries thrive and ripen beſt,
Neighbour'd by fruit of baſer quality. Shakeſp. Henry V.
2. That part of a plant which is taken for food.
By taſting of that fruit forbid,
Where they ſought knowledge, they did error find. Davies.
See how the riſing fruits the gardens crown,
Imbibe the ſun, and make his light their own. Blackmore.
3. Produćtion.
The fruit of the ſpirit is in all goodneſs and righteouſneſs,
and truth. Ez. v. 9.
4. The offspring of the womb ; the young of any animal.
Can'ſt thou their reck’nings keep the time compute,
When their ſwol’n bellies ſhall enlarge their fruit. Sandys.
5. Advantage gained by any enterpriſe or condućt.
What is become of all the king of Sweden's vićtories :
Where are the fruits of them at this day Or of what benefit
will they be to poſterity ? Swift.
Another fruit, from conſidering things in themſelves,
will be, that each man will purſue his thoughts in that me-
thod which will be moſt agreeable to the nature of the thing,
and to his apprehenſion of what it ſuggeſts to him. Locke.
6. The effect or conſequence of any action.
She bluſhed when ſhe conſidered the effect of granting; ſhe
was pale, when ſhe remembered the fruits of denying. Sidney.
They ſhall eat of the fruit of their own way. Prov. i 31.
If I live in the fleſh, this is the fuit of my labour Phi is i.
FRU'Itage. m. ſ. [fruitage, French. J Fruit collectively;
various fruits.
In heav'n the trees
Qf life ambroſial fruitage bear, and vines
Yield neétar. Milton’, Paradiſ, Loft, b. v.
Greedily they pluck'd
The fruitage, fair to fight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flam’d. Milton.
What is more ordinary with them than the taking in flow-
ers and fruitage for the garniſhing of their work AMore.
FRU'it BEARER. m. ſ. [fruit and bearer.] That which pro-
duces fruit. -
Trees, eſpecially fruitbearers, are often infected with the
meaſles. Mirtimer's Husbandry.
FRU'1T B E ARING. adj. [fruit and bear.] Having the quality
of producing fruit.
By this way graft trees of different kinds one on another,
as fruitbearing trees on thoſe that bear not. Mort. Husbandry.
Fºxes. n. ſ. [fruitier, French..] One who trades in
ſult.
I did fight with one Sampſon Stockfiſh, a fruiterer, behind
Gray’s-inn. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Walnuts the fruit’rer's hand in Autumn ſtain;
Blue plumbs and juicy pears augment his gain. Gay.
FRU'It I Ry. m. ſ. [fruiterie, French. J
1. Fruit colle&amp;tively taken.
Oft, notwithſtanding all thy care
To help thy plants, on the ſmall fruitery
Exempt from ills, an oriental blaſt
Diſaſtrous flies. Phillips.
2. A fruit-loſt; a repoſitory for fruit.
FRU'it FUL. adj. [fruit and full.]
1. Fertile; abundantly productive; liberal of produćt.
If ſhe continued cruel, he could no more ſuſtain his life
than the earth remain fruitful in the ſun's continual ab-
ſence. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Actually bearing fruit.
Adonis' gardens,
That one day bloom'd, and fruitful were the next. Shakeſp.
3. Prolifick; childbearing; not barren.
Hear, nature, hear; dear goddeſs, hear a father!
Suſpend thy purpoſe, if thou did'ſt intend
To make this creature fruitful:
Into her womb convey ſterility. Shakeſpeare's King Lear,
I have copied nature, making the youths amorous and the
damſels fruitful. Gay's Prºface to the What dye Call it.
4. Pienteous; abounding in any thing.
While you, my lord, the rural ſhades admire,
And from Britannia's publick poſts retire,
Me into foreign realms my fate conveys,
Through nations fruitful of immortal lays. Addiſon.
FR Yi TFUL. Y. adv. [from fruitful.] -
1. In ſuch a manner as to be prolifick.
How ſacred ſeeds of ſea, and air, and earth,
And purer fire through univerſal night,
And empty ſpace, did fruitfully unite.
2. Plenteouſly; abundantly.
You have many opportunities to cut him off: if your will
want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. Sºakeſp.
FRU it Fulniss. m. ſ. [from fu ful.]
1. Fertility; fecundity; plentiful produćtion.
Neither can we aſcribe the ſame fruitfulneſs to any part of
the earth, nor the ſame virtue to any plant thereon growing,
that they had before the flood. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the horld.
2. The quality of being prolifick.
The goddeſs, preſent at the match ſhe made,
So leſs'd the bed, ſuch fruitſulneſs convey'd,
That ere ten moons had ſharpen'd either horn,
To crown their bliſs, a lovely boy was born. Dryd. Ovid.
3. Exuberant abundance.
The remedy of fruitfulneſs is eaſy, but no labour will help
the contrary: I will like and praiſe ſome things in a young
writer, which yet, if he continues in, I cannot but juſtly hate
him for. £en. Johnſon's Diſcoveries.
FRU 1 GR o’ves. n.ſ.. [fruit and groves.] Shades, or cloſe
plantations of fruit trees.
The faithful ſlave,
Whom to my nuptial train Icarius gave, -
To tend the fruitgroves * Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
FRUITION. n.ſ.. [f uor, Latin. J. Enjoyment ; poſſeſſion ;
pleaſure given by poſſeſſion or uſe
Man doth not ſeem to reſt ſatisfied either with fruitiºn
of that where with his life is preſerved, or with performance
of ſuch actions as advance him moſt deſervedly in eſtina-
tion. Hooker, b. i.
I am driv'n, by breth of her renown, -
Either to ſeek ſhipwreck, or arrive
Where I may have fruition of her love Shakeſp. Henry VI:
God riches and renown to men imparts,
Ev’n all they wiſh ; and yet their narrow hearts
Cannot ſo great a fluency receive,
But their ſ, uit on to a ſtranger leave. Sandys's Parathraſe.
Afflićtion generally diſables a man from purſuing thoſe vices
in which the guilt of men conſiſts: if the affliction be on his
body, his appetites are weakened, and capacity of fruition
deſtroyed. * agers's Sermons.
Wit once, like beauty, without art or dreſs,
Naked and unadorn'd, could find ſucceſs;
* I ill by fruition, novelty deſtroy'd,
The nymph muſt find new charms to be enjoy’d. Gramv.
FRU'itive. adj. [from the noun..] Enjoying; poſſeſſing;
having the power of enjoyment.
To whet our longings for fruit ve or experimental know-
ledge, it is reſerved among the prerogatives of being in heaven
to know how happy we ſhall be, when there. Doyle.
FRU'I'rless. adj. [from fruit.]
i. Barren of fruit; not bearing fruit. -
The Spaniards of Mexico, for the firſt forty years, could
not make our kind of wheat bear ſeed; but it grew up as
high as the trees, and was fruitleſs. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
2. Vain; productive of no advantage; idle; unprofitable. -
O ! let me not, quoth he, return again
Back to the world, whoſe joys ſo fruiteſ; are ;
But let me here for ay in peace remain,
Or ſtraightway on that inſt long voyage fare. Fary Queen.
Serpent' we might have ſpar'd our coming hither,
Frutºſ; to me, though fruit be here tº exceſs, A4iii. P. L.
3. Without offspring. -
Upon my head they plac'd a fruitle3 crown,
And put a barren ſcepter in my gripe;
No ſon of mine ſucceeding. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
FRU’ITLEssly. adv. [from fruitleſ...] Vainly ; idly; unpro-
fitably.
º, this fruit curioſity fruitlºfty enquireth, and confidence
blindly determineth. Brºwn's Vulgar Errours, b. vii.
Walking they talk'd, and fruit eſſ, divin'd
What friend the prieſteſs by thoſe words deſign'd. Dryden.
FRUIT-TIME. n.ſ.. [fruit and time.] The Autumn; the time
for gathering fruit.
FRU’ ºr R.E.E. n. ſ. [fruit and tree. J A tree of that kind
whoſe principal value ariſes from the fruit produced by i d
ady?
Roſcommon.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F R Y
F U E.
1.ady, by yonder bleſſed moon I vow,
That tips with ſilver all theſe fruittree tops. ... Shakeſpeare.
They took ſtrong cities, poieſied houſes full of all goods,
wells digged, vineyards and oliveyards, and fruittrees in abun-
dance Neb. ix. 25.
All with a border of rich fruitirees crown'd,
Whoſe loaded branches hide the lofty mound. Wallºr.
FRUMENTA’cious. adj. [from frumentum, Latin.] Made of
grain. Dić.
FRUM E/NTY. m. ſ. ſ frumentum, corn, Latin.] Food made of
wheat boiled in milk.
To Fru MP. v. a. To mock; to browbeat. Skinner. Ainſw.
To FR Us H. v. a. If oilſer, French..] To break, bruiſe, or
cruſh. Hanmer.
I like thy armour well;
I'll ſºuſh it, and unlock the rivets all,
But 1'll be maſter of it. Shake peare's Troilus and Creſſida.
FRUs H. m. ſ. [from the verb..] A ſort of tender horn that
grows in the middle of the ſole, and at ſome diſtance from
the toe: it divides into two branches, running towards the
heel, in the form of a fork. Farrier’s Dicf.
FR Us TRA'NEous. adj. [fruſtra, Latin.] Vain; uſeleſs; un-
profitable; without advantage.
t Their attempts being ſo fuſºraneous, and the demonſtra-
tions to the contrary ſo perſpicuous, it is a marvel that any
man, virtuouſly and piouſly diſpoſed, ſhould be ſo partially
and zealouſly affected in a cauſe that has neither truth nor any
honeſt uſefulneſs in it. More's Divine Dialogues.
He timely withdraws his fruſtraneous baffled kindneſſes, and
ſees the folly of endeavouring to ſtroke a tyger into a lamb,
or to court an Ethiopian out of his colour. South's Sermons.
To FRU’s I RA E. v. a. [fruſiror, Latin; f, uſirer, Fr.]
1. To defeat; to diſappoint; to balk.
It is an axiom of nature, that natural deſire cannot utterly
be frº/frate. Hooker, b. i.
I ſurvive,
To mock the expectations of the world;
To fru/irate prophecies, and to raze out
Rotten opinion, which hath writ me down
After my ſeeming. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Stern look'd the fiend, as fruſtrate of his will;
Not half ſuffic'd, and greedy yet to kill. Dryden.
Not more almighty to reſiſt our might,
Than wiſe to fruſtrate all our plots and wiles. Milt. P. Loft.
2. To make null; to nullify.
The act of parliament which gave all his lands to the queen,
did cut off and fruſtrate all ſuch conveyances. Spenſer.
Now thou haft aveng'd
Supplanted Adam ; and by vanquining
Temptation, haſt regain'd loſt paradiſe,
And frºſtrat d the conqueſt fraudulent. Milton's Par. Reg.
The peculiar ſtrength of the motive may of itſelf perhaps
contribute to fru/irate the efficacy of it, rendering it liable to
be ſuſpected by him to whom it is addreſſed. Atterbury's Serm.
FRU’s TRATE. participial adj. [from the verb.]
1. Vain; ineffectual; uſeleſs; unprofitable.
He is drown'd
Whom thus we ſtray to find, and the ſea mocks
Our fruſtrate ſearch on land. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ'.
The ruler of the province of Judea being by Julian
buſied in the re-edifying of this temple, flaming balls
of fire iſſuing near the foundation, and oft conſuming the
workmen, made the enterpriſe fruſtrate. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
- All at once employ their thronging darts;
But out of order thrown, in air ...”
And multitude makes fruſtrate the deſign.
2. Null; void.
Few things are ſo reſtrained to any one end or purpoſe, that,
the ſame being extinct, they ſhould forthwith utterly become
f uſ?rate. Hooker, b v. ſ. 42.
FRUSTRATION. m. ſ. [fruſtratio, Latin, from frº/frate. J Diſ-
appointment; defeat.
In ſtates notoriouſly irreligious, a ſecret and irreſiſtible
power countermands their deepeſt projećts, ſplits their coun-
ſels, and ſmites their moſt refined policies with/ru/tration and
a curſe. South's Sermons.
FRU's TRATIVE. cd}. [from fruſtrate. J Fallacious; diſap-
pointing. Ainſworth.
FRU's TRATORY. adj. [from fruſ’rate J That which makes
any procedure void; that which vacates any former proceſs.
Bºrious reſtrains this to a frtºratory appeal. Ayliff's Par.
FRU'STU. A. m. ſ. [Latin.] A piece cut off from a regular
figure. A term of ſcience.
FR Y. m. ſ. [from frce, foam, Daniſh. Skinner.]
1. The ſwarm of little fiſhes juſt produced from the ſpawn.
They come to us, but us love draws;
He ſwallows us, and never chaws:
By him, as by chain'd ſhot, whole ranks do die;
He is the tyrant pike, and we the fry. Donne,
Forth with the ſounds and ſeas, each creck and bay,
With fry innunciable ſwarm, and ſhoals -
Dryden's Ovid.
Of fiſh, that with their fins and ſhining ſcales
Glide under the green wave in ſculls, that oft
Bank the mid-ſea. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. vii.
The angler had the hap to draw up a very little fiſh from
among the fry. L'Eſtrange.
So cloſe behind ſome promontory lie
The huge leviathans, t'attend their prey;
And give no chace, but ſwallow in the fry,
Which through their gaping jaws miſtake the way. Dryd.
2. Any ſwarm of animals; or young people in contempt.
Out of the fry of theſe rakehell horſeboys, growing up in
knavery and villany, are their kern continually ſupplied and
maintained. Spenſer on Ireland.
I hem before the fry of children young,
Their wanton ſports and childiſh mirth did play,
And to the maidens founding timbrels ſung, Fairy Queen.
Draw me no conſteilations there,
Nor dog, nor goat, nor bull, nor bear;
Nor any of that monſtrous fry
Cf animals that ſtock the ſky. Oldham.
The young fry muſt be held at a diſtance, and kept under
the diſcipline of contempt. Collier on Pride.
FRY. m. ſ. A kind of ſieve.
He dreſſeth the duſt from malt, by running it through a
fan or fry. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
To FRY. v. a. [frigo, Lat, fric, Welſh; frijck, Erſe.] To
dreſs food by roaſting it in a pan on the fire.
To FR Y. v. n.
1. To be roaſted in a pan on the fire:
2. To ſuffer the action of fire.
So when with crackling flames a cauldron fries,
The bubbling waters from the bottom riſe;
Above the brims they force their fiery way,
Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day. Dryd. Æn.
3. To melt with heat.
Spices and gums about them melting fry,
And, phenix like, in that rich neſt they die.
4. To be agitated like liquor in the pan on the fire.
Oil of ſweet almonds, newly drawn with ſugar, and a little
ſpice, ſpread upon bread toaſted, is an exceijent nouriſher;
but then, to keep the oil from frying in the ſtomach, drink
mild beer after it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Where no ford he finds, no water fries,
Nor billows with unequal murmurs roar,
But ſmoothly ſlide along, and ſwell the ſhoar,
That courſe he ſteer'd. Dryden's Aºn.
FRY. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A diſh of things fried.
FRYINGPAN. m. ſ. ſ fry and pan. J. The veſſel in which meat
is roaſted on the fire.
If I paſs by ſea, I may chance to fall from the fryingpan
into the fire. Powel's Wocal Foreſt.
We underſtand by out of the fryingpan into the fire, that
things go from bad to worſe. 1’Eſtrange.
A freeman of London has the privilege of diſturbing a
whole ſtreet, for an hour together, with the twanking of a
braſs kettle or a fryingpan. Addiſon's Spectator.
To Fu B. v. a. To put off; to delay by falſe pretences; to
cheat. It is generally written fºb. See Foe.
A hundred mark is a long lone for a poor lone woman to
bear; and I have borne, and borne, and borne, and have been
full'd off and full'd off from this day to that day, that it is a
ſhame to be thought on. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
FU s. n.ſ. A plump chubby boy. Ainſworth.
Fu'cAted. adj [fucatus, Latin.]
1. Painted; diſguiſed with paint.
2. Diſguiſed by falſe ſhow.
FU'CU.S. n.ſ. [Latin. J Paint for the face.
Women chat
Of fucus this, and facus that. Ben. johnſon.
Thoſe who paint for debauchery ſhould have the fucus
pulled off, and the coarſeneſs underneath diſcovered. Collier.
To FU/DDLE. v. a. [ Of unknown etymology. ] To make
drunk.
Waller.
Earneſt brimming bowls
Leave every ſoul the table floating round,
And pavement faithleſs to the ſuddled feet.
To Fu DDLE. v. m. To drink to exceſs.
Men, we ſee, will be whoring and ſuddling on ſtill. L'E/ir.
FUEL. m. ſ [from feu, fire, French..] The matter or aliment
of fire.
This ſhall be with burning and fuel of fire. Iſ, ix. 5.
This ſpark will prove a raging fire,
If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with. Sºak. H. VI.
Mov’d by my charms, with them your love may ceaſe;
And as the fuel ſinks, the flame decreaſe. Priºr.
To Fu'EL. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To feed fire with combuſtible matter.
And yet ſhe cannot waſte by this,
Nor long endure this torturing wrong;
For more corruption needful is,
To fuel ſuch a fever long.
Thomſ. Autumn
Donne.
Never,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F U G
F U L
*
Never, alas ! the dreadful name
That fel; the infernal flame. Cowley.
The fuel'd chimney blazes wide. Thomſon's Autumn.
2. To ſtore with firing. -
Some are plainly oeconomical, as that the ſeat be well
watered, and well fueled. //otton’s Archite&amp;ure.
Fu Eſille MoRTE. [French J Corruptly pronounced and writ-
ten philonot.
Fuellemote colour ſignifies the colour of withered leaves
in Autumn. Locke.
FUGA'cious N Ess. n.ſ. [fugax, Latin.] Volatility; the qua-
lity of flying away.
FuGA'city n.ſ.. [fugax, Latin.]
1. Volatility; quality of flying away.
Spirits and ſalts, which, by their fugacity, colour, ſmell,
taſte, and divers experiments that I purpoſely made to exa-
mine them, were like the ſalt and ſpirit of urine and ſoot. Boyle.
2. Uncertainty; inſtability.
Fugh. interj.-(perhaps from piv.] An expreſſion of abhor-
rt!)C C.
A very filthy fellow; how odiouſly he ſmells of his country
garlick! figh, how he ſtinks of Spain! Dryd. Don Sebaſtian.
FUGITIVE. adj. [fugitif, French; fugitivus, Latin.]
1. Not tenable; not to be held or detained.
Our idea of infinity is a growing and fugitive idea, ſtill in
a boundleſs progreſſion, that can ſtop no where. Locke.
Happineſs, object of that waking dream,
Which we call life, miſtaking: fugitive theme
Of my purſuing verſe, ideal ſhade, -
Notional good, by fancy only made. Prior.
2. Unſteady; unſtable; not durable.
3. Volatile; apt to fly away. -
The more tender and fugitive parts, the leaves, of many of
the more ſturdy vegetables, fall off for want of the ſupply from
beneath: thoſe only which are more tenacious, making a ſhift
to ſubſiſt without ſuch recruit. Woodward’s Nat. Hiſtory.
4. Flying; running from danger.
Whilſt yet with Parthian blood thy ſword is warm,
The fugitive Parthians follow, Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
The Trojan chief
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall. Milton.
5. Flying from duty; falling off.
Can a fugitive daughter enjoy herſelf, while her parents are
in tears Clariſſa.
6. Wandering; runnagate; vagabond.
It was the moſt malicious ſurmiſe that had ever been
brewed, howſoever countenanced by a libellous pamphlet of a
fugitive phyſician. //otton.
Fu'G1tive. n.ſ.. [from the adječtive.]
1. One who runs from his ſtation or duty.
Unmarried men are beſt friends, beſt maſters, beſt ſervants,
but not always beſt ſubječts; for they are light to run away,
and almoſt all fugitives are of that condition. Bacon, Eſſay 8.
Back to thy puniſhment,
Falſe fugitive / and to thy ſpeed add wings,
Leſt with a whip of ſcorpions I purſue
Thy ling'ring. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
We underſtand by ſome fugitives that he hath commanded
The generals to return with vićtory, or expect
A ſhameful death. Denham's Sophy.
2. One who takes ſhelter under another power from puniſh-
1116 Ilt.
There are alſo in this realm of England too many, which,
being men of good inheritance, are fled beyond the ſeas, where
they live under princes which are her majeſty's profeſſed ene-
mies; and converſe and are confederates with other traytors
and ſºgitives, which are there abiding. Spenſer on Ireland.
Your royal highneſs is too great and too juſt a monarch
either to want or to receive the homage of rebellious fusi-
tives. Dryden.
Fu'G | riv EN Ess n.ſ.. [from fugitive )
1. Volatility ; fugacity.
That divers ſalts, emerging upon the analyſis of many con-
cretes, are very volatile, is plain from the fugitivenſ of ſalt
and of hartſhorn aſcending in diſtillation. Boyle.
2. Inſtability; uncertainty. -
FUGUE. m. ſ. [French, from figa, Latin.] In muſick, ſome
point conſiſting of four, five, ſix, or any other number of
notes begun by ſome one ſingle part, and then ſeconded by a
third, fourth, fifth and ſixth part, if the compoſition conſiſts
of ſo many; repeating the ſame, or ſuch like notes, ſo that
the ſeveral parts follow, or come in one after another in the
ſame manner, the leading parts ſtill flying before thoſe that
follow. Harris.
The reports and fugues have an agreement with the figures
in rhetorick of repetition and traduction. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
The ſkilful organiſt plies his grave and fancied deſcant in
lofty fugues; or through the whole ſymphony artful and unima-
ginable touches adorn and grace the well-ſtudied chords of
ſome choice compoſer. 44ilton on Education.
His volant touch
Inſtinét through all proportions, low and high,
Fled, and purſu'd tranſverſe the reſonant figue. Mil. P. L.
Long has a race of heroes fill'd the ſtage,
That rant by note, and through the gamut rage;
In ſongs and airs expreſs their martial fire, -
/ Combat in trills, and in a facue expire. Addison.
FU *CIMIENT. m. ſ. [ ſulcimen, ſulcimentum, Latin.] That on
which a body reſts, which acts or is acted upon at each end, as
a balance or a lever. -
The power that equiponderates with any weight, muſt
have the ſame proportion unto it as there is betwixt their
ſeveral diſtances from the center or fulciment. //ilkins.
To Fulfil. v. a [ſu and f l J
I. º fill till there is no room for more. This ſenſe is now not
Uí CC!.
Six gates i' th' city, with maſſy ſtaples,
And correſponſive and fulfilling bolts,
Sparre up the ſons of froy. Shakespeare. Troil, and Croſſida, Prol.
2. To anſwer any prophecy of promiſe by performance.
They knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets
which are read every ſabbath-day, they have fulfilled them in
condemning him. Aéis xiii. 27.
The fury bath'd them in each other's blood;
Then, having fix’d the fight, exulting flies,
And bears ful.ll d her promiſe to the ſkies. Dryden's Án.
3. To anſwer any purpoſe or deſign.
Here nature ſeems fulfill"d in all her ends. Mill. P. Lºft.
4. To anſwer any deſire by compliance or gratification.
If on my wounded breaſt thou drop'ſt a tear,
Think for whoſe ſake my breaſt that wound did bear;
And faithfully my laſt deſires fºl/l,
As I perform my cruel father's will.
5. To anſwer any law by obedience.
Love worketh no ill to his neighbour, therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law. Ro. xiii. 10.
This I my glory account,
My exaltation, and my whole delight,
That thou in me well-pleas'd, declar'ſt thy will
Puft I'd, which to full is all my bliſs. ...ºulto ºs Par. Loft.
Fulf RA’UGHT. adj. [ful and fraught.] Fully ſtored.
Thy fall hath left a kind of blot
To mark the fulfraught man, the beſt endu'd,
With ſome ſuſpicion. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Fu'l G = Ncy, n.ſ.. [fºgens, Latin.] Splendour; glitter. Dž.
Fu'lge NT, adj. [fugens, Latin.] Shining; dazzling; ex-
quiſitely bright.
As from a cloud, his fºlgent head,
And ſhape ſtar-bright, appear'd. Milton's Paradiſe I off.
The illumination is not ſo bright and fulgent as to obſcure
or extinguiſh all perceptibility of reaſon. Mºore's Divine Dial.
Fºgld adj. [fulgidus, Latin J Shining; glittering; daz-
ziing
Fulci'DITY.. n.ſ.. [from fulgid.] Splendour; dazzling glit-
ter. Dić?.
FU'LGour. m. ſ. [ fulgor, Latin.]
1. Splendour; dazzling brightneſs like that of lightning.
Glow-worms alive project a luſtre in the dark; which
fulgour, notwithſtanding, ceaſeth after death. Brown.
When I ſet my eyes on this ſide of things, there ſhines from
them ſuch an intellectual fulgour, that methinks the very glory
of the Deity becomes viſible through them. 4 ſore.
Fulgur A'tion. m. ſ. [ fulguratiº, Latin. J. The act of
lightening.
Fu'lh AM. n.ſ. A cant word for falſe dice. Hanmer.
Let vultures gripe thy guts, for gourd and Fulham's hold,
And high and low beguile the rich and poor. Shakespeare.
FULi'g, Nous, adj. [fuligineux-ſe, Fr. fuliginºſus, Lat.] Sooty ;
ſmokv.
†. leaf of burrage hath an excellent ſpirit to repreſs the
fuliginous vapours of duſky melancholy, and ſo cure madneſs.
Bacon's Natural Ai/lory.
Whereas hiſtory ſhould be the torch of truth, he makes her
in divers places a fulginous link of lies. Howel.
Fu'll MART. n.ſ. [This word, of which Sinner obſerves that
he found it only in this paſſage, ſeems to mean the ſame with
/loat.] A kind of ſtinking ferret.
The fichat, the fulina, t, and the ferret, live upon the face,
and within the bowels of the earth. //alton's Angler.
FULL. adj. [Fulle, Saxon ; vol, Dutch.]
1. Replete; without vacuity; without any ſpace void.
Better is an handful with quietneſs than both the hands full
with travel and vexation of ſpirit. Eccl. iv. 6.
2. Aboundin” in any quality good or bad.
With pretence from Strephon her to guard,
He met her full, but full of warefulneſs. Sidney.
You ſhould tread a courſe
Pretty and ful of view. Shakeſpeare'. Cymbeline.
Followers, who make themſelves as trumpets of the com-
mendation of thoſe they follow, are full of inconvenience;
for they taint buſineſs through want of ſecreſy, and they ex-
port honour from a man, and make him a return in envy.
Bacon, Eſſay 49.
Dryden's Ovid.
In that ſweet ſeaſon, as in bed I lay,
9 Y - I turn'd
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">l
F U L
I turn'd my weary ſide, but ſtill in vain,
Though fºll of youthful health and void of pain. Dryden;
He is full of wants which he cannot ſupply, and compaſſed
about with infirmities which he cannot remove. Tillotſ. Serm.
From yon bright heaven our author fetch'd his fire,
And paints the paſſions that your eyes inſpire;
Full of that flame, his tender ſcenes he warms,
And trames his goddeſs by your matchleſs charms. Granv.
3. Stored with any tºng; well ſupplied with any thing.
Full of days was he , - -
Two ages paſt, he liv'd the third to ſee. Tickell.
4. Plump; ſaginated ; fat.
A gentleman of a full body having broken his ſkin by a
fall, the wound inflamed, //jeman's Surgery.
5. Saturated; ſated. -
I am fill of the burnt offerings of rams. Iſa i. 11.
The alteration of ſcenes feeds and relieves the eye, before
it be ful of the ſame object. Bacon.
6. Crouded in the imagination or memory.
Every one is full of the miracles done by cold baths on de-
cayed and weak conſtitutions. Locke.
7. That which fills or makes full; large; great in effect.
Water digeſteth a full meal ſooner than any other liquor.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
8. Complete; ſuch as that nothing further is deſired or wanted.
That day had ſeen the full accompliſhment
Of all his travels. Daniel's Civil War.
Being tried at that time only with a promiſe, he gave full
credit to that promiſe, and ſtill gave evidence of his fidelity
as faſt as occaſions were offered. Hammond's P, act. Catechiſm.
The reſurrection of Jeſus from the dead hath given the
world ful aſſurance of another life. 7 iſlatſon, Sermon 5.
9. Complete without abatement; at the utmoſt degree.
At the end of two full years Pharaoh dreamed. Geneſs.
After hard riding plunge the horſes into water, and allow
them to drink as they pleaſe; but gallop them full ſpeed, to
warm the water in their bellies. Swift's Direct. to the Groom.
1o Containing the whole matter ; expreſſing much.
Where my expreſſions are not ſo full as his, either our lan-
guage or my art were defective ; but where mine are fuller
than his, they are but the impreſſions which the often reading
of him hath left upon my thoughts. Denham.
Should a man go about with never ſo ſet ſtudy to deſcribe
ſuch a natural form of the year before the deluge as that which
is at preſent eſtabliſhed, he could ſcarcely do it in ſo few
words, ſo fit and proper, ſo full and expreſs. J/oodward.
11. Strong; not faint; not attenuated.
I did never know ſo full a voice iſſue from ſo empty a heart;
but the ſaying is true, the empty veſſel makes the greateſt
ſound. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Barrels placed under the floor of a chamber, make all noiſes
in the ſame more full and reſounding. Bacon's Nat. Hijio'y.
Dryden taught to join -
The varying verſe, the full reſounding line. Pope.
12. Mature; perfcét.
In the ſultanry of the Mamalukes, ſlaves reigned over fa-
milies of free men; and much like were the caſe, if you ſup-
poſe a nation, where the cuſtom were that after full age the
ions ſhould expulſe their fathers and mothers out of their poſ-
fiſſions. Bacon's Holy // ar.
13. [Applied to the moon.] Complete in its orb.
Towards the ful moon, as he was coming home one morn-
ing, he felt his legs faulter. 14 iſeman's Surgery.
13. Noting the concluſion of any matter, or a full ſtop.
There with he ended, making a ful point of a hearty
figh. Sidney.
15. Spread to view in all dimenſions.
*Till about the end of the third century, I do not remem-
ber to have ſeen the head of a Roman emperor drawn with a
full face: they always appear in profile. Addiſon on Medal.
Full. n.ſ.. [from the adjective.] -
1. Complete meaſure ; freedom from deficiency.
When we return,
we’ll ſee thoſe things effected to the full. Sºak. Henry VI.
He liked the pomp and abſolute authority of a general well,
and preſerved the dignity of it to the full. Clarendon, b. viii.
The picture of Ptolemy Philopater is given by the foremen-
tioned authors to the fall. Dryden's Prºſace to Clemenes.
Sicilian tortures and the brazen bull,
Are emblems, rather than expreſs the full
Of what he feels. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. iii.
If where the rules not far enough extend,
Some lucky licence anſwer to the fill -
Th’ intent propos'd, that licence is a rule. Pope's Criticiſm.
2. The higheſt ſtate or degree.
The ſwan's down feather,
That flands upon the ſwell at fill of tide,
Neither way inclines. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
3. The whole ; the total.
The king hath won, and hath ſent out
A ſpeedy pow'r to encounter you, my lord :
This is the news at ful. Siaºſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
º
But what at full I know, thou know'ſt no part;
I knowing all my peril, thou no art. Shakeſpeare.
4. The ſtate of being full.
When I had fed them to the full. jer. v. 7.
5. [Applied to the moon..] The time in which the moon makes
a perfect orb. * -
Brains in rabbits, woodcocks, and calves, are fulleſt in the
full of the moon. Lacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
FULL. adv. º
1. Without abatement.
In the unity of place they are fill as ſcrupulous; for many
of their criticks limit to that very ſpot of ground where the
play is ſuppoſed to begin. 19n, den’s Dramaticæ Pºeſy.
A modeſt bluſh he wears, not form'd by art; -**
Free from deceit his face, and ſu!! as free his heart. Dryden.
The moſt judicious writer is ſometimes miſtaken after all
his care ; but the haſty critick, who judges on a view, is full
as liable to be deceived. Dryden's Aurengz. Preface.
Since you may -
Suſpeºt my courage, if I ſhould not lay,
The pawn I proffer ſhall be full as good. Dryd. Pig. Poff.
2. With the whole effect.
'Tis the pencil, thrown luckily ful upon the horſe's mouth
to expreſs the foam, which the painter, with all his ſkill, could
not perform without it. I’r, den's Dufeſay.
From harmony, from heavenly harmony,
This univerſal frame began :
From harmony to harmony,
Through all the compaſs of the notes it ran,
The diapaſon cloſing full in man. Dryden:
3. Exačtly.
Full in the centre of the ſacred wood,
An arm ariſeth of the Stygian flood.
Full nineteen ſailors did the ſhip convey,
A ſhole of nineteen dolphins round her play. Addison Ovid.
4. Directly. -
He met her full, but full of warefulneſs. Sidney.
He then confronts the bull,
And on his ample forehead aiming ful, {
The deadly ſtroke deſcending picre'd the ſkull. Dryden.
At length reſolv’d, he throws with all his force
Full at the temples of the warrior horſe. Dryden's Zºn.
5. It is placed before adverbs and adjcćtives, to intcnd or
ſtrengthen their ſignification. -
Why on your ſhield, ſo goodly ſcor’d,
Bear ye the picture of that lady's head?
Full lively is the ſemblant, though the ſubſtance dead. F.2.
I was ſet at work
Among my maids; full little, God knows, looking
Either for ſuch men or ſuch buſineſs. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Full well ye reject the commandment. 4. ar. vii. 9.
Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turn'd full ſad. Milton's Paradiſº Lo?, h. xi.
You full little think that you muſt be the beginner of the
diſcourſe yourſelf. More's Divine Dialºgues.
Full little thought of him the gentle knight. Dryden.
Full well the god his ſiſter's envy knew,
Addison on Ital,
And what her aihs and what her arts purſue. Dryden.
There is a perquiſite full as honeſt, by which you have the
beſt part of a bottle of wine for yourſelf. Swift.
FULL is much uſed in compoſition to intimate any thing ar-
rived at its higheſt ſtate, or utmoſt degree.
Full-blow N. adj. |ſ. and blºwn.]
1. Spread to the utmoſt extent, as a perfeót bloſſom.
My glories are paſt danger; they’re full-blown: -
Things, that are blaſted, are but in the bud. Denh. Sophy.
My full-blown youth already fades apace;
Of our ſhort being 'tis the ſhorteſt ſpace! I'ryden's juven.
2. Stretched by the wind to the utmoſt extent.
He who with bold Cratinus is inſpir’d,
With zeal and equal indignation fir’d;
Who at enormous villany turns pale,
And ſteers againſt it with a full-blown ſail. Dryd. Perſ Sat.
Full-Bo'n'rox: E.D. adj. [full and bottom.] Having a large
bottom.
I was obliged to fit at home in my morning-gown, having
pawned a new ſuit of cloaths and a full bottomed wig for a ſum
of money. . Guardian, Nº. 166.
Full-FA'RED. [full and earl Having the heads full of grain.
As flames roll'd by the winds conſpiring force,
O'er full-car'd corn, or torrents raging courſe.
FULL-E Y'ED. [ fill and eye. J
eyes.
Full-FF'd. [ſºl! and fºd l Sated; fat; ſiginated.
All as a partridge plump, full-fed and fair,
She form'd this image of well-bodicò air. Pºpe's Dunciad.
FULL-LA/D EN. [full and lady..] Laden 'til there can be no
In ore.
It were unfit that ſo excellent a reward as the Goſpel pro-
miſes ſhould ſtoop down, like fruit upon a full-laden bough,
to be plucked by every idle and wanton hand. 7 iſlatſon's Serm.
Denham.
Having large prominent
FU LL-SPREAD.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F U M
Fult sps º'Ab. [fill and ſpread] Spread to the utmoſt ex-
teilt -
How eaſy 'tis, when defliny proves kind,
With full-ſpread ſails to run before the wind;
But thoſe that 'gainſt ſtiff gales laveering go,
Muſt be at once reſolv'd and ſkilful too. Dryden.
Full-scº, MED. [full and ſumm d.] Complete in all its parts.
The time was that the cedar ſtretched forth his imperial
branches as far as the mountains of the moon, and that the
king of birds neſted within his leaves, thick feathered, and
with full ſummed wings faſtenin; his talons. Eaſt and Weſt;
but now the eagle is become half naked. Howel's hoc. Foreſt.
To FULL. v. a. [full, Latin.] To cleanſe cloath from its
oil or greaſe.
Fu’ilade. n.f. [from full.] The money paid for fulling or
cleanſing cleath. -
Fu'll FR. n.ſ. (full, Latin.] One whoſe trade is to cleanſe
cloath. -
The clothiers have put off
The ſpinſters, carders, fu lers, weavers. Shakeſp H. VIII.
His raiment became ſhining, exceeding white as ſnow; ſo
as no fuller on earth can whiten them. Mar. ix. 3.
Fu'LLERs Earth. m. ſ. -
Fullers earth is a marl of a cloſe texture, extremely ſoft and
unétuous to the touch: when dry it is of a greyiſh brown
colour, in all degrees, from very pale to almoſt black, and
generally has ſomething of a greeniſh caſt in it. The fineſt
illers earth is dug in our own iſland. Hill's Mat. Medica.
The faller, earth of England is very various, and it very
much exceeds any yet diſcovered abroad in goodneſs; which
is one great reaſon why the Engliſh ſurpaſs all other nations
in the woollen manufacture. //oºdward on Foſſils.
Fu’lle Ry. a. ſ. [from fuller.] The place where the trade of
a fuller is exerciſed.
Fu’LLING Mill. n.ſ.. [full and mill.J. A mill where the water
raiſes hammers which beat the cloath 'till it be cleanſed.
By large hammers, like thoſe uſed for paper and full ng-
miſs, they beat their hemp. 44ortimer.
FU'LLY. adv. [from full.]
1. Without vacuity.
2. Completely; without lack; without more to be deſired.
There are many graces for which we may not ceaſe
hourly to ſue, graces which are in beſtowing always, but ne-
ver come to be fully had in this preſent life; and therefore,
when all things here have an end, endleſs thanks muſt have
their beginning in a ſtate which bringeth the full and final ſa-
tisfaction of all ſuch perpetual deſires. Hooker, b. v. ſ 43.
He filly poſſeſſed the entire revelation he had received from
God, and had thoroughly digeſted it. Locke.
The goddeſs cry’d
It is enough, I’m fu y ſatisfy'd. Addison's Ovid's Metam.
FU'LM IN ANT. adj. [fulºuinant, Fr fulminans, Latin.] Thun-
dering ; making a noiſe like thunder.
To FULMINAT E. v. n. [ſulaino, Lat. fulminer, French. J
1. To thunder.
2. To make a loud noiſe or crack.
Whilſt it was in fuſion we caſt into it a live coal, which
preſently kindled it, and made it boil and flaſh for a pretty
while : after which we caſt in another glowing coal, which
made it filminate afreſh . Boyle.
In damps one is called the ſuffocating, and the other the ſuſ-
minating damp. l/coaward’s Natural Hylory.
3 To illue out eccleſiaſtical cenſures.
To Fu LM IN AT E. v. a. To throw out as an objećt of ter-
rour. - * -
As excommunication is not greatly regarded here in Eng-
land, as now fulminated; ſo this conſtitution is out of uſe
among us in a great meaſure. /y'iffe's Parergon.
Fu LMIX ATION. m. ſ. [ſululinatio, Latin ; fulmination, French,
from fºr minate.] -
1. The act of thundering.
2. Denunciations of cenſure.
The fu minations from the vatican were turned into ridi-
cule Ayliffe's Parergon.
Foºt. MINATORY... adj. [ ſu'minous, Latin; from fulminate.]
Thundering; ſtriking horror.
FU'LN Ess. n.ſ.. [from full. J
1. The ſtate of being filled ſo as to have no part vacant.
Your heave-offering ſhall be reckoned the fulneſs of the
wine-preſs. t Numb. xviii. 27.
To the houſes I wiſhed nothing more than ſafety, fulneſs,
and freedom. King Charles.
2. The ſtate of abounding in any quality good or bad.
3. Completeneſs; ſuch as leaves nothing to be deſired.
&amp; our enjoyments are ſo complete, I turn wiſhes into gra-
tulations, and congratulating their fulneſs only wiſh their con-
tinuance South.
4. Completeneſs from the coalition of many parts.
The king ſet forwards to London, receiving the acclama-
tions and applauſes of the people as he went ; which indecd
were true and unfeigned, as might well appear in the very
demonſtrations and ſuineſs of the cry. Bacon's Henry VII.
5. Completeneſs; freedom from deficiency.
He is the half part of a bleſſed man,
Left to be finiſhed by ſuch as ſhe ;
And ſhe a fair divided excellence,
Whoſe fulneſs of perfection lies in him.
6. Repletion; ſatiety.
I need not inſtance in the habitual intemperance of rich
tables, nor the evil accidents and effects of fulneſs, pride and
luſt, wantonneſs and ſoftneſs. Taylor’s Rule of living hºly.
7. Plenty; wealth.
To lapſe in fulneſ;
Is ſorer than to lie for needſ; and falſhood
Is worſe in kings than beggars. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
8. Struggling perturbation; ſwelling in the mind.
A principal fruit of friendſhip is the eaſe and diſcharge of
the fulneſs of the heart, which paſſions of all kinds do cauſe
and induce. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
9. Largeneſs; extent.
There wanted the fulneſs of a plot, and variety of charac-
ters to form it as it ought; and perhaps ſomething might have
been added to the beauty of the ſtyle. Dryden.
lo. Force of ſound, ſuch as fills the ear; vigour.
This ſort of paſtoral derives almoſt its whole beauty from a
natural eaſe of thought and ſmoothneſs of verſe; whereas that
of moſt other kinds conſiſts in the ſtrength and fulneſ of
both. Pope.
FULSOME. adj. [from Fulle, Saxon, foul.]
1. Nauſeous; offenſive.
The ſkilful ſhepherd peel'd me certain wands;
And in the doing of the deed of kind,
Shakespeare  K. john.
He ſtuck them up before the fidſome ewes. Shakeſpeare.
He that brings fulſome objects to my view,
With nauſeous images my fancy fills,
And all goes down like oxymel of ſquills. Roſcommon.
Now half the youth of Europe are in arms,
How fulſome muſt it be to ſtay behind, -
And die of rank diſeaſes here at home Otway's Orphan.
2. Of a rank odious ſmell. -
White ſatyrion is of a dainty ſmell, and bean-flowers:
again, if the plant puts forth white flowers only, and thoſe
not thin or dry, they are commonly of rank and fidſome ſmell.
Bacºn's Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 507.
3. Tending to obſcenity.
A certain epigram, which is aſcribed to the emperor, is more
fulſome than any paſſage I have met with in our poet. Dryden.
Fu'lsoMELY. adv. [from fulſome.] Nauſeouſly; rankly; ob-
ſcenely.
FU'lsoMENEss. m. ſ. ſfrom falſºme.
1. Nauſeouſneſs. ſ' ſ falſºme.]
2. Rank ſmell.
3. Obſcenity.
No decency is confidered, no fulfºmenºſ is omitted, no venom
is wanting, as far as dulneſs can ſupply it. Dryden.
FU MADo. n. ſ. [fumus, Latin.] A ſmoked fiſh.
Fiſh that ſerve for the hotter countries, they uſed at firſt to
fume, by hanging them up on long ſticks one by one, drying
them with the ſmoke of a ſoft and continual fire, from which
they purchaſed the name of furnadoes. Carew.
FU'MAGE. m. ſ. [from fumus, Latin. J Hearthmoney. Dić.
Fu'MATORY.. n.ſ.. [fumaria, Lat fumetery, Fr.] See FUMutory.
It hath divided leaves reſembling thoſe of the umbelliferous
plants: the flowers, which are collected into a ſpike, are of
an anomalous figure, ſomewhat reſembling a papilionaceous.
flower, conſiſting of two petals or leaves, open like two lips,
the upper lip ending in a ſpur: the footſtalk is joined to the
middle part of the flower: the fruit is either of a long or a
round figure, which is like a pod. 44iller.
Her fallow leas
The darnel, hemlock, and rankfumatory,
Doth root upon. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
To FU/MBLE. v. n. [fommelen, Dutch.]
1. To attempt any thing aukwardly or ungainly.
Our mechanick theiſts will have their atoms never once to
have fumbled in theſe their motions, nor to have produced any
inept ſyſtem. Cudworth.
2. To puzzle; to ſtrain in perplexity.
Am not I a friend to help you out You would have been
fumbling half an hour for this excuſe. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
3. To play childiſhly.
I ſaw him fumble with the ſhects, and play with flowers,
and ſmile upon his finger's end. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
To FU'MBLE. v. a. To manage aukwardly.
As many farewels as be ſtars in heav'n,
With diſtinét breath and conſign'd kiſſes to them,
He fumbles up all in one looſe adieu. Shakeſpeare.
His greaſy bald-pate choir
Came fumbling o'er the beads, in ſuch an agony,
They told 'em falſe for fear. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Fu'MBLER. m. ſ. [from fumble. One who acts aukwardly.
F’UM FLING LY. adv. [from fumble.] In an aukward manner.
FUM E. m. ſ. [ſumée, French ; fumus, Latin.]
1. Smoke. -
2 º - Thus
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F U M
F U N
Thus fighting fires a while themſelves confume;
But ſtreight, like Turks, forc'd on to win or die,
They firſt lay tender bridges of their fame, -
And o'er the breach in unctuous vapours fly. Dryden.
2. Vapour; any volatile parts flying away. *
Love is a ſmoke rais'd with the fume of fighs;
Being purg'd, a fire ſparkling in lovers eyes Shakespeare.
It were good to try the taking of fumes by pipes, as they do
in tobacco, of other things, to dry and comfort. Bacon.
In Winter, when the heat without is leſs, it becomes ſo far
condenſed as to be viſible, flowing out of the mouth in form
of a fune, or craſier vapour; and may, by proper veſſels, ſet
in a ſtrong freezing mixture, be collected in a conſiderable
quantity. J/oodward's Natural Hylary.
3. Exhalation from the ſtomach.
The fumes of drink diſcompoſe and ſtupify the brains of a
man overcharged with it. South's Sermºns.
Plung'd in ſloth we lic, and ſnore ſupine,
As fill'd with fume, of undigeſted wine. Jºyden's Perſ. Sat.
Pow'r, like new wine, does your weak brain ſurprize,
And its mad fumes in hot diſcourſes riſe;
But time theſe yielding vapours will remove :
- Mcan while I’ll taſte the ſober joys of love. Dryden's zuren.
4. Rage; heat of mind; paſſion.
The fume, of his paſſion do really intoxicate and confound
his judging and diſcerning faculty. South.
5. Any thing unſubſtantial.
When Duncan is aſleep, his two chamberlains
Will I with wine and waſtel ſo convince,
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a firm e. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
6. Idle conceit, vain imagination.
Plato's great year would have ſome effect, not in renewing
the ſtate of like individuals; for that is the ſame of thoſe, that
conceive the celeſtial bodies have more accurate influences
upon theſe things below, than indeed they have, but in groſs.
Bacon, Eſſay 59.
To lay aſide all that may ſeem to have a ſhew of fumes and
fancies, and to ſpeak ſolids, a war with Spain is a mighty
work. Bacon's War with Spain.
To FUME. v. n. [fumer, French ; fumo, Latin.]
J. To ſmoke.
- Their pray'rs paſs'd -
Dimenſionleſs through heav'nly doors; then clad
With incenſe, where the golden altar fum’d,
By their great interceſſor; came in ſight
Before the Father's throne. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xi.
From thence the fuming trail began to ſpread,
And lambent glories danc'd about her head. Dryd. Æn.
Strait hover round the fair her airy band;
Some, as ſhe ſipp'd, the fuming liquor ſann'd. Pope.
2. To vapour; to yield exhalations.
Tie up the libertine in a field of feaſts,
Keep his brain fuming. Shakeſpeare's Ant, and Cleopatra.
Silenus lay,
Whoſe conſtant cups lay fuming to his brain,
And always boil in each extended vein.
3. To paſs away in vapours.
We have
No anger in our eyes, no ſtorm, no lightning:
Our hate is ſpent and fum'd away in vapour,
Before our hands be at work. Ben. Johnſon's Catiline.
Their parts are kept from filming away by their fixity, and
alſo by the vaſt weight and denſity of the atmoſpheres incum-
bent upon them. - Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
The firſt freſh dawn then wak'd the gladden'd race
Of uncorrupted man, nor bluſh d to ſee
The ſluggard ſleep beneath its ſacred beam ;
For their light ſlumbers gentle fumi'd away. Thomſºn's Spring.
4. To be in a rage.
When he knew his rival free’d and gone,
He ſwells with wrath; he makes outrageous moan:
He frets, he ſumes, he ſtares, he ſtamps the ground,
The hollow tow'r with clamours rings around. Dryden.
To FUM E. v. a.
1. To ſmoke; to dry in the ſmoke. -
Thoſe that ſerve for hot countries they uſed at firſt to fame,
by hanging them upon long ſticks one by one, and drying
them with the ſnoke of a ſoft fire. Carew.
2. To perfume with odours in the fire.
he furn'd the temples with an od’rous flame,
And oft before the ſacred altars came, }
To pray for him who was an empty name. Dryden.
The filming of the holes with brimſtone, garlick, or other
unfavory things, will drive moles out of the ground. Mºrtin.
3. To diſperſe in vapours.
The heat will fume away moſt of the ſcent. A/rtimer.
AU M E/TTE. m. ſ. [French..] A word introduced by cooks,
and the pupils of cooks, for the ſtink of meat.
- A haunch of ven’ſon made her ſweat,
Unleſs it had the right fumette. Swift.
FU'MID. adj. [ſiºnidiº, Latin.] Smoky ; vaporous.
Roſcommon.
A craſs and fumid exhalation is cauſed from the combat of
the ſulphur and iron with the acid and nitrous ſpirits of aqua-
fortis. Brown's Pulgar Frrours, b. ii. 3. 5.
Ft. Mi'DITY. m. ſ. [from fumid.] Smokineſs; tendency to
ſmoke. Dić7.
To FUMIGATE. v. n. [ſrom fumus, Latin; fumiger, Fr.]
1. To ſmoke; to perfume by ſmoke or vapour.
Would'ſt thou preſerve thy famiſh’d family,
With fragrant thyme the city fumigate,
And break the waxen walls to ſave the ſtate. Dryden's Virg.
2. To medicate or heal by vapours
Fu'MiG AT 19N. m.ſ. [ſumigatio, Latin; fumigation, French;
from fumigate J -
1. Scents raiſed by fire. º -
Fumigations, often repeated, are very beneficial. Arbuthnot.
My fumigation is to Venus, juſt
The ſouls of roſes, and red coral's duſt:
And, laſt, to make my ſumigation good,
'Tis mixt with ſparrows brains and pigeons blood. Dryden.
2. The application of medicines to the body in fumes.
Fu'Mºsol Y. adv. [rom fame.] Angrily in a rage.
That which we move for our better learning and inſtruction
fake, turneth unto anger and choler in them : they grow alto-
gether out of quietneſs with it; they anſwer fining y, that
they are aſhamed to defile their pens with making anſwer to
ſuch idie queſtions. Hocker, b. v. ſ. 22.
Fu'M.TER. n.ſ. See FUMAtory.
Why, he was met even now,
As mad as the vext ſea; ſinging aloud,
Crown'd with rankfumitºr and furrow-weeds. Shakeſpeare.
FU/Mous. }*. [funcux-ſe, French; from fume.] Producing
Fu’M Y. fumes. -
From dice and wine the youth retir'd to reſt,
And puff'd the fum, god from out his breaft:
Ev’n then he dreamt of drink and lucky play;
More lucky had it laſted 'till the day. Dryden's Zn.
Fu N. a. ſ. [A low cant word J Sport; high merriment; fro-
lickſome delight. .
Don't mind me, though, for all my fun and jokes,
You bards may find us bloods good-natur'd folks. A ſcore.
Fu’s cTion. n.ſ. [ ſunélio, Latin.]
1. Diſcharge; performance.
There is hardly a greater difference between two things
than there is between a repreſenting commoner in the fun-
tion of his publick calling, and the ſame perſon in common
life. Swft.
2. Employment; office.
The miniſtry is not now bound to any one tribe: now
none is ſecluded from that functon of any degree, ſtate, or
calling. Jºitgifte.
You have paid the heav'ns your fundiion, and the priſoner
the very debt of your calling. Shakespeare Meaſure for 41°oſure.
Nor was it any policy of ſtate, or obſtinacy of will, or
partiality of affection either to the men or their functiºn,
which fixed me. King C arſes.
This double funè?ion of the goddeſs gives a conſiderable
light and beauty to the ode which Horace has addreſſed to
her. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Let not theſe indignities diſcourage us from aſſerting the
juſt privileges and pre-eminence of our holy function and cha-
račtcr. Afterluy's Sermºns.
3. Single act of any office.
Without difference thoſe functions cannot, in orderſy ſort,
be executed. Hoºker.
They have ſeveral offices and prayers againſt fire, tem-
peſts, and eſpecially for the dead, in which ſºcions they uſe
ſacerdotal garments. Stillingfiert's Dºſ. ºf Diſc. on Roºn. Idol.
4. Trade; occupation.
Follow your function ; go, and batten on cold bits. Sºft.
5. Office of any particular part of the body.
The bodies of men, and other animals, are excellently well
fitted for life and motion ; and the ſeveral parts of them well
adapted to their particular functions. Leatley's Sermons.
6. Power; faculty.
Tears in his cyes, diſtraćtion in his aſpect,
A broken voice, and his whole function ſuiting
With forms to his conceit. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
Nature ſeems
In all her fundions weary of herſelf:
My race of glory run, and race of ſhame;
And I ſhall ſhortly be with them that reſt. • Milton.
Whatever warms the heart, or fills the head,
As the mind opens, and its fund/ions ſpread,
Imagination p'ies her dang'rous art,
And pours it all upon the peccant part. Pºpe.
Though every human conſtitution is morbid, yet are their
diſeaſes conſiſtent with the common functions of life. Arbuthn.
FUND. m. ſ. [fond, French ; funda, a bag, Latin J
1. Stock; capital; that by which any expence is ſupported.
He touches the paſſions more delicately than Ovid, and per-
forms all this out of his own fund, without diving into the
arts and ſciences for a ſupply. Dryden.
Part
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F U N
5
F U R
º
*..."
º
:
Part muſt be left, a fund when foes invade,
And part employ'd to roll the watry tide. ... Dryden.
In preaching, no men ſucceed better than thoſe who truſt
entirely to the ſtock or fund of their own reaſon, advanced
indeed, but not overlaid by commerce with books. Swift.
2. Stock or bank of money. -
As my eſtate has been hitherto either toſt upon ſeas, or
fluctuating in funds, it is now fixed in ſubſtantial acres. Addison
FU'NDAMENT. n. ſ. Ifundamentum, Latin.] The back part
of the body.
} UNDAM E/NT A L. adj. [fundamentalis, Lat. from fundament.]
Serving for the foundation; that upon which the reſt is built;
eſſential; important; not merely accidental.
Until this can be agreed upon, one main and fundamental
cauſe of the moſt grievous war is not like to be taken from
the earth. Raleigh's Eſſays.
You that will be leſs fearful than diſcreet,
That love the fundamental part of ſtate,
More than you doubt the charge of 't. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Others, when they were brought to allow the throne vacant,
thought the ſucceſſion ſhould go to the next heir, according to
the fundamental laws of the kingdom, as if the laſt king were
actually dead. Swift's Examiner.
Gain ſome general and fundamental truths, both in philo-
ſophy, in religion, and in human life. Watts.
Such we find they are, as can controul
The ſervile actions of our wav'ring ſoul,
Can fright, can alter, or can chain the will;
Their ills all built on life, that fundamental ill. Prior.
Yet ſome there were among the ſounder few,
Of thoſe who leſs preſum’d, and better knew,
Who durſt aſſert the juſter ancient cauſe,
And here reſtor'd wit’s fundamental laws. Pope on Criticiſm.
FUNDAM E/NTAL. n.ſ. Leading propoſition; important and
eſſential part which is the groundwork of the reſt. -
We will propoſe the queſtion, whether thoſe who hold the
fundamental of faith may deny Chriſt damnably, in reſpect of
thoſe ſuperſtructures and conſequences that ariſe from them.
South's Sermons.
It is a very juſt reproach, that there ſhould be ſo much vio-
lence and hatred in religious matters among men who agree in
all fundamental, and only differ in ſome ceremonies, or mere
ſpeculative points. Swift.
FUNDAME'NTAlly. adv. [from fundamental.] Eſſentially;
originally.
As virtue is ſeated fundamentally in the intelle&amp;t, ſo perſpec-
tively in the fancy; ſo that virtue is the force of reaſon, in
the condućt of our ačtions and paſſions to a good end. Grew.
Religion is not only uſeful to civil ſociety, but fundamen-
tally neceſſary to its very birth and conſtitution. Bentley.
The unlimited power placed fundamentally in the body of a
People, the legiſlators endeavour to depoſite in ſuch hands as
would preſerve the people. Swift on the Diſſ, in Ath, and Rome.
FUNERAL. n.ſ.. [funus, Latin; funerailies, French.]
1. The ſolemnization of a burial; the payment of the laſt
honours to the dead; obſcquies.
Here, under leave of Brutus, and the reſt,
Come I to ſpeak in Caeſar's funeral. Shakespeare julius Caſar.
All things that we ordained feſtival,
Turn from their office to black funeral. Shakeſpeare.
He that had caſt out many unburied, had none to mourn for
him, nor any ſolemn funerals, nor ſepulchre with his
fathers. - 2 Mac. v. I c.
- No widow at his funeral ſhall weep. Sandys.
2. The pomp or proceſſion with which the dead are carried.
The long fun'rals blacken all the way. Pope.
You are ſometimes deſirous to ſee a funeral paſs by in the
ſtreet. Swift's Directions to the Chambermaid.
3. Burial; interment.
May he find his funeral
I' th' ſands, when he before his day ſhall fall. Denham.
FU's ERAL. adj. Uſed at the ceremony of interrring the
dead.
Our inſtruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding chear to a ſad fineral feaſt. Shakespeare R. andjul.
Let ſuch honours
And funeral rites, as to his birth and virtues
Are due, be firſt perform'd. Denham's Sophy.
Thy hand o'er towns the ſun'ral torch diſplays,
And forms a thouſand ills ten thouſand ways. Dryden.
FUNE’REAL. adj. [funerea, Latin.] Suiting a funeral; dark;
diffinal.
But if his ſoul hath wing'd the deſtin'd flight,
Inhabitant of deep diſaſtrous night,
Homeward with pious ſpecd repaſs the main,
To the pale ſhade ſuitersal rites ordain. Pope's Odyſſey, h. i.
Fusco's Ty. ...ſ.. [from fungus.J. Unſolid excreſcence. Dić.
FU'Nº'ous. a j. [from fungus.] Excreſcent; ſpongy; want-
ing firmneſs.
it is often employed to keep down the fungous lips that
ſpread upon the bone; but it is much more painful than the
cicharotick medicines, Sharp's Surgery,
FU'NGUS. n.ſ. (Latin J stiãly a muſhroom; a word uſed to
expreſs ſuch excreſcences of fleſh as grow out upon the ºps
of wounds, or any other excreſcence from trees or plants not
naturally belonging to them; as the agarick from the larch-.
tree, and auriculae Judae from elder. $ taincy.
The ſurgeon ought to vary the diet as the fibres length.ca
too much, are too fluid, and produce funguſº, or as they
harden and produce calloſities. Arb throt on Diet,
FUNICLE. m. ſ. [funiculus, Latin.] A ſmall cord; a ſmā'ſ
ligature; a fibre.
FUNI'cula R. adj. [funiculaire, Fr. from funicle.] Conſiſting
of a ſmall cord or fibre. -
FUNK. n ſ. A ſtink. A low word.
FU'NN El. n.ſ.. [infundibulum, Latin; whencefundible, fundle;
funnel.]
1. An inverted hollow cone with a pipe deſcending from it,
through which liquors are poured into veſſels with narrow
mouths; a tundiſh. - - - - -
If you pour a glut of water upon a bottle, it receives little
of it; but with a funnel, and by degrees, you ſhall fill many
of them. - Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
Some the long funnel's curious mouth extend, -
Through which ingeſted meats with eaſe deſcend. Blackm.
The outward ear or auricula is made hollow, and con-
tracted by degrees, to draw the ſound inward, to take in as
much as may be of it, as we uſe a funnel to pour liquor into
any veſſel. . Ray ºn the Creation.
2. A pipe or paſſage of communication. -
Towards the middle are two large funnels, bored through
... the roof of the grotto, to let in light or freſh air. Addiſon.
FUR. n ſ. [fºurrure, French.] - -
I. Skin with ſoft hair with which garments are lined for warmth,
or covered for ornament.
December muſt be expreſſed with a horrid and fearful coun-
tenance; as alſo at his back a bundle of holly, holding in fur
mittens the ſign of Capricorn. Peacham on 1)nawing.
'Tis but dreſſing up a bird of prey in his cap and fu to
make a judge of him. L'Eſtrange.
And lordly gout wrapt up in fur,
And wheezing aſthma, loth to ſtir. f Swift.
2. Soft hair of beaſts found in cold countries, where nature pro-
vides coats ſuitable to the weather ; hair in general.
This night, wherein the cubdrawn bear would couch,
The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
Keep their fur dry, unbonnetted he runs,
And bids what will take all. Shakeſpeare's King Lear:
Such animals as feed upon fleſh qualify it, the one by ſwal-
lowing the hair or fur of the beaſts they prey upon, the other
by devouring ſome part of the feathers of the birds they gorge
themſelves with. Ray ºn the Creation.
3. Any moiſture exhaled to ſuch a degree as that the remainder
ſticks on the part. -
Methinks I am not right in ev'ry part;
I feel a kind of trembling at my heart:
My pulſe unequal, and my breath is ſtrong;
Beſides a filthy fur upon my tongue. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. 3;
To FUR. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. To line or cover with ſkins that have ſoft hair.
How mad a ſight it was to ſee Dametas, like rich tiſſue
furred with lambſkins? Sidney, b. ii.
Through tatter'd cloaths ſmall vices do appear;
Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Shakeſp. King Lear.
You are for dreams and ſlumbers, brother prieſt;
You fur your gloves with reaſons. Shakeſp. Troil, and Creſ.
2. To cover with ſoft matter.
To make lampblack, take a torch and hold it under the bot-
tom of a latten baſon; and, as it groweth to be furred and
black within, ſtrike it with a feather into ſome ſhell. Peacham,
The ſiſters, mourning for their brother's loſs,
Their bodies hid in bark, and furr'd with moſs. Dryden.
Their frying blood compels to irrigate
Their dry furr'd tongues. Phillips:
A dungeon wide and horrible; the walls
On all ſides furr'd with mouldy damps, and hung
With clots of ropy gore. - Addison.
FUR. adv. [It is now commonly written far.] At a diſtance.
- The white lovely dove
Doth on her wings her utmoſt ſwiftneſs prove,
Finding the gripe of falcon fierce not fur. Sidney,
FUR-wrought. adj. [fur and wrought ] Made of fur.
Silent along the mazy margin ſtray,
And with the fur-wrought fly delude the prey. Gay's Poſt.
FURA’cious. adj. [furax, Latin. J Thieviſh; inclined to
ſteal. Dic?.
FuRA'city. n.ſ. (from furax, Latin.] Diſpoſition to theft;
thieviſhneſs. -
Fu'R below. n.ſ.. [fur and he'ow.] Fur ſewed on the lower
part of the garment; an ornament of dreſs.
Nay, oft in dreams invention we beſtow
To change a flounce, or add a furbelow. Pºe.
9 Z Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F U R
To Fu'R BELow. v. a. [from the noun..] To adorn with orna-
mental appendages of dreſs.
When arguments too fiercely glare,
You calm them with a milder air;
To break their points, you turn their force,
And furbelºw the plain diſcourſe. Prior.
She was flounced and ſurbelowed from head to foot; every
ribbon was crinkled, and every part of her garments in curl.
Addison's Speciator, Nº. 129.
To FU'RBIs H. v. a. [ ſourbir, French. J. To burniſh; to
poliſh; to rub to brightneſs.
It may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,
And furbiſh new the name of John o' Gaunt. Shakespeare R. II.
Furbiſh the ſpears, and put on the brigandines. jer. xlvi. 4.
Some others who furbiſh up and reprint his old errours, hold
that the ſufferings of the damned are not to be, in a ſtrict
ſenſe, eternal; but that, after a certain period of time, there
ſhall be a general gaol-delivery of the ſouls in priſon, and that
not for a farther execution, but a final releaſe. South's Serm.
As after Numa's peaceful reign,
The martial Ancus did the ſceptre wield;
Furbiſh'd the ruſty ſword again,
Reſum'd the long-forgotten ſhield,
And led the Latins to the duſty field. Dryden.
Inferior miniſters, for Mars repair
His broken axle-tree, and blunted war;
And ſend him forth again, with furbiſh'd arms. Dryden.
FU’RBIs HER... n.ſ. [fºur biſſeur, French, from furbiſh.] One
who poliſhes anything. -
FURCA't ſon. n.ſ.. [furca, Latin.] Forkineſs; the ſtate of
ſhooting two ways like the blades of a fork.
When they grow old they grow leſs branched, and firſt do
loſe their brow-antlers, or loweſt furcatiºns next the head.
- Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 9.
FU'RFUR. m. ſ. [Latin.] Huſk or chaff, ſcurff or dandriff,
that grows upon the ſkin, with ſome likeneſs to bran. Quincy.
FURFURA'ceous. adj. [furſuraceus, Latin.] Huſky; branny;
ſcaly. *-
FU'RIOUS, adj. [faieux, French; furioſus, Latin.]
1. Mad; phrenetick.
No man did ever think the hurtful ačtions of furious men
and innocents to be puniſhable. . Hooker, b. i. ſ. 9.
2. Raging; violent; tranſported by paſſion beyond reaſon.
- Who can be wife, amaz'd, temp'rate and furious,
Loyal and neutral in a moment? No man. Shakeſp. Macá.
To be furious,
Is to be frighted out of fear; and, n that mood,
The dove will peck the eſtridge. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopat.
Fu'Riously. adv. [from furious.) Madly; violently; vehe-
mently.
* Which when his brother ſaw, fraught with great grief
And wrath, he to him leapt furiouſly. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
They obſerve countenance to attend the practice; and this
carries them on furiouſly to that which of themſelves they are
inclined. South's Sermons.
She heard not half, ſo furiouſly ſhe flies;
Fear gave her wings. Dryden.
FU'Rio Us N Ess. m. ſ. [ from furious. J Frenzy; madneſs;
tranſport of paſſion.
To FURL. v. a. Iſrºſer, French.] To draw up ; to con-
tract.
When fortune ſends a ſtormy wind,
. Then ſhew a brave and preſent mind;
And when with too indulgent gales
She ſwells too much, then furl thy ſails. Creech.
Fu’R LoN G. m. ſ. [parlang, Saxon.] A meaſure of length; the
eighth part of a mile. -
If a man ſtand in the middle of a field and ſpeak aloud, he
fhall be heard a furlong in round, and that in articulate ſounds.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 289.
Coming within a few furlongs of the temple, they paſſed
through a very thick grove. Addison's Freeholder.
FU'RLou GH. n.ſ. [ verloºf, Dutch..] A temporary diſmiſſion
from military ſervice; a licence given to a ſoldier to be abſent.
Brutus and Cato might diſcharge their ſouls,
And give them ſuro's for another world;
But we, like ſentries, are oblig'd to ſtand
In ſtarleſs nights, and wait th' appointed hour. Dryden.
FU'RMEN ty. m. ſ. [More properly fumenty, or frumlety, of fru-
mentum, Latin.J Food made by boiling wheat in milk.
Remember, wife, therefore, though I do it not,
The ſeed-cake, the paſties, and farmenty pot. Tuſſ. Hub.
Fu'RNAc E. m. ſ. [furnus, Latin.] An incloſed fireplace.
Heat not a furnace for your foe ſo hot
• That it may ſinge yourſelf. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
The fining pot is for ſilver and the ſurnace for gold. Prºv.
We have alſo furnaces of great diverſities, that keep great
diverſity of heats. Bacon's New Atlantis.
The kings of Spain have ere&amp;ted divers ſurnaces and forges,
for the trying and fining of their gold. Zºbo..
Whoſo falleth not down and worſhippeth, ſhall the ſame
hour be caſt into the midſt of a burning fiery ſurface. Dan.
A dungeon horrible, on all ſides around,
As one great furnace, flam'd. Milton's Paradiſe L3/?, b. i.
To FU'RNAc E. v. a. [from the noun..] To throw out as
ſparks from a furnace. A bad word.
He furnaces
The thick fighs from him. . Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
To FU'RNISH. v. a. [ſournir, French.]
1. To ſupply with what is neceſſary.
She hath directed
How I ſhall take her from her father's houſe;
What gold and jewels ſhe is furniſh'd with. Shakespeare care.
His training ſuch,
That he may furniſh and inſtruct great teachers,
And never ſeek for aid out of himſelf. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Thou ſhalt furniſh him liberally out of thy flock. Deut. xv.
Auria, having driven the Turks from Corone, both by
ſea and land, furniſhed the city with corn, wine, vićtual, and
powder. Knolles's Hiſtory of the urks.
Come, thou ſtranger, and furniſh a table, and feed me of
that thou haſt ready. Eccluſ. xxix. 26.
I ſhall not need to heap up inſtances; every one's reading
and converſation will ſufficiently furniſh him, if he wants to
be better ſtored. Locke.
2. To give things for uſe.
Theſe ſimple ideas, the materials of all our knowledge, are
ſuggeſted and furniſhed to the mind only by theſe two ways,
ſenſation and reflection. Locke.
It is not any action of the ſtate, but a compačt among pri-
vate perſons that hath furniſhed out theſe ſeveral remittances.
- Addiſon's Remarks in Italy.
3. To fit up ; to fit with appendages.
Something deeper,
Whereof perchance theſe are but furniſhings. Shakespeare.
Plato entertained ſome of his friends at dinner, and had in
the chamber a bed or couch, neatly and coſtly furniſhed. Dio-
genes came in, and got up upon the bed, and trampled it,
ſaying, I trample upon the pride of Plato. Plato mildly an-
ſwered, But with greater pride, Diogenes. Bacon's Apophth.
We were led into another great room, furniſhed with old
inſcriptions. Addiſon on Italy.
4. To equip; to fit out for any undertaking.
Will your lordſhip lend me a thouſand pounds to furniſh
me? Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Ideas, forms, and intellects,
Have furniſh'd out three diff'rent ſects. Prior.
Doubtleſs the man Jeſus Chriſt is ſurniſhed with ſuperior
powers to all the angels in heaven, becauſe he is employed in
ſuperior work. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
5. To decorate; to adorn.
The wounded arm would furniſh all their rooms,
And bleed for ever ſcarlet in the looms. Halifax.
FU'RNISHER, n. ſ. [fourniſſeur, French, from furniſh..] One
who ſupplies or fits out. -
Fu'RNITURE. m. ſ. [fourniture, Fr. from furniſh.]
1. Moveables; goods put in a houſe for uſe or ornament.
No man can tranſport his large retinue, his ſumptuous fare,
and his rich furniture into another world. South's Sermons.
There are many noble palaces in Venice: their furniture is
not commonly very rich, if we except the pićtures from the
hands of the beſt maſters. Addiſon.
2. Appendages.
By a general conflagration mankind ſhall be deſtroyed, with
the form and all the furniture of the earth. , Willotſºn.
3. Equipage; embelliſhments; decorations.
Young Clarion, with vauntful luſtyhed,
After his guiſe did caſt abroad to fare,
And thereto 'gan his furnitures prepare. Spenser.
The duke is coming: ſee, the barge be ready,
And fit it with ſuch furniture as ſuits
The greatneſs of his perſon. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
The ground muſt be of a mixt brown, and large enough,
or the horſe's furniture muſt be of very ſenſible colours. Dryd.
Fu'RRIER. m. ſ. [from fur, J A dealer in furs.
Fu R Row. n.ſ. [ruſh, Saxon.]
1. A ſmall trench made by the plow for the reception of ſeed.
Wheat muſt be ſowed above furrow before Michaelmas.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
Then ploughs for ſeed the fruitful furrows broke,
And oxen labour'd firſt beneath the yoke. Dryden's Ovid.
2. Any long trench or hollow: as a wrinkle.
My lord it is, though time has plow'd that face
With many furrow, ſince I ſaw it firſt;
Yet I’m too well acquainted with the ground quite to for-
get it. Dryd, and jee's Ce.jpus.
FU'RRow-w E E D. m. ſ. [furrow and weed.] A weed that grows
in furrowed land.
Crown'd with rank fumiter, and ſurrow-wºrds. Sha'ſ.
To FU'RRow. v. a. [from the noun; rārian, Saxon.]
1. To cut in furrows. -
While the plowman near at hand,
Whiſtles o'er the ſurrow'd land. Miłºn. º
2. To divide in long hollows,
No
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">F U R
F U S
w
&amp;
No briny tear has furrow'd her ſmooth cheek. Suckling.
The billows fall, while Neptune lays his mace
On the rough ſea, and ſmooths its furrow'd face. Dryden.
3. To make by cutting.
There go the ſhips that furrow out their way; -
Yea, there of whales enormous fights we ſee. J7%tton.
Fu'RRY. adj. [from fur.]
1. Covered with fur; dreſſed in fur.
From Volga's banks th’ imperious Czar
Leads forth his furry troops to war. Felton to Lºrd Gower.
2. Conſiſting of fur.
Not arm'd with horns of arbitrary might,
Or claws to ſeize their furry ſpoils in fight. Dryden.
FURTHER. a j. [from forth, not from far, as is commonly
imagined ; fºrth, further, furtheft, corrupted from fºrther,
frthºff, Forben, Saxon. Forther is uſed by Sir Thomas More.
See For TH and FARTHER, of which the examples are to be
referred to this word.]
1. At a greater diſtance.
2. Beyond this.
What further need have we of witneſſes. ... Mat. xxvi. 65.
Fu'RTHER... adv. [from forth.] To a greater diſtance.
And the angel of the Lord went further, and ſtood in a
narrow place. Numb. xxii. 2.
To Fu'RTHER. v.a. [from the adverb; poſtºnian, Saxon.]
To put onward; to forward; to promote; to countenance;
to aſſiſt ; to help.
Things thus ſet in order, in quiet and reſt,
Shall further thy harveſt, and pleaſure thee beſt. Tuff. Husb.
Could their fond ſuperſtition have furth red ſo great at-
tempts, without the mixture of a true perſuaſion concerning
the irreſiſtible force of divine power. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 1.
Grant not, O Lord, the deſires of the wicked; fur her not
his wicked device. Pſ. cxl. 8.
This binds thee then to further my deſign,
As I am bound by vow to further thine. Dryden.
FU'RTHER ANce. n.ſ.. [from further.] Promotion; advance-
ment; help.
The Gauls learned them firſt, and uſed them only for the
wrtherance of their trade and private buſineſs. Spenſer.
Our diligence muſt ſearch out all helps and furtherances of
direction, which ſcriptures, councils, fathers, hiſtories, the
laws and practices of all churches afford. Hooker.
For gain and work, and ſucceſs in his affairs, he ſeeketh
furtherance of him that hath no manner of power. Hooker.
Cannot my body, nor blood-ſacrifice,
Intreat you to your wonted furtherance P Shakespeare Henry VI.
If men were minded to live righteouſly, to believe a
God would be no hindrance or prejudice to any ſuch deſign,
but very much for the advancement and furtherance of it. Till.
FU'RT HERER. n.ſ.. [from further.] Promoter; advancer.
That earneſt favourer and furtherer of God's true religion,
that faithful ſervitor to his prince and country. Aſcham.
FU'RTHERMoR E. [further and more..] Moreover; beſides.
- This ring I do accept moſt thankfully, -
And ſo, I pray you, tell him; furthermore,
I pray you, ſhew my youth old Shylock's houſe. Shakeſp.
FU'RTIVE, adj. [furtive, Fr. furtivus, Latin.] Stolen; gotten
by theft.
y Or do they, as your ſchemes, I think, have ſhown,
Dart furtive beams and glory not their own,
All ſervants to that ſource of light, the ſun ? . Prior.
FU'RUNCLE. n.ſ.. [furoncle, Fr. furunculus, Latin. J A bile;
an angry puſtule.
A furuncle is in its beginning round, hard, and inflamed;
and as it increaſeth, it riſeth up with an acute head, and ſome-
times a puſtule; and then it is more inflamed and painful,
when it arrives at its ſtate, which is about the eighth or ninth
day. Wiſeman's Surgery,
FURY. m. ſ. [furor, Latin; fureur, French.]
1. Madneſs.
2. Rage; paſſion of anger; tumult of mind approaching to
madneſs.
I do oppoſe my patience to his fury; and am arm'd
To ſuffer with a quietneſs of ſpirit
The very tyranny and rage of his. Shakespeare Mr. of Penice.
He hath given me to know the natures of living creatures,
and the furies of wild beaſts. ///d. vii. 20.
3. Enthuſiaſm; exaltation of fancy.
Taking up the lute, her wit began to be with a divine fury
inſpired; and her voice would, in ſo beloved an occaſion,
ſecond her wit. Sidney, b. ii.
A ſybil, that had number'd in the world
The ſun to courſe two hundred compaſſes,
In her prophetick ſury ſew'd the work. Shakeſp. Othel'o.
Greater than human kind ſhe ſeem'd to look,
And with an accent more than mortal ſpoke;
Her ſtaring eyes with ſparkling fury roll,
When all the god came ruſhing on her ſoul. Dryden's AEn.
4. [From fºria, Latin j . One of the deities of vengeance, and
thence a formy, turbulent, violent, raging woman.
The fight of any of the houſe of York,
Is as a ſity to torinent my ſoul. Shakespeare Henry VI. p. iii.
It was the moſt proper place for a ſºry to make her exit;
and I believe every reader's imagination is pleaſed, when he
ſees the angry goddeſs thus ſinking in a tempeſt, and plunging
herſelf into hell, amidſt ſuch a ſcene of horror and confu.
ſion. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
FURZE. n.ſ.. [Finn, Saxon.] Gorſe; goſs.
The whole plant is very thorny: the flowers, which are of
the pea-bloom kind, are diſpoſed in ſhort thick ſpikes, which
are ſucceeded by ſhort compreſſed pods, in each of which are
contained three or four kidney-ſhaped ſeeds. The ſpecies are
three, each of which grow wild on the heaths and upland-
commons in England: the firſt is ſometimes uſed to make
hedges, for which purpoſe it will do very well for a few
years. º º - Miller.
Carry out gravel to fill up a hole, -
Both timber and furzin, the turf and the cole. Tiff. Hush.
For fewel, there groweth generally in all parts great ſtore
of ſurze, of which the ſhrubby ſort is called tame, and the
better grown French. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
From hence uncertain ſeaſons we may know,
And when to reap the grain, and when to ſow,
Or when to fell the furzes. Dryden's Virg. Georg.
Fº: adj. [from furze.] Overgrown with furze; full of
gorie. -
Wide through the furzy field their route they take,
Their bleeding boſoms force the thorny brake. Gay.
FuscA'tion. n.ſ.. [fuſus, Latin. J . The aët of darkening or
obſcuring. Dić?.
To FUSE. v. a. ſ.ſºndo, fuſum, Latin J. To melt; to put into
fuſion; to liquify by heat.
To Fuse. v. n. To be melted; to be capable of being liqui-
fied by heat.
Fu's Ee. n.ſ.. [fuſeau, French.]
1. The cone round which is wound the cord or chain of a
clock or watch.
The reaſon of the motion of the balance is by the motion
of the next wheel, and that by the motion of the next, and
that by the motion of the fuſee, and that by the motion of the
fpring: the whole frame of the watch carries a reaſonableneſs
in it, the paſſive impreſſion of the intellectual idea that was in
the artiſt. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
2. A firelock [from fuſil, Fr.]; a ſmall neat muſquet. This
is more properly written fuſil.
Fus EE of a bomb or granado ſhell, is that which makes the
whole powder or compoſition in the ſhell take fire, to do the
deſigned execution. 'Tis uſually a wooden pipe or tap filled
with wildfire, or ſome ſuch matter; and is intended to burn
no longer than is the time of the motion of the bomb from
the mouth of the mortar to the place where it is to fall, which
time Anderſon makes twenty-ſeven ſeconds. Harris.
FU's Ee. Track of a buck. Ainſwºrth.
Fu'sible. adj. [from fuſe..] Capable of being melted; capable
of being made liquid by heat. -
Colours afforded by metalline bodies, either colliquate with
or otherwiſe penetrate into other bodies, eſpecially fuſible
OneS, Boyle.
Fe sibility. m. ſ. [from fuſible.] Capacity of being melted;
quality of growing liquid by heat.
The ancients obſerving in that material a kind of metalical
nature, or at leaſt a fuſibility, ſeem to have reſolved it into a
nobler uſe. - - J7%tton’s Archite&amp;ure.
The bodies of moſt uſe, that are ſought for out of the
depths of the earth, are the metals, which are diſtinguiſhed
from other bodies by their weight, fuſibility, and malleable-
neſs. Locke.
Fu’s IL. adj. [fuſik, French ; fuſili, Latin.]
1. Capable of being melted; liquifiable by heat.
The liquid ore he drain'd
Into fit molds prepard; from which he form'd
Firſt his own tools: then, what might clfe be wrought
Fuſile, or grav’n in metal. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi.
Some, leſs ſkilful, fancy theſe ſcapi that occur in moſt of
the larger Gothick buildings of England are artificial; and
will have it, that they are a kind of fuſil marble. Wºodward.
2. Running by the force of heat
Perpetual flames, -
O'er ſand and aſhes, and the ſtubborn flint,
Prevailing, turn into a fuſil ſea. Philips.
Fu’s IL. m. ſ. [fº/il, French.]
1. A firelock; a ſmall neat muſcuet.
2 [In heraldry, from fuſus, Latin.] Something like a ſpindle.
Fuſils muſt be made long, and finall in the middle, in the
ancient coat of Mountague, argent three fºſiſ, in feſſe gules.
# eacham on Blazºni.g.
Fu's 11.1 E.R. m. ſ [from ſufti.] A ſoldier armed with a fuſil.
FU's los. m. ſ. [ fºſi, Latin; fuſion, French.]
1. The act of melting. -
2. The ſtate of being melted, or of running with heat.
Metals in ſºfton do not ſame for want of a copious fume,
except ſpelter, which fumes copiouſly, and thereby flames.
- Newton's Opt.
Fuss, w ſ [A low cant word.) A tumult; a battle. E
n!
s—<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
F U T.
Fnd as it befits your ſtation;
Come to uſe and application;
Nor with ſenates keep a fiſ; ; - -
, I ſubmit, and anſwer thus. - Swift.
FUST. n.ſ.. [fuſie, French.]
1. The trunk or body of a column. *
2. [From fuſiº, French..] A ſtrong ſmell, as that of a mouldy
barrel.
To Fust. v. n. [from the noun ) To grow mouldy; to ſmell
ill.
FU'STIAN. m.ſ [futaine, French, from fuſie, a tree, becauſe
cotton grows on trees J -
1. A kind of cloth made of linen and cotton, and perhaps now
of cotton only.
Is ſupper ready, the houſe trimm'd, the ſerving-men in
their new fuſian and their white ſtockings Shakeſpeare.
2. A high ſwelling kind of writing made up of heterogeneous
parts, or of words and ideas ill aſſociated; bombat.
Nor will you raiſe in me combuſtion,
By dint of high heroick fuſtian. Hudibra, p. ii. cant. I.
What fuſian have I heard theſe gentlemen find out in Mr.
Cowley's odes' In general, I will ſay, that nothing can ap-
pear more beautiful to me than the ſtrength of thoſe images
which they condemn. Dryden.
I am much deceived if this be not abominable fuſian; that
is, thoughts and words ill ſorted, and without the leaſt rela-
tion to each other. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar, Dedication.
Chance thoughts, when govern'd by the cloſe,
Oft riſe to ſuffian, or deſcend to proſe. Smith.
FU'st 1A N. adj. [from the noun.]
1. Made of fuſtian.
2. Swelling; unnaturally pompous; ridiculouſly tumid. Uſed
of ſtile.
When men argue, th’ greateſt part
O' th' conteſt falls on terms of art, .
Until the fuſian ſtuff be ſpent,
And then they fall to th’ argument. Hudibras, p. i. can. 3:
Virgil, if he could have ſeen the firſt verſes of the Sylvae,
would have thought Statius mad in his ſuffian deſcription of
the ſtatue on the brazen horſe. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
FU'stic. m. ſ. A ſort of wood brought from the Weſt-Indies,
uſed in dying of cloath. Dićf.
To Fu'stigate. v. a. [fuſliga, Latin.] To beat with a ſtick;
to Cane. IDićf.
Fu'stil AR1AN. m. ſ. [from fuſly..] A low fellow; a ſtinkard;
a ſcoundrel. A word uſed by Shakeſpeare only.
Away, you ſcullion, you rampallian, you fuſilarian: I'll
tickle your cataſtrophe. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
FU's TIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from fuſly..] Mouldineſs; ſtink.
Fu'sty. adj. [from fuſi.] Ill ſmelling; mouldy.
Hećtor ſhall have a great catch, if he knock out either of
your brains: he were as good crack a fuſly nut with no
kernel. Shakespeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
The ſuſly plebeians hate thine honours. Shakespeare Coriolan.
The large Achilles, at this ſuſly ſtuff,
From his deep cheſt laughs out a loud applauſe. Shakeſp.
FU'TILE. adj. [futile, French; futilis, Latin.]
I. Takative; loquacious.
One futile perſon, that maketh it his glory to tell, will do
more hurt than many that know it their duty to conceal. Bacon.
2. Trifling; worthleſs ; of no weight.
Furt'Lity. n.ſ.. [futilité, French, fromfitile.]
1. Talkativeneſs; Toquacity.
This fable does not ſtrike ſo much at the futility of women,
as at the incontinent levity of a prying humour. L'E/irange.
2" Triflingneſs; want of weight; want of ſolidity.
F Y
Trifling futility appears in their ſigns of the zodiack, and
their mutual relations and aſpects. Bentley.
Fu’ttocks. m. ſ. [corrupted from fºot hooks. Skinner.] The
lower timbers that hold the ſhip together.
FUTURE. adj. [futurus, Latin ; fitur, French. } That
which will be hereafter ; to come : as, the future ſtate.
Glory they ſung to the moſt High good will
To future men, and in their dwellings peace. Milt. P. L.
He ſows the teeth at Pallas's command,
And flings the future people from his hand. Addison's Ovid.
FU'TURE. m. ſ. [trom the adjective.] Time to come; ſome-
what to happen hereafter.
Thy letters have tranſported me beyond
This ign'rant preſent time; and I feel now
The future in the inſtant. Shakespeare’s Macbeth.
The mind, once jaded by an attempt above its power,
either is diſabled for the futu e, or elſe checks at any vigorous
undertaking ever after. " Locke.
FU'ſ UR ELY. adv. [from future.] In time to come.
This preſcience of God, as it is preſcience, is not the cauſe
of any thing futu ely ſucceeding; neither doth God's fore-
knowledge impoſe any neceſſity, or bind. Raleigh.
Futuki"rio N. m. ſ. [from future.] The ſtate of being to be;
of being to come to paſs hereafter.
Is it imaginable, that the great means of the world's re-
demption ſhould reſt only in the number of poſſibilities, and
hang ſo looſe in reſpect of its futurition, as to leave the event
- in an equal poiſe, whether ever there ſhould be ſuch a thing
or no? S.utb's Sermons.
Futurity. n.ſ.. [from future.]
1. Time to come; events to come.
Not my ſervice paſt, nor preſent ſorrows,
Nor purpos'd merit in futurity,
Can ranſom me. Shakespeare's Othel'o.
All futurities are naked before that All-ſcing Eye, the fight
of which is no more hindred by diſtance of time than the fight
of an angel can be determined by diſtance of place. South.
I will contrive ſome way to make it known to futurity, that
I had your lordſhip for my patron. Swift.
This, great Amphiarus, lay hid from thee,
Though ſkill'd in fate and dark futurity. Pope's Statius.
2. The ſtate of being to be; futurition.
It may be well reckoned among the bare poſſibilities, which
never commence into a futurity; it requiring ſuch a free,
ſedate and intent mind, as, it may be, is no where found but
among the platonical ideas. Glanv. Scepſ. c. 1 o.
To FUZZ. v. n. [without etymology. ] To fly out in ſmall
particles. -
FU'zzball. m. ſ. [fuzz and ball] . A kind of fungus, which,
when preſſed, burſts and ſcatters duſt in the eyes.
FY. interj. [fy, French and Flemiſh; ©iv, Greek; vah, Lat.]
A word of blame and diſapprobation.
And fy on fortune, mine avowed foe,
Whoſe wrathful wreaks themſelves do now allay. Fa. Queen.
Fy, my lord, fy / a ſoldier, and afraid! What need we
fear who knows it, when none can call our power to ac-
count 2 Shakeſpeare's Macbeth-
A bawd, ſir, fy upon him! Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
But ſy, my wand'ring muſe, how thou do'ſ ſtray !
Expectance calls thee now another way. Milton.
Nay, ſy, what mean you in this open place
Unhand me, or, I ſwear, I’ll ſcratch your face:
Let go, for ſhame; you make me mad for ſpite:
My mouth's my own; and if you kiſs, I'll bite. Dryden.
F}, madam, he cried, we muſt be paſt all theſe gaities.
Tatter, Nº. 54.
