<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">:
s
ºl
º
-
*.-
J A C
Is in Engliſh conſidered both as a vowel and conſonant;
though, ſince the vowel and conſonant differ in their
form as well as ſound, they may be more properly ac-
counted two letters.
9 I vowel has a long ſound, as fine, thine, which is
uſually marked by an e final; and a ſhort ſound, as fin, thin.
Prefixed to e it makes a diphthong of the ſame ſound with the
ſoft i, or double e, ee : thus field, yield, are ſpoken as feeld,
yeeld; except friend, which is ſpoken frend. Subjoined to a
or e it makes them long, as fail, neigh; and to o makes a
mingled ſound, which approaches more nearly to the true no-
tion of a diphthong, or ſound compoſed of the ſounds of two
vowels, than any other combination of vowels in the Engliſh
language, as oil, coin. The ſound of i before another i, and
at the end of a word, is always expreſſed by y.
j conſonant has invariably the ſame ſound with that of g in
giant ; as jade, jet, jilt, jolt, juſt.
I. pronoun perſonal. [ik, Gothick; ic, Saxon; ich, Dutch.J.
I, gen. me; plural we; gen, us.
1C3 me, pe, ur.
1. The pronoun of the firſt perſon, myſelf.
I do not like theſe ſeveral councils, I. Shakespeare Rich. III.
There is none greater in this houſe than I. Gen. xxxix. 9.
Be of good cheer, it is I; be not afraid. Mat. xiv. 27.
What ſhall I do to be for ever known,
And make the age to come my own
I ſhall like beaſts or common people dye,
Unleſs you write my elegy. Cowley.
Hence, and make room for me. Cowley.
When chance of buſineſs parts us two,
What do our ſouls, I wonder, do Cowley.
Of that book you have given us a large earneſt. Cowley.
Thus, having paſs'd the night in fruitleſs pain,
I to my longing friends return again. Dryden's AEn.
2. Me is in the following paſſage written for 1.
There is but one man whom ſhe can have, and that is
zne. Clariſſa.
3. I is more than once in Shakeſpeare written for ay, or yes.
Hath Romeo ſlain himſelf? Say thou but I,
And that bare vowel, I, ſhall poiſon more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Did your letters pierce the queen
–I, ſir; ſhe took 'em and read 'em in my preſence,
And now and then an ample tear trill'd down. Shakeſpeare.
To JABBER. v. n. [gabheren, Dutch..] To talk idly; to prate
without thinking; to chatter.
We ſcorn, for want of talk, to jabber
Of parties. Swift.
JA'EBER ER... n.ſ.. [from jabber.] One who talks inarticulately
or unintelligibly.
Out cant the Babylonian labourers . -
At all their diale&amp;ts of jabberers. Hudibras, p. iii.
JA'cèNT. adj. [jacens, Latin.] Lying at length.
So laid, they are more apt in ſwagging down to pierce than
in the jacent poſture. Wºtton's Architect.
JAcI'N TH. n.ſ.. . [for hyacinth, as jeruſalem for Hieruſalem.]
1. The ſame with hyacinth.
2. A gem of a deep rediſh yellow approaching to a flame colour,
or the deepeſt amber. Woodward's Met. Fºſſ.
JACK. n.ſ. [Probably by miſtake from jaques, which in French
is 7ames.]
1. The diminutive of John. Uſed as a general term of con-
tempt for ſaucy or paltry fellows.
am in eſtimation:
You will perceive that *3. gardant cannot
Office me from my ſon Coriolanus.
I have in my mind
A thouſand raw tricks of theſe bragging jacks,
Which I will practiſe. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
Every jack ſlave hath his belly-full of fighting, and I muſt
go up and down like a cock that nobody can match. Shakeſp.
2. The name of inſtruments which ſupply the place of a boy,
as an inſtrument to pull off boots.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
J A C
Foot-boys, who had frequently the common name of jack
given them, were kept to turn the ſpit, or to pull off their
maſters boots; but when inſtruments were invented for both
thoſe ſervices, they were both called jacks. Watts's Logick.
3. An engine which turns the ſpit.
The excellencies of a good jack are, that the jack frame be
forged and filed ſquare; that the wheels be perpendicularly and
ſtrongly fixed on the ſquares of the ſpindles; that the teeth be
evenly cut, and well ſmoothed; and that the teeth of the
worm-wheel fall evenly into the groove of the worm. Moxon.
The ordinary jacks, uſed for roaſting of meat, commonly
conſiſt but of three wheels. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
Clocks and jacks, though the ſcrews and teeth be never ſo
ſmooth, yet, if not oiled, will hardly move. Ray.
A cookmaid, by the fall of a jack weight upon her head,
was beaten down. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Some ſtrain in rhyme; the muſes on their racks
Scream, like the winding of ten thouſand jacks. Pope.
4. A young pike.
No fiſh will thrive in a pond where roach or gudgeons are,
except jacks. Mortimer's Husbandry.
5. [jacque, French.] A coat of mail.
The reſidue were on foot, well furniſhed with jack and
ſkull, pike, dagger, bucklers made of board, and ſlicing
ſwords, broad, thin, and of an excellent temper. Hayward.
6. A cup of waxed leather.
Dead wine, that ſtinks of the borrachio, ſup
From a foul jack, or greaſy mapple cup. Dryden's Perſ.
7. A ſmall bowl thrown out for a mark to the bowlers.
'Tis as if one ſhould ſay, that a bowl equally poiſed, and
thrown upon a plain bowling-green, will run neceſſarily in a
direét motion; but if it be made with a byaſs, that may de-
cline it a little from a ſtraight line, it may acquire a liberty of
will, and ſo run ſpontaneouſly to the jack. Bentley's Sermons.
8. A part of the muſical inſtrument called a virginal.
In a virginal, as ſoon as ever the jack falleth, and toucheth
the ſtring, the ſound ceaſeth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
9. The male of animals.
A jack aſs, for a ſtallion, was bought for three thouſand two
hundred and twenty-nine pounds three ſhillings and four
pence. Arbuthnot on Coins.
10. A ſupport to ſaw wood on. Ainſworth.
11. The colours or enſign of a ſhip. Ainſworth,
12. A cunning fellow who can turn to ...} thing.
jack of all trades, ſhow and ſound ;
An inverſe burſe, an exchange under ground. Cleaveland.
Jack Boots. n. ſ. [from jack, a coat of mail.] Boots which
ſerve as armour to the legs.
A man on horſeback, in his breeches and jack boots, dreſſed
up in a commode and a night-rail. Spectator.
JAck by the Hedge. n.ſ. An herb. *
jack by the hedge is an herb that grows wild under hedges,
is eaten as other ſallads are, and much uſed in broth. Mortim.
Jack Pudding. m. ſ. [jack and pudding. J A zani; a merry
Andrew.
Every jack pudding will be ridiculing palpable weakneſſes
which they ought to cover. L’Eſtrange.
A buffoon is called by every nation by the name of the diſh
they like beſt: in French jean pottage, and in Engliſh jack
pudding. Guardian.
jack pudding, in his party-colour'd jacket,
Toſſes the glove, and jokes at ev'ry packet. Gay.
Jack with a Lantern. An ignis fatuus.
Jack Ale'N T. n.ſ. [ jack in Lent, a poor ſtarven fellow.] A
ſimple ſheepiſh fellow.
You little jacka'ent, have you been true to us?
—Ay, I'll be ſworn. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
Jack A'L. m. ſ. [chacal, French..] A ſmall animal ſuppoſed to
ſtart prey for the lyon.
The Belgians tack upon our rear,
And raking chaſe-guns through our ſterns they ſend:
Cloſe by their fireſhips, like jackal, appear,
Who on their lions for the prey attend. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J A I
J A I
The mighty lyon, before whom flood the little jackal, the
faithful ſpy of the king of beaſts. Arbuth, and Pope's M.Sc. ib.
JA'ck ANAPF s. m. ſ. [jack and ape.]
1. Monkey; an ape.
2. A coxcomb ; an impertinent.
Which is he
—That jackanapes with ſcarfs. Shakeſp.
People wondered how ſuch a young upſtart jackamates ſhould
grow ſo pert and ſaucy, and take ſo much upon him. Arbuth.
Jack DA'w. m. ſ. [jack and daw.] A cock daw; a bird taught
to imitate the human voice.
To impoſe on a child to get by heart a long ſcroll of
phraſes, without any ideas, is a pračtice fitter for a jackdaw
than for anything that wears the ſhape of man. /Watts.
JAcker. n.ſ. [jacquet, French.]
1. A ſhort coat; a cloſe waiſtcoat.
In a blue jacket, with a croſs of red. Hubberd's Tale.
And hens, and dogs, and hogs are feeding by ;
And here a ſailor's jacket hangs to dry. Swift.
Jack pudding, in his party-colour'd jacket,
Toſſes the glove, and jokes at ev'ry packet. Gay.
2. To beat one's JAck Et, is to beat the man.
She fell upon the jacket of the parſon, who ſtood gaping at
her. L'E/lrange.
JA'cob's Ladder. n.ſ. The ſame with Greek valerian.
JA'cob's Staff. m. ſ.
1. A pilgrim's ſtaff.
2. Staff concealing a dagger.
3. A croſs ſtaff; a kind of aſtrolabe.
JA'co BINE, n.ſ. A pidgeon with a high tuft. Ainſworth.
JAct (TA"rion. m. ſ [jačiito, Latin. J Toſſing; motion ;
reſtlefineſs; heaving.
If the patient be ſurpriſed with jači 'tation, or great oppreſ-
fion about the ſtomach, expect no relief from cordials. Harv.
JAcu LA"rio N. m. ſ. [jaculatio, jacular, Latin. J. The act of
throwing miſſive weapons.
So hills amid’ the air encounter'd hills,
Hurl’d to and fro with jaculation dire. Milt. Parad. Loff.
JADE. n.ſ. [The etymology of this word is doubtful:, Skinner
derives it from gaad, a goad, or ſpur.]
1. A horſe of no ſpirit; a hired horſe; a worthleſs *g.
Alas, what wights are theſe that load my heart!
I am as dull as Winter-ſtarved ſheep, -
Tir'd as a jade in overloaden cart. Sidney.
When they ſhould endure the bloody ſpur,
They fall their creſt, and, like deceitful jades,
Sink in the tryal. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
The horſemen ſit like fixed candleſticks,
With torchſtaves in their hand; and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, dropping the head and hips. Shakespeare
To other regions
France is a ſtable, we that dwell in't jader;
Therefore to th' war. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
So have I ſeen with armed heel
A wight beſtride a commonweal,
While ſtill the more he kick'd and ſpurr'd,
The leſs the ſullen jade has ſtirr'd. Hudibras, p. i.
The plain nag came upon the trial to prove thoſe to be
jades that made ſport with him. L'A/trange.
Falſe ſteps but help them to renew their race,
As, after ſtumbling, jades will mend their pace. Pope.
2. A ſorry woman. A word of contempt noting ſometimes age,
but generally vice. -
Shall theſe, theſe old jades, paſt the flower
Of youth, that you have, paſs you. Chapman's Iliads.
But ſhe, the cunning'ſt jade alive,
Says, 'tis the ready way to thrive,
By ſharing female bounties. Stepney.
Get in, huffy: now will I perſonate this young jade, and
diſcover the intrigue. Southe, ne’s Innocent Adultery.
In di'monds, pearl, and rich brocades,
She ſhines the firſt of batter'd jades,
And flutters in her pride. Swift.
3. A young woman : in irony and ſlight contempt.
You ſee now and then ſome handſome young jades among
them: the ſluts have very often white teeth and black eyes. Addison
JA D F. n.ſ. A ſpecies of ſtone.
The jade is a ſpecies of the jaſper, and of extreme hard-
neſs. Its colour is compoſed of a pale blueiſh grey, or aſh-
colour, and a pale green, not ſimple and uniform, but inter-
mixed. It appears dull and coarſe on the ſurface, but it takes
a very elegant and high poliſh. It is found in the Eaſt Indies,
and is much uſed by the Turks for handles of ſabres. It is ſo
highly eſteemed by the Indians as to be called the divine ſtone:
they wear it externally as a remedy for the gravel, and an
amulet to preſerve them from the bite of venomous animals.
IIill's Materia Medica.
To JADF. v. a. ſſrom the noun.
1. To tire ; to haraſs; to diſpirit; to weary.
"ith his banners, and his well-paid ranks,
The ne'er-yet-beaten horſe of Pathia
We've jºki out o' th' field. 9 a.k.ſp. Art, and Cleopatra.
It is good in diſcourſe to vary and intermingle ſpeech of the
preſent occaſion with arguments ; for it is a dull thing to tire
and jade any thing too far. Bacon's Eſſays.
If fleet dragon's progeny at laſt -
Proves jaded, and in frequent matches caſt,
No favour for the ſtallion we retain,
And no reſpect for the degen'rate ſtrain. Dryden's juven.
The mind once jaded, by an attempt above its power, is
very hardly brought to exert its force again. Locke.
There are ſeaſons when the brain is overtired or jaded with
ſtudy or thinking; or upon ſome other accounts animal na-
ture may be languid or cloudy, and unfit to aſſiſt the ſpirit in
meditation. - //atts's Lºgick.
2. To overbear ; to cruſh; to degrade; to haraſs, as a horſe
that is ridden too hard.
If we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by a piece of ſcarlet,
Farewel nobility. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
3. To employ in vile offices. -
The honourable blood
Muſt not be ſhed by ſuch a jaded groom. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
4. To ride; to rule with tyranny.
I do not now fool myſelf, to let imagination jade me; for
every reaſon excites to this. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
To JADE. v. n. To loſe ſpirit; to fink.
Many offer at the effects of friendſhip, but they do not laſt:
they are promiſing in the beginning, but they fail and jade and
tire in the proſecution. Sauth's Sermons.
JA'DISH. adj. [from jade.]
I. Vitious ; bad, as an horſe.
That hors'd us on their backs, to ſhow us
A jadiſh trick at laſt, and throw us. Hudilraſ, p. iii.
When once the people get the jadiſh trick
Of throwing off their king, no ruler's ſafe. Southern.
2. Unchaſte; incontinent. -
'Tis to no boot to be jealous of a woman; for if the hu-
mour takes her to be jadiſh, not all the locks and ſpies in na-
ture can keep her honeſt. L’E/irange.
To JAGG. v. a. [gagaw, ſlits or holes, Welſh.] To cut into
indentures; to cut into teeth like thoſe of a ſaw.
Some leaves are round, ſome long, ſome ſquare, and many
jagged on the ſides. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
The jagging of pinks and gilliflowers is like the inequality
of dak-leaves; but they never have any ſmall plain purls. Bac.
The banks of that ſea muſt be jagged and torn by the impe-
tuous aſſaults, or the filent underminings of waves; violent
rains muſt waſh down earth from the tops of mountains. Bent/.
An alder-tree is one among the leſſer trees, whoſe younger
branches are ſoft, and whoſe leaves are jagged Ji atts.
JAG.G. n.ſ. [from the verb.] A protuberance or denticulation.
The figure of the leaves is divided into ſo many jaggs or
eſcallops, and curiouſly indented round the edges. Ray.
Take off all the ſtaring ſtraws, twigs, and jaggs in the
hive, and make them as ſmooth as poſſible. A/ort. Husbandry.
JA'GGY, adj. [from jagg.] Uneven ; denticulated.
His tow'ring creſt was glorious to behold;
His ſhoulders and his ſides were ſcal'd with gold;
Three tongues he brandiſh'd when he charg’d his foes;
His teeth ſtood jaggy in three dreadful rows. Addison.
Amid’ thoſe angles, infinitely ſtrain'd,
They joyful leave their jaggy ſalts behind. Thomſ. Autumn.
Ja'G GED Ness. m / [from jagged..] The ſtate of being denti-
culated; unevenneſs. -
Firſt draw rudely your leaves, making them plain with
your coal or lead, before you give them their veins or jagged-
77e/s. - Peacham on Drawing.
JAIL. m. ſ. [geol, French.] A gaol; a priſon; a place where
criminals are confined. See GAol. It is written either way;
but commonly by latter writers jail.
Away with the dotard, to the jail with him. Shakespeare.
A dependant upon him paid ſix pound ready money, which,
poor man, he lived to repent in a jail. Clarendºn.
He figh’d and turn’d his eyes, becauſe he knew
'Twas but a larger jail he had in view. Dryden.
One jail did all their criminals reſtrain,
Which now the walls of Rome can ſcarce contain. Dryden.
JA'IL BIRD. m. ſ. [jail and bird...] One who has been in a jail. .
JA'i LER. m. ſ. [from jail.] A gaoler; the keeper of a priſon.
Seeking many means to ſpeak with her, and ever kept from
it, as well becauſe ſhe ſhunned it, ſeeing and diſdaining his
mind, as becauſe of her jealous jailers. Sidney.
This is as a jailer, to bring forth
Some monſtrous malefactor. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
His pow'r to hollow caverns is confin'd;
There let him reign, the jailer of the wind;
With hoarſe commands his breathing ſubjects call,
And boaſt and bluſter in his empty hall. Dryden's fin.
Palamon, the priſ’ner knight,
Reſtleſs for woe, aroſe before the light;
And with his jailer’s leave, deſir'd to breathe
An air mole wholeſome than the damp beneath. Dryden.
JAKEs.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J A R
J A S
;:
º:
º
º
º
*
º
-*.
º
º
Jakes. m. ſ. [Of uncertain etymology.] A houſe of office:
I will tread this unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the
walls of jakes with him. - Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Their ſordid avarice rakes
In excrements, and hires the very jakes. Dryden's juvenal.
Some have fiſhed the very jakes for papers left there by men
of wit. - Swift.
JA'LA P. m. ſ. [jalap, French ; jalapium, low Latin.]
jalap is a firm and ſolid root, of a wrinkled ſurface, and
generally cut into ſlices, heavy and hard to break; of a
faintiſh ſmell, and of an acrid and nauſeous taſte. It was
not known in Europe ’till after the diſcovery of America, and
had its name jalapium, or jalapa, from Xalapa, a town in
New Spain, in the neighbourhood of which it was diſcovered;
though it is now principally brought from the Madeiras. It
is an excellent purgative in all caſes where ſerous humours are
to be evacuated. PHill’s Mat. Med.
JAM. n.ſ. [I know not whence derived.] A conſerve of fruits
boiled with ſugar and water. -
JaMB. m. ſ. [jambe, French..] Any ſupporter on either ſide,
as the poſts of a door.
No timber is to be laid within twelve inches of the foreſide
of the chimney jambs. 440xon's Mech. Exer.
IA/M BIck. n.ſ.. [iambique, French; iambicus, Latin J. Verſes
compoſed of iambick feet, or a ſhort and long ſyllable alter-
nately : uſed originaly in ſatire, therefore taken for ſatire.
In thy felonious heart though venom lies,
It does but touch thy Iriſh pen, and dies:
Thy genius calls thee not to purchaſe fame
In keen iambicks, but mild anagram. Dryden.
To JA'NG 1. E. v. n. [jangler, French. Skinner. J. To altercate;
to quarrel; to bicker in words.
Good wits will be jangling; but, gentiles agree,
This civil war of wits were much better us’d
On Navarre and his book-men. Shakespeare Love's Labour Loft.
So far am I glad it did ſo ſort,
As this their jangling I eſteem a ſport. Shakeſpeare.
There is no errour which hath not ſome appearance of pro-
bability reſembling truth, which when men, who ſtudy to be
fingular, find out, ſtraining reaſon, they then publiſh to the
world matter of contention and jangling. Raleigh.
To JA'NGLE. v. a. To make to ſound untuneable.
Now ſee that noble and that ſovereign reaſon,
Like ſweet bells jangled out of tune and harſh. Shakespeare Haml.
'Ere Gothick forms were known in Greece,
And in our verſe 'ere monkiſh rhimes
Had jang!'d their fantaſtick chimes. Prior.
JANGLE.R. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A wrangling, chattering,
noiſy fellow. -
JA'Niza Ry; n.ſ. [A Turkiſh word.] One of the guards of
the Turkiſh king.
His grand viſier, preſuming to inveſt
The chief imperial city of the Weſt,
With the firſt charge compel'd in haſte to riſe;
The ſtandards loſt, and janizaries ſlain, -
Render the hopes he gave his maſter vain. JValler.
JA'NNock, n.ſ. [probably a corruption of bannock. J Oat-
bread. A northern word.
JANTY. adj. [corrupted from gentil, French..] Showy; flut-
tering. -
This ſort of woman is a janty ſlattern: ſhe hangs on her
cloaths, plays her head, and varies her poſture. Spºtator.
JA'NUARY. n.ſ.. [Januarius, Latin. J. The firſt month of the
year, from janus, to whom it was among the Romans con-
ſecrated.
January is clad in white, the colour of the earth at this
time, blowing his nails. This month had the name from Janus,
painted with two faces, ſignifying providence. Peacham.
JAPA’N. n.ſ. [from japan in Aſia, where figured work was
originally done..] Work varniſhed and raiſed in gold and
colours.
The poor girl had broken a large japan glaſs, of great value
with a ſtroké of her bruſh. --~~~;
To JAPA'N. v. a. [from the noun.
1. To Yarniſh, and embelliſh with gold and raiſed figures.
For not the deſk with ſilver nails,
Nor bureau of expence,
Nor ſtandiſh well japan'd, avails
To writing of good ſenſe. Swift.
2. To black ſhoes. A low phraſe. -
The god of fire
Among theſe gen’rous preſents joins his part,
And aids with foot the new japanning art. Gay's Trivia.
JAPA’NNER. m. ſ. [from japan.]
1. One ſkilled in japan work.
2. A ſhoeblacker.
The poor have the ſame itch;
They change their weekly barber, weekly news,
Prefer a new japanner to their ſhoes. Pºpe's Horace.
To JAR. v. n. [from eonne, anger, Saxon; or gierre, war,
French ; or garren, old Teutonick, to clamour.]
1. To ſtrike together with a kind of ſhort rattle.
A hollow groan, a murm'ring wind aroſe;
The rings of iron, that on the doors were hung,
Sent out a jarring ſound, and harſhly rung. Drydºn.
My knees tremble with the jarring blow. Gay.
2. To ſtrike or ſound untuneably.
O, you kind gods !
Cure this great breach in his abuſed nature:
Th’ untun'd and jarring ſenſes, O, wind up,
Of this child-changed father. Shake?. King Lear.
I perceive you delight not in muſick.
—Not a whit, when it jars ſo. Slakeſpeare.
A ſtring may jar in the beſt maſter's hand,
And the moſt ſkilful archer miſs his aim. Roſcºmmºn.
He keeps his temper'd mind, ſerene and pure,
And every paſſion aptly harmoniz'd
Amid’ a jarring world. Thomſºn's Summer,
3. To claſh; to interfere; to act in oppoſition; to be incon-
ſiſtent.
At laſt, though long, our jarring notes agree. Shake?.
For orders and degrees
jar not with liberty, but well conſiſt. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
Venalus concluded his report:
A jarring murmur fill'd the factious court:
As when a torrent rolls with rapid force,
The flood, conſtrain'd within a ſcanty ſpace,
Roars horrible.
4. To quarrel; to diſpute.
When thoſe renowned noble peers of Greece,
Through ſtubborn pride, among themſelves did jar,
Forgetful of the famous golden fleece,
Then Orpheus with his harp their ſtrife did bar. Spenſer.
They muſt be ſometimes ignorant of the means conducing
to thoſe ends, in which alone they can jar and oppoſe each
other. - Dryden's javeral, Dedication.
JAR. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A kind of rattling vibration of ſound.
In r, the tongue is held ſtifly at its whole length, by the
force of the muſcles; ſo as when the impulſe of breath ſtrikes
upon the end of the tongue, where it finds paſſage, it ſhakes
and agitates the whole tongue, whereby the ſound is affected
with a trembling jar. Holder's Elements ºf Speech.
2. Claſh ; diſcord; debate. -
He maketh war, he maketh peace again,
And yet his peace is but continual jar: -
O miſerable men, that to him ſubject are Fairy Qizen,
Nath'leſs, my brother, ſince we paſſed are
Unto this point, we will appeaſe our jar. Hubberd's Tale,
Force would be right; or rather, right and wrong,
Between whoſe endleſs jar juſtice preſides,
Would loſe their names, and ſo would juſtice too. Shake?.
3. A ſtate in which a door unfaſtened may ſtrike the poſt; half
opened.
P; chaffering with diſſenters, and dodging about this or
t'other ceremony, is but like opening a few wickets, and
leaving them a jar, by which no more than one can get in at
a time. Swift.
4. [Giarro, Italian.] An earthen veſſel.
About the upper part of the jar there appeared a good num-
Dryden's Żm.
ber of bubbles. Boyle.
He mead for cooling drink prepares,
Of virgin honey in the jars. Dryden.
Warriors welter on the ground,
Whilſt empty jars the dire defeat reſound. Garth.
jARDES. m. ſ. [French.) Hard callous tumours in horſes,
a little below the bending of the ham on the outſide. This
diſtemper in time will make the horſe halt, and grow ſo pain-
ful as to cauſe him to pine away, and become light-bellicd.
It is moſt common to managed horſes, that have been kept too
much upon their haunche. Farrier's Diº.
JARGON. n.ſ. [jargon, French ; gerigºnga, Spaniſh. J Unin-
telligible talk; gabble; gibberiſh.
Nothing is clearer than mathematical demonſtration, yet
let one, who is altogether ignorant in mathematicks, hear it,
and he will hold it to be plain fuſtian or jargon. Bramhaiſ.
From this laſt til again what knowledge flows:
Juſt as much, perhaps, as ſhows :
That all his predeceſſor's rules
Were empty cant, all jargon of the ſchools. - Priºr.
During the uſurpation an infuſion of enthuſiaſtick jargºn
prevailed in every writing. - - - - - Swſt.
JAR goNElle. n.ſ. See PEAR, of which it is a ſpecies:
JA's HAwk. m.ſ. A young hawk. - Ainſworth.
ja's MINE, n ſ. [jºſmin, French. It is often pronounced jºſ-
famine. - -
It hath a funnel-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of one leaf, which
is cut into ſeveral ſegments at the brim, out of whoſe cup
ariſes the pointal, which afterward becomes the fruit or pod,
which, for the moſt part, grows double and open lengthwiſe,
diſcovering the ſeeds, which are oblong, and have a border
round them: theſe are ranged over each other like flates on
a houſe, and are faſtened to the placenta. Aºiller.
Thou, like the harmleſs bee, may’it freely rarge;
From jaſmine grove to grove may'ſt wander. Tºwſºn.
11 * - JA's: Is F.
.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J A W
I C O
º
JA's MIN E Perſian. n.ſ. A plant. See Lilac, of which
it is a ſpecies.
JA's PER. m. ſ. [jaſpe, Fr. iaſpis, Lat.] A hard ſtone of a bright
beautiful green colour, ſometimes clouded with white, found in
maſſes of various ſizes and ſhapes. It is capable of a very
elegant poliſh, and is found in many parts of the Eaſt Indies,
and in Egypt, Africa, Tartary, and China. Hill's Mat, Med.
The baſis of jaſper is uſually of a greeniſh hue, and ſpotted
with red, yellow and white. //oodward's Met. Foſſ.
The moſt valuable pillars about Rome are four columns of
oriental jaſper in St. Paulina's chapel, and one of tranſparent
oriental jaſper in the vatican library. Addiſon on Italy.
IATRoleptick. adj. [iatralºptique, Fr. 21:2; and 27.4%. J
That which cures by anointing.
To JA'v EL, or jable. v. a. To bemire; to ſoil over with dirt
through unneceſſary traverſing and travelling. This word
is ſtill retained in Scotland and the northern counties.
JA'vel. n.ſ. [perhaps from the verb.]. A wandering fellow.
When as time, flying with wings ſwift,
Expired had the term that thoſe two javel;
Should lender up a reckoning of their travels. Hubb. Tale.
JA've LIN. m. ſ. [javeline, French.] A ſpear or half pike, which
anciently was uſed either by foot or horſe. It had an iron
head pointed.
Others, from the wall, defend
With dart and jav’,in, ſtones and ſulph’rous fire;
On each hand ſlaughter and gigantick deeds. Milt. Pa. Loſt.
She ſhakes her myrtle jav’ān; and, behind,
Her Lycian quiver dances in the wind. Dryden's A.m.
Flies the javelin ſwifter to its mark,
Launch'd from the vigour of a Roman arm Addison Cato.
JA'UNDICE. m.ſ. [jauniſ, jaune, yellow, Fr.] A diſtemper from
obſtructions of the glands of the liver, which prevents the gall
being duly ſeparated by them from the blood; and ſometimes,
eſpecially in hard drinkers, they are ſo indurated as never aſ-
ter to be opened, and ſtraighten the motion of the blood
ſo much through that viſcus as to make it divert with a force
great enough into the gaſtrick arterics, which go off from
the hepatick, to break through them, and drain into the ſto-
mach; ſo that vomiting of blood, in this diſtemper, is a fatal
fymptom. &amp;ing.
Why ſhould a man, whoſe blood is warm within,
Sit like his grandſire cut in alabaſter 2
Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice
By being peeviſh Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
What grief hath ſet the jaundice on your cheeks Shakespeare
Thoſe were thy thoughts, and thou couldſt judge aright,
*Till int’reſt made a jaundice in thy ſight. Dryden.
The eyes of a man in the jaundice make yellow obſerva-
tions on everything; and the ſoul, tinétured with any paſſion,
diffuſes a falſe colour over the real appearances of things.
J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
JA'UN DICED. adj. [from jaundice..] Infected with the jaundice.
All ſeems infected, that th' infected ſpy,
As all looks yellow to the jaundic’d eye. Pote.
To JAUNT. v. n. [janter, French. J To wander here and
there; to buſtle about. It is now always uſed in contempt
or levity.
I was not made a horſe,
And yet I bear a burthen like an aſs;
Spur-gall'd and tir’d by jaunting Bolingbroke. Shakespeare R. II.
JAUNT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Ramble; flight; excurſion.
It is commonly uſed ludicrouſly, but ſolemnly by Milton.
Our Saviour meek, and with untroubled mind,
After his airy jaunt, though hurry'd ſore,
Hungry and cold, betook him to his reſt. Milt. Par. Rºg.
He ſends me out on many a jaunt, -
Qld houſes in the night to haunt. Hudibras, p. iii.
They parted, and away poſts the cavalier in queſt of his
new miſtreſs: his firſt jaunt is to court. L’Eſtrange.
. If you are for a merry jaunt, I'll try for once who can foot
it fartheft. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Thus much of the ſcheme of my deſign in this part have
I run over, and led my reader a long and tedious jaunt, in
tracing out theſe metallick and mineral bodies. J/oodward.
JA'ENTINEss. n.ſ.. [from jºunty, or janty, corrupted from gen-
til, French. See JANTY..] Airyneſs; flutter; genteelneſs.
A certain ſtiffneſs in my limbs entirely deſtroyed that jaun-
tineſs of air I was once maſter of. Addiſon's Speciator.
JAW, n.ſ. [jaue, a cheek, French; whence jowbone, or cheek-
bone, then jaw.]
1. The bone of the mouth in which the teeth are fixed.
A generation whoſe teeth are as ſwords, and their jaw teeth
as knives, to devour the poor. Prov. xxx. 14.
. The jaw bones, hearts, and galls of pikes are very medi-
cinable. J/alton's Angler.
Piſo, who probably ſpeaks Ariſtotle's meaning, ſaith that
the crocodile doth not only move his upper jaw, but that his
nether jaw is immoveable. Grew's 4Auſa umi.
More formidable hydra ſtands within, ,
Whoſe jaw; with iron teeth ſeverely grin. Dryden's Zn.
2. The mouth.
My tongue cleaveth to my jaws, and thou haſt brought me
into the duſt of death. Pſ, xxii. 15.
My bended hook ſhall pierce their ſlimy jaws. Shakeſpeare.
A ſmeary foam works o'er my grinding jaws,
And utmoſt anguiſh ſhakes my lab'ring frame. Rowe.
JAY. m. ſ. [named from his cry. Skinner.] A bird.
Two ſharp winged ſheers,
Deck'd with diverſe plumes, like painted jays,
Were fixed at his back, to cut his airy ways. Fairy Queen.
We'll uſe this unwholſome humidity, this groſs wat'ry
pumpion—we'll teach him to know turtles from jays. Shakespeare
What, is the jay more precious than the lark,
Becauſe his feathers are more beautiful ? Shakeſpeare.
I am highly delighted to ſee the jay or the thruſh hopping
about my walks. Spectator.
Admires the jay, the inſe&amp;ts gilded wings,
Or hears the hawk, when Philomela ſings. Pope.
JA’ze L. m. ſ. A precious ſtone of an azure or blue co-
lour. IDicſ.
ICE. n.ſ. ſir, Saxon; eyſe, Dutch.]
1. Water or other liquor made ſolid by cold.
You are no ſurer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hailſtone in the ſun. Shakespeare's Cºriolanut,
Thou art all i.e., thy kindneſs freezes. Shakeſp. R. III.
If I ſhould aſk whether ice and water were two diſtinét ſpe-
cics of things, I doubt not but I ſhould be anſwered in the
affirmative. Locke.
2. Concreted ſugar.
3. To break the Ice. To make the firſt opening to any attempt.
If you break the ice, and do this feat,
Atchieve the elder, ſet the younger free
For our acceſs, whoſe hap ſhall be to have her,
Will not ſo graceleſs be to be ingrate. Shakeſpeare.
Thus have I broken the ice to invention, for the lively re-
preſentation of floods and rivers neceſſary for our painters and
poets. Peacham on Drawing.
After he'd a while look'd wiſe,
At laſt broke ſilence and the ice.
To ICE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To cover with ice ; to turn to ice.
2. To cover with concreted ſugar.
Ice House. n.ſ.. [ice and houſe..] A houſe in which ice is re-
poſited againſt the warm months.
Ichi NE U Mos. m. ſ. [ xy:cp.ºw. J A ſmall animal that breaks
the eggs of the crocodile.
IcHNFUM on Fly'. n.ſ. A ſort of fly.
The generation of the ichneumofy is in the bodies of cater-
pillars, and other nymphae of inſects. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
Ici Ng'GRAPHY. m. ſ. [x;,&amp;’ and yºzºa.] The groundplot.
It will be more intelligible to have a draught of each front
in a paper by itſelf, and alſo to have a draught of the ground-
plot or ichnºgra, hy of every ſtory in a paper by itſelf. Moxon.
ICHOR. m. ſ. [ x28. j. A thin watery humour like
ſerum. $ºuincy.
Milk, drawn from ſome animals that feed only upon fleſh,
will be more apt to turn rancid and putrify, acquiring firſt a
ſaline taſte, which is a ſign of putrefaction, and then it will
turn into an ichor. Arbuthnot on Alments.
I'chorous. adj. [from ichor.] Sanious; thin; undigeſted.
The lung-growth is imputed to a ſuperficial ſanious or
ichorous exulceration. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The pus from an ulcer of the liver, growing thin and
ichorous, corrodes the veſicls. Arbuthnot on Diet.
IcHTHYo'logy. n.ſ. [ichthyºlºgie, Fr. ix3vox.oyiz, from ix30s
and Aſya...] The doctrine of the nature of fiſh.
Some there are, as camels and ſheep, which carry no name
in ichth, ology. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Ichth Yo'PHAGY. m.ſ. ſix.3% and payw.] Diet of fiſh ; the
practice of eating fiſh. -
Icicle. n / [from ice.] A ſhoot of ice hanging down from
the upper part.
If diſtilled vinegar or aqua-fortis be poured into the pow-
der of loadſtone, the ſubſiding powder, dried, retains ſome
magnetical virtue; but if the menſtruum be evaporated to a
conſiſtence, and afterwards doth ſhoot into icicle, or cryſtals,
the loadſtone hath no power upon them. Brown's Pulgar Err.
From locks uncomb'd, and from the frozen beard,
Long icicles depend, and crackling founds are heard. Pryd.
The common dropſtone conſiſts principally of ſpar, and is
frequently found in form of an icice, hanging down from the
tops and ſides of grotto's. Iſºdward's Nat. Hiſtory.
I'cINEss. n.ſ. [from iy.] The ſtate of generating ice.
1'co N. m. ſ. ſix.y.] A pićture or repreſentation.
Boyſardus, in his tract of divination, hath ſet forth the
icons of theſe ten, yet added two others. Brown's Puig. Hrſ.
Some of our own nation, and many Netherlanders, whoſe
names and icon are publiſhed, have deſerved good commer-
dation. Iiak, will on Providence.
Hudibras, p. iii.
Ico's acLAST.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I D E
I D L
s
º
º
§
º
s
º
Ico'Noclast. n.ſ.. [iconoclaſſe, French; fixovoxxzºn;..] A
breaker of images.
Icono'LoGY.. n.). [iconologie, French; tıxºv and 2.Éyw.] The
doćtrine of pićture or repreſentation.
Icte’Rica L. m.ſ.. [ifferique, French ; iółerus, Latin.]
1. Afflićted with the jaundice.
In the jaundice the choler is wanting, and the iderical have
a great ſourneſs, and gripes with windineſs. Floyer.
2. Good againſt the jaundice.
I'cy. adj. [from ice.]
1. Full of ice; covered with ice; cold; froſty.
But my poor heart firſt ſet free,
Bound in thoſe icy chains by thee. Shakespeare Meaſ for Meaſ.
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
The ſeaſon's difference; as, the icy phang,
And churliſh chiding of the Winter's wind. Shakeſpeare.
He relates the exceſſive coldneſs of the water they met
with in Summer in that icy region, where they were forced to
winter. Boyle.
Bear Britain's thunder, and her croſs diſplay
To the bright regions of the riſing day;
Tempt icy ſeas, where ſcarce the waters roll,
Where clearer flames glow round the frozen pole. Pºpe.
2. Cold ; free from paſſion.
Thou would'ſt have never learn’d
The icy precepts of reſpect.
3. Frigid ; backward.
If thou do'ſt find him trađtable to us,
Encourage him, and tell him all our reaſons;
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
Be thou ſo too. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
I’d. Contračied for I would.
IDE'A. m. ſ. ſideſ, French; lºz.] Mental imagination.
Whatſoever the mind perceives in itſelf, or is the imme-
diate object of perception, thought, or underſtanding, that I
call idea. Locke.
The form under which theſe things appear to the mind, or
the reſult of our apprehenſion, is called an idea. JWatts.
Happy you that may to the ſaint, your only idea,
Although ſimply attir’d, your manly affection utter. Sidney.
Our Saviour himſelf, being to ſet down the perfect idea of
that which we are to pray and wiſh for on earth, did not teach
to pray or wiſh for more than only that here it might be with
us, as with them it is in heaven. Hooker, b. i.
Her ſweet idea wander'd through his thoughts. Fairfax.
I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleneſs of mind. Shakespeare R. III.
How good, how fair,
Anſwering his great idea / Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
If Chaucer by the beſt idea wrought,
The faireſt nymph before his eyes he ſet. Dryden,
IdE'A L. adj. [from idea..] Mental ; intellectual; not perceived
by the ſenſes.
There is a two-fold knowledge cf material things; one
real, when the thing, and the real impreſſion thereof on our
ſenſes, is perceived; the other ideal, when the image or idea
of a thing, abſent in itſelf, is repreſented to and conſidered
on the imagination. Chyne's Phil. Prin.
IDE'ally, adv. [from ideal ] Intelle&amp;tually; mentally.
A tranſmiſſion is made materially from ſome parts, and
ideally from every one. Brown's Wulſar Errours.
IDE'N'Tic Al. }*. ſidentique, French. J . The ſame; imply-
IDE'NTIck. ing the ſame thing; compriſing the ſame idea.
The beard's th’ identick beard you knew,
The ſame numerically true. Hudibras, p. ii.
There majus is identical with magis. Hale's Origin of Man.
Thoſe ridiculous identical propoſitions, that faith is faith,
and rule is a rule, are firſt principles in this controverſy of the
rule of faith, without which nothing can be ſolidly concluded
either about rule or faith. Tillotſon's Sermºns.
If this pre-exiſtent eternity is not compatible with a ſuc-
ceſſive duration, as we clearly and diſtinétly perceive that it is
not, then it remains, that ſome being, though infinitely above
our finite comprehenſions, muſt have had an identical, inva-
riable $ontinuance from all eternity, which being is no other
than God. - Bentley's Sermons.
IDENTITY. m. ſ. ſidentité, French; identitas, ſchool Latin.]
Sameneſs; not diverſity.
There is a fallacy of equivocation from a ſociety in name,
inferring an identity in nature: by this fallacy was he deceived
that drank aqua-fortis for ſtrong water. Brazºn', Wulg. Errours.
Certainly thoſe actions muſt needs be regular, where there
is an identity between the rule and the faculty. South', Serm.
Confidering any thing as exiſting, at any determined time
and place, we compare it with itſelf exiſting at another time,
and thereon form the ideas of identity and diverſity. Locke.
It cuts off the ſenſe at the end of every firſt line, which
muſt always rhime to the next following, and conſequently
produces too frequent an identity in ſound, and brings every
couplet to the point of an epigram. . Priºr.
Ibis, n.ſ. ſide, Fr. idus, Lat. A term anciently uſed among the
SShakeſp. Timon.
Romans, and ſtill retained in the Romiſh kalendar. It is the
13th day of each month, except in the months of March,
May, July and Oétober, in which it is the 15th day, becauſe
in theſe four months it was ſix days before the nones, and in
the others four days." Trevaux.
A ſoothſayer bids you beware the ide; of March. Shakeſp.
IDIO'CRASY. n.f. [idiocraſe, French; 16.GP and xfºrts.]
Peculiarity of conſtitution.
IdiocRA'Tic AL. adj. [from idiocraſ.] Peculiar in conſti-
tutu On.
I'diocy. m. ſ. [3,41ſz.] Want of underſtanding.
I ſtand not upon their idiogy in thinking that horſes did eat
their bits. Bacon's Holy War.
IDIOM. n ſ. ſidiome, French; ºpez.] A mode of ſpeaking
peculiar to a language or dialect; the particular caſt of a
tongue; a phraſe; phraſeology. -
He did romanize our tongue, leaving the words tranſlated
as much Latin as he found them; wherein he followed their
language, but did not comply with the idiom of ours. Dryden.
Some that with care true eloquence ſhall teach,
And to juſt idioms fix our doubtful ſpeech. Prior.
IDIoMA'tic Al. Nadj. [from idiºn.] Peculiar to a tongue ;
IDIoMA'tick. } phraſeological. -
Since phraſes uſed in converſation contraćt meanneſs by
paſſing through the mouths of the vulgar, a poet ſhould guard
himſelf againſt idiomatick ways of ſpeaking. Spectatºr.
IDIo'PATHY, n.ſ. [idiopathie, Fr. 1962 and waſ 932.] A primary
diſeaſe that neither depends on nor proceeds from another. Qui.
Idiosy'NcRASY. m. ſ. ſidioſynacraſe, Fr. iśćP, ºv, and x:273.J
A peculiar temper or diſpoſition not common to another. Qui.
Whether quails, from any idioſyncraſy or peculiarity of con-
ſtitution, do innocuouſly feed upon hellebore, or rather ſome-
times but medicinally uſe the ſame. Brown's Pulg. Errours.
The underſtanding alſo hath its idioſyncraſies, as well as
other faculties. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 15.
I’DIOT. m. ſ. ſidiote, Fr. idiota, Latin ; 13,4+n; ) A fool; a
natural; a changeling; one without the powers of reaſon.
Life is a tale,
Told by an idiot, full of ſound and fury,
Signifying nothing. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
What elſe doth he herein, than by a kind of circumlocu-
tion tell his humble ſuppliants that he holds them idiots, or
baſe wretches, not able to get relief? Ruligh's Eſſays.
By idle boys and idiots vilify’d,
Who me and my calamities deride. - Sandys.
Many idiots will believe that they ſee what they only
hear. - Dennis.
I'diotis M. m.ſ.. [idotiſme, French; tººligº;..] -
1. Peculiarity of expreſſion; mode of expreſſion peculiar to a
language.
Scholars ſometimes in common ſpeech, or writing, in their
native language, give terminations and idotiSpenser ſuitable to
their native language unto words newly invented. Ha'e.
2. Folly; natural imbecility of mind.
I'DLE. adj. [ybel, Saxon.]
1. Lazy; averſe from labour.
For ſhame, ſo much to do, and yet idle. Bull.
2. Not buſy; at leiſure.
For often have you writ to her; and ſhe in modeſty,
Or elſe for want of idle time, could not again reply. Shakespeare
3. Una&amp;tive; not employed.
No war or battle's ſound
Was heard the world around,
The idle ſpear and ſhield were high up hung. Milton.
Children generally hate to be idle; all the care then is, that
their buſy humour ſhould be conſtantly employed in ſomething
of uſe to them. Locke.
Suppoſing, among a multitude embarked in the ſame veſſel,
there are ſeveral that, in the fury of a tempeſt, will rather
periſh than work for their preſervation; would it not be mad-
neſs in the reſt to ſtand idle, and rather chuſe to ſink than do
more than comes to their ſhare Addiſon.
4. Uſeleſs; vain; ineffectual.
They aſtoniſh'd, all reſiſtance loſt, -
All courage; down their idle weapons dropp'd. Milton,
And threatning France, plac'd like a painted Jove,
Held idle thunder in his lifted hand. Dryden.
Where was then
The power that guards the ſacred lives of kings
Why ſlept the lightning and the thunderbolts,
Or bent their idle rage on fields and trees, -
When vengeance call'd 'em here? Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
5. Worthleſs; barren; not produćtive of good.
Suffice it then, thou money god, quoth he,
That all thine idle offers I refuſe;
All that I need I have : what needeth me
To covet more than I have cauſe to uſe Fairy Queen.
Of antres vaſt, and deſarts idle,
It was my hent to ſpeak.
The murmuring ſurge,
That on th' unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes,
Cannot be heard ſo high. Shakeſp. King Lear.
He
Shakespeare's Othelic.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I D O
J E A
He was met even now,
Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our ſuſtaining corn. Shakeſp. King Lear.
6. Trifling; of no importance: as, an idle ſtory.
This anſwer is both idle in regard of us, and alſo repugnant
to themſelves. Hooker.
They are not, in our eſtimation, idle reproofs, when the
authors of needleſs innovations are oppoſed with ſuch nega-
tives, as that of Leo: how are theſe new devices brought in,
which our fathers never knew Hooker, b. ii.
His friend ſmil'd ſcornful, and, with proud contempt,
Rejects as idle what his fellow dreamt. Dryden.
An idle reaſon leſiens the weight of the good ones you gave
before. Swift.
How ill he wiſhes to recall the precious hours he has ſpent
in trifles, and loitered away in idle unprofitable diverſions.
Rogers's Ser mons.
To IDLE. v. n. [from the adjećtive.] To loſe time in lazineſs
and inačtivity. -
Yet free from this poetick madneſs,
Next page he ſays, in ſober ſadneſs,
That ſhe and all her fellow-gods
Sit idling in their high abodes. Prior.
IDLE HEADED. adj. [idle and head..] Fooliſh; unreaſonable.
Theſe idleheaded ſeckers reſorted thither. Carew.
Upon this loſs ſhe fell idl, headed, and to this very day ſtands
near the place ſtill. - L'Aſirange.
I'DL EN Ess. m. ſ. [from idle.]
1. Lazineſs; ſloth; ſluggiſhneſs; averſion from labour.
Nor is exceſs the only thing by which fin mauls and breaks
men in their health, and the comfortable enjoyment of them-
ſelves thereby; but many are alſo brought to a very ill and
languiſhing habit of body by mere idleneſs, and idleneſs is both
itſelf a great fin, and the cauſe of many more. South's Serºn.
2. Abſence of employment.
All which yet could not make us accuſe her, though it made
us pine away for ſpight, to loſe any of our time in ſo trouble-
ſome an identſ. Sidney, b. ii.
To the Engliſh court aſſemble now,
From ev’ry region, apes of idleneſ. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He fearing idleneſ, the nurſe of ill,
In ſculpture exercis'd his happy ſkill. Dryden's Ovid.
Nature being liberal to all without labour, neceſſity im-
poſing no induſtry or travel, idleneſ, bringeth forth no other
fruits than vain thoughts and licentious pleaſures. Raleigh.
3. Omiſſion of buſineſs.
Ten thouſand harms, more than the ills I know,
My idleneſ; doth hatch. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
4. Unimportance; trivial.ncſs.
5. Inefficacy; uſeleſſneſs.
6. Barrenneſs; worthleſſneſs.
7. Unreaſonableneſs ; want of judgment; fooliſhneſs; madneſs.
There is no heat of affection but is joined with ſome idle-
nºſ of brain. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
I'DLER. m. ſ. [from idle.] A lazy perſon ; a ſluggard.
Many of theſe poor fiſhermen and idlers, that are common-
•ly preſented to his majeſty's ſhips, are ſo ignorant in ſea-ſervice
as that they know not the name of a rope. Raleigh.
Thou ſluggiſh ider, dilatory ſlave. Irene.
I’DLY. adv. [from ide.]
1. Lazily; without employment.
I will ſlay myſelf,
For living idly here in pomp and eaſe. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
2. Fooliſhly ; in a trifling manner.
And modern Aſgil, whoſe capricious thought
Is yet with ſtores of wilder notions fraught,
Too ſoon convinc'd, ſhall yield that fleeting breath,
Which play’d ſo idly with the darts of death. Prior.
3. Careleſly ; without attention.
This from rumour's tongue
I idly heard; if true or falſe, I know not. Shakeſp K. john.
But ſhall we take the muſe abroad,
To drop her idly on the road?
And leave our ſubjećt in the middle,
As Butler did his bear and fiddle * Prior.
4. Ineffectually; vainly.
Let this and other allegations, ſuitable unto it, ceaſe to bark
any longer idly againſt the truth, the courſe and paſſage where-
of it is not in them to hinder. Hooker.
I’DOL. n.ſ. [idole, French; tıöwācy; id:lum, Latin.]
1. An image worſhipped as God. -
They did ſacrifice upon the idol altar, which was upon the
altar of God. 1 44ac, i. 59.
A nation from one faithful man to ſpring,
Him on this ſide Euphrates yet reſiding,
Bred up in idol worſhip. Milton's Parad Loſ.
The apoſtle is there arguing againſt the gnoſticks who joined
in the idol feaſts, and whom he therefore accuſes of partici-
pating of the idol god. Atterluy.
2. A counterfeit. -- ~
Woe to the idºl ſhepherd that leaveth the flock. Zech. ii. 17.
3. An image. -
Never did art ſo well with nature ſtrive,
Nor ever idol ſeem'd ſo much alive;
So like the man, ſo golden to the ſight;
So baſe within, ſo counterfeit and light. Dryden.
4. A repreſentation. -
Men beholding ſo great excellence,
And rare perfeótion in mortality,
Do her adore with ſacred reverence,
As th’ idol of her maker's great magnificence. Fairy Qu.
5. One loved or honoured to adoration.
He's honoured and lov’d by all;
The ſoldiers god, and people's idol. Denham's Sophy,
IDO’LATER. n.J. [idolatre, French ; idolo'atra, Latin.] One
who pays divine honours to images; one who worſhips for
God that which is not God.
The ſtate of idolaters is two ways miſerable: firſt, in that
which they worſhip they find no ſuccour; and ſecondly, at
his hands, whom they ought to ſerve, there is no other thing
to be looked for but the effects of moſt juſt diſpleaſure, the
withdrawing of grace, derelićtion in this world, and in the
world to come confuſion. Hoºker.
An aſtrologer may be no Chriſtian; he may be an idolater
or a pagan; but I would hardly think aſtrology to be com-
patible with rank athciſm. Bentley's Sermons.
To Ipoſt. ATRIZE. v. a. ſſrom idolater.] To worſhip idols. Ainſ.
IDo'LATRous. adj. [from idolater.] Tending to idolatry;
compriſing idolatry, or the worſhip of falſe gods. .
Neither may the pictures of our Saviour, the apoſtles, and
martyrs of the church, be drawn to an idolatrous uſe, or be
ſet up in churches to be worſhipped. Peacham on Drawing.
IDo'LATRously. adv. [ſion idºlatrius. J In an idolatrous
In a ſincr.
Not therefore whatſoever idolaters have either thought or
done; but let whatſoever they have either thought or done
idolatrouſly, be ſo far forth abhorr-d. Hooker.
Ido'LAT&amp;Y. n.ſ.. [idºlatric, Fr. idololatria, Lat..] The worſhip of
images; the worſhip of any thing as God which is not God.
Thou ſhalt be worſhipp'd, kiſs'd, lov’d and ador'd;
And, were there ſenſe in his idolatry,
My ſubſtance ſhould be ſtatued in thy ſtead. Shałºżeare.
Idolatry is not only an accounting or worſhipping that for
God which is not God, but it is alſo a worſhipping the true
God in a way wholly unſuitable to his nature; and particu-
larly by the mediation of images and corporeal reſemblances.
South's Sermons.
The kings were diſtinguiſhed by judgments or bleſfings,
according as they promoted idolatry, or the worſhip of the
true God. Addison's Speſſatir.
I Dolis r. n.ſ.. [from id.l..] A worſhipper of images. A poeti-
cal word. -
I to God have brought
Diſhonour, obloquy, and op'd the mouths
Of id:liſts and atheiſts. A4iiton’s Agoniſes.
To I’dolize. v. a. [from idol J To love or reverence to ado-
Iatlon. -
Thoſe who are generous, humble, juſt and wiſe,
Who not their gold, nor themſelves idolize. Denham.
Parties, with the greateſt violation of Chriſtian unity, de-
nominate themſelves, not from the grand author and finiſher
of our faith, but from the firſt broacher of their idolized opi-
nions. Decay of Piety.
IDo'NEOUS. adj. [idºneus, Latin.] Fit; proper; convenient;
adequate.
You entangle, and ſo fix their ſaline part, by making them
corrode ſome idoneºus body. Boyle. ,
An eccleſiaſtical benefice is ſometimes void de jure &amp; facto,
and then it ought to be conferred on an idoreous perſon. Ælffe.
I'DY L. m. ſ. ſeiðvXXiov; idyllium, Latin J A ſmall ſhort poem.
I. E. for id eff, or that is.
That which raiſes the natural intereſt of money, is the ſame
that raiſes the rent of land, i. e. its aptneſs to bring in yearly,
to him that manages it, a greater overplus of income above
his rent, as a reward to his labour. Locke.
JE/ALOUS. adj. [jaloux, French. J
1. Suſpicious in love.
To both theſe ſiſters have I form my love:
Each jealous of the other, as the ſtung
Are of the adder. Shakeſpeare's King Lear-
Wear your eye thus; not jealous, nor ſecure:
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of ſelf-bounty, be abus'd: look to t. Shakespeare Othello.
Miſtreſs Ford, the honeſt woman, the modeſt wife, the
virtuous creature, that hath the jealous fool to her huſband.
Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſºr.
A jealous empreſs lies within your arms,
Too haughty to endure neglected charms. Dryd. Aarºngz.
2. Emulous; full of competition.
I could not, without extreme relućtance, reſign the theme
of your beauty to another hand : give me leave to acquaint
the world that I am jealous of this ſubječt. Dryden-
5 3. Zealouſly
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J E J
J E S
|-
4".
º
..”
3. Zealouſly cautious againſt diſhonour. -
I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hoſts. 1 Kings:
4. Suſpiciouſly vigilant.
I am jealous over you with godly jealouſy. 2 Cor. ii. 2.
His apprehenſions, as his jealous nature had much of ſaga-
city in it, or his reſtleſs and mutinous humour, tranſported
him. Clarendon, b. viii.
5. Suſpiciouſly careful.
Although he were a prince in military virtue approved, and
jealous of the honour of the Engliſh nation; yet his cruelties
and parricides weighed down his virtues. Bacon's Henry VII.
They jealous of their ſecrets, fiercely oppos'd
My journey ſtrange, with clamorous uproar
Proteſting fate ſupreme. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. x.
How nicely jealous is every one of us of his own repute,
and yet how maliciouſly prodigal of other mens. Dec. of Piety.
6. Suſpiciouſly fearful.
'Tis doing wrong creates ſuch doubts as theſe;
Renders us jealous, and deſtroys our peace. Waller.
While the people are ſo jealous of the clergy's ambition, I
do not ſee any other method left for them to reform the world,
than by uſing all honeſt arts to make themſelves acceptable
to the laity. Swift.
JE'Alously, adv, [from jealous.] Suſpiciouſly; emulouſly;
with ſuſpicious fear, vigilance, or caution.
Je'alousNEss. n.ſ.. [from jealous.]...The ſtate of being jealous;
rivalry; ſuſpicion; ſuſpicious vigilance.
Nor is it hard for thee to preſerve me amidſt the unjuſt ha-
tred and jealouſneſs of too many, which thou haſt ſuffered to
prevail upon me. King Charles.
JEA lousy. n.ſ. [jalouſe, French, from jealous.]
1. Suſpicion in love.
But gnawing jealouſy, out of their fight
Sitting alone, his bitter lips did bite. Fairy Queen.
The ſweet woman leads an ill life with him; he's a very
jealouſy man. Shakeſpeare.
How all the other paſſions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and raſh embrac'd deſpair;
And ſhudd ring fear, and green-ey'd jealouſy /
O love, be moderate; allay thy extaſy.
Why did you ſuffer Jachimo,
Slight thing of Italy,
To taint his noble heart and brain
With needleſs jealouſy P Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Small jealouſies, ’tis true, inflame deſire;
, Too great, not fan, but quite blow out the fire. Dryden.
2. Suſpicious fear.
The obſtinacy in Eſſex, in refuſing to treat with the king,
proceeded only from his jealouſy, that when the king had got
him into his hands, he would take revenge upon him. Clarend.
3. Suſpicious caution, vigilance, or rivalry.
To JEER. v. m. [Of uncertain etymology.] To ſcoff; to
flout; to make mock.
The merry world did on a day,
With his trainbands and mates, agree
To meet together where I lay,
And all in ſport to jeer at me. Herbert.
Abſtain from diſſolute laughter, petulant uncomely jeſts,
loud talking, and jeering, which are called indecencies and
incivilities. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
To JEER. v. a. To treat with ſcoffs.
My children abroad are driven to diſavow me, for fear of
being jeered. Howel's England's Tears.
JeeR, n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Scoff; taunt; biting jeſt; flout;
jibe; mock.
Midas, expos'd to all their jeers,
Had loſt his art, and kept his ears. Swift.
They tipt the forehead in a jeer,
As who ſhould ſay—ſhe wants it here;
She may be handſome, young and rich;
But none will burn her for a witch. Swift.
JEERER. m. ſ. [from jeer.] A ſcoffer; a ſcorner; a mocker.
JE'ERINGLY. adj. [from jeering. J Scornfully; contemptu-
ouſly ; in mock; in ſcoff. .
He jeeringly demandeth, whether the ſonorous rays are re-
fračted 2 Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
JE'GGET. m. ſ. A kind of ſauſage. Ainſworth.
JEHow AH. n ſ. [..Tim'] The proper name of God in the He-
brew language.
JEJU'NE. adj. [jejunus, Latin.]
1. Wanting; empty; vacant.
Gold is the only ſubſtance which hath nothing in it vola-
tile, and yet melteth without much difficulty: the melting
ſheweth that it is not jejune, or ſcarce in ſpirit. Bacon.
2. Hungry; not ſaturated.
In groſs and turbid ſtreams there might be contained nutri-
ment, and not jejune or limpid water. Brown's Vulgar Err.
3. Dry ; unaffecting.
You may look upon an inquiry made up of meer narra-
tives, as ſomewhat jejune. Boyle.
JEJU'NEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from jejune.] -
1. Penury; poverty.
There are three cauſes of fixation: the even ſpreading both
Shakeſpeare.
parts, and the jejuneneſ, or extreme comminution of ſpirits,
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Dryneſs; want of matter that can engage the attention.
JE'LLIED. adj. [See GELLY.] Glutinous; brought to a ſtate
of viſcofity. - -
The kiſs that ſips
The jellied philtre of her lips. Cleaveland.
JE'LLY. m. ſ. [gelatinum, Latin. See GE LLY, which is the
proper orthography.] -
1. Anything brought to a ſtate of glutinouſneſs and viſcoſity.
They, diſtill'd
Almoſt to jelly with th' effect of fear,
Stand dumb, and ſpeak not to him. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. Sweetmeat made by boiling ſugar in the gelly.
The deſert came on, and jellies brought. King.
That jelly's rich, this malmſey healing;
Pray dip your whiſkers. Pope's Sat. of Horace.
JENNETING.. n.ſ.. [corrupted from juncting, an apple ripe in
june.] A ſpecies of apple ſoon ripe, and of a pleaſant
taſte. Mºrtimer's Husbandry.
JE'NNET. n.ſ. [See GENNET.] A Spaniſh horſe.
The Spaniſh king preſents a jennet, * -
To ſhew his love. Prizr.
To Jeopard. v. a. [See JEOPARDY.] To hazard; to put
in danger. Obſolete.
He had been accuſed of Judaiſm, and did boldly jeºpard his
body and life for the religion of the Jews. 2 Mac. xiv. 38.
JEſop ARDous, adj. [from jeºpardy..] Hazardous; dangerous.
JE/OPARDY. n.ſ. [This word is ſuppoſed to be derived from
j'ai perdu, or jeu perda. Skinner and junius.] Hazard; dan-
ger; peril. A word not now in uſe. -
And would ye not poor fellowſhip expel,
Myſelf would offer you tº accompany,
In this adventure's chanceful jeopardy. Huhherd's Tale.
Thy rage ſhall burn thee up, and thou ſhalt turn
To º ere our blood ſhall quench that fire:
Look to thyſelf, thou art in jeopardy Shakespeare. K. john.
This colour will be reprehended or encountered, by im-
puting to all excellencies in compoſitions a kind of poverty,
or at leaſt a caſualty or jeopardy. A acon.
To JERK. v. a. [Fereccan, Saxon.] To ſtrike with a quick
ſmart blow; to laſh. It is ſometimes written yerk.
I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me ſervice: nine or ten times -
I thought to've jerk'd him here under the ribs. Shakespeare Othel.
Baſtings heavy, dry, obtuſe, -
Only dulneſs can produce;
While a little gentle jerking
Sets the ſpirits all a working. Swift.
To JERK. v. n. To ſtrike up; to accoſt eagerly. This ſeems
to be the meaning in this place, but is mere cant.
Nor bluſh, ſhould he ſome grave acquaintance meet;
But, proud of being known, will jerk and greet. Dryden.
JERK. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A ſmart quicklaſh.
Contemn the filly taunts of fleering buffoonry; and the
jerks of that wit, that is but a kind of confident folly Glanv.
Wit is not the jerk or ſting of an epigram, nor the ſeeming .
contradićtion of a poor antitheſis; neither is it ſo much the
morality of a grave ſentence, affected by Lucan, but more
ſparingly uſed by Virgil. - Dryden.
2. A ſudden ſpring; a quick jolt that ſhocks or ſtarts.
Well run Tawney, the abbot's churl;
His jade gave him a jerk,
As he would have his rider hurl
His hood after the kirk. Ben. johnſon's Underwoods.
Lobſters uſe their tails as fins, where with they commonly
ſwim backwards by jerks or ſprings, reaching ten yards at
Once. Grew.
Je'RkeN. n.ſ. [cyncelkin, Saxon.] A jacket; a ſhort coat ; a
cloſe waiſtcoat. -
A man may wear it on both fides, like a leather jerkin, Shakespeare
Miſtreſs Line, is not this my jerkin P Now is the jerºin un-
der the line: now, jerkin, you are like to loſe your hair, and
prove a bald jerkin. Shaºffeare's Tºmpºſt.
Unleſs we ſhould expećt that nature ſhould make jerkin, and
ſtockings grow out of the ground, what could ſhe do better
than afford us ſo fit materials for clothing as the wool of the
ſheep More's Antidote againſt Ætheiſm.
Imagine an ambaſſador preſenting himſelf in a pºor frize
jerkin, and tattered cloaths, certainly he would have but ſmall
audience. - S.uth's Sermons.
Then ſtrip thee of thy carnal jerkin, , , - * --
And give thy outward fellow a ferkin. ... Hudibrai, p. ii.
I walked into the ſea, in my leathern jerkin, about an hour
before high water. Gulliver's Travels.
Ja'RKIN. n.ſ. A kind of hawk. Ainſworth. This ſhould be
written gyrkin. -
Je'Rsey. n.ſ.. [from the iſland of jerſey, where much yarn is
ſpun.] Fine yarn of wool.
Jess. n.ſ.. [gedie, French ; gettº, Italian: ) Short ſtraps of lea-
ther tied about the legs of a hawk, with which ſhe is held on
the fiſt. Hunmer.
- II T - If<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J E T
J E w
If I prove her haggard,
Though that my jºſſes were her dear heartſ rings,
I’d whiſtle her off, and let her down the wind
To prey at fortune. Shakeſpeare's Othel's.
Je'ss AM is E. m. ſ. [See JASMINE.] A fragrant flower.
Her goodly boſom, like a ſtrawberry bed;
Her neck, like to a bunch of cullambines;
er breaſt like lilies, ere their leaves be ſhed;
Her nipples, like young bloſſom'd jeſſamines. Spenser.
JERU's Alex, Artichokes. m. ſ. Sunflower, of which they
are a ſpecies.
jeruſalem artichokes are increaſed by ſmall off-ſets, and by
quartering the roots. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To JEST. v. n. [gºfficular, Latin J. To divert or make merry
by words or ačtions. -
jºſt not with a rude man, left thy asceſtors be diſgraced.
Eccluſ. viii. 4.
Fear you the boar, and go ſo unprovided ?
—You may jeft on ; but
I do not like theſe ſeveral councils. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
JEST. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Any thing ludicrous, or meant only to raiſe laughter.
But is this true, or is it elſe your pleaſure,
Like pleaſant travellers to break a jºſt
Upon the company you overtake Shakespeare. -
As for jº, there be certain things which ought to be pri-
vileged from it; namely, religion, matters of ſtate, and great
perſons. Bacon's Eſſays.
No man ought to have the leſs reverence for the principles
of religion, or for the holy Scriptures, becauſe idle and pro-
fane wits can break jeſ's upon them. Tillotſon's Sermons.
He had turn’d all tragedy to jºſt. Prior.
2. The objećt of jeſts; laughing-ſtock.
If I ſuſpect without cauſe, why then make ſport at me;
then let me be yourjºſ, I deſerve it. Shakespeare Mer. Aſ of #indſ.
3. Manner of doing or ſpeaking feigned, not real; ludicrous,
not ſerious; game, not earneſt.
That high All-ſeer, which I dallied with,
Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head,
And giv'n in earneſt what I begg'd in jeſt. Shakespeare. R. III.
When his play-fellows choſe him their king, he ſpoke and
did thoſe things in jº/?, which would have become a king
in earneſt. Grew's Cºſìncl.
JE'stER. m. ſ. [from jºſ.]
I. One given to merriment and pranks:
The ſkipping king, he rambled up and down
With ſhallow jeſters, and raſh bavin wits;
Soon kindled, and ſoon burnt. Shakeſp. Hnry IV.
2. One given to ſarcaſm.
Now, as a jºſer, I accoſt you,
Which never yet one friend has loſt you. Swift.
3. Buffoon; jackpudding.
Another ſort of like looſe fellows do paſs up and down,
amongſt gentlemen, by the name of jeffers; but are, indeed,
notable rogues, and partakers not only of many ſtealths, but
alſo privy to many traitorous practices. Spenſer on Ireland.
JET, n.ſ. [3agaz, Saxon; get, Dutch ; gagates, Latin.]
1. jet is a very beautiful foſſil, of a firm and very even ſtruc-
ture, and of a ſmooth ſurface; found in maſſes, ſeldom of a
great ſize, lodged in clay. It is of a fine deep black colour,
having a grain reſembling that of wood. The ancients re-
commend jet in medicine; but it is now uſed only in toys. It is
confounded with cannal-coal, which has no grain, and is ex-
tremely hard; and the jet is but moderately ſo. Hill.
Black, forſooth; coal-black, as jet. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
There is more difference between thy fleſh and hers, than
between jet and ivory. Shakeſp. 41erchant of Weni. e.
The bottom clear,
Now laid with many a ſet
Of ſeed-pearl, ere ſhe bath'd her there,
Was known as black as jet. - Drayton.
One of us in glaſs is ſet, -
One of us you’ll find in jet. Swift.
Under flowing jet,
Of ſunny ringlets, or of circling brown,
The neck ſlight ſhaded. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. [jet, French..] A ſpout or ſhoot of water.
Prodigious 'tis, that one attractive ray
Should this way bend, the next an adverſe wayſ
For ſhould th’ unſeen magnetick jets deſcend
All the ſame way, they could not gain their end.
Blackmore's Creation.
Thus the ſmall jet, which haſty hands unlock,
Spurts in the gard’ner's eyes who turns the cock. Pope.
3. A yard. Obſoletc.
What orchard unrobbed eſcapes?
Or pullet dare walk in their jet. 7 uſer's Huslandry,
To JET. v. n. [jetter, French.] -
1. To ſhoot forward; to ſhoot out; to intrude; to jut out.
. Think you not how dangerous
It is to ”, upon a prince's right? Shakeſp, Tit. Andr,
2. To ſtrut; to agitate the body by a proud gait.
Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him: how he
jets under his advanced plumes. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
3. To jolt; to be ſhaken. [jetter, French.]
Upon the jetting of a hackney-coach ſhe was thrown out
of the hinder ſeat againſt a bar of iron in the forepart. I?’iſºn.
JETsAM. Un. ſ. [jetter, French. 1, Goods or other things
JE’Tsox. } which, having been caſt over board in a ſtorm, or
after ſhipwreck, are thrown upon the ſhore, and belong to the
lord admiral. Bailey.
JETTY. adj. [from jet.]
1. Made of jet.
2. Black as jet. - -
The people about Capo Negro, Cefala, and Madagaſcar,
are of a jetty black. Brown's Wulgar Erreurs.
Her hair
Adown her ſhoulders looſely lay diſplay'd,
And in her jetty curls ten thouſand Cupids play’d. Prior.
Nigrina black, and Merdamante brown,
Vied for his love in jetty bow'rs below. Pope's Dunciad,
JEWEL. m. ſ. [jºyaux, French; jewee'en, Dutch..]
1. Any ornament of great value, uſed commonly of ſuch as are
adorned with precious ſtones.
Here, wear this jewel for me; ’tis my pićture. Shakespeare
They found him dead, and caſt into the ſtreets,
An empty caſket, where the jewel, life,
By ſome damn'd hand was robb’d and ta'en away. Shakespeare
The pleaſure of the religious man is an eaſy and a portable
pleaſure, ſuch an one as he carries about in his boſom, without
alarming either the eye or envy of the world: a man putting
all his pleaſures into this one, is like a traveller's putting all
his goods into one jewel. S.uth.
2. A precious ſtone; a gem.
jewels too, ſtones, rich and precious ſtones,
Stol'n by my daughter! Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Penice.
Proud fame's imperial ſeat -
With jewel, blaz'd, magnificently great. Pope.
3. A name of fondneſs; an appellation of tender regard.
Bid farewel to your ſiſters.
—Ye jewels of our father, with waſh’d eyes
Cordelia leaves you. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
JFw 2 L-House, or Öffice. n.ſ. The place where the regal or-
naments are repoſited.
The king has made him
Maſter of the jewel-houſe. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
JE'w ELLER. m. ſ. [from jewel. J One who trafficks in pre-
cious ſtones.
Theſe grains were as like little dice as if they had been
made by a jeweller. Bºyle.
The price of the market to a jeweler in his trade is one
thing; but the intrinſick worth of a thing to a man of ſenſe is
another. - L’Eſtrange.
I will turn jeweller: I ſhall then deal in diamonds, and all
ſorts of rich ſtones. Addiſon.
Jews-EARs. n.ſ.. [from its reſemblance of ‘the human ear.
Skinner.] A fungus, tough and thin; and naturally, while
growing, of a rumpled figure, like a flat and variouſly hol-
lowed cup; from an inch to two inches in length, and about
two thirds of its length in breadth. Its ſides are undulated,
and in many places run into the hollow, ſo as to repreſent in
it ridges like thoſe of the human ear. Its ſubſtance is tough
like leather, and its colour very dark. It is light when dry, of
a diſagreeable ſmell and nauſeous taſte. It generally grows on
the lower parts of the trunks of elder-trees, eſpecially where
they are decaying. It is not much uſed by phyſicians; but
the common people cure themſelves of ſore throats with a de-
cočtion of it in milk. Hill's Mat. A ſed.
An herb called jews-ear groweth upon the lower parts of
elder, and ſometimes aſhes: in warm water it ſwelleth, and
openeth extremely. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
JEws-MAI. Low. n.ſ. ſcorchºrus, Latin.]
The leaves are produced alternately at the joints of the
ſtalks : the flower has five leaves, which expand in form of a
roſe: the pointal of the flower becomes a cylindrical fruit,
divided into five cells, filled with angular ſeeds. Ranwolf
ſays it is ſown in great plenty about Aleppo as a pot-herb, the
Jews boiling the leaves of this plant to eat it with their
meat. Miller.
Jews-ston E. m. ſ. An extraneous foſſil, being the cla-
vated ſpine of a very large egg-ſhaped ſea-urchin, petri-
fied by long lying in the earth. It is of a regular figure,
oblong and rounded, ſwelling in the middle, and gradually
tapering to each end; generally about three quarters of an
inch in length, and half an inch in diameter. It is ridged and
furrowed alternately, in a longitudinal direction; and its co-
lour is a pale duſky grey, with a faint caſt of duſky rediſhneſs.
It is found in Syria, lodged in a looſe ſandy ſtone, or a marly
very hard earth. It is diuretick; but has been falſely recom-
mended as a lithontriptick. Hill’s Mat. A ſed.
Jews. HARP. n.ſ. A kind of muſical inſtrument held between
the teeth, which gives a found by the motion of a broad
ſpring
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I G N º
I G N
fpring of iron, which, being ſtruck by the hand, plays againſt
the breath.
IF. conjunéïion. [alp, Saxon.] -
1. Suppoſe that ; allowing that. A hypothetical particle.
Abſolute approbation, without any cautions, qualifications,
if; or ands. Hooker, Preface.
If that rebellion
Came like itſelf, in baſe and abjećt routs;
I ſay, if damn'd commotion ſo appear'd,
In his true, native, and moſt proper ſhape,
You, reverend father, and theſe noble lords,
Had not been here. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
If they have done this deed, my noble lord.
—If? talk'ſt thou to me of if * Thou art a traitor. Shakespeare
This ſeeing of all things, becauſe we can deſire to ſee all
things, he makes a proof that they are preſent to our minds;
and iſ they be preſent, they can no ways be preſent but by
the preſence of God, who contains them all. Locke.
This is only an infallibility upon ſuppoſition, which amounts
to this, that if a thing be true, it is impoſſible to be falſe.
- Tillºtſon's Sermons, Preface.
All of them ſuppoſe the apoſtle to have allowed the Epicu-
rean maxim to be good; if ſo be there were no reſurrec-
tion. Atterbury's Sermons, Preface.
Tiſiphone, that oft haſt heard my pray’r,
Aſſiſt, if Oedipus deſerve thy care.
2. Whether or no.
Uncertain if by augury, or chance;
But by this eaſy riſe they all advance. Dryden.
She doubts if two and two make four:
It can't—it may be—and it muſt ;
To which of theſe muſt Alma truſt?
Nay, further yet they make her go,
In doubting if ſhe doubts or no. Prior.
3. Though I doubt whether; ſuppoſe it be granted that.
Such mechanical circumſtances, if I may ſo call them, were
not neceſſary to the experiments. Boyle.
I'GNEOUS. adj. [igneus, Latin.] Firy; containing fire; emit-
ting fire; having the nature of fire.
That the fire burns by heat, leaves us ſtill ignorant of the
immediate way of igneous ſolutions. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 20.
IGN'pot'ENT. adj. [igni; and potent, Latin.] Preſiding over
fire. Pope's Homer.
IGNIS FATUUS. m. ſ. [Latin.] Will with the wiſp; Jack
with the lanthorn.
Vapours ariſing from putrified waters are uſually called
ignes fatui. Newton's Opt.
To I'GN}TE. v. a. [from ignis, fire, Latin.] To kindle; to
ſet on fire.
Take good firm chalk, ignite it in a crucible, and then
powder it. Grew's Muſeum.
Pºpe's Statius.
IGN I'TION. m. ſ. [ignition, French, from ignite.] The act of
kindling, or of ſetting on fire.
The laborant ſtirred the kindled nitre, that the ignitiºn
might be preſently communicated. Boyle.
Thoſe black circular lines we ſee on diſhes, and other turned
veſſels of wood, are the effects of ignition, by the preſſure of
an edged ſtick upon the veſſel turned nimbly in the lathe. Ray.
IGNITIB1 E. adj. [from ignite.] Inflammable; capable of being
ſet on fire.
Such bodies only ſtrike fire which have ſulphur or ignitible
parts. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
IGNI'vomous. adj. [ignivemus, Latin.] Vomiting fire.
Vulcanos and ignivamous mountains are ſome of the moſt
terrible ſhocks of the globe. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
IGNO’BLE, adj. [ignoble, ignobilis, Latin.]
1. Mean of birth; not noble; not of illuſtrious race.
As when in tumults riſe th' ignoble crowd,
Mad are their motions, and their tongues are loud. Dryden.
2. Worthleſs; not deſerving honour. Uſed of things or perſons.
The noble iſle doth want her proper limbs;
Her royal ſtock graft with ignoble plants. Shakespeare Rich. III.
IGNo'BLY., adv. [from ignoble.]. Ignominiouſly; meanly; diſ.
honourably; reproachfully; diſgracefully.
To theſe, that ſober race of men, whoſe lives
Religious, titled them the ſons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly / Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xi.
Here, over-match'd in fight, in heaps they lie; -
There ſcatter'd o'er the fields ignobly fly. Dryden's AFn.
Ig NoMi Nious. adj, ſignominieux, French; ignominioſus, Lat.
from ignºminy..] Mean; ſhameful; reproachful; diſhonour-
able. Uſed both of perſons and things.
They with pale fear ſurpriz'd,
Fled ignominious. - Milton.
Cethegus, though a traitor to the ſtate,
And tortur'd, 'ſcap'd this ignominious fate. Dryden's juven.
They gave, and ſhe transferr'd the curs'd advice,
That monarchs ſhould their inward ſoul diſguiſe;
By ignominious arts, for ſervile ends,
Should compliment their foes, and ſhun their friends. Prior,
Nor has this kingdom deſerved to be ſacrificed to one ſingle,
rapacious, obſcure, ignominious projector. Swift.
IGNoM1'Niously. adv. [from ignominious.] Meanly; ſcan-
dalouſly; diſgracefully; ſhamefully; reproachfully.
It is ſome allay to the infamy of him who died ignºminiotſy
to be buried privately. - South's Sermons.
IGNOMINY. m. ſ. ſignominic, Fr. ignominia, Latin J Diſ-
grace; reproach; ſhame; infamy; meanneſs; diſhonour.
Adieu, and take thy praiſe with thee to heav'n ;
Thy ignominy ſleep with thee in the grave. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Strength from truth divided, and from juſt,
Illaudable, nought merits but diſpraiſe
And ignominy; yet to glory aſpires,
Vain-glorious, and through infamy ſeeks fame. Milton.
Their generals have been received with honour after their
defeat, yours with ignominy after conqueſt. Addiſon.
IGNORAMUS. n.ſ. [Latin.]
1. Ignoramus is a word properly uſed by the grand inqueſt im-
pannelled in the inquiſition of cauſes criminal and publick;
and written upon the bill, whereby any crime is offered to
their conſideration, when they miſlike their evidence as de-
fe&amp;tive, or too weak to make good the preſentment: the
effect of which word ſo written is, that all farther inquiry
upon that party, for that fault, is thereby ſtopped, and he deli-
vered without farther anſwer. Cowel.
2. A fooliſh fellow ; a vain uninſtructed pretender. A low word.
Tell an ignoramus, in place and power, that he has a wit
and an underſtanding above all the world, and he ſhall readily
admit the commendation. - South's Sermons.
I'GNor ANCE. m. ſ. ſignorance, French; ignoratio, Latin.]
1. Want of knowledge; unſkilfulneſs.
If all the clergy were as learned as themſelves are that moſt
complain of ignorance in others, yet our book of prayer might
remain the ſame. Hooker, b. v.
Ignorance is the curſe of God,
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heav'n. Shakeſp.
Still baniſh your defenders, ’till at length
Your ignorance deliver you,
As moſt abated captives, to ſome nation
That won you without blows Shakeſpeare’s Coriolanus.
If he have power,
Then veil your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
If we ſee right, we ſee our woes;
Then what avails it to have eyes 2
From ignorance our comfort flows,
The only wretched are the wiſe ! Prior.
2. Want of knowledge diſcovered by external effect. In this
ſenſe it has a plural.
Forgive us all our ſins, negligences, and ignorances. C. Pray.
Puniſh me not for my ſins and ignorances. Tob. iii. 2.
I'GNORANT. adj. [ignorant, French; ignorans, Latin.]
I. Wanting knowledge; unlearned ; uninſtructed; unen-
lightened.
So fooliſh was I and ignorant, I was as a beaſt. Pſ. lxxiii. 22.
Thy letters have tranſported me beyond
This ign'rant preſent time, and I feel now
The future in the inſtant. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
In ſuch buſineſs º
A&amp;tion is eloquence, and the eyes of th’ ignorant
More learned than the ears. Shakeſpeare's Coriolants.
. He that doth not know thoſe things which are of uſe for him
to know, is but an ignorant man, whatever he may know be-
ſides. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Fools grant whate'er ambition craves, -
And men, once ignorant, are ſlaves. Pºpe.
2. Unknown; undiſcovered.
If you know aught, which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be inform’d, impriſon't not
In ignorant concealment. Shakeſpeare's IWinter's Tale.
3. Without knowledge of ſome particular.
Let not judges be ſo ignorant of their own right, as to think
there is not left to them, as a principal part of their office, a
wiſe application of laws. Bacon's Eſſays.
O. viſions ill foreſeen Better had I
Liv’d ignºrant of future! ſo had borne - -
My part of evil only. Milton's Paradiſº Lóſ', l. xi.
4. Unacquainted with. In a good ſenſe.
Ignorant of guilt, I fear not ſhame. Dryden.
5. Ignorantly made or done.
- His ſhipping,
Poor ignorant baubles, on our terrible ſeas
Like egg-ſhells mov’d. Shakeſpeare.
Ignor ANT. n.ſ. One untaught, unlettered, uninſtructed.
Did I for this take pains to teach
Our zealous ignorants to preach Denham.
I'd Nor ANTLY. adv. [from ignorant.] Without knowledge;
unſkilfully; without information.
The greateſt and moſt cruel foes we have,
Are thoſe whom you would ignorarity ſave. Dryden.
When a poet, an orator, or a painter has performed ad-
mirably,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I L E
|
I L L
º
mirably, we ſometimes miſtake his blunders for beautics, and
are ſo ignorantly fond as to copy after them. //atts.
To Ig No's E. v.a. [ignorer, French; ignoro, Latin.] Not to
know ; to be ignorant of. This word Boyle endeavoured to
introduce; but it has not been received.
I ignored not the ſtrićter interpretation, given by modern
criticks to divers texts, by me alleged. Boyle.
Philoſophy would ſolidly be eſtabliſhed, if men would more
carefully diſtinguiſh thoſe things that they know from thoſe
that they ignore. - Boyle.
Ionoscible. adj. [ ignoſibilis, Latin. J. Capable of par-
don. Dićf.
JIG n.ſ. [giga, Italian ; geige, Teutonick, a fiddle.] A light
careleſs dance, or tune.
When Cyrus had overcome the Lydians, that were a war-
like nation, inſtead of their warlike muſick, he appointed to
them certain laſcivious lays and looſe jigs; by which he ſo
mollified and abated their courage, that they forgot their for-
mer fierceneſs. Speºſer on Ireland.
As fiddlers ſtill,
Though they be paid to be gone, yet needs will
Thruſt one more jig upon you. . Donne.
Poſterity ſhall know that you dare, in theſe jºg given times,
to countenance a legitimate poem. Ben. Johnſon.
All the ſwains that there abide,
With jigs and rural dance reſort. A ſilt.n.
The muſes bluſh'd to ſee their friends exalting
Thoſe elegant delights of jig and vaulting. Fenton.
They wrote to her friends in the country, that ſhe ſhould
dance a jig next Oétober in Weſtminſterhall. Arbuthnot.
Another Phoebus, thy own Phoebus reigns,
Joys in my jigs, and dances in my chains. Pºpe.
To J1G. v. m. [from the noun..] To dance careleſly; to dance.
Expreſſed in contempt.
As for the jigging part and figures of dances, I count that
little. Locke.
Ji'G-MAKER. m. ſ [jig and make.] One who dances or plays
merrily. -
Your only jig-maker! what ſhould a man do but be merry
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
J'1GG UMBop. n.ſ. [A cant word.] A trinket; a knick-knack;
a ſlight contrivance in machinery.
He rifled all his pokes and fobs
Of gimcracks, whims, and jiggumbols. Hudibras, p. iii.
JILT. n.ſ. [gilia, Iſlandick, to intrap in an amour. Mr. Lye.
Perhaps from giglot, by contračtion; or gillet, or gillot, the dimi-
nutive of gill, the ludicrous name for a woman. 'Tis alſo called
jillet in Scotland.]
1. A woman who gives her lover hopes, and deceives him.
Avoid both courts and camps,
Where dilatory fortune plays the jilt
With the brave, noble, honeſt, gallant man,
To throw herſelf away on fools. Otway's Orphan.
2. A name of contempt for a woman.
When love was all an eaſy monarch's care,
'filts rul’d the ſtate, and ſtateſmen farces writ. Pope.
To JILT. v. a. [from the noun...] To trick a man by flattering
his love with hopes, and then leaving him for another.
Tell who loves who ;
And who is jilted for another's ſake. Dryden's juvenal.
Tell a man, paſſionately in love, that he is jilted; bring a
ſcore of witneſſes of the falſehood of his miſtreſs, and it is
ten to one but three kind words of hers ſhall invalidate all
their teſtimonies. Locke.
She might have learn'd to cuckold, jilt, and ſham,
Had Covent-garden been at Surinam. Congreve.
To Ji'NGLE. v. n. [A word made from jangle, or copied from
the ſound intended to be expreſſed.] To clink; to ſound
correſpondently.
What ſhould the wars do with theſe jingling fools Shakespeare
With noiſes
Of roaring, ſhrieking, howling, jingling chains,
We were awak'd. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
You ne'er with jingling words deceive the ear;
And yet, on humble ſubjećts, great appear. Smith.
What crowds of theſe, impenitently bold,
In ſounds and jingling ſyllables grown old ! Pope.
Ji'NGLE, n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Correſpondent ſounds.
Vulgar judges are nine parts in ten of all nations, who call
conceits and jingles wit. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
2. Any thing ſounding ; a rattle; a bell.
If you plant where ſavages are, do not only entertain them
with trifles and jingles, but uſe them juſtly. Bacon’s Eſſays.
ILE, n.ſ.. [corrupted from aiſle, French.] A walk or alley in a
church or publick building. Properly aile.
Upward the columns ſhoot, the roofs aſcend,
And arches widen, and long iles extend. Pope.
II.E. m. ſ. ſaiſle, French..] An ear of corn. Ainſworth.
(LEU.S. n.ſ. [Latin.]
The conſequences of inflammation is an ileus, commonly
4.
called the twiſting of the guts; but is really either a circum-
volution, or inſertion of one part of the gut within the other.
Arbuthnot on Diet.
I'LEX. n.ſ. [Latin.]
The ilex, or great ſcarlet oak, thrives well in England, is
a hardy ſort of tree, and eaſily raiſed of acorns. The Spa-
niards have a ſort they call enzina; the wood of which, when
old, is finely chambletted, as if it were painted, and is uſeful
for ſtocks of tools, mallet-heads, chairs, axle-trees, wedges,
beetles, pins, and palliſadoes for fortifications, being very
hard and durable. Mortimer.
IL1Ac. adj. [iliacus, Latin. J Relating to the lower bowels.
The iliac paſſion is a kind of convulſion in the belly.
Thoſe who die of the iliac paſſion have their bellies much
ſwelled. Floyer on the Humours.
I'll Ac Paſſion. m. ſ. A kind of nervous cholick, whoſe
ſeat is the ilium, whereby that gut is twiſted, or one
part enters the cavity of the part immediately below or above;
whence it is alſo called the volvulus, from volvo, to roll.
Ilk. adv. [ealc, Saxon. J. Eke; alſo. It is ſtill retained in
Scotland, and denotes each ; as, ilk ane of you, every one of
you. It alſo ſignifies the ſame; as, Macintoſh of that ilk, de-
notes a gentleman whoſe ſurname and the title of his eſtate
are the ſame.
Shepherds, ſhould it not yſhend
Your roundels freſh, to hear a doleful verſe
Of Roſalind, who knows not Roſalind,
That Colin made 2 ilk can I you rehearſe. Spenser.
Ill. adj. [contracted from Evil, and retaining all its ſenſes]
1. Bad in any reſpect; contrary to good, whether phyſical or
moral; evil. See H. v I L.
There's ſome ill planet reigns;
I muſt be patient, 'till the heavens look
With an aſpect more favourable. Shakespeare Winter's Ta'.
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The clergy ill example. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Neither is it ill air only that maketh an ill ſeat; but ill
ways, ill markets, and ill neighbours. Bacon's Eſſays.
Some, of an ill and melancholy nature, incline the com-
pany to be ſad and ill-diſpoſed: others, of a jovial nature,
diſpoſe them to be merry. Bacon.
2. Sick; diſordered; not in health. I know not that evil is ever
uſed in this ſenſe.
You wiſh me health in very happy ſeaſon;
For I am on the ſudden ſomething ill. , Shakespeare Henry IV.
I have known two towns of the greateſt conſequence loſt,
by the governours falling ill in the time of the fieges. Temple.
Ill. m. ſ. s
I. Wickedneſs.
Ill, to man's nature, as it ſtands perverted, hath a natural
motion ſtrongeſt in continuance. Bacon.
Young men to imitate all il's are prone;
But are compell'd to avarice alone:
For then in virtue's ſhape they follow vice. Dryden's juv.
Strong virtue, like ſtrong nature, ſtruggles ſtill,
Exerts itſelf, and then throws off the ill. Dryden's Aureng.
2. Misfortune; miſery.
Who can all ſenſe of others ill; eſcape,
Is but a brute at beſt in human ſhape. Tate's juvenal.
Though plung'd in ills and exercis'd in care,
Yet never let the noble mind deſpair;
When preſt by dangers, and beſet with foes,
The gods their timely ſuccour interpoſe;
And when our virtue ſinks, o'erwhelm'd with grief,
By unforeſeen expedients bring relief. A. Philips.
ILL. adv.
1. Not well; not rightly in any reſpect.
Ill at eaſe, both ſhe and all her train
The ſcorching ſun had borne, and beating rain.
2. Not eaſily.
Dryden.
Thou deſir'ſt
The puniſhment all on thyſelf! alas !
Bear thine own firſt; ill able to ſuſtain
His full wrath, whoſe thou feel'ſt as yet leaſt part,
And my diſpleaſure bear'ſt ſo ill. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Ill bears the ſex a youthful lover's fate,
When juſt approaching to the nuptial ſtate. Dryden.
ILL, ſubſtantive or adverb, is uſed in compoſition to expreſs
any bad quality or condition, which may be eaſily underſtood
by the following examples.
ILL. ſubſtantive.
Dangerous conjećtures in ill breeding minds. Shakespeare Hamlet.
I have an ill divining ſoul:
Methinks I ſee thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb. Shakespeare.
No look, no laſt adieu before he went!
In an ill boding hour to ſlaughter ſent. Dryd. Aºn.
I know
The voice ill boding, and the ſolemn ſound. Phillips.
He may ſtrew
The wiſeſt prince on earth may be deceived by the craft of
ill deſigning men, Swift's *...
Qur
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I L L
I L L
f
:
º
º
Your ill meaning politician lords,
Under pretence of bridal friends and gueſts,
Appointed to await me thirty ſpies, -
Who, threat'ning cruel death, conſtrain'd the bride
To wring from me and tell to them my ſecret. Milt. Agºn.
A ſpy diſtinguiſh'd from his airy ſtand,
To bribe whoſe vigilance, Ægiſthus told
A mighty ſum of ill perſuading gold. Pope's Odyſſey.
Ill. adverb.
There ſounded an ill according cry of the enemies, and a
lamentable noiſe was carried abroad. J/ijd. xviii. Io.
My colleague,
Being ſo ill affected with the gout, -
Will not be able to be there in perſon. Ben. Johnſ, Catil.
The danger of the day's but newly gone,
And the examples
Of every minute's inſtance, preſent now,
Have put us in theſe ill beſeeming arms. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Lead back thy Saxons to their ancient Elbe:
I would reſtore the fruitful Kent, the gift
Of Vortigern, or Hengiſt's ill bought aid. Dryd. K. Arthur.
We ſimple toaſters take delight
To ſee our women's teeth look white;
And ev'ry ſaucy ill bred fellow
Sneers at a mouth profoundly yellow. Priºr.
The ungrateful treaſon of her ill choſen huſband overthrows
her. Sidney, b. ii.
Envy, how carefully does it look? How meagre and ill
complexioned It preys upon itſelf, and exhauſts the ſpirits.
Collier on Envy.
There grows,
In my moſt ill compos'd affection, ſuch
A ſtanchleſs avarice, that, were I king,
I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands. Shakespeare Macb.
To what end this ill concerted lye, -
Palpable and groſs Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Our generals at preſent are ſuch as are likely to make the
beſt uſe of their numbers, without throwing them away on
any ill concerted projects. Addſon ºn the 1/ar.
The ſecond daughter was a peeviſh, froward, ill conditioned
Creature as ever Was. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory ºf john Bull.
No Perſian arras hides his homely walls
With antick veſts, which, through their ſhady fold,
Betray the ſtreaks of ill diſſembled gold. Dryd. Wirg. Geor.
You ſhall not find me, daughter,
After the ſlander of moſt ſtep-mothers,
Ill ey'd unto you. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
I ſee thy ſiſter's tears,
Thy father's anguiſh, and thy brother's death,
In the purſuit of our ill fated loves. Addiſon's Cato.
Others ill fated are condemn'd to toil
Their tedious life. Prior,
Plain and rough nature, left to itſelf, is much better than
an artificial ungratefulneſs, and ſuch ſtudied ways of being ill
faſhioned. Locke.
Much better, when I find virtue in a fair lodging, than
when I am bound to ſeek it in an ill favoured creature, like a
pearl in a dunghill. Sidney.
Near to an old ill favoured caſtle they meant to perform
their unknightly errand. Sidney, b. ii.
O, what a world of vile ill favour’d faults
Look handſome in three hundred pounds a year! Shakeſp.
If a man had but an ill favoured noſe, the deep thinkers
would contrive to impute the cauſe to the prejudice of his edu-
cation. Swift.
I was at her houſe the hour ſhe appointed.
—And you ſped, ſir?
Very ill favouredly. , Shakespeare Merry Wives of I/indſ.
He ſhook him ill favouredly for the time, raging through
the very bowels of his country, and plundering all wherefo-
ever he came. - Howel's Wºcal Forreſt.
They would not make bold, as every where they do, to de-
ſtroy ill formed and miſ-ſhaped produćtions. Locke.
The fabled dragon never guarded more
The golden fleece, than he his ill got ſtore. Dryd. juven.
Bid him employ his care for theſe my friends,
And make good uſe of his ill gotten power,
By ſhelt’ring men much better than himſelf. Addison Cato.
Ill govern'd paſſions in a prince's breaſt,
Hazard his private and the publick reſt. J//aller.
That knowledge of theirs is very ſuperficial and ill
grounded. Dryden's Dufreſhºy.
Ill grounded paſſions quickly wear away;
What's built upon eſteem can ne'er decay. J/aft.
Hither, of ill join’d ſons and daughters born,
Firſt from the ancient world theſe giants came. Milton.
Nor has he erred above once by an ill judged ſuperfluity.
* Garth's Ovid.
Did you never taſte delicious drink out of an ill looked
veſſel ? L’Eſtrange.
The match had been ſo ill made for Plexittus, that his ill
led life would have tumbled to deſtruction, had there not come
fifty to his defence. Sidney, b. ii.
The works are weak, the garriſon but thin,
Diſpirited with frequent overthrows,
Already wavering on their ill mann'd walls. Dryden,
He will not hear me out !
Was ever criminal forbid to plead
Curb their ill manner'd zeal. Drydºn.
Theſe are the produćt -
Of thoſe ill mated marriages thou ſaw'ſt,
Where good with bad were match'd. Milt. Parad. Loft.
It is impoſſible for the moſt ill minded, awaritious, or cun-
ning clergyman to do the leaſt injuſtice to the meaneſt cot-
tager, in any bargain for tythes. Swift.
Soon as th’ ill omen'd rumour reach'd his ear,
Who can deſcribe th’ amazement in his face Dryden:
The eternal law of things muſt not be altered, to comply
with his ill ordered choice. Locke:
When you expoſe the ſcene, *
Down the ill organ'd engines fall, -
Off fly the vizards. Swift.
For Phthia fix’d is my return; *
Better at home my ill paid pains to mourn,
Than from an equal here ſuſtain the publick ſcorn. Dryden.
There motly images her fancy ſtrike,
Figures ill pair'd, and ſimilies unlike. Pope's Dunciad.
Sparta has not to boaſt of ſuch a woman;
Nor Troy to thank her, for her ill plac'd love. Dryden.
I ſhall direct you better, a taſk fºr which I take myſelf not
to be ill qualified, becauſe I have had more opportunities than
many others to obſerve what ſources the follies of women are
derived from. Swift.
Aćtions are pleaſing or diſpleaſing, either in themſelves, or
conſidered as a means to a greater and more deſirable end: the
eating of a well ſeaſoned diſh, ſuited to a man's palate, may
move the mind, by the delight itſelf that accompanics the eat-
ing, without reference to any other end; to which the confi-
deration of the pleaſure there is in health and ſtrength may
add a new guſt, able to make us ſwallow an ill reliſhed po-
tion. - Lock.
Bluſhes, ill reſtrain'd, betray
Her thoughts inventive on the bridal day;
The conſcious ſire the dawning bluſh ſurvey'd,
And ſmiling thus beſpoke the blooming maid. Pope's Odyſſ.
Behold the fruit of ill rewarded pain:
As many months as I ſuſtain'd her hate,
So many years is ſhe condemn’d by fate. Dryden.
The god inform'd
This ill ſhap’d body with a daring ſoul.
Dryden and Lee's Oedipus.
There was plenty enough, but the diſhes were ill ſorted:
whole pyramids of ſweetmeats for boys and women; but lit-
tle of ſolid meat for men. Dryden.
It does not belong to the pricſt's office to impoſe this name
in baptiſm: he may refuſe to pronounce the ſame, if the par
rents give them ludicrous, filthy, or ill ſounding names. Ayliffe.
Ill ſpirited Wor'ſter, did we not ſend grace,
Pardon and terms of love to all of you?" Shakeſp. H. IV.
From thy fooliſh heart, vain maid, remove
An uſeleſs ſorrow, and an ill ſtarr'd love. Prizr.
Ah, why th’ ill ſuiting paſtime muſt I try :
To gloomy care my thoughts alone are free :
Ill the gay ſports with troubled hearts agree. Pºpe's Odyſſey:
Holding of ill taſted things in the mouth will make a ſmall
ſalivation. Grew's Coſmol. b. ii.
The maid, with downcaſt eyes, and mute with grief,
For death unfiniſh'd, and ill tim'd relief,
Stood ſullen to her ſuit. Dryden's Ovid.
How ſhould opinions, thus ſettled, be given up, if there be
any ſuſpicion of intereſt or deſign, as there never fails to be,
where men find themſelves ill treated Locke.
That boldneſs and ſpirit which lads get amongſt their play-
fellows at ſchool, has ordinarily a mixture of rudeneſs and ill
turned confidence; ſo that theſe miſbecoming and diſingenu-
ous ways of ſhifting in the world muſt be unlearned. Locke.
IL, before words beginning with l, ſtands for in.
Illa'ch Ry MABLE. adj. [illachrymabilis, Latin.] Incapable of
weeping. Dićt.
Iliaſes; n. ſ: ſillapſus, Latin.]
1. Gradual immiſſion or entrance of one thing into another.
As a piece of iron red hot, by reaſon of the illapſe of the
fire into it, appears all over like fire; ſo the ſouls of the bleſſed,
by the illapſe of the divine eſſence into them, ſhall be all over
divine. . Norris.
2. Sudden attack; caſual coming.
Life is oft preſerved
By the bold ſwimmer in the ſwift illapſe
Of accident diſaſtrous. Thomſon's Summer.
1 i U To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I L L
I L L
To ILLA’QUEATE. v. a. [illaqueo, Latin.] To entangle;
to entrap; to enſnare.
I am illaquated, but not truly captivated into an aſſent to
your concluſion. More's Divine Dialogues.
ILLA QUEA"rio N. m. ſ. [from illaqueate.]
1. The act of catching or enſnaring.
The word in Mathew doth not only ſignify ſuſpenſion, or
pendulous illaqueation, but alſo ſuffocation. Brown's Wul. Err.
2. A ſnare; anything to catch.
Ill A'rion. m. ſ. [illatio, Latin.] Inference; concluſion drawn
from premiſes.
Herein there ſeems to be a very erroneous illation from the
indulgence of God unto Cain, concluding an immunity unto
himſelf. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Illation ſo orders the intermediate ideas as to diſcover what
connection there is in each link of the chain, whereby the ex-
tremes are held together. Locke.
I'LLATIVE. adj. [illatus, Latin.] Relating to illation or con-
cluſion.
In common diſcourſe or writing ſuch cauſal particles as
for, becauſe, manifeſt the aët of reaſoning as well as the
illative particles then and therefore. JWatts.
ILLA/UDABLE. adj. [illaudabilis, Latin.] Unworthy of praiſe
or commendation.
Strength from truth divided and from juſt,
Illaudable, nought merits but diſpraiſe. Milton's Par. Loft.
ILLA'UDABLY.-adv. [from illaudable.] Unworthily; without
deſerving praiſe. -
It is natural for all people to form, not illaudably, too fa-
vourable a judgment of their own country. Broome.
Ille'GAL. adj. [in and legalis, Latin.] Contrary to law.
No patent can oblige the ſubjećt againſt law, unleſs an il-
legal patent paſſed in one kingdom can bind another, and not
itſelf. Swift.
ILLEGA'lity. n.ſ. [from illegal.] Contrariety to law.
He wiſhed them to conſider what votes they had paſſed, of
the illegality of all thoſe commiſſions, and of the unjuſtifiable-
neſs of all the proceedings by virtue of them. Carendºn.
Ille'GALLY. adv. [from illegal.] In a manner contrary to
law.
Ille'GIBLE. adj. [in and legibilis, from lºgo, Latin.] What
cannot be read.
The ſecretary poured the ink-box all over the writings, and
ſo defaced them that they were made altogether illegible. Howel.
ILLEGI’t IMAcy. m. ſ. [from illegitimate.] State of baſtardry.
ILLE G1't IMATE. adj. [in and legitimus, Latin.] Unlawfully
begotten; not begotten in wedlock.
Grieve not at your ſtate;
For all the word is illegitimate. Cleaveland.
Being illegitimate, I was deprived of that endearing tenderneſs
and uncommon ſatisfaction, which a good man finds in the
love and converſation of a parent. Addiſon's Spediator.
Ill EGi'TIMATELY. adv. [from illegitimate.] Not in wed-
lock.
ILLEGITIM ATION. m.ſ.. [from illegitimate.] The ſtate of one
not begotten in wedlock.
Richard III. had a reſolution, out of his hatred to both his
brethren, to diſable their iſſues, upon falſe and incompetent
pretexts, the one of attainder, the other of illegitimation. Bac.
Ille'vi AB LE. adv. [ſever, French..] What cannot be levied
or exacted. -
He reëtified the method of colle&amp;ing his revenue, and re-
moved obſolete and illeviable parts of charge. Hale.
ILLFA'vour ED. adj. Deformed. See the compoſitions of
ILL. adv.
Illf Avour Edly. adv. With deformity.
ILLFA'vour EDN Ess. v. ſ. Deformity.
ILLI'BERAL. adj. [illiberalis, Latin.]
1. Not noble; not ingenuous.
The charity of moſt men is grown ſo cold, and their reli-
gion ſo illiberal. King Charles.
2. Not munificent; not generous; ſparing.
Yet ſubſiſt they did, and well too: an argument that that
earth did not deal out their nouriſhment with an overſparing
or illiberal hand. J%odward's Natural Hiſtory.
ILLIBERA'Lity. n. ſ. [illiberalitas, Lat, from illiberal.] Parſi-
mony; niggardlineſs; want of munificence.
The illiberality of parents, in allowance towards their chil-
dren, is an harmful error, and acquaints them with ſhifts. Bac.
Illi'BER ALLY. adv. [ from illiberal. J Diſingenuouſly;
meanly.
One that had been bountiful only upon ſurprize and inco-
gitancy, illiberally retračts. Decay of Piety.
ILLI'cit. adj. [illicitus, Latin; illicite, French..] Unlawful.
To Illi'GHTEN. v. n. [in and lighten..] To enlighten; to il-
luminate. A word, I believe, only in Raleigh.
Corporeal light cannot be, becauſe then it would not pierce
the air, nor diaphanous bodies; and yet every day we ſee the
air illightened. Raleigh.
ILLIMITA BLE. adj. [in and limeſ, Latin.] That which can-
not be bounded or limited,
Although in adoration of idols, unto the ſubtiler heads,
the worſhip perhaps might be ſymbolical; yet was the idolatry
direct in the people, whoſe credulity is illimitable, and who
may be made believe that any thing is God. Brown's Wu. Err.
With what an awful world-revolving power,
Were firſt th' unwieldy planets launch'd along
The illimitable void Thomſºn's Summer.
ILLI'M It ABLY. adv. [from illimitable.] Without ſuſceptibi-
lity of bounds.
ILLIMITED. adj. [in and limes, Latin; illimité, French..] Un-
bounded; interminable.
ILLI'M IT EDNess. n.ſ.. [from illimited.] Exemption from all
bounds.
The abſoluteneſs and illimitedneſs of his commiſſion was
generally much ſpoken of. Clarendon, b. viii.
ILLITERATE ad, ſiliteratus, Latin.] Unlettered; un-
taught; unlearned; unenlightened by ſcience.
The duke was illiterate, yet had learned at court to ſupply
his own defects, by the drawing unto him of the beſt inſtru-
ments of experience. J/ation.
Th’-illiterate writer, empirick like, applies
To minds diſeas'd unſafe chance remedies:
The learn'd in ſchools, where knowledge firſt began,
Studies with care th’ anatomy of man;
Sees virtue, vice, and paſſions in their cauſe,
And fame from ſcience, not from fortune draws. Dryden.
In the firſt ages of Chriſtianity not only the learned and the
wiſe, but the ignorant and illit, rate embraced torments and
death. Tillotſon's Sermons.
ILLITE RATEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from illiterate.] Want of learning;
ignorance of ſcience.
Many acquainted with chymiſtry but by report, have, from
the illiterateneſ, and impoſtures of thoſe that pretend ſkill in it,
entertained an ill opinion of the art. Boyle.
ILLI't ERATURE. m. ſ. [in and literature.] Want of learning.
The more uſual cauſes of this deprivation are want of holy
orders, illiterature, or inability for the diſcharge of that ſacred
funètion, and irreligion. Ayliffe's Parergºn.
I LLNEss. n. ſ. [from ill.]
1. Badneſs or inconvenience of any kind, natural or moral.
He that has his chains knocked off, and the priſon-doors
ſet open, is perfectly at liberty, though his preference be de-
termined to ſtay, by the illneſs of the weather. Locke.
2. Sickneſs; malady; diſorder of health.
On the Lord's day, which immediately preceded this illneſſ,
he had received the ſacrament. Atterbury's Sermons.
Since the account her majeſty received of the intolent beha-
viour of the faction, during her late illneſs at Windſor, ſhe
hath been willing to ſee them deprived of all power to do miſ-
chief. Swift.
3. Wickedneſs.
Thou would be great;
Art not without ambition; but without
The illneſs ſhould attend it. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
ILLNATURE. m.ſ.. [il and nature.] Habitual malevolence;
want of humanity. -
Illnature inclines a man to thoſe actions that thwart and
ſour and diſturb converſation, and conſiſts of a proneneſs to do
ill turns, attended with a ſecret joy upon the fight of any miſ-
chief that befals another, and of an utter inſenſibility of any
kindneſs done him. South's Sermons.
ILLNA’t URED. adj. [from illnature.]
1. Habitually malevolent; wanting kindneſs or goodwill; miſ-
chievous.
Theſe ill qualities denominate a perſon illnatured, they being
ſuch as make him grievous and uneaſy to all whom he deals
and aſſociates himſelf with. South's Sermons.
Stay, filly bird, th’ illnatur'd taſk refuſe; "
Nor be the bearer of unwelcome news. Addiſon's Ovid.
It might be one of thoſe illnatured beings who are at enmity
with mankind, and do therefore take pleaſure in filling them
with groundleſs terrors. Atterbury’s Sermons.
2. Phillips applies it to land. Untračtable; not yielding to cul-
ture. *
The fondly ſtudious of increaſe,
Rich foreign mold on their illnatur'd land
Induce. - Philips.
ILLNATUREDLY. adv. [from illnatured.] In a peeviſh, fro-
ward manner.
ILLNATURE DNEss. n.ſ.. [from illnatured J Want of a kind-
ly diſpoſition. - -
ILLO'GICAL. adj. [in and logical.]
1. Ignorant or negligent of the rules of reaſoning.
One of the diſſenters appeared to Dr. Sanderſon ſo hold and
illogical in the diſpute, as forced him to ſay he had never met
with a man of more pertinacious confidence, and leſs abi-
lities. J/altºn.
2. Contrary to the rules of reaſon.
Reaſon cannot diſpute and make an inference ſo utterly ill-
gical. Decay of Pie”.
Ilio GICALLY. adv. [from illºgical.] In a manner contrary to
the laws of argument. -
To
-:
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I L L
º
To Illu'd E. v. a. ſilludo, Latin.] To deceive; to mock;
to impoſe on; to play upon; to torment by ſome contemptu-
ous artifice of mockery.
Sometimes athwart, ſometimes he ſtrook him ſtrait,
And falſed of this blow, tº illude him with ſuch bait. F. Qu.
In vain we meaſure this amazing ſphere,
While its circumference, ſcorning to be brought
Ev’n into fancy'd ſpace, illudes our vanquiſh'd thought. Pri.
To Illu’ME. v. a. ſilluminer, French.]
1. To enlighten; to illuminate.
When yon ſame ſtar, that's weſtward from the pole,
Had made his courſe t' illume that part of heav'n,
Where now it burns. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. To brighten; to adorn.
- The mountain's brow,
Illum'd with fluid gold, his near approach
Betoken. Thomſon's Summer.
To Illu'M INE. v. a. ſilluminer, French.]
1. To enlighten ; to ſupply with light.
To confirm his words, out flew
Millions of flaming ſwords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty cherubims: the ſudden blaze
Far round illumin'd hell. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
- What in me is dark,
Illumine ! what is low, raiſe and ſupport! Milt. Par. Loft.
2. To decorate; to adorn.
To Cato, Virgil paid one honeſt line;
O let my country's friends illumine mine. Pope.
To ILLUMINATE. v. a. ſilluminer, French; lumen, Latin.]
1. To enlighten; to ſupply with light.
Do thou vouchſafe, with thy love-kindling light,
Tº illuminate my dim and dulled eyn. Spenser.
No painting can be ſeen in full perfeótion, but as all nature
is illuminated by a ſingle light. J/otton.
He made the ſtars,
And ſet them in the firmament of heav'n,
Tº illuminate the earth and rule the night. Milt. Par. Loft.
Reaſon our guide, what can ſhe more reply
Than that the ſun illuminates the ſky;
Than that night riſes from his abſent ray,
And his returning luſtre kindles day ! Prizr.
2. To adorn with feſtal lamps or bonfires.
3. To enlighten intelle&amp;tually with knowledge or grace.
Satan had no power to abuſe the illuminated world with his
impoſtures. Sandys's Travels.
When he illuminates the mind with ſupernatural light, he
does not extinguiſh that which is natural. Locke.
4. To adorn with pićtures or initial letters of various colours.
5. To illuſtrate.
My health is inſufficient to amplify theſe remarks, and to
illuminate the ſeveral pages with variety of examples. I?’atts.
ILLUMINA'tion. n.ſ.. [illuminatio, Lat, illumination, Fr. from
illuminate.]
1. The act of ſupplying with light.
2. That which gives light.
The ſun is but a body illightened, and an illumination
created. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
3. Feſtal lights hung out as a token of joy.
Flow’rs are ſtrew'd, and lamps in order plac'd,
And windows with illuminations grac'd, Dryden's Perſ.
4. Brightneſs; ſplendour.
The illuminators of manuſcripts borrowed their title from
the illumination which a bright genius giveth to his work.
Felton on the Claſſicks.
5. Infuſion of intelle&amp;tual light; knowledge or grace.
Hymns and pſalms are ſuch kinds of prayer as are not
conceived upon a ſudden; but framed by meditation before-
hand, or by prophetical illumination are inſpired. Hooker.
We have forms of prayers imploring God's aid and bleſſ-
ing for the illuminatiºn of our labours, and the turning them
into good and holy uſes. - Bacon.
No holy paſſion, no illumination, no inſpiration, can be
now a ſufficient commiſſion to warrant thoſe attempts which
contradict the common rules of peace, Spratt's Sermons.
ILLUMINATIVE: adi, [illuminatiſ, Fr. from illuminate.] Having
the power to give light. -
What makes itſelf and other things be ſeen, being accom-
panied by light, is called fire: what admits the illuminative
action of fire, and is not ſeen, is called air. Digby on Bºdies.
ILLUMINA"roR. n.ſ.. [from illuminate.]
1. One who gives light,
2. One whoſe buſineſs it is to decorate books with pićtures at
... the beginning of chapters.
Illuminators of manuſcripts borrowed their title from the
illumination which a bright genius giveth to his work. Fellon,
ILLu'sios. m. ſ. ſilluſio, Latin ; illuſion, Fr.] Mockery; falſe
ſhow ; counterfeit appearance; errour.
That, diſtill'd by magick ſlights,
Shall raiſe ſuch artificial ſprights,
As, by the ſtrength of their illuſion,
Shall draw him on to his confuſion. Shakeſp, Macbeth.
There wanted not ſome about him that would have per-
ſuaded him that all was but an illuſion. Bacon's Henry VII.
So oft they fell
Into the ſame illuſion; not as man, - -
Whom they triumph'd, once laps'd. Milton's Parad. Loft.
An excuſe for uncharitableneſs, drawn from pretended in-
ability, is of all others the moſt general and prevailing illu-
/ion. Atterbury's Sermons.
Many are the illuſions by which the enemy endeavours to
cheat men into ſecurity, and defeat their title to ſalvation.
Roger's Sermons.
To dream once more I cloſe my willing eyes;
Ye ſoft illuſions, dear deceits, ariſe ! Po:e.
We muſt uſe ſome illuſiºn to render a paſtoral delightful;
and this conſiſts in expoſing the beſt ſide only of a ſhepherd's
life, and in concealing its miſeries. Pºpe.
". ve. adj. [from illuſus, Latin.] Deceiving by falſe
OW.
The heathen bards, who idle fables dreſt,
Illuſive dreams in myſtick forms expreſt. Blackmore.
While the fond ſoul,
Wrapt in gay viſions of unreal bliſs,
Still paints th’ illuſive form. Thomſon's Spring.
I'LLusory, adj. [from in and luſºrius, Latin; thuſoiré, Fr.]
Deceiving; fraudulent.
Subtilty, in thoſe who make profeſſion to teach or defend
truth, hath paſſed for a virtue: a virtue indeed, which, con-
ſiſting for the moſt part in nothing but the fallacious and illu-
ſory uſe of obſcure or deceitful terms, is only fit to make men
more conceited in their ignorance. Locke.
To ILLUSTRATE. v. n. [illuſtro, Latin; ill/irer, Fr.]
1. To brighten with light.
2. To brighten with honour.
Matter to me of glory ! whom their hate
Iluſtrates, when they ſee all regal pow'r
- Giv'n me to quell their pride. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Thee ſhe enroll'd her garter'd knights among,
Illuſtrating the noble liſt. Phillips.
3. To explain ; to clear; to elucidate.
They take up popular conceits, and from tradition unjuſti-
fiable, or really falſe, illuſtrate matters of undeniable truth.
Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Illust RA"tion. n.ſ.. [illuſtration, Fr. from illuſtrate.] Ex-
planation; elucidation; expoſition.
Whoever looks about him will find many living illuſtrations
of this emblem. L’Eſtrange:
Space and duration, being ideas that have ſomething very
abſtruſe and peculiar in their nature, the comparing them one
with another may perhaps be of uſe for their illuſtration. Locke.
Illu's TRATIVE. adj. [from illuſtrate.] Having the quality of
clucidating or clearing.
They play much upon the ſimile, or illuſtrative argumenta-
tion, to induce their enthymemes unto the people. Lrown.
ILLU's TRATIVELY. adv. [from illuſtrative..] By way of ex-
planation.
Things are many times delivered hieroglyphically, meta-
phorically, illuſtratively, and not with reference to action.
L'own's Pulgar Err urs.
ILLUSTRIOUS. adj. [illuſiris, Latin; illuſtre, Fr.] Con-
ſpicuous; noble; eminent for excellence.
In other languages the moſt illuſºrious titles are derived from
things ſacred. - South's Sermons.
Of ev’ry nation, each illuſºrious name, -
Such toys as thoſe have cheated into fame. Dryden’s juven.
ILLU's TRIously... adv. [from illuſºrious. J Conſpicuouſly ;
nobly; eminently.
He diſdained not to appear at feſtival entertainments, that
he might more illuſtriouſly manifeſt his charity. Atterb. Sermons.
Enjoy the glory to be great no more;
And carrying with you all the world can boaſt, -
To all the world illuſºriouſly are loſt. Pope's Spring.
ILLU's TRIOUSN Ess. ..}; illuſtrious.] Eminence; nobi-
lity; grandeur.
I’M. Contraćted from I am. -
IM is uſed commonly, in compoſition, for in before mute letters.
I'MAGE. m. ſ. [image, French; image, Latin. J
1. Any corporeal repreſentation, generally uſed of ſtatues; a
ſtatue; a pićture. -
Whoſe is this image and ſuperſcription ? Mat. xxii. 20.
The one is too like an image, and ſays nothing; and the
other too like my lady's oldeſt ſon, ever more talking, Shakespeare
- Thy brother I,
Even like a ſtony image, cold and numb. Shakeſp, " it. And.
The image of a deity may be a proper obječt for that which
is but the image of a religion. South's Sermons.
Still muſt I be upbraided with your line;
But your late brother did not prize me leſs,
Becauſe I could not boaſt of images. Dryd. Tyrann. Love.
2. An idol; a falſe god.
3. A copy; repreſentation; likeneſs.
- Long may’ſt thou live, - - -
To bear his image and renew his glories' Shakespeare. Hen. VI.
9 I have
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I MA
I M B
I have bewept a worthy huſband's death,
And liv'd by looking on his images :
But now two mirrours of his princely ſemblance
Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death. Shakeſp. R. III.
The image of the jeſt
I'll ſhew you here at large. Shakespeare. Mr. Wives of Windſ.
He made us to his image all agree;
That image is the ſoul, and that muſt be,
Or not the maker's image, or be free.
4. Semblance; ſhow; appearance.
Deny to ſpeak with me? They're ſick, they're weary,
They have travell'd all night ! Mere fetches,
The images of revolt. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
This is the man ſhould do the bloody deed:
The image of a wicked heinous fault
Lives in his eye. Shakeſpeare's King john.
The face of things a frightful image bears,
And preſent death in various forms appears. Dryden's Aen.
5. An idea; a repreſentation of anything to the mind; a pic-
ture drawn in the fancy.
Outcaſts of mortal race' can we conceive
Image of aught delightful, ſoft, or great Prior.
When we ſpeak of a figure of a thouſand angles, we may
have a clear idea of the number one thouſand angles; but the
image, or ſenſible idea, we cannot diſtinguiſh by fancy from
the image of a figure that has nine hundred angles. //atts.
To IMAGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To copy by the fancy;
to imagine.
How are immaterial ſubſtances to be imaged, which are
ſuch things whereof we can have no notion ? Dryden.
Image to thy mind
How our forefathers to the Stygian ſhades
Went quick.
His ear oft frighted with the imag’d voice
Of heav'n, when firſt it thunder'd.
If fate ſome future bard ſhall join
In ſad ſimilitude of griefs to mine,
Condemn'd whole years in abſence to deplore,
| And image charms he muſt behold no more.
IMAGERY. m. ſ. [from image )
1. Senſible repreſentations; pićtures; ſtatues.
Of marble ſtone was cut
An altar, carv'd with cunning imagery.
When in thoſe oratories might you ſee
Rich carvings, portraitures, and imagery;
Where ev'ry figure to the life expreſs'd
The godhead's pow'r, Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Your gift ſhall two large goblets be
Of ſilver, wrought with curious imagery,
And high emboſs'd.
2. Show; appearance. .
What can thy imagery of ſorrow mean?
Secluded from the world, and all its care,
Haſt thou to grieve or joy, to hope or fear? Prior.
All the viſionary beauties of the proſpect, the paint and
imagery that attracted our ſenſes, fade and diſappear. Rogers.
Things of the world fill the imaginative part with beauties
and fantaſtick imagery. Taylor.
3. Copies of the fancy; falſe ideas; imaginary phantaſms.
It might be a mere dream which he ſaw ; the imagery of
a melancholick fancy, ſuch as muſing men miſtake for a
reality. Atterbury's Sermons.
4. Repreſentations in writing; ſuch deſcriptions as force the
image of the thing deſcribed upon the mind.
I wiſh there may be in this poem any inſtance of good
imagery. Dryden.
IMA/GINABLE. adj. [imaginable, Fr. from imagine.] Poſſible
to be conceived.
It is not imaginable that men will be brought to obey what
they cannot eſteem. South's Sermons.
Men, ſunk into the greateſt darkneſs imaginable, retain ſome
ſenſe and awe of a Deity. Tillotſon's Sermons.
IMAGINANT. adj. [imaginant, French.] Imagining; forming
ideas.
We will enquire what the force of imagination is, either
upon the body imaginant, or upon another body. Bacon.
IMA'GINARY. adj. [imaginaire, French, from imagine.]
1. Fancied; viſionary; exiſting only in the imagination.
Falſe ſorrow's eye,
Which, for things true, weeps things imaginary.
Expectation whirls me round:
Th’ imaginary reliſh is ſo ſweet,
That it enchants my ſenſe. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºffda.
Fortune is nothing elſe but a power imaginary, to which
the ſucceſſes of human actions and endeavours were for their
variety aſcribed. Raleigh's Hiiory ºf the //orld.
Why wait thou add, to all the griefs I ſuffer,
Imaginary ills and fancied tortures 2 Addison's Cato.
IMAGINATION. n.ſ. [imaginatio, Latin; imagination, French,
from imagine.]
1. Fancy; the power of forming ideal pićtures; the power of
repreſenting things abſent to one's ſclf or others.
Dryden. }
Phillips.
Prior.
Pope.
Fairy Queen.
Dryden's Án.
Shakespeare
Imagination I underſtand to be the repreſentation of an in-
dividual thought. Imagination is of three kinds: joined with
belief of that which is to come ; joined with memory of that
which is paſt; and of things preſent, or as if they were pre-
ſent: for I comprehend in this imagination feigned and at plea-
ſure, as if one ſhould imagine ſuch a man to be in the veſt-
ments of a pope, or to have wings. Bacon.
Our ſimple apprehenſion of corporal objećts, if preſent, is
ſenſe; if abſent, imagination ; when we would perceive a ma-
terial object, our fancies preſent us with its idea. Glanv. S.4ſ.
O whither ſhall I run, or which way fly
The ſight of this ſo horrid ſpectacle,
Which erſt my eyes beheld, and yet behold
For dire imagination ſtill purſues me. Milton's Agoniſes.
His imaginations were often as juſt as they were bold and
ſtrong. - Dennis.
Where beams of warm imagination play,
The memory's ſoft figures melt away. Pºpe.
2. Conception; image in the mind; idea.
Sometimes deſpair darkens all her imaginations; ſometimes
the active paſſion of love cheers and clears her invention. Sian.
Princes have but their titles for their glories,
An outward honour for an inward toil;
And, for unfelt imaginations,
They often feel a world of reſtleſs cares.
Better I were diſtraćt,
So ſhould my thoughts be ſever'd from my griefs;
And woes, by wrong imaginations, loſe
The knowledge of themſelves. Shakeſp. King Lear.
We are apt to think that ſpace, in itſelf, is actually bound-
leſs; to which imaginatiºn, the idea of ſpace, of itſelf leads
us. Lake.
3. Contrivance; ſcheme.
Thou haſt ſeen all their vengeance, and all their imagina-
tions againſt me. Lam. iii. 60.
IMAGINATIvE. adj. [imaginatif, Fr. from imagine.] Fantaſtick;
full of imagination. -
Witches are imaginative, and believe oft times they do that
which they do not. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Lay fetters and reſtraints upon the imaginative and fanta-
ſtick part, becauſe our fancy is uſually pleaſed with the enter-
tainment of ſhadows and gauds. Taylor's Rule ºf living h ’).
To IMA’GINE. v. a. [imaginer, French; imaginor, Latin.]
1. To fancy; to paint in the mind.
Look what notes and garments he doth give thee,
Bring them, I pray thee, with iwagin'd ſpeed. Shaºcare.
Preſent feats
Are leſs than horrible imaginings. Shakespeare Mºlºth.
What are our ideas of eternity and immenſity but the re-
peated additions of certain ideas of imagined parts of duration
and expanſion, with the infinity of number, in which we can
come to no end of addition ? Lºcke.
2. To ſcheme; to contrive.
They intended evil againſt thee, they imagined a miſchie-
vous device. Pſ. xxi. 11.
IMA'GINER. m.ſ.. [from imagine.] One who forms ideas.
The juggler took upon him to know that ſuch an one ſhould
point in ſuch a place of a garter that was held up ; and ſtill he
did it, by firſt telling the imaginer, and after bidding the actor
think. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
IMBE'cILE. adj. [imbecilis, Latin ; imbecille, French..] Weak;
feeble; wanting ſtrength of either mind or body.
To IMBE'cIle. v. a. [from the adjective. This word is cor-
ruptly written embezzle.] To weaken a ſtock or fortune by
clandeſtine expences or unjuſt appropriations.
Princes muſt in a ſpecial manner be guardians of pupils and
widows, not ſuffering their perſons to be oppreſſed, or their
ſtates imbeciled. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
IM BEcI'lity. n.ſ.. [imbecilité, French..] Weakneſs; feeble-
neſs of mind or body.
A weak and imperfeót rule argueth imbecility and imper-
fe&amp;tion. Hooker, l. iv.
No imbecility of means can prejudice the truth of the pro-
miſe of God herein. Hooker..
We that are ſtrong muſt bear the imbecility of the impotent,
and not pleaſe ourſelves. Hooker.
That way we are contented to prove, which, being the
worſe in itſelf, is notwithſtanding now, by reaſon of common
imlecility, the fitter and likelier to be brooked. Fiocăr.
Strength would be lord of imile ility,
And the rude ſon would ſtrike his father dead. Shakeſpeare.
Imbecility, for ſex and age, was ſuch as they could not lift up
a hand againſt them. King Charles.
When man was fallen, and had abandoned his primitive
innocence, a ſtrange imbecility immediately ſeized and laid hold
of him. J/codward's Natural Hiſtory.
Shakeſp. R. III.
To IMBI'BE. v. a. [imlilo, Latin ; in biter, French.]
1. To drink in ; to draw in.
A pot of aſhes will receive more hot water than cold, for-
aſmuch as the warm water imbibeth more of the ſalt. Brºwn.
The torrent mercileſs imbibes
Commiſſions, perquiſites, and bribes. Swift.
Illumiñ'd
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M B
I M B
-
º
* -
**
- Illumin'd wide, - -
The dewy-ſkirted clouds imbibe the ſun. Thomſon's Autumn,
2. To admit into the mind.
Thoſe, that have imbibed this error, have extended the in-
fluence of this belief to the whole goſpel, which they will not
allow to contain any thing but promiſes. #.
It is not eaſy for the mind to put off thoſe confuſed notions
and prejudices it has imbibed from cuſtom. Locke.
Converſation with foreigners enlarges our minds, and ſets
them free from many prejudices we are ready to imbibe con-
cerning them. JWatts's Improvement &amp; the Mind.
3. To drench; to ſoak. This ſenſe, though unuſual, perhaps
unexampled, is neceſſary in the Engliſh, unleſs the word imbue
be adopted, which our writers ſeem not willing to receive.
Metals, corroded with a little acid, turn into ruſt, which
is an earth taſteleſs and indiſſolvable in water; and this earth,
imbibed with more acid, becomes a metallick ſalt. Newton.
IMBI're R. n.ſ.. [from imbibe.] That which drinks or ſucks.
Salts are ſtrong imbibers of ſulphureous ſteams. Arbuthnot.
IMB1b1"tion. n ſ [imbibition, French, from imbibe.] The aët
of ſucking or drinking in.
Moſt powders grow more coherent by mixture of water
than of oil: the reaſon is the congruity of bodies, which
maketh a perfecter imbibition and incorporation. Bacon.
Heat and cold have a virtual tranſition, without communi-
cation of ſubſtance, but in moiſture not; and to all madefac-
tion there is required an imbibition. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A drop of oil, let fall upon a ſheet of white paper, that
part of it, which, by the imbibition of the liquor, acquires a
greater continuity and ſome tranſparency, will appear much
darker than the reſt; many of the incident beams of light
being now tranſmitted, that otherwiſe would be reflected. Boyle.
To IMB1'tter. v. a. [from bitter.]
1. To make bitter.
2. To deprive of pleaſure; to make unhappy.
Let them extinguiſh their paſſions which imbitter their lives,
and deprive them of their ſhare in the happineſs of the com-
munity. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Is there any thing that more imbitters the enjoyments of
this life than ſhame : South's Sermons.
3. To exaſperate.
To IMbody. v. a. [from body.]
1. To condenſe to a body.
2. To inveſt with matter.
An opening cloud reveals
An heav'nly form imbody'd, and array'd
With robes of light. Dryden.
Though aſſiduity in the moſt fixed cogitation be no trouble
to immaterialiſed ſpirits, yet is it more than our embodied ſouls
can bear without laſſitude. Glanv. Scepſ.
3. To bring together into one maſs or company.
I by vow am ſo embodied yours,
That ſhe which marries you muſt marry me. Shakeſpeare.
Never ſince created, man
Met ſuch imbodied force, as nam'd with theſe,
Could merit more than that ſmall infantry
Warr'd on by cranes. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
Under their head embody'd all in one. Milt. Par. Loft.
Then Clauſus came, 'who led a num'rous band
Of troops embodied, from the Sabine land. Dryden's Zn.
4. To incloſe. Improper. .
In thoſe ſtrata we ſhall meet with the ſame metal or mineral
imbodied in ſtone, or lodged in coal, that elſewhere we found
in marle. - Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
To IM Bo'DY. v. n. To unite into one maſs; to coaleſce.
The ſoul grows clotted by contagion,
Imbodies and imbrutes, ’till ſhe quite loſe
The divine property of her firſt being. Milton.
The idea of white, which ſnow yielded yeſterday, and an-
other idea of white from another ſnow to-day, put together
in your mind, imbody and run into one. Locke.
To IMBo'il. v. n. [from boil.] To exeſtuate; to efferveſce;
to move with violent agitation like hot liquor in a caldron.
With whoſe reproach and odious menace, *
The knight imboiling in his haughty heart,
Knit all his forces, and 'gan ſoon unbrace
His graſping hold. Fairy Queen.
To IMBo'LDEN. v. a. [from bold.] To raiſe to confidence;
to encourage.
'Tis neceſſary he ſhould die:
Nothing imboldens fin ſo much as mercy. Shakespeare. Timon.
I think myſelf in better plight for a lender than you are,
the which hath ſomething imboldened me to this unſeaſoned in.
truſion. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſºr.
º I was the more imboldened, becauſe I found I had a %.
congenial to his. Dryden.
Nor flight was left, nor hopes to force his way;
Inbolden'd by diſpair, he ſtood at bay. Dryden's Án.
Their virtues and ſuperior genius imboldened them, in great
exigencies of ſtate, to attempt the ſervice of their prince and
country out of the common forms. Swift.
i
To IMbo’soM. v. a. [from boſom.] -
1. To hold on the boſom ; to cover fondly with the folds of one's
garment; to hide under any cover.
The Father infinite,
By whom in bliſs imboſom'd ſat the ſon. Milton's Par. Loft.
Villages imboſ.m’d ſoft in trees,
And ſpiry towns by ſurging columns mark'd. Thomſºn.
2. To admit to the heart, or to affection.
But glad deſire, his late embºſom'd gueſt,
Yet but a babe, with milk of fight he nurſt. Sidney.
Who glad t'emboſom his affection vile,
Did all ſhe might, more plainly to appear. Fairy Queen.
To IMRound. v.a. [from bound.j To incloſe; to ſhut in.
That ſweet breath,
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay. Shakespeare K. john.
To Imbo'w. v. a. [from bow.] To arch; to vault.
Prince Arthur gave a box of diamond ſure,
Imbowed with gold and gorgeous ornament. Fairy Queen.
Imbowed windows be pretty retiring places for conference:
they keep both the wind and ſun off. Bacon.
Let my due feet never fail
To walk the ſtudious cloiſter's pale,
And love the high embowed roof,
With antick pillar maſſy proof. AMilton.
IM Bo'wment. n.ſ.. [from imbow.] Arch; vault.
The roof all open, not ſo much as any embowment near any
of the walls left. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
To IMBo'we R. v. a. [from bower, J To cover with a bower;
to ſhelter with trees:
And ſtooping thence to Ham's embowering walks,
In ſpotleſs peace retir’d. Thomſºn.
To IMERA'NGLE. v. a. To intangle. A low word,
With ſubtle cobweb cheats
They're catch'd in knotted law, like nets;
In which, when once they are imbrangled,
The more they ſtir, the more they're tangled. Hudibrar:
IMBR1'cATED. adj. [from imbrex, Latin.] Indented with
concavities; bent and hollowed like a roof or gutter-tile.
IMBRica’tion, n.ſ. [imbrex, Latin.] Concave indenture.
All is guarded with a well made tegument, adorned with
neat imbrications, and many other fineries. Derham.
To IMBRo’wn. v. a. [from brown.] To make brown; to darken;
to obſcure; to cloud.
Where the morning ſun firſt warmly ſmote
The open field, and where the unpierc'd ſhade
Imbrown'd the noontide bow'rs. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
The walking crew,
At thy requeſt, ſupport the miry ſhoe;
The foot grows black that was with dirt imbrown'd,
And in thy pocket gingling half-pence ſound. Gay.
Another age ſhall ſee the golden ear
Imbrown the ſlope, and nod on the parterre. Pope.
Imbrown'd with native bronze, lo! Henly ſtands. Pope.
To IMBru'e. v. a. [from in and brue.]
1. To ſteep; to ſoak; to wet much or long.
Thou mad'ſt many hearts to bleed
Of mighty vićtors, with wide wounds embru'd, -
And by thy cruel darts to thee ſubdu'd. Spenſer.
There ſtreams a ſpring of blood ſo faſt
From thoſe deep wounds, as all embru'd the face
Of that accurſed caitiff. Daniel's Civil War.
The mercileſs Turks, embrued with the Chriſtian blood,
were weary of ſlaughter, and began greedily to ſeek after the
ſpoil. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turki.
At me, as at a mark, his bow he drew,
Whoſe arrows in my blood their wings imbrue. Sandys.
Lucius pities the offenders,
That would embrue their hands in Cato's blood. Addison.
Lo! theſe hands in murder are imbru'd,
Thoſe trembling feet by juſtice are purſu'd. Prizr.
Theſe, where two ways in equal parts divide,
The direful monſter from afar deſcry'd, }
Two bleeding babes depending at her ſide ;
Whoſe panting vitals, warm with life, ſhe draws,
And in their hearts embrues her cruel claws. Pope.
His virgin ſword AEgyſthus' veins imbru'd;
The . fell, and blood atton'd for blood. Pope.
A good man chuſes rather to paſs by a verbal injury than
imbrue his hands in blood. Clariſſa.
2. To pour; to emit moiſture. Obſolete.
Some bathed kiſſes, and did oft embrue -
The ſugar'd liquor through his melting lips. Fairy Queen.
To IMBRU're. v. a. [from brute.] To degrade to brutality.
I, who erſt contended -
With gods to fit the higheſt, am now conſtrain'd
Into a beaſt; and mix with beſtial ſlime,
This eſſence to incarnate and imbrute. Milton's Par. Lºft,
To Imbru're. v. n. To ſink down to brutality.
The ſoul grows clotted by contagion,
Imbodies and imbrutes, ’till ſhe quite loſe • ?
The divine property of her firſt being. Milton:
1 i X To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M M
I M M
To IMBU'E. v. a. ſimhuo, Latin. This word, which ſeems
wanted in our language, has been propoſed by ſeveral writers,
but not yet adopted by the reſt. Imbu, French, the participial
adj. is only uſed.] To tinéture deep; to imbibe with any
liquor or die.
I would render this treatiſe intelligible to every rational
man, however little verſed in ſcholaſtick learning; among
whom I expect it will have a fairer paſſage, than among thoſe
that are deeply imbued with other principles. Digby.
Cloaths which have once been throughly embued with black,
cannot well afterwards be dyed into lighter colour. Bºyle.
Where the mineral matter is great, ſo as to take the eye,
the body appears imbued and tinčtured with the colour. Woodw.
To IMBU'R's E. v. a. [bourſe, French..] To ſtock with money.
This ſhould be emburſe, from embourſer, French.
IMITAB 1'LITY.. n.ſ.. [imitabilis, Latin.] The quality of being
imitable.
According to the multifariouſneſs of this imitability, ſo are
the poſſibilities of being. - Norris.
I'MITABLE. adj. [imitabilis, Latin; imitable, French.]
1. Worthy to be imitated.
How could the moſt baſe men, and ſeparate from all imitable
qualities, attain to honour but by an obſervant ſlaviſh
courſe 2 Raleigh's Hiſtory of the IWorld.
As ačts of parliament are not regarded by moſt imitable wri-
ters, I account the relation of them improper for hiſtory. Hayw.
2. Poſſible to be imitated.
The charaćters of men placed in lower ſtations of life, are
more uſeful, as being imitable by greater nnmbers. Atterbury.
To I'MITATE. v. a. [imitor, Latin; imiter, French.]
1. To copy; to endeavour to reſemble.
We imitate and practiſe to make ſwifter motions than any
out of your muſkets. Bacon.
Deſpiſe wealth, and imitate a god. Cowley.
I would careſs-ſome ſtableman of note,
And imitate his language and his coat.
2. To counterfeit.
This hand appear'd a ſhining ſword to wield,
And that ſuſtain’d an imitated ſhield. Dryden's AEn.
3. To purſue the courſe of a compoſition, ſo as to uſe parallel
images and examples.
For ſhame! what, imitate an ode Ga
IMITA'tion. n.ſ.. [imitatio, Latin; imitation, French.]
1. The aët of copying; attempt to reſemble.
Since a true knowledge of nature gives us pleaſure, a lively
imitation of it, either in poetry or painting, muſt produce a
much greater; for both theſe arts are not only true imitations
of nature, but of the beſt nature. Dryden.
2. That which is offered as a copy.
3. A method of tranſlating looſer than paraphraſe, in which
modern examples and illuſtrations are uſed for ancient, or do-
meſtick for foreign.
In the way of imitation, the tranſlator not only varies from
the words and ſenſe, but forſakes them as he ſees occaſion;
and, taking only ſome general hints from the original, runs
diviſion on the groundwork. Dryden.
I'M ITAt Ive. adj. [imitativus, Latin.] Inclined to copy.
This temple, leſs in form, with equal grace,
Was imitative of the firſt in Thrace. Dryden.
IMITA"roR. m. ſ. [Latin ; imitateur, French.] One that copies
another; one that endeavours to reſemble another.
Imitators are but a ſervile kind of cattle, ſays the poet. Dry.
IM MA'culat E. adj. [immaculatus, Latin; immaculé, Fr.]
1. Spotleſs; pure; undefiled.
To keep this commandment immaculate and blameleſs, was
Man of Taſte.
to teach the goſpel of Chriſt. Hooker.
- His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles;
His love ſincere, his thoughts immaculate. Shakeſpeare.
The king, whom catholicks count a ſaint-like and immacu-
late prince, was taken away in the flower of his age. Bacon.
Were but my ſoul as pure
From other guilts as that, heav'n did not hold
One more immaculate. Denham's Sophy.
2. Pure; limpid. Improper.
Thou clear, immaculate, and ſilver fountain,
From whence this ſtream, through muddy paſſages,
Hath had his current and defil’d himſelf. Shakespeare Rich. II.
To IMMA'Nacle. v. a. [from manacle.] To fetter; to con-
, fine. -
Thou can'ſt not touch the freedom of my mind
With all thy charms, although this corporal rind
IMMA's E. adj. [immani, Latin.] Vaſt; prodigiouſly great.
IM MANENT, adj. [immanent, French; in and mané, Latin.]
Intrinſick; inherent; internal. - -
Judging the infinite eſſence by our narrow ſelves, we aſcribe
intellections, volitions, and ſuch like immanent ačtions, to that
nature which hath nothing in common with us. Glanv. Scºpſ.
What he wills and intends once, he willed and intended
from all eternity; it being groſly contrary to the very firſt no-
tions we have of the infinite perfections of the Divine Nature . .
to ſtate or ſuppoſe any new immanent act in God. South.
l
- IMMATU’R IT Y.
Thou haſt immanac'd, Al Milton. .
IMMA'NIFEst. adj. [ in and manifeſt. J Not manifeſt; not
plain.
A time not much unlike that which was before time, imma-
nifºſi and unknown. Brown's Wulgar Err.ur.
hºrrº. n. ſ. [ immanitas, Latin. J Barbarity; ſavage-
Inels.
It was both impious and unnatural,
That ſuch immanity and bloody ſtrife . -
Should reign among profeſſors of one faith. Shakespeare H. VI.
IMMARce'ssible. adj. [ in and marcºſco, Latin. J. Unfad-
ing. Dić.
IMMA'RTIAL. adj. [in and martial.] Not warlike. -
My pow'rs are unfit, -
Myſelf immartial. Chapman's Odyſſey.
To IMMA'sk. v. a. [in and maſk.] To cover; to diſguiſe.
I have caſes of buckram for the nonce, to immaſ; our noted
outward garments. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
IMM ATE'RIAL. adj. [immateriel, Fr. in and materia, Latin.]
1. Incorporeal; diſtinct from matter; void of matter.
Angels are ſpirits immaterial and intellectual, the glorious
inhabitants of thoſe ſacred palaces, where there is nothing but
light and immortality; no ſhadow of matter for tears, diſ-
contentments, griefs, and uncomfortable paſſions to work
upon ; but all joy, tranquillity, and peace, even for ever and
ever, do dwell. Hacker.
As then the ſoul a ſubſtance hath alone,
Beſides the body, in which ſhe is confin'd;
So hath ſhe not a body of her own,
But is a ſpirit, and immaterial mind. Davies.
Thoſe immaterial felicities we expc&amp;t, ſuggeſt the neceſſity of
preparing our appetites, without which heaven can be no hea-
Ven to us. Decay of Piety.
No man that owns the exiſtence of an infinite ſpirit can
doubt of the poſſibility of a finite ſpirit; that is, ſuch a thing
as is immaterial, and does not contain any principle of cor-
ruption. Tillotſon's Sermons.
2. Unimportant; without weight; impertinent; without rela-
tion. This ſenſe has crept into the converſation and writings
of barbarians; but ought to be utterly rejećted.
IMMATE'RIALITY. m. ſ. [from immaterial.]
diſtinétneſs from body or matter.
When we know cogitation is the prime attribute of a ſpirit,
we inſer its immateriality, and thence its immortality. JWatts.
IMMATE'RIALLY. adv. [from immaterial.] In a manner not
depending upon matter.
The viſible ſpecies of things ſtrike not our ſenſes immate-
rially; but ſtreaming in corporal rays, do carry with them the
qualities of the obječt from whence they flow, and the me-
dium through which they paſs. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
IMMATE'RIAlize D. adj. [from in and materia, Latin.] Diſ-
tinét from matter; incorporeal. •
Though affiduity in the moſt fixed cogitation be no trouble
to immaterialized ſpirits, yet is it more than our imbodied ſouls
can bear without laſſitude. Glanv. Scepſ.
IMMATE'RIALNEss. n.ſ.. [from immaterial.] Diſtinétneſs from
matter. -
IMMATE’RIATE. adj. [in and materia, Latin.] Not conſiſting
of matter; incorporeal; without body.
It is a virtue which may be called incorporeal and immate-
riate, whereof there be in nature but few. Bacon.
After a long enquiry of things immerſe in matter, I inter-
poſe ſome objećt which is immateriate, or leſs materiate; ſuch
as this of ſounds. Bacon.
IMMATU’RE. adj. [immaturus, Latin.]
1. Not ripe. :
2. Not perfeót; not arrived at fulneſs or completion.
The land enterprize of Panama was an ill meaſured and
immature counſel; for it was grounded upon a falſe account,
that the paſſages were no better fortified than Drake had left
them. Bacon.
This is your time for faction and debate,
For partial favour, and permitted hate:
Let now your immature diffenſion ceaſe,
Sit quiet.
3. Haſty; early ; come to paſs before the natural time.
We are pleaſed, and call not that death immature, if a man
lives’till ſeventy. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Incorporeity;
Dryden.
IM Matu'RELY. adv. [from immature.] Too ſoon; too early;
before ripeneſs or completion. -
IMM ATU’RENEss. Un. ſ. [from immature.] Unripeneſs; in-
} completeneſs; a ſtate ſhort of completion.
I might reaſonably expect a pardon from the ingenious for
faults committed in an immaturity of age and judgment. Glan-
- • * * - º
IMMEAEI'lity, n. ſ. [immeabilis, Latin.J Want of power to
paſs. - - a - - - -
From this phlegm proceeds white cold tumours, viſcidity,
and conſequently immeability of the juices. Arbuthnot.
IMME'Asur FAB 1. F. adj. [in and meaſure.] Immenſe; not to
be meaſured; indefinitely extenſive.
Churches reared up to an height immeaſurable, and adorned
with far more beauty in their reſtoration than their founders
before had given them. Hacker.
From
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M M
I M M
.--
º-
::::::
zºº.
gº
jº.
º, ºf
-*
ard
º
tº:
3:4
º
- From the ſhore
They view'd the vaſt immeaſurable abyſs, -
Outrageous as a ſea, dark, waſteful, wild. Milt. Par. Loſt.
Immeaſurable ſtrength they might behold
n me, of wiſdom nothing more than mean. Milt. Agoniſł.
What a glorious ſhow are thoſe beings entertained with,
that can ſee ſuch tremendous objećts wandering through thoſe
immeaſurable depths of ether? Addiſon's Guardian.
Nor friends are there, nor veſſels to convey, -
Nor oars to cut th’ immeaſurable way. Pope's Odyſſey.
IMME'Asurably, adv. [from immeaſurable. J Immenſely ;
beyond all meaſure.
The Spaniards immeaſurably bewail their dead. Spenſer.
There ye ſhall be fed, and fill’d
Immeaſurably; all things ſhall be your prey. Milt. Pa. Loft.
IMMEcHA'N1cal, adj. [in and mechanical.] . Not according to
the laws of mechanicks.
We have nothing to do to ſhow anything that is immechani-
cal, or not according to the eſtabliſhed laws of nature. Cheyne.
IMME'D1Acy. m. ſ. ſ immediateté, French, from immediate. J
Perſonal greatneſs; power of acting without dependance. This
is a harſh word, and ſenſe peculiar I believe to Shakeſpeare.
- He led our pow'rs,
Bore the commiſſion of my place and perſon;
The which immediacy may well ſtand up,
And call itſelf your brother. Shakeſp King Lear.
TMM E/DIATE. adj. [immediat, French; in and medius, Latin.]
1. Being in ſuch a ſtate with reſpect to ſomething elſe as that
there is nothing between them; proximate; with nothing
intervening.
Moſes mentions the immediate cauſes, the rains and the wa-
ters; and St. Peter mentions the more remote and fundamental
cauſes, that conſtitution of the heavens. Burnet.
2. Not ačting by ſecond cauſes.
It is much to be aſcribed to the immediate will of God, who
giveth and taketh away beauty at his pleaſure Abbot.
3. Inſtant; preſent with regard to time. Prior therefore ſhould
not have written more immediate.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Muſt not be toſt and turn'd to me in words,
But find ſupply immediate.
Death denounc'd that day,
Which he preſumes already vain, and void,
Becauſe not yet inflićted, as he fear'd,
By ſome immediate ſtroke. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
But ſhe, howe'er of vićt'ry ſure,
Contemns the wreath too long delay'd;
And arm'd with more immediate pow'r,
Calls cruel ſilence to her aid. Prior.
IMME'DIATELY. adv. [from immediate.]
1. Without the intervention of any other cauſe or event.
God's acceptance of it, either immediately by himſelf, or
mediately by the hands of the biſhop, is that which veſts
the whole property of a thing in God. South's Sermons.
2. Inſtantly; at the time preſent; without delay.
Her father hath commanded her to ſlip
Away with Slender, and with him at Eaton
Immediately to marry. ... Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
IMM E/DIATEN Ess. m. ſ. [from immediate.]
1. Preſence with regard to time.
2. Exemption from ſecond or intervening cauſes.
Shakeſp, Timon.
HMM E/DicABLE. adj. [immedicabilis, Latin.] Not to be healed; -
incurable.
My griefs ferment and rage,
Nor leſs than wounds immedicable,
Rankle and feſter, and gangrene
To black mortification. Milton's Agoniſłes.
IMME'MoRABLE. adj. [immemorabilis, Latin.] Not worth re-
membering. - -
IMMEMO'RIAL. adj. [immemorial, French; in and memoria,
Latin.]. Paſt time of memory; ſo ancient that the beginning
cannot be traced.
By a long immemorial practice, and preſcription of an aged
thorough-paced hypocriſy, they come to believe that for a
reality, which, at firſt practice of it, they themſelves knew to
be a cheat. South's Sermons.
All the laws of this kingdom have ſome memorials in
writing, yet all have not their original in writing; for ſome
obtained their force by immemorial uſage or cuſtom. Hale.
IMMENSE. adj.. [immenſe, Fr. immenſus, Lat.] Unlimited;
unbounded; infinite.
O goodneſs infinite! goodneſs immenſe /
That all this good of evil ſhall produce! Milt. Parad Loft.
As infinite duration hath no relation unto motion and time,
ſo infinite or immenſe effence hath no relation unto body; but
is a thing diſtinét from all corporeal magnitude, which we
mean when we ſpeak of immenſity, and of God as of an im-
menſe being. Grew's Coſmol.
º e'N's ELY. adv. [from immenſe.] Infinitely; without mea-
ure.
We ſhall find that the void ſpace of our ſyſtem is immenſely
bigger than all its corporeal maſs. Bentley's Sermons.
IMME'Nsity. n.ſ. ſimmenſité, French..] Unbounded greatneſs;
infinity.
By the power we find in ourſelves of repeating, as often as
we will, any idea of ſpace, we get the idea of immenſity. Locke,
He that will confider the immenſity of this fabrick, and the
great variety that is to be found in this inconfiderable part of
it which he has to do with, may think that in other manſions
of it there may be other and different intelligent beings. Locke.
All theſe illuſtrious worlds, -
And millions which the glaſs can ne'er deſcry,
Loſt in the wilds of vaſt immerſity,
Are ſuns, are centers. Blackmore's Creation.
IMMENsur Abi'lity. m. ſ. [from immenſurab e.] Impoſſibility
to be meaſured.
IMME'NSURABLE. adj. [in and menſurabilis, Latin.] Not to
be meaſured.
To IMME'RGE. v. a. ſimmerge, Latin To put under water.
IM Me'RIT. n.f. [immerite, Latin.] Want of worth; want of
deſert.
When I receive your lines, and find there expreſſions of a
paſſion, reaſon and my own immerit tell me it muſt not be
for me. Suckling.
* adj. [ imme'ſus, Latin, J Buried; covered; ſunk
eep.
After long inquiry of things immerſe in matter, I interpoſe
ſome obječt which is immateriate, or leſs materiate; ſuch as
this of ſounds, that the intelle&amp;t may become not partial. Bac.
To IMME'RSE. v. a. [immerſus, Latin.]
1. To put under water.
2. To ſink or cover deep.
. He ſtood
More than a mile immers'd within the wood;
At once the wind was laid. Dryden.
They obſerved that they were immerſed in their rocks, quar-
ries, and mines, in the ſame manner as they are at this day
found in all known parts of the world. Iſoodw. Nat. Hiſtory.
3. To keep in a ſtate of intelle&amp;tual depreſſion.
It is a melancholy reflection, that our country, which, in
times of popery, was called the nation of ſaints, ſhould now
have leſs appearance of religion in it than any other neigh-
bouring ſtate or kingdom ; whether they be ſuch as continue
ſtill immerſed in the errours of the church of Rome, or ſuch as
are recovered out of them. Addiſon's Freeholder.
We are prone to engage ourſelves with the buſineſs, the
pleaſures, and the amuſements of this world: we give our-
ſelves up too greedily to the purſuit, and immerſe ourſelves too
deeply in the enjoyment of them. Atterbury's Sermons.
It is impoſfible for a man to have a lively hope in another
life, and yet be deeply immerſed in the enjoyments of this.
Atterbury's Sermons.
IMME'Rs10N. n.ſ.. [immerſo, Latin; immerſion, French.]
1. The act of putting any body into a fluid below the ſurface.
Achilles's mother is ſaid to have dipped him, when he was a
child, in the river Styx, which made him invulnerable all over,
excepting that part which the mother held in her hand during
this immerſion. Addſon's Guardian.
2. The ſtate of ſinking below the ſurface of a fluid.
3. The ſtate of being overwhelmed or loſt in any reſpect.
There are many perſons, who, through the heat of their
luſts and paſſions, through the contagion of ill example, or
too deep an immerſion in the affairs of life, ſwerve from the
rules of their holy faith; and yet would, upon extraordi-
nary warning, be brought to comply with them. Atterbury.
IMMETHo'Dica L. adj. [in and methºdical.] Confuſed; being
without regularity; being without method.
M. Bayle compares the anſwering of an immethodical au-
thor to the hunting of a duck: when you have him full in
your ſight he gives you the ſlip, and becomes inviſible. Addison
IMMETHo'Dically. adv. [from immethodical.] Without me-
thod.
I'M MINENce. n.ſ.. [from imminent.] Any ill impending; im-
mediate or near danger. A word not in uſe.
I do not ſpeak of flight, of fear, of death;
But dare all imminence, that gods and men
Addreſs their dangers in. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſia.
I'MMINENT. adj. [imminent, Fr. imminens, Lat. } Impend-
ing; at hand; threatning. Always in an ill ſenſe.
What dangers at any time are imminent, what evils hang
over our heads, God doth know, and not we. Hocker.
Three times to-day
You have defended me from imminent death. Shakespeare H. VI.
Theſe ſhe applies for warnings and portents
Of evils imminent; and on her knee
Hath begg'd, that I will ſtay at home to-day. Shakeſpeare.
To them preach'd
Converſion and repentance, as to ſouls
In priſon, under judgments imminent. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Men could not ſail without imminent danger and inconve-
niences. Pope.
To IMMINGle. v. a, [in and mingle.] To mingle; to mix;
to unite. -
- Some
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M M
I M M
Some of us, like thee, through ſtormy life
Toil'd, tempeſt-beaten, ere we could attain
This holy calm, this harmony of mind,
Where purity and peace immingle charms. Thºmſ. Summer.
IM MINU'tion. n.f. [from imminuo, Latin. J Diminution;
decreaſe.
Theſe revolutions are as exačtly uniform as the earth's are,
which could not be, were there any place for chance, and did
not a providence continually overſee and ſecure them from all
alteration or imminution. Ray on the Creation.
IM MiscIBI'lity. n.ſ.. [from immiſſible.] Incapacity of being
mingled.
IMMI'scible. adj. [in and miſcible.] Not capable of being
mingled. Clariſſa.
IMMI'ssion. n.ſ.. [immiſſio, Latin.] The act of ſending in ;
contrary to emiſſion.
To IMMI'T. v. n. [immitto, Latin.] To ſend in.
To IMM 1%. v. a. [in and mix.] To mingle.
Samſon, with theſe immixt, inevitabl
Pull'd down the ſame deſtruction on himſelf. Milton.
IMM 1'xABLE. adj. [in and mix J Impoſſible to be mingled.
Fill a glaſs ſphere with ſuch liquors as may be clear, of the
ſame colour, and immixable. Wilkins.
IM Mobi'LITY.. n.ſ.. [immobilité, French, from immobilis, Latin.]
Unmoveableneſs; want of motion; reſiſtance to motion.
The courſe of fluids through the vaſcular ſolids muſt in
time harden the fibres, and aboliſh many of the canals; from
whence drineſs, weakneſs, immobility, and debility of the vital
force. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
IMMO'DERATE. adj. [immoderé, Fr. immoderatus, Latin.]
Exceſſive; exceeding the due mean.
One means, very effectual for the preſervation of health,
is a quiet and chearful mind, not afflićted with violent paſſions,
or diſtraćted with immoderate cares. Ray on the Creation.
IM Mo'DERATELY. adv. [from immoderate.] In an exceſſive
degree.
Immoderately ſhe weeps for Tybalt's death. Shakeſpeare.
It weakened more and more the arch of the earth, ſucking
out the moiſture that was the cement of its parts, drying it
immoderately, and chapping it. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
IM MoDERATION. m. ſ. ſimmoderation, Fr. from immoderate.]
Want of moderation; exceſs. -
IM Mo'DEST. adj. [immºdºſie, French; in and modeſ.]
1. Wanting ſhame; wanting delicacy or chaſtity.
She railed at herſelf, that ſhe ſhould be ſo immodeſt to write
to one that ſhe knew would flout her. Shakeſpeare.
2. Unchaſte; impure.
Immodeſt deeds you hinder to be wrought;
But we proſcribe the leaſt immodºſi thought. Dryden.
3. Obſcene.
'Tis needful that the moſt immodºff word
Be look'd upon, and learn'd ; which once attain'd,
Comes to no farther uſe
But to be known and hated.
4. Unreaſonable; exorbitant; arrogant.
IMMO'D Esty. n.ſ.. [immodºſłie, French, from immodºff.] Want
of modeſty; indecency.
It was a piece of immodeſy. Pope.
To IMMOLATE. v. a. ſimmolo, Latin; immolar, French.]
To ſacrifice; to kill in ſacrifice. - **
Theſe courtiers of applauſe being oftentimes reduced to
live in want, theſe coſtly trifles ſo ingroſſing all that they can
ſpare, that they frequently enough are forced to immolate their
own deſires to their vanity. Boyle.
Now immolate the tongues, and mix the wine,
Sacred to Neptune and the powers divine. Pope's Odyſſey.
IMMOLA"TION. m. ſ. ſimmolation, French, from immolate.]
1. The ačt of ſacrificing.
In the pićture of the immolation of Iſaac, or Abraham ſacri-
ficing his ſon, Iſaac is deſcribed as a little boy. Brown.
2. A ſacrifice offered.
We make more barbarous immolations than the moſt ſavage
heathens. Decay of Piety.
IMMo'MENT, adj. [in and moment.] Trifling; of no impor-
tance or value. A barbarous word.
I ſome lady-trifles have reſerv’d,
Immoment toys, things of ſuch dignit
As we greet modern friends withal. Šatº Ant. and Cleop.
IMMO'RAL. adi, [in and moral] Wanting regard to the laws
of natural religion; contrary to honeſty; diſhoneſt.
IM MoRA'lity. n.ſ. [from immoral J Diſhoneſty; want of
virtue; contrariety to virtue. -
Such men are put into the commiſſion of the peace who en-
courage the groſſeſt immoralities, to whom all the bawds of the
ward pay contribution. Swift.
IMMORTAL. adj. [immortalis, Latin.]
1. Exempt from death; never to die.
To the king eternal, immortal, inviſible, the only wiſe
God, be glory for ever. Tim. i. 17.
Her body ſleeps in Capulet's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives. Shakespeare Roz and jul.
There was an opinion in groſs, that the ſoul was immor-
tal. Abbot's Deſcription of the ſºord.
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
The Paphian queen,
With gored hand, and veil ſo rudely torn,
Like terror did among th’ immortals breed,
Taught by her wound that goddeſſes may bleed.
2. Never ending; perpetual.
Give me my robe, put on my crown: I have
Immortal longings in me. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleºpatra.
IMMoRTA'lity. m. ſ. [immortalité, Fr. from immºrtal.] Ex-
emption from death; life never to end.
This corruptible ſhall put on incorruption, and this mortal,
Waller,
immortality. Corinth.
Quaff immortality and joy. Milton.
He th’ immortality of ſouls proclaim’d,
Whom th’ oracle of men the wiſeſt nam'd. Denham.
His exiſtence will of itſelf continue for ever, unleſs it be
deſtroyed; which is impoſſible, from the immutability of God,
and the nature of his immortality. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
When we know cogitation is the prime attribute of a ſpirit,
we infer its immateriality, and thence its immortality. Watts.
IM Mo'RTAlly. adv. [from the adjećtive..] So as never to die.
To IMMo'RTAlize. v.a. [immortaliſer, French, from immortal.]
To make immortal; to perpetuate; to exempt from death.
Drive them from Orleans, and be immortaliz'd. Shakespeare.
For mortal things deſire their like to breed,
That ſo they may their kind immortalize. Davieſ.
To IMMo'RTAlize. v. n. To become immortal. This word
is, I think, peculiar to Pope. *
Fix the year preciſe,
When Britiſh bards begin tº immortalize. Pºpe.
IM Mo'RT ALLY. adv. [from immortal.] With exemption from
death; without end.
There is your crown;
And he that wears the crown immortally,
Long guard it yours! Shakeſp. Henry IV.
What pity'tis that he cannot wallow immortally in his ſen-
ſual pleaſures' Bentley's Sermons.
IM Movable. adj. [in and moveable.]
1. Not to be forced from its place.
We ſhall not queſtion his removing the earth, when he finds
an immovable baſe to place his engine upon. Brown.
2. Not liable to be carried away; real in law.
When an executor meddles with the immovable eſtate, be-
fore he has ſeized on the moveable goods, it may be then ap-
pealed from the execution of ſentence, Ayliffe's Parergan.
3. Unſhaken; unaffected.
How much happier is he, who, centring on himſelf, remains
immovable, and ſmiles at the madneſs of the dance about
him | Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
IM Mov.ABLY. adv. [from immovable.] In a ſtate not to be
ſhaken.
Immovably firm to their duty, when they could have no pro-
ſpect of reward. Atterbury's Sermons.
IMMUNITY. m. ſ. [immunité, French; immunitas, Latin.]
1. Diſcharge from any obligation.
Of things harmleſs whatſoever there is, which the whole
church doth obſerve, to argue for any man's immunity from
obſerving the ſame, it were a point of moſt inſolent mad-
neſs. PHooker.
2. Privilege; exemption.
Granting great immunities to the commons, they prevailed
ſo far as to cauſe Palladius to be proclaimed ſucceſſor. Sidney.
Simon ſent to Demetrius, to the end he ſhould give the
land an immunity, becauſe all that Tryphon did was to
ſpoil. 1 Mac. xiii. 34-
The laity invidiouſly aggravate the rights and immunities of
the clergy. Sprat's Sermons.
3. Freedom. - -
Common apprehenſions entertain the antidotal condition of
Ireland, conceiving only in that land an immunity from ve-
Indinous CreatureS. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
But this annex'd condition of the crown,
Immunity from errors, you diſown. Dryden.
To IMMU'Re. v. a. [in and murus, Lat, emmurer, old French,
ſo that it might be written emmure.] To incloſe within walls;
to confine; to ſhut up; to impriſon.
Pity, you ancient ſtones, theſe tender babes,
Whom envy hath immur'd within your walls | Shakespeare R. III.
One of theſe three contains her heav'nly pićture;
And ſhall I think in ſilver ſhe's immur'd? Shakeſpeare.
At the firſt deſcent on ſhore he was not immured with a
wooden veſſel, but he did countenance the landing in his long-
boat. - JWotton.
Lyſimachus immured it with a wall. Sandys's Travels.
Though a foul fooliſh priſon her immure
On earth, ſhe, when eſcap'd, is wiſe and pure. Denham.
IMMU'RE. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A wall; an incloſure, as in
Shakeſpeare. -
Their vow is made
To ranſack Troy; within whoſe ſtrong immures
The raviſh'd Helen, Menelaus' queen,
With wanton Paris ſleeps. Shakeſpeare.
IMMU's IcAL.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
I M P
.
º
IMMU'sical. adj. [in and muſical.] Unmuſical; inharmo- IMPA’IRMENT. n.ſ.. [from impair.] Diminution; injury.
nious.
All ſounds are either muſical, which are ever equal, or int-
muſical, which are ever unequal, as the voice in ſpeaking,
and whiſperings. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
His poſterity, at this diſtance, and after ſo perpetual impair-
ment, cannot but condemn the poverty of Adam's conception,
that thought to obſcure himſelf from his Creator in the ſhade
of the garden. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
When we conſider the immuſical note of all ſwans we ever IMPA'LPABLE. adj. [impalpable, Fr. in and palpable.] Not to
beheld or heard of, we cannot conſent. Brown.
IMMUTABI'lity. m. ſ. [ immutabilitas, Lat. immutabilité, Fr.
- from immutable. J Exemption from change; invariableneſs;
unchangeableneſs.
be perceived by touch.
If beaten into an impalpable powder, when poured out, it
will emulate a liquor, by reaſon that the ſmalneſs of the parts
do make them eaſy to be put into motion. Boyle.
The immutability of God they ſtrive unto, by working after To IMPA'Radise. v. a. ſimparadiſare, Italian.] To put in a
one and the ſame manner. Hooker.
His exiſtence will of itſelf continue for ever, unleſs it be de-
ſtroyed; which is impoſſible, from the immutability of God.
Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
IMMUTABLE. adj. [immutabilis, Latin. J Unchangeable;
invariable; unalterable.
By two immutable things, in which it was impoſſible
for God to lye, we have a ſtrong conſolation. Heb. vi.
Thy threat'nings, Lord, as thine, thou may’ſt revoke;
But if immutable and fix'd they ſtand,
Continue ſtill thyſelf to give the ſtroke,
And let not foreign foes oppreſs thy land. Dryden.
I:1MU'TABLY. adv. [from immutable. J Unalterably ; inva-
riably; unchangeably.
His love is like his eſſence, immutably eternal. Boyle.
IMP. n. ſ. ſimp, Welſh, a ſhoot, a ſprout, a ſprig.]
1. A ſon; the offspring; progeny.
That noble imp your ſon. Lord Cromwel to King Henry.
And thou, moſt dreaded imp of higheſt Jove,
Fair Venus’ ſon. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The tender imp was weaned from the teat. Fairfax.
A lad of life, an imp of fame. Shakeſp. Henry V.
2. A ſubaltern devil; a puny devil. In this ſenſe ’tis ſtill re-
tained.
Such we deny not to be the imps and limbs of Satan. Hook.
Him after long debate, irreſolute
Of thoughts revolv’d, his final ſentence choſe,
Fit veſſel, fitteſt imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark ſuggeſtions hide
From ſharpeſt ſight. Milt. Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix.
As ſoon as you can hear his knell,
This god on earth turns d l in hell;
And, lo! his miniſters of ſtate,
Transform'd to imps, his levee wait. Swift.
To IMP. v. a. ſimpio, to engraff, Welſh.] To lengthen or
enlarge with anything adſcititious.
If then we ſhall ſhake off our ſlaviſh yoke,
Imp out our drooping country's broken wings. Shakespeare R. II.
New rebellions raiſe
Their hydra heads, and the falſe North diſplays
Her broken league to imp her ſerpent wings.
Help, ye tart ſatyriſts, to imp my rage
With all the ſcorpions that ſhould whip this age. Cleavel.
With cord and canvas from rich Hamburgh ſent,
His navy's molted wings he imps once more. Dryden.
New creatures riſe,
A moving maſs at firſt, and ſhort of thighs;
*Till ſhooting out with legs, and imp'd with wings,
Milton.
The grubs proceed to bees with pointed ſtings. Dryden.
The Mercury of heav'n, with filver wings
Impt for the flight, to overtake his ghoſt. Southern.
To IMPAct. v. a. [impatius, Latin. J. To drive cloſe or
hard.
They are angular; but of what particular figure is not eaſy
to determine, becauſe of their being impačied ſo thick and
confuſedly together. Woodward on Foſſils.
To IMPA'INT. v. a. [in and paint.] To paint; to decorate
with colours. Not in uſe.
Never yet did inſurreàion want
Such water-colours to impaint his cauſe. Shakeſp. H. VI.
To IMPA'IR. v. a. [empirer, to make worſe, French. Skinner.]
To diminiſh; to injure; to make worſe; to leſſen in quan-
tity, value, or excellence.
To change any ſuch law, muſt needs, with the common
ſort, impair and weaken the force of thoſe grounds whereby
all laws are made effectual. Hooker.
Obječts divine
Muſt needs impair, and weary human ſenſe. Milt. Pa. Loſt.
That ſcon refreſh'd him weary'd, and repair'd
What hunger, if aught hunger had impair’d,
Or thirſt. -
Nor was the work impair’d by ſtorms alone,
But felt th' approaches of too warm a fun. Pope.
In years he ſeem’d, but not impair’d by years. Pope.
To IMPA'ſ R. v. n. To be leſſened or worn out.
Fleſh may impair, quoth he: but reaſon can repair. F. Q.
IMPA'iR. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Diminution; decreaſe.
A loadſtone, kept in undue poſition, that is, not lying on
the meridian, or with its poles inverted, receives in longer
time impair in activity and exchange of faces, and is more
Brown,
powerfully preſerved by ſite than duſt of ſteel.
8
Milton's Paradiſ, Regain'd.
place or ſtate reſembling paradiſe in felicity.
This imparadiſed neighbourhood made Zelmane's ſoul .
cleave unto her, both through the ivory caſe of her body, and
the apparel which did over-cloud it. Sidney, b. ii.
All my ſouls be
Imparadis'd in you, in whom alone
I underſtand, and grow, and ſee. Donne,
Thus theſe two,
Imparadis'd in one another's arms,
The happier Eden, ſhall enjoy their fill
Of bliſs on bliſs. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
IMPA'RIT Y. m. /. [imparitas, impar, Latin.]
1. Inc]uality; diſproportion.
Some bodies are hard, ſome ſoft: the hardneſs is cauſed
chiefly by the jejuneneſs of the ſpirits, and their imparity with
the tangible parts. Bacon.
2. Oddneſs; indiviſibility into equal parts.
What verity is there in that numeral conceit, in the lateral
diviſion of man, by even and odd; and ſo by parity or impa-
rity of letters in mens names, to determine misfortunes on
either ſide of their bodies Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To IMPA'RK. v.a. [in and park.] To incloſe with a park;
to ſever from a common.
To IMPA'RT. v. a. [impartiar, Latin.]
1. To grant; to give.
High ſtate and honours to others impart,
But give me your heart.
2. To communicate.
Gentle lady,
When firſt I did impart my love to you,
I freely told you, all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins. Shakespeare March of Venice.
As in confeſſion the revealing is for the eaſe of a man's
heart, ſo ſecret men come to the knowledge of many things,
while men rather diſcharge than impart their minds. Bacon.
Thou to me thy thoughts
Waſt wont, I mine to thee was wont tº impart. Ažilt. P. L.
I find thee knowing of thyſelf;
Expreſſing well the ſpirit within thee free,
My image, not imparted to the brute. Milt. Par. Left.
IMPA'RTIAL. adj. [impartial, Fr. in and partial J. Equitable ;
free from regard to party; indifferent; difintereſted; equal in
diſtribution of juſtice; juſt. It is uſed as well of actions as
perſons.
Succeſs I hope, and fate I cannot fear:
Alive or dead, I ſhall deſerve a name;
Jove is impartial, and to both the ſame. Dryden's Aºn.
IMPART1A'lity. [n.ſ [impartialité, French; from impartial.]
Equitableneſs; juſtice.
A pious and well diſpoſed will gives not only diligence, but
alſo impartiality to the underſtanding in its ſearch into religion,
which is abſolutely neceſſary to give ſucceſs unto our inquiries
into truth; it being ſcarce poſſible for that man to hit the
mark, whoſe eye is ſtill glancing upon ſomething beſide
it. South's Sermons.
IMPA'RT1Ally. adv. [from impartial.]. Equitably; with in-
different and unbiaſſed ºnent, without regard to party or
intereſt; juſtly; honeſtly
Since the Scripture promiſes eternal happineſs and pardon of
fin, upon the ſole condition of faith and fincere obedience, it
is evident, that he only can plead a title to ſuch a pardon,
whoſe conſcience impartially tells him that he has performed
the required condition. South's Sermons.
IMPART1ble. adj. [impartible, Fr. from impart.] Commu-
nicable; to be conferred or beſtowed. This word is elegant,
though uſed by few writers.
The ſame body may be conceived to be more or leſs infar-
tible than it is ačtive or heavy. Digby.
IMPA'ssable. adj. [in and paſſable ] Not to be paſſed; not
admitting paſſage; impervious.
There are in America many high and impaſſable mountains,
Dryden.
which are very rich. Raleigh.
Over this gulf
Impaſſable, impervious ; let us try,
To found a path from hell to that new world. Milton.
When Alexander would have paſſed the Ganges, he was
told by the Indians that all beyond it was either impoſable
marſhes, or ſandy deſarts. Temple.
IMPAssibility. n.ſ.. [impaſſibilité, Fr. from impaſſible.] Ex:
emption from ſuffering; inſuſceptibility of injury from external
things,
II Y Two
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
I M P
Two divinities might have pleaded their prerogative of im:
poſſibility, or at leaſt not have been wounded by any mortal
hand. Dryden's AEn. Dedicat.
IMPA'ssible. adj. [impaſſible, Fr. in and paſſio, Latin J Inca-
pable of ſuffering; exempt from the agency of external
cauſes; exempt from pain.
If the upper ſoul check what is conſented to by the will,
in compliance with the fleſh, and can then hope that, after a
few years of ſenſuality, that rebellious ſervant ſhall be eter-
nally caſt off, drop into a perpetual impaſſible nothing, take a
long progreſs into a land where all things are forgotten, this
would be ſome colour. Hammond.
Secure of death, I ſhould contemn thy dart,
Though naked, and impaſſible depart Dryden.
IMPA'ssible Ness. n. ſ. [from impoſſible.] Impaſſibility; ex-
emption from pain.
How ſhameleſs a partiality is it, thus to reſerve all the ſen-
ſualities of this world, and yet cry out for the impaſſibleneſ of
the next 2 Decay of Piety.
IMPA'ssioned. adj. [in and paſſion.] Seized with paſſion.
So, ſtanding, moving, or to height upgrown,
The tempter, all impaſſion'd, thus began. Miſt. Par. Lºft.
IMPA'ssive. adj. [in and paſſive..] Exempt from the agency of
external cauſes.
She told him what thoſe empty phantoms were,
Forms without bodies, and impaſſive air. Dryden's Aen.
Pale ſuns, unfelt at diſtance, roll away;
And on th’ impaſſive ice the lightnings play.
IMPA's TED. adj. [in and faſte..] Covered as with paſte.
Horridly trickt
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, ſons,
Bak'd and impaſſed with the parching fires. Shakeſp Hamlet.
IMPA’t 1 EN ce. n.ſ.. [impatience, Fr. impatientia, Latin.]
1. Inability to ſuffer pain; rºge under ſuffering.
All the power of his wits has given way to his impatience.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The experiment I reſolved to make was upon thought, and
Pope.
not raſhneſs or impatience. Timple.
2. Vehemence of temper; heat of paſſion.
3 Inability to ſuffer delay; eagerneſs.
IMPATIENT. adj. [impatient, Fr. impatiens, Latin.]
1. Not able to endure; incapable to bear.
Fame, impatient of extremes, decays
Not more by envy than exceſs of praiſe. Pºpe.
2. Furious with pain; unable to bear pain.
The tortur’d ſavage turns around,
And flings about his foam, impatient of the wound. Dryden.
3. Vehemently agitated by ſome painful paſſion.
To be impatient at the death of a perſon, concerning whom
it was certain he muſt die, is to mourn becauſe thy friend was
not born an angel. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
The impatient man will not give himſelf time to be informed
of the matter that lies before him. Addiſon's Speciator.
4. Eager ; ardently deſirous; not able to endure delay.
The mighty Caeſar waits his vital hour,
Impatient for the world, and graſps his promis'd pow'r. Dry.
On the ſeas prepar'd the veſſel ſtands;
Th’ impatient mariner thy ſpeed demands. Pope's Odyſſey.
IMPATIENTLY. adv. [from impatient.]
1. Paſſionately; ardently.
He conſidered one thing ſo impatiently, that he would not
admit any thing elſe to be worth conſideration. Clarendon.
2. Eagerly; with great deſire.
To IMPATRoNize. v. a. [impatroniſer, Fr. in and patronize.]
To gain to one's ſelf the power of any ſeigniory. This word
is not uſual.
The ambition of the French king was to impatronize him-
ſelf of the dutchy. Bacon's Henry VII.
To IMPA'w N. v a [in and pawn..] To impignorate; to pawn;
to give as a pledge; to pledge.
Go to the king, and let there be impawn'd
Some ſurety for a ſafe return again. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Many now in health
Shall drop their blood, in approbation
Of what your reverence ſhall invite us to ;
Therefore take heed how you impawn our perſon,
How you awake our ſleeping ſword of war. Shakespeare H. V.
To IMPEACH. v. a. [empecher, French.]
1. To hinder; to impede. This ſenſe is little in uſe.
Each door he opened without any breach;
There was no bar to ſtop, nor foe him to impeach.
Fairy Queen.
Theſe ungracious practices of his ſons did impeach his jour-
ley to the Holy Land, and vexed him all the days of his
life. Davies.
If they will impeach the purpoſes of an army, which they
have no reaſon to think themſelves able to reſiſt, they put
themſelves out of all expectation of mercy. Hayward.
A defluxion on my throat impeached my utterance. Howel.
2. To accuſe by publick authority.
They were both impeached by a houſe of commons. Addiſon.
Great diſſentions were kindled between the nobles and com-
mons on account of Coriolanus, whom the latter had im-
peached. - Swift.
IMP each. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Hindrance; let ; impedi-
ment.
Why, what an intricate impeach is this 2
If here you hous'd him, here he would have been ;
If he were mad, he would not plead ſo coldly. Shakeſpeare.
IMPEA'chable. adj. [from impeach. J Accuſable; charge-
able.
Had God omitted by poſitive laws to give religion to the
world, the wiſdom of his providence had been impeach-
able. Grew's Cºſmol.
IM PE(AcHER... n.ſ. [ from impeach. J An accuſer; one who
brings an accuſation againſt another.
Many of our fierceſt impeachers would leave the delinquent
to the merciful indulgence of a Saviour. Gov. of the Tongue.
IMPE(AcHMENT. n.ſ.. [from impeach. J
1. Hindrance; let; impediment; obſtruction. Not in uſe.
Tell us what things, during your late continuance there,
are moſt offenſive, and the greateſt impeachment to the good go-
vernment thereof. Spenſer on Ireland.
Turn thee back,
And tell thy king I do not ſeek him now ;
But could be willing to march on to Calais,
Without impeachment. Shakeſp Henry V.
Neither is this acceſſion of neceſſity any impeachment to
Chriſtian liberty, or enſnaring of mens conſciences. Sanderſ.
2. Publick accuſation; charge preferred.
The king, provok'd to it by the queen,
Devis'd impea, hments to impriſon him. Shakespeare Rich. III.
The lord Somers, though his accuſers would gladly have
dropped their impeachment, was inſtant with them for the pro-
ſecution. Addison.
The conſequences of Coriolanus's impeachment had like to
have been fatal to their ſtate. Swift.
To IMPE'ARL. v. a. [in and pearl]
I. To form in reſemblance of pearls.
Innumerable as the ſtars of night,
Or ſtars of morning, dewdrops, which the ſun
Impearls on every leaf, and ev'ry flow’r. Milton's Par. Lºft.
2. To decorate as with pearls.
The dews of the morning impearl every thorn, and ſcatter
diamonds on the verdant mantle of the earth. Digby to Pºpe.
IMPEcca BI'lity. m. ſ. [impeccabilité, Fr. from impeccable. J
Exemption from ſin; exemption from failure.
Infallibility and impeccability are two of his attributes. Pope.
IMPE'ccable. adj. [impeccable, French; in and perce, Latin.]
Exempt from poſſibility of ſin.
That man pretends he never commits any act prohibited by
the word of God, and then that were a rare charm to render
him impeccable, or that is the means of conſecrating every
fin of his. Hammond on Fundamentals.
To IMPE/D E. v. a. [impedia, Latin.] To hinder; to let; to
obſtruct.
All the forces are muſtered to impede its paſſage.
Decay of Piety.
The way is open, and no ſtop to force
The ſtars return, or to impede their courſe. Creech.
IMPE/DIMENT. n.ſ.. [impedimentum, Latin.] Hindrance; let;
impeachment; obſtraćtion; oppoſition.
The minds of beaſts grudge not at their bodies comfort, nor
are their ſenſes letted from enjoying their objećts: we have the
impediments of honour, and the torments of conſcience. Sidney.
What impediments there are to hinder it, and which were
the ſpeedieſt way to remove them. Acaker.
The life is led moſt happily wherein all virtue is exerciſed
without impediment or let. Płażer.
They bring one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his
ſpeech. 44ar. vii. 32.
But for my tears,
The moiſt imped ments unto my ſpeech,
I had foreſtall'd this dear and deep rebuke. Shakeſp. H. IV.
May I never
To this good purpoſe, that ſo fairly ſhews,
Dream of impediment. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Free from th’ impediments of light and noiſe,
Man, thus retir’d, his nobler thoughts employs. Haller.
Fear is the greateſt impediment to martyrdom; and he that is
overcome by little arguments of pain, will hardly conſent to
loſe his life with torments. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
To IMPE/L. v. a. [impello, Latin.] To drive on towards a
point; to urge forward; to preſs on.
So Myrrha's mind, impell'd on either ſide,
Takes ev'ry bent, but cannot long abide. Dryden's Ovid.
The ſurge impell'd me on a craggy coaſt. Pope.
Propitious gales
Attend thy voyage, and impel thy ſails. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
A mightier pow'r the ſtrong dire&amp;tion ſends,
And ſev'ral men impels to ſev'ral ends;
This drives them conſtant to a certain coaſt. Pope.
IMPE'L LEN T. m. ſ. [impelleni, Latin.] An impulſive power; a
power that drives forward.
ſ
2 How
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P º
I M P
.*
**,
***
~.
º
::
:
tº
º:
º
How ſuch a variety of motions ſhould be regularly ma-
naged, in ſuch a wilderneſs of paſſages, by mere blind impel-
lents and material conveyances, I have not the leaſt conjec-
ture. * * Glanv.
To IMPENB. v. n. [impendeo, Lat.] To hang over; to be at
hand; to preſs nearly.
It expreſſes our deep ſorrow for our paſt fins, and our lively
ſenſe of God’s impending wrath. Smalridge's Sermons.
Deſtruction ſure o'er all your heads impends;
Ulyſſes comes, and death his ſteps attends. Pope's Odyſſey,
No ſtory I unfold of publick woes,
Nor bear advices of impending foes.
IMPE'NDENT. adj. [impendens, Latin.]
ing over; preſſing cloſely.
If the evil feared or impendent be a greater ſenſible evil than
the good, it over-rules the appetite to averſation. Hale.
Dreadful in arms, on Landen's glorious plain
Place Ormond's duke: impendent in the air
Let his keen ſabre, comet-like, appear. Prior.
IMPE's DEN ce. n.ſ.. [from impendent.] The ſtate of hanging
over ; near approach.
Though it be good, yet ſometimes it is not ſafe to be at-
tempted, by reaſon of the impendence of a greater ſenſible evil.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
IMPEN ETR A B1'LITY.. n.ſ.. [impenetrabilité, Fr. from impene-
trahle. J
1. Quality of not being pierceable.
All bodies, ſo far as experience reaches, are either hard or
may be hardened; and we have no other evidence of univer-
ſal impenetrability, beſides a large experience, without an ex-
perimental exception. Newton's Opt.
2. Inſuſceptibility of intelle&amp;tual impreſſion.
IMPENETRABLE. adj. [impenetrable, Fr. impenetrahili, Lat.]
1. Not to be pierced; not to be entered by any external force.
With hard'ning cold, and forming heat,
The cyclops did their ſtrokes repeat,
Pope's Odyſſey.
Imminent; hang-
Before th’ impenetrable ſhield was wrought. Dryden.
2. Impervious ; not admitting entrance.
Deep into ſome thick covert would I run,
Impenetrable to the ſtars or ſun. Dryden.
The mind frights itſelf with anything refleåed on in groſs:
things, thus offered to the mind, carry the ſhew of nothing
but difficulty in them, and are thought to be wrapped up in
impenetrable obſcurity. Locke.
3. Not to be taught ; not to be informed.
4. Not to be affected; not to be moved.
It is the moſt impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.
Let him alone;
I'll follow him no more with bootleſs prayers. Shakeſpeare.
Some will never believe a propoſition in divinity, if any
thing can be ſaid againſt it: they will be credulous in all affairs
of life, but impenetrable by a ſermon of the goſpel. Taylor.
IMPE'N E TRABLY. adv. [from impenetrable.] With hardneſs
to a degree incapable of impreſſion.
Blunt the ſenſe, and fit it for a ſkull
Of ſolid proof, im' enetraby dull. Pºpe's Dunciad.
IMPH/NITEN cf. }* ſim, enitence, Fr. in and penitence..] Ob-
IMPE'NITENcy. duracy ; want of remorſe for crimes; final
diſregard of God's threatenings or mercy.
Where one man ever comes to repent, a thouſand end their
days in final impenitence. South's Sermons.
Before the revelation of the goſpel the wickedneſs and im-
fenitency of the heathens was a much more excuſeable thing,
becauſe they were in a great meaſure ignorant of the rewards
of another life. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
He will advance from one degree of wickedneſs and impe-
nitence to another, 'till at laſt he becomes hardened without
remorſe. Rogers's Sermons.
IMPEN It NT, adj. [mpenitent, Fr. in and penitent.] Finally
negligent of the duty of repentance; obdurate.
Qur Lord in anger hath granted ſome impenitent mens re-
queſts; as, on the other ſide, the apoſtle's ſuit he hath of fa-
vour and mercy not granted. Hooker.
They dy'd .
Jmpenitent, and left a race behind
Like to themſelves. Milton.
When the reward of penitents, and puniſhment of impe-
nitents, is once aſſented to as true, ’tis impoſſible but the mind
of man ſhould wiſh for the one, and have diſlikes to the
other. Hammond.
IMPF'NITENTLY. adv. [from impenitent.] Obdurately; with-
out repentance.
The condition required of us is a conſtellation of all the
goſpel graces, every one of them rooted in the heart, though
mixed with much weakneſs, and perhaps with many fins, ſo
they be not wilfully, and impenitently lived and died in. Hamm.
What crowds of theſe, impenitently bold,
In ſounds and jingling ſyllables grown old,
Still run on poets - Pope.
HM Pr's Nous, adj. [in and penna, Latin.] Wanting wings.
It is generally received an earwigg hath no wings, and is
reckoned amongſt impennous inſe&amp;ts; but he that ſhall with a
needle put aſide the ſhort and ſheathy caſes on their back, may
draw forth two wings, larger than in many flies. Brown.
I'MPERATE. adj. [imperatus, Latin.] Done with conſciouſ-
neſs; done by direction of the mind.
The elicit internal ačts of any habit may be quick and vi-
gorous, when the external imperate ačts of the ſame habit ut-
terly ceaſe. - South's Sermons.
Thoſe natural and involuntary ačtings are not done by deli-
beration, yet they are done by the energy of the ſoul and in-
ſtrumentality of the ſpirits, as well as thoſe imperate ačts,
wherein we ſee the empire of the ſoul. Hale's Origin of Mank.
IMPE’RATIVE. adj. [imperatif, Fr. imperativus, Latin.] Com-
manding; expreſſive of command.
The verb is formed in a different manner, to ſignify the in-
tention of commanding, forbidding, allowing, diſallowing,
intreating; which likewiſe, from the principal uſe of it, is
called the imperative mood. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
IMPERce Pt 1 ble. adj. [imperceptible, Fr. in and perceptible.]
Not to be diſcovered ; not to be perceived; ſmall; ſubtle;
quick or ſlow ſo as to elude obſervation.
Some things are in their nature imperceptible by our ſenſe; yea,
and the more refined parts of material exiſtence, which, by rea-
ſon of their ſubtilty, eſcape our perception. Hale.
In the ſudden changes of his ſubjećt with almoſt imperceptible
connections, the Theban poet is his maſter. Dryden.
The parts muſt have their outlines in waves, reſembling
flames, or the gliding of a ſnake upon the ground: they muſt
be almoſt im, erceptible to the touch, and even. Dryden.
The alterations in the globe are very ſlight, and almoſt im-
perceptible, and ſuch as tend to the benefit of the earth. JWood.
IMPERCEPTIBLE N Ess. n.ſ.. [from imperceptible.] The quality
of eluding obſervation.
Many excellent things there are in nature, which, by rea-
ſon of their ſubtilty and imperceptibleneſ; to us, are not ſo much
as within any of our faculties to apprehend. Hale.
IMPER ce'PTIBLY. adv. [from imperceptible.] In a manner not
to be perceived. a "
Upon reading of a fable we are made to believe we adviſe
ourſelves: the moral inſinuates itſelf imperceptibly, we are
taught by ſurprize, and become wiſer and better unawares. Addison
IMPE’RFECT. adj. [imarfait, Fr. imperfectus, Latin.]
1. Not complete; not abſolutely finiſhed; defe&amp;tive. Uſed either
of perſons or things.
Something he left imperfºr in the ſtate,
Which, ſince his coming forth, is thought of,
Which brought the kingdom ſo much fear and danger,
That his return was moſt required. Shakeſp.
Opinion is a light, vain, crude and imperfect thing, ſettled
in the imagination; but never arriving at the underſtanding,
there to obtain the tinčture of reaſon. Een. johnſon.
The middle astion, which produceth imperfect bodies,
is fitly called, by ſome of the ancients, inquination or incon-
cočtion, which is a kind of putrefaction. Bacºn.
The ancients were imperfect in the doćtrine of meteors, by
their ignorance of gunpowder and fireworks. Brown.
There are divers things we agree to be knowledge by the
bare light of nature, which yet are ſo uneaſy to be ſatisfacto-
rily underſtood by our imperfeół intelle&amp;ts, that let them be deli-
vered in the cleareſt expreſſions, the notions themſelves will
yet appear obſcure. Boyle.
A marcor is either imperfeół, tending to a greater withering,
which is curable; or perfect, that is, an intire waſting of the
body, excluding all cure. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The ſtill-born ſounds upon the palate hung,
And dy'd imperfect on the falt'ring tongue. Dryden.
As obſcure and imperfect ideas often involve our reaſon, ſo
do dubious words puzzle men. Locke.
2. Frail; not completely good.
IMPERFE"ct IcN. m.ſ [imperfection, Fr. from imperfeff. J
Defe&amp;t; failure; fault, whether phyſical or moral; whether
of perſons or things.
Laws, as all other things human, are many times full of
imperfeółion; and that which is ſuppoſed behoveful unto men,
proveth oftentimes moſt pernicious. Hooker.
The duke had taken to wife Anne Stanhope, a woman for
many imperſections intolerable; but for pride monſtrous. Hayw.
Imperficions would not be half ſo much taken notice of, if
vanity did not make proclamation of them. L’Eſtrange.
The world is more apt to cenſure than applaud, and him-
ſelf fuller of imperfections than virtues. Addiſon's Spectator.
Theſe are rather to be imputed to the ſimplicity of the age
than to any imperfesſion in that divine poet. Addiſon.
IMPERFEcTLY. adv. [from imperfeół.] Not completely; not
fully; not without failure.
Should ſinking nations ſummon you away,
Maria's love might juſtify your ſtay;
Imperfe'lly the many vows are paid,
Which for your ſafety to the gods were made. Stepney.
Thoſe would hardly underſtand language or reaſon to any
tolerable degree; but only a little and imperfeólly about things
familiar. Locke.
IMPE Rson A BLF.
~<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
I M P
IMPERFöRA ble. adj. [in and perfºro, Latin.] Not to be
bored through. -
fMPE’RFoRATE. adj. [in and perforatus, Latin.] Not pierced
through; without a hole.
Sometimes children are born imperforate; in which caſe a
finall punčure, dreſſed with a tent, effects the cure. Sharp.
IMPERIAL. adj. [imperial, French; imperialis, Latin.]
1. Royal; poſſeſſing royalty.
Aim he took
At a fair veſtal, throned in the Weſt;
But I might ſee young Cupid's fiery ſhaft
Quench'd in the chaſte beams of the wat'ry moon,
And the imperial vot’reſs paſſed on
In maiden meditation, fancy free. Shakeſpeare,
2. Betokening royalty; marking ſovereignty.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which, as immediate from thy place and blood, -
Derives itſelf to me. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
3. Belonging to an emperor or monarch; regal; royal; mo-
narchical.
The main body of the marching foe
Againſt th' imperial palace is deſign'd. Dryd. Ann, Mirab.
You that are a ſov’reign prince, allay
fmperial pow'r with your paternal ſway. Dryden.
To tame the proud, the fetter'd ſlave to free,
Theſe are imperial arts, and worthy thee. Dryden's Aºn.
IMPE’RIAlist. m. ſ. [from imperial.] One that belongs to an
emperour.
The imperialiſts imputed the cauſe of ſo ſhameful a flight
unto the Venetians. Knollei's Hiſtory of the Turks.
IMPERIOUS. adj. [imperieux, French; imperioſus, Latin.]
1. Commanding; tyrannical; authoritative; haughty; arro-
gant; aſſuming command.
If it be your proud will
To ſhew the power of your imperious eyes. Spenſer.
This imperious man will work us all
From princes into pages. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Not th’ imperious ſhow
Of the full-fortun’d Caeſar ever ſhall
Be brooch'd with me. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
He is an imperious dićtator of the principles of vice, and
impatient of all contradićtion. Mºre's Divine Dialogues.
How much I ſuffer'd, and how long I ſtrove
Againſt th'aſſaults of this imperious love Dryden.
Recolleót what diſorder haſty or imperious words from pa-
rents or teachers have cauſed in his thoughts. Locke.
2. Powerful; aſcendant; overbearing.
A man, by a vaſt and imperious mind, and a heart large as
the ſand upon the ſea-ſhore, could command all the knowledge
of nature and art. - Tillotſon's Sermºns.
IMPE’Riously. adv. [from imperious.] With arrogance of
command; with inſolence of authority.
Who's there, that knocketh ſo imperiouſly 2 Shakespeare H. VI.
Who can abide, that, againſt their own doćtors, ſix whole
books ſhould, by their fatherhoods of Trent, be under pain
of a curſe, imperiouſly obtruded upon God and his
church. Hall.
It is not to inſult and domineer, to look diſdainfully, and
revile imperiouſly, that procures an eſteem from any one. South.
The ſage, tranſported at th' approaching hour,
Imperiouſly thrice thunder'd on the floor! Garth's Diſpenſ.
IMPE'Rious Ness. n.ſ.. [from imperious.]
1. Authority; air of command.
So would he uſe his imperiouſneſs, that we had a delightful
fear and awe, which made us loth to loſe our hopes. Sidney.
2. Arrogance of command.
Imperiouſneſs and ſeverity is but an ill way of treating men,
who have reaſon of their own to guide them. Locke.
IMPERISHABLE, adj. [imperiſable, French; in and periſh.] Not
to be deſtroyed. º
We find this our empyreal form
Incapable of mortal injury,
Imperiſhable; and though pierc'd with wound,
Soon cloſing, and by native vigour heal’d. Milt. Par. Loft.
IMPERSONAL. adj. [imperſonel, French; imperſonalis, Lat.]
Not varied according to the perſons.
IMPE'rson ALLY. adv. [from imperſºnal.] According to the
manner of an imperſonal verb.
IMPERsu A's IBLE. adj. [in and perſuaſibilis, Latin.] Not to be
moved by perſuaſion.
Every pious perſon ought to be a Noah, a preacher of
righteouſneſs; and if it be his fortune to have as imperſuaſible
an auditory, if he cannot avert the deluge, it will yet be the
delivering his own ſoul, if he cannot benefit other mens.
- Decay of Piety.
IMPE'RT IN EN ce. !" ſ. [impertinence, French ; from imper-
IMPERTIN EN cy. $ tinent. J
1. That which is of no preſent weight; that which has no rela-
tion to the matter in hand.
Some tho' they lead a ſingle life, yet their thoughts do end
with themſelves, and account future times impertinencies, Bac.
2. Folly; rambling thought.
O, matter and impertinency mixt,
Reaſon and madneſs! Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. Troubleſomeneſs; intruſion.
It will be ſaid I handle an art no way ſuitable to my em-
ployments or fortune, and ſo ſtand charged with intruſion and
impertinency. Wotton's Architecture.
We ſhould avoid the vexation and impertinence of pedants,
who affect to talk in a language not to be underſtood. Swift.
4. Trifle; thing of no value.
I envy your felicity, delivered from the gilded impertinencies
of life, to enjoy the moments of a ſolid contentment. Evelyn.
Nothing is more eaſy than to repreſent as impertinencies any
parts of learning, that have no immediate relation to the hap-
pineſs or convenience of mankind. Addison.
There are many ſubtle impertinencies learnt in the ſchools,
and many painful trifles, even among the mathematical theo-
rems and problems. Watti's Improvement of the Mind.
IMPE'RTINENT. adj. [impertinent, Fr. in and pertinens, Latin.]
1. Of no relation to the matter in hand; of no weight.
The law of angels we cannot judge altogether impertinent
unto the affairs of the church of God. Hooker.
The contemplation of things that are impertinent to us, and
do not concern us, are but a more ſpecious idleneſs. Tillotſºn.
2. Importunate; intruſive; meddling.
'Tis not a ſign two lovers are together, when they can be
ſo impertinent as to enquire what the world does. Pope.
3. Fooliſh; trifling.
MPERTINENT. n.ſ. A trifler; a meddler; an intruder.
Governours would have enough to do to trouble their heads
with the politicks of every meddling officious impertinent.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
IMPE/RTINENTLY. adv. [from impertinent.]
1. Without relation to the preſent matter.
2. Troubleſomely; officiouſly; intruſively.
I have had joy given me as prepoſterouſly, and as imperti-
mently, as they give it to men who marry where they do not
love. * Suckling.
The bleſſedeſt of mortals, now the higheſt ſaint in the ce-
leſtial hierarchy, began to be ſo impertinently importuned, that
great part of the liturgy was addreſſed ſolely to her. Howel.
Why will any man be ſo impertinently officious as to tell me
all this is only fancy If it is a dream, let me enjoy it. Addison
IMPERVICU.S. adj. [impervius, Latin.]
1. Unpaſſable; impenetrable.
We may thence diſcern of how cloſe a texture glaſs is,
ſince ſo very thin a film proved ſo impervious to the air, that
it was forced to break the glaſs to free itſelf. Boyle.
Left the difficulty of paſſing back
Stay his return, perhaps, over this gulf
Impaſſable, impervious ; let us try
To found a path from hell to that new world. Milton.
The cauſe of reflexion is not the impinging of light on the
ſolid or impervious parts of bodies. Newton's Opt.
A great many veſſels are, in this ſtate, impervious by the
fluids. * Arbuthnot.
From the damp earth impervious vapours riſe,
Increaſe the darkneſs, and involve the ſkies. Pope.
2. Inacceſſible. Perhaps improperly uſed.
A river's mouth impervious to the wind,
And clear of rocks. Pope's Odyſſey.
IMPE'Rviousness. n.ſ.. [from impervious.] The ſtate of not
admitting any paſſage.
IMPERTRANSIBILITY. n.ſ.. [in and pertranſeo, Latin.] Im-
poſſibility to be paſſed through. -
I willingly declined thoſe many ingenious reaſons given by
others; as of the impertranſibility of eternity, and impoſſibility
therein to attain to the preſent limit of antecedent ages. Hale.
IMPETI'GINous. adj. [from impetigo, Latin.] Scurfy 3 co-
wered with ſmall ſcabs.
I'M Petr ABLE. adj. [impetrabilis, from impetro, Lat impetrable,
French.J Poſfible to be obtained. Dić7.
To I'MPETRATE. v.a. [impetrer, Fr. impetro, Latin.] To
obtain by intreaty. Dić7.
I'MPETRATION. m.ſ.. [impetration, Fr. impetratio, from impetro,
Latin.] The aët of obtaining by prayer or intreaty.
The bleſſed ſacrament is the myſtery of the death of Chriſt,
and the application of his blood, which was ſhed for the re-
miſſion of ſins, and is the great means of impetration, and the
meritorious cauſe of it. Taylor.
It is the greateſt ſolemnity of prayer, the moſt powerful
liturgy, and means of impetration in this world. Taylor.
IMPETüo's 1TY. n.ſ.. [impetuoſité, French, from impetuous.]
1. Violence; fury; vehemence; force.
I will ſet upon Aguecheek a notable report of valour, and
drive the gentleman into a moſt hideous opinion of his rage,
ſkill, fury, and impetuoſity. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
The whole intrigue was contrived by the duke, and ſo
violently purſued by his ſpirit and impetuoſity. Clarendon.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
I M P
t
h
*.
º
|
*:
º
1
º
::
:-
:
º
ºt.
:
.
º
The mind gives not only licence, but incitation to the
other paſſions to take their freeſt range, and ačt with the ut-
moſt impetuoſity. Decay of Piety.
IMPETUCUS. adj. [impetueux, Fr. from impetus, Latin
1. Violent; forcible; fierce.
Their virtue, like their Tyber's flood,
Rolling its courſe, deſign'd their country's good;
But of the torrent's too impetuous ſpeed,
From the low earth tore ſome polluted weed. Prior.
2. Vehement; paſſionate.
The king, 'tis true, is noble, but impetuous. Rowe.
IMPE'Tuously. adv. [from impetuous. | Violently; vehe-
thently.
They view the windings of the hoary Nar;
Through rocks and woods impetuouſly he glides,
While froth and foam the fretting ſurface hides. Addison.
IMPE’tuous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from impetuous.] Violence; fury.
I wiſh all words of this ſort might vaniſh in that breath that
utters them; that as they reſemble the wind in fury and impe-
tuouſneſs, ſo they might in tranſientneſs. Decay of Piety.
PMPETUS. n.ſ. [Latin.] Violent tendency to any point;
violent effort.
Why did not they continue their deſcent 'till they were con-
tiguous to the ſun, whither both mutual attraction and impetuſ
carried them. Bentley’s Sermons.
IMPIE'rce ABLE. adj. [in and pierce J Impenetrable; not to
be pierced.
Exceeding rage inflam'd the furious beaſt;
For never felt his impierceable breaſt
So wond’rous force from hand of living wight. Fa. Queen.
IMP'ety. n.ſ.. [impieté, French; impietas, Latin.]
1. Irreverence to the Supreme Being; contempt of the duties of
religion. -
To keep that oath were more impiety :
Than Jeptha's, when he ſacrific'd his daughter. Shakespeare H.VI.
2. An act of wickedneſs; expreſſion of irreligion. In this ſenſe
it has a plural.
If they die unprovided, no more is the king guilty of thoſe
impieties for which they are now viſited. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Can Juno ſuch impieties approve 2 Denham.
We have a melancholy proſpect of the ſtate of our religion:
ſuch amazing impieties can be equalled by nothing but by
thoſe cities conſumed of old by fire. Swift's Examiner.
To IMPI'GNorATE. v. a. [in and pignus, Latin.] To pawn;
to pledge.
IMP1GNoa Ation. n.ſ.. [from impignorate.] The act of pawn-
ing or putting to pledge.
To IMP1’NGE. v. n. [impingo, Latin. J. To fall againſt; to
ſtrike againſt; to claſh with.
Things are reſerved in the memory by ſome corporeal exu-
viae and material images, which, having impinged on the com-
mon ſenſe, rebound thence into ſome vacant cells of the
brain. Glanville's Scepſ.
The cauſe of reflexion is not the impinging of light on the
ſolid or impervious parts of bodies. Newton's Opt.
To IMPI'NGUATE. v. a. [in and pinguis, Lat..] To fatten; to
make fat. -
Frićtions alſo do more fill and impinguate the body than exer-
ciſe; for that in frićtions the inward parts are at reſt. Bacon.
I’MPIOUS. adj. [impius, Latin.] Irreligious; wicked; pro-
fane; without reverence of religion.
That Scripture ſtandeth not the church of God in any
ſtead to direct, but may be let paſs as needleſs to be con-
ſulted with, we judge it profane, impious, and irreligious to
think. Hooker.
Ceaſe then this impious rage. Milton.
Ye gods, deſtroy that impious ſex. Waller.
Then lewd Auchemolus he laid in duſt,
Who ſtain'd his ſtepdame's bed with impious luſt. Dryden.
When no female arts his mind could move,
She turn'd to furious hate her impious love. Dryden.
And impious nations fear'd eternal night. Dryden.
Shame and reproach is generally the portion of the impious
and irreligious. South.
When vice prevails, and impious men bear ſway,
The poſt of honour is a private ſtation. Addiſon.
Since after thee may riſe an impious line,
Coarſe manglers of the human face divine:
Paint on, 'till fate diſſolve thy mortal part,
And live and die the monarch of thy art. Tickel.
They, impious, dar'd to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day. Pope.
Grand miſtakes in religion proceed from taking literally
what was meant figuratively, from which ſeveral impions
abſurdities followed, terminating in abſolute infºg,
ºrbes.
IMP1ously, adv. [from impious.]. Profanely; wickedly.
The Roman wit, who impiouſly divides
His hero and his gods to different ſides,
I would condemn. Granville.
IMPLACAB 1'LITY. m. ſ. [ from inplacable. J Inexorableneſs;
irreconcilable enmity; determined malice.
IMPLACABLE. adj. [implacahii, Lat, implatall, Fr.j Not
to be pacified; inexorable; malicious; conſtant in enmity.
His incenſement is ſo implacable, that ſatisfaction can be
hone but by pangs of death. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
arah bears a generous mind;
But to implacable revenge inclin'd;
A bounteous maſter, but a deadly foe. Dryden's Aurengz.
The French are the moſt implacable and the moſt danger-
ous enemies of the Britiſh nation. Addison.
IMPLA'cably. adv. [from impacable.]
1. With malice not to be pacified; inexorably.
An order was made for diſarming all the papiſts; upon
which though nothing was after done, yet it kept up the ap-
prehenſions in the people of dangers, and diſinclined them
from the queen, whom they begun every day more implacably
to hate, and conſequently to diſoblige. Clarendºn.
2. lt is once uſed by Dryden in a kind of mixed ſenſe of a ty-
rant's love. -
I love,
And 'tis below my greatneſs to diſown it:
Love thee implacably, yet hate thee too. Dryd. Don Selaſ.
To IMPLA'Nt. v. a. [in and planto, Latin.] To infix; to in-
ſert; to place; to engraft; to ſettle; to ſet; to ſow.
How £h you him unworthy then decree,
In whoſe chief part your worths implanted be. Sidney.
See, Father what firſt fruits on earth are ſprung,
From thy implanted grace in man!, Milton's Parad. Loft.
No need of publick ſančtions this to bind, -
Which nature has implanted in the mind. Dryden.
There grew to the outſide of the arytenoides another carti-
lage, capable of motion, by the help of ſome muſcles that
were implanted in it. Ray.
God, having endowed man with faculties of knowing, was
no more obliged to implant thoſe innate notions in his mind,
than that, having given him reaſon, hands, and materials, he
ſhould build him bridges. Locke.
IMPLANTA't Ion. m. ſ. ſimplantation, Fr. from implant.] The
aćt of ſetting or planting. -
IMPLA'usible. adj. [ in and plauſible. J Not ſpecious; not
likely to ſeduce or perſuade.
othing can better improve, political ſchool-boys than the
art of making plauſible or implauſible harangues againſt the
very opinion for which they reſolve to determine. Swift.
I'MPLEMENT. n.ſ. ſimplementum, from impleo, Latin.] -
1. Something that fills up vacancy, or ſupplies wants.
Unto life many implements are neceſſary; more, if we ſeek
ſuch a life as hath in it joy, comfort, delight, and plea-
ſure. Hooker.
2. Tool; inſtrument of manufacture.
Wood hath coined ſeventeen thouſand pounds, and hath
his tools and implements to coin ſix times as much. Swift.
It is the pračtice of the eaſtern regions for the artiſts in
metals to carry about with them the whole implements of trade,
to the houſe where they find employment. Broome.
3. Veſſels of a kitchen.
IMPLE'TIon. n.ſ. ſimples, Latin.] The aët of filling; the
ſtate of being full.
Theophraſtus conceiveth, upon a plentiful impletion, there
may ſucceed a diſruption of the matrix. Brown's Pulg. Err.
IMPLE'x. adj. [implexus, Latin.] Intricate 3 entangled; com-
plicated.
Every poem is either ſimple or implex : it is called ſimple
when there is no change of fortune in it; implex, when the
fortune of the chief actor changes from bad to good, or from
ood to bad. Spectator.
To IMPLICATE. v. a. ſimpliquer, Fr. implio, Latin.] To
entangle; to embarraſs; to involve; to infold.
The ingredients of ſaltpetre do ſo mutually implicate and
hinder each other, that the concrete acts but very lan-
guidly. Boyle.
IMPLICA"tion. n.ſ. ſimplicatio, Lat. implication, French, from
implicate.]
1. Involution; entanglement. -
Three principal cauſes of firmneſs are the groſſneſs, the
quiet conta&amp;t, and the implication of the component parts, Boyle.
2. Inference not expreſſed, but tacitly inculcated.
Though civil cauſes, according to ſome men, are of leſs
moment than criminal, yet the doctors are, by implication, of
a different opinion. Ayliffe's Parergon.
IMPLI'CIT. adj. [implicite, Fr. implicitus, Latin.]
1. Entangled; infolded ; complicated.
In his woolly fleece
I cling implicit. . . Pope.
The humble ſhrub,
And buſh with frizzl'd hair implicit. Thomſºn.
2. Inferred; tacitly compriſed; not expreſſed.
In the firſt eſtabliſhments of ſpeech there was an implicit
compačt, founded upon common conſent, that ſuch and ſuch
words ſhould be ſigns, whereby they would expreſs their
thoughts one to another. ... South.
Our expreſs requeſts are not granted, but the implicit deſires
of our hearts are fulfilled, Smalridge's Sermons.
11 Z 3. Reſting
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
3. Reſting upon another; conneéted with another over which
that which is conneéted to it has no power; truſting without
reſerve or examination.
There be falſe peaces or unities, when the peace is grounded
but upon an implicit ignorance; for all colours will agree in
the dark. Bacon's Effays.
No longer by implicit faith we err,
Whilſt every man's his own interpreter. Denham.
Impli'cITLY. adv. [from implicit.]
1. By inference compriſed though not expreſſed.
The divine inſpection into the affairs of the world doth
neceſſarily follow from the nature and being of God; and he
that denies this, doth implicitly deny his exiſtence: he may ac-
knowledge what he will with his mouth, but in his heart he
hath ſaid there is no God. Bentley.
2. By connexion with ſomething elſe; dependently; with un-
reſerved confidence or obedience.
My bluſhing muſe with conſcious fear retires,
And whom they like, implicitly admires. Roſcommon.
Learn not to diſpute the methods of his providence; but
humbly and implicitly to acquieſce in and adore them. Atterb.
We implicitly follow in the track in which they lead us, and
comfort ourſelves with this poor refle&amp;tion, that we ſhall fare
as well as thoſe that go before us. Rogers's Sermons.
To IMPLO’RE. v. a. ſimplorer, French; implero, Latin.]
1. To call upon in ſupplication; to ſolicit.
They ſhip their oars, and crown with wine
The holy goblet to the pow'rs divine,
Jmploring all the gods that reign above.
2. To aſk; to beg.
Do not ſay 'tis ſuperſtition, that
I kneel, and then impore her bleſfing. Shakespeare Jºinter's Tale.
Implo'R.E. n ſ [from the verb.] The act of begging; in-
treaty; ſolicitation. Not in uſe.
Urged fore
With piercing words and pitiful implore,
Him haſty to ariſe.
IMPlo'RER. m.ſ.. [from implore.] Solicitor.
Meer implorers of unholy ſuits,
Breathing, like ſanétified and pious,
The better to beguile. Shakespeare Hamlet.
IMPLU'MED. adj. [implumis, Latin.] Without feathers. Diet.
To IMPLY'. v. a. ſimpliquer, French; implica, Latin.]
1. To infold; to cover; to intangle.
Whoſe courage ſtout,
Striving to looſe the knot that faſt him ties,
Himſelf in ſtraighter bonds too raſh implies. Fairy Queen.
And Phoebus flying ſo moſt ſhameful fight,
His bluſhing face in foggy cloud implies. Fairy Queen.
2. To involve or compriſe as a conſequence or concomitant.
That it was in uſe among the Greeks the word triclinium
imºlieth. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
What follows next is no obječtion; for that implies a
fault. Dryden.
Bows the ſtrength of brawny arms imply,
Emblems of valour, and of vićtory. Dryden.
To IMpo'Ison. v. a. [empoiſoner, French. It might be writ-
ten emptiſm.]
1. To corrupt with poiſon.
One doth not know -
How much an ill word doth impoiſon liking. Shakeſpeare.
2. To kill with poiſon. This is rare. See EMpoison. -
A man by his own alms impoiſon'd,
And with his charity ſlain.
IMPO'LARILY. adv. [in and polar.] Not according to the di-
rečtion of the poles. . -
Being impolarily adjoined unto a more vigorous loadſtone, it
will, in a ſhort time, exchange its poles. Brown's Pug. Err.
IMPOLI'TIcAL. }*. [in and politick.] Imprudent; indiſcreet;
IMpo'LITIck. void of art or forecaſt.
He that exhorteth to beware of an enemy's policy, doth not
give counſel to be impolitick; but rather to uſe all prudent
forefight and circumſpection, left our ſimplicity be over-reacht
by cunning ſlights. Hooker.
IM politically. \adv. [in and political.] Without art or
IM Poºl ITIck LY. } forecaſt.
IM PoſNDERous. adj. [in and ponderous.] Void of perceptible
weight. -
It produces viſible and real effeóts by imponderous and invi-
ſible emiſſions. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
IM Poro's ITY.. n.ſ.. [in and porous.] Abſence of interſtices;
compačtneſs; cloſeneſs. -
Pope's Odyſſey.
The poroſity or imporoſity betwixt the tangible parts, and
, the greatneſs or ſmalneſs of the pores. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
IMporous, adj. [in and porous.] Free from pores; free from
vacuities or interſtices; cloſe of texture; completely ſolid.
It has its earthly and ſalinous parts ſo exactly reſolved,
that its body is left imporous, and not diſcreted by atomical ter-
minations. Brown’s %ulgar Errours.
If atoms ſhould deſcend plumb down with equal velocity,
4.
Fairy Queen.
Shakespeare Coriolanus. ,
being all perfeótly ſolid and imporous, they would never the
one overtake the other. Ray on the Creation.
To IMPORT. v. a. ſimporto, Latin.]
1. To carry into any country from abroad : oppoſed to export.
For Elis I would ſail with utmoſt ſpeed, -
Tº import twelve mares, which there luxurious feed. Pope.
2. To imply ; to infer. -
Himſelf not only comprehended all our neceſſities, but in
ſuch ſort alſo framed every petition as might moſt naturally
ſerve for many; and doth, though not always require, yet al-
ways import a multitude of ſpeakers together. Hooker.
he name of diſcipline importeth not as they would fain
have it conſtrued; but the ſelf-ſame thing it ſignifieth, which
the name of doctrine doth. Hooker.
This queſtion we now aſked, imported, as that we thought
this land a land of magicians. Bacon.
3. To produce in conſequence.
... . . Something he left imperfeót in the ſtate, -
Which ſince his coming forth is thought of, which
Imports the kingdom ſo much fear and danger,
That his return was moſt requir'd. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
4. [Importer, importe, French. Imperſonally. ] To be of
moment: as, it imports, it is of weight or conſequence.
Her length of ſickneſs, with what elſe more ſerious
Impo teth thee to know, this bears. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatr.
Let the heat be ſuch as may keep the metal perpetually mol-
ten; for that above all importeth to the work. Bacon.
Number in armies importeth not much, where the people is
of weak courage. Bacon's Eſſayſ.
This to attain, whether heav'n move, or earth,
Imports not, if thou reckon right. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
It may import us in this calm to hearken more than we have
done to the ſtorms that are now raiſing abroad. Temple.
If I endure it, what imports it you ? Dryd. Span. Fryar.
IM Po RT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Importance; moment; conſequence.
What occaſion of impºrt
Hath all ſo long detain'd you from your wife 2 Shakeſpeare.
Some buſineſs of import that triumph wears
You ſeem to go with. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipur.
. . When there is any diſpute, the judge ought to appoint the
ſum according to the eloquence and ability of the advocate,
and in proportion to the import of the cauſe. Ayliffe.
2. Tendency. -
Add to the former obſervations made about vegetables a
third of the ſame import made in mineral ſubſtances. Boyle.
3. Anything imported from abroad.
lMP'o'RTABLE. adj. [in and portable.] Unſupportable; not to
be endured. A word peculiar to Spenſer, and accented by him
on the firſt ſyllable.
Both at once him charge on either ſide,
With hideous ſtroaks and impºrtable power,
That forced him his ground to traverſe wide,
And wiſely watch to ward that deadly ſtour. Fairy Queen.
IMpo'RTA Nce. n.ſ. [French.] -
1. Thing imported or implied.
A notable paſſion of wonder appeared in them; but the
wiſeſt beholder, that knew no more but ſeeing, could not ſay
if the importance were joy or ſorrow. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
2. Matter; ſubject.
It had been pity you ſhould have been put together with ſo
mortal a purpoſe, as then each bore, upon importance of ſo
ſlight a nature. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline-
3. Conſequence; moment.
We conſider
Th’ importance of Cyprus to the Turks.
Thy own importance know,
Nor bound thy narrow views to things below. Pope.
4. Importunity. An improper uſe peculiar to Shakeſpeare.
Maria writ
The letter at fir Toby's great importance ;
In recompence whereof he hath married her. Shakespeare.
IMpo'RTANT. adj. [important, French.]
1. Momentous; weighty; of great conſequence.
- The moſt important and preſſing care of a new and vigorous
king was his marriage, for mediate cſtabliſhment of the royal
line. Wºtton.
This ſuperadds treachery to the crime: 'tis the falſifying
the moſt impºrtant truſt. Decay of Piety.
O then, what intereſt ſhall I make
To ſave my laſt important ſtake, {
When the moſt juſt have cauſe to quake. Roſcommon.
The great important end that God deſigns it for, the govern-
ment of mankind, ſufficiently ſhews the neceſſity of its being
rooted deep in the heart, and put beyond the danger of being
torn up by any ordinary violence. South.
Examine how the faſhionable praślice of the world can be
reconciled to the important doćtrine of our religion. Rogers.
Important truths ſtill let your fables hold,
And moral myſteries with art unfold. Grºß
Shakespeare Othello.
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">1 M P
ºº
º:
:
º
**
º
%
º
Th’ important hour had paſs'd unheeded by. Irene.
2. Momentous; forcible; of great efficacy. This ſeems to be
the meaning here.
He fiercely at him flew,
And with important outrage him aſſail'd;
Who ſoon prepar'd to field, his ſword forth drew,
And him with equal value countervail’d. Fairy Queen.
3. Importunate. A corrupt uſe of the word.
Great France -
My mourning and important tears hath pitied. Shakeſpeare.
ImportA'tion. n.ſ.. [from import.] The aët or practice of
importing, or bringing into a country from abroad.
The king's reaſonable profit ſhould not be neglected upon
importation and exportation. Bacon.
Theſe mines fill the country with greater numbers of peo-
ple than it would be able to bear, without the importation of
corn from foreign parts. Addiſon on Italy.
The emperor has forbidden the importation of their manu-
fačtures into any part of the empire. Addiſon on Italy.
IMpo'RTER. n.ſ.. [from import.] One that brings in from
abroad. *
It is impoſſible to limit the quantity that ſhall be brought in,
eſpecially if the impºrters of it have ſo ſure a market as the
Exchequer. Swift.
IMP'o'RT LEss. adj. [from import.] Of no rhoment or conſe-
quence. This is a word not in uſe, but not inelegant.
We leſs expect
That matter needleſs, of importleſ; burthen,
Divide thy lips. . . . Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
IMPORTUNATE. adj. [importunus, Latin; importune, Fr. J
Unſeaſonable and inceſſant in ſolicitations; not to be repulſed.
I was in debt to my importunate buſineſs; but he would not
hear my excuſe. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
They may not be able to bear the clamour of an importu-
mate ſuitor. - Smalridge's Sermons.
A rule reſtrains the moſt importunate appetites of our
nature. Rogers's Sermoas.
IMP'o'RTUNATELY. adv. [from importunate.] With inceſſant
ſolicitation; pertinaciouſly.
Their pertinacy is ſuch, that when you drive them out of
one form, they aſſume another; and are ſo importunately trou-
bleſome, as makes many think it impoſſible to be freed from
them. Duppa's Rules ºf Devotion,
IMpo'RTUNA TENEss. n.ſ.. [from importunate.] Inceſſant ſoli-
Citat1On. * *
She with more and more importunateneſ, craved, which, in
all good manners, was either of us to be deſired, or not
granted. - - Sidney.
To IMPORTUNE. v. a. [importuner, French; importunis,
Latin. Accented anciently on the ſecond ſyllable.] To teize;
* with ſlight vexation perpetually recurring; to mo-
leſt.
Againſt all ſenſe you do importune her. Shakeſpeare.
If he eſpied any lewd gaiety in his fellow-ſervants, his maſ-
ter ſhould ſtraightways know it, and not reſt free from impor-
tuning, until the fellow had put away his fault. Carew.
The bloom of beauty other years demands,
Nor will be gather'd by ſuch wither'd hands: -
You impºrtune it with a falſe deſire. Dryd. Aurengzebe.
The higheſt ſaint in the celeſtial hierarchy began to be ſo
impertinently importuned, that a great part of the liturgy was
addreſſed ſolely to her. Howel's Pocal Foreſ?.
Every one hath experimented this troubleſome intruſion of
ſome friſking ideas, which thus importune the underſtanding,
and hinder it from being employed. - Locke.
We have been obliged to hire troops from ſeveral princes of
the empire, whoſe miniſters and reſidents here have perpetual-
ly importuned the court with unreaſonable demands. Swift.
IMpoRTUNE, adj. [importunus, Latin. It was anciently pro-
nounced with the accent on the ſecond ſyllable.]
1. Conſtantly recurring; troubleſome by frequency.
All that charge did fervently apply,
With greedy malice and importune toil;
And planted there their huge artillery,
With which they daily made moſt dreadful battery. F. Qu.
Henry, calling himſelf king of England, needed not to
have beſtowed ſuch great ſums of treaſure, nor ſo to have bu-
fied himſelf with importune and inceſſant labour and induſtry,
to compaſs my death and ruin, if I had been ſuch a feigned
perſon. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. Troubleſome; vexatious.
And th’ armies of their creatures all, and ſome
Do ſerve to them, and with importune might
War againſt us, the vaſſals of their will. Spenſer.
If the upper ſoul can check what is conſented to by the will,
in compliance with the fleſh, and can then hope that after a
few years of ſenſuality, that importune rebellious ſervant ſhall
be eternally caſt off, this would be ſome colour for that novel
perſuaſion. Hammond.
The ſame airs, which ſome entertain with moſt delightful
tranſports, to others are importune. Glanv. Scep.
3. Unſeaſonable; coming, aſking, or happening at a wrong
time. -
No fair to thine -
Equivalent, or ſecond which compell’d
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze and worſhip thee. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix.
IMPORTU'NELY. adv. [from importune.]
1. Troubleſomely; inceſſantly.
The palmer bent his ear unto the noiſe,
To weet who called ſo importunely:
Again he heard a more efforced voice,
That bad him come in haſte.
2. Unſeaſonably; improperly. -
The conſtitutions that the apoſtles made concerning dea-
cons and widows, are, with much importunity, but very im-
portunely urged by the diſciplinarians. Sanderſon.
IMPortu’NITY.. n.ſ.. [importunitas, Lat. importunité, French,
from importunate. J Inceſſant ſolicitation.
Overcome with the importunity of his wife, a woman of a
haughty ſpirit; he altered his former purpoſe. Knoller-
- Thrice I deluded her, and turn'd to ſport -
Her importunity. Milton's Agoniſtes.
To IMPOSE. v. a. [impoſer, French; impoſtum, Latin.]
1. To lay on as a burthen or penalty.
If a ſon, ſent by his father, do fall into a lewd ačtion.
the imputation, by your rule, ſhould be impoſed upon his
father. Shakeſpeare.
Fairy Queen.
It ſhall not be lawful to impoſe toll upon them. Ezra vii.
To tyrants others have their country ſold,
Impoſing foreign lords for foreign gold. Dryd AEn.
On impious realms and barb'rous kings impoſe
Thy plagues, and curſe them with ſuch ills as thoſe. Pope.
2. To enjoin as a duty or law. - -
... What good or evil is there under the ſun, what ačtion cor-
reſpondent or repugnant unto the law which God hath impoſed
upon his creatures, but in or upon it God doth work, accord-
ing to the law which himſelf hath eternally purpoſed to
keep Hocker.
There was a thorough way made by the ſword for the im-
poſing of the laws upon them. Spenſer on Ireland.
Thou on the deep impºſſ; nobler laws,
And by that juſtice haft remov’d the cauſe. J/aller.
Chriſtianity hath hardly impoſed any other laws upon us,
but what are enaëled in our natures, or are agreeable to the
prime and fundamental laws of it. Tillotſon.
Impoſe but your commands, -
This hour ſhall bring you twenty thouſand hands. Dryden.
It was neither impoſed on me, nor ſo much as the ſubject
given me by any man. Dryden.
3. To fix on ; to impute to... -
This cannot be allowed, except we impute that unto the
firſt cauſe which we impoſe not on the ſecond; or what we
deny unto nature, we impute unto nativity itſelf. Brown.
4. To obtrude fallaciouſly.
- - Our poet thinks not fit -
Tº impoſe upon you what he writes for wit. Dryden.
5. Tº IM pose on. To put a cheat on ; to deceive. -
Phyſicians and philoſophers have ſuffered themſelves to be ſo
far impoſed upºn as to publiſh chymical experiments, which
they never tried. Boyle.
He that thinks the name centaur ſtands for ſome real being,
impoſes on himſelf, and miſtakes words for things. Locke.
6. [Åmong printers.] To put the pages on the ſtone, and fit on
the chaſes, in order to carry the forms to preſs. ...
IMpo'se. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Command ; injunction. Not
in uſe. -
According to your ladyſhip's impoſe,
I am thus early come. Shakespeare.
IMpo's EABLE. adj. [from impoſe.] To be laid as obligatory on
any body. - - - -
They were not fimply impºſeable on any particular man, far-
ther than he was a member of ſome church. Hammond.
Imposer. n.ſ. (from impoſe.] One who enjoins; one who
lays anything on another as a hardſhip. -
The univerſities ſufferings might be manifeſted to all na-
tions, and the impoſers of theſe oaths might repent. Walton.
IMPosition. n.ſ.. [impºſition, French ; impoſitus, Latin.]
1. The ačt of laying any thing on another. -
The ſecond part of confirmation is the prayer and benedic-
tion of the biſhop, made more ſolemn by the impoſition of
hands. Hammond.
2. The aët of giving a note of diſtinétion.
The firſt impoſition of names was grounded, among all na-
tions, upon future good hope conceived of children. Camden.
The impoſition of the name is grounded only upon the
predominancy of that element, whoſe name is aſcribed to
it. - Boyle.
3. Injunction of anything as a law or duty. . -
Their determination is to trouble you with no more ſuit ;
unleſs you may be won by ſome other ſort than your father's
impoſition, depending on the caſkets, Shakeſp. Merch, ºf ‘.
font
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P :
From impoſition of ſtrićt laws, to free
Acceptance of large grace; from ſervile fear
To filial; works of law, to works of faith. Milt. P. Lºft.
4. Conſtraint; oppreſſion.
The conſtraint of receiving and holding opinions by autho-
rity was rightly called impºſition. Locke.
A greater load has been laid on us than we have been able
to bear, and the groſſeſt impoſitions have been ſubmitted to, in
order to forward the dangerous deſigns of a faction. Swift.
Let it not be made, contrary to its own nature, the occa-
ſion of ſtrife, a narrow ſpirit, and unreaſonable impºſitions on
the mind and practice. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
5. Cheat; fallacy; impoſture.
IMpo'ssible. adj. [impoſſibile, Fr. in and poſſible.] Not to be
done; not to be attained; impracticable.
Unlawful deſires are puniſhed after the effect of enjoying;
but impºſſible deſires are puniſhed in the deſire itſelf. Sidney.
It was impoſſible that the ſtate ſhould continue l". 2 Mac.
With men this is impoſſible; but with God all things are
poſſible. Mat. xix. 26.
'Twere impºſſible for any enterprize to be lawful, if that
which ſhould legitimate it is ſubſequent to it. Decay of Piety.
Difficult it is, but not impºſſible. Chillingworth.
It is impoſſible the mind ſhould be ſtopped any where in
its progreſs in this ſpace, how far ſoever it extends its
thoughts. Locke.
We cannot believe it impoſſible to God to make a creature
with more ways to convey into the underſtanding the notice
of corporeal things than five. Docke.
I my thoughts deceive
With hope of things impºſſible to find. Walſh.
IMPossibi'lity. n.ſ.. [impoſſibilité, Fr. from impoſſible.]
1. Impracticability; the ſtate of being not feaſible.
Simple Philoclea, it is the impºſſibility that doth torment
me; for unlawful deſires are puniſhed after the effect of enjoy-
ing, but impoſſible deſires in the deſire itſelf. Sidney.
Admit all theſe impoſſibilities and great abſurdities to be poſ-
ſible and convenient. JWhitgifte,
Let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars 'gainſt the firy ſun,
Murdering impoſſibility, to make
What cannot be, ſlight work. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
They confound difficulty with impºſſibility. South.
Thoſe who aſſert the impoſſibility of ſpace exiſting without
matter, muſt make body infinite. Locke.
When we ſee a man of like paſſions and weakneſs with our-
ſelves going before us in the paths of duty, it confutes all lazy
pretences of impoſſibility. Rogers.
2. That which cannot be done.
Though men do, without offence, wiſh daily that the af-
fairs, which with evil ſucceſs are paſt, might have fallen out
much better; yet to pray that they may have been any other
than they are, this being a manifeſt impoſſibility in itſelf, the
rules of religion do not permit. Płocker.
Impºſſibilities / oh no, there's none,
Could I bring thy heart captive home. Cowley.
I'M Post. n.ſ. ſimpºſt, impit, French; impoſtum, Latin.] A
tax; a toll; cuſtom paid.
Taxes and impoſts upon merchants do ſeldom good to the
king's revenue; for that that he wins in the hundred, he loſeth
in the ſhire. Bacon's §:
IMPO'sts. m. ſ. ſimpoſe, Fr. incumba, Latin.] In archite&amp;ure,
that part of a pillar, in vaults and arches, on which the weight
of the whole building lieth. Ainſworth.
To IMPO'sthum Ate. v. n. [from impoſthume.] To form an
abſº, to gather; to form a cyſt or bag containing matter.
. The bruiſe impoſthumated, and afterwards turned to a ſtink-
ing ulcer, which made every body ſhy to come near
her. Arbuthnot.
To IMºo'sthumate. v. a. To afflićt with an impoſthume.
They would not fly that ſurgeon, whoſe lancet threatens
none but the impoſthumated parts. Decay of Piety.
IMPosthum A'tion, n.ſ.. [from impoſthumate.] Thé ača of
forming an impoſthume ; the ſtate in which an impoſthume is
formed.
He that maketh the wound bleed inwards, endangerethma-
lign ulcers and pernicious impoſthumations. Bacon's Eſſays.
IMPOST HUME. m. ſ. [This ſeems to have been forme: by
Sorruption from impoſtem, as South writes it; and impylem to
have been written erroneouſly for apoſtem, &amp;zé; nº.2, an ab-
ſceſs J A collection of purulent matter in a bag or cyſt.
Now the rotten diſeaſes of the South, ruptures, catarrhs,
and bladders full of impºſthumes, make prepoſterous diſcove:
Iſles. - Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
An error in the judgment is like an impoſem in the head,
which is always noiſome, and frequently mortal. South.
Fumes cannot tranſude through the bag of an impoſthume.
r . . Harvy on Conſumptions.
IMPO's roR. n.ſ. [impoſteur, Fr. from impoſe; impºſitor, Latin.]
One who cheats by a fictitious character.
Shame and pain, Poverty and fickneſs, yea death and hell
itſelf, are but the trophies of thoſe fatal con ueſts w
grand impoſior, the devil, over the deluded . of jº
IMpo'sture. n.ſ.. [impoſure, Fr. impoſtura, Latin.] Chºir.
fraud; ſuppoſititiouſneſs; cheat committed by giving toº.
ſons or .# a falſe charaćter. g to per-
That the ſoul and angels have nothing to do with groſſer
locality is generally opinioned; but who is it that retains not
a great part of the impoſture, by allowing them a definitive
ubi, which is ſtill but imagination? Glanv. Saºſ.
Open to them ſo many of the interior ſecrets of this f
terious art, without impºſure or invidious reſerve. Fº
We know how ſucceſsful the late uſurper was, while i.
army believed him real in his zeal againſt kingſhip; but when
they found out the impoſture, upon his aſpiring to the ſme
himſelf, he was preſently deſerted, and never able to crown.
uſurped greatneſs with that title. South
- Form new legends, -
And fill the world with follies and impoſures. Irene
7 - ºr- -
#. }...ſ. [impotentia, Latin.]
1. Want of power; inability; imbecillity; weakneſs.
Some were poor by impotency of nature; as young fatherleſs
children, old decrepit perſons, ideots, aud cripples. Hajw.
Weakneſs, or the impotence of exerciſing animal motion
attends fevers. Arhim.
God is a friend and a father, whoſe care ſupplies our wants,
and defends our impotence, and from whoſe compaſſion in Chriſt
we hope for eternal glory hereafter. Åogers' &amp;rmani.
This is not a reſtraint or impotency; but the royal preroga-
tive of the moſt abſolute king of kings; that he wills to do
nothing but what he can; and that he can do nothing which
is repugnant to his divine goodneſs. Bently.
2. Ungovernableneſs of paſſion. A Latin ſignification: animi
impotentia.
Will he, ſo wiſe, let looſe at once his ire,
Belike through impotence, or unaware,
To give his enemies their wiſh, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger ſaves
To puniſh endleſs? Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
Yet all combin'd,
Your beauty and my impotence of mind. Dryden.
3. Incapacity of propagation.
Dulneſs with obſcenity muſt prove
As hateful, ſure, as impotence in love. Pºpe.
IMPOTENT. adj. [impotent, Fr. impotens, Latin.]
1. Weak; feeble; wanting force; wanting power.
We that are ſtrong muſt bear the imbecility of the impaint,
and not pleaſe ourſelves. Hºoker.
Yet wealth is impotent -
To gain dominion, or to keep it gain'd. Milton,
Although in dreadful whirls we hung,
High on the broken wave,
f knew thou wert not ſlow to hear,
Nor impotent to ſave.
2. Diſabled by nature or diſeaſe.
In thoſe porches lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of
blind, halt, and withered. jo. v.3.
There ſat a certain man, impotent in his feet, being a crip-
ple from his mother's womb, who never had walked. Aélixiv.
I have learn'd that fearful commenting
Is leaden ſervitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and ſnail-pac'd beggary. Shakesp &amp; III.
3. Without power of reſtraint. [Animi impºtent.]
With jealous eyes at diſtance ſhe had ſeen,
Whiſp'ring with Jove, the filver-footed queen;
Then, impotent of tongue, her ſilence broke,
Thus turbulent in rattling tone ſhe ſpoke.
4. Without power of propagation. - -
He told beau Prim, who is thought impotent, that his miſ-
treſs would not have him, becauſe he is a floven, and had com-
mitted a rape. - - Tatler.
I'M pot ENtly, adv [from impotent.] Without power.
Proud Caeſar, 'midſt triumphal cars,
The ſpoils of nations, and the pomp of wars,
Ignobly vain, and impotently great, .
Shew'd Rome her Cato's figure drawn in ſtate.
To IMPo'UND. v. a. [in and pound. See Pound.]
1. To incloſe as in a pound; to ſhut in ; to confine.
The great care was rather how to impound the rebels, that
none of them might eſcape, than that any doubt". made to
Addison's Spellator.
Dryden.
Pope,
vanquiſh them. Bacon's Henry WIL
2. To ſhut up in a pinfold.
H England ſt
ath taken and i ided as a ſtra
The king impounde y Shakespeare's Henry V.
Seeing him wander about, I took him up for * * and
- - - - - - - ht
impounded him, with intention to reſtore him tº the rig
... &gt; Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
To IMpo'wer. See Empower. - iable.]
Impracticagle. adj. [impracticalle, Fr. in and traº”
1. Not to be performed; unfeaſible; impoſſible. Had
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
I M P
!
º
mº
(T.
g?
!
r
%
IMPREGNATION. n.ſ.. [from impregnate.
Had there not been ſtill remaining bodies, the legitimate
offsprings of the antediluvian earth, 'twould have been an ex-
travagant and impradicable undertaking to have gone about to
determine anything concerning it. Woodward's Nat. Hiſł.
To preach up the neceſſity of that which our experience
tells us is utterly impracticable, were to affright mankind with
the terrible proſpect of univerſal damnation. Rogers's Serm.
2. Untraćtable; unmanageable.
That fierce impraślicable nature
Is govern'd by a dainty-finger'd girl. Rowe.
IMPRA’cticABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from impraślicable.] Impoſſibility.
I do not know a greater mark of an able miniſter than that
of rightly adapting the ſeveral faculties of men, nor is any
thing more to be lamented than the impracticableneſs of doing
this. Swift.
To IMPRECATE. v. a. [imprecor, Latin.] To call for evil
upon himſelf or others.
IMPREcA'tion, n.ſ.. [imprecatio, Lat. imprecation, Fr., from
imprecate.] Curſe; prayer by which any evil is wiſhed.
My mother ſhall the horrid furies raiſe
With imprecations. Chapman's Odyſſey.
Sir John Hotham, uncurſed by any language or imprecation
of mine, not long after paid his own and his eldeſt ſon's
heads. King Charles.
With imprecations thus he fill'd the air,
And angry Neptune heard th’ unrighteous pray’r. Pope.
I(MPREcAroRy. adj. [from imprecate.] Containing wiſhes of
evil.
To IMPRE'GN. v. a. [in and praegno, Latin.] To fill with
young; to fill with any matter or quality.
In her ears the ſound
Yet rung of his perſuaſive words, impregn'd
With reaſon, to her ſeeming. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Th’ unfruitful rock itſelf, impregn'd by thee,
Forms lucid ſtones. - Thomſºn's Summer.
IMPRE'GNABLE. adj. [imprenable, French.]
I. Not to be ſtormed ; not to be taken.
Two giants kept themſelves in a caſtle, ſeated upon the top
of a rock, impregnable, becauſe there was no coming to it but
by one narrow path, where one man's force was able to keep
down an army. Sidney.
Let us be back'd with God, and with the ſeas,
Which he hath given for fence impregnable, -
And with their helps alone defend ourſelves. Shakespeare H. VI.
Haſt thou not him, and all
Which he calls his, incloſed with a wall
Of ſtrength impregnable? Sandys.
There the capitol thou ſee'ſt,
Above the reſt lifting his ſtately head -
On the Tarpeian rock, her citadel
Impregnable. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b. iv.
2. Unſhaken; unmoved; unaffected.
The man's affection remains wholly unconcerned and im-
pregnable; juſt like a rock, which, being plied continually by
the waves, ſtill throws them back again, but is not at all
moved. South’s Sermons.
IMPRE'GNABLY. adv. [from impregnable.] In ſuch a manner
as to defy force or hoſtility. -
A caſtle ſtrongly ſeated on a high rock, joineth by an iſthmus
to the land, and is impregnably fortified. Sandys.
To IMPRE'GNATE. v. a. [in and pragno, Latin.]
1. To fill with young; to make prolifick.
Hermaphrodites, although they include the parts of both
ſexes, cannot impregnate themſelves. “ Brown's Wulg. Err.
Impregnate, from their loins they ſhed
A ſlimy juice. Dryden's Wirg. Georg.
With native earth their blood the monſters mix’d;
The blood, endu'd with animating heat,
Did in the impregnate earth new ſons beget.
2. [Impregner, French.] To fill; to ſaturate.
Chriſtianity is of ſo prolifick a nature, ſo apt to impregnate
the hearts and lives of its proſelytes, that it is hard to imagine
that any branch ſhould want a due fertility. Decay of Piety.
Dryden.
1. The aët of making prolifick; fecundation:
Theyought to refer matters unto counſellors, which is the firſt
begetting or impregnation; but when they are elaborate in the
womb of their counſel, and grow ripe to be brought forth,
then they take the matter back into their own hands. Bacon,
2. That with which anything is impregnated.
What could implant in the body ſuch paculiar impregnations,
as ſhould have ſuch power? Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
3. [Impregnation, French.] Saturation. Ainſworth.
IMPREJudicate. adi, ſin, prae, and judico, Latin.] Unpre-
judiced; not prepoſſeſſed; impartial.
The ſolid reaſon of one man with imprejudicate apprehen-
fions, begets as firm a belief as the authority or aggregated
teſtimony of many hundreds. Brown.
IMPRE PARA'tion. n.ſ.. [in and preparation.] Unprepared-
neſs; want of preparation.
Impreparation and unraadineſs when they find in us, they
turn it to the foothing up of themſelves. H, &amp;e r.
..
To IMPRESS. v. a. [impreſſim, Latin.]
1. To print by preſſure; to ſtamp.
So foul and ugly, that exceeding fear
Their viſages imprºft, when they approached near. Fa. Qu.
When God from earth form'd Adam in the Eaſt,
He his own image on the clay impreſſ. IDenham.
The conquering chief his foot impreſ?
On the ſtrong neck of that deſtructive beaſt. Dryd. Ovid.
2. To fix deep.
We ſhould dwell upon the arguments, and impreſs the mo-
tives of perſuaſion upon our own hearts, ’till we feel the force
of them. Watts.
. To force into ſervice. This is generally now ſpoken and
written preſs.
His age has charms in it, his title more,
To pluck the common boſoms on his ſide,
And turn our impreſ; launces in our eyes
Which do command them. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Macbeth ſhall never vanquiſh'd be, until
Great Birnam-wood to Dunſinane's high hill
Shall come againſt him.
—That will never be:
Who can impreſ; the foreſt, bid the tree
Unfix his earth-bound root ? Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Ormond ſhould contribute all he could for the making thoſe
levies of men, and for impreſſing of ſhips. Clarendon.
IMPRE'ss. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Mark made by preſſure. -
- This weak impreſs of love is as a figure
Trench'd in ice, which with an hour's heat
iſſolves to water. Shakeſp. Two Gent. of Verona.
They having taken the impreſſes of the infides of theſe ſhells
with that exquiſite niceneſs, as to expreſs even the fineſt linea-
ments of them. //oodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. Effects upon another ſubſtance. -
How objećts are repreſented to myſelf. I cannot be igno-
rant; but in what manner they are received, and what im-
preſſes they make upon the differing organs of another, he only
knows that feels them. Glanv. Scepſ.
3. Mark of diſtinétion; ſtamp.
God, ſurveying the works of the creation, leaves us this
general impreſ; or chara&amp;ter upon them, that they were ex-
ceeding good. South's Sermons.
4. Device; motto. -
To deſcribe emblazon'd ſhields,
Impreſſes quaint, capariſons, and ſteeds, -
Baſes, and tinſel trappings. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix.
5. Aćt of forcing any into ſervice; compulſion; ſeizure. Now
commonly preſs.
Ajax was here the voluntary, and you as under an in-
preſs. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Why ſuch impreſs of ſhipwrights, whoſe ſore taſk
Does not divide the Sunday from the week. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Your ſhips are not well mann'd ;
Your mariners are muliteers, reapers, people -
Ingroſt by ſwift impreſs. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
IMPRE'ssion. n.ſ.. [impreſſio, Latin; impreſſion, Fr.]
1. The aët of preſfing one body upon another.
Senſation is ſuch an impreſſion or motion, made in ſome
part of the body, as produces ſome perception in the under-
ſtanding. Locke.
2. Mark made by preſſure; ſtamp.
Like to a chaos, or unlick'd bear-whelp,
That carries no impreſſion like the dam. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
3. Image fixed in the mind.
Were the offices of religion ſtript of all the external degen-
cies, they would not make a due impreſſion on the mind. Atter.
The falſe repreſentations of the kingdom's enemies had
made ſome impreſſion in the mind of the ſucceſſor. Swift.
4. Operation; influence. ,
The king had made him high ſheriff of Suſſex, that he
might the better make impreſſion upon that county. Clarendon.
We lie open to the impreſſions of flattery, which we admit
without ſcruple, becauſe we think we deſerve it. Atterbury.
Univerſal gravitation is above all mechaniſm, and proceeds
from a divine energy and impreſſion. Bentley's Sermont.
There is a reaſ knowledge of material things, when the
thing itſelf, and the real action and impreſſion thereof on our
ſenſes, is perceived. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
5. Edition; number printed at once; one courſe of printing.
To be diſtracted with many opinions, makes men to be of
the laſt impreſſion, and full of change. Bacon.
For ten impreſſiºns, which his works have had in ſo many
years, at preſent a hundred books are ſcarcely purchaſed once
a twelvemonth. Dryden.
6. Effect of an attack.
Such a defeat of near two hundred horſe, ſeconded with two
thouſand foot, may ſurely endure a compariſon with any of
the braveſt impreſſions in ancient times. Hºtton.
IMPRE'ssible. adj. [in and preſum, Lat.] What may be in-
preſſed.
I 2 A The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
I M P
The differences of impreſſible and not impreſſible, figurable
and not figurable, are plebeian notions. Bacon's Natural Hiſł.
IMPRE'ssure. n.ſ.. [from impreſ...] The mark made by preſ-
ſure; the dent; the impreſſion.
Lean but upon a ruſh,
The cicatrice and capable impreſſure
Thy palm ſome moments keeps.
To IMPRI'NT. v. a. [imprimer, French.]
1. To mark upon any ſubſtance by preſſure.
One and the ſame ſeal, imprinted upon pieces of wax of
different colours. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Having ſurveyed the image of God in the ſoul of man, we
are not to omit thoſe characters of majeſty that God imprinted
upon the body. South's Sermons.
She amid'ſt his ſpacious meadows flows;
Inclines her urn upon his fatten’d lands,
And ſees his num'rous herds imprint her ſands. Prizr.
2. To ſtamp words upon paper by the uſe of types.
3. To fix on the mind or memory.
There is a kind of conveying of effectual and imprinting
paſſages, amongſt compliments, which is of ſingular uſe. Bac.
When we ſet before our eyes a round globe, the idea im-
printed in our mind is of a flat circle, variouſly ſhadowed. Loc.
We have all thoſe ideas in our underſtandings which we can
make the objects of our thoughts, without the help of thoſe
ſenfible qualities which firſt imprinted them. Locke.
Retention is the power to revive again in our minds thoſe
ideas, which, after imprinting, have diſappeared. Locke.
By familiar acquaintance he has got the ideas of thoſe two
different things diſtinétly imprinted on his mind. Locke.
To IMPRI’son. v. a. ſempriſonner, Fr. in and priſºn.] To ſhut
up; to confine; to keep from liberty.
He impriſon'd was in chains remedileſs;
For that Hippolytus' rent corſe he did redreſs. Fa. Queen.
Now we are in the ſtreet, he firſt of all,
Improvidently proud, creeps to the wall;
And ſo impriſon'd and hemm'd in by me,
Shakeſp. As you like it.
Sells for a little ſtate his liberty. Donne.
Try to impriſon the reſiſtleſs wind;
So ſwift is guilt, ſo hard to be confin'd. Dryden.
If a man impriſons himſelf in his cloſet, and employs reaſon
to find out the nature of the corporeal world, without experi-
ments, he will frame a ſcheme of chimeras. //atts.
It is not improbable, that all the virtual heat in the juices
of vegetables, metals, and minerals may be owing to the action
of the impriſoned rays. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
IMPRI’son MENT. n.ſ. [empriſonnement, Fr. from impriſºn.] Con-
finement; clauſure; ſtate of being ſhut in priſon. It may be
written empriſonment.
His finews waxen weak and raw,
Through long impriſºnment and hard conſtraint. F. Queen.
Which ſhall I firſt bewail,
Thy bondage or loſt fight,
Thou art become, O worſt impriſºnment 1
The dungeon of thyſelf. Milton's Agoniſłes.
From retentive cage
When ſullen Philomel eſcapes, her notes
She varies, and of paſt impriſonment
Sweetly complains. Phillips.
Count Serini, ſtill cloſe priſoner in this caſtle, loſt his ſenſes
by his long impriſonment and afflićtions. Addison.
It is well if they don't fix the brand of hereſy on the man
who is leading them out of their long impriſonment, and looſe-
ing the fetters of their ſouls. //atts's Impr. of the Mind.
IMPROBABI'lity. n.ſ. [ from improbable.] Unlikelihood;
difficulty to be believed.
The difficulty being ſo great, and the improbability of at-
tempting this ſucceſsfully, it was but reaſon that a ſolid foun-
dation ſhould be laid. Hammond.
As to the improbabilities of a ſpirit appearing, I boldly an-
ſwer him, that a heroick poet is not tied to the bare repreſen-
tation of what is true, or exceeding probable. Dryden.
IMPRø'BABLE. adj. [improbable, Fr. improbabilis, Lat. in and
prºbable.] Unlikely; incredible.
This account of party-patches will appear improbable to
thoſe who live at a diſtance from the faſhionable world. Addison
HM Pro’BABLY. adv. [from improbable.]
1. Without likelihood.
2. In a manner not to be approved. Obſolete.
Ariſtotle tells us, if a drop of wine be put into ten thou-
ſand meaſures of water, the wine being overpowered, will be
...turned into water: he ſpeaks very imprºbably. Boyle.
To IMPRO'BATE. v.a. [in and probo, Latin.] Not to ap-
prove. Ainſworth.
IMPRob A Tros. m. f, [improbatio, Latin; improbation, French.]
Act of diſallowing. Ainſworth.
IMPR o'Brry. n ſ: [ improbi - -
...”. J. probitas, improbus, Latin. I Want of
honeſty; diſhoneſty; #ºnº p J
e was perhaps excommunicable, yea, and caſt out for no-
torious improbity. Hooker.
Wº balance the impr:lity of the one with the improlity of
the other. - I’E/irange.
6 -
To IMPRoll'FIcAte. v. a. [in and prolific{..] To im lºilº -
to fecundate. A word tº. prolificſ.] pregnate;
A difficulty in the doćtrine of eggs is how the ſperm of the
cock improlificates, and makes the oval conception fruitful.
Brown's Pulgar Errºr.
IMPROPER., adj., [imprºpré, Fr. improprius, Latin.]
1. Not well adapted; unqualified.
. As every ſcience requires a peculiar genius, ſo likewiſe
there is a genius peculiarly improper for every one.
2. Unfit; not conducive to the right end.
The methods uſed in an original diſeaſe would be very in-
proper in a gouty caſe. Arbuthnot an Litt.
3. Not juſt ; not accurate.
He diſappear'd, was rarify’d;
For ’tis improper ſpeech to ſay he dy'd :
He was exhal’d. Dryden,
IMPRo'PERLY. adv. [from improper.] -
1. Not fitly; incongruouſly.
2. Not juſtly; not accurately.
Improperly we meaſure life by breath;
Such do not truly live who merit death. Dryd, juvenal
They aſſuring me of their affiſtance in correcting my faults
where I ſpoke improperly, I was encouraged. Dryden.
To IMPRo'PRIATE. v. a. [in and proprius, Latin.]
1. To convert to private uſe; to ſeize to himſelf.
For the pardon of the reſt, the king thought it not fit it
ſhould paſs by parliament; the better, being matter of grace,
to impropriate the thanks to himſelf. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. To put the poſſeſſions of the church into the hands of
laicks.
Mrs. Gulſton being poſſeſſed of the impropriate parſonage
of Bardwell in Suffolk, did procure from the king leave to
Burnet.
annex the ſame to the vicarage. - Spelman.,
IMPRoPRIAT 1 on. n.ſ.. [from impropriate.]
An impropriatiºn is properly ſo called when the church land
is in the hands of a layman; and an appropriation is when it
is in the hands of a biſhop, college, or religious houſe, though
ſometimes theſe terms are confounded. Ayliffe's Parargon.
Having an impropriation in his eſtate, he took a courſe to
diſpoſe of it for the augmentation of the vicarage. Spelman.
IMPRopriator. m. ſ. [from imprºpriate.] A layman that has
the poſſeſſion of the lands of the church.
Where the vicar leaſes his glebe, the tenant muſt pay the
great tythes to the reëtor or impropriator. Ayliff's Parerg.
IMPR opki'Ety. n.ſ. [improprieté, Fr. frcm improprius, Latin.]
Unfitneſs; unſuitableneſs; inaccuracy; want of juſtneſs.
Theſe mighty ones, whoſe ambition could ſuffer them to be
called gods, would never be flattered into immortality; but
the proudeſt have been convinced of the impropriety of that
appellation. Brown's Wul. Erreurs.
Many groſs imprºprieties, however authorized by practice,
ought to be diſcarded. Swift.
IMPRO's perous. adj. [in and proſperous.] Unhappy; unior-
tunate; not ſucceſsful.
This method is in the deſign probable, how imprºſperouſ ſo:
ever the wickedneſs of men hath rendered the ſucceſs of
it. - Hammond on Fundamental.
Our pride ſeduces us at once into the guilt of bold.”
puniſhment of improſperous rebels. Decay of Piety.
Seven revolving years are wholly run, y
Since the improſperous voyage we begun. Dryden's Án.
IMPRo’sperously adv. [from improſperous.] Unhappily; "
ſucceſsfully; with ill fortune.
. This experiment has been but very improſpercuſ, aſ-
tempted. Bok.
IMPRó'vable. adj. [from improve..] Capable of ºilº ad-
vanced from a good to a better ſtate; capable of º,
Adventures in knowledge are laudable, and the eſſays o
weaker heads afford improvable hints unto better. Brown.
We have ſtock enough, and that too of ſo improvable ana-
ture, that is, capable of infinite advancement. Pº) ºf P #.
Man is accommodated with moral principles: improvable }
the exerciſe of his faculties. Halº's Origin ºf º: -
Animals are not improvable beyond their prope; gº º
will never learn to mew, nor a cat to bark. Grº" º -
I have a fine ſpread of improvable lands, and *. already
planting woods and draining marſhes. Addiſon's º:
IMPRO'v AbleNess. n.ſ.. [from improvable.] Capableneſs 0
being made better. d
IMPROVAbly. adv. [from improvable.] In a manner that ad-
mits of melioration. ki
To IMprove. v. a. ſin and prolus. Quaſ probum fººt. Skin-
mer.] -
1. To advance any thing nearer to perfeótion; to raiſe from
good to better. We amend a bad, but improve a gºod tºº.
I love not to improve the honour of the living by iº";
that of the dead. Denham.
Heaven ſeems improv’d with a ſuperior ray, -
And the bright arch reflects a double day. Pope.
2. [In and prove; improuver, Fr. improbo, Lat.] To †: h
Though the prophet Jeremy was unjuſtly accuſed...yº. º
not that improve any thing that I have ſaid, ºff:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I M P
I M P
To IMPRo've. v. m. To advance in goodneſs.
We take care to improve in our frugality and diligence; vir-
tues which become us, particularly in times of war. Atterb.
IMPRo’ve MENT. n.ſ.. [from improve.]
1. Melioration; advancement of anything from good to better.
Some virtues tend to the preſervation of health, and others
to the improvement and ſecurity of eſtates. Tillotſon.
2. Aët of improving. -
The parts of Sinon, Camilla, and ſome few others, are
improvements on the Greek poet. Addiſon's Speciator.
3. Progreſs from good to better; - -
There is a deſign of publiſhing the hiſtory of archite&amp;ture,
with its ſeveral improvements and decays. Addiſon.
4. Inſtruction; edification. -
I look upon your city as the beſt place of improvement: from
the ſchool we go to the univerſity, but from the univerſitics to
London. - South.
5. Effečt of melioration. - - - i
Love is the greateſt of human affections, and friendſhip the
nobleſt and moſt refined improvement of love. South.
IMPRo'v ER. n ſ [from improve.]
1. One that makes himſelf or anything elſe better.
They were the greateſt improvers of thoſe qualifications with
which courts uſed to be adorned. Clarendon.
The firſt ſtarted ideas have been examined, and many effec-
tually confuted by the late improvers of this way. Locke.
Homer is like a ſkilful improver, who places a beautiful
ſtatue ſo as to anſwer ſeveral viſtas. Pope.
2. Anything that meliorates. -
Chalk is a very great improver of moſt lands. Mºrtimer.
Improvided. adj. [improviſus, Latin; imprevu, Fr.] Un-
foreſeen; unexpected; unprovided againſt.
- She ſuborned hath
This crafty meſſenger with letters vain,
To work new woe, and improvided ſcath,
By breaking off the band betwixt us twain. Fairy Queen.
IMprovidence. m.ſ.. [from improvident J Want of fore-
thought; want of caution. - -
Men would eſcape floods by running up to mountains; and
though ſome might periſh through improvidence, or through the
ſudden inundation of a deluge, many would eſcape. Hale.
The improvidence of my neighbour muſt not make me in-
human. - L'Eſtrange.
IMPROVIDENT. adj. [improvidus, Latin.] Wanting fore-
caſt; wanting care to provide.
Improvident ſoldiers, had your watch been good,
This ſudden miſchief never could have fall'n. Shakespeare H. VI.
When men well have fed, the blood being warm,
Then are they moſt improvident of harm. Daniel's Ci. War.
I ſhall conclude this digreſſion, and return to the time when
that briſk and improvident reſolution was taken. Carendon.
This were an improvident revenge, in the young ones,
whereby, in defe&amp;t of proviſion, they muſt º themſelves.
Brown's Vulgar Errours
IMPRo’vidently. adv. [from improvident.] Without fore-
thought; without care.
Now we are in the ſtreet, he firſt of all,
Improvidently proud, creeps to the wall;
And ſo impriſon'd, and hemm'd in by me,
Sells for a little ſtate his liberty. Donne.
IMP Rovi'sion. n. ſ. [in and proviſion.] Want of forethought.
Her improviſion would be juſtly accuſable. Brown.
IMPRU'DFNce. n.ſ.. [imprudence, Fr. imprudentia, Lat.]. Want
of prudence; indiſcretion; negligence; inattention to intereſt.
IMPRUDENT. adj. [imprudent, Fr. imprudens, Lat.] Wanting
prudence; injudicious; indiſcreet; negligent. -
There is no ſuch imprudent perſon as he that neglects God
and his ſoul. Til'oiſºn.
I'M pudence. \n.ſ. ſimpudence, Fr. impudentia, Lat.] Shame-
I'M PUDENcy. } leſſneſs; immodeſty.
I ne'er heard yet
That any of theſe bolder vices wanted
Leſs impudence to gainſay what they did, -
Than to perform it firſt. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
Nor did Noah's open infirmity juſtify Cham’s impudency, or
exempt him from that curſe of being ſervant of ſervants.
- - King Charles.
Thoſe clear truths, that either their own evidence forces us
us to admit, or common experience makes it impudence to
deny. Locke.
l'MPUDENT. adj. [impudent, Fr. impudens, Latin.] "Shame-
leſs; wanting modeſty.
It is not a confident brow, nor the throng of words that
come with ſuch more than impudent ſawcineſs from you, can
thruſt me from a level confideration. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
When we behold an angel, not to fear,
Is to be impudent. Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
IMPUDENT ly, adv. [from impudent.] Shameleſly; without
modeſty. -
At once aſſail
With open mouths, and impudently rail. . Sandys.
Why ſhould ſoft Fabius impudently bear
Names gain’d by conqueſt in the Gallick war
Why lays he claim to Hercules his ſtrain,
Yet dares be baſe, effeminate, and vain? Dryden.
To IMPUGN. v. a. ſimpugner, Fr. impugno, Lat.] To attack;
to aſſault. - - -
Of a ſtrange nature is the ſuit you follow;
Yet in ſuch rule, that the Venetian law
Cannot impugn you. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
I cannot think myſelf engaged to diſcourſe of lots, as to
their nature, uſe, and allowableneſs; and that not only, in
matters of moment and buſineſs, but alſo of recreation, which,
is indeed impugned by ſome, though better defended by others.
South's Sermons.
St. Hierom reporteth, that he ſaw one of theſe in his time;
but the truth hereof I will not raſhly impugn, or over-boldly
affirm. Peacham on Drawing.
IMPu'GNER. m.ſ. [from impugn.] One that attacks or invades,
IMPUI'ssANçe. n.ſ. [French Jº Impotence; inability; weak-
neſs; feebleneſs.
As he would not truſt Ferdinando and Maximilian for ſup-
ports of war, ſo the impuiſſance of the one, and the double
proceeding of the other, lay fair for him for occaſions to ac-
cept of peace. Bacºn's Henry VII.
I'MPULSE. m. ſ. [impulſus, Latin.] . -
1. Communicated force; the effect of onebody ačtingupon another.
If theſe little impulſes ſet the great wheels of devotiºn on
work, the largeneſs and height of that ſhall not at all be pre-
judiced by the ſmalneſs of its occaſion. South's Sermons.
Bodies produce ideas in us manifeſtly by impulſe. Locke.
Bodies, from the impulſe of a fluid, can only gravitats in
proportion to their ſurfaces, and not according to their quan-
tity of matter, which is contrary to experience. Chyne.
2. Influence acting upon the mind; motive; idea. -
Mean time, by Jove's impulſe, Mezentius arm’d, ...
Succeeded Turnus. r Dryden's Æn.
Theſe were my natural impulſes for the undertaking; but
there was an accidental motive, which was full as forcible. Dry.
Moſes ſaw the buſh burn without being conſumed, and
heard a voice out of it: this was ſomething, beſides finding
an ºft upon his mind to go to Pharaoh, that he might bring
his brethren out of Egypt. Locke.
3. Hoſtile impreſſion. -
... Like two great rocks againſt the raging tide,
Unmov'd the two united chiefs abide, -
Suſtain th’ impulſe, and receive the war. . . . . Prior.
IMP'u'lsion. n ſ [impulſion, Fr. impulſus, Latin.]
1. The agency of body in motion upon body. . . . . ."
The motion in the minute parts of any ſolid body paſſeth
without ſound; for that ſound that is heard ſometimes is pro-
duced only by the breaking of the air, and not by the impul-
ſon of the air. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To the impulſion there is requiſite the force of the body that
moveth, and the reſiſtance of the body that is moved ; and if
the body be too great, it yieldeth too little; and if it be too
ſmall, it reſiſteth too little, Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Influence operating upon the mind. . . .
But thou didſt plead º,
Divine impulſion, prompting how thou might'ſt º
Find ſome occaſion to infeſt our foes. Milton's Agoniſier.
IMP'u'lsive., adj...[impulſif, Fr. from impulſe..] Having the
power of impulſe; moving; impellent. . . ---
Nature and duty bind him to obedience; . . . . . .
But thoſe being placed in a lower ſphere, -*.
His fierce ambition, like the higheſt mover,
Has hurried with a ſtrong impulſive motion . . . . . .
Againſt their proper courſe. Denham's Sophy.
What is the fountain or impulſive cauſe of this prevention.
of fin It is perfeótly free grace. South's Sermºns.
Poor men! poor papers' we and they * -
Do ſome impulſive force obey, - }
And are but play'd with, do not play. - Prior.
IMPu'Nity. n.ſ.. [impunité, Fr. impunitas, Latin.] Freedom
from puniſhment; exemption from puniſhment. .
In the condition of ſubjects they will gladly continue,
as long as they may be protećted and juſtly governed, without
oppreſſion on the one ſide, or impunity on the other. Davies.
A general impunity would confirm them; for the vulgar will
never be brought to believe, that there is a crime where they
ſee no penalty. Addison's Freeholder.
Men, potent in the commonwealth, will employ their ill-
gotten influence towards procuring impunity, or extorting un-
due favours for themſelves or dependents. Atterbury's Sermons.
IMPURE. adj. [impur, Fr. impurus, Latin.]
1. Contrary to ſanétity; unhallowed; unholy.
No more can impure man retain and move
In that pure region of a worthy love,
Than earthly ſubſtance can unforc'd aſpire,
And leave his nature to converſe with fire. Donne.
Hypocrites auſterely talk,
Condemning as impure what §. has made -
Pure, and commands to ſome, leaves free to all. Milton.
2. Unchaſte.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N
I N
2. Unchaſte.
lf black ſcandal, or foul-fac’d reproach,
Attend the ſequel of your impoſition,
Your meer enforcement ſhall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and ſtains thereof. Shakeſp. R. III.
One could not deviſe a more proper hell for an impure ſpi-
rit, than that which Plato has touched upon. Addiſon.
3. Feculent; foul with extraneous mixtures; droſy.
IMPU'REly. adv. [from impure J. With impurity.
IM Pu‘REN ess. }". ſ. [impureté, French; impuritas, Lat. from
IM Pu'RIT Y. impure.]
r. Want of ſanāity; want of holineſs.
2. A&amp;t of unchaſtity.
The foul impurities that reigned among the monkiſh clergy.
Atterbury's Sermoni.
3. Feculent admixture.
Cleanſe the alimentary dućt by vomiting and clyſters, the
impurities of which will be carried into the blood. Arbuthnot.
To IMPU'RPLE. v. a. [empourprer, Fr. from purple.] To make
red; to colour as with purple.
Now in looſe garlands, thick thrown off the bright
Pavement, that like a ſea of jaſper ſhone,
Impurpled with celeſtial roſes, ſmil’d. Milton.
IMPUTABLE. adj. [from impute 3
1. Chargeable upon any one.
That firſt ſort of fooliſhneſs is imputable to them. South:
2. Accuſable; chargeable with a fault. Not proper.
If the wife departs from her huſband, through any default of
his, as on the account of cruelty, then he ſhall be compelled
to allow her alimony; for the law deems her to be a dutiful
wife as long as the fault lies at his door, and ſhe is in no wife
imputable. Ayliffe's Parergon.
IMPu'tableNEss. m. ſ. [from imputable.] The quality of being
imputable.
'Tis neceſſary to the imputablendſ of an action, that it be
avoidable. - Norris.
IMPut A’t Ion. n.ſ.. [imputation, Fr. from impute.]
1. Attribution of anything: generally of ill.
Truſt to me, Ulyſſes; - - -
Our imputation ſhall be oddly pois'd -
In this wild action. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
If a ſon that is ſent by his father about merchandize, do fall
into ſome lewd ačtion, the imputation of his wickedneſs, by
your rule, ſhould be impoſed upon his father. Shakeſpeare.
To uſe intelle&amp;tions and volitions in the infinite eſſence, as
hypotheſes, is allowable; but a rigorous imputation is deroga-
“I to him, and arrogant in us. Glanv. Scepſ.
have formerly ſaid that I could diſtinguiſh your writings
from thoſe of any others: 'tis now time to clear myſelf from
any imputation of ſelf-conceit on that ſubječt. Dryden.
2. Sometimes of good.
If I had a ſuit to maſter Shallow, I would humour his men
with the imputation of being near their maſter. Shakeſpeare.
3. Cenſure; reproach.
Whatſoever happens they alſo the leaſt feel that ſcourge of
vulgar imputation, which notwithſtanding they deſerve. Hooker.
• Let us be careful to guard ourſelves againſt theſe groundleſs
imputations of our enemies, and to riſe above them. Addison.
Neither do I reflect upon the memory of his late majeſty,
whom I entirely acquit of any inputation upon this mat-
ter. . Swift.
4, Hint; refle&amp;tion. - -
Anthonio is a good man. -
—Have you º any imputation to the contrary 2
—No, no; my meaning is to have you underſtand me that he
is ſufficient. - Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
IMPUTA'tive. adj. [from impute. J . That which may im-
pute. Ainſworth.
To IMPUTE. v. a. [imputer, Fr. impute, Latin.]
1. To charge upon; to attribute: generally ill; ſometimes
It was imputed to him for righteouſneſs. Ro. iv. 22.
Men in their innovations ſhould follow the cxample of time,
which innovateth but quietly, and by degrees ſcarce to be per-
ceived; for otherwiſe whatſoever is new and unlooked for,
ever mends ſome, and pairs others; and he that is holpen
takes it for a fortune, and thanks the time; and he that is hurt
for a wrong, imputeth it to the author. Bacon's Eſſays.
I made it by your perſuaſion, to ſatisfy thoſe who imputed
it to folly. Temple.
Impute your dangers to our ignorance. Dryden.
This obſcurity cannot be imputed to want of language in
ſo great a maſter of ſtile. Locke.
I have read a book imputed to lord Bathurſt, called a diſſerta-
tion on parties. - Swift.
2. To reckon to one what does not properly belong to him.
Thy merit
Imputed ſhall abſolve them who renounce -
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds. Miltºn.
IMPu't ER. n.ſ.. [from impute.] He that imputes.
IN. prep. [in, Latin.]
1. Noting the place where any thing is preſent.
In ſchool of love are all things taught we ſee;
There learn'd this maid of arms the ireful guiſe. Fairfax.
Is this place here not ſufficient ſtrong
To guard us in *
2. Noting the ſtate preſent at any time.
The other is only by error and miſconceit named the or-
dinance of Jeſus Chriſt: no one proof is yet brought forth,
whereby it may clearly appear to be ſo in very deed. Hooker.
Like one of two contending in a prize,
That thiuks he hath done well in people's eyes. Shakeſp.
Sir Edmond Courtney, and the haughty prelate,
With many more confederates, are in arms. Shać. R. III.
Danger before, and in, and after the act,
You needs muſt grant is great. Daniel's Civil War.
However it be in knowledge, I may truly ſay it is of no uſe
at all in probabilities; for the aſſent there, being to be deter-
mined by the preponderancy, after a due weighing of all the
proofs on both ſides, nothing is ſo unfit to aſſiſt the mind in
that as ſyllogiſm. Lºcke.
In all likelihood I brought all my limbs out of the bed,
which, 'tis probable, he has not done off the breach. Collier.
God hath made our eternal and temporal intereſts, in moſt
caſes, very conſiſtent. Smalridge's Sermºns.
None was ſo little in their friendſhips, or ſo much in that of
thoſe whom they had moſt abuſed. Letter to Publ. of Dunciad.
3. Noting the time.
When we would conſider eternity a parte ante, what do we
but, beginning from ourſelves and the preſent time we are in,
repeat in our minds the ideas of years or ages paſt, with a
proſpect of proceeding in ſuch addition with all the infinity of
numbers? Locke.
4. Noting power.
To feed mens ſouls, quoth he, is not in man. Hubb. Tale.
5. Noting proportion.
Let uſury in general be reduced to five in the hundred, and
let that rate be proclaimed to be free and current. Bacon.
I cannot but lament the common courſe, which, at leaſt,
nine in ten of thoſe who enter into the miniſtry are obliged to
enter. - Swift.
6. Concerning. -
I only confider what he, who is allowed to have carried this
argument fartheſt, has ſaid in it. Locke.
7. For the ſake. A ſolemn phraſe.
. Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat does this our Caeſar feed,
That he is grown ſo great? Shakespeare julius Caeſar.
In the name of the people,
And in the power of us the tribunes, we
Daniel's Civil War.
Baniſh him our city. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Now, in the name of honour, fir, I beg you
That I may ſee your father's death reveng'd. Dryden.
8. Noting cauſe.
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
, Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence. Shakeſp. H. VI.
9, IN that. Becauſe.
Some things they do in that they are men; in that they are
wiſe men, and chriſtian men, ſome things; ſome things in that
they are men miſled, and blinded with error. - Hooker.
He cannot brook ſuch diſgrace well, as he ſhall run into ;
in that it is a thing of his own ſearch, and againſt my will.
Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
1c. IN as much. Since; ſeeing that. . . .
Thoſe things are done voluntarily by us, which other crea-
tures do naturally, in as much as we might ſtay our doing of
them if we would. Hooker.
IN. adv.
1. Within ſome place; not out. -
How infamous is the falſe, fraudulent, and unconſcionable
perſon; eſpecially if he be arrived at that conſummate and IO-
j. degree of falſhood as to play in and out, and ſhow tricks
with oaths, the ſacredeſt bonds which the conſcience of man
can be bound with. South's Sermons.
I fear me, you'll be in 'till then. Shakeſpeare.
2. Engaged to any affair.
We know the worſt can come: 'tis thought upon: .
We cannot ſhift being in, we muſt go on. Daniel.
Theſe pragmatical flies value themſelves for being in at every
thing, and are found at laſt to be juſt good for nothing. L'Eſt.
3. Placed in ſome ſtate.
Poor rogues talk of court news,
Who loſes and who wins; who's in, who's out. Shakeſp.
Muſt never patriot then declaim at gin,
. . Unleſs, good man, he has been fairly in. Pope.
4. Noting entrance. -
Go to thy fellows; bid them cover the table, ſerve in the
meat, and we will come in to dinner. Shakeſpeare.
He's too big to go in there: what ſhall I do? . .
—Let me ſce’t; I’ll in, I’ll in : follow your friend's advice,
I’ll in. Shakespeare's Merry Iſives of J/indſºr.
In the ſaid cavity lies looſe the ſhell of ſome ſort of bivalve
larger than could be introduced in at either of thoſe holes.
- - Iſºodward on Fºſſils.
; Is
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N A
I N A
5. Into any place.
Is it not more elegible to come in with a ſmooth gale, than
to be toſſed at ſea with a ſtorm. Collier.
Next fill the hole with its own earth again,
And trample with thy feet, and tread it in. Dryd. Georg.
6. Cloſe; home.
The poſture of left-handed fencers is ſo different from that
of the right-handed, that you run upon their ſwords if you puſh
forward; and they are in with you, if you offer to fall back
without keeping your guard. Tatler.
IN has commonly in compoſition a negative or privative ſenſe,
as in the Latin: ſo, ačfive denotes that which affs, inactive
that which does not ači. In before r is changed into r, as
irregular : before l into l; as iſlative: and into m before ſome
other cenſonants; as improbable.
Ina BI'lity. n. ſ. [in and ability.] Impuiſſance; impotence;
want of power.
If no natural nor caſual inability croſs their deſires, they al-
ways delighting to inure themſelves with actions moſt benefi-
cial to others, cannot but gather great experience, and thro'
experience the more wiſdom. Hooker.
Neither ignorance nor inability can be pretended; and what
plea can we offer to divine juſtice to prevent condemna-
tion? Rogers.
INA’est IN ENce. n.ſ. [ in and abſtinence..] Intemperance;
want of power to abſtain.
Diſeaſes dire; of which a monſtrous crew
Before thee ſhall appear, that thou may’ſt know
What miſery the inabſtinence of Eve
Shall bring on man. Milt. Par. Lºſt.
INAccE'ssible. adj. [inacceſſible, Fr. in and acceſſible.] Not to
be reached; not to be approached.
Whate'er you are,
That in this deſart inacceſſible,
Under the ſhade of melancholy boughs,
Loſe and negleśt the creeping hours of time. Shakeſpeare.
Many other hidden parts of nature, even of a far lower
form, are inacceſſible to us. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
There ſhall we clearly ſee the ends and uſes of theſe things,
which here were either too ſubtile for us to penetrate, or too
remote and inacceſſible for us to come to any diſtinét view of.
Ray on the Creation.
This part, which is ſo noble, is not altogether inacceſſible;
and that an eaſy way may be found to it, 'tis to conſider nature
and to copy her. Dryden.
INA'ccuRAcy. m. ſ. [from inaccurate.] Want of exactneſs.
INA'ccuRATE. adj. [in and accurate.] Not exact; not accu-
rate. It is uſed ſometimes of perſons, but more frequently of
performances.
INA'ction. m. ſ. [inačtion, Fr. in and ačion.] Ceſſation from
labour; forbearance of labour.
The times and amuſements paſt are not more like a dream
to me, than thoſe which are preſent: I lie in a refreſhing kind
of inadion. Pope.
INA'ctive. adj. [in and ačiive.] Not buſy; not diligent;
idle; indolent; ſluggiſh.
INA’ctively. adv. . [from inačive..] Idly; without labour;
without motion; ſluggiſhly.
In ſeaſons of; perfect freedom, mark how your ſon ſpends
his time; whether he inactively loiters it away, when left to
his own inclination. Locke.
INAct 1'vity. n.ſ.. [in and ačivity.] Idleneſs; reſt; ſluggiſh-
neſs.
A doctrine which manife&amp;tly tends to diſcourage the endea-
vours of men, to introduce a lazy inactivity, and negle&amp;t of
the ordinary means of grace. Rºgers's Sermons.
Virtue, conceal’d within our breaſt,
Is inactivity at beſt. Swift.
INA/D EQUA TE. adj. [in and adacquatus, Latin.] Not equal to
the purpoſe; defective; falling below the due proportion.
- Remorſe for vice
Not paid, or paid inadequate in price, -
What farther means can reaſon now direét? Dryden.
inadequate ideas are ſuch, which are but a partial or incom-
plete repreſentation of thoſe archetypes to which they are re-
ferred. Ilocke.
INA'DE QUATELY. adv. [from inadequate.] Defećtively; not
completely, -
Theſe pores they may either exačtly fill, or but inade-
quately. Boyle.
INA Dv ERTENCE. }". ſ: ſ inadvertance, French; from inad-
IN ADVE’RTEN cy. $ vertent. J
1. Careleſſneſs; negligence; inattention.
There is a vaſt difference between them ; indecd, as vaſt as
between inadvertenºy and deliberation, between ſurprize and
ſet purpoſe. South.
From an habitual heedleſs inadveriency, men are ſo intent
upon the preſent that they mind nothing elſe. L'E/irange.
2. Act or effect of negligence.
Many perſons have lain under great and heavy ſcandals,
+vhich have taken their firſt riſe only from ſome inadvertence or
indiſcretion. Government ºf the Tºngue.
The productions of a great genius, with many lapſes and
inadvertencies, are infinitely preferrable to the works of an in-
ferior kind of author, which are ſcrupulouſly exact. Addiſon.
IN ADVE'RT ENT. adj. [in and advertens, Latin.] Negligent;
careleſs.
IN ADVE'RTENTLY. adv. [from inadvertent.] Careleſly; ne-
gligently.
Ariſtotle mentions Telegonus as the ſon of Circe and Ulyſſes,
who afterwards ſlew his father with the bone of a fiſh inadver-
tently. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey. -
Worthy perſons, if inadvertently drawn into a deviation,
will endeavour inſtantly to recover their loſt ground. Clariſſa.
INA'LIENABLE. adj. [in and alienable.] That cannot be alie-
nated.
INALIME'NTAL. adj. [in and alimental.] Affording no nou-
riſhment.
Dulcoration importeth a degree to nouriſhment; and the
making of things inalimental to be become alimental, may be
an experiment of great profit for making new vićtual. Bacon.
INAM1'ssible, adj. [inamiſſible, French; in and amiſum, Lat.]
Not to be loſt.
Theſe advantages are inamiſſible. Hammond.
INA'NE. adj. [inanis, Latin.] Empty; void.
We ſometimes ſpeak of place in the great inane, *.
the confines of the world. ocke.
To INA'NIMATE. v. a. [in and animo, Latin.] To animate;
to quicken. This word is not in uſe.
There's a kind of world remaining ſtill,
Though ſhe which did inanimate and fill
The world be gone; yet in this laſt long night
Her ghoſt doth walk, that is, a glimmering light. Donne:
INA'NIMATE. l adj. [inanimatus, Latin; inanimé, French.]
INA'NIMATED. } Void of life; without animation.
The ſpirits of animate bodies are all in ſome degree kin-
dled; but inanimate bodies have their ſpirits no whit inflamed.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The golden goddeſs, preſent at the pray'r,
Well knew he meant th’ inanimated fair,
And gave the ſign of granting. Dryden.
All the ideas of Spenserible qualities are not inherent in the
inanimate bodies; but are the effects of their motion upon our
nerves. Bentley.
They can neither ſubſiſt nor be produced by the powers of
mechaniſm; for both require the conſtant influence of a prin-
ciple different from that which governs the inanimated part of
the univerſe. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
From roofs when Verrio's colours fall,
And leave inanimate the naked wall,
Still in thy ſong ſhould vanquiſh'd France appear. Pope.
INAN1'TION. n.ſ.. [inanition, Fr. inanis, Lat..] Emptineſs of body;
want of fulneſs in the veſſels of the animal.
Weakneſs which attends fevers proceeds from too great ful-
neſs in the beginning, and too great inanition in the latter end
of the diſeaſe. Arbuthnot on Diet.
INA'NITY. m. ſ. [from inanis, Latin.]. Emptineſs; void ſpace.
This opinion excludes all ſuch inanity, and admits no va-
cuities but ſo little ones as no body whatever can come to, but
will be bigger than they, and muſt touch the corporal parts
which thoſe vacuities divide. Digby on Bodies.
INA‘ppetency. n.ſ.. [in and appetentia, Latin.] Want of ſto-
mach or appetite.
INA'PPLIcAble. adj. [in and applicable.] Not to be put to a
particular uſe.
INApplication. n.ſ.. [inapplication, Fr. in and application.]
Indolence; negligence.
INA'RAB le. adj. [in and aro, Latin.] Not capable of til-
lage. Dićf.
To INA'RCH. v. a. [in and arch.]
Inarching is a method of grafting, which is commonly
called grafting by approach. This method of grafting is uſed
when the ſtock and the tree may be joined: take the branch
you would imarch, and, having fitted it to that part of the ſtock
where you intend to join it, pare away the rind and wood on
one ſide about three inches in length: after the ſame manner
cut the ſtock or branch in the place where the graft is to be
united, ſo that they may join equally together that the ſap may
meet: then cut a little tongue upwards in the graft, and make
a notch in the ſtock to admit it; ſo that when they are joined
the tongue will prevent their ſlipping, and the graft will more
cloſely unite with the ſtock. Having thus placed them exactly
together, tie them; then cover the place with grafting clay,
to prevent the air from entering to dry the wound, or the wet
from getting in to rot the ſtock: you ſhould fix a ſtake into
the ground, to which that part of the ſtock, as alſo the graft,
ſhould be faſtened, to prevent the wind from breaking them
aſunder. In this manner they are to remain about four
months, in which time they will be ſufficiently united ; and
the graſt may then be cut from the mother-tree, obſerving to
ſlope it off cloſe to the ſtock, and cover the joined parts with
freſh grafting clay. The operation is always performed in
April or May, and is commonly practiſed upon oranges, myr-
tles, jaſmines, walnuts firrs, and pines, which will not ſuc-
ceed by common grafting or budding Miller.
12 B INARTI'culat E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N B
I N C
IN ARTI'cu LATE. adj. [imarticule, Fr. in and articulate.] Not
uttered with diſtinctneſs like that of the ſyllables of human
ſpeech.
Obſerve what inarticulate ſounds reſemble any of the parti-
cular letters. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
By the harmony of words we elevate the mind to a ſenſe of
devotion; as our ſolemn muſick, which is inarticulate poeſy,
does in churches. Dryden.
HNARTI'culateLY. adv. [from imarticulate.] Not diſtinctly.
HNART1'cul Ate Ness. n.ſ.. [from imarticulate.] Confuſion of
ſounds; want of diſtinctneſs in pronouncing. -
INAR T1F1'cIAL. adj. [in and artificial.] Contrary to art.
I have ranked this among the effects; and it may be thought
inartificial to make it the cauſe alſo. Decay ºf Piety.
IN ARTIF1'cIALLY. adv. [from inartificial.] Without art; in
a manner contrary to the rules of art.
This lofty humour is clumſily and inartificially managed,
when its affected by thoſe of a ſelf-denying profeſſion. Collier.
INATTE'N Tion. m. ſ. ſinattention, Fr. in and attention.] Diſ-
regard; negligence; neglect.
Perſons keep out of the reach of the reproofs of the mi-
niſtry, or hear with ſuch inatiention or contempt as renders
them of little effect. Rogers's Sermons.
We ſee a ſtrange inattention to this moſt important pro-
ſpect. Rogers's Sermons.
Novel lays attract our raviſh'd ears;
But old, the mind with inattention hears. Pope.
INATTE'Ntive. adj. [in and attentive..] Careleſs; negligent;
regardleſs.
If we indulge the frequent roving of paſſions, we ſhall pro-
cure an unſteady and inattentive habit. J/atts.
INAU'DIBLE. adj. [in and audible.] Not to be heard; void of
ſound.
Let's take the inſtant by the forward top;
For we are old, and on our quick'ſt decrees
Th’ inaudible and noiſeleſs foot of time
Steals, ere we can effect them. Shakeſpeare.
To INAU"G URATE. v. a. [inauguro, Latin.] To conſecrate;
to inveſt with a new office by ſolemn 1:tes; to begin with good
omens; to begin.
Thoſe beginnings of years were propitious to him, as if
kings did chuſe remarkable days to inaugurate their favours,
that they may appear ačts as well of the time as of the
will. Wotton.
IN AUGURA'tion, n.ſ. [ inauguration, Fr. inauguro, Latin. J
Inveſtiture by ſolemn rites.
The royal olive was ſolemnly ſworn, at his inauguratiºn, to
obſerve theſe things inviolable. Howel's Wocal Forreſt.
At his regal inauguration his old father reſigned the kingdom
to him. - Brown's Wulgar Errours.
IN AURATION. n ſ. [inauro, Latin.] The act of gilding or
covering with gold. -
The Romans had the art of gilding after our manner; but
ſome ſort of their inauration, or gilding, muſt have been much
dearer than ours. Arbuthnot on Coins.
INA USP1c10 U.S. adj. [in and auſpicious.] Ill-omened; un-
lucky; unfortunate.
Oh here
I will ſet up my everlaſting reſt;
And ſhake the yoke of inauſpicious ſtars
From this world-wearied fleſh. Shakespeare Rom, and juliet.
Though heaven's inauſpicious eye
Lay black on love's nativity,
Her eye a ſtrong appeal can give;
Beauty, ſmiles, and love ſhall live. Croſhaw.
The ſtars feel not the diſeaſes their inauſpicious influence
produces. Boyle.
With inaufficious love a wretched ſwain
Purſu'd the faireſt nymph of all the plain;
She plung’d him hopeleſs in a deep deſpair. Dryden.
INBE'ING.. n.ſ.. [in and bring.] Inherence; inſeparableneſs.
When we ſay the bowl is round, the boy is witty, theſe are
proper or inherent modes; for they have a ſort of inlcing in
the ſubſtance itſelf, and do not ariſe from the addition of any
other ſubſtance to it. - J/atts.
I'NBoRN. adj. [in and born.] Innate; implanted by nature.
Led by ſenſe of good,
Inhorn to all, I ſought my needful food. Dryden.
All paſſions being inlorn with us, we are almoſt equally
judges of them. Dryden.
Some Carolina, to heaven's dićtates true,
Thy inborn worth with conſcious eyes ſhall ſee,
And ſlight th’ imperial diadem for thee. Addiſon.
IND REATHED. adj. [in and breath..] Inſpired; infuſed by in-
ſpir, tion.
Bleſt pair of ſyrens, pledges of heav'n's joy,
Sphere-born harmonious ſiſters, voice and verſe,
Wed your divine ſounds, and mixt power employ,
Dead things with inbreath'd ſenſe able to pierce. Milton.
I'N BRED. adj. [in and bred.] Produced within; hatched or
generated within.
My inlred enemy
Forth iſſu’d. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ii.
A man thinks better of his children than they deſerve; but
there is an impulſe of tenderneſs, and there muſt be ſome
eſteem for the ſetting of that inbred affection at work. L’Eſir.
But he unmov’d contemns their idle threat;
And inbred worth doth boaſting valour ſlight. Dryden.
To INCA (GE. v. a. [in and cage.] To coop up ; to ſhut up;
to confine in a cage, or any narrow ſpace.
And yet incaged in ſo ſmall a verge,
Thy waſte is no whit leſſer than thy lord's. Shakespeare R. II.
It made my impriſonment a pleaſure;
Ay, ſuch a pleaſure as incaged birds
Conceive. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
INc ALE'scENce. }": [incalſco, Latin.] The ſtate of grow-
INcALE'scency. $ ing warm; warmth; incipient heat.
Averroes reſtrained his hilarity, making no more thereof
than Seneca commendeth, and was allowable in Cato; that is,
a ſober incaleſence, and regulated eſtuation from wine. Brown.
The oil preſerves the ends of the bones from incaleſcency, which
they, being ſolid bodies, would neceſſarily contračt from a ſwift
motion. Ray on the Creation.
INCANTA"tion. n ſ [incantation, Fr. incanto, Lat.] Charms
uttered by ſinging; enchantment.
My ancient incantations are too weak,
And hell too ſtrong. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
By Adam's hearkening to his wife, mankind, by that her
incantation, became the ſubječt of labour, ſorrow, and death.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/ºrld.
The great wonders of witches, their carrying in the air,
and transforming themſelves into other bodies, are reported to
be wrought, not by incantations or ceremonies, but by anoint-
ing themſelves all over, move a man to think that theſe fables
are the effects of imagination; for ointments, if laid on any
thing thick, by ſtopping of the pores, ſhut in the vapours, and
ſend them to the head extremely. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The name of a city being diſcovered unto their enemies,
their penates and patronal gods might be called forth by charms
and incantations. Brown's Vulgar Errouri.
The nuptial rights his outrage ſtrait attends;
The dow'r deſir'd is his transfigur'd friends:
The incantation backward ſhe repeats,
Inverts her rod, and what ſhe did, defeats. Garth.
The commands which our religion hath impoſed on its fol-
lowers are not like the abſurd ceremonies of pagan idolatry, the
frivolous rites of their initiations and worſhip, that might look
like incantations and magick, but had no tendency to make man-
kind the happier. Bentley's Sermons.
INCA'N TA to R Y. adj. . [from incanto, Latin.] Dealing by en-
chantment; magical.
Fortune-tellers, jugglers, geomancers, and the like incan-
tatory impoſtors, daily delude them. Brown', Wulg, Errours.
To INCA'N To N. v. a. [in and canion.] To unite to a canton
or ſeparate community.
When the cantons of Bern and Zurich propoſed the incor-
porating Geneva in the cantons, the Roman catholicks, fear-
ing the proteſtant intereſt, propoſed the incantoning of Con-
ſtance as a counterpoiſe, Addiſon on Italy.
INcap Abi'LITY. }*ſ [from incapable.] Inability natural;
INCA'PABLENEss. iſqualification legal.
You have nothing to urge but a kind of incapability in
yourſelf to the ſervice. Suckling.
INCA'PABLE. adj. [incapable, Fr. in and capable.]
1. Wanting power; wanting underſtanding; unable to compre-
hend, learn, or underſtand.
Incapable and ſhallow innocents'
You cannot gueſs who caus'd your father's death. Shakeſp.
2. Not able to receive anything.
Wilmot, when he ſaw Goring put in the command, thought
himſelf incapable of reparation. Carendon.
3. Unable; not equal to any thing.
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reaſonable affairs? Is he not ſtupid
With age Shakespeare Winter's Tal.
4. Diſqualified by law.
Their lands are almoſt entirely taken from them, and they
are rendered incapable of purchaſing any more. Swift.
5. In converſation it is uſual to ſay a man is incapable of fºiſe-
hood, or incapable of generoſity, or of any thing good or
bad.
IncAPA'cious. adj. [in and capaciºuſ.] Narrow; of ſmall
COntent.
Souls that are made little and incapacious cannot enlarge
their thoughts to take in any great compaſs of times or
things. Burnet.
INcAPA'ciousness. m. ſ. [ from inca'arious. J Narrowneſs;
want of containing ſpace.
To INCAPA’cITATE. v. a. [in and capacitate.]
1. To diſable; to weaken.
Nothing of conſequence ſhould be left to be done in the
laſt incapacitating hours of life. º -
2. l Q
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H N C
I N C
*
!-
*.
--
&gt;
2. To diſqualify. -
Monſtrofity could not incapacitate from marriage. Arbuthn.
IscAPA’cITY.. n.ſ.. [incapacitº, Fr. in and capacity.] Inability;
want of natural power; want of power of body; want of
comprehenſiveneſs of mind.
It chiefly proceedeth from natural incapacity, and genial in-
diſpoſition. - - - - Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Admonition he imputes either to envy, or elſe ignorance
and incapacity of eſtimating his worth. Govern. of the Tongue.
The inactivity of the ſoul is its incapacity to be moved with
anything common. - - Arbuthnot.
To Iscarce R.A.T.E. v. a. [incarcero, Latin.] To impriſon;
to confine. It is uſed in the Scots law to denote impriſoning
or confining in a gaol; otherwiſe it is ſeldom found.
The peſtilent contagion may be propagated by thoſe denſe
bodies, that eaſily incarcerate the infected air; as woollen
cloaths. Harvey on Conſumptions.
INCARce RA'tion. n.ſ.. [from incarcerate.] Impriſonment;
confinement.
To INCA’R N. v. a. ſincarno, Latin J. To cover with fleſh.
- The fleſh will ſoon ariſe in that cut of the bone, and make
exfoliation of what is neceſſary, and incarn it. //ſeman.
To IxcA'RN. v. n. To breed fleſh. -
The ſlough came off, and the ulcer happily incarned I/iſm.
To INcA'RNADIN E. v. a. ſincarnadine, Fr. incarnadino, pale red,
Italian.]. To dye red. This word I find only once.
Will all great Neptune's ocean waſh this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous ſea incarnardine,
Making the green one red. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To IN ca'RNATE. v. a. ſincarner, Fr. incarno, Latin.]
1. To cloath with fleſh; to embody with fleſh.
I, who erſt contended -
With gods to fit the higheſt, am now conſtrain'd , .
Into a beaſt, and mix with beſtial ſlime,
This eſſence to incarnate and imbrute. Milton.
INCA'RNATE. farticipial adj. [incarnat, Fr. from the verb.]
1. Cloathed with fleſh; em.bodied in fleſh.
- Undoubtedly even the nature of God itſelf, in the perſon of
the ſon, is incarnate, and hath taken to itſelf fleſh. Hooker.
They ſay he cried out of women. .
—Yes, that he did, and ſaid they were devils incarnate. Shakespeare
A moſt wiſe ſufficient means of redemption and ſalvation,
by the ſatisfactory death and obedience of the incarnate ſon of
God, Jeſus Chriſt, God bleſſed for ever. Sanderſon.
- - Here ſhalt thou ſit incarnate, here ſhalt reign -
Both God and man. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. iii.
2. It may be doubted whether Swift underſtood this word.
But he's poſſeſt,
Incarnate with a thouſand imps. Swift.
3. In Scotland incarnate is applied to any thing tinged of a deep
red colour, from its reſemblance to a fleſh colour.
IscARNATION. n.ſ.. [incarnatin, Fr. from incarnate.]
1. The act of aſſuming body.
We muſt beware we exclude not the nature of God from
incarnation, and ſo make the ſon of God incarnate not to be
very God. Hºoker.
Upon the annunciation, or our Lady-day, meditate on, the
incarnation of our bleſſed Saviour. Taylor's Guide to Devºtion.
2. The ſtate of breeding fleſh.
The pulſation under the cicatrix proceeded from the too lax
incarnation of the wound. - J/ſeman's Surgery.
INCA RNATIVE. m. ſ. [incarnatif, Fr. from incarn.] A medicine
that generates fleſh. -
I deterged the abſceſs, and incarned by the common incar-
native. - - . //iſeman's Surgery.
To IscA's E. v. a. [in and caſe.] To cover; to incloſe; to
1nwrap. -
Rich plates of gold the folding doors incaſ,
The pillars ſilver. Pope's Odyſſey.
INSAUTHous. adj. [in and cautious.] Unwary; negligent;
heedleſs.
His rhetorical expreſſions may eaſily captivate any incautious
reader. Keil againſt Barnet.
INCAU TIOUSLY, adv. [from incautious.] Unwarily ; heed-
leſly; negligently. -
A ſpecies of palſy invades ſuch as incautiouſly expoſe them-
, ſelves to the morning air. - Arbuthnºt on Air.
INCE'NDIARY. m. ſ. ſincendiarius, from incendo, Latin; incen-
diaire, French.] -
1. One who ſets houſes or towns on fire in malice or for rob-
bery.
2. One who inflames factions, or promotes quarrels. ,
Nor could any order be obtained impartially to examine im-
pudent incendiaries. - Kºng Charles.
Incendiaries of figure and diſtinétion, who are the inventers
and publiſhers of groſs falihoods, cannot be regarded but with
the utmoſt deteſtation. Addiſon.
Several cities of Greece drove them out as incendiaries, and
peſts of commonweals. Bentley's Sermons.
I'NCENSE. m. ſ. ſincenſun, Latin, a thing burnt; encº, French.]
Perfumes exhaled by fire in honour of ſome god or goddeſs,
Upon ſuch ſacrifices, my Cordelia,
The gods themſelves throw incenſe. Shakſ). K. Lear.
* - Numa the rites of ſtrićt religion knew; -
On ev'ry altar laid the incenſe due. . Prior.
To INCENSE. v. a. ſincenſus, Latin.] To enkindle to rage;
to inflame with anger; to enrage; to provoke; to irritate
to anger; to heat; to fire; to make furious ; to exaſperate.
The world, too ſaucy with the gods, -
Incenſes them to ſend deſtruction. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
If 'gainſt yourſelf you be incens'd, we'll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles. Shakeſp,
He is attended with a deſp'rate train;
And what they may incenſe him to, being apt -
To have his ear abus'd, wiſdom bids fear. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Tračtable obedience is a ſlave
To each incenſed will.
Foul idolatries and other faults,
Heap'd to the popular ſum, will ſo incenſe
God as to leave them. Milton's Paradiſ? Lºft, b. xii.
How could my pious ſon thy pow'r incenſe 2
Or what, alas! is vanquiſh’d Troy's offence : Dryden's AEn.
INCE'N's EMENT. n.ſ. [from incenſe..] Rage; heat; fury.
His incenſement at this moment is ſo implacable, that ſatiſ-
fačtion can be none but by pangs of death. Shakeſpeare.
INCE'Nsion. n.ſ. ſincenſio, Latin.] The ačt of kindling; the
ſtate of being on fire.
Sena loſeth its windineſs by decoèting; and ſubtile or windy
ſpirits are taken off by incenſion or evaporation. Bacon.
INcE'Nsor. n.ſ. [Latin. J A kindler of anger; an inflamer
of paſſions. --
Many prieſts were impetuous and importunate inceſſºrs of
the rage. * . - Hayward.
Ince'Nsory. n.ſ.. [from incenſ...] The veſſel in which incenſe
is burnt and offered. - Ainſworth.
INcE'N TIVE. m. ſ. ſincentivum, Latin.]
I. That which kindles.
Their unreaſonable ſeverity was not the leaſt incentivº, that
blew up into thoſe flames the ſparks of diſcontent. K. Charles.
2. That which provokes; that which encourages; incitement;
motive; encouragement; ſpur. It is uſed of that which in-
cites, whether to good or ill. - - - - - - -
• Congruity of opinions, to our natural conſtitution, is one
great incentive to their reception. Glanv. Scepſ.
Even the wiſdom of God hath not ſuggeſted more preſſing
motives, more powerful incentives to charity, than theſe, that
we ſhall be judged by it at the laſt dreadful day., . Atterbury.
It encourages ſpeculative perſons, with all the intentives of
place, profit, and preferment. Addison's Freshºlder.
INcE'Ntive. adj. Inciting; encouraging. . -
Competency is the moſt incentive to induſtry: too little
makes men deſperate, and too much careleſs; Decay ºf Piety.
INception. n.ſ. ſinceptio, Latin.J. Beginning. .
The inception of putrefaction hath in it a maturation. Bac.
INce'ptive. adj. ſinceptivus, Latin.] Noting beginning.
An incºptive and defitive propoſition, as, the fogs vaniſh as
the ſun riſes; but the fogs have not yet begun to vaniſh, there-
fore the ſun is not yet riſen. . . . .4-cłe.
INcE'ptoR. m. ſ. [Latin.] A beginner; one who is in his ru-
diments. - - -
Ince RATION. m. ſ. ſincero, Latin.] The act of covering with
Wax. - - Die?.
Ince'R'Tirupe. n.ſ. ſincertitude, Fr. incertitude, Lat., UH-
certainty; doubtfulneſs. . . - - -
Ince'ss AKT, adj. [in and ceſans, Latin.] Unceaſing; unia-
termitted; continual; uninterrupted. •
Raging wind blows up inceſant ſhow rs; r
And when the rage allays, the rain begins. Shakespeare . H. VI.
* The inceſant weeping of my wife,
Forc'd me to ſeek delays.
If, by pray’r -
Incaſant, I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not ceaſe
To weary him with my affiduous cries. Milt. Parad. Loft.
In form, a herald of the king ſhe flies, - - -
From peer to peer, and thus inceſant cries. Pope's Q&amp;ſ.
Ince'ss ANTLY. adv. [from inceſant.] Without intermiſſion;
continually.
Both his hands moſt filthy feculent,
Above the water were on high extent,
And fain'd to waſh themſelves incéſantly.
Who reads b
Inceſantly, and to his reading brings not
A #. º judgment equal or ſuperior. Milt. Par. Loft.
The Chriſtians, who carried their religion through ſo many
perſecutions, were inceſantly comforting one another with the
example and hiſtory of our Saviour and his apoſtles: Addiſon.
INCEST. n.ſ. ſinciſie, French; incºſium, Latin.] Unnatural
and criminal conjunction of perſons within degrees prohi-
bited. -
- Is’t not a kind of inceſ? to take life
From thine own ſiſter's ſhame? Shakespeare . Meaſ for Meaſure.
He
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Shakespeare
Fairy Queen.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N C
I N C
He who entered in the firſt ačt, a young man like Pericles,
prince of Tyre, muſt not be in danger in the fifth act of com-
mitting inceſ? with his daughter. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Ince'stuous. adj. [inceſtueux, French. J Guilty of inceſt;
guilty of unnatural cohabitation.
Hide me, thou bloody hand,
Thou perjure, thou ſimular of virtue,
That art #: Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
We may eaſily gueſs with what impatience the world would
have heard an inceſtuous Herod diſcourſing of chaſtity. South.
Ere you reach to this inceſtuous love,
You muſt divine and human rights remove. Dryden.
Ince'stuously. adv. [from inceſtuous.] With unnatural love.
Macareus and Canace, ſon and daughter to Æolus, god of
the winds, loved each other inceſtuouſly. Dryden.
INCH. º [ince, Saxon; uncia, Latin.]
1. A meaſure of length ſuppoſed equal to three grains of barley
laid end to end; the twelfth part of a foot.
A foot is the ſixth part of the ſtature of man, a ſpan one
eighth of it, and a thumb's breadth or inch one ſeventy-
ſecond. Holder on Time.
2. A proverbial name for a ſmall quantity.
The plebeians have got your fellow tribune;
They'll give him death by inches. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
As in laſting, ſo in length is man,
Contraćted to an inch, who was a ſpan. Donne.
Is it ſo deſirable a condition to conſume by inches, and loſe
one's blood by drops? Collier.
He ſhould never miſs, in all his race,
Of time one minute, or one inch of ſpace. Blackmore.
The commons were growing by degrees into power and
property, gaining ground upon the patricians inch by inch, Sw.
3. A nice point of time.
Beldame, I think, we watch'd you at an inch. Shakeſp.
To INch. v.a. [from the noun.]
1. To drive by inches.
Valiant they ſay, but very popular;
He gets too far into the ſoldiers graces,
And inches out my maſter. Dryden's Cleomenes.
2. To deal out by inches; to give ſparingly. Ainſw.
To INch. v. n. To advance or retire a little at a time.
I'Nched. adj. [with a word of number before it..] Containing
inches in length or breadth.
Poor Tom, proud of heart to ride on a bay trotting horſe
over four inched bridges. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
I'Nchipin. n.ſ. Some of the inſide of a deer. Ainſworth.
I'Nchmeal. n.ſ. ſinch and meal.] A piece an inch long.
- All th’ infections that the ſun ſucks up
From bogs, fens, flats, on Proſpero fall, and make him
By inchmeal a diſeaſe! Shakespeare Tempe?.
To I'NchoATE. v.a. [inchoo, Latin.] To begin; to com-
mence.
It is neither a ſubſtance perfeół, nor a ſubſtance inchoate, or
in the way of perfeótion. Raleigh's Hiſł. of the J/orld.
IncHo ATION. n.ſ.. [inchoatus, Lat.] Inception; beginning.
It diſcerneth of four kinds of cauſes; forces, frauds, crimes
various of ſtellionate, and the inchoations or middle ačts towards
crimes capital, not actually perpetrated. Bacon's Henry VII.
The ſetting on foot ſome of thoſe arts in thoſe parts would
be looked upon as the firſt inchoation of them, which yet would
be but their reviving. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
I'Ncho ATIVE. adj. [inchcative, Fr. inchoativus, Latin.] In-
ceptive; noting inchoation or beginning.
To INCI'de. v. a. [from incido, to cut, Latin.]
Medicines are faid to incide which conſiſt of pointed and
ſharp particles; as acids, and moſt ſalts, by which the parti-
cles of other bodies are divided from one another: thus ſome
expectorating medicines are ſaid to incide or cut the phlegm.
Sºuincy.
The menſes are promoted by all ſaponaceous ſubſtances,
which incide the mucus in the firſt paſſages. Arbuthnot.
f
}: }*ſ ſincide, to fall, Latin; induna, French]
1. The direétion with which one body ſtrikes upon another,
and the angle made by that line, and the plane ſtruck upon, is
called the angle of incidence. In the occurſions of two moving
bodies, their incidence is ſaid to be perpendicular or oblique, as
their directions or lines of motion make a ſtraight line or an
oblique angle at the point of contact. $25 incy.
In mirrours there is the like angle of incidence, from the ob-
jećt to the glaſs, and from the glaſs to the eye. Bacon.
In equal incidences there is a conſiderable inequality of re-
fraćtions, whether it be that ſome of the incident rays are re-
fraćted more and others leſs conſtantly, or one and the ſame
ray is by refraction diſturbed. Newton's Opt.
The permanent whiteneſs argues, that in like incidences of
the rays there is no ſuch ſeparation of the emerging rays. Newt.
He enjoys his happy ſtate moſt when he communicates it,
and receives a more vigorous joy from the reflexion than from
the direct incidency of his happineſs. Norris.
2. [Incidens, Latin.] Accident; hap; caſualty.
What incidency thou do'ſt gueſs of harm declare,
Is creeping towards me. Skakeſpeare's //inter's Tale.
INCIDENT, adj. [incident, Fr. incidens, Latin.]
1. Caſual; fortuitous ; occaſional; happening accidentally; fall-
ing in beſide the main deſign; happening beſide expectation.
As the ordinary courſe of common affairs is diſpoſed of by
general laws, ſo likewiſe mens rarer incident neceſſities and
utilities ſhould be with ſpecial equity conſidered. Hooker.
I would note in children not only their articulate anſwers,
but likewiſe ſmiles and frowns upon incident occaſions. IZotton.
In a complex propoſition the predicate or ſubjećt is ſome-
times made complex by the pronouns who, which, whoſe,
whom, &amp;c. which make another propoſition: as, every man,
who is pious, ſhall be ſaved: Julius, whoſe ſurname was Cae-
far, overcame Pompey: bodies, which are tranſparent, have
many pores. Here the whole propoſition is called the primary
or chief, and the additional propoſition is called an incident
propoſition. JWatts.
2. Happening; apt to happen.
Conſtancy is ſuch a ſtability and firmneſs of friendſhip as
overlooks all thoſe failures of kindneſs, that through paſſion,
incident to human nature, a man may be ſometimes guilty
of. South's Sermons.
I'Ncide NT. n.ſ.. [incident, Fr. from the adjećtive..] Something
happening beſide the main deſign; caſualty.
His wiſdom will fall into it as an incident to the point of
lawfulneſs. Bacon's holy War.
No perſon, no incident in the play, but muſt be of uſe to
carry on the main deſign. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Incide'NtA.L. adj. Incident; caſual; happening by chance;
not intended; not deliberate.
The ſatisfaction you received from thoſe incidental diſcourſes
which we have wandered into. Milton.
By ſome religious duties ſcarce appear to be regarded at all,
and by others only as an incidental buſineſs, to be done when
they have nothing elſe to do. Rogers's Sermons.
INcide'NtALLY. adv. [from incidental.] Beſide the main de-
ſign; occaſionally.
Theſe general rules are but occaſionally and incidentaly men-
tioned in Scripture, rather to manifeſt unto us a former than
to lay upon us a new obligation. Sanderſon.
I treat either purpoſely or incidentally'of colours. Boyle.
I'Ncid ENtly. adv. [from incident.] Occaſionally; by the
bye; by the way.
It was incidently moved amongſt the judges what ſhould be
done for the king himſelf, who was attainted; but reſolved
that the crown takes away defe&amp;ts. Bacon's Henry VII.
To INCI'NERATE. v. a. [in and cinerer, Latin.] To burn to
aſhes.
By baking, without melting, the heat indurateth, and then
maketh fragile; and laſtly, it doth incinerate and calcinate.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Fire burneth wood, making it firſt luminous, then black
and brittle, and laſtly broken and incinerate. Bacon.
Theſe dregs ſtick in the capillar inſertions of the ſtomach,
and are ſoon incinerated and calcined into ſuch ſalts which pro-
duce coughs. Harvey on Conſumptions.
INci'NERATIon. m. ſ. ſincineration, Fr. from incinerate.] The
act of burning any thing to aſhes.
I obſerved in the fixt ſalt of urine, brought by depuration
to be very white, a taſte not unlike common ſalt, and ver
differing from the cauſtick lixiviate taſte of other ſalts made by
incineration. Boyle.
INCIRCU M spection, n.ſ.. [in and circumſºediion.] Want of
caution; want of heed.
An unexpected way of deluſion, whereby he more eaſily
led away the incircumſpection of their belief. Brown's Wul. Err.
IN c1's ED. adj. [inciſer, Fr. inciſus, Latin.] Cut; made by
cutting: as, an inciſed wound.
I brought the inciſed lips together.
INci'sion. n.ſ.. [inciſion, Fr. inciſio, Latin.]
1. A cut; a wound made with a ſharp inſtrument. Generally
uſed for wounds made by a chirurgeon.
Let us make inciſion for your love,
To prove whoſe blood is reddeſt, his or mine. Shakeſpeare.
God help thee, ſhallow man: God make inciſion in thee,
thou art raw. Shakeſp. As yºu like it.
The reception of one is as different from the admiſſion of
the other, as when the earth falls open under the inciſions of
the plough, and when it gapes to drink in the dew of heaven,
or the refreſhments of a ſhower. South's Sermons.
A ſmall inciſion knife is more handy than a larger for opening
the bag. Sharp's Sargery.
2. Diviſion of viſcoſities by medicines.
Abſterſion is a ſcouring off, or inciſion of the more viſcous
humours, and making them more fluid, and cutting between
them and the part; as is found in nitrous water, which ſcour-
eth linen cloth. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?.
INci's Ive. adj. [inciſ, Fr. from inciſuſ, Latin.] Having the
quality of cutting or dividing.
The colour of many corpuſcles will cohere by being preci-
pitated together, and be deſtroyed by the effuſion of very
piercing and inciſive liquors. Bey e.
Jºſeman's Surgery.
7 Is C 1’sor.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N C
I N C
º:
º
º
iſiſ
º
INet'sor. n.ſ. ſinciſor, Latin.] Cutter; tooth in the forepart
of the mouthi
Inci'sory. adj. [inciſire, French. J Having the quality of
cutting. - -
INci'sure. n.ſ. ſinciſura, Latin.] A cut ; an aperture.
In ſome creatures it is wide, in ſome narrow, in ſome with
a deep inciſure up into the head, for the better catching and
holding of pºey, and more eaſy comminuting of hard food.
Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
INcITA'tion. n.ſ.. [incitatiº, Latin.] Incitement; incentive ;
motive; impulſe.
Dr. Ridley, in his tract of magnetical bodies, defines mag-
netical attraction to be a natural incitation and diſpoſition con-
forming unto contiguity, an union of one magnetical body
tunto another. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
The multitude of objećts do proportionably multiply both
the poſſibilities and incitations. Governm. of the Tongue.
The mind gives not only licence, but incitation to the other
paſſions to act with the utmoſt impetuoſity. Decay of Piety.
To INCI'TE. v.a. [incito, Lat. inciter, Fr.] To ſtir up; to puſh
forward in a purpoſe; to animate ; to ſpur; to urgeon.
How many now in health
Shall drop their blood, in approbation
Of what your reverence ſhall incite us to 2
No blown ambition doth our arms incite ;
But love, dear love, and our ag'd father's right. Shakeſpeare.
Antiochus, when he incited Pruſias to join in war, ſet before
him the greatneſs of the Romans, comparing it to a fire, that
took and ſpread from kingdom to kingdom. Bacon.
The principles of nature and common reaſon, which in all
difficulties, where prudence or courage are required, do rather
incite us to fly for aſſiſtance to a ſingle perſon than a multi-
tude. - Swift.
INci'ſ EMENT. n.ſ.. [from incite.] Motive; incentive; im-
pulſe; inciting power.
A marvel it were, if a man of great capacity, having ſuch
incitements to make him deſirous of all furtherances unto his
cauſe, could eſpy in the whole ſcripture of God nothing which
might breed at the leaſt a probable opinion of likelihood, that
divine authority was the ſame way inclinable. Hooker.
A perſon ſent hither by ſome good providence, to be the
occaſion and incitement of great good to this iſland. Milton.
If thou muſt reform the ſtubborn times,
From the long records of diſtant age
Derive incitements to renew thy rage. Pope's Statius.
INCI'vil. adj, [incivil, Fr.] Unpoliſhed. See UNcivil.
Incivi'LITY.. n.ſ.. [incivilité, Fr. in and civility.]
1. Want of courteſy; rudeneſs,
He does offend againſt that reverence which is due to the
common apprehenſions of mankind, whether true or not,
which is the greateſt incivility. Tillotſon's Sermons.
2. Aćt of rudeneſs.
Abſtain from diſtolute laughter, uncomely jeſts, loud talk-
ing and jeering, which, in civil account, are called indecen-
cies and incivilities. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
INCLE'MENcy. m. / [inclemence, Fr. inclementia,
mercifulneſs; cruelty; ſeverity ; harſhneſs; roughneſs.
And though by tempeſts of the prize bereſt,
In heaven's inclemency ſome eaſe we find :
Our foes we vanquiſh’d by our valour left. Dryden.
INCLE'MENT. adj. [in and elemens, Latin.]. Unmerciful; un-
pitying; void of tenderneſs; harſh.
Teach us further by what means to ſhun
Th’ inclement ſeaſons, rain, ice, hail and ſnow.
I ſtand
Naked, defenceleſs, on a foreign land:
Propitious to my wants, a veſt ſupply,
To guard the wretched from th’ inclement ſky.
INCLI's A BLE. adj. [inclinabilis, Latin.]
1. Haying a propenſion of will ; favourably diſpoſed; willing;
tending by diſpoſition.
People are not always inclinable to the beſt. Spenſer.
A marvel it were, if a man of capacity could eſpy in the
whole ſcripture nothing which might breed a probable opinion,
that divine authority was the ſame way inclinable. Hooker.
The gall and bitterneſs of certain mens writings, who ſpared
him little, made him, for their ſakes, the leſs inclinable to that
truth which he himſelf ſhould have honoured. Hooker.
Deſire, -
Inclinable now grown to touch or taſte,
Solicited her longing eye. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
2. Having a tendency.
If ſuch a cruſt naturally fell, then it was more likely and
inclinable to fall this thouſand years than the laſt; but if the
Shakeſp H. W.
Miſtan.
Pope.
cruſt was always gradually nearer and nearer to falling, that
plainly evinces that it had not endured eternally. Bentley.
IscL NATION. n.ſ.. [inclinaiſon, inclination, Fr. inclinatio, Lat )
1. Tendency towards any point.
The two rays, being equally refracted, have the ſame incli-
nation to one another after refraction which they had before;
that is, the inclination of half a degree anſwering to the ſun's
diameter. Mewton's Opt.
atin.] Un-
2. Natural aptneſs. - -
Though moſt of the thick woods are grubbed up ſince the
promontory has been cultivated, there are ſtill many ſpots of
it which ſhew the natural inclination of the ſoil leans that
, way. Addiſon.
3. Propenſion of mind; favourable diſpoſition; incipient deſire.
The king was wonderfully diſquieted, when he found that
the prince was totally aliened from all thoughts of or inclination
to the marriage. - - Garendon.
A mere inclination to a thing is not properly a willing of
that thing; and yet, in matters of duty, men frequently
reckon it for ſuch: for otherwiſe how ſhould they ſo often
plead and reſt in the honeſt and well-inclined diſpoſition of
their minds, when they are juſtly charged with an actual non-
performance of the law. South's Sermons.
4. Love; affection.
We have had few knowing painters, becauſe of thelittle
inclination which princes have for painting. Dryden.
5. Diſpoſition of mind.
Bid him -
Report the features of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination. Shakeſp. Aut. and Cleopatru.
6. The tendency of the magnetical needle to the Eaſt or Weſt.
7. [In pharmacy..] The act by which a clear liquor is poured
off from ſome ſeces or ſediment by only ſtooping the veſſel,
which is alſo called decantation. wincy.
INCLI'NATORY. adj. [from incline.] Having a quality of in-
clining to one or other.
If that inclinatory virtue be deſtroyed by a touch from the
contrary pole, that end which before was elevated will then
decline. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
INcli'NATORILY. adv. [from inclinatory.] Obliquely; with
inclination to one ſide or the other; with ſome deviation from
North and South.
Whether they be refrigerated inclinatorily, or ſomewhat
equinoxially, that is, toward the eaſtern or weſtern points,
they diſcover ſome verticity. Brown's Vulgar Errours. .
To INCLI'NE. v. n. [inclino, Latin ; incliner, Fr.]
1. To bend; to lean ; to tend towards any part.
Her houſe inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the
dead. Prov. ii. 18.
Still to this place
My heart inclines, ſtill hither turn my eyes;
- Hither my feet unbidden find their way.
2. To be favourably diſpoſed to ; to feel deſire beginning.
Doth his majeſty
Incline to it, or no?
He ſeems indifferent;
Or rather ſwaying more upon our part.
To INcli'Ne. v. a.
1. To give a tendency or direction to any place or ſtate.
The timely dew of ſleep,
Now falling with ſoft ſlumb'rous weight, inclines
Our eyelids.
Thus far both armies to Belinda yield;
Now to the baron fate inclines the field.
A tow'ring ſtructure to the palace join'd;
To this his ſteps the thoughtful prince inclin'd.
2. To turn the deſire towards anything.
3. To bend; to incurvate.
With due reſpect my body I inclin'd,
As to ſome being of ſuperior kind,
And made-my court.
To INcli'P. v. a. [in and clip.] To graſp; to incloſe; to ſtir-
round.
Whate'er the ocean pales, or ſky inclips,
Is thine, if thou wilt ha’t. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopat.
To Inclo'Isrs R. v. a. [in and cloiſier.] To ſhut up in a cloiſter.
To INcloud. v. a. [in and cloud] To darken; to obſcure.
In their thick breaths,
Rank of groſs diet, ſhall we be inclouded,
And forc'd to drink their vapour.
To INclu'DE. v. a. [includo, Latin.]
1. To incloſe; to ſhut in. º
2. To compriſe; to comprehend. - - -
This deſire being recommended to her majeſty, it liked her
to include the ſame within one intire leaſe. Bacon.
The marvellous fable includes whatever is ſupernatural, and
eſpecially the machines of the gods. Pope.
Inſtead of enquiring whether he be a man of virtue, the
queſtion is only whether he be a whig or a tory; under which
terms all good and ill qualities are included. Swift.
INclu'sive. adj. [incluſif, French.]
1. Incloſing; encircling. -
O, would that the incluſive verge
Of golden metal, that muſt round my brow,
Were red-hot ſteel, to fear me to the brain. Shakespeare R. III.
2. Comprehended in the ſum or number; as, from Wedneſday
to Saturday incluſive; that is, both Wedneſday and Saturday
taken into the number.
I'll ſearch where ev'ry virtue dwells,
From courts incluſive down to cells.
12 C
Rowe.
Shakespeare H. V.
Milton.
Pope:
Pºpe.
Shakeſpeare.
Swift.
Inclu'sively,
Dryden's Flower and Leaf.
£ºſtſ ºf filº
*~--"<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">s
I N C
Inclu'sively. adv. [from incluſive.] The thing mentioned
reckoned into the account.
Thus much ſhall ſerve for the ſeveral periods or growth of
the common law, until the time of Edward I, incluſively. Hale.
All articulation is made within the mouth, from the throat
to the lips incluſively; and is differenced partly by the organs
uſed in it, and partly by the manner and degree of articu-
lating. Holder’s Elements of Speech.
IN coa'Gulable. adj. [in and coagulable.] Incapable of con-
cretion.
Incoexist ENce. n.ſ.. [in and co-xiſtence.]. The quality of not
exiſting together; non-aſſociation of exiſtence.
Another more incurable part of ignorance, which ſets us
more remote from a certain knowledge of the coexiſtence or
incoexiſtence of different ideas in the ſame ſubjećt, is, that there
is no diſcoverable connection between any ſecondary quality
and thoſe primary qualities it depends on. Locke.
Inco'g. adv. [corrupted by mutilation from incognito, Latin.]
Unknown; in private.
But if you're rough, and uſe him like a dog,
Depend upon it, he'll remain incog. Addiſon.
INco'Grrancy. n.ſ.. [incogitantia, Latin.] Want of thought.
One man's fancies are laws to others, who convey them as
ſuch to their ſucceeders, who afterwards miſname all unobſe-
quiouſneſs to their incogitancy preſumption. Boyle.
Next to the ſtupid and meerly vegetable ſtate of incogitancy,
we may rank partial and piece-meal conſideration. Dec. of Piety.
Inco'G1t Ative. adj. [in and cºgitative..] Wanting the power
of thought.
Purely material beings, as clippings of our beards, and ſen-
ſible, thinking, perceiving beings, ſuch as we find ourſelves,
we will call cogitative and incogitative beings. Locke.
Inco'GNIto. adv. [incognitus, Latin.] In a ſtate of conceal-
Inent.
‘Twas long ago
Since gods came down incognito.
#...}, ſ (in and airm.)
1. Want of conneétion; incongruity; inconſequence; want of
dependance of one part upon another.
I find that laying the intermediate ideas naked in their due
order, ſhews the incoherence of the argumentations better than
ſyllogiſms. - Locke.
Incoherences in matter, and ſuppoſitions without proofs, put
handſomely together, are apt to paſs for ſtrong reaſon. Lotke.
2. Want of coheſion; looſeneſs of material parts.
If plaiſter be beaten into an impalpable powder, when poured
out it will emulate a liquor, by reaſon that the ſmalneſs and
incoherence of the parts do both make them eaſy to be put into
motion, and makes the pores they intercept ſo ſmall, that they
interrupt not the unity or continuity of the maſs. Boyle.
IN cohe'R ENT. adj. [in and coherent J
1. Inconſequential; inconſiſtent; having no dependence of one
part upon another.
We have inſtances of perception whilſt we are aſleep, and
retain the memory of them; but how extravagant and incohe-
rent are they, and how little conformable to the perfection of
a rational being ! Locke.
2. Without coheſion; looſe; not fixed to each other.
Had the ſtrata of ſtone become ſolid, but the matter where-
of they conſiſt continued lax and incoherent, they had conſe-
quently been as pervious as thoſe of marle or gravel. Woodw.
IN cohe’RENTLY, adv. [from incoherent.] Inconſiſtently; in-
conſequentially.
The chara&amp;ter of Eurylochus is the imitation of a perſon
confounded with fears, ſpeaking irrationally and incoherently.
- Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
Incolu'Mity. m. ſ. ſincolumitas, Latin.] Safety; ſecurity. A
word very little in uſe.
The parliament is neceſſary to aſſert and preſerve the na-
tional rights of a people, with the incolumity and welfare of a
country.
IN.com Bus TIBI'lity. n.ſ.. [from incombuſtible.] The quality
of reſiſting fire ſo that it cannot conſume.
The ſtone in the Appennines is remarkable for its ſhining
quality, and the amianthus for its incombuſtibility. Ray.
IN combu's TIBLE., adj. [incombuſtible, Fr. in and combuſtible.]
Not to be conſumed by fire.
It agrees in this common quality aſcribed unto both, of
being incombuſtible, and not conſumable by fire. Wilkins.
IN.com Bu's TIBLENE ss., n.ſ. [from incombuſtible.] The quality
of not being waſted by fire.
tº: m. ſ. [ in and come. J Revenue; produce of any
thing.
Thou who repineſt at the plenty of thy neighbour, and the
greatneſs of his incomes, conſider what are frequently the diſ-
mal conſequences of all this. South's Sermons.
No fields afford
So large an income to the village lord. Dryden's Georg.
St. Gaul has ſcarce any lands belonging to it, and little or
no income but what ariſes from its trade: the great ſupport of
this little ſtate is its linen manufacture. Addison on Italy.
Prior.
Hºwel. .
I N C
Notwithſtanding the large incomes annexed to ſome few of
her preferments, this church hath in the whole little to ſubſiſt
On , Atterbury's Sermons.
IN.com Mensur Abi'lity. m. ſ. [from incommenſurable.] The
ſtate of one thing with reſpect to another, when they cannot
be compared by any common meaſure.
IN.com ME'Nsur ABLE. adj. [French, from in, con, and menſu-
rabilis, Latin.] Not to be reduced to any meaſure common
to both ; not to be meaſured together, ſuch as that the propor-
tion of one to the other can be told.
Our diſputations about vacuum or ſpace, incommenſurable
quantities, the infinite diviſibility of matter, and eternal dura-
tion, will lead us to ſee the weakneſs of our nature. J/atts.
IN.com ME'Nsur At E. adj. [in, con, and menſura, Latin.] Not
admitting one common meaſure.
The diagonal line and ſide of a quadrate, which, to our ap-
prehenſion, are incommenſurate, are yet commenſurable to the
infinite comprehenſion of the divine intelle&amp;t. AMore.
As all other meaſures of time are reducible to theſe three;
ſo we labour to reduce theſe three, though ſtrićtly of themſelves
incommenſurate to one another, for civil uſe, meaſuring the
greater by the leſs. Holder on 7 ime.
If the year comprehend days, it is but as any greater ſpace
of time may be ſaid to comprehend a leſs, though the leſs ſpace
be incommenſurate to the greater. Holder on Time.
To INCOMMODATE. N. v. a. ſincommodo, Lat. incommoder,
To INCOMMO'DE. } Fr.] To be inconvenient to ; to
hinder or embarraſs without very great injury.
A gnat, planted upon the horn of a bull, begged the bull's
pardon; but rather than incommode ye, ſays he, I'll re-
In OWe, L’Eſtrange.
Although they ſometimes moleſt and incommode the inhabi-
tants of ſome parts, yet the agent, whereby both the one and
the other is effected, is of that indiſpenſable neceſſity to the
earth and to mankind, that they could not ſubſiſt without it.
JWoodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
Incom Mo'Dious. adj. [ incommodus, Latin. J Inconvenient;
vexatious without great miſchief.
Things of general benefit, for in this world what is ſo per-
fečt that no inconvenience doth ever follow it? may by ſome
accident be incommodious to a few. Hºoker.
Mens intentions in ſpeaking are to be underſtood, without
frequent explanations and incommodious interruptions. Locke.
Incom Moºdiously, adv. [from incommodious.] Inconvenient-
ly; not at eaſe. -
Incommo'diousness. n.ſ. [from incommodious. l Inconve-
Illen Ce. -
Diſeaſes, diſorders, and the incommodiouſneſs of external na-
ture, are inconſiſtent with happineſs. Burnet.
Ncom Mo'dity. m. ſ. [incommodité, Fr. incommoditas, Latin.]
Inconvenience; trouble.
Declare your opinion, what incommodity you have conceived
to be in the common law, which I would have thought moſt
free from all ſuch diſlike. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
If iron can be incorporated with flint or ſtone, without
over great charge, or other incommodity, the cheapneſs doth
make the compound ſtuff profitable. Bacon.
By confidering the region and the winds, one might ſo caſt
the rooms, which ſhall moſt need fire, that he ſhould little
fear the incºmmodity of ſmoak. Wotton’s Architrºfure.
Incommunicabi'lity. n.ſ.. [from incommunicable ] The qua-
lity of not being impartible.
IN.com Mu'N1cABLE. adj.[incommunicable,Fr. in and communicable.]
1. Not impartible; not to be made the common right, property,
or quality of more than one.
They cannot aſk more than I can give, may I but reſerve
to myſelf the incommunicable jewel of my conſcience. K.Charles.
Only the God of nature perfectly knows her; and light
without darkneſs is the incommunicable claim of him that dwells
in light inacceſſible. Glanv.
It was agreed on both ſides, that there was one ſupreme
excellency, which was incommunicable to any creatures. Stilling.
2. Not to be expreſſed; not to be told.
Neither did he treat them with theſe peculiarities of favour
in the extraordinary diſcoveries of the goſpel only, but alſo of
thoſe incommunicable revelations of the divine love, in reference
to their own perſonal intereſt in it. South's Sermons.
IN.com Mu'Nicably. adv. [from incommunicable.] In a manner
not to be imparted or communicated.
To annihilate is both in reaſon, and by the conſent of di-
vines, as incommunicably the effect of a power divine, and above
nature, as is creation itſelf. Hakewill on Providence.
IN.com MU'Nicatin G. adj. [in and communicating.] Having
no intercourſe with each other.
The judgments and adminiſtrations of common juſtice
carry a conſonancy one to another, whereby both are preſerved
from that confuſion that would enſue, if the adminiſtration
was by ſeveral incommunicating hands, or by provincial eſtabliſh-
InentS. Hale's Common Law.
IN.com PA’ct. adj. [in and cºmpačied.] Not joined; not
IN.com PA'cT ED. } cohering,
Salt, ſay they, is the baſis of ſolidity and permanency in
- compound
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">*
compound bodies, without which the other four elements
might be variouſly blended, but would remain incom-
pačied. Boyle.
Inco'MPARABLE. adj. [incomparable; Fr. in and comparable.] .
Excellent above compare; excellent beyond all competition.
My heart would not ſuffer me to omit any occaſion, where-
by I might make the incomparable Pamela ſee how much ex-
traordinary devotion I bore to her ſervice. Sidney.
A moſt incomparable man, breath'd as it were
To an untirable and continuate goodneſs. Shakeſp. Timon.
Her words do ſhew her wit incomparable. Shakespeare H. VI.
Now this maſk
Was cried incomparable, and th' enſuing night -
Made it a fool and beggar. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
If I could leave this argument of your incomparable beauty,
I might turn to one which would equally oppreſs me with its
greatneſs. Dryden.
INco'MPARABLY. adv. [from incomparable.]
1. Beyond compariſon; without competition.
A founder it had, whom I think incomparably the wiſeſt man
that ever the French church did enjoy, ſince the hour it en-
joyed him. Hooker.
Self-preſervation will oblige a man voluntarily to undergo
any leſs evil, to ſecure himſelf but from the probability of an
evil incomparably greater. South's Sermons.
2, Excellently; to the higheſt degree. A low phraſe.
There are the heads of Antoninus Pius, the Fauſtina's, and
Marcus Aurelius, all incomparably well cut. Addiſon on Italy.
Incompa’ssionate. adj. [in and compaſſionate.] Void of pity;
void of tenderneſs. -
Incompatibility, n.ſ. [properly incompetibility, in and com-
peto, Latin.] Inconſiſtency of one thing with another.
He overcame that natural incompatibility, which hath been
noted between the vulgar and the ſovereign favour. Wotton.
The reaſon of the ãº. reſts not upon the incompetibility of
exceſs of one infinitude above another, either in intenſion or
extenſion; but the incompetibility of any multitude to be in-
finite. Hale.
IN.com PATIBLE. [incompatible, French; rather incompetible, as it
is ſometimes written; in and compete, Lat.] Inconſiſtent with
ſomething elſe; ſuch as cannot ſubſiſt or cannot be poſſeſſed
together with ſomething elſe.
Fortune and love have ever been ſo incompatible, that it is
no wonder, madam, if, having had ſo much of the one for
you, I have ever found ſo little of the other for myſelf. Suckl.
May not the outward expreſſions of love in many good
Chriſtians be greater to ſome other obječt than to God? Or is
this incompetible with the fincerity of the love of God? Hamm.
The repugnancy of infinitude is equally incompetible to con- .
*tinued or ſucceſſive motion, and depends upon the incompoſ-
ſibility of things ſucceſſive with infinitude. Hale. .
We know thoſe colours which have a friendſhip with each
other, and thoſe which are incompatible, by mixing together
thoſe colours of which we would make trial. Dryden.
Senſe I have proved to be incompatible with mere bodies,
even thoſe of the moſt compound and elaborate textures. Bent.
Inco'MPATIBLY, adv. [for incompetibly, from incompatible.] In-
conſiſtently. -
INco MPETENCY. n.ſ.. [incompetence, Fr. from incompetent.] In-
ability; want of adequate ability or qualification.
Our not being able to diſcern the motion of a ſhadow of a
dial-plate, or that of the index upon a clock, ought to make
us ſenſible of the incompetency of our eyes to diſcern ſome mo-
tions of natural bodies incomparably ſlower than theſe. Boyle.
Incompetent. adj. [in and competent.] Not ſuitable; not
adequate; not proportionate. In the civil law it denotes ſome
defečt of right to do anything.
Richard #. had a reſolution, out of hatred to his brethren,
to diſable their iſſues, upon falſe and incompetent pretexts, the
one of attainder, the other of illegitimation. Bacon's H. VII.
Every ſpeck does not blind a man, nor does every infirmity
make one unable to diſcern, or incompetent to reprove the groſſer
faults of others. Government of the Tongue.
I thank you for the commiſſion you have given me: how I
have acquitted myſelf of it, muſt be left to the opinion of the
world, in ſpight of any proteſtation which I can enter againſt
the preſent age, as incºmpetent or corrupt judges. Dryden.
Laymen, with equal advantages of parts, are not the moſt
incompetent judges of ſacred things. Dryden.
An equal attraction on all ſides of all matter, is juſt equal
to no attraction at all; and by this means all the motion in the
univerſe muſt proceed from external impulſe alone, which is
an incompetent cauſe for the formation of a world. Bentley.
is: **** tly, adv, [from incompetent.] Unſuitably; un-
uly.
IN complete. adj. [ in and complete. J Not perfect; not
finiſhed. -
It pleaſeth him in mercy to account himſelf incomplete and
maimed without us. Hooker.
In incomplete ideas we are apt to impoſe on ourſelves, and
wrangle with others, eſpecially where they have particular and
familiar names. Locke.
I N : C
IN comple’re Ness. n.ſ [from incomplete.] Imperfestion. ; ºf
finiſhed ſtate.
The incompleteneſ of our ſeraphick lover's happineſs, in his
fruitions, proceeds not from their want of ſatisfactoriº ſs;
but of an intire poſſeſſion. - * . Boyle.
INcompli’Ance. n.ſ.. [in and cºmpliance.]
1. Untraćtableneſs; impračticableneſs; contradićtious temper.
Self-conceit produces peeviſhneſs and incompliance of humour
in things lawful and indifferent. Williſon's Sermons.
2. Refuſal of compliance. -
Confider the vaſt diſproportion between the worſt inconve-
niences that can attend our incompliance with men, and the
eternal diſpleaſure of an offended God. Rogers.
Incomposed. adj. [in and compoſed.] Diſturbed; diſcom-
poſed; diſordered. - -
Somewhat incompoſed they are in their trimming, and ex-
traordinary tender of their young ones. Howel.
Incompossibility. n.ſ. from incompoſſible.] Quality of being
not poſſible but by the negation or deſtruction of ſomething;
inconſiſtency with ſomething.
The manifold incompoſſibilities and lubricities of matter can-
not have the ſame fitneſſes in any modification. More.
Though the repugnancy of infinitude be equally incom-
petible to continued or ſucceſſive motion, and depends upon
the incompoſſibility of the very nature of things ſucceſſive or ex-
tenſive with infinitude, yet that incompºſſibility is more conſpi-
cuous in diſcrete quantity, that ariſeth from individuals already
, ačtually diſtinguiſhed. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Incompo'ssible. adj. [in, con, and poſſible.] Not poſſible to-
gether; not poſſible but by the negation of ſomething elſe.
Incomprehensibility. n.ſ.. [incomprehenſibilité, Fr. from in-
comprehenſible.] Unconceivableneſs; ſuperiority to human un-
derſtanding. -
Incomprehe'NSIBLE, adj. [incomprehenſible, Fr. in and compre-
henſible.]
1. Not to be conceived; not to be fully underſtood.
His precepts tend to the improving and perfecting the moſt
valuable part of us, and annexing incomprehenſible rewards as
an eternal weight of glory. Hammond.
One thing more is incomprehenſible in this matter. Locke.
The laws of vegetation, life, ſuſtenance, and propagation
are the arbitrary pleaſure of God, and may vary in man-
ners incomprehenſible to our imaginations. Bentley.
2. Not to be contained. Not now uſed.
Preſence every where is the ſequel of an infinite and incºm-
prehenſible ſubſtance; for what can be every where but that
which can no where be comprehended ? Hºoker.
- Incomprehe'NsibleNess. n.J. [from incomprehenſible.] Un-
conceivableneſs.
I might argue from God's incomprehenſibleneſ : if we could
believe nothing but what we have ideas of, it would be impoſ-
ſible for us to believe God is incomprehenſible. JWatts.
Incomprehe'Nsibly. adv. [from incomprehenſible.] In a man-
ner not to be conceived. -
We cannot but be aſſured that the God, of whom and from
whom are all things, is incomprehenſibly infinite. Locke.
INcompre’ssible. adj. [incompreſſible, Fr. in and comprºffible.]
Not capable of being compreſſed into leſs ſpace. --
Their hardneſs is the reaſon why water is incompreſſible;
when the air lodged in it is exhauſted. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
IMcompressibi'lity. n.ſ.. [from incompreſſible.] Incapacity
to be ſqueezed into leſs room.
IncoNcu'RRING. adj. [in and concur J. Not concurring.
They derive effects not only from inconcurring cauſes; but
things devoid of all efficiency. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
INconce’ALABLE. adj. [in and conceal.] Not to be hid; not
to be kept ſecret. -
The inconcealable imperfeótions of ourſelves will hourly
prompt us our corruption, and loudly tell us we are ſons of
earth. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INconce'iv ABLE. adj. [inconceivable, Fr. in and conceivable.]
Incomprehenſible; not to be conceived by the mind.
Such are Chriſt's promiſes, divine inconceivable promiſes; a
bliſs to be enjoyed to all eternity, and that by way of return
for a weak obedience of ſome few years. Hammond.
It is inconceivable to me, that a ſpiritual ſubſtance ſhould re-
preſent an extended figure. Locke.
How two ethers can be diffuſed through all ſpace, one of
which ačts upon the other, and by conſequence is rea&amp;ted upon,
without retarding, ſhattering, diſperfing, and confounding one
another's motions, is inconceival'e. Newton's Opt.
IN conce'i v ABLY. adv. [from inconceivable.] In a manner be-
yond comprehenſion; to a degree beyond human comprehenſion.
Does that man take a rational courſe to preſerve himſelf,
who refuſes the endurance of thoſe leſſer troubles, to ſecure
himſelf from a condition inconceivably more miſerable South.
IN conce'ptible. adj. [in and conceptible; conceptus, Latin J
Not to be conceived; incomprehenſible; inconceivable. A
word not uſed.
It is inconceptible how any ſuch man, that hath ſtood the
ſhock of an eternal duration without corruption, ſhould after
be corrupted. w Hale's Origin of Mankind.
I IN conclu DiNT.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N C
IN cosclu'DEN'r. adj. [in and concludens, Latin.] Inferring no
conſequence.
The depoſitions of witneſſes themſelves, as being falſe, va-
rious, contrariant, fingle, inconcludent. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Isco N clu'sive. adj. [in and concluſive.] Not enforcing any
determination of the mind ; not exhibiting cogent evidence.
INconclu's Ively. adv. [from inconcluſive..] Without any
ſuch evidence as determines the underſtanding.
INconclu'sive Ness. n.ſ.. [from incºncluſive..] Want of rational
cogency.
A man, unſkilful in ſyllogiſm, at firſt hearing, could per-
eeive the weakneſs and inconcluſiveneſs of a long, artificial, and
lauſible diſcourſe, wherewith ſome others, better ſkilled in
yllogiſm, have been miſled. Locke.
Iscow co’ct. Nadj. [in and conco?] Unripened; immature;
IN Conco'cºre D. } not fully digeſted.
While the body, to be converted and altered, is too ſtrong
for the efficient that ſhould convert it, it is all that while crude
and inconcoët, and the proceſs is to be called crudity and in-
concočtion. Bacon's Natural Hylory.
I underſtand, remember, and reaſon better in my riper
years than when I was a child, and had my organical parts leſs
digeſted and inconcodied. Hale's Orgin of Mankind.
Inconcoction. n.ſ.. [from inconcoct.] The ſtate of being
indigeſted; unripeneſs; immaturity.
The middle action, which produceth ſuch imperfeót bodies,
is fitly called inquination, or inconczélion, which is a kind of
putrefaction. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
While the body, to be converted and altered, is too ſtrong
for the efficient that ſhould convert it, it is all that while crude
and inconcoct; and the proceſs is to be called crudity and in-
concºction. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
IN co’ND1t E. adj. [inconditus, Lat.] Irregular; rude; unpoliſhed.
Now ſportive youth
Carol incondite rhymes with ſuiting notes,
And quaver inharmonious. - Philips.
IN condi'ſ 10 NAL. adj. [in and conditional.] Without excep-
tion; without limitation; without ſtipulation. -
From that which is but true in a qualified ſenſe, an incondi-
tiºnal and abſolute verity is inferred. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
IN con DITIONATE. adj. [in and condition J. Not limited; not
reſtrained by any conditions; abſolute. -
They aſcribe to God, in relation to every man, an eternal,
unchangeable, and inconditionate decree of election or repro-
bation. Boyle.
Iscon Fo'RMITY. n.ſ.. [in and cºnfºrmity.] Incompliance with
the practice of others.
We have thought their opinion to be, that utter inconſºr-
mity with the church of Rome was not an extremity where-
unto we ſhould be drawn for a time, but the very mediocrity
itſelf, wherein they meant we ſhould ever continue. Hooker.
Incos Fu's ros. n.ſ.. [in and confuſion.] Diſtinétneſs.
The cauſe of the confuſion in ſounds, and the inconfuſion in
ſpecies viſible, is, for that the fight worketh in right lines, and
ſo there can be no coincidence in the eye; but ſounds that
move in oblique and arcuate lines, muſt needs encounter and
diſturb the one the other. Bacon. .
Isco NGRUEN.cf. n.ſ.. [in and cºngruence.] Unſuitableneſs;
want of adaptation.
Humidity is but relative, and depends upon the congruity
or incongruence of the component particles of the liquor to the
pores of the bodies it touches. Boyle.
Isco Ng R Uſ, TY. n.ſ. ſincongruité, Fr. from incºngruous.]
1. Unſuitableneſs of one thing to another. -
The fathers make uſe of this acknowledgment of the incon-
£ruity of images to the Deity, from thence to prove the incon-
gruity of the worſhip of them. Stillingfleet.
2. Inconſiſtency; inconſequence; abſurdity; impropriety.
To avoid abſurdities and incongruities, is the ſame law
eſtabliſhed for both arts: the painter is not to paint a cloud at
the bottom of a pićture, nor the poet to place what is proper
to the end in the beginning of a poem. Dryden.
3. Diſagreement of parts; want of ſymmetry.
She, whom after what form foe'er we ſee,
Is diſcord and rude incºngruity;
She, ſhe is dead, ſhe's dead. Donne.
Isco'NGRuous. adj. [incongru, Fr. in and congruºus.]
1. Unſuitable; not fitting. -
Wiſer heathens condemned the worſhip of God as incºn-
grº tº to a divine nature, and a diſparagement to the
deity. Stillingfleet.
2. Inconſiſtent; abſurd.
ºvovº. adv. [from incongruºus.] Improperly; un-
itly. -
lºcos N Expply. adv. [in and connex.] Without any con-
nexion or dependance. º
Others aſcribed hereto, as a cauſe, what perhaps but caſual-
ly or inconnexedly ſucceeds. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
is conscios ABLE. ad. [in and conſcionable.] Void of the
ſenſe of good and evil; without influence of conſcience.
So inconſciºnable are theſe common people, and ſo little feel-
ing have thcy of God, or their own ſouls good. Spenſer.
Isco'ss EQUENCE. n.ſ [inconſequence, Fr. inºcrºgºn:a, Lat.j
Inconcluſiveneſs; want of juſt inference.
This he beſtows the name of many fallacies upon; and runs
on with ſhewing the inconſequence of it, as though he did in
earneſt believe it were an impertinent anſwer. Stillingfleet.
Inco'ss E QUENT. ad;. [in and conſequens, Lat J Without juſt
concluſion; without regular inference. -
The ground he aſſumes is unfound, and his illation from
thence deduced inconſequent. Halewill on Providence.
Men reſt not in falſe apprehenſions without abſurd and in-
conſequent deductions from fallacious foundations, and miſap-
prehended mediums, erecting concluſions no way inferible from
their premiſes. Brown's Pulgar Errour.
IN consi'DERABLE. adj. [in and conſiderable.] Unworthy o
notice; unimportant. -
. No, I am an inconſiderable feklow, and know nothing.
- Denham's Sathy.
The moſt inconſiderable of creatures may at ſome time or
other come to revenge itſelf upon the greateſt. L’E/ºrange.
Caſting my eyes upon the ants, continually taken up with
a thouſand cares, very inconſiderable with reſpect to us, but of
the greateſt importance for them, they appeared to me worthy
of my curioſity. Addiſon.
May not planets and comets perform their motions more
freely, and with leſs reſiſtance, in this ethereal medium than
in any fluid, which fills all ſpace adequately without leaving
any pores, and by conſequence is much denſer than quickſilver
or gold And may not its reſiſtance be ſo ſmall as to be incºn-
Jiderable P - Newtºn's Opt.
If we were under any real fear of the papiſts, it would be
hard to think us ſo ſtupid not to be equally apprehenſive with
others, ſince we are likely to be the greateſt ſufferers; but we
look upon them to be altogether as incºnſiderable as the women
and children. - Swift.
Let no fin appear ſmall or incºnſiderable by which an almigh-
ty God is offended, and eternal ſalvation endangered. Rºgers.
Inconsi'De RABLE Ness. n. ſ. [from inconſiderable.] Small im-
portance.
To thoſe who are thoroughly convinced of the inconſide-
rableneſs of this ſhort dying life, in compariſon of that eternal
ſtate which remains for us in another life, the confideration of
a future happineſs is the moſt powerful motive. 7 iſºtſºn.
From the conſideration of our own ſmalneſs and inconſide-
rableneſs, in reſpect of the greatneſs and ſplendor of thoſe glo-
rious heavenly bodies, let us with the holy pſalmiſt raiſe up
our hearts. Ray on the Creation.
Inconsi'DERA te. adj. [inconfidere, Fr. inconſideratus, Latin.]
1. Careleſs; thoughtleſs; negligent; inattentive; inadvertent.
When thy inconſiderate hand
Flings ope this caſement, with my trembling name, .
Then think this name alive, and that thou thus
In it offend'ſt my genius. Donne.
If you lament it,
That which now looks like juſtice, will be thought
An inconſiderate raſhneſs. Denham's Sºphy.
It is a very unhappy token of our corruption, that there
ſhould be any ſo inconſiderate among us as to ſacrifice morality
to politicks. Addiſon's Freehalder.
2. Wanting due regard. -
He who laid down his life for the redemption of the tranſ-
greſſions, which were under the firſt Teſtament, cannot be ſo
inconſiderate of our frailties. Lecay ºf Piety.
IN consi'DERATELY. adv. [from inconſiderate.] Negligently ;
thoughtleſly; inattentively.
The king, tranſported with juſt wrath, inconſiderately fighting
and precipitating the charge, before his whole numbers came
up, was ſlain in the purſuit. Bacon.
Joſeph was delighted with Mariamne's converſation, and
endeavoured with all his art to ſet out the exceſs of Herod's
paſſion for her; but when he ſtill found her cold and incredu-
lous, he inconſiderately told her the private orders, he left be-
hind. Addiſon's Speciator.
IN consi'DERATE Ness. m. ſ. [from inconſiderate.] Carcieflneſs;
thoughtleſſneſs; negligence; want of thought 3 inadvertence;
1ſlattent 10I).
If men do know and believe that there is ſuch a being as .
God, not to demean ourſelves towards hin, as becomes our
relation to him, is great ſtupidity and inconſiderateneº. 7 illºtſ.
IN consid ERATION. m.ſ.. [inconſideration, Fr. in and conſideration.]
Want of thought; inattention; inadvertence.
S. Gregory reckons uncleanneſs to be the parent of blind-
neſs of mind, inconſideration, precipitancy or giddineſs in ac-
tions, and ſelf-love. º -
IN consi's TING. adj. [in and conſ/?..] Not conſiſtent; incom-
patible with.
The perſons and actions of a farce are all unnatural, and
the manners falſe; that is, inconſifting with the characters of
mankind. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
INconsi's TENcE. -
- n. ſ. ſ from incom/i/?ent.
IN consi's TEN cy. } J. [ ſiſtent.]
1. Such oppoſition as that one propoſition infers the negation of
the other; ſuch contrariety that both cannot be together.
3 Ther:--&gt;
Taylor. -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N C
I N C
s
º
:
There is a perfeót inconſiſtency between that which is of debt,
and that which is of free gift. South's Sermons.
2. Abſurdity in argument or narration; argument or narrative
where one part deſtroys the other; ſelf-contradićtion.
3. Incongruity.
Mutability of temper, and inconſiſtency with ourſelves, is the
greateſt weakneſs of human nature. Addiſow.
If a man would regiſter all his opinions upon love, politicks,
religion and learning, what a bundle of inconſiſtencies and con-
tradićtions would appear at laſt : Swift.
4. Unſteadineſs; changeableneſs.
IncoNsi's TENT. adj. [in and conſiſtent.]
1. Incompatible; not ſuitable; incongruous. -
Finding no kind of compliance, but ſharp proteſtations
againſt the demands, as inconſiſtent with conſcience, juſtice, or
religion, the conference broke off. Clarendon.
Compoſitions of this nature, when thus reſtrained, ſhew
that wiſdom and virtue are far from being inconſiſtent with po-
liteneſs and good humour. Addiſon's Freeholder.
2. Contrary, ſo as that one infers the negation or deſtruction of
the other. -
The idea of an infinite ſpace or duration is very obſcure and
confuſed, becauſe it is made up of two parts very different, if
not inconſiſtent. Locke.
3. Abſurd; having parts of which one deſtroys the other.
Inconsi's TENTLY. adv. [from inconſiſtent.] Abſurdly; incon-
gruouſly; with ſelf-contradištion. - -
Inco'Nsol ABLE. adj. [in onſolable, Fr. in and conſole.] Not to
be comforted; ſorrowful beyond ſuſceptibility of comfort.
Her women will repreſent to me that ſhe is inconſolable, by
reaſon of my unkindneſs. - Addiſon.
They take pleaſure in an obſtinate grief, in rendering them-
ſelves inconſtable. Fiddes's Sermons.
Inco'Nso NAN cy. n.ſ.. [in and conſonancy..] Diſagreement with
itſelf.
IncoNspi'cuous. adj. [in and conſpicuous.] Indiſcernible; not
perceptible by the fight.
When an excellent experimenter had taken pains in accu-
curately filling up a tube of mercury, we found that yet there
remained ſtore of inconſpicuous bubbles. Boyle.
Inco'Nst ANcy. n.ſ.. [inconſtantia, Lat, inconſtance, Fr. from in-
conſiant.] Unſteadineſs; want of ſteady adherence; mutability
of temper or affection. -
I have ſuffered more for their ſakes, more than the villanous
inconſtancy of man is able to bear. Shakespeare Mer. Wives of Windſ.
Be made the mark
. For all the people's hate, the princeſs’ curſes,
And his ſon's rage, or the old king's incºnſtancy. Denham.
Irreſolution on the ſchemes of life which offer to our choice,
and inconſtancy in purſuing them, are the greateſt cauſes of all
our unhappineſs. Addiſon's Spectator.
As much inconſtancy and confuſion is there in their mixtures
or combinations; for it is rare to find any of them pure and
unmixt. Iłodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
INCONSTANT. adj. [inconftant, Fr. inconſians, Latin J
1. Not firm in reſolution; not ſteady in affection; various of
inclination; wanting perſeverance.
He is ſo naturally inconſtant, that I marvel his ſoul finds not
ſome way to kill his body. Sidney.
2. Changeable; mutable; variable.
O ſwear not by the moon, th’ inconſtant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb, º
Leſt that thy love prove likewiſe variable. Shakeſpeare.
IncoNsu'MABLE. adj. [in and cºnſume.] Not to be waſted.
By arts were weaved napkins, ſhirts, and coats, inconſum-
able by fire, and wherein they burnt the bodies of kings. Brown.
INconsu'MPTIBLE, adj. [in and conſumptus, Lat..] Not to be
ſpent; not to be brought to an end; not to be deſtroyed by
fire. This ſeems a more elegant word than inconſumable.
Before I give any anſwer to this objećtion of pretended in-
conſumptible lights, I would gladly ſee the effect undoubtedly
proved. A. Digby on Bodies.
IncoNTE's TABLE. adj. [inconteſtable, Fr. in and conteſt.] Not
to be diſputed ; not admitting debate; uncontrovertible. º
Our own being furniſhes us with an evident and inconteſtable
proof of a Deity; and I believe no body can avoid the cogen-
, cy of it, who will carefully attend to it. Locke.
IncoNTE's TABLY. adv. [from inconteſtable.] Indiſputably; un-
controvertibly. -
IN conti'Guous. adj. [in and contiguous.] Not touching each
other; not joined together.
They ſeemed part of ſmall bracelets, conſiſting of equally
little incontiguous beads. Boyle.
IN co’NT IN EN ce. } n.ſ.. [incontinentia, Lat. in and continence..] In-
INco'NT IN ENCY. § ability to reſtrain the appetites; unchaſtity.
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this; ſhe hath bought the name of whore thus dearly. Shakespeare
But beauty, like the fair Heſperian tree,
Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard
Of dragon-watch with uninchanted eye,
To ſave her bloſſoms, and defend her fruit
From the raſh hand of bold incontinence. Milton.
This is my defence;
I pleas'd myſelf, I ſhunn’d incontinence, }
And, urg'd by ſtrong deſires, indulg'd my ſenſe. Dryden.
The words ſine veſſe Dianam agree better with Livia, who
had the fame of chaſtity, than with either of the Julia's, who
were both noted of incontinency. Dryden.
IN co’NT IN ENT. adj. [incontinens, Lat. in and continent.]
1. Unchaſte; indulging unlawful pleaſure.
In theſe degrees have they made a pair of ſtairs to marriage,
which they will climb incontinent, or elſe be incontinent before
marriage. Shakespeare As you like it.
Men ſhall be lovers of their own ſelves, falſe accuſers, in-
continent, fierce. 2 Tin. iii. 3.
2. Shunning delay; immediate. This is a meaning now ob-
ſolete.
They ran towards the far rebounded noiſe,
To weet what wight ſo loudly did lament;
Unto the place they came incontinent. Fairy Queen.
Come, mourn with me for what I do lament,
And put on ſullen black incºntinent. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
He ſays he will return incontinent. Sºak. Othello.
IN.co'NTINENTLY. adv. [from incont nent.]
1. Unchaſtely; without reſtraint of the appetites.
2. Immediately; at once. An obſolete ſenſe. Spenser.
The cauſe of this war is no other than that we will not in-
continently ſubmit ourſelves to our neighbours. Hayward.
Incontinently I left Madrid, and have been dogged and way-
laid through ſeveral nations. Arbuthn. and Pope.
IN contRove'RTIBLE. adj. [in and controvertible.] Indiſputable;
not to be diſputed.
IN controve'RT1bly. adv. [from incºntrovertible.] To a de-
gree beyond controverſy or diſpute.
The Hebrew is incontrovertibly the primitive and ſureſt teſt to
rely upon; and to preſerve the ſame uncorrupt, there hath been
uſed the higheſt caution humanity could invent. Brown.
IN conve"NIEN ce. - -
IN conve’NIENcy. } n. ſ. [inconvenient, French.]
1. Unfitneſs; inexpedience.
They plead againſt the inconvenience, not the unlawfulneſs
of popiſh apparel; and againſt the inconvenience, not the un-
lawfulneſs of ceremonies in burial. Booker.
2. Diſadvantage; cauſe of uneaſineſs; difficulty.
There is a place upon the top of mount Athos above all
clouds of rain, or other inconvenience. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Man is liable to a great many inconveniences every moment,
and is continually unſecure even of life itſelf. Tillotſon.
The incºnvenience of old age makes him incapable of cor-
poral pleaſures. Dryden.
Would not quickneſs of ſenſation be an incºnvenience to an
animal, that muſt lie ſtill where chance has once placed
it * - Locke.
Conſider the diſproportion between the worſt inconveniences
that attends incompliance with men, and the eternal diſplea-
ſure of God. Rºgers.
We are freed from many inconveniences, and we enjoy ſeve-
ral advantages. - - Atterbury.
The things of another world, being diſtant, operate but
faintly upon us: to remedy this inconveniency, we muſt fre-
quently revolve their certainty and importance. Atterbury.
IN conve"NIENT. adj. [inconvenient, Fr. in and convenins, Lat.]
1. Tncommodious; diſadvantageous.
They delight rather to lean to their old cuſtoms, though
they be more unjuſt, and more inconvenient for the common
people. Spenſer an Ireland.
We are not to look that the church ſhould change her pub-
lick laws, although it chance that for ſome particular men the
ſame be found inconvenient, eſpecially when there may be other
remedy againſt particular inconveniences. Hocker.
He knows that to be incºnvenient, which we falſely think
convenient for us. Smalridge's Sermons.
2. Unfit; inexpedient.
IN conve’NIENTLY. adv. [from inconvenient.]
1. Unfitly; incommodiouſly.
2. Unſeaſonably. Ainſwºrth.
Inconve'Rsable. adj. [in and converſable.] Incommunicative;
ill qualified by temper for converſation; unſocial.
He is a perſon very inconverſable. , Mºre.
Inconve'rtible. adj. [in and convertible.] Not tranſmutable;
incapable of change. - -
It entereth not the veins, but taketh leave of the permeant
parts, and accompanyeth the inconvertible portion unto the
fiege. - Brown's Wugar Errours.
IncoN v1'NcIBLE. adj. [in and convincible.] Not to be con-
vinced; not capable of convićtion.
IN convi'NcIBLY. adv. [from inconvincible.] Without admit-
ting convićtion. . . . .
#. is injurious unto knowledge obſtinately and inconvincibly
to fide with any one. . . Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Inco'NY. adj. [perhaps from in and conn, to know.]
1. Unlearned; artleſs.
2. In Scotland it denotes miſchievouſly unlucky: as, he's an in-
cony fellow. This ſeems to be the meaning in Shakeſpeare.
12 D O' my
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">i
º
I N C
O' my troth, moſt ſweet jeſts, moſt incony vulgar wit,
When it comes ſo ſmoothly off. Shakeſpeare.
IN.co'RPoRAL. adj. [in and corporal.] Immaterial; diſtinét
from matter; diſtinét from body.
Why do'ſt thou bend thine eye on vacancy,
And with th' incorporal air do'ſt hold diſcourſe? Shakespeare Haml.
Learned men have not reſolved us whether light be corporal
or incorporal: corporal they ſay it cannot be, becauſe then it
would neither pierce the air, nor ſolid diaphanous bodies, and
et every day we ſee the air illightened: incorporal it cannot
i. becauſe ſometimes it affecteth the ſight with offence. Ral.
IN corpor A'lit Y. m. ſ. [incorporalité, Fr. from incorporal.] Im-
materialneſs; diſtinétneſs from body.
IN.co'RPor All Y. adv. [from incorporal.] Without matter;
immaterially.
To INCORPORATE. v.a. [incorporer, French.
1. To mingle different ingredients ſo as they ſhall make one
maſs.
A fifteenth part of ſilver, incorporate with gold, will not be
recovered, except you put a greater quantity of ſilver to draw
to it the leſs. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Who the ſwelling clouds in bladders ties, -
To mollify the ſtubborn clods with rain,
And ſcatter'd duſt incorporate again? Sandyt.
2. To conjoin inſeparably. -
Villainous thoughts, Roderigo, when
Theſe mutualities ſo marſhal the way,
Hard at hand comes the maſter and main exerciſe,
The incorpºrate concluſion. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
By your leaves, you ſhall not ſtay alone, -
TÉ. church incorporate two in one. Shakeſp R. and ju.
Upon my knees
I charm you, by that great vow
Which did incorporate and make us one. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
3. To form into a corporation, or body politick. In this ſenſe
they ſay in Scotland, the incorporate trades in any community.
The apoſtle affirmeth plainly of all men chriſtian, that be
they Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, they are all incorporated
into one company, they all make but one body. Hooker.
The ſame is incorporated with a majoralty, and nameth bur-
geſſes to parliament. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
4. To unite; to aſſociate.
It is Caſca, one incorporate
To our attempts. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
Your moſt grave belly was deliberate,
Not raſh, like his accuſers, and thus anſwer'd;
True is it, my incorporate friends, quoth he,
That I receive the general food at firſt,
Which you do live upon. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
All this learning is ignoble and mechanical among them,
and the Confutian only eſſential and incorporate in their govern-
Inent. Temple.
The Romans did not ſubdue a country to put the inhabi-
tants to fire and ſword, but to incorporate them into their own
community. Addison's Freeholder.
5. To embody.
Courteſy, that ſeemed incorporated in his heart, would not
be perſuaded by danger to offer any offence. Sidney.
The idolaters, who worſhipped their images as gods, ſup-
poſed ſome ſpirit to be incorporated therein, and ſo to make to-
gether with it a perſon fit to receive worſhip. Stillingfleet.
To IN.co'RPoRATE. v. n. To unite into one maſs.
Painters colours and aſhes do better incorporate with cil.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
It is not univerſally true, that acid ſalts and oils will not in-
corporate or mingle. Boyle.
Thy ſoul
In real darkneſs of the body dwells,
Shut out from outward light,
T” incorporate with gloomy night. Milton's Agoniſtes.
It finds the mind unprepoſſeſſed with any former notions,
and ſo eaſily gains upon the aſſent, grows up with it, and in-
corporates into it. South's Sermons.
Incorporate. adj. [ in and corporate.] Immaterial; un-
ied.
Moſes forbore to ſpeak of angels, and things inviſible and
incorporate. Raleigh.
Incorporation. n.ſ.. [incorporation, Fr. from incorporate.j
1. Union of divers ingredients in one maſs.
Make proof of the incorporation of iron with flint; for if it
can be incorporated without over great charge, the cheapneſs
of the flint doth make the compound ſtuff profitable. Bacon.
This, with ſome little additional, may further the intrinſick
incorporation. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Formation of a body politick.
3. Adoption; union; aſſociation.
In him we ačtually are, by our ačtual incorporation into that
ſociety which hath him for their head. Hooker.
Incorpo'REAL. adj. [incorporalis, Lat. incorporel, Fr. in and
corporeal.] Immaterial; unbodied.
It is a virtue which may be called incorportal and immate-
riate, whereof there be in nature but few. Bacon.
I N C
Senſe and perception muſt neceſſarily proceed from ſome
incorporeal ſubſtance within us. Bentley's Sermons.
Incorpo'REALLY. adv. [from incorporeal. J Immaterially;
without body.
The ſenſe of hearing ſtriketh the ſpirits more immediately
than the other ſenſes, and more incorporeally than the ſmelling.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
IN corpore'1TY. m. ſ. [ in and corporeity. ] Immateriality;
diſtinétneſs from body.
To INco'RPse. v. a. [in and corpſ...] To incorporate; to unite
into one body.
- He grew unto his ſeat,
As he had been incºrps'd and demy-natur'd
With the brave horſe. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
INcor Rect. adj. [in and correół J Not nicely finiſhed; not
exact; inaccurate; full of faults.
The piece you think is incorreół: why take it;
I'm all ſubmiſſion; what you'd have it, make it. Pºpe.
Isºrºrº. adv. [from incorrect.] Inaccurately; not ex-
actly.
Istºrests. n.ſ.. [in and correóneſ...] Inaccuracy; want
of exactneſs.
INco'RRIGIBLE, adj. [incorrigible, Fr. in and corrigible.] Bad
beyond correction; depraved beyond amendment by any
means; erroneous beyond hope of inſtruction.
The loſs is many times irrecoverable, and the inconve-
nience incorrigible. More's Divine Dialºgues.
What are their thoughts of things, but variety of incorri-
gible error L’Eſtrange.
Provok'd by thoſe incorrigible fools,
I left declaiming in pedantick ſchools. Dryden's juven.
Whilſt we are incorrigible, God may in vengeance continue
to chaſtiſe us with the judgment of war. Smalridge's Serm.
The moſt violent party-men are ſuch as have diſcovered
leaſt ſenſe of religion or morality; and when ſuch are laid
aſide, as ſhall be found incorrigible, it will be no difficulty to
reconcile the reſt. Swift.
IN cor R1'GibleNEss. n.ſ.. [from incorrigible.] Hopeleſs depra-
vity; badneſs beyond all means of amendment.
What we call penitence becomes a ſad atteſtation of our
incorrigibleneſs. Decay of Piety.
I would not have chiding uſed, much leſs blows, ’till obſti-
nacy and incorrigibleneſ; make it abſolutely neceſſary. Locke.
INco'RRIGibly, adv. [from incorrigible.] To a degree of de-
pravity beyond all means of amendment.
Appear incorrigibly mad,
They cleanlineſs and company renounce. Roſcommon.
IN corru'Pt. adj. [in and corruptus, Latin; incorrompº,
Incor RU'pted. 5 French.]
1. Free from foulneſs or depravation.
º Sin, that firſt
Diſtemper'd all things, and, of incorrupt,
Corrupted. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. xi.
2. Pure of manners; honeſt; good. It is particularly applied
to a mind above the power of bribes. -
Incorruptibility. n.ſ.. [incorruptibilité, Fr. from incorrup-
tible.] Inſuſceptibility of corruption; incapacity of decay.
Philo, in his book of the world's incorruptibility, alledgeth
the verſes of a Greek tragick poet. Hakewill.
INcorruptible. adj. [ incorruptible, Fr. in and corruptible. 1
Not capable of corruption; not admitting decay.
In ſuch abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a great ſtore of fruit untouch'd,
Still hanging incorruptible. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix:
Our bodies ſhall be changed into incorruptible and immortal
ſubſtances, our ſouls be entertained with the moſt raviſhing
objećts, and both continue happy throughout all eternity. Wake.
Incorru'ption. n.ſ.. [incorruption, Fr. in and corruption.] In-
capacity of corruption. -
So alſo is the reſurre&amp;tion of the dead: it is ſown in corrup-
tion, it is raiſed in incorruption. I Cor. xv. 42.
IN corru'pt.NEss. n.ſ.. [in and corrupt.]
1. Purity of manners; honeſty; integrity.
Probity of mind, integrity, and incorruptneſs of manners,
is preferable to fine parts and ſubtile ſpeculations. Woodward.
2. Freedom from decay or degeneration. -
To INcRA'ss ATE. v.a. [in and craſſus, Lat.] To thicken 5
the contrary to attenuate.
If the cork be too light to fink under the ſurface, the body
of water may be attenuated with ſpirits of wine; if too heavy,
it may be incraſated with ſalt. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Acids diſſolve or attenuate, alcalies precipitate or incraſ-
fate. Newton's Opt.
Acids, ſuch as are auſtere, as unripe fruits, produce too
great a ſtrićture of the fibres, incraſate and coagulate the
fluids; from whence pains and rheumatiſm. Arbuthnot.
IN cRass A"tion. m. ſ. [from incraffate.]
1. The aët of thickening.
2. The ſtate of growing thick. - - -
Nothing doth conglaciate but water; for the determination
of quickſilver is fixation, that of milk coagulation, and that
of oil incraſſation. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INCRA'ss ATIVE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N C
I N C
º
:
i
º
º
º
*
INCRA'ss ATIve. n.ſ.. [from incraſate 3 Having the quality of
thickening.
The two latter indicate reſtringents to ſtench, and
incraſatives to thicken the blood. Harvey on Conſumpt.
To INCRE'Ase. v. n. [in and creſco, Lat.] To grow more in
number, or greater in bulk; to advance in quantity or value,
or in any quality capable of being more or leſs.
Hear and obſerve to do it, that it may be well with thee,
and that ye may increaſe mightily. Deutr. vi. 3.
Profane and vain babbling will increaſe unto ungodlineſs.
2 Tim. ii. 16.
From fifty to threeſcore he loſes not much in fancy, and
judgment, the effect of obſervation, ſtill increaſes. Dryden.
Henry, in knots, involving Emma's name
Upon this tree; and, as the tender mark,
Grew with the year, and widen'd with the bark:
Venus had heard the virgin's ſoft addreſs, º
That as the wound the paſſion might increaſe. Prior.
To INCRE"As E. v. a. [See Encrease. J. To make more or
greater.
He hath increaſed in Judah mourning and lamentation. Sam.
I will increaſe the famine, and break your ſtaff of bread.
Ezek. v. 16.
I will increaſe them with men like a flock. Ezek. xxxvi.
Hye thee from this ſlaughter-houſe,
Leſt thou increaſe the number of the dead. Shakeſp. R. III.
Fiſhes are more numerous or increaſing than beaſts or birds,
as appears by their numerous ſpawn. Hale.
It ſerves to increaſe that treaſure, or to preſerve it. Temple.
IN cRE'Ase. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Augmentation; the ſtate of growing more or greater.
For three years he liv'd with large increaſe
In arms of honour, and eſteem in peace.
Hail, bards triumphant born in happier days,
Whoſe honours with increaſe of ages grow,
Dryden.
As ſtreams roll down, enlarging as they flow. Pope.
2. Increment; that which is added to the original ſtock.
3. Produce.
As Heſiod ſings, ſpread waters o'er thy field,
And a moſt juſt and glad increaſe 'twill yield. Denham.
Thoſe grains which grew produced an increaſe beyond ex-
Teótation. Mortimer's Husbandry.
4. Generation.
Into her womb convey ſterility;
Dry up in her the organs of increaſe,
And from her derogate body never ſpring a babe. Shakeſp.
5: Progeny.
Him young Thoaſa bore, the bright increaſe
Of Phorcys. Pope's Odyſſey.
6. The ſtate of waxing, or growing full orbed. Uſed of the moon.
Seeds, hair, nails, hedges and herbs, will grow ſooneſt, if
ſet or cut in the increaſe of the moon. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
INCREASER. n.ſ.. [from increaſe.] He who increaſes.
INCREATED. adj. Not created.
Since the deſire is infinite, nothing but the abſolute and in-
created Infinite can adequately fill it. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
INCREDIBI'lity, n.ſ.. [incredibilité, French..] The quality of
ſurpaſſing belief.
É. objects of incredibility, none are ſo removed from all
appearance of truth as thoſe of Corneille's Andromede. Dryd.
INCRE'DiBLE. adj. [incredibilis, Lat..] Surpaſſing belief; not
to be credited.
The ſhip Argo, that there might want no incredible thing
in this fable, ſpoke to them. Raleigh.
Preſenting things impoſſible to view,
They wander through incredible to true. Granville.
INCRE'DigiE Ness. n.ſ.. [from incredible.] Quality of being
not credible.
IešRE'Dibly. adv. [from incredible.] In a manner not to be
I believed.
NCREDU'LITY.. n.ſ. ſincredulité, French. uality of not
believing; tiº belief. » J Quality
He was more large in the deſcription of Paradiſe, to take
away all ſcruple from the incredulity of future ages. Raleigh.
Incº'bulous adj. [incredule, Fr. incredulus, atin.] Hard
of belief; refuſing credit.
I am not altogether, incredulous but there may be ſuch can-
dles as are made of ſalamander's wool, being a kind of mine-
ral which whiteneth in the burning, and conſumeth not. Bac.
INGRE'DulousNess. n.ſ.. [from incredulous.] Hardneſs of be-
lief; incredulity.
lººr. adj. [in and creme, Latin.] Not conſumable
y nre.
If from the ſkin of the ſalamander theſe incremable pieces
are compoſed. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
INCREMENT. n.ſ. ſincrementum, Latin.]
I. Act of growing greater.
Divers conceptions are concerning its increment, or inunda-
tion. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. Increaſe; cauſe of growing more.
This ſtratum is expanded at top, ſerving as the ſeminary
that furniſheth matter for the formation and increment of ani-
mal and vegetable bodies. • JWoodward.
3. Produce.
The orchard loves to wave
With Winter winds: the looſen'd roots then drink
Large increment, earneſt of happy years. Phillips.
To I'Ncre PATE. v. a. [increpo, Latin.] To chide; to re-
prehend.
INCREPA'tion. n.ſ. [ increpatio, Latin. 1 Reprehenſion;
chiding.
The admonitions, fraternal or paternal, of his fellow Chriſ-
tians, or of the governours of the church, then more publick
reprehenſions and increpations. Hammond.
To IN cRu'st. v. a. [incruſo, Latin; incruſter, French.]
To INcru'state. W. To cover with an additional coat adher-
ing to the internal matter. .* *
The finer part of the wood will be turned into air, and the
groſſer ſtick baked and incruſtate upon the ſides of the veſſel.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Some rivers bring forth ſpars, and other mineral matter, ſo
as to cover and incruſt the ſtones. - M/oodward.
Save but our army; and let Jove incruſt
Swords, pikes, and guns with everlaſting ruſt. Pope.
Any of theſe ſun-like bodies in the centers of the ſeveral
vortices, are ſo incruſtated and weakened as to be carried about
in the vortex of the true ſun. Cheyne's Phil Prin.
The ſhield was purchaſed by Woodward, who incruffed it
with a new ruſt. Arbuthn. and Pope's Mart. Scribl.
IncrustAºtion, n.ſ.. [incruſiation, Fr. from incruſio, Latin.]
An adherent covering; ſomething ſuperinduced.
Having ſuch a º: ſtock of marble, their chapels are
laid over with ſuch a rich variety of incruſtations as cannot be
found in any other part. Addiſon an Italy.
To I'Ncubate. v. n. [incubo, Latin.J. To ſit upon eggs.
INcuba’t 1o N. m. ſ. [incubation, Fr. incubatio, Lat.] The aët
of ſitting upon eggs to hatch them.
Whether that vitality was by incubation, or how elſe, is
only known to God. Raleigh's Hiſtry ºf the IP'orld.
Birds have eggs enough at firſt conceived in them to ſerve
them, allowing ſuch a proportion for every year as will ſerve
for one or two incubations. - Ray on the Creation.
When the whole tribe of birds by incubation produce their
young, it is a wonderful deviation, that ſome few families
ſhould do it in a more novercal way. Derham.
As the white of an egg by incubatiºn, ſo can the ſerum by
the aëtion of the fibles be attenuated. Arbuthnot.
I'Ncubus. n.ſ. [Latin; incube, Fr.] The night-mare.
The incubus is an inflation of the membranes of the ſtomach,
which hinders the motion of the diaphragma, lungs, pulſe,
and motion, with a ſenſe of a weight oppreſſing the breaſt.
Floyer on the Humourt.
To INCU'LCATE. v. a. [inculco, Latin; inculquer, French I
To impreſs by frequent admonitions; to enforce by conſtant
repetition.
Manifeſt truth may deſerve ſometimes to be inculcated, be-
cauſe we are too apt to forget it. Atterbury:
Homer continually inculcates morality, and piety to the
gods. Broome's Notes to Pope's Odyſſey.
INculcaſt Ion. n.ſ.. [from inculcate.] The aët of impreſſing
by frequent admonition; admonitory ºfºr
INcu'lt, adj. [inculte, French; incultus, Lat..] Uncultivated;
untilled.
Her foreſts huge,
Incult, robuſt and tall, by nature's hand
Planted of old. Thomſon's Autumn.
Incu'lpable. adv. [in and culpabilis, Lat..] Unblameable;
not reprehenſible.
Ignorance, ſo far as it may be reſolved into natural inabi-
lity, is, as to men, at leaſt inculpable, and conſequently not
the objećt of ſcorn, but pity. South.
Incu'lpABLY. adj. [in and culpabilis, Lat.] Unblameably ;
without blame. r
As to errours or infirmities, the frailty of man's condition
has invincibly, and therefore inculpably, expoſed him. South.
Incu'MBENcy. n.ſ.. [from incumbent.]
1. The act of lying upon another.
2. The ſtate of keeping a benefice.
Theſe fines are only to be paid to the biſhop, during his in-
cumbency in the ſame ſee. - Swift.
INCU'MBENT. adj. [incumbens, Latin.]
1. Reſting upon; lying upon.
Then with expanded wings he ſteers his flight
Aloft, incumbent on the duſky air, -
That felt unuſual weight. Milt, Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
The aſcending parcels of air, having now little more than
the weight of the incumbent water to ſurmount, were able both
ſo to expand themſelves as to fill up that part of the pipe
which they pervaded, and, by preſſing every way againſt the
ſides of it, to lift upwards with them what water they found
above them. Jºyle.
With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N C
I N D
;
!
i
With wings expanded wide ourſelves we'll rear,
And fly incumbent on the duſky air. Dryden.
Here the rebel giants lye ; -
And, when to move th’ incumbent load they try,
Aſcending vapours on the day prevail. Addison.
Man is the deſtin'd prey of peſtilence,
And o'er his guilty domes
She draws a cloſe incumbent cloud of death. Thomſon.
2. Impoſed as a duty.
All men, truly zealous, will perform thoſe good works that
are incumbent on all Chriſtians. Sprat's Sermons.
There is a double duty incumbent upon us in the exerciſe of
our powers. - - L’Eſtrange.
Thus, if we think and adt, we ſhall ſhew ourſelves duly
mindful not only of the advantages we receive from thence,
but of the obligations alſo which are incumbent upon us. Atter.
INcu (M BENT. n.ſ.. [incumbens, Latin.] He who is in preſent
poſſeſſion of a benefice.
In many places the whole eccleſiaſtical dues are in lay hands,
and the incumbent lieth at the mercy of his patron. Swift.
To INcu'MBER. v. a. [encombrer, French.] To embarraſs.
My cauſe is call’d, and that long look'd-for day
Is ſtill incumber'd with ſome new delay. Dryden's juven.
To INCU'R. v. a. [incurro, Latin.] To become liable to a
puniſhment or reprehenſion.
I have incurred diſpleaſure from inferiours for giving way to
the faults of others. Hayward.
- They, not obeying,
Incurr'd, what could they leſs the penalty;
And manifold in ſin, deſerv'd to fall. Milton's Par. Lºft.
So judge thou ſtill, preſumptuous! 'till the wrath,
Which thou incurr'ſ by flying, meet thy flight
Sev’nfold, and ſcourge that wiſdom back to hell. Milton.
They had a full perſuaſive that not to do it were to deſert
God, and conſequently to incur damnation. South.
2. To occur; to preſs on the ſenſes.
The motions of the minute parts of bodies are inviſible,
and incur not to the eye; but yet they are to be deprehended
by experience. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The mind of man, even in ſpirituals, ačts with corporeal
dependance; and ſo is he helped or hindered in its operations,
according to the different quality of external objects that incur
into the ſenſes. South's Sermons.
Incu Rabi'lity. m. ſ. [incurabilité, Fr. from incurable.] Im-
poſſibility of cure; utter inſuſceptibility of remedy.
We’ll inſtantly open a door to the manner of a proper and
improper conſumption, together with the reaſon of the in-
curalility of the former, and facile cure of the other. Harvey.
IN cu'R ABLE. adj. [incurable, Fr. in and curable ] Not ad-
mitting remedy; not to be removed by medicine; irremediable;
hopeleſs.
º Pauſe not; for the preſent time's ſo ſick,
That preſent medicine muſt be miniſtred, -
Or overthrow incurable enſues. Shakespeare King John.
Stop the rage betime,
Before the wound do grow incurable;
For being green, there is great hope of help. Shakespeare H. VI.
A ſchirrus is not abſolutely incurable, becauſe it has been
known that freſh paſture has cured it in cattle. Arbuthnot.
If idiots and lunaticks cannot be found, incurables may be
taken into the hoſpital. Swift.
INcu'RABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from incurable.] State of not admitting
any cure.
INcu'RABLY. adv. [from incurable.] Without remedy.
We cannot know it is or is not, being incurably igno-
rant. - Locke.
IN CURIOUs, adj. [in and curious.] Negligent; inattentive.
The Creator did not beſtow ſo much ſkill upon his creatures,
to be looked upon with a careleſs incurious eye. Derham.
He ſeldom at the park appear'd; - -
Yet, not incurious, was inclin'd
To know the converſe of mankind. Swift.
INcu'Rsion. n.ſ [from incurro, Latin.] -
1. Attack; miſchievous occurrence.
Sins of daily incurſion, and ſuch as human frailty is un-
South's Sermons.
avoidably liable to.
2. [Incurſion, Fr.] Invaſion without conqueſt; inroad; ravage.
Spain is very weak at home, or very ſlow to move, when
they ſuffered a ſmall fleet of Engliſh to make an hoſtile inva-
ſion, or incurſion, upon their havens and roads. Bacºn.
Now the Parthian king hath gather'd all his hoſt
Againſt the Scythian, whoſe incurſions wild -
Have waſted Sogdiana. Aºilton’s Parad Rºgain'd.
The incurſions of the Goths diſordered the affairs of the
Roman empire. - Arbuthnot on Co.ns.
IN CUR v A'TION. m. ſ. [from incurvo, Latin.]
1. The act of bending or making crooked.
One part moving while the other reſts, one would think,
ſhould cauſe an incurvation in the line. . Glanv. Sceſſ.
2. Flexion of the body in token of reverence. -
He made uſe of ačts of worſhip which God hath appro-
priated; as incurvation, and ſacrifice. Stilingfieet.
To INCU'RVATE. v. a. [ incurvo, Latin. J. To bend; to
crook.
Sir Iſaac Newton has ſhewn, by ſeveral experiments of rays
paſſing by the edges of bodies, that they are incurvated by
the action of theſe bodies. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
INcu'R v It Y. m. ſ. [from incurvus, Latin.] Crookedneſs; the
ſtate of bending inward.
The incurvity of a dolphin muſt be taken not really, but
in appearance, when they leap above water, and ſuddenly ſhoot
down again: ſtrait bodies, in a ſudden motion, protruded
obliquely downward, appear crooked. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To ITNDAGATE. v. a. [indago, Latin.] To ſearch; to beat
Out.
INDAGA'tion. n ſ [from indagate.] Search; enquiry; ex-
amination.
Paracelſus direéts us, in the indagation of colours, to have
an eye principally upon ſalts. Boyle.
Part hath been diſcovered by himſelf, and ſome by human
indagation. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INDAGA"to R. n.ſ.. [indagator, Latin.] A ſearcher ; an en-
quirer; an examiner.
The number of the elements of bodies is an enquiry whoſe
truth requires to be ſearched into by ſuch ſkilful indagators of
nature. Boyle.
To INDA'Rt. v. a. [ir and dart.] To dart in; to ſtrike in.
I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
But no more deep will I indart mine eye,
Than your conſent gives ſtrength to make it fly. Shakespeare
To INDE'B'r. v. a.
1. To put into debt.
2. To oblige; to put under obligation.
INDE'BTED. participial adj. [in and debt.] Obliged by ſomething
received; bound to reſtitution; having incurred a debt. It has
to before the perſon to whom the debt is due, and fºr before
the thing received.
If the courſe of politick affairs cannot in any good courſe
go forward without fit inſtruments, and that which fitteth
them be their virtues, let polity acknowledge itſelf indebted to
religion, godlineſs being the chiefeſt top and well-ſpring of all
true virtues, even as God is of all good things. Hooker.
Forgive us our fins; for we forgive every one that is in-
delted to us. Lu, xi, 4.
He for himſelf
Indebted and undone, has nought to bring. Milton.
This bleſt alliance may
Th’ indebted nation bounteouſly repay. Granville.
Few conſider how much we are indebted to government, be-
cauſe few can repreſent how wretched mankind would be
without it. - Atterbury's Sermons.
Let us repreſent to our ſouls the love and beneficence for
which we daily ſtand indebted to God. Rogers's Sermons.
We are wholly indebted for them to our anceſtors. Swift.
INDE'cENcy. m. ſ. [ indecence, French. J Any thing unbe-
coming; any thing contrary to good manners; ſomething
wrong, but ſcarce criminal.
He will in vain endeavour to reform indecency in his pupil,
which he allows in himſelf. Locke.
INDE'cENT. adj. [indecent, Fr. in and decent.] Unbecoming;
unfit for the eyes or ears. *
*Till theſe men can prove theſe things, ordered by our
church, to be either intrinſically unlawful or indecent, the uſe
of them, as eſtabliſhed amongſt us, is neceſſary. South.
Charaćters, where obſcene words were proper in their
mouths, but very indecent to be heard. Dryden.
INDE'cENTLY. adv. [from indecent.] Without decency; in a
manner contrary to decency.
IND F c1'Duous. adj. [ in and deciduous. J Not falling; not
ſhed.
We find the ſtatue of the ſun framed with rays about the
head, which were the indeciduous and unſhaken locks of
Apollo. Brown's Wul. Err.
IN DEcli'NABLE. adj. [ indeclinable, Fr. indeclinabilis, Latin. I
Not varied by terminations.
Pondo is an indeclinable word, and when it isjoined to num-
bers it ſignifies libra. Arbuthnot.
IND Eco'Rous. adj. [ indecorus, Latin. ) Indecent; unbe-
coming.
What can be more indecorous than for a creature to violate
the commands, and trample upon the authority of that awful
excellence to whom he owes his life? Norris.
INDEco'RUM. n.ſ. [Latin. ) Indecency; ſomething unbe-
coming.
In De'ED. adv. [in and deed.]
1. In reality; in truth; in verity.
Yet loving indeed, and therefore conſtant. Sidney.
Though ſuch aſſemblies be had indeed for religion's ſake,
hurtful nevertheleſs they may prove, as well in regard of their
fitneſs to ſerve the turn of hereticks, and ſuch as privily will
venture to inſtil their poiſon into new minds. Hoºker.
Some, who have not deſerved judgment of death, have been
for their goods ſake caught up and carried ſtreight to the bough :
a thing indeed very pitiful and horrible. Spenſer.
2. Above
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">1 N D
º
*
2. Above common rate.
Then didſt thou utter, I am yours for ever;
'Tis grace indeed. Shakeſpeare.
Borrows, in mean affairs, his ſubječts pains ;
But things of weight and conſequence indeed,
Himſelf doth in his chamber them debate. Davies.
Such ſons of Abraham, how highly ſoever they may have
the luck to be thought of, are far from being Iſraelites in-
deed. South.
I were a beaſt, indeed, to do you wrong,
I who have lov’d and honour'd you ſo long.
3. This is to be granted that. A particle of conneétion.
This limitation, indeed, of our author, will ſave thoſe the
labour who would look for Adam's heir amongſt the race of
brutes; but will very little contribute to the diſcovery of one
next heir amongſt men. Locke.
There is nothing in the world more generally dreaded, and
yet leſs to be feared, than death: indeed, for thoſe unhappy
men whoſe hopes terminate in this life, no wonder if the pro-
fpečt of another ſeems terrible and amazing. Wake.
4. It is uſed ſometimes as a ſlight aſſertion or recapitulation in a
ſenſe hardly perceptible or explicable.
This is indeed more criminal in thee: Shakeſpeare.
I ſaid I thought it was confederacy between the juggler and
the two ſervants; tho' indeed I had no reaſon ſo to think. Bac.
Some ſons indeed, ſome very few we ſee,
Who keep themſelves from this infection free. Dryden.
There is indeed no greater pleaſure in viſiting theſe maga-
zines of war, after one has ſeen two or three of them. Addison
Drydºn.
5. It is uſed to note conceſſion in compariſons:
Againſt theſe forces were prepared to the number of near
one hundred ſhips; not ſo great of bulk indeed, but of a more
nimble motion. Bacon's War with Spain.
IND EFA'TIGABLE. adj. [indefatigabilis, in and defatigo, Lat.]
Unwearied; not tired; not exhauſted by labour
Who ſhall ſpread his airy flight, -
Upborne with indfatigable wings,
Over the vaſt abrupt. Milton.
The ambitious perſon muſt riſe early and ſit up late, and
purſue his deſign with a conſtant indefatigable attendance: he
muſt be infinitely patient and ſervile. South.
INDEFA'ſ IGABLY. adv. [from indefatigable.] Without wea-
rineſs.
A man indefatigably zealous in the ſervice of the church and
ſtate, and whoſe writings have highly deſerved of both. Dryd.
IND EFEcT1B 1'LITY. m. ſ. [from indefectible.] The quality of
ſuffering no decay; of being ſubjećt to no defečt.
INDEFE'cTI BLE. adj. [in and defectus, Lat.] Unfailing; not
liable to defect or decay.
INDEFE'isible. adj. [indefaiſible, French..] Not to be cut off;
not to be vacated ; irrevocable.
So indifeſſible is our eſtate in thoſe joys, that, if we do not
fell it in reverſion, we ſhall, when once inveſted, be beyond
the poſſibility of ill huſbandry. Decay of Piety.
INDEFENSIBLE. adj. [in and defenſum, Lat.] What cannot
be defended or maintained.
As they extend the rule of conſulting Scripture to all the
aćtions of common life, even ſo far as to the taking up of a
ſtraw, ſo it is altogether falſe and indefenſible. Sanderſon.
INDEFINITE. adj. [indefinitus, Latin; indefinit, Fr.]
1. Not determined; not limited ; not ſettled.
Though a poſition ſhould be wholly rejected, yet that negative
is more pregnant of direétion than an indefinite; as aſhes are
, more generative than duſt. Bacon's Eſſays.
Her advancement was left indefinite; but thus, that it ſhould
be as great as ever any former queen of England had. Bacon.
Tragedy and pićture are more narrowly circumſcribed by
place and time than the epick poem: the time of this laſt is
left indefinite. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. Large beyond the comprehenſion of man, though not abſo-
lutely without limits.
Though it is not infinite, it may be indefinite; though it is
not boundleſs in itſelf, it may be ſo to human comprehen-
ſion. Speciator.
INDEFINITELY. adj. [from indefinite.]
I. Without any ſettled or determinate limitation.
We obſerve that cuſtom, whereunto St. Paul alludeth, and
whereof the fathers of the church in their writings make often
mention, to ſhew indefinitely what was done; but not univer-
ſally to bind for ever all prayers unto one only faſhion of ut-
teran Ce. Hooker.
We conceive no more than the letter beareth; that is, four
times, or indefinitely more than thrice. Brown's Vulg. Err.
A duty to which all are indefinitely obliged, upon ſome oc-
caſions, by the expreſs command of God. Smalridge.
2. To a degree indefinite.
If the world be indefinitely extended, that is, ſo far as no
human intellect can fancy any bounds of it, then what we ſee
muſt be the leaſt part. Ray on the Creation.
IND EFI’NITUDE. m. ſ. [from indefinite J Quantity not limited
by our underſtanding, though yet finite.
They ariſe to a ſtrange and prodigious multitude, if not in-
definitude, by their various poſitions, combinations, and con-
junctions. Ha'e's O igin of Mankind.
IND ELI'BERATE. }*. [indeliberé, Fr. in and deliberate.] Un-
INDEL'BERATE d. 9 premeditated; done without conſideration.
Actions proceeding from blandiſhments, or ſweet perſua-
ſions, if they be indeliberated, as in children, who want the
uſe of reaſon, are not preſently free ačtions. Bramhall.
The love of God better can conſiſt with the indeliberate
commiſſions of many ſins, than with an allowed perſiſtance in
any one. Gover nment of the Tongue.
IND E'LIBLE. adj. [indeeble, Fr. indelebilis, Lat. in and delible.
It ſhould be written indeleble.]
1. Not to be blotted out or effaced. -
Wilful perpetrations of unworthy ačtions brands with inde-
Iible characters the name and memory. King Charles.
Thy heedleſs ſleeve will drink the colour'd oil,
And ſpot indelible thy pocket ſoil. Gay's Trivia.
2. Not to be annulled.
All endued with indel ble power from above to feed, to go-
vern this houſhold, and to conſecrate paſtors and ſtewards of
it to the world's end. Sprat's Sermons.
INDE'Lic Acy. n.ſ. [in and delicacy..] Want of delicacy; want
of elegant decency. -
Your papers would be chargeable with worſe than indelicacy,
they would be immoral, did you treat deteſtable uncleanneſs
as you rally an impertinent ſelf-love. Add ſon.
INDE"Lic.A.T.E. adj. [in and delicate.] Wanting decency; void
of a quick ſenſe of decency.
INDEMN, FIca'tion. n /. [from indemniff.]
1. Security againſt loſs or penalty.
2. Reimburſement of loſs or penalty.
To INDE'MNIFY. v. a. [in and damniſy.]
1. To ſecure againſt loſs or penalty. -
2. To maintain unhurt.
Inſolent ſignifies rude and haughty, indemnify to keep
ſafe. Jſ atts.
INDE'MNITY. n.ſ.. [indemnite, French.] Security from puniſh-
ment; exemption from puniſhment.
I will uſe all means, in the ways of amneſty and indemnity,
which may moſt fully remove all fears, and bury all jealouſies
in forgetfulneſs. King Charles.
To INDEN T. v. a. [in and dens, a tooth, Lat.] To mark any
thing with inequalities like a row of teeth; to cut in and
out; to make to wave or undulate.
About his neck
A green and gilded ſnake had wreath'd itſelf,
Who with her head, nimble in threats, approach'd
The opening of his mouth; but ſuddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlink'd itſelf,
And with indented glides did ſlip away
Into a buſh. Shakeſpeare's As you like,
The ſerpent then, not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as ſince; but on his rear
Circular baſe of riſing folds, that tower'd
Fold above fold, a ſurging maze l Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
Trent, who, like ſome earth-born giant, ſpreads
His thirty arms along the indented meads. Milton.
The margins on each ſide do not terminate in a ſtreight
line, but are indented. J/oodward.
To INDE’NT. v. n. [from the method of cutting counterparts
of a contračt together, that, laid on each other, they may fit,
and any want of conformity may diſcover a fraud..] To con-
tract; to bargain; to make a compačt.
Shall we buy treaſon, and indent with fears,
When they have loſt and forfeited themſelves? Shakespeare H. IV.
He deſcends to the ſolemnity of a pačt and covenant, and
has indented with us. Decay of Piety.
INDE'NT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Inequality; inciſure; inden-
tation.
Trent ſhall not wind with ſuch a deep indent,
To rob me of ſo rich a bottom here. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
IND ENTATION. m. ſ. [in and dens, Latin.] An indenture;
waving in any figure.
The margins on each ſide do not terminate in a ſtreight
line, but are indented; each indentation being continued in a
ſmall ridge acroſs the line, to the indentation that anſwers it on
the oppoſite margin. J/oodward on Fºſſils.
INDE'NTURE. m. ſ. [from indent.] . A covenant, ſo named be-
cauſe the counterparts are indented or cut one by the other.
In Hall's chronicle much good matter is quite marred with
indenture Engliſh. Aſcham's Schoolmaſier.
The critick to his grief will find
How firmly theſe indentures bind. Swift.
INDEPE NDENCE. m. ſ. [independance, Fr. in and dependence.]
INDEPE'NDENCY. } Freedom; exemption from reliance or con-
trol; ſtate over which none has power.
Dreams may give us ſome idea of the great excellency of a
human ſoul, and ſome intimations of its independency oil mat-
ter. - - Aadiſon's Sp ed?ator.
Let fortune do her worſt, whatever ſhe makes u', loſe, as
long as ſhe never makes us loſe our hºneſty an’, our ind:-
pendence. Pope.
12 E Give
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N ID
1 N D
Give me, I cry’d, enough for me,
My bread and independency:
So bought an annual rent or two,
And liv'd juſt as you ſee I do. Pºpe.
INDEPE'NdeNT. adj. [independant, Fr. in and dependent.]
1. Not depending; not ſupported by any other; not relying on
another; not controlled. . It is uſed with on, of, or from before
the objećt; of which on ſeems moſt proper, ſince we ſay to
depend on, and conſequently dependent on.
Creation muſt needs infer providence, and God's making
the world irrefragably proves that he governs it too; or that a
being of dependent nature remains nevertheleſs independent
upon him in that reſpect. South's Sermons.
Since all princes of independent governments are in a ſtate
of nature, the world never was without men in that ſtate. Locke.
The town of St. Gaul is a proteſtant republick, independent
of the abbot, and under the protećtion of the cantons. Addiſ,
2. Not relating to any thing elſe, as to a ſuperiour cauſe or
power.
The conſideration of our underſtanding, which is an incor-
poreal ſubſtance independent from matter; and the contempla-
tion of our own bodies, which have all the ſtamps and cha-
raēters of excellent contrivance; theſe alone do very eaſily
guide us to the wiſe Author of all things. Bentley's Sermons.
INDEPE'NDENT. n.ſ. One who in religious affairs holds that
every congregation is a complete church, ſubject to no ſupe-
riour authority.
We ſhall, in our ſermons, take occaſion to juſtify ſuch
paſſages in our liturgy as have been unjuſtly quarrelled at by
preſbyterians, independents, or other puritan ſectaries. Sanderſ.
A very famous independent miniſter was head of a college
in thoſe times. Addiſon's Spectator.
IN DEPENDENTLY. adv. [from independent.] Without refe-
rence to other things.
Diſpoſe lights and ſhadows, without finiſhing every thing,
independently the one of the other. Dryden.
IND Ese'RT. n.f. [in and deſert.J Want of merit.
Thoſe who were once looked on as his equals, are apt to
think the fame of his merit a reflection on their own inde-
ſerts. Addiſon's Spectator.
INDE's INENTLY. adv. [indefinenter, Fr. in and diſinio, Latin.]
Without ceſſation.
They continue a month indeſnently. Ray on the Creation.
INDESTRU'cTIBLE, adj. [in and deſiručible.] Not to be de-
ſtroyed. -
Glaſs is ſo compačt and firm a body, that it is inde-
frućfible by art or nature. Boyle.
TNDETE'RMINABLE. adj. [in and determinable.] Not to be
fixed; not to be defined or ſettled.
There is not only obſcurity in the end, but beginning of .
the world; that as its period is inſcrutable, ſo is its nativity
indeterminable. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INDETE’RMINATE. adj. [indeterminé, Fr. in and determinate.]
Unfixed; not defined; indefinite.
The rays of the ſame colour were by turns tranſmitted at
one thickneſs, and reflected at another thickneſs, for an inde-
terminate number of ſucceſſions. Newton's Opt.
INDETE'RMINATELY. adv. [in and determinately.] Indefinite-
ly; not in any ſettled manner. -
His perſpicacity diſcerned the loadſtone to reſpect the North,
when ours beheld it indeterminately. Brown's Wulg. Err.
The depth of the hold is indeterminately expreſſed in the
deſcription. Arbuthnot on Coins:
INDETERMINED. adj. [in and determined.] Unſettled; un-
fixed.
We ſhould not amuſe ourſelves with floating words of inde-
termined ſignification, which we can uſe in ſeveral ſenſes to
ferve a turn. Locke.
INDETERMINA'tion. n.ſ.. [in and determination.] Want of
determination; want of fixed or ſtated direétion.
By contingents I underſtand all things which may be done,
and may not be done, may happen, or may not happen, by
reaſon of the indetermination or accidental concurrence of the
cauſes. Bramhall againſ? Hobbes.
INDEvotion. n.ſ.. [indevotion, Fr. in and devotion.] "Want of
devotion; irreligion.
Let us make the church the ſcene of our penitence, as of
our faults; deprecate our former indevotion, and, by an exem-
plary reverence, redreſs the ſcandal of our profaneneſs. ...
Decay of Piety.
IN Devou’t. adj. [indevot, Fr. in and devout..] Not devout;
not religious; irreligious. -
He prays much, yet curſes more; whilſt he is meek, but
indevout. Decay of Piety.
INDEx. m. ſ. [Latin.] . -
1. The diſcoverer; the pointer out. - -
* - Taſtes are the indexes of the different qualities of plants, as
we.' as of all ſorts of aliment. . Arbuthnot on Aliments.
That which was once the index to point out all virtues,
does now mark out that part of the world where leaſt of them
reſides. - Decay of Piety.
2. The hand that points to any thing, as to the hour or way.
They have no more inward ſelf-conſciouſneſs of what they
do or ſuffer, than the index of a watch, of the hour it points
to. Bentley's Sermoni,
3. The table of contents to a book.
In ſuch indexes, although ſmall
To their ſubſequent volumes, there is ſeen
The baby figure of the giant maſs
Of things to come, at large. Shakespeare.
If a book has no index, or good table of contents, 'tis very
uſeful to make one as you are reading it; and in your ind, to
take notice only of parts new to you. Watts.
Indexterity, n.ſ. [in and dexterity..] Want of dexterity,
want of readineſs; want of handineſs.
The indexterity of our conſumption-curers demonſtrates
their dimneſs in beholding its cauſes, Harvey on Cºnſumptiºn.
I'NDIAN Arrow-root. n. ſ [marcanta, Latin.] A root.
It has a flower conſiſting of one leaf, almoſt funnel-ſhaped,
opening in ſix parts, three of which are alternately larger than
the others: the lower part of the flower-cup afterwards be:
comes an oval-ſhaped fruit, having one cell, with one hard
rough ſeed. It was brought from the Spaniſh ſettlements of
America into the iſlands of Barbadoes and Jamaica, where it
is cultivated as a medicinal plant, it being a ſovereign remedy
for curing the bite of waſps, and expelling the poiſon of the
manchineel tree. This root the Indians apply to extrad the
venom of their arrows: after they have dug it up they clean
it, maſh it, and lay it as a poultice to the wounded part, and
are generally ſucceſsful in the cure. Miller.
I'NDIAN Creſs. n.ſ. [acriviola, Latin.] A plant.
The leaves are round, umbillicated, and placed alternately;
the ſtalks trailing; the cup of the flower is quinquefid; the
flowers conſiſt of five leaves in form of a violet; the ſeeds are
roundiſh and rough, three of them ſucceeding each flower,
The ſpecies are five. Miller.
I'NDIAN Fig. n.ſ. [opuntia, Latin.] A plant.
The characters are: the flower conſiſts of many leaves,
which expand in form of a roſe, having a great number of
ſtamina in the centre, which grow upon the top of the ovary:
the ovary afterwards becomes a fleſhy umbillicated fruit, with
a ſoft pulp, incloſing many ſeeds, which are for the moſt part
angular. Miller.
I'NDIAN Red, n.ſ. A kind of mineral earth.
Indian red, ſo called by the painters, is a ſpecies of ochre;
and is a very fine purple earth, of firm compact texture, and
great weight: while in the ſtratum it is of a pure blood colour,
and almoſt of a ſtony hardneſs: when dry it is of a fine glow-
ing red, of a rough duſty ſurface, and, when broken, full of
white particles, large, ſolid, bright, and glittering. It is alſo
called Perſian earth, and is dug in the iſland of Ormuz in the
Perſian gulph, and alſo at Bombay. Hill on Fºſſils.
I'NDicANT. adj. [indicans, Latin.] Showing; pointing out;
that which direéts what is to be done in any diſeaſe,
To I'NDICATE. v. a. [indico, Latin.]
1. To ſhow ; to point out.
2. [In phyſick.] To point out a remedy.
INDIcA'tion. n.ſ. (indication, Fr. indicatio, from indico, Lat]
1. Mark; token; ſign; note; ſymptom.
The frequent ſtops they make in the moſt convenient places,
are a plain indication of their wearineſs. Addiſon's Guardian.
We think that our ſucceſſes are a plain indication of the
divine favour towards us. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. [In phyſick.] Indication is of four kinds: vital, preſervative,
curative, and palliative, as it direćts what is to be done to
continue life, cutting off the cauſe of an approaching diflem-
per, curing it whilſt it is actually preſent, or leſſening its ºf
fečts, or taking off ſome of its ſymptoms before it can be
wholly removed. - Quincy.
Theſe, be the things that govern nature principally, and
without which you cannot make any true analyſis, and india-
tion of the proceedings of nature. Baron's Nat. Hiſt.
The depravation of the inſtruments of maſtication .4 ma-
tural indication of a liquid diet. Arbuthnot on Alimentſ.
3. Diſcovery made; intelligence given.
If a º, that had ; fair É. in reverſion, ſhould be
aſſured by ſome ſkilful phyſician, that he would inevitably fall
into a diſeaſe that would totally deprive him of his underſtand-
ing and memory; if, I ſay, upon a certain belief of this indi-
cation, the man ſhould appear overjoyed at the news, would
not all that ſaw him confide that the diffemper had ſº
him * Bently's Sermons.
INDI'cATIVE. adj. [indicativus, Lat.]
1. Showing; informing; peinting out.
2. [In grammar.] A certain modification of a verb, expreſſing
affirmation or indication.
The verb is formed in a certain manner to affirm, dºy,
or interrogate; which formation, from the principal uſe of it,
is called the indicative mood. Clarke's Lat. Gram.
IND1'catively. adv. [from indicative..] In ſuch a manner *
ſhows or betokens. -
Theſe images, formed in the brain, are indicatively of the
ſame ſpecies with thoſe of ſenſe. Grew's Coſmºl.
To INDict. See INDITF, and its derivatives. f
INDI'CTION-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N D
I N D
! --
-
*
*
*
.
º
º:
g
Indiſcrios. h J. [indićion, Fr. indico, Latin.]
1. Declaration; proclamation,
After a legation ad res repetendas, and a refuſal, and a de-
nunciation and indiction of a war, the war is left at large. Bac.
2. [In chronology.] The indićlion, inſtituted by Conſtantine the
great, is properly a cycle of tributes, orderly diſpoſed, for fif-
teen years, and by it accounts of that kind were kept. After-
wards, in memory of the great vićtory obtained by Conſtan-
time over Mezentius, 8 Cal. Oét. 312, by which an intire
freedom was given to Chriſtianity, the council of Nice, for
the honour of Conſtantine, ordained that the accounts of years
ſhould be no longer kept by the Olympiads, which 'till that
time had been done ; but that, inſtead thereof, the in aid?ion
fhould be made uſe of, by which to reckon and date their
years, which hath its epocha A. D. 313, Jan. 1.
INDI'FFERENCE. }". ſ: [ indifference, French ; indifferentia,
INDI'FFERENCY. S. Latin. J
1. Neutrality; ſuſpenſion; equipoiſe or freedom from motives
on either ſide.
In choice of committees it is better to chuſe indifferent per-
ſons, than to make an indifferency by putting in thoſe that are
ſtrong on both ſides. Bacon's Eſſays.
By an equal indifferency for all truth, I mean, not loving it
as ſuch, before we know it to be true. Locke.
A perfeót indifferency in the mind, not determinable by its
laſt judgment, would be as great an imperfection as the want
of indifferency to act, or not to act, 'till determined by the
will. Locke.
Thoſe who would borrow light from expoſitors, either con-
ſult only thoſe who have the good luck to be thought ſound
and orthodox, avoiding thoſe of different ſentiments; or elſe
with indifferency look into the notes of all commentators. Locke.
2. Impartiality.
Read the book with indifferency and judgment, and thou
can'ſt not but greatly commend it. Whitgifte.
3. Negligence; want of affection; unconcernedneſs.
Indifference cannot but be criminal, when it is converſant
about objects which are ſo far from being of an indifferent na-
ture, that they are of the higheſt importance. Addiſon.
A place which we muſt paſs through, not only with the in-
difference of ſtrangers, but with the vigilance of thoſe who
travel through the country of an enemy. Rogers.
Indiff'rence, clad in wiſdom's guiſe,
All fortitude of mind ſupplies;
For how can ſtony bowels melt,
In thoſe who never pity felt - Swift.
He will let you know he has got a clap with as much indif-
ferency as he would a piece of publick news. Swift.
The people of England ſhould be frighted with the French
king and the pretender once a year: the want of obſerving
this neceſſary precept, has produced great indifference in the
vulgar. Arbuthnot.
4. State in which no moral or phyſical reaſon preponderates; ſtate
in which there is no difference.
The choice is left to our diſcretion, except a principal bond
of ſome higher duty remove the indifference that ſuch things
have in themſelves: their indifference is removed, if we take
away our own liberty. Hooker.
INDIFFERENT. adj. [indifferent, Fr. indifferens, Latin.]
1. Neutral; not determined to either ſide.
Doth his majeſty
Incline to it or no
He ſeems indifferent. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Being indifferent, we ſhould receive and embrace opinions
according as evidence gives the atteſtation of truth. Locke.
Let guilt or fear -
Diſturb man's reſt; Cato knows neither of them:
Indifferent in his choice to ſleep or die. Addiſon's Cato.
2. Unconcerned; inattentive; regardleſs.
One thing was all to you, and your fondneſs made you in-
different to every thing elſe. Temple.
It was a remarkable law of Solon, that any perſon who, in
the civil commotions of the republick, remained neuter, or an
indifferent ſpectator of the contending parties, ſhould be con-
demned to perpetual baniſhment. Addiſon's Freeholdºr.
But how indifferent ſoever man may be to eternal happineſs,
yet ſurely to eternal miſery none can be indifferent. Rogers.
3. Not to have ſuch difference as that the one is for its own ſake
preferable to the other.
The nature of things indifferent is neither to be commanded
nor forbidden, but left free and arbitrary. Hooker.
Theſe two cuſtoms, which of themſelves are indifferent in
other kingdoms, became exceeding evil in this realm, by rea-
ſon of the inconveniences which followed thereupon. Davies.
Though at firſt it was free, and in my choice whether or no
I ſhould publiſh theſe diſcourſes; yet, the publication being
once reſolved, the dedication was not ſo indifferent. South.
This I mention only as my conjećture, it being indifferent to
the matter in hand which way the learned ſhall determine. Loc.
4. Impartial; diſintereſted.
Medcalfe was partial to none, but indifferent to all; a maſ-
ter for the whole, and a father to every one. Aſcham.
I am a moſt poor woman, and a ſtranger,
Born out of your dominions; having here
No judge indiff'rent, and no more aſſurance -
Of equal friendſhip and proceeding. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
There can hardly be an indifferent trial had between the
king and the ſubjećt, or between party and party, by reaſon
of this general kindred and conſanguinity. Davies.
5. Paſſable; having mediocrity; of a middling ſtate; neither
good nor worſt. This is an improper and colloquial uſe, eſpe-
cially when applied to perſons.
Some things admit of mediocrity:
A counſellor, or pleader at the bar,
May want Meſſala's pow'rful eloquence,
Or be leſs read than deep Caſelius;
Yet this ind f'rent lawyer is eſteem’d. Roſcommon.
Who would excel, when few can make a teſt
Betwixt indiff'rent writing and the beſt ? Dryden.
This has obliged me to publiſh an indifferent colle&amp;tion of
poems, for fear of being thought the author of a worſe. Prior. .
There is not one of theſe ſubječts that would not ſell a
very indifferent paper, could I think of gratifying the publick
by ſuch mean and baſe methods. Addiſon.
6. In the ſame ſenſe it has the force of an adverb.
... I am myſelf indifferent honeſt; but yet I could accuſe me
of ſuch things, that it were better that my mother had not
borne me. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
This will raiſe a great ſcum on it, and leave your wine in-
different clear. Martimer.
INDIFFerestLY. adv. [indifferenter, Latin.]
1. Without diſtinétion; without preference.
Whiteneſs is a mean between all colours, having itſelf in-
differently to them all, ſo as with equal facility to be tinged
with any of them. Newton's Opt.
Were pardon extended indifferently to all, which of them
would think himſelf under any particular obligation? Addiſon.
Though a church of England-man thinks every ſpecies of
government equally lawful, he does not think them equally ex-
pedient, or for every country indifferently. Swift.
2. In a neutral ſtate; without wiſh or averſion.
Set honour in one eye, and death i' th' other,
And I will look on death indifferently. Shakeſp. jul. Carſ.
3. Not well; tolerably ; paſſably; middlingly.
A moyle will draw indifferently well, and carry great bur-
thens. Carew.
I hope it may indifferently entertain your lordſhip at an un-
bending hour. Rowe.
An hundred and fifty of their beds, ſown together, kept
me but very indifferently from the floor. Gulliver's Travels.
I'NDIGENce. }". ſ [indigence, Fr. indigentia, Lat..] Want ;
I'NDIGENCY. 5 penury; poverty.
Where there is happineſs, there muſt not be indigency, or
want of any due comforts of life. Burnet's Theo. of the Earth.
For ev'n that indigence, that brings me low,
Makes me myſelf, and him above to know. Dryden.
Athens worſhipped God with temples and ſacrifices, as if
he needed habitation and ſuſtenance; and that the heathens had
ſuch a mean apprehenfion about the indigency of their gods, ap-
pears from Ariſtophanes and Lucian. Bentley.
INDI'G ENous. adj. [indigène, Fr. indigena, Latin.] Native to
a country; originally produced or born in a region.
Negroes were all tranſported from Africa, and are not indi-
genous or proper natives of America. Brown's Vulg. Err.
It is wonderful to obſerve one creature, that is, mankind,
indigenous to ſo many different climates. Arbuthnot.
I'NDIGENT. adj. [indigent, French; indigens, Latin.]
1. Poor; needy; neceſſitous.
Charity conſiſts in relieving the indigent. Addiſon.
2. In want; wanting.
Rejoice, O Albion, ſever'd from the world .
By nature's wiſe indulgence; indigent
Of nothing from without. Phillips,
3. Void; empty.
Such bodies have the tangible parts indigent of moiſture.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
INDIGE'st.
INDIGE's TED. łaj. [indigeſle, Fr. indigeſtus, Latin.]
1. Not ſeparated into diſtinét orders; not regularly diſpoſed.
This maſs, or indigeſted matter, or chaos, created in the
beginning, was without the proper form, which it afterwards
acquired. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Iſorld.
Before the ſeas, and this terreſtrial ball,
One was the face of nature, if a face ;
Rather a rude and indigeſted maſs.
2. Not formed, or ſhaped.
Set a form upon that indige/?projećt,
So ſhapeleſs and ſo rude. Shakeſp. King john.
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigeſted lump;
As crooked in thy manners as thy ſhape. Shakeſp H. VI.
3. Not well conſidered and methodiſed.
By irkſome deformities, through endleſs and ſenſeleſs effu-
ſions of indigeſted prayers, they oſtentimes diſgrace the wor-
thieſt part of Chriſtian duty towards God. *f;
c
Dryden's Ovid.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N D
I N D
:
The political creed of the high-principled men ſets the pro-
teſtant ſucceſſion upon a firmer foundation than all the indigeſt-
cd ſchemes of thoſe who profeſs revolution principles. Swift.
4. Not concoéted in the ſtomach.
º Dreams are bred
From riſing fumes of indigeſted food. Dryden.
5. Not brought to ſuppuration. -
His wound was indigeſted and inflamed. Jºſeman.
INDIGE's T1b le. adj. [from in and digeſtible.] Not conquer-
able in the ſtomach; not convertible to nutriment.
Eggs are the moſt nouriſhing and exalted of all animal food,
and moſt indigeſtible: no body can digeſt the ſame quantity of
them as of other food. Arbuthnot on Diet.
INDIGE'stion. n.ſ.. [indigeſtion, Fr. from in and digeſtion.]
The ſtate of meats unconco&amp;ted.
The fumes of indigºffion may indiſpoſe men to thought, as
well as to diſeaſes of danger and pain. Temple.
To INDIGITATE. v. a. [indigito, Lat.] To point out; to
ſhow.
Antiquity expreſſed numbers by the fingers: the depreſſing
this finger, which in the left hand implied but ſix, in the right
hand indigitated ſix hundred. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
As though there were a ſeminality of urine, we fooliſhly con-
ceive we behold therein the anatomy of every particle, and
can thereby indigitate their affections. Brown's Pulg. Err.
We are not to indigitate the parts tranſmittent. Harvey.
IND1Gitation. n.ſ.. [from indigitate.] The act of pointing
out or ſhowing.
Which things I conceive no obſcure indigitation of provi-
dence. Mºre againſt Atheiſm.
IND I'GN. adj. [indigne, Fr. indignuſ, Latin.]
1. Unworthy; undeſerving.
Where there is a kingdom that is altogether unable or in-
dign to govern, is it juſt for another nation, that is civil or
policed, to ſubdue them * Bacºn's Holy War.
2. Bringing indignity. This is a word not in uſe.
And all indign and baſe adverſities
Make head againſt my eſtimation. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
INDI'GN ANT. adj. [indignans, Latin.] Angry; raging; in-
flamed at once with anger and diſdain.
He ſcourg'd with many a ſtroke th' indignant waves. Milt.
The luſtful monſter fled, purſued by the valorous and in-
dignant Martin. Arbuth. and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
What rage that hour did Albion's ſoul poſſeſs,
Let chiefs imagine, and let lovers gueſs!
He ſtrides indignant, and with haughty cries
To ſingle fight the fairy prince defies. Tickel.
INDIGNAT, on. n.ſ.. [indignation, Fr. indignatio, Latin.]
1. Anger mingled with contempt or diſguſt.
Suſpend your indignation againſt my brother, 'till you derive
better teſtimony of his intent. Shakespeare King Lear.
From thoſe officers, warm with indignation at the inſolences
of that vile rabble, came words of great contempt. Clarend.
But keep this ſwelling indignation down,
And let your cooler reaſon now prevail. Rowe.
2. The anger of a ſuperiour.
There was great indignation againſt Iſrael. 2 Kings iii. 27.
3. The effect of anger.
If heav'ns have any grievous plague in ſtore,
Let them hurl down their indignation
On thee, thou troubler of the world. Shakespeare Rich. III.
INDi GNITY. n.ſ. (indignitas, from indignus, Latin; indignité,
Fr.] Contumely; contemptuous injury; violation of right
accompanied with inſult.
Biſhops and prelates could not but have bleeding hearts to
behold a perſon of ſo great place and worth conſtrained to en-
dure ſo foul indignities. Hocker.
No emotion of paſſion tranſported me, by the indignity of
his carriage, to ſay or do any thing unbcſeeming myſelf.
King Charles.
Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this world, and earth his ſeat,
Him lord pronounc'd ; and, O indignity!
Subjećted to his ſervice angel-wings,
And flaming miniſters, to watch and tend
Their earthly charge. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ix.
He does not ſee how that mighty paſſion for the church can
well conſiſt with thoſe indignities and that contempt men beſtow
on the clergy. Swift.
To more exalted glories born,
Thy mean indignities I ſcorn. Pattiſon.
INDIGO. m.ſ [indicum, Latin.] A plant, by the Americans
called anil.
It hath pennated leaves, terminated by a ſingle lobe: the
flowers, diſpoſed in a ſpike, conſiſt of five leaves, and are of
the papilionaceous kind; the uppermoſt petal being larger than
the others, rounder, and lightly furrowed on the ſide: the
lower leaves are ſhort, terminating in a point: in the middle
of the flower is the ſtyle, which afterward becomes a jointed
pod, containing one cylindrical ſeed in one partition, from
which indigo is made, which is uſed in dying for a blue
colour, 41iller.
3
INDIRE'cT. adj. [indireé, Fr. indire:Ius, Latin.]
1. Not ſtrait; not rectilinear.
2. Not tending otherwiſe than collaterally or conſequentially to
a point.
The tender prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your grace;
But by his mother was perforce with-held.
}y, what an indirect and peeviſh courſe
Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Is this of her’s
3. Not fair; not honeſt.
Think you, that any means under the ſun
Can affecure ſo indirect a courſe 2 Baniel's Civil J/ar.
Thoſe things which they do know they may, upon fundry
indire? conſiderations, let paſs; and although themſelves do
not err, yet may they deceive others. Hooker.
O pity and ſhame! that they who to live well
Enter'd ſo fair, ſhould turn aſide, to tread
Paths indireé?. Milt. Par. Loft, b. xi.
Indirect dealing will be diſcovered one time or other, and
then he loſes his reputation. Zillotſºn.
INDIRE'ction. n.ſ.. [in and direction )
1. Oblique means; tendency not in a ſtraight line.
And thus do we, of wiſdom and of reach,
With windlaces, and with eſſays of byas,
By indirections find directions out. Shakeſp. Hamlet,
2. Diſhoneſt practice.
I had rather coin my heart than wring
From the hard hands of peaſants their vile traſh,
By any indirection. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
INDIRE"ctly. adv. [from indirect.]
1. Not in a right line; obliquely.
2. Not in expreſs terms.
Still ſhe ſuppreſſes the name Ithaca, which continues his
doubts and hopes; and at laſt ſhe indireéily mentions it.
Broome's Notes on the Odyſy.
3. Unfairly; not rightly.
He bids you then reſign
Your crown and kingdom, indireéily held
From him the true challenger. Shakespeare Henry V.
He that takes any thing from his neighbour, which was
juſtly forfeited, to ſatisfy his own revenge or avarice, is tied to
repentance, but not to reſtitution: becauſe I took the forfei-
ture indireéily, I am anſwerable to God for my unhandſome,
unjuſt, or uncharitable circumſtances. Taylºr.
INDIRE'ct Ness. n.ſ.. [in and directneſs.]
1. Obliquity.
2. Unfairneſs.
INDiscE'RNIBLE. cd}. [in and diſcernible.] Not perceptible;
not diſcoverable.
Speculation, which, to my dark ſoul,
Depriv'd of reaſon, is as indiſcernible
As colours to my body, wanting fight. Denham's Sºphy.
Is DiscERNIELY. adv. [from indiſernible.] In a manner not
to be perceived.
INDIscERPtible. adj. [in and diſcerptible.] Not to be ſepa-
º ; incapable of being broken or deſtroyed by diſſolution
of parts.
INDIscERPTIBILITY. m. ſ. [from indiſcerptible.] Incapability of
diſſolution.
INpisco'very. m.ſ.. [in and diſcovery.] The ſtate of being
hidden. An unuſual word.
The ground of this aſſertion was the magnifying eſteem of
the ancients, ariſing from the indiſcovery of its head. Browz.
INDIscREE"t. adj. [indiſcret, Fr. in and diſcreet.] Imprudent;
incautious; inconſiderate; injudicious.
Why then
Are mortal men ſo fond and indiſtreet,
So evil gold to ſeek unto their aid;
And having not complain, and having it upbraid. Fa. Qu.
If thou be among the indiſcreet, obſerve the time; but be
continually among men of underſtanding. Eccluſ. xxvii. 1 2.
INDIscREE"rly. adv. [from indiſtreet.] Without prudence;
without conſideration; without judgment.
Job on juſtice hath aſperſions flung,
And ſpoken indiſcreetly with his tongue. Sandyr.
Let a great perſonage undertake an action paſſionately, let
him manage it indſcreetly, and he ſhall have enough to flatter
him. Taylor's Rule of living ho y.
IND1scRE'TION. m. ſ. [indiſcretion, Fr. in and diſcretion.] Im-
prudence; raſhneſs; inconſideration. -
Indiſcretion ſometimes ſerves us well,
When our deep plots do fail. Shakespeare. Hamlet:
His offences did proceed rather from negligence, raſhneſs, or
other indiſcretiºn, than from any malicious thought. Hayward.
Looſe papers have been obtained from us by the impor-
tunity and divulged by the indiſcretion of friends, although re-
ſtrained by promiſes. - - Swift.
Is DiscR1'MINATE. adj. [indiſcriminatuſ, Latin.] Undiſtin-
guiſhable; not marked with any note of diſtinétion.
IND1scR1'MINATELY. adv, [from indiſcriminate.] Without
diſtinčtion. -
Others uſe defamatory diſcourſe purely for love of º:
WI. Oie.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N D
S.
:-i. ſ.º:3.
º
:
*
whoſe ſpeech, like a flowing current, bears away indiſcrimi-
mately whatever lies in its way. Government of the Tongue.
Liquors, ſtrong of acid ſalts, deſtroy the blueneſs of the
infuſion of our wood; and liquors indiſcriminately, that abound
with ſulphureous ſalts, reſtore it. Boyle.
INDISPE/NSABLE. adj. [French.] Not to be remitted; not
to be ſpared; neceſſary.
Rocks, mountains, and caverns, againſt which theſe ex-
ceptions are made, are of indiſpenſable uſe and neceſſity, as
well to the earth as to man. Woodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
In Dispe’NsableNEss. n.ſ.. [from indiſpenſable.] State of not
being to be ſpared; neceflity.
INDIsPE'N'sABLY. adv. [from indiſpenſable.] Without diſpen-
ſation; without remiſſion; neceſſarily.
Every one muſt look upon himſelf as indiſpenſably obliged
to the practice of duty. Addiſon's Freeholder.
To INDISPO'SE. v. a. ſindiſpoſer, French.]
1. To make unfit. With for.
Nothing can be reckoned good or bad to us in this life, any
farther than it prepares or indiſpoſes us for the enjoyments of
another. Atterbury.
2. To diſincline; to make averſe. With to.
It has a ſtrange efficacy to indiſpoſe the heart to religion.
South's Sermons.
3. To diſorder; to diſqualify for its proper funétions.
The ſoul is not now hindered in its ačtings by the diſtem-
perature of indiſpoſed organs. Glanv. Scepſ.
4. To diſorder ſlightly with regard to health.
Though it weakened, yet it made him rather indiſpoſed than
ſick, and did no ways diſable him from ſtudying. Walton.
5. To make unfavourable. . With towards.
The king was ſufficiently indiſpoſed towards the perſons, or
the principles of Calvin's diſciples. Clarendon.
INDIspo's EDNess. n.ſ.. [from indiſpoſed.] State of unfitneſs or
diſinclination; depraved ſtate.
It is not any innate harſhneſs in piety that renders the firſt
eſſays of it unpleaſant; that is owing only to the indiſpoſed-
neſ of our own hearts. Decay #.
INDisposition. n.ſ.. [indiſpoſition, Fr. from indiſpoſe.]
1. Diſorder of health; tendency to ſickneſs.
The king did complain of a continual infirmity of body,
yet rather as an indiſpoſition in health than any ſet §:
neſs. Hayward.
I have known a great fleet loſe great occaſions, by an in-
diſpoſition of the admiral, while he was neither well enough
to exerciſe, nor ill enough to leave the command. Temple.
Wiſdom is ſtill looking forward, from the firſt indiſpoſitions,
into the progreſs of the diſeaſe. * L’Eſtrange.
His life ſeems to have been prolonged beyond its natural
term, under thoſe indiſpoſitions which hung upon the latter
part of it. Addiſon's Freeholder.
2. Difinclination; diſlike.
The indiſpoſition of the church of Rome to reform herſelf,
muſt be no ſtay unto us from performing our duty to
God. Hooker.
The mind, by every degree of affected unbelief, contraćts
more and more of a general indiſpoſition towards believing. Att.
INDispu"TABLE. adj. [in and diſputable.] Uncontrovertible;
inconteſtable. -
There is no maxim in politicks more indiſputable, than that
a nation ſhould have many honours to reſerve for thoſe who
do national ſervices. Addiſon's Guardian.
The apoſtle aſſerts a clear indiſputable concluſion, which
could admit of no queſtion. t Rogers's Sermons.
INDispu't A Blen Ess. n.ſ.. [from indiſputable.] The ſtate of
being indiſputable; certainty.
INDISPU't ABLY. adv. [from indiſputable.]
1. Without controverſy; certainly.
The thing itſelf is queſtionable, nor is it indiſputably cer-
tain what death ſhe died. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. Without oppoſition.
They queſtioned a duty that had been indiſputably granted to
ſo many preceding kings. owel's Vocal Foreſt,
INDIsso'ºyable. adj. [in and diſſºlvable.]
1. Indiſſoluble; not ſeparable as to its parts.
Metals, corroded with a little acid, turn into ruſt, which is
an earth taſteleſs and indiſſolvable in water; and this earth, im-
bibed with more acid, becomes a metallick ſalt. Newt. Opt.
2. Not to be broken; binding for ever.
Depoſition and degradation are without hope of any remiſ.
fion, and therefore the law ſtiles them an indiſſºlvable bond;
, but a cenſure, a diſſolvable bond. Ayliffe's Parergon.
IN pissolubi'Lity; n.ſ.. [indiſſolubilité, Fr. from indiſſºlull..]
Reſiſtance of a diſſolving power; firmneſs; ſtableneſs.
What hoops hold this maſs of matter in ſo cloſe a preſſure
together, from whence ſteel has its firmneſs, and the parts of a
diamond their hardneſs and indiſſolubility. Locke.
IND1'ssolu BLE. cdj. [indiſſoluble, Fr. indiſſolubilis, Lat. in and
diff ºbſe.]
1. Reſiſting all ſeparation of its parts; firm; ſtable.
When common gold and lead are mingled, the lead may
be ſevered almoſt unaltered; yet if, in ſtead of the gold, a tan-
tillum of the red elixir be mingled with the ſaturn, their union
will be ſo indiſſoluble, that there is no poſſible way of ſeparating
the diffuſed elixir from the fixed lead. Boyle.
Ere yet ſhe grew
To this deep-laid ind ſºluble ſtate.
2. Binding for ever; ſubſiſting for ever.
Far more comfort it were for us to be joined with you in
bands of indiſſoluble love and amity, to live as if our perſons
being many, our ſouls were but one. Hooker.
There is the ſupreme and indiſſoluble conſanguinity between
men, of which the heathen poet faith we are all his gene-
ration. Bacon's holy War.
They might juſtly wonder, that men ſo taught, ſo obliged
to be kind to all, ſhould behave themſelves ſo contrary to ſuch
heavenly inſtrućtions, ſuch indiſſoluble obligations. South.
INDI'ssolubleNEss. n.ſ.. [from indiſoluble.] Indiſſolubility;
reſiſtance to ſeparation of parts.
Adam, though conſiſting of a compoſition intrinſically diſ-
ſolvable, might have held, i. the Divine Will, a ſtate of imi-
mortality and indiſſolubleneſs of his compoſition. Hale.
INDI'ssolubly. adv. [from indiſſoluble.] -
1. In a manner reſiſting all ſeparation.
On they move
Indiſſolubly firm; nor obvious hill,
Nor ſtrait'ning vale, nor wood, nor ſtream divide
Their perfeót ranks. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The remaining aſhes, by a further degree of fire, may be
Thomſon's Spring.
indiſſolubly united into glaſs. Boyle.
They willingly unite,
Indiſſolubly firm; from Dubris ſouth
To northern Orcades. Phillips.
2. For ever obligatorily.
INDIsti'Nct. adj. [indiffiné!, Fr. in and diffinéiuſ, Latin.] .
1. Not plainly marked; confuſed.
That which is now a horſe, even with thought,
The rack diſlimns, and makes it indiſliné!
As water is in water. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
She warbled in her throat,
And tun'd her voice to many a merry note;
But indiſtinct, and neither ſweet nor clear. Dryden.
When we ſpeak of the infinite diviſibility of matter; we
keep a very clear and diſtinét idea of diviſion and diviſibility;
but when we come to parts too ſmall for our ſenſes, our ideas
of theſe little bodies become obſcure and indiffiné?. Watts.
2. Not exačtly diſcerning.
We throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Ev’n’till we make the main and th’ aerial blue
An indiſtinct regard. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Índistinction. n.ſ.. [from indiffinº.]
1. Confuſion; uncertainty.
The indiffinétion of many of the ſame name, or the miſap-
plication of the aët of one unto another, hath made ſome
doubt. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2, Omiſſion of diſcrimination.
An indiſtinction of all perſons, or equality of all orders, is
far from being agreeable to the will of God. Spratt.
IND1st1'NcTLY. adv. [from indiſtinči.]
1. Confuſedly; uncertainly.
In its ſides it was bounded diſtinétly, but on its ends con-
fuſedly and indiffindily, the fight there vaniſhing by de-
grees. Newton's Opt.
2. Without being diſtinguiſhed.
Making trial thereof, both the liquors ſoaked indiffinéily
through the bowl. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
IND1sti Nctness. n. ſ. [from indiffind.] Confuſion; uncer-
tainty; obſcurity.
There is unevenheſs or indiffinéineſ; in the ſtyle of theſe
places, concerning the origin and form of the earth. Burmet.
Old age makes the cornea and coat of the cryſtalline hu-
mour grow flatter than before ; ſo that the light, for want of a
ſufficient refraction, will not converge to the bottom of the
eye, but beyond it, and by conſequence paint in the bottom
of the eye a confuſed pićture; and according to the indiffinel-
neſ of this pićture, the obječt will appear confuſed. Newton.
Indistu'RBANce. n.ſ.. [in and diſturb.J Calmneſs; freedom
from diſturbance.
What is called by the ſtoicks apathy, and by the ſcepticks
indiſturbance, ſeems all but to mean great tranquility of
mind. Temple.
INDIVIDUAL. adj. [individu, individuel, Fr. individuus, Lat.]
1. Separate from others of the ſame ſpecies; ſingle; numeri-
cally one.
Neither is it enough to conſults ſecundum genera, what the
kind and charaćter of the perſon ſhould be; #. the moſt judg-
ment is ſhown in the choice of individuals. Bacon.
They preſent us with images more perfect than the life in
any individual. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
Muſt the whole man, amazing thought! return
To the cold marble, or contračted urn ?
And never ſhall thoſe particles agree,
That were in life this individual he
º
º
12 F
Prior.
Know
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N D
I N D
Know all the good that individual find,
Lie in three words, health, peace and competence. Pºpe.
We ſee each circumſtance of art and individual of nature
ſummoned together by the extent and fecundity of his imagi-
nation. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
It would be wiſe in them, as individual and private mortals,
to look back a little upon the ſtorms they have raiſed, as well
as thoſe they have eſcaped. - . . . . Swift.
The object of any particular idea is called an individual; ſo
Peter is an individual man, London an individual city. Watts.
2. Undivided; not to be parted or disjoined.
To give thee being, I lent
Out of my ſide to thee, neareſt my heart,
Subſtantial life, to have thee by my ſide
Henceforth an individual ſolace dear. Milton's Parad. Lºſt.
Long eternity ſhall greet our bliſs
With an individual kiſs. Milton.
Under his great vicegerent reign abide
United, as one individual ſoul,
For ever happy. Mill Parad. Loft, b. v.
Is Div IDUALITY. m. ſ. [from individual.] Separate or diſtinct
exiſtence. -
Crambe would tell his inſtrućtor, that all men were not ſin-
gular; that individuality could hardly be predicated of any
man; for it was commonly ſaid that a man is not the ſame he
was, and that mad men are beſide themſelves. Arbuthnot.
Is Divi'DUALLY. adv. [from individual.] With ſeparate or
diſtinct exiſtence; numerically.
How ſhould that ſubſiſt ſolitarily by itſelf, which hath no
ſubſtance, but individually the very ſame whereby others ſub-
fiſt with it. Hooker.
I dare not pronounce him omniſcious, that being an attri-
bute individually proper to the godhead, and incommunicable
to any created ſubſtance. Hakewi 1 on Providence.
To IN Divi DUATE. v. a. [from individuus, Latin. ) To diſtin-
guiſh from others of the ſame ſpecies; to make ſingle.
Life is individuated into infinite numbers, that have their
diſtinct ſenſe and pleaſure. More againſt Atheiſm.
No man is capable of tranſlating poetry, who, beſides a ge-
nius to that art, is not a maſter both of his author's language
and of his own; nor muſt we underſtand the language only of
the poet, but his particular turn of thoughts and expreſſion,
which are the characters that diſtinguiſh and individuate him
from all other writers. Dryden.
In Div. DUA*TION. m. ſ. [from individuate J That which makes
an individual.
What is the principle of individuation P Or what is it that
makes any one thing the ſame as it was before ? //atts.
IN Dividu'ITY. m. ſ. (from individuus, Lat..] The ſtate of being
an individual; ſeparate exiſtence.
IN DIvi'NITY.. n.ſ.. [in and divinity J Want of divine power.
Not in uſe.
How openly did the oracle betray his indivinity unto Croc-
ſus, who being ruined by his amphibology, and expoſtulating
with him, received no higher anſwer than the excuſe of his
impotency. Brown's ſugar Errours.
IN DIVISIB 1' LITY. }'ſ [from indiviſible.] State in which no
INDIVI's IBLENESS. W. more diviſion can be made.
A peſtle and mortar will as ſoon bring any particle of mat-
ter to indiviſibility as the acuteſt thought of a mathemati-
cian. - Locke.
INDIvi's Ible. adj. [indiviſible, Fr. in and diviſible.] What can-
not be broken into parts; ſo ſmall as that it cannot be ſmaller;
having reached the laſt degree of diviſibility.
By atom, no body will imagine we intend to expreſs a per-
feet indiviſible, but only the leaſt ſort of natural bodies. Digby.
Here is but one indiviſible point of time obſerved, but one
aćtion performed; yet the eye cannot comprehend at once the
whole object. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
INDIVI's IBLY. adv. [from indiviſible.] So as it cannot be di-
vided.
INDo'cIBLE. adj. [in and decible.] Unteachable; inſuſceptible
of inſtruction.
INDo'cIL. adj. [indocile, Fr. indociliº, Latin.] Unteachable;
incapable of being inſtructed.
Theſe certainly are the fools in the text, indocil, intraćtable
fools, whoſe ſtolidity can baffle all arguments, and is proof
againſt demonſtration itſelf. Bentley’s Sermons.
INDocI'LITY.. n.ſ. (indocilité, Fr. in and dºcility..] Unteachable-
neſs; refuſal of inſtruction. -
To INDOCTRINATE v. a. ſendºriner, old French..] To
inſtrućt; to tinéture with any ſcience, or opinion.
Under a maſter that diſcourſed excellently, and took much
delight in indocłrinating his young unexperienced favourite,
Buckingham had obtained a quick conception of ſpeaking very
gracefully and pertinently. Clarendon.
They that never peept beyond the common belief, in which
their eaſy underſtandings were at firſt indoctrinated, are ſtrong-
ly aſſured of the truth and co-operative excellency of their
receptions. - Glanv. Scepſ.
INDoc a RINATION. m. ſ. [from indoºrinate.] Inſtruction; in-
formation.
Although poſtulates are very accommodable unto junior in-
dººrinations, yet are theſe authorities but temporary, and not
f to be embraced beyond the minority of our intellectuals. Bro.
#:::::: } n: ſ [in and daleo, Latin; indolence, French.]
1. Freedom from pain.
As there muſt be indolency where there is happineſs, ſo there
muſt not be indigency. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. Lazineſs; inattention; liſtleſſneſs.
Let Epicurus give indolency as an attribute to his gods, and
place in it the happineſs of the bleſt: the divinity which we
worſhip has given us not only a precept againſt it, but his own
example to the contrary. Dryden.
The Spaniſh nation, rouſed from their ancient indolence and
ignorance, ſeem now to improve trade. Baling” ołe.
INDOLENT. adj. [French. J
1. Free from pain. Ainſworth.
2. Careleſs ; lazy; inattentive; liſtleſs.
Ill fits a chief
To waſte long nights in indo'ent repoſe. Pope's Iliad.
I'N Dol ENTLY. adv. from indolent.]
1. With freedom from pain.
2. Careleſly; lazily; inattentively; liſtleſly.
While lull'd by ſound, and undiſturb’d by wit,
Calm and ſerene you indolently fit. Addison.
To INDow. v. a. [indotare, Latin.] To portion; to enrich
with gifts, whether of fortune or nature. See END ow.
INDRA"U GHT. n.ſ.. [in and draught.]
1. An opening in the land into which the ſea flows.
Ebbs and floods there could be none, when there was no in-
draughts, bays, or gulphs to receive a flood. Raleigh.
2. Inlet; paſſage inwards.
Navigable rivers are ſo many indraughts to attain wealth.
Bacon's Advice to Williers.
To IND RE'Nch. v. a. [from drench.] To ſoak; to drown.
My hopes lie drown'd; in many fathoms deep
They lie Indrench'd. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſda.
IN CU'BioUs. adj. [in and dubious.] Not doubtful; not ſuſ-
pecting ; certain.
Hence appears the vulgar vanity of repoſing an indubiºus
confidence in thoſe antipeitilential ſpirits. Harvey.
INDU'BITA R LE. adj. [indubitabilis, Lat indubitable, Fr. in and
dubitable.] Undoubted ; unqueſtionable.
When general obſervations are drawn from ſo many parti-
culars as to become certain and indubitable, theſe are jewels of
knowledge. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
INDU'BITABLY. adv. [from indulitable.] Undoubtedly; un-
queſtionably.
If we tranſport theſe proportions from audible to viſible ob-
jećts, there will indubitably reſult from either a graceful and
harmonious contentment. //otton’s Architecture.
The patriarchs were indulitably inveſted with both theſe au-
thorities. Spratt'. Sermons.
I appeal to all ſober judges, whether our ſouls may be only
a mere echo from claſhing atoms; or rather indubitably muſt
proceed from a ſpiritual ſubſtance. Bentley's Sermºns.
INDU'BITATE, adj. [indubitatus, Latin.] Unqueſtioned ; cer-
tain; apparent; evident.
If he ſtood upon his own title of the houſe of Lancaſter, he
knew it was condemned by parliament, and tended directly
to the diſinheriſon of the line of York, held then the in-
dubitate heirs of the crown. Bacon's Henry VII.
I have been tempted to wonder how, among the jealouſies
of ſtate and court, Edgar Atheling could ſubſiſt, being then the
apparent and indulitate heir of the Saxon line. JZ attox.
To INDU'CE. v. a. [induire, Fr. induco, Latin.]
1. To perſuade; to influence to anything.
The ſelf-ſame argument in this kind, which doth but induce
the vulgar ſort to like, may conſtrain the wifer to yield. Hook.
This lady, albeit ſhe was furniſhed with many excellent en-
dowments both of nature and education, yet would ſhe never
be induced to entertain marriage with any. Hayward.
Deſire with thee ſtill longer to converſe
Induc’d me. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. viii.
Let not the covetous deſign of growing rich induce you to
ruin your reputation, but rather ſatisfy yourſelf with a mode-
rate fortune; and let your thoughts be wholly taken up with
acquiring to yourſelf a glorious name. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. To produce by perſuaſion or influence. -
Let the vanity of the times be reſtrained, which the neigh-
bourhood of other nations have induced, and we ſtrive apace
to exceed our pattern. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
As this belief is abſolutely neceſſary to all mankind, the evi-
dence for inducing it muſt be of that nature as to accommo-
date itſelf to all ſpecies of men. - Fºrbes.
3. To offer by way of indućtion, or conſequential reaſoning.
They play much upon the ſimile, or illuſtrative argumenta-
tion, to induce their enthymemes unto the people, and take up
popular conceits. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours.
4. To inculcate; to enforce. - -
This indices a general change of opinion, concerning the
pcrſon<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N D
1 N D
**
º
**
º,
-
º:
º
*
º:
&gt;
...”
*
º
.
perſon or party like to be obeyed by the greateſt or ſtrongeſt
part of the people. Temple.
5. To cauſe extrinſically; to produce.
Sour things induce a contraction in the nerves, placed in the
mouth of the ſtomach, which is a great cauſe of appetite. Bacon.
Acidity, as it is not the natural ſtate of the animal fluids,
but induced by aliment, is to be cured by aliment with the
contrary qualities. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
6. To introduce; to bring into view.
To exprobrate their ſtupidity, he induceth the providence of
ſtorks: now, if the bird had been unknown, the illuſtration
had been obſcure, and the exprobration not ſo proper. Brown.
The poet may be ſeen inducing his perſonages in the firſt Iliad,
where he diſcovers their humours, intereſts, and deſigns. Pope.
7. To bring on ; to ſuperinduce.
Schiſm is marked out by the apoſtle as a kind of petrifying
crime, which induces that induration to which the fearful ex-
pectation of wrath is conſequent. Decay of Piety.
INDU'cEMENT. n.ſ.. [from induce..] Motive to anything; that
which allures or perſuades to any thing. -
The former inducements do now much more prevail, when
the very thing hath miniſtered farther reaſon. H o'er.
Viany inducements, beſides Scripture, may lead me to that,
which if Scripture be againſt, they are of no value, yet other-
wiſe are ſtrongly effectual to perſuade. Hooker.
That mov'd me to't,
Then mark th’ inducement.
He lives
Higher degree of life; inducement ſtrong
For us. A ſilt. Par. Lºft, b. ix.
My inducement hither,
Was not at preſent here to find my ſon. Milton's Agoniſ.
Inſtances occur of oppreſſion, to which there appears no in-
ducement from the circumſtances of the actors. Rogers.
INDU cº R. m. ſ. [from induce..] A perſuader; one that influences.
To INDUCT. v. a. [indućus, Latin.]
1. To introduce; to bring in. -
The ceremonies in the gathering were firſt induſted by the
Venetians. Sandys's Travels.
2. To put into ačtual poſſeſſion of a benefice. -
If a perſon thus inſtituted, though not indućled, takes a ſe-
cond benefice, it ſhall make the firſt void. Ayliffe's Parergon.
INDU'cºrio N. m.ſ. [indućiºn, Fr. indućtio, Latin.]
1. Introdućtion; entrance.
Theſe promiſes are fair, the parties ſure,
And our indu:iion full of proſp'rous hope. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
2. Indu&amp;ion is when, from ſeveral particular propoſitions, we infer
one general: as, the doćtrine of the Socinians cannot be proved
from the goſpels, it cannot be proved from the ačts of the
apoſtles, it cannot be proved from the epiſtles, nor the book
of revelations; therefore it cannot be proved from the New
Teſtament. //atti's Logick.
The inquiſition by indu!?ion is wonderful hard; for the things
reported are full of fables, and new experiments can hardly
be made but with extreme caution. Bacon's Natural Hiſ ry.
Mathematical things are only capable of clear demonſtra-
tion: concluſions in natural philoſophy are proved by indušion
of experiments, things moral by moral arguments, and mat-
ters of fact by credible teſtimony. 7illºtſon.
Although the arguing from experiments and obſervations by
induéſion be no demonſtration of general concluſions, yet it is
the beſt way of arguing which the nature of things admits of,
and may be looked upon as ſo much the ſtronger by how much
the indućlion is more general; and if no exception occur from
phenomena, the concluſion may be general. Newton's Opt.
He brought in a new way of arguing from induction, and
that grounded upon obſervation and experiments. %aker.
3. The act or ſtate of taking poſſeſſion of an eccleſiaſtical living.
INDU’ctive. adj. [from induº.]
1. Leading; perſuaſive. With to.
A brutiſh vice,
Induſive mainly to the fin of Eve.
2. Capable to infer or produce.
Abatements may take away infallible concludency in theſe
evidences of fact, yet they may be probable and indu'live of
credibility, though not of ſcience. Hall's Origin of Mankind.
To INDU'E. v. a. [induo, Latin.]
1. To inveſt.
One firſt matter all, - -
Indu'd with various forms. Milton's Paradiſ. Loff.
2. It ſeems ſometimes to be, even by good writers, confounded
with endow or indow, to furniſh or enrich with any quality or
excellence.
The angel, by whom God inded the waters of Betheſda
with ſupernatural virtue, was not ſeen; yet the angel's pre-
ſence was known by the waters. Hooker.
His pow'rs, with dreadful ſtrength indu'd,
She, with her fair hand, ſtill'd into the noſtrils of his
friend. Chapman's Iliads.
To INDU'LGE. v. a. [indulgee, Latin.] -
1. To fondle; to favour; to gratify with conceſſion; to foſter.
The lazy glutton ſafe at home will keep,
Indulge his ſloth, and fatten with his ſleep. Dryd. Perſ.
5
Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Milt. Par. Loft.
A mother was wont to indu'ge her daughters with dogs,
ſquirrels, or birds; but then they muſt keep them well. Lºcke.
To live like thoſe that have tº eir hope in another life, im-
plies that we indulge ourſelves in the gratifications of this life
very ſparingly. Atterbury.
2. To grant not of right, but favour. -
Ancient privileges, indu gºd by former kings to their people,
muſt not, without high reaſon, be revoked by their ſuc-
ceſſors. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
- The virgin entring bright, indulg’d the day
To the brown cave, and bruſh'd the dreams away. Dryden.
This is what nature's want may well ſuffice;
But ſince among mankind ſo few there are,
Who will conform to philoſophick fare,
This much I will indulge thee for thy eaſe,
And mingle ſomething of our times to pleaſe. Dryd, j. v.
My friend, indulge one labour more,
And ſeek Atrides. Pope's Odyſſey.
Yet, yet a moment, one dim ray of light
Indulge, dread chaos and eternal night! Dunciad.
To IN DU'LG E. v. m. [A Latiniſm not in uſe.] To be favour-
able; to give indulgence. With to.
He muſt, by indulging to any one ſort of reproveable diſ-
courſe himſelf, defeat all his e.deavours againſt the reſt.
Government of the Tongue.
INDU/L G F Nc E.
INDU'LG EN cy. }nſ [indu'gence, Fr. from indulge.]
1. Fondneſs; fond kindneſs.
Reſtraint ſhe will not brook;
And left to herſelf, if evil thence enſue, -
She firſt his weak indulgence will accuſe. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
The glories of our iſle,
Which yet like golden ore, unripe in beds,
Expect the warm indulgency of heaven. Dryd. K. Arthur:
2. Forbearance; tenderneſs; oppoſite to rigour.
They err, that through indulgence to others, or fondneſs to
any fin in themſelves, ſubſtitute for repentance anything leſs.
Hammond on Fundamentals.
In known images of life, I gueſs
The labour greater, as th' indulgence leſs. Poſe.
3. Favour granted. -
If all theſe gracious indulgences are without any effcºt on us,
we muſt periſh in our own folly. Rºgers.
4. Grant of the church of Romé, not defined by themſelves.
Thou, that giv'ſt whores indu gences to fin,
I’ll canvas thee. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Indulgences, diſpenſes, pardons, bulls, -
The ſport of winds. - Milton.
In purgatory, indulgence, and ſupererogation, the aſſertors
ſecm to be unanimous in nothing but in reference to profit.
- Decay of Piety.
Leo X, is deſervedly infamous for his baſe proſtitution of
indulgences. . . Atteriury.
INDu'lo ENT. adj. [indulgent, Fr. indulgenſ, Latin.]
1. Kind; gentle.
God has done all for us that the moſt indu'gent Creator could
do for the work of his hands. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Mild ; favourable. w
Hereafter ſuch in thy behalf ſhall be
Th’ indulgent cenſure of poſterity. - //aller.
3. Gratifying; favouring; giving way to. With ºf , ,
The feeble old, indulgent ºf their eaſe.... Dryden's Æn.
INDu'ld F Nº LY. adv. [from indulgent.] Without ſeverity ;
without cenſure; without ſelf-reproach; with indulgence.
He that not only commits ſome aćt of fin, but lives indul-
gently in it, is never to be counted a regenerate man. Hamm.
IN pult. } n.ſ. [Ital, and French.] Privilege or exemption.
INDU L to.
To I'NDURATE. v.m. [induro, Latin.] To grow hard ; to
harden.
Stones within the earth at firſt are but rude earth or clay;
and ſo minerals come at firſt of juices concrete, which after
wards indurate. Baron's Nat. Hiſt.
That plants and ligneous bodies may indurate under water,
without approachment of air, we have experiºnents tº coral-
line. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To I'NDURAt E. v. a.
1. To make hard. - - * -
A contraded indurated bladder is a circumſtance ſometimes
attending on the ſtone, and indeed an extraordinary danger-
OuS Onc. Sharp's Surgery.
2. To harden the mind; to fear the conſcience.
INDURA’tion. m. ſ. [from indurate J -
1. The ſtate of growing hard. - - -
This is a notable inſtance of condenſation and induration,
by burial under earth, in caves, for a long time. Bacºn.
2. The ačt of hardening.
3. Obduracy; hardneſs of heaſt. - - - -
Schiſm is marked out by the apoſtle as a kind of petrifying
crime, which induces that induration to which the fearful cx-
pećtation of wrath is conſequent. - Decay of Piety.
INDUSTRIOUS, adj. [inaujirieux, Fr. induſtritº, Lat..] Dili-
ligent; laborious; aſiduous. Oppoſed to /ethful. He<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N E
I N E
He himſelf, being excellently learned, and induſtrious to
ſeek out the truth of all things concerning the original of his
own people, hath ſet down the teſtimony of the ancients
truly. Spenſer on Ireland.
Let our juſt cenſures
Attend the true event, and put we on
Induſtrious ſoldierſhip. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
His thoughts were low :
To vice induſtrious ; but to nobler deeds
Timorous and ſlothful. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
2. Deſigned; done for the purpoſe.
The induſtrious perforation of the tendons of the ſecond
joints of fingers and toes, draw the tendons of the third joints
through. More's Divine Dialogues.
Obſerve carefully all the events which happen either by an
occaſional concurrence of various cauſes, or by the induſtrious
application of knowing men. Watts's Improv. ºf the Mind.
INDU's TRIously. adv. [from induſtrious.]
1. Diligently; laboriouſly; aſſiduouſly.
lf induſtriouſly
I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end. Shakeſp. Winter’s Tale.
Some friends to vice induſtriouſly defend
Theſe innocent diverſions, and pretend
That I the tricks of youth too roughly blame. Dryd.juv.
2. For the ſet purpoſe; with deſign.
Great Britain was never before united in itſelf under one
king, notwithſtanding that the uniting had been induſtriouſly
attempted both by war and peace. Bacon.
I am not under the neceſſity of declaring myſelf, and I
induſtriouſly conceal my name, which wholly exempts me from
any hopes and fears. Swift.
I'Ndustry. n.ſ.[induſtrie,Fr. induſtria, Lat.]Diligence; affiduity.
The ſweat of induſtry would dry and die,
But for the end it works to. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
See the laborious bee
For little drops of honey flee, }
And there with humble ſweets content her induſtry. Cowl
Providence would only initiate mankind into the uſeful
knowledge of her treaſures, leaving the reſt to employ our in-
duſtry, that we might not live like idle loiterers. More's Antid.
To INE/BRIATE. v. a. [inebrio, Latin.] To intoxicate; to
make drunk.
Wine ſugared inebriateth leſs than wine pure: ſops in wine,
quantity for quantity, inebriates more than wine of itſelf. Bac.
Fiſh, entering far in and meeting with the freſh water, as
if inebriated, turn up their bellies and are taken. Sandys.
To INE’BRIATE. v. n. To grow drunk; to be intoxicated.
At Conſtantinople fiſh, that come from the Euxine ſea into
the freſh water, do inebriate and turn up their bellies, ſo as
you may take them with your hand. Bacon's Natural Hiſt.
INEBRIA"tion. n.ſ.. [from inebriate.] Drunkenneſs; intoxi-
Catl OIl.
That cornelians and bloodſtones may be of virtue to thoſe
intentions they are applied, experience will make us grant;
but not that an amethyſt prevents inebriation. Brown.
IN EFFAB 1'lity, n.ſ.. [from ineffable.] Unſpeakableneſs.
INE'FFABLE. adj. [ineffable, Fr. ineffabilis, Lat.] Unſpeakable;
unutterable; not to be expreſſed. It is uſed almoſt always in
a good ſenſe.
To whom the ſon, with calm aſpect, and clear,
Light'ning divine, ineffable, ſerene !
Made anſwer. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
Refle&amp;t upon a clear, unblotted, acquitted conſcience, and
feed upon the ineffable comforts of the memorial of a con-
quered temptation. South.
IN EFFAB LY. adv. [from incfable.] In a manner not to be ex-
preſſed.
He all his father full expreſs'd,
Ineffably into his face receiv'd. Milton.
IN EFFE'ctive adj. [ineffectif, Fr. in and effºlive.] That which
can produce no effect.
As the body, without blood, is a dead and lifeleſs trunk;
ſo is the word of God, without the ſpirit, a dead and ineffec-
five letter. Taylor.
He that aſſures himſelf he never errs, will always err; and
his preſumptions will render all attempts to inform him inſ-
fºcłive. Glanv. Scepſ.
fºs FFFE'CTUAL. adj. [in and effeółual.] Unable to produce its
proper effect; weak; without power.
The publick reading of the Apocrypha they condemn as a
thing effectual unto evil: the bare reading even of Scriptures
themſelves they miſlike, as a thing ineffectual to do good. Hook.
The death of Patrocles, joined to the offer of Agamem-
non, which of itſelf had proved ineffºual. Pope.
{N EFFE'cru ALLY. adv. [from ineffectual.] Without effect.
IN EFFE'c' UALN Ess. m. ſ. [from ineffectual.] Inefficacy; want
of power to perform the proper effeót.
St. James ſpeaks of the ineffectualneſs of ſome mens devo-
tion, Y c aſk, and receive not, becauſe ye aſk amiſs. J/ake.
{x++ F ſca croU.S. adj. [inºfficace, Fr. inºfficax, Latin.] Unable
to produce cffects; weak; feeble.
- I
Is not that better than always to have the rod in hand, and,
by frequent uſe of it, miſapply and render inefficacious this uſe-
ful remedy ? Locke.
INE'FFIcacy. m. ſ. [in and ºfficacia, Latin.] Want of power;
want of effect.
INE'Le GANce. }". [from inelegant..] Abſence of beauty;
INE'LEGANcy. $ want of elegance.
INE'LEGANT. adj. [inelegans, Lat.]
1. Not becoming; not beautiful: oppoſite to elegant.
What order, ſo contriv'd as not to mix
Taſtes, not well join'd, inelegant, but bring
Taſte after taſte, upheld with kindlieſt change. Milton.
This very variety of ſea and land, hill and dale, which is
here reputed ſo inelegant and unbecoming, is indeed extremely
charming and agreeable. J/oodward.
2. Mean; deſpicable; contemptible.
Modern criticks, having never read Homer, but in low and
inelegant tranſlations, impute the meanneſs of the tranſlation
to the poet. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
IN E'loquent. adj. [in and elºquens, Latin.] Not perſuaſive;
not oratorical: oppoſite to eloquent.
INE'pt. adj. [ineptus, Lat.] Unfit; uſeleſs; trifling; fooliſh.
The works of nature, being neither uſeleſs nor inept, muſt
be guided by ſome principle of knowledge. More.
After their various unſucceſsful ways,
Their fruitleſs labour, and inept eſſays,
No cauſe of theſe appearances they'll find,
But power exerted by th’ Eternal Mind. Blackmore
When the upper and vegetative ſtratum was once waſhed
off by rains, the hills would have become barren, the flrata
below yielding only mere ſterile matter, ſuch as was wholly
inept and improper for the formation of vegetables. Wºodward.
INEºtly adv. Tinºpti, Latin.] Triflingly; fooliſhly; un-
fitly.
Some of them are made fooliſhly or ineptly. More.
All things were at firſt diſpoſed by an omniſcient intelle&amp;t,
that cannot contrive ineptly. Glanv. Scepſ.
INE'ptitude. n.ſ.. [from ineptus, Lat.[ Unfitneſs.
The grating and rubbing of axes againſt the ſockets, wherein
they are placed, will cauſe ſome ineptitude or reſiſtency to rota-
tion of the cylinder. JWilkins.
An omnipotent agent works infallibly and irreſiſtibly,
no ineptitude or ſtubbornneſs of the matter being ever able to
hinder him. Ray on the Creation.
There is an ineptitude to motion from too great laxity, and
an ineptitude to motion from too great tenſion. Arbuthnot.
INEQUA’lity. n.ſ.. [inegalité, Fr. from in aequalitas and in
*qualis, Latin.]
1. Difference of comparative quantity.
There is ſo great an inequality in the length of our legs and
arms, as makes it impoſſible for us to walk on all four. Ray.
2. Unevenneſs; interchange of higher and lower parts.
The country is cut into ſo many hills and inequalities as ren-
ders it defenſible. Addiſon on Italy.
The glaſs ſeemed as well wrought as the object-glaſſes uſe
to be; yet when it was quickſilvered, the reflexion diſcovered
innumerable inequalities all over the glaſs. Newton's Opt.
If there were no inequalities in the ſurface of the earth, nor
in the ſeaſons of the year, we ſhould loſe a conſiderable ſhare
of the vegetable kingdom. Bentley.
3. Diſproportion to any office or purpoſe; ſtate of not being
adequate; inadequateneſs.
The great inequality of all things to the appetites of a ra–
tional ſoul appears from this, that in all worldly things a man
finds not half the pleaſure in the ačtual poſſeſſion that he pro-
poſed in the expectation. South's Sermons.
4. Change of ſtate; unlikeneſs of a thing to itſelf; difference of
temper or quality.
In ſome places, by the nature of the earth, and by the ſitua-
tion of woods and hills, the air is more unequal than in others;
and inequality of air is ever an enemy to health. Bacon.
5. Difference of rank or ſtation.
If ſo ſmall inequality between man and man make in them
modeſty a commendable virtue, who reſpecting ſuperiors as
ſuperiors, can neither ſpeak nor ſtand before them without
fear. Ho:ker.
INERRAbi'LITY.. n.ſ.. [from inerrable.] Exemption from error;
infallibility.
I cannot allow their wiſdom ſuch a completeneſs and in-
errability as to exclude myſelf from judging. King Charles.
INE’RRABLE, adj. [in and err.], Exempt from errour.
We have convićtion from reaſon, or deciſions from the in-
errable and requiſite conditions of ſenſe. Brown's Pulgar Err.
Infallibility and inerrableneſs is aſſumed by the Romfiſh
church, without any inerrable ground to build it on. Harm-
INE’RRABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from inerrable.] Exemption from
erroun.
Infallibility and inerrallenºſ is aſſumed and incloſed by the
Romiſh church, without any inerrable ground to build it
On. Hammond on Fundamentals.
Is E'RRAbly. adv. [ from inerrable. With ſecurity from
errour; infallibly.
JNERRINGLY.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N E
I N E
º
s
INE’RRINGly, adv. [in and erring.] Without errour; with-
out miſtake; without deviation.
That divers limners at a diſtance, without copy, ſhould
draw the ſame pićture, is more conceivable, than that matter
ſhould frame itſelf ſo inerringly according to the idea of its
kind. Glanv. Scepſ.
INE’RT. adj. [iners, Lat] Dull ; ſluggiſh; motionleſs.
Body alone, inert and brute, you'll find ;
The cauſe of all things is by you aſſign'd.
Informer of the planetary trainſ
Without whoſe quickening glance their cumb’rous orbs
Blackmore.
Were brute unlively maſs, inert and dead. Thomſon.
INE'RTLY, adv. [from inert.] Sluggiſhly ; dully.
Ye pow'rs,
Suſpend a while your force inerty ſtrong. Dunciad.
INEscATIon. n.ſ.. [in and eſta, Lat.] The act of baiting. Diff.
INE'st1M A ble. adj. [ine/timable, Fr. ineffimabilis, Lat.] Too
valuable to be rated ; tranſcending all price.
I thought I ſaw a thouſand fearful wrecks,
A thouſand men that fiſhes gnaw’d upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Ineſtimable ſtones, unvalu'd jewels. Shakespeare Rich. III.
The pope thereupon took advantage, abuſing the ſimplicity
of the king to ſuck out ine?imable ſums of money, to the in-
tolerable grievance of both the clergy and temporality. Abbot.
There we ſhall ſee a fight worthy dying for, that bleſſed
Saviour, of whom the Scripture does ſo excellently entertain
us, and who does ſo highly deſerve of us upon the ſcore of
his infinite perfeótions, and his ineffimable benefits. Boyle.
And ſhall this prize, th’ine/imable prize,
On that rapacious hand for ever blaze Pope.
INE’v1 of NT. adj. [inevident, Fr. in and evident.] Not plain;
obſcure. Not in uſe.
The habit of faith in divinity is an argument of things un-
ſeen, and a ſtable aſſent unto things inesident, upon authority
of the divine revealer. Brown's Vulzar Errours.
In " vi., a bility n. ſ. [from inevitable.] Impoſſibility to be
avoided ; certainty. -
By liberty, I do underſtand neither a liberty from fin, mi-
fery, ſervitude, nor violence, but from neceſſity, or rather
neceſſitation; that is, an univerſal immunity from all inevita-
bility and determination to one. Bramh, againſt Hobbs.
INEVITABLE, adj. [inevitable, Fr. inevitabilis, Lat.] Un-
avoidable; not to be eſcaped. -
I had a paſs with him: he gives me the ſtuck in with ſuch a
mortal motion, that it is inevitable. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Fate inevitable -
Subdues us. - Milton.
Since my inevitable death you know,
You ſafely unavailing pity ſhow. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
INE'vitably, adv. [from inevitable.] Without poſſibility of
eſcape.
The day thou eat'ſ thereof, my ſole command
Tranſgreſt, inevitably thou ſhalt die. Milton's Par. Ioff.
How inevitably does an immoderate laughter end in a figh
South's Sermons.
To look no further than the next line, it will inevitably fol-
low, that they can drive to no certain point. Dryden.
Inflammations of the bowels oft inevitably tend to the ruin
of the whole. Harvey on Conſumptions.
If our ſenſe of hearing were exalted, we ſhould have no
quiet or ſleep in the ſilenteſt nights, and we muſt inevitably be
ſtricken deaf or dead with a clap of thunder. Bentley.
INExcu's ABLE. adj. [inexcuſable, Fr. inexcuſabilis, Lat. in and
excuſable.] Not to be excuſed; not to be piated by apology.
It is a temerity, and a folly inexcuſable, to deliver up our-
ſelves needleſly into another's power. D'Eſtrange.
As we are an iſland with ports and navigable ſeas, we ſhould
be inexcuſable if we did not make theſe bleſfings turn to ac-
Count. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Such a favour could only render them more obdurate, and
more inexcuſable: it would inhance their guilt. Atterbury.
If learning be not encouraged under your adminiſtration,
you are the moſt inexcuſable perſon alive. Swift.
A fallen woman is the more in xcuſable, as, from the cradle,
the ſex is warned againſt the deluſions of men. Clariſſa.
IN excu's Able Ness. n.ſ. [from inexcuſable.] Enormity beyond
forgiveneſs cr palliation.
Their inexcuſableneſ, is ſtated upon the ſuppoſition that they
knew God, but did not glorify him. South's Sermons.
In excu's ABLY. adv. [from inexcuſable.] To a degree of guilt
or folly beyond excuſe.
It will inexcuſaby condemn ſome men, who having received
excellent endowments, yet have fruſtrated the intention. Brown.
INExHA'lable. adj. [in and exhale.]. That which cannoteva-
porate. * - -
A new laid egg will not ſo eaſily be boiled hard, becauſe it
contains a great ſtock of humid parts, which muſt be evapo-
rated before the heat can bring the inexhalable parts into con-
ſiſtence. * Brown's Wulgar Errours.
In exhAusted. adj. . [in and exhauffed.] Unemptied; not
poſſible to be emptied.
So wert thou born into a tuneful ſtrain,
An early, rich, and inexhauſted vein. Dryden.
INExHA'ustible. adj. [in and exhauſtible.] Not to be drawn
all away; not to be ſpent.
- Reflect on the variety of combinations which may be made
with number, whoſe ſtock is inexhauſtible, and truly infi-
nite. Locłe.
The ſtock that the mind has in its power, by varying the
idea of ſpace, is perfectly inexhauſtible, and ſo it can multiply
figures in infinitum. Lºcke.
INExi'stent. adj. [in and exiſtent.] Not having being; not
to be found in nature.
To expreſs complexed ſignifications they took a liberty to
compound and piece together creatures of allowable forms into
mixtures inexiſtent. Brown's ſug. Err.
We doubt whether theſe heterogeneities be ſo much as in-
exiſtent in the concrete, whence they are obtained, Boyle.
INExi'stENce. n. ſ. [in and exiſlence.] Want of being; want
of exiſtence.
He calls up the heroes of, former ages from a ſtate of in-
exiſlence to adorn and diverſify his poem. Brocme on the Od ſ.
INExo RABL E. adj. [inexorable, Fr. inexºrabilis, Latin.] Not
to be intreated; not to be moved by intreaty.
You are more inhuman, more inexorable,
Oh ten times more, than tygers of Hyrcania. Shakeſp H.VI.
. Inexorable dog. Shakespeare Merch of Wen ce.
The ſcourge
Inexorable calls to penance. Milton.
The gueſts invited came,
And with the reſt th' inexorable dame. Dryden.
Th' inexorable gates were barr'd,
And nought was ſeen, and nought was heard,
But dreadful gleams, ſhrieks of woe Pope's St. Caecilia.
We can be deaf to the words of ſo ſweet a charmer, and in-
exorable to all his invitations. Rogers.
IN ExPE'DIEN ce. Un.ſ.. [in and expediency..] Want of fitneſs;
IN ExPE'DIENCY. ; want of propriety ; unſuitableneſs to time
or place; inconvenience.
It concerneth ſuperiours to look well to the expediency and
inexpediency of what they enjoin in different things. Sanderſon.
INExPE'DIENT. adj. [in and expedient.] Inconvenient; unfit ;
improper; unſuitable to time or place. -
It is not inexpedient they ſhould be known to come from a
perſon altogether a ſtranger to chymical affairs. Boyle.
We ſhould be prepared not only with patience to bear, but
to receive with thankfulneſs a repulſe, if God ſhould ſee them
to be inexpedient. Smalridge's Sermo's.
INExPE'RIENCE. n.ſ.. [inexperience, Fr. in and experience.] Want
of experimental knowledge; want of experience.
Thy words at random argue thine inexperience... Milton.
Prejudice and ſelf-ſufficiency naturally proceed from inexpe-
rience of the world, and ignorance of mankind. Addiſon.
IN expe'RIENCED. adj. [inexpertus, Lat.] Not experienced.
INExPE'Rt. adj. [inexpertus, Lat. in and expert.] Unſkilful;
unſkilled. -
The race ele&amp;t advance
Through the wild deſert; not the readieſt way,
Leſt ent'ring on the Canaanite alarm’d,
War terrify them inexpert. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xii.
In letters and in laws.
Not inexpert. Prior.
INEXPIABLE. adj. [inexpiable, French; inexpialilis, Latin.]
1. Not to be atoned.
2. Not to be mollified by atonement.
- Love ſeeks to have love:
My love how could'ſt thou hope, who took'ſt the way
To raiſe in me inexpiable hate Mięton's Agoniſes.
INE'xp1ABLY. adv. [from inexpiable.] To a degree beyond
atonement.
Excurſions are inexpiably bad,
- And 'tis much ſafer to leave out than Addison Roſcommen.
INE'xple ABLY. adv. [in and expleo, Lat..] Inſatiably. A word
not in uſe.
What were theſe harpies but flatterers, delators, and the
inexpleably covetous. Sands's Travels.
INE'xplica B L E. adj. [inexplicable, Fr. in and explica, Lat..] In-
capable of being explained; not to be made intelligible.
What could ſuch apprehenſions breed, but, as their nature
is, inexplicable paſſions of mind, deſires abhorring what they
embrace, and embracing what they abhor : Hoºker.
To me at leaſt this ſeems inexpli, able, if light be nothing
elſe than preſſion or motion propagated through ether. Newton.
None eludes ſagacious reaſon more,
Than this obſcure inexplicable pow'r. Blackmore.
INE'xplica Bly. adv. [from inexplicable ] In a manner not to
be explained.
INExPRE'ssible. adj. [in and expreſ...] Not to be told ; not to
be uttered; unutterable. -
Thus when in orbs
Of circuit inexpreſſible they ſtood,
Orb within orb. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
12 G Nothing
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N F
I N F
Nothing can ſo peculiarly gratify the noble diſpoſitions of
human nature, as for one man to ſee another ſo much himſelf
as to figh his griefs, and groan his pains, to ſing his joys, and
do and feel every thing by ſympathy and ſecret inexpreſſible
communications. South's Sermons.
The true God had no certain name given to him; for Fa-
ther, and God, and Creator, are but titles ariſing from his
works; and God is not a name, but a notion ingrafted in
human nature of an inexpreſſible being. Stillingfleet.
There is an inimitable grace in Virgil's words; and in them
principally conſiſts that beauty, which gives ſo inexpreſſible a
pleaſure to him who beſt underſtands their force: this dićtion
of his is never to be copied. Dryden.
IN Expressibly. adv. [from inexpreſſible.] To a degree or in
a manner not to be uttered; unutterably.
God will protećt and reward all his faithful ſervants in a
manner and meaſure inexpreſſibly abundant. Hammºnd.
He began to play upon it: the ſound was exceeding ſweet,
and wrought into a variety of tunes that were inexpreſſibly me-
lodious. Addiſon's Spectator.
INExpu'GNAble. adj. [inexpugnable, Fr. inexpugnabilis, Lat.]
Impregnable; not to be taken by aſſault; not to be ſubdued.
Why ſhould there be implanted in each ſex ſuch a vehement
and inexpugnable appetite of copulation? Ray on the Creation.
IN Ext 1'N GUIs HABLE. adj. [inextinguible, Fr. in and extinguo,
Latin.] Unquenchable.
Pillars, ſtatues, and other memorials, are a ſort of ſhadow
of an endleſs life, and ſhow an inextinguiſhable deſire which all
men have of it. Grew's Cºſmol.
INExtRicable. adj. ſinextricable, Fr. inextricabilis, Latin.]
Not to be diſintangled; not to be cleared; not to be ſet free
from obſcurity or perplexity.
He that ſhould tye inextricable knots, only to baffle the in-
duſtry of thoſe that ſhould attempt to unlooſe them, would be
thought not to have ſerved his generation. Decay of Piety.
Stopt by awful heights, and gulphs immenſe
Of wiſdom, and of vaſt omnipotence,
She trembling ſtands, and does in wonder gaze,
Loſt in the wild inextricable maze. Blackmore.
IN Extric ABLY. adv. [from inextricable ] To a degree of per-
plexity not to be diſintangled.
The mechanical atheiſt, though you grant him his laws of
mechaniſm, is nevertheleſs inextricably puzzled and baffled
with the firſt formation of animals. Bentley's Sermons.
In vain they ſtrive; th’ intangling ſnares deny,
Inextricably firm, the power to fly. Pope's Odyſſey.
To INE(YE. v. n. [in and eye.] To inoculate; to propagate
trees by the inſition of a bud into a foreign ſtock.
Let ſage experience teach thee all the arts
Of grafting and ineying. Phillips.
IN FALLIB 1'LITY. }"ſ. [infallibilité, Fr. from infallible.] In-
INFA'LLIBLE Ness. 5 errability; exemption from errour.
Infallibility is the higheſt perfection of the knowing faculty,
and conſequently the firmeſt degree of aſſent. Tillotſon.
INFA'llible. adj. [infallible, Fr. in and fallible.] Privileged
from errour; incapable of miſtake; not to be miſled or de-
ceived; certain.
Every cauſe admitteth not ſuch infallible evidence of proof,
as leaveth no poſſibility of doubt or ſcruple behind it. Hooker.
Believe my words;
For they are certain and infallible. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
The ſucceſs is certain and infallible, and none ever yet miſ-
carried in the attempt. South's Sei mons.
INFA'LLIBLY. adv. [from infallible.] -
1. Without danger of deceit; with ſecurity from errour.
We cannot be as God infallibly knowing good and evil.
Smalridge's Sermons.
2. Certainly.
Our bleſſed Lord has diſtinétly opened the ſcene of futurity
to us, and directed us to ſuch a condućt as will infallibly render
us happy in it. Rogers's Sermons.
To INFA M.E. v. a. ſinfamer, Fr. infamo, Lat..] To repreſent
to diſadvantage; to defame; to cenſure publickly; to make
infamous; to brand.
Livia is infamed for the poiſoning of her huſband. Bacon.
Hitherto obſcur'd, infam’d,
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end
Created. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
1NFAMOUS. ad. ſinſané, infimant, Fr. infami, Lat.j Pub-
lickly branded with guilt ; openly cenſured; of bad nature.
thoſe that be near, and thoſe that be far from thee, ſhall
mock thee, which art infamous. Ezek. xxii. 5.
... Theſe are as ſome infamous bawd or whore
Should praiſe a matron; what could hurt her more. B.johnſ.
After times will diſpute it, whether Hotham were more in-
famºus at Hull or at Tower-hill. King Charles.
Perſons infamous, or branded with any note of infamy in
any publick court of judicature, are, ipſo jure, forbidden to be
, advocates. Aylife's Parergon.
1's Axiously. adv. [from infamous |
1. With open reproach; with publick notoriety of reproach.
2. Shamefully; ſcandalouſly.
That poem was infamouſly bad. Dryden',
I'NFAMoUs N Ess. {" J. É. Fr. iº.
I'NFAMY. reproach ; notoriety of bad character. C
Ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and are the infan
ny of
the people. Ezek. xxxvi
I throw my infamy at thee: 3.
I will not ruinate my father's houſe,
Who gave his blood to lime the ſtones together,
And ſet up Lancaſter. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI
The noble iſle doth want her proper Hºbs, -
Her face delac'd with ſcars of infamy. Shakespeare Rich. III
Wilful perpetrations of unworthy actions braná, with mºſt
* characters of infamy, the name and º: to poſte-
rity. (in
rºsex. n. ſ. [infantia, Latin.] &amp; Charles.
1. The firſt part of life. Uſually extended by naturaliſts to
ſeven years.
Dare we affirm it was ever his meaning, that unto their fil.
vation, who even from their tender infancy never knew an
other faith or religion than only Chriſtian, no kind of teachin
can be available, ſaving that which was ſo needful for the firſ;
univerſal converſion of Gentiles, hating Chriſtianity? Hair.
Pirithous came t'attend
This worthy Theſeus, his familiar friend:
Their love in early infancy began,
And roſe as childhood ripen'd into man. Dryden,
The inſenſible impreſſions on our tender infancies have very
important and laſting conſequences. Lotke.
2. Civil infancy, extended by the Engliſh law to one and twenty
cars.
3. Firſt age of any thing; beginning; original; commence.
Inent.
In Spain our ſprings, like old mens children, be
Decay’d and wither'd from their infancy. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
The difference between the riches of Roman citizens in the
infancy and in the grandeur of Rome, will appear by com-
paring the firſt valuation of eſtates with the eſtates afterwards
poſſeſſed. Arluthnot ºn Coins.
INFA'NGTHEF, or hingfangtheft, or infangtheof, is compounded
of three Saxon words: the prepoſition, in, fang, or fin;, to
take or catch, and thef. It ſignifies a privilege or liberty
granted unto lords of certain manors to judge any thief taken
within their fee. Cowel.
I'NFANT. n.ſ.. [infant, French; infans, Latin.]
1. A child from the birth to the end of the ſeventh year.
It being a part of their virtuous education, ſerveth greatly
both to nouriſh in them the fear of God, and to put us in con-
tinual remembrance of that powerful grace, which openeth the
mouths of infants to ſound his praiſe. Hooker.
Within the infant rind of this ſmall flower
Poiſon hath reſidence, and medicine power. Shaleſtart:
There ſhall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old
man that hath not filled his days. Iſlav. 20.
Firſt the ſhrill ſound of a ſmall rural pipe,
Was entertainment for the infant ſtage. Roſcommon.
Young mothers wildly ſtare, with fear poſſeſ,
And ſtrain their helpleſs infants to their breaſt. Dryd. Æn.
In their tender nonage, while they ſpread
Their ſpringing leaves and lift their infant head.
Indulge their childhood. 1) ydn's Pirg, Georg.
2. [In law.] A young perſon to the age of one and twenty.
1NFA"NTA, n.ſ. [Spaniſh..] A princeſs deſcended from the
royal blood of Spain. - --
INFA'Nticide. n.ſ. [infanticide, Fr. infantitidium, Lat.] The
ſlaughter of the infants by Herad. - - inf
I'NFANtile, adj...[infantilis, Latin.]. Pertaining.” ...
The fly lies all the Winter in theſe balls in its infanti, .
and comes not to its maturity 'till the following Spring. Der f
I'NFANTRY. n.ſ. [ infanterie, French. J The foot ſoldiers o
an army. . . in the infantry
The principal ſtrength of an army confiſeth in the º in
or foot; and to make good infantry it requireth mºuſ VII
ſome free and plentiful manner. Bacon's Henry VII.
That ſmall infantry, º
Warr'd on by cranes. ſ - º:
INFA'rction. n.ſ.. [in and farcio, Latin.] Stuffing; ‘
at 10n. -
p An hypocondriack conſumption is occaſioned") *::::
tion and obſtruction of the ſpleen. - im.
To I'NFATUAt E. v. a. [infatuo, from in and fatuu', fin.
infatuer, French..] To ſtrike with folly; to dep" "
derſtanding. - in infatuating *
The judgment of God will be very viſible in iſ: lly and
people, as ripe and prepared for deſtruction: '. O # the
madneſs, making the weak to contribute to the de . their
wicked; and ſuffering even thoſe, out of a conſº:
uilt, to grow more wicked.
g it is # reforming of the vices and ſottiſhneſs º º:
overſpread the infatuated, gentile world; a P" }.d
that deſign of Chriſt's ſending his diſciples. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N F
I N F
*-*-
º
º
--
º
ſ
*
:
.
The people are ſo univerſally infatuated with the notion,
that, if a cow falls ſick, it is ten to one but an old woman is
clapt up in priſon for it. - z- - Addiſon on Italy.
The carriage of our atheiſts or deiſts is amazing: no dotage
ſo infatuate, no phrenſy ſo extravagant as theirs. Bentley.
May hypocrites,
That ſlily ſpeak one thing, another think,
Drink on unwarn'd, 'till, by enchanting cups
Infatuate, they their wily thoughts diſcloſe. Phillips.
INFATUATION. m. ſ. [from infatuate.] The aët of ſtriking
with folly; deprivation of reaſon.
Where men give themſelves over to the defence of wicked
intereſts and falſe propoſitions, it is juſt with God to ſmite the
greateſt abilities with the greateſt infatuations. South's Serm.
INFA'ust ING. m. ſ [from infauſtus, Lat.] The act of making
unlucky. An odd and inelegant word.
As the king did in ſome part remove the envy from himſelf,
ſo he did not obſerve that he did withal bring a kind of male-
dićtion and infauſting upon the marriage, as an ill Aft
moſtick. Bacon's Henry VII.
INFE'Asible. adj. [in and feaſible.] Impracticable.
This is ſo difficult and infeaſible, that it may well drive
modeſty to deſpair of ſcience. Glanv. Sceſſ.
To INFECT. v. a. [infeffer, French; infectus, Latin.]
1. To act upon by contagion; to affect with communicated
qualities; to hurt by contagion ; to taint; to poiſon; to pol-
lute.
They put ſuch words in the mouths of one of thoſe fantaſ.
tical mind infeded people, that children and muſicians call
lovers. Sidney.
Thine eyes, ſweet lady, have inſected mine. Shakespeare R. III.
The nature of bad news infeds the teller. Shakeſpeare.
Ev'ry day
It would infect his ſpeech, that if the king
Should without iſſue die, he'd carry it ſo -
To make the ſcepter his. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Infected minds
To their deaf pillows will diſcharge their ſecrets. Shakespeare.
She ſpeaks poniards, and every word ſtabs: if her breath
were as terrible as her terminations, there were no living near
her; ſhe would infect to the north-ſtar. Shakeſpeare.
I am return'd your ſoldier;
No more infected with my country's love,
Than when I parted hence. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
The love-tale -
Infºſted Sion's daughters with like heat,
Whoſe wanton paſſions in the ſacred porch
Ezekiel ſaw. - Milton.
2. To fill with ſomething hurtfully contagious.
Infected be the air whereon they ride,
And damn’d all thoſe that truſt them : Shakeſp Macbeth.
INFE"ction. n.ſ.. [infection, Fr. infectio, Latin.] Contagion;
miſchief by communication; taint; poiſon.
Infection is that manner of communicating a diſeaſe by ſome
effluvia, or particles which fly off from diſtempered bodies, and
mixing with the juices of others, occaſion the ſame diſorders as
in the bodies they came from &amp;uincy.
What a ſtrange infection
Is fall’n into thy ear ! Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
The bleſſed gods
Purge all infrélions from our air, whilſt you
Do climate here. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
Vouchſafe, diffus'd infection of a man,
For theſe known evils but to give me leave,
By circumſtance, to curſe thy curſed ſelf. Shakeſp. R. III.
Hence,
Leſt that th' infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The tranſmiſſion or emiſſion of the thinner and more airy
parts of bodies, as in odours and infections, is, of all the reſt,
the moſt corporeal; but withal there be a number of thoſe
emiſſions, both wholeſome and unwholeſome, that give no
ſmell at all. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
INFE'ctious. adj. [from inſed.] Contagious; influencing by
communicated qualities.
The moſt inſectious peſtilence upon thee! Shakeſpeare.
In a houſe,
Where the infrérious peſtilence did reign. Shakeſpeare.
Some known diſeaſes are infectious, and others are not: thoſe
that are inſe?ious are ſuch as are chiefly in the ſpirits, and not
ſo much in the humours, and therefore paſs eaſily from body
to body; ſuch as peſtilences and lippitudes. Bacon.
Smells may have as much power to do good as to do harm,
and contribute to health as well as to diſeaſes; which is too
much felt by experience in all that are infecticut, and by the
operation of ſome poiſons, that are received only by the
ſmell. #.
INFE'ctiously. adu. [from infrélious.] Contagiouſly.
The will dotes, that is inclinable
To what infectiouſly itſelf affects. Shakeſp. Troil. and Creſſida.
INFE'ctious Ness. n. 7. [from infectious.] The quality of being
infe:lious ; contagiouſncfs. 2
INFE'ctive. adj. [from inſed.] Having the quality of con-
tagſ On.
"True love, well conſidered, hath an infective power. Sidn.
INFEcu'ND. m. ſ. ſinſzcundus, Latin.] Unfruitful; infertile.
How ſafe and agreeable a conſervatory the earth is to ve-
getables, is manifeſt from their rotting, drying, or being ren-
dered infecund in the waters, or the air; but in the earth their
vigour is long preſerved. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
INFecu'NDITY. n.ſ. ſinfecunditas, Lat.] Want of fertility;
barrenneſs.
INFELI'city. n.ſ.. [infelicité, Fr. infelicitas, Latin.] Unhappi-
neſs; miſery; calamity.
Whatever is the ignorance and infelicity of the preſent ſtate,
we were made wiſe and happy. Glanv. Sce'ſ c. 1.
Here is our great infelicity, that, when ſingle words ſignify
complex ideas, one word can never diſtinctly manifeſt all the
parts of a complex idea. - J/atts.
To INFE*R. v. a. [inferer, French; infºro, Latin.]
1. To bring on; to induce.
Vomits infer ſome ſmall detriment to the lungs. Harvey.
2. To infer is nothing but, by virtue of one propoſition laid down
as true, to draw in another as true, i. e. to ſee or ſuppoſe ſuch
a connection of the two ideas of the inferred propoſition. Locke.
Yet what thou can'ſt attain, which beſt may ſerve
To glorify the Maker, and infºr
Thee alſo happier, ſhall not be with-held -
Thy hearing. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vii.
Great,
Or bright, infers not excellence: the earth,
Though in compariſon of heav'n ſo finall,
Nor gliſtering, may of ſolid good contain
More plenty than the ſun, that tarren ſhines. Milton.
One would wonder how, from ſo differing premiſſes, they
ſhould all infer the ſame concluſion. Decay of Piety.
They have more opportunities than other men have of pur-
chaſing publick eſteem, by deſerving well of mankind; and
ſuch opportunities always infer obligations. Atterbury.
3. To offer; to produce.
Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
I'NFERENCE. n.ſ.. [inference, French, from inſer.] Concluſion
drawn from previous arguments.
Though it may chance to be right in the concluſion, it is
yet unjuſt and miſtaken in the method of inference. Glanv.
Theſe inferences or concluſions are the effects of reaſoning,
and the three propoſitions, taken all togethel, are called ſyllo-
giſm or argument. //atts.
INFE/RIBle. adj. [from infºr. J Deducible from premiſed
grounds.
As ſimple miſtakes commonly beget fallacies, ſo men from
fallacious foundations, and miſapprehended mediums, erect
concluſions no way inferrible from their premiſles. Brown.
IN FE’Rio RITY.. n.ſ.. [inferiorité, Fr. from inferiour.] Lower
ſtate of dignity or value.
The language, though not of equal dignity, yet as near
approaching to it as our modern barbariſm will allow; and
therefore we are to reſt contented with that only inferiority
which is not poſſibly to be remedied. Dryden.
INFERIOUR. adj. [inferior, Lat. inferieur, French.]
1. Lower in place.
2. Lower in ſtation or rank of life.
A great perſon gets more by obliging his inferiour than by
diſdaining him. South.
3. Lower in value or excellency.
The love of liberty with life is giv'n, -
And life itſelf th’ inferiour gift of heav'n. Dryden.
I have added ſome original papers of my own, which, whe-
ther they are equal or inferiºur to my other poems, an author
is the moſt improper jndge of. Dryden.
4. Subordinate. º
General and fundamental truths in philoſophy, religion, and
human life, condućt our thoughts into a thouſand inferiour
and particular propoſitions. //atts.
INFe'RioUR. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive..] One in a lower rank
or ſtation than another.
INFERNAL. adj. [infernal, French; infernus, Latin.] Helliſh;
taſtarean.
His gigantick limbs, with large embrace,
Infold nine acres of infernal ſpace. Dryden's Án.
INFE'RNAL Stone, n.ſ.
Infernal ſtone, or the lunar cauſtick, is prepared from an
evaporated ſolution of ſilver, or from cryſtals of ſilver. It is
a very powerful cauſtick, eating away the fleſh and even the
bones to which it is applied. Hill's Mat. Med.
INFE'RTIL E. adj. [infertile, Fr. in and fertile.] Unfruitful; not
produćtive; without fecundity; infecund.
Ignorance being of itſelf, like ſtiff clay, an infertile ſoil,
when pride comes to ſcorch and harden it, it grows perfeółly
impenetrable. Government of the Tongue.
IN FERT1'lit Y. m. ſ. [infºrtiité, Fr. from infertiſe.] Unfruit-
fulneſs; want of fertility.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N F
I N F
The ſame diſtemperature of the air that occaſioned the
plague, occaſioned alſo the infertility or noxiouſneſs of the ſoil,
whereby the fruits of the earth became either very ſmall, or
very unwholſome. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To INFE'st. v. a. [infº/ler, Fr. infºſi, Latin.] o harraſs;
to diſturb; to plague.
They ceaſed not, in the mean while, to ſtrengthen that
part which in heart they favoured, and to infº/t by all means,
under colour of other quarrels, their greateſt adverſaries in this
cauſe. Hºoker.
Although they were a people infeſted, and mightily hated
of all others, yet was there nothing of force to work the ruin
of their ſtate, ’till the time beforementioned was expired. Hook.
Unto my feeble breaſt
Come gently; but not with that mighty rage
Wherewith the martial troops thou do'ſt infº/?,
And hearts of greateſt heroes do'ſ enrage. Spenſer.
They were no mean, diſtreſſed, calamitous perſons that fled
to him for refuge; but of ſo great quality, as it was apparent
that they came not thither to protećt their own fortune, but
to infeſt and invade his. Bacon's Henry VII.
Theſe, ſaid the genius, are envy, avarice, ſuperſtition,
love, with the like cares and paſſions that infeft human life.
Addiſon's Spediator.
No diſeaſe infº/is mankind more terrible in its ſymptoms and
effects. Arbuthnot on Diet.
INFestivity. n.ſ.. [in and fºſſivity.] Mournfulneſs; want of
cheerfulneſs. -
In Fe'stred. adj. [in and fºſter.] Rankling; inveterate.
This curſed creature, mindful of that old
Infºſfred grudge, the which his mother felt,
So ſoon as Clarion he did behold,
His heart with vengeful malice inly ſwelt. Stenſºr.
INFEUDA'tion. n.ſ.. [in and feudum, Lat.] The aët of put-
ting one in poſſeſſion of a fee or eſtate.
Another military proviſion was conventional and by tenure,
upon the infeudation of the tenant, and was uſually called
knight's ſervice. Hale's Common Law of England.
I'N FIDE L. m. ſ. [infidelle, Fr. infidelis, Latin J. An unbelieve, ;
a miſcreant; a pagan ; one who reječts Chriſtianity.
Exhorting her, if ſhe did marry, yet not to join herſelf to
an infidel, as in thoſe times ſome widows chriſtian had done,
for the advancement of their eſtate in this world. Hooker.
IN FIDE'LITY. m.ſ.. [infidelite, French; inſidelitas, Lat.]
1. Want of faith. º
The conſideration of the divine omnipotence and infinite
wiſdom, and our own ignorance, are great inſtruments of
ſilencing the murmurs of infidelity. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
2. Diſbelief of Chriſtianity.
One would fancy that infidels would be exempt from that
fingle fault, which ſeems to grow out of the imprudent fer-
vours of religion; but ſo it is, that infidelity is propagated with
as much fierceneſs and contention, as if the ſafety of mankind
depended upon it. Addiſon's Speciator.
3. Treachery; deceit. -
The infidelities on the one part between the two ſexes, and
the caprices on the other, the vanities and vexations attending
even the moſt refined delights that make up this buſineſs of
life, render it ſilly and uncomfortable. Spectator.
I'NFINITE. adj [infini, French; infinitus, Latin.]
1. Unbounded; boundleſs; unlimited; immenſe; having no
boundaries or limits to its nature.
Impoſſible it is, that God ſhould withdraw his preſence
from any thing, becauſe the very ſubſtance of God is inf-
mite. - Hooker.
What's time, when on eternity we think?
A thouſand ages in that ſea muſt ſink:
Time's nothing but a word; a million
Is full as far from infinite as one. • Denham,
Thou ſov’reign pow'r, whoſe ſecret will controuls
The inward bent and motion of our ſouls |
Why haſt thou plac'd ſuch infinite degrees
Between the cauſe and cure of my diſeaſe? Prior.
When we would think of infinite ſpace or duration, we at
firſt make ſome very large idea; as perhaps of millions of ages
or miles, which poſſibly we multiply ſeveral times. Locke.
Even an angel's comprehenſive thought
Cannot extend as far as thou haſt wrought:
Our vaſt conceptions are by ſwelling brought,
Swallow'd and loſt in infinite, to nought. Dennis.
2. It is hyperbolically uſed for large; great.
I'NFINITELY. adv. [from infinite.] Without limits; without
bounds; immenſely.
Nothing may be infinitely deſired, but that good which in-
deed is infinite. - Hooker.
This is Antonio,
To whom I am ſo infinitely bound. Shakespeare Merch. of Pen.
The king ſaw that contrariwiſe it would follow, that Eng-
land, though much leſs in territory, yet ſhould have infinity
more ſoldicrs of their native forces than thoſe other nations
have. Bacon's ſienry VII.
Infinitely the greater part of mankind have profeſſed to ačt
under a full perſuaſion of this great article. Rogers.
I'NFINITENess. n. J. [from infinite.] Immenſity; boundleſſ-
neſs; infinity.
The cunning of his flattery, the readineſs of his tears, the
infiniteneſ of his vows, were but among the weakeſt threads
of his net. Sidney.
Let us always bear about us ſuch impreſfions of reverences
and fear of God, that we may humble ourſelves before his Al-
mightineſs, and expreſs that infinite diſtance between his inft-
niteneſ, and our weakneſſes. Taylor.
INFIN1te's IMAL. adj. [from infinite.] Infinitely divided.
INF 1'N1tive, adj. [infinitif, Fr. infinitivus, Latin.] In gram-
mar, the infinitive affirms, or intimates the intention of affirm-
ing, which is one uſe of the indicative; but then it does not
do it abſolutely. Clerke's Lat. Gram.
INF1'N1tude. n. ſ [from infinite.]
1. Infinity; immenſity.
Confuſion heard his voice, and wild uproar
Stood rul’d, ſtood vaſt infinitude confin'd. Milt. Par. Loft.
Though the repugnancy of infinitude be equally incom-
petible to continued or ſucceſſive motion, or continued quan-
tity, and depends upon the incompoſſibility of the very nature
of things ſucceſſive or extenſive with infinitude; yet that in-
compoſſibility is more conſpicuous in diſcrete quantity, that
ariſeth from parts ačtually diſtinguiſhed. Hale.
2. Boundleſs number.
We ſee all the good ſenſe of the age cut out, and minced
into almoſt an infinitude of diſtinétions. Addiſon's Spectator.
INFI'N1TY. n.ſ.. [infinité, French; infinitas, Latin.]
1. Immenſity ; boundleſſneſs; unlimited qualities.
There cannot be more infinities than one; for one of them
would limit the other. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the Iłorld.
The better, the more deſirable; that therefore muſt be de-
ſirable, wherein there is infinity of goodneſs; ſo that if any
thing deſirable may be infinite, that muſt needs be the higheſt
of all things that are deſired: no good is infinite but only
God, therefore he our felicity and bliſs. Hºoker.
2. Endleſs number. An hyperbolical uſe of the word.
Homer has concealed faults under an infinity of admirable
beauties. - Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
The liver, being ſwelled, compreſſeth the ſtomach, ſtops
the circulation of the juices, and produceth an infinity of bad
ſymptoms. Arbuthnot on Dict.
INF1'R.M. adj. [infirme, French; infirmus, Latin.]
1. Weak; feeble; diſabled of body.
Here ſtand I your brave;
A poor, infirm, weak, and deſpis'd old man.
That on my head all might be viſited,
Thy frailty, and infirmer ſex, forgiv'n ;
To me committed, and by me expos'd,
2. Weak of mind; irreſolute.
I'll go no more;
I am afraid to think what I have done:
Look out again, I dare not.
—Infirm of purpoſe;
Give me the dagger.
3. Not ſtable; not ſolid.
He who fixes upon falſe principles, treads upon infirm
ground, and ſo ſinks; and he, who fails in his dedućtions from
right principles, ſtumbles upon firm ground, and falls. South.
To INF1'RM. va. [infirmer, Fr. infirmo, Lat.] To weaken;
to ſhake; to enfeeble. Not in uſe. .
Some contrary ſpirits will objećt this as a ſufficient reaſon to
infirm all thoſe points. Raleigh's Eſſays.
The ſpleen is unjuſtly introduced to invigorate the finiſter
ſide, which, being dilated, would rather infirm and debilitate
it. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INF1'RMARY. m. ſ. [infirmerie, French. J Lodgings for the
ſick.
Theſe buildings to be for privy lodgings on both ſides, and
the end for privy galleries, whereof one ſhould be for an in-
firmary, if any ſpecial perſon ſhould be ſick. Bacon.
INF1'RMITY.. n.ſ.. [infirmité, French.]
1. Weakneſs of ſex, age, or temper.
Infirmity, -
Which waits upon worn times, hath ſomething ſeiz'd
His wiſh'd ability. ' Shakeſpeare's Hinter's Tale.
Diſcover thine infirmity,
That warranteth by law to be thy privilege:
I am with child, ye bloody homicides. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
If he had done or ſaid any thing amiſs, he deſired their
worſhips to think it was his infirmities. Shakespeare julius Caſ:
Are the infirmities of the body, pains, and diſeaſes his com-
plaints His faith reminds him of the day when this corruptible
ſhall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality. Rogers.
2. Failing; weakneſs; fault.
A friend ſhould bear a friend's infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are. Shakespeare.
Many infºrmities made it appear more requiſite, that a wiſer
man ſhould have the application of his intereſt. Clarendºn.
3. Diſeaſe;
Shakespeare
Mik. Par. Loft.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N F
Í N F
º:
º
º
4:
e
º,
How difficult is it to preſerve a great name, when he that
has acquired it, is ſo obnoxious to ſuch little weakneſſes and in-
firmities, as are no ſmall diminution to it, when diſcovered.
Addiſon's Spectator.
3. Diſeaſe; malady.
General laws are like general rules of phyſick, according
whereunto, as now, no wiſe man will deſire himſelf to be cured,
if there be joined with his diſeaſe ſome ſpecial accident, in re-
gard that thereby others in the ſame infirmity, but without
the like accident, may. Hooker.
INF1'RMN ess. n.ſ.. [from infirm.] Weakneſs; feebleneſs.
Some experiments may diſcover the infirmneſ; and inſuffi-
ciency of the peripatetick doćtrine. - Boyle.
To INF1'x. v. a. [infixus, Latin.] To drive in ; to faſten.
And at the point two ſtings infixed are, -
Both deadly ſharp, that ſharpeſt ſteel exceeden far. Fa. Qu.
I never lov'd myſelf,
*Till now, infixed, I behold myſelf,
Drawn in the flatt'ring table of her eye. Shakeſp. K. john.
Immoveable, infix’d, and frozen round. Milton.
That ſting infix’d within her haughty mind,
And her proud heart with ſecret ſorrow pin'd. Dryden.
Arcite on Emily had fix’d his look:
The fatal dart a ready paſſage found, -
And deep within her heart infix'd the wound. Dryden.
To INFLAME. v. a. [inflammo, Latin.]
1. To kindle; to ſet on fire.
Love more clear than yourſelves, dedicated to a love, I fear,
more cold than yourſelves, with the clearneſs lays a night of
ſorrow upon me, and with the coldneſs inflames a world of
fire within me. . Sidney.
Its waves of torrent fire inflam'd with rage. Miltºn.
2. To kindle deſire.
Their luſt was inflamed towards her. Suſan. viii.
More inflam'd with luſt than rage. Milton.
3. To exaggerate; to aggravate.
A friend exaggerates a man's virtues, an enemy inflames his
crimes. Addison's Spectator.
4. To heat the body morbidly with obſtrućted matter.
5. To provoke; to irritate.
A little vain curioſity weighs ſo much with us, or the
church's peace ſo little, that we ſacrifice the one to the whet-
ting and inflaming of the other. Decay of Piety.
6. To fire with paſſion.
Satan, with thoughts infam'd of higheſt deſign,
Puts on ſwift wings. Milton.
To INFLA'ME. v. n. To grow hot, angry, and painful by ob-
ſtrućted matter.
If the veſiculae are oppreſt, they inflame. Wiſeman.
IN FLA'MER. n.ſ.. [from inflame.] The thing or perſon that.
inflames. -
Intereſt is a great inflamer, and ſets a man on perſecution
under the colour of zeal. Addiſon's Spediator.
Aſſemblies, who ačt upon publick principles, proceed upon
influence from particular leaders and inflamers. Swift.
IN FLAMMA BI'lity. n ſ. [from inflammable.] The quality of
catching fire.
This it will do, if the ambient air be impregnate with ſub-
tile inflammabilities. Brown's }. Errours.
Choler is the lighteſt and moſt inflammable part of the
blood; whence, from its inflammability, it is salled a ſulphur.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
INFLA’MMABLE. adj. [French..] Eaſy to be ſet on flame;
having the quality of flaming.
The juices of olives, almonds, nuts, and pine-apples, are
all inflammable. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Licetus thinks it poſſible to extraćt an inflammable oil from
the ſtone aſbeſtus. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
Out of water grow all vegetable and animal ſubſtances,
which conſiſt as well of ſulphureous, fat, and inflammable parts
as of earthy and alcalizate ones. Newton's Opt.
Inflammable ſpirits are ſubtile volatile liquors, which come
over in diſtillation, miſcible with water, and wholly combuſ.
tible. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
INFLA'MMABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from inflammable.] The quality of
eaſily catching fire.
We may treat of the inflammableneſ of bodies. Boyle.
INFLAMMATION. m. ſ. [ inflammatio, Latin; inflammation,
French. J
1. The aët of ſetting on flame.
2. The ſtate of being in flame.
The flame extendeth not beyond the inflammable effluence,
but cloſely adheres unto the original of its inflammation. Bro.
Some urns have had inſcriptions on them, expreſſing that
the lamps within them were burning when they were firſt
buried ; whereas the inflammation of fat and viſcous vapours
doth preſently vaniſh. Wilkins’s Dard.
3. [In chirurgery.] Inflammation is when the blood is obſtructed
ſo as to crowd in a greater quantity into any particular part,
and gives it a greater colour and heat than uſual. Quincy.
If that bright ſpot ſtay in his place, it is an inflammation of
the burning. Lev. xiii. 28.
4. The aâ of exciting fervour of mind.
Prayer kindleth our deſire to behold God by ſpeculation;
and the mind, delighted with that contemplative fight of God;
taketh every where new inflammations to pray the riches of the
myſteries of heavenly wiſdom, continually ſtirring up in us
correſpondent deſires towards them. Hooker.
INFLA'MMAtoRy. adj. [from inflame.] Having the power of
inflaming. - -
The extremity of pain often creates a coldneſs in the extre-
mities: ſuch a ſenſation is very conſiſtent with an inflam-
matory diſtemper. Arbuthnot on Diet.
An inflammatory fever hurried him out of this life in three
days. Pope to Swift.
To INFLATE. v. a. [inflatus, Latin.]
1. To ſwell with wind. . - -
That the muſcles are inflated in time of reſt, appears to the
very eye in the faces of children. Ray:
Vapours are no other than inflated veſiculae of water. Derh.
2. To fill with the breath.
With might and main they chas'd the murd’rous fox,
With brazen trumpets and inflated box,
To kindle Mars with military ſounds,
Nor wanted horns tº inſpire ſagacious hounds. Dryden.
IN FLA'tion, n. ſ [inflatio, Lat. from infate.] The ſtate of
being ſwelled with wind; flatulence.
Wind coming upwards, inflations and tumours of the belly
are ſigns of a phlegmatick conſtitution. Arbuthnot on Diet.
To INFLECT. v. a. [infiedo, Latin.]
1. To bend; to turn.
What makes them this one way their race direct,
While they a thouſand other ways reject {
Why do they never once their courſe infleč P Blackm.
Do not the rays of light which fall upon bodies, begin to
bend before they arrive at the bodies? And are they not re-
fle&amp;ted, refracted, and infieded by one and the ſame principle,
aćting variouſly in various circumſtances : Newton's Opt.
2. To change or vary.
3. To vary a noun or verb in its terminations.
INFLE'ction. n.ſ.. [infleáfio, Latin.]
1. The aët of bending or turning.
Neither the divine determinations, perſuaſions, or inflexions
of the underſtanding or will of rational creatures, doth de-
ceive the underſtanding, pervert the will, or neceſſitate either
to any moral evil. Hale.
2. Modulation of the voice. -
His virtue, his geſture, his countenance, his zeal, the mo-
tion of his body, and the infection of his voice, who firſt ut-
tereth them as his own, is that which giveth the very eſſence
of inſtruments available to eternal life. Hooker.
3. Variation of a noun or verb.
The ſame word in the original tongue, by divers infie&amp;lions
and variations, makes divers dialects. Brerewood.
INFLE'ctive. adj. [from infect.] Having the power of bend-
1n t
ºrhi, inflečive quality of the air is a great incumbrance and
confuſion of aſtronomical obſervations. . Derham.
w
łº, ... }, ſ ſinfaii, French, fromiſeik
1. Stiffneſs; quality of reſiſting flexure.
2. Obſtinacy; temper not to be bent; inexorable pertinacy.
INFLE'xible, adj. [French; inflexibilis, Latin.]
1. Not to be bent or incurvated.
Such errors as are but acorns in our younger brows, grow
oaks in our older heads, and become inflexible to the powerful
arm of reaſon. Brown's Preface to Wul. Err.
Too great rigidity and elaſticity of the fibres makes them in-
flexible to the cauſes, to which they ought to yield. Arbuthnot.
2. Not to be prevailed on; immovable. -
The man reſolv’d and ſteady to his truſt,
Inflexible to ill, and obſtinately juſt. Addiſon.
A man of an upright and inflexible temper, in the execution
of his country's laws, can overcome all private fear. Addiſon.
3. Not to be changed or altered.
The nature of things are inflexible, and their natural rela-
tions unalterable: we muſt bring our underſtandings to things,
and not bend things to our fancies. Watts.
INFle'xibly. adv. [from inflexible.] Inexorably; invariably;
without relaxation or remiſſion.
It ſhould be begun early, and inflexibly kept to, 'till there
appears not the leaſt reluctancy; Locke.
To in FLICT. v. a. [infligo, infiélus, Latin; infliger, Fr.]
To put in act or impoſe as a puniſhment.
I know no pain, they can inflić; upon him,
Will make him ſay I mov’d him to thoſe arms. Shakeſp.
Sufficient is this puniſhment which was infifted. 2 Cor. ii.
What the potent vićtor in his rage
Can elſe infiići. Milton.
What heart could wiſh, what hand inflić; this dire diſgrace?
Dryden's Aºn. bºvi.
By diſeaſes we condemn ourſelves to greater torments than
have been yet invented by anger or revenge, or inftićted by the
greateſt tyrants upon the worſt of men. Temple.
I 2 INFLI'cTER.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N F
I N F
inflict #R. n.J. [from inflići.] He who puniſhes.
Revenge is commonly not bounded, but extended to the
utmoſt power of the infiéler. Government of the Tongue.
IN fli'ction. n. ſ. [from inflić; )
1. The aët of uſing puniſhments.
So our decrees,
Dead to inflºtion, to themſelves are dead;
And liberty plucks juſtice by the noſe. Shakeſpeare.
Sin ends certainly in death; death not only as to merit, but
alſo as to actual inflićtion. South's Sermons.
2. The puniſhment impoſed.
What, but thy malice, mov'd thee to miſdeem
Of righteous Job, than cruelly to afflićt him
With all inflićtions? But his patience won. Paradiſe Reg.
How deſpicable are the threats of a creature as impotent as
ourſelves, when compared with the wrath of an Almighty
Judge, whoſe power extends to eternal inflićtions P , Rogers.
His ſevereſt inflicions are in themſelves aéts of juſtice and
righteouſneſs. Rogers's Sermons.
INFLI'ctive. adj. [infictive, Fr. from inflict.] That which is
laid on as a puniſhment.
1'NFLUENCE. n. / [influence, Fr. influo, Latin.]
1. Power of the celeſtial aſpects operating upon terreſtrial bodies
and affairs.
The ſacred influence of light appears. Milton.
Comets no rule, no righteous order own;
Their influence dreaded, as their ways unknown. Prior.
2. Aſcendant power; power of direéting or modifying.
Incomparable lady, your commandment doth not only give
me the will, but the power to obey you; ſuch influence hath
your excellency. Sidney.
God hath his influence into the very eſſence of all things,
without which influence of Deity ſupporting them, their utter
annihilation could not chuſe but follow. Hooker.
A wiſe man ſhall over-rule his ſtars, and have a greater in-
fluence upon his own content than all the conſtellations and
planets of the firmament. Taylor's Rule ſ living holy.
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault. Milton.
Religion hath ſo great an influence upon the felicity of men,
that it ought to be upheld, not only out of a dread of the di-
vine vengeance in another world, but out of regard to the
temporal proſperity of men. Tillotſºn.
Our inconſiſtency in the purſuit of ſchemes throughly
digeſted, has a bad influence on our affairs. Addiſon.
So aſtoniſhing a ſcene would have preſent influence upon
them, but not produce a laſting effe&amp;t. Atterbury.
Where it ought to have greateſt influence, this obvious in-
diſputable truth is little regarded. Rogers.
To I'NFLUENCE. v. a. [from the noun..] To ad upon with
directive or impulſive power; to modify to any purpoſe; to
guide or lead to any end. .
By thy kind pow'r and influencing care,
The various creatures move, and live, and are. Milton.
Theſe experiments ſucceed after the ſame manner in vacuo
as in the open air, and therefore are not influenced by the
weight or preſſure of the atmoſphere. Newton's Opt.
This ſtanding revelation was atteſted in the moſt ſolemn
and credible manner; and is ſufficient to influence their faith
and practice, if they attend. Atterbury.
All the reſtraint men are under is, by the violation of one
law, broken through ; and the principle which influenced their
obedience has loſt its efficacy on them. Rogers's Sermons.
I NFLUENT. adj. [influens, Latin.] Flowing in.
The chief intention of chirurgery, as well as medicine, is
keeping a juſt equilibrium between the influent fluids and vaſ-
cular ſolids. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Is FLUE's TIAL. adj. [from influence.] Exerting influence or
power.
Qur now over-ſhadowed ſouls may be emblemed by thoſe
cruſted globes, whoſe influential emiſſions are interrupted by
the interpoſal of the benighted element. Glanv. Scepſ.
The inward ſprings and wheels of the corporal machine, on
the moſt ſublimed intelle&amp;tuals, is dangerouſly influential. Glan.
INFLUX. n ſ [influxus, Latin.]
1. Aćt of flowing into any thing.
If once contračted in a ſyſtole, by the influx of the ſpirits,
why, the ſpirits continually flowing in without let, doth it not
always remain ſo Ray on the Creation.
An elaſtick fibre, like a bow, the more extended, it reſtores
itſelf with the greater force: if the ſpring be deſtroyed, it is
like a bag, only paſſive as to the influx of the liquid. Arbuthn.
2. Infuſion.
There is another life after this; and the influx of the know-
ledge of God, in relation to this everlaſting life, is infinitely of
n 10 in ent. Płale's Origin of Mankind.
3. Influence; power. In this ſenſe it is now not uſed.
We will enquire whether there be, in the footſteps of na-
ture, any ſuch tranſmiſſion and influx of immateriate virtues,
and what the force of imagination is, either upon the body
imaginant, or upon another body. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Adam, in innocence, might have held, by the continued in-
fux of the divine will and power, a ſtate of immortality. Hals.
Theſe two do not ſo much concern ſea-fiſh, yet they have
a great influx upon rivers, ponds, and lakes. Hale.
INFLU'xious. adj. [from influx.] Influential. Not uſed.
The moon hath an influxious power to make impreſſions
upon their humours. Howel's England's Tears.
To INFo'ld. v. a. [in and fla.] To involve ; to inwrap; to
incloſe with involutions.
For all the creſt a dragon did infold
With greedy paws, and over all did ſpread
His golden wings.
Noble Banquo, let me infold thee, --
And hold thee to my heart. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
But does not nature for the child prepare
The parent's love, the tender nurſe's care :
Who, for their own forgetful, ſeek his good,
Infold his limbs in bands, and fill his veins with food. Black.
Wings raiſe her arms, and wings her feet infold. Pope.
To INFo'LIATE. v. a. [in and folium, Lat.] To cover with
leaves.
Long may his fruitful vine infoliate and claſp about him
with embracements. Howel.
To INFORM. v. a. [informer, Fr. informo, Latin.]
1. To animate; to actuate by vital powers.
All alike inform'd
With radiant light, as glowing ir’n with fire.
Let others better mold the running maſs
Of metals, and inform the breathing braſs;
And ſoften into fleſh a marble face.
As from chaos, huddl’d and deform’d,
The god ſtruck fire, and lighted up the lamps
That beautify the ſky; ſo he inform'd
This ill-ſhap'd body with a daring ſoul. Dryd. and Lee's Oed.
Fairy Queen.
Milton.
Dryden's Aºn.
Breath informs this fleeting frame. Prior.
This ſovereign arbitrary ſoul
Informs, and moves, and animates the whole. Blackmore.
While life informs theſe limbs, the king reply'd,
Well to deſerve be all my cares employ'd. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To inſtruct; to ſupply with new knowledge; to acquaint.
Before the thing communicated was anciently put with; now
generally of, ſometimes in : I know not how proper.
The drift is to inform their minds with ſome method of re-
ducing the laws into their original cauſes. Jiaoker.
I have this preſent evening from my ſiſter
Been well infºrmed of them, and with cautions. Shakeſp.
Our ruin, by thee inform'd, I learn. Milton.
The long ſpeeches rather confounded than informed his un-
derſtanding. Clarendon.
The difficulty ariſes not from what ſenſe informs us of, but
from wrong applying our notions. Digby-
Though I may not be able to inform men more than they
know, yet I may give them the occaſion to conſider. Temple-
The ancients examined in what conſiſts the beauty of good
poſtures, as their works ſufficiently inform us. Dryden.
He may be ignorant of theſe truths, who will never take the
pains to employ his faculties to infrm himſelf of them. Locke.
To underſtand his calling in the commonwealth, and of re-
ligion, is enough to take up his time: few inform themſelves
in theſe to the bottom. Locke.
A more proper opportunity tends to make the narration
more informing or beautiful. Brºme's Notes on the Iliad.
I think it neceſſary, for the intereſt of virtue and religion,
that the whole kingdom ſhould be informed in ſome parts of
your character. Swift.
3. To offer an accuſation to a magiſtrate.
Tertullus infºrmed the governor againſt Paul. Afs xxvi. 1.
To INFo'R.M. v. n.
1. To give intelligence.
t is the bloody buſineſs which informs -
Thus to mine eyes. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
IN Fo'RMAL. adj. [from inform.] Offering an information;
accuſing. A word not uſed.
Theſe poor infºrmal women are no more
But inſtruments of ſome more mightier member,
That ſets them on. Shakespeare Meaſ for Meaſure.
INFo'RMANT. n.ſ. [French.]
1. One who gives information or inſtruction.
He believes the ſentence is true, as it is made up of terms
which his informant underſtands, though the ideas be unknown
to him which his informant has under theſe words. JWatts.
2. One who exhibits an accuſation.
JN for MATION. n.ſ.. [infºrmatio, Lat. from inform.]
1. Intelligence given; inſtruction.
But reaſon with the fellow,
Leſt you ſhould chance to whip your informatiºn,
And beat the meſſenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
The active informations of the intellećt filling the paſſive
reception of the will, like form cloſing with matter, grew ac-
tuate into a third and diſtinét perfeótion of practice. South.
They gave thoſe complex ideas names, that the things they
were continually to give and receive information about, might
be the caſier and quicker underſtood. 3 Locke.
He
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N F
I N G
:
º
::::
* I.
He ſhould regard the propriety of his words, and get ſome
information in the ſubjećt he intends to handle. Swift.
Theſe men have had longer opportunities of information,
and are equally concerned with ourſelves. Rogerſ.
2. Charge or accuſation exhibited.
3. The act of informing or ačtuating.
INFo'R.M.E.R. n.ſ [from infºrm.]
1. One who gives intelligence.
This writer is either byaſſed by an inclination to believe the
worſt, or a want of judgment to chuſe his informers. Swift.
2. One who diſcovers offenders to the magiſtrate.
There were ſpies and infºrmers ſet at work to watch the
company. L’Eſtrange.
Let no court ſycophant pervert my ſenſe,
Nor ſly †. watch theſe words to draw
Within the reach of treaſon. Pope.
Informers are a deteſtable race of people, although ſome-
times neceſſary. Swift.
INFor MIDA Ble, adj. [in and fºrmidabilis, Lat.] Not to be
feared ; not to be dreaded.
Of ſtrength, of courage haughty, and of limb
Heroick built, though of terreſtrial mold;
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound. Miltºn.
InfoRMity; n.ſ.. [from informis, Lat.] Shapeleſſneſs.
From this narrow time of geſtation may enſue a ſmalneſs
in the excluſion; but this infereth no informity. Brown.
INF9'RMous. adj. [informe, Fr. infºrmis, Latin.] Shapeleſs;
of no regular figure.
That a bear brings forth her young informous and unſhapen,
which ſhe faſhioneth after by licking them over, is an opinion
not only common with us at preſent, but hath been delivered
by ancient writers. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INFo'RTUNATE, adj. [infortuné, Fr. infortunatus, Latin.] Un-
happy; . See UN Fortunate, which is commonly uſed.
Perkin, ſeeing himſelf priſoner, and deſtitute of all hopes,
having found all either falſe, faint, or infortunate, did gladly
accept of the condition. Bacon's Henry V (i.
To INFRAct. v. a. ſinfračius, Latin.] To break.
Falling faſt, from gradual ſlope to ſlope,
With wild infračied courſe and leſſen'd roar,
It gains a ſafer bed. Thomſon's Summer.
INFRA’ction. n.ſ. ſinfraction, Fr. infradio, Lat.] The act
of breaking; breach; violation.
By the ſame gods, the juſtice of whoſe wrath
Puniſh'd the infraćlion of my former faith. Waller.
The wolves, pretending an infraélion in the abuſe of their
hoſtages, fell upon the ſheep immediately without their dogs.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
INFRA'NG1ble. adj. [in and frangible ] Not to be broken.
Theſe atoms are ſuppoſed infrangible, extremely compačted
and hard, which compačtedneſs and hardneſs is a demonſtra-
tion that nothing could be produced by them, ſince they could
never cohere. Cheyne's Phil Princ.
INF RE'Qy ency, n ſ [infrequentia, Latin.] Uncommonneſs;
rarity.
The abſence of the gods, and the infrequency of objećts,
made her yield. Broome's Notes on Pope's Odyſſey.
INF RE'QUENT. adj. [ºnfrequens, Lat.] Rare; uncommon.
To INF RI'GIDAt E. v. a. [in and frigidus, Lat.] To chill; to
make cold.
The drops reached little further than the ſurface of the li-
quor, whoſe coldneſs did not infrigidate thoſe upper parts
of the glaſs. Boyle.
To INFRINGE. v. a. [infringo, Latin.]
1. To violate ; to break laws or contračts.
Thoſe many had not dar'd to do that evil,
If the firſt man that did th' edićt infringe, -
Had anſwer'd for his deed. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſ.
Having infring'd the law, I wave my right
As king, and thus ſubmit myſelf to fight.
2. To deſtroy; to hinder.
Homilies, being plain and popular inſtructions, do not
J.Waller.
infringe the efficacy, although but read. Hooker.
Bright as the deathleſs gods and happy, ſhe
From all that may infring delight is free. Waller.
INFRINGEMENT. n.ſ.. [from infringe.] Breach; violation.
The puniſhing of this infringement is proper to that juriſ.
dićtion againſt which the contempt is. Clarendon.
IN FR1'NGER. m. ſ. [from infringe. J A breaker; a violator.
A clergyman's habit ought to be without any lace, under a
ſevere penalty to be inflićted on the infringers of the provincial
conſtitution. Ayliffe's Parergon.
JNFu'Ndibulifor M. n. ſ. [infundibulum and forma, Lat.] "Of
the ſhape of a funnel or tundiſh.
INFU'RIATE, adj. [in and furia, Lat.]. Enraged; raging.
At th' other bore, with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate. Milton.
Fir’d by the torch of noon to tenfold rage,
Th’infuriate hill forth ſhoots the pillar'd flame. Thomſºn.
Is Fusº A'Tio N. m. / [infuſcatus, Latin.] The act of darkening
or blackening.
To INFUSE. v. a. [infuſer, Fr. infuſus, Latin.)
1. To pour in; to inſtil. *.
Thou almoſt mak'ſt me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
That ſouls of animals infuſe themſelves • * * ,
Into the trunks of men. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
My early miſtreſs, now my ancient muſe, -
That ſtrong Circean liquor ceaſe t' infuſe,
Wherewith thou didſt intoxicate my youth. Denham.
Why ſhould he deſire to have qualities infuſed into his ſon,
which himſelf never poſſeſſed ? Swift.
Meat muſt be with money bought;
She therefore, upon ſecond thought,
Infus’d, yet as it were by ſtealth,
Some ſmall regard for ſtate and wealth. Swift.
2. To pour into the mind; to inſpire into. -
For when God's hand had written in the hearts
Of our firſt parents all the rules of good,
So that their ſkill infus’d ſurpaſs'd all arts
That ever were before, or ſince the flood.
Sublime ideas, and apt words infuſe;
The muſe inſtruct my voice, and thou inſpire the muſe. Rºſe.
He infu'd
Bad influence into th’ unwary breaſt. Milton.
Infuſe into their young breaſts ſuch a noble ardour as will
make them renowned. AMilton.
3. To ſteep in any liquor with a gentle heat; to macerate ſo as
to extract the virtues of any thing.
Take violets, and infuſe a good pugil of them in a quart of
vinegar. Lacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. To make an infuſion with any ingredient; to ſupply, to tinc-
ture, to ſaturate with anything infuſed.
Drink, infuſed with fleſh, will nouriſh faſter and eaſier than
meat and drink together. Baton's Natural Hiſtory.
5. To inſpire with.
Thou didſt ſmile,
Infuſed with a fortitude from heav'n.
Infuſe his breaſt with magnanimity,
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms. Shakeſp. H. VI.
INFU'sible. adj. [from infuſe.]
I. Poſſible to be infuſed.
From whom the doćtrines being infuſible into all, it will be
more neceſſary to forewarn all of the danger of them. Hamm.
2. Incapable of diſſolution; not fuſible.
Vitrification is the laſt work of fire, and a fuſion of the
ſalt and earth, wherein the fuſible ſalt draws the earth and in-
fuſible part into one continuum. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INFU'sion. n.ſ.. [infuſion, Fr. infuſio, Latin.]
1. The act of pouring in ; inſtillation.
Our language has received innumerable elegancies and im-
provements from that infuſiºn of Hebraiſms, which are derived
to it out of the poetical paſſages in holy writ. Addiſon's Spet?.
2. The act of pouring into the mind; inſpiration.
We participate Chriſt partly by imputation, as when thoſe
things which he did and ſuffered for us are imputed to us for
righteouſneſs; partly by habitual and real infuſion, as when
grace is inwardly beſtowed on earth, and afterwards more ful-
ly both our ſouls and bodies in glory. Hooker.
They found it would be matter of great debate, and ſpend
much time; during which they did not deſire their company,
nor to be troubled with their infuſions. Clarendon.
Here his folly and his wiſdom are of his own growth, not
Davies.
Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
the echo or ſº of other men. Swift.
3. The act of ſteeping anything in moiſture without boiling.
Repeat the infuſion of the body oftener. Bacon.
4. The liquor made by infuſion. -
To have the infuſion ſtrong, in thoſe bodies which have finer
ſpirits, repeat the infuſion of the body oftener. Bacon.
INFU'sive. adj. [from infuſe..] Having the power of infuſion,
or being infuſed. A word not authoriſed.
Still let my ſong a nobler note aſſume,
And fing th' infuſive force of Spring on man. .
INGA'TE. n.ſ.. [in and gate.] Entrance; paſſage in. .
One noble perſon ſtoppeth the ingate of all that evil which
is looked for, and holdeth in all thoſe which are at his back.
Spenſer on Ireland.
Incan NA'tion. m. ſ [ingannare, Italian.] Cheat; fraud; de-
ception; juggle; deluſion; impoſture; trick; ſlight. A word
neither uſed nor neceſſary.
Whoever ſhall reſign their reaſons, either from the root of
deceit in themſelves, or inability to reſiſt ſuch trivial inganna-
tions from others, are within the line of vulgarity. Brown.
Inga'THERING.. n.ſ.. [in and gathering.] The act of getting
in the harveſt. '
Thou ſhalt keep the feaſt of ingathering, when thou haſt
gathered in thy labours out of the field. Ex. xxiii. 16.
INöe, in the names of places, ſignifies a meadow, from the
Saxon inz, of the ſame import. Gibſon's Camden.
To INGE/MiNate. v. a. ſingemino, Latin.] To double; to
repeat.
He would often ingeminate the word peace, peace. Clarendon.
INGEMINA’tion, n.ſ.. [in and geminatie, Latin.] Repetition;
reduplication.
Thomſon.
INGE'NDERek.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N G *
I N G
INGE's de RER. m. ſ. [from ingender.] He that generates. See
ENGENDER.
INGE's ERA ble. adj. [in and generate.] Not to be produced
or brought into being. •
Divers naturaliſts eſteem the air, as well as other elements,
to be ingenerable and incorruptible. Boyle.
i.#. }ad. [ingeneratus, Latin.]
1. Inborn ; innate; inbred.
Thoſe virtues were rather feigned and affected things to
ſerve his ambition, than true qualities ingenerate in his judg-
ment or nature. Bacon's Henry VII.
In divers children their ingenerate and ſeminal powers lie
deep, and are of ſlow diſcloſure. Wºtton.
Thoſe noble habits are ingenerated in the ſoul, as religion,
ratitude, obedience, and tranquillity. Hale's Origin of Mank.
2. Unbegotten. Not commonly uſed.
Yet ſhall we demonſtrate the ſame, from perſons preſumed
as far from us in condition as time; that is, our firſt and inge-
nerated forefathers.
INGE'NIOUS. adj. [ingenieux, Fr. ingenioſus, Latin.]
1. Witty; inventive; poſſeſſed of genius.
'Tis a per’lous boy,
Bold, quick, incenious, forward, capable:
He's all the mother's from the top to toe. Shakeſp. R. III.
Our ingenious friend Cowley not only has employed much
eloquence to perſuade that truth in his preface, but has in one
of his poems given a noble example of it. Boyle.
2. Mental; intelle&amp;tual. Not in uſe.
The king is mad: how ſtiff is my vile ſenſe,
That I ſtand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge ſorrows; better I were diſtraćt. Shakeſpeare.
INGE'Niously. adv. [from ingenious.] Wittily; ſubtily.
I will not pretend to judge by common fears, or the ſchemes
of men too ingeniouſly politick. Temple.
INGE Nious Ness. n.ſ [from ingenious.] -
1. Wittineſs; ſubtilty; ſtrength of genius.
The greater appearance of ingeniºuſneſs there is in the prac-
tice I am diſapproving, the more dangerous it is. Boyle.
INGE'N IT.E. adj. [ingenitus, Latin.] Innate; inborn ; native;
ingenerate.
Ariſtotle affirms the mind to be at firſt a mere raſa tabula;
and that notions are not ingenite, and imprinted by the
finger of nature, but by the latter and more languid impreſ-
ſions of ſenſe, being only the reports of obſervation, and the
reſult of ſo many repeated experiments. South.
We give them this ingenite, moving force,
That makes them always downward take their courſe. Black.
ING ENU'IT Y. m. ſ. ſingenuité, Fr. from ingenuous. !
1. Openneſs; fairneſs; candour; freedom from diſſimulation.
Such of high quality, or other of particular note, as ſhall
fall under my pen, I ſhall not let paſs without their due cha-
raćter, being part of my profeſſed ingenuity. Wºtton.
My conſtancy I to the planets give;
My truth, to them who at the court do live;
Mine ingenuity and openneſs
To jeſuits; to buffoons my penſiveneſs. Donne.
I know not whether it be more ſhame or wonder, that men
can ſo put off ingenuity, and the native greatneſs of their kind,
as to deſcend to ſo baſe, ſo ignoble a vice. Gov. ºf the Tongue.
If a child, when queſtioned for anything, directly confeſs,
you muſt commend his ingenuity, and pardon the fault, be it
what it will. Lºcke.
2. [From ingenious.] Wit; invention; genius; ſubtilty; acuteneſs.
Theſe are but the frigidities of wit, and become not the
genius of manly ingenuities. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
The ancient atomical hypotheſis might have ſlept for ever,
had not the ingenuity of the preſent age recalled it from its urn
and ſilence. Glanv. Scepſ.
Such ſots have neither parts nor wit, ingenuity of diſcourſe,
nor fineneſs of converſation, to entertain or delight an
One. South.
A pregnant inſtance how far virtue ſurpaſſes ingenuity, and
how much an honett ſimplicity is preferable to fine parts and
ſubtile ſpeculations. Woodward.
INGENUOUS. adj. [ingenuus, Latin.]
1. Open; fair; candid; generous; noble.
Many ſpeeches there are of Job's, whereby his wiſdom and
other virtues may appear; but the glory of an ingenuous mind
he hath purchaſed by theſe words only, Behold I will lay mine
hand upon my mouth; I have ſpoken once, yet will I not there-
fore maintain argument: yea twice, howbeit for that cauſe
further I will not proceed. Hooker.
Infuſing into their young breaſts ſuch an ingenuous and noble
ardour, as would not fail to make many of them renowned.
Milton on Education.
If an ingenuous deteſtation of this ſhameful vice be but
carefully and early inſtilled, that is the true and genuine me-
thod to obviate diſhoneſty. Locke.
2. Freeborn ; not of ſervile extračtion.
Subjećtion, as it preſerves property, peace, and ſafety, ſo it
will never diminiſh rights nor ingenuous liberties. K. Charles.
ING FNuously. adv. [from ingenuous.] Openly; fairly; can-
didly; generouſly.
Brown's Wulg. Err. .
Ingenuouſly I ſpeak,
No blame belongs to thee. Shakeſp. Timºn.
It was a notable obſervation of a wiſe father, and no leſs in-
genuouſly confeſſed, that thoſe which held and perſuaded preſ-
ſure of conſciences were commonly intereſted. Bacon.
I will ingenuouſly confeſs, that the helps were taken from
divines of the church of England. Dryden.
INGe Nuous Ness. n.ſ. [from Angenuous.] Openneſs; fairneſs;
candour.
INGEN.Y.. n.ſ. ſingenium, Lat.] Genius; wit. Not in uſe.
Whatever of the production of his ingºny comes into foreign
parts, is highly valued. Boyle.
To INGE'ST. v. a. ſingeſtus, Lat.] To throw into the ſtomach.
Nor will we affirm that iron, ingeſted, receiveth in the belly
of the oſteridge no alteration. Brown's Wulg, Errours.
Some the long funnel's curious mouth extend,
Through which ingºſted meats with eaſe deſcend. Placºm.
INGE'stion. n.ſ.. [from inceſ?...] The act of throwing into the
ſtomach.
It has got room enough to grow into its full dimenſion,
which is performed by the daily ingºſłion of milk and other
food, that's in a ſhort time after digeſted into blood. Harvey.
INGLORIOUS. adj. [inglerius, Latin.] Void of honour;
mean; without glory.
Left fear return them back to Egypt, chufing
Inglorious life with ſervitude. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
It was never held inglorious or derogatory for a king to be
guided by his great council, nor diſhonourable for ſubječts to
yield and bow to their king. Howel.
Yet though our army brought not conqueſt home,
I did not from the fight inglorious come. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
INGlo'Riously. adv. [from inglorious J. With ignominy;
with want of glory.
This eaſe the chief o'ercome,
Repleniſh'd not in loriouſly at home. Pope.
I'N Got. n.ſ. [lingot, French; or from ingegotem, melted, Dut.]
A maſs of metal.
Some others were new driven, and diſtent -
Into great ingots, and to wedges ſquare. Fairy Queen.
If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
For like an aſs, whoſe back's with ingots bound,
Thou bear'ſt thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloadeth thee. Shakeſp. Meaſ fºr Meaſ:
Within the circle arms and tripods lye,
Ingots of gold and ſilver heap'd on high. Dryden’s AFn.
Every one of his pieces is an ingºt of gold, intrinſically and
ſolidly valuable. Prizr.
To INGRa'FF. v. a. [in and graff.]
1. To propagate trees by inſition.
Nor are the ways alike in all
How to ingraff, how to inoculate. May's Wirg. Georg.
2. To plant the ſprig of one tree in the ſtock of another.
3. To plant anything not native.
All his works on me,
Good or not good, ingraft, my merits thoſe
Shall perfeót, and for thoſe alone. Milton.
As next of kin, Achilles' arms I claim ;
This fellow would ingraft a foreign name
Upon our ſtock. Dryden.
4. To fix deep; to ſettle.
For a ſpur of diligence, we have a natural thirſt after know-
ledge ingrafted in us. Hºcker.
'Tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard ſuch a place as his own ſecond,
With one of an ingraft infirmity. Shakespeare Othełło.
Ingrafted love he bears to Caeſar. Shakeſp. jul. Caeſar-
INGRA'ftMENT. n.ſ.. [from ingraft.]
1. The act of ingrafting.
2. The ſprig ingrafted.
INGRA’t E.
INGRATEFUL.
1. Ungrateful; unthankful.
That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulneſs ſhall poiſon, rather
Than pity note how much. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
And you degen'rate, you ingrate revolts,
You bloody Neros. Shakeſp.
So will fall
He and his faithleſs progeny: whoſe fault
Whoſe but his own Ingrate; he had of me
All he could have : I made him juſt and right,
Sufficient to have ſtood, though free to fall. Milt. Par. Left.
Words ! which no ear ever to hear in heav'n
Expected; leaſt of all from thee, ingrate / Milt. Par. Loft.
Perfidious and ingrate!
His ſtores ye ravage, and uſurp his ſtate. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
2. Unpleaſing to the ſenſe.
The cauſes of that which is pleaſing or ingrate to the hear-
ing, may receive light by that which is pleaſing and grateful to
the ſight. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
He gives no incrateful food. Al/i ton.
To INGRA’TIA te. v. a. [in and gratia, Lat..] To put in fa-
vour ; to recommend to kindneſs. -
łaj. [ingratus, Latin; ingrat, French.]
Thoſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N H
º
Thoſe have been far from receiving the rewards of ſuch
ingratiatings with the people. King Charles.
Their managers turn water into blood for them, make
them ſee armies in the air, and give them their word, the
more to ingratiate themſelves with them, that they ſignify
nothing leſs than future ſlaughter and deſolation. Addiſon.
Politicians, who would rather ingratiate themſelves with
their ſovereign than promote his real ſervice, accommodate
his counſels to his inclinations. , Spectator, Nº. 479.
INGRATITUDE. m. ſ. [ingratitude, French ; in and gratitude.]
Retribution of evil for good; unthankfulneſs.
Ingratitude 1 thou marble-hearted fiend,
More hideous, when thou ſhew'ſt thee in a child,
Than the ſea monſter. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Ingratitude is abhorred both by God and man, and ven-
geance attends thoſe that repay evil for good. L'E/irange.
Nor was it with ingratitude return'd,
In equal fires the bliſsful couple burn’d ;
One joy poſſeſs'd 'em both, and in one grief they mourn'd.
Dryden.
INGRE'DIENT. n.ſ.. [ingredient, French; ingrediens, Latin.]
Component part of a body, conſiſting of different materials.
It is commonly uſed of the ſimples of a medicine. .
The ointment is made of divers ingredients, whereof the
hardeſt to come by is the moſs upon the ſkull of a dead man
unburied. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 998.
So deep the pow'r of theſe ingredients pierc'd,
Ev’n to the inmoſt ſeat of mental fight,
That Adam, now enforc’d to ſhut his eyes, -
Sunk down, and all his ſpirits became entranc'd. Milton.
By this way of analyſis we may proceed from compounds
to ingredients, and from motions to the forces producing them;
and in general, from effects to their cauſes, and from parti-
cular cauſes to more general ones, till the argument end in
the more general. - - Newton's Opticks.
I have often wondered, that learning is not thought a pro-
per ingredient in the education of a woman of quality or for-
tune. - Addiſon's Guard, N°. 155.
Parts, knowledge, and experience, are excellent ingredients
in a publick character. - Rogers'; Sermons.
Water is the chief ingredient in all the animal fluids and
ſolids. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
INGRESS. n.ſ. ſingres, French ; ingreſſus, Latin.] Entrance;
power of entrance.
All putrefactions come from the ambient body; either by
ingreſs of the ſubſtance of the ambient body into the body
putrefied; or elſe by excitation of the body putrefied by the
body ambient. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. N. 836.
| Thoſe air-bladders, by a ſudden ſubſidence, meet again
by the ingreſs and egreſs of the air. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
INGRE'ssion. m. ſ. [ingreſſion, French ; ingreſſio, Lat..] The
ačt of entering. -
The fire would ſtrain the pores of the glaſs too ſuddenly,
and break it all in pieces to get ingreſſion. Digby on Bodies.
I'NGUINAL. adj. [inguinal, French; inguen, Lat..] Belonging
to the groin. . . ; -
The plague ſeems to be a particular diſeaſe, charaćleriſed
with eruptions in buboes, by the inflammation and ſuppura-
tion of the axillary, inguinal, and other glands. Arbuthnot.
To INGU’I.F. v. a. [in and gulf.] . .
1. To ſwallow up in a vaſt profundity.
* . A river large * *
Paſs'd underneath ingulph'd. Milton.
- The river flows redundant;
Then rowling back, in his capacious lap
Ingulf, their whole militia, quick immerſt. Philips.
2. To caſt into a gulf.
If we adjoin to the lords, whether they prevail or not, we
ingulf ourſelves into aſſured danger. Hayward.
Caſt out from God, falls - -
Into utter darkneſs decp ingulph'd. Milton.
To INGU'RGITATE. v. a. ſingurgito, Latin.] To ſwallow
down. Dříž.
INGURGITA’tion. m. ſ. [from ingurgitate.] Voracity. -
INGuſst ABLE. adj. [in and guſlo, Lat..] Not perceptible by the
taſte. - -
As for their taſte, if the cameleon's nutriment be air,
neither can the tongue be an inſtrument thereof; for the body
of the element is inguſłable, void of all ſapidity, and without
any action of the tongue, is, by the rough artery, or wizzen,
conducted into the lungs. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii.
isha'biis, aff, ſimhali, French, inhai. Latjtihāraī.
unready ; unfit; unqualified.
To INHA'BIT. v. a. [habito, Latin.] To dwell in ; to hold as
a dweller. - -
Not all are partakers of that grace whereby Chriſt inha-
biteth whom he ſaveth. PHooker.
They ſhall build houſes and inhabit them.
She ſhall be inhabited of devils.
Iſa. lxv. 21.
Baruch iv. 35.
To INHA'BIT. v. n. To dwell; to live.
Learn what creatures there inhabit. AMilton,
3. Quantity of inhabitants.
They ſay, wild beads inhabit here; -
But grief and wrong ſecure my fear. //aller.
INHABITABLE. adj. [from inhabit.]
1. Capable of affording habitation.
The fixed ſtars are all of them ſuns, with ſyſtems of in-
habitable planets moving about them. Locke.
2. [Inhabitable, French.] Incapable of inhabitants; not habi-
table; uninhabitable. Not in uſe.
The frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground ... Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
INHA'BITANce. n.ſ.. [from inhabit..] Reſidence of dwellers.
So the ruins yet reſting in the wild moors, teſtify a former
inhabitance. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
INHABITANT. n.ſ. [from inhabit..] Dweller; one that lives
or reſides in a place. - - -
In this place they report that they ſaw inhabitants, which
were very fair and fat people. Abbot.
If the fervour of the ſun were the ſole cauſe of blackneſs
in any land of negroes, it were alſo reaſonable that inhabi-
tants of the ſame latitude, ſubječted unto the ſame vicinity of
the ſun, ſhould alſo partake of the ſame hue. Brown.
For his ſuppoſed love a third
Lays greedy hold upon a bird,
And ſtands amaz'd to find his dear
A wild inhabitant of th’ air. . . . - JWaller.
What happier natures ſhrink at with affright,
The hard inhabitant contends is right. Pope.
INHABITATION. m. ſ. [from inhabit.]
1. Habitation; place of dwelling.
Univerſal groan,
As if the whole inhabitation periſh'd. Milton's Agoniſł.
2. The act of inhabiting or planting with dwellings; ſtate of
being inhabited. - -
By knowing this place we ſhall the better judge of the be-
ginning of nations, and of the world's inhabitation. Raleigh.
We ſhall rather admire how the earth contained its inhabi-
tation than doubt it. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi.
INHA'BITER. n.ſ.. [from inhabit.] One that inhabits; a dweller.
The ſame name is given unto the inlanders, or midland
inhabiters, of this iſland. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Wo to the inhabiters of the earth. Rev. viii. 13.
They ought to underſtand, that there is not only ſome in-
habiter in this divine houſe, but alſo ſome ruler. Derham.
To INHA'LE. v. a. [inhalo, Latin.] To draw in with air; to
inſpire.
Martin was walking forth to inhale the freſh breeze of the
evening. Arbuthnot's and Pope's Mart. Scrub.
But from the breezy deep the bleſt inhale
The fragrant murmurs of the weſtern gale. Pope's Odyſſey.
There fits the ſhepherd on the graſſy turf,
Inhaling healthful the deſcending fun. Thomſºn's Spring.
INH ARMo'Nious. adj. [in and harmonious.] Unmuſical; not
ſweet of ſound. -
Catullus, though his lines be rough, and his numbers in-
harmonious, I could recommend for the ſoftneſs and delicacy,
but muſt decline for the looſeneſs, of his thoughts. Feltºn.
The identity of ſound may appear a little inharmonious, and
ſhock the ear. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
To INHERE. v. n. [inharco, Latin.] To exiſt in ſomething
elſe.
For, nor in nothing, nor in things
Extreme and ſcattering bright, can love inhere. Donne.
They do but inhere in their º which ſupports them ;
their being is a dependence on a ſubjećt. Digby on Bodies.
INHERENT. adj. [inherent, French ; inhaerens, Lat.] Exiſting
in ſomething elſe, ſo as to be inſeparable from it; innate;
inborn. -
I will not do't,
Leſt I ſurceaſe to honour mine own truth;
And, my body's action, teach my mind
A moſt inherent baſeneſs. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
I mean not the authority which is annexed to your office :
I ſpeak of that only which is inborn and inherent to your
perſon. Dryden's juvenal.
The power of drawing iron is one of the ideas of a load-
ſtone; and a power to be ſo drawn is a part of the complex
one of iron; which powers paſs for inherent qualities. Locke.
Animal oil is various according to principles inherent in it.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
They will be ſure to decide in favour of themſelves, and
talk much of their inherent right. Swift.
The ideas of ſuch modes can no more be ſubſiſtent, than
the idea of redneſs was juſt now found to be inherent in the
blood, or that of whiteneſs in the brain. Bently's Sermons.
The obligations we are under of diſtinguiſhing ourſelves as
much by an inherent and habitual, as we are already diſtin-
guiſhed by an external and relative holineſs. Bentley's Serm.
To IN HE'Rit. v. a. [enheriter, French.)
1. To receive or poſſeſs by inheritance.
12 I - - Treaſon
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N H
I N I
||
Treaſon is not inherited, my lord. Shaft. A you like it.
Why, all delights are vain; but that moſt vain,
Which with pain purchas'd doth inherit pain. Shakeſpeare.
Prince Harry is valiant; for the cold blood he did naturally
inherit of his father he hath, like lean, ſteril land, manured
with excellent good ſtore of fertile ſherris. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Bleſſed are the meek, for they ſhall inherit the earth. Aſat.
The ſon can receive from him the portion of good things,
and advantages of education naturally due to him, without
pire, that was veſted in him for the good of others; and
therefore the ſon cannot claim or inherit it by a title, which
is founded wholly on his own private good. Locke.
We muſt know how the firſt ruler, from whom any one
claims, came by his authority, before we can know who has
a right to ſucceed him in it, and inherit it from him. Locke.
Unwilling to ſell an eſtate he had ſome proſpect of inherit-
ing, he formed delays. Addiſon's Sped. Nº. 198.
2. To poſſeſs; to obtain poſſeſſion of: in Shakeſpeare.
He, that had wit, would think that I had none,
To bury ſo much gold under a tree,
And never after to inherit it. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
INHe'RITABLE. adj. [from inherit.] Tranſmiſfible by inheri-
tance; obtainable by ſucceſſion.
A kind of inheritable eſtate accrued unto them. Carew.
By the ancient laws of the realm, they were not inherit-
able to him by deſcent. Hayward.
Was the power the ſame, and from the ſame original in
Moſes as it was in David f And was it inheritable in one and
not in the other Locke.
INHERITANce. n.ſ.. [from inherit.]
1. Patrimony; hereditary poſſeſſion. '
In the book of Numbers it is writ,
When the ſon dies let the inheritance
Deſcend unto the daughter. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's
houſe. Gen. xxxi. 14.
Claim our juſt inheritance of old. Milton.
Oh dear, unhappy babel muſt I bequeath thee
Only a ſad inheritance of woef
Gods ! cruel gods ! can't all my pains atone,
Unleſs they reach my infant's guiltleſs head Smith.
2. In Shakeſpeare, poſſeſſion.
You will rather ſhew our general lowts
How you can frown, than ſpend a fawn upon them,
For the inheritance of their loves, and ſafeguard
Of what that want might ruin. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
3. The reception of poſſeſſion by hereditary right.
Men are not proprietors of what they have merely for
themſelves, their children have a title to part of it, which
comes to be wholly theirs, when death has put an end to their
parents uſe of it; and this we call inheritance. Locke.
INHERItoR. m. ſ. [from inherit..] An heir; one who receives
anything º ſucceſſion.
l
You, like a letcher, out of whoriſh loins, -
Are pleas'd to breed out your inheritors. Shakeſpeare.
The ſole inheritor
Of all perfeótions that a man may owe. Shakeſpears.
The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this
box; and muſt the inheritor himſelf have no more ? Shakeſp.
Marriage without conſent of parents they do not make
void, but they mulét it in the inheritors; for the children of
ſuch marriages are not admitted to inherit above a third part
of their parents inheritance. Bacon's New Atlantis.
INHERITRESS. m. ſ. [from inheritor.] An heireſs; a woman
that inherits.
Having given artificially ſome hopes to marry Anne, inhe-
ritreſ to the duchy of Bretagne. Bacon's Henry VII.
INHERIt Rix. n.ſ.. [from inheritor.] An heireſs. This is now
more commonly uſed, though inheritreſs be a word more ana-
logically Engliſh.
Charles the great
Eſtabliſh'd then this law, to wit, No feme
Should be inheritrix in Salike land. Shakeſp. Henry V.
To INHERSE. v. a. [in and herſe.] To incloſe, in a funeral
II, Oſlumeſht.
See, where he lies, inherſed in the arms
Of the moſt bloody nurſer of his harms. Shakespeare Henry VI.
INHE'sion. n.ſ.. [inhaſio, Latin.] Inherence; the ſtate of ex-
ifting in ſomething elſe.
To INHIBIT. v. a. ſinhibco, Lat. inhiber, French.]
1. To reſtrain; to hinder; to repreſs; to check.
Holding of the breath doth help ſomewhat to ceaſe the
hiccough ; and vinegar put to the noſtrils or gargeriſed doth
it alſo, for that it is aſtringent, and inhibiteth the motion of
the ſpirits. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. N°. 686.
The ſtars and planets being whirled about with great ve-
locity, would ſuddenly, did nothing inhibit it, be ſhattered in
pieces. Ray on the Creation.
Their motions alſo are excited and inhibited, are moderated
and managed, by the objećts without them. Bentley's Serm.
º. To prohibit; to forbid.
All men were inhibited by proclamation, at the diſſolution,
ſo much as to mention a parliament. Clarendon.
, Burial may not be inhibited or denied to any one. Affliff.
INHIBITION. m. ſ. [inhibition, Fr. inhibitio, Latin.]
1. Prohibition; embargo.
He might be judged to have impoſed an envious inhibition
on it, becauſe himſelf has not ſtock enough to maintain the
trade. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 7.
2. [In law.]
Inhibition is a writ to inhibit or forbid a judge from farther
proceeding in the cauſe depending before him. Inhibition is
moſt commonly a writ iſſuing out of a higher court Chriſtian
to a lower and inferior, upon an appeal; and prohibition out
of the king's court to a court Chriſtian, or to an inferior
temporal court. Cowell.
To INHo'ld. v. a. [in and hold.] To have inherent; to con-
tain in itſelf.
It is diſputed, whether this light firſt created be the ſame
which the ſun inholdeth and caſteth forth, or whether it had
continuance any longer than till the ſun's creation. Raleigh.
In Ho’spitable. adj. [in and hoſpitable.] Affording no kindneſs
nor entertainment to ſtrangers.
All places elſe
Inhoſpitable appear, and deſolate;
Nor knowing us, nor known. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
Since toſs'd from ſhores to ſhores, from lands to lands,
Inhoſpitable rocks, and barren ſands. Dryden's Virgil.
Inho'spitably, adv. [from inhoſpitable.] Unkindly to ſtrangers.
Of gueſts he makes them ſlaves
Inhoſpitably; and kills their infant males. Milton's Pa. Left.
INHospit ABLE Ness. }*{ [in and hoſpitality; inhoſpitalité,
INHospita’lity. Fr.] Want of hoſpitality; want of
ceurteſy to ſtrangers.
INHU'MAN. adj. [inhumain, Fr. inhumanus, Latin.] Barba-
rous; ſavage; cruel; uncompaſſionate.
A juſt war may be perſecuted after a very unjuſt manner;
by perfidious breaches of our word, by inhuman cruelties,
and by aſſaſſinations. Atterbury's Sermons.
The more theſe praiſes were enlarged, the more inhuman
was the puniſhment, and the ſufferer more innocent.
Gulliver’s Travels.
Princes and peers attend I while we impart
To you the thoughts of no inhuman heart. Pope's Odyſſey.
INHUMA’NITY.. n.ſ.. [inhumanité, French; from inhuman.]
Cruelty; ſavageneſs; barbarity.
Baniſhed
Her mind, beams, ſtate, far from thy weak twigs,
And love with lover hurts is inhumanity. Sidney, b. i.
The rudeneſs of thoſe who muſt make up their want of
juſtice with inhumanity and impudence. King Charles.
Each ſocial feeling fell,
And joyleſs inhumanity pervades,
And petrifies the heart. Thomſon's Spring, 1.305.
INHu'MANLY. adv. [from inhuman.] Savagely; cruelly; bar-
barouſly.
O what are theſe
Death's miniſters, not men: who thus deal death
Inhumanly to men; and multiply
Ten thouſand fold the ſin of him who ſlew
His brother. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
I, who have eſtabliſhed the whole ſyſtem of all true po-
liteneſs and refinement in converſation, think myſelf moſt in-
humanly treated by my countrymen. Swift.
To I'NHUMATE. lv. a. [inhumer, French; humo, Lat.] To
To INHU'Me. } bury; to inter.
Weeping they bear the mangled heaps of ſlain,
Inhume the natives in their native plain. Pope's Odyſſey.
To INJe’ct. v. a. [inječius, Latin.]
1. To throw in ; to dart in.
Angels inječf thoughts into our minds, and know our co-
gitations. Glanville's Step. c. 24.
2. To throw up; to caſt up.
Though bold in open field, they yet ſurround
The town with walls, and mound inject on mound. Pope.
INJE"ction. n.ſ.. [injection, French; inječiio, Latin.]
1. The aët of caſting in.
This ſalt powdered was, by the repeated injećion of well-
kindled charcoal, made to flaſh like melted nitre. Boyle.
2. Any medicine made to be injećted by a ſyringe, or any other
inſtrument, into any part of the body. &amp;uincy.
3. The act of filling the veſſels with wax, or any other proper
matter, to ſhew their ſhapes and ramifications, often done by
anatomiſts. Quincy.
INIMITAbi'lity. n.ſ.. [from inimitable.] Incapacity to be imi-
tated.
Truths muſt have an eternal exiſtence in ſome underſtand-
ing; or rather they are the ſame with that underſtanding it-
ſelf, conſidered as variouſly repreſentative, according to the
various modes of inimitability or participation. Norris.
INI'M ITABLE. adj. [inimitabilis, Latin ; inimitable, French.]
Above imitation; not to be copied.
The portal ſhone, inimitable on earth
By model, or by ſhading pencil drawn. Milton.
What is moſt excellent is moſt inimitable Denham.
And
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N J
I N K
And imitate the inimitable force. Dryden.
Virgil copied this circumſtance from the ancient ſculptors,
in that inimitable deſcription of military fury in the temple of
Janus. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
INIMI'TABLY. adv. [from inimitable.] In a manner not to be
imitated; to a degree of excellence above imitation.
A man could not have been always blind who thus inimita-
by copies nature. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
Thus terribly adorn'd the figures ſhine,
Inimitably wrought with ſkill divine. Pope.
- Charms ſuch as thine, inimitably great. Broome.
To INJo'IN. v. a. [enjoindre, French; injungo, Latin.]
1. To command; to enforce by authority. See ENJoin.
Laws do not only teach what is good, but they injoin it;
they have in them a certain conſtraining force. Hooker, b, i.
This garden tend, our pleaſant taſk injoin'd. Milton.
2. In Shakeſpeare, to join.
The Ottomites
Steering with due courſe towards the iſle of Rhodes,
Have there injoin'd them with a fleet. Shakeſpeare.
INI'QUItous. adj. [inique, Fr. from iniquity..] Unjuſt; wicked.
INIQUITY. n.ſ.. [iniquitas, Lat, iniquité, French.]
1. Injuſtice; unreaſonableneſs.
There is greater or leſs probability of an happy iſſue to a
tedious war, according to the righteouſneſs or iniquity of the
cauſe for which it was commenced. Smalridge's Sermons.
2. Wickedneſs; crime.
Want of the knowledge of God is the cauſe of all iniquity
amongſt men. - Hooker, b. v.
Till God at laſt,
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His preſence from among them. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
INITIAL. adj. [initial, French; initialis, from initium, Lat.]
1. Placed at the beginning.
In the editions, which had no more than the initial letters,
he was made by Keys to hurt the inoffenſive. Pope.
2. Incipient; not complete.
Moderate labour of the body conduces to the preſervation
of health, and cures many initial diſeaſes; but the toil of the
mind deſtroys health, and generates maladies. Harvey.
The ſchools have uſed a middle term to expreſs this affec-
tion, and have called it the initial fear of God. Rogers.
To INITIATE. v. a. [initier, French; initio, Lat.] To en-
ter; to inſtruct in the rudiments of an art; to place in a new
ſtate; to put into a new ſociety.
Providence would only initiate mankind into the uſeful
knowledge of her treaſures, leaving the reſt to employ our
induſtry. - Aſore's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
To initiate his pupil in any part of learning, an ordinary
ſkill in the governour is enough. Locke on Education.
He was initiated into half a dozen clubs before he was one
and twenty. Speciator, N8. 576.
No ſooner was a convert initiated, but, by an eaſy figure,
he became a new man. Addiſon.
To INITIATE. v. n. To do the firſt part; to perform the
firſt rite.
The king himſelf initiates to the pow'r,
Scatters with quiv'ring hand the ſacred flour,
And the ſtream ſprinkles. Pope's Odyſſey.
INITIATE. adj. [initié, Fr. initiatus, Lat..] Unpractiſed.
My ſtrange and ſelf-abuſe
Is the initiate fear; that wants hard uſe:
We're yet but young. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
INITIA'tion. m. ſ. [initiatio, Lat. from initiate.] The act of
entering of a new comer into any art or ſtate.
The ground of initiating or entering men into Chriſtian
life, is more ſummarily compriſed in the form of baptiſm,
the ceremony of this initiation inſtituted by Chriſt. Hammond.
Silence is the firſt thing that is taught us at our initiation
into ſacred myſteries. Broome's Notes to the Odyſſey,
INJU cu'NDITY.. n. ſ. [in and jucundity.] Unpleaſantneſs.
lººsaurs. adj. [in and judico, Lat.] Not cognizable by a
Judge.
INJUDI cial, adj. [in and judicial.] Not according to form of
law. - Dićf.
INJUDiſcious, adj. [in and judicious.] Void of judgment; with-
out judgment.
A philoſopher would either think me in jeſt, or very inju-
dicious, if I took the earth for a body regular in itſelf, if com-
pared with the reſt of the univerſe Burnet.
A ſharp wit may find ſomething in the wiſeſt man, whereby
to expoſe him to the contempt of injudicious people. Tillotſºn.
Is JUD1'cious LY. adv, [from injudicious...] With ill judgment;
not wiſely.
Scaliger injudi.iaſſy condemns this deſcription. Broome.
INJU'Nction. n.f. [from injoin ; injunctus, injuncłio, Latin.]
Command; order; precept. -
The inſtitution of God's law is deſcribed as being eſta-
bliſhed by ſolemn injunction. Hooker, b. i.
My duty cannot ſuffer
Tº obey in all your daughter's hard commands;
Though the injunjian be to bar my doors, .
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you. Shakeſp.
For, ſtill they knew ; and ought t' have ſtill remember'd
The high injunction, not to taſte that fruit,
Whoever tempted. 44ilton's Par. Loft, b. x.
The ceremonies of the church are neceſſary as the injunc-
tions of lawful authority, the practice of the primitive church,
and the general rules of decency. South.
2. [In law.] Injunction is an interlocutory decree out of the
chancery, ſometimes to give poſſeſſion unto the plaintiff for
want of appearance in the defendants, ſometimes to the king's
ordinary court, and ſometimes to the court-chriſtian, to ſtay
proceeding. Cowell.
To INJURE. v. a. ſinjurier, French; injuria, Lat.]
1. To hurt unjuſtly ; to miſchief undeſervedly; to wrong.
They injure by chance in a crowd, and without a deſign;
then hate always whom they have once injured. Temple.
Forgiveneſs to the injur’d does belong;
But they ne'er pardon who commit the wrong. Dryden.
2. To annoy; to affect with any inconvenience.
Left heat ſhould injure us, his timely care
Hath unbeſought provided. Milton.
I'NJURER. n.ſ.. [from injure, Lat.] He that hurts another un-
juſtly ; one who wrongs another.
Ill deeds are well turn'd back upon their authors;
And 'gainſt an injurer, the revenge is juſt. Benj. johnſºn.
The upright judge will countenance right, and diſcounte-
nance wrong, whoever be the injurer or the ſufferer. Atterb.
INJU'Rious. adv. [from injury; injurius, Lat, injurieux, Fr.]
I. Unjuſt ; invaſive of another's rights.
Till the injurious Roman did extort
This tribute from us, we were free. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Injurious ſtrength would rapine ſtill excuſe,
By off ring terms the weaker muſt refuſe. Dryden.
2. Guilty of wrong or injury.
Yet beauty, though injurious, hath ſtrange power,
After offence returning, to regain -
Love once poſſeſt. Milton's Agoniſt. l. 1003.
3. Miſchievous; unjuſtly hurtful.
Our repentance is not real, becauſe we have not done what
we can to undo our fault, or at leaſt to hinder the injurious
conſequences of it from proceeding. Tillotſon's Sermons.
4. Detractory; contumelious; reproachful; wrongful.
A priſon, indeed injurious, becauſe a priſon, but elſe well
teſtifying affection, becauſe in all reſpects as commodious as
a priſon can be. Sidney, b. ii.
It is natural for a man, by direéting his prayers to an
image, to ſuppoſe the being he prays to repreſented by that
image: which how injurious, how contumelious muſt it be
to the glorious nature of God? South's Sermonſ.
If injurious appellations were of any advantage to a cauſe,
what appellations would thoſe deſerve who thus endeavour to
ſow the ſeeds of ſedition. Swift.
INJu'Riously. adv. [from injurious.] Wrongfully; hurtfully
with injuſtice.
Nor ought he to neglect the vindication of his chara&amp;ter,
when it is injuriouſly attacked. Pope and Gay.
INJU'Riousness. n.ſ.. [from injurious.] Quality of being in-
urlOuS.
J Some miſcarriages might eſcape, rather through ſudden ne-
ceſſities of ſtate than any propenſity either to injuriouſneſ; or
oppreſſion. King Charles.
INJURY. m.ſ.. [injuria, Lat. injure, Fr.]
1. Hurt without juſtice.
The town of Bouline, and other places, were acquired by
juſt title of vićtory; and therefore in keeping of them no in-
jury was offered. Hayward.
Riot aſcends above their loftieſt tow’rs,
And injury and outrage. Milton.
2. Miſchief; detriment.
Many times we do injury to a cauſe by dwelling upon tri-
fling arguments. Watts's Logick.
3. Annoyance.
Great injuries ſuch vermin as mice and rats do in the fields.
Mortimer.
4. Contumelious language; reproachful appellation.
Caſting off the reſpects fit to be continued between great
kings, he fell to bitter investives againſt the French king; and,
by how much he was the leſs able to do, talking ſo much the
more, ſpake all the injuries he could deviſe of Charles. Bacon.
INJU'stice. n.ſ.. [injuſtice, French ; injuſtitia, Lat.] Iniqui-
ty; wrong. - - - - - -
Cunning men can be guilty of a thouſand injuſtices without
being diſcovered, or at leaſt without being puniſhed. Swift.
INK. n.ſ. [encre, French ; inchioſtro, Italian.] The black
liquor with which men write.
Mourn boldly my ink; for while ſhe looks upon you, your
blackneſs will ſhine. Sidney. b. ii.
O ! ſhe's fallen
Into a pit of ink, that the wide ſea
Hath drops too few to waſh her clean again. Shakeſpeare.
Write, my queen, -
And with mine eyes I’ll drink the works you ſend, -
Though ink be made of gall. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Like madmen they hurl’d ſtones and ink. Benj. johnſºn.
I Intending
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">fntending to have try’d
The ſilver favour which you gave,
In ink the ſhining point I dy'd, . . . . .
And drench’d it in the ſable wave. J/aller.
Vitriol is the aëtive or chief ingredient in ink, and no other
ſalt will ſtrike the colour with galls. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
I have found pens blacked almoſt all over when I had a
while carried them about me in a ſilver ink caſe. Boyle.
The ſecretary poured the ink box all over the writings, and
ſo defaced them. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
He that would live clear of envy muſt lay his finger upon
his mouth, and keep his hand out of the ink pot. L'Eſtrange.
I could hardly reſtrain them from throwing the ink bottle
at one another's heads. Arbuthnot's Hiſt, of john Bull.
2. Ink is uſed for any liquor with which they write: as, red
ink; green ink.
To INK. v. a. [from the noun..] To black or daub with ink:
as, his face is all over inked.
INkho'RN. m. ſ. ſink and horn.] A portable caſe for the inſtru-
ments of writing, commonly made of horn. -
Bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the jail; we are now
to examine thoſe men. Shakeſp. Much ado about Nothing.
Ere that we will ſuffer ſuch a prince
To be diſgrac'd by an inkhorn mate, , ,
We, and our wives and children, all will fight. Shakeſp.
t What is more frequent than to ſay, a ſilver inkhorn. Grew.
I'NKLE. m. ſ. A kind of narrow fillet; a tape. -
Incles, caddiſſes, cambricks, lawns: why he ſongs the
over as they were gods and goddeſſes. Shakeſpeare.
I twitch'd his dangling garter from his knee :
He wiſt not when the hempen ſtring I drew,
Now mine I quickly doff of inkle blue. Gay's Paſtorals.
INKLING.. n.ſ. [This word is derived by Skinner from inklinc-
Åen, to ſound within. This ſenſe is ſtill retained in Scotland:
as, I heard not an inkling.] Hint; whiſper; intimation.
Our buſineſs is not unknown to the ſenate: they have had
inkling what we intend to do, which now we’ll ſhew them in
deeds. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
We in Europe, notwithſtanding all the remote diſcoveries
and navigations of this laſt age, never heard of any of the
leaſt inkling or glimpſe of this iſland. Bacon's New Atlantis.
They had ſome inkling of ſecret meſſages betwen the mer-
quis of Newcaſtle and young Hotham. Clarendon, b. viii.
Aboard a Corinthian veſſel he got an inkling among the
ſhip's crew of a conſpiracy. L'Eſtrange's Fables,
I'NkMAKER... n.f. [ink and maker.] He who makes ink.
I's KY. adj. [from ink.] -
1. Conſiſting of ink.
England bound in with the triumphant ſea,
Whoſe rocky ſhore beats back the envious fiege
Of wat'ry Neptune, is bound in with ſhame,
With inty blots and rotten parchment bonds. Shakeſpeare.
2. Reſembling ink.
The darkneſs of the liquor preſently began to be diſcuſſed,
and grow pretty clear and tranſparent, loſing its inky black-
neſs. Boyle on Colours.
3. Black as ink. . .
'Tis not alone my inky cloak good mother,
Nor cuſtomary ſuits of ſolemn black,
That can denote me truly. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
I'NLAND. adj. [in and land.] Interior; lying remote from the ſea.
In this wide inland ſea, that hight by name,
The idle lake, my wand'ring ſhip I row. Fairy Queen.
Goodly laws, like little inland ſeas, will carry even ſhips
upon their waters. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
An old religious uncle of mine was, in his youth, an in-
land man. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
A ſubſtitute ſhines brightly as a king,
. Until a king be by ; and then his ſtate
Empties itſelf, as doth an inland brook
Into the main of waters. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
This perſon did publiſh a pamphlet printed in England for
a general exciſe, or inland ; Swift.
I'NLAND. m. ſ. Interior or midland parts.
Out of theſe ſmall beginnings, gotten near to the moun-
tains, did they ſpread themſelves into the Inland. Spenſer.
They of thoſe marches ſhall defend
Our inland from the pilferring borderers. Shakeſpeare.
The reſt were all
Far to th’ inland retir’d, about the walls
Of Pandaemonium. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
I'NLANDER. m. ſ. [from inland..] Dweller remote from the ſea.
The ſame name is given unto the inlanders, or midland in-
habiters of this iſland. Brown's /ulgar Errours, l. vi.
To INLA'PIDATE. v. a. [in and lapids, Lat..] To make ſtoney;
to turn to ſtone. -
Some natural ſpring waters will in 'apidate wood; ſo that
you ſhall ſee one piece of wood, whereof the part above the
water ſhah continue wood, and the part under the water
ſhall be turned into a kind of gravelly ſtone. Bacon.
To IN LA'Y. v. a. ſin and lay.]
1. To diverſiſy with different bodies inſerted into the ground or
ſubſtratum, -
They are worthy
To inlay heav'n with ſtars.
Look, how the floor of heav'n
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold. Shakeſpeare.
A ſaphire throne, inlaid with pure -
Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Amber, and colours of the ſhow'ry arch. Milton.
The timber bears a great price with the cabinet makers,
when large, for inlaying. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Here clouded canes 'midſt heaps of toys are found,
And inlaid tweezer caſes ſtrow the ground. Gay.
2. To make variety by being inſerted into bodies; to varie-
gate. - -
* Sea-girt iſles,
That like to rich and various gems inlay
The unadorned boſom of the deep. Milton.
INLA'Y. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Matter inlaid; wood formed
to inlay.
Under foot the violet,
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay, - :
Broider'd the ground. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iv.
To INLA'w. v. a. [in and law.] To clear of outlawry or at-
tainder. -
It ſhould be a great incongruity to have them to make
laws, who themſelves were not inlawed. Bacon's Henry VII.
I'NLET. n.ſ.. [in and let.] Paſſage; place of ingreſs; entrance.
Doors and windows, inlets of men and of light, I couple
together, becauſe I find their dimenſions brought under one.
- //attan.
She through the porch and inlet of each ſenſe
Dropt in ambroſial oils till ſhe reviv’d. - Milton.
I deſire any one to aſſign any ſimple idea, which is not re-
ceived from one of theſe inlets. Locke.
A fine bargain indeed, to part with all our commodious
ports, which the greater the inlet is are ſo much the better,
for the imaginary pleaſure of a ſtreight ſhore. Bentley.
Inlets amongſt broken lands and iſlands, rocks and ſhoals.
Ellis's Poyage.
I'NLY. adj. [from in..] Interior; internal; ſecret.
Didſt thou but know the inly touch of love,
Thou would'ſt as ſoon go kindle fire with ſnow,
As ſeek to quench the fire of love with words. Shakespeare
I'NLY. adv. Internally; within; ſecretly; in the heart.
Her heart with joy unwonted inly ſwell’d,
As feeling wond’rous comfort in her weaker eld. Fa. Qu.
I’ve inly wept,
Or ſhould have ſpoke ere this. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Whereat he inly rag'd, and as they talk'd,
Smote him into the midriff with a ſtone,
That beat out life. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xi.
The ſtubborn only to deſtroy
Theſe growing thoughts, my mother ſoon perceiving
By words at times caſt forth, inly rejoic'd,
And ſaid to me apart. Milton's Par. Reg. b. i.
The ſoldiers ſhout around with gen’rous rage;
He prais'd their ardor: inly pleas'd to ſee
His hoſt. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
I'NMATE. n.ſ.. [in and mate.] º
Inmates are thoſe that be admitted to dwell for their money
jointly with another man, though in ſeveral rooms of his
manſion-houſe, paſſing in and out by one door. Cowell-
So ſpake the enemy of mankind, inclos'd .
In ſerpent, inmate bad l and toward Eve
Addreſs'd his way. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
- There he dies, and leaves his race
Growing into a nation; and now grown,
Suſpected to a ſequent king, who ſeeks
To ſtop their overgrowth, as inmate gueſts
Too numerous. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xii-
Home is the ſacred refuge of our life, -
Secur'd from all approaches but a wife:
If thence we fly, the cauſe admits no doubt,
None but an inmate foe could force us out. Dryden's Aur-
I'N Most. adj. [from in..] Deepeſt within ; remoteſt from the
ſurface.
'Tis you muſt dig with mattock and with ſpade,
And pierce the inmo/f centre of the earth. Shakeſpeare.
Riſing ſighs and falling tears,
That ſhow too well the warm deſires,
The ſilent, ſlow, conſuming fires,
Which on my inmºſt vitals prey, -
And melt my very ſoul away. Addiſon on Italy.
Comparing the quantity of light refle&amp;ted from the ſeveral
rings, I found that it was moſt copious from the firſt or in-
mg/?, and in the exterior rings became leſs and leſs. Newton.
He ſends a dreadful groan: the rocks around
Through all their inmoſt hollow caves reſound. Pope.
I got into the inmoſt court, and I applied my face to the
windows. Gulliver's Travels.
INN. m. ſ. ſinn, Saxon, a chamber.] A houſe of entertain-
ment for travellers.
How all this is but a fair inn,
Of fairer gueſts which dwell within, Sidney, b. ii.
Palmer,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N N
º
Palmer, quoth he, death is an equal doom
To good and bad, the common inn of reſt;
But, after death, the trial is to come,
When beſt ſhall be to them that lived beſt.
Now day is ſpent, -
Therefore with me ye may take up your inn. Fairy Queen.
The Weſt, that glimmers with ſome ſtreaks of day,
Now ſpurs the lated traveller apace -
To gain the timely inn. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
That very hour, and in the ſelf-ſame inn,
A poor hean woman was delivered. - Shakeſpeare.
Like pilgrims to th’ appointed place we tend;
The world's an inn, and death the journey's end. Dryden.
... One may learn more here in one day, than in a year's ram-
bling from one inn to another. Loke.
2. A houſe where ſtudents were boarded and taught: whence we
ſtill call the colleges of common law inns of court.
Go ſome and pull down the Savoy; others to the inns of
courts: down with thern all. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
To INN. v. n. [from the noun..] To take up temporary
lodging.
Fairy Queen.
In thyſelf dwell;
Inn any where: continuance maketh hell. Donne.
To INN. v. a. To houſe; to put under cover.
He that ears my land, ſpares my team, and gives me leave
to inn the crop. Shakeſp. All's well that end, well.
Howſoever the laws made in that parliament did bear good
fruit, yet the ſubfidy bare a fruit that proved harſh and bitter:
all was inned at laſt into the king's barn. Bacon's Henry VII.
Mow clover or rye-graſs, and make it fit to inn. Mortimer.
INNATE. Nadj. [inne, Fr. innatus, Latin.] Inborn; in-
INNATED. } generate; natural; not ſuperadded; not adſci-
titious. It is applied to things as well as perſons; but more
properly to perſons.
The Druinian hath been cried up for an innated inte-
grity, and accounted the uprighteſt dealer on earth. Howel.
With eloquence innate his tongue was arm'd;
Though i.
Mutual gravitation, or ſpontaneous attraction, cannot poſ-
ſibly be innate and eſſential to matter. Bentley's Serm.
INNA’t eness. n.ſ.. [from innate.] The quality of being in-
nate. -
INNA'vigable. adj. [innavigabilis, Latin.] Not to be paſſed
by ſailing.
If you ſo hard a toil will undertake,
As twice to paſs th’ innavigable lake,
Receive my counſel. Dryden's AFn.
I'NNER. adj. [from in..] Interiour; not outward.
But th' elfin knight with wonder all the way
Did feed his eyes, and fill'd his inner thought. Fairy Queen.
This attraćts the ſoul,
Governs the inner man, the nobler part;
That other o'er the body only reigns. Milton's Paradiſ? Loſ.
Many families are eſtabliſhed in the Weſt Indies, and ſome
diſcovered in the inner parts of America. Addiſon's Spectator.
The kidney is a conglomerated gland, which is to be under-
ſtood only of the outer part; for the inner part, whereof the
papillae are compoſed, is muſcular. Grew's Coſmol.
Thus, ſeiz'd with ſacred fear, the monarch pray'd;
Then to his inner court the gueſts convey'd. Po!e.
INNE'RMost. adj. [from inner. It ſeems leſs proper than in-
mºſt.] Remoteſt from the outward part.
The refle&amp;ted beam of light would be ſo broad at the diſ-
tance of ſix feet from the ſpeculum, where the rings appeared,
as to obſcure one or two of the innermoff rings. Newton.
INNHo'LDER. m. ſ. [inn and hold.] A man who keeps an inn;
an innkeeper.
INNINGs. m. ſ. Lands recovered from the ſea. Ainſworth,
INNke'EpºR. n.ſ. [inn and keeper.] One who keeps lodgings
and proviſions for the entertainment of travellers.
Clergymen muſt not keep a tavern, nor a judge be an inn-
Keeper. ... . Taylor's Rule of holy living.
A factious innkeeper, in the reign of Henry VII. was hanged,
drawn, and quartered. Addiſon's Freeholder.
We were not ſo inquiſitive about the inn as the innkeeper;
and provided our landlord's principles were ſound, did not take
any notice of the ſtaleneſs of his proviſions. Addiſon.
I’NNoc EN ce. - -
I'NNocF Ncy. }n. ſ [innocence, French; innocentia, Latin.]
1. Purity from injurious ačtion; untainted integrity.
Simplicity and ſpotleſs innocence. Milton.
What comfort does overflow the devout ſoul, from a con-
ſcience of its own innocence and integrity. Tillotſon.
2. Freedom from guilt imputed.
It will help me nothing
To plead mine innocence; for that dye is on me
Which makes my whit'ſ part black. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
If truth and upright innocency fail me,
I'll to the king my maſter.
3. Harmleſſneſs; innoxiouſneſs.
The air was calm and ſerene; none of thoſe tumultuary
motions and conflićts of vapours, which the mountains and
Shakespeare H. IV.
the precept, yet the people charm'd. Dryden. .
the winds cauſe in ours: 'twas ſuited to a golden age, and to
, the firſt innocency of nature. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. Simplicity of heart, perhaps with ſome degree of weakneſs.
I urge this childhood proof, -
Becauſe what follows is pure innocence. Shakeſpeare.
I'NNOCENT. adj. [innocent, French; innocent, Latin.]
1. Pure from miſchief.
Something - - " . .
You may deſerve of him through me and wiſdom,
To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb, , - - '.
Tº appeaſe an angry god. - Shakeſp. Macbeth.
* Wreck on innocent frail man his loſs. Milton.
2. Free from any particular guilt. . - -
Good madam, keep yourſelf within yourſelf; |
The man is innocent. , Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
The peaſant, innocent of all theſe ills, -
With crooked ploughs the fertile fallows tills,
And the round year with daily labour fills.
3. Unhurtful; harmleſs in effects. -
- The ſpear
Sung innocent, and ſpent its force in air. Pºpe.
I'NNocent. n.ſ.
i. One free from guilt or harm. -
So pure an innocent as that ſame lamb.
Thou haſt kill'd the ſweeteſt innocent,
That e'er did lift up eye.
... If murth ring innºcents be executing,
Doºm. }
Fair, Queen.
Shakeſp. Othello.
Why, then thou art an executioner. Shakespeare Henry VI,
2. A natural; an idiot.
Innocents are excluded by natural defects. Hocker.
I'NNocent LY. adv. [from innocent.]
1. Without guilt.
The humble and contented man pleaſes himſelf innocently
and eaſily, while the ambitious man attempts to pleaſe others
ſinfully and difficultly. South's Sermons.
2. With ſimplicity; with fillineſs or imprudence.
3. Without hurt.
Balls at his feet fell innocently dead. - Cowley.
INNO'CUOUS. adj. [innocuus, Latin.] Harmleſs in effects.
The moſt dangerous poiſons, ſkilfully managed, may be
made not only innºcuous, but of all other medicines the moſt
effe&amp;tual. - Grew's Coſmol.
INNo'cuously. adv. [from innocuous...] Without miſchievous
effects. t
Whether quails, from any peculiarity of conſtitution, do
innocuouſly feed upon hellebore, or rather ſometimes but medi-
cally uſe the ſame. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
INNo'cuousness. n ſ [from innocuous.] Harmleſſneſs.
The blow which ſhakes a wall, or beats it down, and kills
men, hath a greater effect than that which penetrates into a
mud wall, and doth little harm; for that innocuºuſneſs of the
effect makes, that, although in itſelf it be as great as the other,
yet 'tis little obſerved. Digby on Bodies.
To INNOVATE. v. a. ſinnover, French; innovo, Latin.]
1. To bring in ſomething not known before.
Time indeed innovateth greatly, but quietly and by de-
grees. acozza
Men purſue ſome few principles which they have chanced
upon, and care not to innovate, which draws unknown incon-
veniences. Bacon.
- Former things
Are ſet aſide like abdicated kings;
And every moment alters what is done,
And innovates ſome ačt 'till then unknown. Dryden.
Every man cannot diſtinguiſh betwixt pedantry and poetry;
every man therefore is not fit to innovate. Dryden.
2. To change by introducing novelties.
From his attempts upon the civil power he proceeds to inno-
vate God's worſhip. South's Sermons.
Innovation. n.ſ.. [innovation, French, from innovate.] Change
by the introdućtion of novelty.
The love of things ancient doth argue ſtayedneſs; but levity
and want of experience maketh apt unto innovations. Hooker.
It were good that men in innovations would follow the ex-
ample of time itſelf, which indeed innovateth greatly, but
quietly and by degrees. Bacon's Aſſays.
Great changes may be made in a government, yet the form
continue; but large intervals of time muſt paſs between every
ſuch innovation, enough to make it of a piece with the con-
ſtitution. Swift.
In Nova'tor. n.ſ.. [innovateur, French, from innovate.]
1. An introdućtor of novelties.
I attach thee as a traiterous innovator,
A foe to th’ publick weal. Shakespeare Coriolanus:
Every medicine is an innovation; and he that will not ap-
ply new remedies, muſt expect new evils; for time is the
greateſt innovator : and if time of courſe alter things to the
worſe, and wiſdom and counſel ſhall not alter them to the
better, what ſhall be the end ? Bacon's Eſſayſ.
2. One that makes changes by introducing novelties.
He counſels him to deteſt and perſecute all innovators of di-
vine worſhip. South's Sermons.
12 K. INNO'XIOUS.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N O
I N O
INNOXIOUS. adj. [innoxius, Latin.]
1. Free from miſchievous effects.
Innoxious flames are often ſeen on the hair of mens heads
and horſes manes. Digby.
We may ſafely uſe purgatives, they being benign, and of
innoxious qualities. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
Sent by the better genius of the night,
Innoxious gleaming on the horſe's mane,
The meteor ſits.
2. Pure from crimes.
Stranger to civil and religious rage,
The good man walk'd innoxious through his age.
INNo'xiously. adv. [from innoxious.] Harmleſly,
Animals, that can innoxiouſly digeſt theſe poiſons, become
antidotal to the poiſon digeſted. Brown's Vulgar Err.
INNo'x1ous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from innoxious.] Harmleſſneſs.
INNUE'ND.o. n.ſ.. [innuends, from innue, Latin.] An oblique
hint. - -
As if the commandments, that require obedience and for-
bid murder, were to be indićted for a libellous innuendo upon
all the great men that come to be concerned. L'E/irange.
Mercury, though employed on a quite contrary errand,
Thomſºn's Autumn.
Pope.
owns it a marriage by an innuendo. Dryden.
Purſue your trade of ſcandal-picking,
Your hints that Stella is no chicken;
Your innuendo's, when you tell us,
That Stella loves to talk with fellows. Swift.
INNU'MER A ble. adj. [innumerable, Fr. innumeralili, Lat.] Not
to be counted for multitude.
You have ſent innumerable ſubſtance
To furniſh Rome, and to prepare the ways
You have for dignities. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Cover me, ye pines,
Ye cedars! with innumerable boughs
Hide me where I may never ſee them more. Milton.
In lines, which appear of an equal length, one may be
longer than the other by innumerable parts. Locke.
INNu'MERABLY. adv. [from innumerable.] Without number.
INNU'ME Rous. adj. [ innumerus, Latin. J Too many to be
counted.
'Twould be ſome ſolace yet, ſome little chearing,
In this cloſe dungeon of innumerous boughs. AMilton.
I take the wood,
And in thick ſhelter of innum’rous boughs,
Enjoy the comfort gentle ſleep allows. Pope's Odyſſey.
To INo'culate. v. a. [inocul, in and oculus, Latin.]
1. To propagate any plant by inſerting its bud into another
ſtock; to pračtiſe inoculation. See INoculation.
Nor are the ways alike in all
How to ingraff, how to inoculate. May's Virg. Georg.
Now is the ſeaſon for the budding of the orange-tree: in-
oculate therefore at the commencement of this month. Evelyn.
But various are the ways to change the ſtate,
To plant, to bud, to graft, to inoculcte.
2. To yield a bud to another ſtock.
Virtue cannot ſo inoculate our old ſtock, but we ſhall reliſh
of it. - Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Thy ſtock is too much out of date,
Dryden.
For tender plants tº inoculate. Cleaveland.
Where lilies, in a lovely brown,
Inºculate carnation. Cleaveland.
INocul A'tion. n.ſ. [inoculatio, Lat. from inoculate.]
1. Inoculation is practiſed upon all ſorts of ſtone-fruit, and upon
oranges and jaſmines. In order to perform it, be provided
with a ſharp pen-knife, having a flat haft, and ſome ſound
baſs-mat. Having taken off the cuttings from the trees
you would propagate, chuſe a ſmooth part of the ſtock; then
with your knife make an horizontal cut croſs the rind of the
ſtock, and from the middle of that cut make a ſlit downwards
about two inches in length in the form of a T ; but be care-
ful not to cut too deep, leſt you wound the ſtock: then having
cut off the leaf from the bud, leaving the foot-ſtalk remain-
ing, make a croſs cut about half an inch below the eye, and
with your knife ſlit off the bud, with part of the wood to it.
This done, with your knife pull off that part of the wood
which was taken with the bud, obſerving whether the eye of
the bud be left to it or not; for all theſe buds which loſe their
eyes in ſtripping are good for nothing: then raiſing the bark of
the ſtock with the flat haft of your pen-knife clear to the wood,
thruſt the bud therein, placing it ſmooth between the rind and
the wood of the ſtock, cutting off any part of the rind belong-
ing to the bud which may be too long; and ſo having exactly
fitted the bud to the ſtock, tie them cloſely round with baſs-
mat, beginning at the under part of the ſlit, and ſo proceed to
the top, taking care not to bind round the eye of the bud.
The March following cut off the flock three inches above the
bud, ſloping it, that the wet may paſs off to this part of the
ſtock, above the bud, faſten the ſhoot which proceeds from
the bud, and which would be in danger of being blown out ;
but this muſt continue no longer than one year, after which it
muſt be cut off cloſe above the bud, that the ſtock may be co-
vercd thereby, Miſer.
In the ſtem of Elaiana they all met, and came to be in-
grafted all upon one ſtock, moſt of them by inoculation. Hait...
2. The practice of tranſplanting the ſmall-pox, by infuſion of
the matter from ripened puſtules into the veins of the unin-
fected, in hopes of procuring a milder ſort than what frequent-
ly comes by infection. &amp;time;.
It is evident, by inoculation, that the ſmalleſt quantity of the
matter, mixed with the blood, produceth the diſeaſe. Arbuthn.
Inocula"toR. n.ſ.. [from inoculate.]
1. One that practiſes the inoculation of trees.
2. One who propagates the ſmall-pox by inoculation.
Had John a Gaddeſden been now living, he would have been
at the head of the inoculators. Friend's Hiſi. of Phyſick.
INo'poRATE. adj. [in and odoratus, Lat.]. Having no ſcent.
Whites are more inodarate than flowers of the ſame kind
coloured. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
INo'PoRous. adj. [inodoruſ, Latin.] Wanting ſcent; not aſ-
fe&amp;ting the noſe.
The white of an egg is a viſcuous, unaćtive, inſipid, inode-
rous liquor. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
INoFFE'Nsive. adj. [in and offenſive.]
1. Giving no ſcandal; giving no provocation.
A ſtranger, inoffenſive, unprovoking. Fleetwººd.
However inoffenſive we may be in other parts of our con-
dućt, if we are found wanting in this trial of our love, we
ſhall be diſowned by God as traitors. Rogers'; Sermans.
2. Giving no pain; cauſing no terror.
Should infants have taken offence at any thing, diverting
their thoughts, or mixing pleaſant and agreeable appearances
with it, muſt be uſed, 'till it be grown inoffenſive to them. Loc.
3. Harmleſs; hurtleſs; innocent.
For drink the grape
She cruſhes, inoffenſive moſt. Milton.
With whate'er gall thou ſet'ſt thyſelf to write,
Thy inoffenſive ſatires never bite. Dryden.
Hark, how the cannon, inaffenſive now,
Gives ſigns of gratulation. Phillips.
4. Unembarraſſed; without ſtop or obſtrućtion. A Latin mode
of ſpeech.
From hence a paſſage broad,
Smooth, eaſy, inoffenſive, down to hell. Milton's Parad. Lº/?.
INoFFE'Nsively. adv. [from inoffenſive..] Without appearance
of harm; without harm.
INoFFE'Nsive NEss. n.ſ. [ from inoffinſive. J Harmleſſneſs;
freedom from appearance of harm,
INoFFI'cious. adj. [in and officious.] Not civil; not attentive
to the accommodation of others.
INo'PINATE. adj. [inºpinatus, Lat. inopiné, Fr.] Not expected.
INopport UNE. adj. [inºpportunus, Latin.] Unſeaſonable; in-
COn Venient.
INo'RDIN Acy. m. ſ. [from inordinate.] Irregularity; diſorder.
It is ſafer to uſe inordination.
They become very finful by the exceſs, which were not ſo
in their nature: that inordinacy ſets them in oppoſition to God's
deſignation. Government of the Tongue.
INo'RDINATE. adj. [in and ordinatus, Latin.] Irregular; diſ-
orderly; deviating from right.
Theſe people at firſt were wiſely brought to acknowledge
allegiance to the kings of England; but being ſtraight left unto
their own inordinate life, they forgot what before they were
taught. Spenſer on Ireland.
Thence raiſe
At laſt diſtemper’d, diſcontented thoughts;
Vain hopes, vain arms, inordinate deſires, -
Blown up with high conceits engend'ring pride. , Mºtor-
From inordinate love and vain fear comes all unquietneſs of
ſpirit. Taylor's Guide to Devºtion.
INo'RDINATELY. adv. [from inordinate.] Irregularly; not
rightly. - -
As ſoon as a man deſires any thing inordinately, he is pre-
ſently diſquieted in himſelf. Taylor.
INo'RDINATE Ness, n.ſ. [from inordinate.] Want of regula-
rity; intemperance of any kind. - -
INordination. m. ſ. [from inordinate.] Irregularity; devia-
tion from right. -
Schoolmen and caſuiſts, having too much philoſophy to
clear a lye from that intrinſick inordination and deviation from
right reaſon, inherent in the nature of it, held that a lye was
abſolutely and univerſally finful. South's Sermºns.
INor GA/Nic Al... adj. [in and organical.] Void of organs or
inſtrumental parts.
We come to the loweſt and the moſt inorganical parts of
matter. Loče.
To INo'scul At F. v. n. [in and ſculum, Lat..] To unite by
appoſition or contact. -
This fifth conjugation of nerves is branched to the ball of
the eye, and to the præcordia alſo in ſome meaſure, by in’ſ-
culating with one of its nerves. Derham's Phyſic-The- ºgy.
INoscui. ATION. m. ſ. [from inºſculate.] Union by conjunction
of the extremities.
The almoſt infinite ramifications and inoſulations of all the
ſeveral forts of veſſels may eaſily be detected by glaſſes. Rey.
2. I's Q Esr.
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N Q.
I N Q.
s
º
r:
*
.
!
:
I'Nguest. n.ſ. [enqueffe, French; inquiſitio, Latin.]
1. Judicial enquiry or examination.
What confuſion of face ſhall we be under, when that grand
inqueſt begins; when an account of our . of doing
good, and a particular of our uſe or miſuſe of them is given
in 2 Atterbury's Sermons.
2. [In law.] The inqueſt of jurors, or by jury, is the moſt uſual
trial of all cauſes, both civil and criminal, in our realm ; for
in civil cauſes, after proof is made on either ſide, ſo much as
each part thinks good for himſelf, if the doubt be in the fact,
it is referred to the diſcretion of twelve indifferent men, im-
panelled by the ſheriff for the purpoſe, and as they bring in
their verdićt ſo judgment paſſes; for the judge faith, the jury
finds the fact thus; then is the law thus, and ſo we judge. For
the inqueſt in criminal cauſes, ſee JURY. Cowel.
3. Enquiry; ſearch; ſtudy.
This is the laborious and vexatious inqueſ? that the ſoul muſt
make after ſcience. South's Sermons.
INQUI'Etude. n.ſ. ſinquietude, Fr. inquietudo, inquietus, Lat.]
Diſturbed ſtate; want of quiet; attack on the quiet.
Having had ſuch experience of his fidelity and obſervance
abroad, he found himſelf engaged in honour to ſupport him
at home from any farther inquietude. //otton.
Iron, that has ſtood long in a window, being thence taken,
and by a cork balanced in water, where it may have a free mo-
bility, will bewray a kind of inquietude and diſcontentment
'till it attain the former poſition. Wotton.
The youthful hero, with returning light,
Roſe anxious from th' inquietudes of night. Pope's Odyſſey.
To I'NQUINATE. v. a. [inquino, Latin.] To pollute; to
corrupt.
An old opinion it was, that the ibis feeding upon ſerpents,
that venomous food ſo inquinated their oval conceptions, that
they ſometimes came forth in ſerpentine ſhapes, Brown.
INQuina"tion. n.ſ.. [inquinatio, Lat. from inquinate.] Corrup-
tion; pollution. -
Their cauſes and axioms are ſo full of imagination, and ſo
infected with the old received theories, as they are mere in-
quinations of experience, and concoët it not. Bacon.
The middle action, which produceth ſuch imperfect bodies,
is fitly called by ſome of the ancients inquination, or incon-
cočtion, which is a kind of putrefaction. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
INQU'IRABLE. adj. [from inquire.] That of which inquiſition
or inqueſt may be made.
To INQUIRE. v. n. [enquirer, French; inquiro, Latin.]
1. To aſk queſtions; to make ſearch; to exert curioſity on any
occaſion.
You have oft inquir’d -
After the ſhepherd that complain'd of love. Shakeſpeare.
We will call the damſel, and inquire at her mouth. Gen.
They began to inquire among themſelves, which of them it
was that ſhould do this thing. u. xxii. 23.
Inquire for one Saul of Tarſus. Acts iz. 1.
You ſent Hadoram to king David, to inquire of his wel-
fare. Chron. xviii. Io.
It is a ſubjećt of a very noble inquiry, to inquire of the
more ſubtile perceptions; for it is another key to open nature,
as well as the houſe. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
It may deſerve our beſt ſkill to inquire into thoſe rules, by
which we may guide our judgment. South's Sermons.
The ſtep-dame poiſon for the ſon prepares; -
The ſon inquires into his father's years. Dryden.
Under their grateful ſhade AEneas ſat;
His left young Pallas kept, fix’d to his ſide,
And oft of winds inquir'd, and of the tide. Dryd. Æn.
They are more in danger to go out of the way, who are
marching under a guide that will miſlead them, than he that
is likelier to be prevailed on to inquire after the right way. Locke.
To thoſe who inquired about me, my lover would anſwer,
that I was an old dependent upon his family. Swift.
2. To make examination.
Awful Rhadamanthus rules the ſtate:
He hears and judges each committed crime,
Enquires into the manner, place, and time. Dryden's AEn.
To INQUI'R.E. v. a.
1. To aſk about; to ſeek out: as, he inquired the way.
2. To call; to name. Obſolete.
Canute had his portion from the reſt,
The which he call’d Canutium, for his hire,
Now Cantium, which Kent we commonly inquire. F. $24.
INQUI'RE R. n.ſ.. [from inquire.]
1. Searcher; examiner; one curious and inquiſitive.
What ſatisfaction may be obtained from thoſe violent diſ-
puters, and eager inquirers in what day of the month the world
began Brown's Vulgar Errours.
What's good doth open to th' inquirers ſtand,
And itſelf offers to th' accepting hand. Demham.
Superficial inquirers may ſatisfy themſelves that the parts of
, matter are united by muſcles, nerves, and other like liga-
ments. Glanv. Scepſ.
This is a queſtion only of inquirers, not diſputers, who
incither affirm nor deny, but examine. Locke.
Late inquirers by their glaſſes find,
That ev'ry inſect of each different kind, - .
In its own egg, chear'd by the ſolar rays,
Organs involv’d and latent life diſplays. Blackmore,
2. One who interrogates; one who queſtions.
w - -
INQUI'RY. n.ſ.. [from inquire.] *
1. Interrogation ; ſearch by queſtion.
The men which were ſent from Cornelius had made inquiry
for Simon's houſe, and ſtood before the gate. Acis x. 17.
2. Examination; ſearch.
This exactneſs is abſolutely neceſſary in inquiries after philo-
ſophical knowledge, and in controverfies about truth. Lºcłe.
. As to the inquiry about liberty, I think the queſtion is not
proper, whether the will be free, but whether a man be
free. Locke.
I have been engaged in phyſical inquiries. Locke.
It is a real inquiry, concerning the nature of a bird, or a bat,
to make their yet imperfect ideas of it more complete. Locke.
Judgment or opinion, in a remoter ſenſe, may be called,in-
vention: as when a judge or a phyſician makes an exačt inquiry
into any cauſe. Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
º m. ſ. ſinquiſition, Fr. inquiſtic, Latin.
1. Judicial inquiry. ... r
When he maketh inquiſition for blood, he remembereth
them: he forgetteth not the cry of the humble. Pſix. 12.
We were willing to make a pattern or precedent of an exact
inquiſition. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
With much ſeverity, and ſtrićt inquiſition, were puniſhed
the adherents and aiders of the late rebels. Bacon's Hen. VII.
Though it may be impoſſible to recolle&amp;t every failing, yet
you are ſo far to exerciſe an inquiſition upon yourſelf, as, by
obſerving leſſer particulars, you may the better diſcover what
the corruption of your nature ſways you to. Taylor.
By your good leave,
Theſe men will be your judges: we muſt ſtand
The inquiſition of their raillery
On our condition. Southern.
2. Examination; diſcuſſion. * *
When inquiſition was made of the matter, it was foun
out. - 2 E/?h. xxiii.
3. [In law.] A manner of proceeding in matters criminal, by
the office of the judge. - - Cowel.
4. The court eſtabliſhed in ſome countries ſubječt to the pope
for the detection of hereſy. -
One kiſs of her’s, and but eighteen words, -
Put quite down the Spaniſh inquiſition. Corbet.
INQUISITIVE. adj. [inquiſitus, Latin. J Curious ; buſy in
ſearch; ačtive to pry into any thing. With about, after, int-,
or of, and ſometimes into.
My boy at eighteen years became inquiſitive -
After his brother. Shakeſpeare's Comedy of Errours.
This idleneſs, together with fear of imminent miſchiefs,
have been the cauſe that the Iriſh were ever the moſt inquiſitive
people after news of any nation in the world. Davies.
He is not inquiſitive into the reaſonableneſs of indifferent
and innocent commands. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
It can be no duty to write his heart upon his forehead, and
to give all the inquiſitive and malicious world a ſurvey of thoſe
thoughts, which is the prerogative of God only to know. South.
His old ſhaking fire,
Inquiſitive of fights, ſtill longs in vain
To find him in the number of the ſlain. Dryden's juv.
Thou, what befits the new lord-mayor,
And what the Gallick arms will do,
Art anxiouſly inquiſitive to know, Dryden.
A Dutch ambaſſador, entertaining the king of Siam with
the particularities of Holland, which he was inquiſitive after,
told him that the water would, in cold weather, be ſo hard
*
that men walked upon it. - Locke.
The whole neighbourhood grew inquiſitive after my name
and charaćter. Addiſon's Spectator.
A wiſe man is not inquiſitive about things impertinent:
Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
They cannot bear with the impertinent queſtions of a young
inquiſitive and ſprightly genius. Haiti's Improv. ºf the 4/ind.
INQūi’sitively. adv. [from inquiſitive..] With curioſity; with
narrow ſcrutiny.
INQUI'sitiveness. n.ſ.. [from inquiſitive..] Curioſity; dili-
gence to pry into things hidden.
Though he thought inquiſitiveneſ an uncomely gueſt, he
could not but aſk who ſhe was. Sidney.
Heights that ſcorn our proſpe&amp;t, and depths in which reaſon
will never touch the bottom, yet ſurely the pleaſure ariſing
from thence is great and noble; for as much as they afford
perpetual matter to the inquiſitiveneſs of human reaſon, and ſo
are large enough for it to take its full ſcopes and range in. South-
Providence, delivering great concluſions to us, deſigned to
excite our curioſity and inquiſitiveneſ; after the methods by
which things were brought to paſs. Burnet.
Curioſity in children nature has provided, to remove that ig-
norance they were born with ; which, without this buſy in-
quiſitiveneſs, will make them dull. Lºcke.
INQ: 1's LT Jr.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N S
I N S
º
º: n.ſ. ſinguiſitºr, Latin; inquiſiteur, French.]
1. One who examines judicially. -
In theſe particulars I have played myſelf the inquiſitºr, and
find nothing contrary to religion or manners, but rather me-
dicinable. Bacon's Eſſays.
Minos, the ſtrićt inquiſitor, appears,
And lives and crimes with his aſſeſſors hears. Dryden.
2. An officer in the popiſh courts of inquiſition.
To INRA'il. v. a. ſin and rail.] To incloſe with rails.
In things indifferent, what the whole church doth, think
convenient for the whole, the ſame if any part do wilfully vio-
late, it may be reformed and inrailed again, by that general
authority whereunto each particular is ſubjećt. Hooker.
Where fam'd St. Giles's ancient limits ſpread,
An inrail'd column rears its lofty head;
Here to ſev’n ſtreets ſev’n dials count the day,
And from each other catch the circling ray. Gay.
I'NRoAp. n.ſ.. [in and road.] Incurſion; ſudden and deſultory
invaſion.
Many hot inroads
They make in #. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
From Scotland we have had in former times ſome alarms,
and inroads into the northern parts of this kingdom. Bacon.
By proof we feel
Our pow'r ſufficient to diſturb his heav'n,
And with perpetual inroads to alarm,
Though inacceſſible his fatal throne. Milton's Paradiſe Loſ!.
The loſs of Shrewſbury expoſed all North Wales to the daily
inroads of the enemy. Clarendon.
The country open lay without defence;
For poets frequent inroad; there had made. Dryden.
INsa'Nap L.E. adj. [inſanabilis, Latin. J Incurable; irreme-
diable.
INSA'NE. adj. [inſanus, Latin.] Mad; making mad.
Were ſuch things here as we do ſpeak about?
Or have we eaten of the inſane root,
That takes the reaſon priſoner Shakespeare Macbeth.
INSATIABLE. adj. [inſatiabilis, Latin; inſatiable, French.]
Greedy beyond meaſure; greedy ſo as not to be ſatisfied.
INSA'TIABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from inſatiable.] Greedineſs not to
be *g. -
ome mens hydropick inſatiableneſ had learned to thirſt
the more, by how much more, they drank. King Charles.
INSA'TIABLY. adv. [from inſatiable.] With greedineſs not to
be appeaſed.
They were extremely ambitious, and inſatiably covetous;
and therefore no impreſſion, from argument or miracles, could
reach them. South.
INsaºri ATE. adj. [inſatiatus, Latin.] Greedy ſo as not to be
ſatisfied.
When my mother went with child
Of that inſatiate Edward, noble York,
My princely father, then had wars in France. Shakespeare R. III.
Inſatiate to purſue
Vain war with heav'n. • Milton.
Too oft has pride,
And helliſh diſcord, and inſatiate thirſt
Of others rights, our quiet diſcompos'd. Phillips.
INSAT isfaction. n.ſ.. [in and ſatisfaction.] Want; unſatiſ-
fied ſtate.
It is a profound contemplation in nature, to conſider of the
emptineſs or inſatisfaction of ſeveral bodies, and of their ap-
petite to take in others. Bacon's Natural Hiſtoryt
INSATURA ble. adj. [inſaturabilis, Lat..] Not to be glutted;
not to be filled.
To Inscribe. v. a. [inſcribo, Latin; inſcrire, French.]
1. To write on any thing. It is generally applied to ſomething
written on a monument, or on the outſide of ſomething.
In all you writ to Rome, or elſe
To foreign princes, ego &amp; rex meus
Was ſtill inſcrib'd, Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Connatural principles are in themſelves highly reaſonable,
and deducible by a ſtrong proceſs of ratiocination to be moſt
true; and conſequently the high exerciſe of ratiocination might
evince their truth, though there were no ſuch originally in-
fribed in the mind. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Ye weeping loves! the ſtream with myrtles hide,
And with your golden darts, now uſeleſs grown,
Inſcribe a verſe on this relenting ſtone. Pope.
2. To mark anything with writing: as, I inſcribed the ſtone
with my name.
3. To aſſign to a patron without a formal dedication.
One ode, which pleaſed me in the reading, I have attempted
to tranſlate in Pindarick verſe: 'tis that which is inſcribed to
the preſent earl of Rocheſter. Dryden.
4. To draw a figure within another.
In the circle inſcribe a ſquare. Notes to Creech's Manilius,
INSCRIPTION. n.ſ.. [inſcription, Fr. inſcriptio, Latin.]
1. Something written or engraved.
This avarice of praiſe in time to come,
Thoſe long inſcriptions crowded on the tomb. Dryden,
2. Title. - -
Joubertus by the ſame title led our expectation, whereby
we reaped no advantage, it anſwering ſcarce at all the promiſe
of the inſcription. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
3. [In law.] Is an obligation made in writing, whereby the
accuſer binds himſelf to undergo the ſame puniſhment, if he
ſhall not prove the crime which he objećts to the party accuſed
in his accuſatory libel, as the defendant himſelf ought to ſuffer,
if the ſame be proved. Ayliffe's Parergen.
4. Conſignment of a book to a patron without a formal dedi-
Cation.
INscRU'TABLE. adj. [inſcrutabilis, Lat, inſcrutable, Fr.] Un-
ſearchable; not to be traced out by inquiry or ſtudy.
A jeſt unſeen, inſcrutable, inviſible,
As a weather-cock on a ſteeple. Shakespeare Two Gent. of Wºrona.
This king had a large heart, inſcrutable for good, and was
wholly bent to make his kingdom and people happy. Bacon.
O how inſcrutable / his equity
Twins with his power. Sand, r.
Hereunto they have recourſe as unto the oracle of life, the
great determinator of virginity, conception, fertility, and the
inſcrutable infirmities of the whole body. Brown's Wulg. Erra
We ſhould contemplate reverently the works of nature and
race, the inſcrutable ways of providence, and all the wonder-
ul methods of God's dealing with men. Atterbury.
To INscu'lp. v. a. ſinſculpo, Latin.] To engrave; to cut.
A coin that bears the figure of an ange
Stamp'd in gold, but that inſculpt upon. Shakeſpeare.
INscu'lpture. n.ſ.. [from in and ſculpture ) . Anything en-
graved.
Timon is dead,
Entomb'd upon the very hem o' th' ſea;
And on the grave-ſtone this inſculpture, which
With wax I brought away. Shakespeare. Tinch.
It was uſual to wear rings on either hand; but when pre-
cious gems and rich inſculptures were added, the cuſtom of
wearing them was tranſlated unto the left. Brown.
To INSE’AM. v. a. [in and ſeam.] To impreſs or mark by a
ſeam or cicatrix.
Deep o'er his knee inſeam'd remain'd the ſcar. Pope.
INSECT. n.ſ.. [inſetia, Latin.]
1. Inſects may be conſidered together as one great tribe of ani-
mals: they are called inſects from a ſeparation in the middle of
their bodies, whereby they are cut into two parts, which are
joined together by a ſmall ligature, as we ſee in waſps and
common flies. Lecke.
Beaſt, bird, inſe?, or worm, durſt enter none. Miton.
2. Any thing ſmall or contemptible.
In ancient times the ſacred plough employ'd
The kings, and awful fathers of mankind;
And ſome with whom compar’d, your inſºf tribes
Are but the beings of a Summer's day,
Have held the ſcale of empire. Thomſon's Spring.
INsectator. m. ſ. [from inſector, Latin.] One that perſe-
cutes or haraſſes with purſuit. Dić7.
Insectile. adj. [from inſect.] Having the nature of inſects.
Inſectile animals, for want of blood, run all out into legs. Bac.
Insecto'Log ER. n.ſ.. [inſect and AdyGP.] One who ſtudies or
deſcribes inſe&amp;ts.
The inſeót itſelf is, according to modern inſeciologers, of
the ichneumon-fly kind. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
INSE'cure. adj. [in and ſecure.] ~
1. Not ſecure; not confident of ſafety.
He is liable to a great many inconveniences every moment
of his life, and is continually inſecure not only of the good
things of this life, but even of life itſelf. Tillotſºn's Serm-
2. Not ſafe.
Insecu'R1TY. n.ſ.. [in and ſecurity.]
1. Uncertainty; want of reaſonable confidence.
It may be eaſily perceived with what inſecurity of truth we
aſcribe effects, depending upon the natural period of time,
unto arbitrary calculations, and ſuch as vary at pleaſure. Brown.
2. Want of ſafety; danger; hazard.
The unreaſonableneſs and preſumption, the danger and
deſperate inſecurity of thoſe that have not ſomuch as a thought,
all their lives long, to advance ſo far as attrition and contri-
tion, ſorrow, and reſolution of amendment. Hammond.
INse MINA'tion. m. ſ. [inſemination, Fr. inſeminº, Lat.] The
ačt of ſcattering ſeed on ground.
Insecu'rios. n.). [inſecution, Fr. inſecutio, Lat.} Purſuit. Not
in uſe.
Not the king's own horſe got more before the wheel
Of his rich chariot, that might ſtill the inſecution feel,
With the extreme hairs of his tail. Chapman's Iliads.
INs E'N'sAt E. adj. [inſenſe, French ; inſenſato, Italian.] Stupid's
wanting thought; wanting ſenſibility. -
Ye be reprobates; obdurate inſenſate creatures. Hammoºd.
So fond are mortal men,
As their own ruin on themſelves t” invite,
Inſenſate left, or to ſenſe reprobate,
And with blindneſs internal ſtruck. Milton's Agºniſies.
INS ENSIRI'lit Y.
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N S
I N S
:
:
Insensibility. n.ſ.. [inſenſibilité, French, from inſenſible.]
1. Inability to perceive. -
Inſenſibility of ſlow motions may be thus accounted for:
motion cannot be perceived without perception of the parts of
ſpace which it left, and thoſe which it next acquires. Glanv.
2. Stupidity; dulneſs of mental perception. .
3. Torpor; dulneſs of corporal ſenſe.
Inse'NSIBLE. adj. [inſenſible, French.]
1. Imperceptible; not diſcoverable by the ſenſes.
What is honour? a word. What is that word honour?
air; a trim reckoning. Who hath it? he that died a Wed-
neſday. Doth he feel it no. Doth he hear it? no. Is it
inſenſible then yea, to the dead: but will it not live with the
living? no. Why? detraćtion will not ſuffer it. Shakeſp.
Two ſmall and almoſt inſenſible pricks were found upon
Cleopatra's arm. - Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The denſe and bright light of the circle will obſcure the
rare and weak light of theſe dark colours round about it, and
render them almoſt inſenſible. Newton's Opt.
2. Slowly gradual.
They fall away,
And languiſh with inſenſible decay. Dryden.
3. Void of feeling either mental or corporal.
i thought
I then was paſſing to my former ſtate
Inſenſible, and forthwith to diſſolve. Milton.
4. Void of emotion or affection. -
You grow inſenſible to the conveniency of riches, the de-
lights of honour and praiſe. - Temple.
You render mankind inſenſible to their beauties, and have
deſtroyed the empire of love. Dryden.
INSE'NsibleNEss. n.ſ. [from inſenſible.] Abſence of percep-
tion; inability to perceive.
The inſenſileneſ of the pain proceeds rather from the re-
laxation of the nerves than their obſtruction. Ray.
Inse'Nsibly. adv, [from inſenſible.] . - -
1. Imperceptibly; in ſuch a manner as is not diſcovered by the
ſenſes.
The planet earth, ſo ſtedfaſt though ſhe ſeem,
Inſenſibly three different motions moves. Milt. Par. Lºft.
The hills riſe inſenſibly, and leave the eye, a vaſt unin-
terrupted proſpect. Addiſon on Italy.
2. By ſlow degrees.
Equal they were form'd,
Save what fin hath impair'd, which yet hath wrought
Inſenſibly. --- - Milton.
Propoſals agreeable to our paſſions will inſenſibly prevail upon
our weakneſs. Rogers's Sermons.
Cadenus -
Inſenſibly came on her ſide. , Swift.
3. Without mental or corporal ſenſe. -
Inseparability. Un.J. [from inſeparable.] The quality of
INSE'PARABLE Ness. } beingſuch as cannot be ſevered ordivided.
The parts of pure ſpace are immovable, which follows from
their inſeparability, motion being nothing but change of diſ-
tance between any two things; but this cannot be between
parts that are inſeparable. Locke.
INSE/PARABLE. adj. [inſeparable, French; inſeparabilis, Latin.]
Not to be disjoined; united ſo as not to be parted.
Ancient times figure both the incorporation and inſeparable
conjunction of counſel with kings, and the wiſe and politick
uſe of counſel by kings. Bacon.
Thou, my ſhade,
Inſeparable, muſt with me along;
For death from fin no pow'r can ſeparate. Milt. Par. Loſt.
Care and toil came into the world with ſin, and remain ever
ſince inſeparable from it. South's Sermons.
No body feels pain, that he wiſhes not to be eaſed of,
with a deſire equal to that pain, and inſeparable from it. Locke.
The parts of pure ſpace are inſeparable one from the other,
ſo that the continuity cannot be ſeparated, neither really nor
mentally. - Locke.
Together out they fly,
Inſeparable now the truth and lie;
And this or that unmixt no mortal ear ſhall find. Pope.
INSE/PARABLY. adv. [from inſeparable.] With indiſſoluble
un1O11.
Drowning of metals is, when the baſer metal is ſo incorpo-
rate with the more rich as it cannot be ſeparated; as if ſilver
ſhould be inſeparably incorporated with gold. Bacon.
Him thou ſhalt enjoy,
Inſeparably thine. Milton.
Atheiſts muſt confeſs, that before that aſſigned period matter
had exiſted eternally, inſeparably endued with this principle of
attraćtion; and yet had never attracted nor convened before,
during that infinite duration. Bentley's Sermons,
To INSERT. v. a. ſinſerer, Fr. inſero, inſertum, Latin.] To
place in or amongſt other things.
Thoſe words were very weakly inſerted, where they are ſo
liable to miſconſtruction. Stillin fleet.
With the worthy gentleman's name I will inſert it at length
in one of my papers, Addiſon.
It is the editor's intereſt to inſºrt what the author's judg-
ment had reječted. Swift.
Poeſy and oratory omit things eſſential, and inſert little
beautiful digreſſions, in order to place every thing in the moſt
affecting light. //atts.
INSE'Rtion, n.ſ.. [inſºrtion, Fr. inſºrtio, Latin.]
1. The act of placing any thing in or among other matter.
The great diſadvantage our hiſtorians labour under is too
tedious an interruption, by the inſertion of records in their
narration. - Felton on the Clafficks.
An ileus, commonly called the twiſting of the guts, is
either a circumvolution or inſertion of one part of the gut within
the other. Arbuthnºt on Diet.
2. The thing inſerted. -
He ſoftens the relation by ſuch inſertion, before he deſcribes
the event. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
To *** v. a. ſinſervio, Latin.] To be of uſe to an
end. - -
INSERVIENT. adj. [inſerviens, Latin.] Conducive; of uſe to
an end.
The providence of God, which diſpoſeth of no part
in vain, where there is no digeſtion to be made, makes
not any parts inſervient to that intention. Brown.
To INSHE'LL. v. a. [in and ſhell.] To hide in a ſhell.
Aufidius, hearing of our Marcius' baniſhment,
Thruſts forth his horns again into the world,
Which were inſhell'd when Marcius ſtood for Rome,
And durſt not once peep out. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
To INSH1'P. v. a. [in and ſhip.] To ſhut in a ſhip; to ſtow;
to embark.
See them ſafely brought to Dover; where, inſhipp'd,
Commit them to the fortune of the ſea. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
To INSHRI'NE. v.a. [in and ſhrine.] To incloſe in a ſhrine or
precious caſe.
Warlike and martial Talbot, Burgundy - -
Inſhrines thee in his heart. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Not Babylon,
Equal’d in all its glories, to inſhrine Belus. Miltºn.
I'NSIDE. n.ſ.. [in and ſide..] Interiour part; part within. Op-
poſed to the ſurface or outſide. "
Look'd he o' th' inſide of the paper?
He did unſeal them. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Shew the inſide of your purſe to the outſide of his hand,
and no more ado. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
Here are the outſides of the one, the inſides of the other,
and there's the moiety I promiſed ye. L’Eſtrange.
. As for the inſide of their neſt, none but themſelves were
concerned in it. Addiſon's Guardian.
INSIDIA'toR. n.ſ. [Lat.] One who lies in wait. Dićf.
INSIDIOUS, adj. [inſidieux, French; inſidiºſus, Latin.] Sly;
circumventive; diligent to entrap; treacherous.
Since men mark all our ſteps, and watch our haltings, let a
ſenſe of their inſidious vigilance excite us ſo to behave ourſelves;
that they may find a convićtion of the mighty power of Chriſ-
tianity towards regulating the paſſions. Afterbury's Sermons.
They wing their courſe,
And dart on diſtant coaſts, if ſome ſharp rock,
Or ſhoal inſidious, breaks not their career. Thomſºn.
INSI Diously. adv. [from inſidicus.] In a ſly and treacherous
manner; with malicious artifice.
The caſtle of Cadmus was taken, and the city of Thebes
itſelf inveſted by Phebidas the Lacedemonian, inſidiouſly and
in violation of league. Bacon's War with Spain.
Simeon and Levi ſpoke not only falſely but inſidiouſly, nay
hypocritically, abuſing their proſelytes and their religion, for
the effecting their cruel deſigns. Government of the Tongue.
I'Nsight. n.ſ.. .[inſicht, Dutch. This word had formerly the
accent on the firſt ſyllable.] Inſpection; deep view; know-
ledge of the interiour parts; thorough ſkill in any thing.
Hardy ſhepherd, ſuch as thy merits, ſuch may be her inſ. ht
Juſtly to grant thee reward. Sidney.
Straightway ſent with careful diſgence
To fetch a leech, the which had great inſight
In that diſeaſe of grieved conſcience,
And well could cure the ſame; his name was patience. Spenſ.
Now will be the right ſeaſon of forming them to be able
writers, when they ſhall be thus fraught with an univerſal in-
fight into things. Milton,
The uſe of a little inſight in thoſe parts of knowledge,
which are not a man's proper buſineſs, is to accuſtom our
minds to all ſorts of ideas. Locke.
A garden gives us a great inſight into the contrivance and
wiſdom of providence, and ſuggeſts innumerable ſubječts of
meditation. Speciator.
Due conſideration, and a deeper inſight into things, would
ſoon have made them ſenſible of their error. J/codward,
INSIGNIFI'cANCE. Un.ſ.. [inſignificance, French; from inſigni-
#...} ficant.]
1. Want of meaning; unmeaning terms. -
To give an account of all the inſignificancies and verbal no-
things of this philoſophy, would be almoſt to tranſcribe it.
Glanv. Scetſ, c. 18.
12 L 2. Unimportance.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N S
2. Unimportance. - -
As I was ruminating on that I had ſeen, I could not forbear
refle&amp;ting on the inſignificancy of human art, when ſet in com-
pariſon with the deſigns of providence. Addiſon's Guardian.
My annals are in mouldy mildews wrought,
With eaſy inſignificance of thought.
Insic NI'FicANT. adj. [in and ſignificant.]
1. Wanting meaning; void of ſignification.
*Till you can weight and gravity explain,
Thoſe words are inſignificant and vain.
2. Unimportant; wanting weight; ineffectual.
That I might not be vapoured down by inſignificant teſti-
monies, I preſumed to uſe the great name of your ſociety to
annihilate all ſuch arguments. Glanv. Scepſ. Preface.
Calumny robs the publick of all that benefit that it may juſtly
claim from the worth and virtue of particular perſons, by ren-
dering their virtue utterly inſignificant. South's Sermons.
All the arguments to a good life will be very inſignificant to
a man that hath a mind to be wicked, when remiſſion of fins
may be had upon ſuch cheap terms. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
Nothing can be more contemptible and inſignificant than the
ſcum of a people, inſtigated againſt a king. Addison.
In a hemorrhage from the lungs, no remedy ſo proper as
bleeding, often repeated: ſtypticks are often inſgnificant. Arb.
INsic NI'FicANTLY. adv. [from inſignificant.]
1. Without meaning.
Birds are taught to uſe articulate words, yet they underſtand
not their import, but uſe them inſignificantly, as the organ or
pipe renders the tune, which it underſtands not. Hale.
2. Without importance or effect.
IN since'R.E. adj. [inſºneerus, Lat. in and ſincere.]
1. Not what he appears; not hearty; diſſembling; unfaithful.
2. Not ſound; corrupted.
Ah why, Penelope, this cauſeleſs fear,
To render ſleep's ſoft bleſfings inſincere?
Alike devote to ſorrow's dire extreme,
The day refle&amp;tion, and the midnight dream. Pope.
IN's INce(RITY. m.ſ.. [from inſincere.] Diſſimulation; want of
truth or fidelity.
If men ſhould always ačt tºnder a maſk, and in diſguiſe, that
indeed betrays deſign and inſincerity. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſ.
T; INsi'N Ew. v. a. [in and ſinew.] To ſtrengthen; to con-
rin,
All members of our cauſe,
That are inſinewed to this ačtion. Shakeſp. H. IV.
INSI'Nuant. adj. [French.] Having the power to gain favour.
Men not ſo quick perhaps of conceit as ſlow to paſſions, and
commonly leſs inventive than judicious, howſoever prove
very plauſible, inſinuant, and fortunate men. Wotton.
To INSINUATE. v. a. [inſinuer, Fr. inſinuo, Latin.]
1. To introduce anything gently.
The water eaſily inſinuates itſelf into and placidly diſtends
the veſſels of vegetables. Woodward.
2. To puſh gently into favour or regard: commonly with the
reciprocal pronoun. -
There is no particular evil which hath not ſome appearance
of goodneſs, whereby to inſinuate itſelf. AHooker.
- At the iſle of Rhee he inſinuated himſelf into the very good
grace of the duke of Buckingham. Clarendon.
3. To hint; to impart indireétly.
And all the fiétions bards purſue
Do but inſinuate what's true.
4. To inſtill; to infuſe gently.
All the art of rhetorick, beſides order and clearneſs, are for
nothing elſe but to inſinuate wrong ideas, move the paſſions,
... and thereby miſlead the judgment. Locke.
To INSI'NUATE. v. n.
1. To wheedle; to gain on the affections by gentle degrees.
I love no colours; and without all colour
Of baſe inſinuating flattery,
I pluck this white roſe with Plantagenet. , Shakespeare H. VI.
2. To ſteal into imperceptibly; to be conveyed inſenſibly.
Peſtilential miaſms inſinuate into the humoral and conſiſtent
parts of the body. Harvey.
3. I know not whether Milton does not uſe this word, according
to its etymology, for, to enfold; to wreath; to wind.
Cloſe the ſerpent ſly
Iºſinuating, of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded. ". Milton.
issistation. n: ſ [inſinuatio, Lat. inſinuation, Fr. from inſ-
*::::) The power of pleaſing or ſtealing upon the affections.
When the induſtry of one man hath ſettled the work, a
*** map, by inſinuation or miſinformation, may not ſupplant
him without a juſt cauſe. Bacon.
e had * natural inſinuation and addreſs, which made him
acceptable in the beſt company. Clarendon.
N$1 NUAtive. adj. [from inſinuate.] Stealing on the af-
fečtions.
It is a ſtrange inſinuative power which example and cuſtom
have upon us. - Government of the Tongue.
Iss NATOR. m.ſ. [iſinuator, Lat.] He that infinuates. Minſ,
*NSIPID. adj. [iſ] ider, French ; inſpidus, Latin.]
Garth.
Blackmore.
Swift.
1. Without taſte; without power of affecting the orgāns of gift.
Some earths yield, by diſtillation, a liquor very far from
being inodorous or inſpid. Boyle
This chyle is the natural and alimentary pituita, which #:
ancients deſcribed as inſipid. Flºyer on the Humour,
She lays ſome uſeful bile aſide, -
Totinge the chyle's inſpid tide.
2. Without ſpirit; without pathos; flat; dull; heavy. Prior.
The gods have made your noble mind for me,
And her inſipid ſoul for Fºº, ;
A heavy lump of earth without defire,
A heap of aſhes that o'er-lays your fire. Dryd. Clem.
Some ſhort excurſions of a broken vow
He made indeed, but flat inſpid ſtuff. Dryd. Don Seloft.
INSIPI'dity. - - - - - - -
INsi'PIDNess. }nſ [inſpidité, Fr. from inſpid.]
I. Want of taſte.
2. Want of life or ſpirit.
Dryden's lines ſhine ſtrongly through the inſpidity of
Tate's.
INsi'PIDLY. adv. [from inſpid.] Without taſte; dully.
One great reaſon why many children abandon themſelves
wholly to filly ſports, and trifle away all their time inſpidly,
is becauſe they have found their curioſity baulked. Locke.
INSI'PIENCE. n.ſ.. [inſpientia, Latin.] Folly; want of un-
derſtanding. -
To INSIST. v. n. [inſiſter, French; inſlo, Latin.]
1. To ſtand or reſt upon.
The combs being double, the cells on each fide the parti.
tion are ſo ordered, that the angles on one ſide inſºft upon the
centers of the bottom of the cells on the other fide, Ray.
2. Not to recede from terms or aſſertions; to perſiſt in.
Upon ſuch large terms, and ſo abſolute,
As our conditions ſhall inſiſt upon,
Our peace ſhall ſtand as firm as rocky mountains. Shaiſ,
3. To dwell upon in diſcourſe.
Were there no other act of hoſtility but that which we
have hitherto inſiſted on, the intercepting of her ſupplies were
irreparably injurious to her. Decay ºf Pitt).
Insi'stent. adj. [inſiſtens, Latin.] Reſting upon anything,
The breadth of the ſubſtruction muſt be at leaſt double to
the inſiſtent wall. Iſºtton,
INsi Tiency. n.ſ.. [in and ſtio, Latin.] Exemption from
thirſt.
What is more admirable than the fitneſs of every creature,
for the uſe we make of him The docility of an elephant,
and the inſtiency of a camel for travelling in deſarts. Grew.
Insi"tion. n.J. [inſitio, Latin.] The inſertion or ingraffment
of one branch into another.
Without the uſe of theſe we could have nothing of culture
or civility: no tillage or agriculture, no pruning or lopping,
grafting or inſition. Ray in the Cruſiºn.
INsi'sture. n.ſ.. [from inſiſ?..] This word ſeems in Shakºftart
to ſignify conſtancy or regularity.
The heav'ns themſelves, the planets, and the centre,
Obſerve degree, priority, and place,
Inſ/lure, courſe, proportion, ſeaſon, form,
Office and cuſtom, in all line of order.
To INs NA’Re. v. a. [in and ſnare.] - -
1. To intrap; to catch in a trap, gin, or ſnare; to inveigle.
Why ſtrewſt thou ſugar on that bottled ſpider, I
Whoſe deadly web inſnareth thee about. Shakespeare. R. III.
She inſnar'd
Pºpe.
Shakespeare.
Mankind with her fair looks. Milton.
By long experience Durfey may no doubt
Inſnare a gudgeon, or perhaps a trout} . . . .
Though jryden once exclaim'd in partial ſpire; Fenton.
He fiſh'd l-becauſe the man attempts to wri"
2. To intangle in difficulties or perplexities. . . -
That . in a great part, in the weightieſ: ...
ing to this preſent controverſy, hath ºftarº the ju º:
both of ſundry good and of ſome well learned men, . the
manifeſt truth of certain general principles, . God
ordinances that ſerve for uſual practice in the churc #ooker.
are grounded. - - left the people bei.ſhared
That the hypocrite reign not, le job xxxiv. 30.
INss A'RER. n.ſ.. [from inſhare.] He that inſhares; ...
INso'ciable. #! ºft. fench; inſicialili, Latin!
1. Averſe from converſation.
If this auſtere inſociable life,
Change not your offer made in heat of bloº".
2. Incapable of connexion or union. ſtone, cloſely
The loweſt ledge or row muſt be merely of one,all parú
laid, without mortar, which is a general caut” for º:
in building that are contiguous to board,9. º:
lime and wood are inſociable. //attan's | º ot
Insobriety. n.ſ.. [in and ſobriety.] Drunkennels;
ſobriety. - ſº towards
He whoſe conſcience upbraids him with pººl. ; neigh”
God, and inſobriety towards himſelf, if he is juſt to nº Pin.
bour, he thinks he has quit ſcores. JDecay ºf Tw
Shakespeare
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N S
&amp;
º
º
:
!
t
º
To PNSOLATE. v. a. ſinſºl; Latin.] To dry in the fun;
to expoſe to the action of the ſun.
IN sola’rion. n.ſ.. [inſºlation, French, from inſolate.] Expo-
ſitjon to the ſun. . . . - -
We uſe theſe towers for inſolation, refrigeration, conſer-
vation, and for the view of divers meteors. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
If it have not a ſufficient inſolation it looketh pale, and at-
tains not its laudable colour: if it be ſunned too long, it ſuf-
fereth a torrefaction. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
1'Nsolence. Un. ſ. [inſolence, Fr. inſolentia, Latin.] Pride ex-
I'Nsol ENCY. } erted in contemptuous and overbearing treat-
ment of others; petulant contempt
They could not reſtrain the inſºlency of O'Neal, who, find-
ing none now to withſtand him, made himſelf lord of thoſe
few people that remained. Spenſer on Ireland.
, t ... Such a nature,
Tickled with good ſucceſs, diſdains the ſhadow
Which he treads on at noon; but I do wonder
His inſolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius. Shakeſpeare.
Flown with inſolence and wine. AMilton.
Publick judgments are the banks and ſhores upon which
God breaks the inſolency of ſinners, and ſtays their proud
WaWCS. Tilloiſon.
The ſteady tyrant man,
Who with the thoughtleſs inſºlence of power,
For ſport alone, purſues the cruel chace. Thomſºn.
The fear of any violence, either againſt her own perſon or
againſt her ſon, might deter Penelope from uſing any endea-
vours to remove men of ſuch inſolence and power. Broome.
To I'Nsole Nce. v. a. [from the noun..] To inſult; to treat
with contempt. A very bad word.
The biſhops, who were firſt faulty, inſolenced and aſ-
ſaulted. King Charles.
I'Nsol'ENT. adj. [inſolent, Fr. inſolens, Latin.] Contemptuous
of others; haughty; overbearing.
We have not pillaged thoſe rich provinces which we reſcued:
vićtory itſelf hath not made us inſolent maſters. Atterbury.
I’nsolently. adv. [inſolenter, Latin.] With contempt of
others; haughtily; rudely.
What I muſt diſprove,
He inſolently talk'd to me of love. Dryden.
Not faction, when it ſhook thy regal ſeat,
Not ſenates, inſolently loud,
Thoſe echoes of a thoughtleſs crowd,
Could warp thy ſoul to their unjuſt decree. Dryden.
Briant, being naturally of an haughty temper, treated him
very inſalently, and more like a criminal than a priſoner of war.
Addiſon's Guardian.
isso'lvable, adj. [inſolvable, Fr. in and ſolve.j
1. Not to be ſolved; not to be cleared; inextricable; ſuch as ad-
mits of no ſolution, or explication.
Spend a few thoughts on the puzzling inquiries concerning
vacuums, the doćtrine of infinites, #. and incom-
menſurables, wherein there appear ſome inſolvable difficul-
ties. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. That cannot be paid.
INso'LU BEE, adj. [inſoluble, French; inſolubilis, Latin.]
1. Not to be cleared; not to be reſolved.
Admit this, and what ſhall the Scripture be but a ſnare and
a torment to weak conſciences, filling them with infinite ſcru-
puloſities, doubts inſoluble, and extreme deſpair. Hooker.
2. Not to be diſſolved or ſeparated.
Stony matter may grow in any part of a humah body; for
when anything inſºluble ſticks in any part of the body, it ga-
thers a cruſt about it. Arbuthnot on Diet.
INso'Lv ENT. adj. [in and ſalvo, Latin.] Unable to pay.
By publick declaration he proclaimed himſelf inſºlvent of
thoſe vaſt ſums he had taken upon credit. Howel.
A farmer accuſed his guards for robbing him of oxen, and
the emperor ſhot the ... but demanding repāration of
the accuſer for ſo many brave fellows, and finding him inſºlvent,
compounded the matter by taking his life. Madiſon.
An inſºlvent is a man that cannot pay his debts. Watts.
º Inſolvent tenant of incumber'd ſpace. Smart.
INso'lvency. m. ſ. [from inſolvent.], Inability to pay debts.
Inso Mu'cH. conj. [in ſº much..] So that; to ſuch a degree that.
It hath ever been the uſe of the conqueror to deſpiſe the
language of the conquered, and to force him to learn his: ſo
did the Romans always uſe, inſomuch that there is no nation
but is ſprinkled with their language. Spenſer.
. To make ground fertile, aſhes excel; inſomuch as the coun-
tries about AEtna have amends made them, for the miſchiefs
the eruptions do. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Simonides was an excellent poet, inſomuch that he made his
fortune by it. - L’Eſtrange.
They made the ground uneven about their neſt, inſºmuch
that the ſlate did not lie flat upon it, but left a free paſſage un-
derneath. Addiſon's Guardian.
To Inspe"eT. v. a. [inſpicio, inſpecium, Latin.J. To look into
by way of examination. .
INSPE’ction. m. ſ. [inſpection, French ; inſpectio, Latin.]
1. Prying examination; narrow and cloſe ſurvey.
With narrow ſearch, and with inſpečiion deep, -
Conſider every creature. Miltºn.
Our religion is a religion that dares to be underſtood; that
offers itſelf to the ſearch of the inquiſitive, to the inſpection of
the ſevereſt and the moſt awakened reaſon; for, being ſecure
of her ſubſtantial truth and purity; ſhe knows that for her to
be ſeen and looked into, is to be embraced and admired, as
there needs no greater argument for men to love the light than
to ſee it. South's Sermons.
2. Superintendence; preſiding care. In the firſt ſenſe it ſhould
have into before the objećt, and in the ſecond ſenſe may admit
over; but authors confound them.
We may ſafely conceal our good deeds from the publick
view, when they run no hazard of being diverted to improper
ends, for want of our own inſpection. Atterbury.
We ſhould apply ourſelves to ſtudy the perfeótions of God,
and to procure lively and vigorous impreſſions of his perpetual
preſence with us, and inſpection over us. Atterbury.
The divine inſpection into the affairs of the world, doth ne-
ceſſarily follow from the nature and being of God; and he
that denies this, doth implicitly deny his exiſtence. Bentley.
Inspe’ctor. n. ſ. [Latin.]
1. A prying examiner. -
With their new light our bold inſpeãors preſs,
Like Cham, to ſhew their father's nakedneſs.
2. A ſuperintendent.
They may travel under a wiſe inſpeštor or tutor to different
parts, that they may bring home uſeful knowledge. Watts.
INSPE'Rsion. n.ſ.. [inſperſo, Lat.] A ſprinkling. Ainſw.
To INsphe'RE. v. a. [in and ſphere J To place in an orb or
ſphere.
Where thoſe immortal ſhapes
Of bright aereal ſpirits live inſpher'd, -
In regions mild of calm and ſerene air. Milton.
InspI'Rable. adj. [from inſpire.] Which may be drawn in
with the breath; which may be infuſed.
To theſe inſpirable hurts, we may enumerate thoſe they ſuſ-
tain from their expiration of fuligindus ſteems. Harvey.
INspirATIon. n.ſ.. [from inſpire.] -
1. The aët of drawing in the breath.
In any inflammation of the diaphragm, the ſymptoms are a
violent fever, and a moſt exquiſite pain increaſed upon inſpi-
ration, by which it is diſtinguiſhed from a pleuriſy, in which
the greateſt pain is in expiration. Arbuthnot,
2. The aët of breathing into anything.
3. Infuſion of ideas into the mind by a ſuperiour power.
I never ſpoke with her in all my life.
—How can ſhe then call us by our names,
Unleſs it be by inſpiration ? Shakespeare Comedy of Errours:
Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death
have good inſpirations. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
We to his high inſpiration owe,
Denham.
That what was done before the flood we know. Denham,
What the tragedian wrote, the late ſucceſs
Declares was inſpiration, and not gueſs. Denham.
Inſpiration is when an overpowering impreſſion of any pro-
poſition is made upon the mind by God himſelf, that gives a con-
vincing and indubitable evidence of the truth and divinity of
it: ſo were the prophets and the apoſtles inſpired. Hatti.
To INSPIRE. v. n. [inſpiro, Latin; inſpirer, Fr.] To draw
in the breath. d - f 1 be ſt
If the inſpiring and expiring organ of any animal be ſtopt,
it #:::::::: to : and dies, y Walton.
To INSPI'Re. v. a. -
1. To breathe into; to infuſe into the mind; to impreſs upon
the fancy. - -
I have been troubled in my ſleep this night;
But dawning day new comfort hath inſpir’d. Shakeſpeare.
He knew not his Maker, and he that inſpired into him an
aćtive ſoul, and breathed in a living ſpirit. Wiſd.kv, t.
Then to the heart inſpir'd
Vernal delight. Milton.
2. To animate by ſupernatural infuſion.
North' inſpir’d
Caſtalian ſpring. - Milton.
- Erato, thy poet's mind inſpire,
And fill his ſoul with thy celeſtial fire. Dryd. Æn.
. The letters are often read to the young religious, to inſpire
with ſentiments of virtue. Addiſon.
3. To draw in with the breath. t-
By means of ſulphurous coal ſmoaks the lungs are ſtifled and
oppreſſed, whereby they are forced to inſpire and expire the
air with difficulty, in compariſon of the facility of inſpiring
and expiring the air in the country. Harvey.
His baſeful breath inſpiring as he glides;
Now like a chain around her neck he rides. Dryden.
InsP1’RER. n.ſ.. [from inſpire.] He that inſpires.
To the infinite God, the omnipotent creator and preſerver
of the world, the moſt gracious redeemer, ſanétifier, and in-
ſpirer of mankind, be all honour. Derham,
To InspI'Rit. v. a. [in and ſpirit..] To animate; to actuate;
to fill with life and vigour; to enliven; to invigorate; to en-
courage. -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N S
Í N S
It has pleaſed God to inſpirit and ačtuate all his evangeli-
cal methods by a concurrence of ſupernatural ſtrength, which
makes it not only eligible but poſſible; eaſy and pleaſant for
us to do whatever he commands us. Decay of Piety.
A diſcreet uſe of becoming ceremonies renders the ſervice
of the church ſolemn and affecting, inſpirit; the ſluggiſh, and
inflames even the devout worſhipper. Atterbury's Sermons.
The courage of Agamemnon is inſpirited by love of em-
pire and ambition. Pope's Preface to the Iliads.
Let joy or caſe, let affluence or content,
And the gay conſcience of a life well ſpent,
Calm ev’ry thought, inſpirit ev'ry grace,
Glow in thy heart, and ſmile upon thy face. Pope.
To INSPI'ss ATE. v. a. [in and ſpiffus, Lat.] To thicken; to
make thick. -
Sugar doth inſpiſſate the ſpirits of the wine, and maketh
them not ſo eaſy to reſolve into vapour. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
This oil farther inſpiſſated by evaporation, turns by degrees
into balm. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
INspiss A"tion. n. ſ. [from inſpiſſate.] The act of making any
liquid thick. -
The effect is wrought by the inſpiſſation of the air. Bacon.
Recent urine will cryſtallize by inſpiſſation, and afford a
ſalt neither acid nor alkaline. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
INSTABI'lity. n.ſ.. [inſtabilitar, from inſtabilité, French ; in-
Jiabilis, Lat.] Inconſtancy; fickleneſs; mutability of opinion
or condućt.
Inſtability of temper ought to be checked, when it diſpoſes
men to wander from one ſcheme of government to another;
ſince ſuch a fickleneſs cannot but be fatal to our country.
Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 25.
INst A'Ble. adj. [inſtabilis, Lat..] Inconſtant; changing. See
UN stable.
To INSTA'LL. v. a. [inſtaller, French, in and ſtall.] To ad-
vance to any rank or office, by placing in the ſeat or ſtall
proper to that condition.
She reigns a goddeſs now among the ſaints,
That whilom was the ſaint of ſhepherds light,
And is inſtalled now in heaven's hight. Spenſer's Paſt.
Cranmer is return'd with welcome,
Inſtall'd archbiſhop of Canterbury. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The king choſe him maſter of the horſe, after this he was
inſtalled of the moſt noble order. Wotton.
INSTALLATION. n.ſ.. [inſtallation, French, from inſtall.] The
aćt of giving viſible poſſeſſion of a rank or office, by placing
in the proper ſeat.
Upon the elečtion the biſhop gives a mandate for his in-
ſtallation. Ayliffe's Parergon.
INsta'l Ment. n.ſ.. [from inſtall.]
1. The act of inſtalling.
Is it not eaſy
To make lord William Haſtings of our mind,
For the inſtalment of this noble duke
In the ſeat royal. Shakeſpeare', Richard III.
2. The ſeat in which one is inſtalled.
Search Windſor-caſtle, elves,
The ſeveral chairs of order look you ſcour;
Each fair inſtalment, coat and ſeveral creſt
With loyal blazon evermore be bleſt Shakeſpeare.
#. }n. ſ: [inſtance, French.]
1. Importunity; urgency; ſolicitation.
Chriſtian men ſhould much better frame themſelves to
thoſe heavenly precepts which our Lord and Saviour with ſo
great inſtancy gave us concerning peace and unity, if we did
concur to have the ancient councils renewed. Hooker, b. i.
2. Motive; influence; preſſing argument. Not now in uſe.
She dwells ſo ſecurely upon her honour, that folly dares
not preſent itſelf. Now, could I come to her with any di-
rection in my hand, my deſires had inſtance and argument to
commend themſelves. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
The inſtances that ſecond marriage move,
Are baſe reſpects of thrift, but none of love. Shakeſpeare.
3. Proſecution or proceſs of a ſuit.
The inſtance of a cauſe is ſaid to be that judicial proceſs
which is made from the conteſtation of a ſuit, even to the
time of pronouncing ſentence in the cauſe, or till the end of
three years. Ayliffe's Parergon.
4. Example ; document.
Yet doth this accident
So far exceed all inſtance, all diſcourſe,
That I am ready to diſtruſt mine eyes. Shakeſpeare.
In furnaces of copper and braſs, where vitriol is often caſt
in, there riſeth ſuddenly a fly, which ſometimes moveth, on
the walls of the furnace; ſometimes in the fire below ; and
dieth preſently as ſoon as it is out of the furnace: which is
a noble inſtance, and worthy to be weighed. Bacon.
We find in hiſtory inſtances of perſons, who, after their
priſons have been flung open, have choſen rather to languiſh
in their dungeons, than ſtake their miſerable lives and for-
tunes upon the ſucceſs of a revolution, Addison.
The greateſt ſaints are ſometimes made the moſt remark-
able inſtances of ſuffering. Atterbury's Sermºris.
Suppoſe the earth ſhould be removed nearer to the ſun,
and revolve for inſtance in the orbit of Mercury, the whole
ocean would boil with heat. Bentley's Sermons.
The uſe of inſtances is to illuſtrate and explain a difficulty;
and this end is beſt anſwered by ſuch inſtances as are familiar
and common. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
5. State of any thing.
Theſe ſeem as if, in the time of Edward the firſt, they were
drawn up into the form of a law in the firſt inſtance. Hale.
6. Occaſion; act.
The performances required on our part, are no other than
what natural reaſon has endeavoured to recommend, even in
the moſt ſevere and difficult inſtances of duty. Rogers.
To I'NSTANCE. v. n. [from the noun..] To give or offer an
example.
As to falſe citations, that the world may ſee how little he
is to be truſted, I ſhall inſtance in two or three about which
he makes the loudeſt clamor. Tillotſon.
In tragedy and ſatire, this age and the laſt have excelled
the ancients; and I would inſtance in Shakeſpeare of the for-
mer, in Dorſet of the latter ſort. Dryden's juvenal.
I’NSTANT. adj. [inſtant, Fr. inſians, Latin.]
1. Preſfing; urgent; importunate ; earneſt.
And they were inſtant with loud voices, requiring that he
might be crucified. Luke xxiii. 23.
Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing in-
ſtant in prayer. Rom. xii. 12.
2. Immediate; without any time intervening; preſent.
Our good old friend beſtow
Your needful counſel to our buſineſſes,
Which crave the inſtant uſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Th’ inſtant ſtroke of death denounc'd to day,
Remov’d far off. Milton.
Nor native country thou, nor friend ſhalt ſee;
Nor war haſt thou to wage, nor year to come;
Impending death is thine, and inſtant doom. Prior.
3. Quick; without delay.
Inſtant without diſturb they took alarm. Milton.
Griev'd that a viſitant ſo long ſhould wait
Unmark'd, unhonour'd, at a monarch's gate;
Inſtant he flew with hoſpitable haſte,
And the new friend with courteous air embrac'd, Pope.
I'Nstant. n.ſ.. [inſtant, French.]
1. Inſtant is ſuch a part of duration wherein we perceive no
ſucceſſion. Locke.
There is ſcarce an inſtant between their flouriſhing and
their not being. - Hooker, b. v.
I can at any unſeaſonable inſtant of the night appoint her
to look out at her lady's chamber window. Shakeſpeare. ,
Her nimble body yet in time muſt move,
And not in inſtants through all places ſtride;
But ſhe is nigh and far, beneath, above,
In point of time, which thought cannot divide. Davies.
At any inſtant of time the moving atom is but in one ſingle
point of the line; therefore all but that one point is either
future or paſt, and no other parts are co-exiſtent or contem-
porary with it. Bentley's Sermons.
2. It is uſed in low and commercial language for a day of the
preſent or current month.
On the twentieth inſtant it is my intention to erect a lion's
head. Addiſon's Guard. Nº. 98.
INSTANTA'Neous. adj. [in/fantaneus, Latin.] Done in an in-
ſtant; acting at once without any perceptible ſucceſſion; act-
ing with the utmoſt ſpeed; done with the utmoſt ſpeed.
This manner of the beginning or ceaſing of the deluge
doth not at all agree with the inſtantaneous actions of creation
and annihilation. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The rapid radiance inſtantaneous ſtrikes
Th’ illumin'd mountain. Thomſºn.
INst ANTA'Neously. adv. [from in/fantaneous.] In an indivi-
ſible point of time.
What I had heard of the raining of frogs came to my
thoughts, there being reaſon to conclude that thoſe came from
the clouds, or were inſtantaneouſly generated. Derham.
I'NSTANTLY. adv. [inſtanter, Latin.]
1. Immediately; without any perceptible intervention of time.
In a great whale, the ſenſe and the affects of any one part
of the body inſtantly make a tranſcurſion throughout the whole
body. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt, cent. x.
Sleep inſiantly fell on me. Milton.
As ſeveral winds ariſe,
Juſt ſo their natures alter inſtantly. May's Virgil.
2. With urgent importunity.
To INSTA'ſ E. v. a. [in and ſtate.]
1. To place in a certain rank or condition.
This kind of conqueſt does only inſtate the vićtor in theſe
rights of government, which the conquered prince, or that
prince to whom the conqueror pretends a right of ſucceſſion,
had. Hale's Common Law of England.
I Had
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N S .
I N S
º
ºº-º
&gt;
|
º
* .ſººº
2
Had this gliſtering monſter been born to thy poverty, he
could not have been ſo bad : nor, perhaps, had thy birth in-
ſtated thee in the ſame greatneſs, wouldſt thou have been
better. South's Sermons.
The firſt of them being eminently holy and dear to God,
ſhould derive a bleſſing to his poſterity on that account, and
prevail at laſt to have them alſo accepted as holy, and inſtated
in the favour of God. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. To inveſt. Obſoletc.
For his poſſeſſions,
Although by confiſcation they are ours,
We do inſtate and widow you withal. Shakeſpeare.
INSTAURA’TION. n.ſ. [inſtauration, French ; inſtauratio, Lat.]
Reſtoration; reparation; renewal.
INSTEAD of prep. [A word formed by the coalition of in and
ſtead, place.]
1. In room of ; in place of.
Vary the form of ſpecch, and inſtead of the word church
make it a queſtion in politicks, whether the monument be in
danger. “ - Swift.
2. Equal to.
This very conſideration to a wiſe man is inſtead of a thou-
ſand arguments, to ſatisfy him, that, in thoſe times, no
ſuch thing was believed. Tillotſon's Sermons.
To INSTE'Ep. v. a. [in and ſleep.]
1. To ſoak; to macerate in moiſture.
Suffolk firſt died, and York, all haggled over,
Comes to him where in gore he lay inſleep’d. Shakeſpeare.
2. Lying under water.
The guttered rocks, and congregated ſands,
Traitors inſleep'd to clog the guiltleſs keel. Shakespeare Othello.
INSTEP. m. ſ. [in and ſtep..] The upper part of the foot where
it joins to the leg.
* The caliga was a military ſhoe with a very thick ſole, tied
above the inſtep with leather thongs. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To I'NSTIGATE. v. a. [inſtigo, Lat. inſtiguer, French.] To
urge to ill; to provoke or incite to a crime.
INSTIGATIon. n.ſ.. [inſtigation, French; from inſtigate.] In-
citement to a crime; encouragement; impulſe to ill.
Such inſtigations have been often dropt, *
Where I have took them up. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this But rather follow
Our forceful inſtigation. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
It was partly by the inſtigation of ſome factious malecon-
tents that bare principal ſtroke amongſt them. Bacon.
Shall any man, that wilfully procures the cutting of
whole armies to pieces, ſet up for an innocent As if the
lives that were taken away by his inſtigation were not to be
charged upon his account. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
We have an abridgment of all the baſeneſs and villainy
that both the corruption of nature and the inſtigation of the
devil could bring the ſons of men to. South's Sermons.
INSTIGA"toR. n.ſ.. [inſtigateur, French; from inſtigate.] In-
citer to ill.
That ſea of blood is enough to drown in eternal miſery
the malicious author or inſtigator of its effuſion. K. Charles.
Either the eagerneſs of acquiring, or the revenge of miſ-
fing dignities, have been the great inſtigators of eccleſiaſtick
feuds. Decay of Piety.
To INSTITLL. v. a. ſinſillo, Lat, in filler, French.]
1. To infuſe by drops.
He from the well of life three drops inſtill d. Milton.
2. To inſinuate any thing imperceptibly into the mind; to
infuſe. -
Though ſuch aſſemblies be had indeed for religion's ſake,
hurtful nevertheleſs they may eaſily prove, as well in regard
of their fitneſs to ſerve the turn of hereticks, and ſuch as
privily will ſooneſt adventure to infil their poiſon into mens
minds. Hooker, b. v.
He had a farther deſign in all this compaſſion, to in/ſil and
inſinuate good inſtruction, by contributing to their happineſs
in this preſent life. Calamy's Sermons.
Thoſe heathens did in a particular manner inſiil the prin-
ciple into their children of loving their country, which is far
otherwiſe now-a-days. Swift's Miſcel.
INSTILLATION. n.ſ.. [inſtillatio, Lat. from inſiil.]
1. The aët of pouring in by drops.
2. The aët of infuſing ſlowly into the mind.
3. The thing ºnfuſed.
They imbitter the cup of life by inſenſible inſtillations.
Rambler.
INSTI'Nct. adj. [ºnſ iné!, Fr. inſtinčius, Lat.] Moved; ani-
mated. A word not in uſe.
Forth ruſh'd with whirlwind ſound
The chariot of paternal deity,
Flaſhing thick flames, wheel within wheel undrawn,
Itſelf inſtić with ſpirit, but convoy'd -
By four cherubick ſhapes. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vi.
I'NSTINCT. n.ſ.. [iuſtinct, Fr. inſtinčius, Lat. This word
had its accent formerly on the laſt ſyllable.] Deſire or aver-
ſion aéting in the mind without the intervention of reaſon of
deliberation; the power determining the will of brutes.
In him they fear your highneſs' death;
And mere inſtinét of love and loyalty
Makes them thus forward in his baniſhment. Shakespeare.
Thou knoweſt I am as valiant as Hercules; but beware
inſtiné: ; the lion will not touch the true prince: inſtinct is a
great matter. I was a coward on inſtinct . I ſhall think the
better of myſelf and thee, during my life; I for a valiant
lion, and thee for a true prince.
But providence or inſliné? of nature ſeems,
Or reaſon though diſturb'd, and ſcarce conſulted,
To have guided me aright. Milton's Agoniſt. l. 1545.
Nature firſt pointed out my Portius to me,
And eaſily taught me by her ſecret force
To love thy perſon, e'er I knew thy merit;
Till what was inſtinct grew up into friendſhip. Addison.
The philoſopher avers,
That reaſon guides our deed, and inſiinº theirs.
In/lindi and reaſon how ſhall we divide Prior:
Reaſon ſerves when preſs'd ;
But honeſt inſtinct comes a volunteer. Pope.
Insti'Ncted, adj. [in/indus, Lat..] Impreſſed as an animating
Power. . This, neither muſical nor proper, was perhaps in-
troduced by Bently.
What native unextinguiſhable beauty muſt be impreſſed
and inſtinéfed through the whole, which the defedation of ſo
many parts by a bad printer and a worſe editor could not hin-
der from ſhining forth. Bentley's Preface to Milton.
Insti'Nctive. adj. [from inſtinct.] A&amp;ting without the appli-
cation of choice of reaſon; riſing in the mind without appa-
rent cauſe.
Rais'd
By quick inſtinčiive motion, up I ſprung, -
As thitherward endeavouring. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. viii.
It will be natural that Ulyſſes's mind ſhould forbode; and
it appears that the inſtinčive preſage was a favourite opinion
of Homer's. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
Insti'Nctively. adv. [from inſtinctive..] By inſtinct; by the
call of nature.
The very rats
Inſtinétively had quit it. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
To INSTITUTE. v. n.[inſtituo, inſtitutum, Lat. inſtituer, Fr.]
1. To fix; to eſtabliſh; to appoint; to enaët; to ſettle; to
preſcribe.
God then inſtituted a law natural to be obſerved by crea-
tures; and therefore, according to the manner of laws, the
inſtitution thereof is deſcribed as being eſtabliſhed by ſolemn
injunétion. Hooker, b. i.
Here let us breathe, and haply inſtitute
A courſe of learning, and ingenuous ſtudies. Shakeſpeare.
To the production of the effect they are determined by the
laws of their nature, inſtituted and imprinted on them by ini-
mitable wiſdom. Hale's Original of Mankind.
To inſtitute a court and country party without materials,
would be a very new ſyſtem in politicks, and what, I be-
lieve, was never thought on before. Swift.
2. To educate; to inſtruct; to form by inſtruction.
If children were early inſtituted, knowledge would inſen-
fibly inſinuate itſelf. Decay of Piety,
I'Nstitute. n.ſ.. [inſtitut, Fr. inſtitutum, Latin.]
I. Eſtabliſhed law; ſettled order.
This law, though cuſtom now direéts the courſe,
As nature's inſtitute, is yet in force
Uncancel'd, though diſuſed.
2. Precept; maxim ; principle.
Thou art pale in mighty ſtudies grown,
To make the Stoick inſtitutes thy own. Dryden's Perſus.
Institution, n.ſ.. [inſtitution, Fr. inſtitutio, Latin.]
I. Aćt of eſtabliſhing.
2. Eſtabliſhment; ſettlement.
The inſtitution of God's law is deſcribed as being eſtabliſh-
ed by ſolemn injunction. Hooker,
It became him by whom all things are, to be the way of
ſalvation to all, that the inſtitution and reſtitution of the world
might be both wrought with one hand. Hooker, b. v.
This unlimited power placed fundamentally in the body of
a people, is what legiſlators have endeavoured, in their ſeveral
ſchemes or inſtitutions of government, to depoſit in ſuch hands
as would preſerve the people. Swift.
3. Poſitive law.
The holineſs of the firſt fruits and the lump is an holineſs,
merely of inſtitution, outward and nominal; whereas the
holineſs of the root is an holineſs of nature, inherent and
real. Atterbury's Sermons.
The law and inſtitution founded by Moſes was to eſtabliſh
religion, and to make mercy and peace known to the whole
earth. Forbes.
4. Education.
After baptiſm, when it is in infancy received, ſucceeds in-
ſtruction and inſtitution in the nature and ſeveral branches of
12 M that
Dryden,
Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
/
z
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N S
I N S
that vow, which was made at the font, in a ſhort intelligible
manner. Hammond's Fundamentals.
It is a neceſſary piece of providence in the inſtitution of ºur
children, to train them up to ſomewhat in their youth, that
* honeſtly entertain them in their age. L’Eſtrange.
is learning was not the effect of precept or inſtitution.
Bentley.
INSTITUTIon ARY. adj. [from inſtitution.] Elemental ; con-
taining the firſt doćtrines, or principles of doctrine.
That it was not out of faſhion Ariſtotle declareth in his
politicks, among the inſtitutionary rules of youth. Brown.
1. An eſtabliſher; one who ſettles.
InstitutoR. m. ſ. [inſtituteur, Fr. inſtitutor, Latin.]
It might have ſucceeded a little better, if it had pleaſed
the inſtitutors of the civil months of the ſun to have ordered
them alternately odd and even. Holder on Time.
2. Inſtructor; educator.
The two great aims which every inſtitutor of youth ſhould
mainly and intentionally drive at. JWalker.
I'Nstitutist, n.ſ.. [from inſtitute.] Writer of inſtitutes, or
elemental inſtructions.
Green gall the inſtitutiffs would perſuade us to be an effect
of an over-hot ſtomach. Harvey on Conſumptions.
To Is stop. v. a. [in and ſtop.] To cloſe up; to ſtop.
With boiling pitch another near at hand
The ſeams inſtops. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
To INSTRUCT. v. a. ſinſ, wo, Latin; inſtruire, French.]
1. To teach; to form by precept; to inform authoritatively;
to educate; to inſtitute; to direct.
- Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he
might inſtruct thee. Deut. iv. 36.
His God doth inſtruct him to diſcretion, and doth teach
him. Iſa. xxviii. 26.
They that were inſiructed in the ſongs of the Lord were
two hundred fourſcore and eight. 1 Chron. xxv. 7.
Theſe are the things wherein Solomon was inſtructed for
building of the houſe of God. 2 Chron. iii. 3.
Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, inſtructed about the ſong,
becauſe he was ſkilful. 1 Chron. xv. 22.
She being before inſirudied of her mother. Matth. xiv. 8.
Thou approveſt the things that are more excellent, being
inſirudied out of the law. Rom. ii. 18.
Inſtruct me, for thou knoweſt. Milton.
He ever by conſulting at thy ſhrine
Return'd the wiſer, or the more inſtrućf
To fly or follow what concern'd him moſt. Milton.
2. To model; to form. Little in uſe.
They ſpeak to the merits of a cauſe, after the proëtor has
prepared and inſtructed the ſame for a hearing before the
judge. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Is stru’ct ER. m. ſ. [from inſtruct.] A teacher; an inſtituter ;
one who delivers precepts or imparts knowledge.
You have ten thouſand inſtructors in Chriſt. I Cor. iv. I 5.
After the flood arts to Chaldea fell,
The father of the faithful there did dwell,
Who both their parent and inſtructor was.
O thou, who future things can'ſt repreſent
As preſent, heav'nly inſtructor! Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
Poets, the firſt inſ' uéiors of mankind,
Brought all things to their native proper uſe. Roſcommon.
They ſee how they are beſet on every ſide, not only with
temptations, but inſtructors to vice. Locke on Education.
We have precepts of duty given us by our inſtructors. Rog.
Several inſtructors were diſpoſed among this little helpleſs
people. - Addiſon's Guard. Nº. 105.
INSTRU’ct Ios. n.ſ.. [inſtru?iou, French ; from inſtrue?..]
1. The act of teaching; information.
It lies on you to ſpeak,
Not by your own inſtruction, nor by any matter
Which your heart prompts you to, but with ſuch words
As are rooted in your tongue. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
We are beholden to judicious writers of all ages, for thoſe
diſcoveries and diſcourſes they have left behind them for our
inſtruction. Locke.
2. Precepts conveying knowledge.
Will ye not receive inſtruction to hearken to receive my
words jer. xxxv.
On ev'ry thorn delightful wiſdom grows,
In ev'ry ſtream a ſweet inſtruction flows;
But ſome untaught o'erhear the whiſper'ring rill,
In ſpite of ſacred leiſure, blockheads ſtill. Toung.
3. Authoritative information; mandate.
See this diſpatch'd with all the haſte thou can'ſt;
Anon I'll give thee more iuſtruction. Shakeſpeare.
INSTRU’ctive. adj. [from inſtruct; inſtrue?if, French..] Con-
veying knowledge.
With variety of inſtructive expreſſions by ſpeech man
alone is endowed. Holder.
I would not laugh but in order to inſtruct; or if my mirth
ceaſes to be inſtructive, it ſhall never ceaſe to be innocent.
Addiſon's Speci. N°. 179.
Denham.
INSTRUMENT. n.f. [inſtrument, Fr. inſirunentum, Lat.j
1. A tool uſed for any work or purpoſe.
If he ſmite him with an inſtrument of iron, ſo that he die,
he is a murderer. Num. xxxv. 16.
What artificial frame, what inſtrument,
Did one ſuperior genius eler invent;
Which to the muſcles is preferr'd. Blackmore on Creatiºn.
Box is a wood uſeful for turners and inſtrument makers.
Martimer.
2. A frame conſtructed ſo as to yield harmonious ſounds.
He that ſtriketh an inſtrument with ſkill, may cauſe not-
withſtanding a very pleaſant ſound, if the ſtring whereon he
ſtriketh chance to be capable of harmony. Hooker, b. i.
She taketh moſt delight
In muſick, inſtruments and poetry. .
In ſolitary groves he makes his moan,
Nor, mix'd in mirth, in youthful pleaſure ſhares,
But ſighs when ſongs and inſiruments he hears.
3. A writing containing any contračt or order.
He called Edna his wife, and took paper, and did write
an inſtrument of covenants, and ſealed it. Tob. vii. 14.
4. The agent or mean of any thing. It is uſed of perſons as
well as things, but of perſons very often in an ill ſenſe.
The gods would not have delivered a ſoul into the body
which hath arms and legs, only inſtruments of doing; but that
it were intended the mind ſhould employ them. Sidney.
If, haply, you my father do ſuſpect,
An inſtrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me. Shakeſp. Othell.
All voluntary ſelf-denials and auſterities which Chriſtianity
commends become neceſſary, not ſimply for themſelves, but
as inſtruments towards a higher end. Decay of Piety.
Reputation is the ſmalleſt ſacrifice thoſe can make us, who
have been the inſtruments of our ruin. Swift's Miſcel.
There is one thing to be conſidered concerning reaſon,
whether ſyllogiſm be the proper inſtrument of it, and the uſe-
fulleſt way of exerciſing this faculty. Locke.
5. One who ačts only to ſerve the purpoſes of another.
He ſcarcely knew what was done in his own chamber, but
as it pleaſed her inſtruments to frame themſelves. Sidney, b. ii.
All the inſtrument, which aided to expoſe the child, were
even then loſt when it was found. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
In benefits as well as injuries, it is the principal that we
are to confider, not the inſtrument; that which a man does
by another, is in truth his own ačt. L’Eſtrange.
The bold are but th' inſtruments of the wife,
They undertake the dangers they adviſe. Dryden.
IN i. E'NTAL. adj. [inſtrumental, French; inſtrumentam,
atin.]
1. Conducive as means to ſome end; organical.
All ſecond and inſtrumental cauſes, without that operative
faculty which God gave them, would become altogether
ſilent, virtueleſs, and dead. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the IWorld.
Prayer, which is inſtrumental to every thing, hath a parti-
cular promiſe in this thing. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
It is not an eſſential part of religion, but rather an auxi-
liary and inſtrumental duty. Smalridge's Sermons.
I diſcern ſome excellent final cauſes of conjunction of body
and ſoul; but the inſtrumental I know not, nor what inviſi-
ble bands and fetters unite them together. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Aćting to ſome end; contributing to ſome purpoſe; helpful :
uſed of perſons and things.
The preſbyterian merit is of little weight, when they
allege themſelves inſtrumental towards the reſtoration. Swift.
3. Conſiſting not of voices but inſtruments.
They which, under pretence of the law ceremonial abro-
gated, require the abrogation of inſirumental muſick, ap-
proving nevertheleſs the uſe of vocal melody to remain, muſt
ſhew ſome reaſon, wherefore the one ſhould be thought a
legal ceremony and not the other. Hooker, b. v.
4. Produced by inſtruments; not vocal.
Oft in bands,
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk,
With heav'nly touch of inſtrumental ſounds
In full harmonious number join'd, their ſongs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to heav'n. Milton.
Sweet voices, mix'd with inſtrumental ſounds,
Aſcend the vaulted roof, the vaulted roof rebounds. Dryd.
INstRUMENTA'lity. n.ſ.. [from inſtrumental.] Subordinate
agency; agency of anything as means to an end.
Thoſe natural and involuntary actings are not done by de-
liberation and formal command, yet they are done by the
virtue, energy, and influx of the ſoul, and the inſtrumenta-
lity of the ſpirits. Hale's Original of Mankind.
INst RUME’NTAlly. adv. [from inſtrumental.] In the nature
of an inſtrument; as means to an end.
Mens well-being here in this life is but inſtrumentally good,
as being the means for him to be well in the next life. Digby.
Habitual preparation for the ſacrament conſiſts in a ſtand-
ing, permanent habit, or principle of holineſs, wrought chiefly
by
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J N S
I N T
*
*
º,
º'
~.
s
&amp;
by God's ſpirit, and inſtrumentally by his word, in the heart
or ſoul of man. South's Sermons.
INSTRUME'NTALNEss. n.ſ. [from inſtrumental.] Uſefulneſs as
means to an end. -
The inſtrumentalneſs of riches to works of charity, has
rendered it very political, in every Chriſtian commonwealth,
by laws to ſettle and ſecure propriety. Hammond's Fund.
INsu'FFERABLE. adj. [in and ſufferable.]
1. Intolerable; inſupportable; intenſe beyond endurance.
The one is oppreſſed with conſtant heat, the other with
inſufferable cold. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi.
Though great light be inſufferable to our eyes, yet the
higheſt degree of darkneſs does not at all diſeaſe them; be-
cauſe that cauſing no diſorderly motion, leaves that curious
organ unharmed. Eocke.
2. Deteſtable; contemptible. - -
A multitude of ſcribblers, who daily peſter the world with
their inſufferable ſtuff, ſhould be diſcouraged from writing any
more. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
Insu'FFERABLY. adv. [from inſufferable.] To a degree beyond
endurance. -
Thoſe heav'nly ſhapes
Will dazzle now this earthly, with their blaze
Inſufferably bright. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
There is no perſon remarkably ungrateful, who was not
alſo inſufferably proud. South's Sermons.
INsu FFI’cience. Un. ſ. [inſufficience, Fr. in and ſufficient.] In-
IN SUFF1'CIENCY. } dequateneſs to any end or purpoſe ;
want of requiſite value or power: uſed of things and perſons.
The miniſter's aptneſs or inſufficiency, otherwiſe than by
reading to inſtruct the flock, ſtandeth in this place as a
ſtranger, with whom our form of common prayer hath no-
thing to do. Hooker, b. v.
The inſufficiency of the light of nature is, by the light of
ſcripture, ſo fully ſupplied, that further light than this hath
added, there doth not need unto that end. Hooker, b. ii.
We will give you ſleepy drinks, that your ſenſes, unintel-
ligent of our inſufficience, may, though they cannot praiſe us,
as little accuſe us. . Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
Till experience had diſcovered their defect and inſufficiency,
I did certainly conclude them to be infallible. Wilkins.
Conſider the pleas made uſe of to this purpoſe, and ſhew
the inſufficiency and weakneſs of them. Atterbury.
Insufficient. adj. [inſufficient, French; in and ſufficient.]
Inadequate to any need, uſe, or purpoſe ; wanting abilities;
incapable; unfit.
The biſhop to whom they ſhall be preſented, may juſtly
rejećt them as incapable and inſufficient. Spenſer on Ireland.
We are weak, dependant creatures, inſufficient to our own
happineſs, full of wants which of ourſelves we cannot re-
lieve, expoſed to a numerous train of evils’ which we know
not how to divert. Rogers's Sermons.
Faſting kills by the bad ſtate, not by the inſufficient quan-
tity of fluids. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
INsu FF1'cIENTLY. adv. [from inſufficient.] With want of pro-
per ability; not ſkilfully.
INSUFFLATION. [in and ſuffo, Latin.] The aët of breathing
upon. -
Impoſition of hands is a cuſtom of parents in bleſfing their
children, but taken up by the apoſtles inſtead of that divine
inſuffiation which Chriſt uſed. PHammond's Fundamentals.
I'NsulAR. Nadj. [inſulaire, French; inſularis, Lat.] Belong-
I'Nsula RY. } ing to an iſland.
Druina, being ſurrounded with the ſea, is hardly to be in-
vaded, having many other inſulary advantages. Howel.
I'Nsu LATED. adj. [inſula, Lat..] Not contiguous on any ſide.
INSU'lse. adj. [inſulſus, Lat..] Dull; inſipid ; heavy. Dićf.
INSU'Lt. m. ſ. [inſultus, Lat. inſulte, French. )
1. The aët of leaping upon any thing. In this ſenſe it has the
accent on the laſt ſyllable : the ſenſe is rare.
The bull’s ifth at four ſhe may ſuſtain,
But after ten from nuptial rites refrain. Dryden's Virgil.
2. Aćt of inſolence or contempt.
Take the ſentence ſeriouſly, becauſe railleries are an inſult
on the unfortunate. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
To INSU'LT. v. a. ſinſulter, Fr. inſulto, Lat.]
1. To treat with inſolence or contempt. It is uſed ſometimes
with over, ſometimes without a prepoſition.
The poet makes his hero, after he was glutted by the
death of Hector, and the honour he did his friend by inſult-
ing over his murderer, to be moved by the tears of king
Priam. Pope.
2. To trample upon ; to triumph over.
It pleas'd the king his maſter very lately
To ſtrike at me upon his miſconſtrućtion;
When he conjunét, and flatt’ring his diſpleaſure,
Tript me behind; being down, inſulted, rail'd,
And put upon him ſuch a deal of man,
That worthied him. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
So 'ſcapes the inſulting fire his narrow jail,
And makes ſmall outlets inte open air. Dryden.
3
Ev’n when they fing at eaſe in full content,
Inſulting o'er the toil they underwent,
Yet ſtill they find a future taſk remain,
To turn the ſoil. Dryden's Pirgii.
Issu’lter. n. ſ: [from inſult.] One who treats another with
inſolent triumph.
Ev’n man, the mercileſs inſulter man,
Man, who rejoices in our ſex's weakneſs, - -
Shall pity thee. Rowe's jane Shore.
Insu’lting LY. adv. [from inſulting.] With contemptuous
se
triumph.
Inſultingly, he made your love his boaſt,
Gave me my life, and told me what it coſt. Dryden.
INSUPERAbi'lity. n.ſ.. [from inſuperable.] The quality of be--
ing invincible.
INSU'PERABLE. adj. [inſuperabilis, Latin.] Invincible; in-
ſurmountable; not to be conquered; not to be overcome.
This appears to be an inſuperable objećtion, becauſe of the
evidence that ſenſe ſeems to give it. Digby on Bodies.
Much might be done would we but endeavour; nothing
is inſuperable to pains and patience. Ray on the Creation.
And middle natures how they long to join,
Yet never paſs th’ inſuperable line. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
INSU'PERABleness. n.ſ.. [from inſuperable.] Invincibleneſs;
impoſſibility to be ſurmounted.
INsu'per ABLY. adv. [from inſuperable.] Invincibly; inſur-
mountably.
Between the grain and the vein of a diamond there is this
difference, that the former furthers, the latter, being ſo in-
ſuperably hard, hinders the ſplitting of it. Grew's Muſæum.
INsuppo'RTABLE, adj. [inſupportable, French; in and ſupport-
able.] Intolerable ; inſufferable; not to be endured.
A diſgrace put upon a man in company is inſupportable; it
is heightened according to the greatneſs, and multiplied ac-
cording to the number of the perſons that hear. South.
The baſer the enemies are, the more inſupportable is the
inſolence L’Eſtrange's Fables.
The thought of being nothing after death is a burden in-
Jupportable to a virtuous man: we naturally aim at happineſs,
and cannot bear to have it confined to our preſent being. Dryd.
To thoſe that dwell under or near the Equator, this Spring
would be a moſt peſtilent and inſupportable Summer; and as
for thoſe countries that are nearer the Poles, a perpetual Spring
will not do their buſineſs. Bentley's Sermons.
INsuppo'RTABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from inſupportable.] Inſufferable-
neſs; the ſtate of being beyond endurance.
Then fell ſhe to ſo pitiful a declaration of the inſupportable-
neſs of her deſires, that Dorus's ears procured his eyes with
tears to give teſtimony how much they ſuffered for her ſuf-
fering. Sidney.
INsuppo'RTABLY. adv. [from inſupportable. J Beyond en-
durance.
But ſafeſt he who ſtood aloof,
When inſupportably his foot advanc'd,
In ſcorn of their proud arms and warlike tools,
Spurn'd them to death by troops. Milton's Agºniſter.
The firſt day's audience ſufficiently convinced me, that the
poem was inſupportably too long. Dryden.
Insur Mo'u Ntable. adj. [inſurmontable, Fr. in and ſurmountable.]
Inſuperable; unconquerable.
This difficulty is inſurmountable, 'till I can make ſimplicity
and variety the ſame. , Locke.
Hope thinks nothing difficult; deſpair tells us, that difficul-
ty is inſurmountable. Watts.
INsur Mountably. adv. [from inſurmountable.] Invincibly;
unconquerably.
Insurre’ction. m. ſ. [inſurgo, Latin.] A ſeditious riſing; a
rebellious commotion.
Between the ačting of a dreadful thing,
And the firſt motion, all the interim is
Like a phantaſma, or a hideous dream:
The genius and the mortal inſtruments
Are then in council; and the ſtate of many
Like to a little kingdom, ſuffers then º
The nature of an inſurreółion. Shał, jul Ceſar,
This city of old time hath made inſurrection againſt kings,
and that rebellion and ſedition have been made therein. Ezra.
There ſhall be a great inſurrection upon thoſe that fear the
Lord. 2 Eſd. xvi. 70.
Inſurrections of baſe people are commonly more furious in
their beginnings. Bacon's Henry VII.
The trade of Rome had like to have ſuffered another great
ſtroke by an inſurrection in Egypt, excited by Achilleus. Arbuth.
Insusur Ration. n f: [inſuffurro, Latin.] The aët of whiſ-
crinº.
Isºst E. adj. [in and tač7um, Latin.] Not perceptible
to the touch. - IDićf.
INTAGLIO. n.ſ.. [Italian.] Any thing that has figures en-
graved on it.
We meet with the figures which Juvenal deſcribes on an-
tique intaglios and medals. Addiſon on Italy.
INtA'stasie,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">/
I N T
INTA's TAL LE. adj. [in and taſte.] Not raiſing any ſenſations
in the organs of taſte.
Something which is inviſible, intoſable, and intangible, as
exiſting only in the fancy, may produce a pleaſure ſuperior to
that of ſenſe. Grew's Coſmol.
INTEGER. n.ſ. [Latin.] The whole of any thing.
As not only ſignified a piece of money, but any integer;
from whence is derived the word ace, or unit. Arbuthnot.
I'Nt E GRAL. adj. [integral, French; integer, Latin.]
1. Whole: applied to a thing conſidered as compriſing all its
conſtituent parts.
A local motion keepeth bodies integral, and their parts toge-
ther. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Uninjured; complete; not defective.
No wonder if one remain ſpeechleſs, though of integral
principles, who, from an infant, ſhould be bred up amongſt
mutes, and have no teaching. Holder.
3. Not fraćtional; not broken into fraćtions.
I'NTEGRAL. n.ſ. The whole made up of parts.
Phyſicians, by the help of anatomical diſſections, have
ſearched into thoſe various meanders of the veins, arteries,
nerves, and integrals of the human body. Hale.
Conſider the infinite complications and combinations of
ſeveral concurrences to the conſtitution and operation of al-
moſt every integral in nature. Hale.
A mathematical whole is better called integral, when the
ſeveral parts, which make up the whole, are diſtinét, and each
may ſubſiſt apart. //attr.
INTE'GRITY.. n.ſ.. [integrité, Fr. integritas, from integer, Lat.]
1. Honeſty; uncorrupt mind; purity of manners; uncorrupt-
edneſs.
Your diſhonour
Mangles true judgment, and bereaves the ſtate
Of that integrity which ſhould become it. Shakeſp. Coriol.
Macduff, this noble paſſion,
Child of integrity, hath from my ſoul
Wip'd the black ſcruples, reconcil'd my thoughts
To thy good truth and honour. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Whoever has examined both parties cannot go far towards
the extremes of either, without violence to his integrity or
underſtanding. Swift.
The libertine, inſtead of attempting to corrupt our inte-
grity, will conceal and diſguiſe his own vices. Rogers.
2. Purity; genuine unadulterate ſtate.
Language continued long in its purity and integrity. Hale.
3. Intireneſs; unbroken whole.
Take away this transformation, and there is no chaſm, nor
can it affect the integrity of the action. Braame.
INTEGUMENT. n. ſ. [integumentum, intego, Lat.] Any thing
that covers or invelops another.
He could no more live without his frize-coat than without
his ſkin: it is not indeed ſo properly his coat, as what the
anatomiſts call one of the integuments of the body. Addiſon.
INTELLECT. m. ſ. [intelled, Fr. intellečius, Lat.] The in-
telligent mind; the power of underſtanding.
- All heart they live, all head, all eye, all ear,
. . All intelled, all ſenſe. Milton.
All thoſe arts, rarities, and inventions, which vulgar minds
gaze at, and the ingenious purſue, are but the reliques of an
intellect defaced with fin and time. South's Sermons.
INTELLE'ction. n.ſ.. [intelled?ion, Fr. intelle&amp;io, Latin.] The
ačt of underſtanding.
Simple apprehenſion denotes the ſoul's naked intelle&amp;lion of
an objećt, without either compoſition or dedućtion. Glanv.
A determinate intelle&amp;lion of the modes of being, never hinted
by the ſenſes, can realize chimeras. Glanv. Scepſ.
. They will ſay 'tis not the bulk or ſubſtance of the animal
ſpirit, but its motion and agility, that produces intellection and
ſcnſe. Bentley's Sermons.
INTELLE"ctive. adj. [intelleciif, Fr. from intelled.] Having
power to underſtand.
If a man as intelle&amp;five be created, then either he means the
whole man, or only that by which he is intelle&amp;ive. Glanv.
INT E Lle cru AL. adj. [intelle&amp;fuel, French ; intellectualis, low
Latin.]
1. Relating to the underſtanding; belonging to the mind;
tranſacted by the underſtanding.
Religion teaches us to preſent to God our bodies as well
as our ſouls: if the body ſerves the ſoul in actions natural and
civil, and intelleciual, it muſt not be eaſed in the only offices
of religion. Taylor.
2. Mental; compriſing the faculty of underſtanding; belonging
to the mind.
Logick is to teach us the right uſe of our reaſon, or intel-
leółual powers. Watts.
3. Ideal; perceived by the intelle&amp;t, not the ſenſes.
In a dark viſion's intelle&amp;ual ſcene,
. . Beneath a bow'r for ſorrow made,
The melancholy Cowley lay. Cowley.
. . A train of phantoms in wild order roſe,
And, join'd, this intellectual ſcene compoſe. Popc.
4. Having the power of underſtanding.
I N T
Anaxagoras and Plato term the maker of the world an in-
tellectual worker. Hooker.
Who would loſe,
Though full of pain, this intelle&amp;ual being,
Thoſe thoughts that wander through eternity,
To periſh rather, ſwallow'd up and loſt,
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of ſenſe and motion ? Milton's Parad. Loft.
5. Propoſed as the objećt not of the ſenſes but intellect: as,
Cudworth names his book the intellectual ſyſtem of the uni-
verſe. ,
Intelle'ctual. m. ſ. Intellect; underſtanding; mental
powers or faculties. This is little in uſe.
Her huſband not nigh,
Whoſe higher intellectual more I ſhun. Alfilton.
The fancies of moſt, like the index of a clock, are moved
but by the inward ſprings of the corporeal machine; which,
even on the moſt ſublimed intelledual, is dangerouſly influen-
tial. Glanv. Scºpſ.
I have not conſulted the repute of my intellectual, in bring-
ing their weakneſſes into ſuch diſcerning preſences. Gianº.
INTE'lligence. } m. ſ. [ intelligence, French; intelligentia,
INTE'llic ENcy. $ Latin J
1. Commerce of information; notice; mutual communication;
account of things diſtant or ſecret.'
It was perceived there had not been in the catholicks, either
at Armenia or at Seleucia, ſo much forefight as to provide that
true intelligence might paſs between them of what was done.
Hºoker, b. v.
A mankind witch! hence with her, out of door
A moſt intelligency bawd! Shakeſkeare.
He furniſhed his employed men liberally with money,
to draw on and reward intelligences; giving them alſo in charge
to advertiſe continually what they found. Bacon’s H. VII.
The advertiſements of neighbour princes are always to be
regarded, for that they receive intelligence from better authors
than perſons of inferior note: Hayward.
Let all the paſſages
Be well ſecur'd, that no intelligence
May paſs between the prince and them. Denharº, Sºy.
Thoſe tales had been ſung to lull children aſleep, before ever
Beroſus ſet up his intelligence office at Coos. Bentley.
2. Commerce of acquaintance; terms on which men live one
with another.
Fa&amp;ious followers are worſe to be liked, which follow not
upon affection to him with whom they range themſelves;
whereupon commonly enſueth that ill intelligence that we ſee
between great perſonages. Bacon.
He lived rather in a fair intelligence than any friendſhip with
the favourites. - Clarendºn.
3. Spirit; unbodied mind.
How fully haſt thou ſatisfied me, pure
Intelligence of heav'n, angel! Milt. Parad. Loft.
There are divers ranks of created beings intermediate be-
tween the glorious God and man, as the glorious angels and
created intelligences. Hale.
They hoped to get the favour of the houſes, and by the
favour of the houſes they hoped for that of the intelligencies,
and by their favour for that of the ſupreme God. Stillingſcºt.
The regularity of motion, viſible in the great variety and
curioſity of bodies, is a demonſtration that the whole maſs of
matter is under the conduct of a mighty intelligence. Cºllier.
Satan, appearing like a cherub to Uriel, the intelligence of the
ſun circumvented him even in his own province. Dryden.
4. Underſtanding; ſkill.
Heaps of huge words, up hoarded hideouſly,
They think to be chief praiſe of poetry; -
And thereby wanting due intelligence,
Have marr'd the face of goodly poeſie. Spenſer.
INTELLIGE'NcER. m. ſ. [from intelligence.] One who ſends or
conveys news; one who gives notice of private or diſtant
tranſactions; one who carries meſſages between partics.
His eyes, being his diligent intelligencers, could carry unto
him no other news but diſcomfortable. Sidney.
Who hath not heard it ſpoken
How deep you were within the books of heav'n?
To us, th’ imagin'd voice of heav'n itſelf;
The very opener and intelligencer
Between the grace and ſanctities of heav'n,
And our dull workings. Shakespeare Henry IV.
If they had inſtructions to that purpoſe, they might be the
beſt intelligencers to the king of the true ſtate of his whole
kingdom. - Bacon.
They are the beſt ſort of intelligencers; for they have a way
into the inmoſt cloſets of princes. Hz:vel.
They have news-gatherers and intelligencers, who make
them acquainted with the converſation of the whole king-
dom. - Spe:ator.
INTE'llig ENT. adj. [intelligent, Fr. intelligens, Latin.]
1. Knowing; inſtrućted; ſkilful.
It is not only in order of nature for him to govern that is
the more intelligent, as Ariſtotle would have it ; but there is
4. no
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
I N T
º
!
:
º
*
iſ
.
no leſs required for government, courage to protećt, and
above all honeſty. Bacon.
Intelligent of ſeaſons, they ſet forth
Their airy caravan.
. He of times,
Intelligent, th’ harſh hyperborean ice
Shuns for our equal Winters; when our ſuns
Cleave the chill'd ſoil, he backwards wings his way. Phillips.
Trace out the numerous footſteps of the preſence and in-
terpoſition of a moſt wiſe and intelligent architect throughout
all this ſtupendous fabrick. JWoodward.
2. Giving information.
- Servants, who ſeem no leſs,
Which are to France the ſpies and ſpeculations
Intelligent of our ſtate. Shakespeare King Lear.
INTELLIGE'NTIAL. adj. [from intelligence.]
1. Conſiſting of unbodied mind.
Food alike thoſe pure ,
Intelligential ſubſtances require,
As doth your rational.
2. Intellectual; exerciſing underſtanding.
In at his mouth
The devil enter'd; and his brutal ſenſe,
His heart or head poſſeſſing, ſoon inſpir'd
With ačt intelligential. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
INTELLIGIBI'lity. n.ſ.. [from intelligible.]
1. Poſſibility to be underſtood. -
2. The power of underſtanding; intelle&amp;tion. Not proper.
The ſoul's nature conſiſts in intelligibility. Glanv Scepſ.
INTELLIGIBLE, adj. [intelligible, Fr. intelligibilis, Latin.]
To be conceived by the underſtanding; poſſible to be under-
ſtood. . .
We ſhall give ſatisfaction to the mind, to ſhew it a fair and
intelligible account of the deluge. Burnet.
Something muſt be loſt in all tranſlations, but the ſenſe will
remain, which would otherwiſe be loſt, or at leaſt be maimed,
when it is ſcarce intelligible. Dryden.
Many natural duties relating to God, ourſelves, and our
neighbours, would be exceeding difficult for the bulk of man-
kind to find out by reaſon; therefore it has pleaſed God to ex-
preſs them in a plain manner, intelligible to ſouls of the loweſt
capacity. J&amp;atts.
INTE'lligible Ness. n.ſ.. [from intelligible.] Poſſibility to be
underſtood ; perſpicuity. -
It is in our ideas that both the rightneſs of our knowledge,
and the propriety or intelligibleneſs of our ſpeaking, con-
ſiſts. Locke.
INTE'LLIGIBLY. adv. [from intelligible.] So as to be under-
ſtood; clearly; plainly.
- The genuine ſenſe, intelligibly told,
Shews a tranſlator both diſcreet and bold. Roſcommon.
To write of metals and minerals intelligibly, is a taſk more
difficult than to write of animals. J/oodward's Nat. Hi/?.
INTE'MERATE. adj. [inteneratus, Latin.] Undefiled; unpol-
luted.
INTE'MPERAMENT. n.ſ.. [in and temperament.] Bad conſti-
tution.
Some depend upon the intemperament of the part ulcerated,
and others upon the continual afflux of lacerative humours.
Harvey on Conſumptions.
INTE'MPER ANce. }". f, [intemperance, Fr. intemperantia, Lat.]
INTE'MPER ANc Y. W. Want of temperance; want of modera-
tion; exceſs in meat or drink.
Boundleſs intemperance
In nature is a tyranny ; it hath been
The fall of many kings. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Another law of Lycurgus induced to intemperancy and all
kind of incontinency. Hakewill.
Some, as thou ſaw'ſt, by violent ſtroke ſhall die;
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more
In meats and drinks, which on the earth ſhall bring
Diſeaſes dire; of which a monſtrous crew
Before thee ſhall appear; that thou may'ſt know
What miſery th' inabſtinence of Eve
Shall bring on men. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
The Lacedemonians trained up their children to hate
drunkenneſs and intemperance, by bringing a drunken man
into their company. Watts.
INTEMPERATE. adi, [intemperant, Fr. intemperatus, Latin.]
i. Immoderate in appetite; exceſſive in meat or drink; drunken;
gluttonous.
More women ſhould die than men, if the number of bu-
rials anſwered in proportion to that of ſickneſſes; but men,
being more intemperate than women, die as much by rea-
ſon of their vices, as women do by the infirmity of their
ſex. Graunt.
Notwithſtanding all their talk of reaſon and philoſophy, and
thoſe unanſwerable doubts, which, over their cups or their
coffee, they pretend to have againſt Chriſtianity; perſuade but
the covetous man not to deify his money, the intemperate man
to abandon his revels, and I dare undertake that all their giant-
like obječtions ſhall vaniſh. South.
- Milton.
Milton's Par. Loft.
2. Paſſionate; ungovernable; without rule.
You are more intemperate in your blood
Than thoſe pamper'd animals,
That rage in ſavage ſenſuality. Shakespeare.
Uſe not thy mouth to intemperate ſwearing; for therein is
the word of ſin. Eccluſ, xxiii. 13.
INTE'MPERATELY. adv. [from intemperate.]
1. With breach of the laws of temperance.
How groſly do many of us contradićt the plain precepts of
the Goſpel, by living intemperately or unjuſtly 2 Till tſºn.
2. Immoderately; exceſſively.
Do not too many believe no religion to be pure, but what is
intemperately rigid Whereas no religion is true that is not
peaceable as well as pure. \ Spratt's Sermons.
INTE'MPERATEN ess. m. ſ [from intemperate.]
I. Want of moderation.
2. Unſeaſonableneſs of weather. Ainſwºrth.
INTE'MPERATURE. m. ſ [from intemperate.] Exceſs of ſome
quality.
To INTE'ND. v. a. [intendo, Latin.]
1. To ſtretch out. Obſolete.
* The ſame advancing high above his head,
With ſharp intended ſting ſo rude him ſmote,
That to the earth him drove, as ſtricken dead;
Ne living wight would have him life behot. Fairy Queen:
2. To enforce; to make intenſe.
What ſeems to be the ground of the aſſertion, is the
magnified quality of this ſtar, conceived to cauſe or intend
the heat of this ſeaſon, we find that wiſer antiquity was not of
this opinion. Brown's Wulg. Err.
By this the lungs are intended or remitted. Hale.
This vis inertiae is eſſential to matter, becauſe it neither can
be deprived of it, nor intended or remitted in the ſame body;
but is always proportional to the quantity of matter. Cheyne.
Magnetiſm may be intended and remitted, and is found only
in the magnet and in iron. Newton's Opt.
3. To regard; to attend; to take care of.
This they ſhould carefully intend, and not when the ſacra-
ment is adminiſtred, imagine themſelves called only to walk up
and down in a white and ſhining garment. Hooker.
2. To pay regard or attention to. This ſenſe is now little uſed.
They could not intend to the recovery of that country of
the north. * - Spenſer.
Having no children, ſhe did with fingular care and tender-
neſs intend the education of Philip. Bacon's H. VII.
The king prayed them to have patience 'till a little ſmoak,
that was raiſed in his country, was over; ſlighting, as his
manner was, that openly, which nevertheleſs he intended ſeri-
ouſly. Bacon's H. VII.
Neither was there any queen-mother who might ſhare any
way in the government, while the king intended his pleaſure.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Go therefore, mighty pow'rs'
Terror of heav'n, though fallen' intend at home,
While here ſhall be our home, what beſt may eaſe
The preſent miſery, and render hell
More tolerable. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
Their beauty they, and we our loves ſuſpend; -
Nought can our wiſhes, ſave thy health, intend.
4. To mean ; to deſign.
The opinion ſhe had of his wiſdom was ſuch, as made her
eſteem greatly of his words; but that the words themſelves
ſounded ſo, as ſhe could not imagine what they intended. Sidn.
The gods would not have delivered a ſoul into the body,
which hath arms and legs, only inſtruments of doing, but
that it were intended the mind ſhould employ them. Sidney.
Thou art ſworn
As deeply to effect what we intend,
As cloſely to conceal what we impart 2 Shakespeare R. III.
The earl was a very acute and ſound ſpeaker, when he
would intend it. J/ºttom.
According to this model Horace writ his odes and epods ;
for his ſatires and epiſtles, being intended wholly for inſtruc-
tion, required another ſtyle. Dryden.
Inte's Dant. n.ſ. [French.J. An officer of the higheſt claſs,
who overſees any particular allotment of the publick buſineſs.
Nearchus, who commanded Alexander's fleet, and Oneſi-
crates, his intendant general of marine, have both left relations
of the Indies. Arbuthnot.
INTE'NDIMENT. n.ſ.. [entendement, French J Attention; pa-
tient hearing; accurate examination. This word is only to be
found in Spenſer.
Be nought hereat diſmay’d,
*Till well ye wot, by grave intendiment,
What woman, and wherefore doth me upbraid. Fa. Queen.
IN TE'NDM ENT. m. ſ. [entendement, French.]
1. Intention; deſign.
Out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you
withal; that either you might ſtay him from his intendment, or
brook ſuch diſgrace well as he ſhall run into. Shakeſpeare.
All that worſhip for fear, profit, or ſome other by-end, fall
more or leſs within the irtendment of this emblem. L'Eſtrange.
º:
12 N - To
J/aller.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
I N T
To INTE'NERATE. v. a. [in and tener, Latin.] To make ten-
der; to ſoften. Bp. Taylor.
Autumn vigour gives, -
Equal, intenerating, milky grain. Phillips.
INTENERATION. n.f. [from intenerate.] The act of ſoftening
or making tender.
In living creatures the nobleſt uſe of nouriſhment is for the
prolongation of life, reſtoration of ſome degree of youth, and
inteneration of the parts. Bacon.
INT ENIBLE. adj. [in and tenible.] That cannot hold. It is
commonly written intenable.
I know I love in vain, ſtrive againſt hope;
Yet in this captious and intenible ſieve,
I ſtill pour in the waters of my love.
INTE'NSE. adj. [intenſus, Latin.]
1. Raiſed to a high degree; ſtrained; forced; not ſlight; not lax.
To obſerve the effects of a diſtillation, proſecuted with ſo
intenſe and unuſual a degree of heat, we ventured to come
In Car. - Boyle.
Sublime or low, unbended or intenſe,
The ſound is ſtill a comment to the ſenſe.
2. Vchement; ardent.
Hebraiſms warm and animate our language, and convey our
thoughts in more ardent and intene phraſes. Addſon.
3. Kept on the ſtretch; anxiouſly attentive.
But in diſparity
The one intenſe; the other ſtill remiſs,
Cannot well ſuit with either, but ſoon prove
Tedious alike.
INTE'N's Ely. adv. [from intenſe.] To a great degree. . . .
If an Engliſhman conſiders our world, how intenſely it is
heated, he cannot ſuppoſe that it will cool again. Addiſon.
INT ENSEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from intºnſ.] The ſtate of being affected
to a high degree; force; contrariety to laxity or remiſſion.
The water of ſtanding ſprings and rivers, that ſuſtains a
diminution from the heat above, being evaporated more or
leſs, in proportion to the greater or leſler intenſeneſs of heat.
Woodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
INTE'Nsion. n.ſ.. [intenſion, Fr. intenſio, Latin.] The act of
forcing or ſtraining any thing; contrariety to remiſſion or
relaxation.
Sounds will be carried further with the wind than againſt
the wind; and likewiſe do riſe and fall with the intenſion or
remiſſion of the wind. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Faith differs from hope in the extenſion of its objećt, and
in the intenſion of degree. Taylor's Rule ºf living hºly.
INTE'Nsive. adj. [from intenſe.]
1. Stretched or increaſed with reſpect to itſelf. -
As his perfeótion is infinitely greater than the perfeótion of
a man, ſo it is infinitely greater than the perſe&amp;tion of an angel;
and were it not infinitely greater than the perfection of an
angel, it could not be infinitely greater than the perfection of
a man, becauſe the intenſive diſtance between the perfection of
an angel and of a man is but finite. - Hale.
2. Intent; full of care.
Tired with that aſſiduous attendance and intenſive circum-
ſpection, which a long fortune did require, he was not un-
willing to beſtow upon another ſome part of the pains. Watt.
INTE'Nsive LY. adv. To a greater degree.
God and the good angels are more free than we are, that is,
intenſively in the degree of frecdom; but not extenſively in the
latitude of the object, according to a liberty of exerciſe, but
not of ſpecification. Bramh. againſ? Hobbs.
INTE'N.T. adj. [ intentus, Latin. J. Anxiouſly diligent; fixed
with cloſe application.
Diſtraćtions in England made moſt men intent to their own
ſafety. King Charles.
When we uſe but thoſe means which God hath laid before
us, it is a good ſign that we are rather intent upon God's glory
than our own conveniency. Taylor.
. . The general himſelf had been more intent upon his com-
mand.
Shakeſpeare.
Roſcommon.
Clarendon.
They on their mirth and dance
Intent. Miltºn.
Of ačtion eager, and intent on thought,
The chiefs your honourable danger ſought. Dryden.
Were men as intent upon this as on things of lower con-
cernment, there are none ſo enſlaved to the neceſſities of life,
who might not find many vacancies that might be huſbanded
to this advantage of their knowledge. Locke.
Whilſt they are intent on one particular part of their theme,
they bend all their thoughts to prove or diſprove ſome propo-
fition that relates to that part, without attention to the conſe-
quences that may affect another. //atts.
Be intent and ſolicitous to take up the meaning of the
ſpeaker. J/attr.
INT ENT. m. ſ. [from intend..] A deſign; a purpoſe; a drift;
a view formed ; meaning.
Although the Scripture of God be ſtored with infinite va-
riety of matter in all kinds, although it abound with all ſorts
of laws, yet the principal intent of Scripture is to deliver the
laws of duties ſupernatural. Hooker,
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii. -
Whereas commandment was given to deſtroy all places
where the Canaanites had ſerved the gods, this precept had
reference unto a ſpecial intent and purpoſe, which was that
there ſhould be but one place whereunto the people might
bring offerings. Hooker.
Thoſe that accuſe him in his intent towards our wives, are
a yoke of his diſcarded men. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
I'll urge his hatred more to Clarence;
And, if I fail not in my deep intent,
Clarence hath not another day to live. Shakeſp. R. III.
There is an incurable blindneſs cauſed by a reſolution not
to ſee; and, to all intents and purpoſes, he who will not open
his eyes is for the preſent as blind as he that cannot. South.
He was a miſerable creature to all intents and purpoſes.
L'Eſtrange's Fables.
This fury fit for her intent ſhe choſe;
One who delights in wars. Dryden's AFn.
The Athenians ſent their fleet to Sicily, upon pretence only
to aſſiſt the Leontines againſt Syracuſe; but with an intent to
make themſelves maſters of that iſland. Grew.
Of darkneſs viſible ſo much be lent,
As half to ſhew, half veil the deep intent. Dunciad.
INTE'Ntion. n ſ. [intention, French; intentio, Latin.]
1. Eagerneſs of deſire; cloſeneſs of attention; deep thought;
vehemence or ardour of mind.
Intention is when the mind with great earneſtneſs, and of choice;
fixes its view on any idea, conſiders it on every ſide, and will
not be called off by the ordinary ſolicitation of other ideas. Locke.
Effectual prayer is joined with a vehement intention of the
inferior powers of the ſoul, which cannot therein long con-
tinue without pain: it hath been therefore thought good, by
turns, to interpoſe ſtill ſomewhat for the higher part of the
mind and the underſtanding to work upon. Hooker.
She did courſe o'er my exteriors with ſuch a greedy inten-
tion, that the appetite of her eye did ſeem to ſcorch me up
like a burning-glaſs. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Hindſor.
In perſons poſſeſſed with other notions of religion, the un-
derſtanding cannot quit theſe but by great examination; which
cannot be done without ſome labour and intention of the mind,
and the thoughts dwelling a conſiderable time upon the ſurvey
and diſcuſſion of each particular. , South's Sermons.
2. Deſign; purpoſe.
Moſt part of chronical diſtempers proceed from laxity of the
fibres; in which caſe the principal intention is to reſtore the
tone of the ſolid parts. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. The ſtate of being intenſe or ſtrained. This for diſtinčtion
is more generally and more conveniently written intenſion.
The operations of agents admit of intention and 1emiſſion ;
but eſſences are not capable of ſuch variation. Locée.
INTE'Ntion Al. adj. [intentionel, Fr. from intention.] Deſigned;
done by deſign.
The glory of God is the great end which every intelligent
being is bound to conſult, by a direct and intentional ſervice.
Rogers's Sºrmans.
INTE'Ntion ALLY. adv. [from intentional.]
1. By deſign; with fixed choice.
I find in myſelf that this inward principle doth exert many
of its actions intentionally and purpoſely. Hale.
2. In will, if not in action.
Whenever I am wiſhing to write to you, I ſhall conclude
you are intentionally doing ſo to me. Atterbury to Pope.
INTE'Ntive. adj. [from intent.] Diligently applied; buſily
attentive.
Where the obječt is fine and accurate, it conduceth much to
have the ſenſe intentive and erect. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The naked relation, at leaſt the intentive conſideration of
that, is able ſtill, and at this diſadvantage of time, to rend the
hearts of pious contemplators. Brown’s Pulg. Arrours.
INT'evively. adv. [ from intentive. J With application;
cloſely. -
INTE'Ntly. adv. [from intent.] With cloſe attention; with
cloſe application; with eager deſire.
If we inſiſt paſſionately or ſo intently on the truth of our
beliefs, as not to proceed to as vigorous purſuit of all juſt, ſo-
ber, and godly living. • Hammond on Fundamentali.
The odd paintings of an Indian ſcreen, at firſt glance, may
ſurpriſe and pleaſe a little; but when you fix your eye intently
upon them, they appear ſo extravagantly diſproportioned that
they give a judicious eye pain. Atterbury.
The Chian medal ſeats him with a volume open, and read-
ing intently. Pope.
INTE'NTNess. n.ſ.. [from intent.] The ſtate of being intent;
anxious application.
He is grown more diſengaged from his intentnºſ, on his own
affairs. Swift.
To INTER. v. a. [enterrer, French.] To cover underground;
to bury.
Within their chiefeſt temple I'll erect
A tomb, wherein his corps ſhall be interr'd Shakeſp H. VI.
The evil that men do lives after them;
The good is of interred with their bones. Shakespeare  jul. Caſ
* - His
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
º
s
º
His body ſhall be royally interr'd, -
And the laſt funeral pomps adorn his herſe. Dryden.
The aſhes, in an old record of the convent, are ſaid to have
been interred between the very wall and the altar where they
were taken up. Addiſon on Italy.
The beſt way is to inter them as you furrow peaſe. Mort.
INTE'RcALAR. l adj. [intercalaire, Fr. intercalaris, Latin.]
#:::::::...} Inſerted out of the common order to pre-
ſerve the equation of time, as the twenty-ninth of February
in a leap-year is an intercalary day.
To INTE'RcALATE. v. a. [intercaler, Fr. intercala, Lat.] To
inſert an extraordinary day.
INTERcALATION. n.ſ.. [intercalation, Fr. intercalatio, Latin.]
Inſertion of days out of the ordinary reckoning.
In fixty-three years there may be loſt almoſt eighteen days,
omitting the intercalation of one day every fourth year, allowed
for this quadrant, or ſix ſupernumeraries. Brown's Wul. E. r.
To INTERCE/DE. v. n. [interceder, Fr. interced, Latin.]
1. To paſs between.
He ſuppoſeth that a vaſt period interceded between that ori-
gination and the age wherein he lived. Hale's Origin of Mank.
Thoſe ſuperficies refle&amp;t the greateſt quantity of light,
which have the greateſt refracting power, and which intercede
mediums that differ moſt in their refračtive denſities. Newton.
2. To mediate; to act between two parties with a view of re-
conciling differences.
Them the glad ſon
Preſenting, thus to intercede began. Mi’t. Parad. Loft.
Nor was our bleſſed Saviour only our propitiation to die for
us, and procure our atonement, but he is ſtill our advocate,
continually interceding with his Father in behalf of all true
penitents. Calamy.
I may reſtore myſelf into the good graces of my fair cri-
ticks, and your lordſhip may intercede with them on my pro-
miſe of amendment. Dryden.
Origen denies that any prayer is to be made to them, al-
though it be only to intercede with God for us, but only the
fon of God. Stillingfieet.
INTERce'De R. n.ſ.. [from intercede.] One that intercedes; a
mediator.
To INTERCEPT. v. a. [intercepter, Fr. interceptus, Latin.]
1. To ſtop and ſeize in the way.
The better courſe ſhould be by planting of garriſons about
him, which, whenſoever he ſhall look forth, or be drawn out,
ſhall be always ready to intercept his going or coming. Spenſer.
Who intercepts me in my expedition ?
—O, ſhe that might have intercepted thee,
By ſtrangling thee. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
I then in London, keeper of the king,
Muſter'd my ſoldiers, gather'd flocks of friends,
March'd towards St. Alban's t' intercept the queen. Shakeſp.
Your intercepted packets
You writ to the pope. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
If we hope for things which are at too great a diſtance from
us, it is poſſible that we may be intercepted by death in our
progreſs towards them. - Addiſon's Spectator.
2. To obſtruct; to cut off; to ſtop from being communicated.
- Though they cannot anſwer my diſtreſs, -
Yet in ſome ſort they're better than the tribunes;
For that they will not intercept my tale. Shakeſp. Tit. Andr.
Since death's near, and runs with ſo much force,
We muſt meet firſt, and intercept his courſe. Dryden.
On barbed ſteeds they rode in proud array,
Thick as the college of the bees in May,
When ſwarming o'er the duſky fields they fly
New to the flow’rs, and intercept the ſky. Drydºn.
: Behind the hole I faſtened to the paſteboard, with pitch, the
blade of a ſharp knife, to intercept ſome part of the light which
paſſed through the hole. Newton's Opt.
The direful woes,
Which voyaging from Troy the vićtors bore,
While ſtorms vindićtive intercept the ſhore. Pope.
INTERCE"P'tion. m. ſ. [interception, Fr. interceptio, Lat. from
intercept.] Stoppage in courſe; hindrance; obſtruction.
The pillars...ſtanding at a competent diſtance from the out-
moſt wall, will, by interception of the fight, ſomewhat in ap-
pearance diminiſh the breadth. JWotton's Architecture.
The word in Mathew doth not only ſignify ſuſpenſion, but
alſo ſuffocation, ſtrangulation, or interception of breath. Brown.
INTERcE'ssion. m. ſ. [interciſion, Fr. interceffo, Lat.] Me-
diation ; interpoſition ; agency between two parties; agency
in the cauſe of another, generally in his favour.
Yet loving, indeed, and therefore conſtant, he uſed ſtill the
intercºſion of diligence and faith, ever hoping becauſe he would
not put himſelf into that hell to be hopeleſs, until the time of
our being come and captived there brought forth this end. Sid.
Can you, when you puſh'd out of your gates the very de-
fender of them, think to front his revenges with the palfied in-
terºſion of ſuch a decay’d dotard as you ſeem to be Shakep.
He maketh interceſſion to God againſt Iſrael. Ro. xi. 2.
He bare the ſin of many, and made interceſſion for the
tranſgreſſors. Iſ, liii. 1 2.
5
Pray not thou for this people, neither make intercºſian to
me; for I will not hear thce. º . ... jer. vii. 16.
To pray to the faints to obtain things by their merits and
interceſſions, is allowed and contended for by the Roman
church. - Stillingfieet.
Your intercºſion now is needleſs grown; , -
Retire, and let me ſpeak with her alone Dryd. Aurengz.
INTER ce'ssour. n. ſ. [interceſe r, Fr. interceſſor, Lat.] Mie-
diator; agent between two parties to procure reconciliation.
Behold the heav'ns ! thither thine eyeſight bend ;
Thy looks, fighs, tears, for int.rce/ouri ſend. Fairfax.
- On man's bc half, -
Patron or interce/ſour, none appear'd. Milt. Par. Lºft.
When we ſhall hear our eternal doorn from our intercºſaur,
it will convince us, that a denial of Chriſt is more than tranſi-
tory words. South's Sermons.
To INTERcHA'IN. v. a. [inter and chain.] To chain; to link
together.
Two boſoms interchained with an oath;
So then two boſoms, and a ſingle troth. Shakeſpeare.
To Intercha's GE. va. [inter and change.]
1. To put each in the place of the other; to give and take mu-
tually; to exchange.
They had left but one piece of one ſhip, whereon they kept
themſelves in all truth, having interchanged their cares, while
either cared for other, each comforting and counſelling how
to labour for the better, and to abide the worſe. Sidney.
I ſhall interchange
My wained ſtate for Henry's regal crown. Shakeſpeare.
2. To ſucceed alternately. - -
His faithful friend and brother Euarchus came ſo mightily
to his ſuccour, that, with ſome interchanging changes of for-
tune, they begat of a juſt war, the beſt child peace. Sidney.
INTERchA'NGE. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Commerce; permutation of commodities.
Thoſe people have an interchange or trade with Elana.
Howel.
2. Alternate ſucceſſion. -
With what delight could I have walk'd thee round?
If I could joy in ought ! ſweet interchange
Of hill and valley, rivers, woods, and plains. Milton.
The original meaſures of time, by help of the lights in
the firmament, are perceptible to us by the interchanges of light
and darkneſs, and ſucceſſion of ſeaſons. Holder.
Removes and interchanges would often happen in the firſt
ages after the flood. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
3 £iº donation and reception.
Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring us Creſſid hither. Good Diomede, , --
Furniſh you fairly for this interchange. Shakespeare Trail, and C. ſ.
Farewel; the leiſure, and the fearful time,
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love,
And ample interchange of ſweet diſcourſe. Shaieff. R. III.
Since their more mature dignities and royal neceſſities made
ſeparation of their ſociety, their encounters, though not per-
ſonal, have been royally attornied with interchange of gifts,
letters, loving embaſſies. Shakespeare Jºinter's Tale.
After ſo vaſt an obligation, owned by ſo free an acknow-
ledgment, could any thing be expečted but a continual inter-
change of kindneſſes. - - South.
INTERchA'NGEA Ble, adj. [from interchange.]
1. Given and taken mutually.
So many teſtimonies, interchangeable warrants, and counter-
rolments, running through the hands and reſting in the power
of ſo many ſeveral perſons, is ſufficient to argue and convince
all manner of falſhood. Bacon's Off of Alienation.
2. Following each other in alternate ſucceſſion. -
Juſt under the line they may ſeem to have two Winters and
two Summers; but there alſo they have four interchangeable
ſeaſons, which is enough whereby to meaſure. Hilder.
All along the hiſtory of the Old Teſtament we find the in-
terchangeable providences of God, towards the people of Iſrael,
always ſuited to their manners. Tillotſon.
INTERCHA'NGEABLY. adv. [from interchangeable.] Alternate-
ly; in a manner whereby each gives and receives. ..., .
In theſe two things the Eaſt and Weſt churches did inter-
changeably both confront the Jews and concur with them. Hook.
This in myſelf I boldly will defend,
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this overweening traitor's foot. Shakeſp. R. II.
Theſe articles were ſigned by our plenipotentiaries, and
thoſe of Holland; but not by the French, although it ought to
have been done interchangeably; and the miniſters here pre-
vailed on the queen to execute a ratification of articles, which
only one part had ſigned. Swift.
INTERchA’NGEMENT. n. ſ. [inter and change.] Exchange;
mutual transference.
A contračt of eternal bond of love,
Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands,
Atteſted by the holy cloſe of lips, -
Strengthen’d by interchangement of your rings. Shakespeareears.
INTERc1 PIRNT.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
INTERcr'PIENT. n.f. [intercipient, Latin.] An intercepting
power; ſomething that cauſes a ſtoppage.
They commend repellents, but not with much aſtringency,
unleſs as intercipients upon the parts above, leſt the matter
ſhould thereby be impacted in the part. Wiſeman.
INTERc1's Ion. m. ſ. [inter and cardo, Lat.] Interruption.
By ceſſation of oracles we may underſtand their interciſion,
not aboiſſion, or conſummate deſolation. Brown's Vulgar Err.
To INTER clu'DE. v. n. [intercludo, Latin.] To ſhut from
a place or courſe by ſomething intervening; to intercept.
The voice is ſometimes intercluded by a hoarſeneſs, or viſ-
cuous phlegm cleaving to the aſpera arteria. Holder.
INTER clu'sion. n.ſ. [intercluſus, Latin.] Obſtrućtion; in-
terception.
INTERcolumnia"tion. n.ſ.. [inter and columna, Latin.] The
ſpace between the pillars.
The diſtance or intercolumniation may be near four of his
own diameter, becauſe the materials commonly laid over this
pillar were rather of wood than ſtone. J%tton.
To INTER co’MMon. v. n. [inter and common.] To feed at the
ſame table.
Wine is to be forborn in conſumptions, for that the ſpirits
of the wine do prey upon the roſcid juice of the body, and in-
tercommon with the ſpirits of the body, and ſo rob them of their
nouriſhment. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
INTER commu'N1TY. m. ſ. [inter and community.] A mutual
communication or community; a mutual frecdom or exerciſe
of religion.
Interco'stal. adj. [intercoſial, Fr. inter and cºſia, Lat..] Placed
between the ribs.
The diaphragm ſeems the principal inſtrument of ordinary
reſpiration, although to reſtrained reſpiration the intercoſtal
muſcles may concur. Boyle.
By the aſſiſtance of the inward intercoſial muſcles, in deep
ſuſpirations, we take more large gulps of air to cool our
heart. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
I'Nt frcourse. m. ſ. ſentrecours, French.]
1. Commerce; exchange.
This ſweet intercourſ.
Of looks, and ſmiles; for ſmiles from reaſon flow,
To brute deny'd, and are of love the food. Milton.
2. Communication.
The choice of the place requireth many circumſtances, as
the ſituation near the ſea, for the commodiouſneſs of an inter-
courſe with England. Bacon.
What an honour is it that God ſhould admit us into ſuch a
participation of himſelf? That he ſhould give us minds capable
of ſuch an intercourſ with the Supreme Mind? Alterbury.
INTER cu'RRENCE. m. ſ. [from intercurro, Latin.] Paſſage be-
tWeen.
Conſider what fluidity ſaltpetre is capable of, without the
intercurrence of a liquor. Boyle.
InTER cu'RRENT. adj. [intercurrens, Lat.] Running between.
If into a phial, filled with good ſpirit of nitre, you caſt a
piece of iron, the liquor, whoſe parts moved placidly before,
meeting with particles in the iron, altering the motion of its
parts, and perhaps that of ſome very ſubtile intercurrent mat-
ter, thoſe ačtive parts preſently begin to penetrate, and ſcatter
abroad particles of the iron. Boyle.
INTER DE'A L. m. ſ. [inter and deal.] Traffick; intercourſe.
The Gauliſh ſpeech is the very Britiſh, which is yet retained
of the Welſhmen and Britons of France; though the altera-
tion of the trading and interdeal with other nations has greatly
altered the diale&amp;t. - Spenſer.
To INTERDI'CT. v. a. [interdire, Fr. interdico, Latin.]
1. To forbid; to prohibit.
Alone I paſs'd, through ways
That brought me on a ſudden to the tree
Of interdicted knowledge. Milton's Par. Loft, b. v.
By magick fenc'd, by ſpells encompaſs'd round,
No mortal touch'd this interdićied ground. Tickel.
2. To prohibit from the enjoyment of communion with the
church.
An archbiſhop may not only excommunicate and interdić
his ſuffragans, but his vicar-general may do the ſame. Ayliff.
INTERDI’ct. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. Prohibition; prohibiting decree.
Amongſt his other fundamental laws, he did ordain the in-
terdieſ; and prohibitions touching entrance of ſtrangers. Bacon.
Thoſe are not fruits forbidden, no interdić,
Defends the touching of theſe viands pure;
Their taſte no knowledge works at leaſt of evil. Mit. P. L.
Had he liv'd to ſee her happy change,
He would have cancell'd that harſh infºrdić,
And join'd our hands himſelf. Dryd. Don Sebaſtian.
2. A papal prohibition to the clergy to celebrate the holy offices.
Nani carried himſelf meritoriouſly againſt the pope, in the
time of the interdél, which held up his credit among the pa-
triotS. - J/otton.
INTER Diction. m. ſ. [interdićtiºn, Fr. interdići, Lat. from
interdić.] - -
1. Prohibition; forbidding decree.
- 2
* . . Sternly he pronounc'd
The rigid interdićion, which reſounds
Yet dreadful in mine ear. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b.viii.
2. º from the papal interdić. An improper uſe of the
WOrd. - -
The trueſt iſſue of thy throne,
By his own interdićtion ſtands accurſt. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
INTERDI’ctoRy. adj. Jfrom interdići.] Belonging to an inter-
dićtion. - - - Ainſwºrth.
To INTERE'ss. Uv. a. ſintereſſºr, French..] To concern; to
To INTERE's T. } affect; to give ſhare in.
The myſtical communion of all faithful men is ſuch as
maketh every one to be interſed in thoſe precious bleſfings,
which any one of them receiveth at God's hands. Hocker.
Our joy,
Although our laſt not leaſt; to whoſe young love,
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy,
Strive to be intrºſ'd. Shakeſp. King Lear.
To love our native country, and to ſtudy its benefit and its
glory, to be intereſſed in its concerns, is natural to all men.
Dryden's Aºn. Dedicat.
Scipio, reſtoring the Spaniſh bride, gained a great nation
to intereſ; themſelves for Rome againſt Carthage. Dryden.
This was a goddeſs who uſed to intereſt herſelf in mar-
riages. Addiſon on Medals.
Ill ſucceſſes did not diſcourage that ambitious and intereſted
people. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To INTERE'st. v. n. To affect; to move; to touch with
paſſion; to gain the affections: as, this is an intereſting ſtory.
I'NTERest. n.ſ.. [interºff, Latin; interet, French.]
1. Concern; advantage; good.
O give us a ſerious comprehenſion of that one great intereſ?
of others, as well as ourſelves. Hammond.
There is no man but God hath put many things into his
poſſeſſion, to be uſed for the common good and inters/l. Calam.
2. Influence over others.
They, who had hitherto preſerved them, had now loſt their
intereſt. - Clarendon.
Exert, great God, thy int’re? in the ſky;
Gain each kind pow'r, each guardian deity,
That, conquer'd by the publick vow,
They bear the diſmal miſchief far away. Prior.
Endeavour to adjuſt the degrees of influence, that each
cauſe might have in producing the effect, and the proper agen-
cy and intereſt of each therein. Watts.
3. Share; part in anything; participation: as, this is a matter
in which we have intereſt.
4. Regard to private profit.
Wherever intereſt or power thinks fit to interfere, it little
imports what principles the oppoſite parties think fit to charge
upon each other. Swift.
'Tis int’reſ calls off all her ſneaking train. Pope.
5. Money paid for uſe; uſury.
Did he take intereſ 2
—No, not take intereſ?; not, as you would ſay,
Direétly, int’re/?; mark what Jacob did. Shakeſpeare.
It is a ſad life we lead, my dear, to be ſo teazed; paying
intereſt for old debts, and ſtill contračting new ones. Arbuthn.
6. Any ſurplus of advantage.
- With all ſpeed
You ſhall have your deſires with intereſt. Shakeſpeare.
To INTERFE/R.E. v. n. [inter and firio, Latin.]
1. To interpoſe; to intermeddle.
So cautious were our anceſtors in converſation, as never
to interfere with party diſputes in the ſtate. Swift.
2. To claſh; to oppoſe each other.
If each ačts by an independent power, their commands
may interfere. Smalridge's Serm.
3. A horſe is ſaid to interfere, when the fide of one of his ſhoes
ſtrikes againſt and hurts one of his fetlocks, or the hitting one
leg againſt another, and ſtriking off the ſkin. Farrier's Dicţ.
INTERFLUENT. adj. [interfluens, Lat.] Flowing between.
Air may conſiſt of any terrene or aqueous corpuſcles, kept
ſwimming in the interflient celeſtial matter. Boyle.
INTERFU/LG ENT. adj. [inter and fulgens, Latin. J Shining
between. -
INTF RFU's ED. adj. [interfuſus, Latin. J Poured or ſcattered
betwcen.
The ambient air wide interſus’d,
Embracing round this florid earth. Milton.
INTER J Ace NCY. m. ſ. [from interjacens, Latin J
1. The act or ſtate of lying between.
England and Scotland is divided only by the interjacency of
the Tweed, and ſome deſert ground. Hale.
2. The thing lying between.
Its fluétuations are but motions, which winds, ſtorms,
ſhoars, and every interjacency irregulates. Brown's Puig, Err.
INTERJAce N.T. adj. [interjacens, Latin.] Intervening; lying
between.
The ſea itſelf muſt be very broad, and void of little iſlands
interjacent, elſe will it yield plentiful argument of quarrel to
the kingdoms which it ſervath. Raleigh.
Through
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
- ?º:º
ſ: 5
º
Through this hole objećts that were beyond might be ſeen
diſtinétly, which would not at all be ſeen through other parts
of the glaſſes, where the air was interjacent. Newton's Opt.
INTER JE'ction. n.ſ. [ interjećlion, Fr. interjećlio, Latin. J
1. A part of ſpeech that diſcovers the mind to be ſeized or af-
fećted with ſome paſſion: ſuch as are in Engliſh, O / alas !
ah / Clarke's Lat. Gram.
Their wild natural notes, when they would expreſs their
paſſions, are at the beſt but like natural interjećions, to diſco-
ver their paſſions or impreſfions. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
2. Intervention; interpoſition; ačt of ſomething coming between;
aćt of putting ſomething between.
Laughing cauſeth a continued expulſion of the breath, with
the loud noiſe which maketh the interjećlion of laughing. Bacon.
I’NTERIM. n ſ [interim, Latin.] Mean time; intervening
tl Inc.
I a heavy interim ſhall ſupport, ,
By his dear abſence. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
One bird happened to be foraging for her young ones, and in
this interim comes a torrent that waſhes away neſt, birds, and
all. L’Eſtrange.
In this interim my women aſked what I thought. Tatler.
INTERJo'IN. adj. [inter and join..] To join mutually; to in-
termarry. - -
So felleſt foes, -
Whoſe paſſions and whoſe plots have broke their ſleep,
To take the one the other, by ſome chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, ſhall grow dear friends,
And interjoin their iſſues. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
INTE’RioUR. adj. [interior, Lat. interieur, Fr.] Internal; inner;
not outward; not ſuperficial.
The fool-multitude, that chuſe by ſhow,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach, , .
Which pry not to th’ interizur. Shakeſpeare.
The groſſer parts, thus ſunk down, would harden and con-
ſtitute the interiour parts of the earth. - Burnet.
INTERKNo'wledge. n.ſ.. [inter and knowledge. J Mutual
knowledge. - - &gt;
All nations have interknowledge one of another, either by
voyage into foreign parts, or by ſtrangers that come to
them." - Bacon's New Atlantis.
To INTERLA’ce. v.a. [entrelaſer, French.] To intermix; to
put one thing within another.
Some are to be interlaced between the divine readings of the
law and prophets. Hooker.
Touching reannexing of Bretagne to France, the ambaſſa-
dors declined any mention thereof; but contrariwiſe interlaced,
in their conference, the purpoſe of their maſter to match with
the daughter of Maximilian. Bacon's Henry VII.
They acknowledged what ſervices he had done for the
commonwealth, yet interlacing ſome errors, wherewith
they ſeemed to reproach him. Hayward.
Your argument is as ſtrong againſt the uſe of rhyme in
poems as in plays; for the epick way is, every where interlaced
with dialogue. - - Dryden.
INTERLA'pse. n.ſ.. [inter and lapſe.] The flow of time be-
tween any two events.
Theſe dregs are calcined into ſueh ſalts, which, after a ſhort
interlapſe of time, produce coughs. Harvey.
To INTER LA'RD., v. a. [entrelarder, French.]
1. To mix meat with bacon, or fat; to diverſify lean with fat.
2. To interpoſe; to inſert between. - -
Jeſts ſhould be interlarded, after the Perſian cuſtom, by ages
young and old. - Carew.
3. To diverſify by mixture.
The laws of Normandy were the defloration of the Engliſh
laws, and a tranſcript of them, though mingled and interlarded
with many particular laws of their own, which altered the
features of the original. Hale's Laws of England.
4. Philips has uſed this word very harſhly, and probably did not
underſtand it.
They interlard their native drinks with choice
Of ſtrongeſt brandy. Philips.
Te INTER LE'Ave. v. a. [inter and leave.] To chequer a book
by the inſertion of blank leaves.
To INte Rli'Ne: v. a. ſinter and line.]
1. To write in alternate lines.
When, by interlining Latin and Engliſh one with another,
he has got a moderate knowledge of the Latin tongue, he
may then be advanced farther. Locke.
2. To corre&amp;t by ſomething written between the lines. -
He cancell'd an old will, and forg’d a new ;
Made wealthy at the ſmall expence of ſigning, - *.
With a wet ſeal, and a freſh interlining. Dryden's juven.
Three things render a writing ſuſpećted: the perſon pro-
ducing a falſe inſtrument, the perſon that frames it, and the
interlining and raſing out of words contained in ſuch inſtru-
Inents. Ayliffe's Parergon.
The muſe invok'd, ſit down to write, - - -
Blot out, correct, and interline. Swift.
INTERLINEA'tion. n.ſ. ſinter and lineation.] Correction made
by writing between the lines.
Many clergymen write in ſo diminutive a manner, with
ſuch frequent blots and interlineations, that they are hardly able
to go on without perpetual heſitations. Swift.
To INTERLI'Nk. v. a. [inter and link.] To conneét chains
one to another; to join one in another.
The fair mixture in pićtures cauſes us to enter into the ſub-
jećt which it imitates, and imprints it the more deeply into
our imagination and our memory: theſe are two chains which
are interlinked, which contain, and are at the ſame time con-
tained. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
INTERLocu'tion. m.ſ.. [interlocution, Fr. interlocutio, Latiii.]
1. Dialogue; interchange of ſpeech. -
The plaineſt and the moſt intelligible rehearſal of the pſalms
they ſavour not, becauſe it is done by interlocution, and with
a mutual return of ſentences from ſide to ſide: Hooker.
2. Preparatory proceeding in law; an intermediate ačt before
final deciſion. -
Theſe things are called accidental, becauſe ſome new inci-
dent in judicature may emerge upon them, on which the judge
ought to proceed by interlocution. Ayliffe's Parergon.
InterlocutoR. n.ſ.. [inter and loquor, Latin.] Dialogiſt;
one that talks with another. - -
Some moroſe readers ſhall find fault with my having made
the interlocutors compliment with one another. Boyle.
INTERLo'cutoRY. adj. [interlocutoire, Fr. inter and liquor, Lat.]
1. Conſiſting of dialogue.
When the miniſter by exhortation raiſeth them up, and the
people by proteſtation of their readineſs declare he ſpeaketh not
in vain unto them; theſe interlocutory forms of ſpeech, what are
they elſe but moſt effectual, partly teſtifications, and partly
inflammations of all piety - Hoºker.
There are ſeveral interlocutory diſcourſes in the holy Scrip-
tures, though the perſons ſpeaking are not alternately men-
tioned or referred to. Fiddes's Sermons.
2. Preparatory to deciſion.
To INTERLo'Pe. v. n. [inter and loopen, Dutch, to run.] To
run between parties and intercept the advantage that one
ſhould gain from the other; to traffick without a proper
licence; to foreſtall; to anticipate irregularly.
The patron is deſired to leave off this interloping trade, or
admit the knights of the induſtry to their ſhare. Tatler.
Interlo'PER. n.ſ.. [from interlope.] One who runs into buſi-
neſs to which he has no right. -
The ſwallow was a fly-catcher, and was no more an inter-
leper upon the ſpider's right, than the ſpider was upon the
ſwallow's. L’Eſtrange.
INTERLu'cENT. adj. [ interlucent, Latin. J Shining be-
tWeen. Dićf.
I'NTERLUDE. n.ſ.. [inter and ludus, Latin.] Something plaid
at the intervals of feſtivity; a farce.
When there is a queen, and ladies of honour attending her,
there muſt ſometimes be maſques, and revels, and inter-
ludes. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
The enemies of Socrates hired Ariſtophanes to perſonate
him on the ſtage, and, by the inſinuations of thoſe interludes,
conveyed a hatred of him into the people. Gov. of the Tongue.
Dreams are but interludes, which fancy makes;
When monarch reaſon ſleeps, this mimick wakes. Dryden.
INTERLU'EN cy. n.ſ.. [interluo, Latin.] Water interpoſited;
interpoſition of a flood.
Thoſe parts of Aſia and America, which are now disjoined
by the interluency of the ſea, might have been formerly conti-
guous. . . Hale's Origin of Mankind.
INTERLU'NAR. Qadj. [inter and luna, Lat.] Belonging to the
INTERLU'NARY. } time when the moon, about to change, is
inviſible.
We add the two Egyptian days in every month, the inter-
lunary and prenilunary exemptions. Brown,
The ſun to me is dark,
And ſilent as the moon,
When ſhe deſerts the night,
Hid in her vacant interlunar cave. Milton.
InterMARRIAge. n.ſ.. [inter and marriage.] Marriage be-
tween two families, where each takes one and gives another.
Becauſe the many alliances and intermarriages, as well as
the perſonal feuds that happen among ſo ſmall a people, might
obſtrućt the courſe of juſtice, they have always a foreigner
for this employ. Addiſon on Italy.
To INTERMA'RRY. v. h. [inter and marry..] To marry ſome
of each family with the other.
About the middle of the fourth century, from the building
of Rome, it was declared lawful for nobles and plebeians to
intermarry. - Swift.
To INTERME'DDLE. v. h. [inter and meddle.] To interpoſe
officiouſly. -
The pračtice of Spain hath been by war, and by conditions
of treaty, to intermeddle with foreign ſtates, and declare them-
ſelves protećtors general of Catholicks. Bacon:
Seeing the king was a ſovereign prince, the emperor ſhould
not intermeddle with ordering his ſubječts, or directing the
affairs of his realm. Hayward.
11 Q - There
|-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
I N T
wº-
There were no ladies, who diſpoſed themſelves to inter-
meddle in buſineſs. Clarendon.
To INTER ME’ddle. v. a. [entremºſer, French..] To inter-
mix; to mingle. This is perhaps miſprinted for intermeled.
Many other adventures are intermeddled; as the love of Bri-
tomert, and the virtuouſneſs of Belphaebe. Spenſer.
INTERME'D DLER. m.ſ.. [from intermeddle.] One that inter-
poſes officiouſly; one that thruſts himſelf into buſineſs to
which he has no right. -
There's hardly a greater peſt to government and families,
than officious tale-bearers, and buſy intermeddlers. L'Eſtrange.
Our two great allies abroad, and our ſtock-jobbers at home,
direct her majeſty not to change her ſecretary or treaſurer, who,
for the reaſons that theſe officious intermedders demanded their
continuance, ought never to have been admitted into the leaſt
truſt. Swift.
Shall ſaucy intermeddlers ſay,
Thus far, and thus, are you allow'd to puniſh? A. Phillips.
INTERME'diacy. n.ſ. (from intermediate.] Interpoſition; in-
tervention. An unauthoriſed word.
In birds the auditory nerve is affeded by only the interme-
diacy of the columella. Derham.
INTERME'DIAL. adj. [inter and medius, Latin.] Intervening;
lying between ; intervenient. -
The love of God makes a man temperate in the midſt of feaſts,
and is ačtive enough without any intermedial appetites. Taylor.
A gardener prepares the ground, and in all the intermedial
ſpaces he is careful to dreſs it. Evelyn's Kalendar.
INTER ME'DIATE. adj. [intermediat, Fr. inter and medius, Lat.]
Intervening; interpoſed; holding the middle place or degree
between two extremes. -
Do not the moſt refrangible rays excite the ſhorteſt vibra-
tions for making a ſenſation of a deep violet, the leaſt refran-
gible the largeſt for making a ſenſation of deep red, and the
ſeveral intermediate ſorts of rays, vibrations of ſeveral interme-
diate ºneſia, to make ſenſations of the ſeveral intermediate
colours? Newton's Opt.
An animal conſiſts of ſolid and fluid parts, unleſs one ſhould
reckon ſome of an intermediate nature as fat and phlegm. Arb.
Thoſe general natures, which ſtand between the neareſt
and moſt remote, are called intermediate. J/atts.
INTERMEDIATELY. adv. [from intermediate.] By way of in-
tervention.
To INTERME’ll. v. a. [entremſler, Fr.] To mix 3 to mingle.
By occaſion hereof many other adventures are intermelled,
but rather as accidents than intendments. Spenſer.
INTE'RMENT. n.ſ.. [interment, French; from inter.] Burial;
ſepulchre. -
INTERMIGRA’tion. n.ſ. ſintermigration, Fr. inter and migro,
Lat..] Aćt of removing from one place to another, ſo as that
of two parties removing each takes the place of the other.
Men have a ſtrange variety in colour, ſtature, and humour;
and all ariſing from the climate, though the continent be but
one, as to point of acceſs, mutual intercourſe, and poſſibility
of intermigrations. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
INTE'RMINABLE. adj. [interminable, Fr. in and termino, Latin.]
Immenſe; admitting no boundary.
As if they would confine th’ interminable,
And tie him to his own preſcript. Milton's Agoniſłes.
INTE'RMINATE. adj. [interminate, Fr. interminatus, Latin.]
Unbounded ; unlimited.
Within a thicket I repos'd ; when round
I ruffled up fall'n leaves in heaps, and found,
Let fall from heaven, a ſleep interminate. ... Chapm. Odyſ.
INTERMINA'Tio N. n.ſ.. [intermination, Fr. intermino, Latin.]
Menace; threat. -
The threats and interminations of the Goſpel, thoſe terrors
of the Lord, as goads, may drive thoſe brutiſh creatures who
will not be attracted. Decay of Piety.
To INTERMI'NGLE. v. a. [inter and mingle.] To mingle; to
mix; to put ſome things amongſt others.
The church in her liturgies hath intermingled, with readings
out of the New Teſtament, leſſons taken out of the law and
prophets. - - - - Płooker.
His church he compareth unto a field, where tares, mani-
feſtly known and ſeen by all men, do grow intermingled with
good corn. Plooker.
- - - My lord ſhall never reſt:
I’ll intermingle every thing he does - º
With Caſſio’s ſuit. - Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Here ſailing ſhips delight the wand'ring eyes;
: There trees and intermingled temples riſe. Pope.
To Inter MI'NGLE. v. n. To be mixed or incorporated.
JNTERMI'ssion. n. ſ. [intermiſſion, Fr. intermiſſio, Lat.]
1. Ceſſation for a time; pauſe; intermediate ſtop.
Came a reeking poſt, - -
Deliver'd letters, ſpight of intermiſſiºn, , ,
Which preſently they read. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I count intermiſſion almoſt the ſame thing as change; for
that that hath been intermitted, is after a ſort new. Bacon.
The water aſcends gently, and by intermiſſions; but it falls
continuately, and with force. J/i'kins’s Dard.
The peaſants work on, in the hotteſt part of the day, with-
out intermiſſion. Lacie.
2. Intervenient time,
But gentle heav'n
Cut ſhort all intermiſſion: front to front,
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myſelf. Shałºff.
3. State of being intermitted. -
Words borrowed of antiquity, have the authority of years,
and out of their intermiſſion do win to themſelves a kind of
grace-like newneſs Ben. johnſon.
4. The ſpace between the paroxyſms of a ſever, or any fits
of pain; reſt; pauſe of ſorrow.
Reſt or intermiſſion none I find. Milton.
INTERMI'ssive. adj. [from intermit.] Coming by fits; not
continual.
Wounds I will lend the French, inſtead of eyes,
To weep their intermiſſive miſeries. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
I reduced Ireland, after ſo many intermiſſive wars, to a
perfeót paſſive obedience. Howel's England's Tears.
As though there were any feriation in nature, or juſtitiums
imaginable in profeſſions, whoſe ſubjećt is under no intermiſſive
but conſtant way of mutation, this ſeaſon is commonly termed
the phyſicians vacation. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
To INTERMIT. v. a. [intermito, Latin.] To forbear any
thing for a time; to interrupt.
If nature ſhould intermit her courſe, and leave altogether,
though it were but for a while, the obſervation of her own
laws. Hooker.
Run to your houſes, fall upon your knees;
Pray to the gods, to intermit the plague
That needs muſt light on this ingratitude.
His miſled, laſcivious ſon,
Edward the ſecond, intermitted ſo
The courſe of glory. Daniel's Civ. Iſar.
The ſetting on foot ſome of thoſe arts that were once well
known, would be but the reviving of thoſe arts which were
long before practiſed, though intermitted and interrupted by
War. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
. . Certain Indians, when a horſe is running in his full career,
'leap down, gather any thing from the ground, and immediate-
ly leap up again, the horſe not intermitting his courſe. Wiſłins.
Speech intermitted, thus began. Milton.
We are furniſhed with an armour from heaven of firmneſs;
but if we are remiſs, or ſuffer ourſelves to be perſuaded to lay
by our arms, and intermit our guard, we may be ſurpriſed.
Rºgers's Sermons.
Shakeſpeare.
To INTERMIT. v. n. To grow mild between the fits or pa--
roxyſms. Uſed of fevers.
INTERMITTENT. adj. [intermittent, Fr. intermittens, Latin.]
Coming by fits. -
Next to thoſe durable pains, ſhort intermittent or ſwift re-
current pains do precipitate patients into conſumptions. Harv.
To INTERMI'x. v. a, [inter and mix.] To mingle; to join ;
to put ſome things among others.
Her perſuaſions ſhe intermixed with tears, affirming, that
ſhe would depart from him. Hayward.
Reveal
To Adam what ſhall come in future days,
As I ſhall thee enlighten: intermix
My cov'nant in the woman's ſeed renew'd. Miſt. Par. Loft.
n yonder ſpring of roſes, intermix’d
With myrtle, find what to redreſs’till noon. Milton.
I doubt not to perform the part of a juſt hiſtorian to my
royal maſter, without intermixing with it any thing of the
poet. Dryden.
To InterMI'x. v. n. To be mingled together.
INTERMI'xture... n.ſ.. [inter and mixtura, Latin.]
1. Maſs formed by mingling bodies.
The analytical preparation of gold or mercury, leave per-
ſons much unſatisfied whether the ſubſtances they produce be
truly the hypoſtatical principles, or only ſome intermixtures of
the divided bodies with thoſe employed. Boyle.
2. Something additional mingled in a maſs.
In this height of impiety there wanted not an intermixture
of levity and folly. º - Bacon's Henry VI.
INTERMU'NDANE. adj. [inter and mundus, Latin.] Subſiſting
between worlds, or between orb and orb.
The vaſt diſtances between theſe great bodies are called in-
termundame ſpaces; in which though there may be ſome fluid,
yet it is ſo thin and ſubtile, that it is as much as nothing. Loºke.
INTERMU'RA L. adj. [inter, muralis, murus, Lat J. Lying be-
tween walls. . . ." - Ainſworth.
INTERMU'TUAL. adj. . [inter and mutual.] Mutual; inter-
changed. Inter before mutual is improper.,
A ſolemn oath religiouſly they take,
By intermutual vows proteſting there,
. This never to reveal, nor to forſake -
So good a cauſe. Daniel’s Civil Iſºr.
INTERN adj. [interne, French; internus, Latin.] Inward;
inteſtine; not foreign. ... . - - -
The midland towns are moſt flouriſhing, which ſhews that
her riches are intern and domeſtick. Hº!.
INTERNAL.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º,
I N T
I N T
INTERNAL. adj. [internus, Latin.]
1. Inward; not external.
That ye ſhall be as gods, ſince I as man,
Internal man, is but proportion meet. Mih. Par. Loft.
Myſelf, my conſcience, and internal peace. Milton.
Bad comes of ſetting our hearts upon the ſhape, colour,
and external beauty of things, without regard to the internal
excellence and virtue of them. L’Eſtrange,
If we think moſt mens ačtions to be the interpreters of
their thoughts, they have no ſuch internal veneration for good
rules. - Locke.
2. Intrinſick; not depending on external accidents; real.
We are to provide things honeſt; to conſider not only the
internal restitude of our actions in the ſight of God, but whe-
ther they will be free from all mark or ſuſpicion of evil. Rogers.
INTE'RNALLY. adv. [from internal.]
1. Inwardly.
2. Mentally; intelle&amp;ually.
We are ſymbolically in the ſacrament, and by faith and the
ſpirit of God internaly united to Chriſt. Taylor.
INT E R NE’cIN E. adj. [internecinus, Latin.] Endeavouring mu-
tual deſtruction.
Th’ Egyptians worſhip'd dogs, and for -
Their faith made internecine war. Hudibras, p. i.
INTERNE'cion. n.ſ.. [internecion, French ; internecio, Latin.]
Maſſacre; ſlaughter. -
That natural propenſion of ſelf-love, and natural principle
of ſelf-preſervation, will neceſſarily break out into wars and
internecions. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
INTERNU'Ncio. n.ſ.. [internunciuſ, Latin.] Meſſenger between
two parties.
IN r ERPELLATION. n.ſ.. [interpellation, Fr. interpellatio, Lat.]
A ſummons; a call upon.
In all extrajudicial ačts one citation, monition, or extraju-
dicial interpe lation is ſufficient. • Ayliffe's Parergon.
To INTERPOLATE. v. a. [interpoler, Fr. interpolo, Latin.]
1. To foiſt anything into a place to which it does not belong.
The Athenians were put in poſſeſſion of Salamis by another
law, which was cited by Solon, or, as ſome think, interpolated
by him for that purpoſe. - Pope.
2. To renew ; to begin again; to carry on with intermiſſions.
This motion of the heavenly bodies themſelves ſeems to be
partly continued and unintermitted, as that motion of the firſt
moveable, partly interpolated and interrupted. Hale.
. That individual hath neceſſarily a concomitant ſucceſſion of
interpolated motions; namely, the pulſes of the heart, and the
ſucceſſive motions of reſpiration. Hale.
INTERPola"tion. n.ſ.. [interpolation, Fr. from interpolate.]
Something added or put into the original matter.
I have changed the ſituation of ſome of the Latin verſes,
and made ſome interpolations. Cromwell to Pope.
INTERPola'roR. n.ſ. [Latin; interpolateur, Fr.] One that
foiſts in counterfeit paſſages.
You or your interpolator ought to have confidered. Swift.
INTERPo's Al. n ſ [from interpoſe.]
1. Interpoſition; agency between two perſons.
The interpoſal of my lord of Canterbury's command for the
publication of this mean diſcourſe, may ſeem to take away my
choice. - South's Sermons.
2. Intervention.
Our overſhadowed ſouls may be emblemed by cruſted globes,
whoſe influential emiſfions are intercepted by the interpoſal of
the benighting element. Glanv Scepſ.
To INTERPOSE. v. a. [interpono, Latin; interpoſer, Fr.]
1. To thruſt in as an obſtruction, interruption, or inconve-
in 162nce. -
What watchful cares do interpoſe themſelves
Betwixt your eyes and night. Shakeſp. Julius Caeſar.
Death ready ſtands to interpoſe his dart. Milton.
Human frailty will too often interpoſe itſelf among perſons
of the holieſt function. Swift.
2. To offer as a ſuccour or relief.
. The common father of mankind ſeaſonably interpoſed his
hand, and reſcued miſerable man out of the groſs ſtupidity and
ſenſuality whereinto he was plunged. Woodward.
3. To place between ; to make intervenient.
Some weeks the king did honourably interpoſe, both
to give ſpace to his brother's interceſſion, and to ſhow that he
had a conflićt with himſelf what he ſhould do. Bacon.
To INTERPo's E. v. n.
1. To mediate: to act between two parties.
2. To put in by way of interruption.
- But, interpoſes Eleutherius, this objećtion may be made in-
deed almoſt againſt any hypotheſis. Boyle.
INTERPo's ER. n.ſ. (from interpoſe.]
1. One that comes between others.
I will make haſte; but 'till I come again,
Nobed ſhall ere be guilty of my ſtay;
No reſt be interpoſer 'twixt us twain.
2. An intervenient agent; a mediator. -
INTERPosition. n.ſ. [interpoſition, Fr. interpoſitio, Lat. from
interpoſe.] -
1. Intervenient agency. 2
Shakeſpeare.
There never was a time when the interpºſition of the ma-
giſtrate was more neceſſary to ſecure the honour of reli-
ion. Atterbury's Sermons.
Though warlike ſucceſſes carry in them often the evidences
of a divine interpoſition, yet are they no ſure marks of the
divine favour. Atterbury.
2. Mediation; agency between parties.
The town and abbey would have come to an open rupture,
had it not been timely prevented by the interpoſitiºn of their
common protećtors. Addiſon.
3. Intervention; ſtate of being placed between two.
The nights are ſo cold, freſh, and equal, by reaſon of the
intire interpoſition of the earth, as I know of no other part of
the world of better or equal temper. Raleigh.
She ſits on a globe that ſtands in water, to denote that ſhe
is miſtreſs of a new world, ſeparate from that which the Ro-
mans had before conquered, by the interpoſition of the ſea. Addison
4. Any thing interpoſed.
A ſhelter, and a kind of ſhading cool
Interpoſition, as a Summer's cloud. Milt. Paradiſe Regain'd.
To INTERPRET. v. a. [interpreter, French; interpretor, Lat.]
To explain; to tranſlate; to decipher; to give a ſolution; to
clear by expoſition; to expound. -
One, but painted thus,
Would be interpreted a thing perplex’d
Beyond ſelf-explication.
You ſhould be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are ſo. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He hanged the chief baker, as Joſeph had interpreted to
them. Gen. xl. 22.
Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that
could interpret them unto him. Gen. xli. 8.
An excellent ſpirit, knowledge, and underſtanding, inter-
preting of dreams, and ſhewing of hard ſentences, and diſ-
ſolving of doubts, were found in the ſame Daniel. Dan. v. 12.
Hear his ſighs, though mute'
Unſkilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. xi.
INTE'RPRETABLE. adj. [from interpret.] Capable of being ex-
pounded or deciphered. * *
No man's face is actionable: theſe ſngularities are inter-
pretable from more innocent cauſes. Collier.
INTER PRETA'tion. n.ſ.. [interpretation, Fr. interpretatio, Lat.
from interpret.] -
1. The aët of interpreting; explanation.
This is a poor epitome of your’s,
Which, by th’ interpretation of full time,
May ſhew like all yourſelf. Shakespeare Coriolanuſ.
Look how we can, or ſad or merrily,
Interpretation will miſquote our looks. Shakep. H. IV.
2. The ſenſe given by an interpreter; expoſition.
If it be obſcure or uncertain what they meant, charity, I
hope, conſtraineth no man, which ſtandeth doubtful of their
minds, to lean to the hardeſt and worſt interpretation that
their words can carry. - - Hooker.
The primitive Chriſtians knew how the Jews, who pre-
ceded our Saviour, interpreted theſe predićtions, and the marks
by which the Meſſiah would be diſcovered; and how the Jew-
iſh doćtors, who ſucceeded him, deviated from the interpreta-
tions of their forefathers. Addiſon.
3. The power of explaining.
We beſeech thee to proſper this great ſign, and to give us
the interpretation and uſe of it in mercy. Bacon.
INTE'Rpretative. adj. [from interpret.] Colle&amp;ted by inter-
pretation.
Though the creed apoſtolick were ſufficient, yet when the
church hath erected that additional bulwork againſt hereticks,
the rejećting their additions may juſtly be deemed an interpre-
tative ſiding with hereſies. Hammond.
INTE'RPRETAtively. adv. [from interpretative..] As may be
collečted by interpretation. .
By this proviſion the Almighty interpretatively ſpeaks to him
in this manner: I have now placed thee in a well furniſhed
world. Ray on the Creation.
INTE'RPRETER. m. ſ. [interprete, Fr. interpres, Latin.]
1. An explainer; an expoſitor; an expounder.
What we oft do beſt,
By ſick interpreters, or weak ones, is
Not ours, or not allow'd: what worſt, as oft,
Hitting a groſſer quality, is cry’d up
For our beſt ačt. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
In the beginning the earth was without form and void; a
fluid, dark, confuſed maſs, and ſo it is underſtood by inter-
preters, both Hebrew and Chriſtian. Burnet.
We think moſt mens ačtions to be the interpreters of their
thoughts. Locke.
2. A tranſlator. -
Nor word for word be careful to transfer,
With the fame faith as an interpreter. Fanſhaw.
How ſhall any man, who hath a genius for hiſtory, under-
take ſuch a work with ſpirit, when he conſiders that in an age or
two he ſhall hardly be underſtood without an interpreter. Swift.
INTERPu'Nction.
Shakespeare Cymbeline.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
* I N T
INTF RFU'Nction. n.ſ.. [interpunélio, Fr. interpungo, Latin.]
Pointing between words or ſentences.
INTERREGNUM. n.ſ. [Lat.] The time in which a throne
is vacant between the death of a prince and acceſſion of an-
other.
Next enſu'd a vacancy,
Thouſand worſe paſſions than poſſeſs'd
The interregnum of my breaſt:
Bleſs me from ſuch an anarchy Cowley.
He would ſhew the queen my memorial with the firſt op-
portunity, in order to have it done in this interregnum or ſuſ-
penſion of title. Swift.
INTERRE'IGN. n.ſ.. [interrºgne, Fr. interregnum, Latin.] Va-
cancy of the throne.
The king knew there could not be any interreign or ſuſ-
penſion of title. Bacon's Henry VII.
To INTE’RRoo Ate. v. a. [interrogo, Lat. interroger, Fr.] To
examine; to queſtion.
To IN're'RRocate. v. n. To aſk; to put queſtions.
By his inſtructions touching the queen of Naples, it ſeem-
eth he could interrogate touching beauty. Bacon's Henry VII.
His proof will eaſily be retorted by interrogating, Shall the
adulterer and the drunkard inhcrit the kingdom of God.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
INTERRoc Aºtion. m. ſ. [interrogation, Fr. interrogatio, Lat.]
1. A queſtion put ; an enquiry.
How demurely ſoever ſuch men may pretend to ſanétity,
that interrogation of God preſſes hard upon them, ſhall I count
them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights 2 Government of the Tongue.
This variety is obtained by interrogations to things inani-
matc.; by beautiful digreſſions, but thoſe ſhort. Pope.
2. A note that marks a queſtion : thus as, Does job ſerve
God for nought 2
INTERRo'o Ative. adj. [interrogatif, Fr. interrogativus, Lat.]
Denoting a queſtion; expreſled in a queſtionary form of words.
INTERRo'GATIVE. m. ſ. A pronoun uſed in aſking queſtions:
as, who what? which whether
INTERRO'GATIVELY. adv. [from interrogative..] In form of a
queſtion. -
INTERRogA"roR. n.ſ.. [from interrogate.] An aſker of queſ.
tionS.
INTE’RRog AtoRY. n.ſ.. [interrogatoire, French.] A queſtion;
an enquiry. -
He with no more civility, though with much more buſineſs
than thoſe under-fellows had ſhewed, began in captious man-
ner to put interrogatories unto him. Sidney, b. ii.
Nor time, nor place,
Will ſerve long interrogatories. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
What earthly name to interrogatories
Can taſk the free breath of a ſacred king. Shakeſpeare.
The examination was ſummed up with one queſtion,
Whether he was prepared for death The boy was frighted
out of his wits by the laſt dreadful interrogatory. Addiſon.
INTERRo'Gatory. adj. Containing a queſtion; expreſſing a
queſtion.
To INTERRU'PT. v. a. ſinterrompre, Fr. inter, uptus, Lat.]
1. To hinder the proceſs of any thing by breaking in upon it.
- Rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters, and o'erbear
What they are uſed to bear. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
He might ſecurely enough have engaged his body of horſe
againſt their whole inconſiderable army, there being neither
tree nor buſh to interrupt his charge. Clarendon, b. ii.
This motion of the heavenly bodies ſeems partly uninter-
rupted, as that of the firſt moveable interpolated and inter-
rupted. Hale.
2. To hinder one from proceeding by interpoſition.
Anſwer not before thou haſt heard the cauſe; neither in-
terrupt men in the midſt of their talk. Eccluſ, xi. 8.
3. To divide ; to ſeparate.
Seeſt thou what rage
Tranſports our adverſary, whom no bounds,
Nor yet the main abyſs wide interrupt, can hold. Milton.
1st: RRUPTEDLY. adv. [from interrupted.] Not in continuity;
not without ſtoppages. -
The incident light that meets with a groſſer liquor, will
have its beams either refračted or imbibed, or elſe refle&amp;ted
more or leſs interruptedly than they would be, if the body had
been unmoiſtened. - Boyle on Colours.
INTERRU'PTER. n. ſ. . [from interrupt..] He who interrupts.
INTERRU'PT ion. m. ſ... [interruption, Fr. interruptio, Latin.]
1. Interpoſition; breach of continuity.
Places ſevered from the continent by the interruption of the
ſea, Hale's Original of Mankind.
2. Intervention; interpoſition.
You are to touch the one as ſoon as you have given a
ſtroke of the pencil to the other, left the interruption of time
‘aſſe you to lºſe the idea of one part. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
&amp; Hiiºd, ance ; ſtºp ; let ; obſtruction.
Bloody England into England gone,
O'erbearing int. "ruptism, ſpite of France.
Shakeſpeare.
the acceſſion of oil, becometh more tranſparent.
This way of thinking on what we read, will be a rub only
in the beginning; when cuſtom has made it familiar, it will
be diſpatched without reſting or interruption in the courſe of
our reading. Locke.
Amidſt the interruptions of his ſorrow, ſeeing his penitent
overwhelmed with grief, he was only able to bid her be com-
forted. Addiſon's Spect. Nº. 164.
INTERscA'pular. adj. [inter and ſcapula, Latin.] Placed be-
tween the ſhoulders.
To INTERsci’ND. v. a. [inter and ſcindo, Latin.] To cut off
by interruption. Dićf.
To INTERscR1'BE. v. a. [inter and ſcribo, Lat..] To write be-
tween. Dićf.
INTERse'cant. adj. [interſecans, Latin.] Dividing any thing
into parts.
To INTERSECT. v. a. [interſ.co, Lat.] To cut; to divide
each other mutually.
Perfect and viviparous quadrupeds ſo ſtand in their po-
ſition of proneneſs, that the oppoſite joints of neighbour legs
conſiſt in the ſame plane; and a line deſcending from their
navel interſects at right angles the axis of the earth. Brown.
Excited by a vigorous loadſtone, it will ſomewhat depreſs
its animated extreme, and interſect the horizontal circum-
ference. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii.
To INTERs E^ct. v. m. To meet and croſs each other.
The ſagittal ſuture uſually begins at that point where theſe
lines interſect. Jºſeman's Surgery.
INTERSE"ction. n.ſ.. [interſectio, Lat. from interſed.] Point
where lines croſs each other.
They did ſpout over interchangeably from ſide to ſide in
forms of arches, without any interſection or mceting aloft,
becauſe the pipes were not oppoſite. J/otton's Architecture.
The firſt ſtar of Aries, in the time of Meton the Athe-
nian, was placed in the very interſection, which is now elon-
gated, and moved eaſtward twenty-eight degrees. Brown.
Ships would move in one and the ſame ſurface; and con-
ſequently muſt needs encounter, when they either advance
towards one another in direct lines, or meet in the interſec-
tion of croſs ones. Bentley's Sermons.
To INTERSERT. v. a. [interſero, Lat.] To put in between
other things.
If I may interſert a ſhort philoſophical ſpeculation, the
depth of the ſea is determined in Pliny to be fifteen furlongs.
- h: on Languages.
INTERSE’RTIon. n.ſ.. [from interſert.] An inſertion, or thing
inſerted between any thing.
Theſe two interſertions were clear explications of the
apoſtle's old form, God the father, ruler of all, which con–
tained an acknowledgement of the unity. Hammond.
To INTERSPE(Rs E. v.a. [interſperſus, Lat..] To ſcatter here
and there among other things.
The poſſibility of a body's moving into a void ſpace be-
yond the utmoſt bounds of body, as well as into a void ſpace
inter/perſed amongſt bodies, j always remain clear. Locke.
It is the editor's intereſt to inſert what the author's judg-
ment had rejected; and care is taken to interſperſ, theſe
additions in ſuch a manner, that ſcarce any book can be
bought without purchaſing ſomething unworthy of the author.
Swift.
INTERSPE’Rsion. n.ſ.. [from interſperſe.] The aët of iſ:
ing here and there.
For want of the interſperſion of now and then an elegiack
or a lyrick ode. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
INTERSTE'LLAR. adj. [inter and ſellar, Lat..] Intervening be-
tween the ſtars.
The interſhellar ſky hath ſo much affinity with the ſtar, that
there is a rotation of that as well as of the ſtar. Bacon.
I'NTERstice. n. ſ. [inter/litium, Lat. inter/fice, Lat.]
1. Space between one thing and another.
The ſun ſhining through a large priſm upon a comb placed
immediately behind the priſm, his light, which paſſed through
the interſtices of the teeth fell upon a white paper: the breadths
of the teeth were equal to their interſtices, and ſeven teeth
together with their inter/lices took up an inch in breadth.
Newton's Opticks.
The force of the fluid will ſeparate the ſmalleſt particles
which compoſe the fibres, ſo as to leave vacant interſ?ices in
thoſe places where they cohered before. Arbuthnot.
2. Time between one act and another.
I will point out the inter/lices of time which ought to be
between one citation and another. Ayliff's Parergon.
INTERSTITIAL. adj. [from inter/lice.] Containing interſtices.
In oiled papers, the inter/?itial diviſion being actuated by
Brown.
INTERTE'xt URE. m. ſ. [intertexo, Latin.] Diverſification of
things mingled or woven one among another.
To INTERTwi'N E. R. v. a. [inter and twine, or twiſt.] To unite
To INTER Twi's T. } by twiſting one in another.
Under ſome concourſe of ſhades,
Whoſe branching arms thick intertwin'd might ſhield
From dews and damps of night his ſhelter'd head. Miltºn.
3 INTERVAL.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
I NT
º
.
*
. .
1 *
-
º:
*
I'Nterval. n. ſ. [intervalle, Fr. intervallum, Latin.] . .
1. Space between places; interſtice; vacuity; ſpace unoccu-
pied ; void place; vacancy; vacant ſpace. . . . . . .
With any obſtacle let all the light be now ſtopped which
paſſes through any one interval of the teeth, ſo that the range
of colours which comes from thence, may be taken away,
and you will ſee the light of the reſt of the ranges to be ex-
panded into the place of the range taken away, and there to
be coloured. . . . . . . . . Newton's Opticks.
2. Time paſſing between two aſſignable points. : . .
The century and half following, to the end of the third
Punick war, was a very buſy period at Rome; the intervals
between every war being ſo ſhort, Swift.
3. Remifion of a delirium or diſtemper. . . . --
Though he had a long illneſs, conſidering the great heat
with which it raged, yet his intervals of ſenſe being few and
ſhort, left but little room for the offices of devotion. Atterb.
To INTERVE'N F. v. n. [intervenio, Lat. intervenir, Fr.] To
come between things or perſons; to be intercepted; to make
intervals. . - - * *
While ſo near each other thus all day
Our taſk we chuſe, what wonder, if ſo near,
Looks intervene, and ſmiles. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
Eſteem the danger of an action, and the poſſibilities of
miſcarriage, and every croſs accident that can intervene, to
be either a mercy on God's part, or a fault on ours. Taylor.
INTF Rve'NE. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Oppoſition, or perhaps
interview. A word out of uſe.
They had ſome ſharper and ſome milder differences, which
might eaſily happen in ſuch an intervene of grandees, both
vehement on the parts which they ſwayed. Wotton.
INTERVE'NIENT. adj. [interveniens, Lat, intervenant, French.]
Intercedent; interpoſed; paſſing between.
There be intervenient in the riſe of eight, in tones, two
bemolls or half notes. . . . Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 104.
Many arts were uſed to diſcuſs new affection: all which
notwithſtanding, for I omit things intervenient, there is con-
veyed to Mr. Williers an intimation of the king's pleaſure to
be ſworn his ſervant. ... *
INTERVE'Ntion, n, ſ. [intervention, Fr. interventio, Latin.]
1. Agency between perſons... -
od will judge the world in righteouſneſs by the interven-
tion of the man Chriſt Jeſus, who is the Saviour as well as
the judge of the world. tterbury's Sermons.
2. Agency between antecedents and conſecutives.
n the diſpenſation of God's mercies to the world, ſome
things he does by himſelf, others by the intervention of na-
tural means, and by the mediation of ſuch inſtruments as he
has appointed. I’Eſtrange.
3. Interpoſition; the ſtate of being interpoſed.
Sound is ſhut out by the intervention of that laxe mem-
brane, and not ſuffered to paſs into the inward ear. Holder.
To lNTERVE'RT. v. a. [interverto, Lat.] To turn to another
courſe.
The duke interverted the bargain, and gave the poor wi-
dow of Erpenius for the books five hundred pounds. Iſotton.
Interview. n.ſ. [entrevue, French.] Mutual fight; ſight of
cach other. It is commonly uſed for a formal and appointed
meeting or conference.
The day will come, when the paſſions of former enmity
being allayed, we ſhall with ten times redoubled tokens of
reconciled love ſhew ourſelves each towards other the ſame,
which Joſeph and the brethren of Joſeph were at the time of
their interview in Egypt. Hooker.
His fears were, that the interview betwixt
England and France might, through their amity,
Breed him ſome prejudice. Shakeſp. Han VIII.
Such happy interview, and fair event
Of love, and youth not loſt, ſongs, garlands, flow’rs,
And charming ſymphonies, attach'd the heart
Of Adam. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
To INTER volve. v. a. [intervolvo, Latin.] To involve one
within another.
Myſtical dance which yonder ſtarry ſphere
Of planets, and of fix'd, in all her wheels
Reſembles neareſt; mazes intricate,
Eccentrick, intervolv’d, yet regular,
Then moſt, when moſt irregular, they ſeem. Milton.
To Intekwe’Ave. v. a. preter interwove, part, paſſ inter-
woven, interwove, or interweaved. [inter and weave.] To
mix one with another in a regular texture; to intermingle.
Then laid him down
Under the hoſpitable covert nigh
Of trees thick interwoven. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ii.
At laſt
Words interwove with fighs found out their way. Milton.
I ſat me down to watch upon a bank
With ivy canopied, and interwave
With flaunting honeyſuckle. Milton.
None
Can ſay here nature ends, and art begins,
But mixt like th' elements, and born like twins,
Wotton.
So interweav'd, ſo like, ſo much the ſame: . . . .
None, this mere nature, that mere art can name, Denham.
The proud theatres diſcloſe the ſcene,
Which interwoven Britons ſeem to raiſe, * . .
And ſhow the triumph which their ſhame diſplays. Dryden,
He ſo interweaves truth with probable fićtion, that he puts
a pleaſing falacy upon us. - Dryden.
It appeared a vaſt ocean planted with iſlands, that were
covered with fruits and flowers, and interwoven with a thou-
ſand little ſhining ſeas that ran among them. Addiſon's Sped.
It is a confuſion of kitchen and parterre, orchard and
flower-garden, which lie ſo mixt and interwoven with one
another, as to look like a natural wilderneſs. Speciat.
The Supreme Infinite could not make intelligent creatures,
without implanting in their natures a moſt ardent defire, in-
terwºven in the ſubſtance of their ſpiritual natures, of being
reunited with himſelf. Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
I do not altogether diſapprove the interweaving texts of
ſcripture through the ſtyle of your ſermon, Swift's Miſcel.
To INTERwish v. a. ſinier and wiſh.] To wiſh mutually to
each other.
The venom of all ſtepdames, gameſter's gall,
What tyrants and their ſubjećts interwiſh,
All ill fall on that man. Donne.
INTE's Table. adj. [intºſłabilis, Latin.] Diſqualified to make
a will. -
A perſon excommunicated is rendered infamous and in-
tºftable both actively and paſſively. Ayliffe's Parergon.
INTE'state. adj. [inteſtat, Fr. inteſtatus, Latin.] Wanting a
will; dying without will.
Why ſhould calamity be full of words
—Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Airy ſucceeders of intºſlate joys, -
Poor breathing orators of miſeries. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Preſent puniſhment purſues his maw,
When ſurfeited and ſwell'd, the peacock raw,
He bears into the bath; whence want of breath,
Repletions, apoplex, intºffate death. . Dryden's juvenal.
INTE'stinal. adj. [inteſtinal, Fr. from inteſtine.] Belonging
to the guts. -
The mouths of the laćteals are opened by the inteſtinal
tube, affecting a ſtraight inſtead of a ſpiral cylinder. Arbuth.
INTESTINE. adj. [inteſtin, Fr. intº/linus, Latin.]
1. Internal; inward; not external.
Of theſe inward and inteſtine enemies to prayer, there are
our paſt ſins to wound us, our preſent cares to diſtraćt us,
our diſtempered paſſions to diſorder us, and a whole ſwarm
of looſe and floating imaginations to moleſt us. Pappa.
Inteſtine war no more our paſſions wage,
Ev’n giddy factions hear away their rage. Pope.
2. Contained in the body.
Inteſtine ſtone, and ulcer, cholick pangs,
And moon-ſtruck madneſs. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
A wooden jack, which had almoſt
Loſt, by diſuſe, the art to roaſt,
A ſudden alteration feels,
Increas'd by new inteſtine wheels. Swift's Miſcel.
3. Domeſtick, not foreign. I know not whether the word be
properly uſed in the following example of Shakeſpeare : per-
haps for mortal and inteſtine ſhould be read mortal interne-
gaze.
Since the mortal and inteſtine jars
*Twixt thy ſeditious countrymen and us,
It hath in ſolemn ſynods been decreed,
Tº admit no traffick to our adverſe towns. Shakeſpears.
But God, or Nature, while they thus contend,
To theſe inteſtine diſcords put an end. Dryden's Ovid,
She ſaw her ſons with purple deaths expire,
A dreadful ſeries of inteſtine wars,
Inglorious triumphs, and diſhoneſt ſcars. ... Pope,
INTE'stine. n.ſ. [inteſtinum, Lat. inteſtine, Fr.] The gut ;
the bowel: moſt commonly without a ſingular.
The intºſłines or guts may be inflamed } an acrid ſub-
ſtance taken inwardly. rbuthnot on Diet.
To INTHRALL. v.a. [in and thrall.] To enſlave; to ſhac-
kle; to reduce to ſervitude. A word now ſeldom uſed, at
leaſt in proſe.
What though I be inthrall"d, he ſeems a knight,
And will not any way diſhonour me. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
The Turk has ſought to extinguiſh the ancient memory of
thoſe people which he has ſubjected and inthrall’d. Raleigh.
Authors to themſelves in all
Both what they judge, and what they chooſe ; for ſo
I form'd them free, and free they muſt remain
Till they inthrall themſelves. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ii.
She ſoothes, but never can inthrall my mind:
Why may not peace and love for once be join'd. Prior,
INTHRA'LMENT. n.ſ.. [from inthrall.] Servitude; ſlavery.
Moſes and Aaron, ſent from God to claim
His people from inthralment, they return
With glory, and ſpoil, back to their promis'd land.
Milton's Par. Loff.
16 P Tø<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
I N T
i
To INTHRo'NE. v. a. [in and throne..] To raiſe to royalty; to
ſeat on a throne.
One, chief, in gracious dignity inthron'd,
Shines o'er the reſt. Thomſon's Summer, l. 395.
I'N TIM Acy, n.ſ.. [from intimate.] Cloſe familiarity.
It is in our power to confine our friendſhips and intimacies
to men of virtue. Rogers's Sermons.
I’NTIMATE. adj. [intimado, Spaniſh; intimus, Lat.]
1. Inmoſt; inward; inteſtine.
They knew not
That what I mention'd was of God, I knew
From intimate impulſe, and therefore urged on
The marriage. Mlton's Agoniſt. l. 221.
Fear being ſo intimate to our natures, it is the ſtrongeſt
bond of laws. Tillotſon's Sermons.
2. Near; not kept at diſtance.
Moſes was with him in the retirements of the mount, re-
ceived there his private inſtrućtions; and when the multitude
were thundered away from any approach, he was honoured
with an intimate and immediate admiſſion. South's Sermons.
3. Familiar; cloſely acquainted.
United by this ſympathetick bond,
You grow familiar, intimate, and fond. Roſcommon.
I'N TIMATE. m. ſ. [intimad, Spaniſh; intime, French ; inti-
mus, Latin.] A familiar friend; one who is truſted with our
thoughts.
The deſign was to entertain his reaſon with a more equal
converſe, aſſign him an intimate whoſe intelle&amp;t as much cor-
reſponded with his as did the outward form. Gov. Tongue.
To I'N TIMATE. v. a. [intimer, French ; intimare, low Latin.]
To hint; to point out indirectly, or not very plainly.
Alexander Van Suchten tells us, that by a way he inti-
mates, may be made a mercury cf copper, not of the ſilver
colour of other mercuries, but green. Boyle.
The names of ſimple ideas and ſubſtances, with the ab-
ſtraćt ideas in the mind, intimate ſome real exiſtence, from
which was derived their original patern. Locke.
'Tis the divinity that ſtirs within us;
'Tis heav'n itſelf that points out an hereafter,
And intimates eternity to man. Addison's Cato.
I'N TIMATELY. adv. [from intimate.]
1. Cloſely ; with intermixture of parts.
The ſame ceconomy is cbſerved in the circulation of the
chyle with the blood, by mixing it intimately with the parts
of the fluid to which it is to be aſſimilated.
2. Nearly ; inſeparably.
Quality, as it regards the mind, has its riſe from know-
ledge and virtue, and is that which is more eſſential to us,
and more intimately united with us. Addiſon's Spect. Nº. 219.
3. Familiarly; with cloſe friendſhip.
INTIMA’tion. m. ſ. [intimation, Fr. from intimate.] Hint; ob-
ſcure or indirect declaration or direétion.
Let him ſtrićtly obſerve the firſt ſtirrings and intimations;
the firſt hints and whiſpers of good and evil that paſs in his
heart. South's Sermons.
Of thoſe that are only probable we have ſome reaſonable
intimations, but not a demonſtrative certainty. Hºodward.
Beſides the more ſolid parts of learning, there are ſeveral
little intimations to be met with on medals. Addiſon.
I'N TIME. adj. Inward; being within the maſs; not being ex-
ternal, or on the ſurface; internal.
As to the compoſition or diſſolution of mixed bodies, which
is the chief work of elements, and requires an intime appli-
cation of the agents, water hath the principality and exceſs
over earth. - Digby on Bodies.
To INT1'MIDATE. v. a. [intimider, French; in and timidus,
Lat.) To make fearful; to daſtardize; to make cowardly.
Now guilt once harbour'd in the conſcious breaſt,
Intimidates the brave, degrades the great. Irene.
INTI’RE. m. ſ. [integer, Lat. entier, French ; better written
entire, which ſee, and all its derivatives.] Whole; undimi-
niſhed ; broken.
The lawful power of making laws, to command whole
politick ſocieties of men, belongeth ſo properly unto the ſame
intire ſocieties, that for any prince to exerciſe the ſame of
himſelf, and not either by expreſs commiſſion immediately
and perſonally received from God, or elſe by authority de-
rived at the firſt from their conſent upon whoſe perſons he
impoſes laws, it is no better than mere tyranny. Hooker.
INT1'RENEss. n.ſ.. [from intire; better entireneſs.] Wholeneſs;
integrity.
So ſhall all times find me the ſame:
You this inti eneſ; better may fulfil,
Who have the pattern with you ſtill.
I'N To. prep. [in and to.]
1. Noting entrance with regard to place.
If iron will acquire by mere continuance an habitual incli-
nation to the ſite it held, how much more may education,
being a conſtant plight and inurement, induce by cuſtom
ood habits into a reaſonable creature. Iſotton.
To give life to that which has yet no being, is to frame a
Donne.
Arbuthnot.
living creature, faſhion the parts, and having fitted them to-
gether, to put into them a living ſoul. Locłe.
Water introduces into vegetables the matter it bears along
with it. IWoodward's Nat. Hi/?.
Acrid ſubſtances, which paſs into the capillary tubes, muſt
irritate them into greater contraction. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Noting penetration beyond the outſide, or ſome action which
reaches beyond the ſuperficies or open part.
To look into letters already opened or dropt is held an un-
generous ačt. Pope.
2. Noting a new ſtate to which any thing is brought by the
agency of a cauſe.
They have denominated ſome herbs ſolar and ſome lunar,
and ſuch like toys put into great words. Baczn.
Compound bodies may be reſolved into other ſubſtances
than ſuch as they are divided into by the fire. Boyle.
A man muſt ſin himſelf into a love of other mens ſins; for
a bare notion of this black art will not carry him ſo far. Scuth.
Sure thou art born to ſome peculiar fate,
When the mad people riſe againſt the ſtate,
To look them into duty; and command
An awful filence with thy lifted hand. Dryden's Perſus.
It concerns every man that would not trifle away his ſoul,
and fool himſelf into irrecoverable miſery, with the greateſt
ſeriouſneſs to enquire into theſe matters. Tillotſon.
He is not a frail being, that he ſhould be tired into com-
pliance by the force of affiduous application. Smalridge.
In hollow bottoms, if any fountains chance to riſe, they
naturally ſpread themſelves into lakes, before they can find any
iſſue. Addiſon on Italy.
It would have been all irretrievably loſt, was it not by this
means colle&amp;ted and brought into one maſs. Iſºodward.
Why are theſe poſitions charged upon me as their ſole au-
thor; and the reader led into a belief, that they were never
before maintained by any perſon of virtue. Atterbury.
It is no ways congruous, that God ſhould be always
frightening and aſtoniſhing men into an acknowledgement of
the truth, who were made to be wrought upon by calm evi-
dence. Atterbury's Sermons.
A man may whore and drink himſelf into atheiſm; but it
is impoſſible he ſhould think himſelf into it. Bentley.
INto'LeRABLE. adj. [intolerabilis, Lat. intolerable, Fr.]
1. Inſufferable; not to be endured; not to be born; having
any quality in a degree too powerful to be endured.
If we bring into one day's thoughts the evil of many, cer-
tain and uncertain, what will be and what will never be, our
load will be as intolerable as it is unreaſonable. Taylor.
His awful preſence did the croud ſurprize,
Nor durſt the raſh ſpectator meet his eyes;
Eyes that confeſs'd him born for kingly ſway,
So fierce, they flaſh'd intolerable day. Dryden.
Some men are quickly weary of one thing: the ſame ſtudy
long continued in is as intolerable to them, as the appearing
long in the ſame clothes is to a court lady. Locke-
From Param's top th' Almighty rode, -
Intolerable day proclaim'd the God. Broome.
2. Bad beyond ſufferance. -
INToºler ABLE Ness. n. ſ. [from intolerable.] Quality of a
thing not to be endured.
INto'LERABLY. adv. [from intolerable.] To a degree beyond
endurance.
INTo'LERANT. adj. [intolerant, French.] Not enduring; not
able to endure.
Too great moiſture affects human bodies with one claſs of
diſeaſes, and too great dryneſs with another; the powers of
human bodies being limited and intolerant of exceffes. Arbuth.
To INToMB. v. a. [in and tomb.] To incloſe in a funeral mo-
nument; to bury.
What commandment finally had they for the ceremony of
odours uſed about the bodies of the dead, after which cuſtom
notwithſtanding our Lord was contented that his own moſt
precious blood ſhould be intombed. Hooker, b. i.
Is’t night's predominance or the day's ſhame,
That darkneſs does the face of earth intomb. Shakeſpeare.
Mighty hero's more majeſtick ſhades,
And youths intomb'd before their father's eyes. Dryden.
To I’NTONATE. v. a. [intono, Lat.] To thunder. Diº.
INTon Aºtion. n.ſ.. [intonation, Fr. from intonate.] The act
of thundering. Dž.7.
To INTo'N E. v. n. [from intono, or rather from tone; intonner,
French..] To make a ſlow protracted noiſe.
So ſwells each wind-pipe; aſs intones to aſs -
Harmonick twang. Pope's Dunciad, b. ii.
To INTo'RT. v. a. [intortuo, Lat.] To twiſt; to wreath; to
wring. -
The brain is a congeries of glands, that ſeparate the finer
parts of the blood, called animal ſpirits; and a gland is nothing
but a canal variouſly intorted and wound up together. Arbuth.
With rev'rent hand the king preſents the gold,
Which round th’ intorted horns the gilder roll’d. Pºpe.
To
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T t
I N-T
3.
º
s
*
&gt;
º
.
2.
r
:
º
!
*
To INTO'XICATE. v. a. [in and toxicum, Latin.] To in-
ebriate ; to make drunk.
The more a-man drinketh of the world, the more it in-
toxicateth; and age doth profit rather in the powers of under-
ſtanding than in the virtues of the will and affections. Bacon.
As with new wine intoxicated both,
They ſwim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity within them breeding wings,
Wherewith to ſcorn the earth. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
My early miſtreſs, now my ancient muſe,
That ſtrong Circean liquor ceaſe t' infuſe,
Wherewith thou didſt intoxicate my youth. Denham.
What part of wild fury was there in the bacchanals which
we have not ſeen equall'd, if not exceeded by ſome intoxi-
cated zealots Decay of Piety.
Others, after having done fine things, yet ſpoil them by en-
deavouring to make them better; and are ſo intoxicated with
an earneſt deſire of being above all others, that they ſuffer
themſelves to be deceived. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Vegetables by fermentation are wrought up to ſpirituous
liquors, having quite different qualities from the plant itſelf;
for no fruit taken crude has the intoxicating quality of wine.
Arbuthnot.
INToxication. m. ſ. [from intoxicate.] Inebriation; ebriety;
the aët of making drunk; the ſtate of being drunk. -
That king, being in amity with him, did ſo burn in ha-
tred towards him, as to drink of the lees and dregs of Per-
kin's intoxication, who was every where elſe detected. Bacon.
Whence can this proceed, but from that beſotting intoxi-
cation which verbal magick brings upon the mind. South.
INTRAct Able. n. ſ. [ºntračiabilis, Lat. intraitable, Fr.]
1. Ungovernable; violent; ſtubborn ; obſtinate.
To love them who loves us is ſo natural a paſſion, that
e;en the moſt intračiable tempers obey its force. Rogers.
2. Unmanageable ; furious.
By what means ſerpents, and other noxious and more in-
tractable kinds, as well as the more innocent and uſeful, got
together. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt. p. iii.
INTRA’ct.AbleNess. n.ſ. [from intračiable.] Obſtinacy; per-
verſeneſs.
INTRActably. adv. [from intračiable.] Unmanageably; ſtub-
bornlv. -
IsºQUI'LITY. m. ſ. [in and tranquility.] Unquietneſs;
want of reſt. * *
Jaétations were uſed for amuſement, and allay in con-
ſtant pains, and to relieve that intranquility which makes men
impatient of lying in their beds. - Temple.
INTRA/NSITIVE. v. a. [intranſitivus, Latin.] -
[In grammar.] A verb intranſitive is that which ſignifies an
aćtion, not conceived as having an effect upon any obječt;
as, curro, I run. Clarke's Lat. Gram.
INTRANSMU'TABLE. adj. [in and tranſmutable.] Unchangeable
to any other ſubſtance.
Some of the moſt experienced chemiſts do affirm quick-
filver to be intranſmutable, and therefore call it liquor aeter-
• mus. - Ray on the Creation.
To INTRE'Asure. v. a. [in and treaſure.] To lay up as in a
treaſury.
There is a hiſtory in all mens lives,
Figuring the nature of the times deceas'd;
The which obſerv'd, a man may propheſy,
With a near aim, of the main chance of things
As yet not come to life, which in their ſeeds
And weak beginnings he intreaſured. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
To INTRE’NCH. v. m. [in and trancher, French.]
1. To invade; to encroach; to cut off part of what belongs
to another. -
Little I deſire my ſcepter ſhould intrench on God's ſovereign-
ty, which is the only king of men's conſciences. K. Charles.
That crawling infect, who from mud began,
Warm'd by my beams, and kindled into man
Durſt he, who does but for my pleaſure live,
Intrench on love, my great prerogative. Dryden's Aureng.
We are not to intrench upon truth in any converſation,
but leaſt of all with children. Locke.
2. To break with hollows.
His face
Deep ſcars of thunder had intrench'd, and care
Sat on his faded cheek. AMilton's Par. Loft, b. i.
3. To fortify with a trench: as, the allies were intrenched in
their camp.
INTRE Nch ANT. adj. [This word, which is, I believe, found
only in Shakeſpeare, is thus explained by one of his editors:
The intrenchant air means the air which ſuddenly encroaches
and cloſes upon the ſpace left by any body which had paſſed
through it. Hanmer. I believe Shakeſpeare intended rather
to expreſs the idea of indiviſibility or invulnerableneſs, and
derived intrenchant, from in privative, and trencher, to cut;
intrenchant is indeed properly not cutting, rather than not to
be cut; but this is not the only inſtance in which Shakeſpeare
confounds words of ačtive and paſſive ſignification.] Not to
be divided; not to be wounded ; indiviſible.
As eaſy may'ſt thou the intrenchant air -
With thy keen ſword impreſs, as make me bleed: Shaft.
INTRE’NchMENT. n. ſ. [from intrench..] Fortification with a
trench.
INTRE'pro. adj. [intrepide, Fr. intrepidus, Latin.] Fearleſ; ;
daring; bold; brave. . . . . . .
* *
- º
-
- Argyle
Calm and intrepid in the very throat - * *
, Of ſulphurous war, on Teniers dreadful field. "Themſºn.
INTREPI'dity. n. ſ. [intrºpidite, Fr.] Fearleſſneſs; courage;
boldneſs. tº - -
I could not ſufficiently wonder at the intrepidity of theſe
diminutive mortals, who durſt venture to walk upon
body, without trembling. * Gulliver's º
INTRE’pidly. adv. [from intrepid.]. Fearleſly; boldly; dat-
ingly. -
He takes the globe for the ſcene; he launches forward in-
trepidly, like one to whom no place is new. Pope.
I'NTRIcacy. n.ſ. (from intricate.] State of being entangled;
perplexity; involution; complication of facts or notions.
The part of Ulyſſes in Homer's Odyſſey is much admired
by Ariſtotle, as perplexing that fablé with very agreeable
plots and intricacies, by the many adventures in his voyage,
and the ſubtilty of his behaviour. - - - Addison.
INTRICATE. adj. [intricatus, Lat..] Entangled; perplexed;
involved; complicated; obſcure. -
Much of that we are to ſpeak may ſeem to a number per-
haps tedious, perhaps obſcure, dark, and intricate. Hooker.
His ſtile in writing was fit to convey the moſt intricate bu-
fineſs to the underſtanding with the utmoſt clearneſs.
- * Addiſon.
To I'NtRicate. [from the adjećtive.] To perplex; to darken.
Not proper, nor in uſe.
Alterations of ſirnames have ſo intricated, or rather ob-
ſcured, the truth of our pedigrees, that it will be no little
hard labour to deduce them. - Camden.
I’NTR1cATELY. adv. [from intricate.] With involution of one
in another; with perplexity. -
That variety of factions, into which we are ſo intricately
engaged, gave occaſion to this diſcourſe. Swift.
I'Ntric Ateness. n.ſ.. [from intricate.] Perplexity; involu-
tion; obſcurity.
He found ſuch intricateneſ, that he could ſee no way to
lead him out of the maze. - Sidney.
INTRIGUE. n.ſ.. [intrigue, French.] **
1. A plot; a private tranſaction in which many parties are en-
gaged : uſually an affair of love.
Theſe are the grand intrigues of man, * -
Theſe his huge thoughts, and theſe his vaſt deſires. Flatman,
A young fellow long made love, with much artifice and
intrigue, to a rich widow. Addiſon's Gurra.
The hero of a comedy is repreſented vićtorious in all his
intrigues. . - - Swift.
Now love is dwindled to intrigue, -
Swift's Miſal,
And marriage grown a money league.
2. Intricacy; complication. Little in uſe. .
Though this vicinity of ourſelves to ourſelves cannot give
us the full proſpect of all the intrigues of our nature, yet we
have much more advantage to know ourſelves, than to know
other things without us. Hale's Originat. of Mankind.
3. The complication or perplexity of a fable or poem ; artful
involution of feigned tranſačtion.
As theſe cauſes are the beginning of the aëtion, the oppo-
ſite deſigns againſt that of the hero are the middle of it, and
form that difficulty or intrigue which makes up the greateſt
part of the poem. Pope.
To INTR 1ſcue. v. n. [intriguer, Fr. from the noun..] To
form plots; to carry on private deſigns. -
INTRI'Guer. m. ſ. [intrigueur, Fr. from intrigue.] One who
buſies himſelf in private tranſačtions; one who forms plots ;
one who perſues women. ..
I deſire that intriguers will not make a pimp of my lion,
and convey their thoughts to one another. . . . Addison.
INTRI'GuINGly. adv. [from intrigue.] With intrigue; with
ſecret plotting. -
INTRINSECAL. adj. [intrinſecus, Lat. intrinſeque, French.
This word is now generally written intrinſical, centrarily to
etymology. ] . . . . .
1. Internal; ſolid; natural; not accidental; not merely appa-
rent. - -
Theſe meaſure the laws of God not by the intrinſecal good-
neſs and equity of them, but by reluctancy and oppoſition
which they find in their own hearts againſt them. Tillotſon.
The near and intrinſecal, and convincing argument of the
being of God, is from human nature itſelf. Bentley's Sermony.
2. Intimate; cloſely familiar. Out of uſe. .
He falls into intrinſecal ſociety with Sir John Graham, who
diſſuaded him from marriage, and gave him rather encourage-
ment to woo fortune in court. - Iſºtton.
Sir Fulk Greville was a man in appearance intrinſecal with
him, or at leaſt admitted to his melancholy hours. Wotton.
- INTRI's secAlix.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N T
I N T
tº
º
º
º
Intri'ssecally, adv. [from intrinſecal.]
1. Internally; naturally; really. -
A lye is a thing abſolutely and intrinſecally evil. South.
Every one of his pieces is an ingot of gold, intrinſecally
and ſolidly valuable. Prior.
2. Within; at the inſide.
In his countenance no open alteration; but the leſs he
ſhewed without, the more it wrought intrinſecally. Wotton.
If once bereaved of motion, it cannot of itſelf acquire it
again; nor till it be thruſt by ſome other body from without,
or intrinſecally moved by an immaterial ſelf-active ſubſtance
that can pervade it. Bentley's Sermons.
INTRI'N'sick. adj. [intrinſecus, Latin.]
1. Inward; internal; real; true. .
Intrinſick goodneſs conſiſts in accordance, and fin in con-
trariety to the ſecret will of God, as well as to his revealed.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
2. Not depending on accident; fixed in the nature of the thing.
The difference between worth and merit, ſtričtly taken;
that is, a man's intrinſick; this, his current value. Grew.
His fame, like gold, the more 'tis try’d,
The more ſhall its intrinſick worth proclaim. Prior.
Beautiful as a jewel ſet in gold, which, though it adds
little to intrinſick value, yet improves the luſtre, and attracts
the eyes of the beholder. Rogers's Sermons.
INTRI'N secAt E. adj. [This word ſeems to have been igno-
rantly formed between intricate and intrinſecal.] Perplexed ;
entangled. -
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe,
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords in twain
Too intrinſecate t'unlooſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
- Come, mortal wretch,
With thy ſharp teeth this knot intrinſicate
Of life at once un,ie. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
To INTRODUCE. v. a. [introduco, Lat. introduire, Fr.]
1. To condućt or uſher into a place, or to a perſon.
Mathematicians of advanced ſpeculations may have other
ways to introduce into their minds ideas of infinity. Locke.
2. To bring ſomething into notice or practice.
This vulgar error whoſoever is able to reclaim, he ſhall
introduce a new way of cure, preſerving by theory as well as
practice. Brown's Vulgar Erraurs, b. iv.
- An author who ſhould introduce a ſport of words upon the
ſtage, would meet with ſmall applauſe. Broome.
3. To produce; to give occaſion.
Whatſoever introduces habits in children, deſerves the care
and attention of their governors. Locke on Education.
4. To bring into writing or diſcourſe by proper preparatives.
INTRoDU'cèR. m. ſ. [introdućieur, Fr. from introduce.]
1. One who condućts another to a place or perſon.
2. Any one who brings any thing into practice or notice.
The beginning of the earl of Eſſex I muſt attribute to my
lord of Leiceſter; but yet as an introducer or ſupporter, not
as a teacher. Wotton.
It is commonly charged upon the army, that the beaſtly vice
of drinking to exceſs hath been lately, from their example,
reſtored among us; but whoever the introducers were, they
have ſucceeded to a miracle. Swift.
INTRoDU’ction. n.ſ.. [introdućion, Fr. introduélio, Latin.]
1. The aët of condućting or uſhering to any place or perſon;
the ſtate of being uſhered or conducted.
2. The act of bringing any new thing into notice or pračtice.
The archbiſhop of Canterbury had purſued the introdućtion
of the liturgy and the canons into Scotland with great vehe-
mence. Clarendon.
3. The preface or part of a book containing previous matter.
INTRODU’ctive. adj. [introdućliſ, French; from introduce.]
Serving as the means to ſomething elſe.
The truths of Chriſt crucified, is the Chriſtian's philoſo-
phy, and a good life is the Chriſtian's logick; that great in-
frumental introdućtive art, that muſt guide the mind into the
former. South's Sermons.
Isr Robu'ctory. adj. [from introducius, Latin.] Previous;
ſerving as a means to ſomething further.
This introductory diſcourſe itſelf is to be but an eſſay, not
a book. Boyle.
INTRogRE'ssion. n.ſ.. [introgreſſio, Latin.] Entrance; the
aćt of entering.
INTRo'it, n. ſ... [introit, French...] The beginning of the
maſs; the beginning of publick devotions.
INTRoM1'ssion. n.ſ.. [intromiſſio, Latin.]
1. The act of ſending in.
If fight be cauſed by intromiſſion, or receiving in the form
of that which is ſeen, contrary ſpecies or forms ſhould be re-
ceived confuſedly together, which Ariſtotle ſhews to be ab-
ſurd. Peacham on Drawing.
All the reaſon that I could ever hear alleged by the chief
fačtors for a general intromiſſion of all ſects and perſuaſions into
our communion, is, that thoſe who ſeparate from us are ſtiff
and obſtinate, and will not ſubmit to the rules of our church,
and that therefore they ſhould be taken away. South.
*
2. [In the Scottiſh law.] The aâ of intermeddling with another's
effects: as, he ſhall be brought to an account for his introſniffions
with ſuch an ºſtate.
To I'NTRomit. v. a. [intramitto, Latin.]. To ſend in ; to let
in; to admit; to allow to enter; to be the medium by which
any thing enters. - º -
Glaſs in the window intromits light without cold to thoſe in
the room. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Tinged bodies and liquors reflect ſome ſorts of rays, and
intromit or tranſmit other ſorts. Newtºn's Opt.
To INTrospect. v. a. [introſpesius, Latin.] To take a view
of the inſide.
INTRospection. n.ſ.. [from introſpeã.] A view of the in-
ſide.
The aëings of the mind or imagination itſelf, by way of
refle&amp;ion or introſpediion of themſelves, are diſcernible by
Iſlaſh. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
I was forced to make an introſpection into my own mind,
and into that idea of beauty which I have formed in my own
imagination. - - Dryden.
INT Rove'Nient. adj. [intro and venie, Latin.] Entering;
coming in.
Scarce any condition which is not exhauſted and obſcured,
from the commixture of introvenient nations, either by com-
merce or conqueſt. Brown's Vulgar Erreurs.
To INTRU’DE. v. n. [intrude, Latin J
1. To come in unwelcome by a kind of violence; to enter
without invitation or permiſſion.
Thy years want wit, thy wit wants edge
And manners, to intrude where I am grac'd. Shakeſp.
The Jewiſh religion was yet in poſſeſſion; and therefore that
this might ſo enter, as not to intrude, it was to bring its war-
rant from the ſame hand of omnipotence. *
Forgive me, fair one, if officious friendſhip
Intrudes on your repoſe, and comes thus late
To greet you with the tidings of ſucceſs. Rowe's ja. Shore.
Some thoughts riſe and intrude upon us, while we ſhun
them; others fly from us, when we would hold them. Watts.
2. To encroach; to force in uncalled or unpermitted.
Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary
humility, and worſhipping of angels, intruding into thoſe
things which he hath not ſeen by his fleſhly mind. Col. ii. 18.
To INTRU'de. v. a. To force without right or welcome.
Not to intrude one's ſelf into the myſteries of government,
which the prince keeps ſecret, is repreſented by the winds ſhut
up in a bull-hide, which the companions of Ulyſſes would
needs be ſo fooliſh as to pry into. Pope.
Intru’der. n.ſ.. [from intrude..] One who forces himſelf
into company or affairs without right or welcome.
And the hounds
Should drive upon the new transformed limbs,
Unmannerly intruder as thou art! Shakespeare. Titus Andronicus.
Go, baſe intruder / over-weening ſlave!
Beſtow thy fawning ſmiles on equal mates. Shakeſpeare.
They were but intruders upon the poſſeſſion, during
the minority of the heir : they knew thoſe lands were the
rightful inheritance of that young lady. Davies on Ireland.
Will you, a bold intruder, never learn
To know your baſket, and your bread diſcern ? ... Dryden.
She had ſeen a great variety of faces: they were all ſtrangers
and intruders, ſuch as ſhe had no acquaintance with. Locke.
The whole fraternity of writers riſe up in arms againſt every
new intruder into the world of fame. Addiſon's Freebolder.
INTRU's lon. n.ſ.. [intruſion, French; intruſia, Latin.]
1. The aët of thruſting or forcing any thing or perſon into any
place or ſtate. -
It muſt raiſe more ſubſtantial ſuperſtrućtions, and fall upon
very many excellent ſtrains, which have beenº off by
the intruſions of poetical fićtions. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The ſeparation of the parts of one body, upon the intruſion
of another, and the change from reſt to motion upon impulſe,
and the like, ſeem to have ſome connection. Locke.
2. Encroachment upon any perſon or place ; unwelcome en-
trance; entrance without invitation or permiſſion.
I think myſelf in better plight for a lender than you are,
the which hath ſomething emboldened me to this unſeaſoned
intruſion; for they ſay, if money go before, all ways do lie
open. Shakeſpeare.
Frogs, lice, and flies, muſt all his palace fill
With loath’d intruſion.
How's this, my ſon Why this intruſion *
Were not my orders that I ſhould be private? Addiſ Cato.
I may cloſe, after ſo long an intruſion upon your medita-
tions. JWake's Preparation for Death.
3. Voluntary and uncalled undertaking of anything,
It will be ſaid, I handle an art no way ſuitable either to my
employment or fortune, and ſo ſtand charged with intruſiºn
and impertinency. - l/at, on-
To INTRU'st. v. a. [in and truſt.] To treat with confidence;
to charge with any ſecret commiſſion, or thing of value.
3 Never
Milton's Paradiſe Loft.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N V
I N V
º
*.&amp;
s
:
3.
:
His majeſty had a ſolicitous care for the payment of his debts;
though in ſuch a manner, that none of the duke's officers were
intruſſed with the knowledge of it. Clarendon.
Receive my counſel, and ſecurely move;
Intruſt thy fortune to the pow'rs above. Dryden's juven.
Are not the lives of thoſe, who draw the ſword
In Rome's defence, intruſted to our care : Addiſ Cato.
He compoſed his billet-doux, and at the time appointed
went to intruſt it to the hands of his confidant. Arbuthnot.
INTUI'TION. m. ſ. [intuitus, intucor, Latin.]
1. Sight of any thing. Uſed commonly of mental view; im-
mediate knowledge.
At our rate of judging, St. Paul had ſurely paſſed for a moſt
malicious perſecutor; whereas God ſaw he did it ignorantly in
unbelief, and upon that intuition had mercy on him.
Government of the Tongue.
The truth of theſe propoſitions we know by a bare ſimple
intuitiºn of the ideas, and ſuch propoſitions are called ſelf-
evident. Locke.
2. Knowledge not obtained by deduction of reaſon, but in-
ſtantaneouſly accompanying thc ideas which are its obječt.
All knowledge of cauſes is dedućtive; for we know none
by ſimple intuition, but through the mediation of their effects;
for the cauſality itſelf is inſenſible. Glanv. Scepſ.
Diſcourſe was then almoſt as quick as intuition. South.
He their fingle virtues did ſurvey,
By intuition in his own large breaſt. Dryden.
INTu'itive. adj. [intuitivus, low Latin; intuitif, French.]
1. Seen by the mind immediately without the intervention of
reaſon.
Immediate perception of the agreement or diſagreement of
two ideas, is when, by comparing them together in our minds,
we ſee their agreement or diſagreement; this therefore is called
intuitive knowledge. Locke.
Thoſe lofty flights of thought, and almoſt intuitive perception
of abſtruſe notions, thoſe exalted diſcoveries of mathematical
theorems, we ſometimes ſee exiſtent in one and the ſame
perſon. Bentley.
2. Seeing, not barely believing.
Faith, beginning here with a weak apprehenſion of things
not ſeen, endeth with the intuitive viſion of God in the world
to Conne. - Hooker.
3. Having the power of diſcovering truth immediately without
ratioClnation.
The rule of ghoſtly or immaterial natures, as ſpirits and
angels, is their intuitive intellectual judgment, concerning the
amiable beauty and high goodneſs of that objećt, which, with
unſpeakable joy and delight, doth ſet them on work. Hooker.
The ſoul receives -
T)iſcurſive or intuitive. Milton.
INTUI'Tively. adv. [intuitivement, French.] Without deduc-
tion of reaſon; by immediate perception.
That our love is ſound and ſincere, that it cometh from a
pure heart, and a good conſcience, and a faith unfeigned, who
can pronounce, ſaving only the ſearcher of all mens hearts,
who alone intuitively doth know in this kind who are his. Hook.
God Almighty, who ſees all things intuitively, does not
want logical helps. Baker on Learning.
INTUME'scENCE. l. n.ſ.. [intumeſcence, French; intumeſco, Lat.]
INTUME'scency. $ Swell; tumour; the act or ſtate of ſwelling.
According to the temper of the terreous parts at the bot-
tom, as they are more hardly or eaſily moved, they variouſly
begin, continue, or end their intumeſcencies. Brown.
This ſubterranean heat cauſes a great rarefaction and intu-
meſcence of the water of the abyſs, putting it into very great
commotions, and at the ſame time making the like effort upon
the earth, occaſions an earthquake. Woodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
INTURGE'scence... n.ſ...[in and turgeſco, Latin.] Swelling;
the aët or ſtate of ſwelling.
Not by attenuation of the upper part of the ſea, but intur-
geſcencies cauſed firſt at the bottom, and carrying the upper
part of it before them. Brown's }. Err.
INTU's E. n.ſ.. [intuſus, Latin.] Bruiſe. Spenſer.
To INTwi'N.E. v. a. [in and twine.]
1. To twiſt, or wreath together.
This opinion, though falſe, yet intwined with a true, that
the ſouls of men do never periſh, abated the fear of death in
them. Hooker.
2. To incompaſs by circling round it.
- The veſt and veil divine,
Which wand'ring foliage and rich flow'rs intwine. Dryden.
To INVA’DE. v. a. [invado, Latin.]
1. To attack a country; to make an hoſtile entrance.
He will invade them with troops. Hab. iii. 16.
Should he invade any part of their country, he would ſoon
ſee that nation up in arms. Knolles.
With dang'rous expedition they invade
Heav'n, whoſe high walls fear no aſſault.
Milton.
Thy race in times to come -
Shall ſpread the conqueſts of imperial Rome;
Rome, whoſe aſcending tow’rs ſhall heav'n invade,
Involving carth and ocean in her ſhade. Dryden's AFn.
Encouraged with ſucceſs, he invades the province of phi-
loſophy. Dryden.
In vain did nature's wiſe command
Divide the waters from the land,
If daring ſhips, and men prophane, -
Invade th' inviolable main. Dryden.
2. To attack; to aſſail; to aſſault.
There ſhall be ſedition among men, and invading one ano-
ther; they ſhall not regard their kings. 2 Eſdr. xv. 16.
Thou think'ſt 'tis much, that this contentious ſtorm
Invades us to the ſkin; ſo 'tis to thee:
But where the greater malady is fix’d,
The leſſer is ſcarce felt. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. To violate with the firſt act of hoſtility; to attack, not de-
fend.
Your foes are ſuch, as they, not you, have made;
And virtue may repel, though not invade. Dryden.
INvA'Dea. n. ſ. [from invado, Latin.]
1. One who enters with hoſtility into the poſſeſſions of another.
The breath of Scotland the Spaniards could not endure;
neither durſt they, as invaders, land in Ireland. Bacon.
Their piety
In ſharp conteſt of battle found no aid -
Againſt invaders. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
That knowledge, like the coal from the altar, ſerves only to
embroil and conſume the ſacrilegious invaders. Decay of Piety.
Were he loſt, the naked empire
Would be a prey expos'd to all invaders. Denham's Sophy.
The country about Attica was the moſt barren of any in
Greece, through which means it happened that the natives
were never expelled by the fury of invaders. Swift.
Secure, by William's care, let Britain ſtand; -
Nor dread the bold invader's hand. Prior.
Eſteem and judgment with ſtrong fancy join,
To call the fair invader in ;
My darling favourite inclination, too,
All, all conſpiring with the foe.
2. An aſſailant.
3. Encroacher; intruder. -
The ſubſtance thereof was formerly compriſed in that un-
compounded ſtyle, but afterwards prudently enlarged for the
repelling and preventing heretical invaders. Hammond.
IN valE'scence. n.ſ.. [invaleſco, Latin.] Strength; health;
force. - Dić7.
INVA'LID. adj. [invalide, Fr. invalidus, Latin.] Weak; of
no weight or cogency.
But this I urge,
Admitting motion in the heav'ns, to ſhew
Invalid, that which thee to doubt it mov’d. Milton.
To INvA LIDATE. v. a. [from invalid.] To weaken; to de-
prive of force or efficacy.
To invalidate ſuch a conſequence, ſome things might be
ſpeciouſly enough alledged. Boyle.
Tell a man, paſſionately in love, that he is jilted, bring a
ſcore of witneſſes of the falſhood of his miſtreſs, and it is ten
to one but three kind words of her’s ſhall invalidate all their
teſtimonies, Locke.
INvAli'D. n.ſ. [Fr. J One diſabled by ſickneſs or hurts.
What beggar in the invalides,
With lameneſs broke, with blindneſs ſmitten,
Wiſh’d ever decently to die? - Prior.
INvALI'dity. n.ſ.. [in and validity; invalidité, French.]
1. Weakneſs; want of cogency.
2. Want of bodily ſtrength. This is no Engliſh meaning.
He ordered, that none who could work ſhould be idle; and
that none who could not work, by age, ſickneſs, or invalidity,
ſhould want. Temple.
INvA'luable. adj. [in and valuable.] Precious above eſtima-
tion; ineſtimable.
The faith it produced would not be ſo free an act as it
ought, to which are annexed all the glorious and invaluable
privileges of believing. Atterbury.
INvA'RIABLE. adj. [in and variarus, Lat, invariabile, Fr. J
Unchangeable; conſtant.
Being not able to deſign times by days, months, or years,
they thought beſt to determine theſe alterations by ſome
known and invariable ſigns, and ſuch did they conceive the
riſing and ſetting of the fixed ſtars. Brown's Vulg. Err.
The rule of good and evil would not then appear uniform
and invariable, but would ſeem different, according to mens
different complexions and inclinations. Atterbury.
INvA'RIABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from invariable. J Immutability ;
conſtancy.
INvA'RIAhly. adv. [from invariable.] Unchangeably; con-
ſtantly. -
º, who ſteers his courſe invariably by this rule, takes the
ſureſt way to make all men praiſe him. Atterbury.
INvA'sion. n.ſ.. [invaſion, French; invaſio, Latin.]
1. Hoſtile entrance upon the rights or poſſeſſions of another;
hoſtile encroachment. -
We made an invaſion upon the Cherethites.
. Granville.
w
12 Q. Reaſon
1 Sa. xxx.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">Reaſon finds a ſecret grief and remorſe from every invaſion
that fin makes upon innocence, and that muſt render the firſt
entrance and admiſſion of ſin uneaſy. South's Sermons.
The nations of th’ Auſonian ſhore
Shall hear the dreadful rumour, from afar,
Of arm'd invaſion, and embrace the war. Dryd. Æn.
.William the Conqueror invaded England about the year
1660, which means this; that taking the duration from our
Saviour's time ’till now, for one intire length of time, it
ſhews at what diſtance this invaſion was from the two ex-
tremes. Locke.
2. Attack of an epidemical diſeaſe.
What demonſtrates the plague to be endemial to Egypt, is
its invaſion and going off at certain ſeaſons. A, buthnot.
INvA'sive. adj. [from invade.] Entering hoſtilely upon other
mens poſſeſſions; not defenſive.
I muſt come cloſer to my purpoſe, and not make more in-
vaſive wars abroad, when, like Hannibal, I am called back to
the defence of my country. Dryden.
Let other monarchs, with invaſive bands,
Leſſen their people, and extend their lands;
By gaſping nations hated and obey'd,
Lords of the deſarts that their ſwords had made. Arbuthnot.
Inve’ctive. n.ſ. [invective, Fr. invečiiva, low Lat.] A cen-
ſure in ſpeech or writing; a reproachful accuſation, -
Plain men deſiring to ſerve God as they ought, but being
not ſo ſkilful as to unwind themſelves, where the ſnares
of gloſing ſpeech do lie to entangle them, are in mind not
a little troubled, when they hear ſo bitter inveſtives againſt
that which this church hath taught them to reverence as holy,
to approve as lawful, and to obſerve as behoveful for the exer-
ciſe of Chriſtian duty. Hooker.
So deſp'rate thieves, all hopeleſs of their lives,
Breathe out invectives 'gainſt the officers. Shakespeare H. VI.
Caſting off the reſpect fit to be continued between kings,
even when their blood is hotteſt, he fell to bitter inveółives
againſt the French king. Bacon’s H. VII.
Whilſt we condemn others, we may indeed be in the
wrong; and then all the invectives we make at their ſuppoſed
errours, fall back with a rebounded force upon our own real
ones. Decay of Piety.
If we take ſatyr, in the general ſignification of the world,
for an invective, ’tis certain that 'tis almoſt as old as verſe.
Dryd, juv. Dedication.
INve'ctive. adj. [from the noun..] Satirical; abuſive.
Let him rail on ; let his inve/live muſe
Have four and twenty letters to abuſe.
INvectively. adv. Satirically ; abuſively.
Thus moſt inveđively he pierceth through
The body of the country, city, court,
Yea and of this our life; ſwearing that we
Are meer uſurpers, tyrants. Shakeſpeare.
To INVE/IGH. v. a. [inveh, Latin.] To utter cenſure or
reproach. - -
I cannot blame him for inveighing ſo ſharply againſt the
vices of the clergy in his age. Dryden.
He inveighs ſeverely againſt the folly of parties, in retaining
ſcoundrels to retail their lyes. Arbuthnot.
INVE'iGHER... n.ſ.. [from inveigh..] Wehement railer.
One of theſe inveighers againſt mercury, in a courſe of
ſeven weeks, could not cure one ſmall herpes in the face.
//iſeman's Surgery.
To INVE/IGLE. v. a. [invºgliare, Ital. Minſhew; aveugler,
or enaveugler, French, Skinner and junius.] To perſuade to
ſomething bad or hurtful; to wheedle; to allure; to ſeduce.
Moſt falſe Dueffa, royal richly dight,
That eaſy was to inveigle weaker fight,
Was, by her wicked arts and wily ſkill,
Too falſe and ſtrong for earthly ſkill or might. Fa. Queen.
Dryden.
Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him. Shakºare.
Yet have they many baits and guileful ſpells, -
To inveigle and invite th' unwary ſenſe
Of them that paſs unweeting by the way. Milton.
Both right able
Tº inveigle and draw in the rabble. Hudibras.
Thoſe drops of prettineſs, ſcatteringly ſprinkled amongſt
the creatures, were deſigned to exalt our conceptions, not in-
veigle or detain our paſſions. Boyle.
I leave the uſe of garlick to ſuch as are inveigled into the
gout by the uſe of too much drinking. 7 emple.
The inveigling a woman, before ſhe is come to years of diſ-
cretion, ſhould be as criminal as the ſeducing of her before
ſhe is ten years old. Speciator.
- hº n.J. [from inveigle.] Seducer; deceiver; allurer
O Ill.
Being preſented to the emperor for his admirable beauty,
the prince clapt him up as his inveigler. Sandys,
To INVENT. v. a. [inventer, French; invenio, Latin.]
I. To diſcover; to find out; to excogitate; to produce ſome-
thing not made before.
- The ſubſtance of the ſervice of God, ſo far forth as it hath
in it any thing more than the law of reaſon doth teach, may
not be invented of men, but muſt be recei
himſelf. » eived from God
By their count, which lovers books invent, Holer.
The ſphere of Cupid forty years contains. Spenser
Matter of mirth enough, though there were non: ""
She could deviſe, and thouſand ways invent
To feed her fooliſh humour and vain jolliment. Fa. &amp;een
Woe to them that invent to themſelves inſtruments...}.
fick. -
- Amos vi,
We may invent l, 5.
With what more forcible we may offend
Our enemies. Milton
In the motion of the bones in their articulations, a two.
liquor is prepared for the inunction of their heads; both
which make up the moſt apt mixture, for this uſe, that can be
invented or thought upon. Raj.
Ye ſkilful maſters of Machaon's race,
Who nature's mazy intricacies trace,
By manag'd fire and late invented eyes. Blackmore,
But when long time the wretches thoughts refin'd,
When want had ſet an edge upon their mind,
Then various cares their working thoughts employ'd,
And that which each invented, all enjoy'd. Creech.
The ſhip by help of a ſcrew, invented by Archimedes, was
launched into the water. Arbuthnot,
2. To forge; to contrive falſely; to fabricate.
I never did ſuch things as thoſe men have maliciouſly in-
vented againſt me. Suſan. xliii.
Here is a ſtrange figure invented, againſt the plain ſenſe of
the words. Stillingfut.
3. To feign; to make by the imagination.
I would invent as bitter ſearching terms,
With full as many ſigns of deadly hate,
As lean-fac'd envy in her lothſome cave. Shakeſpeare.
Hercules's meeting with pleaſure and virtue, was invenied by
Prodicus, who lived before Socrates, and in the firſt dawnings
of philoſophy. Addiſon's Speciator.
4. To light on ; to meet with.
Far off he wonders what them makes ſo glad:
Or Bacchus' merry fruit they did invent,
Or Cybel's frantick rites have made them mad. Spenſer,
INve'N't ER. m. ſ. [fºbm inventeur, French.]
1. One who produces ſomething new; a deviſer of ſomething
not known before.
As a tranſlator, he was juſt ; as an inventºr, he was
rich. Garth.
2. A forger.
Inve'N'tion. n.ſ.. [invention, French; inventio, Latin.]
1. Fićtion.
O for a muſe of fire, that would aſcend
The brighteſt heaven of invention / Shaiſ. H. V. Prel.
By improving what was writ before,
Invention labours leſs, but judgment more. R oſcºmmºn.
Invention is a kind of muſe, which, being poſſeſſed of the
other advantages common to her ſiſters, and being warmed
by the fire of Åpollo, is raiſed higher than the reſt...Dºdº".
The chief excellence of Virgii is judgment, of Homº "
invention. Pope.
2. Diſcovery. - - -
Nature hath provided ſeveral glandules to ſeparate thisju"
from the blood, and no leſs than four pair of channels to cºn:
vey it into the mouth, which are of a late invention, and called
dućius ſalvaſes. Ray on the Creatiºn.
3. Excogitation; ačt of producing ſomething new.
Mine is th’ invention of the charming lyre;
Sweet notes and heav'nly numbers I inſpire. Dryden.
4. Forgery.
We hear our bloody couſins, not confeſſing
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers -
With ſtrange invention. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
If thou can'ſ accuſe,
Do it without invention ſuddenly.
5. The thing invented. -
The garden, a place not fairer in matural ammº.
artificial inventions. y:
Th’ invention all admir’d; and º º he
To be th’ inventor miſs'd, ſo eaſy it ſeem t
Once found, which yet unfound moſt would haſe º
Impoſſible Milton's Parad. Lºft.
- - - n-
INve'N'rive. adj. [inventiſ, Fr. from invent.] %.
trivance; ready at expedients; having the power o fºund.
Thoſe have the inventivºff heads for all ºlmaſter.
eſt tongues in all matters. A cham': in man
As he had an inventive brain, ſo there nºvº lived any m
Shakespeare. Henry VI.
- - leigh.
that believed better thereof, and of himſelf Raleig
Reaſon, reanembrance, wit, inventive * Denham.
No nature, but immortal, can impart.
That inventive head
Her fatal image from the temple drew, d
- idth.
The ſleeping guardians of the caſtle ſle". Dry
The inventive god, who never fails º . Dryden
- - e ; the heart. -
Inſpires the wit, when once h wn. INVE'NTOR.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º,
1 N V
I N V
ºw
s
-:
-
-
º
**
ºf*
--
n.
;:
º
.
INve'N tor. n.ſ.. [inventor, Latin.]
1. A finder out of ſomething new.
We have the ſtatue of your Columbus, that diſcovered the
Weſt Indies, alſo the inventor of ſhips: your Monk, that was
the inventor of ordnance, and of gunpowder. Bacon.
Studious they appear
Of arts that poliſh life; inventors rare,
Unmindful of their maker. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Th’ invention all admir'd, and each how he
To be the inventor miſs'd. Milton.
Why are theſe poſitions charged upon me as their ſole au-
thor and inventor, and the reader led into a belief that they
were never before maintained by any perſon of virtue Atterb.
2. A contriver; a framer. In an ill ſenſe.
In this upſhot, purpoſes miſtook,
Fall’n on th’ inventors heads. Shakespeare Hamlet.
INVENTo'RIAll Y. adv. [from inventory, whence perhaps inven-
to ial.] In manner of an inventory.
To divide inventorially, would dizzy the arithmetick of
memory. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
INVENTORY.. n.ſ.. [inventaire, French; inventarium, Latin.]
An account or catalogue of moveables.
I found,
Forſooth, an inventory, thus importing,
The ſeveral parcels of his plate. Shakespeare H. VIII.
The leanneſs that afflićts us, the objećt of our miſery, is
as an inventory to particularize their abundance: our ſufferings
is a gain to them. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Whoe'er looks,
For themſelves dare not go, o'er Cheapſide books,
Shall find their wardrobe's inventory. JDonne.
It were of much conſequence to have ſuch an inventory of
nature, wherein, as on the one hand, nothing ſhould be
wanting, ſo nothing repeated on the other. Grew's Muſæum.
In Perſia the daughters of Eve are reckoned in the inventory
of their goods and chattels; and it is uſual, when a man ſells
a bale of ſilk, to toſs half a dozen women into the bar-
gain. - Speãator.
He gave me an inventory of her goods and eſtate. Speciator.
To I'N VENTor Y. v. a. [inventorier, Fr.] To regiſter; to place
in a catalogue.
I will give out divers ſchedules of my beauty: it ſhall be in-
ventoried, and every particle and utenſil labell'd to my will.
- Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
A man looks on the love of his friend as one of the richeſt
poſſeſſions: the philoſopher thought friends were to be inven-
toried as well as goods. Gov. of the Tongue.
INVE'NTR ess. m. ſ. [inventrice, Fr. from inventor.] A female
that invents.
The arts, with all their retinue of leſſer trades, hiſtory and
tradition tell us when they had their beginning; and how many
of their inventors and inventreſſes were deified. Burnet.
Cecilia came,
Inventreſ of the vocal frame:
The ſweet enthuſiaſt, from her ſacred ſtore,
Enlarg’d the former narrow bounds. Dryden.
INvi'Rse. adj. [inverſ, Fr. inverſus, Latin.] Inverted; reci-
procal: oppoſed to direct. It is ſo called in proportion, when
the fourth term is ſo much greater than the third, as the ſecond
is leſs than the firſt; or ſo much leſs than the third as the ſe-
cond is greater than the firſt.
Every part of matter tends to every part of matter with a
force, which is always in a direct proportion of the quantity
of matter, and an inverſe duplicate proportion of the diſ-
tance. Garth.
INVERsion. m. ſ. (inverſion, Fr. inverſio, Latin.
I. º of order or time, ſo as that the laſt is firſt, and firſt
zllſ.
If he ſpeaks truth, it is upon deſign, and a ſubtle inverſion
of the precept of God, to do good that evil may come of it.
3 T-- • Brown's Wulg. Errours.
! is juſt the inverſion of an ad of parliament; your
lordſhip firſt ſigned it, and then it was paſſed amongſt
the lords and commons. . Dryden.
2. Change ºf place, ſo as that each takes the room of the other.
To INVERT. v. a [inverto, Latin.]
1. To turn upſide down; to place in contrary method or order
to that which was before.
With fate inverted, ſhall I humbly woo
And ſome proud prince, in wild Numidia born,
Pray to accept me, and forget my ſcorn ? J/aller.
Aſk not the cauſe why ſullen Spring
So long delays her flow’rs to bear,
And Winter ſtorms inver, the year. Dryden.
Poeſy and oratory omit things eſſential, and invert times and
actions, to place everything in the moſt affecting light. Watts.
2. To place the laſt firſt.
- Yes, every poet is a fool;
By demonſtration Ned can ſhow it:
Happy, could Ned's inverted rule
Prove cvery fool to be a poet. Prizr.
3. To divert; to turn into another channel; to imbezzle. In-
ftead of this convert or intervert is now conmonly uſed.
Solyman charged him bitterly with inverting his treaſures to
his own private uſe, and having ſecret intelligence with his
enemies. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Inve'Rtedly, adv. [from inverted.] In contrary or reverſed
order.
Placing the forepart of the eye to the hole of the window
of a darkened room, we have a pretty landſkip of the objećts
abroad, invertedly painted on the paper, on the back of the
eye. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
To INve's r. v. a. ſinveſtir, Fr. inveſtio, Latin.]
1. To dreſs; to clothe; to array. When it has two accuſa-
tives it has in or with before the thing.
Their geſture ſad,
Inveſ? in lank lean cheeks and war-worn coats,
Preſented them unto the gazing moon,
So many horrid ghoſts.
Thou with a mantle didſt inveſt
The riſing world of waters. Milton,
Let thy eyes ſhine forth in their full luſtre;
Inveſ? them with thy lovelieſt ſmiles, put on
Thy choiceſt looks.
2. To place in poſſeſſion of a rank or office.
When we ſanctify or hallow churches, that which we do is
only to teſtify that we make places of publick reſort, that we
inveſt God himſelf with them, and that we ſever them from
common uſes. Hooker.
After the death of the other archbiſhop he was inveſted in
that high dignity, and ſettled in his palace at Lambeth. Claren.
The practice of all ages, and all countries, hath been to do
honour to thoſe who are inveſted with publick authority. Atter.
3. To adorn ; to grace.
Honour muſt,
Not accompanied, inveſt him only;
But ſigns of nobleneſs, like ſtars, ſhall ſhine -
On all deſervers. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The fooliſh, over-careful fathers for this engroſs'd
The canker'd heaps of ſtrong atchieved gold;
For this they have been thoughtful to inveſt
Their ſons with arts and martial exerciſes.
Some great potentate,
Or of the thrones above; ſuch majeſty
Inveſts him coming.
4. To confer; to give.
If there can be found ſuch an inequality between man and
man, as there is between man and beaſt, or between ſoul and
body, it invºſſeth a right of government. Bacon.
5. To incloſe; to ſurround ſo as to intercept ſuccours or provi- .
ſions: as, the enemy invºſted the town.
INve's TIENT, adj. [inveſtiens, Latin.] Covering; clothing.
The ſhells ſerved as plaſms or moulds to this ſand, which,
when conſolidated and freed from its invºſtient ſhell, is of the
ſame ſhape as the cavity of the ſhell. Woodward.
Isve's TIGABLE. adj. [from inveſtigate.] To be ſearched out;
diſcoverable by rational diſquiſition.
Finally, in ſuch ſort they are inveſtigable, that the know-
ledge of them is general; the world hath always been ac-
quainted with them. Hooker.
In doing evil, we prefer a leſs good before a greater, the
greatneſs whereof is by reaſon inveſtigable, and may be
known. Hooker.
To INVESTIGATE. v. a. [inveſtigo, Latin.] To ſearch
out; to find out by rational diſquiſition. -
Inveſtigate the variety of motions and figures made by
the organs for articulation. Holder ºf Speech.
From the preſent appearances inveſtigate the powers and
forces of nature, and from theſe account for future obſerva-
tions. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
Investig A'tion. n. ſ. [inveſtigation, Fr. inveſtigatio, Latin.]
1. The act of the mind by which unknown truths are diſ-
covered. -
Not only the inveſtigation of truth, but the communication
of it alſo, is often pračtiſed in ſuch a method as neither agrees
preciſely to ſynthetick or analytick. Watts.
Progreſſive truth, the patient force of thought
Inveſtigation calm, whoſe ſilent powers
Command the world. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. Examination.
Your travels I hear much of: my own ſhall never more be
in a ſtrange land, but a diligent inveſtigation of my own terri-
tories: I mean no more tranſlations, but ſomething domeſtick,
fit for my own country. Pope to Swift.
INve'stiture. n.ſ. [French.]
1. The right of giving poſſeſſion of any manor, office, or be-
nefice.
He had refuſed to yield up to the pope the inveſtiture of
biſhops, and collation of eccleſiaſtical dignities within his
dominions. Raleigh's Eſſayſ.
2. The aët of giving poſſeſſion. -
INve'sTMENT. n.ſ. [in and veſtment.] Dreſs; cloaths; gar-
ment; habit. -
Ophelia, do not believe his vows ; for they are brokers,
Not of that die which their inveſtment, ſhew. Shakeſp, 5.
Ou,
Shakeſp. Henry V.
Denham's Sophy.
Shakeſpeare.
Milt. Parad. Loft.
-
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">1 N v
I N V.
- You, my lord archbiſhop,
Whoſe ſee is by a civil peace maintained, -
º - Whoſe beard the ſilver hand of peace hath touch'd,
º - Whoſe learning and good letters peace hath tutor'd,
i. Whoſe white inveſtments figure innocence,
º The dove, and every bleſſed ſpirit of peace;
Wherefore do you ſo ill tranſlate yourſelf,
Out of the ſpeech of peace, that bears ſuch grace,
- Into the harſh and boiſt'rous tongue of war? Shakespeare H. IV.
INVE"r ERAcy. m.ſ.. [inveteratio, Latin.]
1. Long continuance of any thing bad; obſtinacy confirmed by
| time.
| The inveteracy of the people's prejudices compelled their
| - rulers to make uſe of all means for reducing them. Addiſon.
: 2. [In phyſick.] Long continuance of a diſeaſe.
INVETERATE. adj. [inveteratus, Latin.]
1. Old ; long eſtabliſhed.
The cuſtom of Chriſtians was then, and had been a long
time, not to wear garlands, and therefore that undoubtedly
they did offend who preſumed to violate ſuch a cuſtom by not
obſerving that thing; the very inveterate obſervation whereof
was a law, ſufficient to bind all men to obſerve it, unleſs they
could ſhew ſome higher law, ſome law of Scripture, to the
contrary. Hooker.
It is an inveterate and received opinion, that cantharides,
applied to any part of the body, touch the bladder and exul-
cerate it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Obſtinate by long continuance.
It is not every ſinful violation of conſcience that can quench
the ſpirit; but it muſt be a long inveterate courſe and cuſtom
of finning, that at length produces and ends in ſuch a curſed
effect. South's Sermons.
He who writes ſatire honeſtly is no more an enemy to
the offender, than the phyſician to the patient when he pre-
ſcribes harſh remedies to an inveterate diſeaſe. Dryden.
In a well-inſtituted ſtate the executive power will never let
abuſes grow inveterate, or multiply ſo far that it will be hard to
find remedies. Swift.
To INVETERATE. v. a. [inveterer, Fr. invetero, Latin.] To
harden or make obſtinate by long continuance.
The vulgar conceived, that now there was an end given,
and a conſummation to ſuperſtitious prophecies, and to an
ancient tacit expectation, which had by tradition been infuſed
and inviterated into mens minds. Bacon.
Let not atheiſts lay the fault of their ſins upon human na-
ture, which have their prevalence from long cuſtom and inve-
terated habit. Bentley’s Sermons.
INVETER AT EN Ess. n.ſ. [from inveterate.] Long continuance
of any thing bad; obſtinacy confirmed by time.
As time hath rendered him more perfect in the art, ſo hath
the inveterateneſ of his malice made him more ready in the
execution. Brown's Wulg, Errours.
Neither the inveterateneſ of the miſchief, nor the pre-
valency of the faſhion, ſhall be any excuſe for thoſe who will
not take care about the meaning of their words. Locke.
JNVETERATION. m. ſ. [inveteratio, Latin.] The aët of har-
dening or confirming by long continuance.
INVI’DIOUS. adj. [invidioſus, Latin.]
I. Envious; malignant.
I ſhall open to them the interior ſecrets of this myſte-
rious art, without impoſture or invidious reſerve. Evelyn.
2. Likely to incur or to bring hatred. This is the more uſual
ſenſe.
Agamemnon found it an invidious affair to give the pre-
ference to any one of the Grecian heroes. Broome.
Not to be further tedious, or rather invidious, theſe are a
few cauſes which have contributed to the ruin of our mo-
rals. Swift.
INV1'BioUSLY, adv. [from invidious.]
I. Malignantly; enviouſly.
The clergy murmur againſt the privileges of the laity; the
laity invidiouſly aggravate the immunities of the clergy. Sprat.
2. In a manner likely to provoke hatred.
INV1'Drous Ness, n.ſ. [from invidius.] Quality of provoking
envy or hatred.
To INvi'GORATE. v. a. [in and vigour.] To endue with vi-
gour; to ſtrengthen; to animate; to enforce.
The ſpleen is introduced to invigorate the finiſter fide,
which, dilated, would rather infirm and debilitate. Brown.
I have lived in a reign when the prince, inſtead of invigo-
*ating the laws, or giving them their proper courſe, aſſumed
a power of diſpenſing with them. Addiſon.
No one can enjoy health, without he feel a lightſome and
invigºating principle, which ſpurs him to action. Speciator.
Chriſtian graces and virtues they cannot be, unleſs fed, in-
vigºrated, and animated by a principle of univerſal charity.
Atterbury's Sermonſ.
Gentle warmth
Diſcloſes well the earth's all teeming womb,
Invigorating tender ſeeds.
INVIGoRATION. m. ſ. [from invigorate.]
I. The ačt of invigorating.
Phillips.
2. The ſtate of being invigorated.
I find in myſelf an appetitive faculty, which is always in
ağual exerciſe, in the very height of activity and invigora-
tion. Norris.
INVINCIBLE. adj. [invincible, French; invincibilis, Latin.]
Inſuperable; unconquerable; not to be ſubdued.
I would have thought her ſpirits had been invincible againſt
all aſſaults of affection. Shakeſpeare.
- Should he invade any part of their country, he would ſoon
ſee that invincible nation with their united forces up in arms.
Knolles's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
The ſpirit remains invincible. AMilton.
That miſtake, which is the conſequence of invincible er-
rour, ſcarce deſerves the name of wrong judgment. Locke.
If an atheiſt had had the making of himſelf, he would have
framed a conſtitution that could have kept pace with his inſa-
tiable luſt, been invincible by intemperance, and have held out
a thouſand years in a perpetual debauch. Bentley's Sermons.
IN vi'NciBLEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from invincible.] Unconquerable-
neſs; inſuperableneſs.
IN vi'NcIBLY. adv. [from invincible.] Inſuperably; uncon-
querably.
Ye have been fearleſs in his righteous cauſe;
And as ye have receiv'd, ſo have ye done
Invincibly. Miltzz.
Neither invitations nor threats avail with thoſe who are in-
vincibly impeded, to apply them to their benefit. Dec. of Piety.
INVI'OLABLE. adj. [inviolable, French; inviolabilis, Latin.j
1. Not to be profaned; not to be injured.
Thou, be ſure, ſhalt give account
To him who ſent us, whoſe charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and theſe from harm. Milt. Par. Lº/f.
In vain did nature's wiſe command
Divide the waters from the land,
If daring ſhips, and men prophane,
Invade the inviolable main;
Th’ eternal fences overleap,
And paſs at will the boundleſs deep. Dryden.
Ye lamps of heav'n' he ſaid, and lifted high
His hands, now free; thou venerable ſky
Inviolable pow'rs! ador'd with dread,
Be all of you adjur’d. Dryden's AFn.
This birthright, when our author pleaſes, muſt and muſt not
be ſacred and inviolable. Locke-
2. Not to be broken.
The prophet David thinks, that the very meeting of men
together, and their accompanying one another to the houſe of
God, ſhould make the bond of their love inſoluble, and tie
them in a league of inviolable amity. Acaker-
See, ſee, they join, embrace, and ſeem to kiſs,
As if they vow’d ſome league inviolable. Shakeſp. H. VI.
3. Inſuſceptible of hurt or wound.
Th’ inviolable ſaints
In cubick phalanx firm advanc'd intire. Milton.
INV1'ol ABLY. adv. [from inviolable.] Without breach; with-
out failure.
The true profeſſion of Chriſtianity inviolably engages all its
followers to do good to all men. Spratt's Sermons.
Meer acquaintance you have none: you have drawn them
all into a nearer line; and they who have converſed with you,
are for ever after inviolably yours. Dryden.
INvi'ol at E. adj. [inviolate, Fr. inviolatus, Lat.] Unhurt; un-
injured; unprofaned ; unpolluted; unbroken.
His fortune of arms was ſtill inviolate. Bacon’s H. VII:
But let inviolate truth be always dear
To thee; even before friendſhip, truth prefer. Denham.
If the paſt
Can hope a pardon, by thoſe mutual bonds
Nature has ſeal’d between us, which though I
Have cancell'd, thou haſt ſtill preſerv'd inviolate:
I beg thy pardon. Denham's Sophy.
My love your claim inviolate ſecures;
'Tis writ in fate, I can be only yours. Dryden's Aurengz.
In all the changes of his doubtful ſtate,
His truth, like heav'n's, was kept inviolate. Dryden.
I'Nvious. adj. [invius, Latin.] Impaſſable; untrodden.
If nothing can oppugn his love,
And virtue invious ways can prove,
What may not he confide to do,
That brings both love and virtue too. Hudibrar.
- IN visi b 1'11ty. n.ſ.. [inviſibilité, Fr. from inviſible.] The ſtate
of being inviſible; imperceptibleneſs to fight.
They may be demonſtrated to be innumerable, ſubſtituting
their ſmalneſs for the reaſon of their inviſibility. Ray.
INVISIBLE. adj. [inviſible, Fr. inviſibilis, Latin.] Not per-
ceptible by the fight; not to be ſeen. - -
He was inviſible that hurt me ſo;
And none inviſible, but ſpirits, can go.
The threaden ſails,
Borne with th' inviſible and creeping wind,
Drew the huge bottoms to the furrow'd ſea. Shakeſp. H. V.
Sidney.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

6
'Tis
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N V
º:
º:
rººt.
-*
"…
º::
:
º
'Tis wonderful,
'That an inviſible inſtinét ſhould frame them
To loyalty unlearn'd, honour untaught,
Civility not ſeen from others.
To us inviſible, or dimly ſeen,
In theſe thy loweſt works. Milton.
. He that believes a God, believes ſuch a being as hath all
... perfections; among which this is one, that he is a ſpirit, and
conſequently that he is inviſible, and cannot be ſeen. Tillotſon.
It ſeems eaſier to make one's ſelf inviſible to others, than
to make another's thoughts viſible to me, which are not viſible
... to himſelf. Locke.
Invi's IBLY. adv. [ from inviſible. J Imperceptibly to the
fight. -
- o Age by degrees inviſibly doth creep,
Nor do we ſeem to die, but fall aſleep. Denham.
To INvi'scATE. v.a. [in and viſcus, Latin.] To lime; to
intangle in glutinous matter. -
The cameleon's food being flies, it hath in the tongue a
mucous and ſlimy extremity, whereby, upon a ſudden emiſ-
fion, it inviſcates and intangleth thoſe inſects. Brown.
IN vit Aºtion. n.ſ.. [invitation, Fr. invitatio, Lat.] The aët
of inviting, bidding, or calling to any thing with ceremony
and civility.
That other anſwer'd with a lowly look,
‘And ſoon the gracious invitation took. Dryden.
IN vi'TAtoRY. adj. [from invito, Latin.] Uſing invitation;
containing invitation. - -
To INVITE. v. a. [invitz, Latin; inviter, French.]
1. To bid; to aſk to any place, particularly to one's own houſe,
with intreaty and complaiſance. -
If thou be invited of a mighty man, withdraw thyſelf.
Eccluſ, i. 39.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline,
He comes invited by a younger ſon. Milton.
When much company is invited, then be as ſparing as
poſſible of your coals. Swift.
2. To allure; to perſuade.
A war upon the Turks is more worthy than upon any other
Gentiles, though facility and hope of ſucceſs might invite
ſome other choice. Bacon.
Nor art thou ſuch -
Created, or ſuch place haſt here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though ſpirits of heav'n,
To viſit thee. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
The liberal contributions ſuch teachers met with, ſerved
ſtill to invite more labourers into that work. Decay of Piety.
Shady groves, that eaſy ſleep invite,
And after toilſome days a ſoft repoſe at night. Dryd. Wirgil.
To INyi'te. v. n. [inv.to, Latin J. To aſk or call to anything
pleaſing.
All things invite r
To peaceful counſels. … -- . Mium.
INV1't ER. m.ſ.. [from invite.] He who invites. .
... They forcibly cut out abortive votes, ſuch as their inviters
and encouragers moſt fancied. King Charles.
Honour was the aim of the gueſts, and intereſt was the
ſcope of the inviter. Smalridge's Sermons.
Wines and cates the table grace,
But moſt the kind inviter's chearful face. Pope's Odyſſ.
IN vi'TINGLY. adv. [from inviting.] In ſuch a manner as in-
vites or allures.
If he can but dreſs up a temptation to look inviting'y, the
buſineſs is done. Decay of Piety.
To INU'MBRATE. v. a. [inumbro, Latin.] To ſhade; to cover
with ſhades. Dićf.
INU'Nction. m. ſ. [ inungo, inundius, Latin, J The act of
ſmearing or anointing.
The wife Author of nature hath placed on the rump two
glandules, which the bird catches hold upon with her bill, and
ſqueezes out an oily liniment, fit for the inunction of the fea-
thers, and cauſing their filaments to cohere. Ray.
INUNDA't Ion. n. ſ. [inundation, French; inundatio, Latin.]
1. The overflow of waters; flood; deluge. Inundation, ſays
Cowley, implies leſs than deluge.
Her father counts it dangerous,
That ſhe ſhould give her ſorrow ſo much ſway;
And in his wiſdom haſtes our marriage,
To ſtop the inundatiºn of her tears. Shakespeare. Rom. and juliet.
The ſame inundation was not paſt forty foot in moſt places;
ſo that although it deſtroyed man and beaſt generally, yet ſome
few wild inhabitants of the woods eſcaped. Bacon.
All fountains of the deep,
Broke up, ſhall heave the ocean to uſurp
Beyond all bounds, ’till inundation riſe
Above the higheſt hills. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. xi.
This inundation unto the Egyptians happeneth when it is
Winter unto the Ethiopians. Brown's Wu'g. Errours.
Your care about your banks infers a fear
Of threatening floods, and inundations near. Dryden.
The hero next aſſail'd proud Doway's head,
And ſpite of confluent inundations ſpread
With unexampled valour did ſucceed. Blackmore,
No ſwelling inundation hides the grounds; -
But cryſtal currents glide within their bound;. Gay,
2. A confluence of any kind. -
Many good towns, through that inundation of the Iriſh,
were utterly waſted. Spenser.
To I'Nvocate. v. a. ſ invoco, Latin. J. To invoke; to im-
plore; to call upon ; to pray to.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
Be’t lawful, that I invocate thy ghoſt,
To hear the lamentations of poor Anne, Shakespeare Rich. III,
If Dagon be thy god,
Go to his temple, invocate his aid -
With ſolemneſt devotion. Milton's Agoniſeſ,
... Here rather let me drudge, and earn my bread,
*Till vermin or the draff of ſervile food
Conſume me, and oft invocated death
Haſten the welcome end of all my pains. Milton’s Agoniſt,
Invocation. m. ſ. [invocation, French ; invocatio, Latin.j
1. The act of calling upon in prayer.
Is not the name of prayer uſual to ſignify even all the ſer-
vice that ever we do unto God And that for no other cauſe,
as I ſuppoſe, but to ſhew that there is in religion no acceptable
duty, which devout invocation of the name of God doth not
either preſuppoſe or infer. Hooker.
2. The form of calling for the aſſiſtance or preſence of any
being.
My invºcation is
Honeſt and fair, and in his miſtreſs' name. Shakespeare
The propoſition of Gratius is contained in a line, and that
of invºcation in half a line. J/aſe.
I will ſtrain myſelf to breath out this one invºcatin. Howel.
The whole poem is a prayer to fortune, and the invocation
is divided between the two deities. Addison on Italy.
I'Nvoic E. m.ſ. [This word is perhaps corrupted from the French
word envoyez, ſend..] A catalogue of the freight of a ſhip,
or of the articles and price of goods ſent by a factor.
To INvo'ke. v. a. [invoco, Latin; invoquer, French..] To call
upon; to implore; to pray to. a
The power I will invoke dwells in her eyes. Sidney.
One peculiar nation to ſelect
From all the reſt, of whom to be invºk'd. Miltºn’s P. Loſt.
The ſkilful bard, -
Striking the Thracian harp, invokes Apollo,
To make his hero and himſelf immortal. Prior,
To IN vo'Lve. v. a. [involvo, Latin.]
1. To inwrap; to cover with anything circumfluent.
Leave a ſinged bottom all involv'd
With ſtench and ſmoke. Milton.
No man could miſs his way to heaven for want of light;
and yet ſo vain are they as to think they oblige the world by
involving it in darkneſs. Decay of Piety.
In a cloud involv’d, he takes his flight,
Where Greeks and Trojans mix'd in mortal fight. Dryden.
2. To imply ; to compriſe.
We cannot demonſtrate theſe things ſo as to ſhew that the
contrary neceſſarily involve: a contradiction. Tillotſon,
3. To entwiſt; to join.
He knows his end with mine involv’d. Milton.
4. To take in ; to catch. -
The gath'ring number, as it moves along, -
Involves a vaſt involuntary throng. , Pope.
Sin we ſhould hate altogether ; but our hatred of it may
involve the perſon which we ſhould not hate at all. Sprat.
One death involves
Tyrants and ſlaves.
5. To intangle. - *
This reference of the name to a thing whereof we have
no idea, is ſo far from helping at all, that it only ſerves the
Žhºmſºn's Summer.
more to involve us in difficulties. Locke.
As obſcure and imperfect ideas often involve our reaſon, ſo
do dubious words puzzle mens reaſon. Locke.
6. To complicate; to make intricate. -
Some involv'd their ſnaky folds. Milton.
Syllogiſm is of neceſſary uſe, even to the lovers of truth,
to ſhew them the fallacies that are often concealed in florid,
witty, or involved diſcourſes. Locke.
7. To blend; to mingle together confuſedly,
Earth with hell mingle and involve. Milton.
INvolunt ARILY. adv. [from involuntary..] Not by choice;
not ſpontaneouſly.
INVOLUNTARY. adj. [in and voluntarius, Latin; involon-
taire, French.] *
1. Not having the power of choice.
The gath'ring number, as it moves along,
Involves a vaſt involuntary throng,
Who gently drawn, and ſtruggling leſs and leſs,
Roll in her vortex, and her pow'r confeſs. Dunciad, b. iv.
2. Not choſen; not done willingly.
The forbearance of that ačtion, conſequent to ſuch com-
mand of the mind, is called voluntary ; and whatſoever. ac-
tion is performed without ſuch a thought of the mind, is
called involuntary. - Locke.
12 R. But
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I N W.
I N W
But why? ah tell me, ah too dear!
Steals down my cheek th’ involuntary tear.
Nvolu'rion. n.ſ.. [involutio, Latin.]
1. The aët of involving or inwrapping.
2. The ſtate of being entangled ; complication.
All things are mixed, and cauſes blended by mutual invo-
lutions. Glanville's Scepſ. c. 23.
3. That which is wrapped round anything.
Great conceits are raiſed of the involution or membranous
covering called the filly-how, ſometimes found about the
heads of children. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v.
To INU'RE. v. a. [in and ure.]
1. To habituate; to make ready or willing by pračtice and
cuſtom; to accuſtom. It had anciently with before the thing
• praćtiſed, now to. -
Becauſe they inſiſt ſo much, and ſo proudly inſult thereon,
we muſt a little inure their ears with hearing how others,
whom they more regard, are in this caſe accuſtomed to uſe
the ſelf-ſame language with us. Hooker, b. v.
If there might be added the right helps of true art and
learning, there would be as much difference, in maturity of
judgment, between men therewith inured, and that which
now men are, as between men that are now and innocents.
Hooker, b. i. ſ. 6.
That it may no painful work endure,
It to ſtrong labour can itſelf inure. Hubberd's Tale.
England was a peaceable kingdom, and but lately inured
to the mild and goodly government of the Confeſſor. Spenser.
The forward hand, inur'd to wounds, makes way
Pope.
Upon the ſharpeſt fronts of the moſt fierce. Daniel.
Then cruel, by their ſports to blood enur'd
Of fighting beaſts, and men to beaſts expos'd. Milton.
To inure
Our prompt obedience. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. viii.
They, who had been moſt inured to buſineſs, had not in
their lives ever undergone ſo great fatigue for twenty days to-
gether. Clarendon, b. viii.
We may inure ourſelves by cuſtom to bear the extremities
of weather without injury. Addiſon's Guard. Nº. 102.
2. To bring into uſe; to practiſe again.
. The wanton boy was ſhortly well recur'd
Of that his malady;
But he ſoon after freſh again inur'd
His former cruelty. Spenſer.
INU'REMENT. n.ſ. [from inure.] Pračtice; habit; uſe ; cuſ-
tom; frequency.
If iron will acquire by mere continuance a ſecret appetite,
and habitual inclination to the ſite it held, then how much
more may education, being nothing elſe but a conſtant plight
and inurement, induce by cuſtom good habits into a reaſon-
able creature. J/otton.
To INU'RN. v. a. [in and urn..] To intomb ; to bury.
The ſepulchre
Wherein we ſaw thee quietly inurn'd,
Hath op'd its ponderous and marble jaws
To caſt thee up again. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
Amidſt the tears of Trojan dames inurn'd,
And by his loyal daughters truly mourn'd.
INU's TIos. m. ſ. [iniſłio, Lat.] The act of burning.
INU'TILE. adj. [inutile, Fr. inutilis, Lat.] Uſeleſs; unprofitable.
To refer to heat and cold is a compendious and inutile
ſpeculation. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. N°. 839.
INUT I'llºr Y. n.ſ.. [inutilité, Fr. inutilitas, Lat.) Uſeleſſneſs;
unprofitableneſs,
INvu"LNERABLE. adj. [invulnerable, Fr. invulnerabilis, Lat.]
Not to be wounded; ſecure from wound.
Our cannon's malice vainly ſhall be ſpent
Dryden.
Againſt th' invulnerable clouds of heav'n. Shakeſpeare.
Nor vainly hope -
To be invulnerable in thoſe bright arms,
That mortal dint none can reſiſt. Milton.
Vaneſia, though by Pallas taught,
By love invulnerable thought,
Starching in books for wiſdom's aid,
Was in the very ſearch betray'd. Swift's Mºſel.
To IN waſ L.L. v. a. [in and wall.] To incloſe with a wall.
Three ſuch towns in thoſe places with the garriſons, would
be ſo augmented as they would be able with little to inwall
themſelves ſtrongly. Spenser on Ireland.
I'Nw ARD.
I'N w AR ps.
1. Towards the internal parts; within.
The parts of living creatures that be more inward; nouriſh
more than the outward fleſh. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
The medicines which go to theſe magical ointments are ſo
ſtrong, that if they were uſed inward; they would kill; and
therefore they work potently, though outwards. Bacon.
Coeleſtial light ſhiné inward. Milton.
2. With inflexion or incurvity; concavely.
. He ſtretches out his arm in ſign of peace, with his breaſt
bending inward. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
}adu. [inpeanb, Saxon.]
3. Into the mind or thoughts.
Looking inward we are ſtricken dumb ; looking upward
we ſpeak and prevail. Hooker, b. v.
I'Nwar D. adj.
1. Internal; placed not on the outſide but within.
Though the lord of the liberty do pain himſelf all he may
to yield equal juſtice unto all, yet can there not but great
abuſes lurk in ſo inward and abſolute a privilege. Spenſer.
He could not reſt, but did his ſtout heart eat,
And waſte his inward gall with deep deſpight. Fa. Qiz.
To each inward part
It ſhoots inviſible. Milton.
Sickneſs, contributing no leſs than old age to the ſhaking
down this ſcaffolding of the body, may diſcover the inward
ſtrućture more plainly. Pope.
2. Reflecting; deeply thinking.
With outward ſmiles their flatt'ry I receiv'd;
But bent and inward to myſelf again
Perplex'd, theſe matters I revolv’d, in vain. Prizr.
3. Intimate; domeſtick.
All my inward friends abhorred me.
4. Seated in the mind.
Princes have but their titles for their glories,
An outward honour for an inward toil;
And for unfelt imaginations,
They often feel a world of reſtleſs cares.
INWARD. n.ſ.
I. Any thing within, generally the bowels.
ſenſe a ſingular.
Then ſacrificing, laid
The inwards, and their fat, with incenſe ſtrew’d
On the cleft wood, and all due rites perform'd. Miltºn.
They eſteem them moſt profitable, becauſe of the great
quantity of fat upon their inwards. Mºrtimer's Huys.
2. Intimate; near acquaintance.
Sir, I was an inward of his ; a fly fellow was the duke;
and I know the cauſe of his withdrawing, Shakeſpeare.
I'Nw ARD ly, adv. [from inward.]
1. In the heart; privately. -
That which inwardly each man ſhould be, the church out-
wº; ought to teſtify. Hocker, b. v.
bleed inwardly for my lord. Shakeſpeare.
Mean time the king, though inwardly he mourn'd,
In pomp triumphant to the town return'd, -
Attended by the chiefs. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
2. In the parts within; internally.
Let Benedick, like covered fire,
Conſume away in fighs, waſte inwardly. Shakeſpeare.
Cantharides he preſcribes both outwardly and inwardly.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
job xix. 19.
Shakeſpeare. .
Seldom has this
. With inflexion or concavity.
'Nwardness. n.ſ. [from inward.] Intimacy; familiarity.
You know, my inwardneſs and love
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio. Shakeſpeare.
To IN we’Ave. preter. inwove or inweaved, part. paſſ inwave
or inwoven. [in and weave.]
1. To mix any thing in weaving ſo that it forms part of the
texture.
A fair border, wrought of fundry flowers,
Inwoven with an ivy winding trail. Spenſer.
Down they caſt
Their crowns, inwove with amaranth and gold. Milton.
And o'er ſoft palls of purple grain unfold -
Rich tap'ſtry, ſtiffen'd with inwoven gold. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To intwine; to complicate. -
The roof -
Of thickeſt covert was inwoven ſhade. Milton's Par. Lºff.
To IN wo'od. v. a. [in and wood.] To hide in woods.
He got out of the river, inwooded himſelf ſo as the ladies
loſt the marking his ſportfulneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
To IN wraſp. v. a. [in and wrap.]
1. To cover by involution; to involve.
And over them Arachne high did lift
Her cunning web, and ſpread her ſubtil net,
Inwrapped in foul ſmoak. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
This, as an amber drop, inwraps a bee,
Covering diſcovers your quick ſoul; that we {
May in your through-ſhine front our hearts thoughts ſee.
- Donne.
2. To perplex; to puzzle with difficulty or obſcurity.
The caſe is no ſooner made than reſolv'd : if it be made
not inwraped, but plainly and perſpicuouſly. Bacon.
3. It is doubtful whether the following examples ſhould nºt be
enrap or inrap, from in and rap, rapiz, Latin, to raviſh or
tranſport.
This pearl ſhe gave me I do feel't and ſee’t;
And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet ’tis not madneſs. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
For if ſuch holy ſong
Enwrap our fancy long,
Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold. Milton.
Is wro'vo H.T. adj. [in and wrought.] Adorned with work.
Camus,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J O C
J O Í
º
:
º:
º
-
:
º
º;
tº.
º
Camus, reverend fir, went footing ſlow;
His mantle hairy and his bonnet ſedge,
Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge -
Like to that ſanguine flower inſcrib'd with woe. Milton.
To IN wre’ATHE. v.a. [in and wreath..] To ſurround as with
a wreath. -
Bind their reſplendent locks inwreath'd with beams.
- Milton.
Nor leſs the palm of peace inwreathes thy brow.
Thomſon.
JOB. n.ſ. [A low word now much in uſe, of which I cannot
tell the etymology.] .
2. A low mean lucrative buſy affair.
1. Petty, piddling work; a piece of chance work.
He was now with his old friends in the ſtate of a poor
diſbanded officer after peace, like an old favourite of a cun-
ning miniſter after the job is over. Arbuthnot.
No cheek is known to bluſh, no heart to throb, -
Save when they loſe a queſtion, or a job. Pope.
. Such patents as theſe never were granted with a view of
being a job, for the intereſt of a particular perſon to the da-
mage of the publick. Swift.
3. A ſudden ſtab with a ſharp inſtrument.
To JoB. v. a.
1. To ſtrike ſuddenly with a ſharp inſtrument.
As an aſs with a galled back was feeding in a meadow, a
raven pitched upon him, and there ſat jobbing of the ſore.
L’Eſtrange.
2. To drive in a ſharp inſtrument.
Let peacocke and turkey leave jobbing their bex. Tuſſºr,
The work would, where a ſmall irregularity of ſtuff ſhould
happen, draw or job the edge into the ſtuff. Moxon.
To Job. v. n. To play the ſtockjobber; to buy and ſell as a
broker.
The judge ſhall job, the biſhop bite the town,
And mighty dukes pack cards for half a crown. Pope.
Joe's tears. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſ.
Jo’BBER. n.ſ.. [from job.]
1. A man who ſells ſtock in the publick funds.
So caſt it in the ſouthern ſeas,
And view it through a jobber's bill;
Put on what ſpectacles you pleaſe,
Your guinea's but a guinea ſtill.
2. One who does chancework.
JoBBERNowl. n.ſ.. [moſt probably from jobbe, Flemiſh, dull,
and nowl, pnol, Saxon, a head.J Loggerhead; blockhead.
And like the world, men's jobbernowls
Turn round upon their ears, the poles. Hudibras, p. iii.
Jo'cKEY. m. ſ. [from jack, the diminutive of john, comes
jackey, or, as the Scotch, jockey, uſed for any boy, and par-
ticularly for a boy that rides race-horſes.
1. A fellow that rides horſes in the race. -
Theſe were the wiſe ancients, who heaped up greater ho-
nours on Pindar's jockies than on the poet himſelf. Addiſon.
2. A man that deals in horſes. *
3. A cheat; a trickiſh fellow.
To Jo'cKEY. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To juſtle by riding againſt one.
2. To cheat; to trick. - *
Jºse. adj. [jocºſus, Latin.] Merry; waggiſh; given to
Cit.
If the ſubjećt be ſacred, all ludicrous turns, and jocoſ or
comical airs, ſhould be excluded, leſt young minds learn to
trifle with the awful ſolemnities of religion. JWatts.
Joco's ELY. adv. [from jocoſe..] Waggiſhly ; in jeſt; in game.
Spondanus imagines that Ulyſſes may poſſibly ſpeak jocoſe-
ly, but in truth Ulyſſes never behaves with levity. Broome.
jºr }n. f [from jocoſe..] Waggery; merriment.
A laugh there is of contempt or indignation, as well as of
Swift's Miftel.
mirth or ſº Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vii.
JO'CULAR. adj. [jocularis, Latin.] Uſed in jeſt; merry;
jocoſe; waggiſh; not ſerious.
Theſe jocular ſlanders are often as miſchievous as thoſe of
deepeſt deſign. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 5.
The ſatire is a dramatick pocm; the ſtile is partly ſt-
rious, and partly jocular. Dryden.
Jºaº. n.J. [from jocular.] Merriment; diſpoſition to
elt,
The wits of thoſe ages were ſhort of theſe of ours; when
men could maintain immutable faces, and perfiſt unaiterably
at the efforts of jocularity. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vii.
JOCU'ND. adj. [jocundus, Lat.]. Merry; gay; airy; lively.
There's comfort yet; then be thou jocund. Shakeſpeare.
No jocund health, that Denmark drinks to day,
But the great cannon to the clouds ſhall tell. Shakeſpeare.
- They on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund muſick charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds. Milton,
Alexis ſhun'd his fellow ſwains
Their rural ſports, and jocund ſtrains, Prior.
Jocu'NDLY. adv. [from jocund.J. Merrily; gally. -
He has no power of himſelf to leave it; but he is ruined
jºcundly and pleaſantly, and damned according to his heart's
... deſire. * - - South's Sermons.
To JOG. v. d. [ſhocken, Dutch..] To puſh; to ſhake by a
ſudden impulſe; to give notice by a ſudden puſh.
Now leaps he upright, jogs me and cries, Do you ſee
Yonder well-favour'd youth 2 JDonne,
This ſaid, he jogg'd his good ſteed nigher, -
And ſteer'd him gently toward the ſquire. Hudibras, p. i.
I was pretty well pleaſed while I expcéted, till fruition
jogged me out of my pleaſing ſlumber, and I knew it was
but a dream. Norris's Miſal,
Sudden I jogg'd Ulyſſes, who was laid -
Faſt by my fide. Pope's Odſ.
To Jog. v. n. To move by ſuccuſation; to move with ſmall
ſhocks like thoſe of a low trot.
The door is open, Sir, there lies good way,
You may be jogging while your boots are green. Shakespeare
og on, jog on the foot-path way,
And merrily heat the ſtile-a,
A merry heart goes all the day, -
Your ſad tires in a mile-a. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
Here lieth one, who did moſt truly prove .
That he could never die while he could move;
So hung his deſtiny, never to rot
While he might ſtill jog on and keep his trot. Mºon.
Away they trotted together: but as they were jºgging on;
the wolf ſpy’d a bare place about the dog's neck. L’Étrange.
Thus they jog on, ſtill tricking, never thriving, .
And murd'ring plays, which they miſcal reviving. Dryden.
Jog. m. ſ. [from the verb.] º
1. A puſh ; a flight ſhake; a ſudden interruption by a puſh or
ſhake; a hint given by a puſh.
. As a leopard was valuing himſelf upon his party-coloured
ſkin, a fox gave him a jog, and whiſpered him, that the
beauty of the mind was above that of a painted outſide.
L’Eſtrange.
Nick found the means to ſlip a note into Lewis's hands,
which Lewis as ſlily put into John's pocket, with a pinch or
a jog to warn him what he was about. Arbuthnot.
A letter when I am inditing,
Comes Cupid, and gives me a jog,
: And I-fill all the paper with writing
Of nothing but ſweet Molly Mogg. Swift's Miſcel,
2. A rub; a ſmall ſtop; an irregularity of motion.
How that which penetrates all bodies without the leaſt jog
or obſtrućtion, ſhould impreſs a motion on any, is incon-
ceivable. Glanville's Scepſ.
Jo'gger. n. ſ. [from jog.] One who moves heavily and dully.
They, with their fellow joggers of the plough. Dryden.
To Jo'GGLE. v. n. To ſhake.
In the head of man, the baſe of the brain is parallel to the
horizon; by which there is leſs danger of the two brains
joggling, or ſlipping out of their place. Derham.
Jo’HNAPPLE. n.ſ.
A johnapple is a good reliſhed ſharp apple the Spring fol:
lowing, when moſt other fruit is ſpent : they are fit for the
cyder plantations. 4%rtimer's Huſt.
To Join. v. a. [joindre, French.]
1. To add one to another in continuity. º
Wo unto them that join houſe to houſe, that lay field to
field. Iſa. lviii.
oin them one to another into one ſtick. Ezek. xxxvii. 17.
he wall was joined together unto the half. Neh. iv. 6.
2. To couple; to combine.
In this faculty of repeating and joining together its ideas,
the mind has great power. Locke,
3. To unite in league or marriage.
One only daughter heirs my crown and ſtate,
Whom not our oracles, nor heav'n, nor fate,
Nor frequent prodigies permit to join
With any native of the Auſonian line.
4. To daſh together; to collide ; to encounter. -
When they joined battle, Iſrael was ſmitten. 1 Sam. iv. 2.
They ſhould with reſolute minds ſet down themſelves to
endure, until they might join battle with their enemies.
Knoller's Hiff. of the Turks.
Dryden's AEm.
5. To aſſociate. --
Go near, and join thyſelf to this chariot. Aé's vii. 29.
Thou ſhalt not be joined with them in burial. Iſa. xiv. 20.
6. To unite in one act.
Our beſt notes are treaſon to his fame,
join'd with the loud applauſe of publick voice. Dryden.
Thy tuneful voice with numbers join,
Thy words will more prevail than mine. Dryden.
. To unite in concord.
Be perfeótly joined together in the ſame mind. I Cor. i. 10.
8. To act in concert with.
Know your own int’reſt, Sir, where'er you lead,
We jointly vow to join no other head. Dryden's *:
- A C
4
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J O I
J O L.
To Join. v. n. -
1. To grow to ; to adhere; to be continuous.
- Juſtus's houſe joined hard to the ſynagogue. Acis xviii. 7.
2. To cloſe; to claſh. -
* . Look you, all you that kiſs my lady peace at home, that
our armies join not in a hot day. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
. ... Here's the earl of Wiltſhire's blood,
Whom I encounter'd, as the battles join'd. Shakeſpeare.
3. To unite with in marriage, or any other league.
Should we again break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people : Ezra ix. 14.
. To become confederate. -
When there falleth out any war, they join unto our ene-
mics, and fight againſt us. Exod. i. Io.
Let us make peace with him, before he join with Alexan-
der againſt us, I Mac. x. 4.
Ev’n you yourſelf
join with the reſt; you are arm'd againſt me. . Dryden.
Any other may join with him that is injured, and aſſiſt him
in recovering ſatisfaction. Locke.
Jo'INDER. m. ſ. [from join..] Conjunétion; joining.
A contračt of eternal bond of love,
. Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands. Shakeſpeare.
Jo'INER. m. ſ. [from join..] One whoſe trade is to make uten-
fils of wood joined. - -
The people wherewith you plant ought to be ſmiths, car-
penters, and joiners. - Bacon's Eſſays.
It is counted good workmanſhip in a joiner to bear his hand
curiouſly even. Moxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
Jo'INERY. m. ſ. [from joiner.]
joinery is an art whereby ſeveral pieces of wood are ſo fit-
ted and joined together by ſtrait lines, ſquares, miters, or
any bevel, that they ſhall ſeem one entire piece. Moxon.
Joint. m. ſ. [junctura, Lat. jointure, French..]
1. Articulation of limbs; juncture of moveable bones in ani-
... mal bodies.
Dropſies and aſthmas, and joint racking rheums. Milton.
I continued well, till I felt the ſame pain in the ſame joint.
- Temple.
2, Hinge; junétures which admit motion of the parts.
is . The coach, the cover whereof was made with ſuch joints
that as they might, to avoid the weather, pull it up cloſe
when they liſted; ſo when they would, they might remain
as diſcovered and open-fighted as on horſeback. Sidney.
3. [In Joinery; jointe, Fr. J .
Strait lines, in joiners language, is called a joint, that is,
- two pieces of wood are ſhot, that is, plained. Moxon,
4. A knot or commiſlure in a plant. --
5. One of the limbs of an animal cut up by the butcher.
In bringing up a joint of meat, it falls out of your hand. '
- - Swift.
6. Out of Joint. Luxated; ſlipped from the ſocket, or cor-
a reſpondent part where it naturally moves. -
* : Jacob's thigh was out of joint. Gen. xxiii. 25.
... My head and whole body was fore hurt, and alſo one of
my arms and legs put out of joint. Herbert.
7. Out of Joint. Thrown into confuſion and diſorder; con-
fuſed; full of diſturbance.
... The time is out of joint, oh curſed ſpight ! .
That ever I was born to ſet it right. Shakeſpeare.
Joi N.T. adj. . -
I. Shared among many.
Entertain no more of it, -
Than a joint burthen laid upon us all. … Shakespeare.
Though it be common in reſpect of ſome men, it is
not ſo to all mankind; but is the joint property of this coun-
try, or this pariſh. : Locke.
2. United in the ſame poſſeſſion : as we ſay, jointheirs or coheirs,
jointheireſſes or coheireſs.
The ſun and man did ſtrive,
joint tenants of the world, who ſhould ſurvive. Donne.
Pride then was not ; nor atts, that pride to aid;
Man walk'd with beaſt joint tenant of the ſhade. Pope.
3. Combined ; ačting together in conſort.
- On your joint vigour now,
My hold of this new kindom all depends. AMilton.
In a war carried on by the joint force of ſo many nations,
France could ſend troops. Addiſon on the State of the I/ar.
To Joi N.T. v. a. [from the noun.] - -
1. To join together in confederacy.
The times
Made friends of them, jointing their force gainſt Caeſar. Shakespeare
2. To form many parts into one.
Againſt the ſteed he threw
His forceful ſpear, which hiſing as it flew,
Pierc'd through the yielding planks of jointed wood. Dryd.
3. To form in articulations. -
The fingers are jointed together for motion, and furniſhed
with ſeveral muſcles. Ray on the Creation.
4. To divide a joint; to cut or quarter into joints.
He joints the neck; and with a ſtroke ſo ſtrong
The helm flies off; and bears the head along, Drydºn.
Jo'INTED. adj. [from joint.J Full of joints, knots, or com-
miſſures. - -
Three cubits high
The jointed herbage ſhoots. - Philips.
Jo'INTER. [from joint..] A ſort of plane.
The jointer is ſomewhat longer than the fore-plane, and
hath its ſole perfectly ſtrait: its office is to follow the fore-
plane, and ſhoot an edge perfectly ſtrait, when a joint is to
be ſhot. . Moxon's Mech. Exerciſe.
Jo'INTLY. adv. [from joint.]
1. Together; not ſeparately. -
I began a combat firſt with him particularly, and after his
death with the others jointly. - - - Sidney, b. ii.
Becauſe all that are of the church cannot jointly and equally
work; the firſt thing in polity required is a difference of per-
ſons in the church. Hooker, b. iii.
The generous prince told him he could lay no claim to his
gratitude, but deſired they might go to the altar together,
and jointly return their thanks to whom only it was due.
- - - - Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 49e
2. In a ſtate of union or co-operation.
His name a great example ſtands, to ſhow
How ſtrangely high endeavours may be bleſt,
Where piety and valour jointly go. • Dryden.
Joſis TREss. n.ſ.. [from jointure.] One who holds any thing
in jointure. -
'. Our queen,
Th’ imperial jointreſ of this warlike ſtate,
We've taken now to wife. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Jointsto'ol. n. ſ. [joint and ſtool.] A ſtool made not merely
by inſertion of the feet, but by inſerting one part in another.
He rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon
jointſtools, and wears his boot very ſmooth like unto the ſign
of the leg. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Could that be eternal which they had ſeen a rude trunk,
and perhaps the other piece of it a jointſtool. South's Sermons.
He uſed to lay chairs and joint/tools in their way, that they
might break noſes by falling. Arbuthnot-
JOINTURE. m. ſ. [jointure, French.] Eſtate ſettled on a
wife to be enjoyed after her huſband's deceaſe. -
The jointure that your king muſt make, -
With her dow'ry ſhall be counterpois'd. Shaft/p-
The old counteſs of Deſmond, who lived in 1589, and
many years ſince, was married in Edward the fourth’s time,
and held her jointure from all the earls of Deſmond ſinc
then. Raleigh's Hſi. of the World.
There's a civil queſtion us.'d of late,
Where lies my jointure, where your own eſtate Dryden.
What's property You ſee it alter,
Or, in a mortgage, prove a lawyer's ſhare,
Or, in a jointure, vaniſh from the heir. Pºpe.
Joist. n.ſ.. [from joindre, French..] The ſecondary beam of
a floor.
Some wood is not good to uſe for beams or joiſts, be-
cauſe of the brittleneſs. - A ſortimer's Huſbandry.
The kettle to the top was hoiſt,
And there ſtood faſten’d to a joi/?. Swift.
To Joist. v. a. [from the noun..] To fit in the ſmaller beams
of a flooring. -
JOKE. m. ſ. [jocus, Latin.] A jeſt; ſomething not ſerious. .
Link towns to towns with avenues of oak, -
Incloſe whole downs in walls, ’tis all a joke /
Inexorable death ſhall level all. Pope.
Why ſhould publick mockery in print, or a merry joke upon
a ſtage, be a better teſt of truth than ſevere railing ſarcaſms
and publick perſecutions : //atts's Improv. of the Mind.
To Joke. v. n. [jocor, Latin.] To jeſt; to be merry in
words or actions.
Our neighbours tell me oft, in joking talk,
Of aſhes, leather, oat-meal, bran, and chalk. Gay.
Jo’KER. m. ſ. [from joke..] A jeſter; a merry fellow:
Thou mad'ſt thy firſt appearance in the world like a dry
joker, buffoon, or jack-pudding. Dennis.
JCLE. m. ſ. [gueule, French; crol, Saxon.)
1. The face or cheek. It is ſeldom uſed but in the phraſe
cheek by jole.
Follow 1 nay, I'll go with thee cheek by jole. Shakeſt.
And by him in another hole,
Afflićted Ralpho, cheek by jole. Hudibrar-
A man, who has digeſted all the fathers, lets a pure Eng-
liſh divine go cheek by jole with him. Collier on Pride.
Your wan complexion, and your thinjoles, father. Dryden.
2. The head of a fiſh.
A ſalmon's belly, Helluo, was thy fate;
The doćtor call’d, declares all help too late:
Mercy cries Helluo, mercy on my ſoul!
Is there no hope alas ! then bring the jowl. Pope.
Red-ſpeckled trouts, the ſalmon's filver jole,
The jointed lobſter, and unſcaly foale. Gay's Trivia.
To Joll. v. a. [from jol, the head..] To beat the head
againſt any thing; to claſh with violence.
- Howſo’eyer
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J O R
s
“.
º
. With branches we the fanes adorn, and waſte
Howſoe'er their hearts are ſever'd in religion, their heads
are both one: they may joll horns together like any deer i' th'
herd. Shakeſpeare.
The tortoiſes envied the eaſineſs of the frogs, 'till they ſaw
them jolled to pieces and devoured for want of a buckler. L’Eſt,
Jo'Llity. adv. [from jolly.] In a diſpoſition to noiſy mirth.
The goodly empreſs, jollily inclin'd,
Is to the welcome bearer wondrous kind. Dryden's Perſ.
Jo'lliMENT. n ſ [from jolly..] Mirth; merriment; gaiety.
Matter of mirth enough, though there were none,
* . She could deviſe, and thouſand ways invent
To feed her fooliſh humour, and vain jolliment. Fa. Queen.
Jolliness. n.J. [from joly.]
Jo'i Lity. } - - - jolly.]
1, Gaiety; elevation of ſpirit. -
He with a proud jollity commanded him to leave that quar-
rel only for him, who was only worthy to enter into it. Sidney.
2. Merriment; feſtivity.
With joyance bring her, and with jo'lity. Spenſer.
There ſhall theſe pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theſeus, all in jollity. Shakeſpeare,
The brazen throat of war had ceas'd to roar;
All now was turn'd to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feaſt and dance. Milton's Parad. Loft.
Good men are never ſo ſurpriſed as in the midſt of their
jollitieſ, nor ſo fatally overtaken and caught as when the table
is made the ſnare. South's Sermons.
In jollity the day ordain'd to be the laſt. Dryden's An.
My heart was filled with melancholy to ſee ſeveral dropping
in the midſt of mirth and jellity. Addiſon's Spectator.
JO'LLY. adj. [joli, French; jovialis, Latin.]
I . Gay; merry; airy; cheerful ; lively; jovial.
Like a jolly troop of huntſmen, come
Our luſty Engliſh. Shakeſp. King john.
O nightingale!
Thou with freſh hope the lover's heart do'ſt fill,
While the jelly hours lead on propitious May.
All my griefs to this are jolly;
Nought ſo ſad as melancholy.
Ev’n ghoſts had learn'd to groan;
But free from puniſhment, as free from ſin,
The ſhades liv'd jolly, and without a king. Dryd, juven.
This gentle knight, inſpir’d by jolly May,
Forſook his eaſy couch at early day. Dryden.
A ſhepherd now along the plain he roves,
And with his jolly pipe delights the groves.
2. Plump; like one in high health.
He catches at an apple of Sodom, which though it may en-
tertain his eye with a florid, jolly white and red, yet, upon the
touch, it ſhall fill his hand only with ſtench and foulneſs. South.
To JOLT. v. n. [I know not whence derived.] To ſhake as a
carriage on rough ground. -
In ſuch a contrivance every little unevenneſs of the ground
will cauſe ſuch a jolting of the chariot as to hinder the motion
of its ſails. //ilkins.
Violent motion, as jolting in a coach, may be uſed in this
caſe. Arbuthnot on Diet.
A coach and fix horſes is the utmoſt exerciſe you can bear,
and how glad would you be, if it could waft you in the air
to avoid jolting. Swift to Gay.
To Jolt. v. a. To ſhake one as a carriage does.
Jolt. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Shock; violent agitation.
The ſymptoms are, bloody water upon a ſudden jolt or
violent motion. Arbuthnot on Diet.
The firſt jolt had like to have ſhaken me out; but after-
wards the motion was eaſy. Gulliver's Travels.
Jo'LTHEAD. m.ſ. [I know not whence derived.] A great
head; a dolt; a blockhead.
Fie on thee, jolthead, thou can'ſt not read. Shakeſpeare.
Had he been a dwarf, he had ſcarce been a reaſonable crea-
tue ; for he muſt then have either had a jolthead, and ſo there
would not have been body and blood enough to ſupply his
brain with ſpirits; or he muſt have had a ſmall head, and ſo
there would not have been brain enough for his buſineſs. Grew.
Josqui'll E. m. ſ. [jonquille, French.] A ſpecies of daffodil.
The flowers of this plant, of which there are ſingle and
double kinds, are greatly eſteemed for their ſtrong ſweet ſcent,
though few ladies can bear the ſmell of them, it being ſo
powerful as to overcome their ſpirits. A4iller.
Nor gradual bloom is wanting,
Nor hyacinths of pureſt virgin white,
Low bent and bluſhing inward; nor jonquille;
Of potent fragrance.
Jo'RDEN. m. ſ. ſºon, ſercuſ, and ben, receptaculum.] A pot.
Milton.
Burton.
Prior.
Thomſon's Spring.
To Jostle. v. 4. [jºr, French. I to juſtle; to rufi
againſt. ,
Jot. n.ſ. [ºrz.] A point; a tittle; the leaſt quantity aſ:
ſignable.
As ſuperfluous fleſh did rot,
Amendment ready ſtill at hand did wait,
To pluck it out with pincers fiery hot,
That ſoon in him was left no one corrupt jut.
Go, Eros, ſend his treaſure after, do it;
Detain no jot, I charge thee. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopat.
Let me not ſtay a jot from dinner; go, get it ready. Shdºſ.
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jet; -
Fa. Qāsen.
Forbear it therefore; give your cauſe to heav'n. Shakeſp.
This bond doth give thee here no jet of blood; ..
The words expreſly are a pound of fleſh. Shakeſpeare,
I argue not
Againſt heav'n's hand, or will; nor bate one jot
Of heart or hope; but ſtill bear up and ſteer -
Mºon.
Right onwards.
You might, with every jot as much juſtice, hang me up, be-
cauſe I'm old, as beat me becauſe I’m impotent. L’Eſirange.
A man may read the diſcourſes of a very rational author,
and yet acquire not one jet of knowledge. Locke.
he final event will not be one jot leſs the conſequence of
our own choice and ačtions, for God's having from all eternity
foreſeen and determined what that event ſhall be. Rogers.
JOVIAL. adj. [jovial, French; jovialis, Latin.]
1. Under the influence of Jupiter. -
The fixed ſtars are aſtrologically differenced by the planets,
and are eſteemed martial or jovia', according to the colòurs
whereby they anſwer theſe planets. Brown's Pulg, Err.
2. Gay ; airy; merry. - *
My lord, ſleek o'er your rugged looks;
Be bright and jovial 'mong your gueſts. Shakespeare Aſheb.
Our jovial ſtar reign'd at his birth. Shºp. Cymbeline.
Some men, of an ill and melancholy nature, incline the
company, into which they come, to be ſad and ill-diſpoſed;
and contrariwiſe, others of a jovial nature diſpoſe the com-
pany to be merry and cheerful. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
His odes are ſome of them panegyrical, others moral, the
reſt jºvial or bacchanalian. Dryden,
Perhaps the jeſt that charm'd the ſprightly crowd,
And made the jovial table laugh ſo loud,
To ſome falſe notion ow'd its poor pretence.
Jo'v1ALLY. adv. [from jovial 3 Merrily; gaily.
Jovi ALNEss. n.ſ.. [from jovial.] Gaiety; merriment.
Jo'UISAN ce. n.ſ. [rejouiſance, French..] Jollity; merriment;
feſtivity.
Colin, my dear, when ſhall it pleaſe thee ſing,
As thou wert wont, ſongs of ſome jouiſance;
Thy muſe too long ſlumbereth in ſorrowing,
Lulled aſleep through love's miſgovernance. Spenser.
Jo’URNAL. adj. [journale, French; giornale, Italian.] Daily;
quotidian. Out of uſe.
Now 'gan the golden Phoebus for to ſteep
His fiery face in billows of the Weſt,
And his faint ſteeds water'd in ocean deep,
Whilſt from their journal labours they did reſt. Fa. Qeen.
Ere twice the ſun has made his journal greeting
To th’ under generation, you ſhall find
Your ſafety manifeſted. Shakespeare Meaſ for Meaſure,
So ſick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not ſo citizen a wanton, as
To ſeem to die ere ſick; ſo, pleaſe you, leave me:
Stick to your journal courſe; the brºth of cuſtom
Is breach of all. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Jo'URNAL.. n.ſ. [journal, Freneh; giornale, Italian.]
1. A diary; an account kept of daily tranſačtions. -
Edward kept a moſt judicious journal of all the principal
paſſages of the affairs of his eſtate. Hayward on Edw. VI.
Time has deſtroyed two noble journals of the navigation of
Hanno and of Hamilcar. Arbuthnot on Coins,
2. Any paper publiſhed daily.
o'URNAL1st. n.ſ.. [from journal.]. A writer of journals.
JOURNEY. n.ſ. [journe, French.j
1, The travel of a day.
When Duncan is aſleep,
Whereto the rather ſhall this day's hard journey
Soundly invite him. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Scarce the ſun
Hath finiſh'd half his journey. Milton.
2. Travel by land; a voyage or travel by ſea.
So are the horſes of the enemy;
In general journey bated and brought low. Shakeſp H. IV.
Before the light of the goſpel, mankind travelled like peo-
ple in the dark, without any certain proſpect of the end of
Prior.
They will allow us ne'er a jorden, and then we leak in vour
chimney; and your chamberlye breeds fleas like a loach. Shakespeare their journey, or of the way that led to it. Rogers.
This China jorden let the chief o'ercome He for the promis'd journey bids prepare -
The ſmooth hair'd horſes and the rapid car. Pope's Odſ.
Repleniſh, not ingloriouſly at home. Pope's Dunciad.
The copper-pot can boil milk, heat porridge, hold ſmall-
beer, or, in caſe of neceſſity, ſerve for a jorden. Swift.
Jo's EPH's Flowers, n.ſ. A plant. Ainſworth.
3. Paſſage from place to place.
Some, having a long journey from the upper regions, would
float up and down a good while. Burner'ſ Theory ºf the Earth.
12 S Light<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J O Y J O Y
-*
flight of the world, the ruler of the year,
Almeyda ſmiling came,
Still as thou do'ſt thy radiant journies run,
Attended with a train of all her race,
Through every diſtant climate own, Whom in the rage of empire I had murder'd ;
That in fair Albion thou haſt ſeen But now, no longer foes, they gave me joy -
The greateſt prince, the brighteſt queen. Prior. Of my new conqueſt. Dryden's Dan Sela/7:-
To Jo'URNEY. v. m. [from the noun..] To travel; to paſs The bride,
from place to place. - Lovely herſelf, and lovely by her ſide,
Gentlemen of good eſteem A bevy of bright nymphs, with ſober grace,
Are journeying to ſalute the emperor. Shakeſpeare. Came glitt'ri
ng like a ſtar, and took her place:
We are journeying unto the place, of which the Lord ſaid, Her heav'nly form beheld, all wiſh'd her joy;
I will give it you. Numb. x. 29.
And little wanted, but in vain, their wiſhes all employ. Pry
Make the two trumpets, that thou mayeſt uſe them for the 4. A term of fondneſs.
journeying of the camps.
Now our joy,
Since ſuch love's natural ſtation is, may ſtill Although our laſt, yet not our leaſt young love,
My love deſcend, and journey down the hill;
Numb. x. 2.
º-*
What ſay you? Shakespeare King Lear.
- Not panting after growing beautics, ſo To Joy. v. m. [from the noun..] To rejoice; to be giad; to
| I ſhall ebb on with them who homeward go. 1)onne. exult.
- - I have journeyed this morning, and it is now the heat of the
- day; therefore your lordſhip's diſcourſes had need content my
ears very well, to make them intreat my eyes to keep open.
Bacon's Holy War.
Sometimes I joy, when glad occaſion fits,
And maſk in mirth like to a comedy;
Soon after, when my joy to ſorrow flits,
I will make my woes a tragedy. Spenser.
Over the tent a cloud I cannot joy, until I be reſolv'd
Shall reſt by day, a fiery gleam by night, Where our right valiant father is become. Shakespeare H. VI.
Save when they journey. Milton's Par. L9/?, b. xii. He will joy over thce with finging. Zeph. iii. 17.
Having heated his body by jºurneying, he took cold upon I will rejoice in the Lord, I will jºy in the God of my ſai-
the ground. JWiſeman's Surgery. vation. .. Heb. iii. 18.
º Jo'URNEY MAN. m.ſ. [journée, a day's work, Fr. and man.] A Exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, becauſe
hired workman. his ſpirit was refreſhed by you. 2 Cor. vii. 134
They were called journeymen that wrought with others by They laugh, we weep; theyjoy while we lament. Fair:
the day, though now by ſtatute it be extended to thoſe like- No man imparteth his joys to his friend, but he joyeth the
wiſe that convenant to work in their occupation with another more; and no man imparteth his griefs, but he grieveth the
by the year. Cowel. leſs. Bacon's F/art-
º Players have ſo ſtrutted and bellowed, that I have thought Well then, my ſoul, joy in the midſt of pain;
ſome of nature's journeymen had made men, and not made them Thy Chriſt, that conquer'd hell, ſhall from above
well. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet. With greater triumph yet return again,
!, I intend to work for the court myſelf, and will have journey- And conquer his own juſtice with his love. JP'.tiºn.
t men under me to furniſh the reſt of the nation. Addiſon. joy thou,
. Says Frog to Bull, this old rogue will take the management In what he gives to thee this paradiſe,
º of the young lord's buſineſs into his hands: in that caſe what And thy fair Eve. Milton's Paradif, Loft, A. viii.
: muſt become of us and our families 2 We muſt ſtarve or turn Their chearful age with honour youth attends,
journeymen to old Lewis Baboon. Arbuthnot's john Bull. joy'd that from pleaſure's ſlav'ry they are free. Denham.
Jö’URNEY work. m.ſ. [journee, French, and work.] Work To Joy. v. a.
l performed for hire. 1. To congratulate; to entertain kindly.
º See how your ſoldier wears his cage Like us they love or hate; like us they know
- Of iron, like the captive Turk, To joy the friend, or grapple with the foe. Prizr.
* And as the guerdon of his rage 1 2. To gladden; to exhilarate.
- See how your glimmering peers do lurk, She went to Pamela, meaning to delight her eyes and jºy her
| Or at the beſt work journeywork. Craveland. thoughts with the converſation of her beloved ſiſter. Sidney.
... " Did no committee ſit, where he My ſoul was joy'd in vain;
º Might cut out journeywork for thee ? For angry Neptune rouz'd the raging main. Pºpe.
And ſet thee a taſk with ſubornation, 3. [jouir de French.J. To enjoy; to have happy poſſeſſion.
l To ſtitch up ſale and ſequeſtration. Hudibrar. et us hence,
Her family ſhe was forced to hire out at journeywork to her And let her joy her raven-colour'd love. Shakeſp. Tit. Andr:
º neighbours. Arbuthnot's H/lory of john Bull. I might have liv'd, and joy'd immortal bliſs,
i Jous r. n.ſ. [jouſt, French.J. Tilt; tournament; mock fight. Yet willingly choſe rather death with thee. Milton:
* It is now written leſs properly juſ!. Th'uſurper joy'd not long
i Baſes, and tinſel trappings, gorgeous knights His ill-got crown. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
At jouſt and tournament. Milton's Parad. Loff, b. ix. Joy Ance. n.ſ. [joiant, old French.] Gaiety; feſtivity.
To Joust. v. n. [jouſter, French..] To run in the tilt. Bring home with you the glory of her gain;
All who ſince With joyance bring her, and with jollity. Spenser:
- jouſhed in Aſpramont or Montalban. Milton. There him reſts in riotous ſuffiſance,
l Joſwile R. m. ſ. [perhaps corrupted from howler, as making a Of all his gladfulneſs and kingly joyance. Spenser.
. hideous noiſe after the game, whom the reſt of the pack fol- Jo'y FUL. adj. [joy and full.]
low as their leader.] A kind of hunting dog or beagle. 1. Full of joy; glad; exulting.
See him drag his feeble legs about,
They bleſſed the king, and went unto their tents jº/and
Like hounds ill-cºupled: jowler lugs him ſtill glad of heart. 1 King, viii. 66-
Through hedges, ditches, and through all this ill. Dryden. My ſoul ſhall be joyful in my God. Aſ lai. Io-.
Jo'w TER. m. ſ. [perhaps corrupted from jolter.]
2. Sometimes it has of before the cauſe of joy.
Plenty of fiſh is vcnted to the fiſh-drivers, whom we call
- -
Six brave companions from each ſhip we loſt:
jotvtcry. Carew: With ſails outſpread we fly th' unequal ſtrife,
JOY. m. ſ. [joye, French ; gioia, Italian.] Sad for their loſs, but joyful of our life. Pope's Odyſſey.
i. The paſſion produced by any happy accident; gladneſs; exul- Joyfully, adj. [from joyful.] With joy; gladly.
tation. If we no more meet 'till we meet in heav'n,
º joy is a delight of the mind, from the conſideration of the Then joyfully, my noble lord of Bedford,
- preſcnt, or aſſured approaching poſſeſſion of a good. Locke. And my kind kinſmen, warriours all, adieu. Shakeſp. H. V.
There appears much joy in him; even ſo much, that joy Never did men more joyfully obey,
could not ſhew itſelf modeſt enough without a badge of bit- Or ſooner underſtood the ſign to flie:
: - terneſs. Shakeſpeare. With ſuch alacrity they bore away,
There ſhould not be ſuch heavineſs in their deſtruction, as As if to praiſe them all the ſtates ſtood by: Dryden.
ſhall be joy over them that are perſuaded to ſalvation. 2 Eſdr. The good Chriſtian conſiders pains only as neceſſary paſſages
. The lightſome paſſion of joy was not that trivial, vaniſh- to a glorious immortality; that, through this dark ſcene. of
- ing, ſuperficial thing, that only gilds the apprehenſion, and fancied horror, ſees a crown and a throne, and everlaſting
- plays upon the ſurface of the ſoul. Scuth's Sermons. bleſfings prepared for him, joyfully receives his ſummons, as he
f 2. Gaiety; merriment; feſtivity. has long impatiently expected it. - J/ake.
* The roofs with joy reſound; Joyfulness. n.ſ. [ from joyful. J Gladneſs; Joy.
And hymen, id hymen, rung around. Dryden. Thou ſervedſt not the Lord thy God with joyfulneſ, and
. .3, Happineſs; felicity. with gladneſs of heart, for the abundance of all things. Deutr.
My lord Baſſanio, and my gentle lady, Jo'y I. Ess. adj. [from joy. J
º I wiſh you all the joy that you can wiſh. Shakeſpeare. i. Void of joy; feeling no pleaſure.
Come, love and health to all; A little joy enjoys the queen thereof;
Then I'll ſit down: give me ſome wine: For I am ſhe, and altogether joyleſ. Shakeſp. R. III.
I drink to the general jºy of the whole table. Shakespeare -
- Wit;
4. 1 tº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I R O
ºlº. - -
y §§ With down-caſt eyes the joyleſ, vićtor ſat,
. Revolving in his alter'd ſoul
sº The various turns of chance below;
*: ſº And now and then a ſigh he ſtole, -
j And tears began to flow. Dryd. Alexander's Feaſt.
toºk §§ 2. It has ſometimes of before the objećt.
º With two fair eyes his miſtreſs burns his breaſt;
**, He looks and languiſhes, and leaves his reſt:
*s, Forſakes his food, and, pining for the laſs, -
s Is joyleſ of the grove, and ſpurns the growing graſs. Dryd.
3. Giving no pleaſure.
*R*, A joyleſ, diſmal, black, and ſorrowful iſſue:
. . . Here is the babe, as loathſome as a toad. Shakeſp. Tit. And.
Here love his golden ſhafts employs; here lights
His conſtant lamp, and waves his purple wings;
tiºns Reigns here, and revels: not in the bought ſmiles
kº, " Of harlots, loveleſs, joyleſ, unendear'd,
tº: Caſual fruition. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
The pure in heart ſhall ſee God; and if any others could ſo
v'd invade this their incloſure, as to take heaven by violence, it
ºccº ſurely would be a very joyleſ, poſſeſſion. Decay of Piety.
* He forgets his ſleep, and loaths his food,
l, That youth, and health, and war are joyleſ; to him. Addiſon.
- Jo'yous. adj, [joyeux, French.]
º-3 1. Glad; gay; merry.
ºils Moſt joyous man, on whom the ſhining ſun
Did ſhew his face, myſelf I did eſteem,
*s And that my falſer friend did no leſs joyous deem. Fa. Queen.
º, ºr oyous the birds; freſh gales and gentle airs
* * * Whiſper'd it. Milton.
... is Then joyous birds frequent the lonely grove,
ºf: And beaſts, by nature ſtung, renew their love. Dryden,
*:::s Faſt by her flow'ry bank the ſons of Arcas,
gº, Fav'rites of heav'n, with happy care protećt
*** Their fleecy charge, and joyous drink her wave. Prior.
2. Giving joy.
º, They all as glad as birds of joyous prime,
* Prº. Thence led her forth, about her dancing round. F. Queens
*s. 3. It has of ſometimes before the cauſe of joy.
"...tº Round our death-bed ev'ry friend ſhould run,
... -- ** And joyous of eur conqueſt early won;
. While the malicious world with envious tears
*:::1 Should grudge our happy end, and wiſh it theirs. Dryden.
* Ipecacua'NHA. m. ſ. [An Indian plant.]
*** * Ipecacuanha is a ſmall irregularly contorted root, rough,
:::::: denſe, and firm. One ſort is of a duſky greyiſh colour on the
: º: ſurface, and of a paler grey when broken, which is brought
**. from Peru: the other ſort is a ſmaller root, reſembling the
former; but it is of a deep duſky brown, or blackiſh colour on
tº . the outſide, and white when broken, brought from the Braſils.
*:::::: The grey ought to be preferred in medicinal uſe, becauſe the
* ... " brown, being ſtronger, is apt to operate more roughly. Ipe-
** ***...,
cacuanha was in the middle of the laſt century firſt brought
--- into Europe, and became celebrated for the cure of dyſente-
ries, a virtue diſcovered in it by the Indians; but after a few
years it ſunk into oblivion, being given in two large doſes.
Hill's Mat. Med.
- IRA'sciel E. adj. [ iraſcibilis, low Latin; iraſcible, French. J
º, Partaking of the nature of anger.
The iraſcible paſſions follow the temper of the heart, and
the concupiſcible diſtraćtions the craſis of the liver. Brown.
I know more than one inſtance of iraſcible paſſions ſubdued
by a vegetable diet. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
We are here in the country ſurrounded with bleſfings and
:4 pleaſures, without any occaſion of exerciſing our iraſcible fa-
º: culties. Digby to Pope.
IRE. m. ſ. [Fr. ira, Latin.] Anger; rage; paſſionate hatred.
She lik’d not his deſire;
Fain would be free, but dreaded parents ire.
If I digg’d up thy forefathers graves,
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not flake mine ire, nor'eaſe my heart. Shakespeare H. VI.
Or Neptune's ire, or Juno's, that ſo long
- Perplex'd the Greek and Cytherea's ſon, Milton's Par. Left.
gº wº he ſentence, from thy head remov’d, may light
** On me, ſole cauſe to thee of all this woe;
Me! me! only juſt objećt of his ire. Milton's Parad. Left.
For this th’ avenging pow'r employs his darts,
And empties all his quiver in our hearts;
Sidney.
* Thus will perſiſt, relentleſs in his ire,
º *Till the fair ſlave be render'd to her ſire. Dryden.
º: I'REFUL. adj. [ire and full.] Angry; raging; furious.
*: The ireful baſtard Orleans, that drew blood
2: From thee, my boy, I ſoon encounter'd. Shakespeare H. VI.
jº By many hands your father was ſubdu'd;
- - But only ſlaughter'd by the ireful arm
º Of unrelenting Clifford. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
** There learn'd this maid of arms the ireful guiſe. Fairfax.
In midſt of all the dome misfortune ſat,
And gloomy diſcontent and fell debate,
r And madneſs laughing in his ireful mood. Dryden.
.2 lasfully, adv. [from ire J With ire ; in an angry manner,
PRIS. n.f. [Latin.j
I. The rainbow. -
Beſide the ſolary iris, which God ſhewed untbioah; there
is another lunary, whoſe efficient is the moon. Brown:
2. Any appearance of light reſembling the rainbow.
When both bows appeared more diſtinét, I theaſured the
breadth of the interior iris 2 gr. 10'; and the breadth of the
red, yellow; and green in the exterior iris, was to the breadth
of the ſame colours in the interior 3 to 2. Newton's Opt.
3. The circle round the pupil of the eye.
4. The flower-de-luce.
Jris all hues, roſes and jeſlamine. Milton.
To IRK. v.a. ſyré, work, iſlandick.] This word is uſed only
imperſonally; it irks me; mihi paenae ºff, it gives me pain; or,
I am weary of it. Thus the authors of the Accidence ſay,
taedet, it irketh.
Come, ſhall we go and kill us veniſon?
And yet it irks me, the poor dappled fools
Should, in their own confines, with forked heads,
Have their round haunches got'd. Shakeſpeare.
It irks his heart he cannot be reveng'd. Shakeſp H. VI.
Irksome. adj. [from irk. J. Weariſome ; tedious; trouble-
ſome; toilſome ; tireſome ; unpleaſing. -
I know ſhe is an irkſome brawling ſcold.
Since that thou can'ſt talk of love ſo well,
Thy company, which erſt was irkſome to me,
I will endure. Shakespeare As you like it.
Where he may likelieſt find
Truce to his reſtleſs thoughts, and entertain .
Shakeſpeare:
The irkſome hours, ’till his great chief return. Milton.
For not to irkſome toil, but to delight
He made us, and delight to reaſon join'd. Milton.
There is nothing ſo irkſome as general diſcourſes, eſpecially
when they turn chiefly upon words. Addiſon's Spºtiator.
Frequent appeals from hence have been very irkſome to that
illuſtrious body. Swift.
I’rksomely, adv. [from irkſome.] Weariſomely; tediouſly.
I'RksomeNess. n.ſ.. [from irkſome. J Tediouſneſs; weari-
ſomeneſs.
I'RON. n.ſ. ſhaiarn, Welſh; renn, inen, Saxon; iorn, Erſe.]
1. A metal common to all parts of the world, plentiful in moſt;
and of a ſmall price, though ſuperior in real value to the dear-
eſt. Though the lighteſt of all metals, except tin, it is con-
ſiderably the hardeſt; and, when pure, naturally malleable,
but in a leſs degree than gold, ſilver, lead, or copper: when
wrought into ſteel, or when in the impure ſtate from its firſt
fuſion, in which it is called caſt iron, it is ſcarce malleable;
and the moſt dućtile iron, heated and ſuddenly quenched in
cold water, loſes much of this quality. Iron is more capable
of ruſt than any other metal, is very ſonorous, and requires
the ſtrongeſt fire of all the metals to melt it, and is with dif-
ficulty amalgamated with mercury. Moſt of the other metals
are brittle, while they are hot; but this is moſt malleable as it
approaches neareſt to fuſion. It conſiſts of a vitriolick ſalt, a
vitrifiable earth, and a peculiar bituminous matter. The ſpe-
cifick gravity of iron is to water as 7632 is to 1000. It is
the only known ſubſtance that is attracted by the loadſtone.
Iron is not only ſoluble in all the ſtronger acids, but even in
common water. Pure iron has been found in ſome places but
very rarely. Iron has greater medicinal virtues than any of
the other metals. Hill.
Nor airleſs dungeon, nor ſtrong links of iron,
Can be retentive to the ſtrength of ſpirit. Shakeſp. jul. Caſ:
If he ſmite him with an inſtrument of iron, ſo that he die,
he is a murderer. Num. xxxv. 16.
The power of drawing iron is one of the ideas of a load-
ſtone, and a power to be ſo drawn is a part of that “,iron.
crife.
In a piece of iron ore, of a ferruginous colour, are ſeveral
thin plates, placed parallel to each other. Woodward.
There are incredible quantities of iron flag in various parts
of the foreſt of Dean. Hºodward on Foſſils.
Iron ſtone lies in ſtrata. Woodward on Foſſils.
I treated of making iron work, and fleel work in general.
Moxon's Mech. Exer.
2. Any inſtrument or utenſil made of iron: as, a flat iron, box
iron, or ſmoothing iron.
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with thoſe that wore them, theſe baſe ſlaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
O Thou! whoſe captain I account myſelf,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye:
Put in their hands thy bruiſing irons of wrath,
That they may cruſh down with a heavy fall
Th'uſurping helmets of our adverſaries. . . Shakespeare R. III.
His feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in irons. Pſ.
Can'ſt thou fill his ſkin with barbed irons, or his head with
fiſh-ſpears 2 job xli. 7:
For this your locks in paper-durance bound
For this with tort’ring irons wreath'd around? Pope.
3. Chain; ſhackle; manacle: as, he was put in irons.
The iron entered into his ſoul. Pſalms. Common *.
(Ron.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I R. R.
I R R
- –
difficulty to allow air, that is diaphanous, to be every where
mingled with light. - Digby on Bodieſ
It is not a converting but a crowning grace; ſuch an on.
as irradiates and puts a circle of glory about the head. i.
I'RoN. #
Made of iron. - * . . "
J, iW13. In iron walls they deem'd me not ſecure. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Get me an iron crow, and bring it ſtraight
Unto my cell. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet. ." upon whom it deſcends. - South
Some are of an iron red, ſhining, and polite; others not 2. To enlighten intellectually; to illumine; to illuminate.”
- polite, but as if powdered with iron duſt. J%odward. Celeſtial light -
Shine inward, and the mind through all her pow'rs
Irradiate ; there plant eyes: all miſt from thence
Purge and diſperſe. ZMilton's Paradiſ. Lºft, i.iii
Poll-cats and weeſels do a great deal of injury to warrens:
the way of taking them is in hutches, and iron traps. Martim.
2. Reſembling iron in colour.
A piece of ſtone of a dark iron grey colour, but in ſome 3. To animate by heat or light.
parts of a ferruginous colour. Woodward on Foſſils. Ethereal or ſolar heat muſt digeſt, influence, irradiate, and
Some of them are of an iron red, and very bright. Woodw. put thoſe more ſimple parts of matter into motion. H.
3. Harſh; ſevere; rigid; miſerable; calamitous: as, the iron 4. To decorate with ſhining ornaments.
age, for an age of hardſhip and wickedneſs. Theſe ideas may No weeping orphan ſaw his father's ſtore
be found more or leſs in all the following examples. Our ſhrines irradiate, or imblaze the floor. Pºpe.
Three vigorous virgins, waiting ſtill behind, IRRADIA'tion. m. ſ. ſirradiation, Fr. from irradiate.]
Aſſiſt the throne of th’ iron ſcepter'd king. Craſhaw. 1. The aët of emitting beams of light. |
O ſad virgin, that thy power
Might bid the ſoul of Orpheus ſing
Such notes as warbled to the ſtring,
Drew iron tears from Pluto's cheek,
And made hell grant what love did ſeek. Milton.
In all my iron years of wars and dangers,
From blooming youth down to decaying age,
My fame ne'er knew a ſtain of diſhonour. Rowe.
Jove cruſh the nations with an iron rod,
And ev'ry monarch be the ſcourge of God. Pope's Odyſſey.
4. Indiſſoluble; unbroken. -
Raſh Elpenor, in an evil hour,
Dry'd an immeaſurable bowl, and thought
Tº exhale his ſurfeit by irriguous ſleep,
Imprudent: him death's iron ſleep oppreſt. Phillips.
5. Hard; impenetrable.
I will converſe with iron witted fools,
And unreſpective boys: none are for me,
That look into me with conſid’rate eyes. Shakeſp. R. III.
To I'ron. v.a. [from the noun.j
1. To ſmooth with an iron.
2. To ſhackle with irons.
IRo'Nical. adj. [ironique, Fr. from irony.] Expreſſing one thing
and meaning another; ſpeaking by contraries.
In this fallacy may be compriſed all ironical miſtakes, or
expreſſions receiving inverted ſignifications. Brown.
I take all your ironical civilities in a literal ſenſe, and ſhall
expect them to be literally performed. Swift.
IRo'Nically, adv. [from ironical.] By the uſe of irony.
, Socrates was pronounced by the oracle of Delphos to be the
wiſeſt man of Greece, which he would turn from himſelf
ironically, ſaying, there could be nothing in him to verify the
- oracle, except this, that he was not wiſe, and knew it; and
, others were not wiſe, and knew it not. Bacon.
º The dean, ironically grave,
. Still ſhunn'd the fool, and laſh'd the knave. Swift.
IRoNMo'NGER. m. ſ. [iron and monger.] A dealer in iron.
I Roswood. n.ſ. A kind of wood extremely hard, and ſo pon-
derous as to ſink in water. It grows in America. Rob. Cruſº.
PRQNwokt. m.ſ.. [ſideritis, Latin.] It is a plant with a labiated
flower, conſiſting of one leaf, whoſe upper lip or beard is
divided into three parts: out of the flower-cup riſes the pointal,
attended, as it were, by four embryoes; which afterward turn
to ſo many oblong ſeeds, ſhut up in an huſk, which before was
the flower-cup : to theſe marks muſt be added, the flowers
growing in whorles at the wings of the leaves, which are cut
like a creſt, and differ from the other leaves of the plant. Mill.
lºosy: adj. [from iron.j Made of iron, partaking of iron.
- The force they are under is real, and that of their fate but
*ginary: it is not ſtrange if the irony chains have more
ſolidity than the contemplative. Hammond's Fundamentals.
. Some ſprings of Hungary, highly impregnated with vitrio-
lick ſalts, diſſolve the body of one metal, ſuppoſe iron, put
into the ſpring; and depoſite, in lieu of the irony particles car-
f ried off, coppery particles. - J/oodward on Fºſſils.
IRONY. * / [ironie, Fr. iiºveſz.] A mode of ſpeech in
which the meaning is contrary to the words: as, Boling/roke
was a hºly man.
$o grave a body, upon ſo ſolemn an occaſion, ſhould not
deal in irony, or explain their meaning by contraries. Swift.
IRRA'DIAN ce. -
IRRA'DIANcy.
I. Emiſſion of rays or beams of light upon any objećt.
The principal affection is its tranſlucency; the irradiamey
and ſparkling, found in many genus, is not diſcoverable in
this. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
2. Beams of light emitted.
Love not the heav'nly ſpirits Or do they mix
*ance' virtual, or immediate touch? Ajit. Par. Lº/?.
To IRRA'diat F. º, a. ſirradio, Latin.] -
!. To adorſ, with light emitted upon it; to brighten.
- w hen he thus perceives that theſe opacous bodies do not
hinder the eye from judging light to have an equal plenary
diffuſion through the whole Place it irradiates, he can have no
}, / ſi radiance, French ; irradio, Latin.]
IRREconci'l Able N Ess. n.ſ.. [from irre”
IR Reconci'l ABLY. adv. [from irreconcilable.
- T
IRREconcile B. adj. [in and recºnciled.]. Nºt *
If light were a body it ſhould drive away the air, which is
likewiſe a body, wherever it is admitted; for within the whole
ſphere of the irradiation of it, there is no point but light is
found. Digby on Bºdieſ.
The generation of bodies is not effected by irradiatiºn, or
- anſwerably unto the propagation of light; but herein a tranſ.
miſſion is made materially from ſome parts, and ideally from
every one. - - - Brown's Pulgar Errours.
2. Illumination; intelle&amp;ual light.
The means of derivation and immediate union of theſe in-
telligible objects to the underſtanding, are ſometimes divine
and ſupernatural, as by immediate irradiation or revelation.
Hale's Origin of Mankind,
IRRATIONAL. adj. [irrationalis, Latin.]
I. Void of reaſon; void of underſtanding; without the diſ-
courſive faculty.
Thus began -
Outrage from lifeleſs things; but diſcord firſt,
Daughter of ſin, among th' irrational
Death introduc’d. Milton's Paradjº Lº?.
He hath eat'n, and lives,
And knows, and ſpeaks, and reaſons and diſcerns;
Irrational'till then. Milt. Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix.
2. Abſurd; contrary to reaſon.
Since the brain is only a part tranſmittent, and that humours
oft are precipitated to the lungs before they arrive to the brain,
no kind of benefit can be effected from ſo irrational an appli-
cation. Harvey on Conſumptionſ,
I ſhall quietly ſubmit, not wiſhing ſo irrational a thing as
that every body ſhould be deceived. Pºpe.
IRRAt Iona'lity. n.ſ.. [from irrational.] Want of reaſon.
IRRA'tionally. adv. [from irrational.] Without reaſon;
abſurdly.
IRR E claimable. adj. [in and reclaimable ] Not to be ſº-
claimed; not to be changed to the better. -
As for obſtinate, irreclaimall, profeſſed enemies, we mºſt
expect their calumnies will continue. Addison's Freehºlder;
IRR Econcilable. adj. [irreconcilialle, Fr. in and rºtiatºl
1. Not to be reconciled; not to be appeaſed.
Wage eternal war,
Irreconcilable to our grand foe.
A weak unequal faction may animate a government;"
when it grows equal in ſtrength, and irreconcilable by animo-
ſity, it cannot end without ſome criſis. Temple.
There are no factions, though irreconcilable to one another,
that are not united in their affection to you. Dryden.
Milton.
2. Not to be made conſiſtent. It has with or tº:
As ſhe was ſtrictly virtuous herſelf, ſo ſhe always º:
beſt conſtruction upon the words and aćtions of her neigh-
bours, except where they were irreºnia%, ’’ the rules of
honeſty and decency. Aruth". Hiſt, ºf †: Bull.
Since the ſenſe I oppoſe is attended with ſuch groſs '...
cilable abſurdities, I preſume I need not offer any *: r
in ſupport of the one, or in diſproof of the other. - - .
This eſſential power of gravitation 9: attraction is £º *
cilable with the atheiſt's own doctrine of a chaos. entity.
All that can be tranſmitted from the ſtats is wº.
countable, and irreconcilable to any ſyſtem º inji
bility to be reconciled. J In a manner
not admitting reconciliation.
oned.
uities. Shakſ,
H. W.
A ſervant dies in many irreconciled iniq
IRRecover Able. adj [in and recoverabel
1. Not to be regained; not to be reſtore
d or repaired. tiuſt
U
I-- - : ~ :- rable: the momen J
Time, in a natural ſenſe, is irrecove Rºgerſ.
fled by us, it is impoſſible to recall.
- - incipal
The irrecºverable loſs of ſo many living” of Fº
value. - - , his ſoul
It concerns every man, that would not trifle * º
and fool himſelf into irºverall, miſery, with * *
2. Not to be remedied.
- - ://atſºn' Sermºns.
ſeriouſneſs to enquire, - Tiltº y C BLY
- IRR sco'w ERA****<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I R R
I R R
-**
--
ſ
IRR Eco'ver A B ly, adv. [from irrecoverable.] Beyond reco-
very ; paſt repair.
O dark, dark, dark amid’ the blaze of noon;
Irrecov'rably dark, total eclipſe,
Without all hope of day. Milton's Agoniſłes.
The credit of the Exchequer is irrecoverally loſt by the laſt
breach with the bankers. Temple.
IRREDU'cIBLE, adj. [in and reducible.] Not to be brought or
reduced.
Theſe obſervations ſeem to argue the corpuſcles of air to
be irreducible into water. Boyle.
IRREFRAGAbi'lity. m. ſ. [from irrefragable.] Strength of
argument not to be refuted.
IRREFRA'GABLE. adj. [irrefragabilis, ſchool Latin; irre-
fragable, Fr.] Not to be confuted; ſuperior to argumental
oppoſition.
Strong and irrefragable the evidences of Chriſtianity muſt
be: they who reſiſted them would reſiſt everything. Atterbury.
The danger of introducing unexperienced men was urged
as an irrefragable reaſon for working by ſlow degrees. Swift.
IRREFRA'GABLY. adv. [from irrefragable.] With force above
confutation.
That they denied a future ſtate is evident from St. Paul's
reaſonings, which are of no force but only on that ſuppoſition,
as Origen largely and irrefragably proves. Atterbury.
IRREFU’TABLE. adj. [irrefutabilis, Latin.] Not to be over-
thrown by argument.
IRREGULAR. adj. [irregulier, Fr. irregularii, Latin.]
1. Deviating from rule, cuſtom, or nature.
The am’rous youth
Obtain'd of Venus his deſire,
Howe'er irregular his fire. Prior.
2. Immethodical; not confined to any certain rule or order.
This motion ſeems excentrique and irregular, yet not well
to be reſiſted or quieted. King Charles.
Regular -
Then moſt, when moſt irregular they ſeem. Milton.
The numbers of pindariques are wild and irregular, and
ſometimes ſeem harſh and uncouth. Cowley.
3. Not being according to the laws of virtue. A ſoft word for
Z/t/t01.j.
IRREGULA/R 1TY. n. ſ. [irregularité, Fr. from irregular.]
1. Deviation from rule.
2. Neglect of method and order.
This irregularity of its unruly and tumultuous motion might
afford a beginning unto the common opinion. Brown.
As theſe vaſt heaps of mountains are thrown together with
ſo much irregularity and confuſion, they form a great variety
of hollow bottoms. Addiſon on Italy.
3. Inordinate pračtice. -
Religion is ſomewhat leſs in danger of corruption, while
the ſinner acknowledges the obligations of his duty, and is
aſhamed of his irregularities. Rogers'; Sermons.
IRRE'GULARLY. adv. [from irregular.] Without obſervation
of rule or method.
Phaeton,
By the wild courſes of his fancy drawn,
From Eaſt to Weſt irregularly hurl’d,
Firſt ſet on fire himſelf, and then the world.
Your's is a ſoul irregularly great,
Which wanting temper, yet abounds with heat. Dryden.
It may give ſome light to thoſe whoſe concern for their lit-
tle ones makes them ſo irregularly bold as to conſult their own
reaſon, in the education of their children, rather than to rely
upon old cuſtom. Locke.
To IRRE'GULATE. v. a. [from in and regula, Latin.] To
make irregular; to diſorder.
Its fluctuations are but motions ſubſervient, which winds,
ſhelves, and every interjacency irregulates. Brown's Wulg. Err.
IRR E'LATIve. adj. [in and relativus, Latin.] Having no re-
ference to any thing; ſingle ; unconnected.
Separated by the voice of God, things in their ſpecies came
out in uncommunicated varieties, and irrelative ſeminalities.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
IRR ELI'Gron. m. ſ. ſirreligion, Fr. in and religion.] Contempt
of religion; impiety.
The weapons with which I combat irreligion are already
conſecrated. Dryden.
We behold every inſtance of prophaneneſs and irreligion,
not only committed, but defended and gloried in, Rogers.
IRREli'Gious. adj. [irreligieux, Fr. in and religious.]
1. Contemning religion ; impious.
The iſſue of an irreligiºus Moor. Shakeſp. Tit. Andron.
Whoever ſees theſe irreligious men,
Dryden jun.
- With burthen of a ſickneſs weak and faint,
But hears them talking of religion then,
And vowing of their ſouls to ev'ry ſaint. Davies.
Shame and reproach is generally the portion of the impious
and irreligious. South's Sermons.
2. Contrary to religion.
Wherein that Scripture ſtandeth not the church of God in
any ſtead, or ſerveth nothing at all to direct, but may be let
paſs as needleſs to be conſulted with, we judge it profane, in-
pious, and irreligious to think. Hoker.
Might not the queen's domeſticks be obliged to avoid ſwear-
ing, and i, religious profane diſcourſe 2 Swift.
IRREli'oiously, adv. [from irreligiour.] With impiety;
with irreligion.
IRRE'MEABLE. adj. [irremeabilis, Latin.] Admitting no re-
turn.
The keeper charm’d, the chief without delay
Paſs'd on, and took th’ irremeable way. Dryden.
IRREME'DIABLE. adj. [irremedable, Fr. in and remediable. J
Admitting no cure; not to be remedied.
They content themſelves with that which was the irremediable
error of former times, or the neceſſity of the preſent hath caſt
upon them. Hooker.
A ſleddy hand, in governing of military affairs, is more
requiſite than in times of peace, becauſe, an error committed
in war may prove irremediable. Bacom.
Whatever he conſults you about, unleſs it lead to ſome fatal
and irremediable miſchief, be ſure you adviſe only as a
friend. Locke,
IRREME'DIABLY. adv. [from irremediable.] Without cure.
It happens to us irremediably and inevitably, that we may
perceive theſe accidents are not the fruits of our labour, but
gifts of God. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
IRR EMI'ssible. adj. [in and remitte, Lat, irremiſſible, French.J
. Not to be pardoned. -
IRR EMI'ssible Ness. n.ſ.. [from irremiſſible ] The quality of
being not to be pardoned. -
Thence ariſes the aggravation and irremiſſibleneſs of the
ſin. Hammond on Fundamentals.
IRRE Mo’va BLE. adj. [in and remove.] Not to be moved;
not to be changed.
He's irremovable,
Reſolv'd for flight. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
IRRENow N ED. adj. [in and renown.] Void of honour.
For all he did was to deceive good knights,
And draw them from purſuit of praiſe and fame
To ſluggiſh ſloth and ſenſual delights,
And end their days with irrenowned ſhame. Fairy Queen.
IRRE'PARABLE. adj. [irreparabilis, Lat. irreparable, Fr.] Not
to be recovered ; not to be repaired.
Irreparable is the loſs, and patience ſays it is not paſt her
Cure. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Toil'd with loſs irreparable. Milton.
It is an irreparable injuſtice we are guilty of, when we are
prejudiced by the looks of thoſe whom we do not know. Addison
The ſtory of Deucalion and Pyrrha teaches, that piety and
innocence cannot miſs of the divine protećtion, and that the
only loſs irreparable is that of our probity. Garth.
IRRE PARABLY. adv. [from irreparable ] Without recovery;
without amends.
Such adventures befall artiſts irreparably. Boyle.
The cutting off that time induſtry and gifts, whereby ſhe would
be nouriſhed, were irreparably injurious to her. Dec. of Piety.
IRREPLE'v1Able. adj. [in and replevy.] Not to be redeemed.
A law term.
IRReprehe'ssible. adj. [irreprehenſible, Fr. irreprehenſibilis,
Latin.] Exempt from blame. -
IRREPREHE'Nsibly. adv. [from irreprehenſible.] Withcut blame.
IRREPRESE’NTABLE. adj. [in and repreſent.] Not to be figured
by any repreſentation.
God's irrepreſentable nature doth hold againſt making images
of God. Stillingfieet.
IRRE PRO'AchAel E. adj. [in and reproachable ] Free from
blame; free from reproach.
He was a ſerious ſincere Chriſtian, of an innocent, irre-
proachable, nays exemplary life. Atterbury.
Their prayer may be, that they may raiſe up and breed as
irreproachable a young family as their parents have done. Pope.
IRR EPRo'AchABLY. adv. [from irreproachable. J Without
blame; without Neproach. - -
IRREPro'veable. ºff. [in and reproveable.] Not to be blamed;
irreproachable. -
IRREsist IBI'lity. n.ſ.. [from irreſ/fille J Power or force
above oppoſition.
The doćtrine of irreſ/fililty of grace, in working whatſo-
ever it works, if it be acknowledged, there is nothing to be
affixt to gratitude. Hammond on Fundamentals.
IRResi's title. adj. [irrºſſible, Fr. in and rºſſible.] Supe-
riour to oppoſition.
Fear doth grow from an apprehenſion of the Deity, inducd
with irrºſſible power to hurt; and is of all affections, anger
excepted, the unapteſt to admit conference with reaſon. Hºok.
In mighty quadrate join'd
Of union irreſiſtible, Milton.
Fear of God is inward acknowledgment of an holy juſt
Being, armed with almighty and irrºffible power. Tilliºn.
There can be no difference in the ſubjećts, where the appli-
cation is almighty and irreſiſtible, as in creation. Rogers.
Won by the charm
Of goodneſs irreſ/fille, ſhe bluſh'd conſent. Thomſºn.
12 T IRResi'stibly.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I R. R.
I R R
IRRESI's TILLY. adv. [from irreſſible.] In a manner not to
be oppoſed.
God irreſiſ?ibly ſways all manner of events on earth. Dryden.
Fond of pleaſing and endearing ourſelves to thoſe we eſteem,
we are irreſ/libly led into the ſame inclinations and averſions
with them. Rogers.
IRRF si'stless. adj. [A barbarous ungrammatical conjunction
of two negatives.] Irreſiſtible; reſiſtleſs.
Thoſe radiant eyes, whoſe irreſſileſ, flame
Strikes envy dumb, and keeps ſedition tame,
They can to gazing multitudes give law,
Convert the fačtious, and the rebel awe. Granville.
JRRE'soluble. adj. [in and reſolubilis, Latin.] Not to be
broken; not to be diſſolved.
In factitious ſal armoniac the common and urinous ſalts are
ſo well mingled, that both in the open fire and in ſubliming
veſſels they riſe together as one ſalt, which ſeems in ſuch veſ-
ſels irreſoluble by fire alone. Boyle.
IRR Eſsoluble N Ess. n.ſ.. [from irreſoluble.] Reſiſtance to ſe-
paration of the parts.
Quercetanus has this confeſſion of the irreſºlubleneſs of dia-
monds. ' Boyle.
IRR Eso'lve DLY. adv. [in and reſolved J. Without ſettled de-
termination.
Divers of my friends have thought it ſtrange to hear me
ſpeak ſo irreſolvedly concerning thoſe things, which ſome take
to be the elements, and others the principles of all mixed
bodies. Boyle.
IRRE'solute. adj. [irreſºlu, Fr. in and reſolute.] Not conſtant
in purpoſe; not determined.
Were he evil us'd, he would outgo
His father, by as much as a performance
Does an irreſolute purpoſe. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Him, after long debate, irreſolute
Of thoughts revolv'd, his final ſentence choſe
Fit veſſel, fitteſt imp of fraud, in whom
To enter. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
To make refle&amp;tions upon what is paſt, is the part of inge-
nious but irreſolute men. Temple.
So Myrrha's mind, impell'd on either ſide,
Takes ev'ry bent, but cannot long abide;
Irreſolute on which ſhe ſhould rely,
At laſt unfix’d in all, is only fix’d to die. Dryden.
IRRE’solutely. adv. [from irreſolute.] Without firmneſs of
mind; without determined purpoſe.
IRREsolution. n.ſ.. [irreſolution, Fr. in and reſºlution.] Want
of firmneſs of mind.
It hath moſt force upon things that have the lighteſt mo-
tion, and therefore upon the ſpirits of men, and in them
upon ſuch affections as move lighteſt; as upon men in fear, or
men in irreſolution. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Irreſolution on the ſchemes of life, which offer themſelves
to our choice, and inconſtancy in purſuing them, are the
greateſt cauſes of all our unhappineſs. Addiſon.
IRRESPE'ctive. adj. [in and reſpective..] Having no regard to
any circumſtances.
Thus did the Jew, by perſuading himſelf of his particular
irreſpective clečtion, think it ſafe to run into all foul fins.
- Hammond on Fundamentals.
According to this do&amp;rine, it muſt be reſolved wholly into
the abſolute irreſpective will of God. Rogers's Sermons.
PRR Espectively. adv. [from irreſpective..] Without regard
to circumſtances.
He is convinced, that all the promiſes belong to him abſo-
lutely and irreſpectively. Hammond on Fundamentals.
IRRETRIE’vABLE. adj. [in and retrieve.] Not to be repaired;
irrecoverable; irreparable.
IRRETRIE’vABLY. adv. [from irretrievable.] Irreparably; ir-
recoverably.
It would not defray the charge of the extraćtion, and there-
fore muſt have been all irretrievably loſt, and uſeleſs to man-
kind, was it not by this means collected. Woodward.
IR REVERENCE. m. ſ. [irreverentia, Lat, irreverence, Fr. in and
reverence.]
I. Want of reverence; want of veneration; want of reſpect.
Having ſeen our ſcandalous irreverence towards God's wor-
ſhip in general, 'tis eaſy to make application to the ſeveral parts
of it. Decay of Piety.
They were a ſort of attributes, with which it was a matter
of religion to ſalute them on all occaſions, and which it was
an irreverence to omit. Pope.
2. State of being diſregarded.
The concurrence of the houſe of peers in that fury, can be
imputed to no one thing more than to the irreverence and ſcorn
the judges were juſtly in, who had been always looked upon
there as the oracles of the law. Clarendon.
in REVERENT. adj. [irreverent, Fr. in and reverent.] Not pay-
ing due homage or reverence; not expreſſing or conceiving
due veneration or reſpect.
As our fear excludeth not that boldneſs which becometh
ſaints, ſo, if our familiarity with God do not ſavour of fear,
I
it draweth too near that irreverent confidence wherewith true
humility can never ſtand. H.23 cr.
Knowledge men ſought for, and covered it from the yulgar
ſort as jewels of ineſtimable price, fearing the irrever,nt cºn-
ſtrućtion of the ignorant and irreligious. Raleigh.
Witneſs the irreverent ſon
Of him who built the ark; who, for the ſhame
Done to his father, heard his heavy curſe,
Servant of ſervants, on his vitious race. Milt. Par. Loſt.
Swearing, and the irreverent uſing the name of God in
eommon diſcourſe, is another abuſe of the tongue. Ray.
If an irreverent expreſſion or thought too wanton are crept
into my verſes, through my inadvertency, let their authors
be anſwerable for them. Dryden.
IRRe've Rently. adv. [from irreverent.] Without due re-
ſpect or veneration.
'Tis but an ill eſſay of reverence and godly fear to uſe the
goſpel irreverently. Gºvernment of the Tongue.
IRREve'Rs1.ble. adj. [in and reverſe.] Not to be recalled; not
to be changed.
The fins of his chamber and his cloſet ſhall be produced
before men and angels, and an eternal irreverſible ſentence be
pronounced. Rºgers's Sermony.
IRREve’rsibly. adv. [from irreverſible.] Without change.
The title of fundamentals, being ordinarily confined to the
dočtrines of faith, hath occaſioned that great ſcandal in the
church, at which ſo many myriads of ſolifidians have ſtum-
bled, and fallen irreverſibly, by conceiving heaven a reward of
true opinions. Hammond on Fundamentals.
IARE'vocable. adj. [irrevocabilis, Latin; irrevocable, French.]
Not to be recalled; not to be brought back; not to be re-
verſed.
Give thy hand to Warwick,
And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwick's daughter ſhall be thine. Shakeſp.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom, . .
Which I have paſt upon her. Shakespeare A you like it.
That which is paſt is gone and irrevocable, therefore they
do but trifle that labour in paſt matters. Bacon's Eſſays.
The ſecond, both for piety renown'd,
And puiſſant deeds, a promiſe ſhall receive
Irrevocable, that his regal throne
For ever ſhall endure.
By her irrevocable fate,
War ſhall the country waſte and change the ſtate. Dryden.
The other vićtor flame a moment ſtood,
Then fell, and lifeleſs left th' extinguiſh'd wood;
For ever loſt, th’ irrevocable light -
Forſook the black'ning coals, and ſunk to night. Dryden.
Each ſacred accent bears eternal weight,
And each irrevocable word is fate. Pope.
IRRE'vocably. adv. [from irrevocable.] Without recall.
If air were kept out four or five minutes, the fire would be
irrevocably extinguiſhed. Bºyle.
To IRRIGATE. v. a. ſirrigo, Latin.] To wet; to moiſten;
to Water.
The heart, which is one of the principal parts of the body,
doth continually irrigate, nouriſh, keep hot, and ſupple all the
members. Ray on the Creation.
A bulky charger near their lips,
With which, in often interrupted ſleep,
Their frying blood compels to irrigate ----
Their dry furr'd tongues. A. Philips.
IRRIGA't Ios. m. ſ. [from irrigate.] The act of watering or
moiſtening. - - - -
Help of ground is by watering and irrigation. Bacon.
IRR1'GUous. adj. [from irrigate.]
1. Watery; watered.
The flow'ry lap -
Of ſome irriguous valley ſpreads her ſtore. Milton.
2. Dewy; moiſt. Philips ſeems to have miſtaken the Latin
phraſe irriguus ſpor.
- Raſh Elpenor
Dry’d an immeaſurable bowl, and thought
Tº exhale his ſurfeit by irriguous fleep : ----
Imprudent! him death's iron ſleep oppreſt. Phillips.
IRR1'sióN. n.ſ.. [irriſo, Lat. irriſon, French.] The act of
laughing at another. - -
This perſon, by his indiſcreet and unnatural irriſon, and
expoſing of his father, incurs his indignation and curſe.
Woodward's Natural Hiſory.
To I'RRITATE. v. a. [irrito, Latin ; irriter, F rench.]
1. To provoke; to teaze; to exaſperate. - - -
The earl, ſpeaking to the freeholders in imperious lan-
guage, did not irritate the people. Bacºn's Henry VII.
His power at court could not qualify him to go through with
that difficult reformation, whilſt he had a ſuperior in the
church, who, having the reins in his hand, could ſlacken them
according to his own humour and indiſcretion, and was
Milton's Paradiſ. Loff.
thought to be the more remiſs to irritate his cholerick diſpo- '
ſition. Clarendon.
2. To
!
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I S I
I S S
º
º
* f.
º:
...”
2. To fret; to put into motion or diſorder by any irregular or
unaccuſtomed conta&amp;t; to ſtimulate; to vellicate.
Cold maketh the ſpirits vigorous, and irritateth them. Bacon.
3. To heighten; to agitate; to enforce.
Air, if very cold, irritateth the flame, and maketh it burn
more fiercely, as fire ſcorcheth in froſty weather. Bacon.
When they are colle&amp;ted, the heat becometh more violent
and irritate, and thereby expelleth ſweat. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Rous’d
By daſh of clouds, or irritating war
Of fighting winds, while all is calm below,
They furious ſpring. Thomſºn's Summer.
IRRITA'tion. n.ſ.. [irritatio, Latin; irritation, French; from
irritate.] º
1. Provocation; exaſperation.
2. Stimulation ; vellication.
Violent affections and irritations of the nerves, in any part
of the body, is cauſed by ſomething acrimonious. Arbuthnot.
IRRU'ption. n.ſ.. [irruption, Fr. irruptio, Latin.]
1. The aët of anything forcing an entrance.
I refrain, too ſuddenly,
To utter what will come at laſt too ſoon;
Leſt evil tidings, with too rude irruption,
Hitting thy aged ear, ſhould pierce too deep. Milton.
There are frequent inundations made in maritime coun-
tries by the irruption of the ſea. Burnet.
A full and ſudden irruption of thick melancholick blood
into the heart puts a ſtop to its pulſation. Harvey.
2. Inroad; burſt of invaders into any place.
Notwithſtanding the irruptions of the barbarous nations,
one can ſcarce imagine how ſo plentiful a ſoil ſhould be-
come ſo miſerably unpeopled. Addiſon on Italy.
Is... ſir, Saxon. See To Be..]
1. The third perſon ſingular of to be : I am, thou art, he is.
He that is of God, heareth God’s words. jo. viii. 47.
Be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil; neither is
it in them to do good. jer. x. 5.
My thought, whoſe murther yet is but fantaſtical,
Shakes ſo my ſingle ſtate of man, that function
Is ſmother'd in ſurmiſe; and nothing is,
But what is not. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. It is ſometimes expreſſed by 's.
There's ſome among you have beheld me fighting. Shakeſp.
Is ARE'LLA Colour. n.ſ. A kind of colour. Ainſw.
Ischia'Dick, adj. [itzow, lax123;x&amp;; ; iſchiadique, Fr.] In
anatomy, an epithet given to the veins of the foot that termi-
nate in the crural. - Harris.
I'schu Ry. a. ſ. [laxºſz, taxo and stov, urine ; iſ hurle, Fr.
iſchuria, Latin.] A ſtoppage of urine, whether by gravel
or other cauſe.
Ischu RE"tick. n.ſ.. [iſchuretique, Fr. from iſthury.] Such me-
icines as force urine when ſuppreſſed.
Is H. [Irc, Saxon.] .
1. A termination added to an adjećtive to expreſs diminution, a
ſmall degree, or incipient ſtate of any quality: as, bluiſh,
tending to blue ; brightiſh, ſomewhat bright.
2. It is likewiſe ſometimes the termination of a gentile or poſ-
ſeſſive adjećtive: as, Swediſh, Daniſh; the Daniſh territories,
or territories of the Danes.
3. It likewiſe notes participation of the qualities of the ſubſtan-
tive to which it is added: as fool, fooliſh; man, manniſh; rogue,
roguiſh. -
I's icle. m. ſ. [More properly icicle, from ice; but ice ſhould ra-
ther be written iſ ; irr, Saxon.] A pendent ſhoot of ice.
Do you know this lady ?
—The moon of Rome; chaſte as the iſ cle
That's curdled by the froſt from pureſt ſnow
Hanging on Dian's temple. Shakeſpeare.
The froſts and ſnows her tender body ſpare;
Thoſe are not limbs for iſicles to tear. Dryden.
IsiNG L'Ass. n ſ [from ice, or ſe, and glaſ; ; that is, matter
congealed into glaſs ; ichthyocolla, Latin.]
ſingleſ, is a tough, firm, and light ſubſtance, of a whitiſh
colour, and in ſome degree tranſparent, much reſembling glue,
but cleanlier and ſweetºr. We uſually receive it in twiſted
pieces, of a roundiſh figure like a ſtaple, which the druggiſts
divide into thin ſhreds like ſkins, that eaſily diſſolve. The
fiſh from which iſn'glaſ is prepared is one of the cartilaginous
kind, and a ſpecies of ſturgeon; it grows to eighteen and
twenty feet in length, and in its general figure greatly re-
ſembles the ſturgeon. It is frequent in the Danube, the Bo-
riſthenes, the Volga, and many other of the larger rivers of
Europe. From the inteſtines of this fiſh the iſnglaſ, is pre-
pared by boiling. The greateſt quantity of ſinglaſſ is made
in Ruſſia. It is an excellent agglutinant and ſtrengthener,
and often preſcribed in gellies and broths. The wine-coopers
find it cfficacious for clearing wines. Hill's Mat. Med.
The cure of putrefaction requires an incraſiating diet, as
all viſcid broths, hartſhorn, ivory, and iſinglaſs. Florer.
Some make it clear by reiterated fermentations, and others
by additions, as jing'oſ. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
I's INGLAss Stºne. m.ſ. This is a foſſil which is one of the
pureſt and ſimpleſt of the natural bodies. It is found in
broad maſſes, compoſed of a multitude of extremely thin
plates or flakes. The maſſes are of a browniſh or rediſh co-
lour; but when the plates are ſeparated, they are perfectly
colourleſs, and more bright and pellucid than the fineſt glaſs.
It is found in Muſcovy, Perſia, the iſland of Cyprus, in the
Alps and Apennines, and the mountains of Germany. The
ancients made their windows of it, inſtead of glaſs. It is alſo
ſometimes uſed for glaſs before pićtures, and for horn in
lanthorns. Hill’s Mat. A4ed.
I'SLAND. m. ſ. [inſta, Latin; iſºla, Italian; ealand, Erſe. It
is pronounced iland.] A tract of land ſurrounded by water.
He will carry this iſland home in his pocket, and give it his
ſon for an apple. And ſowing the kernels of it in the ſea,
bring forth more iſlands. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Within a long receſs there lies a bay,
An iſland ſhades it from the rolling ſea,
And forms a port. Dryden.
Some ſafer world in depth of woods embrac'd,
Some happier iſland in the wat'ry waſte. johnſºn.
Iſland of bliſs! amid’ the ſubject ſeas. Thomſn.
I's LANDER. n ſ [from iſland. Pronounce ilander.] An inha-
bitant of a country ſurrounded by water.
We, as all iſlanders, are lunares, or the moon's men. Camd.
Your dinner, and the generous iſlanders
By you invited, do attend your preſence. Shakeſp. Othello.
There are many bitter ſayings againſt iſlanders in general,
repreſenting them as fierce, treacherous, and unhoſpitable:
thoſe who live on the continent have ſuch frequent intercourſe
with men of different religions and languages, that they be-
come more kind than thoſe who are the inhabitants of an
iſland. Addiſon's Freeholder.
A race of rugged mariners are theſe,
Unpoliſh'd men, and boiſt'rous as their ſeas;
The native iſlanders alone their care,
And hateful he that breathes a foreign air. Pope's Odyſſey.
Isle. m. ſ. [iſle, French; inſula, Latin. Pronounce ile.]
1. An iſland; a country ſurrounded by water.
Is it not an eaſy matter
To make lord William Haſtings of our mind,
For the inſtalment of this noble duke
In the ſeat royal of this famous iſle P
The dreadful fight
Betwixt a nation and two whales I write:
Seas ſtain'd with gore I ſing, advent’rous toil,
And how theſe monſters did diſarm an iſle. JPaler.
2. [Written, I think, corruptly for aile, from aile, French, from
a'a, Latin, the aile being probably at firſt only a wing or ſide
walk. It may come likewiſe from allee, French, a walk..] . A
long walk in a church, or publick building.
O'er the twilight groves and duſky caves,
Long ſounding iſles and intermingled graves,
Black melancholy ſits. Pope.
Isorr RIMETRica L. m.ſ. [la CP, tie, and ºreov.] In geome-
try, are ſuch figures as have equal perimeters or circumfe-
Shakeſp. R. III.
rences, of which the circle is the greateſt. Harris.
Iso'sceles. m. ſ. [iſoſcele, Fr. or equiangular triangle.] That
which hath only two ſides equal. - Harris.
ISSUE. m. ſ. [iſſue, French.]
1. The aët of paſſing out.
2. Exit; egreſs; or paſſage out
Unto the Lord belong the iſ.e. from death. Pſ. lxviii. 20.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the
iſſues of life. Prov. iv. 23.
Let us examine what bodies touch a moveable whilſt in
motion, as the only means to find an iſſue out of this diffi-
culty. - Digby on Bodieſ.
We might have eaſily prevented thoſe great returns of mo-
ney to France; and if it be true the French are ſo impove-
riſhed, in what condition muſt they have been, if that iſſue of
wealth had been ſtopped : Swift.
3. Event; conſequence.
Spirits are not finely touch'd,
But to fine iſſues. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſure.
If I were ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the iſſue doubted,
Whereof the execution did cry out
Againſt the non-performance, ’twas a fear
Which oft infects the wiſeſt. Shakespeare Winter’s Tale,
But let the iſſue correſpondent prove
To good beginnings ºf each enterprize. Fairfax.
If things were caſt upon this iſſue, that God ſhould never
prevent fin 'till man deſerved it, the beſt would ſin, and fin
for ever. - Scuth’s Sermons.
The wittieſt ſayings and ſentences will be found the iſſues of
chance, and nothing elſe but ſo many lucky hits of a roving
fancy. - South's Sermons.
Gur preſent condition is better for us in the iſſue, than that
uninterrupted health and ſecurity that the atheiſt deſires. Bent.
4. Termination;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I S S
I T
2. Termination; concluſion.
He hath preſerved Argalus alive, under pretence of having
him publickly executed after theſe wars, of which they hope
for a ſoon and proſperous iſſue. Sidney.
What iſſue of my love remains for me!
How wild a paſſion works within my breaſt !
With what prodigious flames am I poſſeſt Dryden.
Homer, at a loſs to bring difficult matters to an iſſue, lays
his hero aſleep, and this ſolves the difficulty. Broome.
5. Sequel deduced from premiſes.
I am to pray you not to ſtrain my ſpeech
To groſſer iſſues, nor to larger reach,
Than to ſuſpicion. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
6. A fontanel; a vent made in a muſcle for the diſcharge of
humours. -
This tumour in his left arm was cauſed by ſtrićt binding of
his iſſue. JWiſeman.
7. Evacuation.
A woman was diſeaſed with an iſſue of blood. Mat. ix. 20.
8. Progeny; offspring.
O nation miſerable !
When ſhalt thou ſee thy wholſome days again?
Since that the trueſt iſſue of thy throne, -
By his own interdićtion ſtands accurſt. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Nor where Abaffin kings their iſſue guard,
Mount Amara, though this by ſome ſuppos'd
True paradiſe, under the AEthiop line
By Nilus' head. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft,
This old peaceful prince, as heav'n decreed,
Was bleſs'd with no male iſſue to ſucceed. Dryden's Aen.
The frequent produćtions of monſters, in all the ſpecies of
animals, and ſtrange iſſues of human birth, carry with them
difficulties, not poſſible to conſiſt with this hypotheſis. Locke.
9. [In law.] Iſſue hath divers applications in the common law:
ſometimes uſed for the children begotten between a man and
his wife; ſometimes for profits growing from an amercement,
fine, or expences of ſuit; ſometime for profits of lands or
tenements; ſometime for that point of matter depending in
ſuit, whereupon the parties join and put their cauſe to the
trial of the jury. Iſſue is either general or ſpecial: general
iſſue ſeemeth to be that whereby it is referred to the jury to
bring in their verdićt, whether the defendant have done any
ſuch thing as the plaintiff layeth to his charge. The ſpecial
iſſue then muſt be that, where ſpecial matter being alleged by
the defendant for his defence, both the parties join thereupon,
and ſo grow rather to a demurrer, if it be quaſiio juris, or to
trial by the jury, if it be quaſio fadii. Cowel.
To 1'ssue. v. n. [from the noun; iffer, Fr. uſire, Italian.]
1. To come out; to paſs out of any place.
Waters iſſued out from under the threſhold of the houſe.
Ezek. xlvii. 1.
From the utmoſt end of the head branches there iſleth out
a gummy juice. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the I/orld.
Waters iſſu'd from a cave. Milton.
Ere Pallas iſſu'd from the thunderer's head,
Dulneſs o'er all poſſeſs'd her ancient right. Pope.
2. To make an eruption.
Three of maſter Ford's brothers watch the door with
piſtols, that none ſhould iſſue out, otherwiſe you might ſlip
away. Shakeſpeare.
See that none hence iſſue forth a ſpy. Miltºn.
Haſte, arm your Ardeans, iſſue to the plain;
With faith to friend, aſſault the Trojan train. Dryden.
At length there iſſu'd, from the grove behind,
A fair aſſembly of the female kind. Dryden.
A buzzing noiſe of bees his ears alarms;
Straight iſſue through the fides aſſembling ſwarms. Dryden.
Full for the port the Ithacenſians ſtand,
And furl their ſails, and iſſue on the land.
3. To proceed as an offspring.
Of thy ſons that ſhall iſſue from thee, which thou ſhalt
beget, ſhall they take away. - 2 Kings xx. 18.
4. To be produced by any fund.
Theſe altarages iſſued out of the offerings made to the altar,
and were payable to the prieſthood. Ayliffe's Parergon.
5. To run out in lines.
It would be tried in pipes, being made with a belly towards
the lower end, and then iſſuing into a ſtraight concave again.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Pope's Odºſo.
To l’ssu E. v. a.
1. To ſend out; to ſend forth.
A weak degree of heat is not able either to digeſt the parts
or to iſſue the ſpirits. - + Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. To ſend out judicially or authoritatively. This is the more
frequent ſenſe.
If the council iſſued out any order againſt them, or if the
king ſent a proclamation for their repair to their houſes, ſome
nobleman publiſhed a proteſtation. Clarendon.
Deep in a rocky cave he makes abode,
A manſion proper for a mourning god:
Here he gives audience, iſſuing out decrees
To rivers, his dependent deitics. Dryden.
In vain the maſter iſſues out commands,
In vain the trembling ſailors ply their hands;
The tempeſt unforeſeen prevents their care. Dryden.
They conſtantly wait in court to make a due return of what
they have done, and to receive ſuch other commands as the
judge ſhall iſſue forth. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Issue less, adj. [from iſſue..] Without offspring; without
deſcendants.
Carew, by virtue of this entail, ſucceeded to Hugh's por-
tion, as dying iſſueleſs. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
I have done ſin;
For which the heav'ns, taking angry note,
Have left me iſſuelºſ. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
I'sthmus; n.ſ.. [iſthmus, katin.] A neck of land joining the
peninſula to the continent.* -
There is a caſtle ſtrongly ſeated on a high rock, which
joineth by an iſthmus to the land, and is impregnably forti-
fied. Sandys's Travels.
The north ſide of the Aſſyrian empire ſtretcheth northward
to that iſ!hmus between the Euxine and the Caſpian ſeas.
Brerewood on Languages.
O life, thou nothing's younger brother!
Thou weak built iſthmus, that do'ſt proudly riſe
Up betwixt two eternities,
Yet can'ſt not wave nor wind ſuſtain;
But broken and o'erwhelm'd the ocean meets again. Cºwler.
Our church of England ſtands as Corinth between two ſeas,
and there are ſome buſy in cutting the iſłłmus, to let in both
at once upon it. - Stillingfleet.
Cleomenes thinking it more adviſeable to fortify, not the
iſłhmus, but the mountains, put his deſign in execution. Creech.
Plac'd on this iſthmus of a middle ſtate,
A being darkly wiſe, and rudely great. Pºpe.
IT. pronoun. [pit, Saxon.]
1. The neutral demonſtrative. Uſed in ſpeaking of things.
Nothing can give that to another which it hath not itſelf.
Bramh, againſt Hobbi.
Will our great anger learn to ſloop ſo low :
*
I know it cannot. Gawley.
Tell me, O tell, what kind of thing is wit,
Thou who maſter art of it. Cowley.
His ſon, it may be, dreads no harm;
But kindly waits his father's coming home. Flatman.
The time will come, it will, when you ſhall know
The rage of love. Dryden.
How can I ſpeak? or how, ſir, can you hear?
Imagine that which you would moſt deplore,
And that which I would ſpeak, is it or more. Dryden.
A mind ſo furniſhed, what reaſon has it to acquieſce in its
concluſions! Locke.
The glory which encompaſſed them covered the place, and
darted its rays with ſo much ſtrength, that the whole fabrick
began to melt. Addiſon's Freeholder.
If we find a greater good in the preſent conſtitution, than
would have accrued either from the total privation of it, or
from other frames and ſtructures, we may then reaſonably con-
clude, that the preſent conſtitution proceeded from an intelli-
gent and good being, that formed it that particular way out of
choice. Bentley's Sermºns.
2. It is uſed abſolutely for the ſtate of a perſon or affair.
How is it with our general
Even ſo
As with a man by his own alms impoiſon'd,
And with his charity ſlain. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. It is uſed for the thing; the matter; the affair.
It's come to paſs,
That tractable obedience is a ſlave
To each incenſed will.
4. It is ſometimes expreſſed by 't.
He rallied, and again fell to 't;
For catching foe by nearer foot,
He lifted with ſuch might and ſtrength,
As would have hurl’d him thrice his length. Hudibras.
The deſign, it ſeems, is to avoid the dreadful imputation of
pedantry. Swift.
5. It is uſed ludicrouſly after neutral verbs, to give an emphaſis.
If Abraham brought all with him, it is not probable that he
meant to walk it back again for his pleaſure. Raleigh.
The Lacedemonians, at the ſtraights of Thermopylae, when
their arms failed them, fought it out with their nails and
Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
teeth. - Dryden.
I have often ſeen people laviſh it profuſely in tricking up
their children, and yet ſtarve their minds. Locke.
A mole courſes it not on the ground, like the rat or mouſe,
but lives under the earth. Addiſon's Speciator.
Whether the charmer ſinner it, or ſaint it,
If folly grows romantick, I muſt paint it. Pope.
6. Sometimes applied familiarly, ludicrouſly, or rudely to perſons.
Let us after him,
Whoſe care is gone before to bid us welcome:
It is a peerleſs kinſman. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Po<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I T E
J U D
r:2.
-
2.
1
***
º
rtſ
*
}
Do, child, go to it grandam, child:
Give grandam kingdom, and its grandam will
Give it up him. Shakeſp. King john.
7. It is ſometimes uſed of the firſt or ſecond perſon, ſometimes
of more. This mode of ſpeech, though uſed by good au-
thors, and ſupported by the ily a of the French, has yet an ap-
pearance of barbariſm.
Who was’t came by ? º
—'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
Macduff is fled to England. Shakespeare Macbeth.
City
'Tis I, that made hy widows. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
• 'Tis theſe that early taint the female ſoul. Pope.
ITCH. n.ſ. sicha, Saxon.]
1. A cutaneous diſeaſe extremely contagious, which overſpreads
the body with ſmall puſtules filled with a thin ſerum, and raiſed
as micróſcopes have diſcovered by a ſmall animal. It is cured
by ſulphur.
Luſt and liberty
Creep in the minds and marrows of our youths,
That 'gainſt the ſtream of virtue they may ſtrive,
And drown themſelves in riot, itches, blains. Shakespeare. Timon.
The Lord will ſmite thee with the ſcab and with the itch,
whereof thou can'ſt not be healed. Leutr. xxviii. 27.
As if divinity had catch'd
The itch, on purpoſe, to be ſcratch'd. Hudibras.
2. The ſenſation of uneaſineſs in the ſkin, which is eaſed by
rubbing.
3. A conſtant teazing deſire.
A certain itch of meddling with other people's matters, puts
us upon ſhifting. L’Eſtrange.
He had ſtill pedigree in his head, and an itch of being
thought a divine king. Dryden.
From ſervants company a child is to be kept, not by pro-
hibitions, for that will but give him an itch after it, but by
other ways. - Locke.
At half mankind when gen’rous Manly raves,
All know 'tis virtue; for he thinks them knaves:
When univerſal homage Umbra pays,
All ſee 'tis vice, and itch of vulgar praiſe. Pope.
To Itch. v. n. [from the noun J
1. To feel that uneaſineſs in the ſkin which is removed by rubbing.
A troubleſome itching of the part was occaſioned by want of
tranſpiration. Wiſeman's Surgery.
My right eye itches; ſome good luck is near;
Perhaps my Amaryllis may appear. - Dryden.
2. To long; to have continual deſire. This ſenſe appears in the
following examples, though ſome of them are equivocal.
Maſter Shallow, you have yourſelf been a great fighter,
though now a man of peace. Mr. Page, though now I
be old, and of peace, if I ſee a ſword out, my finger itches
to make one. Shakeſpeare.
Caffius, you yourſelf
Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,
To ſell and mart your offices for gold. Shakespeare julius Caeſar.
The itching ears, being an epidemick diſeaſe, give fair op-
portunity to every mountebank. Decay of Piety.
All ſuch have ſtill an itching to deride,
And fain would be upon the laughing ſide. Pope.
I'Tch Y. adj. [from itch..] Infected with the itch.
I'TE.M. adv. [Latin.] Alſo. A word uſed when any article
is added to the former.
I'TEM. m.ſ.
1. A new article.
I could have looked on him without the help of admiration,
though the catalogue of his endowments had been tabled by
his ſide, and I to peruſe him by items. Shakeſpeare.
If this diſcourſe have not concluded our weakneſs, I have
one item more of mine: if knowledge can be found, I muſt
loſe that which I thought I had, that there is none. Glanv.
2. A hint ; an innuendo.
To IT ERATE. v. a. [itera, Latin.]
1. To repeat; to utter again; to inculcate by frequent mention.
We covet to make the pſalms eſpecially familiar unto all:
this is the very cauſe why we iterate the pſalms oftner than any
other part of Scripture beſides; the cauſe wherefore we inure
the people together with their miniſter, and not the miniſter
alone to read them, as other parts of Scripture he doth. Hook.
If the one may monthly, the other may daily be ite-
rated. Plooker.
In the firſt ages God gave laws unto our fathers, and their
memories ſerved inſtead of books; whereof the imperſections
being known to God, he relieved the ſame by often putting
them in mind: in which reſpect we ſee how many times one
thing hath been iterated into the beſt and wiſeſt. Płooker.
The king, to keep a decency towards the French king, ſent
new ſolemn ambaſſadors to intimate unto him the decree of
his eſtates, and to iterate his motion that the French would de-
ſiſt from hoſtility. Bacon's Henry VII.
There be two kinds of reflečtions of ſounds; the one at
diſtance, which is the echo, wherein the original is heard diſ-
tinctly, and the reflection alſo diſtinétly: the other in con-
currence, when the ſound refle&amp;ing, returneth immediately
upon the original, and ſo iterateth it not, but amplifieth it.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. To do over again.
Aſhes thoroughly burnt, and well reverberated by fire, after
the ſalt thereof hath been drawn out by iterated deco&amp;tions.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Adam took no thought,
Fating his fill; nor Eve to iterate
Her former treſpaſs fear'd, the more to ſooth
Him with her lov’d ſociety. 44ilt. Par. Lºft, b. ix.
I'TERANT. adj. [iterans, Latin.] Repeating.
Waters being near, make a current echo; but being far-
ther off, they make an iterant echo. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
ITERATION. n.ſ.. [iteration, French; iteratio, Latin.] Repeti-
tion; recital over again.
Truth tir’d with iteration
As true as ſteel, as plantage to the moon.
My huſband
—Ay, 'twas he that told me firſt.
— My huſband 8
What needs this iteration, woman
I ſay, thy huſband. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Iterations are commonly loſs of time; but there is no ſuch
gain of time, as to iterate often the ſtate of the queſtion; for
it chaſeth away many a frivolous ſpeech. Bacon's Eſſays.
In all theſe reſpects it hath a peculiar property to engage the
receiver to perſevere in all piety, and is farther improved by the
frequent iteration and repetition. Ham..mond.
ITI NERANT: adj [itimerant, French.] Wandering; not ſettled.
It ſhould be my care to ſweeten and mellow the voices of
itinerant tradeſmen, as alſo to accommodate their cries to
their reſpective wares. Addiſon's Speciator.
ITI'N RARY. n.ſ.. [itineraire, French; itinerarium, Latin.] A
book of travels.
The clergy are ſufficiently reproached, in moſt itineraries,
for the univerſal poverty one meets with in this plentiful king-
dom. Addiſon on Italy.
Iti'NERARY, adj. [itineraire, Fr. itinerarius, Lat J Travelling;
done on a journey; done during frequent change of place.
He did make a progreſs from Lincoln to the northern parts,
though it were rather an itinerary circuit of juſtice than a pro-
greſs. Bacon's Henry VII.
Itself. pronoun. [it and ſelf.] The neutral reciprocal pro-
noun applied to things.
Who then ſhall blame
His peſter'd ſenſes to recoil and ſtart,
When all that is within him does condemn
Itſelf for being there? Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Borrowing of foreigners, in itſelf, makes not the kingdom
rich or poor. - Locke.
JU'BILANT. adj. [jubilans, Lat.] Uttering ſongs of triumph.
The planets liſt’ning ſtood,
While the bright pomp #. jubilant. Milt. Par. Loft.
JUBILA'TION. n ſ, [jubilation, Fr. jubilatio, Lat. The aët of
declaring triumph.
JU'BILEE. : [jubilé, Fr. jubilum, from jubilo, low Latin.] A
publick feſtivity; a time of rejoicing; a ſeaſon of joy.
Angels utt'ring joy, heav'n rung
With jubilee, and loud hoſanna's fill’d
Th’ eternal regions. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
Joy was then a maſculine and a ſevere thing: the recreation
of the judgment, or rejoicing, the jubilee of reaſon. South.
The town was all a jubilee of feaſts. Dryden.
Jucu'Ndity. n.ſ. [jucunditas, jucundu, Latin.] Pleaſantneſs;
agreeableneſs.
The new or unexpected jucundities, which preſent them-
ſelves, will have ačtivity enough to excite the earthieſt ſoul,
and raiſe a ſmile from the moſt compoſed tempers. Brown.
Judas Tree. n.ſ.. [ſiliquoſtrum, Latin.] . A plant.
It hath a papilionaceous flower, whoſe wings are placed
above the ſtandard: the head is compoſed of two petals; the
pointal, which riſes in the centre of the flower-cup, and is
encompaſſed with the ſtamina, afterward becomes a long flat
pod, containing ſeveral kidney-ſhaped ſeeds: to which may be
added roundiſh leaves, growing alternately on the branches.
judas tree yields a fine purpliſh, bright, red bloſſom in the
Spring, and is increaſed by layers. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To JUDA'ize. v. n. [judaiſer, Fr. judaizo, low Latin.] To
conform to the manner of the Jews.
Paul judaiz'd with Jews, was all to all.
JUDGE. n.ſ. [jugé, French; judex, Latin.]
1. One who is inveſted with authority to determine any cauſe or
queſtion, real or perſonal.
Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Geneſſ.
A father of the fatherleſs, and a judge of the widows is God
in his holy habitation. Pſ. lxviii. 5.
Thou art judge
Of all things made, and judgeſt only right. Milton.
It is not ſufficient to imitate nature in every circumſtance
dully: it becomes a painter to take what is moſt beautiful, as
being the ſovereign judge of his own art. Dryden.
12 U 2. Qne
Shakeſpeare,
Sandyt.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J U D.
s
2. One who preſides in a court of judicature.
My lord Baſſanio gave his ring away - -
Unto the judge that begg'd it. Shakeſpeare's Merch, ºf Penice.
A ſingle voice; and that not paſt me, but
By learned approbation of the judges. Shakespeare H. VIII.
3. One who has ſkill ſufficient to decide upon the merit of any
thing.
How dares your pride,
As ºn a liſted field to fight your cauſe,
Unaſk'd the royal grant; nor marſhal by,
As knightly rites require, nor judge to try. Dryden.
A perfeót judge will read each piece of wit,
With the ſame ſpirit that its author writ. Pope.
To JUDGE. v. m. [juger, French; judico, Latin.]
1. To paſs ſentence.
My wrong be upon thee; the Lord judge between thee and
Inc. Geneſis.
Ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you
in the judgment. 2 Chro. xix. 6.
2. To form or give an opinion.
Beſhrew me, but I love her heartily;
For ſhe is wiſe, if I can judge aright.
Ye judge after the fleſh; I judge no man.
Authors to themſelves,
Both what they judge and what they chuſe. Milton.
If I did not know the originals, I ſhould never be able to
judge, by the copies, which was Virgil, and which Ovid. Dryd.
Whether it be a divine revelation or no, reaſon muſt judge,
which can never permit the mind to rejećt a greater evidence,
Shakeſpeare.
jo. viii. 15.
to embrace what is leſs evident. Locke.
He proceeds in his inquiry into ſciences, reſolved to judge
of them freely. Locke.
3. To diſcern; to diſtinguiſh.
How doth God know Can he judge through the dark
cloud job xxii. 13.
judge in yourſelves: is it comely a woman pray unto God
uncovered 2 I Cor. xi. 13.
How properly the tories may be called the whole body of
the Britiſh nation, I leave to any one's judging. Addison.
To JUDG E. v. a.
1. To paſs ſentence upon; to examine authoritatively; to de-
termine finally.
Chaos ſhall judge the ſtrife. Milton.
Then thoſe, whom form of laws
Condemn'd to die, when traitors judg’d their cauſe. Dryden.
2. To paſs ſevere cenſure; to doom ſeverely. -
He ſhall judge among the heathen; he ſhall fill the places
with the dead bodies. Pſ. cx, 6.
judge not, that ye be not judged. Matthew.
Let no man judge you in meat or drink. 2 Col. 16.
Ju'dge R. m. ſ. [from judge.] One who forms judgment; or
paſſes ſentence.
The vulgar threatened to be their oppreſſers, and judgers of
their judges. King Charles.
They who guide themſelves meerly by what appears, are ill
judgers of what they have not well examined. Digby.
JU'DGMENT. n.ſ. [jugement, French J
1. The power of diſcerning the relations between one term or
one propoſition and another.
O judgment / thou art fled to brutiſh beaſts,
And men have loſt their reaſon. Shakespeare julius Caſar.
The faculty, which God has given man to ſupply the want
of certain knowledge, is judgment, whereby the mind takes
any propoſition to be true or falſe, without perceiving a de-
monſtrative evidence in the proofs. Locke.
judgment is that whereby we join ideas together by affir-
mation or negation; ſo, this tree is high. Watts.
2. Doom; the right or power of paſſing judgment.
If my ſuſpect be falſe, forgive me, God;
For judgment only doth belong to thee.
3. The act of exercifing judicature.
They gave judgment upon him. 2 King; xxv. 6.
When thou, O Lord, ſhalt ſtand diſclos'd
In majeſty ſevere,
And fit in judgment on my ſoul,
O how ſhall I appear.
4. Determination; deciſion.
Where diſtinétions or identities are purely material, the
judgment is made by the imagination, otherwiſe by the under-
ſtanding. Glanv. Scepſ.
We ſhall make a certain judgment what kind of diſſolution
that earth was capable of. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Reaſon ought to accompany the exerciſe of our ſenſes,
whenever we would form a juſt judgment of things propoſed
to our inquiry. J/attſ.
5. The quality of diſtinguiſhing propriety and impropriety;
criticiſm.
judgment, a cool and ſlow faculty, attends not a man in
Shakespeare H. VI.
Addiſon's Speciator.
the rapture of poetical compoſition. Dennis.
'Tis with our judgments as our watches, none
Go juſt alike; yet each believes his own. Pope,
6. Opinion; notion.
- I ſee mens judgments are
A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
Draw the inward quality after them,
To ſuffer all alike. Shakespeare Ant, and Cºatra.
When ſhe did think my maſter lová her well, `"
She, in my judgment, was as fair as you. Shakeſpeare.
7. Sentence againſt a criminal. -
When he was brought again to th' bar, to hear
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was ſtirr'd
With agony. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The chief prieſts informed me, deſiring to have judgment
againſt him. Acis Xxv. 5.
On Adam laſt this judgment he pronounc'd, Miltºn.
8. Condemnation. This is a theological uſe.
The judgment was by one to condemnation; but the free
gift is of many offences unto juſtification. Ram v. 16.
The precepts, promiſes, and threatenings of the Goſpel
will riſe up in judgment againſt us, and the articles of our
faith will be ſo many articles of accuſation. Ti lºtſon.
9. Puniſhment inflićted by providence, with reference to ſºme
particular crime.
This judgment of the heavens that makes us tremble,
Touches us not with pity. Shakespeare King Lear.
We cannot be guilty of greater uncharitableneſs, than to in-
terpret afflićtions as puniſhments and judgments: it aggravates
the evil to him who ſuffers, when he looks upon himſelf as
the mark of divine vengeance. Addiſon's Speciator.
10. Diſtribution of juſtice.
The Jews made inſurrečtion againſt Paul, and brought him
to the judgment ſeat. t
Your diſhonour
Mangles true judgment, and bereaves the ſtate
Of that integrity which ſhould become it. Shakespeare Cori.l.
In judgment; between rich and poor, confider not what the
poor man needs, but what is his own. Taylor.
A bold and wiſe petitioner goes ſtrait to the throne and
judgment ſeat of the monarch. Arbuthn. and Pºpe's Mart.Sc. ib.
I 1. Judiciary laws; ſtatutes.
If ye hearken to theſe judgmeuts, and keep and do them,
the Lord thy God ſhall keep unto thee the covenant. Deutr.
12. The laſt doom.
The dreadful judgment day
So dreadful will not be as was his fight. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
JU'DICATORY.. n.ſ. [judico, Latin.] -
1. Diſtribution of juſtice.
No ſuch crime appeared as the lords, the ſupreme court of
judicatory, would judge worthy of death. Clarendon.
2. Court of juſtice.
Human judicatories give ſentence on matters of right and
wrong, but inquire not into bounty and beneficence. Aftterb.
JU'Dicature, n.ſ. [judicature, Fr. judico, Latin.) Power of
diſtributing juſtice.
The honour of the judges in their judicature is the king's
4:7; xviii. I 2.
honour. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
If he ſhould bargain for a place of judicature, let him be
rejećted with ſhame. . Bacon.
In judicatures to take away the trumpet, the ſcarlet, the at-
tendance, makes juſtice naked as well as blind. South's Sermºns.
JUDI'CIAL. adj. [judicium, Latin.]
1. Pračtiſed in the diſtribution of publick juſtice.
What government can be without judicial proceedings?
And what judicature without a religious oath Bentley's Serm.
2. Inflićted on as a penalty.
The reſiſtance of thoſe will cauſe a judicial hardneſs. South.
Jºlix. adv. [from judicial.] In the forms of legal
Juſtice.
It will behove us to think that we ſee God ſtill looking on,
and weighing all our thoughts, words, and actions in the
balance of infallible juſtice, and paſſing the ſame judgment
which he intends hereafter judicially to declare. Grew's Coſmol.
JUDI’cian Y. adj. [judiciaire, Fr. judiciarius, Latin.] Paſſing
judgment upon any thing.
Before weight be laid upon notions of judiciary aſtrologers,
the influence of conſtellations ought, by ſevere experiments,
to be made out. Boyle.
JUDI’CIOUS. adj. [judicieux, French.] Prudent; wiſe; ſkil-
ful in any matter or affair.
For your husband,
He's noble, wiſe, judicious, and beſt knows
The fits o' th' feaſon. Shakespeare Marleth.
Love hath his ſeat
In reaſon, and is judicious. Milton.
To each ſavour meaning we apply,
And palate call judicious. Milton.
We are beholden to judicious writers of all ages for thoſe
diſcoveries they have left behind them. Locke.
Judi'ciously. adv. [from judicious.) Skilfully; wiſely; with
juſt determination.
So bold, yet ſo judiciouſy you dare,
That your leaſt praiſe is to be regular. Dryden.
Longinus<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J U K
J U M
---
--
:*
s
Longinus has judiciouſly preferred the ſublime genius that
- ſometimes errs to the middling or indifferent one, which
makes few faults, but ſeldom riſes to excellence. Dryden.
Jug. n.ſ. [jugge, Daniſh.] A large drinking veſſel with a gib-
bous or ſwelling belly.
You'd rail upon the hoſteſs of the houſe,
Becauſe ſhe bought ſtone jugs and no ſeal’d quarts. Shakespeare
He fetch'd 'em drink, -
Fill'd a large jug up to the brink. Swift's Miſcel.
To Ju'GGLE. v. n. [jougler orjongler, Fr. jocari, Lat.]
1. To play tricks by ſlight of hand; to ſhow falſe appearances
of extraordinary performances.
The ancient miracle of Memnon's ſtatue ſeems to be a
juggling of the Ethiopian prieſts. Digby on Bodies.
2. To practiſe artifice or impoſture.
Be theſe juggling fiends no more believ'd,
That palter with us in a double ſenſe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Is’t poſſible the ſpells of France ſhould juggle
Men into ſuch ſtrange mockeries Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
They ne'er forſwore themſelves, nor lied,
Diſdain'd to ſtay for friends conſents;
Nor juggl’d about ſettlements. .
Ju'cci.F. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A trick by legerdemain.
2. An impoſture; a deception.
The notion was not the invention of politicians, and a
juggle of ſtate to cozen the people into obedience. Tillotſon.
Jú'GGler. n.ſ.. [from juggle.] -
1. One who practiſes ſlight of hand; one who deceives the
eye by nimble conveyance.
They ſay this town is full of cozenage,
As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
Drug-working forcerers that change the mind,
Diſguiſed cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many ſuch like libertines of fin. Shakeſpeare.
I ſaw a juggler that had a pair of cards, and would tell a
man what card he thought. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Ariſtaeus was a famous poet, that flouriſhed in the days of
Croeſus, and a notable juggler. Sandys's Travels.
Fortune-tellers, jugglers, and impoſters, do daily delude
them. Brown's Vulgar Errous, b. i.
The juggler which another's ſlight can ſhow,
But teaches how the world his own may know. Garth.
One who is managed by a juggler fancies he has meney in
hand; but let him graſp it never ſo carefully, upon a word
or two it increaſes or dwindles. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 18.
What magick makes our money riſe,
When dropt into the ſouthern main;
Or do theſe jugglers cheat us
2. A cheat; a trickiſh fellow.
O me, you juggler; oh, you canker bloſſom,
You thief of love; what, have you come by night,
Hudibras, p. iii.
Swift's Miſcel.
And ſtoll’n my love's heart from him : Shakeſpeare.
I ſing no harm
To officer, juggler, or juſtice of peace. Donne.
JU'GGLINGLY. adv. [from juggle.] In a deceptive manner.
JU'GULAR. adj. [jugulum, Latin.] Belonging to the throat.
A gentleman was wounded into the internal jugular, through
his neck. Wiſeman's Surgery.
JUICE. m. ſ. [jus, French; juys, Dutch.]
1. The liquor, ſap, or water of plants and fruits.
If I define wine, I muſt ſay, wine is a juice not liquid, or
wine is a ſubſtance; for juice includes both ſubſtance and
liquid. Watts's Logick, p. i.
Unnumber'd fruits,
A friendly juice to cool thirſt's rage contain. Thomſon.
2. The fluid in animal bodies.
juice in language is leſs than blood; for if the words be
but becoming and ſignifying, and the ſenſe gentle, there is
juice: but where that wanteth, the language is thin, ſcarce
covering the bone. Benj. johnſon's Diſcovery.
An animal whoſe juices are unſound can never be nouriſh-
ed; unſound juices can never repair the fluids. Arbuthnot.
Jui'celess. adj. [from juice.] Dry; without moiſture; with-
out Juice.
Divine Providence has ſpread her table every-where; not
with a juiceleſ, green carpet, but with ſucculent herbage and
nouriſhing graſs. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
When Boreas’ ſpirit bluſters ſore,
Beware th' inclement heav'ns; now let thy hearth
Crackle with juiceleſs boughs. Philips.
JU'IcINEss. n.ſ.. [from juice..] Plenty of juice; ſucculence.
JU'Icy. adj. [from juice..] Moiſt; full of juice.
Earth being taken out of watery woods, will put forth
herbs of a fat and juicy ſubſtance. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Each plant and juicieſ; gourd will pluck. Milton.
The muſk's ſurpaſſing worth ! that, in its youth,
Its tender nonage, loads the ſpreading boughs
With large and juicy offspring.
To JUKE. v. n. [jucher, French.]
I. To perch upon anything: as, birds,
Philips.
2. Juking, in Scotland, denotes ſtill any complaiſance by bend-
ing of the head.
Two aſſes travelled; the one laden with oats, the other
with money : the money-merchant was ſo proud of his truſt,
that he went juking and toſſing of his head. L'E/ºrange.
J'UJub. }*{ [zizyphus, Lat.] A plant whoſe flower con-
JU'Jubes. ſiſts of ſeveral leaves, which are placed circular-
ly, and expand in form of a roſe; out of whoſe empalement
riſes the pointal, which afterwards becomes an oblong fleſhy
fruit, ſhaped like an olive, including an hard ſhell divided in-
to cells, each containing an oblong nut or kernel. The fruit
is like a ſmall plum, but it has little fleſh upon the ſtone. Mill.
Ju'LAP. m. ſ. [A word of Arabick original; julapium, low
Lat. julep, Fr.]
julap is an extemporaneous form of medicine, made of
ſimple and compound water ſweetened, and ſerves for a vehi-
cle to other forms not ſo convenient to take alone. &amp;tiny.
Behold this cordial julap here,
That flames and dances in his cryſtal bounds
With ſpirits of balm and fragrant ſyrups mixt. Miltºn.
. If any part of the after-birth be left, endeavour the bring-
ing that away; and by good ſudorificks and cordials expel
the venom, and contemperate the heat and acrimony by julaps
and emulſions. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Ju'lus. n.ſ.
1. July flower. See Clove-GILLIFow ER and Gilliflow ER.
2. julus, among botaniſts, denotes thoſe long worm-like
tufts or palms, as they are called in willows, which at the
beginning of the year grow out, and hang pendular down
from hazels, walnut-trees, &amp;c. Miller.
JU'LY. n.ſ. [julius, Lat. juillet, Fr.] The month anciently
called quintilis, or the fifth from March, named july in ho-
nour of julius Caeſar; the ſeventh month from January.
july I would have drawn in a jacket of light yellow, eat-
ing cherries, with his face and boſom ſun-burnt. Peacham.
ju"MART. n.ſ. [French.]
Mules and jumarts, the one from the mixture of an aſs
and a mare, the other from the mixture of a bull and a mare,
are frequent. Locke,
To Ju'Mble. v. a. [in Chaucer, jombre, from combler, French,
Skinner.] To mix violently and confuſedly together.
Perſons and humours may be jumbled and diſguiſed; but
nature, like quickſilver, will never be killed. L’Eſtrange.
A verbal concordance leads not always to texts of the ſame
meaning; and one may obſerve, how apt that is to jumble
together paſſages of ſcripture, and thereby diſturb the true
meaning of holy ſcripture. Locke.
Writing is but juſt like dice,
And lucky mains make people wiſe;
And jumbled words, if fortune throw them,
Shall, well as Dryden, form a poem. Prior.
Is it not a firmer foundation for tranquillity, to believe that
all things were at firſt created, and are continually ordered
for the beſt, than that the whole univerſe is mere bungling
and blundering; all ill-favouredly cobled and jumbled toge-
ther by the unguided agitation and rude ſhuffles of matter.
Bentley's Sermons.
How tragedy and comedy embrace,
How farce .epick get a jumbled race. Pope's Dunciad.
That the univerſe was formed by a fortuitous concourſe of
atoms, I will no more believe, than that the accidental jum-
bling of the alphabet would fall into a moſt ingenious treatiſe
of philoſophy. Swift.
To Ju'MBLE. v. n. To be agitated together.
* They will all meet and jumble together into a perfect har-
mony. Swift.
JU'MBle. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Confuſed mixture; violent
and confuſed agitation.
Had the world been coagmented from that ſuppoſed fortui-
tous jumble, this hypotheſis had been tolerable. Glanville.
What jumble here is made of eccleſiaſtical revenues, as if
they were all alienated with equal juſtice. , Swift.
JU'MENT. n.ſ. [jument, Fr. jumentum, Lat..] Beaſt of burthen.
juments, as horſes, oxen, and aſſes, have no erućtation,
or belching. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
To JUMP. v. n. [gumpen, Dutch.]
1. To leap ; to ſkip; to move forward without ſtep or ſliding.
Not the worſt of the three but jumps twelve foot and an
half by the ſquare. . Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
#. upon this bank and ſhelve of time,
We'd jump the life to come. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The herd come jumping by me,
And fearleſs, quench their thirſt, while I look on,
And take me for their fellow-citizen.
So have I ſeen from Severn's brink
A flock of geeſe jump down together,
Swim where the bird of Jove would ſink, -
And ſwimming never wet a feather. Swift.
Candidates petition the emperor to entertain the court with
a dance on the rope ; and whoever jumps the higheſt ſucceeds
in the office, Gulliver's Travels.
2. To
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J U N
I V O
2. To leap ſuddenly.
One Peregrinus jumped into a fiery furnace at the Olym-
pick games, only to ſhew the company how far his vanity
could carry him. Collier.
We ſee a little, preſume a great deal, and ſo jump to the
concluſion. Speciator, Nº. 626.
3. To jolt.
The noiſe of the prancing horſes, and of the jumping cha-
riots. Mah. iii. 2.
4. To agree ; to tally ; to join.
Do not embrace me till each circumſtance
Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
That I am Viola. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
In ſome ſort it jumps with my humour. Shakeſpeare.
But though they jump not on a juſt account, . .
Yet do they all confirm a Turkiſh fleet. Shakeſp. Othello.
Becauſe I will not jump with common ſpirits,
And rank me with the barb'rous nations. Shakeſpeare.
Herein perchance he jumps not with Lipſius. Hakewill.
Never did truſty ſquire with knight,
Or knight with ſquire, e'er jump more right;
Their arms and equipage did fit,
As well as virtues, parts, and wit.
This ſhews how perfectly the rump
And commonwealth in nature jump :
For as a fly that goes to bed,
Reſts with his tail above his head ;
So in this mungrel ſtate of ours,
The rabble are the ſupreme powers. Hudibras, p. iii.
Good wits jump, and mine the nimbler of the two. AMore.
Good now, how your devotions jump with mine. Dryd.
I am happier for finding our judgments jump in the notion.
Pope to Swift.
Hudibras, p. i.
JUMP. adv. Exačtly; nicely. Obſolete.
Otherwiſe one man could not excel another, but all ſhould
be either abſolutely good, as hitting jump that indiviſible point
or center wherein goodneſs conſiſteth ; or elſe miſſing it, they
{hould be excluded out of the number of well doers. Hooker.
But ſince ſo jump upon this bloody queſtion,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arriv'd. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Myſelf the while to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him jump, when he may Caſio find
Soliciting his wife. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
JUMP. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The ačt of jumping; a leap ; a ſkip.
The ſureſt way for a learner is, not to advance by jumps
and large ſtrides; let that, which he ſets himſelf to learn
next, be as nearly conjoined with what he knows already, as
is poſſible. Locke.
2. A lucky chance.
Do not exceed
The preſcript of this ſcrowl: our fortune lies
Upon this jump. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
3. [jupe, French..]. A waiſtcoat ; a kind of looſe or limber
ſtays worn by ſickly ladies. -
The weeping caſſock ſcar'd into a jump,
A ſign the preſbyter’s worn to the ſtump. Cleaveland.
JU'NcATE. n.ſ. [juncade, French ; giancata, Italian.]
1. Cheeſecake; a kind of ſwcetmeat of curds and ſugar.
2. Any delicacy.
A goodly table of pure ivory,
All ſpread with juncates, fit to entertain
The greateſt prince. Spenſer, Sonnet 77.
With ſtories told of many a ſcat,
How fairy Mab the juncates eat. Milton.
3. A furtive or private entertainment. It is now improperly
written junket in this ſenſe, which alone remains much in
uſe. See JU'N KET.
JU'N cous. adj. [junceus, Lat.] Full of bulruſhes.
JU'Nction... n.ſ. [jonélion, French..] Union; coalition.
Upon the junction of the two corps, our ſpies diſcovered a
great cloud of duſt. Addiſon.
JU'NcTURE. m. ſ. [junélura, Latin.]
1. The line at which two things are joined together.
Beſides thoſe groſſer elements of bodies, ſalt, ſulphur, and
mercury, there may be ingredients of a more ſubtile nature,
which being extremely little, may eſcape unheeded at the
jumélures of the diſtillatory veſſels, though never ſo carefully
luted. Boyle.
2. Joint; articulation.
She has made the back-bone of ſeveral vertebrae, as being
leſs in danger of breaking than if they were all one entire
bone without thoſe griſtly junétures. More.
All other animals have tranſverſe bodies; and though ſome
do raiſe themſelves upon their hinder legs to an upright poſ-
ture, yet they cannot endure it long, neither are the figures
or juncłureſ, or order of their bones, fitted to ſuch a poſture.
Hale's Originat, of Mankind.
3. Union ; amity.
Nor are the ſobereſt of them ſo apt for that devotional
compliance and jundžº e of hearts, which I deſire to bear in
thoſe holy offices to be performed with me, K. Charles,
4. A critical point or article of time.
By this profeſſion in that juniºre of time, they bid fire-
wel to all the pleaſures of this life. Addiſon.
When any law does not conduce to the publick ſafety, but
in ſome extraordinary junctures, the very obſervation of it
would endanger the community, that law ought to be laid
aſleep. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 16.
JUNE. n.ſ. [juin, Fr. junius, Lat.] The ſixth month from
January. - -
june is drawn in a mantle of dark green. Peacham.
JU'Nio R. adj. [junior, Lat..] One younger than another.
The fools my juniors by a year,
Are tortur'd with ſuſpenſe and fear,
Who wiſely thought my age a ſcreen,
When death approach'd to ſtand between. Swift.
According to the nature of men of years, I was repining
at the riſe of my juniors, and unequal diſtribution of wealth.
Tatler, Nº. 160.
JU'NIP's R. m. ſ. [juniperus, L2t.] A plant.
The leaves of the juniper are long, narrow, and prickly;
the male flowers are, in ſome ſpecies, produced at remote
diſtances from the fruit on the ſame tree; but in other ſpecies
they are produced on different trees from the fruit: the firſt
is a ſoft pulpy berry, containing three ſeeds in each. Miller.
Some of our common juniper ſhrubs are males and ſome
females, of the ſame ſpecies. The male ſhrubs produce, in
April and May, a ſmall kind of juli with apices on them,
very large, and full of farina; the females produce none of
theſe juli, but only the berries, which do not ripen till the
ſecond year, and then do not immediately fall off; ſo that it
is no uncommon thing to ſee the berries of three different
years at once on the ſame tree. The ſhrub is very common
with us on heaths and barren hills, but the berries uſed me-
dicinally in our ſhops are brought from Germany, where it
is greatly more abundant. The berries are powerful atte-
nuants, diureticks, and carminative. Hill.
A clyſter may be made of the common decoètions, or of
mallows, bay, and juniper berries, with oil of linſced. Jºſem.
JUNK. m. ſ. [probably an Indian word.j
1. A ſmall ſhip of China.
America, which have now but junks and canoes, abound-
ed then in tall ſhips. Bacon's New Atlantis.
2. Pieces of old cable. Ainſ.
JU'NKET. m. ſ. [properly juncate.
1. A ſweetmeat.
You know, there wants no junkets at the feaſt. Shakeſp.
2. A ſtolen entertainment.
To JU'NKET. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To feaſt ſecretly; to make entertainments by ſtealth.
Whatever good bits you can pilfer in the day, ſave them
to junket with your fellow ſervants at night. Swift.
2. To feaſt.
Job's children junketed and feaſted together often, but the
reckoning coſt them dear at laſt. South's Sermons.
The apoſtle would have no revelling or junketing. South.
jū’NTO. n.ſ. [Italian.] A cabal; a kind of men combined
in any ſecret deſign.
Would men have ſpent toilſome days and watchful nights
in the laborious queſt of knowledge preparative to this work,
at length come and dance attendance for approbation upon a
junto of petty tyrants, ačted by party and prejudice, who de-
nied fitneſs from learning, and grace from morality. South.
From this time began an intrigue between his majeſty and
a junto of miniſters, which had like to have ended in my de-
ſtruction. Gulliver's Travels.
I'voRY. m. ſ. [ivoire, French; ebur, Lat.]
Ivory is a hard, ſolid, and firm ſubſtance, of a fine white
colour, and capable of a very good poliſh: it is the dens ex-
ertus of the elephant, who carries on each ſide of his jaws a
tooth of ſix or ſeven feet in length, of the thickneſs of a
man's thigh at the baſe, and almoſt entirely ſolid; the two
ſometimes weighing three hundreed and thirty pounds: theſe
ivory tuſks are hollow from the baſe to a certain height, and
the cavity is filled with a compact medullary ſubſtance, ſeem-
ing to have a great number of glands in it. The fineſtivary
is brought from the Eaſt-Indies, where great quantity of it is
not taken immediately from the head of the animal, but
found buried in the earth. The ivory of the iſlands of Ceylon
and of Achem do not become yellow in the wearing as all
other ivory does, and it therefore bears a greater price than
of the Guinea coaſt. The preparations of ivory have the
ſame reſtorative virtues with thoſe of the hartſhorn. Hill.
There is more difference between thy fleſh and hers, than
between jet and ivory. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Draw Erato with a ſweet and lovely countenance, bear-
ing a heart with an ivory key. Peacham.
From their ivory port the cherubim
Forth iſſu’d. -
Two gates the ſilent houſe of ſleep adorn,
Of poliſh’d iv'ry this, that of tranſparent horn :
True viſions through tranſparent horn ariſe,
Through poliſh'd jv'ry paſs deluding lies.
- 2.
See JUNcAte.]
Milton.
Dryden's Aºn.
Ju'PPoN.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J U R
J U S
s
-
:
..
º
- *
... e.
*
º
Joppo'N. n.ſ. (jappen, French.] A ſhort cloſe coat.
Some wore a breaſt-plate and a light juppon,
Their horſes cloath’d with rich capariſon. Dryden.
Ju'RAT. n.ſ. [juratus, Lat. jura juré, Fr.] A magiſtrate in
ſome corporations.
Ju'RAtoRY, adj. [juratoire, Fr. juro, Lat.] Giving an oath.
A contumacious perſon may be compelled to give juratory
caution de parendo juri. Ayliffe's Parergon.
JURI'Dica L. adj. [juridicus, Lat. juridique, Fr.]
1. Aëting in the diſtribution of juſtice.
2. Uſed in courts of juſtice.
According to a juridical account and legal ſignification,
time within memory, by the ſtatute of Weſtminſter, was
ſettled in the beginning of the reign of king Richard the
firſt. Hale's Hiſt. of the Common Law of England.
JURI'dically... adj. [from juridical.] With legal authority;
according to forms of juſtice.
JU'RisconsulT. n.ſ. [juris conſultus, Latin.] One who gives
his opinion in caſes of law.
There is mention made, in a deciſion of the juriſconſult
Javolemus, of a Britannick fleet. Arbuthnot on Coins.
JURISDI'ction. n.ſ. [juriſdićtio, Lat., juriſdiction, Fr.]
1. Legal authority; extent of power. -
Sometimes the practice of ſuch juriſdiction may ſwerve
through error even in the very beſt, and for other reſpects,
where leſs integrity is. Hooker, b. v.
Without the king's aſſent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a legate; by which power
You maim'd the juriſdiction of all biſhops. Shakeſpeare.
All perſons exerciſing eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction ſhould have
the king's arms in their ſeals of office. Hayward.
This place exempt
From heav'n's high juriſdiction. Milton.
As Adam had no ſuch power as gave him ſovereign juriſ-
diction over mankind. Locke.
This cuſtom in a popular ſtate, of impeaching particular
men, may ſeem to be nothing elſe but the people's chuſing
to exerciſe their own juriſdiction in perſon. Swift.
2. Diſtričt to which any authority extends.
JURIsPRU'DENCE. n.ſ. [juriſprudence, Fr. juriſprudentia, Lat.]
The ſcience of law.
Ju'Rist. n.ſ. [juriſe, Fr. jura, Lat.] A civil lawyer; a man
who profeſſes the ſcience of the law; a civilian.
This is not to be meaſured by the principles of juriſts. Bac.
Ju'RoR. n.ſ. [juro, Lat.] One that ſerves on the jury.
Were the jurors picked out of choice men, this would be
as bad ; for the evidence will be as deceitful as the verdićt.
Spenſer's State of Ireland.
I ſhall find your lordſhip judge and juror,
You are ſo merciful, I ſee your end, ..."
'Tis my undoing. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
I fing no harm, good ſooth' to any wight,
Officer, jugler, or juſtice of peace,
juror, or judge. Donne.
About noon the jurors went together, and becauſe they
could not agree, they were ſhut in. Hayward.
JU RY. m. ſ. [jurata, Ł. juré, Fr.]
jury, a company of men, as twenty-four or twelve, ſworn
to deliver a truth upon ſuch evidence as ſhall be delivered
them touching the matter in queſtion. There be three man-
ners of trials in England: one by parliament, another by
battle, and the third by aſfiſe or jury. The trial by aſfiſe,
be the action civil or criminal, publick or private, perſonal
or real, is referred for the fact to a jury, and as they find it,
ſo paſſeth the judgment. This jury is uſed not only in cir-
cuits of juſtices errant, but alſo in other courts, and matters
of office, as, if the eſcheatour make inquiſition in any thing
touching his office, he doth it by a jury of inqueſt: if the
coroner inquire how a ſubjećt found dead came to his end,
he uſeth an inqueſt: the juſtices of peace in their quarter-
ſeſſions, the ſheriff in his county and turn, the bailiff of a
hundred, the ſteward of a court-leet or court-baron, if they
inquire of any offence, or decide any cauſe between party
and party, they do it by the ſame manner: ſo that where it
is ſaid, that all things be triable by parliament, battle, or
aſſize; aſſize, in this place, is taken for a jury or inqueſt,
empanelled upon any cauſe in a court where this kind of trial
is uſed. This jury, though it appertain to moſt courts of the
common law, yet it is moſt notorious in the half year courts
of the juſtices errants, commonly called the great aſſizes,
and in the quarter-ſeſſions, and in them it is moſt ordinarily
called a jury, and that in civil cauſes ; whereas in other
courts it is often termed an inqueſt. In the #. aſſize,
ore of cauſes,
both civil and criminal, commonly to be tried, whereof one
is called the grand jury, and the reſt petit juries. The grand
there are uſually many juries, becauſe there be
allow by writing ignoramus. Such as they do approve, if
they touch life and death, are farther referred to another jury
to be conſidered of, becauſe the caſe is of ſuch importance;
but others of lighter moment are, upon their allowance,
without more work, fined by the bench, except the party
traverſe the indićtment, or challenge it for inſufficiency, or
remove the cauſe to a higher court by certiorari; in which
two former caſes it is referred to another jury, and in the lat-
ter tranſmitted to the higher. Thoſe that paſs upon civil
cauſes real, are all, or ſo many as can conveniently be had,
of the ſame hundred, where the land or tenement in queſtion
doth lie, and four at the leaſt; and they, upon due exami-
nation, bring in their verdićt either for the demandant or te-
nant: according unto which, judgment paſſeth afterward in
the court where the cauſe firſt began; and the reaſon hereof
is, becauſe theſe juſtices of affize are, in this caſe, for the
eaſe of the countries only to take the verdićt of the jury by
the virtue of the writ ºft. niſi prius, and ſo return it to the
court where the cauſe is depending. Cowell.
The jury, paſſing on the priſoner's life, ,
May in the ſworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try, Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſure.
How innocent I was, `
His noble jury and foul cauſe can witneſs. Shakeſp. H. IV.
Clodius was acquitted by a corrupt jury, that had palpably
taken ſhares of money before they gave up their verdićt. Bac.
Ju'RYMAN. m. ſ. [jury and man.] One who is impannelled on
a Jury.
J The hungry judges ſoon the ſentence ſign,
And wretches hang that jurymen may dine. Pope.
No judge was known, upon or off the bench, to uſe the
leaſt inſinuation, that might affect the intereſts of any one
ſingle juryman, much leſs of a whole jury. Swift's %.
Ju'RYMAst. n. ſ. So the ſeamen call whatever they ſet up in
the room of a maſt loſt in a fight, or by a ſtorm; being
ſome great yard which they put down into the ſtep of that
loſt maſt, faſtening it into the partners, and fitting to it the
miſſen or ſome leſler yard with ſails and ropes, and with it
make a hard ſhift to ſail. Harris.
JUST. adj. [juſle, Fr. juſtus, Latin.]
1. Upright; incorrupt; equitable in the diſtribution of juſtice.
Take it, while yet 'tis praiſe, before my rage
Unſafely juſt, break looſe on this bad age. Dryden.
2, Honeſt; without crime in dealing with others.
uſt balances, juſt weights, and a juſt ephaph. Lev. xix.
en are commonly ſo juſt to virtue and goodneſs, as to
praiſe it in others, even when they do not practiſe it them-
ſelves. Tillotſon's Sermons.
juſt of thy word, in ev'ry thought ſincere,
Who knew no wiſh but what the world might hear. Pope.
3. Exačt; proper; accurate.
Boileau's numbers are excellent, his expreſſions noble, his
thoughts juſt, his language pure, his ſatyr pointed, and his
ſenſe cloſe. - Dryden', juv,
Theſe ſcenes were wrought,
Embelliſh'd with good morals and juſt thought. Granville, "
uſt precepts thus from great examples giv'n,
She drew from them what they deriv'd from heav'n. Pope.
juſt to the tale, as preſent at the fray,
Or taught the labours of the dreadful way. Pope.
Once on a time La Mancha's knight, they ſay,
A certain bard encountring on the way,
Diſcours'd in terms as juſt, with looks as ſage,
As ere could Dennis of the laws o' th' ſtage. Pope.
Though the ſyllogiſm be irregular, yet the inferences are
juſt and true. Watts's Logick.
4. Virtuous; innocent; pure.
Noah was a juſt man, and perfect. Gen. vi. 9.
How ſhould man be juſt with God? job ix. 2.
A juſt man falleth ſeven times and riſeth. Prov. xxiv. 16.
He ſhall be recompenſed at the reſurre&amp;tion of the juſt.
w 44at. xiv., 14.
The juſt th' unjuſt to ſerve. Milton.
5. True; not forged; not falſely imputed; well grounded.
Crimes were laid to his charge too many, the leaſt whereof
being juſt, had bereaved him of eſtimation and credit. Hooker.
Me though juſt right
Did firſt create your leader, Milton.
6. Equally retributed,
He received a juſt recompence of reward, Heb. ii, 2.
Whoſe damnation is juſt. Rom, iii. 8,
As Heſiod fings, ſpread water o'er thy fields,
And a moſt juſt and glad increaſe it yields. Denham.
7. Complete without ſuperfluity or defect. -
He was a comely perſonage, a little above juſt ſtature, well
and ſtrait limbed, but ſlender, Bacon's Henry VII,
jury conſiſts ordinarily of twenty-four grave and ſubſtantial 8. Regular; orderly.
gentlemen, or ſome of them yeomen, choſen indifferentl
out of the whole ſhire by the ſheriff, to conſider of all bills
of indiétment preferred to the court; which they do either
approve by writing upon them theſe words, billa vera, or diſ-
When all
The war ſhall ſtand ranged in its juſt array,
And dreadful pomp ; then will I think on thce, Addison.
$ 2 X Qs Exaëly<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">J U S
J U S
9. Exaº'y proportioned. -
The prince is here at hand: pleaſeth your lordſhip
To meet his grace, juſt diſtance 'tween our armies? Shakespeare
Io. Full ; of full dimenſions.
His foldiers had divers ſkirmiſhes with the Numidians, ſo
that once the ſkirmiſh was like to have come to a juſt battle.
Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
There is not any one particular abovementioned, but would
take up the buſineſs of a juſt volume. Hale's Orig. of Mank.
There ſeldom appeared a juſt army in the civil wars.
- Dutcheſ of Newcaſtle.
11. Exačt in retribution. -
See nations ſlowly wiſe, and meanly juſ”,
To bury'd merit raiſe the tardy buſt.
- Panity of Human I//cs.
Just. adv.
1. Exačtly; nicely; accurately.
The god Pan guided my hand juſt to the heart of the
beaſt. Sidney.
They go about to make us believe that they are juſt of the
ſame opinion, and that they only think ſuch ceremonies are
not to be uſed when they are unprofitable, or when as good
or better may be eſtabliſhed. H.oker.
There, ev'm juſt there he ſtood; and as ſhe ſpoke,
Where laſt the ſpectre was, ſhe caſt her look. Dryden.
A few ſeem to underſtand him right; juſt as when our Sa-
viour ſaid, in an allegorical ſenſe, except ye eat the fleſh of
the ſon of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
- Bentley's Sermons.
'Tis with our judgments as our watches, none
Go juſt alike; yet each believes his own. Pope.
2. Merely ; barely.
It is the humour of weak and triſling men to value them-
ſelves upon juſt nothing at all. L'Eſtrange.
The nereids ſwam before -
To ſmooth the ſeas; a ſoft eteſian gale
But juſt inſpir'd and gently ſwell'd the ſail. Dryden.
Give me, ye gods, the produćt of one field,
That ſo I neither may be rich nor poor;
And having ju/? enough, not covet more. . Dryden.
. Nearly. -
Being ſpent with age, and juſt at the point of death, Demo-
critus called for loaves of new bread to be brought, and with
the ſteam of them under his noſe prolonged his life. Temple.
JC's T. n.ſ. [joiſie, French..] Mock encounter on horſeback;
tilt ; tournament.
None was either more grateful to the beholders, or more
noble in itſelf, than juſ’s, both with ſword and launce. Sidney.
What news from Oxford hold thoſe juſts and triumphs
Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
Among themſelves the tourney they divide,
In equal ſquadrons rang'd on either ſide;
Then turn'd their horſes heads, and man to man,
And ſteed to ſteed oppos'd, the ju/?s began. Dryden.
To JUST. v. m. [joiſſler, French.]
1. To engage in a mock fight; to tilt.
2. To puſh ; to drive; to juſtle.
JU'ST ICE. m. ſ. [juſtice, French; juſlitia, Latin.]
1. The virtue by which we give to every man what is his due.
O that I were judge, I would do juſtice. 2 Sam. xv. 4.
The king-becoming graces,
As juſtice, verity, temp'rance, ſtableneſs,
I have no reliſh of them. Shakespeare Macbeth.
The nature and office of juſtice being to diſpoſe the mind
to a conſtant and perpetual readineſs to render to every man
his due, it is evident, that if gratitude be a part of juſtice, it
muſt be converſant about ſomething that is due to another. Loc.
2. Vindicative retribution; puniſhment.
This ſhews you are above
Yon juſtices, that theſe our nether crimes
So ſpeedily can venge. Shakeſp. King Lear.
He executed the ju/lice of the Lord. Deut. xxxiii. 21.
Left juſtice overtake us. Iſ, lix. 9.
Examples of juſtice muſt be made, for terror to ſome; ex-
amples of mercy, for comfort to others: the one procures
fear, and the other love. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
3. Right; aſſertion of right.
Draw thy ſword,
That if my ſpeech offend a noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee juſtice. Shakeſp. King Lear.
4. [?"/liciarius, Lat..] One deputed by the king to do right by
way of judgment. Cowel.
And thou, Eſdras, ordain judges and juſtices, that they may
judge in all Syria. 1 Eſdr. viii. 23.
5. Jo's TICE ºf the King's Bench. I juſticiarius de Banquo Regis.]
Is a lord by his office, and the chief of the reſt; wherefore
he is alſo called capitalis juſticiarius Anglia. His office eſpe-
cially is to hear and determine all pleas of the crown; that is,
ſuch as concern offences committed againſt the crown, dig-
nity, and peace of the king; as treaſons, felonies, mayhems,
and ſuch like: but it is come to paſs, that he with his
aſſiſtants heareth all perſonal actions, and real alſo, if they
3
*
be incident to any perſonal adion depending before
them. Cºwel.
Give that whipſter his errand,
He'll take my lord chief juſtice' warrant. Prizr.
6. Ju'stic E of the Common Pleas. [juſticiarius Cºmmuniºn Pia-
citorum.] Is a lord by his office, and is called dºmina, ju/?i-
ciarius communium placitorum. He with his aſſiſtants originally
did hear and determine all cauſes at the common law; that is,
all civil cauſes between common perſons, as well perſonal as
real; for which cauſe it was called the court of common pleas,
in oppoſition to the pleas of the crown, or the king's pleas,
which are ſpecial, and appertaining to him only. Cowel.
7. JU's Tice ºf the Foreſt. [juſticiarius Foreſa..] Is a lord by
his office, and hath the hearing and determining of all offences
within the king's foreſt, committed againſt veniſon or vert:
of theſe there be two, whereof the one hath juriſdićtion over
all the foreſts on this ſide Trent, and the other of all be-
yond. Cowel.
8. Justices ºf Aſſº., [juſticiarii ad capienda; Aſſas.] Are
ſuch as were wont, by ſpecial commiſſion, to be ſent into this
or that country to take aſſes; the ground of which polity
was the eaſe of the ſubjećts: for whereas theſe ačtions pāſ; aſ-
ways by jury, ſo many men might not, without great hin-
derance, be brought to London; and therefore juſtices, for
this purpoſe, were by commiſſion particularly authoriſed and
ſent down to them. Cowel.
9. JU'stices in Eyre. [juſticiarii itinerantes.] Are ſo termed
of the French erre, iter. The uſe of theſe, in ancient time,
was to ſend them with commiſſion into divers counties, to hear
ſuch cauſes eſpecially as were termed the pleas of the crown,
and therefore I muſt imagine they were ſent abroad for the
eaſe of the ſubječts, who muſt elſe have been hurried to the
king's bench, if the cauſe were too high for the country
court. They differed from the juſtices of Oyer and Termi-
ner, becauſe they were ſent upon ſome one or few eſpecial
caſes, and to one place; whereas the juſtices in eyre were
ſent through the provinces and countries of the land, with
more indefinite and general commiſſion. Cowel.
Io. Ju'stices of Gaol Delivery. [juſticiarii ad Gaolas deliberan-
day.] Are ſuch as are ſent with commiſfion to hear and deter-
mine all cauſes appertaining to ſuch as for any offence are caſt
into gaol, part of whoſe authority is to puniſh ſuch as let to
mainpriſe thoſe priſoners, that by law be not bailable. Theſe
by likelihood, in ancient time, were ſent to countries upon
ſeveral occaſions; but afterward juſtices of aſſiſe were like-
wiſe authoriſed to this. Cowel.
11. JU'stices of Niſi Prius are all one now-a-days with juſtices
of aſſiſe; for it is a common adjournment of a cauſe, in the
common pleas, to put it off to ſuch a day: miſſ prius juſticiarii
venerint ad eas partes ad capiendas aſſas; and upon this clauſe
of adjournment they are called juſtices of nſ frius, as well as
juſtices of affiſe, by reaſon of the writ or ačtion that they
have to deal in. Coweſ.
12. Ju'stices of Peace. [juſticiarii ad Pacem.] Are they
that are appointed by the king's commiſſion, with others, to
attend the peace of the country where they dwell; of whom
ſome, upon eſpecial reſpect, are made of the quorum, be-
cauſe ſome buſineſs of importance may not be dealt in with-
out the preſence of them, or one of them. Cºwel.
- The juſtice,
In fair round belly with good capon lin'd,
With eyes ſevere, and beard of formal cut,
Full of wiſe ſaws and modern inſtances,
And ſo he plays his part. Shakespeare As you like it.
Thou haſt appointed juſtices of the peace to call poor men
before them, about matters they were not able to anſwer.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
The juſtices of peace are of great uſe: anciently they were
conſervators of the peace; theſe are the ſame, ſaving that ſe–
veral acts of parliament have enlarged their juriſdiction.
Bacon's Zdvice to Williers.
I ſing no harm
To officer, juggler, or juſtice of peace. Donne.
To JU'stic E. v. a. [from the noun..] To adminiſter juſtice to
any. A word not in uſe.
As for the title of proſcription, wherein the emperor hath
been judge and party, and hath juſticed himſelf, God forbid
but that it ſhould cndure an appeal to a war. Bacon.
Whereas one Styward, a Scot, was apprehended, for in-
tending to poiſon the young queen of Scots, the king deli-
vered him to the French king, to be juſticed by him at his
pleaſure. Hayward.
Ju's ice MENT. m. ſ [from juſtice..] Procedure in courts.
JU'stic E.R. m. ſ. [from To juſtice..] Adminiſtrator of juſtice.
An old word.
He was a ſingular good juſticer; and if he had not died in
the ſecond year of his government, was the likelieſt perſon to
have reformed the Engliſh colonies. Davies on Preland.
JU'stic Eship. n.ſ.. [from juſtice..] Rank or office of juſ-
tice. Swift.
JUSTI’c. Apt. E. adj. [from juſtice.] Proper to be examined in
courts of juſtice.
Ju's TIFIAEL s.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- J U S
J U V
** *
--"
----
-:
º
º
-
--- -
_-m-º-º-º- ºr
-
Ju'stifiable. adj. [ from juſtiff. J Defenſible by law or
reaſon; conformable to juſtice.
Juſt are the ways of God,
And juſtifiable to men. Milton's A:onſºr.
Although ſome animals in the water do carry a juſtifiable
reſemblance to ſome at land, yet are the major part which
bear their names unlike. Brown's ſugar Errours.
Ju's rif IARLENEss. n.f. [from juſtifiable.] Rectitude; poſſi-
bility of being fairly defended.
Men, jealous of the juſt alleneſ of their doings, before
God, never think they have human ſtrength enough.
- - King Charles.
Justifiably. adv. [from jºſable.] Rightly; ſo as to be
ſupported by right. - -
A man may more jºſifally throw croſs and pile for his opi-
nions, than take them up by ſuch meaſures. . . . . Locke.
Justific Arios, n. ſ. [jºization, French; juſtificatiº, low
Latin.
I. º, maintenance; vindication; ſupport; abſolution
from guilt. - *-- *- - -
I hope, for my brother's juſtification, he wrote this but as
an eſſay of my virtue: . . Shakeſp. King Lear.
Among theological arguments, in juſtification of abſolute
obedience, was one of a ſingular nature. Swift.
2. Deliverance by pardon from fins paſt. Clarke.
In ſuch righteouſneſs
To them by faith imputed, they may find
juſtification towards God, and peace --
Of conſcience. AZilton's Parad. Lºft, b. xii.
'Tis the conſummation of that former act of faith by this
latter, or, in the words of St. Paul and St. James, the con-
ſummation of faith by charity and good works, that God ac-
cepteth in Chriſt to juſtificatiºn, and not the bare aptneſs of
faith to bring forth works, if thoſe works, by the fault of a
rebellious infidel, will not be brought forth. Hammond.
Justific A'ſ ok. m. ſ. [from ſtyliſy. J One who ſupports, de-
ſends, vindicates, or juſtifies. -
JU's TIFIER. m.ſ. [from juſtify J One who juſtifies; one who
defends or abſolves; one who frees from fin by pardon.
That he might be juſt, and the juſtifier of him which be-
lieveth in Jeſus. - Ro. iii. 26.
To JUSTIFY. v. a. [juſtifier, French ; juſtificº, low Latin.]
1. To clear from imputed guilt; to abſolve from an accuſation.
The law hath judg’d thee, Eleanor;
I cannot ju/liff, whom law condemns. Shałęſ. H. VI.
They ſay, behold a man gluttonous, a friend of publicans
and finners; but wiſdom is juſtified of her children. Mat. xi.
How can man be juſtifted with God? Or how can he be
clean that is born of a woman : job xxv. 4.
There is an exquiſite ſubtilty, and the ſame is unjuſt ; and
there is a wiſe man that juſtifieth in judgment. Eccluſ x. 25.
You're neither ju/lify'd, nor yet accus’d. Dryden.
2. To maintain; to defend; to vindicate.
When we began in courteous manner to lay his unkind-
neſs unto him, he ſeeing himſelf confronted by ſo many, like
a reſolute orator, went not to denial, but to juſtify his cruel
falſhood. Sidney,
What ſhe did, whatever in itſelf,
Her doing ſeem'd to juſtify the deed.
My unwilling flight the gods inforce,
Miſt. Par. Loft,
And that muſt juſtify our ſad divorce. Denham.
Yet ſtill thy fools ſhall ſtand in thy defence,
And juſtify their author's want of ſenſe. Dryden.
Let others juſtify their miſſions as they can, we are ſure
we can juſtiff that of our fathers by an uninterrupted ſuc-
ceſſion. Atterbury's Sermons,
3. To free from paſt fin by pardon. ... -
By him all that believe are juſtified from all things, from
which ye could not be juſtified by the law of Moſes. Acts xiii.
To Ju's le. v. n. [from juſt, joiſter, French..] To encoun-
ter; to claſh; to ruſh againſt each other.
While injury of chance
Puts back leave taking, juſtles roughly by
All time of pauſe, rudely beguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
The chariots ſhall rage in the ſtreets, they ſhall juſtle one
againſt another in the broad ways. Nah. ii. 4.
Argo paſs'd
Through Boſphorus, betwixt the juſtling rocks. Milton.
Late the clouds
Ju'stLY. adv. [from juć.]
1. Uprightly; honeſtly ; in a juſt manner.
JU'st Ness. n. ſ. [from juſt.]
1. Juſtice; reaſonableneſs; equity. Juſineſ is properly applied
juſtling, or puſh'd with winds, rude in their ſhock,
Tine the ſlant lightning. 44ilton's Paradiſe Loft.
Not one ſtarry ſpark,
But gods meet gods, and ſºft's in the dark. Lee.
Courtiers therefore juſt c for a grant;
And, when they break their friendſhip, plead their want.
19tyden's Knight's Tale.
Murmuring noiſes riſe in every ſtreet;
The more remote run ſtumbling with their fear,
And, in the dark, men jºſtle as they meet. Dryden,
Juv EN1'LITY. n.ſ.. [from juvenile..] Youthfulneſs.
When elephant 'gainſt elephant did rear
His trunk, and caſtles juſtled in the air,
My ſword thy way to victory had ſhown. Dryden.
Was there not one who had ſet bars and doors to it, and
ſaid hitherto ſhall thou come, but no farther, and here ſhall
thy proud waves be ſtaid; then might we well expect ſuch
viciſſitudes, ſuch juſtlings and claſhings in nature. I/2div.
I thought the dean had been too proud
To juſtle here among a crowd. '
againſt it. - -
Private and ſingle abilities ſhould not juſle out and deprive
the church of the joint abilities of many learned and godly
men, King Charles.
Many excellent ſtrains have been juſtled off by their intru-
ſions. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The ſurly commons ſhall reſpect deny,
And juſtle peerage out with property. Dryden.
It is not to be imagined that the incongruous alphabets and
abuſes of writing can ever be juſtled out of their poſſeſſion
of all libraries. Bolder.
Running in the dark, a man may juſtle a poſt.
Cºllier ºf the Eagerneſs of Deſire.
Abſent good, though thought on, not making any part of
unhappineſs in its abſence, is juſtled out, to make way for the
removal of thoſe uneaſineſſes we feel. Locke.
We juſtled one another out, and diſputed the poſt for a
great while. . Addiſon's Guardian.
Nothing can juſly be deſpiſed, that cannot juſly be blamed:
where there is no choice, there can be no blame. South.
With ignominy ſcourg'd, in open fight:
Next view the Tarquin kings; th’ avenging ſword
Of Brutus juſly drawn, and Rome reſtor'd. Dryden,
The goddeſs, ſtudious of her Grecians fate,
Taught therh, in laws and letters to excel,
In acting juſtly, and in writing well. Prior; .
2. Properly; exactly; accurately.
Their artful hands inſtrućt the lute to ſound,
Their feet aſſiſt their hands, and juſly beat the ground.
Dryden.
to things, and juſtice to perſons; though we now ſay the
juſtice of a cauſe, as well as of a judge.
It maketh unto the right of the war againſt him, whoſe
ſucceſs uſeth commonly to be according to the juſtneſs of the
cauſe for which it is made. Spenſer on Ireland.
We may not think the juſtneſs of each act
Such and no other than event doth form it. Shakeſpeare.
2. Accuracy; exactneſs; propriety.
I value the ſatisfaction I had in ſeeing it repreſented with
all the juſtneſs and gracefulneſs of action. Dryden.
I appeal to the people, was the uſual ſaying of a very ex-
cellent dramatick poet, when he had any diſpute with parti-
-cular perſons about the juſtn'ſ and regularity of his produc-
tions. Addison's Guardian.
To JUT. v. n. [This word is ſuppoſed to be corrupted from jet,
perhaps from ſhoot.] To puſh or ſhoot into prominences; to
come out beyond the main bulk.
Inſulting tyranny begins to jut
Upon the innocent and awleſs throne: Shakeſp. R. III.
All the projećted or jutting parts ſhould be very moderate,
eſpecially the cornices of the lower orders. Wotton.
The land, if not reſtrain'd, had met your way,
Projected out a neck, and jutted to the ſea. . Dryden.
Broke by the jutting land on either ſide;
A port ſecure for ſhips to ride,
In double ſtreams the briny waters glide. Dryden. :
It ſeems to jut out of the ſtructure of the poem, and be
Broome's Nºtes on the Odyſſey,
To Ju'Tty. v. a. [from jut.) To ſhoot out beyond.
independent of it.
Then lend the eye a terrible aſpect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like a braſs cannon: let the brow o'erwhelm it
As fearfully, as doth a galled rock
O'erhang and jutty his confounded baſe,
Swill'd with the wild and waſteful ocean. Shakespeare H. W.
JU'VENILE. adi, [juvenilis, Latin.] Young; youthful.
Learning hath its infancy when it is almoſt childiſh; then
its youth, when it is luxuriant and juvenile ; then its ſtrength
of years, when it is ſolid; and laſtly, its old age, when it
waxeth dry and exhauſt. Bacon's Eſſays.
The reſtauration of grey heirs to juvenility, and renewing
the exhauſted marrow, may be effected without a miracle.
- Glanv. Scºtſ, c. 21.
Cuſtomary ſtrains and abſtraćted juvenilities have made it
difficult to commend and ſpeak credibly in dedications.
Glanv. Scepſ Preface.
JU'XT aposition.
Swift. -
To JU'st LE. v. a. To puſh; to drive; to force by ruſhing<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">I V Y
J Y M
xrarostrion. n.f. [juxtapoſition, French; " and po-
Jº Latin.] #. the ſtate of being placed by each
other. - -
Nor can it be a difference, that the parts of ſolid bodies are
held together by hooks, fince the coherence of theſe will be ºf
difficult conception; and we muſt either ſuppoſe an infinite
number of them holding together, or at laſt come 3 Part that
are united by a meer juxtapºſitiº . Glanv. Scºpſ.
I'vy. n.ſ. [piz, Saxon; hedera, Latin.] A plant. ..
The charaćters are: it is a paraſitick plant, ſending forth
roots or fibres from its branches: by which it is faſtened to
ºr trees, walls, or plants which are near it, and, from
thence receives a great ſhare of its nouriſhment: * leaves
are angular; the flowers, for the moſt part, conſiſt of ſix
leaves, and are ſucceeded by round black berries, which grow
in round bunches, each of which, for the -
º ſeeds. Miller. 3. moſt part, contains
A gown made of the fineſt wool;
A belt of ſtraw, and ivy buds,
With coral claſps and amber ſtuds;
And if theſe pleaſures may thee move,
Come live with me and be my love.
7.
Dire&amp; Ra'igh.
The claſping ivy where to climb. A4iii. Parad, Lºft
Jy'Mold. adj. [See GIMAL.) -
Their poor jades
Lob down their heads, dropping the hide and hips;
And in their pale dull mouths the jymold bit
Lies, foul with chew'd graſs, ſtill and motionleſs.
Shakespeare's Henry V,
