O.
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 200</div><p class="Text">O A K
Has in Engliſh a long ſound; as, drone, groan, ſºone,
alone, clºſe, broke, coal, drºll; or ſhort, gº, Anot,
ſhot, prong, long. It is uſually denoted long by
a ſervile a ſubjoined ; as, moan, or by e at the
end of the ſyllable; as, bone : when theſe vowels
are not appended, it is generally ſhort, except before ll ; as,
droll, ſcroll, and even then ſometimes ſhort; as, ll.
1. O is uſed as an interjećtion of wiſhing or exclamation.
O that we, who have reſiſted all the deſigns of his love,
would now try to defeat that of his anger Decay ºf Piety.
O / were he preſent, that his eyes and hands
Mightſee, and urge, the death which he commands. Dryd.
2. O is uſed with no great elegance by Shakeſpeare for a circle
or oval.
Can this cockpit hold
The vaſty field of France or may we cram
Within this wooden O, the very caſks
That did affright the air at Agincourt Shakeſp.
OAF. n.ſ. [This word is variouſly written ; auff, of , and
oph; it ſeems a corruption of euph, a demon or fairy, in
German alf, from which elf; and means properly the ſame
with changeling; a fooliſh child left by malevolent ouphs or
fairies, in the place of one more witty, which they ſteal
away.
I. A ãº. a fooliſh child left by the fairies.
Theſe, when a child haps to be got,
Which after proves an idiot,
When folk perceives it thriveth not,
The fault therein to ſmother:
Some ſilly doating brainleſs calf,
That underſtands things by the half,
Says that the fairy left this oaf,
And took away the other.
2. A dolt; a blockhead; an idiot.
OA'Fish. adj. [from oaf.] Stupid; dull; doltiſh.
QAFISHNESS. n.ſ.. [from oafiſh.] Stupidity; dullneſs.
OAK. m. ſ. [ac, aec, Saxon ; which, ſays Skinner, to ſhew
how eaſy it is to play the fool, under a ſhew of literature
and deep reſearches, I will, for the diverſion of my reader,
Jerive from ºxos, a houſe; the oak being the beſt timber
for building. Skinner ſeems to have had junius in his thoughts,
who on this very word has ſhewn his uſual fondneſs for Greek
etymology, by a derivation more ridiculous than that by which
Skinner has ridiculed him. A or oak, ſays the grave critick,
ſignified among the Saxons, like robur among the Latins, not
only an oak but ſtrength, and may be well enough derived,
ºn incommºde deduci potſ, from 2xx}, ſtrength; by taking
the three firſt letters and then ſinking the x, as is not un-
common.]
The oak-tree hath male flowers, or katkins, which conſiſt of
a great number of ſmall ſlender threads. The embryos, which
Produced at remote diſtances from theſe on the ſame tree, do
afterwards become acorns, which are produced in hard ſcal
cups: the leaves are ſinuated. The ſpecies are five. Miller.
He return'd with his brows bound with oak. Shakeſp.
He lay along -
Under an oak, whoſe antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood. Shakeſp.
No tree beareth ſo many baſtard fruits as the oak" for be-
fides the acorns, it beareth galls, oak apples, oak nuts, which
are inflammable, and oak berries, ſticking cloſe to the body
of the tree without ſtalk. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
Shoots riſing up and ſpreads by ſlow degrees :
Three centuries he grows, and three he ſtays
- Drayt. Nymphid.
Supreme in flate; and in three more decays. Dry.
l An oak grºwing from a plant to a great tree, and then
opped, is ſtill the ſame oak. Locke.
. . A light earthy, ſt -
affixed . oak tº. S. ony, and ſparry matter, incruſted and
the days of Homer every grove, river, fountain, and
//oodward on Fºſſ.
O A R
ca; tree, were thought to have their peculiar deities. Odſ.
Let India boaſt her plants, nor envy we
The weeping amber and the balmy tree,
While by our oaks the precious loads are born,
And realms commanded which thoſe trees adorn. Pºpe.
OAk. [Evergreen.]
The leaves are, for the moſt part, indented, or ſinuated,
and in ſome the edges of the leaves are prickly, and are ever-
green: it hath amentaceous flowers, which are produced at
remote diſtances from the fruit on the ſame tree: the fruit is
an acorn like the common cak. The wood of this tree is
accounted very good for many ſorts of tools and utenſils;
and affords the moſt durable charcoal in the world. A ſiller.
OAKA'PPLE, n.ſ. ſoak and apºle..] A kind of ſpongy excre-
ſcence on the oak.
Another kind of excreſcence is an exudation of plants
joined with putrefaction, as in oakapples, which are found
chiefly upon the leaves of oaks. Bacon's Nat. Hji.
OA'k FN. adj. [from oak..] Made of oak ; gathered from oak.
No nation doth equal England for caken timber where with
to build ſhips. Bacon's Advice to Jilliers.
By lot from Jove I am the pow'r
Of this fair wood, and live in caken bow’r. Milton.
Clad in white velvet all their troop they led,
With each an oaken chaplet on his head. Dryden.
An oaken garland to be worn on feſtivals, was the recom-
penſe of one who had covered a citizen in battle. Addiſon.
He ſnatched a good tough oaken cudgel, and began to
brandiſh it. Arbuthnot's j. Buil.
OA'KENPIN. m. ſ. An apple.
Oakenpin, ſo called from its hardneſs, is a laſting fruit,
yields excellent liquor, and is near the nature of the Weſt-
bury apple, though not in form. A ſortimer.
OA'ku.M. n.ſ. [A word probably formed by ſome corruption.]
Cords untwiſted and reduced to hemp, with which, mingled
with pitch, leaks are ſtopped.
They make their oakum, wherewith they chalk the ſeams
of the ſhips, of old ſeer and weather beaten ropes, when they
are over ſpent and grown ſo rotten as they ſerve for no other
uſe but to make rotten oakum, which moulders and waſhes
away with every ſea as the ſhips labour and are toſſed. Ral.
Some drive old oakum thro’ each ſeam and rift;
Their left hand does the calking-iron guide ;
The rattling mallet with the right they lift. Dryden.
OAR. m.ſ.. [ane, Saxon; perhaps by alluſion to the common
expreſſion of plowing the water, from the ſame root with car,
to plow, aro, Lat..] A long pole with a broad end, by which
veſſels are driven in the water, the reſiſtance made by water
to the oar puſhing on the veſſel.
Th' oars were ſilver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept ſtroke, and made
The water which they beat, to follow faſter,
As amorous of their ſtrokes. Shakeſp. jul. Caſar.
So tow'rds a ſhip the oar-finn'd gallies ply,
Which wanting ſea to ride, or wind to fly,
Stands but to fall reveng’d. Denham's Poems.
In ſhipping ſuch as this, the Iriſh kern -
And untaught Indian, on the ſtream did glide,
E’er ſharp-keel’d boats to ſtem the flood did learn,
Or fin-like oars did ſpread from either ſide. Dryden.
Its progreſſive motion may be effected by the help of ſe-
veral oars, which in the outward ends of them ſhall be like
the fins of a fiſh to contract and dilate. JWilkins.
To OAR. v. n. [from the noun..] To row.
He more undaunted on the ruin rode,
And oar'd with labouring arms along the flood. Pºpe.
To OAR. v. a. To impel by rowing. º
His bold head
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and card
Himſelf with his good arms in luffy ſtrokes
To th’ ſhore. Shakeſpeare's Terrºg/?.
2 OA'RY.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 201</div><p class="Text">O B D
O B E
OA'Ry. adj. [from oar.] Having the form or uſe of oars.
His hair transforms to down, his fingers meet, -
In ſkinny films, and ſhape his oary feet. Addiſon.
The ſwan with arched neck,
Between her white wings mantling, proudly rows
Her ſtate with cary feet.
Oasir. n.ſ. A kiln. Not in uſe. -
Empty the binn into a hog-bag, and carry them imme-
diately to the oaſi or kiln, to be dried. Mortimer,
OATcA'ke. n.ſ. ſeat and cake.] Cake made of the meal of
Milton.
“Fake a blue ſtone they make haver or oatcakes upon, and
lay it upon the croſs bars of iron. . . - Peacham.
OA're N. adj. [from eat.] Made of oats; bearing oats.
When ſhepherds pipe on caten ſtraws,
And merry larks are ploughmens clocks. ... Shakespeare .
OATH. m. ſ. [aith, Gothick; a S, Saxon. The diſtance be-
tween the noun oath, and the verb fwear, is very obſervable,
as it may ſhew that our oldeſt dialect is formed from different
languages.] An affirmation, negation, or promiſe, corrobo-
rated by the atteſtation of the Divine Being.
Rºad over Julia's heart, thy firſt beſt love,
For whoſe dear ſake thou then did'ſt rend thy faith
Into a thouſand oaths; and all thoſe oaths
Deſcended into perjury to love me. Shakeſpeare.
He that ſtrikes the firſt ſtroke, I'll run him up to the
hilts as I am a ſoldier.
—An oath of mickle might; and fury ſhall abate. Sha.
We have conſultations, which inventions ſhall be publiſhed,
which not: and take an oath of ſecrecy for the concealing of
thoſe which we think fit to keep ſecret. Bacon.
Thoſe called to any office of truſt, are bound by an oath
to the faithful diſcharge of it: but an oath is an appeal to
God, and therefore can have no influence, except upon thoſe
who believe that he is. Swift.
OA'Thable, adj. [from oath. A word not uſed.] Capable
of having an oath adminiſtered.
You're not oathable,
Altho' I know you'll ſwear
Into ſtrong ſhudders th’ immortal gods. Shakeſpeare.
Oathbrea'King. n.ſ. [oath and break.] Perjury; the vid-
lation of an oath. -
His oathbreaking he mended thus,
By now forſwearing that he is forſworn. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
OA'TMAlt. m. ſ. [oat and malt.] Malt made of oats.
In Kent they brew with one half oatmalt, and the other
half barleymalt. Mortimer's Huſø.
OATMEAL. m. ſ. ſoat and meal.] Flower made by grinding
Oats.
Oatmeal and butter, outwardly applied, dry the ſcab on the
head. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
Our neighbours tell me oft, in joking talk,
Of aſhes, leather, oatmeal, bran, and chalk. Gay.
QATMEAL n. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
OATs. n.ſ.. [aten, Saxon.] A grain, which in England is
generally given to horſes, but in Scotland ſupports the people.
It is of the graſs leaved tribe ; the flowers have no petals,
and are diſpoſed in a looſe panicle : the grain is eatable.
The meal makes tolerable good bread. Miller.
The oats have eaten the horſes. Shakeſpeare.
It is bare mechaniſm, no otherwiſe produced than the
turning of a wild oatbeard, by the inſinuation of the particles
of moiſture. Locke.
For your lean cattle, fodder them with barley ſtraw firſt,
and the cat ſtraw laſt. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
His horſe's allowance of oats and beans, was greater than
the journey required." Swift.
QA't thistle. n.ſ. [oat and thiſ le.] An herb. Ainſ.
OºAMBulation. n.ſ. [obambulatio, from obambula, Latin.]
The act of walking about. Dić.
To Obdu'ce. v. a. ſolduco, Latin.] To draw over as a co-
vering.
No animal exhibits its face in the native colour of its ſkin
but man; all others are covered with feathers, hair, or a
- Cortex that is obduced over the cutis. Hale.
Obduction. n. f. [from obduélio, obduco, Latin.] The aët
of covering, or laying a cover.
OBDu'RAcy. n. ſ. [ from obdurate. J Inflexible wickedneſs;
impenitence; hardneſs of heart.
Thou think'ſt me as far in the Devil's book, as thou and
Falſtaff, for obduracy and perfiſtency. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
God may, by a mighty grace, hinder the abſolute com-
Fletion of ; in final obsluracy. South's Serm.
OBDU/RATE. adj. [obduratus, Latin.]
* Hard of heart; inflexibly obſtinate in ill; hardned; impe-
nitent.
Oh! let me teach thce for thy father's ſake,
That gave thee life, when well he might have ſlain thee;
Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears. Shakeſpeare.
If when you make your pray'rs,
God ſhould be ſo obdurate as yourſelves,
How would it fare with your departed ſouls
Women are ſoft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
Thou ſtern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorſeleſs. Shakeſp.
To convince the proud what ſigns avail,
Or wonders move th’ obdurate to relent;
They harden'd more, by what might more reclaim. Mih.
&amp;durate as you are, oh! hear at leaſt
My dying prayers, and grant my laſt requeſt.
2. Hardned; firm; ſtubborn.
Sometimes the very cuſtom of evil makes the heart old,-
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
rate againſt whatſoever inſtructions to the contrary. Hooker.
A pleaſing forcery could charm
Pain for a while, or anguiſh, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th’ obdurate breaſt
With ſtubborn patience, as with triple ſteel. Milton.
No ſuch thought ever ſtrikes his marble, obdurate heart,
but it preſently flies off and rebounds from it. It is impoſſiblé
for a man to be thorough-paced in ingratitude, till he has
ſhook off all fetters of pity and compañon. South.
3. Harſh; rugged.
They joined the moſt obdurate conſonants without one in-
tervening vowel. Swift.
OBDU’RAtely. adv. [from obdurate.] Stubbornly; inflexibly;
impenitently.
OBDu'RATEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from obdurate.] Stubbornneſs; in-
flexibility; impenitence.
OBDURA’tion. n.ſ. [from obdurate. J Hardneſs of heart;
ſtubbornneſs.
What occaſion it had given them to think, to their greater
obduration in evil, that through a froward and wanton deſire
of innovation, we did conſtrainedly thoſe things, for which
conſcience was pretended ? Hooker, b. iv.
Obdu'RED. adj. [ obduratus, Latin. J Hardned; inflexible;
impenitent. -
This ſaw his hapleſs foes, but ſtood obdur’d,
And to rebellious fight rallied their pow'rs
Inſenſate. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. vi.
Obe'DIEN ce. m. ſ. ſobedience, Fr. obedientia, Lātin.j Obſe-
quiouſneſs; ſubmiſſion to authority; compliance with com-
mand or prohibition.
If you violently proceed againſt him, it would ſhake in
pieces the heart of his obedience. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
Thy huſband
Craves no other tribute at thy hands,
But love, fair looks, and true obedience. Shakeſp.
His ſervants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether of ſin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteouſneſs. Rom. vi. 16.
It was both a ſtrange commiſſion, and a ſtrange obedience
to a commiſſion, for men ſo furiouſly affailed, to hold their
hands. - Bacon's ſºar with Spain.
** Nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou didſt want,
Obedience to the law of God, impos'd
On penalty of death. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii.
OBE DIENT. adj. [obediens, Latin.]. Submiſſive to authority;
compliant with command or prohibition; obſequious.
To this end did I write, that I might know the proof of
you, whether ye be obedient in all things. 2 Cor. ii. 9.
To this her mother's plot
She, ſeemingly obedient, likewiſe hath
Made promiſe. Shakeſp. M. W. of I/ind.
He humbled himſelf, and became obedient unto death.
Phil. ii. 8.
Religion hath a good influence upon the people, to make
them obedient to government, and peaceable one towards
another. Tillotſon, Serm. 3.
The chief his orders gives; th’ obedient band,
With due obſervance, wait the chief's command. Pope.
OBE'DIENTIAL. adj. [obedientiel, Fr. from obedient.] Accord-
ing to the rule of obedience.
Faith is ſuch as God will accept of, when it affords fidu-
cial reliance on the promiſes, and obediential ſubmiſſion to the
command. Hammond.
Faith is then perfeół, when it produces in us a fiduciary
aſſent to whatever the goſpel has revealed, and an obediential
ſubmiſſion to the commands. ſtate's Prep. for Death.
OBE DIENTLY. adv. [from obedient J. With obedience.
We ſhould behave ourſelves reverently and obediently to-
wards the Divine Majeſty, and juſtly and charitably towards
Inen. - Tillotſºn.
Obeisance. n.ſ. [obeiſance, Fr. This word is formed by cor-
ruption from abaiſance, an act of reverence.] A bow ; a cour-
teſy; an act of reverence made by inclination of the body or
knee. -
Bartholomew my page,
See dreſt in all ſuits like a lady; -
Then call him Madam, do him all obeiſance. Shakeſpeare,
Bathſheba bowed and did obeiſance unto the king. I K. i. 16.
18 K
, ;
Th
{-
-&gt; .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 202</div><p class="Text">O B J
O B L
The lords and ladies ;: d }
Their homage, with a low obeiſance made 5
*:. jthe ſacred ſhade. Dryden.
'aelisk, n. ſ. ſobeliſcus, Latin.]
I. º: of ſolid marble, or other fine ſtone,
having uſually four faces, and leſſening upwards by degrees,
till it ends in a point like a pyramid. Harris.
Between the ſtatues obeliſks were plac'd,
And the learn'd walls with hieroglyphicks grac'd, Pope.
2. A mark of cenſure in the margin of a book, in the form of
a dagger [f]. - -
He publiſhed the tranſlation of the Septuagint, having
compared it with the Hebrew, and noted by aſteriſks what
was defective, and by obeliſks what redundant. º;
Obequitation. n.ſ.. [from olequito, Latin.] The act o
riding about. - f
Operation. n.ſ.. [from olerre, Latin.] The aćt of wan-
dering about. - ſh
OBESE. adj. [obeſus, Latin.] ... Fat; loaden with fleſh.
Oasseness. n.f. [from alſ. J Morbid fatneſs; incum-
OBE’s 1TY. } brance of fleſh. -
On theſe many diſeaſes depend; as on the ſtraitneſs of the
cheſt, a phthiſis; on the largeneſs of the veins, an atrophy;
on their ſmallneſs, obeſity. Grew's Coſmol. b. ii.
To Obey. v. a. ſoleir, French ; obedie, Latin. )
1. To pay ſubmiſſion to ; to comply with, from reverence to
authority.
The will of heav'n
Be done in this and all things! I obey. Shakespeare Hen.VIII.
I am aſham’d, that women are ſo ſimple
To ſeek for rule, ſupremacy, and ſway,
When they are bound to ſerve, love, and obey. . Shºff.
Let not fin reign in your mortal body, that ye ſhould obey
it in the luſts thereof. Rom. vi. 12.
Was ſhe thy God, that her thou didſt obey,
Before his voice Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
Africk and India ſhall his pow'r obey,
He ſhall extend his propagated ſway }
Beyond the ſolar year, without the ſtarry way. Dryden.
2. It had formerly ſometimes to before the perſon obeyed, which
Addiſon has mentioned as one of Milton's latiniſms; but it is
frequent in old writers; when we borrowed the French word
we borrowed the ſyntax, obeirau roi.
He commanded the trumpets to ſound; to which the two
brave knights obeying, they performed their courſes, breaking
their ſtaves. Sidney.
The flit bark, obeying to her mind,
Forth launched quickly, as ſhe did defire. Fairy Q.
His ſervants ye are, to whom ye obey. Rom. vi. 16.
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel,
Yet to their general's voice they ſoon obey'd. Milton.
O'BJECT. n.ſ. [objet, Fr. obječium, Latin.]
1. That about which any power or faculty is employed.
Pardon
The flat unrais'd ſpirit, that hath dar'd,
On this unworthy ſcaffold to bring forth
So great an objeći. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
They are her fartheſt reaching inſtrument,
Yet they no beams unto their obječis ſend;
But all the rays are from their objects ſent,
And in the eyes with pointed angles end. Davies.
The object of true faith is, either God himſelf, or the
word of God: God who is believed in, and the word of
God as the rule of faith, or matter to be believed. Hamm.
Thoſe things in ourſelves, are the only proper objects of
our zeal, which, in others, are the unqueſtionable ſubjećts
of our praiſes. Sprat's Serm.
Truth is the object of our underſtanding, as good is of the
will. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. Something preſented to the ſenſes to raiſe any affection or
emotion in the mind.
Diſhonour not your eye
By throwing it on any other objeći. Shakeſp.
Why elſe this double obječ in our fight,
Of flight purſu'd in the air, and o'er the ground. Milton.
This paſſenger felt ſome degree of concern, at the fight
of ſo moving an objeći, and therefore withdrew. Atterbury.
3. [In grammar.] Any thing influenced by ſomewhat elſe.
The accuſative after a verb tranſitive, or a ſentence in
room thereof, is called, by grammarians, the object of the
verb. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
OBJEctolass. n.ſ. Glaſs remoteſt from the eye.
... An ºbječiglaſs of a teleſcope I once mended, by grinding
* on Pitch with putty, and leaning caſily on it in the grind-
ingº left the putty ſhould ſcratch it. Newt. Opt.
To QTJEcºr. v. a. ſolºr, Fr. objicio, obječium, Latin.]
* Tºppoſe; to preſent in oppoſition.
lowers growing ſcattered in divers beds, will ſhew more
ſo as that they be object to view at once. Bacon.
Pallas to their eyes -
The miſt objected, and condens'd the ſkies. Pope.
2. To propoſe as a charge criminal; or a reaſon adverſe: with
to or again/l. -
were it not ſome kind of blemiſh to be like unto Infidels
and Heathens, it would not ſo uſually be obſeéted; men would
not think it any advantage in the cauſe of religion to be able
therewith juſtly to charge their adverſaries. Hooker.
The book requireth due examination, and giveth liberty
to object any crime againſt any ſuch as are to be ordered. -
I?%itgift.
Men in all deliberations find eaſe to be of the nega-
tive ſide, and affect a credit to obječ; and foretel difficulties:
for when propoſitions are denied, there is an end of them;
but if they be allowed, it requireth a new work; which
falſe point of wiſdom is the bane of buſineſs. Bacon.
This the adverſaries of faith have too much reaſon to cº-
ject againſt too many of its profeſſors ; but againſt the faith
itſelf nothing at all. Sprat's Serm.
It was objected againſ? a late painter, that he drew many
graceful pictures, but few of them were like. Dryden.
Others object the poverty of the nation, and difficulties in
furniſhing greater ſupplies. Addison's State of the J/ar.
There was but this ſingle fault that Eraſinus, though an
enemy, could objeć to him. 4tterbury.
Objection., n.ſ.. [objection, Fr. obječijo, Latin.]
1. The act of preſenting any thing in oppoſition.
2. Criminal charge.
Speak on, Sir,
I dare your worſt objections.
3. Adverſe argument.
There is ever between all eſtates a ſecret war. I know
well this ſpeech is the objection and not the deciſion; and that
it is after refuted. Bacon's Jºar with Spain.
Whoſoever makes ſuch objections againſt an hypotheſis,
Shałºff. Henry VIII.
hath a right to be heard, let his temper and genius be what
it will. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. Fault found.
I have ſhewn your verſes to ſome, who have made that al-
jºian to them. J/a/h's Letter.
O'BJECTIVE. adj. [obječijf, Fr. obješius, Latin.] -
1. Belonging to the object; contained in the obječt.
Certainty, according to the ſchools, is diſtinguiſhed into
objećlive and ſubjećtive. Objective certainty is when the pro-
poſition is certainly true in itſelf; and ſubječtive, when we
are certain of the truth of it. The one is in things, the
other in our minds. J/atts's Logick.
2. Made an object; propoſed as an objećt. -
If this one ſmall piece of nature ſtill affords new mat-
ter for our diſcovery, when ſhould we be able to ſearch out
the vaſt treaſuries of obječive knowledge that lies within
the compaſs of the univerſe Hale's Origin of Man.
O'Bjectively. adv. [from obječive.] .
1. In manner of an ebjećt. º
This may fitly be called a determinate idea, when, ſuch
as it is at any time objectively in the mind, it is annexed, and
without variation determined to an articulate ſound, which is
to be ſteadily the ſign of that very ſame objećt of the mind.
Locke's Epiſtle to the Reader.
2. In a ſtate of oppoſition.
The baſiliik ſhould be deſtroyed, in regard he firſt re-
ceiveth the rays of his antipathy and venomous emiſſion,
which objeffively move his ſenſe. Brown’s W. Err.
O'Bjective Ness. n. ſ. [from objeclive.] The ſtate of being
an object. -
Is there ſuch a motion or objećliveneſ of external bodies,
which produceth light The faculty of light is fitted to re-
ceive that impreſion or objectiveneſs, and that obječiiveneſs
fitted to that faculty. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Objector. m. ſ. [from obječ7.] One who offers objections ;
one who raiſes difficulties. . .
But theſe objectors muſt the cauſe upbraid,
That has not mortal man, immortal made. Blackm.
Let the objectors conſider, that theſe irregularities muſt have
come from the laws of mechaniſm. Bentley's Serm.
OBIT. [a corruption of obiit, or obivit.] Funeral obſequies. Ainſ.
To OBJU'RGATE. v. a. [objurgo, Latin.] To chide; to
reprove. -
oº::cation. m. ſ. [objurgatio, Lat..] Reproof; reprehen-
1Oil.
If there be no true liberty, but all things come to paſs by
inevitable neceſſity, then what are all interrogations and objur-
gations, and reprehenſions and expoſtulations : Bramh.
OBJU'RG AtoRY. adj. [objurgatorius, Latin.] Reprehenſory;
culpatory; chiding.
OBLATE, adj. [oblatus, Latin.] Flatted at the poles. Uſed
of a ſpheroid. -
By gravitation bodies on this globe will preſs towards its
center, though not exactly thither, by reaſon of the oblate
ſpheroidical
º
s
--
7,
- i.
.
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 203</div><p class="Text">O B L
O B L
ſpheroidical figure of the earth, ariſing from its diurnal rota-
tion about its axis. Cheyne's Phil Prin.
Ontarios. n.ſ. [oblation, Fr. oblatuſ, Latin.] An offering; a
ſacrifice; anything offered as an act of worſhip or reverence:
with that ſhe looked upon the pićture before her, and
flraight fighed, and ſtraight tears followed, as if the idol of
duty ought to be honoured with ſuch oblations. - Sidney.
Many conceive in this oblation, not a natural but a civil
kind of death, and a ſeparation from the world. Brown.
The will gives worth to the oblation, as to God's accept-
ſets the pooreſt giver upon the ſame level with the
ance,
- South's Sermons.
richeſt I wiſh
The kind oblation of a falling tear. Dryden.
Behold the coward, and the brave,
All make oblations at this ſhrine. Swift's Poems.
Ostºcration... n.ſ. ſollāſatio, [at] Delight; pleaſure.
To OBLIGATE. v. a. [obligo, Latin.] To bind by con-
tract or duty. - - - - - -
Obligation. n.ſ. [obligatio, from obligo, Lat. obligation, Fr.]
1. The binding power of any oath, vow, duty; contract.
- Your father loſt a father;
That father his ; and the ſurvivor bound
In filial obligation, for ſome term,
To do obſequious ſorrow. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
There was no means for him as a chriſtian, to ſatisfy all
obligations both to God and man, but to offer himſelf for a
mediator of an accord and peace. Bacon's Henry VII.
The better to ſatisfy this double obligation, you have early
cultivated the genius you have to arms. Bryden.
No ties can bind, that from conſtraint ariſe,
Where either's forc'd, ail obligation dies. Granvile.
2. An act which binds any man to ſome performance.
The heir of an obliged perſon is not bound to make re-
ſtitution, if the obligation paſſed only by a perſonal act; but
if it paſſed from his perſon to his eſtate; then the eſtate paſſes
with all its burthen. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
3. Fayour by which one is bound to gratitude:
Where is the obligation of any man's making me a preſent
of what he does not care for himſelf? D'Eſtrange.
So quick a ſenſe did the Iſraelites entertain of the merits
of Gideon, and the obligation he had laid upon them, that
they tender him the regal and hereditary government of that
people. - South's Sermons.
Obligatory. adj. [obligatione, Fr. from obligate.] Impoſing
an obligation ; binding; coercive ; with to or on.
And concerning the lawfulneſs, not only permiſſively, but
whether it be not obligatory to Chriſtian princes and ſtates. Bac.
As long as the law is obligatory, ſo long our obedience is
due. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
A people long uſed to hardſhips, look upon themſelves as
creatures at mercy, and that all impoſitions laid on them by
a ſtronger hand, are legal and obligatory. Swift.
If this patent is obligatory on them, it is contrary to acts of
rliament, and therefore void. Swift.
To OBLIGE. v. a. [obliger, Fr. obligo, Latin.]
1. To bind; to impoſe obligation ; to compel to ſomething.
Religion obliges men to the practice of thoſe virtues which
conduce to the preſervation of our health. Tillotſon.
The law muſt oblige in all precepts, or in none. lf it
oblige in all, all are to be obeyed ; if it oblige in none, it has
no longer the authority of a law. Rogers, Serm. 15.
2. To indebt; to lay obligations of gratitude.
He that depends upon another, muſt
Oblige his honour with a boundleſs truſt.
Since love obliges not, I from this hour
Aſſume the right of man's deſpotic power.
Vain º creature, how art thou miſled,
To think thy wit theſe godlike notions bred
Theſe truths are not the produćt of thy mind,
But dropt from heav'n, and of a nobler kind:
&amp;eveal’d religion firſt inform'd thy fight,
And reaſon ſaw not, till faith ſprung the light.
Thus man by his own ſtrength to heaven wou'd ſoar,
Waller.
Dryden.
And wou'd not be oblig'd to God for more. Dryden,
When int’reſt calls off all her ſneaking train,
When all th’ oblig'd deſert, and all the vain,
She waits or to the ſcaffold or the cell. Pope,
To thoſe hills we are obliged for all cur metals, and with
them for all the conveniencies and comforts of life. Bentley.
3. To pleaſe; to gratify.
. A great man gets more by obliging his inferiour, than by
diſdaining him ; as a man has a greater advantage by ſowing
and dreſling his ground, than he can have by trampling upon
it. South's Sermons.
Some natures are ſo ſour and ſo ungrateful, that they are
never to be obliged. L’Eſtrange.
Happy the people, who preſerve their honour
By the ſame duties that oblige their prince Addison Cato.
9°11'5EE. n.ſ. [from oblige.] The perſon bound by a legal
or written contract.
Oblic EMENT. n. /.. [obligenent, French..] Obligation.
- ºr--º-º-º- º g = -
I will not reſiſt, whatever it is, either of divine or human
obligenent, that you lay upon me. AMilton's Education.
Let this fair princeſs but one minute ſtay,
... A look from her will your obligements pay. Dryden.
QBLIGER. m. ſ. He who binds by contraa. -
Obliºging, part, adj. [obligeant, Fr. from oblige.] Civil; com-
plaiſant ; reſpectful; engaging.
... Nothing could be more obliging and reſpeaſul than the
. : was, in appearance; but there was death in the
ue intent. - L'Eſtrange. Fab. 54.
Monſeigneur Strozzi has many aſ: : is .#
obliging to a ſtranger who deſires the fight of them. Addiſon.
Obliging creatures make me ſee
All that diſgrac'd my betters, met in me. Pope.
. . . . So obliging that he ne'er oblig'd. Pope.
OBLI'Gingly. adv. [from obiging.] Civilly; complaiſantly.
Eugenius informs me very obligingly, that he never thought
he ſhould have diſliked any paſſage in my paper. Addiſon.
I ſee her taſte each nauſeous draught, -
And ſo obligingly am caught; .
I bleſs the hand from whence they came, , ,
Nor dare diſtort my face for ſhame. Swift's Miſcell.
OBLI'GING Ness. n.ſ.. [from obliging.]
1. Obligation; force. - .
They look into them not to weigh the obligingneſ, but to
quarrel the difficulty of the injunctions: not to direét prac-
tice, but excuſe prevarications. Decay of Piety.
2. Civility; complaiſance.
OBLIQUA'tion. n.ſ.. [obliquatio, from oblique, Latin.] Decli-
nation from perpendicularity; obliquity.
The change made by the obliquation of the eyes, is leaſt
in colours of the denſeſt than in thin ſubſtances: Newt. Opt.
OBLI'QUE. adj. [oblique, Fr. obliquus, Latin.]
I. Not direct; not perpendicular ; not parallel.
One by his view
Mought deem him born with ill-diſpos'd ſkies, -
When oblique Saturn ſat in the houſe of th’ agonies. Fairy Q.
If ſound be ſtopped and repercuſſed, it cometh about on
the other ſide in an oblique line. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
May they not pity us, condemn'd to bear
The various heav'n of an obliquer ſphere;
While by fix’d laws, and with a juſt return,
They feel twelve hours that ſhade, for twelve that burn.
Prior.
That fatal day the mighty work was done, }
With rays oblique upon the gallic ſun. Prior.
It has a direction oblique to that of the former motion.
Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Criticks form a general charaéter from the obſervation of
particular errors, taken in their own oblique or imperfeót
views; which is as unjuſt, as to make a judgment of the
beauty of a man's body, from the ſhade it caſts in ſuch and
ſuch a poſition. Notes on the Odyſſey.
2. Not direct. Uſed of ſenſe.
Has he given the lie
In circle, or oblique, or ſemicircle, -
Or direct parallel; you muſt challenge him. Shakeſp.
3. [In grammar.] Any caſe in nouns except the nominative.
Obli'QUELY. adv. [from oblique.]
1. Not direétly; not perpendicularly.
Of meridian altitude, it hath but twenty-three degrees;
ſo that it plays but obliquely upon us, and as the ſun doth
about the twenty-third of January. Brown's Wular Err.
Declining from the noon of day,
The ſun obliquely ſhoots his burningray.
2. Not in the immediate or direct meaning.
His diſcourſe tends obliquely to the detraćting from others,
or the extolling of himſelf. Addiſon's Spediator, N°. 255.
3:::::::::: { m. ſ. ſolbiquité, Fr. from oblique.]
1. Deviation from phyſicial reëtitude; deviation from paral-
leliſm or perpendicularity.
Which elſe to ſeveral ſpheres thou muſt aſcribe,
Mov’d contrary with thwart obliquities. Milt. P. Lºft.
2. Deviation from moral reëtitude. - a - - - -
There is in rectitude, beauty; as contrariwiſe in obliquity,
deformity. Hooker, b. i. ſ 8.
Count Rhodophill cut out for government and high affairs,
and balancing all matters in the ſcales of his high under-
ſtanding, hath rectified all obliquities. Hºwel's Vocal For.
For a rational creature to conform himſelf to the will of
God in all things, carries in it a rational restitude or good-
neſs; and to diſobey or oppoſe his will in anything, imports
a moral obliquity. South; Sermons.
To OBLITERATE. v. a. ſoblitero, ob and litera, Latin.]
1. To efface anything written.
2. To wear out; to deſtroy; to efface.
Wars and deſolations obliterate many ancient monuments.
Hae's Origin of Mankind.
Let men conſider themſelves as enſnared in that unhappy
4. contract,
Bavaria's ſtars muſt be accus’d which ſhone
Po. Ra. Locke.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 204</div><p class="Text">O B S
O B N
, which has rendered them part of the Devil's pºſ.
*:::::::: how they may obliterate that reproach,
and diſentangle their mortgaged ſouls. Decay of Piety.
Theſe ſimple ideas, the underſtanding can no more refuſe
to have, or alter, or blot them out, than a mirrour can re-
fuſe, alter, or obliterate the images, which the objects ſet
before it produce. - - - Locke.
Osire RA’tion. n.ſ.. [obliteratio, Latin.] Effacement; **
tinčtion. - -
Conſidering the caſualties of wars, tranſmigrations, eſpe-
cially that of the general flood, there might probably be an
oblitºration of all thoſe monuments of antiquity that "gº Pº:
cedent at ſome time have yielded. Hale's origin ºf Mankind.
Oblivion. m. ſ. [oblivio, }.
1. Forgetfulneſs; ceſſation of remembrance.
Water-drops have worn the ſtones of Troy,
And blind oblivion º cities up, d
- tes characterleſs are graft
hº - sº Troil. and Crºſſida.
Thou ſhouldſ have heard many things of worthy memory:
which now ſhall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienced
to thy grave. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
Knowledge is made by oblivion, and to purchaſe a clear
and warrantable body of truth, we muſt forgºt and part with
much we know. Brown's Vulgar Err. Prºf.
Can they imagine, that God has therefore forgot their
fins, becauſe they are not willing to remember them? Or
will they meaſure his pardon by their own oblivion. South.
Among our crimes oblivion may be ſet ;
But 'tis our king's perfection to forget. Dryden.
2. Amneſty; general pardon of crimes in a ſtate. -
By the act of oblivion, all offences againſt the crown, and
all particular treſpaſſes between ſubject and ſubject, were par-
doned, remitted, and utterly extinguiſhed. Davies.
Oblivious. adj. [oblivioſus, Latin.] Cauſing forgetfulneſs.
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with ſome ſweet oblivious antidote
Cleanſe the ſtuff'd boſom. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
- The Britiſh ſouls
Exult to ſee the crouding ghoſts deſcend
Unnumber'd ; well aveng'd, they quit the cares
Of mortal life, and drink th’ oblivious lake. Philips.
Oh born to ſee what none can ſee awake
Behold the wonders of th’ oblivious lake. Pope's Dunc.
OBLO'NG. adj. [allong, Fr. oblongus, Latin.] Longer than
broad; the ſame with a rečtangle parallelogram, whoſe ſides
are unequal. - Harr.
The beſt figure of a garden I eſteem an oblong upon a de-
ſcent. Temple's Miſcell.
Every particle, ſuppoſing them globular or not very oblong,
would be above nine million times their own length from any
other particle. Bentley's Sermons.
Oblo'NGLY. adv. [from oblong.] In an oblong direction.
The ſurface of the temperate climates is larger than it
would have been, had the globe of our earth or of the pla-
nets, been either ſpherical, or oblongly ſpheroidical. Cheyne.
Oblo'NGNess. n.ſ.. [from oblong..] The ſtate of being oblong.
O'Bloquy, n. ſ. [obloquor, Lat.]
1. Cenſorious ſpeech ; blame; ſlander; reproach.
Reaſonable moderation hath freed us from being deſervedly
ſubjećt unto that bitter kind of obloquy, whereby as the church
of Rome doth, under the colour of love towards thoſe things
which be harmleſs, maintain extremely moſt hurtful corrup-
tions; ſo we peradventure might be upbraided, that under
colour of hatred towards thoſe things that are corrupt, we
are on the other ſide as extreme, even againſt moſt harm-
leſs ordinances. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
Here new aſperſions, with new obloquies,
Are laid on old deſerts. Daniel's Civil War.
Canſt thou with impious obloquy condemn
The juſt decree of God, pronounc'd and ſworn ? Milton.
Shall names that made your city the glory of the earth, be
mentioned with obloquy and detraction Addiſon.
Every age might perhaps produce one or two true genius,
if they were not ſunk under the cenſure and obloquy of plod-
ding, ſervile, imitating pedants. Swift.
2. Cauſe of reproach ; diſgrace. Not proper.
My chaſtity's the jewel of our houſe,
Bequeathed down from many anceſtors;
Which were the greateſt obloquy i'th' world
In me to loſe. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
OBMUTE'scence. n. ſ. [from obmuteſco, Latin.] Loſs of ſpeech.
A Yehement fear often produceth obmuteſcence. Brown.
QPNQºIOU.S. n.ſ. ſolnºxius, Latin.]
1. Subject. -
! Propound a character of juſtice in a middle form, be-
** the ſpeculative diſcourſes of philoſophers, and the
* ºf lawyers, which are tied and obnoxious to their
particular laws. &gt; l
2. Liable to puniſhment. Bacon's Holy War.
All are obnoxious, and this faulty land,
Like fainting Heſter, does before you ſtand, * -- .
Watching your ſceptre. Iſailºr.
we knowóurſelves obnoxious to God's ſevere juſtice, and that
he is a God of mercy and hateth fin; and therefore that we
might not have the leaſt ſuſpicion of his unwillingneſs to for-
give, he hath ſent his only begotten ſon into the world, by
his diſmal ſufferings and curſed death, to expº” or offences.
Calamy’s Sermons.
Thy name, O Varus, if the kinder pow'rs
Preſerve our plains, and ſhield the Mantuan tow’rs,
Obnoxious by Cremona's neighb'ring crime,
The wings of ſwans, and ſtronger pinion'd rhyme
Shall raiſe aloft. Dryd.
3. Liable; expoſed. - - -
Long hoſtility had made their friendſhip weak in itſelf,
and more obnoxious to jealouſes and diſtruſts. Hayward.
But what will not ambition and revenge
Deſcend to ? who aſpires, muſt down as low
As high he ſoar'd; obnoxious firſt or laſt,
To baſeſt things. Milton's Paradiſ: Lºſ!,
Beaſts lie down, -
To dews obnoxious on the graſſy floor. Dryden.
OBNoxiousNess. n. ſ. [from obnoxious.] Subjećtion ; liable-
neſs to puniſhment.
OBNo'xiously. adv. [from obnoxious.] In a ſtate of ſubjec-
tion; in the ſtate of one liable to puniſhment.
To O'BNubilate. v. a. [ obnubilo, Latin. J. To cloud ; to
obſcure.
O'Bole. m. ſ. ſololus, Lat.] In pharmacy, twelve grains. Ainſ.
OBRE'ption. m. ſ. ſobreptio, Latin.] The act of creeping on.
To OBR o'GATE. v. a. [abrogo, Lat. J. To proclaim a con-
trary law for the diſſolution of the former. Die?.
OBSCE/NE. adj. [obſcene, Fr. olfaenus, Latin.]
1. Immodeſt; not agreeable to chaſtity of mind; cauſing lewd
ideas. -
Chemos th’ obſcene dread of Moab's ſons. Milton.
Words that were once chaſte, by frequent uſe grow oftene
and uncleanly. J/atts's Logick.
2. Offenſive ; diſguſting.
A girdle foul with greaſe binds his obſcene attire. Dryden.
ome as they went, the ſad diſcourſe renew'd,
Of the relentleſs dame to death purſu'd, }
And of the fight obſcene ſo lately view'd. Dryden.
3. Inauſpicious ; ill omined.
Care ſhuns thy walks, as at the chearful light
The groaning ghoſts, and birds obſºne take flight. Dryd.
It is the ſun's fate like your’s, to be diſpleaſing to owls
and obſcene animals, who cannot bear his luſtre. Pope's Lett.
Obsce’NELY. adj. [from ol/cene.] In an impure and unchaſte
Inanner.
Obsce'N EN Ess. U n.ſ.. [alſºenité, Fr. from olſcene..] Impurity of
Obsce’N1TY. } thought or language ; unchaſtity; lewdneſs.
Mr. Cowley aſſerts plainly, that obſcenity has no place in
wit. - Dryden.
Thoſe fables were tempered with the Italian ſeverity, and
free from any note of infamy or alſceneneſs. Dryden.
Thou art wickedly devout,
In Tiber ducking thrice by break of day,
To waſh th' obſcenities of night away. Dryden.
No pardon vile obſcenity ſhould find,
Tho' wit and art conſpire to move your mind. Pope.
Obscur ATION. m. ſ. [obſcuratio, Lat.]
1. The act of darkening. º
As to the ſun and moon, their cºſturation or change of
colour happens commonly before the eruption of a fiery moun-
tain. Burnet.
2. A ſtate of being darkened.
OBSCU’RE. adj. [obſcur, Fr. obſcurus, Latin.]
1. Dark ; unenlightened ; gloomy, hindring fight.
Whoſo curſeth his father or mother, his lamp ſhall be put
out in obſcure darkneſs. Prov. xx. 20.
Who ſhall tempt with wand'ring feet
The dark unbottom'd infinite abyſs,
And thro’ the palpable obſcure find out
His uncouth way : Milton's Parad'ſ Lºſ!.
2. Living in the dark. -
The alſº ure bird clamour'd the live-long night. Shaft.
3. Not eaſily intelligible; abſtruſe; difficult.
I explain ſome of the moſt obſcure paſſages, and thoſe
which are moſt neceſſary to be underſtood, and this accord-
ing to the manner wherein he uſed to expreſs himſelf. Dryd.
4. Not noted; not obſervable.
He ſays, that he is an obſcure perſon; one, I ſuppoſe, that
is in the dark.
Aiterbury,
To QBscu'R.E. v. a. ſolſcuro, Latin.]
1. To darken; to make dark.
Sudden the thunder blackens all the ſkies,
And the winds whiſtle, and the ſurges roll
Mountains on mountains, and obſcure the pole. Pope.
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 205</div><p class="Text">O B S
O B S
2. To make leſs viſible.
They are all couched in a pit hard by Herne's oak, with
alſ ared lights; which at the very inſtant of Falſtaff’s and
our meeting, they will at once diſplay to the night. Shakespeare
What muſt I hold a candle to my ſhames :
They in themſelves, good ſooth, are too, too light.
why, 'tis an office of diſcovery, love,
And I ſhould be obſcur'd. Shakespeare M. of Venice.
Thinking by this retirement to obſcure himſelf from God,
he infringed the omniſciency and eſſential ubiquity of his
maker. Brown's /ulgar Errours.
3. To make leſs intelligible. -
By private conſent it hath been uſed in dangerous times
to obſcure writing, and make it hard to be read by others not
acquainted with the intrigue. Holder.
There is ſcarce any duty which has been ſo ºbſcured by the
writings of learned men, as this. - J/ake,
4. To make leſs glorious, beautiful, or illuſtrious.
Think'ſt thou, vain ſpirit, thy glories are the ſame,
And ſeeſt not fin obſcures thy godlike frame *
I know thee now by thy ungrateful pride,
That ſhows me what thy faded looks did hide.
Oescu'RELY. adv. [from ºbſcure.]
1. Not brightly; not luminouſly. -
2. Out of fight; privately ; without notice; not conſpicuouſly.
Such was the riſe of this prodigious fire,
which in mean buildings firſt cºcurely bred,
Dryden.
From thence did ſoon to open ſtreets aſpire. Dryden.
There live retir’d,
Content thyſelf to be obſcurely good. Addison's Catc.
Let him go, purſued by filent wrath,
Meet unexpected daggers in his way,
And in ſome diſtant land obſcurely die. Irene.
3. Not clearly ; not plainly.
gº }n. / [olſ uritas, Lat. obſcurité, Fr.]
1. Darkneſs; want of light.
Lo a day of darkneſs and obſcurity, tribulation and an-
guiſh, upon the earth. Eſther xi. 8.
Should Cynthia quit thee, Venus, and each ſtar,
It would not form one thought dark as mine are:
I could lend them obſcuruneſ; now, and ſay,
Out of myſelf there ſhould be no more day. Donne.
2. Unnoticed ſtate; privacy.
You are not for obſcurity deſign'd,
But, like the ſun, muſt cheer all human kind. Dryd.
3. Darkneſs of meaning.
Not to mention that obſcureneſs that attends prophetic rap-
tures, there are divers things knowable by the bare light of
nature, which yet are ſo uneaſy to be ſatisfactorily underſtood
by our imperfect intellects, that let them be delivered in the
cleareſt expreſſions, the notions themſelves will yet appear
obſcure. Boyle on Colours.
That this part of ſacred ſcripture had difficulties in it:
many cauſes of obſcurity did readily occur to me. Locke.
What lies beyond our poſitive idea towards infinity, lies
in obſcurity, and has the undeterminate confuſion of a nega-
tive idea, wherein I know I do not comprehend all I would,
it being too large for a finite capacity. Locke.
Obsecration. m. ſ. [obſecratio, from obſecro, Lat..] Intreaty ;
ſupplication.
That theſe were comprehended under the ſacra, is mani-
feſt from the old form of obſecration. Stillingfleet.
Osseſquies. n. ſ. [ obſeques, French. I know not whether
this word be not anciently miſtaken for exequies, exequiae,
Latin: this word, however, is apparently derived from ol-
Jequium.] .
1. Funeral rites; funeral ſolemnities.
There was Dorilaus valiantly requiting his friends help, in
a great battle deprived of life, his obſequies being not more
ſolemnized by the tears of his partakers, than the blood of
his enemies. Sidney, b. ii.
Fair Juliet, that with angels doſt remain,
Accept this lateſt favour at my hand;
That living honour'd thee, and being dead,
With fun'ral obſequies adorn thy tomb.
Theſe tears are my ſweet Rutland's obſequies.
I ſpare the widows tears, their woful cries,
And howling at their huſbands obſequies;
How Theſeus at theſe fun'rals did affiſt,
And with what gifts the mourning dames diſmiſt. Dryden.
His body ſhall be royally interr'd,
I will, myſelf,
Be the chief mourner at his obſequies.
Alas! poor Poll, my Indian talker dies,
Go birds and celebrate his obſequies. Creech.
2. It is found in the fingular, perhaps more properly.
Or tune a ſong of vićtory to me,
Or to thyſelf, fing thine own obſequy.
Him I'll ſolemnly attend,
With filent obſequy and funeral train,
Home to his father's houſe.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
Craſhaw.
Miltºn's Agenſes,
OBSEQUIOUS. adj. [from obſequium, Latin.]
1. Obedient; compliant; not reſiſting.
Adore not ſo the riſing ſon, that you forget the father, who
raiſed you to this height; nor be you ſo abſequious to the fa-
ther, that you give juſt cauſe to the ſon to ſuſpect that you
neglect him. Bacon’s Advice to Williers.
At his command th’ up-rooted hills retir’d
Each to his place; they heard his voice, and went
Obſequious. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
I follow'd her; ſhe what was honour knew,
And with abſequious majeſty, approv’d
My pleaded reaſon. AZilton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. viii.
A genial cheriſhing heat acts ſo upon the fit and obſequi-
cus matter, as to organize and faſhion it according to the
exigencies of its own nature. Boyle.
His ſervants weeping,
Olſequious to his orders, bear him hither. Addison Cato.
The vote of an aſſembly, which we cannot reconcile to
public good, has been conceived in a private brain, afterwards
ſupported by an obſequious party. Swift.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to ſignify, funereal; ſuch as the rites
of funerals require.
Your father loſt a father;
That father his ; and the ſurviver bound
In filial obligation, for ſome term,
To do obſequious ſorrow. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
OBSE'QUIously. adv. [from obſequious. J
1. Obediently; with compliance.
They riſe, and with reſpectful awe,
At the word giv'n, obſequiouſly withdraw. Dryden.
We cannot reaſonably expect, that any one ſhould readily
and obſequiouſly quit his own opinion, and embrace ours with
a blind reſignation. Locke.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſignifies, with funeral rites; with reverence
for the dead.
I a while obſequiouſly lament
The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaſter. Shakeſp. R. III.
Obse"QuiousNEss. n.ſ.. [from obſequious.] Obedience; com-
pliance.
They apply themſelves both to his intereſt and humour,
with all the arts of flattery and obſequiouſneſs, the ſureſt and
the readieſt ways to advance a man. South's Sermons.
Obse'Rv Able. adj. [from obſervo, Lat..] Remarkable ; emi-
nent; ſuch as may deſerve notice.
They do bury their dead with obſervable ceremonies. Abbot.
Theſe propricties affixed unto bodies from conſiderations
deduced from eaſt, weſt, or thoſe obſervable points of the
ſphere, will not be juſtified from ſuch foundations. Brown.
I took a juſt account of every obſervable circumſtance of
the earth, ſtone, metal, or other matter, from the ſurface
quite down to the bottom of the pit, and entered it carefully
into a journal. Iłoodward's Nat. Hiſł.
The great and more obſervable occaſions of exerciſing our
courage, occur but ſeldom. Rogers.
OBSERVABLY. adv. [from obſervable.] In a manner worthy
of note.
It is prodigious to have thunder in a clear ſky, as is ob-
Frvably recorded in ſome hiſtories. Brown's Vulgar Err.
Obse(Rv ANce. n.ſ. [obſervance, Fr. obſervo, Latin.]
1. Reſpect; ceremonial reverence.
. In the wood, a league without the town,
Where I did meet thee once with Helena,
To do obſervance on the morn of May. Shakeſpeare.
Arcite left his bed, reſolv'd to pay
Obſervance to the month of merry May. Dryden.
2. Religious rite.
Some repreſent to themſelves the whole of religion as con-
ſiſting in a few eaſy obſervances, and never lay the leaſt re-
ſtraint on the buſineſs or diverſions of this life. Rogers.
3. Attentive practice.
Uſe all th' obſervance of civility,
Like one well ſtudied in a ſad oſtent
To pleaſe his grandam. Shakeſp. M. of Penice.
If the divine laws were propoſed to our obſervance, with
no other motive than the advantages attending it, they would
be little more than an advice. Rogers, Sermon I.
4. Rule of pračtice.
There are other ſtrićt obſervances;
As, not to ſee a woman. Shakeſp. L. Labours Lºſt.
5. Careful obedience. -
We muſt attend our creator in all thoſe ordinances which
he has preſcribed to the abſervance of his church. Rogers.
6. Obſervation; attention. -
There can be no obſervation or experience of greater cer-
tainty, as to the increaſe of mankind, than the ſtričt and
vigilant obſervance of the calculations and regiſters of the bills
of births and deaths. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
7. Obedient regard. - -
Having had ſuch experience of his fidelity and obſºrvance
abroad, he found himſelf engaged in honour to ſupport him.
Wotton.
18 J, - Lowers
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 206</div><p class="Text">O B S
O B S
.
Love rigid honeſty
And ſtriá obſervance of impartial laws.
onsºr, aft. [elſervant, Hat".]
i.e. diligent; watchful. - -
I. A. which gave themſelves to follow and imi-
r iſºam ſectators of thoſe maſters they ad-
º were obſ, Raleigh's Hiſtory of the JWorld.
Wandring from clime to clime obſervant ſtray d,
Their manners noted, and their ſtates ſurvey'd. Pope.
dient; reſpectful. -
2. o: are told i. obſervant Alexander was of his maſter
Ariſtotle. Digby on the Soul, Dedicat.
3. Reſpectfully attentive. -
She now obſervant of the parting ray,
Eyes the calm ſun-ſet of thy various day.
4. Meanly dutiful : ſubmiſſive. -
How could the moſt baſe men attain to honour but by
ſuch an obſervant ſlaviſh courſe. jº
Observant. n. ſ. [This word has the accent on .."
ſyllable in Shakeſpeare.] A ſayiſh attendant. Not in uſe.
Theſe kind of knaves in this plainneſs,
Harbour more craft, and º corrupter ends,
an twenty ſilky ducking obſervants
#. jº nicely. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Oeservation. n.ſ. [obſervatiº, from obſervo, Lat, obſerva-
tion, Fr.] - -
1. The act of obſerving, noting, or remarking.
The cannot be infuſed by obſervation, becauſe they are
the rules by which men take their firſt apprehenſions and
obſervations of things; as the being of the rule muſt be be-
fore its application to the thing directed by it. South's Serm.
The rules of our practice are taken from the conduct of
ſuch perſons as fall within our obſervation. - Rogers.
2. Notion gained by obſerving; note; remark; animadverſion.
In matters of human prudence, we ſhall find the greateſt
advantage by making wiſe obſervations on our conduct, and
of the events attending it. Watts's Logick.
Observator. n.ſ.. [alſervateur, Fr. from obſervo, Lat.] One
that obſerves; a remarker.
The obſervator of the bills of mortality, hath given us
the beſt account of the number that late plagues have ſwept
away. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
She may be handſome, yet be chaſte, you ſay,+
Good obſervator, not ſo faſt away. Dryden.
Obse'Rvatory. n.ſ.. [alſervatoire, French..] A place built
for aſtronomical obſervations.
Another was found near the obſervatory in Greenwich Park.
Woodward on Foſſils.
To OBSERVE. v. a. [obſerver, Fr. obſervo, Latin.]
1. To watch; to regard attentively.
Remember, that as thine eye obſerves others, ſo art thou
obſerved by angels and by men. Taylor.
2. To find by attention; to note.
If our idea of infinity be got from the power we obſerve
in ourſelves, of repeating without end our own ideas, it may
be demanded why we do not attribute infinity to other ideas,
as well as theſe of ſpace and duration. Locke.
One may obſerve them diſcourſe and reaſon pretty well,
of ſeveral other things, before they can tell twenty. Locke.
3. To regard or keep religiouſly.
A night to be much obſerved unto the Lord, for bringing
them out of Egypt. Ex. xii. 42.
4. To obey; to follow.
To Observe. v. n.
1. To be attentive.
Olſerving men may form many judgments by the rules of
ſimilitude and proportion, where cauſes and effects are not
entirely the ſame. Watts's Logick.
2. To make a remark.
Wherever I have found her notes to be wholly another's,
which is the caſe in ſome hundreds, I have barely quoted the
true proprietor, without obſerving upon it. Pope's Lett.
O'Bserver, n. ſ. [from obſerve.]
1. One who looksvigilantlyon perſons and things; cloſe remaker.
He reads much ;
He is a great obſerver; and he iooks
Quite thro' the deeds of men. Shakeſp. jul, Ceſar.
Angelo,
There is a kind of charaćter . thy life,
That to th' obſerver doth thy hiſtory
Fully unfold.
Careful obſervers may foretel the hour,
Rºſcommºn.
Pope.
y ſure prognoſtics when to dread a ſhow'r, Swift.
2. One who'looks on ; the beholder.
F If a ſlow pac’d ſtar had ſtol’n away,
Tom the obſerver's marking, he might ſtay
hree hundred years to ſee’t again Donne.
*Pºny, he thinks, leſſens the ſhame of vice, by ſharing
obſerver, h cannot wholly avoid the eye of the
* he hopes to diſtrađ it at left by a multiplicity of
South's Sermons.
it; and therefore, if he
obj ečts -
Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
. One who keeps any law or cuſtom or practice. -
Many nations are ſuperſtitious, and diligent ºbſerver of
old cuſtoms, which they receive by continual tradition from
their parents, by recording of their bards and chronicles.
Spen er on Ireland.
The king after the vićtory, as one that had been bred un-
der a devout mother, and was in his nature a great obſerver
of religious forms, cauſed Te Deum to be ſolemnly ſung in
the preſence of the whole army upon the place. Bacon.
He was ſo ſtrict an obſerver of his word, that no conſide-
ration whatever could make him break it. Prior.
Himſelf often read uſeful diſcourſes to his ſervants on the
Lord's day, of which he was always a very ſtrict and ſolemn
obſerver. - Atterbury's Serm.
Observingly. adv. [from obſerving.] Attentively; carefully.
There is ſome ſoul of goodneſs in things evil, -
Would men obſervingly diſtil it out. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Obsession. m. ſ. [obſeſſio, Latin.]
1. The aët of beſiging.
2. The firſt attack of Satan, antecedent to poſſeſſion.
Obs1'DIona L. adj. [cºſidionalis, Lat.] Belonging to a ſiege. Diº.
OBSOLETE. adj. [obſoletus, Lat..] Worn out of uſe; diſ-
uſed; unfaſhionable.
Obſolete words may be laudably revived, when either they
are more ſounding, or more ſignificant than thoſe in practice.
Dryden's juvenal Ded.
What if there be an old dormant ſtatute or two againſt
him, are they not now obſolete P Swift.
ObsoleteNess. n.ſ. [from obſolete. J State of being worn
out of uſe; unfaſhionableneſs.
Obstacle. n. ſ. ſol/lacle, Fr. obſtaculum, Lat.] Something
oppoſed; hindrance; obſtruction.
Conſcience is a bluſhing ſhame-fac’d ſpirit,
That mutinies in a man's boſom : it fills
One full of obſtacles. Shakeſpeare's Rich. III.
If all obſtacles were cut away,
And that my path were even to the crown,
As the ripe reverence and due of birth. Shakespeare R. III.
Diſparity in age ſeems a greater obſtacle to an intimate
friendſhip than inequality of fortune: For the humours, bu-
fineſs, and diverſions, of young and old, are generally very
different. Collier on Friendſhip.
Some conjećtures about the formation of ſand-ſtone, the
origin of mountains and iſlands, I am obliged to look into
that they may not remain as obſtacles to the leſs ſkilful.
Woodw. Nat. Hiſt.
What more natural and uſual obſtacle to thoſe who take
voyages, than winds and ſtorms. Pope.
Obstetrication. m. ſ. [from obſtetricor, Lat.] The office
of a midwife.
Obstetrick, adj. [from obſtetrix, Lat.] Midwifiſh; befit-
ting a midwife; doing the midwife's office.
There all the learn'd ſhall at the labour ſtand,
And Douglas lend his ſoft obſtetrick hand. Dunciad, b. iv.
O'BSTINAcy.m. ſ. ſolſtination, Fr. ob/linatio, Lat. from obſtinate.]
Stubbornneſs ; contumacy; pertinacy ; perſiſtency.
Chuſing rather to uſe all extremities, which might drive
men to deſperate obſtinacy, than to apply moderate remedies.
King Charles.
Moſt writers uſe their words looſely and uncertainly, and
do not make plain and clear dedućtions of words one from
another, which were not difficult to do, did they not find it
convenient to ſhelter their ignorance, or obſtinacy, under the
obſcurity of their terms. Locke.
What crops of wit and honeſty appear,
From ſpleen, from obſtinacy, hate or fear. Pope's Eſ.
O'BSTINATE. adj. [obſtinatus, Lat.] Stubborn ; contuma-
cious; fixed in reſolution. Abſolutely uſed, it has an ill ſenſe ;
but relatively, it is neutral.
The queen is obſtinate,
Stubborn to juſtice, apt tº accuſe it, and
Diſdainful to be try’d º: Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
ield,
Except you mean with obſtinate repulſe,
To ſlay your ſov’reign. Shakeſp.
I have known great cures done by obſtinate reſolutions of
drinking no wine. Temple.
Her father did not fail to find
In all ſhe ſpoke, the greatneſs of her mind;
Yet thought ſhe was not ob/linate to die,
Nor deem'd the death ſhe promis'd was ſo nigh. Dryden.
Look on Simo's mate;
No aſs ſo meek, no aſs ſo ob/?inate. Pope's Ep. ii.
O'BSTINATELY. adv. [from obſtinate.] Stubbornly; inflexibly;
with unſhaken determination.
Pembroke abhorred the war as al/linately, as he loved
hunting and hawking. Clarendon, b. ii.
A Greek made himſelf their prey,
T'impoſe on their belief, and Troy betray;
Fix'd on his aim, and obſtinately bent
To dic undaunted, or to circumvent, Dryden.
Inflexibl:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 207</div><p class="Text">O B. T
O B 'T
—-- *-
Inflexible to ill, and ol/linately juſt. Addiſon.
My ſpouſe maintains her royal truſt,
Tho' tempted chaſte, and ol/linately juſt. Pope.
f NATENess. n.f. [from ol/linate.] Stubbornneſs.
3.º. n. ſ. ſſrom ol/lipo, Lat.] The act of ſtop-
- any paſſage.
oº: ãº. [olffreperus, Lat.] Loud ; clamorous;
noiſy; turbulent 5 vociferous. - - -
*heſe abſºrperous ſcepticks are the bane of divinity, who
are ſo full of the ſpirit of contradiction, that they raiſe dail
new diſputes. Howel's Vocal É.
Theſe abſtraperous villainsſhout, and knownot for what they
make a noiſe. - - Dryden.
The players do not only connive at his obſ?reperous appro-
bation, but repair at their own coſt whatever damages he
º Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 235.
Opstre'PERously. adv. [from ol/?reperous.] Loudly ; cla-
morouſly; noiſily.
Onstre'PERousN ESS...”. ſ. [ from ol/freperous. J Loudneſs ;
glamour; noiſe; turbulence. - - -
o, rºcrios. m. ſ. [ from ºričius, Latin. J Obligation;
d.
bon He hath full right tº exempt
whom ſo it pleaſes him by choice,
From national obſirićtion.
To OBSTRUCT. v. a. ſol/rue, Lat.]
1. To hinder; to be in the Way of; to block up; to bar.
- He them beholding, ſoon
Comes down to ſee their city, ere the tow’r
Obſtruči Heav'n-tow’rs. Milton’s Paradiſe Left.
Fat people are moſt ſubject to weakneſs in ſevers, becauſe
the fat, melted by the feveriſh heat, ol/truć's the ſmall canals.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Milton's Agoniſtes,
. To oppoſe; to retard. -
ãº. n. ſ. [from obſtruct. J One that hinders or
oppoſes. - - -
Oașºru'ction. m. ſ. ſobſtructio, Lat. clºſłrućtion, Fr. from ob-
ruč7.
indrance; difficulty.
1. Hi Sure God by †. diſcoveries did deſign,
That his clear light thro' all the world ſhould ſhine ;
But the obſtruction from that diſcord ſprings,
The prince of darkneſs makes 'twixt Chriſtian kings. Denh.
2. Obſtacle; impediment; that which hinders.
All obſlrutions in parliament, that is, all freedom in differ-
ing in votes, and debating matters with reaſon and candour,
muſt be taken away. King Charles.
In his winter quarters the king expe&amp;ted to meet with all
the obſtructions and difficulties his enraged enemies could lay
in his way. Clarendon, b. viii.
Whenever a popular aſſembly free from obſtructions, and
already poſſeſſed of more power than an equal balance will
allow, ſhall continue to think that they have not enough, I
cannot ſee how the ſame cauſes can produce different effects
amongus, from what they did in Greece and Rome. Swift.
3. [In phyſick.]
The blocking up of any canal in the human body, ſo as to
prevent the flowing of any fluid through it, on account of the
increaſed bulk of that fluid, in proportion to the diameter of
the veſſel. Quincy.
4. In Shakeſpeare it once ſignifies ſomething heaped together.
Aye but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obſtruction, and to rot;
This ſenſible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
Obstructive. adj. [olſtructif, Fr. from ol/iruči.] Hindering;
cauſing impediment.
Having thus ſeparated this doćtrine of God's predetermin-
ing all events from three other things confounded with it, it
will now be diſcernible how noxious and obſtructive this doc-
trine is to the ſuperſtructing all good life. Hammond.
Obstructive. m. ſ. Impediment; obſtacle.
The ſecond obſlrućtive is that of the fiduciary, that faith
is the only inſtrument of his juſtification, and excludes good
works from contributing anything toward it. Hammond.
ObstruENT. adj. [obſtruens, Lat..] Hindering; blocking up.
OBstupef Action. m. ſ. [ohſiupefacio, Latin.] The act of
inducing ſtupidity, or interruption of the mental powers.
OBstupef Active. adj. [from obſtupefacio, Lat..] Obſtruct-
ing the mental powers; itupifying.
The force of it is obſlupefactive, and no other.
Abbot.
To OBTAIN. v. a. [obtenir, Fr. obtineo, Latin.]
I. To gain; to acquire; to procure.
May be that I may obtain children by her. Gen. xvi. 2.
We have obtained an inheritance. Eph. i. 11.
Whatever once is denied them, they are certainly not to
obtain by crying. Locke's Education.
. The juices of the leaves are obtained by expreſſion, which
is the nutritious juice rendered ſomewhat more oleaginous.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To impetrate; to gain by the conceſſion or excited kindneſs
of another.
In ſuch our prayers cannot ſerve us as means to obtain the
thing we deſire. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 48.
By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us. Heb. ix. 12.
If they could not be obtained of the proud and craftyty-
rant, then to conclude peace with him upon any conditions.
- Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Some pray for riches, riches they obtain;
But watch'd by robbers for their wealth are ſlain.
Dryden.
The concluſion of the ſtory I forbore, becauſeſ cº not
obtain from myſelf to ſhew Abſalom unfortunate. Dryden.
To OBTAI'N. v. n.
1. To continue in uſe.
The Theodoſian Code, ſeveral hundred years after Juſ-
tinian's time, did obtain in the weſtern parts of Europe. Bak.
2. To be eſtabliſhed.
Our impious uſe no longer ſhall obtain,
Brothers no more, by brothers, ſhall be ſlain. Dryden.
The ſituation of the ſun and earth, which the theoriſt ſup-
poſes, is ſo far from being preferable to this which at preſent
obtains, that this hath infinitely the advantage of it. Woodw.
The general laws of fluidity, elaſticity, and gravity, obtain
in animal and inanimate tubes. Cheyne's É. Prin.
3. To prevail; to ſucceed.
There is due from the judge to the advocate, ſome com-
mendation where cauſes are fair pleaded; eſpecially towards
the ſide which obtaineth not. Bacon,
OBTA'INABLE. adj. [from obtain.] To be procured.
Spirits which come over in diſtillations, miſcible with wa-
ter, and wholly combuſtible, are obtainable from plants by
previous fermentation. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
OetA'INER. n.f. [from obtain..] He who obtains.
To OETE'MPERATE. v. a. [obtemperer, Fr. obtempero, Lat.] To
obey,
Diff.
To OBTE'ND. v. a. [obtendo, Lat.]
1. To oppoſe; to hold out in oppoſition.
2. To pretend ; to offer as the reaſon of anything.
Thou doſt with lies the throne invade,
Obtending Heav'n for whate'er ills befal. Dryden.
OBTENEBRATION. m. ſ. [ob and tenebrae, Latin.] Darkneſs;
the ſtate of being darkened; the act of darkening ; cloudineſs.
In every megrim or vertigo, there is an obtenebration joined
with a ſemblance of turning round. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
OBTE'Nsion. m. ſ. [from obtend..] The aët of obtending.
To OBTE's T. v. a. [obteſtor, Latin.] To beſeech; to ſup-
plicate.
Suppliants demand
A truce, with olive branches in their hand;
Obteſt his clemency, and from the plain
Beg leave to draw the bodies of their ſlain. Dryden.
OBTEst Aºtion. m. ſ. [obteſtatio, Lat, from obteſt.] Supplica-
tion; entreaty.
ObtrecTA'tion. n.ſ. [obtrečio, Lat.] Slander; detračtion;
calumny.
To OBTRU'DE. v. a. [obtrudo, Latin.] To thruſt into any
place or ſtate by force or impoſture ; to offer with unreaſon-
able importunity.
It is their torment, that the thing they ſhun doth follow
them, truth, as it were, even obtruding itſelf into their know-
ledge, and not permitting them to be ſo ignorant as they
would be. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
There may be as great a vanity in retiring and withdraw-
ing men's conceits from the world, as in obtruding them. Bac.
Some things are eaſily granted ; the reſt ought not to be
obtruded upon me with the point of the ſword. King Charles.
Who can abide, that againſt their own doćtors ſix whole
books ſhould, by their fatherhoods of Trent, be under pain
of a curſe, imperiouſly obtruded upon God and his duº, º
- all-
Why ſhouldſt thou then obtrude this diligence
In vain, where no acceptance it can find Milton.
Whatever was not by them thought neceſſary, muſt not
by us be obtruded on, or forced into that catalogue. Hamm.
A cauſe of common error is the credulity of men; that
is, an eaſy aſſent to what is obtruded, or believing at firſt ear
what is delivered by others. Brown'. W. Err.
The objects of our ſenſes obtrude their particular ideas upon
our minds, whether we will or no ; and the operations of
our minds will not let us be without ſome obſcure notions of
them. Locke,
Whether thy great forefathers came
From realms that bear Veſputio’s name 3
For ſo conjectures would obtrude, -
And from thy painted ſkin conclude. Swift.
Optru/DER. n.ſ. [from obtrude..] One that obtrudes.
They will do juſtice to the inventors or publiſhers of the
true experiments, as well as upon the ºbtruder of falſe ones.
Boyle.
OETRU's Ios,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 208</div><p class="Text">O B U - O C C
OBTRU'SION. n.ſ. [ from obtruſº, Latin. J The ad of ob- The rays of royal majeſty reverberated ſo ſtrongly upon
truding. Villerio, diſpelled all thoſe clouds which did hang over and
chumbrate him. Howe's Pocal &amp;re/?.
No man can think it other than the badge and method of
ſlavery, by ſavage rudeneſs and importunate obtruſiºns of vio- OBUMBRATION. m. ſ. [from clumbro, Latin.] The act of
lence, to have the miſt of his errour and paſſion diſpelled. darkening or clouding.
King Charles. OCCASION. m. ſ. ſoccaſion, Fr. occaſio, Lat.] -
1. Occurrence; caſualty; incident.
OBTRU'sſy E. aff. [from obtrude..] Inclined to force one's ſelf
or any thing elie, upon others. The laws of Chriſt we find rather mentioned by a -
Not obvious, not cl/iruſive, but retir’d in the writings of the Apoſtles, than any ſolemn ...” ºn
- The more deſirable. Milton's Paradiſe Lost, h. viii. rectly written to comprehend them in legal ſort. *: di-
; To OBTU'ND. v. a. [obtundo, Latin.] To blunt; to dull; to 2. Opportunity ; convenience. 22ker. \ .
º Unweeting, and unware of ſuch miſhap, -
quel; to deaden.
* - Avicen countermands letting blood in cholerick bodies, be- She brought to miſchief through occaſion,
cauſe he eſteems the blood a bridle of gall, obtunding its Where this ſame wicked villain did me ligh -
; : - - o t -
acrimony and fierceneſs. Harvey on Con ump. That woman that cannot make her ..". #. 3.
- OBTURATION, n.ſ.. [from olturatus, Lat..] The act of ſtop- coſan, let her never nurſe her child herſelf, for ſhe º S ºc-
ping up anything with ſomething ſmeared over it. it like a fool. Shakeſp. As you like it.
oº: º: º [from obtuſe and angle.] Having angles Becauſe of the money returned in our ſacks are we brought
larger than right angles. in, that he may ſeek occaſion, fall upon us, and take us for Gen. xliii. 18.
º º U SE. º fºliº, Latin.] iºninen. y on, rail upon us, *::::::: . :: *
º 1. Not pointed ; not acute. Uſe not liberty for an occaſion •
2. Not quick; dull; ſtupid. Leºme nº icºſ, Gal. v. 13. * -
! - Thy ſenſes then Occaſion which now ...” Milton. P - … "
Ottº, all taſte of pleaſures muſt forego. Milton. P. Lost. I'll take th’ occaſion which he gives to bring
3. Not ſhrill; obſcure : as, an obtuſe ſound. Him to his death. 
º º adv. ſºon obtiſe.] tº a mind as great as theirs he came JWaller. ---
Without a point. o find at home occaſion for his fa * * *
! 2. Dully, ſtupidly. - Where dark confuſions did the . hid * -
Ontu's ENEss. m. ſ. ſſrom obtuſe..] Bluntneſs; dulneſs. From this admonition they took OIlS hide. //aller. * *
OB'ru's Ion. n. / [from obtuſe.] - ºy took only occaſion to redoub - - -
| 1. The act of dulling, their fault, and to ſleep again. . -
| 2. The ſtate of being dulled, wº f: of obſerving more than once . º
i 9.fuſion of the ſenſes, internal and external. Harvey. c s of antiquity, that are ſtill to be ſeen in Rome. º
| Obve'N'T Ion. n.ſ. [ obvenia, Latin. J. Something happening 3. Accidental cauſe. Addison on Italy. º
ºnly and regularly, but uncertainly ; incidental ad: Have you ever heard what was th ſ tº a -º
i. vantage. - - ... -- - e occaſion and firſt be. º
: When the country grows more rich and better inhabited gunning º: cuſtom Spenser on Ireland tº --
s the tythes and oth ****** - &gt; he fair for whom they ſtrove - Tº
º i. . . er obventions, will alſo be more augmented Northought, when ſhe j. fi h from f. it: :
and better valued. Spen &gt; ght from far --
| To Obve'Rt. v. a. [obverto, Lat.] To ºtºº Ireland. 4. R". beauty was th’ occaſion of the war. &gt; Dryden. tº .
h The laborant with an iron rod ſtirred the kindled part of - . º º: ſº
t the nitre, that the fire might b - inels calls on you -
t parts might be obverted to i. .. more diffuſed, and #. 3. you embrace th' occaſion to depart. Shakeſpeare "…-
º . A man can from no place behold, but there will be anºt º: i. lodged in the memory, and upon º: (, .
innumerable ſuperficieculae, that look ſome one way, and i. impreſſi y the mind, it takes notice of them as of a former :*
another, enough of them obverted to hi 2 preſſion. Locke
º fuſed idea of light. S *; jº. 5. Incidental need; caſual exigence. ºr. ! ::
| An erect come placed in an hori oyle on Colours. . Never maſter had * -
diſtance from the eye, we judge ... º º a great A page ſo kind, ſo duteous, diligent, fºre ...
if its baſe be obverted towards us. § }. º So tender over his ºccaſions. Shakeſpeare's Cymbel; *:::::
To O'BVIATE. v. a. [from obvius, Lat. obvior, F J T agick. Antony will uſe his affection where it #. 9moeline. * -- .
in the way; to prevent. &gt; *-ai- er, Fr.] To meet He married but his occaſion here. Shakeſpeare. Ant. and C. º
To lay down every thing in its full light, ſo as to obvi My ºccaſions have found time to uſe them toward. ſ. . &amp;
all º, and remove every dº; wº &amp;º: of +...º.º. deſ f Shakeſpeare. Timon of Žſ * -
Out too far. » ey who are deſirous o " _ " - - - - * .
oº:: adj. [obvius, Latin.] J/oodward's Nat. Hyl. with diligence, and make h..."; º . . . .
i - - . • - - CIl th “. . . .
I. Meeting any *; 5 º in front to any thing º find for their purpoſe, and of which they may . J
- To the evil turn - “yº. . . . Dryden's Dufreſh, *:::::
}ſº º ; .# to overcome lº..." on occaſion to diſcover #;
uffering, and earn reſt from lab - - - . . .
| - 2. Open; expoſed. d DOur WOn. Milton. The ancient canons were very well fitted for the º
Whether ſuch room i - cf the church in its purer ages B ions - - - - , w,
- m in nature unpoſteſt God h - ges. aker on Learning. ºf
9nly to ſhine, yet ſcarce to contribute od hath put us into an imperfect ſtate, where we have
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
perpetual occasion of each other's assistance Swift.
Each orb a glimpſe of light, convey'd ſo far perpetual occaſion of each other's aſſiſtance.
Down to this habitable, which º A prudent chief not always muſt diſpla . º
- Light back to them, is ºil. to †. His pow'rs in equal ranks, and fair ...' “ º .
3. Eaſily diſcovered; plain ; evident; .. foun d Milton. §: ...'. ion and the place comply, ºfº
- Whv w - onceal his force, nay, ſeem ſometi --es of ,
To ſuch a tender §. ... fin'd To Occa's Ion. v. a. ''...}. º * Pope. ºpen
So obvious and ſo eaſy to be .." &gt; 1. To cauſe caſually. ..] ºt.
Wh b Entertain'd with ſolitude, Milton. º: º find # reaſonable that the ſoul ſhould, in its re- º nºſ
ere obvious duty ere whil • - ent, during ſleep, never light on any of thoſe i - º
They are ſuch ſº aS * jº Milton. borrowed not from ſenſation, preſerve #. º i. S it º º, ſ
ſenſe, who loves poetry and underſtands i tº Dryden to every man of ideas but ſuch, which being occaſioned from the b }. no ºn; tº
I am apt to think many wº † bſ. ºtºº. º be leſs natural to a ſpirit C DO yº. **
are obvious to ſcholars or obſcure, which he good Pſalmift condemns the fooliſh though ºte.
Theſe ſentiments - h - Swift. a reflection on the proſperous ſtate of hi ou g ts, which
or ariſe as obvious ...; ..º. On º º times occaſioned in ...? of his affairs ly º:
cauſe they have been found i | alon, I call natural, be- 2. To cauſe ; to produce. ervury.
- I ages &gt;
º All the great lines of in all ages. Rogers. I doubt not, whether the great encreaſ -
extent of it ºft. i. º are clear and obvious ; the not have been ºn by 3. j º diſeaſe may
the wiſdom of complying win. |. º and troduced into our common tables ll Cll wº: .
r c - - - - - -n - -
". adv. [from obvious.] É. º J. ſ By its ſtyptic quality it affects the nerves, very cº
- - - &gt; - 1971.1%lg t - vºca-
cº. ... Propoſitions obviouſly and at firſt ºn, 3. To i. - 4, Arbuthnot on Aliments.
'ºviousness. , J. º - Locke. If we enquire what it i
• *. J. from obv - - we enq at it is that occaſions men t ke ſev
or apparent [ ious...] State of being evident combinations of fimple i - - *-- o make ſeveral
- - - - ple ideas into d
light $xperiments - lect others which have as much º iſtinét modes, and neg-
thought the are more eaſily and cheaply tried; I ſhall n aptneſs to be combined,
jº “ſineſs or obviouſneſ; y &gt; we ſhall find the reaſon to be the end of 1 -
“Preciate them *viouſneſs fitter to recommend than OccA'sional. adj. [2. of language. Locke,
To OBU'MBRAT: 9. a. [ob Boyle, i, Incidental : ă. occaſionel, Fr. from occaſion.]
" * * Løbumbro, Lat. I To ſhade : - - - Nº. .
2 J ade ; to cloud, Thus much is ſufficient out of ſcripture, to verify our ex-
Plication<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 209</div><p class="Text">O C C
O C C
m- *—------ * == ºr
plication of the deluge, according to the Moſtical hiſtory of
the flood, and according to many occaſional reflections diſperſed
in other places of ſcripture concerning it. Burnet.
2. Producing by accident. -
The ground or occaſional original hereof, was the amaze-
ment and ſudden ſilence the unexpected appearance of wolves
does often put upon travellers. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
3. Produced by occaſion or incidental exigence.
Thoſe letters were not writ to all ;
Nor firſt intended but occaſional,
Their abſent ſermons. Dryd. Hind, and Panth.
OccA'sion All Y. adv. [from occaſional.] According to inci-
dental exigence; incidentally. -
Authority and reaſon on her wait,
As one intended firſt, not after made
Occaſionally. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. viii.
I have endeavoured to interweave with the aſſertions ſome
of the proofs whereon they depend, and occaſionally ſcatter
ſeveral of the more important obſervations throughout the
work. J/oodw. Nat. Hiſt.
Occasion ER. m. ſ. [from occaſion.] One that cauſes, or pro-
motes by deſign or accident. -
She with true lamentations made known to the world,
that her new greatneſs did no way comfort her in reſpect of
her brother's loſs, whom ſhe ſtudied all means poſſible to
revenge upon every one of the occaſioners. Sidney, b. ii.
Some men will load me as if I were a wilful and reſolved
occaſioner of my own and my ſubjećts miſeries. K. Charles.
In caſe a man dig a pit and leave it open, whereby it
happeneth his neighbour's beaſt to fall thereinto and periſh,
the owner of the pit is to make it good, in as much as he
was the occaſioner of that loſs to his neighbour. Sanderſon.
Occecatios. n. ſ. ſoccaccatio, from occaco, Latin.] The aët
of blinding or making blind.
Thoſe places ſpeak of obduration and occeration, ſo as
if the blindneſs that is in the minds, and hardneſs that is
in the hearts of wicked men, were from God. Sanderſon.
Occident. m. ſ. [from occidens, Latin.] The weſt.
The envious clouds are bent
To dim his glory, and to ſtain the tract
Of his bright paſſage to the occident. Shakespeare R. II.
OccIDE'NTAL. adj. [occidentalis, Latin.] Weſtern.
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp,
Moiſt Heſperus hath quench'd his ſleepy lamp. Shakeſp.
If ſhe had not been drained, ſhe might have tiled her pa-
laces with occidental gold and ſilver. Howel.
Eaſt and weſt have been the obvious conceptions of phi-
loſophers, magnifying the condition of India above the ſet-
ting and occidental climates. Brown's Pulgar Err.
Occi'Duous. adj. [occidens, Latin.] Weſtern.
Occi'pital. adj. [occipitalis, Latin. J Placed in the hinder
part of the head. -
000IPUT. n.ſ. [Latin.] The hinder part of the head.
His broad-brim’d hat
Hangs o'er his occiput moſt quaintly,
To make the knave appear more ſaintly. Butler.
Occ.(sion. m. ſ. [from occiſio, Latin.] The act of killing.
To Occlu'd E. v. a. [occludo, Latin.] To ſhut up.
They take it up, and roll it upon the earths, whereby
ºluding the pores they conſerve the natural humidity, and
ſo prevent corruption. Brown.
Occluse. adj. [occluſus, Latin.] Shut up; cloſed.
The appulſe is either plenary and occluſe, ſo as to preclude
all paſſages of breath or voice through the mouth; or elſe
partial and pervious, ſo as to give them ſome paſſages out
of the mouth. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Occlu'sion. n.ſ.. [from occluſio, Latin.] The act of ſhutting
up.
CCCULT. adj. [occulte, Fr. occultus, Lat..] Secret; hidden;
unknown; undiſcoverable.
If his occult guilt
Do not itſelf unkennel in one ſpeech,
It is a damned ghoſt that we have ſeen. Shakeſp. Ham.
. An artiſt will play a leſſon on an inſtrument without mind-
ing a ſtroke; and our tongues will run diviſions in a tune
not miffing a note, even when our thoughts are totally en-
gaged elſewhere: which effects are to be attributed to ſome
ſecret act of the ſoul, which to us is utterly occult, and with-
out the ken of our intelle&amp;ts. Glanv. Scepſ c. iv.
Theſe inſtincts we call occult qualities; which is all one
with ſaying that we do not underſtand how they work. L'Eſt.
Theſe are manifeſt qualities, and their cauſes only are oc-
*. And the Ariſtotelians gave the name of occult qualitics
lot to manifeſt qualities, but to ſuch qualities only as they
"PPoſed to lie hid in bodies, and to be the unknown cauſes
of manifeſt effects. Newt. Opt.
Occultation. n. ſ. ſoccultatio, Latin.]
In aſtronomy, is the tine that a ſtar or planet is hid from
ºut fight, when eclipſed by interpoſition of the body of the
"99m, or ſome other planet between it and us. Harris.
***Thess. n.ſ. (from occult..] Secretneſs; ſtate of being hid.
Cºeurºscy. "...ſ.. [from occupans, Latin: The act of tak-
ing poſſeſſion.
- Of moveables, ſome are things natural ; others, things ar-
tificial. Property in the firſt is gained by occupancy, in the
latter by improvement. Jºrourton of Literary Property.
Occupant. n.ſ. [occupant, Latin.] He that takes poſſeſſion
of any thing. -
Of beaſts and birds the Property paſſeth with the poſſeſſion,
and goeth to the occupant; but of civil people not ſo. Bacon.
To Occupate. v.a. [occupo, Latin.] To poſſeſs; to hold;
to take up.
Drunken men are taken with a plain deſtitution in volun-
tary motion; for that the ſpirits of the wine oppreſs the ſpi-
rits animal, and occupate part of the place whºre they are,
and ſo make them weak to move. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Occupa"TION. m. ſ. [from occupation, Fr. occupatio, Lat.]
1. The act of taking poſſeſſion.
Spain hath enlarged the bounds of its crown within this laſt
ſixſcore years, much more than the Ottomans: I ſpeak not of
matches or unions, but of arms, occupations, invaſions. Bacon.
2. Employment; buſineſs.
Such were the diſtreſſes of the then infant world; ſo in-
cefiant their occupations about proviſion for food, that there
was little leiſure to commit any thing to writing. Woodw.
In your moſt buſy occupations, when you are never ſo much
taken up with other affairs, yet now and then ſend up an
ejaculation to the God of your ſalvation. J/ake.
3. Trade ; calling; vocation.
The red peſtilence ſtrike all trades in Rome, -
And occupations periſh. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
He was of the ſame craft with them, and wrought, for by
their occupation they were tent-makers. Acis xviii. 3.
Occupier, n.ſ.. [from occupy.]
I. A poſſeſſor; one who takes into his poſſeſſion.
If the title of occupiers be good in a land unpeopled, why
ſhould it be bad accounted in a country peopled over thinly
Raleigh's Eſſays.
2. One who follows any employment.
Thy merchandiſe and the occupiers of thy merchandiſe,
ſhall fall into the midſt of the ſeas. Ezek. xxvii. 27.
To O'CCUPY. v. a. ſoccuper, Fr. occupo, Latin.]
1. To poſſeſs ; to keep 5 to take up.
How ſhall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned ſay
amen at thy giving of thanks, ſeeing he underſtandeth not
what thou ſayeſt ? º I Cor. xiv. 16.
Powder being ſuddenly fired altogether, upon this high ra-
refaction, requireth a greater ſpace than before its body oc-
cupied. Brown's Wulgar Err. b. ii.
He muſt aſſert, that there were infinite generations before
that firſt deluge; and then the earth could not receive them,
but the infinite bodies of men muſt occupy an infinite ſpace.
Bentley's Sermons.
2. To buſy; to employ.
They occupied themſelves about the ſabbath, yielding ex-
ceeding praiſe to the Lord. 2 Mac. viii. 27.
How can he get wiſdom that driveth oxen and is occupied
in their labours, and whoſe talk is of bullocks Ecc. xxxviii. 25.
He that giveth his mind to the law of the moſt high, and
is occupied in the meditation thereof, will ſeek out the wiſ-
dom of all the ancient, and be occupied in propheſies.
Eccus xxxix. I.
3. To follow as buſineſs. -
They occupy their buſineſs in deep waters. Comm. Prayer.
Mariners were in thee to occupy thy merchandiſe. Ez.xxvii. 9.
4. To uſe; to expend.
All the gold occupied for the work, was twenty and nine
talents. Exodus xxxviii. 24.
To Occu'PY. v. n. To follow buſineſs.
He called his ten ſervants, and delivered them ten pounds,
and ſaid unto them, occupy till I come. Luke xix. 13.
To OCCU'R. v. n. [occurro, Latin.]
1. To be preſented to the memory or attention.
There doth not occur to me any uſe of this experiment for.
profit. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſł.
The mind ſhould be always ready to turn itſelf to the ya-
riety of objećts that occur, and allow them as much confide-
ration as ſhall be thought fit. Locke.
The far greater part of the examples that occur to us, are
ſo many encouragements to vice and diſobedience. Kºgºr.
2. To appear here and there. -
In ſcripture, though the word heir occur, yet there is no
ſuch thing as heir in our author's ſenſe. Locke.
3. To claſh; to ſtrike againſt; to meet. - -
All bodies have a determinate motion according to the de-
grees of their external impulſe, their inward principle of gra-
Vitation, and the reſiſtance of the bodies they ºctºr with.
Bentley's Sermons.
4. To obviate; to make oppoſition to. A lafiniſm. . . .
Before I begin that I muſt occur to one ſpecious objection
againſt this propoſition. Bentley's Serm.
18 M Occu'RRENc E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 210</div><p class="Text">o c T
am-
- - - s
- …rance, Fr. from occur: this was perhap
t)ccu'RRENce. n.ſ. ſoccurrº” F
- - ºrmrrentury.
originally occur. J
ident; accidental event. - - -
I. lº. ji time is to be beſtowed on that which is
ſt conſequence in the ordinary courſe and occur-
... |. º: man is deſigned for. Locke.
reſentation.
2. º: the mind by the perpetual **
expectation of ſomething new. I º º
Occu'RRENT. n.ſ. ſoccurrent, Fr. occurrens, Lat..] Incident;
- happens. -
*... º as yet never able to prevent two evils,
the one a mutual exchange of unſeemly and unjuſt diſgraces,
the other a common hazard of both to be made, a . by
ńch as ſtudy how to work upon all *; wº º:
- in private. ooker's Leacaſ.
**. "...it certify all the news and occurrents .
every particular, from Calice, to the º º º
London. aco -
- - - -º a n.ſ. ſoccurſºm, Latin.] Claſh; mutual blow.
“ºff. of tº. by fire, ſome of the diſſipated
parts may, by their various occurſion occaſioned by the jº
- oſely. tºle;
*: ºld thoſe a&amp;ive particles, ever, and anºn juſtled
by the occurſion of other bodies, ſo orderly keep, their cells
without alteration of ſite. - Glanv. Scepſ.
OCEAN. m. ſ. [ocean, Fr. oceanu, Latin.]
1. The main; the great ſea.
The golden ſun ſalutes the ..",
nd, having gilt the ocean with his beams, -
§ ... Shakeſp. Tit, and Andronicus.
will all great Neptune's ocean waſh this blood
Clean from my hand Shakeſp. Macbeth.
2. Any immenſe expanſe.
Time, in general, is to duration, as place to expanſion,
They are ſo much of thoſe boundleſs oceans of eternity and
immenſity, as is ſet out and diſtinguiſhed from the reſt, to
denote the poſition of finite real beings, in thoſe uniform,
infinite oceans of duration and ſpace. Locke.
O'cEAN. adj. [This is not uſual, though conformable to the
original import of the word..] Pertaining to the main or great
ſea.
In bulk as huge as that ſea-beaſt
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugeſt that ſwim th’ ocean ſtream. Milt. P. Lºft.
Bounds were ſet -
To darkneſs, ſuch as bound the ocean wave. Miltºn.
Ocea'Nick, n. ſ. [from ..") Pertaining to the ocean. Die!.
Oce'llATED. adj. [ocellatus, Latin.] Reſembling the eye.
The white butterfly lays its offspring on cabbage leaves; a
very beautiful reddiſh ocellated onc. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
O'chr E. m. ſ. [ochre, ocre, Fr. ºx; 2.]
The earths diſtinguiſhed by the name of ochres are thoſe
which have rough or naturally duſty ſurfaces, are but ſlightly
coherent in their texture, and are compoſed of fine and loft
argillaceous particles, and are readily diffuſible in water.
They are of various colours; ſuch as red, yellow, blue, green,
black. The yellow ſort are called ochres of iron, and the
blue ochres of copper. Hill's Mat. Med.
O'CHREous. adj. [from ochre.] Conſiſting of ochre.
In the interſtices of the flakes is a grey, chalky, or ochre-
6tts matter. //oodward on Foſſils.
O'CHREY. adj. [from ochre.] Partaking of ochre.
This is conveyed about by the water; as we find in earthy,
ochrey, and other looſe matter. Woodw. on Fºſſ.
O'cHIMY. m. ſ. [formed by corruption from alchimy.] A mixed
baſe metal.
OCTAGON. m. ſ. [3:12 and yovſz.] In geometry, a figure
conſiſting of eight ſides and angles; and this, when all the
ſides and angles are equal, is called a regular oélagon, which
may be inſcribed in a circle. Harris.
oº::cºat. adj. [from octagon.] Having eight angles and
Oct ANGULAR. adj. [acio and angulus, Lat.] Having eight
angles. Die?.
Oct ANGULARNFss. n. ſ. [from oélangular.] The quality of
having eight angles. Dićf.
Oct ANT. ; adj. In aſtrology, is, when a planet is in ſuch
Octite. an aſpect or poſition with reſpect to another, that
their places are only diſtant an eighth part of a circle or
forty-five degrees. Dic?.
Ocºve. n, f: [ºave, Fr. offavus, Lat.]
* The eighth day after ſome peculiar feſtival.
2. In muſick..] An eighth or an interval of eight ſounds.
3: Eight days together after a feſtival. Ainſ.
OCTA 10. […] A book is ſaid to be in octavo when a
ſheet is folded into eight leaves. Dić7.
They now accompany the ſecond edition of the original
*Pºrtments, which were printed firſt in Engliſh in viavº.
- Boyle.
Octº's N1A1. adj. [from zélennium, Lat.]
1. Happening every cighth year. -
2. Laſting eight years. -
OCTOBER. m. ſ. [Octºber, Lat. cºchre, Fr.] The terth moºth
of the year, or the eighth numbered from March.
- - …” -
Oºzier is drawn in a garment of yellow and carnation;
upon his head a garland of oak leaves, in his right hand the
ſign ſcorpio, in his left a baſket of ſerviſes. Peach ºn.
Octoe D'Rica L. adi. Having eight ſides. J.J. f.
Octo'GENARY. adj. [actºni, Lat J Of eighty years of age.
- 12/c2.
O'cron ARY. adj. [ºnarius, Lat.] Belonging to the nun-
ber eight. 12:...'.
Octoso'cular, adj. ſo.” and arºs.' . Having eight eyes.
Moſt animals are binocular ; ſpiders for the moſt part of o-
nocular, and ſome ſenocular. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
Octope". Alous. adj. [3,43 and Tilzº, Gr.] Having eight
flower leaves. Dict.
Octostyle. n.ſ. (2.42 and sºº’, Gr.] In the ancient ar-
chitecture, is the face of a building or ordonnance containing
cight columns. Barriſ.
Ocºuple. adj. [oël:plus, Lat.] Eight fold. Dić7.
O'CULAR. adj. [oculaire, Fr. from oculus, Lat.] Depending
on the eye; known by the eye.
Prove my love a whore,
Be ſure of it : give me the ocular proof,
Or thou hadſt better have been born a dog. Shakeſpeare.
He that would not believe the menace of God at firſt, it
may be doubted whether before an ocular example he be-
lieved the curſe at firſt. Brown's W. Err.
O'cul ARLY. adv. [from ocular.] To the obſervation of the eye.
The ſame is ocularly confirmed by Vives upon Auſtin. Bro.
O'culate. adj. [oculatus, Latin.] Having eyes; knowing by
the eye.
oº: n: ſ [from oculus, Latin.] One who profeſſes to
cure diſtempers of the eyes.
If there be a ſpeck in the eye, we take them off; but he
were a ſtrange oculiſt who would pull out the eye. Bacon.
I am no oculīſī, and if I ſhould go to help one eye and put
out the other, we ſhould have but an untoward buſineſs of it.
L'//trange.
O CULUS beli. [Latin.] -
The oculus beli of the modern jewellers, and probably of
Pliny, is only an accidental variety of the agat kind; hasing
a grey horny ground, with circular delineations, and a ſpot
in the middle of them ſomething reſembling the fight of the
eye; whence the ſtone had its name. //oodw.
ODD. adj. [udda, Swediſh.]
1. Not even ; not diviſible into equal numbers.
This is the third time; I hope
Good luck lies in odd numbers. Shakeſpeare.
What verity there is in that numeral conceit, in the lateral
diviſion of man by even and odd; aſcribing the odd unto the
right ſide, and the even unto the left; and ſo by parity, or
imparity of letters in mens names, to determine misfortunes.
Brown's /ular Errours, b. iv.
2. More than a round number ; indefinitely exceeding any
number ſpecified.
The account of the profits of Ulſter, from the fifth year
of Edward IIId. until the eighth, do amount but to nine
hundred and odd pounds. Davies on Ireland.
Sixteen hundred and odd years after the earth was made,
it was deſtroyed in a deluge of water. Burnet's Theory.
The year, without regard to days, ends with an odd day
and odd hours, odd minutes and odd ſeconds of minutes; ſo
that it cannot be meaſured by any even number of days,
hours, or minutes. Holder on Time.
3. Particular; uncouth; extraordinary ; not like others; not
to be numbered among any claſs. In a ſenſe of contempt or
diſlike.
Her madneſs hath the oddſ? frame of ſenſe,
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e'er I heard in madneſs. Shakespeare Meaſure fºr Maſ.
Of thee, kind boy, I aſk no red and white,
To make up my delight,
No odd becoming graces,
Black eyes, or little know not what's in faces. Suckling.
This blue colour being made by nothing elſe than by re-
flexion of a ſpecular ſuperficies, ſecms ſo odd a phenomenon
and ſo difficult to be explained by the vulgar hypotheſis of
philoſophers, that I could not but think it deſerved to be
taken notice of. Newt. Opt.
When I broke looſe from writers who have employed their
wit and parts in propagating of vice, I did not queſtion but
I ſhould be treated as an odd kind of a fellow. Speciator.
No fool Pythagoras was thought;
He made his liſt’ning ſcholars ſtand,
Their mouth ſtill cover'd with their hand :
Elſe, may be, ſome odd thinking youth,
Might have refus’d to let his ears -
Attend the muſic cf the ſpheres. Priºr.
So
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 211</div><p class="Text">O D D
--
-º
So proud I am no ſlave,
So impudent I own myſelf no knave, }
So odd, my country's ruin makes me grave. Pope.
4. Not noted not taken into the common account; unheeded.
I left him cooling of the air with fighs,
In an odd angle of the iſle. - Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
There are yet miſfing ſome few odd lads that you remem-
ber not. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
5. Strange ; unaccountable; fantaſtical.
É. ſtrange or odd ſoe’er I bear myſelf,
As I, perchance, hereafter ſhall think meet,
To put an antick diſpoſition on. Shakespeare Hamlet,
It is an odd way of uniting parties to deprive a majority of
part of their ancient right, by conferring it on a fačtion, who
had never any right at all. Swift.
Patients have ſometimes coveted odd things which have re-
lieved them; as ſalt and vinegar. Arbuthn. on Aliments.
6. Uncommon ; particular.
The odd man to perform all three perfectly is, Joannes
Sturmius. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
7. Unlucky. - -
The truſt Othello puts him in,
On ſome odd time of his infirmity,
Will ſhake this iſland.
8. Unlikely; in appearance improper: .
Mr. Locke's Eſſay would be a very odd book for a man to
make himſelf maſter of, who would get a reputation by cri-
tical writings. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 291.
Opply, adv. [from odd. This word and oddneſs, ſhould, I
think, be written with one dº but the writers almoſt all com-
bine againſt it.]
1. Not evenly.
2. Strangely ; particularly ; unaccountably ; uncouthly.
How oddly will it ſound, that I,
Muſt aſk my child forgiveneſs. Shakespeare Tempeſt.
One man is preſſed with poverty, and looks ſomewhat
oddly upon it. Collier on the Spleen.
The dreams of ſleeping men are made up of the waking
man's ideas, though for the moſt part oddly put together. Locke.
This child was near being excluded out of the ſpecies of
man barely by his ſhape. It is certain a figure a little more
oddy turned had caſt him, and he had been executed. Locke.
The real eſſence of ſubſtances we know not; and there-
fore are ſo undetermined in our nominal eſſences, which we
make ourſelves, that if ſeveral men were to be aſked con-
cerning ſome oddly-ſhaped fetus, whether it were a man or
no it is paſt doubt, one ſhould meet with different º:
očke.
Shakeſp. Othello.
Her aukward love indeed was oddly fated;
She and her Polly were too near related.
As maſters in the clare obſcure,
With various light your eyes allure:
A flaming yellow here they ſpread;
Draw off in blue, or charge in red;
Yct from theſe colours oddly mix’d,
Your fight upon the whole is fix’d. Prior.
They had ſeen a great black ſubſtance lying on the ground
very oddly-ſhaped. Gulliv. Trav.
Foſſils are very oddly and elegantly ſhaped, according to
the modification of their conſtituent ſalts, or the cavities they
are formed in. Bentley's Serm.
O'DDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from odd.]
I, The ſtate of being not even.
2. Strangeneſs; particularity; uncouthneſs.
Coveting to recommend himſelf to poſterity, Cicero begged
it as an alms of the hiſtorians, to remember his conſulſhip ; and
obſerve the oddneſs of the event; all their hiſtories are loſt,
and the vanity of his requeſt ſtands recorded in his own writ-
ings. - Dryden's Aurengzebe, Prºf.
A knave is apprehenſive of being diſcovered; and this ha-
bitual concern puts an oddneſs into his looks. Collier.
My wife fell into a violent diſorder, and I was a little diſ-
compoſed at the oddneſs of the accident. Swift.
ODDs. n.ſ.. [from odd.]
1. Inequality; exceſs of either compared with the other.
Between theſe two caſes there are great odds. Hooker.
The caſe is yet not like, but there appeareth great odds
between them. Spenſer on Ireland.
I will lay the odds that ere this year expire,
We bear our civil ſwords and native fire,
As far as France. - Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Cromwel, with odds of number and of fate,
Prior.
Remov’d this bulwark of the church and ſtate. Waller.
I chiefly who enjoy
So far the happier lot, enjoying thee
Pre-eminent by ſo much odds. Milton's Paradſ, Loft.
Shall I give him to partake
Full happineſs with me or rather not ;
But keep the odds of knowledge in my pow'r
Without co-partner * 44 iton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix.
All theſe, thus uncºually furniſhed with truth, and ad-
vanced in knowledge, I ſuppoſe of cquai natural parts; all the
ºdds between them has been the different ſcope that has
been given to their underſtandings to range in. / ocłe.
Judging is balancing an account, and determining on which
ſide the odd, lie. Locke.
2. More than an even wager. -
Since every man by nature is very prone to think the beſt
ºf himſelf, and of his own condition; it is odd, but he will
find a ſhrewd temptation. outh's Serm.
The preſbyterian party endeavoured one day to introduce
a debate about repealing the teſt clauſe, when there appeared
at leaſt four to one odds againſt them. Swift.
Some biſhop beſtows upon them ſome inconſiderable Ée-
nefice, when 'tis odds they are already encumbered with a
numerous family. Swift's Miſcell.
3. Advantage; ſuperiority.
And tho’ the ſword, ſome underſtood,
In force had much the odds of wood, - -
'Twas nothing ſo; both ſides were balanc'd
So equal, none knew which was valiant'ſt.
4. Quarrel; debate; diſpute.
I can't ſpeak
Any beginning to this peeviſh odds.
What is the night
Almoſt at odds with the morning, which is which.
He flaſhes into one groſs crime or other,
That ſets us all at odds. Shakeſp. King Lear,
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were ſtill at odds, being but three;
Until the gooſe came out of door,
And ſtaid the odds by adding four.
Gods of whatſoe'er degree,
Reſume not what themſelves have given,
Or any brother God in heav'n; , .
Which keeps the peace among the Gods, * -
Or they muſt always be at odds. Swift's Miſcell.
ODE. n.ſ. [dº.] A poem written to be ſung to muſick; a
lyrick poem; the ode is either of the greater or leſs kind;
The leſs is charaćteriſed by ſweetneſs and eaſe; the greater
by ſublimity, rapture, and quickneſs of tranſition. .
A man haunts the foreſt that abuſes our young plants with
carving Roſalind on their barks; hangs odes upon hawthorns,
and elegies on brambles, all forſooth deifying the name of
Roſalind. Shakeſp. A you like it.
O run, prevent them with thy humble ode,
And lay it lowly at his bleſſed feet.
What work among you ſcholar Gods !
Phoebus muſt write him am’rous odes;
And thou, poor couſin, muſt compoſe
His letters in ſubmiſſive proſe.
O'Dible. adj. [from odi.] Hateful.
O'DIOUS, adj. ſodicux, Fr. odioſus, Latin.j
1. Hateful; deteſtable; abominable.
For ever all goodneſs will be moſt charming; for ever all
wickedneſs will be moſt odious. Sprat's Serm.
Hatred is the paſſion of defence, and there is a kind of
hoſtility included in its very eſſence. But then, if there
could have been hatred in the world, when there was ſcarce
any thing odious, it would have acted within the compaſs of
its proper objećt. South's Sermons.
Let not the Trojans, with a feign'd pretence
Of proffer'd peace, delude the Latian prince :
Hudibras.
Shakespeare Othell.
Shakespeare
Sha, L. Lab. Lºft.
Milt. Poems.
Prior.
Die?.
Expel from Italy that odious name. Dryden.
She breathes the odious fume -
Of nauſeous ſteams, and poiſons all the room. Granvi
2.Expoſed to hate.
Another means for raiſing money, was, by inquiring after
offences of officers in great place, who as by unjuſt dealing
they became moſt odious, ſo by juſtice in their puniſhments
the prince acquired both love and applauſe. Hayward.
He had rendered himſelf odious to the parliament. Clarend.
3. Cauſing hate ; incidious.
The ſeventh from thee,
The only righteous in a world perverſe,
And therefore hated, therefore ſo beſet
With foes, for daring fingle to be juſt,
And utter odious truth, that God would
To judge them with his ſaints.
O'Diously. adv. [from odious.]
1. Hatefully ; abominably.
j thy love, ſtill odiouſly pretended, -
Been as it ought, ſincere, it would have taught thge ,
Far other reas'nings. A4ilton's Agon}ies.
2. Invidiouſly; ſo as to cauſe hate. -
Arbitrary power no ſober man can fear, either from the
king's diſpoſition or his practice; or even where you would
odiouſly lay it, from his miniſters. Dryden.
O'DioGsNess. n.ſ. [from odious.]
I. Hatefulneſs.
Have a true ſenſe of his fin, of its odiouſneſs, and of its
danger IFake's Prºp. for Death.
Conne
Milton's Par. Lº/?.
2. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 212</div><p class="Text">O E I
O F
2. The ſtate of being hated.
There was left ºf the blood royal, an aged gentleman of
approved goodneſs, who had gotten nothing by his couſin's
power but danger from him, and odiouſneſs for him. Sidney.
ODIUM. n.ſ. [Latin..] Invidiouſneſs; quality of provoking hatc.
The odiºm and offences which ſome men's rigour or re.
miſneſs had contracted upon my government, I was reſolved
to have expiated. King Charles.
She threw the odium of the fact on me, n
And publickly avowed her love to you. - - Dryden.
OdoNTA'icick. adj. [332, and &amp;ayo;..] Pertaining to the
tooth-ach. -
O'dorate. adj. [oderatus, Latin.] Scented; having a ſtrong
ſcent, whether foetid or fragrant. -
Smelling is with a communication of the breath, or va-
pour of the object odorate. Bacºn'; Nº. Hi/.
ODORI'FEROUS. adj. [odoriſer, Lat.J Giving ſcent; uſually,
ſweet of ſcent; fragrant; perfumed. -
A bottle of vinegar ſo buried, came forth more lively and
odoriferous, ſmelling almcº like a violet. alcºhl.
Gentle gales
Fanning their odoriferºus, wings, diſpenſe
Native perfumes, and whiſper whence they ſtole -
Theſe balmy ſpoils. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. iv.
Smelling bodies ſend forth effluvias of ſteams, without ſen-
fibly waſting. Thus a grain of muſk will. ſend forth odori-
ferºus particles for ſcores of years, without its being ſpent.
- Locke.
OpoRI'FERousness. n. ſ. [from odoriferous. J Sweetneſs of
ſcent; fragrance.
O'Donous. dj. [odorus, Lat. J Fragrant; perfumed; ſweet
of ſcent. -
Such fragrant flowers do give moſt odorous ſmell,
But her ſweet odour did them all excel. Spenſer.
Their private roofs on odºrous timber borne,
Such as might palaces for kings adorn. //aller.
We ſmell, becauſe parts of the odorous body touch the
nerves of our noſtrils. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
O'Dour. n.ſ. [odor, Lat. odeur, Fr.]
1. Scent, whether good or bad.
Democritus, when he lay a dying, ſent for loaves of new
bread, which having opened and poured a little wine into
them, he kept himſelf alive with the odour till a certain feaſt
was paſt. Bacon.
Infuſions in air, for ſo we may call odours, have the ſame
diverſities with infuſions in water; in that the ſeveral odours
which are in one flower or other body, iſſue at ſeveral times,
ſome earlier, ſome later. Bacon.
They refer ſapor unto ſalt, and odºur unto ſulphur; they
vary much concerning colour. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
2. Fragrance; perfume ; ſweet ſcent.
Me ſeem'd I ſmelt a garden of ſweet flow’rs,
That dainty odours from them threw around,
For damſels fit to deck their lover's bow’rs. Spenſºr.
By her interceſſion with the king ſhe would lay a moſt ſea-
ſonable and popular obligation upon the whole nation, and
leave a pleaſant odour of her grace and favour to the people
behind her. Clarend.
The Levites burned the holy incenſe in ſuch quantities
as refreſhed the whole multitude with its odours, and filled
all the region about them with perfume. Addiſon's Freehold.
OE. This combination of vowels does not properly belong to
our language, nor is ever found but in words derived from
the Greek, and not yet wholly conformed to our manner of
writing: oe has in ſuch words the ſound of E.
OEcono'Micks. n.ſ. ſolzovopºds, a concmique, Fr. from oeco-
nomy. Both it and its derivatives are under exonºmy.] Manage-
ment of houſehold affairs,
A prince's leaving his buſineſs wholly to his miniſters, is
as dangerous an errour in politicks, as a maſter's committing
all to his ſervant, is in oeconomicks. L’Eſtrange.
Oecu'Mºnical. adj. [diaspiyizès, from dºeºtyn.] General 3.
reſpecting the whole habitable world.
º Nicene ... not received as an oecumenical
Council in any of the eaſtern patriarchates ting
that of Čº. p » º
OEDE MA, n. ſ. [3,3,42, from £13:w, to ſwell.] A tumour. It
is now and commonly by ſurgeons confined to a white, ſoft, in-
ſenſible tumour, Proceeding from cold and aqueous humours,
ſuch as ha - - - -
appen to hydropick conſtitutions. - 9tuincy.
OEDEMA'tick. ydrop &amp;uincy
OF DE'Matous. ! adj. [from oedema..] Pertaining to an oedema.
i." º generated out of the effuſion of melancho-
a phlegmº or ſecondarily out of the dregs and remainder of
p *nous or oedematick tumour. Harvey on Conſump.
waſ: º of matter, and the extremity of pain
languiſhed. *us ſwellings aroſe in her legs, and ſhe
guiſhed and died. //ſeman's Surgery.
OE'IL AD. n ſ: [f -
- - - - TOIn 6 - ink . -
of the eye. [ ºil, French..] Clance; wink; token
7
She cave zºº and moſt ſpeaking loºks - r-.
To noble Edmund. Sºakeſp. lºng Lear.
O’ER. contracted from ºver. See Over.
His tears defic'd the ſurface of the well,
with circle after circle as they fºll,
And now the lovely face but half aſ Pºrs, -
or run with wrinkles and defac'd with tears. . .”.
OE’soph Agus. m. ſ. [from Cigá;, wicker, from ſome fini-
litude in the ſtructure of this part to the contexture of
that ; and taxa to eat J The gullet ; a long, large, and
round canal, that deſcenº’s from the mouth, lying all along
between the windpipe aid the joints of the neck and back,
to the fifth joint of the back, where it turns a little to the
right, and gives way to the deſcending artery; and both run
by one another, till at the ninth the oeſºphagus turns again to
the left, pierces the midriff, and is continued to the left orifice
of the ſtomach. - &amp;airy.
Wounds penetrating the oeſºphagus and ºffera arteria, re-
quire to be ſtitched cloſe, eſpecially thoſe of the oeſºphagus,
where the ſuſtenance and ſaliva ſo continually preſſeth into it.
///eman's Surgery.
OF. prºp. [or, Saxon.]
1. It is put before the ſubſtantive that follows another in con-
ſtruction; as, of theſe part were ſlain ; that is, part of theſe.
I cannot inſtantly raiſe up the groſs
Of full three thouſand ducats. Shakeſpeare.
e to his natural endowments of a large invention, a ripe
judgment, and a ſtrong memory, has joined the knowledge
of the liberal arts. - Dryden.
All men naturally fly to God in extremity, and the moſt
atheiſtical perſon in the world, when forſaken of all hopes
of any other relief, is forced to acknowledge him. Tillotſºn.
They will receive it at laſt with an ample accumulation o
intereſt. Smallridge's Serm.
Since the rouſing of the mind with ſome degrees of vigour,
does ſet it free from thoſe idle companions. ocłe.
The value of land is raiſed only by a greater plenty of
money. Locke.
2. It is put after comparative and ſuperlative adjećtives.
The moſt renowned of all are thoſe to whom the name is
given Philippinae. Abbot's Deſtript. of the World.
We profeſs to be animated with the beſt hopes of any men
in the world. Tillotſon's Serm.
At midnight, the moſt diſmal and unſeaſonable time of all
other, then all thoſe virgins aroſe and trimmed their lamps.
Tillotſºn, Serm. 31.
We are not to deſcribe our ſhepherds as ſhepherds at this
day really are, but as they may be conceived then to have
been, when the beſt of men followed the employment. Pope.
Peace, of all worldly bleſfings, is the moſt valuable. Small.
- From. -
3 The captain of the Helots, with a blow whoſe violence
grew of fury, not of ſtrength, or of ſtrength proceeding of
fury, ſtruck Palladius upon the ſide of the head. Sidney.
One that I brought up of a puppey, one that
I ſav'd from drowning. Shakespeare Two Gent. of Verona.
He borrowed a box of the ear of the Engliſhman, and
ſwore he would pay him again when he was able. Shakespeare
It was called Corcyra ºf Corcyra, the daughter of AEſopus.
Sandy's Travels.
4. Concerning; relating to.
The quarrel is not now ºf fame and tribute,
Or of wrongs done unto confederates,
But for your own republick. Ben. Jºhnſºn's Cat.
This cannot be underſtood of the firſt diſpoſition of the
waters; as they were before the flood. Burnet.
All have this ſenſe of war. Smallridge's Serm.
5. Out of. -
Yet of this little he had ſome to ſpare,
To feed the famiſh’d and to clothe the bare. Dryden.
Look once again, and for thy huſband loſt,
Lo all that's left of him, thy huſband's ghoſt. Dryden.
6. Among.
He is the only perſon of all others for an epic poem. Dryd.
Of all our heroes thou canſt boaſt alone,
That Jove, whene'er he thunders, calls thee ſon. Dryd.
Neither can I call to mind any clergyman of my own ac-
quaintance who is wholly exempt from this error. Swift.
7. By. This ſenſe was once very frequent, but is not now in
uſe.
She dying
Shall be lamented, pitied, and excus'd
Of every bearer. Shakeſpeare.
Like heav’n in all, like earth in this alone,
That tho' great ſtates by her ſupport do ſtand,
Yet ſhe herſelf ſupported is of none,
But by the finger of the Almighty's hand. Bavier.
I was friendly entertained of the Éngliſh conſul. Sandys.
Leſt a more honourable man than thoſe be bidden of him.
N. F./?.
8. Accord-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 213</div><p class="Text">O F
ding to. - -
8. According tº The ſenate
And people of Rome, of their accuſtom'd greatneſs,
will ſharply and ſeverely vindicate
Not only any fact, but any practice
'Gainſt the ſtate. Ben. jºhnſºn's Catiline.
They do of right belong to you, being moſt of them firſt
reached amongſt you. - Tillotſon's Ded.
p Tancred, whoſe delight
was plac'd in his fair daughter's daily ſight,
Of cuſtom, when his ſtate affairs were done,
Would paſs his pleaſing hours with her alone. - Dryden.
9. Noting power, ability, choice, or ſpontaneity. With the re-
ciprocal pronoun. -
Some ſoils put forth odorate herbs of themſelves; as wild
Wme. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
‘of himſelf man is confeſſedly unequal to his duty. Steph.
The Venice glaſſes would crack of themſelves. Boyle.
Of himſelf is none,
But that eternal infinite and one,
Who never did begin, who ne'er can end ;
On him all beings, as their ſource, depend:
The thirſty cattel, of themſelves obtain'd
From water, and their graſſy fare diſdain'd. Dryden.
To aſſert mankind to have been of himſelf, and without
a cauſe, hath this invincible objećtion againſt it, that we
plainly ſee every man to be from another. Tº
No particle of matter, nor any combination of particles;
that is, no bodies can either move of themſelves, or of them-
ſelves alter the direction of their motion. Cheyne.
A free people met together, as ſoon as they fall into any
acts of civil ſociety, do of themſelves divide into three powers.
Swift.
th
Dryden.
It was civil in angel or elf,
For he ne'er could have filled it ſo well of himſelf. Swift.
Io. Noting properties or qualities:
He was a man ºf a decayed fortune, and ºf no good educa-
tion. Clarend.
The colour of a body may be changed by a liquor which
of itſelf is of no colour, provided it be ſaline. Boyle.
The freſh eglantine exhal'd a breath,
Whoſe odours were of pow'r to raiſe from death. Dryd.
A man may ſuſpend the act of his choice from being de-
termined for or againſt the thing propoſed, till he has exa-
mined whether it be really of a nature, in itſelf and con-
ſequences, to make him happy or no. Locke.
The value of land is raiſed, when remaining of the ſame
fertility it comes to yield more rent. Locke.
11. Noting extraction.
Lunsford was a man of an ancient family in Suſſex. Clar.
Mr. Rowe was born of an ancient family in Devonſhire,
that for many ages had made a handſome figure in their
country. Rowe's Life.
12. Noting adherence, or belonging.
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furniſh me. Shakespeare Merch. of Wenice.
Pray that in towns and temples of our own,
The name of great Anchiſes may be known.
13. Noting the matter of any thing.
The chariot was all of cedar, gilt and adorned with cryſ-
tal, ſave that the fore end had pannels of ſaphires ſet in bor-
ders of gold, and the hinder end the like of emeralds of the
Peru colour. Bacon’s New Atlantis.
The common materials which the ancients made their
ſhips of, were the wild aſh, the evergreen oak, the beech,
and the alder. Arbuthnot on Coins:
14. Noting the motive. -
It was not of my own choice that I undertook this work.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Our ſov’reign Lord has ponder'd in his mind
The means to ſpare the blood of gentle kind;
And of his grace and inborn clemency,
He modifies his ſevere decree.
15. Noting form or manner of exiſtence.
As if our Lord, even of purpoſe to prevent this fancy of
extemporal and voluntary prayers, had not left of his own
framing, one which might both remain as a part of the
church liturgy, and ſerve as a pattern whereby to frame all
other prayers with efficacy, yet without ſuperfluity of words:
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
16. Noting ſomething that has ſome particular quality.
Mother, ſays the thruſh, never had any ſuch a friend as
I have of this ſwallow. No, ſays ſhe, nor ever mother ſuch
a fool as I have of this ſame thruſh. L’Eſtrauge.
17. Noting faculties of power granted.
If any man miniſter, let him do it as of the ability which
God giveth. 1 Peter iv. 11.
18. Noting preference, or poſtponence.
Your highneſs ſhall repoſe you at the Tower.
—I do not like the Tower of any place.
19. Noting change of one ſtate to another.
O miſcrable of happy is this the end
Dryden.
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
Of this new glorious world, and me ſo late
--- -
The glory of that glory, who now become
Accurs'd, of bleſſed '''Fan” ºr - 2. ..
20. Noting cauſality. - A4ilton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x.
ood nature, by which I mean beneficence and -
- . . - candour
is the product of right reaſon; which of neceſſity will give
allowance to the failures of others, b - -
is nothing perfect in mankind. by conſidering *; º:
21. Noting proportion. ryaen.
How many are there
lars themſelves.
22. Noting kind or ſpecies.
To cultivate the advantages of ſucceſ,
cabinet; and the neglect of this ſucceſs
fatal conſequence to a nation.
23. It is put before an indefinite expreſſion of time:
in late times.
Of late, divers learned men have ad
ſtatical principles.
OFF: adv. [af, Dutch.]
1. Of this adverb the chief uſe is to conjoin it with verbs:
to come ºff; to fly off; to take off;
verbs.
ºf an hundred, even amongſt ſcho-
Locke.
, is an affair of the
may be of the moſt
Swift.
as, of late,
opted the three hypo-
Boyle on Colours.
as,
which are found under the
. It is generally oppoſed to on ; as, to lay on ; to take off. In
this caſe it ſignifies, diſunion; ſeparation; breach of conti.
nuity.
Since the wiſdom of their choice is rather t
than my heart, I will practice the infinuating nod, and be off
to them moſt counterfitly. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Where are you, Sir John º off with your boots. Sha.
o have my cap
- - ce
The lurking gold upon the fatal tree;
Then rend it off. - Dryden, AEn. vi.
A piece of ſilver coined for a ſhilling, that has half the
or
ſilver clipped off, is no more a ſhilling thin a piece of wood,
which was once a ſealed yard, is ſtill a yard, when one half
of it is broke off.
Locke.
3. It ſignifies diſtance.
Weſt of this foreſt, ſcarcely off a mile, -
In goodly form comes on the enemy. Shakeſpeare.
About thirty paces off were placed harquebuſiers. Knoller.
4. In painting or ſtatuary it ſignifies proječtion or relief.
'Tis a good piece;
This comes off well and excellent. Shakeſpeare.
5. It ſignifies evaneſcence; abſence or departure.
Competitions intermit, and go off and on as it happens,
upon this or that occaſion. L’Eſtrange.
6. It ſignifies any kind of diſappointment; defeat; interruption;
adverſe diviſion: as, the affair is off; the match is off.
7. In favour.
The queſtions no way touch upon puritaniſm, either off
Or on. Sanderſon.
8. From ; not toward.
Philoclea, whoſe delight of hearing and ſeeing was beforé
a ſtay from interrupting her, gave herſelf to be ſeen unto her
with ſuch a lightening of beauty upon Zelmane, that neither
ſhe could look on, nor would look ºff. Sidney, b. ii.
9. Off hand; not ſtudied.
Several ſtarts of fancy off hand look well enough. L'Eſ.
OFF. interject. An expreſſion of abhorrence, or command to
depart.
Off, or I fly for ever from thy fight.
OFF. prep.
1. Not on. t
I continued feeling again the ſame pain; and finding it
grow violent I burnt it, and felt no more after the third time;
was never off my legs, nor kept my chamber a day. Temple.
2. Diſtant from.
Cicero's Tuſculum was at a place called Grotto Ferrate,
about two miles off this town, though moſt of the modern
writers have fixed it to Freſcati. Addiſon on Italy.
OFFAL. n.ſ. [off fall, ſays Skinner, that which falls from the
table: perhaps from offa, Latin.] -
1. Waſte meat; that which is not eaten at the table. -
He let out the offal; of his meat to intereſt, and kept a
regiſter of ſuch debtors in his pocket-book. Arbuthnot.
2. Carrion ; coarſe fleſh. -
I ſhould have fatted all the region kites
With this ſlave's offal. h burſt
Cram’d, and gorg'd, nigh burſt, * P. --&gt;
With ſuck’d º offal. - Milton's Par. Loft.
3. Refuſe; that which is thrown away as of no value. -
To have right to deal in things ſacred, was accounted an
argument of a noble and illuſtrious deſcent ; God would
Smith's Phaedr.
Shaieff. Hamlet.
l; of other profeſſions. South.
not accept the * a mall iºn his lot,
That after death his mouldring limbs ſhall rot,
A ſecret ſting remains within his mind;
The fool is to his own caſt offal; kind. Dryden.
They commonly fat hogs with offal corns. Mort.
4. Anything of no eſteem. * - 5
ſh is Rome? what rubbiſh and what offalº, Sºd.
W. tra * sºme U O'FFENCE.
-__Y -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 214</div><p class="Text">O F F
O F F
OFFENCE. m. ſ. [ºffinſ, Fr. ºffºnſº, from offendo, Lat.]
1. Crime; act of wickedneſs. •,
Thither with ſpeed their haſty courſe they ply d, .
where Chriſt the Lord for our ºffences dy'd. Fairfax.
Thou haſt ſtol’n that, which after ſome few hours
were thine without ºffence. ` Shakespeare . Henry IV.
2. A tranſgreſſion.
If, by the law of nature, every man hath not a power to
puniſh ºffences againſt it, I ſee not how the magiſtrates of any
&amp;ommunity can puniſh an alien of another county. Locke.
3. Injury. - -
I have given my opinion againſt the authority of two great
men, but I hope without ºffence to their memories; for
loved them living, and reverence them dead. Dryden.
4. Diſpleaſure given ; cauſe of diſguſt; ſcandal. . .
Giving no ºffence in anything, that the miniſtry be not
blamed. 2 Cor. vi. 3.
He remcmbered the injury of the children of Bean, who
had been a ſhare and an office unto the people. ," Mac. iv.
The pleaſures of the touch are gºater than thoſe of the
other ſenſes; as in warming upon cold, or refrigeºt”, “P”
heat: for as the pains of the touch are greater than the of
fences of other ſenſes, ſo º are the pleaſures. Bacºn.
. Anger; diſpleaſure conceived. -
5 film'ſ º preſent humour, and making himſelf brave
in his liking, he was content to give them juſt cauſe of ºſ-
ºnce when they had power to make juſt revenge. Sidney.
6. Attack; act of the affailant.
Courteſy that ſeemed incorporated in his heart, would not
be perſuaded to offer any ºffence, but only to ſtand upon the
beſt defenſive guard. - Sidney.
O. Fºrceful. adj. [offence and full.] Injurious; giving diſ-
pleaſure.
It ſeems your moſt offence/ul act
Was mutually committed. Shakespeare . Meaſure fºr Mºoſ.
OFFE's celess. adj. [from ºffence.) Unoffending; innocent.
You are but now caſt in his mood, a puniſhment more in
policy than in malice ; even ſo as one would beat his offence-
lºſs dog to affright an imperious lion. Shakeſp. Othell.
To OFFEND. v. a. [ºffend, Latin.]
1. To make angry.
If much you note him
You ſhall ºffend him, and extend his paſſion,
Feed and regard him not. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Three ſorts of men my ſoul hateth, and I am greatly ºf
finded at their life. Ecclus xxv.2.
The emperor himſelf came running to the place in his ar-
mour, ſeverely reproving them of cowardice who had for-
faken the place, and grievouſly offended with them who had
kept ſuch negligent watch. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
2. To aſſail; to attack.
He was ſain to defend himſelf, and withal ſo to offind him,
that by an unlucky blow the poor Philoxenus fell dead at his
fect. Sidney.
3. To trangreſs; to violate.
4. To injure.
Cheaply you fin, and puniſh crimes with eaſe,
Not as th’ ºffended, but th' offenders pleaſe. Dryden.
To OFFEND. v. n.
1. To be criminal; to trangreſs the law.
This man that of earthly matter maketh graven images,
knoweth himſelf to ºffend above all others. J//d. xiv. 13.
Whoſoever ſhall, keep the whole law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all. james ii. Io.
2. To cauſe anger.
I ſhall offend, either to detain or give it.
3. To commit tranſgreſſion.
Our language is extremely imperfect, and in many in-
ſtances it ºffends againſt every part of grammar. Swift.
OFFENDER. n.ſ.. [from offend.]
1. A criminal ; one who has committed a crime; a tranſgreſſor;
a guilty perſon. c
All that watch for iniquity are cut off, that make a man
an offender for a word. Iſ, xxix. 21.
So like a fly the poor offender dies; -
But like the waſp, the rich eſcapes and flies.
How ſhall I loſe the fin, yet keep the ſenſe,
And love th' offender, yet déteſt th' offence Pope.
The conſcience of the offender ſhall be ſharper than an
Shakeſp. Lear.
Denham:
avenger's ſword. Clariſſa.
2. One who has done an injury. iſ:
V All vengeance comes too ſhort,
Which can purſue th' offender. Shakeſp. King Lear.
º n: ſ [from offender.] A woman that offends.
Out º murthers itſelf, and ſhould be buried in highways
ture anctified limit, as "...º.º. againſt na-
º: - bakeſp. All’s well that ends well.
º * adj. [ºf enſif, Fr. i...ºft. Lat.]
I. s ing anger ; diſpleaſing; diſguſting.
- º .." Can do ill with a good conſcience, the con-
* * We herein ſeem to find is but a meer deceitful
ſºlves in error, which at the length muſt needs
turn to our greater gricſ, if that which we do to pleaſe God
moſt, be for the minifold defects thereof ºffenſive unto him.
Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 4.
It ſhall ſuffice, to touch ſuch cuſtoms of the Iriſh as ſeem
offenſive and repugnant to the good government of the realm.
Speyer on Ireland.
pleaſing of our
2. Cauſing pain ; injurious. -
It is in excellent opener for the liver, but ºff nſive to the
ſtomach. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Some particular acrimony in the ſtomach ſometimes makes
it ºffen we, and which cuſtom at laſt will overcome. Arbuth.
3. Affailant; not defenſive.
He recounted the benefits and favours that he had done
him, in provoking a mighty and opulent king by an offenſive
war in his quarrel. Bºon.
We enquire concerning the advantages and diſadvantages
betwixt thoſe military offenſive engines uſed among the an-
cients, and thoſe of the:e latter ages. Jäää.
Off Fºssiy ELY. adv. [from ºff ºve.]
1. Miſchievouſly ; injuriouſly.
In the leaſt thing done ºffenſively againſt the good of men,
whoſe benefit we ought to ſeek for as our own, we plainly
ſhew that we do not acknowledge God to be ſuch as indeed
he is. Hooker, b. v. J. 2.
2. So as to cauſe uneaſineſs or diſpleaſure.
A lady had her fight diſordered, fo that the images in her
hangings did appear to her, if the room were not extraordi-
º, darkened, embelliſhed with ſeveral ºff iſſueſy vivid co-
lours. Bºyle on C.Jours.
3. By way of attack; not defenſively.
OFFE'Nsiv EN Ess. m. ſ. [from 2fº/ve.]
1. Injuriouſneſs; miſchief. - º
2. Cauſe of diſguſt.
The muſcles of the body, being preſerved found and lim-
ber upon the bones, all the motions of the parts might be
explicated with the greateſt caſe and without any offº/veneſ.
- Grew's 41aſcetim.
To OFFER. v. a. [ºffºrd, Lat. offir, Fr.]
1. To preſent to any one ; to cxhibit anything ſo as that it may
be taken or received.
The heathen women under the Mogul, offir themſelves
to the flames at the death of their huſbands. Collier.
Some ideas forwardly offer themſelves to all mens under-
ſtandings; ſome ſort of truths reſult from any idea, as ſoon
as the mind puts them into propoſitions. Locke-
Servants placing happineſs in ſtrong drink, make court to
my young maſter, by offering him that which they love. Lºcke.
2. To ſacrifice ; to immolate; to preſent as an act of worſhip.
They offered unto the Lord of the ſpoil which they had
brought, ſeven hundred oxen. 2 Chron. xv. 11.
He ſhall offer of it all the fat thereof. Lev. vii. 3.
An holy prieſthood to offer up ſpiritual ſacrifices. 1 Pet. ii. 5.
Whole herds of offer'd bulls about the fire,
And briſtled boars and woolly ſheep expire. Drydºn.
When a man is called upon to offer up himſelf to his con-
ſcience, and to reſign to juſtice and truth, he ſhould be ſo
far from avoiding the liſts, that he ſhould rather enter with
inclination, and thank God for the honour. Collier.
3. To bid, as a price or reward.
Nor ſhouldſt thou offer all thy little flore,
Will rich Iolas yield, but offer more.
4. To attempt; to commence.
Lyſimachus armed about three thouſand men, and began
firſt to offer violence. 2 A/a. iv. 40.
5. To propoſe.
In all that great extent wherein the mind wanders in re-
mote ſpeculations, it ſtirs not one jot beyond thoſe ideas
which ſenſe or reflection have offired for its contemplation.
H.2.Ér.
Our author offers no reaſon. - i.ocke.
To O'FFER. v. n.
1. To be preſent; to be at hand; to preſent itſelf.
No thought can imagine a greater heart to ſee and con-
temn danger, where danger would offir to make any wrong-
ful threatning upon him. Sidney, b. ii.
Th’ occaſion offers, and the youth complies. Drydºn.
2. To make an attempt.
We came cloſe to the ſhore, and offered to land. Bacon.
One offers, and in off ring makes a ſtay; -
Another forward ſets, and doth no more. Dan. Civ. J’ar.
I would treat the pope and his cardinals roughly, if they
Drydºn.
offered to ſee my wife without my leave. Dryden.
3. With at.
I will not offer at that I cannot maſter. Bacon.
I hope they will take it well that I ſhould offer at a new
thing, and could forbear preſuming to meddle where any of
the learned pens have ever touched before. Graunt.
Write down and make ſigns to him to pronounce them,
and guide him by ſhewing him by the motion of your own<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
lips
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 215</div><p class="Text">O F F
O F F
= ~ *-*** *===----
lips to offer at one of thoſe letters; which being the eaſieſt,
he will ſtumble upon one of them. Holder.
The maſquerade ſucceeded ſo well with him, that he would
be offring at the ſhepherd's voice and call too, L'Eſtrange.
It contains the grounds of his doctrine, and offers at ſome-
what towards the diſproof of mine. Atterbury.
Without offering at any other remedy, we haſtily engaged
in a war, which hath coſt us ſixty millions. Swift.
OFFER. m. ſ. [offre, Fr. from the verb.]
1. Propoſal of advantage to another. -
Some nymphs there are, too conſcious of their face;
Theſe ſwell their proſpects, and exalt their pride,
When offers are diſdain'd, and love deny'd.
2. Firſt advance.
Force compels this offer,
And it proceeds from policy, not love. —
— Mowbray, you overween to take it ſo :
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear.
What wouldſt beg, Laertes,
That ſhall not be my offer, not thy aſking 2
3. Propoſal made.
Th' offers he doth make,
Were not for him to give, nor them to take. Daniel.
I enjoined all the ladies to tell the company, in caſe they
had been in the ſiege and had the ſame offer made them as
the good women of that place, what every one of them
would have brought off with her, and have thought moſt
worth the ſaving. Addiſon's Spectator.
It carries too great an imputation of ignorance, or folly,
to quit and renounce former tenets upon the offer of an ar-
gument which cannot immediately be anſwered. Locke.
4. Price bid ; act of bidding a price.
When ſtock is high, they come between,
Making by ſecond hand their offers;
Then cunningly retire unſeen,
With each a million in his coffers.
5. Attempt; endeavour.
Many motions, though they be unprofitable to expel that
which hurteth, yet they are offers of nature, and cauſe mo-
tions by content; as in groaning, or crying upon pain. Bacon.
It is in the power of every one to make ſome eſſay, ſome
offer and attempt, ſo as to ſhew that the heart is not idle or
inſenſible, but that it is full and big, and knows itſelf to be
ſo, though it wants ſtrength to bring forth. South's Serm.
One ſees in it a kind of offer at modern architecture, but
at the ſame time that the archite&amp;t has ſhown his diſlike of
the gothic manner, one may ſee that they were not arrived
at the knowledge of the true way. Addison on Italy.
6. Something given by way of acknowledgment.
Fair ſtreams that do vouchſafe in your clearneſs to repre-
ſent unto me my blubbered face, let the tribute offer of my
tears procure your ſtay a while with me, that I may begin
yet at laſt to find ſomething that pities me. Sidney, b. ii.
O'FFERFR. m. ſ. [from offer.]
1. One who makes an offer.
2. One who ſacrifices, or dedicates in worſhip.
If the mind of the offerer be good, this is the only thing
God reſpcółeth. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 34.
When he commanded Abraham to ſacrifice Iſaac, the place
of the offering was not left undetermined, and to the offerer's
diſcretion. South's Sermons.
OFFERING. m. ſ. [from offer.] A ſacrifice; anything immo-
lated, or offered in worſhip.
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
Pope.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
Swift.
They could not find a heart within the beaſt. Shakeſp.
They are polluted offerings, more abhorr'd
Than ſpotted livers in the ſacrifice. Shakeſpeare.
When thou ſhalt make his ſoul an offering for fin, he ſhall
ſee his ſeed. Iſ, liii. Io.
The gloomy god
Stood mute with awe, to ſee the golden rod;
Admir'd the deſtin'd off"ring to his queen,
A venerable gift ſo rarely ſeen.
What nations now to Juno's pow'r will pray,
Or off"rings on my ſlighted altars lay Dryd. Wirg.
I'll favour her,
That my awaken'd ſoul may take her flight,
Renew’d in all her ſtrength, and freſh with life,
An offering fit for heaven. Addison's Cato.
OFFE'RTöRY. n.ſ.. [affºrtoire, Fr.] The thing offered; the
act of offering.
He went into St. Paul's church, where he made offertory
of his ſtandards, and had orizons and Te Deum ſung. Bacon.
OFFE'RTURE. m. ſ. [from offer.] Offer; propoſal of kindneſs.
A word not in uſe.
Thou haſt prevented us with offºrtures of thy love, even
when we were thine enemies. King Charles.
O'FFICE. m. ſ. ſaffice, Fr. officium, Latin.]
* A publick charge or employment.
You have contriv'd to take
From Rome all ſeaſon'd office, and to wind
Yourſelf into a power tyrannical. Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
Dryden.
Methought this ſtaff, mine offee-badge in court,
as broke in twain. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
The inſolence of off.e. Shakeſpeare.
2. Agency; peculiar uſe. ~
All things that you ſhould uſe to dome wrong,
Deny their off.e. Shakeſp. King Lear.
In this experiment the ſeveral intervals of the tººth of the
comb do the affice of ſo many priſms, every interval producing
the phenomenon of one priſm. Newt. Opt.
3. Buſineſs; particular employment.
The ſun was funk, and after him the flar
Qf Heſperus, whoſe office is to bring
Twilight upon the earth. Milt. Par. Lºft, b. ix.
4. Aćt of good or ill voluntarily tendered. &gt;
Wolves and bears
Caſting their ſavageneſs aſide, have done
Like offices of pity. Shakespeare . Jºinter’, ‘Tale,
Mrs. Ford, I ſee you are obſequious in your love, and I
profeſs requital to a hair's breadth; not only in the ſimple
office of love, but in all the accouſtrement, complement, and
ceremony of it. Shakespeare. Merry //, ºf Iſºnºr.
I would I could do a good office between you. Shakeſp.
The wolf took this occaſion to do the fox a good ºff.e.
L'A/ºrange.
You who your pious offees employ
To ſave the reliques of abandon'd Troy. Dryd. Pirg,
5. Aćt of worſhip.
This gate
Inſtructs you how tº adore the heavens, and bows you
To morning's holy office. Shºp. Cymbeline.
6. Formulary of devotions.
Whoſoever hath children or ſervants, let him take care
that they ſay their prayers before they begin their work: the
Lord's prayer, the ten commandments, and the creed, is a
yery good ºffice for them, if they are not fitted for more regu-
lar offices. Taylor's Devotion.
7. Rooms in a houſe appropriated to particular buſineſs.
What do we but draw anew the model
In fewer offices * at leaſt defiſt
To build at all. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. ii.
Let ºffices ſtand at diſtance, with ſome low galleries to paſs
from them to the palace itſelf. Bacon.
8. Place where buſineſs is tranſacted. [Officina, Lat.]
What ſhall good old York ſee there,
But empty lodgings and unfurniſh’d walls,
Unpeopled ºffices, untroden ſtones 2 Sha. Rich. II.
Empſon and Dudley, though they could not but hear of theſe
ſcruples in the king's concience, yet as if the king's ſoul
and his money were in ſeveral offices, that the one was not
to intermeddle with the other, went on with as great rage as
ever. Bacon's Henry VII.
To O'FFIce. v. a. [from the noun..] To perform ; to diſ-
charge ; to do.
I will be gone, altho’
The air of Paradiſe did fan the houſe,
And angels offic'd all. Sha. All's well that ends well.
O'FFICER. m. ſ. [ºffsier, French.]
1. A man employed by the publick.
'Tis an office of great worth,
And you an officer fit for the place.
Submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers, and be content
To ſuffer lawful cenſure. Shakeſ?. Coriolanus.
The next morning there came to us the ſame officer that
came to us at firſt to conduct us to the ſtranger's houſe. Bac.
If it ſhould fall into the French hands, all the princes
would return to be the ſeveral officers of his court. Temple.
As a magiſtrate or great officer he locks himſelf up from
all approaches. - South's Sermºns.
Birds of prey are an emblem of rapacious ºffers. A ſu-
perior power takes away by violence from them, that which
by violence they took away from others. L’Eſtrange.
2. A commander in the army.
If he did not nimbly ply the ſpade,
His ſurly officer ne'er fail'd to crack
His knotty cudgel on his tougher back.
I ſummon'd all my ºfficers in haſte,
All came reſolv'd to die in my defence. - Dryden.
The bad diſpoſition he made in landing his men, ſhews
him not only to be much inferiour to Pompey as a ſea ºfficer,
but to have had little or no ſkill in that element. Arb.
3. One who has the power of apprehending criminals.
The thieves are poſſeſt with fear
So ſtrongly, that they dare not meet each other;
Each takes his fellow for an ºfficer. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
We charge you
To go with us unto the ºffer; Shaft. Henry VI.
O'FFIce Rep. adj. [from ºfficer.] Commanded; ſupplied with
manders. - -
º could we expe&amp;t from an army officered by Iriſh pa-
piſts and outlaws. Addison's Freeholder.
OFFICIAL,
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 216</div><p class="Text">O F F
O G L
–
Officia L. a.ſ.. [ſia!, Fr. from ºffee.] -
1. Conducive; appropriate with regard to their uſe.
In this animal are the guts, the ſtomach, and other parts
official unto nutrition, which, were its aliment the empty re-
ception of air, their º had been ſuperfluous. Brown.
. Pertaining to a publick charge.
2. Pe § P The tribunes
Endue you with the people's voice. Remains
That in th' official marks inveſted, you
Anon do meet the ſenate.
OFF1'cIAL. n.ſ. -
Official is that perſon to whom the cognizance of cauſes
is committed by ſuch as have eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction, Ayl.
A poor man found a prieſt over familiar with his wife, and
becauſe he ſpake it abroad and could not prove it, the prieſt
ſued him before the biſhop's ºfficial for defamation. Camden.
OFFI'cIAlty. n. ſ. [officialite, Fr. from ºfficial.] The charge
or poſt of an official. -
#. office of an ºfficialty to an archdeacon. - A/ºff.
To OFF:(c1ATE. v. a. [from ºffice.] To give, in conſequence
of office.
All her number'd ſtars that ſeem to rowl
Spaces incomprehenſible, for ſuch -
Their diſtance argues, º ſwift return
Diurnal, merely to ºfficiate light
Round thi. jº #. this punctual ſpot. Milton.
To OFFI'cIATE. v. n. - -
1. To diſcharge an office, commonly in worſhip.
No miniſter ºfficiating in the church, can with a good con-
ſcience omit any part of that which is commanded by the
aforeſaid law. ...
Who of the biſhops or prieſts that officiates at the altar,
in the places of their ſepulchres, ever ſaid we offer to thee
Peter or Paul ? Stillingſleet.
To prove curates no ſervants, is to reſcue them from that
contempt which they will certainly fall into under this no-
tion; which conſidering the number of perſons officiating this
way, muſt be very prejudicial to religion. Collier.
2. To perform an office for another.
OFFIci'NAL. adj. [from ºff ina, a ſhop.] Uſed in a ſhop, or
belonging to it: thus ºfficinal plants and drugs are thoſe uſed
in the ſhops.
OFFICIOU.S. adj. [effieux, Fr. offioſis, Lat.]
1. Kind ; doing good offices.
Yet, not to earth are thoſe bright luminaries
Officious; but to thee, earth's habitant, Aſik. P. Lºft.
2. Importunely forward.
You are too offious -
In her behalf that ſcorns your ſervices. Shakeſp.
At Taunton they killed in fury an ºfficious and eager com-
miſſioner for the ſubſidy. Bacon's Henry VII.
Cato, perhaps
I'm too ºfficious, but my forward cares
Would fain preſerve a life of ſo much value. Addison.
OFFI'ciously. adv. [from a icious.]
1. Importunately forward.
The moſt corrupt are moſt obſequious grown,
And thoſe they ſcorn'd, officiouſly they own. Dryden.
- Flatt'ring crouds officiouſly appear, -
To give themſelves, not you, an happy year. Dryd.
2. Kindly; with unaſked kindneſs.
Let thy goats ºfficiouſly be nurſt,
And led to living ſtreams to quench their thirſt. Dryd.
OFFI'ciousNess. m. ſ...[from officious.]
1. Forwardneſs of civility, of reſpect, or endeavour. Com-
monly in an ill ſenſe.
I ſhew my officiouſneſ; by an offering, though I betray my
poverty by the meaſure. - South's Serm.
2. Service.
In whom is ſequired underſtanding as in a man,
and Vivacity as in a lion, ſervice and miniſterial officiouſneſs as
in the ox, and expeditiºn as in the cagle. Brown's P. Err.
OFFING.. n.ſ. [from Ø.] The act of ſteering to a diſtance
from the land.
Q'FFSET. n. ſ. [off and ſº..] Sprout; ſhoot of a plant.
They are multiplied ºf only by the ſeed, but many alſo
by the root, producing ºffsets or creeping under ground. Ray.
Some plants are raiſed from any part of th: root, others
by ºffets, and in others the branches ſet in the ground will
take root. Locke
ºu'RING.. n.ſ. [off and ſour.] Recrement; part rubbed
*Wºy in cleaning any thing.
of * * us as the ºfficouring and refuſe in the midſt
- ple. ---
9;spring. n. ſ. [off and ſpring.] Lam. iii. 45.
i. *º generation.
**gs coveting to be lik - - -
which Cannot ñº, *i. ...'...º. at
‘ºle itſelf by off prin. A d “y, 11-
2. The thing 'p.'" Propagation. Hooker.
CInt3, &amp; Pºgated or generated. children; deſcend-
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
COu rage
When the fountain of mankind
Did draw corruption, and God's curſe, by ſin;
This was a charge, that all his heirs did bind,
And all his ºff pring grew corrupt therwin. Davies.
To the Gods alone
Our future off pring, and our wives are known. Dryd.
His principal actor is the ſon of a goddeſs, not to men-
tion the offspring of other deities. Addison's Spectator.
3. Produćtion of any kind. -
Tho' both fell before their hour,
Time on their ºffspring hath no pow'r ;
Nor fire nor fate their bays ſhall blaſt,
Nor death's dark vail their days o'ercaſt. Denham.
To OFFU'SCATE. v. a. ſºft ſco, Lat. ºff ſºuer, Fr.] To
dim ; to cloud ; to darken.
OFFUscATION. "gſ [from ºff-ſate.] The act of darkening.
OFT, adº, ſoft, Saxon.] Often frequently ; not rarely;
not ſeldom.
In labours more abundant, in ſtripes above meaſure, in
priſons more frequent, in deaths oft. - 2 Cor. ii. 23.
It may be a true faith, for ſo much as it is; it is one part
of true faith, which is of miſtaken for the whole. Hºan.
Favours to none, to all ſhe ſmiles extends,
Oft ſhe rejects, but never once offends. Po. Ra. Locke.
O'FTEN. adv. [from orz, Saxon; in the comparative, oftner;
ſuperlative, oftneſt.] Oft; frequently ; many times; not
ſeldom.
The queen that bore thee,
Oftner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died ev'ry day ſhe liv'd. Shakespeare. Mºſh:
Uſe a little wine for thy ſtomach's ſake, and thine often
infirmities. I ſim. v. 23.
In journeying ºften, in perils in the wilderneſ. 2 Cº. ii. 25.
Who does not more admire Cicero as an author, than as
a conſul of Rome, and does not ºftner talk of the celebrated
writers of our own country in former ages, than of any
among their contemporaries? Alºjan's Freeholder.
OF TENT I'MEs. adv. ſoften and times. From the compoſition
of this word it is reaſonable to believe, that ºft was once an
adjective, of which often was the plural; which ſeems re.
tained in the phraſe thine often injīrmities. See OF TEN.]
Frequently ; many times; often.
Is our faith in the bleſſed trinity a matter needleſs, to be ſo
£º mentioned and opened in the principal part of that
uſy which we owe to God, our public prayer? Hººker.
The difficulty was by what means they could ever arrive
to places oftentime, ſo remote from the ocean. //codw.
It is equally neceſſary that there ſhould be a future ſtate,
to vindicate the juſtice of God, and ſolve the preſent irre-
gularities of providence, whether the beſt mºn be often-
times only, or always the moſt miſèrable. Atterbury.
OFTT1'MEs. adv, ſºft and times.] Frequently; often.
Oſºtimes nothing profits more
Than ſelf-eſteem, grounded on juſt and right,
Well manag’d. Aſilton's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. viii.
Ofttimes before I hither did reſort,
Charm'd with the converſation of a man
Who led a rural life. Dryden and Lee.
QGE'E. W. n.ſ. Is a ſort of moulding in architecture, conſiſt-
OGive. } ing of a round and a hollow : it is almoſt in the
form of an S, and is the ſame with what Vitruvius calls
cima. Cima reverſa, is an ogee with the hollow downwards.
Harris.
To O’GLE. v. a. […gº, an eye, Dutch..] To view with fide
glancº, as in fondneſs; or with a deſign not to be heeded.
From their high ſcaffold with a trumpet cheek,
And ogling all their audience, then they ſpeak. Dryden.
If the female tongue will be in motion, why ſhould it not
be ſet to go right Could they talk of the different aſpects
and conjunctions of the planets, they need not be at the
Pains to comment upon aglings and clandeſtine marriages.
Addison's Guardian, Nº. 155.
Whom is he agling yonder himſelf in his looking-glaſs.
Martinus Scriblerius.
O'GLER. m. ſ. ſoºghcler, Dutch..] A ſly gazer; one who views
by ſide glances.
Upon the diſuſe of the neck-piece, the whole tribe of
*gºr ſtared the fair ſex in the neck rather than in the face.
Addison's Guardian, N°. Ioo.
Jack was a prodigious ogler; he would ogle you the out-
ſide of his eye inward, and the white upward. j. Bull.
O'GLIo. m. ſ. [from olla, Spaniſh.] A diſh made by mingling
different kinds of meat; a medley ; a hotchpotch.
Theſe general motives of the common good, I will not
ſo much as once offer up to your lordſhip, though they have
ſtill the upper end ; yet, like great oglio's, they rather make
a ſhew than provoke appetite. Suckling.
- Where is there ſuch an oglio or medley of various opinions
in the World again, as thoſe men entertain in their ſervice,
without any ſcruple as to the diverſity of their ſe&amp;ts and opini-
ons f King cº;
c
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 217</div><p class="Text">He that keeps an open houſe, ſhould confider that there
are oglio's of gueſts, as well as of diſhes, and that the liberty
of a common table is as good as a tacit invitation to all ſorts
of intruders, - - - - L’Eſtrange.
OH. interject. An exclamation denoting pain, ſorrow, or fur-
riſe.
P He,
Like a full acorn'd boar, a churning on,
Cry’d, oh!, and mounted. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Oh me! all the horſe have got over the river, what ſhall
we do? Walton's Angler.
My eyes confeſs it,
My every action ſpeaks my heart aloud;
But oh, the madneſs of my high attempt -
Speaks louder§: ! Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
OIL. n.ſ. [ooel, Saxon; oleum, Latin.]
1. The juice of olives expreſſed.
Bring pure oil olive beaten for the light.
2. Any fat, greaſy, unctuous, thin matter. -
In moſt birds there is only one gland; in which are di-
vers cells, ending in two or three larger cells, lying under
the nipple of the oil bag. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
3. The juices of certain vegetables, expreſſed or drawn by the
ſtill without fermentation, or after the ſpirit.
Oil with chemiſts called ſulphur, is the ſecond of their hy-
poſtatical, and of the true five chymical principles. It is an
inflammable, unctuous, ſubtile ſubſtance, which uſually riſes
after the ſpirit. The chemiſts attribute to this principle all
the diverſity of colours, and all the * and deformity.
It ſweetens the acrimony of ſalts, and by ſtopping or filling
up the pores of a mixt body, keeps it longer from corrup-
tion, where it abounds. There are two ſorts of oil which
feem to be mixt with ſpirit; for it can never be drawn pure,
and which will ſwim upon water, ſuch as oil of aniſeed and
lavender, which the chemiſts call eſſential, and is commonly
drawn in a limbeck with ſtore of water : and another kind
which probably is mixt with ſalts; and theſe will ſink in
water, ſuch as the oil of guiacum and cloves. Płarris.
After this expreſſed oil, we made trial of a diſtilled one; and
for that purpoſe made choice of the common oil or ſpirit. Boyle.
To Oil. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſmear or lubricate with
oil.
The men fell a rubbing of armour, which a great while
had lain oiled. Wotton.
Amber will attract ſtraws thus oiled, it will convert the
needles of dials, made either of braſs or iron, although they
be much oiled, for in thoſe needles conſiſting free upon their
center there can be no adheſion. Brown's W. Err.
Swift oils many a ſpring which Harley moves. Swift.
O'LColour, n. ſ. [oil and colour.] Colour made by grinding
coloured ſubſtances in oil.
Oileolours, after they are brought to their due temper, may
be preſerved long in ſome degree of ſoftneſs, kept all the
while under water. Boyle.
O'LINEss. n.ſ. [from oily.] Unétuouſneſs; greaſineſs; qua-
lity approaching to that of oil.
Baſil hath fat and ſucculent leaves; which oilineſs, if drawn
forth by the ſun, will make a very great change. Bacon.
Wine is inflammable, ſo as it hath a kind of oilineſs. Bac.
Smoke from unctuous bodies and ſuch whoſe oilineſs is evi-
dent, he nameth nidor. Brown's Wulgar Err.
Chyle has the ſame principles as milk, viſcidity from the
caſeous parts, an oilineſs from the butyraceous parts, and an
acidity from the tartareous. Flyer.
The fleſh of animals which live upon other animals, is
moſt antiacid ; though offenſive to the ſtomach ſometimes
by reaſon of their oilineſs. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
O'LMAN. m. ſ. ſoil and man.] One who trades in oils and
pickles. -
Oilshop. m. ſ. ſoil and ſhºp.] A ſhop where oils and pickles
are ſold.
Or'LY. adj. [from oil.]
I. Conſiſting of oil; containing oil ; having the qualities of oil.
The like cloud, if it were oily or fatty, will not diſcharge;
not becauſe it ſticketh faſter, but becauſe air preyeth upon
water and flame, and fire upon oil. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Flame is groſſer than groſs fire, by reaſon of the mixture
with it of that viſcous oily matter, which, being drawn out of
the wood and candle, ſerves for fewel. Digby.
Watry ſubſtances are more apt to putrify than oily. Bacon,
2. Fat; greaſy.
This oily raſcal is known as well as Paul's;
Go call him forth. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
O'LYGRAIN. n. ſ. A plant.
The flowers are produced from the wings of the leaves with-
out any footſtalk ; the flower cup conſiſts of one leaf, divided
into five long ſlender ſegments; the flower is of one leaf,
in ſhape like thoſe of the fox-glove ; the pointal, which
ſites in the middle of the flower, afterward becomes an ob-
long four cornered pod, divided into four diſtinct cells, which
are replete with eſculent ſeeds. AMiller,
Ex. xxvii. 20.
Or'LYPALM. r. ſ. ... • - * 5 *
It gºw; in great plenty on the coaſt of Guiney; as alſº in
Cape Verd iſland, where it grows as high as the main maſt
of a ſhip. . But theſe trees have been tranſplanted to Jamaica
and Barbados, in both which places they thrive very well
The inhabitants make an oil from the pulp of the fruit, an
draw a wine from the body of the trees, which inebriates;
and with the rind of theſe trees they make mats to lie on.
f :- — . " Miller.
To OINT. v. a. ſoint, French.] To anoint; to ſmear with
ſomething unctuous.
They ºint their naked limbs with mother'd oil,
Or from the founts where living ſulphurs boil,
They mix a med'cine to foment their limbs. Dryden.
Iſmarus was not wanting to the war, -
Direčting ointed arrows from afar;
And death with poiſon arm'd. Dryden's Fnei.
O'NTMENT. n. ſ. [from oint.] Unguent; unctuous matter to
ſmear any thing.
Life and long health that gracious ointment gave,
And deadly wounds could heal, and rear again
The ſenſeleſs corpſe appointed for the grave. Fairy Q.
O'KER. n. ſ. [See Ochre..] A colour.
And Klaius taking for his younglings cark,
Leſt greedy eyes to them might challenge lay,
Buſy with oker did their h. mark. Sidney.
Red after is one of the moſt heavy colours; yellow oxer is
not ſo, becauſe it is clearer. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
OLD. adj. [eale, Saxon ; all, German.]
1. Paſt the middle part of life; not young.
To old age fince you your ſelf aſpire,
Let not old age diſgrace my high deſire. Sidney.
He wooes high and low, rich and poor, young and old.
Shakeſp. Merry I/ive of Ilºnd,
2. Of long continuance; begun long ago.
When Gardiner was ſent over as embaſſador into France,
with great pomp, he ſaid unto an old acquaintance of his that
came to take his leave of him, Now I am in my gloria patri.
Yea, ſaid his friend, and I hope, et nunc et ſemper. Or,
replied the biſhop, if it pleaſe the king my maſter, ſcat
erat in principio, a poor ſcholar of Cambridge again.
Camden's Remains.
3. Not new. -
The vine beareth more grapes when it is young; but grapes
that make better wine when it is old; for that the juice is
better concočted. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
4. Ancient; not modern. -
The Genoeſe are cunning, induſtrious, and inured to hard-
ſhip ; which was likewiſe the chara&amp;ter of the old Ligurians.
- Addiſon on Italy.
5. Of any ſpecified duration.
How old art thou ? Not ſo young, Sir, to love a woman
for ſinging; nor ſo old to doat on her for any thing. I have
years on my back forty-eight. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Plead you to me, fair dame, I know you not.
In Epheſus I am but two hours old, -
As ſtrange unto your town as to your talk. ºft.
Any man that ſhall live to ſee thirty perſons deſcended of
his body alive together, and all above three years old, makes
this feaſt, which is done at the coſt of the ſtate. Bacon.
6. Subſiſting before ſomething elſe. -
The Latian king, unleſs he ſhall ſubmit,
Own his old promiſe, and his new forget,
Let him in arms the pow'r of Turnus prove. Dryd.
He muſt live in danger of his houſe falling about his ears,
and will find it cheaper to build it again from the ground in
a new form ; which may not be ſo convenient as the old.
Swift's Proj.for the Advan. of Relig.
7. Long practiſed.
Then ſaid I unto her that was old in adulteries, will they
now commit whoredoms with her Ezek. xxiii. 43.
* 8. A word to ſignify in burleſque language, more than enough.
Here will be old Utis; it will be an excellent ſtratagem. •
Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Here's a knocking indeed; if a man were porter of hell
gate, he ſhould have old turning the key. Shakeſp.
. Of old; long ago; from ancient times. - ri . - -
Theſe things they cancel, as having been inſtituted in re-
gard of occaſions peculiar to the times of old, and as being
now ſuperfluous. Hºly b. v. ſ. 35.
Whether ſuch virtue ſpent of old now fail'd -
More angels to create. AMilt. P. Lºft, b. ix.
A land there is, Heſperia nam'd of ºld,
The ſoil is fruitful, and the men are bold;
Now call'd Italia, from the leader's name. Dryden.
In days of old there liv'd of mighty ame, -
A valiant prince, and Theſeus was his name. Dryd.
Oldfashios D. adj. ſold and fº/ion.] Formed according to
obſolete cuſtom. -
Some are offended that I turned theſe tales into modern
18 O Engliſh ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 218</div><p class="Text">O M I
º
:
O L I
- ioned
Engliſh; becauſe they look on Chaucer as a dry, º:
wº wººwned men of wit and º
dº ſº.
Oºpen adj. [from *3. perhaps the Saxon plural.]
- - now in u!C. -
Thiº ..". ſhed ere now, i'th' olden time, , -
Ere human ſtatute purg'd the gen'ral weal. Shakeſp.
O'LDNess. m. ſ. [from º Old age; antiquity ; not new-
* . ity of being old. -
*#". and ºve of ages, makes the world bitter
to the beſt of our times; keeps our fortunes from is º, our
oldneſ cannot reliſh them. Shakeſp. King fany".
OLEAGINous, adj. [cleaginus, Lat. from oleum, oleagineux, Fr.]
ilº - ‘tuous.
Oil le º it firſt enters the root, is earthy, watery,
poor, and ſcarce cleaginºſ. - Arbuthnºt on Aliment.
Ofra'61Nousness. n.ſ.. [from oleaginous.) Oilineſs. !
In ſpeaking of the º of urinous ſpirits, I º
ord moſt rather than all. - - 'læ.
oº:: n.ſ. ſoleandre, Fr.] The plant roſeby. -
OLEASTER. A. J. [Latin. J Wild olive; a 'ſpecies of
olive. It is a native of Italy, but hardy, and will endure
the cold of our climate, and grow to the height of ſixteen
or eighteen feet. It blooms in June, and perfumes the cir-
cumambient air to a great diſtance. Its leaves *::::::
coloured. 1. It’r.
OLE'ose. adj. ſokºſus, Lat.] Oily. -
Rain water may be endued with ſome vegetating or pro-
lifick virtue, derived from ſome ſaline ". clºſe º It
ontains. ay on the Creation.
c In falcons is a ſmall quantity of ga!!, the oleous parts of the
chyle being ſpent moſt on the fat. Floyer on the Hamours.
To OLFA'ct. v. a. ſofacius, Lat.] To ſmell. A burleſque
word.
There is a machiavilian plot,
Tho' every nare alfa: it not. - Hudibras, p. i.
OLFA’ctory. adj. ſolfactoire, Fr. from olfacio, Lat..] Having
the ſenſe of º -
Effluvias, or inviſible particles that come from bodies at
a diſtance, immediately affect the olfactory nerve. Locke.
3:...} aſ Liu, Laº) sinking, ſaid.
The fixt ſalt would have been not unlike that of men's
urine ; of which clid and deſpicable liquor I choſe to make
an inſtance, becauſe chemiſts are not wont to care for ex-
tracting the fixt ſalt of it. - Boyle.
In a civet cat a different and offenſive odour proceeds partly
from its food, that being eſpecially fiſh, whereof this humour
may be a garous excretion and oldous ſeparation. Brown.
OLGARCHY, n.ſ. [ćayzezſz.] A form of government which
places the ſupreme power in a ſmall number; ariſtocracy.
The worſt kind of oligarchy, is, when men are govern-
ed indeed by a few, and yet are not taught to know what
thoſe few be, to whom they ſhould obey. Sidney, b. ii.
We have no ariſtocracies but in contemplation, all oligar-
chies, wherein a few men domineer, do what they liſt. Burt.
After the expedition into Sicily, the Athenians choſe four
hundred men for adminiſtration of affairs, who became a
body of tyrants, and were called an oligarchy, or tyranny of the
º f º which hateful denomination they were º after
epolcd. 101ſt,
O'LIo. ! { ſella, Span.] A mixture; a medly. See oś
Ben Johnſon, in his Sejanus and Cataline, has given us
this ſº of a play, this unnatural mixture of comedy and
tragedy. - Dryd, on Dram. Poetry.
1 gm in a very chaos to think I ſhould ſo forget myſelf.
But I have ſuch an olio of affairs, I know not whit to jo.
Congreve's Hay of the I/orld.
O'LITORY. m. ſ. ſolitar, Latin.] Belonging to the kitchen
gaden.
Gather your olitory ſeeds. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Oliv A's TER. adj. [olivaſ're, Fr.] Darkly brown; tawny.
The countries of the Abyſenes, Barbary, and Peru, where
they are tawny, olivºſler and pale, are generally more ſandy.
- Bacon's Nat Hſiery, No. 399.
O'LIVE. m. ſ. ſolive, Fr. clea, Lat..] A plant producing oil ; the
emblem of peace.
The leaves are for the moſt part oblong and ever-green;
the flower conſiſts of one leaf, the lower part of which is
hollowed, but the upper Pºrt is divided into four parts; the
'''“Y, which is fixed in the center of the flowe: cup, be-
**; an oval, ſoft, pulpy fruit, abounding with a fat liquor
incloſing an hard rough ſtone.
o ti h h Miller.
.*.*, heav'ns, in thy nativi
º: d an olive branch and i. ºrown,
s likely to be bleſt in peace and war. Sha. Hen. VI.
A . the purlews of this foreſt, ſtands -
- #. ºned about with złº, trCCS. Shakeſpeare.
* Thou ſhalt let it reſt. In like Inanner
thou ſhalt deal with thy vineyard and alive yard. Ex. xxiii. 11.
He led
Mutuſcans from their olive bearing town,
And all th’Eretian pow'rs. Dryden's Aºn. viii.
It is laid out into a grove, a vineyard, and an allotment
for olives and herbs. Notes on the 0. "y.
O'MBRE. m. ſ. [hombre, Spaniſh..] A game of cards played by
three.
He would willingly carry her to the play; but ſhe had ra-
ther go to lady Centaure's and play at ombre. ‘ſatier.
O'MEGA. m. ſ. [...ºz.) The laſt letter of the alphabet, there-
fore taken in the Holy Scripture for the laſt.
I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the ending.
Rev. i. 8.
O’MELET. m. ſ. ſomelette, Fr.] A kind of pancake made with
egºs.
Oºsed. adj. [from omen.] Containing prognoſticks.
Fame may prove,
Or omen'd voice, the meſſenger of Jove,
Propitious to the ſearch. Pope's Oºſy, b. i.
O’MEN. m. ſ. ſomen, Latin.] A ſign good or bad, a prog-
noſtick.
...When young kings begin with ſcorn of juſtice,
They make an omen to their after reign.
The ſpeech had omen that the Trojan race
Should find repoſe, and this the time and place. Dryden.
Chooſe out other ſmiling hours,
Such as have lucky omens ń.
Q'er forming laws and empires riſing.
OMENTUM. n.ſ. [Latin.]
The cawl, called alſo reticulum, from its fºrućture, re-
ſembling that of a net. When the peritona um is Cut, as
uſual, and the cavity of the abdomen iaid open, the amºn,
or cawl preſents itſelf firſt to view. This membrane, which
is like a wide and empty bag, covers the greateſt part of the
guts. &amp;tincy.
O'MER. m. ſ. A Hebrew meaſure about three pints and hiſt
Engliſh. Bailey.
To O'MINATE. v. a. ſominor, Lat.] To foretoken; to ſhºw
prognoſticks.
This ºminates ſadly, as to our diviſions with the Romaniſts.
Decay ºf Aey.
OMINA"rios. m. ſ. [from ominor, Lat.] Prognoſtick.
The falling of ſalt is an authentick preſagement of ill luck,
yet the ſame was not a general prognoſtick of future evi
among the ancients; but a particular ominatiºn concerning
the breach of friendſhip. Brown's /. Err. b. v.
O'MINous, adj. [from omen.]
1. Exhibiting bad tokens of futurity; foreſhewing ill; inau-
ſpicious. -
Let me be duke of Clarence;
For Glo'ſter's dukedom is ominous.
Pomfret, thou bloody priſon,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers. Shake!}. Rich. III.
Theſe accidents the more rarely they happen, the more
ominous are they eſteemed, becauſe they are never obſerved
but when ſad events do enſue. Hayward.
Roving the Celtic and Iberian fields,
He laſt betakes him to this ominous wood.
Dryden.
Prizr.
Shakesp. Henry VI.
A ſil. Poems.
As in the heathen worſhip of God, a ſacrifice without an-
heart was accounted ominous; ſo in the chriſtian worſhip of
him, an heart without a ſacrifice is worthleſs. South's Sºrm.
Pardon a father's tears,
And give them to Charinus’ memory;
May they not prove as ominous to thee.
2. Exhibiting tokens good or ill. -
Though he had a good ominous name to have made a peace,
nothing followed. Bacon's Henry VII.
O'MINously, adv. [from ominous.] With good or bad omen.
OMI'NousNess. n.ſ. [from ominous...] The quality of being
ominous,
OMI'ssion. m. ſ. ſomiſus, Lat.]
1. Neglect to do ſomething ; forbearance of ſomething to be
done.
Would it not impoſe a total omiſſion of phyſic. Brown.
If he has made no proviſion for this great change, the
omiſſion can never be repaired, the time never redeemed.
Roger's Serm. 12. '
2. Negle&amp;of duty, oppoſed to commiſſion or perpetration of crimes.
Omiſſion to do what is neceſſary,
Seals a commiſſion to a blank of danger. Shakeſpeare.
The moſt natural diviſion of all offences, is into thoſe of
omiſſion and thoſe of commiſſion. Aldſºn's Freeholder.
To O'MIT. v. a. ſomºto, Lat.]
1. To leave out; not to mention. *
Theſe perſonal compariſºns I omit, becauſe I would ſay
nothing that may favour of a ſpirit of flattery. Bacon.
Great Cato there, for gravity renown'd,
Who can omit the Gracchi, who declare
The Scipio's worth -
2. To neglect to pračtiſe.
Her father omitted nothing in her education, that º:
II] 3 KC
Dryden.
Dryden, Aºi. vi.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 219</div><p class="Text">O M N
make her the moſt accompliſhed woman of her age.
OMITTANce. n.ſ.. [from omit.], Forbearance: . - .
He ſaid, mine eyes were black, and my hair black;
And now I am remember'd, ſcorn’d at me !
I marvel why I anſwer'd not again ;
But that's all one, omittance is no quittance. Shakeſp.
OMNIFA'Rious. adj. [omnifariam, Lat..] Of all varieties or
inds. -
*... particles could never of themſelves, by omnifarious
kinds of motion, whether fortuitous or mechanical, have
fallen into this viſible ſyſtem. Bentley’s Serm.
But if thou ..". drinks wou'dſt brew ;
Beſides the orchard, ev'ry hedge and buſh ---
Affords aſſiſtance. - Philips,
OMNIFERous, adj. ſomnis and fero, Lat..] All-bearing. Dićf.
OMNI'Fick. adj. ſomni, and facia, Lat.] All-creating.
Silence, ye troubled waves, and thou deep, peace *
Said then th' omnific word, your diſcord end. Milton,
OMNIFoRM. adj. [omnis and forma, Lat.] Having every º:
1Cº.
OMNI/GENous. adj. [onnigenus, Lat.] Conſiſting of all 'º';
16tf:
OMNI'potence. \ n.ſ. ſomnipºtentia, Lat.] Almighty power;
OMNI'Pot ENCY. } unlimited power.
Whatever fortune
Can give or take, love wants not, or deſpiſes : -
Or by his own omnipotence ſupplies. Denham.
As the ſoul bears the image of the divine wiſdom, ſo this
part of the body repreſents the omnipotency of God, whilſt it
is able to perform ſuch wonderful effects. JWilkins.
The greateſt danger is from the greateſt power, and that
is omnipotency. Tillotſon, Serm. 1.
Will ºmnipotence negle&amp;t to ſave,
The ſuffering virtue of the wife and brave: Pope.
oMN1'pot ENT. adj. [omnipotens, Lat..] Almighty; powerful
without limit,
You were alſo Jupiter, a ſwan, for the love of Leda :
oh omnipotent love ! how near the god drew to the complexion
of a gooſe?. Shakeſp. Merry IPves of J/ind.
The perfeót being muſt needs be omnipotent; both as
ſelf-exiſtent and as immenſe : for he that is felf-exiſtent, hav-
ing the power of being, hath the power of allbeing; equal
to the cauſe of all being, which is to be omnipotent.
Grew's Coſmol. b. i. e. 1.
OMNIPRE's EscE. m. ſ. ſomnis and praſens; Lat.] Ubiquity;
unbounded preſence. -
He alſo went
Inviſible; yet ſtaid, ſuch privilege . . - - -
Hath omnipreſence. Milton's Par Loft, b. vii.
Adam, thou know'ſt his omnipreſence fills
Land, ſea, and air. Milton's Par. Loft. b. ix.
The ſoul is evolved and preſent to every part: and if my
ſoul can have its effectual energy upon my body with eaſe,
with how much more facility can a being of immenſe exiſ-
tence and omnipreſence, of infinite wiſdom and power, govern
a great but finite univerſe Hale.
OMNIPRE's ENT. adj. [omnis and praſºns, Latin.] Ubiquitary;
preſent in every place.
Omniſcient maſter, omnipreſent king,
To thee, to thee, my laſt diſtreſs I bring. Prior.
º: n. ſ. [ommis and ſcientia, Lat.] Boundleſs
OMNI'scIENCY. § knowledge; infinite wiſdom.
In all this miſconſtruction of my actions, as I have no judge
but God above me, ſo I can have comfort to appeal to his
ºmniſcience. King Charles.
Thinking by this retirement to obſcure himſelf from God,
he inſtinged the omniſciency and eſſential ubiquity of his maker,
who as he created all things, ſo is he beyond and in them all.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
An immenſe being does ſtrangely fill the ſoul; and om-
nipotency, omniſciency, and infinite goodneſs, enlarge the
Aidſ.
ſpirit while it fixtly looks upon them. Burnet.
Since thou boaſt'ſt th' omniſcience of a God,
Say in what cranny of Sebaſtian's ſoul,
Unknown to me, ſo loath'd a crime is lodg’d Dryden.
OMNI'scient, adj. [ominis and ſcio, Lat..] Infinitely wiſe;
knowing without bounds; knowing every thing.
By no means truſt to your own judgment alone; for no
man is omniſcient. Bacon's Adv. to Williers.
What tan 'ſcape the eye
Of God all-ſeeing, or deceive his heart
Omniſcient? Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. x.
Whatſoever is known, is ſome way preſent ; and that
which is preſent, cannot but be known by him who is om-
miſcient. South's Sermons.
Omniſcient maſter, omnipreſent king,
To thee, to thee, my laſt diſtreſs I bring. Prior.
*MN, scious. adj. [omni, and ſcio, Lat..] All-knowing.
I dare not pronounce him omniſciouſ, that being an attri-
bute individually proper to the Godhead, and incommunicable
º
O N -
to any created ſubſtance. Hakewill on Providence
QMNI'vorous. adj. [omni; and vora, Lat.] All-devouring. Die?.
OMo'PLATE. n.f. [...a6, and rac10:..] The ſhoulder blade.
- Dićt.
9****Tick. m. ſ. . [...????; and cºlº;..] An optic
glaſs that is convex on both fides, commonly called a convex
lens. Die?.
ON, prep. ſaen, Dutch; ar, German.]
1. It is put before the word, which fignifics that which is un-
der, that by which any thing is ſupported, which anything
covers, or where anything is fixed.
He is not lolling on a lewd love bed, .
But on his knees at meditation. Shaft:%. Rich. III.
What news — w
—Richmond is on the ſeas:-
-There let him ſink and be the ſeas on him. Shakeſp.
Diſtracted terror knew not what was beſt;
On what determination to abide. Daniel's Civ. IMar.
How ſoon hath time, the ſuttle thief of youth,
Stol'n on his wing my three and twentieth year,
My haſting days fly on with full career. Milton.
As ſome to witneſs truth heav'n's call obey;
So ſome on earth muſt, to confirm it, ſtay. Dryden,
- They ſtooping low,
Perch’d on the double tree. Pryden’s AFn. vi.
2. It is put before any thing that is the ſubject of action.
Th’ unhappy huſband, huſband now no more,
Did on his tuneful harp his loſs deplore.
3. Noting addition or accumulation.
- Miſchiefs on miſchiefs, greater ſtill and more,
The neighb'ring plain with arms is cover'd o'er. Dryden.
4. Noting a ſtate of progreſſion.
- Ho Maeris! whither on thy way ſo faſt :
This leads to town.
5. It ſometimes notes elevation.
Chuſe next a province for thy vineyard's reign,
Dryden.
Dryden.
On hills above, or in the lowly plain. Dryden.
6. Noting approach or invaſion.
Their navy ploughs the wat'ry main,
Yet ſoon expect it on your ſhores again. Drydºn.
On me, on me let all thy fury fall,
Nor err from me, ſince I deſerve it all. Pope.
7. Noting dependance or reliance.
On God's providence and on your bounty, all their preſent
ſupport and future hopes depend. Sºo'ſ idge.
8. At, noting place.
On each ſide her,
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like ſmiling
Cupids. - Sha. At aid Cleo.
9. It denotes the motive or occaſion of any thing.
The ſame prevalence of genius, the world cannot pardom
your concealing, on the ſame conſideration ; becauſe we
neither have a living Varus nor a Horace. Dryden.
The joy of a monarch for the news of a vićtory, muſt not
be expreſſed like the ecſtaſy of a harlequin on the receipt of
a letter from his miſtreſs. Dryden's Diſrſity.
The beſt way to be uſed by a father on any occaſion, to
reform any thing he wiſhes mended in his ſon. Locke.
We abſtain on ſuch ſolemn occaſions from things lawful,
out of indignation that we have often gratified ourſelves in
things unlawful. - Smallridge's Sermons.
10. It denotes the time at which any thing happens: as, this
happened on the firſt day. On is uſed, I think, only before
dav or hour. -
II. f is put before the objećt of ſome paſſion.
Compaſſion ºn the king commands me ſtoop. Sºft.
Cou'd tears recal him into wretched life,
Their ſorrow hurts themſelves; on him is loſt. Dryden.
12. In forms of denunciation it is put before the thing threatned.
Hence on thy life; the captive maid is mine,
Whom not for price or pray'rs I will reſign. Prydºn.
13. Noting imprecation.
_Sorrow on thee, and all the pack of you,
That triumph thus upon my miſery ! Shakespeare.
14. Noting invocation. -
On thee, dear wiſe, in deſcrts all alone
He call’d. Dryden's Pirg, Georg. iv.
15. Noting the ſtate of any thing.
—The earth ſhook to ſee the heav'ns on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
The horſes burnt as they ſtood faſt tied in the ſtables, or
by chance breaking looſe ran up and dºwn with their tails
and mains on a light fire. Knºllº'. Hiſ ºf the Turks.
His fancy grows in the progreſs, and becomes on fire like
a chariot wheel by its own rapidity. Pºp. Prºf. to Iliad.
16. Noting ſtipulation or condition.
I can be ſatisfied on more eaſy terms.
17. Noting diſtinction or oppoſition. - -
The Rhodians, on the other ſide, mindful of their former
honour, valiantly repulſed the enemy. Knºes.
- I S. Before
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 220</div><p class="Text">O N C
O N E
it, by corruption, it ſtands for ºf
18. Before it, by p This tempeſt,
- c garment of this peace, aboded r
ſº breach on't. Shakespeare's Henry VII ſ-
A thriving gameſter has but a poor trade on't, who fills his
ckets at the price of his reputation. Locke's Educat.
19. Noting the manner of an event.
- Note,
How much her grace is alter'd on the ſudden Shakeſp.
20. On, the ſame with upon. See Upon.
ON. adv.
1. Forward; in ſucceſſion.
As he forbore one act, ſo he night have foreborn another,
and after that another, and ſo on, till he had by degrees
weakened, and at length mortified and extinguiſhed the habit
moon paſſes over them and eclipſes them, their light vaniſhes,
not gradually like that of the planets, but all at ºnce. Newt.
4. At a point of time indiviſible.
Night came on, not by degrees prepared,
But all at once ; at once the winds ariſe,
The thunders roll. Dryden's Cimon and Iphig.
5. One time, though no more. -
Fuſcinus, thoſe ill deeds that ſully fame,
In blood once tainted, like a current run
From the lewd father to the lewder ſon. Dryden.
6. At the time immediate.
This hath all its force at once, upon the firſt impreſſion,
and is ever afterwards in a declining ſtate. Atterbury.
7. Formerly; at a former time.
Thereon his arms and once-lov’d portrait lay,
itſelf. South's Sermons. Thither our fatal marriage-bed convey. Denham.
1. # de tenant fail the landlord, he muſt fail his creditor, My ſoul had once ſome fooliſh fondneſs for thee, -
and he his, and ſo on Docke. But hence 'tis gone. 4 diſºn.
» -
Theſe ſmaller particles are again compoſed of others much
ſmaller, all which together are equal to all the pores or
empty ſpaces between them; and ſo on perpetually till you
come to ſolid particles, ſuch as have no pores. e10t.
2. Forward; in progreſſion.
On indeed they went ; but oh! not far;
What kindled in the dark the vital flame,
Andere the heart was form'd, puſh'd on the red'ning ſtream.
Blackmore on Creation.
Go to, I did not mean to chide you;
On with your tale.
3. In continuance; without ceaſing.
Let them ſleep, let them ſleep on,
Till this ſtormy night be gone,
And th’ j. dawn. Craſhaw.
Sing on, ſing on, for I can ne'er be cloy'd. Dryden.
You roam about, and never are at reſt;
By new deſires, that is, new torments ſtill poſeſt:
As in a fey'riſh dream you ſtill drink on,
And wonder why your thirſt is never gone. Dryden.
The Peaſants defy the ſun; they work on in the hºſt
part of the day without intermiſſion. Locke's Educat.
Rowe's J. Shore.
8. Once ſeems to be rather a noun than an adverb, when it has
at before it, and when it is joined with an adjective: as, thi,
once, that once.
ONE. aff. [an, cene, Saxon; ºn, Dutch ; ein, German; º,
Greek.]
1. Leſs than two ; ſingle ; denoted by an unite.
all things. Aaleigh.
If one muſt be rejected, one ſucceed,
Make him my Lord, within whoſe faithful breaſt
is fix'd my image, and who loves me beſt. Dryden.
Love him by parts in all your num’rous race,
And from thoſe parts form ºne collected grace;
Then when you have refin'd to that degree,
Imagine all in one, and think that one; hº Dryden.
2. Indefinitely; any.
- - - - - -
A fatal ſtop travers'd their head-long courſe. Daniel. The man he knew was one that willingly,
§. on he led his radiant files. Miltºn. For one good look would hazard all. - c Daniel.
Hopping and flying, thus they led him on Pindarus the poet, and one of the wiſeſt, acknowledged
To the ſlow lake. Dryden, alſo one God the moſt high, to be the father and creator of
We ſhall
Preſent our ſervices to a fine new prince,
One of theſe days. Shakeſpeare.
I took pains to make thee ſpeak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and un-
derſtandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one and catcheth
4. Not off. away that which was ſown in his heart. 44att. xiii. 19.
5. Upon the body, as part of dreſs. If any one prince made a felicity in this life, and left fair
A long cloak he had on. Sidney. fame after death, without the love Óf his ſubjects, there were
Stiff in brocade, and pinch'd in ſtays,
Her patches, paint, and jewels on ;
All day let envy view her face,
And Phyllis is but twenty-one. Prior.
6. It notes reſolution to advaňce,
Since 'tis decreed, and to this period lead
A thouſand ways, the nobleſ: path we'll tread ;
And bravely on, till they or wë, or all,
A common ſacrifice to honour fall. Denham.
ON. interject. A word of incitement or encouragement to at-
tack; elliptically for go on.
Therefore on, or ſtrip your ſword ſtark-naked; for meddle
you muſt. Shakeſpeare's Tw.fi/. Night.
Cheerly on, couragious friends,
To reap the harveſt of perpetual peace,
By this one bloody trial of ſharp war.
ONCE. adv. [from one.]
1. One time.
Trees that bear maſt, are fruitful but once in two years;
the cauſe is, the expence of ſap. Bacon.
Forthwith from out the aſk a raven flies,
And after him the ſurer meſſenger,
A dove, ſent forth once and again to ſpy
Green trees or ground. 44ilton's Paradſ: Lº/?, b. ix.
You came out like ſome #"at monarch, to take a town
but ºnce a year, as it were for Yºur diverſion, though you
had no need to extend your territories. Dryden.
O virgin' daughter of eterm. night,
Give me this once thy labour, to ſuſtain
Shakeſp. R. III,
ſome colour to deſpiſe it. Suckling.
3. Different; diverſe; oppoſed to another.
What a precious comfort to have ſo many, like brothers,
commanding one another's fortunes. Shakeſpeare.
It is ºne thing to draw outlines true, the features like, the
Proportions exact, the colouring tolerable, and another thing
to make all theſe graceful. Dryden.
Suppoſe the common depth of the ſea, taking one place
with another, to be about a quarter of a mile. Burmet.
It is one thing to think right, and another thing to know
the right way to lay our thoughts before others with ad.
tage and clearneſs. Locłc.
My legs were cloſed together by ſo many wrappers one
over another, that I looked like an Egyptian mummy. Addison
Two bones rubbed hard againſt one another, or with a file,
produce a fetid ſmell. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
At one time they keep their patients ſo warm, as almoſt to
ſtifle them, and all of a ſudden the cold regimen is in vogue.
- Baker on Learning.
4. One of two oppoſed to the other.
Aſk from the one ſide of heaven unto the other, whether
there hath been any ſuch thing as this. Deutr. iv. 32.
Both the matter of the ſtone and marchaſite, had been at
once fluid bodies, till one of them, probably the marchaſite,
firſt growing hard, the other, as being yet of a more yield-
ing couſiſtence, accommodated itſelf to the harder's fº,
2yte.
There can be no reaſon why we ſhould prefer any one ac-
tion to another, but becauſe we have greater hopes of ad-
My right, and execute my juſt diſdain. Dryden. Vantage from the one than from the other. Smallridge.
In your tuneful lays, 5. Particularly one.
Once more reſound the great Apollo's praiſe. Pope. One day when Phaebe fair,
2. A ſingle time. . . - With all her band was following th’ chaſe,
Who this heir is, he does not once tell us. Locke. This nymph quite tird with heat of ſcorching air,
3. The ſame time.
- At once with him the roſe :
Their "ſing all at once was a à. ſound
f hunder heard remote. AMilton's Par. Loft, b. ii,
i. * this thought, at once he ſtrain'd the breaſt,
OW º * a burning kiſs impreſs'd. . . Dryden.
tance, * ºlars, by reaſon of their immenſe diſ-
lated by refri l * Points, unleſs ſo far as their light is di-
y *tion may “PPcar from hence, that when the
$
Sat down to reſt.
6. Some future.
Heav'n waxeth old, and all the ſpheres above
Shall one day faint, and their ſºft motion ſtay;
And time itſelf, in time ſhall ceaſe to move,
But the ſoul ſurvives and lives for aye. Davies.
ONE. n.ſ. [There are many uſes of the word one, which ſerve
to denominate it a ſubſtantive, though ſome of them may
ſeen rather to make it a Pronoun relative, and ſome may
perhaps
Fairy Queen, b. i.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 221</div><p class="Text">O N E
perhaps be conſidered as conſiſtent with the nature of an ad-
jective.]
1. A ſingle perſon.
If one by one you wedded all the world,
She you kill'd would be unparallel’d. Shakeſpeare.
Although the beauties, riches, honours, ſciences, virtues,
and perfections of all men were in the preſent poſſeſſion of
one, yet ſomewhat beyond and above all this there would ſtill
be ſought and earneſtly thirſted for. Hooker, b. i.
From his lofty ſteed he fiew,
And raiſing one by one the ſuppliant crew, -
To comfort each. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
When join'd in one, the good, the fair, the great,
Deſcends to view the muſe's humble ſeat. Granvile.
2. A fingle maſs or aggregate.
It is one thing only as a heap is one. Blackmore.
3. The firſt hour.
Till 'tis one o'clock, our dance of cuſtom
Let us not forget. Shakespeare . M. Wives of JPind.
4. The ſame thing. -
I marvel, why I anſwer'd not again ;
But that's all one, omittance is no quittance. Shakespeare
To be in the underſtanding, and not to be underſtood, is
all one as to ſay any thing is, and is not in the underſtand-
ing. Locke.
5. A perſon. - -
A good acquaintance with method will greatly aſſiſt every
one in ranging human affairs. JWatts's Logick.
6. A perſon by way of eminence.
Ferdinand
My father, king of Spain, was reckon'd one,
The wiſeſt prince that there had reign'd.
7. A diſtinct or particular perſon.
That man ſhould be the teacher is no part of the matter;
for birds will learn one of another. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
No nations are wholly aliens and ſtrangers the one to the
other. Bacon's Holy War.
One or other ſees a little box which was carried away with
her, and ſo diſcovers her to her friends. Dryden.
8. Perſons united.
As I have made ye one, lords, one remain:
So I grow ſtronger, you more honour gain. Shakespeare
9. Concord; agreement; one mind.
The king was well in ſtructed how to carry himſelf be-
tween Ferdinando and Philip, reſolving to keep themat one
within themſelves. Bacon's Henry VII.
He is not at one with himſelf what account to give of it.
Tillotſºn.
10. [On, "on, French. It is uſed ſometimes a general or in-
definite nominative for any man, any perſon. For one the
Engliſh formerly uſed men; as, they live obſcurely men knºw
nºt hºw, or die alſºarely, men mark not when. Aftham. For
which it would now be ſaid, one knows not how, one knºws
nºt when ; or, it is not known how.] Any perſon ; any man
indefinitely.
It is not ſo worthy to be brought to heroical effects by for-
tune or neceſſity, like Ulyſſes and Æneas, as by one's own
choice and working. Sidney, b. ii.
One may be little the wiſer for reading this dialogue, ſince
it neither ſets forth what Erona is, nor what the cauſe ſhould
be which threatens her with death. Sidney, b. ii.
One would imagine theſe to be the expreſſions of a man
bleſſed with eaſe, affluence and power; not of one who had
been juſt ſtripped of all thoſe advantages. Atterbury.
For provoking of urine, one ſhould begin with the gentleſt
- - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
For ſome time one was not thought to underſtand Ariſtotle,
Shakeſp.
unleſs he had read him with Averroe's comment. JBaker.”
II. A perſon of particular character.
Then muſt you ſpeak
Of one that lov’d not wiſely, but too well;
Of one not eaſily jealous; but being wrought
Perplex'd in the extreme. Shakeſp. Othello.
With lives and fortunes truſting one
Who ſo diſcreetly us'd his own. //aller.
Edward I. was one that very well knew how to uſe a vic-
tory, as well as obtain it. Hale.
One who contemned divine and human laws. Dryden.
12. One has ſometimes a plural, either when it ſtands for
perſons indefinitely; as, the great ones of the world: or when
it relates to ſome thing going before, and is only the repre-
ſentative of the antecedent noun. This relative mode of
ſpeech, whether ſingular or plural, is in my ear not very
elegant, yet is uſed by good authors.
Be not found here; hence with your little ones. Shakespeare .
Theſe ſucceſſes are more glorious which bring benefit to
the world, than ſuch ruinous ones as are d yed in human blood.
Glanvie's Scepſ. Prºf.
. He that will overlook the true reaſon of a thing which
but one, may eaſily find many falſe ones, error being in-
finite, ‘liºtſºn, Serm. I.
Tº following plain rules and direáions, are not the leſs
uſeſul becauſe they are plain ones. Atterbury.
There are many whoſe waking thoughts are wholly em-
ployed on their ſleeping ones. Addiſon's Speciator.
Arbitrary Power tends to make a man a bad ſovereſ. n, who
might Poſibly have been a good one, had he been inj
with an authority limited by law. Addiſon's Freeholder.
This evil fortune which attends extraºy men, hath
becn imputed to divers cauſes that need not be ſet down,
when ſo obvious an one occurs, th
- ... that when a great genius ap-
pears the dunges are all in conſpiracy againſt him. Swift.
ONE'Exed. adj. [one and eye.] Having only one eye.
A ſign-poſt dauber wou'd diſdain to paint
The one-y’d heroe on his elephant.
The mighty family
Of oneey’d brothers haſten to the ſhore. Addison.
OSEIRocki'TICAL. adj. [3-epox; flºor, Gr. onirocritique, Fr. it
ſhould therefore according to analogy be written chirºcritical
and onirocritick.] Interpretative of dreams.
If a man has no mind to paſs by abruptly from his imagined
to his real circumſtances, he may employ himſelf in that
new kind of obſervation which my oneirocritical correſpondent
has directed him to make. Addiſon's Speciator.
ONEIRocR1'Tick. m. ſ. [ºvipox?ſixõ, Gr.] An interpreter of
dreams.
Dryden.
Having ſurveyed all ranks and profeſſions, I do not find
in any quarter of the town an oneirocritick, or an interpreter
of dreams. Addison's Spediator, Nº. 505.
ONE'NEss; n.ſ.. [from one..] Unity; the quality of being one.
Our God is one, or rathcr very oneneſ; and mere unity,
having nothing but itſelf in itſelf, and not conſiſting, as all
things do beſides God, of many things. Hooker.
The oneneſs of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, referring to the ſe-
veral hypoflaſes, is the one eternal indiviſible divine nature,
and the eternity of the ſon's generation, and his co-eternity,
and his conſubſtantiality with the father when he came down
from Heaven and was incarnate. Hammond.
O'N ERARY. adj. [enerarius, Lat. oneraiſe, Fr.] Fitted for car-
riage or burthens.
To O'NERATE. v. a. [onero, Lat.] To load; to burthen.
ONERATION. m. ſ. [from onerate.] The act of loading. Dić.
O'NEROUS. adj. [onereux, Fr. onerºſis, Lat..] Burthenſome ;
oppreſſive. * :
A baniſhed perſon, that is abſent out of neceſſity, retains
all things onerous to himſelf, as a puniſhment for his crime.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
Osion. n.ſ. ſoignon, French.] -
It hath an orbicular, coated, bulbous root; the leaves are
hollow or pip; the ſtalk alſo hollow and ſwells out in the
middle; the flowers conſiſting of ſix leaves are collected in-
to a ſpherical head; the ſtyle of the flower becomes a roundiſh
fruit divided into three cells, containing roundiſh ſeeds. Mill.
If the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a ſhower of commanded tears,
An oniºn will do well. . Sha. I aming of the Shrew.
I an aſs, am onion-ey'd. Sha. Ant. and Cleºpatra.
This is ev'ry cook's opinion,
No ſav'ry diſh without an onion :
But leſt your kiſſing ſhould be ſpoil'd,
Your aniºns muſt be throughly boil’d. Swiſt,
O'NLY. adj. [from one, one!y, or onelike.]
1, Single ; one and no more.
Of all whom fortune to my ſword did bring,
This only man was worth the conquering.
2. This and no other.
The logick now in uſe has long poſſeſſed the chair, as the
only art taught in the ſchools for the direction of the mind
in the ſtudy of the ſciences. Locke.
3. This above all other: as, he is the only man for muſick.
O'NLY. adv.
1. Simply ; ſingly ; merely ; barely.
I propoſe my thoughts only as conjcółures. Bºrnet.
The poſterity of the wicked inherit the fruit of their fa-
ther's vices; and that not only by a juſt judgment, but from
the natural courſe of things. Jillotſon, Serm. 4.
All who deſerve his love, he makes his own;
And to be loy'd himſelf, needs only to be known. Dryd.
Nor muſt this contrition be exerciſed by us, ºnly for ºf
evils; but when we live the beſt. J/ake.
2. So and no otherwiſe. -
Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only
evil continually. Gen. vi. 5.
3. Singly without more: as, only isºtº; . . .
O's ox: As cy. m. ſ. [...o.º. 2 and … ſº...] Divination by a name.
Deſtinies wºre ſuperſtitiouſly by **** deciphered out
of names, as though the namº and natures of men were
ſuitable, and fatal neceſſities concurred herein with vºluntary
motion. f - - - Camden.
O'ºrical...a... [...ov 2 and wº." Prediting y hºmes:
Theodatus, when curious to know the ſucceſs of his wars
againſ, the Romans, an enºmentical or name-wiłº Jews
-&gt; 18 P w;...".
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 222</div><p class="Text">O N Y
O P E
.. :-- f
* *11 - ſhut up a number of ſwine and give ſome o
...º Gothiſh names with ſeveral marks,
and there to leave them. Camden.
O'NSET. m. ſ. [on and ſet.]
... Attack; ſtorm; aſſault; firſt brunt, -
"...If the ſoldier dieth, which ſtandeth ſtill, as he that
gives the braveſt onſet. - Sidney, b. ii.
All breathleſs, weary, faint,
Him ſpying, with freſh onſet he affail'd, .
And kindling new his courage, ſeeming queint, .
Struck him ſo hugely, that through great conſtraint --
He made him ſtoop. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
The ſhout
Of battle now began, and ruſhing ſound . -
Of onſet. Milton's Paradiſ? Lºft, b. vi.
Sometimes it gains a point; and preſently it finds itſelf
baffled and beaten off; yet ſtill it renews the cºſt, attacks
the difficulty afreſh; plants this reaſoning and that argument,
like ſo many intellectual batteries, till at length it forces a
way into the obſtinate encloſed truth. South.
Without men and proviſions it is impoſſible to ſecure con:
queſts that are made in the firſt onſets of an invaſion. Addison
Obſerve
The firſt impetuous onſets of his grief; ---
Uſe every artifice to keep him ſtedfaſt. Philips.
2. Something added by way of ornamental appendage. This
ſenſe, ſays Nicholſºn, is ſtill retained in Northumberland,
where onſet means a tuft.
I will with deeds requite thy gentleneſs;
And for an onſet, Titus, to advance
Thy name and honourable family,
Lavinia will I make my empreſs. Shakespeare . Tit. And.
To O'Ns E.T. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſet upon ; to begin.
This for a while was hotly onſetted and a reaſonable price
offered, but ſoon cooled again. Carew.
O'NSLAUGHT. m. ſ. [on and ſlay. See SLAUGHTER.] At-
tack; ſtorm ; onſet.
They made a halt
To view the ground, and where t'aſſault,
Then call'd a council, which was beſt,
By ſiege or onſlaught to inveſt
The enemy; and 'twas agreed
By ſtorm and onſlaught to proceed. IIudibras, p. i.
ONTo'Logist. n. / [from ontolºgy.] One who conſiders the
affections of being in general; a metaphyſician.
ONTology, n. ſ. [3,72 and x870;..] The ſcience of the af-
fections of being in general; metaphyſicks.
The modes, accidents and relations that belong to various
beings, are copiouſly treated of in metaphyſicks, or more
properly ontology. // atti's Lºgick.
O'Nward, adv. [onºpeans, Saxon.]
I. Forward; progreſſively.
My lord,
When you went onward on this ended ačtion,
I look'd upon her with a ſoldier's eye.
Satan was now at hand, and from his ſeat
The monſter moving onward came as faſt,
With horrid ſtrides. Milt. Par. Lºft, b. ii.
Him thro’ the ſpicy foreſt onward come
Adam diſcern'd, as in the door he ſat
Of his cool bow'r, Milt. Paradiº Lºſº, b. v.
Not one looks backward, onward ſtill he goes,
Yet ne'er looks forward farther than his noſ. Pope
2. In a ſtate of advanced progreſſion. 1'--
Philoxenus came to ſee how onward the fruits were of his
Shakespeare.
friends labour. Sidney
You are already ſo far onward of your way, that you have
forſaken the imitation of ordinary converſe. Dryden.
3. Somewhat farther.
A little ºnward lend thy guiding hand
r To theſe dark ſteps, a little farther on. Milton.
O'NYCHA. n.ſ. It is found in two different ſenſes in ſcrip-
ture. — The odoriferous ſnail or ſhell, and the ſtone named
onyx. The gºateſt part of commentators explain it b
thº, ºnyx or odoriferous ſhell, like that of the ſhellfiſh
called purpura. The onyx is fiſhed for in watry places of
the Indies, where grows the ſpicanardi, which is the food of
this fiſh and what makes its ſhell ſo arématick. Calnet.
* -- Take ſweet ſpices, ºa, and galbanum. Ex. xxx. 34.
O'Nyx, m. ſ. ſºvá.] The onyx, is a ſemipellucid gem, of
which there are ſeveral ſpecies, but the blueiſh white kind,
wº brown and white zones, is the true onyx legitima of the
º, It is a very elegant and beautiful gem, and the
for their º and diſpoſition of its colours make amends
ant of ſhow. Hill's Mat. Mºd.
For . º ner rare endowments to be ſold,
T * º by Ophir ſhown,
The onyx i. aphir, or rich onyx ſtone. Sandys.
of a dark horn ºl variety of the agat kind: it is
and ſometimes y º º, in which is a plate of a bluiſh white,
* * * : when on one or both ſides the white,
there happens to lie alſo a plate of a reddiſh or freſh colour,
the jewellers call the ſtone a ſardonyx. Mºodward on Fºſſ.
OOZE. m. ſ. [cither from eaux, waters, French ; or Paeſ,
wetneſs, Saxon.]
1. Soft mud; mire at the bottom of water; ſºme.
My ſon i' th' ooze is bedded. Shakespeare. Tempeſ.
Some carried up into their grounds the coze or ſalt water
mud, and found good profit thereby. Carew.
Old father Thames rais'd up his rev'rend head,
Deep in his coze he ſought his ſedgy bed,
And ſhrunk his waters back into his urn. Drydºn.
2. Soft flow; ſpring. This ſeems to be the meaning in Priºr.
From his firſt fountain and beginning ooze,
Down to the ſea each brook and torrent flows. Priºr,
3. The liquor of a tanner's vat. -
To Ooze. v. n. [from the noun..] To flow by ſtealth; to
run gently ; to drain away.
When the contracted limbs were cramp'd, even then
A wat'riſh humour ſwell'd and ooz'd agen. Dryden.
Where creeping waters ooze,
Where marſhes ſtagnate, and where rivers wind,
Cluſter the rolling fogs. Tºomſ. Autumn.
The lilly drinks
The latent rill, ſcarce oozing thro' the graſs. Thomſºn.
O'ozY. adj. [from ooze.] Miry; muddy; ſlimy.
From his oozy bed,
Old father Thames advanc'd his rev'rend head. Pope.
To OPA'cate. v. a. [ºpaco, Lat..] To ſhade; to cloud; to
darken; to obſcure. -
The ſame corpuſcles upon the unſtopping of the glaſs, did
opacate that part of the air they moved in. Boyle.
OPA'city. m. ſ. [opacité, Fr. opacitas, Lat: J Cloudineſs; want
of tranſparency.
Can anything eſcape the perſpicacity of thoſe eyes in whoſe
opticks there is no opacity ? Brown.
Had there not been any night, ſhadow or opacity, we ſhould
never have had any determinate conceit of darkneſs. Glanv.
How much any body hath of colour, ſo much hath it of
opacity, and by ſo much the more unfit is it to tranſmit the
ſpecies. Ray on the Creation:
The leaſt parts of almoſt all natural bodies, are in ſome
meaſure tranſparent; and the opacity of thoſe bodies ariſeth
from the multitude of reflexions cauſed in their internal parts.
Newt. Opt.
OPA'cous. adj. [opacus, Latin.] Dark ; obſcure ; not tran-
ſparent.
When he perceives that theſe opacous bodies do not hinder
the eye from judging light to have an equal diffuſion through
the whole place that it irradiates, he can have no difficulty to
allow air, that is diaphanous, and more ſubtile far than they,
and conſequently, diviſible into leſſer atoms ; and having
leſſer pores, gives leſs ſcope to our eyes to miſs light. Digby.
Upon the firm opacous globe
Of this round world, whoſe firſt convex divides
The luminous inferior orbs, inclos'd
From chaos, and th’ inroad of darkneſs old,
Satan alighted. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. iii.
O'PAL. m. ſ. The opal is a very elegant and a very ſingular
kind of ſtone, it hardly comes within the rank of the pellucid
gems, being much more opake, and leſs hard. It is found
always in the pebble ſhape of various ſizes, from the head
of a pin to the bigneſs of a walnut. It is naturally bright,
ſmooth and gloſſy, and ſhows all its beauty without the help
of the lapidary : in colour it much reſembles the fineſt mo-
ther of pearl; its baſis ſeeming a bluiſh or greyiſh white,
but with a property of reflecting all the colours of the rain-
bow, as turned differently to the light, among which the
green and the blue are particularly beautiful, but the fiery
red is the fineſt of all. This ſtone is found in the Eaſt-Indies,
in Egypt, Perſia and Tartary, and in ſome parts of Europe,
particularly in Bohemia; but the oriental is much the fineſt.
Hill's Aſat. Med.
Thy mind is a very opal.
Th’ empyreal heav'n, extended wide
In circuit, undetermin'd ſquare or round;
With opal tow’rs, and battlements adorn'd
Of living ſaphir. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. ii.
We have this ſtone from Germany, and is the ſame with
the opal of the ancients. //oodw, on Fºſſ.
OPA'QUE, adj. [opacus, Lat.]
The
Shot upward ſtill direét, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall. Aſit. Par. Loft.
Theſe diſappearing fixt ſtars were aétually extinguiſhed
and turned into more opaque and groſs planet-like bodies.
Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
To OP E. } v. a. [open, Saxon; op, Iſlandick, a hole. Ope
To OPEN. ; is uſed only in poetry, when one ſyllable is more
convenient than two.] -
1. To uncloſe ; to unlock; to put into ſuch a flate as that the
inner parts may be ſeen or entered. The contrary to ſhºt.
The
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
º,
- º
T. t
Nº
M.
Tº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 223</div><p class="Text">O P E
– -------&gt; --&gt; . -7-y I
. The world's mine oyſter, -
which I with ſword will open. Shakeſp. M. W. of J/ind.
Before you fight, ope this letter. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
They conſent to work us harm and woe,
To ope the gates, and ſo let in our foe. Fairfax.
If a man open a pit and not cover it, and an ox fall there-
in, the owner of the pit ſhall make it good. Ex. xxi. 23.
Let us paſs through your land, and none ſhall do you any
hurt; howbeit they would not open unto him. I Mac. v. 48.
Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cauſe of all ſuch as
are appointed to deſtrućtion. Prov. xxxi. 8.
often to me the gates of righteouſneſs. Pſ. cxviii. 19.
Adam, now ope thine eyes; and firſt behold -
Th’ effects which thy original crime hath wrought
In ſome to ſpring from thee. Milt. Par. Loft, b. xi.
Our fleet Apollo ſends,
Where Tuſcan Tyber rolls with rapid force,
And where Numicus opes his holy ſource. Dryden.
when firſt you ope your doors, and paſſing by
The ſad ill-omen'd objećt meets your eye. Dryden.
When the matter is made, the ſide muſt be opened to let
it out. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To ſhow; to diſcover. -
The Engliſh did adventure far for to open the north parts
of America. Abbot's Deſcription of the IWorld.
3. To divide; to break.
The wall of the cathedral church was opened by an earth-
quake, and ſhut again by a ſecond. Addiſon on Italy.
4. To explain ; to diſcloſe.
Some things wiſdom openeth by the ſacred books of ſcrip-
ture, ſome things by the glorious works of nature. Hooker.
Paul reaſoned with them out of the ſcriptures, opening and
alleging, that Chriſt muſt needs have ſuffered and riſen again
from the dead. Aéïs xvii. 3.
After the earl of Lincoln was ſlain, the king opened him-
ſelf to ſome of his council, that he was ſorry for the earl's
death, becauſe by him he might have known the bottom of
his danger. Bacon's Henry VII.
Gramont governour of Bayonne, took an exquiſite notice
of their perſons and behaviour, and opened himſelf to ſome
of his train, that he thought them to be gentlemen of much
more worth than their habits bewrayed. //otton.
A friend who relates his ſucceſs, talks himſelf into a new
pleaſure; and by opening his misfortunes, leaves part of them
behind him. Collier on Friendſhip.
5. To begin.
You retained him only for the ºpening of your cauſe, and
your main lawyer is yet behind. Dryd. Ep. to the J/higs.
Homer opens his poem with the utmoſt ſimplicity and mo-
deſty, he continually grows upon the reader. Notes on Odyſſ.
To OPE.
To O'PEN. } ‘U. 77.
1. To uncloſe itſelf; not to remain ſhut ; not to continue cloſed.
The hundred doors
Ope of themſelves; a ruſhing whirlwind roars
Within the cave. Dryden, AEn. vi.
My old wounds are open'd at this view,
And in my murd’rer's preſence bleed anew. Dryden.
Unnumber'd treaſures ope at once,
From each ſhe nicely culls with curious toil,
And decks the goddeſs. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
2. To bark. A term of hunting.
If I cry out thus upon no trail, never truſt me when I open
again. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of I/indor.
The night reſtores our actions done by day;
As hounds in ſleep will open for their prey. Dryden.
Cytheron loudly calls me to my way;
Thy hounds, Taygetus, open and purſe their prey. Dryd.
Hark! the dog opens, take thy certain aim ;
The woodcock flutters. Gay's Rural Sports.
OpE. adj. [Ope is ſcarcely uſed but by old authors, and by
O'PEN. } them in the primitive not figurative ſenſe.]
1. Uncloſed; not ſhut.
The gates are ope; now prove good ſeconds;
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them ;
Not for the fliers. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Moſt ſacrilegious murther hath broke ope
The lord's anointed temple, and ſtole thence
The life o' th' building. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Then ſent Sanballat his ſervant, with an open letter in his
hand. Neh. vi. 5.
With the ſame key ſet ope the door
Wherewith you lock'd it faſt before. Cleaveland.
Thro' the gate,
Wide open and unguarded, Satan paſs'd. Milt. P. Loft.
They meet the chiefs returning from the fight,
And each with open arms embrac'd her choſen knight. Dry.
He, when Æneas on the plain appears, -
Meets him with open arms and falling tears. Dryden.
The bounce broke ope the door. Dryden.
The door was ope, they blindly grope the way. Dryden.
2. Plain; apparent; evident. - - -
They crucify to themſelves the ſon of God afreſh, and put
him to an open ſhame. - Hebr. vi. 6.
Th’ under-work, tranſparent, ſhews too plain:
Where ºpen acts accuſe, th’ excuſe is vain. Daniel.
3. Not wearing diſguiſe; clear; artleſs; ſincere.
He was ſo ſecret therein, as not daring to be open, that to
no creature he ever ſpake of it. Sidney.
- Lord Cordes, the hotter he was againſt the Engliſh in
time of war, had the more credit in a negotiation of peace;
and beſides was held a man open and of good faith. Bacon.
The French are always open, familiar, and talkative; the
Italians ſtiff, ceremonious, and reſerved. Alºn.
This reſerved myſterious way of acting towards perſons,
who in right of their poſts expected a more ºpen treatment,
was imputed to ſome hidden deſign. Swift.
His generous, open, undeſigning heart,
Has begg'd his rival to ſollicit for him. Addiſon's Cato.
4. Not clouded; clear.
With dry eyes, and with an open look,
She met his glance midway. Dryden's Boccace.
Then ſhall thy Craggs
On the caſt ore another Pollio ſhine;
With aſpect open ſhall erect his head. Pope.
5. Not hidden; expoſed to view.
In that little ſpot of ground that lies between thoſe two
great oceans of eternity, we are to exerciſe our thoughts,
and lay open the treaſures of the divine wiſdom and goodneſs
hid in this part of nature and providence. Burnet.
Theſe innate notions ſhould lie open fairly to every one's
View. Locke.
Moral principles require reaſoning and diſcourſe to diſcover
the certainty of their truths : they lie not open as natural
chara&amp;ters engraven on the mind. Locke.
6. Not reſtrained ; not denied.
If Demetrius and the craftsmen have a matter againſt any
man, the law is open and there are deputies; let them im-
plead one another. Acts xix. 38.
7. Not cloudy; not gloomy. . . .
An open and warm winter portendeth a hot and dry ſum-
mer. Bacon's Nai. Hiſſ.
8. Uncovered.
Here is better than the open air. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
And when at laſt in pity, you will die,
I'll watch your birth of immortality;
Then, turtle-like, I'll to my mate repair,
And teach you your firſt flight in open air. Dryden.
9. Expoſed; without defence. - -
The ſervice that I truly did his life,
Hath left me open to all injuries. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Io. Attentive.
Thine eyes are ºpen upon all the ſons of men, to give every
one according to his ways. jer. xxxii. 19.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears
are open unto their cry. Pſ, xxxiv. 15.
O'PENER. m. ſ. [from open.] . . -
1. One that opens; one that unlocks; one that uncloſes.
True opener of mine eyes,
Much better ſeems this viſion, and more hope.
Of peaceful days portends, than thoſe two paſt. Milt.
2. Explainer; interpreter.
To us, th’ imagin'd voice of heav'n itſelf;
The very opener and intelligencer
Between the grace, the ſanctities of heav'n, -
And our dull workings. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
3. That which ſeparates; diſuniter. - *
There may be ſuch openers of compound bodies, becauſe
there wanted not ſome experiments in which it appeared.
Boyle.
OPENEYED. adj. [open and eye.] Vigilant; watchful.
While you here do ſnoring lie,
Openeyed conſpiracy -
- His time doth take. - Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
OPENHA'NDED. adj. [open and hand.] Generous ; liberal ;
munificent.
Good heav'n who renders mercy back for mercy,
With openhanded bounty ſhall repay you. Rowe.
OPENHEARTED. adj. [open and heart J. Generous ; candid;
not meanly ſubtle. -
I know him well; he's free and openhearted. Pryden,
Of an openhearted generous miniſter you are not to ſay that
he was in an intrigue to betray his county ; but, in an in;
trigue with a lady. - 4 ºthner's j. Bull.
OPEN HEA'RTEDN Ess. n. ſ. [ºpen and heart.] Liberality; nau-
nificence ; generoſity.
O'PENING.. n.ſ. [from open.]
I. Aperture ; breach. - - - . . .
The fire thus up, makes its way through the cracks and
openings of the earth. - Wºodw. Nat. Hiſł.
2. Diſcovery at a diſtance; faint knowledge; dawn.
God has been pleaſed to diſſipate this confuſion and º
2.I.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 224</div><p class="Text">O P E
O P I
- *** * * e dawnings of liberty and
e us ſome ofening, ſom &gt;
and to give * “s South's Sermons.
“...". of your glory, was like that of light; .
ſhone to us from afar and diſcloſed your firſt º:
tant nations.
ºy, adv. [from open.]
º, not ſecretly; in fight; not obſcurely.
Tijrºadions always ſpoken of with great honour,”
now called openly into queſtion. Hºcker, b. v.
Prayers are faulty, not whenſocver they be openly made,
but when hypocriſy is the cauſe of open praying: Hºoker.
Why ſhould you have put me to deny
This claim which now you wear ſo ºpen}.
- I knew the time,
Now full, that I no more ſhould live obſcure,
But openly begin, as beſt becomes
#...; which I derivá from heav'n. ... Per §3.
How groſy and ºpenly do many º º,"
- ur ungodlineſs and Worldly -
precepts of the goſpel, by o o Tillotſºn, Serm. 5.
we expreſs our thanks by of ºnly owning our parentage,
and paying our common devotions to God on this day's ſo-
lemnity. Aftterbary's Sermons.
Shakespeare ?.
2. Plainly ; apparently : evidently; without diſguiſe.
Darah
Too ºpenly does love and hatred ſhow :
A bounteous maſter, but a deadly foe. Dryden.
Orºmov'thep. adj. [ºpen and mouth.J Greedy; ravenous;
clamorous; vociferous.
Up comes a lion ºpenmouthed toward the aſs. L'//ºrange.
O'FENNess. n.ſ.. [from of en.]
1. Plainneſs; clearneſs; freedom from obſcurity or ambiguity.
Deliver with more openn'ſ your anſwers
To my demands. Shalºft. Cºlcline.
2. Plainneſs; freedom from diſguiſe.
The noble openneſs and freedom of his reflexions, arc cz-
preſſed in lively colours. Felton on the Cºfficks.
Theſe, letters all written in the oyºnº's of friendſhip, will
rove what were my real ſentiments. Pººr's Letters.
OPERA. m. ſ. [Italian.]
An opera is a poetical tale or fition, repreſented by vocal
and inſtrumental muſick, adorncil with ſcenes, machines,
and dancing. Dryden's Prºf. to Albiºn.
O'PERABLE. adj. [from ºperºr, Latin.] To be done; prac-
ticable.
Being uncapable of operahle circumſtances, or rightly to
judge the prudentiality of affairs, they only gaze upon the vi-
fible ſucceſs, and thereafter condemn or cry up the whole
progreſſion. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours, b. i.
O'PER ANT. adj. [operant, French..] Active ; having power
to produce any effect. A word not in uſe.
Earth, yield me roots |
Who ſeeks far better of thee, ſauce his palate
With thy moſt ºperant poiſon Shakespeare. Tim, of Athens.
I muſt leave thee, love, and ſhortly too :
My operant powers their functions leave to do. Shakeſp.
To QPERATE. v. n. [operor, Latin; operºr, French..] To
act; to have agency; to produce effects.
The virtues of private perſons ºperate but on a few ; their
ſphere of action is narrow, and their influence is confined to
it. . . . . Atterbury's Sermons.
Bodies produce ideas in us, manifeſtly by impulſe, the
only way which we can conceive bodies operate in. Locke.
t can ºperate on the guts and ſtomach, and thereby pro-
duce diſtinct ideas. - Lºcke.
A plain cºnvincing reaſon operate; on the mind, both of
a lºaned and ignorant hearer is long as they live. Swift.
Where cauſes operate freely, with a liberty of indifference
to this or the contrary, the effect will be contingent, and
the certain knowledge of it belongs only to God. J/atts.
f -
OPERATION. m. ſ. [operatio, Lat ºperation, French.]
1. Agency; production of effects; influence.
There are in men operations, ſome natural,
ſome ſupernatural, ſome politick, ſome finally ſome rational,
eccleſiaſtical.
By all the operatiºns of the orbs, Hooker.
From whom we do exiſt and ceaſe to be
Here I diſclaim all my paternal care. &gt; Shakespeare . Lear
All operations by tranſmiſſion of ſpirits and imºn.
work at diſtance and not at touch. Bacon's Nº. fift.
Waller's preſence had an extraordinary operation to º
any thing deſired. Clarendºn, b. viii
The tree whoſe operation brings x * - v iii.
Knowledge of good and ill, ſhun to taſte. Mk. P. Lºft.
the ºperation of theſe ſalts be in convenic
moted by warmth
and reduced i
- nt glaſſes pro-
• the aſcending ſteams may eaſily be º
The pain º a penctrant ſpirit. Bº
* and ſickneſs cauſed by manna, are the effects of
its ºperation on th
- e ſto : -
figure of its infºni, mach and guts by the ſeize, motion and
2. Action; effect. ble parts. Locke.
Repentanc
° and renovation
lo - - -
6 a conſiſt not in the firiſe, wiſh,
or purpoſe, but in the aqual operations of good life. Hamm.
That falſe fruit
Far other operation firſt diſplay'd,
Carnal deſire inflaming. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
Speculative painting, without the aſſiſtance of manual ope-
ratiºn, can never attain to perfection, but ſlothfully languiſhes;
for it was not with his tongue that Apciles performed his
noble works. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
In this underſtanding piece of clock-work, his body as
well as other ſenſeleſs matter has colour, warmth and ſoft-
neſs. But theſe qualities are not ſubſiſtent in thoſe bodies,
but are operations of fancy begotten in ſomething elſe. Bently.
3. [In chirurgery.] The part of the art of healing which de-
pends on the uſe of inſtruments.
4. The motions or employments of an army.
O'PERATIVE. adj. [from ºperate.] Having the power of aq-
ing ; having forcible agency.
To be over curious in ſearching how God's all-piercing
and operative ſpirit diſtinguiſhing gave form to the matter ºf
the univerſal, is a ſearch like unto his, who not contented
with a known ford, will preſume to paſs over the greateſt
rivers in all parts where he is ignorant of their depths. Ral.
Many of the nobility endeavoured to make themſelves po-
pular, by ſpeaking in parliament againſt thoſe things which
were moſt grateful to his majeſty; and he thought a little
diſcountenance upon thoſe perſons would ſuppreſs that ſpirit
within themſelves, or make the poiſon of it leſs operative upon
others. - Clarendon.
In adions of religion we ſhould be zealous, active and
oferative, ſo far as prudence will permit. Taylor.
This circumſtance of the promiſe muſt give life to all the
reſt, and make them operative toward the producing of good
life. Decay of Piety.
It holds in all operative principles, eſpecially in morality;
in which, not to proceed, is certainly to go backward. South.
The will is the concluſion of an operative ſyllogiſm. Norr.
OPERATOR. m. ſ. [operateur, Fr. from of crate.] One that per-
forms any act of the hand ; one who produces any effect.
An imaginary operator opening the firſt with a great deal
of nicety, upon a curſory view appeared like the head of
another. Aliſon's Speciator, Nº. 275.
To adminiſter this doſe, there cannot be fewer than fifty
thouſand ºperators, allowing one ºperator to every thirty. Swift.
OPERo's E. adj. [operºſus, Latin.] Laborious; full of dº
and tediouſneſs.
Such an explication is purcly imaginary, and alſo very
operaſe, and would affect a great part of the univerſe; they
would be as hard put to it to get rid of this water, when
the deluge was to ceaſe, as they were at firſt to procure it.
Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
Written language, as it is more of creas, ſo it is more di-
geſted, and is permanent. Holder.
Opinio'PHAcous. adj. [??:, and £3.22. J. Serpenteating.
Not uſed.
All ſnakes are not of ſuch poiſonous qualities as common
opinion preſumeth; as is confirmable from ophiophagous na-
tions, and ſuch as feed upon ſerpents. Brºwn's W. Err.
OPH1'TEs. n. ſ. A ſtone.
Ophites has a duſky greeniſh ground, with ſpots of a lighter
green, oblong, and uſually near ſquare. //oodw, on Fºſſ.
OpH THA'LMick. adj. (ophthalmique, Fr from 32327 wo;, Gr.]
Relating to the eye.
O'pH THALMY. m. ſ. [ophthalmie, Fr. from 3:33.xwo;, Gr.] A
diſeaſe of the eyes, being an inflammation in the coats, pro-
ceeding from arterious blood gotten out of the veſſels and col-
lected into thoſe parts. Diff.
The uſe of cool applications, externally, is moſt eaſy to
the eye; but after all, there will ſometimes enſue a trouble-
ſome ophthalmy. Sharp's Surgery.
O'PIATE. m. ſ. A medicine that cauſes ſleep.
They choſe atheiſm as an opiate, to ſtill thoſe frightning
apprehenſions of hell, by inducing a dulneſs and lethargy of
mind, rather than to make uſe of that native and ſalutary
medicine, a hearty repentance. Bently’s Serm.
O'PIAT. E. adj. Soporiferous; ſomniferous; narcotick; cauſing
ſleep.
The particular ingredients of thoſe magical ointments,
are opiat, and ſoporiferous. For anointing of the forehead
and back bone, is uſed for procuring dead Îleeps. Bacon.
All their ſhape
Spangled with eyes, more num'rous than thoſe
Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drouze,
Charm'd with Arcadian pipe, the paſtºral reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod. A filton’s Par. Lºſ’.
Lettuce, which has a milky juice with an anodyne or
opiate quality reſolvent of the bile, is prºper for melancholy.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
O'PIFICE. m. ſ. ſopificium, Lat..] Workmanſhip ; º:
*C/.
Opificer. m. ſ. [epiſºx, Lat..] One that performs any work ;
artiſt. A word not received. A
n<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 225</div><p class="Text">O P I
O P O
There is an infinite diſtance betwixt the poor mortal artiſt, .
and the almighty opifºr: Bentley's Serm.
Opis ABLE. adj. [of inor, Lat.J Which may be thought. Dić.
OpinA'tion. n.ſ.. [ºpinor, Lat.) Opinion ; notion. Dief.
OPINA'roR. n.ſ.. [opiner, Lat. One who holds an opinion.
Conſider againſt what kind of opinators the reaſon above
iven is levelled. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Tô Opi'NE. v. n. [opinor, Latin.] To think 3 to judge ; to
be of opinion.
Fear is an ague, that forſakes
And haunts by fits thoſe * it takes;
And they’ll opine they feel the pain -
And ... £, felt {.. again. Hudibras, p. i.
In matters of mere ſpeculation, it is not much material to
the welfare of government, or of themſelves, whether they
opine right or wrong, and whether they be philoſophers or no.
1. South's Serm.
But I, who think more highly of our kind,
Opine, that nature, as in duty bound,
Deep hid the ſhining miſchief under ground.
Opi'N1A rive. adj. [from opinion.]
1. Stiff in a preconceived notion.
2. Imagined; not proved. . . - -
It is the more difficult to find out truth, becauſe it is in
ſuch inconſiderable proportions ſcattered in a maſs of opinia-
tive uncertainties; like the ſilver in Hiero's crown of gold.
- Glanv. Scepſ, c. 9.
Opix1A"roR. m. ſ. ſopiniatre, French.] One fond of his own
notion; inflexible; adherent to his own opinion.
What will not opiniators and ſelf-believing men diſpute of
and make doubt of Kaleigh.
Eſſex left lord Roberts governour; a man of a ſour and
ſurly nature, a great opiniator, and one who muſt be over-
come before he would believe that he could be ſo. Clarend.
For all his exact plot, down was he caſt from all his great-
neſs, and forced to end his days in a mean condition; as it
is pity but all ſuch politick opiniators ſhould. South's Serm.
OPINIATRE, adj. [French.] Obſtinate; ſtubborn.
Inſtead of an able man, you deſire to have him an in-
ſignificant wrangler, opiniatre in diſcourſe, and priding him-
ſelf in contradicting others. Locke.
OPINIA'TRETY. } n: ſ [opiniatret?, French.] Obſtinacy; in-
OPI'NIATRY. flexibility; determination of mind ; ſtub-
bornneſs. This word, though it has been tried in different
forms, is not yet received, nor is it wanted. -
Leſt popular opiniatry ſhould ariſe, we will deliver the chief
opinions. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vii.
The one ſets the thoughts upon wit and falſe colours, and
not upon truth ; the other teaches fallacy, wrangling and
opiniatry. Locke’s Education.
So much as we ourſelves conſider and comprehend of truth
and reaſon, ſo much we poſſeſs of real and true knowledge.
The floating of other men's opinions in our brains, make us
not one jot the more knowing, though they happen to be
true: what in them was ſcience, is in us but opiniatrety.
* Locke.
I can paſs by opiniatry and the buſy meddling of thoſe who
thruſt themſelves into every thing. //oodw. Letters.
I was extremely concerned at his opiniatrety in leaving me;
but he ſhall not get rid ſo. Pope.
OPINION. m. ſ. [opinion, Fr. opinio, Lat.]
1. Perſwaſion of the mind, without proof or certain knowledge.
Opinion is a light, vain, crude and imperfect thing, ſettled
in the imagination, but never arriving at the underſtanding,
there to obtain the tincture of reaſon. Ben. johnſon.
Opinion is, when the aſſent of the underſtanding is ſo far
gained by evidence of probability, that it rather inclines to
one perſwaſion than to another, yet not altogether without
Pope.
a mixture of incertainty or doubting. Hale.
Stiff in opinion, ever in the wrong. Dryden.
Bleſt be the princes who have fought
For pompous names, or wide dominion,
Since by their error we are taught,
That happineſs is but opinion. Prior,
2
. Sentiments; judgment; notion.
Can they make it out againſt the common ſenſe and opinion
of all mankind, that there is no ſuch thing as a future ſtate
of miſery for ſuch as have lived ill here. South.
Charity itſelf commands us, where we know no ill, to
think well of all ; but friendſhip, that always goes a pitch
higher, gives a man a peculiar right and claim to the good
opinion of his friend. South's Sermons,
We may allow this to be his opinion concerning heirs, that
where there are divers children the eldeſt ſon has the right to
be heir. Locke.
Philºſophers are of opinion, that infinite ſpace is poſſeſſed
by God's infinite omnipreſence. Locke,
I ſhall conclude my paper with a ſtory out of Boccalini,
which ſufficiently ſhews us the opiniºn that judicious author
“ntertained of the ſort of critics I have been here mentioning.
Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 291.
3. Favourable judgment. * - - -
In actions of arms ſmall matters are of great moment,
eſpecially when they ſerve to raiſe an opinion of commanders.
I.ſay ward.
Howſoever I have no opinion of thoſe things; yet º much
I conceive to be true, that itrong imagination bath more
... force upon things living, than things merely inanimate. Bacon.
To OPI'Nios. v. a. [from the noun..] To opine; to think.
A word out of uſe, and unworthy of revival. *
The ſtoicks ºpinioned the ſouls of wiſe men dwell about the
moon, and thoſe fools wandered about the earth: whereas
the Epicureans held that death was nothing, nor after death.
- - - - Brown's W. Lºrr.
That the ſoul and the angels are devoid of quantity and
dimenſion, is generally opinioned. Glanv. Sººpſ. c. xiii.
It is opinioned, that the earth reſts as the world's centre;
while the heavens are the ſubject of the univerſal motions.
Glanv. Scepſ c. xi.;
Opi'NIon ATIVE: adj. [from opinion.] Fond of preconceived
notions; ſtubborn, -
Striking at the root of pedantry and opinionative aſſurance;
would be no hindrance to the world's improvement. Glanv.
One would rather chuſe a reader without art, than one
ill inſtructed with learning, but opinionative and without judg-
Inent. Burnet's Theory of the Earth,
QPI'NIon Atively. adv. [from opinionative..] Stubbornly.
OP1’NIon ATIVEN Ess. m. ſ. [from opinionative..] Obſtimacy.
OPI'NIonist. m. ſ. [opinioniſie, Fr. from opinion.] One fond of
his own notions.
Every conceited opinionſ? ſets up an infallible chair in his
own brain. º Glanv. to Albius.
OPI(PARous. adj. [opiparus, Lat.] Sumptuous. IXićf.
OPITULATION. m. ſ. ſopitulatio, Lat..] An aiding ; a help-
ing. Dić?.
O'PIUM. n.ſ. A juice, partly of the reſinous, partly of the
gummy kind. It is brought to us in flat cakes or maſſes;
uſually of a roundiſh figure, very heavy and of a denſe tex-
ture, not perfectly dry: its colour is a dark browniſh yellow;
its ſmell is very unpleaſant, of a dead faint kind; and its
taſte very bitter and very acrid. It is brought from Natolia,
from Egypt, and from the Eaſt-Indies, where it is produced
from the white garden poppy; a plant of which every part
is full of a milky juice, and with which the fields of Aſia-
Minor are in many places ſown as ours are with corn. When
the heads grow to maturity, but are yet ſoft, green and full
of juice, inciſions are made in them, and from every one of
theſe a few drops flow of a milky juice, which ſoon hardens
into a ſolid conſiſtence. Theſe drops are gathered with great
care, and the fineſt opium proceeds from the firſt inciſions.
In the countries where opium is produced, multitudes are em-
ployed in preparing it with water, honey and ſpices, and
working it up into cakes ; but what we generally have is the
mere crude juice, or at moſt worked up with water, or a
ſmall quantity of honey fufficient to bring it into form. The
ancients were greatly divided about the virtues and uſe of
opium; ſome calling it a poiſon, and others the greateſt of
all medicines. At preſent it is in high eſteem, and exter-
nally applied it is emolient, relaxing and diſcutient, and
greatly promotes ſuppuration. A moderate doſe ºf ºpium
taken internally, is generally under a grain, yet cuſtom will
make people bear a dram as a moderate doſe; but in that
caſe nature is vitiated. Its firſt effect is the making the pa-
tient cheerful, as if he had drank moderately of wine; it
removes melancholy, excites boldneſs, and diſſipates the
dread of danger; and for this reaſon the Turks always take
it when they are going to battle in a larger doſe than ordi-
nary : it afterward quiets the ſpirits, eaſes pain, and diſpoſes
to ſleep. After the effect of a doſe of opium is over, the
pain generally returns in a more violent manner; the ſpirits,
which had been elevated by it, become lower than before,
and the pulſe languid. An immoderate doſe of opium brings
on a ſort of drunkenneſs, cheerfulneſs and loud laughter, at
firſt, and, after many terrible ſymptoms, death itſelf. Thoſe
who have accuſtomed themſelves to an immoderate uſe of
of ium, are ſubject to relaxations and weakneſſes ºf all the
parts of the body; they are apt to be faint, idle and thought-
leſs, and are generally in a ſtupid and uncomfortabl; ſtate,
except juſt after they have taken a freſh doſe they loſe their
appetite, and in fine grow old before their time. Hill.
Sleep hath forſook and giv'n Ine o'er -
To death's benumbing opium as my only cure. . Milton.
The colour and taſte of opium are, as well as its ſoporific
Or anodyne virtues, mere powers dependin On 11S prunary
qualities, whereby it is fitted to produce different operations
on different parts of our bodies. - Lºcke
O'ple-tre F. n.ſ.. [ºple and tree J. A ſºrt of tº: Ainſ,
OPOBALSAMU.M. m. ſ. [Latin.j Balm of Gilead.
OPO PONZX. n.ſ. [Latin.]. A gum reſin of a tºlerably firm
texture, in ſmall looſe granules, and ſometimes in large maſſes
which are impure. It is of a ſtrong diſagreeable incll, and
an acrid and extremely bitter taile. It is brought to us from
18 Q. the<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 226</div><p class="Text">** - ---
O P P
the Eaſt, and was well known to the Greeks ; but we *
entirely ignorant of the plant which produces this *s,
is atteñuating and diſcutient, and gently purgative. . Hitſ.
. O'PP11)AN. nj. [ºppidanus, Lat..] A townſman ; an inhabi-
a to WI1. - - -
Tºr. v. a. [ºppignero, Lat.] To pledge; to
*11. -
Pº, duke of Guiſe Henry was the greateſt uſurer in France,
for that he had turned all his eſtate into obligations; meaning
that he had ſold and oppignorated all his patrimony, to give
large donatives to other men. Bacon.
Ferdinando merchanded at this time with F"... the
- - ignan, oppignorated to them.
reſtoring Rouſfillion and Perpignan, opp *... Henry VII.
To OPPILATE. v. a. [ºppiº, Lat. oºpiler, Fr.] To heap
up obſtruction. - •. Ob
Oppil. ATION. m. ſ. [ #. Fr. from of pilate. J -
ućtion ; matter heaped together.
tº: ingredients º in their ſubſtance adº the
ſpirits, reclude oppilations, and mundify the blood. Harvey.
Oppilative. adj. [oppilative, Fr. J. Qbſtructive.
Opple’TED. adj. [oppletus, Lat.] Filled; crouded.
Oppo's ENT, adj. [opponens, Lat..] Oppoſite; adverſe.
Ere the foundations of this earth were laid,
It was opponent to our ſearch ordain'd, * -
That joy, ſtill ſought, ſhould never be attain'd.
Oppo'NENT. n.ſ.. [opponens, Lat.]
º 1. Antagoniſt; adverſary. - - - -
* 2. One who begins the diſpute by raiſing obječtions to a tenet.
Inaſmuch as ye go about to deſtroy a thing which is in
force, and to draw in that which hath not as yet been re-
ceived, to impoſe on us that which we think not ourſelves
bound unto; that therefore ye are not to claim in any con-
ference other than the plaintiffs or opponents part. Hooker.
How becomingly does Philopolis exerciſe his office, and
ſeaſonably commit the opponent with the reſpondent, like a
long practiſed moderator. More.
OPPORTUNE, adj. [opportune, Fr. opportunus, Latin.] Sea-
ſonable; convenient; fit; timely; well-timed; proper.
There was nothing to be added to this great king's fe-
licity, being at the top of all worldly bliſs, and the perpetual
conſtancy of his proſperous ſucceſſes, but an opportune death
to withdraw him from any future blow of fortune. Bacon.
Will lift us up in ſpite of fate,
Nearer our ancient ſeat; perhaps in view
Of thoſe bright confines, whence with neighb'ring arms
And ºpportune excurſion, we may chance
Re-enter heav'n. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
Conſider'd every creature, which of all
oft ºppºrtune might ſerve his wiles; and found
The ſerpent ſubtleſt beaſt of all the field. • Milton.
Opportu'NELY. adv. [from ºportune.] Seaſonably; conve-
niently; with opportunity either of time or place.
He was reſolved to chuſe a war rather than to have Bre-
tagne carried by France, being ſituate ſo opportunely to annoy
England either for coaſt or trade. Bacon's Henry VII.
Againſt theſe there is a proper objećtion, that they offend
ºnifºrmity; whereof I am therefore oppºrtinº, induced ,
º ſomewhat. #otton's Architecture.
This experiment does opportuneſ, ſupply the deficiency. Boyle.
Opportunity. * / [ºpportunité, Fr. ºpportunitas, Lat..] Fit
fit place; time; convenience ; ſuitableneſs of circumſtances to
any end.
* * man will make more oppºrtunitia, than he finds.
Mens behaviour ſhould be like ič, not too ſtraight
but frce for exerciſe. Bacon, Eſſay 53.
* Opportunity, like a ſudden guſt,
Hath ſwell’d my calmer thoughts into a tempeſt.
Accurſed ºpportunity /
That work ſt our thoughts into defires, deſires
To reſolutions ; thoſe being ripe and quicken'd,
Thou giv'ſt them birth, and bring't them forth to adion.
Denham.
Prior.
... Tho' their advice be good, their counſel wiſe
Yet length ſtill loſes oppºrtunitiº. 3. Denham
Neglect no ºpportunity of doing good, nor check th de:
fire ºf doing it, by a vain fear of What may happen. Atterb.
All º º taken an opportunity to give long deſcrip-
...tions of the night. Broome's Notes on the offſ.
To OPPOSE. J. a. [ºppºſer, French; oppono, Latin. Odyſſey.
i. To act againſt; to be adverſe; to hinder ; to reſiſt.
There's no bottom, none
In my voluptuouſneſs: and my deſire
lººtinent impediments would o'erbear,
That did ºppoſe my will. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. T; * | 9PPoſition; to offer as an antagoniſt or rival.
en ar -
and then I ma **9t naturally equal, I am ſure all ſlaves are ;
...” without preſumption, ºppºſe my ſingle opini.
3. To place as an obſtacle. Locke.
Since he ſta
And that no
nds obdurate,
*wful means can carry me
O'pposit EN Ess. n. / [from ºppºſite.]
Out of his envy's reach, I do optºſ, -
My patience to his fury. Shakespeare Merch. ºf Penice.
I thro’ the ſeas purſu'd their exil'd race,
Engag'd the heav'ns, fº'd the ſtormy main ;
But billows roar'd and tempeſts rag'd in vain. Dryden.
i. To place in front.
4. To p Her grace ſat down
In a rich chair of ſtate; oppºſing freely
The beauty of her perſon to the people. Shakeſpeare.
To OPPo's E. v. n.
1. To act adverſely. -
A ſervant, thrill'd with remorſe,
Oppos'd againſt the act, bending his ſword
To his great maſter.
He practiſed to diſpatch ſuch of the nobility as were like
to oppoſe againſt his miſchievous drift, and in fiſh for to en-
cumber and weaken the reſt, that they ſhould be no imped:-
ments to him. Hayward.
2. To object in a diſputation; to have the part of raiſ. dif-
ficulties againſt a tenet ſuppoſed to be right. º
Oppo's Eless. adj. [from oppoſe.] Irreſiſtible ; not to be oppoſed
I could bear it longer, and not fall -
To quarrel with your great oppºly, wills. Sº,
Oppo's ER. m. ſ. [from oppoſe..] Ohé that oppoſes; anta
enemy; rival.
ſpeare.
goniſt;
Now the fair goddeſs fortune
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Miſguide thy oppºſers ſwords: bold gentleman
Proſperity be thy page. *a*.ſp. Coriolanus.
Brave wits that have made eſſays worthy of immortality;
yet by reaſon of envious and more popular ºppºſers, have it."
mitted to fate, and are almoſt loſt in oblivion. Glanv.
I do not ſee how the miniſters could have continued in
their ſtations, if their ºppºſers had agreed about the methods
by which they ſhould be ruined. Swift.
A hardy modern chief,
A bold oppoſer of divine belief.
OPPOSITE. adj. [oppoſite, Fr. oppºſius, Lat.]
I. Placed in front; facing each other.
To th’ other five,
Their planetary motions and aſpects,
In ſextile, ſquare, trine and oppoſite,
Of noxious efficacy. 41ſton's Paradſ: 1%, b. x.
2. Adverſe; repugnant.
Nothing of a foreign nature, like the trifling novels, by
which the reader is miſled into another ſort of pleaſure,
oppºſite to that which is deſigned in an epick poem. Dryd.
This is a proſpect very uneaſy to the liſts and paſſions,
and oppºſite to the ſtrongeſt deſires of fleſh and blood. Roger.
. Contrary.
In this fallen ſtate of man religion begins with repentance
and converſion, the two oppºſite terms of which are God and
ſin. Tilºtſon, Serm. 1.
Particles of ſpeech have divers, and ſometimes almoſt op-
poſite ſignifications. Zocke.
OPPosit E. a. ſ. Adverſary; opponent; antagoniſt; enemy.
To the beſt and wiſeſt, while they live, the world is con-
tinually a froward oppoſite, a curious obſerver of their de-
fečts and imperfections; their virtues it afterwards as much
admireth. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 7.
He is the moſt ſkilful, bloody, and fatal oppºſite that you
could have found in Illyria. Shakespeare ?. I welfth N.ht.
The knight whom fate or happy chance
Shall grace his arms ſo far in equal fight,
From out the bars to force his ºppoſiº,
The prize of valour and of lové ſhall gain.
Blackmore.
Dryden.
Oppositely, adv. [from oppºſite.]
1. In ſuch a ſituation as to face each other.
The leſler pair are joined edge to edge, but not oppoſitely
with their points downward, but upward. Grew's Muſ.
2. Adverſely.
And now in dry, and brittle ſtraw did grow,
Winds from all quarters oppºſitely blow. May, Wirgil.
The ſtate of being op-
I oft have ſeen, when corn was ripe to mow, ;
poſite.
Opposition, n. ſ. [oppºſition, Fr. oppºſitio, Lat.]
1. Situation ſo as to front ſomething oppoſed.
2. Hoſtile reſiſtance.
He
Sry'd oh! and mounted; found no ºppºſitiºn
From what he look'd for ſhould oppoſe. Shakespeare.
Virtue which breaks thro' all oppºſition,
And all temptation can remove,
Moſt ſhines, and moſt is acceptable above. AZ ſtºn.
He conſiders Lauſus reſcuing his father at the hazard of
his own life, as an image of himſelf when he took Anchiſes
on his ſhoulders, and bore him ſafe thro' the rage of the fire
and the oppoſition of his enemies. Dryden's Dufreſnºy,
3. Contrariety of affection.
They who never tried the experiment of a holy life, mea-
- ſure
Shakespeare. King Lear.
3.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 227</div><p class="Text">O P P
*
fire the laws of God not by their intrinſical goodneſs, but
by the reluctancy and oppºſition which they find, in their own
hearts. Tillotſon, Serm. 6.
. Contrariety of intereſt; contrariety of meaſures.
5- Contrariety of meaning; diverſity of meaning.
The parts of every true oppoſition do alway both concern
the ſame ſubjećt, and have reference to the ſame thing, fith
otherwiſe they are but in ſhew oppoſite, and not in truth.
. . . Hoºker, b. v. ſ. 48.
Reaſon can never permit the mind to rejećt a greater cvi-
dence, to embrace what is leſs evident, nor allow it to enter-
tain probability in ºppºſition to knowledge and certainty. Locke.
To OPPRESS. v. a. [of preſſus, Lat..] .
1. To cruſh by hardſhip or unreaſonable ſeverity.
Iſrael and Judah were oppreſſed together, and all that took
them captives held them faſt, they refuſed to let them go. .
er. l. -
Alas! a mortal moſt oppreſt of thoſe } 33
whom fate has loaded with a weight of woes.
erpower; to ſubdue.
2. To overp were not ourſelves, -
When nature, being oppreſ?, commands the mind
To ſuffer with the body. Shakeſp. King Lear.
In º of noon,
The ſun oppreſs'd, is plung d in thickeſt gloom.
oº: [oppreſſion, Fr. from oppreſs.]
1. The ad of oppreſſing; cruelty; ſeverity.
2. The ſtate of being oppreſſed; miſery. . . .
- Famine is in thy cheeks;
Need and oppreſſion ſtare within thine ‘...;
Contempt and beggary hang upon thy back.
Caeſar himſelf has work, and our oppreſſion
Exceeds what we expected. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleop.
3. Hardſhip; alamiº * * . -
We are all ſubječt to the ſame accidents; and when we
ſee any under particular oppreſſion, we ſhould look upon it as
e common lot of human nature. Addison Speciator.
‘. of ſpirits; laffitude of body. -
Drouſineſs, oppreſſion, heavineſs, and laſfitude, are ſigns
of a too plentiful meal. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
Oppre'ssive. adj. [from oppreſs.]
1. Cruel; inhuman; unjuſtly exactious or ſevere.
2. Heavy ; overwhelming. . . . -
- Alicia, reach thy friendly arm,
And help me to ſupport that feeble frame,
That nodding totters with oppreſſive wee, *.*
And ſinks beneath its load. Rowe's jane Shore.
OppRE'ssoR. n.ſ. [oppreſſeur, Fr. from oppreſs.] One who
harraſſes others with unreaſonable or unjuſt ſeverity.
I from oppreſſors did the poor defend,
Pope.
Thomſ.
Shaiºſ.
4.
The fatherleſs, and ſuch as had no friend. Sandys.
The cries of orphans, and th' oppreſſor's rage,
Had reach'd the ſtars. . Dryden.
Power when employed to relieve the oppreſſed, and to
puniſh the oppreſſor, becomes a great bleſfing. Swift.
OPPRO'BRIOUS. adj. [from opprobrium, Lat..] Reproach-
ful; diſgraceful; cauſing infamy; ſcurrilous.
Himſelf pronounceth them bleſſed, that ſhould for his
name ſake be ſubjećt to all kinds of ignominy and opprobrious
maledićtion. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 48.
I will not here defile
My unſtain’d verſe with his opprobrions name.
Solomon he led by fraud to build
His temple right againſt the temple of God,
On the approbrious hill. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
They ſee themſelves unjuſtly aſperſed, and vindicate them.
ſelves in terms no leſs opprobrious than thoſe by which they
are attacked. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 137.
Oppro'Briously. ad. [from opprobrious.] Reproachfully ;
ſcurrilouſly.
Think you, this little prating York
Was not incenſed by his ſubtle mother,
To taunt and ſcorn you thus opprobriouſly. Shakeſp. R. III.
OPPro'BRious Ness. n.ſ.. [from opprobrious.] Reproachfulneſs;
ſcurrility. -
To §§ GN. v. a. [oppugno, Lat.] To oppoſe; to attack;
to reſiſt.
For the eccleſiaſtical laws of this land we are led by a
great reaſon to obſerve, and ye be by no neceſſity bound to
oppugn them. Hooker's Prºf.
They ſaid the manner of their impeachment they could
Daniel.
not but conceive did oppugn the rights of parliament. Clar.
If nothing can oppugn his love,
And virtue invious ways can prove,
What cannot he confide to do
That brings both love and virtue too Hud. p. i.
The ingredients reclude oppilations, mundify the blood,
and oppugn putrefaction. Harvey,
9°ru'GNANcy. n.ſ. [from oppugn.] Oppoſition.
Take but degree away, untune that ſtring,
And hark what diſcord follows, each thing meets
In meer oppugnancy. Shakeſpeare's. Troil, and Creſ.
O R
OPP.GNER. m. ſ. [from oppugn.] One who oppoſes of attacks,
The modern and degenerate Jews be, upon the ſcore of
being the great patrons of man’s free will, not cauſeleſsly
eſteemed the great ºff-gºers of God’s free grace. Bºyle.
oºths. "...ſ. [3]+232.] Late education ; late eru-
. Clition.
9 ºrios. m. ſ. ſepſinati, Latin.) Catering; a buying
proviſions. - - c f:.
QPTABLE. adj...[aptabilis, Lat..] Deſirable; to be wiſhed.
O'ptative. adj. Iºtativus, Lat.j Expreſſive of deſire. [In
grammar.] . . -
..The verb undergoes in Greek a different formation to ſig-
nify wiſhing, which is called the optative mood. Clarke.
Optical. n.ſ. [3alizos.] Relating to the ſcience of optics.
It ſeems not agreeable to what anatomiſts and optical wri-
ters deliver, touching the relation of the two eyes to each
other. - - Boyle.
QPTIcIAN. m. ſ...[from optick.] One ſkilled in opticks."
O'PTIck. ad;. Tèrºlixo; ; optiºue, Fr.]
1. Viſual; producing viſion; ſubſervient to viſion.
May not the harmony and diſcord of colours ariſe from
the proportions of the vibrations propagated through the fibres
of the optic nerves into the brain, as the harmony and diſ-
cord of ſounds ariſe from the proportions of the vibrations
of the air Newt. Opt.
2. Relating to the ſcience of viſion.
Where our maſter handleth the contračtions of pillars,
we have an optic rule, that the higher they are the leſs ſhould
be always their diminution aloft, becauſe the eye itſelf doth
naturally contract all objects, according to the diſtance.
//otton's Architecture.
Optick, n, ſ: An inſtrument of fight; an organ of fight.
Can any thing eſcape the perſpicacity of thoſe eyes which
were before light, and in whoſe optick; there is no opacity.
- - - Brown.
Our corporeal eyes we find
Dazzle the opticks of our mind. Denham.
You may neglect, or quench, or hate the flame,
Whoſe ſmoke too long obſcur'd your riſing name,
And quickly cold indiff'rence will enſue,
When you love's joys thro’ honour's optick view. Prior.
Why has not man a microſcopick eye *
For this plain reaſon, man is not a fly.
Say what the uſe, were finer opticks giv'n,
T'inſpect a mite, not comprehend the heav'n. Pope.
O'ptick. n.ſ. [3+lizº.] The ſcience of the nature and laws
of viſion. -
No ſpherical body of what bigneſs ſoever illuminates the
whole ſphere of another, although it illuminate ſomething
more than half of a leſſer, according unto the doćtrine of
opticks. . . . Brown's Vulgar Err. b. vi.
Thoſe who deſire ſatisfaction in the appearance, muſt go
to the admirable treatiſe of opticks by Sir Iſaac Newton.
Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
O'PTIMAcy. m. ſ. [optimates, Lat.] Nobility; body of nobles.
In this high court of parliament there is a rare co-ordina-
tion of power, a wholeſome mixture betwixt monarchy,
optimacy, and democracy. Howel.
Opti'Mity. n.ſ.. [from optimus.] The ſtate of being beſt,
O'ption. m. ſ. [optio, Lat.) Choice; election. -
Tranſplantation muſt proceed from the option of the people,
elſe it ſounds like an exile; ſo the colonies muſt be raiſed by
the leave of the king and not by his command. Bacon.
Which of theſe two rewards we will receive, he hath left
to our option. Smallridge's Serm.
Opulence. Un. ſ. [opulence, Fr. opulentia, Latin.] Wealth ;
O'PULENCY. } riches; affluence.
It muſt be a diſcovery of the infinite flatteries that follow
youth and opulency. Shakeſp. Tim. of Athens.
After eight years ſpent in outward opulency and inward mur-
mur, that it was not greater; after vaſt ſums of money and
great wealth gotten, he died unlamented. Clarendon.
He had becn a perſon not only of great opulence, but au-
thority. Atterbury,
There in full opulence a banker dwelt,
Who all the joys and pangs of riches felt ;
His fide board glitter'd with imagin'd plate, r_... r
And his proud fancy held a vaſt eſtate. Swiſt:
O'pulent. aft. [ºpulent, Fr. ºpulentus, Lat.] Rich; wealthy
affluent. r
He made him his ally, and provoked a mighty and ºpulent
king by an offenſive war in his quarrel. - *- - &amp; Cº.71.
To begin with the ſuppoſed policy of gratifying only the
rich and ºpulant. Does our wiſe man think that the grandee
whom he courts does not ſee through all the little plots of
his courtſhip. South's Sermons.
O'rulestly adv. [from opulent.] Richly; with ſplendor.
OR. conjunº. [oser, Saxon.] . - - - - - -
1. A disjunctive particle, marking diſtribution, and ſometimes
oppoſition. - - -
Inquire what the antients thought concerning this world,
whether it was to periſh or no ; whether to be de;
ſtroyed
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 228</div><p class="Text">O R A
O R A
º
oved or to fland eternally? -
ſtroy #: i. . ſhou'd receive, h
If I cou’d write or Holles cou’d forgive. . Garth.
Every thing that can be divided by the mind into two or
more ideas, is called coinplex. - JWatts's Logick.
2. It correſponds to either ; he muſt either fall or fly. itted
o, is ſometimes redundant, but is then more properly omitted.
How great ſoever the fins of any unreformed perſon are,
Chriſt died for him becauſe he died for all; only he muſt re-
form and forſake his ſins, or elſe he ſhall never receive bene-
fit of his death. - Hammond's Fund.
4. [on, or aene, Saxon.] Before ; or ever, is befºre rººr.
Ör we go to the declaration of this pſalm, it ſhall be con-
venient to ſhew who did write this pſalm. Fiſher.
The dead man's knell * --
Is there ſcarce aſk'd for whom, and good men's lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
#. or ere they ſicken. º: 4.
Léarn before thou ſpeak, and uſe Phyſic A....'...'.
fick.
- h.] Gold.
OR. m.ſ. [French.] †. ſhow'ry arch
with liſted colours gay, or, azure, gules, - - -
Delights and º: beholders eyes. Philips.
O'Rach. n.ſ. The flower is without lºves, but conſiſts of
many ſtamina ariſing from a five leav'd empalement; the
pointal becomes a flat orbicular feed, encloſed 1n the en-
palement, which becomes a foliaceous capſule, including two
forts of ſeeds. There are thirteen ſpecies ; of which the
firſt called garden orach, was cultivated as a culinary herb,
and uſed as ſpinach, though it is not generally liked by the
Engliſh, but ſtill eſteemed by the French. It was formerly
uſed in medicine. Miller.
O'RACLE. m. ſ. [oracle, Fr. oraculum, Lat.]
1. Something delivered by ſupernatural wiſdom. -
The main principle whereupon our belief of all things
therein contained dependeth, is, that the ſcriptures are the
oracles of God himſelf. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 8.
2. The place where, or perſon of whom the determinations
of heaven are enquired.
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well,
And ſet me up in hope f Shakeſp. Macbeth.
God hath now ſent his living oracle
Into the world to teach his final will,
And ſends his ſpirit of truth henceforth to dwell
In pious hearts, an inward oracle,
To all truth requiſite for men to know. Par. Reg.
3. Any perſon or place where certain deciſions are obtained.
There mighty nations ſhall enquire their doom,
The world's great oracle in times to come. Pope.
4. One famed for wiſdom; one whoſe determinations are not
to be diſputed.
To O'Racle. v. n. [from the noun..] To utter oracles. A
word not received.
No more ſhalt thou by oracling abuſe
The gentiles. Paradiſe Regained, b. i.
QRA'cular. 1 adi, [from oracle.] Uttering oracles; reſem-
ORA'culous. } bling oracles.
Thy counſel would be as the oracle of
Urim and thummim, thoſe oraculous gems
On Aaron's breaſt, or tongue of ſeers old
Infallible. Milton's Paradiſe Reg. b. iii.
Here Charles contrives the ord'ring of his ſtates,
Here he reſolves his neighb'ring princes fates ;
What nation ſhall have peace, where war be made,
Determin'd is in this oraºlous ſhade. /Walker.
Though their general acknowledgments of the weakneſs
of human underſtanding look like cold and ſceptical diſcourage-
ments; yet the particular expreſſions of their ſentiments are
as oraculous as if they were omniſcient. Glanv Scepſ.
They have ſomething venerable and oracular, in that uſ.
adornº gravity and ſhortneſs in the expreſſion. Pop. Prºf.
Th' oraclous ſeer frequents the Pharian coaſt,
- Proteus a name tremendous o'er the main. Pope.
"ORA'culously. adv. [from oraculous...] In manner of an
Oracle.
The teſtimony of antiquity, and ſuch as paſs oraculouſly
amongſt us, were not always ſo exact as to examine the
doctrine they delivered. Brown's Pulgar Err. b. i.
Hence riſe the branching beech and vocal oak,
Barnet.
ORA’ here Jove of old oraculouſly ſpoke. Dryden.
ººvses. n: ſ [from oraciliar..] The ſtate of being
Ullar.
() §ºos. m. ſ. [araiſon, Fr. oratio, Lat.] Prayer; verbal
"ºn. 9 oral worſhip: more frequently written oriſon.
". let’s hear the oraiſons he makes. Shakeſpeare.
H uſineſs might ſhorten, not diſturb her pray’r ;
* R had the beſt, if not the greater ſhare:
An active life, long oraiſºns forbids,
*** Pºiſſºya by deed. Dodº.
ORAL. adj. [oral, Fr. os, orris, Latin.] Delivered by mouth ;
not written.
Oral diſcourſe, whoſe tranſient faults dying with the ſound
that gives then life, and ſo not ſubject to a ſtrict review,
more eaſily eſcapes obſervation. Locke's Educat.
St. John was appealed to as the living oracle of the church;
and as his oral teſtimony laſted the firſt century, many have
obſerved, that by a particular providence ſeveral of Čur Sa-
viour's diſciples, and of the early converts, lived to a very
great age, that they might perſonally convey the truth of the
goſpel to thoſe times which were very remote. Addison.
O'RAI. LY. adv. [from oral.] By mouth ; without writing.
Oral tradition were incompetent without written monu-
ments to derive to us the original laws of a kingdom, be-
cauſe they are complex, not orally traducible to ſo great a
diſtance of ages. Hale's Comm. Law; of Eng.
ORANGE. m. ſ. [orange, Fr. aurentia, Latin.] The leavis
have two lobes or appendages at their baſe like ears, and cut
in form of a heart; the fruit is round and depreſſed, and of
a yellow colour when ripe, in which it differs from the cil
tron and lemon. The ſpecies are eight. 44iller.
I will diſharge it in your ſtraw-colour'd beard, your orange
tawny beard. Shakeſp. Midſ. Night's Drea.
The notary came aboard, holding in his hand a fruit like
an orange, but of colour between orange tawny and ſcarlet,
which caſt a moſt excellent odour, and is uſed for a preſerva.
tive againſt infection. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Fine oranges, ſauce for your veal,
Are charming when ſqueez'd in a pot of brown ale. Swift.
The ideas of orange colour and azure, produced in the
mind by the ſame infuſion of lignum nephriticum, are no
leſs diſtinct ideas than thoſe of the ſame colours taken from
two different bodies. Locke.
O'RANGERY. m. ſ. [orangerie, Fr.] Plantation of oranges.
A kitchen garden is a more pleaſant fight than the fineſt
orangery, or artificial green houſe. Spºtator, Nº. 477.
QRANGEMusk. n.ſ. See PEAR, of which it is a ſpecies.
O’RANGEwife. n.ſ. [orange and wife.] A woman who ſells
oranges. -
You wear out a good wholeſome forenoon in hearing a
cauſe between an orangewife and a foſſet feller. Shakespeare
ORATIon. m. ſ. [oration, Fr. oratio, Lat.] A ſpeech made ac-
cording to the laws of rhetorick; a harangue; a declarnation.
There ſhall I try,
In my oration, how the people take
The cruel iſſue of theſe bloody men. ... Shakespeare 7d. Ceſ:
This gives life and ſpirit to every thing that is ſpoken,
awakens the dulleſt ſpirits, and adds a fingular grace and
excellency both to the perſon and his oration. J/atts.
ORATO'Rical. adj. [froin oratour.] Rhetorical; befitting an
CIa tour.
Where he ſpeaks in an oratorical, affecting, or perſuaſive
way, let this be explained by other places where he treats of
the ſame theme in a doctrinal way. J/atts.
O'RA tour. m. ſ. [orateur, Fr. orator, Lat.]
1. A publick ſpeaker; a man of eloquence,
Poor queen and ſon | your labour is but koſt;
For Warwick is a ſubtle orator. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
As when of old ſome orator renown'd,
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence
Flouriſh'd, fince mute to ſome great cauſe addreſs'd,
Stood in himſelf collected; while each part,
Motion, each act, won audience. Milton's Par. Loft.
The conſtant deſign of both theſe orators in all their
ſpeeches, was to drive ſome one particular point. Swift.
I have liſtened to an orator of this ſpecies, without being
able to underſtand one ſingle ſentence. Swift.
Both orators ſo much renown'd,
In their own depths of eloquence were drown'd. Dryden.
2. A petitioner. This ſenſe is uſed in addreſſes to chancery.
O'RAtoRY. m. ſ. [oratoria, ars, Lat.]
1. Eloquence ; rhetorical ſkill. -
Each paſture ſtored with ſheep feeding with ſober ſecurity,
while the pretty lambs with bleating oratory craved the dams
comfort. Sidney.
When a world of men
Could not prevail with all their oratory,
Yet hath a woman's kindneſs over-rul’d.
When my oratory grew tow'rd end,
I bid them that did love their country's good,
Cry, God ſave Richard. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Sighs now breath'd
Unutterable, which the ſpirit of pray’r
Inſpir’d, and wing'd for heav'n with ſpeedier flight
Than loudeſt oratory. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi.
By this kind of oratory and profeſſing to decline their own
inclinations and wiſhes, purely for peace and unity, they
prevailed over thoſe who were ſtill ſurpriſed. . Clarend.
Shakeſpeare.
The former who had to deal with a people of much more -
politeneſs, learning, and wit, laid the greateſt weight of his
oratory upon the ſtrength of his arguments. Swift.
- Come<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 229</div><p class="Text">O R B
O R D
Come harmleſs charaćters, that no one hit,
Come Henley's oratory, Oſborn's wit.
2. Exerciſe of eloquence. -
The Romans had ſeiſed upon the fleet of the Antiates,
among which there were fix armed with roſtra, with which the
conſul Menenius adorned the publick place of oratory. Arb.
, [Oratoire, French.) - - - -
Oratory ſignifies a private place, which is deputed and al-
lotted for prayer alone, and not for the general celebration of
divine ſervice. Aliff's Parergon.
They began to ere&amp;t to themſelves oratºries not in any
ſumptuous or ſtately manner, which neither was poſſible by
reaſon of the poor eſtate of the church, and had been peril-
ous in regard of the world's envy towards them. Hooker.
Do not omit thy prayers for want of a good oratory or
place to pray in ; nor thy duty for want of temporal en-
couragements. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
ORB. r. ſ. ſorbe, Fr. orbis, Latin.]
1. Sphere; orbicular body; circular body.
A mighty colle&amp;tion of water incloſed in the bowels of the
earth, conſtitutes an huge orb in the interior or central parts;
upon the ſurface of which crb of water the terreſtrial ſtrata
are expanded. I?’oodw. Nat. Hiſt.
The with a ſtorm of darts to diſtance drive
The Trojan chief; who held at bay from far,
On his Vulcanian orb ſuſtain'd the war.
2. Mundane ſphere; celeſtial body; light of heaven.
nſ the floor of heav'n
There's not the ſmalleſt orb which thou behold'ſt,
But in his motion like an angel ſings,
Still quiring to the young-ey'd cherubims.
3. Wheel; any rolling body.
The orbs
Of his fierce chariot roll'd as with the ſound
Of torrent floods. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vi.
4. Circle; line drawn round.
5. Circle deſcribed by any of the mundane ſpheres.
Aſtronomers, to ſolve the phenomena, framed to their
conceit eccentricks and epicycles, and a wonderful engine of
orbs, though no ſuch things were. Bacon.
With ſmiling aſpect you ſerenely move,
In your fifth orb, and rule the realm of love.
6. Period; revolution of time.
Self-begot, ſelf-rais'd,
By our own quick’ning pow'r, when fatal courſe
Had circled his full orb, the birth mature
Of this our native heav'n. Milt. Par. Loſº, b. v.
7. Sphere of ačtion.
Will you again unknit
This churliſh knot of all abhorred war,
And move in that obedient orb again,
Where you did give a fair and nat'ral light. Shakeſp.
8. It is applied by Milton to the eye, as being luminous and
ſpherical.
A drop ſerene hath quench'd their orbſ,
Or dim ſuffuſion veil’d. Milton.
ºries. m. ſ. [orbatus, Lat.] Privation of parents or chil-
Ien.
O'RPFD. adj. [from orb.]
1. Round; circular; orbicular.
All thoſe ſayings will I overſwear,
And all thoſe ſwearings keep as true in ſoul,
As doth that orbed continent the fire,
That ſevers day from night. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
2. Formed into a circle.
Truth and juſtice then
Will down return to men, -
Orb’d in a rainbow, and like glories wearing.
3. Rounded.
Pope:
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
Milton.
A golden axle did the work uphold,
Gold was the beam, the wheels were orb’d with gold. Addison
CRP1 cu LAR. adj. [orbiculaire, Fr. orbiculatus, Lat.]
1. Spherical.
He ſhall monarchy with thee divide
Qf all things, parted by th’ empyreal bounds,
His quadrature from thy orbicular world.
2. Circular.
The form of their bottom is not the ſame; for whereas
before it was of an articular make, they now look as if they
were preſſed. Addiſon's Guardian, N°. 1 14.
. By a circle I underſland not here a perfect geometrical
circle, but an orbicular figure, whoſe length is equal to its
breadth, and which as to ſenſe may ſeem circular. Newt.
ºcul ARLY. adj. [from orbicular.) Spherically; circularly.
**'Sularn Ess. m. ſ. [from orbicular.] The ſtate of being
orticular,
'**'cular ED. adj. [ºrbiulatus, Latin.] Moulded into an orb.
O Rp11. n, f, ſorbite, Fr. orbita, Latin.] The line deſcribed
by the revolution of a planet. -
ºppoſe more ſuns in proper orbits roll'd,
pºd the ſnows and chac'd the polar cold. Blackm.
- Suppoſe the earth placed nearer to the ſun, and revolve for
- inſtance in the orbit of Mercury; there the whole ocean
Milton.
O
- * - - - - - - - - - - - -
would even boil with extremity of heat, and be all exhaled
into vapours; all plants and animals would be ſcorched. Bent.
ORRITY. m. ſ. ſorbus, Latin.] Loſs, or want of parents or
children.
ORc. n. / [orca, Lat. devya..] A ſort of ſea-fiſh. Ainſ.
An iſland ſalt and bare,
The haunt of ſeals and orcs, and ſea-maws clang. Milt.
Qºchal. * / A ſtone from which a blue colour is made. Ainſ.
QRchANET. n.ſ.. An herb. Ainſ.
O'RCHARD. m. ſ. ſeither hortyard or wortyard, ſays Skinner;
ontgearb, Saxon. Junius.] A garden of fruit trees,
Planting of orchards is very profitable, as well
able.
: as pleaſur-
- - Bacºn's Advice to Williers.
They overcome their riches, not by making
Baths, orchards, fiſh pools. Ben. johnſºn.
Her private orchard, wall'd on ev'ry fide,
To lawleſs Sylvans all acceſs deny'd. Pope.
O'RCHESTRE. m. ſ. [French, dºxºrg.z.] The place where
the muſicians are ſet at a publick ſhow.
ORD. m. ſ. An edge or ſharpneſs; as in ordheim, ordbright, &amp;c.
and in the Iſlandiſh tongue, ord ſignifies a ſpear or dart. Gib.
Ord, in old Engliſh, ſignified beginning; whence probably
the proverbial phraſe odds [ords] and ends, ſor ſcraps or rem-
nants.
To O'RDAIN. v. a. ſordino, Lat, ordonner, Fr.]
1. To appoint; to decree.
Know the cauſe why muſick was ordain'd;
Was it not to refreſh the mind of man -
After his ſtudies, or his uſual pain Shakeſpeare.
Jeroboam ordained a feaſt. I Kings xii. 32.
He hath alſo prepared for him the inſtruments of death;
he ordaineth his arrows againſt the perſecutors. Pſ. vii. 13.
As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.
Aćis xiii. 48.
He commanded us to teſtify that it is he which was or-
dained of God to be the judge of quick and dead. A:is X. 42.
The fatal tent, -
The ſcene of death, and place ordain'd for puniſhment. Dryd.
To ſouls oppreſs'd and dumb with grief,
The Gods ordain this kind relief,
That muſick ſhould in ſounds convey
What dying lovers dare not ſay. JWaller.
My reaſon bends to what thy eyes ordain;
For I was born to love, and thou to reign. Prior.
2. To eſtabliſh; to ſettle ; to inſtitute.
Mulmutius
Ordain'd our laws, whoſe uſe the ſword of Caeſar
Hath too much mangled. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
I will ordain a place for Iſrael. I Chron. xvii. 9.
God from Sinai deſcending, will himſelf
In thunder, lightning, and loud trumpets ſound,
Ordain them laws. Milton's Par. Loft, b, xii.
For thee I have ordain’d it, and
Have ſuffer'd, that the glory may be thine
Of ending this great war; fince none but thou
Can end it. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vi.
Some laws ordain, and ſome attend the choice
Of holy ſenates, and elect by voice.
3. To ſet in an office.
All ſignified unto you by a man, who is ordained over the
affairs, ſhall be utterly deſtroyed. Eſther, xiii. 6.
4. To inveſt with miniſterial function, or ſacerdotal power.
Meletius was ordained by Arian biſhops, and yet his ordi-
nation was never queſtioned. Stillingſleet.
O'RDAINER. m. ſ. [from ordain..] He who ordains.
O'RDEAL. n.ſ. [onbal, Sax. ordalium, low Lat. ordalie, Fr.]
A trial by fire or water, by which the perſon accuſed appealed
to heaven, by walking blindfold over hot bars of iron; or
being thrown, I ſuppoſe, into the water ; whence the vulgar
trial of witches.
Their ordeal laws they uſed in doubtful caſes, when clear
proofs wanted. Hakewill on Providence.
In the time of king John, the purgation per ignem et
aquam, or the trial by ordeal continued; but it ended with
this king. Hale.
O'RDER. m. ſ. [ordo, Lat., ordre, Fr.]
1. Method; regular diſpoſition. -
To know the true ſtate of Solomon's houſe, I will keep
this order; I will ſet forth the end of our foundation, the
inſtruments for our works, the ſeveral employments aſſigned,
and the ordinances we obſerve. Bacon's New Atlantis.
As St. Paul was full of the doćtrine of the goſpel; ſo it lay
all clear and in order, open to his view. ocke:
2. Eſtabliſhed proceſs. -
The moderator, when either of the diſputants breaks the
rules, may interpoſe to keep them to order. JWatts.
3. Proper ſtate.
Dryden.
Any of the faculties wanting, or out of order, produce
ſuitable defects in mens underſtandings. Locke.
4. Regularity; ſettled mode.
This order with her ſorrow ſhe accords,
Which orderleſs all form of order brake. Daniel.
18 R 5. Mandate ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 230</div><p class="Text">O R D
5. Mandate; precept; command.
Give order to my ſervants, that they take -
No note of our being abſent. Shakeſp. Mer. of Ven.
If the lords of the council iſſued out any order againſt
them, or if the king ſent a proclamation for their repair to
their houſes, preſently ſome nobleman deputed by the tables
publiſhed a proteſtation againſt thoſe order; and proclamations.
- Clarendon.
Upon this new fright, an order was made by both houſes
for diſarming all the papiſts in England; upon which, and
the like orders, though ſeldom an thing was after done, yet
it ſerved to keep up the apprehenſions in the people, of dan-
gers and deſigns, and to diſincline them from any reverence
or affection to the queen. Clarendon.
I have received an order under your hand for a thouſand
pounds in words at length. - Tatler, N°. 6o.
6. Rule; regulation.
The church hath authority to eſtabliſh that for an order
at one time, which at another time it may aboliſh, and in
both do well. %. b. v. ſ. 8.
7. Regular government.
The night, their number, and the ſudden act
Would daſh all order, and protećt their fact. Daniel.
8. A ſociety of dignified perſons diſtinguiſhed by marks of ho-
nour.
Elves,
The ſeveral chairs of order look you ſcour,
With juice of balm and ev'ry precious flow’r. Shakeſp.
Princes many times make themſelves deſires, and ſet their
hearts upon toys; ſometimes upon a building; ſometimes
upon erecting of an order. Bacon.
She left immortal trophies of her fame,
And to the nobleſt order gave the name. Dryden.
By ſhining marks, diſtinguiſh'd they appear,
And various orders various enſigns bear. Granville.
9. A rank, or claſs.
The king commanded the high prieſt and the prieſts of
the ſecond order, to bring forth out of the temple all the
veſſels. 2 Kings xxiii. 4.
Th’Almighty ſeeing,
From his tranſcendent ſeat the ſaints among,
To thoſe bright orders utter'd thus his voice. Milton.
10. A religious fraternity.
Find a bare foot brother out,
One of our order to aſſociate me,
Here viſiting the ſick. Shakeſp. Rom. and juliet.
11, f(n the plural.] Hierarchical ſtate.
If the faults of men in orders are only to be judged among
themſelves, they are all in ſome ſort parties. Dryden.
Having in his youth made a good progreſs in learning,
that he might dedicate himſelf more intirely to religion he
entered into holy orders, and in a few years became renown-
ed for his ſanétity of life. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 164.
12. Means to an end.
Virgins muſt remember, that the virginity of the body is
only excellent in order to the purity of the ſoul; for in the
ſame degree that virgins live more ſpiritually than other per-
ſons, in the ſame degree is their virginity a more excellent
ſtate. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
We ſhould behave reverently towards the Divine Majeſty,
and juſtly towards men; and in order to the better diſcharge
of theſe duties, we ſhould govern ourſelves in the uſe of ſen-
ſual delights, with temperance. Tillotſon, Serm. 6.
The beſt knowledge is that which is of greateſt uſe in or-
der to our eternal happineſs. Tillotſon, Serm. 1.
What we ſee is in order only to what we do not ſee; and
both theſe ſtates muſt be joined together. Atterbury.
One man purſues power in order to wealth, and another
wealth in order to power, which laſt is the ſafer way, and
generally followed. Swift's Exam. N°. 27.
13. Meaſures; care.
It were meet you ſhould take ſome order for the ſoldiers,
which are now firſt to be diſcharged and diſpoſed of ſome way;
which may otherwiſe grow to as great inconvenience as all
this that you have quit us from. Spenſer on Ireland.
Provide me ſoldiers,
Whilſt I take order for mine own affairs. Shakespeare.
The money promiſed unto the king, he took no order for,
albeit Soſtratus required it. 2 Mac. iv. 27.
If any of the family be diſtreſſed, order is taken for their
relief and competent means to live. Bacon.
14. [In architecture.] A ſyſtem of the ſeveral members, or-
naments, and proportions of columns and pilaſters; or it is
a regular arrangement of the projecting parts of a building,
eſpecially thoſe of a column; ſo as to form one beautiful
whole: or order is a certain rule for the proportions of co-
lumns, and for the figures which ſome of the parts ought to
have, on the account of the proportions that are given them.
There are five orders of columns; three of which are Greek,
viz. the doric, ionic, and corinthian ; and two Italian, viz.
the tuſcan and compoſite. The whole is compoſed of two
parts at leaf', the column and the entablature, and of four
arts at the moſt ; where there is a pedeſtal under the co-
ſº and one acroter or little pedeſtal on the top of the
entablature. The column has three parts ; the baſe, the
ſhaft, and the capital; which parts are all different in the
ſeveral orders. - -
In the tuſcan order, any height being given, divide it into
ten parts and three quarters, called diameters, by diameters
is meant the thickneſs of the ſhaft at the bottom, the pe-
deſtal having two ; the column with baſe and capital, ſeven ;
and the entablature one and three quarters.
In the doric order, the whole height being given, is divided
into twelve diameters or parts, and one third; the pedeſtal
having two and one third, the column eight, and the enta-
blature two.
In the ionic order, the whole height is dividedinto thirteen
diameters and a half, the pedeſtal having two and two thirds,
the column nine, and the entablature one and four fifths.
In the corinthian order, the whole height is divided into
fourteen diameters and a half, the pedeſtal having three, the
column nine and a half, and the entablature two.
In the compoſite order, the whole height is divided into fif-
teen diameters and one third; the pedeſtal having three and
one third, the column ten, and the entablature two.
In a colonnade or range of pillars, the intercolumination or
ſpace between columns in the tuſcan order, is four diameters.
In the doric order, two and three quarters; in the ionic or-
der, two and a quarter; in the corinthian order, two ; and
in the compoſite order, one and a half. Builder's Dićf.
To O'RDeR. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To regulate; to adjuſt ; to manage; to condućt.
To him that ordereth his converſation aright, will I ſhew
the ſalvation of God. Pſ. 1. 23.
As the ſun when it ariſeth in the heaven, ſo is the beauty
of a good wife in the ordering of her houſe. Ecclus xxvi. 16.
Thou haſt ordered all in meaſure, number, and weight.
///d. xi. 20.
Bias being aſked how a man ſhould order his life an-
ſwered, as if a man ſhould live long, or die quickly. Bacon.
2. To manage ; to procure.
The kitchin clerk that hight digeſtion,
Did order all the cates in ſeemly wiſe. Fairy Queen.
3. To methodiſe; to diſpoſe fitly.
Theſe were the orderings of them in their ſervice, to come
into the houſe of the Lord. 1 Chron. xxiv. 19.
4. To direét; to command.
5. To ordain to ſacerdotal funètion.
The book requireth due examination, and giveth liberty to
obječt any crime againſt ſuch as are to be ordered. Whitgift.
O'RDERER. n.ſ. [from order.] One that orders, methodiſes,
or regulates.
That there ſhould be a great diſpoſer and orderer of all
things, a wiſe rewarder and puniſher of good and evil, hath
appeared ſo equitable to men, that they have concluded it
neceſſary. Suckling.
O'RDER less. adj. [from order.] Diſorderly; out of rule.
All form is formleſs, order orderleſ,
Save what is oppoſite to England's love. Shakespeare.
O'RDERLINEss. n.ſ.. [from orderly.] Regularity; methodi-
calneſs.
O'RDERLY. adj. [from order.]
1. Methodical; regular.
The book requireth but orderly reading. Hooker.
2. Not tumultuous; well regulated.
Balfour, by an orderly and well-governed march, paſſed
in the king's quarters without any confiderable loſs, to a place
of ſafety. Clarendon, b. viii.
3. According with eſtabliſhed method. • v.
As for the orders eſtabliſhed, fith the law of nature, of
God and man, do all favourthat which is in being, till or-
derly judgment of deciſion be given againſt it, it is but juſtice
to exact obedience of you. Hooker's Prºf.
A clergy reformed from popery in ſuch a manner, as hap-
pily to preſerve the mean between the two extremes, in
doğtrine, worſhip, and government, perfected this reforma-
tion by quiet and orderly methods, free from thoſe confuſions
and tumults that elſewhere attended it. Atterbury.
O'RDERLY. adv. [from order.] Methodically; according to
order ; regularly ; according to rule. -
All parts of knowledge have been thought by wiſe men
to be then moſt orderly delivered and proceeded in, when they
are drawn to their firſt original. - Hºoker, b. i.
Aſk him his name, and orderly proceed
To ſwear him. Shakesp. Rich. III.
Make it orderly and well,
According to the faſhion of the time. Shakeſpeare.
It is walled with brick and ſtone, intermixed orderly. Sandys.
How ſhould thoſe active particles, ever and anon juſtled
by the occurſion of other bodies, whereof there is an infinite
ſtore, ſo orderly keep their cells without any alteration of
fite. - Glanville.
In the body, when the principal parts, the heart and li-
ver, do their offices, and all the inferior ſmaller veſſels.
oz ºf ''
r:
w
º
**
i
º
º
:
t
.º
º
!
!,
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 231</div><p class="Text">- * * * *
O R D
ºrſ, and duly, there ariſes a ſweet enjoyment upon the
º which % call health. South's Serm.
O'RDINABLE. adj. [ordino, Lat.] Such as may be appointed.
All the ways of deconomy God hath uſed toward a ra-
tional creature, to reduce mankind to that courſe of living
which is moſt perfeótly agreeable to our nature, and by the
mercy of God ordinable to eternal bliſs. - Hamm.
O'RDINAL. adj. [ordinal, Fr. ordinalis, Lat.] Noting order:
2S3 ſecond, third. - - -
The moon's age is thus found, add to the epačt the day
of the month and the ordinal number of that month from
March incluſive, becauſe the epačt begins at March, and
the ſum of thoſe, caſting away thirty or twenty-nine, as
as it ariſeth, is the age of the moon. Hºlder.
oº: m. ſ. £rini, Fr. ordinale, Latin.] A ritual; a
book containing orders: Ainſ.
OºpinAscF. n.ſ.. [ºrdºnnance, French.]
1. Law; rule; preſcript. - --- -
it ſéemeth hard to plant any ſound ordinance, or reduce
them to a civil government; ſince all their ill cuſtoms are
ermitted unto them- Spenſer on Ireland.
P Let Richard and Elizabeth,
The true ſucceeders of each royal houſe;
By God's fair ordinance conjoin together'
2. Obſervance commanded.
One ordinance ought not to exclude the other, much leſs
to diſparage the other, and leaſt of all to undervalue that
which is the moſt eminent. Taylor.
intment.
3. Arº created to ſhew bare heads,
When one but of my ordinance ſtood up, "… *
To ſpeak of peace or war. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
4. A cannon. It is now generally written for diſtinétion ord-
nance; its derivation is not certain.
Caves and womby vaultages of France,
Shall chide your treſpaſs and return your mock, -
In ſecond accent to his ordinance. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
O'RDINARILY. adv. [from ordinary.]
1. According to eſtabliſhed rules ; according to ſettled method.
We are not to look that the church ſhould change her
publick laws and ordinances, made according to that which
is judged ordinarily, and commonly fitteſt for the whole, al-
though it chance that for ſome particular men the ſame be
found inconvenient. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 12.
Springs and rivers do not derive the water which they ar:
dinarily refund, from rain. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
2. Commonly; uſually. -
The inſtances of human ignorance were not only clear
ones, but ſuch as are not ſo ordinarily ſuſpected. Glanv.
Prayer ought to be more than ordinarily fervent and vi-
gorous before the ſacrament. South's Sermons.
ORDINARY. adj. [ordinarius, Latin.]
1. Eſtabliſhed; methodical ; regular. -
Though in arbitrary governments there may be a body of
laws obſerved in the ordinary forms of juſtice, they are not
ſufficient to ſecure any rights to the people; becauſe they
may be diſpenſed with. Addiſon's Freeholder.
The ſtanding ordinary means of conviction failing to in-
fluence them, it is not to be expected that any extraordinary
means ſhould be able to do it. Atterbury.
2. Common ; uſual.
Yet did ſhe only utter her doubt to her daughters; think-
ing, ſince the worſt was paſt, ſhe would attend a further
occaſion, leaſt over much haſte might ſeem to proceed of
the ordinary miſlike between ſiſters in law. Sidney.
It is ſufficient that Moſes have the ordinary credit of an
hiſtorian given him. Tillotſon, Serm. 1.
This deſignation of the perſon our author is more than
ordinary obliged to take care of, becauſe he hath made the
conveyance, as well as the power itſelf, ſacred. Locke.
There is nothing more ordinary than children's receiving
into their minds propoſitions from their parents; which be-
ing faſtened by degrees, are at laſt, whether true or falſe,
riveted there. Locke.
Method is not leſs requiſite in ordinary converſation, than
in writing. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 476.
3. Mean; of low rank.
Theſe are the paths wherein ye have walked, that are of
the ordinary ſort of men; theſe are the very ſteps ye have
trodden, and the manifeſt degrees whereby ye are of your
guides and directors trained up in that ſcheol. Hooker.
Men of common capacity, and but ordinary judgment,
are not able to diſcern what things are fitteſt for each kind
and ſtate of regiment." Hooker, b. i. ſ. 10.
Every ordinary reader, upon the publiſhing of a new poem,
has will and ill-nature enough to turn ſeveral paſſages of it
into ridicule, and very often in the right place. Addiſon.
My ſpeculations, when ſold ſingle, are delights for the
rich and wealthy; after ſome time they come to the market
in great quantities, and are every ordinary man's money.
Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 488.
Shakeſp.
4. Regular price of a meal.
You will wonder how ſuch an ordinary fºllow as Wood,
could get his majeſty's broad ſeal. Swift.
4. Ugly; not handſome : as ſhe is an ordinary woman.
O'RDINARY. m. ſ.
1. Eſtabliſhed judge of eccleſiaſtical cauſes.
t •' The evil will
Of all their pariſhioners they had conſtrain'd,
whoto the ordinary of them complain'd. Hubberd.
If fault be in theſe things any where Juſtly found, law hath
refered the whole diſpoſition and redreſs ºthereof to the ar.
dinary of the place. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 12.
2. Settled eſtabliſhment.
Spain had no other wars ſave thoſe which were grown in-
to an ordinary; now they have coupled therewith the extra-
ordinary of the Waltoline and Palatinate. Bacon.
3. Aćtual and conſtant office.
Villiers had an intimation of the king's pleaſure to be
his cup-bearer at large ; and the ſummer following he was
admitted in ordinary. J/ott.
Our courteous Antony,
Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feaſt;
And for his ordinary pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopat.
5. A place of eating eſtabliſhed at a certain price. -
They reckon all their errors for accompliſhments; and all
the odd words they have picked up in a coffee-houſe, or a
gaming ordinary, are produced as flowers of ſtyle. Swift.
To O'RDINATE. v. a. [ordinatus, Latin.]
1. To appoint. -
Finding how the certain right did ſtand,
With full conſent this man did ordinate -
The heir apparent to the crown and land. Daniel.
O'RDINATE. adj. [ordinatus, Lat..] Regular ; methodical.
Ordinate figures are ſuch as have all their ſides, and all their
angles equal. Ray on the Creation.
ORDINATION. m. ſ. [ordinatic, Lat. from ordinate.]
1. Eſtabliſhed order or tendency.
Virtue and vice have a natural ordination to the happineſs
and miſery of life reſpectively.
2. The aët of inveſting any man with ſacerdotal power.
Though ordained by Arian biſhops, his ordination was ne-
wer queſtioned. Stilling fleet.
St. Paul looks upon Titus as advanced to the dignity of
a prime ruler of the church, and entruſted with a large dioceſe
under the immediate government of their reſpective elders;
and thoſe deriving authority from his ordination. South.
O'RDNANce. n.ſ. [This was anciently written more frequently.
ordinance; but ordnance is uſed for diſtinétion.] Cannon;
great É.
ave I not heard great ordnance in the field
And heav'n's artillery thunder in the ſkies : ... Shakeſp.
When a ſhip feels or rolls in foul weather, the breaking
looſe of ordnance is a thing very dangerous. Raleigh.
There are examples now of wounded perſons that have
roared for anguiſh and torment at the diſcharge of ordnance,
though at a very great diſtance. - Bentley's Serm.
ORDO’NNANCE. n.ſ. [French.j Diſpoſition of figures in
a pićture.
oº: URE. n.ſ. [ordure, French; from ſordes, Lat. Skinner.]
Dung; filth. -
Gard’ners with ordure hide thoſe roots
That ſhall firſt ſpring and be moſt delicate. Shakeſp.
Working upon human ordure, and by long preparation
rendering it odoriferous, he terms it zibetta occidentalis. Brown.
We added fat pollutions of our own,
Norris.
Tº encreaſe the ſteaming ordures of the ſtage. Dryden.
Renew'd by ordure's ſympathetick force,
As oil'd with magic juices for the courſe, Pope.
, Vigºrous he riſes.
ORE. n.ſ. [one, or ona, Saxon; oor, Dutch, a mine.]
1. Metal unrefined ; metal yet in its mineral ſtate.
Round about him lay on every ſide,
Great heaps of gold that never would be ſpent ;
Of which ſome were rude ore not purify'd , . . . .
Of Mulciber's devouring element. Fairy £ueen.
They would have brought them the gold or aboard their
ſhips. - Raleigh's Apology.
- A hill not far,
Shone with a gloſſy ſcurf, undoubted ſign
That in his womb was hid metallic ore, - -
The work of ſulphur. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. i.
Who have labour'd more .
To ſearch the treaſures of the Roman ſtore,
Or dig in Grecian mines for purer ºf P
We walk in dreams on fairy land,
Rºſcommºn.
where golden ore lies mixt with commºn ſand. Dryden.
Thoſe who unripe veins in mines explore,
On the rich bed again the warm turf lay,
Till time digeſts the yet imperfect ore,
And know it.will be gold another day. "F.
*C*-
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 232</div><p class="Text">O R G
O R. I
Thoſe profounder regions they explore,
Where metals ripen invaſt cakes of ore. Garth.
2. Metal.
The liquid ore he drain'd
Firſt his own tools; then what might elſe be wrought,
Fuſile, or grav’n in metal. *Mii. P. iºſi, b. xi.
QRewi ed. !" f. A weed either growing upon the rocks un-
9*kwoºp, 5 der high water mark, or ºn frºm the bot-
Tom, of the ſea by rough weather, and caſt upon the next
by the wind and flood. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
O'Ro AL. m. ſ. Lees of wine. Ainſ.
O'RGAN. ºf [organe, Fr. 3;7&amp;voy.
1. Natural inſtrument; as the tongue is the organ of ſpeech,
the lungs of reſpiration.
When he ſhall hear ſhe died upon his words,
The ever lovely organ of her life
Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit,
Than when ſhe liv'd indeed. Shakeſpeare.
For a mean and organ, by which this operative virtue
might be continued, God appointed the light to be united,
and gave it alſo motion and heat.
The aptneſs of birds is not ſo much in the conformity of
the organs of ſpeech, as in their attention. Bacon.
Wit and will
Can judge and chuſe, without the body's aid;
Tho' on ſuch objećts they are working ſtill,
As thro' the body's organs are convey'd. Davies.
2. An inſtrument of muſick conſiſting of pipes filled with wind
and of ſtops, touched by the hand. [Orgue, Fr.]
A hand of a vaſt extenſion, and a prodigious number of
fingers playing upon all the organ pipes in the world, and
making every one ſound a particular note. Keil.
While in more lengthen’d notes and ſlow,
The deep, majeſtick, ſolemn organs blow. Pope.
ORGA'Nic Al.
ORGA'Nick. } adj. [organique, Fr. organicus, Lat.]
1. Conſiſting of various parts co-operating with each other.
He rounds the air, and breaks the hymnick notes
In birds, heav'n's choriſters, organick throats;
Which, if they did not die, might ſeem to be
A tenth rank in the heavenly hierarchy. Donne.
He with ſerpent tongue
Organick, or impulſe of vocal air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began. Mill. P. Loft.
The organical ſtructure of human bodies, whereby they
live and move and are vitally informed by the ſoul, is the
workmanſhip of a moſt wiſe, powerful, and beneficent be-
ing. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Inſtrumental; ačting as inſtruments of nature or art, to a
certain end. -
Read with them thoſe organick arts which enable men to
diſcourſe and write perſpicuouſly, elegantly, and according
to the fitteſt ſtyle of lofty, mean, or lowly. Milton.
3. Reſpecting organs.
She could not produce a monſter of anything that hath
more vital and organical parts than a rock of marble. Roy.
They who want the ſenſe of diſcipline, or hearing, are
alſo by conſequence deprived of ſpeech, not by any imme-
diate, organical indiſpoſition, but for want of diſcipline.
Halder's Elements of Speech.
ORGANIcally, adv. [from organical.] By means of organs
or inſtruments; by organical diſpoſition of parts.
All ſtones, metals, and minerals, are real vegetables; that
is, grow organically from proper ſeeds, as well as plants.
Locke on Nat. Philoſºphy.
ORGANICALNEss. n.ſ.. [from organical.] State of being or-
ganical.
O'RoANISM. n.ſ.. [from organ.] Organical ſtrućture.
How admirable is the natural ſtructure or organiſm of bo-
dies. Grew's Cºſnol. b. i. c. 4.
O'Ro ANIST. m. ſ. [organiſłe, Fr. from organ.] One who plays
on the organ.
He is an organjº, and ſerves that office in a publick choir. .
Boyle on Colours.
Org ANIZATION. m. ſ. [from organize.] Conſtruction in which
the parts are ſo diſpoſed as to be ſubſervient to each other.
Every man's ſenſes differ as much from others in their figure,
colour, ſite, and infinite other peculiarities in the organiza-
tion, as any one man's can from itſelf, through divers acci-
dental variations. Glanv. Scepſ c. xxvi.
That being then one plant, which has ſuch an organiza-
tiºn of parts in one coherent body, partaking of one con-
mon life, it continues to be the ſame plant, though that life
be communicated to new particles of matter, in a like con-
tinued organization. Locke.
To O'RGANIZE. v. a. [organiſer, Fr. from organ.] To con-
ſiručt ſo as that one part co-operates with another; to form
organically.
As the ſoul doth organize the body, and give unto every
member thereof that ſubſtance, quantity, and ſhape, which
Raleigh. .
nature ſeeth moſt cxpedient, ſo the inward grace of ſacra-
thents may teach what ſerveth beſt for their outward form.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 58.
A genial and cheriſhing heat ſo ačts upon the fit and
obſequious matter, wherein it was harboured, as to organize
and faſhion that diſpoſed matter according to the exigencies
of its own nature. Boyle.
Thoſe nobler faculties in the mind, matter organized could
never produce. Ray on the Creation.
The identity of the ſame man conſiſts in a participation
of the ſame continued life, by conſtantly fleeting particles in
ſucceſſion vitally united to the ſame organized body. Locke.
O'RoANLoft. m. ſ. [organ and lºft.] The loſt where the or-
gans ſtand. -
Five young ladies of no ſmall fame for their great ſeve-
rity of manners, would go no where with their lovers but to
an organloft in a church, where they had a cold treat and
ſome few opera ſongs. Tatler, N°. 61.
O'Ro ANPipe. n.ſ. [organ and pipe.] The pipe of a muſical
organ.
The thunder,
That deep and dreadful organpipe pronounc'd
The name of Proſper. Shakespeare's Tempeſt.
O'Ro ANY. m. ſ. [origanum, Lat..] An herb. Ainſ.
ORGA's M. m. ſ. [orgoſme, Fr. 3,727ac:..] Sudden vehemence.
By means of the curious lodgment and inoſculation of the
auditory nerves, the ºrgaſms of the ſpirits ſhould be allayed,
and perturbations of the mind quieted. Derham's Phyſic:-Theol.
O'RGeis. n.ſ. A ſea-fiſh, called likewiſe organing. Both ſeem
a corruption of the orkenyling, as being taken on the Or-
kenv coaſt. Ainſ.
ORGI'llous. adj. [argueilleux, French.] Proud; haughty.
From iſles of Greece
The princes orgillous, their high blood chaſed,
Have to the port of Athens ſent their ſhips. Shakeſp.
O'RGies. m. ſ. [orgies, Fr. orgia, Lat.] Madrites of Bacchus;
frantick revels.
Theſe are nights
Solemn to the ſhining rites,
Of the fairy prince and knights,
While the moon their orgies lights.
She feign'd noćturnal orgies; left my bed,
And, mix'd with Trojan dames, the dances led. Dryd.
O'RichalcH. m. ſ. [orichaleum, Lat.] Braſs,
Not Bilbo ſteel, nor braſs from Corinth fet,
Nor coſtly crichalch from ſtrange Phoenice,
But ſuch as could both Phoebus' arrows ward,
And th’ hailing darts of heav'n beating hard. Spenſºr.
O'RIENT. adj. [oriens, Latin.]
1. Riſing as the ſun.
Moon that now meet'ſt the orient ſun, now fly'ſt
With the fix’d ſtars. Milton's Par. Lo/?, b. v.
When fair morn orient in heav'n appear'd. Milton.
2. Eaſtern; oriental.
3. Bright; ſhining; glittering; gaudy; ſparkling.
The liquid drops of tears that you have ãº,
Shall come again transform'd to orient pearl;
Advantaging their loan with intereſt,
Oftentimes double gain of happineſs. Shakeſp.
There do breed yearly an innumerable company of gnats,
whoſe property is to fly unto the eye of the lion, as being a
bright and orient thing. Abbot on the JWorld.
We have ſpoken of the cauſe of orient colours in birds;
which is by the fineneſs of the ſtrainer. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Morning light
More orient in yon weſtern cloud, that draws -
O'er the blue firmament a radiant white. Milton.
In thick ſhelter of black ſhades imbowr’d,
He offers to each weary traveller
His orient liquor in a cryſtal glaſs,
To quench the drouth of Phoebus. Milton.
The chiefs about their necks the ſcutcheons wore,
With orient pearls and jewels powder'd o'er. Dryden.
O'RIENT. n.ſ.. [orient, Fr.] The eaſt; the part where the ſun
firſt appears.
ORIETNTAL. adj. [oriental, French.] Eaſtern; placed in
the eaſt; proceeding from the eaſt.
Your ſhips went as well to the pillars of Hercules, as to
Pequin upon the oriental ſeas, as far as to the borders of the
eaſt Tartary. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Some aſcribing hereto the generation of gold, conceive
the bodies of this ſituation to receive ſome appropriate in-
fluence from the ſun's aſcendent, and oriental radiations.
Brown's Pulgar Err. b. vi.
ORIE’NTAL. m. ſ. An inhabitant of the eaſtern parts of the
world.
They have been of that great uſe to following ages, as to
be imitated by the Arabians and other orientals. Grezv.
ORIE’NTALISM. n. / [from oriental.] An idiom of the ea-
ſtern languages; an eaſtern mode of ſpeech.
Ben. johnſºn.
ORIE’NTALITY.
*
t
.
-
º
!ºr
tº:
A:
--
º
lº
º
tº:
stºº
º
Tº
ºx
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 233</div><p class="Text">O R I O R P
Orientality, n.ſ.. [from oriental.] State of being oriental. To OR1'ginate. v. a. [from origin..] To bring into exiſ-
His revolution being regular, it hath no power nor effiacy tence. © c
peculiar from its orientality, but equally diſperſeth his beams. OrigiNation. n. / [originatio, Lat. from originate.] The aët
Brown’s W. Err. b. vi. of bringing into exiſtence; firſt produćtion.
O'Ririct. m. ſ. [orifice, Fr. orificium, Lat.] Any opening or - º the origination of mankind ſeems to be
rforation. - univerſal ; but the particular igination ex-
The prince of Orange, in his firſt hurt by the Spaniſh cogitated by the ... wº º *:::
boy, could find no means to ſtanch the blood, but was fain This eruca is propagated by animal parents, to wit but.
to have the orifice of the wound ſtopped by men's thumbs, terflies, after the common origination of all caterpillar. R
ſucceeding one another for the ſpace of two days. Bacon. Deſcartes firſt introduced the fancy of making a wº.
Their mouths and deducing the origination of the univerſe from #º:
With hideous orifice gap'd on us wide, principles. Keil
Portending hollow truce. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vi. O'Risons. m. ſ. . [oraiſºn, French: this word is variouſly acº
Etna was bored through the top with a monſtruous ori- cented ; Shakeſpeare has the accent both on the firſt º ſe-
fre: Add on's Guardian, Nº. 103. cond ſyllables; Milton and Craſhaw on the firſt, others on
Blood-letting, Hippocrates faith, ſhould be done with the ſecond..] A prayer ; a ſupplication.
broadlancets or ſwords, in order to make a large orifice by Nymph, in thy oriſons
ſtabbing or pertuñon. - Arbuthnot on Coins. Be all thy fins remember'd. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
O'RIFLAMB. m. f probably a corruption of auriflamma, Lat. Alas! your too much love and care of me,
or famme d'or, Fr. in like manner as orpiment is corrupted.] Are heavy oriſons º this poor wretch. Shakeſp.
A golden flandard. - - aimſ. He went into St. Paul's church, where he had oriſons and
oº::AN. n.ſ. [origan, Fr. organum, Lat..] Wild majorum. Te Deum ſung. Bacon's Henry VII.
I ſaw her in her proper hue, ~ : My wakeful lay ſhall knock
Bathing herſelf in origan and thyme. Fairy Queen, #.th’ . š. and duly mock
IN. - - ori e early larks ſhrill oriſons, to be
§. {n. ſ: [origine, Fr. origo, Lat.] An intº at the day's #. Craſhaw.
J. Beginning; firſt exiſtence. - - - - - His daily oriſºns attract our ears. Sandys on job.
She ſacred hiſtorian only treats of the origins of terreſtrial Lowly they bow'd, adoring, and began
animals. - . Bentley's Sermons. Their oriſons, each morning duly paid. Milton.
2. Fountain; ſource; that which gives beginning or exiſtence. ' So went he on with his wriſons,
Nature which contemns its origin, Which, if you mark them well, were wife ones. Cotton.
Cannot be border'd certain in itſelf. . . Shakeſp. King Lear. Here at dead of night -
If any ſtation upon earth be honourable, theirs was ; and The hermit oft, mid his oriſons, hears -
their poſterity therefore have no reaſon to bluſh at the me- Aghaſt the voice of time diſparting tow’rs. Dyer.
mory of ſuch an original. - -- - Atterbury. O'RLop. n.ſ. ſoverloop, Dutch..] The middle deck. Skinn.
Original of beings' pow'r divine! A ſmall ſhip of the king's called the Penfie, was affailed by
Since that I live and that I think, is thine. Prior. the Lyon, a principal ſhip of Scotland; wherein the Penfie
Theſe great orbs, - ſo applyed her ſhot, that the Lyon's oreloop was broken, her
Primitive founts, and origins of light. Prior. ſails and tackling torn ; and laſtly, ſhe was boarded and
3. Firſt copy; archetype; that from which any thing is tran- taken. Hayward.
ſcribed or tranſlated. In this ſenſe origin is not uſed. O'RNAMENT, n.ſ. [ornamentum, Lat, ornament, Fr.]
Compare this tranſlation with the original, and the three 1. Embelliſhment; decoration.
firſt ſtanzas are rendered almoſt word for word, and not only So may the outward ſhows be leaſt themſelves;
with the ſame elegance, but with the ſame turn of expreſſion. The world is ſtill deceiv'd with ornament. Shakeſp.
Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 229. The Tuſcan chief, to me has ſent
External material things, as the objećts of ſenſation; and Their crown, and ev'ry regal ornament. Dryden.
the operations of our minds within, as the objećts of re- No circumſtances of life can place a man ſo far below the
fledion; are the only originals from whence all our ideas take notice of the world, but that his virtues or vices will render
their beginnings. - Locke. him, in ſome degree, an ornament or diſgrace to his pro-
4. Derivation; deſcent. - - - feſſion. - Rogers, Serm. 9.
They, like the ſeed from which they ſprung, accurſt 2. Honour; that which confers dignity.
Againſt the gods immortal hatred nurſt ; The perſons of different qualities in both ſexes, are in-
An impious, arrogant, and cruel brood, deed allowed their different ornaments; but theſe are by no
Expreſſing their original from blood. Bryden. means coſtly, being rather deſigned as marks of diſtinétion
ORIGINAL. adj. [originel, Fr. originalis, Latin.] Primitive; than to make a figure. Addiſon on Italy.
priſtine; firſt. - ORNAME’NTAL. adj. [from ornament.] Serving to decoration;
The original queſtion was, whether God by this law hath giving embelliſhment.
forbidden the giving any worſhip to himſelf by an image 2 Some think it moſt ornamental to wear their bracelets on
Stillingfleet on Idolatry. their wriſts, others about their ancles. Brown.
Had Adam obeyed God, his ºriginal perfection, the know- If the kind be capable of more perfeótion, though rather
ledge and ability God at firſt gave him, would ſtill have in the ornamental parts of it, than the eſſential, what rules
continued. Make's Prep. for Death. of morality or reſpect have I broken, in naming the defects
You ſtill, fair mother, in your offspring trace that they may hereafter be amended ? Dryden.
The ſtock of beauty deſtin'd for the race; Even the Heathens have eſteemed this variety not only
Kind nature, forming them the pattern took, ornamental to the earth, but a proof of the wiſdom of the
From heav'n's firſt work, and Eve's original look. Prior. creator. JWoodw. Nat. Hiſt.
ORI'GINALLY. adv. [from original.] If no advancement of knowledge can be had from univer-
1. Primarily; with regard to the firſt cauſe: ſities, the time there ſpent is loſt; every ornamental part of
A very great difference between a king that holdeth his education is better taught elſewhere. Swift on Religion.
crown by a willing ačt of eſtates, and one that holdeth it ORNAME'NTAlly. adv. [from ornamental.] In ſuch a man-
ºriginally by the law of nature and deſcent of blood. Bacon. ner as may confer embelliſhment.
A preſent bleſfing upon our faſts, is neither originally due ORNAMENTED. adj. . [from ornament. J. Embelliſhed ; be-
from God's juſtice, nor becomes due to us from his vera- decked.
city. Smallridge's Sermons. O'RNATE. adj. [ornatus, Lat.] Bedecked; decorated ; fine. '
1. At firſt. What thing of ſea or land,
The metallic and mineral matter, found in the perpendi- Female of ſex it ſeems,
eular intervals of the ſtrata, was originally, and at the time That ſo bedeck'd, ornate and gay, -
of the deluge, lodged in the bodies of thoſe ſtrata: Moodw. Comes this way ſailing. Miltºn's Agoniſes.
3. As the firſt author. O'RNATENess. n.f. [from ornate.] Finery; ſtate of being
For what originally others writ, embelliſhed. - -
May be ſo well diſguis’d and ſo improv’d, ORNA'TURE. m. ſ. [ornatus, Lat.] Decoration. Ainſ.
That with ſome juſtice it may paſs for yours. Roſcomm. ORNI'scopist. n.ſ. (38.1; and irzazz.] One who examines
Orrginalness. n. ſ. [from original.] The quality or ſtate the flight of birds in order to foretel futurity.
of being original. Ornithology. n.ſ. [#vi, and Aºyo. A diſcourſe on birds.
ORI'oin ARY. adj. [originaire, Fr. from origin.] O'RPHAN. n.ſ. [šépx?s orphºlin, Fr.] A child who has
i. Produćtive; cauſing exiſtence. loft father or mother, or both.
The produćtion of animals in the originary way, requires Poor orphan in the wide world ſcattered,
a certain degree of warmth, which proceeds from the ſun's As budding branch rent from the native tree,
influence. Cheyne's Phil. Prin. And thrown forth until it be withered : . . * - --
2. Primitive; that which was the firſt ſtate. Such is the ſtate of man. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Remember I am built of clay, and muſt - who can be bound by any ſolemn Vow
Reſolve to my originary duſt. Sandy's Par. on job. To reave º º of his patrimony, To
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 234</div><p class="Text">O R T
O S C
To wring the widow from her cuſtom'd right,
And have no other reaſon for his wrong,
But that he was bound by a ſolemn oath Shakeſp.
Sad widows, by thee rifled, weep in vain,
And ruin’d orphans of thy rapes complain. Sandys.
The ſea with ſpoils his angry bullets ſtrow,
Widows and orphans making as they go. I/aller.
Pity, with a parent's mind,
This helpleſs orphan whom thou leav'ſ behind. Dryden.
O'RPHAN., adj. [orphelin, Fr.) Bereſt of parents.
This king left orphan both of father and mother, found
his cſtate, when he came to age, ſo disjointed even in the
nobleſt and ſtrongeſt limbs of government, that the name
of a king was grown odious. Sidney, b. ii.
QRPHANAGE. n.ſ. [orphelinage, Fr. from orphan.] State
O'RPHANISM. ; of an orphan.
ORF1'MENT. n. ſ. ſauripigmentum, Lat, orpiment, orpin, Fr.]
True and genuine orpiment is a foliaceous foſſil, ſometimes
found in maſles of two or three inches diameter, and one
inch in thickneſs; but it is oftener met with in ſmaller con-
geries of flakes from an eighth of an inch to a third in dia-
meter, lodged in zarnich. See ZARN1ch. It is of a fine
and pure texture, remarkably heavy, and its colour is a
bright and beautiful yellow, like that of gold. It is not
hard but very tough, eaſily bending without breaking: ſome
have declared orpiment to be only muſcovy talk, ſtained by acci-
dent. But talk is always elaſtick, but orpiment not ſo; talk
alſo remains unaltered in the ſtrongeſt fire, whereas orpiment
melts readily, and as readily burns away. Orpiment has
been ſuppoſed to contain gold, and is found in mines of
gold, ſilver, and copper, and ſometimes in the ſtrata of marl.
t is frequent in, the Eaſt-Indies and the Turkiſh dominions,
the fineſt coming from Smyrna. We have it alſo in Ger-
many and Saxony. The ancients were well acquainted with
this drug, which they called arſenicon ; and though they
were utterly unacquainted with the poiſonous ſubſtance called
arſenick, yet orpiment has been by ſome very unjuſtly deemed
a poiſon; but it appears to be an innocent medicine which
the ancients preſcribed internally. The painters are very
fond of it as a gold colour. Hill's Mat. Med.
For the golden colour, it may be made by ſome ſmall mixture
of orpiment, ſuch as they uſe to braſs in the yellow alchymy; it
will eaſily recover that which the iron loſeth. Bacon.
ORPHAsot RoPHY. n.ſ. [3; favº; and 1:29;..] An hoſpital
for orphans.
O'RPIN F. n.ſ. ſorpin, Fr.] Liverer or roſe root, anacamtſeros,
Tºplium, or Rhodia radis. A plant. It hath a roſe ſhaped
flower, conſiſting of ſeveral leaves placed orbicularly ; out of
whoſe many-leaved empalement riſes the pointal, which after-
ward becomes a three-cornered fruit, conſiſting of one cell,
which is filled with roundiſh ſeeds: the leaves are placed alter-
nately on the branches. It is a low plant, whoſe branches trail
on the ground; the leaves are ſmall and roundiſh, of a glau-
cous colour, and of a pretty thick conſiſtence. The flowers
are ſmall, and of a whitiſh green colour. Miller.
Cool violets and orpine growing ſtill,
Embathed balm and cheerful galingale. Spenſºr.
O'RRERY. m. ſ. An inſtrument which by many complicated
movements repreſents the revolutions of the heavenly bodies.
It was firſt made by Mr. Rowley, a mathematician born at
Litchfield, and ſo named from his patron the earl of Orrery:
by one or other of this family almoſt every art has been en-
couraged or improved.
O'RR1s. r. ſ. [oris, Latin.] A plant and flower.
It hath no leaves to the flower, but conſiſts of many ſta-
mina ariſing from a five-leaved empalement. The pointal
becomes the ſeed, which is flat and orbicular, and incloſed
in the empalement, which becomes a foliaceous capſule, in
which are included two ſorts of ſeeds. Miller.
The nature of the orris root is almoſt ſingular; for roots
that are in any degree ſweet, it is but the ſame ſweetneſs
with the wood or leaf; but the orris is not ſweet in the leaf;
neither is the flower any thing ſo ſweet as the root. Bacon.
O'RRIs, m. ſ. ſold Fr.] A ſort of gold or filver lace.
CRTs. m. ſ. ſeldom with a ſingular. [This word is derived
by Sinner from ort, German, the fourth part of any thing;
by Mr. Lye more reaſonably from orda, Iriſh, a fragment.
In Anglo Saxon, ord ſignifies the beginning; whence in ſome
provinces odds and end; ; for ords and ends ſignify remnants,
ſcattered picces, refuſe ; from ord thus uſed probably came
ort..] Refuſe; things left or thrown away. -
He muſt be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth ;
A barren-ſpirited fellow, one that feeds
On abject orts and imitations. Shakeſp. jul. Crſ.
The fraćtions of her faith, orts of her love,
he fragments, ſcraps, the bits, and greaſy, reliques
Of her o'er eaten faith, are bound to Diomede. Shakeſp.
Much good do't you then;
Brave pluſh and velvet men,
Can feed on orts and ſafe in your ſtage-cloths,
are quit, upon your oaths,
The ſtagers, and the ſtage-wrights too. Ben. johnſºn,
O'RTHODOX. adj. [#30; and 3.x: ; orthodox, Fr.] Sound
in opinion and doćtrine ; notheretical. - -
Be you perſuaded and ſettled in the true proteſtant religion
profeſſed by the church of England; which is, as ſound and
orthodox in the doćtrine thereof, as any Chriſtian church in
the world. - Bacon.
Eternal bliſs is not immediately ſuperſtructed on the moſt
orthodox beliefs; but as our Saviour faith, if ye know theſe
things, happy are ye if ye do them ; the doing muſt be firſt
ſuperſtructed on the knowing or believing, before any hap-
pineſs can be built on it. Hammond.
O'RTHopox LY. adv. [from orthodox. J. With ſoundneſs of
opinion.
The doćtrine of the church of England, expreſſed in the
thirty-nine articles, is ſo ſoundly and ſo orthodoxly ſettled, as
cannot be queſtioned without extreme danger to the honour
of our religion. Bacon.
O'Rthodoxy. n.ſ. [3:303%iz; orthodoxie, Fr. from orthodox.]
Soundneſs in opinion and doctrine.
I do not attempt explaining the myſteries of the chriſtian
religion, fince Providence intended there ſhould be myſteries,
it cannot be agreeable to piety, orthodoxy, or good ſenſe, to
go about it. Swift.
ORTHopkomicks, n.ſ.. [from *Šć” and 3:éºº.J. The art
of ſailing in the ark of ſome great circle, which is the ſhorteſt
or ſtraighteſt diſtance between any two points on the ſur-
face of the globe. Harris.
O'RTHodromy. n. ſ. [3:3&amp;P and 3:#,GP; orthodromie, Fr.]
Sailing in a ſtraight courſe.
ORTHOGON. n.ſ. [4:30; and yov, 2.] A reëtangled figure.
The ſquare will make you ready for all manner of com-
partments : your cylinder for vaulted turrets and round build-
ings; your orthogon and pyramid, for ſharp ſteeples. Peach.
O'Rt Hocosal. adj. [orthogonel, Fr. from orthogon.] Rectan-
gular.
O'RTHog RAPHER. m. ſ. [3:30; and y:4?...] One who ſpells
according to the rules of grammar.
He was wont to ſpeak plain, like an honeſt man and a
ſoldier; and now he is turn'd orthographer, his words are juſt
ſo many ſtrange diſhes. Shakeſpeare.
ORTHog RAPHical. n.ſ. [from orthºgraphy.]
1. Rightly ſpelled.
2. Relating to the ſpelling.
I received from him the following letter, which, after
having rectified ſome little orthographical miſtakes, I ſhall
make a preſent of to the public. Addiſon's Spectator.
3. Delineated according to the elevation, not the ground-plot.
In the orthographical ſchemes there ſhould be a true de-
lineation and the juſt dimenſions of each face, and of what
belongs to it. Mortimer's Huſø.
ORTHog RAPHIcAlly. adv. [from orthographical.]
1. According to the rules of ſpelling.
2. According to the elevation. -
ORTHO'GRAPHY. n.ſ. (#32; and yeºto; orthographie,Fr.]
1. The part of grammar which teaches how words ſhould be
ſpelled.
This would render languages much more eaſy to be learned,
as to reading and pronouncing, and eſpecially as to the writ-
ing them, which now as they ſtand we find to be trouble-
ſome, and it is no ſmall part of grammar which treats of
orthography and right pronunciation. Holder.
2. The art or practice of ſpelling.
In London they clip their words after one manner about
the court, another in the city, and a third in the ſuburbs;
all which reduced to writing, would entirely confound ortho-
graphy. Swift.
3. The elevation of a building delineated.
You have the orthography or upright of this ground-plat,
and the explanation thereof with a ſcale of feet and inches.
Moxon's Mech. Exer.
ORTHo'PNoe A. m. ſ. [3e3%rvoix; orthopnée, Fr.] A diſorder
of the lungs, in which reſpiration can be performed only in
ue upright poſture.
His diſeaſe was an aſthma oft turning to an orthopnara; the
cauſe a tranſlation of tartarous humours from his joints to
his lungs. - Harvey on Conſumptions.
O'RTIve. adj. [ortive, Fr. ortivus, Lat..] Relating to the riſing
of any planet or ſtar.
O'RTOLAN. n. / [French..] A ſmall bird accounted very de-
licious.
Nor ortolans nor godwits. Cowley.
O'Ryal. n.ſ. [orvale, Fr. orvala, Lat.] The herb clary. Dict.
OR v IETAN. m. ſ. [orvietano, Italian; ſo called from a moun-
tebank at Orvieto in Italy.] An antidote or counter poiſon;
a medicinal compoſition or electuary, good againſt poiſon.
Bailey.
OscHEo'cELE. m. ſ. [3axtov and xxxn.] A kind of hernia when
the inteſtines break into the ſcrotum. Pićf.
Oscillation. n. / [oſcillum, Latin.] The act of moving
backward and forward like a pendulum.
Osci’ll AtoRy. adj. [oſcillum, Lat.] Moving backwards and
forwards like a pendulum. -
The
t
!
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 235</div><p class="Text">O S T
O S T
–- —------- 4-7-7.
|-
The aëtions upon the ſolids are ſtimulating or increaſing
their vibrations, or oſcillatory motions. Arbuthnot.
Osci’t ANcy. m. ſ. [oſcitantia, Lat.]
1. The act of yawning.
2. Unuſual ſleepineſs; careleſſneſs.
If perſons of ſo circumſpect a piety, have been thus over-
taken, what ſecurity can there be for our wreckleſs oſcitancy?
Government of the Tongue.
It might proceed from the oſcitancy of tranſcribers, who,
to diſpatch their work the ſooner, uſed to write all numbers
in cyphers. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 470.
Osciºr ANT. adj. [oſitans, Latin.]
1. Yawning; unuſually ſleepy.
2. Sleepy; ſluggiſh. -
Our oſcitant lazy piety, gave vacancy for them, and they
will now lend none back again for more a&amp;tive duty.
Decay of Piety.
Oscitation. m. ſ. [oſcito, Lat.]. The act of yawning.
I ſhall defer conſidering this ſubječt till I come to my trea-
tiſe of oſcitation, laughter, and ridicule. Tatler, Nº. 63.
Osier. n.ſ. ſofter, French.] A tree of the willow kind, grow-
ing by the water, of which the twigs are uſed for baſket-
work.
The rank of oſiers, by the murmuring ſtream,
Left on your right hand, brings you to the place. Shakespeare
Ere the ſun advance his burning eye,
I muſt fill up this ofter cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious juiced flowers. Shakeſp.
Bring them for food ſweet boughs and offers cut,
Nor all the winter long thy hay rick ſhut. May's Wirg.
Like her no nymph can willing offers bend, -
In baſket-works, which painted ſtreaks commend. Dryd.
Along the marſhes ſpread,
We made the ofter fringed bank our bed. Po. Odyſſ.
O’s MUND. m. ſ. A plant. It is ſometimes uſed in medicine.
It grows upon bogs in divers parts of England. Miller.
O'sPRAY. n.ſ.. [corrupted from off fraga, Latin.] The ſea-
eagle, of which it is reported, that when he hovers in the
air, all the fiſh in the water turn up their bellies, and lie
ſtill for him to ſeize which he pleaſes. Hanmer.
I think he'll be to Rome
As is the oſpray to the fiſh who takes it,
By ſovereignty of nature. Shakeſp. Goriolanus.
Among the fowls ſhall not be eaten, the eagle, the offifrage,
and the oſpray. Numbers xi. 13.
0SSELET. n.ſ. [French. J A little hard ſubſtance ariſing
on the inſide of a horſe's knee, among the ſmall bones; it
grows out of a gummy ſubſtance which faſtens thoſe bones
together. - Farrier’s Dićf.
O'ssicle. n ſ. [officulum, Latin.] A ſmall bone.
There are three very little bones in the ear, upon whoſe
right conſtitution depends the due tenſion of the tympanum ;
and if the aëtion of one little muſcle, which ſerves to draw
one of theſe officles, fixt to the tympanum, be loſt or abated,
the tenſion of that membrane ceaſing, ſound is hindred from
coming into the ear. Holder on Speech.
O'ssifick... adj. [oſa and facio, Lat.] Having the power of
making bones, or changing carnedus or membranous to
bony ſubſtance.
If the caries be ſuperficial, and the bone firm, you may
by medicaments conſume the moiſture in the caries, dry the
bone, and diſpoſe it, by virtue of its offick faculty, to thruſt
out a callus, and make ſeparation of its caries. Wiſeman.
Ossification. m. ſ. [from oſſy. ] Change of carneous,
membranous, or cartilaginous, into bony ſubſtance.
Oſſifications or indurations of the artery, appear ſo con-
ſtantly in the beginnings of aneuriſms, that it is not eaſy to
judge whether they are the cauſe or the effect of them. Sharp,
Ossi'FRAGE. m. ſ. [oſſraga, Lat, oſſrague, Fr.] A kind of eagle,
whoſe fleſh is forbid under the name of gryphon. The off-
fraga or oſpray, is thus called, becauſe it breaks the bones
of animals in order to come at the marrow. It is ſaid to
dig up bodies in church-yards, and eat what it finds in the
bones, which has been the occaſion that the Latins called
it avis buffaria. Calmet.
Among the fowls ſhall not be eaten the eagle and the
eſſage, and the oſpray. Numb. xi. 13.
To Q'ssify. v. a. [oſa and facio..] To change to bone.
. The dilated aorta every where in the neighbourhood of
the cyſt is generally ºffed. Sharp's Surgery.
Ossivorous. adj. [off, and voro.] Devouring bones.
The bore of the gullet is not in all creatures alike an-
ſwerable to the body or ſtomach : as in the fox, which feeds
on bones, and ſwallows whole, or with little chewing;
and next in a dog and other offivorous quadrupeds, it is very
large. Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
9'sſary. m. ſ. [oſarium, Lat.] A charnel houſe; a place
oº: the bones of dead people are kept. Dić?.
ST.
OUst. }n. f. A veſſel upon which hops or malt are dried. Dià.
OstE'Nsive. adj. [ºftentif, Fr. offendo, Lat.] . Showing; be-
tokening. - -
-
O's rent, n.ſ. [offentum, Latin.] .
1. Appearance; air; manner; mien:
Uſe all th’ obſervance of civility,
Like one well ſtudied in a ſad oftent,
To pleaſe his grandam., Shakeſp. Merch. of Wen.
2. Show; token. Theſe ſenſes are peculiar to Shakeſpeare.
Be merry, and employ your chiefeſt thoughts.
To courtſhip, and ſuch fair oftents of love -
As ſhall conveniently become you there. Shakeſp.
3. A potent; a prodigy; any thing ominous.
Latinus, frighted with this dire oftent,
For counſel to his father Faunus went;
And ſought the ſhades renown'd for prophecy,
Which near Albunia's ſulph’rous fountain lie. Dryden,
Ostentation. m. ſ. [ºffentation, Fr. offentatio, Lat.]
I. Outward ſhow ; appearance.
If theſe ſhows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volſcians ? —
—March on my fellows; -
Make good this offentation, and you ſhall
Divide in all with us. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
You are come
A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
The oſientation of our love. Shakeſpeare.
*A* diſplay; boaſt; vain ſhow. This is the uſual
enſe.
If all theſe ſecret ſprings of detraćtion fail, yet a vain
6/ientation of wit ſets a man on attacking an eſtabliſhed
name, and ſacrificing it to the mirth and laughter of thoſe
about him. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 256.
He knew that good and bountiful minds were ſometimes
inclined to offentation, and ready to cover it with pretence
of inciting others by their example, and therefore checks -
this vanity: Take heed, ſays he, that you do not your alms
before men, to be ſeen. Atterbury.
3. A ſhow; a ſpectacle. Not in uſe.
The king would have me preſent the princeſs with ſome
delightful oſientation, ſhow, pageant, antick, or firework.
Shakeſpeare's Love's Lab. Lºſt.
OSTENTATIOUS. adj. [oftento, Latin.] Boaſtful ; vain;
fond of ſhow ; fond to expoſe to view.
Your modeſty is ſo far from being offentatious of the good
you do, that it bluſhes even to have it known; and therefore
I muſt leave you to the ſatisfaction of your own conſcience,
which, though a ſilent panegyrick, is yet the beſt. Dryden.
They let Ulyſſes into his diſpoſition, and he ſeems to be
ignorant, credulous, and offentatious. Broome on the Odyſſ.
Ostentatiously. adv. [from offentatious.] Vainly ; boaſt-
fully.
Ostent Aºtiousness. m. ſ. [from offentatious.] Vanity; boaſt-
fulneſs.
Ostent.A.Tour. m. ſ. [offentateur, Fr. offento, Lat.] A boaſter ;
a vain ſetter to ſhow. -
Osteo'colla. n. ſ. [3rtov and x0xxº~ ; ºffeocolle, Fr.] Qſteocolla
is frequent in Germany, and has long been famous for bring-
ing on a callus in fraćtured bones; but the preſent, practice
with us takes no notice of it. Hill's Mat. Med.
Q/leocolla is a ſpar, generally coarſe, concreted with earthy
or ſtony matter, precipitated by water, and incruſted upon
ſticks, ſtones, and other like bodies. I/oodward.
Osteoſcope. n.ſ. [3rtov and x&amp;#12; offeocºpe, Fr.] Pains in
the bones, or rather in the nerves and membranes that en-
compaſs them. - Pict.
Osteology. n.ſ. [3; toy and Xiya ; oſteologie, Fr.] A deſcrip-
tion of the bones.
Richard Farloe, well known for his acuteneſs in diſſection
of dead bodies, and his great ſkill in offeology, has now laid
by that practice. - Tatler, Nº. 62.
Osri'ARY. n.ſ. ſoftium, Lat.] The opening at which a ri-
ever diſembogues itſelf. . - -
It is generally received, that the Nilus hath ſeven offiarieſ,
that is, by ſeven channels diſburtheneth itſelf unto the ſea. .
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi.
O'stler, n.ſ. [hºſtelier, French.] The man who takes care
of horſes at an inn. -
The ſmith, the effler, and the boot-catcher, ought to par-
take. - Swift's Direct. tº the Groom.
Ostlery. n.ſ. [hoſtelerie, French.] The place belonging tº
the oſtler. -
O'stracism. n.ſ. [ćrpaxiaº; ; oftraciſme, Fr.] A. of
paſſing ſentence, in which the note of. acquital or condem-
nation was marked upon a ſhell which the voter threw
into a veſſel. Baniſhment; publick cenſure.
Virtue in courtiers hearts
Suffers an oſtraciſm, and departs :
Profit, eaſe, fitneſs, plenty, bid it gº,
But whither, only knowing you, I know. 1)onne.
Publick envy is as an o/raciſm, that eclipſeth. men when
they grow too great; and therefore it is a bridle to keep
them within bounds. - Bacon's Eſſays, Nº. 9.
Hyperbolus by ſuffering did traduce -
Theºſºn, and ſham'd it out of uſe. civil
18
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 236</div><p class="Text">O T H
O V E
This man, upon a ſight and falſe accuſation of favouring
arbitrary power, was baniſhed by gſtraciſm; which in Engliſh
would ſignify, that they voted he ſhould be removed from
their preſence and council for ever. Swift.
Ostra'cites. n.ſ. Q/iracites expreſſes the common oyſter in
its foſſil ſtate, under whatever circumſtances it has been pe-
trified. Hill's Mat. Med.
O'strich, n. ſ. ſautruche, Fr. ſtruthio, Lat. J Oſlrich is
ranged among birds. It is very large, its wings very ſhort,
and the neck about four or five ſpans. The feathers of its
wings are in great eſteem, and are uſed as an ornament for
hats, beds, canopies : they are ſtained of ſeveral colours,
and made into pretty tufts. They are hunted by way of
courſe, for they never fly; but uſe their wings to aſſiſt them
in running more ſwiftly. The oſtrich ſwallows bits of iron
or braſs, in the ſame manner as other birds will ſwallow
ſmall ſtones or gravel, to aſſiſt in digeſting or comminuting
their food. It . its eggs upon the ground, hides them
under the ſand, and the ſun hatches them. Calmet.
I'll make thee eat iron like an ºſtrich, and ſwallow my
ſword like a great pin, ere thou and I part. Shakeſp.
Gaveſt thou the goodly wings unto the peacock? or wings
and feathers unto the oſtrich. job xxxix. 13.
The Scots errant fight, and fight to eat,
Their ſtrich ſtomachs make their ſwords their meat. Cleav.
Modern ſtriches are dwindled to meer larks, in compa-
riſon with thoſe of the ancients. Arbuthnot.
O' Acoustick. n.ſ. (ºr, and 2x42; otacouſique, Fr.] An
inſtrument to faciſitate hearing.
In a hare, which is very quick of hearing, it is ſupplied
with a bony tube; which, as a natural otacºuſtick, is ſo di-
rected backward, as to receive the ſmalleſt and moſt diſtant
found that comes behind her. Grew's Coſmol. i. i.
OTHER: pron. [oºer, Sax, autre, Fr.]
1. Not the ſame; not this ; different.
Of good ačtions ſome are better than other ſome. Hooker,
Will it not be received
That they have don't,
Who dares receive it other 2 Shakeſp. K. Lear.
He that will not give juſt occaſion to think, that all go-
Vernment in the world is the product only of force and vio-
knce, and that men live together by no ºther rules but that
of beaſts, where the ſtrongeſt carries ; and ſo lay a founda-
tion for perpetual diſorder and miſchief, tumult, ſedition and
rebellion ; things that the followers of that hypotheſis ſo
loudly cry out againſt, muſt of neceſſity find out another
ſtate of government. Locke.
No leaſes ſhall ever be made other than leaſes for years
not exceeding thirty-one, in poſſeſſion, and not in reverſion
or remainder. Swift.
2. Not I, or he, but ſome one elſe.
- Were I king,
I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands;
Deſire his jewels and this other's houſe. Shakeſp.
Phyſicians are ſome of them ſo conformable to the hu-
mour of the patient, as they preſs not the true cure of the
viſeaſe ; and fome other are ſo regular in proceeding accord-
ing to art, as they reſpect not the condition of the patient.
Bacon, Eſſay 31.
The diſmayed matrons and maidens, ſome in their houſes,
other ſome in the churches with floods of tears and lament-
able cries, poured forth their prayers to the Almighty, craving
his help in that their hard diſtreſs. Jºnolles.
The king had all he crav'd, or could compel,
And all was done—let others judge how well. Daniel.
3. Not the one, not this, but the contrary.
There is that controling worth in goodneſs, that the will
cannot but like and deſire it; and on the other ſide, that
odious deformity in vice, that it never offers itſelf to the aſ-
fºctions of mankind, but under the diſguiſe of the other. South.
4. Correlative to each.
In lowlineſs of mind let eacheſteem other better than them-
ſelves. Phil. ii. 3.
Scotland and thou did each in other live, -
Nor would'ſt thou her, nor could ſhe thee ſurvive. Dryd.
5. Something befides. -
The learning of Latin being nothing but the learning of
words, join as much other real knowledge with it as you can.
- Locke on Education, ſ. 169.
6. The next.
Thy air,
Thou other gold bound brow, is like the firſt;
A third is like the former. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
7. The third paſt.
Bind my hair up ; as 'twas yeſterday:
No, nor the t'other day. Ben. Johnſon.
8. It is ſometimes put elliptically for other thing; ſomething
different,
I can expect no other from thoſe that judge by ſingle ſights
- and raſh meaſures, than to be thought fond or inſolent. Glanv.
OTHERGates, adv. [other and gate, for way.] In another
II14 Ilner.
If fir Toby had not been in drink, he would have tickled
. . you otbergates than he did.
O't HERGUIs E. adj. [other and guiſe. This is often miſtaken,
and ſometimes written othergueſs.] Of another kind.
O'THERw HERE. adv. [other and where.] In other places.
As Jews they had acceſs to the temple and ſynagogues,
but as Chriſtians they were of neceſſity forced otherwhere to
aſſemble themſelves. Hoºker, b. v. ſ. 11.
His godlike acts, and his temptations fierce,
And former ſufferings, otherwhere are found. Milton.
OTHER while. adv. [other and while..] At other times.
OTHERwise. adv. [other and wiſe.]
1. In an indifferent manner.
They only plead, that whatſoever God revealeth, as ne-
ceſſary for all Chriſtian men to do and believe, the ſame we
ought to embrace, whether we have received it by writing
or otherwiſe, which no man denieth. Hooker, b. i.
The whole church hath not tied the parts unto one and
the ſame thing, they being therein left each to their own
choice, may either do as others do, or elſe otherwiſe, with-
out any breach of duty at all. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 13.
In theſe good things, what all others ſhould practiſe, we
ſhould ſcarce know to practiſe otherwiſe. Sprat.
Thy father was a worthy prince,
And merited, alas ! a better fate ;
But heaven thought otherwiſe. Addison's Cato.
2. By other cauſes.
Sir John Norris failed in the attempts of Liſborn, and re-
turned with the .. ſickneſs and otherwiſe, of eight thou-
ſand men. " Raleigh.
3. In other reſpects.
It is ſaid truly, that the beſt men otherwiſe, are not always
the beſt in regard of ſociety. - Hooker, b. i.
Men ſeldom confider God any otherwiſe than in relation
to themſelves, and therefore want ſome extraordinary bene-
fits to excite their attention and engage their love. Roger.
O'tter. m. ſ. [oter, Saxon. J. An amphibious animal that
preys upon fiſh.
The toes of the otter's hinder feet, for the better ſwim-
ming, are joined together with a membrane, as in the bevir;
from which he differs principally in his teeth, which are ca-
nin; and in his tail, which is felin, or a long taper: ſo that
he may not be unfitly called putoreus aquaticus, or the water
pole-cat. He makes himſelf burrows on the water ſide, as
a bevir ; is ſometimes tamed and taught, by nimbly ſur-
rounding the fiſhes to drive them into the net. Grew.
At the lower end of the hall is a large otter's ſkin ſtuffed
with hay. Addiſon’s Speciator, Nº. 115.
Would you preſerve a num’rous finny race
Let your fierce dogs the rav'nous otter chaſe ;
Th’ amphibious monſter ranges all the ſhores,
- Darts thro' the waves, and ev'ry haunt explores. Gay.
Oval. adj. [ovale, Fr. ovum, an egg.] Oblong; reſembling
the longitudinal ſection of an egg.
The mouth is low and narrow, but, after having entered
pretty far in the grotto, opens itſelf on both ſides in an ºval
figure of an hundred yards. Addiſon on Italy.
Mercurius, neareſt to the central ſun,
Does in an oval orbit, circling run;
But rarely is the object of our ſight,
In ſolar glory ſunk. Blackmore on Creat. b. ii.
O'v Al. n.ſ.
A ſynonimous word, or a mere negation of the contrary;
a tranſlation of the word into another tongue, or a gramma-
tical explication of it, is ſometimes ſufficient ; as a triangle
is that which has three angles, or an oval is that which has
the ſhape of an egg. Watts's Logick.
Ov A'Rious. adj. [from ovum.] Confiſting of eggs.
He to the rocks
Dire clinging gathers his ovarious food. Thomſon.
O'v ARY. n.ſ.. [ovaire, Fr. ovarium, Latin.] The part of the
body in which impregnation is performed.
The ovary or part where the white involveth it, is in the
ſecond region of the matrix, which is ſomewhat long and
inverted. - Brown's W. Err. b. iii.
Ov A'TIon. m. ſ. [ovation, Fr. ovatio, Lat..] A leffer triumph
among the Romans allowed to thoſe commanders who had
won a vićtory without much blood ſhed, or defeated ſome
leſs formidable enemy. Dićf.
3. }n. J. A ſort of caterpillar; an inſect. Dič.
Ouch. m. ſ. An ornament of gold or jewels.
Ouches or ſpangs, as they are of no great coſt, ſo they are
of moſt glory. Bacon, Eſſay 38.
Ouch of a boar. The blow given by a boar's tuſk. Ainſ.
Oven. m. ſ. ſoren, Saxon.] An arched cavity heated with
fire to bake bread. -
He loudly bray'd, that like was never heard,
And from his wide devouring oven ſent
A flake of fire, that flaſhing in his beard,
Him all amaz'd. Fairy Queen.
Here's yet in the word hereafter, the kneading, the making
Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 237</div><p class="Text">O V E
-- " -
of the cake, the heat of the oven, and the baking. Shakeſ?.
Bats have been found in ovens and other hollow cloſe
places, mattted one upon another; and therefore it is likely
that they ſleep in the winter, and eat nothing. Bacon.
Over hath a double ſignification in the names of places, ac-
cording to the different ſituations of them. If the place be
upon or near a river, it comes from the Saxon orne, a brink
or bank: but if there is in the neighbourhood another of the
Hºme name, diſtinguiſhed by the addition of nether; then over
is from the Gothick uſar, above. Gibſon's Camden.
OVER. prºp. [ufar, Gothick ; ,orre, Saxon.]
... Above; with reſpect to excellence or dignity.
- How happy ſome, o'er other ſome can be l
Thro' Athens I am thought as fair as ſhe. Shakeſp.
Young Pallas ſhone conſpicuous º'er the reſt;
Gilded his arms, embroider'd was his yeſt. Dryden,
High, ºver all, was your great condućt ſhown,
You ſought our ſafety, but forgot your own. Dryden.
The commentary which attends this poem, will have one
advantage over moſt commentaries, that it is not made upon
conjectures. Advert. to Pope's Dunciad.
Ånd it will afford field enough for a divine to enlarge on,
by ſhewing the advantages which the Chriſtian world has
vier the Heathen. - Swift.
2. Above, with regard to rule or authority.
* The church has over her biſhops, able to filence the fac-
tious, no leſs by their preaching than º their authority. South.
Captain, yourſelf are the fitteſt to live and reign not over,
but next and immediately under the people. Dryden.
in place.
3. Aºi. wº more than over ſhoes in love. Shakespeare.
The ſtreet ſhould ſee as ſhe walkt over head. Shakeſp.
Thrice happy is that humble pair,
Beneath the level of all care;
Over whoſe heads thoſe arrows fly,
Of ſad diſtruſt and jealouſy. JWaller.
Acroſs: as, he lºped over the brook.
Certain lakes and pits, ſuch as that of Avennes poiſon
birds which fly over them. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
The geeſe fly o'er the barn, the bees in arms
Drive headlong from their waxen cells in ſwarms. Dryd.
5. Through. -
All the world over, thoſe that received not the commands
of Chirſt and his doctrines of purity and perſeverance, were
ſignally deſtroyed. Hammond.
6. Upon.
Wiſe governours have as great a watch over fames, as
they have of the ačtions and deſigns. Bacon.
- Angelic quires
Sung heav'nly anthems of his vićtory
O'er tcpmptation and the tempter proud.
7. Before. This is only uſed in over night:
On their intelided journey to proceed,
And o'er night whatſo thereto did need.
O'VER. adv.
1. Above the top.
Give, and it ſhall be given unto you; good meaſure, preſſed
down and ſhaken together and running over, ſhall men give.
Luke vi. 38.
Milton.
PHubberd.
2. More than a quantity aſſigned.
Even here likewiſe the laws of nature and reaſon be of
neceſſary uſe; yet ſomewhat over and beſides them is ne-
ceſſary, namely human and poſitive law. Hooker, b. i.
And when they had mete it, he that gathered much had
nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack.
- Ex. xvi. 18.
The ordinary ſoldiers having all their pay, and a month's
pay over, were ſent into their countries. Hayward.
The eaſtern people determined their digit by the breadth
of barley corns, ſix making a digit, and twenty-four a
hand's breadth: a ſmall matter over or under. Arbuthnot.
3. From ſide to ſide.
The fan of an Indian king, made of the feathers of a pea-
cock's tail, compoſed into a round form, bound altogether
with a circular rim, above a foot over. Grew.
4. From one to another.
This golden cluſter the herald delivereth to the Tirſan, who
delivereth it over to that ſon that he had formerly choſen.
Bacon's New Atlantis.
5. From a country beyond the ſea.
It hath a white berry, but is not brought over with the
coral. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
They brought new cuſtoms and new vices o'er;
Taught us more arts than honeſt men require.
6. On the ſurface.
The firſt came out red all over, like an hairy garment.
Gen. xxv. 25.
7. Paſt. This is rather the ſenſe of an adječtive.
Soliman pauſing a little upon the matter, the heat of his
fury being ſomething over, ſuffered himſelf to be intreated.
Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
Philips.
Meditate upon the effects of anger; and the beſt time to
do this, is to look back upon anger when the fit is over. Bacon,
What the garden choiceſt bears
To fit and taſte, till this meridian heat
Be ºver, and the ſun more cool decline. Milton.
The act of ſtealing was ſoon over, and cannot be undone,
and for it the finner is only anſwerable to God or his vice.
gerent. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
He will, as ſoon as his firſt #. is % ; §
to wonder how ſuch a favour came to be beſtowed on him.
4tterbury's Sermons.
There youths and nymphs in conſort 9ay» y Priozzy
Shall hail the riſing, cloſe the parting day,
With me, alas! with me thoſe joys are ºr,
For me the vernal garlands bloom no more. P
8. Throughout; completely. ope.
Well,
Have you read o'er the letters I ſent you? Shakeſp.
Let them argue over all the topicks of divine goodneſs
and human weakneſs, yet how trifling muſt be their plea
South's Sermons.
9. With repetition ; another time.
He o'er and o'er divides him,
'Twixt his unkindneſs and his kindneſs.
Sitting or ſtanding ſtill confin'd to roar,
In the ſame verſe, the ſame rules o'er and o'er.
Longing they look, and gaping at the fight,
Devour her o'er and o'er with vaſt delight.
Thou, my Hector, art thyſelf alone,
My parents, brothers, and my lord in one:
O kill not all my kindred o'er again,
Nor tempt the dangers of the duſty plain;
But in this tow'r, for our defence, remain. Bryden.
Whenever children forget, or do an action aukwardly,
make them do it over and over again, till they are perfect.
- Locke on Education.
If this miracle of Chriſt's riſing from the dead, be not
ſufficient to convince a reſolved libertine, neither would
the riſing of one now from the dead be ſufficient for that
purpoſe ; ſince it would only be the doing that over again
which hath been done already. Atterbury.
The moſt learned will never find occaſion to act over again
what is fabled of Alexander the Great, that when he had
conquered the eaſtern world, he wept for want of more
worlds to conquer. JWatts.
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
Dryden.
10. Extraordinary; in a great degree.
The word ſymbol ſhould not ſeem to be over difficult. Baker.
11. Over and above. Beſides; beyond what was firſt ſup-
poſed or immediately intended.
Moſes took the redemption money of them that were over
and above. Numb. iii. 49.
He gathered a great maſs of treaſure, and gained over and
&amp;bove the good will and eſteem of all people wherever he
Caine. L’Eſtrange.
12. Over againſ. Oppoſite; regarding in front.
. . In Ticinum is a church with windows only from above.
It reporteth the voice thirteen times, if you ſtand by the cloſe
end of the wall, over againſt the door. Bacon.
I viſit his picture, and place myſelf over againſ? it whole
hours together. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 241.
Over againſt this church ſtands a large hoſpital, erected
by a ſhoemaker. Addiſon on Italy.
13. In compoſition it has a great variety of ſignifications; it is
arbitrarily prefixed to nouns, adjectives, or other parts of
ſpeech in a ſenſe equivalent to more than enough; too much.
Deviliſh Macbeth,
By many of theſe trains hath ſought to win me
Into his pow'r: and modeſt wiſdom plucks me
From over-credulous haſte. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
St. Hierom reporteth, that he ſaw a ſatyr; but the truth
hereof I will not raſhly impugn, or over-boldly affirm. Peach.
Theſe over-buſy ſpirits, whoſe labour is their only reward,
hunt a ſhadow and chaſe the wind. Decay of Piety.
If the ferment of the breaſt be vigorous, an over-fermenta-
tion in the part, produceth a phlegmon. Iſºſºman.
A gangrene doth ariſe in phlegmons, through the unſea-
ſonable application of over-cold medicaments. Jºſeman.
Poets, like lovers, ſhould be bold and dare,
They ſpoil their buſineſs with an over-care :
And he who ſervilely creeps after ſenſe,
Is ſafe, but ne'er will reach an excellence. Dryden.
Wretched man o'erfeeds
His cramm'd deſires, with more than nature needs. Dryd.
Bending o'er the cup, the tears ſhe ſhed,
Seem'd by the poſture to diſcharge her head, •
O'er-fill'd before. Dryden's Boccace.
Crude humour or phlegm, are produced by over-dige/?ion.
Floyer.
As they are likely to over-ſºuriſh their ºwn caſe, ſo their
flattery is hardeſt to be diſcovered ; for who would imagine
18 T that
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 238</div><p class="Text">O V E.
O V E.
that himſelf was guilty of putting tricks upon himſelf
- º Collier.
He has afforded us only the twilight of probability; ſuit-
able to that ſtate of mediocrity he has placed us in here;
wherein, to check our over-confidence and preſumption, we
might, by every day's experience, be made ſenſible of our
ſhortfightedneſs. Locke.
This part of grammar has been much neglected, as ſome
others over-diligently cultivated. It is eaſy for men to write
one after another, of caſes and genders. Locke.
It is an ill way of eſtabliſhing this truth, and ſilencing
atheiſts, to take ſome men's having that idea of God in their
minds, for the only proof of a deity; and out of an over-
Jºſs of that darling invention, caſhier all other arguments.
- 12, Ke.
A grown perſon ſurfeiting with honey, no ſooner hears
the name of it, but his fancy immediately carries ſickneſs
and qualms to his ſtomach : had this happened to him by
an over-doſe of honey, when a child, all the ſame effects
would have followed, but the cauſe would have been miſ-
taken, and the antipathy counted natural. Locke.
He over-acted his part; his paſſions, when once let looſe,
were too impetuous to be managed. . Atterbury.
Take care you over-burn not the turf; it is only to be
burnt ſo as may make it break. ..}/zrtiºner.
Don't over-fatigue the ſpirits, left the mind be ſeized with
a laſtitude, and thereby nauſeate and grow tir’d of a parti
cular ſubject. J; aftſ.
The memory of the learner ſhould not be too much crowded
with a tumultuous heap of ideas, one idea effaces another.
An over greedy graſp does not retain the largeſt handful. Watts.
To O'v ER-A Bous D. v. n. [over and abound..] To abound
more than enough. * -
Both imbibe
Fitting congenial juice, ſo rich the ſoil, -
So much does fructuous moiſture o'cr-abound. Philips.
The learned, never over-abounding in tranſitory coin, ſhould
not be diſcontented. Pºpe's Letters.
To OvºR-Act. v. a. ſover and dº..] To ad more than enough.
You over-aēţ, when you ſhould underdo:
A little call yourſelf again, and think. Bºn. jºhnſºn.
Princes courts may over-act their reverence, and make
themſelves laughed at for their fooliſhneſs and extravagant
relative worſhip. Stillingfleet.
Good men often blemiſh the reputation of their piety, by
over-aēſing ſome things in religion; by an indiſcreet zeal
about things wherein religion is not concerned. Tillotſon.
To O'v ER-ARCH. v. a. [over and reach..] To cover as with
- an arch.
- Where high Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
Brown with o'er-arching ſhades and pendent woods. Pope.
To Over-Awe. v. a. [over and awe.] To keep in awe by
ſuperiour influence.
The king was preſent in perſon to overlook the magiſtrates,
and to over-awe theſe ſubjects with the terror of his ſword.
Spenſºr on Ireland.
er graceful innocence, her every air
Of geſture, or leaſt action, over-aw'd
His malice. Milton's Par. Lºſº, b. ix.
I could be content to be your chief tormentor, ever pay-
ing you mock reverence, and founding in your ears, the
empty title which inſpired you with preſumption, and over-
awed my daughter to comply. Addiſon's Guardian.
A thouſand fears
Still over-awe when ſhe appears. Granvile’s Pºem:.
To O'v ER-BALANCE. v. a. To weigh down; to preponderate.
Not doubting but by the weight of reaſon I ſhould con-
terpoiſe the over-balancings of any factions. King Charles.
The hundred thouſand pounds per annum, wherein we
over-balance them in trade, muſt be paid us in money. Locke.
When theſe important conſiderations are ſet before a ra-
tional being, acknowledging the truth of every article, ſhould
a bare ſingle poſſibility be of weight enough to over-balance
them. Rogers, Serm. xii.
O've R-BALANCE. m. ſ. ſºver and balance..] Something more
than equivalent.
Our exported commoditics would, by the return, encreaſe
the treaſure of this kingdom above what it can ever be by
other means, than a mighty over-balance of our exported to
our imported commoditics. Temple.
The mind ſhould be kept in a perfect indifference, not
inclining to either ſide, any further than the over-balance of
probability gives it the turn of aſſent and belief. Locke.
O'w ER-BATTLE. adj. [Of this word I know not the deriva-
tion; batten is to grow fat, and to battle, is at Oxford to feed
on truſt.] Too fruitful; exuberant. *
In the church of God ſometimes it cometh to paſs, as in
over-battle grounds; the fertile diſpoſition whereof is good,
yet becauſe it exceedeth due proportion, it bringeth abun-
dantly through too much rankneſs, things leſs profitable,
whereby that which principally it ſhould yield, being either
prevented in place or defrauded of nouriſhment, faileth.
* Hºoker.
To O'v FR-BEAR. v. a. ſover and bear.] To repreſs; to
ſubdue ; to whelm ; to bear down.
What more ſavage than man, if he ſee himſelf able by
fraud to over-reach, or by power to over-bear the laws. Hzzé.
My deſire
All continent impediment would over-bear,
That did oppoſe my will. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The ocean o'er-peering of his liſt, -
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haſte
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head
O'er-bears your officers.
Our counſel, it pleas'd your highneſs
To over-bear. Shakeſp. King john.
Gloſter, thou ſhalt well perceive,
That nor in birth or for authority,
The biſhop will be over-borne by thee. Shakespeare
The Turkiſh commanders, with all their forces, affaijéd
the city, thruſting their men into the breaches by heaps, as
it they would, with very multitude, have diſcouraged or
over-born the Chriſtians. Knolls.
The point of reputation, when news firſt came of the
battle loſt, did over-bear the reaſon of war.
Shakespeare  care.
Bacon.
Yet fortune, valour, all is over-born,
By numbers; as the long reſiding bank
By the impetuous torrent. Denham.
A body may as well be cºor-born by the violence of a
ſhallow, rapid ſtream, as ſwallowed up in the gulph of
ſmooth water. L'E/irange.
Crowding on the laſt the firſt impel;
Till over-born with weight the Cyprians fell. Dryden.
The judgment, if ſwayed by the over-bearing of paſſion,
and ſtored with lubricous opinions inſtead of clearly con-
ceived truths, will be erroneous. Glanv. Scºtſ, c. 27.
Take care that the memory of the learner be not too much
crowded with a tumultuous heap, or over-bearing multitude
of docu:nents at one time. //atts.
The horror or loathſomneſs of an objećt may over-bear
the pleaſure which reſults from its greatneſs, novelty, or
beauty. Addiſon's Spe?ator.
To Over-BID. v. a. [over and bid.] To offer more than
equivalent.
You have o'er-bid all my paſt ſufferings,
And all my future too. 12 yd. Sºan. Friar.
To O've R-Blow. v. 7... [over and blow.] To be paſt its vio-
lence.
To O'v ER-Blow. v. a. [over and lºw.] To drive away as
clouds befo:e the wind.
Led with delight, they thus beguile the way,
Until the bluſtring ſtorm is over-blown. Fairy Q ſeen.
All thoſe tempeſts being over-blºwn, there long after aroſe
a new ſtorm which over-run all Spain. Spenſer.
This ague fit of fear is over-blºwn,
An eaſy taſk it is to win our own. Shakespeare. Rich. II.
Some angel that beholds her there,
Inſtruct us to record what ſhe was here ;
And when this cloud of ſorrow's o'er-blown,
Thro' the wide world we'll make her graces known. JPaller.
Seiz'd with ſecret joy,
When ſtorms are over-blown. Dryden's Pīrg.
O'y ER-BoA.R.D. adv. [over and board. See BoARD.] Off
the ſhip; cut of the ſhip.
The great aſſembly met again; and now he that was the
cauſe of the tempeſt being thrown over-board, there were
hopes a calm ſhould enſue. Hºwel.
A merchant having a veſſel richly fraught at ſea in a ſtorm,
there is but one certain way to ſave it, which is, by throw-
ing its rich lading over-bºard. South's Serºn.
The trembling dotard, to the deck he drew,
And hoiſted up and over-board he threw ;
This done, he ſeiſed the helm. Dryden.
He obtained liberty to give them only one ſong before he
leaped over-bºard, which he did, and then plunged into the
ſea. L’Eſtrange.
Though great ſhips were commonly bad ſea-boats, they
had a ſuperiour force in a ſca engagement: the ſhock of thern
being ſometimes ſo violent, that it would throw the crew on
the upper deck of leſſer ſhips over-beard. Arbuthnot.
To O'VER-Bulk. v. a. ſover and buſ...] To oppreſs by bulk.
The feeding pride,
In rank Achilles, muſt or now be cropt, -
Or ſhedding, breed a nurſery of like evils,
To over-bulk us all. Shakeſp. Trail and Crºftd.
To O've R-BUR DEN. v. a. [over and burthen...] To load with
too great weight.
If ſhe were not cloyed with his company, and that ſhe
thought not the earth over-burthered with him, ſhe would
cool his fiery grief. Sidney, b. ii.
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 239</div><p class="Text">O V E
O V E
To over-buy. v. a. ſover and buy.J. To buy too dear.
He, when want requires, is only wiſe,
Who ſlights not forcign aids, nor over-bºys ; {
But on our native ſtrength, in time of need, relies. Dryd.
To Over-cARRY. v. 6. Lºver and carry..] To hurry too far;
to be urged to any thing violent or dangerous. -
He was the king's uncle, but yet of no capacity to ſtic-
ceed; by reaſon whereof his natural affection and duty was
, is eaſy to be over-carried by ambition. Hayward.
T. Over-cast. v. 6, part. over-cºſt, ſover and ca/.]
1. To cloud ; to darken; to cover with gloom.
- As they paſt,
The day with clouds was ſudden over-coſ’. Fairy Qºn.
Hie, Robin, over-caſt the night;
The ſtarry welkin cover thou anon,
with drooping fogs, as black as Acheron. Shakeſp.
Our days of age are ſad and over-caſt, in which we find that
of all out vain paſſions and affections paſt, the ſorrow onl
abideth. Raleigh's Hiſł. of the World.
I of fumes and humid vapours made,
No cloud in ſo ſerene a manſion find,
To over-caſt her ever-ſhining mind.
J/aller.
Thoſe clouds that over-coſt our morn ſhall fly,
Diſpell'd to fartheſt corners of the ſky. Dryden.
The dawn is over-coſt, the morning lours,
And heavily in clouds brings on the day. Addiſon.
2. To cover. This ſenſe is hardly retained but by needle-wo-
men, who call that which is incircled with a thread, over-
tal When malice would work that which is evil, and in work-
ing avoid the ſuſpicion of an evil intent, the colour where-
with it over-coſteth itſelf is always a fair and plauſible pre-
tence of ſeeking to further that which is good. Hooker.
Their arms abroad with gray moſs over-caſt,
And their green leaves trembling with every blaſt. Spenſºr.
3. To rate too high in computation.
The king in his accompt of peace and calms, did much
over-caſt his fortunes, which proved full of broken ſeas,
tides, and tempeſts. Bacon’s Henry VII.
To Over-charge. v. a. ſover and charge.]
J. To oppreſs; to cloy; to ſurcharge.
On air we feed in every inſtant, and on meats but at times;
and yet the heavy load of abundance, wherewith we oppreſs
and over-charge nature, maketh her to fink unawares in the
mid-way. Raleigh's Hiſł. of the I/orld.
A man may as well expect to grow ſtronger by always
eating, as wifer by always reading. Too much over-charges
nature, and turns more into diſeaſe than nouriſhment. Collier.
2. To load; to crowd too much.
* *
Our language is over-charged with conſonants.
Pope.
3. To burthen.
He whiſpers to his pillow,
The ſecrets of his over-charged ſoul. Shakeſp.
4. To rate too high.
Here's Glo'ſter, a foe to citizens,
O'er-charging your free purſes with large fines. Shałęſp.
5. To fill too full.
Her heart is but o'er-charg’d; ſhe will recover. Shakeſp.
The fumes of paſſion do as really intoxicate, and con-
found the judging and diſcerning faculty, as the fumes of
drink diſcompoſe and ſtupify the brain of a man over-charged
with it. South's Sermons.
If they would make diſtinét abſtraćt ideas of all the va-
rieties in human actions, the number muſt be infinite, and
the memory over-charged to little purpoſe. Locke.
The action of the Iliad and AEneid in themſelves exceeding
ſhort, are ſo beautifully extended by the invention of epiſodes,
that they make up an agreeable ſtory ſufficient to employ the
memory without over-charging it. Addiſon's Speciator.
6. To load with too great a charge.
- They were
As canons over-charg’d with double cracks. Shakeſp.
Who in deep mines, for hidden knowledge toils,
Like guns o'er-charg’d, breaks, miſſes, or recoils. Denham.
To Over-cloud. v. a. ſover and cloud.] To cover with
clouds. -
The filver empreſs of the night
O'er-clouded, glimmers in a fainter light. Tickel.
To OvºR-cloy, v. a. ſover and clºy..] To fill beyond ſatiety.
A ſcum of Britons and baſe lackey peaſants,
Whom their o'er-cloyed country vomits forth
To deſperate adventures and deſtruction. Shakeſp.
To Overcom E. v. a. pret. I overcame; part paſſ overcome;
anciently overcomen, as in Speºſer. [overcomen, Dutch.]
1. To ſubdue ; to conquer; to vanquiſh.
They overcommen, were deprived
Qf their proud beauty, and the one moiet
Transformed to fiſh, for their bold ſurquédry.
This wretched woman, overcome
Of anguiſh rather than of crime hath been.
Spenſºr.
Sponſºr.
5
Iº-º-º- ---
. Of whom a man is ºvercºe, of the ſame is he brought
in bondage. 2 Pet. ii. 9.
H re by thicker air o'ercome,
And downward forc’d in earth's capacious womb,
Alters its particles; is fire no more.
Priºr.
2. To over-flow ; to ſurcharge.
Th’ unfallow’d glebe
Yearly o'ercomes the granaries with ſtores. Philips.
3. To come over or upon ; to invade ſuddenly. Not in uſe.
Can't ſuch things be
- tº ~~2
And overcome us like a ſummer's cloud,
Without our ſpecial wonder Shakespeare. Macbeth.
To Qy ERcom E. v. m. To gain the ſuperioriº.
That thou mighteſt be juſtified in thy ſayings, and mighteſt
overcome when thou art judged. Rºm. iii. 4.
OVER.com ER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] He who overcome.
To Over-count. v. a. ſover and count..] To rate above
the true value.
Thou know'ſt how much
We do o'er-count thee. Shakespeare . Ant, and Cleop.
To Over-cover. v. a. ſover and cover.] To cover compleatly.
Shut me nightly in a charnel houſe,
Q'er-cover'd quite with dead mens rattling bones, -
With recky ſhanks and yellow chapleſ, ſkulls. Shakespeare .
To O'VER-cRów. v. a. ſºver and crow.] To crow as in tri-
umph.
A baſe varlet, that being but of late grown out of the
dunghil, beginneth now to over-crow ſo high mountains, and
make himſelf the great protector of all out-laws. Spen er.
To Over Do. v. a. ſover and do..] To do more than enough.
Any thing ſo ºver-dine is from the purpoſe of playing ;
whoſe end is to hold the mirrour up to nature. Shakespeare.
Nature ſo intent upon finiſhing her work, much oftner
over-dºes than under-does. You ſhall hear of twenty ani-
mals with two heads, for one that hath none. Grew.
When the meat is over-done, lay the fault upon your lady
who hurried you. Swift.
To Q'VER-DREss. v. a. ſover and drºſ...] To adorn laviſhly.
In all, let nature never be forgot;
But treat the goddeſs like a modeſt fair,
Nor over-drºſ, nor leave her wholly bare. Pope.
To O've R-DRIVE. v. a. [over and drive.] To drive too hard,
or beyond ſtrength. -
The flocks and herds with young, if men ſhould over-drive
one day, all will die.
To Over-EYE. v. a. ſºver and eye.]
1. To ſuperintend. *
2. To obſerve ; to remark. -
I am doubtful of your modeſtics,
Left over eying of his odd behaviour,
You break into ſome merry paſſion.
Gen. xxxiii. 13.
Shakeſp.
To Over-EMPTY. v. a. ſover and empty..] To make too
empty.
The women would be loth to come behind the faſhion
in new-fangledneſs of the manner, if not in coſtlineſs of the
matter, which might over-empty their huſbands purſes. Carew.
Over FAL. m. ſ. [over and fall.] Cataraćt.
Toſtatus addeth, that thoſe which dwell near thoſe falls of
water, are deaf from their infancy, like thoſe that dwell near
the overſals of Nilus. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the IWorld.
To Ov ER-Flo Ar. v. n. [ºver and float.] To ſwim ; to float.
The town is fill'd with ſlaughter, and o'er-ficats
With a red deluge, their increaſing moats.
To Ov ER-Flow. v. m. ſover and flow.]
I. To be fuller than the brim can hold.
While our ſtrong walls ſecure us from the foe,
E’er yet with blood our ditches over-flow. Dryden.
Had } the ſame conſciouſneſs that I ſaw Noah's flood, as
that I ſaw the over-flºwing of the Thames laſt winter, I
could not doubt, that I who ſaw the Thames over fººd, and
viewed the flood at the general deluge, was the ſame ſelf. Locke.
2. To exuberate. -
A very ungrateful return to the author of all we enjoy,
but ſuch as an over-flowing plenty too much inclines men to
make. Rºgers, Sermon 2.
To OvIR-FLow. v. a.
1. To fill beyond the brim. * -
Suppoſe thyſelf in as great a ſadneſs as ever did load thy
ſpirit, wouldſt thou not bear it chearfully if thou wert ſure
that ſome excellent fortune would relieve and recompenſe
Drydºn.
thee ſo as to over-fow all thy hopes. - Taylor.
New milk that all the winter never fails,
And all the ſummer over-flows the pails. Dryden.
2. To deluge; to drown ; to over-run to over-power:
The Scythians, at ſuch time, as the northern nations ºver-
ſºwed all Chriſtendom, came down to the ſea-coaſt. Spenſer.
Clanius over-fow'd th’ unhappy coaſt. Dryden.
Do not the Kile and the Niger make yearly inundations
in our days, as they have formerly done and are not the
countries<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 240</div><p class="Text">O V E
O V E
countries ſo over-flown, ſtill ſituate between the tropicks
Bentley's Sermons.
Sixteen hundred and odd years after the earth was made,
it was over-flowed and deſtroyed in a deluge of water, that
overſpread the face of the whole earth, from pole to pole,
and from eaſt to weſt. Burnet.
Thus oft by mariners are ſhewn, -
Earl Godwin's caſtles over-flown. Swift.
O'v ER-Flow. n.ſ. [over and flow.] Inundation; more than
fulneſs ; ſuch a quantity as runs over; exuberance.
Did he break out into tears —
In great meaſure— -
-A kind over-fiew of kindneſs. Shakespeare,
Where there are great over-flows in fens, the drowning of
them in winter maketh the ſummer following more fruitſ, ;
for that it keepeth the ground warm. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
It requires pains to find the coherence of abſtruſe writ-
ings: ſo that it is not to be wondered, that St. Paul's
epiſtles have, with many, paſſed rather for disjointed pious
diſcourſes, full of warmth and º º: º
rather than ſtrong, coherent reaſonings all through:
rather than for calm, £5 Locke's Eff, on St. Paul's Epift.
After every ºverflºw of the Nile, there was not always a
menſuration. Arbuthnot on Coins.
If this ſoftens not the expreſſion, it may be aſcribed to
an over-flow of gratitude in the general diſpoſition of Ulyſſes.
Broome’s Notes on the Odyſſey.
O'v ER-FLow ING. m. ſ. [from overſiov.] Exuberance; co-
piouſneſs. - - -
When men are young, they might vent the over-fowings
of their fancy that way. Denham's Dedicat.
When the over-ſlowings of ungodlineſs make us afraid,
the miniſters of religion cannot better diſcharge their duty
of oppoſing it. Rogers, Serm. 17.
Over-Flow INGLY, adv. [from over-ſowing.j Exuberandy;
in great abundance. A word not elegant nor in uſe.
Nor was it his indigence that forced him to make the
world; but his goodneſs preſſed him to impart the goods
which he ſo overflowingly abounds with. Boyle.
To Over-FLY. v. a. ſover and fly.] To croſs by flight.
A failing kite
Can ſcarce o'er-fy them in a day and night. Dryden.
Over-Forwar DNäss. m. ſ. ſover and forwardrºſ...] Too
great quickneſs; too great readineſs.
By an over-fºrwardneſ in courts to give countenance to ſi-
volous exceptions, though they make nothing to the true
merit of the cauſe, it often happens that cauſes are not de-
termined according to their merits. Hale.
To O YER-FREIGHT. v. a. pret. over-freighted; part. over-
Jraight. [over and freight.] To load too heavily ; to fill with
too great quantity.
A boat over-freighted with people, in rowing down the
river, was, by the extreme weather, ſunk. Carew.
Grief, that does not ſpeak,
Whiſpers the o'er-fraught heart and bid, it break. Shakeſp.
Sorrow has ſo o'er-fraught
This ſinking barque, I ſhall not five to ſhew
... How I abhor my firſt raſh crime. Denham.
To Over-ger. * * ſºver and get.] To reach; to come
up with.
With fix hours hard riding, through ſo wild places, as it
was rather the cunning of my horſe ſometimes, than of my-
ſelf, ſo rightly to hit the way, I ºver-got them a little before
night. Sidney, b. ii
To O'v ER-G LAN - a-- % ºf
°F. v. a. ſover and glance.] To look haſtily
OVer.
I have, but with a curſory eye,
, O'er-glanc'd the articles. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
O *†. v. a. [over and gºl To ſurpaſs; to excel.
ſo f hinking t beyond the degree of humanity to have a wit
'''", *S*S his age, and ſuch dreadfuſ terror proceed
from ſo excellent beauty. Sidney.
- Great nature hath laid down at laſt,
That mighty birth wherewith ſo long ſhe went,
And over-went the times of ages paſt,
Here to lye in upon our ſoft content. Daniel.
Tºº-cºrer. ‘U. a. [… and gorge.] To gorge too
Art thou grown great
And, like ambitious Sylä, º, Shakeſp.
VER-GREAT. adj. Lover and great..] Too great.
hough putting the mind unprepared upon an unſual
{treſs *ght to be avoided; yet this ºft f n it, b
*-great ſhyneſs of diff ić. His muſt not run it, by an
obvious º culties, into a lazy *;
9.Q'VERGRów. 9. a. ſover and row.] QcAfe.
1. To cover with growth. grow.
ut ...” floor, and walls were all of gold,
††".” with duſt and old deca
And hid in darkneſs that y? ld
he hue thereof at none could behold --
º Fairy Queen, b. ii.
The woods and deſart caves,
With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'er-grown,
And all their echo's mourn. Milton.
2. To riſe above.
If the binds be very ſtrong and much over-grown the poles,
ſome adviſe to ſtrike off their heads with a long ſwitch. Mºrº.
To Over-G Row. v. n. To grow beyond the fit or natural
ſize.
One part of his army, with incredible labour, cut a way
thorough the thick and over-grown woods, and ſo came tº
Solyman. Knolles's Aſſº. of the Tarº.
A huge over-grown ox was grazing in a meadow. I.”Eff.
Him for a happy man I own,
Whoſe fortune is not over-grown. Swift.
Over-Growth. m. ſ. ſºver and growth.] Exuberant growth.
The over-growth of ſome complexion,
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reaſon. Shakeſp.
The fortune in being the firſt in an invention, doth.
ſometimes a wonderful over-growth in riches. Bacon.
Suſpected to a ſequent king, who ſeeks
To ſtop their over-growth, as in-mate gueſts
Too numerous. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xii.
To Q'veR-HALE. v. a. ſover and hale.]
1. To ſpread over.
The welked Phoebus gan availe
His weary wain, and now the froſty night
Her mantle black thro’ heaven gan over-hale. Spenſ.
2. To examine over again: as, he over-halid my account.
To Over-HANG. v. a. ſºver and hang.j ió jut over; to
impend over.
Lend the eye a terrible aſpect,
Let the brow overwhelm it,
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O'er-hang and jutty his confounded baſe. Shakespeare
Hide me ye forcſts, in your cloſeſt bow’rs,
Where flows the murm'ring brook, inviting dreams,
Where bord'ring hazle over-hangs the ſtreams. Gay.
If you drink tea upon a promontory that over-hangs the
ſea, it is preferable to an aſſembly. Pope.
To O'v FR-HANG. v. n. To jut over.
The reſt was craggy cliff, that over-hung
Still as it roſe, impoſſible to climb. A4ilt. P. Loft.
To Over-HARDEN. v. a. ſover and *arden.] To make too
hard.
By laying it in the air, it has acquired ſuch a hardneſs,
that it was brittle like over-hardened ſteel. Boyle.
O'v ER-HEAD. adv. [aver and head..] Aloft; in the zenith;
above; in the cieling.
Over-head the moon
Sits arbitreſs, and nearer to the earth
Wheels her pale courſe. 44ilton's Par. Loft, b. i.
The four ſtars over-head, repreſent the four children. Addison
To Over-HEAR. v. a. ſover and hear.] To hear thoſe whº
do not mean to be heard.
I am inviſible,
And I will over-hear their conference. Shakeſpeare.
They had a full fight of the Infanta at a maſk dancing,
having over-heard two gentlemen, who were tending towards
that fight, after whom they preſſed. //otton.
That ſuch an enemy we have who ſeeks
Our ruin, both by thee inform'd I learn,
And from the parting angel over-heard. Milton.
They were ſo loud in their diſcourſe, that a black-berry
from the next hedge over-heard them. L’Eſtrange.
The nurſe,
Though not the words, the murmurs over-heard. Dryden.
The witneſs over-hearing the word pillory repeated, ſunk
away privately. Addiſon.
To Over-HEAT. v. a. ſover and heat..] To heat too much.
Pleas'd with the form and coolneſs of the place,
And over-heated by the morning chace. Addison.
It muſt be done upon the receipt of the wound, before
the patient's ſpirits be over-heated with pain or fever. Jºſeman.
To Over-HEND. v. a. ſover and hend] To overtake 3 to
reach.
Als his fair Leman flying through a brook,
He over-hemt nought moved with her piteous look. Spenſ.
To O'v ER-Joy. v. a. ſover and joy.] To tranſport; to raviſh.
He that puts his confidence in God only, is neither over-
joyed in any great good things of this life, nor ſorrowful for
a little thing. Taylor's Guide to Devºtion.
The biſhop, partly aſtoniſhed and partly over-joyed with
theſe ſpeeches, was ſtruck into a ſad ſilence for a time. Bayw.
This love-ſick virgin, over-joy'd to find
The boy alone; ſtill follow'd him behind. Addison.
O've R-Joy. m. ſ. Tranſport; ecſtaſy.
The mutual conf'rence that my mind hath had,
Makes me the bolder to ſalute my king
With ruder terms ; ſuch as my wit affords,
And over-joy of heart doth miniſter. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
To O'VER-RIPEN. v. a. ſover and ripen.] Tomášek. ripe.
Why<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 241</div><p class="Text">O V E
Why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn, -
Hanging the head with Ceres' plenteous load Shakespeare
To Overla'bour. v. a. ſover and labour.] To take too
much pains on anything; to harraſs with toil.
She without noiſe will over-ſee
His children and his family; .
And order all things till he come, -
Sweaty and over-labour'd home. - - Dryden.
To OvertA'DE. v. a. ſover and lad..] To over-burthen.
Thus to throng and over-lade a ſoul
With love, and then to have a room for fear,
That ſhall all that controul,
What is it but to rear
• Our paſſions and our hopes on high,
That thence they may deſcry - a -
The nobleſt way how to deſpair and die 2 Suckling.
Overla'RGE. adj. ſover and large.] Larger than enough.
Our attainments cannot be over-large, and yet we ma-
nage a narrow fortune very unthriftily. Collier.
Overla'shingly. m. ſ. ſºver and laſh.] With exaggeration.
A mean word, now obſolete. -
Although I be far from their opinion who write too over-
laſhingly, that the Arabian tongue is in uſe in two third parts
of the inhabited world, yet I find that it extendeth where the
religion of Mahomet is profeſſed. Brerewood.
To Overla Y. v. a. ſover and lay.] -
1. To oppreſs by too much weight or power.
Some commons are barren, the nature is ſuch,
And ſome over-layeth the commons too much. Tºff:
Not only that mercy which keepeth from being over-laid
and oppreſt, but mercy which ſaveth from being touched
with grievous miſeries. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 48.
When any country is over-laid by the multitude which
live upon it, there is a natural neceſſity compelling it to diſ-
burthen itſelf and lay the load upon others. Raleigh,
We praiſe the things we hear with much more willingneſs
than thoſe we ſee; becauſe we envy the preſent, and reve-
rence the paſt; thinking ourſelves inſtructed by the one, and
over-laid by the other. Ben. johnſon.
Good laws had been antiquated by the courſe of time, or
over-laid by the corruption of manners. King Charles.
Our ſins have over-laid our hopes. King Charles.
The ſtrong Emetrius came in Arcite's aid,
...And Palamon with odds was over-laid.
2. To ſmother with too much or too cloſe covering.
Nor then deſtroys it with too fond a ſtay,
Like mothers, which their infants over-lay. Milton.
3. To ſmother; to cruſh; to overwhelm.
Ships burnt in fight, or forc'd on rocky ſhores,
The new-born babes by nurſes over-laid. Dryden.
They quickly ſtifled and over-laid thoſe infant principles,
of piety and virtue, ſown by God in their hearts; ſo that
they brought a voluntary darkneſs and ſtupidity upon their
minds. South's Sermons.
The gods have made your noble mind for me,
And her inſipid ſoul for #.
A heavy lump of earth without deſire,
Dryden.
A heap of aſhes that o'er-lays your fire. Dryden.
The ſtars, no longer over-laid with weight,
Exert their heads from underneath the maſs, -
And upward ſhoot. Dryden.
Seaſon the paſſions of a child with devotion, which ſeldom
Hies; though it may ſeem extinguiſhed for a while, it breaks
out as ſoon as misfortunes have brought the man to himſelf.
The fire may be covered and over-laid, but cannot be entirely
quenched and ſmothered. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 291.
In preaching, no men ſucceed better than thoſe who truſt
to the fund of their own reaſon, advanced but not over-laid
º with books. Swift.
o cloud; to over-caſt.
Phoebus' golden face it did attaint,
As when a cloud his beams doth over-lay.
5. To cover ſuperficially. -
The over-laying of their chapiters was of ſilver, and all
the pillars were filleted with filver. Ex. xxxviii. 17.
By his preſcript a ſančtuary is fram'd
Of cedar, over-laid with gold.
4. To join by ſomething laid over.
Thou us impower'd
To fortify thus far, and over-lay,
With this portentous bridge, the dark abyſs. Milton.
Tº Overle AP. v. a. ſover and leap. J. To paſs by a
Jump.
4.
Fairy Queen.
Milt. Par. Loft.
A ſtep
Qn which I muſt fall down or elſe o'er-leap, :
or in my way it lies. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
In vain did nature's wiſe command
ivide the waters from the land;
If daring ſhips and men prophane,
Th’eternal fences over-leap,
And paſs at will the boundleſs deep. Dryden.
O V E
Over LEATHER. m. ſ. ſover and leather.] The part of the
ſhoe that covers the foot. - --
. I have ſometimes more feet than ſhoes; or ſuch ſhoes
as my toes look through the over-leather. Shakeſp.
Overdi GHT. m. ſ. ſover and light.] Too ſtrong light.
... An ºr-light maketh the eyes dark, inſomuch as perpe-
tual looking againſt the ſun would cauſéblindneſs. Bacon.
To Over live. v. a. ſover and live.] To live longer than
another; to ſurvive; to out-live. . . . -
Muſidorus, who ſhewed a mind not to over-live Pyrocles;
prevailed. - - - . Sidney, b. ii.
He concludes in hearty prayers, -
That your attempts may over-live the hazard
And fearful meeting of their oppoſite. ; Shakeſp.
They over-lived that envy, and had their pardons after-
wards. - - - - Hayward.
To Overli’ve. v. n. To live too long.
Why do I over-live * º -
Why am I mock'd with death, and lengthen'd out
, Te deathleſs pain . . . Milton's Par. off, b. x.
Over liver. n.f. [from over-live..] Survivor; that which
lives longeſt. - -
A peace was concluded, to continue for both the kings lives,
... and the over-liver of them. . . . Bacon's Hºn. VII.
To Overload. v. a. [over and load.] To burthen with too
muth. - -
The memory of youth is charged and over-loaded, and all
they learn is meer jargon. - - Felton.
Cºverlong. adj. [ºver and long.] Too long. . .
I have tranſgreſſed the laws of oratory, in making my
periods and parentheſes over-long. Boyle.
To Overlo’ok. v. a. ſover and look.]
1. To view from a higher place. . .
The pile o'er-look'd the town, and drew the ſight, .
Surpris’d at once with rev'rence and delight. Dryden.
I will do it with the ſame reſpect to him, as if he were
alive, and over-looking my paper while I write. Dryden.
2. To view fully; to peruſe.
Wou'd I had o'er-look'd the letter. Shakeſpeare.
3. To ſuperintend; to over-ſee: ". . .
He was preſent in perſon to over-look the magiſtrates, and
to over-awe thoſe ſubjećts with the terror of his ſword. Spenſ.
In the greater out pariſhes many of the poor pariſhioners
through neglect do periſh, for want of ſome heedful eye to
over-look them. Graunt.
4. To review. - -
- The time and care that are required, j
To over-look and file, and poliſh well, -
Fright poets from that neceſſary toil. Roſcommon.
5. To paſs by indulgently. * - -
This part of good-nature which conſiſts in the pardoning
and over-looking of faults, is to be exerciſed only in doing
ourſelves juſtice in the ordinary commerce of life. . Addiſon.
In vain do we hope that God will over-look ſuch high con-
tradićtion of ſinners, and pardon offences committed #.
the plain convićtions of conſcience. ogers.
6. To neglect; to flight.
Of the two relations, Chriſt over-looked the meaner, and en-
titled and denominated them ſolely from the more honourable.
f - ... South's Sermons.
To over-look the entertainment before him, and languiſh
for that which lies out of the way, is ſickly and ſervile, Collier.
The ſuffrage of our poet laureat ſhould not be over-looked.
Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 488.
Religious fear, when produced by juſt apprehenſions of
a divine power, naturally over-looks all human greatneſs
that ſtands in competition with it, and extinguiſhes every
other terror. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 117.
The happieſt of thankind, over-looking thoſe ſolid bleſſings
which they already have, ſet their hearts upon ſomewhat they
want, Atterbury's Sermons.
They over-look truth in the judgments they paſs on ad-
verſity and º The temptations that attend the
former they can eaſily ſee, and dread at a diſtance; but
they have no apprehenſions of the dangerous conſequences
of the latter. Atterbury's Sermons.
O've RLookeR. m. ſ. ſove" and look.] - . . . . .
The original word fignifies an over-lºoker, or on...who
ſtands higher than his fellows and over-looks them. Watts.
Overloop. m. ſ. The ſame with orlop. - * ,
In extremity we carry our ordnance better than we were
wont, becauſécur nether over-loops are raiſed commonly from
the water; to wit, between the lower Part of the port and
the ſea. - - Raleigh.
OVERMºsten. adj. [over and moſºl. Having too much maſt.
Cloanthus better mann'd, purſu'd him faſt,
But his o'er-maſted gally check'd his haſte. Dryden.
To Over MAster. v. a. ſover and mºſter.] To ſubdue
to govern. • * :
For your deſire to know what is between us,
O'er-maſter it as you may, Shakespeare eare's Hamlet.
18 U. So
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 242</div><p class="Text">O V E
O V E
t
So ſleeps a pilot, whoſe poor bark is preſt
wº º, ... o'er-maſ?'ring wave. - craſhaw.
Over-maſtered with a ſcore of drunkards: the only ſoldiery
left about them, or elſe to comply with all rapines and vio-
lences. Milton on Education.
To Over MA'tch. v. a. ſover and match..] To be too power-
ful; to conquer; to oppreſs by ſuperior force.
- I have ſeen a ſwan
With bootleſs labour ſwim againſt the tide,
And ſpend her ſtrength with over-matching waves. Shakeſ?.
Sir William Lucy, with me -
Set from our o'er-match'd forces forth for aid. Shakeſp.
Aſſiſt, leſt I who erſt
Thought none my equal, now be over-match'd Par. Rºg.
How great ſoever our curioſity be, our exceſs is grººter,
and does not only over-match, but ſupplant it. Dec. ºf Piety.
He from that length of time dire omens drew,
Of Engliſh ºver-match'd, and Dutch too ſtrong,
Who never fought three days but to purſue:
It moves our wonder, that a foreign gueſt.
Should over-match the moſt, and match the beſt. Drydºn.
Over MA’tcH. n.ſ. ſover and match..] One of ſuperior powers;
one not to be overcome. - -
Spain is no over-match for England, by that which leadeth
Dryden.
all men; that is, experience and reaſon. Bacon.
Eve was his over-match, who ſelf-deceiv'd
And raſh, before-hand had no better weigh'd
The ſtrength he was to cope with or his own. Miltºn.
In a little time there will ſcarce be a woman of quality in
Great-Britain, who would not be an over-match for an Iriſh
prieſt. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 89.
Over-ME'Asure. m. ſ. [over and medure.] Something given
over the due meaſure.
To Oy ER-MI'x. v. a. ſover and mix.] To mix with too
much.
Thoſe things theſe parts o'er-rule, ho joys ſhall know,
Or little pleaſure over-mist with woe. Creech.
Over Most adj. [over and mºſt.] Higheſt; over the reſt in
authority. Aftſ.
Over Muſch. adj. [over and much..] Too much; more thin
enough.
It was the cuſtom of thoſe former ages, in their over-much
gratitude, to advance the firſt authors of any uſeful diſcovery
among the number of their gods. Wilkins.
An ºver-much uſe of ſalt, beſides that it occaſions thirſt
and ºver-much drinking, has other ill effects. Locke.
Over Muſch, adv. . In too great a degree.
The fault which we find in their is, that they over-much
abridge the church of her power in theſe things. Where-
"pon they re-charge us, as if in theſe things we gave the
church a liberty which hath no limits or boºids. Hooker.
- Perhaps
I alſo erred, in over-much admiring
What ſeem'd in thce ſo perfect, that I thought
No evil durit attempt thee. Aikºn's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
Deject not then ſo over-much thyſelf,
Who haſt of ſorrow thy full load beſides, Milton.
OvºRMº'ch. m. ſ. More than enough.
By attributing over-much to things -
Leſs excellent, as thou thyſelf perceiv'ſ. Milton.
With reſpect to the bleſfings the world enjoys, even good
* may aſcribe over-much to themſelves. Grew.
Over Mu &amp; HNess. n. J. [from ºver-much..] Exuberance ; ſu-
perabundance.
There *Words that do as much raiſe a ſtile, as others
can depreſs it; ſuperlation and over-muchnºſ, amplifies. It
may t; above faith, but not above a mean. Ben. johnſon.
Ov ERNI'GHT. m. ſ. ſover and ºt. This ſeems to be uſed
}. * * *@un, but by Addison more properly, as
beº: tºº it, as * noun with a prepoſition.] Night
If I had given you this at over-ni ht
; rhight have been o’erta'en. §bt, Shakeſpeare.
| Will confeſſes, * for half his life his head j every
morning with reading men over-night. Addiſon.
To º MP. v. a. ſover and name.] To name in a ſeries.
...” them; and as thou nameſt them I will deſcribe
To tºne. v. a. ſover and $/aftſp. Merch. of Penice.
of an office. • * Lºver and ºfte.] To lord by virtue
This might be the ſate of a Politician which this aſ over-
6//ices.
Ove Roffreto • ?- . Shakeſp. Hamlet.
- ***OU.S. adj. ſover and 24; ; - * .
importunate. §. [. ºfficus.] Too buſy ; too
his is an on * -
* * truth, and is always at a man's
heels; ſo that if he &gt; y
1t ooks about him, he muſt take notice of
Collier ºn Human Reaſon.
"I o over f
ASS. v. a. [ºver and 143.J
1. To croſs.
I ſtood on a wide ri
Which I muſt º, r1
ver’s *ank,
y
° er-, y-,
When on a ſudden Torriſmond appear'd,
Gave me his hand, and led me lightly o’er.
What have my Scyllas and my Syrtes done, *
When theſe they der-paſ, and thoſe they ſhun ? Doºn.
2. To over-look ; to paſs with diſregard.
The complaint about pſalms and hymns might as well be
over-poſt without any anſwer, as it is without any cauſe
brought forth. . . Boºker, b. v. J. 37.
Remember that Pellean conqueror,
A youth, how all the beauties of the eaſt
He flightly view'd, and ſlightly over-paſs'd. Milton.
3. To omit in a reckoning. -
Arithmetical progreſſion demonſtrates how faſt mankind
would increaſe, over-poſing as miraculous, though indeed na-
tural, that example of the Iſraelites who were muhiplied in
two hundred and fifteen years, from ſeventy to ſixty thouſand
able men. - Aaleigh.
4. To omit ; not to receive.
If the grace of him which ſaveth over-pºſ, ſome, ſo that
the prayer of the church for them be not received, this we
may leave to the hidden judgments of fighteouſneſs. H.i.
Over PA'st. part, adj. [from *Pºſil Gone; paſt. *
What canſt thou ſwear by now —
—By time to come,
That thou haſt wronged in the time o'er-paſı. Shakeſ,
To Over PAY.v.a.[over and pay.] To º the º:
Take this purſe of gold, -
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will over-pay, and pay again,
When I have found it.
You have yourſelf, your kindneſs over-paid,
He ceaſes to oblige who can upbraid.
Wilt thou with pleaſure hear thy lover's ſtrains,
And with one heav'nly finile o'er-pay his pains.
To Oviº PERCH. n.ſ. ſºver and perſh. Tº fly over.
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch theſe walls,
For ſtony limits cannot hold love out. Shakeſp.
Tº Ovelºpe'ER. v. a. ſover and peer.] To over-lo. 5 to
hover above. It is now out of uſe.
The ocean over-peering of his liſt,
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haſte,
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O'er-bears your officers.
Your Argoſies with portly ſail,
Do over-peer the petty traffickers,
That curt’ſy to them, do them reverence.
Mountainous error wou'd be too highly heapt,
Dryden.
Shakespeare  care.
Dryden.
Prior.
~
Shakespeare, Hamlet.
Shakespeare .
For truth to o'er-peer. Shakeſp. Coriolanus,
Thus yields the cedar to the ax's edge,
Whoſe top branch o'er-peer'd Jove's ſpreading tree,
And kept low ſhrubs from winter's pow'rful wind. Shake?.
They are invincible by reaſon of the over-pºering moun-
tains that back the one, and ſlender fortificatios of the other
to land-ward. Sandys's journey.
O'VERPLUs. m. ſ. ſover and plus.] Surplus ; what remains
more than ſufficient.
Some other finners there are, from which that overplus of
ſtrength in perſuaſion doth ariſe. Hoºker's Prºf.
A great deal too much of it was made, and the overplus
remained ſtill in the mortar. L'E/trange.
It would look like a fable to report, that this gentleman
gives away all which is the overplus of a great fortune. Addison
To Ovr RPLY. v. a. ſover and ply.] To employ too laboriouſly.
What ſupports me, doſſ thou aſk? -
The conſcience, friend, t' have loſt them over-ply'd,
In libery's defence. 44;ſton's Poems.
To Qy ERPoise., v. a. ſover and poiſ...] To outweigh.
Whether cripples who have loſt their thighs will float;
their lungs being able to waft up their bodies, which are in
others over-poiſed by the hinder legs; we have not made ex-
periment. - Brown's Pulgar Err. b. iv.
- The ſcale
O'er-pois'd by darkneſs, lets the night prevail 5
And day, that lengthen’d in the ſummer's height,
Shortens till winter, and is loſt in night. Creech.
Overpoise. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Preponderant weight.
Horace, in his firſt and ſecond book of odes, was ſtill ri-
ſing, but came not to his meridian till the third. After
which his judgment was an over-poiſe to his imagina.
He grew too cautious to be bold enough, for he deſcended
in his fourth by ſlow degrees. Dryden.
. Some over-poiſe of way, by turns they ſhare,
In peace the people, and the prince in war. Dryden.
To OVERPO'w ER. v. a. ſover and Pºwer.] To be predo-
minant over ; to oppreſs by ſuperiority.
Now in danger try’d, now known in arms
Not to be over-power'd. A/iſt. Par. Lºft.
As much light over-powers the eye, ſo they who have weak
“yes, when the ground is covered with ſhow, are wont to
complain of too much light. Boyle.
Reaſon allows none to be confident, but him only who
govcſils<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 243</div><p class="Text">O V E -
governs the world, who knows all things, and can do all
things; and therefore can neither be ſurpriſed nor over-powered.
South's Sermons.
After the death of Craſſus, Pompey found himſelf out-
witted by Caiar; he broke with him, over-pºwered him in
in ſenate, and cauſed many unjuſt decºcºs to paſs againſt
him. - Dryden's Dedicat. to Æneid.
Inſpiration is, when ſuch an over-pºwering impreſſion of
any propoſition is made upon the mind by God himſelf, that
iſes a convincing and indubitable evidence of the truth and
divinity of it. - • - Watts's Logick.
Thé hiſtorian makes theſe mountains the ſtandards of the
riſe of the water; which they could never have been, had
they not been ſtanding, when it did ſo riſe and over-pºwer
the earth. Iłºdaw. Nat. Hiſt.
Tº over PRE'ss. v. a. ſover and preſs.] To bear upon with
irreſiſtible force ; to overwhelm ; to cruſh. -
Having an excellent horſe under him, when he was over-
preſſed by ſome, he avoided them. - Sidney.
Mićhael's arm main promontories flung,
And b-er-preſs'd whole legions weak with fin. Roſcomm.
When a prince enters on a war, he ought maturely to
confider whether his coffers be full, his people rich by a
long peace and free trade, not over-preſſed with many bur-
thenſome taxes. - - Swift.
Tº overprize. v. a. ſºver and prize.] To value at too
high price. - - - - - -
paſſents over-prize their children, while they behold them
through the vapours of affection. Wotton.
Oyssex'Nk. n.ſ. [over and rank.] Too rank.
It produces over-rank binds. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Over RATE. v. a. ſover and rate.] To rate at too much.
While vain ſhows and ſcenes you over-rate,
'Tis to be fear'd,
That as a fire the former houſe o'erthrew,
Machines and tempeſts will deſtroy the new. Dryden,
To avoid the temptations of poverty, it concerns us not
to over-rate the conveniencies of our ſtation, and in eſtimat-
ing the proportion fit for us; to fix it rather too low than too
high; for our deſires will be proportioned to our wants,
real or imaginary, and our temptations to our deſires.
- - Rogers.
To Over RE'AcH. v. a. [over and reach.] º
1. To riſe above. -
The mountains of Olympus, Atho and Atlas, over-reach
and ſurmount all winds and clouds. Raleigh.
Sixteen hundred years after the earth was made, it was
overflowed in a deluge of water in ſuch exceſs, that the floods
over-reached the tops of the higheſt mountains:-. Burnet.
2. To deceive ; to go beyond; to circumvent. A ſagacious
man is ſaid to have a long reach. - - -
What more cruel than man, if he ſee himſelf able by
fraud to over-reach, or by power to over-bear the laws where-
unto he ſhould be ſubječt. Hacker, b. v. ſ. 2.
I have laid my brain in the ſun and dried it, that it wants
matter to prevent ſo groſs over-reaching. Shakeſp.
Shame to be overcome, or over-reach'd,
Would utmoſt vigour raiſe, and rais'd unite.
A man who had been matchleſs held
In cunning, over-reach'd where leaſt he thought,
To ſave his credit, and for very ſpight - -
Still will be tempting him who foils him ſtill. Milion:
There is no pleaſanter encounter than a trial of ſkill be-
twixt ſharpers to over-reach one another. L’Eſtrange.
Forbidding oppreſfion, defrauding and over-reaching one
another, perfidiouſneſs and treathery. Tillotſon.
Such a principle is ambition, or a deſire of fame, by which
many vicious men are over-reached, and engaged contrary to
their natural inclinations in a glorious and laudable courſe of
aćtion. -
John had got an impreſſion that Lewis was ſo deadly cun-
ning a man, that he was afraid to venture himſelf alone with
him; at laſt he took heart of grace ; let him come up, quoth
he, it is but ſticking to my point, and he can never over-
reach me. - , Hiſtory of j. Bull,
To Over RE'AcH. v. n. A horſe is ſaid to over-reach, when
he brings his hinder feet too far forwards, and ſtrikes his
toes againſt his fore ſhoes. Farr. Dić7.
Over REACHER. m. ſ. [from over-reach..] A cheat; a de-
ceiver. -
To Over RE'AD. v. a. ſover and read..] To peruſe.
The contents of this is the return of the duke; you ſhall
anon over-read it at your pleaſure. Shakeſpeare.
To Over-RED. v. a. ſover and red.] To ſmear with red.
Prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
Thou lilly liver'd boy. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To Over Rośst. v. a. ſover and rooft.] To roaſt too much.
'Twas burnt and dried away,
And better 'twere, that both of us did faſt,
Since of ourſelves, ourſelves are cholerick,
Than feed it with ſuch over-roafted fleſh.
6
Milton.
Shaº.
To Qver Ruſie. v. a. ſover and rule.]
Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 255.
O V E
* To influence with predominant power; to be ſuperior in
authority.
, Which humour perceiving to over-rule me, I ſtrave againſt
it. - - Sidney.
That which the church by her eccleſiaſtical authority ſhall
probably think and deſire to be true or good, muſt in con-
guity of reaſon over-rule all other inferior arguments what-
ſoever. - - - Hoºker, b. v. f 8.
Except our own private, and but probable reſolutions, be
by the law of publick determinations over-ruled, we take
away all poſſibility of ſociable life in the world. Płocker.
What if they be ſuch as will be over-ruled with ſomeone
whom they dare not diſpleaſe. - jº.
So much his paſſion and animoſity over-rided his conſcience.
- Clarendon, b. viii.
w A wiſe man ſhall over-rule his ſtars, and have a greater
influence upon his own content, than all the conſteiations
and planets of the firmament. Taylor.
He is acted by a paſſion which abſolutely over-rules him ;
and ſo can no more recover himſelf, than a bowl rolling down
an hill ſtop itſelf in the midſt of its career. South.
'Tis temerity for men to venture their lives upon unequal
encounters; unleſs where they are obliged by an over-ruling
impulſe of conſcience and duty. I.’Eſtrange.
. A man may, by the influence of an over-ruling planet, be
inclined to luſt, and yet by the force of reaſon overcome that
bad influence. Swift.
2. To govern with high authority; to ſuperintend.
Wherefore does he not now come forth and openly over-
rule, as in other matters he is accuſtomed Hayward.
3. To ſuperſede: as in law to over-rule a plea is to rejećt it as
incompetent.
Thirty acres make a farthing land, nine farthings a Cor-
niſh acre, and four Corniſh acres a knights fee. But this rule
is over-ruled to a greater or leſſer quantity, according to the
fruitfulneſs or barrenneſs of the ſoil. Carew.
To Over RU'N. v. a. ſover and run.]
1. To harraſs by incurſions; to ravage; to rove over in a ho-
ſtile manner.
Thoſe barbarous nations that over-ran the world, poſſeſſed
thoſe dominions, whereof they are now ſo called. Spenſer.
Till the tears ſhe ſhed,
Like envious floods o'er-ran her lovely face,
She was the faireſt creature in the world. . .
They err, who count it glorious to ſubdue
By conqueſt far and wide, to over-run
Large countries, and in field great battles win;
Great cities by aſſault. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
The nine
Their fainting foes to ſhameful flight compell'd,
And with reſiſtleſs force o'er-run the field. Dryden.
... Guſtavus Adolphus could not enter this part of the em-
pire after having over-run moſt of the reſt. Addiſon.
A commonwealth may be over-run by a powerful neigh-
bour, which may produce bad conſequences upon your trade
and liberty. Swift's Miſcell.
Shakeſ?,
2. To out-run.
Pyrocles being come to fixteen, over-run his age in growth;
ſtrength, and all things following it, that not Muſidorus could
perform any action on horſe or foot more ſtrongly, or deliver
that ſtrength more nimbly, or become the délivery more
gracefully, or employ all more virtuouſly. Sidney, b. ii.
We may out-run
By violent ſwiftneſs, that which we run at,
And loſe by over-running. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Ahimaz ran by the way of the plain, and over-ran Cuſhi.
2 Sam. xviii. 23.
Galilaeus noteth, that if an open trough, wherein water
is, be driven faſter than the water can follow, the water ga-
thereth upon an heap towards the hinder end, where the
motion began; which he ſuppoſeth, holding confidently the
motion of the earth to be the cauſe of the ebbing and flow-
ing of the ocean; becauſe the earth over-runneth the water.
- - - - Bacon's Nat. Hiſłory.
3. To overſpread; to cover all over.
With an over-running flood he will make an utter end of
the place. Nah. 1. 8.
This diſpoſition of the elements and the parts of, the
earth, ſhews us the footſteps of ſome kind of ruin which
happened in ſuch a way, that at the ſame time * general
flood of waters would neceſſarily over-run the whole earth.
OOC. On Wa º Theory of the Earth.
4. To miſchief by great numbers; to peſter.
To flatter fooliſh men into a hope of life where there is
none, is much the ſame with betraying people into an opinion,
that they are in a virtuous and happy ſtate, when they are
over-run with paſſion and drowned in their luffs. L’Eſtrangr.
were it not for the inceſlant labours of this induſtrious
animal, Egypt would be ºver-run with crocodiles. Addiſon.
such prºviſion made, that a country ſhould not want ſprings
- aS
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 244</div><p class="Text">O V E
O V E
°.9%RSHA now.
as were convenient for it; nor be over-run with them, and
afford little or nothing elſe; but a ſupply every where ſuit-
able to the neceſſities of each climate and region of the
globe. 3Woodw. Nat. Hiſt.
5. To injure by treading down.
His tears defac'd the ſurface of the well,
And now the lovely face but half appears, * * * *
O'er-run with wrinkles and deform'd with tears. Addison.
6. Among printers, to be obliged to change the diſpoſition of
the lines and words in correcting, by reaſon of the inſertions.
To CVERRU'N. v. m. To overflow ; to be more than full.
Though you have left me, -
Yet ſtill my ſoul o'er-runs with fondneſs towards you. Smith.
Cattle in incloſures ſhall always have freſh paſture, that
now is all trampled and over-run. Spenſer.
To Overse'E. v. a. ſover and ſee.]
1. To ſuperintend; to overlook.
He had charge my diſcipline to frame,
And tutors nouriture to overſee. Fairy Queen.
She without noiſe will overſee
His children and his family. Dryden.
2. To overlook; to paſs by unheeded; to omit.
I who reſolve to overſee
No lucky opportunity, , ,
Will go to council to adviſe - ---
Which way tº encounter, or ſurpriſe. Hud, p. iii.
bverseen. part. [from overſee..] Miſtaken; deceived.
A common received error is never utterly overthrown,
till ſuch times as we go from ſigns unto cauſes, and ſhew
ſome manifeſt root or fountain thereof common unto all,
whereby it may clearly appear how it hath come to paſs that
ſo many have been overſeen. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 8.
They rather obſerved what he had done, and ſuffered for
the king and for his country, without farther enquiring what
he had omitted to do, or been overſeen in doing. Carend.
Overse'ER. n.ſ.. [from overſe.]
1. One who overlooks; a ſuperintendent.
There are in the world certain voluntary overſers of all
books, whoſe cenſure, in this reſpect, would fall ſharp on us.
- - Hºcker, b. v. ſ. 31.
Jehiel and Azariah were overſeers under Cononiah.
2 Chron. xxxi. 13.
To entertain a gueſt, with what a care
Wou'd he his houſhold ornaments prepare;
Harraſs his ſervants, and as o'erſeer ſtand,
To keep them working with a threat'ning wand.
Clean all my plate, he cries. Dryden.
2. An officer who has the care of the parochial proviſion for
the poor.
The church-wardens and overſeers of the poor might find
it poſſible to diſcharge their duties, where's now in the
greater out-pariſhes many of the poorer pariſhioners, through
*eglect, do periſh for want of ſome heedful eye to overlook
them. Graunt's Bill of Mort.
To Overset. v. a. ſover and ſet.]
1. To turn the bottom upwards; to throw off the baſis.
. The tempeſts met,
The ſailors maſter'd, and the ſhip o'er-ſet. Dryden.
It is forced through the hiatus's at the bottom of the ſea
With ſuch vehemence, that it puts the ſea into the moſt hor-
rible perturbation, even when there is not the leaſt breath
of wind; over-ſetting ſhips in the harbours, and ſinking them.
- Poodw. Nat. Hi/.
Would the confederacy exert itſelf, as much to annoy the
enemy, as they do for their defence, we might bear them
down with the weight of our armies, and overſet the whole
power of France. Addiſon on the War.
. To throw out of regularity.
* *tion againſt Catiline ruined the conſul, when it
ſaved the city; for it ſo fºclied his ſoul, that ever after-
wards it was apt to be over-ſet with º Dryden.
To Qv ERSE"t. v. n. To fºil off the baſis.
Part of the weight will be under the axle-tree, which
will ſo far counterpoiſe what is above it, that it will ve
much prevent the over-ſetting. AMortimer's #.
To Oversh Ade. v. a. ſºver and ſhade.] To cover with
any thing that cauſes darkneſs.
Black night o'er-ſhade thy day, and death thy life. Shakespeare
Dark cloudy death º, his beams . life, ſº
And he nor ſees, nor hears us. - Shakespeare.
l *śl and mighty ſubject might eclipſe or over-ſhade
* imperial power. - Bacon.
I ºf a wood of leaves o'er-ſhade the tree,
" **n the hind ſhall vex the threſhing floor,
‘...." chaff and ſtraw will be thy ſtore. Dryden.
...}} y º our friendly talk,
*4 in that ſavºrite w,
Both Pleas'd with ... walk
5
e thought we wanted. Prior.
‘U. a. j | d
T t [over and ſha ow.]
3 throw a ſhadow, ºver any thing.
•eds choak and , .
** *r-ſhadºw d
ºr ſtarve and depºj the corn, and bear it down,
6
* nouriſhment. Bacon,
Death,
Let the damps of thy dull breath
Over-ſhadow even the ſhade,
And make darkneſs ſelf afraid. . . . . . Craſhaw:
Darkneſs muſt over-ſhadow all his bounds,
Palpable darkneſs, and blot out three days. Milton.
2. To ſhelter; to protect ; to cover with ſuperiour influence.
My over-ſhadowing ſpirit and might, with thee
I ſend along : ride forth and bid the deep
Within appointed bounds. 44ilton's Par. Left.
On her ſhould come
The holy ghoſt, and the power of the higheſt -
O'er ſhadow her. Paradiſe Regain'd, b. i.
To Over shoot. v. n. [over and ſhoot..] To fly beyond the
mark. -
Often it drops, or over-ſhoots by the diſproportions of diſ.
tance or application. Collier on Human Reaſon:
To Overshoot. v. a.
1. To ſhoot beyond the mark.
Every inordinate appetite defeats its bwn ſatisfaction, by
over-ſhooting the mark it aims at. Tillotſºn.
2. [With the reciprocal pronoun.] To venture too far; to af.
fert too much.
Leave it to themſelves to conſider, whether they have in
this Point or not over-ſhot themſelves ; which God doth
know is quickly done, even when our meaning is moſt ſinceſ.
Booker, b. ii. ſ. 8.
In finding fault with the laws I doubt me, you ſhall much
over-ſhoot yourſelf, and make me the more diffike your other
diſlikes of that government. Spenſer on Ireland.
For anything that I can learn of them, you have over-ſhot
yourſelf in reckoning. Jºhitgifte.
Oversight... n.ſ.. [from over and ſight.]
I. Superintendence.
They gave the money, being told unto them that had the
over-ſight of the houſe. 2 Kings xii. 11:
Feed the flock of God, taking the over-ſight thereof, not
by conſtraint, but willingly. I Pet. v. 2.
2. Miſtake; error.
Amongſt ſo many huge volumes, as the infinite pains of
St. Auguſtine have brought forth, what one hath gotten
greater love, commendation, and honour, than the book
wherein be carefully owns his over-ſights and ſincerely con-
demneth them. Płocker's Prºf.
His ſon mark'd this over-ſight, -
And then miſtook reverſe of wrong for right. Pope.
To OvºRs1'ze. v. a. ſover and ſize.]
I. To ſurpaſs in bulk.
Thoſe bred in a mountainous country, over-ſº, thoſe that
dwell on low levels. Sandys journey.
2. ſover and ſize, a compoſt with which maſons cover walls.]
To plaſter over.
He thus o'er-ſiz'd with coagulate gore, -
Old grandfire Priam ſeeks. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
To Overski'p. v. a. ſover and ſºp.]
1. To paſs by leaping.
Preſume not ye that are ſheep, to make yourſelves guides
of them that ſhould guide you; neither ſeek ye to over-ſkip
the fold, which they about you have pitched. Booker.
2. To paſs over.
Mark if to get them ſhe o'er-ſkip the reſt,
Mark if ſhe read them twice, or kiſs the name. Donne.
3. To eſcape.
When that hour o'er-ſºps me in the day,
Wherein I figh not, Julia, for thy ſake;
The next enſuing hour ſome foul miſchance º
Torment me. Shakespeare . Two Gent. of Perona.
Who alone ſuffers, ſuffers moſt i' th' mind;
But then the mind much ſuffrance does o'er-ſºp,
When grief hath mates and bearing fellowſhip. Shakespeare
To Qversie'Ep. v. a. ſover and ſleep.j To ſleep too long.
To Oversli'p. v. a. ſover and ſlip.j To Paſs undone, un-
noticed, or unuſed; to neglect.
The careleſſneſs of the juſtices in impoſing this rate, or the
negligence of the conſtables in collecting it, or the back-
wardneſs of the inhabitants in paying the ſame, over- ipped
the time. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
It were injurious to over-ſlip a noble ačt in the duke during
this employment, which I muſt celebrate above all his ex:
pences. * J/otton.
To Over SNow. v. a. ſover and ſnow..] To cover with ſnow.
Theſe I wielded while my bloom was warm,
Ere age unſtrung my nerves, or time o'er-ſnow'd my head.
Dryden's Æneis.
Overso'LD. part. [from overſel] Sold at too high a price.
Life with eaſe I can diſclaim,
And think it over-ſold to purchaſe fame. Drydºn,
Over soºn: adv. [over and ſoon.] Too ſoon.
The lad may prove well enough, if he sº-can think not
too well of himſelf, and will bear away that he heareth of
his elders. Sidney, b. ii.
- O'yER-
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 245</div><p class="Text">O V E
O V E
Overspe’Nr. part. [over and ſend.] Wearied; harraſſed;
foreſpent. The verb overſpend is not uſed.
Theſtylis, wild thyme, and garlick beats,
For harveſt-hinds, o'erſpent with toil and heats. Dryden.
To oversprea'd. v. a. ſover and ſpread..] To cover over ;
to fill; to ſcatter over. - - -
whether they were Spaniards, Gauls, Africans, Gothes,
or ſome other which did overſpread all chriſtendom, it is im-
poſſible to affirm. Spenſer.
Of the three ſons of Noah was the whole earth overſpread.
- Gen. ix. 19.
Darkneſs Europe's face did overſpread,
From lazy cells, where ſuperſtition bred. Denham.
Not a deluge that only over-run ſome particular region;
but that overſpread the face of the whole earth from pole to
pole, and from eaſt to weſt. Burnet.
Tº Overst A'ND. V. a. ſover and ſtand.] To ſtand too
much upon conditions. -
Her’s they ſhall be, ſince you refuſe the price;
What madman would o'erfland his market twice. Dryd.
To Overst A(Re. v. a. ſover and fare.] To ſtare wildly.
Some warlike ſign muſt be uſed; either a ſlovenly buſkin,
or an overſaring frounced head. Aſcham.
To Overstock. v. a. [over and ſtock.] To fill too full ; to
ud.
º raillery had entered the old Roman coins, we ſhould
have been ºver/locked with medals of this nature. . Addiſon.
Some biſhop, not overſtocked with relations, or attached to fa-
vourites, beſtows ſome inconſiderable benefice. Swift.
Since we are ſo bent upon enlarging our flocks, it may be
worth enquiring what we ſhall do with our wool, in caſe
Barnſtaple ſhould be ever overſtocked. Swift.
To Oversto'RE. v.a. [over and ſtore.] To ſtore with too much.
Fiſhes are more numerous than beaſts or birds, as appears
by their numerous ſpawn; and if all theſe ſhould come to
maturity, even the ocean itſelf would have been long ſince
overflored with fiſh. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To OverstRAI'N. v. n. [over and ſtrain..] To make too
violent efforts.
Craſſus loſt himſelf, his equipage, and his army, by over-
aiming for the Parthian gold. Collier.
He wiſhed all painters would imprint this leſſon deeply in
their memory, that with overſtraining and earneſtneſs of
finiſhing their pieces, they often did them more harm than
good. Pryden's Dufreſnoy.
To OverstRAI'N. v. a. To ſtretch too far.
Confeſſors were apt to overſ'rain their privileges, in which
St. Cyprian made a notable ſtand againſt them. Ayliffe.
To Overswa’y. v. a. ſover and ſway.] To over-rule ; to
bear down.
When they are the major part of a general aſſembly, then
their voices being more in number, muſt overſway their
judgments who are fewer. Hooker.
Great command o'erſways our order. Shakeſp.
To Overswell. v. a. [over and ſwell.] To riſe above.
Fill, Lucius, ’till the wine o'erſwell the cup ;
I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love. Shakeſp.
When his banks the prince of rivers, Po,
Doth overſwell, he breaks with hideous fall. Fairfax.
Overt, adj. [ouvert, Fr.] Open; publick; apparent.
To vouch this, is no proof,
Without more certain and more overt teſt,
Than theſe thin habits and poor likelihoods. Shakeſp.
Overt and apparent virtues bring forth praiſe; but there
be ſecret and hidden virtues that bring forth fortune; certain
deliveries of a man's ſelf. Bacon.
My repulſe at Hull, was the firſt overt eſſay to be made
how patiently I could bear the loſs of my kingdoms. K. Charles.
The deſign of their deſtruction may have been projected
in the dark; but when all was ripe, their enemies proceeded
to ſo many overt ačts in the face of the nation, that it was
obvious to the meaneſt. Swift.
Whereas human laws can reach no farther than to reſtrain
the overt action, religion extends to the ſecret motions of the
foul. Rogers, Serm. 17.
Overtly. adv. [from the adječtive..] Openly.
To Overt AſkE. v. a. ſover and take.]
1. To catch anythingby purſuit; to come up to ſomething go-
ingbefore.
We durſt not continue longer ſo near her confines, leſt
her plagues might ſuddenly overtake us before we did ceaſe
to be partakers with her ſins. Hooker.
If I had given you this at over-night,
She might have been o’ertaken; and yet ſhe writes
Purſuit would be but vain. Shakeſpeare.
I ſhall ſee
The winged vengeance overtake ſuch children. Shakeſp.
. The enemy ſaid, I will purſue, I will overtake, I will di-
vide the ſpoil. Ex. xv. 9.
My ſoul, more earneſtly releas'd,
Will out-ſtrip hers, as builets flown before
A later bullet may o'ertake, the powder being more. Donne.
To thy wiſhes move a ſpeedy pace,
Or death will ſoon o’ertäke thee in the chace. Drydºn.
. How muſt he tremble for fear vengeance ſhould overtake
him, before he has made his peace with God? Rºº.
2. To take by ſurprize. •
If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are ſpiritual
reſtore ſuch an one in the ſpirit of meekneſs. Gal. vi. 1.
To Over TA'sk. v. a. ſover and taſk.] To burthen with too
heavy duties or injunctions.
That office is performed by the parts with difficulty, becauſe
they were overtaſked. Harvey on Conſumptions.
To QVERTA(x, y, a. ſover and tax.] To tax too heavily.
To OVERTHROW. v. a. [ever and throw ; preter, ºver-
threw; part. overthrown.]
1. To turn upſide down.
Pittacus was a wife and valiant man, but his wife over-
threw the table when he had invited his friends. Taylor.
2. To throw down; to ruin; to demoliſh.
When the walls of Thebes he overthrew,
His fatal hand my royal father ſlew. Dryden.
3. To defeat; to conquer; to vanquiſh.
Our endeavour is not ſo much to overthrow them with
whom we contend, as to yield them juſt and reaſonable cauſes.
- Hooker, b. v. J. I.
To Sujah next, your conquering army drew,
Him they ſurpris'd, and eaſily o'erthrew.
4. To deſtroy ; to miſchief; to bring to nothing.
She found means to have us accuſed to the king, as though
we went about ſome practiſe to overthrow him in his own
eſtate. . Sidney, b. ii.
Dryden.
Here’s Glo'ſter
Q'er-charging your free purſes with large fines,
That ſeeks to overthrow religion. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Thou walkeſt in peril of thy overthrowing. Éce. Xiii. 13.
God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedneſs.
Prov. xxi. 12.
Overthrow. m. ſ. [from the verb.] .
1. The ſtate of being turned upſide down.
2. Ruin; deſtruction.
Of thoſe chriſtian oratories, the overthrow and ruin is de-
fired, not by infidels, pagans, or Turks, but by a ſpecial re-
fined ſect of chriſtian believers. JHooker, b. v. ſ. 17.
They return again into Florida, to the murther and over-
throw of their own countrymen. Abbot.
I ſerve my mortal foe,
The man who caus'd my country's overthrow.
3. Deſeat; diſcomfiture.
- From without came to mine eyes the blow,
Whereto mine inward thoughts did faintly yield;
Both theſe conſpir’d poor reaſon's overthrow;
Falſe in myſelf, thus have I loſt the field.
Quiet ſoul, depart; -
For I have ſeen our enemies overthrow. Shakeſp.
From theſe divers Scots feared more harm by vićtory than
they found among their enemies by their overthrow. Hayw.
Poor Hannibal is maul’d,
The theme is giv'n, and ſtrait the council's call’d,
Whether he ſhould to Rome directly go,
Drydºn.
Sidney.
To reap the fruit of the dire overthrow. Dryden.
4. Degradation.
His overthrow heap'd happineſs upon him;
For then, and not 'till then he felt himſelf,
And found the bleſſedneſs of being little. Shakeſp.
Over THRow ER. m. ſ. [from overthrow.] He who overthrows.
OVERTHWART. adj. [over and thwart.]
1. Oppoſite; being over againſt.
We whiſper, for fear our overthwart neighbours
Should hear us, and betray us to the government. Dryd.
2. Croſſing any thing perpendicularly.
3. Perverſe ; adverſe ; contradictious.
Two or three acts diſpoſed them to croſs and oppoſe any
propoſition; and that overthwart humour was diſcovered to
rule in the breaſts of many. - Clarendon.
OverthwA'RTLY. adv. [from overthwart.] -
1. Acroſs; tranſverſely.
The brawn of the thigh ſhall appear, by drawing ſmall
hair ſtrokes from the hip to the knee, ſhadowed again over-
thwartly. Peacham on Drawing.
2. Pervicaciouſly; perverſely. . . .
OverthwARTNess. n. ſ. [from overthwart.] Pervicacity ;
perverſeneſs. -
Over took. pret. and part. paſſ of overtake.
To Overto'P. v. a. ſover and top.]
1. To riſe above; to raiſe the head above.
Pile your duſt upon the quick and dead,
Tº o'er top old Pelion or the ſkyiſh head
Of blue Olympus. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
In the dance the graceful goddeſs leads -
The quire of nymphs, and overtºp, their heads.
2. To excel; to ſurpaſs.
Who ever yet
Have ſtood to charity, and diſplay'd th’ effects
18 X - Of
Dryd.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 246</div><p class="Text">O V E
O V E
:
iſsoſition gentle and of wiſdom,
º: power. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
As far as the ſoul º'er” the body, ſo far its pains, or
rather mournful ſenſations, exceed thoſe of the carcaſe. Harv.
1. obſcure; to make of leſs importance by ſuperiour ex-
cellence.
Whereas
ſhould now grow leſs,
junction.
he had been heretofore an arbiter of Europe, he
and be over-topped by ſo great a Sºº-
Bacon's Henry VII.
One whom you love,
Had champion kill'd, or trophy won,
Rather than thus be overtºt, -
wou'd you not wiſh his laurels cropt? Swift.
To over trip. v. a. ſover and trip.]
walk lightly over.
To trip over ; to
In ſuch a night,
Did Thiſbe fearfully o’ertrip the dew,
And ſaw the lion's ſhadowere himſelf, -
And ran diſmay’d away. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
Overture. n.ſ. ſouverture, French.]
1. Opening; diſcloſure ; diſcovery.
I wiſh d
You had only in your filent judgment try’d it,
Without i. . Shakeſp. Win. Tale.
2. Propoſal; ſomething offered to conſideration.
MacMurugh moved Henry to invade Ireland, and made
anºture unto him for obtaining of the ſovereign lordſhip
thereof. . Davies on Ireland.
All theſe fair overtures, made by men well eſteemed for
honeſt dealing, could not take place; Hayward.
We with open breaſt
Stand ready to receive them, if they like
Our overtüre, and turn not back perverſe. Milton.
The earl of Pembroke, who abhorred the war, promoted
all overtures towards accommodation with great impor-
tunity. Clarendon.
If a convenient ſupply offers itſelf to be ſeiſed by force or
gained by fraud, human nature perſuades us tº hearken to the
inviting overture. Rogers, Serm. 2.
Suppoſe five hundred men propoſing, debating, and voting,
according to their own little or much reaſon, abundance of
indigeſted and abortive, many pernicious and fooliſh ºverturº
would ariſe. Swift.
To Overtu'RN. v. a. ſover and turn.]
1. To throw down; to topple down ; to ſubvert; to ruin.
He is wiſe in heart and mighty in ſtrength—which removeth
the mountains, and overturneth them in his anger. job ix.5.
Theſe will ſometimes overturn, and ſometimes ſwallow
up towns, and make a general confuſion in nature. . Burnet.
This he obviates, by ſaying we ſee all the ideas in God;
which is an anſwer to this obječtion, but ſuch an one as
overturns his whole hypotheſis, and renders it uſeleſs and
as unintelligible, as any of thoſe he has laid afide. Locke.
If we will not encourage publick works of beneficence,
till we are ſecure that no ſtorm ſhall overturn what we help
to build; there is no room left for charity. Atterbury.
A monument of deathleſs fame,
A woman's hand o'erturns. Rowe.
2. To over-power; to conquer.
Pain exceſſive overturns all patience. Milton.
Over TU'RNER. n.ſ.. [from overturn..] Subverter.
I have brought before you a robber of the publick treaſure,
an overturner of law and juſtice, and the deſtruction of the
Sicilian province. Swift.
To Overv A'LUE. v. a. ſover and value.] To rate at too
high a price.
We have juſt cauſe to ſtand in ſome fear, leaſt by thus
overvaluing their ſermons they make the price and eſtima-
tion of ſcripture, otherwiſe notified, to fall. Hooker.
To Overve I'l. v. a. [over and veil..] To cover:
The day begins to break, and night is fled ;
Whoſe pitchy mantle overveil'd the earth. Shakeſp.
To Qveryo'TE. v. a. ſover and vote.] To conquer by pia-
rality of votes. -
The lords and commons might be content to be overvoted
by the major part of both houſes, when they had uſed each
their own freedom. King Charles.
To Over watch, v. n. [over and watch..] To ſubdue with
long want of reſt.
Morpheus is diſpatch'd;
Which done, the lazy º *whº'd,
Down from his propping elbow drops his head,
Diſſolvd in ſleep, and firinks within his bed. Dryden.
oº:: TCHED. adj. Tired with too much watching,
tº. the dog hunted in the river, he had withdrawn him-
OVER lºy with ſleep his over-watched eyes. Sidney.
º i º [over and weak.] Too weak; too feeble.
original gi perſuaſions, after mankind began to forget the
* gºver of life, became in all overweak to reſiſt the
firſt inclination of evil; or after, when it became habitual,
to conſtrain it. Raleigh's Hi/?. of the ſºrld.
To OverweA'RY. adj. [over and weary..] To ſubdue with
fatigue.
Might not Palinurus fall aſleep and drop into the ſea,
having been over-wearied with watching. Dryden.
To Ove Rw EA’t HER. v. a. [over and weather.] To batter
by violence of weather.
How like a younker or a prodigal,
The ſkarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugo'd and embraced by the ſtrumpet wind
How like the prodigal doth ſhe return,
With over-weather'd ribs and ragged fails,
Lean, rent, and beggar'd by the ſtrumpet wind. Shakespeare
To Overwee’N. v. n. [over and ween.] To think too highly;
to think with arrogance. e”.7 x
To reach beyond the truth of any thing in thought;
eſpecially in the opinion of a man's ſelf. Hº.
Oft have J ſeen a hot o'erweening cur,
Run back and bite, becauſe he was with-held. Shakespeare .
My maſter hath ſent for me, to whoſe feeling ſorrows I
might be ſome allay, or I o'erween to think ſo. -&gt; Shakeſp.
Laſh hence theſe overweening rags of France,
Theſe famiſh'd beggars, weary of their lives. Shakespeare .
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
Unleſs my hand and ſtrength could equal them. Shakespeare .
Take heed of overweening, and compare
Thy peacock's feet with thy gay peacock's train;
Study the beſt and higheſt things that are,
But of thyſelf an humble thought retain. Davies.
They that overween,
And at thy growing virtues fret their ſpleen,
No anger find in thee. Milton.
He might have learnt
Leſs overweening, ſince he fail'd in Job,
Whoſe conſtant perſeverance overcame
Whate'er his cruel malice could invent. Par. Reg.
No man is ſo bold, raſh, and overweening of his own
works, as an ill painter and a bad poet. Dryden.
Enthuſiaſm, though founded neither on reaſon nor reve-
lation, but riſing from the conceits of a warmed or over-
werning brain, works more powerfully on the perſuaſions
and actions of men, than either or both together. Locke-
Men of fair minds and not given up to the overweening of
ſelf-flattery, are frequently guilty of it: and, in many caſes,
one with amazement hears the arguings, and is aſtoniſhed
at the obſtinacy of a worthy man who yields not to the evi-
dence of reaſon. Locłe.
Now enters overweening pride,
And ſcandal ever gaping wide. Swift.
Overwee’NINGly. adv. [from overween.] With too much
arrogance; with too high an opinion.
To Overwei'GH. v. a. ſover and weigh..] To preponderate.
Sharp and ſubtile diſcourſes of wit, procure many times
very great applauſe, but being laid in the balance with that
which the habit of ſound experience delivereth, they are over-
weighed. Hºer, b. v. ſ. 7.
My unſoil'd name, the auſtereneſs of my life,
Will ſo your accuſation overweigh,
That you ſhall ſtifle in your own report. Shakespeare.
Overweight. m. ſ. [over and weight.] Preponderance,
Sinking into water is but an overweight of the body, in
reſpect of the water. Bacon's Nat. Hiſ?.
To Overwhelm. v. a. ſover and whelm.]
1. To cruſh underneath ſomething violent and weighty.
What age is this, where honeſt men,
Plac'd at the helm,
A ſea of ſome foul mouth or pen,
Shall overwhelm ?
Back do I toſs theſe treaſons to thy head,
With the hell hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart. Shakespeare
How trifling an apprehenſion is the ſhame of being laughed
at by fools, when compared with that everlaſting ſhame and
aſtoniſhment which ſhall overwhelm the ſinner, when he ſhall
appear before the tribunal of Chriſt. Rogers.
Blind they rejoice, though now even now they fall;
Death haſtes amain; one hour o'erwhelms them all. Pºpe.
2. To overlook gloomily.
Let the brow o'erwhelm it,
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O'erhang and jutty his confounded baſe. Shakespeare.
An apothecary late I noted,
In tatter'd weeds with overwhelming brows,
Culling of fimples. Shakeſp. Rom, and juliet.
Overwhe'LMINGLY. adv. [from overwhelming.] In ſuch a
manner as to overwhelm.
Men ſhould not tolerate themſelves one minute in any
known fin, nor impertinently betray their ſouls to ruin for
that which they call light and trivial; which is ſo indeed in
8 reſpect
Ben. Johnſºn.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 247</div><p class="Text">O U N
reſpect of the acqueſt, but overwhelmingly ponderous in re-
gard of the pernicious conſequents. .... Decay of Piety.
OWER wi's E. v. a. ſover and wiſe.] Wiſe to affectation.
Make not thyſelf overwiſe. Eccl. vii. 16.
Overwrou'GHT. part. [ºver and wrought.]
1. Laboured too much.
Apelles ſaid of Protogenes, that he knew not when to
give o'er. A work may be overwrought, as well as under-
wrought: too much labour often takes away the ſpirit, by
...i. to the poliſhing; ſo that there remains nothing but
...iſ correctneſs, a piece without any conſiderable faults,
but with few beauties. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. Worked all over.
Of Gothic ſtructure was the northern ſide,
O'erwrought with ornaments of barbarous pride. Pope.
3. It has in Shakeſpeare a ſenſe which I know not well how to
reconcile to the original meaning of the word, and therefore
conclude it miſprinted for overraught; that is, overreached or
cheated. By ſome device or other,
The villain is o'erwrought of all my money:
They ſay this town is full of cozenage.
Overwo'RN. part. [over and worn.]
1. Worn out; ſubdued by toil.
with watching overworn, with cares oppreſt,
Unhappy I had laid me down to reſt.
2. Spoiled by time. -
The jealous o'erworn widow and herſelf,
Are mighty goſſips in this monarchy.
Overy EA'RED. adj. [over and year.] Too old.
Among them dwelt
A maid, whoſe fruit was ripe, not overyeared. Fairfax.
Overze A'Lous. adj. [over and zealour.] Too zealous.
It is not of ſuch weighty neceſſity to determine one way
or the other, as ſome overzealous for or againſt the imma-
teriality of the ſoul, have been forward to make the world
believe. Locke.
Oucht. n.ſ.. [aphie, that is, a whit, Saxon. . This word is
therefore more properly written aught. See Aught.] Any
thing; not nothing.
For ought that I can underſtand, there is no part but the
bare Engliſh pale, in which the Iriſh have not the greateſt
footing, Spenſºr on Ireland.
He aſked him if he ſaw ought. Mark viii. 23.
To do ought good never will be our taſk ;
But ever to do ill our ſole delight. Milton's Par. Loft.
Univerſal Lord! be bounteous ſtill
To give us only good; and if the night
Have gather'd ought of evil, or conceal’d,
Diſperſe it, as now light diſpels the dark. Milton.
Ought, verb imperfeół. [This word the etymologiſts make
the preterite of owe, but it has often a preſent ſignification.]
1. [Preterite of owe.] Owed; was bound to pay; have been
indebted. -
Apprehending the occaſion, I will add a continuance to
that happy motion, and beſides give you ſome tribute of the
love and duty I long have ought you. Spelman.
This blood which men by treaſon ſought, -
That followed, ſir, which to myſelf I ought. Dryden.
2. To be obliged by duty.
Judges ought to remember, that their office is to interpret
w, and not to make or give law.
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
Bacon.
Morals criticks ought to ſhow. Pope.
She aëts juſt as ſhe ought,
But never, never reach'd one generous thought. Pope.
3. To be fit; to be neceſſary.
If grammar ought to be taught, it muſt be to one that can
ſpeak the language º Locke.
Oviro'R.M. adj. [ovum and forma, Lat..] Having the ſhape
of an egg.
This notion of the mundane egg, or that the world was ovi-
form, hath been the ſenſe and language of all antiquity. Burn.
O'viPARous. adj. [ovum and pario, Latin.] Bringing forth
eggs; not viviparous.
That fiſhes and birds ſhould be oviparous, is a plain ſign
of providence. More's Ant. againſt Atheiſm.
Birds and oviparous creatures have eggs enough at firſt
conceived in them to ſerve them for many years laying. Ray.
UNCE. m. ſ. [once, Fr. uncia, Latin.] A name of weight of
different value in different denominations of weight. In troy
weight, an ounce is twenty penny-weight ; a penny-weight,
twenty-four grains.
The blood he hath loſt,
Which I dare vouch is more than that he hath
By many an ounce, he dropt it for his country. Shakeſp.
A ſponge dry weigheth one ounce twenty-ſix grains; the
ſame ſponge being wet, weigheth fourteen ounces fix drams
and three quarters. Bacon.
OUNce. n. J. [once, French ; onza, Spaniſh..] A lynx ; a
panther.
a. *º-
O U T
- The ounce,
The libbard, and the tiger, as the mole
Riſing, the crumbled earth above them threw
In hillocks. Milton's Par. Loft, b. vii.
OUPHE. m. ſ. [auff, Teutonick.] A fairy; a goblin.
Lik an #. and º little ſon, we'll dreſs
ike urchins, ouphes, and fairi - z.
Ou'phen. n.ſ. frºm ºh.] ; green and white. Shakespeare
Fairies, black, gray, green,
and whi
Ye moon ſhine revellers and ſh white,
ades of ni
You ouphen heirs of fixed deſtiny es of night,
Attend your office. y?
OUR. pron. poſſ [une, Saxon.] Shakeſpeare.
1. Pertaining to us; belonging to us.
You ſhall
Lead our firſt battle, brave Macduff, and we
Shall take upon us what elſe remains. Shakeſpeare.
Our wit is given almighty God to know,
Our will is given to love him being known ;
But God could not be known to us below,
But by his works which through the ſenſe are ſhown.
So in our little world this ſoul of ours
Being only one, and to one body ty'd,
Doth uſe on divers objećts divers powers,
And ſo are her effects diverſify’d.
2. When the ſubſtantive goes before, it is written ours.
Edmund, whoſe virtue in this inſtance,
So much commands itſelf, you ſhall be ours. Shakeſp.
Thou that haſt faſhion'd twice this ſoul of ours,
So that ſhe is by double title thine,
Davies.
Davies.
Be ours, who e'er thou art,
Forget the Greeks. Denham.
Taxallan, ſhook by Montezuma's powers,
Has, to reſiſt his forces, call’d in ours. Dryden.
Reading furniſhes the mind only with materials of know-
ledge, it is thinking makes what we read ours : it is not
enough to cram ourſelves with a great load of colle&amp;tions,
unleſs we chew them over again, they will not give us
ſtrength. Locke.
Their organs are better diſpoſed than ours, for receiving
grateful impreſſions from ſenſible objećts. Atterbury.
OUR se’lves. reciprocal pronoun. [the plural of myſelf.]
I. We ; not others.
We ourſelves might diſtinétly number in words a great
deal farther than we uſually do, would we find out but ſome
fit denominations to ſignify them by.
Locke.
2. Us; not others, in the oblique caſes.
Safe in ourſelves, while on ourſelves we ſtand,
The ſea is ours, and that defends the land. Dryden.
OURSELF is uſed in the regal ſtile.
To make ſociety
The ſweeter welcome, we will keep ourſelf
Till ſupper-time alone. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
We ourſelf will follow
In the main battle. Shakeſpeare.
Not ſo much as a treaty can be obtained, unleſs we would
denude ourſelf of all force to defend us. Clarendon.
Ouse. n.ſ. Tanners bark. Ainſworth.
Ou'sel. n.ſ. [orle, Saxon.] A blackbird.
The merry lark her mattins fings aloft,
The thruſh replies, the mavis deſcant plays,
The ouſel ſhrills, the ruddock warbles ſoft;
So goodly all agree, with ſweet conſent,
To this day's merriment.
The ouſel cock ſo black of hue,
With orange tawney bill. Shakeſpeare.
Thruſhes and ouſels, or blackbirds, were commonly ſold
for three pence a-piece. Hakewill on Providence.
To Oust. v. a. [ouſter, 6ter, French.] To vacate ; to take
away.
Miriation of a&amp;ions upon the caſe were rare formerly,
and thereby wager of law ouſted, which diſcouraged many
ſuits. Hale.
Out. adv. [ut, Saxon; uyt, Dutch I
1. Not within. -
The gown with ſtiff embroid'ry ſhining,
Looks charming with a ſlighter lining;
The out, if Indian figures ſtain,
The inſide muſt be rich and plain.
2. It is generally oppoſed to in. •
That blind raſcally boy, that abuſes every one's eyes be-
cauſe his own are out, let him be judge h9W deep I am in
love. Shakeſp.
3. In a ſtate of diſcloſure. - -
Fruits and grains are half a year in concoëting; whereas
ſ
Spenſºr.
Prior.
leaves are out and perfect in a month. Bacon.
4. Not in confinement or concealment.
Nature her cuſtom holds,
ſet ſhame ſay what it will; when theſe are gone,
The woman will be ºut. Shakespeare.
5. From
-----, -, - " -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 248</div><p class="Text">O U T
O U T.
*
. From the place or houſe.
out with the dog, ſays "...
other: whip him out, ſº the third.
º the inner part. - - -
6. Fº is the place where the prieſts ſhall boil the treſpaſs
bear it not out into the utter court, to
Ezek. xlvi. 20.
what cur is that? ſays an-
Shakeſp.
offering; that they
ſanétify the people.
. Not at home. . . .
$. In a ſtate of extinótion. - -
It was great ign'rance, Gloſer's eyes being out,
To let him live; where he arrives he moves. ...
All hearts. Shakespeare . King Lear.
This candle burns not clear; 'tis I muſt ſnuff it,
Then out it goes. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Bid thy ceremony give thee cure |
Thinkſt thou the firy fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation.
Her candle goeth not out by night.
9. In a ſtate of being exhauſted..., , .
when the butt is out we will drink water, not a drop be-
fore; bear up and board them. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Large coals are propereſt for dreſſing meat; and when they
are out, if you happen to miſcarry in any diſh, lay the fault
upon want of coals. Swift.
10. Not in an affair.
So we'll live and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too,
Who loſes, and who wins; who's in, who's out. Shakespeare
The knave will ſtick by thee: he will not out, he is true
bred. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
I am not ſo as I ſhould be;
But I’ll ne'er out.
11. To the end.
Shakespeare . Hen. V.
Prov. xxxi. 18.
Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleºp.
Hear me out ;
He reap'd no fruit of conqueſt, but theſe bleſfings. Dryd.
You have ſtill your happineſs in doubt,
Or elſe 'tis paſt, and you have dream'd it out. Dryden.
The tale is long, nor have I heard it out;
Thy father knows it all. Addison's Cato.
12. Loudly; without reſtraint.
At all I laugh, he laughs no doubt;
The only difference is, I dare laugh out. Pope.
13. Not in the hands of the owner.
If the laying of taxes upon commodities does affect the
land that is out at rack rent, it is plain it does equally affect
all the other land in England too. Locke.
Thoſe lands were out upon leaſes of four years, after the
expiration of which term the tenants were obliged to renew.
- Arbuthnot on Coins.
14. In an errour.
You are mightily out to take this for a token of eſteem,
which is no other than a note of infamy. L'Eſtrange.
As he that hath been often told his fault,
And ſtill perſiſts, is as impertinent,
As a muſician that will always play,
And yet is always out at the ſame note. Roſcommon.
. According to Hobbes's compariſon of reaſoning with caſt-
ing up accounts, whoever finds a miſtake in the ſum total,
muſt allow himſelf out, though after repeated trials he may
not ſee in which article he has miſreckoned. Swift.
15. At a loſs; in a puzzle.
Like a dull actor now :
! have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full diſgrace. Shakeſp. Cºriolanus.
This youth was ſuch a mercurial, as the like hath ſeldom
been known ; and could make his own part, if at any time
he chanced to be out. Bacon's Hºn. VII.
16. With torn cloaths.
- Evidences ſwore;
Who hither coming out at hecla and knees,
For this had titles.
17. Away; at a loſs.
I never was out at a mad frolick, though this is the maddeſt
I ever undertook. - Dryden.
let all perſons avoid niceneſs in their clothing or diet,
Dyden.
becauſe they dreſs and comb out all their opportunities of .
"ing devotion, and ſleep out the care for their ſouls. Taylor.
18. It is uſed emphatically before alas.
Out, alas / no ſea, I find,
Is troubled like a lover's mind.
19. It is added emphatically to verbs of diſcovery.
If ye will not do ſo, be ſure your fin will find you out.
OUT. int... : Num. xxxii. 23.
" 'º';*. An expreſſion of abhorrence or expulſion.
**on this half-ſacºd fºllowſhip. Shakeſp.
%. º **, rude man thou doſt ſhame thy mother. Sha.
%. arlet from my fight. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
of ſ." mad headed ape a weazel hath not ſuch a deal
Out of Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
lºt, out "Y door, you witch you hag!
» 04t, out. Shakespeare . M. JP, of JPind.
Suckling.
Out, out, hyena; theſe are thy wonted arts,
To break all faith. 44 ſton's 4.njºe.
Out upon it, I have lov’d
Three whole days togethcr;
And am like to love three more,
If it prove fair weather. Suckling.
Out of prep. [Of ſeems to be the prepoſition, and out only
to modify the ſenſe of ºf..] -
1. From ; noting produce.
So many Neroes and Caligulas,
Out of theſe crooked ſhores muſt daily raiſe. Spºnſ.
Thoſe bards coming many hundred years after, could not
know what was done in former ages, nor deliver certainty
of any thing, but what they feigned out 3..." OWn un-
learned heads. penſer on Ireland.
Alders and aſhes have been ſeen to grow out of ſteeples;
but they manifeſtly grow out of clefts. Bacon.
He is ſofter than Ovid ; he touches the paſſions more de-
licately, and performs all this out ºf his own fund, without
diving into the ſciences for a ſupply. Dryden.
2. Not in ; noting excluſion or diſmiſſion.
The ſacred nymph
Was out of Dian's favour, as it then befel.
Fa. Queen.
Guiltineſs *~,
Will ſpeak, though tongues were out of uſe. Shałęſ.
The cavern's mouth alone was hard to find, J
Becauſe the path diſus’d was cut of mind. Dryden.
My retreat the beſt companions grace,
Chiefs out of war, and ſtateſmen out ºf place. Pºpe.
Does he fancy we can fit,
To hear his out of faſhion wit?
But he takes up with younger folks,
Who, for his wine, will bear his jokes. Swift.
They are out ºf their element, and logic is none of their
talent. Baker on Learning.
3. No longer in. -
Enjoy the preſent ſmiling hour;
And put it out of fortune's pow'r.
4. Not in ; noting unfitneſs.
He is witty out of ſeaſon ; leaving the imitation of nature,
and the cooler dićtates of his judgment. Dryden.
Thou'lt ſay my paſſion's out of ſeaſon,
That Cato's great example and misfortunes
Should both conſpire to drive it from my thoughts. Aidſ.
5. Not within ; relating to a houſe.
Court holy water in a dry houſe, is better than the rain
waters out of door. Shakeſp. King Lear.
6. From ; noting extračtion.
Juices of fruits are watry and oily: among the watry are
all the fruits out of which drink is expreſſed; as the grape,
the apple, the pear, and cherry. Bacon.
7. From ; noting copy.
St. Paul quotes one of their poets for this ſaying, not-
withſtanding T. G.'s cenſure of them out of Horace. Stiling.
8. From ; noting reſcue.
Chriſtianity recovered the law of nature out of all thoſe
errors with which it was overgrown in the times of pa-
ganiſm. Addison's Freeholder.
9. Not in ; noting exorbitance or irregularity.
Why publiſh it at this juncture; and ſo, out of all me-
thod, apart and before the work. Swift.
Uſing old thread-bare phraſes, will often make you go
out of your way to find and apply them. Swift.
10. From one thing to ſomething different.
He that looks on the eternal things that are not ſeen, will,
through thoſe opticks, exactly diſcern the vanity of all that
is viſible; will be neither frighted nor flattered out of his
duty. Decay ºf Piety.
Words are able to perſuade men out of what they find
and feel, and to reverſe the very impreſſions of ſenſe. South.
11. To a different ſtate from ; in a different ſtate, noting diſorder.
That noble and moſt ſovereign reaſon,
Like ſweet bells jang!'d out of tune and harſh ;
That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth,
Blaſted with extaſy. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
When the mouth is out of taſte, it maketh things taſte
ſometimes ſalt, chiefly bitter, and ſometimes loathſome, but
never ſweet. Bacon.
By the ſame fatal blow, the earth fºll out of that regular
form wherein it was produced at firſt, into all theſe irregula-
rities in its preſent form. Burmet on the Earth.
They all at once employ their thronging darts,
But out of order thrown, in air they join,
And multitude makes fruſtrate the deſign. Dryden.
12. Not according to. -
That there be an equality, ſo that no man aéts or ſpeaks
out of character. Pope's View of Ep. Poem.
13. To a different ſtate from ; noting ſeparation.
Whoſoever doth meaſure by number, muſt needs be greatly
out ºf love with a thing that hath ſo many faults; whoſoever
by
Dryden.
*
:
.
º
- sº*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 249</div><p class="Text">O U T
by weight cannot chuſe but eſteem very highly of that where-
in the wit of ſo ſcrupulous adverſaries hath not hitherto ob-
ſerved any defect, which themſelves can ſeriouſly think to
be of moment. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 27.
If ridicule were employed to laugh men out of vice and
folly, it might be of ſome uſe; but it is made uſe of to laugh
men out of virtue and good ſenſe, by attacking every thing
ſolemn and ſerious. Addiſon's Spectator.
I4. Beyond. - - - -
Amongſt thoſe things which have been received with great
reaſon, ought that to be reckoned, which the antient practiſe
of the church hath continued out of mind. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 9.
What, out of hearing gone no ſound, no word 2
Alack, where are you ? Shakeſpeare.
I have been an unlawful bawd, time out of mind. Shakespeare
Few had the leaſt ſuſpicion of their intentions, till they
were both out ºf diſtance to have their converſion attempted.
Clarendon, b. viii.
with a longer peace, the power of France with ſo great
revenues, and ſuch application, will not encreaſe every year
out of proportion to what ours will do. Temple.
He ſhall only be priſoner at the ſoldiers quarters; and
when I am out of reach, he ſhall be releaſed. Dryden.
We ſee people lulled aſleep with ſolid and elaborate diſ-
courſes of piety, who would be tranſported out of themſelves
by the bellowings of enthuſiaſm. Addiſon.
Milton's ſtory was tranſačted in regions that lie out of
the reach of the ſun and the ſphere of the day. Addiſon.
Women weep and tremble at the fight of a moving preacher,
though he is placed quite out of their hearing. Addiſon.
15. Deviating from : Noting irregularity.
Heaven defend but ſtill I ſhould ſtand ſo,
So long as out of limit, and true rule,
You ſtand againſt anointed majeſty Shakeſp.
The ſupream being has made the beſt arguments for his
own exiſtence, in the formation of the heavens and the earth,
and which a man of ſenſe cannot forbear attending to, who
is out of the noiſe of human affairs. Addiſon.
16. Paſt; without ; noting ſomething worn out or exhauſted.
I am out of breath :
—How art thou out of breath, when thou haſt breath
To ſay to me that thou art out of breath? Shakeſp.
Out of hope to do any good, he directed his courſe to
Corone. Knolles.
He found himſelf left far behind,
Both out of heart and out of wind. Hudibras.
I publiſhed ſome fables, which are out of print. Arbuth.
17. By means of.
Out of that will I cauſe thoſe of Cyprus to mutiny. Shakespeare
18. In conſequence of; noting the motive or reaſon.
She is perſuaded I will marry her, out of her own love and
flattery, not out of my promiſe. Shakeſp. Othello.
The pope, out of the care of an univerſal father, had in
the conclave divers conſultations about an holy war againſt
the Turk. - Bacon's Hen. VII.
Not out of cunning, but a train
Of atoms juſtling in his brain,
As learn'd philoſophers give out. Hudibras, p. ii.
Cromwell accuſed the earl of Mancheſter, of having be-
trayed the parliament out of cowardice. Clarendon.
Thoſe that have recourſe to a new creation of waters, are
ſuch as do it out of lazineſs and ignorance, or ſuch as do it
cut of neceſſity. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Diſtinguiſh betwixt thoſe that take ſtate upon them, purely
•ut ºf pride and humour, and thoſe that do the ſame in com-
pliance with the neceſſity of their affairs. L’Eſtrange.
Make them conformable to laws, not only for wrath
and out of fear of the magiſtrate's power, which is but a
weak principle of obedience; but out of conſcience, which
is a firm and laſting principle. Tillotſºn.
What they do not grant out of the generoſity of their na-
ture, they may grant out of mere impatience. Smallridge.
Our ſucceſſes have been the conſequences of a neceſſary
war; in which we engaged, not out of ambition, but for the
defence of all that was dear to us. Atterbury.
19. Out of hand; immediately; as that is eaſily uſed which
IS *; in the hand.
e bade to open wide his brazen gate, *
Which long time had been ſhut, and out of hand,
Proclaimed joy and peace through all his ſtate. Fa. $24een.
No more ado,
But gather we our forces out of hand,
And ſet upon our boaſting enemy.
To Out. v. A. To expel; to deprive.
The members of both houſes who withdrew, were counted
deſerters, and outed of their places in parliament. K. Charles.
$o many of their orders, as were ºuted from their fat poſ-
ºffions, would endeavour à re-entrance againſt thoſe whom
they account hereticks. Dryden.
*"...in compoſition, generally ſignifics ſomething beyond or
more than another,
Shakeſp.
O U T
Out-fawn as much, and out-comply,
And ſeem as ſcrupulouſly juſt,
To bait the hooks for greater truſt. Hud. p. ii. can. 3.
To Ouºla'ºt. v. a. [out and aº.] To do beyond. -
He has made me heir to treaſures,
Would make me out-act a real widow's whining. Otway.
To Outba'LANce. v. a. [out and balance.] To over-weigh;
to preponderate.
Let dull Ajax bear away my right,
When all his days outbalance this one night. Dryden.
To OuTBA'R. v. a. [out and bar.] To ſhutout by fortification.
Theſe to outbar with painful pionings, -
From ſea to ſea he heap'd a mighty mound. Fa. Queen.
To Qutbi'D. v. a. [out and bid.] To over-power by bidding
a higher price. -
If in thy heart
New love created be by other men,
Which have their ſtocks entire, and can in tears,
In ſighs, in oaths, in letters outbid me,
This new love may beget new fears. Donne.
For Indian ſpices, for Peruvian gold,
Prevent the greedy, and outbid the bold. Pope.
Out BI'd DeR. m. ſ. [out and bid.] One that out-bids.
Outblo'wed. adj. [out and blow.] Inflated; ſwollen with wind.
At their roots grew floating palaces,
Whoſe outblow'd bellies cut the yielding ſeas. Dryden.
Outbor N. adj. [out and born.] Foreign; not native.
Outbound. adj. [out and bound..] Deſtinated to a diſtant
voyage.
Triumphant flames upon the water float,
And outbound ſhips at home their voyage end. Dryden.
To Out BRA've. v.a. [out and brave.] To bear down and
diſgrace by more daring, inſolent, or ſplendid appearance.
We ſee the danger, and by fits take up ſome faint reſolu-
tion to outbrave and break through it. L’Eſtrange.
I would out-ſtare the ſterneſt eyes that look,
Outbrave the heart moſt daring on the earth,
To win thee, lady. Shakeſpeare.
Here Sodom's tow’rs raiſe their proud tops on high,
The tow’rs, as well as men, out-brave the ſky. Cowley.
To Out Bra'zeN. v. a. [out and brazen.] To bear down
with impudence.
Out BREAK. m. ſ. [out and break.] That which breaks forth;
eruption.
Breathe his faults ſo quaintly,
That they may ſeem the taints of liberty,
The flaſh and outbreak of a fiery mind.
To OutREATHE. v. a. [out and breath.]
1. To weary by having better breath.
Mine eyes ſaw him
Rendering faint quittance, wearied and outbreath'd,
Shakeſ?.
To Henry Monmouth. Shakeſpeare.
2. To expire.
That ſign of laſt outbreathed life did ſeem. Spenſer.
Outcast, part. [out and caſt. It may be obſerved, that both
the participle and the noun are indifferently accented on either
ſyllable. It ſeems moſt analogous to accent the participle on
the laſt, and the noun on the firſt.]
1. Thrown into the air as refuſe, as unworthy of notice.
Abandon ſoon, I lead, the caitive ſpoil -
Of that ſame outcaſt carcaſs. Fairy Queen, b. ii. c. 8.
2. Baniſhed; expelled. .
Behold, inſtead
Of us outcaſt exil'd, his new delight -
Mankind created. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
OutcA'st. n.ſ. Exile; one reječted; one expelled.
Let's be no ſtoicks, nor no ſtocks,
Or ſo devote to Ariſtotle,
As Ovid, be an outcaſt quite abjur'd. Shakeſp.
O blood-beſpotted Neapolitan,
Outcaſt of Naples, England's bloody ſcourge Shakespeare
For me, outcaſt of human race, -
Love's anger only waits, and dire diſgrace: º,tºr.
He dies ſad outcaſt of each church and ſtate ope.
- ning.
To Outcraft. v. a. [out and craft.] To excel in “”é
Italy hath outcrafted him,
And he's at ſome hard point.
O'UtcRY. ić [out and º diſtreſs; clamour
1. Cry of vehemence ; cry of diſtreſs ; clº - r
#. outcries the #jº there ſhun, i.
readily hearkened unto here. d ãºº -
So ſtrange thy outcry, º ... o itrang
- Ul - - -
*:::::::::. that my Milt. Par. Loſt, b. ii.
I make my way
Where noiſes, tumults, autºr”
I heard.
2. Clamour of deteſtation. . . . -
There is not any one Vice- incident to the mind of man,
againſt which the world has raiſed ſuch a loud * univerſal
circry, as againſt ingratitude: South’s Serm.
18 Y 3. A pub-
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
and alarms
Denham.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 250</div><p class="Text">O U T
O U T
3. A publick ſale; an auction. Ainſ.
Out DA; F. v. a. ºut and dare.] To venture beyond.
Myſelf, my brother, and his ſon,
That brought you home, and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. Shakeſpeare.
To OUTDATE. v. a. [out and date.] To antiquate.
works and deeds of the law, in thoſe places, ſignify le-
galobedience, or circumciſion, and the like judaical outdated
ceremonies; faith, the evangelical grace of giving up the whole
hcart to Chriſt, without any ſuch judaical obſervances. Hamm.
To OUT Do". V. a. [cut and do..] To excel; to ſurpaſs ; to
perform beyond another.
He hath in this action outdone his former decds doubly, Shakespeare
What brave commander is not proud to ſee
Thy brave Melantius in his gallantry
Our greateſt ladies love to ſee their ſcorn
Outdone by thine, in what themſelves have worn. J/aller.
Heav'nly love ſhall outdo helliſh hate,
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what helliſh hate
So eaſily deſtroy'd. - Alſºſton.
Here let theſe who boaſt in mortal things,
Learn how their greateſt monuments of fame,
And ſtrength, and art, are eaſily outdone
Miltºn.
By ſpirits reprobate.
An impoſłor outdoes the original. L'Aſirange.
Now all the gods reward and bleſs my ſon;
Thou haſt this day thy father's youth outdone. Dryden.
I muſt confeſs the encounter of that day
Warm'd me indeed, but quite another way;
Not with the fire of youth, but generous rage,
To ſee the glories of my º age
So far outdone. Dryden.
The boy's mother deſpiſed for not having read a ſyſtem
of logick, outdºes him in it. Locke.
I grieve to be outdone by Gay,
In my own humourous biting way. Swift.
To Our Dwe'l. v. a. [out and dwell.] To ſtay beyond.
He cutawel; his hour,
For lovers ever run bcfore the clock. Sha'eſh.
OU'TER. adj. [from out..] That which is without ; oppoſed
to inner.
The kidney is a conglomerated gland only in the outer
part: for the inner part, whereof the papillae are compoſed,
is muſcular. Grew's Coſmol. b. i. e. 5.
OU/TERLY. adv. [from outer.] Towards the outſide.
In the lower jaw, two tuſks like thoſe of a boar, ſtanding
outcrly, an inch behind the cutters. Grew's Muſeum.
Out ERMost. adj. [ſuperlative, from outer.] Remoteſt from
the midſt.
Try if three bells were made one within another, and air
betwixt each; and the outermºſt bell were chimed with a
hammer, how the found would differ from a ſingle bell. Bacon.
The outermºſt corpuſcles of a white body, have their va-
rious little ſurfaces of a ſpecular nature. Boyle.
To OUTFA'ce. v. a. [out and face.]
1. To brave; to bear down by ſhew of magnanimity; to bear
down with impudence.
We ſhall have old ſwearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we'll cuſate them and out-ſwear them too. Shakespeare
Doſt thou come hither
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and ſo will I. Shakeſp.
Be fire with fire;
Threaten the threatner; and cuſace the brow
Of bragging horror. - Shakespeare. King jºhn.
They bewrayed ſome knowledge of their perſons, but
were outfaced. //ottom.
2. To ſtare down.
We behold the ſun and enjoy his light, as long as we look
towards it circumſpectly : we warm ourſelves ſafely while we
ſtand near the fire; but if we ſeek to outface the one, to en-
ter into the other, we forthwith become blind or burnt. Ral.
To Out FA'WN. v. 4. [ºut and fawn..] To cxcel in fawning.
In affairs of leſs import, &gt;
That neither do us good nor hurt,
And they receive as little by,
Outflºwn as much and out-comply. Hudibras.
To OUTFLY'. v. a. [out and fly.] To leave behind in flight.
His evaſion wing'd thus ſwift with ſcorn, º
Cannot outfly our apprehenſions.
• * Horoſcop's great ſoul,
Rais'd on the pinions of the bounding wind,
Outflºw the rack, and left the hours behind Garth
Outrº. * f [ºut and form.] External appearance art/?.
...” % took vain delight -
* *ſº, until he loſt his fight
Hath chang'd his ſoul, and made hija you. B. Johnſ
To OUT FRows
• *. 6. out and frozcº: * f \ w, ºr
to over-bear by º and ſº wº.] To frown down;
Shakeſpeare.
Mºº king, am I caſt down, -
oº: º f e outfrown falſe fortune's frown. Shakeſ,
• * / [ºut and gate.] Outlet; paſſage Outwards
Thoſe places are ſo fit for trade, having moſt convenieſ
*-gate; by divers ways to the ſea, and in-gates to the §
parts of the land, that they would ſoon be enriched. '. e
o OUTGI've. v. a. [out and give.] To ſurpaſs in gº.”
To º play’r outgave the pinching lord. Bºº.
. TV. a. ... a fºr tº exºr :
1. To ſurpaſs; to &amp;ºi cutivent; part. outgone. [out and go-l
For frank, well ordered and continual hoſpitality, he out-
went all ſhew of competence. Carew
While you practiſed the rudiments of war, you out-wºm
all other captains; and have ſince found noné but yourſelf
alone to ſurpaſs. Dryden.
Where they apply themſelves, none of their neighbours
out-go them. Locke on Education.
2. To go beyond; to leave behind in going.
Many ran afoot thither out of all cities, and out-went them,
and came unto him. 4.ſaw vi. 33.
3. To circumvent; to overreach.
Mollcſion
Thought us to have out-gone
With a quaint invention. Denham.
To OurGRow. v. a. [out and grºw.] To ſurpaſs in growth;
to grow too great or too old for anything.
Much their work outgrew,
The hands diſpatch of two, gard’ning ſo wide. Milton.
When ſome virtue much outgrows the reſt,
It ſhoots too faſt and high. Dryden.
This eſſay wears a dreſs that poſſibly is not ſo ſuitable to
the graver geniuſes, who have outgrown all gaieties of ſtile
and youthful reliſhes. Glanv. Scºpſ. Prºf.
The lawyer, the tradeſman, the mechanic, have found ſo
many arts to deceive, that they far outgrow the common
prudence of mankind. Swift.
Oºto UARD m. ſ. [out and guard.] Cne poſted at a diſtance
from the main body, as a defence. -
As ſoon as any foreign object preſſes upon the ſenſe, thoſe
ſpirits which are poſted upon the out-guards, immediately
ſcowre off to the brain. South.
You beat the outguards of my maſter's hoſt. Dryden.
Theſe cut-guards of the mind are ſent abroad,
And ſtill patrolling beat the neighb'ring road,
Or to the parts remote obedient fly
Keep poſts advanc'd, and on the frontier lye. . Blackmºre,
CUTJE's r. v. a. [out and jº/?..] To over-power by jeſting.
The fool labours to outjy?
His heart ſtruck injuries. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
To OUTKNA’ve. v. a. [out and #nave.] To ſurpaſs in knavery.
The world calls it out-witting a man, when he's only
out; naved. L’E/irange.
CUTLA'NDIsh. adj. [out and land.] Not native ; foreign.
Yourſelf tranſplant
A while from hence: perchance outlandiſh ground
Bears no more wit than ours; but yet more ſcant
Are thoſe diverſions there which here abound. Donne.
Tedious waſte of time to fit and hear
So many hollow compliments and lies,
Outlandiſh flatteries. Milt. Par. Reg. b. iv.
Upon the approach of the king's troops under General
Wills, who was uſed to the outlandiſh way of making war,
we put in praśtice paſſive obedience. daiſon.
To OUTLA'st. v. a. [out and laſt.] To ſurpaſs in duration.
Good houſewives, to make their candles burn the longer,
lay them in bran, which makes them harder; inſomuch as
they will out-lºſt other candles of the ſame ſtuff, half in half.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſł. Nº. 371.
Summer's chief honour, if thou hadſt outlaſted,
Bleak winter’s force that made thy bloſſoms dry. Milt.
The preſent age hath attempted perpetual motions, whoſe
revolutions might outly? the exemplary mobility, and out-
meaſure time itſelf. Brown's W. Err.
- What may be hop'd,
When not from Helicon's imagin'd ſpring,
But ſacred writ, we borrow what we fing 2
This with the fabrick of the world begun,
Elder than light, and ſhall outloft the ſun. Waller.
Ovt.LAw, n ſ. ſutlaža, Saxon.] One excluded from the
bcnefit of the law. A blunderer; a robber; a bandit.
An outlaw in a caſtle keeps. Shakeſp. Hen. VI
Gathering unto him all the ſcatterlings and outlaws out of
. woods and mountains, he marched forth into the Engliſh
pale. Spenſºr on Ireland
As long as they were out of the protection of the I...".
as every Engliſhman might kill them, how ſhoj i. :
other than outlaws and enemies to the º of £º e
r avies on Ireland.
o”.... | ſpread out the unſun'd heaps
- y an outlaw's den,
And<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 251</div><p class="Text">O U T
O U. T
And tell me it is ſafe, as bid me hope
Danger will let a helpleſs maiden, paſs. Milton.
- A junkard is outlawed from all worthy and creditable
converſe: men abhor, loath, and deſpiſe him. South.
To Ou'rlaw. v. a. To deprive of the benefits and protec-
tion of the law. -
- I had a ſon -
Now outlaw'd from my blood; he ſought my life. Shakespeare
He that is drunken,
Is cutlaw'd by himſelf: all kind of ill -
Did with his liquor ſlide into his veins. Herbert.
Like as there are particular perſons outlawed and pro-
fibed by civil laws, ſo are there nations that are outlawed
and proſcribed by the law of nature and nations. Bacon.
All thoſe ſpiritual aids are withdrawn, which ſhould aſſiſt
him to good, or fortify him againſt ill; and like an out-lawed
* perſon he is expoſed to all that will aſſault him.
Decay of Piety.
Outlaw Ry. [from outlaw.] A decree by which any man
is cut off from the community, and deprived of the protec-
tion of the law. -
By proſcription and bills of outlawry,
Oétávius, Antony, and Lepidus,
Have put to death an hundred ſenators. Shakeſp.
Divers were returned knights and burgeſſes for the par-
liament; many of which had been by Richard III. at-
tainted by cutlawries. Bacon's Henry VII.
To Outlº Aſp. v. a. [out and leap.] To paſs by leaping ;
to ſtart beyond. -
Out LEA'p. n.ſ.. [from the verb..] ... Sally ; flight; eſcape.
Since youth muſt have ſome liberty, ſome outleaps, they
might be under the eye of a father, and then no very great
harm can come of it. - Locke on Education.
Ou'rlet. n.ſ. [out and let.] Paſſage outwards; diſcharge out-
wards; egreſs; paſſage of egreſs.
Colonies and foreign plantations, are very neceſſary, as
outlets to a populous nation. Bacon.
The enemy was deprived of that uſeful out-let. Clarend.
So 'ſcapes th’ inſulting fire his narrow jail,
And makes ſmall outlets into open air. Dryden.
Have a care that theſe members be neither the inlets nor
outlets of any vices; that they neither give admiſſion to the
temptation, nor be expreſſive of the conception of them. Ray.
Ou'tiiNE. m. ſ. [out and line.] Contour; line by which any
figure is defined ; extremity.
Painters, by their outlines, colours, lights, and ſhadows,
repreſent the ſame in their pictures. Dryden.
To Outlive. v. a. [out and live.] To live beyond ; to
ſurvive.
Will theſe moſſed trees,
That have outliv'd the eagle, page thy keels,
And ſkip when thou point'ſt out. Shakeſp.
Die two months ago, and not forgotten,
Yet then there is hopes a great man's memory
May outlive his life half a year. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
He that outlives this day, and comes ſafe home,
Will ſtand a tiptoe when this day is nam'd. Shakeſp.
His courage was ſo ſignal that day, that too much could
not be cxpected from it, if he had outlived it. Clarend.
- Thou muſt outlive
Thy youth, thy ſtrength, thy beauty, which will change
To wither'd, weak, and gray. Milt. Par. Loft.
Time, which made them their fame outlive,
To Cowley ſcarce did ripeneſs give. Denham.
The ſoldier grows leſs apprehenſive, by computing upon
the diſproportion of thoſe that outlive a battle, to thoſe that
fall in it. L’Eſtrange.
Since we have loſt
Freedom, wealth, honour, which we value moſt,
I wiſh they would our lives a period give;
They live too long who happineſs outlive. Dryden.
It is of great conſequence where noble families are gone
to decay; becauſe their titles outlive their eſtates. Swift.
Pray outlive me, and then die as ſoon as you pleaſe. Swift.
QUTL1'VEH. n.ſ. [out and live..] A ſurviver.
To Outlook. v. a. [cut and look.] To face down; to
browbeat.
I cull'd theſe fiery ſpirits from the world,
To outlock conqueſt, and to win renown,
Ev’n in the jaws of danger and of death. Shakeſp.
O ºrwºrki. v. a. [out and lu/lre.] To excel in bright-
Ilêſs.
She went before others I have ſecn, as that diamond of
Yours outlºſtres many I have beheld. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
"Tºy ING. part, adj. [out and lie.] Not in the common
courſe of order. Removed from ſomething elſe.
The laſt ſurvey I propoſed of the four out-lying empires,
was that of the Arabians. Temple,
We have taken all the out-Wing parts of the Spaniſh rºo-
"ºrchy, and made impreſſions upon the very heart of it. Addison
99UTMEA'suke. v. a. [cut and meaſure.] To exceed in
meaſure.
The preſent age hath attempted perpetual motions and
**ś, and thoſe revolutions might out-laſt the exemplary
mºbility, and out-meaſure time itſelf. Brown's V. Err.
To Out NU'MBER, v.a. [out and number.] To exceed in
number.
The ladies came in ſo great a body to the opera, that they
outnumbered the enemy. Addiſon's Spediator.
To OutMARCH. v. a. [out and march..] To leave behind
in the march.
The horſe out-marched the foot, which, by reaſon of the
heat, was not able to uſe great expedition. Clarend.
Out Most. adj. [out and mºſt.] Remoteſt from the middle.
Chaos retir’d,
As from her outmoſ' works a broken foe. Milton.
If any man ſuppoſe that it is not reflected by the air, but
by the outmºſ' ſuperficial parts of the glaſs, there is ſtill the
ſame difficulty. Newt. Opt.
The generality of men are readier to fetch a reaſon from
the immenſe diſtance of the ſtarry heavens, and the out-
moſt walls of the world. - Bentley's Sermons.
OUTPA'RISH. n.ſ. [out and pariſh.] Pariſh not lying with-
in the walls.
In the greater outpariſhes many of the poorer pariſhioners,
through neglect, do periſh for want of ſome heedful eye to
overlook them. . Graunt's Mort.
Outpa'RT. m. ſ. [out and part.] Part remote from the cen-
ter or main body.
He is appointed to ſupply the biſhop's juriſdićtion and other
judicial offices in the outparts of his dioceſe. Ayliffe.
To OUTPA’ce. v. a. ſoul and pace.] To outgo; to leave be-
hind.
- Arion's ſpeed
Could not outpace thee; or the horſe Laomedon did breed.
Chapman's Iliads.
To Outpou'R. v. a. [out and power.] To emit; to ſend
forth in a ſtrain.
He looked and ſaw what number, numberleſs
The city gates outpour’d; light arm'd troops
In coats of mail and military pride. Milt. Par. Reg:
To OUTPRI'ze. v. a. [out and prize.] To exceed in the
value ſet upon it.
Either your unparagon'd miſtreſs is dead, or
She's outprized by a trifle. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To OU'TRAGE. v. a. ſoutrager, Fr.] To injure violently or
contumeliouſly; to inſult roughly and tumultuouſly; to en-
dangering life.
Ah heavens ! that do this hideous ačt behold,
And heavenly virgin thus outraged ſee ;
How can the vengeance juſt ſo long withhold ! Fa. 9aeen.
The news put divers young bloods into ſuch a fury, as the
Engliſh embaſſadors were not without peril to be outraged.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Baſe and inſolent minds outrage men, when they have hopes
of doing it without a return. Atterbury.
This interview outrages all decency; ſhe forgets her mo-
deſty, and betrays her virtue, by giving too long an audience.
Pope's Odyſſey, b. vi.
To OUTRAGE. v. m. To commit exorbitancies.
Three or four great ones in court will outrage in apparel,
huge hoſe, monſtrous hats, and gariſh colours. Aſcham.
OU'TRAGE. n. ſ. ſoutrage, Fr.]
1. Open violence; tumultuous miſchief.
He wrought great outrages, waſting all the country where
he went. • Spenſer on Ireland.
He doth himſelf in ſecret ſhrowd,
To fly the vengeance for his outrage due.
In that beaſtly fury
He has been known to commit outrage,
And cheriſh factions. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens,
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And ſhamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd ;
My charity is outrage. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
2. This word ſeems to be uſed by Philips for mere commotion,
without any ill import, contrary to the univerſal uſe of writers.
See with what outrage from the froſty north,
The early valiant Swede draws forth his wings ---
In battailous array. Philips.
OUTRAGIOUS. adj. [outrageux, French. It ſhould, I think,
be written outrageous; but the cuſtom ſeems otherwiſe.]
1. Violent; furious; raging; exorbitant; tumultuous; turbulent.
Under him they committed divers the moſt outragiaiſ: vil-
lanies, that a baſe multitude can imagine. Sidney.
As ſhe went her tongue did walk,
In ſoul reproach and terms of vile deſpight,
Provoking him by her outragious talk, -
To heap more vengeance on that wretched wight. F. Qx.
They view'd the vaſt immeaſurable abyſs, -
Outragious as a ſea, dark, waſteful, wild. Milton.
when he knew his rival freed and gone,
He ſwells with wrath; he makes outragious moan :
He frets, he fumes, he ſtares, he ſtamps the ground;
The hollow tow'r with clamours rings around. Dryde".
- - - 2. Exceſſive ,
Fa. Queen.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 252</div><p class="Text">O U T
O U T.
2. º: gº reaſon or decency.
Characte t
flºº. to t *...". sº though they are
º g of outragious panegyrick.
3. *::::: ; atrocious. Dryden's Dufreſnoy,
hink not, although in writi •
The manner of thy º . . d
O T hat therefore I have forg'd. Shaiſ. Hen, VI.
UTRA Giously. adv, [f - -
º ; furiouſly. [from ourageous.] Violently; tumul-
*P* will have colour of employment given them,
by which they will poll and ſpoil ſo º: º the very
chemy cannot do worſe. Spºnſºr on Ireland.
...Let luſt burn never ſo outragiouſly for the preſent, yet age
will in time chill thoſe heats. outh's Sermons.
****'Siousness. m. ſ. [from outragious.] With fury; with
violence.
.Virgil, more diſcreet than Homer, has contented himſelf
With the partiality of his deities, without bringing them to
the outragiouſneſ of blows. Dryden.
To QuTREA'chi. v. a. ſout and reach.] To go beyond.
This uſage is derived from ſo many deſcents of ages, that
the cauſe and author outreach remembrance. Carew.
Our forefathers could never dream ſo high a crime as par-
ricide, whereas this outreaches that fačt, and exceeds the re-
gular diſtinétions of murder. Brown.
To Our RI DE. v. a. [out and ride.J. To paſs by riding.
This advantage age from youth hath won,
As not to be outridan, though out-run. Dryden.
OuTRI'GHT. adv. [out and right.]
1. Immediately; without delay.
When theſe wretches had the rope about their necks, the
firſt was to be pardoned, the laſt hanged outright. j. Bull.
2. Completely.
By degrees accompliſh’d in the beaſt,
He neigh’d cutright, and all the ſteed expreſt. Addison.
To Out Roa'R. v. a. ſout and roar.] To exceed in roaring.
O that I were
Upon the hºll of Baſan, to outroar
The horned herd I Shakeſ?. Ant. and Cleop.
OUTR o'DE. m. ſ. [out and rode.J Excurſion.
He ſet horſemen and footmen, to the end that iſſuing out,
they might make outrodes upon the ways of Judea.
1 Mac. xv. 41.
To OutRoot. v. a. [out and root.] To extirpate ; to era-
dicate.
Pernicious diſcord ſeems
Outreated from our more than iron age; -
Since none, not ev'n our kings, approach their temples
With any mark of war's deſtructive rage,
But ſacrifice unarm'd. Rowe's Amb. Step-Mather.
To OutRu'N. v. a. [cut and run.]
1. To leave behind in running.
By giving th' houſe of Lancaſter leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end. Shakeſp.
The expedition of my violent love
Outruns the pauſer reaſon.
We may outrun,
By violent ſwiftneſs, that which we run at. Shakeſp.
When things are come to the execution, there is no ſe-
crecy comparable to celerity, like the motion of a bullet in
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
the air, which flieth ſo ſwift as it outruns the eye. Bacon.
This advantage age from youth hath won,
As not to be out-riden, though outrun. Dryden.
2. To exceed.
We outrun the preſent income, as not doubting to reim-
burſe ourſelves out of the profits of ſome future project. Addison
To OUTSAI'll, v. a... [out and ſail.] To leave behind in ſailing.
The word ſignifies a ſhip that outſails other ſhips. Broome.
To Outsco'RN. v. a. [out and ſcorn.) To bear down or con-
front by contempt ; to deſpiſe ; not to mind.
He ſtrives in his little world of man t’ outſ orn
The to and fro conflićting wind and rain. Shakeſp.
To Outseºl. v. a. [out and ſell.]
1. To excecd in the price for which a thing is ſold ; to ſell at a
higher rate than another.
it would ſºon improve to ſuch a height, as to outſºl our
neighbours, and thereby advance the proportion of our ex-
ported commodities. Temple.
2. To gain an higher price. -
Her pretty action did outſel her gift,
And yet enrich'd it too.
To QuTshi'NE. v. a. [out and ſhine.]
1. To emit luſtre.
Witneſs my ſon, now in the ſhade of death;
Whoſe bright outſhining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkneſs folded up. Shakeſp. R. III.
2. To excel in luſtre.
By Shakeſpeare's, Johnſon's, Fletcher's lines,
Our ſtage's luſtre Rome's outſhines. Denham.
Beauty and greatneſs are ſo eminently joined in your royal
highneſs, that it were not eaſy for any but a poet to deter-
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
mine which of them out/hines the other. Dryden.
Homer does not only outſhine all other poets in the variety
but alſo in the novelty of his characters. Addison
We ſhould ſee ſuch as would outſhine the rebellious part
of their fellow-ſubjects, as much in their gallantry as in their
cauſe. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 24.
Such accounts are a tribute due to the memory of thoſe
only, who have outſhone the reſt of the world by their rank
as well as their virtues. 4tterbury's Sermons.
Happy you!
Whoſe charms as far all other nymphs outſhine,
As others gardens are excell'd by thine. Pope.
To Outshoot. v. a. [out and ſhoot.]
1. To exceed in ſhooting.
The forward youth
Will learn to outſhoot you in your proper bow. -
2. To ſhoot beyond. y y Dryden,
Men are reſolved never to outſhoot their forefathers mark :
but write one after another, and ſo the dance goes round i.
a circle. Norris.
Outsi'DE. m. ſ. [out and ſide.]
1. Superficies; ſurface; external part.
What pity that ſo exquiſite an outſide of a head ſhould not
have one grain of ſenſe in it. L'Eſtrange.
The leathern outſide, boiſt'rous as it was,
Gave way and bent. Dryden,
2. Extreme part; part remote from the middle.
Hold an arrow in a flame for the ſpace of ten pulſes, and
when it cometh forth, thoſe parts which were on the outſides
of the flame are blacked and turned into a coal. Bacon.
3. Superficial appearance.
You ſhall find his vanities foreſpent
Were but the outſide of the Roman Brutus,
Covering diſcretion with a coat of folly. Shakeſpeare.
The ornaments of converſation, and the outſide of faſhion-
able manners, will come in their due time. Locke.
Created beings ſee nothing but our outſide, and can there-
fore only frame a judgment of us from our exterior actions.
Addiſon's Speciator, N9. 257.
4. The utmoſt. A barbarous uſe.
Two hundred load upon an acre, they reckon the outſide
of what is to be laid. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
5. Perſon; external man.
Fortune forbid, my outſide have not charm'd her l Shaf.
Your outſide promiſeth as much as can be expected from
a gentleman. Bacon.
What admir'ſt thou, what tranſports thee ſo
An outſide º fair, no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cheriſhing and thy love. Milton's Par. Loft, b. viii.
6. Cuter ſide; part not i.
I threw open the door of my chamber, and found my fa-
mily ſtanding on the outſide. Sped. N°. 577
To Outsi'T. v. a. [out and ſit..] To ſit beyond the time of
any thing.
He that prolongs his meals and ſacrifices his time, as well
as his other conveniences, to his luxury, how quickly does
he outſit his pleaſure ? South.
To Outsleep. v. a. [out and ſleep.] To ſleep beyond.
Lovers, to bed; 'tis almoſt fairy time:
. I fear we ſhall outſkep the coming morn. Shakeſp.
To Outspeak. v. a. [out and ſpeak.] To ſpeak ſomething
beyond; to exceed.
Rich ſtuffs and ornaments of houſhold
I find at ſuch proud rate, that it outſpeaks
Poſſeſſion of a ſubject. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
To Outspo'RT. v. a. [out and ſport.] To ſport beyond.
Let's teach ourſelves that honourable ſtop,
Not to outſport diſcretion. Shakeſp. Othells.
To Outsprea’D. v. a. [out and ſpread..] To extend; to diffuſe.
With ſails outſpread we fly. Pope.
To Outsta‘ND. v. a. [out and ſland.]
1. To ſupport; to reſiſt.
Each could demoliſh the other's work with eaſe enough,
but not a man of them tolerably defend his own; which was
ſure never to outſtand the firſt attack that was made. Woodw.
2. To ſtand beyond the proper time.
I have outſiood my time, which is material
To th’ tender of our preſent. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To Outsta‘Nd. v. n. To protuberate from the main body.
To Outsta‘RE. v. a. [out and /fare.] To face down; to
brow-beat; to outface with effrontery.
I would out/lare the ſterneſt eyes that look,
To win thee, lady. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wenice.
Theſe curtain'd windows, this ſelf-priſon'd eye,
Outſtares the lids of large-lookt tyranny. Craſhaw.
Outstree".T. m. ſ. [out and ſtreet.] Street in the extremities
of a town.
To Outstre'rch. v. a. [out and ſtretch..] To extend ; to
ſpread out.
Make him ſtand upon the mole-hill,
That caught at mountains with out-ſtretched arms. Shakeſp.
Out-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 253</div><p class="Text">O U T
O U T.
Out-ſtretch'd he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
Curs'd his creation. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
A mountain, at whoſe verdant .
acious plain, out-ſtretch'd in circuit wide .
*: #. , outſ? - Milt. Par. Reg. b. iii.
Does Theſeus burn ?
And muſt not ſhe with out-ſtretch'd arms receive him -
And with an equal ardour meet his vows? Smith.
To ou’rstrip. v. a. [This word Skinner derives from out and
ſpritzen, to ſpout, German. I know not whether it might
ot have been originally out-trip, the ſ being afterward in-
ſºrted.] To outgo; to leave behind.
If thou wilt out-ſtrip death, go croſs the ſeas,
And live with Richmond from the reach of hell. Shakespeare
Do not ſmile at me, that I boaſt her off;
For thou ſhalt find, ſhe will out-ſtrip all praiſe,
And make it halt behind her. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Thou both their graces in thyſelf haſt more
Outſtript, than they did all that went before. B. Johnſon.
My ſoul, more earneſtly releas'd,
will outſirip hers; as bullets flown before
A latter bullet may o'ertake, the powder being more. Donne.
A fox may be out-witted, and a hare out-ſtript. L’Eſtran.
He got the ſtart of them in point of obedience, and
thereby ºut-ſlript them at length in point of knowledge. South.
With ſuch array Harpalice beſtrode
Her Thracian courſer, and out-ſirip'd the rapid flood. Dryd.
To Ou'r-sweeten. v. a. [out and ſweeten..] To excel in
ſweetneſs.
The leaf of eglantine, which not to ſlander,
Out-ſweeten’d not thy breath. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To Outswea'R. v. a. [out and ſwear.] To over-power by
ſwearing. -
We ſhall have old ſwearing,
But we'll out-face them, and out-ſwear them too. Shakeſp.
To Out-To'NGUE. v. a. [out and tongue.] To bear down by
noiſe.
Let him do his ſpite:
My ſervices which I have done the ſignory,
Shall out-tongue his complaints. Shakeſp. Othello.
To Outt A'LK. v. a. [out and talk.] To over-power by talk.
This gentleman will out-talk us all. Shakeſpeare.
To Out-va'LUE. v. a. ſout and value.] To tranſcend in price.
He gives us in this life an earneſt of expected joys, that
out-values and tranſcends all thoſe momentary pleaſures it
requires us to forſake. - Boyle.
To Outve'NoM. v. a. [out and venom.] To exceed in poiſon.
'Tis ſlander;
Whoſe edge is ſharper than the ſword, whoſe tongue
Out-venoms all the worms of Nile. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To Outv1'E. v. a. [out and vie.] To exceed; to ſurpaſs.
For folded flocks, on fruitful plains,
Fair Britain all the world outvies. Dryden.
The farmers uſed to make gratias to the Engliſh mer-
chants, endeavouring ſometimes to out-vie one another in
ſuch indulgencies. Addiſon.
One of theſe petty ſovereigns will be ſtill endeavouring
to equal the pomp of greater princes, as well as to out-vie
thoſe of his own rank. Addiſon.
To Out-viſ LLAIN. v. a. [out and villain.] To exceed in
villainy.
He hath out-villain'd villainy ſo far, that the rarity redeems
him. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
To Outvoice. v. a. [out and voice.] To out-roar; to ex-
ceed in clamour.
The Engliſh beach
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,
Whoſe ſhouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth'd ſea. Sha.
To Outvote. v. a. [out and vote.] To conquer by plura-
lity of ſuffrages.
They were out-voted by other ſe&amp;ts of philoſophers, neither
for fame, nor number leſs than themſelves. South.
To Outwalk. [out and walk.] To leave one in walking.
OUTwA'll n.ſ. [out and wall.]
I. Outward part of a building.
2. Superficial appearance.
For confirmation that I am much more
Than my out-wall, open this purſe and take
What it contains. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Outward. adj. [utpeanb, Saxon.]
1. External: oppoſed to inward.
If theſe ſhews be not outward, which of you
But is four Volſcians ? Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Oh what may man within him hide,
Though angel on the outward fide Shakeſp.
He took a low'ring leave; but who can tell
What outward hate might inward love conceal? Dryden.
2. Extrinſick; adventitious.
Princes have their titles for their glories,
An outward honour, for an inward toil. Shakeſp.
Part in peace, and having mourn'd your fin
For outward Eden loſt, find paradiſe within. Dryden,
OU’tward. adv.
To Outwei'oh. v. a. [out and weigh.]
3. Foreign, not inteſtine.
It was intended to raiſe an outward war to join with ſome
ſedition within doors. - Hayward.
4. Tending to the out-parts.
The fire will force its outward way,
Or, in the priſon pent, conſume the prey. Dryden.
5. [In theology.] Carnal; corporeal; not ſpiritual.
When the ſoul being inwardly moved to lift itſelf up by
prayer, the outward man is ſurprized in ſome other poſture;
God will rather look to the inward motions of the mind,
than to the outward form of the body. Duppa.
OU'Twar D. m. ſ. External form.
I do not think
So fair an outward, and ſuch ſtuff within,
Endows a man but him. Shakeſp. Cymbeline:
1. To foreign parts. As a ſhip outward bound.
2. To the outer parts.
Outwar DLY. adv. [from outward.]
1. Externally: oppoſed to inwardly. -
That which inwardly each man ſhould be, the church
outwardly ought to teſtify. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 6.
Griev'd with diſgrace, remaining in their fears:
However ſeeming outwardly content, -
Yet th’ inward touch their wounded honour bears. Daniel.
2. In appearance not ſincerely.
Many wicked men are often touched with ſome inward
reverence for that goodneſs which they cannot be perſuaded
to practiſe ; nay, which they outwardly ſeem to deſpiſe. Sprat.
OU'Twards. adv. Towards the out-parts.
Do not black bodies conceive heat more eaſily from light
than thoſe of other colours do, by reaſon that the light fail-
ing on them is not reflected outwards, but enters the bodies,
and is often reflected and refracted within them until it be
ſtifled and loſt 2 Newton's Opticks.
To OuTweA'R. v. a. [out and wear.] To paſs tediouſly.
Thus ſpent already how ſhall nature bear
By the ſtream, if I the night out-wear,
The dews deſcending and noćturnal air. Pope. ;
To OUTweed. v. a. ſout and weed.] To extirpate as a
P
weed.
Wrath is a fire, and jealouſy a weed ;
The ſparks ſoon quench, the ſpringing weed out-weed,
Spenſ.
1. To exceed in gravity.
Theſe inſtruments require ſo much ſtrength for the ſup-
porting of the weight to be moved, as may be equal unto it,
beſides that other ſuper-added power whereby it is out-weighed
and moved. - Wilkins's Math. Mag.
2. To preponderate; to excel in value or influence.
If any think brave death out-weighs bad life,
Let him expreſs his diſpoſition. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
All your care is for your prince I ſee,
Your truth to him out-weighs your love to me. Dryden.
Whenever he finds the hardſhip of his ſlavery out-weigh
the value of his life, it is in his power, by reſiſting the will
of his maſter, to draw on himſelf the death he deſires. Locke.
The marriage of the clergy is attended with the poverty
of ſome of them, which is balanced and out-weighed by
many ſingle advantages. Atterbury.
To Out we'll. v. a. [out and well.] To pour out.
As when old father Nilus 'gins to ſwell,
With timely pride about the AEgyptian vale,
His fattie waves do fertile ſline out-well,
And overflow each plain and lowly dale.
Fa. Queen.
To OU′twit. v. a. [out and wit..] To cheat; to overcome
by ſtratagem.
A fox may be out-witted, and a hare out-ſtript. L’Eſt.
The truer hearted any man is, the more liable he is to
be impoſed on ; and then the world calls it out-witting a man,
when he is only out-knaved. L’Eſtrange.
Nothing is more equal in juſtice, and indeed more na-
tural in the direct conſequence of effects and cauſes, than
for men wickedly wiſe to out-wit themſelves; and for ſuch
as wreſtle with providence, to trip up their own heels. South.
After the death of Craſſus, Pompey found himſelf out-
witted by Caeſar and broke with him. Dryden.
OU'twoRk. n.ſ. [out and work.] The parts of a fortification
next the enemy. -
Take care of our out-work, the navy royal, which are the
walls of the kingdom ; and every great ſhip is an impregnable
fort; and our many ſafe and commodious ports as the re-
doubts to ſecure them. - Bacon;
Death hath taken in the out-wºº. . . .
And now affails the fort; I feel, I feel him
Gnawing my heart-ſtrings. Denham,
Outwo'RN. part. [from out-wear.] Conſumed or deſtroyed
by uſe. - - - - -
Better at home lie bed-rid, idle,
Inglorious, unemploy'd, with age out-worn. Miltºn,
18 Z To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 254</div><p class="Text">|
O X
O W N
To Ourwrest. v.a. [out and wreſt.] To extort by violence.
The growing angui
Rankled ſo fore .. ; ñº,
U Till that the truth thereof I did surºn. Fa. Queen
TWROU’ - -
ceed ; .." [* and wrought.j Outdone, ex.
In your violent ads
The fall of toº. and the noiſe of tempeſts
The boyling of Carybdis, the ſea's wildneſs, &gt;
B he ºating force of flames, and wings of winds,
O e all *-wrought by your tranſcendent furies. B. johnſ.
° Outwo RTH. v. a. ſºut and warth.] To excel in value.
A beggar's book
Out-worth; a noble's Éood. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
o Owe. *.*. [eg aa, I owe, or I ought, Iſlandick.]
1. To be obliged to pay; to be indebted.
I owe you much, and, like a witheſs youth,
That which I owe is loſt. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wen.
Let none ſeek needleſs cauſes to approve
The faith they owe. Milt. Par. Loſt, b. ix.
All your parts of pious duty done, -
You owe your Ormond nothing but a ſon, Dryden.
Thou haſt deſerv'd more love than I can ſhow,
But 'tis thy fate to give, and mine to owe. Dryden.
If, upon the general balance of trade, Engliſh merchants
owe to foreigners one hundred thouſand pounds, if commo-
dities do not, our money muſt go out to pay it. Locke.
2. To be obliged to aſcribe; to be obliged for.
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fall'n condition is, and to me owe -
All his deliv'rance, and to none but me. Milton.
3. To have from any thing as the conſequence of a cauſe.
O deem thy fall not ow'd to man's decree,
Jove hated Greece, and puniſh'd Grecce in thee. Pope.
4. To poſſeſs; to be the right owner of For ove, which is, in
this ſenſe, obſolete, we now uſe own.
Thou doſt here uſurp
The name thou ow'ſ not, and haſt put thyſelf
Upon this iſland as a ſpy. Shakeſp. Tempºff.
Fate, ſhew thy force; ourſelves we do not owe ;
What is decreed muſt be ; and be this ſo. Shakeſp.
Not poppy nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowſy firups of the world,
Shall ever med'cine thee to that ſweet ſleep
Which thou owed'ſ yeſterday. Shakeſp. Othello.
If any happy eye
This roving wanton ſhall deſcry,
..Let the finder ſurely know
Mine is the wag; 'tis I that owe .
The winged wand'rer. Craſhaw.
5. A pračtice has long prevailed among writers, to uſe owing,
the ačtive participle of owe, in a paſſive ſenſe, for owed or
due. Of this impropriety Bolinbroke was aware, and, having
no quick ſenſe of the force of Engliſh words, has uſed due,
in the ſenſe of conſequence or imputation, which by other
writers is only uſed of debt. We ſay, the money is due to
me; Bolinbroke ſays, the effect is due to the cauſe.
6. Conſequential.
This was owing to an indifference to the pleaſures of life,
and an averſion to the pomps of it. Atterbury.
. Due as a debt.
You are both too bold;
I'll teach you all what's owing to your queen. Dryden.
The debt, owing from one country to the other, cannot
be paid without real effects ſent thither to that value. Locke.
8. Imputable to, as an agent.
If we eſtimate things, what in them is owing to nature,
and what to labour, we ſhall find in moſt of them , 23 to
be on the account of labour. Locke.
The cuſtom of particular impeachments was not limited
any more than that of ſtruggles between nobles and com-
mons, the ruin of Greece was owing to the former, as that
of Rome was to the latter. Swift.
Owl. Un. ſ. [ule, Saxon; hulate, French and Scottiſh.] A
O'WLET. }
Adder's fork, and blind worm's ſting,
Lizard's leg, and owlet's wing
For a charm. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Return to her | - -
No! rather I abjure all roofs, and chuſe
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl. Shakeſp.
'Twas when the dog-ſtar's unpropitious ray
Smote ev'ry brain, and wither'd every bay;
Sick was the ſun, the owl forſook his bow’r. Dunciad.
Owl ER. m. ſ. One who carries contraband goods. Perhaps
from the neceſſity of carrying on an illicit trade by night.
By running goods, theſe graceleſs owlers gain. ... Swift.
We underſtand by ſome owlers, old people die in France.
- Tatler, N°. 56.
OWN. n.ſ.. [axen, Saxon ; eygen, Dutch..] ' -
1. This is a word of no other uſe than as it is added to the
poſſeſſive pronouns, my, thy, his, our, your, their. It ſeems
7
bird that flies about in the night and catches mice.”
to be a ſubſtantive; as, my own, my peculiar: but is, in
reality, the participle paſſive of the verb owe, in the parti-
ciple owen or own: my own; the thing owned by, or belong-
ing to me.
Inachus in his cave alone,
Wept not another's loſſes, but his own. Dryden.
2. It is added generally by way of emphaſis or corroboration.
I yet never was forſworn,
Scarcely have coveted what was my own. Shakeſp.
Every nation made gods of their own, and put them in
high places. 2 Kings xvii. 29.
For my own ſhare one beauty I deſign,
Engage your honours that ſhe ſhall be mine. Dryden.
It is conceit rather than underſtanding, if it muſt be un-
der the reſtraint of receiving and hoſding opinions by the
authority of anything but their own perceived evidence. Locke.
Will ſhe thy linen waſh, or hoſen darn,
And knit thee gloves made of her own ſpun yarn. Gay.
Paſſion and pride were to her ſoul unknown,
Convinc'd that virtue only is our own. Pope.
3. Sometimes it is added to note oppoſition or contradiſtinétion;
domeſtick; not foreign; mine, his, or yours; not another's.
Theſe toils abroad, theſe tumults with his own,
Fell in the revolution of one year. Daniel.
There's nothing fillier than a crafty knave out-witted, and
beaten at his own play. L'Eſtrange.
To Own. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To acknowledge ; to avow for one's own.
When you come, find me out,
And own me for your ſon. Dryden's Cleomenes.
2. To poſſeſs ; to claim ; to hold by right.
Tell me, ye Trojans, for that name you own;
Nor is your courſe upon our coaſts unknown. Dryden.
Others on earth o'er human race preſide,
Of theſe the chief, the care of nations own,
And guard with arms divine the Britiſh throne. Pope.
3. To avow.
I'll venture out alone,
Since you, fair princeſs, my protection own. Dryden.
4. To confeſs; not to deny.
Make this truth ſo evident, that thoſe who are unwilling
to own it may yet be aſhamed to deny it. Tillºtſºn.
Others will ºwn their weakneſs of underſtanding. Locke.
Ow'NER ship. n.ſ.. [from owner.] Property ; rightful poſſeſſion.
In a real action, the proximate cauſe is the property or
ownerſhip of the thing in controverſy. Ayliffe's Par.
O'wN.E.R. n.ſ. [from own.] One to whom anything belongs;
maſter; rightful poſſeſſor.
A bark
Stavs but till her owner comes aboard. Shakespeare .
. it not enough to break into my garden,
Climbing my walls in ſpight of me the owner,
But thou wilt brave me. Shakespeare .
Here ſhew favour, becauſe it happeneth that the owner
hath incurred the forfeiture of eight years profit of his lands,
before he cometh to the knowledge of the proceſs againſt
him. Bacon.
They intend advantage of my labours,
With no ſmall profit daily to my owners. Milton,
Theſe wait the owners laſt deſpair,
And what's permitted to the flames invade. Dryden.
A freehold, though but in ice and ſnow, will make the
owner pleaſed in the poſſeſſion, and ſtout in the defence of it.
Aldſon's Freeholder, Nº. I.
That ſmall muſcle draws the noſe upwards, when it ºx-
preſſes the contempt which the owner of it has upºn ſeeing
any thing he does not like. Addiſon's Spectator.
W. hath not made us inſolent, nor have we taken
advantage to gain any thing beyond the honour of reſtoring
every one's right to their juſt owners. Atterbury.
What is this wit, which muſt our cares employ
The owner's wife, that other men enjoy. - Pope.
Owre. n.ſ. [urus jubatus, Lat..] A beaſt. Ainſworth.
Ox. n.ſ. plur. Oxen. [oxa, Saxon; oxe, Daniſh.]
1. The general name for black cattle.
The black ox hath not trod on his foot. Camden.
Sheep run not half ſo tim’rous from the wolf,
Or horſe or oxen from the leopard, -
As you fly from your oft-ſubdued ſlaves. Shakeſp.
I ſaw the river Clitumnus, celebrated by the poets for
making cattle white that drink of it. The inhabitants of
that country have ſtill the ſame opinion, and have a great
many oxen of a whitiſh colour to confirm them in it. Addison
2. A caſtrated bull.
The horns of oxen and cows are larger than the bulls;
which is cauſed by abundance of moiſture. Bacon.
Although there be naturally more males than females,
yet artificially, that is, by making geldings, oxen and wea-
thers, there are fewer. Graunt.
The field is ſpacious I deſign to ſow, -
With oxen far unfit to draw the plough. Dryden.
Th;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 255</div><p class="Text">O Y E
O Z O
The frowning bull
And ox half-rais'd. Thomſon's Summer.
Oxba'NE. m. ſ. A plant. Ainſworth.
ãºs. m.ſ. (Buphthalmus.] The whole, face of the plant is
iike tanſy; the flowers are radiated, and the moſt part pro-
duced fimply; the flowers of the diſk are ſeparated with an
imbricated little leaf. - Miller.
Oxgang of Land. n.ſ. Twenty acres. Ainſworth.
Oxhe'al. n.ſ. A plant. - Ainſworth.
Öºrly. n.ſ.. [ox and fly.]. A fly of a particular kind.
Öxiºr. n.ſ. The ſame with cowſlip; a vernal flower.
A bank whereon the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlip and the nodding violet grows. Shakeſp.
Oxsta'll. n.ſ. [ox and ſtall.] A ſtand for oxen. ..
Oxtongue. n.ſ. A plant. , Ainſworth.
Öxycrate. n.ſ. ſoºngalow, oxycrat, Fr. ogºs and xsha'w.]
A mixture of water and vinegar. -
Apply a mixture of the ſame powder, with a compreſs
preſt out of oxycrate, and a ſuitable bandage. - Wiſeman.
Oxymel. n. ſ. [3%usa, oś, and ºtal.] A mixture of vi-
negar and honey.
fevers, the aliments preſcribed by Hippocrates, were
ptiſans and decoctions of ſome vegetables, with oxymel or
the mixture of honey and vinegar. Arbuthnot.
Oxymo'RoN. n.ſ.. [oftºpov.] A rhetorical figure, in which
an epithet of a quite contrary ſignification is added to any
word. Dić7.
Oxy"RRhodine. n.ſ. ſoftwºodwov, 330; and dºov.] A mix-
ture of two parts of oil of roſes with one of vinegar of roſes.
The ſpirits, opiates, and cool things, readily compoſe
oxyrrhodines. Floyer on the Humours.
O'yer. n.ſ. [oyer, old French, to hear.] A court of oyer and
terminer, is a judicature where cauſes are heard and deter-
mined.
OYE's. n.ſ. ſoyez, hear ye, French.] Is the introdućtion to
any proclamation or advertiſement given by the publick criers
both in England and Scotland. It is thrice repeated.
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier hobgoblin make the fairy Oye!, Shakeſ,
Q yes / if any happy eye
This roving wanton ºfficky,
Let the finder ſurely know
f Mine is the wag. Craſhaw,
OYLETHøle. a. ſ. See Oyler. [It may be written oylet,
from oeillet, French ; but eylet ſeems better.]
Diſtinguiſh'd flaſhes deck the great,
As each excels in birth or ſtate;
His oyletholes are more and ampler,
The king's own body was a ſamplar. Prior.
O'Yster. n.ſ. [oſter, Dutch ; huitre, Fr.:] A bivalve teſta.
ceous fiſh.
I will not lend thee a penny-
—Why then the world's mine oyſter which
I with ſword will open. Shakeſp. Merr. W. of Wind.
Rich honeſty dwells like your miſer, ſir, in a poor houſe;
as your pearl in your foul oyſter. - Shakeſp.
Another maſs held a kind of oyſter ſhell, and other bivalves.
Woodward on Foſſils.
There may be as many ranks of beings in the inviſible
world ſuperior to us, as we are ſuperior to all the ranks of
being in this viſible world; though we deſcend below the
oyſter to the leaſt animated atoms diſcovered by microſcopes.
Watts's Improv. of the Mind.
Where oyſter tubs in rows 4.
Are rang'd beſide the poſts, there ſtay thy haſte. Gay.
O'Ysterwench. }". [oyſter and wench, or woman.]. A
O'ysterwoman. woman whoſe buſineſs is to ſell oyſters.
Proverbially. A low woman.
Off goes his bonnet to an oyſterwench. Shakeſp.
The oyſterwomen lock'd their fiſh up, -
And trudg'd away to cry no biſhop. Hudibras.
Oz A:"NA. m. ſ. [3 ×iva, from 3% ; ozºne, Fr.] An ulcer in
the inſide of the noſtrils that gives an ill ſtench. Quincy,
