--<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 187</div><p class="Text">D.
D AE D
Is a conſonant nearly approaching in ſound to
T, but formed by a ſtronger appulſe of the tongue
to the upper part of the mouth. The ſound of
D in Engliſh is uniform, and it is never mute.
9 ºf Căşă finij"A term in muſick, which
ſignifying from the head or the beginning, means that the firſt
part of the tune ſhould be repeated at the concluſion.
To DAB. v. a. [dauber, Fr.] To ſtrike gently with ſomething
ſoft or moiſt.
A ſore ſhould never be wiped by drawing a piece of tow
or rag over it, but only by dabbing it with fine lint. Sharp.
A DAB. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſmall lump of any thing.
2. A blow with ſomething moiſt or ſoft.
3. Something moiſt or ſlimy thrown upon one.
4. [In low language.J. An artiſt; a man expert at ſomething.
This is not in writing.
5. A kind of ſmall flat fiſh.
Of flat fiſh there are rays, flowks, dabs, plaice. Carew.
DA B-chick. m. ſ. A chicken newly hatched; a chicken with
its feathers not yet grown.
A dab-chick waddles through the copſe,
On feet and wings, and flies, and wades, and hops. Pope.
To DA'BBLE. v. a. [dabbelen, Dutch..] To ſmear; to daub ;
to ſpatter; to beſprinkle; to wet
- Then came by -
A ſhadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
I ſcarified, and dabbled the wound with oil of turpentine.
Wiſeman's Surgery.
Mean while the South, riſing with dabbled wings,
A ſable cloud athwart the welkin flings. Swift.
To DA'pple. v. m. -
1. To play in water; to move in water or mud.
Neither will a ſpirit, that dwells with ſtars, dabble in this
impurer mud. Glanville's Apology.
The little one complained of her legs, that ſhe could neither
ſwim nor dabble with them. L'Eſtrange.
But when he found the boys at play,
And ſaw them dabbling in their clay,
He ſtood behind a ſtall to lurk,
And mark the progreſs of their work. Swift.
2. To do any thing in a ſlight, ſuperficial, or ſhallow manner;
to tamper.
Shakeſpeare ſhall bear it company, and be put into your
hands, as clear and as fair as it came out of them.; though
you, I think, have been dabbling here and there with the text,
. I have had no more reverence for the writer, and the printer,
and left every thing ſtanding juſt as I found it. Pope.
DABB LeR. m. ſ. [from dabble.]
1. One that plays in water.
2. One that meddles without maſtery; one that never goes to
the bottom of an affair; a ſuperficial meddler. -
He dares not complain of the tooth-ach, left our dabblers in
politicks ſhould be ready to ſwear againſt him for diſ-
affection. Swift's Intelligencer, N°. 9.
DACE. m. ſ. [of uncertain derivation: in moſt provinces called
dare.] A ſmall river fiſh, reſembling a roach, but leſs.
Let me live harmleſsly, and near the brink
Of Trent or Avon have a dwelling place;
Where I may ſee my quill or cork down fink,
With eager bite of pearch, or bleak, or dace. //alton's Ang'.
DA"ct YLE. m. ſ. […, a finger.] A poetical foot conſiſt-
ing of one long ſyllable and two ſhort, like the joints of a
finger ; as candidas.
Dap ºn./. [The child's way of expreſſing father. It is
IJA opy. Ś remarkable, that, in all parts of the world, the
word for father, as firit taught to children, is compounded of
a and t, or the kindred letter d difiercntly placcd; assad, W clſh;
zºº, Greek; atta, Gothick; tºta, Latin. A. animas atque
tatas hat t ºra, Mart. Father.
I was never to bethampt with words,
Since firſt I calid my brºther's father dad. Shakeſp K. john.
His loving mother left him to my care;
Fine child, as like his dad as he could ſale ! Gay.
Dá'p A L. adj. Lacºſalus, Latin.] -
2
-
D A G
1. Various; variegated.
2. Skilful : this is not the true meaning, nor ſhould be imitated.
Nor hath
The dadal hand of nature only pour'd
Her gifts of outward grace. Philips.
f
Bºii, n. ſ. [Suppoſed by Skinner to be cor-
fººpi'ily. § "P" from aſphodelus.
This plant hath a lily-flower, conſiſting of one leaf, which
is bell-ſhaped, and cut into ſix ſegments, which incircle its
middle like a crown; but the empalement, which commonly
riſes out of a membranous vagina, turns to an oblong or
roundiſh fruit, which is triangular, and gapes in three parts;
is divided into three cells, and full of roundiſh ſeeds. Miller.
Strew me the green ground with daffodowndillies,
And cowſlips, and kingcups, and loved lilies. Spenſer.
Bid Amaranthus all his beauty ſhed,
And daffºdillies fill their cups with tears,
To ſtrew the laureate herſe where Lycid lies. Milton.
The daughters of the flood have ſearch'd the mead
For violets pale, and cropp'd the poppy's head:
The ſhort narciſſus, and fair daffodil,
Pancies to pleaſe the fight, and caſfia ſweet to ſmell. Dryden.
To Daft. v. a. [contracted from do oft; that is, to throw
back, to throw off.] To toſs aſide; to put away with con-
tempt; to throw away ſlightly.
Where is his ſon,
The nimble-footed mad-cap prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daft the world aſide,
And bid it paſs Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
I would ſhe had beſtow'd this dotage on me: I would have
daff all other reſpects, and made her half myſelf. Shakeſp.
Dad... n.ſ. [dague, French.]
1. A dagger.
2. A handgun; a piſtol: ſo called from ſerving the purpoſes of
: dagger, being carried ſecretly, and doing miſchief ſud-
enly.
To B. v. a. [from daggle.] To daggle; to bemire; to let
fall in the water: a low word.
DA'GGER. n.ſ. [dague, French.]
1. A ſhort ſword; a poniard.
She ran to her ſon's dagger, and ſtruck herſelf a mortal
wound. Sidney, b. ii.
This ſword a dagger had his page,
That was but little for his age;
And therefore waited on him ſo,
As dwarfs upon knights errant do. Hudibrar, p. i. cant. 1.
He ſtrikes himſelf with his dagger; but being interrupted
by one of his friends, he ſtabs him, and breaks the dagger on
one of his ribs. Addison on Italy.
2. [In fencing ſchools.) A blunt blade of iron with a baſket
hilt, uſed for defence.
3. [With printers J The obelus; a mark of reference in form
of a dagger; as [+].
DA'Goer's DRA wing. n.ſ. [dagger and draw.] The act of
drawing daggers; approach to open violence.
They always are at daggerſdrawing,
And one another clapperclawing. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. z.
I have heard of a quartel in a tavern, where all were at
dagger/drawing, 'till one deſired to know the ſubječt of the
quarrel. Swift.
To DA'GGLE. v. a. [from dag, dew; a word, according to
Mr. Lye, derived from the Daniſh; according to Skinner, from
ba;, ſprinkled, or beazan, to dip. They are probably all of
the ſame root.] To dip negligently in mire or water; to be-
mire; to beſprinkle.
To DAG cle. v. n. To be in the mire; to run through wet
or dirt.
Nor like a puppy, dºggled through the town,
To fetch and carry fing-ſong up and down. Pope's Epiſtles.
DA'GGled Ail. n.ſ.. [dagle and tail.] Bemired; dipped in
the water or mud; beſpattered.
The gentlemen of wit and pleaſure are apt to be choaked
at the fight of ſo many daggedtail parſons, that happen to
fall in their way. Swift.
DA'ILY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 188</div><p class="Text">D A I
D A L
º
DATLY. adj. ſtagic, Saxon.) Happening every day, or
very frequently ; done every day; quotidian. -
Much are we bound to heaven
In daily thanks, that gave us ſuch a prince. Shakespeare H. VIII.
Ceaſe, man of woman born 1 to hope relief
From daily trouble, and continu'd grief.
Da'ily, adv. Every day; very often.
Let that man with better ſenſe adviſe,
That of the world leaſt part to us is read;
And daily how through hardy enterprize,
Many great regions are diſcovered. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
I was ambitious to be acquainted with a man, with whom
I converſed almoſt daily, for years together. Dryd. Wing. Ded.
DA'INTILY. adv. [from dainty.]
1. Elegantly; delicately.
This ſame truth is a naked and open day-light, that doth
not ſhew the maſks and mummeries, and triumphs of the
world, half ſo ſtately and daintily as candle-light. Bacon.
2. Deliciouſly; pleaſantly.
There is no region on earth ſo daintily watered, with ſuch
great navigable rivers. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
Thoſe young ſuiters had been accuſtomed to nothing but to
ſleep well, and fare daintily. Broom's View of Epick Poems.
DA'INT IN Ess. n.ſ.. [from dainty.]
1. Delicacy; ſoftneſs.
What ſhould yet thy palate pleaſe ?
Daintineſ; and ſofter eaſe,
Sleeked limbs, and fineſt blood :
2. Elegance; nicety. -
The duke exceeded in the daintineſs of his leg and foot,
and the earl in the fine ſhape of his hands. //otton.
3. Squeamiſhneſs; faſtidiouſneſs.
Of ſand, and lime, and clay, Vitruvius hath diſcourſed
without any daintineſs. Wotton's Architecture.
DA'INTY. adj. [derived by Skinner from dain, an old French
word for delicate; which yet I cannot find in dićtionaries.]
I. Pleaſing to the palate; of exquiſite taſte; delicious.
They are all over watery; whereas an higher conco&amp;tion is
required for ſweetneſs, or pleaſure of taſte, and therefore all
your dainty plumbs are a little dry. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Delicate; of acute ſenſibility; nice; ſqueamiſh; ſoft; luxu-
rious; tender.
This is the ſloweſt, yet the daintieſ ſenſe;
For ev'n the ears of ſuch as have no ſkill,
Perceive a diſcord, and conceive offence;
And knowing not what's good, yet find the ill.
Prior.
Ben. johnſon's Forg/?.
Davies.
They were a fine and dainty people; frugal and yet elegant,
though not military.
3. Scrupulous; ceremonious.
Which of you all
Will now deny to dance She that makes dainty,
I'll ſwear hath corns. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
- Therefore to horſe;
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
But ſhift away. Shakeſpeare's Macleih.
4. Elegant; tenderly languiſhingly, or effeminately beau-
tiful.
Bacon's Holy War.
My houſe, within the city,
Is richly furniſhed with plate and É.
Baſons and ewers to lave her dainty hands. Shakeſpeare.
Why ſhould ye be ſo cruel to yourſelf,
And to thoſe dainty limbs, which nature lent
. . For gentle uſage, and ſoft delicacy Milton.
5. Nice; affectedly fine: in contempt.
Your dainty ſpeakers have the curſe,
To plead bad cauſes down to worſe. Prior.
DA'INT Y. n.ſ.
1. Something nice or delicate; a delicacy; ſomething of ex-
guiſite taſte.
Be not deſirous of his dainties; for they are deceitful
In eat. Prov, xxiii. 3.
A worm breedeth in meal, of the ſhape of a large white
maggot, which is given as a great dainty to nightingales. Bacon.
She then produc’d her dairy ſtore,
And unbought dainties of the poor. Dryden.
The ſhepherd ſwains, with ſure abundance bleſt,
In the fat flock, and rural dainties, feaſt. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. A word of fondneſs formerly in uſe.
Why, that's my dailty; I ſhall miſs thee: *
But yet thou ſhalt have freedom. Shakeſpeare's Tempſf.
There is a fortune coming
Towards you, dainty, that will take thee thus,
And ſet thee aloft. Hen. johnſon's Catiline.
DAIRY. n.ſ.. [from dey, an old word for milk. Mr. Lye.]
1. The occupation or art of making various kinds of food from
milk.
Grounds were turned much in England from breeding,
either to feeding or dairy; and this advanced the trade of
Engliſh butter, which will be extremely beaten down, when
Ireland turns to it too. Temple.
2. The place where milk is manufactured.
Theſe beauties will ſuſpe&amp;t
That you have no more worth
Than the coarſe and country fairy,
That doth haunt the hearth or dairy. Ben. johnſºn.
What ſtores my dairies and my folds contain
A thouſand lambs that wander on the plain. Dryden's Wirgil.
She in pens his flocks will fold,
And then produce her dairy ſtore. Dryden.
3. º milk farm; ground where milch cattle are
ept.
Dairie, being well houſewived, are exceeding commo-
dious. Bacon's Advice to Pilliers.
Children, in dairy countries, do wax more tall than where
they feed more upon bread and fleſh. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
DA'iry MAID. m. ſ. [dairy and maid.] The woman ſervant
whoſe buſineſs is to manage the milk.
The pooreſt of the ſex have ſtill an itch,
To know their fortunes, equal to the rich :
The dairymaid enquires if ſhe ſhall take
The truſty taylor, and the cook forſake. Dryden's juvenal.
Come up quickly, or we ſhall conclude that thou art in
love with one of fir Roger's dairymaid. Addison's Speciator.
DA'Is Y. n.ſ. [eaegereage, day's eye. Chaucer.] A Spring-
flower.
It hath a perennial root: the ſtalks are naked, and never
branch out: the cup of the flower is ſcaly and ſimple, divided
into many ſegments to the foot-ſtalk. The flowers are ra-
diated; and the heads, after the petals are fallen off, reſemble
obtuſe cones. Miller.
When daiſies pied, and violets blue,
And lady ſmocks all over white,
And cuckow buds of yellow hue,
Do paint the meadows much bedight. Shakeſpeare.
Then fing by turns, by turns the muſes ſing,
Now hawthorns bloſſom, now the daſies ſpring;
Now leaves the trees, and flow’rs adorn the ground:
Begin, the vales ſhall ev’ry note rebound. Pope's String.
This will find thee picking of daiſies, or ſmelling to a lock
of hay. Addiſon's Spečator, N°. 131.
Fair-handed Spring unboſoms every grace;
The daiſy, primroſe, violet, darkly blaze. Thomſon's Spring.
DAle. n.ſ. [dalei, Gothick; dal, Dutch and German.] A low
place between hills; a vale; a valley.
Long toſt with ſtorms, and bet with bitter winds,
High over hills, and low adown the dale,
She wandred many a wood and meaſur'd many a vale.
Fary &amp;ueen, b. i. cant. 7. ſtanz. 28.
Before the downfal of the fairy ſtate
This dale, a pleaſing region, not unbleſt,
This dale poſſeſs'd they, and had ſtill poſſeſs'd.
He ſteals along the lonely dale
In ſilent ſearch. Thomſon's Spring, l. 220.
DA'll IANce. n.ſ.. [from dally.]
1. Interchange of careſſes; ačts of fondneſs.
- Look thou be true: do not give dalliance
Too much the rein: the ſtrongeſt oaths are ſtraw
To th’ fire i' th' blood. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
Nor gentle purpoſe, nor endearing ſmiles
Wanted; nor youthful daliance, as beſeems
Fair couple, link'd in happy nuptial league,
Alone as they. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. iv. l. 332.
I'll head my people;
Then think of dalliance when the danger's o'er:
My warlike ſpirits work now another way,
And my ſoul's tun'd to trumpets. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. Conjugal converſation. - -
The giant, ſelf-diſmayed with the ſound,
Where he with his Dueſla dailiance found,
In haſte came ruſhing forth from inner bow'r. Fairy Queen.
That, not myſtick, where the ſapient king.
Held dalliance with his fair Fgyptian ſpouſe. Mili. Par, Lºſt.
Since thou claim'ſt me for thy fire,
And my fair ſon here ſhow'ſt me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in heav'n, and joys
Then ſweet, now ſad to mention. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
3. Dºg procraſtination.
ay, come, I pray you, fir, give me the chain;
Both wind and tide ſtay for this gentleman;
And I, to blame, have held him here too long-
—Good lord, you uſe this dalliance to excuſe
Your breach of promiſe. Shakeſp. Comedy of Erreurs.
DA'llie R. n.ſ.. [from dally..] A trifler; a fondler.
The daily dalliers with pleaſant words, with ſmiling coun-
tenances, and with wagers, purpoſed to be loſt, before they
were purpoſed to be made. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
DA'llop. n.ſ. [of unknown etymology.] A tuft, or clump.
Of barley the fineſt and greeneſt ye find,
Leave ſtanding in dallops 'till time ye do bind. Tuſſºr.
To DA'LLY. v. n. [dolen, Dutch, to trifle.]
1. To trifle; to play the fool; to amuſe one's ſelf with idle
play; to loſe time in trifles.
Take up thy maſter:
Tickell.
If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 189</div><p class="Text">D A M
D A M
If thou ſhouldſt dally half an hour, his life,
With thine, and all that offer to defend him, ...
Stand in aſſured loſs. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
He left his cur, and laying hold
Upon his arms, with courage bold
Cried out, 'tis now no time to daly, -
The enemy begin to rally: Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
We have trifled too long already: it is madneſs to dally any
longer, when our ſouls are at flake. (aſany's Sº moº.
Öne hundred thouſand pounds muſt be raiſed; for there is
no dallying with hunger. Swift.
2. To exchange careſſes; to play the wanton; to fondle.
He is not lolling on a lewd love bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dalying with a brace of courtezans,
But meditating with two deep divines. Shakeſp. Rih. III.
3. To ſport; to play; to frolick.
She her airie buildeth in the cedar's top,
And dallies with the wind, and ſcorns the ſun. Shakespeare R. III.
4. To delay.
They that would not be reformed by that correction,
wherein he dallied with them, ſhall feel a judgment worthy
of God. // iſd. xii. 26.
To D'A'll Y. v. a. To put off; to delay; to amuſe ’till a pro-
per opportunity.
He fully ſet down, after his wonted manner, to perform
ſervice; not by the hazard of one ſet battle, but by day-
ing off the time with often ſkirmiſhes. Knolles's Hiſtory.
DAM. n.ſ.. [from dame, which formerly ſignified mother. Had
Nero never been an emperour, ſhude never his dame have be
ſlaine. Chau er.]
1. The mother: uſed of beaſts, or other animals not human.
The dam runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmleſs young one went,
And can do nought but wail her darling loſs. Shakespeare H. VI.
Mother, ſays a . kite, give over lamentations, and let
me have your prayers: alas, my child, ſays the dam, which
of the gods ſhall I go to ? L'Eſtrange, Fab. 17.
They bring but one merſel of meat at a time, and have
not fewer, it may be, than ſeven or eight young in the neſt
together, which, at the return of their dams, do all at once,
with equal greedineſs, hold up their heads and gape. Ray.
2. A human mother: in contempt or deteſtation.
This brat is none of mine;
It is the iſſue of Polixena:
Hence with it, and, together with the dam,
Commit them to the fire. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
DAM. m. ſ. [dam, Dutch..] A mole or bank to confine water.
As when the ſea breaks o'er its bounds,
And overflows the level grounds,
Thoſe banks and dams, that like a ſkreen
Did keep it out, now keep it in. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. z.
Not with ſo fierce a rage the foaming flood
Roars, when he finds his rapid courſe withſtood;
Bears down the dams with unreſiſted ſway,
And ſweeps the cattle and the cots away. Dryden's Aeneis.
Let looſe the reins to all your wat'ry ſtore,
Bear down the dam', and open every door. Dryden.
The inſide of the dam muſt be very ſmooth and ſtreight;
and if it is made very ſloping on each ſide, it is the better.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
To DAM. v. a. [bemman, Fonebemman, Saxon; dammen, Dut.]
1. To confine, or ſhut up water by moles or dams.
I'll have the current in this place damm’d up;
And here the ſmug and filver Trent ſhall run
In a new channel, fair and evenly. Shakespeare Hen. VI. p. ii.
Home I would go,
But that my doors are hateful to my eyes,
Fill'd and damm’d up with gaping cº,
Watchful as fowlers when their game will ſpring. Otway.
Boggy lands are fed by ſprings, pent by a weight of earth,
that dams in the water, and cauſes it to ſpread in the ground,
ſo far as the earth is ſoft. A ſortimer's Husbandry.
'Tis you muſt drive that trouble from your ſoul;
As ſtreams, when damm’d, forget their ancient current,
And wond'ring at their banks in other channels flow. Smith.
2. It is uſed by Shakeſpeare of fire, and by Milton of light.
The more thou damm/t it up, the more it burns. Shakeſp.
Moon l if your influence be quite damm'd up
With black uſurping miſts, ſome gentle taper,
Though a ruſh-candle from the wicker hole
Of ſome clay habitation, viſit us
With thy long levelſ'd rule of ſtreaming light. Milton.
DAMAGE. n: ſ donage, French.)
1. Miſchief; hurt; detriment.
Groſs errours and abſurdities many commit for want of a
friend to tell them of them, to the great damage both of their
fame and fortune. Bacºn, Eſſay 28.
Such as were either ſent from thence, or raiſed here, did
commonly do more hurt and damage to the Engliſh ſubječts
than to the Iriſh enemies, by their continual ſeſs and extor-
tion. - Davies on Ireland.
He repulſed the enemy very much to their damage. Car end.
2. Loſs; miſchief ſuffered.
His heart exalts him in the harn
Already done, to have diſpcopied heav'n,
My damage fondly deem d! Milton's Paradje 1 g/?, b. vii.
3. The value of miſchief done.
They believed that they were not able, tho;:gh they
ſhould be willing to ſell all they have in Ireland, to pay the
damages which had been ſuſtained by the war. Clarensºr.
4. Reparation of damage; retribution.
The biſhop demanded reſtitution of the ſpoils taken by the
Scots, or damages for the ſame. Bacon's Henry VII.
Tell me whether, upon exhibiting the ſeveral particulars
which I have related to you, I may not ſue her for damages in
a court of juſtice? addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 97.
5. [In law.] Any hurt or hindrance that a man taketh in his
citate. In the common law it particularly ſignifies a part of
what the jurors be to inquire of ; for, after verdict given of
the principal cauſe, they are likewiſe aſked their conſciences
touching coſts, which are the charges of ſuit, and damages,
which contain the hindrance which the plaintiff or demandant
hath ſuffered, by means of the wrong done him by the de-
fendant or tenant. Cowel.
When the judge had awarded due damages to a perſon, into
whoſe field a neighbour's oxen had brºke, it is reported that
he reverſed his own ſentence, when he heard tº at the oxen,
which had done this miſchief, were his own. It atti's Lºgick.
To Da'MAGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To miſchief; to in-
jure; to impair; to hurt; to harm.
I conſider time as an immenſe ocean, into which many
noble authors are entirely ſwallowed up, many very much
ſhattered and damaged, ſome quite disjointed and broken into
pieces. Addison's Sp &amp;latºr. Nº. 223.
To Da'Mac F. v. m. To take damage, or be damaged.
DAMAGE a ble. adj. [from damage.
1. Suſceptible of hurt; as, damageable goods.
2. Miſchievous ; pernicious.
Obſcene and immodeſt talk is offenſive to the purity of
God, damageable and infectious to the innocence of our neigh-
bours, and moſt pernicious to ourſelves. Governm. of the Tongue.
DAM Asch NE. n.ſ. [damaſcenus, from Damaſcus...] A ſmall
black plum; a Damſon, as it is now ſpoken.
In April follow the cherry tree in bloſſom, the damaſene
and plum trees in bloſſom, and the white thorn in leaf. Bacon.
In fruits the white commonly is meaner, as in pcar plums
and damaſcenes; and the choiceſt plums are black. Bacon.
DAMASK. n.ſ...[damaſquin, French; damaſchino, Ital from
Damaſcus.]
1. Linen or filk woven in a manner invented at Damaſus, by
which part riſes above the reſt in flowers, or other forms.
Wipe your ſhoes, for want of a clout, with a damaſk nap-
kin. Swift's Rules to Servants.
2. It is uſed for red colour in Fairfax, from the damask roſe.
And for ſome deale perplexed was her ſpirit;
Her damaſ late, now chang'd to pureſt white. Fairfax, b. ii.
To DA'MAs K. v a...[from the noun.]
1. To form flowers upon ſtuffs.
2. To variegate; to diverſify.
Around him dance the roſy hours,
And damaſking the ground with flow’rs,
With ambient ſweets perfume the morn. Fenton.
. To adorn ſteel-work with figures.
AM Ask-PLUM. See PLUM.
DAM Ask Rose. n.ſ. The roſe of Damaſcus; a red roſe.
See Rºse.
Damaſk-roſes have not been known in England above one
hundred years, and now are ſo common. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
No gradual bloom is wanting from the bud,
Nor broad carnations, nor gay ſpotted pinks,
Nor, ſhower'd from every buſh, the damaſk-rºſ. Tºomſºn.
Da'M Ask FN IN G. m. ſ. [from damaſquiner, Fr J. The art or act
of adorning iron or ſteel, by making inciſions, and filling them
up with gold or ſilver wire: uſed in enriching the blades of
ſwords, and locks of piſtols. Chambers,
DAME. m.ſ. [dame, French; dama, Spaniſh.]
1. A lady; the title of honour to women.
The word dame originally ſignified a miſtreſs of a family,
•who was a lady; and it is uſed ſtill in the Engliſh law to fig-
nify a lady : but in common uſe, now-a-days, it repreſents a
farmer's wife, or a miſtreſs of a family of the lower rank in
the country. - 1%att's Logick,
Bleſs you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
Though in your ſtate of honour I am perfect:
If you will take a homely man's advice,
Be not found here. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
. Not all theſe lords do vex me half ſo much
As that proud dare, the lord protector's wife. Shaº. H. VI.
Shut your mouth, dang,
Or with this paper I ſhall ſtop it;
Thou worſe than any thing. Shakºſca 's King lear.
Sov’reign of creatures, univerſal dame ' Aſit. Par. Loyº.
2. It is ſtill uſed in poetry for women of rank.
His
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 190</div><p class="Text">D A M
D A M
His father Faunus: a Laurentian dame . . .
His mother, fair Marica was her name. Dryden's Aneid.
Who would not repeat that bliſs,
And frequent ſight of ſuch a dame
Buy with the hazard of his fame? Waller.
3. Miſtreſs of a low family.
They killed the poor cock; for, ſay they, if it were not
for his waking our dame, ſhe would not wake us. L'Eſtrange;
4. Woman in general.
We've willing dames enough; there cannot be
That vulture in you to devour ſo many,
As will to greatneſs dedicate themſelves,
Finding it ſo inclin'd. Shałºffeare's Macleth.
DAMES-viol. ET. m. ſ.
The flower of this plant, called alſo queen's gillyflower,
conſiſts, for the moſt part, of four leaves, which expand in
form of a croſs: out of the flower-cup ariſes the pointal,
which becomes a long, taper, cylindrical pod, divided
into two cells by an intermediate partition, to which the im-
bricated valves adhere on both ſides, and are furniſhed with
oblong, cylindrical, or globular ſeeds. Miller.
To DAVIN. v. a. [damno, Latin.]
1. To doom to eternal torments in a future ſtate.
Not in the legions
Of horrid hell, can come a devil more damn'd
In evils to top Macbeth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
It is moſt neceſſary, that the church, by doctrine and de-
cree, do damn and ſend to hell for ever thoſe facts and opi-
nions. Bacon, Eſſay 3.
2. To procure or cauſe to be eternally condemned.
That which he continues ignorant of, having done the ut-
moſt lying in his power, that he might not be ignorant of it,
{hall not damn him. South's Sermons.
3. To condemn.
His own impartial thought :
Will damn, and conſcience will record the fault. Dryd.juv.
4. To hoot or hiſs any publick performance; to explode.
They damn themſelves, nor will my muſe deſcend
To clap with ſuch who fools and knaves commend. Dryden.
For the great dons of wit,
Phoebus gives them full privilege alone
To damn all others, and cry up their own. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
You are ſo good a critick, that it is the greateſt happineſs
of the modern poets that you do not hear their works; and
next, that you are not ſo arrant a critick as to damn them,
like the reſt, without hearing. Pope.
DA'MNABLE. adj. [from damn.]
1. Deſerving damnation; juſtly doomed to never-ending puniſh-
Inent.
It gives him occaſion of labouring with greater earneſt-
neſs elſewhere, to entangle unwary minds with the ſnares of
his damnable opinion. Hooker, b. 5: ſeei. 42.
He's a creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
And, to tranſport him in the mind he is,
Were damnable. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
As he does not reckon every ſchiſm of a damnable nature,
ſo he is far from cloſing with the new opinion of thoſe who
make it no crime. Swift.
2. It is ſometimes indecently uſed in a low and ludicrous ſenſe;
odious ; pernicious.
Oh thou damnable fellow ! did not I pluck thee by the noſe
for thy ſpeeches Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
DA'MNABLY. adv. [from damnable.]
1. In ſuch a manner as to incur eternal puniſhment; ſo as to be
excluded from mercy.
We will propoſe the queſtion, whether thoſe who hold the
fundamentals of faith may deny Chriſt damnably, in reſpect of
thoſe conſequences that ariſe from them South's Sermons.
2. It is indecently uſed in a ludicrous ſenſe; odiouſly; hatefully.
The more ſweets they beſtowed upon them, the more
damnably their conſerves ſtunk. Dennis.
DAMNA'tion. n.ſ.. [from damn.] Excluſion from divine
mercy; condemnation to eternal puniſhment.
He that hath been affrighted with the fears of hell, or re-
members how often he hath been ſpared from an horrible
damnation, will not be ready to ſtrangle his brother for a
trifle. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
Now mince the ſin,
And mollify damnation with a phraſe:
Say you conſented not to Sancho's death,
But barely not forbade it. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Da'MNATORY. adj. [from damnatorius.] Containing a ſentence
of condemnation.
DA'MNED, part. adj. [from damn.] Hateful; deteſtable; ab-
horred; abominable.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damned inceſt. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
But, oh, what dammed minutes tells he o'er,
Who'doats, yet doubts; ſuſpects, yet ſtrongly loves. Shakespeare
Dare not
To brand the ſpotleſs virtue of my prince
V With failhoods of moſt baſe and dam’d contrivance. Rowe.
ol. I.
DA'MNIFIc. adj. [from damniſy..] Procuring loſs; hiſ
chievous.
To DA'MNIFY. v. a. [from damnifico, Latin.]
1. To endamage; to injure; to cauſe loſs to any.
He, who has ſuffered the damage, has a right to demand in
his own name, and he alone can remit ſatisfaction: the dam-
mified perſon has the power of appropriating the goods or fer-
vice of the offender, by right of ſelf-preſervation. Locke.
2. To hurt; to impair.
When now he ſaw himſelf ſo freſhly rear,
As if late fight had nought him damniſy'd, -
He was diſmay’d, and 'gan his ate to fear. Fairy Queen.
DA'MNING NEss. n.ſ.. [from damning.] Tendency to procure
damnation.
He may vow never to return to thoſe ſins which he hath
had ſuch experience of, for the emptineſs and dammingneſs of
them, and ſo think himſelf a complete penitent. Hammond,
DAMP. adj. [dampe, Dutch.". º
I. Moiſt; inclining to wet, lot completely dry; foggy.
She ſaid no more: the trembling Trojans hear,
O'erſpread with a damp ſweat and holy fear. Dryden's Án,
2. Dejećted; ſunk; depreſſed. , -
All theſe and more came flocking, but with looks
Downcaſt and damp; yet ſuch wherein appear'd
Obſcure ſome glimpſe of joy. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b, li
A DAMP. m. ſ. -
I. Fog; moiſt air; moiſture.
Thus Adam to himſelf lamented loud,
Through the ſtill night; not now, as ere man fell,
Wholſom and cool, and mild ; but with black air
Accompany'd, with damps and dreadful gloom. Milt. P. L.
A rift there was, which from the mountain's height
Convey’d a glimmering and malignant light,
A breathing-place to draw the damps away,
A twilight of an intercepted day.
2. A noxious vapour exhaled from the earth.
The heat of the ſun in the hotter ſeaſons, penetrating the
exterior parts of the earth, excites thoſe mineral exhalations
in ſubterraneous caverns, which are called damps: theſe ſel-
dom happen but in the ſummer-time, when the hotter the
weather is, the more frequent are the damps. Woodward.
3. Dejećtion; depreſſion of ſpirit; cloud of the mind.
Adam, by this from the cold ſudden damp
Recov'ring, and his ſcatter'd ſpirits return'd,
To Michael thus his humble words addreſs'd. Milt. P. Lºft.
His name ſtruck ev'ry where ſo great a damp,
As Archimedes through the Roman camp. Roſcommon.
Even now, while thus I ſtand bleſt in thy preſence,
A ſecret damp of grief comes o'er my thoughts. Addison Cata.
An eternal ſtate, he knows and confeſſes that he has made
no proviſion for, that he is undone for ever; a proſpect
which is enough to caſt a damp over his ſprightlieſt hours.
- Rogers, Sermon, 19.
This commendable reſentment againſt me, ſtrikes a damp
upon that ſpirit in all ranks and corporations of men. Swift.
To DAMP. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To wet; to moiſten; to make humid.
2. To depreſs; to deject; to chill. -
The very loſs of one pleaſure is enough to damp the reliſh
of another. L’Eſtrange, Fable 38.
Dread of death hangs over the mere natural man, and,
like the hand-writing on the wall, damps all his jollity. Atterb.
It would be enough to damp their warmth in ſuch purſuits,
if they could once reflect, that in ſuch courſe they will be ſure
to run upon the very rock they mean to avoid. Swift.
3. To weaken; to abandon.
A ſoft body dampeth the ſound much more than a hard.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 158.
Dryden's Falles.
Unleſs an age too late, or cold *
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing . -
Depreſs'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix.
DAMPish Ness. n.ſ.. [from damp.] Tendency to wetneſs;
foggineſs; moiſture. - -
It hath been uſed by ſome with great ſucceſs to make their
walls thick; and to put a lay of chalk between the bricks, to
take away all dampiſhneſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 937.
DA'MP'Ness. n. ſ. [from damp.] Moiſture; foggineſs.
Nor need they fear the dampneſs of the ſky
Should flag their wings, and hinder them to fly;
'Twas only water thrown on ſails too dry. Dryden.
By ſtacks they often have very great loſs, by the dampneſ of
the ground, which rots and ſpoils it. Mortimer's Husbandry.
DA'MFY. adj. [from damp.] Dejected; gloomy; ſorrowful.
The lords did diſpel damfy thoughts, which the remem-
brance of his uncle might raiſe, by applying him with exer-
ciſes and diſports. Hayward.
DA'MSE i... n.ſ. [damciſelle, French.] • r * * *
1. A young gentlewoman; a young woman of diſtinétion: now
only uſed in verſe.
Kneeling, I my ſervant's ſmiles implore,
And one mad damſel dares diſpute my pow'r, Prior.
2. An attendant of the better rank. -
6 G - With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 191</div><p class="Text">e
ID A N
With her train of damſel; ſhe was gone
In ſhady walks, the ſcorching heat to ſhun. Dryden's Falles.
3. A wench; a country laſs. -
The clowns are whoremaſters, and the damſ's with child.
Gay's Prface to //hat d'ye call it.
DA'Mson. m. ſ [corruptly from daniaſcene..] A ſmall black
plum. See DA at Ascen E.
My wife deſir'd ſome damSpenser,
And made me climb with danger of my life. Shakespeare H. VI.
DAN. n.f. [from dominus, as now don in Spaniſh, and donna,
Italian, from domina.] The old term of honour for men; as
we now ſay mafter.
This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
This ſignor Junio's giant dwarf, dan Cupid. Shakeſpeare.
Dick, if this ſtory pleaſeth thee,
Pray thank dan Pope, who told it me. Prior”; Alma.
To DANCE. v. m. [damſer, Fr. dangar, Span as ſome think
from tanza, Arabick, a dance; as junius, who loves to derive
from Greek, thinks, from 32%-3.J -
1. To move in meaſure; to mdve with ſteps correſpondent to
the ſound of inſtruments. '
What ſay you to young Mr Fenton He capers, he dances,
he has eyes of youth, he writes verſes. Shakesp. Mer. If... of Windſ.
To DANCE Attendance. v. a. To wait with ſuppleneſs and
obſequiouſneſs.
Men are ſooner weary to dance attendance at the gates of
foreign lords, than to tarry the good leiſure of their own ma-
giſtrates. Raleigh's Eſſays.
It upbraids you
To let your father's friend, for three long months,
Thus dance attendance for a word of audience. Dryd Clom.
To DANCE. v. a. -
1. To make to dance; to put into a lively motion. •
Thy grandſire lov'd thee well;
Many a time he danc'd thee on his knee. Shakespeare. Tit. Andron.
That I ſee thee here,
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt’ heart,
Than when I firſt my wedded miſtreſs ſaw
Beſtride my threſhold. Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
In peſtilences the malignity of the infecting vapour danceth
the principal ſpirits. Bacon's Natural Hiſ ry, Nº. 333.
DANCE. m. ſ. [from the verb..] A motion of one or many in
concert, regulated by muſick.
Our dance of cuſtom, round about the oak of Herne the
hunter. + Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of IPindſor.
The honourableſt part of talk is to give the occaſion, and
again to moderate and paſs to ſomewhat elſe; for then a man
leads the dance. - Bacon, Eſſay 33.
But you perhaps expe&amp;t a modiſh feaſt,
With am’rous ſongs and wanton dances grae'd. Dryd.juv.
DA'Nce R. m. ſ. [from dance.] One that practiſes the art of
dancing.
He at Philippi kept
His ſword e'en like a dancer, while I ſtrook
. The lean and wrinkled Caſſius. Shakeſp Ant. and Cleopatra.
Muſicians and dancers / take ſome truce,
With theſe your pleaſing labours; for great uſe
As much wearineſs as perfeótion brings. Donne.
The earl was ſo far from being a good dancer, that he was
no graceful goer. * J/otton.
It is a uſual pračtice in theſe times for our funambulours,
- or dancers on the rope, to attempt ſomewhat like to flying.
- Wilkins's Math. Alagic.
He, perfeót dancerſ climbs the rope,
And balances your fear and hope. Prior.
Nature, I thought, perform'd too mean a part,
Forming her movements to the rules of art;
And, vex'd, I found that the muſician's hand
Had o'er the dancer's mind too great command. Prior.
DANCINGMASTER. m. ſ [dance and maſter.] One who teaches
the art of dancing
The apes were taught their ape's tricks by a dancingmaſter.
L'Eſtrange.
The legs of a dancingmaſter, and the fingers of a muſician,
fall, as it were, naturally, without thought or pains, into re-
gular and admirable motions. Lºcke on Underſtanding, feef. 4.
DA'NciNgschool. n.ſ. [dancing and ſchool.] The ſchool
where the art of dancing is taught.
They bid us to the Engliſh dancingſchools,
And teach lavolta's high, and ſwift couranto's ;
Saying our grace is only in our heels. Shakespeare. Henry V.
. A certain Egyptian king endowed a dancingſchool for the
inſtitution of apes of quality. L'Eſtrange.
Pºros. n ſ [dent de lion, French.] The name of a
plant.
It agrees in all reſpects with the hawkweed, but only in
its having a ſingle naked ſtalk, with one flower upon the
top. 44iller.
For cowſlips ſweet, let dande ions ſpread;
For 3!ouzelinda, blithſome maid, is dead Gay's Paſtoral.
DA'NDIP. Ar. a.ſ. (daudiw, French..] A little fellow; an
- 2
urchin: a word uſed ſometimes in fondneſs, ſometimes in
contempt.
To DANDLE. v. a. [dandelen, Dutch.]
1. To ſhake a child on the knee, or in the hands, to pleaſe and
quiet him.
Then ſhall ye ſuck, and ſhall be born upon her ſides, and
be dandled upon her knees. Iſ, lxvi. 12.
Thy little brethren, which, like fairy ſprights,
Oft ſkip into our chamber thoſe ſwect nights,
And, kiſs'd and damd’d on thy father's knee, -
Were brib'd next day to tell what they did ſee. Dºnme.
Courts are but ſuperficial ſchools to dande fools. Jºotion.
Sporting the lion ramp'd, and in his paw
Dandled the kid. 4Milton's Pa'aºiſe Loſt, h. iv. l. 344.
Motion occaſions ſleep, as we find by the common uſe of
rocking froward children in cradles, or danding them in their
nurſes arms Temple.
2. To fondle; to treat like a child.
Their child ſhall be advanc'd,
And be received for the emp'ror's heir ;
And let the emperor dandle him for his own. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
They have put me in a ſilk gown, and a gaudy fool's cap;
and I am aſhamed to be dandled thus, and cannot look in the
glaſs without bluſhing, to ſee myſelf turned into ſuch a little
pretty maſter. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 13.
3. To delay; to procraſtinate; to protract by trifles.
Captains do ſo dandle their doings, and dally in the ſervice
to them committed, as if they would not have the enemy
ſubdued. Spenser on Ireland.
DA'Ndle R. m. ſ. [from dande..] He that dandies or fondles
children.
DA'NDRUFF. m. ſ. ſoften written dendriff, from can, the itch,
and brop, ſordid, filthy..] Scabs in the head; ſcurf at the
roots of the hair.
DA'NEwok T. m. ſ. A ſpecies of elder; called alſo dwarf-elder,
or wallwort.
DANGER. n.ſ [danger, Fr. of uncertain derivation. Skinner
derives it from damnum, Menage from anga, ia, Minſhew from
3x3-, death, to which junius ſeems inclined.] Ruſque;
hazard; peril.
They that ſail on the ſea, tell of the danger. Ecclus. xliii. 24.
Our craft is in danger to be ſet at nought. Aéis, x. 27.
I dare pawn down my life for him, that he hath writ this
to feel my affection to your honour, and to no other pretence
of danger. Shakespeare's King Lear.
More danger now from man alone we find,
Than from the rocks, the billows, and the wind. Waller.
To DA'NGER. v. a. [from the noun..] To put in hazard; to
endanger.
Pompey's ſon ſtands up
For the main ſoldier; whoſe quality going on,
The ſides o' th' world may danger. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopat.
DA'NGER less, adj. [from danger.] Without hazard; with-
out riſque; exempt from danger. º
He ſhewed no leſs magnanimity in dangerleſ deſpiſing, than
others in dangerous affecting the multiplying of kingdoms. Sid.
DA'NGERous. adj. [from danger.] Hazardous; perillous; full
of danger.
A man of an ill tongue is dangerous in his city. Ecclus. ix.
All men counſel me to take away thy life, likely to bring
forth nothing but dangerous and wicked effects. Sidney, b. ii.
Already we have conquer'd half the war,
And the leſs dangerous part is left behind. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
Da'NGERously. adv. [from dangerous.] Hazardouſly; peril-
louſly; with danger.
But for your ſon, believe it, oh, believe it,
Moſt dang'rouſly you have with him prevail'd,
If not moſt mortal to him. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
A ſort of naughty perſons
Have pračtis'd dangerouſly againſt your ſtate,
Dealing with witches and with conjurers. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
It is juſt with God to permit thoſe, which think they ſtand
ſo ſurely, to fall moſt dangerouſly. Hammond on Fundamentals.
Plutarch ſays Telefilla, a noble lady, being dangerouſly ſick,
was by the oracle adviſed to apply her mind to the muſe and
poetry. Peacham on Poetry.
If it were ſo; which but to think were pride,
My conſtant love would dangerouſly be tried. Dryden.
DA'NG E Rous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from dangerous.] Danger; hazard;
eril.
p I ſhall not need to mind you of judging of the dangerouſneſs
of diſeaſes, by the nobleneſs of that part affected. Boyle.
To DANGLE. v. n. [from hang, according to Skinner; as
hang, hangle dangle.] To hang looſe and quivering.
Go, bind thou up yond dangling apricocks. Shakespeare R. II.
He'd rather on a gibbet dangle,
Than miſs his dear delight to wrangle. Hudibras, p. iii.
Codrus had but one leg; ſo ſhort to boot,
That his ſhort wife's ſhort legs hung danging out. Dryden.
With dangling hands he ſtrokes th’ imperial robe,
And with a cuckold's air commands the globe. sº
lit
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 192</div><p class="Text">D A R
D A R
But have you not with thought beheld
The ſword hang dangling o'er the ſhield. • Prior.
2. To hang upon any one; to be an humble, uſeleſs, harmleſs
follower.
The preſbyterians, and other fanaticks that dangle after
them, are well inclined to pull down the preſent eſtabliſh.
ment. Swift.
DA'NGLE.R. m. ſ. [from dangle.] A man that hangs about wo-
men only to waſte time.
A dangler is of neither ſex. Raph's Miſtel.
DANK. adj. [from tuncken, Germ. Skinner.] Damp; humid;
moiſt; wet. -
He her the maiden ſleeping ſound,
On the dank and dirty ground, Shakespeare Midſ. Night's Dream.
Yet oft they quit
The dank, and, riſing on ſtiff pinions, tour
The mid aereal sky. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii. l. 440.
Through each thicket, dank or dry,
Like a black miſt, low creeping, he held on
His midnight ſearch. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix. l. 179.
Lawrence, of virtuous father, virtuous ſon,
Now that the fields are dank, and ways are mire,
Where ſhall we ſometimes meet, and by the fire
Help waſte a ſullen day ? Milton's Paradiſe Regained.
By the ruſhy-fringed bank,
Where grows the willow and the oſier dank,
My ſliding chariot ſtays.
- Me, in my vow'd
Pićture, the ſacred wall declarest' have hung
My dank and dropping weeds
To the ſtern god of ſea. - Milton.
To waſh the ſkins of beaſts and fowls herewith, would
keep them from growing dank in moiſt weather.
DA'NKIs H. adj. Somewhat dank.
They bound me, bore me thence,
And in a dark and dankiſh vault at home,
There left me. Shakeſpeare's Comedy of Errours.
To DAP. v. n. [corrupted from dip.] To let fall gently into
the water: a word, I believe, only uſed by anglers.
I have taught him how to catch a chub, by dapping with a
graſshopper. Walton's Angler.
DAPA'tic AL. adj. [from dapaticus, Latin.] Sumptuous in
cheer. Bailey.
DAPPER. adj. [dapper, Dutch..] Little and ačtive; lively
without bulk. It is uſually ſpoken in contempt.
And on the tawny ſands and ſhelves,
Trip the pert fairies and the dapper elves. Milton.
A pert dapper ſpark of a magpye, fancied the birds would
never be governed ’till himſelf ſhould ſit at the helm. L’Eſtr.
DA'PPERLING.. n.ſ.. [from dapper.] A dwarf; a dandi-
prat. Ainſworth.
DAPPLE. adj. [from apple; as pommel.] Marked with
various colours; variegated; ſtreaked; imbricated: it is uſed
chiefly of animals.
My country neighbours do not find it impoſſible to think
of a lame horſe, ’till they have run over all beings that are,
and then pitch on dapple. Locke.
To DA'PPLE. v. a. [from the adječtive.] To ſtreak; to vary;
to diverſify with colours.
Certes, ſaid ſhe, I wot not how he hight;
But under him a grey ſteed did he weild, -
Whoſe ſides with dappled circles were endight. Fairy 24een.
The gentle day
Dapples the drowſy eaſt with ſpots of grey. Shakeſpeare.
Horſes that are dappled, turn white; and old ſquirrels turn
griſly. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 85.
The lark begins his flight,
From his watch-tower in the ſkies,
*Till the dappled dawn doth riſe.
I choſe
The dappl’d pink, and bluſhing roſe,
Milton.
Grew.
Milton.
To deck my charming Cloe's hair. Prior.
The gods, to curſe Pamela with her pray'rs,
Gave the gilt coach and dappled Flanders mares. Pope.
$º. } n. ſ. A fiſh found in the Severn. Bailey.
To DARE. v. m. pret. I dur/?; part. I have dared, [beannan,
Saxon; derren, Dutch J To have courage for any purpoſe;
not to be afraid; to adventure; to be adventurous.
I ſay 'tis copper. Darſt thou be as good as thy word now?
—Why, Hal, thou know'ſt, as thou art but a man, I dre;
but as thou art a prince, I fear thee. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
I dare do all that may become a man;
Who dares do more, is none. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
They are both hanged; and ſo would this be, if he dur/?
ſteal any thing advent'rouſly. Shakespeare's Henry V.
Neither of them was of that temper as to dare any dan-
gerous fačt. Haywood.
The father bore it with undaunted ſoul,
Like one who durſt his deſtiny controul. Dryden.
Deliberate and well-weighed courage knows both to be
cautious and to dare, as occaſion offers. Dryden.
We dare not build much upon ſuch a notion or doćtrine,
'till it be very fully examined. Watts's Improv. of the Mind.
To DARE. v. a. To challenge; to defy.
I never in my life
Did hear challenge urg'd more modeſtly,
Unleſs a brother ſhould a brother dare .
To gentle exerciſe and proof of arms. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Here ſhe ſtands:
Take but poſſeſſion of her with a touch;
I dare thee but to breathe upon my love. Shakeſpeare.
He had many days, in this proud manner, come half ſeas
over; and ſometimes paſſing further, came and lay at the
mouth of the harbour, and, as it were, daring them to fight.
Knoles's Hi/ory of the Turks.
Maſters of the arts of policy thought that they might even
defy and dare providence to the face.
South.
All cold, but in her breaſt, I will deſpiſe; -
And dare all heat but that in Celia's eyes. Roſº mmon.
Time! I dare thee to diſcover -
..Such a youth, and ſuch a lover. Dryden.
Preſumptuous wretch l with mortal art to dare
Immortal power, and brave the thunderer. Granville.
To DARE Larks. To catch them by means of a looking-glaſs,
which keeps them in amaze 'till caght; to amaze.
Shrimps are dipped up in ſhallow water with little round
nets, not much unlike that which is uſed for daring larks.Carew.
As larks lie dar'd to ſhun the hobby's flight. Dryden.
DARE. n.ſ.. [from the verb.) Defiance; challenge.
- Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caeſar, and commands
The empire of the ſea. Shakeſp. Anthony and Cleºpatra.
DA'REFUL. adj. [dare and full J Full of defiance.
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
DA'RING. adj. [from dare.] Bold; adventurous; fearleſs;
courageous; intrepid; brave; ſtout.
The laſt Georgick has indeed many metaphors, but not
ſo daring as this; for human thoughts and paſſions may be
more naturally aſcribed to a bee than to an inanimate plant.
Addiſon's Eſſays on the Georgicks.
The ſong too daring, and the theme too great. Prior.
Grieve not, O daring prince that noble heart. Pope.
DA'RINGLY., adv. [from daring.] Boldly; courageouſly;
fearleſsly; impudently; outrageouſly.
Some of the great principles of religion are every day
openly and daringly attacked from the preſs. Atterbury.
Your brother, fir’d with ſucceſs,
Too daringly upon the foe did preſs. Płalifax.
DA'RING NEss. n.ſ.. [from daring.] Boldneſs.
DARK, adj. [beonc, Saxon.] -
1. Not light; without light.
Fleance, his ſon, who keeps him company,
Muſt embrace the fate of that dark hour. Shakespeare Macbeth.
While we converſe with her, we mark
No want of day, nor think it dark.
2. Not of a ſhowy or vivid colour.
If the plague be ſomewhat dark, and the plague ſpread not
in the ſkin, the prieſt ſhall pronounce him clean. I Lev. xiii. 6.
In Muſcovy itſelf the generality of the people are more
inclined to have dark coloured hair than flaxen. Boyle.
3. Blind; without the enjoyment of light. -
- Thou wretched daughter of a dark old man,
Condućt my weary ſteps. Bryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
4. Opake; not tranſparent.
5. Obſcure; not perſpicuous.
What may ſeem dark at the firſt, will afterwards be found
more plain. Hoºker, b. i. ſect. I.
Mean time we ſhall expreſs our darker purpoſe. Shakeſp.
6. Not enlightened by knowledge; ignorant. -
The age, wherein he liv'd, was dark; but he
Could not want fight, who taught the world to ſee. Denh.
7. Gloomy; not chearful.
All men of dark tempers, according to their degree of
melancholy or enthuſiaſm, may find convents fitted to their
humours. Addiſon on Italy.
DARK. m. ſ.
1. Darkneſs; obſcurity; want of light.
Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunneſt ſmoke of hell,
That my keen knife ſee not the wound it makes;
Nor heav'n peep through the blanket of the dark,
To cry hold, hold! Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Cloud and ever-during dark
Surrounds me! from the chearful ways of men
Cut off. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. iii. l. 45.
Whereas ſeeing requires light, and a free medium, and a
right line to the objects, we can hear in the dark immured,
and by curve lines. Holder's Elements of Speech.
2. Obſcurity; condition of one unknown.
All he ſays of himſelf is, that he is an obſcure perſon; one,
I ſuppoſe he means, that is in the dark, and thinks it proper
to continue ſo. Atterbury.
3. Want
Waller.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 193</div><p class="Text">D A R
- 3. Want of knowledge.
'Till we ourſelves perceive by our own underſtandings,
we are as much in the dark, and as void of knowledge, as
before. Locke.
To DARK. v. a. [from the noun..] To darken; to obſcure:
obſolete. -
Fair when her breaſt, like a rich laden bark
With precious merchandize, ſhe forth doth lay:
Fair when that cloud of pride, which oft doth dark
Her goodly light, with ſmiles ſhe drives away. Spenser.
To DARKEN. v.a. [from dark.] -
1. To make dark; to deprive of light.
Black with ſurrounding foreſts then it ſtood,
That hung above, and darken'd all the flood. Addison.
Whether the darken'd room to muſe invite,
Or whiten’d wall provoke the ſkew'r to write. Pope.
2. To cloud; to perplex.
Such was his wiſdom, that his confidence did ſeldom darken
his foreſight, eſpecially in things near hand. Bacon's Hen. VII.
3. To foul; to ſully.
The luſts and paſſions of men do ſully and darken their
minds, even by a natural influence. Tillotſon, Serm. 4.
To Darken. v. n. To grow dark.
BA'RKLING.. [a participle, as it ſeems, from darkle, which
yet I have never found..] Being in the dark; being without
light: a word merely poetical.
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not ſo. Shakeſpeare.
Darkling ſtands
The varying ſhore o' th' world. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
- The wakeful bird
Sings darkling, and, in ſhadieſt covert hid,
Tunes her noćturnal note. Milton's Paradſe Loft, b. iii.
Darkling they mourn their fate, whom Circe's pow'r,
With words and wicked herbs, from human kind -
Had alter'd, and in brutal ſhapes confin'd. Dryden’s AEm.
DA'RKLY. adv. [from dark.] In a fituation void of light;
obſcurely; blindly.
For well you know, and can record alone,
What fame to future times conveys but darkly down. Dryd.
DA'RKNess. n.ſ.. [from dark.]
1. Abſence of light.
Darkneſs was upon the face of the deep. Gen. i. z.
I go whence I ſhall not return, even to the land of darkneſ;
and the ſhadow of death. job, x. 20.
2. Opakeneſs.
3. Obſcurity.
4. Infernal gloom; wickedneſs.
- The inſtruments of darkneſs tell us truths;
Win us with honeſt trifles, to betray us
In deepeſt conſequence. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
All the light truth has, or can have, is from the clearneſs
and validity of thoſe proofs upon which it is received: to talk
of any other light in the underſtanding, is to put ourſelves in
the dark, or in the power of the prince of darkneſs. Locke.
5. The empire of Satan, or the devil.
Who hath delivered us from the power of darkneſ, and
tranſlated us into the kingdom of his dear ſon. Coloſ. i. 13.
DA'RK some. adj. [from dark.] Gloomy; obſcure; not wä
enlightened; not luminous. -
He brought him through a darkſºme narrow paſs,
To a broad gate, all built of beaten gold. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
And her fair eyes, like ſtars that dimmed were
With darkſome cloud, now ſhew their goodly beams. Spenser.
You muſt not look to have an image, or the like, in any
thing that is lightſome; for even a face in iron, red-hot, will
not be ſeen, the light confounding the ſmall differences of
lightſome and darkſome which ſhew the figure. Bacon's N. Hiſt.
A darkſome cloud of locuſts, ſwarming down,
Muſt eat, and on the ground leave nothing green. Milton.
He here with us to be,
Forſook the courts of everlaſting day,
And choſe with us a darkſome houſe of mortal clay. Milton.
Miſtaken bleſfing, which old age they call,
'Tis a long, naſty, darkſome hoſpital. Dryden's juvenal.
The darkſome pines that o'er yon’ rocks reclin'd,
Wave high, and murmur to the hollow wind. Pope.
Da'RLING. adj. [beonlinx, Sax.] Favourite; dear; beloved;
regarded with great kindneſs and tenderneſs.
'Tis not for a generous prince to countenance oppreſſion
and injuſtice, even in his moſt darling favourites. L’Eſtrange.
Have a care left ſome beloved notion, or ſome darling
ſcience, too far prevail over your mind. It atts's Improvement.
PARLING. m. ſ. A favourite; one much beloved.
Young Ferdinand they ſuppoſe is drown'd,
And his and my lov’d darling. Shakeſpeare's Tempſ?.
In Thames, the ocean's darling, England's pride,
The pleaſing emblem of his reign does glide. Halifax.
She immediately became the darling of the princeſs Sophia.
- Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 21.
To DARN. v. a. [of uncertain original.] To mend holes by
imitating the texture of the ſtuff. -
Will ſhe thy linen waſh, or hoſen darn ? Gay.
He ſpent every day ten hours in his cºſt, in darning his
ſtockings, which he performed to admiration. Swift,
DA'RNEL. m. ſ. A weed growing in the fields. See GRAss.
He was met ev’n now
Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo flowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our ſuſtaining corn. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Want ye corn for bread Î
'Twas full of darnel; do you like the taſte? Shakespeare H. VI.
No fruitful crop the ſickly fields return;
But oats and darmel choak the riſing corn. Dryd. Paſoral.
To DA'RRAIN. v. a. [This word is by junius referred to dare:
it ſeems to me more probably deducible from arranger la
battaille.]
1. To prepare for battle; to range troops for battle.
The town-boys parted in twain, the one ſide calling them-
ſelves Pompeians, the other Caeſarians; and then darraining
a kind of battle, but without arms, the Caeſarians got the
over-hand. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Comes Warwick, backing of the duke of York:
Darrain your battle ; for they are at hand. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
2. To apply to the fight.
Therewith they 'gan to hurlen greedily,
Redoubted battle ready to darraine. Pairy Queen, l. ii.
DART. n.ſ. [dard, French.]
1. A miſſile weapon thrown by the hand; a ſmall lance.
Here one is wounded or ſlain with a piece of a rock or
flint; there another with a dart, arrow, or lance. Peacham.
O'erwhelm'd with darts, which from afar they fling,
The weapons round his hollow temples ring. Dryden’ AFn.
2. [In poetry.] Any miſſile weapon.
To DART. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To throw offenſively.
He whets his tuſks, and turns, and dares the war;
Th’ invaders dart their jav'lins from afar. Dryden's Án.
Pan came, and aſk'd what magick caus'd my ſmart;
Or what ill eyes malignant glances dart. Pope.
2. To throw ; to emit; as the ſun darts his beams on the earth.
To Dart. v. n. To fly as a dart; to let fly with hoſtile in-
tention.
Now, darting Parthia, art thou ſtruck. Shakesp. Ant. and Cleop.
To DASH. v. a. [The etymology of this word, in any of its
ſenſes, is very doubtful.]
I. To throw any thing ſuddenly againſt ſomething.
If you doſh a ſtone againſt a ſtone in the bottom of the
water, it maketh a ſound. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 792.
A man that cuts himſelf, and tears his own fleſh, and
daſhes his head againſt the ſtones, does not act ſo unreaſonably
as he. Tillotſon, Serm. 1.
2. To break by colliſion.
They that ſtand high, have many blaſts to ſhake them;
And, if they fall, they daſh themſelves to pieces. Shakeſp.
David's throne ſhall be like a tree,
Spreading and overſhad'wing all the earth;
Or as a ſtone, that ſhall to pieces doſh -
All monarchies beſides throughout the world. Milt. P. Rºg.
3. To throw water in flaſhes.
Daſhing water on them may prove the beſt remedy. Mortim.
4. To beſpatter; to beſprinkle. .
This tempeſt,
Daſhing the garment of this peace, aboded
The ſudden breach on't. Shakeſpeare's Hnry VIII.
5. To agitate any liquid, ſo as to make the ſurface fly off.
At once the bruſhing oars and brazen prow
Daſh up the ſandy waves, and ope the depths below. Dryd.
6. To mingle; to change by ſome ſmall admixture.
Hight Whacum, bred to daſh and draw,
Not wine, but more unwholſome law. Hudibras, p. ii. c. 3.
I take care to daſh the character with ſuch particular cir-
cumſtances as may prevent ill-natured applications. Addiſon.
Several revealed truths are daſhed and adulterated with a
mixture of fables and human inventions. Speciaior, Nº. 580.
7. To form or print in haſte, careleſsly.
Never was daſh'd out, at one lucky hit, ... . .
A fool, ſo juſt a copy of a wit. Pope's Danciad; b. ii. 1. 43.
8. To obliterate; to blot; to croſs out.
To daſh over this with a line, will deface the whole copy
extremely, and to a degree that, I fear, may diſpleaſe you. Pope,
9. To confound; to make aſhamed ſuddenly; to ſurpriſe with
fhame or fear.
- His tongue
Dropp'd manna, and could make the worſe appear
The better reaſon, to perplex and doſh
Matureſt counſels. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. ii. l. I 14:
Yearly enjoin'd, ſome ſay, to undergo
This annual, humbling certain number'd days,
To daſh their pride and joy for man ſeduc’d. Milt. Pa. Lºft.
An unknown hand ſtill check'd my forward joy, , , .
Daſh'd me with bluſhes. Dryd. and Lee's Oedipus.
To dºſh this cavil, read but the praślice of Chriſtian emi-
perors, * South.
3 Nothing
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 194</div><p class="Text">D A T
Nothing daſhed the confidence of the mule like the braying
of the aſs, in the very interim while he was dilating upon his
genealogy. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 18.
The nymph, when nothing could Narciſſus move,
Still doſh’d with bluſhes for her ſlighted love. Addison Ov. Met.
After they had ſufficiently blaſted him in his perſonal capa-
city, they found it an eaſy work to diſh and overthrow him in
his political. Sout.’s S. mons.
Some ſtronger pow'r cludes our ſickly will;
Daſhes our riſing hope with certain ill. Prior.
Daſh the proud gameſter in his gilded car ;
Bare the mean heart that lurks beneath a ſtar. Pope.
To DAs H. v. m.
1. To fly off the ſurface.
If the veſſel be ſuddenly ſlopt in its motion, the liquor con-
tinues its motion, and daſhes over the ſides of the veſſel. Lheyne.
2. To fly in flaſhes with a loud noiſe.
On each hand the guſhing waters play,
And down the rough caſcade, while daſhing, fall. Thomſon.
3. To ruſh through water ſo as to make it fly.
Doeg, though without knowing how or why,
Spurr'd boldly on, and deſ, d through thick and thin,
Through ſenſe and nonſenſe, never out or in. Dryden.
A Daº. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Colliſion.
By the touch ethereal rou’d,
The doſh of clouds, or irritating war,
Cf fighting winds, while all is calm below
They furious ſpring. Thomſon's Summer, l. I Ico.
2. Infuſion; ſomething mingled in a ſmall proportion.
There is nothing which one regards ſo much, with an eye
of mirth and pity, as innocence, when it has in it a daſh of
folly. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 247.
3. A mark in writing; a line , to note a pauſe, or
On 11110 fl.
He is afraid of letters and chara&amp;ers, of notes and daſhes,
which, ſet together, do ſignify nothing. Lºrown's Vulgar Err.
In modern wit all printed traſh is
Set off with num’rous breaks and daſhes. Swift.
4. Stroke; blow.
Stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.
–––. She takes upon her bravely at firſt daſh. Shakeſp. H. V.
DASH. adv. An expreſſion of the ſound of water daſhed.
Hark, hark, the waters fall;
Ahd, with a murmuring ſound,
Daſh, daſh, upon the ground,
To gentle ſlumbers call. Drydºn's Indian Emperor.
DA'STARD. m.ſ. abarºniža, Saxon.] A coward; a poltron;
A man infamous for fear.
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our da/lard nobles,
And ſuffer'd me by th’ voice of ſlaves to be
Whoop'd out of Rome. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Who now my matchleſs valour dare oppoſe
How long will }. wait his da/İard foes. Dryden's Mºn.
J'affard and drunkard, mean and inſolent;
Tongue-valiant hero, vaunter of thy might,
In threats the foremoſt, but the laſt in fight. Dryden.
Such bug-bear thoughts, once got into the minds of chil-
dren, make them do/lards, and afraid of the ſhadow of dark-
neſs ever after. Locke on Education, ſe&amp;#. 1 38.
Curſe on their dºſłard ſouls, they ſtand aſtoniſh'd. Addison
To D'A's'r A R D. v. a. To terrify 5 to intimidate; to deſert
with cowardice; to diſpirit.
I’m weary of this fleſh which holds us here,
And doſiards manly ſoul with hope and fear. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
To DA's r A * Dise v. a. [from dºſiard.] To intimidate; to
deject with cowardice; to diſpirit; to depreſs; to terrify 5 to
make an habitual coward.
He had ſuch things to urge againſt our marriage,
As, now declar'd, would blunt my ſword in battle, .
And dºſiaraiſe my courage. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
DA's r ARDLY. adj. [from daſard.] Cowardly; mean; ti-
morous.
This way of brawl and clamour is ſo arrant a mark of a
doſłardly wretch, that he does as good as call himſelf ſo that
uſes it. L’Eſtrange.
DA's TARDY. m. ſ. [from dyſła, d.] Cowardlineſs; timorouſ-
neſs.
DA't ARY. m. ſ. [from date.] An officer of the Chancery of
Rome, through whoſe hands moſt benefices paſs. Dić?.
DATE. n.ſ. [datte, Fr. from datam, Latin.]
1. The time at which a letter is written, marked at the end or
the beginning.
2. The time at which any event happened.
3. The time ſtipulated when anything ſhall be done.
His days and times are paſt,
And my reliance on his fracted dates
Has ſmit my credit. Sºakeſpeare's Timon.
My father's promiſe ties me not to time;
And bonds, without a date, they ſay are void. Dryden.
4. End; concluſion. -
VoI. I. 2.
What time weuld ſpare, from ſteel receives its date;
And monuments, like men, ſubmit to fate. Pºz:
5. Duration; continuance.
Could the declining of this fate, O friend,
Our date to immortality extend ? Denham.
Then raiſe,
From the conflagrant maſs, purg’d, and refin'd,
New heav'ns, new earth, ages of endleſs date,
Founded in righteouſneſs. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſł.
6. [from daºyius.] The fruit of the date-tree.
Hold, take theſe keys, and fetch more ſpices, nurſe.
They call for dates and quinces in the paſtry. Shakeſp.
DATE-TRE e. n ſ. See PALM, of which it is a ſpecies.
To DATF. v ., a [from the noun..] To note with the time at
which any thing is written or done.
'Tis all one, in reſpect of eternal duration yet behind, whe-
ther we begin the world ſo many millions of ages ago, or date
from the late aera of about ſix thouſand years. * entej's Sermons.
To all their dated backs he turns you round;
Theſe Aldus printed, thoſe Du Súcil has bound. Pºpe's Epiſt.
DA'TELEss. adj. [from date.] ... Without any fixed term.
The fly-ſlow hours ſhall not determinate
The dateſ ſº limit of thy dear exile. Shakespeare's Rich. II.
DA"rive. adj. [dativus, Latin
1. [In grammar.] The epithet of the caſe that ſignifies the
perſon to whom any thing is given.
2. [In law.] Thoſe are term'd dative executors who are ap
pointed ſuch by the judge's decree; as adminiſtrators with us
here in England. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To DAUB. v. a. [dalben, Dutch; dauber, French.
1. To ſmear with ſomething adheſive.
She took for him an ark of bulruſhes, and daubed it with
ſlime and with pitch. Exod. ii. 3.
2. To paint courſely
Haſty dauling will but ſpoil the pićture, and make it ſo un-
natural as muſt want falſe light to ſet it off. Otwº Orph. Dedic.
They ſnatched out of his hands a lame imperfeót piece,
rudely daubed over with too little reflection, and too much
haſte. Dryden's D freſnoy.
If a pićture is daubed with many bright and glaring colours,
the vulgar admire it as an excellent piece. // atts's Lºgick.
3. To cover with ſomething ſpecious or ſtrong, ſomething that
diſguiſes what it lies upon.
So ſmooth he daub'd his vice with ſhew of virtue,
He liv'd from all attainder of ſuſpect. Shakeſpeare’s R. III.
4. To lay on anything gaudily or oſtentatiouſly.
Since princes will have ſuch things, it is better they ſhould
be graced with elegancy than dauled with coſt. Lacon's Eſſays.
Let him be daub'd with lace, live high, and whore;
Sometimes be louſy, but be never poor. Dryden's ful enal.
5. To flatter groſsly. -
Let every one, therefore, attend the ſentence of his con-
ſcience; for, he may be ſure, it will not daub nor flatter. South.
To DAU B. v. n. To play the hypocrite.
I cannot daub it further;
And yet I muſt.
A Da'ub ER. m. ſ [from daub.] A coarſe low painter.
What they call'd his picture, had been drawn at length by
the daubers of almoſt all nations, and ſtill unlike him. Dryden.
Parts of different ſpecies jumbled together, according to the
mad imagination of the dauber, to cauſe laughter. 12 yden.
A ſign-poſt dauler would diſdain to paint
The one-ey'd hero on his elephant. Dryden's juven. Sat.
The treachcrous tapſter, Thomas, -
Hangs a new angel two doors from us,
As fine as daubers hands can make it. Swift.
DA'UBRY... n.ſ.. [from daub.] An old word for any thing
artful.
She works by charms, by ſpells, and ſuch daulry as this is
beyond our element. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of 1/indſor.
DA'UBY. adj. [from daub.] Viſcous; glutinous; adheſive.
Not in vain th’ induſtrious kind,
With dauby wax and flow’rs the chinks have lin'd. Dryden.
Some the gall'd ropes with dauby marling bind,
Or ſear-cloth maſts with frong tarpawling coats. Dryden.
DA'UGHTER. m. ſ. [dauhtar, Gothick; bohten, Saxon; dotter,
Runick; dohter, German; d.chter, Dutch.]
1. The female offspring of a man or woman.
Your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids, could not fill up
The ciſtern of my luſt. Shakeſpeare's Macleth,
Now Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With roſy luſtre purpled o'er the lawn. Pºpe's Hon. Odſey,
. A daughter in law, or ſon's wife.
. A woman.
Jacob went out to ſee the daughters of the land. Gen. xxxiv.
... [In poetry.] Any deſcendent.
. The penitcht of a confeſſor.
Are you at leiſure, holy father, now ;
Or ſhall I come to you at evening maſs :
—My leiſure ſerves me, penſive daughter, now. Shakespeare
6 II To
::
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 195</div><p class="Text">*
ſ
D A Y
To DAUNT. v. a. [d.mter, French, domitare, Latin.] To
diſcourage; to fright; to intimidate. -
Fairfax, whoſe name in arms through Europe rings,
And fills all mouths with envy or with praiſe,
And all her jealous monarchs with amaze, ---
And rumours loud, which daunt remoteſt kings. Milton.
Where the rude ax, with heaved ſtroke,
Was never heard the nymphs to daunt,
Or fright them from their hallow'd haunt. Milton.
Some preſences daunt and diſcourage us, when others raiſe
us to a briſk aſſurance. Glanville's Scepſ c. 24.
DA'UNTLEss. adj. [from daunt.J Fearleſs; not dejected; not
diſcouraged.
Grow great by your example, and put on s
The dauntly; ſpirit of reſolution. Shakeſpeare's King john.
Dauntleſ, he roſe, and to the fight return'd :
With ſhame his glowing checks, his eyes with fury burn'd.
Dryden's Wirgil's Aneid.
He, not by wants or woes oppreſt,
Stems the bold torrent with a dauntly; breaſt. Dryden.
The utmoſt weight of affliction from miniſterial power
and popular hatred, were almoſt worth bearing, for the glory
of ſuch a daunt eſs conduct as he has ſhewn under it. Pope.
DA'UNTLEssNess. m. ſ. [from deuntleſ...] Fearleſſneſs.
Daw. n.ſ. [ſuppoſed by Skinner ſo named from his note; by
junius to be corrupted from dawl; the German tul, and dºl, in
the Bavarian dialect, having the ſame ſignification.] The
name of a bird.
I will wear my heart upon my ſleeve,
For daws to peck it. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
If death do quench us quite, we have great wrong,
That daws, and trees, and rocks ſhould laſt ſo long,
When we muſt in an inſtant paſs to nought. Davies.
The loud daw, his throat diſplaying, draws
The whole aſſembly of his fellow daws. J/aller.
DAWK. m. ſ. A cant word among the workmen for a hollow
or inciſion in their ſtuff.
Obſerve if any hollow or dawks be in the length. Mºxon.
To DAwk. v. a. To mark with an inciſion.
Should they apply that ſide of the tool the edge lies on,
the ſwift coming about of the work would, where a ſmall ir-
regularity of ſtuff ſhould happen, jobb the edge into the ſtuff,
and ſo dawk it. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
To DAWN. v. n. [ſuppoſed by the etymologiſts to have been
originally to dayen, or advance towards day.]
I. To grow luminous; to begin to grow light.
I have been troubled in my ſleep this night;
But dawning day new comfort hath inſpir'd. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
As it began to dawn, towards the firſt day of the week,
came Mary Magdalene to ſee the ſepulchre. Mat. xxviii. 1.
All night I ſlept, oblivious of my pain;
Aurora dawn'd, and Phoebus ſhin'd in vain. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To glimmer obſcurely.
A Romaniſt, from the very firſt dawning of any notions in
his underſtanding, hath this principle conſtantly inculcated,
viz. that he muſt believe as the church. Lºcke.
3. To begin, yet faintly; to give ſome promiſes of luſtre or
CIn 1 nence.
While we behold ſuch dauntleſs worth appear
In dawning youth, and ſouls ſo void of fear. Dryden's An.
Thy hand ſtrikes out ſome free deſign,
When life awakes and dawns at every line. Pope.
DAw N. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The time between the firſt appearance of light and the ſun's
riſe, reckoned from the time that the ſun comes within
cighteen degrees of the horizon.
Then on to-morrow's dawn your care employ,
To ſearch the land, and where the cities lie,
And what the men; but give this day to joy. Dryden's AFn.
2. Beginning; firſt riſe.
Theſe tender circumſtances diffuſe a dawn of ſerenity over
the ſoul. Pope.
But ſuch their guiltleſs paſſion was,
As in the dawn of time inform'd the heart
Of innocence, and undiſſembling truth. Thomſºn's Summer.
DAY. m. ſ. ſbag, Saxon.]
1. The time between the riſing and ſetting of the ſun, called
the artificial day.
Why ſtand ye here all the day idle Mat. xx. 6.
Of night impatient, we demand the day;
The day arrives, then for the night we pray:
The night and day ſucceſſive come and go,
Our laſting pains no interruption know. Blackmore's Creation.
Or object new
Caſual diſcourſe draws on, which intermits
...Our day's work. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. ix. l. 224.
* The time from noon to noon, called the natural day.
How many hours bring about the day 2
How many days will finiſh up the year; Shakeſp. Henry VI.
3. Light; ſunſhine.
Let us walk honeſtly, as in the day; not in rioting and
drunkenneſ. Rout. xiii. 13.
The Weſt yet glimmers with ſome ſtreaks of day:
D A Y
Now ſpurs the lated traveller apace,
To gain the timely inn. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Around the ficlás did nimble lightning play,
Which offer'd us by fits, and ſnatch'd the day:
"Midſt this was heard the ſhrill and tender cry
Of well-pleas'd ghoſts, which in the ſtorm did fly. Dryden.
Yet are we able only to ſurvey
Dawnings of beams, and promiſes of day. Prior.
4. Any time ſpecified and diſtinguiſhed from other time; an age;
the time. In this ſenſe it is generally plural.
After him reigned Gutheline his heir,
The juſteſt man, and trueſt, in his days. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
I think, in theſe days, one honeſt man is obliged to ac-
quaint another who are his friends. Pope.
We have, at this time of day, better and more certain
means of information than they had. Iſºodward’s Nat. Hiſt.
5. Life: in this ſenſe it is commonly plural. He never in his
days broke his word; that is, in his whole (ife.
6. The day of conteſt; the conteſt; the battle.
His name ſtruck fear, his conduct won the day;
He came, he ſaw, he ſeiz'd the ſtruggling prey. Roſcommon.
The noble thanes do bravely in the war;
The day almoſt itſelf profeſſes your's,
And little is to do. - Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Would you th’ advantage of the fight délay,
..If, ſtriking firſt, you were to win the day 2 Dryden.
7. An appointed or fixed time. -
Or if my debtors do not keep their day,
Deny their hands, and then refuſe to pay,
I muſt with patience all the terms attend. Dryden's juvenal.
8. A day appointed for ſome commemoration.
The field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Criſpin Criſpianus. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
9. From day to day; without certainty or continuance.
Bavaria hath been taught, that merit and ſervice doth
oblige the Spaniard but from day to day. Bacon's War with Spain.
To-DAY. On this day.
73-day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Pſ.
The paſt is all by death poſeſt,
And frugal fate, that guards the reſt,
By giving, bids us live to-day. Fenton.
DA'Y BED. m. ſ. [day and bed.] A bed uſed for idleneſs and
luxury in the daytime.
Calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet gown;
having come down from a daybed, where I have left Olivia
ſleeping. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
DA'y Book. n.ſ.. [from day and book.] A tradeſman's journal;
a book in which all the occurrences of the day are ſet down.
DA'YBREAK. m. ſ. [day and break.] The dawn; the firſt ap-
pearance of light.
I watch'd the early glories of her eyes,
As men for daybreak watch the Eaſtern ſkies. Dryd. In. Emp.
DAYLA'Bour. n.ſ. [day and labour.] Labour by the day;
labour divided into daily taſks. -
Doth God exact daylabour, light deny'd,
I fondly aſk. Milton’s Paradiſe Regained.
Did either his legs or his arms fail him No; but daylabour
was but an hard and a dry kind of livelihood to a man, that
could get an eſtate with two or three ſtrokes of his pen. South.
DAYLA'Bou Re R. n.ſ.. [from daylabour.] One that works by
the day.
'in one night, ere glimpſe of morn,
His ſhadowy flail hath threſh'd the corn
That ten daylabourers could not end. Milton.
The daylabourer, in a country village, has commonly but a
ſmall pittance of courage. Locke.
DA'Y LIGHT. n.ſ. [day and light.] The light of the day, as
oppoſed to that of the morn, or a taper.
By this the drooping daylight 'gan to fade,
And yield his room to ſad ſucceeding night. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Nay, then thou mock'ſt me: thou ſhalt buy this dear,
If ever I thy face by daylight ſee.
Now go thy way. Shakeſp. Midſummer-Night's Dream.
They by daylight paſſing through the midſt of the Turks
fleet, ſafely recovered the haven, to the great joy of the be-
ſieged Chriſtians. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
He ſtands in daylight, and diſdains to hide
An act, to which by honour he is ty’d. Dryden:
Will you murder a man in plain da light? Dryd. Sp. Fryar.
Yet though rough bears in covert ſeek defence,
White foxes ſtay, with ſeeming innocence;
That crafty kind with daylight can diſpenſe. Dryden.
If bodies be illuminated by the ordinary priſmatick colours,
they will appear neither of their own daylight colours, nor of
the colour of the light caſt on them, but of ſome middle
colour between both. Newton's Opt.
DAY-Li'l Y. m. ſ. The ſame with Asp Hop E1, which ſee.
DA'YsMAN. m. ſ. [day and man.] An old word for umpire. Ainſ.
Perhaps rather, ſurety.
For what art thou,
That mak’ſ thyſelf his dayſnan, to prolong
The vengeance preſt : Fairy ºucet, b. ii. cart. 8.
JDA'YSPRING.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 196</div><p class="Text">- * . . . - * * . . .:
-
DA'Yspr ING. m. ſ. [day and ſpring.] The riſe of the day; the
dawn; the firſt appearance of light.
So all ere dayſpring, under conſcious night, -
Secret they finiſh d, and in order ſet. Milton's Parad. Loft.
The breath of heav'n freſh-blowing, pure and ſweet,
With dayſpring born, here leave me to reſpire. Milt. Agon.
DA'Yst AR. m. ſ. [day and /lar.] The morning ſtar.
I meant to make her fair, and free, and wiſe,
Of greateſt blood, and yet more good than great:
I meant the day/lar ſhould not brighter riſe,
Nor lend like influence from his lucent ſeat. Ben. johnſon.
Sunk though he be beneath the watry floor;
So finks the dayſiar in the ocean bed,
And yet anon repairs his drooping head. Milton.
DA'Ya IX:E. n.ſ. [day and time.] The time in which there is
light, oppoſed to night.
In the daytime ſhe fitteth in a watch-tower, and flieth moſt
by night; that ſhe mingleth things done with things not done,
and that ſhe is a terror to great cities. Bacon, Eſſay 60.
My ants never brought out their corn but in the night when
the moon did ſhine, and kept it under ground in the day-
time. Addiſon's Guardian, N° 156.
DA's work. n.ſ. [day and work.] Work impoſed by the day;
day labour.
True labour in the vineyard of thy lord,
Ere prime thou haſt th' impoſed daywork done. Fairfax.
To DAZE. v. a. [bpaes, Saxon.] To overpower with light;
to ſtrike with too ſtrong luſtre; to hinder the act of ſeeing .
by too much light ſuddenly introduced.
They ſmote the gliſtering armies as they ſtand,
With quiv'ring beams, which daz'd the wond'ring eye.
Fairfax, b. i. ſian. 73.
Poor human kind, all daz'd in open day,
Err after bliſs, and blindly miſs their way. Dryden.
DA'z IED. adj. [rather doſed. See DAs Y.] Beſprinkled with
daiſies.
Let us
Find out the prettieſt dazied plot we can,
And make him a grave. Shakeſkeare's Cymbeline.
To DA'zzle. v. a. [See DAZE.]
1. To overpower with light; to hinder the aëtion of the ſight
by ſudden luſtre.
Fears uſe, many times, to be repreſented in ſuch an imagi-
nary faſhion, as they rather dazzle, men's eyes than open
them. Bacon's War with Spain.
How is it that ſome wits are interrupted;
That now they dazzled are, now clearly ſee? Davies.
The places that have either ſhining ſentiments or manners,
have no occaſion for them : a dazzling expreſſion rather da-
mages them, and ſerves only to eclipſe their beauty. Pope.
2. To ſtrike or ſurpriſe with ſplendour.
Thoſe heav'nly ſhapes
Will dazzle now this earthly, with their blaze
Inſufferably bright. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix. l. 1683.
Ah, friend to dazzle let the vain deſign; . .
To raiſe the thought, or touch the heart, be thine. Pope.
To DA'zzle. v. n. To be overpowered with light; to loſe
the power of ſight.
Dazzle mine eyes? or do I ſee three ſuns Shakespeare Hen.VI.
Come, boy, and go with me; thy ſight is young,
And you ſhall read, when mine begins to dazzle. Shakeſp.
An overlight maketh the eyes dazzle, inſomuch as perpe-
tual looking againſt the ſun would cauſe blindneſs. Bacon.
Look, Dianet, for I dare not truſt theſe eyes;
They dance in miſts, and dazzle with ſurpriſe. Dryd. Auren.
DEACON. m. ſ. [diaconus, Latin.]
1. One of the loweſt order of the clergy.
Likewiſe muſt the deacons be grave. 2 Tim. iii. 8.
The conſtitutions that the apoſtles made concerning dea-
cons and widows, in thoſe primitive times, are very impor-
tunely urged by the diſciplinarians. Bp. Sanderſon's judgment.
2. [In Scotland.] An overſeer of the poor.
§ And alſo the maſter of an incorporated company.
E'Acos Ess. n.ſ. [from deacon.] A female officer in the an-
cient church.
DE'AcoxRY. Un.ſ.. [from deacon.] The office or dignity of
IDE'Acons HIP. } a deacon.
DEAD. adj. [beab, Sax. dood, Dutch.]
1. Deprived of life; exanimated.
The queen, my lord, is dead:
—She ſhould have died hereafter. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
A brute or a man are another thing, when they are alive,
from what they are when dead. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
She either from her hopeleſs lover fled,
Or with diſdainful glances ſhot him dead. Dryden.
2. With of before the cauſe of death.
This Indian told them, that, miſtaking their courſe, the
crew, all except himſelf, were dead of hunger. Arbuthnot.
3. Without life; inanimate.
All, all but truth, drops dead-born from the preſs,
Like the laſt gazette, or the laſt addreſs. Pope, Dial. ii.
4. Imitating death ; ſenſeleſs; motionleſs.
At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and
horſe are caſt into a dead ſleep. . . Pſ. lxxvi. 6.
Anointing of the forehead, neck, feet, and backbone, we
º know is uſed for procuring dead ſleeps. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
5. Una&amp;tive; motionleſs. - -
The tin ſold ſometimes higher, and ſometimes lower, ac-
cording to the quick vent and abundance, or the dead ſale and
ſcarcety. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Nay, there's a time when ev'n the rolling year
Seems to ſtand ſtill: dead calms are in the ocean, * -
When not a breath diſturbs the drouſy main. Lee's Oedipus.
: They cannot bear the dead weight of unemployed time
lying upon their hands, nor the uneaſineſs it is to do nothing
at all. Locke on Education, ſect. 207.
6. Empty; vacant. - - - -
This colour, nevertheleſs, often carries the mind away;
yea, it deceiveth the ſenſe; and it ſeemeth to the eye a ſhorter
diſtance of way, if it be all dead and continued, than if it
have trees or buildings, or any other marks whereby the eye
may divide it. - Bacon's Cºl. of Good and Evil.
Nought but a blank remains, and a dead void ſpace,
A ſtep of life, that promis'd ſuch a race. Dryden.
7. Uſeleſs; unprofitable.
The commodities of the kingdom they took, though they
lay dead upon their hands for want of vent. Bacon's Hen. VII.
Perſuade a prince that he is irreſiſtible, and he will take
care not to let ſo glorious an attribute lie dead and uſeleſs by
him. Addiſon's Whig Examiner.
8. Dull; gloomy; unemployed.
Travelling over the mountain Amanus, then covered with
deep ſnow, they came in the dead Winter to Aleppo in
Syria. - - J(nolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
There is ſomething unſpeakably chearful in a ſpot of ground
which is covered with trees, that ſmiles amidſt all the rigours
of Winter, and gives us a view of the moſt gay ſeaſon in the
midſt of that which is the moſt dead and melancholy. Addison Speci.
9. Still; obſcure. - - - - -
Their flight was only deferred until they might cover their
diſorders by the dead darkneſs of the night. Hayward.
Io. Having no reſemblance of life. . . . . -
At a ſecond fitting, though I alter not the draught, I muſt
touch the ſame features over again, and change the dead co-
louring of the whole. Dryden's Fab. Preface.
11. Obtuſe; dull; not ſprightly. Uſed of ſounds.
We took a bell of about two inches in diameter at the
bottom, which was ſupported, in the midſt of the cavity of
the receiver, by a bent ſtick, by reaſon of its ſpring againſt
the oppoſite parts of the inſide of the veſſel; in which, when
it was cloſed up, we obſerved that the bell ſeemed to ſound
more dead than it did when juſt before it ſounded in the open
air. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
12. Dull; frigid; not animated; not affecting. .
How cold and dead does a prayer appear, that is compoſed
in the moſt elegant forms of ſpeech, when it is not heightened
by ſolemnity º phraſe from the ſacred writings. Addison Spect.
13. Taſteleſs; vapid; ſpiritleſs: of liquors. -
14. Uninhabited. .
Somewhat is left under dead walls and dry ditches. Arbuthn.
15. Without the natural force or efficacy; as, a dead fire.
16. Without the power of vegetation; as, a dead bough.
17. [In theology.] The ſtate of ſpiritual death, lying under
the power of fin. -
You hath he quickened, who were dead in treſpaſſes and
ſins. Epheſ, ii. 1.
The DEAD. m. ſ. Dead men.
- Jove ſaw from high, with juſt diſdain,
The dead inſpir'd with vital life again. Dryd. Æn. b. vii.
The ancient Romans generally buried their dead near the
great roads. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
That the dead ſhall riſe and live again, is beyond the diſco-
very of reaſon, and is purely a matter of faith. Docke.
The tow'ring bard had ſung in nobler lays, -
How the laſt trumpet wakes the lazy dead. Smith.
DEAD. m. ſ. Time in which there is remarkable ſtillneſs or
gloom; as at midwinter, and midnight.
After this life, to hope for the favours of mercy then, is
to expect an harveſt in the dead of winter. South's Sermons.
In the dead of the night, when the men and their dogs
were all faſt aſleep. L'E/irange.
At length, in dead of night, the ghoſt appears
Of her unhappy lord. Dryden's Virg. Æn.
To DEAD. v. n. [from the noun..] To loſe force, of whatever
kind.
So iron, as ſoon as it is out of the fire, desdeth ſtraitways.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 774.
To DEAD.
To De’AD EN. }v. d. -
1. To deprive of any kind of force or ſenſation.
That the ſound may be extinguiſhed or daded by diſ-
charging the pent air, before it cometh to the mouth of the
piece, and to the open air, is not probable. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
It is requiſite that the tympanum be tenſe, and hard
ſtretched,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 197</div><p class="Text">D E A
4.
D E A
otherwiſe the laxneſs of that membrane will ce:
º, and damp the ſound. Hºlder'ſ Elements ºf Speeth.
his motion would be quickly deadened by countermotions;
and we ſhould not remember any thing, but 'till the next
impreſſion. - Glanv. Sceſſ. c. 6.
we will not oppoſe any thing to them, that is hard
and ſtubborn, but by a ſoft anſwer deaden their force by
degrees. Burnet’s Theory of the Earth.
Öur dreams are great inſtances of that activity which is
natural to the human ſoul, and which is not in the power of
ſleep to deaden or abate. - Spectator, Nº. 487.
Anodyne, or abaters of pain, are ſuch things as relax the
tenſion of the affected nervous fibres, or deſtroy the particu-
lar acrimony which occaſions the pain, or what deadens the
ſenſation of the brain by procuring ſleep. Arbuthnºt on Diet.
2. To make vapid, or ſpiritleſs.
The beer and the wine, as well within water as above,
have not been palled or deaded at all. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
DEAD-boſsc. participial adj. [dead and dº..] . Deſtructive;
killing; miſchievous; having the power to make dead.
Hold, O dear lord, your dead-dºing hand; -
Then loud he cry’d, I am your humble thrall. Fai. Queen.
They never care how many others -
They kill, without regard of mothers,
Or wives or children, ſo they can
Make up ſome fierce, dead-doing man. Hudibra', p. i. can. I 1.
DEAD-lift. n.ſ. [dead and lift.] Hopeleſs exigence.
And have no power at all, nor ſhift,
To help itſelf at a dead-lift. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 2.
DE'ADLY. adj. [from dead J
1. Deſtructive; mortal; murtherous.
She that herſelf will ſhiver and diſbranch
From her material ſap, perforce muſt wither,
And come to deadly uſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
She then on Romeo calls,
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murther her. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and ju'iet.
Dry mourning will decay more deadly bring,
As a North wind burns a too forward Spring;
Give ſorrow vent, and let the ſluices go. Dryden's Aurengb.
2. Mortal; implacable.
The Numidians, in number infinite, are deadly enemies
unto the Turks. Knzlles's Hiſtºry of the Turks.
DE'ADI Y adv.
1. In a manner reſembling the dead.
Like dumb ſtatues, or unbreathing ſtones,
Star'd each on other, and look'd deady pale. Shakeſp. R. III.
Young Arcite heard, and up he ran with haſte,
And aſk'd him why he look'd ſo deadly wan. Dryd. Fables.
2. Mortally.
I will break Pharaoh's arms, and he ſhall groan before him
with the groanings of a deadly wounded man. Ez. xxx. 24.
3. Implacably; irreconcileably; deſtructively.
4. It is ſometimes uſed in a ludicrous ſenſe, only to enforce the
ſignification of a word.
Mettled ſchoolboys ſet to cuff,
Will not confeſs that they have done enough,
Though deadly weary. Orrery.
John had got an impreſſion, that Lewis was ſo deadly cun-
. a man, that he was afraid to venture himſelf alone with
III]. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of 'john Bull.
DEADNEss. n.ſ. [from dead J iſłory of j
1. Frigidity; want of warmth; want of ardour; want of af-
fečtion.
His grace removes the defect of inclination, by taking of
9. natural deadneſs and diſaffection towards them. Rogers.
2. Weakneſs of the vital powers; languour; faintneſs; inacti-
vity of the ſpirits.
Your gloomy eyes betray a deadneſs,
And inward languiſhing. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
3. Vapidneſs of liquors; loſs of ſpirit.
Deadhºſ, or flatneſs in cyder is often occaſioned by the too
flee admiſſion of air into the veſſels. Mortinº, Husbandry.
Pº'absettle. n ſ. A weed, the ſame with archangel.
DEAD Reckonisd. n: ſ [a ſea-term.] That eſtimation or
conjecture which the ſeamen make of the place where a ſhip
1S, by keeping an account of her way by the log, by knowing
the courſe they have ſteered by the compaſs, and by rectifying
all with allowance for drift or lee-way; ſo that this reckon:
ing is without any obſervation of the ſun, moon, and ſtars,
and is to be reëtificq as often as any good obſervation can be
aCl.
DEAF. adj. [dºf, Dutch.]
1. Wanting the ſenſe of hearing.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf. Shakeſpeare.
- Infected minds
To their deaf pillows will diſcharge their ſecrets. Shakespeare Mac.
The chief deſign here intended by this account of the na-
tural alphabet, ** Pſepare a more eaſy and expedite way to
inſtruct ſuch as are deaf and dumb, and dumb only by con-
ſequence of their want ºf hearing. Holder's Elem. of Speech.
If any ſins afflićt our life
With that prime ill, a talking wife,
'Till death ſhall bring the kind relief,
We muſt be patient, or be deaf. Prior,
Thus you may ſtill be young to me,
While I can better hear than ſee:
Oh ne'er may fortune ſhew her ſpight,
To make me deaf, and mend my fight. Swift.
2. It has to before the thing that ought to be heard.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuſes;
Nor tears, nor prayers ſhall purchaſe out abuſes. Shakespeare.
Oh, that men's ears ſhould be
To counſel deaf, but not to flattery! Shakeſpeare's Timon,
Whilſt virtue courts them; but, alas, in vain:
Fly from her kind embracing arms,
Deaf to her fondeſt call, blind to her greateſt charms. Roſ.
Not ſo, for once indulg'd, they ſweep the main;
Deaf to the call, or, hearing, hear in vain, Dryden.
Hope, too long with vain deluſion fed,
Deaf to the rumour of fallacious fame, -
Gives to the roll of death his glorious name. Pºpe's Odiſ).
3. Deprived of the power of hearing. -
Deaf with the noiſe, I took my haſty flight:
- No mortal courage can ſupport the fright. Dryd Ind. Emp.
4. Obſcurely heard.
Nor ſilence is within, nor voice expreſs,
But a deaf noiſe of ſounds that never ceaſe;
Confus'd and chiding, like the hollow roar
Of tides, receding from th’ inſulted ſhoar. Dryden.
The reſt were ſeiz'd with fullen diſcontent,
And a deaf murmur through the ſquadrons went Dryden:
To DEAF. v. a. To deprive of the power of hearing.
Hearing hath deaf’d our ſailors; and if they
Know how to hear, there's none know what to ſay. Donne.
A ſwarm of their aerial ſhapes appears,
And, flutt’ring round his temples, deaf; his ears Dryd. Æn.
To DEAF EN. v. a. [from deaf.] To deprive of the power of
hearing.
É. Salius enters; and exclaiming loud,
For juſtice deafens, and diſturbs the crowd. Dryden's Wirgil.
From ſhouting men, and horns, and dogs, he flies,
Deafen’d and ſtunn'd with their promiſcuous cries. Addiſon.
DE'AFLY. adv. [from deaf)
1. Without ſenſe of ſounds.
2. Obſcurely to the ear.
De’AFN Ess. n.ſ.. [from deaf) Want of the power of hear-
ing; want of ſenſe of ſounds.
Thoſe who are deaf and dumb, are dumb by conſequence
from their deafneſ. Hold r’s Elements of ſpeech.
The Dunciad had never been writ, but at his requeſt, and
for his deafneſs; for had he been able to converſe with me, do
you think I had amuſed my time ſo ill; Pope.
2. Unwillingneſs to hear. -
I found ſuch a deafneſ, that no declaration from the biſhops
could take place. King Charles.
DEAL. n.ſ. [deel, Dutch.]
1. Part.
A great deal of that which had been, was now to be re-
moved out of the church. Hooker, b. 4. ſect. 14.
2. Quantity; degree of more or leſs. It is a general word for
expreſſing much joined with the word great.
When men's affections do frame their opinions, they are
in defence of errour more earneſt a great deal than, for the
moſt part, ſound believers in the maintainance of truth, ap-
prehending according to the nature of that evidence which
ſcripture yieldeth. Hooker, Preface.
There is, indeed, ſtore of matters, fitter and better a great
deal for teachers to ſpend time and labour in. Hoºker, b. iv.
To weep with them that weep, doth eaſe ſome deal;
But ſorrow, flouted at, is double death. Shakeſp. Tit. And on."
What a deal of cold buſineſs doth a man miſpend the bet-
ter part of life in In ſcattering compliments, and tendering
viſits. Ben. johnſºn's Diſcoveries.
The charge, ſome deal thee haply honour may,
That noble §. had while here he liv'd. Fairfax, b. v.
Poſſibly ſome never ſo much as doubted of the ſafety of
their ſpiritual eſtate; and, if ſo, let them reſt aſſured, that
they have ſo much the more reaſon a great deal to doubt of
it. South's Sermons.
The author, who knew that ſuch a deſign as this could not
be carried on without a great deal of artifice and ſophiſtry,
has puzzled and perplexed his cauſe, by throwing his thought*
together in a ſtudied confuſion. Addiſon's Freehºlder, Nº. 31. .
3. The art or practice of dealing cards.
How can the muſe her aid ſupport, ,
Unſkill'd in all the terms of art'
Or in harmonious numbers put -
The deal, the ſhuffle, and the cut. Swift.
4. [deyl, Dutch..] Firwood; the wood of pines,
I have alſo found, that a piece of deal, far thicker than one
would eaſily imagine, being purpoſely interpoſed betwixt my
eye, placed in a room; and the clearer daylight was º:
only
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 198</div><p class="Text">D E A
only ſomewhat tranſparent, but appeared quite through a
lovely red. Boyle on Colours.
To DEAL. v. a. [deelen, Dutch..]
1. To diſtribute ; to diſpoſe to different perſons.
£cal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are
caſt out, to thy houſe. Iſa. lviii. 7.
One with a broken truncheon deal; his blows. Dryd. Fab.
The buſineſs of mankind in this life, being rather to act
than to know, their portion of knowledge is deat them ac-
cordingly. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 237.
How Spain prepares her banners to unfold,
And Rome deal; out her bleſfings and her gold. Tickel.
Had the philoſophers and great men of antiquity beca poſ-
ſeſſed of the art of printing, there is no queſtion but they
would have made an advantage of it, in dealing out their
lectures to the publick. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 184.
If you deal out great quantities of ſtrong liquor to the mob,
there will be many drunk. If atts's Improvement of the 4/ind.
2. To ſcatter; to throw about.
Keep me from the vengeance of thy darts,
Which Niobe's devoted iſlue felt,
When hiſſing through the ſkies, the feather'd deaths were
dealt. Dryden's Fables.
3. To give gradually, or one after another.
The nightly mallet deals reſounding blows,
*Till the proud battlements her tow’rs incloſe. Gay.
His lifted arms around his head he throws, -
And deal, in whiſtling air, his empty blows. Dryd. Wirgil.
To D.E.A.L. v. n.
1. To traffick; to tranſačt buſineſs; to trade.
It is generally better to deal by ſpeech than by letter; and
by the mediation of a third, than by a man himſelf. Bacºn.
This is to drive: a wholeſale trade, when all other petty
merchants deal but for parcels. Decay of Piety.
They buy and ſcil, they deal and traffick. South.
2. To act between two perſons; to intervene.
Sometimes he that deals between man and man, raiſeth his
own credit with both, by pretending greater intereſt than he
hath in either. Lacon, Eſſay 55.
3. To behave well or ill in any tranſićtion.
I doubt not, if he will deal clearly and impartially, but
that he will acknowledge all this to be true. Tillotſon's Sermons.
4. To act in any manner. -
Two deep enemies,
Foes to my reſt, and my ſweet ſleep's diſturbers,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon. Shakeſp. R. III.
5. To DEAL by. To treat well or ill.
Such an one deal; not fairly ly his own mind, nor condućts
his own underſtanding aright. Locke.
6. To DEAL in. To have to do with ; to be engaged in ; to
practiſe.
Suiters are ſo diſtaſted with delays and abuſes, that plain-
dealing, in denying to deal in ſuits at firſt, is grown not only
honourable, but alſo gracious. Bacon, Eſſay 59.
The Scripture forbids even the countenancing a poor man
in his cauſe; which is a popular way of preventing juſtice,
that ſome men have dealt in, though without that ſucceſs which
they propoſed to themſelves in it. Atterbury's Sermons.
Among all ſets of authors, there are none who draw upon
themſelves more diſpleaſure than thoſe who deal in political
ImatteſS. Addison's Freeholder, N°. 40.
True logick is not that noiſy thing that deals all in diſpute
and wranging, to which the former ages had debaſed and con-
fined it. JWatts's Logick.
7. In DEA 1 with. To treat in any manner; to uſe well or ill.
Neither can the Iriſh, nor yet the Engliſh lords, think
themſelves wronged, nor hardly dealt wiſh, to have that which
is none of their own given to them. Speºſer's Ireland.
Who then ſhall guide
His people? Who defend ? Will they not deal
Worſe with his followers, than with him they dealt? Milton.
If a man would have his conſcience deal clearly with him,
he muſt deal ſeverely with that. South's Sermons.
God did not only excrciſe this providence towards his own
people, but he dealt thus alſo with other nations. Tilºt on.
But I will deal the more civilly with his two poems, becauſe
nothing ill is to be ſpoken of the dead. Dryd. A./. Prºſace.
You wrote to me with the freedom of a friend, draſing
plainly with me in the matter of my own trifics. Pope.
Refle&amp;t on the merits of the cauſe, as well as of the men,
who had been thus dealt with by their country. Çwiſt.
8. Tº D F A L with. To contchd with.
If ſhe hated me, I ſhould know what paſſion to deal
with. Sidney, b. ii.
Gentlemen were commanded to remain in the country, to
govern the people, eaſy to be dealt with whilſt they land in
fear. Hayward,
Then you upbraid me; I am pleas'd to ſee
You're not ſo perfect, but can ſail like me:
I have no God to deal with. 1/ryden's Aureºgzcłc.
To DEALBATE. v. a. [deallº, Lat.] To whiten; to bleach.
Vol. I.
DEAL BA/Tron. m. ſ [deallatio, Lat.] The aët of bleaching
or whitening; rendering things white, which were not ſo
before : a word which is now almoſt grown into diſuſe.
- All ſeed is white in viviparous animals, and ſuch as have
preparing veſſels, wherein it receives a manifold deallation.
Brown's /uſgar Errours, b. vi. c. 10.
DF'AL FR. m. ſ. [from deal.]
1. One that has to do with any thing.
... I find it common with theſe ſmall dealers in wit and learn-
ing, to give themſelves a title from their firſt adventure. Swift.
2. A trader or trafficker.
Where fraud is permitted and connived at, the honeſt
dealer is always undone, and the knave gets the advantage.
- Culliver's Travel.
3. A perſon who deals the cards.
DEA LING. m. ſ. [from deal.]
1. Pračtice; action.
- What theſe are
Whoſe own hard dealings teach them to ſuſpećt
The thoughts of others. Shakespeare's Archant of Penice. .
Concerning the dealings of men, who adminſter govern-
ment, and unto whom the execution of that law belongeth,
they have their judge, who fitteth in heaven. Hooker, b. ii.
But this was neither one pope's fault, nor one prince's
deſtiny: he muſt write a ſtory of the empire, that means to
tell of all their dealing; in this kind. R. leigh's r ſays.
2. Intercourſe. * -
It were to be wiſhed, that men would promote it to the
happineſs of one another, in all their private dealings, among
thoſe who lie more immediately within their influence. Addison
3. Mcaſure of treatment; rules by which one treats another.
God's gracious dealings with men, are the aids and auxilia-
ries neceſſary to us in the purſuit of piety. Hammond's Fundam.
4. Traffick; buſineſs.
The doćior muſt needs die rich; he had great dealings in
his way for many years. Swift's Bicker/aff detected.
DEAMBULATION. m. ſ. [drambulatio, Latin.] I he aët of
walking abroad. -
DeA'M BULAT or Y. adj. [deambu'o, Latin.] Relating to the
pračtice of walking abroad.
DEAN. m. ſ. [decanus, Latin; doyen, French.]
From the Greek word 3:22; in Engliſh, ten; becauſe he
was anciently ſet over ten canons or prebendaries at leaſt in
ſome cathedral church. Ayliffe's Parergon.
As there are two foundations of cathedral churches in Eng-
land, the old and the new, (the new are thoſe which Henry
VIII. upon ſuppreſſion of abbeys, transformed from abbot or
prior, and convent to dean and chapter) ſo there are two
means of creating theſe deans; for thoſe of the old foundation
are brought to their dignity much like biſhops, the king firſt
ſending out his Congé deſire to the chapter, the chapter then
chuſing, the king yielding his royal aſſent, and the biſhop con-
firming them, and giving his mandate to inſtal them. Thoſe
of the new foundation are, by a ſhorter courſe, inſtalled by
virtue of the king's letters patents, without either election or
confirmation. This word is alſo applied to divers, that are
chief of certain peculiar churches or chapels; as the dean of
the king's chapel, the dean of the Arches, the dean of St.
George's chapel at Windſor, and the dean of Bocking in
Eſſex. Cowel.
The dean and canons, or prebends of cathedral churches,
in their firſt inſtitution, were of great uſe in the church:
they were not only to be of counſel with the biſhop for his
revenue, but chiefly for his government in cauſes eccleſiaſti-
cal. Uſe your beſt means to prefer ſuch to thoſe places who
are fit for that purpoſe. Lacºn's Advice to ſiliers.
DE'ANERY. m. ſ. [from dean J
1. The office of a dean. - -
When he could no longer keep the deanery of the chapel-
royal, he made him his ſucceſſor in that near attendance upon
the king. - - Clarendon.
2. The revenue of a dean.
Put both deans in one; or, if that's too much trouble,
Inſtead of the deans, make the dean'ry double. Swift.
3. The houſe of a dean. - *
Take her by the hand, away with her to the deanery, and
diſpatch it quickly. Shake peare's Merry //ives of I/indſor.
DEAN HIP. m. ſ. [from dean J. The office and rank of a dean.
DEAR. adj. [Seon, Saxon.]
i. Beloved; favourite; darling,
Your brother Glo'ſter hates you. * * *
—Oh, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear. Shakespeare R. III.
The dear, dear name ſhe bathes in flowing tears,
Hungs o'er the tomb, Aidion's Ovid, 44tam. b. ii.
And the laſt joy was dearer than the reſt. Pope.
2. Valuable; of a high price ; coſtly.
What made directors cheat the South ſea year?
To feed on wen’ſon when it ſold ſo dear. Pºpe
3. Scarce; not plentiful; as, a dear year. 4.
4. It ſeems to be ſometimes uſed in Shakeſpeare for dººr; ſad:
hatcful; grievous. - &gt; &gt;
What fooliſh boldneſ, brought thee to their mercies,
6 I Whom<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 199</div><p class="Text">D E A
D E A
Whom thou in terms ſo bloody, and ſo dear, -
Haft made thine enemies? Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Let us return,
And ſtrain what other means is left unto us
In our dear peril. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Some dear cauſe
Will in concealment wrap me up a-while :
When I am known aright, you ſhall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Would I had met my deareſ foe in heav'n,
Or ever I had ſeen that day. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Thy other baniſh’d ſon, with this dear fight
Struck pale and bloodleſs. Shakeſpeare's Titus Andronicus.
DEAR. m.ſ. A word of endearment.
That kiſs
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip
Hath virgin'd it e'er ſince. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanuſ.
Go, dear; each minute does new danger bring, Dryden.
See, my dear,
How laviſh nature has adorn'd the year. Dryden.
DE'AR bought. adj. [dear and bought.] Purchaſed at an high
price.
O fleeting joys
Of Paradiſe, dearbought with laſting woe. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Such dearbought bleſfings happen ev'ry day,
Becauſe we know not for what things to pray. Dryd. Fables.
Forget not what my ranſom coſt,
Nor let my dearbought ſoul be loſt. Roſcommon.
DE'ARLING. m. ſ. [now written darling.] Favourite.
They do feed on nećtar, heavenly wiſe,
With Hercules and Hebe, and the reſt
Of Venus's dearlings, through her bounty bleſt. Spenser.
DE'ARLY. adv. [from dear.]
1. With great fondneſs.
For the unqueſtionable virtues of her perſon and mind, he
loved her dearly. Wotton.
2. At an high price.
It is rarely bought, and then alſo bought dearly enough with
fuch a fine. Bacon.
Turnus ſhall dearly pay for faith forſworn;
And corps, and ſwords, and ſhields, on Tyber born. Dryd.
My father dotes, and let him ſtill dote on;
He buys his miſtreſs dearly with his throne. Dryd. Aurengz.
To DEARN. v. a. [bynnan, Sax. to hide.] To mend cloaths.
See DARN.
DE'ARN Ess. n.ſ.. [from dear.]
I. Fondneſs; kindneſs; love.
My brother, I think, he holds you well, and in dearneſ of
heart hath holp to effect your enſuing marriage. Shakeſpeare.
The whole ſenate dedicated an altar to friendſhip, as to a
goddeſs, in reſpect of the great dearneſs of friendſhip between
them two. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
He who hates his neighbour mortally, and wiſely too, muſt
profeſs all the dearneſ, and friendſhip, with readineſs to ſerve
him. Sonth's Sermons.
2. Scarcity; high price.
Landlords prohibit tenants from plowing, which is ſeen in
the dearneſs of corn. Swift.
DE'ARNLY. adv. [beonn, Sax.] Secretly; privately; unſeen.
Obſolete.
At laſt, as chanc'd them by a forreſt ſide
To paſs, for ſuccour from the ſcorching ray,
They heard a rueful voice, that dearnly cry’d
With piercing ſhrieks. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 1. ſan. 35.
DEARTH. n.ſ.. [from dear.]
1. Scarcity which makes food dear.
In times of dearth it drained much coin out of the kingdom,
to furniſh us with corn from foreign parts. Bacon to Williers.
There have been terrible years dearths of corn, and every
place is ſtrewed with beggars; but dearths are common in bet-
ter climates, and our evils here lie much deeper. , Swift.
2. Want; need; famine.
Pity the dearth that I have pined in,
By longing for that food ſo long a time. Shakeſpeare.
Of every tree that in the garden grows,
Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth. Mill. P. L.
3. Barrenneſs; ſterility.
They have brought on themſelves that dearth of plot, and
narrowneſs of imagination, which may be obſerved in all
their plays. Dryden on Dramatick Poeſy.
To DEART I'culat E. n.ſ. [de and articulus, Latin.] To diſ-
joint; to diſmember. Dići.
DEATH. n.ſ. [bea;, Saxon.]
º extinction of life; the departure of the ſoul from the
ody. -
He is the mediator of the New Teſtament, that by means
of death, for the redemption of the tranſgreſſions, they which
are called might receive the promiſe of eternal inhe-
ritance. Heb. ix. 15.
They ſay there is divinity in odd numbers, either in nati-
vity or death. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſºr,
Death, a neceſſary cnd,
3
Will come, when it will come. Shakeſp. Julius Cæſar.
He muſt his ačts reveal,
From the firſt moment of his vital breath,
To his laſt hour of unrepenting death. Dºyden's ºn. b.6.
2. Mortality; deſtruction.
* * How did you dare
To trade and traffick with Macbeth,
In riddles and affairs of death : Shakeſpeare's M.cbeth.
3. The ſtate of the dead. -
In ſwiniſh ſleep
Their drenched natures lie, as in a death. Shakespeare Macbeth.
4. The manner of dying.
Thou ſhalt die the deaths of them that are ſlain in the midſt
of the ſeas. , Ez. xxviii. 8.
5. The image of mortality repreſented by a ſkeleton.
I had rather be married to a death's head, with a bone in
his mouth, than to either of theſe. Shakespeare Mer.h. of Wenice.
If I gaze now, 'tis but to ſee
What manner of death's head twill be,
When it is free
From that freſh upper ſkin; -
The gazer's joy, and ſin. Sucking.
6. Murder, the act of deſtroying life unlawfully.
As in manifeſting the ſweet influence of his mercy, on the
ſevere ſtroke of his juſtice; ſo in this, not to ſuffer a man of
death to live. Bacon, Eſſay 14.
7. Cauſe of death.
They cried out, and ſaid, O thou man of God, there is
death in the pot. 2 Kings, iv. 40.
He caught his death the laſt county-ſeſſions, where he would
go to ſee juſtice done to a poor widow woman. Addison Speciat.
8. Deſtroyer.
All the endeavours Achilles uſed to meet with Heółor, and
be the death of him, is the intrigue which comprehends the
battle of the laſt day. Pote's Wiew of Epic P:stry.
9. [In poetry.] The inſtrument of death.
Deaths inviſible come wing'd with fire;
They hear a dreadful noiſe, and ſtraight expire. Dry. In. Em.
Sounded at once the bow; and ſwiftly flies
The feather'd death, and hiſſes through the ſkies. Dryd. Æn.
Oft, as in airy rings they ſkim the Heath,
The clam’rous plovers feel the leaden death. Pope.
1c. [In theology.] Damnation; eternal torments.
We pray that God will keep us from all fin and wicked-
neſs, from our ghoſtly enemy, and from everlaſting death.
Church Catechiſºn.
DEATH-BED. m. ſ. ſaleath and bed.] The bed to which a man
is confined by mortal ſickneſs.
Sweet ſoul, take heed, take heed of perjury;
Thou art on thy death-bed. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Thy death-bed is no leſſer than the land,
Wherein thou lieſt in reputation ſick. Shakeſ Richard II.
Theſe are ſuch things as a man ſhall remember with joy
upon his death-bed; ſuch as ſhall chear and warm his heart,
even in that laſt and bitter agony. South's Sermons.
Then round our death-bed ev'ry friend ſhould run,
And joyous of our conqueſt early won. Dryden’s Falles.
A death-bed figure is certainly the moſt humbling fight in
the world. Collier on the Palue of Life.
A death-bed repentance ought not indeed to be neglected,
becauſe it is the laſt thing that we can do. Atterbury's Serm.
Fame can never make us lie down contentedly on a death-
bed. Pºpe.
DEATHFUL. adj. [dath and full.] Full of ſlaughter; deſtruc-
tive; murderous. -
Your cruelty was ſuch, as you would ſpare his life for many
deathful torments. Sidney, b, ii.
Time itſelf, under the deathfil ſhade of whoſe wings all
things wither, hath waſted that lively virtue of nature in man
and beaſts, and plants. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
Blood, death, and deathſūl deeds are in that noiſe,
Ruin, deſtruction at the utmoſt point. Miltºn's Agoni/?.
Theſe eyes behold
The deathſul ſcene; princes on princes roll’d. Pope's Odºſ.
DF’ATHL Ess. adj. [from death..] Immortal; neverdying ;
everlaſting.
God hath only immortality, though angels and human
ſouls be deathleſs. Boyle.
Their temples wreath'd with leaves, that ſtill renew ;
For deathleſs laurel is the vićtor's due. Dryden.
Faith and hope themſelves ſhall dic,
While deathlºſs charity remains. Prior.
DE'ATHLIKE. adj. [death and life.] Reſembling death ; ſtill;
gloomy; motionleſs; placid; calm ; peaceful; undiſturbed;
reſembling either the horrours or the quietneſs of death.
Why doſt thou let thy brave ſoul lie ſuppreſt
In deathlike ſlumbers, while thy dangers crave
A waking eye and hand? Craſhaw.
A deathlike ſleep !
A gentle waſting to immortal life! A filton's Paradiſ Iº,
On ſeas, on earth, and all that in them dwell, -
A deathlike quiet and deep ſilence fell. "ß
- - - 3-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 200</div><p class="Text">D E B
D E B
Black melancholy fits, and round her throws
A deathike flumber, and a dread repoſe. Pope.
De ATH's-Doo R. [death and door.] A near approach to death;
the gates of death, wºx2, 43. It is now a low phraſe.
I myſelf knew a perſon of great ſančtity, who was afflicted
to death's-dºor with a vomiting. Taylor's Hºrthy Communicant.
There was a poor young woman that had brought herſelf
even to death's-door with grief for her ſick huſband. L'E/irange.
DE'At HSMAN. m. ſ. [death and man.] Executioner; hang-
man; headſman; he that executes the ſentence of death.
He's dead; I'm only ſorry -
He had no other deathſman. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
As deathſmen you have rid this ſweet young prince. Shakespeare
DE'ATHw Arch. n.ſ.. .[death and watch..] An infect that
makes a tinkling noiſe like that of a watch, and is ſuperſti-
tiouſly imagined to prognoſticate death.
The ſolemn deathwatch click'd the hour ſhe dy’d. Gay.
We learn to preſage approaching death in a family by ravens
and little worms, which we therefore call a deathwatch. JWatts.
To DEA'URATE. v. a. [deauro, Latin.] To gild, or cover
with gold. Die?.
JDEAURA’t 1o N. m. ſ. [from deaurate.] The ačt of gilding.
DEBAccHA'TION. n.ſ. [debacchatio, Latin.] A raging ; a
madneſs. Dić?.
To De BARB. adj. [from de and barba, Latin.] To deprive of
his beard. Dić7.
To DE BA/RK v. a. [debarquer, Fr.] To diſembark. Dić.
To DEBA'R. v. a. [from bar.] To exclude ; to preclude; to
ſhut out from anything; to binder.
* The ſame boats and the ſame buildings are found in coun-
tries two thouſand miles diſtant, debarred from all commerce
by unpaſſable mountains, lakes and deſerts. Raleigh's Eſſays.
Not ſo ſtrićtly hath our Lord impos'd
Labour, as to debar us when we need
Refreſhment, whether food, or talk between,
Food of the mind. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix. 1, 236.
Civility, intended to make us eaſy, is employed in laying
chains and fetters upon us, in de' arring us of our wiſhes, and
in croſſing our moſt reaſonable deſires. Swift's Examiner.
To DEBASE. v. a. [from baſe.]
1. To reduce from a higher to a lower ſtate.
Homer intended to teach, that pleaſure and ſenſuality delaſe
men into beaſts. Notes on the Odyſſey.
As much as you raiſe ſilver, you debaſe gold; for they are
in the condition of two things, put in oppoſite ſcales; as much
as the one riſes, the other falls. Locke.
2. To make mean; to degenerate; to fink into meanneſs; to
make deſpicable.
It is a kind of taking God's name in vain, to debaſ reli-
gion with ſuch frivolous diſputes. Hooker, b. v. ſeół. 30.
A man of large poſſeſſions has not leiſure to conſider of
every ſlight expence, and will not debaſe himſelf to the ma-
nagement of every trifle. Dryden.
Reſtraining others, yet himſelf not free;
Made impotent by pow'r, dehas’d by dignity. Dryden.
3. To fink; to vitiate with meanneſs.
He ought to be careful of not letting his ſubjećt delaſ his
ſtyle, and betray him into a meanneſs of expreſſion. Addiſon.
4. To adulterate; to leſſen in value by baſe admixtures.
He reformed the coin, which was much adulterated and,
debaſed in the times and troubles of king Stephen. Hale.
Words ſo debas'd and hard, no ſtone
Was hard enough to touch them on. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
DEBA's EMENT. n.ſ.. [from debaſe.] The act of debaſing or
degrading.
It is a wretched debaſement of that ſprightly faculty, the
tongue, thus to be made the interpreter to a goat or boar.
Government of the Tongue, ſect. 1 2.
De BA's ER. n ſ [from debaſe.] He that debaſes; he that adul-
terates; he that degrades another; he that ſinks the value of
things, or deſtroys the dignity of perſons.
DEBA"TABLE. adj. [from debate.] Diſputable; that which is,
or may be, ſubject to controverſy.
The French requeſted, that the fiſhing of Tweede, the de-
batable ground, and the Scottiſh hoſtages, might be reſtored to
the Scots. Hayward.
A DEBATE. m. ſ. [debat, French.] -
1. A perſonal diſpute; a controverſy.
Another way that men ordinarily uſe, to force others to
ſubmit to their judgments, and receive their opinion in debate,
is to require the adverſary to admit what they allege as a
proof, or to aſſign a better. Locke.
It is to diffuſe a light over the underſtanding, in our enqui-
ries after truth, and not to furniſh the tongue with debate and
controverſy. //atts's Logik.
2. A quarrel; a conteſt.
Now, lords, if heav'n doth give ſucceſsful end
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
We will our youth lead on to higher fields,
And draw no ſwords but what are ſančtified. Shakespeare H. IV.
'Tis thine to ruin realms, o’erturn a ſtate;
Betwixt the deareſt friends to raiſe debate. Dryden's En.
To DERATR. v. a. [debatre, French.] To controvert; to
diſpute; to conteſt.
Debate thy cauſe with thy neighbour himſelf, and diſcover
not a ſecret to another. Prov. xxv. 9.
He could not debate any thing without ſome commotion,
even when the argument was not of moment. Clarendon.
To DE BATE. v. n.
1. To deliberate.
Your ſev'ral ſuits -
Have been conſider'd and debated on. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
2. To diſpute. . -
He preſents that great ſoul debating upon the ſubjećt of life
and death with his intimate friends. Tatler, N°. 53.
DEBA'TEFU L. adj. [from debate.]
1. [Of perſons.] Quarrelſome; contentious.
2. [Of things.] Conteſted; occaſioning quarrels.
DEBA'TEMENT. n.ſ. [from debate.] Conteſt; controverſy.
Without debatement further, more or leſs,
He ſhould the bearers put to ſudden death. Shakespeare Hamlet.
DE BATER. m. ſ. [from debate.] A diſputant; a controvertiſt.
To DEBA'UCH. [dºſbaucher, Fr. debacchari, Latin.]
1. To corrupt; to vitiate. .
This it is to counſel things that are unjuſt ; firſt, to de-
bauch a king to break his laws, and then to ſeek protećtion.
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. To corrupt with lewdneſs.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and ſquires,
Men ſo diſorder'd, ſo debauch'd and bold,
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shews like a riotous inn. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. To corrupt by intemperance.
No man's reaſon did ever dićtate to him, that it is reaſon-
able for him to debauck himſelf by intemperance and brutiſh
ſenſuality. - Tillotſon, Sermon 6.
DEBA'uch. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A fit of intemperance ;
luxury; exceſs; lewdneſs. -
He will for ſome time contain himſelf within the bºunds of
ſobriety; ’till within a little while he recovers his former de-
bauch, and is well again, and then his appetite returns. Calamy.
The firſt phyſicians by debauch were made;
Exceſs began, and ſloth ſuſtains the trade. Dryden's Fables.
De BAU chE'E. m. ſ. [from deſlauché, French..] A lecher; a
drunkard ; a man given to intemperance.
Could we but prevail with the greateſt debauchees amongſt
us to change their lives, we ſhould find it no very hard matter
to change their judgments. South's Sermons.
DEBA'uch ER. m. ſ. [from debauch..] One who ſeduces others
to intemperance or lewdneſs; a corrupter.
DEBA'UcHERY. m. ſ. [from debauch..] The pračtice of exceſs;
intemperance; lewdneſs.
Oppoſe vices by their contrary virtues, hypocriſy by
ſober piety, and debauchery by temperance. Sprat's Sermons.
Theſe magiſtrates, inſtead of leſſening enormities, occaſion
juſt twice as much debauchery as there would be without them.
Swift's Projeci for the Advancement of Religion.
DeBA'UcHMENT. n.ſ.. [from debauch..] The act of debauch-
ing or vitiating; corruption.
They told them ancient ſtories of the raviſhment of chaſte
maidens, or the debauchment of nations, or the extreme po-
verty of learned perſons. Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
To DEBE'L. v. a. [debello, Latin.] To conquer; to
To DEBELLATE. } overcome in war.
It doth notably ſet forth the conſent of all nations and ages,
in the approbation of the extirpating and debellating of giants,
monſters, and foreign tyrants, not only as lawful, but as me-
ritorious even of divine honour. Bacon's Holy War.
Him long of old
Thou didſt debel, and down from heaven caſt
With all his army. Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b. iv.
DE BELLATION. m.ſ.. [from debellatio, Lat.] The act of con-
quering in war.
DE BE'NTURE. m. ſ. [debentur, Latin, from debco.] A writ or
note, by which a debt is claimed.
You modern wits, ſhould each man bring his claim,
Have deſperate debentures on your fame;
And little would be left you, I'm afraid,
If all your debts to Greece and Rome were paid. , Swift.
DE'BILE. adj. [debili, Lat.] Weak; feeble ; languid; faint;
without ſtrength; imbecile; impotent.
I have not waſh'd my noſe that bled,
Or foil’d ſome debile wretch, which without note
There's many elſe have done. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To DEBI'LITATE. v. a. [debilito, Latin.] To weaken; to
make faint; to enfeeble; to emaſculate.
In the luſt of the eye, the luſt of the fleſh, and the pride
of life, they ſeemed as weakly to fail as their debilitated poſte-
rity ever after. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. 1. cant. 1.
The ſpirits being rendered languid, are incapable of venti-
lating and purifying the blood, and debilitated in attracting
nutriment for the parts. Harvey on Conſumptions.
DEBILITA"rios. n.ſ. (from debilitatio, Lat..] The act of
Weakening.
The
i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 201</div><p class="Text">D E C
D E C
The weakneſs cannot return anything of ſtrength, honour,
or ſafety to the head, but a debilitation and ruin. K. Charles.
I)f B111 ry. m. ſ. [debilitas, Latin.] Weakneſs; feebleneſs;
languor; faintneſs; imbecility.
Methinks I am partaker of thy paſſion,
And in thy caſe do glaſs mine own debility. Sidney.
Aliment too vaporous or perſpirable will ſubječt it to the
inconveniencies of too ſtrong a perſpiration, which are debi-
lity, faintings, and ſometimes ſudden death. Arbuthn, on Alim.
DEBONAIR. adj. [debonnaire, Fr.] Elegant; civil; well-
bred; gentle; complaiſant.
Crying, let be that lady dehonair,
Thou recreant knight, and ſoon thyſelf prepare
To battle, if thou mean her love to gain. Fairy Queen.
He met her once a maying,
There on beds of violets blue, -
And freſh blown roſes waſh’d in dew,
Fill'd her with thee, a daughter fair,
So buckſom, blithe, and debonair. Miltºn.
The nature of the one is dibonair and accoſtable; of the
other, retired and ſupercilious; the one quick and ſprightful,
the other ſlow and ſaturnine. Howel's Wocal Foreſt.
And ſhe that was not only paſſing fair, * -
But was withal diſcreet and debonair,
Reſolv’d the paſſive doćtrine to fulfil. Dryden's Nun’s Prieſ.
Debosa'i Rly. dav. [from delonair.J Elegantly; with a gen-
teel air.
DEBT. n.ſ. [debitum, Latin; dºtte, French.]
1. That which one man owes to another.
There was one that died greatly in debt: well, ſays one, if
he be gone, then he hath carried five hundred ducats of mine
with him into the other world. Bacon, Apophth, 14 I.
The delt of ten thouſand talents, which the ſervant owed
º
the king, was no ſlight ordinary ſum. Duppa's Devotions.
To this great loſs a ſea of tears is due;
But the whole debt not to be paid by you. J/allir.
Above a thouſand pounds in delt,
Takes horſe, and in a mighty fret
Rides day and night. Swift.
2. That which any one is obliged to do or ſuffer.
Your ſon, my lord, has paid a ſoldier's debt;
He only liv'd but 'till he was a man,
But like a man he died. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
DE'BTE D. part. [from debt. To DEBT is not found J In-
debted; obliged to.
Which do amount to three odd ducats more
Than Iſtand debted to this gentleman. Shakespeare C.m. of Errours.
DE'BTor. m. ſ. [debitor, Latin.]
1. He that owes ſomething to another.
I am debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, both
to the wiſe and to the unwiſe. Ro. i. 14.
The caſe of debtors in Rome, for the firſt four centuries, .
was, after the ſet time for payment, no choice but either to
pay, or be the creditor's ſlave. Swift.
2. One that owes money.
I'll bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully reſt deltºr for the firſt. Shakespeare March. of Wen.
If he his ample palm
Should hap’ly on ill-fated ſhoulder lay
Of debtor, ſtrait his body, to the touch
Obſequious, as whilom knights were wont,
To ſome enchanted caſtle is convey'd. Philips. -
There dy'd my father, no man's debtor;
And there I'll die, nor worſe, nor better. Pope's Horace.
3. One ſide of an account-book.
When I look upon the debtor ſide, I find ſuch innumerable
articles, that I want arithmetick to caſt them up; but when I
look upon the creditor ſide, I find little more than blank
paper. Addison's Speciator, N°. 549.
DE BULLITION. m. ſ. [dibulītio, Lat..] A bubbling or ſeething
Over. Dić.
IXECAcu'MINATED. adj. [decacuminatus, Latin.] Having the
top cut off. Diº.
DE'cA.D.E. n.ſ. [*2, Gr. decas, Latin.] The ſum of ten;
a number containing ten. -
Men were not only out in the number of ſome days, the
latitude of a few years, but might be wide by whole olym-
piads, and divers decades of years. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
We make cycles and periods of years; as decades, centuries,
and chiliads, chiefly for the uſe of computations in hiſtory,
chronology, and aſtronomy. Płlder on Time.
All rank'd by ten; whole decades, when they dine,
Muſt want a Trojan ſlave to pour the wine. Pºpe's Iliad.
PECA'D Ency. m.ſ. [decadence, French..] Decay; fail. Dić.
DF's Agos. n.ſ.. [from *, ten, and zºna, a corner.] A
plain figure in geometry, having ten ſides and angles.
DF'cAlogu E. m. ſ. [?izaxº~. Greek.] The ten command-
ments given by God to Moſes.
The commands of God are clearly revealed both in the
decalogue and other parts of ſacred writ. Hammond.
To DECAMP. v. m. [decamper, French..] To ſhift the camp;
to move off.
DEcAMPMENT. n.ſ.. [from decamp J The ad of ſhifting the
camp.
To DECATNT., v.a. [decanto, Lat. decanter, Fr.] To pour
off gently by inclination.
Take aqua fºrtis, and diſſolve in it ordinary coined ſilver,
and pour the coloured ſolution into twelve times as much fair
water, and then decant or filtrate the mixture, that it may be
very clear. Iºle.
They attend him daily as their chief,
Decant his wine, and carve his beef. Swift.
DF cast A'TIGN. m. ſ. [decantation, Fr J. The act of decanting
or pouring off clear.
DEcA'NTER. m. ſ [from decant..] A glaſs veſſel made for pour-
ing off liquor clear from the lees.
To DECA'PITATE. v. a. [decapito, Latin.] To behead.
To DECA'Y. v. n. [decheoir, Fr. from de and cadere, Latin.]
To loſe excellence; to decline from the ſtate of perfection;
to be gradually impaired.
The monarch oak
Three centuries grows, and three he ſtays
Supreme in ſtate, and in three more decays. Dryden.
The garlands fade, the vows are worn away;
So dics her love, and ſo my hopes decay. Poſe.
To DE'cAY. v. a. To impair ; to bring to decay.
Infirmity, that decays the wiſe, doth ever make better the
fool. Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night.
Cut off a ſtock of a tree, and lay that which you cut off
to putrefy, to ſee whether it will decay the reſt of the ſtock.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 905.
He was of a very ſmall and decayed fortune, and of no good
education. Clarendon.
Decay’d by time and wars, they only prove
Their former beauty by your former love. Dryden.
In Spain our ſprings, like old men's children, be
I)ecay’d and wither'd from their infancy. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
It is ſo ordered, that almoſt everything which corrupts the
ſoul decays the body. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 122.
DF ca'Y. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Decline from the ſtate of perfection; ſtate of diminution:
What comfort to this great decay may come,
Shall be applied. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
She has been a fine lady, and paints and hides
Her decays very well. Ben. Johnſon's Catiline.
And thoſe decays, to ſpeak the naked truth, -
Through the defects of age, were crimes of youth. Denham.
By reaſon of the tenacity of fluids, and attrition of their
parts, and the weakneſs of claſticity in ſolids, motion is much
more apt to be loſt than got, and is always upon the decay. Newt.
Each may feel encreaſes and decays,
And ſee now clearer aid now darker days. Eſſay on Criticiſm.
Taught half by reaſon, half by mere decay,
To welcome death, and calmly paſs away. Popſ.
2. The effects of diminution; the marks of decay.
They think, that whatever is called old muſt have the decay
of time upon it, and truth too were liable to mould and rot-
tenneſs. Lºcke.
3. Declenſion from proſperity.
And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with
thee, then thou ſhalt relieve him. Levit. xxv. 35.
I am the very man,
That, from your firſt of difference and decay,
Have follow'd your ſad ſteps. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
DEc'AYER. m. ſ. [from decay.] That which cauſes decay.
Your water is a fore decayer of your whorſon dead body.
* Shakespeare care's Hamlet.
DECE/ASE. m. ſ. ſaeceſs, Lat J Death; departure from life.
Lands are by human law, in ſome places, after the owner's
deceaſe, divided unto all his children; in ſome, all deſcendeth
to the clieſt ſon. Hooker, b. i. ſºci. Io.
To DEcE/ASE. v. m. [decedo, Latin.] To die; to depart from
life. +
He tells us Arthur is deceas'd to-night. Shakespeare King john.
You ſhall die
Twice now, where others, that mortality
In her fair arms holds, ſhall but once deceaſe. Chapm. Odyſſ.
His lateſt vićtories ſtill thickeſt came,
As, near the centre, motion doth increaſe:
*Till he, preſs'd down by his own weighty name,
Did, like the veſta!, under ſpoils deceaſe. Dryden.
DECEIT. m. ſ. [deceptio, Latin.]
1. Fraud; a cheat; a fallacy; any praślice by which falſhood is
made to paſs for truth.
My lips ſhall not ſpeak wickedneſs, nor my tongue utter
deceit. job, xxvii. 4.
2. Stratagem; artifice.
His demand
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honeſt love,
But from deceit, bred by neceſſity. Shakeſpeare's Hºry v1.
3. [In law.] A ſubtle wily ſhift or deviſe; all manner of craft,
ſubtilty, guile, fraud, wilineſs, ſlightneſs, cunning, Covin,
colluſion, practice and offence, uſed to deceive another nań
by any means, which hath no other propel or particular name
but offence. C. we'.
DEcE"It F C L.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 202</div><p class="Text">D E C
º
Dece'itful. adj. [deceit and full.J Fraudulent; full of
deceit. - - -
- I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, falſe, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, ſmacking of ev'ry ſin -
That has a name. - Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
The lovely young Lavinia once had friends,
And fortune ſnil'd, deceitful, on her birth. Thomſon's Autumn.
Dece'rfully adv. [from dºitul. Fraudulently; with
deceit. - -
Exerciſe of form may be deceitfully diſpatched of }.
- attoº.
Dece'rt FULNess. n.ſ. (from deceitful..] The quality of being
fraudulent; tendency to deceive. .
The care of this world, and the ..", of riches,
choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful. Alſat. xiii. 22.
Dece'Iv ABL. E. adj. [from deceive.] -
1. Subjećt to fraud; expoſed to impoſture. - -
Man was not only deceivable in his integrity, but the angels
of light in all their clarity. Brown's Pulgar Errours, h. i. c. 1.
How would thou uſe me now, blind, and thereby
Deceivable, in moſt things as a child
Helpleſs; hence eaſily contemn’d and ſcorn'd,
And laſt neglected. Milton's Agoniſles, l. 938.
2. Subject to produce errour; deceitful.
t is good to conſider of deformity, not as a ſign, which is
more deceivable, but as a cauſe which ſeldom faileth of the
effect. Raon's Eſſays.
He received nothing but fair promiſes, which proved
deceivable. - Hayward.
O everſailing truſt
In mortal ſtrength ! And oh, what not in man
Deceivable and vain : Mi ton’s Agoniſłes, l. 348.
Dece'Iv A BLENEss. n.ſ.. [from deceivable.] Liableneſs to be
deceived. - * - -
He that has a great patron, has the advantage of his negli-
gence and deceivableneſs. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 8.
To DECEIVE. v. a [decipio, Latin.]
1. To cauſe to miſtake; to bring into errour; to impoſe upon.
Some have been apt to be deceived into an opinion, that
there was a natural or divine right of primogeniture to both
eſtate and power. Locke.
2. To delude by ſtratagem.
3. To cut off from expectation. - -
The Turkiſh general, deceived of his expećtation, with-
drew his fleet twelve miles off. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
* I now believ'd -
The happy day approach'd, nor are my hopes deceiv'd. Dryd.
4. To mock; to fail. .” -
- They rais'd a feeble cry with trembling notes,
But the weak voice deceiv'd their gaſping throats. Dryd. Æn.
Dece'rv ER. m. ſ. [from deceive..] One that leads another into
errour; a cheat.
Sigh no more, ladies, figh no more;
Men were deceivers ever :
One foot in ſea, and one on ſhore; -
To one thing conſtant never. Shakespeare Much ado about Nothing.
As for his diſmiſſion out of France, they interpreted it not
as if he were detected, or neglected for a counterfeit de-
ceiver. s º Paon's Henry VII.
Thoſe voices, ačtions or geſtures, which men have not by
any compact agreed to make the inſtruments of conveying
their thoughts one to another, are not the proper inſtruments
of deceiving, ſo as to denominate the perſon uſing them a
lyar or deceiver. - - - - - - South's Sermons.
It is to be admired how any deceiver can be ſo weak to
foretel things near at hand, when a very few months muſt
of neceſſity diſcover the impoſture. Swift's Predictions.
Adieu, the heart-expanding bowl, --
And all the kind deceivers of the ſoul. | Pope's Horace.
December. m. ſ. [december, Latin.] The laſt month of the
year; but named december, or the tenth month, when the year
began in March. -
Men are April when they woo, and December when they
ºwed. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
What ſhould we ſpeak of," -
When we are old as you? When we ſhall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
DE ce'MPEDAL. adj. [from decempeda, Latin.] Ten feet in
length. - ' ' ' ' ' Dić7.
DEcE'Mvir ATE. n.ſ. [decemviratus, Lat.] The dignity and
office of the ten governours of Rome, who were appointed to
rüle the commonwealth inſtead of conſuls. Their authority
ſubſiſted only two years. - - ... . -
Bºğ. }n. ſ. [decence, French; decet, Latin.] º
1. Propriety of form; proper formality; becoming ceremony.
Thoſe thouſand decencies, that daily flow . . .
From all her words and actions. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
In good works there may be goodneſs in the general; but
detence and gracefulneſs can be only in the particulars in doing
the good. ' ' ' ' ' ' - ' ' ' ' ' Sprat's Sºrmons.
Wol. ;
*
Were the offices of religion ſtript of all the external de-
cºncies of worſhip, they would not make a due impreſſion on
the minds of thoſe who aſſiſt at them. Atterbury's Sermons.
She ſpeaks, behaves, and acts juſt as ſhe ought;
But never, never reached gen’rous thought:
Virtue ſhe finds too painful an endeavour,
Content to dwell in decencies for ever.
2. Suitableneſs to character; propriety.
And muſt I own, ſhe ſaid, my ſecret ſmart - -
What with more deconce were in ſilence kept. Dryden's AFn.
The next conſideration, immediately ſubſequent to the
being of a thing, is what agrees or diſagrees with that thing;
what is ſuitable or unſuitable to it; and from this ſprings the
notion of decency or indecency, that which becomes or miſ-
becomes. - South's Sermons.
Sentiments which raiſe laughter, can very ſeldom be ad-
mitted with any decency into an heroick poem. Addison Speciat.
3. Modeſty; not ribaldry; not obſcenity. -
Immodeſt words admit of no defence; -
For want of decency is want of ſenſe. Roſammon.
Dece'NNIAL. adj. [from decennium, Latin.] What continues
for the ſpace of ten years.
DEceNNov Al. }*. [decem and movem, Latin.] Relating
DEcENNo'v ARY. to the number nineteen.
Meton, of old, in the time of the Peloponeſian war, con-
ſtituted a decennºval circle, or of nineteen years; the ſame
which we now call the golden number. Holder on Time.
Seven months are retrenched in this whole decennovary pro-
greſs of the epačts, to reduce the accounts of her motion and
place to thoſe of the ſun. Holder on Time.
DE'cENT, adj. [decens, Lat.] Becoming; fit; ſuitable.
Since there muſt be ornaments both in painting and poetry,
if they are not neceſſary, they muſt at leaſt be decent; that is,
in their due place, and but moderately uſed. Dryden.
DE'cENTLY. adv. [from decent.] In a proper manner; with
ſuitable behaviour; without meanneſs or oſtentation.
They could not decently refuſe aſſiſtance to a perſon, who
had puniſhed thoſe who had inſulted their relation. Broome.
2. Without immodeſty.
Paſt hope of ſafety, 'twas his lateſt care,
Like falling Caeſar, decently to die. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
He performs what friendſhip, juſtice, truth require; ,
What could he more, but decently retire * Swift.
Decept IBI'lity. n. ſ. [from deceit..] Liableneſs to be de-
ceived. -
Some errours are ſo fleſhed in us, that they maintain their
intereſt upon the dºptibility of our decayed natures. Glanville.
DECE'PTIBLE. adj. [from deceit.] Liable to be deceived; open
to impoſture; ſubjećt to fraud. * t
The firſt and father cauſe of common errour, is the com-
mon infirmity of human nature; of whoſe deceptible condi-
tion, perhaps, there ſhould not need any other eviction than
the frequent errours we ſhall ourſelves commit. Brown.
DEcE'PTIGN. m. ſ. [deceptio, Latin.] -
1. The act or means of deceiving; cheat; fraud; fallacy.
Being thus divided from truth in themſelves, they are yet
farther removed by advenient deception. Brown's Vulgar Err.
All deception is a miſapplying of thoſe ſigns, which, by
compačt or inſtitution, were made the means of mens ſigni-
fying or conveying their thoughts. South's Sermons.
2. The ſtate of being deceived. -
Reaſon, not impoſſibly, may meet
Some ſpecious obječi by the foe ſuborn'd,
And fall into deception unaware.
P4.
. Yet there is a credence in my heart,
That doth invert th’ atteſt of eyes and ears; *
As if thoſe organs had deceptious functions, - -
Created only to calumniate. Shakeſpeare's Troil, and Creſſida.
DE ce'Ptive. adj. [from deceit.] Having the power of de-
ceiving - - Die?.
Dece'PTö Ry. adj. [from deceit.] Containing means of deceit. Die?.
DECE/RPT. adj. [decerptus, Lat..] Diminiſhed; taken off Diéf.
Dece'RPTIBLE. adj. [decerto, Latin.] That may be taken
off. . Dić?.
Dece'Rption. n. ſ. [from decerpt.] The act of leſſening, or
taking off. - - - - Dićf.
DeceRTA'tion. n.ſ. [decertatio, Latin.] A contention; a
ſtriving; a diſpute. Die?.
Dece'ssion. m. ſ. [deceſſio, Latin.] A departure ; a going
away. . - Dief.
To DEcHA'R.M. v. a, [dechariner, French..] To counteract a
charm; to diſinchant.
Notwithſtanding the help of phyſick, he was ſuddenly
cured by decharming the witchcraft. Harvey on Conſumptions.
To DECIDE. v. a. [decido, Latin.]
1. To fix the event of ; to determine.
- ‘The day approach'd when fortune ſhould decide
Th’ important enterprize, and give the bride. Dryd. Fables.
2. To determine a queſtion or diſpute.
In council oft, and oft in battle tried,
Betwixt thy maſter and the world dutide. Granville.
6 K - Whe
Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt;
DEcE'ptioUs, adj. [from deceit..] Deceitful; apt to deceive.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 203</div><p class="Text">D E C
D E C
Who ſhall decide, when doćtors diſagree,
And foundeſt caſuiſts doubt Pope.
be'cine Nce. 'ſ [decido, Latin.]. . .
1. The quality of being ſhed, or of falling off.
2. The act of falling away.
Men obſerving the decidence of their horn, do fall upon the
conceit that it annually rotteth away, and ſucceſſively renew-
eth again. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. iii. c. 7.
Dec.1'DER. m. ſ. [from decide.]
1. One who determines cauſes.
I cannot think that a jeſter or a monkey, a droll or a pup-
pet, can be proper judges or deciders of controverſy. It atts.
It is ſaid that the man is no ill decider in common caſes of
property, where party is out of the queſtion. Swift.
2. One who determines quarrels.
DECIDUOUS. adj. [deciduus, Latin.] Falling; not peren-
nial; not laſting through the year.
In botany the perianthium, or calyx, is deciduous with the
flower. £uincy.
Deciduous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from deciduous.] Aptneſs to fall;
quality of fading once a year. I)i&amp;#.
Decim AL. adj. [decimus, Latin.] Numbered by ten; multi-
plied by ten.
In the way we take now to name numbers by millions of
millions of millions, it is hard to go beyond eighteen, or, at
moſt, four and twenty decimal progreſſions, without con-
fuſion. Locke.
To DECIMATE. v. a. [decimus, Latin.] To tithe; to take
the tenth.
Decima’rion, n.ſ.. [from decimate J
1. A tithing ; a ſelection of every tenth by lot or otherwiſe.
2. A ſelection by lot of every tenth ſoldier, in a general mutiny,
for puniſhment.
By decimation and a tithed death,
Take thou the deſtin'd tenth.
A decimation I will ſtrićtly make
Of all who my Charinus did forſake;
And of each legion each centurion ſhall die. Dryden.
To DECIPHER. v.a. [dºchiffrer, French.]
1. To explain that which is written in ciphers.
Zelmane, that had the ſame charašter in her heart, could
eaſily decipher it; and therefore, to keep him the longer in
fpeech, deſired to know the concluſion of the matter, and
how the honeſt Dametas was eſcaped. Sidney.
Aſſurance is writ in a private charaćter, not to be read,
nor underſtood, but by the conſcience, to which the ſpirit of
God has vouchſafed to decipher it. South's Sermons.
2. To write out; to mark down in charaćters. -
Could I give you a lively repreſentation of guilt and hor-
rour on this hand, and paint out eternal wrath, and decipher
eternal vengeance on the other, then might I ſhew you the
condition of a ſinner hearing himſelf denied by Chriſt. South.
Then were laws of neceſſity invented, that ſo every parti-
cular ſubject might find his principal pleaſure, d. ciphered unto
him, in the tables of his laws. Locke.
3. To ſtamp; to charaćteriſe; to mark.
You are both decipher'd
For villains mark'd with rape. Shakeſpeare's Titus Andronicus.
4. To unfold; to unravel; as, to decipher a perplexed affair.
Deci'PHE RER. m. ſ. [ from decipher. J One who explains
writings in cypher.
DEc1'sion. n.ſ.. [from decide.]
1. Determination of a difference.
Pleaſure and revenge
Have ears more deaf than adders, to the voice
Of any true deciſion. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſſida.
The great number of the undertakers, the worth of ſome
of them, and their zeal to bring the matter to a deciſion, are
ſure arguments of the dignity and importance of it. Iſoodward.
War is a direét appeal to God for the deciſiºn of ſome diſ-
pute, which can by no other means be poſſibly determined.
Atterbury's Sermons.
Shakeſpeare's Timon.
2. Determination of an event.
The time approaches,
That will with due deciſion make us know
What we ſhall ſay we have, and what we owe. Shakespeare Macb.
Their arms are to the laſt deciſion bent,
- And fortune labours with the vaſt event. Dryden's Aurengz.
3. It is uſed in Scotland for a narrative, or reports of the pro-
ceedings of the court of ſeſſion there.
Deci'sive. adj. [from decide.]
1. Having the power of determining any difference.
Such a reflečtion, though it carries nothing perfectly deci-
five in it, yet creates a mighty confidence in his breaſt, and
trengthens him much in his opinion. Atterbury's Sermons.
This they are ready to look upon as a determination on
their ſide, and deciſive of the controverſy between vice and
virtue. - Rogers's Sermons.
2. Having the power of ſettling any event.
~ : - For on th' event,
Pºciſive of this bloody day, depends
The fate of kingdoms. Philips.
5
Deci'sively, adv. [from deciſive..] In a concluſive manner.
Deci's Iven Ess. n.ſ. [from deciſive.] The power of termi-
nating any difference, or ſettling an event.
Deci’so RY. adj. [from decide.J. Able to determine or decide.
To DEck. v. a. [decken, Dutch.]
1. To cover ; to overſpread. -
Ye miſts and exhalations, that now riſe
From hill or ſteaming lake, duſky or grey,
*Till the ſun paint your fleecy ſkirts with gold,
In honour to the world's great Author, riſe !
Whether to dºck with clouds th’ uncolour'd ſky,
Or wet the thirſty earth with falling ſhowers,
Riſing or falling, ſtill advance his praiſe. Milt. Par. Loft.
2. To dreſs; to array. -
Sweet ornament' that decks a thing divine. Shakeſpeare.
Long may'ſt thou live to wail thy children's loſs,
And ſee another, as I ſee thee now,
Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art ſtall'd in mine. Shakespeare. R. III.
She ſets to work millions of ſpinning worms,
That in their green ſhops weave the ſmooth-hair'd ſilk,
To deck her ſons. - Milton.
3. To adorn; to embelliſh. -
But direful, deadly black, both leaf and bloom,
Fit to adorn the head, and deck the dreary tomb. Fai. Queen.
Now the dew with ſpangles deck'd the ground,
A ſweeter ſpot of earth was never found. Dryden.
The god ſhall to his vot'ries tell
Each conſcious tear, each bluſhing grace,
That deck'd dear Eloiſa's face. Prior.
DEck. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The floor of a ſhip.
Her keel plows hell,
And deck knocks heaven. B. jobmſon.
We have alſo raiſed our ſecond decks, and given more vent
thereby to our ordinance, trying on our nether overloop. Ralei.
If any, born and bred under deck, had no other informa-
tion but what ſenſe affords, he would be of opinion that the
ſhip was as ſtable as a houſe. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 11.
On high-rais'd decks the haughty Belgians ride,
Beneath whoſe ſhade our humble frigates go. Dryden.
Day to night they bring,
With hymns and peans, to the Bowyer king:
At ſun-ſet to their ſhip they make return,
And ſnore ſecure on decks 'till roſy morn.
2. Pack of cards piled regularly on each other.
Beſides gems, many other ſorts of ſtones are regularly
figured: the Amianthus, of parallel threads, as in the pile of
velvet; and the Selenites, of parallel plates, as in a deck of
cards. Grew's Cºſmol. b. i. c. 2.
DE'cker. n.ſ.. [from deck.] A dreſſer; one that apparels or
adorns; a coverer.
To DECLA'IM. v. n. [dedamo, Latin.] To harangue; to
ſpeak to the paſſions; to rhetoricate; to ſpeak ſet orations.
What are his miſchiefs, conſul ? You declaim
Againſt his manners, and corrupt your own. B. Johnſ. Cat.
The ſplendid declaimings of novices and men of heat. South.
It is uſual for maſters to make their boys declaim on both
fides of an argument. Swift.
Dreſs up all the virtues in the beauties of oratory, and
declaim aloud on the praiſe of goodneſs. J/atts's Improvement.
Decla'i MER. m. ſ. [from declaim..] One who makes ſpeeches
with intent to move the paſſions.
Your Salamander is a perpetual declaimer againſt
jealouſy. - Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 198.
Decla Mation. m. ſ. [declamatio, Latin.] A diſcourſe ad-
dreſſed to the paſſions; an harangue; a ſet ſpeech; a piece of
rhetorick.
The cauſe why declamations prevail ſo greatly, is, for that
men ſuffer themſelves to be deluded. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 8.
Thou mayſt forgive his anger, while thou makeſt uſe of the
plainneſs of his declamation. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Decla MA'to R. n.ſ. [Latin. J A declaimer; an orator; a
rhetorician.
Who could, I ſay, hear this generous declamator, without
being fired at his noble zeal. Tatler, Nº. 56.
Decla'MAT or Y. adj. [declamatorius, Latin.]
1. Relating to the practice of declaiming; pertaining to decla-
mation; treated in the manner of a rhetorician.
This a while ſuſpended his interment, and became
a declamatory theme amongſt the religious men of that
age. J%tton.
2. Appealing to the paſſions.
He has run himſelf into his own declamatory way, and
almoſt forgotten that he was now ſetting up for a moral
poet. Dryden.
Decla'Rable. adj. [from declare.] Capable of proof.
This is declarable from the beſt writers. Brown's Vulg. Err.
Decla RA'tion. n. ſ. [from declare.] -
I. A proclamation or affirmation; oral expreſſion; publication.
His promiſes are nothing elſe but declarations, what God
will do for the good of men. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 2.
Though wit and learning are certain and habitual perfec-
- tions
Dryden's Iliad.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 204</div><p class="Text">D E C
D E C
*
ticns of the mind, yet the declaration of them, which alone
brings the repute, is ſubjećt to a thouſand hazards. South.
There are no where ſo plain and full declarations of his
mercy and love to the ſons of men, as are made in the
goſpel. Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
2. An explanation of ſomething doubtful. Obſoletc.
3. [In law.] Declaration (declaratio) is properly the ſhewing
forth, or laying out, of an action perſonal in any ſuit, though
it is uſed ſometimes for both perſonal and real actions. Cowel.
Declarative. adj. [from declare.] Making declaration;
explanatory. -
The names of things ſhould be always taken from ſome-
thing obſervably declarative of their form or nature. Grew.
2. Making proclamation.
To this we may add the vox populi, ſo declarative on the
ſame ſide. Swift's Examiner, N°. 44.
Decla'RAtoRILY. adv. [from declaratory.] In the form of a
declaration; not promiſfively; not in a decretory form.
Andreas Alciatus the civilian, and Franciſcus de Cordua,
have both declaratorily confirmed the ſame. Brown's Vulg. Err.
Decla'Rator Y. adj. [from declare.] Affirmative; expreſſive;
not decretory; not promiſſory.
Theſe bleſfings are not only declaratory of the good plea-
ſure and intention of God towards them, but likewiſe of the
natural tendency of the thing. Tillotſon, Serm. 4.
To DECLA'RE. v. a. [declaro, Latin.]
1. To clear; to free from obſcurity.
To declare this a little, we muſt aſſume that the ſurfaces of
ſuch bodies are exactly ſmooth. Boyle on Colours.
2. To make known; to tell evidently and openly. -
It hath been declared unto ſome of you, that there are con-
tentions among you. I Cor. i. 1 1.
The ſun by certain ſigns declares,
Both when the South projećts a ſtormy day,
And when the clearing §. will puff the clouds away.
r Dryden's Virg. Geor. l. 62o.
3. To publiſh; to proclaim.
Declare his glory among the heathens. 1 Chron. xvi. 24.
4. To ſhew in open view.
We are a conſiderable body, who, upon a proper occaſion,
would not fail to declare ourſelves. Addiſon.
To Decla'R E. v. n. To make a declaration; to proclaim
: ſome reſolution or opinion, ſome favour or oppoſition.
The internal faculties of will and underſtanding, decreeing
and declaring againſt them. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
God is ſaid not to have left himſelf without witneſs in the
rld, there being ſomething fixed in the nature of men that
will be ſure to teſtify and declare for him. South's Sermons.
Like fawning courtiers, for ſucceſs they wait;
And then come ſmiling, and declare for fate. Dryden.
Decla'REMENT. n.ſ.. [from declare.] Diſcovery; declara-
tion; teſtimony.
Cryſtal will calify into eleētricity; that is, a power to at-
tract ſtraws, or light bodies, and convert the needle freely
placed, which is a declarement of very different parts. Brown.
Decla'RER. n.ſ.. [from declare J A proclaimer; one that
makes any thing known. -
DEcLE'Nsion. n.ſ. [declinatio, Latin.] -
1. Tendency from a greater to a leſs degree of excellence.
A beauty-waining and diſtreſſed widow,
Ev’n in the afternoon of her beſt days,
Seduc’d the pitch and height of all his thoughts
To baſe declenſion. Shakeſpeare's Richard lil.
Take the pićture of a man in the greenneſs and vivacity of
his youth, and in the latter date .# declenſions of his droop-
ing years, and you will ſcarce know it to belong to the ſame
perſon. South's Sermons.
2. Declination; deſcent.
We may reaſonably allow as much for the declenſion of the
land from that place to the ſea, as for the immediate height
of the mountain. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
3. Inflexion; manner of changing nouns.
Declenſion is only the variation or change of the termina-
tion of a noun, whilſt it continues to ſignify the ſame thing.
Clarke's Latin Grammar.
Decli'NAble. adj. [from decline.] Having variety of termi-
nations; as, a declinable noun.
Declin A'tion. n. ſ. [declinatio, Latin.]
1. Deſcent; change from a better to a worſe ſtate; decay.
The queen, hearing of the declination of a monarchy, took it
ſo ill, as ſhe would never after hear of his ſuit. Bacon, Eſ. 23.
Hope waits upon the flow'ry prime;
And Summer, though it be leſs gay,
Yet is not look'd on as a time
Of declination or decay. Waller.
2. The aët of bending down; as, a declination of the lead.
3. Variation from rectitude; oblique motion; obliquity.
Suppoſing there were a declination of atoms, yet will it not
effect what they intend; for then they do all decline, and ſo
there will be no more concourſe than if they did perpendicu-
larly deſcend. Ray on the Creation.
This declination of atoms in their deſcent, was itſelf either
neceſſary or voluntary. Bentley.
4. Varition from a fixed point. - -
There is no declination of latitude, ner variation of the
* elevation of the pole, notwithſtanding what ſome have aſ-
ſerted. Woodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
5. [In navigation.] The variation of the needle from the true
meridian of any place to the Eaſt or Weſt.
6. [In aſtronomy.] The declination of a ſtar we call its ſhorteſt
diſtance from the equator. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i. c. 13.
7. [In grammar.] The declenſion or inflection of a noun
through its various terminations.
8. DEclination of a Plane [in dialing], is an arch of the
horizon, comprehended either between the plane and the prime
vertical circle, if accounted from the Eaſt or Weſt 3 or elſe
between the meridian and the plane, if accounted from the
North or South. Harris.
DEcLINA'tor. Un. ſ [from decline.] An inſtrument in dial-
Decli'NATor Y. } ing, by which the declination, reclination,
and inclination of planes are determined. Chambers.
There are ſeveral ways to know the ſeveral planes; but the
readieſt is by an inſtrument called a declinatory, fitted to the
variation of your place. - Moxon's Mech. Exer.
To DECLINE. v. m. [declino, Latin.]
1. To lean downward.
And then with kind embracements, tempting kiſſes,
And with declining head into his boſom,
Bid him ſhed tears, as being overjoy’d. Shakeſpeare.
2. To deviate; to run into obliquities.
Neither ſhalt thou ſpeak in a cauſe to decline after many,
to wreſt judgment. Ex. xxiii. 2.
3. To ſhun ; to avoid to do anything.
4. To fink; to be impaired; to decay. Oppoſed to improve-
- ment or exaltation. ,
Sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, the father ſhould
be as a ward to the ſon. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
They'll be by th’ fire, and preſume to know
What's done i' th' capitol; who's like to riſe, ,
Who thrives, and who declines. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanuſ,
Sometimes nations will decline ſo low
From virtue, which is reaſon, that no wrong,
But juſtice, and ſome fatal curſe annex’d,
Deprives them of their outward liberty. Milton's Par. Loft.
That empire muſt decline,
Whoſe chief ſupport and ſinews are of coin. Waller,
And nature, which all acts of life deſigris,
Not like ill poets, in the laſt declines. Denham.
Thus then my lov'd Euryalus appears;
He looks the prop of my declining years 1 Dryden's AEn.
Next that, is when autumnal warmth declines;
E’er heat is quite decay’d, or cold begun,
Or Capricorn admits the Winter ſun. Dryden's Virg. Georg.
Faith and morality are declined among us. Swift.
God, in his wiſdom, hath been pleaſed to load our declining
years with many ſufferings, with diſeaſes, and decays of
nature. Swift.
To DEcli'NE. v. a. -
1. To bend downward; to bring down.
And now fair Phoebus 'gan decline in haſte,
His weary waggon to the weſtern vale. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
And leaves the ſemblance of a lover, fixt
In melancholy deep, with head declin'd,
And love-dejcćted eyes. Thomſon's Spring, l, 1020.
2. To ſhun ; to avoid; to refuſe; to be cautious of.
He had wiſely declined that argument, though in their com-
mon ſermons they gave it. Clarendon, b. viii.
Since the muſes do invoke my pow'r,
I ſhall no more decline that ſacred bow'r, -
Where Gloriana, their great miſtreſs, lies. Waller.
Though I the buſineſs did decline;
Yet I contriv'd the whole deſign;
And ſent them their petition. Denham.
If it ſhould be ſaid that theſe minute bodies are indiſſoluble,
becauſe it is their nature to be ſo, that would not be to reh-
der a reaſon of the thing propoſed, but, in effect, to decline
rendering any. Boyle's Hiſtory of Firmneſt.
Could her mind have been captivated with the glorics of
this world, ſhe had them all laid before her; but ſhe gene-
rouſly declined them, becauſe ſhe ſaw the acceptance of them
was inconſiſtent with religion. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 21.
Whatever they judged to be moſt agreeable, or diſagree-
able, they would purſue or decline. . Alterbury.
3. To modify a word by various terminations; to inflect.
You decline muſa, and conſtrue Latin; by the help of a
tutor, or with ſome Engliſh tranſlation. Hºatti's Improvement.
Decli'NE, n.ſ. [from the ſubſtantive.] The ſtate of tendency
to the worſe; diminution; decay. Contrary to increaſe,
improvement, or elevation.
Thy riſe of fortune did I only wed;
From its decline; determin'd to recede. Prior.
Thoſe fathers lived in the decline of literature. Swift.
DECLI/VITY. n.ſ. [declivis, Latin.] Inclination or obliquity
reckoned downwards; gradual deſcent; not precipitous or
perpendicular: the contrary to acclivity.
Rivers will not flow, unleſs upon declivity, and their
ſources
!<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 205</div><p class="Text">D E C
D E C
ources be raiſed above the earth's ordinary ſurface, ſº that
É. may run upon a deſcent. //codward's Nat: Hiſtory.
i found myſelf within my depth; and the declivity was ſo
ſmall, that I walked near a mile before I got tº the ſhore.
Gulliver's Travels.
Decli'vous. adj. [decliviº, Lat.J. Gradually deſcending; not
precipitous; not perpendicularly ſinking: the contrary to
acclivous; moderately ſteep. -
To DECO'CT. v. a. [decºquo decotºum, Latin.]
1. To prepare by boiling for any uſe; to digeſt in hot water.
2. To digeſt by the heat of the ſtomach.
- There ſhe decod?, and doth the food prepare;
There ſhe diſtributes it to ev'ry vein,
There ſhe expels what ſhe may º ſpare. Davies.
3. To boil in water, ſo as to draw the ſtrength or virtue of any
thing.
‘ſhe longer malt or herbs are decoded in liquor, the clearer
it is. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 308.
4. To boil up to a conſiſtence; to ſtrengthen or invigorate by
boiling.
Can ſodden water, their barley-broth,
Decočf their cold blood to ſuch valiant heat. Shakespeare . H. V.
Deco'ctible. adj. [from decoct.] That which may be boiled,
or prepared by boiling. - Die?.
Deco'crion, n.ſ. [dero&amp;um, Latin.]
1. The act of boiling any thing, to extračt its virtues.
In infuſion the i. it is, the greater is the part of the
groſs body that goeth into the liquor; but in decodiion, though
more goeth forth, yet it either purgeth at the top, or ſettleth
at the bottom. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 308.
2. A preparation made º boiling in water.
- They diſtil their huſbands land
In decºcions; and are mann'd.
With ten emp'rics, in their chamber
" Lying for the ſpirit of amber. Ben. jºhnſºn.
If the plant ... in water, the ſtrained liquor is called
the decocłion of the plant. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Ecó’ctüRE. n.ſ.. [from decod?..] A ſubſtance drawn by
decoction. .
Decollation, n.ſ. [decollatio, Lat J The act of beheading.
He, by a decollation of all hope, annihilated his mercy:
this, by an immoderancy thereof, deſtroyed his juſtice. Brown.
Decomposite. adj. [decompoſitus, Latin.] Compounded a
ſecond time; compounded with things already compoſite.
Decompºſites of three metals, or more, are too long to in-
quire of, except there be ſome compoſitions of them already
obſerved. * Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
DEcoMposition. n.ſ. [decompºſitus, Lat.] The act of com-
pounding things already compounded. .
... We confider what happens in the compoſitions and decom-
poſitions of ſaline particles. - Boyle.
To DECOMPOUND. v.a. [decompono, Latin.] To compoſe
tof, things already compounded; to compound a ſecond time;
to form by a ſecond compoſition. -
Nature herſelf doth in the bowels of the earth make dºcum-
fºunded bodies, as we ſee in vitriol, cinnabar, and even in
ſulphur itſelf. - Boyle's Scept. Chym.
When a word ſtands for a very complex idea, that is com-
Pounded and decompounded, it is not eaſy for men to form and
retain that idea exactly. Locłe.
If the violet, blue and green, be intercepted, the remaining
yellow, orange, and red, will compound upon the paper an
- orange; and then, if the intercepted colours be let paſs, they
will fall upon this compounded orange, and, together with it,
decompound a white. Newton's Opt.
DEcoMpo'UND. adj. [from the verb.] Compoſed of things or
*** already compounded; compounded a ſecond time.
The pretended ſalts and ſulphur are ſo far from being
elementary parts extracted out of the body of mercury, that
they are rather, to borrow a term of the grammarians, decom-
found bodies, made up of the whole metal and the menſtruum,
or other additaments employed to diſguiſe it. Royle.
. No body ſhould uſe any compound or decompºund of the
ſubſtantial verbs, but as they are read in the common conju-
•. gations. - Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
DE'coR AMENT. n.ſ.. [from decorate.] Ornament; embelliſh-
:*: , , ... Dićf.
To DECORATE, v. a- [decoro, Latin.] To adorn; to em-
belliſh ; to beautify.
DEcoRA"rios. * / [from decorate.] Ornament; embelliſh-
ment; added beauty.
fi * enſigns of virtues contribute to the ornament of
- gures; ſuch as the decorations belonging to the liberal arts,
and to war. : Dryden's Dufreſnoy
... ... This helm and heavy buckler I can ſpare -
As ºnly decorations of the war: &gt;
º * * Arm'd for glory, not for need. Dryden.
iñº, *** *ſ [from decorate.] An adorner; an embel-
- (- -, * ... - - Die?.
º 6&amp;. [decorus, Latin.] Decent; ſuitable to a cha-.
: ti. ...ſº befitting; ſeemly.
****** in reſpect of God, that he ſhould im-
* , , - - -
º' -- ~~. * - ... .
*...*.*.
mediately do all the meaneſt and triflingeſt things himſelf,
without making uſe of any inferiour or ſubordinate mi-
niſter. Ray on the Creation.
To DECO'RTICATE. v. a. [dcortico, Latin.] To diveſt of
the bark or huſk ; to huſk to peel; to ſtrip.
- Take great barley, dried and decorticated, after it is well
waſhed, and boil it in water. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Decortica'rion, n.ſ. [from decorticate.] The act of ſtripping
the bark or huſk. -
DECO'RU44, n.ſ. [Latin.] Decency; behaviour contrary to
licentiouſneſs, contrary to levity; ſecmlineſs.
If your maſter
Would have a queen his beggar, you muſt tell him,
That majeſty, to keep decorum, muſt
No leſs beg than a kingdom. Shakeſpeare's Ant, and Cleop.
I am far from ſuſpecting ſimplicity, which is bold to treſ.
paſs in points of decorum. J%tton.
Beyond the fix’d and ſettled rules
Of wice and virtue in the ſchools,
The better ſort ſhould ſet before 'em
A grace, a manner, a decorum. Prior.
Gentlemen of the army ſhould be, at leaſt, obliged to ex-
ternal decºrum : a profligate life and character ſhould not be a
means of advancement. Swift.
He kept with princes due decorum; -
Yet never ſtood in awe before 'em. Swift.
To DECO'Y. v. a. [from Koey, Dutch, a cage.] To lure into
a cage; to intrap; to draw into a ſnare.
A fowler had taken a patridge, who offered to decoy her
companions into the ſnare. L'Aſtrange.
Decºy'd by the fantaſtick blaze,
Now loſt, and now renew'd, he ſinks abſorpt,
Rider and horſe. Thomſºn's Autumn, l. 1 165.
DF co’Y. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Allurement to miſchiefs;
temptation.
The devil could never have had ſuch numbers, had he not
uſed ſome as decoys to enſnare others. Government ºf the Tongue.
Theſe exuberant productions of the earth became a con-
tinual decoy and ſnare: they only excited and formented lufts.
//ccdward's Natural Hiſtory.
An old dramdrinker is the devil's decoy. Berkley.
DEco'y Duck. m. ſ. A duck that lurgs others.
There is likewiſe a ſort of ducks, called decoyducks, that
will bring whole flights of fowl to their retirements, where
are conveniences made for catching them. A ſortinier'. Husb.
To DECREASE. v. n. [decrºſco, Latin.] To grow leſs; to
be diminiſhed.
From the moon is the ſign of feaſts, a light that decreaſeth
in her perfection. Eccluſ. xliii. 7.
Unto fifty years the heart annually increaſeth the weight of
one drachm; after which, in the ſame proportion, it de-
creaſeth. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. v. c. 20.
It is to be obſerved, that when the ſun comes to his tro-
picks, days increaſe and decreaſe but a very little for a great
while together. Newton's Opt.
To Decre’Ase. v. a. To make leſs; to diminiſh.
He did diſhonourable find
Thoſe articles, which did our ſtate decreaſe. Daniel’s C. War.
Nor cheriſh'd they relations poor, º -
That might decreaſe their preſent ſtore. . . Priºr.
Heat increaſes the fluidity of tenacious liquids, as of oil,
balſam, and honey; and thereby decreaſes their reſiſtance. N, wit.
Deck E'Ase. n.ſ.. [from the verb..] The ſtate of growing leſs;
decay. -
By weak’ning toil, and hoary age o'ercome, -
See thy decreaſe, and haſten to thy tomb. Prior.
2. The wain; the time when the viſible face of the moon grows
leſs. -
See in what time the ſeeds, ſet in the increaſe of the moon,
come to a certain height, and how they differ from thoſe that
are ſet in the decreaſ of the moon. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To DECREE. v. n. [decretum, Latin.] To make an cdićt ;
to appoint by edict; to eſtabliſh by law ; to determine; to
reſolve. - -
They ſhall ſee the end of the wiſe, and ſhall not under-
ſtand what God in his counſel hath decreed of him. Hºſa. iv.
Father eternal Thine is to decree;
Mine, both in heav'n and earth, to do thy will.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. l. 68.
Had heav'n decreed that I ſhould life enjoy, -
Heav'n had decreed to ſave unhappy Troy. Dryden's ºn.
To DEcRE'E. v. a. To doom or aſſign by a decree.
Thou ſhalt alſo decree a thing, and it ſhall be eſtabliſhed. Jº.
The king their father,
Oh juſt and weighty reaſons, has decreed
His ſceptre to the younger. Rowe's Ambitious Stºp-mother.
DEcR E'E. m. ſ. [decretam, Latin.] --
1. An edićt; a law. -
If you deny me, fie upon your law!
There is no force in the decrees of Venice. Shakeſpeare.
There went a decree from Caeſar Auguſtus, that all the
world ſhould be taxed. . . . - Luke ii.A.
. . . . . Art<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 206</div><p class="Text">D E C
D E {}
Dec Re'Pitu DE.
Are we condemn’d by fate's unjuſt decree,
No more our houſes and our homes to ſee : Dryden's Wirg.
The Supreme Being is ſovereignly good; he rewards the
juſt, and puniſhes the unjuſt ; and the folly of man, and not
the decree of heaven, is the cauſe of human calamity. Broome.
2. An eſtabliſhed rule.
When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the
lightning of the thunder. job xxviii. 20.
3. A determination of a ſuit, or litigated cauſe. -
4. [In canon law.] An ordinance, which is enaëted by the
pope himſelf, by and with the advice of his cardinals in coun-
cil aſſembled, without being conſulted by any one thereon.
Ayiſfe's Parergon.
DE'cRE MENT. n.ſ. ſaecrementum, Latin.] Decreaſe; the ſtate
of growing leſs; the quantity loſt by decreaſing.
Upon the tropick, and firſt deſcenſion from our ſolſtice,
we are ſcarce ſenſible of declination; but declining farther,
our decrement accelerates: we ſet apace, and in our laſt days
precipitate into our graves. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
lsocks, mountains, and the other elevations of the earth,
ſuffer a continual decrement, and grow lower and lower. Woodw.
DECRE'PIT. adj. [decrepitus, Latin J Waſted and worn out
with age ; in the laſt ſtage of decay.
Decrepit miſer baſe, ignoble wretch! Shakespeare. H. VI.
Theſe years were ſhort of many mens lives in this decrepit
age of the world, wherein many exceed fourſcore, and ſome
an hundred years. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the I/orld.
This pope is decrepit, and the bell goeth for him : take or-
der that there be choſen a pope of freſh year. Bacon's H. Iſar.
Decrepit ſuperſtition, and ſuch as had their nativity in times
beyond all hiſtory, are freſh in the obſervation of many
heads. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
And from the North to call
Decrepit Winter. Miltºn's Paradiſe ſoft, b. x. l. 655.
Who this obſerves, may in his body find
Decrepit age, but never in his mind.
Propp'd on his ſtaff, and ſtooping as he goes,
A painted mitre ſhades his furrow'd brows;
The god, in the decrepit form array'd,
The gardens enter'd, and the fruits ſurvey’d. Pope.
The charge of witchcraft inſpires people with a malevo-
lence towards thoſe poor decrepit parts of our ſpecies, in
whom human nature is defaced by infirmity and dotage. Addison
To DECRE'PITATE. v. a. [decrepo, Latin.] To calcine ſalt
till it has ceaſed to crackle in the fire.
So will it come to paſs in a pot of ſalt, although decrepitated.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii.
Decrepit A'tion. n.ſ.. [from decrepitate.] The crackling
noiſe which ſalt makes, when put over the fire in a cru-
cible. Quincy.
DEcRE PITNEss. n.ſ.. [from decrepit.] The laſt ſtage of de-
} cay; the laſt effects of old age. -
Mother earth, in this her barrenneſs and decrepitneſs of age,
can procreate ſuch ſwarms of curious engines. Bentley's Serm.
DECRE'scenT. adj. [from decreſcens, Latin.] Growing leſs;
being in a ſtate of decreaſe.
DE'cRETAL. adj. [decretum, Latin:] Appertaining to a decree;
eontaining a decree.
A decretal epiſtle is that which the pope decrees either by
himſelf, or elſe by the advice of his cardinals; and this muſt
be on his being conſulted by ſome particular perſon or per-
ſons thereon. * . Ayliffe's Parergon.
DE'ck ETAL, n. ſ. [from the adječive.]
1. A book of decrees or edićts; a body of laws.
- The ſecond room, whoſe walls
Were painted fair with memorable geſts,
Of magiſtrates, of courts, of tribunals,
Of commonwealths, of ſtates, of policy,
Of law , of judgments, and of decretals. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
2. The colle&amp;tion of the pope's decrees.
Traditions and decretals were made of equal force, and as
authentical as the ſacred charter itſelf. Howel's Vocal Forreſt.
Dºck etist. n.ſ. [from decree..] One that ſtudies or profeſſes
the knowledge of the decretal.
The decretiſ's had their riſe and beginning under the reign
of the emperor Frederick Barbaroſla. Ayliffe's Parergon.
DecretoRy. adj. [from decree.]
1. Judicial; definitive.
There are lenitives that friendſhip will apply, before it will
be brought to the decretory rigours of a condemning ſentence.
- - South's Sermons.
2. Critical; in which there is ſome definitive event.
The motions of the moon, ſuppoſed to be meaſured by
ſevens, and the critical or decretary days, depend on that
number. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 12.
Decki'al. n. ſ. [from decry..] Clamorous cenſure; haſty or
noiſy condemnation; concurrence in cenſuring any thing.
To DECRY'. v. a... [dercrier, French..] To cenſure; to blame
clamorouſly ; to clamour againſt.
Malice in criticks reigns ſo high,
That for ſmall errours they whole plays decry.
Vol. I.
Denham.
Dryden,
Thoſe meaſures which are extolled by one half of the
kingdom, are naturally decryed by the other. Addison's Freeh.
They a plied themſelves to leſſen their authority, decryed
them as hard and unneceſſary reſtraints. Rogers, Serm. 17.
Quacks and impoſtors are ſtill cautioning us to beware of
counterfeits, and decºy others cheats only to make more way
for their own. Swift.
DECU MBENcE. W. n.ſ. [decumbº, Latin.] The aët of lying
DEcu'MBFNcy. } down; the poſture of lying down.
This muſt come to paſs, if we hold opinion they lie not
down, and enjoy no decumbence at all; for ſtation is properly no
reſt, but one kind of motion. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii.
Not conſidering the ancient manner of decumbency, he im-
puted this geiture of the beloved diſciple unto ruſticity, or an
act of incivility. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v. c. 6.
DEcu'M BITURE. n.ſ.. [from decumbo, Latin.] .
1. The time at which a man takes to his bed in a diſeaſe.
2. [In aſtrology.] A ſcheme of the heavens erected for that
time, by which the prognoſticks of recovery or death are diſ-
covered.
If but a mile ſhe travel out of town,
The planetary hour muſt firſt be known,
And lucky moment: if her eye but akes,
Or itches, its decumbiture ſhe takes. Dryden's juv. Sat. vi.
DE'cuple. adj. [decuplus, Latin.] Tenfold; the ſame number
ten times repeated.
Man's length, that is, a perpendicular from the vertex unto
the ſole of the foot, is decuple unto his profundity; that is, a
direct line between the breaſt and the ſpine. Brown's Wul. Err.
Suppoſing there be a thouſand ſorts of inſects in this iſland,
if the ſame proportion holds between the inſects of England
and of the reſt of the world, as between plants domeſtick and
exotick, that is, near a decuple, the ſpecies of inſects wil
amount to ten thouſand. Ray on the Creation.
DEcu'Rion. n.ſ. [decurio, Lat.] A commander over ten; an
officer ſubordinate to the centurion. -
He inſtituted decurions through both theſe colonies, that is,
one over every ten families. Temple,
DEcu'Rsion. n.ſ. [decurſus, Lat.] The act of running down.
What is decayed by that decurſion of waters, is ſupplied by
the terrene foeces which water brings. Hale's Orig. of 44ankind.
DEcuRTA'tion, n.ſ [decurtatio, Latin.] The aët of cutting
ſhort, or ſhortening.
To DECU'SSATE. v. a. [decuſe, Latin.] To interſea at
acute angles.
This it performs by the aëtion of a notable muſcle on each
fide, of a great length, having the form of the letter X,
made up of many fibres, decuſating one another longways. Ray.
Decuss A'Tion. n.ſ.. [from decuſate.] The act of croſfing;
ſtate of being croſſed at unequal angles.
Though there be decuſation of the rays in the pupil of the
eye, and ſo the image of the obječt in the retina, or bottom
of the eye, be inverted; yet doth not the object appear in-
verted, but in its right or natural poſture. Ray on the Creation.
To DEDECORATE. v. a. [dedecoro, Latin.] To diſgrace;
to bring a reproach upon. Dić?.
DEDEcoRA'tion. n.ſ.. [from dedecorate.] The act of diſ-
gracing; diſgrace, - Dić7,
DEDE'corous. adj. [dedecus, Lat..] Diſgraceful; reproachful;
ſhameful. Dić7.
DED ENT1'tion. n.ſ. [de and dentitio, Lat..] Loſs or ſhedding
of the teeth.
Solon divided it into ten ſeptenaries, becauſe in every one
thereof a man received ſome ſenſible mutation: in the firſt is
dedentition, or falling of teeth. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv.
To DE'DICATE. v. a. [dedico, Latin.]
1. To devote to ſome divine power; to conſecrate and ſet apart
to ſacred uſes.
A pleaſant grove
Was ſhot up high, full of the ſtately tree
That dedicated is to olympick Jove,
And to his ſon Alcides, when as he
Gain’d in Nemea goodly vićtory. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant, 5.
The princes offered for dedicating the altar, in the day that
it was anointed. Num, vii. Io.
Warn'd by the ſeer, to her offended name
We rais'd, and dedicate this wond’rous frame. Dryden's dºn.
2. To appropriate ſolemnly to any perſon or purpoſe.
There cannot be
That vulture in you to devour ſo many,
As will to greatneſs dedicate themſelves. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Ladies, a gen'ral welcome from his grace
Salutes you all : this night he dedicates
To fair content and you. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
He went to learn the profeſſion of a ſoldier, to which he
had dedicated himſelf. Clarendon,
Bid her inſtant ºved,
And quiet dedicate her remnant life
To the juſt duties of an humble wife. Prior,
3. To inſcribe to a patron. -
He compiled ten elegant books, and dedicated them to the
lord Burghley. Peacham on Poetry.
I, DE'pic At E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 207</div><p class="Text">|:
i.
D E D
DE'DrcAte. adj. [from the verb.] Conſecrate; devote; dedi-
cated; appropriate.
Prayers from preſerved ſouls,
From faſting maids, whoſe names are dedicate
To nothing temporal. Shakeſpeare's Meaſureſº Mesſure.
This tenth part, or tithe, being thus aſſigned unto him,
leaveth now to be of the nature of the other nine parts,
which are given us for our worldly neceſſities, and becometh
as a thing dedicate and appropriate unto God. Spelman.
Dedic A'tion. n.ſ. [dedicatio, Latin.]
1. The aët of dedicating to any being or purpoſe; conſecration;
ſolemn appropriation.
It cannot be laid to many mens charge, that they have been
ſo curious as to trouble biſhops with placing the firſt ſtone in
the churches; or ſo ſcrupulous as, after the erection of them,
to make any great ado for their dedication. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 12.
Among publick ſolemnities there is none ſo glorious as that
under the reign of king Solomon, at the dedication of the
temple. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 49.
2. A ſervile addreſs to a patron.
Proud as Apollo on his forked hill,
Sat full blown Bufo, puff’d by ev'ry quill;
Fed by ſoft dedication all day long,
Horace and he went hand in hand in ſong. Pope, Epiſt. xi.
DE Dica"toR. m. ſ. [from dedicate.] One who inſcribes his
work to a patron with compliment and ſervility.
Leave dang'rous truths to unſucceſsful ſatyrs,
And flattery to fulſome dedicators. Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
De'dicatory, adj. [from dedicate.] Compoſing a dedication;
complimental; adulatory.
Thus I ſhould begin my epiſtle, if it were a dedicatory one;
but it is a friendly letter. Pope.
DEDI'tion. n.ſ. (deditio, Latin.] The aët of yielding up any
thing; ſurrendry.
It was not a complete conqueſt, but rather a dedition upon
terms and capitulations agreed between the conqueror and the
conquered. Hale's Hiſtory of the Common Law.
To DEDUCE. v.a. [deduco, Latin.]
1. To draw in a regular connected ſeries, from one time or one
event to another.
O goddeſs, ſay, ſhall I deduce my rhimes
From the dire nation in its early times Pope.
2. To form a regular chain of conſequential prepoſitions.
Reaſon is nothing but the faculty of deducing unknown
truths from principles already known. Locke.
3. To lay down in regular order, ſo as that the following ſhall
naturally riſe from the foregoing.
Lend me your ſong, ye nightingales' Oh pour
The mazy-running ſouſ of melody
Into my varied verſe! while I deduce,
From the firſt note the hollow cuckoo ſings,
... The ſymphony of Spring. Thomſon's Spring, 1.575.
DF D9'cEMENT. n.ſ.. [from deduce.] The thing deduced; the
collection of reaſon; conſequential prepoſition.
Praiſe and prayer are his due worſhip, and the reſt of thoſe
deducements, which I am confident are the remote effects of
revelation. Dryden's Pref. to Rel. Laici.
Depu'cIBLE. adj. [from deduce..] Collectible by reaſon; con-
ſequential; diſcoverable from principles laid down.
The condition, although deducible from many grounds, yet
ſhall we evidence it but from few. Brown’s W.ulgar Errours, b. i.
The general chara&amp;ter of the new earth is paradiſaical, and
the particular charaćter that it hath no ſea; and both are ap-
parently deducible from its formation. Burnet's Theo. of the Earth.
So far, therefore, as conſcience reports anything agreeable
to, or deducible from theſe, it is to be hearkened to. South.
All properties of a triangle depend on, and are deducible
from, the complex idea of three lines, including a ſpace. Locke.
Deducive. adj [from deduce. J Performing the act of de-
dućtion. Dić7.
To DEDUCT. v. a. [deduco, Latin.]
1. To ſubſtraćt; to take away; to cut off; to defalcate.
We dedući from the computation of our years, that part of
our time which is ſpent in incogitancy of infancy. Norris.
2. To ſeparate ; to diſpart; to divide. Now not in uſe.
Having yet, in his dedućied ſpright,
Some ſparks remaining of that heavenly fire. Spenſer.
Deduction, n.ſ. [deduši, Latj Conſequential colleaión;
conſequence; prepoſition drawn from principles premiſed.
Out of ſcripture ſuch duties may be duduced, by ſome kind
of conſequence, as by long circuit of deduction it may be that
even all truth, out of any truth, may be concluded. Hooker.
Set before you the moral law of God, with ſuch deductions
from it as our Saviour hath drawn, or our own reaſon, well
informed, can make. Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
That by diverſity of motions we ſhould ſpell out things not
reſembled by them, we muſt attribute to ſome ſecret deducion;
but what this deduction ſhould be, or by what mediums this
knowledge is advanced, is as dark as ignorance. Glanv. Scºpſ.
You have laid the experiments together in ſuch a way, and
made ſuch didn'?ions from them, as I have not hitherto met
With, Boyle's Scept, Chym.
D E E
All croſs and diſtaſteful humours are either expreſy, or by
clear conſequence and deducłion, forbidden in the New Teſ-
tannent. Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
A refle&amp;tion ſo obvious, that natural inſtinét ſeems to have
ſuggeſted it even to thoſe who never much attended to deduc-
tions of reaſon. Rogers, Serm. 19.
2. That which is dedućted; defalcation.
Bring then theſe bleſfings to a ſtrićt account;
Make fair deductions, ſee to what they mount. Pope's Eſſays.
Dedu/ctive. adj. [from deduct.] Deducible; that which is
or may be deduced from a poſition premiſed.
Dedu'ctively, adv. [from deductive.]. Conſequentially; by
regular dedućtion; by a regular train of ratiocination.
There is ſcarce a popular errour paſſant in our days, which
is not either directly expreſſed, or deductively contained in this
work. Brown’s Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 8.
DEED. n.ſ.. [barb, Saxon; daed, Dutch.]
1. Aćtion; whether good or bad; thing done.
From loweſt place when virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by th' doer’s deed. Shakeſpeare.
The monſter nought reply'd; for words were vain,
And deeds could only deed, unjuſt maintain. Dryden.
The ſame had not conſented to the counſel and deed. Luke.
We are not ſecluded from the expectation of reward for our
charitable deeds. Smalridge's Sermons.
2. Exploit; performance.
I, on the other ſide,
Us'd no ambition to commend my deeds; -
The deeds themſelves, though mute, ſpoke loud the doer. Milt.
Thouſands were there in darker fame that dwelt,
Whoſe deeds ſome nobler poem ſhalladorn. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
3. Power of action; agency.
So, knew I not
To be with will and deed created free. Milt. Paradiſe Loft.
4. Act declaratory of an opinion.
They deſire, with ſtrange abſurdity, that to the ſame ſenate
it ſhould belong to give full judgment in matter of excommu-
nication, and to abſolve whom it pleaſed them, clean contrary
to their own former deed, and oaths. Hocker's Preface.
5. Written evidence of any legal act.
The ſolicitor gave an evidence for a deed, which was im-
peached to be fraudulent. Bacom.
He builds his houſe upon the ſand, and writes the deed, by
which he holds his eſtate, upon the face of a river. South.
6. Fačt; reality; the contrary to fićtion: whence the word indeed.
O that, as oft I have at Athens ſeen
The ſtage ariſe, and the big clouds deſcend;
So now in very deed I might behold
The pond’rous earth, and all yon marble roof,
Meet like the hands of Jove. Lee's Oedipus.
De E'dless. adj. [from deed.] Una&amp;tive; without ačtion;
without exploits.
Speaking in deeds, and deedleſ; in his tongue. Shakeſpeare.
Inſtantly, he cry’d, your female diſcord end,
Ye deedleſs boaſters! and the ſong attend. Pope's Odyſſey.
To DEEM v. n. part. dempt, or deemed [domgan, Gothick;
doemen, Dutch ; seman, Saxon.] To judge; to conclude
upon conſideration; to think; to opine; to determine.
Here eke that famous golden apple grew,
For which th' Idean ladies diſagreed,
*Till partial Paris dempt it Venus' due. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Do me not dy,
Ne deem thy force by fortune's doom unjuſt,
That hath, maugre her ſpite, thus low me laid in duſt.
Fair, Queen, b. ii. cant. 5. ſtanz, 12. .
But they that ſkill not of ſo heavenly matter,
All that they know not, envy or admire,
Rather than envy, let them wonder at her,
But not to deem of her deſert aſpire. Spenſer, Sonnet 84.
So natural is the union of religion with juſtice, that we
may boldly deem there is neither, where both are not. Hooker.
He, who to be deem'd
A god, leap'd fondly into AFtna flames. Milt. Parad. Loft.
Theſe bleſlings, friend, a deity beſtow'd;
For never can I deem him leſs than god. Dryd. Wirg Paſ?.
- Nature diſturb’d,
Is deem'd vindićtive to have chang'd her courſe. Thºmſon.
DEEM. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Judgment; ſurmiſe; opinion.
Not now in uſe.
Hear me, my love, be thou but true of heart.
—I true! how now? what wicked deem is this Shakeſpear.
DEE'MSTER, n.ſ.. [from deem.] A judge: a word yet in uſe in
Jerſey and the Iſle of Man.
DEEP. adj. [beep, Saxon.]
1. Having length downwards; deſcending far; profound.
All trees in high and ſandy grounds are to be ſet deep, and
in watery grounds more ſhallow. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The gaping gulph low to the centre lies,
And twice as deep as earth is diſtant from the ſkies. Dryden.
2. Low in ſituation; not high.
3. Meaſured from the ſurface downward.
Mr. Halley, in diving deep into the ſea in a diving veſſel,
found,
.
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 208</div><p class="Text">D E E D E, F:
/
found, in a clear ſun-ſhine day, that when he was ſunk many Through mazy thickets of the woodland ſhade. Pºpe's Odºff
fathoms deep into the water, the upper part of his hand, on De'eply, adj. [from deep.]
which the ſun ſhone directly, appeared of a red colour. Newt. 1. To a great depth; far below the ſurface.
4. Entering far; piercing a great way. Fear is a paſſion that is moſt deeply rooted in our natures,
This avarice - and flows immediately from the principle of ſelf-preſervation.
Strikes deeper; grows with more pernicious root. Shakespeare. Macb. - Tillotſon, Serm, 1.
For, even in that ſeaſon of the year, the ways in that vale Thoſe impreſſions were made when the brain was more
were very deep. Clarendon, b. viii. ſuſceptive of them: they have been deeply engraven at the
Thou haſt not ſtrength ſuch labours to ſuſtain: proper ſeaſon, and therefore they remain. Watts's Imprºvement.
Drink hellebore, my boy! drink deep, and ſcourthy brain. 2. With great ſtudy or ſagacity; not ſuperficially; not care-
Dryden's Perſ. Sat. leſly; profoundly.
5. Far from the outer part. 3. Sorrowfully; ſolemnly ; with a great degree of ſeriouſneſs of
So the falſe ſpider, when her nets are ſpread, ſadneſs.
Deep ambuſh'd in her ſilent den does lie. Dryd. Ann. Mirab. He fighed deeply in his ſpirit. Mark viii. 12;
6. Not ſuperficial; not obvious. Klockins ſo deeply hath ſworn ne'er more to come
If the matter be knotty, and the ſenſe lies deep, the mind In bawdy-houſe, that he dares not go home. Donne.
muſt ſtop and buckle to it, and ſtick upon it with labour and Upon the deck our careful general ſtood,
thought, and cloſe contemplation. Locke. And deeply mus'd on the ſucceeding day, Dryd. Ann, Mirab.
7. Sagacious; penetrating; having the power to enter far into 4. With a tendency to darkneſs of colour.
a ſubječt. Having taken of the deepy red juice of buckthorn berries,
Who hath not heard it ſpoken, I let it drop upon white paper. Bºyle on Colours.
How deep you were within the books of heav'n' Shakespeare 5. In a high degree.
The ſpirit of deep prophecy ſhe hath. Shakeſp. Henry VI. To keep his promiſe with him, he had deeply offended both
He's meditating with two deep divines. Shakeſp. Rich. III. his nobles and people. Bacºn's tenry VII,
He in my ear De'epness. n.ſ.. [from deep.] Entrance far below the ſurface;
Vented much policy and projećts deep profundity; depth.
Of enemies, of aids, battles and leagues, Cazzianer ſet forward with great toil, by reaſon of the
Plauſible to the world, to me worth naught. Milt. Par. Reg. deepneſs of the way and heavineſs of the great ordnance.
I do not diſcover the helps which this great man of deep Knolles's H/?ory of the Turks.
thought mentions. Locke. Some fell upon ſtony places, and they withered, becauſe
8. Full of contrivance; politick; inſiduous. they had no deepneſs of earth. Matt. xiii. 5.
When I have moſt need to employ a friend, Deer... n.ſ.. [beon, Saxon; thier, Teutonick; ºne, Greek.]
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile, That claſs of animals which is hunted for veniſon, contain-
Be he to me. Shakeſpeare's Richard III. ing many ſubordinate ſpecies. -
9. Grave; ſolemn. You have beaten my men, killed my deer, and broke open
O God! if my deep prayers cannot appeaſe thee, my lodge. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſor.
But thou wilt be aveng'd on my miſdeeds, The pale that held my lovely deer. Waller.
Yet execute thy wrath on me alone. Shakeſp. Rich. III. To DEFA'CE. v. a. [defaire, French.] To deſtroy ; to raze;
Nor awful Phoebus was on Pindus heard to ruin; to disfigure.
With deeper ſilence, or with more regard. Dryden's Silenius. º Fatal this marriage,
10. Dark coloured. - Defacing monuments of conquer'd France,
With deeper brown the grove was overſpread. Dryd. Fab. Undoing all. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
II. Having a great degree of ſtilneſs, or gloom, or ſadneſs. Pay him ſix thouſand, and deface the bond. Shakeſpeare.
Their deep poverty abounded into the riches of their libe- Whoſe ſtatues, freezes, columns broken lie,
ity. 2 Cor. viii. 2: And, though defac'd, the wonder of the eye. Bryden,
And the Lord God cauſed a deep ſleep to fall upon Adam. One nobler wretch can only riſe;
Gen. ii. 21. 'Tis he whoſe fury ſhall deface
12. Baſs; grave in ſound. The ſtoick's image in this piece. Prior.
The ſounds made by buckets in a well, are deeper DEFA'ce MENT. n. J. [from deface..] Violation; injury;
and fuller than if the like percuſſion were made in the open raſure; abolition; deſtrućtion.
air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 152. But what is this image, and how is it defaced 2. The poor
DEEP. n.ſ.. [from the adječtive.] - men of Lyons will tell you, that the image of God is purity ;
1. The ſea; the main; the abyſs of waters; the ocean. and the defacement, fin. Bacon's Holy War.
Yet we did lift up our hearts and voices to God above, DEFA'cer. n.ſ.. [from deface.] Deſtroyer; aboliſher; vio-
who ſheweth his wonders in the deep. Bacon's New Atlantis. later. -
What earth in her dark bowels could not keep That foul defacer of God's handywork,
From greedy man, lies ſafer in the deep. Waller. Thy womb let looſe, to chaſe us to our graves. Shakesepare. R. III.
Whoe'er thou art, whom fortune brings to keep DEFA'ILANce. n.ſ. [defaillance, French.] Failure; miſcar-
Theſe rites of Neptune, monarch of the deep. Pope's Odyſſ. riage: a word not in uſe. -
2. The moſt ſolemn or ſtill part. The affections were the authors of that unhappy defai-
There want not many that do fear, lance. Glanv. Scepſ c. 2.
In deep of night, to walk by this Herne's oak. Shakeſpeare. To DEFA'LCATE. v.a. [from falx fakis, a fickle ; d.falquer,
The deep of night is crept upon our talk. Shakespeare jul. Caſ: French..] To cut off; to lop; to take away part of a pen-
Virgin face divine, fion or ſalary. It is generally uſed of money. .
Attracts the hapleſs youth through ſtorms and waves, DeFalcA'T16N. m. ſ [from defalcate.] Diminution; abate-
Alone in deep of night. Philips. ment; exciſion of any part of a cuſtomary allowance.
To De'epen. v. a. [from deep.] The tea table is ſet forth with its cuſtomary bill of fare,
1. To make deep; to ſink far below the ſurface. and without any defalcation. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 487.
The city of Rome would receive a great advantage from To Der A'lk. v. a. [See DEFALCATE.] To cut off; to
the undertaking, as it would raiſe the banks and deepen the bed lop away.
of the Tiber. - Addiſon's Travels. What he defalls from ſome inſipid fin, is but to make ſome
2. To darken; to cloud; to make dark. other more guſtful. Decay of Piety.
You muſt deepen your colours ſo, that the orpiment may DEFAMA'tion. n. ſ. [from defame.] The act of defaming or
be the higheſt. Peacham on Drawing. bringing infamy upon another; calumny; reproach; cenſure ;
3. To make ſad or gloomy. See DEEP. adj. detraćtion.
Her gloomy preſence ſaddens all the ſcene, Defamation is the uttering of reproachful ſpeeches, or con-
Shades ev'ry flow'r, and darkens ev'ry green, tumeſious language of any one, with an intent of raiſing an
Deepens the murmurs of the falling floods, ill fame of the party thus reproached; and this extends to
And breathes a browner horror on the woods. Pope. writing, as by defamatory libels; and alſo to desis, by re-
DEEP-Mouthed, adj. [deep and mouth.] Having a hoarſe and proachful poſtures, ſigns and geſtures. Ayliffe's Parergon.
loud voice. Be ſilent, and beware, if ſuch you ſee; •
Huntſman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds; 'Tis defamation but to ſay, that's he Dryden's juv. Sat.
And couple Clowder with the deep-mouth'd Brach. Shakeſp. Many dark and intricate motives there are to detraćtion
Behold the Engliſh beach and defamation, and many malicious ſpies are ſearching into
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys, the actions of a great man. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 256.
Whoſe ſhouts and claps outvoice that deep-mouth'd ſea. Shakespeare DEFA'MAtoRY. adj. [from defame.] Calumnious; tending to
Then toils for beaſts, and lime for birds were found, defame; unjuſtly cenſorious ; libellous; falſely ſatirical.
And deep-mouth'd dogs did foreſt walks ſurround. Dryden. The moſt eminent ſin is the ſpreading of defamatory reports.
Hills, dales, and foreſts far behind remain, Government of the Tongue, ſet. 5.
While the warm ſcent draws on the deep-mouth'd train. Gay. Auguſtus, conſcious to himſelf of many crimes, made aſl
Deep-Mu'sing, adj. [deep and muſe..] Contemplative; loſt in edićt againſt lampoons and ſatyrs, and defamatºry writings:
thought. Dryden's juv. Dedicatiºn.
But he deep-muſing o'er the mountains ſtray'd, To DEFA'ME. v.a. [de and fama, Latin.] To make infa-
Inouſ 3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 209</div><p class="Text">D E F
To DE FECAT
mºus; to cenſure falſely in publick;
to diſhonour by reports; to libel; to c"
reputation by either º: words. er. xx. 1 O
- //ling of ºnany. - : “... ."
ſºft tº, jº. Chriſtianity merely in ſpight,
to defame it. - - Decay of Piety.
My guilt thy growing virº did ºfane; ’; /E
My blackneſs blotted thy unblemiſh'd name. Dryden's An.
IDEFA'Me. n.ſ [from the verb.] . Diſgrace; diſhonour.
Many doughty knights he in his days
Had done to death,
And hung their conquer'd arms for more defame
On gallowtrees. Fairy Queen, b. ii., cant. 5. ſtan. 26.
Deramir, n.ſ.. [from defame.] One that injures the repu-
tation of another; a detraćter; a calumniator.
It may be a uſeful trial of the patience of the defamed, yet
the defamer has not the leſs crime. Government of the Tongue.
To DEFATIGATE. v. a. [defatigo, Latin.] To weary; to
to deprive of honour ;
luminiate ; to deſtroy
tire. - - - - Did.
De fatigation. m. ſ. [ defatigatio, Latin. J Wearineſs;
fatigue. IDict.
pºilt. º [defaut, French.]
1. Omiſſion of that which we ought to do ; negle&amp;t.
2. Crime; failure; fault.
Sedition tumbled into England more by the default of go-
vernours than the peoples. Haywood.
We that know what 'tis to faſt and pray,
Are penitent for your default to-day. Shakespeare Com, of Errours.
Let me not raſhly call in doubt
Divine predićtion: what if all foretold
Had been fulfill'd, but through mine own default,
Whom have I to complain of, but myſelf? Milt. Agoniſłes.
Partial judges we are of our own excellencies, and other
mens defaults. Swift.
3. Defect ; want.
In default of the king's pay, the forces were laid upon the
ſubječt. Davies an Ireland.
Cooks could make artificial birds and fiſhes, in dºſa. It of
the real ones. Arſuthnot on Coins.
4. [In law.] Non-appearance in court at a day affigned. Cowel.
To DeFA'Ult. v. a. [from the noun..] To fail in perform-
ing any contract or ſtipulation; to forfeit by breaking a
contračt.
DEFEASANCE. n.ſ. [defaiſance, French.]
". ačt of annulling or abrogating any contračt or ſtipu-
at 10n. -
2. Dºfaſance is a condition annexed to an ad; as to an obli-
gation, a recogniſance, or ſtatute, which performed by the
obligee, or the cognizee, the aët is diſabled and made void,
as if it had never been done. Cowel.
3. The writing in which a defeaſance is contained.
4. A defeat; conqueſt; the act of conquering; the ſtate of
being conquered. Obſolete.
- That hoary king, with all his train,
Being arrived, where that champion ſlout,
After his foe's defeaſance, did remain,
Him goodly grečts, and fair does entertain. Fairy Queen.
DEFE'Asible. adj. [rom d faire, Fr. to make void.] That
which may be annulled or abrogated.
He came to the crown by a defeaſible title, ſo was never
well ſettled. Davies on Ireland.
DEFEAT. n.ſ.. [from defaire, French.]
1. The overthrow of an army.
End Marlbºrough's work, and finiſh the defeat. Addison.
2. Aćt of deſtruction : deprivation.
A king, upon whoſe life
- A damn'd defeat was made.
To DEFE'at. ... a. [from the noun.]
1. To overthrow.
Ye gods, ye make the weak moſt ſtrong;
Therein, ye gods, ye tyrants do defeat. Shºeſ. Yul. Caſºr.
They invaded Ireland, and were defeated by the lord
Mountjoy. Bacon on the War with Spain.
2. To fruſtrate.
Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
To his accuſations
He pleaded ſtill not guilty, and alleg'd
Many ſharp reaſons to difat the law. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
1)eath,
Then due by ſentence when thou did'ſ tranſgreſs,
JD feated of his ſeizure, many days, -
Giyºn thee of grace. A/ilian's Paradiſe I ºff, b. i. 1.254.
!).iſcover'd, and diſcated of your prey,
You ſkulk d. Dryden's Wing. Paſº. 3.
He finds himſelf n-turally to dread a ſuperior Being, that
can defeat all his deſ , ſº - ... as “T. J/, //,
f To º is deſigns, and diſappoint all his hopes. Tillotſon.
F FE'A'rup E.
m, ſ. ſſr - - - -
alteration of ſ. [from de and frature.] Change of feature;
Countenance.
Grief hath chang'd me,
hours, with time's deformed hand,
trange dºfratures in my face.
+. v a. Lºſº, Latin.
And careful
Hath writt
ch - - - -
Shake feare.
1. To purge liquors from lees or foulneſs; to purify; to cleanſe.
I practiſed a way to defecate the dark and muddy oil of
amber. Boyle's Hiſtory of Firmneſ.
The blood is not ſufficiently defecated or clarified, but re-
mains muddy. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Provide a brazen tube
Inflext; ſelf-taught and voluntary flies
The defecated liquor, through the vent
Aſcending; then, by downward tract convey'd,
Spouts into ſubject veſſels, lovely clear. Philips.
2. To purify from any extraneous or noxious mixture; to clear;
to brighten.
We defecate the notion from materiality, and abſtract quan-
tity, place, and all kind of corporeity from it. Glamº. Scepſ.
We are puzzled with contradićtions, which are no abſº-
dities to defecate faculties. Glanv. Scrºſ. c. I 3.
De'FEcate. adj. [from the verb.j Purged from lees or
foulneſs.
This liquor was very defecate, and of a pleaſing golden
colour. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
Defication. m. ſ. ſaferatio, Latin.] Purification; the act
of clearing or purifying.
The ſpleen and liver are obſtructed in their offices of deft-
catiºn, whence vicious and dreggiſh blood. Harvey on t. orſum.
DEFECT. m. ſ. [defectu, Latin.]
1. Want; abſence of ſomething neceſſary; inſufficiency; the
fault oppoſed to ſuperfluity.
Errors have been corrected, and d/ºis ſupplied. Davies.
Had this ſtrange energy been leſs,
Defect had been as fatal as exceſs. Blackmore's Creation.
2. Failing; want. -
Oft 'tis ſeen
Our mean ſecures us, and our mere dºſº,
Prove our commodities. Sha (ſpeare's King Lear.
3. A fault; miſtake; error.
We had rather follow the perfestions of them whom we
like not, than in defects reſemble them whom we love. Hocker.
You praiſe yourſelf,
By laying defect, of judgment to me. Shakeſ Ant. and Cleºp.
Truſt not yourſelf; but your defects to know,
Make uſe of ev'ry friend—and ev'ry foe. Pope's Eſay.
4. Any natural imperfection; a blemiſh; a failure.
Men, through ſome dºſed in the organs, want words, yet
fail not to expreſs their univerſal ideas by ſigns. Locke.
To DEFE"ct. v. n. [from the noun..] To be deficient; to fall
ſhort of; to fail. Obſolete.
Some loſt themſelves in attempts above humanity, yet the
enquiries of moſt defeated by the way, and tired within the
ſober circumference of knowledge. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Defectibility. n.ſ.. [from defectible.] The ſtate of failing;
deficiency; imperfection. -
The corruption of things corruptible depends upon the in-
trinſecal defectibility of the connection or union of the parts of
things corporeal, which is rooted in the very nature of the
things. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Dr Feſcriple. adj [from defect.]
1. Imperſcćt; deficient; wanting.
The extraordinary perſons, thus highly favoured, were for
a great part of their lives in a defective condition. Hale,
DEF Ecº ion. m. ſ. [defectio, Latin.]
1. Want; failure.
2. A falling away; apoſtacy. -
This dºfection and falling away from God was firſt found in
angels, and afterwards in men. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the ſºrld.
If we fall away after taſting of the good word of God, how
criminal muſt ſuch a deficiion be Atterbery's Sermons.
But there is more evil owing to our original defection from
God, and the fooliſh and evil diſpoſitions that are found in
fallen man. // atts's 1 ogick.
3. An abandoning of a king, or ſtate; revolt.
He was diverted and drawn from hence by the general de-
feetion of the whole realm. Davies on Ireland.
Neither can this be meant of evil governours or tyrants,
but of ſome perverſeneſs and defection in the very nation it-
ſelf. Bacon's Holy J/ar.
DE FE"ct 1 v E. adj. [from defºlivus, Latin.]
1. Full of defects; imperfect; not ſufficient; not adequate to
the purpoſe.
It ſubjećts them to all the diſeaſes depending upon a deſ:c-
tive proječtile motion of the blood. Arluthnot on Alinents.
It will very little help to cure my ignorance, that this is the
beſt of four or five hypotheſes propoſed, which are all de-
fect ive. - Locke.
If it rend rsus perfect in one accompliſhment, it generally
leaves us defective in another. Addiſcº's Speciator, Nº. 255.
2. Faulty; vitious; blameable. - -
Our tragedy writers have been notoriouſly defective, i.
giving proper ſentiments to the perſons they introduce. Addison
DEFE crive or deficient Nouns [in grammar. J Indeclinable
nouns, or ſuch as want a number, or ſome particular caſe.
Derective Jºry [in grammar.) A verb which wants ſome of
its tenſcs. -
- 2. ' DEFE"ct 1 v ENESs.
f
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 210</div><p class="Text">D E F
D E F
f
DEFE'ctive NEss. n.ſ.. [from defective..] Want; the ſtate of
being imperfect; faultineſs.
The lowneſs often opens the building in breadth, or the
defectiveneſs of ſome other particular makes any ſingle part
appear in perfection. - Addiſon's Remark, on Ittºy.
DEFENCE. n.ſ. [defenſio, Latin.]
1. Guard; protection; ſecurity.
Rehoboam dwelt in Jeruſalem, and built cities for defence
in Judah. 2 Chro. ii. 5.
The Lord is your protećtion and ſtrong ſtay, a defence from
heat, and a cover from the ſun. Eccluſ xxxiv. 16.
Be thou my ſtrong rock for an houſe of defence to ſave
Ine. Pſ. xxxi. 2.
Againſt all this there ſeems to be no defence, but that of
ſupporting one eſtabliſhed form of doctrine and diſcipline. Sw.
2. Vindication; juſtification; apology.
Alexander beckoned with his hand, and would have made
his defence unto the people. Acts xix. 33.
The youthful prince
With ſcorn replied, and made this bold defence. Dryden.
3. Prohibition: this is a ſenſe merely French.
Severe defences may be made againſt wearing any linnen
under a certain breadth. Temple.
4. Reſiſtance.
5. [In law.] The d fendant's reply after declaration produced.
6. [In fortification.] The part that flanks another work.
DEFE'Nch less. adj. [from defence J
1. Naked ; unarmed; unguarded; not provided with defence;
unprepared.
Captain or dolonel, or knight in arms,
Whoſe chance on theſe dºſe:cºlºſ doors may ſeize,
If deed of honour did thee ever pleaſe,
Guard them, and him within protect from harms. Milton.
My ſiſter is not ſo defenceleſs left
As you imagine: ſhe has a hidden ſtrength
Which you remember not. Milton.
Ah me ! that fear
Comes thund'ring back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceleſs head. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. l. 815.
On a ſlave diſarm’d,
Defenceleſs, and ſubmitted to my rage,
A baſe revenge is vengeance on myſelf. Dryd. Don Sebaſt.
2. Impotent; unable to make reſiſtance.
Will ſuch a multitude of men employ
Their ſtrength againſt a weak defenceleſs boy Addison Ovid.
To DEFEND. v. a. [defendo, Latin; defendre, French.]
1. To ſtand in defence of ; to protećt; to ſupport.
There aroſe, to defend Iſrael, Tola the ſon of Puah. judg.
Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me
from them that riſe up againſt me. Pſ lix. 1.
Heav'n defend your ſouls, that you think
I will your ſerious and great buſineſs ſcant. Shakeſp. Othello.
2. To vindicate; to uphold; to aſſert; to maintain.
The queen on the throne, by God's aſſiſtance, is able to
defend herſelf againſt all her majeſty's enemies and allies put
together. Swift's Remarks on the Barrier Treaty.
3. To fortify to ſecure. -
And here th’ acceſs a gloomy grove defends,
And here th' unnavigable lake extends. Dryden's Aneis.
4. To prohibit; to forbid. [defendre, French.]
Where can you ſay, in any manner, age,
That ever God defended marriage 2 Chaucer.
O ſons ! like one of us, man is become
To know both good and evil, ſince his taſte
Of that defended fruit. Milton's Paradiſe Loſſ, h. xi. l. $6.
The uſe of it is little practiſed, and in ſome places
defended by cuſtoms or laws. ‘ſeºple.
5. To maintain a place, or cauſe, againſt thoſe that attack it.
DEFE'NDAB L E. adj. [from defend..] That may be defended.
DEFE'NDANT. adj. [from defendo, Latin.] Defenſive; fit for
defence.
Line and new repair our towns of war
With men of courage, and with means defendant. Shakeſp.
DEFE'NDANT. m. ſ. [from the adječtive.]
1. He that defends againſt aſſailants.
Thoſe high towers, out of which the Romans might more
conveniently fight with the defendants on the wall, thoſe alſo
were broken by his engines. JWilkins's Math. Mag.
2. [In law.] The perſon accuſed or ſued.
This is the day appointed for the combat,
And ready are th’ appellant and defendant. Shaft. Hºry VI.
Plaintiff dog, and bear defendant. Hudibras.
DEFE'NDER. m. ſ [defenſor, Latin.]
1. One that defends; a champion.
You have the power ſtill
To baniſh your defenders, 'till at length
Your ignorance deliver you,
As moſt abated captives, to ſome nation
That won you without blows. Shakespeare's Coriolanus.
Do'ſt thou not mourn our pow'r employ'd in vain,
And the defenders of our city ſlain : Dryden.
Vol. L
2. An aſſerter; a vindicator. - - * *
Undoubtedly there is no way ſo effectual to betray the truth;
as to procure it a weak defender. South's Sermons.
3. [In law.] An advocate; one that defends another in a court
of juſtice.
DEFENSA'tive. m. ſ. ſfrom defence.
1. Guard; #!/ [ efence.]
A very unſafe defenſative it is againſt the fury of the lion,
and ſurely no better than virginity, or blood royal, which
Pliny doth place in cock-broth. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
If the biſhop has no other defenſatives but excommunica-
tion, no other power but that of the keys, he may ſurrender
up his paſtoral ſtaff. South's Sermons.
2. [In ſurgery.] A bandage, plaiſter, or the like, uſed to ſecure
a wound from outward violence.
DEFE'Nsible. adj. [from defence.] That may be defended.
- A field,
Which nothing but the ſound of Hotſpur's name,
Did ſeem to make defenſible. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
They muſt make themſelves defenſible, both againſt the na-
tives and againſt ſtrangers. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Having often heard Venice repreſented as one of the moſt
defenſible cities in the world, I informed myſelf in what its
ſtrength conſiſts. Addiſon's Reſnarks on Italy.
2. Juſtifiable; right; capable of vindication.
I conceive it very defenſible to diſarm an adverſary, and diſ-
able him from doing miſchief. Collier.
DEFE'ssive. adj. . [defenſif, Fr. from defendens, Latin.]
1. That ſerves to defend; proper for defence; not offenſive.
He would not be perſuaded by danger to offer any offence,
but only to ſtand upon the beſt defenſive guard he could Sidney.
My unpreparedneſs for war, teſtifies for me, that I am ſet
on the defenſive part. King Charles.
Defenſive arms lay by, as uſeleſs here,
Where maſly balls the neighbouring rocks do tear, ſºaller.
2. In a ſtate or poſture of defence.
What ſtood, recoil'd,
Defenſive ſcarce, or with pale fear ſurpriz'd,
Fled ignominious. - Milton.
D. FENSIVE. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive.]
1. Safeguard.
Wars preventive upon juſt fears, are true diSpenserive, as
well as on aétual invaſions. Bacon's War with Spain.
2. State of defence.
His majeſty, not at all diſmayed, reſolved to ſtand upon
the defenſive only. Clarendon, b. viii.
DEFE'Nsively. adv. [from defenſive ) In a defenſive manner.
DEFE'NST. part, paſſ [from defence..] Defended. Obſolete.
Stout men of arms, and with their guide of power,
Like Troy's old town, defenſ! with Illion's tow’r. Fairfax.
To DEFE/R. v. n. [from differo, Latin.]
1. To put off; to delay to act.
He will not long defer
To vindicate the glory of his name
Againſt all competition, nor will long
Endure it. Milton's Agoniſles, l. 473.
Inure thyſelf by times to the love and practice of good
deeds; for the longer thou defºreſt to be acquainted with them,
the leſs every day thou wilt find thyſelf diſpoſed to them. Atterb.
2. To pay deference or regard to another's opinion.
To DEFE'R. v. a.
1. To withold; to delay.
Defer the promis'd boon, the goddeſs cries,
Celeſtial azure brightning in the eyes. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
Neither is this a matter to be deferred 'till a more conve-
rient time of peace and leiſure. Swift.
2. To refer to; to leave to another's judgment and deter-
mination.
The commiſſioners deferred the matter unto the earl of
Northumberland, who was the principal man of authority in
thoſe parts. Bacon's Henry VII.
DEFERENCE. m. ſ. [deference, French.]
1. Regard; reſpect. -
Virgil could have excelled Varius in tragedy, and Horace in
lyric poetry, but out of deference to his friends he attempted
neither. Dryden's juven. Dedicat.
He may be convinced that he is in an error, by obſerving
thoſe perſons, for whoſe wiſdom and goodneſs he has the
greateſt defºrence, to be of a contrary ſentiment. Swift.
2. Complaiſance; condeſcenſion
A natural roughneſs makes a man uncomplaiſant to others;
ſo that he has no deference for their inclinations, tempers, or
conditions. Locke.
3. Submiſſion.
Moſt of our fellow-ſubjećts are guided either by the preju-
dice of education, or a deference to the judgment of thoſe
who, perhaps, in their own hearts, diſapprove the opinions
which they induſtriouſly ſpread among the multitule. Addiſon.
IDE's E RENT. adj. [from deferens, of deſero, Latin.] That car-
ries up and down.
. The figures of pipes or concaves, through which
6 M - ſounds
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 211</div><p class="Text">+ HD E F
E) F. F.
founds paſs, or of other bodies deferent, conduce to the varicty
and alteration of the found. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 220.
DE FERENT. n.ſ.. [from the adjective.] That which carries;
that which conveys.
It is certain, however it croſſes the received opinion, that
ſounds may be created without air, though air be the moſt
favourable deferent of ſounds. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
DEFERENTs [in ſurgery.] Certain veſſels in the human body,
appointed for the conveyance of humours from one place to
another. Chambers.
DEFIANCE. n.ſ.. [from diff, French.]
1. A challenge; an invitation to fight.
The firey Tybalt, with his ſword prepar’d,
Which, as he breath’d defiance to my cars,
He ſwung about his head. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and Julie'.
Nor is it juſt to bring
A war, without a juſt defiance made. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
2. A challenge to make any impeachment good.
3. Expreſſion of abhorrence or contempt.
The Novatian hereſy was very apt to attraćt well meaning
ſouls, who, ſeeing it bad ſuch expreſs defiance to apoſtacy,
could not ſuſpect that it was itſelf any defection from the
faith. Decay of Piety.
No body will ſo openly bid defiance to common ſenſe, as to
affirm viſible and direct contradictions. Locke.
DEFICIENCE. Un. ſ. [from deficio, Latin.] Defect; fail-
DEFI’CIENCY. { ing; imperfection.
Scaliger, finding a defect in the reaſon of Ariſtotle, intro-
duceth one of no leſs deficiency himſelf. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Thou in thyſelf art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficience found. 4/ilton's Paradiſe Lø/?, b. viii 1.415.
We ſhall find, in our own natures, too great evidence of
intellectual deficience, and deplorable confeſſions of human
ignorance. Glanv. Sceſſ, c. 3.
What great deficience is it, if we come ſhort of others :
Sº rat’s Sermons.
The charaćters of comedy and tragedy are never to be
made perfect, but always to be drawn with ſome ſpecks of
frailty and deficience, ſuch as they have been deſcribed to us in
hiſtory. Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Prºf.
2. Want; ſomething leſs than is neceſſary.
What is to be conſidered in this caſe, is chiefly, if there
be a ſufficient fulneſs or deficiency of blood, for different me-
thods are to be taken. Arbuthnºt on Diet.
There is no burden laid upon our poſterity, nor any deft-
ciency to be hereafter made up by ourſelves, which has been
our caſe in ſo many other ſubſidies. Addiſon's Freeholder.
DEF1'cIENT. adj. [deficiens, from deficio, Latin.] Failing;
wanting; defective; imperfect.
O woman beſt are all things as the will
Of God ordain'd them: his creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Figures are either ſimple or mixed: the ſimple be either
circular or angular; and of circular, either complete, as cir-
cles, or deficient, as ovals. J/otton's Archite.7.
Neither Virgil nor Homer were diſcient in any of the
former beauties. Dryden's Fab. Prºf.
Several views, poſtures, ſtands, turns, limitations and ex-
ceptions, and ſeveral other thoughts of the mind, for which
we have either none, or very deficient names, are diligently to
be ſtudied. Loºke.
DEF1'cIENT Werbs. See IDF FEctive Werbs.
DEFI’c1 ENT Nouns. See DEF Ective Nouns.
DEF1'ci ENT Numbers [in arithmetick] are thoſe numbers whoſe
parts, added together, make leſs than the integer, whoſe
parts they are. Chambers.
DEF1'E.R. m. ſ. [from diff, French.] A challenger; a con-
temner; one that dares and defies.
Is it not then high time that the laws ſhould provide, by
the moſt prudent and effectual means, to curb thoſe bold and
inſolent defiers of heaven. Tillotſºn, Serm, 3.
To DEFILE. v. a, [apilan, Sax. from ful, ſoul.]
1. To make foul or impure; to make naſty or filthy; to dirty.
There is a thing, Harry, known to many in our land by
the name of pitch: this pitch, as ancient writers do report,
doth defile. - Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
He is juſtly reckoned among the greateſt prelates of this
age, however his character may be dºff’ed by mean and dirty
hands. Swift's Letter concerning the Sacramental Tºft.
2. To pollute; to make legally or ritually impure.
That which dieth of itſelf he ſhall not eat, to defile himſelf
therewith. Lev. xxii. 8.
Neither ſhall he defile himſelf for his father. Lev. xxi. 11.
3. To corrupt chaſtity; to violate.
Ev'ry object his offence revil'd,
The huſband murder'd, and the wife d fil’d. Prior.
4. To taint; to corrupt ; to vitiate ; to make guilty.
Forgetfulneſs of good turns, djiling of ſouls, adultery and
ſhameleſs uncleanneſs. J77ſºl. xiv. 26.
God requires rather that we ſhould die than defile ourſelves
with impictics Stilingfeet.
Let not any inſtances of fin dºfile your requeſts. //ake.
To DEF1't E. v. n. [...filer, French J To march; to go of:
file by file.
DEF11. E. m. ſ. ſºffe, Fr. from file, a line of ſoldiers, which
is derived from ſlum, a thread J A narrow paſſage; a ſong
narrow paſs; a lane. -&gt;
There is in Oxford a narrow dºſe, to uſe the military
term, where the partiſans uſed to encounter. …kiſ. Speziator.
DEF I'll EMENT. n.ſ.. [from dºfile.] The ſtate of being defiled;
the act of defiling; nailineſs; pollution; corrupton; de-
fcdation.
Luſt,
By unchaſte looks, looſe geſtures, and foul talk,
Lets in dºſlement to the inward parts Åſiºn.
The unchaſte are provoked to ſee their vice expoſed, and
the chaſte cannot rake into ſuch fifth without dańser of de-
flement. Speciatzy, Nº. 286.
DEF (LER. m. ſ. [from defe.] One that deities; a corrupter;
a violater.
At the laſt tremenduous day I ſhall hold forth in my arms
my much wronged child, and call aloud for vengeance on her
defter. …diſcº's Gaºqian, Nº. 128.
DE FI'NA El E. adj. [from ºfte.]
1. That which may be defined; capable of definition.
The Supreme Nature we cannot otherwiſe define, than
by ſaying it is infinite, as if infinite were aſinate, or inti-
nity a ſubject for our narrow underſtanding. Dryden.
2. That which may be aſcertained.
Concerning the time of the end of the world, the queſtion
is, whether that time be dºff, aſ e or no. Lurict's 1.23.
To DEFINE. v. a. [defini, Lat. aftir." French.]
1. To give the definition; to explain a thing by its qualities and
circumſtances. -
Whoſe loſs can'ſ thou mean,
That do'ſt ſo well their miſeries ºf ef Sºrey, b. ii.
Though defining be thought the proper way to make known
the proper ſignification, yet there are ſome words that will
not be defined. Locke.
2. To circumſcribe; to mark the limit; to bound.
When the rings, or ſome parts of them, appeared only
black and white, they were very diſtinct and weſ, afted, and
the blackncſs ſeemed as intenſe as that of the central ſpot. Nºtt.
To DEF I'N E. v. m. To determine; to decide; to decree.
The unjuſt judge is the capital remover of landmarks,
when he defineth amiſs of lands and properties. Bacon, Eſ, 57.
DEFI'NE R. m. ſ. [from diſine.] One that explains; one that
deſcribes a thing by its qualitics.
Your God, forſooth, is found
Incomprehenſible and infinite;
But is he therefore found Vain ſearcher! no :
Let your imperfect definition ſhow,
That nothing you, the weak definer, know. Prior.
DEFINITE. adj. [from definitus, Latin.] -
1. Certain; limited ; bounded.
Hither to your arbour divers times he repaired, and here, by
your means, had the fight of the goddeſs, who in a definite
compaſs can ſet forth infinite beauty. Sidney, b. i.
2. Exačt; preciſe.
Ideots, in this caſe of favour, would
Be wiſely diſinte. Shakespeare's Cymbeline.
In a charge of adultery, the accuſer ought to ſet forth, in
the accuſatory libel or inquiſition, which ſucceeds in the place
of accuſation, ſome certain and definite time. Ayliff's Parerg.
DEFINIT.E. n ſ. [from the adjective.] Thing explained or
defined.
If theſe things are well confidered, ſpecial baſtardy is no-
thing elſe but the definition of the general; and the general,
again, is nothing elſe but a definite of the ſpecial. Ayliffe.
DE/FINITEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from definite.] Certainty; limited-
neſs. Dist.
DEFINI"rios. n.ſ. [definitia, Latin; definition, French..]
1. A ſhort deſcription of a thing by its properties.
I drew my definition of poetical wit from my particular con-
fideration of him ; for propriety of thoughts and words are
only to be found in him; and, where they are proper, they
will be delightful. Dryden.
2. 1)eciſion; determination.
3. [In logick.] The explication of the eſſence of a thing by
its kind and difference.
What is man? Not a reaſonable animal merely ; for that
is not an adequate and diſtinguiſhing definition. Lentley's Serº.
DE Fi'NITIVE. adj. [definitivus, Latin. J Determinate; poſi-
tive; expreſs.
Other authors write often dubiouſly, even in matters where-
in is expected a ſtrict and diſinitive truth. Brown's Puig. Err.
I make haſte to the caſting and comparting of the whole
work, being indeed the very definitive ſum of this art, to diſ-
tribute uſefully and gracefully a well choſen plot. Iſºtton.
DEFINITIVELY. adv. [from definitive..] Poſitively; deciſive-
ly; expreſly. --
Definitively thus I anſwer you :
* Your love deſerves my thanks; but my deſert, -
Unmeritable, ſhuns your high requeſt. Shakespeare. Riº
2 lat
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 212</div><p class="Text">D. E. F.
}} E F
That Metheuſalah was the longeſt lived, of all the chil-
dren of Adam, we need not grant; nor is it definitively ſet
down by Moſes. Brown's Vulgar Errours, i. vi. c. 6.
Hellarmine faith, becauſe we think that the body of Chriſt
may be in many places at once, locally and viſibly ; therefore
we ſay and hold, that the ſame body may be circumſcriptively
and definitivº in more places at once. A ſai!.
D5 i Ni rives ess. n.ſ.. [from definitive..] Deciſiveneſs. Licº.
12 ºr LAGRAB I'll ty. a. ſ. [from defiagro, Latin.] Combuſti-
bility ; the quality of taking fire, and burning totally away.
We have been forced to ſpend nuch more time than the
opinion of the ready diſagrahility, if I may ſo ſpeak, of fait-
petre did beforehand permit us to imagine. Boyle on Saltpet, e.
D: F.A'GRABLE. adj. from defiagro, Lat. J Having the qua-
lity of waiting away wholly in fire, without any remains.
Our chymical oils, ſuppoſing that they were exactly pure,
yet they would be, as the beſt ſpirit of wine is, but the more
iniammable and dºſagrable. Boyle's Scept. Chym.
DE LA GRATION. a. ſ. [diſagratio, Latin.) -
A term frequently made uſe of in chymiſtry, for ſetting fire
to ſeveral things in their preparation; as in making Æthiops
with fire, with ſal prunelle, and many others. 9ttincy.
The true reaſon, therefore, why that paper is not burned
by the flame that plays about it, ſeems to be, that the aqueous
part of the ſpirit of wine, being imbibed by the paper, keeps
it ſo moiſt, that the flame of the ſulphureous parts of the ſame
ſpirit cannot faſten on it; and therefore, when the dºſiagration
is over, you ſhall always find the paper moiſt; and ſometimes
we have found it ſo moiſt, that the flame of a candle would
not readily light it. Boyle,
To CE.F LEC I. v. m. [d ſºlo, Latin.] To turn aſide; to
deviate from a true courſe, or right line.
At ſome parts of the Azores the needle defle&amp;fe h not, but
lieth in the true meridian : on the other ſide of the Azores,
and this ſide of the Equator, the North point of the needle
whecleth to the Weſt. Brown's Pugar Errouri.
Ariſing beyond the Equator, it maketh northward almoſt
fifteen degrees; and deſiecting after weſtward, without mean-
ders, continueth a ſtrait courſe about forty degrees. Brown.
For did not ſome from a ſtrait courſe deft.&lt;!,
They could not meet, they could no world erect. Blackm.
DEFL crio N. m. ſ. [from dºſe:ſo, Latin.]
1. Deviation; the act of turning aſide.
Needles incline to the South on the other ſide of the
Equator; and, at the very line or middle circle, ſtand
without diffection. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. 2. c. 2.
2. A turning aſide, or out of the way.
3. [{n navigation.] The departure of a ſhip from its true courſe.
IDE FLE'xURE. m. ſ. [from deflecio, Latin.] A bending down ;
a turning aſide, or out of the way. Dić7.
DEF lor A't Ios. m. ſ. [d floration, Fr. from defloratus, Lat.]
1. The act of deflouring; the taking away of a woman's vir-
ginity.
2. A ſele&amp;tion of that which is moſt valuable.
The laws of Normandy are, in a great meaſure, the defto-
ration of the Engliſh laws, and a tranſcript of them. Haie.
To DEFLOUR. v. a. [d florer, French.]
1. To raviſh; to take away a woman's virginity.
As is the luſt of an eunuch to dºſiour a virgin, ſo is he that
executeth judgment with violence. Eccluſ, xx. 4.
Now will I hence to ſeek my lovely Moor,
And let my ſpleenful ſons this trull deftour. Shakeſp. Tit. Aid.
2. To take away the beauty and grace of any thing.
How on a ſudden loſt,
Defic'd, deflour'd, and now to death devote ! Milt, Pa. Lyſ.
If he died young, he died innocent, and before the ſweet-
neſs of his ſoul was defloured and raviſhed from him, by the
flames and follics of a froward age. Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
DEFlo'URER. m. ſ. [from defour.] A raviſher; one that takes
away virginity.
I have often wondered, that thoſe defourers of innocence,
though dead to all the ſentiments of virtue and honour, are
not reſtrained by humanity. Addiſon's Guardian.
DEFLU'ous. adj. [d fluids, Latin.]
1. That flows down.
2. That falls off.
DEFLU'x1ON. m. ſ. [diffuxia, Latin.] A defluxion; a flowing
down of humours.
We ſee that taking cold moveth looſeneſs, by contračtion
of the ſkin and outward parts; and ſo doth cold likewiſe cauſe
rheums and diffuxions from the head. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
DFF Ly’. adv. [ from dºſt. J Dexterouſly ; ſkilfully. Ob-
ſolete. Properly dºffſ.
Lo, how finely the graces can it foot
To the inſtrument ;
They dauncen defly, and ſingen foote,
In their merriment. Spenser's Paſioral.
De Foe D'A'TION. m. ſ. [from diſrdus, Lat.] The act of making
filthy ; pollution.
What native, unextinguiſhable bcauty muſt be impreſſed
and inſtinčied through the whole, which the dºſedaiion of ſo
many parts by a bad printer, and a worſe editor, could not
hinder from ſhining forth. Bentley's Preface to Milton.
DEFo'RCEMENT. n.). [from fºrce.] A with holding of lands
and tenements by force from the right owner.
To DEFQ RM. v. a. [d fºrmo, Latin.]
1. To disfigure; to make ugly; to ſpoil the form of anything,
I that am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by diſſembling nature,
Pfºrm'd, unfiniſh'd, ſent before my time
Into this breathing world, ſcarce half made up. Shakesepare. R. III.
- Wintry blaſts
Defºrm the year delightleſs.
2. To diſhonour; to make ungraceful.
Old men with duſt dºform'd their hoary hair. Dryd. Fab,
DEFo'R.M. ad. [d formis, Latin j Ugly; disfigured; of an
irregular form.
Thomſºn's Hºinter.
I did proclaim,
That whoſo kill'd that monſter moſt defºrm,
Should have mine only daughter to his dame. Fairy Queen,
So ſpake the griefly terror; and in ſhape,
So ſpeaking and ſo threatning, grew tenfold
More dreadful and deform. 4%ilton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. ii.
Sight ſo dºform, what heart of rock could long
Dry-ey’d behold. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. 1.494.
DFF RMA'rios. m. ſ. [d fºrmatio, Latin.] A defacing; a
disfiguring.
DEFor MEDLY. adv. [from dºform.] In an ugly manner.
De Fo'RMEDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from diformed.] Uglineſs; a dif-
agreeable form.
DEFo'R.M.T.Y. m. ſ. [deformitas, Latin.]
1. Uglineſs; ill-favouredneſs.
I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to paſs away the time,
Unleſs to ſpy my ſhadow in the ſun,
And deſcant on mine own d formity. Shakſ care's Rich. III,
. Proper defºrmity ſeems not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Where fits defornity to mock my body, -
To ſhape my legs of an unequal ſize;
To diſproportion me in every part. Shakespeare Henry VI. p. iii.
Why ſhould not man,
Retaining ſtill divine ſimilitude
In part, from ſuch defornities be free, -
And, for his maker's image ſake, exempt? Miſt. Pa. Ló/?.
2. Ridiculouſneſs; the quality of ſomething worthy to be
laughed at.
In comedy there is ſomewhat more of the worſe likeneſs
to be taken, becauſe it is often to produce laughter, which is
occaſioned by the fight of ſome defºrmity. Dryd. Prºf. Dufreſ.
3. Irregularity; inordinateneſs. -
No glory is more to be envied than that of due reforming
either church or ſtate, when deformities are ſuch, that the per-
turbation and novelty are not like to exceed the benefit of
reforming. King Charles.
4. Diſhonour; diſgrace.
DeFo'r so R. m. ſ. [from force ºr, French.] One that overcomes
and caſteth out by force. A law term. Blount.
To DEFRAUD. v. a. [defraudo, Latin.] To rob or deprive
by a wile or trick; to cheat; to cozen ; to deceive; to be-
guile. With of before the thing taken by fraud.
That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any
matter, becauſe that the Lord is the avenger of all ſuch, as
we alſo have forewarned you and teſtified. Theſ, iv. 6.
My ſon, defraud not the poor of his living, and make not
the needy eyes to wait long. Eccluſ. iv. 1.
They ſeem, after a ſort, even to mourn, as being injured
and defrauded of their right, when places, not ſanctified as
they are, prevent them unneceſſarily in that pre-eminence and
honour. Hoºker, b. v. ſ. 16.
Then they, who brothers better claim diſown,
Expel their parents, and uſurp the throne;
Defraud their clients, and, to lucre ſold,
Sit brooding on unprofitable gold, Dryden's Aºn. 6.
But now he ſeiz'd Briſeis' heav'nly charms,
And of my valour's prize defrauds my arms. Pope's Iliad.
There is a portion of our lives which every wiſe man
may juſtly reſerve for his own particular uſe, without de-
frauding his native country. Dryden's Dedicat. to King Arthur.
DEFRA'UDER. m. ſ. [from defraud..] A deceiver; one that
cheats.
The profligate in morals grow ſevere,
Defrauders juſt, and ſycophants fineere. Blackm, Creation.
To DEFRA.Y. v. a [defrayer, French.) To bear the charges
of ; to diſcharge expences.
He would, out of his own revenue, defray the charges be-
longing to the ſacrifices. 2 Mac. ix. 16.
It is eaſy, Ireneus, to lay a charge upon any town ; but to
foreſee how the ſame may be anſwered and defrayed, is the
chicf part of good adviſement, Spenſer's State y ºf
t
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 213</div><p class="Text">D E G
D E G
It is long ſince any ſtranger arrived in this part, and there-
fore take ye no care; the ſtate will defray you all the time
you ſtay; neither ſhall you ſtay one day the leſs for that. Bacon.
DEFRA'YER. n.ſ.. [from deſray J One that diſcharges ex-
pences. -
DEFRA'yMENT. n.ſ.. [from defray.]. The payment of expences.
DEFT, adj. [barz, Saxon.] Obſolete.
1. Neat; handſome; ſpruce.
2. Proper; fitting.
You go not the way to examine: you muſt call the watch
that are their accuſers.
—Yea, marry, that's the defiºſº way. Shakespeare Much ado about N.
3. Ready; dexterous.
Loud fits of laughter ſeiz'd the gueſts, to ſee
The limping god ſo deft at his new miniſtry. Dryd. Iliad.
The wanton calf may ſkip with many a bound,
And my cur, Tray, play defteſt feats around. Gay's Paſ?.
DE'Ftly, adv. [from deft.] Obſolete.
1. Neatly; dexterouſly.
2. In a ſkilful manner.
Come, high or low,
Thyſelf and office deftly ſhow. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Young Colin Clout, a lad of peerly meed,
Full well could dance, and deftly tune the reed. Gay's Paſł.
DEFUNCT. adj. [d fundius, Latin.]
1. Dead; deceaſed.
I therefore beg it not,
To pleaſe the palate of my appetite;
Nor to comply with heat, the young affects,
In me d.funct, and proper ſatisfaction. Shakeſp. Othel'o.
Here entity and quiddity,
The ſouls of defunct bodies fly. Hudibras.
Defu'Nct. n.ſ.. [from the adjective..] One that is deceaſed;
a dead man, or woman.
Nature doth abhor to make his couch
ith the defunct, cr ſleep upon the dead. Sha'eſ. Cymbeline.
In many of theſe caſes the ſearchers are able to report the
opinion of the phyſician who was with the patient, as they
receive the ſame from the friends of the defunct. Graunt.
Defu'Nction n. ſ [from defunct.] Death.
Nor did the French poſſeſs the Salique land,
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of king Pharamond. Shakeſpeare's Hen. V.
To DEFY'. v. a. [differ, Fr. from defide decedere, or ſome like
phraſe, to fall from allegiance to rebellion, contempt, or
inſult.]
1. To call to combat; to challenge.
I once again
Defy thee to the trial of mortal fight. Milton's Agoniſtes.
Where ſeek retreat, now innocence is fled !
Safe in that guard, I durſt even hell defy ;
Without it, tremble now, when heav'n is nigh. Dryden.
Agis, the Lycian, ſtepping forth with pride, -
To ſingle fight the boldeſt foe defy'd. Dryden's Án.
2. To treat with contempt; to ſlight.
I do know
As many fools that ſtand in better place,
Garniſh’d like him, that for a trickſy word
Defy the matter. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Penice.
Pº n. ſ. [from the verb.] A challenge; an invitation to
ht.
§ At this the challenger, with fierce defy,
His trumpet ſounds; the challeng'd makes reply:
With clangour rings the field, reſounds the vaulted ſky. Dryd.
DEFY'E.R. n. ſ. [from deſy.) A challenger; one that invites
to fight.
God may, ſome time or other, think it the concern of his
juſtice, and providence too, to revenge the affronts put upon
them by ſuch impudent deſyers of both, as neither believe a
God, nor ought to be believed by man. South's Sermons.
De GE'NERAcy, n. ſ. [from digeneratio, Latin.]
1. A departing from the virtue of our anceſtors.
2. A forſaking of that which is good.
'Tis true, we have contracted a great deal of weakneſs
and impotency by our wilful degeneracy from goodneſs; but
that grace, which the goſpel offers to us for our aſſiſtance, is
ſufficient for us. Tillotſon, Serm. 6.
The ruin of a ſtate is generally preceded by an univerſal
degeneracy of manners, and contempt of religion, which is
entirely our caſe at preſent. Swift.
3. Meanneſs.
There is a kind of ſluggiſh reſignation, as well as poorneſs
and degeneracy of ſpirit, in a ſtate of ſlavery. Addiſon.
To DEGENERATE. v. n. [degenerare, Lat. degenerer, Fr.
degenerar, Spaniſh.]
1. To fall from the virtue of anceſtors.
2. To fall from a more noble to a baſe ſtate. -
When wit tranſgreſſeth decency, it degenerates into info-
lence and impiety. Tillotſon, Sermon z.
3. To fall from its kind; to grow wild or baſe.
Moſt of thoſe fruits that uſe to be grafted, if they be ſet of
kerne's or ſtones, degenerate. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 519.
DE GE'N E R At E. adv. [from the verb ] -
1. Unlike his anceſtors; fallen from the virtue and merit of his
anceſtors.
Thou art like enough
To fight againſt me under Piercy's pay;
To dog his heels, and curt’ſy at his frowns,
To ſhow how much thou art degenerate. Shakeſp. Hen. TV.
Yet thou haſt greater cauſe to be
Aſham'd of them, than they of thee;
Degenerate from their ancient brood,
Since firſt the court allow'd them food.
2. Unworthy; baſe.
So all ſhall turn degen'rate, all deprav'd ;
Juſtice and temperance, truth, and faith forgot!
One m in except. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. 1.806.
When a man ſo far becomes degenerate as to quit the prin-
ciples of human nature, and to be a noxious creature, there
is commonly an injury done ſome perſon or other. Locke.
DEGE'NerateNess. n.ſ.. [from degenerate.] Degeneracy; a
being grown wild ; out of kind Dićt.
DEGENERA'ſ 10N. m.ſ.. [from degenerate.]
1. A deviation from the virtue of one's anceſtors.
2. A falling from a more excellent ſtate to one of leſs worth.
3. The thing changed from its primitive ſtate.
In plants, wherein there is no diſtinétion of ſexes, theſe
tranſplantations are yet more obvious than they; as that of
barley into oats, of wheat into darnell; and thoſe grains which
generally ariſe among corn, as cockle, aracus, oegilops, and
other degeneratiºns. Brown's Pugar Errours, b. iii. c. 17.
DEGE'Nerous. adj. [from degener, Latin.]
1. Degenerated; fallen from the virtue and merit of his an-
ceſtors. -
2. Vile; baſe; infamous; unworthy.
Let not the tumultuary violence of ſome mens immoderate.
demands ever betray me to that degenerºus and unmanly fla-
very, which ſhould make me ſtrengthen them by my
conſent. King Charles.
Shame, inſtead of piety, reſtrains them from many baſe
and degenerous practices. South's Sermons.
Degenerous paſſion, and for man too baſe,
It ſeats its empire in the female race;
There rages, and, to make his blow ſecure,
Puts flatt'ry on, until the aim be ſure. Dryden's juvenal.
DEGE'Nerously. adv. [from degenerous.] In a degenerate
manner; baſely; meanly.
How wounding a ſpectacle is it to ſee our greateſt heroes,
like Hercules at the diſtaff, thus degenerouſly employed 2
Decay of Piety.
DEGLUTI'tion. n.ſ. [deglutition, Fr. from dºglutio, Lat..] The
aćt or power of ſwallowing.
When the dºglutition is totally aboliſhed, the patient may be
nouriſhed by clyſters. Arbuthnot on Diet.
DEGRADA'tic N. m.ſ. (degradation, French.]
1. A deprivation of an office or dignity.
The word degradation is commonly uſed to denote a depri-
vation and removing of a man from his degree. Ayliff's Par.
2. Degeneracy; baſeneſs.
So deplorable is the degradation of our nature, that whereas
before we bore the image of God, we now retain only the
image of men. South's Sermons.
3. [In painting..] A term made uſe of to expreſs the leſſening
and rendering confuſed the appearance of diſtant objects in a
landſkip, ſo as they may appear there as they would do to an
eye placed at that diſtance from them. Dićf.
To DEGRA'DE. v. a. [d grader, French.]
1. To put one from his degree; to deprive him of his office,
dignity, or title.
Swift.
He ſhould
Be quite degraded, like a hedgeborn ſwain,
That doth preſume to boaſt of gentle blood. Shakespeare Hen.VI.
2. To leſſen; to diminiſh the value of.
Nor ſhalt thou, by deſcending to aſſume
Man's nature, leſſen or degrade thine own. Milt. Par. Loſt.
All higher knowledge in her preſence falls
Degraded. 41ilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. viii. i. 551.
DeGRAva"TION. m. ſ. [from degravate, of degravo, Lat.] The
aćt of making heavy. Dićf.
DEGREE. m. ſ. [degré, French, from gradus, Latin.]
1. Quality; rank; ſtation; place of dignity.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high de-
gree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether
lighter than vanity. Pſ. lxii. 9.
It was my fortune, common to that age,
To love a lady fair, of great degree,
The which was born of noble parentage,
And ſet in higheſt ſeat of dignity. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant, 4.
I embrace willingly the ancient received courſe and conve-
niency of that diſcipline, which teacheth inferior degrees any
orders in the church of God. Hooker's Dedication.
Well
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 214</div><p class="Text">D E I.
D E I
*
Well then, Coleville is your name; a knight is your degree,
and your place the dale. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Degree being wizarded,
Th’ unworthieſt ſhews as fairly in the maſk. Shakeſpeare.
This noble youth to madneſs lov’d a dame
Of high degree, Honoria was her name. Dryden.
• Farmers in degree,
He a good huſband, a good houſewife ſhe. Dryden.
But is no rank, no ſtation, no degree,
From this contagious taint of ſorrow free ? Prior.
2. The ſtate and condition in which a thing is.
The book of wiſdom noteth degrees of idolatry, making
that of worſhipping petty and vile idols more groſs than ſim-
ply the worſhipping of the creature. Bacon's Holy War.
3. A ſtep or preparation to anything.
Her firſt degree was by ſetting forth her beauties, truly in
nature not to be miſliked, but as much advanced to the eye
as abaſed to the judgment by art. Sidney, b. ii.
Which fight the knowledge of myſelf might bring,
Which to true wiſdom is the firſt degree. Davies.
4. Order of lineage; deſcent of family.
King Latinus, in the third degree,
Had Saturn author of his family. Dryden's A.m. b.vii. 1.72.
5. The orders or claſſes of the angels.
The ſeveral degrees of angels may probably have larger
views, and be endowed with capacities able to ſet before them,
as iſ one picture, all their paſt knowledge at cnce. Locke.
6. M &amp;aſure; proportion.
If you come to ſeparate them, and that all the parts are
cquelly heard as loud as one another, they will ſtun you to
tº “ digree, that you would fancy your ears were torn in
pieces. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
- Poeſy
Admits of no degrees; but muſt be ſtill
Sublimely good, or deſpicably ill. Roſcommon.
7. [In geometry.] The three hundred and ſixtieth part of the
circumference of a circle. The ſpace of one degree in the
heavens is accounted to anſwer to ſixty miles.
In minds and manners, twins oppos'd we ſee;
In the ſame ſign, almoſt the ſame degree. Dryden's Perſ. Sãº.
To you who live in chill degree,
As map informs, of fifty-three. Dryden's Epiſºls.
8. [In arithmetick J A degree conſiſts of three figures, viz. of
three places comprehending units, tens and hundreds; ſo three
hundred and ſixty-five is a degree. Cocker’s Arithmetick.
9. The diviſion of the lines upon ſeveral ſorts of mathematical
inſtruments.
1 *. [In muſick.] The intervals of ſounds, which are uſually
marked by little lines. Ličf.
1 1. [In phyſick and chymiſtry.] The vehemence or ſlackneſs of
the hot or cold quality of a plant, mineral, or other mixtbody.
The ſecond, third, and fourth degrees of heat are more
eaſily introduced than the firſt: every one is both a prepara-
tive and a ſtep to the next. South's Sermons.
By DEGRE'Es. adv. Gradually; by little and little.
Their bodies are exerciſed in all abilities both of doing and
ſuffering, and their minds acquainted by degrees with danger.
- Sidney, b. ii.
Doth not this ethereal medium, in paſſing out of water,
- glaſs, cryſtal, and other compačt and denſe bodies, into empty
ſpaces, grow denſer and denſer by degrees 2 'ewton's Opt.
Exulting in triumph, now ſwell the bold notes;
In broken air, trembling, the wild muſick floats;
*Till by degrees remote and ſmall,
The ſtrains decay,
And melt away,
In a dying, dying fall. Pºpe's Cecilia.
A perſon who is addićted to play or gaming, though he
took but little delight in it at firſt, by degrees contračis a ſtrong
inclination towards it. Spediator, N°. 447.
DE'. UsTATION. m. ſ. ſargº/?atic, Latin.] A taſting. Dić7.
To DEHORT. v. a. [d horior, Latin.] To diſſuade; to ad-
viſe to the contrary.
One of the greateſt ſticklers for this fond opinion, ſeverely
dhorted all his followers from proſtituting mathematical prin-
ciples unto common apprehenſion or pračtice. //ilkins.
The author of this epiſtle, and the reſt of the apoſtles, do
every where vehemently and earneſtly dahort us from unbelief:
did they never read theſe dehortations //ard on Infidelity.
DE HORTA'TION. m. ſ. [from dehortor, Latin.] Diſſuaſion; a
counſelling to the contrary.
The author of this epiſtle, and the reſt of the apoſtles, do
every where vehemently and earneſtly dehort from unbelief,
did they never read theſe dehortations. J/ard on Infidelity.
DF Ho'RTA ToRY. adj. [from debartor, Latin.] Belonging to
diſſuaſion.
DEHo'RTER, m ſ [from dehart.] A diſſuader; an adviſer to
the contrary.
DEICIDE. n.ſ. [from deus and cardº, Latin.] The murder of
God; the act of killing God. It is only uſed in ſpeaking of
the death of our bleſſed Saviour. -
Explain how perfection ſuffer'd pain, -
Wol. I. - 2
Almighty languiſh’8, and Eternal dy'd;
How by her patient vićtor death was ſlain,
And earth profan'd, yet bleſs'd with deicide / Prior;
To DEJECT. v. a. [difficio, Latin.]
1. To caſt down; to afflict; to grieve; to depreſs; to fink; to
diſcourage, to cruſh.
Well, I am your theme; you have the ſtart of me; I am
dejećted; ignorance itſelf is a plummet o'er me; uſe me as
you will. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſor.
The loweſt, moſt dejećied thing of fortune,
Stands ſtill in eſperance; lives not in fear! Shakeſ K. Lear.
Nor think to die, dejećis my lofty mind;
All that I dread is leaving you behind! Pope's R. of the Lock.
2. To change the form with grief; to make to look ſad.
Eneas here beheld, of form divine,
A godlike youth in glitt'ring armour ſhine,
With great Marcellus keeping equal pace; -
But gloomy were his eyes, djecied was his face. Dryd. Aºn.
DE JE'ct adj. [dječius, Latin.j Caſt down; afflićted; low-
ſpirited. -
I am of ladies moſt dºječ7 and wretched,
That ſuck'd the honey of his muſick vows. Shakespeare Hamlet.
DE JE'ct EDLY. adv. [from deject.] In a deječted manner;
afflićtedly.
No man in that paſſion doth look ſtrongly, but dejectedly;
and that repulſion from the eyes, diverteth the ſpirits, and gives
heat more to the ears, and the parts by them. Bacon's N. Hiſł.
DE JE'cTEDNEss. n. ſ. [from dejected.]. A being caſt down ; a
lowneſs of ſpirits. Dić?.
DFJE/ction. m. ſ. [dejećlion, Fr. from djećio, Lat.]
1. A lowneſs of ſpirits; melancholy.
What beſides
Of ſorrow, and deječin, and deſpair,
Our frailty can ſuſtain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
Deſerted and aſtoniſhed, he ſinks into utter dejection ; and
even hope itſelf is ſwallowed up in deſpair. Rogers's Sermons. .
2. Weakneſs; inability.
The effects of ſuch an alkaleſcent ſtate, in any great de-
gree, are thirſt and a dejection of appetite, which putrid things
occaſion more than any other. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. [In medicine.] A going to ſtool.
The liver ſhould continually ſeparate the choler from the
blood, and empty it into the inteſtines, where there is good
uſe for it, not only to provoke dejeciion, but alſo to attenuate
the chyle. Ray on the Creation.
DEJº'cture. m.ſ [from dje?..] The excrements.
A diſeaſe oppoſite to this ſpiffitude is too great fluidity, the
ſymptoms of which are exceſs of animal ſecretions; as of
perſpiration, ſweat, urine, liquid dejectures, leanneſs, weak-
neſs, and thirſt. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
De JERATION. n.ſ.. [from dejero, Lat.] A taking of a ſolemn
oath. Dićf.
Deification. m.ſ [deficatiºn, French.] The aët of deify-
ing, or making a god.
DE'IFoRM. adj. [from deus and fºrma, Latin.] Of a godlike
form. - -
To DEIFY. v. a. [deifier, Fr. of deus and fic, Latin J
1. To make a god of; to adore as god; to transfer into the
number of the divinities.
Daphnis, the fields delight, the ſhepherds love,
Renown'd on earth, and deify’d above. Dryden.
Even the ſeals which we have of Julius Caeſar, which we
know to be antique, have the ſtar of Venus over them, though
they were all graven after his death, as a note that he was
deified. Dryden's Virg. Æn. Dedicat.
Perſuade the covetous man not to deiff his money, and the
proud man not to adore himſelf. South's Sermons.
Half of thee
Is deify’d before thy death. Prior.
2. To praiſe exceſſively; to extol one as if he were a god.
He did again ſo extol and deify the pope, as made all that
he had ſaid in praiſe of his maſter and miſtreſs ſeem temperate
and paſſable. Bacon's Henry VIII.
To DEIGN. v. n. [from daigner, Fr. of dignor, Latin.] To
vouchſafe; to think worthy.
Deign to deſcend now lower, and relate
What may no leſs perhaps avail us known. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Oh deign to viſit our forſaken ſeats,
The moſſy fountains, and the green retreats. Pope's Summer.
To DEIGN. v. a. To grant; to perinit; to allow:
Now Sweno, Norway's king, craves compoſition;
Nor would we deign him burial of his men,
*Till he diſburs'd ten thouſand dollars. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
DE'IGNING.. n.ſ.. [from deign.] A vouchſafing; a thinking
worthy.
To DE1'NTEGRAT e. v. a. [from de and integro, Latin.] To
take from the whole; to ſpoil; to diminiſh. Dić7.
DE1'PARous. adj. [deiparus, Latin.] That brings forth a god;
the epithet applied to the bleſſed Virgin. Diff.
DEISM, n.ſ. [define, French J The opinion of thoſe that
6 N enly
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 215</div><p class="Text">D E L
D E L
only acknowledge one God, without the reception of any
revealed religion.
Deiſm, or the principles of natural worſhip, are only the
faint remnants or dying flames of revealed religion in the
poſterity of Noah. Dryden's Prof. to Rel. Laici.
DE'IST, n. ſ. [deiße, French..] A man who follows no particu-
lar religion, but only acknowledges the exiſtence of God,
without any other article of faith.
The diſcourſe is in the ſecond epiſtle of St. Peter, the third
chapter, where certain deiſis, as they ſeem to have been,
laughed at the prophecy of the day of judgment. Burnet.
Pººl. adj. [from deiff.] Belonging to the hereſy of the
ChitS. -
But this folly and weakneſs of trifling, inſtead of arguing,
does not happen to fail only to the ſhare of Chriſtian wri-
ters, but to ſome who have taken the pen in hand to ſup-
port the dejlical or antichriſtian ſcheme of our days. Iſatis.
DETTY. m. ſ. [deité, French, from deitas, Latin.]
1. Divinity; the nature and eſſence of God. }
Some things he doth as God, becauſe his deity alone is the
ſpring from which they flow; ſome things as man, becauſe
they iſſue from his meer human nature; ſome things jointly
as both God and man, becauſe both natures concur as prin-
ciples thereunto. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 53.
With what arms
We mean to hold, what antiently we claim
Of deity, or empire. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v. 1.724.
2. Aº god ; a term applied to the heathen gods and god-
deſſes.
Will you ſuffer a temple, how poorly built ſoever, but yet
a temple of your deity, to be razed Sidney, b. ii.
Heard you not what an humble ſuppliant
Lord Haſtings was to her for his delivery
—Who humbly complaining to her deity,
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty, Shakeſp. Richard IIſ.
Give the gods a thankful ſacrifice when it pleaſeth their
deities to take the wife of a man from him. Shakesp. Ant. and Cleop.
3. The ſuppoſed divinity of a heathen god.
They on their former journey forward paſs,
In ways unknown, her wandering knight to ſeek;
With pains far paſſing that long wandering Greek,
That for his love refuſed deity. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 4.
By what reaſon could the ſame deity be denied unto Lau-
rentia and Flora, which was given to Venus 2 Raleigh.
DelaceRA'tion. n.ſ.. [from delacero, Latin.] A tearing in
pieces. Dić7.
DelacryMA'tion. m. ſ. [d lacrymatio, Lat.] A falling down
of the humours; the wateriſhneſs of the eyes, or a weeping
much. Dief.
DEL Acta't Ion, n.ſ. [delačiatio, Latin.] A weaning from
the breaſt. Dićſ.
DELA'pse D. adj. [With phyſicians.] [from delapſus, Latin.]
Bearing or falling down. It is uſed in ſpeaking of the womb,
and the like. Dić?.
To DELATE. v. a. [from deatus, Lat.] Carried; conveyed.
Try exactly the time wherein ſound is delated. Bacon.
DELA'tion. n.ſ.. [delatio, Latin.]
1. A carrying; conveyance.
In delation of ſounds, the incloſure of them preſerveth them,
and cauſeth them to be heard further. Bacon's Nat. Hiſlory.
It is certain, that the delation of light is in an inſtant. Bacon.
There is a plain delation of the ſound from the teeth to the
inſtrument of hearing. Bacon's Natural Hijlory, Nº. 149.
2. An accuſation; an impeachment.
DeLA'toR. m. ſ. [delatºr, Latin.] An accuſer; an informer.
Men have proved their own dilators, and diſcovered their
own moſt important ſecrets. Government of the Tongue.
No ſooner was that ſmall colony, wherewith the depopu-
lated earth was to be replanted, come forth of the ark, but
we meet with Cham, a delator to his own father, inviting his
brethren to that execrable ſpectacle of their parent's naked-
neſs. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 2.
TopčLAY. v. a. [from delayer, French.]
1. To defer; to put off.
And when the people ſaw that Moſes delayed to come down
out of the mount, the people gathered themſelves together
unto Aaron. Ex. xxxii. 1.
2. To hinder; to fruſtrate.
She flies the town, and mixing with a throng
Of madding matrons, bears the bride along:
Wand'ring through woods and wilds, and devious ways,
And with theſe arts the Trojan match delays. Dryden’s Mºn.
Be mindful, goddeſs, of thy promiſe made
Muſt ſad Ulyſſes ever be d lay'd? Pope's Odyſſey, b. x.
To DELAY. v. n. To ſtop; to ceaſe from action.
There ſcem to be certain bounds to the quickneſs and ſlow-
neſs of the ſucceſſion of thoſe ideas one to another in our
minds, beyond which they can neither delay nor haſten. Loºke.
1)RLA'y. n. ſ: [from the verb.] A deferring; procraſtination;
lingering inactivity. **
- I have learn'd that fearful commenting
Is leaden ſervitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and ſnail-pac'd beggary. Shakespeare R. III.
The condućt of our lives, and the management of our
great concerns, will not bear delay. Locke.
2. Stay; ſtop.
The keeper charm’d, the chief without delay
Paſs'd on, and took the irremediable way. Dryden's £n. 6.
DELAYER. n.ſ.. [from delay.] One that defers; a putter off.
DELECTABLE. adj. [delectabilis, Latin.] Pleaſing; de-
lightful.
Ev’ning now approach'd;
For we have alſo our ev'ning, and our morn;
We ours for change deletable, not need. Milton's Par. Loft.
Thence, as thou know'ſt,
He brought thee into this delicious grove,
This garden; planted with the trees of God;
Delectable, both to behold and taſte! Milton's Parad. Lºſt.
Some of his attributes, and the manifeſtations thereof, are
not only highly delectable to the intelle&amp;tive faculty, but are
ſuitably and eaſily conceptible by us, becauſe apparent in his
works; as his goodneſs, beneficence, wiſdom and power. Hale.
The apple's outward form,
Dekºah's, the witheſs ſwain beguiles;
Till that with writhen mouth, and ſpattering noiſe,
He taſtes the bitter morſel. Phillips.
DELE'ct ABLE Ness. n. / (from deliable.] Delightfulneſs;
pleaſantneſs. -
DELE"ct AB . Y. adv. Delightfully; pleaſantly.
DELESTATION. m.ſ. [delectatio, Latin.) Pleaſure; delight.
To DELEGATE. v. a. [dºg, Latin.j
1. To ſend away.
2. To ſend upon an embaſſy.
3. To intruſt; to commit to another's power and juriſdićtion.
As God hath imprinted his authority in ſeveral parts upon
ſeveral eſtates of men, as princes, parents, ſpiritual guides; ſo
he hath alſo delegated and committed part of his care and pro-
vidence unto them. Taylor's Rule of living holy. .
We are to remember, that as God is the univerſal monarch
of the world, ſo we have all the relation of fellow-ſubjects to
him; and can pretend no farther juriſdićtion over each other,
than what he has delegated to us. Decay of Piety.
Why does he wake the correſpondent moon,
And fill her willing lamp with liquid light,
Commanding her, with delegated pow'rs,
To beautify the world, and bleſs the night? Prior.
4. To appoint judges to hear and determine a particular cauſe.
De'le GAt E. m. ſ. [delegatus, Latin.]
I. A deputy; a commiſſioner; a vicar; any one that is ſent to
act for, or repreſent another.
If after her
Any ſhall live, which dare true good prefer,
Every ſuch perſon is her de egate,
Tº accompliſh that which ſhould have been her fate. Donne.
There muſt be ſevere exactors of accounts from their dele-
gates and miniſters of juſtice. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Let the young Auſtrian then her terrours bear;
Great as he is, her delegate in war. Prior.
Elect by Jove, his delegate of ſway,
With joyous pride the ſummons I'd obey. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. [In law.) Deºgates are perſons delegated or appointcd by the
king's commiſion to it, upon an appeal to him, in the court
of Chancery, Blount.
DELE G At E. adj. [delegatus, Latin.] Deputed ; ſent to ačt
for, or repreſent another.
Princes in judgment, and their delegate judges, muſt judge
the cauſes of all perſons uprightly and impartially. Taylor.
DE'le GATEs [Cºurt of]. A court wherein all cauſes of appeal,
by way of devolution from either of the archbiſhops, are
decided. - Ayliffe's Parergon.
DELE GA"tion. m. ſ. [delegatio, Latin.]
1. A ſending away.
2. A putting in commiſſion.
3. The aſſignment of a debt to another.
DELENI'FICAL. adi, [dºleniſcus, Latin.] Having virtue to aſ-
ſwage, or eaſe pain. Dić7.
To DELETE. v. a. [from deko, Lat J. To blot out. Dić.
DE LETE'ſ Ious, adj. [deleterius, Latin.] Deadly; deſtructive;
of a poiſonous quality.
Many things, neither deleterious by ſubſtance or quality, are
yet deſtructive by figure, or ſome occaſional aćtivity. Brown.
DELETERY, adj. [from deleterius, Latin.] Deſtructive; dead-
ly ; poiſonous.
Nor doćtor epidemick,
Though ſtor'd with deletery med'cines,
(Which whoſoever took is dead ſince)
Eer ſent ſo vaſt a colony
To both the under worlds as he. Hudibras, p. i. eant. z.
DE LETION m.ſ. [deletio, Latin.]
1. Act of raſing or blotting out.
2. A deſtruction.
Indeed, if there be a total diletion of every perſon of the op-
- poſing
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 216</div><p class="Text">D E L
º
poſing party or country, then the vićtory is complete, becauſe
none remains to call it in queſtion. Hale's Co. Law of England.
#. ; n.ſ.. [from belwan, Sax, to dig.]
1. A mine; a quarry.
Yet could not ſuch mines, without great pains and charges,
if at all, be wrought: the deſ, would be ſo flown with wa-
ters, that no gins or machines could ſuffice to lay and keep
them dry. Ray on the Creation.
2. Earthen ware; counterfeit China ware, made at Delph.
Thus barter honour for a piece of def:
No, not for China's wide domain itſelf. Smart.
DELIEATION. m.ſ.. [delibatio, Latin.] An eſſay; a taſte.
To DELIBERATE. v. n. [delibero, Latin.] To think, in or-
der to choice; to heſitate. -
A conſcious, wiſe, refle&amp;ting cauſe,
Which freely moves, and ačts by reaſon's laws;
That can deliberate means elect, and find
Their due connection with the end deſign'd. Blackm. Creat.
When love once pleads admiſſion to our hearts,
In ſpite of all the virtue we can boaſt,
The woman that deliberates is loſt.
DELI'BERATE. adj. [deliberatus, Latin.]
1. Circumſpect; wary; adviſed; diſcreet.
2. Slow ; tedious; not ſudden.
Commonly therefore it is for virtuous conſiderations, that
wiſdom ſo far prevaileth with men as to make them deſirous
of flow and deliberate death, againſt the ſtream of their ſen-
fual inclination. - - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 46.
Echoes are ſome more ſudden, and chop again as ſoon as
the voice is delivered; others are more deliberate, that is, give
more ſpace between the voice and the echo, which is cauſed
by the local nearneſs or diſtance. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
DELI'BERATELY. adv. [from deliberate.] Circumſpectly; ad-
viſedly; warily.
He judges to a hair of little indecencies; knows better than
any man what is not to be written; and never hazards him-
ſelf ſo far as to fall; but plods on deliberately, and, as a grave
man ought, is ſure to put his ſtaff before him. Dryden.
DELI'BERATEN Ess. m. ſ. [from deliberate.] Circumſpection;
warineſs; coolneſs; caution.
They would not ſtay the ripening and ſeaſon of counſels, or
fair production of ačts, in the order, gravity, and deliberateneſ,
befitting a parliament. King Charles.
DELIBERA'tion, n.ſ. [deliberatio, Latin.] The act of delibe-
rating; thought in order to choice.
If mankind had no power to avoid ill or chuſe good by free
deliberation, it ſhould never be guilty of any thing that was
done. Hammond's Fundamentals.
DELIBERATIVE, adj. [deliberativus, Latin.] Pertaining to
deliberation; apt to conſider.
DELIBERATIVE, m. ſ. [from the adječtive.] The diſcourſe in
which a queſtion is deliberated.
In deliberatives, the point is, what is evil; and of good,
what is greater; and of evil, what is leſs. Bacon.
DELICACY. m. ſ. [delicateſ, French, of delicia, Latin.]
1. Daintineſs; fineneſs in eating.
On hoſpitable thoughts intent,
What choice to chuſe for delicacy beſt. Milion's Parad. Loft.
2. Any thing highly pleaſing to the ſenſes.
Theſe delicacies,
I mean of taſte, ſight, ſmell, herbs, fruits and flow’rs,
Walks, and the melody of birds. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
3. Softneſs; feminine beauty.
She had never ſeen a man of a more goodly preſence, in
whom ſtrong making took not away delicacy, nor beauty
fierceneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
4. Nicety; minute accuracy. -
Van Dyck has even excelled him in the delicacy of his co-
louring, and in his cabinet pieces. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
5. Neatneſs; elegance of dreſs.
6. Politeneſs; gentleneſs of manners.
7. Indulgence; gentle treatment. . -
Perſons in thoſe poſts are uſually born of families noble and
rich, and ſo derive a weakneſs of conſtitution from the eaſe
and luxury of their anceſtors, and the delicacy of their own
education. Temple.
8. Tenderneſs; ſcrupulouſneſs; mercifulneſs.
9. Weakneſs of conſtitution.
DE'lic At E. adj. [delicat, French.]
1. Fine; not coarſe; conſiſting of ſmall parts.
As much blood paſſeth through the lungs as through all the
reſt of the body: the circulation is quicker, and heat greater,
and their texture is extremely delicate. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Beautiful; pleaſing to the eye.
3. Nice; pleaſing to the taſte; of an agreeable flavour.
The chuſing of a delicate before a more ordinary diſh, is to
be done as other human actions are, in which there are no
degrees and preciſe natural limits deſcribed. Taylour.
4. Dainty; deſirous of curious meats.
5. Choice; ſelect; excellant.
Addison,
6. Polite; gentle of manners.
7. Soft; effeminate; unable to bear hardſhips.
Witneſs this army of ſuch maſs and charge, . .
Led by a delicate and tender prince. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet,
Tender and delicate perſons muſt needs be oft angry, they
have ſo many things to trouble them, which more robuſt na-
tures have little ſenſe of Bacon, Eſſay 58.
8. Pure; clear. - - - - -
Where they moſt breed and haunt, I have obſerv'd
The air is delicate. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
DE'LIcAt ELY. adv. [from delicate.]
1. Beautifully.
Ladies, like variegated tulips, ſhow,
'Tis to their changes half their charms we owe ;
Such happy ſpots the nice admirer take, -
Fine by defect, and delicately weak, Pope, Epift. ii. 1.41:
2. Finely; not coarſely.
3. Daintily. -
Eat not delicately, or nicely; that is, be not troubleſome to
thyſelf or others in the choice of thy meats, or the delicacy
of thy ſauces. Taylor's Rule ºf living holy.
4. Choicely.
5. Politely.
6. Effeminately.
Delicat FNEss. n.ſ.
licate; tenderneſs; ſoftneſs; effeminacy.
The delicate woman among you would not adventure to
ſet the ſole of her foot upon the ground, for delicateneſs and
tenderneſs. Deutr. xxviii. 56.
DF'LICATEs. m. ſ. [from delicate.] Niceties; rareties; that
which is choice and dainty. -
he ſhepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink, out of his leather bottle,
All which ſecure and ſweetly he enjoys, .
Is far beyond a prince's delicates. Shakespeare care's Henry VI.
They their appetites not only fecd
With delicates of leaves and marſhy weed;
But with thy ſickle reap the rankeſt land,
And miniſter the blade with bounteous hand. Dryd. Pirgil.
With abſtinence all delicates he ſees,
And can regale himſelf with toaſt and cheeſe King’s Cookery.
DE'Lic Es. n.ſ. pl. [deliciar, Latin.] Pleaſures. This word
is merely French. -
And now he has pour'd out his idle mind
In dainty delice; and laviſh joys,
Having his warlike weapons caſt behind, -
And flowers in pleaſures and vain pleaſing toys. Fai. Queen.
DELI'cious. adj. [delicieux, French, from deicatus, Latin.]
1. Sweet; delicate; that affords delight; agrecable; charming;
grateful to the ſenſe or mind.
*
It is highly probable, that upon Adam's diſobedience Al-
mighty God chaſed him out of paradiſe, the faireſt and moſt
delicious part of the earth, into ſome other the moſt barren and
unpleaſant of all the whole globe. . Mºodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
In his laſt hours his eaſy wit diſplay;
Like the rich fruit he ſings, delicious in decay.
Still on that breaſt enamour’d let me lie,
Still drink delicious poiſon from thy eye. Pope's El, to Abelard.
DELI'ciously. adv. Ifrom delicious...] Swectly; pleaſantly ;
delightfully.
How much ſhe hath glorified herſelf and lived deliciouſly, ſo
much torment and ſorrow give her. Rev. xviii. 7.
Deli'cious Ness. n.ſ.. [from delicious.] Delight; pleaſure;
Swift.
- *i.e. no man judge of himſelf, or of the bleſings and eff-
cacy of the ſacrament itſelf, by any ſenſible reliſh, by the guſt
and deliciouſneſs, which he ſometimes perceives, and other
times does not perceive. Taylor's Ji orthy Communicant.
DeligATION. m. ſ. ſaeligatio, Latin.] A binding up.
The third intention is deligation, or retaining the parts ſo
joined together. - //iſeman's Surgery.
DELI'GHT. n ſ. [delice, Fr. from deſešior, Latin.]
1. Joy; content; ſatisfaction. -
And Saul commanded his ſervants, ſaying, commune with
David ſecretly, and ſay, behold the king hath deſight in thee,
and all his ſervants love thee; now therefore be the king's
ſon-in-law. I Sa. xviii. 22.
2. That which gives delight.
Come, ſiſters, chear we up his ſprights,
And ſhew the beſt of our deights :
We'll charm the air to give a found,
While you perform your antick round. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Titus Veſpaſian was not more the delight of human kind:
the univerſal empire made him only known, and more power-
ful, but could not make him more beloved. Dryd. Juv. Dedic.
She was his care, his hope, and his delight;
Moſt in his thought, and ever in his ſight. Dryden's Fables,
To DELIGHT. v. a. [deſce?or, Latin.]
1. To pleaſe; to content; to ſatisfy; to afford pleaſure.
Delight thyſelf alſo in the Lord, and he ſhall give thee the
deſires of thine heart. I’ſ *i;
Q
[from delicate.] The ſtate of bcing de- -
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 217</div><p class="Text">D E L
D E L
Poor inſe&amp;ts, whereof ſome are bees, delighted with flowers,
and their ſweetneſs; others beetles, deſighted with other kinds
of viands. Locke.
He heard, he took, and pouring down his throat,
Delighted, ſwill'd the large luxurious draught. Pope's Odyſſ.
To Deli'ght. v. n. To have delight or pleaſure in. It is
followed by in.
Doth my lord, the king, delight in this thing?, 2 Sa. xxiv.
Bleſſed is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth
greatly in his commandments. Pſal. cxii. 1.
DELI'chtful. adj. [from delight and full.] Pleaſant; charm-
ing; full of delight.
He was given to ſparing in ſo immeaſurable ſort, that he
did not only bar himſelf from the delightful, but almoſt from
the neceſſary uſe thereof. Sidney, b. iv.
No Spring nor Summer on the mountain ſeen,
Smiles with gay fruits, or with delightful green. Addiſon.
Bºrrºw. adv. Pleaſantly; charmingly; with de-
ight.
- O voice! once heard
Delightfully, increaſe and multiply;
Now death to hear ! Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
DELI'GHTFulNess. n.ſ.. [from delight.] Pleaſure; comfort;
ſatisfaction.
This indeed ſhews the excellency of the objećt, but doth
not altogether take away the delightfulneſs of the knowledge.
Tillotſon, Sermon 1.
DELI'GHTsome. adj. [from delight.] Pleaſant; delightful.
The words themſelves being ſo ancient, the knitting of
them ſo ſhort and intricate, and the whole periods and com-
paſs of his ſpeech ſo delightſºme for the roundneſs, and ſo
grave for the ſtrangeneſs. Spenſer.
God has furniſhed every one with the ſame means of ex-
changing hunger and thirſt for delightſome vigour. Grew's Coſm.
DELI'GHTsomely, adv. [from delightſome.j Pleaſantly; in a
delightful manner.
DELI'GHTsomeNess. n.ſ.. [from delightſome.] Pleaſantneſs;
delightfulneſs.
To DELINEATE. v. a. [delineo, Latin.]
1. To draw the firſt draught of a thing; to deſign.
2. To paint in colours; to repreſent a true likeneſs in a pićture.
The licentia pićtoria is very large: with the ſame reaſon
they may delineate old Neſtor like Adonis, Hecuba with He-
len's face, and Time with Abſolon's head. Brown's Wug. Err.
3. To deſcribe; to ſet forth in a lively manner.
It followeth to delineate the region, in which God firſt
planted his delightful garden. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
I have not here time to delineate to you the glories of God's
heavenly kingdom; nor, indeed, could I tell you, if I had,
what the happineſs of that place and portion is. JWake.
DELINEA'tion. n.ſ. [delineatio, Latin.] The firſt draught of
a thing. *
In ă. orthographical ſchemes there ſhould be a true deli-
meation, and the juſt dimenſions of each face, and of what
things belong to it. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
DELI'NIMENT. n.ſ. [delinimentum, Latin.] A mitigating, or
aſſwaging. Dići.
DELINQUENCY. n.ſ. [delinquentia, Latin J A fault; a
failure in duty; a miſdeed.
They never puniſh the greateſt and moſt intolerable delin-
quency of the tumults, and º exciters. King Charles.
all
Thy years determine like the age of man,
That thou ſhould'ſt my delinquencies exquire,
And with variety of tortures tire Sandys's Paraphr. ºf job.
A delinquent ought to be cited in the place or juriſdiction
where the delinquency was committed by him. Ayliff's Parerg.
DELI'NQUENT. n.ſ.. [from delinquens, Latin.] An offender;
one that has committed a crime or fault.
Such an envious ſtate,
That ſooner will accuſe the magiſtrate
Than the delinquent ; and will rather grieve
The treaſon is not acted, than believe. Ben. Johnſºn's Catil.
All three ruined, not by war, or any other diſaſter, but by
juſtice and ſentence, as delinquents and criminals; all three
famous writers. Bacon's Holy J/ar.
He had, upon frivolous ſurmiſes, been ſent for as a delin-
quent, and been brought upon his knees at the bar of both
houſes. Dryden's Án. Dedicat.
To DELIQUATE v. n. [deliqueo, Latin.] To melt; to be
diſſolved.
It will be reſolved into a liquor very analogous to that
which the chymiſts make of ſalt of tartar, left in moiſt cel-
lars to deliquate. Boyle's Chym. Princip.
Such an ebullition as we ſee made by the mixture of ſome
chymical liquors; as oil of vitriol, and deliquated ſalt of
tartar. Cudworth on the Creation.
DELIQUA"tion. n.ſ. [deliquatio, Latin.] A melting; a diſ-
ſolving.
DELIºIIIUM. m. ſ. Latin. [a chymical term.] A diſtillation
by the force of fire, or a diſſolving any calcined matter, by
hanging it up in moiſt cellars, into a lixivious humour. Diº.
DELI'RAMENT. n.ſ. [ deliramentum, Latin. J A doting or
fooliſh idle ſtory. Die?.
To DELI'RATE. v. n. [deliro, Latin.] To dote; to rave;
to talk or act idly. Dićf.
DELIRA'TION. n.ſ. [deliratio, Latin.] Dotage; folly; mad-
neſs. Dić.
DELI'Rious. adj. [delirius, Latin.]
1. Light-headed; raving; doting.
The people about him ſaid he had been for ſome hours deli-
rious ; but when I ſaw him he had his underſtanding as well as
ever I knew. Swift,
On bed
Delirious flung, ſleep from his pillow flies. Thomſon's Spring.
DELIRIUM. n.ſ. [Latin. J Alienation of mind; dotage.
Too great alacrity and promptneſs in anſwering, eſpecially
in perſons naturally of another temper, is a ſign of an ap-
proaching delirium; and in a feveriſh delirium there is a ſmall
inflammation of the brain. Arbuthnot on Diet.
DELITIGA"tion. n.ſ.. [from dºlitigo, Latin.] A ſtriving; a
chiding; a contending. - Dici.
To DELI'VER. v. a. [delivrer, French.]
1. To give; to yield; to offer; to preſent.
In any caſe thou ſhalt deliver him the pledge again when
the ſun goeth down. Deut. xxiv. 13.
Now therefore receive no more money of your acquain-
tance, but deliver it for the breaches of the houſe. 2 Kings.
Yet within three days ſhall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and
reſtore thee unto thy place; and thou ſhalt deliver Pharaoh’s
cup into his hand, after the former manner, when thou waſt
his butler. Gen. xl. 13.
It was no wonder that they, who at ſuch a time could be
corrupted to frame and deliver ſuch a petition, would not be
reformed by ſuch an anſwer. Dryden's 42n. Dedicat.
2. To caſt away; to throw off.
Charm'd with that virtuous draught, th’ exalted mind
All ſenſe of woe delivers to the wind. Pope's Gdyſſey, b. iv.
3. To ſurrender; to put into one's hands.
And David ſaid to him, canſt thou bring me down to this
company And he ſaid, ſwear unto me by God, that thou
wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into the hands of my
maſter, and I will bring thee down to this company. 1 Sa.
They obeyed not thy commandments, wherefore thou haſt
delivered us for a ſpoil, and unto captivity. Tob. iii. 4.
4. To ſave; to reſcue. -
Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked,
out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man. Pſ. lxxi. 4.
I was like to be apprehended for the witch of Brainford;
but that my admirable dexterity of wit, counterfeiting the
aćtion of an old woman, delivered me. Shakespeare M. W. of Windſor.
Thus ſhe the captive did deliver;
The captive thus gave up his quiver. Prior.
5. To ſpeak; to tell; to relate; to utter; to pronounce.
A mirth-moving jeſt,
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expoſitor,
Delivers in ſuch apt and gracious words,
That aged ears play truant at his tales.
Tell me your highneſs' pleaſure;
What from your grace I ſhall deliver to him. Shakespeare R. III.
I knew a clergyman, who appeared to deliver his ſermon
without looking into his notes. Saliſt.
6. To diſburden a woman of a child.
On her fright and fears,
She is ſomething before her time deliver'd. Shakesp. Winter's Tale.
Tully was long ere he could be delivered of a few verſes,
and thoſe poor ones too. Peacham on Poetry.
To DELI've R over. v. a.
1. To put into another's hands; to leave to the diſcretion of
another.
Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies; for
falſe witneſſes are riſen up againſt me, and ſuch as breathe out
cruelty. Pſ, xxvii. 12.
The conſtables have delivered her over to me, and ſhe ſhall
have whipping enough, I warrant her. Shakeſpeare's Hen. IV.
2. To give from hand to hand; to tranſmit.
If a true account may be expected by future ages from the
preſent, your lordſhip will be delivered over to poſterity in a
fairer character than I have given. Dryden's Ded. to K. Arthur.
To DELI'v ER up. v. a.
1. To ſurrender; to give up.
He that ſpared not his own ſon, but delivered him up for us
all, how ſhall he not, with him alſo, freely give us all things?
Rom. viii. 32.
Are the cities that I got with wounds,
Deliver'd up again with peaceful words Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Happy having ſuch a ſon,
That would deliver up his greatneſs ſo
Into the hand of juſtice. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
DELI'v ERANcE. m. ſ. [delivrance, French.]
1. The act of delivering a thing to another,
Shakeſpeare.
2. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 218</div><p class="Text">D ---
D E. £,
E L
2. The aët of freeing from captivity, ſlavery, or any oppreſſion;
reſcue.
He hath ſent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deli-
verance to the captives, and recovering of fight to the blind,
to ſet at liberty thoſe that are bound. Lu. iv. 18.
O God, command deliverances for Jacob. Pſ. xliv. 4.
Whate'er befalls, your life ſhall be my care;
One death, or one deliv'rance we will ſhare. Dryden's Zºn.
3. The act of ſpeaking; utterance; pronunciation.
If ſeriouſly I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have ſpoke
With one that in her ſex, her years profeſſion,
Wiſdom and conſtancy, hath amaz'd me more
Than I dare blame my weakneſs. Shakespeare. All's well that ends well.
4. The act of bringing childdren.
• - Ne'er mother
Rejoic’d d liverance more. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
People have a ſuperſtitious belief, that in the labour of wo-
men it helpeth to the eaſy deliverance. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
DELI'v ERER. m. ſ. [from deliver.]
1. A ſaver; a reſcuer; a preſerver; a releaſer.
It doth notably ſet forth the conſent of all nations and ages,
in the approbation of the extirpating and debellating of giants,
monſters, and foreign tyrants, not only as lawful, but as me-
ritorious even of divine honour; and this, although the deli-
verer came from the one end of the world unto the other.
Bacon’s Holy JWar.
By that ſeed
Is meant thy great deliverer, who ſhall bruiſe
The ſerpent's head. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii. l. 149.
Andrew Doria has a ſtatue erected to him at the entrance
of the doge's palace, with the glorious title of deliverer of the
commonwealth; and one of his family another, that calls him
its preſerver. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Him their deliverer Europe does confeſs,
All tongues extol him, all religions bleſs. Halifax.
She wiſhes for death, as a deliverer from pain. Bolingbroke.
2. A relater; one that communicates ſomething by ſpeech or
writing.
Divers chymical experiments, delivered by ſober authors,
have been believed falſe, only becauſe the menſtruums, or
other materials employed in the unſucceſsful trials of them,
were not as highly rectified, or otherwiſe as exquiſitely depu-
rated, as thoſe that were uſed by the deliverers of thoſe expe-
riments. Boyle.
DELI'v ERY. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The aët of delivering, or giving,
2. Releaſe; reſcue; ſaving.,
He ſwore, with ſobs,
That he would labour my delivery. Shakeſp. Richard III.
. A ſurrender; giving up.
After the delivery of your royal father's perſon into the
hands of the army, I undertaking to the queen mother, that
I would find ſome means to get acceſs to him, ſhe was pleaſed
to ſend me. Denham, Dedication.
Nor did he in any degree contribute to the delivery of his
houſe, which was at firſt imagined, becauſe it was ſo ill, or
not at all defended. Clarendon, b. viii.
4. Utterance; pronunciation; ſpeech.
We alledge what the ſcriptures themſelves do uſually ſpeak,
for the ſaving force of the word of God, not with reſtraint to
any certain kind of delivery, but howſoever the ſame ſhall
chance to be made known. Hooker, b. v. ſºci. 22.
5. Uſe of the limbs; ačtivity.
The earl was the taller, and much the ſtronger; but the
duke had the neater limbs, and freer d.livery. J/otton.
6. Childbirth. -
Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of
her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out. Iſ, xxvi. 7.
Dell. n.ſ. [from dal, Dutch.]
1. A pit; a valley; a hole in the ground; any cavity in the
earth. Obſolete.
The while, the like ſame unhappy ewe,
Whoſe clouted leg her hurt doth ſhew,
Fell headlong into a dell. Spenser's Paſtorals.
I know each lane, and every alley green,
Dingle, or buſhy dell of this wild wood. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
But, foes to ſun-ſhine, moſt they took delight
In del's and dales, conceal’d from human fight. Tickell.
DELPH. n.ſ.. [from Delft, the name of the capital of Delft-
land.] A fine ſort of earthen ware.
A ſupper worthy of herſelf;
Five nothings in }. plates of delph. Swift.
De’ltorpe. adj. [from delta, the fourth letter of the Greek
alphabet; ſo called by reaſon of its reſembling this letter.]
An epithet applied to a triangular muſcle ariſing from the
clavicula, and from the proceſs of the ſame, whoſe action is
to raiſe the arm upward.
Cut ſtill more of the deltoid muſcle, and carry the arm
backward. Sharp's Surgery.
DELU'DA PLF. adj. [from delude..] Liable to be deceived; that
is eaſily impoſed on.
Vol. I.
Not well underſtanding omniſcience, he is not ſo ready
to deceive himſelf as to falſify uñto him whoſe cogitation is
no ways deludable. Brown's Pºlgar E. rour, b. i.
To DELUDE. v. a. [deludo, Latin J
1. To beguile; to cheat; to deceive; to impoſe on.
O, give me leave, I have dº!ºd.d you;
'Twas neither Charles, nor yet the duke I nam’d,
But Reignier, king of Napies, that prevail'd, Shać. H. VI.
Let not the Trojans, with a feign'd pretence
Of proffer'd peace, de'ude the Latian prince. Dryden's AEit.
2. To diſappoint; to fruſtrate.
DELU'D ER. m. ſ. [from delude J
: 1. A beguiler; a deceiver; an impoſtor; a cheat; a falſe pre-
tender.
Say, flatterer, ſay, ah fair deluder ſpeak; -
Anſwer me this, ere yet my heart does break. Granville:
To DELVE. v. a. [celpan, Sax. delven, Dut. perhaps from
3.xtaš, a hog, junius.]
1. To dig ; to open the ground with a ſpade.
- It ſhall go hard
But I will delve one yard below the mines,
And blow them at the moon. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet:
Delve of convenient depth your thraſhing floor;
With temper'd clay then fill and face it o'er. Dryd. Georg.
- Beſides, the filthy ſwine will oft invade
Thy firm incloſure, and with delving ſnout -
The rooted foreſt undermine. w Philips:
2. To fathom ; to fift; to found one's opinion.
What's his name and birth 2
—I cannot delve him to the root: his father
Was call’d Sicillius. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
DE'lve. n.ſ.. [from the verb...] A ditch; a pitfal; a den; a
CaVC.
He by and by
His feeble feet dire3ed to the cry; -
Which to that ſhady delve him brought at laſt, *
Where Mammon earſt did ſun his treaſury. Fairy Queen.
Such a light and metall'd dance
Saw you never yet in France;
And by landmen, for the nonce,
That turn round like grindle-ſtones,
Which they dig out fro’ the delves,
For their bairns bread, wives, and ſelves. Ben. johnſºn:
A DE Lve of Coals. A certain quantity of coals dug in the mine
or pit. Dić?.
DE'lver. n.f. [from delve..] A digger; one that opens the
ground with a ſpade. - -
DELUGE. m. ſ. [deluge, French, from diluvium, Latin.]
1. A general inundation; a laying entirely under water.
The apoſtle doth plainly intimate, that the old world was
ſubjećt to periſh by a deluge, as this is ſubječt to periſh by
conflagration. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. An overflowing of the natural bounds of a river.
But if with bays and dams they ſtrive to force
His channel to a new or narrow courſe,
No longer then within his banks he dwells,
Firſt to a torrent, then a deluge ſwells. Denham.
3. Any ſudden and reſiſtleſs calamity.
To DE'Luc E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To drown; to lay totally under water.
The reſtleſs flood the land would overflow,
By which the delug'd earth would uſeleſs grow. Blackmore,
Still the battering waves ruſh in
Implacable, ’till delug’d by the foam
The ſhip ſinks, found'ring in the vaſt abyſs. Philips.
2. To overwhelm; to cauſe to ſink under the weight of any
calamity.
At length corruption, like a general flood,
Shall deluge all. Pope's Epift. iii. l. 137.
DELU's Ion. n.ſ. [deluſio, Latin J
1. A cheat; guile; deceit ; treachery; fraud; colluſion ; falſe-
hood.
2. A falſe repreſentation; illuſion; errour; a chimerical thought.
Who therefore ſeeks in theſe
True wiſdom, finds her not, or by deluſion. Milt. Par. Rºg.
I waking, view’d with grief the riſing ſun,
And fondly mourn'd the dear deluſºn gone. Prior.
DFLu'sive. adj. [from deluſus, Latin.] Apt to deceive ; be-
guiling; impoſing on.
When, fir’d with paſſion, we attack the fair,
Deluſive ſighs and brittle vows we bear. Prior,
The happy whimſey you purſue,
*Till you at length believe it true;
Caught by your own deluſive art, -
You fancy firſt, and then aſſert. Prior.
While the baſe and groveling multitude of different nations,
ranks and ages were liſtening to the de uſive deities, thoſe of a
more erect aſpect and exalted ſpirit ſeparated themſelves from
the reſt. Tatler, Nº. 8 1.
A vaſt variety of phaenomena, and thoſe many of them fo
delºſive, that it is very hard to eſcape impoſition and miſtake.
}}oodward's Natural Hiſłory, p. iv.
6 O L = Lu's 9R Y.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 219</div><p class="Text">D E. M. -
DELU'sory. adj. [from deluſa, Latin.] Apt to deceive.
This confidence is founded on no better foundation than a
deluſory prejudice. Glanv. Scepſ, c. I 2.
De"MAGogue. m. ſ. [Muayay?...] A ringleader of the rabble;
a populous and factious orator.
Who were the chief demagogues and patrons of tumults, to
ſend for then, to flatter and embolden them. King Charles.
A plauſible, inſignificant word, in the mouth of an expert
demagºgue, is a dangerous and dreadful weapon. South's Serm.
Demoſthenes and Cicero, though cach of them a leader,
or, as the Greeks called it, a demagogue, in a popular ſtate,
yet ſeem to differ in their practice upon this branch of their
art. Swift.
DEMA'i N.
DEME'AN. }.J. [domaine, French.
DEME's NE.
That land which a man holds originally of himſelf, called
dominium . the civilians, and oppoſed to fºodum or fee,
which ſignifies thoſe that are held of a ſuperior lord. It is
ſometimes uſed alſo for a diſtinétion between thoſe lands that
the lord of the manor has in his own hands, or in the hands
of his leſſee, demiſed or let upon a rent for a term of years
or life, and ſuch other lands appertaining to the ſaid manor as
belong to free or copyholders; although the copyhold belong-
ing to any manor, according to many good lawyers, is alſo
accounted demeans. Philips.
Having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demeſis, youthful, and nobly allied. Shakeſpeare.
That earldom indeed had a royal juriſdiction and ſeigniory,
though the lands of that county in demeſne were poſſeſſed for
the moſt part by the ancient inheritors. Davies on Ireland.
The defects in thoſe acts for planting foreſt-trees might be
fully ſupplied, ſince they have hitherto been wholly ineffec-
tual, except about the demeſnes of a few gentlemen; and even
there, in general, very unſkilfully made, and thriving accord-
ingly. Swift.
DEMA'ND. n.ſ. [demande, French.]
1. A claim; a challenging; the aſking of any thing with au-
thority.
This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the de-
mand by the word of the holy ones. Dan. iv. 17.
Giving vent, gives life and ſtrength to our appetites; and
he that has the confidence to turn his wiſhes into demands,
will be but a little way from thinking he ought to obtain
them. Locke.
2. A queſtion; an interrogation. -
3. The calling for a thing in order to purchaſe it.
My bookſeller tells me, the demand for thoſe my papers in-
creaſes daily. Addiſon's Spečiator, Nº. 124.
4. [In law.] The aſking of what is due. It hath alſo a proper
ſignification diſtinguiſhed from plaint; for all civil actions are
purſued either . demands or plaints, and the purſuer is called
demandant or plaintiff. There are two manners of demandi,
the one of deed, the other in law: in deed, as in every prae-
cipe, there is expreſs demand : in law, as every entry in land-
diſtreſs for rent, taking or ſeiſing of goods, and ſuch like acts,
which may be done without any words, are demands in
law. Blount.
To DEMAND. v. a. [demander, French.]
1. To claim; to aſk for with authority.
The pound of fleſh, which I demand of him,
Is dearly bought, 'tis mine, and I will have it. Shakeſpeare.
2. To queſtion; to interrogate.
And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of
him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the
war proſpered. 2 Sa. xi. 7.
If any friend of Caeſar's demand, why Brutus roſe againſt
Caeſar, this is my anſwer: Not that I loved Caeſar leſs, but
that I loved Rome more. , Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
Young one,
Inform us of thy fortunes; for, it ſeems, * -
They crave to be demanded. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
The oracle of Apollo being demanded, when the war and
miſery of Greece ſhould haye an end, reply'd, When they
would double the altar in Delos, which was of a cubick form.
Peacham on Geometry.
3. [In law.] To proſecute in a real ačtion.
l), MA'NDABLE. adj. [from demand.] That may be demanded;
requeſted; aſked for.
All ſums demandable, either for licence of alienation to be
made of lands holden in chief, or for the pardon of any ſuch
alienation, already made without licence, have been ſtayed in
the way to the hanaper. Bacon's Off of Alienation.
DEMA's ANT. n. ſ. [from demand } He who is actor or
plaintiff in a real action, becauſe he demandeth lands. Coke,
One of the witneſſes depoſed, that dining on a Sunday
with the demandant, whoſe wife had ſat below the ſquire's lady
at church, ſhe the ſaid wife dropped ſome expreſſions, as if
ſhs thought her huſband ought to be knighted. Speciator.
DEMA'NDER. m. ſ. [demandeur, French.]
1. One that requires a thing with authority.
2. One that aſks a civil queſtion.
3. One that aſks for a thing in order to purchaſe it.
They grow very faſt and fat, which alſo bettereth their
taſte, and delivereth them to the demanders ready uſe at all
ſeaſons. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
4. A dunner; one that demands a debt.
De ME'AN. m.ſ. (from demener, French.]
1. A mien ; preſence; carriage; demeanour; deportment.
At his feet, with ſorrowful demean,
And deadly hue, an armed corſe did lie. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To DEMEAN. v. a. [from demener, French.]
1. To behave; to carry one's ſelf.
Thoſe plain and legible lines of duty requiring us to de-
mean ourſelves to God humbly and devoutly, to our governors
obediently, and to our neighbours juſtly, and to ourſelves
ſoberly and temperately. South's Sermont.
A man cannot doubt but that there is a God; and that,
according as he demeans himſelf towards him, he will make
him happy or miſerable for ever. Tillotſon, Serm. i.
Strephon had long perplex'd his brains,
How with ſo high a nymph he might
Demean himſelf the wedding-night. Swift.
2. To leſſen; to debaſe; to undervalue.
Now, out of doubt, Antipholis is mad;
Elſe he would never ſo demean himſelf. Shakesp. Com. of Errourt.
DeMe'anour. m. ſ. [ demener, French. J Carriage; beha-
ViOur.
Of ſo inſupportable a pride he was, that where his deeds
might well ſtir envy, his demeanour did rather breed diſdain.
Sidney, b. ii.
Angels beſt like us, when we are moſt like unto them in all
parts of decent demeanour. Hooker, b. i.
His geſtures fierce
He mark'd, and mad demeanour, then alone,
As he ſuppos'd, all unobſery'd, unſeen. Milton's Par. Lºft.
To whom thus Eve, with ſad demeanour meek,
Ill worthy I, ſuch title ſhould belong
To me tranſgreſſorſ Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi. 1 162.
He was of a courage not to be daunted, which was mani-
feſted in all his actions, eſpecially in his whole demeanour at
the Iſle of Ree, both at the landing, and upon the retreat. Clar.
DEME'ans. n.ſ. pl. An eſtate in goods or lands; that which
a man poſſeſſes in his own right.
To DEMENTATE. v. n. [demento, Latin.] To grow mad.
DEMENTA"tion. m. ſ. [dementatio, Latin.] "A being mad, or
frantick.
DEME'RIT. n.ſ. [demérite, Fr. from demeritus, of demereor,
Latin.] The oppoſite to merit; ill-deſerving; what makes
one worthy of blame or puniſhment.
They ſhould not be able once to ſtir, or to murmur, but it
ſhould be known, and they ſhortened according to their
demerits. Spenser on Ireland.
Thou liv'ſt by me; to me thy breath reſign;
Mine is the merit, the demerit thine. Dryden's Fables.
Whatever they acquire by their induſtry or ingenuity,
ſhould be ſecure, unleſs forfeited by any demerit or offence
againſt the cuſtom of the family. Temple.
2. Anciently the ſame with merit; deſert.
'Tis yet to know,
Which when I know that boaſting is an honour,
I ſhall promulgate, I fetch my life and being
From men of royal ſiege; and my demerits
May ſpeak, unbonnetting, to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reach'd. Shakeſpeare's Othell,
To DEME'RIT. v. a. [demeriter, French.] To deſerve blame
or puniſhment.
DEME'Rsed. adj. [from demerſus, of demergo, Latin.] Plunged;
drowned. }.
DEME'Rsion. n. / [demerſo, Latin.]
1. A drowning.
2. [In chymiſtry.] The putting any medicine in a diſſolving
liquor. Dić.
DEME's NE. See DEMAIN.
DEMI. inſeparable particle. [demi, Fr. dimidium, Latin.J Half;
one of two equal parts. This word is only uſed in compoſi-
tion; as demigod, that is, half human, half divine.
DEMI-can NoN. n.ſ. [demi and cannon.]
DEMI-can NoN Lowſ. A great gun that carries a ball of
thirty pounds weight and ſix inches diameter. The diameter
of the bore is ſix inches two eighth parts. Diff.
DEMI-CANNoN Ordinary. A great ghn fix inches four eights
diameter in the bore, twelve foot long. It carries a ſhot ſix
inches one ſixth diameter, and thirty-two pounds weight. Dić.
DEMI-can NoN of the greateſ? Size. A gun fix inches and ſix
eighth parts diameter in the bore, twelve foot long. It car-
ries a ball of fix inches five eights diameter, and thirty-ſix
pounds weight. Dict.
what'ſ this a ſleeve; 'Tis like a demi-cannon. Shakeſp.
Ten
3.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 220</div><p class="Text">D. E. M.
Ten engines, that ſhall be of equal force either to a cannon
or demi-cannon, culverin or demi-culverin, may be framed at
the ſame price that one of theſe will amount to. Wilkins.
DEMI-culver IN. m. ſ. [demi and culverin.]
DEMI-culverin of the loweſt Size. A gun four inches two
eights diameter in the boré, and ten foot long. It carries a
ball four inches diameter, and nine pounds weight. Dićf.
DEMI-culver in Ordinary. A gun four inches four eights
diameter in the bore, ten foot long. It carries a ball four
inches two eights diameter, and ten pounds eleven ounces
weight. -
DeMr-culver IN, elder Sort. A gun four inches and ſix eights
diameter in the bore, ten foot one third in length It carries
a ball four inches four eight parts diameter, and twelve pounds
eleven ounces weight. Milit. Dićf.
They continue a perpetual volley of demi-culverins; Raleigh;
The army left two demi-culverins, and two other, good
tºns. Clarendon, b. viii.
DEMI-Devil. n.ſ. [demi and devil.J Partaking of infernal
nature; half a devil.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil,
Why he hath thus enſnar'd my ſoul and body? Shakespeare Othel.
DEMI GóD. m.ſ. [demi and god..] Partaking of divine nature;
half a god; an hero produced by the cohabitation of divinities
with mortals.
He took his leave of them, whoſe eyes bad him farewel
with tears, making temples to him as to a demi-god. Sidney.
Be gods, or angels, demi-gods. Milton's Paradiſe Lø/?.
Tranſported demi-gods ſtood round,
And men grew heroes at the ſound,
Enflam'd with glory's charms. Pope's St. Caecilia.
Nay, half in heaven, except (what's mighty odd).
A fit of vapours clouds this demi-god. Pope's Epiſt. of Hor.
T} EMI-LAN.ce. n. ſ. [demi and lance..] A light lance; a ſpear;
a half-pike.
On their ſteel'd heads, their demi-lances wore
Small pennons, which their ladies colours bore. Dryden.
Light demi-lances from afar they throw,
Faſten’d with leathern thongs to gaul the foe. Dryden's Án.
DEM1-MAN. n.ſ. [demi and man.] Half a man. A term of
reproach.
We muſt adventure this battle, leſt we periſh by the com-
plaints of this barking demi-man. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks;
DāM-wolf. m. ſ. [dimi and wolf.] Half a wolf; a mongrel
dog between a dog and wolf. Lyciſca.
Spaniels, curs,
Showghs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves, are cleped
All by the name of dogs. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
DEMI's e. *ſ [from demetre, demis, demiſe, French.] Death;
deceaſe. It is ſeldom uſed but in formal and ceremonious
language. -
Åbout a month before the demiſe of queen Anne, the author
retired. Swift.
To DEMI'SE. v. a. [demis, demiſ, French..] To grant at
one's death; to grant by will; to bequeath.
My executors ſhall not have power to demiſe my lands to be
purchaſed. Swift's Laſt ſºill.
DEMI'ssion. n.ſ. [demiſſio, Latin.] Degradation; diminu-
tion of dignity ; depreſſion.
Inexorable rigour is worſe than a laſche demiſſion of ſove-
reign authority. L’Eſtrange.
To DEMIT. v. a. [demitto, Latin.] To depreſs; to hang
down; to let fall. Dićf.
When they are in their pride, that is, advancing their
train, if they decline their neck to the ground, they preſently
demit, and let fall the ſame. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
DEMOCRACY. n.ſ. [Muazza.] One of the three forms
of government; that in which the ſovereign power is neither
lodged in one man, nor in the nobles, but in the collective
body of the people.
While many of the ſervants, by induſtry and virtue, ar-
rive at riches and eſteem, then the nature of the government
inclines to a democracy. Temple.
The majority having the whole power of the community,
may employ all that power in making laws, and executing
thoſe laws; and there the form of the government is a perfect
democracy. Locke.
DEMock A'tical. adj. [from democracy..] Pertaining to a po-
pular government; popular.
They are ſtill within the line of vulgarity, and are democra-
tical enemies to truth. Brown's Vulgar Errouri, b. i. c. 3.
As the government of England has a mixture of democrati-
cal in it, ſo the right of inventing political lyes, is partly in
the people. Arbuthnot.
To DEMOLISH. v. a. [demolir, French; demºlior, Latin.]
1. To throw down buildings; to raze; to deſtroy.
I expected the fabrick of my book would long ſince have
been demoliſhed, and laid even with the ground. Hilloiſon, Prºf.
Red lightning play'd along the firmament,
And their demoliſh'd works to pieces rent. Dryden's Ovid.
Demolisher. n.f [from demoliſh.J. One that throws dowii
buildings; a deſtroyer; a layer waſte.
DeMoli'rion. n.ſ. (from demoliſh.] The aćt of overthrow-
ing or demoliſhing buildings; deſtruction. . - - - ---
Two gentlemen ſhould have the direction in the demolition
of Dunkirk. Swift.
DEMON. n.ſ. (demon, Latin; daiº.J A ſpirit; generally
an evil ſpirit; a devil.
I felt him ſtrike, and now I ſee him fly :
Curs'd demon! O for ever broken lie
Thoſe fatal ſhafts, by which I inward bleed, Prior,
DeM on 1'AcAl. li. [from d
DE Mo'N1 Ack. }aj. [from demon.]
1. Belonging to the devil; deviliſh.
He, all unarm’d,
Shall chaſe thee with the terror of his voice --
From thy demoniack holds, poſſeſſion foul. Milton's Par, Reg.
2. Influenced by the devil; produced by diabolical poſſeſſion.
Demoniack phrenſy, moping melancholy. Milt. Par. Left.
DeMo'N1Ack. m. ſ [from the adjective..] One poſſeſſed by
the devil; one whoſe mind is diſturbed and agitated by the
power of wicked and unclean ſpirits.
Thoſe lunaticks and demoniacks that were reſtored to their
right mind, were ſuch as ſought after him, and believed in
him. Bentley's Sermons.
DeMo'NIAN. adj. [from demon.] Deviliſh; of the nature of
devils.
Bemonian ſpirits now, from the element
Each of his reign allotted, rightlier called
Pow’rs of fire, air, water, and earth beneath. Parad. Reg.
DEMono'cRAcy. m.ſ. [3a*, and zºdia.] The power of the
devil. Diff.
DEMono'LATRY. m. ſ. [3a*, and 24;ta.] The worſhip of
the devil. Dić7.
De Mono'logy. n.ſ. [3aº, and x:ye..] Diſcourſe of the
nature of devils. Thus king James entitled his book con-
cerning witches.
DEMo'NstARLE. adj. [demanſirabilis, Lat..] That which may
be proved beyond doubt or contradićtion; that which may be
made not only probable, but evident.
The grand articles of our belief are as demºnſtrable as
geometry. Glanv. Scepſ c. 24.
DEMo'Nst RABLY. adv. [from demon/ºrable.] . In ſuch a man-
ner as admits of certain proof; evidently; beyond poſſibility
of contradićtion.
He ſhould have compelled his miniſters to execute the law,
in thoſe caſes that demonſtrably concerned the publick peace. Cli
To DEMONSTRATE. v. a. [demonſtro, Latin.] To prove
with the higheſt degree of certainty; to prove in ſuch a man-
ner as reduces the contrary poſition to evident abſurdity.
We cannot demonſtrate theſe things ſo, as to ſhew that the
contrary often involves a contradićtion. Tillotſºn, Prºf.
DeMonstra'rion. m. ſ. [demonſtratio, Latin.]
1. The higheſt degree of deducible or argumental evidence;
the ſtrongeſt degree of proof; ſuch proof as not only evinces
the poſition proved to be true, but ſhews the contrary poſi-
tion to be abſurd and impoſſible.
What appeareth to be true by ſtrong and invincible demon-
ſtration, ſuch as wherein it is not by any way poſſible to be
deceived, thereunto the mind doth neceſſarily aſſent. Hooker.
Where the agreement or diſagreement of anything is plain-
ly and clearly perceived, it is called demonſtration. Lockr.
2. Indubitable evidence of the ſenſes or reaſon.
Which way ſoever we turn ourſelves, we are encountered
with clear evidences and ſenſible dºnºnſtrations of a Deity. Till.
DeMo'Nst RATIVE. adj. [demonſtrativus, Latin.]
1. Having the power of demonſtration; invincibly concluſive;
Certain. r
An argument neceſſary and demonſtrative, is ſuch as, being
propoſed unto any man, and underſtood, the man cannot
chuſe but inwardly yield. Hººker, Prºf.
2. Having the power of expreſſing clearly and certainly.
Painting is neceſſary to all other arts, becauſe of the need
which they have of demonſ/rative figures, which often give
more light to the underſtanding than the cleareſt diſcourſes we
can make. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
De Mo'NSTRATIvely. adv. [from demonſtrative.]
1. With evidence not to be oppoſed or doubted.
No man, in matters of this life, requires an aſſurance either
of the good which he deſigns, or of the evil which he avoids,
from arguments demony?ratively certain. South's Sermons,
Firſt, I demonſtratively prove,
, That feet were only made to move. Prior.
2. Clearly; plainly; with certain knowledge.
Demºnſtratively underſtanding the ſimplicity of perfeótion,
it was not in the power of earth to work them from it. Brown.
DEMonstra' to R. n ſ [from demonſtrate.] One that proves;
one that teaches; one that demonſtrates.
DeMonstra'tory, adj. [from demonſtrate.] Having the ten-
dency to demonſtrate.
DEMU'lcrxt.
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 221</div><p class="Text">i). E M
DEMU'lcENT: adj. [demukens, Latin.] Soſtening; mollify-
ing; aſſuaſive.
Peaſe, being deprived of any aromatick parts, are mild and
demulent in the higheſt degree; but being full of aerial par-
ticles, are flatulent, when diſſolved by digeſtion. Arjuthnot.
To DEMUR. v n. Idemicarer, French; dimorare, Italian;
demorari, Latin.]
1. To delay a proceſs in law by doubts and obječtions. Sce
DEMURRER.
To this plea the plaintiff demurred. Haltºn's Angler.
2. To pauſe in uncertainty; to ſuſpend determination; to heſi-
tate; to delay the concluſion of an affair.
Upon this rub the Engliſh ambaſſadours thought fit to de-
mur, and ſo ſent into England to receive directions from the
lords of the council, Hayward.
Running into demands, they expect from us a ſudden
reſolution in things, wherein the devil of Delphos would
dem.tir. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. c. 3.
He muſt be of a very ſluggiſh or querulous humour, that
ſhall demur upon ſetting out, or demand higher encourags-
ments than the hope of heaven. Decay of Piety.
News of my death from rumour he receiv'd,
And what he wiſh'd, he eaſily believ'd;
But long demurr'd, though from my hand he knew
I liv'd, ſo loth he was to think it true. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
3. To doubt; to have ſcruples or difficulties; to deliberate.
There is ſomething in our compoſition, that thinks and ap-
prehends, and reflects and deliberates, determines and doubts,
conſents and denies; that wills and demurs, and reſolves and
chuſes, and reječts. Bentley.
To DEMU'R. v. a. To doubt of.
The latter I demur; for in their looks
Much reaſon, and in their actions, oft appears. Miſt. P. L.
DeMu'R. n. ſ. [from the verb.] Doubt; heſitation; ſuſpenſe
of opinion.
O progeny of heav'n, empyreal thrones |
With reaſon hath deep ſilence and demur
Seiz'd us, though undiſmay’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ix.
Certainly the higheſt and deareſt concerns of a temporal
life are infinitely leſs valuable than thoſe of an eternal ; and
conſequently ought, without any demur at all, to be ſacrificed
to them, whenſoever they come in competition with them. South.
All my demurs but double his attacks;
At laſt he whiſpers, Do, and we go ſnacks. Pope's Epiſtles.
DEMURE. adj. [des maurs, French.]
1. Sober; decent.
Lo! two moſt lovely virgins came in place,
With countenance demure, and modeſt grace. Fairy Queen.
Come, penſive nun, devout and pure,
- Sober, ſtedfaſt and demure. Milton.
2. Grave; affectedly modeſt: it is now generally taken in a ſenſe
of contempt.
After a demure travel of regard, I tell them I know my
place, as I would they ſhould do theirs. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
There be many wiſe men, that have ſecret hearts and tranſ-
parent countenances; yet this would be done with a demure
abaſing of your eye ſometimes. Bacon, Eſſay 23.
A company of mice, peeping out of their holes, ſpied a cat,
that lay and looked ſo demure as if there had been neither life
nor ſoul in her. L’Eſtrange.
So cat, transform’d, ſat gravely and demure,
*Till mouſe appear'd, and thought himſelf ſecure. Dryden.
Jove ſent and found, far in a country ſcene,
Truth, innocence, good-nature, look ſerene;
From which ingredients, firſt, the dext'rous boy
Pick'd the demure, the aukward, and the coy. Swift.
To DEMU'R.E. v. n. [from the noun..] To look with an affected
modeſty.
Your wife Oétavia, with her modeſt eyes,
And ſtill concluſion, ſhall acquire no honour,
Demuring upon me. Shakeſp. Anthony and Cleopatra.
DEMU'Rely. adv. [from demure.] With affected modeſty;
ſolemnly ; with pretended gravity.
Put on a ſober habit,
Talk with reſpect, and ſwear but now and then,
Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely. Shakespeare.
Eſop's damſel, turned from a cat to a woman, ſat very
demurely at the board's end, 'till a mouſe ran before her. Bacon.
Next ſtood hypocriſy with holy leer,
Soft ſmiling, and demurely looking down;
But hid the dagger underneath the gown. Dryden's Fables.
2. In the following line it is the ſame with ſolemnly. J/arb.
Hark, how the drums demurely wake the ſleepers' Shakespeare
DEMU'R EN Ess. m. ſ. [from denure.]
1. Modeſty; ſoberneſs; gravity of aſpect.
Her eyes having in them ſuch a cheerfulneſs, as nature
ſeemed to ſmile in them; though her mouth and cheeks obeyed
to that pretty demureneſs, which the more one marked, the
more one would judge the poor ſoul apt to believe. Sidney.
2. Affected modeſty; pretended gravity.
DEMU'RRAGE. m. ſ. [from demur.] An allowance made by
merchants to maſters of ſhips, for their ſtay in a port beyond
the time appointed.
DEMU'RRE R. n. ſ. [dernerer, French; i. e. manere in aliquo loc,
vel marari.] A kind of pauſe upon a point of difficulty in an
aćtion ; for, in every ačtion, the controverſy conſiſts either
in the fact, or in the law: if in the fact, that is tricó by the
jury; if in law, then is the caſe plain to the judge, or ſo hard
and rare, as it breedeth juſt doubt. I call that plain to the
judge, wherein he is aſſured of the law; and in ſuch caſe the
judge, with his aſſociates, proceeds to judgment without far-
ther work. But when it is doubtful to him and his aſſociates,
then is there ſtay made, and a time taken, either for the court
to think farther upon it, and to agree, if they can ; or elſe
for all the juſtices to meet together in the Chequer-chamber,
and, upon hearing that which the ſerjeants can ſay of both
parts, to adviſe, and ſet down as law, whatſoever they con-
clude firm, without farther remedy. C.wel.
A prohibition was granted, and hcreunto there was a de-
murrer. Alſe's Parergon.
DEN. m.ſ.. [ben, Saxon.]
1. A cavern or hollow running horizontally, or with a ſmall
obliquity, under ground; diſtinét flom a hole, which runs
down perpendicularly.
They here diſperſed, ſome in the air, ſome on the earth,
ſome in the waters, ſome amongſt the minerals, dens and caves
under the earth. 11.2%r, b. i. ſ. 4.
2. The cave of a wild beaſt.
What, ſhall they ſeek the lion in his den,
And fright him there : Sha'ſ are’s King jJr.
The tyrant's den, whoſe uſe, though loſt to faine,
Was now th’ apartment of the royal dame;
The cavern, only to her father known,
By him was to his dailing daughter ſhown. Dryden's Fałks.
'Tis then the ſhapeleſs bear his den forſakes;
In woods and fields a wild deſtrućtion nakes. Dryd, ſigil.
3. Den may ſignify either a valley or a woody place; for the
Saxon ben imports both. Gibſon's Camden.
DENA'Y. m. ſ. [a word formed between deny and may.] Denial;
refuſal.
To her in haſte, give her this jewel ; ſay
My love can give no place, bide no dºnay, Shakesp. Twel. Night,
DENDRo'logy. n.ſ. ſº, and x,y?...] The natural hiſtory of
trees.
DENI’ABLE. adj. [from deny..] That which may be denied;
that to which one may refuſe belief.
The negative authority is alſo deniable by reaſon.
De N1'al. n.ſ.. [from deny.]
1. Negation; the contrary to confeſſion.
No man more impudent to deny, where proofs were not
manifeſt; no man more ready to confeſs, with a repenting
manner of aggravating his own evil, where denial would but
make the fault fouler. Sidney, b. ii.
7. Refuſal; the contrary to grant, allowance, or conceſſion.
Here comes your father; never make denial:
I muſt and will have Catharine to my wife. Shakeſpeare.
The denial of landing, and haſty warning us away, troubled
us much : on the other ſide, to find people ſo full of huma-
nity, did comfort us.
He, at every freſh attempt, is repell’d
With faint denials, weaker than before. Dryden's Ann. Mir.
3. Abjuration; contrary to acknowledgment of adherence.
We may deny God in all thoſe acts that are capable of being
morally good or evil: thoſe are the proper ſcenes, in which
we ačt our confeſſions or denial of him. South's Sermons.
DENI'E.R. n. / [from deny.]
1. A contradićtor; an opponent; one that holds the negative of
a propoſition.
By the word virtue the affirmer intends our whole duty to
God and man, and the denier by the word virtue means only
courage, or, at moſt, our duty towards our neighbour, with-
out including the idea of the duty which we owe to God.
J/atts's Logick, p i. c. 6. ſ. 3.
2. A diſowner; one that does not own or acknowledge.
If it was ſo fearful when Chriſt looked his dºmier into re-
pentance, what will it be when he ſhall look him into de-
ſtruction. South's Sermons.
3. A refuſer; one that refuſes.
It may be I am eſteemed by my denier: ſufficient of myſ. If
to diſcharge my duty to God as a prieſt, though not to men as
a prince. King Charles.
DEN, E'R. m. ſ. [from denarius, Lat. It is pronounced as demeer, in
two ſyllables.) A ſmall denomination of French money; the
twelfth part of a ſous.
You will not pay for the glaſſes you have burſt?
No, not a denier. Shakespeare Taming ºf the Shrew.
To DENIGRATE. v. a. ſaenigro, Latin J. To blacken; to
make black. -
By ſuffering ſome impreſſion from fire, bodies are caſually
or artificially demigrated in their natural complexion: thus
are charcoals made black by an infection of their own
ſuffitus. Frown's /ukºr Erroirs, h. vi. c. 12.
Hartſhorn, and other white bodies, will be denigrated by
heat ; yet camphire would not at all loſe its whiteneſs, Boyle.
Brown.
DENICRA'Tion,
Bacon's New Atlantis.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 222</div><p class="Text">D. E. N.
Desigration, n.ſ. Idenigratio, Latin.]. A blackening, or
making black. -
Theſe are the advenient and artificial ways of denigration,
anſwerably whereto may be the natural progreſs. Brown.
In ſeveral inſtances of denigration the metals are worn
off, or otherwiſe reduced into very minute parts. Boyle.
DENIzA'tion. n.ſ. (from denizen.] The act of infranchiſing,
or making free.
That the mere Iriſh were reputed aliens appears by the char-
ters of denization, which in all ages were purchaſed by them.
Davies on Ireland.
DENIZEN. l. n. ſ. [from dinoſldyn, a man of the city, or di-
IDENISON. } neſydd, free of the city, Welſh.] A freeman ;
one infranchiſed.
Denizen is a Britiſh law term, which the Saxons and Angles
found here, and retained. Davies's Preface.
Thus th' Almighty fire began: ye gods,
Natives, or denizens, of bleſt abodes,
From whence theſe murmurs ? Dryden.
A great many plants will hardly, with nurſing, be made to
produce their ſeed out of their native ſoil; but corn, ſo neceſ-
Mary for all people, is fitted to grow and to ſeed as a free deniſon
of the world. Grew's Coſm. b. iii. c. 2.
He ſummons ſtraight his denizens of air;
The lucid ſquadrons the ſails repair. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
To De'Nize N. v. a. [from the noun..] To infranchiſe; to
make free.
Pride, luſt, covetize, being ſeveral
To theſe three places, yet all are in all ;
Mingled thus, their iſſue is inceſtuous;
Falſhood is denizen'd, virtue is barbarous. Donne.
To DENOMINATE. v. a. [denomino, Latin.] To name;
to give a name to.
Their commendable purpoſe being not of every one under-
ſtood, they have been in latter ages conſtrued as though they
had ſuperſtitiouſly meant either that thoſe places, which were
denominated of angels and ſaints, ſhould ſerve for the worſhip
of ſo glorious creatures; or ekſe thoſe glorified creatures for
defence, protećtion, and patronage of ſuch places, Hooker, b. v.
Predeſtination is deſtructive to all that is eſtabliſhed among
men, to all that is moſt precious, to human nature, to the
two faculties that denominate us men, underſtanding and will;
for what uſe can we have of our underſtandings, if we cannot do
what we know to be our duty : And if we act not voluntarily,
what exerciſe have we of our wills Hammond's Fundamenta's.
DENom INA'tion. m. ſ. [denominatio, Latin.] A name given
to a thing, which commonly marks ſome principal quality of
it.
But is there any token, denomination, or monument of the
Gauls yet remaining in Ireland, as there is of the Scythians?
Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The liking or diſliking of the people gives the play the
denomination of good or bad; but does not really make or con-
ſtitute it ſuch. Dryden's Defence of Dramatick Poeſy.
Philoſophy, the great idol of the learned part of the Heathen
world, has divided it into many ſe&amp;ts and denominations;
as Stoicks, Peripateticks, Epicureans, and the like. South.
All men are ſinners: the moſt righteous among us muſt
confeſs ourſelves to come under that denomination. Rºgers.
DENo MINAT IV e. adj. [from denominate.]
1. That which gives a name; that which confers a diſtinét ap-
pellation.
2. That which obtains a diſtinét appellation. This would be
more analogically denominable.
The leaſt denominative part of time is a minute, the greateſt
integer being a year. Cocker’s Arithmetick.
De NoMINA'to R. m. ſ. [from denominate.] The giver of a
name; the perſon or thing that cauſes an appellation.
Both the ſeas of one name ſhould have one common deno-
minator. Brºwn's Wulgar Errours.
DFNoMINA'tor of a Fraélion, is the number below the line,
ſhewing the nature and quality of the parts which any integer
is ſuppoſed to 5e divided into: thus in ‘’, 8 the denominator
ſhews you, that the integer is ſuppoſed to be divided into 8
parts, or half quarters; and the numerator 6 ſhews, that you
take 6 of ſuch parts, i. e. three quarters of the whole. Harris.
When a ſingle broken number or fraćtion hath for its deno-
minator a number conſiſting of an unit, in the firſt place
towards the left hand, and nothing but cyphers from the unit
towards the right hand, it is then more aptly and rightly called
a decimal fraćtion. Cocker's Arithmeticæ.
Denominator of any proportion, is the quotient ariſing from
the diviſion of the antecedent by the conſequent : thus 6 is
the denominator of the proportion that 30 hath to 5, becauſe
5) 30 (b. This is alſo called the exponent of the proportion,
or ratio. Harris.
Dº Not A'Tron. n.ſ. [denotatio, Latin.] The aët of denoting.
To DENOTE. v. a. [denoto, Latin.j To mark; to be a ſign
of; to betoken; to ſhew by ſigns ; as, a quick pulſe denotes a
fever. -
To DENOUNCE v. a. [denuncio, Latin; denoncer, French.]
1. To threaten by proclamation.
Vol. I.
I denounce unto you this day, that ye ſhall ſurely periſh.D.ut.
He of their wicked ways
Shall them admoniſh, denouncing wrath to come
On their impenitence. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi. 1815,
They impoſe their wild conjectures for laws upon others,
and denounce war againſt all that receive them not. Dec. of Piety.
2. To threaten by ſome outward ſign or expreſſion.
He ended frowning, and his look denounc'd
Deſperate revenge, and battle dangerous
To leſs than gods. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ii. l. I c6,
The ſea grew white; the rolling waves from far,
Like heralds, firſt d nounce the watry war. Dryden,
3. To give information againſt.
Archdeacons ought to propoſe parts of the New Teſtament
to be learned by heart by inferior clergymen, and aenounce
ſuch as are negligent. Ayliffe's Parergon.
DE Nou'NCEMENT. n.ſ. [from denounce.] The act of proclaim-
ing any menace; the proclamation of intended evil; denun-
Clation.
Falſe is the reply of Cain upon the denouncement of his curſe,
My iniquity is greater than can be forgiven. Brown's Wu. Err.
DE No'UNcER. m. ſ. [from denounce.] One that declares ſome
IſlenaCe,
Here comes the ſad denouncer of my fate,
To toll the mournful knell of ſeparation. Dryden.
DENSE. adj. [denſus, Latin.] Cloſe; compaét; approaching
to ſolidity; having ſmall interſtices between the conſtituent
particles. -
The cauſe of cold is the denſity of the body; for all denſ,
bodies are colder than moſt other bodies, as metals, ſtone,
glaſs ; and they are longer in heating than ſofter bodies. Becon.
In the air the higher you go, the leſs it is compreſſed,
and conſequently the leſs denſe it is ; and ſo the upper part
is exceedingly thinner than the lower part which we breathe.
. Lºcke.
To De'N's HIRE. v. a. A barbarous term of huſbandry.
Burning of land, or burn-bating, is commonly called dºn-
Jhiring, that is, Devenſhiring or Denbighſhiring, becauſe moſt
uſed or firſt invented there. *A4ortiºr's Huſbandry.
DE'Nsity. n ſ. [denſitas, Latin.] Cloſeneſs; compactneſs;
cloſe adheſion, or near approach of parts.
Whilſt the denſeſt of metals, gold, if foliated, is tranſpa- -
rent, and all metals become tranſparent, if diſſolved in men-
ſtruums or vitrified, the opacity of white metals ariſeth not
from their denſity alone. Newton's Opticks.
The air within the veſſels being of a leſs denſity, the out-
ward air would preſs their ſides together; and, being of a
greater denſity, would expand them ſo as to endanger the life
of the animal. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
DENTAL. adj. [dentalis, Latin.]
1. Belonging or relating to the teeth.
2. [In grammar.] Pronounced principally by the agency of the
teeth. - -
The Hebrews have aſſigned which letters are labial, which
dental, and which guttural. Bacon's Natural Hylor, Nº. 198.
The dºntal conſonants are eaſy, therefore let them be next;
firſt the labic-dental, as alſo the lingua-dentals. Holder's Elem.
De'NTAL. m. ſ. A ſmall ſhell-fiſh.
Two ſmall black and ſhining pieces, ſeem, by the ſhape, to
have been formed in the ſhell of a dental. 1, codward on Fºſſils.
DENTE'LL.I. m. ſ. [Italian.] Modiiſons.
The modillons, or dentelli, make a noble ſhow by graceful
projections. *; céiator, Nº. 4 15-
DENTIcul A"tion. n.ſ. [denticulatus, Latin.] The ſtate of
being ſet with ſmall teeth.
He omits the denticulation of the edges of the bill, or
thoſe ſmall oblique inciſions made for the better retention of
the prey. - Grew's Muſa'um.
DENTI'cu LATED. adj. [denticulatus, Latin.] Set with ſmall
teeth. -
De'NTIFR1ce. n.ſ.. [dens and frica, Latin.] A powder made
to ſcour the teeth.
Is this grey powder a good dentifice P Ben. jºhnſ Catil.
The ſhells of all ſorts of ſhell-fiſh, being burnt, obtain a
cauſtick nature: moſt of them, ſo ordered and powdered,
make excellent dentifrices. Grew's 441/2um.
DEN r1'Tio N. m. ſ. [dentitio, Latin.]
1. The act of breeding the teeth.
2. The time at which childrens tecth are bred.
To DENU'DATE. v. a. [d nudo, Latin.J. To diveſt; to ſtrip;
to lay naked. -
*Till he has denudated himſelf of all incumbrances, he is
unqualified. Decay of Piety.
DENUDA'ſ 10 N. m. ſ. [from denudate.] The act of ſtripping,
or making naked. .
To DENU'Dº. v. a. [denudo, Lat.] To ſtrip; to make naked;
to diveſt. * - -
Not a treaty can be obtained, unleſs we would denude our-
ſelf of all force to defend us. Clarendon, b. vi.
If in Summer-time you denude a vine-branch of its leaves,
the grapes will never come to maturity. Ray on the Crºatin.
6 P - The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 223</div><p class="Text">D E P.
D E P
The eye, with the ſkin of the eye-lid, is denuded, to ſhew
the muſcle. - Sharp's Surgery.
DENuncia"tios. m. ſ. [denunciatio, Latin.] The act of dé-
nouncing; the proclamation of a threat; a publick menace.
In a denunciatiºn or indiction of a war, the war is not con-
fined to the place of the quarrel, but is left at large. Bacon.
Chriſt tells the Jews, that, if they believe not, they ſhall
die in their fins: did they never read thoſe demanciations 27/ard.
Midſt of theſe denunciations, and notwithſtanding the warn-
ing before me, I commit myſelf to laſting durance. Cºngreve.
DENUNcia‘to R. n.ſ. [from denuncio, Latin.]
1. He that proclaims any threat.
2. He that lays an information againſt another.
The denunciator does not make himſelf a party in judgment,
as the accuſer does. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To DENY'. v. a. [denier, French; denego, Latin.]
1. To contradićt an accuſation; not to confeſs.
Sarah denied, ſaying, I laughed not; for ſhe was afraid. Gen.
2. To refuſe; not to grant.
My young boy
Hath an aſpect of interceflion, which
Great nature cries—deny not.
Ah, charming fair, ſaid I,
How long can you my bliſs and your's deny P
3. To abnegate; to diſown. -
It ſhall be therefore a witneſs unto you, left you deny your
God. t jo/h. xxiv. 27.
4. To renounce; to diſregard; to treat as foreign or not be-
longing to one.
The beſt ſign and fruit of denying ourſelves, is mercy to
others. Sprat's Sermons.
When St. Paul ſays, if in this life only we have hope in
Chriſt, we are of all men moſt miſerable: he conſiders Chriſ-
tians as denying themſelves in the pleaſures of this world, for
the ſake of Chriſt. Atterbury's Sermons, Prºf.
To DEOBSTRUCT. v. a. [deobſtruo, Latin. J. To clear from
impediments; to free from ſuch things as hinder a paſſage.
It is a ſingular good wound-herb, uſeful for deal/truding the
pores of the body More's Antidote again? Atheiſm.
Such as carry off the faeces and mucus, deal/truct the mouth
of the lačteals, ſo as the chyle may have a free paſſage into
the blood. Arbuthnot on Diet.
Deo'est RUENT. n.ſ.. [deolffruens, Latin.] A medicine that
has the power to reſolve viſcidities, or to open by any means
the animal paſſages.
All ſopes are attenuating and declftruent, reſolving viſcid
ſubſtances. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
DE'od AND. m. ſ. [deo dandum, Latin.] A thing given or for-
feited to God for the pacifying his wrath, in caſe of any miſ-
fortune, by which any Chriſtian comes to a violent end,
without the fault of any reaſonable creature; as, if a horſe
ſhould ſtrike his keeper, and ſo kill him ; if a man, in driving
a cart, and endeavouring to rectify ſomething about it, ſhould
fall ſo as the cart-wheels, by running over him, ſhould preſs
him to death; if one ſhould be felling a tree, and giving warn-
ing to company by, when the tree were near falling, to look
to themſelves, and any of them ſhould nevertheleſs be ſlain
by the fall of the tree; in theſe caſes the horſe, the cart-wheel,
cart and horſes, and the tree, are to be given to God; that is,
ſold and diſtributed to the poor, for an expiation of this dread-
ful event, though occaſioned by unreaſonable, ſenſeleſs, and
dead creatures: and though this be given to God, yet is it for-
feited to the king by law, as executor in this caſe, to ſee the
rice of theſe diſtributed to the poor. Cowel.
Tô DEOPPILATE. v. a. [de and of pilº, Latin.] To deob-
ſtrućt; to clear a paſſage; to free from obſtructions. -
DEoppilation. n.ſ. [from deeppiate.] The act of clearing
obſtructions; the removal of whatever obſtructs tie vital
jaſſages. -
P Though the groſſer parts be excluded again, yet are the
diſſoluble parts extracted, whereby it becomes effectual in de-
of pilations. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. ii. c. 21.
Drºppilative. adj. [from deeppilate.] Deobſtruent.
A phyſician preſcribed him a deepfilative and purgative
apozem. Harvey on Conſumption.
Drºsculation n.ſ. [droſulatio, Latin.] The act of kiſſing.
We have an enumeration of the ſeveral acts of worſhip re-
quired to be performed to images, viz. proceſſions, genuflec-
tions, thurifications and dºſtatiºnſ. Stillingfleet.
To Dr.P.A'INT. v. a. ſafeint, French.] -
1. To picture; to deſcribe by colours; to paint; to ſhew by a
painted reſemblance. - -
He did unwilling worſhip to the ſaint, --
That on his ſheild depainted he did ſee, Fairy Qkeen, b. ii.
2. To deſcribe. -
Such ladies fair would I dºpaint
In roundelay, or ſonnet quaint.
To DEPART.º. n. [ºf art, French.]
1. To go away from a place. -
When the people dºparted away, Suſanna went into her
garden. Suſan, vii.
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Dryden.
Gay's Paſtorals.
He ſaid unto him, go in peace; ſo he departed from him a
little way. 2 Kings v. a.
They departed quickly from the ſepulchre, with fear and
great #: and did run to bring his diſciples word. Mat xxviii.
e, which hath no ſtomach to this fight,
Let him depart; his paſſport ſhall be made. Shakespeare Henry V.
Barbaroſla ſtayed his courſe, and returned to Caſtronovum,
whence, better appeaſed with preſents, he departed out of that
bay. Knolles's Hi/?ry of the Turks.
And could'ſt thou leave me, cruel, thus alone;
Not one kind kiſs from a departing ſon
No look, no laſt adieu !
2. To deſiſt from a practice.
He cleaved unto the fins of Jeroboam, he departed not
therefrom. -
3. To be loſt; to periſh.
The good departed away, and the evil abode ſtill. 2 Eſd. iii.
4. To deſert; to revolt; to fall away 5 to apoſtatiſe.
In tranſgreſſing and lying againſt the Lord, and detart ng
away from our God. Iſ lix. 13.
5. To deſiſt from a reſolution or opinion. -
His majeſty prevailed not with any of them to depart from
the moſt unreaſonable of all their demands. Clarendon, A. viii.
6. To dye; to deceaſe; to leave the world.
As her ſoul was in departing; for ſhe died. Gen. iii. r. 18.
Lord, now letteſt thou thy ſervant depart in peace, accord-
ing to thy word.
As you wiſh Chriſtian peace to ſouls dºparted,
Stand theſe poor people's friend. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
To Dr PA'Rt. v. a. To quit; to leave; to retire from,
You have had diſpatch in private by the conſul;
You are will'd by him this evening
To depart Rome. Ben. johnſºn's Cati ine.
To DEPA'Rt. v. a. [partir, French; partior, Latin.] To di-
vide; to ſeparate.
DEPART. n.ſ. [depart, French.]
1. The act of going away.
I had in charge, at my depart from France,
To marry princeſs Margret. Shakespeare care's Henry VI. p. ii.
2. Death.
When your brave father breath'd his lateſt gaſp,
Tidings, as ſwiftly as the poſt could run,
Were brought me of your loſs and his depart. Shakespeare H. VI,
3. [With chymiſts.] An operation ſo named, becauſe the par-
ticles of ſilver are departed or divided from gold, or other
metal, when they were before melted together in the ſame
maſs, and could not be ſeparated any other way. Dić?.
De PA'RTER. n.ſ.. [from depart.] One that refines metals by
ſeparation.
DEPA'RTMENT. n.ſ. [departement, French.] Separate allot-
ment; province or buſineſs aſſigned to a particular perfon.
The Roman fleets, during their command at ſea, had their
ſeveral ſtations and departments: the moſt conſiderable was the
Alexandrian fleet, and the ſecond was the African. Arbuthnot.
DEPA'RTURE. m. ſ. [from depart.]
I. A going away.
Dryden’s AFneſs. "
2 Kings iii. 3.
Lu. xxix.
For thee, fellow,
Who needs muſt know of her departure, and
Do'ſt ſeem ſo ignorant, we'll force it from thee
By a ſharp torture. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
What beſides
Of ſorrow, and dejećtion, and deſpair,
Our frailty can ſuſtain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place. Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. xi.
2. Death; deceaſe; the act of leaving the preſent ſtate of
exiſtence. - -
Happy was their good prince in his timely detarture, which
barred him from the knowledge of his ſon's miſeries. Sidney.
They were ſeen not only all the while our Saviour was
upon earth, but ſurvived after his departure out of this world.
Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
3. A forſaking; an abandoning.
The fear of the Lord, and departure from evil, are phraſes
of like importance. Tillotſon, Sermon I.
DEPA'sce N.T. adj. [depaſcens, Latin.] Feeding greedily.
To DEPA's TURE. v. a. [from depaſtor, Latin.] To eat up; to
conſume by feeding upon it.
They keep their cattle, and live themſelves in bodies paſtur-
ing upon the mountains, and removing ſtill to freſh land, as
they have depa/lured the former. Spenſer's Ireland.
To DEPAUPERATE. v. a. [depaupero, Lat.] To make poor;
to impoveriſh; to conſume.
Liming does not depauperate; the ground will laſt long,
and bear large grain. Mortimer's Hushanary.
Great evacuations, which carry off the nutritious humours,
depauperate the blood. Arbut not on Aliºrents.
DEFE'ctible. adj. [from dºpedia, Latin.] Tough; clammy;
tenacious.
It may be alſo, that ſome bodies have a kind of lentor, and
are of a more deped/ible nature than oil; as we ſee it evident
in coloration; for a ſmall quantity of ſaffron will tinét more
than a very great quantity of braſil or wine. Lacºn'. *f;
2. *
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 224</div><p class="Text">, D. E. P
!
To Dr Pe'1Nct. v. a. [depeindre, French.] To depaint; to
paint; to deſcribe in colours. A word of Spenſer.
The red roſe medlied with the white y fere,
In either cheek depeindlen lively here. Spenser’s Paſtorals.
To DEPEND. v. m. [dependeo, Latin.]
1. To hang from.
- From the frozen beard
Long ificles depend, and crackling founds are heard. Dryden.
From gilded roofs depending lamps diſplay
Noćturnal beams, that emulate the day. Dryd. Wirg. Æn.
There is a chain let down from Jove,
So ſtrong, that from the lower end,
They ſay, all human things depend. Swift.
The direful monſter was afar deſcry’d
Two bleeding babes depending at her ſide. Pope's Statius.
2. To be in a ſtate of ſervitude or expectation; to live ſubject
to the will of others; to retain to others.
We work by wit, and not by witchcraft;
And wit defends on dilatory time. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Never be without money, nor depend upon the curteſy of
others, which may fail at a pinch. Bacon's Advie to Williers.
3. To be in ſuſpenſe; to be yet undetermined.
By no means be you perſuaded to interpoſe yourſelf in any
cauſe depending, or like to be depending in any court of juſ-
tice. Bacon's Advice to Will ers.
The judge corrupt, the long defending cauſe,
And doubtful iſſue of miſconſtru’d laws. Prior.
4. To LEPE'N D upon. To rely on ; to truſt to ; to reſt upon
with confidence; to be certain of.
He reſolved no more to depend upon the one, or to provoke
the other. Clarendºn.
But if you're rough, and uſe him like a dog,
Depend upon it—he'll remain incog. Addiſon's Drum. Prol.
I am a ſtranger to your characters, further than as com-
men fame reports them, which is not to be depended upon. Swift.
5. To be in a ſtate of dependance; to be at the diſcretion of
others. *
Be then deſir’d
Of fifty to diſquantity your train;
And the remainders, that ſhall ſtill depend,
To be ſuch men as may befort your age. Shakeſ K. Lear.
6. To reſt upon any thing as its cauſe.
The peace and happineſs of a ſociety depend on the juſtice
and fidelity, the temperance and charity of its members. Rºgers.
DEPE'NDAN ce.
DE PE'NDAN cy. }n.ſ. [from depend.]
1. The ſtate of hanging down from a ſupporter.
2. Something hanging upon another.
On a neighb'ring tree deſcending light,
Like a large cluſter of black grapes they ſhow,
And make a large dependance from the bough. Dryd. Virgil.
3. Concatination; connexion; relation of one thing to another.
In all ſorts of reaſoning, the connexion and dependance of
ideas ſhould be followed, 'till the mind is brought to the ſource
on which it bottoms. Locke.
4. State of being at the diſpoſal or under the ſovereignty of
another.
Every moment we feel our dependance upon God, and find
that we can neither be happy without him, nor think ourſelves
ſo Tilotſon, Serm. . . .
5. The things or perſons of which any man has the dominion
or diſpoſal.
Never was there a prince bereaved of his dependancies by
his council, except where there hath been either an over-
greatneſs in one counſellor, or an over-ſtrict combination in
divers. Bacon, Eſſay 21.
The ſecond natural diviſion of power, is of ſuch men who
have acquired large poſſeſſions, and conſequently dependancies ;
or deſcend from anceſtors, who have left them great inhe-
ritances. Swift on the Diſſentions in Athens and Rome.
6. Reliance; truſt; confidence. -
Their dependencies on him were drowned in this conceit.
f Hooker, b. i. ſ. 4.
They ſlept in peace by night,
Secure of bread, as of returning light;
And with ſuch firm defendance on the day,
‘I hat need grew pampcr'd, and forgot to pray. Dryden.
7. Accident; that of which the exiſtence preſuppoſes the exiſtence
of ſºmething elſe.
Modes I call ſuch complex ideas, which, however com-
pounded, contain not in them the ſuppoſition of ſubſiſting by
themſelves, but are conſidered as dependencies on, or affections
of ſubſtances; ſuch are the ideas ſignified by the words tri-
angle, gratitude, murder. Locke.
IDF PE's DANT. ad. [from depend J
1. In the power of anothcr.
On God, as the moſt high, all inferior cauſes in the world
are defendant. Hºcr; b. v. ſ 23.
i&gt;1 PE'ND ANT. m. ſ. [from ditcna.] One who lives in ſubjec-
tion, or at the diſcretion of another; a retainer.
A great abatement of i.indi.cſs appears as well in the gene-
ral dependants, as in the duke himſelf alſo, and your daughter,
Shaº ºff care's King L ar.
For a ſix-clerk 'a perſon recommended a dependant upon
him, who paid fix thouſand pounds ready money. Claredon.
His defendants ſhall quickly become his proſelytes. , 8 uth.
DEPENDEN ce. }"iſ [from depºnd, Latin. This word, with
DEPE'NDENCY. S. many others of the ſame terminations are
indifferently written with ance of ence, ancy or ency, as the
authors intended to derive them from the Latin or French.]
1. A thing or perſon at the diſpoſal or diſcretion of another.
We invade the rights of our neighbours, not upon account
of covetouſneſs, but of dominion, that we may create depen-
dencies. Collier on Pride.
2. State of being ſubordinate, or ſubjećt in ſome degree to the
diſcretion of another; the contrary to ſovereignty.
Let me report to him
Your ſweet dependency, and you ſhall find
A conqu'ror that will pray in aid for kindneſs,
Where he for grace is kneel'd to. Shakespeare Ant. and Cle patra:
At their ſitting out they muſt have their commiſſion, or
letters patents from the king, that ſo they may acknowledge
their dependency upon the crown of England. Bacon to Pºlliers.
3. That which is not principal; that which is ſubordinate.
We ſpeak of the ſublunary worlds, this earth, and its de-
pendencies, which roſe out of a chaos about fix thouſand
years ago. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. Concatination; connexion; riſe of conſequents from pre-
miſes.
Her madneſs hath the oddeſt frame of ſenſe ;
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e'er I heard in madneſs. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
5. Relation of anything to another, as of an effect to its cauſe.
I took pleaſure to trace out the cauſe of effects, and the
dependence of one thing upon another in the viſible creation.
Burnet's 1 he ry ºf the Earth.
6. Truſt; reliance; confidence.
The expectation of the performance of our deſire, is that
we call dependence upon him for help and aſſiſtance. Stillingfeet.
DEPE'ND ENT. adj. [dependens, Latin. This, as many other
words of like termination, are written with ent or ant, as
they are ſuppoſed to flow from the Latin or French..] Hang-
ing down. -
None may wear this furr but princes; and there is a certain
number of ranks allowed to dukes, marquiſies, and earls,
which they muſt not exceed in lining their caps therewith. In
the time of Charles the Great, and long ſince, the whole furrs
in the tails were dependent ; but now that faſhion is left, and
the ſpots only worn, without the tails. Peacham on Blazoning.
DEPE'NDENT. n.ſ.. [from dependens, Latin.] One ſubordinate;
one at the diſcretion or diſpoſal of another.
We are indigent, defenceleſs beings; the creatures of his
power, and the dependents of his providence. Rogers's Sermons. .
DEPE'NDER. n.ſ. (from depend..] A dependant; one that re-
poſes on the kindneſs or power of another.
What ſhalt thou expečt,
To be defender on a thing that leans? Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
DepERd1'tion. n.ſ.. [from deperditus, Latin. J Loſs; de-
ſtruction.
It may be unjuſt to place alleſficacy of gold in the non-omiſſion
of weights, or deperdition of any ponderous particles. Brown.
DE PHL EGMA'tion. n.ſ. [ from deph'egm. J. An operation
which takes away from the phlegm any ſpirituous fluid by
repeated diſtillation, 'till it is at length left all behind. Quincy.
In divers caſes it is not enough to ſeparate the aqueous parts
by dephlegmation; for ſome liquors contain alſo an unſuſpected
quantity of ſmall corpuſcles, of ſomewhat an earthy nature,
which, being aſſociated with the ſaline ones, do clog and
blunt them, and thereby weaken their activity. Bºyle.
To DEPHLEGM. v. a. [dºphlegmo, low Latin.] To
To DEPHLE'GMATE. } clear from phlegm, or aqueous in-
ſipid matter.
We have ſometimes taken ſpirit of ſalt, and arº; de-
phlegmed it. oyle.
DEPHle'GME DNess. n.ſ.. [from dephlegm.] The quality of
being freed from phlegm or aqueous matter. -
The proportion betwixt the coralline folution and the ſpirit
of wine, depends ſo much upon the ſtrength of the former
liquor, and the dephlegmedºgſ of the latter, that it is ſcarce
poſſible to determine generally and exactly what quantity of
each ought to be taken. Boyle.
To DEPI'cT. v. a. [deping, depićium, Latin.]
1. To paint; to portray; to repreſent in colours.
The cowards of Lacedemon depicted upon their ſhields the
moſt terrible beaſts they could imagine. Haylºr's Wºrthy Comm.
2. To deſcribe; to repreſent an action to the mind.
When the diſtračtions of a tumult are ſenſibly depicted,
every object and every occurrence are ſo preſented to your
view, that while you read, you ſeem indeed to ſee them. Felton.
DEP'LAT or Y. n ſ. [de and pilus, Latin.] An application uſed
to take away hair.
DE/Pilous, adj. [de and pilus, Latin.] Without hair. l,
- - ill;
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 225</div><p class="Text">D E P
D E P
This animal is a kind of lizard, or quadruped, corticated
and depilous; that is, without wool, furr, or hair. Brown,
DEPLANTA"rion. n.ſ. [deplanto, Latin.] The act of taking
plants up from the bed. Dić.
DEPLE'TION. n.ſ. [depleo depletus, Lat.] The aët of emptying.
- Abſtinence and a ſlender diet attenuates, becauſe depletion
of the veſſels gives room to the fluid to expand itſelf. Arbuthn.
Deplo'RAble, adj. [from deploro, Latin.]
1. Lamentable; that which demands or cauſes lamentation;
diſmal; ſad; calamitous ; miſerable; hopeleſs.
This was the deplorable condition to which the king was
reduced. Clarendon, b. viii.
The bill of all weapons gives the moſt ghaſtly and de-
plorable wounds. 7 emple.
It will be conſidered in how deplorable a ſtate learning lies
in that kingdom. Swift's Vindication of Iſaac Biker/aff.
2. It is ſometimes, in a more lax and jocular ſenſe, uſed for con-
temptible; deſpicable: as, deplorable nonſenſe; deplorable ſtu-
pidity.
Deplo'RABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from deplorable.] The ſtate of being
deplorable; miſery; hopeleſneſs. Dići.
Deplo'RABLY, adv. [from deplorable.] Lamentably; miſèrably;
hopeleſsly.
Notwithſtanding all their talk of reaſon and philoſophy,
God knows, they are deplorably ſtrangers to them. South.
Deplo'RAte. adj. [deploratus, Lat.] Lamentable; hopeleſs.
The caſe is then moſt deplorate when reward goes over to
the wrong ſide, and when intereſt ſhall be made the text and
the meaſure. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 30.
Deplora"tion. n.ſ.. [from deplore.] The act of deploring,
or of lamenting.
To DEPLORE. v. a. [deploro, Latin.] To lament; to be-
wail; to wail; to mourn; to bemoan; to expreſs ſorrow.
But chaſte Diana, who his death deplor’d,
With Æſculapian herbs his life reſtor'd. Dryden’s AEn.
Deplo'RER. m. ſ. [from deplore.] A lamenter; a mourner;
one that laments.
DePluma'tion. n.ſ. [deplumatio, Latin.]
1. A pluming, or plucking off the feathers.
2. [In ſurgery J A ſwelling of the eyelids, accompanied with
the fall of the hairs from the eye-brows: Philips.
To DEPLU'ME. v.a. [de and pluma, Latin.] To ſtrip of its
feathers. -
To DEPO'NE. v. a. [dipono, Latin.]
1. To lay down as a pledge or ſecurity.
2. To riſque upon the ſucceſs of an adventure.
On this I would depone
As much, as any cauſe I’ve known.
DEPO'NENT. n. ſ. [from depeno, Latin.]
1. One that depoſes his teſtimony in a court of juſtice; an evi-
dence; a witneſs.
2. [In grammar.] Such verbs as have no active voice are called
deponents, and generally ſignify action only; as fateor, I
confeſs. Clark's Latin Grammar.
To DEPOPULATE. v. a. [depopular, Latin. J. To unpeople;
to lay waſte; to deſtroy inhabited countries.
Where is this viper,
That would depopulate the city, and
Be every man himſelf? Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
He turned his arms upon unarmed and unprovided people,
to ſpoil only and depopulate, contrary to the laws both of war
and peace. Bacon's Henry VII.
A land exhauſted to the laſt remains,
Depopulated towns, and driven plains.
Grim death, in different ſhapes,
Depopulates the nations, thouſands fall
His vićtims. Philips.
DEPopulation. m.ſ.. [from depopulate.] The act of unpeo-
pling; havock; waſte; deſtruction of mankind.
How did'ſt thou grieve then, Adam to behold
The end of all thy off-ſpring, end ſo ſad,
Depopulation / Thee another flood,
Of tears and ſorrow a flood, thee alſo drown'd,
And ſunk thee as thy ſons. ... Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
Remote thou hear'ſt the dire effect of war,
Depopulation. Philºs.
Depopulator. n.ſ [from depopulate.] A diſpeopler; a de-
ſtroyer of mankind; a waſter of inhabited countries.
To DEPORT. v. a. [deporter, French.j To carry; to de-
mean; to behave: it is uſed only with the reciprocal pronoun.
Let an ambaſſador deport himſelf in the moſt graceful man-
ner before a prince. Pope.
DEpo'RT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Demeanour; grace of atti-
tude ; behaviour; deportment.
She Delia’s ſelf
In gait ſurpaſs'd, and goddeſs-like deport. Milt. Parad. Lºft,
f middle age one riſing, eminent
In wiſe deport, ſpake much of right and wrong. Miſtan.
Deportation. n.ſ. [deportatio, Latin. J Tranſportation;
exile into a remote part of the dominion, with prohibition to
change the place of reſidence.
Hudibras.
Dryden's 4ºn.
2. Exile in general.
An abjuration, which is a deportation for ever into a foreign
land, was anciently with us a civil death. Ayliff's Parergon.
DEpo'RTMENT. m. ſ. [deportement, French.] -
1. Conduct; management; manner of acting.
I will but ſweep the way with a few notes, touching the
duke's own deportment in that iſland. Wotton.
2. Demeanour; behaviour.
The coldneſs of his temper, and the gravity of his deport-
ment, carried him ſafe through many difficulties, and he lived
and died in a great ſtation. Swift.
To DEPOSE. v. a. [depono, Latin.] : “
1. To lay down; to lodge; to let fall.
Its ſhores are neither advanced one jot further into the
ſea, nor its ſurface raiſed by additional mud depoſed upon it by
the yearly inundations of the Nile. Hºodward's Nat. Hiſtory.
2. To degrade from a throne or high ſtation.
Firſt, of the king: what ſhill of him become?
—The duke yet lives that Henry ſhall depoſ. Shakespeare H.VL
May your ſick fame ſtill languiſh 'till it die; -
Then, as the greateſt curſe that I can give,
Unpity’d, be depos'd, and after live. Zryden's Aurengzebe.
Petºſed conſuls, and captive princes, might have preceded
him. Tatler, Nº. 53.
3. To take away; to diveſt; to ſtrip off.
You may my glory and my ſtate depoſe,
But not my griefs; Å; am I king of thoſe. Shakespeare Rich. IIL.
4. To give teſtimony; to atteſt.
'Twas he that made you to depoſe;
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
It was uſual for him that dwelt in Southwark, or Tothill-
fºrest, to depºſ, the yearly rent or valuation of lands lying in
the North, or other remote part of the realm. Bacon.
5. To examine any one on his oath. Not now in uſe.
According to our law,
Depoſe him in the juſtice of his cauſe. Shakespeare Richard III.
To DEPo's E. v. n. To bear witneſs. -
Love ſtraight ſtood up and depºſed, a lie could not come
from the mouth of Zelmane. Sidney, b. ii.
DEPo'sit ARY. n.ſ. [defºſitarius, Latin.] One with whom
anything is lodged in truſt.
I gave you all.
—And in good time you gave it.
—Made you my guardians, my defoſitaries;
But kept a reſervation to be follow’d
With ſuch a number. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To DEPOSITE. v. a. [depoſtum, Latin.]
1. To lay up ; to lodge in any place. -
The eagle got leave here to depºſite her eggs, L’E/ºrange.
Dryden wants a poor ſquare foot of ſtone, to ſhew where
the aſhes of one of the greateſt poets on earth are depºſited. Garth.
When veſſels were open, and the inſects had free acceſs to
the aliment within them, Redi diligently obſerved, that no
other ſpecies were produced, but of ſuch as he ſaw go in and
feed, and depºſite their eggs there, which they would readily do
in all putrefaction. Bentley's Sermons.
2. To lay up as a pledge, or ſecurity.
3. To place at intereſt.
God commands us to return as to him, to the poor,
his gifts, out of mere duty and thankfulneſs; not to depºſite
them with him, in hopes of meriting by them. Sprat.
4. To lay aſide.
The difficulty will be to perſuade the depºſiting of thoſe luſts,
which have, by I know not what faſcination, ſo endeared
themſelves. Decay of 1°iety.
Deposite. m. ſ. [depºſitum, Latin.]
1. Anything committed to the truſt and care of another.
2. A pledge; a pawn; a thing given as a ſecurity.
3. The ſtate of a thing pawned or pledged.
They had ſince Marſeilles, and fairly left it: they had the
other day the Valtoline, and now have put it in depoſite. Bacon.
DEPosition. m. ſ. [from deºſitio, Latin.]
1. The act of giving publick teſtimony.
A witneſs is obliged to fuear, otherwiſe his defoſtion is not
valid. Ayliffe's Parergºn.
2. The aët of degrading a prince from ſovereignty.
3. [In canon law.] Depoſition properly ſign, its a ſolemn de-
priving of a man of his clerical orders. Ayliffe's Parergon.
DEPositor Y. m.ſ.. [from dipºſite.] The place where anything
is lodged. Depoſitary is properly uſed of perſons, and depoſi-
tory of places; but in the following example they are con-
founded.
The Jews themſelves are the depoſitories of all the prophe-
cies which tend to their own confuſion. Addiſon.
DEPR A v A TI ON. m. / [d pravatio, Latin.]
1. The act of making any thing bad; the ačt of corrupting;
corruption. -
The three forms of government have their ſeveral perfec-
tions, and are ſubject to their ſeveral depravations : however,
few ſtates are ruined by defect in their inſtitution, but gene-
rally by corruption of manners. Szciń.
2. The
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 226</div><p class="Text">D E P º
|
!
2. The ſtate of being made bad; degeneracy; depravity.
We have a catalogue of the blackeſt ſins that human na-
ture, in its higheſt deprava’ion, is capable of committing. Szuth.
3. Defamation; cenſure: a ſenſe not now in uſe.
Stubborn criticks are apt, without a theme
For depravation, to ſquare all the ſex. Shakeſp. Troil, and Creſſ.
To LEPRA'V E. v. a. [depravo, Latin.] To vitiate; to cor-
rupt; to contaminate.
We admire the providence of God in the continuance of
ſcripture, notwithſtanding the endeavours of Infidels to abo-
liſh, and the fraudulence of hereticks always to deprave the
ſame. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
Who lives that's not depraved, or depraves P Shakeſp. Timon.
* But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt; both mind and will deprav'd. Milt. P. Lºſt.
A taſte which plenty does deprave,
Loaths lawful good, and lawleſs ill does crave. Dryden.
DEPRA've Dx Ess. n.ſ.. [from deprave..] Corruption; taint ;
contamination; vitiated ſtate.
What ſins do you mean? Our original depravedneſs, and
proneneſs of our eternal part to all evil. Hammond's Pr. Catech.
DEPRA've MENT. n.ſ.. [from deprave..] A vitiated ſtate; cor-
ruption.
He maketh men believe, that apparitions are either decep-
tions of fight, or melancholy depravements of fancy. Brown.
DE PRA've R. n.ſ.. [from deprave..] A corrupter; he that cauſes
depravity.
DE PRA'vity. m. ſ. [from deprave. J Corruption; a vitiated
ftate. -
To DEPRECATE. v. m. [deprecor, Latin.]
1. To pray earneſtly. Dià.
2. To requeſt; to petition. Dići.
3. To aſk pardon for. - Die?.
To DE'PR EcAt E. v. a.
1. To implore mercy of
At length he ſets
Thoſe darts, whoſe points make gods adore
His might, and deprecate his pow'r. Prior.
2. To avert ; to remove ; to turn away. -
3. To beg off; to pray deliverance from.
In deprecating of evil, we make an humble acknowledg-
ment of guilt, and of God's juſtice in chaſtifing, as well as
clemency, in ſparing the guilty. Grew's Coſmol. Sac. b. iii. c.6.
Poverty indeed, in all its degrees, men are eaſily perſuaded
to deprecate from themſelves. Rogers, Sermon ii.
The judgments which we would deprecate, are not re-
moved. - Smalridge.
The Italian entered them in his prayer: amongſt the three
evils he petitioned to be delivered from, he might have depre-
cated greater evils. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
DE PRECAT on. n. ſ. [d precatio, Latin.]
1. Intreaty ; petitioning.
2. An excuſing; a begging pardon for.
3. Prayer againſt evil.
I, with leave of ſpeech implor’d,
And humble deprecat on, thus reply'd. Milton's Parad. Loft.
Sternutation they generally conceived to be a good ſign,
or a bad one; and ſo, upon this motion, they commonly uſed
a gratulation for the one, and a deprecation for the other. Brown.
Dºs PRE.ca"Tiv E. !". [from deprecate.] That ſerves to de-
DE PREC A'To R Y. S. precate; excuſive; apologizing.
Biſhop Fox underſtanding that the Scottiſh king was ſtill
diſcontent, being troubled that the occaſion of breaking of
the truce ſhould grow from his men, ſent many humble and
deprecatory letters to the Scottiſh king to appeaſe him. Bacon.
I}F PR EcA'ſ or... n. ſ. [deprecator, Latin.]
1. One that ſues for another; an interceſſor; a ſolicitor. Dić7.
2. An excuſer. -
To DEPRECHATE. v. a. [de retiare, Latin J
1. To bring a thing down to a lower price.
2. To undervaluc.
They preſumed upon that mercy, which, in all their con-
verſations, they endeavour to depreciate and miſrepreſent. Addison
As there are none more ambitious of fame, than thoſe who
are coiners in poetry, it is very natural for ſuch as have not
ſucceeded in it to depreciate the works of thoſe who have. Spect.
To DE'PREDATE. v. a. [depraedari, Latin.]
1. To rob ; to pillage.
2. To ſpoil; to devour.
It maketh the ſubſtance of the body more ſolid and com-
pačt, and ſo leſs apt to be conſumed and depredated by the
ſpirits. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 299.
DEPR F D A"rio N. m. ſ. ſaleſ radatio, Latin.]
1. A robbing; a ſpoiling.
Commiſſioners were appointed to determine all matters of
piracy and depredations between the ſubjects of both king-
doms. Hayward.
The land had never becn before ſo free from robberies and
depredations as through his reign. J/otton.
2. Voracity; waſte.
The ſpeedy dipredation of air upon watry moiſture, and
Vol. I. 2.
verſion of the ſame into air, appeareth in nothing more viſible
than in the ſudden diſcharge or vaniſhing of a little cloud of
breath, or vapour from glaſs, or the blade of a ſword, or any
ſuch poliſhed body. Bacon's Natural Hi/?ory, Nº. 91.
DE PREDA'to R. m.J. [depravdator, Lat..] A robber; a devourer.
It is reported, that the ſhrub called our Lady's Seal, which
is a kind of briony, and coleworts, ſet near together, one or
both will die: the cauſe is, for that they be both great depre-
dators of the earth, and one of them ſtarveth the other. Bacon.
We have three that collect the experiments, which are in
all books; theſe we call depredators. Bacon's New Atlantis.
To DE PREHEND. v. a. [deprehend, Latin.] -
1. To catch one; to take unawares; to take in the fact.
That wretched creature, being deprehended in that impiety,
was held in ward. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
Who can believe men upon their own authority, that are
once deprehended in ſo groſs and impious an impoſture. More,
2. To diſcover; to find out a thing; to come to the knowledge
or underſtanding of.
The motions of the minute parts of bodies, which do ſo
great effects, have not been obſerved at all, becauſe they are
inviſible, and incur not to the eye; but yet they are to be de-
prehended by experience. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 98.
DEPREHE'NSIBLE. adj. [from deprehend.]
1. That may be caught. -
2. That may be apprehended, conceived, or underſtood. Dis.
DE PREHE'NSIBLE N Ess. n.ſ.
1. Capableneſs of being caught.
2. Intelligibleneſs; eaſineſs to be underſtood.
DEPREHE'Nsion. m. ſ. [deprehenſio, Latin.]
1. A catching or taking unawares.
2. A diſcovery. - *
To DEPRESS. v. a. [from depreſſus, of detrimo, Latin.]
1. To preſs or thruſt down.
2. To let fall; to let down.
The ſame thing I have tried by letting a globe reſt, and
raiſing or deſ reſing the eye, or otherwiſe moving it to make
the angle of a juſt magnitude. Mewton's Opt.
3. To humble; to deject; to ſink.
Others depreſ; their own minds, deſpond at the firſt diffi-
culty, and conclude that the making any progreſs in know-
ledge is above their capacities. Locke.
If we conſider how often it breaks the gloom, which is apt
to depreſs the mind, with tranſient unexpected gleams of joy,
onc would take care not to grow too wiſe for ſo great a plea-
ſure of life. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 249.
- Paſſion can depreſs or raiſe
The heavenly, as the human mind. Prior.
DEPRE'ssion. m. ſ. [depreſſio, Latin.]
1. The act of preſſing down.
2. The ſinking or falling in of a ſurface.
The beams of light are ſuch ſubtile bodies, that, in reſpect
of them, even ſurfaces that are ſenſibly ſmooth, are not exactly
ſo: they have their own degree of roughneſs, conſiſting of lit-
tle protuberances and depreſſions; and conſequently ſuch in-
equalities may ſuffice to give bodies different colours, as we
fee in marble that appears white or black, or red or blue, even
when moſt carefully poliſhed. Boyle on Colours.
If the bone be much depreſſed, and the fiſſure conſiderably
large, it is then at your choice, whether you will enlarge that
fiſſure, or continue it for the evacuation of the matter, and
forbear the uſe of the trapan; not doubting but a ſmall depreſ-
fion of the bone will either riſe, or caſt off, by the benefit of
nature. //ſeman's Surgery.
3. The aët of humbling; abaſement. -
Depreſſion of the nobility may make a king more abſolute,
but leſs ſafe. Racon's Ornam. Ration. 28.
DEPRE'ssion of an Equation [in algebra], is the bringing it
into lower and more ſimple terms by diviſion. Dić?.
DEPRE'ssion of a Star [with aſtronomers], is the diſtance of a
ſtar from the horizon below, and is meaſured by the arch of
the vertical circle or azimuth, paſſing through the ſtar, inter-
cepted between the ſtar and the horizon. Dić.
DePRE'ssoR. n.ſ. [defreſſor, Latin.]
1. He that keeps or preſſes down.
2. An oppreſſor.
DePRE'ssor. [In anatomy..] A term given to ſeveral muſcles
of the body, whoſe actibn is to depreſs the parts to which
they adhere.
DE'PRIMENT. adj. [from deprimens, of deprimo, Latin J. An
epithet applied to one of the ſtraight muſcles that move the
globe or ball of the eye, its uſe being to pull it downwards.
Phillips.
All I ſhall farther take notice of, ſhall be only the exquiſite
equilibration of all oppoſite and antagoniſt muſcles, affected
partly by the natural poſture of the body and the eye, which
is the caſe of the attollent and depriment muſcles. Derham.
DE PRIVA'tion. m.ſ.. [from de and privatio, Latin.]
1. The act of depriving, or taking away from.
Fools whoſe end is deſtruction, and eternal deprivation of
being, Bentley.
6 Q. DE PRIVATION
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 227</div><p class="Text">D E P
D E R
DEPRIVA'rios [in law], is when a clergyman, as a biſhop,
parſon, vicar or prebend, is deprived, or depoſed from his pre-
ferment, for any matter in fact or law. Phillips.
To DEPRI'VE. v. a. [from de and privo, Latin.]
J. To bereave one of a thing; to take it away from him.
God hath deprived her of wiſdom, neither hath he imparted
to her underſtanding. ob xxxix. , 7.
He lamented the loſs of an excellent ſervant, and the hor-
rid manner in which he had been deprived of him. Clarendon.
Now wretched Oedipus, depriv'd of fight,
Led a long death in everlaſting night.
2. To hinder; to debar from.
From his face I ſhall be hid, depriv'd
His bleſſed count'nance. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi.
The ghoſts rejected, are th’ unhappy crew
Depriv'd of ſepulchres, and fun'ral due. Dryden's An. vi.
3. To releaſe; to free from.
Moſt happy he,
Whoſe leaſt delight ſufficeth to deprive
Remembrance of all pains which him oppreſt. Spenser.
4. To put out of an office. -
A miniſter, deprived for inconformity, ſaid, that if they de-
prived him it ſhould coſt an hundred mens lives. Bacon.
Depth. n. ſ. [from deep, of disp, Dutch.]
1. Deepneſs; the meaſure of any thing from the ſurface down-
wards.
As for men, although they had buildings in many places
higher than the depth of the water, yet that inundation had a
long continuance. Bacon's New Atlants.
We have large and deep caves of ſeveral depths: the deep-
eſt are ſunk ſix hundred fathoms. Ba, on.
The left to that unhappy region tends,
Which to the depth of Tartarus deſcends.
For though, in nature, depth and height
Are equally held infinite,
In poetry the height we know
'Tis only infinite below. Swift.
2. Deep place; not a ſhoal.
The falſe tides ſkim o'er the cover'd land,
And ſeamen with diſſembled depths betray. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
3. The abyſs; a gulph of infinite profundity.
When he prepared the heavens I was there, when he ſet a
compaſs upon the face of the depth. Prov. viii. 27.
4. The middle or height of a ſeaſon.
And in the depth of winter, in the night,
You plow the raging ſeas to coaſts unknown. Denham,
The earl of Newcaſtle, in the depth of Winter, reſcued
the city of York from the rebels. Clarendºn.
5. Abſtruſeneſs; obſcurity.
There are greater depths and obſcurities in an elaborate and
well written piece of nonſenſe, than in the moſt abſtruſe tract
of ſchool divinity. Addiſon's I/hig Examiner.
DEPTH of a Squadron or Batallion, is the number of men in the
file. Milit. Dić7.
To DEPTHEN. v. a. [dispen, Dutch..] To deepen, or make
deeper. Dić7.
To DePU'cel ATE. v. a. [depuceler, French.] To deflower;
to bereave of virginity. . - Dićf.
Depulsion. n.ſ. [defuſion, Latin.] A beating or thruſting
Pope's Statius.
Dryden's dºn.
away.
DEP'u'lso RY. adj. [from depulſus, Latin.] Putting away;
averting. Die?.
To DEPURATE. v. a. [depurer, French, from depurgo, Lat.]
To purify ; to cleanſe; to free anything from its impurities.
Chemiſtry enabling us to depurate bodies, and in ſome
meaſure to analize them, and take aſunder their hetero-
geneous parts, in many chemical experiments we may better
than in others, know what manner of bodies we employ; art
having made them more ſimple, or uncompounded, than na-
ture alone is wont to preſent them to us. Boyle.
DE/PURATE. adj. [from the verb.]
1. Cleanſed; freed from dregs and impurities.
2. Pure; not contaminated.
Neither can any boaſt a knowledge depurate from the defile-
ment of a contrary, within this atmoſphere of fleſh. Glanv.
DEPURA'tion. n ſ [depuratio, Latin.]
1. The act of ſeparating the pure from the impure part of any
thing.
Bindone is a mineral body, of fat and inflammable parts;
and this is either uſed crude, and called ſulphur vive, or is of
a ſadder colour, and, after depuration, ſuch as we have in mag-
deleons, or rolls of a lighter yellow. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
What hath been hitherto diſcourſed, inclines us to look upon
the ventilation and depuration of the blood as one of the prin-
cipal and conſtant uſes of reſpiration, Boyle's Spring of the Air.
2. The cleanſing of a wound from its filth.
To DEPU'RE. v. a. [depurer, French.]
1. To cleanſe; to free from impurities.
2. To purge; to free from ſome noxious quality.
It produced plants of ſuch imperfection and harmful quality,
as the waters of the general flood could not ſo waſh out or
depure, but that the ſame defe&amp;tion hath had continuance in
the very generation and nature of mankind. Raleigh.
DEPUTA'TION. m. ſ. [deputation, French.]
1. The act of deputing, or ſending away with a ſpecial com-
miſſion.
2. Vicegerency; the poſſeſſion of any commiſſion given.
Cut me off the heads
Of all the fav'rites that the abſent king
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was perſonal in the Iriſh war. Shakeſ Henry IV.
He looks not below the moon, but hath deſigned the regi-
ment of ſublunary affairs unto ſublunary deputations. Brown.
The authority of conſcience ſtands founded upon its vice-
gerency and deputation under God. South's Sermºns.
To DEPUTE v. a. [dipºter, French..] To ſend with a ſpe-
cial commiſſion; to impower one to tranſact inſtead of an-
other.
And Abſalom ſaid unto him, See thy matters are good and
right, but there is no man deputed of the king to hear. 2 Sa.
A biſhop, by deputing a prieſt or chaplain to adminiſter the
ſacraments, may correct and remove him for his demerits.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
And Linus thus, deputed by the reſt,
The heroes welcome, and their thanks expreſs'd, Rºſſomm.
DE"Put Y. m. ſ. [deputé, Fr. from deputatus, Latin.] A lieu-
tenant; a viceroy; one that is appointed by a ſpecial commiſ-
fion to govern and act inſtead of another.
He exerciſeth dominion over them as the vicegerent and
deputy of Almighty God. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
He was vouched his immediate deputy upon earth, and vice-
roy of the creation, and lord lieutenant of the world. South.
2. Any one that tranſacts buſineſs for another.
Preſbyters, abſent through infirmity from their churches,
might be ſaid to preach by thoſe deputies, who, in their ſtead,
did but read homilies. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 21.
A man hath a body, and that body is confined to a place;
but where friendſhip is, all offices of life are, as it were,
granted to him and his deputy; for he may exerciſe them by
his friend. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
3. (In law.] One that exerciſes any office or other thing in
andther man's right, whoſe forfeiture or miſdemeanour iball
cauſe the officer or perſon for whom he acts to loſe his
office. Phillips.
To DE QUA'NTITATE. v. a. [from de and quantitas, Latin.]
To dininiſh the quantity of.
This we affirm of pure gold; for that which is current,
and paſſeth in ſtamp amongſt us, by reaſon of its allay, which
is a proportion of ſilver or copper mixed therewith, is aétually
dequantitated by fire, and poſſibly by frequent extinction.
Brown's Wugar Errours, b. ii. c. 2. '
DER. A term uſed in the beginning of names of places. It is
generally to be derived from bean, a wild beaſt, unleſs the
place ſtands upon a river; for then it may rather be fetched
from the Britiſh dur, i. e. water. Gibſon's Camden.
To DERA 'cINATE. v. a. [deraciner, French.]
1. To pluck or tear up by the roots.
Her fallow leas,
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory
Doth root upon; while that the cutter ruſts
That ſhould deracinate ſuch ſavagery. Shakeſp. Henry V.
2. To aboliſh; to deſtroy ; to extirpate.
To DERAIGN. 7. /. . . . - - -
To DERAIN. }v. a. [diſrationare, or dirationare, Latin.]
1. To prove; to juſtify.
When the parſon of any church is diſturbed to demand
tythes in the next pariſh by a writ of indicavit, the patron
ſhall have a writ to demand the advowſon of the tythes being
in demand ; and when it is deraigned, then ſhall the plea paſs
in the court chriſtian, as far forth as it is deraigned in the
king's court. - Blount.
2. To diſorder; to turn out of courſe. Dićf.
F R A J G NME N T. -
ºn / ſtom drain]
1. The ačt of deraigning or proving.
2. A diſordering or turning out of courſe.
3. A diſcharge of profeſſion; a departure out of religion.
In ſome places the ſubſtantive dereignment is uſed in the very
literal ſignification with the French diſrayer, or deſranger;
that is, turning out of courſe, diſplacing, or ſetting out of
order; as deraignment or departure out of religion, and dereign-
ment or diſcharge of their profeſſion, which is ſpoken of thoſe
religious men who forſook their orders and profeſſions. Plount.
DERAY. n.ſ.. [from deſrayer, French, to turn out of the right
wa
I. Tumult; diſorder; noiſe.
2. Merriment; jollity; ſolemnity. Douglaſs.
To DER E. v. a. [benian, Saxon.] To hurt. Obſolete.
So from immortal race he does proceed,
That mortal hands may not withſtand his might;
Dred for his derring doe, and bloody deed;
For all in blood and ſpoil is his delight. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
DERE Li'ction.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 228</div><p class="Text">DeReli'ction. n.ſ [derelićlio, Latin.] An utter forſaking or
leaving; an abandoning.
There is no other thing to be looked for, but the effects of
God's moſt juſt diſpleaſure, the withdrawing of grace, dere-
lićtion in this world, and in the world to come confuſion. Hooker.
DE’RELIcts. n.ſ. pl. [In law.] Such goods as are wilfully
thrown away, or relinquiſhed by the owner. IDićf.
To DERI'DE. v. a. [derideo, Latin.]
1. To laugh at ; to mock; to turn to ridicule ; to ſcorn.
And before whoſe preſence to offend with any the leaſt un-
ſeemlineſs, we would be ſurely as loth as they who moſt re-
prehend or deride what we do. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 29.
What ſhall be the portion of thoſe who have derided God's
word, and made a mock of every thing that is ſacred and
religious 2 Tillotſon, Serm. ii.
Theſe ſons, ye gods, who with flagitious pride
Inſult my darkneſs, and my groans deride. Pope's Statius.
DE R1'DER. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A mocker; a ſcoffer.
Upon the wilful violation of oaths, execrable blaſphemies,
and like contempts offered by deriders of religion, fearful
tokens of divine revenge have been known to follow. Hooker.
2. A droll; a buffoon.
DE R1's Ion. n.ſ. [deriſo, Latin.]
1. The aët of deriding or laughing at.
2. Contempt; ſcorn; a laughing-ſtock.
I am in deriſion daily; every one mocketh me. jer. xx. 7.
Thou makeſt us a reproach to our neighbours, a ſcorn and
a deriſion to them that are round about us. Pſ. xliv. 13.
Enſnar'd, aſſaulted, overcome, led bound,
Thy foes deriſon, captive, poor and blind,
Into a dungeon thruſt. Milton's Agonſles, l. 364.
Are we grieved with the ſcorn and deriſion of the prophane :
Thus was the bleſſed Jeſus deſpiſed and reječted of men. Rogers.
Vanity is the natural weakneſs of an ambitious man, which
expoſes him to the ſecret ſcorn and deriſion of thoſe he con-
verſes with. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 255.
DERI's Ive. adj. [from deride.] Mocking; ſcoffing.
O'er all the dome they quaff, they feaſt;
Deriſive taunts were ſpread from gueſt to gueſt, -
And each in jovial mood his mate addreſt. Pope's Odyſſey.
DERI’sor Y. adj. [deriſarius, Latin.] Mocking; ridiculing.
DERI'v ABL. E. adj. [from derive..] Attainable by right of
deſcent or derivation.
God has deciared this the eternal rule and ſtandard of all
honour derivable upon me, that thoſe who honour him ſhall
be honoured by him. South's Sermons.
DeRiv A'tion. m. ſ. [derivatio, Latin.]
1. A draining of water; a turning of its courſe; letting out.
When it began to ſwell, it would every way diſcharge itſelf
by any deſcents or declivities of the ground; and theſe iſſues
and derivations being once made, and ſupplied with new wa-
ters puſhing them forwards, would continue their courſe 'till
they arrived at the ſea, juſt as other rivers do. Burnet.
2. [In grammar.] The tracing of a word from its original.
Your lordſhip here ſeems to diſlike my taking notice, that
the derivation of the word ſubſtance favours the idea we have
of it; and your lordſhip tells me, that very little weight is to
be laid on it, on a bare grammatical etymology. Locke.
3. The tracing of any thing from its ſource.
As touching traditional communication, and tradition of
thoſe truths that I call connatural and engraven, I do not
doubt but many of thoſe truths have had the help of that deri-
vatiou. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
4. [In medicine.] The drawing of a humour from one part of
the body to another. - .
Derivation differs from revulſion only in the meaſure of the
diſtance, and the force of the medicines uſed : if we draw it
to ſome very remote, or, it may be, contrary part, we call
that revulſion; if only to ſome neighbouring place, and by
gentle means, we call it derivation. Wiſeman on Tumours.
DERI'vative. adj. [derivativus, Latin.] Derived or taken
from another.
As it is a derivative perfection, ſo it is a diſtinét kind of
perfection from that which is in God. Hale's Origin of Mank.
DERI'vAt Ive. n.ſ.. [from the adječtive.] The thing or word
derived or taken from another.
For honour,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I ſtand for. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
The word honeſtus originally and ſtrictly ſignifies no more
than creditable, and is but a derivative from honour, which
ſignifies credit or honour. South's Sermons.
DERI'v ATIVELY. adv. [from derivative. J In a derivative
manner.
To DER!"VE. v. a. [deriver, French, from derivo, Latin.]
1. To turn the courſe of anything; letting out; communicating.
Company leſſens the ſhame of vice by ſharing it, and abates
the torrent of a common odium by deriving it into many
channels. South's Sermons.
2. To deduce from its original.
They endeavour to derive the varieties of colours from the
various proportion of the direct progreſs or motion of theſe
globules to their circumvolution, or motion about their own
centre. Boyle on Colours.
. This property of it ſeems rather to have been derived from
the Pretorian ſoldiers, who inſolently aſſumed the diſpoſing of
the empire. Decay of Piety,
Men derive their ideas of duration from their refle&amp;tion on
the train of ideas they obſerve to ſucceed one another in their
own underſtandings. Locłe.
From theſe two cauſes of the laxity and rigidity of the
fibres, the methodiſts, an ancient ſet of phyſicians, derived all
diſeaſes of human bodies with a great deal of reaſon; for the
fluids derive their qualities from the ſolids. Arbuthnºt.
3. To communicate to another, as from the origin and ſource.
Chriſt having Adam's nature as we have, but incorrupt,
deriveth not nature, but incorruption, and that immediately
from his own perſon, unto all that belong unto him. Hooker.
The cenſors of theſe wretches, who, I am ſure, could de-
rive no ſanctity to them from their own perſons; yet upon this
account, that they had been conſecrated by the offering incenſe
in them, were, by God's ſpecial command, ſequeſtered from
all common uſe. South’s Sermons.
4. To communicate to by deſcent of blood.
Beſides the readineſs of parts, an excellent diſpoſition of
mind is derived to your lordſhip from the parents of two gene-
rations, to whom I have the honour to be known. Felton.
5. To ſpread; to diffuſe gradually from one place to another.
The ſtreams of the publick juſtice were derived into every
part of the kingdom. Davies on Ireland.
6. [In grammar J. To trace a word from its origin.
To DE'Rive. v. n.
1. To come from ; to owe its origin to.
He that reſiſts the pow'r of Ptolomy,
Reſiſts the pow'r of heav'n ; for pow'r from heav'n
Derives, and monarchs rule by gods appointed. Prior.
2. To deſcend from.
I am, my lord, as well deriv'd as he,
As well poſſeſt. Shakeſpeare's Midſummer Night's Dream.
DE R1'v ER. n. / [from derive J
1. One that draws or fetches from the original.
Such a one makes a man not only a partaker of other mens
fins, but alſo a deriver of the whole intire guilt of them to
himſelf. South's Sermons.
DERN. adj. [beann, Saxon.]
1. Sad; ſolitary.
2. Barbarous; cruel. Obſolete.
DER NIE'R. adj. Laſt. It is a mere French word, and uſed
only in the following phraſe.
In the Imperial chamber, the term for the proſecution of an
appeal is not circumſcribed by the term of one or two years,
as the law elſewhere requires in the Empire, this being the
dernier reſort and ſupreme court of judicature. Ayliffe's Parerg.
To DE’Rog At E. v. a. [derogo, Latin.]
1. To do an act contrary to a preceding law or cuſtom, ſo as
to diminiſh its former value.
By ſeveral contrary cuſtoms and ſtiles uſed here, many of
thoſe civil and canon laws are controuled and derogated. Hale.
2. To leſſen the worth of any perſon or thing; to diſparage.
To De'Rog A re. v. n. To degenerate; to do a thing contrary
to one's calling or dignity.
We ſhould be injurious to virtue itſelf, if we did derogate
from them whom their induſtry hath made great. Hooker.
DE'RogATE. adj. [from the verb.] Damaged; leſſened in
value.
Into her womb convey ſterility;
Dry up in her the organs of increaſe,
And from her derºgate body never ſpring
A babe to honour her Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
DE RogATION. n.ſ. [derogatio, Latin.]
1. The act of breaking and making void a former law or
contračt.
It was indeed but a wooing ambaſſage, with good reſpects
to entertain the king in good affection; but nothing was done
or handled to the derogation of the king's late treaty with the
Italians. Bacon's Henry VII.
That which enjoins the deed is certainly God's law; and it
is alſo certain, that the ſcripture, which allows of the will, is
neither the derogation nor relaxation of that law. South's Serm.
2. A diſparaging; leſſening or taking away the worth of any
perſon or thing. Sometimes with to, properly with from.
Which, though never ſo neceſſary, they could not eaſily
now admit, without ſome fear of dirogation from their credit;
and therefore that which once they had done, they became for
ever after reſolute to maintain. Hºcker, Preface.
So ſurely he is a very brave man, neither is that any thing
which I ſpeak to his derogation ; for in that I ſaid he is a min-
gled people, it is no diſpraiſe. Speºſer on Ireland.
The wiſeſt princes need not think it any diminution to
their greatneſs, or derogation to their ſufficiency, to rely upon
counſel. - Bacon, Eſſay 21.
I ſay
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 229</div><p class="Text">ID E S
D E S
I ſay not this in derogation to Virgil, neither dol contradićt
any thing which I have formerly ſaid in his juſt praiſe, Dryden.
.* I believe there are none of theſe patriots who will think t
a derogation from their merit to have it ſaid, that they received
many lights and advantages from their intimacy with Rºy lord
Somers. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 39.
DeRogative, adj. [derºgativus, Latin.] Derogating; leſſen-
ing the value of. - '.
That ſpirits are corporeal ſeems to me a conceit derogative
to himſelf, and ſuch as he ſhould rather labour to overthrow ;
yet thereby he eſtabliſheth the doćtrine of luſtrations, amulets
and charmis, as we have declared before. Brown's Pulgar Err.
De Ro'o a to RILY. adv. [from derogatory.] In a detracting
manner. - Dićt.
DERo'o. At or IN Ess. n.ſ.. [from derogatory..] The aët of dero-
gating. Dić.
DeRo'o AtoRY. adj. [derogatorius, Latin.] That leſſens the
value of.
They live and die in their abſurditics, paſſing their days in
perverted apprehenſions and conceptions of the world, deroga-
tory unto God and the wiſdom of the creation. Brown.
Theſe deputed beings, as they are commonly underſtood,
are derogatory from the wiſdom and power of the Author of
Nature, who doubtleſs can govern this machine he could
create, by more direct and eaſy methods than employing theſe
ſubſervient divinities. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
DE'Rv1s. m. ſ. [dervis, French.] A Turkiſh prieſt.
Even there, where Chriſt vouchſaf’d to teach,
Their derviſes dare an impoſtor preach. Sandyſ.
The dervis at firſt made ſome ſcruple of violating his pro-
miſe to the dying brachman; but told him, at laſt, that he
could conceal nothing from ſo excellent a prince. Spectator.
DESCANT. m. ſ. [d/canto, Italian.] -
1. A ſong or tune compoſed in parts.
Nay, now you are too flat,
And mar the concord with too harſh a deſtant. Shakeſpeare.
The wakeful nightingale
All night long her amorous deſcant ſung. Milton's Par. Ioff.
2. A diſcourſe; a diſputation; a diſquiſition branched out into
ſeveral diviſions or heads. It is commonly uſed as a word of
cenſure, or contempt.
Look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
And ſtand between two churchmen, good my lord;
For on that ground I’ll build a holy deſtant. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Such kindneſs would ſupplant our unkind reportings, and
ſevere dºſants upon our brethren. Government ºf the Tongue.
To DE'scast. v. … [from the noun.]
1. To ſing in parts.
2. To diſcourſe at large; to make ſpeeches: in a ſenſe of cen-
ſure or contempt.
Why I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to paſs away the time;
Unleſs to ſpy my ſhadow in the ſun,
And dºcant on mine own deformity. Shakespeare Richard III.
Comſt thou for this, vain boaſter, to ſurvey me,
To dºſant on my ſtrength, and give thy verdict Milton.
A virtuous man ſhould be pleaſed to find people deſcanting
upon his actions, becauſe, when they are thoroughly canvaſſed
and examined, they turn to his honour. Addison's Freeholder.
To DESCEND. v. a. [deſcend, Latin.]
1. To come from a higher place to a lower; to fall; to ſink.
The rain deſcended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that houſe; and it fell not, for it was
founded upon a rock. Matt, vii. 25.
The brook that deſcended out of the mount. Deutr. ix. 2 i.
He cleft his head with one deſcending blow. Dryden.
Foul with ſtains
Of guſhing torrents and deſcending rains. Addison's Cato.
O goddeſs! who, dºſcending from the ſkies,
Vouchſaf'd thy preſence to my wond'ring eyes. Pope's Odyſſ.
2. To come down in a popular ſenſe, implying only an arrival
at one place from another.
He ſhall deſcend into battle, and periſh. 1 Sa. xxvi. Io.
3. To come ſuddenly or violently; to fall upon as an enemy.
For the pious ſire preſerve the ſon ;
His wiſh’d return with happy pow'r befriend,
And on the ſuitors let thy wrath dºſcend. Pope's Odyſſy, b. iv.
4. To make an invaſion.
The goddeſs gives th' alarm; and ſoon is known
The Grecian fleet, deſcending on the town. Dryden.
A foreign ſon upon the ſhore deſcends,
Whoſe martial fame from pole to pole extends. Dryden.
5. To proceed from an original; to be extracted from.
Deſpair diſſends from a mean original; the offspring of fear,
lazineſ, and impatience. Collier againſt Deſpair.
Will is younger brother to a baronet, and deſcended of the
ancient family of the Wimbles. Addison's Spectator, Nº. 108.
6. To fall in order of inheritance to a ſucceſſor.
Should we aſſow that all the property, all the eſtate of the
father, ought to dºſend to the clieſt ſon; yet the father's na-
*** *minion, the paternal power, cannot deſcend unto him
by inheritance. Locke.
The inheritance of both rºle over men and property, in
things ſprung from the ſame original, and were to dº cºnd by
the ſame rules. Loºe.
Our author provides for the dºſ ending and conveyance
down of Adam's monarchical power to poſterity, by the inhe-
ritance of his heir, ſucceeding to his father's authority. Locke.
7. To extend a diſcourſe from general to particular conii-
derations.
Congregations diſcerned the ſmall accord that was among
themſelves, when they deſcended to particulars. Decay of Piety.
To Desce'N D. v. a. To walk downward upon any place.
He ended, and they both dºſcid the hill;
Deſcended Adam to the bow'r, where Eve
Lay ſleeping. Milton's Paradºſ Iſ?.
In all our journey through the Alps, as well when we
climbed as when we deſcended them, we had ſtill a river run-
ning along with the road. Aſ ºf n on ſtay.
In the midſt of this plain ſtands a high hill, ſo very fleep,
that there would be no mounting or deſcending it, were not it
made up of a looſe crumbled earth. Addison on Italy.
DEsc END ANT. n.ſ. ſºftendant, Fr. d.ſendens, Latin.] The
offspring of an anceſtor; he that is in the line of generation
at whatever diſtance.
The deſcendants of Neptune were planted there. Bacºn.
O, true deſcendant of a patriot line,
Vouchſafe this picture of thy ſoul to ſec. Dryden.
He revealed his own will, and their duty, in a more ample
manner than it had been declared to any of my deſcendants
before them. Æterbury's Sermons.
DEscE's DENT, adj. [deſcendens, Latin. It ſeems to be eſta-
bliſhed that the ſubſtantive ſhould derive the termination from
the French, and the adjective from the Latin.]
1. Falling; ſinking; coming down; deſcending.
There is a regreſs of the ſap in plants from above down-
wards; and this dºſendent juice is that which principally nou-
riſhes both fruit and plant. Ray ºn the Creation.
2. Proceeding from another as an original or anceſtor.
More than mortal grace
Speaks thee diſendent of athereal race. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
DF sce's DIBLE. adj. [from deſcend J
1. Such as may be deſcended ; ſuch as may admit of a paſſage
downwards.
2. Tranſmiſſible by inheritance. -
According to the cuſtoms of other countries thoſe hono-
rary fees and infludations were deſcendille to the eldeſt, and
not to all the males. Hale's Common Law of England.
Desc F'Nsios. n.ſ. [diſcºſo, Latin.]
1. The act of falling or ſinking; deſcent.
2. A declenſion; a degradation.
From a god to a bull a heavy diſenſon:
It was Jove's caſe. From a prince to a 'prentice? a low
transformation: that ſhall be mine. Shakeſpeare's 1:enry IV.
3. [In aſtronomy..] Right diſceſſion is the arch of the equator,
which deſcends with the ſign or ſtar below the horizon of a
direct ſphere.
Oblique diſenſion is the arch of the equator, which deſcends
with the ſign below the horizon of an oblique ſphere. Ozanam.
DEscE'Nsion AL. adj. [from deſcenſin.) Relating to deſcent.
DEscE'N T. m. ſ. [deſcenſus, Latin; deſcrite, French J
1. The act of paſſing from a higher place.
Why do fragments, from a mountain rent,
Tend to the earth with ſuch a ſwift deſcent?
2. Progreſs downwards.
Obſerving ſuch gradual and gentle deſcents downwards, in
Blackmore:
thoſe parts of the creation that are beneath men, the rule of
analogy may make it probable, that it is ſo alſo in things
above. Locke.
3. Obliquity; inclination.
- The heads and ſources of rivers flow upon a dſent, or an
inclining plane, without which they could not flow at all.
//o.dward's Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
4. Loweſt place.
From th' extremeſt upward of thy head,
To the deſcent and duſt below thy feet,
A moſt toad-ſpotted traitor. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
5. Invaſion; hoſtile entrance into a kingdom: in alluſion to
the height of ſhips.
At the firſt deſent on ſhore, he was not immured with a
wooden veſſel, but he did countenance the landing in his
long-boat. //otton.
The duke was general himſelf, and made that unfortunate
deſent upon the Iſle of Ree, which was attended with a miſe-
rable retreat, in which the flower of the army was loſt. Claren.
Ariſe, true judges, in your own defence,
Controul thoſe foplings, and declare for ſenſe;
For ſhould the fools prevail, they ſtop not there,
But make their next deſcent upon the fair. Dryden.
6. Tranſmiſſion of any thing by ſucceſſion and inheritance
If the agreement and conſent of men firſt gave a ſceptre
into any one's hand, that alſo muſt direct its ºften; and con-
veyance. - Locłe.
:
7. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 230</div><p class="Text">D E S
D E S
7. The ſtate of proceeding from an original or progenitor.
All of them, even without ſuch a particular claim, ha
great reaſon to glory in their common deſcent from Abraham,
Iſaac and Jacob, to whom the promiſe of the bleſſed ſeed was
ſeverally made. Atterbury's Sermons.
S. Birth ; extraction; proceſs of lineage.
I give my voice on Richard's ſide,
To bar my maſter's heirs in true deſcent /
God knows, I will not do it. Shakespeare Richard III.
Turnus, for high deſcent and graceful mien, -
Was firſt, and favour’d by the Latian queen. Dryden's &amp;n.
9. Offspring; inheritors; thoſe proceeding in the line of gene-
ration.
The care of our deſcent perplexes us moſt,
Which muſt be born to certain woe. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
From him
His whole deſent, who thus ſhall Canaan win. Milt. P. L.
to. A ſingle ſtep in the ſcale of genealogy; a generation.
No man living is a thouſand deſcents removed from Adam
himſelf. - - Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
Then all the ſons of theſe five brethren reign'd
By due ſucceſs, and all their nephews late,
Even thrice eleven deſcents the crown retain'd,
* Till aged Heli by due heritage it gain'd. Fairy Queen, b, ii.
11. A rank in the ſcale or order of being.
How have I then, with whom to hold converſe,
Save with the creatures which I made, and thoſe
To me inferior; infinite deſcents
Beneath what other creatures are to thee. Milton's P. Loft,
To DESCRI'BE. v. a. [deſcribo, Latin.]
1. To mark out anything by the mention of its properties.
I pray thee, overname them; and as thou nam'ſt them,
I will deſcribe them; and according to my deſcription, level at
my affection. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
He that writes well in verſe will often ſend his thoughts in
fearch, through all the treaſure of words that expreſs any one
idea in the ſame language, that ſo he may comport with the
meaſures, or the rhyme of the verſe which he writes, or with
his own moſt beautiful and vivid ſentiments of the thing he
deſcribes. Watts's /mprovement of the Mind.
2. To delineate; to mark out; to trace: as a torch waved
about the head deſcribes a circle.
3. To diſtribute into proper heads or diviſions.
Men paſſed through the land, and deſcribed it by cities into
ſeven parts in a book. %. xviii. 9.
4. To define in a lax manner by the promiſcuous mention of
qualities general and peculiar. See Description.
DEscR1'BER. m. ſ. [from deſcribe.] He that deſcribes.
From a plantation and colony of theirs, an iſland near
Spain was by the Greek deſcribers named Erythra. Brown.
Descri'É R. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A diſcoverer; a detecter.
May think his labour vainly gone,
The glad deſcrier ſhall not miſs
To taſte the nećtar of a kiſs.
Descri'ption. n.ſ. [deſcriptio, Latin.]
1. The act of deſcribing or making out any perſon or thing by
perceptible properties.
2. The ſentence or paſſage in which any thing is deſcribed.
A poet muſt refuſe all tedious and unneceſſary deſcriptions:
a robe which is too heavy, is leſs an ornament than a burthen.
- Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Preface.
Sometimes miſguided by the tuneful throng,
I look for ſtreams immortaliz'd in ſong,
That loſt in ſilence and oblivion lie,
Dumb are their fountains, and their channels dry,
That run for ever by the muſe's ſkill,
And in the ſmooth deſcription murmur ſtill.
3. A lax definition.
This ſort of definition, which is made up of a mere col-
lećtion of the moſt remarkable parts or properties, is called
an imperfe&amp;t definition, or a deſcription ; whereas the definition
is called perfeót when it is compoſed of the eſſential difference,
added to general nature or genus. Watts's Logick.
4. The qualities expreſſed in a deſcription.
I’ll pay fix thouſand, and deface the bond,
Before a friend of this deſcription
Shall loſe a hair. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
To DESCRY'. v. a. [deſirier, French.]
1. To give notice of any thing ſuddenly diſcovered; as, the
ſcout deſcried the enemy, that he gave notice of their approach.
This ſenſe is now obſolete, but gave occaſion to thoſe which
are now in uſe.
2. To ſpy out; to examine at a diſtance. -
And the houſe of Joſeph ſent to deſtry Bethel. judg. i. 23.
Edmund, I think, is gone to deſcry
Th' ſtrength o' th' enemy. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. To detect ; to find out any thing concealed.
Of the king they got a ſight after dinner in a gallery, and
of the queen mother at her own table; in neither place deſ:
cryed, no, not by Cadinet, who had been lately ambaſſador in
England. - J/ott.n.
Vol. I.
Craſhaw.
Addiſon.
4. To diſcover; to perceive by the eye; to ſee anything diſłań:
or abſent. -
Thus dight, into the court he took his way;
Both through the guard, which never him deſcry'd,
And through the watchmen, who him never ſpy'd.
Płubbard’s Tale,
The ſpirit of deep prophecy ſhe hath;
What's paſt and what's to come ſhe can deſtry. Shakespeare H. VI.
That planet would, unto our eyes, deſcrying only that part
whereon the light falls, appear to be horned, as the moon
ſeems. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the I/orld, b. i. c. 7.
And now their way to earth they had deſcry'd,
To Paradiſe firſt tending. 44ilton's Paradiſe Loff, b x.
Although the motion of light be not deſcried, no argument
can be made from thence to prove that light is not a body.
- IDigby on Bodies.
A tow'r ſo high, it ſeem'd to reach the ſky,
Stood on the roof, from whence we could diſºry
All Ilium. - Denham.
Once more at leaſt look back, ſaid I,
Thyſelf in that large glaſs diſºry. Prior.
Descry'. n.ſ. [from the verb.] Diſcovery; thing diſcovered.
How near's the other army
—Near, and on ſpeedy foot, the main deſtry -
Stands on the hourly thought. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To DE'SECRATE. v. a. [diſacro, Lat..] To divert from the
purpoſe to which any thing is conſecrated.
The founders of monaſtries imprecated evil on thoſe who
ſhould deſecrate their donations. Salmon's Survey.
DESECRA'tion. m. ſ. [from deſecrate.] The abolition of con-
ſecration.
DE's ERT. n.ſ. [ deſertum, Latin. J A wilderneſs; ſolitude;
waſte country; uninhabited place. -
Be alive again,
And dare me to the deſert with thy ſword.
Of trembling I inhibit; then proteſt me
The baby of a girl. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He, looking round on every ſide, beheld
A pathleſs deſert, duſk with horrid ſhades. Paradiſº Rºg.
DE's ERT. adj. [deſertus, Latin.]. Wild; waſte; ſolitary; un-
inhabited; uncultivated; untilled.
- I have words
That would be howl'd out in the deſert air,
Where hearing ſhould not catch them. Shakespeare Macbeth.
He found him in a deſert land, and in the waſte howling
wilderneſs. Deutr. xxxii. o.
The promiſes and bargains between two men in a deſert
iſland are binding to them, though they are perfectly in a ſtate
of nature, in reference to one another. Locke-
To DESERT. v. a. [deſerter, French; deſero, Latin.]
1. To forſake; to fall away from; to quit meanly or treache-
rouſly,
I 3. not remember one man, who heartily wiſhed the paſt.
ing of that bill, that ever deſerted them ’till the kingdom was
in a flame. Dryden's &amp;n. Dedicat.
2. To leave; to abandon.
What is it that holds and keeps them in fixed ſtations and
intervals, againſt an inceſſant and inherent tendency to deſert
them Bentley's Sermons.
3. To quit the army, or regiment, in which one is enliſted.
Dese'RT. n.ſ. [properly deſert : the word is originally French.]
The laſt courſe; the fruit or ſweetmeats with which a feaſt is
concluded. See Dessert.
Dese'Rt. m. ſ. [from deſert.]
1. Qualities or condućt conſidered with reſpect to rewards or
puniſhments; degree of merit or demerit.
Being of neceſſity a thing common, it is, through the ma-
nifold perſuaſions, diſpoſitions, and occaſions of men, with
equal deſert both of praiſe and diſpraiſe, ſhunned by ſome, by
others deſired. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 46.
The baſe o' th' mount
Is rank'd with all deſerts, all kind of natures,
That labour on the boſom of this ſphere
To propagate their ſtates. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Uſe every man after his deſert, and who ſhall 'ſcape whip-
ping Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
2. Proportional merit; claim to reward.
More to move you,
Take my deſerts to his, and join them both. Shakeſ Timon.
All deſert imports an equality between the good conferred
and the good deſerved, or made due. South's Sermons.
3. Excellence; right to reward; virtue.
Dese'RTER. m. ſ. [from deſert.]
1. He that has forſaken his cauſe or his poſt.
The members of both houſes, who at firſt withdrew, were
counted deſerters, and outed of their places in parliament.
King Charler.
Streight to their ancient calls, recall'd from air,
The reconcil'd deſerters will repair. Dryden's Virg. Georg.
Hoſts of deſerters, who your honour ſold,
And baſely broke your faith for bribes of gold. Dryd. Æn,
2. He that leaves the army in which he is enliſted.
6 R They
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 231</div><p class="Text">|
D E S
They are the ſame deſºrters, whether they ſtay in our own
camp, or run over to the enemies. Decay of Piety.
A deſerter, who came out of the citadel, ſays the garriſon
is brought to the utmoſt neceſſity. Tatler, Nº. 59.
3. He that forſakes another; an abandoner.
The fair ſex, if they had the deſerter in their power, would
certainly have ſhewn him more mercy than the Bacchanals did
Orpheus. Dryden's ABn. Dedicat.
Thou, falſe guardian of a charge too good,
Thou mean deſerter of thy brother's blood.
Dese'RTIon. m. ſ. [from deſert.]
1. The act of forſaking or abandoning a cauſe or poſt.
Every compliance that we are perſuaded to by one, is a
contradićtion to the commands of the other; and our adhe-
rence to one, will neceſſarily involve us in a deſertion of the
other. Rogers, Serm v.
3. [In theology.] Spiritual deſpondency; a ſenſe of the derelic-
tion of God; an opinion that grace is withdrawn.
Chriſt hears and ſympathizes with the ſpiritual agonics of a
ſoul under deſertiºn, or the preſſures of ſome ſtinging af-
flićtion. South's Sermons.
Dese'Rtless. adj. [from deſert.] Without merit; without
claim to favour or reward.
She ſaid ſhe lov’d ;
Lov'd me deſertieſ, who, with ſhame, confeſt
Another flame had ſeiz'd upon my breaſt. Dryd. Tyr. Love.
To DESERVE. v. a. [deſervir, French.]
1. To be worthy of either good or ill.
Thoſe they honoured, as having power to work or ceaſe, as
men deſerved of them. Hooker, b. i.
Some of us love you well; and ev'n thoſe ſome
Envy your great deſervings, and good name. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
All friends ſhall taſte
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cup of their deſervings. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
What he deſerves of you and me I know. Shakespeare H. VIII.
Yet well, if here would end
The miſery: I deſerv'd it, and would bear
My own deſervings. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x. l. 727.
Courts are the places where beſt manners flouriſh,
Where the deſerving ought to riſe. Otway's Orphan.
A mother cannot give him death; though he
Deſerves it, he deſerves it not from me. Dryden's Ovid.
Since my Orazia's death I have not ſcen
A beauty ſo deſerving to be queen,
He had been a perſon of great deſervings from the repub-
lick, was an admirable ſpeaker, and very popular. Swift.
2. To be worthy of reward.
According to the rule of natural juſtice one man may merit
and deſerve of another. South's Sermons.
DESE'RVEDLY. adv. [from deſerve J Worthily; according to
deſert, whether of good or evil.
For him I was not ſent, nor yet to free
That people vićtor once, now vile and baſe,
Deſervedly made vaſſal. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b. iv.
A man deſervedly cuts himſelf off from the affections of that
eommunity which he endeavours to ſubvert. Addison Freeholder.
Dese'R v ER. m. ſ. [from diſrve.] A man who merits rewards.
It is uſed, I think, only in a good ſenſe.
Their love is never link'd to the deſerver,
*Till his deſerts are paſs'd. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Heavy, with ſome high minds, is an overweight of obliga-
tion; or otherwiſe great deſervers do perchance grow into-
lerable preſumers. //otton.
Emulation will never be wanting amongſt poets, when par-
ticular rewards and prizes are propoſed to the beſt deſervers.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Prºſace.
Desi'ccANts. m. ſ. [from deſiccate.] Applications that dry up
the flow of ſores; driers.
This, in the beginning, may be prevented by deſiccants,
and waſted. JWiſeman's Surgery.
To DESICCATE. v. a. [diſcºw, Latin.] To dry up; to ex-
hale moiſture.
In bodies deſiccated by heat or age, when the native ſpirit
goeth forth, and the moiſture with it, the air with time get-
eth into the pores. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 842.
Where there is moiſture enough, or ſuperfluous, there wine
helpeth to digeſt and deſiccate the moiſture. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Seminal ferments were elevated from the ſea, or ſome deſic-
cated places thereof, by the heat of the ſun. Hale.
DesiccATION. m.ſ.. [from deſiccate.] The act of making dry;
the ſtate of being dried.
If the ſpirits iſſue out of the body, there followeth deſicca-
tion, induration, and conſumption; as in brick, evaporation
of bodies liquid, &amp;c. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 3:9.
DFsiccativá. adj. [from dºſi.cate.] That which has the
power of drying.
To DESI'd E R at E. v. a. ſalºftiero, Lat.] To want; to miſs;
to deſire in abſence. A word ſcarcely uſed.
Eclipſes are of wonderful aſſiſtance toward the ſolution of
this ſo deſirable and ſo much dºſiderated problem. Cheyne.
Pope.
Desi'prose, adj. [dſdioſus, Latin.] Idle; lazy; heavy. Diº.
To DESIGN. v. a. [deſigno, Latin; diffner, French.]
1. To purpoſe; to intend any thing.
2. To form or order with a particular purpoſe: with fºr.
The acts of religious worſhip were purpoſely deſigned fºr
the acknowledgment of a being, whom the moſt excellent
creatures are bound to adore as well as we. Stillingfect.
You are not for obſcurity deſign'd,
But, like the ſun, muſt cheer all human kind. Dryden.
3. To devote intentionally; with to.
One of thoſe places was deſigned by the old man to his
ſon. - Clar end.n.
He was born to the inheritance of a ſplendid fortune; he
was deſigned to the ſtudy of the law. Dryden.
4. To plan; to project; to form in idea.
We are to obſerve whether it be well drawn, or, as more
elegant artizans term it, well deſigned; then, whether it be
well coloured, which be the two general heads. //citor.
Thus while they ſpeed their pace, the prince deſigns
The new elected ſeat, and draws the lines. Dryden's Zn.
5. To mark out.
'Tis not enough to make a man a ſubjećt, to convince him
that there is regal power in the world; but there muſt be
ways of deſigning and knowing the perſon to whom this regal
power of right belongs. Lake.
Desi'GN. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
I. An intention; a purpoſe.
2. A ſcheme; a plan of ačtion.
Is he a prudent man, as to his temporal eſtate, that lays
dº/gns only for a day, without any proſpect to the remaining
part of his life? Tillotſon, Sermon i.
3. A ſcheme formed to the detriment of another.
A ſedate ſettled deſign upon another man's life, put him in
a ſtate of war with him againſt whom he has declared ſuch an
1I]tention. - Locke.
4. The idea which an artiſt endeavours to execute or expreſs.
I doubt not but in the deſigns of ſeveral Greek medals one
may often ſee the hand of an Apelles or Protogenes. Addiſon.
Thy hand ſtrikes out ſome new deſign,
Where life awakes and dawns at every line. Pope's Epſilº.
DESIGNABLE, adj. [deſigno, Latin.] Diſtinguiſhable; capable
to be particularly marked out.
The power of all natural agents is limited : the mover muſt
be confined to obſerve theſe proportions, and cannot paſs over
all theſe infinite deſignable degrees in an inſtant. Digby.
DESIGNATION. m.ſ. [deſignatio, Latin.]
I. The act of pointing or marking out by ſome particular token.
This is a plain deſignation of the duke of Marlborough: one
kind of ſtuff uſed to fatten land is called marle, and every
body knows that borough is a name for a town. Swift.
2. Appointment; direction.
William the Conqueror forbore to uſe that claim in the
beginning, but mixed it with a titulary pretence, grounded
upon the will and deſignation of Edward the Confeſſor. Bacon.
3. Import; intention.
Finite and infinite ſeem to be looked upon by the mind as
the modes of quantity, and to be attributed primarily in their
firſt deſignation only to thoſe things which have parts, and are
capable of increaſe or diminution. Locke.
DESI'GNEDLY. adv. [from deſign.] Purpoſely ; intentionally;
by deſign or purpoſe; not ignorantly; not inadvertently; not
fortuitouſly.
The next thing is ſometimes deſignedly to put them in pain;
but care muſt be taken that this be done when the child is in
good humour. Locke.
Uſes made things; that is to ſay, ſome things were made
deſignedy, and on purpoſe, for ſuch an uſe as they ſerve
to. Ray on the Creation.
DESI'GN ER. n.ſ.. [from deſign.]
1. A plotter; a contriver; one that lays ſchemes.
It has therefore always been both the rule and pračice for
ſuch deſigners to ſuborn the publick intereſt, to countenance
and cover their private. Decay of Piety.
2. One that forms the idea of any thing in painting or ſculpture.
There is a great affinity between deſigning and poetry; for
the Latin poets, and the deſigners of the Roman medals, lived
very near one another, and were bred up to the ſame reliſh for
wit and fancy. Addiſon.
DESI'GNING. participial adj. [from deſign.] Inſidious; treache-
rous; deceitful; fraudulently artful.
'Twould ſhew me poor, indebted, and compell’d,
Deſigning, mercenary; and I know
You would not wiſh to think I could be bought. Southern.
Desi'GNI, Ess. adj. [from deſign.] Without intention; with-
out deſign; unknowing; inadvertent.
Desi'GN LEssly. adv. [from deſignkſ...] Without intention;
ignorantly; inadvertently.
In this great concert of his whole creation, the deſignleſſ,
conſpiring voices are as differing as the conditions of the re-
ſpective ſingers. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
Desi'GNMENT. n.ſ.. [from dyſgn.]
2. 1. An
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 232</div><p class="Text">D E S
*
D E S
1. A ſcheme of hoſtility.
News, lords, our wars are done:
The deſperate tempeſt hath ſo bang'd the Turks,
That their deſignment halts. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
2. A plot; a malicious intention.
She received advice both of the king's deſperate eſtate, and
of the grke's deſignments againſt her. Hayward.
3. The icº, or ſketch of a work.
The frenes which repreſent cities and countries are not
really ſuch, but only painted on boards and canvaſs; but ſhall
that excuſe the ill painture or deſignment of them Dryden.
When abſent, yet we conquer'd in his right;
For though that ſome mean artiſt's ſkill were ſhown
In mingling colours, or in placing light,
Yet ſtill the fair deſignment was his own. Dryden.
Desi'RARLE. adj. [from deſire.]
1. Pleaſing; delightful.
She then let drop ſome expreſſions about an agate ſnuff-box;
I immediately took the hint, and bought one, being unwilling
to omit any thing that might make me deſirable in her eyes.
Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 97.
Our own ſex, our kindred, our houſes, and our very names,
ſeem to have ſomething good and deſirable in them. JWatts.
2. That which is to be wiſhed with earneſtneſs.
Adjudged caſes, collected by men of great ſagacity, will
improve his mind, toward acquiring this deſirable amplitude
and extent of thought J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
• He cannot but confeſs, that it is a thing the moſt deſirable
tº man, and moſt agreeable to the goodneſs of God, that he
ſhould ſend forth his light and his truth by a ſpecial revela-
tion of his will. Rogers, Sermon iii.
DESI'RE. m. ſ. [diſr, Fr. deſo, Ital. dºſiderium, Lat..] Wiſh;
eagerneſs to obtain or enjoy.
Drink provokes, and unprovokes; it provokes the deſire,
but it takes away the performance. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Deſire's the vaſt extent of human mind;
It mounts above, and leaves poor hope behind. Dryden.
Deſire is the uneaſineſs a man finds in himſelf upon the ab-
ſence of any thing, whoſe preſent enjoyment carries the idea
of delight with it. Locke.
It is in a man's power-only to obſerve what the ideas are
that take their turns in his underſtanding, or elſe to direct the
ſort, and call in ſuch as he hath a dºſire or uſe of. Locke.
To Desi'R.E. v. a. [deſirer, French; deſiderare, Latin.]
1. To wiſh ; to long for ; to covet.
Thou ſhalt not deſire the ſilver or gold. Deutr. vii. 25.
2. To expreſs wiſhes; to appear to long.
Jove beheld it with a deſiring look. Dryden.
3. To aſk; to intreat.
- Sir, I intreat you home with me to dinner.
—l humbly do deſire your grace of pardon ;
I muſt away this night. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
But ſince you take ſuch int’reſt in our woe,
And Troy's diſaſt’rous end deſire to know,
I will reſtrain my tears, and briefly tell
What in our laſt fatal night befell. Dryden's Żn. h. ii.
DESI'RER. m. ſ. [from deſire.] One that is eager of any thing;
a wiſher.
I will counterfeit the bewitchment of ſome popular man,
and give it bountifully to the deſirers. Shakeſp. Criolanus.
DESI'Rous, adj. [from dºſire.] Full of deſire; eager; longing
after ; wiſhing for.
The ſame piety which maketh them that are in authority
deſirous to pleaſe and reſemble God by juſtice, inflameth every
way men of action with zeal to do good. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 1.
Be not dºſºrous of his dainties; for they are deceitful
Incat. - Prov. xxiii. 3.
Men are drowſy and dºſrous to ſleep before the fit of an
ague, and yawn and ſtretch. Eacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 296.
- - Adam the while, -
Waiting dºſrºws her return, had wove -
Of choiceſt flow’rs a garland. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. ix.
Conjugal affection,
Prevailing over ſcar and timorous doubt,
Hath led me on, dºſírcus to behold
Once more thy face. Miltºn's Agoniſłes.
DESI'Rous N Ess. n.ſ.. [from dºſraus. J Fulneſs of deſire;
eagerneſs. - - Dić?.
Desi'Rously, adv. [from deſirous.] Eagerly; with deſire;
with ardcnt wiſhes, Pić7.
. To DESIST. v. n. [dſ,”, Latin.] To ceaſe from anything;
to ſtop.
Dºſſ?, thou art diſcern'd,
And toil'ſ in vain; nor me in vain moleſt. A ſilt. Pa. Loſ’.
There are many who will not quit a project, though they
find it perficious or abſurd; but will readily dºſſi from it,
when they are convinced it is impračticable. Addison Freeholder.
Desi's TAN CE. m. ſ. [from dºſſi.] The act of deſiſting; ceſ-
ſation.
Men uſually give freclieſt where they have not given before;
and make it both the motive and excuſe of their dºſſiance from
giving any more, that they have given already. Bºyle.
Des'rive. adj. [dſtºs, Latin.] Ending; concluded.
ºptive and deſitive propoſitions are of this ſort: the fogs
vaniſh as the ſun riſes, but the fogs have not yet begun to va-
niſh; therefore the fun is not yet riſen. Watts's Logick, p. iii.
DEsk. ºf [diſh, a table, Dutch..] An inclining table for the
uſe of writers or readers, made commonly with a box or re-
poſitory under it. -
Tell her in the deſ,
That's cover'd o'er with Turkiſh tapeſtry,
There is a purſe of ducats. Shakeſp. Comedy of Er, ours,
He is drawn leaning on a dºſº, with his bible before him."
J/alton's Angler.
I have alſo been obliged to leave unfiniſhed in my deſ the
heads of two eſſays. Pope.
Not the deſk with filver nails,
Nor bureau of expence,
Nor ſtandiſh well japann'd, avails
To writing of good ſenſe. Swift.
DE'solate. adj. [diſolatus, Latin J
1. Without inhabitants; uninhabited.
Let us ſeek ſome deſolate ſhade, and there
Weep our fad boſoms empty. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
This hero appears at firſt in a deſºlate iſland, fitting upon
the ſide of the ſea. Broome on Epic Poetry.
2. Deprived of inhabitants; laid waſte.
This city ſhall be deſolate, without an inhabitant. jer. xxvi.
3. Solitary; without ſociety.
To DESOLATE. v. a. [deſolo, Latin.] To deprive of inha-
bitants; to lay waſte.
The iſland of Atlantis was not ſwallowed by an earthquake,
but was diſolated by a particular deluge; for earthquakes are
ſeldom in thoſe parts: but, on the other ſide, they have ſuch
pouring rivers, as the rivers of Aſia, Africa, and Europe are
but brooks to them. Bacon, Eſſay 59.
Thick around
Thunders the ſport of thoſe, who with the gun
And dog, impatient bounding at the ſhot,
Worſe than the ſeaſon, deſolate the fields. Thomſºn's I/inter.
DE'solately. adv. [from diſolate.] In a deſolate manner.
DE’soLATION. n.ſ.. [from diſolate.] Leſtruction of inhabi-
tants; ravage. w
What with your praiſes of the country, what with your
diſcourſe of the lamentable deſºlation thereof made by thoſe
Scots, you have filled me with a great compaſſion of their
calamities. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Without her follows to myſelf and thee,
Herſelf, the land, and many a Chriſtian ſoul,
Death, deſolation, ruin, and decay. Shakeſp. Richard III.
To complete
The ſcene of deſºlation ſtretch'd around,
The grim guards ſtand. Thorn, on’s Summer, l, 1075.
2. Gloomineſs; ſadneſs; melancholy.
Tbat dwelling place is unnatural to mankind; and then the
terribleneſs of the continual motion, the deſolation of the far
being from comfort, the eye and the ear having ugly images
before it, doth ſtill vex the mind, even when it is beſt armed
againſt it. Sidney, b. ii.
Then your hoſe ſhall be ungartered, and everything about
you demonſtrate a careleſs deſolation. Shakespeare As you like it.
My deſºlation does begin to make
A better life. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
3. A place waſted and forſaken.
How is Babylon become a diſolation among the nations !
jer. I. 23.
DESPATR. n.ſ. [diſſºir, French.]
1. Hopeleſneſs; deſpondence; loſs of hope.
You had either never attempted this change, ſet on with
hope, or never diſcovered it, ſtopt with deſpair. Sidney, b. ii.
We are troubled on every ſide, yet not diſtreſſed; we are
perplexed, but not in deſpair. † 2 Cor. iv. 8.
Weary'd, forſaken, and purſu'd at laſt,
All ſafety in deſpair of ſafety plac'd,
Courage he thence reſumes, reſolv'd to bear
All their aſſaults, ſince ’tis in vair to fear. Denham.
Equal their flame, unequal was their care; , -
One lov’d with hope, one languiſh'd with deſpair. Pºdºº.
Deſpair is the thought of the unattainableneſs of any good,
which works differently in mens minds, ſometimes producing
uneaſineſs or pain, ſometimes reſt and indolºney. Locke.
2. That which cauſés deſpair; that of which there is no hope.
Strangely viſited people, -
All ſwol'n and ulc’rous, pitiful to the eye
The mere deſpair of ſurgery, he cures;
Hanging a golden ſtamp about their necks, 3. I
Put on with holy prayers. Shakespeareear's Macleth.
3. [In theology.] Loſs of confidence in the mercy of God.
Are not all or moſt evangelical virtues and graces in danger
of extremes? As there is, God knows, too often a defect on
the one ſide, ſo there may be an exceſs on the other: may
not hope in God, or godly ſorrow, be perverted into preſump-
tion or deſpair f Sprat's Sermons.
To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 233</div><p class="Text">D E S
D E S
To DESPA'iR. v. n. [differ, Latin.] To be without hope;
to deſpond. .
Though thou drcweſt a ſword at thy friend, yet deſpair not;
for there may be a turning. Eccluſ. xxii. 21.
We commend the wit of the Chineſe, who deſpair of
making of gold, but are mad upon making of filver. Pacon.
Never deſpair of God's bleſfings here, or of his reward
hereafter; but go on as you have begun. Wake's Preparatiºn.
Desp A 1R ER. m. ſ. [from deſpair.] One without hope.
He cheers the fearful, and commends the bold,
And makes deſpairers hope for good ſucceſs. Dryden.
DEs, A'iRFul. adj. [deſpair and full Hopeleſs. Obſolete.
That ſweet but four deſpairful care - Sidney, l. i.
DESPA'I RING 1. v. adv. [from deſpairing.] In a manner be-
tokening hopeleſneſs or deſpondency.
He ſpeaks ſeverely and deſpairingly of our ſociety. Boyle.
To Di SPA/TCH. v. a. [depºſcher, French.] -
1. To ſend away haſtily.
Dočtor Theodore Coleby, a ſober and intelligent man, I
deſpatched immediately to Utrecht, to bring me ſome of the
moxa, and learn the exact method of uſing it, from the man
that ſold it. Temple.
The good AEneas, whoſe paternal care
Julus’ abſence could no longer bear,
Deſpatch’d Achates to the ſhips in haſte,
To give a glad relation of the paſt. Dryden's Pig. Æn.
2. To ſend out of the world; to put to death.
Edmund, I think, is gone,
In pity of his miſery, to deſpatch
His nighted life. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
And the company ſhall ſtone them with ſtones, and deſpatch
them with their ſwords. Ezek. xxiii. 47.
In combating, but two of you will fall;
And we reſolve we will diſpatch you all. Dryden.
Peſpatch me quickly, I may death forgive;
I ſhall grow tender elſe, and wiſh to live. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
3. To perform a buſineſs quickly; as, I deſpatched my affairs,
and ran hither.
Therefore commanded he his chariot man to drive without
ceaſing, and to diſpatch the journºy, the judgment of God
now following him. 2 A fac. ix.4.
No ſooner is one action deſpatched, which, by ſuch a deter-
mination as the will, we are ſet upon, but another uneaſineſs
is ready to ſet us on work. Locke.
4. To conclude an affair with another.
- What, are the brothers parted 2
—They have dºſ atch'd with Pompey; he is gone. Shakeſp.
DFsp A'Tch. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] . -
1. Haſty execution ; ſpecdy performance.
Affected deſpatch is one of the moſt dangerous things to
buſineſs that can be. Bacon.
You'd ſee, could you her inward motions watch,
Feigning delay, ſhe wiſhes for deſpatch;
Then to a woman's meaning would you look,
Then read her backward. Granville.
The deſpatch of a good office is very often as beneficial to
the ſolicitor as the good office itſelf. Addiſon's Spectator.
2. Conduct; management. Obſolete.
You ſhall put
This night's great buſineſs into my deſpatch,
Which ſhall, to all our nights and days to come,
Give ſolely ſovereign ſway and maſterdom. Shakespeare Macbeth.
3. Fºxpreſs; haſty meſſenger or meſſage; as, deſpatches were
ſent away.
DESPA'tci FUL. adj [from deſpatch..] Bent on haſte; intent
on ſpeedy execution of buſineſs.
So ſaying, with diſpatchful looks, in haſte
She turns, on hoſpitable thoughts intent. Milt. Parad. Loft.
Let one diſpatchful bid ſome ſwain to lead
A well fed bullock from the graſſy mead. Pºpe's Odyſſey, b. iii.
DESPERAT E. adj. [diſperatus, Latin.]
1. Without hope.
Since his exile ſhe hath deſpis'd me moſt ;
Forſworn my company, and rail'd at me,
That I am deſperate of obtaining her. Shakeſpeare.
2. Without care of ſafety; raſh; precipitant; fearleſs of danger.
Can you think, my lords,
That any Engliſhman dare give me counſel,
Or be a known friend 'gainſt his highneſs' pleaſure,
Though he be grown ſo deſperate to be honeſt,
And live a ſubject. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
He who goes on without any care or thought of reforming,
ſuch an one we vulgarly call a diſperate perſon, and that ſure
is a moſt damning ſin. Hammond's Prači. Catech.
3. Irretrievable; unſurmountable; irrecoverable.
Theſe debts may be well called deſperate ones; for a mad
man owes them. Shakeſpeare's 7 imon.
In a part of Aſia the ſick, when their caſe comes to be
thought deterate, are carried out and laid on the earth, before
they are dead, and left there. Locke.
I am a man of differate fortunes, that is, a man whoſe
friends are dead; for I never aimed at any other fortune than
in friends. Pope tº Swift.
4. Mad ; hot-brained; furious
Were it not the part of a dºſerate phyſician to wiſh his
friend dead, rather than to apply the beſt endeavours of his
ſkill for his recovery Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
5. It is ſometimes uſed in a ſenſe nearly ludicrous, and only .
marks any bad quality predominating in a high degree.
Concluding all mere deſp'rate ſots and fools,
That durſt depart from Ariſtotle's rules. Pope's Eſ. on Crit.
DE's PERATELY. adv. [from deſ: crate.]
1. Furiouſly; madly; without attention to ſafety or danger.
Your eldeſt daughters have foredone themſelves,
And dºſpºrately are dead. s Shakespeare King Lear.
There might be ſomewhat in it, that he would not have
done, or deſired undone, when he broke forth as differately
as before he had done uncivilly. Brown's Vulgar Erroirs, b. i.
2. In a great degree ; violently: this ſenſe is ludicrous.
She fell deſtrately in love with him, and took a voyage into
Sicily in purſuit of him, he having withdrawn thither on pur-
poſe to avoid her. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 223.
DE's PER • TEN Ess. n ſ [from dºſperate J Madneſs; fury,
precipitance.
The going on not only in terrours and amazement of con-
ſcience, but alſo boldly, hopingly, confidently, in wilful habits
of fin, is called a diſperateneſs alſo ; and the more bold thus,
the more deſperate. Hammond's Prači. Catech.
DESPERATION. m. ſ. [from deſtrate.] Hopeleſseſs; deſpair;
deſpondency."
Deſperation
Is all the policy, ſtrength, and defence,
That Rome can make againſt them. Shakeſ Coriolanus.
As long as we are guilty of any paſt fin, 2nd have no pro-
miſe of remiſſion, whatever our future care be, this deſpera-
tion of ſucceſs chills all our induſtry, and we fin on, becauſe
we have ſinned. Hammond on Fundamentals.
DESPICABLE. adj. [deſpicabilis, Latin.] Contemptible; vile;
mean; for did; worthleſs. It is applied equally to perſons or
things. -
Our caſe were miſerable, if that wherewith we moſt endea-
vour to pleaſe God, were in his fight ſo vile and deſpicable as
mens diſdainful ſpeech would make it. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 23.
Their heads as low
Bow’d down in battle, ſunk before the ſpears
Of deſpicable foes. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i. 437.
All th’ earth he gave thee to poſſeſs and rule,
No deſpicable gift Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. xi. 1 340.
All the quiet that could be expected from ſuch a reign, muſt
be the reſult of abſolute power on the one hand, and a deſpi-
cable ſlavery on the other. Addiſon.
When men of rank and figure paſs away their lives in cri-
minal purſuits and praćtices, they render themſelves more vile
and deſpicable than any innocent man can be, whatever low
ſtation his fortune and birth have placed him in. Addiſon.
DEs P1’c AB LFN Ess. n.ſ. [from deſpicable.] Meanneſs; vile-
neſs; worthleſneſs. -
We confider the great diſproportion between the infinity of
the reward and the difficallenſ of our ſervice. Decay ºf Piety.
De’spicaBLY. adv. [from depicalle.] Meanly; ſordidly;
vilely.
'Here wanton Naples crowns the happy ſhore,
Nor vainly rich, nor deſpicably poor;
The town in ſoft ſolemnities delights,
And gentle poets to her arms invites. Addiſon on Italy.
DE SPI's A BLE. adj. [from deſpiſe.] Contemptible; deſpicable;
regarded with contempt. A word ſcarcely uſed but in low
converſation. -
I am extremely obliged to you for taking notice of a poor
old diſtreſſed courtier, commonly the moſt deſpiſable thing in
the world. Arbuthnot to Pope.
To DESPI'SE. v. a. [deſiſer, old French, Skinner; deſpicio,
Latin.]
1. To ſcorn; to contemn; to ſlight; to diſreſpešt.
For, lo, I will make thee ſmall among the Heathen, and
deſpiſed among men. jer. xlix. 15.
My ſons their old unhappy fire deſpiſe,
Spoil'd of his kingdom, and depriv'd of eyes. Pope's Statius.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems once to ſignify abhor, as from the
Italian deſpettare. -
Let not your ears deſpiſe my tengue for ever,
Which ſhall poſſeſs them with the heavieſt ſound
That ever yet they heard. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Despi's ER. n. ſ. [from deſpiſe.] Contemner; ſcorner.
Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy diſtreſs 2
Or elſe a rude deſpiſer of good manners,
That in civility thou ſeem'ſt ſo empty Shakespeare As you like it.
Wiſdom is commonly, at long running, juſtified even of
her deſpiſers. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 7.
Thus the atheiſts, libertines, and deſpiſers of religion, uſually
paſs under the name of free-thinkers. Swift.
DESPI'TE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 234</div><p class="Text">D E S
D E S
DESPITE. n.ſ.. [ſpijt, Dutch; dipit, French.”
1. Malice; anger; malignity; maliciouſneſs; ſpleen; hatred.
Thou wretch! deſpite o'erwhelm thee! Shakespeare Coriolanus.
With men theſe conſiderations are uſually the cauſes of
deſpite, diſdain, or averſion from others; but with God they
paſs for reaſons of our greater tenderneſs towards others. Sprat.
2. Defiance. - -
The life, thou gav'ſt me firſt, was loſt and done;
*Till with thy warlike ſword, deſpite of fate,
To my determin'd time thou gav'ſ new date. Shakespeare H. VI.
My life thou ſhalt command, but not my ſhame;
The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
Deſpite of death, that lives upon my grave,
To dark diſhonour's uſe thou ſhalt not have. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Know I will ſerve the fair in thy deſpite. Dryd. Fab.
I have not quitted yet a vićtor's right;
I'll make you happy in your own deſpite. Dryd. Aurengzebe,
Say, would the tender creature, in deſpite
Of heat by day, and chilling dews by night,
Its life maintain Blackmore's Creation.
Thou, with rebel inſolence, did'ſt dare
To own and to protećt that hoary ruffian;
And in deſpite, ev’n of thy father's juſtice,
To ſtir the factious rabble up to arms. Row's Amb. S. Moth.
3. Aćt of malice; ačt of oppoſition.
His puniſhment, eternal miſery,
It would be all his ſolace and revenge,
As a deſpite done againſt the moſt High,
Thee once to gain companion of his woe. Milt. Par. Loft.
To Despi'TE. v. a. [from the noun..] To vex; to affront;
to give uneaſineſs to.
Saturn, with his wife Rhea, fled by night, ſetting the
town on fire, to deſpite Bacchus. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Despi're FUL. adj. [deſpite and ful..] Malicious; full of ſpleen;
full of hate; malignant; miſchievous: uſed both of perſons
and things.
His taken labours bid him me forgive;
I, his deſpiteful Juno, ſent him forth
From courtly friends with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dog the heels of worth. Shakespeare
Preſerve us from the hands of our deſpiteful and deadly
enemies. King Charles.
Meanwhile the heinous and deſpiteful act
Of Satan, done in Paradiſe, was known
In heav'n. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x. l. 1.
Despi'refulLY. adv. [from deſpiteful.] aliciouſly; ma-
lignantly. '
It requires us to pray for them that deſpitefully uſe us and
perſecute us. Matthew v. 44.
Despitefulness. n.ſ.. [from deſpiteful..] Malice ; hate;
malignity.
Let us examine him with deſpitefulneſ; and torture, that we,
know his meekneſs, and prove his patience. JWiſd. ii. 19.
Despiteous. adj. [from deſpite.] Malicious; furious. A
word now out of uſe.
The knight of the red-croſs, when him he ſpy'd
Spurring ſo hot with rage deſpiteous,
"Gan fairly couch his ſpear.
To DESPOIL. v. a. [deſpolio, Latin.]
1. To rob ; to deprive. With of
Deſpoil'd of warlike arms, and knowen ſhield. Spenſer.
You are nobly born,
Deſpoiled of your honour in your life. Shakespeare Henry VI.
He waits with helliſh rancour imminent,
To intercept thy way, or ſend thee back
Deſpoil'd of innocence, of faith, of bliſs. Milt. Par. Loft.
He, pale as death, deſpoil"d of his array, -
Into the queen's apartment takes his way.
Ev’n now thy aid,
Eugene, with regiments unequal preſt,
Awaits: this day of all his honours gain'd
Deſpoils him, if thy ſuccour opportune
Defends not the ſad hour. Phillips.
HD Espolia"tion. n.ſ.. [from deſpolio, Latin.] The ačt of de-
fpoiling or ſtripping.
To DESPO'ND. v. a. [deſpondeo, Latin.]
1. To deſpair; to loſe hope; to become hopeleſs or deſperate.
It is every man's duty to labour in his calling, and not to
deſpond for any miſcarriages or diſappointments that were not
in his own power to prevent. L’Eſtrange, Fab. I to:
There is no ſurer remedy for ſuperſtitious and deſpond-
ing weakneſs, than firſt to govern ourſelves by the beſt im-
provement of that reaſon which providence has given us for
a guide; and then, when we have done our own parts, to
commit all chearfully, for the reſt, to the good pleaſure of
heaven with truſt and reſignation. L’Eſtrange.
Beſides, to change their paſture 'tis in vain, -
Or truſt to phyſick: phyſick is their bane:
The learned leaches in deſpair depart,
And ſhake their heads, deſponding of their art. Dryd.
V Others depreſs their own minds, deſpond at the firſt diffi-
ol. I,
Fairy Queen, b. i. c. 2.
Dryden.
Virgil.
culty; and conclude that making any progreſs in knowledge,
farther than ſerves their ordinary buſineſs, is above their capa-
cities. - - - - - Locke.
2. [In theology.] To loſe hope of the divine mercy.
He conſiders what is the natural tendency of ſuch a virtue;
or ſuch a vice: he is well apprized that the repreſentation of
ſome of theſe things may convince the underſtanding, ſome
may terrify the conſcience, ſome may allure the ſlothful, and
ſome encourage the deſºonding mind. Matti's Improvement.
Despo'NDENcy, n. ſ. [from deſpondent.] Deſpair; hopeleſneſs;
deſperation. -
Despo'NDENt. adj. [deſpondens, Latin.] Deſpairing; hopeleſs;
without hope -
Congregated thruſhes, linnets, ſit
On the dead tree, a dull deſpondent flock. Thomſºn's Autumn.
It is well known, both from ancient and modern expe-
rience, that the very boldeſt atheiſts, out of their debauches
and company, when they chance to be ſurpriſed with ſolitude
or ſickneſs, are the moſt ſuſpicious, timorous, and deſpondent
wretches in the world. - Bentley's Sermons.
To DESPONSATE. v. a. [diffonſ, Latin.] To betroth; to
affiance; to unite by reciprocal promiſes of marriage.
DesponsA'tion, n, ſ. [from deſponſate. J The betrothing
perſons to each other.
DE'S. OT. n.ſ.. [?igrº; J An abſolute prince; one that go-
verns with unlimited authority. This word is not in uſe, ex-
cept as applied to ſome Dacian prince ; as, the deſpot of
Servia.
Despo"TICAL.
Despo' }*. [from diſpot.] Abſolute in power; unli-
ESPO'TICK.
mited in authority; arbitrary; unaccountable.
God's univerſal law
Gave to the man deſpotick power
Over his female in due awe,
Nor from that right to part an hour, * . .
Smile ſhe or lowre. Milion's Agoniſter,
In all its direétions of the inferior faculties, reaſon con-
veyed its ſuggeſtions with clearneſs, and enjoined them with
power: it had the paſſions in perfect ſubjection; though its
command over them was but perſuaſive and political, yet if
had the force of coactive and deſpatical. South's Sermons.
. . We may ſee in a neighbouring government the ill con-
ſequences of having a dºſ click prince, in a ſtate that is moſt
of it compoſed of rocks and mountains; for notwithſtanding
there is vaſt extent of lands, and many of them better than
thoſe of the Swiſs and Griſons, the common people among
the latter are in a much better ſituation. Addiſon on Italy.
Patriots were forced to give way to the madneſs of the
people, who, ſtirred up with the harangues of their orators,
were now wholly bent upon ſingle and deſpotic ſlavery, Swift.
Despo"tical Ness. n.ſ.. [from deſpotical.] Abſolute authority.
DE'spotism. n. ſ. [dºſpotiſmº, French, from deſpit.J Abſolute
ower.
To DESPUMATE. v. m. [deſpumo, Latin.] To throw off
parts in foam; to froth; to work. -
Despu Mation. n.ſ. [from deſ unate.] The ačt of throwing
off excrementitious parts in ſcum or foam.
Desqu AMA't Ion. n ſ. [from ſuama, Latin.] The ačº of
ſcaling foul bones.
Desse'Rt. n.ſ. [deſºrte, French..] The laſt courſe at an en-
tertainment; the fruit or ſweetmeats ſet on the table after the
Incat.
To give thee all thy due, thou haſt the art
To make a ſupper with a fine deſert. Dryden's Perſus.
At your deſert bright pewter comes too late,
When your firſt courſe was well ſerv’d up in plate. King.
To DESTINATE. v. a. [dyiino, Latin.] To deſign for any
particular end or purpoſe.
Birds are deſlinated to fly among the branches of trees and
buſhes. Ray on the Creation.
Destin A'tion. n.ſ [from deſtinate.] The purpoſe for which
any thing is appointed; the ultimate deſign.
The paſſages through which ſpirits are conveyed to the
members, being almoſt infinite, and each of them drawn
through ſo many meanders, wherein other ſpirits are a jour-
neying, it is wonderful that they ſhould perform their regular
deſtinations without loſing their way. Glanv. Scepſ.
There is a great variety of apprehenſions and fancies of
men, in the #. and application of things to ſeveral
ends and uſes. Hale's Orign of Mankind.
To De'st INE. v. a. [deſtino, Latin.]
1. To doom; to appoint unalterably to any ſtate or condition.
- Wherefore ceaſe we then
Say they who counſel war: we are decrecd,
Reſerv'd, and deſtin'd to eternal woe: - -
Whatever doing, what can we ſuffer more? Milt. Pa. Loft,
All altars flame; before each altar lies,
Drench'd in his gore, the deſlin'd ſacrifice. Dryden's AFneis.
2. To appoint to any uſe or purpoſe.
Too thin blood ſtrays into the immediately ſubordinate
veſſels, which are dyſłined to carry humours ſecreted from the
blood, Arbuthnot on Alimentſ.
6 S 3. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 235</div><p class="Text">D E S
F} E S
º To Despair. v. n. [differ, Latin.] To be without hope;
to deſpond. . . .
Though thou drcweſt a ſword at thy friend, yet deſpair not;
for there may be a turning. Eccluſ. xxii. 21.
We commend the wit of the Chineſe, who deſpair of
making of gold, but are mad upon making of ſilver. Pacon.
Never deſpair of God's bleſfings here, or of his reward
hereafter; but go on as you have begun. Wake's Preparatiºn.
Despa IRER. m. J. [from deſpair.] One without hope.
He cheers the fearful, and commends the bold,
And makes deſpairers hope for good ſucceſs. Dryden.
Despa'iRFul. ca. [deſpair and full Hopeleſs. Obſolete.
That ſweet but four deſpairful care Sidney, l. i.
- DESPA'ſ RING I. Y. adv, [from deſpairing.] In a manner be-
tokening hopeleſneſs or deſpondency.
He ſpeaks ſeverely and deſpairingly of our ſociety.
Toº SPA"TCH. v. a. [d pºſther, French.]
1. To ſend away haſtily.
Doctor Theodore Coleby, a ſober and intelligent man, I
deſpatched immediately to Utrecht, to bring me ſome of the
moxa, and learn the exact method of uſing it, from the man
that ſold it. Temple.
The good AFneas, whoſe paternal care
- Jülus’ abſence could no longer bear,
Deſpatch'd Achates to the ſhips in haſte,
To give a glad relation of the paſt. Dryden's Wing. Æn.
2. To ſend out of the world; to put to death.
Edmund, I think, is gone,
In pity of his miſery, to deſpatch
His nighted life. Shakeſpeare's King Lear,
And the company ſhall ſtone them with ſtones, and deſpatch
them with their ſwords. Ezek. xxiii. 47.
In combating, but two of you will fall;
And we reſolve we will d ſpatch you all.
Deſpatch me quickly, I may death forgive ;
I ſhall grow tender elſe, and wiſh to live. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
3. To perform a buſineſs quickly; as, I deſpatched my affairs,
and ran hither.
Therefore commanded he his chariot man to drive without
ceaſing, and to deſpatch the journy, the judgment of God
now following him. 2 A.Mac. ix.4.
No ſooner is one action deſpatched, which, by ſuch a deter-
mination as the will, we are ſet upon, but another uneaſineſs
is ready to ſet us on work. Locke.
4. To conclude an affair with another.
- What, are the brothers parted 2
—They have dºſ atch'd with Pompey; he is gone. Shakeſp.
Dr.sp A"rch. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] . - -
1. Haſty execution ; ſpecdy performance.
Affected deſpatch is one of the moſt dangerous things to
buſineſs that can be. Bacon.
You'd ſee, could you her inward motions watch,
Feigning delay, ſhe wiſhes for diſpatch;
Then to a woman's meaning would you look,
Then read her backward. Granville.
The deſpatch of a good office is very often as beneficial to
the ſolicitor as the good office itſelf. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. Conduct; management. Obſolete.
You ſhall put
This night's great buſineſs into my deſpatch,
Which ſhall, to all our nights and days to come,
Give ſolely ſovereign ſway and maſterdom. Shakespeare Macbeth.
3. Expreſs; haſty meſſenger or meſſage; as, deſpatches were
ſent away.
Despa"rciful... adj [from dºſhatch..] Bent on haſte; intent
on ſpeedy execution of buſineſs.
So ſaying, with diſpatchful looks, in haſte
She turns, on hoſpitable thoughts intent. Milt. Parad. Loft.
Let one diſpatchful bid ſome ſwain to lead
A well fed bullock from the graſſy mead. Pºpe's Odyſſey, b. iii.
DESPERAT E. adj. [differatus, Latin.]
1. Without hope.
Since his exile ſhe hath deſpis'd me moſt ;
Forſworn my company, and rail'd at me,
That I am diſperate of obtaining her. Shakeſpeare.
2. Without care of ſafety; raſh ; precipitant; fearleſs of danger.
Can you think, my lords,
That any Engliſhman dare give me counſel,
Or be a known friend 'gainſt his highneſs' pleaſure,
Though he be grown ſo diſperate to be honeſt,
And live a ſubjećt. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
He who goes on without any care or thought of reforming,
ſuch an one we vulgarly call a diſperate perſon, and that ſure
is a moſt damning fin. Hammond's Prači. Catech.
3. Irretrievable; unſurmountable; irrecoverable.
Theſe debts may be well called diſperate ones; for a mad
man owes them. Shakeſpeare's 7 imon.
In a part of Aſia the ſick, when their caſe comes to be
thought deterate, are carried out and laid on the earth, before
they are dead, and left there. Locke.
I am a man of dºſerate fortunes, that is, a man whoſe
Boyle.
Dryden.
friends are dead; for I never aimed at any other fortune than
in friends. Pope to Swift.
4. Mad; hot-brained; furious
Were it not the part of a dºſerate phyſician to wiſh his
friend dead, rather than to apply the beſt endeavours of his
ſkill for his recovery Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
5. It is ſometimes uſed in a ſenſe nearly iudicrous, and only .
marks any bad quality predominating in a high degree.
Concluding all mere dºſpºrate ſots and fools,
That durſt depart from Ariſtotle's rules. Pope's Eſ, on Crit.
DE's PERATELY. adv. [from dºſ crate.]
1. Furiouſly; madly ; without attention to ſafety or danger.
Your cºdeſ' daughters have foredone themſelves,
And dºſpºrately are dead. º Shakespeare King Lear.
There might be ſomewhat in it, that he would not have
done, or deſired undone, when he broke forth as deſperately
as before he had done uncivilly. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
2. In a great degree; violently: this ſenſe is ludicrous,
She fell dºff, rately in love with him, and took a voyage into
Sicily in purſuit of him, he having withdrawn thither on pur-
poſe to avoid her. Addison's Stºjator, Nº. 223.
DE's PERATENEss. m. ſ. [from diſperate J Madneſs; fury;
precipitance.
The going on not only in terrours and amazement of con-
ſcience, but alſo boldly, hopingly, confidently, in wilful habits
of fin, is called a diſperateneſs alſo ; and the more bold thus,
the more deſperate. Hammond's Prađ. Catech.
DESPERATION. m. ſ. [from deſtrate.] Hopeleſseſs; deſpair;
deſpondency.
Deſperation
Is all the policy, ſtrength, and defence,
That Rome can make againſt them. , Shakeſ Coriolanut.
As long as we are guilty of any paſt fin, and have no pro-
miſe of remiſſion, whatever our future care be, this deſpera-
tion of ſucceſs chills all our induſtry, and we fin on, becauſe
we have ſinned. Hammond on Fundamentals.
DESPICABLE. adj. [deſpitabilis, Latin.] Contemptible; vile;
mean ; for did; worthleſs. It is applied equally to perſons or
things. -
Our caſe were miſerable, if that wherewith we moſt endea-
vour to pleaſe God, were in his fight ſo vile and deſpicable as
mens diſdainful ſpeech would make it. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 23.
Their heads as low
Bow’d down in battle, ſunk before the ſpears
Of deſpicable foes. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i. 437.
All th’ earth he gave thee to poſſeſs and rule,
No deſpicable giftſ Milton's Paradiſe Loff, b. xi. 1.34c.
All the quict that could be expected from ſuch a reign, muſt
be the reſult of abſolute power on the one hand, and a deſpi-
cable ſlavery on the other. Addiſon.
When men of rank and figure paſs away their lives in cri-
minal purſuits and pračtices, they render themſelves more vile
and deſpicable than any innocent man can be, whatever low
ſtation his fortune and birth have placed him in. Addiſon.
Despi'cAB LFN Ess. n.ſ.. [from deſpicable.] Meanneſs; vilc-
neſs; worthleſneſs. -
We confider the great diſproportion between the infinity of
the reward and the diſpicalleneſs of our ſervice. Decay of Piety.
DespicaBLY, adv. [from dºpicalle.] Meanly; ſordidly;
vilely.
'Here wanton Naples crowns the happy ſhore,
Nor vainly rich, nor deſpically poor;
The town in ſoft ſolemnities delights,
And gentle poets to her arms invites. Addiſon on Italy.
Despi's A BLE, adj. [from diſpºſe.] Contemptible; deſpicable;
regarded with contempt. A word ſcarcely uſed but in low
converſation. -
I am extremely obliged to you for taking notice of a poor
old diſtreſſed courtier, commonly the moſt deſpiſable thing in
the world. Arbuthnot to Pope.
To DESPI'SE. v. a. [dºſ iſºr, old French, Skinner; difficia,
Latin.]
1. To ſcorn; to contemn; to ſlight; to diſreſpešt.
For, lo, I will make thee ſmall among the Heathen, and
deſpiſed among men. jer. xlix. 15.
My ſons their old unhappy fire deſpiſ,
Spoil'd of his kingdom, and depriv'd of eyes. Popº's Statius.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems once to ſignify abhor, as from the
Italian deſpettare. -
Let not your ears deſpiſe my tengue for ever,
Which ſhall poſſeſs them with the heavieſt ſound
That ever yet they heard. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
Despi's ER. m. ſ. [from deſpiſe.] Contemner; ſcorner.
Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy diſtreſs?
Or elſe a rude deſpiſer of good manners,
That in civility thou ſeem'ſt ſo empty Shah. A you lik, i.
Wiſdom is commonly, at long running, juſtified even of
her deſpiſers. . . Government ºf the Tºngue, / 7.
Thus the atheiſts, libertines, and deſpiſers of religion, uſually
Paſs under the name of free-thinkers. Swift.
DESP1"re.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 236</div><p class="Text">D E S
T--
DESPITE. n.ſ.. [ſpijt, Dutch; dipit, French.
1. Malice; anger; malignity; maliciouſneſs; ſpleen; hatred.
Thou wretch! deſpite o'erwhelm thee! Shakespeare Coriolanus.
With men theſe conſiderations are uſually the cauſes of
deſpite, diſdain, or averſion from others; but with God they
paſs for reaſons of our greater tenderneſs towards others. Sprat.
2. Defiance. - -
The life, thou gav'ſt me firſt, was loſt and done;
*Till with thy warlike ſword, deſpite of fate,
To my determin'd time thou gav'ſ new date. Shakespeare H. VI.
My life thou ſhalt command, but not my ſhame;
The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
Deſpite of death, that lives upon my grave,
To dark diſhonour's uſe thou ſhalt not have. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Know I will ſerve the fair in thy deſpite. Dryd. Fab.
I have not quitted yet a vićtor's right;
Pll make you happy in your own deſpite. Dryd. Aurengzebe,
Say, would the tender creature, in deſpite
Of heat by day, and chilling dews by night,
Its life maintain Blackmore's Creation.
Thou, with rebel inſolence, did'ſt dare
To own and to protećt that hoary ruffian;
And in deſpite, ev’n of thy father's juſtice,
To ſtir the factious rabble up to arms. Row's Amb. S. Moth.
3. Aćt of malice; ačt of oppoſition.
His puniſhment, eternal miſery,
It would be all his ſolace and revenge,
As a deſpite done againſt the moſt High,
Thee once to gain companion of his woe. Milt. Par. Loſt.
To Despi'TE. v. a. [from the noun..] To vex; to affront;
to give uneaſineſs to.
Saturn, with his wife Rhea, fled by night, ſetting the
town on fire, to deſpite Bacchus. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Despi'TEFUL. adj...[deſpite and ful..] Malicious; full of ſpleen;
full of hate; malignant; miſchievous: uſed both of perſons
and things.
His taken labours bid him me forgive;
I, his deſpiteful Juno, ſent him forth
From courtly friends with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dog the heels of worth. Shakespeare
Preſerve us from the hands of our deſpiteful and deadly
enemies. King Charles.
Meanwhile the heinous and deſpiteful ačt
Of Satan, done in Paradiſe, was known
In heav'n. Milton’s º Loft, b. x. l. 1.
Despi’t efully. adv. [from deſpiteful..] Maliciouſly; ma-
lignantly. '
It requires us to pray for them that deſpitefully uſe us and
perſecute us. Matthew v. 44.
Despitefulness. n.ſ.. [from deſpiteful..] Malice; hate;
malignity.
Let us examine him with deſpitefulnſ; and torture, that we,
know his meekneſs, and prove his patience. Wiſd. ii. 19.
Despiteous. adj. [from deſpite.] Malicious; furious. A
word now out of uſe.
The knight of the red-croſs, when him he ſpy'd
Spurring ſo hot with rage deſpiteous,
'Gan fairly couch his ſpear.
To DESPOIL. v. a. [diſpolio, Latin.]
1. To rob; to deprive. With of
Fairy Queen, b. i. e. 2.
Deſpoil'd of warlike arms, and knowen ſhield. Spenſer.
You are nobly born,
Deſpoiled of your honour in your life. Shakespeare Henry VI.
He waits with helliſh rancour imminent,
To intercept thy way, or ſend thee back
Deſpoil'd of innocence, of faith, of bliſs. Milt. Par. Loft.
He, pale as death, deſpoil"d of his array,
Into the queen's apartment takes his way.
Ev’n now thy aid,
Eugene, with regiments unequal preſt,
Awaits: this day of all his honours gain'd
Deſpoils him, if thy ſuccour opportune
Defends not the ſad hour. Phillips.
HD Espolia'TIon. n.ſ.. [from deſpolio, Latin.] The aët of de-
fpoiling or ſtripping.
To DESPO'ND. v. a. [deſpondeo, Latin.]
1. To deſpair; to loſe hope; to become hopeleſs or deſperate.
It is every man's duty to labour in his calling, and not to
deſpond for any miſcarriages or diſappointments that were not
in his own power to prevent. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 1 ſo.
There is no ſurer remedy for ſuperſtitious and deſpond-
ing weakneſs, than firſt to govern ourſelves by the beſt im-
provement of that reaſon which providence has given us for
a guide; and then, when we have done our own parts, to
commit all chearfully, for the reſt, to the good pleaſure of
heaven with truſt and reſignation. L’Eſtrange.
Beſides, to change their paſture 'tis in vain, -
Or truſt to phyſick: phyſick is their bane:
The learned leaches in deſpair depart,
And ſhake their heads, deſponding of their art. Dryd. Virgil. -
Others depreſs their own minds, deſpond at the firſt diffi-
Vol. I.
Dryden. -
suity; and conclude that making any progreſs in knowledge,
farther than ſerves their ordinary .. is above their capa-
cities. - - - - Locke.
2. [In theology.] To loſe hope of the divine mercy.
He confiders what is the natural tendency of ſuch a virtue;
or ſuch a vice: he is well apprized that the repreſentation of
ſome of theſe things may convince the underſtanding, ſome
may terrify the conſcience, ſome may allure the ſlothful, and
ſome encourage the deſºonding mind. Matti's Improvement.
Pº * / [from deſpondent.] Deſpair; hopeleſneſs;
Pº. adj. [deſpondens, Latin.] Deſpairing; hopeleſs;
Congregated thruſhes, linnets, fit
9n the dead tree, a dull deſpondent flock. Thomſon's Autumn.
It is well known,
- both from ancient and modern expe-
rience, that the very boldeſt atheiſts, out of their debauches
and company, when they chance to be ſurpriſed with ſolitude
or ſickneſs, are the moſt ſuſpicious, timorous, and deſpondent
wretches in the world. Bentley's Sermons.
To DESPONSATE. * * [dºſſonſ, Latin.] To betroth; to
affiance; to unite by reciprocal promiſes of marriage.
DesponsA'tion. n.J. [from deſponſate. J The betrothing
perſons to each other.
DE'S OT. n.ſ.. [?izzº, J An abſolute prince; one that go-
verns with unlimited authority. This word is not in uſe, ex-
. applied to ſome Dacian prince; as, the deſpot of
ervla.
Despo"TIcAl. }*. [from deſpot.] Abſolute in power; unli-
Despo"Tick. mited in authority; arbitrary; unaccountable:
God's univerſal law
Gave to the man deſpotick power
Over his female in due awe,
Nor from that right to part an hour, - - -
Smile ſhe or lowre. Milton's Agoniſes,
In all its directions of the inferior faculties, reaſon con-
veyed its ſuggeſtions with clearneſs, and enjoined them with
power: it had the paſſions in perfect ſubjection; though its
command over them was but perſuaſive and political, yet it
had the force of coactive and diſpºtical. South's Sermont.
We may ſee in a neighbouring government the ill con-
ſequences of having a dºſ click prince, in a ſtate that is moſt
of it compoſed of rocks and mountains; for notwithſtanding
there is vaſt extent of lands, and many of them better than
thoſe of the Swiſs and Griſons, the common people among
the latter are in a much better ſituation. Addiſon on Italy.
Patriots were forced to give way to the madneſs of the
people, who, ſtirred up with the harangues of their orators,
were now wholly bent upon fingle and deſpotick ſlavery, Swift.
Despo"tical Ness. n.ſ.. [from deſpotical.] Abſolute authority.
DE'spotism. n. ſ. [deſpotiſmº, French, from deſpit.J Abſolute
ower.
P -
To DESPUMATE. v. m. [deſpumo, Latin.] To throw off
parts in foam; to froth; to work. -
Despuviation. n.ſ. [from deſumate.] The aët of throwing
off excrementitious parts in ſcum or foam.
Desqu AMA'Tion. n.ſ. (from ſuama, Latin.] The aâ of
ſcaling foul bones.
Desse'RT. n.ſ. [deſºrte, French.] The laſt courſe at an en-
tertainment; the fruit or ſweetmeats ſet on the table after the
meat.
To give thee all thy due, thou haſt the art
To make a ſupper with a fine deſert. Dryden's Perſuf,
At your deſert bright pewter comes too late,
When your firſt courſe was well ſerv'd up in plate. King.
To DESTINATE. v. a. [diſlino, Latin.] To deſign for any
particular end or purpoſe. -
Birds are dºlinated to fly among the branches of trees and
buſhes Ray on the Creation.
Destin A'tion. n.ſ [from dyſłinate.] The purpoſe for which
any thing is appointed; the ultimate deſign.
The paſſages through which ſpirits are conveyed to the
members, being almoſt infinite, and each of them drawn
through ſo many meanders, wherein other ſpirits are a jour-
neying, it is wonderful that they ſhould perform their regular
deſtinations without loſing their way. - Glanv Scepſ.
There is a great variety of apprehenſions, and fancies of
men, in the #. and application of things tº ſeveral
ends and uſes. Hale's Orign of Mankind.
To De'st INE. v. a. [deſtino, Latin.] - - -
1. To doom; to appoint unalterably to any ſtate or condition.
Wherefore ceaſe we then f
Say they who counſel war: . decrecd,
eſerv’d, and de/?in’d to cternal woe: - - -
§. ºº:: can we ſuffer more? Milt. Pa. Lºft,
All altars flame; before each altar lies,
Drench'd in his gore, the deſlin'd ſacrifice. Dryden's ABneit.
2. To appoint to any uſe or purpoſe.
Too' thin blood ſtrays into the immediately ſubordinate
veſſels, which are diffined to carry humours ſecreted from the
blood, Arbuthnot on Alimentſ.
6 S - 3. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 237</div><p class="Text">ID E S
D E S
3. To devote; to doom to puniſhment or miſery.
May heav'n around this deſiin'd head
The choiceſt of its curſes ſhed. Prior.
4. To fix unalterably.
The infernal judge's dreadful pow'r,
From the dark urn ſhall throw thy deſlin’d hour. Prior.
Dz'stiNY. m. ſ. [deſtinée, French.J
1. The power that ſpins the life, and determines the fate of
living beings.
Thou art neither like thy fire or dam;
But like a foul miſ-ſhapen #:
Mark'd by the deſtinies to be avoided.
2, Fate; invincible neceſſity.
He ſaid, dear daughter, rightly may Irue
The fall of famous children born of me;
But who can turn the ſtream of dyſłiny,
Or break the chain of ſtrong neceſſity,
Which faſt is ty'd to Jove's eternal ſeat? Fairy Queen, b. i.
How can hearts, not free, be try’d whether they ſerve
Willing or no, who will but what they muſt
By deſtiny, and can no other chuſe? Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
... Had thy great diſliny but given thee ſkill
To know, as well as pow'r to act her will. Denham.
- Chance, or forceful deſ'iny,
Which forms in cauſes firſt whate'er ſhall be. Drydn's Fab.
3. Doom; condition in future time. -
At the pit of Acheron
Meet me i' th' morning: thither he
Will come to know his dºiny.
DESTITUTE. adj. [dºſtitutus, Latin.]
1. Forſaken; abandoned.
To forſake the true God of heaven, is to fall into all ſuch
evils upon the face of the earth, as men, either deſtitute of
grace divine, may commit, or unprotected from above, may
endure. Hooker, b. v. ſ i.
He will regard the prayer of the deſtitute, and not deſpiſe
their prayer. Pſal. cii. 17.
2. In want of.
Living turfs upon his body lay;
This done, ſecurely take the deſtin'd way
To find the regions deſtitute of day. Dryden's AEn. h. vi.
Nothing can be a greater inſtance of the love that mankind
has for liberty, than ſuch a ſavage mountain covered with
people, and the Campania of Rome, which lies in the ſame
country, deſtitute of inhabitants. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
Destitution. n.ſ.. [from deſtitute.] Want; the ſtate in
which ſomething is wanted.
That deſtitution in food and cloathing is ſuch an impedi-
ment, as, ’till it be removed, ſuffereth not the mind of man to
admit any other care. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 1 o.
They which want furtherance unto knowledge, are not left
in ſo great deſtitution, that juſtly any man ſhould think the or-
Shakespeare Henry VI.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
dinary means of eternal life taken from them. Hooker, b. v.
The order of paying the debts of contract or reſtitution is
ſet down by the civil laws of a kingdom: in deſtitution or want
of ſuch rules, we are to obſerve the neceſſity of the creditor,
the time of the delay, and the ſpecial obligations of friend-
ſhip. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
To DESTRO'Y. v. a. [dºſiruo, Latin; dº/fruire, French.]
1. To overturn a city; to raze a building; to ruin.
The lord will deſtroy this city. Gen. xix. 14.
2. To lay waſte; to make deſolate.
Solyman ſent a great part of his army out of the main
unto the iſland, which burnt and deſtroyed the country vil-
lages. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
3. To kill.
A people, great and many, and tall as the Anakims; but
the Lord deſtroyed them before them, and they ſucceeded them,
and dwelt in their ſtead. Deutr. ii. 21.
'Tis ſafer to be that which we deſtroy,
Than by deſtruction dwell in doubtful joy. Shakespeare Macbeth.
The wiſe providence hath placed a certain antipathy be-
tween ſome animals and many inſects, whereby they delight
in their deſtruction, though they uſe them not as food; as
the peacock deſtroys ſnakes and adders; the weaſel, mice and
rats; ſpiders, flies; and ſome ſorts of flies deſtroy ſpiders. Hale.
4. To put an end to ; to bring to nought.
Do we not ſee that ſlothful, intemperate and inconti-
nent perſons deſtroy their bodies with diſeaſes, their reputa-
tions with diſgrace, and their faculties with want? . Bentley.
There will be as many ſovereigns as fathers: the mother
too hath her title, which deſtroys the ſovereignty of one ſu-
preme monarch. Locke.
Destro'yer. n.ſ. [from dº/froy.] The perſon that deſtroys
or lays waſte; a murderer.
In all the tranſlations it is ſaid, that Aſſur both founded it
and ruined it: it may be underſtood, that Aſlur the founder
was the ſon of Shem, and Aſſur the deſtroyer was an Aſſyrian.
Raleigh's Hi/ory of the World.
For glory done
Of triumph, to be ſtyl’d great conquerors,
Patrons of mankind, gods, and ſons of gods!
Dº?royers rightlier call’d, and ſlayers of men. Milt, P. Lºft.
Yet, guiltleſs too, this bright dºſtroyer lives;
At random wounds, nor knows the wound the gives. Pºpe.
DESTRUCTIBLE. adj. [ſrom dºſiruo, Latin.] Liable to
deſtruction.
Destructibi'lity. m. ſ. [from deſiručiible.] Liableneſs to
deſtruction.
Destru'crion, n.ſ...[dºručia, Latin.]
1. The act of deſtroying; waite.
2. Murder; maſſacre.
'Tis ſafer to be that which we deſtroy,
Than by deſtructiºn dwell in doubtful joy. Shakespeare Macbeth.
If that your moody diſcontented ſouls -
Do through the clouds behold this preſent hour,
Even for revenge mock my deſtructiºn. Shaky. Richard III.
When that which we immortal thought,
We ſaw ſo near deſtruction brought,
We felt what you did then endure,
And tremble yet, as not ſecure. Waler.-
3. The ſtate of being deſtroyed; ruin.
4. The cauſe of deſtruction; a deſtroyer; a depopulator: as a
conſuming plague.
The diſtriciºn that waſteth at noon-day. Pſ. xci. 6.
5. [In theology.) Eternal death. *
Broad is the way that leadeth to dººrººn. Matth, vii. 13.
DE structive. ad. [dyiručºvić, ow Latin.]
1. That which deſtroys; waſ eful; cauſing ruin and devaſta-
tion; that which brings to deſtruction. -
In ports and roads remote, -
Dºſirudºve fires among whole flects we ſend. Dryden.
One may think, by the name duration, that the continua-
tion of exiſtence, with a kind of reliſtance to any dyiraºive
force, is the continuation of ſolidity. Locke.
2. With of.
He will put an end to ſo abſurd a pračice, which makes
our moſt refined diverſions diſtructive ºf all politeneſs. Addison
Both are defects cqually dyiručive ºf true religion. Rogers.
3. With to, -
In a firm building
g, even the cavities ought not to be filled
with rubbiſh which is of a periſhable kind, dº/iručive to the
ſtrength. Dryden's 42n. Dedicat.
Exceſs of cold, as well as heat, pains us; becauſe it is
equally diſručive to that temper which is neceſſary to the
preſervation of life. Lake.
DESTRU'ctively. adv. [from dºſiručive..] Ruinouſly; miſ-
chievouſly; with power to deſtroy. -
What remains to him that ponders this epidemick folly,
but to breathe out Moſes's wiſh? O that men were not ſo de-
fºrućtively fooliſh. Decay of Piety.
Dest RU'ctive N Ess. m. ſ. [from dyſłručive.] The quality of
deſtroying or ruining.
The vice of profeſſors exceeds the deſiručiveneſs of the
moſt hoſtile aſſaults, as inteſtine treachery is more ruinous
than foreign violence. Decay of Piety.
Destru/ctor. n.ſ.. [from deſtroy.] Deſtroyer; conſumer.
Helmont wittily calls the fire the deſiručior and the artifi-
cial death of things. Boyle.
Desu DA'tion. n ſ. [deſiidatio, Latin.] A profuſe and inor-
dinate ſweating, from what cauſe ſoever.
DESu'etude. n.ſ. [d ſuetudo, Latin.] Ceſſation to be ac-
cuſtomed; diſcontinuance of practice or habit.
By the irruption of numerous armies of barbarous people,
thoſe countries were quickly fallen off, with barbariſm and de-
/uetude, from their former civility and knowledge. Hale.
We ſee in all things how defuctude does contračt and nar-
row our faculties, ſo that we can apprehend only thoſe things
wherein we are converſant. Government of the Tongue.
DESU'ltoRY. adj. [deſultorius, Lat.] Roving from thing
DESULTO'Rious. } to thing; unſettled; immethodical; un-
conſtant.
'Tis not for a dºſidtory thought to attone for a lewd courſe
of life, nor for any thing but the ſuperinducing of a virtuous
habit upon a vitious one, to qualify an effectual converſion.
L'Eſtrange.
Let but the leaſt trifle croſs his way, and his deſulterious
fancy preſently takes the ſcent, leaves the unfiniſhed and half-
mangled notion, and ſkips away in purſuit of the new
game. Norris.
Take my dºſiultory thoughts in their native order, as they
riſe in my mind, without being reduced to rules, and mar-
ſhalled according to art. . Felton on the Clafficks.
To DESU'ME. v. a. [deſumo, Latin.] To take from anything;
to borrow.
This pebble doth ſuppoſe, as pre-exiſtent to it, the more
ſimple matter out of which it is deſumed, the heat and influence
of the ſun, and the due preparation of the matter. Hak.
They have left us relations ſuitable to thoſe of Ælian and
Pliny, whence they deſumed their narrations. Brown’s Wul. Err.
Laws, if convenient and uſeful, are never the worſe,
though they be deſumed and taken from the laws of other
countries. Piaſe's Law of England.
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 238</div><p class="Text">D E T
To DETA/CH. v. a. [detacher, French.] -
1. To ſeparate; to diſengage; to part from ſomething. . .
The heat takes along with it a ſort of vegetative and ter-
reſtrial matter, which it detaches from the uppermoſt ſtratum.
J/oodward’s Natural Hiſtory, p. iii.
The ſeveral parts of it are detached one from the other, and
yet join again one cannot tell how. Pope.
2. To ſend out part of a greater body of men on an expedition.
If ten men are in war with forty, and the latter detach only
an equal number to the engagement, what benefit do they
receive from their ſuperiority : Addison on the State of the J/ar.
DETA'ch MEN r. n.ſ.. [from detach..] A body of troops ſent
out from the main army.
The Czar diſpatched inſtructions to ſend out detachments of
his cavalry, to prevent the king of Sweden's joining his
army. 7atler, Nº. 55.
Reſides materials, which are brute and blind,
Did not this work require a knowing mind
Who for the taſk ſhould fit detachments chuſe
From all the atoms. Blackmore's Creation.
To DETAIL. v. a. [detailler, French.] To relate particu-
larly ; to particulariſe; to diſplay minutely and diſtinčily.
They will perceive the ground of the miſtakes of theſe
philoſophers, and be able to anſwer their arguments, with-
out my being obliged to detail them. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
DETA'IL. n.ſ. [detail, French..] A minute and particular ac-
COunt.
I chuſe, rather than trouble the reader with a detail here, to
defer them to their proper place. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
I was unable to treat this part of my ſubject more in detail,
without becoming dry and tedious. Pope.
To DETA'IN. v. a. [detineo, Latin.]
1. To keep that which belongs to another.
Detain not the wages of the hireling; for every degree of
detention of it, beyond the time, , is injuſtice and uncha-
ritableneſs. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
2. To withold; to keep back.
Theſe doings ſting him
So venomouſly, that burning ſhame detains him
From his Cordelia. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
He has deſcribed the paſſion of Calypſo, and the indecent
advances ſhe made to detain him from his country. Broom.
3. To reſtrain from departure. -
Let us detain thee until we ſhall have made ready a kid.
judg. xiii. 15.
Had Orpheus ſung it in the nether ſphere,
So much the hymn had pleas'd the tyrant's ear,
The wife had been detain'd to keep her huſband there. Dry.
4. To hold in cuſtody. -
Deta'INDER. m. ſ. [from detain..] The name of a writ for
holding one in cuſtody.
Det A'INER. n.ſ.. [from detain.] He that holds back any one's
right; he that detains anything.
By proportion to theſe rules, we may judge of the obliga-
tion that lies upon all ſorts of injurious perſons; the ſacrile-
gious, the detainers of tithes, and cheaters of mens inheri-
tances. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
To DETECT. v. a. [detetius, Latin.] To diſcover; to find
out any crime or artifice.
There's no true lover in the foreſt, elſe fighing every minute
and groaning every hour, would detect the lazy foot of time
as well as a clock. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Though ſhould I hold my peace, yet thou
Would'ſt eaſily detect what I conceal. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
DETE'ct ER. m. ſ. [from deteå.] A diſcoverer; one that finds
out what another deſires to hide.
Oh heavens ! that this treaſon were not; or not I the
dete?er. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Hypocriſy has a ſecret hatred of its deteffer; that which
will bring it to a teſt which it cannot paſs. Decay of Piety.
Dete'ction. n.ſ.. [from detect.]
1. Diſcovery of guilt or fraud, or any other fault.
Should I come to her with any detection in my hand, I could
drive her then from the ward of her purity. Shakeſpeare.
That is a ſign of the true evangelical zeal, and note for the
detection of its contrary: it ſhould abound more in the mild
and good-natured affection, than in the vehement and wrath-
ful paſſions. Sprat's Sermons.
Detection of the incoherence of looſe diſcourſes was wholly
owing to the ſyllogiſtical form. Locke.
2. Diſcovery of any thing hidden.
Not only the ſea, but rivers and rains alſo, are inſtrumental
to the detection of amber, and other foſſils, by waſhing away
the earth and dirt that before covered and concealed them.
Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
DETE'Ntion. m. ſ. [from detain.]
1. The aët of keeping what belongs to another.
How goes the world, that I am thus encountred
With clam’rous claims of debt, of broken bonds,
And the detention of long ſince due debts,
Againſt my honour? Shakeſpeare', Timºr.
2. Confinement; reſtraint.
*
3
... This worketh by detention of the ſpirits, and conſtipation of
the tangible parts. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 341.
To DET'ER. v. a. [deterreo, Latin.] To diſcourage from any
thing; to fright from anything. . -
I never yet the tragick ſtrain aſſay’d, … . .
Deterr'd by thy inimitable maid. * Waller:
Many and potent enemies tempt and deter us from our duty,
yet our caſe is not hard, ſo long as we have a greater ſtrength
on our ſide. - - Tilletſon, Serm. e.
Beauty or unbecomingneſs are of more force to draw or
deter imitation, than any diſcourſes which can be made to
them. • , Locke.
The ladies may not be deterred from correſponding with me
by this method. Addiſon's Guardian; N°. I 14.
My own face deters me from my glaſs; --- - -
And Kneller only ſhews what Celia was. Prior.
DETE'RMENT. m. ſ. [from deter.] Cauſe of diſcouragement;
that by which one is deterred.
This will not be thought a diſcouragement unto ſpirits;
which endeavour to advantage nature by art; nor will the ill
ſucceſs of ſome be made a ſufficient determent unto others.
Brown's Vulgar irrours, b. vi., c. 8.
Theſe are not all the determents that oppoſed my obeying
ou. -- v, -6.
T. DETERGE. v. a. ſistergo, Latin J. To cleanſe a fore;
to {. any part from feculence or obſtructiºns.
onfider the part and habit of body, and add or diminiſh
your ſimples as you deſign to deterge or incarn. J//eman.
Sea ſalt preſerves bode, through which it paſſeth, frºm
corruption, and it detergeth the veſſels, and kee s the flººds
from putrefaction. Arbuthnot on … int...i.
Dete'RG ENT. adj. [from deterge J. That which cleanſes
The food ought to be nouriſhing and deterg, ut. Arb throt.
Det E RoRA'tion. n.ſ. [from deterior, I ain..] The act of
making any thing worſe; the ſtate of growing worſe.
DETE'RMINABLE. adj. [from determine j That which may be
certainly decided. - -
Whether all plants have ſeeds were more eaſily determinalle,
if we could conclude concerning harts-tongue, ferne and
ſome others. Brown's Pulgar Err urs, b. ii. c. 7.
About this matter, which ſeems ſo eaſily det, rulina, le by
ſenſe, accurate and ſober men widely diſ gree. oyle.
To DJ.TERMINATE. v.a. [determiner, French..] To linit;
to fix; to determine; to terminate.
. The fly-ſlow hours ſhall not d. terminate * .
The dateleſs limit of thy dear exile. Sha'ſ Richard II.
DETE'RMINATE. adj [determinatus, Latin.] " . . .
I. Limited ; determined.
Demonſtrations in numbers, if they are Lot more evident
and exact than in extenſion, yet they are more ge.eral in their
uſe, and determinate in their application. Lo Åe.
To make all the planets move about the ſun in circular
orbs, there muſt be given to each, by a determinate impulſe,
thoſe preſent particular degrees of velocity which they now
have, in proportion to their diſtances from the ſun, and to the
quantity of the ſolar matter. Bently’s Sermons.
2. Eſtabliſhed; ſettled by rule; poſitive. :
Scriptures are read before the time of divine ſervice, and,
without either choice or ſtint, appointed by any determ rate
order. - 1. ooker, b. v. ſ. 19.
3. Deciſive; concluſive.. . .
I' th' progreſs of this buſineſs,
E’re a determinate reſolution, he,
I mean the biſhop, did require a reſpite. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
4. Fixed; reſolute. -
Like men diſuſed in a long peace, more d terminate to do,
than ſkilful how to do. Sidney.
5. Reſolved -
My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy. Shakespeare.
DETE'RMINATFLY. adv. [from determinate.]
1. Reſolutely; with fixed reſolve.
The queen obeyed the king's commandment, full of aging
agonies, and determinately bent, that ſhe would ſeek a loving
means to win Zelmane. Sidney.
Think thus with yourſelves, that you have not the making
of things true or falſe; but that the truth and exiſtence of
things is already fixed and ſettled, and that the principles of .
religion are already either determinately true or falſe, before you
think of them. Tillºtſon, Serm. I.
Detek MiNA'tion. n.ſ.. [from determinate }
1. Abſolute direction to a certain end.
When we voluntarily waſte much of our lives, that re-
miſſneſs can by no means conſiſt with a conſtant determiration
of will or deſire to the greateſt apparent good. Locłe.
2. The reſult of deliberation; concluſion formed; reſolution
taken.
They have acquainted me with their determination, which
is indeed to go home, and to trouble you with no more ſuit.
Shakeſpeare's Merchant ºf P, i.e.
The proper acts of the intellcét are intelle&amp;ion, delibera-
tion, and determination or deciſion. Hale's Origin ºf M.nkind.
It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 239</div><p class="Text">D E T
D E. T.
º
It is much diſputed by divines, concerning the power of
man's will to good and evil in the ſtate of innocence; and,
upon very nice and dangerous precipices, ſtand their determi-
nations on either ſide. South's Sermons.
Conſult thy judgment, affections and inclinations, and
make thy determination upon every particular ; and be always
as ſuſpicious of thyſelf as poſſible. Calamy's Sermons.
3. Judicial deciſion. -
He confined the knowledge of governing to juſtice and
lenity, and to the ſpeedy determination of civil and criminal
cauſes. . Gulliver's Travels.
Dete'RMINATIve. adj. [from determinate.]
I. That which uncontrolably directs to a certain end.
That individual ačtion which is juſtly puniſhed as finful in
us, cannot proceed from the ſpecial influence and determinative
power of a juſt cauſe. Bramh, againſ? Hobbs.
2. That which makes a limitation.
If the term added to make up the complex ſubjećt does not .
neceſſarily or conſtantly belong to it, then it is determinative,
and limits the ſubjećt to a particular part of its extenſion; as,
every pious man i be happy. l/atti's Logick.
DETERMINA'toR. n. ſ. [from determinate J One who deter-
nints.
Hereunto they have recourſe as unto the oracles of life,
unto the great determinator of virginity, conceptions, fertility,
and the inſcrutable infirmities of the whole body. Brown.
To DETERMINE. v. a. [determiner, Fr. determino, Latin.]
1. To fix; to ſettle.
It is concluded he ſhall be protećtor.
—It is determin'd, not concluded yet;
But ſo it muſt be, if the king miſcarry. Shakespeare Richard III.
More particularly to determine the proper ſeaſon for gram-
mar, I do not ſee how it can be made a ſtudy, but as an intro-
dućtion to rhetorick. Locke.
2. To conclude; to fix ultimately.
Probability, in the nature of it, ſuppoſes that a thing may,
or may not be ſo, for any thing that yet appears, or is cer-
tainly determined on the other ſide. South's Sermons.
ºft. ſubject was ſtill greater than either of the former :
it does not determine the fate of ſingle perſons or nations,
but of a whole ſpecies. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 267.
Deſtrućtion hangs on every word we ſpeak,
On every thought, 'till the concluding ſtroke
Determiner all, and cloſes our deſign. Addiſon's Cato.
3. To bound; to confine.
The knowledge of men hitherto hath been determined by
the view or fight; ſo that whatſoever is inviſible, either in re-
ſpect of the fineneſs of the body itſelf, or the ſmallneſs of the
parts, or of the ſubtilty of the motion, is little enquired.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 98.
No ſooner have they climbed that hill, which thus deter-
mines their view at a diſtance, but a new proſpect is opened.
Atterbury's Sermons.
4. To adjuſt; to limit.
The principium individuationis is exiſtence itſelf, which
determines a being of any ſort to a particular time and place,
incommunicable to two beings of the ſame kind. Locke.
He that has ſettled in his mind determined ideas, with names
affixed to them, will be able to diſcern their differences one
from another, which is really diſtinguiſhing. Locke.
5. To direct to any certain point.
6. To influence the choice.
You have the captives,
Who were the oppoſites of this day's ſtrife:
We do require them of you, ſo to uſe them
As we ſhall find their merits and our ſafety
May equally determine. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
A man may ſuſpend the act of his choice from being deter-
mined for or againſt the thing propoſed, 'till he has examined
it. Mocke.
As ſoon as the ſtudious man's hunger and thirſt makes him
uneaſy, he, whoſe will was never determined to any purſuit of
ood cheer, is, by the uneaſineſs of hunger and thirſt, pre-
#., determined to eating and drinking. Locke.
7. To reſolve.
Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to ſlay
David. I Ša. xx, 33.
3. To decide.
I do not aſk whether bodies ſo exiſt, that the motion of
one cannot be without the motion of another: to determine
this either way, is to beg the queſtion for or againſt a
Vacuum. Locke.
9. To put an end to ; to deſtroy.
Now where is he, that will not ſtay ſo long
*Till ſickneſs hath determin'd me? Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
To DETERMIN E. v. n. -
1. To conclude; to form a final concluſion.
Eve! now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will ſoon determine, or impoſe
New laws to be obſerv’d. Milton's Paradiſe I off, b. xi.
It is indifferent to the matter in hand which way the learned
ſhall determine of it. ALocke.
2. To end ; to come to an end.
They were apprehended, and after convićtion the danger
determined by their deaths. Hayward.
All pleaſure ſpringing from a gratified paſſion, as moſt of
the pleaſure of ſin does, muſt needs determine with that
paſſion. South's Sermons.
3. To come to a deciſion.
She ſoon ſhall know of us,
How honourably and how kindly we
Determine for her. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
4. To end conſequentially.
Revolutions of ſtate, many times, make way for new in-
ſtitutions and forms; and often determine in either ſetting up
ſome tyranny at home, or bringing in ſome conqueſt from
abroad. Temple.
5. To reſolve concerning anything.
Now, noble peers, the cauſe why we are met
Is to determine of the coronation. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Deter RA'tion. n.ſ. [de and terra, Latin; deterrer, F rench.]
Diſcovery of anything by removal of the earth that hides it;
the aët of unburying.
This concerns the raiſing of new mountains, deterrations
or the devolution of earth down upon the valleys, from the
hills and higher grounds. PWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
DETE'Rsion. n.ſ.. [from detergo, Latin.] The act of cleanſing
a ſore.
I endeavoured deterſon; but the matter could not be diſ-
charged. Jºſeman's Surgery.
Dete's sive. adj. [from deterge.] Having the power to
cleanſe.
Dete'Rsive. m.ſ. An application that has the power of
cleanſing wounds.
We frequently ſee ſimple ulcers afflićted with ſharp humours,
which corrode them, and render them painful ſordid ulcers,
if not timely relieved by deterſives and lenients. Mºiſeman. ..
To DETEST. v. a. [detºffer, Latin.] To hate; to abhor;
to abominate.
Nigh thereto the ever-damned beaſt
Durſt not approach; for he was deadly made,
And all that life preſerved did deteſ. Fairy Queen, b. i. c. 12.
Glory grows guilty of detº/fed crimes,
When for fame's ſake, for praiſe, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart. Shakeſpeare.
Since Cleopatra died,
I've liv'd in ſuch diſhonour, that the gods
Deteſt my baſeneſs. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
There is that naturally in the heart of man which abhors
fin as ſin, and conſequently would make him detº/f it both in
himſelf and others too. South's Sermons.
Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
My heart deteſ’s him as the gates of hell. Pºpe.
DETE'st ABLE. adj. [from deteſ?..] Hateful; abhorred; abo-
minable; odious.
Beguil'd, divorc'd, wrong’d, ſpighted, ſlain!
Moſt detºſlable death. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
He deſired him, and the reſidue of the Scottiſh nobility, to
conſider that both armies conſiſted of Chriſtians, to whom
nothing is more deteſtable than effuſion of human blood. Hayw.
Dete'stably. adv. [from detºftable.] Hatefully; abominably;
odiouſly.
It ſtands here ſtigmatized by the apoſtle as a temper of
mind, rendering man ſo deteſtably bad, that the great enemy
of mankind, the devil himſelf, neither can nor deſires to make
them worſe. - - South's Sermons.
Detest A'Tion. m. ſ. [from dete/.]
1. Hatred; abhorrence; abomination.
Then only did misfortune make her ſee what ſhe had done,
eſpecially finding in us rather deteſtation than pity. Sidney, b. ii.
2. It is ſometimes uſed with for; but of ſeems more proper.
The detºſlation you can expreſs - -
For vice in all its glitt'ring dreſs. Swift.
Our love of God will inſpire us with a deteſtation fºr fin, as
what is of all things moſt contrary to his divine nature. Swift.
DETE's TER. n.ſ.. [from deteſ?..] One that hates or abhors.
To DE THRO'NE. v. a. [deſtroner, Fr. de and thronus, Latin.]
To deveſt of regality; to throw down from the throne; to
deprive of regal dignity.
DETI'NUE, n ſ [detenue, French.] A writ that lies againſt
him, who, having goods or chattels delivered him to keep,
refuſes to deliver them again. Cowel.
DEton A'tion. n. / [detono, Latin.] Somewhat more forcible
than the ordinary crackling of ſalts in calcination; as in the
going off of the pulvis or aurum fulminans, or the like. It
is alſo uſed for that noiſe which happens upon the mixture of
fluids that ferment with violence; as oil of turpentine with
oil of vitriol, reſembling the exploſion of gunpowder. Quincy.
A new coal is not to be caſt on the nitre, ’till the detonation
occaſioned by the former be either quite or almoſt altogether
ended; unleſs it chance that the puffing matter do blow the
coal too ſoon out of the crucible. Bºyle on Saltpetre.
To DETONIZE. v. a. [from detona, Latin.] To calcine with
detonation. A chemical term,
4. Nineteen
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 240</div><p class="Text">D E T'
D E V
Nineteen parts in twenty of detonized nitre is deſtroyed in
eighteen days. Arbuthnot on Air.
To De To'RT, v. a. [detortus, of detorqueo, Latin.] To wreſt
from the original import, meaning, or deſign.
They have aſſumed what amounts to an infallibility in the
private ſpirit, and have detorted texts of ſcripture to the ſedi-
tion, diſturbance, and deſtruction of the civil government.
Dryden's Preface to Rel. Laici,
To DETRACT. v. a. [detradium, Latin; detracier, French.]
To derogate; to take away by envy and calumny, or other-
wiſe, any thing from the reputation of another.
Thoſe were affiſtants in private, but not truſted to manage
the affairs in publick; for that would detrać from the honour
of the principal ambaſſador. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
No envy can detrati from this: it will ſhine in hiſtory,
and, like ſwans, grow whiter the longer it endures. . Dryden.
De TRA/ct E.R. n.J. [from detract.] One that takes away
another's reputation; one that impairs the honour of another
injuriouſly.
I am right glad to be thus ſatisfied by you, in that I have
often heard it queſtioned, and yet was never able till now to
choke the mouth of ſuch detracters with the certain know-
ledge of their ſlanderous untruths. Spenſer on Ireland.
Whether we are ſo intirely ſure of their loyalty upon the
preſent foot of government as you may imagine, their de-
tracters make a queſtion. Swift.
Away the fair detracters went,
And gave by turns their cenſures vent. Swift.
DETRA'ction. n.ſ. [detraćtio, Latin ; detraćlion, French.]
Detraction, in the native importance of the word, ſignifies
the withdrawing or taking off from a thing; and, as it is ap-
plied to the reputation, it denotes the impairing or leſſening a
man in point of fame, rendering him leſs valued and eſteemed
by others, which is the final aim of detraction, though pur-
ſued by various means. Ayliffe.
Even now
I put myſelf to thy direction, and
Unſpeak mine own detraction; here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myſelf,
For ſtrangers to my nature. Shakeſheare's Macbeth.
Fame, that her high birth to raiſe,
Seem'd erſt ſo laviſh and profuſe,
We may juſtly now accuſe
Of detraction from her praiſe. Milton.
If detraction could invite us, diſcretion ſurely would con-
tain us from any derogatory intention. Brºwn.
To put a ſtop to the inſults and detraélions of vain men,
I reſolved to enter a little farther into the examination.
IVoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
To conſider an author farther, as the ſubjećt of obloquy
and detraction, we may obſerve with what pleaſure a work is
received by the invidious part of mankind, in which a writer
falls ſhort of himſelf. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 40.
DETRA'croRY. adj. [from detrađ.] Defamatory by denial of
deſert; derogatory. Sometimes with to, properly from.
This is not only derogatory unto the wiſdom of God, who
hath propoſed the world unto our knowledge, and thereby the
notion of himſelf, but alſo detractory unto the intelle&amp;t and
ſenſe of man, expreſſedly diſpoſed for that inquiſition. Brown.
In mentioning the joys of heaven, I uſe the expreſſions I
find leſs detrađory from a theme above our praiſes. Boyle.
The detrađory lye takes from a great man the reputation
that juſtly belongs to him. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of j. Bull.
DETRA'cTREss. n.ſ.. [from detrači.] A cenſorious woman.
If any ſhall detract from a lady's character, unleſs ſhe be
abſent, the ſaid detracir'ſ ſhall be forthwith ordered to the
loweſt place of the room. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 23.
DETRIMENT. n.ſ. [detrimentum, Latin.] Loſs; damage;
miſchief; diminution; harm.
Difficult it muſt needs have been for one Chriſtian church
to aboliſh that which all had received and held for the ſpace of
many ages, and that without any detriment unto religion.
Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
I can repair
That detriment, if ſuch it be, to loſe
Self-loſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii. l. 152.
If your joint pow'r prevail, th’ affairs of hell
No detriment need fear : go, and be ſtrong. Milton's P. Loft.
There often falls out ſo many things to be done on the
ſudden, that ſome of them muſt of neceſſity be negle&amp;ted for
that whole year, which is the greateſt detriment to this whole
myſtery. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Let a family burn but a candle a night leſs than the uſual
number, and they may take in the Spećtator without detriment
to their private affairs. Addiſon's Spºtator, Nº. 486.
Det RIME'NTAL. adj. [from detriment.] Miſchievous; harm-
ful; cauſing loſs. -
Among all honorary rewards, which are neither dangerous
nor detrimental to the donor, I remember none ſo remarkable
as the titles which are beſtowed by the emperor of China:
theſe are never given to any ſubjećt ’till the ſubject is dead.
- Addison's Guardian, N°. 96.
Vol. I. -
-- ~~
Obſtinacy in prejudices, which are detrimental to our coun-
try, ought not to be miſtaken for virtuous reſolution and
firmneſ, of mind. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 25.
DETRI'tion, n.ſ. [detero, detritus, Latin.] The act of wear-
ing away. 1);&amp;#.
Tº PETRU'DE. v. a. [dºtrude, Latin.] To thruſt down;
To force into a lower place.
... Such as are detruded down to hell,
Either, for ſhame, they ſtill themſelves retire;
Qr, ty'd in chains, they in cloſe priſon dwell. Davies.
Philoſophers are of opinion, that the ſouls of men may, for
their miſcarriages, be dºtruded into the bodies of beaſts. Locke.
...At thy command the vernal fun awakes
The torpid ſap, detrided to the root
By wintry winds.
To DETRUNCATE. v. a. [dirnrº,
cut; to ſhorten by deprivation of parts.
DETRUNCA'tion. n.ſ.. [from detruncate.] The act of lopping
or cutting.
DETRU'sſon. m. ſ. [from detruſio, Latin.] The aa of thruſ-
ing or forcing down.
From this detruſion of the waters towards the fide, the parts
towards the pole muſt be much increaſed. Keil againſt Burnet.
DETURBA'tios. n.ſ. [diturbo, Latin.] The act of throwing
down; degradation. Dićf.
Dev ASTA'tion. m. ſ. [devaſio, Latin.] Waſte; havock; de-
ſolation; deſtruction.
By devaſtation the rough warrior gains,
And farmers fatten moſt when famine reigns. Garth.
That flood which overflowed Attica in the days of Ogyges,
and that which drowned Theſſaly in Deucalion's Time, made
cruel havock and devaſtation among them. J%odward.
DEU cf. m. ſ. [deux, French..] 1. Two: A word uſed in games.
You are a gentleman and a gameſter; then, I am ſure, you
know how much the groſs ſum of deuce ace amounts to. Shakespeare
2. The devil. See DE Us E.
To DevE'Lop. v. a. [developer, French..] To diſengage from
ſomething that enfolds and conceals; to diſentangle; to clear
from its covering, +
Take him to develop, if you can,
And hew the block off, and get out the man. Dunciad.
DevE'R GENCE. m.ſ. [devergentia, Latin.] Declivity; declina-
tion. - Dićf.
To DevE'st. v. a. [deve/ler, French; d. and vºis, Latin.]
1. To ſtrip; to deprive of cloaths.
Then of his arms Androgeus he devºſts, -
His ſword, his ſhield he takes, and plumed creſts. Denham.
2. To ſtrip; to take away anything good.
What are thoſe breaches of the law of nature and nations,
which do forfeit and devºſt all right and title in a nation to
government? - Bacon.
3. To free from any thing bad.
Come on, thou little inmate of this breaſt,
Which for thy ſake from paſſions I deveſ'. Prior,
DEVEX. adj. [devexus, Latin.] Bending down; declivous ;
incurvated downwards.
Devexity, n.ſ.. [from devex.] Incurvation downwards; de-
clivity.
To DE/v1ATE. v. m. [de via decedere, Latin.]
1. To wander from the right or common way.
The reſt to ſome faint meaning make pretence,
Thomſºn's Spring.
Latin.] To lop; to
But Shadwell never deviates into ſenſe. Dryden.
Thus Pegaſus, a nearer way to take,
May boldly deviate from the common, track. Pope.
What makes all phyſical and moral ill?
There nature deviates, and here wanders will. Pope's Eſſays.
Beſides places which may deviate from the ſenſe of the au-
thor, it would be kind to obſerve any deficiencies in the
dićtion. Pope.
2. To go aſtray; to err; to fin; to offend.
Devi Aºtion. n.ſ. [from deviate.] -
1. The act of quitting the right way; error; wandering.
Theſe bodies perſevere in their motions, and conſtantly
move round in the ſame tracts, without making the leaſt
deviation. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
2. Variation from eſtabliſhed rule.
Having once ſurveyed the true and proper natural alphabet,
we may eaſily diſcover the deviatiºnſ from it in the character
thereof, in all the alphabets in uſe, either by defect of ſingle
chara&amp;ters, of letters, or by confuſion of them. Holder.
3. Offence; obliquity of conduct. - - - -
worthy perſons, if inadvertently drawn into a deviation,
will endeavour inſtantly to recover their loſt ground, that they
may not bring error into habit. . . - Clariſſa.
Devi'ce. n.ſ. ſaeviſ, French; diviſa, Italian.]
1. A contrivance; a ſtratagen. -
This is our device,
That Falſtaff at that oak ſhall meet with us. Shakeſpeare.
He intended it as a politick device to leſſen their intereſt,
and keep them low in the world. Atterbury's Sermons,
2. A deſign; a ſcheme formed ; projećt; ſpeculation.
Touching the exchange of laws in practice with laws in
T device,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 241</div><p class="Text">D E V
D E V
device, which they ſay are better for the ſtate of the church,
if they might take place: the farther we examine them, the
greater cauſe we find to conclude, although we continue the
ſame we are, the harm is not great. Hoºker, Dedicat.
His device is againſt Babylon, to deſtroy it. jer. li. I 1.
There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheleſs, the
counſel of the Lord ſhall ſtand. Prov. xix. 21.
3. The emblem on a ſhield; the enſign armorial of a nation or
family. -
Then change we ſhields, and their devices bear;
Let fraud ſupply the want of force in war. Dryden's AEn.
Hibernia's harp, device of her command,
And parent of her mirth, ſhall there be ſeen. Prior.
They intend to let the world ſee what party they are of,
by figures and deſigns upon theſe fans; as the knights-errant
uſed to diſtinguiſh themſelves by devices on their ſhields. Addison
4. Invention; genius.
- He's gentle; never ſchooled, and yet learned; full of noble
device, of all ſorts enchantingly beloved. Shakespeare As you like it.
DEVIL. n.ſ.. [biopul, Saxon; diabolus, Latin. It is more
properly written divel.]
1. A fallen angel; the temper and ſpiritual enemy of mankind.
Are you a man :
—Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appal the devil. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
2. A wicked man or woman.
See thyſelf, devil:
Proper deformity ſeems aot in the fiend
So horrid as in woman. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. A ludicrous term for miſchief.
A war of profit mitigates the evil;
But to be tax'd, and beaten, is the devil. Granville.
4. A kind of expletive, expreſſing wonder or vexation.
The things, we know, are neither rich nor rare;
But wonder how the devil they got there ! Pope, Epiſt. ii.
5. A kind of ludicrous negative in an adverbial ſenſe.
The devil was well, the devil a monk was he. A Proverb.
Devilish. adj. [from devil.]
1. Partaking of the qualities of the devil; diabolical; miſ-
chievous; "malicious; deſtrućtive.
Gynecia took a farther conceit of it, miſtruſting greatly
Cecropia, becauſe ſhe had heard much of the deviliſh wicked-
neſs of her heart. Sidney, b, i.
For grief thereof, and deviliſh deſpight,
From his infernal furnaces forth he threw
Huge flames, that dimmed all the heaven's light,
Enroll'd in duſkiſh ſmoak and brimſtone blue. Fairy Queen.
In hollow cube
He trains his deviliſh engin'ry, impal’d
On ev'ry ſide with ſhadowy ſquadrons deep. Milton's P. Loft.
2. Having communication with the devil.
The dutcheſs, by his ſubornation,
Upon my life began her deviliſh practices. Shakespeare Henry VI.
3. An epithet of abhorrence or contempt.
A deviliſh knavel beſides the knave is handſome, young,
and blyth : all thoſe requiſites are in him that delight. Shakeſp.
Devi LisHLY. adv. [from deviliſh..] In a manner ſuiting the
devil; diabolically.
Thoſe trumpeters threatened them with continual alarms of
damnation, if they did not venture life, fortune, and all, in
that which wickedly and deviliſhly thoſe impoſtors called the
cauſe of God. South's Sermony.
DR'vilkin, n.ſ.. [from devil.] A little devil. Clariffa.
DE'vious, adj. [devius, Latin.]
1. Out of the common track.
Creuſa kept behind: by choice we ſtray
Through ev'ry dark and ev'ry devious way. Dryden's &amp;n.
In this minute devious ſubject I have been neceſſitated to
explain myſelf in more words, than to ſome few may ſeem
needful. Holder's Elements of Speech.
2. Wandering; roving; rambling.
Every muſe,
And every blooming pleaſure, wait without
To bleſs the wildly devious morning walk. Thºmſ. Summer.
3. Erring; going aſtray from rectitude.
One devious ſtep, at firſt ſetting out, frequently leads a per-
ſon into a wilderneſs of doubt and error. Clariffa.
To DEVISE. v. a. [deviſer, French, as of deviſare, to look
about. Skinner.]
1. To contrive; to form by art; to invent; to excogitate; to
ſtrike out by thought.
Whether they, at their firſt coming into the land, or after-
wards, by trading with other nations which had letters, learned
them of them, or deviſed them among themſelves, is very
doubtful. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
He could by his ſkill draw after him the weight of five
thouſand buſhels of grain, and deviſe thoſe rare engines which
ſhot ſmall ſtones at hand, but great ones afar off. Peacham.
Ye ſons of art, one curious piece deviſe,
From whoſe conſtructure motion ſhall aſſé.
Blackmore.
2. To plan; to ſcheme.
Behold I frame evil againſt you, and deviſe a device againſt
WOu. jer. xiii. 1 i.
Tó Devi's E. v. n. To confider; to contrive; to lay plans;
to form ſchemes.
Her merry fit ſhe freſhly 'gan to rear,
And did of joy and jollity deviſe,
Herſelf to cheriſh and her gueſt to chear. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
But fith now ſafe ye ſeiſed have the ſhore,
And well arrived are, high God be bleſł,
Let us deviſe of eaſe and everlaſting reſt. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Since we are ſo far entered, let us, I pray you, a little deviſe
of thoſe evils by which that country is held in this wretched
caſe, that it cannot, as you ſay, be recured. Spenſer's Ireland.
Deviſe but how you'll uſe him when he comes, and let us
two deviſe to bring him thither. Shakespeare Mer. Hives ºf //indſºr.
Devi's E. n ſ. [Jewiſe, a will, old French.]
1. The act of giving or bequeathing by will.
This word is properly attributed, in our common law, to
him that bequeaths his goods by his laſt will or teſtament in
writing; and the reaſon is, becauſe thoſe that now appertain
only to the deviſour, by this act are diſtributed into many
parts. Cowel.
The alienation is made by deviſe in a laſt will only, and the
third part of theſe profits is there demandable, by ſpecial provi-
ſion thereof made in the ſtatute. Bacon's Off. of Alienation.
2. Contrivance. See Device.
God hath omitted nothing needful to his purpoſe, nor left
his intention to be accompliſhed by our deviſes. Hooker.
To Devi'se. v. a. [from the noun..] To grant by will. A
law term.
Devi's E.R. n.ſ.. [from deviſe.] A contriver; an inventer.
Being divided from truth in themſelves, they are yet farther
removed by advenient deception; for true it is, if I ſay they
are daily mocked into error by deviſers. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
The authors of uſeful inventions, the deviſers of wholſome
laws, as were the philoſophers of ancient times, were honoured
as the fathers and prophets of their country. Grew's Coſmol.
DE'VITABLE. adj. [devitabilis, Lat.J Poſſible to be avoided;
avoidable. Dićf.
DE vita"tion. m. ſ. [devitatio, Latin.] The act of eſcaping or
avoiding. Dićf.
Devo'ID. adj. [vuide, French.]
1. Empty; vacant; void.
When I awoke, and found her place devoid,
And nought but preſſed graſs where ſhe had lyen,
I ſorrow'd all ſo much as earſt I joy'd. Fairy Queen, b. i.
2. Without any thing, whether good or evil; free from ; in
want of.
He flung it from him, and devoid of dread,
Upon him lightly leaped without heed. Fairy ºueen, b. ii.
That the ſoul and angels are devoid of quantity and dimen-
ſon, hath the ſuffrage of the moſt; and that they have no-
thing to do with proper locality, is generally opinioned. Glanv.
The motion of this chariot will ſtill be eaſier as it aſcends
higher, 'till at length it ſhall become utterly devoid of gravity,
when the leaſt ſtrength will be able to beſtow upon it a ſwift
motion. //ilkins's Math. Magic.
His warlike mind, his ſoul devoid of fear, }
His high deſigning thoughts were figur'd there,
As when, by magick, ghoſts are made appear. Dryden.
We Tyrians are not ſo devoid of ſenſe,
Nor ſo remote from Phoebus' influence. Dryden's Virg. Æn.
Devo'IR. n.ſ. [devoir, French.]
1. Service. A ſenſe now not uſed.
To reſtore again the kingdom of the Mamalukes, he of.
fered him their utmoſt devoir and ſervice. Knollº's Hiſtory.
2. Aćt of civility or obſequiouſneſs,
Aukward and ſupple, each devoir to pay,
She flatters her good ſady twice a day. Pope.
To DEVOLVE. v. a. [devolvo, Latin.]
1. To roll down. ,
The matter which devolves from the hills down upon the
lower grounds, does not conſiderably raiſe and augment them.
- //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Through ſplendid kingdoms he devolves his maze,
Now wanders wild through ſolitary tracts
Of life-deſerted ſand. Thomſon's Summer, 1.805.
2. To move from one hand to another.
Becauſe they found too much confuſion in ſuch a multitude
of ſtateſmen, they divolved their whole authority into the
hands of the council of ſixty. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
The whole power, at home and abroad, was devolved upon
that family. Swift.
To Devo'Lv E. v. n. To fall in ſucceſſion into new hands.
Suppoſing people, by wanting ſpiritual bleſſings, did loſe all
their right to temporal, yet that forfeiture muſt devolve only to
the ſupreme Lord. Decay of Piety.
Devolution. m. ſ. [devolutio, Latin.]
1. The aët of rolling down.
What concerns the raiſing of new mountains, deterrations,
or the devolution of earth down upon the valleys from the
hills
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 242</div><p class="Text">D E V
D E V
hills and high grounds, will fall more properly under our con-
ſideration on another occaſion. JWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Removal from hand to hand.
The juriſdiction exerciſed in thoſe courts is derived from
the crown of England, and the laſt devolution is to the king
by way of appeal. Hale's Common Law of England.
Devo R A'TION. n ſ [from devaro, Latin.] The act of de-
vouring. - - Dić?.
To DEVOTE. v. a. [devoveo devotus, Latin.]
1. To dedicate; to conſecrate; to appropriate. - * *
No devoted thing that a man ſhall devote unto the Lord, of
all that he hath, both of man and beaſt, and of the field of
his poſſeſſion, ſhall be ſold or redeemed. Lev. xxvii. 21.
What black magician conjures up this fiend,
To ſtop devoted charitable deeds Shakeſp. Richard III.
While we do admire
This virtue, and this moral diſcipline,
Let's be no ſtoicks, nor no ſtocks, I pray;
Or ſo devºte to Ariſtotle's checks, -
As Ovid be an outcaſt quite abjur’d. Sh, Tam. of the Shrew.
They, impious, dar'd to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
If perſons of this make ſhould ever devote themſelves to
ſcience, they ſhould be well aſſured of a ſolid and ſtrong con-
ſtitution of body. JWatts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. To addićt; to give up to ill.
Aliens were devoted to their rapine and deſpight. Dec. of Piety.
Having once debauched their ſenſes with the pleaſures of
other nations, they devoted themſelves unto all wickedneſs.
- Grew's Coſm. Sac. b. iii. c. 3.
Ah why, Penelope, this cauſeleſs fear,
To render ſleep's ſoft bleſfings inſincere?
Alike devote to ſorrow's dire extreme,
The day refle&amp;tion, and the midnight dream. Pope's Odyſſey.
3. To curſe; to execrate; to doom to deſtruction.
Yet not for thy advice, or threats, I fly
Thoſe wicked tents devoted; leſt the wrath
Impendent, raging into ſudden flame, -
Diſtinguiſh not. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. v. l. 890.
To deſtruction ſacred, and devote,
He with his whole poſterity muſt die. Milton's Parad, Loft.
Goddeſs of maids, and conſcious of our hearts,
So keep me from the vengeance of thy darts,
Which Niobe's devoted iſſue felt,
When, hiſing through the ſkies, the feather'd deaths were
dealt. . Dryden's Fables.
Let her, like me, of ev'ry joy forlorn,
Devote the hour when ſuch a wretch was born:
Like me to deſerts and to darkneſs run. Rowe's jane Shore.
Devo're DNess. n.ſ.. [from devote.] The ſtate of being devoted
or dedicated.
Whatever may fall from my pen to her diſadvantage, relates
to her but as ſhe was, or may again be, an obſtacle to your
devotedneſs to ſeraphick love. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
The owning of our obligation unto virtue, may be ſtiled
natural religion; that is to ſay, a devotedneſ; unto God, our
liege Lord, ſo as to act in all things according te his will.
- Grew's Coſmol. Sac. b. iii. c. 5.
Devote'E. n.ſ. [devot, French.] One erroneouſly or ſuper-
ſtitiouſly religious; a bigot.
DEVOTION. n.ſ. [devotion, French; devotio, Latin.]
1. The ſtate of being conſecrated or dedicated.
2. Piety; ačts of religion.
Mean time her warlike brother on the ſeas
His waving ſtreamers to the winds diſplays, }
And vows for his return, with vain devotion, pays. Dryd.
3. An act of external worſhip.
Religious minds are inflamed with the love of publick
devotion. flooker.
For as I paſſed by and beheld your devotion, I found an altar
with this inſcription, To the unknown God. Aćis xvii. 23.
In vain doth man the name of juſt expect,
If his devotions he to God neglect. Penham.
4. Prayer; expreſſion of devotion.
An aged holy man,
That day and night ſaid his devotion,
No other worldly buſineſs did apply. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Your devotion has its opportunity: we muſt pray always,
but chiefly at certain times. Sprat's Sermons.
5. The ſtate of the mind under a ſtrong ſenſe of dependance
upon God.
Grateful to acknowledge whence his good
Deſcends, thither with heart, and voice, and eyes
Directed in devotion, to adore
And worſhip God ſupreme, who made him chief
Of all his works. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. vii. l. 514.
From the full choir, when loud Hoſanna's riſe,
And ſwell the pomp of dreadful ſacrifice;
Amid’ that ſcene, if ſome relenting eye
Glance on the ſtone where our cold reliques lie,
Devotion's ſelf ſhall ſteal a thought from heav'n,
One human tear ſhall drop, and be forgiv'n, Poſt,
Devotion may be confidered either as an exerciſe of publick
or private prayers at ſet times and occaſions, or as a temper
of the mind, a ſtate and diſpoſition of the heart, which is
rightly affected with ſuch exerciſes. Law on Chriſł's Perfººtion:
6. An act of reverence, reſpect, or ceremony.
- Whither away ſo faſt
—No farther than the Tower; and, as I gueſs,
Upon the like devotion as yourſelves, - - -
To gratulate the gentle princes there. Shakespeare Richard III.
7. Strong affection; ardent love; ſuch as makes the lover the
ſole property of the perſon loved. .
Be oppoſite, all planets of good luck;
To my proceeding, if, with pure heart's love;
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts, w
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter. Shakespeare R. III.
He had a particular reverence for the perſon of the king;
and the more extraordinary devotion for that of the prince, as
he had had the honour to be truſted with his education. Car.
8. Diſpoſal; power; ſtate of dependance on any one.
Arundel-caſtle would keep that rich corner of the country
at his majeſty's devotion. Clarendon, b. viii.
Devo"tional. adj. [from devotion.] Pertaining to devotion;
annexed to worſhip; religious.
Nor are the ſobereſt of them ſo apt for that devotional com:
pliance and junéture of hearts, which I deſire to bear in holy
offices, to be performed with me. King Charle :
The favourable opinion and good word of men comes often
times at a very eaſy rate, by a few demure looks, with ſome
devotional poſtures and grimaces. South's Sermons.
Devo't Ion ALIST. n.ſ.. [from devotion.] A man zealous with-
out knowledge; ſuperſtitiouſly devout.
To DEVOU'R. v. a. [devoro, Ž.
1. To eat up ravenouſly, as a wild beaſt or animal of prey.
We will ſay ſome evil beaſt hath devoºred him. Gen. xxxvii.
We've willing dames enough: there cannot be -
That vulture in you to devour ſo many
As will to greatneſs dedicate themſelves, -
Finding it ſo inclin'd. Shakespeare's Marbeth.
So looks the pent up lion o'er the wretch
That trembles under his devºuring paws. Shakespeare Henry VI.
2. To deſtroy or conſume with rapidity and violence.
A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame
burneth. joel ii. 3.
How dire a tempeſt from Mycenae pour’d,
Our plains, our temples, and our town devºur’d;
It was the waſte of war. Dryden's Aen. h. viii.
Notwithſtanding that Socrates lived in the time of this de-
vouring peſtilence at Athens, he never caught the leaſt in-
feótion. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 195.
3. To ſwallow up; to annihilate. -
He ſeemed in ſwiftneſs to devour the way. Shakeſpeare.
Such a pleaſure as grows freſher upon enjoyment; and
though continually fed upon, yet is never devoured. South.
Death ſtalks behind thee, and each flying hour
Does ſome looſe remnant of thy life devour. Dryden.
Devou'RER... n.ſ. [from devour.] A conſumer; he that de-
vours; he that preys upon.
Rome is but a wilderneſs of tygers:
Tygers muſt prey, and Rome affords no prey
But me and mine: how happy art thou then,
From theſe devourers to be baniſhed Shakespeare. Tit. Andronicus.
Since thoſe leviathans are withdrawn, the leſſer devourers
ſupply their place: fraud ſucceeds to violence. Decay of Piety.
Store the pond with carp and tench, which do the beſt to—
gether of any fiſh, all other fiſh being devourers of their
ſpawn. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
DEVOUT. adj. [devotus, Latin.] *
1. Pious; religious; devoted to holy duties.
We muſt be conſtant and devout in the worſhip of our
God, and ready in all acts of benevolence to our neighbour.
Rogers, Sermon 13.
2. Filled with pious thoughts.
For this, with ſoul devout, he thank'd the god;
And, of ſucceſs ſecure, return'd to his abode. Dryd. Fables,
3. Expreſſive of devotion or piety.
Anon dry ground appears, and from his ark
The ancient ſire deſcends, with all his train:
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout, -
Grateful to heav'n. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. xi. 1 863.
Devo'Utly. adv. [from devout..] Piouſly; with ardent devo-
tion; religiouſly.
Her grace roſe, and with modeſt paces
Came to the altar, where ſhe kneel'd ; and, ſaint-like,
Caſt her fair eyes to heav'n, and pray'd devoutly. Shakespeare H.VIII.
One of the wiſe men of the ſociety of Solomon's houſe,
having a while attentively and devoutly viewed and contem-
plated this pillar and croſs, fell down upon his face. Bacon.
Her twilights were more clear than our mid-day,
She dreamt devoutlier than moſt uſe to pray;
Who being here fill'd with grace, yet ſtrove to be
Both where more grace and more capacity f
At once is given. Donne.
Think,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 243</div><p class="Text">D E W
D E X
Think, O my ſoul, devoutly think,
How, with affrighted eyes,
Thou ſaw'ſt the wide extended deep
In all its horrors riſe Addſon's Spediator, Nº. 490.
To ſecond cauſes we ſeem to truſt, without expreſſing, ſo
devoutly as we ought to do, our dependance on the firſt. Atterb.
Deuse. n.ſ. ſmore properly than deuce, junius, from Duſius,
the name of a certain ſpecies of evil ſpirits.] The devil: a
ludicrous word.
'Twas the prettieſt prologue, as he wrote it;
Well, the deuce take me if I ha'n't forgot it. Congreve.
DFuteRo'o AMY. n.ſ.. [ivrº and yaº, J A ſecond mar-
riage. - Dicf.
DEUTERoNo'My. m. ſ. ſºurce res. J The ſecond book of
the law, being the book of Moſes.
Deutero'scopy, n.ſ. [ºrgo and 2*...] The ſecond in-
tention; the meaning beyond the literal ſenſe.
Not attaining the deuteroſcopy, or ſecond intention of the
words, they are fain to omit their conſequences, coherences,
figures, or tropologies. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
DEW, n.ſ.. [beap, Saxon; daaw, Dutch..] The moiſture upon
the ground.
Fogs, particularly thoſe which we frequently obſerve after
fun-ſetting, even in our hotteſt months, are nothing but a
vapour, conſiſting of water, and of ſuch mineral matter as
it meets with in its paſſage, and could well bring up along with
it; which vapour was ſent up in greater quantity all the fore-
going day, than now in the cvening: but the ſun then being
above the horizon, taking it at the ſurface of the earth, and
rapidly mounting it up into the atmoſphere, it was not diſ-
cernible, as now it is; becauſe the ſun being now gone off,
the vapour ſtagnates at and near the earth, and ſaturates the
air.’till it is ſo thick as to be eaſily viſible therein: and when
at length the heat there is ſomewhat further ſpent, which is
uſually about the middle of the night, it falls down again in
a dew, alighting upon herbs and other vegetables, which it
cheriſhes, cools and refreſhes, after the ſcorching heat of the
foregoing day. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Never yet one hour in bed
Did I enjoy the golden dew of ſleep,
But with his tim’rous dreams was ſtill awak'd. Shakespeare R. III.
That churchman bears a bounteous mind, indeed;
A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us;
His dew falls ev'ry where. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
She looks as clear
As morning roſes newly waſh'd with dew. Shakeſpeare.
Dews and rain are but the returns of moiſt vapours con-
denſed. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 81.
Now ſliding ſtreams the thirſty plants renew,
And feed their fibres with reviving dew. Pope.
To Dew. v. a. [from the noun..] ſo wet as with dew; to
moiſten; to bedev.
A trickling ſtream of balm moſt ſovereign,
And dainty dear, which on the ground ſtill fell,
And overflowed all the fertile plain,
As it had dºwed been with timely rain. Fairy Qzeen, b. i.
Be we the med'cine of the fickly weal,
And with him pour we in our country's purge,
Each drop of us.
Or ſo much as it needs
To dew the ſovereign flower, and drown the weeds. Shakespeare
Give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournful tears. Shakespeare H. VI.
He ceas'd ; diſcerning Adam with ſuch joy
Surcharg’d, as had, like grief, been dºw’d in tears,
Without the vent of words, which theſe he breath'd.
- Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. xii. 1, 373.
Palemon above the reſt appears,
In fable garments, dºw’d with guſhing tears. Dryd. Fables.
2. It is not uſed properly of an action of terrour.
In Gallick blood again
He dews his reeking ſword, and ſtrows the ground
With headleſs ranks.
DE'w BERRY. m. ſ. [from dew and berry.]
Dewberries, as they ſtand here among the more delicate
fruits, muſt be underſtood to mean raſberries, which are alſo
of the bramble kind. Hammer.
Feed him with apricocks and dewlerries, -
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. Shakeſpeare.
DEwB ESPRE's T. part. [dew and beſprent.] Sprinkled with
dew.
This evening late, by then the chewing flocks
Had ta'en their ſupper on the favoury herb
Of knot-graſs dewbeſprent, and were in fold,
I fat me down to watch upon a bank
With ivy canopied, and interwove
With flaunting honey-ſuckle. Milton.
Dew-bºr NING. off. [from dew and burning.] The meaning
of this compound is doubtful. Perhaps it alludes to the
ſparkling of dew.
Phillips.
He, now to prove his late renewed might,
High-brandiſhing his bright dew-burning blade,
Upon his creſted ſcalp ſo fore did ſmite,
That to the ſcull a yawning wound it made. Fairy Queen.
DF'wn Rop. m. ſ. ſ dew and drop. J A drop of dew which
ſparkles at ſun-riſe.
I muſt go ſeek ſome dºwdrºps here,
And hang a pearl in every cowſlip's ear.
An hoſt
Innumerable as the ſtars of night,
Or ſtars of morning, dewdrops, which the ſun
Impearls! on every leaf, and ev'ry flow’r. Milton's Pa. Lºft.
Reft, ſweet as dewd, ops on their flow'ry lawns,
When the ſky opens, and the morning dawns |
Dºwlap. m.ſ. [from lapping or licking the dew.]
1. The fleſh that hangs down from the throat of oxen.
Large rowles of fat about his ſhoulders ſlung,
And from his neck the double dºwlap hung. Addison Ov. M.t.
2. It is uſed in Shakeſpeare for a lip flaccid with age, in contempt.
And ſometimes lurk I in a goſlip's bowl,
In very likeneſs of a roaſted crab ;
And when ſhe drinks againſt her lips I bob,
And on the wither'd dewlap pour the ale. Shakespeare.
DE'wlAPT. adj [from dewlap.] Furniſhed with dewlaps.
Who would believe, that there were mountaineers
Dºwlapt like bulls, whoſe throats had hanging at 'em
Wallets of fleſh. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
The dewlapt bull now chaſes along the plain,
While burning love ferments in ev'ry vein. Gay.
DE'wwo RM. m. ſ. [from dew and worn.] A worm found in
dew.
For the trout, the dew-wºrm, which ſome call the lob-
worm, and the brandliny, are the chicf. Halton's Angler.
De'w Y. adj. [from dew.)
1. Reſembling dew ; partaking of dew.
From the earth a dewy miſt
Went up, and water'd all the ground, and each
Plant of the field. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. vii. l. 331.
Where two adverſe winds,
Sublim’d from dewy vapours in mid ſky,
Engage with horrid ſhock, the ruffled brine
Roars ſtormy.
2. Moiſt with dew ; roſcid.
The joyous day 'gan early to appear,
And fair Aurora from her dewy bed
Of aged Tithone, 'gan herſelf to rear,
With roſy cheeks, for ſhame as bluſhing red. Fairy Queen.
The bee with honied thigh,
That at her flow'ry work doth ſing,
And the waters murmuring, -
With ſuch conſort as they keep,
Entice the dewy feather'd ſleep.
His deity locks diſtill'd
Ambroſia. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. v. l. 56.
His own Praeniſte ſends a choſen band,
With thoſe who plough Saturnia's Gabine land;
Beſides the ſuccour which cold Ancien yields,
The rocks of Hernicus and dºwy fields. Dryden's ºn, b. viii.
DEXTER. adj. [Latin J The right; not the left. A term.
uſed in heraldry.
My mother's blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this finiſter
Bounds in my fire's. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºffds.
DEXTERITY. m. ſ. [dºxteritas, Latin.]
1. Readineſs of limbs; activity; readineſs to attain ſkill; ſkill;
expertneſs.
2. Readineſs of contrivance; quickneſs of expedient; ſkill of
management.
His wiſdom, by often evading from perils, was turned
rather into a dexterity to deliver himſelf from dangers, when
they preſſed him, than into a providence to prevent and re-
move them afar off. Bacon's Henry VII.
They attempted to be knaves, but wanted art and dex-
terity. South's Sermons.
The ſame Proteſtants may, by their dexterity, make them-
ſelves the national religion, and diſpoſe the church-revenues
among their paſtors. Swift.
DE'xt ERous. adj. [dester, Latin.]
1. Expert at any manual employment; ačtive; ready; as, a
dexterous workman.
2. Expert in management; ſubtle; full of expedients.
They confine themſelves, and are dexterous managers
enough of the wares and products of that corner, with
which they content themſelves. Locke.
Dexte'Rously. adv. [from dexterous.] Expertly; ſkilfully;
artfully.
The magiſtrate ſometimes cannot do his own office dex-
terouſly, but by acting the miniſter. South's Sermons.
But then my ſtudy was to cog the dice, *
And dexterouſly to throw the lucky fice.
Shakespare.
Tickell.
Phillips.
Milton.
Dryden.
DE'xtRAL.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 244</div><p class="Text">D I A
S.
..]
}
Dºrral. adj. [dexter, Latin.) The right; not the left.
As for any tunicles or ſkins, which ſhould hinder the liver
from enabling the dextral parts, we muſt not conceive it dif-
fuſeth its virtue by meer irradiation, but by its veins and pro-
per veſſels. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 5.
DextRA'LITY.. n.ſ.. [from dextral.] The ſtate of being on
the right, not the left, fide.
If there were a determinate prepotency in the right, and
ſuch as ariſeth from a conſtant root in nature, we might ex-
pećt the ſame in other animals, whoſe parts are alſo differenced
by dextrality. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 5.
DIAbe"Tes. n.ſ. [3again..] A morbid copiouſneſs of urine;
a fatal colliquation by the urinary paſſages.
An increaſe of that ſecretion may accompany the general
colliquations; as in fluxes, hečtick ſweats and coughs, diabetes,
and other conſumptions. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
DIA Bo'LIcAL. }* [from diabolus, Latin.] Deviliſh; par-
DIAbo'Lick. § taking of the qualities of the devil; impious ;
atrocious; nefarious; pertaining to the devil.
This, in other beaſts obſerv'd,
Doubt might beget of diabolick pow'r, -
Aétive within, beyond the ſenſe of brute. Milt. Par. Loſt.
Does not the ambitious, the envious, and the revengeful
man know very well, that the thirſt of blood, and affectation
of dominion by violence and oppreſſion, is a moſt diabolical
outrage upon the laws of God and Nature, and upon the
common well-being of mankind? L’Eſtrange.
The pračtice of lying is a diabolical exerciſe, and they that
uſe it are the devil’s children. Ray on the Creation.
Damned ſpirits muſt needs be all envy, deſpair, and rage;
and have ſo much of a diabolical nature in them, as to wiſh
all men to ſhare their miſery. Atterbury's Sermons.
DIACO'DIUM. n.ſ. [Latin.] The ſyrup of poppies.
Diaco'Ustics. n.ſ.. [ºaxerxa.] The doćtrine of ſounds.
DIADEM. n.ſ. [diadema, Latin.]
1. A tiara; an enſign of royalty bound about the head of
Eaſtern monarchs.
The ſacred diadem in pieces rent,
And purple robe gored with many a wound. Fairy Queen.
A liſt the cobler's temples ties,
To keep the hair out of their eyes;
From whence ’tis plain the diadem,
That princes wear, derives from them.
2. The mark of royalty worn on the head ; the crown.
A crown,
Golden in ſhew, is but a wreath of thorns;
Brings dangers, troubles, cares, and ſleepleſs nights,
To him who wears the regal diadem. Milton's Par. Loſt.
Why ſhould he raviſh then that diadem
From your grey temples, which the hand of time
Muſt ſhortly plant on his. Denham's Sophy.
Fačtion, that once made diadems her prey,
And ſtopt our prince in his triumphant way, }
Fled like a miſt before this radiant day. Roſcommon.
DIADE'MED. adj. [from diadem.] Adorned with a diadem;
crowned.
Not ſo, when diadem’d with rays divine,
Touch'd with the flame that breaks from virtue's ſhrine,
Her prieſtleſs muſe forbids the good to dye,
And opes the temple of eternity. Pope.
Di'ADRom. n ſ. [3.2%aui, J The time in which any motion
is performed ; the time in which a pendulum performs its
vibration.
A gry is one tenth of a line, a line one tenth of one inch,
an inch one tenth of a philoſophical foot, a philoſophical foot
one third of a pendulum; whoſe diadroms, in the latitude of
forty-five degrees, are each equal to one ſecond of time, or a
ſixtieth of a minute. Locke.
DIAE'Resis. n.ſ. [?agai; J The ſeparation or disjunétion of
ſyllables; as a”er.
DIAGNo'stick. n.ſ. [?aywºxw.] A ſymptom by which a diſ-
eaſe is diſtinguiſhed from others.
I ſhall lay down ſome indiſputable marks of this vice, that
whenever we ſee the tokens, we may conclude the plague is
in the houſe:—let us hear your diagnoſticks. Collier on Pride.
One of our phyſicians proved diſappointed of his prognoſ-
ticks, or rather diagnoſticks. Harvey on Conſumptions.
DIA'GONAL. adj. [32, ane..] Reaching from one angle to
another, ſo as to divide a parallelogram into equal parts.
The monſtrofity of the badger is ill-contrived, and with
ſome diſadvantage; the ſhortneſs being fixed unto the legs of
one fide, that might have been more properly placed upon
the diagonal movers. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 5.
This, and all like ſorts of ſtone that are compoſed of gra-
nules, will cut and rive in any direction, as well in a perpen-
dicular, or in a diagonal, as horizontally and parallel to the
ſide of the ſtrata. //oodward on Foſſils.
DIA'Gonal. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive..] A line drawn from
angle to angle, and dividing a ſquare into equal parts.
When a man has in his mind the idea of two lines, viz.
the ſide and diagonal of a ſquare, whereof the diagonal is an
Vol. I.
Swift.
inch long, he may have the idea alſo of the diviſion of that
line into a certain number of equal parts. Locke.
DIA'Gona LLY. adu. [from diagonal.] In a diagonal direétion.
The right and left are not defined by philoſophers accord- .
ing to common acceptation, that is, reſpe&amp;tively from one
man unto another, or any conſtant ſite in each, as though
that ſhould be the right in one, which, upon confront or facing,
ſtands athwart or diagonally unto the other; but were diſtin-
guiſhed, according unto their activity and predominant loco-
motion, on the either ſide. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.
Di'AGRAM. m. ſ. [34%apua.] A delineation of geometrical
figures; a mathematical ſcheme.
Many a fair precept in poetry is like a ſeeming demonſtra-
tion in the mathematicks; very ſpecious in the diagram, but
failing in the mechanick operation. Dryden.
Why do not theſe perſons make a diagram of theſe cogita-
tive lines and angles, and demonſtrate their properties of per-
ception and appetite, as plainly as we know the other proper-
ties of triangles and circles Bentley's Sermons.
DIAGRY'DIATES. m. ſ. [from diagrydium, Lat J Strong purga-
tives made with diagrydium. -
All cholerick humours ought to be evacuated by diagrydiates,
mixed with tartar, or ſome acid, or rhubarb powder. Floyer.
DI’AL. n.ſ. [diale, Skinner.] A plate marked with lines,
where a hand or ſhadow ſhews the hour.
O, gentlemen, the time of life is ſhort:
To ſpend that ſhortneſs baſely were too long,
Though life did ride upon a dial's point,
Still ending at th’ arrival of an hour. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
If the motion be very ſlow, we perceive it not: we have
no ſenſe of the accretive motion of plants or animals; and
the ſly ſhadow ſteals away upon the dial, and the quickeſt eye
can diſcover no more but that it is gone. Glanv. Scºpſ. c. 11.
DIAL-plate. n.ſ. [dial and plate.] That on which hours or
lines are marked.
He tells us that the two friends, being each of them poſ-
ſeſſed of one of theſe needles, made a kind of dial-plate, in-
ſcribing it with the four and twenty letters, in the ſame man.
ner, as the hours of the day are marked upon the ordinary
dial-plate. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 241.
DIALECT. n.ſ. [3,4xº~..]
1. The ſubdiviſion of a language; as the Attic, Doric, Ionic,
AEolic diale&amp;ts.
2. Stile; manner of expreſſion.
When themſelves do praćtiſe that whereof they write, they
change their dialed?; and thoſe words they ſhun, as if there
were in them ſome ſecret ſting. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
3. Language; ſpeech.
In her youth
There is a prone and ſpeechleſs dialeół,
Such as moves men. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
If the conferring of a kindneſs did not bind the perſon,
upon whom it was conferred, to the returns of gratitude,
why, in the univerſal dialect of the world, are kindneſſes ſtill
called obligations? - South's Sermons.
DIALE'ctical. adj. [from dialeãick.J Logical; argumental.
Thoſe dialectical ſubtleties that the ſchoolmen too often
employ about phyſiological myſteries, are wont much more
to declare the wit of him that uſes them, than increaſe the
knowledge of ſober lovers of truth. Boyle.
DIALECTICK. m. ſ. [...axiºz.] Logick; the ačt of rea-
ſoning.
Dºño. n. ſ. [from dial.] The ſciaterick ſcience; the
knowledge of ſhadow; the aët of conſtructing dials on which
the ſhadow may ſhew the hour.
D1A list. n.ſ.. [from dial.] A conſtructer of dials.
Scientifick dialiſts, by the geometrick conſiderations of
lines, have found out i. to mark out the irregular motion
of the ſhadow in all latitudes, and on all planes. Moxon.
DIA'Logist. n.ſ.. [from dialogue.] A ſpeaker in a dialogue or
conference; a writer of dialogues.
DI’ALOGUE. m. ſ. [3.2.x.y.e..] A conference; a converſation
between two or more, either real or feigned.
Will you hear the dialogue that the two learned men have
compiled in praiſe of the owl and cuckow Shakeſpeare.
Oh, the impudence of this wicked ſex | Laſcivious dialogues
are innocent with you. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
In eaſy dialogues is Fletcher's praiſe;
. He mov’d the mind, but had not pow'r to raiſe. Dryden.
To Di'Alogue. v. a. [from the noun..] To diſcourſe with
another; to confer.
Do'ſ dialogue with thy ſhadow Shakeſpeare's Timon.
DIALY'sis. m. ſ. [34×vais.] The figure in rhetorick by which
ſyllables or words are divided.
DIA'METER... n.ſ.. [ºa and wire”.] The line, which paſſing
through the center of a circle, or other curvilinear figure,
divides it into equal parts. -
The ſpace between the earth and the moon, according to
Ptolemy and Alfraganus, is ſeventeen times the diameter of
the carth, which makes, in a groſs account, about one hundred
and twenty thouſand miles. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
6 U The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 245</div><p class="Text">D I A
D I A
The bay of Naples is the moſt delightful one that I ever
ſaw: it lies in almoſt a round figure of about thirty miles in
the diameter. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
DIA'M ETRAL. adj. [from diameter.] Deſcribing the diameter;
relating to the diameter.
DIA'METRALLY. adv. [from diametral.] According to the
direétion of a diameter.
Chriſtian piety is, beyond all other things, diametrely op-
poſed to profaneneſs and impiety of actions. Hammond.
DiAM E/TRica L. adj. [from diameter.]
1. Deſcribing a diameter.
2. Obſerving the direction of a diameter.
The ſin of calumny is ſet in a moſt diametrical oppoſition
to the evangelical precept of loving our neighbours as our-
ſelves. Government of the Tongue, ſ v.
DIAME't Rica LLY. adv. [from diametrical.] In a diametrical
direétion. -
He perſuaded the king to conſent to what was diametri-
cally againſt his conſcience and his honour, and, in truth, his
ſecurity. Clarendon, b. viii.
When it is thus intercepted in its paſſage, the vapour,
which cannot penetrate the ſtratum diametrically, glides
along the lower ſurface of it, permeating the horizontal
interval, which is betwixt the ſaid denſe ſtratum and that
which lies underneath it. J%dward.
DIAMond. m. ſ. [diamant, French; adamas, Latin.]
The diamond, the moſt valuable and hardeſt of all the gems,
is, when pure, perfeótly clear and pellucid as the purcſt
water; and is eminently diſtinguiſhed from all other ſub-
ſtances by its vivid ſplendour, and the brightneſs of its re-
flexions. It is extremely various in ſhape and ſize, being
found in the greateſt quantity very ſmall, and the larger ones
extremely ſeldom met with. The largeſt ever known is that
in the poſſeſſion of the great Mogul, which weighs two hun-
dred and ſeventy-nine carats, and is computed to be worth
ſeven hundred and ſeventy-nine thouſand two hundred and
forty-four pounds. The diamond bears the force of the
ſtrongeſt fires, except the concentrated ſolar rays, without
hurt; and even that infinitely fierceſt of all fires does it no in-
jury, unleſs directed to its weaker parts. It bears a glaſs-houſe
fire for many days, and, if taken carefully out, and ſuffered to
cool by degrees, is found as bright and beautiful as before ;
but if taken haſtily out, it will ſometimes crack, and even
ſplit into two or three pieces. The places where we have
diamonds are the Eaſt Indies and the Braſils; and though they
are uſually found clear and colourleſs, yet they are ſometimes
flightly tinged with the colours of the other gems, by the
mixture of ſome metalline particles. Hill on Foſſils.
This diamond was my mother's : take it, heart;
But keep it ’till you woo another wife. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner;
Or, for the diamond, the chain you promiſed. Shakespeare.
I ſee how thine eye would emulate the diamond: thou haſt
the right arched bent of the brow. Shakespeare Mer. Iſives ºf //indſ.
The diamond is preferable and vaſtly ſuperior to all others
in luſtre and beauty; as alſo in hardneſs, which renders it
more durable and laſting, and therefore much more valuable,
than any other ſtone. //oodward's Mett. Foſſ.
The diamond is by mighty monarchs worn,
Fair as the ſtar that uſhers in the morn. Blackm. Creation.
The lively diamond drinks thy pureſt rays,
Colle&amp;ted light, compačt. Thomſon's Summer, l. 140.
Di'A PASE. m. ſ. [3.2 rać.] A chord including all tones. The
old word for diapaſon. See DIAPAson.
And 'twixt them both a quadrant was the baſe,
Proportion'd equally by ſeven and nine;
. Nine was the circle ſet in heaven's place,
All which compacted made a good diapaſ. Fairy Queen.
- The ſweet numbers and melodious meaſures,
With which I wont the winged words to tie,
And make a tuneful diapaſe of pleaſures,
Now being let to run at liberty. Spenser.
DIAPA’son. m. ſ. [3.2.12%,.] - -
º denotes a chord which includes all tones: it is the
ſame with that we call an eighth, or an octave; becauſe there
are but ſeven tones or notes, and then the eighth is the ſame
again with the firſt. - - Harris.
It diſcovereth the true coincidence of ſounds into diapaSpenser,
which is the return of the ſame ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Harſh din
Broke the fair muſick that all creatures made
To their great Lord, whoſe love their motion ſway’d
In perfect diapaſon, whilſt they ſtood
In firſt obedience, and their ſtate of good. Milton.
Many a ſweet riſe, many as ſweet a fall,
A full-mouth diapaſon ſwallows all. Craſhaw.
From harmony, from heav'nly harmony,
This univerſal frame began:
From harmony to harmony
Through all the compaſs of the notes it ran,
The dispoſºn cloſing full in man. Dryden.
DIAPER. m. ſ. I diapre, French, of uncertain etymology. J
1. Linen cloth woven in flowers, and other figures.
Not any damſel, which her vaunteth moſt
In ſkilful knitting of ſoft ſilken twine;
Nor any weaver, which his work doth boaſt
In diaper, in damaſk, or in lyne,
Might in their diverſe cunning ever dare
With this ſo curious net-work to compare. Sponſºr.
2. A napkin ; a towel.
Let one attend him with a ſilver baſon
Full of roſe-water, and beſtrew’d with flowers;
Another bear the ewer, a third a diaper. Shaºffeare.
To Di'APER. v. a. [from the noun J
1. To variegate; to diverſify; to flower.
For fear the ſtones her tender foot ſhould wrong,
The ground he ſtrew’d with flowers all along,
And diaper'd like the diſcoloured mead. Sfeſſºr.
Flora uſeth to cloath our grand-dame earth with a few
livery, diapered with various flowers, and chequercd with de-
lightful objects. Hºwel's lºcal 1 or ºff.
2. To draw flowers upon cloaths.
If you diaſer upon folds, let your work be broken, and
taken, as it were, by the half; for reaſon tells you, that your
fold muſt cover ſomewhat unſeen. Peacham on Drawing.
DIAPH ANE'. TY. m. ſ. [from **** {4.) Tranſparency; pel-
lucidneſs; power of tranſmitting light.
Becauſe the outward coat of the eye ought to be pelucid,
to tranſmit the light, which, if the eyes ſhould always ſtand
open, would be apt to grow dry and ſhrink, and loſe their
diaphaneity; therefore are the eyelids ſo contrived as often to
wink, that ſo they may, as it were, glaze and varniſh them
over with the moiſture they contain. J&amp;ay on the Creatiºn.
DIA PHA. Nick. adj. [2.2 and cars...] Tranſparent; pellucid;
having the power to tranſmit light.
Air is an element ſuperior, and lighter than water,
through whoſe vaſt, open, ſubtile, diaphanick, or tranſparent
body, the light, afterwards created, eaſily tranſpired.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Iſºrld.
DIA'PHANOU.S. adj. [.2 and par...] Tranſparent; clear;
tranſlucent; pellucid ; capable to tranſmit light.
Ariſtotle calleth light a quality inherent, or clearing to a
diaphanous body. Raleigh's Hiſ?ory ºf the Wºrld.
When he had taken off the infect, he found in the leaf
very little and diaphanous eggs, exactly like to thoſe which yet
remained in the tubes of the fly's womb. Ray on the Creation.
DIAPHoR E"tick. adj. [2.222;ºrizº...] Sudorifick; promoting a
diaphoreſis or perſpiration; cauſing ſweat.
Diaphoreticks, or promoters of perſpiration, help the organs
of digeſtion, becauſe the attenuation of the aliment make it
perſpirable. Aºuthnot on Aiments.
A diaphoretic; medicine, or a ſudorifick, is ſomething that
will provoke ſweating. // atts.
Di'APHRAGM. n.ſ. […wa.]
1. The midriff which divides the upper cavity of the body from
the lower.
2. Any diviſion or partition which divides a hollow body.
It conſiſts of a faſciculus of bodies, round, about one ſixth
of an inch in diameter, hollow, and parted into numerous cells
by means of diaphragms, thick ſet throughout the whole length
of the body. - J/oodward on Foſſils.
DIARRHOE'A. m. ſ. [3,4}...] A flux of the belly, whereby
a perſon frequently goes to ſtool, and is cured either by
purging off the cauſe, or reſtringing the bowels. S&amp;incy.
During his diarrhaea I healed up the fontanels. J/iſeman.
DIA RR Hoe"rick. adj. [from diarrhoea.] Promoting the flux
of the belly; ſolutive; purgative.
Millet is diarrhaetick, cleanſing, and uſeful in diſeaſes of
the kidneys. Arbuthnot on fliznents.
Di'ARY. m. ſ. [diarium, Latin.] An account of the tranſ-
actions, accidents, and obſervations of every day; a journal.
In ſea-voyages, where there is nothing to be ſeen but ſky
and ſea, men make diaries ; but in land-travel, wherein ſo
much is to be obſerved, they omit it. Bacon, Eſſay 19.
I go on in my intended diary. Tatler, Nº. 60.
DIA'stol E. m. ſ. [2.2.x.]
1. A figure in rhetorick, by which a ſhort ſyllable is made long.
2. The dilation of the heart.
The ſyſtole ſeems to reſemble the forcible bending of a
ſpring, and the dia/?ole its flying out again to its natural ſtate.
Ray on the Creation.
DIA's TYLE. [2.2 and -ºxº, a pillar.] A ſort of edifice where
the pillars ſtand at ſuch a diſtance from one another, that
three diameters of their thickneſs are allowed for intercolum-
niation. IHarris.
DIATE'ss E R on. m. ſ. [of 3.2 and zizzigz, four.] An inter-
"val in muſick, compoſed of one greater tone, one leſſer,
and one greater ſemi-tone; its proportion being as four to
three. It is called, in muſical compoſition, a perfect fourth.
Harris.
DIATO'Nick. ſ of 3,2-42. The ordinary ſort of muſick
which proceeds by different tones, either in aſcending or
- deſcending.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 246</div><p class="Text">D I C
D I E
deſcending. It contains only the two greater and leſſºr tones,
and the greater ſemi-tone. Harris.
Diaze's rick Tone. [of 22 and ºvg..] In the ancient Greek
muſick, disjoined two fourths, one on each ſide of it; and
which being joined to either, made a fifth. This is, in our
muſick, from A to B.
They allowed to this diazentick tone, which is our La, Mi,
the proportion of nine to eight, as being the unalterable dif-
ference of the fifth and four h. Harris.
Di'a ple. n.ſ. [from dipfel, Dutch, a ſharp point, Skinner;
from dabble, junius.) A ſmall ſpade; a pointed inſtrument
with which the gardeners make holes for planting.
Dic A'city. m. ſ. [dicacitas, Lat.] Pertneſs; ſaucineſs. Dić.
Di'Eston E. n.ſ. A little ſtone which children throw at an-
other ſtone. -
I have ſeen little girls exerciſe whole hours together, and
take abundance of pains to be expert at dilſtones, as they call
it. - Locke.
DICE. n.ſ. The plural of die. See Die.
It is above a hundred to one againſt any particular throw, that
you do not caſt any given ſet of faces with four cubical dice;
becauſe there are ſo many ſeveral combinations of the ſix faces
of four dice: now, after you have caſt all the trials but one,
it is ſtill as much odds at the laſt remaining time, as it was at
the firſt. - Bentley's Sermons.
To Dic F. v. n. [from the noun..] To game with dice.
I was as virtuouſly given, as a gentleman need to be ; vir-
tuous enough; ſwore little; diced not above ſeven times a
week; went to a bawdy-houſe not above once in a quarter
of an hour. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Dice-box. n ſ. [dice and box.] The box from which the dice
are thrown.
What would you ſay, ſhould you ſee the ſparkler ſhaking
her elbow for a whole night together, and thumping the table
with a dice-box *
Diºce R. m. ſ. [from dice.] A player at dice; a gameſter.
- They make marriage vows
As falſe as dicers oaths. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Dich. adj. This word ſecms corrupted from dit for do it.
Rich men ſin, and I eat root:
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus. Shakeſp. Timon.
Dicho'Tom Y. n.f. [3xºtozºa J Diſtribution of ideas by
alrs.
p Some perſons have diſturbed the order of nature, and abuſed
their readers by an affectation of dichotomies, trichotomies,
ſevens, twelves, &amp;c. Let the nature of the ſubjećt, conſidered
together with the deſign which you have in view, always de-
termine the number of parts into which you divide it. Watts.
I)1'ckeNs. A kind of adverbial exclamation, importing, as it
ſeems, much the ſame with the devil; but I know not whence
derived.
Where had you this pretty weathercock?
—I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my huſband had
him of. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
What a dickens does he mean by a trivial ſum ?
. But han’t you found it, fir Congreve's Old Batchelor.
Diſch ER of Leather. n.ſ. [dicra, low Latin.] Ten hides. Dići.
To DICTATE. v. a. [dido, Latin.] To deliver to another
with authority; to declare with confidence.
The ſpoils of elephants the roofs inlay,
And ſtudded amber darts a golden ray;
Such, and not nobler, in the realms above,
My wonder dićtates is the dome of Jove. Pope's Odyſſey.
Whatſoever is dićiated to us by God himſelf, or by men.
who are divinely inſpired, muſt be believed with full aſſu-
ran CC. Watts's Logick.
DI’ct At E. m. ſ. [dićlatum, Latin.] Rule or maxim delivered
with authority; preſcription; preſcript.
Others caſt about for new diſcoveries, and to ſeek in their
own thoughts for thoſe right helps of art which will ſcarce be
found, I fear, by thoſe who ſervilely confine themſelves to the
diciates of others. Locke.
I credit what the Grecian dićlates ſay, -
And Samian ſounds o'er Scota's bills convey. Prior.
Then let this dićtate of my love prevail;
Inſtant, to foreign realms prepare to ſail,
To learn your father's fortunes. Pope's Odyſſey, b. i.
Dict A'TION. m.ſ.. [from diffate.] The aët or practice of
dićtating or preſcribing. Diff.
DICTATOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] -
1. A magiſtrate of Rome made in times of exigence and diſtreſs,
and inveſted with abſolute authority.
Kind dićlatºrs made, when they came home,
Their vanquiſh'd foes free citizens of Rome.
Julius with honour tam'd Rome's foreign foes;
But patriots fell, ere the dićiator roſe. Prior.
2. One inveſted with abſolute authority. - -
Unanimous they all commit the care,
And management of this main enterprize,
To him their great dictator. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b. i.
3. One whoſe credit or authority enables him to direct the con-
dućt or opinion of others.
Waller.
3
Dict A'Torship. m. ſ. [from dićator.]
Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 120.
Nor is it a ſmall power it gives one man over another, to
have the authority to be the dictator of principles, and teacher
of unqueſtionable truths. - Lºcke.
That riches, honours, and outward ſplendour, ſhould ſet
up perſons for dićiators to all the reſt of mankind, is a moſt
ſhameful invaſion of the right of our underſtanding. If atts.
Dictato'RIAL. adj. [from dićator.] Authoritative; confi
dent; dogmatical; overbearing.
A young academick often dwells upon a journal, or an ob-
ſervator that treats of trade and politicks in a dicatorial
ſtyle, and is laviſh in the praiſe of the author. J/uits.
1. The office of dićtator.
This is the ſolemneſt title they can confer under the prince
dom, being indeed a kind of di:;atorſhip. //otton.
2. Authority; inſolent confidence.
This is that perpetual dictatºrſhip which is exerciſed by
Lucretius, though often in the wrong, Dryden.
Dict A't URE. m.ſ. [dićlatura, Latin.j The office of a dicta-
tor; dićtatorſhip. Dićf.
DI'ction. n.ſ. [dićlion, French; dićlio, Latin.] Stile; lan-
guage; expreſion. - -
There appears in every part of his dićlion, or expreſſion, .
a kind of noble and bold purity. Dryden.
D'ctionaRY. m. ſ. [dicłionarium, Latin.] A book contain-
ing the words of any language in alphabetical order, with
explanations of their meaning; a lexicon; a vocabulary; a
word-book.
Some have delivered the polity of ſpirits, and left an ac-
count that they ſtand in awe of charms, ſpells, and conjura-
tions; that they are afraid of letters and characters, notes
and daſhes, which, ſet together, do ſignify nothing; and not
only in the dictionary of man, but in the ſubtler vocabulary of
ſatan. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 10.
Is it ſuch a horrible fault to tranſlate ſimulacra images 2 I ſee
what a good thing it is to have a good catholick dićlionary. Still.
An army, or a parliament, is a collection of men; a dic-
tionary, or nomenclature, is a collection of words. Watts.
DID. of do. [bib, Saxon.]
1. The preterite of do. . . - -
Thou can'ſt not ſay I did it. Shalºſ care.
What did that greatneſs in a woman's mind ;
Ill lodg’d and weak to act what it deſign'd. 1'ryd. Aurengz,
2. The ſign of the preter-imperfect tenſe, or perfect.
When did his pen on learning fix a brand,
Or rail at arts he did not underſtand. Dryden.
3. It is ſometimes uſed emphatically; as, I did really love him.
DIDA'cTIcAl. Nadj. [??axlze..] Preceptive; giving precepts:
DIDA"ct Ick. } as a didaćtick poem is a poem that gives rules
for ſome art; as the Georgicks.
The means uſed to this purpoſe are partly didačical, and
partly protreptical, demonſtrating the truth of the goſpel; and
then urging the profeſſors of thoſe truths to be ſtedfaſt in the
faith, and to beware of infidelity. Ward on Infidelity.
D1'DAPPER. m. ſ. [from dip.] A bird that dives into the
Water.
DIDA'scALIck. adj. [??azzaxx3..]
giving precepts in ſome art.
I found it neceſſary to form ſome ſtory, and give a kind of
body to the poem: under what ſpecies it may be compre-
hended, whether didaſcalick or heroick, I leave to the judg-
ment of the criticks. Prior.
To Di'DDER. v. a. [diddern, Teut. zittern, Germ.] To quake
with cold; to ſhiver. A provincial word Skinner.
Didst. The ſecond perſon of the preter tenſe of do. See DiD.
Oh laſt and beſt of Scots! who did? maintain
Thy country's freedom from a foreign reign. Dryden.
To DIE. v. a. [beag, Saxon, a colour.] To tinge; to colour;
to ſtain.
Preceptive; didaćtick;
So much of death her thoughts
Had entertain'd, as dy'd her cheeks with pale. Milt. P. L.
All white, a virgin ſaint ſhe ſought the ſkies;
For marriage, though it ſullies not, it dies. Dryden.
Die. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Colour; tinéture; ſtain; hue acquired.
It will help me nothing
To plead mine innocence; for that die is on me,
Which makes my whit'ſt part black. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
We have dainty works of feathers of wonderful luftre,
excellent dies, and many. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Darkneſs we ſee emerges into light, -
And ſhining ſuns deſcend to ſable night:
, Ev’n heav’n itſelf receives another die,
When weary'd animals in ſlumbers lie
Of midnight eaſe; another, when the gray
Of morn preludes the ſplendor of the day. Dryden's Fables.
It is very ſurpriſing to ſee the images of the mind ſtamped
upon the aſpect; to ſee the cheeks take the die of the paſſions,
and appear in all the colours and complexions of thought.
Collier of the Aſpeš.
- Firſt this
She ſends on earth; then that of deeper die -
Steals ſoft behind. Thompſºn's Summer, l, 1685.
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 247</div><p class="Text">D I E
D I E
To Die. v. n. [beabian, Saxon.]
1. To loſe life; to expire; to paſs into another ſtate of
exiſtence.
Thou doſt kill me with thy unkind falſhood; and it grieves
me not to die, but it grieves me that thou art the murtherer.
Sidney.
Nor did the third his conqueſts long ſurvive,
Dying ere ſcarce he had begun to live. Addison Ovid. Metam.
Oh let me live my own, and die ſo too !
To live and die is all I have to do?
2. To periſh by violence or diſeaſe.
The dira only ſerved to confirm him in his firſt opinion,
that it was his deſtiny to die in the enſuing combat. Dryden.
Talk not of life or ranſom, he replies,
Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies:
In vain a ſingle Trojan ſues for grace;
But leaſt the ſons of Priam's hateful race:
Die then, my friend what boots it to deplore ?
The great, the good Patroclus is no more
He, far thy better, was foredoom'd to die;
And thou, doſt thou, bewail mortality. Pope's Hom. Iliad.
3. It has by before an inſtrument of death.
4. Of before a diſeaſe.
They often come into the world clear, and with the ap-
pearance of ſound bodies; which, notwithſtanding, have
been infected with diſeaſe, and have died of it, or at leaſt
have been very infirm. - Wiſeman's Surgery.
5. : commonly before a privative, and of before a poſitive
Caulc.
At firſt ſhe ſtartles, then ſhe ſtands amaz'd;
At laſt with terror ſhe from thence doth fly,
And loaths the wat'ry glaſs wherein ſhe gaz'd,
And ſhuns it ſtill, although for thirſt ſhe die. Davies.
He in the loaden vineyard dies for thirſt. Addiſon.
Hipparchus being paſſionately fond of his own wife, who
was enamoured of Bathyllus, leaped and died of his fall. Addison
6. To be puniſhed with death.
If I die for it, as no leſs is threatened me, the king my old
maſter muſt be relieved. Shakeſp. King Lear.
What is the love of our neighbour *
-The valuing him as the image of God, one for whom
Chriſt died. Hammond's Pracf. Catech.
7. To be loſt; to periſh; to come to nothing.
How now, my lord, why do you keep alone *
Of ſorrieſt fancies your companion making,
Uſing thoſe thoughts which ſhould indeed have died
With them they think on. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
If any ſovereignty, on account of his property, had been
veſted in Adam, which in truth there was not, it would have
died with him. Locke.
Whatever pleaſure any man may take in ſpreading whiſpers,
he will find greater ſatisfaction by letting the ſecret die within
his own breaſt. Spectator, Nº. 595.
8. To ſink; to faint.
His heart died within him, and he became as a ſtone. I Sa.
9. [In theology..] To periſh everlaſtingly.
So long as God ſhall live, ſo long ſhall the damned die.
Hakewell on Providence.
10. To languiſh with pleaſure or tenderneſs.
To ſounds of heav'nly harps ſhe dies away,
And melts in viſions of eternal day. Pope's Eloi, to Abelard.
11. To vaniſh. -
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light. Shakespeare H. VI.
The ſmaller ſtains and blemiſhes may die away and diſap-
pear, amidſt the brightneſs that ſurrounds them; but a blot of
a deeper nature caſts a ſhade on all the other beauties, and
darkens the whole charaćter. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 256.
12. [In the ſtile of lovers..] To languiſh with affection.
The young men acknowledged in love-letters, that they
died for Rebecca. Tatler, Nº. 11 o.
13. To wither as a vegetable.
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it
abideth alone ; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.
john xii. 25.
Pope's Epiſtles.
14. To grow vapid, as liquor.
D1E. n.ſ. pl. dice. [dº, French; dir, Welſh.]
I. A ſmall cube, marked on its faces with numbers from one to
ſix, which gameſters throw in play.
Keep a gameſter from the dice, and a good ſtudent from his
book, and it is wonderful. ... Shakeſp. Merry Wives of I/indſor.
I have ſet my life upon a caſt,
And I will ſtand the hazard of the die. Shakeſ Richard III.
He knows which way the lot and the die ſhall fall, as per-
fečtly as if they were already caſt. South's Sermons.
2. Hazard; chance;
Eftſoons his cruel hand Sir Guyon ſtaid,
Temp'ring the paſſion with adviſement ſlow,
And muſtring might on enemy diſmay’d;
For th' equal die of war he well did know. Fairy Queen.
So both to battle fierce arranged are ;
In which his harder fortune was to fall
Under my ſpear: ſuch is the die of war. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Thine is the adventure, thine the vićtory:
Well has thy fortune turn'd the die for thee. Dryden's Faller.
# Any cubick body. - -
1E. n. ſ. plur. dies. The ſtamp uſed in coinage.
There have been ſuch variety of dies made uſe of by
Wood in ſtamping his money, that it makes the diſcovery of
counterfeits more difficult, Swift.
Di'ER. n.ſ...[from die..] One who follows the trade of dying,
one who dies cloaths.
The fleece, that has been by the dier ſtain'd,
Never again its native whiteneſs gain'd. J/aller.
There were ſome of very low rank and profeſſions, who
acquired great eſtates: coblers, diers, and ſhoemakers gave
publick ſhows to the people. Arbuthnot on Coins.
DI'E.T. n.ſ. [diata, low Latin; 3.2 ra.]
1. Food; proviſions for the mouth; vićtuals.
They cared for no other delicacy of fare, or curioſity of
diet, than to maintain life. Raleigh's Hi/?ry of the // orld.
Time may come, when men
With angels may participate; and find
No inconvenient diet, nor too light fare. Mi't. Par. Loſ’.
No part of diet, in any ſeaſon, is ſo healthful, ſo natural,
and ſo agreeable to the ſtomach, as good and well-ripened
fruits. 7 emple.
Milk appears to be a proper diet for human bodies, where
acrimony is to be purged or avoided; but not ſo proper where
the canals are obſtructed, it being void of all ſaline quality.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Food regulated by the rules of medicine, for the prevention
or cure of any diſeaſe.
I commend rather ſome diet for certain ſeaſons, than fre-
quent uſe of phyſick; for thoſe diets alter the body more, and
trouble it leſs. Bacon, Eſſay 31.
I reſtrained myſelf to ſo regular a diet, as to eat fleſh but
once a day, and little at a time, without ſalt or vinegar. Temp.
To Di'ET. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To feed by the rules of medicine.
She dicts him with faſting every day,
The ſwelling of his wounds to mitigate,
And made him pray both early and eke late.
Shew a while like fearful war,
To diet rank minds ſick of happineſs,
And purge th' obſtructions, which begin to ſtop
Our very veins of life. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
He was not taken well; he had not din'd:
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold; and then
We powt upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we've ſtuff'd
Theſe pipes, and theſe conveyances of blood,
With wine and feeding, we have ſuppler ſouls
Than in our prieſtlike faſts; therefore I'll watch him
*Till he be dieted to my requeſt. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I will attend my huſband, be his nurſe,
Diet his ſickneſs; for it is my office. Shakeſp. Cam. of Err.
- Henceforth my early care
Shall 'tend thee, and the fertile burden eaſe
*Till dieted by thee, I grow mature
In knowledge as the gods, who all things know. Milt. P. L.
We have lived upon expedients, of which no country had
leſs occaſion: we have dicted a healthy body into a conſump-
tion, by plying it with phyſick inſtead of food. Swift.
2. To give food to.
I'm partly led to diet my revenge,
For that I do ſuſpect the luſty Moor
Hath leapt into my ſeat.
3. To board; to ſupply with diet.
To D1'Et. v. n.
1. To eat by rules of phyſick.
2. To eat; to feed.
I join with thee calm peace and quiet;
Spare faſt, that oft with gods doth diet. Milton.
Diet-DRINk. n.ſ.. [diet and drink.] Medicated liquors; drink
brewed with medicinal ingredients.
The obſervation will do that better than the lady's diet-
drinks, or apothecary's medicines. Locke.
Di'ET. n.ſ [from dies, an appointed day, Skinner : from diet,
an old German word ſignifying a multitude, junius.] An
aſſembly of princes or eſtates. -
An emperour in title without territory, who can ordain no-
thing of importance but by a diet, or aſſembly of the eſtates
of many free princes, eccleſiaſtical and temporal. Raleigh.
Di'ETARY. adj. [from diet. J Pertaining to the rules of
diet. Dićt.
Di'ETER. m. ſ. [from dict.] One who preſcribes rules for eat-
ing; one who prepares food by medicinal rules.
He ſauc'd our broth as Juno had been ſick,
And he her dieter. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Diet eſtical. Unſ. [\arrºrizº.] Relating to diet; belonging
DIETE'Tick, } to the medicinal cautions about the uſe of food.
He
Fairy Queen.
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 248</div><p class="Text">D I F
He received no other counſel than to refrain from cold
drink, which was but a dietetical caution, and ſuch as, with-
out a journey to Æſculapius, culinary preſcription might
have been afforded. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i.
This book was received by the publick with the reſpect
that was due to the importance of its contents: it became the
ſubjećt of converſation, and produced even ſe&amp;ts in the dietetick
philoſophy. Arbuthnot on Aliments, Prºf.
To DIFFER. v. m. [differo, Latin.]
. 1. To be diſtinguiſhed from ; to have properties and qualities
not the ſame with thoſe of another perſon or thing. -
If the pipe be a little wet on the inſide, it will make a dif-
fering ſound from the ſame pipe dry. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Thy prejudices, Syphax, wont diſcern
What virtues grow from ignorance and choice,
Nor how the hero differs from the brute. Addiſon's Cato.
The ſeveral parts of the ſame animal differ in their qua-
lities. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To contend; to be at variance.
A man that is of judgment and underſtanding ſhall ſome-
times hear ignorant men differ, and know well within himſelf
that thoſe which ſo differ mean one thing, and yet they them-
ſelves never agree.
There are certain meaſures to be kept, which may leave a
tendency rather to gain than to irritate thoſe who differ with
you in their ſentiments. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 19.
Here uncontroll'd you may in judgment ſit;
We'll never differ with a crowded pit. Rowe.
Others differ with me about the truth and reality of theſe
ſpeculations. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
. To be of a contrary opinion.
In things purely ſpeculative, as theſe are, and no ingre-
dients of our faith, it is free to differ from one another in our
opinions and ſentiments. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Di'FFERENCE. m. ſ. [differ entia, Latin.]
1. State of being diſtinét from ſomething; contrariety to identity.
Where the faith of the holy church is one, a difference be-
tween cuſtoms of the church doth no harm. Hooker, b. iv.
2. The quality by which one differs from another.
This nobility, or difference from the vulgar, was not in the
beginning given to the ſucceſſion of blood, but to the ſucceſ-
ſion of virtue. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Thus born alike, from virtue firſt began
The diff'rence that diſtinguiſh'd man from man:
He claim'd no title from deſcent of blood,
But that which made him noble, made him good. Dryden.
Though it be uſeful to diſcern every variety that is to be
found in nature, yet it is not convenient to conſider every
difference that is in things, and divide them into diſtinét claſſes,
under every ſuch difference. Locke.
3. The diſproportion between one thing and another cauſed by
- the qualities of each.
You ſhall ſee great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your
Sicilia. - Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale,
Oh the ſtrange difference of man and man!
To thee a woman's ſervices are due ;
My fool uſurps my body. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Here might be ſeen a great difference between men practiſed
to fight, and men accuſtomed only to ſpoil. Hayward.
4. Diſpute; debate; quarrel; controverſy.
What was the difference P
—It was a contention in publick. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
He is weary of his life that hath a difference with any of
them, and will walk abroad after daylight. Sandys.
5. Diſtinction.
Our conſtitution, under a good adminiſtration, does not
only make a difference between the guilty and the innocent,
but, even among the guilty, between ſuch as are more or leſs
criminal. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 31.
Nothing could have fallen out more unluckily than that
there ſhould be ſuch differences among them, about that which
they pretend to be the only means of ending differences. Tillotſ.
6. Point in queſtion; ground of controverſy.
- Are you acquainted with the difference,
That holds this preſent queſtion in the court? Shakeſpeare.
7. A logical diſtinétion. -
Some are never without a difference, and commonly, by
amuſing men with a ſubtilty, blanch the matter. Bacon's Eſſays.
8. Evidences of diſtinétion; differential marks.
Henry had the title of ſovereign, yet did not put thoſe
things in execution which are the true marks and differences of
ſovereignty. Davies.
To Di'FFEREN.cf. v. a. [from the noun..] To cauſe a dif-
ference; to make one thing not the ſame as another.
Moſt are apt to ſeek all the differences of letters in thoſe
articulating motions; whereas ſeveral combinations of letters
are framed by the very ſame motions of thoſe organs, which
are commonly obſerved, and are differenced by other concur-
rent cauſes. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Graſs differenceſh a civil and well cultivated region from a
barren and deſolate wilderneſs. Ray on the Creation.
Vol. I.
Bacon's Eſſays.
We ſee nothing that differences the courage of Mneſtheus
from that of Sergeſthus. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
Di'FFERENT. adj. [from differ.]
1. Diſtinct; not the ſame. * -
Happineſs conſiſts in things which produce pleaſure, and, in
the abſence of thoſe, which cauſe any pain: now theſe, to
different men, are very different things. " Locke.
There are covered galleries that lead from the palace to
five different churches. Addiſon on Italy:
2. Of many contrary qualities.
The Britons change
Sweet native home for unaccuſtom'd air,
And other climes, where diff'rent food and ſoil -
Portend diſtempers. Phillips.
3. Unlike; diſfimilar. -
Neither the ſhape of faces, nor the age, nor the colour;
ought to be alike in all figures, any more than the hair; be-
cauſe men are as different from each other, as the regions in
which they are born are different. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
DIFF ERE'NTIAL Method, is applied to the doćtrine of É
mals, or infinitely ſmall quantities, called the arithmetick of
fluxions; about the invention of which there has been a con-
teſt between Leibnitz and Sir Iſaac Newton. It conſiſts
in deſcending from whole quantities to their infinitely ſmall
differences, and comparing together theſe infinitely ſmall dif-
ferences, of what kind ſoever they be: and from thence it
takes the name of the differential calculus, or analyſis of in-
finiteſimals. - Harris.
D1'FFERENTLY. adv. [from different.] In a different manner.
He may conſider how differently he is affected by the ſame
thought, which preſents itſelf in a great writer, from what he
is when he finds it delivered by a perſon of an ordinary genius.
Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 4cg.
D'IFFERING LY. adv. [from differing.] In a different manner.
Such protuberant and concave parts of a ſurface may remit
the light ſo differingly, as to vary a colour. Boyle.
DIFFICIL adj. [difficilis, Latin.]. -
1. Difficult; hard; not eaſy; not obvious. Little uſed.
That that ſhould give motion to an unwieldy bulk, which
itſelf hath neither bulk nor motion, is of as diffcil apprehen-
fion as any myſtery in nature. Glanv. Scepſ c. 4.
* Latin was not more diffcil,
Than to a blackbird 'tis to whiſtle. Hudibras.
2. Scrupulous; hard to be perſuaded.
The cardinal finding the pope difficil in granting the diſpen-
ſation, doth uſe it as a principal argument, concerning the
king's merit towards that ſee, that he had touched none of
thoſe deniers which had been levied by popes in England. Bac.
DI'fficilness. n.ſ.. [from diff.il.] Difficulty to be perſuaded;
incompliance; impracticability.
There be that in their nature do not affect the good of
others: the lighter ſort of malignity turneth but to a croſſneſs,
or frowardneſs, or aptneſs to oppoſe, or difficilneſs, or the like;
but the deeper ſort, to envy and mere miſchief. Bacon's Eſſays.
DIFFICULT. adj. [difficilis, Latin.]
1. Hard ; not eaſy; not facil.
It is difficult in the eyes of this people. Zachar.
2. Troubleſome; vexatious.
- Hard to pleaſe; pesviſh ; moroſe.
DI'FFIcult LY. adv. [from difficult J Hardly; with difficulty.
A man who has always indulged himſelf in the full enjoy-
ment of his ſtation, will difficultly be perſuaded to think any
methods unjuſt that offer to continue it. Rogers's Sermons.
D1'FFIculty. n.ſ.. [from difficult; difficultà, French.]
1. Hardneſs; contrariety to eaſineſs or facility.
The religion which, by this covenant, we engage ourſelves
to obſerve, is a work of labour and difficulty; a ſervice that
requires our greateſt care and attention to the diſcharge of
it. Rogers, Serm. 13.
2. That which is hard to accompliſh; that which is not eaſy.
They miſtake difficulties for impoſſibilities: a pernicious
miſtake certainly ; and the more pernicious, for that men are
ſeldom convinced of it, 'till their convićtions do them no
good. South's Sermons.
3. Diſtreſs; oppoſition.
Thus, by degrees, he roſe to Jove's imperial ſeat:
Thus difficulties prove a ſoul legitimately great. Dryden:
4. Perplexity in affairs; uneaſineſs of circumſtances.
They lie at preſent under ſome difficulties, by reaſon of the
emperor's diſpleaſure, who has forbidden the importation of
their manufactures. Addiſon on Italy.
5. Objećtion; cavil.
Men ſhould conſider, that raiſing difficulties concerning the
myſteries in religion, cannot make them more wiſe, learned,
or virtuous. * Swift.
To DIFFIDE. v. n. [diffdo, Latin.] To diſtruſt; to have
no confidence in.
With hope and fear
The woman did the new ſolution hear:
The man diffides in his own augury,
And doubts the gods. Dryden,
6 X Di'FFIDENgE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 249</div><p class="Text">D I F
D I G.
Di'Ef idence. n.ſ.. [from diffide..] Diſtruſt; want of confi-
dence; timidity. -
No man almoſt thought himſelf ſecure, and men durſt ſcarce
commune or talk one with another; but there was a general
diffidence every where. Bacon's Henry VII.
You have brought ſcandal
To Iſrael, diffdence of God, and doubt
In feeble hearts, propenſe enough before
To waver. Milion's Agoniſłes.
If the evidence of its being, or that this is its true ſenſe,
be only on probable proofs, our aſſent can reach no higher
than an aſſurance or diffdence, ariſing from the more or leſs
apparent probability of the proofs. Locke.
Be filent always, when you doubt your ſenſe;
And ſpeak, though ſure, with ſeeming diffidence. Pope.
Whatſoever atheiſts think on, or whatſoever they look on, all
do adminiſter ſome reaſons for ſuſpicion and diffdence, leaſt
poſſibly they may be in the wrong; and then it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Bentley's Serm.
D1'FFIDENT, adj. [from diffide.] Not confident; not certain;
diſtruſtful.
I am not ſo confident of my own ſufficiency as not willing-
ly to admit the counſel of others; but yet I am not ſo diffident
of myſelf, as brutiſhly to ſubmit to any man's dićtates. K.Charles.
Be not diffident
Of wiſdom; ſhe deſerts thee not, if thou
Diſmiſs not her, when moſt thou need'ſt her nigh. Milton.
I was really ſo diffident of it, as to let it lie by me theſe two
years, juſt as you now fee it. Pope.
Pliny ſpeaks of the Seres, the ſame people with the Chineſe,
as being very ſhy and diffident in their manner of dealing.
Arbuthnot.
Diſtreſs makes the humble heart diffdent. Clariſſa.
To DIFFIND. v. a. [diffind, Latin.] To cleave in two;
to ſplit. Dićf.
DIFF 1's Ion. n.ſ. . [diffiſſio, Latin.] The act of cleaving or
ſplitting. Dić7.
DIFFLA'tion. n.ſ.. [difflare, Latin.] The aët of ſcattering
with a blaſt of wind. Dićf.
Di'FFLUENCE. Un. ſ. [from diffuo, Latin.] The quality of
D1'FFLUENcy. } falling away on all ſides; the effect of fluidi-
ty; the contrary to conſiſtency.
Ice is water congealed by the frigidity of the air, whereby
it acquireth no new form; but rather a confiſtence or deter-
mination of its diffuency, and omitteth not its eſſence, but
condition of fluidity. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
Di'FFLUENT. adj. [diffuens, Latin.] Flowing every way;
not conſiſtent; not fixed.
DIFFORM. adj. [from forma, Latin.] Contrary to uniform;
having parts of different ſtructure; diffinilar; unlike; irre-
gular ; as a difform flower, one of which the leaves are unlike
each other.
The unequal refraćtions of diffirm rays proceed not from
any contingent irregularities; ſuch as are veins, an uneven
...}. or fortuitous poſition of the pores of glaſs. Newton.
DIF Fo'RMITY. m. ſ [from difform.] Diverſity of form ; irre-
gularity; diſfimilitude.
While they murmur againſt the preſent diſpoſure of things,
they reſt not in their eſtabliſhed natures; but deſire in them a
diffirmity from the primitive rule, and the idea of that mind,
that formed all things beſt. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. e. i 1.
DIFFRA'Nch is EMENT. n.ſ.. [franchiſe, French..] The act of
taking away the privileges of a city.
To DIFFU'SE. v. a. [diffuſus, Latin.]
1. To pour out upon a plane, ſo that the liquor may run every
way.
When theſe waters began to riſe at firſt, long before they
could ſwell to the height of the mountains, they would diffuſe
themſelves every way. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. To ſpread; to ſcatter; to diſperſe.
Wiſdom had ordain'd
Good out of evil to create; inſtead
Of ſpirits malign, a better race to bring
Into their vacant room, and thence diffuſ: -
His good to worlds, and ages, infinite. Milton's Par. Loſt.
No ſcét wants its apoſtles to propagate and diffuſe it.
A chief renown'd in war,
Whoſe race ſhall bear aloft the Latian name,
And through the conquer'd world diffuſe our fame. Dryden.
His eyes diffus’d a venerable grace,
And charity itſelf was in his face.
DIFFU's E. adj. [diffuſis, Latin.]
1. Scattered; widely ſpread.
2. Copious; not conciſe.
DIFFU's Ed. participial adj. [from diffuſe J. This word ſeems
to have ſignified, in Shakeſpeare's time, the ſame as wild, un-
couth, irregular.
Let them from forth a ſawpit ruſh at once,
With ſome diffuſed ſong. Shakesp. Merry lºss of Hindſºr.
He grows like ſavages,
Dryden's Good Parſm.
Decay of Piety.
To ſwearing and ſtern looks, diffus'd attire,
And every thing that ſeems unnatural. Shakeſp. Henry V.
DIFFU'sedly, adv. [from diffuſed.] Widely; diſperſedly;
in manner of that which is ſpread every way. -
DIFFU's Edness. n.ſ. (from diffuſed.] The ſtate of being
diffuſed; diſperſion. -
DIFFU's Ely. adv [from diffuſe.]
1. Widely; extenſively.
2. Copiouſly; not conciſely.
DIFFU'sion. n.ſ.. [from diffiſ...]
1. Diſperſion; the ſtate of being ſcattered every way.
Whereas all bodies act either by the communication of their
natures, or by the impreſſions and ſignatures of their motions,
the diffuſion of ſpecies viſible ſeemeth to participate more of
the former operation, and the ſpecies audible of the latter.
Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 269.
A ſheet of very well ſleeked marbled paper did not caſt
diſtinét colours upon the wall, nor throw its light with an
equal diffuſion ; but threw its beams, unſtained and bright, to
this and that part of the wall. Boyle on Colours.
2. Copiouſneſs; exuberance of ſtile.
DIFFU'sive. adj. [from diffiſ...} -
1. Having the quality of ſcattering any thing every way.
Diffuſive of themſelves, where-e'er they paſs
They make that warmth in others they expcét:
Their valour works like bodies on a glaſs,
And does its image on their men project. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
2. i.e., diſperſed; having the quality of ſuffering dif-
fuſion.
No man is of ſo general and diffuſive a luſt, as to proſecute
his amours all the world over. South's Sermony.
The ſtars, no longer overlaid with weight,
Exert their heads from underneath the maſs,
And upward ſhoot, and kindle as they paſs,
And with diffuſive light adorn their heav'nly place. Dryden.
Cheriſh'd with hope, and fed with joy it grows;
Its cheerful buds their opening bloom diſcloſe,
And round the happy ſoil diffuſive odour flows. Prior.
3. Extended; in full extenſion.
They are not agreed among themſelves where infallibility
is ſeated; whether in the pope alone, or a council alone, or
in both together, or in the diffuſive body of Chriſtians. Tilotſ.
Diffu'sively. adv. [from aſ ifive..] Widely; extenſively;
every way.
DIFFU'sive N Ess. ºft [from diffuſive.]
1. Extenſion ; diſperſion; the power of diffuſing; the ſtate of
being diffuſed. -
2. Want of conciſeneſs; large compaſs of cxpreſſion.
The fault that I find with a modern legend, is its d'ſ-
fºſveneſs: you have ſometimes the whole ſide of a medal over-
run with it. Addiſon on Ancient A.ſedals.
To DIG. v. a. preter, dug, or digged; part paſſ, dig, or digged.
[bic, Saxon, a ditch; diger, Daniſh, to dig.]
1. To pierce with a ſpade.
Then ſaid he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall;
and when I had digged in the wall, I beheld a door. Ezek. viii. 8.
2. To form by digging.
Seek with heart and mouth to build up the walks of Jeru-
ſalem, which you have broken down; and to fill up the mines
that you have digged by craft and ſubtlety, to overthrow the
ſame. Jºhitgift.
He built towers in the deſert, and digged many wells; for
he had much cattle. 2 Chro. xxvi. Io.
3. To cultivate the ground by turning it with a ſpade.
The walls of your garden, without their furniture, look as
ill as thoſe of your houſe; ſo that you cannot dig up your
garden too often. Temple.
Be firſt to dig the ground, be firſt to burn
The branches lopt. Dryden's Virg. Georg. ii.
4. To pierce with a ſharp point.
A rav'nous vulture in his open'd ſide,
Her crooked beak and cruel talons try'd ;
Still for the growing liver digg’d his breaſt,
The growing liver ſtill ſupply'd the feaſt.
5. To gain by digging. -
It is digged out of even the higheſt mountains, and indeed
all other parts of the earth contingently and indifferently; as
the pyrites. JWoodward.
Nor was the ground alone requir'd to bear -
Her annual income to the crooked ſhare;
But greedy mortals, rummaging her ſtore,
Digg'd from her entrails firſt the precious ore. Dryd Ovid.
To D. G. v. a. To work with a ſpade; to work in making
holes, or turning the ground.
They long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it
more than far hid treaſures. job iii. 21.
They have often dug into lands that are deſcribed in old
authors, as the places where ſuch particular ſtatues or obe-
liſks ſtood, and have ſeldom failed of ſucceſs in their purſuits.
Addiſon's Travel.
To DIG up. v. a. To throw up that which is covered with er,
*
Dryden's Zn.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 250</div><p class="Text">D I G
D I G
If I digg’d up thy forefather's graves,
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It would not ſlake mine ire. Shakespeare H. VI.
DI'GER ENT. adj. [digerens, Latin.] That which has the power
of digeſting, or cauſing digeſtion. Dići.
DIGE'st. n.ſ. [digeſia, Latin.] The pande&amp;t of the civil law,
containing the opinions of the ancient lawyers.
I had a purpoſe to make a particular digeſ', or recompile-
ment of the laws of mine own nation. Bacon.
Laws in the digeſt ſhew that the Romans applied them-
ſelves to trade. - Arbuthnot on Coins.
To DIGEST. v. a. [digero, digſlum, Latin.]
1. To diſtribute into various claſſes or repoſitories; to range or
diſpoſe methodically.
2. To concoët in the ſtomach, ſo as that the various particles of
food may be applied to their proper uſe.
If little faults, proceeding on diſtemper,
Shall not be wink'd at, how ſhall we ſtretch our eye,
When capital crimes, chew'd, ſwallow'd, and digeſted,
Appear. - Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Each then has organs to digeſt his food;
One to beget, and one receive the brood. Prior.
3. To ſoften by heat, as in a boiler, or in a dunghil: a che-
mical term. -
4. To range methodically in the mind; to apply knowledge by
meditation to its proper uſe. -
A few choſen friends, who ſometimes deign
To bleſs my humble roof, with ſenſe refin'd,
Learning digeſted well. Thomſon's Winter, l. 550.
5. To reduce to any plan, ſcheme, or method. -
Our play
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firſtlings of thoſe broils,
'Ginning i' th' middle: ſtarting thence away,
To what may be digeſted in a play. Shakeſp. Troil, and Creſſid.
6. To receive without loathing or repugnance; not to reject.
Firſt, let us go to dinner.
—Nay, let me praiſe you while I have a ſtomach.
—No, pray thee, let it ſerve for table talk;
Then howſoe'er thou ſpeak'ſt, 'mong other things
1 ſhall digeſt it. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
The pleaſance of numbers, that rudeneſs and barbariſm
might the better taſte and digeſt the leſſons of civility. Peacham.
7. To receive and enjoy.
Cornwal and Albany,
With my two daughters dowers, digeſt the third. Shakeſp.
8. [In chirurgery.] To diſpoſe a wound; to generate pus in
order to a cure. -
To DIGE'st. v. n. To generate matter as a wound, and tend
to a Cure.
DIGE's TER. n.ſ.. [from diggſ?..]
1. He that digeſts or concoëts his food.
People that are bilious and fat, rather than lean, are great
eaters and ill digeſters. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. A ſtrong veſſel or engine, contrived by M. Papin, wherein to
boil, with a very ſtrong heat, any bony ſubſtances, ſo as to
reduce them into a fluid ſtate. Quincy.
3. That which cauſes or ſtrengthens the conco&amp;tive power.
Rice is of excellent uſe for all illneſſes of the ſtomach, a
great reſtorer of health, and a great digeſter. Temple.
DIGE'stible. adj [from dige/?..] That which is capable of
being digeſted or conco&amp;ted in the ſtomach.
Thoſe medicines that purge by ſtool enter not into the
meſentery veins; but are, at the firſt, not dige/lible by the ſto-
mach, and therefore move immediately downwards to the
guts. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 43.
DIGE'stroN. n ſ. [from diggſ.]
1. The aët of digeſting or concoëting food in the ſtomach.
Now good digeſtion wait on appetite,
And health on both. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Digeſtion is a fermentation begun, becauſe there are all the
requiſites of ſuch a fermentation; heat, air, and motion: but
it is not a complete fermentation, becauſe that requires a
greater time than the continuance of the aliment in the ſto-
mach : vegetable putrefaction reſembles very much animal
digeſtion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Quantity of food cannot be determined by meaſures and
weights, or any general Leffian rules; but muſt vary with the
vigour or decays of age or of health, and the uſe or diſuſe of
air or of exerciſe, with the changes of appetite; and then,
by what every man may find or ſuſpect of the preſent ſtrength
or weakneſs of digeſtion. Temple.
Every morſel to a ſatisfied hunger, is only a new labour to
a tired dige/?ion. South's Sermons.
2. The preparation of matter by a chemical heat.
We conceive, indeed, that a perfeót good concoétion, or
digºſłion, or maturation of ſome metals, will produce gold.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 327.
Did chymick chance the furnaces preparé,
Raiſe all the labour-houſes of the air, {
And lay crude vapours in digeſtion there. Blackmore.
3. Redućtion to a plan; the act of methodifing; the maturation
of a ſcheme. -
The digeſtion of the counſels in Sweden is made in ſenate,
conſiſting of forty counſellors, who are generally the greateſt
Inlen, Temple.
4. The ačt of diſpoſing a wound to generate matter.
à The diſpoſition of a wound or fore to generate matter.
IGF'stive. adj. [from digºff.]
1. Having the power to cauſe digeſtion, or to ſtrengthen the
ſtomach.
A chiliſaćtory menſtruum, or a digs/five preparation, drawn
from ſpecies or individuals, whoſe ſtomachs peculiarly diſſolve
lapideous bodies. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. e. 5.
2. Capable by heat to ſoften and ſubdue.
The earth and ſun were in that very ſame ſtate; the one
aćtive, piercing, and digeſtive by its heat; the other paſſive,
receptive, and ſtored with materials for ſuch a produćtion.
- Hale's Origin of Mankind.
3. Conſiderating; methodiſing. -
To buſineſs, ripen'd by digºffive thought, '-
This future rule is into method brought. Dryden:
DIGE'stive. m. ſ. [from digºff.] An application which diſ-
poſes a wound to generate matter. - -
I dreſſed it with digeſtives. + Iłiſman of Aſſeſſes.
DI'GG ER. n.ſ.. [from dig J One that opens the ground with
a ſpade. - - - -
When we viſited mines, we have been told by diggers, that
even when the ſky ſeemed clear, there would ſuddenly ariſe
a ſteam ſo thick, that it would put out their candles. Boyle.
To DiGHT. v. a. [bihran, to prepare, to regulate, Saxon. J
To dreſs; to deck; to bedeck; to embelliſh ; to adorn.
On his head his dreadful hat he dight,
Which maketh him inviſible to ſight. Hubberd's Tale,
Let my due feet never fail
To walk the ſtudious cloiſters pale,
And love the high embowed roof,
With antick pillar maſſy proof,
And ſtoried windows richly dight,
Caſting a dim religious light.
Juſt ſo the proud inſulting laſs
Array'd and dighted Hudibras.
DI'GIT. n.ſ. [digitus, Latin.] - .
1. The meaſure of length containing three fourths of an inch.
If the inverted tube of mercury be but twenty-five digits
high, or ſomewhat more, the quickſilver will not fall, but
remain ſuſpended in the tube, becauſe it cannot preſs the ſub-
jacent mercury with ſo great a force as doth the incumbent
cylinder of the air, reaching thence to the top of the atmo-
ſphere. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
2. The twelfth part of the diameter of the ſun or moon.
3. Any of the numbers expreſſed by ſingle figures; any number
to ten. - -
Not only the number ſeven and nine, from conſiderations
abſtruſe, have been extolled by moſt, but all or moſt of other
digits have been as myſtically applauded. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
DI'GITATED. adj. [from digitus, Latin.J. Branched out into
diviſions like fingers; as a digitated leaf is a leaf compoſed of
many ſmall leavez.
For animals multifidous, or ſuch as are digitated, or have
ſeveral diviſions in their feet, there are but two that are uni-
parous; that is, men and elephants. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
DiGLADIA'Tion. n.ſ. [digladiatio, Latin.] A combat with
ſwords; any quarrel or conteſt. -
Ariſtotle ſeems purpoſely to intend the cheriſhing of con-
troverſial digadiations, by his own affection of an intricate
obſcurity. Glanv. Scºtſ, c. 19.
DI'GNIFIED. adj. [from dignify.] Inveſted with ſome dignity:
it is uſed chiefly of the clergy.
Abbots are ſtiled dignified clerks, as having ſome dignity in
the church. - Ayliffe's Parergon.
DIGNIFICATIon. n.ſ.. [from dignify.] -
I grant that where a noble and ancient deſcent and merit
meet in any man, it is a double dignification of that perſon.
IWalton's Angler.
To DI'GNIFY. v. a. ſſrom dignus and facio, Latin.]
1. To advance; to prefer; to exalt. Uſed chiefly of the clergy.
2. To honour; to adorn; to give luſtre.
- - Such a day,
So fought, ſo follow'd, and ſo fairly won;
Came not 'till now to dignify the times,
Since Caeſar's fortunes | Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Not that we think us worthy ſuch a gueſt,
But your worth will dignify our feaſt. Ben. johnſºn's Epigr.
No turbots dignify my boards; -
But gudgeons, flounders, what my Thames affords. Pope.
DI'GNITARY. : [from dignat, Latin.] A clergyman ad-
vanced to ſome dignity; to ſome rank above that of a parochial
rieſt. -
P If there be any dignitaries, whoſe preferments are per-
haps not liable to the accuſation of ſuperfluity, they may
be perſons of ſuperior merit. . Swift.
DI'GNITY. m.ſ. [dignitas, Latin.]
I. Rank of elevation.
Angels are not any where ſpoken ſo highly of as our º
a!.
Milton.
Hadibras, p. i. eant. 3.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 251</div><p class="Text">D I L
I) I L
; : ſus Chriſt, and are not in dignity equal to
i. Saviour Jeſus Chriſt, Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 6.
2. Grandeur of mien; elevation of aſpe?.. .
Some men have a native dignity, which will procure ther,
more regard by a look, than others ca" obtain by the moſt
imperious commands. - Clariſſa.
4. Advancement; preferment; high place.
- Faſter than ſpring-time ſhow’rs comes thoughton thought,
And not a thought but thinks on dignity. Shakesp, Henry VI.
For thoſe of old,
And theſe late dignities heap'd up to them,
&amp; Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
4. [Among eccleſiaſticks.] By a dignity we underſtand that pro-
motion or preferment to which any juriſdićtion is annexed.
Ayliff's Parergon.
5. Maxims; general principles; xviia; ºz.
the ſciences concluding from dignities, and principles
known by themſelves, receive not ſatisfaction from probable
reaſons, much leſs from bare and peremptory affeverations.
- Brºwn's Wulgar Errouri, b. i. º. 7.
6. [In aſtrology.] The planet is in dignity when it is in any
ſign.
Diºsotion, n. ſ: [from dignoſe, Lat.] Diſtinétion; diſtin-
guiſhing mark. -
That temperamental dignations, and conjecture of prevalent
humours, may be colle&amp;ted from ſpots in our nails, we are not
averſe to concede. Brown's Vulgar Errour, b. v. c. 21.
To DIGRESS. v. m. [digreffus, Latin.]
1. To turn out of the road.
2. To depart from the main deſign of a diſcourſe, or chief
tenour of an argument.
In the purſuit of an argument there is hardly room to
digreſs into a particular definition, as often as a man varies
the fignification of any term. Locke.
3. To wander ; to expatiate.
It ſeemeth, to digreſ; no farther, that the Tartarians, ſpread-
ing ſo far, cannot be the Iſraelites. Brerewood.
4. To go out of the right way, or common track; to tranſ-
greſs; to deviate.
I am come to keep my word,
Though in ſome part am forced to digreſs,
Which at more leiſure I will ſo excuſe
As you ſhall well be ſatisfied. Shakespeare. Taming of the Shrew.
Thy noble ſhape is but a form of wax,
Digriffing from the valour of a man. Shakespeare. Romeo andjuliet.
Digre'ssion. m. ſ. [digreſſio, Latin.]
I. A paſſage deviating from the main tenour or deſign of a
diſcourſe.
The good man thought ſo much of his late conceived com-
monwealth, that all other matters were but digreſſions to
him. Sidney, b. i.
He, ſhe knew, would intermix
Grateful digreſſions, and ſolve high diſpute
With conjugal careſſes. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. viii.
Here ſome digreſſion I muſt make, t'accuſe
Thee, my forgetful and ungrateful muſe. Denham.
To content and fill the eye of the underſtanding, the beſt
authors ſprinkle their works with pleaſing digriffions, with
which they recreate the minds of their readers. Dryd. Dufreſn.
2. Deviation.
The digreſſiºn of the ſun is not equal; but near the equi-
noćtial interſections, it is right and greater; near the ſolſtices,
more oblique and leſſer. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 4.
PIJudication. n.ſ. [dijudicatio, Latin.) Judicial diſtinction.
Dike, n.ſ.. [bic, Saxon; dyk, Erſe.]
I. A channel to receive water.
The dykes are fill'd, and with a roaring ſound
The riſing rivers float the nether ground. Dryd. Pirg, Geo.
...The king of dykes / than whom no ſluice of mud
With deeper ſable blots the filver flood. Pop.'s Dunciad.
2. A mound to hinder inundations.
God, that breaks up the flood-gates of ſo great a deluge,
and all the art and induſtry of man is not ſufficient to riſé
up.ºes and ramparts againſt it. Cowley's Davides.
To DILACERATE. v.a. [dilaterº, Latin.] To tear; to
º to º: in two.
° Infant, at the accompliſhed period, ſtruggling to com
forth, dilaterates and i. º which . .
D before. / Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 6.
'***ERA'tion. n.ſ.. [from dilateratiº, Latin.] The act of
rending in two.
º ſenſation of pain is by the obſtruction of the
°ls, and dilateration of the nervous fibres.
- Arbuthnot on Diet.
To r - - - -
Pila'NIAte. v.a. [dilania, Latin.] To tear; to rend in
pieces.
Tnº ºn they would dilaniate the cntrails of their Own
“r, and expoſe her thereby to be raviſhed, they met half
Way in a gallant kind. Howel's Engl. Tears
9 D LAPIDA rº - - - - -
DILAPIDA'tion. m. ſ. [dilapidatio, Latin.] The incumbent's
ſuffering the chancel, or any other edifices of his eccleſiaſtical
living, to go to ruin or decay, by neglecting to repair the
ſame : and it likewiſe extends to his committing or ſuffering
to be committed, any wilful waſte in or upon the glebe-wood.
or any other inheritance of the church. Aliffe's Parergon.
'Tis the duty of all church-wardens to prevent the dilapi-
dations of the chanoel and manſion-houſe belonging to the
rećtor or vicar. Ayliff Parergºn.
DiLATABI'lity. n.ſ. [from dilatable.] The quality of .d.
mitting extenſion.
We take notice of the wonderful dilatability or extenſive-
neſs of .#. of ſerpents: I have taken two adult mice
out of the ſtomach of an adder, whoſe neck was not bigger
than my little finger. Bay on the Creation.
By this continual contračtibility and dilatality, by different
degrees of heat, the air is kept in a conſtant motion. Arbuthn.
Dila'table. adj. [from dilate.] Capable of extenſion.
The windpipe divides itſelf into a great number of branches
called bronchia: theſe end in ſmall air-bladders, dilatable and
contračtable, capable to be inflated by the admiſſion of air,
and to ſubſide at the expulſion of it. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
DILata"tion. n.ſ.. [from dilatatio, Latin.]
1. The ačt of extending into greater ſpace
The motions of the tongue, by contračtion and dilatation,
are fo eaſy and ſo ſubtle, that you can hardly conceive or
diſtinguiſh them aright. Holder.
2. The ſtate of being extended; the ſtate in which the parts are
at more diſtance from each other.
Joy cauſeth a cheerfulneſs and vigour in the eyes; ſing-
ing, leaping, dancing, and ſometimes tears: all theſe are the
effects of the dilatation, and coming forth of the ſpirits into
the outward parts, which maketh them more lively and
ſtirring. Bacon's Na:ural Hiſtory.
The image of the ſun ſhould be drawn out into an oblong
form, either by a dilatation of every ray, or by any other
caſual inequality of the refractions. Newtºn's Opt. Experim.
To DILATE. v. a. [dilato, Latin.]
1. To extend; to ſpread out; to enlarge.
But ye thereby much greater glory gate,
Than had ye ſorted with a prince's peer;
For now your light doth more itſelf dilate,
And in my darkneſs greater doth appear. Speiſer.
Satan alarm’d,
Colle&amp;ting all his might, diated ſtood,
Like Teneriff, or Atlas, unremov’d. Milton's Paradiſe Left.
Opener of mine eyes,
Dim erſt; dilated ſpirits, ampler heart,
And growing up to godhead: which for thee
Chiefly I ſought; without thee, can deſpiſe. Milt. Pa. Lºft.
Through all the air his ſounding ſtrings dilate
Sorrow, like that which touch'd our hearts of late. Waller,
Diffus'd, it riſes in a higher ſphere;
Dilates its drops, and ſoftens into air. Prior.
I mark the various fury of the winds;
Theſe neither ſeaſons guide, nor order binds:
They now dilate, and now contračt their force;
Various their ſpeed, but endleſs is their courſe. Prior.
The ſecond refraction would ſpread the rays one way as
much as the firſt doth another, and ſo dilate the image in
breadth as much as the firſt doth in length. Newton's Opt.
2. To relate at large; to tell diffuſely and copiouſly.
But he would not endure that woful theam
For to dilate at large; but urged ſore,
With piercing words, and pitiful implore,
Him haſty to ariſe. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 5. ſtan. 37.
I obſerving,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earneſt heart,
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels ſhe had ſomething heard,
But not diſtinétively.
To DILA't E. v. n.
1. To widen; to grow wide.
His heart dilates and glories in his ſtrength. Addiſon.
2. To ſpeak largely and copiouſly.
It may be behoveful for princes, in matters of grace, to
tranſačt the ſame publickly, and by themſelves; or their mi-
niſters to dilate upon it, and improve their luſtre, by any addi-
tion or eloquence of ſpeech. Clarendon.
DILA'to R. n.ſ.. [from dilate.] That which widens or extends,
The buccinatores, or blowers up of the cheeks, and the
dilators of the noſe, are too ſtrong in cholerick people. Arb.
D1'lator INEss. n.ſ.. [from dilatory..] The quality of being
dilatory; ſlowneſs; ſluggiſhneſs.
DITLATORY. adj. [dilatoire, French; dilatorius, Lat.] Tardy;
ſlow; given to procraſtination ; addićted to delay; ſluggiſh;
loitering.
An inferior council, after former tedious ſuits in a higher
court, would be but dilatory, and ſo to little purpoſe. Hayward.
What wound did ever heal but by degrees TI
1011
Shakeſpeare's Othell,
:
6.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 252</div><p class="Text">D I L
D I M
*
Thou know'ſt we work by wit, and not by witchcraft;
And wit depends on dilatory time. Shakeſpeare's Othe'le.
Theſe cardinals trifle with me: I abhor
This dilatory ſloth, and tricks of Rome. Shakespeare Henry VIII
Dilatºry fortune plays the jilt
With the brave, noble, honeſt, gallant man,
To throw herſelf away on fools and knaves Otway's Orph.
A dilatory temper commits innumerable cruelties without
deſign Addiſon', Sºedjator, N° 469.
Di LE'cTION. m. ſ. [dilećlio, Latin.] I he act of loving ;
kindneſs. -
So free is Chriſt's diletion, that the grand condition of our
felicity is our belief. Boyle's Seraph. Lºve.
DILE'M M A. m. ſ. [3.xnawa.]
1. An argument equally concluſive by contrary ſuppoſitions.
A young rhetorician applied to an old ſophiſt to be taught the
art of pleading, and bargained for a certain reward to be
paid, when he ſhould gain a cauſe. The maſter ſued for his
reward, and the ſcholar endeavoured to elude his claim by a
dilemma : If I gain my cauſe, I ſhall withold your pay, becauſe
the judge's award will be againſt you; if I loſe it, I may with-
hold it, becauſe I ſhall not yet have gained a cauſe. On the
contrary, ſays the maſter, if you gain your cauſe, you muſt
pay me, becauſe you are to pay me when you gain a cauſe ;
if you loſe it, you muſt pay me, becauſe the judges will.
award it.
A di emma, that biſhop Morton the chancellor uſed, to raiſe
benevolence, ſome called his fork, and ſome his crutch.
Bacon's Henry VII.
Hope, whoſe weak being ruin’d is
Alike if it ſucceed, and if it miſs;
Whom good or ill does equally confound,
And both the horns of fate’s diſemma wound. Cowley.
2. A difficult or doubtful choice; a vexatious alternative.
A ſtrong diſemma in a deſp'rate caſe
To act with infamy, or quit the place. Swift.
A dire dilemma; either way I'm ſped;
If foes, they write, if friends, they read me dead. Pope.
Di'L1GEN ca. m. ſ. [diligentia, Latin.] Induſtry; aſiduity;
conſtancy in buſineſs; continuance of endeavour; uninter-
mitted application; the contrary to idleneſs.
Do thy diligence to come ſhortly unto me. 2 Tim. iv. 9.
Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election
ſure. 2 Pet. i. 1 o.
DILIGENT. adj. [diligens, Latin.]
1. Conſtant in application; perſevering in endeavour; affiduous;
not idle; not negligent; not lazy.
Seeſt thou a man diligent in his buſineſs? he ſhall ſtand
before kings. Prov. xxii. 29.
2. Conſtantly applied; proſecuted with ačtivity and perſeve-
rance; aſſiduous. º
And the judges ſhall make diligent inquiſition. Deutr xix.
Di'l 16 ENT.I.Y. adv. [from diligent.] With affiduity; with
heed and perſeverance; not careleſly; not idly; not negli-
gently. -
If you inquire not attentively and diligently, you ſhall never
be able to diſcern a number of mechanical motions. Bacon.
The ancients have diligently examined in what conſiſts the
beauty of good poſtures. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
DiLL. m. ſ. [bile, Saxon.]
It hath a ſlender, fibroſe, annual root : the leaves are like
thoſe of fennel; the ſeeds are oval, plain, ſtreaked, and bor-
dered.
Dill is raiſed of ſeed, which is ripe in Auguſt. Mortimer.
DILU'CID. adj. [dilucidus, Latin.]
1. Clear; plain; not opaque.
2. Clear; plain; not obſcure.
To Dilu'c, DATE. v. a [from dilucidare, Latin.] To make
clear or plain; to explain; to free from obſcurity.
I ſhall not traduce or extenuate, but explain and dilucidate,
according to the cuſtom of the ancients. Irown's /u. Err. Pr.
Dilucid A'ſ ion. m. ſ. [from dilucidatio.] The aët of making
clear; explanation; expoſition.
DPLUEN I. adj. [diluens, Latin.] Having the power to thin
and attenuate other matter.
D,'luent. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive.] That which thins other
nattºr.
There is no real diluent but water: every fluid is diluent, as
it contains water in it. Arbuthnot an Aliments.
To DILUTE v. a. [diluo, Latin.]
1. To make thin ; to attenuate by the admixture of other parts.
Drinking a large doſe of diluted tea, as ſhe was ordered by
a phyſician, ſhe got to bed. Locke.
The aliment ought to be thin to dilute, demulcent to tem-
per, or acid to ſubdue. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To make weak.
If the red and blue colours were more dilute and weak, the
diſtance of the images would be leſs than an inch; and if they
were more intenſe and full, that diſtance would be greater.
Newton's Opt. Pro. i. Th. 1.
The chamber was dark, leſt theſe colours ſhould be diluted
and weakened by the mixture of any adventitious light. Newt.
Vol. I.
Dilu're R. n ſ [from dilute.] That which makes any thing
elſe thin.
Water is the only diluter, and the beſt diſſolvent of moſt of
the ingredients of our aliment. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
DiLu'rion. m. ſ. [dilutio, Lat J The aët of making anything
thin or weak -
Oppoſite to dilution is coagulation, or thickening, which is
performed by diffipating the moſt liquid parts by heat, or by
inſinuating ſome ſubſtances, which make the parts of the fluid
cohere more ſtrongly. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Diluvia N. adj. [from diluvium, Lat..] Relating to the deluge.
Suppoſe that this diluvian lake ſhould riſe to the mountain
tops in one place, and not diffuſe itſelf equally into all coun-
tries about. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
DIM. adj. bimme, Saxon; dy, Welſh; dow, Erſe.]
1. Not having a quick fight; not ſeeing clearly.
For her true form, how can my ſpark diſcern,
Which, dim by nature, art did never clear? Davies.
2. Dull of apprehenſion.
The underſtanding is dim, and cannot by its natural light
diſcover ſpiritual truths. Rºgers's Sermons.
3. Not clearly ſeen; obſcure; imperfeótly diſcovered.
We might be able to aim at ſome dim and ſeeming con-
ception, how matter might begin to exiſt by the power of that
eternal firſt Being. Locke.
Something, as dim to our internal view,
Is thus perhaps the cauſe of all we do. Pope, Epift. i.
4. Obſtructing the act of viſion; not luminous; ſomewhat
dark.
Her face right wond’rous fair did ſeem to be,
That her broad beauty's beam great brightneſs threw
Through the dim ſhade, that all men might it ſee. Fai. Qu.
To DIM. v. a. [from the adjective.] -
1. To cloud; to darken; to hinder from a full perception of
light, and free exerciſe of viſion.
As where the Almighty's lightning brand does light,
It dims the dazed eyen, and daunts the ſenſes quite, Fa. Qu.
It hath been obſerved by the ancients, that much uſe of
Venus doth diºn the fight; and yet eunuchs, which are unable
to generate, are nevertheleſs alſo dim fighted. Bacon’s N Hi/?.
Every one declares againſt blindneſs, and yet who almoſt is
not fond of that which dim; his fight? Locke.
For thee Idim theſe eyes, and ſtuff this head,
With all ſuch reading as was never read. Pope's Dunciad.
2. To make leſs bright; to obſcure.
A ſhip that through the ocean wide,
By condu&amp;t of ſome ſtar doth make her way,
When as a ſtorm hath dimm'd her truſty guide,
Out of her courſe doth wander far aſtray. Spenſer.
Siſter, have comfort: all of us have cauſe
To wail the dimming of our ſhining ſtar;
But none can help our harms by wailing them. Shakespeare R. III.
Thus while he ſpake, each paſſion dimm'd his face,
Thrice chang'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv. l. 114.
DIMENSION. n.ſ. [dimenſio, Latin.J. Space contained in
any thing; bulk ; extent; capacity. It is ſeldom uſed but in
the plural. The three dimenſions are length, breadth, and depth.
He try’d
The tomb, and found the ſtrait dimenſions wide. Dryden.
My gentleman was meaſuring my walls, and taking the
dimenſions of the room. Swift.
DIME'Nsionless. adj. [from dimenſion.] Without any definite
bulk.
In they paſs'd
Dimenſionleſ, through heav'nly doors. Milton's Paradiſe Loff.
DIME'N's IV E. adj. [dimenſus, Latin.] That which marks the
boundaries or outlines.
All bodies have their meaſure, and their ſpace;
But who can draw the ſoul's dimenſive lines 2 Davies.
DIMICA'tio N. n.ſ. [dimicatio, Latin.] A battle; the aët of
fighting; conteſt. Dićf.
DIMIDIA'rio N. m. ſ. [dimidiatio, Latin.] The aët of halving;
diviſion into two equal parts. Dić.
To DIMINISH. v. a. [diminuo, Latin.] -
1. To make leſs by abſciſſion or deſtruction of any part: the
oppoſite to increaſe.
That we call good which is apt to cauſe or increaſe pleaſure,
or diminiſh pain in us. Locke.
2. To impair; to leſſen; to degrade.
Impiouſly they thought
Thee to diminiſh, and from thee withdraw
The number of thy worſhippers., . Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
4. To take any thing from that to which it belongs: the con-
trary to Addison
Nothing was diminiſhed from the ſafety of the king by the
impriſonment of the duke. Hayward.
Ye ſhall not add unto the word which I command you,
neither ſhall you diminiſh aught from it.
To DIMI'NIs H. v. n. To grow leſs; to be impaired.
What judgment I had increaſes rather than diminiſhes; and
thoughts, ſuch as they are, come crowding in ſo faſt upon
me, that my º difficulty is to chuſe or to reječt. Dryden.
6 Crete's
Deut. iv. 2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 253</div><p class="Text">- D I M
D I N
Crete's ample fields diminiſh to our eye;
Before the Boreal blaſts the veſſels ſly. Pope's Odyſſey.
i M1'Nishi No LY. adv. [from diminiſh..] In a manner tending
to vilify, or leſſen.
I never heard him cenſure, or ſo much as ſpeak diminiſhingly
of any one that was abſent. Locke.
Di MINU'tion. m. ſ. [diminutio, Latin.]
1. The act of making leſs; oppoſed to augmentation.
The one is not capable of any diminution or augmentation
at all by men; the other apt to admit both. Hooker, b. iii.
2. The ſtate of growing leſs; oppoſed to increaſe.
The gravitating power of the ſun is tranſmitted through
the vaſt bodies of the planets without any diminution, ſo as to
aćt upon all their parts, to their very centres, with the ſame
force, and according to the ſame laws, as if the part upon
which it ačts were not ſurrounded with the body of the
planet. * Newton's Opt.
Finite and infinite ſeem to be looked upon as the modes of
quantity, and to be attributed primarily to thoſe things which
are capable of increaſe or diminution. Locke.
3. Diſcredit; loſs of dignity; degradation.
Gladly to thee
Heroick laurel'd Eugene yields the prime;
Nor thinks it dimination to be rank'd
In military honour next. Phillips.
They might raiſe the reputation of another, though they
are a diminution to his. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 256.
4. Deprivation of dignity; injury of reputation.
Make me wife by thy truth, for my own ſoul's ſalvation,
and I ſhall not regard the world's opinion or diminution of
Inc. s - King Charles.
5. [In archite&amp;ture.] The contračtion of the diameter of a
column, as it aſcends.
DIMI'N UT1 v E. adj. [diminutivus, Latin.] Small; little; nar-
row; contračted. -
- . . . The poor wren,
The moſt diminutive of birds, will fight,
- Her young ones in her neſt, againſt the owl. Shakespeare Macbeth.
It is the intereſt of mankind, in order to the advance of
knowledge, to be ſenſible they have yet attained it but in poor
and diminutive meaſure. Glanv. Scepſ. Preface.
- The light of man's underſtanding is but a ſhort, diminutive,
contracted light, and looks not beyond the preſent. South.
If the ladies ſhould once take a liking to ſuch a diminutive
race of lovers, we ſhould, in a little time, ſee mankind epi-
tomized, and the whole ſpecies in miniature. Addison Guardian.
They know how weak and aukward many of thoſe little
diminitive diſcourſes are. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
DIMI'NUTIve. n.ſ.. [from the adještive.]
1. A word formed to expreſs littleneſs; as lapillus, in Latin, a
little ſlone; maiſonette, in French, a little houſe; manniken, in
Engliſh, a little man.
He afterwards proving a dainty and effeminate youth, was
commonly called, by the diminutive of his name, É. Or
'Perkin. Bacon's Henry VII.
Sim, while but Sim, in good repute did live;
Was then a knave, but in diminutive.
2. A ſmall thing: a ſenſe not now in uſe.
Follow his chariot; monſter-like, be ſhewn
For poor'ſt diminutives, for doits! Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
DIMI'NUtively. adv. [from d minutive..] In a diminutive
, manner. º
DiMi'NUTIVEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from diminutive..] Smalneſs; little-
neſs; pettyneſs; want of bulk; want of dignity.
Pº. adj. [from dim.] Somewhat dim; ſomewhat ob-
Cui C.
'Tis true, but let it not be known,
My eyes are ſomewhat dimiſh grown;
For nature, always in the right,
To your decays adapts my fight. Swift.
Di'MissoRy. adj. [dimijirius, Latin.] That by which a man
is diſmiſſed to another juriſdicton.
A biſhop of another dioceſs ought neither to ordain or ad-
mit a clerk, with the conſent of his own proper biſhop, and
without the letters dimiſory. Ayliff's Parergon.
DI'M ITTY. n.ſ. A fine kind of fuſtian, or cloath of cotton.
- I direéted a trowze of fine dimitty. ///eman's Surgery.
IDI’M LY." adv. [from dim.]
1. Not with a quick fight; not with a clear perception.
Unſpeakable ! who fitt'ſt above theſe heav'ns,
To us inviſible, or dimly ſeen,
In theſe thy loweſt works.
2. Not brightly; not luminouſly. -
In the beginning of our pumping the air, the match ap-
peared well lighted, though it had almoſt filled the receiver
with its plentiful fumes; but by degrees it burnt more and
more dimily. Boyle's Spring of the Air.
I ſaw th’ angelick guards from earth aſcend,
Griev'd they muſt now no longer man attend;
The beams about their temples dimly ſhone;
One would have thought the crime had been their own. Dry.
Cotton.
«
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
Di'MNEss. n.ſ. [from dim.]
1. Dulneſs of fight. -
2. Want of apprehenſion; ſtupidity.
Anſwerable to this dimneſs of their perception was the whole
ſyſtem and body of their religion. Decay of Piety.
DI'MPLE. n.ſ. [dint, a hole; dintle, a little hole; by a care-
leſs pronunciation dimple. Skinner.] The ſame cavity or
depreſſion in the cheek or chin.
The dimple of the upper lip is the common meaſure of
them all. Grew's Coſm. Sac. b. i. e. 5.
In her forehead's fair half-round,
Love fits in open triumph crown'd;
He in the dimple of her chin,
In private ſtate, by friends is ſeen. Prior.
To Di'MPLE. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſink in ſmall cavi-
ties, or little inequalities.
The wild waves maſter'd him, and ſuck'd him in,
And ſmiling eddies dimpled on the main. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
Eternal ſmiles his emptineſs betray,
As ſhallow ſtreams run dimpling all away. Pope, Epiſtle ii.
D1'MPLE.D. adj. [from dimple. J Set with dimples.
On each ſide her
Stood pretty dimpled boys like ſmiling Cupids. Shakesp. Ant. and C.
D1'MPLY. adj. [from dimple..] Full of dimples; ſinking in
little inequalities.
As the ſmooth ſurface of the dimply flood,
The filver-ſlipper'd virgin lightly trod. JWharton's Iſis.
DIN. n.ſ.. [byn, a noiſe; bynan, to make a noiſe, Sax, dyna,
to thunder, Iſlandick.] A loud noiſe; a violent and continued
ſound.
And all the way he roared as he went,
That all the foreſt with aſtoniſhment
Thereof did tremble; and the beaſts therein
Fled faſt away from that ſo dreadful din. Hubberd's Tale.
O, 'twas a din to fright a monſter's ear;
To make an earthquake: ſure, it was the roar
Of a whole herd of lions. Shakeſpeare's Tempſf.
While the cock with lively din
Scatters the rear of darkneſs thin,
And to the ſtack or the barn-door
Stoutly ſtruts, his dame before.
Now night over heav'n
Inducing darkneſs, grateful truce impos'd,
And ſilence, on the odious din of war. Milton's Par. Loft.
How, while the troubled elements around,
Earth, water, air, the ſtunning din reſound,
Through ſtreams of ſmoak and adverſe fire he rides, -
While ev'ry ſhot is levell'd at his ſides. Smith.
Some independent ideas, of no alliance to one another,
are, by education, cuſtom, and the conſtant din of their party,
ſo coupled in their minds, that they always appear there toge-
ther. Locke.
To DIN. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſtun with noiſe; to haraſs with clamour.
Rather live
To bait thee for his bread, and din your ears
With hungry cries. Otway's Venice Preſerved.
2. To impreſs with violent and continued noiſe.
What ſhall we do, if his majeſty puts out a proclamation
commanding us to take Wood's half-pence : This hath been
often dinned in my ears. Swift.
To DINE. v. n. [diner, French..] To eat the chief meal about
the middle of the day. -
Perhaps ſome merchant hath invited him,
And from the mart he's ſomewhere gone to dinner:
Good ſiſter, let us dine, and never fret. Shakeſpeare.
Myſelf, he, and my ſiſter,
To-day did dine together. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errours.
He would dine with him the next day. Clarendon.
Thus, of your heroes and brave boys, º
With whom old Homer makes ſuch noiſe,
The greateſt actions I can find,
Milton.
Are, that they did their work and din'd. Prior.
To DIN E. v. a. To give a dinner to; to feed.
Boil this reſtoring root in gen’rous wine,
And ſet beſide the door the ſickly ſtock to dine. Dryd Wirg.
DIN E'tica L. adj. ſºlº &amp; J Whirling round; vertiginous.
Some of late have concluded, from ſpots in the ſun, which
appear and diſappear again, that, beſides the revolution it
maketh with its orbs, it hath alſo a dinetical motion, and rolls
upon its own poles. Brown's Vulgar Errour, b. vi. c. 6.
A ſpherical figure is moſt commodious for dinetical motion,
or revolution upon its own axis. Ray on the Creation.
To DING. pret, dung. v. a. [dringen, Dutch..]
1. To daſh with violence.
2. To impreſs with force. -
To DING. v. m. To bluſter; to bounce; to huff. A low word.
He huffs and dings at ſuch a rate, becauſe we will not ſpend
the little we have left to get him the title and eſtate of lord
Strut. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of John Bull.
DING-DoN G. n.ſ. A word by which the found of bells is
imitated.
Let
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 254</div><p class="Text">D I O
i
Let us all ring fancy's knell;
Ding, dong bell. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
D1'NGLE. n.ſ.. [from ben, or bin, a hollow, Saxon.] A hollow
between hills; a dale. -
. I know each lane, and every alley green,
Dingle or buſhy dell of this wild wood;
And every boſky bourn from fide to fide,
My daily walks and ancient neighbourhood. Milton.
D; NING-Room. n.ſ. [dine and room..] The principal apart-
ment of the houſe; the room where entertainments are made.
He went out from the dining-room before he had fallen into
errour by the intemperance of his meat, or the deluge of
drink. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Di'NNER. n.ſ. [diner, French.J. The chief meal; the meal
eaten about the middle of the day.
Let me not ſtay a jot for dinner:
Go, get it ready. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Before dinner and ſupper, as often as it is convenient, or
can be had, let the publick prayers of the church, or ſome
parts of them, be ſaid publickly in the family. Taylor.
The jolly crew, unmindful of the paſt,
The quarry ſhare, their plenteous dinner haſte. Dryd. 42n.
DINNER-time. n.ſ. [dinner and time.] The time of dining.
At dinner-time,
I pray you, have in mind where we muſt meet. Shakeſpeare.
Then from the mint walks forth the man of rhyme,
Happy to catch me juſt at dinner-time. Pope, Epiſtle ii.
DINT. n. ſ. ſoyne, Saxon.]
1. A blow; a ſtroke.
Much daunted with that dint, her ſenſe was daz'd ;
Yet kindling rage, herſelf ſhe gather'd round. Fairy Queen.
Neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in theſe bright arms,
Though temper'd heav'nly; for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can reſiſt. Milt. Par. Loft.
2. The mark made by a blow; the cavity remaining after a vio-
a
lent preſſure.
Now you weep; and, I perceive, you feel
The dint of pity. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
He embrac'd her naked body o'er,
And, ſtraining hard the ſtatue, was afraid -
His hands had made a dint and hurt the maid. Dryden.
3. Violence; force; power.
We are to wreſt the whole Spaniſh monarchy out of the
hands of the enemy; and, in order to it, to work our way
into the heart of his country by dint of arms. Addiſon.
The dewlap'd bull now chafes along the plain,
While burning love ferments in ev'ry vein;
His well arm'd front againſt his rival aims,
And by the dint of war his miſtreſs claims. Gay.
To DINT. v. a. [from the noun..] To mark with a cavity by
a blow, or violent impreſſion.
With greedy force each other doth affail,
And ſtrike ſo fiercely, that they do impreſs
Deep dinted furrows in the batter'd mails:
The iron walls to ward their blows are weak and frail. F. Q.
Leave, leave, fair bride, your ſolitary bone,
No more ſhall you return to it alone;
It nurſeth ſadneſs; and your body's print, -
Like to a grave, the yielding down doth dint. Donne.
Deep dinted wrinkles on her cheeks ſhe draws;
Sunk are her eyes, and toothleſs are her jaws. Dryd. Æn.
DINUMERA'tion...m. ſ. [dinumeratio, Lat.] The aët of num-
bering out ſingly. -
Dioce's AN. m. ſ. [from diºceſs.] A biſhop as he ſtands related
to his own clergy or flock.
I have heard it has been adviſed by a dioceſan to his inferior
clergy, that they ſhould read ſome of the moſt celebrated ſer-
mons printed by others, for the inſtruction of their con-
gregation. Tatler, Nº. 57.
DſCCESS. m.ſ. [diascºſis. A Greek word compounded of 32
and wºrk.] The circuit of every biſhop's juriſdićtion;
for this realm has two diviſions, one into ſhires or coun-
ties, in reſpect of temporal policy; another into dioceſs, in
reſpect of juriſdiction eccleſiaſtical. Cowel.
None ought to be admitted by any biſhop, but ſuch as have
dwelt and remained in his dioceſs a convenient time. Whitgift.
He ſhould regard the biſhop of Rome as the iſlanders of
Jerſey and Guernſey do him of Conſtance in Normandy; that
is, nothing at all, ſince by that French biſhop's refuſal to ſwear
unto our king, thoſe iſles were annexed to the dioceſs of Win-
cheſter. Raleigh's Eſſays.
St. Paul looks upon Titus as advanced to the dignity of a
prince, ruler of the church, and intruſted with a large dioceſs,
containing many particular cities, under the immediate govern-
, ment of their reſpective elders, and thoſe deriving authority
from his ordination. South.
DIO/PTRICAL. Ün ſ. ſhºop.2,.] Affording a medium for the
DIO/PTRICK. } ight; aſſiſting the fight in the view of diſ-
tant objects.
I
Being excellently well furniſhed with dioptrical glaſſes, he
had not been able to ſee the ſun ſpotted. Boyle.
View the aſperities of the moon through a dioptrick glaſs,
and venture at the proportion of her hills by their ſhadows.
More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
Dio'ptRicks. n.ſ. A part of opticks, treating of the dif-
ferent refračtions of the light paſſing through different me-
diums; as the air, water, glaſſes, &amp;c. PHarris. :
Dior thro's Is. m. ſ [**śwok, of 3.0;3.0 , to make ſtrait..] A
chirurgical operation, by which crooked or diſtorted members
are made even, and reſtored to their primitive and regular
ſhape. Harris.
To DIP. v. a. particip, dipped, or dipt. [oppan, Saxon; dopen,
Dutch.]
1. To immerge; to put into any liquor.
The perſon to be baptized may be dipped in water; and ſuch
an immerſion or dipping ought to be made thrice, according
to the canon. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Old Corineus compaſs'd thrice the crew,
And diff'd an olive-branch in holy dew,
Which thrice he ſprinkl’d round, and thrice aloud
Invok'd the dead, and then diſmiſs'd the crowd. Dryd. Æn.
He turn’d a tyrant in his latter days,
And from the bright meridian where he ſtood,
Deſcending, dipp'd his hands in lovers blood. Dryd. Fables.
The kindred arts ſhall in their praiſe conſpire;
One dip the pencil, and one ſtring the lyre. Pope's Epiſtles.
Now on fancy's eaſy wing convey'd, -
The king deſcended to th' Elyſian ſhade;
There in a duſky vale, where Lethe rolls,
Old Bavius fits to di poetick ſouls. Pope's Dunciad, b. iii.
So fiſhes riſing from the main,
Can ſoar with moiſten’d wings on high;
The moiſture dry'd, they ſink again,
And dip their wings again to fly. Swift.
2. To moiſten; to wet. -
And though not mortal, yet a cold ſhudd'ring de
Dips me all o'er, as when the wrath of Jove
Speaks thunder. Milton.
3. To be engaged in any affair. f
When men are once dipt, what with the encouragements
of ſenſe, cuſtom, facility, and ſhame of departing from what
they have given themſelves up to, they go on ’till they are
ſtifled. L’Eſfrange, Fab 126.
In Richard's time, I doubt, he was a little dipt in the re-
bellion of the commons. Dryden's Fahles.
4. To engage as a pledge; generally uſed for the firſt mortgage.
Be careful ſtill of the main chance, my ſon;
Put out the principal in truſty hands,
Live on the uſe, and never aip thy lands.
To DIP. v. n.
1. To ſink; to immerge.
We have ſnakes in our cups, and in our diſhes; and who-
ever dips too deep will find death in the pot. L’É/irange's Fa'.
2. To enter; to pierce.
The vulture dipping in Prometheus' ſide,
His bloody beak with his torn liver dy’d.
3. To enter ſlightly into any thing.
When I think all the repetitions are ſtruck out in a copy,
I ſometimes find more upon dipping in the firſt volume. Pope.
4. To drop by chance into any maſs; to chuſe by chance.
With what ill thoughts of Jove art thou poſſeſs tº
Wouldſt thou prefer him to ſome man Suppoſe
I dipp'd among the worſt, and Status choſe Dryden's Perſ.
DIPCH1'ck. m.ſ.. [from dip and chick.] The name of a bird.
Dipchick is ſo named of his diving and littleneſs. Carew.
DIPE"t Alous. adj. [.., and wirax...] Having two flower-
leaves. -
DI'PPER. n.ſ.. [from dip.] One that dips in the water.
DIPPING Needle. m. ſ. A device which ſhews a particular pro-
perty of the magnetick needle, ſo that, beſides its polarity or
verticity, which is its direction of altitude, or height above
the horizon, when duly poiſed about an horizontal axis, it
will always point to a determined degree of altitude, or eleva-
tion above the horizon, in this or that place reſpectively. Phil.
D1'PHT HONG. m. ſ. [...ºry?...] A coalition of two vowels to
form one ſound; as vain, leaf, Caſar.
We ſee how many diſputes the ſimple and ambiguous
nature of vowels created among grammarians, and how it has
begot the miſtake concerning diphthongs: all that are properly
ſo are ſyllables, and not diphthongs, as is intended to be ſigni-
fied by that word. H laſer's Elements of Speech.
Make a diphthong of the ſecond eta and iota, inſtead of their
being two ſyllables, and the objection is gone.
Notes on the Iliad.
D1'Ploe. m.ſ. The inner plate or lamina of the ſkull.
DIPLo'MA. m. ſ. [3 =X-22.] A letter or writing conferring
ſome privilege, ſo called becauſe they uſed formerly to be
written on waxed tables, and folded together.
Dryden's Perſ.
Granville.
DI'PsAs.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 255</div><p class="Text">D I R
D I R.
p/rsas. n.ſ. [Latin, from *lºw, to thirſt.] A ſerpent, whoſe
bite produces the ſenſation of unquenchable thirſt.
Scorpion, and aſp, and amphiſboºna dire,
Serafles horn'd, hydrus, and elops drear,
‘....". " " " ... P. Loft, i.x. 1526.
Dºº n ſ [*2] A noun conſiſting of wº
Dºes n.ſ. [diptycha, Latin.] A regiſter of biſhops and
Tºmmemoration of ſaints was made out. of the (i. tych of
the church, as appears by multitudes of places in St Auſtin. Still.
DIRE. adj. [diº us, Latin J Dreadful; diſmal; mournful; hor-
rible; terrible; evil in a great degree.
Your eye in Scotland
would create ſoldiers, and make women fight,
To doff their dire diſtreſſes. Shakespeare care's Macleth.
More by intemperance die
In meats, and drinks, which on the earth ſhall bring
Diſeaſes dire; of which a monſtrous crew
Before thee ſhall appear. Mi ton’s P. Loſº, b. xi. 1.474.
Hydras, and gorgons, and chimaeras dire 4Milton.
Or what the croſs, dire-looking planet ſmites,
Or hurtful worm with canker'd venom bites. Milton.
Dire was the toſſing, deep the groans, deſpair
Tended the ſick. Milton.
Diſcord dire ſiſter of the ſlaughtered pow'r,
Small at her birth, but riſing ev'ry hour;
While ſcarce the ſkies her horrid head can bound,
She ſtalks on earth, and ſhakes the world around. Pope's Il.
DIRECT. adj [dire:ſus, Latin.]
1. Strait, not crooked.
2. Not oblique.
The ſhips would move in one and the ſame ſurface; and
conſequently muſt needs encounter when they either advance
towards one another in dirtéſ lincs, or meet in the interſe&amp;tion
of croſs lines. Fentle,’s Serm.
3. [In aſtronomy..] Appearing to an eye on earth to move pro-
greſſively through the zodiac, not retrograde.
Two geomantic figures were diſplay'd,
Above his head, a warrior and a maid, }
One when direct, and one when retrograde. Dryd Fub.
4. Not collateral, as the grandſon ſucceeds his grandſire in a
dreši line.
5. Apparently tending to ſome end.
Such was as then the ſtate of the king, as it was no time
by direct means to ſeek her. And ſuch was the ſtate of his
captivated will, as he would delay no time of ſeeking her. Sid.
He that does this, will be able to caſt off all that is ſuper-
fluous; he will ſee what is pertinent, what coherent, what is
direct to, what ſlides by the queſtion. Locke.
6. Open ; not ambiguous.
There be, that are in nature faithful and ſincere, and plain
and direct ; not crafty and involved. Bacon's Eſſay, 21.
7. Plain; expreſs. -
He no where, that I know, ſays it in direct words. Locłe.
To DIRE'ct, v a. [dirigº, direclam, Latin J
I. To aim in a ſtrait line.
Two eagles ſrom a mountain's height,
By Jove's command direct their rapid flight. Pope's Od.
2. To point againſt as a mark.
The ſpear flew hiſing through the middle ſpace,
And pierc'd his throat, directed at his face. Dryd. Æn.
3. To regulate ; to adjuſt.
It is not in man that walketh to direct his ſteps. jer. x. 23.
Wiſdom is profitable to direct. Ecclus x. 10.
All that is in a man’s power, is to mind what the ideas are
that take their turns in his underſtanding; or elſe to direct and
ſort, and call in ſuch as he deſires. Lºcke.
4. To preſcribe certain meaſure; to mark out a certain courſe.
He direºth it under the whole heavens, and his lightening
unto the ends of the earth. job xxxvii. 3.
5. To order; to command
DIR"ct E.R. n.ſ. Ldirector, Latin.]
I . Qne that directs; one that preſcribes.
2. An inſtrument that ſerves to guide any manual operation.
Di RE'ction. n.ſ. [direº, Latin.]
1. Aim at a certain point.
. The direction of good works to a good end, is the only prin-
ciple that diſtinguiſhes charity. Smalridge's Serm.
2. Motion impreſſed by a certain impulſe.
Theſe mens opinions are not the product of judgment, or
the Fonſequence of reaſon; but the effects of chance and ha-
ºad, of *.mind floating at all adventures, without choice, and
Without direction. Locke.
that º rºl. of matter, nor any combination of particles,
airºi. of its ſº either move of itſelf, or of itſelf alter the
3. Order; comm. ofton. . . . Cheyney.
- &gt; mand ; preſcription.
º that St Jerome giveth Leta, of taking
learned mens ſº as alſo by the help of other
directiºn. So * delivered in like caſe, we may take
2. Hooker b. 5. ſ. 20.
Ev’n now
I put myſelf to thy dire?ion. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
He needs not our miſtruſt, ſince he delivers
Our offices, and what we have to do,
To the d recion juſt. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
The nobles of the people digged it by the dire?iºn of the
law-giver. Numb. xxi. 18.
Mens paſſions and God's direélion ſeldom agree. K. Charlet.
All nature is but art unknown to thee,
All chance, direé?ion which thou can'ſ not ſee. Pºpe's Eſ.
General direélions for ſcholaſtic diſputers, is never to diſpute
upon mere trifics. Watt's improv. Mind, p. iſ 3.
DIRE'c 1 v F. n.ſ.. [from direči.]
1. Having the power of direction.
A law therefore generally taken, is a dreſſive rule unto
goodneſs of operation. Hoºker, b. 1. ſ. 7.
A power of command there is without all queſtion, tho’
there be ſome doubt in what faculty this command doth prin-
cipally reſide, whether in the will or the underſtanding The
true reſolution is, that the directive command for counſel is in
the underſtanding; and the applicative command, or cmpire,
for putting in execution of what is directed, is in the will.
Bramh, againſ Holbº.
On the directive powers of the former, and the regularity,
of the latter, whereby it is capable of direction, depends the
generation of all bodies. Grew's Coſm. Sac. b. ii. c. 1.
2. Informing; ſhewing the way.
Nor viſited by one directive ray,
From cottage ſtreaming, or from airy hall.
DiRE"ctly, adj. [from dire?..]
1. In a ſtrait line; rectilineally.
The more a body is nearer to the eyes, and the more direfly
it is oppoſed to them, the more it is enlightened; becauſe the
light languiſhes and leſiens the farther it removes from its pro-
per ſource. Drydºn's Diſreſnºy.
There was no other place aſſigned to any of this matter,
than that whereinto its own gravity bore it, which was only
dire? y downwards, whereby it obtained that place in the
globe which was juſt underneath. //Zodward’s N. Hiſ/. p. 4.
If the refračted ray be return d direcil, back to the point of
incidence, it ſhall be refraited by the incident ray. Newt. Opt.
2. Immediately ; apparently; without circumlocution; without
any long train of conſequence.
Infidels being clean without the church, deny directly and
utterly rejećt the very principles of chriſtianity, which hereticks
embrace, and erroneouſly by miſconſtrućtion. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 1.
No man hath hitherto been ſo impious, as plainly and
directly to condemn prayer. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 2.
By aſſerting the ſcripture to be the canon of our faith, I
have unavoidably created to myſelf enemies in the papiſts
directly, becauſe they have kept the ſcripture from us what
they could, and have reſerved to themſelves a right of inter-
preting them. . Dryden's Prºf. Rel. Laici.
His work direéily tends to raiſe ſentiments of honour and
virtue in his readers. Addiſon's Freeholder.
No reaſon can poſſibly be aſſigned, why it is beſt for the
world that God Almighty hath ſuch a power, which doth
not directly prove that no mortal man ſhould have the
like Swift on the Sent of a Ch. of Engl Man.
Dir E'cTNFss. n.ſ.. [from direct.] Straitncſs; tendency to any
point; the neareſt way.
They argued from celeſtial cauſes only, the conſtant vici-
nity of the ſun, and the directneſs of his rays; never ſuſpect-
ing that the body of the earth had ſo great an efficiency in the
changes of the air. Pentley's Serm.
DIRE'croR. m. ſ. [dire?or, Latin J
1. One that has authority over others; a ſuperintendent; one
that has the general management of a deſign or work.
Himſelf ſtood director over them, with nodding or ſtamping,
ſhewing he did like or miſlike thoſe things he did not under-
ſtand. Sidney, b, i.
In all affairs thou ſole dire/for. Swift's Miſſel.
What made direčiars cheat in ſouth ſea year Pope's Ep.
2. A rule; an ordinance.
Common forms were not deſign'd
Directºrs to a noble mind. Swift's Miſel.
3. An inſtructor; one who ſhews the proper methods of pro-
ceeding.
They are glad to uſe ſuch as counſellors and directors in all
their dealings which are of weight, as contračts, teſtaments.
Hooker's Pref.
Thomſ. Aut.
4. One who is conſulted in caſes of conſcience.
I am her director and her guide inſpiritual affairs. Dryd.Sp. Fr.
5. An inſtrument in ſurgery, by which the hand is guided in its
operation.
The manner of opening with a knife, is by ſliding it on
a director, the groove of which prevents its being miſ-
guided. Sharp's Surgery.
Dir E'ctory. m. ſ. [from direflor.] The book which the .
factious preachers publiſhed in the rebellion for the direction of
their ſe&amp;t in ačts of worſhip.
As to the ordinance concerning the direčiary, we cannot
COft-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">D I S
conſent to the taking away of the book of common
prayer. Oxford Reaſons againſ the Cºv.
Di'Réful. adj. [This word is frequent among the poets, but
has been cenſured as not analogical ; all other words com-
pounded with full conſiſting of a ſubſtantive and full, as dread-
ful, or full of dread; joyful, or full of joy..] Dire; dreadful;
diſmal.
Point of ſpear it never piercen would,
Ne dint of direful ſword, divide the ſubſtance could. Pa. &amp;.
But yet at laſt, whereas the direful fiend,
She ſaw not ſtir, off ſhaking vain affright,
She nigher drew, and ſaw that joyous end;
Then God ſhepray'd, and thank'd her faithful knight. Fa:Q#.
Direful hap betide that hated wretch -
That makes us wretched by the death of thee. Shakespeare K. Rich.
The voice of God himſelf ſpeaks in the heart of men, whe-
ther they underſtand it or no; and by ſecret intimations
ives the finner a foretaſte of that direful cup, which he is
#. to drink more deeply of hereafter. South's Serm.
I curs'd the direful author of my woes:
*
‘’Twas told again, and thence my ruin roſe. Dryden.
The wrath of Peleus’ ſon, the direful ſpring
Of all the Grecian woes, O goddeſs, ſing. Pope.
D1'RENEss. n.ſ.. [from dire.] Diſmalneſs; horror; hideouſneſs.
Direneſs, familiar to my ſlaught’rous thoughts,
Cannot once ſtart me. Shakeſp. Macb.
DIRE'ption, n.ſ. [direptio, Lat.] the aët of plundering, -
D. Roe. [This is not a contračtion of the Latin dirige, in the
popiſh hymn dirige greffus meos, as ſome pretend ; but from the
Teutonic dyrke, laudare, to praiſe and extol. Whence it is
poſſible their dyrke, and our dirge, was a laudatory ſong to
commemorate and applaud the dead. Verſiegan. Bacon apparently
derives it from dirge.] A mournful ditty; a ſong of lamenta-
tlCI). -
Th' imperial jointreſs of this warlike ſtate,
Have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
In equal ſcale weighing delight and dole,
Taken to wife. Shakeſp. Haml.
Mean while the body of Richard, after many indignities
and reproaches, the dirigies and obſequies of the common
people towards tyrants, was obſcurely buried. Bacon's Hen. VII.
You from above ſhall hear each day,
One dirge diſpatch’d unto your clay,
Theſe your own anthems ſhall become,
Your laſting epicedium. Sandy's Paraph.
- All due meaſures of her mourning kept, -
- Did office at the dirge, and by infection wept. Dryd. Sigiſ.
DI'RIGENT. adj. [dirigens, Latin.] - -
The dirigent line in geometry is that along which the line
deſcribent is carried in the generation of any figure. Harris.
DIRK. m. ſ. [an Earſe word.] A kind of dagger uſed in the
Highlands of Scotland.
In vain thy hungry mountaineers
Come forth in all their warlike geers,
The ſhield, the piſtol, dirk, and dagger,
In which they daily wont to ſwagger. . Tickell.
To DIRKE, v. a. To ſpoil; to ruin. Obſolete. ,
Thy waſte bigneſs but cumbers the ground, ,
And dirke; the beauties of my bloſſoms round. Sp. Paſ?.
DIRT. n.ſ. [dryt, Dutch, dirt, Iſlandic.] Mud ; filth ; mire;
any thing that ſticks to the cloaths or body.
They gilding dirt, in noble verſe
Ruſtick philoſophy rehearſe. Denham.
Numbers engage their lives and labours, to heap together
a little dirt, that ſhall bury them in the end. /Wake's Pr.
They all aſſured me that the ſea riſes as high as ever, tho’
the great heaps of dirt it brings along with it are apt to choak
up the ſhallows. Addiſon.
Mark by what wretched ſteps their glory grows; -
From dirt and ſea-weed as proud Venice roſe:
In each how guilt and greatneſs equal ran,
And all that rais'd the hero ſunk the man. Pope's Eſ.
Is yellow dirt the paſſion of thy life?
Look but on Gripus, or on Gripus' wife. Pope's Eſ.
2. Meanneſs; ſordidneſs. -
To DIRT. v. a. [from the noun..] To foul; to bemire; to
make filthy; to bedawb; to ſoil; to pollute; to naſty. . .
Ill company is like a dog, who dirts thoſe moſt whom he
loves beſt. Swift's Th. on var. Subj.
DiRT-P1 E. m. ſ [dirt and pie.] Forms moulded by children of
clay, in imitation of paſtry. :
Thou ſet'ſt thy heart upon that which has newly left off
making of dirt-pies, and is but preparing itſelf for a green-
ſickneſs. Suckling.
DI'RTILY. adv. [from dirty.]
1. Naſtily; foully; filthily.
2. Meanly; ſordidly; ſhamefully. -
Such gold as that wherewithal
Almighty chimiques from each mineral
Are dirtiy and deſperately gull'd.
DI'RT IN ess. n. ſ. [from dirty.]
Vol. I.
Dºnne.
1. Naſtineſs; filthineſs; foulneſs. •
2. Meanneſs; baſeneſs; ſordidneſs. a-
Di'RTY. adj. [from dirt.] -
1. Foul; naſty; filthy.
Thy Dol and Helen of thy noble thoughts
Is in baſe durance, and contágious priſon,
, Haul'd thither by mechanic, dirty hands.
2. Sullied; not elegant. -
Pound an almond, and the clear white colour will be alter-
ed into a dirty one, and the ſweet taſte into an oily one. Locke.
3. Mean; baſe; deſpicable.
Such employments are the diſeaſes of labour, and the ruſt
of time, which it contračts not by lying ſtill, but by dirty
employment. - 7aylor's Holy Living.
; Marriages would be made up upon more natural motives
than meer dirty intereſts, and increaſe of riches without mea-
ſure or end. Temple's Miſcelanies.
They come at length to grow ſots and epicures, mean in
their diſcourſes, and dirty in their pračtices. South's Serm.
To Di'Rty. v. a. [from the noun.] - -
1. To foul; to ſoil.
The Lords Strutts lived generouſly, and never uſed to dirty
their fingers with pen, ink, and counters. Arburth. H/l. Bull.
2. To diſgrace; to ſcandalize.
DI'RUPTION. m. ſ. [diruptio, Latin.]
1. The act of burſting, or breaking.
2. The ſtate of burſting, or breaking.
Dis. An inſeparable particle uſed in compoſition, implying
commonly a privative or negative ſignification of the word
to which it is joined; as to arm, to diſarm; to join, to di join.
It is borrowed from des, uſed by the French and Spaniards in
the ſenſe; as deſnauer, to untie; deſferrar, to baniſh; from the
Latin de; as ſiruo, to build; deſiruo, to deſtroy.
Shakesp. Hºn. IV.
Disabi'lity. n.ſ.. [from diſable.]
I. Want of power to do anything; weakneſs; impotence.
Our conſideration of creatures, and attention unto ſcriptures,
are not in themſelves things of like diſability to breed or beget
faith. - Hock.r, b. v. ſ. 22.
Many withdrew themſelves out of pure faintneſs, and diſ.
ability to attend the concluſion. Raleigh's Hiff. World.
He that knows moſt of himſelf, knows leaſt of his know-
ledge, and the exerciſed underſtanding is conſcious of its
diſability. - Glanv. Scepſ c. 27.
The ability of mankind does not lie in the impotency or
diſabilities of brutes. Lºcke.
2. Want of proper qualifications for any purpoſe; legal impe-
diment. -
A ſuit is commenced in a temporal court for an inheritance,
and the defendant pleads in diſability, that the plaintiff is
a baſtard. Ayliffo's Parergon.
It is true, indeed, that this diſadvantage which the diffen-
ters at preſent lie under, of a diſability to receive church pre-
ferments, will be eaſily remedied by the repeal of the
teſt. Swift's Adv. Rep. Sacr. Tºft.
To Disa'BLE. v. a. [dis and able.]
1. To deprive of natural force; to weaken; to cruſh.
The invaſion of the Scots, and rebellion of the barons, did
not only diſable this king to be a conqueror, but deprived him
both of his kingdom and life. Davier's Ireland
Nor ſo is overcome
Satan, whoſe fall from heav'n, a deadlier bruiſe
Diſabled not to give thee thy death's wound. Mill. P. Loft.
A chriſtian's life is a perpetual exerciſe a wreſtling and war-
fare, for which ſenſual pleaſure diſables him, by yielding to that
enemy with whom he muſt ſtrive. Taylor's Holy Living.
2. To impair; to diminiſh. -
'Tis not unknown to you Anthonio,
How much I have diſabled mine eſtate,
By ſhewing ſomething a more ſwelling port -
Than my faint means would grant continuance. Shakesp care.
3. To make una&amp;tive. . -
I have known a great fleet diſabled for two months, and
thereby loſe great occaſions by an indiſpoſition of the ad-
miral. Temple.
4. To deprive of uſefulneſs or efficacy. -
Farewel, Monſieur Traveller; look you liſp, and wear
ſtrange ſuits; diſable all the benefits of your own country. Shakespeare
Your days I will alarm, I'll haunt your nights,
And worſe than age diſable your delights. Dryden's Aurenzebe.
5. To exclude as wanting proper qualifications. -
... I will not diſable any for proving a ſcholar, nor yet diſ-
ſemble that I have ſeen many happily forced upon the courſe,
to which by nature they ſeem much indiſpoſed. Wotton.
To DISABU's E. v. a. [dis and abuſe.] To ſet free from a miſ-
take; to diſentangle from a fallacy ; to ſet right; to undeceive.
The impoſture and fallacy of our ſenſes impoſe not only
on common heads, but even more refined mercuries, who have
the advantages of an improved reaſon to diſabuſe you. Glanv.
... Thoſe teeth fair Lyce muſt not ſhow,
If ſhe would bite her lovers: though
Like birds they ſtoop at ſeeming grapes, .
Are djalus'd, when firſt ſhe gapes. Wal'er.
6 Z. If<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 257</div><p class="Text">D I S
ff by ſimplicity you meant a general defea in thoſe that
profeſs angling, I hope to diſabuſe you. J/aller’s Angler.
Chaos of thought and paſſion, all confus'd ;
Still by himſelf abus'd, or diſabus’d. Pope's Eff, on Man.
Disaccommodation. n.ſ. [dis and accommodation.] The
ſtate of being unfit or unprepared.
Devaſtations have happened in ſome places more than in
others, according to the accommodation or diſaccommodation of
them to ſuch calamities. Hale's Orig. of Mankind.
To Disaccu'stom. v. a. [dis and accuſtom.] To deſtroy the
force of habit by diſuſe or contrary practice. -
Disacqua'intance. n. ſ. [dis and acquaintance.] Diſuſe of
familiarity. -
Conſcience, by a long negle&amp;t of, and diſacquaintance with
itſelf, contračts an inveterate ruſt or foil. South.
Disadva'NtAGE. m. ſ. [dis and advantage.]
1. Loſs; injury to intereſt; as, he ſold to diſadvantage.
2. Diminution of any thing deſirable, as credit, fame, honour.
Our old Engliſh poet, Chaucer, in many things reſembled
Ovid, and that with no diſadvantage on the fide of the modern
author. Dryden's Fab. Pref.
The moſt ſhining merit goes down to poſterity with diſad-
vantage, when it is not placed by writers in its proper
light. Addison's Freeholder.
Thoſe parts already publiſhed give reaſon to think, that
the Iliad will appear with no diſadvantage to that immortal
poem. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Their teſtimony will not be of much weight to its diſad-
vantage, fince they are liable to the common objećtion of con-
demning what they did not underſtand. Swift.
3. A ſtate not prepared for defence.
But all in vain; no fort can be ſo ſtrong,
Ne fleſhly breaſt can armed be ſo ſound,
But will at laſt be won with batt'ry long,
Or unawares at diſadvantage found. Fairy Queen.
To Disadvantage. v. a. [from the noun.J. To injure in in-
tereſt of any kind.
All other violences are ſo far from advancing chriſtianity,
that they extremely weaken and diſadvantage it. Decay of Piety.
Disadva’NtAGEABLE. adj. [from diſadvantage.] Contrary to
profit; producing loſs. A word not uſed.
In clearing of a man's eſtate, he may as well hurt himſelf in
being too ſudden, as in letting it run on too long; for haſty
ſelling is commonly as diſadvantageable as intereſt. Bacon's Eſ.
Disadvant A'GEous. adj. [from diſadvantage.] Contrary to in-
tereſt; contrary to convenience; unfavourable.
A multitude of eyes will narrowly inſpect every part of him,
conſider him nicely in all views, and not be a little pleaſed
when they have taken him in the worſt and moſt diſadvanta-
geous lights. Addison Spetſ. Nº. 256.
Disadvant AſGeously. adv. [from diſadvantageous.] In a
manner contrary to intereſt or profit; in a manner not favour-
able to any uſeful end.
An approving nod or ſmile ſerves to drive you on, and
make you diſplay yourſelves more diſadvantageouſly. Gov. Tan.
DIs Advant A'GEousNess. n. ſ. [from diſadvantageous.] Con-
trariety to profit; inconvenience; miſchief; loſs.
DIs ADVE'NTURQUs. adj. [dis and adventurous.] Unhappy;
unproſperous. -
Now he hath left you here,
To be the record of his rueful loſs, -
And of my doleful diſadventurous death. Fairy Queen, b, i.
To Disaffe′ct. v. a. [diſand affect.] To fill with diſcon-
tent; to diſcontent; to make leſs faithful or zealous.
They had attempted to diſaffect and diſcontent his majeſty's
late army. Clarendon.
D1s AFFE'cTED. part, adj. [from diſaffect.] Not diſpoſed to
zeal or affection. Uſually applied to thoſe who are enemies to
the government.
By denying civil worſhip to the emperor's ſtatues, which the
cuſtom then was to give, they were proceeded againſt as diſ-
affected to the emperor. Stilling. Def, of Diſ on Ro. Idol.
Bisaffectedly, adv. [from diſafficied.] After a diſaffected
manner.
DIs AFFE'cred Ness, n.ſ.. [from diſaffeded.] The quality of being
diſaffeóted.
DIs AFFE'ction. h. ſ. [from diſaff:ff.] Want of zeal for the
government; want of ardour for the reigning prince.
In this age, every thing diſliked by thoſe who think with
the majority, is j diſaffection. Swift.
D1s AFFI'RMANCE. m. ſ. [dis and affirm.] Confutation; ne-
ation.
That kind of reaſoning which reduceth the oppoſite conclu-
ſion to ſomething that is apparently abſurd, is a demonſtration
in diſaffirmance of anything that is affirmed. Hale's Or. of Man.
To Disaffo'Rest. v. a. . [dis and foreſ?] To throw open to
common purpoſes; to reduce from the privileges of a foreſt to
the ſtate of common ground.
The commiſſioners of the treaſury moved the king to diſ.
affºreſ ſome foreſts of his, explaining themſelves of ſuch fo-
reſts as lay out of the way, not near any of the king's
houſcs. Bacºn.
How happy's he, which hath due place aſſign'd
To his beaſts; and diſaff reſted his mind Donne.
To Disagr’EE. v. m. [dis and agree.] -
I. To differ; not to be the ſame.
The mind clearly and infallibly perceives all diſtinét ideas to
diſagree; that is, the one not to be the other. Locke.
2. To differ; not to be of the ſame opinion.
Why both the bands in worſhip diſagree,
And ſome adore the flow'r, and ſome the tree. Dry Fl. and L.
3. To be in a ſtate of oppoſition: followed by frºm or with,
before the oppoſite.
It containeth many improprieties, diſagreeing almoſt in all
things from the true and proper deſcription. Brown's W. Er.
Strange it is, that they rejećt the plaineſt ſenſe of ſcrip-
ture, becauſe it ſeems to diſagree with what they call
reaſon. Atterbury's Sºrmons,
Disagree(ABLE. adj. [from diſagree.]
1. Contrary; unſuitable.
Some demon, an enemy to the Greeks, had forced her to a
condućt diſagreeable to her fincerity. Pope'ſ Od. b. iv. notes.
2. Unpleaſing; offenſive.
To make the ſenſe of eſteem or diſgrace ſink the deeper,
and be of the more weight, either agreeable or diſagreeable
things ſhould conſtantly accompany theſe different ſtates. Locks.
Disagree'AbleNEss. n. ſ. [from diſagreeable.]
1. Unſuitableneſs; contrariety.
2. Unpleaſantneſs; offenſiveneſs.
A father will hug and embrace his beloved ſon for all the
dirt and foulneſs of his cloaths; the dearneſs of the perſon
eaſily apologizing for the diſagreeableneſs of the habit. South's S.
Disa GREE'MENT. n.ſ.. [from diſagree.]
1. Difference; diffimilitude; diverſity; not identity.
Theſe carry ſuch plain and evident notes and chara&amp;ters,
either of diſagreement or affinity with one another, that the
ſeveral kinds of them are eaſily known and diſtinguiſh-
ed. Woodw. Nat. Hiſt.
2. Difference of opinion; contrariety of ſentiments.
They ſeemed one to croſs another, as touching their ſeve-
ral opinions about the neceſſity of ſacraments, whereas in truth
their diſagreement is not great. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 57.
To Disallow. v. a. [dis and allow.]
*
-
1. To deny authority to any.
When, ſaid ſhe,
Were thoſe firſt councils diſallºw'd by me?
Or where did I at ſure tradition ſtrike,
Provided ſtill it were apoſtolic. Dryd. Hind, and Panth,
2. To conſider as unlawful; not to permit an act.
Their uſual kind of diſputing ſheweth, that they do not
diſallow only theſe Romiſh ceremonies which are unprofitable,
but count all unprofitable which are Romiſh. Hooker.
3. To cenſure by ſome poſterior ačt.
It was known that the moſt eminent of thoſe who profeſſed
his own principles, publickly diſallowed his proceedings. Sw,
4. Not to juſtify.
There is a ſecret, inward foreboding fear, that ſome evil or
other will follow the doing of that which a man's own con-
ſcience diſallows him in. - South's Serm.
To Disallow. v. n. To refuſe permiſſion; not to grant; not
to make lawful. -
God doth in converts, being married, allow continuance
with infidels, and yet diſallºw that the faithful, when they are
free, ſhould enter into bonds of wedlock with ſuch. Hooker.
Disallowable. adj. [from diſallow.] Not allowable; not to
be ſuffered.
Disallow ANce. n.ſ.. [from diſallºw.] Prohibition.
God accepts of a thing ſuitable for him to receive, and ſor
us to give, where he does not declare his refuſal and diſallow-
ance of it. South's Serm.
To Dis'ANchoR. v. a. [from dis and anchor.] to drive a ſhip
from its anchor.
To Disa NIMA't E. v. a. [dis and animate.]
1. To deprive of life.
2. To diſcourage; to dejećt; to depreſs.
The preſence of a king engenders love amongſt his ſub-
jećts, and his loyal friends, as it diſanimates his ene-
mies. - Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
He was confounded and diſanimated at his preſence, and
added, how can the ſervant of my lord talk with my lord?
Boyle's Seraph. Love.
Disan IMA'tion. m. ſ. [from diſanimate.] Privation of life.
They cannot in reaſon retain that apprehenſion after death,
as being affections which depend on life, and depart upon diſ-
animation. Brown's Vulg. Er. b. iii. l. Io.
To DIs ANNU'l. v. a. [dis and annul. This word is formed
contrary to analogy by thoſe who not knowing the meaning of
the word annul, intended to form a negative ſenſe by the need-
leſs uſe of the negative particle. It ought therefore to be re-
jećted as ungrammatical and barbarous.] To annul; to de-
prive of authority; to vacate; to make null; to make voide
to nullify.
To
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 258</div><p class="Text">D I S
The Jews ordinances for us to reſume, were to check our
Lord himſelf, which hath diſannulled them. Hooker, b. iv. §. i.
That gave him power of diſannulling of laws, and diſpoſing
of mens fortunes and eſtates, and the like points of abſolute
power, being in themſelves harſh and odious. Bacon, Hen.VII.
To be in both worlds full,
Is more than God was, who was hungry here:
Wouldſt thou his laws of faſting diſannulf Herbert.
Wilt thou my judgments diſannul P Defame
My equal rule, to clear thyſelf of blame? Sandys.
Disan Nu'LMENT. n.ſ.. [from diſannull The aët of making
void.
To Disappear. v. n. [diſparoitre, French.] To be loſt to
view; to vaniſh out of ſight; to fly; to go away.
She diſappear'd, and left me dark I wak'd -
To find her, or for ever to deplore. Milton's Parad. Loſt.
- When the night and winter diſappear, -
The purple morning, riſing with the year, *
Salutes the Spring. Dryden.
The pićtures drawn in our minds are laid in fading colours,
and, if not ſometimes refreſhed, vaniſh and diſappear. Locke.
Criticks I ſaw, that other names deface, -
And fix their own with labour in their place;
Their own, like others, ſoon their place reſign'd, -
Or diſappear'd, and left the firſt behind. Pope's Tem, of Fame.
"To Disappo'INT. v. a. [dis and appoint.] º -
1. To defeat of expectation; to balk; to hinder from ſomething
expected. -
The ſuperior Being can defeat all his deſigns, and diſ-
appoint all his hopes. Tillotſon, Sermon i.
Whilſt the champion, with redoubled might,
Strikes home the jav'lin, his retiring foe * -
Shrinks from the wound, and diſappoints the blow. Addison.
There's nothing like ſurpriſing the rogues: how will they
be diſappointed, when they hear that thou haſt prevented their
sevenge. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
We are not only tortured by the reproaches which are of
fered us, but are diſappointed by the filence of men when it is
unexpected, and humbled even by their praiſes. Addison Spectat.
2. It has of before the thing loſt by diſappointment.
The Janizaries, diſappointed by the baſſas of the ſpoil of the
merchants, eſpecially Chriſtians and Jews, received of the
bounty of Solyman a great largeſs. Knolles's Hiff. of the Turks.
Disappo'INTMENT. n.ſ.. [from diſappoint..] Defeat of hopes;
miſcarriage of expectations.
It is impoſſible for us to know what are calamities, and what
are bleſſings: how many accidents have paſſed for misfortunes,
which have turned to the welfare and proſperity of the perſons
in whoſe lot they have fallen How many diſappointments have,
in their conſequences, ſaved a man from ruin? Spectator.
If we hope for things, of which we have not thoroughly
conſidered the value, our diſappointment will be greater than
our pleaſure in the fruition of them. Addiſon's Spediator.
DIs APPROB'Ation. n.ſ. [dis and approbation.] Cenſure; con-
demnation; expreſſion of diſlike.
Pope was obliged to publiſh his letters, to ſhew his diſ.
approlation of the publiſhing of others written in his youth.
, Pope to Swift.
To Disappro've. v. a... [diſapprover, French..] To diſlike;
to cenſure; to find fault with. -
I reaſon'd much, alas! but more I lov’d ;
Sent and recall'd, ordain’d and diſapprov’d. Prior,
Without good breeding, truth is diſapprov'd;
That only makes ſuperior ſenſe belov’d. Pope's Eſ on Crit.
A projećt for a treaty of barrier with the States was tranſ-
mitted hither from Holland, and was diſapproved of by our
court. Swift.
D1's ARD. m. ſ. [biri brix, Saxon, a fool, Skinner; diſeur,
French, junius.] A prattler; a boaſting talker. This word
is inſerted both by Skinner and junius; but I do not remem-
ber it. -
To Disa'R.M. v. a. [deſarmer, French.]
1. To ſpoil or diveſt of arms; to deprive of arms.
I am ſtill the ſame,
By different ways ſtill moving to one fame;
And by diſarming you, I now do more -
To ſave the town, than arming you before. Dryd, In. Emp.
2. It has of before the arms taken away.
They would be immediately diſarmed of their great maga-
zine of artillery. Ilocke.
To Dis ARRA'Y. v. a. [dis and array.] To undreſs any one;
to diveſt of cloaths.
So, as ſhe bad, the witch they diſarray'd. Fairy Queen.
, Now night is come, now ſoon her diſarray,
And in her bed her lay. Spenſer's Epithalamium.
D1s ARRA'Y. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Diſorder; confuſion; loſs of the regular order of battle.
He returned towards the river, to prevent ſuch danger as
the diſarray, occaſioned by the narrowneſs of the bridge, might
caſt upon them. Hayward.
Diſarray and ſhameful rout enſue,
And force is added to the fainting crew. Dryden's Fableſ.
Disa'strous. adj. [from diſaſter.]
2. Undreſs. -
DISASTER. m. ſ. [diſaffre, French.
1. The blaſt or (.º. †† planet. º
Stars ſhone with trains of fire, dews of blood fall;
Diſaſters veil'd the ſun; and the moiſt ſtar,
Upon whoſe influence Neptune's empire ſtands,
Was ſick almoſt to doomſday with eclipſe. Shakeſp. Hamlik.
2: Misfortune; grief; miſhap; miſery; calamity.
This day black omens threat the brighteſt fair,
..That e'er deſerv'd a watchful ſpirit's care,
Some dire diſaſter, or by force or ſlight;
But what, or where, the fates have wrapt in night. Pope.
To DiSA's TER. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. To blaſt by the ſtroke of an unfavourable ſtar.
Ah, chaſte bed of mine, ſaid ſhe, which never heretofore
couldſt accuſe me of one defiled thought, how canſt thou now
receive that diſaſtered changing? Sidney, b. ii.
2. To afflićt; to miſchief. * * -
Theſe are the holes where eyes ſhould be, which pitifully
diſaſter the cheeks. . Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
In his own fields, the ſwain y f
Diſaſler'd ſtands. Thomſon's Jºinter, 1.286.
1. Unlucky; not fortunate..
That day ſeemeth a moſt diſaſtrous day to the Scots, not
only in regard of this overthrow, but for that upon the ſame
day they were in like ſort defeated by the Engliſh at Flooden-
field. - - Hayward.
2. Unhappy; calamitous; miſerable; ſtruck with afflićión.
Then Juno, pitying her diſaffrous fate,
Send Iris down, her pangs to mitigate. Denham.
Immediately after his return from this very expedition, ſuch
diſaſtrous calamities befel his family, that he burnt two of his
children himſelf. South's Sermons.
Fly the purſuit of my diſaffrous love,
... And from my unhappy neighbourhood remove. Dryd. Aarºn.
3. Gloomy; threatning misfortune.
The moon,
In dim eclipſe, diſaſtrous twilight ſheds
On half the nations. , Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. i. 1597.
Disastrously, adv, (from diſaſtrous.) In a difinal manneſ.
DISA's TRoussess. n.ſ.. [from diſaſtrous.] Unluckineſs; un-
fortunateneſs. Diff. .
To Disavou'cH. v.a. [dis and avouch..] To retract profeſ.
ſion; to diſown. -
Thereupon they flatly diſavouch,
To yield him more obedience or ſupport. Daniel's C. War.
To Disavo'w. v.a. [dis and avow.] To diſown; to deny
knowledge of ; to deny concurrence in anything.
The heirs and poſterity of them which yielded the ſame,
are, as they ſay, either ignorant thereof, or do wilfully deny,
or heiß diſavow it. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The Engliſh, that knew his noble ſpirit, did believe his
name was therein abuſed, which he manifeſted to be true by
diſavowing it openly afterwards. Hayward.
To deal in perſon is good, when a man's face breedeth re-
gard, and generally when a man will reſerve to himſelf liberty
either to diſavow or to expound. Bacon, Eſſay 48.
A man that acts below his rank, doth but diſavºw fortune,
and ſeemeth to be conſcious of his own want in worth, and
doth but teach others to envy him. Bacou, Eſſay 9.
He only does his conqueſt diſavow, -L/
And thinks too little what they found too much. Dryden.
We are reminded by the ceremony of taking an oath, that
it is a part of that obedience which we learn from the goſpel,
expreſly to diſavow all evaſions and mental reſervations what-
ſoever. Addison's Freeholder.
Disavo'wal. n.ſ [from diſavow J Denial.
An earneſt diſavowal of fear, often proceeds from fear.
DisavowMENT. n.ſ.. [from diſavow.] Denial.
As touching the Tridentine hiſtory, his holineſs will not
preſs you to any diſavowment thereof. J/otton.
To Disau'thorise. v. a. [dis and authoriſe.] To deprive of
credit or authority. º
The obtruſion of ſuch particular inſtances as theſe, are
inſufficient to diſauthoriſe a note grounded upon the final in-
tention of nature. //otton.
To DisbA'ND. v. a. [dis and band.] -
1. To diſmiſs from military ſervice; to break up an army; to
diſmiſs ſoldiers from their colours.
They disbanded themſelves, and returned every man to his
own dwelling. - Knºlles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Pythagoras bids us in our ſtation ſtand,
*Till God, our general, ſhall us disland. Denham.
This if you do, to end all future ſtrife, -
I am content to lead a private life;
Disband my army to ſecure the ſtate. Dryden's Aurengzºle.
Bid him disband his legions,
Reſtore the commonwealth to liberty. Addiſon's Cato.
2. To ſpread abroad; to ſcatter.
Some imagine that a quantity of water, ſufficient to make
ſcuh
Clariſſa.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 259</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S.
ſuch a deluge, was created upon that occaſion; and, when the
buſineſs was done, all disbanded again, and annihilated. Iſºodw.
To Disba'Nd. v. n. To retire from military ſervice; to ſepa-
rate; to break up.
Our navy was upon the point of disbanding, and many of
our men come aſhore. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
- The rang'd pow'rs
Disband, and wand'ring, each his ſeveral way
Purſues. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii. 1.525.
The common ſoldiers, and inferior officers, ſhould be fully
paid upon their disbanding. Clarendon.
Were it not for ſome ſmall remainders of piety and virtue,
which are yet left ſcattered among mankind, human ſociety
would in a ſhort ſpace disband and run into confuſion, and
the earth would grow wild and become a foreſt. Tillºtſon.
To DisbA'RK. v. a. [debarquer, French..] To land from a
ſhip; to put on ſhore.
Together ſail'd they, fraught with all the things
To ſervice done by land that might belong, -
And, when occaſión ſerv'd, disbarked them. Fairfax, b. i.
The ſhip we moor on theſe obſcure abodes;
Disbar; the ſheep, an offering to the gods. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
Disbelief. n.ſ.. [from disbelieve..] Refuſal of credit; denial
of belief.
Our belief or disbelief of a thing does not alter the nature
of the thing. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
To Disbell'Eve. v. a. [ dis and believe. J Not to credit;
not to hold true.
The thinking it impoſſible his fins ſhould be forgiven,
though he ſhould be truly penitent, is a fin, but rather of infi-
delity than deſpair; it being the disbelieving of an eternal truth
of God's. Hammond's Prač7. Catech.
Such, who profeſs to disbelieve a future ſtate, are not always
equally ſatisfied with their own reaſonings. Atterbury.
From a fondneſs to ſome vices, which the doćtrine of futu-
rity rendered uneaſy, they brought themſelves to doubt of
religion; or, out of a vain affectation of ſeeing farther than
other men, pretended to disbelieve it. Rogers, Sermon 13.
Disbelieve R. n.ſ.. [from disbelieve..] One who refuſes belief;
one who denies any poſition to be true.
An humble ſoul is frighted into any particular ſentiments,
becauſe a man of great name pronounces hereſy upon the con-
trary ſentiments, and caſts the disbeliever out of the church,
- J/atts's Lºgick.
To Disbe'Nch. v. a. [dis and bench.] To drive from a feat.
Sir, I hope
My words disbench'd you not :
No, ſir; yet oft,
When blows have made me ſtay, I fled from words. Shakespeare
To DisbrA'Nch. v. a. [dis and branch..] To ſeparate or break
off, as a branch from a tree.
I fear your diſpoſition:
That nature which contemns its origine,
Cannot be border'd certain in itſelf:
She that herſelf will ſliver and disbranch
From her maternal ſap, perforce muſt wither,
And come to deadly uſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
But for ſuch as are newly planted, they need not be diſ-
-
branched 'till the ſap begins to ſtir, that ſo the wound may be
healed without the ſcar, which our froſts do frequently
leave. Evelyn's Kalendar.
To Disbu'd. v. a. [With gardeners.] To take away the
branches or ſprigs newly put forth, that are ill placed. Dići.
To DisBU'RDEN. v. a. [dis and burden.]
1. To eaſe of a burden ; to unload.
Better yet do I live, that though by my thoughts I be
plunged
Into my life's bondage, I yet may disburden a paſſion. Sidney.
The river, with ten branches or ſtreams, disburdens himſelf
within the Perſian ſea. Peacham on Drawing.
Disburden'd heav'n rejoic’d. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi.
2. To diſencumber, diſcharge, or clear.
They removed either by caſualty and tempeſt, or by inten-
tion and deſign, either out of lucre of gold, or for the diſ-
burdening of the countries, ſurcharged with multitudes of in-
Aabitants. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
We ſhall disburden the piece of thoſe hard ſhadowings,
which are always ungraceful. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. To throw off a burden. -
Lucia, disburden all thy cares on me,
And let me ſhare thy moſt retired diſtreſs.
To Disbu'R DEN. v. m. To eaſe the mind. -
To DISBU'RSE. v. a. [debourſer, French..] To ſpend or lay
out money. -
Money is now not disburſed at once, as it might be ; but
drawn into a long length, by ſending over now twenty thou-
ſand, and next half year ten thouſand pounds. Spenſer.
Nor would we deign him burial for his men,
*Till he disbury’d at St. Colmeſkil Iſle,
Ten thouſand dollars to our general. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
As Alexander received great ſums, he was no leſs generous
and liberal in disbuſing of them. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Addison's Cato.
Dispu'R's FMENT. n. ſ. [delouſ ment, French.]
or laying out.
It may be, Ireneus, that the queen's treaſure, in ſo great
occaſions of di burſºmeºt, is not always ſo ready, nor ſo plen-
tiful, as it can ſpare ſo great a ſum tºgether. Sfºnſºr', 1,...,nd.
Pisºu ºf R. m.ſ...[from diºſ...] One that disbürſes.
DISCALCEATED. adj. [ djalicatus, Latin.] Stripped of
ſhoes. -
DiscAlcEA't los. m. ſ. [ from dical cated. J. The act of
pulling off the ſhoes.
The cuſtom of diſcakration, or putting off their ſhoes at
meals, is conceived to have been done, as by that means
keeping their beds clean. Brown's Pulgar Errors, h. v. c. 6
To tºº. v. m. [from dis and canº.] To diſſolve; to
Incit. -
A disburſing
Izanner.
The hearts,
That ſpaniel'd me at heels, to whom I gave
§ wiſhes, do diſtand, melt their ſweets
n bloſſoming Caeſar. Shakeſpeare's Ant. an -
To Discarp. v.a. [dis and card J ſº and Cleopatra.
1. To throw out of the hand ſuch cards as are uſ...fs.
2. To diſcharge or eject fron ſervice or cmployment.
- Theſe men being certainly jewels to a wiſe man, conſider-
ing what wonders they were able to perform, yet were diſ.
carded by that unworthy prince, as not worthy the holding. Sid.
Their captains, if they liſt, diſcard whom they pleaſe, ands
ſend away ſuch as will perhaps willingly be rid of that danger-
ous and hard ſervice. - Sperſºr's St. te of Ireland.
Should we own that we have a very imperfect idea of ſub-
ſtance, would it not be hard to charge us with diſcarding ſub-
, ſtance out of the world : Žº.
Juſtice diſcard, party, friendſhip, kindred, and is always
therefore repreſented as blind. Addison's Guardian, Nº. 99.
They blame the favourites, and think it nothing extraordi-
nary that the queen ſhould be at an end of her patience, and
reſolve to diſcard them. Swift.
I do not conceive why a ſunk diſarded party, who ić
expect nor deſire more than a quiet life, ſhould be charged
with endeavouring to introduce popery. Swift.
DiscARNATE, adj. [di, and cars, fleſh; Jarrato, Ital.] Stripied
of fleſh.
'Tis better to own a judgment, though but with a curta
fºpellex of coherent notions, than a memory, like a ſepul-
chre, furniſhed with a load of broken and diſarnate bones.
- Glanville's Scepſ c. 17.
To DiscA's F. v. a. [dis and caſe ) To ſtrip; to undreſs."
Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell:
I will diſcoſe me, and myſelf preſent.
To DISCERN. v. a. [diſarno, Latin.]
1. To deſcry; to ſee; to diſcover.
And behold among the ſimple ones, I diſarmed among the
youths a young man void of underſtanding. o
2. To judge; to have knowledge of
What doth better become wiſdom than to diſarn what is
worthy the loving 2 Sidney, b. ii.
Boes any here know me? This is not Lear:
Does Lear walk thus, ſpeak thus? Where are his eyes?
Either his motion weakens, or his diſcernings -
Are lethargicq. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
You ſhould be rul’d and led
By ſome diſcretion, that diſcerns your ſtate
Better than you yourſelf. Shakespeare's King Lear.
3. To diſtinguiſh. -
To diſcern ſuch buds as are fit to produce bloſſoms, from
ſuch as will diſplay themſelves but in leaves, is no difficult
matter. Boyle.
4. To make the difference between.
They follow virtue for reward, to-day;
To-morrow vice, if ſhe give better pay:
We are ſo good, or bad, juſt at a price;
For nothing elſe diſcerns the virtue or vice.
To DiscE'RN. v. m. To make diſtinction.
Great part of the country was abandoned to the ſpoils of .
the ſoldiers, who not troubling themſelves to diſcern between
a ſubject and a rebel, whilſt their liberty laſted, made indif-
ferently profit of both. - Hayward.
The cuſtom of arguing on any ſide, even againſt our per-
ſuaſions, dims the underſtanding, and makes it by degrees
loſe the faculty of diſcerning between truth and falſhood. Locke.
Disce'RNER. n.ſ.. [from diſern J
1. Diſcoverer; he that deſcries.
'Twas ſaid they ſaw but one; and no diſºerner
Durſt wag his tongue in cenſure. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
2. Judge ; one that has the power of diſtinguiſhing.
He was a gºat obſerver and diſcerner of mens natures and
humours, and was very dextrous in compliance, where he
found it uſeful. Clarendon, b. viii.
How unequal dºſ rrºrs of truth there are, and eaſily ex-
poſed unto erroir, will appear by their unqualified intel-
lectuals. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours, b, i. c. 3.
Discº'RNIBLE, adj. [from diſcºrn J Diſcoverable; perceptible
diſtinguiſhaole ; apparent.
Shakespeare . Tempºſt.
-
Prov. vii. 7.
Ben. jºhn ºl.
- -
It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 260</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
i
Is is indeed a ſin of ſo groſs, ſo formidable a bulk, that
there needs no help of opticks to render it diſcernible, and
therefore I need not farther expatiate on it. Gov. of the Tongue.
All this is eaſily diſcernible by the ordinary diſcourſes of the
underſtanding. º South's Sermons.
DiscE'RNI bleness. n.ſ.. [from diſcernible.] Viſibleneſs.
Disce'RNIBLY. adv. [from diſcernible.j Perceptibly; appa-
rently.
&amp;nder what doćtrines are infuſed diſcernibly among Chriſ-
tians, moſt apt to obſtruct or interrupt the Chriſtian life. Ham.
Disce'RNING. participial adj. [ from diſcern. J Judicious ;
knowing.
This hath been maintained not only by warm enthuſiaſts,
but by cooler and more diſcerning heads. Atterbury's Sermons.
Disce'RNINGLY. adv. [from diſcerning.] Judiciouſly ; ra-
tionally; acutely.
Theſe two errours Ovid has moſt diſcerningly avoided. Garth.
Disce'RNMENT. n.ſ.. [from diſcern.] Judgment; power of
diſtinguiſhing.
A reader that wants diſcernment, loves and admires the cha-
raćters and actions of men in a wrong place. Freeholder.
To DISCE'RP. v. a. [diſcerpo, Latin J To tear in pieces; to
break; to deſtroy by ſeparation of its parts. Dićf.
DiscE'RPT1B L E. adj. [from diſcerp..] Frangible ; ſeparable;
liable to be deſtroyed by the diſunion of its parts.
What is moſt denſe, and leaſt porous, will be moſt cohe-
rent and leaſt diſcerptible. Giantile's Sceſſ.
Matter is moveable, this immoveable; matter diſcerp-
tilte, this indiſcerptible. More's Div. Dialogues.
Disce RPT1b1'LITY.. n.ſ.. [from diſcerptible.] Liableneſs to be .
deſtroyed by diſunion of parts.
Disce'RPTION. n.ſ.. [from diſcerp..] The ačt of pulling to
pieces, or deſtroying by diſuniting the parts.
To DISCHARGE. v. a. [diſcharger, French.]
1. To diſburden; to exonerate; to free from any load or incon-
venience.
How rich in humble poverty is he,
Who leads a quiet country life;
Diſcharg’d of buſineſs, void of ſtrife. Dryden.
When they have taken a degree, and are conſequently grown
a burden to their friends, who now think themſelves fully diſ-
charged, they get into orders as ſoon as they can. Swift.
2. To unload; to diſembark. -
I will convey them by ſea in floats, unto the place that thou
ſhalt appoint me, and will cauſe them to be diſcharged. I Ki. v.
3. To throw off any thing collected or accumulated; to give
vent to anything; to let fly. It is uſed of anything violent,
or ſudden.
Mounting his eyes,
He did diſcharge a horrible oath. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Infected minds,
To their deaf pillows will diſcharge their ſecrets. Shakespeare. Macb.
Nor were thoſe bluſt'ring brethren left at large,
On ſeas and ſhores their fury to diſcharge. Dryden's Ovid.
Soon may kind heav'n a ſure relief provide;
Soon may your fire diſcharge the vengeance due,
And all your wrongs the proud oppreſſors rue. Pope's Odyſſey.
Diſcharge thy ſhafts; this ready boſom rend. Pope's Stat.
4. To unload a gun.
A conceit runneth abroad, that there ſhould be a white
powder, which will diſcharge a piece without noiſe. Bacon.
The galleys alſo did oftentimes, out of their prows, aiſ-
charge their great pieces againſt the city. Knolles's Hiſtory.
We diſcharged a piſtol, and had the ſound returned upon us
fifty-ſix times, though the air was foggy. Addiſon on Italy.
5. To clear a debt by payment.
Death of one perſon can be paid but once,
And that ſhe has diſcharged. Shakeſpeare's Ant, and Cleopatra.
A grateful mind,
By owing, owes not, but ſtill pays ; at once
Indebted, and diſcharg’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. iv.
Now to the horrors of that uncouth place,
He paſſage begs with unregarded pray'r;
And wants two farthings to diſcharge his fare. Dryd.juven.
When foreign trade imports more than our commodities
will pay for, we contračt debts beyond ſea; and thoſe are paid
with money, when they will not take our goods to diſcharge
them. Locke,
0. To ſend away a creditor by payment.
If he had
The preſent money to diſcharge the Jew,
He would not take it. Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Venice.
7. To ſet free from obligation.
If one man's fault could diſcharge another man of his duty,
there would be no place left for the common offices of ſo-
ciety. - L’Eſtrange.
8. To clear from an accuſation or crime; to abſolve.
They wanted not reaſons to be diſcharged of all blame,
who are confeſſed to have no great fault, even by their very
word and teſtimony; in whoſe eyes no fault of ours hath ever
hitherto been eſteemed to be ſmall. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 27.
V They are imprudent enough to diſcharge themſelves of this
"ol. J.
blunder, by laying the contradićtion at Virgil's door. Dr den.
9. To perform; to execute.
Had I a hundred tongues, a wit ſo large,
As could their hundred offices diſcharge.
10. To put away; to obliterate; to deſtroy.
It is done by little and little, and with many eſſays; but
all this diſchargeth not the wonder. Bacon’s Natural Hi/?ory.
Trial would alſo be made in herbs poiſonous and purga-
tive, whoſe ill quality perhaps may be diſcharged, or atten-
pered, by ſetting ſtronºer poiſons or purgatives by them. Bac.
i I. To diveſt of any office or employment; to diſmiſs from
ſervice
-
Dryden's Faler.
12. To diſmiſs; to releaſe; to ſend away from any buſineſs o:
appointment.
Diſcharge your pow'rs unto their ſeveral counties. Shakespeare
When Caeſar would have diſcharged the ſenate, in regard of
ſome ill preſages, and eſpecially a dream of Calphurnia, this
man lifted him gently by the arm out of his chair, telling
him, he hoped he would not diſmiſs the ſenate ’till his wife
had dreamed a better dream. Bacon, Eſſay 28.
To Disch A'RC E. v. n To diſmiſs itſelf; to break up.
The cloud, if it were oily or fatty, would not diſcharge.
- Bacon's Natural Hyſary.
Disch A'Roe. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Vent; exploſion; emiſſion.
As the heat of all ſprings is owing to ſubterraneous fire,
ſo wherever there are any extraordinary diſcharges of this
fire, there alſo are the neighbouring ſprings hotter than or-
dinary. - //oodward.
2. Matter vented.
The haemorrhage being ſtopped, the next occurrence is a
thin ſerous diſcharge. Sharp's Surgery.
3. Diſruption; evaneſcence.
Mark the diſcharge of the little cloud upon glaſs or gems,
or blades of ſwords, and you ſhall ſee it ever break up firſt in
the ſkirts, and laſt in the middle. Bacon's Natiºnal Hiſtory.
4. Diſmiſſion from an office.
5. Releaſe from an obligation or penalty.
He warns
Us, haply too ſecure of our diſcharge
From penalty, becauſe from death releas'd
Some days. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi, l, 196.
6. Abſolution from a crime. . .
The text expreſſes the ſound eſtate of the conſcience, not
barely by its not accuſing, but by its not condemning us;
which word imports properly an acquittance or diſcharge of a
man upon ſome precedent accuſation, and a full trial and cog-
nizance of his cauſe. South's Sermons,
7. Ranſom; price of ranſom. -
O, all my hopes defeated
To free him hence | But death, who ſets all free, -
Hath paid his ranſom now and full diſcharge. Milt. Agoni/?.
8. Performance; execution.
The obligations of hoſpitality and protećtion are ſo ſacred,
that nothing can abſolve us from the diſcharge of thoſe duties.
L'E/irange, Fable 149.
0. An acquittance from a debt.
10. Exemption; privilege.
There is no diſcharge in that war, neither ſhall wickedneſs
deliver thoſe that are given to it. Eccl. viii. 8.
DiscHA's GER. m. ſ. [from diſcharge.]
1. He that diſcharges in any manner.
2. He that fires a gun.
To abate the bombulation of gunpowder a way is promiſed
by Porta, by borax and butter, which he ſays will make it ſo
go off, as ſcarcely to be heard by the diſcharger. Brown.
Disc1'Nct. adj. [ diſcincius, Latin. J. Ungirded ; looſely
dreſſed. Dić7.
To Disc1'Nd. v. a. [diſcinda, Latin.] To divide; to cut in
pieces.
We found ſeveral concretions ſo ſoft, that we could eaſily
diſcind them betwixt our fingers. Boyle.
DISCIPLE. m. ſ. [diſcipulus, Latin.] A ſcholar; one that pro-
feſſes to receive inſtructions from another.
He rebuked diſciples, who would call for fire from heaven
upon whole cities, for the negle&amp;t of a few. King Charles,
The commemorating the death of Chriſt, is the profeſſing
ourſelves the diſciples of the crucified Saviour; and that en-
gageth us to take up his croſs and follow him. ... Hammond.
A young diſciple ſhould behave himſelf ſo well, as to gain
the ... and the ear of his inſtructor. J/afts.
To Disciple. v. a. [from the noun.] To puniſh 3 to diſci-
pline. This word is not in uſe
She, bitter penance, with an iron whip,
Was wont him to diſciple every day. Spenſ. Fai. 9tteem.
Disci'pt Estrip. m.ſ.. [from diſciple.] The ſtate or function of
a diſciple, or follower of a maſter.
That to which juſtification is promiſed, is certainly the
giving up of the whole ſoul intirely unto Chriſt, undertaking
diſcipleſhip upon Chriſt's terms. Hammond's Prači. Catech.
Discipli'NABLE. adj. [diſciplinabilis, Lat..] Capable of inſtruc-
tion; capable of improvement by diſcipline and learning.
7 A DiscIPLINA B LEN Ess,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 261</div><p class="Text">D I S
L) I S
Discipli'NableNess. n.ſ.. [from diſciplinable.] Capacity of
ipſtruction; qualification for improvement by education and
diſcipline.
We find in animals, eſpecially ſome of them, as foxes,
dogs, apes, horſes, and elephants, not only perception, phan-
taſy, and memory, common to moſt, if not all animals, but
ſomething of ſagacity, providence, and diſciplinableneſ. Hale.
Disciplina's 1A N. adj. [from diſcipline.J. Pertaining to diſ-
cipline.
'W., eagerneſs in diſciplinarian uncertainties, when the
love of God and our neighbour, evangelical unqueſtionables,
are neglected. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 27.
Disciplin A'RIAN. m. ſ. [diſciplina, Latin.]
1. One who rules or teaches with great ſtrićtneſs; one who
allows no deviation from ſtated rules.
2. A follower of the preſbyterian ſect, ſo called from their per-
petual clamour about diſcipline.
They draw thoſe, that diſſent, into diſlike with the ſtate, as
puritans, or diſciplinarians. Sanderſ. Pax. Eccl.
Disci'PLINARY. adj. [diſciplina, Latin.] Pertaining to diſci-
pline; relating to a regular courſe of education.
Theſe are the ſtudies, wherein our noble and gentle youth
ought to beſtow their time in a diſciplinary way. Milton.
DISCIPLINE. m. ſ. [diſciplina, Latin.]
1. Education; inſtruction; the aët of cultivating the mind;
the act of forming the manners.
The cold of the northern parts is that which, without aid
of diſcipline, doth make the bodies hardeſt, and the courage
warmett. Bacon, Eſſay 59.
They who want that ſenſe of diſcipline, hearing, are alſo
by conſequence deprived of ſpeech. Holder's Elements of Speech.
It muſt be confeſſed, it is by the aſſiſtance of the eye and
—the ear eſpecially, which are called the ſenſes of diſcipline, that
our minds are furniſhed with various parts of knowledge. Watts.
2. Rule of government; order; method of government.
They hold, that from the very apoſtles time ’till this pre-
ſent age, wherein yourſelves imagine ye have found out a
right pattern of ſound diſcipline, there never was any time ſafe
to be followed. Hooker, Preface.
As we are to believe for ever the articles of evangelical
doćtrine, ſo the precepts of diſcipline we are, in like ſort, bound
for ever to obſerve. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1 c.
While we do admire
This virtue and this moral diſcipline,
Let's be no ſtoicks.
3. Military regulation.
This opens all your vićtories in Scotland,
Your diſcipline in war, wiſdom in peace. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
4. A ſtate of ſubjećtion.
The moſt perfeót among us, who have their paſſions in the
beſt diſcipline, are yet obliged to be conſtantly on their guard.
Rogers, Sermon 13.
Shakeſpeare.
5. Anything taught; art; ſcience.
Art may be ſaid to overcome and advance nature in theſe
mechanical diſciplines, which, in this reſpect, are much to be
preferred. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
6. Puniſhment; chaſtiſement; corre&amp;tion.
A lively cobler kicked and ſpurred while his wife was car-
rying him, and had ſcarce paſſed a day without giving her the
diſcipline of the ſtrap. Addison's Spediator, Nº. 499.
To D1'sciplin E. v. a. [from the noun.]
r. To educate; to inſtruct; to bring up.
We are wiſe enough to begin when they are very young,
and diſcipline betimes thoſe other creatures we would make
uſeful and good for ſomewhat. - Locke.
They were with care prepared and diſciplined for confir-
mation, which they could not arrive at, 'till they were found
upon examination to have made a ſufficient progreſs in the
knowledge of Chriſtianity. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
2. To regulate; to keep in order.
They look to us, as we ſhould judge of an army of well
diſciplined ſoldiers at a diſtance. Derham's Aſtro Theolºgy.
3. To puniſh; to correct; to chaſtiſe.
4. To reform; to redreſs.
The law appear'd imperfect, and but giv'n
With purpoſe to reſign them in full time
Up to a better covenant, diſciplin'd
From ſhadowy types to truth, from fleſh to ſpirit. Milton.
To Discla’IM. v. a. [dis and claim..] To diſown; to deny
any knowledge of; to retract any union with 5 to abrogate ;
to renounce.
You cowardly raſcal! nature diſclaims all ſhare in thee: a
taylor made thee. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
He calls the gods to witneſs their offence;
Diſclaims the war, aſſerts his innocence. Dryden's ºn. b. vii.
Let crooked ſteel invade
The lawleſs troops which diſcipline diſclaim,
And their ſuperfluous growth with rigour tame. Dryd. Virg.
We find our Lord, on all occaſions, diſclaiming all preten-
fions to a temporal kingdom. Rgers, Sermon 9.
Very few, among thoſe who profeſs themſelves Chriſtians,
diſºlaim all concern for their ſouls, diſown the authority, or
renounce the expectations of the goſpel. Rogers, Sermon 13.
DiscLA'i Mer. m. ſ. [from diſclaim.]
1. One that diſclaims, diſowns, or renounces.
2. [In law.] A plea containing an expreſs denial or refuſal. Cowel.
To Disclo'se v. a. [diſcludo, Latin; dis and cloſe.]
1. To uncover; to produce from a ſtate of latitancy to open
W1CW.
In this deep quiet, from what ſource unknown,
Thoſe ſeeds of fire their fatal birth diſcloſe;
And firſt few ſcatt'ring ſparks about were blown,
Big with the flames that to our ruin roſe Dryd. Ann. Mr.
Then earth and ocean various forms diſcºſ. Dryden.
The ſhells being broken, ſtruck off, and gone, the ſtone
included in them is thereby diſclºſed and ſet at liberty. It codw.
2. To hatch; to open.
It is reported by the ancients, that the oſtrich layeth her
eggs under ſand, where the heat of the ſun diſcloſeth them. Bac.
3. To reveal; to tell; to impart what is ſecret.
There may be a reconciliation, except for upbraiding, or
pride, or diſcºſing of ſecrets, or a treacherous wound; for
from theſe things every friend will depart. Eccluſ, xxii. 22.
If I diſcloſe my paſſion,
Our friendſhip's at an end; if I conceal it,
The world will call me falſe. Addison's Cato.
Disclo's ER. m. ſ. [from diſclºſe..] One that reveals or diſcovers.
Disclo's URE. m. ſ. [from diſcloſe.]
1. Diſcovery ; production into view.
The producing of cold is a thing very worthy the inquiſi-
tion, both for the uſe and diſºloſure of cauſes. Bac. Nat. Hiſſ.
2. Aćt of revealing anything ſecret.
After ſo happy a marriage between the king and her daugh-
ter, bleſſed with iſſue male, ſhe was, upon a ſudden mutabi-
lity and diſclºſire of the king's mind, ſeverely handled. Eacon.
DiscoLoRA"rion. m. ſ. [from diſco our.]
1. The act of changing the colour; the act of ſtaining.
2. Change of colour; ſtain; die.
In a depravation of the humours from a ſound ſtate to what
the phyſicians call by a general name of a cacochymy, ſpots
and diſcolorations of the ſkin are ſigns of weak fibres. Arbuth.
To DISCOLOUR. v. a. [decoloro, Latin.] To change from
the natural hue ; to ſtain.
.Many a widow's huſband groveling lies,
Coldly embracing the diſcolºur'd earth. Shakespeare K. john.
Drink water, either pure, or but dicoloured with malt, imp.
Suſpicious and fantaſtical ſurmiſe,
And jealouſy with jaundice in her eyes,
Diſcolouring all ſhe view'd. Dryden.
He who looks upon the ſoul through its outward actions,
ſees it through a deceitful medium, which is apt to diſcolour
and pervert the object. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 257.
Have a care leſt ſome beloved notion, or ſome darling
ſcience, ſo prevail over your mind as to diſcolour all your
ideas. Watts.
To DISCO'MFIT. v. a. [deſtonfire, Fr. ſomfiggere, Ital. as if
from diſconfigere, Latin. J. To defeat; to conquer; to van-
quiſh; to overpower; to ſubdue ; to beat; to overthrow.
Fight againſt that monſtrous rebel, Cade,
Whom, ſince, I heard to be diſomfited. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Joſhua diſcomfied Amelek and his people with the edge
of the ſword. Exod. xvii. 13.
He, fugitive, declin'd ſuperior ſtrength;
Diſcomfited, purſu'd, in the ſad chace
Ten thouſand ignominious fall. Philips.
While many of my gallant countrymen are employed in
purſuing rebels, half diſcomfited through the conſciouſneſs of
their guilt, I ſhall labour to improve thoſe victories to the good
of my fellow ſubjects. Addiſon's Freehºlder, Nº. 16.
Disco'MFIT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Defeat; rout; overthrow.
Fly you muſt: incurable diſconſt
Reigns in the hearts of all our preſent party. Shakespeare . H. VI.
Dagon muſt ſtoop, and ſhall ere long receive
Such a diſcomfit, as ſhall quite deſpoil him
Of all theſe boaſted trophies. Milton's Agoniſłes, l. 468.
Disco'MFITURE. m. / [from diſcomfit..] Defeat; loſs of battle;
rout; ruin; overthrow.
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loſs, of ſlaughter, and diſcºmfiture. Shakeſ Henry VI.
Behold, every man's ſword was againſt his fellow, and
there was a very great diſcomfiture. 1 Sa. xiv. 20.
What a defeat and d ſcomfiture is it to a man, when he
comes to uſe this wealh, to find it all falſe metal? Gov. Tongue.
He ſent his angels to fight for his people; and the diſcomft-
ture and ſlaughters of great hoſts, is attributed to their aſſiſt-
ance. Atterbury's Sermons.
Disco'MFORT. m. ſ. [dis and comfºrt.] Uneaſineſs; ſorrow;
melancholy; gloom.
This himſelf did foreſee, and therefore armed his church,
to the end they might ſuſtain it without diſcomfort. Hooker.
Diſcomfort guides my tongue, -
And bids me ſpeak of nothing but deſpair. Shakespeare Rich. II.
In<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 262</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
- In ſolitude there is not only diſcomfort, but weakneſs alſo. Sou.
To Disco'MFor T. v. a. [from the noun..] To grieve; to
ſadden; to deject.
Her champion went away diſºmforted as much as diſ-
comfited. Sidney.
His funeral ſhall not be in our camp,
Leſt it diſcomfort us. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
Disco'MFoRTABLE. m. ſ. [from diſcomfort.]
1. One that is melancholy and refuſes comfort.
Diſcomfortable couſin, know'ſt thou not,
That when the ſearching eye of heav'n is hid
Behind the globe, it lights the lower world. Shakespeare R. II.
z 2. That cauſes ſadneſs.
What I did that help poor Dorus, whoſe eyes could carry
unto him no other news but diſcomfºrtable * Sidney.
To Discom ME'ND. v. a. [dis and commend..] To blame; to
cenſure; to mention with diſapprobation.
Abſolutely we cannot diſcommend, we cannot abſolutely ap-
prove, either willingneſs to live, or forwardneſs to die. Hooker.
Now you will all be wits; and he, I pray,
And you, that diſcommend it, mend the play. Denham.
Neither do I diſcommend the lofty ſtile in tragedy, which is
naturally pompous and magnificent. Dryd. Span. Fry. Dedicat.
Disco MMENDABLE. adj. [from diſcommend J Blameable;
cenſurable; deſerving blame.
Puſillanimity is, according to Ariſtotle's morality, a vice
very diſcommendable. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Discom Me'NDABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from diſcommendable.] Blame-
ableneſs; liableneſs to cenſure. Dići.
Disco MMENDA'tion. n.ſ.. [from diſcommend..] Blame; re-
proach; cenſure.
Tully affigns three motions, whereby, without any diſcom-
mendation, a man might be drawn to become an accuſer of
others. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Disco MME'NDER. m. ſ. [from diſcommend..] One that diſcom-
mends; a diſpraiſer.
To Disco MMO'DE. v. a. ſahs and commode, French.] To put
to inconvenience; to moleft; to incommode.
Discom Mo'Dious. adj. [from diſcommode. J Inconvenient;
troubleſome; unpleaſing.
So many thouſand ſoldiers, unfit for any labour or other
trade, muſt either ſeek ſervice and employment abroad, which
may be dangerous, or elſe employ themſelves here at home,
which may be diſcommodious. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
~ Discom Mo'DITY.. n.ſ. [ from diſcommode. J Inconvenience;
diſadvantage; hurt; miſchief.
We ſpeak now of uſury, how the diſcommodities of it may
be beſt avoided, and the commodities retained : or how in the
balance of commodities and diſcommodities, the qualities of
uſury, are to be reconciled. Bacon.
It is better that a ſhip ſhould be preſerved with ſome diſ.
commodity to the ſailors, than that, the ſailors being in health,
the ſhip ſhould periſh. Hayward.
To DISCOMPOSE. v.a. [decompoſer, French.]
1. To diſorder; to unſettle.
The debate upon the ſelf-denying ordinance had raiſed
many jealouſies, and diſcompoſed the confidence that had for-
merly been between many of them. Clarendon, b. viii.
2. To ruffle ; to diſorder.
Now Betty from her maſter's bed had flown,
And ſoftly ſtole to diſcompoſe her own. Swift.
3. To diſturb the temper; to agitate by perturbation.
No more, dear mother: ill in death it ſhows,
Your peace of mind by rage to diſcompoſe. Dryd. Tyr. Love.
4. To offend; to fret ; to vex.
* Men, who poſſeſs all the advantages of life, are in a ſtate
where there are many accidents to diſorder and diſcompoſe, but
few to pleaſe them. Swift.
5. To diſplace; to diſcard. -
Though he was a dark prince, and infinitely ſuſpicious, he
never put down or diſcompoſed a counſellor, or near ſervant. Bac.
Disco MP'o'sure. n.ſ.. [from diſcompoſe..] Diſorder; pertur-
bation.
He threw himſelf upon his bed, lamenting with much paſ-
ſion, and with abundance of tears; and continued in this
melancholick diſcompoſure of mind many days. Clarendon.
To Disconcr'Rt. v. a. [dis and concert.]
1. To unſettle the mind; to diſcompoſe.
You need not provoke their ſpirits by outrages: a careleſs
geſture, a word, or a look, is enough to diſconcert them. Collier.
2. To break a ſcheme; to defeat a machination.
Disconfo'RMITY. m. ſ. [dis and confºrmity.) Want of agree-
ment; inconſiſtency.
Lies ariſe from errour and miſtake, or malice and forgery;
they conſiſt in the diſagreement and diſconformity betwixt the
fpeech and the conception of the mind, or the conceptions of
the mind and the things themſelves, or the ſpeech and the
things. Hakewill on Providence.
Discongru'ITY, m ſ [dis and congruity.] Diſagreement; in-
conſiſtency.
There is want of capacity in the thing, to ſuſtain ſuch a
duration from the intrinſical diſcongruity of the one to the
other. - Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Disco'Nsolate. adj. [4], and conſole..] Without comfort;
hopeleſs; ſorrowful; melancholy.
See Caſſius all diſconſolate,
With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill. Shakespeare Jul. Ceſar,
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Diſmiſs them not di conſolate. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
The ladies and the knights, no ſhelter nigh,
Were dropping wet, diſconſolate and wan, -
And through their thin array receiv'd the rain. Dryden.
The moon reflects the ſunbeams to us, and ſo, by illumi-
nating the air, takes away in ſome meaſure the di conſolate
darkneſs of our winter-nights. Ray on the Creation.
Disco'NsoLATELY. adv. [from diſconſolate.] In a diſconſolate
manner; comfortleſly. *
Disco'Nsolat EN ess. m. ſ. [ from diſconſolate. J The ſtate of
being diſconſolate.
Disconte'N T. n.ſ. ſ dis and content. J Want of content;
uneaſineſs at the preſent ſtate.
I ſee your brows full of diſcºntent,
Your hearts of ſorrows, and your eyes of tears. Shakespeare.
Not that their pleaſures caus’d her diſcontent
She figh'd, not that they ſtay’d, but that ſhe went. Pope.
Disco NtENT. adj. [dis and content.] Uneaſy at the preſent
ſtate; diſſatisfied.
They were of their own nature circumſpect and ſlow, diſ-
countenanced and diſcontent, and thoſe the earl ſingled as
fitteſt for his purpoſe. Hayward.
To Disco'NtENT. v. a. [from the noun..] To diſſatisfy; to
make uneaſy at the preſent ſtate.
I know a diſontented gentleman,
Whoſe humble means match not his haughty ſpirit. Shakespeare .
The diſcontented now are only they
Whoſe crimes before did your juſt cauſe betray. Dryden.
Disconte NTED. participial adj. [from diſcontent.] Uneaſy;
chcarleſs; malevolent.
Let us know
What will tie up your diſontented ſword Shakespeare Ant. and Cl.
Theſe are, beyond compariſon, the two greateſt evils in
this world, a diſeaſed body and a diſcontented mind. Tillotſon.
The goddeſs, with a diſcontented air,
Seems to reject him, though ſhe grants his pray’r. Pope.
Disconte's Ted Ness. n.ſ.. [from diſcontented.] Uneaſineſs;
want of eaſe; diſſatisfaction.
A beautiful buſt of Alexander the Great, caſts up his face
to heaven with a noble air of grief, or diſcontentedneſs in his
looks. Addiſon's Travels.
Disconte'NTMENT. n.ſ. ſ from diſcontent. The ſtate of
being diſcontented; uneaſineſs.
Theſe are the voices that fill them with general diſfontent-
ment, as though the boſom of that famous church, wherein
they live, were more noiſome than any dungeon. Hooker.
Certainly the politick and artificial nouriſhing and enter-
taining of hopes, and carrying men from hopes to hopes, is
one of the beſt antidotes againſt the poiſon of diſcontentments.
Bacon, Eſſay 16.
Discosti's UANCE. m. ſ. [from diſcontinue.]
1. Want of coheſion of parts; want of union of one part with
another; diſruption.
The ſtillicides of water, if there be enough to follow, will
draw themſelves into a ſmall thread, becauſe they will not diſ-
continue; but if there be no remedy, then they caſt them-
ſelves into round drops, which is the figure that faveth the
body moſt from diºcºntinuance. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Cefiation; intermiſſion.
Let us conſider, whether our approaches to him are ſweet
and refreſhing, and if we are uneaſy under any long diſconti-
nuance of our converſation with him. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. [In the common law.] An interruption or breaking off; as
diſcontinuance of poſſeſſion, or diſcontinuance of proceſs. The
effect of diſcontinuance of poſſeſſion is, that a man may not
enter upon his own land or tenement alienated, whatſoever
his right be unto it, or by his own authority; but muſt ſeek
to recover poſſeſſion by law. The effect of diſcontinuance of
plea is, that the inſtance may not be taken up again, but by a
new writ to begin the ſuit afreſh. Cowel.
Discontinuation. n.ſ. [from diſcontinue.J. Diſruption of
continuity; breach of union of parts; diſruption; ſeparation.
Upon any diſcontinuation of parts, made either by bubbles
or by ſhaking the glaſs, the whole mercury falls. Newt. Opt.
To Discosºri'NU E. v.a. [diſcontinuer, French.] .
1. To loſe the coheſion of parts; to ſuffer ſeparation or diſrup-
tion of ſubſtance.
All bodies, dućtile and tenſile, as metals that will be drawn
into wires; wool and tow, that will be drawn into yarn, or
thread, have in them the appetite of not d'ſ ntinuing ſtrong,
which maketh them follow the force that pulleth them out;
and yet ſo as not to diſontinue or forſake their own body. Ba.
2. To loſe an eſtabliſhed or preſcriptive cuſtom.
Thyſelf ſhalt diſcºntinue from thine heritage that I gave
thee, and I will cauſe thee to ſerve thine enemies. jer. xvii. 4.
To
!
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 263</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
To Disconti'NU E. v. a. To leave off; to ceaſe any pračtice
or habit.
Twenty puny lics I'll tell
That men ſhall ſwear I’ve diſcontinued ſchool
Above a twelvemonth. Shakespeare.
Examine thy cuſtoms of dict, ſleep, exerciſe, apparel, and
the like, and try, in any thou ſhalt judge hurtful, to diſcontinue
it by little and little; but ſo, as if thou find any inconvenience
by the change, thou come back to it again. Bacon's Effºys.
2. To break off; to interrupt.
There is that property, in all letters, of aptneſs to be con-
joined in ſyllables and words, through the voluble motions of
the organs from one ſtop or figure to another, that they mo-
dify and diſcriminate the voice, without appearing to diſcon-
tinue it. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Discon TINU'ity. m. [dis and continuity.] Biſunity of
parts; want of coheſion.
That this diſcontinuity of parts is the principal cauſe of the
opacity of bodies, will appear by conſidering that opaque ſub-
ſtances become tranſparent by filling their pores with any
ſubſtance of equal, or almoſt equal denſity with their
parts. Newton O. t.
Disco NV E'NIENCE m. ſ [dis and convenience..] Incon-
gruity; diſagreement; oppoſition of nature.
Fear ariſeth many times out of natural antipathies of na-
ture, but in theſe diſcoveniences of nature deliberation hath
no place at all. Framhall's Anſwer to Hobbs.
i)ISCORD. m. ſ. [diſºria, Latin J
1. Diſagreement; oppoſition; mutual anger; reciprocal oppug-
nancy.
See what a ſcourge is laid upon your hate,
That heav'n finds means to kill your joys with love!
And I, for winking at your diſords too,
Have loſt a brace of kinſmen. Shakespeare Rom. and jul.
Take but degree away, untune that ſtring,
And hark what diſcard follows; cach thing mee's
In meer oppugnancy. Shakeſp. Tº oil, and Creſſ.
He is a falſe witneſs that ſpeaketh lics, and that ſoweth diſ-
cord among brethren. Prov. vi. 19.
2. Difference, or contrariety of qualitics.
Diſcord, like that of muſic's various parts,
Diſcord that makes the harmony of hearts;
Diſcord that only this diſpute ſhall bring,
Who beſt ſhall love the duke and ſerve the king. Dryd Ep.
All nature is but art unknown to thee;
All chance, direction which thou canſt not ſee;
All diſord, harmony not underſtood;
All partial evil, univerſal good. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
3. [In muſic.] Sounds not of themſelves pleaſing, but neceſſary
to be mixed with others.
It is ſound alone that doth immediately and incorporeally
affect moſt ; this is moſt manifeſt in muſic, and concords and
diſcords in muſic: for all ſounds, whether they be ſharp or
flat, if they be ſweet, have a roundneſs and equality; and if
they be harſh, are unequal: for a diſºrd itſelf is but a harſh-
neſs of divers ſounds meeting. Bacon's N. Hiſt. Part I. p. 400.
It is the lark that ſings ſo out of tune, *
Straining harſh diſcord, and unpleaſing ſharps. Shakeſp.
How doth muſic amaze us, when of diſcºrd; ſhe mak-
eth the ſweeteſt harmony Peacham.
To D1'scor D. v. m. [diſord, Latin J. To diſagree; not to
ſuit with.
Sounds do diſturb and alter the one the other; ſometimes
the one drowning the other, and making it not heard; ſome-
times the one jarring and diſcording with the other, and mak-
ing a confuſion. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 227.
Disco'RDANce } n ſ [from diſºrd J. Diſagreement; op-
Disco'RDAN cy. poſition; inconſiſtency.
Disco'RDANT. adj. [diſordanº, Latin.]
1. Inconſiſtent; at variance with itſelf.
Myrrha was joy'd the welcome news to hear,
But clogg'd with guilt, the joy was unfincere;
So various, ſo diſordant is the mind,
That in our will a different will we find. Dryden.
2. Oppoſite ; contrarious.
The diſcordant attraction of ſome wandering comets would
certainly diſtraćt and diſorder the harmony of the motions and
revolutions of the planets, if they approached too near them.
Cheyne's Phil. Princip.
3. Incongruous; not conformable.
Hither conſcience is to be referred, if by a compariſon of
things done with the rule there be a conſonancy, then follows
the ſentence of approbation; if diſordant from it, the ſentence
of condemnation. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
Disco'R D ANTLY. adv. [from diſordant.]
1. Inconſiſtently; in diſagreement with itſelf.
2. In diſagreement with another.
Two ſtrings of a muſical inſtrument being ſtruck together,
making two noiſes that arrive at the ear at the ſame time as to
ſenſe, yield a ſound differing from either of them, and as it
were compounded of both ; inſomuch, that if they be diſcor-
dantly tuned, though each of them ſtruck apart, would yield a
pleaſing ſound; yet being ſtruck together, they make a harſh
and troubleſome noiſe. Boyle on Colours.
3. Peeviſhly ; in a contradićtious manner.
To Disco v ER. v. a ſºleſcºuvrir, French ; dis and cover.]
1. To ſhew ; to diſcloſe ; to bring to light.
Go draw aſide the curtains, and diſ over
The ſeveral caſkets to this noble prince. Shakesp. Merch of P.n.
He diſcovereth deep things out of darkneſs, and bringeth out
to light the ſhadow of death. job xii. 22.
2. To make known.
We will paſs over unto thoſe men, and we will diſ over
ourſelves unto them. - Iſa. xiv. 8.
3. To find out; to eſpy.
He ſhall never by any alteration in me diſcover my know-
ledge of his miſtake. Pope's Letters,
Disco'v ERA B L E adj. [from diſcover.]
1. That which may be found out.
That mineral matter which is ſo ſparingly and diſperſedly
intermixed with the common and terreſtrial matter, as not to
be diſcoverable by human induſtry; or if diſcoverall, dif-
fuſed and ſcattered amongſt the craſſer and more unprofitable
matter, can never be ſeparated. J/24 w. Nat Hi/?.
Revelation may aſſert two things to be joined, whoſe con-
nçëtion or agreement is not d ſcoverable by reaſon. If att,’, Log.
2. Apparent ; expo'ed to view.
They were deceived by Satan, and that not in an inviſible
ſituation, but in an open and diſcºverable apparition, that is,
in the form of a ſerpent. Brown', Wag. Err. b i. c. 6.
It is concluded by aſtronomers, that the atmoſphere of the
moon hath no clouds nor rains, but a perpetual and uniform
ſerenity; becauſe nothing diſcoverahle in the lunar ſurface is
ever covered and abſconded by the interpoſition of any clouds
or miſts. Bentley’s Serin.
Discover E.R. m. ſ. [from d ſo er.]
1. One that finds any thing not known before; a finder out.
If more be found out, they will not recompence the diſ.
coverer's pains, but will be fitter to be caſt out. Hodºr’s £1.
Places receive appellations according to the language of the
diſcºverer, from obſervations made upon the people. Nºtes on O.I.
The Cape of Good Hope was doubled in thoſe early times;
and that the Portugueſe were not the firſt d/coverers of that
navigation. Arbuthnºt on Coin.
An old maiden gentlewoman is the greateſt dicoverer of
judgments; ſhe can tell you what ſin it was that ſet ſuch a
man's houſe on fire. Addison Speci. Nº. 483.
2. A ſcout ; one who is put to deſcry the poſture or number of
an enemy; ſpeculator.
Here ſtand, my lords, and ſend dſ overers forth,
To know the numbers of our enemies. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Disco'v ERY. m. ſ. [from diſcover.]
1. The act of finding any thing hidden.
Of all who ſince have us’d the open ſea,
Than the bold Engliſh none more fame have won;
Beyond the year, and out of heaven's high way,
They make diſcoveries where they ſee no ſun. Dºyd. A. M.
2. The act of revealing or diſcloſing any ſecret.
What muſt I hold a candle to my ſhame?
They in themſelves, good ſooth, are too too light.
Why ’tis an office of diſcºvery, love,
And I ſhould be obſcur'd. Shakespeare. Merch ºf Vºnize.
Things that appeared amiable by the light of this world,
appear of a different odious hue in the clear diſcove ies of the
Inext. - South's Serm.
It would be neceſſary to ſay ſomething of the ſtate to which
the war hath reduced us; ſuch a diſcovery ought to be made as
late as poſſible. Swift.
To Discou'NSE L. v. a. [dis and counſel.] . To diſſuade; to
give contrary advice. -
But him that palmer from that vanity,
With temperate advice diſcºunſºlid. Spe'ſ r's Fa. Qu.
Disco UNT. m. ſ. [dis and count..] The ſum refunded in a
bargain.
His whole intention was, to buy a certain quantity of cop-
per money from Wood at a large diſcount, and ſell them as
well as he could. - Swift's Miſel.
To Disco UNT. v. a. [from the noun..] To count back; to
pay back again.
My father's, mother's, brother's death I pardon :
My prayers and penance ſhall diſcount for theſe,
And beg of heav'n to charge the bill on me. Dryd Don Seb.
The farmers ſpitefully combin'd,
Force him to take his tithes in kind;
And Parviſol diſcounts arrears,
By bills for taxes and repairs. Swift's M!ſel.
To Disco U'NTENANCE. v. a. [dis and countenance.]
1. To diſcourage by cold treatment.
Unwilling they were to diſcountenance any man who was
willing to ſerve them. Clarendºn, b. viii.
The truly upright judge will always countenance right, and
diſcountenance wrong. Atterbury's Serm.
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 264</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I s
|
2. To abaſh; to put to ſhame. * * ~ *
Wiſdom in diſcourſe with her, - -
Loſes diſcountenanced, and like folly ſhews. Milt, Par. Lºſt.
He came, and with him Eve, more loth, though firſt
To offend; diſcountenanc'd both, and diſcompos'd. Milton.
How would one look from his majeſtic brow,
Seated as on the top of virtue's hill,
Diſcount'nance her deſpis'd. - Milton.
Discou NT ENANce. n.ſ. [dis and countenance.] Cold treat-
ment; unfavourable aſpect; unfriendly regard.
He thought a little diſcountenance upon thoſe perſons would
ſuppreſs that ſpirit. Clarendon.
All accidental misfortunes, how inevitable ſoever, were ſtill
attended with very apparent diſcountenance. Clarendon, b.viii.
In expe&amp;tation of the hour of judgment, he patiently bears
all the difficulties of duty, and the diſcountenance he meets with
from a wicked and prophane world. Rogers's Serm.
Discou'NT EN AN cer. m. ſ. [from diſcountenance.] One that
diſcourages by cold treatment; one that depreſſes by unfriendly
regard.
Rumours of ſcandal and murmurs againſt the king and his
government, taxed him for a great taxer of his people and
diſcountenancer of his nobility. Bacon's Hen. VII.
To T);SCOURAGE. v. a. [decourager, Fr. dis and courage.]
1. To depreſs; to deprive of confidence; to deječt; to daſtardize.
I might neither encourage the rebels inſolence, nor diſ-
courage the proteſtants loyalty and patience. K. Charles.
The apoſtle with great zeal diſcourages too unreaſonable a
preſumption. Roger's Serm.
2. To deter; to fright from any attempt: with from before the
thing. *
wherefore diſcourage ye the heart of the children of Iſrael
from going over into the land Numb. xxxii. 7.
3. It is irregularly uſed by Temple, with to before the following
word.
You may keep your beauty and your health, unleſs you
deſtroy them yourſelf, or diſcourage them to ſtay with you,
by uſing them ill. Temple's Miſcell.
Discou"RAGER. m.ſ.. [from diſcourage.] One that impreſſes
diffidence and terror. -
Moſt men in years, as they are generally diſcouragers of
youth, are like old trees, which being paſt bearing themſelves,
will ſuffer no young plants to i.i. beneath them. Pope,
Discou"RAGEMENT. n.ſ.. [from diſcourage.]
1. The aët of deterring, or depreſſing hope.
2. Determent; that which deters from anything. .
Amongſt other impediments of any inventions, it is
none of the meaneſt diſcouragement, that they are ſo gene-
rally derided by common opinion. Wilkins's Math. Magn.
The books read at ſchools and colleges, are full of incite-
ments to virtue, and diſcouragements from vice. Swift.
3. The cauſe of depreſſion, or fear.
To things we would have them learn, the great and only
diſcouragement is that they are called to them. Lºcke.
DISCOURSE. m. ſ. [diſcours, Fr. diſcurſus, Latin.]
1. The aët of the underſtanding, by which it paſſes from pre-
miſes to conſequences.
By reaſon of that original weakneſs in the inſtruments,
without which the underſtanding part is not able in this world
. . by diſcourſe to work, the very conceit of painfulneſs is a bridle
to ſtay us. - Hooker, b. 1. ſ. 7.
Sure he that made us with ſuch large diſcourſe,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reaſon -
To ruſt in us unus’d. Shakeſpeare.
The third ačt of the mind is that which connects propoſi-
tions, and deduceth concluſions from them: and this the ſchools
call diſcourſe; and we ſhall not miſcall it, if we name it
reaſon. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 13.
2. Converſation; mutual intercourſe of language; talk.
He waxeth wiſer than himſelf, more by an hour's diſ-
courſe, than by a day's meditation. Bacon's Eſſays.
In thy diſcourſe, if thou deſire to pleaſe,
All ſuch is courteous, uſeful, new, or witty;
Uſefulneſs come by labour, wit by eaſe,
Courteſy grows in court, news in the city.
The vanquiſh'd party with the vićtors join'd,
w
Herbert.
Nor wanted ſweet diſcºurſe, the banquet of the mind. Dryd.
3. Effuſion of language; ſpeech.
Topical and ſuperficial arguments, of which there is ſtore
to be found on both ſides, filling the head with variety of
thoughts, and the mouth with copious diſcourſe, ſerve only to
amuſe the underſtanding and entertain company. Locke. .
4. A treatiſe; a diſſertation either written or uttered.
- The diſcourſe here is about ideas, which, he ſays, are real
things, and ſeen in God. Locke.
Plutarch, in his diſcourſe upon garrulity, commends the
fidelity of the companions of Ulyſſes. Pope's Odyſſey, Notes,
To Discou'RSE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To converſe; to talk; to relate.
How wert thou handled, being priſoner?
Pºſ, I pr’ythee on this turret's top. Shakespeare. Hºn.IV.
Vol. I.
Of various things diſciurſing as he paſs'd,
Anchiſes hither º ſing Dryd.
2. To treat upon in a ſolemn or ſet manner. - - -
That the general maxims we are diſcourſing of are not
known to children, ideots, and a great part of mankind, we
have already ſufficiently proved. - . Locke.
3. To reaſon; to paſs from premiſes to conſequences.
And yet the pow'rs of her diſcourſing thoughts,
From the collection is a diverſe thing. . Davieſ.
Brutes do want that quick diſcourſing pow'r, , , Davies.
To Discov'RSE. v. a. [from the noun..] To treat of.
Renowned duke, vouchſafe to take the pains
To go with us into the abbey here, -
And let us there at large diſcourſe all our fortunes. Shakesp. Co. Err.
Disco U'R's ER, n. ſ. [from diſcourſe.]
1. A ſpeaker; an haranguer.
º The tract of every thing,
Would by a good diſcourſer loſe ſome life,
Which ačtion's ſelf was tongue to.
2. A writer on any ſubječt; a diſſertator. - -
Philologers and critical diſcourſers, who look beyond the ob-
vious exteriors of things, will not be angry at our narrower
explorations. Brown's Prºf. to Vulgar Errours.
But it ſeems to me, that ſuch †. do reaſon upon
ſhort views, and a very moderate compaſs of thought. Swift.
Discou"Rsive. adj. [from diſcourſe.] .
1. Paffing by intermediate ſtops from premiſes to conſequences.
* . . . . , The ſoul. -
Reaſon receives, and reaſon is her being,
Diſcourſive, or intuitive; diſcourſe - - -
Is ofteſt yours, the latter is moſt ours. Milton's Par. Loft.
2. Containing dialogue; interlocutory. .
The epic is every where interlaced with dialogue or diſcour-
five ſcenes. - - Dryden on Dramatic Poeſy.
Discou'Rteous. adj. [dis and courteous.] Uncivil; uncom-
plaiſant; defective in good manners. - -
He reſolved to unhorſe the firſt diſcourteous knight he ſhould
meet. - Motteux's Don Quixote
Discou'RTESY. m. ſ. [dis and courteſy.] Incivility; rude-
neſs; ačt of diſreſpect.
As if chearfulneſs had been tediouſneſs, and good enter-
tainment had been turned to diſcourteſy, he would ever get
himſelf akone. Sidn'y.
Be calm in arguing; for fierceneſs makes -
Frror a fault, and truth diſcourteſy. Herbert.
He made me many viſits, maundering as if I had done him
a diſcourteſy. JWiſeman's Surg.
Discou'RTeously. adv, [from diſcourte:us.] Uncivily ; rudely.
Discou's. [from diſcus, Latin.] Broad; flat; wide. Uſed by
botaniſts to denote the middle, plain, and flat part of ſome
flowers, ſuch as the flos ſolis, &amp;c. Quinſ.
DISCRE/DIT. n. ſ. [decrediter, French.] Ignominy; re-
proach; lower degree of infamy; diſgrace; imputation of
a fault. -
Had I been the finder out of this ſecret, it would not have
reliſhed among my other diſcredits. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
Idlers will ever live like rogues, and not fall to work, but
be lazy, and then certify over their country to the diſcredit
of a plantation. - Baton.
That they may quit their morals without any diſredit to
their intelle&amp;tuals, they fly to ſeveral ſtale, trite, pitiful ob-
jećtions and cavils. South.
'Tis the duty of every chriſtian to be concerned for the re-
putation or diſcredit his life may bring on his profeſſion. Rºgers.
Alas, the ſmall diſcredit of a bribe,
Scarce hurts the lawyer, but undoes the ſcribe, Pºpe.
To DiscRE'DIt. va. [decrediter, French.]
1. To deprive of credibility; to make not truſted.
He had fram'd to himſelf, by the inſtrućtion of his frailty,
many deceiving promiſes of life, which I have diſredited
to him, and now is he reſolved to die. Shakespeare
2. To diſgrace; to bring reproach upon; to ſhame; to make
leſs reputable or honourable.
You had left unſeen a wonderful piece of work, which not
to have been bleſt withal, would have diſcredited you. Shakespeare
He is commended that makes a ſaving voyage, and
leaſt diſcredits his travels, who returns the ſame man he
shai'ſ eart.
Went. Wotton,
He like a privileg'd ſpy, whom nothing can
Diſcredit, libels now 'gainſt each great man. Donne.
Refle&amp;t how glorious it would be to appear in countenance
of diſcredited duty, and by example of piety revive the declin-
ing ſpirit of religion. Rºgers.
Without care our beſt ačtions will loſe much of their in-
fluence, and our virtues will be often diſcredited with the ap-
pearance of evil. Rogers's Serm.
DISCREET, adj. [diſºret, French. Prudent; circumſpect;
cautious; ſober; not raſh ; not precipitant; not careleſs; not
hardily adventurous.
Honeſt, diſcreet, quiet, and godly learned men, will not
be withdrawn by you. Iſhitgifte.
7 R You
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 265</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
Leſs fearful than diſtreet,
You love the fundamental part of flate,
More than you doubt the charge of 't. Shakeſpeare's Coriol.
To elder years to be diſcreet and grave,
Then to old age maturity ſhe gave. Demham.
It is the diſreſſman, not the witty, northe learned, nor the
brave, who guides the converſation, and gives meaſures to
ſociety. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 225,
2. Modeſt; not forward.
Dear youth, by fortune favour'd, but by Love
Alas! not favour'd leſs, be ſtill as now
Diſcreet. Thomſon's Summer, l, 1355.
Discrée’tly, adv. [from diſtreet.J Prudently; cautiouſly;
- circumſpectly.
Poets loſe half the praiſe they ſhould have got,
Could it be known what they diſcreety blot. Waller.
The labour of obedience, loyalty, and ſubjećtion, is no
more but for a man honeſtly and diſcreetly to fit ſtill. South.
- Profit ſprings from huſks diſreety i. Philipſ.
The dulleſt brain, if gently ſtirr'd,
Perhaps may waken to a humming bird;
The moſt recluſe, diſtreetly open'd, find
Congenial object in the cockle kind. Dunciad, b. iv. l. 437.
Discree'ſ Ness. n.ſ.. [from diſcreet.] The quality of being diſ-
creet; diſcretion.
DISCREPANCE. m. ſ. [diſcrepantia, Latin. J Difference;
contrariety; diſagreement.
Discrepant, adj. [diſcrepans, Latin.] Different; diſagreeing;
contrary.
Discr E’ſ E. adj. [diſcreºus, Latin.]
J. Diſtinét; disjoined; not continuous.
Diſcrete quantity, or different individuals, are mea-
ſured by number, without any breaking continuity, that is,
in things that have continuity, as continued quantity and
motion. Hale'. Origin. of Mankind.
2. Disjunctive; as, I reſign my life, but not my honour, is a diſ-
crete propoſition.
3. Diſcrete proportion is when the ratio between two pairs of
numbers or quantities is the ſame; but there is not the ſame
proportion between all the four: thus, 6:8:: 3:4. Harris.
DiscRE"tion. n.ſ.. [from diſcretio, Latin.]
1. Prudence; knowledge to govern or direct one's ſelf; ſkill;
wiſe management.
Nothing then was further thought upon for the manner of
governing; but all permitted unto their wiſdom and diſcretion
which were to rule. - Hoºker, b. i. ſ. 1 o.
A knife may be taken away from a child, without de-
priving them of the benefits thereof, which have years and
diſcretion to uſe it. Hoºker, b. iv. ſ.12.
It is not good that children ſhould know any wickedneſs:
old folks, you know, have diſcretion, as they ſay, and know
the world. Shakeſ eart's Merry Wives of Windſor.
All this was order'd by the good diſcretion
Of the right reverend cardinal of York. Shakeſp Hen.VIII.
The pleaſure of commanding our paſſions is to be preferred
before any ſenſual pleaſure; becauſe it is the pleaſure of wiſ-
dom and diſcretion. Tillºtſon.
But care in poetry muſt ſtill be had,
It aſks diſcretion, ev’n in running mad. Pope's Eſſon Crit.
There is no talent ſo uſeful towards riſing in the world, or
which puts men more out of the reach of fortune than diſ.
cre’iºn, a ſpecies of lower prudence. Swift.
Liberty of acting at pleaſure; uncontrolled, and uncondi-
tional power; as, he ſurrenders at diſcretion; that is, without
ſtipulation.
Discº E'tion ARY. adj. [from diſretion.] Left at large; unli-
mited ; unreſtrained.
A deacon may have a diſpenſation for entering into orders
before he is twenty three years of age, and it is diſcretionary in
the biſhop to admit him to that order at what time he thinks
fit. - Ayliff’s Parergon.
The major being a perſon of conſummate experience, was
inveſted with a diſcretiºnary power. Tatler, N° 61.
Disc RE"rive. adj. [diſcretus, Latin.]
1. [In logick.] Diſcretive propoſitions are ſuch wherein vari-
ous, and ſeemingly oppoſite judgements are made, whoſe va-
riety or diſtinétion is noted by the particles but, tho’, yet, &amp;c.
as, travellers may change their climate, but not their temper:
job was patient, tho' his grief was great. Watts's Logic.
2 [In grammar.] Diſcretive conjunétions are ſuch as imply op-
poſition; as, not a man but a beaſt.
DiscRI'M INABLE. adj. [from diſcriminate.] Diſtinguiſhable by
outward marks or tokens. Dićt.
To DISCRIMINATE. v. a. [diſcrimino, Latin.]
1. To mark with notes of difference; to diſtinguiſh by certain
tokens from another.
Oyſters and cockles and muſcles, which move not, have no
diſcriminate ſex. Bacºn’s Natural Hiſtºry, Nº. 875.
There are three ſorts of it differing in fineneſs from each
other, and diſcriminated by the natives by three peculiar
Plain CŞ. Boyle.
The right hand is diſcriminated from the left by a natural,
neceſſary, and never to be confounded diſtinction. South.
Although the features of his countenance be no reaſon of
obedience, yet they may ſerve to diſcriminate him from any
other perſon, whom ſhe is not to obey. Stillingfleet.
There may be ways of diſcriminating the voice; as by acute-
neſs and gravity, the ſeveral degrees of riſing and falling from
one tone or note to another. Holder.
2. To ſelect or ſeparate from others.
You owe little leſs for what you are not, than for what you
are, to that diſºriminating mercy, to which alone you owe
your exemption from miſeries Boyle.
Discri'MINATE Ness. n.ſ.. [from diſcriminate.] Diſtinétneſs;
marked difference. Liči.
DiscR1 MINA'tion m.ſ.. [from diſcriminatio, Latin.]
1. The ſtate of being diſtinguiſhed from other perſons or things.
There is a reverence left to be ſhewed them on the account
of their diſcrimination from other places, and ſeparation for
ſacred uſes. Stillingfieet's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Id.l.
2. The act of diſtinguiſhing one from another; diſtinétion;
difference put.
A ſatire ſhould expoſe nothing but what is corrigible, and
make a due diſcrimination between thoſe that are, and thoſe
who are not the proper objects of it. Addiſon's Spediator.
By that prudent diſcrimination made between the offenders
of different degrees, he obliges thoſe whom he has diſtin-
guiſhed as objects of mercy. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 31.
3. The marks of diſtinétion.
Take heed of abetting any factions, or applying any pub-
lick diſcriminations in matters of religion. King Charles.
Letters ariſe from the firſt original diſcriminations of voice,
by way of articulation, whereby the ear is able to judge and
obſerve the differences of vocal ſounds. Holder's El of Speech.
DiscR1'MINATIve. adj. [from diſcriminate J
1. That which makes the mark of diſtinétion; charaćteriſtical.
The only ſtanding teſt, and diſcriminative characteriſtick of
any metal or mineral, muſt be ſought for in the conſtituent
matter of it. J/oodward.
2. That which obſerves diſtinétion.
Diſcriminative providence knew before the nature and
courſe of all things. 4%re's Antidote again? Aheiſn.
Discri'MINous, adj. [from diſcrimen, Latin.] Dangerous;
hazardous.
Any kind of ſpitting of blood imports a very diſºriminºus
ſtate, unleſs it happens upon the gaping of a vein opened by
a plethory. 11arvey on Conſumptions.
Discu'Ritory. adj. [diſcubitorius, Lat..] Fitted to the poſture
of leaning.
After bathing they retired to bed, and refreſhed themſelves
with a repaſt; and ſo that cuſtom, by degrees, changed their
cubiculary beds into diſcubit ry. Brown's Vulgar Er ours, b. v.
Discu'MBEN cy. m. ſ [diſcumbens, Latin.] The act of lean-
ing at meat, after the ancient manner.
The Greeks and Romans uſed the cuſtom of diſcumbency at
meals, which was upon their left ſide; for ſo their right hand
was free and ready for all ſervice. Brown's Vulgar Erroirs.
To Discu'M BER. v. a. [dis and cumber.] To diſengage from
any troubleſome weight or bulk.
His limbs diſcumber'd of the clinging veſt,
He binds the ſacred cinéture round his breaſt. Pope's Odſ.
To Discu'R E. v. a. [decouvrir, French..] To diſcover; to
reveal. A word perhaps peculiar to Spenſer.
I will, if pleaſe you it diſcure, aſſay
To eaſe you of that ill. Fairy Queen.
DISCU'RSIVE. adj. [diſturſſ, French, from diſcurro, Latin.]
1. Moving here and there; roving.
Some noiſes help ſleep; as the blowing of the wind, and
the trickling of water: they move a gentle attention, and
whatſoever moveth attention, without too much labour, ſtilleth
the natural and diſcurſive motion of the ſpirits. Bacºn's N. Hiſ?.
. Proceeding by regular gradation from premiſes to conſe-
quences; argumentative. This is ſometimes, perhaps not
improperly, written diſcuſſive.
There is a ſanétity of ſoul and body, of more efficacy for
the receiving of divine truths, than the greateſt pretences to
diſcurſive demonſtration. More's Divine Dialogues.
There hath been much diſpute touching the knowledge of
brutes, whether they have a kind of diſturſive faculty, which
ſome call reaſon. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Discu'rsively. adv. [from diſcurſive..] By due gradation of
argument.
We have a principle within, whereby we think, and we
‘know we think; whereby we do diſcurſively, and by way of
ratiocination, deduce one thing from another. afe.
Discu'Rsor Y. adj. [diſcurſor, Latin.] Argumental; rational.
DISCUS. m. ſ. [Latin. J A quoit; a heavy piece of iron
thrown in the ancient ſports.
From Elatreus' ſtrong arm the diſcus flies,
And ſings with unmatch'd force along the ſkies. Pope's Ody.
To DISCUSS. v. a. ſaiſcutio, diſcuſſim, Latin.] -
1. To examine; to ventilate; to clear by diſquiſition. W
e
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 266</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
We are to diſcuſ; only thoſe general exceptions which have
been taken. Hooker, "b. iv. ſ. 1.
His uſage was to commit the diſcuſſing of cauſes privately to
certain perſons learned in the laws. Ayliffe's Parergon,
This knotty point ſhould you and I diſcuſ,
Or tell a tale.
2. To diſperſe any humour or ſwelling.
Disc U'ss ER. m. y [from diſcuſ;..] He that diſcuſſes; an exa-
miner.
Discu'ssion. n.ſ.. [from diſcuſ...]
1. Diſquiſition; examination; ventilation of a queſtion.
Truth cannot be found without ſome labour and intention
of the mind, and the thoughts dwelling a confiderable time
upon the ſurvey and diſcuſſion of each particular. South.
Various diſcuſſions tear our heated brain:
Opinions often turn; ſtill doubts remain; }
And who indulges thought, increaſes pain. Prior.
2. [In ſurgery.] Diſcuſſion or reſolution is nothing elſe but
breathing out the humours by inſenſible tranſpiration. Wiſeman.
Discu'ssive. adj. [from diſcuſ;..] Having the power to diſcuſs
or diſperſe any noxious matter.
Discu'rient. n.ſ. [diſcutiens, Latin.] A medicine that has
power to repel or drive back the matter or tumours in the
blood, with tendency to ſeparate. It ſometimes means the
ſame as carminative. $2Hincy.
The ſwellings ariſing from theſe require to be treated, in
their beginning, with moderate repellents and diſculients. Wiſe.
To DISDA'IN. v. a. [didaigner, French..] To ſcorn; to con-
fider as unworthy of one's charaćter.
There is nothing ſo great, which I will fear to do for you;
nor nothing ſo ſmall, which I will diſdain to do for you. Sidn.
They do diſdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me ſweat with wrath. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
What ſafe and nicely I might well delay
By rule of knighthood, I diſdain and ſpurn. Shakeſ K. Lear.
Tell him, Cato
Diſdains a life which he has power to offer. Addiſon's Cato.
Disda’IN. m. ſ. [ſdegno, Ital.] Contempt ; ſcorn; contemp-
tuous anger; indignation.
Children being haughty, through diſdain and want of nur-
ture, do ſtain the nobility of their kindred. Eccluſ, xxii. Io.
But againſt you, ye Greeks, ye coward train,
Gods ! how my ſoul is mov’d with juſt diſdain / Pope's Od.
Dispa'INFUL. adj. [diſdain and full.] Contemptuous; haugh-
tily ſcornful; indignant.
There will come a time when three words, uttered with
charity and meekneſs, ſhall receive a far more bleſſed reward
than three thouſand volumes, written with diſdainful ſharpneſs
of wit. - Hooker, Preface,
Pope.
The queen is obſtinate,
Stubborn to juſtice, apt t'accuſe it,
Diſdainful to be tried by’t.
Seek through this grove;
A ſweet Athenian lady is in love
With a diſdainful youth: anoint his eyes;
But do it when the next thing he eſpies -
Shall be the lady. Shakeſpeare's Midſummer Night's Dream.
But thoſe I can accuſe, I can forgive:
By my diſdainful filence let them live. Dryden.
The diſdainful ſoul came ruſhing through the wound. Dry.
Dispa'INFULLY. adv. [from diſdainful..] Contemptuouſly ;
with haughty ſcorn; with indignation.
Either greet him not,
Or elſe diſdainfully, which ſhall ſhake him more
Than if not look'd on. Shakeſpeare's Troil, and Crºſſida.
It is not to inſult and domineer, to look diſdainfully, and
revile imperiouſly, that procures eſteem from any one, South.
Disda’INFulness. m. ſ. [from diſdainful..] Contempt; con-
temptuouſneſs; haughty ſcorn.
Can I forget, when they in priſon placing her,
With ſwelling heart, in ſpite and due ºft,
She lay for dead, 'till I help'd with unlacing her. ... Sidney.
A proud diſdainfulneſs of other good men in all honeſt
matterS. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
DISEASE. m.ſ. [dis and eaſe.] Diſtemper; malady; ſickneſs;
morbid ſtate.
What's the diſeaſ, he means ?
—'Tis call'd the evil. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
It is idle to propoſe remedies before we are aſſured of the
diſeaſe, or to be in pain 'till we are convinced of the danger.
Swift's Project for the Advancement of Religion.
Then waſteful forth
Walks the dire power of peſtilent diſeaſe. Thomſ. Summer.
To Dise A's E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To afflićt with diſeaſe; to torment with ſickneſs; to make
morbid; to infect.
We are all diſeaſed,
And with our ſurfeiting and wanton hours
Have brought ourſelves into a burning fever,
And we muſt bleed for it. . . Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Flatt’rers yet wear ſilk, drink wine, lie ſoft,
Hug their diſeas'd perfumes, and have forgot
Shakeſpeare.
That ever Timon was. Shakeſpeare's Tºmca.
Let her alone, lady: as ſhe is now, ſhe will but diſeaſe our
better mirth. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
He was diſeaſed in his feet. 1 Kings xv. 23.
2. To put to pain; to pain; to make uneaſy.
Though great light be inſufferable to our eyes, yet the
higheſt degree of darkneſs does not at all diſeaſe them. Locke.
Dissa's EDNEss. m. ſ. [from diſeaſed.] Sickneſs; morbidneſs;
the ſtate of being diſeaſed.
This is a reſtoration to ſome former ſtate; not that ſtate
of indigency and diſenſedneſs. Burnet's Theory of the Earth,
Dise'DG Ed. adj. [dis and edge.] Blunted; obtunded; dulled.
I grieve myſelf
To think, when thou ſhalt be diſedg’d by her
Whom now thou tir'ſt on, how thy memory
Will then be pang'd by me. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline,
To Dise MBA'RK. v. a. [dis and embark.] To carry to land.
I muſt unto the road, to diſembark
Some neceſſaries. Shakespeare's Two Gentlemen ºf Verona,
To Dise MBA/RK. v. m. To land; to go on land.
There diſembarking on the green ſea-ſide,
We land our cattle, and the ſpoil divide. Pope's Odyſſy.
To Dise MB1*TTER. v.a. [dis and embitter.] To ſweeten; to
free from bitterneſs; to clear from acrimony.
Encourage ſuch innocent amuſements as may diſembit-
ter the minds of men, and make them mutually rejoice in
the ſame agreeable ſatisfactions. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 34.
P. MBo'DIED. adj. [dis and embodied.] Diveſted of their
odies.
To Dise Mbo’Gue. v. a. [diſm'oucher, old French. Skinner.]
To pour out at the mouth of a river; to vent.
Rivers
In ample oceans diſemhogu'd, are loſt. Dryden's Ovid.
* Rolling down, the ſleep Timăvus raves,
And through nine channels diſenbogues his wavest Addiſon.
To Dise Mbo’GUE. v. n. To gain a vent; to flow,
By eminences placed up and down the globe, the rivers
make innumberable turnings and windings, and at laſt diſemi-
bogue in ſeveral mouths into the ſea. Cheyne', Phil. P. in.
Dise M Bo'well ED. participial adj. [dis and embowel..] Taken
from out the bowels. -
So her diſembowell'd web,
Arachne in a hall or kitchen ſpreads,
Obvious to vagrant flies. Phillp.
To DiseMBRo'i L. v. a. [deb-viller, French..] To diſentangle;
to free from perplexity; to reduce from confuſion. -
Then earth from air, and ſeas from earth were driv'n,
And groſſer air ſunk from etherial heav'n;
Thus diſembroil'd, they take their proper place. Dryden.
The ſyſtem of his politicks is diſenbroiled, and cleared of all
thoſe incoherences and independent matters that are woven
into this motly piece. Addison's Whig Examiner.
To Disen A'BLE. v.a. [dis and enable.] To deprive of power;
to diſable; to ſink into weakneſs; to weaken.
Now age has overtaken me; and want,..a more inſufferable
evil, through the change of the times, has wholly diſenabled
ne. Dryden’s juvenal, Dedication.
To Dise Ncha'Nt. v. a. [dis and enchant..] To free from the
force of an enchantment; to deliver from the power of
charms or ſpells.
Alas! let your own brain diſenchant you. Sidney.
Muſe, ſtoop thy diſenchanted wing to truth. Denham.
Haſte to thy work; a noble ſtroke or two
Ends all the charms, and diſenchants the grove. Dryden.
To Dise Ncu'MBER. v. a. [dis and encumber.j
1. To diſcharge from incumbrances; to free from clogs and im-
pediments; to diſburthen ; to exonerate.
It will need the ačtual intention, the particular ſtreſs and
application of the whole ſoul, to diſencumber and ſet it free,
to ſcour off its ruſt, and remove thoſe hindrances which would
otherwiſe clog and check the freedom of its operations. Spratt.
The diſencumber'd ſoul
Flew off, and left behind the clouds and ſtarry pole. Dryd.
Dreams look like the amuſements of the ſoul, when ſhe is
diſencumbered of her machine; her ſports and recreations, when
ſhe has laid her charge aſleep. Speciator, N°. 487.
2. To free from obſtruction of any kind.
Dim night had diſencumber'd heav'n. Milton’s Par. Loft.
The church of St. Juſtina, deſigned by Falladio, is the
moſt handſome, luminous, diſencumbered building, in the in-
fide, that I have ever ſeen; and is eſteemed, by many artiſts,
one of the fineſt works in Italy. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Dise Ncu'MBRANce. n ſ [from the verb.] Freedom from
incumbrance,
There are many who make a figure below what their for-
tune or merit entitles them to, out of mere choice, and
elegant deſire of eaſe and diſencumbrance. Speciator, N°. 264.
To Dise NGA'GE. v. a. ſais and engage.]
1. To ſeparate from any thing with which it is in union.
Some others, being very light, would float up and down
a good while, before they could wholly diſengage themſelves
and deſcend. Burnet'. Theory of the Earth.
6 2. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 267</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
2. To withdraw the affection; to wean ; to abſtraćt the mind.
It is requiſite that we ſhould acquaint ourſelves with God,
that we ſhould frequently diſengage our hearts from earthly
purſuits. .. Atterbury.
The conſideration that ſhould diſengage our fondneſs from
worldly things, is, that they are uncertain in their founda-
tion, fading, tranſient, and corruptible in their nature Rogers.
3. To diſentangle; to clear from impediments or difficulties.
From civil broils he did us diſengage; -
Found nobler objećts for our martial rage. //al. r.
In the next paragraph I found my author pretty well diſ-
engaged from quotations. Alterbury.
4. To free from any thing that powerfully ſeizes the attention.
When our mind's eyes are diſengag’d and free,
They clearer, farther, and diſtinctly fee. Denham.
To Dise NGA'GE. v. n. To ſet one's ſelf free from; to with-
draw one's aſsections from.
Providence gives us notice, by ſenſible declenſions, that we
may diſengage from the world by degrees. Coſier on Thought.
DISENGA'GED. participial adj. [from diſengage.] Vacant; at
leiſure; not fixed down to any particular object of attention.
Dise NGAGEDN Ess. m. ſ. . [from diſengage.] The quality of
being diſengaged; vacuity of attention; freedom from any
preſſing buſineſs. -
DISENGAGEMENT. m. ſ. [from diſengage.]
1. Releaſe from any engagement, or obligation.
2. Freedom of attention; vacancy.
To Dise NTA'NGLE. v. a. [dis and entangle.]
1. To ſet free from impediments; to diſembroil; to clear from
perplexity or difficulty.
*Till they could find ſome expedient to explicate and diſºn-
tangle themſelves out of this labyrinth, they made no advance
towards ſupplying their armies. Clarendon, b. viii.
The welfare of their ſouls requires a better judgment than .
their own, either to guide them in their duty, or to diſentangle
them from a temptation. South.
2. To unfold or looſe the parts of any thing interwoven with
one another.
Though in concretions particles ſo entangle one another, that
they cannot in a ſhort time clear themſelves, yet they do in-
ceſſantly ſtrive to diſentangle themſelves, and get away. Boyle.
3. To diſengage; to ſeparate.
Neither can God himſelf be otherwiſe underſtood by us
than as a mind free, and diſentangled from all corporeal mix-
tures. - Stillingſleet's Def. of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
To Disente'RRE. v. a. [dis and enterrer, French..] To un-
bury; to take out of the grave.
Though the blindneſs of ſome fanaticks have ſavaged on
the bodies of the dead, and have been ſo injurious unto worms
as to diſenterre the bodies of the deceaſed, yet had they there-
in no deſign upon the ſoul. Brown's Wul. Errours, b. vii. c. 19.
To Dise NTHRA'L. v. a. [dis and enthral.] To ſet free; to
reſtore to liberty; to reſcue from ſlavery.
But God my ſoul ſhall diſenthral;
For I upon his name will call. Sandys.
If religion were falſe, bad men would ſet the utmoſt force
of their reaſon on work to diſcover that falſity, and thereby
diſinthral themſelves. South's Sermons.
To Dise NTH Ro'NE. v. a. [dis and enthrone..] To depoſe from
ſovereignty; to dethrone. -
Either to diſenthrone the king of heav'n
We war, if war be beſt ; or to regain
Our own right loſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii. 1. 229.
To Dise NTRA'N ce. [dis and entrance.] To awaken from a
trance, or deep ſleep.
Ralpho, by this time diſentranc'd,
Upon his bum himſelf advanc'd,
Though ſorely bruis’d. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
To Disespous E. v. a. [dis and eſpouſe.] To ſeparate after
faith plighted. -
Such was the rage
Of Turnus, for Lavinia diſºſpousd. Milton's Parad. Loft.
Disest E'EM. n.f. [dis and ſleen.] Slight regard; a diſ-
regard more moderate than contempt:
When any one, by miſcarriage, falls into diſſteem, he will
fall under neglect and contempt. Locke.
To Disest E(EM. v. a. [from the noun..] To regard ſlightly;
to conſider with a ſlight degree of contempt.
Should Mars ſee’t,
That horrid hurrier of men, or ſhe that betters him,
Minerva, never ſo incens'd, they could not diſg/leem, Chapm.
But if this ſacred gift you diſºfteem,
Then cruel plagues ſhall fall on Priam's ſtate. Denham.
I would not be thought to diſſieem or diſſuade the ſtudy of
nature. * Locke.
Disest IMA’tion, n.ſ. [dis and aftimatio, Lat..] Diſreſpect;
diſeſteem. Dićf.
Disfavour. m. ſ. [dis and favour.]
1. Diſcountenance; unpropitious regard; unfavourable aſpect;
unfavourable circumſtance.
It was verily thought, that had it not been for four great
diſavours of that voyage, the enterprize had ſucceeded. Pazar.
2. A ſtate of ungraciouſneſs or unacceptableneſs; a ſtate in
which one is not favoured.
While free from ſacrilege, he was at peace, as it were,
with God and man; but after his ſacrilege, he was in diſa-
vour with both. Spelman. .
3. Want of beauty. Joiº. .
To Disr A'vov R. v. a. [from the noun..] To diſcountenance;
to withold or withdraw kindneſs.
Might not thoſe of higher rank, and nearer acceſs to her
majeſty, receive her own con.maſſis, and be countenanced
or diſavoured according as the ovey Swift.
Disfiguratios. r. ſ. (i.v.m. a.ſ.l.. e.]
1. The act of disfiguring.
2. The ſtate of being disfigured.
3. D, formity.
To Disfi'Guſ E. v. a. [di, and figure.] To change any thing
to a worſe form ; to deform; to mangle.
One
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure, or diſgure it.
In this the antique and well-noted face
Of plain old form is much diſgured. Sºº. King John.
Abjeći is their puniſincit,
Diſguring not God's lººr. , but their own,
Or, if his likeneſ, iº ºſcive Cºſacid. ... Par. I ºff.
Uriel once war: º, purſu'd him down º
The way he weſt, and on the Aſſyrian mount
Saw him dyigur'd more than could beſ.]]
Spirit of happy ſort. Altºn's Paradjº Lºft, b. iv. l. 27.
A noſe flatter, or a mouth wider, could have conſiſted, as
well as the reſt of his figure, with ſuch a ſoul and ſuch parts as
made him, diſgured as he was, capable to be a dignitary in
the church. - Lake.
Nor would his ſlaughter'd army now have lain
On Africk's ſands, diſgur'd with their wounds,
To gorge the wolves and vultures of Numidia. Addison Cato.
His long abſence, and travels which had diſgură him,
made him altogether unknown. Pope on Epick Poetry.
Disfi'GUREMENT. n.ſ. [ from diſgure. J. Defacement of
beauty; change of a better form to a worſe.
The diſgºrement that travel of ſickneſs has beſtowed upon
him, is not thought great by the lady of the iſle. Suzºg.
And they, ſo perfect is their miſery,
Not once perceive their foul disfigure.cnt. Miltºn's Comuſ.
To Disfor Est. v. a. [dis and frºſt.] To reduce land from
the privileges of a foreſt to the ſtate of common land.
To DisPRA'Nchise. v. a. [ dis and franchiſe. J To deprive
of privileges or immunities. . -
Disfranchi's EMENT. n.ſ.. [from diſian life.] The ağ of
depriving of privileges. IJičí.
To Disk U'RNISH. v. a. [dis and furniſh.j To deprive; to un-
furniſh; to ſtrip. -
My riches are theſe poor habiliments,
Of which if you ſhould here difurniſh me,
You take the ſum and ſubſtance that I have. Shakeſpeare.
He durſt not difurniſh that country either of ſo great a
commander, or of the wonted garriſons. Knolly's Hiſtory.
To Disga'RNISH. v. a. [dis and garniſh.]
1. To ſtrip of ornaments. -- Die?.
2. To take guns from a fortreſs. -
To Disclo'RIFY. v. a... [dis and glorify.] To deprive of
glory; to treat with indignity.
So Dagon ſhall be magnify'd, and God,
Beſides whom is no god, compar'd with idols,
Digloriſ'd, blaſphem’d, and had in ſcorn. .4/ilt. Agoniſłes.
To Disg9'RGE. v. a. [degorger, Fr. from gorge, the throat.]
1. To diſcharge by the mouth; to ſpew out; to vomit.
So, ſo, thou common dog, did'ſt thou diſjorge
Thy glutton boſom of the royal Richard
And now thou wouldſt cat thy dead vomit up,
And howl'ſt to find it. . . Shakeſpeare's lenry IV. p. ii.
From the diſtant ſhore they loudly laught,
To ſee his heaving breaſt diſgorge the briny draught. Dryden.
2. To pour out with violence. -
All th’ emboſſed ſores and headed evils,
That thou with licence of free foot haſt caught,
Would thou diſgorge into the general world.
The deep-drawing barks do there diſorge
Their warlike fraughtage. Shakeſp. Troiºs and Crºſſida, Prol.
They move along the banks
Of four infernal rivers, that diſgorge
Into the burning lake their balciul ſtream. º. Par. Left.
There are ſcarcely any countries much annoyed with
earthquakes, that have not volcanoes, or fiery vents; and
theſe are conſtantly all in flames, whenever any carthquake
happens; they ºorging that fire which, whilſt underneath,
was the cauſe of the diſaſter. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
Sha'ºffeare.
Sašºffrare.
3 Disc R A ce.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 268</div><p class="Text">D I Š
D I S
Discra’ce. n. / [diſgrace, French.J
1. Shame; ignominy; diſhonour.
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out
Even to a full diſgrace. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Poetry, howſoever cenſured, is not falſen from the high-
eſt ſtage of honour to the loweſt ſtair of dºg race. Peacham.
2. State of diſhonour.
To ſuch bondage he was for ſo many courſes tied by her,
whoſe diſgraces to him were graced by her excellence. Sidney.
. State of being out of favour.
To Disc RA ce. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To bring a reproach upon; to diſhonour.
We may not ſo in any one ſpecial kind admire her, that
we diſgrace her in any other; but let all her ways be accord-
ing unto their place and degree adored. Hoºker, b. 11. ſ, 1.
Mens paſſions will carry them far in miſrepreſenting an
opinion, which they have a mind to diſgrace. Burnet.
2. To put out of favour: as, the miniſter was diſgraced.
Disc RA(cf Ful. adj. [diſgrace and full.] Shameful; igno-
minious; reproachful.
Maſters muſt correct their ſervants with gentleneſs, pru-
dence, and mercy; not with upbraiding and diſgraceful lan-
guage, but with ſuch only as may expreſs and reprove the
fault, and amend the perſon. Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
To retire behind their chariots was as little diſgraceful then,
as it is now to alight from one's horſe in a battle. Pope.
Disgracefully... adv. [ from diſgraceful. J. In diſgrace;
with indignity; ignominiouſly.
The ſenate have caſt you forth
Diſgracefully, to be the common tale
Of the whole city. Ben. Yohnſºn's Catiline.
Disgr A'CEFULN Ess. n.ſ.. [from diſgraceful..] Ignominy.
Disgr AceR. m. ſ [from diſgrace. J One that expoſes to
ſhame; one that cauſes ignominy. -
I have given good advice to thoſe infamous diſgracers of the
ſex and calling. Swift.
Disgr A'cious, adj. [dis and gracious.J Unkind; unfavourable.
I do ſuſpect I have done ſome offence,
That ſeems diſgracious in the city’s eye. Shakespeare Richard III.
To Disgui's E. v. a. [deguiſer, French; dis and guiſe.]
1. To conceal by an unuſual dreſs.
How might we diſguiſe him?
Alas, I know not: there is no woman's gown big
enough for him. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſºr.
Diſguis'd he came; but thoſe his children dear
Their parent ſoon diſcern'd, though in diſguiſe. Milt. P. L.
2. To hide by a counterfeit appearance; to cloak by a falſe
ſhow; as, he diſguiſed his anger.
3. To disfigure ; to change the form.
They ſaw the faces, which too well they knew,
Though then diſguis'd in death, and ſmear'd all o'er
With filth obſcene, and dropping putrid gore. Dryd. Æn.
Ulyſſes wakes, not knowing the place where he was ; be-
cauſe Minerva made all things appear in a diſguiſed view. Popé.
4. To deform by liquor : a low term.
I have juſt left the right worſhipful, and his myrmidons,
about a ſneaker of five gallons: the whole magiſtracy was
pretty well diſguiſed before I gave them the ſlip. Speciator.
Disc U1's E. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A dreſs contrived to conceal the perſon that wears it.
They generally act in a diſguiſe themſelves, and therefore
miſtake all outward ſhow and appearances for hypocriſy in
others. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 1 jo.
2. A falſe appearance; counterfeit ſhow.
You ſee we've burnt our cheeks; and mine own tongue
Splits what it ſpeaks: the wild diſguiſe hath almoſt
Antickt us. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
A ſudden thought then ſtarting in his mind,
Since I in Arcite cannot Arcite find,
The world may ſearch in vain with all their eyes,
But never penetrate through this diſguiſe. Dryden's Fables.
Hence guilty joys, diſtaſtes, ſurmiſes,
Falſe oaths, falſe tears, deceits, º: Pope.
Disgui's EMENT. m. ſ. [from º reſs of concealment.
Under that diſguiſement I ſhould find opportunity to reveal
myſelf to the owner of my heart. Sidney.
The marquis thought beſt to diſmaſk his beard, and told
him, that he was going covertly to take a ſecret view of the
forwardneſs of his majeſty's fleet, then in preparation: this
did ſomewhat handſomely heal the diſguiſement. J/ztt,n.
Disc U1's ER. m. ſ. [from diſguiſe.] -
1. One that puts on a diſguiſe.
I hope he is grown more diſengaged from his intentneſs on
his own affairs, which is quite the reverſe to you, unleſs you
are a very dextrous diſguiſer. Swift.
2. One that conceals another by a diſguiſe; one that disfigures.
Death's a great diſguiſer. Shakespeare. Meaſure for Aleºſure.
DISGUST. m. ſ. [d gout, French.
1. Averſion of the palate from any thing.
2. Ill humour; malevolence; offence conceived.
‘I he manner of doing is of more conſequence than the
Voſ. 1.
thing done, and upon that depends the ſatisfaction or diſguſ
wherewith it is received. Locke.
Thence dark diſguſt and hatred, winding wiles,
Coward deceit, and ruffian violence. Thomſon's Spring.
To Disgu'st. v. a. [degoater, French; deguſſo, Latin.]
1. To raiſe averſion in the ſtomach; to diſtaſte.
2. To ſtrike with diſlike; to offend. It is variouſly conſtruſted
with at or with.
If a man were diſuſed at marriage, he would never re-
commend it to his friend. Atterbury.
Thoſe unenlarged ſouls are diſguſted with the wonders
- which the microſcope has diſcovered ſtattº's Impr. of the Mind.
3. To produce averſion: with from.
What diſguſ's me from having to do with anſwer jobbers is,
that they have no conſcience. Swift.
Discº'stful, adj. [diſguſt and fall.] Nauſeous; that which
cauſes averſion.
I have finiſhed the moſt diſguſful taſk that ever I under-
took. Swift.
DISH. m.ſ. ſorc, Saxon; dyſ, Erſe; diſus, Latin.]
I. *º wide veſſel, in which ſolid food is ſerved up at the
table. -
Of theſe he murders one; he boils the fleſh,
And lays the mangled morſels in a diſh. Dryden.
I ſaw among the ruins an old heathen altar, with this
particularity in it, that it is hollowed like a diſh at one end;
but it was not this end on which the ſacrifice was laid. Addison
2. A deep hollow veſſel for liquid food.
Who would rob a hermit of his weeds,
His few books, or his beads, or maple diſh;
Or do his grey hairs any violence? Milton.
A ladle for our ſilver diſh
Is what I want, is what I wiſh. Prior.
3. The meat ſerved in a diſh; any particular kind of food.
I have here a diſh of doves, that I would beſtow upon your
worſhip. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
Let's carve him as a diſh fit for the gods,
Not hew him as a carcaſs fit for hounds. Shakeſ ful. Caſ.
The contračt you pretend with that baſe wretch,
One bred of alms and foſter'd with cold diſhes,
With ſcraps o' th' court; it is no contract, none, Shakesp. Cymb.
'Tis not the meat, but 'tis the appetite
Makes eating a delight;
And if I like one diſh -
More than another, that a pheaſant is. Suckling.
The earth would have been deprived of a moſt excellent
and wholſome fare, and very many delicious diſhes that we
have the uſe and benefit of. //oodward.
Many people would, with reaſon, prefer the griping of an
hungry belly to thoſe diſhes which are a feaſt to others. Locke.
To Dish. v.a. [from the noun..] To ſerve in a diſh; to ſend
up to table.
For conſpiracy,
I know not how it taſtes, though it be diſh'd
For me to try. Shakeſpeare's Jºinter's Tale.
Dish-clouT. n.f. [diſh and clout..] The cloath with which the
maids rub their diſhes.
A diſh-clout of Jaquenetta's, he wears next his heart for
a favour. Shakeſpeare's Love's Labºur Loft.
Send them up to their maſters with a diſh-clout pinned at
their tails. Swift's Directions to the Cook.
Dish-washer. n.ſ. [diff, and waſher.] The name of a bird.
DISHABI'LLF. adj. [d/halillº, French..] Undreſſed; looſely
or negligently dreſſed.
Queens are not to be too negligently dreſſed or diſhabille.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Dishapi'LLE. m. ſ. Undreſs; looſe dreſs. -
A woman, who would preſerve a lover's reſpect to her per-
ſon, will be careful of her appearance before him when in
diſhabille. Clariffa.
To Dish A'pit. v. a. [This word I have found cnly in Shake-
ſpeare.] To throw out of place; to drive from their habi-
tation.
But for our approach thoſe ſleeping ſtones,
By the compulſion of their ordinance,
By this time from their fixed beds of lime -
Had been diſhabited, and wide havock made. Shakſº. K. Lear.
Dish A'RMony, n.ſ. [dis and harmøy.j Contrary to harmony.
To Dish EA'RTEN. v. a. [dis and hearten J
1. To diſcourage; to deject; to terrify; to depreſs. -
To diſhcarten with fearful ſentences, as tho' ſalvation could
hardly be hoped for, is not in our underſtanding ſo conſonant
with chriſtian charity. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 22.
Be not diſhcartened then, nor cloud thoſe looks,
That wont to be more cheatful and ſeretic. 44it. Par. Lºft.
Yet neither thus diſcºrten’d nor diſinay’d, -
The time prepard I waited. Milton.
It is a confideration that might diſhcarten thoſe who are en-
gaged againſt the common adverſaries, that they promiſe them-
ſelves as much from the folly of enemies, as from the power
of their friends. stiling flºt's Pref tº Def Rom. Id.
- C Men
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 269</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
Men cannot ſay, that the greatneſs of an evil and danger is
an encouragement to men to run upon it; and that the great-
neſs of any good and happineſs ought in reaſon to diſhearten
men from the purſuit of it. Tillºtſºn, Serm. i.
A true chriſtian fervour is more than the alliances of our potent
friends, or even the fears of our diſłeartened enemies. Aftterbury.
Dishe’rison. m. ſ. [dis and heriſºn.] The act of debarring
from inheritance,
To Dishe’R1T, v, a. ſals and inherit.] To cut off from here-
ditary ſucceſſion; to debar from an inheritance.
He tries to reſtore to their rightful heritage ſuch good
old Engliſh words as have been long time out of uſe, al-
moſt diſherited. Spencer's Paſſ.
How they were rank'd ſhall reſt untold by me,
With nameleſs nymphs that liv'd in ev'ry tree;
Nor how the Dryads and the woodland train,
Diſherited, ran howling o'er the plain. Dryden's Fah.
To Dishe’ve L. v. a [decheveler, French.] To ſpread the hair
diſorderly; to throw the hair of a woman negligently about
her head. It is not often uſed but in the paſſive participle.
A gentle lady all alone,
With garments rent and hair diſhevelled,
Wringing her hands, and making piteous moan. Sp. Fa. Qu.
After followed great numbers of women weeping, with
diſhevelled hair, ſcratching their faces and tearing themſelves
after the manner of the country. Knolles.
A troop of Trojans mix'd with theſe appear,
And mourning matrons with diſheve"d hair. Dryd. Æneid.
The flames involv’d in ſmoak
Of incence, from the ſacred altar broke,
Caught her diſhevel’d hair and rich attire. Dryden's Aneid.
You this morn beheld his ardent eyes,
Saw his arm lock'd in her diſhevell'd hair. Smith's Ph. Hip.
Di's HING. adj. [from diſh.] Concave; a cant term among
artificers.
For the form of the wheels, ſome make them more diſhing,
as they call it, than others; that is, more concave, by ſetting
off the ſpokes and fellies more outwards. Mortimer's Huſband.
Disho'NEST. adj. [dis and honeſ.]
1. Void of probity; void of faith; faithleſs; wicked; fraudulent.
To-morrow will we be married—I do deſire it with all my
heart; and I hope it is no diſhoneſ! deſire, to deſire to be a
woman of the world. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Juſtice then was neither blind to diſcern, nor lame to exe-
cute. It was not ſubječt to be impoſed upon by a deluded
fancy, nor yet to be bribed by a glozing appetite, for an utile
or jucundum to turn the balance to a falſe or diſhoneſt ſen-
tencC. South's Sermons.
He lays it down as a principle, that right or wrong, honeſt
and diſhoneſ?, are defined only by laws and not by nature. Locke.
2. Diſgraced ; diſhonoured.
Diſhºneſ? with lopp'd arms the youth appears,
Spoil'd of his noſe, and ſhorten’d of his ears. Dryden.
3. Diſgraceful; ignominious. Theſe two ſenſes are ſcarcely
Engliſh, being borrowed from the Latin idiom.
She ſaw her ſons with purple death expire,
Her ſacred domes involv’d in rolling fire,
A dreadful ſeries of inteſtine wars,
Inglorious triumphs and diſhoneſt ſcars. Pope's J/indſ For.
Disho'NEstLY. adv. [from diſhoneſ.]
1. Without faith; without probity; faithleſly; wickedly.
I proteſt he had the chain of me,
Tho' moſt diſhoneſtly he doth deny it. Shakeſp. Com. Err.
2. Lewdly; wantonly; unchaſtely.
A wiſe daughter ſhall bring an inheritance to her huſband;
but ſhe that liveth diſhame'ily is her father's heavineſs. Ecc. xxii.4.
DIs Ho’Nest Y. n.ſ.. [from diſh.nſf.]
1. Want of probity; faithleſsncſs; violation of truſt.
Their fortune depends upon their credit, and a ſtain of open
public diſhoneſly muſt be to their diſadvantage. Swift.
2. Unchaſtity; incontinence; lewdneſs.
Mrs. Ford, the honeſt woman, the modeſt wife, the vir-
tuous creature, that hath the jealous fool to her huſband | 1
ſuſpect without cauſe, miſtreſs, do I?—Heav'n be my witneſs
you do, if you ſuſpect me in any diſhoneſiy. Shakeſpeare.
Disho'No UR. m. ſ. [dis and honour.]
1. Reproach; diſgrace; ignominy.
Let not my jealouſies be your diſhonours,
But mine own ſafeties. Shakespeare's Macb, th:
He was pleaſed to own Lazarus even in the diſhonours of the
grave, and vouchſafed him in that deſpicable condition the
glorious title of his friend. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
Take him for your huſband and your lord,
'Tis no diſhonour to confer your grace
On one deſcended from a royal race. Dryden's Fables.
2. Reproach uttered; cenſure; report of infamy.
So good, that no tongue could ever
Pronounce diſhºnour of her; by my life
She never knew harm-doing.
To Di Ho"Nou R. v. a. [di, and honour.]
1. To diſgrace; to bring ſhamc upon; to blaſt with infamy.
Shakespeare’s Henry VIII.
- Make known,
It is no vicious blot, murther, or foulneſs,
No unchaſte action, or diſhonour’d ſtep,
That hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour. Sakſ.
This no more diſºnºurs you at all,
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which elſe would put you to your fortune, Shakespeare. Car,
A woman that honoureth her huſband, ſhall be indăºd wife
of all; but ſhe that diſhonºureth him in her pride, ſhall tº
counted ungodly of all. Eccl. xxvi. 26.
We are not ſo much to ſtrain ourſelves to make theſ. vir-
tues appear in us which really we have not, as to avoid thoſe
imperfections which may diſhonour us. Dºyden's Dufreſnoy
2. To violate chaſtity. -
3. To treat with indignity.
If I, celeſtial fire in ought
Have ſerv'd thy will, or gratify'd thy thought,
Qne glimpſe of glory to my iſſue give, -
Grac'd for the little time he has to live:
Piſhonour’d by the king of men he ſtands;
His rightful prize is raviſh'd from his hands. Dryd. Iliad.
Disho'Nourable. adj. [from diſhonour.]
1. Shameful, reproachful; ignominious.
He did diſhºnourable find
Thoſe articles which did our ſtate decreaſe. Dan. Cº. fºr
2. In a ſtate of neglect or diſeſteem. -
He that is honoured in poverty, how much more in riches:
and he that is d/hºnourable in riches, how much more in po-
verty. Leºlus, x. 31 -
Disho'Nour ER. m./ [from diſhonour.]
1. One that treats another with indignity.
Preaching how meritorious with the gods
It would be, to enſnare an irreligious
Diſhonourer of Dagon.
2. A violator of chaſtity.
To Disho'RN. v.a. [di and hºrn.] To ſtrip of horns.
We'll diſhorn the ſpirit,
And mock him home to Windſor. Shakespeare M Iºve ſpºnd.
Dish U'MoUR. m. ſ. [di, and humour.] Peeviſhneſs; ill humour;
uneaſy ſtate of mind.
. Speaking impatiently to ſervants, or any thing that betrays
inattention ord/humour, are alſo criminal. Speciator, Nº. 424.
Dis1 MPRø'vement. n.ſ. [dis and improvement.] Redućion
from a better to a worſe ſtate; the contrary to melioration;
contrary to improvement.
The final iſſue of the matter would be, an utter negled and
diſimprºvement of the earth. Nºrris.
I cannot ſee how this kingdom is at any height of improve-
ment, while four parts in five of the plantations for thirty
years paſt have been real diſimprovements. Swift.
To Disinca'RcERATE. m. ſ. [di, and incarcerate.] To ſet at
liberty; to free from priſon.
The arſenical bodies being now coagulated, and kindled
into flaming atoms, require dry and warm, or ſubtiliz-
ing air, to melt and open the ſurface of the carth for to
diſincarcerate the ſame venene bodies. Harvey on the Plague.
DisiNclination. n ſ [from diſincline.] Want of affection;
ſlight; diſlike; ill will not heightened to averſion.
Diſappointment gave him a diſinclination to the fair ſex, for
whom he does not expreſs all the reſpect poſſible. Arb.ard Pole.
To DisiN cli'NE. v. a. [dis and indine.] To produce diſlike
to ; to make diſaffected; to alienate affection from.
They were careful to keep up the fears and apprehenſions
in the people of dangers and deſigns, and to diffincline them
from any reverence or affection to the quccn, whom they be-
gun every day more implacably to hate, and conſequently to
diſoblige. Clarendon.
DISINGENu‘ity. n.ſ.. [from diſingenuous J. Meanneſs of arti-
fice; unfairneſs.
They contračt a habit of ill-nature and diſingenuity neceſſary
to their affairs, and the temper of thoſe upon whom they are
to work. Clarendon.
DisiNge'Nuous, adj. . [dis and ingenuous.] Unfair; meanly
artful; viciouſly ſubtle; ſly; cunning; illiberal; unbecoming
a gentleman; crafty.
'Tis diſingenuous to accuſe our age
Of idleneſs, who all our pow'rs engage
In the ſame ſtudies, the ſame courſe to hold,
Northink our reaſon for new arts too old. Denham.
It was a diſingenuous way of proceeding, to oppoſe a judg-
ment of charity concerning their church, to a judgment of
reaſon concerning the nature of a&amp;tions. Stillingficer.
There cannot be any thing ſo diſingenuºus and miſbecoming
any one who pretends to be a rational creature, as not to yield
to plain reaſon and the convićtion of clear arguments. I cake.
Dising E'Nvously, adv. [from diffrzeru.us.) In a d fingenuous
nanner.
DisiNGE'NuousNess. n.ſ. (from diſingeru us...] Mean ſubtilty;
unfairneſs; low craft.
I might preſs them with the unreaſonableneſs, the d/ºngenu-
ouſneſs of embracing a profeſſion to which their own ſearts
have an inward reluctance. Gºvernment ºf the Tongue, ſ. 3.
Miltºn's Agon. l. 857.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
IS-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 270</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
DisinHE'Rison. m. ſ [di, and inherit.] The aët of cutting of
from any hereditary ſucceſſion; the aët of diſinheriting.
If he ſtood upon his own title of the houſe of Lancaſter,
inherent in his perſon, he knew it was a title condemned by
parliament, and generally prejudged in the common opinion
of the realm, that it tended directly to the diſinheriſon of the
line of York. Bacon's Henry VII.
The chief miniſter of the revenue was obliged to prevent
and even oppoſe ſuch diſinheriſon. Clarendon.
2. The ſtate of being cut off from an hereditary right.
In reſpect of the effects and evil conſequences, the adultery
of the woman is worſe, as bringing baſtardy into a family,
and diſinheriſons or great injuries to the lawful children. Tayſ.
To DisinHE'RIT. v. a. [dis and inherit.] To cut off from an
hereditary right; to deprive ef an inheritance.
Is it then juſt with us to diſinherit
The unborn nephews for the father's fault Davies.
Unmuffle, ye faint ſtars, and thou fair moon,
Stoop thy pale viſage through an amber cloud,
And diſinherit chaos that reigns here
In double night of darkneſs, and of ſlander. Milton.
Poſterity ſtands curs'd fair patrimony,
That I muſt leave ye, ſons ! O were I able
To waſte it all myſelf, and leave ye none;
So diſinherited, how would ye bleſs -
Me, now your curſe Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b.x. l. 521.
Of how fair a portion Adam diſinherited his whole poſterity
by one ſingle prevarication. South's Sermons.
To Dis1 NTE'R. v. a. [from dis and inter.] To unbury 5 to
take out of the grave.
The philoſopher, the ſaint, or the hero, the wiſe, the good,
or the great man, very often lie hid and concealed in a plebeian,
which a proper education might have diſinterred. Addiſ Spect.
Dis: Nºr ERE'ssed. m. ſ. [dis and intereſt, French. It is written
diſintereſ?ed by thoſe who derive it immediately from intereſt,
and I think more properly J Without regard to private ad-
vantage; not biaſled by particular views; impartial.
Not that tradition's parts are uſeleſs here,
When general, old, diſintereſs'd, and clear. Dryden.
Disint E RE'ss M &amp; Nt. n ſ. [dis and intereſſement, French J Diſ-"
regard to private advantage; diſintereſt; diſintereſtedneſs. This
word like charges in the ſame ſentence, is merely gallick.
He has managed ſome of the charges of the kingdom with
known ability, and laid them down with entire diſintereſſment.
Prior's Poſſcript.
Dis1'NTERest. n ſ. [dis and intereſ?..]
1. What is contrary to one's wiſh or proſperity; that which any
one is concerned to prevent.
They judge it the great diſintereſt to Rome. Glanville.
2. Indifference to profit; ſuperiority to regards of private ad-
vantage.
Dis1'NTERFstED. adj. [from diſintereſt.] Superior to regard of
private advantage; not influenced by private profit.
My lord, as diſintereſted as you appear to the world, I am
convinced, that no man is more in the power of prevailing
favourite paſſion than yourſelf, Swift.
3. Withcut any conc rn in an affair; without fear or hope.
i):sis ºr ERE's reply. adv. [from diſintereſted J In a diſintereſt-
ed manner.
1) IsiNTERE's re D NEss. n.ſ.. [from diſintereſted.] Contempt of
private intereſt; neglect of perſonal profit.
Theſe expreſſions of ſelfiſhneſs and diſintereſtedneſ have been
uſed in a very looſe and indeterminate manner. Brown.
To Dis1'NTRic Are. v. a. [dis and intricate.] To diſin-
tangle. Dić7.
To Disis viºr E. v. a [dis and invite.] To retraćt an invita-
tion. Dić#.
To Disjo'1N. v. a. [djoindre, French; dis and join.] To ſepa-
rate; to part from each other ; to diſunite ; to funder.
Never ſhall my harp thy praiſe
Forget, nor from thy father's praiſe disjoin. Milton's P. Loft.
Leſt different degree
Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce
Deity for thce, when fate will not permit. Milton. P. Loff.
Happier for me, that all our hours aſſign'd,
Together we had liv'd : ev'n not in death disjoin'd. Dryd.
Never let us lay down our arms againſt France till we have
utterly disjoined her from the Spaniſh monarchy. Addiſon.
To Disjo'Is T. v. a. [dis and joint.]
1. To put out of joint.
Be all their ligaments at once unbound,
And their dij inted bones to powder ground. Sandy's Paraph.
Yet what could ſwords or poiſon, racks or flame,
But mangle and disjºint the brittle frame, {
More fatal Henry's words; they murder Emma's fame. Pr.
2. To break at junétures; to ſeparate at the part where there
is a cement.
Mould'ring arches, and disjointed columns. Irene.
3 To break in picces; to dilaniate.
Rotation muſt diſperſe in air,
All things which on the rapid orb appear;
And if no power that motion ſhould controul,
It muſt disjoint and diffipate the whole, Bla.kmore.
Should a barbarous Indian, who had never ſeen a palace or
a ſhip, view the ſeparate and disjointed parts, he would be
able to form but a very lame and dark idea of either of thoſe
excellent and uſeful inventions. Watts's Improvm. ºf the Mind.
4. To carve a fowl. -
5. To make incoherent; to break the relation between the parts.
- The conſtancy of your wit was not wont to bring forth ſuch
disjointed ſpeeches. Sidney, b. ii.
But now her grief has wrought her into frenzy,
The images her troubled fancy forms
Are incoherent, wild; her words disjointed. Smith.
To Disjoi'Nt. v. n. To fall in pieces.
Let both worlds disjºint, and all things ſuffer,
Ere we will eat our meal in fear. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
Disjoi'st, participle [from the verb.] Separated; divided.
- Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak ſuppoſal of our worth;
Thinks, by our late dear brother's death,
Our ſtate to be disjoint and out of frame. Shakespeare Hamlet.
Disjudication. n.f. [dijudicatio, Latin.] Judgment; deter-
mination; perhaps only miſtaken for diſudiation,
The diſpoſition of the organ is of great importance in the
disjudications we make of colours. Boyle on Colours.
Disju'Nct, adj. [disjunéſus, Latin.] Disjoined; ſeparate.
Disju'Nction. n.ſ.. [from dijunctio, Latin.] Diſunion; ſepa-
ration; parting
You may
Enjoy your miſtreſs now, from whom, you ſee,
There's no di junction to be made, but by
Your ruin. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale:
There is a great analogy between the body natural and poli-
tic, in which the eccleſiaſtical, or ſpiritual part, juſtly ſupplies
the part of the ſoul; and the violent ſeparation of this from
the other, does as certainly infer death and diſſolution, as the
disjunction of the body and the ſoul in the natural. South.
Disju'nctive. adj. [disjunctivus, Latin.]
I. Incapable of union.
Such principles, whoſe atoms are of that disjunctive nature,
as not to be united in a ſufficient number to make a viſible
maſs. Grew's Coſm. Sac b. i. c. 2.
2. That which marks ſeparation or oppoſition; as I lºve him, or
fear him. -
There are ſuch words as disjunctive conjunctions. Iłatts.
3. [In logick.] A disjunctive propoſition is when the parts are op-
poſed to one another by disjunctive particles; as, It is either day
or night: The weather is either ſhiny or rainy: Quantity is either
length, breadth, or depth. The truth of disjunctives depends on the
neceſſary and immediate oppoſition of the parts, therefore only
the laſt of theſe examples is true; but the two firſt are not
ſtrictly true, becauſe twilight is a medium between day and
night; and dry cloudy weather is a medium between ſhining
and raining. J/att,’s Logick.
A disjunctive ſyllogyſm is when the major propoſition is diſ-
junctive; as, The earth moves in a circle, or an ellipſis; but it
does not move in a circle, therefore it moves in an el-
lipſis. Watts's Logick.
Disju'Nctively. adv. [from disjunctive..] Diſtinaly; fe-
parately.
What he obſerves of the numbers disjunctively and apart,
reaſon ſuggeſts to be applicable to the whole body united.
Cauſes of the Decay of Piety.
DISK. n.ſ. [diſcus, Latin.] !ſes of y of Piety
1. The face of the ſun, or any other planet, as it appears to
the eye.
The diſk of Phaebus, when he climbs on high,
Appears at firſt but as a bloodſhot eye. Dryden.
It is to be conſidered, that the rays, which are equally re-
frangible, do fall upon a circle anſwering to the ſun's diff. Newt.
Mercury's diſk
Can ſcarce be caught by philoſophic eye,
Loſt in the near effulgence. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. Abroad piece of iron thrown in the antient ſports; a quoit.
The cryſtal of the eye, which in a fiſh is a ball, in any
land animal is a diſk or bowl; being hereby fitted for the
clearer fight of the objećt. Grew's Cºſm. Sac. i. i. e. 5.
In areas vary'd with moſaic art,
Some whirl the diſk, and ſome the jav'lin dart. Pope's Ow.
Diski'NDN Ess. n.ſ. [dis and kindneſs.] Want of kindneſs;
want of affection; want of benevolence.
2. lll turn; injury; ačt of malignity; detriment.
This diſcourſe is ſo far from doing any diſkindneſ to the
cauſe, that it does it a real ſervice. Iſoodward's Nat. Hiſt.
Disli'ke. m. ſ. [from the verb ]
1. Diſnclination; abſence of affection; the contrary to fondneſs,
He then them took, and tempering goodly well
Their contrary diſlikes with loved means,
Did place them all in order, and compel
To keep themſelves within their fundry reigns,
Together link'd with adamantine chains.
Your diſlikes to whom I would be pleaſing,
Do cloud my joys with danger and with ſorrow. Shakeſp.
Spencer.
2 God's
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 271</div><p class="Text">D 1 S
D IS
- inciple of his new birth, gives him
Go d º º: *** Hammond's Pract. Catechiſºn.
cº º have been as ſilent as º .
*&amp;#iº or diſlikes are founded rather upon humour and
fancy than upon reaſon. - :/7: ". º;
The jealous man is not angry if you diſlike another; º
ou find thoſe faults which are in his own character, you gº
ºver not only your diſlike of another, but of himſelf. Addison
. Diſcord; diſſention; diſagreement. This ſenſe is not now
111 "in ſaid Aletes, and a murmur roſe - -
That ſhew’d diſlike among the chriſtian peers. Fairfax.
To Dislike. v. a. [dis and like:J.To diſapprove ; to regard
without affection; to regard with ill-will or diſguſt. . .
What moſt he ſhould diſlike, ſeems pleaſant to him ;
What like, offenſive. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Ye diſlike, and ſo undo
The players, and diſgrace the poet too. Denh. Prol. Sºphy.
whoſoever diſlikes the digreſſions, or grows weary of them,
may throw them away. - *- :- Temple.
Dislike ful. a j. [diſlike and full.] Diſaffected 3 malign:
I think it beſt, by an union of manners, and conformity of
minds, to bring them to be one people, and to put away the
d ſlikeful conceit of the one and the other. Spenser's Ireland.
To pislike N. v. a. [dis and lice.] To make unlike.
Muffle your face,
Diſmantle you ; and, as you can, diſliken
The truth of your own ſeeming. Shakespeare. I/inter's Tale.
Dislik EN Ess. n.ſ. [dis and likeneſs.] Diffimilitude; not re-
ſemblance; unlikeneſs.
That which is not deſigned to repreſent any thing but itſelf,
can ncycr be capable of a wrong repreſentation, nor miſlead
us from the true apprehenſion of any thing by its diſlikeneſ;
to it; and ſuch, excepting thoſe of ſubſtances, are all our own
complex ideas. Locke.
Disliki. R. m. ſ (from diſike..] A diſapprover; one that is not
pleaſed.
- There is a point, which whoever can touch, will never fail
of pleaſing a majority, ſo great that the diſlikers will be
forced to fall in with the herd. Swift's Intell.
To Disli'MB. v. a. [dis and limb.] To dilaniate; to tear limb
from limb. Dić7.
To Disli'MN. v. a. [dis and limn.] To unpaint; to ſtrike out
of a pićture.
That which is now a horſe, even with a thought
The rack diſlimns, and makes it indiſtinét
As water is in water. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleºp.
To DI's locATE. v. a. [dis and locus, Latin.)
1. To put out of the proper place. -
The ſtrata ſeemed to have been diſlºcated, borne from their
original ſite, and diſtanced by ſome external power. Woodw.
After ſome time the ſtrata were broken on all ſides of the
globe, that they were diſlocated, and their ſituation varied,
being elevated in ſome places, and depreſſed in others. IVozdºv.
2. To put out of joint; to disjoint.
Were’t my fitneſs
To let theſe hands obey my boiling blood,
They're apt enough to diſlocate and tear
Thy fleſh and bones. Shakeſpear’s King Lear.
Dislocation, n.ſ. (from diſlocate J
1. The act of ſhifting the places of things.
2. The ſtate of being diſplaced.
The poſture of rocks, often leaning or proſtrate, ſhews that
they had ſome diſlocation from their natural ſite. Burnet.
3. A luxation; a violent preſſure of a bone out of the ſocket;
a joint put out. -
It might go awry either within or without the upper, as
often as it is forcibly pulled to it, and ſo cauſe a diſlocation, or
a ſtrain. Grew's Muſeum.
To Dislodo E. v. a. [dis and lodge.] -
1. To remove from a place.
The ſhell-fiſh which are reſident in theſe places live and die
there, and are never diſlodged or removed by ſtorms, nor caſt
upon the ſhores, which the littorales uſually are. Iſo:dward.
2. To remove from an habitation.
Thoſe ſenſes loſt, behold a new defeat,
The ſoul diſlodging from another ſeat.
3 To drive an enemy from a ſtation.
My ſword can perfect what it has begun,
And from your walls diſſedge that haughty ſon.
4. To remove an army to other quarters.
. . . The ladies have prevail'd,
The Volſcians are diſlodg’d, and Marcus gone. Shakespeare Cor.
To Dislodge. v. n. To go away to another place.
Soon as midnight brought on the duſky hour,
Friendlieſt to ſleep, and filence, he reſolv’d
with all his legions to diſlodge. Milton's Par. Loft.
Dislo'y Al. adj. [diſloyal, French; dis and loyal.]
1. Not true to allegance; faithleſs; falſe to a ſovereign; diſ-
obedient,
- 5
Dryden's juv.
Dryd. Aſur.
Foul diſtruſt, and breach
Diſloyal on the part of man; revolt
And diſobedience. 44iltºn's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix. l. 7.
2. Diſhoneſt; perfidious. Obſolete.
Such things, in a falſe diſloyal knave,
Are tricks of cuſtom; but, in a man that's juſt,
They're cold delations working from the heart,
That paſſion cannot rule. Shakeſpeare's Othell,
3. Not true to the marriage-bed.
The lady is diſloyal.
Diſloyal / The word is too good to paint out her wick.
edneſs. Shakeſpeare.
Diſloyal town
Speak, did'ſt not thou
Forſake thy faith, and break the nuptial vow Dryden.
4. Falſe in love; not conſtant. The three latter ſenſes are now
obſolete.
Disloy ALLY: adv. [from diſloyal..] Not faithfully; treache-
rouſly; diſobediently. -
Dislo'YALTY. n.ſ.. [from diſloyal.]
1. Want of fidelity to the ſovereign. -
Let the truth of that religion I profeſs be repreſented to
judgment, not in the diſguiſes of levity, ſchiſm, hereſy, no-
velty, and diſloyalty. King Charles.
2. Want of fidelity in love. A ſenſe now obſolete.
There ſhall appear ſuch ſeeming truths of Hero's diſloyalty,
that jealouſy ſhall be called aſſurance. Shakesp. Much Ado about Norf.
DISMAL. adj. [dies malus, Latin, an evil day.] Sorrowful;
dire; horrid; melancholy; uncomfortable; unhappy; dark.
On the one hand ſet the moſt glittering temptations to diſ.
cord, and on the other view the diſmal effects of it. Dec. of Piety.
Di's MAlly, adv. [from diſnal.] Horribly; ſorrowfully; un-
comfortably.
Di's Malness. n.ſ. [from diſmal.] Horror; ſorrow.
To Disma'NTL.E. v. a. [dis and mantle J
1. To throw off a dreſs; to ſtrip. -
He that makes his prince deſpiſed and undervalued, and
beats him out of his ſubjects hearts, may eaſily ſtrip him of
his other garriſons, having already diſpoſſeſſed him of his
ſtrongeſt, by diſmantling him of his honour, and ſeiſing his
reputation. South's Sermons.
2. To looſe; to unfold; to throw open.
This is moſt ſtrange
That ſhe, who ev'n but now was your beſt objećt,
Deareſt and beſt, ſhould in this trice of time
Commit a thing ſo monſtrous, to diſmantle
So many folds of favour. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3. To ſtrip a town of its outworks.
It is not ſufficient to poſſeſs our own fort, without the diſt
mantling and demoliſhing of our enemies. Hakewill on Provid.
4. To break down anything external.
His eyeballs, rooted out, are thrown to ground; {
His noſe diſmantled, in his mouth is found;
His jaws, cheeks, front, one undiſtinguiſh’d wound. Dry.
To Dism A^sk. v. a. [dis and moſ...] To diveſt of a maſk; to
uncover from concealment.
Fair ladies maſk'd, are roſes in the bud;
Or angels veil'd in clouds: are roſes blown,
Diſmºſ'd, their damaſk ſweet commixture ſhewn. Shakeſp.
The marquis had no leiſure to laugh, but thought beſt to
d/maſk his beard; and ſo told him, that he was going co-
vertly. - //ction.
To DISMAY. v. a. [deſnoyar, Spaniſh.) To terrify; to diſ-
courage; to affright; to depreſs; to dejećt. -
Their mighty ſtrokes their haberjeons diſmay’d. Fai. Qu.
Enemies would not be ſo troubleſome to the weſtern coaſts,
nor that country itſelf would be ſo often diſmayed with alarms
as they have of late years been. Raleigh's Eſſayſ.
He will not fail thee; fear not, neither be diſmayed. Deutr.
Nothing can make him remiſs in the practice of his duty,
no proſpect of intereſt can allure him, no fear of danger
diſmay him. Atterbury's Sermons.
DIs MA’Y. m. ſ. [diſmayo, Spaniſh.] Fall of courage; terrour
felt; deſertion of mind; fear impreſſed.
All ſat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In others countenance read his own diſmay. Mit. Par. Lº!.
This then not minded in diſmay, yet now
Aſſures me that the bitterneſs of death
Is paſt. Aſ; tºm's Paradiſe Loº, b. xi. 1, 156.
DIs MAYEDN Ess. n.ſ [from diſmay.] Dejection of courage;
diſpiritedneſs. - -
The valianteſt feels inward diſplayednºſ, and yet the ſeaſ.
fulleſt is aſhamed fully to ſhew it. Sidney, b. ii.
DISAME. m. ſ. [French. A tenth; the tenth part; tythe.
Since the firſt ſword was drawn about this queſtion,
Ev'ry tithe ſoul 'mongſt many thouſand diſines,
Hath been as dear as Helen. Shakeſp. 7 roilus and Crºſſda.
The pope began to exerciſe his new rapines here in Eng-
land, by a compliance with the ſaid king Edward, in granting
him two years diſme from the clergy. Aft's Parergon.
w
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 272</div><p class="Text">D I S
To Dis” r"MPER. v a. [di, and member.] To divide member
from member; to dilacerate; to cut in pieces.
I am with both, each army hath a hand;
And in their rage, I having hold of both,
They whirl aſunder, and diſmember me. Shakeſp. King john.
O, that we then could come by Caeſar's ſpirit,
And not diſrember Caeſar! But, alas !
Cs far muſt bleed for it. Shakeſpeare's julius Cæſar.
A ſtate can never arrive to its period in a more deplorable
criſis, than when ſome prince lies hovering, like a vulture,
to devour, or diſmember its dying carcaſs. Swift.
Fow's obſcene diſmember'd his remains,
And dogs had torn him on the naked plains. Pope's Odyſſey:
Thoſe who contemplate only the fragments or pieces of
ſcience, diſperſed in ſhort unconnected diſcourſes, without rela-
tion to each other, can never ſurvey an entire body of truth,
but muſt always view it as deformed and diſmembered. Watts.
To DISMI'SS. v. a. [dimiſus, Latin.]
1. To ſend away.
t We commit thee thither, -
º Until his army be diſmiſs'd from him. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He diſmiſed the aſſembly. Aðs xix. 41.
2. To give leave of departure.
If our young Iulus be no more,
= Diſtiſ, our navy from your friendly ſhore. Dryd. Wirg. Æn,
4. To diſcard; to diveſt of an office.
º D18 M1'ssion. m. ſ [from demiffa, Latin.]
1. Diſpatch; ačt of ſending away.
So pois'd, ſo gently ſhe deſcends from high,
It ſeems a ſoft aiſmiſſion from the ſky. Dryd. Hind and Pant.
2. An honourable diſcharge from any office or place.
Not only thou degrad'ſt them, or remit'ſt
To life obſcure, which were a fair diſmiſſion;
But throw'ſt them lower than thou didſt exalt them high.
Milton’s Agoniſles, l, o&amp;7.
3. Deprivation; obligation to leave any poſt or place.
You muſt not ſtay here longer; your diſmiſſiºn
Is come from Caeſar. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
To Dis Mo‘RTGAGE. v. a. [dis and mortgage.] To redeem
from mortgage.
He diſmortgaged the crown demeſnes, made an increaſe of
munition, arms and treaſure, and left behind a maſs of
gold. Hºwel's Vocal Forry?,
To Dismo'UNT. v. a. [demonter, French.]
1. To throw off an horſe.
From this flying ſteed unrein'd, as once
Bellerophon, though from a lower clime,
Diſmounted, on th' Aleian field I fall. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
n 2. To throw from any elevation or place of honour.
| 3. To throw cannon from its carriage.
The Turks artillery, planted againſt that tower, was, by
the ſkilfulneſs of the Chriſtian cannoneers, in ſhort time diſ.
- mounted with ſhot from the tower, and many of the gunners
; ſlain. Knoles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
To Dismo'UNT. v. n.
1. To alight from an horſe.
When he came within ſight of that prodigious army at
Agincourt, he ordered all his cavalry to diſmount, and im-
plore upon their knees a bleſſing. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 49.
2. To deſcend from any elevation.
To DisNA'ſ URAL1s E. v. a. [dis and naturalſ...] To alienate;
to make alien ; to deprive of the privileges of birth.
Disn A'TURED. adj. [dis and nature.] Unnatural; wanting na-
tural tenderneſs; devoid of natural affection.
If the muſt teem,
Create her child of ſpleen, that it may live,
And be a thwart diſmatur'd torment to her. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Disobe'DIEN.cf. n.ſ. [dis and obedience.]
1, Violation of lawful commands or prohibition; breach of
duty due to ſuperiours.
Th' offence is holy that ſhe hath committed,
And this deceit loſes the name of craft,
Of diſobedience, or unduteous title. Shakespeare M. J/Z of Pºindſ.
Of man's firſt diſºbedience, and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree, ſing heav'nly muſe. Milton.
Murder, adultery, or diſºbedience to parents, have a general
notion antecedently to laws. Still ngfeet.
This is not diſobedience, but rebellion; 'tis diſclaiming the
ſovereignty of Chriſt, and renouncing all allegiance to his
authority. Rºgers, Sermon 4.
2. Incompliance.
If planetary orbs the ſun chev,
Why ſhould the moon diſown his ſovereign ſway;
Why in a whirling cddy of her own
Around the globe terreſtrial ſhould ſhe run ?
This diſºbedience of the moon will prove
The ſun's bright orb does not the planets move. Blackmore.
1) Isobr'DIENT. adj. [di, and obedient.] Not obſervant of law-
ful authority; guilty of the breach of lawful commands or
prohibition.
The man of God was diſºbedient unto the word of the
Lord. 1 Kingſ Xiii. 26.
Vo L. I.
To Disone'v. v.a. [di, and eley.] To break commands of
tranſgreſs prohibitions. -
§ º, bade him, and he durſt not knºw how to
diſºbey. Sidney, b. ii.
He's loth to dºey the god's command,
Nor willing to forſake this pleaſant land. P.
Disobligatios. n.ſ. [di, and ºbligation.] Offence; cauſe o
diſguſt. -
if he receded from what he had promiſed, it would be ſuch
a diſºbligation to the prince that he would never forget it. Clar.
There can be no malice, and conſequently no crime or */-
obligation. L'E/ºrange.
To DISOBLIGE. v. a. [di, and oblige.] To offend ; to diſ-
guſt; to give offence to. A term by which offence is ten-
derly expreſſed.
Aſhley had been removed from that charge, and was
thereby ſo much diſabliged that he quitted the king's party. Cla.
Thoſe, though in higheſt place, who flight and diſºblige
their friends, ſhall infallibly come to know the value of them,
by having none, when they ſhall moſt need them. South.
Is is in the power of more particular perſons in this king-
dom, than in any other, to diſtreſs the government, when
they are diſobliged. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 48.
My plan has given offence to ſome gentlemen, whom it would
not be very ſafe to diſºblige. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 108.
We love and eſteem our clergy, and are apt to lay ſome
weight upon their opinion, and would not willingly diſoblige
them. Swift concerning the Sacramental Teſt.
If a woman ſuffers her lover to ſee ſhe is loth to diſoblige
him, let her beware of an encroacher. Clariffa.
Disobii'GING. participial adj. [from diſoblige.] Diſguſting; un-
pleaſing; offenſive.
Peremptorineſs can befit no form of underſtanding: it ren-
ders wiſe men diſºbliging and troubleſome, and fools ridiculous
and contemptible. Government of the Tongue, ſ. 1 i.
Disobli'G INGLY. adv. [from diſºb/ging.] In a diſguſting or
offenſive manner; without attention to pleaſe.
Disor LI'GING NEss. n.ſ.. [from diſobliging. J Offenſiveneſs;
readineſs to diſguſt.
Diso'RBED, adj. [dis and orb.] Thrown out of the proper
orbit.
Fly like chidden Mercury from Jove,
Or like a ſtar diſorb’d. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
Diso'r DeR. n.ſ. ſalis and order; deſordre, French.)
1. Want of regular diſpoſition; irregularity; confuſion; im-
methodical diſtribution.
When I read an author of genius without method, I fancy
myſelf in a wood that abounds with many noble objećts,
riſing among one another in the greateſt confuſion and diſ-
order. Spečiator, N°. 476.
2. Tumult; diſturbance; buſtle.
A greater favour this diſºrder brought
Unto her ſervants, than your awful thought
Durſt entertain, when thus compell'd they preſt
The yielding marble of her ſnowy breaſt. Waller.
3. Neglect of rule ; irregularity.
From vulgar bounds with brave diſorder part,
And ſnatch a grace beyond the reach of art. Pope's Eſſays.
4. Breach of laws; violation of ſtanding inſtitution.
There reigned in all men blood, manſlaughter, diſquieting
of good men, forgetfulneſs of good turns, and diſorder in
marriages. Wiſd. xiv. 26.
5. Breach of that regularity in the animal ceconomy which
cauſes health; ſickneſs; diſtemper. It is uſed commonly for
a ſlight diſeaſe.
Pleaſure and pain are only different conſtitutions of the
mind, ſometimes occaſioned by diſorder in the body, or ſome-
times by thoughts in the mind. Locke.
6. Diſcompoſure of mind; turbulence of paſſions.
To Diso'RDER. v. a. [dis and order.]
1. To throw into confuſion; to confound; to put out of me-
thod; to diſturb; to ruffle ; to confuſe.
Eve
Not ſo repuls'd, with tears that ceas'd not flowing,
And treſſes all diſorder'd, at his feet
Fell humble. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. 1911.
Yon diſºrder'd heap of ruin lies,
Stones rent from ſtones, where clouds of duſt ariſe. Dryden.
The incurſions of the Goths, and other barbarous nations,
di ordered the affairs of the Roman empire. Arbuthnot on Coinſ.
2. To make ſick; to diſturb the body.
3. To diſcompoſe; to diſturb the mind. ... -
Disordered, adj. [from diſºrder.] Diſorderly; irregular ;
vicious; looſe; unreſtrained in behaviour; debauched.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and ſquires,
Men ſo diſorder'd, ſo debauch'd and bold,
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shews like a riotous inn. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Diso'RDERED N Ess. m. ſ. [from diſºrdered J. Irregularity; want
of order; confuſion.
By that diſorderedneſ of the ſoldiers, a great advantage was
offered unto the enemy. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Yºks.
7 D Diso's DERLY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 273</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
!
º
Diso'RDERLY. adj. [from diſorder.]
1. Confuſed ; immethodical; without proper diſtribution.
Thoſe obſolete laws of Henry I. were but diſorderly, con-
fuſed, and general things; rather caſes and ſhells of admi-
niſtration than inſtitutions. Hale.
2. Irregular ; tumultuous. -
His thoughts, which are the pićtures and reſults of paſ-
ſions, are generally ſuch as naturally ariſe from thoſe diſor-
derly motions of our ſpirits. Dryden.
A di orderly multitude, contending with the body of the
legiſlature, is like a man in a fit, under the conduct of one in
the fulneſs of his health and ſtrength. Addiſon.
3. Lawleſs; contrary to law; inordinate; contrary to the rules
of life; vicious.
They thought it the extremeſt of evils to put themſelves at
the mercy of thoſe hungry and diſorderly people. Bac. H. VII.
He reproved them for their diſorderly aſſemblies, againſt the
peaceable people of the realms. Bayward.
Diso'RDERLY. adv. [from diſorder.]
1. Without rule; without method; irregularly; confuſedly.
Naked ſavages fighting diſorderly with ſtones, by appoint-
ment of their commanders, may truly and abſolutely be ſaid
to War. Raleigh's Eſſays.
2. Without law; inordinately.
We behaved not ourſelves diſorderly among you. 2 Theſſ. iii.
Diso'RDINATE. adj. [dis and ordinate.] Not living by the
rules of virtue; inordinate.
Theſe not diſordinate, yet cauſeleſs ſuffer
The puniſhment of diſſolute days. Milton's Agoniſłes.
Diso'RDINATELY. adv. [from diſordinate. J Inordinately;
viciouſly.
Diso’s IENTATED. adj. [ dis and orient. J Turned from the
Eaſt; turned from the right direction; thrown out of the
proper place. Barris.
To Disown. v. a. [dis and own.]
1. To deny; not to allow.
Then they, who brother's better claim diſown,
Expel their parents, and uſurp the throne. Dryden's An:
2. To abrogate; to renounce.
When an author has publickly diſowned a ſpurious piece,
they have diſputed his name with him. Swift.
To DISPA'ND. v. a. [ diſpando, Latin. J. To diſplay; to
ſpread abroad. Dić7.
Dispa'Nsion. m. ſ. [from diſpanſas, Lat.] The act of diſplay-
ing; the aët of ſpreading; diffuſion; dilatation.
To DISPA(RAGE. v. a. [from diſpar, Latin.]
1. To match unequally; to injure by union with ſomething in-
feriour in excellence. - -
2. To injure by a compariſon with ſomething of leſs value.
3. To treat with contempt; to mock; to flout; to reproach.
Ahaz, his ſottiſh conqueror he drew,
God's altar to diſparage and diſplace,
For one of Syrian mode. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
Thou durſt not thus diſparage glorious arms,
Which greateſt hero's have in battle worn,
Their ornament and ſafety. 4/ilton's Agoniſłes, l. 1 130.
They will defy
That which they love moſt tenderly;
Quarrel with minc'd pies, and diſparage
Their beſt and deareſt friend, plum-porridge. Hudibras
4. To bring reproach upon; to be the cauſe of diſgrace.
How ſhall frail pen, with fear diſparaged,
Conceive ſuch ſovereign glory and great bountihed. Fai. ?u.
His religion ſat eaſily, naturally, and gracefully upon him,
without any of thoſe forbidding appearances which ſometimes
diſparage the actions of men ſincerely pious. Atterbury's Serm.
5. To marry any one to another of inferiour condition.
DISPA'RAGEMENT. m.ſ.. [from diſparage.]
1. Injurious union or compariſon with ſomething of inferior ex-
cellence.
They take it for a diſparagement to ſort themſelves with
any other than the enemies of the publick peace. L’Eſtrange.
2. [In law.] Matching an heir in marriage under his or her de-
gree, or againſt decency. Cowel.
You wrongfully do require Mopſa to ſo great a diſparage-
ment, as to wed her father's ſervant. Sidney.
She was much affectionate to her own kindred, even unto
faction, which did ſtir great envy in the lords of the king's
ſide, who counted her blood a diſparagement to be mingled
with the king's. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Reproach; diſgrace; indignity.
Gentle knight,
That doth againſt the dead his hand uprear,
His honour ſtains with rancour and deſpight,
And great diſparagement makes to his former might. Fa. Qu.
In a commonwealth much diſparagement is occaſioned,
when able ſpirits, attracted by a familiarity, are inflamed with
fačtion. //ottom.
'Tis no diſparagement to philoſophy, that it cannot deify
us. Glanv. Apol.
Reaſon is a weak, diminutive light, compared to revela-
tion; but it ought to be no diſparagement to a ſtar that it is not
a ſun, South's Sermons,
5
Rely upon your beauty: 'twere a diſparagement of that to
talk of conditions, when you are certain of making your own
terms. Southern's Innocent Adultery.
4. It has to before the perſon or thing diſparaged.
Then to our age, when not to pleaſure bent, -
This ſeems an honour, not diſfaragement. Denham.
The play was never intended for the ſtage; nor, without
diſparagement to the author, could have ſucceeded. Dryden.
Dispa'RAG ER. n.ſ.. [from diſparage J One that diſgraces;
one that treats with indignity.
DisPA R At Es. m. ſ. [diſparata, Latin.] Things ſo unlike that
they cannot be compared with each other.
DisPA'RITY.. n.ſ.. [from diſpor, Latin.]
1. Inequality; difference in degree either of rank or excellence.
Between Elihu and the reſt of Job's familiars, the greateſt
diſparity was but in years. Backer, b. v. ſ. 47.
Among unequals, what ſociety
Can ſort, what harmony or true delight?
Which muſt be mutual, in proportion due,
Giv'n and receiv'd ; but in diſparity,
The one intenſe, the other ſtill remiſs,
Cannot well ſuit with either, but ſoon prove
Tedious alike. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſº, b viii. 1. 386.
There was as great a diſparity between the practical dićtates
of the underſtanding then and now, as there is between em-
pire and advice, counſel and command. South's Sºrmons.
Men ought not to aſſociate and join themſelves together in
the ſame office, under a di parity of condition or profeſsion.
Ayliffe's Parergon.
Some members muſt preſide and dire&amp;t, and others ſerve
and obey; and a diſparity between theſe, in the outward con-
dition, is neceſſary to keep ſeveral orders in mutual depen-
dance on each other. Rogers'; Sermons.
2. Diffimilitude; unlikeneſs.
To DisPA'RK. v. a. [dis and park.]
1. To throw open a park.
You have fed upon my ſigniories,
Diſpark'd my parks, and fell'd my foreſt woods. Shakesepare. R. II.
2. To ſet at large without encloſure.
They were ſuppos'd
By narrow wits to be inclos'd,
*Till his free muſe threw down the pale,
And did at once diſpark them all. J/aller.
To DisPA'Rt. v. a. [dis and part; de-artir, French; diſportior,
Latin.] To divide in two; to ſeparate; to break; to burſt;
to rive.
The gate nor wood, nor of enduring braſs,
But of more worthy ſubſtance framed was;
Doubly diſparted, it did lock and cloſe,
That when it locked, none might through it paſs. Fai. Qu.
On either ſide -
Diſparted chaos overbuilt exclaim’d,
And with rebounding ſurge the bars aſſail'd,
That ſcorn'd his indignation. Milton's Paradiº Loft, b. ix.
The reſt to ſeveral places
Diffarted, and between ſpun out the air. Milt. Par. Lºft.
19:/parted Britain mourn'd their doubtful ſway,
And dreaded both, when neither would obey. Prior.
The pilgrim oft,
At dead of night, 'mid his oriſon, hears
Aghaſt, the voice of time diſparting tow’rs. Dier.
DISPA'ssion. n.ſ. [...is and paſſion.] Freedom from mental per-
turbation; exemption from paſſion.
What is called by the Stoicks apathy, or diſaſſion, is called
by the Scepticks indiſturbance, by the Moleniſts quietiſm,
by common men peace of conſcience. Temple.
DisPA'ssion ATE. adj. [from dis and paſſionate.] Cool; calm;
impartial ; moderate; temperate.
Wiſe and diſta/ionate men thought he had been proceeded
with very juſtly. Clarendºn.
To DisPE'L. v. a. [diffello, Latin.] To drive by ſcattering;
to diſſipate. -
- If the night
Have gathered aught of evil, or conceal’d,
Diſperſe it, as now light diſpels the dark. Milton.
When the ſpirit brings light into our minds, it diſpels dark-
neſs: we ſee it, as we do that of the ſun at noon, and need
not the twilight of reaſon to ſhew it. Locke.
Dispe’s ce. n.ſ. [diffence, Fr.] Expence; coſt; charge.
It was a vault ybuilt for great diſpence,
With many ranges rear'd along the wall,
And one great chimney, whoſe long funnel thence
The ſmoke forth threw. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant, 9.
To DISPEND. v. a. [diſpendo, Latin.] To ſpend; to con-
ſume ; to expend.
Of their commodities they were now ſcarce able to diſ-end
the third part. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Dispe’NSARY. m. ſ. [from diſpenſ...] The place where medi-
cines are diſpenſed.
To thee the lov’d diſpens’ry I reſign. Garth.
DisPENSATION. m. ſ. [from diſpenſatio, Latin.]
1. Diſtribution; the act of dealing out any thing.
This perpetual circulation is conſtantly promoted, by a diſt
penſation
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 274</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S -
penſation of water promiſcuouſly and indifferently to all parts
of the earth. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. The dealing of God with his creatures; method of provi-
dence; diſtribution of good and evil. -
God delights in the miniſtries of his own choice, and the
methods of grace, in the oeconomy of heaven, and the diſ-
penſations of eternal happineſs. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
Neither are God's methods or intentions different in his
*::::: to each private man. Rogers, Sermon 16.
o thou, my ſoul, the deſtin'd period wait,
When God ſhall ſolve the dark decrees of fate;
His now unequal diſpenſations clear,
And make all wiſe and beautiful appear. Tickell.
3. An exemption from ſome law; a permiſſion to do ſomething
forbidden; an allowance to omit ſomething commanded.
A diſpenſation was obtained to enable Dr. Barrow to
marry. - Ward.
Disp FNs A'roR. m. ſ. [Latin.] One employed in dealing out
any thing; a diſtributer.
As her majeſty hath made them diſpenſators of her favour
towards her people, ſo it behoveth them to ſhew themſelves
equal diſtributers of the ſame. Bacon.
DIs PENSA toRY. m. ſ. [from diſpenſe J A book in which the
compoſition of medicines is deſcribed and directed; in the
Greek a Pharmacºpeia.
The deſcription of the ointment is found in the chymical
diſpenſatory. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 98.
A whole diſpenſatory was little enough to meet with, and
ſuffice to all their wants. Hammond.
Our materia medica is large enough; and to look into our
diſpenſatories, one would think no diſeaſe incurable. Baker.
To DISPENSE. v. a. [deſpenſer, French J
1. To deal out; to diſtribute.
Thoſe now, that were diſpen'd,
The burden of many ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge Milton's Paradiſe #
Thoſe to whom Chriſt has committed the diſpenſing of his
goſpel. Decay of Piety.
At length the muſes ſtand reſtor'd again
While you diſpenſe the laws and guide the ſtate, Dryden.
To them but earth-born life they did diſpenſe,
To us, for mutual aid, celeſtial ſenſe. Tate's juvenal.
2. To make up a medicine.
3. To DisPENSE with. To excuſe; to grant diſpenſation for;
to allow. -
To ſave a brother's life,
Nature diſpenſes with the deed. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
How few kingdoms are there, wherein, by diſpenſing with
oaths, abſolving ſubjects from allegiance, and curſing, or
threatning to curſe, as long as their curſes were regarded, the
popes have not wrought innumerable miſchiefs Raleigh's Eſ.
Rules of words may be diſpenſed with. Watts's Logick:
4. To DisPENSE with. To clear from ; to ſet free from an
obligation. This conſtrućtion ſeems ungrammatical.
I could not diſpenſe with myſelf from making a voyage to
Caprea. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
5. To Dispense with. To obtain a diſpenſation from ; to come
to agreement with. This ſtructure is irregular, unleſs it be
here ſuppoſed to mean, as it may, to diſcount; to pay an
equivalent.
Haſt thou not ſworn allegiance unto me? . .
Canſt thou diſpenſe with heav'n for ſuch an oath Shakespeare H.VI.
DISPE'NSE. n. ſ. [from the verb.] Diſpenſation; exemption.
Then reliques, beads,
Indulgences, diſenſes, pardons, bulls,
The ſport of winds. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. iii.
Dispe'N's ER. m. ſ. [from diſpenſe..] One that diſpenſes; one
that deals out any thing; a diſtributer.
The miniſters of that houſhold are the diSpensers of that
faith. Spratt's Sermons.
Thoſe who ſtand before earthly princes, who are the diſ-
penſers of their favours, and conveyers of their will to others,
challenge high honours. Atterbury's Sermons.
To DisPE’o PLE. v. a. [dis and people.] To depopulate; to
empty of people.
The Iriſh whom they baniſhed into the mountains, where
they lived only upon white meats, ſeeing their lands ſo diſ-
peopled and weakened, came down into all the plains ad-
joining. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Conflagrations, and great droughts, do not merely diſpeºple,
but deſtroy. Bacon, Eſſay 59.
His heart exalts him in the harm
Already done, to have diſpeopled heav'n. Milton's Par, Loft.
ings, furious and ſevere,
Who claim'd the ſkies, diffeopled air and floods,
The lonely lords of empty wilds and woods. Pope.
Disp E'ople R. n. / [from diſprople..] A depopulator; a waſter.
Nor drain I ponds, the golden carp to take;
Nor trowle for pikes, diſpeoplers of the lake. G
- ay.
To DisPE’RGE., v. a. [diſpergo, Latih.] To ſprinkle; to
ſcatter. Shakeſpeare.
To DISPERSE. v. a. [diſperſus, Latin.]
1. To ſcatter; to drive to different parts.
And I ſcattered them among the heathen,
diſperſed through the countries.
2. To diſſipate.
Soldiers, diſperſe yourſelves.
- If the night 3.
Have gather'd aught of evil, or conceal’d, l
Diſperſe it, as now light diſpels the dark. .. Mi tº:
DisPE'R's Edly, adv. [from diſperſed.] In a diſperſed manner;
ſeparately. -
The exquiſite wits of ſome few, peradventure, are able,
diſperſedly here and there, to find now a word, and then a ſen-
tence, which may be more probably ſuſpected than eaſily
cleared of errour. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 23.
Thoſe minerals are either found in grains, diſperſedly inter;
mixed with the corpuſcles of earth or ſand, or elſe amalled
into balls or nodules. - Woodward.
DISPE'Rs EDNEss. m. ſ. [from differſ...] The ſtate of being
diſperſed; diſperſion,
Dispe/RseNess, n.ſ.. [from diſperſ...] Thinneſs; ſcatteredneſs,
The torrid parts of Africk are by Piſo reſembled to a lib-
bard's ſkin, the diſtance of whoſe ſpots repreſent the diſperſe-
neſ of habitations or towns in Africk. Brerewood on Languageſ.
DISPE'R's ER. n.ſ.. [from differſe.] A ſcatterer; a ſpreader.
Thoſe who are pleaſed with defamatory libels, ſo far
as to approve the authors and diſperſers of them, are as
guilty as if they had compoſed them. Speciator, Nº. 451.
DisPE(Rsion. n.ſ.. [from diſperſio, Latin.]
1. The act of ſcattering or ſpreading.
2. The ſtate of being ſcattered.
Noah began from thence his diſperſon. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
After ſo many diſperſons, and ſo many diviſions, two or
three of us may yet be gathered together, not to plot, but to
divert ourſelves, and the world too, if it pleaſes. Pope.
To DisP1(RIT. v. a. [dis and ſpirit.]
1. To diſcourage; to dejećt; to depreſs; to damp; to terrify ;
to intimidate; to fright; to ſtrike with fear.
Certain it is, that the poor man appeared ſo diſpirited, that
he ſpoke but few words after he came upon the ſcaffold. Clar.
The providence of God ſtrikes not in with them, but
daſhes, and even diffirits, all their endeavours, and makes
their deſigns heartleſs and ineffectual. South's Sermons.
Steady to my principles, and not diſpirited with my afflic-
tions, I have overcome all difficulties. Dryden's Aºn. Dedicat.
Amidſt all the honours that are paid him, he feels nothing
in himſelf, but a poor, weak, diſpirited mortal, yielding to
the laws of corruption. Rogers, Sermon 5.
2. To exhauſt the ſpirits; to oppreſs the conſtitution of the body.
He has diſpirited himſelf by a debauch, and drank away his
and they were
Ezek. xxxvi. 19.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
good humour. Collier.
Dispi'Rite DNess. n.ſ.. [from diſpirit. J Want of vigour;
want of vivacity. Dić7.
To DISPLA’c E. v. a. [dis and place.]
1. To put out of place; to place in another ſituation.
2. To put out of any ſtate, condition, office, truſt, or dignity.
To diſplace any who are in, upon diſpleaſure, is by all means
to be avoided, unleſs there be a manifeſt cauſe for it. Bacon.
Abdal, who commands
The city, is the prince's friend, and therefore
Muſt be diſplac'd, and thou ſhalt ſtrait ſucceed him. Denh.
A religion eſtabliſhed by God himſelf, ſhould not be diſ-
placed by any thing, under a demonſtration of that divine
power that firſt introduced it. South's Sermons.
One then may be diſplac'd, and one may reign;
And want of merit render birthright vain. Dryd. Aurengz.
2. To diſorder.
You have diſplac'd the mirth, broke the good meeting,
With moſt admir’d diſorder. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
DISPLA/CENCY. m. ſ [diſplicentia, Latin.]
1. Incivility; diſobligation.
2. Diſguſt; any thing unpleaſing.
, The diff/acencies that he receives, by the conſequences of
his exceſs, far outweigh all that is grateful in it. Dec. of Piety.
To DISPLA'N T. v. a. [dis and plant.]
1. To remove a plant. -
2. To drive a people from the place in which they have fixed
their reſidence.
All thoſe countries, which, lying near unto any mountains,
or Iriſh deſarts, had been planted with Engliſh, were ſhortly
diſplanted and loſt. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Plantations are amongſt ancient, primitive, and heroical
works: when the world was young, it begat more children;
for I may juſtly account new plantations to be the children of
former kingdoms: I like a plantation in a pure ſoil; that is,
where people are not diſplanted. Bacon's Eſſays.
IDIsPLANTA". Ion. n ſ, from dis and plantatiº.]
1. The removal of a plant.
2. The ejection of a people.
The Edenites were garriſoned to reſiſt the Aſſyrians,
whoſe diſplantation Senacherib vaunted of. Raleigh,
To DISPLAY. v. a. ſ.l.ier, dºglyer, French.]
1. To ſpread wide
- The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 275</div><p class="Text">I) I S
D I S
The northern wind his wings did bºº!
At his command, and reared him "P light. Fairy Queen.
Say, how this inſtrument of love began ; G
And iſ immortal ſtrains diſplay the fan. ay.
- hibit to the fight or mind.
2. To º º ...i. yourſelf, who ever yet
d to charity, and diſplay'd th’ effects
#. . tion gentle. Shaftar, s Henry VIII.
Tº heav'n's alternate beauty can't diſplay,
The ſºft of morning, and the milky way. . . Pryden.
The works of nature, and the words of revelation, diſplay
truth to mankind in characters ſo viſible, that thoſe, who
are not quite blind, may read. - - Locke.
The ſtorm the dark Lycaean groves diſplay'd, -
And firſt to light expos'd the ſacred ſhade. Pope's Statius.
3. To carve; to cut up.
He carves, diſplays, and cuts up to a wonder.
4. To talk without reſtraint.
The other meſſenger,
Whoſe welcome I perceiv'd had poiſon'd mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Diſplay’d ſo ſaucily againſt your highneſs. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
5. To ſet oſtentatiouſly to view. -
They are all couched in a pit, hard by Herne's oak, with
obſcured lights; which, at the very inſtant of Falſtaff's and
our meeting, they will at once diſplay to the night. Shakeſp.
Displa'Y. n.ſ. [from the verb.] An exhibition of any thing
to view.
Our enobled underſtandings take the wings of the morning
to viſit the world above us, and have a glorious diſplay of the
higheſt form of created excellencies. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 2.
We can with the greateſt coldneſs behold the ſtupendous
diſplays of omnipotence, and be in tranſports at the puny
eſſays of human ſkill. Speciator, Nº. 626.
Disple'AsANce. n.ſ.. [from diſpleaſe..] Anger; diſcontent:
Obſolete.
Cordell ſaid, ſhe lov’d him as behov’d;
w Whoſe ſimple anſwer wanting colours fair
To paint it forth, him to diſpleaſance mov’d. Fairy Queen.
Displea's ANT. adj. [from diſpleaſe..] Unpleaſing; offenſive;
unpleaſant.
What to one is a moſt grateful odour, to another is noxious
and diſpleaſant; and it were a miſery to ſome to lie ſtretched
on a bed of roſes. Glanv. Scepſ c. 15.
To Disple'ase. v. a. ſai; and pleaſe J
1. To offend; to make angry.
God was diſpleaſed with this thing. 1 Chron. xxi. 7:
Your extreme fondneſs was perhaps as diſpleaſing to Gód
before, as now your extreme affiétion. Temple.
2. To diſguſt; to raiſe averſion.
Foul fights do rather diſpleaſe, in that they excite the
memory of foul things, than in the immediate objects; and
therefore, in pićtures, thoſe foul fights do not much offend.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 275.
Sweet and ſinking commonly ſerve our turn for theſe ideas,
which, in effect, is little more than to call them pleaſing or
diſpleaſing; though the ſmell of a roſe and violet, both ſweet,
are certainly very diſtinét ideas. Locke.
Dispie'asingNess. n.f. [from diſpleaſing. J Offenſiveneſs;
quality of offending.
It is a miſtake to think that men cannot change the diſt
pºſingneſ, or indifferency, that is in actions, into pleaſure and
deſire, if they will do but what is in their power. Locke.
Displeasure. m. ſ. [from diſpleaſe.]
1. Uneaſineſs; pain received.
When good is propoſed, its abſence carries diſpleaſure or
pain with it. Lºcke.
2. Offence; pain given.
Now ſhall I be more blameleſs than the Philiſtines, though
I do them a diſpleaſure. judg. xv. 3.
3. Anger; indignation.
T * “Pentance may be wrought in the hearts of ſuch as
fear God, and yet incur his diſpleaſure, the deſerved effect
whereof is eternal death. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
He ſhould beware that, by the fame of ſuch a fact, he did
not Prºvºke Solyman's heavy diſpleaſure againſt him. Knolles.
Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn
From his diſpleaſure. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. l. 109.
...] hough the reciprocalneſs of the injury ought to allay the
** at it, yet men ſo much mºre coni, whº they
ſuffer than what they do. Decay of Piety.
On me alone thy juſt diſfleaſire lay;
But take thy judgments from this mourning land. Dryden.
v. have ſhewn how much you my content deſign;
. would heaven's diſpleaſure paſs like mind. Dryden.
mº . ** itſelf ſo pernicious to communities of learned
º * ... of their prince, which thoſe may juſtly
º: * who would make uſe of his favour to his ow:
Judice. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 33.
4. State of diſtrar - - -
*** *ate in which one does obtain diſcoli.
tenance; disfavour. S Obta COil Il
Spectator.
2.
He went into Poland, being in diſpleaſire with the pope
for overmuch familiarity. Peacham on Muſick.
To Disple'asure. v. a. [from the noun..] To diſpleaſe; not
to gain favour; not to win affection. A word not elegant,
nor now in uſe.
When the way of pleaſuring or diſpleaſuring lieth by the
favourite, it is impoſſible any other ſhould be overgreat. Bacºn.
To DISPLODE. v. a. [diſplodo, Latin.] To diſperſe with
a loud noiſe; to vent with violence.
In view
Stood rank'd of ſeraphim another row,
In poſture to diſplode their ſecond fire
Of thunder. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi. l. 605.
Displo'sion. n.ſ.. [from diſploſus, Lat.] The act of diſplod-
ing; a ſudden burſt 9&amp;diſperſion with noiſe and violence.
Dispo'RT. n.ſ. [dis and ſport.] Play; ſport; paſtime; diver-
ſion; amuſement; merriment.
She liſt not hear, but her diſports purſu'd;
And ever bade him ſtay, 'till time the tide renew’d. Fai. Qu.
His diſports were ingenuous and manlike, whereby he always
learned ſomewhat. Hayward on Édward VI.
She buſied, heard the ſound
Of ruſling leaves; but minded not, as us'd
To ſuch diſport before her through the field. M.H. P. Lºft.
To Dispo'Rt. v. a. [from the noun..] To divert.
He often, but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to diſsort himſelf. Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
To Dispo'Rt. v. n. To play; to toy; to wanton.
Freſh gales and gentle airs
Whiſper'd it to the woods, and from their wings
Flung roſe, flung odours from the ſpicy ſhrub
Płº, ſ Aſilºn's Para iſ lºft, H. viii. 1. 518.
ooſe to the winds their airy garments fiew;
The glitt'ring textures of the filmy dew,
Dipt in the richeſt tinéture of the ſkies,
Where light difforts in ever mingling dyes.
Dispe's Al. n.ſ. [from diſpoſe.]
1. The aët of diſpoſing or regulating any thing; regulation;
diſpenſation; diſtribution.
Tax not divine diſpoſal; wiſeſt men
Have err'd, and by bad women been deluded. Mih. Agon:
2. The power of diſtribution; the right of beſtowing.
I am called off from publick diſſertations by a domeſtick
affair of great importance, which is no leſs than the diſpoſal
of my ſiſter Jenny for life. Tatler, Nº. 75.
Are not the bleſfings both of this world and the next in his
diſpoſal? Atterbury's Sermons.
3. Government; management; condućt.
We ſhall get more true and clear knowledge by one rule,
than by taking up principles, and thereby putting our minds
into the diſpoſals of others. Locke.
To DISPO'SE. v. a. [diſpoſer, French; diſpono, Latin.]
1. To employ to various purpoſes; to diffuſe.
Thus whilſt ſhe did her various pow'r diſpoſº,
The world was free from tyrants, wars, and woes. Priºr.
2. To give ; to place; to beſtow.
Yet ſee, when noble benefits ſhall prove
Not well diſpos'd, the mind grown once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
Than ever they were fair. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Of what you gathered, as moſt your own, you have diſ-
pºſed much in works of publick piety. Spratt's Sermons.
3. To turn to any particular end or conſequence.
Endure, and conquer; Jove will ſoon diſpoſe,
To future good, our paſt and preſent woes. Dryden's Wirgil.
4. To adapt; to form for any purpoſe.
Theſe, when the knights beheld, they'gan diſpoſe
Themſelves to court, and each a damſel choſe. Fai. Queen.
But if thee liſt unto the court to throng,
And there to haunt after the hoped prey,
Then muſt thou thee diffuſe another way. Hulberd's Tale.
5. To frame the mind; to give a proper propenſion; to incline.
Suſpicions diſpoſe kings to tyranny, huſbands to jealouſy,
and wife men to irreſolution and melancholy. Bacon's Eſſays.
The memory of what they had ſuffered, by being without
it, eaſily diſ oſed them to do this, Clarendan, b. viii.
He knew the ſeat of Paradiſe,
And, as he was diffe'd, could prove it. -
Below the moon, or elſe above it. Hudibras, p. i. cant. i.
This diſpſ's men to believe what it teaches, to follow what
it adviſes. Temple,
A man might do this now, if he were maliciouſly diſpoſed,
and had a mind to bring matters to extremity. Dryd. Spa. Fry.
This may dipoſe me, perhaps, for the reception of truth;
but helps me not to it. Locke.
Although the frequency of prayer and faſting may be of Ilo
efficacy to diſpoſe God to be more gracious, yet it is of great
uſe to diſpoſe us to be more objećts of his grace. ... Sharidge.
If mere moraliſts find themſelves diſpoſed to pride, luſt, in-
temperance, or avarice, they do not think their morality con-
cerned to check them. Swift.
6. To regulate; to adjuſt.
Pope.
Wak’d
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 276</div><p class="Text">D I S
Wak'd by the cries, th’ Athenian chief aroſe,
The knightly forms of combat to diſjoſ. Dryden's Fables.
7. To Dispose of To apply to any purpoſe; to transfer to
any other perſon or uſe. -
All men are naturally in a ſtate of perfeót freedom to order
their actions, and d'ſ oſe of their poſſeſſions and perſons as
they think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature. Locke.
Diſpºſe ºf the meat with the butler, or any other crony. Sw.
8. To Dispose ºf. To put into the hands of another.
As ſhe is mine, I may diſpoſe of her;
Which ſhall be either to this gentleman,
Or to her death. Shakeſpeare's Midſummer Night's Dream.
I have diſ oſed of her to a man of buſineſs, who will lether
ſee, that to be well dreſſed in good humour, and chearful in
her family, are the arts and ſciences of female life. Tatler.
9. To Dispose ºf To give away.
A rural judge diſpos'd of beauty's prize. J/aller.
10. To Dispose of. To employ to any end.
The lot is caſt unto the lap; but the whole diff oſing thereof
is of the Lord. Prov. xvi. 33.
They muſt receive inſtructions how to diſpoſe of themſelves
when they come, which muſt be in the nature of laws
unto them. Bacºn's Advice to Williers.
11. To Dispose of. To place in any condition.
For the remaining doubt,
What to reſolve, and how diſpºſe ºf me,
- Be warn'd to caſt that uſeleſs care aſide. Dryden's Fables.
12. To Dispose of. To put away by any means.
They require more water than can be found, and more
than can be diſpºſed of, if it was found. Burnet's Th. of Earth.
To Dispose. ... n. To bargain; to make terms. Obſolete.
When ſhe ſaw you did ſuſpect -
She had diſpos'd with Ceſar, and that your rage
Would not be purg’d, ſhe ſent word ſhe was dead. Shakeſp.
Dispo's E. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Power; management; diſpoſal.
All that is mine I leave at thy diſpoſe;
My goods, my lands, my reputation. Shakespeare.
It ſhall be my taſk
To render thee the Parthian at diſpoſ. Milton's Parad. Reg.
Of all your goodneſs leaves to our diſſoſ,
Our liberty's the only gift we chuſe. Dryden's Indian Emp.
2. Diſtribution; act of government.
All is beſt, though oft we doubt
What th' unſearchable diſpoſe
Of higheſt wiſdom brings about,
And ever beſt found in the cloſe.
3. Diſpoſition; caſt of behaviour. Obſolete.
He hath a perſon, and a ſmooth diſpoſe,
To be ſuſpećted; fram'd to make women falſe. Shakespeare Othello.
4. Diſpoſition; caſt of mind; inclination. Obſolete.
He carries on the ſtream of his diſpºſe
Without obſervance or reſpect of any,
In will peculiar. Shakeſp. Troil. and Creſd.
Milton's Agoniſłes.
Dispo's ER. n.ſ. [from diſoſ.)
1. Diſtributer ; giver; beſtower.
The magiſtrate is both the beggar and the diff oſer of what
is got by begging Graunt's Bill of AMortality.
2. Governor; regulator; direétor.
I think myſelf obliged, whatever my private apprehenſions
may be of the ſucceſs, to do my duty, and leave events to
their diff o'er. Boy'e.
All the reaſon of mankind cannot ſuggeſt any ſolid ground
of ſatisfaction, but in making that God our friend, who is the
abſolute diſpºſºr of all things. South's Sermons.
Would I had been diſpoſºr of thy ſtars,
Thou ſhouldſt have had thy wiſh, and died in wars. Dryd.
3. One who gives to whom he pleaſes.
But brandiſh'd high, in an ill omen’d hour,
To thee, proud Gaul, behold thy juſteſt fear,
The Inaſier ſword, diſpoſer of thy pow'r, Prior.
Pispo's TION. m. ſ. [from diſpoſitio, Latin.]
1. Order ; method; diſtribution.
Touching muſical harmony, whether by inſtrument or
voice, it being of high and low, in due proportionable diſ-
pºſition, ſuch notwithſtanding is the force thereof, and ſo very
pleaſing effects it hath, in that very part of man, which is
moſt divine, that ſome have been thereby induced to think,
that the ſoul itſelf by nature is, or hath in it harmony. Hooker.
Under this head of invention is placed the diſpoſition of the
work, to put all things in a beautiful order and harmony, that
the whole may be of a piece. Dryden's Dufreſnoy, Preface.
I aſk whether the connection of the extremes be not more
clearly ſeen, in this ſimple and natural diſpoſition, than in the
perplexed repetitions and jumble of five or ſix ſyllogiſms. Locke.
2. Natural fitneſs; quality.
Refangibility of the rays of light is their diſpºſition to
be refracted, or turned out of their way, in paſſing out of one
tranſparent body or medium into another. Newton's Opt.
3. Tendency to any act or ſtate. -
This argueth a great diff oſition to putrefaction in the ſoil
and air. . Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, N°. 69.
Vol. I.
Bleeding is to be uſed or omitted according.” the ſymp-
toms which affect the brain : it relieves in any inflammatory
diſpoſition of the coat of the nerve. Arbuthnot on Diet.
4. Temper of mind. -
I have fiftºn more for their ſakes, more than the Yi*
nous inconſtancy of man's diſp/ition is able to bear. Shakeſp.
- Leſſer had been
The thwartings of your diſoſition, if • * -
You had not ſhew'd them how you were diſpos d; * 1
'Ere they lack'd power to croſs you, Shakeſp. Cºriº”
5. Aftection of kindneſs or ill-will. -
I take myſelf to be as well informed as moſt men in the
diſpºſitions of each people towards the other. Swift.
6. Predominant inclination. -
As they pinch one another by the diſpoſition, he cries out,
no more. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleºpatra.
Diffoſition is when the power and ability of doing any
thing is forward, and ready upon every occaſion to break into
aćtion. Locée.
The love we bear to our friends is generally cauſed by our
finding the ſame diſpºſition in them which we feel in our-
ſelves. Pope.
Dispo'sitive. adj. [from diſpºſe.] That which implies dif-
poſal of any property; decretive.
The words of all judicial ačts are written narratively, un-
leſs it be in ſentences wherein diff oſitive and enaëting terms
are made uſe of. - Ayliffe's Parergon.
Dispo'sitively. adº. [from diſpºſitive.]
1. In a diſpoſitive manner.
2. Reſpecting individuals ; diſtributively.
That axiom in philoſophy, that the generation of one thing
is the corruption of another, although it be ſubſtantially true,
concerning the form and matter, is alſo diſpºſitively verified
in the efficient or producer. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iii.
Dispo's ItoR. m. ſ. [from diſpoſº..] The lord of that ſign
in which the planet is, and by which therefore it is over-ruled.
To Disposse'ss. v. a. [dis and poſſ.]
1. To put out of poſſeſſion; to deprive; to diſſeize.
The blow from ſaddle forced him to fly;
Elſe might it needs down to his manly breaſt
Have cleft his head in twain, and life thence d.ſºſſ?. F. Q.
Thou ſhalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras, ere I will allow
of thy wits; and fear to kill a woodcock, leſt thou diff aſſeſ;
the ſoul of thy grandame. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Let us ſit upon the ground, and tell
How ſome have been depos'd, ſome ſlain in war,
Some haunted by the ghoſts they diſpºſºft'd. Shakeſp. R. II.
I will chuſe
Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world, -
And diſpoſeſ; her all. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
In thee I hope; thy ſuccours I invoke,
To win the crown whence I am diſpoſeſ'd;
For like renown awaiteth on the ſtroke,
To caſt the haughty down, or raiſe th' oppreſs'd, Fairfax,
The children went to Gilead, and took it, and dſ offſed
the Amorite which was in it. Numb. xxxii. 39.
By their aid
This inacceſſible high ſtrength, the ſeat
Of deity ſupreme, us diſpoſſeſs'd,
He truſted to have ſeiz'd. Milton’s Paradiſe Lºft, b. vii.
Reſtleſs Amata lay,
Fir’d with diſdain for Turnus diſpoſeſt,
And the new nuptials of the Trojan gueſt. Dryden's 4ºn.
2. It is generally uſed with of before the thing taken away.
Charles reſolved, with a puiſſant army, to paſs over, and
by arms to diſpoſeſ; the pyrate of his new gotten kingdom
in Tunis. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
No pow'r ſhall diſpoſſeſ;
My thoughts of that expected happineſs. Denham.
O, faireſt of all creatures, laſt and beſt
Of what heav'n made, how art thou diſpoſeſ'd
Of all thy native glories' Dryden's State of Innocence.
Nothing can create more trouble to a man than to endea-
vour to diſpoſeſ him of this conceit. Tillotſon, Serm. ii.
3. Formerly with from. -
They arrogate dominion undeſerv'd
Over their brethren, and quite diſaſſeſ; -
Concord and law of nature from the earth. Milt, Par. Left.
It will be found a work of no ſmall difficulty to diſpºſſeſ;
and throw out a vice from that heart, where long poſieſſion
begins to plead preſcription. South's Sermons,
Dispo's URE. n.ſ.. [from diſ ºft.]
1. Diſpoſal; government; power; management.
In his diſpoſure is the orb of earth, -
The throne of kings, and all of human birth. Sandyſ.
They quietly ſurrendered both it and themſelves to his diſ-
Oſºre. - Sandy's journey.
Whilſt they murmur againſt the preſent diſºſure of things,
they do tacitly deſire in them a difformity from the primitive
rulé, and the idea of that mind that formed all things beſt.
Brºwn's Wugar Errours, b. i. c. 11.
7 E 2. State ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 277</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
2. State; poſture.
They remained in a kind of warlike diſpoſure, or perhaps
little better. J/otton.
‘Dispr A'ise. n.ſ. [ dis and praiſ...] Blame; cenſure; diſ-
honour. -
If I can do it,
By aught that I can ſpeak in his diſtraiſe,
She ſhall not long continue love to him. Shakeſpeare.
To me reproach
Rather belongs, diſtruſt, and all diſpraiſ. Mit. Par. Loft.
Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail
Or knock the breaſts; no weakneſs, no contempt,
Diſpraiſe or blame. Milton's Agoniſies, l, 1723.
I need not raiſe
Trophies to thee from other mens diſpraiſ. Denham.
Looks fright not men: the general has ſeen Moors
With as bad faces; no diſpraiſe to Bertran's. Dryd. Sp. Fry.
If any writer ſhall do this paper ſo much honour as to in-
ſcribe the title of it to others, the whole praiſe or diſpraiſe of
ſuch a performance will belong to ſome other author. Addiſon.
My faults will not be hid, and it is no diſpraiſe to me that
they will not: the cleanneſs of one's mind is never better
proved than in diſcovering its own faults. Pope.
To DisPRA's E. v. a. [from the noun..] To blame; to cén-
ſure; to condemn.
In praiſing Anthony, I have diffrai;’d Caeſar. Shakespeare
No abuſe, Ned, in the world; honeſt Ned, none: I diſ-
praiſed him before the wicked, that the wicked might not fall
in love with him; in which doing, I have done the part of a
careful friend. Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
The criticks, while they like my wares, may diffraiſ my
writing. Spectator, Nº. 288.
DisPRA is R. m. ſ. [from diſ raiſ...] A cenſurer; one who
blames. Dićf.
DISPRA isible. adj. [from diſpraiſ...] Unworthy of commen-
dation. Dic?.
DisPRA'IsiNgly. adv. [from diſºra'ſ...] With blame; with
cenſure.
Michael Caſſio !
That came a wooing with you; many a time,
When I have ſpoke of you diſpraiſingly,
Hath ta'en your part. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
To DisPRE'A p. v. o. [dis and ſhread] To ſpread different
ways. In this word, and a few others, dis has the ſame force
as in Latin compoſition, and means, different ways; in dif-
ferent direétions.
As morning ſun her beams diſpreaden clear,
And in her face fair truth and mercy doth appear. Fa. Qº.
Over him, art ſtriving to compare
With nature, did an arbour green diſread,
Framed of wanton ivy, flowing fair,
Through which the fragrant egantine did ſpread
His pricking arms, entrail'd with roſes red. Fairy Queen.
Above, below, around, with art diſpread,
The ſure incloſure folds the genial bed. Pope's Odyſ,.
DisPro'FIT. m. ſ. [dis and profit..] Loſs; damage; detri-
ment. Dić7.
DisPRo'of. n.ſ. [dis and prof..] Confutation; convićtion of
errour or falſhood.
His remark contains the grounds of his doćtrine, and
offers at ſomewhat towards the diſproof of mine. Atterbury.
Inced not offer any thing farther in ſupport of one, or in
diſproof of the other. Rogers, Serm. 14.
To DispRo'PERTY. v. a. [dis and property.] To diſpoſſeſs of
any property. Dić?.
Dispropo'RTION. m. ſ. [dis and proportion.] Unſuitableneſs in
quantity of one thing, or one part of the ſame thing, to ano-
ther; want of ſymmetry.
Not to affect many propoſed matches
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we ſee in all things nature tends:
Foh one may ſmell, in ſuch, a will moſt rank,
Foul diſproportion; thoughts unnatural. Shakeſ; eart's Othello.
Reaſoning, I oft admire
How nature, wife and frugal, could commit
Such diſproportions; with ſuperfluous hand
So many nobler bodies to create,
Greater, ſo many fold to this one uſe. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Perhaps from greatneſs, ſtate, and pride,
Thus ſurpriſed, ſhe may fall:
Sleep does diſproportion hide,
And, death icſembling, equals all. J/aller.
For their ſtrength,
The diſproportion is ſo great, we cannot but
Expect a fital conſequence. Denham's Sophy.
What, did the liquid to th’ aſſembly call,
To give their aid to form the pond’rous ball?
Firſt, fell us, why did any come next why
J n ſuch a disproportion to the dry 2 Blackmore's Creation.
That we are deſigned for a móre exalted happineſs, than
can be derived from the things of this life, we may infer from
their vaſt disprºportion to the deſires and capacities of our
ſoul. Rogers, Serºn. 5.
To Disp Ropo'RTIon. v. a. [from the noun..] To miſmatch;
to join things unſuitable in quantity.
There fits deformity to mock my body,
To ſhape my legs of an unequal ſize,
To diſproportion me in every part. Shakespeare Henry VI. p. iii.
Diſtance and mens fears have ſo enlarged the truth, and ſo
diſºroportioned every thing, that we have made the little troop
of diſcontents a gallant army, and already meaſure by the
evening ſhadow. Suckling.
Muſick craveth your acquaintance: many are of ſuch aiſ-
proportioned ſpirits, that they avoid her company. Peachara.
We on earth, with undiſcording voice,
May rightly anſwer that melodious noiſe ;
As once we did, 'till diſproportion'd ſin
Jarr'd againſt nature's chime. Milton.
DisPropo'Rºrio NABLE. adj. [from diſproportion.] Unſuitable
in quantity; not duly regulated in regard to ſomething elſe.
Doubts and fears are the ſharpeſt paſſions: through theſe
falſe opticks all that you ſee is like the evening ſhadows, diſ-
proportionale to the truth, and ſtrangely longer than the true
ſubſtance. Suckling.
Had the obliquity been greater, the earth had not been able
to endure the diſprºportionable differences of ſeaſon. Brown.
We are apt to ſet too great a value on temporal bleſfings,
and have too low and diſproportionable eſteem of ſpiritual. Smal.
There is no wine of ſo ſtrong a body as to bear ſuch a diſ-
proportionable quantity of water as ſixty parts. Pope's Od. Notes.
Dispropo'RT on ABLE N Ess. n.ſ.. [from diſproportionable.] Un-
ſuitableneſs to ſomething elſe.
Dispropo'RTIONABLY. adv. [from diſproportion.] Unſuitably;
not ſymmetrically.
DisPRópo'RTIon Al. n. ſ. [from diſproportion.] Diſproportion-
able; unſymmetrical; unſuitable in quantity to ſomething elſe.
DisPR opo'RT 1 on ALLY. adv. [from diſprºportional.] Unſuit-
ably with reſpect to quantity or value.
Dispropo'RTIon at E. adj. [from diſproportion.] Unſymme-
trical; unſuitable to ſomething elſe either in bulk or value.
None of our members are crooked or diſtorted, or diſpro-
portionate to the reſt, either in exceſs or defect. Kay.
It is plain that men have agreed to a diſproportionate and
unequal poſſeſſion of the earth. Locke.
DisPRopo'RTIon ATELY. adv. [from diſprºportionate.] Un-
ſuitably; unſymmetrically.
DisPROPo'R' Ion At ENEss. n.ſ.. [from diſproportionate.] Un-
ſuitableneſs in bulk or value.
To DisPR o'v E. v. a. [dis and prove.]
1. To confute an aſſertion; to convićt of errour or falſhood.
This expoſition they plainly diſprove, and ſhew by manifeſt
reaſon, that of David the words of David could not poſſibly be
In Callt. Hooker.
This Weſtmoreland maintains,
And Warwick ſhall diſprove it. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
Arcite with diſdain,
In haughty language, thus reply'd again:
Forſworn thyſelf; the traytor's odious name
I firſt return, and then diſprove thy claim. Dryden's Fables.
It is eaſier to affirm than to diſprove. Holder's Elements.
That falſe ſuppoſition I advanced in order to diſprove it, and
by that means to prove the truth of my doctrine.
- Atterbury's Sermons, Prºf.
We ſee the ſame aſſertions produced again, without notice
of what hath been ſaid to diſprove them. Swift.
2. To convićt a pračtice of errour.
They behold thoſe things diſproved, diſannulled, and re-
jećted, which uſe had made in a manner natural. Hooker, b. iv.
If God did not forbid all indifferent ceremonies, then
our conformity with the church of Rome in ſome ſuch is
not hitherto as yet diſproved, although papiſts were unto us as
heathens were unto Iſrael. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 6.
DisPro'v ER. m. ſ. [from diſprove.] -
1. One that diſproves or confutes. -
2. One that blames ; a cenſurer, if the following paſſage be not
ill printed for diſapprover.
The fingle example that our annals have yielded of two
extremes, within ſo ſhort time, by moſt of the ſame commen-
ders and diſprovers, would require no ſlight memorial. J/ction:
DISPU'NISHABLE. adj. [dis and puniſhable.] Without penal
reſtraint.
No leaſes of any part of the ſaid lands ſhall ever be made,
other than leaſes for years not exceeding thirty-one, in poſſeſ-
ſon, and not in reverſion or remainder, and not diſpuniſhable
of waſte. Swift's loft Will.
To Dispu'R's E. v. a. [dis and furſe.] To pay; to diſburſe. It
is not certain that the following paſſage ſhould not be written
*;
any a pound of my own proper ſtore,
Becauſe I would not tax the needy commons,
Have I diſpurſed to the garriſons,
And never aſk'd for reſtitution. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
DisPU"TABLE.
*
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 278</div><p class="Text">D I S
Disput AB. F. adj. [from diſpute.] -
1. Liable to conteſt; controvertible; that for which ſomething
may be alleged on oppoſite ſides.
If they are not in themſelves diſputable, why are they ſo
much diſputed South.
2. Lawful to be conteſted.
Until any point is determined to be a law, it remains
diſputable by every ſubject. - Swift.
Di's PUT ANT. n.ſ.. [from diſpute;s diſputans, Latin.] A con-
trovertiſt; an arguer; a reaſoner.
Our diſutants put me in mind of the ſkuttle-fiſh, that when
he is unable to extricate himſelf, blackens all the water about
him 'till he becomes inviſible. Speciator, N°. 476.
T]1's PuTANT. adj. Diſputing; engaged in controverſy.
Thou there waſt found
Among the graveſt rabbies, diſputant
On points and queſtions fitting Moſes chair. Milt. Pa. Reg.
Disputation. n.ſ.. [from diſputatio, Latin.] . . .
1. The ſkill of controverſy; argumentation.
Conſider what the learning of diſputation is, and how they
are employed for the advantage of themſelves or others,
whoſe buſineſs is only the vain oſtentation of ſounds. Locke.
2. Controverſy ; argumental conteſt.
Well do I find, by the wiſe knitting together of your an-
ſwer, that any diſputation I can uſe is as much too weak as I
unworthy. Sidney, b. ii.
*Till ſome admirable or unuſual accident happens, as it
hath in ſome, to work the beginning of a better alteration in
the mind, diſputation about the knowledge of God com-
monly prevaileth little. - Hooker, b. v.
Disput A’tious. adj. [from diſpute.] Inclined to diſpute;
cavilling.
A man muſt be of a very diſputatious temper, that enters
into ſtate-controverſies with any of the fair ſex. Addison Freehold.
Dispu'TATIve. adj. [from diſpute.] Diſpoſed to debate; ar-
gumentative. -
Perhaps this praćtice might not ſo eaſily be perverted as
to raiſe a cavilling, diſputative, and ſceptical temper in the
minds of youth. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
To DISPU'ſ E. v. n. [di puto, Latin.] To contend by argu-
ment; to altercate; to debate; to argue; to controvert.
If attempts of the pen have often proved unfit, thoſe
of the ſword are more ſo, and fighting is a worſe expe-
dient than diſputing. Decay ºf Piety.
The atheiſt can pretend no obligation of conſcience, why
he'ſhould diſpute againſt religion. Tillotſon, Serm. ii.
Did not Paul and Barnabas diſpute with vehemence about
a very little point of conveniency * Atterbury.
To DisPU'TE. v. a.
1. To contend for, whether by words or ačtion.
Things were diſputed before they came to be determined:
men afterwards were not to diſpute any longer, but to
obey. Hooker.
*
So diſpute the prize,
As if you fought before Cydaria's eyes. Dryd. Ind. Emperor.
One ſays the kingdom is his own: a Saxon drinks the
quart, and ſwears he'll diſpute that with him. Tatar, Nº. 75.
2. To oppoſe; to queſtion.
- Now I am ſent, and am not to diſpute
My prince's orders, but to execute. Dryden's Ind. Emperor.
3. To diſcuſs ; to think on; a ſenſe not in uſe.
Diſpute it like a man.
I ſhall do ſo :
But I muſt alſo feel it as a man. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Dispu'ſ E. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Conteſt; controverſy ; argu-
mental contention.
The queſtion being about a faët, it is begging it, to bring
as a proof an hypotheſis which is the very thing in diſpute. Loc.
The earth is now placed ſo conveniently, that plants thrive
and flouriſh in it, and animals live: this is matter of fact, and
beyond all diſpute. Bentley's Sermons.
Dispu'ſ El Ess, adj. [from diſpute.] Undiſputed; uncontro-
vertible. - Diff.
Dispu'TER. n.ſ.. [from difute.] A controvertiſt; one given
to argument and oppoſition. .”
Both were vehement diſputers againſt the heathen ido-
latry. Stilingfiest's Def. of Diſ. dº Rom. Idol.
Thoſe concluſions have generally obtained, and have been
acknowledged even by diputers themſelves, ’till with labour
Rogers's Sermons.
Disqº A LIF ca"tion. . m. ſ. [ from diſqualify. ] That which
they had ſtifled their convictions.
diſqualifies; that which makes unfit.
It is recorded as a ſufficient diſqualification of a wife, that,
ſpeaking of her huſband, ſhe ſaid, God forgive him. Speciatºr.
To Disoy A'll FY. v. a. [dis and qualif.]
1. To make unfit 3 to diſable by ſome natural or legal impe-
diment.
Such perſons as ſhall confer benefices on unworthy and diſ.
qualified perſons, after a notice or correótion given, ſhall for
that turn be deprived of the power of preſenting unto ſuch
Ayliffe's Parerºon.
benefices.
Iknow no employment for which piety diſta'ifts. Swift,
My common illneſs utterly dº qualifies me for all conver-
ſation; I mean my deafneſs. Swift,
2. To deprive a right or claim by ſome poſitive reſtrićtion; to
diſable; to except from any grant
The church of England is the only body of Chriſtians
which diſqualifies thoſe, who are employed to preach its doc-
trine, from ſharing in the civil power, farther than as ſe-
nators. - Swift on the Sacramental Tºff.
To Disq9A'NTITY. v. a. [dis and qiaºtity..] To leſſen; to
diminiſh. -
Be entreated of fifty to diſtantity your train;
And the remainders that ſhall ſtill depend, -
To be ſuch men as may befort your age. Shakespeare K Lear.
Disqº I'ET. n.ſ. [dis and quiet..] Uneaſineſs; reſtleſſneſs; want
of tranquillity; vexation; diſturbance; anxiety. -
He that, upon a true principle, lives without any diſguiet of
thought, may be ſaid to be happy. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
If we give way to our paſſions, we do but gratify ourſelves
for the preſent, in order to our future diſquiet. 7 illotſon.
I had rather live in Ireland than under the frequent di quiets
of hearing you are out of order. Swift.
Disqui'ET, adj. Unquiet; uneaſy; reſtleſs.
I pray you, huſband, be not ſo diſquiet ;
The meat was well, if you were ſo content. Shakeſpeare.
To Disqui"E.T. v. a. [from the noun.] To diſturb; to make
º ; to harraſs; to vex; to fret; to deprive of tranquil-
ity.
The proud Roman him diſquieted,
A warlike Caeſar, tempted with the name
Of this ſweet iſland. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. Io.ſtan. 47.
Why art thou ſo vexed, Q my ſoul? And why art thou ſo
diſquieted within me? Pſalm i.
By anger and impatience the mind is diſquieted, and is not
able eaſily to compoſe itſelf to prayer. Duppa.
Thou, happy creature, art ſecure
From all the torments we endure;
Deſpair, ambition, jealouſy,
Loſt friends, nor love diſguiet; thee. Roſcommon.
Disqui'ete R. m. ſ. [from di quiet.] A diſturber; a harraſſer.
Disq91'ETLY. adv. [from d/ºuiet..] Without reſt; anxiouſly;
uneaſily; without calmneſs.
We have ſeen the beſt of our machinations, hollowneſs;
treachery, and all ruinous diſorders, follow us diſquietly to our
raVCS. Shakeſpeare's King Lear:
He reſted diſguietly that night; but in the morning I found
him calm. I/iſeman's Surgery.
Disqui'ETNFss. n.ſ.. [from diſquiet.] Uneaſineſs; reſtleſſneſs;
anxiety; diſturbance.
All otherwiſe, ſaid he, I riches rede,
And deem them root of all diſquietneſs. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Arius won to himſelf, both followers and great defenders;
whereupon much diſquietneſs enſued. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 49.
Disqui'e TUDE. m. ſ. [from diſquiet..] Uneaſineſs; anxiety;
diſturbance; want of tranquility.
Little happineſs attends a great charaćter, and to a multi-
tude of diſquietudes the deſire of it ſubjects an ambitious
mind. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 256.
'Tis the beſt preſervative from all thoſe temporal fears and
diſquietudes, which corrupt the enjoyment, and embitter the
lives of men. Rogers, Sermon I.
Disquisi'TION. m. ſ. [diſpuiſitio, Latin.] Examination; diſ-
putative enquiry.
God hath reſerved many things to his own reſolution, whoſe
determinations we cannot hope from fleſh; but with reverence
muſt ſuſpend unto that great day, whoſe juſtice ſhall either
condemn our curioſity, or reſolve our diſquiſitions. Brown.
'Tis indeed the proper place for this diſquiſition concern-
ing the antediluvian earth, and it could not well have been
brought in before. J/ºodward's Natural Hiſtory.
The royal ſociety had a good effect, as it turned many
of the greateſt geniuſes of that age to the diſquiſitions of
natural knowledge. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 267.
The nature of animal diet may be diſcovered by taſte,
and other ſenſible qualities, and ſome general rules, without
particular diſquiſition upon every kind. Arbuthnot.
To Disr A'NK. v. a. [dis and rank.] To degrade from his
rank. Dić7.
DISREGA'RD. m. ſ. [dis and regard.] Slight notice; neglect ;
contempt.
To DISREGA'RD. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſlight; to ne-
glečt; to contemn.
Since we are to do good to the poor, to ſtrangers, to ene-
mies, thoſe whom nature is too apt to make us deſpiſe, diſ-
regard, or hate, then undoubtedly we are to do good to all.
Spratt's Sermons.
Thoſe faſts which God hath diff garded hitherto, he may
regard for the time to come. Smalridge's Sermons.
Studious of good, man diſregarded fame,
And uſeful knowledge was his eldeſt aim. Blackmore,
DISR R G A'RDFv1.
-
t
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 279</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
DisREGARDFul, adj. [diſregard and full.] Negligent; con-
temptuous.
DisREGARDFULLY. adj. [from diſregardful, 1 Negligently ;
contemptuouſly.
DisRE'LISH. n.f. [di, and relſh.]
1. Bad taſte; nauſeouſncſs.
Oft they affay'd,
Hunger and thirſt conſtraining; druggld as oft
With hatefulleſt diſreliſh, writh'd their jaws,
With ſoot and cinders fill’d. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x.
2. Diſlike of the palate; ſqueamiſhneſs.
Bread or tobacco may be neglected, where they are ſhewn
not to be uſeful to health, becauſe of an indifferency or diſ-
reliſh to them. Locke.
To Disr E'L1s H. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To make nauſeous; to infect with an unpleaſant taſte.
Fruits of taſte to pleaſe
True appetite, and not diſreliſh thirſt -
Of neétarous draughts between, from milky ſtream. Milt.
The ſame anxiety and ſolicitude that embittered the pur-
ſuit, diſreliſhes the fruition itſelf. Rogers, Sermon 19.
2. To want a taſte of; to diſlike.
The world is become too buſy for me: every body is ſo
concerned for the publick, that all private enjoyments are loſt,
or diſreliſhed. Pope.
DISREPUTA'TION. m. ſ. [dis and reputation.]
1. Diſgrace; diſhonour.
I will tell you what was the courſe in the happy days of
queen Elizabeth, whom it is no diſreputation to follow. Bacon.
2. Loſs of reputation; ignominy. -
The king fearing leſt that the bad ſucceſs might diſcourage
his people, and bring diſreputation to himſelf, forbad any re-
port to be made. Hayward.
Gluttony is not of ſo great diſreputation amongſt men as
drunkenneſs. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Disr EPU'TE. m. ſ. [dis and repute.] Ill character; diſhonour;
want of reputation. -
How ſtudiouſly did they caſt a ſlur upon the king's perſon,
and bring his governing abilities under a diſrepute. South.
DISRESPE'cT. n.ſ. [dis and reſpeci.] Incivility; want of re-
verence; irreverence; an act approaching to rudeneſs.
Any diſreſpect to acts of flate, or to the perſons of ſtateſ-
men, was in no time more penal. Clarendon.
Ariſtotle writ a methodical diſcourſe concerning theſe arts,
chuſing a certain benefit before the hazard that might accrue
from the vain diſreſpects of ignorant perſons. J/ilkins.
What is more uſual to warriours than impatience of bear-
ing the leaſt affront or diſreſpect 2 Pope.
DISRESPE'ct FUL. adj. [diſreſpect and full.] Irreverent; un-
civil.
Disr Espe’ct FULLY. adv. [from diſreſpeciful J. Irreverently;
uncivillv.
We time believe our poſterity will think ſo diſreſpešfully
of their great grandmothers, as that they made themſelves
monſtrous to appear amiable. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 27.
To Disk o'BE. v. a. [dis and robe.] To undreſs; to uncover;
to ſtrip.
Thus when they had the witch diſrobed quite,
And all her filthy feature open ſhown,
They let her go at will, and wander ways unknown. F. Qu.
Kill the villain ſtrait,
Piſſole him of the matchleſs monument,
Thy father's triumph o'er the ſavages. Shakeſ King john.
Theſe two great peers were diſroled of their glory, the one
by judgment, the other by violence. //otton.
Who will be prevailed with to diſrobe himſelf at once of all
his old opinions, and pretences to knowledge and learning,
and turn himſelf out ſtark naked in queſt afreſh of new no-
tions. Locke.
Disk UPTION, n.ſ. [diruptio, Latin.] The aët of breaking
aſunder; a breach ; rent; dilaceration.
This ſecures them from diſruption, which they would be in
danger of, upon a ſudden ſtretch or contortion. Ray.
The agent which effected this diſruption, and diſlocation of
the ſtrata, was ſeated within the earth. Iſoodward’s Nat. Hiſt.
If raging winds invade the atmoſphere,
Their force its curious texture cannot tear, {
Nor make diſruption in the threads of air. B'ackmore.
3Dissy'TISF Act 13 N. n.ſ. [dis and ſatisfaction.] The ſtate of being
ºfº, diſcontent; want of ſomething to compleat the
wiſh.
He that changes his condition, out of impatience and diſ.
ſatiſfaction, when he has tried a new one, wiſhes for his old
again. L'E/irange.
The ambitious man has little happineſs, but is ſubject to
much uneaſińcſ, and diſatisfacion. Addiſon's Speciator.
In vain we try to remedy the defects of our acquiſition, by
varying the object: the ſame diſatisfacion purſues us through
the circle of created goods. Rogers, Sermon 5.
Dissa’ſ 1st Actor is ess. n.ſ. Iſrom diſatiſaćºry.] Inability
to give content. - -
Dissatisfactory. adj [from diſatiſy.) That which is un-
able to give content.
To Dissa (TISFY. v. a. [dis and ſatiſ;..] -
1. To diſcontent; to diſpleaſe.
The advantages of life will not hold out to the length of
deſire; and, ſince they are not big enough to ſatisfy, they
ſhould not be big enough to diſatisfy. Calier.
2. To fail to pleaſe; to want ſomething requiſite.
I ſtill retain ſome of my notions, after your lordſhip's
having appeared diſatisfied with them. - Lºcke.
To DISSE/CT. v. a. [diffe, o, Latin.]
i. To cut in pieces. It is uſed chiefly of anatomical enquiries,
made by ſeparation of the parts of animal bodies.
No maſk, no trick, no favour, no reſerve;
Diffect your mind, examine every nerve. R ſcommon.
Following life in creatures we diffect,
We loſe it in the moment we detect. Pºpe.
2. To divide and examine minutely.
This paragraph, that has not one ingenuous word through-
out, I have diffected for a ſample. Atterbury.
Disse'ction. n.ſ. [diffidio, Lat.] The act of ſeparating the
parts of animal bodies; anatomy.
She cut her up; but, upon the diffection, found her juſt like
other hens. - L’Eſtrange.
I ſhall enter upon the diffeºffion of a coquet's heart, and
communicate particularities obſerved in that curious piece
of anatomy. Addiſon's Spečiator.
Such ſtrict enquiries into nature, ſo true and ſo perfect a
diffection of human kind, is the work of extraordinary dili-
gence. Granville.
To DISSE'IZE. v. a. [diſaiſer, French..] To diſpoſſeſs; to
deprive.
He ſo diſeized of his griping groſs,
The knight his thrillant ſpear again aſſay’d,
In his braſs-plated body to emboſs. Fairy Queen, b. i.
If a prince ſhould give a man, beſides his ancient patri-
mony, which his family had been diſſezed of, an additional
eſtate, never before in the poſſeſſion of his anceſtors, he
could not be ſaid to re-eſtabliſh lineal ſucceſſion. Locke.
Disse"IsiN. n.ſ.. [from diſſir, French J An unlawful diſpoſ-
ſeſſing a man of his land, tenement, or other immoveable or
incorporeal right. Cowel.
Diss E(IzoR. m.J. [from diſſize.] He that diſpoſſes another.
To DISSEMBLE. v. a. [diffinulo, Latin; ſemblance, diſem-
blance, and probably diſſembler, in old French.]
1. To hide under falſe appearance; to conceal; to pretend that
not to be which really is.
Your ſon Lucentio
Doth love my daughter, and ſhe loveth him,
Or both diſſemble deeply their affections. Shakeſpeare.
She anſwered, that her ſoul was God's ; and touching her
faith, as ſhe could not change, ſo ſhe would not diſſemble
it. Hayward.
2. To pretend that to be which is not. This is not the true
fignification.
In vain, on the diſſembl’d mother's tongue,
Had cunning art and ſly perſuaſion hung;
And real care in vain, and native love
In the true parent's panting breaſt had ſtrove. Prior.
To Disse'MB LE. v. n. To play the hypocrite.
Ye diſſembled in your hearts when ye ſent me unto the
Lord your God, ſaying, pray for us. jer. xiii. 20.
I would diſſemble with my nature, where
My fortunes, and my friends, at ſtake, requir’d
I ſhould do ſo in honour. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
I am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by diſſembling nature,
Deform’d, unfiniſh'd. Shakespeare. Richard III.
Thy funètion too will varniſh o'er our arts,
And ſanctify diffembing. Rowe's Ambitious Stepmother.
DissEMBLER. m. ſ. [from diſſemble. J. An hypocrite; a man
who conceals his true diſpoſition.
Thou doſt wrong me, thou diſemblr, thou. Shakeſp.
The French king, in the buſineſs of peace, was the greater
diſºnbler of the two. Bacon’s Henry VII.
Such an one, whoſe virtue forbiddeth him to be ba'e and a
diſſembler, ſhall evermore hang under the wheel. Raleigh.
The queen, with rage inflam'd,
Thus greets him, Thou diſſimbler, wouldſt thou fly
Out of my arms by ſtealth. Denham.
Men will truſt no farther than they judge a perſon for ſin-
cerity fit to be truſted: a diſcovered diſſembler can atchieve
nothing great and conſiderable. South's Sermons.
DissEM blin GLY. adv. [from diſºn!!e..] With diſſimulation;
hypocritically.
They might all have been either diſemblingly ſpoken, or
falſly reported of the equity of the barbarous king. Knoles.
To DISSE'MINATE. v. a. [diff mino, Latin.J. To ſcatter as
ſeed; to ſow ; to ſpread every way. -
Illuſcs are made of it many times in ſtirring up ſeditions,
rebellions, in diſcº.inating of hereſies, and infuſing of pre-
judices. Hammond's Fºndamentals.
There
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 280</div><p class="Text">D I S
There is a nearly uniform and conſtant fire or heat diſmi-
nated throughout the body of the earth. Iſºodward’s N. Hiſł.
The Jews are indeed diſeminated through all the trading
parts of the world. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 425.
asy firmneſs of mind, and freedom of ſpeech, the goſpel
was diſeminated at firſt, and muſt ſtill be maintained. Atterb.
Diss E"Mis ATION. n.ſ. [diſeminatio, Lat.] The act of ſcat-
tering like ſced; the aët of ſowing or ſpreading.
Though now at the greateſt diſtance from the beginning of
errour, yet we are almoſt loſt in its diffimination, whoſe ways
are boundicſs, and confeſs no circumſcription. Brown.
Diss E MINA"ToR. m. ſ. [diffeminator, Lat..] He that ſcatters; a
ſcatterer; a fower ; a ſpreader.
Men, vehemently thirſting after a name in the world, hope
to acquire it by being the diffeminators of novel doćtrines.
Decay of Piety.
DISS'ENSION. m. ſ. [differſo, Latin.] Diſagreement; ſtrife;
diſcord; contention; difference; quarrel; breach of union,
Friend now, faſt ſworn,
Whoſe hours, whoſe bed, whoſe meal, whoſe exerciſe,
Are ſtill together; who twine, as 'twere, in love,
Unſeparable, ſhall within this hour,
On a diffenſiºn of a doit, break out
To bittereſt enmity. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
That no diffenſion hinder government. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
He appeaſed the diffenſion then ariſing about religion. Knolles.
rown
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow;
But firſt among the prieſts diffenſion ſprings. Milt. Pa. Lºft.
Debates, diffenſions, uproars are thy joy;
Provok'd without offence, and practis'd to deſtroy. Dryden.
Disse’Nsious. adj. [from diffenſion.] Diſpoſed to diſcord;
quarrelſome ; factious; contentious.
Either in religion they have a diffenſious head, or in the
commonwealth a factious head. Aſcham's Schoolmaſier.
Who are they that complain unto the king
That I am ſtern ? They love his grace but lightly,
That fill his ears with ſuch diffenſious rumours. Shakespeare R. III.
You diffenſious rogues,
That rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourſelves ſcabs Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To DISSE’NT. v. m. [diſſentio, Latin.]
1. To diſagree in opinion; to think in a contrary manner.
Let me not be any occaſion to defraud the publick of what
is beſt, by any moroſe or perverſe diſſentings. King Charles.
What cruelty, in the moſt barbarous rites of heathens, has
not been matched by the inhumanity of diſſenting chriſtians ?
Decay of Piety.
There are many opinions in which multitudes of men diſ-
ſent from us, who are as good and wiſe as ourſelves. Addiſan.
2. To differ; to be of a contrary nature.
We ſee a general agreement in the ſecret opinion of men,
that every man ought to embrace the religion which is true,
and to ſhun, as hurtful, whatſoever diffenteth from it, but that
moſt which doth fartheſt diſſent. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 1.
Disse’NT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Diſagreement; difference of
opinion; declaration of difference of opinion.
In propoſitions, where though the proofs in view are of moſt
moment, yet there are grounds to ſuſpect that there is proof
as conſiderable to be produced on the contrary ſide, there
ſuſpence or diſſent are voluntary ačtions. Locke.
What could be the reaſon of this general diſſent from the
notion of the reſurrečtion, ſeeing that almoſt all of them did
believe the immortality of the ſoul? Bentley's Sermons.
Disse NTA'Neous. adj. [from diffent.] Diſagreeable; incon-
ſiſtent; contrary.
Disse'NTER. m. ſ. [from diſſent.]
1. One that diſagrees, or declares his diſagreement from an
opinion. -
They will admit of matter of ſačt, and agree with diſ-
Jenters in that; but differ only in aſſigning of reaſons. Locke,
2. One who, for whatever reaſons, refuſes the communion of
the Engliſh church.
Diss ERTA'TIos. m. ſ. [differtatio, Latin.] A diſcourſe; a diſ-
quiſition; a treatiſe.
Plutarch, in his differtation upon the poets, quotes an in-
ſtance of Homer's judgment in cloſing a ludicrous ſcene with
decency and initrućtion. Pope's Odyſſey, Notes.
To Disse'Rv E. v. a. [dis and ſerve.] To do injury to ; to
miſchief; to damage; to hurt; to harm.
Having never done the king the leaſt ſervice, he took the
firſt opportunity to differve him, and engaged againſt him
from the beginning of the rebellion. - Clarendon.
Deſires of things of this world, by their tendency, promote
or differve our intereſts in another. Rogers, Sermon 2.
Disse’s vice. n.ſ. [dis and ſervice..] Injury; miſchief; ill
turn.
We ſhall rather perform good offices unto truth, than any
diffrvice unto relaters who have well deſerved. Brown.
Great ſickneſſes make a ſenſible alteration, but ſmaller in-
diſpoſitions do a proportionable differvice. Collier on Hu. Reaſºn.
Vol. I.
D I S
/p +, - - - - * -
Disse'Rviceable. adj [from d/ºrvice.]. Injurious; miſ.
pº hurtful.
ISSERVICEABLENEss n: ſ [from differviceable Ini
--~~- M. 1 - - ury :
harm; hurt; miſchief; damage. iſ. }le.] Jury 3
All action being for ſome end, and not the end itſelf, its
*Ptºeſs to be commanded or forbidden muſt be founded upon
its ſerviceableneſs or diſſerviceableneſs to ſome end. Norris.
Tººls. v. 4. [ dis and ſettle. J To unſettle; to
X. -
- /ºr - - -
To Disse V**, *. a. [dis and ſever. In this word the particle
dis makes no change i - - - -
n the ſignification, and therefore the
word, though ſupported by great authorities, ought to º
ejected, from our language.J. To part in two; to break;
to divide; to funder; to ſeparate; to diſunite, &gt;
. Shortly had the ſtorm ſo diffevered the company, which the
day befºre had tarried together, that moſt of them never met
again, but were ſwallowed up. Sidney, b. ii.
The diſevering of fleets hath been the overthrow of many
aćtions., . - - -- Raleigh's Eſſays.
All downright rains diſſºver the violence of outrageous
winds, and level the mountainous billows. Raleigh.
Diffever your united ſtrengths,
And part your mingled colours once again. Shakespeare K. john.
The meeting points the ſacred hair diffever
From the fair head, for ever and for ever. Pope.
Dissi'Dence, n.ſ. [ diffideo, Latin. J Diſcord; diſagree-
inent. Dićf.
Dissi'll ENCE. m. ſ. [diffilio, Latin.]. The ad of ſtarting
aſunder.
Dissi'LIENT. adj. [diffiens, Latin.] Starting aſunder; burſt-
ing in two.
Diss ILITIon. n.ſ.. [diffilio, Latin.] The aët of burſting in
two ; the act of ſtarting different ways.
The air having much room to receive motion, the diffilition
of that air was great. Boyle's Spring of the Air. -
Dissimilar. adj. [dis and ſimilar. J. Unlike; heteroge-
Il COuS.
Simple oil is reduced into diſſimilar parts, and yields a ſweet
oil, very differing from fallet-oil. Boyle.
The light whoſe rays are all alike refrangible I call ſimple,
homogeneal, and ſimilar; and that whoſe rays are ſome
more refrangible than others, I call compound, heterogeneal,
and diſſimilar. Newton's Opt.
If the fluid be ſuppoſed to conſiſt of heterogeneous particles,
we cannot conceive how thoſe diſſimilar parts can have a like
ſituation. Bentley's Sermons.
Diss IMI LA'RITY.. n.ſ.. [from diſſimilar.] Unlikeneſs; diffi-
militude.
If the principle of reunion has not its energy in this life,
whenever the attractions of ſenſe ceaſe, the acquired prin-
ciples of diſſimilarity muſt repel theſe beings from their centre;
ſo that the principle of reunion, being ſet free by death, muſt
drive theſe beings towards God their centre, and the principle
of diſſimilarity forcing him to repel them with infinite vio-
lence from him, muſt make them infinitely miſerable. Cheyne.
Diss IMI'LITUDE. m. ſ. [diſſimilitudo, Lat J. Unlikeneſs; want
of reſemblance.
Thereupon grew marvellous diſſimilitudes, and by reaſon.
thereof jealouſies, heartburnings, jars and diſcords. Hooker.
We doubt whether the Lord, in different circumſtances, did
frame his people unto any utter diffimilitude, either with Egyp-
tians, or any other nation. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 6.
The diſſimilitude between the Divinity and images, ſhews
that images are not a ſuitable means whereby to worſhip
God. Stillingfiest's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idolatry.
As humane ſociety is founded in the ſimilitude of ſome
things, ſo it is promoted by ſome certain diſſimilitudes. Grew.
Women are curious obſervers of the likeneſs of children
to parents, that they may, upon finding diſſimilitude, have the
pleaſure of hinting unchaſtity. Pope's Odyſſey, Noteſ.
Dissimulation. n.ſ. [diſſimulatio, Latin.] The act of diſ-
ſembling; hypocriſy; fallacious appearance; falſe pretenſions.
Diffimulation is but a faint kind of policy; for it aſketh a
ſtrong wit, and a ſtrong heart, to know when to tell truth,
and to do it. Bacon, Eſſay 6.
He added not; and Satan, º low
His grey diffimulation, diſappear' . . . . .
#. ... º, Paradº Rºdiºd, i. !.
Diffmulation may be taken for a bºre concealment of one's
mind, in which ſenſe we commonly ſay, that it is prudence to
diſſemble injuries. - South's Sermons.
DissipA(Ble. adj. [from diſpate.] Eaſily ſcattered; liable to
iſperſion. . . .
º heat of thoſe plants is very diſtable, which under the ... . t
earth is contained and held in; but when it cºmeth to the airtºtº
it exhaleth. Bacon's Natural Hſtory.
The parts of plants are very tender, as conſiſting of cor-
puſcles which are extremely ſmall and lights. and therefore
the more eaſily difffable. Hºodward's Natural Hiſtory.
To DISS}PATÉ. v. a. [diſitatus, Latin.]
1. To ſcatter every way; to diſperſe. - - --
The heat at length grows ſo great, that it again diſtate:
Sº..." * &gt; º-
º, Vº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 281</div><p class="Text">D I S
D I S
- - r ºles which before it brought.
and bears off thoſe very corpuſ jº, Natural Hiſtory.
- - - - - ins eddy in
he circling mountains 2
From º bare wild, the diſpated ſtorm. Thomſºn's Autumn.
2. To ſcatter the attention.
This ſlavery to his pa
d; º ated.
3 º a fortune. -
- The wherry that contains
Of diſpated wealth the poor remains. London.
Dissipation. n./. [diſpatio, Latin.]
he act of diſperſion. -
I. Tº: effects . heat are moſt advanced when it worketh
upon a body without loſs or diſſipation of the matter. . Bacon.
"Abraham was contemporary with Paleg, in whoſe time the
famous diſpation of mankind and diſtinction. of languages
happened. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
where the earth contains nitre within it, if that heat which
is continually ſteaming out of the earth be preſerved, its diff-
pation prevented, and the cold kept off by ſome building, this
alone is ordinarily ſufficient to raiſe up the nitre. //ccdward.
2. The ſtate of being diſperſed.
Now
Foul diſpation follow'd, and forc’d rout. Milt. Par. Lºft.
3. Scattered attention.
I have begun two or three letters to you by ſnatches, and
been prevented from finiſhing them by a thouſand avocations
and diffipations. Swift.
To Disso'ciate. v. a. [diſſºcio, Latin.] To ſeparate ; to diſ-
unite ; to part.
In the diſſºciating action, even of the gentleſt fire, upon a
concrete, there does perhaps vaniſh, though undiſcernedly,
ſome active and fugitive particles, whoſe preſence was requi-
ſite to contain the concrete under ſuch a determinate form. Boyle.
Dissolvable. adj. [from diſſºlve..] Capable of diſſolution;
liable to be melted.
Such things as are not diſſºlvable by the moiſture of the
tongue, act not upon the taſte. Newton's Opt.
Dissolubi.e. adj. [diſſºlubilis, Latin.] Capable of ſeparation
of one part from another by heat or moiſture.
Nodules, repoſed in thoſe cliffs amongſt the earth, being
hard and not ſo diſſoluble, and likewiſe more bulky, are left
behind. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Dissolub I'lity. n.ſ.. [from diſſºluble.] Liableneſs to ſuffer a
diſunion of parts by heat or moiſture; capacity of being
diſſolved. -
Bodies ſeem to have an intrinſick principle of alteration,
or corruption, from the diſſolubility of their parts, and the co-
adlition of ſeveral particles endued with contrary and deſtruc-
tive qualities each to other. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To DISSQLVE. v. a. [diſºr, Latin.] -
1. To deſtroy the form of anything by diſuniting the parts with
heat or moiſture; to melt; to liquefy.
The whole terreſtrial globe was taken all to pieces, and
diſſºlved at the deluge. Hoºdward's Nat. Hiſt. Preface.
2. To break; to diſunite in any manner. -
Seeing then that all theſe things ſhall be diſſºlved, what
manner of perſons ought ye to be. 2 Pet. iii. 11.
3. To looſe; to break the ties of anything.
Witneſs theſe ancient empires of the earth,
In height of all their flowing wealth diſſºlv’d. Mill. P. Lºft,
The commons live, by no diviſions rent;
But the great monarch's death diſſºlves the government. Dry.
4. To ſeparate perſons united.
- She and I long ſince contraded, -
Are now ſo ſure that nothing can diſſºlve us. Shakeſpeare.
5. To break up aſſemblies.
By the king's authority alone, and by his writs, parliaments
are aſſembled ; and by him alone they are prorogued and diſ-
ſºvº', but each houſe may adjourn itſelf. Bacon to Williers.
6. To ſolve ; to clear.
And I have heard of thee, that thou can'ſt make interpre-
tations and diſſolve doubts. Dan. v. 16.
7. To break an enchantment.
Highly it concerns his glory now
To fruſtrate and diº've the magick ſpells. Milton's Agoniſł.
8. To be relaxed by pleaſure.
Angels diſſºlv’d in hallclujahs lye. 'atºr.
To Dissolve. º 77. Jans |ye. . Dryden
1. To be melted; to be liquefied.
As wax diſſºlves, as ice begins to run
And trickle into drops before the ſun,
So, melts the youth, and languiſhes away. Addison Ovid. Met.
2. To link away; to fall to nothing.
if there be more, more woful, hold it in ;
- For | an almoſt ready to diſºwe,
Hearing of this.
3. To melt away in pleaſures.
. . . / - - - - -
issolve Nr. ºd. [from diſſºlve.] Having the power of diſ-
ſolving or melting.
* man and viviparous quadrupeds, the food, moiſtened
with the ſpittle, is firſt chewed, then ſwallowed into the ſto-
flions produced a life irregular and
Savage's life.
Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
mach, where, being mingled with diſſºlvent juices, it is con-
cočted, macerated, and reduced into a chyle. Ray.
Dissolv ENT, n.ſ.. [from the adjective..] Having the power
of diſuniting the parts of anything.
, Spittle is a great diſſºlvent, and there is a great quantity of
it in the ſtomach, being ſwallowed conſtantly. Arbuthnot.
Disso'ºy E.R. m.ſ.. [from diſſºlve.] That which has the power
of diſſolving.
Fire, and the more ſubtle diº’ver, putrefaāion, by dividin
the particles of ſubſtances, turn them black. Arbuthnot.
Hot mineral waters are the beſt diſſolver, of phlegm. Arbut.
Disso'LVIBLE. adi, [from diſſºlve. It is commonly written
diſſºlvable, but leſs properly.J. Liable to periſh by diſſolution.
Man, that is even upon the intrinſick conſtitution of his
nature diſſolville, muſt, by being in an eternal duration, con-
tinue immortal. Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
DI'SSOLUTE, adj. [diſſºlutus, Latin.] Looſe; wanton; un-
reſtrained; diſſolved in pleaſures; luxurious; debauched.
A giant huge and tall,
Who him diſarmed, diſſºlute, diſmay’d,
Unawares ſurpriz'd. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 7.
Such ſtand in narrow lanes,
And beat our watch and rob our paſſengers;
While he, young, wanton, and effeminate boy,
Takes on the point of honour, to ſupport
So diſſºlute a crew. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
A man of little gravity, or abſtinence in pleaſures; yea;
ſometimes almoſt diſſolute. Hayward.
They cool'd in zeal,
Thenceforth ſhall practiſe how to live ſecure,
Worldly, or diſſºlute, on what their lords
Shall leave them to enjoy. Miltºn's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi.
... The true ſpirit of religion baniſhes indeed all levity of
behaviour, all vicious and diſſºlute mirth; but, in exchange,
fills the mind with a perpetual ſerenity. Addiſon's Speciaiºr.
The beauty of religion the moſt diſºlate are forced to ac-
knowledge. Rogers's Sermons.
Di'ssolu're LY. adv. [from diſſºlute.] Looſely; in debauchery;
without reſtraint.
Whereas men have lived diſſolutely and unrighteouſly, thou
haſt tormented them with their own abominations. Wiſd. xii.
DissoluteNEss. n. ſ. [from diſſolute.] Looſeneſs; laxity of
manners; debauchery.
If we look into the common management, we ſhall have
reaſon to wonder, in the great diſſoluteneſs of manners which
the world complains of, that there are any footſteps at all left
of virtue. Locke.
Dissolution. m. ſ. [diſſolutio, Latin.]
1. The act of liquefying by heat or moiſture.
2. The ſtate of being liquefied.
3. The ſtate of melting away; liquefaction.
I am as ſubject to heat as butter; a man of continual diſ.
olution and thaw. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of ſ/indſor.
4. Deſtruction of any thing by the ſeparation of its parts.
The elements were at perfect union in his body; and their
contrary qualities ſerved not for the diſſolution of the com-
pound, but the variety of the compoſure. South's Sermons.
5. The ſubſtance formed by diſſolving any body.
Weigh iron and aqua-fortis ſeverally; then diſſolve the iron
in the aqua-fortis, and weigh the diſſºlution. *Bacon.
6. Death; the reſolution of the body into its conſtituent ele-
InclitS.
The life of man is always either increaſing towards ripe-
neſs and perfection, or declining and decreaſing towards rot-
tenneſs and diſſºlution. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
We expected
Immediate diſſºlution, which we thought
Was meant by death that day. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft, b. x.
. Deſtruction.
He determined to make a preſent diſſºlution of the world.
Hooker, b. i. ſ. 3.
7
He thence ſhall come,
When this world's diſſolution ſhall be ripe. Milt. Par. Loft.
Would they have mankind lay aſide all care of proviſions
by agriculture or commerce, becauſe poſſibly the diſſolution of
the world may happen the next moment? Bentley's Sermonſ.
8. Breach or ruin of anything compacted or united.
Is a man confident of wealth and power Why let him
read of thoſe ſtrange unexpected diſſºlutions of the great mo-
narchies and governments of the world. Sluth's Sermons.
9. The act of breaking up an aſſembly.
10. Looſeneſs of manners; laxity; remiſſneſs; diffipation.
Fame makes the mind looſe and gayiſh, ſcatters the ſpirits,
and leaves a kind of diſſºlution upon all the faculties. South.
An univerſal diſſolution of manners began to prevail, and a
profeſſed diſregard to all fixed principles. Atterbury's Sermºns.
DISSONANCE. n.ſ. [diſſºnant, Latin; diſſonance, French.]
A mixture of harſh, unpleafing, unharmonious ſounds; un-
ſuitableneſs of one found to another.
Still govern thou my ſong,
But drive far off the barbarous diſſonance
Of Bacchus, and his revellers, Milton's Paradiſe Lºſ’, º:
- e
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 282</div><p class="Text">D I S.
.
The wonted roar was up amidſt the woods,
And fill'd the air with barbarous dº onazire,
At which I ceas'd, and liſten'd them a while. Milton.
The Latin tongue is a dead language, and none can decide
with confidence on the harmony or diſſonance of the numbers
of theſe times. Garth's Prºf. to Ovid.
DissonANT. adj. [diſſºnans, Latin.]
1. Harſh; unharmonious.
Dire were the ſtrain and diſſonant, to fing
The cruel raptures of the ſavage kind. Thomſºn's Spring.
2. Incongruous; diſagreeing -
What can be more diſºnant from reaſon and nature, than
that a man, naturally inclined to clemency, ſhould ſhew him-
ſelf unkind and inhuman. Hakewell on Providence.
When conſcience reports anything diſſonant to truth, it
obliges no more than the falſhood reported by it. South.
To DISSU'ADE. v. a. [diſſuadeo, Latin.]
1. To dehort; to divert by reaſon or importunity from any
thing.
- § We ſubmit to Caeſar, promiſing
To pay our wonted tribute, from the which -
We were diſhaded by our wicked queen. Shakespeare Cymbeline,
2. To repreſent anything as unfit or dangerous. “
This would be worſe;
War therefore, open or conceal’d, alike .
My voice diffiades. A ſilton's Paradiſ. Lºſº, b. ii.
Not diffident of thee, do I diffiade
Thy abſence from my fight. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. ix.
I’d fain deny this wiſh, which thou haſt made;
Or, what I can't deny, would ſain diſſuade. Addiſon's Ovid.
Dissu’AdFR. m. ſ. [from diffiade.] He that diſſuades.
Dissu'Asio N. m. ſ. [diffioſo, Lat.] Urgency of reaſon or im-
portunity againſt anything; dehortation.
Endeavour to preſerve yourſelf from relapſe by ſuch diſſua-
- ſons from love, as its votaries call invečtives againſt it. Boyle.
Dissu'Asiv F. adj. [from diſſuade.] Dehortatory; tending to
divert or deter from any purpoſe.
Dissu’Asiv E. m. ſ. , Dehortation; argument or importunity
employed to turn the mind off from any purpoſe or purſuit.
The meanneſs, or the fin, will ſcarce be diſſuaſiºrs to thoſe
who have reconciled themſelves to both. Gºvern, of the longue.
To DISSU'NDER. v. a. [dis and ſunder. This is a barbarous
word. See Dissever.] To ſunder; to ſeparate.
But when her draught the ſea and earth diffinder'd,
The troubl’d bottoms turn'd up, and ſhe thunder'd. Chapm.
DIssy'LLABLE. m.ſ. ſºvºz864] A word of two ſyllables.
No man is tied, in modern poetry, to obſerve any farther
rule in the feet of his verſe, but that they be diſyllables; whe-
ther ſpondee, trochee, or iambique, it matters not. Dryden.
D1's TAFF. n.ſ.. [birtar, Saxon J -
1. The ſtaff from which the flax is drawn in ſpinning.
- In ſum, proud Boreas never ruled fleet,
Who Neptune's web on danger's diſtaff ſpins,
With greater power than ſhe did ſnake them wend
Each way, as ſhe that ages praiſe did bend. Sidney.
. ... Weave thou to end this web which I begin;
I will the diſtaff hold, come thou and ſpin. Fairfax, b. iv.
Ran Coll our dog, and Talbot with the band,
And Malkin with her d/?aff in her hand.
2. It is uſed as an emblem of the female ſex.
In my civil government ſome ſay the croſier, ſome ſay the
diſtaff was too buſy. Howel's England's 7 cars.
See my royal maſter murder'd,
His crown uſurp'd, a diſaff in the throne. Dryden.
Dist AFF-THistle. m. ſ. A ſpecies of thiſtle. See THISTLE.
To Dista'in. v. a. [dis and ſlain. J
1. To ſtain; to tinge with an adventitious colour.
Nor ceas'd his arrows, 'till the ſhady plain
Sev’n mighty bodies with their blood diſtain. Dryd. Wirg.
Place on their heads that crown diſtain'd with gore,
Which thoſe dire hands from my ſlain father tore. Pope.
2. To blot; to fully wib infamy.
He underſtood,
That lady whom I had to me aſſign'd,
Had both diſtain’d her honourable blood,
And cke the faith which ſhe to me did bind. Fairy Queen.
The worthineſs of praiſe diſłains his worth,
If he that's prais'd, himſelf bring the praiſe forth. Shakeſp.
DI’S TANCE. ii. ſ. [diſtance, French; difiantia, Latin.]
1. Diſtance is ſpace confidered barely in length between any two
beings, without confidering anything elſe between them. Lºcke.
It is very cheap, notwithſtanding the great diſtance between
the vineyards and the towns that fell the wine. Addiſ on Italy.
As he lived but a few miles diſtance from her father's
houſe, he had frequent opportunitics of ſeeing her. Addison.
2. Remoteneſs in place.
Caeſar is ſtill diſpoſed to give us terms,
And waits at diſtance 'till he hears from Cato. Addiſ Cato.
Theſe dwell at ſuch convenient diſtance,
That each may give his friend aſſiſtance. Prior.
3: The ſpace kept betwccn two antagoniſts in fencing.
Dryden.
We come to ſee fight; to ſee th . . . -
- ..ſee thy paſs, thy ſtock, thy re-
Verſe, thy diſtance. sia; ny - 'º','!'.
4. &amp;: oppoſition. a&amp;ſpeare's Merry Iſives of Windſºr,
So i Banquo was your enemy,
% is he mine; and in ſºft bloody diſiance,
That every minute of hi. being thruſts
Againſt my nearſ of life
- Shakespeare '; M. •
5. A ſpace marked on the courſe where hº ºr. ; Macbeth
This was - -
and won the º:º that ran the whole field out ;Aft'.
6. sº of time. º/trange.
9, muſt do it by diſance of time. 2 Eſthr. V.
I help my preface by a preſcript, to tell that §: is †
years diſtance between one and the other Pric
7. Remoteneſs in time either paſt or future. rººf.
We have as much afir.j of theſe thin
ture and at a diſiance are capable of.
To judge right of bleſſings prayed for
We muſt be able to know things future.”
8. º º 3 º ſeparation. º
**qualities that affečf our ſenſes are i -
themſelves, ſo united and blended, that tiº, º, . ...
no diſtance between them. p Lock •
9. Reſpect; diſtant behaviour. - Qa`Afz.
- I hope your modeſt
will know, what #. §. the ºi. due. Drydºn
Tis by reſpect and aftanz, that authority is upheld. Aſº.
gs, as things fu-
Tillºtſon's Sermons.
and yet at a diſtance,
Smalridge's Sermons.
If a man makes me keep my diſtance, the comfort is, he
keeps his at the ſame time. Swift
Io. Retraction of kindneſs; reſerve; alienation. ..
On the part of heav'n,
Nº. º di/?ance and diſtaſte,
"gºr, and juſt rebuke, and judgment giv'n, Žilt, P.
To Pi's TANce. v. a. [from the j giv'n, Mill. P. Lºft.
” Tº place remotely; to throw off frºm the view.
That which gives a relievo to a bºl is the quick light, or
White which appears to be on the fij. neareſt to us, and th.
black by conſequence diſtance, the object Dºd. Pºſ.
2. To leave behind at a race the length of a diſtance; ſº, §:
quer in a race with great ſuperiority.
Each daring lover, with adventºrous pace,
Purſu'd his wiſhes in the dang'rous race;
Like the ſwift hind the bounding damſel flies,
Strains to the goal, the diſianca ſover dies.
Dista NT. adj. [di/fans, Latin.]
1. Remote in place; not near.
The wond’rous rock the Parian marble ſhone,
And ſeem'd to diffant ſight of ſolid ſtone. Pope
Narrowneſs of mind ſhould be cured by reading hiſtories
of paſt ages, and of nations and Countries diſtant from our
own. - Watt,’s Improvement of the Mind.
The ſenſes will diſcover things near is with ſufficient exact:
neſs, and things diſtant alſo, ſo far as they relate to our ne-
ceſſary uſe. . //atts's Logick.
• Remote in time either paſt or future.
. Remote to a certain degree; as, ten years, ten miles diffant.
. Reſerved; ſly. -
. Not primary; not obvious.
It was one of the firſt diſtinétions of a well bred ITian to
expreſs everything obſcene in modeſt terms and diſtant phraſes
while the clown clothed thoſe ideas in plain homely terms that
are the moſt obvious and natural. 4aºſon's Speciator.
DISTA's TE. m. ſ. [dis and to/fe.]
1. Averſion of the palate; diſreliſh; diſguſt.
1. gives the º of the diſaſte of ſatiety, and of the
Plºture in novelty in meats and drinks. Baconi, Nat. Hiſtory.
2. Diſlike; º Hiſtory
Proſperity is not without many, fears and di/?aſes, and
adverſity is not without comforts and hopes. Bacºn's Eſſays.
3. Anger; alienation of affection.
Julius Caeſar was by acclamation termed king, to try how
the people would take it: the people ſhewed great murmur
and diſłoſłe at it. Bacon, Apºphth. 221.
The king having taſted of the envy of the people, for his
impriſonment of Edward Plantagenci, was doubtful to heap
up any more diſaſtes of that kind by the impriſonment of
De la Pole alſo. Ba, on Henry VII.
On the part of heaven,
Now alienated, diſtance, and d/ie/le, -
And juſt rebuke. Milton's Parad. Loft.
With ſtern diſaſ' avow’d,
. To their own diſtricts drive the ſuitor crowd. Pºpe's Odyſ.
To D1st A'st E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To fill the mouth with nauſeouſneſs, or diſreliſh.
Dang'rous conceits are in their nature poiſons,
Which at firſt are ſcarce found to diſaffe;
But with a little act upon the blood,
Burn like the mines of ſulphur.
2. To diſlike; to loath.
I'd have it come to queſtion;
If he diſaffe it, let him to my ſiſter. Shakeſp. Åing Lear.
3. Te
Gay's Fan,
:
Shakespeare'. Othell,.
X
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 283</div><p class="Text">D I S -
D IS
3. To offend; to diſguſt. - -
He thought it no policy to diſaffe the Engliſh or Iriſh by a
courſe of reformation, but ſought to pleaſe them. Davies.
4. To vex; to exaſperate; to ſour.
The whiſtling of the winds is better muſick to contented
minds, than the opera to the ſpleenful, ambitious, diſeaſed,
diſaſted, and diſtracted ſouls. Pope.
Dista'stEFUL. adj. [diſaſte and full.]
1. Nauſeous to the palate; diſguſting,
what to one palate is ſweet and delicious, to another
is odious and diſaſteful. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 15.
2. Offenſive; ujáſág.
The viſitation, though ſomewhat diſſoff-ful to the Iriſh
lords, was ſweet and welcome to the common people. Davies.
- None but a fool diſlaſ' ful truth will tell ;
So it be new and pleaſe, ’tis full as well. Dryd. Tyran. Lºve.
Diſłafteful humours, and whatever elſe may render the con-
verſation of men grievous and uneaſy to one another, are
forbidden in the New Teſtament. Tillaſºn, Sermon 5.
3. Malignant; malevolent,
After diſaſteful looks,
With certain half-caps, and cold moving nods,
They froze me into filence. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
The ground that begot this aſſertion, might be the diſłaffe-
ill averſeneſs of the Chriſtian from the Jew. Brown's Wul. Err.
Dist E'MPER, n.ſ. [di, and temper.]
1. A diſproportionate mixture of parts; want of a due temper
of ingredients. -
2. A diſeaſe; a malady; the peccant predominance of ſome hu-
mour; properly a flight illneſs; indiſpoſition.
They heighten diſempers to diſeaſes. Suckling.
It argues ſickneſs and diſemper in the mind, as well as in
the body, when a man is continually turning and toſſing. South.
3. Want of due temperature.
It was a reaſonable conječture, that thoſe countries which
were ſituated directly under the tropick, were of a diffemper
uninhabitable. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
4. Bad conſtitution of the mind; predominance of any paſſion
or appetite.
- If little faults, proceeding on diſemper,
Shall not be wink'd at, how ſhall we ſtretch our eye
At capital crimes? Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
5. Want of due ballance between contraries.
The true temper of empire is a thing rare, and hard to
keep; for both temper and diſłemper conſiſt of contraries. Bac.
6. Ill humour of mind; depravity of inclination.
I was not forgetful of thoſe ſparks, which ſome mens diſ.
tempers formerly ſtudied to kindle in parliament. King Charles.
7. Tumultuous diſorder.
- Still as you riſe, the ſtate exalted too,
Finds no diffemper while ’tis chang'd by you. Waller.
8. Diſorder; uneaſineſs.
There is a ſickneſs,
Which puts ſome of us in diffemper; but
I cannot name the diſeaſe, and it is caught
Of you that yet are well. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
To Diste'MPER. v. a. [dis and temper.]
1. To diſeaſe.
Young ſon, it argues a diſemper'd head,
So ſoon to bid good-morrow to thy bed. Shakespeare Ro. and jul.
2. To diſorder.
!
-
In madneſs,
Being full of ſupper and diſlemp'ring draughts,
Upon malicious bravery, do'ſt thou come
To ſtart my guilt. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
He diffempered himſelf one night with long and hard
ſtudy. Boyle's Hiſtory of Fluids.
3. To diſturb; to fill with perturbation; to ruffle.
Thou ſee'ſt me much diſemper'd in my mind;
Pull'd back, and then puſh'd forward to be kind. Dryden.
4. To deſtroy temper or moderation.
Diffemper'd zeal, ſedition, canker'd hate, -
No more ſhall vox the church and tear the ſtate. Dryden.
They will have admirers among poſterity, and be equally
celebrated by thoſe whoſe minds will not be diſicmpered by
intereſt, paſſion, or partiality. Addſºn's Freeholder.
5. To make diſaffected, or malignant.
- Once more to-day well met, diſemper'd lords;
The king by me requeſts your preſence ſtrait. Shakespeare K. john.
Dist E'MPERATE. adj. [di, and temperate.] Immoderate.
Aquinas objećteth the diſemperate heat, which he ſuppoſeth
to be in all places directly under the ſun. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Disr E/MPERATURE. m. ſ. [from diſemperate.]
1. Intemperateneſs; exceſs of heat or cold, or other qualities.
Through this diffemperature we ſee
The ſeaſons alter; hoary headed froſts
Fall in the freſh lap of the crimſon roſe. Shakeſpeare.
They profited little againſt him, but were themſelves con-
ſunned by the diſcommodities of the country, and the differſpe-
rºare of the air. Abbot’s Deſriptiºn of the //ºrld.
2. Yºgi, tumu'taoiſmoſ : outrageouſneſs, -
w
3. Perturbation of the mind.
Thy earlineſs doth me aſſure -
Thou art uprouz'd by ſome diſiemperature. Shakespeare.
4. Confuſion; commixture of extremès; loſs of regularity.
- At your birth
Our grandam earth, with this diffemperature, .
In paſſion ſhook. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Tell how the world fell into this diſeaſe,
And how ſo great diſemperature did grow. Daniel's C. II ar.
To DISTE’ND, v. a. [djiend, Latin.] To ſtretch out in
breadth.
Thus all day long the full diffended clouds
Indulge their genial ſtores, and well ſhower'd earth
Is deep enrich'd with vegetable life. Thomſon's String.
D1st ENT, n.ſ.. [from diffend..] The ſpace through which any
thing is ſpread; breadth.
... Thoſe arches are the gracefulleſt, which, keeping preciſely
the ſame height, ſhall yet be diſtended one fourteenth part
longer; which addition of diffent will confer much to their
beauty, and detract but little from their ſtrength. Wotton.
DISTE’NTIoS. m. ſ. [diſſentio, Latin.] -
1. The act of ſtretching in breadth.
Wind and diſſention of the bowels are ſigns of a bad digeſ-
tion in the inteſtines; for in dead animals, when there is no
digeſtion at all, the diffention is in the greateſt extremity. Arb.
2. Breadth ; ſpace occupied by the thing diſtended.
3. The act of ſeparating one part from another; divarication.
Our leggs do labour more in elevation than in diſiention.
//otton's Architrélure.
To Disthroni'ze. v. a. [dis and throme.] To dethrone; to
depoſe from ſovereignty.
By his death he it recovered;
But Peridure and Vigent him diſilronized. Fairy Queen.
Di'stich. m. ſ. [ diffichon, Latin. J A couplet; a couple of
lines; an epigram conſiſting only of two verſes.
The French compare anagrams, by themſelves, to gems;
but when they are caſt into a diſtich, or epigram, to gems en-
chaſed in enamelled gold. Camden's Remains.
The bard, whoſe diffich all commend,
In power, a ſervant; out of power, a friend. Pope.
To DISTI'L. v. m. [diſlillo, Latin.] -
1. To drop ; to fall by drops.
In vain kind ſeaſons ſwell'd the teeming grain;
oft ſhow’rs diffil"d, and ſuns grew warm in vain. Pope.
Cryſtal drops from min'ral roofs diſiil. Pope.
2. To flow gently and ſilently.
The Euphrates diſtilleth out of the mountains of Armenia,
and falleth into the gulph of Perſia. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
3. To uſe a ſtill; to practiſe the act of diſtillation.
Have I not been
Thy pupil long? Haſt thou not learn'd me how
To make perfumes, diſiil, preſerve? • Shakeſp. Cymbeline,
To Disti'l. v. a.
1. To let fall in drops; to drop anything down.
They pour down rain, according to the vapour thereof,
which the clouds do drop and diſtil upon man abundantly, job.
The dew, which on the tender graſs
The evening had diſill'd,
To pure roſe-water turned was,
The ſhades with ſweets that fill’d. Drayton's Q. of Cynthia.
From his fair head
Perfumes diffil their ſweets. Prior.
The roof is vaulted, and diffils freſh water from every part
of it, which fell upon us as faſt as the firſt droppings of a
ſhower. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
2. To force by fire through the veſſels of diſtillation; to exalt,
ſeparate, or purify by fire.
Upon the corner of the moon
There hangs a vap’rous drop, profound;
I'll catch it ere it come to ground;
And that, diſtill'd by magick ſlights,
Shall raiſe artificial ſprights. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
3. To draw by diſtillation; to extract by the force of fire.
The liquid, diſtilled from benzoin, is ſubject to frequent
viciſſitudes of fluidity and firmneſs. Boyle.
D1st ILLATION. º Latin.]
1. The aët of dropping, or falling in drops.
2. The act of pouring out in drops.
3. That which falls in drops.
4. The act of diſtilling by fire.
Water by frequent diſiilations changes into fixed earth.
Newton's Opt.
The ſerum of the blood, by a ſtrong diffiliation, affords a
ſpirit, or volatile alkaline ſalt, and two kinds of oil, and an
earth. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
5. The ſubſtance drawn by the ſtill.
I ſuffered the pangs of an egregious death, to be ſtopt in
like a ſtrong diſilation, with cloaths. Shakesp. Mer. Wi. of H indſ.
DISTI'LLATORY. adj. [from diſil.] Belonging to diſtillation;
uſed in diſtillation. -
2. - Beſides
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 284</div><p class="Text">D I S
Beſides thoſe groſſer elements of bodies, ſalt, ſulphur and
mercury, ingredients of a more ſubtile nature, extremely lit-
tle, and nºt viſible, may eſcape at the junctures of the dj.
tillatory veſſels. Boyle's Scept. Chyn.
Disri'll ER. m. ſ. [from diffil.]
1. One who practiſes the trade of diſtilling.
I ſent for ſpirit of ſalt to a very eminent diffiller of it. Boyle.
2. ; who makes and ſells pernicious and inflammatory
pirits.
Dis. It MENT. n. ſ. [from diſil.] That which is drawn by
diſtillation. A word formerly uſed, but now obſolete.
Upon my ſecure hour thy uncle ſtole,
And in the porches of mine ears did pour
The leperous diffilment. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
DISTINCT. adj (diffinºus, Latin.]
1. Different; not the ſame in number or in kind.
Bellarmin ſaith, it is idolatry to give the ſame worſhip to an
image which is due to God: Vaſquez faith, it is idolatry to
give diſſinéſ worſhip: therefore, if a man would avoid idola-
try, he muſt give none at all. Stillingſ?et.
Fatherhood and property are diffind titles, and began pre-
ſently, upon Adam's death, to be in diffiné? perſons. Locke.
2. Different; apart; not conjunét.
The intention was, that the two armies, which marched
out together, ſhould afterwards be diffind?. Clarendon.
Men have immortal ſpirits, capable of a pleaſure and hap-
pineſs diſtinči from that of our bodies. Tillotſon's Sermons.
3. Clear; unconfuſed.
Heav'n is high,
High and remote, to ſee from thence diſting
Each thing on earth. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ix.
4. Spotted; variegated.
Tempeſtuous fell
His arrows from the four-fold-viſag'd four,
Di/?ind? with eyes; and from the living wheels
Diſtinct alike with multitude of eyes. Milton's Parad. Loft.
5. Marked out; ſpecified. -
Dominion hold
Over all living things that move on th' earth,
Wherever thus created; for no place
Is yet diſtinct by name. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
DISTI'Ncrios. m. ſ. [diſtinézio, Latin.]
. Note of difference.
. Honourable note of ſuperiority.
. That by which one differs from another.
This faculty of perception puts the diffinélion betwixt the
animal kingdom and the inferior parts of matter. Locke.
4. Difference regarded; preference or neglect in compariſon
with ſomething elſe.
Maids, women, wives, without diffinétion fall;
The ſweeping deluge, love, comes on, and covers all. Dryd.
5. Separation of complex notions.
This fierce abridgment
Hath to it circumſtantial branches, which
Diſtinction ſhould be rich in. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
6. Diviſion into different parts.
The diſłinétion of it into acts was not known unto
them ; or, if it were, it is yet ſo darkly delivered to us, that
we cannot make it out. Dryden on Dramatick Poeſy.
7. Notation of difference between things ſeemingly the ſame.
The mixture of thoſe things by ſpeech, which by nature
are divided, is the mother of all error: to take away there-
fore that error, which confuſion breedeth, diſtinétion is re-
quiſite. * Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 3.
Lawfulneſs cannot be handled without limitations and
diffin:lions. Bacon's Holy War.
This will puzzle all your logick
And diſſinéſions to anſwer it. Denham's Sophy.
From this diſtinction of real and apparent good, ſome diſ-
tinguiſh happineſs into two ſorts, real and imaginary. Norris.
7. Diſcernment; judgment.
Disr,'Nctive. adj. [from diffiné?..]
1. That which marks diſtinétion or difference.
For from the natal hour, diffinéfive names,
One common right the great and lowly claims. Pope's Ody.
2. Having the power to diſtinguiſh and diſcern; judicious.
Credulous and vulgar auditors readily believe it, and the
more judicious and diſtinčive heads do not rejećt it. Brown.
Dis 1's c 1 Ively. adv. [from diffinétive J in right order;
11ot confuſedly.
I did all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels ſhe had ſomething heard,
But not diſtinčivey. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
D1st I’s crl Y. adv. [from diſtiné!.]
1. Not confuſedly; without the confuſion of one part with
another.
‘I o make an eccho that will report three, or four, or five
words diſtinctly, it is requiſite that the body percuſſing be a
good diſtance off. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 248.
On its ſides it was bounded pretty diſtinči!y, but on its ends
very confuſedly and indiſtinctly. Mewtºn's Opt.
VJ L. I.
;
3
D I S
2. Plainly; clearly.
The obječt I could firſt diffindly view, -
Yºal fºreight trees, which on the waters flew. D34.
After the light of the ſun was a little worn off my eyes, I could
ſee all the parts of it diffinéily, by a glimmering reflection that
Played upon them from the ſurface of the water, Addiſon,
Disri'Nc4 Ness. n.ſ. [from diffind.]
* Nicº obſervation of the différence between different things.
The membranes and humours of the eye are perfectly pel-
lucid, and void of colour, for the clearneſs, and for the iſ:
tinčineſs of viſion. Ray on the Creation:
2. Such ſ - - r
otº, ºuen of things as makes them eaſy to be ſeparately
To DISTI'NGUISH. v. a. ſaſhin -
1. To note the diverfity of Jºº. Latin.]
Rightly to diſtinguiſh, is, by conceit of the mind, to ſever
things different in nature, and to diſcern wherein they
differ. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 3.
2. To ſeparate from others by ſome mark of honour or pre-
ference,
They diffinguiſh my poems from thoſe of other men, and
have made me their peculiar care. Dryden', Fables, Dedicat.
Let us revolve that roll with ſtričieſt eye,
Where, ſafe from time, diſlinguiſh'd actions ſie.
3. To divide by proper notes of diverſity.
Moſes diſtinguiſhes the cauſes of #: flood into thoſe that
belong to the heavens, and thoſe that belong to the earth,
the rains, and the abyſs. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. º: know one from another by any mark or note of dif-
erence.
Prior,
So long
As he could make me, with this eye or ear,
Diſtinguiſh him from others, he did keep
The deck. - Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline,
We have not yet been ſeen in any houſe,
Nor can we be diſlinguiſh’d by our faces,
For man or maſter. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
By our reaſon we are enabled to diſlinguiſh good from evil,
as well as truth from falſhood. //atts's Logick.
5. To diſcern critically; to judge.
Sweet, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet div'd into the world's deceit;
Nor more can you diſlinguiſh of a man,
Than of his outward ſhew 1 Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
6. To conſtitute difference; to ſpecificate; to make different
from another.
St. Paul's Epiſtles contain nothing but points of chriſtian
inſtruction, amongſt which he ſeldom fails to enlarge on the
great and diſtinguiſhing doctrines of our holy religion. Locke.
7. To make known or eminent.
To Disti'NGUISH. v. n. To make diſtinčtion; to find or
ſhew the difference.
He would warily diſlinguiſh between the profit of the mer-
chant and the gain of the kingdom. Child's Diſc. on Trade.
The readers muſt learn by all means to diſlinguiſh between
proverbs and thoſe polite ſpeeches which beautify con-
verſation. Swift.
DISTI'NGUISHAble. adj. [from diſlinguiſh J
1. Capable of being diſtinguiſhed; capable of being known or
made known by notes of diverſity.
By the intervention of a liquor, it puts on the form of a
fluid body; when, being diſſolved in aqueous juices, it is by
the eye diffinguiſhable from the ſolvent body, and appears as
fluid as it is. Boyle.
Impenitent, they left a race behind
Like to themſelves, diffinguiſhable ſcarce
From Gentiles, but by circumciſion vain. Miſt. Parad Reg.
The acting of the ſoul, as it relates to perception and
deciſion, to choice and purſuit, or averſion, is diſtinguiſhable
to us. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
I ſhall diſtribute duty into its principal and eminent parts,
diſlinguiſhable as they relate to God, our neighbour, and our-
ſelves. Government of the Tongue, / 2.
A ſimple idea, being in itſelf uncompounded, contains
nothing but one uniform appearance, or conception in the
mind, and is not diffinguiſhable into different ideas. Locke.
2. Worthy of note; worthy of regard.
I would endeavour that my betters ſhould ſeek me by the
merit of ſomething diſlinguiſhable, inſtead of my ſeeking
them. Swift.
Disti'Nguished, participialadj. [from diſlinguiſ”.] Eminent;
tranſcendent; extraordinary. - -
For fins committed, with many aggravations of guilt, the
furnace of wrath will be ſeven times hotter, and burn with a
diſlinguiſhed fury. Kogers, Serm. 3.
Néver on man did heav'nly favour ſhine
With rays ſo ſtrong, diſtinguiſh'd, and divine. Pope's Odyſ.
Dist1'Nguisher. n.ſ.. [from diſtinguiſh..] . . -
1. A judicious obſerver; one that accurately diſcerns one thing
from another.
lf writers be juſt to the memory of Charles II, they cannot
&amp; deny
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 285</div><p class="Text">Dº I S
deny him to have been an exact knower of mankind, and a
perfect diſtinguiſher of their talents. Dryd. Pºlic, to K. Arthur.
2. He that ſeparates one thing from another by proper marks of
diverſity. -
Let us admire the wiſdom of God in this diſlinguiſher of
times, and viſible deity, the fun. Brown's ſugar Errours.
Disti's GUIs HINGLY. adº. (from diffinguiſhing J With diſtinc-
tion; with ſome mark of eminent preference.
Some call me a Tory, becauſe the heads of that party have
been diffinguiſhingly favourable to me. Pope.
Dist1'NGU is HMENT. n. / [from diſlingiſh.J. Diſtinčtion;
obſervation of difference.
To make corrections upon the ſearchers reports, I conſi-
dered whether any credit at all were to be given to their
diſtinguiſhments. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
To DISIORT. v. a. [di/?ºrtus, Latin.]
1. To writhe ; to twiſt; to deform by irregular motions.
Now mortal pangs diſſort his lovely form. Smith.
2. To put out of the true direction or poſture.
Wrath and malice, envy and revenge, do darken and diſ-
tort the underſtandings of men. Tilotſon.
3. To wreſt from the true meaning.
Something muſt be dj/orted, beſide the intent of the divine
inditer. - Peacham on Poetry.
Disto'RTION. m. ſ. [di'ortio, Lat.] Irregular motion by which
the face is writhed, or the pºrts diſordered.
By his diſjortions he reveals his pains;
He by his tears, and by his ſighs complains Prior.
In England we ſee people lulled aſleep with ſolid and elabo-
rate diſcourſes of piety, who would be warmed and tranſ-
ported out of themſelves by the bellowings and di/?ortions of
enthuſiaſm. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 407.
To DISTRACT. v. a. part paſſ dºſłracted; anciently deſiraught.
[diſtracius, Latin.]
1. To pull different ways at once.
2. To ſeparate; to divide.
By ſea, by ſea.
—Moſt worthy fir, you therein throw away
The abſolute º you have by land;
Diſłračf your army, which doth moſt conſiſt
Of war-mark'd footmen. Shakespeare Anthony and Cleºpatra.
3. To turn from a ſingle direction towards various points.
If he cannot wholly avoid the eye of the obſerver, he hopes
to diſtra: it by a multiplicity of the obječt. South's Sermons.
4. To fill the mind with contrary conſiderations; to perplex;
to confound; to harraſs.
While I ſuffer thy terrors I am di/raiſed. Pſ. lxxxviii. 1;.
Come, couſin, can'ſt thou quake, and change thy colour,
Murther thy breath in middle of a word,
And then again begin, and ſtop again,
As if thou wert diſtraught and mad with terror? Shakespeare. R. III.
It would burſt forth; but I recover breath,
And ſenſe diºraći, to know well what I utter. Milt. Agoni/?.
He poſſeſſes a quiet and cheerful mind, not afflicted with
violent paſſions, or diffraged with immoderate cares. Ray.
If our ſenſe of hearing were a thouſand times quicker than
it is, how would a perpetual noiſe diſtrađ us : We ſhould, in
the quieteſt retirement, be leſs able to ſleep or meditate than
in the middle of a ſea-fight. Locke.
5. To make mad. -
Wherefore throng you hither ?
To fetch my poor diſtracted huſband hence:
Let us come in, that we may bind him faſt,
And bear him home for his recovery. Shakespeare Com. of Err.
Better I were diſirači,
So ſhould my thoughts be ſever'd from my griefs,
And woes, by wrong imagination, loſe
The knowledge of themſelves. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
She was unable, in ſtrength of mind, to bear the grief of
his deceaſe, and fell diffracted of her wits. Bacon's Hen. VII.
You ſhall find a diſtračied man fancy himſelf a king, and
vºith a right inference require ſuitable attendance, reſpect, and
obedicnce. - - * Locke.
Distr Act EDI.Y. adv. [from diſłraft.] Madly; frantickly.
- Methought her eyes had croſt her tongue; -
For ſhe did ſpeak in ſtarts diſtraćirdly, Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
Distſ Act Er NFss. n ſ, [from diffrači.] The ſtate of being
diſtraćted; madneſs. -
D1st RA"crios. m. ſ. [diffrađio, Latin J
1. Tendency to different parts; ſeparation.
While he was yet in Rome,
His power went out in ſuch diſłrađiºns as
Beguil'd all ſpies. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleºpatra.
2. Confuſion; ſtate in which the attention is called different
ways. - -
Never was known a night of ſuch diſraélion;
Noiſe ſo confus'd and drcadful : joſtling crowds,
That run, and knew not whither. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
What may we not hope from him in a time of quiet and
tranquility, ſince, during the late di/?raftions, he has done ſo
much for the advantage of our trade Addison's Freeholder.
3. Perturbation of mind; violence of ſome painful paſſion.
The di/?rađion of the children, who ſaw both their parents
expiring together, would have melted the hardeſt heart. Iailer.
4. Madneſs; frantickneſs; loſs of the wits.
Madam, this is a meer d//ractiºn :
You turn the good we offer into envy. Shakespeare. H. VIII.
So to mad Pentheus double Thebes appears,
And furies howl in his diflemper'd ears.
Oreſtes ſo, with like diºraćion toſi,
Is made to fly his mother's angry ghoſt. I/aller.
Commiſerate all thoſe who labour under a ſettled diſtrac-
tion, and who are ſhut out from all the pleaſures and advan-
tages of human commerce.
5. Diſturbance; tumult; difference of ſentiments.
The two armies lay quiet near each other, without im-
proving the confuſion and dyſraélion which the king's forces
were too much inclined to. Care acº, b. viii.
To DISTRAIN. v. a. ſ from dºingº, Latin. J. To ſeize;
to lay hold on as an indemnification for a debt. -
Here's Beauford, that regards not God nor king.
, Hath here diſtrain'd the Tower to his uſe. Shaºp. Han. VI.
To Distr A'i N. v. m. To make ſeizure.
The earl anſwered, I will not lend money to my ſuperiour, .
upon whom I cannot diſtrain for the debt. Camden's Kewains.
Blood his rent to have regain'd,
Upon the Britiſh diadem diſtrain'd. Marvel.
Distra'INER. m. ſ. [from diſtrain...] He that ſizes.
Distr A'INT. n.ſ.. [iron diºrain..] Seizure. Dž.
Dist RA’UGHT. part. adj. [from diſtraº..] Diſtraćted.
He had been a good military man in his days, but was then
diſtraught of his wits. Camden's Remains.
DISTRESS. n.ſ. [deſireſ, French.]
1. The act of making a legal ſeizure.
2. A compulſion in real actions, by which a man is aſſured to
appear in court, or to pay a debt or duty which he refuſed. Cºw.
When any one was indebted to another, he would firſt de-
mand his debt; and, if he were not paid, he would ſtraight
go and take a diſtreſs of his goods and cattle, where he could
find them, to the value, which he would keep ’till he were
ſatisfied. Speºſer's State of Ireland.
Quoth ſhe, ſome ſay the ſoul's ſecure
Againſt di/?reſ; and forfeiture. Hudibras, p. iii, cant. I.
3. The thing ſeized by law.
4. Calamity ; miſery; misfortune.
There can I fit alone, unſeen of any,
And to the nightingale's complaining notes -
Tune my diſºrſes, and record my woes. Shakespeare.
There ſhall be ſigns in the ſun, and in the moon, and in
the ſtars; and upon earth diſtrºſs of nations, with perplexity,
the ſea and the waves roaring. Lake xxi. 25.
People in affliction or diſreſ, cannot be hated by generous
minds. Clariſſa.
To Distr E'ss. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To proſecute by law to a ſeizure.
2. To barraſs; to make miſerable; to cruſh with calamity.
Diſtreſ, not the Moabites, neither contend with them in
battle. Deutr. ii. 9.
I am diſºrgſºd for thee, my brother Jonathan. 2 Sa. i. 26.
Distr E'ssFUL. adj. [diſtrºſ; and full J Miſera le; full of
trouble; full of miſery. -
He, with a body fill'd and vacant mind,
Gets him to reſt, cramm'd with ajíreſſul bread. Sh, H. V.
I often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did ſpeak of ſome djirºſful ſtroke
That my youth ſuffered. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
The ewes ſtill folded, with diffended thighs,
Unmilk'd, lay bleating in diſreſſul cries. Poſe's Odyſſey.
Diſireſ ful and deſolating events, which have attended the
miſtakes of politicians, ſhould be preſent in their minds. Watts.
To DISTRIBUTE. v. a. [diſtribuo, Lat..] To divide amongſt
more than two; to deal out.
The king ſent over a great ſtore of gentlemen and warlike
people, amongſt whom he diſtributed the land. Speºſer.
The ſpoil got on the Antiates
Was not diſtributed. Shakeſpeare's Coricants.
She did diſtribute her goods to all them that were neareſt of
kindred. judith xvi. 24.
D1st Ri'BUTE R. n.ſ.. [from di/?ribute.] One who deals out
any thing; a beſtower.
There were judges and diſtributºrs of juſtice appointed
for the ſeveral parts of his dominions. Addiſh on Italy.
Of that peculiar matter out of which the bodies of vege-
tables, and conſequently of animals, are formed, water is the
common vehicle and diºributer to the parts of thoſe bodies.
- łłoodward's Natural Hiſtºry.
Distribution. n.ſ. [diſtributio, Latin.]
1. The act of diſtributing or dealing out to others.
Of great riches there is no real uſe, except it be in the
diſtributiºn. - - Bacon's Eſſays.
Providence has made an equal dº?rilutiºn of natural gifts,
whereof each creature ſeverally has a ſhare. L’E/trange.
Every man in a great ſtation would imitate the queen in
the di/?ribution of offices in his diſpoſal. - Swift.
…tº lay's Sermons.
2. Act
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 286</div><p class="Text">D I S
D H S
2. A&amp;t of giving in charity. -
Let us govern our charitable diſtributions by this pattern of
nature, and maintain a mutual circulation of benefits and
returns. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. [In logick, J As an integral whole is diſtinguiſhed into
its ſeveral parts by diviſion; ſo the word diſtribution is moſt
properly uſed, when we diſtinguiſh an univerſal whole into
its ſeveral kinds of ſpecies. //atts's Lºgick.
Dist Ri'BUT 1 v E. adi. [from diſºribute.] -
1. That which is employed in aſſigning to others their portions;
as, diſtributive juſtice, that which allots to cach his ſentence
or claim.
If juſt ce will take all, and nothing give,
Juſtice methinks is not diſtributive. Dryden's Conq. ºf Gran.
Obſerve the diſiributive juſtice of the authors, which is con-
ſtantly applied to the puniſhment of virtue, and the reward
of vice, directly oppoſite to the rules of their beſt criticks. Sw.
2. That which affigns the various ſpecies of a general term.
Distr "PUT v FLY. adv. [from diſtributive.]
1. By diſtribution.
2. Singly ; particularly.
Although we cannot be free from all ſin colle&amp;ively, in
ſuch ſort that no part thereof ſhall be found inherent in us;
yet, diſributively at the leaſt, all great and grievous actual of.
fences, as they offer themſelves one by one, both may, and
ought to be, by all means avoided. Hooker, b. v. ſ 48.
3. In a manner that expreſſes ſingly all the particulars in-
cluded in a general term ; not collectively.
An univerſal term is ſometimes taken colle&amp;tively for all its
particular ideas united together, and ſometimes diſiributively,
meaning each of them ſingle and alone. J/att,’s Logick.
Di's TR icº. n ſ [diſirºus, Latin.]
1. The circuit or territory within which a man may be thus
compelled to appearance. Cowel.
2. Circuit of authority; province.
His governors of towns and provinces, who formed them-
felves upon the example of their grand monarque, practiſed
all the arts of deſpotick government in their reſpective diſ-
tricis. Addiſon.
With ſtern diſtaſte avow’d,
To their own diºrić, drive the ſuitor crowd Pope's Odyſſ.
3. Region ; country; territory.
Thoſe diſtrić's which between the tropicks lie,
The ſcorching beams, directly darted, fry. Blackmore.
To Dist RU'st. v. a. [dis and truſt.] To regard with diffi-
dence; to diffide in ; not to truſt.
- He ſheweth himſelf unto ſuch as do not diffruſt him. Wiſd.
Distru's r. n.ſ [from the verb.]
1. Diſcredit; loſs of credit; loſs of confidence.
To me reproach
Rather belongs, diſtruſt, and all diſpraiſe. Miſt. Par. Loft.
2. Suſpicion; want of faith; want of confidence in another.
You doubt not me; nor have I ſpent my blood,
To have my faith no better underſtood:
Your ſoul's above the baſeneſs of diſruff;
Nothing but love could make you ſo unjuſt. Dryd, Aureng.
Distru'stful... adj. [diſruſ; and full.]
1. Apt to diſtruſt; ſuſpicious.
Generals often harbour diffruſ ful thoughts in their
breaſts. Boyle's Seraphick Love.
2. Not confident; diffident.
The great corrupters of diſcourſe have not been ſo diſruff-
ful of themſelves. Government of the Tºngue.
3. Diffident of himſelf; modeſt; timorous.
Di/ru/iful ſenſe with modeſt caution ſpeaks;
It ſtill looks home, and ſhort excurſions makes; {
But rattling nonſenſe in full vollies breaks. Pope.
Distru's TFULLY. adv. [from diſru/ful..] In a diſtruſtful
Indilſ) Cr. . .
DISTRU's TFULNEss. m. ſ [from diſh uſſul..] The ſtate of
being diſtruſtful; want of confidence.
To DiS TURB. v. a [diſłurbo, low Latin.] -
1. To perplex; to diſquiet; to deprive of tranquillity.
He that has his own troubles, and the happineſs of his
neighbours to did urb him, has work enough. Collier on Envy.
His youth with wants and hardſhips muſt engage;
Plots and rebellions muſt diſturb his age. Prior.
2. To confound; to put into irregular motions.
3. To interrupt ; to hinder. -
4. To turn off from any direction: with from. This is not
uſual.
It oſt-times may ſucceed, ſo as perhaps
Shall grieve him, if I fail not; and diſturb
His inmoſt counſels fom their deſtin’d aim. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Distu'R BANCE. m. ſ. [from dilurb.]
1. Perplexity ; int. ruption of tranquility.
The denomination of money concerns trade, and the alte-
ration of that neceſſarily brings diſturbance to it. Locke.
2. Confuſion; diſorder.
They can ſurvey a variety of complicated ideas without
fatigue or di/iiirlance. //atts's Improvement of the jºind.
3. Tumult; violation of peace.
This miſchief had not then befall'n,
And more that ſhall befal: innunerable
Diſturbances on earth through female ſnares. Miſt. Pa. Lºft.
Distu'R BER. m.ſ [from diſiuri j
1. A violater of peace; he that cauſes tumults and publick diſ-
orders.
He ſtands in the fight both of God and men moſt juſtly
blameable, as a needleſs diſturber of the peace of God's
church, and an author of diſienſion. Hooker, b iv. f. 1 ..
Men that make an inſult upon ſociety, ought to be hum-
bled as diſturbers of the publick tranquility. Addison Freeholder.
Ye great diſturbers, who in endleſs noiſe,
In blood and horror, ſeek unnatural joys;
. For what is all this buſtle, but to ſhun
Thoſe thoughts with which you dare not be alone. Granv.
2. He that injures tranquillity; he that cauſes perturbation of
mind.
Two deep encinies,
Foes to my reſt, and my ſweet ſleep's diſturers,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon. Shakeſp. R. III.
To DISTU'RN. v. a. [d's and turn..] To turn off; to turn
aſide. -
He glad was to di/?urn that furious ſtream
Of war on us, that elſe had ſwallow'd them. Daniel.
DIsvalu A'tion. m.ſ. [dis and valuation.] Diſgrace; diminu-
tion of reputation.
What can be more to the diſtaluation of the power of the
Spaniard, than that eleven thouſand Engliſh ſhould, within
two months, have marched into the heart of his countries?
Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
To Disv A'LUE. v. a. [dis and value.] To undervalue; to ſet
a low price upon.
Her reputation was diſalićd
In levity. Shakespeare’s Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
The very ſame pride which prompts a man to vaunt and
overvalue what he is, does as forcibly incline him to contemn
and alſvalue what he has. Government of the Tongue.
To Disv E'lop. v. a. [developer, French..] To uncover. Dicſ.
DISU'NION. m. ſ. [dis and union.] i
1. Separation ; disjunction.
Reſt is moſt oppoſite to motion, the immediate cauſe of
diſunion. Glanv. Scºpſ, c 7.
Diſunion of the corporeal principles, and the vital, cauſeth
death. Grew’s Coſmºl. Sac.
Let not peace be made before the diſunion of France and
Spain. Addison's State ºf the Iſar.
The ſtrength of it will join itſelf to France, and grow the
cloſer to it by its diſunion from the reſt. Addiſon on the J/ar.
2. Breach of concord. - - -
To DisUNITE. v. a. [dis and unite.]
1. To ſeparate; to divide.
The beaſt they then divide, and diſanite
The ribs and limbs.
2. To part friends or allies.
To DisUNITE. v. n. [dis and unite.] To fall aſunder; to be-
come ſeparate.
While every particular member of the publick provides
ſolely for itſelf, the ſeveral joints of the body politick do ſepa-
rate and diſunite, and ſo become unable to ſupport the
whole. South's Sermons.
DisU'Nity. n.ſ. [dis and unity.] A ſtate of actual ſeparation.
Diſunity is the natural property of matter, which of itſelf
is nothing elſe but an infinite congeries of phyſical monads.
- More's Divine Dialogues.
DisU's AGE. m. ſ. [ dis and uſage. J The gradual cellation of
uſe or cuſtom. -
They cut off preſently ſuch things as might be extin-
guiſhed without danger, leaving the reſt to be aboliſhed by
diſuſage through tract of time. Hoºker, b. iv. f. 14.
Disu’s E. m. ſ. [dis and uſe.]
1. Ceſſation of uſe; deſſuetude; want of pračtice.
The diſuſe of the tongue is the only effectual remedy
againſt theſe. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 1 2.
2. Ceſſation of cuſtom. *
That obligation upon the lands did not preſcribe, or come
into diſuſe, but by fifty conſecutive years. Arwutºnot,
To Disu's E. v. a. [dis and uſe..]
1. To ceaſe to make uſe of.
'Tis law, though cuſtom now diverts the courſe;
As nature's inſtitute is yet in force, -
Uncancell'd, though diſus’d. Dryden's Faller.
Priam, in arms diſus'd, inveſts his limbs decay’d. Dryden.
2. To diſaccuſtom.
He ſhall his troops for fighting fields prepare,
Diſus’d to toils and triumphs of the war. Dryden's Żn.
To D15 vouch. v. a. [dis and vouch..] To deſtroy the credit
of ; to contradićt.
Every letter he hath writ hath diſ ouched another. Shakespeare.
Diswift'ſ Ed. adj. [dis and wit..] Deprived of the wits; mad;
diſtraćted. A word not in uſe.
She ran away alone;
Which when they heard, there was not one
Pope's Odyſſey.
I
But
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 287</div><p class="Text">D I V
D I V
But haſted after to be gone, -
As ſhe had been diſwitted. Drayton's Nºmlid.
DIT. n.ſ. [dicht, Dutch..] A ditty ; a poem ; a tune. Obſolete.
No bird but did her ſhrill notes ſweetly ſing;
No ſong but did contain a lovely dit. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
DITCH. n J. [bic, Saxon; diik, Erſe.]
1. A trench cut in the ground uſually between fields.
Some aſked for manors, others for acres that lay convenient
for them; that he would pull down his fences, and level his
ditches. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory ºf john Bull.
Sudden the d"tches ſwell, the meadows ſwim. Thomſon.
2. Any long narrow receptacle of water: uſed ſometimes of a
ſmall river in contempt.
In the great plagues there were ſeen, in divers ditches and
low grounds about London, many toads that had tails three
inchcs long. Bacon.
3. The moat with which a town is ſurrounded.
The ditc'es, ſuch as they were, were altogether dry, and
eaſy to be paſſed over. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
4. Ditch is uſed, in compoſition, of any thing worthleſs, or
thrown away into ditches. -
Poor Tom, when the foul fiend rages, eats cowdung for
fallets, ſwallows the old rat, and the ditch-dog. Shakeſpeare.
To Ditch. v. a. [from the noun..] To make a ditch.
I have employed my time, beſides ditching, in finiſhing my
travels. Swift.
Ditch-DELIver ED. adj. [ditch and deliver.] Brought forth in
a ditch.
Finger of birth-ſtrangled babe,
Ditch-deliver'd by a drab. Shakeſ; ca. e's Macleth.
D1'tch ER. n.ſ.. [from ditch..] One who digs ditches.
You merit new employments daily,
Our thatcher, ditcher, gard’ner, baily. Swift.
DITHY RA'MBick. n.ſ. [dithyrambus, Latin.]
1. A ſong in honour of Bacchus; in which anciently, and now
among the Italians, the diſtraćtion of ebriety is imitated.
2. Any poem written with wildneſs and enthuſiaſm.
Pindar does new words and figures roll
Down his impetuous dithyrambic; tide. Cowley.
Ditt A'Nder. n.ſ. The ſame with pepperwort, which ſee.
Di'TTA NY. n.ſ. [didamnus, Latin.]
Dittany hath been renowned for many ages, upon the
account of its ſovereign qualities in medicines. It is generally
brought over dry from the Levant. A/illar.
Virgil reports of dittany, that the wild goats eat it when
they are ſhot with darts. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
D1't'rie D. adj. [from ditty J Sung; adapted to muſick.
He, with his ſoft pipe, and ſmooth dittied ſong,
Well knows to ſtill the wild winds when they roar. Milton.
DITTY. n.ſ. [dºcht, Dutch J A poem to be ſung; a ſong.
Although we lay altogether aſide the confideration of ditty
or matter, the very harmony of ſounds being framed in due
ſort, and carried from the ear to the ſpiritual faculties of our
fouls, is, by a native puiſſance and efficacy, greatly available
to bring to a perfect temper whatſoever is there troubled. H.ok.
Being young, I fram'd to the harp
Many an Engliſh ditty, lovely well,
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Strike the melodious harp, ſhrill timbrels ring,
And to the warbling lute ſoft ditties fing. Sandys.
His annual wound in Lebanon, allur’d
The Syrian damſels to lament his fate,
In am’rous ditties, all a Summer's day. Milt. Paradiſ. Lºft.
Mean while the rural ditties were not mute,
Temper'd to th' oaten flute;
Rough ſatyrs danc'd. Milton.
They will be fighing and finging under thy inexorable
windows lamentable dittie, and call thee cruel. Dryden.
Dry A'N. m.ſ. [An Arabick or Turkiſh word.]
1. The council of the Oriental princes.
2. Any council aſſembled: uſed commonly in a ſenſe of diſlike.
Forth ruſh'd in haſte the great conſulting peers,
Rais'd from the dark divan, and with like joy
Congratulant approach'd him. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. x.
Swift to the queen the herald Medon ran,
Who heard the conſult of the dire divan. Pºpe's Odyſſey.
To DIVARICATE. v. m. [divaricatus, Latin.] To be parted
into two ; to become bifid.
The partitions are ſtrained acroſs; and as they tend towards
the cruſt, they gradually leſſen: one of them alſo divaricates
into two, and another into ſeveral ſmall ones. J/oodward.
To Diva'RicATE. v. a. To divide into two.
A ſlender pipe is produced forward towards the throat, -
whereinto it is at laſt inſerted, and is there divaricated, after
the ſame manner as the ſpermatick veſſels. Grew's Coſm. Sac.
Div AR IcA’t los. n: / [divaricatio, Latin.]
1. Partition into two. -
Dogs, running before their maſters, will ſtop at a divaria-
tion of the way, 'till they ſee which hand their maſters will
take. Ray on tº e Creation.
2. Diviſion of opinions.
To take away all doubt, or any probable divarication, the
curſe is plainly ſpecified. Brown', Wulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 11.
To DIVE. v. n. [sippan, Saxon.]
1. To ſink voluntarily under water.
I am not yet informed, whether when a diver diveth, having
his eyes open, and ſwimeth upon his back, he ſees things in
the air greater or leſs. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 76.
Around our pole the ſpiry dragon glides,
And, like a winding ſtream, the Bears divides,
The leſs and greater; who, by fate's decree,
Abhor to dive beneath the Southern ſea. Dryd. Pig. Georg.
That the air in the blood-veſſels of live bodies has a com-
munication with the cutward air, I think, ſeems plain, from
the experiments of human creatures being able to bear air of
much greater denſity in diving, and of much leſs upon the tops
of mountains, provided the changes be made gradually. A b.
2. To go under water in ſearch of anything
Crocodiles defend thoſe pearls which lie in the lakes: the
poor Indians are eaten up by them, when they dive for the
pearl. Raleigh's Hiſtory f the I/orld.
The knave deſerves it, when he tempts the main,
Where folly fights for kings, or dives for gain. Pope's Eſſays.
3. To go deep into any queſtion; doctrine; or ſcience.
The wits that div'd moſt deep, and ſoar'd moſt high,
Seeking man's powers, have found his weakneſs ſuch. Davies.
He performs all this out of his own fund, without d'ving
into the arts and ſciences for a ſupply. Dryden.
Whenſoever we would proceed beyond thoſe ſimple ideas,
and dive farther into the nature of things, we fall preſently
into darkneſs and obſcurity. - Locke.
You ſwim a-top, and on the ſurface ſtrive;
But to the depths of nature never dive. Plackmore.
You ſhould have div'd into my inmoſt thoughts. Philips.
4. To immerge into any buſineſs or condition.
Sweet prince, th’ untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet div'd into the world's decº .
Nor can you diſtinguiſh. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
5. To depart from obſervation.
Dive thoughts down to my ſoul, here Clarence comes.
Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
To Dive. v. a. To explore by diving.
Then Brutus, Rome's firſt martyr I ſhuſt name,
The Curtii bravely div'd the gulph of fame. Denham.
D1've R. m. ſ. [from dive.]
1. One that ſinks voluntarily under water.
If perſeverance gain the diver's prize,
Not everlaſting Blackmore this denies. Pope's Dunciad.
2. One that goes under water in ſearch of treaſure.
It is evident, from the relation of divers and fiſhers for
pearls, that there are many kinds of ſhell-fiſh which lie per-
petually concealed in the deep, ſkreened from our ſight. //codw.
3. He that enters deep into knowledge or ſtudy.
He would have him, as I conceive it, to be no ſuperficial
and floating artificer; but a diver into cauſes, and into the
myſteries of proportion. J/otton's Architecăure.
To DIVERGE. v. n. [divergo, Latin.] To tend various ways
from one point.
Homogeneal rays, which flow from ſeveral points of any
object, and fall perpendicularly on any reflecting ſurface, ſhall
afterwards diverge from ſo many points. Newton's Opt.
Dive'RGENT. adj. [from divergens, Lat.] Tending to various
parts from one point.
DI've Rs. adj. [diverſus, Latin.] Several; fundry; more than
one. It is now grown out of uſe.
We have divers examples in the primitive church of ſuch
as, by fear, being compelled to ſacrifice to ſtrange gods, after
repented, and kept ſtill the office of preaching the goſpel.
Iſhitgift.
The teeth breed when the child is a year and a half old :
then they caſt them, and new ones come about ſeven years;
but divers have backward teeth come at twenty, ſome at thirty
and forty. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N9.755.
Divers letters were ſhot into the city with arrows, wherein
Solyman's councils were revealed. Knºlles's Hiſt, ºf the Turks.
Divers friends thought it ſtrange, that a white dry body
ſhould acquire a rich colour, upon the affuſion of ſpring-
Water. Boyle on Colours.
DI’ve Rs E. adj. [diverſus, Latin.]
1. Different from another.
Four great beaſts came up from the ſea, diverſ one from
another. - Dan. vii. 3.
2. Different from itſelf; various; multiform; diffuſed.
Eloquence is a great and diverſe thing, nor did ſhe yet ever
favour any man ſo much as to be wholly his. Ben. johnſon.
3. In different directions. It is little uſed but in the laſt ſenſe.
To ſeize his papers, Curl, was next thy care;
His papers light, fly diverſe toſt in air. Pope's Dunciad, b. ii.
DiversIFICATION. m. ſ. [from diverſiſy.]
1. The act of changing forms or qualities.
If you conſider how variouſly ſeveral things may be com-
pounded, you will not wonder that ſuch fruitful principles, or
Imanners<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 288</div><p class="Text">D I V
D I V
º
|
manners of diverſfication, ſhould generate differing colours.
- - - - Boyle on Colours.
2. Variation; variegation.
3, Variety of forms; multiformity.
4. Change; alteration.
This which is here called a change of will, is not a change
of his will, but a change in the objećt, which ſeems to make
a diverſification of the will, but indeed is the ſame will diver-
ſified. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To Drve'Rs.IFY. v. a. ſ.liverſifier, French.]
1. To make different from another; to diſtinguiſh.
There may be many ſpecies of ſpirits, as much ſeparated
and diverſified one from another as the ſpecies of ſenſible things
are diſtinguiſhed one from another. Locke.
Male ſouls are diverſified with ſo many charaćters, that the
world has not variety of materials ſufficient to furniſh out their
different inclinations. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 211.
It was eaſier for Homer to find proper ſentiments for Gre-
cian generals, than for Milton to diverſify his infernal council -
with proper charaćters. Addiſon's Spectator.
2. To make different from itſelf; to vary; to variegate.
The country being diverſified between hills and dales,
woods and plains, one place more clear, another more dark-
ſome, it is a pleaſant pićture. Sidney.
There is, in the producing of ſome ſpecies, a compoſition
of matter, which may be much diverſified. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Dive'Rs 1 on. n.ſ.. [from divert.]
1. The aët of turning anything off from its courſe.
Cutting off the tops, and pulling off the buds, work reten-
tion of the ſap for a time, and diverſion of it to the ſprouts
that were not forward. Bacon's Natural Hiſory.
2. The cauſe by which any thing is turned from its proper
courſe or tendency.
Fortunes, honour, friends,
Are mere diverſions from love's proper objećt,
Which only is itſelf. - Denham's Sºphy.
3. Sport; ſomething that unbends the mind by turning it off
from care. Diverſion ſeems to be ſomething lighter than
amuſement, and leſs forcible than pleaſure.
You for thoſe ends whole days in council it,
And the diverſions of your youth forget. //aller.
In the book of games and diverſions the reader's mind may
be ſuppoſed to be relaxed. e Addiſon's Spectator.
Such produćtions of wit and humour as expoſe vice and
folly, furniſh uſeful diverſions to readers. Addiſon's Freeholder.
4. [In war.] The aët or purpoſe of drawing the enemy off from
ſome deſign, by threatening or attacking a diſtant part.
Dive'RSITY. m. ſ. [diverſité, Fr. from diverſitas, Latin.]
1. Difference; diſſimilitude; unlikeneſs.
Then is there in this diverſity no contrariety. Hoºker, b.v.
They cannot be divided, but they will prove oppoſite; and
not §: in a bare diverſity, quickly riſe into a contrariety.
South's Sermons.
2. Variety.
The diverſity of ceremonies in this kind ought not to cauſe
diſſenſion in churches. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 13.
The moſt common diverſity of human conſtitutions ariſes
from the ſolid parts, as to their different degrees of ſtrength
and tenſion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Diſtinét being; not identity.
Society cannot ſubſiſt without a diverſity of ſtations; and if
God ſhould grant every one a middle ſtation, he would defeat
the very ſcheme of happineſs propoſed in it. Rogers.
Conſidering any thing as exiſting, at any determined time
and place, we compare it with itſelf exiſting at another time,
and thereon form the ideas of identity and diverſity. Locke.
4. Variegation.
A waving glow his bloomy beds diſplay,
Bluſhing in bright diverſities of day.
DI’v ERsly. adv. [from diverſe.]
1. In different ways; differently; variouſly.
Our common neceſſitics, and the lack we all have as well
of ghoſtly, as of earthly favours, is in each kind eaſily known;
but the gifts of God are ſo diverſy beſtowed, that it ſeldom
appeareth what all receive: what all ſtand in need of ſeldom
lieth hid. Hºoker, b. v. ſ. 43.
Both of them do diverſy work, as they have their medium
diverſly diſpoſed. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 264.
Whether the king did permit it to ſave his purſe, or to
communicate the envy of a buſineſs, diſpleaſing to his people,
was diverſy interpreted. Bacºn.
Leiceſter bewrayed a deſire to plant him in the queen's
favour, which was diverſy interpreted by ſuch as thought
that great artizan of courts to do nothing by chance, nor
much by affection. J7%tton.
The univerſal matter, which Moſes comprehendeth under
the names of heaven and earth, is by divers diverſy under-
ſtood. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
William's arm
Could nought avail, however fam'd in war;
Nor armies leagu'd, that diverſy affay'd
Vol. I.
Pope, Epiſtle 4.
-
To curb his power.
2. In different direétions; to different points.
On life's vaſt ocean diverſ, we ſail;
Reaſon the card, but paſſion is the gaſe. Pot."
-- paſſion is the gale. Pope's Eff, on Man.
To DIVE/RT. v. a. [diverto, }.} pe's Eff.
1. To turn off from any direction or courſe.
I rather will ſubject me to the majce
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
He finds no reaſon to have his rent abated
£ºr part of it is diverted from his landlord.
They diverted raillery from improper objećts,
new turn to ridicule.
Nothing more is requiſite for
colours and degrees of refrangi
light be bodies of different ſizes; the leaſt of which may
make violet the weakeſt and d
- arkeſt of the colours, and be
more eaſily diverted by refracting ſurfaces from the right
courſe; and the reſt, as they are bigger and bigger, make
the ſtronger and more lucid colours, blue, green, yülow, and
rºl, and be more and more difficultly divºrted. Newton', Opt.
2. To draw forces to a different part.
The kings of England would have had an abſolute con-
queſt of Ireland, if their whole power had been employed;
but ſtill there aroſe fundry occaſions, which divided and di.
verted their power ſome other way. - Davies on Ireland.
3. To withdraw the mind. -
Alas, how ſimple, to theſe cates compar'd,
Was that crude apple that diverted Eyeſ Milton's Pa. Rºg.
They avoid pleaſure, leſt they ſhould have their affections
tainted by any ſenſuality, and diverted from the love of him
who is to be the only comfort.
Phillips,
Shakeſpeare.
, becauſe a
Locke.
and gave a
Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 45.
producing all the variety of
bility, than that the rays of
Addiſon on lialy.
Maro's muſe, not wholly bent
Qn what is gainful, ſometimes ſhe divert,
From ſolid counſel. Phill ps.
4. To pleaſe; to exhilerate. See Diversion.
An ingenious gentleman did divert or inſtruct the kingdom
by his papers. wift.
5. To ſubvert; to deſtroy, in Sºakeſ care.
Frights, changes, horrours,
Divert and crack, rend and dcracinate
The unity and married calm of ſtates. Shakespeare. Troil. and Creſ.
Div E(RTER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Anything that diverts or
alleviates.
Angling was, after tedious ſtudy, a reſt to his mind, a
cheerer of his ſpirits, and a diverter of ſadneſs. Walton's Angl.
To DIVERTI'SE. v. a. [divertiſer, French; diverto, Latin.]
To pleaſe; to exhilerate; to divert. A word now little
uſed.
Let orators inſtruct, let them divertiſe, and let them move
us, this is what is properly meant by the word ſalt. Dryden.
D1 v E'RTIs EMENT. n.ſ. [divertiſement, French.j Diverſion;
delight; pleaſure. A word now not much in uſe.
How fond ſoever men are of bad divertiſement, it will prove
mirth which ends in heavineſs. Government of the Tongue.
Dive'Rtive. adj. [from divert J Recreative; amuſive; exhi-
lerating.
I would not exclude the common accidents of life, nor
even things of a pleaſant and divertive nature, ſo they are
innocent, from converſation. Rogers's Sermons.
To DIVE/ST. v. a. [deve/fir, French. The Engliſh word is
therefore more properly written deveſ?. See DEVEST.] To
ſtrip; to make naked.
Then of his arms Androgeus he diveſ'; ;
His ſword, his ſhield he takes, and plumed creſts. Denham.
Let us diveſ the gay phantom of temporal happineſs, of
all that falſe luſtre and ornament in which the pride, the paſ-
ſions, and the folly of men have dreſſed it up. Rogers's Serm.
Dive's a URE. m. ſ. [from diveſ?..] The aët of putting off.
The diveſture of mortality diſpenſes them from thoſe labo-
rious and avocating duties which are here requiſite to be
performed. - Boyle's Seraphick Lºve.
DI’vid ABLE. adj [from divide.] Separate; different; parted.
A word not uſed.
How could communities maintain
Peaceful commerce from dividable ſhores Shakeſpeare.
Divi'DANT, adj. [from divide..] Different; ſeparate. A word
not in uſe.
Twinn’d brothers of one womb,
Whoſe procreation, reſidence, and birth - -
Scarce is dividant, touch with ſeveral fortunes. Shakespeare. Timon.
To DIVIDE. v. a. [divid, Latin J
1. To part one whole into different pieces.
Diviſ, the living child in two, and give half to the one,
1 Kings iii. 25.
and half to the other. -
Let old Timotheus yield the prize,
Or both divide the crown ;
He rais'd a mortal to the ſkies,
She drew an angel down. Dryden's St. Cecilia.
They were divided into little, independent ſocieties, ſpeak-
ing different languages. Locke.
2. To ſeparate ; 'hkeep apart; to ſtand as a partition between.
7 Let .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 289</div><p class="Text">D I V
D I V
Let there be firmament in the midſt of the waters, and
let it divide the waters from the waters. Gen. i.
- You muſt go
where ſeas, and winds, and dearts will divide you. Pryd.
3. To diſunite by diſcord. - --
There ſhall five in one houſe be divided. Luke xii.
4. To deal out; to give in ſhares.
Then in the midſt a tearing groan did break
The name of Anthony: it was divided
Between her heart and lips. Shakespeare Anthony and Cleºpatra.
Divide the prey into two parts, between them that took
the war upon them, who went out to battle, and between all
the congregation. Num xxxi. 27.
Cham and Japhet were heads and princes ower their fami-
lies, and had a right to divide the earth by families. Locke.
To Divi'DE. v. m. To part; to ſunder; to break friendſhip.
Love cools, friendſhip falls off,
Brothers divide. Shakespeare's King Lear.
DI'v 1 DEND. m.ſ.. [from divide..] A ſhare; the part allotted
in diviſion.
Each perſon ſhould adapt to himſelf his peculiar ſhare, like
other dividends. Decay of Piety:
If on ſuch petty merits you confer
So vaſt a prize, let each his portion ſhare:
Make a juſt dividend; and, if not all,
The greater part to Diomede will fall. Dryden's Fables.
Dividend is the number given to be parted or divided.
Cocker's Arithmetick.
Div 1'DER. m. ſ. [from divide.]
1. That which parts any thing into pieces.
According as the body moved, the divider did more and
more enter into the divided body; ſo it joined itſelf to ſome
new parts of the medium, or divided body, and did in like
manner forſake others. Digby on the Soul.
2. A diſtributer; he who deals out to each his ſhare.
Who made me a judge or divider over you? Lu, xii. 14.
3. A diſuniter; the perſon or cauſe that breaks concord.
Money, the great divider of the world, hath, by a ſtrange
revolution, been the great uniter of a divided people. Swift.
4. A particular kind of compaſſes.
Divi'DUAL. adj. [dividuus, Latin.] Divided; ſhared or par-
ticipated in common with others.
She ſhines,
Revolv'd on heav'n's great axle, and her reign
With thouſand leſſer lights dividual holds,
With thouſand thouſand ſtars! Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. vii.
Divin A'TION. n.ſ. [divinatio, Latin.]
Divination is a predićtion or foretelling of future things,
which are of a ſecret and hidden nature, and cannot be
known by any human means. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Certain tokens they noted in birds, or in the entrails
of beaſts, or by other the like frivolous divinations. Hocker.
Surely there is no enchantment againſt Jacob, neither is
there any divination againſt Iſrael. Num. xxiii. 23.
Tell thou thy earl his divination lies,
And I will take it as a ſweet diſgrace. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
His count'nance did imprint an awe;
And naturally all ſouls to his did bow,
As wands of divination downward draw,
And point to beds where ſov’reign gold doth grow. Dryden.
The excellency of the ſoul is ſeen by its power of divining
in dreams: that ſeveral ſuch divinations have been made, none
can queſtion who believes the holy writings. Addiſon's Speciat.
DIVINE, adj. [divinus, Latin.]
1. Partaking of the nature of God.
Her line
Was hero-make, half human, half divine. Dryden.
2. Proceeding from God; not natural; not human.
The benefit of nature's light is not thought excluded as
unneceſſary, becauſe the neceſſity of a divine light is mag-
nified. Hooker.
- Inſtructed, you’d explore
Divine contrivance, and a God adore. Blackmore's Creation.
3. Excellent in a ſupreme degree.
- The divingſ; and richeſt mind,
Both by art's purchaſe and by nature's dower,
That ever was from heav'n to earth confin'd. Davies.
4. Preſageful; divining; preſcient.
Yet oft his heart, divine of ſomething ill,
Miſgave him; he the fault'ring meaſure felt. Miſt. Pa, Lo?.
Divi's E. n.ſ.
1. A miniſter of the goſpel; a pricſt ; a clergyman.
Claudio muſt die to-morrow : let him be furniſhed with
divings, and have all charitable preparation. Shakesp. Meaſ fºr Maj.
Give Martius leave to proceed in his diſcourſe, for he
ſpoke like a divine in armour. Bacºn’s Holy //ar.
A divine has nothing to ſay to the wiſeſt congregation,
which he may not expreſs in a manner to be underſtood by
the meaneſt among them. Swift.
2. A man ſkilled in divinity; a theologian.
Th’cternal cauſe in their immortal lines
Was taught, and pocts were the firſt divines. Denham.
To Divi'NE. v. a. [divino, Latin.]
1. To foretell; to foreknow; to preſage.
Why do'ſt thou ſay king Richard is depos'd?
Dar'ft thou, thou little better thing than earth,
Divine his downfall Shakeſpeare.
To Div 1'N E. v. m.
1. To utter prognoſtication.
Then is Caeſar and he knit together.——If I were to
divine of this unity, I would not propheſy ſo. Shakespeare
The prophets thereof divine for money. Mic. iii. 1 i.
2. To feel preſages.
If ſecret powers
Suggeſt but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliſs. Shakespeare H. VI.
3. To conječture; to gueſs.
The beſt of commentators can but gueſs at his meaning;
none can be certain he has divined rightly. Dryd, juv. Dedic.
He took it with a bow, and ſoon divin'd -
The ſeeming toy was not for nought deſign'd. Dryd. Fables.
In change of torment would be eaſe,
Could you divine what lovers bear;
Even you, Prometheus, would confeſs
There is no virtue like deſpair. Granville.
Divi'NELY. adv. [from divine.]
1. By the agency or influence of God.
Faith, as we uſe the word, called commonly divine faith,
has to do with no propoſitions but thoſe which are ſuppoſed to
be divinely inſpired. Locke.
This topick was very fitly and diviney made uſe of by our
apoſtle, in his conference with philoſophers, and the inquiſitive
people of Athens. Bently's Sermons.
2. Excellently in the ſupreme degree.
The Grecians moſt divinely have given to the active per-
fe&amp;tion of men, a name expreſſing both beauty and good-
neſs. Hooker.
She fair, diviney fair! fit love for gods. Milt, Par. Lºſt.
Exalted Socrates divinely bravel
Injur'd he fell, and dying he forgave;
Too noble for revenge. Creech's juvenal, Sat.13.
3. In a manner noting a deity.
His golden horns appear'd,
That on the forehead ſhone divinel, bright,
And o'er the banks diffus’d a yellow light. Addison's Italy:
Div 1'NENEss. n.ſ. [from divine.]
1. Divinity; participation of the divine nature. -
Is it then impoſſible to diſtinguiſh the divineneſs of this
book from that which is humane Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
2. Excellence in the ſupreme degree.
By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,
An earthly paragon: behold divineneſs
No elder than a boy. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Divi'NER. m. ſ. [from To divine.]
1. One that profeſſes divination, or the art of revealing occult
things by ſupernatural means. -
This drudge of the devil, this diviner, laid claim to me,
called me Dronio, and ſwore I was aſſured to her; told me
what privy marks I had about me. Shakespeare Comedy of Errours.
Expelled his oracles, and common temples of deluſion, the
devil runs into corners, exerciſing meaner trumperies, and acting
his deceits in witches, magicians, diviners, and ſuch inferior
ſeducers. Brown's Wulgar Erraurs, b. vii. c. 12.
2. Conjećturer; gueſſer.
If he himſelf be conſcious of nothing he then thought on,
he muſt be a notable diviner of thoughts that can aſſure him
that he was thinking. Locke.
Divi"NER ess. n.ſ.. [from d viner.] A propheteſs; a woman
profeſſing divination. -
The mad divinereſ had plainly writ,
A time ſhould come, but many ages yet,
In which ſiniſter deſtinies ordain,
A dame ſhould drown with all her feather'd train. Dryden.
Divi'NITY. m. ſ. [divinité, French, from divinitas, Latin.]
1. Participation of the nature and excellence of God; deity;
godhead.
As with new wine intoxicated both,
They ſwim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
I)ivinity within them breeding wings,
Wherewith to ſcorn the earth. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix.
When he attributes divinity to other things than God,
it is only a divinity by way of participation. Stillingfleet.
2. God; the Deity; the Supreme Being; the Cauſe of cauſes.
3. Fäſe god.
- Vain idols, deities that ne'er before
In Iſrael's lands had fix'd their dire abodes,
Bcaſtly divinities, and groves of Gods. Prior.
4. Celeſtial being.
God doubtleſs can govern this machine he could create,
by more direct and eaſy methods than employing theſe ſubſer-
vient divinities. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
5. The ſcience of divine things; theology.
Hear him but reaſon in divinity,
And,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 290</div><p class="Text">D I V
D I V
- And, all admiring with an inward wiſh, " .
| You would deſire the king were made a prel..te. Shakespeare H. VI.
- - Truſt not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this ſweet lady lie not guiltleſs here - -
Under ſome biting errour. Shakespeare Much Ado about Nothing.
Among hard words I number thoſe which are peculiar to
* divinity, as it is a ſcience. Swift.
6. Something ſupernatural.
They ſay there is divinity in odd numbers, either in nati-
vity, chance, or death. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of //indſor.
DIVISIBLE. adj. [diviſibilis, Latin.] Capable of being divided
into parts; diſcerptible; ſeparable.
When we frame in our minds any notion of matter, we
conceive nothing elſe but extenſion and bulk, which is impe-
netrable, or diviſible and paſſive. Bentley's Sermons.
Divisibi'lity. m. ſ. [diviſibilité, French..] The quality of ad-
mitting diviſion or ſeparation of parts.
The moſt palpable abſurdities will preſs the aſſerters of
infinite diviſibility. Glanv. Scºpſ, c. 7.
This will eaſily appear to any one, who will let his
thoughts looſe in the vaſt expanſion of ſpace, or diviſibility of
matter. Locke.
DIvi'sibleNess. n.ſ [from diviſible.] Diviſibility.
Naturaliſts diſagree about the origin of motion, and the
indefinite diviſibleneſs of matter. Boyle.
DIvi's Ion. n.ſ. [diviſio, Latin.]
1. The act of dividing any thing into parts.
Thou madeſt the ſpirit of the firmament, and commanded
it to part aſunder, and to make a diviſion betwixt the waters.
2 Eſdr. vi. 41.
2. The ſtate of being divided.
3. That by which any thing is kept apart; partition.
4. The part which is ſeparated from the reſt by dividing.
If we look into communities and diviſions of men, we ob-
ſerve that the diſcreet man, not the witty, guides the conver-
ſation. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 225.
5. Diſunion; diſcord; difference.
There was a diviſion among the people, becauſe of
him. jo. vii. 43.
As to our diviſions with the Romaniſts, were our diffe-
rences the product of heat, they would, like ſmall clefts in the
ground, want but a cool ſeaſon to cement them. Dec. of Piety.
6. Parts into which a diſcourſe is diſtributed.
In the diviſions I have made, I have endeavoured, the beſt
I could, to govern myſelf by the diverſity of matter. Locke.
Expreſs the heads of your diviſions in as few and clear
words as you can, otherwiſe I never can be able to retain
them. Swift.
7. Space between the notes of muſick, or parts of a muſical
compoſure; juſt time.
Thy tongue
Makes Welſh as ſweet as ditties highly penn'd,
Sung by a fair queen, in a Summer's bower,
With raviſhing diviſion to her lute. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Our tongue will run diviſions in a tune, not miſſing a note,
even when our thoughts are totally engaged elſewhere. Glanv.
8. Diſtinétion. -
I will put a diviſion between my people and thy people. Ex.
9. [In arithmetick.] The ſeparation or parting of any number
or quantity given, into any parts aſſigned. Cocker's Arithmetick.
10. Subdiviſion; diſtinétion of the general into ſpecies.
The king-becoming graces,
I have no reliſh of them; but abound
In the diviſion of each ſeveral crime,
Aćting it many ways. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
DiviſsoR. n.ſ. [ diviſor, Latin. J. The number given, by
which the dividend is divided; the number which ſheweth
how many parts the dividend is to be divided into.
DIVORCE. m.ſ. [divorce, Fr. from divortium, Latin.] The
legal ſeparation of huſband and wife.
Divorce is a lawful ſeparation of huſband and wife, made
before a competent judge, on due cognizance had of the
cauſe, and ſufficient proof made thereof. A liffe's Parergon.
To reſtore the king,
He counſels a divorce, a loſs of her,
That like a jewel has hung twenty years
. About his neck, yet never loſt her luſtre. Shakespeare Hºn. VIII.
He had in his eye the divorce which had paſſed betwixt the
emperor and Scribonia. Dryden's Dedicat. to the Æn.
2. Separation; diſunion.
Such motions may occaſion a farther alienation of mind,
and divorce of affections in her, from my religion. K. Charles.
Theſe things, to be a baſtard, and to be born out of law-
ful wedlock, are convertible the one with the other; and ’tis
hard to make divorce between thoſe things that are ſo near in
nature to each other, as being convertible terms. Ayliff's Par.
3. The ſentence by which a marriage is diſſolved.
4. The cauſe of any penal ſeparation.
Go with me, like good angels, to my end;
And as the long divorce of ſteel falls on me,
Make of your prayers one ſweet ſacrifice,
... And lift my ſoul to heav'n. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII,
To Pivorce v. a. [from the noun.] ſp y
1. To ſeparate a huſband or wife from the other.
2. To force aſunder 5 to ſeparate by violence.
Were it conſonant unto reaſon to divºrce theſe two ſen-
tences, the former of which doth ſhew how the latter is re-
ſtrained, and not marking the former, to conclude by the
latter of them Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 5.
The continent and the iſland were continued together,
within mens remembrance, by a draw-bridge; but is now
divorced by the downfallen cliffs. Carew, Survey of Cornwal.
So ſeem'd her youthful ſoul not eas’ly forc'd,
Or from ſo fair, ſo ſweet a feat divorc’d. Waller:
3. To ſeparate from another.
- If thou wer’t not glad,
I would divºrce me from thy mother's tomb,
Sepulch'ring an adultreſs. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Jſ ſº be it were poſſible, that all other naments of mind
might be had in their full Perfection, nevertheleſs the mind,
that ſhould poſſeſs them divorced from piety, could be but a
ſpectacle of commiſeration. Hooker.
4. To take away.
I dare not make myſelf ſo guilty,
To give up willingly that noble title
Your maſter wed me to: nothing but death
Shall e'er divorce my dignities. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Divo'RCEMENT. n.ſ.. [from divºrce..] Divorce; ſeparation of
marriage.
Write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand,
and ſend her out of his houſe. Deutr. xxiv. 1.
Divo'RCER... n.ſ. [from divorce.] The perſon or cauſe which
produces divorce or ſeparation.
Death is the violent eſtranger of acquaintance, the eternal
divorcer of marriage. Drummond’s Cypr. Grove.
DiURE"tick, adj. ſºle;%rixo..] Having the power to provoke
uſine.
Diureticks are deco&amp;tions, emulſions, and oils of emollient
vegetables, that relax the urinary paſſages: ſuch as relax
ought to be tried before ſuch as force and ſtimulate.
Thoſe emollients ought to be taken in open air, to hinder
them from perſpiring, and on empty ſtomachs.
DIU'RNAL. adj. [diurnus, Latin.]
1. Relating to the day.
We obſerve in a day, which is a ſhort year, the greateſt
heat about two in the afternoon, when the ſun is paſt the
meridian, which is the diurnal ſolſtice, and the ſame is evi-
dent from the thermometer. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.,
Think, ere this diurnal ſtar
Leave cold the night, how we his gather'd beams
Reflected, may with matter ſere foment. Milt. Par. Loft.
2. Conſtituting the day.
Why does he order the diurnal hours
To leave earth's other part, and riſe in our's Prior,
3. Performed in a day; daily; quotidian.
The prime orb,
Incredible how ſwift, had thither rowl'd
Diurnal. Milton's Paradie Loſt, b. iv. l. 594.
- The diurnal and annual revolution of the ſun have been, .
from the beginning of nature, conſtant, regular, and univer-
ſally obſervable by all mankind. Locke.
DIU'RNAL. m. ſ. [diurnal, French..] A journal; a day-book.
DIU'RNALLY. adv. [from diurnal, J Daily ; every day.
As we make the enquiries, we ſhall diurnaly communicate
them to the publick. - Tatler, N°. 56.
DIUTURNITY.. n.ſ. [diuturnitas, Latin J Length of duration.
Such a coming, as it might be ſaid, that that generation
ſhould not paſs 'till it was fulfilled, they needed not ſuppoſe
of ſuch diuturnity. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. vii. c. 10.
To DIVU'LGE. v. a. [divºlgo, Latin.] .
1. To publiſh; to make publick; to reveal to the world.
Men are better contented to have their commendations
ſuppreſſed than the contrary much divulged. Hoºker, Dedicat.
I will pluck the veil of modeſty from the ſo ſeeming miſtreſs
Page, and divulge Page himſelf for a ſecure and wilful Acteon.
Shakeſpeare's Merry //ives of Windſor.
Theſe anſwers in the ſilent night receiv'd,
The king himſelf divulg’d, the land believ'd. Dryden's Æn.
You are deprived of the right over your own ſentiments,
of the privilege of every human creature, to divulge or son-
ceal them. Pope. ,
The cabinets of the fick, and the cloſets of the dead, have
been ranſacked to publiſh our private letters, and divulge to
all mankind the moſt ſecret ſentiments of friendſhip. Pºpe.
2. To proclaim.
*. is true glory and renown, when God
Looking on th' earth, with approbation, marks
The juſt man, and divulges him through heav'n
To all his angels, who with true applauſe -
Recount his praiſes. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
Divu'ld Er. n.ſ.. [from divulge.] A publiſher; one that ex-
poſes to publick view, -
I think
Arbuthnot.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 291</div><p class="Text">D O
ID O
I think not anything in my letters could tend ſo much to
my reproach, as the odious divulging of them did to tle in-
famy of the divulgers. - King Charles.
Divulsion. n.ſ. [divulſº, Latin.] The aâ of plucking awry.
Ariſtotle, in his Ethicks, takes up the coºt of the beaver,
and the divulſion of his teſticles. Brown's /ulgar Braurº, b. i.
To Dr. EN. º. a. [This word ſeems corrupted from dight.]
To dreſs; to deck; to rig out. A low word.
Your ladyſhip liſts up the ſaſh to be ſeen; . -
For ſure I had dizen'd you out like a queen. Swift.
Pizzard. n.ſ. [from dizzy.] A blockhead; a fool. Dićf.
DI’zzINEss. n.ſ.. [from dizzy..] Giddineſs; whirl in the head.
Fixed ſeriouſneſs heats the brain in ſome to diſtraction,
and cauſeth an aching and dizzinºſ; in ſounder heads. Glanv.
Dizzy. adj. [buri, or 3, Saxon.] -
1. Giddy; vertiginous; having in the head the ſenſation of
turning round. - -
- All on a ſudden miſerable pain
Surpriz'd thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzy ſwam
In darkneſs. Milton's Paradiſe Ly?, b. ii. l. 753.
. Cauſing giddineſs.
2. Cauſing g How fearful
And dizzy 'tis to caſt one's eyes ſo low !
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air,
Shew ſcarce ſo groſs as beetles. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. Giddy : thoughtleſs.
What followers, what retinue can'ſt thou gain
Or at thy heels the dizzy multitude,
Longer than thou can'ſ feed them on thy coſt? Milton.
To Di'zzy. v. a. [from the adjective.] To whirl round; to
make giddy. -
Not the dreadful ſpout,
Which ſhipmen do the hurricano call,
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear
In his deſcent, than ſhall my prompted ſword
Falling on Diomede. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
To DO. v. a. preter. did; part, paſſ done. [bon, Sax. doen, Dut.]
1. To practiſe or act anything good or bad.
Thou haſt done evil above all that were before thee. I Kings.
Flee evil, and do good. Pſalms.
2. To perform; to atchieve.
They help, who hurt ſo ſmall;
And he hath nothing done, that doth not all. Daniel's C. J/ar.
Learn to live well, that thou may’ſt die ſo too ;
To live and die is all we have to do. Denham.
What is the reaſon a man's arm won't ſmile and frown,
and do all the intelle&amp;tual poſtures of the countenance Collier.
3. To execute; to diſcharge.
May one, that is a herald and a prince,
Do a fair meſſage to his kingly ears? Shakespeare. Troil, and Creſſ.
Pindarus is come
To do you ſalutation from his maſter. Shakeſp. jul. Caſar.
4. To cauſe.
A fatal plague which many did to dye. Spenser.
Nought can quench mine inly flaming ſide,
Nor ſea of liquor cold, nor lake of mire,
Nothing but death can do me to reſpire. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
5. To tranſact.
The thing was not done in a corner.
6. To produce any effect to another.
If he did not care whether he had their love or no, he
waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither good nor harm.
* Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Thou haſt, Sebaſtian, done good feature ſhame. Shakeſp.
If there be any good thing to be done,
That may to thee do eaſe, and grace to me,
Speak to me. Shakespeare's Hamlet.
'Tis true, I did ſo; nor was it in vain:
Aći; xxvi. 26.
She did me right, and ſatisfy'd my vengeance. Rowe.
You do her too much honour: ſhe hath neither ſenſe nor
taſte, if ſhe dares to refuſe you. Swift.
7. To have recourſe to ; to practiſe as the laſt effort, commonly
in the form of a paſſionate interrogation.
What will ye do in the end thereof: jer. v. 81.
8. To perform for the benefit of another. -
I know what God will do for me. Sa. xxii. 3.
Aćts of mercy done to the poor, ſhall then be accepted,
and rewarded, as done to our Saviour himſelf. Atterb. Sermons.
9. To exert; to put forth.
Do thy diligence, to come ſhortly unto me. 2 Tim. iv. 9.
Io. To manage by way of intercourſe or dealing; to have buſi-
neſs ; to deal.
No man, who hath to do with the king, will think himſelf
ſafe, unleſs you be his good angel, and guide him. Bacon.
I have been deterred by an indiſpoſition from having much
to do with ſteams of ſo dangerous a nature. Boyle.
What had I to do with kings and courts 2 -
My humble lot had caſt me far beneath them. Rowe.
11. To gain a point; to effect by influence.
It is much, that a jeſt with a ſad brow will do with a fellow
that never had the ache in his ſhoulders. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
His queen, notwithſtanding ſhe had preſented him with
4. -
divers children, and with a crown alſo, though he would not
acknowledge it, could dº nothing with him. Bacºn's H. VII.
1 z. To make anything what it is not.
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head ;
And whilſt we breathe take him to do him dead. Sh, H. VI.
13. To finiſh; to end.
As for this mercy,
Which he intends for Lear and for Cordelia,
The battle dºne, and they within our power,
Shall never ſee his pardon. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Go on to the reading of ſome part of the New Teſtament,
not careleſly, or in haſte, as if you had a mind to have dane,
but attentively, as to be able to give ſome account of what
you have read. Duppa.
Gigantick hinds, as ſoon as work was done,
To their huge pots of boiling pulſe would run. Dryden.
14. To conclude; to ſettle.
When all is done, there is no man can ſerve his own intereſt
better than by ſerving God. Tillotſºn's Sermons.
15. To put.
Why, Warwick, who ſhould dº the duke to death? Shakespeare
The lord Aubrey Vere, -
Was done to death Shake peare's Henry VI. p. iii.
16. This phraſe, what to Do with, ſignifies how to beſtow;
what uſe to make of; what courſe to take; how to employ;
which way to get rid of.
Men are many times brought to that extremity, that if it
were not for God, they would not know what to do with them-
ſelves, or how to enjoy themſelves for one hour. Tillotſon.
To Do. v. n. -
1. To act or behave in any manner well or ill.
Unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear
not the Lord, neither do they after the law and commandment
which the Lord commanded the children of Jacob. 2 Kings.
As every prince ſhould govern as he would deſire to be go-
verned, ſo every ſubject ought to obey as he would deſire to
be obeyed, according to the maxim of doing as we would be
done by. Temple.
2. To make an end; to conclude.
You may ramble a whole day, and every moment diſcover
ſomething new ; but when you have done, you will have but
a confuſed notion of the place. Speciatºr, Nº. 47.
3. To ceaſe to be concerned with 5 to ceaſe to care about; to
deſiſt from notice or practice.
No men would make uſe of diſunited parties to deſtroy one
body, unleſs they were ſure to maſter them when they had
done with them. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
I have done with Chaucer, when I have anſwered ſome ob-
jećtions. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
We have not yet done with aſſenting to propoſitions at firſt
hearing, and underſtanding their terms. Locke.
Having done with ſuch amuſements, we give up what we
cannot diſown. Pope.
4. To fare; to be with regard to ſickneſs or health.
Good woman, how dºſ? thou ?
The better that it pleaſes your good worſhip to aſk. Shakespeare
5. To ſucceed; to fulfil a purpoſe.
Come, ’tis no matter; we ſhall do without him. Addison,
You would do well to prefer a bill againſt all kings and
parliaments ſince the conqueſt; and, if that won't do, chal-
lenge the crown. Collier on Duelling.
6. To Do is uſed for any verb to ſave the repetition of the word;
as, I ſhall cºme, but if I do not, go away; that is, if I come
Ilot.
Thus painters Cupid paint, thus poets do
A naked god, blind, young, with arrows two. Sidney:
If any thing in the world deſerve our ſerious ſtudy and con-
fideration, thoſe principles of religion do. 7 illotſºn's Sermons.
Take all things which relax the veins; for what does ſo,
prevents too vigorous a motion through the arteries. Arbuthn.
7. Do is a word of vehement command, or earneſt requeſt; as,
help me, do; make haſle, do. -
If thou haſt loſt thy land, do not alſo loſe thy conſtancy;
and if thou muſt die a little ſooner, yet do not die impa-
tiently. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
- I am enſnared;
Heaven's birdlime wraps me round, and glues my wings:
—Looſe me.—I will free thee.
—Do, and I'll be thy ſlave. Dryden’s King Arthur.
8. To Do is put before verbs ſometimes expletively; as, I do
love, or, I love; I did love, or, I loved.
The Turks do acknowledge God the father, creator of
heaven and earth, being the firſt perſon in the Trinity, though.
they deny the reſt. Bacon's Holy War.
This juſt reproach their virtue does excite;
They ſtand, they join, they thicken to the fight. Dryd. Æn.
Expletives their feeble aid do join. Pope.
9. Sometimes emphatically ; as, I do hate him, but will not wrong
him.
Perdition catch my ſoul
But I do love thee; and when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again. Shakeſpeare's Othelk.
10. Sometimes
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 292</div><p class="Text">D O C
D O D
to. Sometimes by way of oppoſition; as, I did love him, but ſcorn
him now. - -
To DoAt. v. n. See To Dote.
DO'CIBLE. adj. [docilis, Latin.] Tračtalle; docile; eaſy
to be taught.
The Aſinine feaſt of ſow-thiſtles and brambles is commonly
ſet before them, as all the food and entertainment of their
tendereſt and moſt decible age. Milton.
Do'cIBLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from decible.] Teachableneſs; docility;
readineſs to learn.
I might enlarge in commendation of the noble hound, as
alſo of the docibleneſs of dogs in general. Walton's Angler.
DO'CILE. adj. [docilis, Latin.]
º 1. Teachable; eaſily inſtructed; tractable.
Dogs ſoon grow accuſtomed to whatever they are taught,
and, being docile and tractable, are very uſeful. Ellis's Wºyage.
2. With to before the thing taught.
Soon docile to the ſecret acts of ill,
With ſmiles I could betray, with temper kill. Prior.
Doc'LITY.. n.ſ. [docilité, French, from docilitas, Lat.] Aptneſs
to be taught ; readineſs to learn.
All the perfection they allowed his underſtanding was apt-
neſs and docility, and all that they attributed to his will was a
poſſibility to be virtuous South's Sermons.
What is more admirable than the fitneſs of every creature
for uſe The docility of an elephant, and the inſtiency of
a camel for travelling in deſarts i Grew's Coſm. Sac.
Dock. m. ſ. [bocca, Saxon.]
The cup of the flower conſiſts of ſix leaves, three large,
and red; the other three leſſer, and green : in the middle of
the cup are placed ſix ſtamina. The three outer ſmall leaves
of the cup fall away, when ripe; but the three inner large
leaves join together, and form a triangular covering, in the
middle of which are contained three ſhining cornered ſeeds.
The ſpecies are ſeventeen, ten of which grow wild, ſeveral
of them being uſed in medicine; and the ſort called the orien-
tal burdock, is ſaid to be the true rhubarb. Millar.
Nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thiſtles, keckſies, burs,
Loſing both beauty and utility. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
My love for gentle Dermot faſter grows
Than yon tall dock that riſes to thy noſe:
Cut down the dock, 'twill ſprout again; but know
Love rooted out, again will never grow. Swift.
DOCK. n.ſ. The ſtump of the tail, which remains after
docking.
The tail of a great rhinoceros is not well deſcribed by Bon-
tius. The dock is about half an inch thick, and two inches
broad, like an apothecary's ſpatula. Grew's Muſæum.
Dock. m. ſ. [As ſome imagine of 32.7%.] A place where water
is let in or out at pleaſure, where ſhips are built or laid up.
There are dºcks for their gallies and men of war, moſt of
them full; as well as work-houſes for all land and naval pre-
parations. Addſon on Italy.
To Dock. v. a. [from dock, a tail.]
1. To cut off a tail.
2. To cut any thing ſhort.
One or two ſtood conſtant centry, who docked all favours
handed down ; and ſpread a huge inviſible net between the
prince and ſubjećt, through which nothing of value could
paſs. Swift's Examiner, Nº. 19.
3. To cut off a reckoning; to cut off an entail.
4. To lay the ſhip in a dock.
Docket. m. ſ. A direction tied upon goods; a ſummary of a
larger writing. Dić7.
Děčíð. n. ſ. [doctor, Latin.]
1. One that has taken the higheſt degree in the faculties of divi-
nity, law, or phyſick. In ſome univerſities they have doćtors
of muſick. In its original import it means a man ſo well
verſed in his faculty, as to be qualified to teach it.
No woman had it, but a civil doćior,
Who did refuſe three thouſand ducats of me,
And begg'd the ring. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
Then ſtood there up one in the council, a phariſee, named
Gamaliel, a doctor of laws. Aćis v. 34.
2. A man ſkilled in any profeſſion.
Then ſubtle d'élors ſcriptures made their pride,
Caſuiſts, like cocks, ſtruck out each other's eyes. Denham.
Each proſelyte would vote his doctor beſt,
With abſolute excluſion to the reſt. Dryd Hind and Panth.
3. A phyſician; one who undertakes the cure of diſeaſes.
By med'cine life may be prolong’d, yet death
Will ſeize the do?or too. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
How does your patient, doctor P
—Not ſo ſick, my lord,
As ſhe is troubl’d with thick coming fancies. Shakeſp. Macb.
Children will not take thoſe medicines from the doćtor’s
hand, which they will from a nurſe or mother, Gov. of Iongue.
To 'pothecaries let the learn'd preſcribe,
That men may die without a double bribe:
Let them, but under their ſuperiors, kill,
When dºlors firſt have ſign'd the bloody bill,
Dryden,
Vol. I.
He that can cure by recreation, and make pleaſure the ve-
hicle of health, is a doſſor at it in good earneſt. Colier.
In truth, nine parts in ten of thoſe who recovered, owed
their lives to the ſtrength of nature and a good conſtitution,
while ſuch a one happened to be the doćior. Swſt.
4. Any able or learned man.
The ſimpleſt perſon, that can but apprehend and ſpeak
ſenſe, is as much judge of it as the greateſt doſior in the
ſchool. Digły of Bodies.
To Do'croR. v. a. [from the noun..] To phyſick; to cure;
to treat with medicines. A low word.
Doctor AL. adj. [decisralis, Latin.] Relating to the degree
of a doćtor. - *-
Doctor ALLY: adv. [from dººral.] In manner of a doctor.
The phyſicians reſorted to him to touch his pulſe, and con-
ſider of his diſeaſe dºćiorally at their departure. Hakewill.
Do’ctors.H.I.P. m. ſ. [from doćior.] The rank of a do&amp;or.
From a ſcholar he became a fellow, and then the preſident
of the college, after he had received all the graces and degrees,
the proëtorſhip and the doćiorſhip, that could be obtained
there. - - - Clarendon.
Doctri'NAL. adj. [doctrina, Latin.j
1. Containing doćtrine, or ſomething formally taught.
The verſe naturally affords us the doćirinal propoſition,
which ſhall be our ſubjećt. South's Sermons.
Not ſuch as aſſent to every word in Scripture, can be ſaid
in doćirinals to deny Chriſt. South's Sermons.
2. Pertaining to the act or means of teaching.
To this end the word of God no otherwiſe ſerveth, than
only in the nature of a doctrinal inſtrument. Hooker, b. v.
What ſpecial property or quality is that, which, being no
* where found but in ſermons, maketh them effectual to ſave
ſouls, and leaveth all other dodirinal means beſides deſtitute of
vital efficacy. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
DocTR1'NALLY. adv. [from doºrine.] In the form of doc-
trine; poſitively; as neceſſary to be held.
Scripture accommodates itſelf to common opinions, and em-
ploys, the uſual forms of ſpeech, without delivering any thing
doéirinally concerning theſe points. Ray on the Creation.
DoctriNE. m. ſ. [doctrina, Latin.]
1. The principles or poſitions of any ſeół or maſter; that which
is taught. -
To make new articles of faith and do?rine, no man think-
eth it lawful: new laws of government, what church or com-
monwealth is there which maketh not either at one time or
other Hºoker, b. iii. ſ. 10:
Ye are the ſons of clergy, who bring all their dºctrines
fairly to the light, and invite men with freedom to examine
them. - - Atterbury's Sermons.
That great principle in natural philoſophy is the doºrine of
gravitation, or mutual tendency of all bodies toward each
other. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. The ačt of teaching,
He ſaid unto them in his do.:7rine.
Do'cu MENT. n.ſ. [documentum, Latin.]
1. Precept; inſtruction; direétion.
It is a moſt neceſſary inſtruction and document for them,
that as her majeſty made them diſpenſators of her favour, ſo
it behoveth them to ſhew themſelves equal diſtributers. Bacon.
Learners ſhould not be too much crouded with a heap or
multitude of documents or ideas at one time. J%atts.
2. Precept in an ill ſenſe; a precept inſolently authoritative,
magiſterially dogmatical, ſolemnly trifling.
Gentle inſinuations pierce, as oil is the moſt penetrating
of all liquors; but in magiſterial documents men think them-
ſelves attacked, and ſtand upon their guard. Govern. of Tongue.
It is not unneceſſary to digeſt the documents of cracking
authors into ſeveral claſſes. Harr. on Conſumptions.
DO’DDER. n.ſ.. [touteren, to ſhoot up, Dutch. Skinner.]
Dodder is a ſingular plant: when it firſt ſhoots from the
ſeed it has little roots, which pierce the earth near the roots
of other plants; but the capillaments of which it is formed,
ſoon after clinging about theſe plants, the roots wither away.
From this time it propagates itſelf along the ſtalks of the
plant, entangling itſelf about them in a very complicated
manner. It has no leaves, but conſiſts of ſuch capillaments or
ſtalks, as are browniſh with a caſt of red, which run to great
lengths. They have at certain diſtances tubercles, which fix
them faſt down to the plant, and by means of which they
abſorb the juices deſtined for its nouriſhment. The flowers
ſtand in a kind of little round cluſters on the ſtalks, are ſmall,
of a whitiſh or pale rediſh colour, of the bell-faſhioned kind,
and deeply divided into four or five ſegments at the edge;
The flower is ſucceeded by a roundiſh fruit with three or
four ridges, that give it a trigonal or tetragonal form: this
has only one cavity. The ſeeds are numerous: theſe fall upon
the ground, and produce young plants. Hil.
Do'DDE RED. adj. [from dodder.] Overgrown with dodder.
covered with ſupercreſcent plants.
Near the hearth a lawrel grew,
Dodder'd with age, whoſe boughs encompaſs round
The *H gods, and ſhade the holy ground. Dryd. Æn.
7 1. - The
Mark iv. 2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 293</div><p class="Text">D O F
D O G
The peaſants were enjoin'd -
Sere-wood, and firs, and dodder'd oaks tº find. Dryd. Fables.
Dope"cacon. n.ſ. [*** and ** J A figure of twelve
ſides. -
'Rios. n.ſ. [3.2.xxiºusgºw.] The twelfth part.
Doorcarrºº Žſº thus deſcrib'd:
Thrice ten degrees, which every ſign contains,
Let twelve exhauſt, that not one part remains;
It follows ſtreight, that every twelfth confines
Two whole, and one half portion of the ſigns. Creech,
To Dodge. v. n. [probably corrupted from dog 3 to ſhift and
play ſly tricks like a dog.]
1. Tó uſe craft; to deal with tergiverſation; to play mean tricks;
to uſe low ſhifts. -- - b
If in good offices and due retributions we may nº §
pinching and niggardly, it argues an earthly and ignoble
mind, where we have apparently wronged, to higgle and dodge
in the amends. Hal's Contemplation.
The confideration ſhould make men grow weary of ";"
ing and ſhewing tricks with God. South.
2. To ſhift place as another approaches.
For he had, any time this ten years full, -
Dodº'd with him betwixt Cambridge and the Bull. Milton.
3. To play faſt and looſe; to raiſe expeciations and diſappoint
them.'
You know my paſſion for Martha, and what a danº ſhe
has led me: ſhe dodged with me above thirty years. Aid 0/l.
The chaffering with diſſenters, and dodging about this or
t'other ceremony, is but like opening a few wickets, and
leaving them a-jar, by which no more than one can get in at
a time. Swift.
Doºdkin. n.ſ.. [duytken, Dutch..] A doitkin or little doit; a
contemptuous name for a low coin.
I would not buy them for a dodkin. Lily's Gram. conſirued.
Do'DMAN. m. ſ. The name of a fiſh.
Thoſe that caſt their ſhell are the lobſter, the crab, the
crawfiſh, the hodmandod or dodman, and the tortoiſe. Bacon.
Doe. n.ſ.. [ba, Saxon; daa, Daniſh J A ſhe-deer; the female
of a buck. -
Then but forbear your food a little while,
While, like a doe, I go to find my fawn,
And give it food. Shakeſpeare's A you like it.
Bucks have horns, does none. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The fearful doe
And flying flag amid'ſt the greyhounds go. Dryden's Wirgil.
Doe. n.ſ.. [from To do..] A feat; what one has to do; what
one can perform.
No ſooner he does peep into
The world, but he has done his doe. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 3.
Do'ER. n.ſ. [from To do..] One that does any thing good or
bad.
So foul a thing, O! thou Injuſtice art,
That tort’reſt both the doer and diſtreſt. Daniel's Civ. War.
It may be indeed a publick crime, or a national miſchief;
yet it is but a private act, and the doer of it may chance to
pay his head for his preſumption. South's Sermons.
2. Aćtor; agent.
Sith thus far we have proceeded in opening the things that
have been done, let not the principal doers themſelves be for-
gotten. Hooker.
. Performer.
Then have they moſt commonly one, who judgeth the
prize to the beſt doer, of which they are no leſs glad than great
princes are of triumphs. Sidney.
4. An active, or buſy, or valiant perſon.
Fear not, my lord, we will not ſtand to prate;
Talkers are no good doers: be aſſur’d,
We go to uſe our hands, and not our tongues. Shakespeare R. III.
They are great ſpeakers, but ſmall doers; greater in ſhew
than in deed. Knolle's Hiſtory of the Turks.
5. One that habitually performs or practiſes.
Be doers of the word, and not bearers only. Comm. Prayer.
- In this we ſhew ourſelves weak, and unapt to be doers of
his will, in that we take upon us to be controllers of his
wiſdom. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 6.
Does. The third perſon from do for doth.
Though lending to foreigners, upon uſe, doth not at all
alter the balance of trade between thoſe countries, yet it does
alter the exchange between thoſe countries. Locke.
To Dof F. v. a. [from do off.]
*. To put off dreſs.
You have deceiv'd our truſt,
And made us doff our eaſy robes of peace,
To cruſh our old limbs in ungentle ſteel. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Dºff thoſe links. Milton's Agoniſłes.
Nature, in awe to him, -
Had dºff’d her gaudy trim,
with her great maſter ſo to ſympathize. Milton.
*jºgº is hot, and diff; his gown, while this
* O'er night was bowſy : 5* v- ** &gt;
$9 many rubs appear, the time is gone
For hearing, and the tedious ſuit goes on. Dryd. Jnv. Sat.
Alcides diff; the lion's tawny hide. R.we.
2. To ſtrip.
Why art thou troubled, Herod What vain fear
Thy blood-revolving breaſt doth move :
Heaven's king, who doſs himſelf our fleſh to wear,
Comes not to rule in wrath, but ſerve in love. Craſhaw.
3. To put away; to get rid of.
Your eye in Scotland
Would create ſoldiers, and make women fight,
To doff their dire diſtreſſes. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
4. To ſhift off; to delay; to refer to another time,
Every day thou dºff'ſ me with ſome device, Iago; and
rather keep'ſt from me all conveniency, than ſupplieſt ne
with the leaſt advantage of hope. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
Away, I will not have to do with you.
-Can't thou ſo dºff me? Shakespeare Much Ad, about Nothing.
5. This word is in all its ſenſes obſolete, and ſcarcely uſed except
by ruſticks.
DOG.. n.ſ. (dogghe, Dutch.]
1. A domeſtick aniinal remarkably various in his ſpecies; come
priſing the maitiff, the ſpaniel, the buldog, the greyhound,
the hound, the terrier, the cur, with many others. The
larger ſort are uſed as a guard; the leſs for ſports.
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe ſooth every paſſion:
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With ev'ry gale and vary of their maſters,
As knowing nought, like dogs, but following. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Why ſhould we not think a watch and piſtol as diſtinct
ſpecies one from another, as a horſe and a dºg. Locke.
The clamour roars of men and boys, and dogs,
Ere the ſoft fearful people, to the flood
Commit their woolly ſides. Thomſon's Spring, l. 375.
2. A conſtellation called Sirius, or Canicula, riſing and ſetting
with the ſun during the canicular days, or dog days.
Among the ſouthern conſtellations two there are who bear
the name of the dog ; the one in ſixteen degrees latitude, con-
taining on the left thigh a ſtar of the firſt magnitude, uſually
called Procyon, or Anticanus. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv.
It parts the twins and crab, the dog divides,
And Argo's keel that broke the frothy tides. Creech.
3. A reproachful name for a man.
I never heard a paſſion ſo confus'd,
So ſtrange, outrageous, and ſo variable,
As the dog Jew did utter in the ſtreets. Shakespeare Mr. of Venice.
Beware of dºgs, beware of evil workers. Phil. iii. 2.
4. To give or ſend to the Dogs; to throw away. To go to the
Dods; to be ruined, deſtroyed, or devoured.
Had whole Colepeper's wealth been hops and hogs,
Could he himſelf have ſent it to the dºgs º Pope's Epiſtles.
5. It is uſed as the term for the male of ſeveral ſpecies; as,
the dºg fox, the dog otter.
If ever I thank any man, I'll thank you; but that they call
compliments is like the encounter of two dog apes. Shakeſp.
6. Dog is a particle added to any thing to mark meanneſs, or
degeneracy, or worthleſſneſs; as dog roſe.
To Dog. v. a. [from the noun..] To hunt as a dog, inſidiouſly
and indefatigably.
I have dogg’d him like his murtherer. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
His taken labours bid him me forgive ;
I, his deſpiteful Juno, ſent him forth
From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dog the heels of worth. Shakespeare.
Sorrow dogging fin,
Afflićtions ſorted. Herbert.
Theſe ſpiritual joys are dºgged by no ſuch ſad ſequels as are
the products of thoſe titillations, that reach no higher than
fancy and the ſenſes. Glanv. Scepſ. Prºf.
I have been purſued, dogged, and way-laid through ſeveral
nations, and even now ſcarce think myſelf ſecure. Pope.
Hate dogs their riſe, and inſult mocks their fall. ...
Wanity of Human // ſher.
Dog-teeth. m. ſ. [dog and teeth.] The teeth in the human
head next to the grinders; the eye-teeth.
The beſt inſtruments for dividing of herbs are inciſor teeth ;
for cracking of hard ſubſtances, as bones and nuts, grinders,
or mill-teeth; for dividing of fleſh, ſharp-pointed or dºg-
teeth. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Dog-trick. n.ſ. [dog and trick.] An ill turn ; furly or brutal
treatment -
Learn better manners, or I ſhall ſerve you a dog-trick:
come, down upon all four immediately; I'll make you know
your rider. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
DO’G BANE. m. ſ. [dog and bane.]
The leaves are produced oppoſite by pairs upon the branches:
the flower conſiſts of one leaf, cut into ſeveral ſegments: from
its flower-cup ariſes the pointal, fixed like a nail in the lººk-
part of the flower. Miller.
DoG B ERRY-TRE E. See CoRNE LIAN-cHERRY.
Do'Geol.T. m. ſ. [dog and bolt.] Of this word I know not the
meaning, unleſs it be, that when meal or flower is fifted or
bolted to a certain degree, the coarſer part is called dogbolt,
or flower for dogs. H;
*S
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 294</div><p class="Text">D O G
His only ſolace was, that how
His dogholt fortune was ſo kw, .
That either it muſt quickly end,
Or turn about again, and mend. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
Do'GbRIAR. n.ſ. [d g and briar.] The briar that bears the
hip; the cynoſbaton.
Dogche AP., adj. [dog and cheap.] Cheap as dogs meat; cheap
as the offal bought for dogs.
Good ſtore of harlots, ſay you, and dogcheap * Dryden.
Do'GDAYs. n.ſ. [dog and days...] The days in which the dog-
ſtar riſes and ſets with the ſun, vulgarly reputed unwhole-
ſome.
Nor was it more in his power to be without promotion,
and titles, and wealth, than for a healthy man to fit in the
ſun, in the brighteſt dogdays, and remain without warmth.
Clarendon.
Do'GDRAw, n.ſ. [dog and draw.] A manifeſt deprehenſion of
an offender againſt veniſon in the foreſt, when he is found
drawing after a deer by the ſcent of a hound which he leads
in his hand. Cowel.
Dog E. m. ſ. [dage, Italian ] The title of the chief magiſtrate
of Venice and Genoa.
Doria has a ſtatue at the entrance of the doge's palace,
with the title of deliverer of the commonwealth. Addisonn.
Do'GF is H. n.ſ.. [from dºg and fiſh.] Another name for a
ſhark.
It is part of the jaw of a ſhark, or dogfiſh. Woodward.
Do'GFLY. m. ſ. [dog and fly.] A voracious biting fly.
Thump-buckler Mars began,
And at Minerva with a lance of braſs he headlong ran;
Theſe vile words uſhering his blows, Thou dogfy, what's
the cauſe -
Thou mak’ſ gods fight thus * Chapman's Iliad, b. xxi.
Do'G GED. adj. [ from dog. J Sullcn; ſour; moroſe; ill-
humoured; gloomy.
Your uncle muſt not know but you are dead:
I'll fill theſe dogged ſpies with falſe reports. Shakespeare K. john.
- Dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
Whoſe over-weening arm I have pluck'd back,
By falſe accuſe doth level at my life. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Few miles on horſeback had they jogged,
But fortune unto them turn'd dogged. Hudibras, p. i. eant. 1.
Do'Go EDLY." adj. [from dagged J Sullenly; gloomily; ſourly;
moroſely. -
Doggedness. n.ſ.. [from dogged.] Gloom of mind; ſullen-
neſs; moroſeneſs.
Do'oger. m.ſ.. [from dog, for its meanneſs. Skinner.] A ſmall
ſhip with one maſt.
Do’ccer E.L. adj. [from dog..] Looſed from the meaſures of
regular poetry; vile; deſpicable; mean.
Then haſten Og and Doeg to rehearſe,
Two fools that crutch their feeble ſenſe on verſe;
Who by my muſe, to all ſucceeding times,
Shall live in ſpite of their own dogg’rel rhymes. Dryden.
Your wit burleſque may one ſtep higher climb,
And in his ſphere may judge all dogg’rel rhyme. Dryden.
It is a diſpute among the criticks, whether burleſque poetry
runs beſt in heroick verſe, like that of the Diſpenſary; or in
doggerel, like that of Hudibras.
Dodge REL. m. ſ. Mean, deſpicable, worthleſs verſes.
The hand and head were never loſt of thoſe
Who dealt in dogg’rel, or who pin'd in proſe. Dryd, juv.
The vileſt dºgg’rel Grub-ſtreet ſends, -
Will paſs for your's with foes and friends. Swift.
Do'G G is H. adj. [from dog..] Curriſh ; brutal.
DoGHe/ARTED. adj. [dºg and heart.] Cruel; pitileſs; ma-
licious. -
His unkindneſs,
That ſtript her from his benedićtion, turn'd her
To foreign caſualties, gave her dear rights -
To his doghearted daughters. Shakeſpeare's King Bear.
Do'chole. n.ſ. [dog and hole.] A vile hole; a mean habi-
tation.
France is a dºhole, and it no more merits the tread of a
man's foot : to the wars. Shakeſp. Ali’s well that ends well.
But, could you be content to bid adieu
To the dear playhouſe, and the players too,
Sweet country ſeats are purchas'd ev'ry where,
With lands and gardens, at leſs price than here; {
You hire a darkſon doghole by the year. Dryden's juv.
Load ſome vain church with old theatrick ſtate,
Turn arcs of triumph to a garden gate ;
Reverſe your ornaments, and hang them all
On ſome patch'd dºghole, ek'd with ends of wall. , Pope.
Docke'NNEl. n.ſ. [dºg and Kennel.] A little hut or houſe for
dogs. -
'A certain nobleman, beginning with a dogkennel, never
lived to finiſh the palace he had contrived. Dryden.
I am deſired to recommend a dog kennel to any that ſhall
want a pack. Tatler, Nº. 62.
Do Glouše. n. ſ. [dog and loºſe.] An inſcét that harbours on
dogs.
2,
Addison's Spectator, N°. 249. .
D O I
HDO'GMA. n.ſ. [Latin.] Eſtabliſhed principle ; ſettled notion,
Our poet was a floºk philoſopher, and all his moral ſen-
*** are drawn from the dºgma, of that ſº. Dryden
Pººva is that determinatiºn which confifts in, and as a
relation to, ſome caſuiſtical point of doćtrine, or ſome dog.
tº part of the Chriſtian faith. - Aylºff's Parergon.
É. Ticº. }*. [from dºgma.] Authoritative; magińe.
h A tick. rial; poſitive; in the manner of a philoſo-
Pher laying down the firſt principles of a ſe&amp;.
The dim and bounded itejº of an ſeldom proſperouſly
adventures to be dogmatical about things that approach to in-
finite, whether in vaſtneſs or li
- - - ittlencfs. Boyle.
I laid by my natural diffidence and ſcepticiſm for a oyſe
- while
to take up that dºgmatical way, which is ſo much his dia.
raćter. - Dryd
yaen.
Learning gives us a diſcovery of our ignorance, an
us from being Peremptory and dºgmati.e. in . *:::::
ºks write i ſit; - Coller on Pride.
language rite in a poſitive dºnatº way, without either
guage, genius, or imagination. Steffator
One of theſe authors is indeed ſo grave, ſententious do .
D mºtia, a rogue, that there is no enduring him. Sº,
OGMATICALLY. adv. [ from dºgmatical. iſ cºiſ.
poſitively. - [ dºgmatical. J Magiſterially;
I ſhall not preſume to interpoſe dºgmatically in a contro-
verſy, which I look never to ſee decided. South's Sermony.
GMA’rical Ness. m. ſ. . [from dºnatical] The quality of
being dogmatical ; magiſterialneſs; mock authority.
Do GMAT is T. n.ſ. [dºgmatiſe, Fr. J . A magiſterial teacher;
a poſitive aſſerter; a bold advancer of principles. 2.
. I could deſcribe the poverty of our intellectual acquiſ-
tions, and the vanity of bold' opinion, which the dºgmatiſts
themſelves demonſtrate in all the controverfies they are en-
gaged in. - - - Glanville's cºpſ.
A dogmatiſt in religion is not a great way off from a bigot,
and is in high danger of growing up to be a bloody pºſ:
Cutor. // atts's /mprovement of the Mind.
To Do"GMAtız F. v. n. I from dogma. J. To aſſºt poſi-
. to advance without diſtruſt; to teach magiſte-
rially.
Theſe, with the pride of dºgmatizing ſchools,
Impos'd on nature arbitrary rules; -
Forc'd her their vain inventions tº, obey,
And move as learned frenzy trac'd the way. Blackmºre.
DoGMATI'z ER. m.ſ.. [from dºgmatize.]. An aſſerter; a magiſ-
terial teſther; a bold advancer of opinions.
Such opinions, being not entered into the confeſſions of our
church, are not properly chargeable either on Papiſts or Pro-
teſtants, but on particular dºgmatizers of both parties. Hamm.
Do'orose. m. ſ. ſlºg and roſ...] The flower of the hip.
Of the rough or hairy excreſcence, thoſe on the briar, or
degroſe, are a good inſtance. Perhan's Phyſico-Theology.
Dogsleep. m. ſ. [dog and ſleep.] Pretended ſleep. -
Juvenal indeed mentions a drowſy huſband, who raiſed an
eſtate by ſnoring; but then he is repreſented to have ſlept
what the common people call dºgſleep. Addison’s Stedjator.
D9GsMEAT. m. ſ. [dog and meat..] Refuſe; vile ſtuff; offal
like the fleſh ſold to feed dogs.
His reverence bought of me the flower of all the market;
theſe are but dºgſmeat to 'em. Dryden.
Dogst AR. n ſ idºg and/far; canicula, Lat..] The ſtar which
gives the name to the dogdays.
All ſhun the raging dºg/?ar's ſultry heat,
And from the half-unpeopled town retreat.
Dogs root H. n.ſ.. [from dog and tooth.] A plant.
It hath a fleſhy root, ſhaped like a dog's tooth : the leaves are
broad, and ſpread upon the ground: the flower is naked, and
produced ſingle upon each ſtalk, each conſiſting of ſix leaves,
ſhaped like a lily, and hanging downward. The pointal of
the flower becomes a roundiſh fruit, containing oblong ſeeds:
they produce their flowers early in March, for which they ara
valued. Miller.
Dºor. n: ſ [dog and trot.] A gentle trot like that of a
Og.
Addison.
This ſaid, they both advanc'd, and rode
A dºgtrot through the bawling crowd. Hudhras, p. ii.
Do'Gwe ARY. adj. [dog and weary.j Tired as a dog; exceſ-
fively weary.
Oh, maſter, maſter, I have watch'd ſo long,
That I’m dºgweary. Shakeſp. Taming ºf the Shrew.
Do'Gwood. See CoRNE LIAN-cHE FRY, of which it is a
ſpecies.
Do'ily. n.ſ. A ſpecies of woollen ſtuff, ſo called, I ſuppoſe,
from the name of the firſt maker. -
We ſhould be as weary of one ſet of acquaintance, though
never ſo good, as we are of one ſuit, though never ſo fine: a
fool, and a dily ſtuff, would now and then find days of grace,
and be worn for variety. Congreve's Hay of the World.
Do'INGs. n.ſ.. [from Tº do. This word has hardly any fin-
gular.]
1. Things
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 295</div><p class="Text">D O L
D O L
1. Things done; events; tranſačtions.
I have but kill'd a fly.
But how if that fly had a father and mother?
How would he hang his ſlender gilded wings,
And buz lamented doings in the air Slakeſp. 7 it. Andron.
2. Feats; actions: good or bad.
The next degree was to mark all Zelmane's doings, ſpeeches
and faſhions, and to take them unto herſelf, as a pattern of
worthy proceeding: Sidney, b. ii.
If I'm traduc’d by tongues which neither know
My faculties nor perſon, yet will be
The chronicles of my doing; let me ſay
'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
That virtue muſt go through. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
At length a reverend fire among them came,
And of their doings great diſlike declar'd,
And teſtify’d againſt their ways. Milton's Paradiſe Loſł.
3. Behaviour; conduct. -
Never the earth on his round ſhoulders bare,
A maid train'd up from high or low degree,
That in her doings better could compare
Mirth with reſpect, few words with curteſy. Sidney.
4. Conduct ; diſpenſation.
After ſuch miraculous doings, we are not yet in a condition
of bringing France to our terms. - Swift.
Dangerous it were for the feeble brains of man to wade
far into the doings of the Moſt High. Hºoker, b. i. ſ. 1.
. Stir; buſtle; tumult.
Shall there be then, in the mean while, no doing; 2 Hooker.
6. Feſtivity; merriment, - - -
7. This word is now only uſed in a ludicrous ſenſe, or in low
mean language.
Dorr. m. ſ. [duyt, Dutch; dºghº, Eiſe.] A ſmall piece of
money. - - -
When they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar,
they will lay out ten to ſee a dead Indian. ... Shakeſp. Ten y!.
In Anna's wars a ſoldier, poor and old,
Had dearly earn’d a little purſe of gold;
Tir'd with a tedious march, one luckleſs night
He ſlept, poor dog! and loſt it to a doit. Poſe.
DOLE. n.ſ.. [from deal; balan, Saxon.]
1. The act of diſtribution or dealing.
The perſonal fruition in any man cannot reach to feel great
riches: there is a cuſtody of them, or a power of dole and
donative of them, or a fame of them, but no ſolid uſe to the
oWiltſ. Bacon, Eſſay 35.
At her general doſe
Each receives his ancient ſoul.
2. Anything dealt out or diſtributed.
Now, my maſters, happy man be his dole ſay I; every man
to his buſineſs. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Let us, that are unhurt and whole, *
Fall on, and happy man be's dole. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
3. Proviſions or money diſtributed in charity.
They had ſuch firm dependance on the day,
That Need grew pamper'd, and forgot to pray;
So ſure the do e, ſo ready at their call,
They ſtood prepar'd to ſee the manna fall. Dryden.
Clients of old were feaſted; now a poor
Divided dole is dealt at th’ outward door, -
which by the hungry rout is ſoon diſpatch'd. Dryd, juven.
4. Blows dealt out. -
It was your preſurmiſe,
That in the dº e of blows your ſon might drop. Shakespeare H. IV.
What if his eye-ſight, for to Iſrael's God
Nothing is hard, by miracle reſtor'd,
He now be dealing dole among his foes,
And over heaps of ſlaughter'd walk his way? Miſt. Agoni/?.
5. [from dolor.] Grief; ſorrow ; miſery. -
Yonder they lie; the poor old man, their father, making
ſuch pitiful dole over them, that all beholders take his part
with weeping. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Our ſometime ſiſter, now our queen,
Have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy,
With mirth in ſºneral, and with dirge in marriage,
In equal ſcale weighing delight and dole,
Taken to wife. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
They might hope to change
Torment with eaſe, and ſooneſt recompenſe
Dºle with delight. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv. l. 892.
Toljoi. e.v.a. [from the noun J. To deal; to diſtribute. Dić.
ID. I.e. n.ſ. Void ſpace left in tillage. Dic?.
Do'LEFU L. adj. [dale and full.]
1. Sorrowful; diſmal; expreſing grief. -
She earneſtly intreated to know the cauſe thereof, that either
ſhe might comfort, or accompany her doleful humour. Sidney.
For none but you, or who of you it learns,
Can rightfully aread ſo doleful lay. Spenſ. Tears of the Muſes.
With ſcrewed face, and dolful whine, they only ply with
&amp;nſeleſs harangles of conſcience againſt carnal ordinances.
- South's Sermons.
Cleveland.
Juſt then the hero caſt a doleful cry,
And in thoſe abſent, flames began to fry:
The blind contagion rag’d within his veins. . Dryd. Fablet.
2. Melancholy ; afflićted; feeling grief.
How oft my doleful fire cry'd to me, tarry, ſon,
When firſt he ſpyed my love | Sidney, b, i.
3. Diſmal; impreſſing ſorrow.
It watereth the heart, to the end it may frućtify; maketh
the virtuous, in trouble, full of magnanimity and courage;
ſerveth as a moſt approved remedy againſt all dolful and heavy
accidents, which befall men in this preſent life. Hooker, b. v.
From thoſe flames
No light, but rather darkneſs viſible,
Serv'd only to diſcover fights of woe,
Regions of ſorrow ! doleful ſhades' where peace
And reſt can never dwell ! 41ilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. i.
Happy the mortal man who now at laſt
Has through this do ful vale of mis’ry paſt;
Who to his deſtin'd ſtage has carry'd on
The tedious load, and laid his burden down. Prior,
Do'LE FULLY. adv. [from dºleful J. In a doleful manner; for-
rowfully ; diſmally ; querulouſly.
Do'LEFU LNEss. n.ſ. . [from doleful.]
1. Sorrow ; melancholy.
2. Querulouſneſs.
3. Diſmalneſs.
Do'LEsox f. adj. [from dole..] Melancholy; gloomy; diſmal;
ſorrowful; doleful.
Hell-ward bending o'er the beach diſcry
The doleſome paſſage to th’ infernal ſky. Pope's Odyſſey, b. ii.
Dolesom El Y. adv. [from doleſºme.] In a doleſome manner.
Do'LEsox EN Ess. n. / [from dolºſome.] Gloom; melancholy;
diſmalneſs.
Doll. n.ſ.
1. A contraćtion of Dorothy.
2. A little girl's puppet or baby.
Do'LLAR. m. ſ. [daler, Dutch..] A Dutch and German coin of
different value, from about two ſhillings and ſixpence to four
and ſixpence.
He diſburs'd, at St. Colmeſkill iſle,
Ten thouſand dollars for our gen'ral uſe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Dolor I'Fick. adj. [dolºrificus, Latin.] That which cauſes
grief or pain.
The pain then by degrees returned, which I could attribute
to nothing but the diſſipating that vapour which obſtructed
the nerves, and giving the dolorifick motion free paſſage again.
Ray on the Creation.
This, by the ſoftneſs and rarity of the fluid, is inſenſible,
and not dolorifick. Arbuthnot on Air.
Do'LoRous. adj. [from dolor, Latin.]
1. Sorrowful; doleful; diſmal; gloomy.
We are taught by his example, that the preſence of
d lorous and dreadful objećts, even in minds moſt perfect,
may, as clouds, overcaſt all ſeaſonable joy. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 48.
You take me in too dolorous a ſenſe:
I ſpake t'you for your comfort. Shakespeare Anth, and Cleopatra.
Through many a dark and dreary vale
They paſs'd, and many a region dolorous,
O'er many a frozen, many a fiery alp,
Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and ſhades of death.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii. l. 618.
Talk not of ruling in this dol’rous gloom,
Nor think vain words, he cry'd, can eaſe my doom. Pope.
2. Painful.
Their diſpatch is quick, and leſs dolorous than the paw of the
bear, or tecth of the lion. . More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
Do Lou R. m. ſ. [dolor, Latin.] -
1. Grief; ſorrow.
I've words too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongue's office ſhould be prodigal,
To breathe th’ abundant d.lour of the heart. Shakeſ R. II.
2. Lamentation; complaint. -
3. Pain ; pang.
A mind fixed and bent upon ſomewhat that is good, doth
avert the dolours of death. Bacon, Eſſay z.
Do'LPHIN. m. ſ. [deſphin, Latin; though the dolphin is ſup-
poſed to be not the ſame fiſh J The name of a fiſh.
His delights
Were dolphin like; they ſhew’d his back above
The element they liv'd in. Shakespeare Anth, and Cleopatra.
You may draw boys riding upon goats, eagles, and dolphins.
- Peacham on Drawing.
DOLT. m. ſ. [dol, Teutonick. J . A heavy ſtupid fellow; a
blockhead; a thickſcul; a loggerhead.
Let dolts in haſte ſome altar fair erect
To thoſe high powers, which idlely ſit above. Sidney, b, ii.
Thou haſt not half that power to do me harm,
As I have to be hurt : oh, gull 1 oh, doſt /
As ignorant as dirt! Shakeſpeare'. Othell.
Like men condemn'd to thunder-bolts,
Who, ere the blow, become merg dolts;
And
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 296</div><p class="Text">They neither have the hearts to ſtay, - -
Nor wit enough to run away. Hudibras, p. iii. tant. 2.
Wood's adult'rate copper,
Which, as he ſcatter'd, we, like dolts,
Miſtook at firſt for thunder-bolts. Swift.
Do'LTIs H. adj. [from dot..] Stupid; mean; dull; blockiſh.
Dametas, the moſt arrant doltiſh clown, that ever was
without the privilege of a bauble. Sidney.
Do'MABLE. adj. [dºmabilis, Latin.] Tameable. Dić?.
DoMA'IN. n.ſ.. [domaine, French, from dominium, Latin.]
1. Dominion; empire.
* Rome's great emperor, whoſe wide domain
* Had ample territory, wealth and pow'r. Milt. Parad. Reg.
Ocean trembles for his green domain. Thomſon.
2. Poſſeſſion; eſtate.
A Latian field, with fruitful plains,
And a large portion of the king's domains. Dryden's Án.
Dom E. m. ſ. [dome, French, from domus, Latin.]
1. A building; a houſe; a fabrick.
Beſt be he call'd among good men,
Who to his God this column rais'd :
• Though lightning ſtrike the dome again,
The man who built it ſhall be prais'd.
Stranger whoe'er thou art, ſecurely reſt,
Affianc'd in my faith, a friendly gueſt: º
Approach the dome, the ſocial banquet ſhare,
And then the purpoſe of thy ſoul declare. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. A hemiſpherical arch; a cupola.
DOME’STICAL. } adj. [aomg/?icus, Latin.]
Prior.
DOME'STICK.
1. Belonging to the houſe; not relating to things publick.
The neceſſities of man had at the firſt no other helps and
ſupplies than dºmeſical; ſuch as that which the prophet imply-
eth, ſaying, can a mother forget her child Hooker.
The practical knowledge of the domeſtick duties is the prin-
cipal glory of a woman. Clariſſa.
2. Private; done at home; not open.
In this their domeſtical celebration of the Paſſover, they
divided ſupper into two courſes.
Beholding thus, O, happy as a queen'
We cry; but ſhift the gaudy, flattering ſcene,
View her at home in her domeſtick light,
For thither ſhe muſt come, at leaſt at night.
3. Inhabiting the houſe; not wild.
The faithful prudent huſband is an honeſt, tractable, and
domeſtick animal. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 128.
4. Not foreign; inteſtine.
Domeſtical evils, for that we think we can maſter them at
all times, are often permitted to run on forward, 'till it be too
late to recall them. Hooker, Dedication.
Equality of two domeſtick pow'rs
Breeds ſcrupulous fačtion. Shakeſpeare's Anth. and Cleopatra.
Combine together 'gainſt the enemy;
For theſe domeſtick and particular broils
Are not the queſtion here. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Next to the fin of thoſe who began that rebellion, theirs
muſt needs be who hindered the ſpeedy ſuppreſſing of it, by
domeſtick diſſentions. King Charles.
Such they were, who might preſume t' have done
Much for the king and honour of the ſtate;
Having the chiefeſt actions undergone,
Both foreign and domeſtical of late. Daniel's Civil Iſar.
To Do Me'sTICATE. v. a. [from domeſtick.] To make domeſ-
tick; to withdraw from the publick. Clariſſa.
Dome'stick. n.ſ. One kept in the ſame houſe. .
A ſervant dwells remote from all knowledge of his lord's
purpoſes: he lives as a kind of foreigner under the ſame
roof; a dom'ſlick, and yet a ſtranger too. South's Sermons.
To Do'MIFY. v. a. [domiſco, Latin.] To tame. Dićf.
Do'MINANT, adj. [dominant, French; dominans, Latin.] Pre-
dominant; preſiding; aſcendant.
To DOMINATE. v. a. [dominatus, Lat.] To predominate;
to prevail over the reſt.
I thus conclude my theme,
The dominating humour makes the dream.
Dom INA'tion. n.ſ. [dominatio, Latin.]
1. Power; dominion.
- Thou and thine uſurp
The domination, royalties, and rights
Of this oppreſſed boy. Shakeſpeare's King john.
2. Tyranny ; inſolent authority.
Maximinus traded with the Goths in the produćt of
his own eſtate in Thracia, the place of his nativity, whi-
ther he retired, to withdraw from the unjuſt domination of
Opilius Macrinus. Arbuthnot on Coinſ,
3. One highly exalted in power: uſed of angelick beings.
He heav'n of heav'ns, and all the pow'rs therein,
By thee created; and by thee threw down
Th' aſpiring dominations. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. iii.
Hear all ye angels, progeny of light,
Thrones, dominations, princedoms, virtues, pow'rs. Milton.
Do'M INATIVE. adj. [from dominate.] Imperious ; inſolent. Dief,
Vol. I.
Granville.
Dryden.
Hooker, b. iii.
DOMINATOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] The preſiding or predominant
power or influence. -
Jupiter and Mars are dominators for this North-weſt part of .
the world, which maketh the people impatient of ſervitude,
lovers of liberty, martial and courageous. Camden's Remains.
To Dom INEER. v. n. ['aminor, Latin.] To rule with inſo-
lence; to ſwell ; to blufter; to act without control.
Go to the feaſt, revel and domineer, -
Carowſe full meaſure. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
The voice of conſcience now is low and weak, chałłſing
the paſſions, as old Eli did his luſtful domineering ſons. South.
Both would their little ends ſecure;
He fighs for freedom, ſhe for pow'r :
His wiſhes tend abroad to roam, :
And her’s to domineer at home Priºr.
Domi'N1cAL. adj. [domini-ali, Latin.] That which notes the
Lord's day, or Sunday. º
The cycle of the moon ſerves to ſhew the epāóts, and that
of the ſun the dominical letter, throughout all their variations.
Holder on Hime,
DoM1'N Ion. m. ſ. [dominium, Latin.]
1. Sovereign authority; unlimited power.
They on the earth
Dominion exerciſe, and in the air, -
Chiefly on man. Milton's Par, Lºft.
He gave us only over beaſt, fiſh, fowl,
Dominion abſolute; that right we hold
By his donation: but man over man
He made not lord. . Milton.
Bleſt uſe of pow'r, O virtuous pride in kings'
And like his bounty, whence dominion ſprings. Tickell.
2. Power; right of poſſeſſion or uſe, without being accountable.
He could not have private dominion over that, which was
under the private dominion of another. Locke.
3. Territory; region; ſubject; diſtrict.
The donations of biſhopricks were a flower of the crown,
which the kings of England did ever retain in all their domi-
nions, when the pope's uſurped authority was at the higheſt.
Davies on Ireland.
4. Predominance; aſcendant. -
Obječts placed foremoſt ought to be more finiſhed than
thoſe caſt behind, and to have dominion over things confuſed
and tranſient. Dryden's Duſreſnoy.
5. An order of angels.
By him were all things created, viſible and inviſible;
whether they be thrones or dºminions, or principalities or
powers. Col. i. 16.
Don. n.ſ. [dominus, Latin.]• The Spaniſh title for a gentle-
man; as, don Quixote.
To Do N. v. a. [To do on..] To put on ; to inveſt one with.
- The purple morning left her crimſon bed,
And don'd her robes of pure vermilion hue. Fairfax, b. iii.
Her helm the virgin don'd. Fairfax, b. i. Jian. 48.
What! ſhould I don this robe, and trouble you ? Shakeſp.
Do'N ARY. m.ſ.. [donarium, Latin.] A thing given to ſacred
uſes. -
DoNA'tion. m. ſ. [dinatio, Latin.]
1. The act of giving any thing; the aët of beſtowing.
He gave us only over beaſt, fiſh, fowl
Dominion abſolute; that right we hold
By his donation. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii.
After donation there is an abſolute change and alienation
made of the property of the thing given, and that as to the
uſe of it too; which being ſo alienated, a man has no more
to do with it than with a thing bought with another's money.
- South's Scrimons.
2. The grant by which any thing is given or conferred.
Howſoever the letter of that donation may be unregarded
by men, yet the ſenſe thereof is ſo imprinted in their hearts,
as if every one laid claim for himſelf unto that which was
conferred upon all. Raleigh's Aſſays.
The kingdoms of the world to thee were giv'n,
Permitted rather, and by thee uſurp'd,
Other donation none thou can'ſt produce. Mºt. Par, Rºg.
Do'Native. n.ſ. [donatif, French, from d natus, Latin.]
1. A gift; a largeſs; a preſent; a dole of money diſtributed.
The Roman emperor's cuſtom was, at certain ſolemn
times, to beſtow on his ſoldiers a donative; which d native
they received, wearing garlands upon their heads. . . Hºo'er.
They were entertained with publick ſhows and degotives,
to make them more eaſily digeſt their loſt liberty. , Dry ten.
2. [In law.] A benefice merely given and collated by the patton
to a man, without either preſentation to the ordinary, or in-
ſtitution by the ordinary, or induction by his orders. Cºwel.
Never did ſteeple carry double truer; -
His is the donative, and mine the cure.
DoNE. part. paſſ of the verb. To do.
Another like fair tree eke grew thereby,
Whereof who ſo did eat, eftſoons did know
Both good and evil: O mournful memory ! -
That tree, through one man's fault, hath done us all to dye.
Fairy Queen, b. i. tant, 11. Jianz, 47.
7 K. DoNR
Cleveland. .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 297</div><p class="Text">D O O
D O R
DoNE, a Hind of interjeńion. The word by which a wager is
concluded; when a wager is offered, he that accepts it ſays
done.
Done: the wager? ..Shakeſpeare's Tempſ.
One thing, ſweet-heart, I will aſk;
Take me for a new-faſhion'd maſk: .
—Done; but my bargain ſhall be this,
I'll throw my maſk off when I kiſs. Cleveland.
'Twas done and done, and the fox, by conſent, was to be
the judge. L'Eſtrange, Fab. 133.
Do'NjoN. m. ſ. ſnow corrupted to dungeon, from damnioniſm,
low Latin, according to Menage.] The higheſt and ſtrongeſt
tower of the caſtle, in which priſoners were kept; as in
Chaucer.
The grete toure, that was ſo thicke and ſtrong,
Which of the caſtle was the chief dongeon,
Wherein the knightes were in priſon,
Was evin joynant to the garden-wall,
Ther as this Emely had her playeing. Chaucer.
Do'Nor. n.ſ.. [from dono, Latin.] A giver; a beſtower; one
who gives anything.
Litters thick beſiege the donor's gate,
And begging lords and teeming ladies wait
The promis'd dole. Dryden's juvenal, Sat. i.
It is a mighty check to beneficent tempers to conſider how
often good deſigns are fruſtrated by an ill execution of them,
and perverted to purpoſes, which, could the donors themſelves
have foreſeen, they would have been very loth to promote.
i. Atterbury's Sermons.
DooDL E. n.ſ.. [a cant word, perhaps corrupted from do little,
Faineant..] A trifler; an idler.
To DOOM. v. a. [beman, Saxon.]
1. To judge.
Him through malice fall'n,
Father of mercy and grace thou did'ſt not dºom
So ſtrićtly, but much more to pity incline. Milt. Par. Loft.
2. To condemn to any puniſhment; to ſentence.
He may be doom'd to chains, to ſhame, to death,
While proud Hippolitus ſhall mount his throne. Smith.
Juſtly th’ impartial fates conſpire,
Dooming that ſon to be the fire
Of ſuch another ſon. Granville.
3. To pronounce condemnation upon any.
Minos, the ſtrict inquiſitor, appears,
And lives and crimes, with his aſleſſors, hears;
Round in his urn the blended balls he rolls,
Abſolves the juſt, and dooms, the guilty ſouls. Dryden’s AFn.
4. To command judicially or authoritatively.
Have I a tongue to dºom my brother's death?
And ſhall that tongue give pardon to a ſlave? Shakeſpeare.
5. To deſtine; to command by uncontrolable authority.
Fate and the gods, by their ſupreme command,
Have doom'd our ſhips to ſeek the Latian land. Dryd AEm.
I have no will but what your eyes ordain;
Deſtin'd to love, as they are doom'd to reign. Granville.
Doom. m. ſ. ſoom, Saxon; doem, Dutch..]
1. Judicial ſentence; judgment.
He's fled, my lord, and all his pow'rs do yield;
And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
Expect your highneſs' doom of life or death. Shakeſp. H. VI.
To Satan, firſt in fin, his doom apply'd,
Though in myſterious terms, judg’d as then beſt. Milton.
And now, without redemption, all mankind
Muſt have been loſt, adjudg’d to death and hell
By doom ſevere. 44ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii. l. 224.
In the great day, wherein the ſecrets of all hearts ſhall be
laid open, no one ſhall be made to anſwer for what he knows
nothing of; but ſhall receive his doom, his conſcience accuſing
or excuſing him. Locke.
2. The great and final judgment.
Search Windſor-caſtle, elves within and out:
Strew good luck, Ouphes, on every ſacred room,
That it may ſtand 'till the perpetual dºom. Shakeſpeare.
3. Condemnation.
Revoke thy doom,
Or whilſt I can vent clamour from my throat,
I’ll tell thee thou do'ſt evil. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
4. Determination declared.
If friend or foe, let him be gently uſed.
—Revoke that doom of mercy; for ’tis Clifford. Shakespeare H. VI.
5. The ſtate to which one is deſtined.
By day the web and loom,
And homely houſhold-taſk, ſhall be her doom. Dryd. Iliad.
6. Ruin; deſtruction.
From the ſame foes, at laſt, both felt their doom,
And the ſame age ſaw learning fall, and Rome. Pope.
DoomsDAY. m. ſ. [dom and day.] The day of final and uni-
verſal judgment; the laſt, the great day.
Men, wives, and children ſtare, cry out, and run,
As it were doomſday. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.
They may ſerve for any theme, and never be out of date
until doomſday. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b, i. c. 6.
Our ſouls, not yet prepar'd for upper light,
*Till doomſday wander in the ſhades of night:
This only holiday of all the year, -
We privileg'd in ſunſhine may appear. Dryden.
2. The day of ſentence or condemnation. -
All-ſouls day is my body's doomſday. Shakespeare's R. III.
ToomsDAY-Book. n.ſ. [doomſday and hook.] A book made by
order of William the Conqueror, in which the eſtates of
the kingdom were regiſtered.
The Danes alſo brought in a reckoning of money by ores,
per oras, which is mentioned in dºomſday-look. Camden.
DOOR. m. ſ. ſoon, bune, Saxon; dºrris, Erſe.]
1. The gate of a houſe; that which opens to yield entrance.
Door is uſed of houſes and gates of cities, or publick build-
ings, except in the licence of poetry.
All the caſtle quaked from the ground,
And every dor of free-will open flew. Fairy Queen, b. i.
In the ſide a dºor
Contriv'd; and of proviſions laid in large,
For man and beaſt. Miltºn's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. xi.
To the ſame end men ſev'ral paths may tread,
As many doors into one temple lead. Denham.
For without rules there can be no art, any more than there
can be a houſe without a dºor to conduct you in. Lºyd. Difrºſ.
2. In familiar language, a houſe.
Lay one piece of fleſh or fiſh in the open air, and another
of the ſame kind and bigneſs within dºors. Bacon's Not. Hiſł.
Lct him doubt whether his cloaths be warm, and ſo go
naked; whether his houſe be firm, and live without doºrs.
Decay of 1°iety.
Martin's office is now the ſecond door in the ſtreet, where
he will ſee Parnel. Arbuth.
Lambs, though they are bred within doors, and never ſaw
the actions of their own ſpecies, puſh at thoſe who approach
them with their foreheads. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 121.
The ſultan entered again the peaſant's houſe, and turned the
owner out of doºrs. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 99.
3. Entrance; portal.
The tender blades of graſs appear,
And buds, that yet the blaſt of Eurus fear, {
Stand at the dºor of life, and doubt to clothe the year. Dry.
4. Paſſage; avenue ; means of approach.
The indiſpenſable neceſſity of ſincere obedience, ſhuts the
door againſt all temptations to carnal ſecurity. Hammond.
5. Out of Door, or Doors. No more to be found; quite
gone; fairly ſent away.
Should he, who was thy lord, command thee now,
With a harſh voice and ſupercilious brow,
To ſervile duties, thou would'ſt fear no more;
The gallows and the whip are out ºf door. Dryden’s Perſ.
His imaginary title of fatherhood is cut ºf doors, and Cain
is no prince over his brother. Locke.
6. At the Door of any one. Imputable; chargeable upon him.
In any of which parts, if I have failed, the fault lies wholly
at my door. Dryden's Diſreſnoy, Prºf...e.
7. Next Door to. Approaching to ; near to ; bordering upon.
A ſeditious word leads to a broil, and a riot unpuniſhed is
but next door to a tumult. L'E/trange.
Do'o RCASE. n.ſ. [door and caſe.] The frame in which the door
is incloſed.
The making of frames for doorcaſes, is the framing of two
pieces of wood athwart two other pieces. Mox. 4. ech. Exer.
Do'or KEEPER. m. ſ. [door and keeper..] Porter ; one that keeps
the entrance of a houſe.
He that hath given the following aſſiſtances to thee, deſires
to be even a doorkeeper in God's houſe, and to be a ſervant to
the meaneſt of God's ſervants. Taylor's Preface.
Do'QUET. n.ſ. A paper containing a warrant. -
Before the inſtitution of this form and office, no writ of
covenant for the levying any final concord in chief, no doguct
for licence to alien, nor warrant for pardon of alienation made,
could be purchaſed and gotten, without an oath called an
affidavit. Bacon's Office of Alienation.
Do'RMANT. adj. [dormant, French.]
1. Sleeping.
He a dragon' if he be, ’tis a very peaceful one: I can in-
ſure his anger is dormant; or ſhould he ſeem to rouſe, ’tis well
laſhing him, and he will ſleep like a top. Cong. Gld Batchelor.
2. In a ſleeping poſture.
If a lion were the coat of Judah, yet were it not a lion
rampant, but rather couchant and dormant. Brown's P'ug. Err.
With this radius he is ſaid to ſtrike and kill his prey, for
which he lies, as it were, do mant, 'till it ſwims within his
reach. Grew's 41/aciºn,
3. Private ; not publick.
There were other dormant muſters of ſoldiers throughout
all parts of the realm, that were put in readineſs, but not
drawn together. Bacon's War with Spain.
4. Concealed; not divulged.
It would be prudent to reſerve theſe privileges dºrmant,
never to be produced but upon great occaſions. Swift.
5. Leaning; not perpendicular,
I Old
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 298</div><p class="Text">D O T
Old dºrmant windows muſt confeſs
Her beams: their glimmering ſpectacles, .
Struck with the ſplendor of her face,
Do th’ office of a burning-glaſs.
Do'RMIto RY. m. ſ. [dormitorium, Latin.]
1. A place to ſleep in: uſed commonly for a room with many
beds.
Rooms that have thorough lights are left for entertainment,
and thoſe that have windows on one ſide for dormitories. Mort.
Naked mourns the dormitory wall,
And Jones and Boyle's united labours fall. Pope's Dunciad.
2. A burial place.
The places where dead bodies are buried, are in Latin called
caemiteria, and in Engliſh dormitories. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Do'RMouse. º {dormio, to ſleep, and mouſe..] A ſmall ani-
mal which paſſes a large part of the Winter in ſleep.
Come, we all ſleep, and are mere dormice flies,
A little leſs than dead: more dulneſs hangs
On us than on the moon. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
Cleveland.
After they have lain a little while they grow as drowſy as
dormice, unleſs they are rouſed. Collier on Thought.
DoRN. n.ſ.. [from dorn, German, a thorn.] The name of a
fiſh ; perhaps the ſame as the thornback.
The coaſt is ſtored both with ſhellfiſh, as ſcallops and
ſheathfiſh, and flat, as turbets, dorms, and holybut. Carew.
Do'RN1ck. m. ſ. [of Deornick in Flanders, where firſt made.]
A ſpecies of linen cloath uſed in Scotland for the table.
To DORR. v. a. [tor, ſtupid, Teutonick.] To deafen or
ſtupify with noiſe. This word I find only in Skinner.
Dor R. n.ſ.. [ſo named probably from the noiſe which he
makes.]. A kind of flying inſect, remarkable for flying with
a loud noiſe.
The dorr, or hedge-chafer's chief marks are theſe: his
head is ſmall, like that of the common beetle: this and his
eyes black: his ſhoulder-piece, and the middle of his belly,
alſo black; but juſt under the wing-ſhells ſpotted with white.
His wing-ſhells, legs, and the end of his tail, which is long
and flat-pointed, of a light cheſnut: his breaſt, eſpecially,
covered with a downy hair. Grew's Muſæum.
Do'Rsel. }". ſ: [from dorſum, the back..] A pannier; a baſket
Do'R's ER. 9 or bag, one of which hangs on either ſide a beaſt
of burthen, for the reception of things of ſmall bulk.
DoRs1'FERous. n.ſ. I dorſum and fero, or pario, Latin. I
DoRs1'PA Rous. } Having the property of bearing or bring-
ing forth on the back. It is uſed of plants that have the
ſeeds on the back of their leaves, as fern; and may be pro-
perly uſed of the American frog, which brings forth young
from her back.
Do'RTURE. m. ſ. [contračted from dormiture; dºrmitura, Lat.
dartoir, French.] A dormitory; a place to ſleep in.
He led us to a gallery like a dorture, where he ſhewed us
along the one ſide, for the other was but wall and window,
feventeen cells, very neat, having partitions of cedar-wood.
Bacon's New Atlantis.
Dos E. m. ſ. [?….]
1. So much of any medicine as is taken at one time. Quincy.
The too vigºrous doſe too fiercely wrought,
And added fury to the ſtrength it brought. Dryden's Virgil.
In a vehement pain of the head he preſcribed the juice of
the thapſia in warm water, without mentioning the dºſe.
A buthnot.
2. As much of any thing as falls to a man's lot.
No ſooner does he peep into
The world, but he has done his doe; -
Married his punétual doſe of wives,
Is cuckolded, and breaks, or thrives. Hudibras, p. ii.
3. It is often uſed of the utmoſt quantity of ſtrong liquor that
a man can ſwallow. He has his doſe, that is, he can carry off
no more.
To Dos E. v. a.
1. To proportion a medicine properly to the patient or diſeaſe.
Plants ſeldom uſed in medicine, being eſteemed poiſonous,
if corrected, and exactly doſed, may prove powerful me-
dicines. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
2. To give phyſick to any man in a ludicrous ſenſe.
Do'ssil. n.f. [corrupted from dºrſel, ſomething laid upon the
part.] A pledget; a nodule or lump of lint, to be laid on a
ſore.
Her complaints put me upon dreſſing with ſuch medica-
ments as baſilicon, with præcipitate, upon a dºſſil. Wiſeman.
Dost. [the ſecond perſon of do. J
Why then dºſ' treat me with rebukes, inſtead,
Of kind condoling cares, and friendly ſorrow Addison Cato.
DOT. m. f. [ ſ his is derived by Skinner from dºtter, German,
the white of an egg, and interpreted by him a grume of pus.
It has now no ſuch ſignification, and ſeems rather corrupted
from jot, a point..] A ſmall point or ſpot made to mark any
place in a writing. -
To Dot. v. n. [from the noun..] To make dots, or ſpots.
Doºt A G E m.ſ.. [from dote ) º
1. Loſs of underſtanding; imbecillity of mind; deliriouſneſs.
The ſoul in all hath one intelligence;
Though too much moiſture in an infant's brain,
And too much drineſs in an old man's ſenſe,
Cannot the prints of outward things retain:
Then doth the ſoul want work, and idle ſit,
And this we childiſhneſs and dotage call. Daviè:
I hold, that perfect joy makes all our parts
As joyful as our hearts:
Our ſenſes tell us, if we pleaſe not them,
Our love is but a dotage, or a dream. Suckling:
2. Exceſſive fondneſs.
If on your head my fury does not turn,
Thank that fond dotage which ſo much you ſcorn. Dryden:
Do"tal, adj. [dºtalis, Latin.] Relating to the portion of a
woman; conſtituting her portion; compriſed in her portion.
Shall I, of one poor dotal town poſſeſt, -
My people thin, my wretched country waſte?
An exil'd prince, and on a ſhaking throne,
Or riſk my patron's ſubječts, or my own Garth's Ovid.
Do'TARD. m.ſ.. [from dote.] A man whoſe age has impaired
his intelle&amp;ts; a man in his ſecond childhood; called in ſome
provinces a twichild.
... Dotard, ſaid he, let be thy deep adviſe,
Seems that through many years thy wits thee fail,
And that weak old hath left thee nothing wiſe,
Elſe never ſhould thy judgement be ſo frail. Fairy Queen.
The ſickly dotard wants a wife,
To draw off his laſt dregs of life. Prior.
DoTA"tion. n.ſ. [dotatio, Latin.] The aët of giving a dowry
or portion. Dićf.
To DOTE. v. n. [doten, Dutch; radoter, French.]
1. To have the intelle&amp;t impaired by age or paſſion; to be de-
lirious.
Unleſs the fear of death make me dote,
I ſee my ſon. Shakeſp. Com. of Err.
A ſword is upon the liars, and they ſhall dote : a ſword is
upon her mighty men, and they ſhall be diſmayed. jer. l. 36.
Time has made you dote, and vainly tell
Of arms imagin'd, in your lonely cell:
Go, be the temple and the gods your care;
Permit to men the thought of peace and war. Dryd. Æn.
When an old woman begins to dote, and grow chargeable
to a pariſh, ſhe is turned into a witch, and fills the country
with extravagant fancies. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 1 17.
2. To be in love to extremity.
He was ſtriken with great affection towards me, which ſince
is grown to ſuch a doting love, that, 'till I was fain to get this
place, ſometimes to retire in freely: I was even choked with
his tediouſneſs. Sidney:
I have loºg loved her, and beſtowed much on her, fol-
lowed her v.ith a doting obſervance. Shakespeare M. Wives of Windſ.
To Dot E upon. To regard with exceſſive fondneſs; to love to
exceſs.
All their prayers and love
Were ſet on Hereford, whom they doted on,
And bleſs'd, and grac'd. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Forgive me, that I do not dream on thee,
Becauſe thou ſeeſt me dote upon my love. Shakeſpeare.
All the beauties of the court beſides, .*
Are mad in love, and dote upon your perſon. Denham.
Mark thoſe who dote on arbitrary power,
And you ſhall find 'em either hot-brain'd youth,
Or needy bankrupts.
Would you ſo date upon your firſt deſire,
As not to entertain a nobler fire * Dryden's Indian Emperor.
We dote upon this preſent world, and the enjoyments of
it; and ’tis not without pain and fear, and reluctancy, that
we are torn from them, as if our hopes lay all within the
Dryden.
compaſs of this life. Burnet.
O death, all eloquent you only prove
What duſt we dote on, when 'tis man we love. Pope.
Do'TER. n.ſ.. [from dote.] -
1. One whoſe underſtanding is impaired by years; a dotard.
What ſhould a bald fellow do with a comb, a dumb dater
with a pipe, or a blind man with a looking-glaſs 2 Burton.
2. A man fondly, weakly, and exceſſively in love.
If in black my lady's brow be deckt,
It mourns that painting and uſurping hair
Should raviſh doters with a falſe aſpect;
And therefore is ſhe born to make black fair. Shakeſpeare.
Our deters upon red and white are inceſlantly perplexed, by
the incertainty both of the continuance of their miſtreſ's
kindneſs, and of the laſting of her beauty. Boyle.
Do"TINGLY. adv. [from diting.] Fondly ; by exceſſive fond-
neſs.
That he, to wedlock dotingly betray'd, *
Should hope in this lewd town to find a maid! Dryd. Yuv.
Dott AF D. m. ſ. This word ſeems to ſignify a tree kept low
by cutting.
For great trees, we ſee almoſt all overgrown trees in church-
yards, or near ancient buildings, and the like, are pollards and
dottards, and not trees at their full height. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Do"tt ER EL. m. ſ. [from date.] The name of a bird that
mimicks geſtures.
We
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 299</div><p class="Text">* D O U
D O U
&gt;
We ſee how ready apes and monkeys are to imitate all
motions of man; and in catching of dotterel, we ſee how
the fooliſh bird playeth the ape in geſtures. Bacon's Nat. Hiſſ.
DO'UBLE, adj. [ double, French; duplex, Latin; duple,
Erſe.
I. º of a ſort; one correſponding to the other; in pairs.
All things are double one againſt another, and he hath made
nothing imperfect. Eccluſ, xlii. 24.
2. Twice as much; containing the ſame quantity repeated.
Great honours are great burthens; but, on whom
They are caſt with envy, he doth bear two loads:
His cares muſt ſtill be double to his joys,
In any dignity. Ben. Johnſon's Catiline.
I am not ſo old in proportion to them as I formerly was,
which I can prove by arithmetick; for then I was double their
age, which now I am not. - Swift.
This ſum of forty thouſand pounds is almoſt double to what
is ſufficient. - Swift's Draper's Letters.
3. Having one added to another; having more than one in the
ſame order or parallel.
It is a curioſity alſo to make flowers double, which is ef-
fečted by often removing them into new earth; as, on the
contrary part, double flowers by neglecting, and not removing,
prove ſingle. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 513.
I met a reverend, fat, old gouty fryar,
With a paunch ſwoln ſo high, his double chin
Might reſt upon't. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar,
4. Twofold; of two kinds.
Thus curſed ſteel, and more accurſed gold,
Gave miſchief birth, and made that miſchief bold;
And double death did wretched man invade,
By ſteel aſſaulted, and by gold betray'd. Dryden's Ovid.
No ſtar appears to lend his friendly light;
Darkneſs and tempeſt make a double night. Dryden.
5. Two in number.
And if one power did not both ſee and hear,
Our fights and ſounds would always double be. Davies.
6. Having twice the cffect or influence; having the power of
tWO. •
The magnifico is much belov’d,
And hath in his effect a voice potential,
As dºuble as the duke's. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
7. Deceitful; acting two parts, one openly, the other in ſecret.
I' th' preſence
He would ſay untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words and meaning. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Fifty thouſand could keep rank, that were not of double
heart. . * 1 Chron. xii. 33.
Double-plea. m. ſ. [ duplex placitum, Latin. J. Is that in
which the defendant alleges for himſelf two ſeveral matters,
in bar of the aëtion, whereof either is ſufficient to effect his
deſire in debarring the plaintiff. Cowel.
Double-QUARREL, is a complaint made by any clerk or other
to the archbiſhop of the province, againſt an inferiour ordi-
nary, for delaying juſtice in ſome cauſe eccleſiaſtical. The
effect is, that the archbiſhop directs his letters, under the au-
thentical ſeal, to all clerks of his province, commanding them
to admoniſh the ſaid ordinary within nine days to do the juſ-
tice required, or otherwiſe to cite him to appear before him
or his official: and laſtly to intimate to the ſaid ordinary, that
if he neither performs the thing enjoined, nor appears at the
day affigned, he himſelf will proceed to perform the juſtice
required. And this ſeems to be termed a double quarrel, be-
cauſe it is moſt commonly made againſt both the judge, and
him at whoſe petition juſtice is delayed. Cowel.
Double is much uſed in compoſition, generally for doubly, two
ways; as double edged, having an edge on each ſide; or for
twice the number or quantity, as dºuble died, twice died.
Double-Biting. adj. [double and bite.] Biting or cutting on
either ſide.
But moſt their looks on the black monarch bend,
His riſing muſcles and his brawn commend;
His double-biting ax, and beamy ſpear,
Each aſking a gigantick force to rear. Dryden's Fables.
Double-Button Ed. adj, [double and buttoned.] Having two
rows of buttons.
Others you'll ſee, when all the town's afloat,
Wrapt in th’ embraces of a kerſey coat,
Or double-button'd frieze. - Gay's Trivia.
Double-DEALER. m. ſ. [double and dealer.] A deceitful, ſubtle,
inſidious fellow ; one who acts two parts at the ſame time;
one who ſays one thing and thinks another.
Double-dealers may paſs muſter for a while ; but all par-
ties waſh their hands of them in the concluſion. L'Eſtrange.
Double-DEALING. m. ſ. [double and dealing J Artifice; diffi-
mulation; low or wicked cunning.
Thou ſhalt not be the worſe for me; there's gold.
—But that it would be double-dealing, ſir, I would you could
make it another. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Our poets have joined together ſuch qualities as are by na-
ture moſt compatible; valour with anger, meekneſs with
piety, and prudence with diſſimulation: this laſt union was
neceſſary for the goodneſs of Ulyſſes; for without that, his
diſſimulation might have degenerated into wickedneſs and
double-dealing. Pope's Piew of Epic Poetry.
To Double-die. v. a. [double and die.] To die twice over.
Yes, I'll to the royal bed,
Where firſt the myſteries of our love were a&amp;ed,
And double-die it with imperial crimſon. Dry, and Lee's Oed.
Double-Fou NTED. adj. I double and fount. J. Having twe
ſources.
Here the dºuble-fºunted ſtream
Jordan, true limit eaſtward. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. xii.
Double-H ANDED. adj. [double and hand J. Having two hands.
All things being double-handed, and having the appearances
both of truth and falſhood, where our affections have engaged .
us, we attend only to the former. Glanv. Scepſ c. 15.
Double-HEADED. adj. [double and head J Having the flowers
growing one to another.
The double rich ſcarlet nonſuch is a large double-headed
flower, of the richeſt ſcarlet colour. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To Double-lock. v. a. [double and lock.] To ſhoot the lock
twice; to faſten with double ſecurity.
He immediately double-locked his door, and ſat down care-
fully to reading and comparing both his orders. Tatler, Nº. 60.
Double-MINDED. a j. [from double and mind.] Leceitful;
infidious.
A double-minded man is unſtable in all his ways. James i. 8.
Double-shº NING, adj. I double and ſhine. J . Shining with
double luftre.
He was
Among the reſt that there did take delight,
To ſee the ſports of double-ſhining day. Sidney.
Double-tongued, adj. [ double and tongue. J Deceitful;
giving contrary accounts of the ſame thing.
The deacons muſt be grave, not dulle-tongued, not given
to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre. 1 Tim. iii. 8.
For much ſhe fear'd the Tyrians, double-tºngu'd,
And knew the town to Juno's care belong’d. Dryd. Virgil.
To Double. v. a. [from the adječtive.]
1. To enlarge any quantity by addition of the ſame quantity.
Rumour doth double voice, and echo
The numbers of the fear'd. Shakespeare's Henry IV.
Pay him fix thouſand, and deface the bond; -
Double fix thouſand, and then treble that. Shakeſpeare.
Our foe's too proud the weaker to aſſail,
Or doubles, his diſhonour if he fail. Dryd State of Innocence.
This power of repeating or doubling any idea we have of
any diſtance, and adding it to the former, as often as we will,
without being ever able to come to any ſtop or ſtint, let us
enlarge it as much as we will, is that which gives us the idea
of immenſity. Locke.
This was only the value of the filver: there was beſides
a tenth part of that number of talents of gold, which, if
gold was reckoned in a decuple proportion, will juſt double
the ſum. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To contain twice the quantity.
Thus reinforc'd againſt the adverſe fleet,
Still doubling our's, brave Rupert leads the way. Dryden.
3. To repeat; to Addison
He ſaw proud Arcite and fierce Palemon
In mortal battle, doubling blow on blow ;
Like lightning flam'd their faulchions to and fro. Dryden.
4. To add one to another in the ſame order or parallel.
Thou ſhalt double the curtain in the tabernacle. Ex. xxvi. 9.
5. To fold.
He bought her ſermons, pſalms, and graces,
And doubled down the uſeful places. Prior.
6. To paſs round a headland.
Preſently departing again, and ſailing along the coaſt,
he doubled the promontory of Carthage, yet famous for
the ruins of that proud city. ... Knoles’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
Now we have the cape of Good Hope in fight, the trade-
wind is our own, if we can but double it. Dryden.
To Do'UBLE. v. n. -
1. To increaſe to twice the quantity.
'Tis obſerved in particular nations, that within the ſpace of
three hundred years, notwithſtanding all caſualties, the num-
ber of men dºuble.
2. To enlarge the ſtake to twice the ſum in play.
Throw AFgypt's by, and offer in the ſtead,
Offer—the crown on Berenice's head:
I am reſolv’d to dºuble 'till I win. Dryden’s Tyran. Love.
3. To turn back, or wind in running.
Under the line the ſun croſſeth the line, and maketh two
Summers and two Winters; but in the ſkirts of the torrid
zone it doublih and goeth back again, and ſo maketh one
long Summer. Bacon's Natºral Hiſ ry, Nº. 398.
So keen thy hunters, and thy ſcent ſo ſtrong,
Thy turns and dºublings cannot ſave thee long. Swift,
4. To play tricks; to uſe ſleights.
Who knows which way ſhe points
Doubling and turning like an hunted hare
Find out the meaning of her mind who can. Dryd Sp. Fry.
Do'UBLE.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 300</div><p class="Text">D O U
D O U
Do'UB : F. m. ſ. .
1. Twice the quantity or number.
In all the four great years of mortality abovementioned, I
do not find that any week the plague increaſed to the double
of the precedent week above five times. Graunt's Mortality.
2. Strong beer; beer of twice the common ſtrength.
Here's a pot of good double, neighbour: drink, and fear
not your man. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
2. A trick; a ſhift; an artifice.
Doc B : E N Ess. n.ſ.. [from double.] The ſtate of being double.
If you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleneſ of
the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. Shakesp. Meaſ. for Meaſ.
Do'UBL I R. m. f. [from double.] He that doubles anything.
Do'Uſ, i. Et. m. ſ. [from double.]
1. The inner garment of a man; the waiſtcoat: ſo called from
being double for warmth.
What a pretty thing a man is, when he goes in his doublet
and hoſe, and leaves off his wit. Shakesp. Much Ado about Nothing.
His doublet was of ſturdy buff,
And though not ſword yet cudgel proof. Hudibras, p. i.
It is common enough to ſee a countryman in the dou'let and
breeches of his great grandfather. Addiſon's Italy.
They do but mimick ancient wits at beſt, -
As apes our granfires, in their doublets dreſt. Pope's Criticiſm.
2. Two ; a pair.
Thoſe doublets on the ſides of his tail ſecm to add ſtrength
to the muſcles which move the tail-fins. Grew', Mºſarum.
D(20B20 N. m. ſ. [French..] A Spaniſh coin containing the
value of two piſtoles.
Do'URLY. adv. from double.] In twice the quantity; to twice
the degree
Young Hollis, on a muſe by Mars begot,
Born, Ca far hke, to write and act great deeds,
Impatient to revenge his fatal ſhot,
His right hand dºubly to his left ſucceeds. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
Haply at night he does with horror ſhun
A widow’d daughter, or a dying ſon:
His neighbour's offspring he to-morrow ſees,
And doubly feels his want in their increaſe. Prior.
To i) GUBT. v. n. [doubter, French ; dubito, Latin.]
1. To queſtion ; to be in uncertainty.
Even in matters divine, concerning ſome things, we may
lawfully doubt and ſuſpend our judgment, inclining neither to
one ſide or other; as, namely, touching the time of the fall
both of man and angels. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
Let no man, while he lives here in the world, doubt whe-
ther there is any hell or no, and thereupon live ſo, as if abſo-
lutely there were none. South's Sermons.
I doubt not to make it appear to be a monſtrous folly to
deride thcſe things. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Can we conclude upon Luther's inſtability, becauſe in a
ſingle notion, no way fundamental, an enemy writes that he
had ſome doublings Atterbury.
2. To queſtion any event, fearing the worſt.
Doulting things go ill, often hurt more
Than to be ſure they do. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
. Sometimes with of in both the foregoing ſenſes.
Solyman ſaid he had hitherto made war againſt divers na-
tions, and always had the vićtory, whereof he doubted not
now alſo. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Have I not manag'd my contrivance well,
To try your love, and make you doubt of mine? Dryden.
4. To fear; to be apprehenſive. *
I doubt there's deep reſentment in his mind, -
For the late ſlight his honour ſuffer'd there. Otway's Orph.
Tf there were no fault in the title, I doubt there are too
many in the body of the work. Baker on Learning.
This is enough for a projećt, without any name; I doubt
more than will be reduced into practice. Swiſt.
5. To ſuſpect; to have ſuſpicion.
The king did all his courage bend
Againſt thoſe four which now before him were,
Doºlting not who behind him doth attend. Daniel's C. War.
6. To heſitate; to be in ſuſpenſe.
At firſt the tender blades of graſs appear, }
And buds that yet the blaſt of Eurus fear,
Stand at the door of fife, and doubt to clothe the year. Dry.
To Doti Bt. v. a.
1. To hold queſtionable; to think uncertain.
He from the terror of this arm ſo late
Doubted his empire. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i. 1, 113.
To teach vain wits a ſcience little known,
Tº admire ſuperior ſenſe, and doubt their own. Pope.
2. To ſcar; to ſuſpect. -
He did ordain the interdićts and prohibitions which we have
to making cntrance of ſtrangers, which at that time was fre-
qucht, doubting novelties and commixture of manners. Bacon.
3. To diſtruſt.
You that will be leſs fearful than diſcreet,
That love the fundamental part of ſtate,
More than you don't the change of it, prefer
A noble life before a long, Shakeſpeare's Coriolanuſ,
VoI. I.
Doºb T. n ſº [from the verb.]
1. Uncertainty of mind; ſuſpenſe; undetermined ſtate of
opinion.
Could any difficulty have been propoſed, the reſolution
would have been as early as the propoſal; it could not have
had time to ſettle into doubt. South's Sermons.
Thoſe who have examined it, are thereby got paſt dºubt
in all the doctrines they profeſs. Locke.
2. Queſtion; point unſettled.
Hippocrates commends the fleſh of the wild ſow above the
tame, and no doubt but the animal is more or leſs healthy
according to the air it lives in. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
'Tis paſt a dºubt,
All Bedlam or Parnaſſus is let out. Pope.
3. Scruple; perplexity; irreſolution.
Our doubts are traytors,
And make us loſe, by fearing to attempt, -
The good we oft might win. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
4. Uncertainty of condition.
And thy life ſhall hang in doubt before thee; and thou ſhalt
fear day and night, and ſhalt have no aſſurance of thy
life. Deutr. xxviii. 66, .
5. Suſpicion; apprehenſion of ill.
I deſire to be preſent with you now, and to change my
voice; for I ſtand in doubt of you. Gal. iv. 20.
6. Difficulty objected.
To every doubt your anſwer is the ſame,
It ſo fell out, and ſo by chance it came. Blackmore's Creation.
Do'UBT ER. m. ſ. [from doubt..] One who entertains ſcruples;
one who hangs in uncertainty.
Do'UBTFUL. adj. [doubt and fall.]
1. Dubious; not ſettled in opinion.
Methinks I ſhould know you, and know this man;
Yet I am doubtful. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. Ambiguous; not clear in its meaning.
3. That about which there is doubt; that which is not yet deter-
mined or decided; obſcure; queſtionable; uncertain.
In handling the right of a war, I am not willing to inter-
mix matter dºubtful with that which is out of doubt; for as in
capital cauſes, wherein but one man's life is in queſtion,
the evidence ought to be clear; ſo much more in a judgment
upon a war, which is capital to thouſands. Bacon.
In doubtful caſes, reaſon ſtill determines for the ſafer ſide;
eſpecially if the caſe be not only doubtful, but alſo highly con-
cerning, and the venture be a ſoul, and an eternity. South.
Themetes firſt, 'tis doubtful whether hir’d,
Or ſo the Trojan deſtiny requir’d,
Mov’d, that the ramparts might be broken down,
To lodge the monſter fabrick in the town. Dryden's AEn
4. Not ſecure; not without ſuſpicion.
Our manner is always to caſt a doubtful and a more ſuſpi-
cious eye towards that, over which we know we have leaſt
power. Hoºker, Dedication.
5. Not confident; not without fear.
With dºubtful feet and wavering reſolution
I come, ſtill dreading thy diſpleaſure, Samſon. Ažilt. Agoniſt.
Do'UBTFULLY. adv. [from doubtful.]
1. Dubiouſly; irreſolutely.
2. Ambiguouſly; with uncertainty of meaning.
Knowing how doubtfully all allegories may be conſtrued,
and this book of mine being a continual allegory, I have
thought good to diſcover the general intention. Speºſer.
Nor did the goddeſs doubtfully declare
Her alter'd mind, and alienated care. Dryden.
Do'UBTFULNEss. n.ſ.. [from doubtful.]
1. Dubiouſneſs; ſuſpenſe; inſtability of opinion. -
Though doubtfumeſ; or uncertainty ſeems to be a medium
between certain truth and certain falſhood in our minds, yet
there is no ſuch medium in things themſelves. J/atts's Logick.
2. Ambiguity; uncertainty of meaning.
In arguing, the opponent uſes as comprehenſive and equi-
vocal terms as he can, to involve his adverſary in the doubtful-
neſ of his expreſſions: this is expected, and therefore the
anſwerer, on his ſide, makes it his play to diſtinguiſh as much
as he can. Locke.
Moſt of his philoſophy is, in broken ſentences, delivered
with much doubtfulneſs. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
Do'UBTINGLY. adv. [from doubt..] In a doubting manner;
dubiouſly.
Whatſoever a man imagineth d ultingly, or with fear, muſt
needs do hurt, if imagination have any power at all ; for a
man repreſenteth that oftner that he feareth, than the con-
trary. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 945.
Do'UBTL Ess. adj. [from dºubt..] Without fear , without ap-
prehenſion of danger.
Pretty child, ſleep doubtleſ, and ſecure,
That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
Will not offend them. Shakeſpeare's King jºn.
I am doubtleſ ; I can purge
Myſelf of many I am charg’d withal. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Do'UBTL Ess. adv. Without doubt; without queſtion; un-
queſtionably.
f L Doubtlºft.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 301</div><p class="Text">D O W
D O W,
Doubtleſ; he would have made a noble knight. Shakespeare H. VI.
All their deſires, deſerts, or expectations the Conqueror
had no other means to ſatisfy, but by the eſtates of ſuch as
had appeared open enemies to him, and doubtleſ, many inno-
cent perſons ſuffered in this kind. Hale's Com. Law of England.
Doubtleſ, many men are finally loſt, who yet have no mens
fins to anſwer for, but their own. South's Sermons.
Theſe mountains have been doubtleſ much higher than they
are at preſent: the rains have waſhed away of the ſoil, that
has left the veins of ſtones ſhooting out of them. J/ºadward.
Doubtleſ, oh gueſt ! great laud and praiſe were mine,
If, after ſocial rites and gifts beſtow'd,
I ſtain'd my hoſpitable hearth with blood. Pope's Odyſſey.
Douce"T. n.ſ. [doucet, French.] A cuſtard. This word I find
only in Skinner.
Do'Uck E R. m. ſ. [from 7% duck, corrupted from To duck.]
A bird that dips in the water.
The colymbi, or douckers, or loons, are admirably con-
formed for diving, covered with thick plumage, and their
feathers ſo ſlippery, that water cannot moiſten them. Ray.
DOVE. m. ſ. [duvo, old Teutonick; taub, daub, German.]
1. A wild pigeon.
So ſhews a ſnowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows ſhows. Shakespeare. Rom, and juliet.
Say, will the falcon, ſtooping from above,
Smit with her varying plumage, ſpare the dove * Pope.
Not half ſo ſwift the trenfbling dºves can fly,
When the fierce eagle cleaves the liquid ſky;
Not half ſo ſwiftly the fierce eagle moves,
When through the ſkies he drives the trembling doves. Pope.
2. A pigeon.
I have here a diſh of doves, that I will beſtow upon your
worſhip. Shakeſpeare's Merchant ºf Venice.
Dov EcoT. m. ſ. [dive and cot.] A ſmall building in which
pigeons are bred and kept.
Like an eagle in a dºvecºt, I
Flutter'd your Volſcians in Corioli;
Alone I did it. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus:
Do've Hous E. m. ſ. [dove and hºuſe.] A houſe for pigeons.
The hawk ſets up for protector, and makes havock in the
dovehouſe. L'E/irange, Fab. 20.
But ſtill the dovehouſe obſtinately ſtood. Dryden.
Dov ETA 11... n.ſ. [dive and tail.] A form of joining two
bodies together, where that which is inſerted has the form of
a wedge reverſed, and therefore cannot fall out.
Doug H. m. ſ. ſbah, Saxon ; degh, Dutch...]
1. The paſte of bread, or pies, yet unbaked.
When the gods moulded up the paſte of man,
Some of their dºugh was left upon their hands,
For want of ſouls, and ſo they made Egyptians. Dryden.
You that from pliant paſte would fabricks raiſe,
Expecting thence to gain immortal praiſe,
Your knuckles try, and let your ſinews know
Their pow'r to kneed, and give the form to dough. King.
2. My cake is Doug H. My affair has miſcarried; my under-
taking has never come to maturity.
My cake is dough, but I’ll in among the reſt;
Out of hope of all, but my ſhare of the feaſt. Shakeſpeare.
Doug HBA'KED. adj. [dºugh and baked.] Unfiniſhed; not
hardened to perfection; ſoft.
For when, through taſteleſs flat humility,
In doughfak'd men ſome harmleſſneſs we ſee, }
'Tis but his phlegm that's virtuous, and not he. Dºnne.
Do'U GHTY. adj. [bohtrº, Saxon; deught, virtue, Dutch J
1. Brave; noble ; illuſtrious; eminent. Uſed of men and
things.
Such reſtleſs paſſion did all night torment
The flattning courage of that fairy knight,
Deviſing how that doughty tournament,
With greateſt honour, he atchieven might. Fairy Queen.
2. It is now ſeldom uſed but ironically, or in burleſque.
If this doughty hiſtorian hath any honour or conſcience left,
he ought to beg pardon. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſ. on Rom Idol.
She ſmail'd to ſee the daughty hero ſlain;
But, at her ſmile, the beau reviv'd again. Pºpe.
JDo'U G HY. adj. [from dough..] Unſound; ſoft; unhardened.
Your ſon was miſled with a ſnipt taffata fellow there,
whoſe villanous ſaffron would have made all the unbaked and
doughy youth of a nation in his colour. Shakeſpeare.
To DOUSE. v. a. ſº but probably it is a cant word formed
from the ſound.] To put over head ſuddenly in the water.
To i)ouse. v. m. To fall ſuddenly into the water.
It is no jeſting, trivial matter,
To ſwing i' th' air, or # in water. Hudibras, p. ii.
Dow A GER. n.ſ. (douairiere, French J
I. A widow with a jointure.
She lingers my deſires,
Like to a ſtepdame or a dowager,
Long wintering on a young man's revenue. Shakeſpeare.
Widows have a greater intereſt in property than either
maids or wives; ſo that it is as unnatural for a dowager as a
freeholder to be an enemy to our conſtitution. Addiſ, Freehold.
2. The title given to ladies who ſurvive their huſbands,
Catharine no more
Shall be call’d queen; but princeſs dowager,
And widow to prince Arthur. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Dow DY. m. ſ. An aukward, ill-dreſſed, inclegant woman.
Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench ; Dido, a
dowdy; Cleopatra, a gipſy ; Helen and Hero, ſlidings and
harlots. Shakeſpeare's Rome, and juliet.
The bedlam train of lovers uſe
Tº inhance the value, and the faults excuſe;
And therefore 'tis no wonder if we ſee
They doat on dowdies and deformity. Dryden.
No houſewifry the dowdy creature knew ;
To ſum up all, her tongue confeſs'd the ſhrew. Gay's Paff.
Bºy. } n.ſ. (douaire, French.]
1. That which the wife bringeth to her huſband in marriage.
His wife brought in alw'r Cilicia's crown, -
And in herſelf a greater dow'r alone. Dryden.
His only daughter in a ſtranger's pow'r,
For very want, he could not pay a dow'r. Pope's Epiſtles.
2. That which the widow poſſeſſes.
His patrimonial territories of Flanders were partly in dower
to his mother-in-law, and partly not ſerviceable, in reſpect of
the late rebellions. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. The gifts of a huſband for a wife.
Aſk me never ſo much dowery and gift, and I will give ac-
cording as ye ſhall ſay unto me; but give me the damſel to
wife. Gen. xxxiv. 12.
4. Endowment; gift.
What ſpreading virtue, what a ſparkling fire;
How great, how plentiful, how rich a dow'r,
Do'ſt thou within this dying fleſh inſpire Davier.
Dow ER ED. adj. [from dower...] Portioned ; ſupplied with a
portion.
Will you with thoſe infirmities ſhe owes,
Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,
Dower'd with our curſe, and ſtranger'd with our oath,
Take her, or leave her. y Shakeſ” are’s King Lear.
Do'w ERLEss. adj. [from dower.] Without a fortune; un-
portioned.
Thy dow'rleſ, daughter, king, thrown to ray chance,
Is queen of us, and ours, and our fair France. S. K. lear.
Dow Las. n.ſ. A coarſe kind of linen.
Dowlas, filthy dowlas; I have given them away to bakers
wives, and they have made boulters of them. Shakespeare Hen, IV.
Down. n.ſ. [duun, Daniſh.]
1. Soft feathers.
Virtue is the rougheſt way;
But proves at night a bed of down. JWitton.
Leave, leave, fair bride your ſolitary bed,
No more ſhall you return to it alone;
It nurſeth ſadneſs; and your body's print,
Like to a grave, the yielding down doth dint. Donne.
Lie tumbling on our down, courting the bleſſing
Cf a ſhort minute's ſlumber. Denham's Sophy.
A tender weakly conſtitution is very much owing to the
uſe of down beds. Lºcke.
2. Anything that ſooths or mollifies.
Thou boſom ſoftneſs down of all my cares!
I could recline my thcughts upon this breaſt
To a forgetfulneſs of all my griefs,
And yet be happy.
3. Soft wool, or tender hair.
Scarce had the down to ſhade his cheeks begun;
One was their care, and their delight was one. Dryden.
I am not chang'd, I love my huſband ſtill;
But live him as he was when youthful grace,
And the firſt dºwn began to ſhade his face. Dryd. Aurengz.
On thy chin the ſpringing beard began
To ſpread a doubtful down, and promiſe man. Prizr.
4. The ſoft fibres of plants which wing the ſeeds.
Any light thing that moveth, when we find no wind,
ſheweth a wind at hand; as when feathers, or down of thiſtles,
fly to and fro in the air. . Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 822.
Like ſcatter'd dºwn by howling Eurus blown,
By rapid whirlwinds from his manſion thrown. Sandys.
DOWN. n.ſ.. [bun, Saxon; dune, Erſe, a hill; but it is uſed
now as if derived from the adverb.] A large open plain, q1.
valley.
Southern's Oroonoko.
On the downs we ſee, near Wilton fair,
A haſt'ned hare from greedy greyhound go. Sidney.
Lord of much riches, which the uſe renowns;
Seven thouſand broad-tail'd ſheep graz'd on his downs. Sandys.
Not all the fleecy wealth
That doth enrich thoſe dºwns is worth a thought,
To this my errand, and the care it brought. Milton.
How Will-a-wiſp miſleads night-faring clowns
O'er hills, and ſinking bogs, and pathleſs downs. Gay.
To compaſs this, his building is a town,
His pond an ocean, his parterre a down. Pope, Epiſºle iv.
2. A hill; a riſing ground. This ſenſe is very rare. Hills
111S
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 302</div><p class="Text">D O W
D O W,
ºw-
Hills afford pleaſant proſpects; as they muſt needs acknow-
ledge who have been on the downs of Suſſex. Ray on the Creat.
Down. prep. [abuna, Saxon.]
1. Along a deſcent; from a higher place to a lower.
Let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down hill, leſt it
break thy neck with following it; but the great one that goes
upward, let him draw after. Shakespeare's King Lear.
A man falling down a precipice, though in motion, is not
at liberty, becauſe he cannot ſtop that motion if he would. Loc.
2. Towards the mouth of a river.
Mahomet put his chief ſubſtance into certain boats, to be
conveyed down the river, as purpoſing to fly. Knolles.
Dow N. adv. w
1. On the ground; from the height at which anything was to
a lower #.
Whom they hit, none on their feet might ſtand,
Though ſtanding elſe as rocks; but down they fell
By thouſands. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi. l. 593.
Down ſinks the giant with a thund'ring ſound,
His pond’rous limbs oppreſs the trembling ground; ;
Blood, brains, and foam, guſh from the gaping wound. Dr.
z. Tending towards the ground.
3. Out of fight; below the horizon.
How goes the night, boy
—The moon is dwn; I have not heard the clock,
And ſhe goes down at twelve. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
4. To a total maceration.
What remains of the ſubjećt, after the decočtion, is con-
tinued to be boiled down, with the addition of freſh water, to
a ſapid fat. Arbuthn.t on Aliments.
5. Into diſgrace; into declining reputation.
He ſhar'd our dividend o' th' crown,
We had ſo painfully preach'd down;
And forc'd us, though againſt the grain,
Tº have calls to teach it up again. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 2.
It has been ſtill preached up, but acted down; and dealt
with, as the eagle in the fable did with the oyſter, carrying it
up on high, that, by letting it fall, he might daſh it in
pieces. South's Sermons.
There is not a more melancholy objećt in the learned
world, than a man who has written himſelf down. Addiſon.
6. [Anſwering to up.] Here and there.
Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they
be not ſatisfied. Pſ, lix. 15.
Dow N. interj.
1. An exhortation to deſtrućtion or demolition.
Go, ſome pull down the Savoy; others to the Inns of
Courts: down with them all. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
If there be ten, ſhrink not; but down with them. Shakeſp.
But now they cry, down with the palace, fire it,
Pull out th' uſurping queen. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. A contemptuous threat.
Down, down to hell, and ſay I ſent thee thither. Shakeſp.
Down. [To go..] To be digeſted; to be received.
If he be hungry more than wanton, bread alone will down;
and if he be not hungry, 'tis not fit he ſhould eat. Locke.
I know not how abſurd this may ſeem to the maſters of de-
monſtration; and probably it will hardly down with any body,
at firſt hearing. Locke.
To Dows. v. a. [from the particle.] To knock; to ſubdue;
to ſuppreſs; to conquer.
The hidden beauties ſeem’d in wait to lie,
To down proud hearts, that would not willing die. Sidney.
Downcast. adj. [down and caſt.] Bent down; dire&amp;ted to
the ground.
Wanton languiſhing borrowed of her eyes the downcaſt
look of modeſty. Sidney, b. ii.
My wily nurſe by long experience found,
And firſt diſcover'd to my ſoul its wound,
'Tis love, ſaid ſhe ; and then my downcaſt eyes,
And guilty dumbneſs, witneſs'd my ſurprize. Dryden.
Thy downcaſt looks, and thy diſorder'd thoughts,
Tell me my fate: I aſk not the ſucceſs
My cauſe has found.
Dows FAL. m. ſ. [d:wn and fall.]
1. Ruin; calamity; fall from rank or ſtate.
Why do'ſt thou ſay king Richard is depos'd?
Dar'ſt thou, thou little better thing than earth,
Divine his downfal? Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
We have ſeen ſome, by the ways by which they had de-
figned to riſe uncontrollably, to have directly procured their
utter downfal. South's Sermons.
2. A ſudden fall, or body of things falling.
Each downfal of a flood the mountains pour
From their rich bowels, rolls a ſilver ſtream. Dryd. Ind. Em.
3. Deſtruction of fabricks.
Not more aghaſt the matrons of tenown,
When tyrant Nero burn'd th’ imperial town,
Shriek’d for the downfal in a doleful cry, -
For which their guiltleſs lords were doom'd to die. Dryden.
Do'w N FALLEN. participial adj. [dºwn and fall.] Ruined ;
fallen.
Addiſon's Cato.
The land is now divorced by the downfallen ſteep cliff; on
the farther ſide. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Downgy RED. adj. [down and gyred.] Let down in circular
wrinkles.
Lord Hamlet, with his ſtockings looſe,
Ungarter'd, and downgyred to his ancles. Shakespeare . Hamlet.
Down Hil. n. ſ. [down and hill J Declivity; deſcent.
Heavy the third, and ſtiff, he ſinks apace;
And though 'tis downhil all, but creeps along the race. Dryd.
Downhil. adj. Declivous; deſcending.
Downlooked, adj. [down and look.j Having a deječted
countenance; gloomy; ſullen; melancholy.
Jealouſy ſuffus'd, with jaundice in her eyes,
Diſcolouring all ſhe view'd, in tawney dreſs'd;
Downlook'd, and with a cuckow on hér fiſt. Dryd. Fables.
Downix ING, adj. [dºwn and lie..] About to be in travail of
childbirth.
DownRIGHT, adv. [down and right.]
1. Strait or right down; down perpendicularly.
A giant's ſlain in fight,
Or mow'd o'erthwart, or cleft dºwnright. Hudibras, p. i.
2. In plain terms; without ceremony.
Elves away;
We ſhall chide downright, if I longer ſtay.
3. Completely; without ſtopping ſhort.
This paper put Mrs. Bull in ſuch a paſſion, that ſhe fell
downright into a fit. Arbuthnºt's Hiſtory of john Bull,
Down Right. adj.
1. Plain; open; apparent; undiſguiſed.
An admonition from a dead author, or a caveat from an
impartial pen, will prevail more than a dºwnright advice,
which may be miſtaken as ſpoken magiſterially. Bacon.
It is dºwnright madneſs to ſtrike where we have no power
to hurt. L’Eſtrange, Fab.44.
Religion ſeems not in danger from dºwnright atheiſm, ſince
rational men muſt reječt that for want of proof. Rogers's Serm.
The merchant's wife, who abounds in plenty, is not to
have downright money; but the mercenary part of her mind
is engaged with a preſent of plate. Speciator, N°. 206.
2. Directly tending to the point; plain; artleſs.
I would rather have a plain downright wiſdom, than a
fooliſh and affected eloquence. Ben.johnſºn's Diſcoveries.
3. Unceremonious; honeſtly ſurly.
When it came to the count to ſpeak, old fact ſo ſtared him
in the face, after his plain downright way, that the count was
ſtruck dumb. Addison's Count Tariff.
4. Plain; without palliation.
The idolatry was direct and dºwnright in the people, whoſe
credu, y is illimitable. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i. c. 4.
Do'wº sin T. G. r. ſ [down and ſit..] Reſt; repoſe ; the act
of ſitting down, or going to reſt.
Thou knoweſt my dowºſting and mine upriſing; thou un-
derſtandeſt Iny thoughts aſar off. Pſ. cxxxix. 2.
Do'w Nwa Rd.
DownwARDs.
1. Towards the center.
As you lift up the glaſſes the drop will aſcend ſlower and
ſlower, and at length reſt, being carried downward by its
weight, as much as upwards by the attraction. Newton's Opt.
2. From a higher ſituation to a lower.
Look downward on that globe, whoſe hither ſides,
With light from hence, ſhines. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
Hills are ornamental to the earth, affording pleaſant pro-
ſpects to them that look downwards from them upon the ſub-
jacent countries. Ray on the Creation.
What would this man? Now upward will he ſoar,
And little leſs than angel, would be more:
Now looking downwards, juſt as griev'd, appears
To want the ſtrength of bulls, the fur of bears. Pope.
3. In a courſe of ſucceſſive or lineal deſcent.
A ring the count does wear,
That downward hath ſucceeded in his houſe,
From ſon to ſon, ſome four or five deſcents. Shakespeare.
Do'wnwARD. adj.
1. Moving on a declivity; tending towards the center; tend-
ing to the ground.
With downward force,
That drove the ſand along, he took his way,
And roll'd his yellow billows to the ſea.
2. Declivous ; bending.
When Aurora leaves our northern ſphere,
She lights the downward heaven, and riſes there. Dryd. Wirg.
3. Depreſſed; deječted.
At the loweſt of my dºwnward thoughts, I pulled up my
heart to remember, that nothing is atchieved before it be
thoroughly attempted, and that lying ſtill doth never, go
forward. Sidney.
Down Y. adj [from down.]
I. Covered with down or nap.
By his gates of breath
There lies a downy feather, which ſtirs not :
Shakespeare.
} adv. [ouncpearb, Saxon.]
Dryden's Aºn.
Did
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 303</div><p class="Text">º
º
|
º
I) R A
Did he ſuſpire, that light and weightleſs down
Perforce muſt move. Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
There be plants that have prickles, yet have dºwny or vel-
vet rind upon their leaves; as ſtock-gillyflowers and coltsfoot;
which down or nap conſiſtºth of a ſubtile ſpirit, in a ſoft ſub-
ſtance. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 560.
In her hand ſhe held
A bough of faireſt fruit, that downy ſmil'd,
New-gather'd, and ambroſial ſmell diffus'd. Afilt. Par. Lºft.
2. Made of down or ſoft feathers.
A ſide breeze from weſtward waits their ſails to fill,
And reſts in thoſe high beds his downy wings. Dryden.
Belinda ſtill her downy pillow preſt,
Her guardian ſylph prolong'd the balmy reſt. Pºpe.
3. Soft; tendºr; ſoothing.
Banquo Donalbain' Malcolm awake!
Shake off this dºwny ſleep, death's counterfeit,
And look on death itſelf. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
The night's companion kindly cheating them
Of all their carcs, tam'd the rebellious eye
Of ſorrow with a ſoft and downy hand,
Sealing all breaſts in a lethean band. Craſhaw.
Do'wr E. } n. ſ. (donaire, French. It ought to be written
Do'wr Y. dower.]
1. A portion given with a wife.
I could marry this wench for this dºwre. Sidney.
And aſk no other dºwry but ſuch another jeſt. Shakeſpeare.
The king muſt die, that I may make you great,
And give a crown in dowry with my love. Dryd. Span Fry.
Tethys all her waves in dowry gives. Dryden's Wirgil.
2. A reward paid for a wife.
Thine own hand
An hundred of the faithleſs foe ſhall ſlay,
And for a dowre a hundred foreſkins pay. Cowley's Davidiis.
# A gift; a fortune given.
º n. ſ. [.32 and x., b.] A form of giving glory to
od.
David breaks forth into theſe triumphant praiſes and doxºlo-
gies expreſſed in the text; Bleſſed be the Lord God of Iſrael,
who has kept me this day from ſhedding blood, and from
avenging myſelf with my own hand. South's Sermons.
Little did Athanaſius imagine, that ever it would have been
rcceived in the Chriſtian church, to conclude their books with
a dºxºlogy to God and the bleſſed virgin. Stillingficet.
Doxy. m. ſ. A whore; a looſe wench.
When daffadils begin to pure,
With heigh the doxy over the dale: Shakeſ IPinter's Tale.
To DOZE. v. n. [braer, Saxon; daes, Dutch..] To ſlumber;
to live in a ſtate of drouſineſs; to be half aſleep.
There was no ſleeping under his roof: if he happened to
doze a little, the jolly cobler waked him. L'Aſtrange.
It has happened to young men of the greateſt wit to waite
their ſpirits with anxiety and pain, ſo far as to doze upon their
work with too much eagerneſs of doing well. Dryd. Dufrºſt.
How to the banks, where bards departed doze,
They led him ſoft; how all the bards aroſe. Pope's Dunciad.
Chiefleſs armies doz'd out the campaign,
And navies yawn'd for orders on the main. Pope's Dunciad.
To Doze. v. a. To ſtupify ; to dull.
He was now much decayed in his parts, and with immo-
derate drinking dozed in his underſtanding. Clarendon, b. viii.
Two ſatyrs, on the ground,
Stretch'd at his eaſe, their fire, Silenus, found
Doz'd with his fumes, and heavy with his load. Dryden.
Do'z EN. m. ſ. [douzaine, French..] The number of twelve.
We cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentlewo-
men, but it will be thought we keep a bawdyhouſe traight.
- Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
That they bear ſuch huge leaves, or delicate fruit, I could
never find; yet I have travelled a dozen miles together under
them. Raleigh's Hiſłory of the I/orld.
By putting twelve units together, we have the complex
idea of a dozen. Lºcke.
The number of diſſenters was ſomething under a dozen
with them. Swift concerning the Sacramental Tºft.
Do'z IN Ess. n.ſ.. [from dozy.J. Sleepineſs; drouſineſs.
A maſt, by a violent fit of the gout in his limbs, finds a
dºzineſ; in his head, or a want of appetite. Lºcke.
Doºzy, adv. [from doze.] Sleepy; drouſy; ſluggiſh.
The yawning youth, ſcarce half awake, eſſays
His lazy limbs and dºzy head to raiſe. Dryden's Perſ. St.
DRAB. m. ſ. [onabbe, Saxon, lees.) A whore; a ſtrumpet.
That I, the ſon of a dear father murder'd,
Muſt, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,
And fall a curſing, like a very drab / Shakeſp. Hamlet.
If your worſhip will take order for the drabs and the
knaves, you need not to fear the bawds. Shakeſpeare.
r - Babe,
Ditch-deliver'd by a drah. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Curs'd be the wretch ſo venal, and ſo vain,
Paltry and proud as drabs in Drury-lane. Pºpe.
I) R A
DR Acºſ. m. ſ. [drachma, Latin J
1. An old Roman coin.
See here theſe movers, that do prize their honours
At a crack'd drachm. Shakeſpeare's AJacle.h.
2. The eighth part of an ounce.
DRACUN CULUS. n.ſ. (Latin.] A worm bred in the hot
countries, which grows to many yards length between the
ſkin and fleſh. -
DRAD. adj. [for dread, or the pretcrit of To dread J Terrible;
formidable; dreaded.
Th’ utmoſt ſand-breach they ſhortly fetch,
Whilſt the drad danger does behind remain. Fairy Queen.
DRAFF. m. ſ ſºror, dirty, Saxon; draf, Dutch, the ſediment
of ale.] Anything thrown away; ſweepings; refuſe; lees;
dregs. -
You would think I had a hundred and fifty tattered prodi-
gals lately come from ſwinekeeping, from eating droff and
luſks. Shakespeare's Henry IV. p. i.
'Twere ſimple fury, ſtill thyſelf to waſte
On ſuch as have no taſte;
To offer them a ſurfeit of pure bread
Whoſe appetite is dead ' '
No, give them grains their fill; -
Huſks, draff, to drink and ſwill. Pen. Johnſºn.
* I call’d, and drew them thither,
My hell-hounds to lick up the droff and filth,
Which man's polluting fin with tant had ſhed
On what was pure. Miltºn's Paradiſe Lºſt, b. x. l. 6;o.
Here rather let me drudge, and earn my bread,
*Till vermin, or the draff of ſervile food,
Conſume me.
As Muley-Zeydan were not worth their care,
And younger brothers but the draff of nature. Dryden,
DRAFFY. a j. [from droff.] Worthleſs; dreggy.
DRAF T. adj. [corrupt for draught.]
Ulyſſes and old Neſtor yoke you like draft oxen, and make
you plough up the wair. Shakeſp. 7 roilus and Crºftda.
To DRAG. v. a. [brazan, Saxon.]
1. To pull along the ground by main force; to draw heavily
along.
such his aſpe&amp;t, when, foil'd, with bloody duſt,
Dragg’d by the cords which thro' his feet were thruſt. Denh.
2. To draw any thing burthenſome ; anything from which one
cannot diſengage one’s ſelf. -
'Tis long ſince I, for my celeſtial wife,
Loath’d by the gods, have dragg’d a ling ring life. Dryden.
Can I, who lov’d ſo well,
To part with all my bliſs to ſave my lover ?
Oh! can I drag a wretched life without him Smith.
While I have any ability to hold a commerce with you,
will never be ſilent ; and this chancing to be a day that I can
hold a pen, I will drag it as long as I am able. Swift.
3. To draw contemptuouſly along, as a thing unworthy to be
carried. -
They ſhall ſurprize
The ſerpent, prince of air, and drag in chains
Through all his realm, and there confounded leave. Milton.
To fall, that's juſtice;
But thea, to drag him after | For to die,
And yet in death to conquer, is my wiſh. Dryd. Cleºmenes.
He triumphs in St. Auſtin's opinion; and is not only con-
tent to drag me at his chariot-wheels, but he makes a ſhew
of me. Stikingfeet's Def. of Diſc. on Rom. Idol.
4. To pull about with violence and ignominy.
The conſtable was no ſooner eſpied but he was reproached
with diſdainful words, beaten and dragged in ſo barbarous a
manner, that he hardly eſcaped with his life. . Clarendon.
5. To pull roughly and forcibly.
In my fatal cauſe your ſword was drawn;
The weight of my misfortunes dragg'd you down. Dryden.
To DRAG. v. n. To hang ſo low as to trail or grate upon the
ground.
From hence are heard the groans of ghoſts, the pains
Of ſounding laſhes, and of dragging chains. Dryden's Án.
A door is ſaid to drag, when, by its ill hanging on its hinges,
the bottom edge of the door rides in its ſweep upon the
floor. A foxon's 44e.h. Exer.
DRAG. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A net drawn along the bottom of the water.
Caſting nets were ſpread in ſhallow brooks,
Drags in the deep, and baits were hung on hooks. Dryden.
The creatures are but inſtruments in God's hand: the re-
turning our acknowledgments to them is juſt the ſame abſur-
dity with theirs who burnt incenſe to the drag, and ſacrificed
to the net. Rogers's Sermons.
2. An inſtrument with hooks to catch hold of things under
Watcr.
You may in the morning find it near to ſome fixed place,
and then take it up with a drag hook, or otherwiſe. J/alt.n.
3. A kind of car drawn by the hand.
The drag is made ſomewhat like a low car: it is uſed for
the
Milton's Agºniſes.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 304</div><p class="Text">D R A
D R A
the carriage of timber, and then is drawn by the handle by
two or more men. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
DRAGNet. n.ſ. [drag and net.] A net which is drawn along
the bottom of the water.
Dragnets were made to fiſh within the deep,
And caſtingnets did rivers bottoms ſweep. May's Virgil.
Some fiſhermen, that had been out a whole day with a drag-
met, and caught nothing, had a draught towards the evening,
that came home very heavy, which put them in hope of a
ſturgeon at laſt. L’Eſtrange, Fable 1 12.
One of our late great poets is ſunk in his reputation, be-
cauſe he could never forgive any conceit which came in his
way, but ſwept, like a dragnet, great and ſmall. Dryden.
Whatſoever old time, with his huge dragnet, has conveyed
down to us along the ſtream of ages, whether it be ſhells or
ſhellfiſh, jewels or pebbles, ſticks or ſtraws, ſeaweeds or mud,
theſe are the ancients, theſe are the fathers. Watts's Improvem.
To DRA'GGle. v. a. [from drag..] To make dirty by dragging
on the ground.
You'll ſee a draggled damſel, here and there, . .
From Billingſgate her fiſhy traffick bear. Gay's Trivia.
He wore the ſame gown five years, without diaggling or
tearing Swift.
To DRA'GGLE. v. n. To grow dirty by being drawn along
the ground. -
His draggling tail hung in the dirt,
Which on his rider he would flirt. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
DRAGON. n ſ [draco, Latin; dragon, French.]
1. A kind of winged ſerpent, perhaps imaginary, much cele-
brated in the romances of the middle age.
I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than ſeen. Shakespeare Coriolan.
Swift, ſwift, you dragons of the night' that dawning
May bear the raven's eye. Shakeſpeare's Cymbe ine.
And you, ye dragons / of the ſcaly race,
Whom glittering gold and ſhining armours grace;
In other nations harmleſs are you found,
Their guardian genii and protećtors own'd. Rowe.
On ſpiry volumes there a dragon rides;
Here, from our ſtrićt embrace, a ſtream he glides. Pope.
2. A fierce violent man or woman.
3. A conſtellation near the North pole.
DRA'Gon. n.f. [dracunculus, Latin.] A plant.
The leaves are like thoſe of arum, but divided into many
parts: the ſtalk is ſpotted; but, in other reſpects, it agrees
with the arum. Miller.
DRAGoNET. n.ſ.. [from dragon J A little dragon.
Or in his womb might lurk ſome hidden neſt
Of many dragonets, his fruitful ſeed. Fairy Queen, b. i.
DRA'Gonfly. m. ſ. [dragon and fly.] A fierce ſtinging fly.
The body of the cantharides is bright coloured; and it
may be, that the delicate coloured dragonflies may have like-
wiſe ſome corroſive quality. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 7 29.
DRA’Gonish. adj. [from dragon.] Having the form of a
dragon; dragonlike.
Sometime we ſee a cloud that's dragoniſh;
A vapour ſometime like a bear or lion. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleop.
DRA'Go NLIK E. adj. [dragon and like..] Furious; fiery.
He fights dragonlike, and does atchieve as ſoon
As draw his ſword. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
DRA'Go NSBlooD. m. ſ. [dragon and bloºd.] So called from, a
falſe opinion of the dragon's combat with the elephant.
Dragonsblood is a reſin, ſo oddly named as to ſeem to have
been imagined an animal produćtion.
friable, and duſky red; but of a bright ſcarlet, when pow-
dered: it has little ſmell, and is of a reſinous and aſtringent
taſte. One ſort is very compačt: another ſort leſs compact,
and leſs pure, is called common dragonsblºod.
tough and viſcous, and of a blood colour; and in keeping it
grows hard, like the firſt ſort. Four vegetables afford dragons-
blºod: one is a tall tree in the Canaries: the ſanguis draconis
exſudates from the cracks of the bark in the great heats.
Another grows to fix or eight feet high in the iſland of Java,
where the reſin is extrasted from the fruit, about the ſize of a
hazelnut, by boiling. A third is a tall tree in New Spain,
and a true ſanguis draconis flows from the trunk. The fourth
rows in ſº and has a red bark: its trunk and large
É. yield a reſinous juice, which ſeems to be our fineſt
ſort of dragonsbloºd. Hill's Materia Medica.
Take dragºnsblºod, beat it in a mortar, and put it in a cloth.
with aqua vita, and ſtrain them together.
DRA’Gossii FAD. m. ſ. A plant.
It hath a labiated flower, conſiſting of ore leaf; whoſe
upper lip, which is creſted, and its under lip, which is divided
into three ſegments, end in chaps or jaws, and have the re-
preſentation of a dragon's head. AMiller.
DRA'Gos TREE. m. ſ. See PALM TRE E, of which it is a
ſpecies. -
This tree is common in the Madeira and Canary iſlands,
where they grow to a conſiderable ſize; and from it is ſup-
poſed that the dragonsblood is obtained. Miller.
Vol. I.
Peacham.
It is moderately heavy,
A third ſort is
DRAGOON. n.ſ.. [from dragen, German, to carry..] A kind
of ſoldier that ſerves indifferently either on foot of horſeback.
Two regiments of dragoons ſuffered much in the late
aëtion. . . - Tatler, Nº. 55.
To DRAGo'os. v. a. [from the noun..] To perſecute by aban-
doning a place to the rage of ſoldiers.
In politicks I hear you're ſtanch,
Directly bent againſt the French;
Deny to have your free-born foe
Dragoon'd into a wooden ſhoe.
To DRAIN. v. a. [trainer, French.]
1. To draw off gradually.
Salt water, drained through twenty veſſels of earth, hath
become freſh. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 2.
The fountains drain the water from the ground adjacent,
and 1.ave but ſufficient moiſture to breed moſ. Bacon.
In times of dearth it drained much coin of the kingdom,
to furniſh us with corn from foreign parts. Bacon to Willierſ.
Whilſt a foreign war devoured our ſtrength, and drained
our treaſures, luxury and expences increaſed at home. Atterb.
The laſt emperor drained the wealth of thoſe countries
into his own coffers, without increaſing his troops againſt
France. Swift.
2. To empty by drawing gradually away what it contains.
Sinking waters, the firm land to drain,
Fill'd the capacious deep, and form'd the main. Roſ::mmon.
Prior.
The royal babes a tawny wolf ſhall drain. Dryden.
While cruel Nero only drains -
The mortal Spaniard's ebbing veins,
By ſtudy worn, and ſlack with age,
How dull, how thoughtleſs is his rage Prior.
Had the world laſted from all eternity, theſe comets muſt
have been drained of all their fluids. Cheyne's Phil Prin.
3. To make quite dry. *
When wine is to be bottled, waſh your bottles, but do not
drain them. Swift's Directions to the Butler.
DRAIN, n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The channel through which
liquids are gradually drawn; a watercourſe; a ſink.
If your d’ains be deep, that you fear cattle falling into
them, fling in ſtones and brickbats, and cover them with
wood, flags, and turf. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Why ſhould I tell of ponds and drains,
What carps we met with for our pains Swift.
DRAKE.. n.ſ. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. The male of the duck. -
The duck ſhould hide her eggs from the drake, who will
ſuck them if he finds them. Martimer's Husbandry.
2. [from draco, dragon, French.] A ſmall piece of artillery.
Two or three ſhots, made at them by a couple of drates,
made them ſtagger. Clarendon, b. viii.
DRAM. m. ſ [from drachm, drachma, Latin.]
1. In weight the eighth part of an ounce. -
The trial being made betwixt lead and lead, weighing
ſeverally ſeven drams in the air, the balance in the water
weigheth only four drams and forty-one grains, and abateth
of the weight in the air two drams and nineteen grains: the
balance kept the ſame depth in the water as aboveſaid.
Bacon.
2. A ſmall quantity, in a kind of proverbial ſenſe.
One loving hour
For many years of ſorrow can diſpenſe;
A dram of ſweet is worth a pound of ſour. Fairy Queen.
No dram of judgment with thy force is join'd;
Thy body is of profit, and my mind. Dryden's Fables.
3. Such a quantity of diſtilled ſpirits as is uſually drank at once.
I could do this, and that with no raſh potion,
But with a ling'ring dram, that ſhould not work
Maliciouſly like poiſon. Shakeſpeare's ſ/inter's Tale.
Every dram of brandy, every pot of ale that you drink,
raiſeth.your character. Swift.
4. Spirits; diſtilled liquors.
A ſecond ſee, by meeker manners known,
And modeſt as the maid that ſips alone;
From the ſtrong fate of dram, if thou get free,
Another Durfy, Ward ſhall ſing in thee. Pºpe's Dunciad.
To DRAM. v. n. [from the noun..] In low language, to drink
drams; to drink diſtilled ſpirits.
DRAMA. m. ſ. [ x2.4. ) A poem accommodated to ačtion; a
poem in which the action is not related, but repreſented; and
in which therefore ſuch rules are to be obſerved as make the
repreſentation probable.
Many rules of imitating nature Ariſtotle drew from Homer,
which he fitted to the drama; furniſhing himſelf alſo with
obſervations from the theatre, when it flouriſhed under Eſchy-
lus, Euripides, and Sophocles. Dryden's AEn. Dediat.
D R AMA'tic Al. Nadj. [from drama.] Repreſented by action;
DRAMATIC K. } not narrative.
I hope to make it appear, that in the great dramatick
poem of nature, is a neceſſity of introducing a God. Bent ey.
DRAMA’ rically, adv. [from dramatick.] Repreſentatively;
by repreſentation.
: M
Ignorance
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 305</div><p class="Text">D R A
D R A
Ignorance and errors are ſeverally reprehended, partly dra-
matically, partly ſimply. Dryden's ºf uvenal, Dedicat.
DRAMAT is r. n.ſ. [from drama.] The author of dramatick
compoſitions.
The whole theatre reſounds with the praiſes of the great
dramatiſt, and the wonderful art and order of the compo-
ſition. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
DRANK. [the preterite of drink.] -
To DRAPE. v. m. [drap, French; drapus, low Latin.]
1. To make cloth.
It was a rare thing to ſet prices by ſtatute; and this ačt did
not preſcribe prices, but ſtinted them not to exceed a rate,
that the clothier might drape accordingly as he might afford.
Bacon's Henry VII.
2. To jeer, or ſatyrize. [drapper, French J It is uſed in this ſenſe
by the innovator Temple, whom nobody has imitated.
DRA'PER. m. ſ. [from drape.] One who ſells cloth. -
If a piece of cloth in a draper's ſhop be variouſly folded, it
will appear of differing colours. Boy'e on Cºlours.
The draper and mercer may meaſure her as they pleaſe.
Howel's England's Tears.
DRA'PERY. n.ſ. [drapperie, French.]
1. Clothwork; the trade of making cloth.
He made ſtatutes for the maintenance of drapery, and
the keeping of wools within the realm Iacon's Henry VII.
The reverend clergy ſhould ſet us an example, by con-
tenting themſelves with wearing gowns, and other habili-
ments, of Iriſh drapery. Swift.
2. Cloth; ſtuffs of wool.
The bulls and frogs had ſerved the lord Strut with drapery
ware for many years. Arluthnot's Hiſtory ºf john Bull.
3. The dreſs of a picture, or ſtatue.
Poets are allowed the ſame liberty in their deſcriptions and
tompariſons, as painters in their draperies and ornaments. Pri.
DRA'PET. m. ſ. [from drafte.] Cloth; coverlet.
Thence ſhe them brought into a ſtately hall,
Wherein were many tables fair diſpred,
And ready dight with drapets feaſtival,
Againſt the viands ſhould be miniſtred. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
DRA's rick. adj. [3,4raº...] Powerful; vigorous; efficacious.
It is uſed of a medicine that works with ſpecd; as jalap,
ſcammony, and the ſtronger purges. &amp;uincy.
DRAve. [the preterite of drive.]
He drave them beyond Amon's flood,
And their ſad bounds mark'd deep in their own blood. Cowl.
The foe ruſh'd furious as he pants for breath,
And through his navel drave the pointed death. Poſe's Iliad.
DR AUGH. m. ſ. [corruptly written for draff] Refuſe; ſwill.
See DRAF F.
We do not ačt, that often jeſt and laugh:
'Tis old, but true, ſtill ſwine eat all the draugh.
DRAUGHT. n.ſ.. [from draw.]
1. The aët of drinking.
Fill high the goblets with a ſparkling flood,
And with deep draughts invoke our common god. Dryden.
They ſlung up one of their hogſheads, and I drank it off at
a draught, which I might well do ; for it did not hold half a
pint. Gulliver’s Tavels.
2. A quantity of liquor drank at once.
He had once continued about nine days without drink; and
he might have continued longer, if, by diſtempering himſelf
one night with hard ſtudy, he had not had ſome inclination to
take a ſmall draught. Byſe.
I have cured ſome very deſperate coughs by a draught every
morning of ſpring-water, with a handful of ſage boiled in
it. Temple.
Every draught, to him that has quenched his thirſt, is but
, a further quenching of nature; a proviſion for rheum and
diſeaſes. South's Sermons.
Long draughts of ſleep his monſtrous limbs enſlave;
He reels, and, falling, fills the ſpacious cave. Dryden's Aſſn.
3. Liquor drank for pleaſure. *
•. Were it a draught for Juno when ſhe banquets,
Shakeſp.
I would not taſte thy treaſonous offer. Milton.
Number'd ills, that lie unſeen
In the pernicious draught : the word obſcene,
Or harſh, which, once elanc'd, muſt ever fly
Irrevocable; the too prompt reply. Prior.
Delicious wines th’ attending herald brought;
The gold gave luſtre to the purple draught. Pope's Odyſſy.
4. The act of drawing or pulling carriages.
A general cuſtom of uſing oxen for all ſorts of draught,
would be perhaps the greateſt improvement. Temple.
The moſt occaſion that farmers have, is for draught horſes.
AMortiºner's Husbandry.
5. The quality of being drawn.
The Hertfordſhire wheel-plough is the beſt and ſtrongeſt
for moſt uſes, and of the eaſieſt draught. Mortimer's Husband.
6. Repreſentation by picture.
Her pencil drew whate'er her ſoul deſign'd,
And oft the happy draught ſurpaſs'd the image in her mind.
Dryden.
7. Delineation; ſketch.
A good inclination is but the firſt rude draught of virtue;
but the finiſhing ſtrokes are from the will. South's Sermons.
I have, in a ſhort draught, given a view of our original
ideas, from whence all the reſt are derived. Locke.
8. A pićture drawn.
Whereas in other creatures we have but the trace of his
footſteps, in man we have the draught of his hand: in him
were united all the ſcattered perfections of the creature. South.
9. The act of ſweeping with a net.
Upon the draught of a pond not one fiſh was left, but two
pikes grown to an exceſſive bigneſs. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
10. The quantity of fiſhes taken by once drawing the net.
He laid down his pipe, and caſt his net, which brought
him a very great draught. L'E/trange, Fable IC9.
11. The aët of ſhooting with the bow.
Geffrey of Boullion, the glorious general, at one draught
of his bow, ſhooting againſt David's tower in Jeruſalem,
broached three feetleſs birds called allerions. Camden's Rem.
12. Diverſion in war; the act of diſturbing the main deſign;
perhaps ſudden attack.
I conceive the manner of your handling of the ſervice, by
drawing ſudden draughts upon the enemy, when he looketh
not for you; and to watch advantages upon him, as he doth
upon you. S. enſer's Ireland.
13. Forces drawn off from the main army; a detachment.
Such a draught of forces would leſſen the number of thoſe,
that might otherwiſe be employed. Addiſon.
14. A ſink; a drain.
Whatſoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly,
and is caſt out into the draught. at. xv. 17.
15. The depth which a veſſel draws, or ſinks into the water.
With roomy decks, her guns of mighty ſtrength,
Deep in her draught, and warlike in her length. Dryden.
With a ſmall veſſel one may keep within a mile of the
ſhore, go amongſt rocks, and paſs over ſhoals, where a veſſel
of any draught would ſtrike. Ellis's Poyage.
16. [In the plural, draughts.] A kind of play reſembling cheſs.
DR AUGHT House. m. ſ. [d a ght and houſe..] A houſe in which
filth is depoſited. -
And they brake down the image of Baal, and brake down
the houſe of Baal, and made it a draughthouſe. 2 Kings x. 27.
To DRAW. v. a. pret, drew; part, paſſ. drawn. [ opagan,
Saxon.]
1. To pull along; not to carry.
Then ſhall all Iſrael bring ropes to that city, and we will
draw it into the river. 2 Sa. xvii. 13.
2. To pull forcibly ; to pluck.
He could not draw the dagger out of his belly. judg. ii. 22.
The arrow is now drawn to the head. Atterbury.
3. To bring by violence; to drag.
Do not rich men oppreſs you, and draw you before the
judgment-ſeats ja. ii. 6.
4. To raiſe out of a deep place.
They drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out
of the dungeon. jer. xxxviii. 13.
Draw the water for the ſiege. Nath. iii. 14.
5. To ſuck.
He hath drawn thee dry. Eccluſ xiii. 7.
There was no war, no dearth, no ſtop of trade or com-
merce; it was only the crown which had ſucked too hard,
and now being full, upon the head of a young king, was like
to draw leſs. Bacon's Henry VII.
Sucking and drawing the breaſt diſchargeth the milk as faſt
as it can be generated. // ſeman on Tumours.
6. To attract; to call towards itſelf.
We ſee that ſalt, laid to a cut finger, healeth it; ſo as it.
ſecmeth ſalt draweth blood, as well as blood draweth ſalt. Bacºn.
Majeſty in an eclipſe, like the ſun, draws eyes, that would
not have looked towards it, if it had ſhined out. Suckling.
He affected a habit different from that of the times, ſuch
as men had only beheld in pičiures, which drew the eyes of
moſt, and the reverence of many towards him. Clarendon.
All eyes you draw, and with the eyes the heart;
Of your own pomp yourſelf the greateſt part.
7. To inhale, -
Thus I cali'd, and ſtray'd I know not whither,
From where I firſt drew air, and firſt beheld .
This happy light. Milton's Paradiſe loſſ, b. viii. l. 284.
While near the Lucrine lake, conſum'd to death,
I draw the ſultry air, and gaſp for breath, - -
You taſte the cooling breeze. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Why dew Marſeille's good biſhop purer breath,
Dryden.
When nature ſicken'd, and each gale was death Pope.
8. To take from anything containing.
They drew out the ſtaves of the ark. 2 Chron. v. 2.
9. To take from a caſk.
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lecs
Are left this vault to brag of. Sºakeſ care's Macleth.
10. To pull a ſword from the ſheath.
We will our youth lead on to higher fields,
And draw no ſwords but what are ſanétiſy'd. Shakespeare H. IV.
I will
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 306</div><p class="Text">D R A
I will draw my ſwºrd; my hand ſhall deſtroy them. Ex. xv.
He proceeded ſo far in his inſolence as to draw out his
ſword, with an intent to kill him. Dryden's Conq. of Granada.
In all your wars good fortune blew before you,
*Till in my fatal cauſe your ſword was drawn;
The weight of my misfortunes dragg'd you down. Dryden.
11. To let out any liquid.
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavour. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
I opened the tumour by the point of a lancet, without draw-
ing one drop of blood. Wiſeman's Surgery.
1 z. To take bread out of the oven.
The joyner puts boards into ovens after the batch is drawn.
Mortimer’s Husbandry.
13. To uncloſe or ſlide back curtains.
Go, draw aſide the curtains, and diſcover -
The ſev'ral caſkets to this noble prince, Shakespeare Merch. of Wan.
Alarm’d, and with preſaging heart he came,
And drew the curtains, and expos'd the dame
To lothſome light. Dryden's Sigiſm. and Guiſcar.
Shouts, cries, and groans firſt pierce my cars, and then
A flaſh of lightning draws the guilty ſcene,
And ſhows new arms, and wounds, and dying men. Dryden.
14. To cloſe or ſpread curtains.
Philoclea earneſtly again intreated Pamela to open her,
grief, who, drawing the curtain, that the candle might not
complain of her bluſhing, was ready to ſpeak. Sidney, b. ii.
15. To extraćt.
Spirits, by diſtillations, may be drawn out of vegetable
juices, which ſhall flame and fume of themſelves. Cheyne.
16. To procure as an agent cauſe.
When he finds the hardſhip of ſlavery outweigh the value
of fife, ’tis in his power, by reſiſting his maſter, to draw on
himſelf death. Locke.
R7. To produce or bring as an efficient cauſe.
Have they invented tones to win
he women, and make them draw in
The men, as Indians with a female
Tame elephant inveigle the male Hudibras, p. i. cant. 2.
Religion will requite all the honour we can do it, by the
bleſfings it will draw down upon us. Tillotſon.
Our voluntary ačtions are the precedent cauſes of good and
evil, which they draw after them, and bring upon us. Locke.
What would a man value acres of excellent land, ready
cultivated, and well ſtocked too with cattle, where he had no
hopes of commerce with other parts of the world to draw
money to him, by the ſale of the product of the iſland. Locke.
Thoſe elucidations have given riſe or increaſe to his doubts,
and drawn obſcurity upon places of ſcripture. Locke.
His ſword ne'er fell but on the guilty head;
Oppreſſion, tyranny, and pow'r uſurp'd,
Draw all the vengeance of his arm upon 'em. Addiſ Cato.
18. To convey ſecretly.
The liers in wait draw themſelves along. judg. xx. 37.
In proceſs of time, and as their people increaſed, they drew
themſelves more weſterly towards the Red ſea.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
19. To protract; to lengthen.
Do you note
How much her grace is alter'd on the ſudden 2
How long her face is drawn P how pale ſhe looks,
And of an earthly cold: Obſerve her eyes! Shakespeare H. VIII.
If we ſhall meet again with more delight,
Then draw my life in length; let me ſuſtain,
In hopes of his embrace, the worſt of pain. Dryden's AEn.
In ſome ſimiles men draw their compariſons into minute
particulars of no importance. Felton on the Ciafficks.
20. To utter lingeringly.
The brand amid’ the flaming fuel thrown,
Or dew, or ſeem'd to draw, a dying groan.
21. To repreſent by picture; or in fancy.
I do arm myſelf
To welcome the condition of the time;
Which cannot look more hideouſly on me,
Than I have drawn it in my fantaſy. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
With his other hand, thus o'er his brow,
He falls to ſuch peruſal of my face,
As he would draw it. Shake peare's Hamlet.
Draw the whole world expecting who ſhould reign,
Dryd. Fables.
After this combat, o'er the conquer'd main. //aller.
From the ſoft aſſaults of love
Poets and painters never are ſecure:
Can I, untouch'd, the fair one's paſſions move,
Or thou draw beauty, and not feel its pow'r? Prizr.
22. To form a repreſentation.
The emperor one day took up a pencil which fell from the
hand of Titian, who was then drawing his picture; and upon
the compliment which Titian made him on that occaſion, he
ſaid, Titian deſerves to be ſerved by Caeſar. Dryden's Dufreſ,
23. To derive; to have from ſome original cauſe or donor.
Shall freeborn men, in humble awe,
Submit to ſervile ſhamc; , 4
Who from conſent and cuſtom draw
The ſame right to be rul’d by law, . .
Which kings pretend to reign Dryden.
Several wits entered into commerce with the Egyptians, and
from them drew the rudiments of ſciences. Temple.
24. To deduce as from poſtulates
From the events and revolutions of theſe governments are
dawn the uſual inſtruction of princes and ſtateſmen. Temple.
*5. Tº imply; to produce as a conſequential inference. -
hat ſhews the force of the inference but a view of all
the intermediate ideas that draw in the concluſion, or propo-
ſition inferred. Eocke.
26. To allure; to entice.
I'll raiſe ſuch artificial ſprights,
As, by the ſtrength of their illuſion,
Shall draw him on to his confuſion. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
We have dawn them from the city. joſ. viii. 6.
Draw me not away with the wicked. Pſ, xxviii. 3.
Having the art, by empty promiſes and threats, to drai,
others to his purpoſe. Hayward.
. The Spaniards, that were in the town, had ſo good memo-
ries of their loſſes in their former ſailies, as the confidence of
an army, which came for their deliverance, could not draw
them forth again. Bacon's Har with Spain.
27. To lead as a motive. º -
Your way is ſhorter; -
My purpoſes do draw me much about. Sh, Ant. and Cleop.
Æneas wond'ring ſtood, then aſk'd the cauſe
Which to the ſtream the crowding people draws. Dryden.
28. To perſuade to follow.
The poct
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, ſtones, and floods;
Since nought ſo ſtockiſh, hard, and full of rage,
But muſick, for the time, doth change his nature. Shakeſp.
29. To induce; to perſuade.
The Engliſh lords, to ſtrengthen their parties, did ally
themſelves with the Iriſh, and draw them in to dwell among
them, and gave their children to be foſtered by them. Davies.
Their beauty or unbecomingneſs are of more force to draw
or deter their imitation than diſcourſes. Locke.
30. To win; to gain : a metaphor from cards.
This ſeems a fair deſerving, and muſt draw me .
That which my father loſes. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
31. To receive ; to take up.
For thy three thouſand ducats here is ſix.
—If every ducat in ſix thouſand ducats
Were in i. parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them,
32. To extort; to force.
So ſad an obječt, and ſo well expreſs'd,
Drew fighs and groans from the griev'd hero's breaſt. Dryd,
Can you e'er forget
The fond embraces, and repeated bleſfings,
Which you drew from him in your laſt farewel? Addison Cato,
33. To wreſt; to diſtort.
I wiſh that both you and others would ceaſe from drawing
the Scriptures to your fantaſies and affections. Whitgifte.
34. To compoſe; to form in writing.
In the mean time I will draw a bill of properties, ſuch as
our play wants. Shakeſp. 4/idſummer Night's Dream.
Clerk, draw a deed of gift. Shakeſ Merch, ºf Penice.
The report is not unartfully drawn, in the ſpirit of a
pleader, who can find the moſt plauſible topicks. Swift.
Shall Ward draw contracts with a ſtateſman's ſkill? Pºe.
35. To withdraw from judicial notice.
Go, waſh thy face, and draw thy ačtion: come, thou muſt
not be in this humour with me. Shakeſheare.
36. To eviſcerate ; to embowel.
In private draw your poultry, clean your tripe,
And from your eels their ſlimy ſubſtance wipe. King', Cº.
37. Tº DR Aw in. To apply to any purpoſe by diſtortion or
violence.
A diſpute, where every little ſtraw is laid hold on, and
everything that can but be drawn in any way, to give colour
I would have my bond. Shakeſp.,
to the argument, is advanced with oſtentation. Lºcke.
38. To DRAw in. To contračt to pull back.
Now, ſporting muſe, draw in the flowing reins;
Leave the clear treams awhile for ſunny plains. Gay.
39. To DR Aw in. To inveigle; to intice.
It was the proſtitute faith of faithleſs miſcreants that drew
them in, and deceived them. South's Sermons.
4c. To Draw ºff. To extract by diſtillation.
At thors, who have thus drawn off the ſpirits of their
thoughts, ſhould lie ſtill for ſome time, ’till their minds have
gathered freſh ſtrength, and by reading, reflection, and con-
verſation, laid in a new ſtock of elegancies, ſentiments, and
images of nature. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 4c.
41. To drain out by a vent. -
Stop your veſſel, and have a little vent-hole ſtopped with a
ſpill, which never allow to be pulled out 'till you draw of a
great quantity. Mortimer’s Huſbandry.
42. To DR Aw ºff. To witbdraw; to abſtract.
It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 307</div><p class="Text">D R A
D R A
It draws mens minds off from the bitterneſs of party. Add
43. To DR Aw on. To occaſion ; to invite.
Under colour of war, which either his negligence draws
on, or his practices procured, he levied a ſubſidy. Hayward.
44. Tº DRAw on. To cauſe to bring by degrees.
The examination of the ſubtile matter would draw on the
conſideration of the nice controverſies that perplex philo-
ſophers. Boyle on Fluids.
45. I, DRAw over. To raiſe in a fli'i.
I took rectified oil of vitriol, and by degrees mixed with it
eſſential oil of wormwood, drawn over with water in a
limbeck. Boyle on Colours.
46. I, DRAw over. To perſuade to revolt; to induce to
change a party.
Some might be brought into his intereſts by money, others
drawn over by fear. Addison on the State f the J/ar.
One of differing ſentiments would have drawn Luther over
to his party. - Atterbury.
47. To DRAw out. To protract; to lengthen.
He muſt not only die the death,
But thy unkindneſs ſhall his death draw at
To ling ring ſufferance. Shakespeare. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Virgil has drawn out the rules of tillage and planting into
two books, which Heſiod has diſpatched in half a one. Addison
48. To DR Aw out. To extract; to pump out by inſinuation.
Philoclea found her, and, to draw cut more, ſaid ſhe, I
have often wondered how ſuch excellencies could be. Sidney.
49. Tº DR Aw out. To call to action; to detach for ſervice;
to range.
Draw out a file, pick man by man,
Such who dare die, and dear will ſºll their death. Dryden.
Th’Arcadian king
And Trojan youth the ſame oblations bring:
Next of his men, and ſhips, he makes review,
Draws out the beſt and ableſt of the crew. Dryden's 42n.
50. To range in battle.
Let him deſire his ſuperior officer, that the next time he is
drawn out the challenger may be poſted near him. Collier.
51. To DRAw up. To form in order of battle.
The lord Bernard, with the king's troops, ſeeing there was
no enemy left on that ſide, ar, w up in a large field oppoſite
to the bridge. Clar endon, b. viii.
So Muley-Zeydan found us
, Drawn up in battle to receive the charge. Dryd. Don Sebaſ.
52. To DR Aw up. To form in writing; to contrive.
To make a ſketch, or a more perfect model of a pićture, is,
in the language of poets, to draw up the ſcenary of a play. Dry.
A paper might be drawn up, and ſigned by two or three
hundred principal gentlemen. y Swift.
To D R A w. v. n.
i. To perform the office of a beaſt of draught.
An heifer which hath not been wrought with, and which
hath not drawn in the yoke. Deutr. xxi. 3.
Think every bearded fellow, that's but yok'd,
May daw with you. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
2. To act as a weight. *
They ſhould keep a watch upon the particular bias in their
minds, that it may not draw too much. Adºlſºn's Speciator.
3. To contract; to ſhrink.
I have not yet found certainly, that the water itſelf, by
mixture of aſhes, or duſt, will ſhrink or draw into leſs
room. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 34.
4. To advance; to move ; to make progreſſion.
Draw ye near hither all the chicf of the people. I Sa. xiv.
He ended; and th’ archangel ſoon dew high,
Not in his ſhape celeſtial, but as man
Clad to meet man. Milton's Paradiſ Lºſº, b. xi. 1. 238.
Ambitious meteors how willing they are to ſet themſelves
upon the wing, taking every occaſion of drawing upward to
the ſun. Dryden's Don Sečaſłian.
Now nearer to the Stygian lake they draw,
Whom from the ſhore the furly boatman ſaw,
Obſerv'd their paſſage through the ſhady wood,
And mark'd their near approaches to the flood. Dryden.
And now I faint with gricf; my fate draws nigh:
In all the pride of blooming youth I die. Addison's Ovid.
5. To draw a ſword.
For his ſake
Did I expoſe myſelf, pure; for his love
Drew to defend him, when he was beſet. Shakesp. Twelfth Night.
6. To practiſe the act of delineation.
So much inſight into perſpective, and ſkill in drawing, as
will enable him to repreſent tolerably on paper any thing he
ſees, ſhould be got. Locke.
7. To take a cºrd cut of the pack; to take a lot.
He has drawn a black, and ſmiles. Dryden.
8. To make a fore run by attraction.
9. To retire; to retreat a little.
They returned to the camp where the king was, and the
Scots drew a little back to a more convenient poſt for their
reſidence. Clarendon, b. ii.
10. To DRAw ºff. To retire ; to retreat.
When the cngagement proves unlucky, the way is to draw
off by degrees, and not to come to an open rupture. Cir.
11 T, DR Aw on. To advance; to approach.
The fatal day draws on, when I muſt fall. Dryden.
12. To DR Aw up. To form troops into regular order.
DR Aw. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The aët of drawing.
2. The lot or chance drawn.
DR Awback. n.ſ. [draw and back.] Money paid back for
ready payment, or any other reaſon.
In poundage and drawbacks I loſe half my rent;
Whatever they give me, I muſt be content. Swift.
DRA'w FR I do E. m. ſ. [draw and bridge.] A bridge made to
be lifted up, to hinder or admit communication at pleaſure.
Half the buildings were raiſed on the continent, and the
other half on an iſland, continued together by a drawbridge.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
DRA'we R. n.ſ.. [from draw.]
1. One employed in procuring water from the well.
From the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water. Deutr. xxix. 11.
2. One whoſe buſineſs is to draw liquors from the caſk.
To drive away the time ’till Falſtaff comes, I pray thee do
thou ſtand in ſome bye room, while I queſtion my puny
drawer to what end he gave me the ſugar. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Let the drawers be ready with wine and freſh glaſſes;
Let the waiters have eyes, though their tongues muſt be
ty'd. Ben. j. hnſon's Tavern Academy.
A man of fire is a general enemy to all waiters, and
makes the drawers abroad, and his footmen at home, know
he is not to be provoked. Tatler, Nº. 61.
3. That which has the power of attraction.
Love is a flame, and therefore we ſay beauty is attractive,
becauſe phyſicians obſerve that fire is a great drawer. Swift.
4. A box in a caſe, out of which it is drawn at pleaſure.
There may be other and different intelligent beings, of
whoſe faculties he has as little knowledge, or apprehenſion, as
a worm, ſhut up in one drawer of a cabinet, hath of the ſenſes
or underſtanding of a man. Locke.
We will ſuppoſe the China diſhes taken off, and a drawer
of medals ſupplying their room. Addiſon on Medals.
5. [In the plural.] The lower part of a man's dreſs.
The Malteſe harden the bodies of their children, and recon-
cile them to the heat, by making them go ſtark naked, with-
out ſhirt or drawers, ’till they are ten years old. Lotke.
DRA'w ING. m. ſ. [from draw.] Delineation; repreſentation.
They random drawings from your ſheets ſhall take,
And of one beauty many blunders make. Pope's Epiſºles.
DRA'w ING Roc M. m.ſ. [draw and room.]
1. The room in which company aſſembles at court.
What you heard of the words ſpoken of you in the drawing-
room was not true: the ſayings of princes are generally as ill
related as the ſayings of wits. Pope.
2. The company aſſembled there.
DR Aw N. [participle from draw.]
An army was drawn together of near ſix thouſand horſe. Cla.
So lofty was the pile a Parthian bow,
With vigour drawn, muſt put the ſhaft below. Dryd. Fab.
1. Equal; where each party takes his own ſtake.
If we make a drawn game of it, or procure but moderate
advantages, every Britiſh heart muſt tremble. Addiſon.
2. With a ſword drawn. - -
What, art thou drawn among thoſe heartleſs hinds Shaft.
3. Open; put aſide, or uncloſed.
A curtain drawn, preſented to our view
A town beſieg'd. Dryden's Tyran. Love.
4. Eviſcerated. -
There's no more faith in thee than in a ſtoned prune; no
more truth in thee than in a drawn fox. Shakeſp.
5. Induced as from ſome motive.
The Iriſh will better be drawn to the Engliſh, than the Eng-
liſh to the Iriſh government. Spenser on Ireland.
As this friendſhip was drawn together by fear on both ſides,
ſo it was not like to be more durable than was the fear. Hayw.
DR A'ww.F.L.L. n.ſ. [draw and well.] A deep well; a well out
of which water is drawn by a long cord.
The firſt conceit, tending to a watch, was a drawwell: the
people of old were wont only to let down a pitcher with a
handcord, for as much water as they could caſily pull up. Grew.
To DR Awl. v. n. [from draw J To utter any thing in a
ſlow driveling way. -
Then mount the clerks, and in one lazy tone
Through the long heavy page drawl on. Pope's Danciad.
IDRAY. * n.ſ.. [traº, Saxon.] The car on which beer
DRA’YCART. : is carried. -
Let him be brought into the field of ele&amp;ion upon his day-
cart, and I will meet him there in a triumphant chariot. Aadſ.
When dra, bound high, then never croſs behind,
Where bubbling yeſt is blown by guſts of wind Gay's Triv.
DRA'YHoRSE. n.ſ. (dray and horſe. J A horſe which draws a
dray.
This truth is illuſtrated by a diſcourſe on the nature of the
elephant and the dra, h.rſe. Tatler, No. 60.
DRA's MAN.
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 308</div><p class="Text">D R E
DRA'y MAN. n.ſ. [dray and man.] One that attends a dray or
Cart.
A brace of draymen bid God ſpecd him well,
And had the tribute of his ſupple knee. Shakespeare.
Have not coblers, draymen, and mechanicks governed as
well as preached Nay, have not they by preaching come to
govern ? South's Sermons.
DRA’y PLou GH. m. ſ. [dray and plough..] A plough of a parti-
cular kind. ' -
The drayplough is the beſt plough in Winter for miry
clays. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
DRA'zel. n.ſ. [perhaps corrupted from droſſel, the ſcum or
droſs of human nature; or from drylºſe, French, a whore.]
A low, mean, worthleſs wretch. -
As the devil uſes witches,
To be their cully for a ſpace,
That, when the time's expir’d, the drazels
For ever may become his vaſſals. Hudibras, p. iii, cant. i.
DREAD. n.ſ. [onab, Saxon.]
1. Fear; terrour; affright.
Think'ſt thou that duty ſhall have dread to ſpeak,
When pow'r to flatt'ry bows To plainneſs honour
Is bound, when majeſty to folly falls. Shakeſp. King Lear.
But was ever any wicked man free from the ſtings of a
guilty conſcience, from the ſecret dread of divine diſpleaſure,
and of the vengeance of another world? Tilotſon, Serm.4.
If our fears can be awakened with the dread of evil, he has
armed his laws with the terrour of eternal miſery. Rogers.
2. Habitual fear; awe.
The fear of you, and the dread of you, ſhall be upon every
beaſt of the earth. Gen. ix. 2.
3. The perſon or thing feared; the cauſe of fear.
To thee, of all our good the ſacred ſpring;
* To thee, our deareſt dread; to thee, our ſofter king. Prior.
DREAD. adj. [bnaeb, Saxon.]
1. Terrible; frightful.
That e'er this tongue of mine,
That laid the ſentence of dread baniſhment
On yºnd' proud man, ſhould take it off again -
...With words of ſooth ! Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
It cannot be, but thou haſt murther'd him:
So ſhould a murtherer look, ſo dread, ſo grim. Shakeſpeare.
To be expos'd againſt the warring winds :
To ſtand againſt the deep dread bolted thunder. Shakespeare
Amaze -
Be ſure, and terrour, ſeiz'd the rebel hoſt,
When, coming towards them, ſo dread they ſaw
The bottom of the mountains upward turn'd. Milt. P. Lºft.
2. Awful; venerable in the higheſt degree.
Thou, attended gloriouſly from heav'n,
Shalt in the ſky appear, and from thee ſend
The ſummoning archangels to proclaim . .
Thy dread tribunal. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii. l. 323.
From this deſcent
Celeſtial virtues riſing, will appear -
. More glorious and more dread than from no fall. Milton.
3. This ſeems to be the meaning of that controverted phraſe
dread majeſty. Some of the old acts of parliament are ſaid
in the preface to be metuendiſſimi regis, our dread ſovereign's.
To DREAD. v. a. [from the noun..] To fear in an exceſſive
degree.
You may deſpiſe that which terrifies others, and which yet
all, even thoſe who moſt dread it, muſt in a little time en-
counter. Wake.
To DREAD. v. n. To be in fear.
Dread not, neither be afraid of them. Deut. i. 8.
DREADER. m. ſ. [from dread..] One that lives in fear.
I have ſuſpended much of my pity towards the great
dreaders of popery. Swift.
DREADFul. n.ſ. (dread and fill.] Terrible; frightful; for-
midable. , -
Thy love, ſtill arm'd with fate,
Is dreadful as thy hate. Granville.
DREADFULNess. n.ſ.. [from dreadful.] Terribleneſs; fright-
fulneſs.
It may juſtly ſerve for matter of extreme terrour to the
... wicked, whether they regard the dreadfulneſs of the day in
which they ſhall be tried, or the quality of the judge by whom
they are to be tried. Hakewill on Providence.
DRE ADFully. adv. [from dreadful..] Terribly; frightfully.
Not ſharp revenge, nor hell itſelf can find
A fiercer torment than a guilty mind,
Which day and night doth dreadfaly accuſe,
Condemns the wretch, and ſtill the charge renews. Dryden.
DRE'A DI. Es N Ess. m. ſ. [from dreadlºſs.] Fearleſneſs; intre-
pidity; undauntedneſs.
Zelmane, to whom danger then was a cauſe of dreadleſneſs,
all the compoſition of her elements being nothing but fiery,
with ſwiftneſs of deſire croſſed him. - Sidney.
DREADLess. adj. [from dread..] Fearleſs; unaffrighted; in-
trepid ; unſhaken; undaunted; free from terrour.
Vol. I.
Dreadeſ, ſaid he, that ſhall I ſoon declare;
It was complain'd, that thou had'ſt done great torf *-
Unto an aged woman. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 5, ſcº. 27.
All night the dreadleſs angel, unpurſu'd,
Through heav'n's wide champaign held his way. , Milton.
DREAM. n.ſ. [droom, Dutch. This word is derived by Meric
Caſaubon, with more ingenuity than truth, from 2:2:4 is tie,
the comedy of life; dreams being, as plays are, a repreſentation
of ſomething which does not really happen. This conceit
junius has enlarged by quoting an epigram.
Xazºº was $ 3,9. × 727-12, ; p. 29: waº,
Tº arº, usta‘i:, ; £égs ra, ºva;. Anthol
1. A phantaſm of ſleep; the thoughts of a ſleeping man.
We eat our meat in fear, and ſleep
. In the afflićtion of thoſe terrible dreams
That ſhake us nightly. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
In dreams they fearful precipices tread;
Or, ſhipwreck'd, labour to ſome diſtant ſhore. Dryden.
Glorious dreams ſtand ready to reſtore
The pleaſing ſhapes of all you ſaw before. Dryden.
2. An idle fancy; a wild conceit ; a groundleſs ſuſpicion.
Let him keep
A hundred knights; yes, that on ev'ry dream,
Each buz, each fancy, each complaint, diſlike,
He may enguard his dotage, Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To DREAM. v. m. preter, dreamed, or dreamt. [from the noun.]
1. To have the repreſentation of ſomething in ſleep.
Dreaming is the having of ideas, whilſt the outward ſenſes
are ſtopped, ſo that they receive not outward objects with
their uſual quickneſs, in the mind; not ſuggeſted by any ex-
teinal obječts, or known occaſion, nor under the rule or con-
dućt of the underſtanding. Locke.
I have long dream'd of ſuch a kind of man,
But, being awake, I do deſpiſe my dream. Shakespeare H. IV.
I have nightly ſince - -
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyſelf and me:
We have been down together in my ſleep,
Unbuckling helms, fiſting each other's throat, -
And wak'd half dead with nothing. Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
I dreamed that I was conveyed into a wide and boundleſs
plain. Tailer, Nº. 81.
2. To think; to imagine. - -
Theſe boys know little they are ſons to th' king,
Nor Cymbeline dreaus that they are alive. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
. He never dreamed of the deluge, nor thought that firſt orb
more than a tranſient cruſt. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
He little dream'd how nigh he was to care, - -
*Till treach’rous fortune caught him in the ſnare. Dryden,
3. To think idly.
They dream on in a conſtant courſe of reading, but not
digeſting. - - Locke.
I began to dream of nothing leſs than the immortality of
my work. Sinith.
3. To be ſluggiſh; to idle. -
Why does Anthony dream out his hours,
And tempts not fortune for a noble day? Dryd. Allſor Lºve.
To DREAM. v. a. To ſee in a dream.
The Macedon, by Jove's decree,
Was taught to dream an herb for Ptolomey.
At length in ſleep their bodies they compoſe;
And dreamt the future fight, and early roſe. Dryden's Fab.
DRE'AM E.R. m. ſ. [from dream.] -
1. One who has dreams; one who has fancies in his ſleep.
The viſion ſaid, and vaniſh'd from his fight;
The dreamer waken'd in a mortal fright. Dryden.
If our dreamer pleaſes to try whether the glowing heat of a
glaſs furnace be barely a wandering imagination in a drowſy
man's fancy, by putting his head into it, he may perhaps be
wakened into a certainty. Locke.
2. An idle fanciful man; a viſionary.
Sometime he angers me,
With telling of the moldwarp, and the ant,
Of dreamer Merlin, and his prophecies. Shakespeare Henry IV:
3. A mope; a man loſt in wild imagination; a reveur.
The man of ſenſe his meat devours,
But only ſmells the peel and flow’rs;
And he muſt be an idle dreamer, -
Who leaves the pie, and gnaws the ſtreamer. Prior.
4. A ſluggard; an idler. -
DRE'A Miless, adj. [from dream.]. Without dreams.
The ſavages of mount Atlas, in Barbary, were reported to
be both nameleſs and dreamleſs. Camden’s Remains.
DREAR. adj. [oreoniz, Saxon, dreary.] Mournful; diſmal;
ſorrowful. -
In urns and altars round, w
A drear and dying ſound -
Affrights the flamens at their ſervice quaint. Milton.
DRE'Aria EAD. n.ſ.. [from dreary..] Horrour; diſmalneſs:
a word now no longer in uſe. -
That ſhortly from the ſhape of womanhed,
Such as ſhe was when Pallas ſhe attempted,
7 N She
Dºdon.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 309</div><p class="Text">-
She grew to hideous ſhape of dre"
Pined §. grief of folly late repented. Spenſer.
DREArment. n.ſ. [from drºl
1. Sorrow; diſmalneſs à º lament
. I teach the woods and watº * . . nº..." -
Y. dreariment. - - Spenser s Epithalamium.
2. Horrour; dread; terrour. This word is now obſolete.
Almighty Jove, in wrathful mood,
£guiſt of mortal fins is bent;
Tº*:::: #. thundering dart with deadly food, -
Injrd in flames and ſmould'ring drearinent. Fairy Queen.
DREARY. adi. [bneontº Saxon.]
1. Sorrowful; diſtreſsful: , - -
The meſſenger of death, the ghaſtly owl,
with dreary ſhrieks did alſo yell; -
And hungry wolves º did howl * -
At her abhorred face, ſo horrid and ſo foul. Fairy Queen.
. Gloomy; diſmal; horrid. -
2. G &amp;: they went º dreary ſhades, that led
Along the vaſt dominions of the dead. Dryden, AEn. 6.
Towns, foreſts, herds and men promiſcuous drown'd,
With one great death deform the dreary ground. Prior.
DREDGE. n.J. [To dretch, in Chaucer, is to delay; perhaps a
net ſo often ſtopped may be called from this J A kind of
net. -
For oyſters, beſides gathering by hand, at a great ebb, they
have a peculiar dredge; which is a thick ſtrong net, faſtened
to three ſpills of iron, and drawn at the boat's f ern, gathering
whatſoever it meeteth lying in the bottom of the water. Carew.
To DREDGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To gather with a
dredge. -
The oyſters dredged in the Lyne, find a welcome accep-
tance - Carew.
DREDGER. m.ſ [from dredge..] One who fiſhes with a dredge.
DRE'GciNess. n.ſ.. [fiom dreggy.] Fulneſs of dregs or lees;
foulneſs; muddineſs; feculence.
DRE'Gorsh. adj. [from dregs.] Foul with lees; feculent.
To give a ſtrong taſte to this dreggiſh liquor, they fling in
an incredible deal of broom or hops, whereby ſmall beer is
rendered equal in miſchief to ſtrong. Harvey on Conſumptions.
DRe(GGY, adj. [from dregs.] Containing dregs; conſiſting of
dregs; muddy; feculent.
Theſe num'rous veins, ſuch is the curious frame,
Receive the pure infinuating ſtream;
Hut no corrupt or dreggy parts admit,
To form the blood, or feed the limbs unfit. Blackm. Creat.
Ripe grapes, being moderately preſſed, their juice may,
without much dreggy matter, be ſqueezed out. Boyle.
DREGS. n.ſ. [enerzen, Saxon; dreggian, Iſlandick.]
I. º: ſediment of liquors; the lees; the grounds; the fecu-
enCC.
Fain would we make him author of the wine,
If for the dregs we could ſome other blame. Davies.
They often tread deſtruction's horrid path,
And drink the drags of the revenger's wrath. Sandys.
We from the dregs of life think to receive,
What the firſt ſprightly running could not give. Dryden.
- Such run on poets in a raging vein,
Ev’n to the drags and ſqueezings of the brain. Pope.
2. Anything by which purity is corrupted.
. The king by this journey purged a little the dregs and
leaven of the northern people, that were before in no good
affections towards him. Bacon.
3. Droſs; ſweepings; refuſe.
Heav'n's favourite thou, for better fate's deſign'd,
Than we the dregs and rubbiſh of mankind. Dryden's juv.
What diffidence we muſt be under, whether God wiſſ re-
gard our ſacrifice, when we have nothing to offer him but
the dregs and refuſe of life, the days of loathing and ſatiety,
and the years in which we have no pleaſure. Rogers's Sermon.
To DREIN. v. n. [See DRAIN.J. To empty. "
I am ſure I can fiſh it out of her: ſhe is the ſluice of her
łady's ſegrets: 'tis but ſetting her mill agoing, and I can drain
her of them all. Congreve's Old Batchelor.
'Tis dºein’d and empty'd of its poiſon now;
A cordial draught. -
To DRENCH. v. a. [brencan, Saxon.]
1. To waſh; to ſoak; to ſteep. -
- In ſwiniſh ſleep
Their drenched natures lie, as in a death. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Our garments being as they were dranched in the ſea, hold
notwithſtanding their freſhneſs and gloſſes, being rather new-
dy'd than ſtain'd with ſalt water. Shakeſpeare's Tempſ.
To-day deep thoughts learn with me to dº,
In mirth, that after no repenting draws. Milton's Sam.
Now dam the ditches, and the floods reſtrain;
Their moiſture has already drench'd the plain. Dryd. Wirgil.
2. To ſaturate with drink or moiſture: in an ill ſenſe.
T . . alas! has mutual hatred drench'd
ºr twords in native blood, ----
3. To phyſick by º Phillips.
Southern.
D R E
If any of your cattle are infected, ſpeedily let both ſick and
well blood, and drench them. Mortimer's Husbandry.
DRENch. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A draught; a ſwill: by way of abhorrence or contempt.
Let ſuch bethink them, if the ſleepy drench
Of that forgetful lake benumb not ſtill,
That in our proper motion we aſcend. Milton's Par. Lº.
2. Phyſick for a brute. -
A drench is a potion or drink prepared for a ſick horſe, and
compoſed of ſeveral drugs in a liquid form. Farrier's Diº.
Harry, ſays ſhe, how many haſt thou kill'd to-day : Give
my roan horſe a drench, ſays he ; and anſwers, fourteen, an
hour after. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. P. i.
A drench of wine has with ſucceſs been us'd,
And through a horn the gen'rous juice infus’d. Drydºn.
3. Phyſick that muſt be given by violence.
Their counſels are more like a drench, that muſt be poured
down, than a draught which might be leiſurely drank, if I
liked it. King Charles.
4. A channel of water.
DRE'Ncher. n.ſ.. [from drench.]
1. One that dips or ſteeps any thing.
2. One that gives phyſick by force. JDiº.
DRENT. participle. Probably corrupted from drenched, to make
a proverbial rhyme, brent or burnt.
What flames, quoth he, when I the preſent ſee,
In danger rather to be drent than brent? Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To DRESS. v. a. [dreſſer, French.]
1. To clothe ; to inveſt with cloaths.
The firſt requeſt
He made, was, like his brothers to be drºſ'd; }
And, as his birth requir’d, above the reſt. Dryden.
2. To clothe pompouſly or elegantly.
Look upon pleaſures not upon that fide that is next the ſun,
or where they look beauteouſly; that is, as they come towards
you to be enjoyed; for then they paint and ſmile, and dreſs
themſelves up in tinſel and glaſs gems and counterfeit ima-
gery. Taylºur.
Few admir'd the native red and white,
Till poets dreſs'd them up to charm the ſight. Dryd. Epiſtles.
Lollia Paulina wore, in jewels only, when dreſſed out,
about the value of three hundred twenty-two thouſand nine
hundred and ſixteen pounds thirteen ſhillings and four pence.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
3. To adorn; to deck; to embelliſh; to furniſh.
Where was a fine room in the middle of the houſe, hand-
ſomely dreſſed up, for the commiſſioners to fit in. Clarendon.
Skill is uſed in dreſſing up power with all the ſplendour ab-
ſoluteneſs can add to it. Locke.
The mind loſes its natural reliſh of real truth, and is re-
conciled inſenſibly to any thing that can be drºffed up, into
any feint appearance of it. Locke.
4. To cover a wound with medicaments.
. . In time of my ſickneſs another chirurgeon dreſſed her. Wiſm.
5. To curry; to rub.
Our infirmities are ſo many, that we are forced to dreſ;
and tend horſes and aſſes, that they may help our needs. Taylor.
Three hundred horſes, in high ſtables fed,
Stood ready, ſhining all, and ſmoothly dreſs'd. Dryd. Æn.
6. To reëtify; to adjuſt.
Adam' well may we labour ſtill to dreſs
This garden; ſtill to tend plant, herb, and flow'r,
7. To prepare for any purpoſe.
In Orkney they dreſ, their leather with roots of tormentil,
inſtead of bark. Martimer's Husbandry.
8. To trim; to fit anything for ready uſe.
When he dreſſeth the lamps he ſhall burn incenſe. Ex. xxx.
When you drºſ; your young hops, cut away roots or
ſprigs. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
9. To prepare vićtuals for the table.
Thus the voluptuous youth, bred up to dreſs
For his fat grandfire ſome delicious meſs,
In feeding high his tutor will ſurpaſs,
An heir apparent of the gourmand race. Dryden.
DREss. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
1. Cloaths; garment; habit. -
Dreſſes laughed at in our forefathers wardrobes or pićtures,
when, by the circulation of time and vanity, they are brought
about, we think becoming. Government of the Tongue.
A robe obſcene was o'er his ſhoulders thrown, -
A dreſs by fates and furies worn alone. Pºpe's Statius.
2. Splendid cloaths; habit of ceremony. -
Full dreſ, creates dignity, augments conſciouſneſs, and
keeps at diſtance an encroacher. Clariffa.
3. The ſkill of adjuſting dreſs.
The men of pleaſure, dreſs, and gallantry. Pope.
DRE'ssER. m.ſ.. [from dreſs.] -
1. One employed in putting on the cloaths and adorning the
perſon of another.
She hurries all her hand-maide to the taſk;
Her head alone will twenty dreſſers aſk. Dryden's *:::
2. UMl
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 310</div><p class="Text">‘D R I
D R I
2. One employed in regulating, trimming, or adjuſting any
thing. -
§ he unto the dreſſºr of his vineyard, Behold, theſe three
years I come ſeeking fruit on this fig-tree, and find’none. Luke.
3. The bench in a kitchen on which meat is dreſt or prepared for
the table. -
'Tis burnt, and ſo is all the meat: -
What º are theſe ? Where is the raſcal cook?
How durſt you, villains, bring it from the dreſſºr,
And ſerve it thus to me that love it not 2 Shakeſpeare.
A mapple dreſſer in her hall ſhe had,
On which full many a ſlender meal ſhe made. Dryden.
When you take down diſhes, tip a dozen upon the dreſſer.
- Swift's Directions to the Cook.
DRE'ssing. n.ſ.. [from dreſ...] The application made to a
ſore.
The ſecond day after we took off the dreſſings, and found
an eſchar made by the catheretick. Wiſeman on Tumours.
DRE'ssingRoom. n.ſ. [dreſ; and room.] The room in which
clothes are put on.
Latin books might be found every day in his dreſſingroom, if
it were carefully ſearched. Swift.
DREST. part. [from dreſs.]
In flow'ry wreaths the royal virgin dreſſ
His bending horns, and kindly clapt his breaſt. Addison Ovid.
To DRIB. v. a. [contračted from dribble.] To crop; to cut
off; to defalcate. A cant word.
Merchants gains come ſhort of half the mart;
For he who drives their bargains, dribs a part. Dryd, juv.
To DRIBBLE. v. n. [This word ſeems to have come from
drop by ſucceſſive alterations, ſuch as are uſual in living lan-
guages. Drop, drip, dripple, dribble, from thence drivel and
driveler. Drip may indeed be the original word, from the
Daniſh drypp.]
1. To fall in drops.
Semilunar proceſſes on the ſurface, owe their form to the
dribbling of water that paſſed over it. Woodward on Foſſils.
A dribbling, difficulty, and a momentary ſuppreſſion of urine,
may be cauſed by the ſtone's ſhutting up the orifice of the
bladder. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. To fall weakly and ſlowly.
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a compleat boſom. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure:
3. To ſlaver as a child or ideot. º
To DRI'bble. v. a. To throw down in drops. -
Let the cook follow with a ladle full of ſoup, and dribble
it all the way upſtairs. Swift's Rules to Servants.
Pººr. n. ſ. [from dribble.] A ſmall ſum; odd money in
a lum.
r
Twelve long years of exile born,
Twice twelve we number'd ſince his bleſt return:
So ſtrićtly wert thou juſt to pay,
Even to the dribblet of a day. Dryden.
DR1'E.R. n.ſ...[from dry.] That which has the quality of ab-
ſorbing moiſture; a deſiccative.
There is a tale, that boiling of daiſy roots in milk, which
it is certain are great driers, will make dogs little. Bacon.
DRIFT. n.ſ.. [from drive.]
1. Force impellent; impulſe; overbearing influence. -
A man being under the drift of any paſſion, will ſtill follow
the impulſe of it, 'till ſomething interpoſe, and, by a ſtronger
impulſe, turn him another way. South's Sermons.
2. Violence; courſe.
The mighty trunk, half rent with rugged rift,
Doth roll adown the rocks, and fall with fearful drift. F. 9.
3. Anything driven at random. -
Some log, perhaps, upon the waters ſwam,
An uſeleſs drift, which rudely cut within,
And hollow'd, firſt a floating trough became,
And croſs ſome riv'let paſſage did begin. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
4. Anything driven or born along in a body.
The ready racers ſtand,
Swift as on wings of wind up-borne they fly,
And drifts of riſing duſt involve the sky. Pope's Odyſſey.
5. A ſtorm; a ſhower.
Our thunder from the South
Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town. Shakespeare K. john.
6. A heap or ſtratum of any matter thrown together by the
wind; as, a ſnowdrift, a deep body of ſnow.
7. Tendency, or aim of ačtion. -
The particular drift of every ačt, proceeding eternally
from God, we are not able to diſcern; and therefore cannot
always give the proper and certain reaſon of his works. Hook.
Their drift 'comes known, and they diſcover'd are;
For ſome, of many, will be falſe of courſe Daniel’s C. Iſar.
8, Scope of a diſcourſe.
The main drift of his book being to prove, that what is
true is impoſſible to be falſe, he oppoſes nobody. Tillot. Prof.
The drift of the pamphlet is to ſtir up our compaſſion
towards the rebels.
This by the ſtile, the manner, and the drift,
'Twas thought could be the work of none but Swift, Swift.
Addiſon.
To DRIN k. v. a.
To DRIFT. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To drive; to urge along. ...
Snow no larger than ſo many grains of ſand, drifted with
the wind in clouds from every plain. Ellis's Woyage.
2. Thrown together on heaps. . ‘. .
- - He wanders on
From hill to dale, ſtill more and more aſtray,
... Impatient flouncing through the drifted heaps. Thomſºn.
To DRILL. v. a. [drillen, Dutch; pinlian, Saxon, from purgh,
through.] -
1. To pierce any thing with a drill.
The drill-plate is only a piece of flat iron, fixed upon a flat
board, which iron hath an hole punched a little way into it,
to ſet the blunt end of the ſhank of the drill in, when you
drill a hole. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
2. To perforate; to bore; to pierce.
My body through and through he drill'd, -
And Whacum by my ſide lay kill'd. Hudibras, p. ii. can, 3.
Tell, what could drill and perforate the poles,
And to th’ attractive rays adapt their holes? Blackm, Creat.
3. To make a hole. . . -
When a hole is drilled in a piece of metal, they hold the
drill-bone in their right hand; but when they turn ſmall work
they hold the drill-bone in their left hand. Moxon's Mech. Ex.
4. To delay; to put off: in low phraſe.
She has bubbled him out of his youth; ſhe drilled him on
to five and fifty, and ſhe will drop him in his old age. Addiſon.
5. To draw from ſtep to ſtep. A low phraſe. -
When by ſuch infinuations they have once got within him,
and are able to drill him on from one lewdneſs to another, by
the ſame arts they corrupt and ſqueeze him. South's Sermons.
6. To drain; to draw ſlowly. This ſenſe wants better au-
thority. - - -
Drill'd through the ſandy ſtratum every way,
The waters with the ſandy ſtratum riſe. Thomſon's Autumn.
7. To range troops. An old cant word. -
The foe appear'd drawn up and drill'd,
Ready to charge them in the field. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
DRILL. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. An inſtrument with which holes are bored. It is preſſed hard
againſt the thing bored, and turned round with a bow and
Ítring.
#. way of tempering ſteel to make gravers, drills, and
mechanical inſtruments, we have taught artificers. Boyle;
Drill, are uſed for the making ſuch holes as punches will
not conveniently ſerve for; as a piece of work that hath
already its ſhape, and muſt have an hole or more made in it.
Moxon's Mech. Exer.
2. An ape; a baboon. - -
Shall the difference of hair be a mark of a different inter-
nal ſpecifick conſtitution between a changeling and a drill,
when they agree in ſhape and want of reaſon? Locke.
3. A ſmall dribbling brook. This I have found no where elſe,
and ſuſpećt it ſhould be rill. -
Springs through the pleaſant meadows pour their drill,
Which ſnake-like glide between the bordering hills. Sandys.
To DRINK. v.m. preter. drank, or drunk; part, paſſ drunk, or
drunken. [b]uncan, Saxon.] -
1. To ſwallow liquors; to quench thirſt.
Here, between the armies,
Let's drink together friendly, and embrace. Shakespeare Henry IV:
She ſaid drink, and I will give thy camels drink alſo ; ſo I
drank, and ſhe made the camels drink alſo. Gen. xxiv. 46.
He drank of the wine. -- Gen. ix. 21.
When delight is the only end, and reſts in itſelf, and dwells
there long, then eating and drinking is not a ſerving of God,
but an inordinate ačtion. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
2. To feaſt; to be entertained with liquors. * * *
We came to fight you.—For my part, I am ſorry it is
turned to a drinking. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
3. To drink to exceſs; to be an habitual drunkard. A collo-
quial phraſe. . - -
4. To DRINk to. To ſalute in drinking; to invite to drink by
drinking firſt. -.
I take your princely word for thoſe redreſſes.
—I gave it you, and will maintain my word 3. ...,
And thereuponi drink unto your grace. Shakespeare. Hºney IV.
5. Tº DR1sk to. To wiſh well to in the act of taking the
Cut).
r - Give me ſome wine; fill full:
I drink to th’ general joy of the whole table, .
And to our d'ar friend Banquo, whom we miſs. Shakespeare. Mac'.
I'll drink to maſter Bardolph, and to all the cavaleroes
about London. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
1. To ſwallow : applied to liquids. -
He had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water three days
and three nights. 1 Sd. xxx. 12.
We have drunken our water for money. Sam. v. 4.'
One man gives another a cup of poiſon, a thing as terrible
as death; but at the ſame time he tells him that it is a cord a',
and ſo he drinks it off, and dics, South's Sermo's.
S Alexander,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 311</div><p class="Text">-* --- ---
L) R. I
Alexander, after he had arank up a cup of fourteen pints,
was going to take another. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To ſuck up; to abſorb.
The body being reduced nearer unto the earth, and emp-
tied, becometh more porous, and greedily drinketh in water.
- Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. ii. e. 5.
Set rows of roſemary with flow'ring ſtem,
And let the purple villets drink the ſtream. Dryden's Wirgil.
Bruſh not thy ſweeping ſkirt too near the wall;
Thy heedleſs ſleeve will drink the colour'd oil. Gay's Trivia.
3. To take in by any inlet; to hear; to ſee. -
- My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of that tongue's uttering, yet I know the ſound. Shakeſp.
Thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you ſend,
Though ink be made of gall. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline,
Phemius' let ačts of gods, and hero's old,
What ancient bards in hall and bow'r have told,
Attemper'd to the lyre, your voice employ;
Such the pleas'd ear will drink with filent joy. Pope's Odyſſey.
I drink delicious poiſon from thy eye. - Pºpe.
4. To act upon by drinking.
Come, we have a hot veniſon paſty to dinner: come, gen-
tlemen, I hope we ſhall drink down all unk in lneſs. Shakeſp.
In the compaſs of ſome years he will drown his health and
his ſtrength in his belly; and, after all his drunken trophies, at
length drink down himſelf too. South's Sermons.
5. To make drunk.
Benhadad was drinking himſelf drunk in the pavilions.
1 Kings xx. 16.
DRINK. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Liquor to be ſwallowed, oppoſed to meat.
When God made choice to rear
His mighty champion, ſtrong above compare,
Whoſe drink was only from the liquid brook Milt. Agoniſł.
2. Liquor of any particular kind.
We will give you rare and ſleepy drinks. Shakesp. Winter's Tale.
The juices of fruits are either watry or oily: I reckon
among the watry all the fruits out of which drink is expreſſed,
as the grape, the apple, and the pear. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
* O madneſs, to think uſe of ſtrongeſt wines,
And ſtrongeſt drinks, our chief ſupport of health ! Milton.
Theſe, when th' allotted orb of time's compleat,
Are more commended than the labour'd drink. Philips.
Amongſt drinks, auſtere wines are apt to occaſion foul
eruptions. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
DR1'NKMoney. n.ſ. [drink and money..] Money given to
buy liquor.
Peg's ſervants were always aſking for drinkmoney. Arbuthnot.
DR1'NKABLE. adj. [from drink.] Potable; ſuch as may be
drank.
DR1'NK ER. n.ſ.. [from drink.] One that drinks to exceſs; a
drunkard. - - -
It were good for thoſe that have moiſt brains, and are great
Arinkers, to take fume of lignum, aloes, roſemary, and frank-
incenſe, about the full of the moon. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The drinker and debauched perſon is the object of ſcorn and
contempt. South.
The urine of hard drinkers afford a liquor extremely fetid,
but no inflammable ſpirit: what is inflammable ſtays in the
blood, and affects the brain. Great drinkers commonly die
apoplećtick. A buthnot on Aliments.
To DRIP. v. n. [dippen, Dutch.]
1. To fall in drops.
2. To have drops falling from it.
The ſoil, with fatt'ning moiſture fill’d,
Is cloath'd with graſs, and fruitful to be till'd ;
Such as in fruitful vales we view from high, -
Which dripping rocks, not rowling ſtreams ſupply. Dryden.
The fineſt ſparks, and cleaneſt beaux,
Drip from the ſhoulders to the toes. Prior.
To DRIP. v. a.
1. To let fall in drops. - -
Her flood of tears
Seem like the lofty barn of ſome rich ſwain,
Which from the thatch drips faſt a ſhower of rain. Swift.
2. To drop fat in roaſting.
. Let what was put into his belly, and what he drips, be his
ſauce. - J/alton's Angler.
His offer'd entrails ſhall his crime reproach,
And drip their fatneſs from the hazle broach. Dryd. Wirgil.
Dr IP. n.ſ. [from the verb.] That which falls in drops.
Water may be procured for neceſſary occaſions from the
heavens, by preſerving the drips of the houſes. Mortimer.
DR1'PPING.. n.ſ.. [from drip.] The fat which houſewives ga-
ther from roaſt meat.
Shews all her ſecrets of houſekeeping;
For candles how ſhe trucks her dripping, Swift.
DR1'PPINGPAN. n.ſ. [drip and pan.] I he pan in which the
fat of roaſt meat is caught.
. When the cook turns her back, throw ſmoaking coals into
the drippingpan. Siºt.
DR1'PPLE, adj. [from drip.] This word is uſed ſomew::cre
by §§ for weak, or rare; dripºle ſhot.
To DRIVE. v. a. preterite drove, anciently dºor, part. paſſ
driven, or drove. [dreiban, Gothick; ºran, Saxon; dryº,
Dutch.] - *
1. To produce motion in any thing by violence.
2. To force along by impetuous preſſure.
On helmets, helmets throng,
Shield preſs'd on ſhield, and man a zve nian along. Pºe.
3. To expel by force from any place. -
Driven from his native land to foreign grounds,
He with a gen’rous rage reſents his wounds. 1 ryden's J.g.
His ignominious flight the victors boaſt,
Beaux baniſh beaux, and wordknots ſwordknots drive. Pope.
4. To ſend by force to any place.
Time drives the flocks from field to fold,
When rivers rage and rocks grow cold. Shakespeare. M.W.of Win.
Fate has driven 'em all
Into the net.
5. To force or urge in any dire&amp;tion. -
He ſtood and meaſured the earth: he beheld, and drove
aſunder the nations Heb. iii. 6.
6. To impel to greater ſpeed. - -
7. To guide and regulate a carriage.
He took off their chariot wheels, that they drove them
heavily. Ex. xiv. 25.
Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
8. To convey animak, ; to make animals march along under
guidance.
There find a herd of heifers, wand'ring o'er
The neighbºring hill, and drive 'em to the ſhore. Addison.
9. To clear any place by forcing away what is in it.
We come not with deſign of waſteful prey,
To drive the country, force the ſwains away. Dryden's Pīrg.
10. To force; to compel.
He driven to diſmount, threatned, if I did not the like, to
do as much for my horſe as fortune had done for his. Sidney.
They did not think that tyranny was thoroughly extin-
guiſhed, 'till they had driven one of their conſuls to depart the
city, againſt whom they found not in the world what to ob-
ject, ſaving only that his name was Tarquin. Hooker, b. iv.
He was driven by the neceſſities of times, more than led by
his own diſpoſition to rigour. King Charles.
11. To diftreſs; to ſtraiten.
This kind of ſpeech is in the manner of deſperate men f.r
driven. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
12. To urge by violence, not kindneſs.
He taught the goſpel rather than the law, -
And forc'd himſelf to drive; but lov'd to draw. Dryden.
13. To impel by influence of paſſion. -
I drave my ſuitor from his mad humour of love to a living
humour of madneſs. Shakeſpeare'. As you like it.
Diſcontents drave men into ſlidings. King Charles.
Lord Cottington, being maſter of temper, and of the moſt
profound diſſimulation, knew too well how to lead him into
a miſtake, and then drive him into choler. Clarendon.
It is better to marry than to burn, ſays St. Paul; where we
may ſee what drives men into a conjugal life: a little burning
puſhes us more powerfully than greater pleaſures in pro-
ſpect. - Lºcke.
14. To urge; to preſs to a concluſion.
The experiment of wood that ſhineth in the dark, we have
diligently driven and purſued; the rather for that, of all things
that give light here below, it is the moſt durable, and hath
leaſt apparent motion. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 352.
We have thus the proper notions of the four elements, and
both them and their qualities, driven up and reſolved into
their moſt ſimple principles. Digby on Bodies.
To drive the argument farther, let us inquire into the ob-
vious deſigns of this divine architect. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
The deſign of theſe orators was to drive ſome particular
point, either the condemnation or acquittal. Swift.
15. To carry on.
As a farmer cannot huſband his ground ſo well, if he ſit at
a great rent; ſo the merchant cannot arive his trade ſo well,
if he fit at great uſury. - Bacon, Eſſay 42.
The bees have common cities of their own,
And common ſon, beneath one law they live,
And with one common ſtock their traffick drive. Dryda
Your P. fimond a lawleſs bargain drove,
The parent could not ſell the daughter's love. Dryden.
The trade of life cannot be driven without partners. Collier.
16. To purify by motion. - - -
The one's in the plot, let him be never ſo innocent; and
the other is as white as the driven ſhow, let him be never ſo
criminal. L'Aſtrange.
17. To DRIVE out. To expel.
Tumults and their exciters d'ave Inyſelf and many of both
houſes out of their places. King Charles.
As ſoon as they heard the name of Roſcetes, they forth with
drawe ºut their gºvernour, and received the Turks into the
iQY, In, Kncile, ºftory of the Turks.
To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 312</div><p class="Text">D R I
To Dr 1, E. v. n.
1. To go as impelled by any external agent.
The needle endeavours to conform unto the meridian ; but
being diſtraćted, driveth that way where the greater and power-
fuller part of the earth is placed. Brown's Wugar Errour, b. ii.
Love, fixt to one, ſtill ſafe at anchor rides,
And dares the fury of the winds and tides;
But loſing once that hold, to the wide ocean born,
It drives away at will, to every wave a ſcorn.
Nor with the riſing ſtorm would vainly ſtrive ;
But left the helm, and let the veſſel drive. Dryden's 4; n.
2. To ruſh with violence.
Fierce Boreas drove againſt his flying ſails, -
And rent the ſheets. Dryden's &amp;n.
Near as he draws, thick harbingers of ſmoke,
With gloomy pillars, cover all the place;
Whoſe little intervals of night are broke,
By ſparks that drive againſt his ſacred face. Dryd. Ann. Mir.
Then with ſo ſwift an ebb the flood drove backward,
It ſlipt from underneath the ſcaly herd. Dryd. All for Love.
The bees drive out upon each other's backs,
Tº imboſs their hives in cluſters. Dryden's Don Selaſian.
While thus he ſtood,
Perithous’ dart drove on, and nail'd him to the wood. Dryd.
As a ſhip, which winds and waves aſſail,
Now with the current drives, now with the gale;
She feels a double force, by turns obeys
The imperious tempeſt, and th’ impetuous ſeas. Dryden.
The wolves ſcampered away, however, as hard as they
could drive. L’E/irange.
Thick as autumnal leaves, or driving ſand,
The moving ſquadrons blacken all the ſtrand. Pope's Iliad.
3. To paſs in a carriage. -
There is a litter ready ; lay him in't,
And drive tow’rd Dover. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Thy flaming chariot wheels, that ſhook
Heav'n's everlaſting frame, while o'er the necks
Thou drov'ſ of warring angels diſarray'd. Milt. Par. Loſt.
4. To tend to ; to conſider as the ſcope and ultimate deſign.
Our firſt apprehenſions are inſtructed in authors, which
‘drive at theſe as the higheſt elegancies which are but the fri-
gidities of wit. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 9.
We cannot widely miſtake his diſcourſe, when we have
found out the point he drives at. Locke.
They look no further before them than the next line;
whence it will inevitably follow, that they can drive to no
certain point, but ramble from one ſubjećt to another. Dryd.
We have done our work, and are come within view of the
end that we have been driving at. Addiſon on the War.
5. To aim; to ſtrike at with fury. -
Four rogues in buckram let drive at me. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
At Auxur's ſhield he drove, and at the blow
Dryden.
Both ſhield and arm to ground together go. Dryden’s AFn.
To DRI'VEL. v. n. [from drip, dripple, dribble, drivel J
1. To ſlaver ; to let the ſpittle fall in drops, like a child, an
ideot, or a dotard.
I met with this Chremes, a driveling old fellow, lean,
ſhaking both of head and hands, already half earth, and yet
then moſt greedy of earth. Sidney, b. ii.
No man could ſpit from him, but would be forced to
drivel like ſome paralytick, or a fool. Grew's Coſm.
2. To be weak or fooliſh; to dote.
This driveling love is like a great natural, that runs lolling
up and down to hide his bauble. Shakeſp. Rom, and juliet.
I hate to ſee a brave bold fellow ſotted,
Made ſour and ſenſeleſs, turn'd to whey by love;
A driveling hero, fit for a romance. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Dr I'v FL. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Slaver; moiſture ſhed from the mouth.
Beſides th' eternal drivel, that ſupplies
The dropping beard, from noſtrils, mouth and eyes. Dryden.
2. A fool; an ideot ; a driveller. This ſenſe is now out of uſe.
What fool am I, to mingle that drivel's ſpeeches among
my noble thoughts. - Sidney, b. ii.
Millions of years this old drivel Cupid lives,
While ſtill more wretch, more wicked he doth prove. Sidney.
DRI'v ELLER. m. ſ. [from drivel.] A fool; an ideot; a ſla-
vercr. -
I have heard the arranteſt drivellers commended for their
fhrewdneſs, even by men of tolerable judgment. Swift.
DR1 v EN. Participle of drive.
They were driven forth from among men. job xxx. 5.
DR 1've R. m. ſ. [from drive.]
1. The perſon or inſtrument who gives any motion by violence.
2. One who drives beaſts.
He from the many-peopl’d city flies;
Contemns their labours, and the driver's cries. Sandys.
The driver runs up to him immediately, and beats him
almoſt to death. L’E/irange's Fables.
The multitude or common rout, like a drove of ſheep, or
an herd of men, may be managed by any noiſe or cry which
their driver ſhall accuſtom them to.
Vol. 1.
South's Sermons,
3. One who drives a carriage.
Not the fierce driver with more fury ſends *
The ſounding laſh, and, ere the ſtroke deſcends. {
Low to the wheels his plant body bends. Dryd./ºrg.Er. Ş
To DRI'ZZLE. v. a. [drjºlen, German, to ſhed dew.] To
ſhed in ſmall ſlow drops; as Winter rains.
When the ſun ſets the air doth drizzle dew. Shakeſpeare.
Though now this face of mine be hid
In ſap-conſuming Winter's drizzled ſnow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
Yet hath my night of life ſome memory. Shakeſpeare.
To DRI'zzle. v. n. To fall in ſhort ſlow drops.
And drizzling drops that often do redound,
The firmeſt flint doth in continuance wear. Speºſer.
Her heart did melt in great compaſſion,
And drizzling tears did ſhed for pure affection. Fairy Queen.
This day will pour down,
If I conjećture ought, no drizzling ſhow'r,
But rattling ſtorm of arrows barb’d with fire. Milton.
The neighbouring mountains, by reaſon of their height,
are more expoſed to the dews and drizzling rains than any of
the adjacent parts. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
DRIzz LY. adj. [from drizzle.] Sheding ſmall rain.
This during Winter's drizzly reign be done,
*Till the new ram receives th’ exalted ſun. Dryden’s Pirgil.
DROIL. n.ſ.. [by junius underſtood a contraćtion of drivel.]
A drone; a ſluggard.
To DROIL. v. n. To work ſluggiſhly and ſlowly; to plod.
Let ſuch vile vaſſals, born to baſe vocation,
Drudge in the world, and for their living droil,
Which have no wit to live withouten toyle. Spenser.
We ſee in all things how deſuetude does contračt and nar-
row our faculties, ſo that we can apprehend only thoſe things
in which we are converſant: the droiling peaſant ſcarce thinks
there is any world beyond his own village, or the neighbour-
ing markets. Government of the Tongue.
DRöLL n. ſ: [droler, French.]
1. One whoſe buſineſs is to raiſe mirth by petty tricks; a jeſter;
a buffoon; a jackpudding.
As he was running home in all haſte, a droll takes him up
by the way. r L’Eſtrange.
Why, how now, Andrew 1 cries his brother droll;
To-day's conceit, methinks, is ſomething dull. Prior.
Democritus, dear droll, reviſit earth,
And with our follies glut thy heighten’d mirth, Prior,
2. A farce; ſomething exhibited to raiſe mirth.
Some as juſtly fame extols,
For lofty lines in Smithfield drolls. Swift.
To Daoll. v. n. [drile, French..] To jeſt; to play the
buffoon.
Such auguſt deſigns as inſpire your inquiries uſed to be de-
cided by drolling fantaſticks, that have only wit enough to
make others and themſelves ridiculous. Glanv. Scepſ. Pref.
Men that will not be reaſoned into their ſenſes, may yet be
laughed or drolled into them. L’Eſtrange.
fºr virtuoſº infilt and deſpiſe on, yet they never ſhall be
able to droll away nature. South's Sermons.
DRo'll ERY. m.ſ. [from droll.] Idle jokes; buffoonery.
They hang between heaven and hell, borrow the Chriſtians
faith, and the atheiſts drollery upon it. Governm. of the Tongue.
DRO'MEDARY. m. ſ. [dromedare, Italian.]
A ſort of camel ſo called from its ſwiftneſs, becauſe it is
ſaid to travel a hundred miles a day, and ſome affirm one hun-
dred and fifty. Dromedaries are ſmaller than common camels,
ſlenderer, and more nimble, and are of two kinds: one
larger, with two ſmall bunches, covered with hair, on its back;
the other leſſer, with one hairy eminence, and more frequent-
ly called camel: both are capable of great fatigue, and very
ſerviceable in the weſtern parts of Aſia, where they abound.
Their hair is ſoft and ſhorn: they have no fangs and fore-
teeth, nor horn upon their feet, which are only covered with
a fleſhy ſkin; and they are about ſeven feet and a half high,
from the ground to the top of their heads. They drink much
at a time, and are ſaid to diſturb the water with their feet.
They keep the water long in their ſtomachs, which, as ſome
report, travellers in neceſſity will open for the ſake of the
water contained in them. The ſtomach of this animal is
compoſed of four ventricles; and in the ſecond are ſeveral
mouths, which open a paſſage into twenty cavities, which
ſerve for conſervatories of water. See CAM FL. Calmet.
Straw for the horſes and dramcdaries brought they unto the
place. 1 King; iv. 28.
DRONE. n.ſ.. [broen, Saxon J
1. The bee which makes no honey, and is therefore driven out
by the reſt.
The ſad-ey'd juſtice, with his ſurly hum,
Delivering o'er to executors pale
The lazy yawning done. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Luxurious kings are to their people loſt;
They live, like drones, upon the publick coſt. Dºyd Auren.
All, with united force, combine to drive
The lazy drones from the laborious hive. Dryden's Pirgil.
7 O 2. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 313</div><p class="Text">D R O
D R O
2. A ſluggard; an idler.
He ſleeps by day
More than the wild cat: drones hive not with me,
Therefore I part with him. Shakeſpeare's Merch. of Venice.
Sit idle on the houſhold hearth
A burd'nous drone, to viſitants a gaze. Milton's Agoniſtes.
It is my misfortune to be married to a drone, who lives
upon what I get, without bringing any thing into the com-
mon ſtock. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 21 1.
3. The hum, or inſtrument of humming.
To DR on E. v. n. [from the noun..] To live in idleneſs; to
dream.
What have I loſt by my forefathers fault?
Why, was not I the twentieth by deſcent
From a long reſtive race of droning kings? Dryd. Span. Fry.
DRO'Nish. adj. [from drone..] Idle ; ſluggiſh; dreaming;
lazy; indolent; unactive.
The droniſh monks, the ſcorn and ſhame of manhood,
Rouſe and prepare once more to take poſſeſſion,
To neſtle in their ancient hives again. Rowe's Jane Gray.
To DR oop. v. n. [droeſ, ſorrow, Dutch..]
1. To languiſh with ſorrow.
Conceiving the diſhonour of his mother,
He ſtraight declin'd, droop'd, took it deeply;
Faſten'd, and fix'd the ſhame on't in himſelf. Shakeſpeare.
I drop, with ſtruggling ſpent;
My thoughts are on my ſorrows bent. Sandyſ.
2. To faint; to grow weak; to be deſpirited.
I find my zenith doth depend upon
A moſt auſpicious ſtar; whoſe influence
If now I court not, but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after drop. Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
Good things of day begin to droop and drowſe,
While night's black agents to their prey do rowze, Shakespeare. Macb.
When, by impulſe from heav'n, Tyrtaeus ſung,
In droofing ſoldiers a new courage ſprung. Rºſcommon.
Can flow'rs but droop in abſence of the ſun,
Which wak'd their ſweets? and mine, alas! is gone. Dryd.
Time ſeems not now beneath his years to ſtoop,
Nor do his wings with ſickly feathers drop. Dryden.
When factious rage to cruel exile drove
The queen of beauty and the court of love, -
The muſes droop'd with their forſaken arts. Dryden.
I'll animate the ſoldiers drooping courage,
With love of freedom and contempt of life. Addiſ Cato.
I ſaw him ten days before he died, and obſerved he began
very much to droop and languiſh. Swift.
3. To ſink; to lean downwards.
I never from thy ſide henceforth muſt ſtray,
Where'er our day's work lies; though now enjoin'd
Laborious, ’till day droop. Milton's Paradije Loſt, b. xi.
His head, though gay
Carnation, purple, azure, or ſpeck'd with gold,
Hung drooping, unſuſtain'd. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. ix.
On her heav'd boſom hung her droºping head,
Which, with a ſigh, ſhe rais'd; and this ſhe ſaid. Pºpe.
DROP. m.ſ.. [bnoppa, Saxon.]
1. A globule of moiſture; as much liquor as falls at once when
there is not a continual ſtream.
Meet we the med'cine of our country's weal,
And with him pour we in our country's purge,
Each drop of us. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Whereas Ariſtotle tells us, that if a drop of wine be put
into ten thouſand meaſures of water, the wine being over-
powered by ſo vaſt a quantity of water, will be turned into it:
he ſpeaks, to my apprehenſion, very improbably. Boyle.
Admiring, in the gloomy ſhade,
Thoſe little drops of light. J/aller.
Had I but known that Sancho was his father,
I would have pour’d a deluge of my blood
To ſave one drop of his. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
2. Diamond hanging in the ear.
The drops to thee, Brillante, we conſign;
And, Momentilla, let the watch be thine. Pope.
DROP SERENE. n.ſ. [gutta ſerena, Latin J A diſeaſe of the
eye, proceeding from an inſpiſſation of the humour.
So thick a drop ſºreme hath quench'd their orbs,
Or dim ſuffuſion veil'd Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. iii.
To DRoP. v. a. [bnoppan, Saxon.]
1. To pour in drops or ſingle globules.
His heavens ſhall drop down dew.
2. To let fall.
Others o'er chimney tops and turrets row,
And drop their anchors on the meads below. Dryden.
One only hag remain'd : -
Againſt a wither'd oak ſhe lean'd her weight,
Propp'd on her truſty ſtaff, not half upright,
And dropp'd an aukward court’ſy to the knight. Dryden.
St. John himſelf will ſcarce forbear
To bite his pen and drop a tear;
The reſt will give a ſhrug, and cry,
I'm ſorry, but we all muſt die! Swift.
Deut. xxxiii. 28.
3. To let go; to diſmiſs from the hand, or the poſſeſſion.
Though I could
With barefac’d power ſweep him from my fight,
And bid my will avouch it; yet I muſt not,
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
Whoſe loves I may not drop. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Thoſe who have aſſumed viſible ſhapes for a ſeaſon, can
hardly be reckoned among this order of compounded beings;
becauſe they drop their bodies, and diveſt themſelves of thoſe
viſible ſhapes. //atts's Logick.
4. To utter ſlightly or caſually.
Drºp not thy word againſt the houſe of Iſaac. Amos vii. 16.
5. To inſert indireétly, or by way of digreſſion.
St. Paul's epiſtles contain nothing but points of Chriſtian
inſtruction, amongſt which he ſeldom fails to drop in the great
and diſtinguiſhing doćtrines of our holy religion. Lºcke.
6. To intermit; to ceaſe.
Where the act is unmanly or immoral, we ought to drop
our hopes, or rather never entertain them. Cºllier on Deſpair.
After having given this judgment in its favour, they ſud-
denly dropt the purſuit. Sharp's Surgery.
7. To quit a maſter.
I have beat the hoof 'till I have worn out theſe ſhoes in
your ſervice, and not one penny left me to buy more; ſo that
you muſt even excuſe me, if I drop you here. L’Eſtrange.
8. To let go a dependant, or companion, without farther aſſo-
C12t1On.
She drilled him on to five and fifty, and will drop him in
his old age, if ſhe can find her account in another. Addiſon.
They have no ſooner fetched themſelves up to the faſhion
of the polite world, but the town has dropped them. Addiſon.
9. To ſuffer to vaniſh, or come to nothing.
Thus was the fame of our Saviour perpetuated by ſuch re-
cords as would preſerve the traditionary account of him to
after-ages, and rectify it, if, by paſſing through ſeveral gene-
rations, it might drop any part that was material. Addiſon.
Opinions, like faſhions, always deſcend from thoſe of qua-
lity to the middle ſort, and thence to the vulgar, where they
are drºpped and vaniſh. - Swift.
Io. To bedrop ; to ſpeckle; to variegate with ſpots. Wariis
Jºelatus corpºra guttis.
Or, ſporting with quick glance,
Shew to the ſun their wav'd coats, dropp'd with gold. Milt.
To DR op. v. n.
1. To fall in drops, or ſingle globules.
The quality of mercy is not ſtrain'd;
It droppeth, as the gentle rain from heaven,
Upon the place beneath. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
2. To let drops fall; to diſcharge itſelf in drops.
The heavens dropped at the preſence of God. Pſ. lxvii. 8.
While cumber'd'with my dropping cloaths I lay,
The cruel nation, covetous of prey,
Stain'd with my blood th’ unhoſpitable coaſt. Dryden's AFn.
Beneath a rock he ſigh’d alone,
And cold Lycaeus wept from every dropping ſtone. Drydºn.
3. To fall; to come from a higher place.
Philoſophers conjećture that you dropped from the moon, or
one of the ſtars. Gulliver's Travels.
In every revolution, approaching nearer and nearer to the
ſun, this comet muſt at laſt drop into the ſun's body. Cheyne.
4. To fall ſpontaneouſly.
So may'ſt thou live, ’till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
Into thy mother's lap; or be with eaſe
Gather'd, not harſhly pluck'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
5. To fall in death; to die ſuddenly.
It was your preſurmiſe,
That in the dole of blows your ſon might drop. Shakespeare
6. To die.
Nothing, ſays Seneca, ſo ſoon reconciles us to the thoughts
of our own death, as the proſpect of one friend after another
dropping round us. Digby to Pope.
7. To ſink into filence; to vaniſh ; to come to nothing: a fami-
liar phraſe.
Virgil's friends thought fit to let drºp this incident of Helen.
Addiſon's Travels.
I heard of threats, occaſioned by my verſes: I ſent to ac-
quaint them where I was to be found, and ſo it dropped. Pope.
8. To come unexpectedly.
He could never make any figure in company, but by giving
diſturbance at his entry; and therefore takes care to drop in
when he thinks you are juſt feated. Spectator, N°. 448.
DR o'PPING.. n.ſ.. [from drop.]
1. That which falls in drops.
Thrifty wench ſcrapes kitchen-ſtuff,
And barreling the droppings and the ſnuff
Of waſting candles. Donne.
2. That which drops when the continuous ſtream ceaſes.
Strain out the laſt dull droppings of your ſenſe,
And rhyme with all the rage of impotence. Pope's Criticiſm,
DRO'PLF t. m. ſ. A little drop.
Thou abhorr'dſt in us our human griefs,
s Scorn’d<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 314</div><p class="Text">D R O
D R O
Scorn'd our brine's flow, and thoſe our droplets, which
From niggard nature fall. Shakeſpeare's Timon.
Dropston E. m. ſ. [drºp and ſtone..] Spar formed into the
ſhape of drops. //oodward's Foſſ.
DRO'pwort. m. ſ. [drop and wºrt.] A plant of various ſpecies.
DRo'Psic AL. adj. [from d oftſ; J Diſeaſed with a dropſy ;
hydropical; tending to a dropſy.
The diet of nephritick and dropſical perſons ought to be
ſuch as is oppoſite to, and ſubdueth the alkaleſcent nature of
the ſalts in the ſerum of the blood. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
DRopsied. adj. [from dro'ſ,.] Diſeaſed with a dropſy.
Where great addition ſwells, and virtue none,
It is a dropſied honour: good alone
Is good. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
DROPSY. n.ſ. [hydrops, Latin; whence anciently hydropiſ),
-
thence dropiſ), dropſy J A collečtion of water in the body,
from too lax a tone of the ſolids, whereby digeſtion is
weakened, and all the parts ſtuffed. $24incy.
An anaſarca, a ſpecies of dropſy, is an extravaſation of
water lodged in the cells of the membrana adipoſa. Sharp.
DROSS. n.ſ.. [onor, Saxon.]
1. The recrement or deſpumation of metals.
Some ſcumm'd the droſ; that from the metal came,
Some ſtirr'd the molton ore with ladles great,
And every one did ſwink, and every one did ſweat. Fai. Qu.
Should the mixture of a little droſs conſtrain the church to
deprive herſelf of ſo much gold, rather than learn how, by
art and judgment, to make ſeparation of the one from the
other * Hooker, b. v. ſ. 20.
2. Ruſt; incruſtation upon metal. *
An emperor, hid under a cruſt of droſ, after cleanſing, has
appeared with all his titles freſh and beautiful. Addiſ on Medals.
3. Refuſe; leavings; ſweepings; any thing remaining after the
removal of the better part; dreggs; feculence; corruption.
Fair proud, now tell me, why ſhould fair be proud,
Sith all world's glory is but droſ unclean;
And in the ſhade of death itſelf ſhall ſhroud,
However now thereof ye little ween 2 Spenſer, Sonnet 2.
That moſt divine light only ſhineth on thoſe minds, which
are purged from all worldly drºſ; and human uncleanneſs. Ral.
All treaſures and all gain eſteem as droſ,
And dignities and pow'rs all but the higheſt. Miſt. Pa. Loft.
Such precepts exceedingly diſpoſe us to piety and religion,
by purifying our ſouls from the droſ; and filth of ſenſual
delights. - Tillotſon, Sermon 5.
Dro'ssINEss. n.ſ.. [from droſy.] Foulneſs; feculence; ruſt.
The furnace of afflićtion refines us from earthly droſſineſ,
and ſoftens us for the impreſſion of God's ſtamp. Boyle,
DRo'ssy. adj. [from droſs.]
1. Full of ſcorious or recrementitious parts; full of droſs.
So doth the fire the droſy gold refine. Davies.
For, by the fire, they emit not only many droſy and ſco-
rious parts, but whatſoever they had received either from
earth or loadſtone. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. i. c. 4.
2. Worthleſs; foul; feculent.
Your intention hold,
As fire theſe droſ, rhymes to purify,
Or as elixir to change them into gold. Donne.
DRotchel. n.ſ.. [corrupted perhaps from dretchel. To dretch,
in Chaucer, is to idle, to delay. Droch, in Friſick, is delay.]
An idle wench; a ſluggard. In Scottiſh it is ſtill uſed.
DRove. n.ſ.. [from drive.]
1. A body or number of cattle: generally uſed of oxen or black
cattle.
They brought to their ſtations many droves of cattle; and
within a few days were brought out of the country two thou-
ſand muttons. Hayward.
A Spaniard is unacquainted with our northern droves. Brown.
2. A number of ſheep driven. -
A drove of ſheep, or an herd of oxen, may be managed
by any noiſe or cry which the drivers ſhall accuſtom them
to. South's Sermons.
3. Any collection of animals.
The ſounds and ſeas, with all their finny drove,
Now to the moon in wavering morrice move.
4. A crowd; a tumult.
But if to fame alone thou do'ſt pretend,
The miſer will his empty palace lend,
Set wide with doors, adorn'd with plated braſs,
Where droveſ, as at a city-gate, may paſs. Dryden's juven.
DRo've N. part, from drive.
- This is fought indeed;
Had we ſo done at firſt, we had droven them home
With clouts about their heads. Shakespeare Anth. and Cleopatra.
DRo’ve R. n.ſ.. [from drove..] One that fats oxen for ſale, and
drives them to market.
The prince hath got your hero.
—I wiſh him joy of her.
—Why, that's ſpoken like an honeſt drover; ſo they ſell
bullocks. Shakeſpeare's Much Ado about Nothing.
The drover who his fellow drºver meets,
In narrow paſſages of winding ſtreets. Dryden's juvenal.
Milton.
DROUGHT. n.ſ. ſomugose, Saxon ; drowth, Scottiſh J
1. Dry weather; want of rain.
O earth! I will befriend thee more with rain
Than youthful April ſhall with all his ſhowers:
In Summer's drought I'll drop upon thee ſtill. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
Great droughts in Summer, laſting 'till the end of Auguſt,
ſome gentle ſhowers upon them, and then ſome dry weather,
portend a peſtilent Summer the year following. Bacon.
To ſouth the Perſian bay,
And inacceſſible th' Arabian drought. Milton's Parad. Reg.
As torrents in the drowth of Summer fail,
So periſht man from death ſhall never riſe. Sandys.
They were ſo learned in natural philoſophy, that they
foretold earthquakes and ſtorms, great droughts, and great
plagues. Temple.
In a drought the thirſty creatures cry,
And gape upon the gather'd clouds for rain. Dryden.
Upon a ſhower, after a drought, earthworms and land-
ſnails innumerable come out of their lurking places. Ray.
2. Thirſt; want of drink.
His carcaſe, pin'd with hunger and with drought. Milton.
One whoſe drought
Yet ſcarce allay’d, ſtill eyes the current ſtream,
Whoſe liquid murmur heard, new thirſt excites. Milt. P. L.
D ou'GHTINEss. n.ſ.. [from droughty.] The ſtate of wanting
rain.
DRo'UGHT Y. adj. [from drought.]
1. Wanting rain; ſultry.
That a camel, ſo patient of long thirſt, ſhould be bred in
ſuch droughty and parched countries, where it is of ſuch emi-
nent uſe for travelling over thoſe dry and ſandy deſarts, where
no water is to be had, muſt be acknowledged an act of provi-
dence and deſign. Ray on the Creation.
2. Thirſty; dry with thirſt.
If the former years
Exhibit no ſupplies, alas! thou muſt
With taſteleſs water waſh thy droughty throat. Phillips.
To Drown. v. a. [from drundºn, below, German, Skinner,
from onuncinian, Saxon, Mr. Lye.]
1. To ſuffocate in water.
They would ſoon down thoſe that refuſed to ſwim down
the popular ſtream. King Charles.
When of God’s image only eight he found
Snatch'd from the wat'ry grave, and ſav'd from nations
drown'd. Prior.
2. To overwhelm in water.
Or ſo much as it needs
To dew the ſovereign flower, and drown the weeds. Shakespeare
Galleys might be drowned in the harbour with the great
ordnance, before they could be rigged. Knolles's Hiſtory.
3. To overflow; to bury in an inundation; to deluge.
Betwixt the prince and parliament we ſtand,
The barriers of the ſtate on either hand: }
May neither overflow, for then they drown the land. Dry.
4. To immerge; to loſe in any thing.
Moſt men being in ſenſual pleaſures drown'd,
It ſeems their ſouls but in their ſenſes are.
5. To loſe in ſomething that overpowers or covers.
Who cometh next will not follow that courſe, however
good, which his predeceſſors held, for doubt to have his doings
drowned in another man's praiſe. Spenſer on Ireland.
To think that the brightneſs of the ſun's body above doth
drown our diſcerning of the leſſer lights, is a popular errour.
Wotton's Architecture.
My private voice is drown'd amid’ the ſenate. Addison Cato.
Some aged man, who lives this act to ſee,
And who in former times remember'd me,
May ſay, the ſon, in fortitude and fame,
Outgoes the mark, and drowns his father's name.
To DR own. v. n. To be ſuffocated in the waters.
There be, that keep them out of fire, and yet was never
burned ; that beware of water, and yet was never nigh
drowning. Aſham's Schoºlmaſter.
Methought what pain it was to down /
What dreadful noiſe of waters in my ears!
What fights of ugly death within mine eyes! Shakeſ R. III.
To DROWSE. v. a. [drotſen, Dutch..] To make heavy with
ſleep.
Davies.
Dryden,
There gentle ſleep
Firſt found me, and with ſoft oppreſſion ſeiz'd
My drowſed ſenſes uncontroll’d. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
To DRows E. v. n.
1. To ſlumber; to grow heavy with ſleep.
All their ſhape
Spangled with eyes, more numerous than thoſe
Of Argus; and more wakeful than to drowſe,
Charm'd with Arcadian pipe, the paſtoral reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. xi.
2. To look heavy; not cheerful.
They rather drows'd, and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face, and render'd ſuch aſpect
As cloudy men uſe to their adverſaries. Shakeſp. Henry VI,
DRC'wsILY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 315</div><p class="Text">D R U
D R U
Drowsily, adv. [from drowſ.]... . ſ
1. Sleepily; heavily; with an inclination to ºp.
The air ſwarms thick with wand ring deitics,
Which drowſily like º * riſe. Dryd. Ind. Emp.
- . . Altr - ully ; lazlly.
2. sº º &amp; underſtanding yº, º: firſt
:--~~ iated, ſlothfully and drowſily fit down.
things, and, thereby ſatiated, ...}} jº the J/or'd.
/ ss. n.ſ.. [from drowſ.] - -
Pº º with ſleep; diſpoſition to ſleep.
W. a ſtrange drowſineſ, poſſeſſes them Shakeſp. Tempſf.
. In deep of night, when drowſineſs
Hath lock'd up mortal ſenſe, then liſten I - -
To the celeſtial ſyren's harmony. Paradiſe Regained.
What ſuccour can I hope the muſe will ſend,
whoſe drowſineſ; hath wrong'd the muſe's friend ? Craſhaw.
He paſſes his whole life in a dozed condition, between ſleep-
ing and waking, with a kind of drowſineſ; and confuſion upon
his ſenſes. South's Sermons.
He that from his childhood has made riſing betimes fami-
liar to him, will not waſte the beſt part of his life in drawſ-
neſ and lying a-bed. Locke.
A ſenſition of drowſineſ, oppreſſion, heavineſs, and laſi-
tude, are ſigns of a plentiful meal, eſpecially in young people.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Idleneſs; indolence; inactivity.
It falleth out well, to ſhake off your drowſineſs; for it
ſeemed to be the trumpet of a war. Bacon's Holy 1/ar.
Drows1HED. m. ſ. Sleepineſs; inclination to ſleep.
The royal virgin ſhook off drowſ;hed;
And riſing forth out of her baſer boure,
Look'd for her knight. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 2. /?an. 7.
Drowsy. adj. [from drowſe.]
1. Sleepy ; heavy with ſleep; lethargick.
Drowſy am I, and yet can rarely ſleep. Sidney.
Men drowſy, and deſirous to ſleep, or before the fit of an
ague, do uſe to yawn and ſtretch. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The flowers, call'd out of their beds,
Start and raiſe up their drowſy heads. Cleaveland.
Drunken at laſt, and drowſy they depart,
Each to his houſe. Dryden,
2. Heavy; lulling; cauſing ſleep.
Sir Guyon, mindful of his vows yplight,
Up roſe from drowſy couch. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant, 3.
While thus ſhe reſted, on her arm reclin'd,
The hoary willows waving with the wind,
And feather'd quires that warbled in the ſhade,
And purling ſtreams that through the meadow ſtray'd, }
In drºwſy murmurs lull'd the gentle maid. Addiſon.
3. Stupid ; dull.
Thoſe inadvertencies, a body would think, even our au-
thor, with all his drowſy reaſoning, could never have been
capable of. Atterbury.
To DRUB. v. a. [druber, to kill, Daniſh.] To threſh; to
beat; to bang; to thump; to thwack; to cudgel. A word
of contempt.
He that is valiant, and dares fight,
Though drubb'd, can loſe no honour by’t. Hudibras, p. i.
The little thief had been ſoundly drubbed with a good
honeſt cudgel. L’Eſtrange.
Though the bread be not mine, yet, if it had been leſs
than weight, I ſhould have been drubbed. Locke.
DRUB. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A thump; a knock; a blow.
The blows and drubs I have receiv'd,
Have bruis'd my body, and bereav'd
My limbs of ſtrength. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
By ſetting ſuch an unfortunate mark on their followers,
they have expoſed them to innumerable drubs and contuſions.
Addiſon's Freehºlder, Nº. 50.
To DRUDGE. v. n. [breccan, to vex, Saxon; draghen, to
carry, Dutch..] To labour in mean offices; to toil without
honour or dignity; to work hard; to ſlave.
And to crack'd fiddle, and hoarſe tabour,
In merriment, did drudge and labour. Hudibras, p.i.
The poor ſleep little: we muſt learn to watch
Qur labours late, and early every morning,
Mid'ſt Winter froſts; then clad and fed with ſparing,
Riſe to our toils, and drudge away the day. Otway.
Advantages obtained by induſtry directed by philoſophy,
can never be expected from drudging ignorance. Glanv. Scepſ.
Soon he came to court,
Proffering for hire his ſervice at the gate,
"o drudge, draw water, and to run or wait. Dryd. Fables.
I made no ſuch bargain with you, to live always drudg-
Dryden's Dedicat. Æn.
- in dull renown drudg’d o'er
HD One little ſingle hour of love is more.
º * [from the verb. ) Qne employed in mean
To coni i ; one doomed to ſervile occupation. .
claim to m. e, this drudge º: devil, this diviner, laid
tle fits above, and a....” of Errours.
ing.
What is an age,
Granville.
At thee, ordain’d his drudge, to execute
Whate'er his wrath ſhall bid. Milton's Paradiſ. º, b. ii.
Art thou our ſlave,
Our captive, at the publick mill our drudge,
- And dar'ſt thou, at our ſending and command,
Diſpute thy coming. 44iltºn's Agoniſies, 1. 392.
He is content to be their drudge, ~
And on their errands gladly trudge. Hudibras, p. iii, cant. 1.
The hard maſter makes men ſerve him for nought, who
rewards his drudges and ſlaves with nothing but ſhame and
ſorrow, and miſery. 7ilºſon, Sermon 4.
DRU'Do ER. m. ſ. [from drudge.]
1. A mean labourer.
2. The drudging-box; the box out of which flower is thrown
on roaſt meat. Die?.
DRU'DoERY, n.ſ.. [from drudge J. Mean labour; ignoble toil;
diſhonourable work; ſervile occupation.
My old dame will be undone for one to do her huſbandry,
and her drudgery. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
Were there not inſtruments for drudgery as well as offices
of drudgery P. Were there not people to receive orders as well
as others to give and authorize them L'E/irange.
You do not know the heavy grievances,
The toils, the labours, weary drudgeries,
Which they impoſe. Sauthern's Oroonoko.
To thee that drudgery of pow'r I give;
Cares be thy lot: reign thou, and let me live. Dryd, Auren.
Paradiſe was a place of bliſs, as well as immortality, with-
out drudgery, and without ſorrow. Locke.
Even drudgery himſelf,
As at the car he ſweats, or duſty hews
The palace-ſtone, looks gay. Thºmſon's Summer, l, 1445.
It is now handled by every dirty wench, and condemned to
do her drudgery. Swift's Meditations on a Broom/lick.
DRU'Do ING box. m. ſ. [drudging and box.] The box out of
which flower is ſprinkled upon roaſt meat.
But if it lies too long, the crackling's pall'd,
Not by the drudgingbox to be recall’d. King's Cookery.
DRU'DGINGLY. adv. [from drudging.] Laboriouſly; toil-
ſomely. -
He does now all the meaneſt and triflingeſt things himſelf
drudgingly, without making uſe of any inferiour or ſubordi-
nate miniſter. Ray on the Creation.
DRUG. n.ſ. [drogue, French.]
1. An ingredient uſed in phyſick; a medicinal ſimple.
Mortal drugs I have ; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them. Shakespeare. Rom, and juliet,
A fleet deſcry’d
Hangs in the clouds, by jº winds
Cloſe ſailing from Bengala, or the iſles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring
Their ſpicy drugs. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii. 1.640.
And yet no doubts the poor man's draught control;
He dreads no poiſon in his homely bowl:
Then fear the deadly drug, when gems divine
Enchaſe the cup, and ſparkle in the wine. Dryden's juven.
Judicious phyſick's noble art to gain,
He drugs and plants explor'd, alas, in vain' Smith.
Bright Helen mix’d a mirth-inſpiring bowl,
Temper'd with drugs of ſov’reign uſe, t'aſſuage
The boiling boſom of tumultuous rage. Pope's Odyſſey, b. iv.
In the names of drugs and plants, the miſtake in a word
may endanger life. Baker's Refteåions on Learning.
2. Anything without worth or value; anything of which no
purchaſer can be found.
Each noble vice
Shall bear a price,
And virtue ſhall a drug become:
An empty name
Was all her fame,
But now ſhe ſhall be dumb.
3. A drudge.
Dryden's Albion.
He from his firſt ſwath proceeded
Through ſweet degrees that this brief world affords,
To ſuch as may the paſſive drugs of it freely command. Shakespeare
To DRUG. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſeaſon with medicinal ingredients.
The ſurfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with ſnores.-I’ve drugg’d their poſſets,
That death and nature do contend about them. Shakespeare Macb.
2. To tinéture with ſomething offenſive.
Oft they aſſay’d,
Hunger and thirſt conſtraining: drugg’d as oft
With hatefuleſt diſreliſh, writh'd their jaws,
With foot and cinders filrd. . Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft, b. x.
DRU'Goet. n.ſ. A ſlight kind of woollen ſtuff.
In druggets dreſt, of thirteen pence a yard, -
See Philip's ſon amid'ſt his Perſian guard. Swift.
DRuggist. 'n ſ [from dºg.] Obe who ſells phyſical drigº,
Common nitre we bought at the druggift's, Boyle.
DRU'oster. n.ſ.. [from drug. J One who ſells phyſical
ſimples, C
ommon
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 316</div><p class="Text">D R U
D R Y
Common oil of turpentine I bought at the drugſters. Boyle.
They ſet the clergy below their apothecaries, the phyſician
of the ſoul below the drugſters of the body. Atterbury.
DRU'id, n. ſ. [derio, oaks, and hud, incantation; which may
be as ancient as the Grecian 2,04. Perron; darrach, oak, Erſe.]
The prieſts and philoſophers of the antient Britons.
DRUM. n.ſ.. [tromme, Daniſh; drumme, Erſe.]
1. An inſtrument of military muſick, conſiſting of vellum
ſtrained over a broad hoop on each ſide, and beaten with
ſticks.
Let's march without the noiſe of threat'ning drums. Shakespeare
In drums the cloſeneſs round about, that preſerveth the
ſound from diſperſing, maketh the noiſe come forth at the
drum-hole, far more loud and ſtrong than if you ſhould ſtrike
upon the like ſkin extended in the open air. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Tears trickling down their breaſts bedev the ground,
And drums and trumpets mix their mournful ſound. Dryden.
Now no more the drum
Provokes to arms, or trumpet's clangor ſhrill
Affrights the wives, and chills the virgin's blood. Phillips.
2. The tympanum of the ear, or the membrane which perceives
the vibration of the air.
To DRUM. v. n.
1. To beat a drum; to beat a tune on a drum.
2. To beat with a pulſatory motion.
t %. heart,
Be ribb'd with iron for this one attempt;
Set ope thy ſluices, ſend the vigorous blood
Through every active limb for my relief;
Then take thy reſt within the quiet cell;
For thou ſhalt drum no more. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
To DRU'MBLE. v. n. To drone; to be ſluggiſh. Hanmer.
Take up theſe cloaths here quickly: where's the cowlſtaff
Look, how you drumble: carry them to the landreſs in Datchet
mead. Shakeſpeare's Merry JWives of Windſor.
DRU'MFIs H. n.ſ. The name of a fiſh.
The under jaw of the drumfiſh from Virginia. Woodward.
DRU’MMAJoR. m. ſ. [drum and major.] The chief drummer
of a regiment.
Such company may chance to ſpoil the ſwearing;
And the drummajor's oaths, of bulk unruly,
May dwindle to a feeble. Cleaveland.
DRU'MMAKER. m. ſ. [drum and maker.] He who deals in
drums.
The drummaker uſes it, and the cabinetmaker. Mºrtimer.
DRU'MMER. n.ſ.. [from drum.] He whoſe office it is to beat
the drum.
Drummer, ſtrike up, and let us march away. Shakespeare HIV.
Here rows of drummers ſtand in martial file,
And with their vellum-thunder ſhake the pile. Gay's Privia.
DRU'Mstick. n.ſ. [drum and ſlick.] The ſtick with which .
a drum is beaten.
DRUNK. adj. [from drink.]
1. Intoxicated with ſtrong liquour; inebriated.
This was the morn when iſſuing on the guard,
Drawn up in rank and file, they ſtood prepar'd
Of ſeeming arms to make a ſhort aſſay;
Then haſten to be drunk, the buſineſs of the day. Dryden.
We generally conclude that man drunk, who takes pains
to be thought ſober. Spectator, Nº. 577.
2. Drenched or ſaturated with moiſture.
I will make mine arrows drunk with blood. Deut. xxix. 6.
DRU'NKARD. m. ſ." [from drunk.] One given to exceſſive
uſe of ſtrong liquors; one addićted to habitual ebriety.
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavour. I’ve ſeen drunkards
Do more than this in ſport. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
My bowels cannot hide her woes,
But, like a drunkard, I muſt vomit them. Shakeſp. Tit. And.
God will not take the drunkard's excuſe, that he has ſo
long accuſtomed himſelf to intemperate drinking, that now
he cannot leave it off. South's Sermont.
DRU'NKEN. adj. [from drink.]
1. Intoxicated with liquor ; inebriated.
O monſtrous beaſt ! how like a ſwine he lies'
Sirs, I will practiſe on this drunken man. Shakeſpeare.
Drunken men imagine every thing turneth round: they
imagine alſo, that things come upon them; they ſee not well
things aſar off; thoſe things that they ſee near hand, they ſee
out of their place; and ſometimes they ſee things double. Bac.
2. Given to habitual ebriety.
3. Saturated with moiſture. -
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood. Shakespeare H. VI.
4. Done in a ſtate of inebriation. -
When your carters, or your waiting vaſſals,
Have done a drunken ſlaughter, and defac’d
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You ſtrait are on your knees for pardon, pardon. Shakespeare. R. III.
We ſhould for honour take
The drunken quarrels of a rake. Swift.
DRUN's ENLY, adj. [from drunken..] In a drunken manner.
My blood already, like the pelican,
Haſt thou tapt out, and drunkenly carows'd. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Vol. I.
DRU'NKENNess. n.ſ.. [from drunken.]
1. Intoxication with ſtrong liquour. "
Every going off from our natural and common temper,
and our uſual ſeverity of behaviour, is a degree of drunken.
neſ. . . Taylor's Rule of holy living:
2. Habitual ebriety. -
The Lacedemonians trained up their children to hate
drunkenneſ, by bringing a drunken man into their company.
- - -- J/atts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i. c. 17.
3. Intoxication, or inebriation of any kind; diſorder of the
faculties. -
Paſſion is the drunkenneſ of the mind, and therefore in its
preſent workings not controllable by reaſon. Sjenſer.
DRY. adj. [bniz, Saxon.] -
1. Arid;
moiſt.
If the pipe be a little wet on the inſide, it will make a dif-
fering ſound from the ſame pipe dry. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
- When God ſaid,
Be gather'd now, ye waters under heav'n, - *
Into one place, and let dry land appear ! Milton's Par. Loft.
Of turbid elements the ſport;
From clear to cloudy toſt, from hot to cold,
- And dry to moiſt. -
2. Without rain. - -
A dry March and a dry May portend a wholſome Summer,
if there be a ſhowering April {.. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The weather, we agreed, was too dry for the ſeaſon. Addison
3. Not ſucculent; not juicy. -
I will drain him dry as hay;
Sleep ſhall neither night nor day
Hang upon his penthouſe lid:
He ſhall live a man forbid.
4. Without tears.
Dry mourning will decays more deadly bring,
As a North wind burns a too forward Spring:
Give ſorrow vent, and let the ſluices go. Dryden's Aurengz.
5. Thirſty; a-thirſt.
So dry he was for ſway. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Void of a bulky *: near their ift peſ?
With which, in often interrupted ſleep,
Their frying blood compels to irrigate * * * *
Their dry furr'd tongues. . . Phillips.
6. Jejune 3 barren; plain; unembelliſhed; without pathos,
As we ſhould take care that our ſtile in writing be neither
dry nor empty, we ſhould look again it be not winding or
wanton with far-fetched deſcriptions: either is a vice. B.johnſ.
It remaineth to treat concerning ornaments within, or with-
out the fabrick, a piece not ſo dry as the meer contemplation of
proportions; and therefore, I hope, therein ſomewhat to refreſh
both the reader and myſelf. Wotton's Architecture.
That the fire burns by heat, is an empty dry return to the
queſtion, and leaves us ſtill ignorant. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 20.
It is a dry fable, with little or nothing in it. L’Eſtrange.
Authority and friendſhip work upon ſome, dry and ſober
reaſon works upon others. L’Eſtrange.
To clear up this theory, I was willing to lay aſide dry ſub-
tilties with which the ſchools are filled. Burnet's Theory.
Theſe epiſtles will become leſs dry, and more ſuſceptible of
Ornament. Pºpe.
7. Hard; ſevere. [Drien anciently to endure, dree, Scottiſh.]
I rather hop'd I ſhould no more
Hear from you o' th' gallanting ſcore;
For hard dry baſtings uſed to prove
The readieſt remedies of love;
Next a dry diet.
To DRY. v. a.
1. To free from moiſture; to arefy; to exſiccate.
The meat was well, if you were ſo contented.
—I tell thee, Kate, 'twas $ºn. and dry'd away,
And I expreſly am forbid to touch it. Shakeſpeare.
Heat drieth bodies that do eaſily expire; as parchment,
leaves, roots, and clay; and ſo doth time er age arefy, as in
the ſame bodies. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 294.
Herbs and flowers, if they be dried in the ſhade, or dried
in the hot ſun a ſmall time, keep beft. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The running ſtreams are deep :
See, they have caught the father of the flock,
Who drys his fleece upon the neighbouring rock. Dryden.
2. To exhale moiſture.
'Twas grief no more, or grief and rage were one,
Within her ſoul: at laſt ’twas rage alone;
Which burning upwards in ſucceſſion, dries -
The tears that ſtood confidering in her eyes. Dryd. Fables.
The water of the ſea, which formerly covered it, was in
time exhaled and died up by the ſun. If oodward's Nat. Hiſł.
3. To wipe away moiſture.
Then with her veſt the wound ſhe wipes and dries. Denh.
See, at your bleſt returning,
Rage diſappears;
The widow’d Iſle in mourning,
Dries up her tears.
Thomſºn.
Shai'ſ eart's Macbeth.
Hudibras, p. ii. cant. i.
Dryden's Allion.
7 P 4. To
without wet; without moiſture; not wet; not -
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 317</div><p class="Text">D U A
D U C
4. To ſcorch with thirſt.
Their honourable men are fainiſhed, and their multitude
dried up with thirſt. Iſ v. 13.
5- To drain; to exhauſt.
Raſh Elpenor, in an evil hour,
Dry'd an immeaſurable bowl, and thought
Tº exhale his ſurfeit by irriguous ſleep
Imprudent: him, death's iron ſleep oppreſt. . Phillips.
To DRY. v. n. To grow dry; to loſe moiſture; to be drained
of its moiſture.
DRY'ER. n.ſ. [..." dry.] That which has the quality of
abſorbing moiſture.
The ill effeóts of drinking are relieved by this plant, which
is a great dryer and opener, eſpecially by perſpiration. Temple.
DRY'eyed. adj. [ dry and eye. J ithout tears; without
WCCD1112.
Sight ſo deform, what heart of rock could long
Dryey'd behold Adam could not, but wept. .4/iii. P. Lºft.
DRY'LY. adv. [from dry. ]
1. Without moiſture.
2. Coldly; frigidly; without affe&amp;tion.
The archduke, conſcious to himſelf how dryly the king
had been uſed by his council, did ſtrive to recover the king's
affection. Bacon's Henry VII.
Would'ſt thou to honour and preferments climb,
Be bold in miſchief, dare ſome mighty crime,
Which dungeons, death, or baniſhment deſerves;
For virtue is but dryly prais'd, and ſtarves. Dryden's juven.
3- Jejunely; barrenly; without ornament or embelliſhment.
Some dryly plain, without invention's aid,
Write dull receipts how poems may be made.
DRY'Ness. n.ſ.. [from dry.]
1. Want of moiſture; ſiccity.
The Africans are conceived to be peculiarly ſcorched and
torrified by the ſun, by dryneſ, from the ſoil, from want and
defe&amp;t of water. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi. c. 10.
Such was the diſcord which did firſt diſperſe
Form, order, beauty, through the univerſe;
While dryneſ, moiſture, coldneſs heat reſiſts,
All that we have, and that we are, ſubſiſts. Denham.
The marrow ſupplies an oil for the inunction of the bones
and ligaments in the articulations, and particularly of the
ligaments, preſerving them from dryneſ, and rigidity, and
keeping them ſupple and flexible. Ray on the Creation.
The difference of muſcular fleſh depends upon the hardneſs,
tenderneſs, moiſture, or dryneſ of the fibres. Arbuthnot.
Is the ſea ever º; to be evaporated by the ſun, or to be
emptied with buckets? Why then muſt we fancy this impoſ-
fible drineſ, and then, upon that fictitious account, calum-
niate nature ? Bent ey's Sermons.
2. Want of ſucculence. -
Pºpe.
If he fill’d
His vacancy with his voluptuouſneſs,
Full ſurfeits, and the dryneſ of his bones,
Call on him for’t. Shakeſpeare's Anthony and Cleopatra.
3. Want of embelliſhment; want of pathos; jejuneneſs; bar-
renneſs. -
Their new flowers and ſweetneſs do not as much corrupt,
as the others drynºſ; and ſqualor, if they chuſe not carefully.
Ben. Johnſon's Diſcoveries.
Be faithful where the author excels, and paraphraſe where
penury of fancy or dryneſs of expreſſion aſk it. Garth.
4. Want of ſenſibility in devotion; want of ardour; aridity.
It may be, that by this dyiºſ of ſpirit God intends to
make us the more fervent and reſigned in our direct and ſolemn
devotions, by the perceiving of our wants and weakneſs.
Taylor's J/orthy Communicant.
DRY'NURSE. m. ſ. [dry and nurſe.]
1. A * who brings up and feeds a child without the
breaſt.
2. One who takes care of another: with ſome contempt of the
perſon taken care of. -
Miſtreſs Quickly is in the manner of his nurſe, or his dry-
nurſe, or his cook, or his laundry, his waſher, and his wringer.
Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indſor.
"To DRY'NURSE. v. a. [from the noun..] To feed without the
breaft.
As Romulus a wolf did rear,
So he was drynurs’d by a bear. Hudibras, p. i. cant, 2.
DRY's Hod. adj. [dry and ſhod.] Without wet feet; without
treading above the ſhoes in the water.
He had embarked us in ſuch diſadvantage, as we could not
return dryſhod. Sidney, b. ii.
Dryhod to paſs, ſhe parts the floods in tway;
And eke huge mountains from their native ſeat
She would command, themſelves to bear away. Fairy Queen,
Has honour's fountain then fuck'd back the ſtream :
He has ; and hooting boys may dyſh d paſs,
And gather pebbles from the naked ford. Dryd. Don Sebaſ.
Du'AL, adj. [dualis, Latin.] Expreſſing the number two.
Modern languages have only one variation, and ſo the
Latin; but the Greek and Hebrew have one to ſignify two,
and another to ſignify more than two: under one variation
the noun is ſaid to be of the dual number, and under the other
of the plural. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
To DUB. v. a. ſoubban zonibene, Saxon; addubba till riddara,
Iſlandick, to dub a knight. Addubba, in its primary ſenſe,
ſignifies to ſtrike, knights being made by a blow with the
ſword.]
1. To make a man a knight.
Knight, knight, good mother! Baſiliſco like.
What I am dubb'd ; I have it on my ſhoulder. Shakespeare.
The robes which the kings then allowed to each knight,
when he was dubbed, of green or burnet, as they ſpake in that
age, appeareth upon record. Camden's Remains.
The king ſtood up under his cloth of ſtate, took the ſword
from the lord protector, and dubbed the lord mayor of London
knight. - Hayward on Edward VI.
2. To confer any kind of dignity, or new character.
The jealous o'erworn widow and herſelf,
Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen,
Are mighty goſſips in tºº. Shakeſp. Richard III.
- e -
Gave thee no inſtance why thou ſhould'ſ do treaſon,
Unleſs to dub thee with the name of traitor. Shałºp. H. V.
Women commence by Cupid's dart, -
As a king hunting dubs a hart. Cleaveland.
A plain gentleman, of an ancient family, is of better qua-
lity than a new knight, though the reaſon of his dº bling was
meritorious. Collier on Pride.
O, poet ! thou had'ſt been diſcreeter,
Hanging the monarch's hat ſo high,
If thou had'ſt dubb'd thy ſtar a meteor,
That did but blaze, and rove, and die.
Theſe demoniacks let me dub
With the name of legion club.
A man of wealth is dubb’d a man of worth;
Venus ſhall give him form, and Anſtis birth. Pope's Horace.
DUB. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A blow ; a knock.
- As ſkilful coopers hoop their tubs
With Lydian and with Phrygian dubs. Hudibras, p. ii.
Dubio's ITY.. n.ſ.. [from dubious. J A thing doubtful. A word
not uſed.
Men often ſwallow falſities for truths, dubioſities for cer-
tainties, feſibilitics for poſſibilities, and things impoſſible for
poſſible. Brown's Pulgar Erraurs, b. i. c. 4.
DU/BIOUS. m. ſ. [dubius, Latin ) -
1. Doubtful; not ſettled in an opinion.
2. Uncertain; that of which the truth is not fully known.
No quick reply to dubious queſtions make. Denham.
..We alſo call it a dubious or doubtful propoſition, when
there are no arguments on either ſide. //atts's Logick.
3. Not plain; not clear.
Satan with leſs toil, and now with caſe,
Waſts on the calmer wave by dubious light. Mit. Pa. Loft.
Du'Biously. adv. [from dubious...] Uncertainly ; without any
determination.
Authors write often dubiouſly, even in matters wherein is
expected a ſtrict definitive truth. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. i.
Almanackmakers are ſo wiſe to wander in generals, and
talk dubiouſly, and leave to the reader the buſineſs of inter-
preting. . Swift's Predictions for the Year 1708.
Du'BioUSNESS. m. ſ. [ from duticus. J Uncertainty; doubt-
fulneſs.
DU/BITABLE. adj. [dulito, Latin.] Doubtful; uncertain;
what may be doubted.
DUBITATION. n.ſ. [dubitatio, Latin.] The aët of doubting;
doubt.
Many of the ancients denied the antipodes; but the expe-
rience of our enlarged navigation can now aſſert them beyond
all dubitatiºn. Brown's Pulgar Err ours, b. i. c. 7.
Dubitation may be called a negative perception; that is,
when I perceive that what I ſee, is not what I would ſee. Grew.
Du'cA L. adj. [from duke. J Pertaining to a duke; as, a dual
COronct.
Du'ca T. n.ſ.. [from duke.]. A coin ſtruck by dukes: in ſilver
valued at about four ſhillings and ſix pence; in gold at nine
ſhillings and ſix pence.
I cannot inſtantly raiſe up the groſs
Of full three thouſand ducats. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
There was one that died in debt: it was reported, where
his creditors were, that he was dead : one ſaid, he hath car-
ried five hundred dºcats of mine into the other world. Bacon.
DUCK. n.ſ. [duck,”, to dip, Dutch J
1. A water fowl, both wild and tame.
The ducks that heard the proclamation cry'd,
And fear'd a perſecution might betide,
Full twenty mile from town their voyage take,
Obſcure in ruſhes of the liquid lake. Dryden's Nun’s Prieſ?.
Grubs if you find your land ſubject to, turn ducks into
it. A/artizner's fill-bandry.
2. A word of endearment, or fondneſs.
Will you buy any tape, or lace for your cap,
My dainty duº, my dear-a! Shakeſpeare's ſhºrtº's Tale.
Prizr.
Swift.
3. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 318</div><p class="Text">i) U C
B U E
3. A declination of the head: ſo called from the frequent ačtion
of a duck in the water.
Back, ſhepherds, back; enough your play,
*Till next ſunſhine holyday:
Here be without duck or nod,
Other trippings to be trod, *
Of lighter toes, and ſuch court guiſe . -
As Mercury did firſt deviſe. . . . Milton.
4. A ſtone thrown obliquely on the waters ſo as to ſtrike it and
rebound. - -
Neither croſs and pile, nor ducks and drakes, are quite ſo
ancient as handy-dandy. Arbuthn, and Pope's Mart. Scribieruſ.
To Duck. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To dive under water as a duck.
The varlet ſaw, when to the flood he came,
How without ſtop or ſtay he fiercely leapt;
And deep himſelf be ducked in the ſame,
That in the lake his lofty creſt was ſteept.
Let the labouring bark jº. of ſeas
- Impus high, and duck again as low
'º jº. o Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Thou art wickedly devout;
In Tiber ducking thrice, by break of day. Dryden's Perſ
2. To drop down the head, as a duck.
As ſome raw youth in country bred,
When at a ſkirmiſh firſt he hears
The bullets whiſtling round his ears,
Will duck his head aſide, will ſtart, -
And feel a trembling at his heart. - Swift.
3. To bow low; to cringe. In Scottiſh duyk, or juyk, to make
obeiſance, is ſtill uſed.
I cannot flatter and look fair,
Smile in mens faces, ſmooth, deceive, and cog,
Duck with French nods and apiſh courteſy. Shakespeare. R. III.
The learned pate
Ducks to the golden fool. Shakeſpeare's Timºn.
Du'cker. n.ſ.. [from duck.] , “e
1. A diver.
2. A cringer.
To Duck. v. a. To put under water. - - -
Du'ckINGstool. n.ſ. [duck and ſtool.] A chair in which
ſcolds are tied, and put under water.
She in the duckingſ!ool ſhould take her ſeat,
Dreſt like herſelf in a great chair of ſtate. Dorſet.
Reclaim the obſtinately opprobrious and virulent women,
and make the ducking/tool more uſeful. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Du'cklegged. adj. [duck and leg.] Short legged.
Ducklºgg’d, ſhort waiſted, ſuch a dwarf ſhe is,
That ſhe muſt riſe on tiptoes for a kiſs. Dryden's juv. Sat.
Du'ckling. n.ſ.. [from duck.] A young duck; the brood of
he duck. -
t Ducklings, though hatched and led by a hen, if ſhe brings
them to the brink of a river or pond, preſently leave her, and
in they go. Ray on the Creation.
Fairy Queen.
Dić7.
Ev'ry morn
Amid the ducklings let her ſcatter corn. Gay's Paſtorals.
Du'ckMe At. n.ſ. [duck and meat..] A common plant grow-
ing in ſtanding waters. - -
Duckco'y. n.f. [See To Duckoy.] Any means of enticing
and enſnaring. - - - -
Seducers have found it the moſt compendious way to their
deſigns to lead captive filly women, and make them the duck-
coys to their whole family. Decay of Piety.
To Ducko'y. v. a. [miſtaken for decoy; the decoy being com-
monly practiſed upon ducks, produced the errour.] To entice
to a ſnare. - -
This fiſh hath a ſlender membranous ſtring, which he pro-
jects and draws in at pleaſure, as a ſerpent doth his tongue:
with this he duckeys little fiſhes, and then preys upon them.
Grew's Muſæum.
'cks Foot. n.ſ. Black ſnakeroot, or Mayapple.
DU ‘ī. cup of &amp; flower conſiſts of one leaf: the flowers are
hexapetalous; the footſtalk of the flower comes out from the
ſtalk of the leaf; the fruit is ſhaped like an urn, and contains
many roundiſh fimbriated ſeeds. ... Miller.
Du'ckweed. n.ſ. [duck and weed.] The ſame with duck-
"ºut we call duckweed hath a leaf no bigger than a thyme-
leaf, but of a freſher green; and putteth forth a little ſtring
into the water, far from the bottom. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Duct. n.ſ. [ducius, Latin.]
1. Guidance; direction. -
This doctrine, by faſtening all our actions, by a fatal de-
cree at the foot of God's chair, leaves nothing to us but only
to obey our fate, to follow the duº of the ſtars, or neceſſity
of thoſe irony chains which we are born under Hammond.
2. A paſſage through which anything is conducted.
A dº from each of thoſe cells ran into the root of the
tongue, where both joined together, and paſſed forward in
one common due to the tip of it. Addison's Spediator, Nº. 275.
It was obſerved, that the chyle in the thoracick duct retained
the original taſte of the aliment. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
DUCTILE ad, [ludi, Latin)
1. Flexible; pliable.
- Thick woods and gloomy night
Sonceal the happy plant from human light:
One bough it bears; but, wond’rous to behold, ..
. . The duelile rind and leaves of radiant gold. Dryden's Án.
2. Eaſy to be drawn out into length, or expanded.
All bodies, duéile and tenſile, as metals, that will be drawn
into wires; wool and tow, that will be drawn into yarn or
thread, have in them the appetite of not diſcontinuing ſtrong.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Gold, as it is the pureſt, ſo it is the ſofteſt and moſt dutile
of all metals. Dryden's Fables, Dedicat
3. Tračtable; obſequious; complying; yielding. -
- He generous thoughts inſtills
Of true nobility ; forms their ductile minds
. To human virtues. Phillip;.
Their deſigning leaders cannot defire a more ductile and
eaſy people to work upon. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 7.
Du'cTILENEss. n.ſ.. [from dućiile.] Flexibility; dućtility.
I, when I value gold, may think upon
The dućiileneſ, the application;
The wholſomneſs, the ingenuity,
From ruſt, from ſoil, from fire ever free.
Ductiºlity. m. ſ. [from du:iiie.]
1. Quality of ſuffering extenſion; flexibility.
Yellow colour and dutility are properties of gold: they be-
long to all gold, but not only to gold; for ſaffron is alſo yel-
low, and lead is dućtile. J/atti's Logick
2. Obſequiouſneſs; compliance. -
Donne,
Du'DGEoN. n. / [dolch, German.]
1. A ſmall dagger.
I ſee thee ſtill;
And, on the blade of thy dudgeon, gouts of blood, Shakeſp.
I was a ſerviceable dulgen,
Either for fighting or for drudging. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
2. Malice; ſullenneſs; malignity; ili will.
Civil dudgeon firſt grew high, -
And men fell out they knew not why. Hudibras, p. i. c. 1.
The cuckow took this a little in dudeon. L'E/irange.
DUE, adj. The participle paſſive of owe. [d?, French.]
1. Owed; that which any one has a right to demand in conſe-
quence of a compact, or for any other reaſon.
There is due from the judge to the advocate ſome com-
mendation and gracing, where cauſes are well handled and
fair pleaded. Bacon, Eſſay 57.
There is likewiſe due to the publick a civil reprehenſion of
advocates, where there appeareth cunning, groſs neglect, or
flight information. Bacon, Eſſay 57.
Mirth and chearfulneſs are but the due reward of innocency
of life. More's Divine Dialogues.
A preſent bleſfing upon our faſts is neither originally due
from God's juſtice, nor becomes due to us from his veracity.
Smalridge's Sermons.
There is a reſpect due to mankind, which ſhould incline
ever the wiſeſt of men to follow innocent cuſtoms. Watts.
2. Proper ; fit; appropriate.
Opportunity may be taken to excite, in perſons attending
on thoſe ſolemnities, a due ſenſe of the vanity of earthly ſatiſ.
fačtions. Atterbury.
3. Exačt; without deviation.
You might ſee him come towards me beating the ground
in ſo due time, as no dancer can obſerve better meaſure. Sidn.
And Eve within, due at her hour, prepar’d
For dinner ſavoury fruits. A ſilion's Paradiſe Ig/?, b. v.
DUE, adv. [from the adjective..] . Exactly; directly; duly.
Like the Pontick ſea, -
Whoſe icy current, and compulſive courſe,
Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontick and the Helleſpont.
DUE. m. ſ. [from the adječtive.]
1. That which belongs to one; that which may be juſtly
claimed.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which, as immediate from thy place and blood,
Derives itſelf to me.
The ſon of Duncan,
From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth,
Lives in the Engliſh court. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Thou better know'ſt
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courteſy, dues of gratitude:
Thy half Q' th' kingdom thou haſt not forgot,
Wherein I thee endow’d. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
I deſire of you a condućt over land.
—My lord, you are appointed for that purpoſe;
The due of honour in no point omit. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
I take this garland, not as given by you,
But as my merit, and my beauty's due. Dryd. Ind. Emperor.
No popular aſſembly ever knew, or propoſed, or declared
what ſhare of power was their due. Swift.
2. Right; juſt title.
Shakeſp. Othello.
Shakespeare.
4.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 319</div><p class="Text">D U K
The key of this infernal pit by duº, .
heav'n's all-powerful king, -
*: command of Milton's Fº Loft, b. ii. l. 850.
3. Whatever cuſtom or law “... be done.
ow'd prieſts, 'till outmoſt end
§ º be done, and none left out. Milt. Par. Rºg.
They pay the dead his annual dues. Dryden.
: tribute.
- cºº of the exorbitant dues that are paid at moſt other
ports, this deſervedly retains the name of free. Addiſon.
Tº Duº. v.a. [from the noun..] . To pay as due.
This is the lateſt glory of their praiſe,
That I thy enemy due thee withal. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
DUEL. n.ſ. [duelium, Latin.] A combat between two; a
le fight.
ñº. ; armies, if the matter ſhould be tried by duel be-
tween two champions, the vićtory ſhould go on the one ſide;
and yet if it be tried by the groſs, go on the other ſide. Bacon,
To whom thus Michael: dream not of your fight
As of a duel, or the local wounds
Of head or heel. Miton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii. l. 387.
'Twas I that wrong'd you; you my life have ſought;
No duel ever was more juſtly fought. J/aller.
To Du'EL. v. n. [from the noun..] To fight a ſingle combat:
The challenging and fighting with a man, a certain poſi-
tive mode of a&amp;tion, by particular ideas diſtinguiſhed from all
others, is called duelling. Locke.
To Du'Él. v. a. To attack or fight with ſingly.
Who ſingle
Duel"d their armies, rank'd in proud array,
Himſelf an army, now unequal match
To ſave himſelf againſt a coward arm’d, -
At one ſpear's length. Milton's Agoniſłes, l. 344.
Du'Eller. n.ſ.. [from duel.] A ſingle combatant.
They perhaps begin as ſingle duellers, but then they ſoon get
their troops about them. Decay of Piety.
Dw'Ellist. m. ſ [from duel J
1. A ſingle combatant. -
If the king ends the differences, the caſe will fall out no
worſe than when two duelliſ's enter the field, where the worſted
party hath his ſword again, without further hurt. Suckling.
Henceforth let poets, ere allow'd to write,
Be ſearch'd like duellſ's before they fight. Dryden.
2. One who profeſſes to live by rules of honour.
His bought arms Mung not lik'd; for his firſt day
Of bearing them in field, he threw’em away;
And hath no honour loſt, our duellifts ſay. Ben. Johnſon.
DUE'LLO. n.ſ. [Italian.] The duel; the rule of duelling.
The gentleman will, for his honour's ſake, have one bout
with you: he cannot by the duello avoid it. Shakesp. Twelfth Night.
DUE'NNA. m. ſ. [Spaniſh.] An old woman kept to guard
a younger.
- I felt the ardour of my paſſion increaſe as the ſeaſon ad-
vanced, 'till in the month of July I could no longer contain:
I bribed her duenna, was admitted to the bath, ſaw her un-
dreſſed, and the wonder diſplayed. Arbuthnot and Pope.
DuG. m. ſ. [deggia, to give ſuck, Iſlandick.]
1. A pap; a nipple; a teat: ſpoken of beaſts, or in malice or
contempt of human beings.
Of her there bred
A thouſand young ones, which ſhe daily fed,
Sucking upon her poiſonous dug; ; each one
Of fundry ſhape, yet all ill favoured. Fairy Queen, b. i.
They are firſt fed and nouriſhed with the milk of a ſtrange
dug. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the Wºrld.
Then ſhines the goat, whoſe brutiſh dug, ſupply'd
The infant Jove, and nurſt his growing pride. Creech.
2. It ſeems to have been uſed formerly of the breaſt without
reproach. -
It was a faithleſs ſquire that was the ſource
Of all my ſorrow, and of theſe ſad tears ;
With whom, from tender dug of common nourſe,
At once I was up brought. Fair' Queen, b. ii. cant. 4.
As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe,
Dying with mother's dug between its lips. Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
DuG. preterit, and part, paſſ of dig.
They had often found medals, and pipes of lead, as they
dug among the rubbiſh. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
DUKE. m. f: [duc, French; dux, Latin.] One of the higheſt
order of nobility in England; in rank a nobleman next to
the royal family.
The duke of Cornwal, and Regan his dutcheſs, will be here
with him this night. Shakespeare's King Lear.
Aurmarle, Surrey, and Exeter muſt loſe
The names of dukes, their titles, dignities,
And whatſoever profits thereby riſe, panicſ, c. Iſar.
Pºdox. 2.f. [from dute.]
* The ſeigniory or poſſeſſions of a duke.
- Her brother found a wife,
Wºº he himſelf was loſt; Proſpero his dukedom
In a poor iſle.
Shakeſpeare's Tempe?.
I
The cardinal never reſigned his purple for the proſpe&amp;t of
giving an heir to the dukedom of Tuſcany. Addiſon.
2. The title or quality of a duke.
Du'lbRAINED. adi. [dull and brain.J Stupid ; doltiſh ; fooliſh.
This arm of mine hath chaſtiſed
The petty rebel, dulbrain'd Buckingham. Shakeſ Rich. III.
Du'lcet. adj. [dulcis, Latin.]
1. Sweet to the taſte; luſcious.
From ſweet kernels preſs'd,
She tempers dulcet creams; nor theſe to hold
Wants ſhe fit veſſels pure. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. v.
2. Sweet to the ear; harmonious; melodious.
I ſat upon a promontory,
And heard a mermaid, on a dolphin's back,
Uttering ſuch dulcet and harmonious breath,
That the rude ſea grew civil at her ſong.
A fabrick huge
Roſe like an exhalation, with the ſound
Of dullet ſymphonies, and voices ſweet. Mi’t. Parad. Loft.
Dulcifica'tion. n.ſ.. [from dulciſy..] The act of ſweetning;
the aët of freeing from acidity, ſaltneſs, or acrimony.
In colcothar the exacteſt calcination, followed by an exqui-
ſite dulcification, does not reduce the remaining body into
elementary earth; for after the ſalt or vitriol, if the calcina-
tion have been too faint, is drawn out of the coloothar, the
reſidue is not earth, but a mixt body, rich in medical vir-
tues. Boyle's Scept. Chyn.
To DULCIFY. v. a. [duliffer, French.] To ſweeten; to
ſet free from acidity, ſaltneſs, or acrimony of any kind.
A decoction of wild gourd, or colocynthis, though ſome-
what qualified, will not from every hand be dulcified into ali-
ment, by an addition of flower or meal. Brºwn's Wulgar Err.
I dreſſed him with a pledgit, dipt in a dulcified tincture of
vitriol. // ſeman's Surgery.
Spirit of wine dulcifies ſpirit of ſalt; nitre, or vitriol have
other bad effects. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Du'lcIMER. m. ſ. [dolcimello, Skinner.] A muſical inſtrument
... played by ſtriking the braſs wires with little ſticks.
Ye hear the ſound of the cornet, flute, harp, ſackbut,
pſaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of muſick. Dan. iii. 5.
To DULCORATE. v. a. [from dulcis, Latin.] To ſweeten;
to make leſs acrimonious.
The ancients, for the dulcorating of fruit, do commend
ſwine's dung above all other dung. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Turbith mineral, as it is ſold in the ſhops, is a rough me-
dicine; but being ſomewhat dulcorated, firſt procureth vomit-
ing, and then ſalivation. J/ſeman's Surgery.
DulcoRA'tion. m. ſ. [from dullorate.] The act of ſweet-
ening.
Malt gathereth a ſweetneſs to the taſte, which appeareth in
the wort: the dulcoration of things is worthy to be tried to the
full; for that dulcoration importeth a degree to nouriſhment:
and the making of things inalimental to become alimental,
may be an experiment of great profit for making new vićtuals.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 649.
Du'l H E AD. m. ſ. [dull and head..] A blockhead; a wretch
fooliſh and ſtupid; a dolt.
This people be fools and dulheads to all goodneſs; but
ſubtle, cunning, and bold in any miſchief. Aſaham's Schoºlm.
Du'li A. n.ſ.. [ºxia J An inferiour kind of adoration.
Paleotus faith, that the ſame worſhip which is given to the
prototype may be given to the image; but with the different
degrees of latria and dulia. Stillingfleet.
DULL. adj. [dwl, Welſh; bole, Saxon; dol, mad, Dutch J
1. Stupid ; doltiſh ; blockiſh; unapprehenſive; indocile; flow
of underſtanding.
Such is their evil hap to play upon dull ſpirited men. Hooker.
He that hath learned no wit by nature, nor art, may com-
plain of groſs breeding, or comes of a very dull kindred. Shaft.
Sometimes this perception, in ſome kind of bodies, is far
more ſubtile than the ſenſe; ſo that the ſenſe is but a dºll thing
in compariſon of it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Every man, even the dullºft, is thinking more than the moſt
Shakeſpeare.
eloquent can teach him how to utter. Dryden.
2. Blunt; obtuſe.
Meeting with time, Slack thing, ſaid I,
Thy ſcythe is dull; whet it, for ſhame. Herbert.
3. Unready; aukward. -
Gynecia a great while flood ſtill, with a kind of dull amaze-
ment looking ſtedſaſtly upon her. Saey.
O help thou my weak wit, and ſharpen my dull tongue.
Fairy Queen, b. i. ſia-2. 2.
Memory is ſo neceſſary to all conditions of life, that we
are not to fear it ſhould grow dull for want of exerciſe, if
exerciſe would make it ſtronger. Lºcke.
4. Hebetated; not quick.
This people's heart is waxed groſs, and their ears are dull
of hearing. Math. xiii. 15.
5. Sad; melancholy.
6. Sluggiſh; heavy ; flow of motion.
Thenceforth the waters waxed dull and ſlow,
And all that drunk thereof did faint and feeble grow. F. &amp;
7. Groſs;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 320</div><p class="Text">D U M
D U N
7. Groſs; cloggy; vile.
She excels each mortal thing -
Upon the dull earth dwelling. Shakespeare Two Gent. of Perona.
8. Not exhilaterating; not delightful; as, to make dictionaries is
dull work. -
9. Not bright; as, the mirror is dull, the fire is dull,
I'll not be made a ſoft and dull ey'd fool,
To ſhake the head, relent, and figh, and yield
To Chriſtian interceſſors, Shakespeare's Merch. of Venice.
10. Drowſy; ſleepy.
To Dull. v. a. [from the adjećtive.]
1. To ſtupify; to infatuate
Nothing hath more dulled the wits, or taken away the will
of children from learning, than care in making of Latin. Aſch.
Thoſe drugs ſhe has
Will ſtupify and dull the ſenſe awhile. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
2. To blunt; to obtund.
This entrance of the battle did whet the courage of the
Spaniards, though it dulled their ſwords. Bacon.
3. To ſadden; to make melancholy.
4. To hebetate; to weaken.
Now forc'd to overflow with brackiſh tears,
The troublous noiſe did dull their dainty ears. Spenſer.
5. To damp; to clog.
Prayers were ſhort, as if darts thrown out with a ſudden
quickneſs, left that vigilant and erect attention of mind,
which in prayer is very neceſſary, ſhould be waſted or dulled
through continuance. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 33.
In bodies, union ſtrengtheneth and cheriſheth any natural
aćtion; and, on the other ſide, weakeneth and dulleth any
violent impreſſion, and even ſo is it of minds. Bacon's Eſſays.
6. To make weary, or ſlow of motion.
7. To fully brightneſs.
The breath dull; the mirrour. Bacon.
Du'll AR c. n.ſ.. [from dull.] A blockhead; a dolt; a ſtupid
fellow ; a dunce.
What, mak’ſt thou me a dullard in this ačt -
Wilt thou not ſpeak to me? Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Thou muſt make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential ſpurs
To make thee ſeek it. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Du'll Y. adv. [from dull J
1. Stupidly; doltiſhly.
It is not ſufficient to imitate nature in every circumſtance
dully, literally, and meanly; but it becomes a painter to take
what is moſt beautiful. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. Slowly; ſluggiſhly.
- The air, if it be moiſt, doth in a degree quench the flame,
and howſoever maketh it burn more duly. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
3. Not vigorouſly; not gaily; not brightly; not keenly.
Du’lness. m. ſ. [from dull.]
1. Stupidity; weakneſs of intelle&amp;t; indocility; ſlowneſs of ap-
prehenſion.
Nor is the duneſ of the ſcholar to extinguiſh, but rather
to inflame the charity of the teacher. South's Sermons.
Shadwel alone my perfeót image bears,
Mature in dulneſs from his tender years. Dryden.
2. Want of quick perception.
Nature, by a continual uſe of any thing, groweth to a ſatiety
and dulneſs, either of appetite or working. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
3. Drowſineſs; inclination to ſleep.
Here ceaſe more queſtions;
Thou art inclin'd to ſleep. 'Tis a good dulneſs,
And give it way. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
4. Sluggiſhneſs of motion.
5. Pimneſs; want of luſtres
5. Bluntneſs; want of edge.
}).9'LY. adv. [from due.]
1. Properly; fitly; in the due manner.
Ever ſince they firmly have retained,
And duly well obſerved his beheaſt.
I do not know
What kind of my obedience I ſhould tender,
More than my all, which is nothing; nor my prayers
Are not words duty hallow'd, nor my wiſhes
More worth than vanities; yet prayers and wiſhes *
Are all I can return. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
In the body, when the principal parts, as the heart and
liver, do their offices, and all the inferiour ſmaller veſſels ačt
orderly and duly, there ariſes a ſweet enjoyment upon the
whole, which we call health. South's Sermons.
If attention be duly engaged to thoſe refle&amp;tions, they can-
not fail of influence. Rogers, Sermon 3.
2. Regularly ; exaétly.
Seldom at church, 'twas ſuch a buſy life;
But du', ſent his family and wife. Pope, Epiſtle 3.
DUMB. adj. [D]" he was ſilent; dumbs, Gothick; bumbe,
Saxon; dum, Daniſh; dom, Dutch, dull.]
1. Mute; incapable of ſpeech.
It hath pleaſed himſelf ſometime to unlooſe the very
tongues even of dumb creatures, and tº teach them to
Vol. I.
Spenſer.
plead in their own defence, leſt the cruelty of mah ſhould
perſiſt to afflićt them. A looker, b. v. ſ. 8.
They ſpake not a word;
But like dumb ſtatues, or unbreathing ſtones,
Star'd each on other. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
. Some poſitive terms ſignify a negative idea: blind implies a
privation of ſight, dumb a denial of ſpeech. Watts's Lºgick.
2. Deprived of ſpeech. - - - -
They ſung no more, or only ſung his fame;
Struck dumb, they all admir'd the godlike man.
3. Mute; not uſing words.
He is a proper man's pićture; but, alas! who can converſe
with a dumb ſhow : Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
His gentle dumb expreſſion turn’d at length
The eye of Eve to mark his play. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
Her humble geſtures made the reſidue plain,
Dumb eloquence perſuading more than ſpeech. Roſcommon.
For he who covets gain in ſuch exceſs,
Does by dumb ſigns himſelf as much expreſs,
As if in words at length he ſhow'd his mind. Dryden's juv.
Nothing is more common than for lovers to complain,
relent, languiſh, deſpair, and die in dumb ſhow. Addison Spetſ.
4. Silent; . to ſpeak.
The good old ſeer withſtood
Th’ intended treaſon, and was dumb to blood;
*Till tir’d with endleſs clamours, and purſuit
Of Ithacus, he ſtood no longer mute. Dryden's Án.
DU'MBLY. adv. [from dumb.] Mutely; ſilently; without
words.
Du'MB Ness. n.ſ.. [from dumb.]
1. Incapacity to ſpeak.
2. Omiſſion of ſpeech; muteneſs.
There was ſpeech in their dumbneſ, language in their very
geſture: they looked as they had heard of a world ranſomed,
or one deſtroyed. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
To th' dumbneſ of the geſture
One might interpret. Shakeſpeare's Timon of Atheni.
3. Refuſal to ſpeak; ſilence.
'Tis love, ſaid ſhe ; and then my downcaſt eyes,
And guilty dumbneſs, witneſs'd my ſurprize. Dryden.
To Du'MBFound. v.a. [from dumb.] To confuſe; to ſtrike
dumb. A low phraſe.
They had like to have dumbfºunded the juſtice; but his clerk
came in to his aſſiſtance. Spectator, N°. 616.
DUMP. n.ſ. [from dºm, ſtupid, Dutch.]
1. Sorrow; melancholy; ſadneſs.
Sing no more ditties, ſing no mo
Of dumps ſo dull and heavy;
The frauds of men were ever ſo,
Since Summer firſt was leafy. Shakesp. Much Ado about Nothing.
Viſit by night your lady's chamber window
With ſome ſweet conſort: to their inſtruments
Tune a deploſing damp; the night's dead ſilence
Will well become ſuch ſweet complaining grievance. Shakespeare
Funerals with ſtately pomp -
March ſlowly on, in ſolemn dump. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
The ſquire who fought on bloody ſtumps,
By future bards bewail d in doleful dumps. Gay's Paſtorals.
2. Abſence of mind; reverie,
This ſhame dumps cauſe to well-bred people, when it
carries them away from the company. Locke.
Du'MP1sh. adj. [from dump.] Sad; melancholy; ſorrowful.
New year, forth looking out of Janus' gate,
Doth ſeem to promiſe hope of new delight;
And bidding th' old adieu, his paſſed date
Bids all old thoughts to die in dumpiſh ſpight. Spenſer.
The life which Ilive at this age is not a dead, dumpiſh, and
four life; but chearful, lively, and pleaſant. Herbert.
DU’MPLING.. n.ſ.. [from dump, heavineſs.] A ſort of pudding.
You prate too long, like a book-learn'd ſot,
*Till pudding and dumpling burn to pot.
DUN. adj. [bun, Saxon.]
1. A colour partaking of brown and black. -
By mixing ſuch powders we are not to expect a ſtrong and
full white, ſuch as is that of paper; but ſome duſky obſcure
one, ſuch as might ariſe from a mixture of light and darkneſs,
or from white and black, that is, a grey, or dun, or ruſſet
brown. Newton's Opta
2. Dark; gloomy.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Come, thick night!
And pall thee in the dunneſ ſmoke of hell,
That my keen knife ſee not the wound it makes;
Nor heav'n peep through the blanket of the dark,
To cry hold! hold! Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He then ſurvey'd
Hell, and the gulph between, and Satan there
Coaſting the wall of heav'n on this ſide,
In the dun air ſublime. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii. l. 69:
To DUN. v. a. [bunan, Saxon, to clamour.] To claim a
debt with vehemence and importunity.
Borrow of thy back, and borrow of thy belly: they'll
never aſk thee again. I ſhall be dunning thee every day. Bacon.
7 I remember
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 321</div><p class="Text">T) U N
D U R
I remember what ſhe won :
And hath ſhe ſent ſo ſoon to dun ? Swift,
When thou dun'ſ their parents, ſeldom they,
Without a ſuit before the tribune, pay. Dryden’s juvenal.
DuN. n.ſ. [from the verb.] A clamorous, importunate, trou-
bleſome creditor.
Thus, while my joyleſs minutes tedious flow,
With looks demure, and filent pace, a dun,
Horrible monſter' hated by gods and men,
To niv aerial citadel aſcends. Phillips.
It grieves my heart to be pulled by the ſleeve by ſome raſ-
cally dun, Sir, remember my bill. Arbuthn. Hiſtory of j. Bull.
Dunce. m. ſ. [A word of uncertain etymology; perhaps from
dum, the Dutch ſtupid.] A dullard; a dolt; a thickſkul; a
ſtupid indocile animal.
Dunce at the beſt; in ſtreets but ſcarce allow’d,
To tickle, on thy ſtraw, the ſtupid crowd. Dryden's Pirgil.
Was Epiphanius ſo great a dunce to imagine a thing, indif-
ferent in itſelf, ſhould be directly oppoſite to the law of
God? - - Stillingfieet.
I never knew this town without dunces of figure, who had
credit enough to give riſe to ſome new word. Swift.
DUNG. r. ſ. ſpineş, Saxon.] The excrement of animals uſed
to fatten ground. - -
For dung, all excrements are the refuſe and putriſaćtions of
nouriſhment. Facºn's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 696.
I judge the likelieſt way to be the perforation of the
body of the tree in ſeveral places, one above the other;
and the filling of the holes with dung, mingled with the medi-
cine; and the watering of thoſe lumps of dung, with ſquirts
of an infuſion of the medicine in dunged water, once in three
or four days. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, No. 5co.
For when from herbs the pure part muſt be won,
From groſs by 'ſtilling, this is better done
By deſpis'd dung than by the fire or fun. Donne.
He ſoon would learn to think like me,
And bleſs his raviſh'd eyes to ſee
Such order from confuſion ſprung,
| Such gaudy tulips rais'd from dung. Swift.
To DuNG. v. a. [from the noun..] To fatten with dung.
It was received of old, that dunging of grounds, when the
Weſt wind bloweth, and in the decreaſe of the moon, doth
reatly help. . . Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 667.
There, as his dream foretold, a cart he found,
That carry'd compoſt forth to dung the ground. Dryden.
DU’NG EoN. m. ſ. [from donjon, the tower in which priſoners
were kept, whence all priſons eminently ſtrong were in time
called dungeons.] A cloſe priſon: generally ſpoke of a priſon
dark or ſubterraneous.
Then up he took the ſlumbered ſenſeleſs corſe,
And e're he could out of his ſwoon awake,
Him to his caſtle brought with haſty force,
And in a dungeon deep him threw without remorſe. Fa. Qu.
We know not that the king of heav'n hath doom'd
This place our dungeºn; not our ſafe retreat
Beyond his potent arm. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
Now from the North
Of Norumbeque, and the Samoed ſhore,
Burſting their brazen dungeon, arm'd with ice,
And ſnow, and hail, come ſtormy guſt, and flaw. Milton.
By imagination a man in a dungeon is capable of entertain-
ing himſelf with ſcenes and landſkapes, more beautiful than
any that can be found in the whole compaſs of nature. Addison
Du'NG F9R K. m. ſ. [dung and fºrk.] A fork to toſs out dung
from ſtables.
Dungforks and paddles are common every where. Mortimer.
Du'NGHIL. m. ſ. [äng and hill.]
1. An heap or accumulation of dung.
I, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth; for
the which his animals on his dunghil are as much bound to
him as I. - Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
Turn out that eyeleſs villain; throw this ſlave
Upon the dunghil. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Two cocks fought a duel for the maſtery of a dunghiſ L'Eſ.
Never enter into a league of friendſhip with an ingrateful
perſon; that is, plant not thy friendſhip upon a dunghil; it is
too noble a plant for ſo baſe a ſoil. South's Sermons.
The dunghil having raiſed a huge muſhroom of ſhort dura-
• tion, is now ſpread to enrich other mens land. Swift.
2. Any mean or vile abode.
Perhaps a thouſand other worlds, that lie
Remote from us, and latent in the ſky,
Are lighten’d by his beams, and kindly nurſt,
Of which our earthly dunghil is the worſt. Dryden.
3. Any ſituation of meanneſs.
The poor he raiſeth from the duſt,
Even from the dunghil lifts the juſt. Sandys.
4. A term of reproach for a man meanly born.
Out, dunghi. " dar'ft thou brave a nobleman Shakeſp.
Du'NGH11... adj Sprung from the dunghil; mean ; low; baſe;
vile; worthleſs.
His dunghil thoughts, which do themſelves enure
To dirty droſs, no higher dare aſpire. Stenſºr on Love.
Du'NGY. adj. [from dung.] Full of dung; means vile; baſe ;
low ; odious; worthleſs.
If it be ſo,
We need no grave to bury honeſty;
There's not a grain of it, the face to ſweeten
Of the whole dungy earth. Shakespeare's Winter's Tale.
Du'NG YARD. m. ſ. [ dung and yard, J T he place of the
dunghil.
Any manner of vegetables caſt into the dungyard. Martimer.
Du'NN.E.R. n.ſ.. [from dun J One employed in ſoliciting petty
debts.
They are ever talking of new ſilks, and ſerve the owners
in getting them cuſtomers, as their common dunners do in
making them pay. - Speciator, Nº. 454.
Duo'd ecuple. adj. [duo and decuplus, Latin.] Conſiſting of
twelves.
Griſepſius, a learned Polander, endeavours to eſtabliſh the
duodecuple proportion among the Jews, by comparing ſome
paſſages of Scripture together. A buthnot on Coins.
DUPE. n.ſ. [dufe, French, from duppe, a fooliſh bird eaſily
caught.] A credulous man; a man eaſily tricked.
An uſurping populace is its own dupe, a mere underworker,
and a purchaſer in truſt for ſome ſingle tyrant. Swift.
Firſt ſlave to words, then vaſſal to a name,
Then dupe to party; child and man the ſame. Dunciad.
To DUPE. v. a. [from the noun..] To trick; to cheat.
The throne a bigot keep, a genius quit;
Faithleſs through piety, and dup'd through wit. Pope's Epiff.
DU'PLE. adj. [duplus, Latin.] Double ; one repeated.
To DUPLICATE. v. a. [duplico, Latin.]
1. To double; to enlarge by the repetition of the firſt number
or quantity.
And ſome alterations in the brain duplicate that which is
but a ſingle object to our undiſtempered ſentiments. Glanv.
2. To fold together.
DU'PLICATE. adj. [from the verb.]
Duplicate proportion is the proportion of ſquares. Thus,
in a rank of geometrical proportions, the firſt term to the
third is ſaid to be in a duplicate ratio of the firſt to the ſecond,
or as its ſquare is to the ſquare of the ſecond: ſo in 2, 4, 8,
16, the ratio of 2 to 8 is a duplicate of that of 2 to 4 ; or
as the ſquare of 2 to the ſquare of 4. Phillips. Harris. Bailey.
It has been found, that the attraction is almoſt reciprocally
in a duplicate proportion of the diſtance of the middle of the
drop from the concourſe of the glaſſes, viz., reciprocally in a
ſimple proportion, by reaſon of the ſpreading of the drop,
and its touching each glaſs in a larger ſurface; and again reci-
procally in a ſimple proportion, by reaſon of the attractions
rowing ſtronger within the ſame quantity of attracting
#urface. Newton's Opt.
Du'plicate. n.ſ. Another correſpondent to the firſt; a
ſecond thing of the ſame kind, as a tranſcript of a paper:
Nothing is more needful for perfecting the natural hiſtory
of bodies than the ſubjecting them to the fire; to which end
I have reſerved duplicates of the moſt conſiderable. Woodward.
Duplica"tion. n.ſ.. [from duplicate.] -
1. The act of doubling.
What great pains hath been taken concerning the quadra-
ture of a circle, and the duplication of a cube, and ſome other
mathematical problems. Płale's Origin of 44ankind.
2. The act of folding together.
3. A fold; a doubling.
The peritonaeum is a ſtrong membrane, every where double;
in the duº lications of which all the viſcera of the abdomen are
hid. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Du'plicature. n.ſ.. [from duplicate.] A fold; any thing
doubled.,
Vaſt bags are requiſite to contain the water which iſſues
from the lymphedućts, either dilacerated or obſtructed, and
cxonerating themſelves into the foldings, or between the du-
plicatures of the membranes. Ray on the Creation.
DUPL1(city. n.ſ [duplicis, Latin.]
1. Doubleneſs; the number of two. -
This duplicity was ill contrived to place one head at
both extremes, and had been more tolerable to have ſet three
or four at one. Brown's Vulgar Errouri, b. iii. c. 14.
Do not affect duplicities nor triplicities, nor any certain
number of parts in your diviſion of things. Patts's Logick.
2. Deceit; doubleneſs of heart, or of tongue.
DURAB 1'lity. m. ſ. [durabilis, Latin.] The power of laſting;
continuance; endurance.
Stones though in dignity of nature inferior unto plants,
yet exceed them in firmneſs of ſtrength, or durability of being.
- Hooker, b. i. ſ. 6.
Our times upon the earth have neither certainty, nor
durability. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
DU’RABLE. adj. [durabilis, Latin.]
1. Laſting; having the quality of long continuance.
The bones of his body we may compare to the hard rocks
and ſtones, and therefore ſtrong and durable. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
- 2 With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 322</div><p class="Text">D U R
With pins of adamant,
And chains, they made all faſt; too faſt they made,
And durable / Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x. l. 320.
The glories of her majeſty's reign ought to be recorded in
words more durable than braſs, and ſuch as our poſterity may
read a thouſand years hence. Swift.
2, Having ſucceſſive exiſtence.
- t When on a day,
For time, though in eternity, apply'd
To motion, meaſures all things durable
By preſent, paſt, and future, on ſuch day
As heav'n's great year brings forth. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Du'RABLE Ness. n.ſ. [ from durable. J Power of laſting ;
COIntl Inua Il Ce.
The different conſiſtence and durableneſ of the ſtrata
whereof they conſiſt, are more or leſs Woodward's Nat. Hiſł.
A bad poet, if he cannot become immortal by the good-
neſs of his verſe, may by the durableneſs of the metal that
ſupports it. - Addiſon on ancient Medals.
Du'RABLY. adv. [from durahle.] In a laſting manner.
There indeed he found his fame flouriſhing, his monuments
engraved in marble, and yet more durably in mens, me-
mories. - - Sidney.
Du'RANce. n.ſ.. [from dureſ, law French.]
1. Impriſonment; the cuſtody or power of a jaylor; a priſon.
Thy Dol, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,
Is in baſe durance and contagious priſon;
Haul'd thither by mechanick dirty hands. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
A poor, innocent, forlorn ſtranger, languiſhing in durance,
upon the falſe accuſations of a lying, inſolent, whoriſh
Wonal 1. South's Sermons.
There's neither iron bar nor gate,
Portcullis, chain, nor bolt, nor grate;
And yet men durance there abide,
In dungeons ſcarce three inches wide. Hudibras, p. i. eant. 2.
Notwithſtanding the warning and example before me, I
commit myſelf to laſting durance. Congreve's Old Batchelor.
2. Endurance; continuance; duration.
Sick nature at that inſtant trembled round,
And mother earth figh’d as ſhe felt the wound:
Of how ſhort durance was this new made ſtate |
How far more mighty than heaven's love, hell's hate Dryd.
DURA'tion. n.ſ. [duratio, Latin.] -
1. A ſort of diſtance or length, the idea whereof we get, not
from the permanent parts of ſpace, but from the fleeting and
perpetually periſhing parts of ſucceſſion. Docke.
2. Power of continuance.
Duration is a circumſtance ſo eſſential to happineſs, that if
we conceived it poſſible for the joys of heaven itſelf to paſs
from us in an inſtant, we ſhould find ourſelves not much con-
cerned for the attainment of them. Rogers's Sermons.
3. Length of continuance,
Ariſtotle, by greatneſs of ačtion, does not only mean it
fhould be great in its nature, but alſo in its duration, that it
ſhould have a due length in it. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 267.
To DURE. v. n. [duro, Latin.] To laſt; to continue; to
endure.
The delights and pleaſures of the world are moſt pleafing
while they dure. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Du'REFU L. adj. [from endure and full.] Laſting; of long con-
tinuance; durable.
The durful oak, whoſe ſap is not 3. dry'd,
Is long e'er it conceive the kindling fire;
But when it once doth burn, it doth divide
Great heat, and makes his flames to heaven aſpire. Spenſer.
Du'RE less. adj. [from dure.] Without continuance; fading;
tranſitory; ſhort.
Yet were that aptitude natural, more inclinable to follow
and embrace the falſe and dureleſ; pleaſures of this ſtage-play
world, than to become the ſhadow of God. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
DU’RESSE. n.ſ. [French, hardſhip, ſeverity.]
1. Impriſonment; conſtraint; confinement.
2. [In law.] A plea uſed by way of exception, by him who
being caſt into priſon at a man's ſuit, or otherwiſe by threats,
beating, &amp;c. hardly uſed, ſeals any bond to him during his
reſtraint. This the law holds as invalid, and ſuppoſes to be
conſtrained. Cowel.
Du'RING. prep. [This word is rather a participle from dure;
as, during life, durante vita, life continuing ; during my plea-
ſure, my pleaſure continuing the ſame.] For the time of the
continuance of ; while any thing laſts.
If during his childhood he be conſtantly and rigorouſly kept
from drinking cold liquor whilſt he is hot, forbearance grows
into a habit. - Locke.
Du'RITY, n. ſ. [duraté, French; durus, Latin.] Hardneſs;
firmneſs.
Ancients did burn fragments of marble, which in time
became marble again, at leaſt of indiſſoluble durity, as ap-
peareth in the ſtanding theatres Wotton's Archite/fure.
Irradiancy of ſparkling, found in many gems, is not diſco-
verable in this ; for it cometh ſhort of their compaétneſs and
durity. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 1.
DURSt. The preterite of dare.
The Chriſtians durſt have no images of the Deity, becauſe
they would rather die than defile themſelves with ſuch an
impiety. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſc. on Rom, Idol,
DUSK, adj. [duyler, Dutch.]
1. Tending to darkneſs. See Dusky.
2. Tending to blackneſs; dark coloured.
The hills to their ſupply,
Vapour, and exhalation diſk, and moiſt,
Sent up amain. A4ilton's Paradije Lºſº, b. x. 1.741.
DUSK. m. ſ. [from the adjective.]
1. Tendency to darkneſs; incipient obſcurity. -
I will wait on you in the duſk of the evening, with my
ſhow upon my back. Speciator, Nº. 27 i.
2. Darkneſs of colour; tendency to blackneſs. -
Some ſprinkled freckles on his face were ſeen, -
Whoſe duſk ſet off the whiteneſs of the ſkin. Dryden's Fah.
To Dus K. v. a. [from the noun..] To make duſkiſh. Dict.
To DUSK. v. n. To grow dark; to begin to loſe light or
brightneſs; to have luſtre diminiſhed. - Die?.
DU's KILY. adv. [from diſj.] With a tendency to darkneſs
or blackneſs.
Du's Kish. adj. [from duſk..]
1. Inclining to darkneſs; tending to obſcurity.
From his infernal furnace forth he threw
Huge flames, that dimmed all the heaven's light,
Enroll'd in duſkiſh ſmoak, and brimſtone blue. Fai. 3 ſeen.
2. Tending to blackneſs; dark coloured.
Sight is not contented with ſudden departments from one
extreme to another; therefore rather a duſkiſh tinéture than an
abſolute black. A/otton's Architecture.
Du's KISHLY. adv. [from duſkiſh.] Cloudily; darkly.
The ſawduſt burned fair, 'till part of the candle conſumed:
the duſt gathering about
duſkiſhy. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 365.
DU's KY. adj. [from duſk; duyler, Dutch.]
1. Tending to darkneſs; obſcure ; not luminous.
Here lies the duſky torch of Mortimer,
Chok'd with ambition of the meaner ſort. Shakeſp. H. VI.
There fierce winds o'er duſky valleys blow,
Whoſe every puff bears empty ſhades away. Dryd. Ind. Em.
Through the plains of one continual day,
Six ſhining months purſue their even way;
And ſix ſucceeding urge their duſky flight,
Obſcur'd with vapours and o'erwhelm'd in night. Prior.
2. Tending to blackneſs; dark coloured; not clear; not bright.
They did plot -
The means that duſky Dis my daughter got. Shakespeare Tempeſt:
It is not green, but of a duſky brown colour. Bacon.
When Jove in duſky clouds involves the ſkies,
And the faint creſcent ſhoots by fits before their eyes. Dryd.
The ſurface is of a duſky yellow colour. J/oodward.
By mixing ſuch powders we are not to expect a ſtrong and
full white, ſuch as is that of paper; but ſome duſky obſcure
one, ſuch as might ariſe from a mixture of light and dark-
the ſnaſt, made the ſnaſt to burn
neſs, or from white and black; that is, a grey or dun, or .
ruſſet brown. .
2. Glºomy; ſad; intelle&amp;tually clouded.
While he continues in life, this duſky ſcene of horrour,
this melancholy proſpect of final perdition, will frequently oc-
cur to his fancy. Bentley's Sermons.
Umbriel, a duſky, melancholy ſprite,
As ever ſully'd the fair face of light,
Down to the central earth, his proper ſcene,
Repairs to ſearch the gloomy cave of ſpleen.
DUST. n. ſ. ſourc, Saxon ; duff, Erſe 1
1. Earth or other matter reduced to ſmall particles.
- The duſt
Should have aſcended to the roof of heav'n,
Rais'd by your populous troops. Shakeſp. Anth, and Cleopat.
Duff helpeth the fruitfulneſs of trees, inſomuch as they caſt
duſt upon them: that powdering, when a ſhower cometh:
maketh a ſoiling to the tree, being earth and water finely laid
On. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 666.
2. The grave; the ſtate of diſſolution.
The ſcepter, learning, phyſick muſt -
All follow this, and come to duſt. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Thou
Out of the ground waſt taken, know thy birth;
For duſt thou art, and ſhalt to duſt return.
Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Newton's Opt.
Pope.
3. A mean and dejećted ſtate.
God raiſeth up the poor out of the duff, to ſet them among
princes. 1 Sam. ii. 8.
To Dust. v. a. [from the noun.] To free from duſt; to
ſprinkle with duft.
Du'st MAN. n.ſ. [duff and man.] One whoſe employment is
to carry away the duſt.
he diffman's cart offends thy cloaths and eyes,
When through the ſtreet a cloud of aſbes flies, Gay.
Dw'sty.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 323</div><p class="Text">D U T
Du'sty. adj. [from duff..] . .
1. Filled º |. clouded with duſt. . .
Arms and the duſly field I leſs admire, Pryden
And ſoften ſtrangely º: new deſire. ryaen.
ith quit.
2. Covered or *g. drudgery hº
car he ſweats, or duſly hews
#: ſtone, looks gay. Thomſºn's Summer, l, 1445.
DU'Tchess. n. £º French.]
- a duke.
I • Tº: of Cornwal, and Regan his dutcheſ. will be
here. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The duke was to command the army, and the dutcheſ, by
the favour ſhe poſſeſſed, to be near her majeſty. Swift.
The gen’rous god, who wit and gold refines,
And ripens ſpirits as he ripens minds, -
Kept droſs for dutcheſſes, the world ſhall know it, - -
To you gave ſenſe, good humour, and a poet. Pope's Epiſt.
2. A lady who has the ſovereignty of a dukedom. . . . .
Dutch v. n.ſ. [duché, French.] A territory which gives title
to a duke, or has a duke for its ſovereign. -
France might have ſwallowed up his whole dutchy. Swift.
Different ſtates border on it; the kingdom of France, the
dutchy of Savoy, and the canton of Bern. Addiſon on Italy.
Du'rchy court. n.ſ. A court wherein all matters appertain-
ing to the dutchy of Lancaſter are decided by the decree of
the chancellor of that court. Cowel.
Du'reous. adj. [from duty.]
1. Obedient; obſequious; reſpectful to thoſe who have natural
or legal authority.
Great Aurengzebe did duteous care expreſs,
And durſt not puſh too far his great ſucceſs. Dryd. Aureng.
A female ſoftneſs, with a manly mind;
A duteous daughter, and a ſiſter kind; }
In ſickneſs patient, and in death reſign'd. Dryden.
Who taught the bee with winds and rains to ſtrive,
To bring her burden to the certain hive; -
And through the liquid fields again to paſs
Duteous, and hark'ning to the ſounding braſs? Prior.
2. Obſequious; obedient to good or bad purpoſes.
* I know thee well; a ſerviceable villain!
As deteoarto the vices of thy miſtreſs,
As madneſs would deſire. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Every beaſt, more duteous at her call,
Than at Circean call the herd diſguis’d. Milt. Parad, Loft.
3. Enjoined by duty; enforced by the relation of one to
another.
With mine own tongue deny my ſacred right,
With mine own breath releaſe all duteous ties. Shakespeare R. II.
DU'TIFUL. adj. [duty and full.]
1. Obedient; ſubmiſſive to natural or legal ſuperiours; re-
Verent.
She died in an extreme old age, without pain, under the
care of the moſt dutiful ſon that I have ever known or heard
of. Swift to Pope.
2. Expreſſive of reſpect; giving token of reverence; reſpectful;
reverential.
There would ſhe kiſs the ground, and thank the trees,
bleſs the air, and do dutiful reverence to everything ſhe thought
did accompany her at their firſt meeting. Sidney, b. ii.
Dutifully, adv. [from dutiful.]
1. Obediently; ſubmiſfively.
2. Reverently; reſpectfully.
. His daughter Philocleå he found at that time dutifully watch-
ing by her mother, and Miſo curiouſly watching her. Sidney.
He with joyful, nimble wing,
Flew dutifully back again,
And made an humble chaplet for the king. Swift.
Duſtiful Ness. n.ſ. [from dutiful.]
1. Obedience; ſubmiſſion to juſt authority.
Piety, or dutifulneſs to parents, was a moſt popular virtue
among the Romans. Dryden's AFn.
2. Reverence; reſpect.
It is a ſtrange kind of civility, and an evil dutifulneſ; in
friends and relatives, to ſuffer him to periſh without reproof
º medicine, rather than to ſeem unmannerly to a great
llather. J.--” / - -
Du’ty. m.ſ [from due.] Taylor's Rule of living holy.
I. º which a man is by any natural or legal obligation
When ye ſhall have done all thoſe things which are com-
*** you ſay we are unprofitable ſervants: we have done
that which was our duty to do. Lu xvii. 10.
x- Good my lord,
You have begot me, bred me, lov'd me: I
*In thoſe duties back, as are right fit;
º Yºu lºve you, and moſt honour you. Shakespeare K. Lear.
d: * Pain children feel from any neceſſity of nature, it is the
!'" ºf parents to relieve. 10.4
* Acts or forbearance 0. Afe.
All our duty is ſet
dº y we beg the Div
* equired by religion or morality.
down Tº our prayers, becauſe in all our
* Aſſiſtance; and remember that you
are bound to do all thoſe duties, for the doing of which you
have prayed for the Divine Aſſiſtance. 7aylor's Devotion.
3. Obedience or ſubmiſſion due to parents, governors, or ſupe-
riours; loyalty; piety to parents.
Thinkeſt thou that duty ſhall have dread to ſpeak,
When pow'r to flatt'ry bows To plainneſs honour
Is bound, when majeſty to folly falls. , Shakeſp. King Lear.
God's party will appear ſmall, and the king's not greater;
it being not probable, that thoſe ſhould have ſenſe of duty to
him that had none to God. Decay ºf Piety.
4. Aćt of reverence or reſpect.
They both attone;
Did duty to their lady as became. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
5. The buſineſs of a ſoldier on guard.
The regiment did duty there punctually. Clarendon, b. viii.
Otho bribed his guards at a high rate; for as often as Galba
ſupped with him, he uſed to give every ſoldier upon duty an
aureus. Arbuthnot on Coins.
6, The buſineſs of war; ſervice.
The night came and ſevered them, all parties being tired
with the duty of the day. Clarendºn, b. viii,
See how the madmen bleed! Behold the gains
With which their maſter, love, rewards their pains!
For ſev’n long years, on duty ev'ry day,
Lo! their obedience, and their monarch's pay! Dryden.
7. Tax; impoſt; cuſtom; toll.
All the wines that come down from Tuſcany make their
way through ſeveral duties and taxes, before they reach the
port. Addiſn's Travels.
Such ſhekels as they now ſhew, were the old ones in which
duty was to be paid by their law. Arbuthnot on Coins.
DWARF., n.ſ.. [byeong, Sax, dwerg, Dutch; ſherg, Scottiſh.]
1. A man below the common ſize of men.
Get you gone, you dwarfſ
You minimus, of hind'ring knot-graſs made. Shakeſpeare.
Such dwarfs were ſome kind of apes. Brown's Vulg, Err.
They but now who ſeem'd
In bigaeſs to ſurpaſs earth's giant ſons,
Now leſs than ſmalleſt dwarf; in narrow room
Throng numberleſs. , Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i. 1.779.
2. Any animal or plant below its natural bulk.
It is a delicate plantation of trees, all well-grown, fair, and
ſmooth: one dwarf was knotty and crooked, and the reſt had
it in deriſion. L’Eſtrange.
Saw off the head of the ſtock in a ſmooth place; and for
dwarf trees, graft them within four fingers of the ground.
- Mortimer's Art of Husbandry.
3. An attendant on a lady or knight in romances.
. . . The champion ſtout,
Eftfloones diſmounted from his courſer brave,
And to the dwarf a-while his needleſs ſpear he gave. F. Qu.
4. It is uſed often by botaniſts in compoſition; as, dwarf elder,
dwarf honeyſuckle. -
To Dwarf. v.a. [from the noun.] To hinder from growing
to the natural bulk; to leſſen; to make little.
It is reported that a good ſtrong canvas, ſpread over a tree
grafted low, ſoon after it putteth forth, will dwarf it, and
make it ſpread. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 534
The whole ſex is in a manner dwarfed, and ſhrunk into a
race of beauties, that ſeems almoſt another ſpecies. Addiſon.
Dwa'Rfish. adj. [from dwarf] Below the natural buik;
low ; ſmall; little; petty; deſpicable.
Their dwarfiſh pages were
As cherubins, all gilt. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
And are you grown ſo high in his eſteem,
Becauſe I am ſo dwarfiſh and ſo low Shakeſpeare.
This unheard ſawcineſs, and boyiſh troops,
The king doth ſmile at ; and is well prepar'd
To whip this dwarfiſh war, theſe pigmy arms,
From out the circle of his territories. Shakeſp. King john.
A thicket cloſe beſide the grove there ſtood,
With briars and brambles choak'd, and dwarfiſh wood. Dry.
We ſhould have loſt oaks and cedars, and the other tall
and lofty ſons of the foreſt, and have found nothing but
dwarfiſh ſhrubs, and creeping moſs, and deſpicable muſh-
rooins. Bentley's Sermons.
Dw A'RFISHLY. adj. [from dwarfiſh.] Like a dwarf.
Dwa'RF1s HN Ess. n.ſ.. [from dwarfiſh.] Minuteneſs of ſta-
ture; littleneſs.
'Tis no wonder that ſcience hath not outgrown the dwarf-
iſhneſs of its priſtine ſtature, and that the intellectual world is
ſuch a microcoſm. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 17.
To Dwaul F. v. a. [Spelian, Sax. to wander; dwaelºn, Dut]
To be delirious: a provincial word mentioned by junius.
To DWELL. v. n. preterite dwell, or dwelled. ...[duala, old
Teutonick, is ſlay, delay; duelia, Iſlandick, to ſtay, to ſtand
ſtill. -
I . *. to live in a place; to reſide; to have an habi-
tation.
If thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be
ſold unto thee, thou ſhalt not compel him to ſerve as a bond-
ſervant. Lev. xxv. #.
c
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 324</div><p class="Text">D W E
D Y S
ſe ſhall dwell alone, without the camp ſhall his habita-
1 be. Lev. xiii. 46.
ºn Haywood and Sir Thomas More, in the pariſh where-
i was born, dwelt and had poſſeſſions. Peacham on Poetry.
Why are you vex'd, lady ? Why do you frown
}}ere dwell no frowns, nor anger; from theſe gates
Sorrow flies far.
2. To live in any form of habitation.
Abraham ſojourned in the land of Promiſe as in a ſtrange
country, dwelling in tabernacles. Beb. xi. 9.
3. To be in any ſtate or condition.
'Tis ſafer to be that which we deſtroy,
Than by deſtruction dwell in doubtful joy. Shakespeare Macbeth.
4. To be ſuſpended with attention.
Th’ attentive queen
Dwelt on his accents, and her gloomy eyes -
Sparkled with gentler fires. Smith's Phaed, and Hippolitus.
5. To fix the mind upon; to hang upon with fondneſs.
* Such was that face, on which I dwelt with joy,
Ere Greece aſſembled, ſtemm'd the tides to Troy;
But parting then for that deteſted ſhore,
Our eyes, unhappy I never greeted more.
6. To continue long ſpeaking.
He preach'd the joys of heav'n and pains of hell,
And warn'd the finner with becoming zeal;
But on eternal mercy lov'd to dwell. Dryd. Good Parſon.
We have dwelt pretty long on the conſiderations of ſpace
and duration. Locke.
Thoſe who deſend our negotiators, dwell upon their
zeal and patience. Swift.
To Dwell. v. a. To inhabit.
I ſaw and heard ; for we ſometimes
Who dwell this wild, conſtrain’d by want, come forth
To town or village nigh. Milton's Paradiſe Regained, b, i.
Dwr'LLE R. n.ſ.. [from dwell.] An inhabitant; one that lives
in any place. -
The houſes being kept up, did of neceſſity enforce a dweller;
and the proportion of land for occupation being kept up, did
of neceſſity enforce that dweller not to be beggar or cottager,
but a man of ſome ſubſtance. Bacon's Henry VII.
Their cries ſoon waken all the dwellers near ;
Now murmuring noiſes riſe in every ſtreet.
Dw E'LLING.. n.ſ.. [from dwell.]
1. Habitation; place of reſidence; abode.
His dwelling is low in a valley green,
Under the foot of Rauran moſſy hore. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Hazor ſhall be a dwelling for dragons, and a deſolation for
ever. jer. xlix. 33.
If he have ſeveral dwellings, let him ſort them ſo, that
what he wanteth in the one he may find in the other. Bacon.
- - God will deign
To viſit oft the dwellings of juſt men, -
Delighted. Milton's Paradiſe Ioff, b. vii. l. 570.
So it ſeems
To thee who haſ thy dwelling here on earth. Milt. P. Lºft.
All dwellings elſe -
Flood overwhelm’d, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water roll'd ; ſea cover'd ſea,
Sea without ſhore! Milton's Paradiſe [gſ, b. xi. 1.747.
The living few, and frequent funerals then,
Proclaim'd thy wrath on this forſaken place; ,
And now thoſe few, who are return'd again,
Thy ſearching judgments to their dwellings trace.
The force of fire aſcended firſt on high,
And took its dwelling in the vaulted ſky.
2. State of life; mode of living. : -
My dwelling ſhall be with the beaſts of the field. Dan. iv. 25.
Dwe'liiNGHouse. n.ſ. [from dwell and houſe.] The houſe
at which one lives. -
A perſon ought always to be cited at the place of his
Milt27.
Pope's Odyſſey.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Dryden's Ovid.
Vol. I.
dºnghouſe, which he has in reſpect of his habitation and
uſual reſidence; and not at the houſe which he has in reſpect
of his eſtate, or the place of his birth. Ay ºffe's Paregon.
Dwe **ING PLACE. n.ſ. [dwell and place. J . The place of
reſidence.
. People do often change their dwellingplaces, and ſome muſt
dies whilſt other ſome do grow up into ſtrength. Spenſer.
To Pwll'NDLE. v. n. [epinan, Saxon.]
i. To ſhrink; to loſe bulk; to grow little.
Proper names, when familiarized in Engliſh, dwindle to
monoſyllables; whereas in modern languages they receive a
ſofter turn, by the addition of a new ſyllable. Addiſon's Speci.
Tº .."; are dwindled down to nought;
eir period finiſh'd e'er 'tis well begun. * --&gt; -:
2. To degenerate; to fink. begun. Thomſon's Spring.
'Tis now dwindled down to light frothy ſtuff. Morris.
If there have been ſuch a gradual diminution of the gene-
rative faculty of the earth, j. it hath dwindled from nobler
animals to Puny mice and inſects, why was there not the like
decay in the production of vegetables? Bentley's Sermons.
He found the expected council was dwindling into a con-
venticle, a packed aſſembly of Italian biſhops, not a free con-
vention of fathers. Atterbury.
Religious ſocieties, though begun with excellent intentions,
are ſaid to have dwindled into factious clubs. Swift.
3. To wear away; to loſe health; to grow feeble. -
Weary ſev’nnights nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
How often do we ſee, that ſome ſmall part of the foot being
injured by a wrench or a blow, the whole leg or thigh thereby
loſes its ſtrength and nouriſhment, and dwindles away. Locłº,
Phyſicians, with their milky cheer,
The love fick maid and dwindling beau repair. Gay's Triv.
4. To fall away; to be diminiſhed; to moulder off.
Of all the forces under Greenvil, there were only five hun-
dred foot and three hundred horſe left with him for the block-
ing up Plymouth ; the reſt were dwindled away. Clarention.
Dye. See Die.
DYING. The participle of die.
1. Expiring; giving up the ghoſt.
2. Tinging; giving a new colour.
DYNAsty. m. ſ. [?vrariſa J Government; ſovereignty.
Some account him fabulous, becauſe he carries up the Egyp.
tian dynaſties before the flood, yea, and long before the
creation. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Greece was then divided into ſeveral dynaſties, which our
author has enumerated under their reſpective princes.
Notes on Pope's Iliad.
DY's cras Y. m. ſ. [?vaxçao'2.] An unequal mixture of ele-
ments in the blood or nervous juice; a diſtemperature, when
ſome humour or quality abounds in the body. Dić7.
In this pituitous dyſra/y of blood, we muſt vomit off the
pituita, and purge upon intermiſſions. Floyer on the Humours.
Dyse'NtERY. m. ſ fººtºrie, French, from *warri;2.]. A
looſeneſs wherein very ill humours flow off by ſtool, and are
alſo ſometimes attended with blood. - Diff.
From an unuſual inconſtancy of the weather, and perpetual
changes of the wind from Eaſt to Weſt, proceed epidemical
dyſenteries. Arbuthnot on Air.
Dyspepsy. m. ſ. ſºvºrºſa J. A difficulty of digeſtion, or bad
fermentation in the ſtomach or guts. Dić.
Dy's PHoNY. m. ſ. [3.222*2.] A difficulty in ſpeaking, occa-
ſioned by an ill diſpoſition of the organs. Dići.
Dyspno’EA. m. ſ. ſºvorza.] A difficulty of breathing; ſtrait-
neſs of breath. -
Dy's URY. n.ſ. [3.2°ºſa..] A difficulty in making urine.
It doth end in a dyſentery, pains of the haemorrhoids, in-
flammations of any of the lower parts, diabetes, a continual
piffing, or a hot dyſary, difficulty of making water. Harvey.
