W.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">w A D
Is a letter of which the form is not to be found
in the alphabets of the learned languages ;
though it is not improbable that by our w is
expreſſed the ſound of the Roman v, and the
9 Eolick f. Both the form and ſound are ex-
cluded from the languages derived from the Latin.
jº/ is ſometimes improperly uſed in diphthongs as a vowel, for a,
view; /?rew : the found of w conſonant is uniform.
To WABBle: v. n. [A low, barbarous word..] To ſhake; to
move from ſide to ſide.
If in your work you find it walble; that is, that one ſide
of the flat inclines to the right or left hand, with ſoft blows
of an hammer ſet it to rights, and then ſcrew it hard up. Moxon.
WAD. m. ſ. [peoo hay, Saxon.] - ..
I. A bundle of ſtraw thruſt cloſe together.
2. Wadd, or black lead, is a mineral of great uſe and
value. J/zodward.
WA'DPING... m. ſ. [from wad, vad, Iſlandick J A kind of ſoft
ſtuff looſely woven, with which the ſkirts of coats are ſtuf-
fed out. -
To WA/pdl.e. v. n. [wagghelen, Dutch, to waggle; whence,
by a caſual corruption, waddle.] To ſhake, in walking from
ſide to ſide ; to deviate in motion from a right line. -
She could have run and waddled all about. Shakespeare
The ſtrutting petticoat ſmooths and levels all diſtinctions;
while I cannot but be troubled to ſee ſo many well-ſhaped,
innocent virgins bloated up, and waddling up and down like
big-bellied women. Speciator, Nº. 127.
The farmer's gooſe,
Grown fat with corn and fitting ſtill,
Can ſcarce get o'er the barn-door fill,
And hardly waddles forth to cool ... -- .
Her belly in the neighb'ring pool. Swift.
A dabchick waddles through the copſe -
On feet and wings, and flies, and wades, and hops. Pope.
Dulneſs, of buſineſs the directing ſoul,
To human heads like biaſs to the bowl; -
Which, as more pond’rous, makes their aim more true,
Obliquely waddling to the mark in view. Pope.
To WADE. v. n. [from vadum, Lat. pronounced wadum.]
1. To walk through the waters; to paſs water without ſwim-
ming. -
We'll wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood. Sha.
She waded through the dirt to pluck him off. Shakeſpeare.
I am in blood
Stept in ſo far, that, ſhould I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He ſtaid ſeven days at the Craſſus, until a bridge was made
for the tranſporting of his army, for that the river was not to
be waded over. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
Then ſince fortune's favours fade ; -
You that in her arms do ſleep,
Learn to ſwim, and not to wade,
For the hearts of kings are deep. JWetton's Poems.
With head, hands, wings, or feet purſues his way,
And ſwims, or ſinks, or wades, or creeps, or flics. Milton.
It is hard to wade deep in baths where ſprings ariſe. Brown.
Fowls that frequent waters, and only wade, have as well
long legs as long necks; and thoſe that are made for ſwim-
ming have feet like oars. More's Divine Dialogues.
Thoſe birds only wade in the water, and do not ſwim. More.
As when a dabchick waddles through the copſe
On feet and wings, he flies, and wades, and hops. Pope.
2. To paſs difficultly and laboriouſly.
They were not permitted to enter unto war, nor conclude
any league of peace, nor to wade through any ačt of moment
between them and foreign ſtates, unleſs the oracle of God,
or his prophets, were firſt conſulted with. Hooker, b. iii.
I have waded through the whole cauſe, ſearching the truth
by the cauſes of truth. Hooker.
The ſubſtance of thoſe controverſies whereunto we have
begun to wads, be rather of outward things appertaining to
the church, than of any thing wherein the being of the
church conſiſteth. Hooker, b. iii.
w A F
Virtue gives herſelf light, through darkneſs fºr to wade.
Fairy ºur i.
- I ſhould chuſe rather with ſpitting and ſº i. tº:
into the duſt in blood, bearing witneſs to any known truth of
our Lord; than, by a denial of thoſe truths, through blood
and Perjury wade to a ſceptre, and lord it in a thronº. South.
Tis not to my purpoſe to wade into thoſe bottomleſs Con-
. . like a gulph, have ſwallowed up ſo much
time of learned men. - - Dec -
The dame - «y ºf Piety.
Now try'd the ſtairs, and wading through the night,
Search'd all the deep receſs, and iſſu’d into light. Dryden.
The wrathful God then plunges from above,
A. §. in thickeſt waves the ſparkles drove,
There lights, and wades through fumes, and gropeshi
Half-fing'd, half-ſtifid. * » and grope º:
Simonides, the more he contemplated the nature of the
Deity, found that he waded but the more out of his depth
... and that he loſt himſelf in the thought, Žiš.
WAFE R. n: ſ [waſel, Dutch.]
I. A thin cake. -
Wife, make us a dinner; ſpare fleſh, neither Corn ;
Make wafers and cakes, for our ſheepe muſt be ſhorne.7% t?".
Poor Sancho they perſuaded that he enjoyed a great doini-
nion, and then gave him nothing to ſubſiſt upon but wºſers and
marmalade. Pope.
2. The bread given in the euchariſt by the Romaniſts.
That the ſame body of Chriſt ſhould be in a thouſand
Places at once; that the whole body ſhould lie hid in a little
thin wºfºr; yet ſo, that the members thereof ſhould not one
run into another, but continue diſtinct, and have an order
agreeable to a man's body, it doth excecd reaſon. Hall.
3. Paſte made to cloſe letters.
To Waft. v. a. [probably from wave.]
I. To carry through the air, or on the water.
A braver choice of dauntleſs ſpirits,
Than now the Engliſh bottoms have waſ o'er,
Did never float upon the ſwelling tide. Shakeſpeare,
Our high admiral
Shall waſ them over with our royal fleet. Shakeſpeare.
Whether cripples, who have loºk their thighs, will not
ſink but float; their lungs being able to waſ up their bodies,
which are in others overpoiſed by the hinder legs, we have
not made experiment. . . Brown's Pºjar Errours.
Nor dares his tranſport-veſſel croſs the waves,
With ſuch whoſe bones are not compos'd in graves:
A hundred years they wander on the ſhore;
At length, their penance done, are waſted o'er. Dryden.
Lend to this wretch your hand, and waft him o'er
To the ſweet banks of yon forbidden ſhore. Dryden.
From hence might firſt ſpring that opinion of the vehicles
of ſpirits; the vulgar conceiving that the breath was that
wherein the ſoul was wafted and carried away. Ray.
They before waſted over their troops into Sicily in open veſ-
ſels. Arbuthnot on Coins.
In vain you tell your parting lover,
You wiſh fair winds may waſ him over:
Alas! what winds can happy prove,
That bear me far from what I love : Prior.
Speed the ſoft intercourſe from ſoul to ſoul,
And waft a figh from Indus to the pole. Pope.
2. To beckon; to inform by a ſign of any thing moving.
To WAFT. v. n. To float.
It waſted nearer yet, and then ſhe knew,
That what before º but ſurmis'd, was true.
Thoſe trumpets his triumphant entry tell,
And now the ſhouts waft near the citadel.
WAFT. n.ſ. [from the verb.] - - -
1. A floating body. -
- From the bellowing eaſt of the whirlwind's wing
Sweeps up the burthen of whole wintry plains, •, rrr' . .
In one wide waft. HŽººr's Hºnºr.
2. Motion of a ſtreamer. Uſed as a token or mean of infor-
mation at ſea.
Dryden.
Dryden,
30 F WA'FTAGF.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- W A G
W A G
warrace. n.ſ. [from ºff. Carriage by water or air. Not
1n "wº ſhip of Epidamnum ſtays for me ?—
-A ſhip you ſent me to, to hire waſtage. Shakeſpeare.
I ſtalk about her door,
Like a ſtrange ſoul upon the Stygian banks, -
Staying for waftage. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
waſ tº R. n.ſ. [from waſt.] A paſſage boat. Ainſworth.
WA/FTURE. m. ſ. [from waft.] The aćt of waving. Not in uſe.
You anſwer'd not ;
But with an angry waſture of your hand
Gave ſign for me to leave you. Shakeſp. Julius Caſar.
To WAG. v. a. [Fazian, Saxon; waggon, Dutch.J. To move
lightly; to ſhake ſlightly.
fº counterfeit the deep tragedian ;
Tremble and ſtart at wagging of a ſtraw.
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops, and to make a noiſe,
Shakeſpeare.
when they are fretted with the guſts of heav'n. Shakespeare .
All that paſs, hiſs and wag their head at thee. La. ii. 15.
Thou canſt not wagthy finger, or begin
The leaſt light motion, but it tends to fin. Dryden.
So have freen in black and white,
A prating thing, a magpye hight,
Majeſtically ſtalk;
A ſtately, worthleſs animal,
That plies the tongue, and wag; the tail,
All flutter, pride, and talk. Swift.
To WA G. v. n.
1. To be in quick or ludicrous motion.
Be merry, my wife has all;
For women are ſhrews, both ſhort and tall;
'Tis merry in hall, where beards wag all. Shakeſp.
I will fight with him upon this theme,
Until my eyelids will no longer wag. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
2. To go ; to be moved.
i will provoke him to't, or let him wag. Shakeſpeare.
Her charms ſhe mutter'd o'er;
And yet the reſty ſieve wagg’d ne'er the more:
I wept for woe. Dryden's Theocritus.
WAG. m. ſ. [poegan, Saxon, to cheat..] Any one ludicrouſly
miſchievous ; a merry droll.
Cupid the wag, that lately conquer'd had
Wiſe counſellors, ſtout captains puiſſant;
And ty'd them faſt to lead his triumphs bad,
Glutted with them, now plays with meaneſt things. Sidney.
Was not my lord the verier wago' th' two Shakeſp.
We wink at wags, when they offend,
And ſpare the boy, in hopes the man may mend. Dryden.
A counſellor never pleaded without a piece of packthread in
his hand, which he uſed to twiſt about a finger all the
while he was ſpeaking : the wags uſed to call it the thread of
his diſcourſe. Addison.
WAGE, n.ſ. the plural wages is now only uſed. [wegen, or
wagen, German; gages, Fr.]
1. Pay given for ſervice.
All friends ſhall taſte
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cup of their deſervings. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
The laſt petition is for my men; they are the pooreſt,
But poverty could never draw them from me;
That they may have their wages duly paid them,
And ſomething over to remember me. Shakeſpeare.
By Tom Thumb, a fairy page;
He ſent it, and doth him engage,
By promiſe of a mighty wage,
It ſecretly to carry. Drayton's Nymphid.
The thing itſelf is not only our duty, but our glory: and
he who hath done this work, has, in the very work, partly
received his wages. South.
2. Gage; pledge. Ainſw.
To WAGE. v.a. [The origination of this word, which is
now only uſed in the phraſe to wage war, is not eaſily diſ-
covered : wagen, in German, is to attempt any thing dan-
gerous.]
1. To attempt; to venture.
We muſt not think the Turk is ſo unſkilful,
Neglecting an attempt of eaſe and gain,
. ...To wake and wage a danger profitleſs.
2. To make; to carry on. Applied to war.
Return to her, and fifty men diſmiſs'd
No 5 rather I abjure all roofs, and chuſe
To wage againſt the enmity o' th' air,
To be a comrade with the wolf. Shakſº. K. Lear.
Your reputation wages war with the enemies of your royal
Shakeſpeare.
family, even within their trenches. Dryden.
He ponder'd, which of all his ſons was fit
**Sh, and wage immortal war with wit. Dryden.
3. [From wage, wagºjºſo ſet to hire.
* hou muſt wage
Thy works for wealth, and life for gold engage. F. Queen,
4. To take to hire; to hire for pay; to hold in pay;
for wages. - y;
I ſeem'd his follower, not partner; and
#: ić. me with his countenance, as if
ad been mercenary. Shakeſpeare's Cº.;
The officers of the admiralty having ºft º º
nefit, it is their parts, being well waged and º i.
exactly to look into the ſound building of ſhips, *.
The king had erected his courts of ordinary reſort º
was at the charge not only to wage juſtice and their mº
but alſo to appoint the ſafe cuſtody of records. ers,
to employ
- - Bac
This great lord came not over with any great numb tºº.
waged ſoldiers. Davieſ' er of
5. [In law.] avies'; Ireland.
When an action of debt is brought againſ one, as for
money or chattles, left or lent the defendant, the defendant
may wage his law ; that is, ſwear, and certain perſon, with
him, that he owes nothing to the plaintiff in männer as he
hath declared. The offer to make the oath is called 1942&amp;n
of law: and when it is accompliſhed, it is called the miliº
or doing of law. Blui
WA'GER. m. ſ. [from wage, to venture.] ww.fij -
I. A bett; anything pledged upon a chance or performance,
Love and miſchief made a wager, which ſhould have mºſt
power in me. Sidney.
The ſea ſtrove with the winds which ſhould be loud.
and the ſhrouds of the ſhip, with a ghaſtful noiſe to them º:
were in it, witneſſed that their ruin was the water of the
other's contention. -
Full faſt ſhe fled, ne everlook'd behind;
As if her life upon the wager lay. Fairy Queen,
Beſides theſe plates for horſe-races, the wagers may be as
Sidney, b, ii.
the perſons pleaſe. Temple.
Fačtious, and favºring this or t'other ſide,
Their wagers back their wiſhes. Dryden.
If any atheiſt can ſtake his ſoul for a wager, againſt ſuch
an inexhauſtible diſproportion; let him never hereafter accuſe
others of credulity. Bentley's Sermonſ,
2. [In law.] An offer to make oath. See to wage in law.
Multiplication of actions upon the caſe were areformerly,and
thereby wager of law ouſted, which diſcouraged manyſuits. Hal.
To WAGER. v. a. [from the noun..] To lay; to pledge as a
bett; to pledge upon ſome caſualty or performance.
'Twas merry, when you wager'd on your angling, Shaiºff.
He that will lay much to ſtake upon every flying ſtory,
may as well wager his eſtate which way the wind will ſit
next morning. Government ºf the Tºngue.
I feed my father's flock;
What can I wager from the common ſtock?
WA'Ges. m. ſ. See WAGE.
WA'Go ERY. m. ſ. [from wag.] Miſchievous merriment; ſo-
guiſh trick ; ſarcaſtical gaiety.
'Tis not the waggeri; or cheats practiſed among ſchºol-
boys, that make an able man; but the principles of juſtice,
generoſity, and ſobriety. Lº
WAGGish. adj. [from wag Knaviſhly merry; merily miº
chievous ; frolickſome.
Change fear and niceneſs,
The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,
Woman its pretty ſelf, to waggiſh courage. Shakespeare,
This new conceit is the waggiſh ſuggeſtion of ſº and
ſculking atheiſts. Žºrº's Divine Dialºguë.
A company of waggiſh boys watching of frogs at theſideº
a pond, ſtill as any of them put up their heads, they wo
Drydºn.
be pelting them down with ſtones. Children, ſays º
the frogs, you never conſider, that though this º: º
to you, 'tis death to us. L'Érang!.
As boys, on holidays let looſe to play,
Lay waggiſh traps for girls that paſs that way;
Then ſhout to ſee in dirt and deep diſtreſs Dyſºn.
Some ſilly cit. Iſchief
WA’Gorshness. n.ſ.. [from waggiſh.] Merrymſº been
A chriſtian boy in Conſtantinople had likº." .
ſtoned for gagging, in a waggiſhneſ, a long billed *:::: º
To WA/Goie. v. n. [wagghelen, German.] To waddle ;
move from ſide to ſide.
The ſport Baſilius would ſhew to . - on his
mounting of his hawk at a heron, which gº. the
waggling wings with pain, as though the air nex as now
earth were not fit for his great body to fly through, º:
Zelmare, was tº
rown to diminiſh the fight of himſelf. -a- - - !
9. Why do you go nodding and waggling ſo, * jº.
ſays the gooſe to her goſſeling. j
WA’oon. n.ſ. [rcegen, Sax. wºegheni, Dutch; *
1. A heavy carriage for burthens. fith wagº
The Hungarian tents, were encloſed round wit he jº
Knollei'; Hy?. ºf t
one chained to another. Millºi,
Iſaggons fraught with utenſils of war.
2. A chariot. Not in uſe. :... ... haſ
Now fair Phoebus 'gan decline in hałe, Sºft.
His weary waggºn to the weſtern valº. Then
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">VV A I
--
Then to her waggon ſhe betakes,
And with her bears the witch.
O Proſerpina, -
For the flowers now that frighted thou let'ſ fall
From Dis's waggon. ... • Shakeſpeare.
Her waggon ſpokes made of long ſpinners legs;
The cover, of the wings of graſshoppers. Shakeſpeare.
WA'oon NER. n.ſ.. [from *g”.] One who drives a wa-
, gon.
By this, the northern waggoner had ſet
His ſevenfold team behind the fledſaft ſtar,
That was in ocean waves yet never wet. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Gallop apace, you fi'ry-footed ſteeds,
Tow'rd Phoebus' manſión ſuch a waggoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the wi. Shakeſpeare.
A waggoner took notice upon the creaking of a wheel,
that it was the worſt wheel that made moſt n. L’É/irange.
The waggoners that curſe their ſtanding teams,
Wou’d wake e'en drowly Druſus from his dreams. Dryden.
I deſcribed to him the uſe and the nature of it; and the
next day the waggoners arrived with it. Gulliver's Travels.
WA'GTAil. n.ſ. A bird. Ainſw.
WAIP. v. a. [I ſuppoſe for weighed.] Cruſhed.
. His horſe waid in the back, and ſhoulder ſhotten. Shakeſp.
WAIF. n.ſ. [wavium, waivium, law Lat. from wave..] Goods
found, but claim'd by no body ; that of which every one
waves the claim. Commonly written weif. Ainſw.
9 WAIL. v. a. ſqualare, Italian.] To moan; to lament; to
bewail.
Wiſe men ne'er wail their preſent woes,
Spen/cr.
But preſently prevent the ways to waii. Shakeſpeare. .
, Say, if my ſpouſe maintains her royal truſt 2
Or if no more her abſent lord ſhe wails,
But the falſe woman o'er the wife prevails Pope.
To WAIL. v. m. To grieve audibly; to expreſs ſorrow.
Son of man wail for the multitude. Ez. xxxii. 18.
I will wail and howl. Mic. i. 8.
WAIL. m. ſ. Audible ſorrow.
Around the woods
She fighs her ſong, which with her wail reſound. Thomſºn.
WA'iling. m. ſ. [from wail.J Lamentation ; moan ; audible
ſorrow.
The camp filled with lamentation and mourning, which
would be increaſed by the weeping and wailing of them,
which ſhould never ſee their brethren. Knolles.
Qther cries amongſt the Iriſh, ſavour of the Scythian bar-
bariſm ; as the lamentations of their burials, with deſpairful
outcries, and immoderate wailings. Spenſer's Ireland.
Take up wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with
tearS. jer. ix. 18.
The wailings of a maiden I recite. Gay.
WA(ILFUL. adj. [from wail and full.] Sorrowful; moun-
ful.
Lay lime to tangle her deſires
By waiful ſonnets, whoſe compoſed rhimes
Should be full fraught with ſerviceable vows. Shakeſpeare.
WAIN...m. ſ. [contracted from wagon.] A carriage.
There antient night arriving, did alight
From her high weary wain. Spenſºr.
Yours be the harveſt; 'tis the beggar's gain,
To glean the fallings of the loaded vain. Dryden.
WA'INROPE. m. ſ. [wain and rope.] A large cord, with which
the load is tied on the wagon.
Oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together. Shakespeare
WA/INsco.T. m. ſ. Lwageſchot, Dutch..] The inner wooden co-
vering of a wall.
Some have the veins more varied and chambletted; as
oak, whereof wainſcot is made. Bacon.
She never could part with plain wainſcot and clean hang-
ings. Arbuthnot.
A rat your utmoſt rage defies, -
That ſafe behind the wainſcot lies. Swift.
To WA’INscot. v. a. [waagen/chotten, Dutch.]
I. To line walls with boards.
Muſick ſoundeth better in chambers wainſcotted, than
hanged. Bacon.
2. To line in general. - -
It is moſt curiouſly lined, or wainſ atted, with a white teſta-
ceous cruſt, of the ſame ſubſtance and thickneſs with the
tubuli marini. Grew.
One ſide commands a view of the garden, and the other 1S
wainſcotted with looking-glaſs. Addiſon's Guardian.
W.A.R. m. ſ. [In carpentry..] A piece of timber two yards long,
and a foot broad. Bailey.
WAIST. n.ſ. [gwaſe, Welſh ; from the verb gwaſh, to preſs
or bind.]
1. The ſmalleſt part of the body; the part below the ribs.
The one ſeem'd woman to the waſ, and fair,
But ended foul in many a ſcaly fold,
Voluminous and vaſt. AMilton's Par. Lo/?, b. ii.
W A I
**, *s a veil, down to h
ºr unadorned golde
Diſhevel’d.
- er ſlender waff,
n treſſes wore, -
AMilton's Par. Loft, p. iv.
They ſeiz'd, and with entangling folds § i
is neck twice Compaſſing, and twice his waiſt. Denham.
Stiff tays conſtrain her ſlender waiſt. Gay
2. The middle deck, or floor of a ſhip. !y.
Sheets ºf water from the clouds are ſent,
Which hiſing through the planks, the fines prevent
ſº º . . ſ four ſhips alone &gt;
urn to the waiſt, and for the flé
9 WAIT, v. a. ſwachten, Dutch.] et atone. Dryden.
1. To expect; to ſtay for.
I Bid them prepare within;
am to blame to be thus waited for. - h -
Aw'd with theſe words, in camps they ſtill sººn.
And wait with longing loo
..Such courage did the antient herº #how,
Who, when they might Prevent, would wait the blow. Dry.
2. To attend ; to accompany with ſubmiſſion or reſpect.
He choſe a thouſand horſe, the flow'r of all
His warlike troops, to wait the funeral. Dryden.
3. To attend as a conſequence of ſomething. -
Remorſe and heavineſs of heart ſhaft wait thee,
And everlaſting anguiſh be thy portion.
4. To watch as an enemy.
He is waited for of the ſword. job xv. 22.
To WA it. v. n.
1. Tº expect; to ſtay in expectation.
All the days of my appointed time will I wai, till my
change come.
Rowe.
- ob xiv. 14.
The poultry ſtand - j 4.
Waiting upon her charitable hand. Gay.
2. To pay ſervile or ſubmiſſive attendance. \
Though Syrinx your Pan's miſtreſs were,
Yet Syrinx well might wait on her. AMilton's Arcades.
he morning waiting on him at Cauſham, ſmiling upon
me, he ſaid, he could tell me ſome news of myſelf. Denham.
Fortune and vićtory he did purſue,
To bring them, as his ſlaves, to wait on you. Dryden.
A parcel of ſoldiers robbed a farmer of his poultry, and
then made him wait at table. Swift.
3. To attend. A phraſe of ceremony.
The dinner is on the table; my father deſires your wor-
ſhip's company.— - -
—I will wait on him. Shakespeare Merry Iſive, of I/indſºr.
4. To ſtay ; not to depart from.
How ſhall we know when to wait for, when to decline
perſecution. South's Sermons.
With Vulcan's rage the riſing winds conſpire,
And near our palace rolls the flood of fire:
Haſte, my dear father, 'tis no time to wait,
And load my ſhoulders with a willing freight. Dryden.
I know, if I am deprived of you, I die:
But oh! I die, if I wait longer for you. A. Philips.
5. To ſtay by reaſon of ſome hindrance.
6. To look watchfully. -
It is a point of cunning to wait upon him, with whom you
ſpeak, with your eye, as the Jeſuits give it in precept. Bacon.
7. To lie in ambuſh as an enemy. - - -
Such ambuſh waited to intercept thy way. Milton.
8. To follow as a conſequence.
It will import thoſe men who dwell careleſs, to cnter into
ſerious conſultation how they may avert that ruin, which waits
on ſuch a ſupine temper. Decay of Piety.
WAIT. n. ſ. Ambuſh; inſidious and ſecret attempts.
If he hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die; he that
ſmote him ſhall be put to death. . Num. xxxy. 20.
Why ſat'ſt thou like an enemy in wait? Milton.
WA/ITER. m. ſ. [from wait..] An attendant; one who attends
for the accommodation of others. - -
Let the drawers be ready with wine and freſh glaſſes;
Let the waiters have eyes, though their tongues muſt be
ty'd. B. Johnſon's Tavern Academy:
The leaſt tart or pie,
By any waiter there ſtolen and ſet by. , Bp. Corbet.
A man of fire is a general enemy to all the waiters whºſe
you drink. Tatler, N°. 61.
The waiters ſtand in ranks; the yeomen cry, -
Make room. - Swift.
WA'iting gentlewoman. ) m. ſ. [from wait..]. An upper ſer-
WA/ITING maid. } vant, who attends on a lady in
WA/ITING woman. her chamber.
He made me º,
To talk ſo like a waiting-gentlewoman, - T -
Ö; *. and drums, and wounds. Shalºft. Hºn. IV.
Flibbertigibbet, prince of mopping and mowing, ſince poſ-
ſeſſès chamber-maids and waiting-women. Shakeſp. K. º
The waiting-woman might be converſant in romances. Swift.
The waiting-maid hopes to ingratiate herſelf. sºft,
ks their promis'd guide. Dryden. º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">-&gt; K
W A K.
W A L
To WAKE. v. n. [wakan, Gothick; pacian, Saxon ; watchen,
Dutch.] h to ſl
teh; not to fleep.
1. To . night ſhe watch'd, ne once a-down would lay
dainty limbs in her ſad dreriment,
; * ſtill did wake, and waking did lament. Spenſºr.
The father waketh for the daughter, and the care for her
taketh away ſleep. Eccluſ. xlii. 9.
Thou holdeſt mine eyes waking. Pſ. lxxvii. 4.
In the valley of Jehoſhaphat,
The judging God ſhall cloſe the book of fate ;
And there the laſt affizes keep,
For thoſe who wake, and thoſe who ſleep. ... Dryden.
I cannot think any time, waking or ſleeping, without be-
igg ſenſible of it. - - Locke.
g Though wiſdom wakes, ſuſpicion ſleeps. Milton.
2. To be rouſed from ſleep. -
. Each tree ſtirr'd appetite, whereat I wak'd. Milton.
3. To ceaſe to ſleep. - -
The ſiſters awaked from dreams, which flattered them with
more comfort, than their waking would conſent to. Sidney.
Come, thou powerful God,
And thy leaden charming rod,
Dipt in the Lethean lake,
O'er his watchful temples ſhake,
Left he ſhould ſleep, and never wake.
4. To be put in action; to be excited.
Gentle airs to fan the earth now wak'd.
To Wake. v. a. ſpeccian, Saxon ; weeken, Dutch..]
1. To rouſe from ſleep.
They wak'd each other, and I ſtood and heard them, Sha.
The waggoners that curſe their ſtanding teams,
Wou’d wake e'en drowſy Druſus from his dreams. Dryden.
Shock, who theught ſhe ſlept too long,
Leap'd up, and wak'd his miſtreſs with his tongue.
2. To excite; to put in motion, or action.
Prepare war, wake up the mighty men; let them come
up. Joel ii. 9.
Thine, like Amphion's hand, had wak'd the ſtone,
And from deſtruction call'd the riſing town ;
Denham.
Milton.
Pope.
Nor could he burn ſo faſt, as thou couldſt build. Prior.
What you've ſaid,
Has wak’d a thought in me, which may be lucky. Rºwe.
To wake the ſoul by tender ſtrokes of art,
To raiſe the genius, and to mend the heart. Prol to Cato.
3. To bring to life again, as if from the ſleep of death.
To ſecond life,
JP'ak'd in the renovation of the juſt.
wAke. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The feaſt of the dedication of the church, formerly kept by
watching all night.
Fill oven ful of flawnes, Ginnie paſſe not for ſleepe,
Tomorrow thy father his wake-daie will keepe. Tuſſºr.
The droiling peaſant ſcarce thinks there is any world beyond
his village, nor gaiety beyond that of a wake. Gov. of Tongue.
Putting all the Grecian actors down,
And winning at a wake their parſley crown.
Sometimes the vulgar will of mirth partake,
And have exceſſive doings at their wake. King's Art of Cook.
2. Vigils; ſtate of forbearing ſleep.
By dimpled brook, and fountain brim,
The wood-nymphs deckt with daiſies trim,
Their merry wakes and paſtimes keep :
What hath night to do with ſleep? Milton.
WA/KEFul. adj. Iwake and full.] Not ſleeping; vigilant.
Before her gate high God did ſweat ordain,
And wakeful watches ever to abide. Spenſer.
Why doſt thou ſhake thy leaden ſceptre go,
Beſtow thy poppy upon wakeful woe,
Sickneſs and ſorrow, whoſe pale lids ne'er know
Thy downy finger; dwell upon their eyes,
Shut in their tears; ſhut out their miſeries.
All thy fears,
Thy wakeful terrors, affrighting dreams,
Have now their full reward.
Diſſembling fleep, but wakeful with the fright,
The day takes off the pleaſure of the night.
WAKEFULNEss. n. ſ. [from wakºſul..]
1. Want of ſleep.
Other perfumes are fit to be uſed in burning agues, con-
ſumptions, and too much wakefulneſs. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
2. Forbearance of ſleep.
To WA/KEN. v. m. [from wake.] To wake; to ceaſe from
ſleep; to be rouſed from ſleep.
Early Turnus wak'ning with the light,
All clad in armour, calls hi -
- S troops to fight.
To WA/KEN. v.a. &gt; p º
I. To rouſe from ſleep.
When he was waken'd with the noiſe,
And ſaw the beaſt ſo ſmall 3.
7 » - - -
T. *: this, quoth he, that gives ſo weak a voice,
at tº ". men withal * Spenſer,
Milton.
Dryden.
Craſhaw.
Dryden.
Drydºn.
Denham's Sophy.
A man that is wakened out of ſleep.
We make no longer ſtay; go, waken Eve
2. To excite to action. -
Then Homer's and Tyrtaeus' martial m
Wakem'd the world, and ń. loud º:
3. To produce ; to bring forth. -
They introduce
Their ſacred ſong, and waken raptures high.
Wºº, n. ſ. [A plant.] The leaves are en
and triangular at the baſe: the flower confi
ſhaped like an aſs's eye: from the bottom of * †: º
the pointal, with embryo's, each of which becomes a . .
wº ..". Miller. undi
AL E. 71. M. l pe axon ; a web.] A riſino -
face of &amp; &gt; &gt; J riſing Part in the fur-
To WALK. v. a. ſwalen, German; realcan, Saxon
1. To move by leiſurely ſteps, »
for the other is taken up.
What mean you, Caeſar think you to walk forth? §
A man was ſeen walking before the door very compoſed .
2. It is uſed in the ceremonious language of invitation, .
or go.
Zech. iv. I.
AMiltºn,
Rºſºmmºn.
Milton.
tire, long,
to roſ.
ſo that one foot is ſet down, º
Sir, walk in.
--I had rather walk here, I thank you. Shakeſha
3. To move for exerciſe or amuſement. ałºſtart,
Theſe bow'rs as wide as we need walk. Miltºn
4. To move the ſloweſt pace. Not to trot, gallo
Applied to a horſe. p 2 gallop, or amble,
5. To appear as a ſpectre.
The ſpirits of the dead
May walk again; if ſuch thing be, thy mother
Appear'd to me laſt night. Shakespeare . hinter'; Tal,
It then draws near the ſeaſon *
Wherein the ſpirit is wont to walk. Shałºff. Hamlı.
There were walking ſpirits of the houſe of York, as well
in Ireland as in England. Davier's Ireland.
Some ſay no evil thing that walks by night,
In fog, or fire, by lake, or mooriſh fen,
Blue meagre hag, or ſtubborn unlaid ghoſt,
That breaks his magick chains at curfew time;
No goblin, or ſwart fairy of the mine,
Hath hurtful pow'r o'er true virginity.
6. To act on any occaſion.
Do you think I’d walk in any plot,
Where Madam Sempronia ſhould take place of me,
And Fulvia come i' th' rear * B. jºhnſºn.
7. To be in motion. Applied to a clamorous or abuſive fe-
male tongue; and is ſtill in low language retain'd.
As ſhe went, her tongue did walk
In foul reproach, and terms of vile deſpight;
Provoking him by her outragious talk,
8. To act in ſleep.
When was it ſhe laſt walk'd?—
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, unlock her cloſet,
take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, and return tº
bed ; yet all this while in a moſt faſt ſleep. Shakeſp. Matheti,
9. To range; to move about.
Affairs that walk,
As they ſay ſpirits do at midnight, have
In them a milder nature, than the buſineſs
That ſeeks diſpatch by day. Shakespeare . Hin, VIII,
Io. To move off.
When he comes forth, he will make their cows and g
rans to walk, if he doth no other harm to their perion* Sºſ.
11. To act in any particular manner.
Do juſtly, |º and walk humbly with thy God. Mic.
If thou forget the Lord, and walk after other gods, ye
ſhall ſurely periſh. Duviº.
I'll love with fear the only God, and wak M.
- - - Milláň.
As in his preſence.
12. To travel. -
The iºd hath bleſſed thee; he knowsthº
through this wilderneſs. Dºut, il. 7.
To WALK. v. a.
Miltºn.
1. To paſs through.
do not without danger walk theſe ſtreets. Shałęſtart.
No rich or noble knave, Pºt.
Shall walk the world in credit to his grave. .
2. To lead out, for the ſake of air or exerciſe.
WAlk. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Aćt of walking for air or exerciſe. - Miltºn.
Not walk by moon without thee, is ſweet,
Her keeper by her ſide, Dryá".
To watch her walks, his hundred eyes applied. hiſ.
Philander uſed to take a walk in a neighbour” wº 4.
I long to renew our old intercourſe, 9" In Oſſil *}.
ſerences, and our evening walkſ.
2, Gait; ſtep; manner of moving. -
Morpheus, of all his numerous train,
The ſhape of man, and imitated beſt; "..
The walk, the words, the geſture could ſupply, Dryºn.
The habit mimick, and the micn ſupply. 3. A
expreſs'd
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">VV A L
: y --
º
-
2.
3. A length of ſpace, or circuit through which one walks.
He uſually from hence to th’ palace gate
Makes it his walk. Shakeſp. Macketh.
If that way be your walk, you have not far. AMilton.
She would never miſs one day,
A walk ſo fine, a fight ſo gay. Prior.
4. An avenue ſet with trees.
He hath left you all his walks,
His private harbours, and new-planted orchards,
On that ſide the Tiber. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
Goodlieſt trees planted with walks and bow’rs. Milton.
5. Way ; road; range; place of wandering.
The mountains are his walks, who wand'ring feeds
On ſlowly-ſpringing herbs. Sandys's Paraphraſe.
Set women in his eye, and in his walk,
Among daughters of men the faireſt found. Milton.
Our ſouls, for want of that acquaintance here,
May wander in the ſtarry walks above. Dryden.
That bright companion of the ſun,
Whoſe glorious aſpe&amp;t ſcal'd our new-born king;
And now a round of greater years begun,
New influence from his walks of light did bring. Dryden.
Wanting an ampler ſphere to expatiate in, he open'd a
boundleſs walk for his imagination. Pope.
6. [Turbo, Lat..] A fiſh. Ainſw.
7. //alk is the ſloweſt or leaſt raiſed pace, or going of a
horſe. In a walk, a horſe lifts two legs of a ſide, one after
the other, beginning with the hind leg firſt ; as ſuppoſe that
he leads with the legs on his right ſide, then he lifts his far
hind foot firſt ; and in the time that he is ſetting it down,
which in a ſtep is always ſhort of the tread of his fore foot
upon the ſame ſide, he lifts his far fore foot, and ſets it down
before his near foot, and juſt as he liſts up his near hind foot,
and ſets it down again juſt ſhort of his near fore foot, and
juſt as he is ſetting it down, he lifts his near fore foot, and ſets
it down juſt before his far fore foot. Farrier's Dict.
WA/LKE.R. m. ſ. [from walk..] One that walks.
I ride and walk, and am reputed the beſt walker in this
town. - Swift to Gay.
May no ſuch vicious walkers croud the ſtreet. Gay.
WA’LKINGst AFF. m. ſ. A ſtick which a man holds to ſup-
port him in walking.
The club which a man of an ordinary ſize could not lift,
was but a walking/?aff for Hercules. Glanville.
WALL. m.ſ. [wal, Welſh; vallum, Lat. pall, Saxon ; walle,
Dutch.] -
1. A ſeries of brick or ſtone carried upwards, and cemented
with mortar; the ſides of a building.
Poor Tom 1 that eats the wall-newt and the water-
newt. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Where though I mourn my matchleſs loſs alone,
And none between my weakneſs judge and me;
Yet ev'n theſe gentle walls allow my moan,
Whoſe doleful echo's with my plaints agree. J7%tton.
Part riſe in cryſtal wall or ridge direct. AMilton.
2. Fortification; works built for defence. In this ſenſe it is
commonly uſed plurally.
With love's light wings did I o'erperch theſe walls;
For ſtony limits cannot hold out love. Shakeſpeare.
General, the walls are thine:
Witneſs the world, that I create thee here
My lord and maſter. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
A pre
To that proud &amp; whoſe high walls thou ſaw'ſt --
Left in confuſion. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xii.
I ruſh undaunted to defend the walls. Dryden.
3. To take the wall. To take the upper place; not to give place.
I will take the wall of any man or maid of Mon-
tague's. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
When once the poet's honour ceaſes,
From reaſon far his tranſports rove :
And Boileau, for eight hundred pieces,
Makes Louis take the wall of Jove.
To WALL. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To incloſe with walls. -
There bought a piece of ground, which Birſa call’d,
From the bull's hide they firſt inclos'd and wall’d. Dryden.
2. To defend by walls.
The walled towns do work my greater woe:
The foreſt wide is fitter to reſound
The hollow echo of my careful cries. Spenſºr.
His council adviſed him to make himſelf maſter of ſome
good walled town. Bacon's Hen. VII.
The Spaniards caſt themſelves continually into roundels,
their ſtrongeſt ſhips walling in the reſt. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
And terror of his name, that walls us in
From danger. Denham's Sophy.
WAllcrº Eſper. m. ſ. A bird. - Ainſw.
WA'llet. m. ſ. [peallian, to travel, Saxon.]
1. A bag, in which the neceſſaries of a traveller are put; a knap-
ſack.
Prior.
W A N
Having entered into a long gallery, he laid down his wallet,
and ſpread his carpet, in order to repoſe himſelf upon it. Addison
2 Any thing protuberant and ſwagging.
Who would believe, that there were mountaineers
Pew-lapt like bulls, whoſe throats had hanging at them
//allets of fleſh. is, Keſheare
ALLE(YED. adj. [wall and ey Havi h: - º eſpeare.
JWal-ey ſ | nd eye.] Having white eyes.
Thi al -eyed ſlave ! whither wouldſt thou convey
WA’LL is growing image of thy fiend-like face Sha'eſpeare.
.*****9WER. m.ſ. See Stockgill, Flower, of which
it is a ſpecies.
//alftowers are of ſeveral ſorts; as the common ones, the
great ſingle ones, the great double ones, the ſingle white,
the double white, the double red, and the pale yellow; all
which flower about the end of March, and in May or
April. - AMortimer’s Huſbandry,
WALLFRUIT. n.ſ. Fruit, which to be ripened, muſt Ée
planted againſt a wall. -
To walfruit and garden-plants, there cannot be a worſe
enemy than ſnails. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
To WA’llop. v. n. [pealan, to boil, Saxon.] To boil.
WA’llouse. m. ſ. [cimex, Lat.] An inſect. Ainſw.
To WALLOW. v. n. [walugan, Gothick; palpian, Saxon.]
1. To move heavily and clumſily.
Part, huge of bulk |
J/allowing unwickly, enormous in their gait,
Tempeſt the ocean. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. vii.
2. To roll himſelf in mire, or any thing filthy.
Gird thee with ſackcloth, and wallow thyſelf in aſhes. jer.vi.
Dead bodies, in all places of the camp, wallºwed in their
own blood. Knolles's Hºft. of the Turks.
A boar was wallowing in the water, when a horſe was go-
ing to drink. L'Eºrange.
3. To live in any ſtate of filth or groſs vice.
God ſees a man wallowing in his native impurity, delivered
over as an abſolute captive to fin, polluted with its guilt, and
enſlaved by its power ; and in this moſt loathſome condition,
fixes upon him as an obječt of his diſtinguiſhing mercy. South.
A WA’llow. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A kind of rolling walk.
One taught the toſs, and one the French new wallow ;
His ſword-knot this, his cravat that deſign'd. Dryden.
WA LRU’E. m. ſ. An herb. - Ainſw.
WA’llwort. n.ſ. A plant, the ſame with dwarf-elder, or
danewort. See ELDER.
WA/LNUT. n.ſ. [palp pnuza, Saxon, nux juglans.] The cha-
raćters are; it hath male flowers, or katkins, which are pro-
duced at remote diſtances from the fruit on the ſame tree;
the outer cover of the fruit is very thick and green, under
which is a rough hard ſhell, in which the fruit is incloſed,
ſurrounded with a thin ſkin: the kernel is deeply divided into
four lobes; and the leaves of the tree are pinnated or winged.
The ſpecies are, 1. The common walnut. 2. The large
French walnut. 3. The thin-ſhell'd walnut. 4. The dou-
ble walnut. 5 T he late ripe walnut. 6. The hard-ſhell’d
walnut. 7. The Virginian black walnut. 8. Virginian
black walnut, with a long furrowed fruit. 9. The hickery,
or white Virginian walnut. Io. I he ſmall hickery, or white
Virginian walnut. Miller.
'Tis a cockle, or a walnut-ſhell;
A knack, a toy. Shakeſ Taming of the Shrew.
Help to ſearch my houſe this one time; if I find not what
I ſeek, let them ſay of me, as jealous as Ford, that ſearcheth
a hollow walnut for his wife's leman. Shakeſpeare.
Some woods have the veins ſmooth as fir and walnut. Bacon.
WA’ll PEPPER. m. ſ. See Hous ELEEK, of which it is a ſpecies.
WA/LTRoN. m. ſ.
The morſe, or waltron, is called the ſea-horſe. Woodward.
To WA/MBLE. v. n. [wemmelen, Dutch..] To roll with nauſea
and ſickneſs. It is uſed of the ſtomach.
A covetous man deliberated betwixt the qualms of a warm-
bling ſtomach, and an unſettled mind. L’Eſtrange.
was adj. [Pann, Saxon; gwan, weakly, Welſh.] Pale, as
with ſickneſs; languid of look.
Sad to view his viſage pale and wane,
who erſt in flowers of freſheft youth was clad. Fa. Kºen.
All the charms of love, lip !
Salt Cleopatra, ſoften thy wan IiP
Let ... join with iº. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleºpatra.
Why ſo pale and wan, fond lover ?
Prythee, why ſo pale -
will, when looking well can't move her, -
Looking ill prevail? - Suckling.
Their couiſe through thickeſt conſtellations held, ...
Spreading their bane; the blaſted ſtars look'd wan. Milton.
How chang'd from him, -
Companion of my arms', how wan ! how dim
How'faded all thy glories' -
W.A.N. for won; the old pret of ºn.
And thoſe with which th' Eubean young man ºven
Swift Atalanta, when through craft he her outran. Sfcºſºr.
30 G He
“”
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">VV A N
W A N
He wan the king with ſecrecy and diligence; but chiefly
becauſe he was his old ſervant in his leſs fortunes. Bacon.
wasp. m. ſ. [waand, Pº d
. A ſmall ſtick, or twig a long rod. . .
I. A "F. ſkilful º peel'd me certain wand. Shakeſp.
with a whip or wand, if you ſtrike the air, the ſharper
and quicker you ſtrike it, the louder ſound it giveth. Bacon.
His ſpear, to equal which the talleſt pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the maſt
Of ſome great admiral, were but a wand. Milton.
A child runs away laughing, with good ſmart blows of a
wand on his back, who would have cried for an unkind
word. Locke on Education.
2. Any ſtaff of authority, or uſe.
Though he had both ſpurs and wand, they ſeemed rather
marks of ſovereignty, than inſtruments of puniſhment. Sidney.
He held before his decent ſteps a ſilver wand. Milton.
3. A charming rod. -
Nay, lady, fit; if I but wave this wand, -
Your nerves are all chain'd up in alabaſter. Milton.
Picus bore a buckler in his hand;
His other wav'd a long divining wand. Dryden.
To WA’NDER. v. n. [panonian, Saxon; wandelen, Dutch..]
1. To rove ; to ramble here and there; to go, without any
certain courſe. It has always an ill ſenſe.
I have no will to wander forth of doors. Shakeſpeare.
I will go loſe myſelf,
And wander up and down to view the city. Shakeſpeare.
The old duke is baniſh'd; four loving lords have put them-
ſelves into exile with him, whoſe revenues enrich the new
duke; therefore he gives them good leave to wander. Shakeſp.
Then came wand'ring by
A ſhadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood, and he ſhriek'd out aloud.
They wandered about in ſheeps and goats ſkins.
Let them wander up and down for meat.
From this nuptial bow'r,
How ſhall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower world : Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
Here ſhould my wonder dwell, and here my praiſe;
But my fixt thoughts my wand'ring eye betrays. Denham.
A hundred years they wander on the ſhore. Dryden.
Virgil introduces his AFncas in Carthage, before he brings
him to Laurentum ; and even after that, he wanders to the
kingdom of Evander. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. To deviate; to go aſtray.
Shakeſpeare.
Płeb. xi.
Pſ. lix.
O let me not wander from thy commandments. Pſ. cxix.
They give the reins to wand'ring thoughts,
*Till by their own perplexities involv’d,
They ravel more. Milton.
To WANDER. v. a. To travel over, without a certain courſe.
The nether flood
Runs diverſe, wand'ring many a famous realm.
Thoſe few eſcap'd
Famine and anguiſh, will at laſt conſume,
Jºand'ring that wat'ry deſart. A/ilton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
See harneſs'd ſteeds deſert the ſtony town,
And wander roads unſtable, not their own.
WA'N DE RER. n.ſ.. [from wander.] Rover; rambler.
Nor for my peace will I go far,
As wanderers that ſtill do roam ;
But make my ſtrengths ſuch as they are,
Here in my boſom, and at home.
He here to every thirſty wanderer,
By ſly enticement, gives his baneful cup. Milton.
The whole people is a race of ſuch merchants as are wan-
derers by profeſſion, and at the ſame time are in all places in-
capable of lands or offices. Spectator, N° 495.
Taſte, that eternal wanderer, which flies,
Milton.
Gay.
B. Johnſon,
From head to ears, and now from ears to eyes. Pope.
WA/NDER ING. n ſ [from wander.]
1. Uncertain peregrination.
He aſks the god, what new appointed home
Should end his wand'rings, and his toils relieve Addiſon.
2. Aberration ; miſtaken way.
If any man's eagerneſs of glory has made him overſee the
way to it, let him now recover his wanderings. Decay of Piety.
3. Incertainty ; want of being fixed.
A proper remedy for this wandering of thoughts, would do
great ſervice to the ſtudious. Locke.
To WANE. v. n. Iranian, to grow leſs, Saxon.]
1. To grow leſs; to decreaſe. Applied to the moon.
The huſbandman, in ſowing and ſetting, upon good reaſon
obſerves the waxing and waining of the moon. Fiake will.
//aining moons their ſettled periods keep,
To ſwell the billows, and ferment the deep. Addison.
2. To decline; to fink. -
A lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waining age. Shakeſpeare.
I will interchange -
My wained ſtate for Henry's regal crown. Shakeſp.
Your father were a fool
To give thee all; and in his waining age
Set foot under thy table.
In theſe confines ſily have I lurk'd,
To watch the waining of mine enemie.
. Nothing more jealous than a favourite,
ing time, and ſuſpect of ſatiety.
S*}ar.
Shakespeare Rich. III.
towards the wain-
I'm waining in his favour, yet I love him. %.
You ſaw but ſorrow in its waining form ryden,
A working ſea remaining from a ſtorm ; &gt;
When the now weary waves roll o'er the dee
And faintly murmur, ere they fall aſleep. P, D
Land and trade ever will wax and war. together &amp;:
Her waining form no longer ſhall incite gether. Chill.
Envy in woman, or deſire in man. Aw's jane Shr,
WAN F. n.ſ. (from the verb.]
1. Decreaſe of the moon.
The ſowing at the wane of the moon
the corn ſound. B
Young cattle, that are brought forth in the full .
moon, are ſtronger and larger than thoſe that are br .
forth in the wane. Ought
is thought to make
- - - - - - - - - - Bacºn,
This is fair Diana's caſe; ūſāh
For all aſtrologers maintain,
Each night a bit drops off her face,
When mortals ſay ſhe's in her wane. Swift
2. Decline; diminution; declenſion.
You're caſt upon an age, in which the church is in its
twane. - South.
WA's NED. adj. [from wan.] Turned pale and him. .
loured.
Is it not monſtrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of paſſion,
Could force his ſoul ſo to his own conceit,
That, from her working, all his viſage wann'.
WA/NNess. n.ſ. [from wan.] Paleneſs; languor.
To WANT. v. a. ſpana, Saxon.]
1. To be without ſomething fit or neceſſary.
// ant no money, Sir John ; you ſhall want none. Shaiſ).
A man to whom God hath given riches, ſo that he
wanteth nothing for his ſoul of all that he deſireth, yet God
Shalºff.
giveth him not power to eat thereof. Ard. vi. 2.
2. To be defective in ſomething.
Smells do moſt of them want names, Locłe.
Nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou didſt want,
Obedience to the law. Miltºn.
3. To fall ſhort of ; not to contain.
Northink, though men were none,
That heav'n wou’d want ſpectators, God want praiſe. Mit.
4. To be without ; not to have.
By deſcending from the thrones above,
Thoſe happy places, thou haſt deign'da-while
To want, and honour theſe. Miltºn's Par, Lºft.
How loth I am to have recourſe to rites
So full of horror, that I once rejoice -
I want the uſe of fight. Dryden and Let'; 0 diº.
The unhappy never want enemies. Clarija.
5. To need; to have need of; to lack.
It hath cauſed a great irregularity in our calendar, and
wants to be reformed, and the equinox to be right'."
puted. Hºlder,
God, who ſees all things intuitively, does not want helps;
he neither ſtands in need of logick, nor uſes it. Baker.
6. To wiſh for ; to long for.
Down I come, like gliſt'ring Phaeton, r
Wanting the manage of unruly jades. Shaiſsart.
The ſylvans to their ſhades retire,
Thoſe very ſhades and ſtreams new ſhades and ſtreams it:
quire, - - D
And want a cooling breeze of wind to fan the ragingfire. ry.
What wants my ſon 2 for know . . . /)...
My ſon thou art, and I muſt call thee ſo. 4.
Men who want to get a woman into their *:
ſcruple the means. -
To WANT. v. n.
1. To be wanted; to be improperly abſent; no
cient Quattity. M.
N. ºthere want cornice or freeze. . Mr.
Finds wealth where 'tis, beſtows it where it”. ham
Cities in deſarts, woods in cities plants. .. º
we have the means in our hands, and nothing º
plication of them is wanting. ſ
As in bodies, thus in ſouls, we find . .
what wants in blood and ſpirits, ſwell'd wit
The deſign, the diſpoſition, the manners, *
t to be in ſuff-
h wind. Pºſt,
d the thoughts,
- or imper-
are all before it; where any of thoſe are * Dryden.
fect, ſo much wants in the imitation of huma" life. Dr)
2. To fail; to be deficient. -
No ſhall I to the work thou enterpriſeſt Miltºn,
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid. Though
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A N
Though England is not wanting in a learned nobility, yet
unhappy circumſtances have confined me to a narrow
choice. Dryden's Dedication to Lord Ciffºrd.
Whatever fortune, good or bad betide,
No time ſhall find me wanting to my truth. Dryden.
Religion will never be without enemies, nor thoſe enemies
be wanting in endeavours to expoſe it to the contempt of
mankind. Rogers's Sermons.
Several are againſt his ſevere uſage of you, and would be
glad of an occaſion to convince the reſt of their error, if you
will not be wanting to yourſelf. Swift.
3. To be miſled ; to be not had.
Twelve, wanting one, he ſlew,
My brethren : I alone ſurviv'd. Dryden.
- Granivorous animals have a long colon and calcum, which
in carnivorous are wanting. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
W.A.N.T. n.ſ.
1. Need.
It infers the good
By thee communicated, and our want. Milton.
Parents ſhould diſtinguiſh between the wants of fancy, and
thoſe of nature. Locke.
2. Deficiency.
This proceeded not from any want of knowledge, but of
judgment. Dryden.
One objećtion to Civita Vecchia, is, that the air is not
wholeſome : this proceeds from want of inhabitants. Addiſon.
The blood flows through the veſſels, by the exceſs of the
force of the heart above the incumbent preſſure, which in fat
people is exceſſive ; and as want of a due quantity of mo-
tion of the fluids increaſeth fat, the diſeaſe is the cauſe of
itſelf. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. The ſtate of not having.
You ſhall have no reaſon to complain of me, for want of a
generous diſdain of this world. Pope.
4. Poverty; penury ; indigence.
Nothing is ſo hard for thoſe who abound in riches, as to
conceive how others can be in want. Swift.
5. [pano, Saxon.] A mole.
WA/N to N. m. ſ. [This word is derived by Minſhew from want
one, a man or woman that wants a companion. This ety-
mology, however odd, junius ſilently adopts. Skinner, who
had more acuteneſs, cannot forbear to doubt it, but offers
nothing better.]
1. Laſcivious ; libidinous ; letcherous; luſtful.
Thou art froward by nature, enemy to peace,
Laſcivious, wanton ; more than well beſeems
A man of thy profeſſion. Shakeſ, Hen. VI.
Entic’d to do him wanton rites. 44ilton.
2. Licentious ; diſſolute.
My plenteous joys,
Wanton in fulneſs, ſeek to hide themſelves
In drops of ſorrow. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Men grown wanton by proſperity,
Study’d new arts of luxury and eaſe.
3. Frolickſome ; gay; ſportive; airy.
As flies to wanton boys, we are to th’ gods:
They kill us for their ſport. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Note a wild and wanton herd,
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wenice.
Time drives the flocks from field to fold ;
The flow’rs do fade, and wanton fields
To wayward winter reckoning yields. Raleigh.
How eagerly ye follow my diſgrace,
As if it fed ye; and how ſleek and wanton
Y’ appear, in every thing may bring my ruin. Shakeſpeare.
4. Looſe ; unreſtrained. - - -
How does your tongue grow wanton in her praiſe ! Addison
5. Quick, and irregular of motion.
6. Luxuriant; ſuperfluous.
What we by day lop overgrown, -
One night or two, with wanton growth derides, -
Tending to wild. Milton.
Women richly gay in gems and wanton dreſs. Milton.
7. Not regular; turned fortuitouſly.
The quaint mazes in the wanton green, -
For want of tread are undiſtinguiſhable. Milton.
WA'Nton. n.ſ.
1. A laſcivious perſon; a ſtrumpet; a whoremonger.
An old wanton will be doating upon women, when he can
ſcarce ſee without ſpectacles. South's Sermons.
To lip a wanton in a ſecure couch,
And to ſuppoſe her chaſte.
2. A trifier; an inſignificant flutterer.
Shall a beardleſs boy,
A cocker'd, ſilken wanton brave your fields,
Mocking the air with colours idly ſpread,
And find no check 2 Shakeſpeare's K. john.
Paſs with your beſt violence;
I am afraid you make a wanton of me. Shakepeare's Hamlet.
Roſcommon.
Shake?. Othello.
WV A R
3. A word of ſlight endearment.
Peace, my wantºns; he will do,
More than you can aim unto.
To WA’s ros. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To play laſciviouſly.
He from his guards and midnight tent,
Diſguis'd o'er hills and vallies went,
To wantºn with the ſprightly dame,
And in his pleaſure loſt his fame. Prior
2. To revel; to play. -
Oh I I heard him wan, an in his praiſe;
Speak things of him might charm i. Otway.
Nature here
Hanton'd as in her prime, and play'd at will
Her virgin fancies. Milton.
O ye muſes! deign your bleſ retreat,
Where Horace wantons at your ſpring,
And Pindar ſweeps a bolder ſtring. Fenton.
3. To move nimbly, and irregularly.
WA'Ntonly. adv. [from wanton.] Laſciviouſly; frolickſome-
ly; gayly; ſportively; careleſsly.
hou doſt but try how far I can forbear,
Nor art that monſter which thou wouldſt appear:
But do not wantonly my paſſion move,
I pardon nothing that relates to love. Dryden.
WA/NToNNEss. n.J. [from wanton.]
1. Laſciviouſneſs; ſetchery.
The ſpirit of wantonneſs is ſcar'd out of him. Shakeſp.
Bulls and goats bled apace; but neither the violence of the
one, nor the wantonne, of the other, ever died a vićtim at
any of their altars. South.
2. Sportiveneſs; frolick; humour.
When I was in France,
Young would be as ſad as night,
Only for wantonneſs. - Shakespeare K. jºhn.
Love, rais'd on beauty, will like that decay;
Qur hearts may bear its ſlender chain a day:
As flow'ry bands in wantonneſ are worn,
A morning's pleaſure, and at evening torn. Pºpe.
3. Licentiouſneſs; negligence of reſtraint.
The tumults threatened to abuſe all acts of grace, and
turn them into wantonneſs. A. Charles.
*Till wantonneſ, and pride
Raiſe out of friendſhip hoſtile deeds in peace. Milton.
WA/NTwiT. n.ſ. [want and wit..] A fooſ; an idiot.
Such a wantwit ſadneſs makes of me,
That I have much ado to know myſelf. Sºakeſpeare.
WA'NTY. n.ſ. [I know not whence derived.] A broad girth of
leather, by which the load is bound upon the horſe.
A panel and wanty, pack-ſaddle and ped,
With line to fetch litter. Tuſſºr.
WA'PED. adj. [Of this word I know not the original, except
that to whape, to ſhock, or dejećt, is found in Spenſer; from
which the meaning may be gathered.] Dejected; cruſhed by
miſery.
This makes the waped widow wed again. Shaſe care.
WA'PENTAKE.. n.ſ.. [from woepun, Saxon, and take, wapen-
takium, waſ entagium, low Latin J
//apentake is all one with what we call a hundred : as
upon a neeting for that purpoſe, they touched each other's
weapons, in token of their fidelity and allegiance. Cowel.
Hundred ſignifieth a hundred pledges, which were under
the command and aſſurance of their alderman ; which, as I
ſuppoſe, was alſo called a wapentake, ſo named, of touching
the weapon or ſpear of their alderman, and ſwearing to fol-
low him faithfully, and ſerve their prince truly. But others
think, that a wapentake was ten hundreds, or boroughs. ‘feſſer.
WAR. m. ſ. [werre, old Dutch ; guerre, Fr.]
War may be defined the exerciſe of violence under ſove-
reign command againſt withſtanders; force, authority, find
reſiſtance being the eſſential parts thereof. Violence, limited
by authority, is ſufficiently diſtinguiſhed from robbery, and
the like outrages; yet conſiſting in relation towards others,
it neceſſarily requires a ſuppoſition of reſiſtance, whereby the
force of war becomes different from the violence inflicted
upon ſlaves or yielding maleſactors. Aaleigh,
On, you nobleſt Engliſh, -
Whoſe blood is fetcht from fathers of war proof. Shakespeare
After a denunciation or indićlion of war, the war is no more
confined to the place of the quarrel, but left at large. Bacon.
I ſaw the figure and armour of him, that headed the pea:
ſants in the war upon Bern, with the ſeveral weapons found
on his followers. Adayan.
2. The inſtruments of war, in poetical language.
The god of love inhabits there,
With all his rage, and dread, and grief, and care; -
His complement of flores, and total war. Prior.
3. Forces; army. Poetically.
On th’ embattled ranks the waves return, -
And overwhelm the war. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xii.
4. The profeſſion of arms. Thing
B. Jºhnſºn.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A R
W A R
- ichty word leapt down from heaven, as a fierce
...” º, : midſt of a land of deſtruction. ///dom.
5. Hoſtility; ſtat: of oppoſition ; act of oppoſition.
- Duncan's horſes
Turn'd wild in nature, broke their ſtalls, flung out,
Contending 'gainſt obedience, as they would
Muke war with man. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To was v. n. [from the noun J. To make war; to be in a
ſtate of hoſtility. -
Was this a face,
To be expos'd againſt the warring winds Shakeſp.
why ſhould war without the walls of Troy,
That find ſuch crucl battle here within : Shakeſpeare.
Make peace with God, for you muſt die, my lord.-
–Have you that holy feeling in your ſoul,
To counſel me to make my peace with God,
And are you yet to your own ſoul's ſo blind,
That you will war with God, by murd'ring me? Shakeſp.
He teacheth my hands to war. 2 Sam. xxii.
This charge I commit unto thee, ſon Timothy, that thou
by them mighteſt war a good warfare. 1 Tim. i. 18.
He limited his forces, to proceed in aid of the Britons, but
in no wiſe to war upon the French. Bacon's Hen. VII.
We ſeem an itious God’s whole work t' undo ;
With new diſeaſes on ourſelves we war,
And with new phyſick, a worſe engine far. Donne.
His next deſign
Was all the Theban race in arms to join,
And war on Theſeus. Dryden.
To the iſland of Delos, by being reckoned a ſacred place,
nations warring with one another reſorted with their goods,
and traded as in a neutral country. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To WAR. v. a. To make war upon. A word not any longer
uſed.
And them long time before great Nimrod was,
That firſt the world with ſword and fire warred. Spenſºr.
To them the ſame was render'd, to the end,
To war the Scot, and borders to defend. Daniel's Civ. War.
To WA/R BLE. v. a. [werben, old Teutonick; wervelen, Ger-
man; to twirl, or turn round.]
1. To quaver any found.
2. To cauſe to quaver.
Follow me as I ſing,
And touch the warbled fring. Milton.
3. To utter muſically. -
he can thaw the numbing ſpell,
If ſhe be right invok'd with wa bled ſong. Milton.
To WAZR BLE. v. m.
1. To be quavered.
| Such ſtrains ne'er warble in the linnet's throat. Gay.
2. To be uttered melodiouſly.
A plaining ſong, plain-ſinging voice requires,
For warbling notes from inward cheering flow. Sidney.
There birds reſort, and in their kind, thy praiſe
Among the branches chant in waſ bling lays. J/otton.
3. To ſing.
Creatures that liv'd and mov’d, and walk'd, or flew ;
Birds on the branches w a bling ; all things ſmil’d. Milton.
She was bled in her throat,
And ten’d her voice to many a merry note,
But indiſtinét.
A bard amid the joyous circle fings
High airs attemper'd to the vocal ſtrings;
Whilſt waſ bling to the varied ſtrain advance,
Two ſprightly youths to form the bounding dance. Pope.
WA/R BLER. m. ſ. [from wa ble.] A ſinger; a ſongſter.
Hark! on ev'ry bough,
In lulling ſtrains the feather'd warblers woo. Tickell.
WARD. A ſyllable much uſed as an affix in compoſition, as
heavenward, with tendency to heaven; hitherward, this way :
from peajib, Saxon
Before ſhe could come to the arbour, ſhe ſaw walking
from her-ward, a man in ſhepherdiſh apparel. Sidney.
To WARD. v. a. [Feaſibian, Saxon ; waren, Dutch ; garder,
French.]
1. To guard; to watch.
He marched forth towards the caſtle wall,
Whoſe gates he found faſt ſhut, ne living wight
To ward the ſame, nor anſwer comer's call. Fairy &amp;teen.
2. To defend ; to protect. -
Tell him it was a hand that warded him
... Fron thouſand dangers, bid him bury it. Shakeſpeare.
3. º ºnce off; to obſtruct, or turn aſide any thing miſchie-
UlS.
Not once the baron liſt his armed hand
T º * the maid, but gazing on her eyes,
Where lordly Cupid ſeem'd in arms to ſtand,
Nº. . º º: lº. Fairfax.
Now wards a ſelling bl es his ground ;
g blow, now ſtrikes again.
Dryden.
Daniel.
Toxeus amaz'd, and with amazement ſlow.
Or to revenge, or ward the coming blow »
Stood doubting; and while doubting thiſ he ſtood.
Receiv'd the ſteel bath'd in his brother's blood 'D
The pointed javelin warded off his rage. - %.
The proviſion of bread for food; cloating to w *.
the inclemency of the air, were to be firſt lookiai, #. off
It inſtructs the ſcholar in the various methods of tu .
off the force of objections, and of diſcovering and re .
Tºwº: º: of ſophiſters. J/atts's Improv, ºf º:
1. To be vigilant; to keep guard.
2. To act upon the defenſive with a weapon.
So redoubling her blows, drove the ſtran
ſhift than to iºd and go back. ger §. º
Short crooked ſwords in cloſer fight they wear *); b, il,
And on their wading arms light bucklers bear. 3. Drd
WARD. m. ſ. [from the verb.] ryden.
1. Watch ; act of guarding.
Still when ſhe ſlept, he kept both watch andw h
Sublime on theſe a . ſteel is rear'd; ard. She'ſ r.
And dire Tiſiphone there keeps the ward.
Girt in her ſanguine gown, by night and day,
Obſervant of the ſouls that paſs the downward way. Dryden
2. Garriſon ; thoſe who are intruſted to keep a place. -
By reaſon of theſe two forts, though there be but
ſmall wards left in them, there are two good towns now
grown, which are the greateſt ſtay of both thoſe two coun.
tricS. Špejºr,
Th' aſſieged caſtles ward
Their ſtedfaſt ſtonds did mightily maintain. Spºnſºr,
3. Guard made by a weapon in fencing.
Thou know'ſt my old ward; here I lay, and thus I bore
my point. Shakespeare . Hin. IV.
Come from thy ward,
For I can here diſarm thee with this ſtick. Shaiſ, Tºmpſ.
Now, by proof it ſhall appear,
Whether thy horns are ſharper, or my ſpear.
At this, I threw : for want of other ward,
He lifted up his hand, his front to guard. Drydºn.
4. Fortreſs; ſtrong hold.
She dwells ſecurely on the excellency of her honour. Now
could I come to her with any detection in my hand, I could
drive her from the ward of her purity, her reputation, and a
thouſand other her defences, which now are too too ſtrongly
embattled againſt me. Shakeſp. Merry Wives ºf Windſºr.
5. [J/arda, law Lat.) Diſtričt of a town.
Throughout the trembling city plac'd aguard,
Dealing an equal ſhare to every ward. Dryden,
6. Cuſtody; confinement. -
That wretched creature being deprehended in that impº",
was held in ward. Hacier.
Stopt there was his too veh’ment ſpeech with ſº .
And he ſent cloſe to ward from where he ſtood. Daniel.
. The part of a lock, which, correſponding to the P^*
key, hinders any other from opening it.
In the key-hole turns
Th’ intricate ward, and ev'ry bolt and bar. Miltºn.
As there are locks for ſeveral purpoſes, ſo are there ſeveral
inventions in the making and contriving their ward, or
guards. Aºzºn's Mich. Bº
The keys, as well as the locks, were fitted ward to º
by the ſame wiſdom. Grew's Cºſmºg.
8. One in the hands of a guardian.
The king cauſeth bring up his wardi,
7
but beſtoweth nº
- - -- (* ºld.
more of their rents upon them than is uſeful. Drum”
You know our father's ward, &gt;
The fair Monimia : is your heart at peace
y p Ottoºſ.
Is it ſo guarded that you could not love her
Thy Violante's heart was ever thine, Drydºn.
Compell'd to wed, before ſhe was my ward. J.
when ſtern as tutors, and as uncles hai", Dryden.
We laſh the pupil, and defraud the ward. great can
Titles of honour and privileges, the rich and ". O
never deſerve, unleſs they employ them fºr the pro Sprat.
theſe, the true ward; and children of God.
9. The ſtate of a child under a guardian;
I muſt attend his majeſty's command, tº " Shaftſcaſt.
in ward, evermore in ſubjection. - h baſed tº
Lewis the eleventh of France having * i. he had
greatneſs and power of the peers, would ſº Bacºn.
brought the crown º of º -
. Guardianſhip; right over orphans. r dr-
Io. It is alſo º in Ireland, that the º of
riages of gentlemen's children ſhould be in " º,
any of thoſe lords.
wa's of N. n.ſ. [waerden, Dutch..]
I. A keeper ; a guardian.
2. A head officer. - 1 Garth.
The warden of apothecaricº hall. A mag"
hom I am no"
_
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A R
W A R
º
º
*
2
3. Warden of the cinque ports.
A magiſtrate that has the juriſdićtion of thoſe havens in the
eaſt part of England, commonly called the cinque ports, or
five havens, who has there all that juriſdićtion which the ad-
miral of England has in places not exempt. The reaſon why
one magiſtrate ſhould be aſſigned to theſe havens ſeems to be,
becauſe in reſpect of their ſituation, they formerly required
a more vigilant care than other havens, being in greater dan-
ger of invaſion by our enemies. Cowel.
4. [Pyrum volemum, Lat. I know not whence denominated.]. A
large pear.
Nor muſt all ſhoots of pears alike be ſet,
Cruſtumian, Syrian pears, and wardens great. May's Virg.
Ox-cheek when hot, and wardens bak'd ſome cry.
King.
WARDER. m. ſ. [from ward.]
I. A keeper; a guard.
Upon thoſe gates with force he fiercely flew,
And rending them in pieces, felly ſlew
Thoſe warders ſtrange, and all that elſe he met. Hubbard.
Where be theſe warders, that they wait not here?
Open the gates. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Though bladed corn be lodg’d and trees blown down,
Though caſtles topple on their warder, heads. Shakeſpeare.
The warders of the gate but ſcarce maintain
Th’ unequal combat, and reſiſt in vain. Dryden.
2. A truncheon by which an officer of arms forbade fight.
Sound trumpets, and ſet forward combatants.
—But ſtay, the king hath thrown his worder down.
Shakeſpeare.
Then, then, when there was nothing could have ſtaid
My father from the breaſt of Bolingbroke,
Q, when the king did throw his warder down,
His own life hung upon the ſtaff he threw. Shakeſpeare.
WA'RDMote, n. ſ. ſpeano and mor, or zemot, Saxon; ward-
motº, low Lat.) A meeting ; a court held in each ward or diſ-
trićt in London for the direction of their affairs.
WARDrop E. m. ſ. [garderobe, French; garderoba, low Lat.) A
room where cloaths are kept. -
The third had of their wardrobe cuſtody,
In which were not rich tires nor garments gay,
The plumes of pride, and wings of vanity,
But cloaths meet to keep keen cold away.
I will kill all his coats,
I'll murder all his wardrobe piece by piece
Until I meet the king. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Behold :
What from his wardrobe her belov’d allows,
To deck the wedding-day of his unſpotted ſpouſe. Dryden.
It would not be an impertinent deſign to make a kind of
an old Roman wardrobe, where you ſhould ſee toga's and tu-
nica's, the chlamys and trabea, and all the different veſts and
ornaments ſo often mentioned in the Greek and Roman au-
thors. Addiſon.
WA/RDship n ſ [from ward.]
1. Guardianſhip.
By reaſon of the tenures in chief revived, the ſums for re-
ſpect of homage be encreaſed, and the profits of wardſhips can-
not but be much advanced. Bacon.
2. Pupillage; ſtate of being under ward.
The houſes ſued out their livery, and redeemed themſelves
from the wardſhip of tumults. King Charles.
WARE. The preterite of wear, more frequently wore.
A certain man ware no cloaths. Luke viii. 27.
WARE. adj [For this we commonly ſay aware.]
1. Being in expectation of ; being provided againſt. .
The lord of that ſervant ſhall come in a day when he look-
eth not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of him.
Matth. xxiv. 5 c.
Fairy Queen.
2. Cautious ; wary.
What man ſo wiſe, what earthly wit ſo ware,
As to deſcry the crafty cunning train
By which deceit doth maſk in Vizor fair. Fairy Qween.
Bid her well be ware and ſtill erect. 41ilton.
To WARE. v. n. To take heed of; to beware.
A ſhuffled, ſullen, and uncertain light
That dances through the clouds, and ſhuts again,
Then ware a riſing tempeſt on the main. Dryden.
WARE. m. ſ. ſpann, Saxon; waere, Dutch ; wara, Swediſh.]
Commonly ſomething to be ſold.
Let us, like merchan s, ſhew our fouleſt wares,
And think, perchance, they'll ſell. Shakeſpeare.
If the people bring ware or any vićtuals to ſell, that we
would not buy it. Nehem. x. 31.
I know thou whole art but a ſhop
Of toys and trifles, traps and ſnares,
To take the weak, and make them ſtop;
Yet art thou falſer than thy wares.
Why ſhould my black thy love impair
Let the dark ſhop commend the ware. Cleaveland.
He turns himſelf to other wares which he finds your mar-
kets take off. Ilocke.
Ben. johnſon.
wºrvº. adj. [ware and full J Cautious; timorouſly pru-
ent.
WA'Reful sess. n.ſ.[from wareful..] Cautiouſneſs. Obſºlete:
With pretence from Strephon her to guard,
He met her full; but full of ware/unºf;.
WAREHouse. n.ſ. warefulneſ;
chandiſe.
tº "...". is only the warehouſ: of other mens lum-
, I mean falſe and unconcluding reaſonings rather than a
repoſitory of truth for his own uſe. Locke.
She had never more ſhips at ſea, greater quantities of mer-
chandiſe in her warehouſe, than at preſent. Addiſon.
- She the big warehouſe built,
Rais'd the ſtrong crane. Thomſon's A. tumn.
unwary. Spenſ.
WA'Reless. adj. [from ware.] Uncautious;
WA'RELY. adv. [from ware.] Warily; cautiouſly; timorouſly.
hains,
They bound him hand and foot with iron &amp;
Fairy Queen.
Sidney.
[ware and hºuſe..] A ſtorehouſe of mer-
And with continual watch did warely keep.
WA/R FARE. m. / [war and fare.] Military ſervice; mili-
tary life.
In the wilderneſs
He ſhall firſt lay down the rudiments
Of his great warfare, ere I ſend him forth
To conquer ſin and death. Milton's Paradiſ. Regained.
Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearleſs in his righteous cauſe. Milon.
Tully, when he read the Tactics, was thinking on the bar
which was his field of battle: the knowledge of warfare is
thrown away on a general who does not make uſe of what he
knows. -- Dryden.
The ſtate of Chriſtians, even when they are not actually
perſecuted, is a perpetual ſtate of warfare and voluntary ſuf.
ferings. Atterbury's Sermons.
The ſcripture has direéted us to refer theſe miſcarriages in
our Chriſtian wafare to the power of three enemies. Rºgers.
To yº. v. m. [from the noun..] To lead a military
life.
That was the only amulet in that credulous warfaring age
to eſcape dangers in battles. Camden's Remains.
WA'RHABLE. adj. [war and habile, from habilis, Lat, or able.]
Military; fit for war.
The weary Britons, whoſe warhable youth
Was by Maximilian lately led away,
With wretched miſeries and woeful ruth,
Were to thºſe pagans made an open prey. Fairy Queen.
WA'Rily, adv. [ſrom wary.J. Cautiouſly; with timorous pru-
dence; with wiſe forethought.
The charge thereof unto a courteous ſp'rit
Commended was, who thereby did attend,
And warily awaited day and night,
From other covetous fiends it to defend. Fairy Queen.
The change of laws, eſ ecially concerning matters of reli-
gion, muſt be warily proceeded in. Hooker.
It will concern a man to treat conſcience awfully and warily,
by ſtill obſerving what it commands, but eſpecially what it for-
bids. South's Sermons.
They ſearched diligently and concluded warily. Sprat.
WA'RINEss. n.ſ.. [from wary..] Caution; prudent forethought;
timorous ſcrupulouſneſs.
For your own conſcience he gives innocence,
But for your fame a diſcreet warineſs. Donne.
To determine what are little things in religion, great wa-
rine', is to be uſed. Sprat's Sermons.
The path was ſo very ſlippery, the ſhade ſo exceeding
gloomy, and the whole wood ſo full of echoes, that they were
forced to march with the greateſt warineſs, circumſpection and
ſilence. Addison's Freshºlder.
Moſt men have ſo much of ill nature, or of warineſs, as
not to ſooth the vanity of the ambitious man. Addſºn.
1 look upon it to be a moſt clear truth; and expreſſed it
with more warineſ, and reſerve than was neceſſary. Atterbury:
WARK. n ſ. [Anciently uſed for work; whence bulwark.]
Building.
Thou findeſt fault where any's to be found,
And buildeſt ſtrong work upon a weak ground.
WA'R LIKE. n. ſ. [war and like.]
1. Fit for war; diſpoſed to war. -
She uſing ſo ſtrange, and yet ſo well ſucceeding a temper,
made her people by peace warlike. - Sidney.
Old Siward with ten thouſand warlike men,
All ready at appoint, was ſetting forth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
when a warlike ſtate grows ſoft and effeminate, they may
be ſure of a war. Bacon.
O imprudent Gauls,
Relying on falſe hopes, thus to incenſe
The warlike Engliſh.
2. Military; relating to ..ºf hi like toil
he great arch-angcl from his warlike toi
sº t Milton's Paradiſ? Lºft.
Spenſer.
--
Philips.
was ling. n.ſ.. [from war.] This word is I believe only
found in the following adage, and ſeems to mean, one often
arrelled with.
quarrelled w *
3o H Pette:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A R
W A R
=-
's darling than a young man's war-
, ºr be an old man's d g gº Rºº.
"... . ſ. ſwardlºr, Iſlandick, a charm ; Perloº,
Wº: }"ſ. an evil ſpirit. This etymology was com-
municated by Mr. J/ſ...] A male witch; a wizzard.
jºhº in Scotland is applied to a man whom the vulgar
ſuppoſe to be converſant with ſpirits, as a woman who car-
ri; on the ſame commerce is called a witch: he is. ſuppoſed
to have the invulnerable quality which Dryden mentions, who
did not underſtand the word.
He was no warluck, as the Scots commonly call ſuch men,
who they ſay are iron free or lead free. Dryden.
WARM. adj. [warm, Gothick; Pearm, Sax. warm, Dutch.]
1. Not cold, though not hot; heated to a ſmall degree.
He ſtretched himſelf upon the child, and the fleſh of the
child waxed warm. 2 King, iv. 34.
Main ocean flow'd, not idle, but with warm
Prolifick humour, ſoft'ning all her globe.
2. Zealous; ardent.
I never thought myſelf ſo warm in any party's cauſe as to
deſerve their money. Pºpe.
Scaliger in his poetics is very warm againſt it.
Broome's Note: on the Odyſſey.
Milton.
3. Violent; furious; vehement.
Welcome day-light; we ſhall have warm work on't:
The Moor will 'gage
His utmoſt forces on his next aſſault,
To win a queen and kingdom.
4. Buſy in ačtion.
I hate the ling'ring ſummons to attend,
Death all at once would be a nobler end;
Fate is unkind: methinks a general
Should warm, and at the head of armies fall.
5. Fanciful; enthuſiaſtick.
If there be a ſober and a wiſe man, what difference will there
be between his knowledge and that of the moſt extravagant
fancy in the world 2 If there be any difference between them,
the advantage will be on the warm-headed man's ſide, as hav-
ing the more ideas, and the more lively. Locke.
To WARM. v. a. ſſrom the adjective.]
1. To free from cold; to heat in a gentle degree.
It ſhall be for a man to burn, for he ſhall take thereof and
warm himſelf. Iſa. xliv. 15.
There ſhall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to fit before
it. Iſa. xlvii. 14.
The mounted ſun
Shot down direét his fervid rays to warm
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
Dryden.
Earth's inmoſt womb. Milton.
Theſe ſoft fires with kindly heat
Of various influence, foment and warm. Milton.
2. To heat mentally; to make vehement.
The action of Homer being more full of vigour than that
of Virgil, is more pleaſing to the reader: one warms you by
degrees, the other ſets you on fire all at once, and never in-
termits his heat. Dryden.
WA'RMINGPAN. m. ſ. ſwarm and pan.] A covered braſs pan
for warming a bed by means of hot coals.
WA'RMING-Tone. n ſ. ſwarm and/one..] To theſe uſeful
ſtones add the warming-ſtone, digged in Cornwall, which be-
ing once well heated at the fire retains its warmth a great
while, and hath been found to give caſe in the internal hae-
morrhoids. Fay on the Creation.
WARMLY. adv. [from warm.]
1. With gentle heat.
There the warming ſun firſt warmy ſmote
The open field.
2. Eagerly; ardently.
Now I have two righthoneſ wives
One to Atrides I will ſend,
And t'other to my Trojan friend;
Each prince ſhall thus with honour have
What both ſo warmy ſeem to crave. Prior.
The ancients expect you ſhould do them right in the ac-
Milton.
count you intend to write of their characters: I hope you
think more warmly than ever of that deſign. Pope.
WA'RMN Ess.
WARMT H. } m. ſ. [from warm.]
1. Gentle heat.
Then am I the priſoner, and his bed my goal; from the
loathed warmth whereof deliver me. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Cold plants have a quicker perception of the heat of the ſun
*Feaſing than the hot herbs have; as a cold hand will ſooner
find a little warmth than an hot. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
..He vital virtue infus'd, and vital warmth
Throughout the fluid maſs. Mlton.
Herc kindly warmth their mounting juice ferments
9 * taſtes, and more exalted ſents Addison
* Zeal; paſſion; fervour of mind. !/
What warmth is there in
- - your affection towards any of
theſe Princely ſuitors that are y
already come Shakºft care.
Our duties towards God and man, we ſhould -
that unfeigned integrity which belongs to §º with
with that temper and ſobriety which becomes Chri
dence and charity; with that warmth and affai -
agrees with ğ. zeal. º
Your opinion that it is entirely to be neglected, woºd º:
been my own, had it been my own café; but I felt more
warmth here than I did when firſt I ſaw his book againſt my-
ſelf.
n piety;
ſtian pi.
3. Fancifulneſs; enthuſiaſm. Pºpe,
The ſame warmth of head diſpoſes men to both. Templ.
To WARN. v. a. ſpannian, Saxon; warnen, Dutch: º,
Swediſh; varna, Iſlandick.] &gt;
1. To caution againſt any fault or danger; to give previous no-
tice of ill.
What do'ſ thou ſcorn me for my gentle counſel;
And ſooth the devil that I warn thee from? Shakºftart
Our firſt parents had been warn'd -
The coming of their ſecret foe, and 'ſcap'd
His mortal ſnare. Milton's Paradſ: Li,
The hand can hardly lift up itſelf high enough to flieſ.
it muſt be ſeen; ſo that it warns while it threatens; tı.
falſe infidious tongue may whiſper a lie ſo cloſe and low, that
though you have ears to hear yet you ſhall not hear. Sºuth.
Juturna warns the Daunian chief,
Of Lauſus’ danger, urging ſwift relief. Dryden,
If we confider the miſtakes in mens diſputes and notions,
how great a part is owing to words, and their uncertain or
miſtaken ſignifications; this we are the more carefully to be
warned of, becauſe the arts of improving it have been made the
buſineſs of mens ſtudy. Lºft.
The father, whilſt he warn’d his erring ſon,
The ſad examples which he ought to ſhun
Deſcrib’d.
When firſt young Maro ſung of kings and wars,
Ere warning Phoebus touch'd his trembling ears,
Perhaps he ſeem’d above the critick's law,
And but from nature's fountains ſcorn'd to draw.
Priºr,
Pºpe.
2. To admoniſh of any duty to be performed, or practice or
place to be avoided or forſaken.
Cornelius was warned from God by an holy angel to ſend
for thee. A/7; x. 22.
He had chidden the rebellious winds for obeying the com-
mand of their uſurping maſter: he had warned them from
the ſeas; he had beaten down the billows. Dryden.
. To notify previouſly good or bad.
3 He wonders to what end you have aſſembled
Such troops of citizens to come to him, -
His grace not being warn'd thereof before. Shaitſtart,
He charg’d the ſoldiers with preventing care,
Their flags to follow, and their arms prepare, he war
- , , ; - - - 2ſ.
lſ arm'd of the enſuing fight, and bade'em º: Æntid,
Man, who knows not hearts, ſhould make examples,
Which like a warning-piece muſt be ſhot off, Friar
To fright the reſt from crimes. Dryden's Spaniſh *
WA/RNING. m.ſ.. [from warn.]
1. Caution againſt faults or dangers; previous notice º
I will thank the Lord for giving me warning in the night, Hj.
He groaning from the bottom of his breaſt,
This warning in theſe mournful words expreſt. .
Here wretched Phlegias warns the world with º in
Could warning make the werld more juſt or wiſe. 3:
You have fairer warning than others who are º:
cut off, and ſo have a better opportunity, as well *;
engagements to provide for your latter end. be of uſe
"A true and plain relation of my misfortunº" uch truſt
and warning to credulous maids, never to Pº º: Lad).
in deceitful men. #. Story of the Injur
2. Previous notice: in a ſenſe indifferent. - : the
Death called up an old man, and bade ...
man excuſed himſelf, that it was a great jo" L'Effrage.
Ort a war?/1713. - 38
ſo !'. .# ſºme diſdain, more nonſenſe than :.
bad a poet could have crammed into it at 4 pmont Dryden.
in which time it was wholly written: That order of
WAR P. n.ſ. ſpearp, Saxon; werſ. P.
thread in a thing woven that croſſes the wº arts in length
The fourteenth is the placing of the tangible .f of texture,
or tranſverſe, as it is in the war? " .. Hiſtºry.
more inward or more outward. Bacon ſº to throw ;
TowARP. v. n. [Feonpan, Saxon; * To ding: from
whence we ſometimes ſay, the work caſts.] hange the poſition
the true ſituation by inteſtine motion ; to ch";
ne part to another. :ain wainſcot,
of i.º. will but join you together * they º: green
then one of you will prove a ſhrunk pannel, A you like it.
timber warp. *...* piece,
They clamp one picce of wood to ".en º, Exerciſt.
to keep it from caſting or warping. Moxon 2. T 9
Drydºn,
+
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A R
2. To loſe its proper courſe or direaion.
There's our commiſfion
From which we would not have you warp. Shakeſp.
This is ſtrange hethinks p eſh
My favour here begins to warp. Shakeſpeare.
All atteſt this doctrine, that the pope can give away the
right of any ſovereign, if he ſhall neverºlittle warp. Dryden.
This we ſhould do as directly as may be, with as little warp-
ing and declenſion towards the creature asſis poſſible. Norris.
3. To turn.
- - The potent rod
Qf Amram's ſon in Egypt's evil day
Way’d round the coaſt, up card a pitchy cloud
Of locuſts, warping on the eaſtern wind,
That o'er the realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like night. 44ilton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
To WARP. v.a.
1. To contračt; to ſhrivel.
2. To turn aſide from the true direction.
This firſt avow’d, nor folly warp'd my mind;
Nor the frail texture of the femalekind
Betray'd my virtue.
Not foreign or domeſtick treachery
Could warp thy ſoul to their unjuſt decree. Dryden.
A ſeat argument of the goodneſs of his cauſe, whicſ.".
quired in its defender zeal, to a degree of warmth able to
warp the ſacred rule of the word of Čod. Locke.
I have no private conſiderations to warp me in this contro-
Dryden:
verſy, ſince my firſt entering upon it. Addiſon.
- Not warp'd by paſſion, aw’d by rumour,
Not grave through pride, or gay through folly;
An equalmixture of good humour,
And ſenſible ſoft melancholy. Swift.
A conſtant watchfulneſs againſt all thoſe prejudices that
might warp the judgment aſide from truth. Watts.
3. It is uſed by Shakeſpeare to expreſs the effect of froſt.
Freeze, freeze, thou bitter ſky,
Thou do'ſ not bite ſo nigh
As benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp,
Thy ſting is not ſo ſharp
As friends remember'd not. Shakespeare As you like it.
To WARRANT. v. n. [garantir, French.]
I. To ſupport or maintain; to atteſt.
She needed not diſdain any ſervice, though never ſo mean,
which was warranted by the ſacred name of father. Sidney.
He that readeth unto us the Scriptures delivereth all the
myſteries of faith, and not any thing amongſt them all more
than the mouth of the Lord doth warrant. Płocker.
If this internal light be conformable to the principles of
reaſon, or to the word of God, which is atteſted revelation,
reaſon warrants it, and we may ſafely receive it for true. Lock.
2. To give authority.
Now we'll together, and the chance of goodneſs
Be like our warranted quarrel. Shakespeare Macbeth,
3. To juſtify.
How can any one warrant himſelf in the uſe of thoſe things
againſt ſuch ſuſpicions, but in the truſt he has in the common
honeſty and truth of men in general? South.
True fortitude is ſeen in great exploits,
That juſtice warrants and that wiſdom guides;
All elſe is tow'ring frenzy and diſtraćtion.
4. To exempt; to privilege; to ſecure.
If my coming, whom, ſhe ſaid, he feared, as ſoon as he
knew me by the armour, had not warranted her from that
near approaching cruelty. Sidney.
Theſe thoughts cannot, in this your lonelineſs, warrant you
from ſuſpicion in others, nor defend you from melancholy in
Addison.
yourſelf. Sidney.
I'll warrant him from drowning. Shakeſp. Tempſ.
In a place
Leſs warranted than this, or leſs ſecure,
I cannot be, that I ſhould fear to change it. Milton.
5. To declare upon ſurety. -
What a galled neck have we here! Look ye, mine's as
ſmooth as ſilk, I warrant ye. L'E/irange.
The Moors king
Is ſafe enough, I warrant him for one. Dryd. Span. Fryar.
WA'RRANT. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A writ conferring ſome right or authority.
Are you now going to diſpatch this deed
—We are, my lord, and come to have the warrant,
That we may be admitted where he is. Shakespeare Rich. III.
He ſent him a warrant for one thouſand pounds a year pen-
ſion for his life. Clarendon.
2. A will giving the officer of juſtice the power of caption.
There was a damn'd deſign, cries one, no doubt;
For warrants are already iſſued out. Dryden's juvenal.
3. A juſtificatory commiſſion or teſtimony.
His Promiſe is our plain warrant, that in his name what we
aſk we ſhall receive. Hooker.
W A R
ſ º this a º ſufficient for any man's conſcience to build
** Pºdings upon, as have been and -
theſº of that cauſe 2 are put in uſe for
*P* of Paradiſe might be ſeen unto Moſes, and unto
the prophets which ſucceeded him; both which I º for my
*arrant to guide me in this diſcovery. Faleigh.
*...*.does the Chriſtian Éith defend, o
º: that felying, all their quarrels end. J/aller.
hi he Jewiſh religion was yºt in poſſeſſion; and therefore, that
this might ſo enter as not tº intrude, it was to bring its warrant
from the ſame hand of Omni - y
4. Right; legality. §ºns Sauth's Sermons.
I attach thee
For an abuſer of the world, a practicer
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant. Shakespeare Othelk,
Therefore to horſe,
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
** ſhift away : there's warram inj theft,
Which ſteals itſelf when there's no mercy left. Shakeſp.
Wºraurº. adj. [from warrant. J Juſtifiable; de-
CIn 11DIe.
To purchaſe a clear and warrantall, body of truth, we muſt
forget and part with much we know. Brown.
His meals are coarſe and ſhºrt, his employment warrant.
able, his ſleep certain and refreſhing. South.
If I can mend my condition by any warrantable induſtry,
the way is fair and open; and that's a privilege every reaſon-
able creature has in his commiſſion. L’Eſtrange.
WA's RantableNess. m. ſ. [ from warrantable. J. Juſti-
fiableneſs.
By the foil thereof you may ſee the nobleneſs of my deſire
*You, and the warrantalleneſ of your favour to me. Sidney.
WARRANTABLY. adv. [from warrantable.] Juſtifiably.
The faith which God requires is only this, that he wicer.
tainly reward all thoſe that believe in him, and obey his com-
mandments; but for the particular application of this faith to
ourſelves, that deſerves no more of our aſſent, nor can indeed
warrantably have it, than what is founded upon the ſerious
conſideration of our own performances. JWake.
WA(RRANTER. n.ſ.. [from warrant.]
1. Qne who gives authority. t
2. One who gives ſecurity.
WA'RRANTIse. n.ſ. [warrantiſe, law Latin; from warrant.]
Authority; ſecurity.
There's none protećtor of the realm but I:
Break up the gates, I’ll be your warrantiz. Shakespeare H. VI.
WARRANTY. m.ſ. [warrantia, law Latin; garantie, garant,
French.]
I. [In the common law.] A promiſe made in a deed by one man
unto another for himſelf and his heirs, to ſecure him and his
heirs againſt all men, for the enjoying of anything agreed of
between them. Cowel.
2. Authority; juſtificatory mandate.
Her obſequies have been ſo far enlarg’d
As we have warranty: her death was doubtful ;
And but that great command o'erſways the order,
She ſhould in ground unſanétiſy'd have lodg'd
*Till the laſt trump. - Shakeſpeare:
In the uſe of thoſe epithets we have the warranty and con-
ſent of all the churches, ſince they ever had a liturgy. Taylor.
3. Security. -
Every one cannot diſtinguiſh between fine and mixed ſilver:
thoſe who have had the care and government of politick ſo-
cieties, introduced coinage as a remedy: the ſtamp was a
*arranty of the publick, that under ſuch a denomination they
ſhould receive a piece of ſuch a weight and fineneſs. Lock.
To WARRA'Y. v. a. [from war.] To make war upon.
But Ebranc ſalved both their infancies
With noble deeds, and warraydon Brunchild
In Hainault, where yet of his vićtories
Brave monuments remain, which yet that land envys. F. Q.
Of theſe a mighty people ſhortly grew, -
And puiſſant kings, which all the world warraid,
And to themſelves all nations did ſubdue. Fairy Queen.
This continual, cruel, civil war,
The which myſelf againſt myſelf do make, -
Whilſt my weak powers of paſſions warraid are,
No ſkill can ſtint, nor reaſon can aſlake. Spenſºr.
Six years were run ſince firſt in martial guiſe -
The Chriſtian lords warraid the eaſtren land. Fairfax.
WARRE., adj. ſpºrn, Saxon.] Worſe. Obſolete.
They ſay the world is warre than it wont,
All for her ſhepherds is º and bloont:
Others ſaine, but how truly note, y
All for they holden ſhame of their cote. Spenſºr's Paſſ.
WA'RREN. n.ſ. [waerande, Dutch; guerenne, French..] A
kind of park for rabits. -
I found him here, as melancholy as a lodge in a warren.
Shakeſp. Much Zd, about Nothing.
The coney convenes a whole warren, tells her ſtory, and
iſes reWºnge. I'E/irange.
adviſes upon a reveng Men<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A S
* W A s
res in their warrent to catch Pºla: and
º ſhould ſet ſna Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
was rener. n.ſ. If?” warren.] The keeper of a waſ ºn:
wºſovº. m. ſ. [ from * J A ſoldier; a military
mail. I came from Corinth, -
Brought to this town by that moſt famous warrior,
Duke Menaphon. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errouri.
Fierce fiery warrior fight upon the clouds,
In ranks and ſquadrons and rightform of war,
which drizzled blood upon the Capitºl. Shakespeare. jul. Catſ.
I fing the warriour and his mighty deeds. Lauderdale.
The warriour horſes ty'd in order fed. Dryden's &amp;n.
The mute walls relate the warriour's fame,
And Trojan chiefs the Tyrians pity claim. Dryden's 4ºn.
Camilia led her troops, a warriour dame;
Unbred to ſpinning, in the loom unſkill’d,
She choſe the nobler Pallas of the field. Dryden's AFn.
wART. n.ſ. ſpeanz, Saxon; werte, Dutch..] A corneous
excreſcence; a ſmall protuberance on the fleſh.
if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, 'till our ground,
Singeing his pate againſt the burning ſun,
Make Oſſa like a wart. Shakespeare Hamlet.
in old ſtatues of ſtone, which have been put in cellars, the
feet of them being bound with leaden bands, there it appeared
the lead did ſwell, inſomuch as it hanged upon the floº like
wart;. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Like vile ſtones lying in ſaffron'd tin,
Or wart, or weals, it hangs upon her ſkin. Donne.
In painting, the warts and moles, adding a likeneſs to the
face, are not to be omitted. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
He is taken with thoſe warts and moles, and hard features,
by thoſe who repreſent him on the ſtage, or he is no more
Achilles. Dryden.
Malpighi, in his treatiſe of galls, under which he compre-
hends all preternatural and morboſe tumours of plants, doth
demonſtrate that all ſuch warts, tumours and excreſcences,
where any inſe&amp;ts are found, are excited or raiſed up by ſome
venenoſe liquors, which with their eggs ſuch inſects ſhed ; or
boring with their terebrae, inſtil into the very pulp of ſuch
buds.
wartwort. n.ſ. [wart and wort.] Spurge:
wa's ry, adj. [from wart.] Grown over with warts.
wa'Rworn adj. [war and worn J Worn with war.
Their geſture ſad,
Inveſt in lank lean cheeks and wartworn coats,
Preſented them unto the gazing moon
So many horrid ghoſts. Shakespeare Henry V.
WA'Ry. aff. [poem, Saxon.] Cautious; ſcrupulous; tımo-
rouſly prudent.
Hé is above, and we upon earth; and therefore it behoveth
cur words to be wary and few. Hºcker.
Leontius, their biſhop, although an enemy to the better
part, yet wary and ſubtle, as all the heads of the Arrians fac-
tion were, could at no time be plainly heard to uſe either
form. Hooker.
Good cauſe he had to haſten thence away;
For on a day his wary dwarf had ſpy'd,
Where in a dungeon deep huge numbers lay,
Of captive wretched thrals that wailed night and day. F.&amp;
Each thing feigned ought more warybe. Hubb. Tale.
Each warns a warier carriage in the thing,
Left blind preſumption work their ruining. Daniel.
Others grows wary in their praiſes of one, who ſets, too
great a value on them, leſt they ſhould raiſe him too high in
his own imagination. Addiſon's Spectator.
WAs. The preterite of To Be. **
Enoch walked with God, and was not; for God took
him. Gen. v. 24.
To WASH. v. a. ſparcan, Saxon; waſ then, Dutch..]
1. To cleanſe by ablution.
How fain, like Pilate, would I waſh my hands
Of this moſt grievous guilty murther done ! Shakeſ R. III.
Look, how ſhe rubs her hands. -
It is an accuſtom'd action with her to ſeem thus waſhing
her hands. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Waſh me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanſe me
from my ſin. Pſ. li. 2.
Thou didſ waſ thyſelf. Ez. xxiii. 40.
* he that gives fire to the train pretend to waſh his
s of the hurt that is done by the playing of the mine?
2. To moiſten. L'Eſirange's Fables.
º
|
3. To affect by ablution.
* baptized, and waſh away thy fins. A&amp;#3 xxii. 16.
ins of irreligion muſt ſtill be ſo accounted for as to crave
Fº and be waſhed off by repentance. Taylor.
7t'a' sº the things you have heard, that they may not be
Wºrd all away from the mind by a torrent of other engage-
II, CIltS. &gt; • - -
[S JP'aiti's Improvement ºf the Mind.
Ray on the Creation.
4. To colour by waſhing,
To waſh over a coarſe or inſignificant meaning, is to coun
terfeit nature's coin. Colli
To WASH. v. m. allier of the Afteå,
1. To perform the ačt of ablution.
I will go waſh;
And when my face is fair, you ſhall perceive
Whether I bluſh or no. Shakeſp. Cºrial
Waſh and be clean. 2 Kim º
Are not the rivers of Damaſcus better than all the w º
of Iſrael? May I not waſh in them : aters
Let each becalm his troubled breaſt,
Waſh and partake ſerene the friendly feaſt. Popº'; Od,
2. To cleanſe cloaths. y ope's Odyſy.
She can waſh and ſcour.
—A ſpecial virtue; for then ſhe need not be waſhed and
ſcoured. Shakespeare Two G
WASH. n.ſ. [from the verb.] entlemen of Verona,
1. Alluvion; any thing collected by water.
The waſh of paſtures, fields, commons, and roads, where
rain-water hath a long time ſettled, is of great * € to
all land. Mortimer's H.
2. A bog; a marſh; a fen ; a quagmire. ry.
Full thirty times hath Phoebus car gone round
Neptune's ſalt waſh, and Tellus' orb’d ground. Shahjari
The beſt part of my power -
. in the waſhes all unwarily
evoured by the unexpected flood. Shakespeare, Ki
4. A medical ...'...'. ºff, King jºhn,
Try whether children may not have ſome woſh to make
their teeth better and ſtronger. Bacon's Natural Hiſlºy.
They paint and patch their imperfections
Of intelle&amp;tual complećtions,
And daub their tempers o'er with waſheſ,
As artificial as their faces. Hudibrar,
He tried all manner of waſhes to bring him to a better com-
plexion; but there was no good to be done. L'Eſtrange.
None are welcome to ſuch, but thoſe who ſpeak paint and
waſh; for that is the thing they love; and no wonder, ſince it
is the thing they need. South's Sirmoni,
To ſteal from rainbows, ere they drop in ſhow’rs,
A brighter waſh. Pºpe's Rape ºf the Lock.
Here gallypots and vials plac'd,
Some fill'd with waſhes, ſome with paſte.
5. A ſuperficial ſtain or colour.
Imagination ſtamps ſignification upon his fact, and tells the
people he is to go for ſo much, who oftentimes, being deceived
by the waſh, never examine the metal, but take him upon con-
tent. Cºllier,
6. The feed of hogs gathered from waſhed diſhes.
The wretched, bloody, and uſurpingbº,
That ſpoil'd your ſummer-fields and fruitfulviº
Swills your warm blood like waſh, and makes his trough
In your embowell'd boſoms. Shalºft. Rithard III.
7. The act of waſhing the cloaths of a family; the linen waſhed
at 9nce.
WA's H ball. n.ſ. [waſh and ball.J. Ball made of ſoap.
I aſked a poor man how he did; he ſaid he wº like a wiſh-
ball, always in decay. Swift.
WA'sher. n.ſ.. [from waſh.] . One that waſhes. .
Quickly is his laundreſs, his waſher, and his wringºr. Shakespeare
WA's hy. adj. [from waſh.]
1. Watry; damp. -
On the waſhy ouze deep channels wore,
Eaſy, ere God had bid the ground be dry.
2. Weak; not ſolid.
A poliſh of clearneſs, evenly and ſmoothly ſpread, notºr
thin and waſhy, but of a pretty ſolid conſiſtence. º,
WASP. m.ſ. [rearp, Saxon; veſpa, Latin; gueſe, French]
briſk ſtinging infect, in form reſembling a bee.
- More waſps, that buz about his noſe, y VIII
Will make this ſting the ſooner. Shawfare, Hºy"
Encountring with a waff,
2 Kings v. 12.
Swift.
Milan,
He in his arms the fly doth claſp. . . . Draytºn.
why, what a waff-tongu'd and impº"
Art thou, to break into this woman's mood, ; Shui, H.IV.
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own: irritable;
wa'spisii, adj. [from waſp.J. Peeviſh; malignant; y
iraſcible. h
I'll uſe you for my laughter, ºut ſºatſár,
When you are waſpiſh. o Shakespeare. julius Caft
Come, you waſp, you are toº). -
—If I be ºffiſh, tº Beware my ſting. Shakſtart
By the ſtern brow and waſpiſh action, .
which ſhe did uſe as ſhe was writing of ſº A, ºu likih
It bears an angry tenour. Shakespeare º the
The taylor's wife was only a good hearly * ... her
impotency of an unruly waſpiſh humº" ſhe wº; Eſtrang!.
will. ,-, * Oſ!
Upon this groſs miſtake the Poor waftſ, *.
for many leaves. Much
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A S
-
º
*
**i.
Much do I ſuffer, much, to keep in peace
This jealous, waſpiſh, wºg-head, rhining race. Pºpe.
Aspishly. adv. [from waſhiº.J. Peeviſhly.
WA'spishness. n.ſ. [from wapiſh..] Peeviſhneſs; irritability.
3.
WA'ssail. m. ſ. [from Fºr £gel, your health, Saxon.]
1. A liquour made of applés, ſugar, and ale, anciently much
uſed by Engliſh goodféliows.
2. A drunken bout.
The king doth wake to-night, and takes his rouſe,
Keeps waſail, and the ſwaggring upſpring reels. Shakeſp.
WA’ss AiLER. m.ſ.. [from ** ai!..] A toper; a drunkard.
I'm loth to meet the rudeneſs, and ſwill'd inſolence
Of ſuch late waffailers. Milton.
WAST: ... The ſecond perſon of was, from Tº be.
To WASTE. v.a. [apercan, Saxon; wo/en, Dutch; gud/fare,
Italian; vo/fare, Latin.]
I. To diminiſh.
The fire that mounts the liquor 'till't run o'er,
Seeming t'augment it, woffe'it. Shakeſp. H. VIII.
Firſt vegetive, then feels, and reaſons laſt;
Rich of three ſouls, and lives all three to woffe. Dryden.
Could ſighs furniſh new breath, or drawife and ſpirits from
the wººing of your's, your friends would encourage your
paſſion. Temple.
2. To deſtroy wantonly and luxuriouſly; to ſquander.
. The people's praying after the miniſter, they ſay, waſ eth
tl Inc.
- Hooker.
There muſt be providence uſed, that our ſhip-timber be not
waſted. Bacon.
No ways and means their cabinet employ,
But their dark hours they waſte in barren joy. Garth.
3. To deſtroy; to deſolate.
He only their proviſions waſes and burns.
Peace to corrupt, no leſs than war to waſte.
The Tyber
Inſults our walls, and waſ’es our fruitful grounds. Dryden.
Now waſting years my former ſtrength confound
And added woes have bow'd me to the ground;
Yet by the ſtubble you may gueſs the grain,
And mark the ruins of no vulgar man.
4. To wear out.
Here condemn'd
To waſ e cternal days in woe and pain.
5. To ſpend; to conſume.
O were I able
To waſte it all myſelf, and leave you none. Milton.
To Waste. v. m. To dwindle; to be in a ſtate of conſumption.
Man dieth and waſ eth away. job xiv. Io.
Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; waſting and de-
Daniel.
Milton,
&gt;
Broome.
Milton.
ftruction are in their paths. Iſ lix. 7.
The latter watch of wafting night,
And ſetting ſtars to kindly ſleep invite. Bryden.
Waste. adj. [from the verb.] -
1. Deſtroyed; ruined.
Sophi leaves all waſhe in his retreat. Milton.
The multiplication and obſtinacy of diſputes, which have ſo
laid waſ: the intellectual world, is owing to nothing more
... than to the ill uſe of words. Locke.
When thus the gather'd ſtorms of wretched love,
In my ſwoln boſom, with long war had ſtrove,
Laid all the civil bonds of manhood waſte,
And ſcatter'd ruin as the torrent paſt. Prior.
2. Deſolate; uncultivated.
There be very waſ e countries and wilderneſſes; but we
find not mention whether any do inhabit there. Abbot.
He found him in a deſert land, and in the waſ, howling
wilderneſs. - Deut. xxxii. Io.
3. Superfluous; exuberant; loſt for want of occupiers.
Quite ſurcharg'd with her own weight,
And ſtrang!'d with her waſie fertility. Milton.
4. Worthleſs; that of which none but vile uſes can be made.
5. That of which no account is taken, or value found. -
It may be publiſhed as well as printed, that ſo much ſkill
... in Hebrew derivations may not lie for waſie paper. Dryden.
WAste. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Wanton or luxurious deſtruction; the aët of ſquandering;
conſumption; loſs. - -
Reaſons induce us to think it a good work, which they, in
, their care for well beſtowing of time, account waſte. Hooker.
Thin air is better pierced, but thick air preſerveth the ſound
better from waſ 2. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Freedom who loves, muſt firſt be wiſe and good;
But from that mark how far they rove we ſee,
For all this waſte of wealth, and loſs of blood. Milton.
It was providently deſigned to repair the waſte daily made
by the frequent attrition in maſtication. Ray ºn the Creation.
So fooliſh and laviſh are we, that too often we uſe ſome
words in mere waſte, and have no ideas for them. J/atts.
2. Uſeleſs expence.
But youth, the periſhing good, runs on too faſt,
And unenjoy'd it ſpends itſelf to waſe; - }
Few know the uſe of life before 'tis paſt. Dryden.
W A T
Secure the workings of your ſoul from running to waſ e, and
even your looſer moments Will turn to happy account. Wall.
3. Deſolate or uncultivated ground. -
Land that is left wholly to nature, that hath no improve-
"ent of paſturage, tillage, or planting, is called waſte. Locke;
Liſted aloft he'gan to mount up higher,
And, like freſh eagle, made his hardy flight
Thro' all that great wide waſte, yet wanting light. Spenſºr.
4. Ground, place, or ſpace unoccupied. -&gt;
Theſe gentlemen, on their watch,
In the dead woſe and midji the night,
Had been thus encountred. Shakſº. Hamlet.
Forty days Elijah, without food,
Wander'd this barren waſ, Milton's Paradſ: Regain'd.
Lords of the world's great waſte, the ocean, we
Whole foreſts ſend to reign upon the ſea.
From that dire deluge, through the wat'ry waſte,
Such length of years, ſuch various perils paſt.
Waller.
Dryden.
Thee I purſue, oh great ill-fated youth !
Through the diſmal wºff, of gloomy death. Smith,
See the man who ſpacious regions gave,
A waſte for beaſts, himſelf deny'd a grave. Pope.
5. Region ruined and deſerted.
All the leafy nation ſinks at laſt,
And Vulcan rides in triumph o'er the waſe. Dryden's Zn.
6. Miſchief; deſtruction.
The ſpirit of wantonneſs is ſure ſcarce out of him: if the
devil have him not in fee-ſimple, he will never, I think, in
the way of waſ e, attempt us again. Shakespeare
WA's reful. adj. [waſe and full J
1. Deſtructive; ruinous. -
The folly of man
Let in theſe waſteful furies.
2. Wantonly or diſſolutely conſumptive.
To ſmooth the ice, or add another hue
Into the rainbow, or with taper light
To ſeek the beauteous eye of heav'n to garniſh,
Is waſteful and ridiculous exceſs. Shakeſp. K. john.
In ſuch caſes they ſet them off more with wit aſid aćtivity,
than with coſtly and waſ ful expences. Bacon.
3. Laviſh; prodigal; luxuriantly liberal.
How has kind heav'n adorn'd the happy land,
Miltºn's Paradiº Left.
And ſcatter'd bleſfings with a waſ ful hand! Addiſon.
4. Deſolate; uncultivated; unoccupied. -
In wilderneſs and waſ ful deſarts ſtray'd,
To ſeek her knight. Fairy Queen.
Outrageous as a ſea, dark, waſ ful, wild. AMilton.
WA'stefully. adv. [from waſ fil] with vain and diff.
lute conſumption. -
Never any man would think our labour miſ-ſpent, or the
time waſ efally conſumed. Hooker.
To her new-made favourite, Morat, - • *
Her laviſh hand is waſ fully profuſe. Dryden's Aurangz
WA'steful Ness. n.ſ.. [from º Prodigality.
WA'steness, ºſ (from waſ ej Deſºlation; ſolitude.
She, of nought afraid, • -
Through woods and waſ eneſ wide him daily ſought. Spenſ:
That day is a day of wrath, a day of waffeneſ. Zeph. i. 15.
WA's ter. n / [from waſ...] One that conſumes diſſolutely
and extravagantly; a ſquanderer; vain conſumer.
ivers Roman knights, -
The profuſe waſters of their patrimonies,
So threatned with their debts, as they will now ---
Run any deſperate fortune. Ben. johnſºn's Catiline.
Plenty, in their own keeping, makes them wanton and
careleſs, and teaches them to be ſquanderers and waſters. Locke.
Upon cards and dice never learn any play, and ſo be incapa-
citated for thoſe encroaching waſters of uſeful time. Locke.
Sconces are great waſters of candles, Swift.
WASTREL. n.ſ. [from waſte.] - - -
Their works, both ſtream and load, lie in ſeveral, or in
waſ rel, that is, in incloſed grounds, or in commons. Carew.
WATCH. n.ſ. [paecce, Saxon.]
1. Forbearance of ſleep.
2. Attendance without ſleep. - - " - -
All the long night their mournful watch they keep, * /* …
And all the day ſtand round the tomb and weep. Addison.
. Attention ; cloſe obſervation.
3. A In mytholidays, when I had loſt one ſhaft,
I ſhot his fellow, of the ſelf-ſame flight,
The ſelf-ſame way, yº. ºth
her forth ; vent ring both; - -
º . ; by sº. Merchant ºf Venice,
; vigilant keep.
4. Gº ſhe it. he kept both watch and ward. F. Q.
Hie thee to thy charge; -
Uſe careful watch, ãº. truſty centinels. Shakeſp. R. III.
Love can find entrance not only into an open heart, but alſo
into a heart well fortified, if watch be not well kept. º:
5. Watchman; men ſet to guard. It is uſed in a collective ſenſe.
Before her gate, high God did ſweat ordain, , .
And wakeful watches ever to abide, Frity *::::
39 |
w<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A T -
Such ſtand in narrow lanes, .. -
And beat our watch, and robour paſſengers. Shakeſhta”.
The ports he did ſhut up, or at leaſt kept a watch on them,
that none ſhould paſs to or fro that was ſuſpected. Bacon.
. The tow’rs of heav'n are fill'd
ith armed watch, that render all acceſs
}: » AMilton's Parad; e Loſł.
An abſurdity our Saviour accounted it for the blind to
lead the blind, and to put him that cannot ſee to the office of
a watch. South's Sermons.
6. Place where a guard is ſet.
He upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch.
7. Poſt or office of a watchman.
As I did ſtand my watch upon the hill,
I look'd toward Birnam, and anon methought
The wood began to move. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
8. A period of the night. -
Your fair daughter,
At this odd, even, and dull watch o' th' night,
Is now tranſported with a gondalier,
To the groſs claſps of a laſcivious Moor.
All night he will purſue ; but his approach
Shakeſp. Othello.
Shakespeare Othello.
Darkneſs defends between, 'till morning watch. Milton.
The latter watch of waſting night,
And ſetting ſtars, to kindly ſleep invite: Dryden’s AEm.
9. A pocket-clock; a ſmall clock moved by a ſpring.
A watch, beſides the hour of the day, gives the day of the
month, and the place of the ſun in the zodiack. Hale.
On the theatre we are confined to time; and though we
talk not by the hour-glaſs, yet the watch often drawn out of
the pocket warns the actors that their audience is weary. Dryd.
That Cloe may be ſerv'd in ſtate,
The hours muſt at her toilet wait;
Whilſt all the reaſoning fools below
Wonder their watches go ſo flow.
To Watch. v. m. ſpacian, Saxon.]
1. Not to ſleep; to wake.
I have two nights watch'd with you; but can perceive no
truth in your report. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Watching care will not let a man ſlumber, as a ſore diſeaſe
breaketh ſleep. Ecclus xxxi. 2.
Sleep, liſt'ning to thee, will watch. Milton.
2. To keep guard.
I will watch over them for evil, and not for good. Yer. xliv.
In our watching we have watched for a nation that could not
ſave us. Lam. iv. 17.
He gave ſignal to the miniſter that watch'd Milton.
3. To look with expećtation.
My ſoul waiteth for the Lord, more than they that watch
for the morning. Pſ. cxxx. 6.
4. To be attentive; to be vigilant.
Watch thou in all things, endure afflićtions.
5. To be cautiouſly obſervant.
hatch over thyſeli, counſel thyſelf, judge thyſelf impar-
Prior.
2 Tim. iv. 5.
tially. Taylor.
6. To be infidiouſly attentive.
He ſomewhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wiſh, and beſt advantage us aſunder,
Hopeleſs to circumvent us join'd. Milton.
To WATch. v. a.
1. To $. ; to have in keep.
laming miniſters watch and tend their charge. Milton.
2. To obſerve in ambuſh.
Saul ſent meſſengers unto David's houſe to watch him, and
to ſlay him. i Sa. xix. 1 r.
He is bold, and lies near the top of the water, watching the
motion of any water-rat that ſwims betwixt him and the
ſky. //alton.
They under rocks their food
In jointed armour watch. Milton.
3. To tend.
Paris watched the flocks in the groves of Ida. Brozme.
4;. To obſerve in order to dete&amp;t or prevent.
WA’rcHER. m. ſ. [from watch.]
I. One who watches.
Get on your night-gown, leſt occaſion call us,
And ſhew us to be waichers. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Love hath chac'd ſleep from my enthralled eyes,
And made them watchers of miné own heart's ſorrow. Shakespeare
2. Diligent overlooker or obſerver.
It is obſerved, by thoſe that are more attentive watchers of
the works of naturé. A1are
WA'tch ET. adj. [Forceb, Saxon, weak. Sinner.] Blue;
pale blue. - &gt;
wº." 'midſ, the Alps do hanging throats ſurpriſe
ho ſtares in Germany at wº. eyes? Dryden's juven.
W A CHF - | | &gt; &gt;
U L. adj. LU&amp;t h and ul igi - -
I - &amp;l. tº , V igilant attentive
Cautlous &gt; nicely obſervant. f
Call home our exil'd friends,
That fled the ſnares of watchful tyranny. Shakespeare Macbeth.
WA’rchfully. adv. [from watchfu
WA"rchfulness. m. ſ. [from watchful.]
WATER. m. ſ. [waeter, Dutch ; poeter, Saxon.]
13c. watºſul, and ſtrengthen the things ready to die, R., tº
Nodding a while, and watchful of his blow t". Itf.
He fell; and falling cruſh'd th’āngrateful y -
- grateful nymph below. D,
Readers ſhould not lay by that caution which b j,
ſincere purſuit of truth, and ſhould make them ... d
ul againſt whatever might conceal or miſrepreſent º:
- - - l.] Vigilantly; tº:
º i. with cautious obſervation; heſiſ, Llti-
this experime º - , tria-1 :- -
ſeveral i..."....'. tried in veſſels of
c y iſcovered. Bºyle.
1. Vigilance; heed; ſuſpicious attention; cautious regard, diſi
gent obſervation. 5**u ; Gill-
The experience of our own frailties, and -
of the watchfulneſs of the tempter, iº.";
Love, fantaſtick pow'r that is afraid - "mºra,
To ſtir abroad 'till watchfulneſ; be laid;
Undaunted then o'er cliffs and valleys ſtrays,
And leads his vot’ries ſafe through pathleſs ways Pr;
- - Gr,
Huſbands are counſelled not to truſt too much to their
wives owning the doctrine of unlimited conjugal fidelity, and
ſo to neglect a due watchfulneſs over their manners. hiº
Prejudices are cured by a conſtant jealouſy and an.
fulneſs over our paſſions, that they may never interpoſe when
we are called to paſs a judgment. Watt;
By a ſolicitous watchfulneſs about one's behaviour, inſtead of
being mended, it will be conſtrained. Lith
2. Inability to ſleep. -
Hatchfulneſ, ſometimes called a coma vigil, often precals
too great ſleepineſs. Arbuthnºt on Dit.
WA'tchhouse. n ſ. [watch and hotſ...] Place where the
watch is ſet.
Where ſtatues breath'd, the works of Phidias' hands,
A wooden pump or lonely watchhºuſe ſtands. Gay.
WA’tching. n.ſ.. [from watch..] Inability to ſleep.
The bullet, not having been extraćted, occaſioned great
pain and watchings. J/ijeman's Suraj.
WA’tch M Aker n.ſ.. [watch and maker.] One whoſe trade
is to make watches, or pocket-clocks.
Smithing comprehends all trades which uſe forge or file,
from the anchorſmith to the watchmaker; they all uſing the
ſame tools, though of ſeveral ſizes. Aloxon.
WA'tch MAN. m. ſ. [watch and man.] Guard; ſentinel; one
ſet to keep ward. º
On the top of all I do eſpy
The watchman waiting, tydings glad to hear, Fa. Qºtºn.
Turn him into London-ſtreets, that the watchmen might
carry him before a juſtice. Bacon.
Drunkenneſs calls off the watchmen from their towers; and
then all evils that proceed from a looſe heart, an untied tongue,
and a diſſolute ſpirit, we put upon its account. Tajir,
Our watchmen from the tow’rs, with longing eyes,
Exped his ſwift arrival. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
The melancholy tone of a watchman at midnight. Sºft
WA'tchtower. n.ſ.. [watch and tower.] Tower on which
a centinel was placed for the ſake of proſpect. -
In the day-time ſhe fitteth in a watchtower, and flieth moſt
by night. Baan.
Up unto the watchtºwer get,
And ſee all things deſpoil'd of fallacies. Dºnnt,
To hear the lark begin his flight,
And ſinging ſtartle the dull night
From his watchtower in the ſkies,
Mltºn.
'Till the dappled dawn doth riſe. . .
The ſenſes in the head, as ſentinels in a watthew, Con-
vey to the ſoul the impreſſions of external objects. dy.
WArchwor D. m.ſ. ſwatch and word..] The word given to
the centinels to know their friends. Huard
All have their ears upright, waiting when the watºw'ſ
ſhall come, that they ſhould all ariſe into rebellion. i.
we have heard the chines at midnight, maſº .
—That we have, fir John: our watchward, hem: boys. º:
A watchword every minute of the night gº *:::
walls, to teſtify their vigilancy.
1. Sir Iſaac Newton defines water, when pure, * º
fluid ſalt, volatile, and void of all favour or tiſe; and icles
to conſiſt of ſmall, ſmooth, hard, porous, ſpherical * º
of equal diameters, and of equal İpecifick gravitº: ſpacts
Cheyne obſerves; and alſo that there are betwº ºr.
ſo large, and ranged in ſuch a manner, as to be pº eaſily
all fides. Their ſmoothneſs accounts for their º: alſo
over one another's ſurfaces: their ſphericity k". º y
from touching one another in more points than one; º:
both theſe their frićtions in ſliding over one *::: the in-
dered the leaſt poſſible. Their hardneſs acco”. º
compreſſibility of water, when it is free from the º: there is
of air. The poroſity of water is ſo very great, º: water is
at leaſt forty times as much ſpace as mattº ".", O ſequently
nineteen times ſpecifically lighter than gº!". and con §
rarer in the ſame proportion.
My
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A T
My mildneſ, hath allay’d their ſwelling griefs, - -
My mercy dry'd their water-flowing tears.” S.A. ft. VI.
our water is a fore deca yer of your whorſon dead tody.
*ašeſpeare's Hamiſt.
W. A T
ER. v. a. [from the noun.
Q irrigate; to ſupply with moſt re.
"er went out of Eden to water the
To wāºr
1. T
garden. Gen. ii. Io:
- man's nature ru -
The ſweet manner of it forc’d runs to herbs or weed.
. ſeaſonably warth d deſtroy th ºfore let him
º - - - * the one, and deſtroy t r.
. . . . # waters from me, which I would have ſtopp'd, haſte moral writing we may iºns Bacon
. ;: had not ſo much of man in me; - *get of which now it can recompenſe; &gt;
- º ... into mine eye, Shakespeare Henry V +...in which from fift. proceeds,
- nd gave me up to tears, akeſ. Henry V. hat ſacred - r -
Men's evil manners live in braſs, their virtue: 3. * “d ſtream, ſhould never water weeds. Waller.
We write in water. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Thoſe healths will make thee and thy ſtate look ill, iimon :
here's that which is too weak to be a finner, honeſt water,
which ne'er left man ºth mi. Shakeſpeare's Timºn.
/*ater is the chief ingredient in all the animal fluids and
ſolids; for a dry bone, diſtilled, affords a great quantity of in-
º ſpid water: thereforew. *ems to be proper drink fºr every
ely plant, ſo as to make it grow
down, your friends would be ſo far
that they would encourage it, and
Temple.
Mortimer.
are it.
You ºay water the lower land
* To ſupply with water for drink.
Now 'gan the golden Phoebus
His fiery
when you will.
for to ſteep
*
-
face in billows of the weſt,
º, º 4 ºuthnot on Alimentſ. W And his faint ſteeds waſ,” in ocean deep,
º 2. I he ſea. - Whilſt from their journalist. they did reſt. Fa. G
• ‘s Travel by land or by water. Common Prarer. oth not each *: ſabbath looſe #. Ox º:
tº By water they found the ſea, weſtward from Peru, always and lead him away to watering 2 u, xiii 1.
--. very calm. Abbot's Deſ ription ºf the Iſèriº. His horſemen kept them in ſo ſtrait, that no man coºd,
'' -- 3. Urine. - without great danger, go to water his horſe. (noles.
ºr ºl If thou could'ſt, doćtor, caſt Žater him, and, drinking what he can,
- The water of my land, find her diſeaſe, ºage him to thirſt again with bºn. Dryden
And purge it to a ſound and priſtine health, 3. To fertilize or accommodate with ſtreams. -
I would applaud thee. - -
99.12 bed, after you have made 7tafer.
4. 7% hold WATER. To be ſound; to be tight.
ſel that will not leak.
A good Chriſtian and an honeſt man muſt be all of a piece,
and inequalities of Proceeding will never hold water. L'E/fr.
5. It is uſed for the luſtre of a diamond.
'Tis a good form,
And rich: here is a water, look ye. Shakeſ?, Timon.
6. Water is much uſed in compoſition for things made with
water, being in water, or growing in water.
She might ſee the ſam: *ater-ſpaniel, which before had
hunted, come and fetch away one of Philoclea's gloves, whoſe
fine proportion ſhewed well what a dainty gueſt was wont
Shakespeare Alſacbeth.
Swift.
From a veſ-
there to be lodged. Sidney.
Oh that I were a mockery king of ſnow,
Standing before the fun of Bolingbroke,
And melt myſelf away in water-drops. Shakespeare.
Poor Tom cats the wall-newt, and
Touch me with noble anger
Q let not women's weapons, water-drops,
Stain my man's cheeks.
the water-newt. Shakespeare
Shakespeare King Lear.
Let not the water-flood overflow me. Pſ. lxix. 15.
They ſhall ſpring up as among the graſs, as willows by the
Zwater-courſes. Iſ xliv, 4.
As the hart panteth after the water-brook, ſo pánteth my
foul after thee, O God. Pſalms.
Deep calleth unto deep, at the noiſe of thy water-ſpouts.
Pſ. xlii. 7.
He turneth rivers into a wilderneſs, and the water-ſprings
into dry ground. Pſ, Syii.33.
There were ſet fix water-pots of ſtone. #. ii. 6.
Hercules's page, Hylas, went with a water-pot to fill it at a
pleaſant fountain that was near. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
As the carp is accounted the water-fox for his cunning, ſo
the roach is accounted the water, ſheep. Walton's Angler.
Sea-calves unwonted to freſh rivers fly;
The water-ſnakes with ſcales upſtanding die. May, Pirgil.
By making the water-wheels larger, the motion will be ſo
ſlow, that the ſcrew will not be able to ſupply the outward
ſtreams. Wilkins's Daedalus.
Rain carried away apples, together with a dunghill that lay
in the water-courſe. L'E/irange.
- Oh help, in this extremeſt need,
If water-gods are deities indeed. Dryden.
The water-ſnake, whom fiſh and paddocks fed, - -
With ſtaring ſcales lies poiſon'd in his bed. Dºyd Virgil.
Becauſe the outermoſt coat of the eye might be pricked, and
this humour let out, therefore nature hath made proviſion to
repair it by the help of certain water-pipes, or lymphaedućts,
inſerted into the bulb of the eye, proceeding from glandules
that ſeparate this water from the blood. Ray on the Creation.
The lacerta aquatica, or water-newt, when young, hath
fºur neat ramified fins, two on one fide, growing out a little
above its forelegs, to poiſe and keep its body upright, which
fall off when the legs are grown. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
Other mortar uſed in making water-courſes, ciſterns, and
fiſhponds, is very hard and durable. * , Moxon.
The moſt brittle *:::carriage, was uſed among the Egyp-
tians, who, as Strabo faith, would fail ſometimes in boats
made of earthen ware. Arbuthnot.
A gentleman watered St. foin in dry weather at new ſow-
ing, and, when it came up, with a water-cart, carrying his
water in a caſk, to which there was a tap at the end, which
- lets the water run into a long trough full of ſmall holes. Mr.
In Hampſhire they ſell water-trefoil as dea. hops. Mort.
°untains, that run from one extremity of Italy to the
9ther, give riſe to an incredible variety of rivers that wº.
Addison on Italy.
4. To diverſify as with waves. :/ y
The different ranging the ſuperficial Parts of velvet and
twatered ſilk, does the like. Lºcke.
To WA’t ER. v.,.
I. To ſhed moiſture.
! ſtain'd this napkin with the blood,
That valiant Clifford with his rapier's point
Made iſſue from the boſom of the boy;
And if thine “yes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
Mine eyes,
Seeing thoſe beads of ſorrow ſtand in thine,
Began to water. - Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
The tickling of the noſtrils within, doth draw the moiſture
to the noſtrils, and to the eyes by conſent; for they alſo will
20ater. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
How troubleſome is the leaſt mote, or duſt falling into the
eye! and how Quickly does it weep, and water upon the leaſt
grievance 1 South's Sermons.
* Tº get or take in water; to be uſed in ſupplying water.
He ſet the rods he had pulled before the fiocks in the gutters
in the watering troughs. Gen. xxx. 38.
Mahomet ſent many ſmall boats, manned with harquebu-
fiers and ſmall ordnance, into the lake near unto the camp, to
keep the Chriſtians from watering there. Knoles.
3. Whe mouth WATERs. The mi longs; there is a vehement
deſire. From dogs who drop their ſlaver when they ſee meat
which they cannot get. - -
Cardinal Wolſey's teeth watering at the biſhoprick of win-
cheſter, ſent one unto biſhop Fox, who had advanced him, for
tº move him to reſign, the biſhoprick, becauſe extreme age
had made him blind; which motion Fox did take in ſo ill part,
that he willed the meſſenger to tell the cardinal, that, although
now I am blind, I have eſpied his malicious unthankfulneſſ.
Camden's Remains.
Theſe reaſons made his mouth to water,
With amorous longings to be at her. Hudibrar.
Thoſe who contend for 4 per cent, have ſet men. mouths
6-watering for money at that rate. Locke.
WATER colours. n.ſ. [water and colour.] -
Painters make colours into a ſoft conſiſtence with water or
oil; thoſe they call watercolours, and theſe they term oilco-
lours. Boyle on Colourt.
Leſs ſhould I dawb it o'er with tranſitory praiſe,
#And watercolours of theſe days: - - -
Theſe days! where e'en th' extravagance of poetry
Is at a loſs for figures to expreſs
Men's folly, whimſies, and inconſtancy. -
WA’re R cresses. 77. ſ. [/ſymbrium, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a flower compoſed of four leaves, which are placed
in form of a croſs, out of whoſe empalement riſes the pointal,
which afterward becomes a fruit or pod, which is divided into
two cells by an intermediate partition, to which the valves ad-
here on both ſides, and furniſhed with ſeeds which are round-
iſh. To theſe marks muſt be added, that the whole appear-
ance of the plant is peculiar to the ſpecies of this genus. There
are five ſpecies. Miller. - - -
The nymphs of floods are made very beautiful; upon their
heads are garlands of watercrºſs. Peacham on Drawing,
WA'TE RER. m. / [from water...] One who waters. - - -
This ill weed, rather cut off by the ground than plucked up
by the root, twice or thrice grew forth again; but yet, maugre
the warmers and waterers, hath been ever parched up. Carew,
-WA’rs RFA,
Shaft. Henry VI:
Swift.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">[water and fall.] Cataraćt; caſcade.
WA’TERFAL. n. ſ. he Indies far greater waterfalls than thoſe
I have ſeen in t
of Nilus. Raleigh.
Not Lacedæmon charms me more,
igh Albana's airy walls
Than hig ry 2. Addison.
ding with her waterfalls. -
W ºf m. ſ. Fowl &amp; live, or get their food in
"ºwl joy moſt in that air, which is likeſ water. Bacon.
IWaterfowl; ſupply the wearineſs of a long flight by taking
water, and numbers of them are found in iſlands, and in the
main ocean. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Fiſh and waterfowl, who feed of turbid and mudy ſlimy
water, are accounted the cauſe of phlegm. Floyer.
The ſtomachs of waterfowl that live upon fiſh, are hu-
man. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
watercru’el. m. ſ. [water and gruel.] Food made with oat-
meal and water.
For breakfaſt milk, milk-pottage, watergruel, and flum-
mery, are very fit to make for children. ... Locke.
The aliment ought to be ſlender, as watergruel acidulated.
Arbuthnot on Diet.
wA’tERINEss. n.ſ.. [from watery.] Humidity; moiſture.
The forerunners of an apoplexy are dulneſs, night-mares,
weakneſs, wateryneſ, and turgidity of the eyes. Arbuthnot.
WATER Is H. adj. [from water.J
1. Reſembling water.
Where the principles are only phlegm, what can be ex-
pećted from the wateriſh matter, but an inſipid manhood,
and a ſtupid old infancy Dryden.
2. Moiſt; inſipid.
Some parts of the earth grow mooriſh or wateriſh, others
dry. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
WAZTERISHN Ess. n.ſ.. [from wateriſh..] Thinneſs; reſem-
blance of water.
A pendulous flimineſs anſwers a pituitous ſtate, or an acer-
bity, which reſembles the tartar of our humours, or wateriſh-
neſs, which is like the ſeroſity of our blood. Floyer.
WA’ſ ERLEAF. n.ſ. A plant. It hath a bell-ſhaped flower,
conſiſting of one leaf, and cut into ſeveral ſegments: from
the bottom part of the flower ariſes the pointal, which after-
ward becomes a fruit, opening in two parts, incloſing feeds
of the ſame ſhape as the veſſel. AMiller.
WATERLILLY. n.ſ. [ nymphaea, Lat. 1 A plant. The cha-
raćters are ; the flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, which ex-
pand in form of a roſe; out of the flower cup ariſes the poin-
tal, which afterwards becomes an almoſt globular fruit, con-
ſiſting of many cells, filled with ſeeds, which are for the
moſt part oblong. Miller.
Let them lie dry twelve months, to kill the water-weeds,
as waterlillies and bull-ruſhes. J/alton's Angler.
WA’t ERMAN. n.ſ. [water and man.] A ferryman; a boat-
man.
Having blocked up the paſſage to Greenwich, they ordered
the watermen to let fall their oars more gently. Dryden.
Bubbles of air working upward from the very bottom of
the lake, the watermen told us that they are obſerved always
to riſe in the ſame places. - Addiſon on Italy.
The waterman forlorn, along the ſhore,
Penſive reclines upon his uſeleſs oar. Gay.
WaterMARK, n. ſ. [water and mark.] The utmoſt limit of
the riſe of the flood.
Men and beaſts
Were borne above the tops of trees that grew
On th' utmoſt margin of the watermark. Dryden.
WA^TERMELoN. m. ſ. A plant. It hath trailing branches, as
the cucumber or melon, and is diſtinguiſhed from other cu-
curbitaceous plants, by its leaf deeply cut and jagged, and
by its producing uneatable fruit. Miller.
WA'TERMIL. n.ſ. Mill turned by water.
Forth flowed freſh
A guſhing river of black gory blood,
That drowned all the land whereon he flood:
The ſtream thereof would drive a watermill. Fairy Queen.
The picture may be ſet forth with farm houſes and ºr.
mills. Peacham on Drawing.
Corn ground by windmills, erected on hills, or in the plains
where the watermill; ſtood. 41crtimer's Huſbandy.
WATERMINT. m. ſ. A plant.
Wº: m. ſ. A ſpecies of water-creſſes, which ſee.
Th . ić A rat that makes holes in banks.
+.e k e. º and water-ats. Shakeſpeare.
the º e º old, and lies near the top of the water, watching
wº. any frºg, or water-rat, or mouſe. J/alton.
f *T. n.ſ. A ſpecies of water-creſſes.
º: "...ſ. ſhºttonia, Lat.] A plant. It hath a
roſe-ſhaped flower, cºnſiſting of one leaf, which is divided
#. two parts, almoſt to the bottom: in the center of the
º: which afterwards, becomes a cylin-
3. ** are containcá ſpherical ſeeds. Miller.
WATERSA'PPHIRE. m. ſ. A ſort of ſtone.
łłºtºſºpphire is the occidental ſapphire, and is neithe
ſo bright a blue, nor ſo hard as theoriental. #. * of
WA'ſ ER witH. n.ſ. [water and with..] A plant. 24tward, ,
The waterwith of Jamaica growing on dry hills, i th
woods, where no water is to be met with, its trunk Il the
into pieces two or three yards long, and held
the mouth, affords ſo plentifully a limpid
freſhing water, or ſap, as gives new life to the drough
traveller or hunter. Derham's P.
WA't ER work. n.ſ.. [water and work.J. Play of intº
artificial ſpouts of water; any hydraulick Performance hS;
Engines invented for mines and waterwork; often ñſ in the
performance. Wilkins's Math. M, i.
The French took from the Italians the firſt plans of §
gardens, as well as waterworks. Addison
WATERY. adj. [from water.] -
1. Thin ; liquid ; like water. -
Quickſilver, which is a moſt crude and waterybody, heat.
ed, and pent in, hath the like force with gunpowder. 'i.
The bile, by its ſaponaceous quality, mixeth the oily i
watery parts of the aliment together. Arbuthnot on Åiºn
2. Taſtleſs; inſipid ; vapid ; ſpiritleſs. --fºr--
We'll uſe this unwholeſome humidity, this groſ, tratºry
pumpion. Shakeſpeare's Mºrry Wiv. ºf Windſºr,
No heterogeneous mixture uſe, as ſome
With watry turneps have debas'd their wines,
3. Wet; abounding with water.
When the big lip, and wat'ry eye
Tell me, the riſing ſtorm is nigh:
'Tis then thou art yon angry main,
Deform'd by winds, and daſh'd by rain.
4. Relating to the water.
On the brims her fire, the wat'ry god,
Roll'd from a ſilver urn his cryſtal flood,
5. Conſiſting of water.
The wat'ry kingdom is no bar
To ſtop the foreign ſpirits; but they come,
As o'er a brook, to ſee fair Portia.
Thoſe few eſcap'd
Famine, and anguiſh, will at laſt conſume,
Wand'ring that wat'ry deſart. Milton's Par, Lºft, b. xi.
Betwixt us and you wide oceans flow,
And wat'ry deſarts. Dryden's Indian Emperor.
---, if cut
d by either end to
• Innocent, and re-
Philipi.
Priºr,
Drydon,
Shałºńeart,
Together to the wat'ry camp they haſte, Dryden.
Perhaps you'll ſay,
That the attracted wat'ry vapours riſe
From lakes and ſeas, and fill the lower ſkies. Blackmºrt.
WA'ttle. n.ſ.. [from waghelen, to ſhake, German. Sinnº)
1. The barbs, or looſe red fleſh that hangs below the cock's ºil
The loach is of the ſhape of an eel, and has a bººl ºf
watte's like a barbel. Walton.
The barbel is ſo called, by reaſon of his barb, or ºth
at his mouth, which is under his noſe or chops. Walm.
His comb and wattel, are an ornament becoming hi: "º
tial ſpirit. Mºre', Antidote agaiji Atºm.
2. A hurdle. Ainº
To WA’ttle. v. a. ſpa-clas, Saxon, twigs...] Tº bind with
twigs; to form, by platting twigs one within another,
Might we but hear
The folded flocks penn'd in their wattled cotes, , ,
Or ſound of paſtoral reed with oaten ſtops. *:
A plough was found in a very deep bog, and a l º
wattled ſtanding. Martimer's H.
WAVE. m. ſ. ſpacze, Saxon; wagh, Dutch 5 vº Fº &amp;
I. water raiſed above the level of the ſurface; billo"; "
driven into inequalities. 11 or
The hº that o'er his wave-worn baſis bow'd. Shalºft.
The waves that riſe would drown the higheſt hill;
But at thy check they flee, and when they hº
- L’.”
Thy thund'ring voice, they poſt to do thy will. Wºttºm.
Ámidſt theſe toils ſucceeds the balmy night;
Now hiſing waters the quench'd guns reſtº
And weary waves withdrawing from the fight, Dryden.
Are lull'd, and pant upon the filent ſhore. Pºpe.
The wave behind impels the wave beſ?"
Luxuriant on the wave-worn bank he lay Pºpe.
Stretch'd forth, and panting in the funny”
2. Unevenneſs; inequality. - from
Thus it happens, if the glaſs of the priſms ...
veins, and their ſides be accurately plane and we * uſually
without thoſe numberleſs waves, or cºlº -
- ing Wit
ariſe from ſand-holes a little ſmoothed " pº
utty.
Tºw. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To play looſely ; to float.
I may find - - Drydº
Your warlike enſigns waving in the wind.
Meſiapus’ helm . Drydº.
He laces on, and wears the wavº”; creſt. 2. Tº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A W
W A Y
---
*
º
2. To be moved as a ſignal.
A bloody arm it is, that holds a pine
Lighted, above the capitol, and now
It waves unto us.
3. To be in an unſettled ſtate ; to flućtuate.
They wave in and out, no way ſufficiently grounded, no
way reſolved, what to think, ſpeak, or write, more than only
that becauſe they have taken it upon them, they muſt be op-
poſite. Hooker, b.v.
If he did not care whether he had their love or no, he
wav'd indifferently 'twixt doing them neither good nor
harm. Shakespeare ? Coriolanus.
To WAv F. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To raiſe into inequalities of ſurface.
He had a thouſand noſes,
Horns welk'd and wav'd like the enridged ſea. Shakespeare.
2. To move looſely.
They wav'd their fiery ſwords, and in the air
Made horrid circles. Milton.
AEneas wav'd his fatal ſword
High o'er his head. Dryden.
He beckoned to me, and, by the waving of his hand, di-
rººted me to approach the place where he fit. Addiſon.
3. To waſt; to remove any thing floating.
Some men never conceive how thiſ motion of the earth
below ſhould wave one from a knock Perpendicularly direéted
from a body in the air above. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
4. To beckon; to direét by a waft or motion of any thing.
Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground:
But do not go with it.
5. [Gueſver, Fr. Skinner.] To put off.
He reſolved not to wave his way upon this reaſon, that if
he ſhould but once, by ſuch a diverſion, make his enemy
believe he were afraid of danger, he ſhould never live
without. łotton's Lift of the Duke of Buckingham.
Theſe, waving plots, found out a better way;
Some god deſcended, and preſerv'd the play. Dryden.
6. To put aſide for the preſent.
I have wav'd the ſubject of your greatneſs, to reſign myſelf
to the contemplation of what is more peculiarly yours. Dryden.
Since ſhe her intereſt for the nation's wav'd,
Then I who ſav'd the king, the nation ſav’d. Dryden.
To WAVER. v. n. [parian, Saxon.]
Shakespeare.
1. To play to and fro; to move looſely.
I took two triangular glaſſes, and one of them being kept
fixt in the ſame poſture, that the Iris it projected on the floor
might not waver, I caſt on the ſame floor another Iris, with
another priſm, moving it to and fro. Boyle.
The whitening ſhower deſcends,
At firſt then wavering. Thomſºn's Winter.
2. To be unſettled; to be uncertain, or inconſtant 5 to fluc-
tuate; not to be determined.
In which amazement, when the miſcreant
Perceived him to waver, weak and frail,
Whilſt trembling horror did his conſcience daunt,
And helliſh anguiſh did his ſoul affail. Fairy Queen.
Remember where we are ;
In France, among a fickle, wavering nation. Shakeſpeare.
Thou almoſt mak’ſt me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
That ſouls of animals infuſe themſelves
Into the trunks of men. Shakeſpeare.
Hold faſt the faith without wavering. Heb. x.
The wav'ring faith of people vain and light. Daniel.
Faith as abſolutely determines our minds, and as perfectly
excludes all wavering, as our knowledge itſelf; and we may
as well doubt of our own being, as we can, whether any re-
velation from God be true. Locke.
What if Hoſpinian ſhould have ſaid, that Luther waver'd
in the point of the ſacrament does it follow that he really
did ſo * Atterbury.
They, who at this diſtance from the firſt riſe of the go-
ſpel, after weighing the ſeveral evidences of it, waver in their
faith, would have waver'd, though they had ſeen the firſt
promulgers work wonders. Atterbury.
WA'v ERER. n.ſ. [from waver.] One unſettled and irreſolute.
Come, young waverer, come, and go with me 3.
In one reſpect I'll thy aſfiſtant be. Shakeſpeare.
WA’vy. adj. [from wave.]
1. Riſing in waves.
For thee the ocean ſmiles, and ſmooths her wavy breaſt;
And heav'n itſelf with more ſerene and purer light is bleſt.
Dryden.
2. Playing to and fro, as in undulations.
Where full-ear'd ſheaves of rye
Grow wavy on the tilth, that ſoil ſele&amp; -
For apples. Philips.
Let her glad vallies ſmile with wavy corn; -
Let fleecy flocks her riſing hills adorn. Prior.
WAwfs, or wars. m. ſ. A word uſed by Spenſºr, according to
the Saxon pronunciation,
B. Jºhnſºn's Catline.
I. For waves.
Another did the dying brands repair
ith iron tongs, and ſprinkled of the fame
With liquid wºe.
2. In the fºllºwing paſſage it ſeems to be for woes
Whilſt they fly that gulf's devouring jaws,
hey on this rock are ent, and ſunkin helpleſs waiver. Spenſ.
o WAwl. v. n. [Pa: grief, Saxon.] To Cry; to howl.
w!. | º that we ſmell the air,
e wºwie and cry. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
WAX. m. ſ ſpaxe, Saxon; wer, Daniſh 5 : Dutch.]
I. The thick tenacious *gathered by the bee, and formed
into cells for the reception of the honey.
..//ax conſiſts of an acid ſpirit, of a nauſeous taſte, and an
oil or butter, which is emollient, laxative, and anodyne. Arb.
They give us food which may with nečiar vie,
And wax, that does the abſent ºn ſupply.
All the magiſtrates, every new or full moon,
to Confucius with bowings, wax candles, and inc
While viſits ſhall be paid on ſolemn days,
When num’rous wax lights in bright order blaze 5
Fairy Queen.
ſpa, Saxon.]
Roſcommon.
give honour
enſe. Stillin.
So long my honour, name, and Praiſe ſhall live. Pºpe.
2. Any tenacious maſs, ſuch as is uſed to faſten letters.
We ſoften the wax, before we ſet on the ſeal. More.
3. A kind of concretion in the fleſh.
A fontanel in her neck was much inflamed
kernels about it.
To Wax. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſm
Wax.
2 and many wax-
//?ſeman's Surgery.
car; to join with
Jacqual in their length, and was a with Care,
They ſtill retain the name of his ungrateful fair. Dryden.
To WAX. v. m. pret, wox, waxed, Part. Paſſ waxed, waxen.
ſºaxan, Saxon; wachſen, German.
1. To grow; to increaſe; to become bigger, or more. Uſed
of the moon, in oppoſition to wane, and figuratively of things
which grow by turns bigger and leſs.
The huſbandman in fowing and ſetting, upon good reaſon,
obſerves the waxing and waning of the moon. Hakewill.
Land and trade are twins, they wax and wane together. Child.
2. To paſs into any ſtate; to become 3 to grow. It is in either
ſenſe now almoſt diſuſed. -
Where things have been inſtituted, which being convenient
and good at the firſt, do afterward in proceſs of time wax
otherwiſe, we make no doubt but they may be altered, yea,
though councils or cuſtoms general have received them. Hooker.
Careleſs the man ſoon wox, and his wit weak
Was overcome of things that did him pleaſe. Fairy Queen.
Art thou like the adder waxen deaf; Shakeſpeare.
We will deſtroy this place; becauſe the cry of them is
waxen great before the Lord. Gen. xix. 13.
Flowers removed wax greater, becauſe the nouriſhmentis
more eaſily come by in the looſe earth. Bacon.
This anſwer given, Argantes wild drew near,
Trembling for ire, and waxing pale for rage;
Nor could he hold. Fairfax, b. ii.
If I wax but cold in my deſire,
Think heav'n hath motion loſt, and the world fire. Donna.
Their manners wax more and more corrupt, in proportion
as their bleſfings abound. Atterbury.
WA'KEN. m.ſ.. [from wax.] Made of wax.
Swarming next appear'd
The female bee, that feeds her huſband drone
Deliciouſly, and builds her waxen cells
With honey ſtor'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
I can yet ſhoot beams, whoſe heat can meſt
The waxen wings of this ambitious boy. Denham:
So weary bees in little cells repoſe;
But if night-robbers lift the well-ſtor'd hive,
An humming through their waxen city grows,
And out upon each other's wings they drive. Dryden.
Others with ſweets the waken cells diſtend. Gay.
WAY. n.ſ. [poeg, Saxon; weigh, Dutch..]
1. The road in which one travels.
I am amaz'd, and loſe my way, -
Among the thorns and dangers of this world. Shakespeare.
You cannot ſee your way.—
—I have no way, and therefore want no eyes:
I ſtumbled when I ſaw. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
To God’s eternal houſe direét the way, - .
A broad and ample road. - - Milton.
Flutt'ring the god, and weeping ſaid,
Pity poor Cupid, generous maid
Who happen'd, being blind, to ſtray, -
And on thy boſom loſt his way. Prior.
2. Broad road made for paſſengers.
Know'ſt thou the way to Dover ?—
—Both ſtile and gate, horſe-way, and foot-path. Shakespeare
th of iourney.
3. A. º : had travelled a great way under a huge
burden, found himſelf ſo weary, that he called upºn death
to deliver him. I’E/ºrange.
30 K. 4. Courſe
He form'd the reeds, proportion'd as they are; }<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W A Y
W A Y
dire&amp;ion of motion. fore foll
I now go toward him, therefore follºw * , 1.
And .# what way I make. Shakeſp. //inter Tale.
He ſtood in the gate, and aſk'd of ev'ry one,
4. Courſe ;
which way ſhe took, and whither ſhe was gone. Dryden.
Attending long in vain, I took the way,
which through a path, but ſcarcely printed, lay. Dryden.
with downward force he took his way,
And roll'd his yellow billows to the ſea. Dryden.
My ſeven brave brothers, in one fatal day,
To death's dark manſions took the mournful way. Dryden.
To obſerve every the leaſt difference that is in things, keeps
the underſtanding ſteady and right in its way to know-
ledge. Locke.
5. Advance in life. -
The boy was to know his father's circumſtances, and that
he was to make his way by his own induſtry. Spectator, Nº. 123.
6. Paſſage; power of progreſſion made or given.
Back do I toſs theſe treaſons to thy head :
This ſword of mine ſhall give them inſtant way,
Where they ſhall reſt for ever, Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Th’ angelick choirs,
On each hand parting, to his ſpeed gave way,
Through all th' empyreal road. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. v.
Youth and vain confidence thy life betray:
Through armies this has made Melantius' way. Waller.
The reaſon may be, that men ſeldom come into thoſe
poſts, till after forty; about which time the natural heat be-
ginning to decay, makes way for thoſe diſtempers. Temple.
The air could not readily get out of thoſe priſons, but by
degrees, as the earth and water above would give way. Burnet.
As a ſoldier, foremoſt in the fight,
Makes way for others. - Dryden.
Some make themſelves way, and are ſuggeſted to the mind
by all the ways of ſenſation and reflection. Locke.
7. Vacancy made by timorous or reſpectful receſſion.
There would be left no difference between truth and falſe-
hood, if what we certainly know, give way to what we may
poſſibly be miſtaken in. Locke.
Nor was he ſatisfy'd, unleſs he made the pure profeſſion of
the goſpel give way to ſuperſtition and idolatry, wherever he
had power to expel the one, and eſtabliſh the other. Atterbury.
I would give way to others, who might argue very well
upon the ſame ſubječt. Swiſt.
8. Local tendency.
Come a little nearer this way,
I warrant thee no body hears. Shakeſp. Mer. Wives of Wind.
9. Courſe; regular progreſſion.
But give me leave to ſeize my deſtin'd prey,
And let eternal juſtice take the way.
Io. Situation where a thing may probably be found.
Theſe inquiſitions are never without baſeneſs, and very
often uſeleſs to the curious inquirer. For men ſtand upon
their guards againſt them, laying all their counſels and ſecrets
out of their way. Taylor’s Rule of Living Hºly.
11. A ſituation or courſe obſtructive and obviating.
The imagination being naturally tumultuous, interpoſeth
itſelf without aſking leave, caſting thoughts in our way, and
forcing the underſtanding to reflect upon them. Duppa.
12. Tendency to any meaning, or act.
There is nothing in the words that ſounds that way, or
points particularly at perſecution. Atterbury.
13. Acceſs; means of admittance.
Being once at º 'twas ſaid, having made my way with
ſome foreign prince, I would turn pirate. Raleigh.
14. Sphere of obſervation.
The general officers, and the publick miniſters that fell in
Dryden.
my way, were generally ſubject to the gout. Temple.
I 5. K., mediate inſtrument; intermediate ſtep.
By noble ways we conqueſt will prepare;
Firſt offer peace, and that refus'd, make war. Dryden.
What conceivable ways are there, whereby we ſhould
come to be aſſured that there is ſuch a being as God? Tillotſon.
A child his mother ſo well inſtructed this way in geography,
that he knew the limits of the four parts of the world. Locke.
It is not impoſible to God to make a creature with more
tºys to convey into the underſtanding the notice of corporeal
things, than thoſe five he has given to man. Locke.
16. Method ; ſcheme of management. .."
He durit not take open way againſt them, and as hard it
was to take a ſecret, they being ſo continually followed by
the beſt, and every way ableſt of that region. Sidney, b. ii.
Will not my yielded crown redeem my breath
Still am I fear'd is there no way but death Daniel.
* by calling evil good, a man is miſrepreſented to him-
ſelf in the way of flattery; ſo by calling good evil, he is miſ-
repreſented to others, in the way of ſlander. South's Sermons.
9W what impious ways my wiſhes took
Hºw they the monarch, and the man fºck?
The ſenate,
thought it their
- - Prior.
forced to yield to the tribunes of the people,
*** courſe to give way alſo to the time. Swift.
17. Private determination.
He was of an high mind, and loved his own will and hi
as one that revered himſelf, and would reign indeed 1S
If I had my way, -
#: º mew'd in flames at home, not i' th' ſenate,
ad fing'd his furs by this time. ‘.... ', ...
18. Manner º y e B. johnſon', Catilin,
She with a calm careleſsneſs let every thing ſide 2
by their ſpeeches, who neither in matter nor pºiſºn º do
way belong unto us. .."
God hath ſo many times and ways ſpoken to men i. i.
Few writers make an extraordinary figure, º: ër.
ſomething in their way of thinking or expreſſing, that is not
tirely their own. sºil. N. º:
His way of expreſſing and applying them, not i. i. 0.
tion of them, is what we admire. 4.
19. Method ; manner of practice. ſon,
Having loſt the way of nobleneſs, he ſtrove to climb to the
way,
Bacºn.
height of terribleneſs. Sidn
Matter of mirth, ty.
She could deviſe, and thouſand way; invent,
To feed her fooliſh humour, and vain jolliment. Spºnſer,
Taught
To liveth' eaſieſt way, not with perplexing thoughts Mil
20. Method or plan of life, conduct, or .. 3. iltºn's
A phyſician, unacquainted with your body, may put you
in a way for a preſent cure, but overthroweth your health in
ſome other kind. Bawn.
To attain -
The height and depth of thy eternal way,
All human thought comes ſhort. Miltºn.
When a man ſees the prodigious expence our forefathers
have been at in theſe barbarous buildings, one cannot but
fancy what miracles they would have left us, had they onl
been inſtructed in the right way. Addison an Itaj.
21. Right method to act or know.
We are quite out of the way, when we think that things con-
tain within themſelves the qualities that appear to usinthem. L.
They are more in danger to go out of the way, who are
marching under the conduct of a guide that will miſlead them,
than he that has not yet taken a ſtep, and is likelier to en-
quire after the right way. Dock,
By me, they offer all that you can aſk,
And point an eaſy way to happineſs. - Rowe,
22. General ſcheme of acting.
Men who go out of the way to hint free things, muſt be
guilty of abſurdity, or rudeneſs. . Claria.
23. By the way. Without any neceſſary connection with the
main deſign; en paſſant. -
Note, by the way, that unity of continuance is eaſie."
procure, than unity of ſpecies. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
Will. Honeycomb, now on the verge of threeſcore, aſked
me, in his moſt ſerious look, whether I would adviſe him to
marry lady Betty Single, who, by the wº), is on g the
greateſt fortunes about town. Speciator, N° 475.
24. To go or come one's way, or ways ; to come along, or depart.
A familiar phraſe.
Nay, come your ways; -
This is his majeſty, ſay your mind to him: .
To a boy faſt aſleep upon the brink of a river, º:
came and waki him, prºhee get up, and ºth ";"|
tumble in and be drown'd elſe. L'Elanº.
25. It'ay and ways, are now often uſed corruptly for wiſe. hat
But if he ſhall any ways make them void after he ha
heard them, then he ſhall bear her iniquity. Numl.ºxx. .
They erect concluſions no way inferible from their pr
miſes. Brºwn's Pulgar Errºr"
Being ſent to reduce Paros, he miſtook a great º:
diſtance for the fleet, and being no was a match for them,
Shaleſ eart,
utif.
ſet ſail for Athens. - #.
'Tis no way the intereſt even of prieſthood. Anſw.
WAYBREAD. m. ſ. A plant.
WAY FA’RER. m.ſ. [way and fare, to
veller.
Howſoever, many wayſarers make themſelves
ting the inhabitants in mind of this privilege;
eſpecially the women, forflow not to bain them. a journey.
WAYFARíNG. adi. Travelling; paſſing: hº º be di-
They to whom all this is revealed, if they ". wayfaring
rečted into a path ſo plained and ſmoothed, tº º acknow-
men, though fools, ſhall not err thereº muſ º at will not
ledge themſelves in the number of the º ºnentalſ.
enter into God's reſt. Hammºnd's º
WAY FARING TRE E. m. ſ. [viburnum, Lat.] A p º into five
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, which * *... in-
parts, and expands in a circular order; theſe ** laced oſt
to the form of an umbrella : the ova). which º
the upper part of the flower, becomes.” ſoft º Miller.
which contains one ſtony compreſſed furio” h jiu, in
To W. Ayla Y. v. a. [way and lay.] To watch
the way; to beſet by ambuſh. I will
goj Piſºgº; “
glee, by put.
who again,
Care:0.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W .E. A
- I will waylay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to
kill ºne-thou kill'ſ melike a rogue and a villain. Shakeſp.
The employment of money is chiefly nerchandizing or
purchaſing; and uſury wayſay, both: it juis and damps all
induſtries.
Bacon.
How thou lurk'ſt
In valley or green meadow to waylay
Some beauty rare. 44;ton's Paradſ: Regained.
Now on their coaſts our Sºnquering navy rides,
H'aylays their merchants, and their land beſets,
Each day new wealth without their care provides,
They lay aſleep with Prizes in their nets. Dryden.
Like hunted caſtors, conſcious of their ſtore,
Their waylaid wealth to Norway's coaſts they bring. Dryd.
WAYLA’YER. n.ſ. [from waylay.] One who waits in ambuſh
for another.
Way'less, adj. [from way.] Pathleſs; untracked.
When on upon my wayleſ walk,
As my deſires me draw, -
I, like a madman feſ to talk
With every thing I ſaw.
Wax’MARK. a. ſ. [way and mark.
velling.
$ºt thee up waymark, make thee high heaps jer. xxxi. 21.
To WAYMEST. ... a. ſpa, Saxon.] To lament, or grieve.
Obſolete.
What boots it to Wºep and to wayment,
When ill is chanc'd, but doth the iſ increaſe,
ãº the weak mind with double wo. tºrment. Fairy Queen.
WAY WARD. adj, pa º, and Pearb, Saxon.] Froward;
peeviſh; moroſe; vexatious.
That night the elder it **, the more wayward it ſhewed
itſelf towards them. Sidney.
How wayward is this fooliſh love,
That, like a teſty babe, will ſcratch the nurſe,
Drayton's &amp;ueen of Cynthia.
J Mark to guide in tra-
And preſently all humbled, kiſs the rod. Shakeſpeare.
*ayward beauty doth not fancy move,
A frown forbids, a ſmile engendreth love. Fairfax.
To miſchief bent, -
He ſeldom does a good with good intent;
łłayward, but wife; by long experience taught
To pleaſe both parties, for iijeni, he fought. Dryden.
WAY^w ARDLY. adv. [from wayward] Frowardly; per-
verſely.
**ywardy proud; and therefore bold: becauſe extremely
faulty. Sidney.
Howſoever, ſome will ſtill be tºwardly diſpoſed; yet if
ſuch as be in authority will do their duties, they may by con-
venient diſcipline be kept within the boºn. of modeſty, or
elſe removed. º //hitgifte.
WAYwa RdNess. n.ſ.. [from wayward.] Frowardneſs; per-
verſeneſs.
Such the behaviour of ladies, as builded their chaſtity not
*P9 #6) iſ ardrºſ, but choice of worthineſs. Sidney.
The beſt of his time hath been but raſh; then muſt we look
from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of long en-
grafted condition; but the unruly waywardn'ſs that infirm and
cholerick years bring. Shakeſpeare.
A child will have as much wit as he hath waywardneſ.
//otton on Educatiºn.
WF. pronoun. [See I.]
1. The plural of I. -
Retire we to our chamber,
A little water clears us of this deed. Shakeſpeare.
Fair and noble heſteſs,
A'e are your gueſts to ni ght. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Notwithſtanding animals had nothing like the uſe of reaſon,
we find in them all the lower Parts of our nature, in the
greateſt ſtrength. - - Addiſon.
2. Improperly and upgrammatically for the oblique caſe, a.
To poor we,
Thine enmity's moſt capital. Shakeſpeare.
WEAK. adj. ſpac, Saxon; wek, Dutch..]
I. Feeble; not ſtrong. -
He is weary and weak handed.
Here only weak,
2 Sam. xvii. 2.
Againſt the charm of beauty's powerful glance. Milton.
Wer’t thou not weak with hunger, mad with love,
My hand ſhould force thee. Dryden.
*The and reputation are weak ties: many have not the
leaſt ſenſe of them : Powerful men are only awed by them as
they conduce to their intereſt, Dryden.
Children, being by the courſe of nature born weak, and un-
able to provide for themſelves, they have, by the appointment
of God, a right to be maintained by their parents. Locke.
2. Infirm; not healthy.
Here I ſtand your brave,
A poor, infirm, weak, and deſpis'd old man. Shakeſpeare.
3. Soft ; pliant; not ſtiff.
4. Low of ſound. - -
A voice not ſoft, weak, pping and womaniſh; but audible,
ſtrong and manlike. Aſcham.
W E A
5. Feeble of mind; "anting ſpirit; wanting diſcernment.
As the caſe Itands with this preſent age; full of tongue and
weak of brain, we yield to the ſtream thereof. Booker.
This murderó Prince, though wº he Was,
He was not ill, nor yet ſo tweak, but that
‘ſhew’d much maſtill Valour in his place. Daniel.
She firſt his wea; indulgence will accuſe. 4/ilton.
hat Portugal hath yet 110 more than a ſu
they may thai, the Whigs, whoſe fair. .
Wºre ſo weak to believe.
* much impregnated with any ingredient:
ture, weak beer.
7. Not powerful; not potent.
!.muſt make fair wººther yet a while,
as a weak tinc-
Till Henry be moreº and I more ſtrong. Shakespeare.
The weak, by thinking themſelves ſtrong, are induced to
Venture and proclaim war againſt that which ruins them; and
the ſtrong, by conceiting themſelves weak, are thereby rº
dered unactive and uſeleſ. South's Sirmoºr.
If the Poor found the rich diſpoſed to ſupply their wants,
or if the weak might always find Protection from the mighty
they could none of them lament their own condition. Swift.
8. Not well ſupported by argument.
A caſe ſo weak and feeblº, been much perſiſted in. Hozł.
9. Unfortified.
To quell the tyrant love, and guard thy heart
n this weak ſide, where moſt our nature fails,
Would be a conqueſt worthy Cato's ſon. Ząſºn's Catz.
To WEA'ken. v.a. To debilitate; to enfeeble 5 to deprive of
ſtrength.
The firſt which weakened them was their ſecurity. Hºoker.
Their hands ſhall be w.…..; from the work that it be Ilot
done. - ^e%. vi. 9.
Inteſtine broils,
Weakening the ſcepter fold night. Milton.
Very violence offered to the body weakens and impairs it,
and renders it leſs durable. Ray on the Creatiºn.
** **, not weaken ſtill the weaker ſide
By our diviſions. Addison's Catº,
Solemn impreſſions that ſeem to *aken the mind, may, by
Proper reflection, be made to ſtrengthen it. Clariſſa.
FAKTING. m./. [from *a*..] A feeble creature.
Thou art no Atlas for ſo great a weight;
And, weakling, Warwick takeshi. gift again,
And Henry is my king, Warwick his ſubject. Shakespeare,
AEſop begged his companions not to overcharge him; they
found him a *g, and bade him pleaſe himſelf. L'A/irange.
WEA'kly. adu. [from weak.]
1. Feebly; with want of ſtrength. -
The motion of gravity worketh weaky, both far from the
earth, and alſo within the earth. Bacon.
Was plighted faith ſo weaky ſeal’d above,
That for one error, I muſt loſe your love? Dryden.
2. Indiſcreetly; injudiciouſly; timorouſly; with feebleneſs of mind.
This high gift of ſtrength committed to me,
Under the ſcal of filence could not keep,
But weakly to a woman muſt revealit. A Milton.
Tancred, I neither am diſpos'd to make
Requeſt for life, nor offer'd life to take.
Much leſs deny the deed; but leaſt of all
Beneath pretended juſtice weakly fall. Dryden's Falles.
WEA'KLY. adj. [from weak.] Not ſtrong; not healthy.
Being old and weaky, *Wenty years in priſon, it was ten
to one that ever I ſhould have returned. Raleigh.
WEAKNEss. n.ſ.. [from went J
1. Want of ſtrength; want of force; feebleneſs
Troy in our weakneſs lives, not in her ſtrength. Shakeſp.
Argument -
Of human weakneſ; rather than of ſtrength. Milton,
The General's force, as kept alive by fight,
Now, not oppos'd, no longer can purſue:
Laſting till heav'n had done his courage right,
When he had conquer’d, he his weanſ knew. Drydºn.
New graces yearly like thy works diſplay,
Soft without weakn'ſ, without glaring gay. Pope.
By ſuch a review we ſhall diſcern and ſtrengthen our wº.
meſſes with good reſolution, and ſo order our future converſa-
tion as may render us leaſt expoſed to falling. Roger 's Sermons.
ity; unhealthineſs.
2. º *. poſts derive a weakneſs of conſtitution from
the eaſe and luxury of their anceſtors, and the delicacy of their
own education. Temple.
Ogrency. -
3. Wº: to § conſcious of the weakneſs of thoſe jºr
- 1//ºt/on.
4. "... of judgment ; want of reſolution; fooliſhneſs of mind.
//eakneſs is thy excuſe,
And I believe it; weakneſs to reſiſt
Philiſtian gold: if weakneſs may excuſe,
What murderer, what traitor, particide,
Inceſtuous, ſacrilegious, but may plead it?
All *: is weakneſs. 5. ſº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E A
W. E. A
- WEA/NEL.
... failing. - ..ſ [from wean.]
s 5. Defeół ; failing •ou muſt know his nature, WEA'NLING. }n f [ e
If you will work on any man, You and i. 1. An animal newly weaned.
and ſo lead him ; or his weakneſſes and diſadvantages,
º
: awe him. - - - - Bacon.
º Many find a pleaſure in contradićling the common reports
º reading abroad the weakneſſes of an exalted
f and in ſi - a-
†. P Addiſon's Spectator.
wºxside n.ſ. [wiak and ſide.J Foible; deficience; infir-
mity. - -
Yii, dog would have fought for his maſter in any other caſe;
but the love of mutton was his weakſide. L’Eſtrange.
Their application to trade has increaſed their ſhipping,
which they found to be their wealſide in their laſt attempts.
Temple.
WEAl. n.ſ. ſpeian, Saxon; wealuſ, Dutch.]
1. Happineſs; proſperity; flouriſhing ſtate:
Our weal on you depending,
Counts it your weal, that he have liberty. Shakeſpeare. .
As we lové the weal of our ſouls and bodies, let us ſo behave
ourſelves as we may be at peace with God. Bacon.
Thine, and of all thy ſons,
The weal or woe in thee is plac'd; beware! Milton.
Ireland ought to be conſidered, not only in its own intereſt,
but likewife in relation to England, upon whoſe weal in the
main, that of this kingdom depends. Temple.
2. Republick; ſtate; publick intereſt.
Blood hath been ſhed -
Ere human ſtatute purg'd the gen'ral weal. Shakeſpeare.
- How ſhall the muſe, from ſuch a monarch ſteal
An hour, and not defraud the publick weal. Pope.
Weal. n.ſ. [palan, Saxon.] The mark of a ſtripe.
Like warts or weals it hangs upon her ſkin. Danne.
Weal away. interſ. Alas. Obſolete. Spenſer.
Weald, Wald, I/alt. Whether ſingly or jointly ſignify a wood
or grove, from the Saxon peals. Gibſon.
WEALTH. n.ſ. [pales, rich, Saxon.] Riches; money, or
precious goods.
In deſart haſt thine habitance,
And theſe rich heaps of wealth doth hide apart
From the world's eye and from her right uſance. Fa, ºueen:
I ſhould forge
Quarrels unjuſt againſt the good and loyal,
Deſtroying them for wealth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I wiſh thee, Vin, above all wealth,
Both bodily and ghoſtly health:
Not too much wit or wealth come to thee;
For much of either may undo thee. Biſhop Corlet.
Each day new wealth without their care provides,
They lie aſleep with prizes in their nets. Dryden,
WEA'LTHILY. adv. [from wealthy..] Richly.
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua,
If wealthily, then happily in Padua. Shakeſpeare.
WEA'LTHIN Ess. n.ſ. [from wealthy..] Richneſs.
WEA'LTHY, adj. [from wealth..] Rich ; opulent; abundant.
If a gentleman, or any wealthy yeoman, have any chil-
dren, the eldeſt ſhall be kept in ſome order, but all the reſt ſhall
ſhift and fall to this occupation of ſtealing. Spenſer.
I will be married to a wealthy widow,
Ere three days paſs. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew:
My ſpeculations, when ſold ſingle, like cherries upon the
ſtick, are delights for the rich and wealthy; after ſome time
they come to market in great quantities, and are every ordi-
nary man's money. Addiſon's Spediator.
Not Neptune's ſelf from all his floods receives
A wealthier tribute than to thine he gives.
To WEAN. v. a. ſpenan, Saxon.]
1. To put from the breaſt; to ablaðtate.
She was weaned when it did taſte the wormwood on the
nipple; pretty fool to ſee it fall out with the dug. Shakeſpeare.
I have behaved as a child that is weaned of his mother. Pſ.
In weaning young creatures, the beſt way is never to let
them ſuck the paps at all; for then they will drink up milk
g” without any difficulty. Ray on the Creation.
Pope.
*
mixed with it. Aſortimer's Huſbandry.
2. To withdraw from any habit or deſire.
Here the place whoſe pleaſant fight,
From other ſhades have wean'd my wand'ring mind;
Tell me what wants me here. Spenſer.
I the rather wean me from deſpair,
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb. Shakeſpeare.
Şeriouſly reflect on the happy ſtate he ſhall moſt certainly
arrive to, if he but wean himſelf from theſe worldly impedi-
ments here that clog his ſoul's flight. Digby.
Children newly waned from their parents, put out their
. towards them in their dreams, as if they were ſtill pre-
cnt. Th Stilingfieet.
F ere the coarſe cake, and homely huſks of beans,
** Pºmpring riot the young ſtomach weans. Dryden.
They were intended by the Author of our being, to wean
tº gradually from our fondneſ -
to the end of it. ondneſs of life, the nearer we º
2.
WEAPON. m. ſ. ſpeapon, Saxon.]
A fortnight before you wean calves from milk, let water be 2.
3.
Though when as Lowder was far away
This wolfiſh ſheep would catchen his prey,
A lamb, or a kid, or a weanel waſt, &gt;
With that to the wood would he ſpeed haſte. S
To gorge the fleſh of lambs and weanling kids pºſir.
Qn hills where flocks are fed, flies towºrd is º
Of Ganges or Hydaſpes. Å;
A child newly weaned. ºrad Lý.
Inſtru
ſomething with which one is armed to º:
The giant -
Down let fall his arm, and ſoft withdrew
His weapon huge, that heaved was on high
For to have ſlain the man that on the going didly. F. 3
The cry of Talbot ſerves me for a ſword: y ta. 3.
{‘. I have loaden me with many ſpoils, &gt;
ing no other weapon but his name. Shai
Which Ih Take this weapon ºff. HenryVI,
ic ave here recover'd from the Moor. h
Touch me with noble anger; Shahſ. Othl,
Q let not womens weapons, water drops,
Stain my man's cheeks. Shakespeare', King La,
His foes, who came to bring him deaff, 5 **w-
Bring him a weapon that before had none.
With his full force he whirld it firſt around,
Imperial Juno turn'd the courſe before;
And fix'd the wand'ring weapon in the door. Dryden's Fr.
offence ;
David.
WEA'posed. adj. [from weapon.] Armed for offence; fir.
niſhed with arms.
In what ſort, ſo ill weaponed, could you atchieve this ºn.
terprize Sidn').
Both the combatants entered, apparelled only in their doub-
lets and hoſes, and weaponed with ſword, buckler, and dºg.
yer. Hayward,
Weaponless. adj. [from weapon.] Having no weapon; uſ.
armed.
Ran on embattl'd armies, clad in iron,
And weaponleſ himſelf,
Made arms ridiculous, uſeleſs the forgery
Of brazen ſhield and ſpear, the hammer'd cuiraſs,
Chalybean temper'd ſteel, and frock of mail,
Adamantean proof. Milton.
WEA'poNsalve. n.ſ. [weapon and ſalue.] A ſilve which was
ſuppoſed to cure the wound, being applied to the weapon
that made it.
That the ſympathetick powder and the wupriſalve conſtant.
ly perform what is promiſed of them, I leave others to *:::
y
To WEAR. v. a. Preterite wore, participle wºrn, ſº anº.
I.
To waſte with uſe or time. - -
O wicked world ! one that is well nigh wºn to pics with
age, to ſhow himſelf a young gallant. - Shakeſpearſ.
Protogenes could lay his colours ſo artificially, that one be-
ing worn off, a freſh ſhould ſucceed to the number of five.
Patham,
Waters wear the ſtones. %h xiv. º
An haſty word, or an indiſcreet adion does not º
diſſolve the bond, but that friendſhip may be ſtill ſound at
heart; and ſo outgrow and wear off theſe liº º
South'; Sermºni,
making them wit unto
and obliterate
Dao ºf Pitſj.
They have had all advantages to the
ſalvation, yet ſuffer their manhood to wear *
all thoſe rudiments of their youth.
'Tis time muſt wear it off; but I muſt gº Drydin.
- ear it
No differences of age, tempers, º sº i: i. it.
ny conſiderable number of ſnº ".
out, and ſet any Tilſºn's *.
- - - - in the
Theodoſius exerted himſelf to animate hº *...
courſe of life ſhe was entering upon, * i. Sºlutº,
mind groundleſs fears. ad/
To conſume tediouſly. .
What maſks, what dances, Shaftart.
To wear away this long age of three hours. y cannot en-
- -- - s the -
In moſt places, their toil is ſo extrºnº out at coitº
- ; the reſidue they.” asis
ºº::::::ge-
Wiſºft and beſt men full oft beguil'd,
with goodneſs principl’d, not to reject
The penitent, but ever to forgive, Miltºn,
Are drawn to wear out miſerable days.
To his name inſcrib'd, their tears they pay, Drydº,
Till years and kiſſes wear his º
(inos ti mmonly begin by forcº, dº,
Kings titles co y âlows into right. Dr;
Which time wears off º
To carry appendant to the body.
y app This pale and angry ** Hºr, Vl
Will I for ever wear.
ill 1 IO Why
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E A
º
Why art thou angry –
That ſuch a ſlave as this ſhould ºar a ſword,
Who wears not honeſty. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
- What is this
That wearſ upon his baby brow the round
And top of ſovereignty. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I am the firſt-born ſon of him, that laſt
Wore the imperial diadem of Rome. Shakeſpeare.
Their adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plait-
ing the hair, and of wearing of gold. I Pet. iii. 3.
Eas'd the putting off
Theſe troubleſome diſguiſes which we wear. Milton.
He aſk'd what arms the ſwarthy Memnon wore;
What troops he landed. Dryden's Virg. Æneid.
This is unconſcionable dealing, to be made a ſlave, and
not know whoſe livery I wear. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
On her white breaſt a ſparkling croſs ſhe wº. Pope.
4. To exhibit in appearance.
Such an infectious face her ſorrow wears,
I can bear death, but not Cydaria's tears. Dryden.
5. To affect by degrees.
Trials wear us into a liking of what poſſibly, in the firſt
eſſay, diſpleaſed us. Locke.
A man who has any reliſh for true writing, from the maſter.
ly ſtrokes of a great author every time he peruſes him, wears
himſelf into the ſame manner. Addiſon's Speciator.
6. To WEAR out. To harraſs.
He ſhall wear out the ſaints.
7. To WEAR out. To waſte or deſtroy by uſe.
This very rev'rent letcher, quite worn out
With rheumatiſms, and crippled with his gout. Dryden.
To WEA R. v. n.
1. To be waſted with uſe or time.
Thou wilt ſurely wear away. Exod. xviii. 18.
In thoſe who have loſt their fight when young, in whom
the ideas of colours having been but ſlightly taken notice of,
and ceaſing to be repeated, do quite wear out. Locke.
2. To be tediouſly ſpent.
Thus wore out night, and now the herald lark
Left his ground-neſt, high tow'ring to deſcry
The Morn's approach, and greet her with his ſong. Milion.
3. To paſs by degrees.
If paſſion cauſes a preſent terror, yet it ſoon wears off; and
inclination will eaſily learn to ſlight ſuch ſcarecrows. Locłe.
The difficulty will every day grow leſs and wear off, and
obedience become eaſy and familiar. Rogers'; Sermons.
WEAR. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The act of wearing; the thing worn.
It was th’ inchantment of her riches
That made m'apply tº your crony witches;
That in return would pay th’ expence,
The wear and tear of conſcience. Hudibras.
2. Iran, Saxon, a fen ; war, German, a mound.j A dam to
ſhut up and raiſe the water; often written weir or wier,
They will force themſelves through flood-gates, or over
wars, hedges or ſtops in the water. //alton's Angler.
WEARD. m. ſ. Weard, whether initial or final, ſignifies watch-
fulneſs or care, from the Saxon peanban, to ward or keep. Gib.
WEA'RER, n.ſ. [from wear.] One who has any thing appen-
dant to his perſon.
The celeſtial habits, and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. Shakeſpeare's JWinter's Tale.
Were I the wearer of Antonio's beard,
I would not ſhave t to-day. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Cowls, hoods and habits with their wearers toſt,
And flutter'd into rags. Milton.
Armour bears off inſults, and preſerves the wearer in the
day of battle; but the danger once repelled, it is laid aſide, as be-
Dan, vii. 25.
ing too rough for civil converſation. Dryden.
We ought to leave room for the humour of the artiſt or
1Uearer. Addiſon on Italy.
WEA'RING. m. ſ. [from wear. J Cloaths.
It was his bidding ;
Give me my nightly wearing and adieu. Shakeſpeare.
WEA/RINEss. n.ſ.. [from weary.]
1. Laffitude; ſtate of being ſpent with labour.
Come, our ſtomachs
Will make what's homely favoury; wearineſ;
Can ſnore upon the flint, when reſty ſloth -
Finds the down pillow hard. , Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Water-fowls ſupply the wearineſ of a long flight by taking
Water. Hale.
Heaven, when the creature lies proſtrate in the weakneſs
of ſleep and wearineſ, ſpreads the covering of night and dark-
neſs to conceal it. South's Sermons.
To full bowls each other they provoke;
At length, with wearinºſ, and wine oppreſs'd,
They riſe from table, and withdraw to reſt. Dryden.
2. Fatigue; cauſe of laſſitude.
The more remained out of the wearineſ, and fatigue of their
late marches. Clarendon.
3. Impatience of anything.
4. ediouſneſs.
WEA'Rish. adj. [I believ
Boggy; watery.
A garment over-rich and wide for man - -
- - - - - y of their wear;
wº ill º Carew's Survey of {...}.
**1som E. adj. [from wºr. Troubleſome tedions.
cauſing wearineſs. J.J oubleſome ; tedious;
The ſoul preferreth reſt in ignorance before weariſome la-
bour to know. Aio, Ker
Theſe high wild hills, and rough uneven ways
Draw out our miles, and make them we w iſome Shakeſp.
Troops came to the army the day bef -
long and weariſome march. y Y before, haraſſed with a
Coſtly I reckon not them alone which charge the pur
which are wearſome and importune in ſuits.
e from paen, Saxon, a quagmire.]
Bacon.
ſe, but
Shrinki - Bacon.
rinking up, or ſtretching *...* wear iſome poſitions,
and ſuch as perturb the quiet of thoſe parts. Brown
This muſt be our taſk
In heav'n, this our delight; how was ſºme
Eternity ſo ſpent, in worſhip paid
To whom we hate. 4.iton's Paradſ: Loft.
Satiety from all things elſe doth come,
Then life muſt to itſelf grow wear/on.e. Denham.
WEA'R1som Ely adv. [from wea, ſºm. J Tediouſly; ſo as
to cauſe wearineſs. -
. As of Nimrod, ſo are the opinions of writers different touch-
ing Aſſur, and the beginning of that great ſtate of Aſiyria; a
controverſy wearſomey diſputed without any direct proof or
certainty. &amp;aleigh.
WEA'Riso MENE. s. n ſ. [from wearſºme.]
1. The quality of tiring.
2. The ſtate of being eaſily tired.
A wit, quick without lightneſs, ſharp without brittleneſs,
deſirous of good things without newfangleneſs, diligent in
painful things without wearjºmeneſ. 4/ºan's School, after.
To WE ARY. v. a. [from the adjective.] -
I. To tire; to fatigue; to harras; to ſubdue by labour.
Better that the enemy ſeek us;
So ſhall he waſte his means, weary his ſoldiers,
Doing himſelf offence. Sºakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
The people labour in the very fire, weary themſelves for
very vanity. Aab. ii. 13.
Dewy ſleep oppreſs'd them weary'd. Miſion.
Sea would be pools without the bruſhing air,
To curl the waves; and ſure ſome little care
Should weary nature ſo, to make her want repoſe. Dryden,
You have already weary'd fortune ſo,
She cannot farther be your friend or foe,
But ſits all breathleſs. - I’rden.
It would not be difficult to continue a paper by reſuming the
ſºme ſubjects, and warying out the reaſier with the ſame
thoughts in a different phraſe. Addison's Freeholder.
2. To make impatient of continuance.
I ſtay too long by thee, I weary thee. Shake?. Henry V.
Should the government be wearied out of its preſent pati-
ence, what is to be expected by ſuch turbulent men ; //
3. To ſubdue or harraſs by any thing irkſome.
Muſt'ring all her wiles,
With blandiſh'd parleys, feminine aſſults,
Toºgue batteries; ſhe ſurceas'd not day nor night
To ſtorm me over-watch'd and weary'd out. Aſ; ton.
WEARY. adj. [penix, Saxon; warren, to be tired, Dutch J
I. Subdued by fatigue; tired with labour.
Fair Phoebus 'gan decline, in haſte,
His weary waggon to the weſtern vale. Speºſ. r.
Gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my wary arms,
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe, Shakespeare.
I am weary, yea, my memory is tird:
Have we no wine here? Shakeſpeare.
An old man broken with the ſtorms of ſtate,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye:
Give him a little earth for charity. Shakeſpeare.
Let us not be weary in well-doing. Gal. vi. 9.
Our ſwords ſo wholly did the ſates employ,
That they at length grew weary to deſtroy ;
• Refus’d the work we brought, and out of breath,
Made ſorrow and deſpair attend for dº ath. Dryden.
2. Impatient of the continuance of any thing painful or ik-
ſome.
The king was as wary of Scotland, as he had been impa-
tient to go thither, finding all things propoſed to him without
conſideration of his honour or intereſt. Clarºndon.
My hopes all flat, nature within me ſeems,
In all her functions, weary of herſelf. Aldilºn.
3. Deſirous to diſcontinue.
See the revolution of the times,
Make mountains level, and the continent
Weary of ſolid firmneſs, melt itſelf
Into the ſeas. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
30 L - 4. Cauſing<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E A
W. E. A
4. Cauſing wearineſs; tireſome.
Their gates to all were open evermore
That by the weary way were travelling,
And one ſat waiting ever them before
Tji incomers by that needy were and poor. Fa. &amp;een.
The warieſ; and moſt lothed life
That age, ach, penury, impriſonment,
Can lay on nature, is a paradiſe
To what we fear of death.
Put on what weary negligence you pleaſe,
You and your fellows; I'd have it come to queſtion. Shak:
WEA'sel. n.ſ. ſperel, Saxon; weſel, Dutch; muſtela, Latin.]
A ſmall animal that eats corn and kills mice.
Ready in gybes, quick-anſwer'd, ſaucy, and -
As quarrelſome as the weaſel. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
A weaſel once made ſhift to ſlink
In at a corn loft through a chink. - - Pope.
WE's AND. m. ſ. ſparen, Saxon. This word is is very variouſly
written; but this orthography is neareſt to the original word.]
The windpipe; the paſſage through which the breath is drawn
and emitted.
Marry Diggon, what ſhould him affray,
To take his own where-ever it lay;
For had his weaſand been a little wider,
He would have devoured both hidder and ſhidder. Spenſer.
Cut his wezand with thy knife. Shakeſpeare's Tempe/?.
Matter to be diſcharged by expe&amp;oration muſt firſt paſs in-
to the lungs, then into the aſpera arteria, or weaſand, and
from thence be coughed up and ſpit out by the mouth. ///em.
The ſhaft that ſlightly was impreſs'd,
Now from his heavy fall with weight encreas'd,
Drove through his neck aſlant; he ſpurns the ground,
And the ſoul iſſues through the weazon's wound. Dryden.
The unerring ſteel deſcended while he ſpoke,
Pierc'd his wide mouth, and through his weazon broke.
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
WEATHER.. n.ſ. ſpeoen, Saxon.]
1. State of air, reſpecting either cold or heat, wet or drineſs.
Who's there, beſides foul weather 2–One mended like the
weather, moſt unquietly. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I am far better born than is the king;
But I muſt make fair weather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weak and I more ſtrong. Shakeſpeare.
Men muſt content themſelves to travel in all weathers, and
through all difficulties. L’Eſtrange.
The ſun
Foretells the change of weather in the ſkies,
Through miſts he ſhoots his ſullen beams,
Suſpect a drifling day. Dryden,
2. The change of the ſtate of the air.
It is a reverend thing to ſee an ancient caſtle not in decay;
how much more to behold an ancient family, which have ſtood
againſt the waves and weathers of time? Bacon.
3. Tempeſt; ſtorm.
What guſts of weather from that gath'ring cloud,
My thoughts preſage. Dryden's Wirgil.
To WEATHER. v. a [from the noun.]
1. To expoſe to the air.
He perch'd on ſome branch thereby,
To weather him and his moiſt wings to dry. Spºnſer.
Muſtard-ſeed gather for being too ripe,
And weather it wel, yer ye give it a ſtripe. 17 uſer.
2. To paſs with difficulty.
He weather'd fell Charibdis; but ere long,
The ſkies were darkened, and the tempeſts ſtrong. Garth.
Could they weather and ſtand the ſhock of an eternal dura-
tion, and yet be at any time ſubject to a diſſolution. Hale.
3. To WEATHER a point. To gain a point againſt the wind;
to accompliſh againſt oppoſition.
We have been tugging a great while againſt the ſtream, and
have almoſt weather'd our point; a ſtretch or two more will
do the work. Addiſon.
4. To WEATHER out. To endure.
When we have paſs'd theſe gloomy hours,
And weather'd out the ſtorm that beats upon us. Addison.
wºrks. adj. Haraſied and ſeaſoned by hard wea-
thcr.
They perceived an aged man and a young, both poorly ar-
rayed; extremely weather beaten; the old man blind, the young
man leading him. Sidney.
She enjoys ſure peace for evermore,
As weather leaten ſhip arrived on happy ſhore. Fairy Qeen.
Thrice from the banks of Wye,
And ſandy bottom'd Severn, have I ſent
Him bootleſs home, and wratherheaten back. Shakespeare H. IV.
. I hope when you know the worſt, you will at once leap
into the river, and ſwim through handſomely, and not wea-
therheaten With the divers blaſts of irreſolution, ſtand ſhivering
upon the brink. &gt; Snººn:
* A weathericaten veſſel h
Gladiy the port. catch veſſel holds 41ſton,
Dido received his weatherheaten treopS
- Dryden' Wire!!
The old weath ºn trºops. Dryden', pººl
eagle. *atherbeaten ſoldier carries in his hand the Rº #.
WEA't her BoARD, or Watherbow n. I Addison.
- ... n. /. In th -
that ſide of a ſhip that is to the sº e ſea º
'ić.
Yº: {{ ſweather and cock.]
1. An artificial cock ſet on the top of a ſpi ºl.
*...*. º from which #: wº º by turn.
ut alas! the ſun keeps his light, though thy fait
. ; the rocks ſtand ſtill, though thou ... º:
A kingfiſher. hanged by the bill, converting the b º
that point. ... the horizon from whence the win. jº to
is a very ſtrange introducing of natural weathercock, OW,
2. A. thing fickle and inconſtant. -
Where had you this pretty weathercock?——
what his name is my ºff. him of. 'º tell
He break my promiſe and abſolve my vow! ſpart,
The word which I have given ſhall ſtand like fate
Not like the king's that weathercock of ſtate. 'D. d.
We A^T HERDRIVEN. part. Forced by ſtorms or contrar º
Philip, during his voyage towards Spain, was .." S.
driven into Weymouth. Carew's S *:
WEATHERGA'Ge. n.ſ. [weather and gage.] ". "...
ſhews the weather. y thing that
To vere and tack, and ſteer a cauſe,
Againſt the weathergage of laws. Hudibra,
WEATHER GLAss. n.ſ.. [weather and glaſ...] A barometer.
As in ſome weathergloſ, my love I hold,
Which falls or riſes with the heat or cold,
I will be conſtant yet Dryden,
John's temper depended very much upon the air; hiſ ſpi-
rits roſe and fell with the weathe glaſs. Arbuthnºt.
We ſhall hardly wiſh for a perpetual equinox to five the
charges of weatherglaſſes; for the two equinoxes of our year
are the moſt windy and tempeſtuous. Bentley's Sermun.
WEATHERspy'. n.ſ.. [weather and ſy.) A ſtar-gazer; an
aſtrologer; one that foretels the weather.
And ſooner may a gulling weatherſºy,
By drawing forth heav'n's ſcheme telícertainly,
What faſhion'd hats or ruffs, or ſuits next year,
Our giddy-headed antick youth will wear. Donne,
WEA'THER wise. adj. [weather and wift.] Skillful in foretel-
ling the weather.
WEA'THERwise R. m.ſ.. [weather and wiſen, Dutch; to ſhow.]
* that foreſhows the weather.
oſt vegetables expand their flowers and down in warm
ſun ſhiny weather, and again cloſe them toward the evening,
or in rain, as is in the flowers of pimpernel, the opening
and ſhutting of which are the countryman's weatherwiſer.
- Derham's Phyſicº-Theºlºgy.
To WEAVE. v. a. Preterite wove, weaved, part, paſſ wºven,
weaved; [peran, Saxon; weven, Dutch.]
1. To form by texture; to form by inſerting one pait of the
materials within another.
Here in her hairs
The painter plays the ſpider, and hath woven
A golden meſh to intrap the hearts of men,
Faſter than gnats in cobwebs. Shahſar,
The women wove hangings for the grove. 2 King ºut 7.
White ſeem'd her robes, yet woven ſo they were,
As ſnow and gold together had been wrought.
Theſe purple veſts were weav'd by Dardan dº:
Brown.
Dryden.
Drján.
Dan Pope for thy misfortune griev'd,
With kind concern and ſkill has weav'd
A ſilken web ; and ne'er ſhall fade
Its colours; gently has he laid
The mantle o'er thy ſad diſtreſs: Priºr
And Venus ſhall the texture bleſs.
2. To unite by intermixture. d
When religion was woven into the civil governm." º
flouriſhed under the protećtion of the emperors, mº" though:
and diſcourſes were full of ſecular affairs; but intº three ºr
- - - - - is religion
centuries of chriſtianity, men who embrāº this relig
ld, and lived in a
had given up all their intereſts in this wor &amp;ld, ſº
perpetual preparation for the next. Addison.
3. To interpoſe; to inſert. ! beſt
The duke be here to-night! the better' tº sidiºt".
This weaves itſelf perforce into my buſineſs.
To WEAve. v. n. To work with a loom.
WEA'veR. m. ſ. [from weave..] One who make
cloth.
s threads intº
Upon theſe taxations,
The clothiers all not able to maintain, ſº
The many to them 'longing, have put off -
The .. carders, fullers, wevers. Shaº ſº
My days are ſwifter than a weaver's ſhuttle, º vii. 6.
without hope.
Th:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E D
*
º
The weaver "ºaſt religion upon whatloomhe pleaſe. How.
Her flag aloft ſ" cads ruffling to the wind,
And ſanguine ſtreamers ſeem the flood to fire:
The * charm'd with what his loom deſign'd,
Goes on to ſee, and knows not to retire. Dryden.
W E AZ
WEB ******H, ºſ [araneus pºſsi, Latin.] A fiſh. Ainſworth.
: "...ſ. ſpebba, Saxon J
1. Texture; any thing woven.
Penelope, for her Ulyſſes' ſake,
Pevis’d a web her wooes to deceive;
In which the work that ſhe aſ day did make,
The ſame at night ſhe did again unreave. Spenſer.
Spiders touch'd, ſeek their we's inmoſt part.
By day the web and loom,
And homely houſhold taſk ſhaft. her doom. Drydºn.
The fates, when they this happy web have ſpun,
Shall bleſs the ſacrediciº and bid it ſmoothly run. Dryden.
Pan Pope with ſkill hath weav'd
A ſilken web; and ne'er ſhall fade
Its colours.
2. Some part of a ſword. Obſolete.
The ſword, whereof the web was ſteel;
Pommel, rich ſtone; hill, gold, approv’d by touch. Fairf.
3. A kind of duſky film that hinder th: fight; ſuffuſion.
This is the foul fibertigibbet; he gives the web and the pin,
Shakeſpeare.
ſquints the eye, and makes the hairlip.
WEE BED. adj. [from tºº..] Joined by a film.
Such as are whole-footed, or whoſe toes are webbed toge-
ther, their legs are generally ſhort, the moſt convenient fºe
Derham’s Phyſico-Theology.
WEBFooted. adj. [web and ſoo...] Palmipedous; having films
for ſwimming.
between the toes.
//'ſºoted fowls do not live conſtantly upon the land, nor
fear to enter the water. Kay on the Creation.
We'Est ER. n.ſ. [Pebrºne, Saxon; a woman-weaver.] A
weaver. Obſolete. -
After local names, the moſt in number have been derived
from occupations; as Ta lor, Webſter, Wheeler. Camden.
To WED. v. a. ſpesian, axon.]
1. To marry; to take for huſband or wife.
If one by one you wedded all the world,
91, from the all that are, took ſomething good
To make a perfect woman; ſhe you kill'd
Would be unparalell’d. Shakeſpeare,
Never did thy beauty, ſince the day
I ſaw thee firſt, and wédied thee, adorn'd -
With all perfeótion, ſo inflame my ſenſes. Milton,
Cloe, blind to wit and worth,
{%d the rich dullneſs of ſome ſon of earth. Pope.
2. To join in marriage.
In Syracuſa was I born, and wed
Unto a woman happy but for me.
Then I ſhall be no more;
And Adam, wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her. Milion's Parad'ſ Lºft.
The woman in us ſtill proſecutes a deceit like that begun
in the garden; and our underſtandings are wedded to an Eve,
as fatal as the mother of their miſeries. Glanville.
3. To unite for ever.
Afflićtion is enamour'd of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity. Shakeſp. Rom. and jul.
4. To take for ever.
Thº'g'' the Principal men of the houſe of commons were
again elected to ſerve in this parliament, yet they were far
from * the war, or taking themſelves to be concerned
to make good any declaration made by the former. Clarendºn.
They poſitively and concernedly wedded his cauſe, Clarendon.
5. To unite by love or fondneſs. -
Men are wedded to their luſts, and reſolved upon a wicked
courſe; and ſo it becomes their intereſt to wiſh there Were no
God. Tillotſon's Sermons:
To WEp. v. m. To contract matrimony.
When I ſhall wed,
That lord whoſe hand ſhall take my plight, ſhall carry
Half my love with him, half my care and duty. Shakeſpeare.
To love, to wed,
For Hymen's rites, and for the marriage bed -
You were ordain'd. - Suckling.
Nor took I Guiſcard, by blind fancy led,
Or haſty choice as many women wed;
But with deliberate care. - Dryden.
WE'pping. n.ſ.. [from wed.] Marriage; nuptials; the nup-
tial ceremony,
Shakeſpeare,
Come, away
For you ſhall hence upon your wedding-day. Shakeſpeare.
I will dance and eat plums at your wedding. Shake peare.
Lether beauty be her wedding dower 5
For me and my poſſeſſions ſhe eſteems not. Shakeſpeare.
When my ſon was entesed into his wedding-chamber, he
fell down and died. - 2 £ſdr. x. 1.
Theſe three country bills agree, that each wedding produ-
ces four children. Graunt's Bills of 44%rtality.
Davies.
Prior.
L'E/irange.
If ſhe affirmed heft *...* a virgin, ſhe muſt 0. º ".
ding-day, and in her wedding cloa is perform the ceremony
of going alone into the den, and ſtay an hour with the lion.
- Swift.
* º ſeldom aſks advice before ſhe has bought her º
-CIOaths.
- Speciator.
Yº: *ſ [vegge, Daniſh; weace, Dutch.] p
". ody, which having a ſharp edge, continually growing
icker, is uſed to cleave timber; one of the mechanical powers.
he trunk to groan. Spenſºr.
ity is the wedge uſed in the clea-
**ini's Mathemati. 44agic;
He left his *e within the cloven ... gic
To whet their courage.
The oak let many a heavy groan, when he wº. cleft with a
*e of his own timber.
4 buthnot'. Hiſ of #.
2. A maſs of metal. * Hi/?, of jihn Bull,
às ſparkles from the anvil uſed to fly,
hen heavy hammers on the *** are ſwaid. Fo. 9,
When I ſaw a goodly Babyloniſh garment, and a wººf
gºld of fifty ſhekºs weight, then I coveted them. %2, vii.
3. Anything in the form ºf a wedge.
In warlike muſters they appear,
In rhombs and *e, and half-moons and wings. Milºn
To W *PGE. v. a. [from the Roun..] To faſten with wedges,
to ſtraiten with wedges; to cleave with wedges; to ſtop; to
obſtruct.
Dryden's A.neid.
My heart, -
As wedged with a figh would rive in twain,
eſt Hector, or my father, ſhould Perceive me. Shakespeare
Where have yoſ been broiling – ./1
-Among the crowd iſ the abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedg'd in more. Shakeſpeare'; Henry VIII.
Your wit will not ſo ſoon 9ilt as another man's wiń; it .
frongly wedged up in a ºad. Shakeſpeare.
art
In common, rang'd in figure wedge their way;
Intelligent of ſeaſºns. Milton's Paradiſ? Zo/?.
Sergeſthus in the ºntaur, ſoon he paſs'd,
%d in the rocky ſhoals and ſticking faſt. Dryden.
%dge on the keeneſ: ſcythes, -
And give us fleeds that ſhºrt againſt the foe. 4. Philips.
hat impulſe can be Pºpagated from one particle, entom;
and wedged in the *y center of the earth, to anothe, i. the
center of Saturn. Bentley's Sermons.
We'd lock. * / [peo and lac, Sax. marriage and gift J Maſſ.
flage 3 matrimon y.
She doth ſtray about
By holy croſſes, where ſhe kneels and prays
For happy wedlºck hours.
Sirrah, your brother is legitimate;
Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him:
And if ſhe did Play falſe, the fault was hers. Shakeſp.
Can wedlock know ſo great a curſe,
As Putting huſbands out to nurſe.
He his happieſt choice too late,
Shall meet already link'd, and wedlock-bound
To a fell adverſary. Milton's Paradiſ Iº.
May not a priſon or a grave,
Like wedlock, honour's title have * Denhan.
One thought the ſex's prime felicity
Was from the bonds of wº... to be free:
And uncontroll'd to give account to none. Dryden.
A man determined about the fiftieth year of his age to en-
ter upon wedlock. Židiſºr.
WE'DNESDAY. m.ſ ſpobenroax, Saxon; adºſłay, Swediſh;
woerſday, Dutch; º/day, Iſlandick.] The fourth day of
the week, ſo named by the Gothick nations from ſº, Or
Odin.
Where is the honour of him that died on wednºſlay. Shat.
WEE adj. [A Saxon word of the ſame root with weeing, Dutch;
wenig, German.] Little; ſmall: whence the word weaſk or
weſel is uſed for little; as a tºeſel face. In Scotland it de-
notes ſmall or little; as wee ane, a little one, or child; a wee
bit, a little bit.
Does he not wear a great round beard, like a glover's pa-
ring knife?–No, forſooth; he hath but a little vee face with
a little yellow beard. Shakespeare. Merry ſºvº flººnſ.
WEEcH E LM. n: / [This is often written witch elm.] A ſpe-
cies of elm.
A cion of a vecchelin grafted upon an ordinary elm, will put
forth leaves as broad as the brim of a hat. Bacon.
WEED. m. ſ. [peob, Saxon, tares.]
I. An herb noxious or uſeleſs. -
If he had an immoderate ambition; which is a weed, if it be
a wee”, apt to grow in the beſt ſoils, it doth not appear that
it was in his nature. Clarendºn.
Shakeſpeare.
7 He
Cleaveland.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E. E.
On ſ He wand'ring feeds
"...ºwly growing herbs and ranker weed.
Too much n in c. 4,113
winſ. ..."...º.º. with wººd,
- - - ocults, did deſtrov
t i ex- “, roy the ſeeds. s
"..." and poiſonous plants .. . *"...
weeds. °y are cut, let them lic, if weedy, to kill the
. virtue, like their Tyber's ºr : Husbanary,
i. . its courſe deſign'd the country's good;
r Oftº torrent's too impetuous ſpeed, »
An º the low carth tore ſome polluting weed;
sº the º of Jove there always ran
!!er part, ſome ti -
2: [u]oeba, Saxon; º inéture of the man. Prior.
- d - -
dreſs. Now ſcarce ſ Dutch J A garment; cloaths; habit;
- uſe, except in widow's weed -
ing dreſs of a widow p j, the mourn
Sandys.
* - § mind for weed, your virtue's livery wears. Sidney.
*r is it any man's buſineſs to cloath all his ſervants
with * “eed; nor theirs to cloath themſelves ſo, if left to
their own judgments. Hooker
They meet upon the wa
An aged fire, in long black weed, yelad;
His feet all bare, his beard all hoary gray,
And by his belt his book he hanging had. Fairy Queen.
Livery is alſo called the upper we'd which a ſerving man
wears, ſo called as it was delivered and taken from him at
pleaſure. Spenſer.
The ſnake throws her enamelled ſkin,
JWeed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. Shakeſpeare.
Throngs of knights and barons bold,
In weeds of peace high triumphs hold,
With ſtore of ladies. Milton.
Lately your fair hand in woman's weed
Wrapp'd my glad head. //aller.
To WEEp. v. a. (from the noun.]
1. To rid of noxious plants.
when you ſow the berries of bays, weed not, the borders
for the firſt half year; for the weed giveth them ſhade. Bacon.
Your ſeedlings having ſtood till June, beſtow a wººding or
a ſlight howing upon them. Mortimer.
2. To take away noxious plants.
Oh Marcius,
Each word thou'ſt ſpoke hath weeded from my heart .
A root of ancicnt envy- Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
3. To free from any thing hurtful or offenſive. -
He warded the kingdom of : . Were º: º Elaiana,
:... c.4 moſt dangerous confederacy.
and manumized it from that 9, Howel's Wocal Kºi.
contumelies, and invectives, fill ſo many pages
of sº writings, that, were thoſe * out;
lumes would be reduced to a more moderate bulk and
many vo Decay of Piety.
temper.
-- out vice. - - -
- º be not as well. aware in weeding from their
- . . . . . " hey were before in grafting in them
children ill things, as they were Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
learning. - d, they might all be weeded
they appeared, they ºg
9. łł ºver they had been there. Locke.
wº : n.ſ. from weed.] One that takes away anything
E" E DE R. "J.
noxious. - lverſaries
…dºr out of his proud al" • -
ſº of his friends. Shakespeare . Richard º
W A. n, ſ. [weed and hook.] A hook by which weeds
F'E - -
ted.
are cut away 9% º I, a crotch, and a glove,
In sº : º as the corn doth not love. Tuffer.
Aº adj. [from weed.] Frce from weeds; free from
WE º uſeleſs or noxious. ..
any §, many weekſ, paradiſes be, ſ Donne
which of themſelves produce no venomous lin. -
l
ſtal brook, -
ſº moſt it does the bottom ſhow; Dryden
wº edleſ, all above, and rockleſs all below. ryaen.
'T is wº
- d.
we'r DY. adj. [from wer
I . cºunt boughs, her coronet wced
ious ſliver broke,
•ring to hang, * envious
sº º her weedy trophics and herſelf Shakſ. Hamlet.
Fell in the weeping brook. ., wº tº
in ºr with weeds. -
2. Aº: wº, lake all night I lay,
…” f ſafety. . .
i..., º it lie upon the
wº n.f. [ycoº Saxon; wº
Tº º: º ºw. will give thee this alſo. Gen. xxix.
Ll J) -
f aſ ſweek and day.] Any day not Sunday.
wº.
V ſº ºf..] Happening, produced, or done
W. E. EKLY. “”
owcc 2. week; hebdomadary. -
Dryden's Æn.
round. Mortimer;
i. ; weeka, Swediſh.]
• y 3. Pope.
dºing ſolemniz, d the Lord's. ope
The Jews had always their weekly readings of the law of
Moſes, Hooker.
So liv'd our fires, ere doćtors learn'd to kill,
And multiply'd with heirs their weekly bill. Dryden.
Nothing more frequent in their weekly papers, than affecting
to confound the terms of clergy and high-church, and then
loading the latter with calumny. Swift.
WE/EKLY. adv. [from week.] Once a week; by hebdomadal
periods.
Theſe are obliged to perform divine worſhip in their turns
weekly, and are ſometimes called hebdomadal canons, Aiji.
WEEL. m. ſ. [poel, Saxon.]
1. A whirlpool.
2. A twiggen ſnare or trap for fiſh, [perhaps from willow]
To WEEN. v. n. [penan, Saxon; waenen, Dutch..] To think;
to imagine; to form a notion; to fancy. Obſolete.
Ah lady dear, quoth then the gentle knight,
Well may I ween your grief is wond’rous great. Spe'ſ r,
So well it her beſeems, that ye would ween
Some angel ſhe had been. Spenſer's Epithalamium.
When weening to return, whence they did ſtray,
They cannot find that path which firſt was ſhown;
But wander to and fro in ways unknown,
Furtheſt from end then, when they neareſt wºn, Fa.ºn.
Thy father, in pity of my hard diſtreſs,
Levy’d an army, weening to redeem
And reinſtal me in the diadem.
// een you of better luck,
I mean, in perjur'd witneſs, than your maſter,
Whoſe miniſter you are, while here he liv'd
Upon this naughty earth. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
They wern'd
That ſelf-ſame day, by fight or by ſurprize,
To win the mount of God; and on his throne
To ſet the envier of his ſtate, the proud
Aſpirer; but their thoughts prov'd fond and vain, Milton,
To WEEP. v. n. preter. and part, paſſ wºpt, wºrſed. [peopan,
Saxon.]
1. To ſhow ſorrow by tears.
In that ſad time
My manly eyes did ſcorn an humble tear;
And what theſe ſorrows could not hence exhale,
That beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping, Shakespeare
I fear he will prove the weeping philoſopher when he grows
old, being ſo full of unmannerly ſadneſs in his youth. Shaº.
The days of weeping and mourning for Moſes were ended:
Deutr, xxxiv, 8.
Have you wept for your fin, ſo that you were indeed ſorrow-
ful in your ſpirit? Are you ſo ſorrowful that you hate it. Do
you ſo hate it that you have left it? Taylºr.
Away, with women werp, and leave me here,
Fix'd, like a man, to die without a tear,
Or ſave, or ſlay us both. Dryden.
A corps it was, but whoſe it was, unknown;
Yet mov’d, howe'er, ſhe made the caſe her own;
Took the bad omen of a ſhipwreck'd man,
As for a ſtranger wºpt. Drydº.
when Darius wept over his army, that within a ſingkº
not a man of all that confluence would be left alive. At"
nus improved his meditation by adding, that yet al. " dºm
ſhould meet with ſo many evils, that every one ſhould wº
himſelf dead long before. Iſaia's Prºparatiºn fºr Dialº.
This lovely weeping fair cannot bedcarer to thee,
Than thou art to thy faithful Scofrid. Rºti.
2. To ſhed tears from any paſſion.
Then they for ſudden joy did werp,
And I for ſorrow ſung,
‘I hat ſuch a king ſhould playbo-peep,
And go the fools among.
3. To lament; to complain. r
They werp unto me, ſaying, give usfieſh thatwº maycat Nº.
To WEEP. v. a.
1. To lament with tears; to bewail; to bemoan. *
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes. Shaftart,
Nor was I near to cloſe his dying eyes,
To waſh his wounds, to weep his obſcquics. Dryden,
We wand'ring go * Pºłº
Through dreary waſtes, and wrºp each other?" ºpe.
2. To ſhed moiſture.
Thus was this place
A happy rural ſeat of various view, ºl.
Groves whoſe rich trees wept od’rous gums and balm. Mill,
Let India boaſt her plants, nor envy we
The weeping amber or the balmy tree,
While by our oaks the precious loads are borne,
Andreaſins commanded which thoſe trees advin “”
3. To abound with wet. - timer
Rey-graſs grows on clayey and weeping grounds. Mºrtimer.
WE'EPER. n.f. [from weep.] -
1. One who ſheds tears; a lamenter ; a bewailer; amº -
If you kave ſerved God in a holy life, ſcnd away the º
Shaleſ. Hºy VI.
Slałej, King Liaº
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E I
W E I
º
men and the weeper; tell them it is as much intemperance to
weep too much as to laugh too much : if thou art alone, ºr
with fitting company, die as thou ſhould'ſt ; but do not die
impatiently, and like a fox catched in a trap. Taylor.
Laughter is eaſy; but the wonder lies,
What ſtore of brine ſupply'd the weeper's eyes.
2. A white border on the ſleeve of a mourning coat.
We'r R1s H. adj. [See WEARISH.] This old word is uſed by
Aſham in a ſenſe which the lexicographers ſeem not to have
known. Applied to taſtes, it means inſipid; applied to the
body, weak and waſhy: here it ſeems to mean ſour; furly.
A voice not ſoft, weak, piping, womaniſh; but audible,
ſtrong, and manlike: a countenance not weeriſh and crabbed,
but fair and comely. Aſham's Schoolmaſter.
To WEET. v. n. preterite wot, or wate. [pican, Saxon; weten,
Dutch..] To know ; to be informed; to have knowledge.
Obſolete.
Him the prince with gentle court did board;
Sir knight, mought I of you this court’ſy read,
To weet why on your ſhield, ſo goodly ſcor’d,
Bear ye the picture of that lady's head
- I bind,
On pain of puniſhment, the world to weet
We ſtand up peerleſs. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Dryden.
Spenſer.
But well I weet thy cruel wrong
Adorns a nobler poet's ſong. Prior.
WE'et less. adj. [from west.] Unknowing. Spenſer.
We'e vil. n.ſ. ſpipel, Saxon; vevel, Dutch..] A grub.
A worm called a weevil, bred under ground, feedeth upon
roots; as parſnips and carrots. Lacon's Natural Hiſłory.
Corn is ſo innocent from breeding of mice, that it doth not
produce the very we'vil: that live in it and conſume it. Bently,
We'Ezel m.ſ. [See WEA's El...]
I ſuck melancholy out of a ſong, as a weazel ſucks eggs. Shakespeare
The corn-devouring weezil here abides,
And the wife ant. Dryden's Georg.
WEFT. The old preterite and part. paſſ from 7% wave. Spenſ.
WEFT. m. ſ. [guaive, French ; vya, to wander, Iſlandick;
vagus, Latin. J
1. That of which the claim is generally waved; any thing wan-
dering without an owner, and ſeized by the lord of the manour.
His horſe, it is the herald's weſt ;
No, 'tis a mare. //en. johnſon's Underwood.
2. It is in Bacon for waft, a gentle blaſt.
The ſmell of violets exceedeth in ſweetneſs that of ſpices,
and the ſtrongeſt ſort of ſmells are beſt in a weſt afar off. Bac.
WEFT. n.ſ. [pepca, Saxon.] The woof of cloth.
WE/F tAGE. m.ſ. [from weft.] Texture.
The whole muſcles, as they lie upon the bones, might be
truly tanned; whereby the wºffage of the fibres might more
eaſily be obſerved. Grew's 44t/acum.
To WE 1GH. v. a. [poexan, Saxon; weyhen, Dutch..]
1. To examine by the balance.
Earth taken from land adjoining to the Nile, and preſerved,
fo as not to be wet nor waſted, and weighed daily, will not alter
weight until the ſeventeenth of June, when the river begin-
neth to riſe; and then it will grow more and more ponderous,
'till the river cometh to its height. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Th’ Eternal hung forth his golden ſcales,
Wherein all things created firſt he weigh’d.
2. To be equivalent to in weight.
By the exſuction of the air out of a glaſs-veſſel, it made
that veſſel take up, or ſuck up, to ſpeak in the common lan-
guage, a body wighing divers ounces. Boyle.
3. To pay, allot, or take by weight.
They that muſt weigh out my afflićtions,
They that my truſt muſt grow to, live not here;
They are, as all my comforts are, far hence. Shakeſpeare.
They weighed for my price thirty pieces of ſilver. Zech. xi.
4. To raiſe; to take up the anchor.
Barbaroſſa, uſing this exceeding cheerfulneſs of his ſoldiers,
(noles.
Mºton.
weighed up the fourteen gallies he had ſunk.
Here he left me, ling’ring here delay'd
His parting kiſs, and there his anchor weigh’d.
5. To examine; to balance in the mind.
Regard not who it is which ſpeaketh, but
is ſpoken.
I have in equal balance juſtly weigh’d
What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we ſuffer,
And find our griefs heavier than our offences. Sha'i. H. IV.
The ripeneſs or unripeneſs of the occaſion muſt ever be well
weighed. Bacon.
His majeſty's ſpeedy march left that deſign to be better
weighed and digeſted. Carendon.
You choſe a retreat, and not 'till you had maturely weighed
the advantages of riſing higher, with the hazards of the
fall. Dryden.
All grant him prudent; prudence intereſt weighs,
And intereſt bids him ſeek your love and praiſe. Dryden.
The mind, having the power to ſuſpend the ſatisfaction of
any of its deſires, is at liberty to examine them on all ſides,
and weigh them with others. Locke.
Dryden.
weigh only what
- A footer.
He is the only proper judge of our perfections, who weighs
the goodneſs of our actions by the ſincerity of our intentions.
Addiſon's Speciator.
6. To WE G H dºwn. To overballance.
Fear weighs dºwn faith with ſhame. Damie's Civ. J/ar.
7. Tº WEIGH down. To overburden; to oppreſs with weight;
to depreſs.
The Indian fig boweth ſo low, as it taketh root again; the
plenty of the ſap, and the ſoftneſs of the ſtalk, making the
bough, being overloaden, weigh dºwn. Bacon.
In thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry,
To weigh thy ſpirits down.
Her father's crimes
Sit heavy on her, and weigh down her prayers;
A crown uſurp'd, a lawful king depos'd,
His children murder'd. Dryden's Staniſh Fryar.
My ſoul is quite weigh’d down with care, and aſks
The ſoft refreſhment of a moment's ſleep. Addiſon's Cato.
Excellent perſons, weighed down by this habitual ſorrow of
heart, rather deſerve our compaſſion than reproach. Addison.
To WEIGH. v. n.
1. To have weight.
Exačily weighing and ſtrangling a chicken in the ſcales, upon
an immediate ponderation, we could diſcover no difference in
weight; but ſuffering it to lie eight or ten hours, until it grew
perfectly cold, it weighed moſt ſenſibly lighter Brown.
2. To be conſidered as important; to have weight in the intel-
le&amp;tual ballance. -
This objection ought to weigh with thoſe, whoſe reading is
deſigned for much talk and little knowledge. Locke.
A wiſe man is then beſt ſatisfied, when he finds that the ſame
argument which weighs with him has weighed with thouſands
before him, and is ſuch as hath born down all oppoſition. Addison
3. To raiſe the anchor.
When gath'ring clouds o'erſhadow all the ſkies,
And ſhoot quick lightnings, weigh, my boys, he cries. Dry.
4. To bear heavily; to preſs hard.
Can’ſ thou not miniſter to a mind diſeas'd,
And with ſome ſweet oblivious antidote
Cleanſe the ſtuff'd boſom of that perilous ſtuff
Which weigh, upon the heart 2 Shakeſp. Macbeth.
WEIGHED. adj. [from weigh.J Experienced. -
In an embaſſy of weight, choice was made of ſome ſad per-
ſon of known experience, and not of a young man, not
weighed in ſtate matters. Bacon.
We'rg H.E.R. m.ſ.. [from weigh.] He who weighs,
WEIGHT. m.ſ. I pipe, Saxon. J
1. Quantity meaſured by the ballance.
Tobacco cut and weighed, and then dried by the fire, loſeth
weight; and, after being laid in the open air, recovereth weight
again. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Fain would Ichuſe a middle courſe to ſteer;
Nature's too kind, and juſtice too ſevere:
Speak for us both, and to the balance bring,
On either ſide, the father and the king:
Heav'n knows my heart is bent to favour thee;
Make it but ſcanty weight, and leave the reſt to me. Dryd.
Boerhaave fed a ſparrow with bread four days, in which
time it eat more than its own weight; and yet there was no
acid found in its body. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
A maſs by which, as the ſtandard, other bodies are examined.
Juſt balances, juſt weights ſhall ye have. Lev. xix. 36.
Undoubtedly there were ſuch weights which the phyſicians
uſed, who, though they might reckon according to the weight
of the money, they did not weigh their drugs with pieces of
money. Arbuthnot on Coins.
y -
When the balance is intirely broke, by mighty weights
fallen into either ſcale, the power will never continue long in
equal diviſion, but run intirely into one. Swift.
Milton,
3. Ponderous maſs.
A man leapeth better with weight; in his hands than with-
out; for that the weight, if proportionable, ſtrengtheneth the
finews by contračting them; otherwiſe, where no contračtion
is needful, weight hindereth: as we ſee in horſeraces, men are
curious to foreſee that there be not the leaſt weight upon the
one horſe more than upon the other. In leaping with weights,
the arms are firſt caſt backwards, and then forwards, with ſo
much the greater force. Facon's Natural Hiſtory.
Wolſey, who from his own great ſtore might have
A palace or a college for his grave,
Lies here interr'd :
Nothing but earth to earth, no pond’rous weight
Upon him, but a pebble or a quoit:
If thus thou lieſt neglected, what muſt we
Hope after death, who are but ſhreds of thee ? Bp. Corbet.
All their confidence
Under the weight of mountains bury'd deep. Milton.
Pride, like a gulf, ſwallows us up; our very virtues, when
ſo leavened, becoming weights aſſu plummets to ſink us to the
deeper ruin. Government ºf the Tongue,
30 M Then<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E L
W. E. L
Then ſhun the ill. -
indneſs and . 3 and know, my deat,
* - ancy will
| he only pillars fit {. tºwe
4. G..." weight as that of love.
- y; eavineſs; tendency
*ineſs or weight is not h
natural quality
y, whereb
tend downwa y cond
Prior.
to the center.
jº as being ſuch a
enſed bodies do of themſe
ards; but - - elves
they º: ºº: as being an affection, whereby
he ſhaft that flight - 3. l/ilkins.
Now from his heavy . y was impreſs'd,
with weight increas'd
TOve through his neck. &amp; »
hat natural agent impel them ſo ſtrongly with a tranſverſe
ſide blow againſt th -
t * --
whole world, are * weight and rapidity, when
Dryden.
5. Preſſure; burthen; overwhelming power. Bentley.
Thou art no Atlas for ſo great a weight. Shakeſpeare.
So ſhall the world go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign,
Under her own weight groaning. Milton.
We muſt thoſe, who groan beneath the weight
Qf age, diſeaſe, or want, commiſerate. Denham.
The prince may carry the plough, but the weight lies upon
the people. L’Eſtrange.
Poſſeſſion's load was grown ſo great,
He ſunk beneath the cumb’rous weight. Swiſt.
6. Importance; power; influence; efficacy.
How to make ye ſuddenly an anſwer,
In ſuch a point of weight, ſo near mine honour,
In truth I know not Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
If this right of heir carry any weight with it, if it be the
ordinance of God, muſt not all be ſubjećt to it. Lºcke.
To make the ſenſe of eſteem or diſgrace ſink the deeper,
and be of the more weight, other agreeable or diſagreeable
things ſhould conſtantly accompany theſe different ſtates, loºke.
An author's arguments loſe their weight, when we are Per-
ſuaded that he ºnly writes for argument's ſake. Addison.
See, Lord, the ſorrows of my heart,
Ere yet it be too late ;
A. hear my Saviour's dying groans, Addiſon's Sped
To give thoſe ſorrows weight. Addison's Spºtatºr.
łº, that encompaſs, the magiſtrate add dignity
to all his ačtions, and weight tº all his words. Atterbury.
Wrightily. adv. [from weighty.]
1. Heavily; ponderouſly,
- idly; importantly. -
2 sº §º, the worſe, becauſe he makes his ..",º:
weightily and ſententiouſly? Brºme" Notes on the Odyſſey.
we’ightin Ess. n.ſ. [from wright).]
1. Ponderoſity; gravity; heavineſs.
2. sº i º: dwelt longer on this paſſage than the weightineſs
of any argument in it requires. Locke.
rtan Cº. - - - eighti-
- lº apparent defea of her judgment, i. to *:::::::
reſ of the adventuº cauſed many to marvel. } -
wºrless, adj [from weight.]
- ... havi gravity. . -
I. isiº in the weightleſs air º, Sandy
Can't thou the wiſdom of his works declare : andys.
eighed. Improper.
2. Not i. ...}} and immortal prove,
- D, yden.
Becauſe the centre of it is above. y
weighty, adº [from weight.]
- derous. w
I . He..., weary'd fortune *.
She cannot farth. be your friend º
But fits all breathleſs, and admires heel Dryden.
º foºtiºhty, that" º her wheel.
..omentous; efficaº".
2. Impº .. aſſiſtance do make love,
Maſking the buſineſs from the common “sºft. Macbeth.
}. ſundry ...,ghty reaſons:
No fool Pythagºras was thought:
whilſt he his weighty doarines taught,
. 1 ſl”... . s ſtand,
He made lº their hand:
Their º ſome odd-thinking youth,
#: º tº doctrine than tº truth,
#. have refus’d to let his ears
ſpheres.
Attend the muſick of the §: knight full of care,
, - -
L Thus §. in a weighty affair. Swift.
et me -
w R gº OUS ſeve - t - C.
2 - 3 !ere No 1 in uſ
i - ntal T1S C3
I * after tWO days ſhine, Athens CO the
£eſ Timon.
ghtier judgment; Shakeſ
Prior.
t -
Attend our * This I once believed a corruptiºn of weal
w ... interſ. - },...i.d explained it; but
we'law's "...},..., gone; ſo juniº.º. º, a v
away, ºº palapa, “. woes from welaway, is
the . by corruption we aday.] Alaº- he cried
forme y now out, and wealaway, - p Stenſºr
wº day bath ſent this curſed light! penſer.
What di
Ah, welaway / moſt noble lords, how can
Your cruel eyes endure ſo piteous fight : Fairy Qun,
//elaway, the while I was ſo fond,
To leave the good that I had in hond. Spenſir.
WE’L COME. adj. [bien venu, French ; pilcume, Saxon; wil-
Kom, Dutch.]
I, Received with gladneſs; admitted willingly to any place or
enjoyment; grateful; pleaſing.
I ſerve you, madam:
Your graces are right welcome. Shakeſp. King Lear,
He, though not of the plot, will like it,
And wiſh it ſhould proceed; for, unto men
Preſt with their wants, all change is ever welcome. B. johnſ.
Here let me earn my bread,
*Till oft invocated death
Haſlen the welcome end of all my pains. Milton,
He that knows how to make thoſe he converſes with eaſy,
has found the true art of living, and being welcome and valued
every where. Lock,
2. To bid Welcome. To receive with profeſſions of kindneſs.
Some ſtood in a row in ſo civil a faſhion, as if to welcºme
us; and divers put their arms a little abroad, which is their
geſture when they bid any welcome. Bacºn,
We'lcome. interſ. A form of ſalutation uſed to a new comeſ,
elliptically uſed for you are welcome.
Welcome, he ſaid,
O long expected to my dear embrace. Dryden.
I/elcome, great monarch, to your own. Dryden,
We'lcome. n.ſ.
1. Salutation of a new comer. º
If alcome ever ſmiles, and farewel goes out fighing Shalºft,
Leontes opening his free arms, and weeping
His welcome forth. Shakespeare Winter's Tal.
2. Kind reception of a new comer.
I ſhould be free from injuries, and abound as much in the
true cauſes of welcomes, as I ſhould find want of the effects
thereof. Sidney,
I look’d not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome. Shakespeare . King Lear,
Madam, new years may well expečt to find
Jºe cºme from you, to whom they are ſo kind:
Still as they paſs they court and ſmile on you,
And make your beauty as themſelves ſeem new. ... Waler.
Where diligence opens the door of the underſtanding, and
impartiality keeps it, truth finds an entrence and Awilºme
too. Sºuth's Sermºns.
To We’lco M E. v. a. To ſalute a new comer with kindneſs.
- I know no cauſe
Why I ſhould welcome ſuch a gueſt as grief,
Save bidding farewel to ſo ſweet a gueſt
As my ſweet Richard. Shatſ. Rihard II.
They flood in a row in ſo civil a faſhion, as if to wºn
uS. Bat.",
Thus we ſalute thee with our early ſong, -
And welcome thee, and wiſh thee long. Miltºn,
To welcºme home
His warlike brother, is Pirithous come Dryden,
The lark and linnet ſtrain their warbling throats,
To welcºme in the Spring. Dºdº.
We’lcome to ºur Houſe n.ſ. An herb. Ainſwºrth.
Welcom EN ss. n.). [from welcome.] Gratefulneſs.
Our joys, after ſome centuries of years, may ſeem" have
grown elder, by having been enjoyed ſo many gºs; º' will
they really ſtill continue new, not only upon the ſolº their
welcºmeneſs, but by their perpetually equal, becauſe infinite,
diſtance from a period. Bºl,
WE'lcome R. m. ſ. [from welcome.] The ſaluter or receiver ºf
a new COmer.
Farewel, thou woful welcomer of glory. ... Shaº"
weld, or Would n.ſ. [ luteola, Latin. J Yellow weed, or
dyers weed.
Its leaves are oblong and intire : it has an anomalous flower,
conſiſting of many diffinilar leaves: the fruit is globular, hol.
low, and divided into three parts. The dyers uſ;" for dying
bright yellows and lemon colours; and this is by ſome ſp.
poſed to be the plant uſed by the ancient Pićts in painting
their bodies. Miller.
To WELD, for To wield. Sºſr.
To WELD. v. a. To beat one maſs into another, ſo as to ill-
corporate them. - l
Sparkling or welding heat is uſed when yºu double up your
iron to make it thick enough, and ſo ºff or work in the
doubling into one another, Moxºn's Mºth. tº:
we’ld ER. n.ſ. A term perhaps merely Iriſh; though tº
be derived from To wield, to turn or manage: whence withid,
welder.
such immediate tenants have others under them. and ſo a
third and fourth in ſubordination, till it comes tº the º
as they call him, who ſits at a rack-rent, and *:
rably. wg"
WE/ . ARE. m.ſ. ſwell and fare.] Happineſs; ſucceſs; º
If friends to a government forbear their aſſiſtance, they r;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E L
W E L
it in the power of a few deſperate men to ruin the wºre of
thoſe who are ſuperiour to them in ſtrength and intereſt. Addison
Diſcretion is the perfection of reaſon : cunning is a kind of
inſtinct that only looks out after our immediate intereſt and
welfare. Addison's Spectator.
To Welk v. 2. [Of this word in Spenſºr I know not well the
meaning: realcan, in Saxon, is to roll; woken, in German,
and recen, in Saxon, are clouds; whence I ſuppoſe welº,
we &amp; or whi} is an undulation or corrugation, or corrugated
or convolved body. J/ºil is uſed for a ſmall ſhell-fiſh..] To
cloud; to obſcu'e.
Now ſad Winter welked hath the day,
And Phoebus, weary of his yearly taſk,
Eſtabliſhed hath his ſteeds in lowly lay,
And taken up his inn in fiſhes haſk.
As gentle ſhepherd in ſweet eventide,
When ruddy Phoebus 'gins to wºlk in Weſt,
Marks which do bite their haſty ſupper beſt. Fairy Queen.
The welked Phoebus 'gan avale
His weary wain. Spenſer.
WE'lked, adj. Wrinkled; wreathed.
Methought his eyes
Were two full moons: he had a thouſand noſes,
Horns wel}'d and wav'd like the enridged ſea. Shakeſpeare.
WE'l KIN. m. ſ. (from pealcan, to roll, or pelcen, clouds, Sax.]
1. The viſible regions of the air. Out of uſe, except in poetry.
Ne in all the welkin was no cloud. Chaucer.
He leaves the weſkin way moſt beaten plain,
And rapt with whirling wheels inflames the ſkyen,
With fire not made to burn, but fairly for to ſhine. Fa. Qu.
The ſwallow peeps out of her neſt,
And cloudy wełin cleareth. i Spenſer's Paſłorals.
Spur your proud horſes hard, and ride in blood:
A maze the we'Kin with your broken ſtaves. Slak. R. III.
With feats of arms
From either end of heav'n the welkin burns. Milton.
Now my taſk is ſmoothly done,
I can fly, or I can run
Quickly to the green earth's end,
Where the bow’d we'éin ſlow doth bend. AZ ſton.
Their hideous yells
Rend the dark weláin. Philips.
2. WELKIN Eye, is, I ſuppoſe, blue eye; ſkycoloured eye.
Yet were it true
To ſay this boy were like me! Come, fir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye, ſweet villain. Shakeſpeare.
WELL. m.ſ. ſpelle, pdell, Saxon.]
1. A ſpring; a fountain ; a ſource.
Begin then, ſiſters of the ſacred we',
That from beneath the ſeat of Jove doth ſpring.
As the root and branch are but one tree,
And well and ſtream do but one river make;
So if the root and well corrupted be,
The ſtream and branch the ſame corruption take. Davies.
2. A de p narrow pit of water.
The muſcles are ſo many well-buckets: when one of them
ačis and draws, ’tis neceſſary that the other muſt obey. Dryden.
3. The cavity in which ſtairs are placed.
Hollow newelled ſtairs are made about a ſquare hollow
newel ; ſuppoſe the well-hole to be eleven foot ſong, and fix
foot wide, and we would bring up a pair of ſtairs from the firſt
floor eleven foot high, it being intended a ſky-light ſhall fall
through the hollow newel. AMoxon's A/ech. Exer.
To WELL. v. m. ſpeallan, Saxon.] To ſpring; to iſſue as from
a ſpring.
Thereby a cryſtal ſtream did gently play,
Which from a ſacred fountain we led forth alway. Fa. Qu.
Spenſºr.
Milton.
The bubbling wave did ever freſhly well. Fairy Queen.
A dreary corſe,
All wallow'd in his own yet lukewarm blood,
That from his wound yet well, d freſh, alas ! Spenſºr.
Himſelf aſſiſts to lift him from the ground,
With clotted locks, and blood that well'd from out the
wound. Dryden's Aºn.
From his two ſprings,
Pure weſling out, he through the lucid lake
Of fair Dambea rolls his infant ſtream. Thomſon's Summer.
To WFI. L. v. a. To pour anything forth.
To her people wealth they forth do we',
And health to every foreign nation. Fairy ºueen.
9. It is a word b
IO.
it is not very much nor very good. Few men mend with fick-
neſs, as there are but few who by travel and a wandering life
become devout. - 7ayſor's Guide to Devºtion.
Men under irregular appetites never think themſelves we'ſ,
ſo long as they fancy they might be better; then from better
they muſt riſe to beſt. Z'E/?range.
'Tis eaſy for any, when wel, to give advice to them that
are not. //ake's Preparation fºr 19eath.
2. Convenient; happy.
Holdings were ſo plentiful, and holders ſo ſcarce, as well
was the landlord, who could get one to be his tenant. Carew.
Charity is made the conſtant companion and perfection of
all virtues; and well it is for that virtue where it moſt enters,
and longeſt ſtays. Strat's Sermons.
This exactneſs is neceſſary, and it would be well too, if it
extended itſelf to common converſation. Locke.
It would have been well for Genoa, if ſhe had followed
the example of Venice, in not permitting her nobles to make
any purchaſe of lands in the dominions of a foreign prince. Ad.
3. Being in favour.
He followed the fortunes of that family; and was well
with Henry the fourth. Dryden.
4. Recovered from any ſickneſs or misfortune.
I am ſorry -
For your diſpleaſure; but all will ſure be well. Shakeſ rare.
Juſt thoughts, and modeſt expectations are eaſily ſatisfied.
If we don't over-rate our pretenſions, all will be well. Collier.
Well adv. [will, Gothick; pell, Saxon ; wel, Dutch ; vel,
Iſlandick.
1. Not ill; not unhappily.
Some ſenſe, and more eſtate, kind heav'n
To this weſ/-lotted peer has given :
What then he muſt have rule and ſway; -
Elſe all is wrong till he's in play. Prizr.
2. Not ill; not wickedly.
My bargains, and well-won thrift he calls int'reſt. Shakespeare
Thou one bad act with many deeds well done
May'ſ cover, Milton.
3. Skilfully; properly.
A private caution I know not well how to ſort, unleſs I
ſhould call it political, by no means to build too near a great
neighbour. /?%tton.
Beware and govern well thy appetite. AZilton.
Whether the learn’d Minerva be her theme,
Orchaſte Diana bathing in the ſtream;
Dryden.
None can record their heavenly praiſe ſo well.
What poet would not mourn to ſee
His brother write as well as he * Swift.
4. Not amiſs ; not unſucceſsfully; not erroneouſly.
Solyman commended them for a plot ſo well by them laid,
more than he did the Victory of others got by good fortune, not
grounded upon any good ſeaſon. Knolles.
The ſoldier that philoſopher well blam’d,
Who long and loudly in the ſchools declaim'd. Denham.
'Tis almoſt impoſſible to tranſlate verbally and well. Dryden.
5. Not inſufficiently; not defectively.
The plain of Jordan was well watered every where. Geneſs.
We are well able to overcome it. Num. xiii. 30.
The merchant adventurers being a ſtrong company, and
well underſet with rich men, held out bravely. Bacon.
6. To a degree that gives pleaſure.
I like well, in ſome places, fair columns upon frames of
carpenters work. Bacom.
7. With praiſe; favourably.
All the world ſpeaks well of you. Pope.
8. Well is ſometimes like the French bien, a term of conceſſion.
The knot might well be cut, but untied it could notbe. Sidney.
To know
In meaſure what the mind can well contain. Alžºltzn.
y which ſomething is admitted as the ground
for a concluſion. -
Well, let's away, and ſay how much is done. Shakespeare.
JWell, by this author's confeſſion, a number ſuperior are
for the ſucceſſion in the houſe of Hanover. Swift.
As well as. Together with ; not leſs than.
Coptos was the magazine of all the trade from AEthiopia,
by the Nile, as well as of thoſe commodities that came from
the weſt by Alexandria. Arbuthnot on Coins.
11. Well is him or me; bene eſ?, he is happy.
Well is him that dwelleth with a wife of underſtanding, and
that hath not ſlipped with his tongue. Ac ſuſ, xxv. 8.
WF.L. ad. [// ell ſeems to be ſometimes an ade&amp;tive, though
12. Well nigh. Nearly ; almoſt.
it is not always eaſy to determine its relations.]
1. Not ſick; not unhappy.
Mark, wº
To ſay the dead are well. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleºpatra.
Lady, I am not well, elſe I ſhould anſwer
from a full flowing ſtomach. Shakeſp. King Lear.
In poiſon there is phyſick; and this news,
That would, had I been well, have made me ſick,
Being ſick, hath in ſome meaſure made me well. Shakeſp.
While thou art well, thou mayeſt do much good; but when
thou art ſick, thou can'ſt not tell what thou ſhalt be able to do:
ſtruction.
I freed well nigh half th’ angelick name. Milton,
13. It is uſed much in compoſition, to expreſs anything right,
laudable, or not defective.
Antiochus underſtanding him not be well affected to his af.
fairs, provided for his own ſafety. 2 A.ac. iv. 21.
There may be ſafety to the well-affected Perſians; but to
thoſe which do conſpire againſt us, a memorial of de-
E%. xvi. 23.
Should a whole hoſt at once diſcharge the bow,
My well-aim'd ſhaft with death prevents the foe, Pope.
- What<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W. E. L
What will annº
-appointed lead f in
|º arei Aºi. º us here Sºft.
ºping winter treads, Shakespeare Romeo and juliet.
Ande ifici º march'd before,
Admoniſh. ..."...sh; join'd,
- is well- intº nº
B Such mºnº attending mind. Pope,
efore was never made,
* When of old the ſon -
.1 ſl . . s of
ſhilſ the Creator great of morning ſung,
* conſtellations ſet,
And the well-balanc
h “arners muſt at fir
*"g been once mad
'd world on hinges hung. Milton.
ſt be believers, and their maſter's rules
* - 1 - ** axioms to them, they miſlead thoſe
. think it ſufficient to excuſe them, if i; go out of
* **y in a well-beaten track. Locke.
rie choſe * thouſand horſe, the flow'r of all
* Watlike troops, to wait the funerºi:
To bear him back, and ſhare Evander's grief;
well-becoming, but a weak relief.
, , , Thoſe oppoſed files,
Which lately met in the inteſtine ſhock,
And furious cloſe of civil butchery,
Shall now, in mutual well-beſeeming rank,
March all one way. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
O'er the Elean plains, thy well-breath'd horſe
Impels the flying car, and wins the courſe. Dryden.
More diſmal than the loud diſploded roar
Of brazen enginry, that ceaſeleſs ſtorms
The baſtion of a well-built city. Philips.
He condućted his courſe among the ſame well-choſen
friendſhips and alliances with which he began it. Addiſon.
My ſon corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement. Shakeſpeare.
If good accrue, 'tis conferr'd moſt commonly on the baſe
and infamous; and only happening ſometimes to well-de-
ſervers. Dryden.
It grieves me he ſhould deſperately adventure º º, his
well-deſerving life. - tancy, p. ii.
What a pleaſure is well-directed ſtudy in the º ;
truth ! - Locke:
A certain ſpark of honour, which roſe in her well-diſpoſed
mind, made her fear to be alone with him, with sº º:
deſired to be. idney, b. 11.
*::::: unprepoſſeſſed, the well-diſpoſed, who both together
make much the major part of the world, *::::::::: *:
f theſe things. - otºtp 5 Jer?/10715.
*::: idea is º whereof the mind hath ſuch a º
and evident perception, as it does receive from an outwar
Pryden.
object, operating duly on a well-diſpoſed organ. Locke.
J Amid the main, two mighty fleets engage 5 Dryd
A&amp;ium ſurveys the well-diſputed prize. ryaen.
- - r many, as
ways of well doing are in number ev ºn as
*: jº. of voluntary actions : ſo that whatſoever We do
i. this world, and may do it ill, we ſhew oº:: º
- - - ooker, p. 11.
by well-doing to be wife. - ſs for a recom-
y The conſcience of well-doing may paſs L’Eſ!, ange.
CIYCC. - ding to his works ; to
* - every man according -
God . lº..."...º. in well-doing, º
. h the heat and burden of the day, he '. º: sº
º . their labour. 436 2.
As far the ſpear I throw,
- the well-drawn bow. Pope.
Aºi. youths around her *; t
y fixt on her alone. -
But ev'ry eye was . S 2 - ... :
- t, James's alſo
- sº sº d well-dreſt rabble ſtare. *:
#: i. of eſteem, riches, or Pow" makes men *}.
The C1C inions in faſhion. - - º
the gº . º well-eſtabliſhed riº
W: ãº to change for every difficulty. -
not
ble man
Echenus ſage, a vº" ſent age ſurpaſs'd. Pºpe.
- nd the preſent ag ... º. -
Whoſe º". true antiquity, though dº.i.
jº. ay happily diſcover. sº 0.71 17 eld/ld.
wº ". the products of a peaceful º -
h "...ºught poct, and º, -
†: well-fill'd palacº, the . Ca1t 3
joicing, and a people * : -
A º º did his ºf lº,
ino with deter *
º ..º.º. ...and ſword he draws. Dryden.
gain
Faireſt piece of well-form'd earth, J/aller.
chtv birth.
Urge not thus your tº: diſcerned in a well-formed,
Pope.
A rational º, º - :
ill-ſhaped infant. . . . - communicate the
º "... propoſition is ſufficient to JWatts.
º #: º, before the well-fought wall !
* fall
it...iſh’d day renown'd my "&gt; -
Had ſome º my º funerals. her life *::::
§. º: have a well-grounded hope in an Oth CT 111C 3
Ood II)
W E L
ºte as certain of a future recompence, as of the being of
God. Alterbury.
Let firm, well-hammer'd ſoles protect thy ſet
Through freezing ſhows. Gay's Trivia.
The camp of the heathen was ſtrong, and well-harneſſed,
and compaſſed round with horſemen. I Alic, iv. 7.
Among the Romans, thoſe who ſaved the life of a citizen,
were dreſſed in an oaken garland; but among us, this has
been a mark of ſuch well-intentioned perſons as would be.
tray their country. Addiſon.
He, full of fraudful arts, -
This well-invented tale for truth imparts. Dryden.
He, by enquiry, got to the well-known houſe of K.
lander. -
- Sidney,
Soon as thy letters trembling I uncloſe,
That well-known name awakens all my woes. Pºſt.
Where proud Athens rears her tow'ry head,
With opening ſtreets, and ſhining ſtructures ſpread,
She paſt, delighted, with the well-known ſeats. Pºt.
From a confin'd well-manag’d ſtore,
You both employ and feed the poor. lſaller,
A noble ſoul is better pleas'd with a zealous vindicator of
liberty, than with a temporizing poet, or well-manner: COllrt-
ſlave, and one who is ever decent, becauſe he is naturally ſer.
vile. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal,
Jºell-meaners think no harm; but for the reſt,
Things ſacred they pervert, and filence is the beft. Drydin.
By craft they may prevail on the weakneſs of ſome will.
meaning men to engage in their deſigns. Roger's Sermon.
He examines that well-meant, but unfortunate, lie of the
conqueſt of France. Arbuthnºt.
A critick ſuppoſes he has done his part, if he proves a
writer to have fail'd in an expreſſion; and can it be wonder'd
at, if the poets ſeem reſolved not to own themſelves in aſly
error for as long as one ſide deſpiſes a well-meant ended.
your, the other will not be ſatisfied with a moderate appro-
bation. Pope's Prºface to his Hºrli.
Many ſober, well-minded men, who were real lowers of
the peace of the kingdom, were impoſed upon. Carandºn.
Jarring int’reſts of themſelves create
Th' according muſick of a well-mix'd ſtate,
When the blaſt of winter blows,
Into the naked wood he goes;
And ſeeks the tuſky boar to rear,
With well-mouth'd hounds, and pointed ſpeat. Drdin.
The applauſe that other people's reaſon gives to virtuous
and well-ordered actions, is the proper guide of children, till
they grow able to judge for themſelves. Lik.
The fruits of unity, next unto the well-pleaſing of God,
which is all in all, are towards thoſe that are without the
Pºſt,
church ; the other toward those that are within. Bacon.
The exerciſe of the offices of charity is always well-plea-
ſing to God, and honourable among men. Atterbury,
My voice ſhall ſound, as you do prompt mine car;
And {. ſtoop, and humble my intents
To your well practis'd wiſe directions. Shakeſ, Hin, WI.
T he well proportion'd ſhape, and beauteous face,
Shall never more be ſeen by mortal eyes. Drydºn,
'Twas not the haſty product of a day,
But the well-ripen'd fruit of wiſe delay. Dryden,
Procure thoſe that are freſh gathered, ſtrait, ſmoºth, wid
well-rooted. Mortimer's Huſſariº,
If I ſhould inſtruct them to make well-running veries, they
wait genius to give them ſtrength. Drydºn.
The eating of a well-ſeaſoned diſh, ſuited to a man's Pa-
late, may move the mind, by the delight itſelf that accom.
panies the eating, without reference to any other end. Lait.
Inſtead of well-ſet hair, baldneſs. lſa. iii. 24.
Abraham and Sarah were old, and well-ſtricken ingºſºft,
Many well-ſhaped innocent virgins are waddling like big-
bellied women. - Spectator, N 127,
We never ſee beautiful and well-taſted fruits from a tree
choaked with thorns and briars. Dryden's Du ſhº.
The well-tim'd oars th
With ſounding ſtrokes divide the ſparkling waves. Smith
Wiſdom's triumph is well-tim'd retreat,
As hard a ſcience to the fair as great, Pºp!,
Mean time we thank you for your will took labour, l
Go to your reſt. Shalº Hºlt
Oh you are well-tun'd now ; but I'll let down the pegs
that make this muſick. Shahſ. Othell.
Her well-turn’d neck he view'd,
And on her ſhoulders her diſhevel’d hair. Dryden,
A well-weighed judicious poem, which at firſt gain. "
more upon the world than to be juſt received, lº.º
ſelf by inſenſible degrees into the liking of the reader. Pºº"
He rails hrift
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift, -
Which he calls intered. Shakeſp. Merch. ºf Wait.
Each by turns the other's bound invade, Pº
As, in ſome well-wrought picture, light and ſhade. **
- - -- - - - Ye:
we'll ADAY. interjeti. [This is a corruption of weawº). “
WELAwa Y.] Alas. O well-
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W E L
“s.
-
:
:
.*º, e.
º
O welladay, miſtreſs Ford, having an honeſt man to your
Shakeſpeare.
- Gay.
huſband, to give him ſuch cauſe of ſuſpicion.
Ah, welladay! I’m ſhent with baneful ſmart
WELºe'1NG. m.ſ.. [well and be..] Happineſs; proſperity.
Man is not to depend upon the uncertain diſpoſitions of
men for his wellbeing, but only on God and his own
ſpirit. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
For whoſe wellbeing
So amply, and with hands ſo liberal,
Thou haſt provided all things. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. viii.
The moſt ſacred ties of duty are founded upon gratitude:
ſuch as the duties of a child to his parent, and of a ſubjećt to
his ſovereign. From the former there is required love and
honour, in recompence of being; and from the latter obe-
dience and ſubjection, in recompence of protećtion and well.
being. . . South's Sermons.
All things are ſubſervient to the beauty, order, and waii.
being of the whole. L’Eſtrange.
He who does not co-operate with this holy ſpirit, receives.
none of thoſe advantages which are perfecting of his nature,
and neceſſary to his wellbeing. Speciator, Nº. 571.
WELLBo'RN. n.ſ. Not meanly deſcended.
One whoſe extraction from an antient line,
Gives hope again that wellborn men may ſhine.
Heav'n, that wellhorn ſouls inſpires,
Prompts me, through lifted ſwords, and riſing fires,
To ruſh undaunted to defend the walls. Dryden.
WELLBRED. adj. [well and bred.] Elegant of manners; polite.
None have been with admiration read,
But who, beſides their learning, were wellbred. Roſcom.
Both the poets were wellbred and well-natur'd. Dryden.
Wellbred ſpaniels civilly delight,
In mumbling of the game they dare not bite. Pope.
wºrvº. adj. [well and nature. J Good-natured ;
kind.
WELLDo'NE. interječi. A word of praiſe.
//cllºlone, thou good and faithful ſervant. Matt. xxv. 21.
WELLFA'you REP. adj. [well and favour.] Beautiful; plea-
fing to the eye.
His wife ſeems to be wellfavoured. I will uſe her as the
key of the cuckoldy rogue's coffer. Shakeſpeare.
WELLME^T. interſ. [well and meet.] A term of ſalutation.
Once more to-day wellmet, diſtemper'd lords;
//aller.
The king by me requeſts your preſence ſtraight. Shakeſp.
On their life no grievous burthen lies,
Who are wellnatur'd, temperate and wiſe:
But an inhuman and ill-temper'd mind,
Not any eaſy part in life can find. Denham.
The manners of the poets were not unlike; both of them
were well-bred, wellnatured, amorous, and libertine at leaſt
in their writings; it may be alſo in their lives. Dryden.
Still with eſteem no leſs convers’d than read ;
With wit wellnatur'd, and with books well-bred. Pope,
Well N (G.H. adv. [well and migh..] Almoſt.
The ſame ſo fore annoyed has the knight,
That wellnigh choaked with the deadly ſtink,
His forces fail. Fairy Queen, b. i.
My feet were almoſt gone: my ſteps had wellnigh ſlipt. Pſ.
England was wellnigh ruined by the rebellion of the barons,
and Ireland utterly neglected. Davies.
Whoever ſhall read over St. Paul’s enumeration of the
duties incumbent upon it, might conclude, that wellnigh the
whole of chriſtianity is laid on the ſhoulders of charity
alone. . Sprat's Sermons.
Notwithſtanding a ſmall diverſity of poſitions, the whole ag-
gregate of matter, as long as it retained the nature of a chaos,
would retain wellhigh an uniform tenuity of texture. Bentley.
WELLsPE'N T. adj. Paſſed with virtue.
They are to lie down without anything to ſupport them in
their age, but the conſcience of a wellſpent youth. L'Eſtrange.
What a refreſhment then will it be to look back upon a
well/pent life Ca'any's Sermons.
The conſtant tenour of their well pent days,
No leſs deſerv'd a juſt return of praiſe. - Pope.
We'llspring. n.ſ. [poell:erpriž, Saxon.] Fountain; ſource.
The fountain and wellſpring of impiety, is a reſolved pur-
roſe of mind to reap in this world, what ſenſual profit or
ſenſual pleaſure ſoever the world yieldeth. Hooker.
Underſtanding is a wellſpring of life. Prov. xvi. 22.
Wellwi'lek. n.ſ. [will and willer.] One who means
kindly. -
timing all his own countrymen, that no man might
ſhew himſelf a well, viller of mine. Sidney, b. ii.
There are fit occaſions miniſtred for men to purchaſe to
themſelves wellwillers by the colour, under which they of—
tentimes proſecute quarrels of envy. Hooker.
Wellwi's H. n.ſ.. [well and wiſh. J A wiſh of happineſs. \
Let it not enter into the heart of any one that hath a well-
wiſh for his friends or poſtcrity, to think of a peace with
France, till the Spaniſh monarchy be entirely torn from it. Addison
Wellwi's HER. m. ſ. [from wellwiſh.] One who wiſhes the
good of another. -
W E N
The actual traitor is guilty of perjury in º - -
law; the ſecret º: of #: º . '' ºi.;
nal of conſcience. Addiſon's Freeholder, No 6
. Betray not any of your wellwiſhers into the like intº
Illencies. Spectator, Nº. 271.
No man is more your fincere wellwiſher than myſelf, or
more the ſincere welliffer of your family. P2:
- # *-
"ß º . a guard; an edging.
e low he - ike -ºſ. ...:
Pyramids, I like tººk round like ºvelts, with ſome #.
ſid **in ſcioli, or ſmatterers, are buſy in the ſkirts and out.
* of learning, and have ſearce anything of ſolid literature
to recommend them. They may have ſome edging or trim-
ming of a ſcholar, a well, or ſo ; but no more. Å. johnſºn
To WELt. v.a. [from the noun..] To ſew any thing with ătorieſ.
To We’lter. …
• * * [Peakan, Saxon; weierºn, Dutch.
tari, Lat.] » ; volu
I. To roll in water or mire.
He muſt not float upon his watry bier
Unweep'd, nor weſter to the parching winds.
The companions of his fall o'erwhelm'd
He ſoon diſcerns; and welt’ring by his ſide
The next himſelf. A4ilton's Par. Lºft, b. i.
...The gaſping head flies off; a purple flood
Flows from the trunk, that weller, in the blood.
He ſung Darius, great and good,
By too ſevere a fate,
Fallen from his high eſtate,
And welt’ring in his blood.
2. To roll voluntarily ; to wallow.
If a man inglut himſelf with vanity, or welter in filthineſ,
like a ſwine, all learning, all goodneſs is ſoon forgotten. Aftham.
WEMM. m. ſ. ſpem, Saxon.] A ſpot; a ſcar.
Although the wound be healed, yet the wemme or ſcar ſtºl
remaineth. Breretvood on Languages.
WEN. a. ſ. ſpen, Saxon.] A fleſhy or callous excreſcence, or
protuberance. -
Warts are ſaid to be deſtroy'd by the rubbing them with a
green elder ſtick, and then burying the ſtick to rot in muck.
It would be tried with corns and wens, and ſuch other ex-
creſcences. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Mountains ſeem but ſo many wens and unnatural protube-
rances upon the face of the earth. 44ore.
The poet reječts all incidents which are foreign to his
poem: they are wens and other excreſcences, which belong
not to the body. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
A promontory wen with griefly grace,
Stood high upon the handle of his face.
WENCH. n.ſ. ſpencle, Saxon.]
I. A young woman.
What do I, filly wench, know what love hath prepared for
me * Sidney, b. ii.
Now—how doſt thou look now Ohill-ſtarr'd wench /
Pale as thy ſmock 1 when we ſhall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my ſoul from heav'n,
And fiends will ſnatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl,
Ev’n like thy chaſtity. Shakeſp. Othell.
Thou wouldſt perſwade her to a worſe offence
Milton.
Dryden.
Dryden's St. Cecília.
Dryden -
Than that, whereof thou didſt accuſe her wench. Donne.
2. A young woman in contempt; a ſtrumpet.
But the rude wench her anſwer'd nought at all. Spenſºr.
Do not play in wench-like words with that
Which is ſo ſerious. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Men have theſe ambitious fancies,
And wanton wenches read romances.
3. A ſtrumpet.
It is not a digreſſion to talk of bawds in a diſcourſe upon
wenches. Speºſator, N° 266.
WE'Ncher. n.ſ.. [from wench..]. A fornicator.
He muſt be no great eater, drinker, or ſleeper; no game-
ſter, wencher, or fop. Grew's Coſmolºgy.
To WEND. v. n. [penban, Saxon.] -
1. To go; to paſs to or from. This word is now obſolete, but
its preterite went, is ſtill in uſe.
Back to Athens ſhall the lovers wend
With league, whoſe date till death ſhall never end. Shakeſ?.
They went on, and inferred, that if the world were a liv-
ing creature, it had a ſoul. Bacon's Nat. Hiſ?.
Then Rome ſhall wend to Benevento;
Great feats ſhall he atchieve
2. To turn round. It ſeems to be an old ſea term.
A ſhip of 660 tons will carry as good ordnance as a ſhip
of 1200 tons; and though the greater have double the nuin-
ber, the leſſer will turn her broadſides twice, before the
greater can wend once. - Raleigh.
WE'NNEL. n.ſ.. [a corrupted word for weamling.] An animal
newly taken from the dam.
Pinch never thy wennels of water or meat,
If ever ye hope for to have them good neat. Tiſºr.
WE'NN.Y. adj. [from wen.] Having the nature of a wen.
Some perſons, ſo deformed with theſe, haye ſuſpected thcm
to be wenny, Iłºſeman's urgery.
30 N VVE., T.
-
Prior.
Arbuthnot.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W. E. T
See WEND and Go.
West, pra.
*T. pret, and part. O
f wee
She for p.
- Joy tenderly wept.
WERE. of . verb to º p Milton.
o give - - -
untou. our ſiſter to one "ncircumciſed, were a reproach
In infilſ, * - - - - Gen. xxxiv. 14.
n infuſions in things that a I4
ſe of too high a ſpirit, you
70e) - -
° better pour off the firſt infuſion, and uſe the latter, hº
Th Henry divided, as it were,
As º of himſelf into four parts. Daniel's Civil War
imagina. there were any. feriation in nature, or juſtimº
Wac ion ° in profeſſions, this ſeaſon is termed the phyſicians
- Brown's Wul
He had been well aſſurd that at ulgar Errours.
And condućt w
y ere of w
wº". "...º.º. rut. Dryden.
Qºci' let thy bed be turned from fine gravel to weeds and
mud; let ſome unjuſt niggardsmake ºf oil thy b -
WERT. the ſecond perſon ſingular of the ... º
Thou wert heard B. johnſºn
O that thou wert as my brother. Caníviii. i.
All join'd, and thou of many wert but one. Dryden.
WERTH, wearth, wyrth, n. J. Whether initial or final in the
names of places, ſignify a farm, court, or village, from the
Saxon Peorºls, uſed by them in the ſame ſenſe. Gibſon's Cam.
WE'sil. n.ſ. See WE's AND.
The weſil, or windpipe, we call aſpera arteria. Bacon.
WEST. m. ſ. [perc, Saxon; weſt, Dutch..] The region where
the ſun goes below the horizon at the equinoxes.
The weſt yet glimmers with ſome ſtreaks of day:
Now ſpurs the lated traveller apace,
To gain the timely inn. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The moon in level'd weſt was ſet. Milton.
All bright Phoebus views in early morn,
Or when his evening beams the weſt adorn. Pope.
West. adj. Being towards, or coming from, the region of
the ſetting ſun.
A mighty ſtrong weſt wind took away the locuſts. Ex. x.
This ſhall be your weſt border. Num, xxxiv. 6.
The Phenicians had great fleets; ſo had the Carthaginians,
which is yet farther weſt. Bacon.
WEST. adº. To the weſt of any place.
Iſºft of this foreſt,
In goodly form comes on the enºmy. Shakeſpeare.
What earth yields in India eaſt or weſ?. 44ilton.
IWeſt from Orontes to the ocean. Milton.
WE's TERING. adj. Paſſing to the *.
ſtar that roſe at evening bright, - -
T. heav'ns deſcent had ſlop'd his wºffering wheel. Milt.
Wr'sterly, adj. [from weſt.] Tending or being towards
the weſt. - - ſterly, ſoutherl
ills give us a view of the moſt eaſterly, ſºutherly,
lº. of England. . . Graunt. Bills of Mortality.
wº. diff. [from weſt.] Being in the weſt, or toward
the part where the ſun ſets. - -
No. fair Phoebus 'gan decline in haſte
His weary waggon to the º :- }.
jazraj" t is a continued rock. 11071.
Th: : º [perſpearb, Saxon.] Towards the weſt.
WE's Tw ter they found the ſea weſtward from Peru, which is
By * calm. Aliot's Deſcription of the World.
always §. grove of ſycamore, Shak
hat Jºard rootéth from the city ſide. shakeſpeare.
Tº. weſtward like the fun you took your wº, d
And from iºnighted Britain bore the day. ryaen.
The ſtorm flies, - - -
weſtward, when the ſhow'ry kids ariſe. Addiſon.
From At home º: Prior
- ket WaW. -
Nº. *::::::::::: ...}.}}| With tendency to the
We’s Tw -
C If our loves faint, and weſtwardly decline ;
alſely thine - …- *
To º,º: alãons ſhall diſguiſe. JDonne.
Aº [poet, Saxon ; waed, Daniſh.]
WET. #. having ſome moiſture adhering: tains. Job. xxiv:
1. Humid 3 ... with the ſhow’rs of the mountains. fled, and
They * f the feet have great affinity with the . 2 . t
The º .* ſtomach ; as going wº º º f;
º: º affectcth both. at 27, -
uſe 1 2
2. Ray% Nº. ſeldom hurts the moſt unwiſe. Dryden.
// tº **
- ... moiſture; rainy weather.
ſ. Water ; humidity; In Ol b nd curled, is the
whº iſ appearing weather'd, ſtubby, * Barºn.
immoderate 19*.
diº. ſun, with more effectual beams,
h, and dry'd the wet .
... the face of the eart” ilton' ... Regain'd.
Fº plant. Milion's Par. Reg
Tuberoſes will not ...dure the wet ; therefore ſet yº.
Tuberoic h dry. ‘Lº’ \'º -
- nd keep them dry
º sº ãº turn inſide outs to preſerve the
Our Im c
Swift.
outſide from wet,
W H A
To Wet. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To humectate; to moiſten; to make to have moiſture adīt.
rent.
Better learn of him, that learned be,
And han been watered at the muſes well;
The kindly dew drops from the higher tree,
And wets the little plants, that lowly dwell. Spenſºr,
A drop of water running ſwiftly over ſtraw, weitethnot. Bac.
Wet the thirſty earth with falling ſhow’rs. Milton.
2. To drench with drink.
Let's drink the other cup to wet our whiſtles, and ſo ſing
away all ſad thoughts. Walton's Angº.
WE'THER... n.ſ. [yeben, Saxon; weder, Dutch..] A ram
caſtrated.
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Meeteſt for death. Shakeſp. Mr.h. ºf Wºniº,
He doth not apprehend how the tail of an African weather
outweigheth the body of a good calf, that is, an hundred
pound. Brown's Vulg. Errouri.
Although there be naturally of horſes, bulls, or rams,
more males than females; yet artificially, that is, by making
geldings, oxen, and weathers, there are fewer.
Graunt.
When Blowzelind expir’d, the weather's bell
Before the drooping flock toll'd forth her knell. Gay.
It is much more difficult to find a fat weather, than if half
that ſpecies were fairly knock'd on the head. Swift.
WE'TNEss. [from wet.] The ſtate of being wet; moiſture;
humidity.
The wetneſs of theſe bottoms often ſpoils them for
corn. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
To WEx. v. a. [corrupted from wax by Spenſer, for a thyme,
and imitated by Dryden.] To grow ; to increaſe.
She firſt taught men a woman to obey;
But when her ſon to man's eſtate did wes,
She it ſurrender'd. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
She trod a wezing moon, that ſoon wou'd wane,
And drinking borrow'd light, be fill'd again. Dryden.
Counting ſev’n from noon,
'Tis Venus' hour, and in the wezing moon. Dryden.
WE'zAND. m. ſ. [ſee weſand.] The windpipe.
Air is inguſtible, and by the rough artery, or wezand, con-
dućted into the lungs. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
WHALE. n.ſ.. [hpale, Saxon.] The largeſt of fiſh; the largeſt
of the animals that inhabit this globe.
God created the great whales. Geneſ.
Barr'd up with ribs of whale-bone, ſhe did leeſe
Noneofthewhale'slength, foritreach'dherknees, B.Cºrbit.
The greateſt whale that ſwims the ſea,
Does inſtantly my pow'r obey. Swift,
WHAME. m. ſ.
The whame, or burrel-fly, is vexatious to horſes in ſummer,
not by ſtinging, but by their bombylious noiſe, or tickling
them in ſticking their nits on the hair. Derham,
WHA'LY. adj. [See weal.] Marked in ſtreaks.
A bearded goat, whoſe rugged hair,
And whaly eyes, the ſign of jealouſy,
Was like the perſon's ſelf, whom he did bear. Fa.ºut.
WHARF. n.ſ. [warf, Swediſh; werſ, Dutch..] A perpendi-
cular bank or mole, raiſed for the convenience of lading of
emptying veſſels.
#. ſhould'ſt thou be, than the fat weed,
That roots itſelf in eaſe on Lethe's wharf,
Would'ſt thou not ſtir in this. Shalºft. Hamlt.
There were not in London uſed ſo many wharf, or kº,
for the landing of merchants goods. Child on Trade.
wharf AGE. n.ſ. [from wharf.] Dues for landing atawit.
wharf INGER. n.). [from wharf.] One who attends awha',
Towhur R. v. n. To pronounce the letter r with too ºh
force. Dict,
WHAT. pronoun. [hpaer, Saxon; wat, Dutch.]
I. That which.
What you can make her do,
I am content to look on ; what to ſpeak,
I am content to hear. Shakespeare, Iſinter Tak,
In theſe caſes we examine the why, the whº, and the
how of things. L'Eſtrange.
He's with a ſuperſtitious fear not aw’d,
For what befals at home, or what abroad. Dryden,
A ſatire on one of the common ſtamp, never nº wº
that approbation, as what is aimed at a perſon whoſe merit
places him upon an eminence. - †
Mark what it is his mind aims at in the queſtion, * º
what words he expreſſes. tºº.
If any thing be ſtated in a different manner from * !
like, tell me freely. Pºpe tº Swift,
whatever commodities lie under the greateſt diſº
ments from England, thoſe are what they are moſt º:
in cultivating, Sºft,
... Which part. - -
2 If we º ghtly eſtimate things, what in them is purely º
to nature, and what to labour, we ſhall find ninety-nine pº
- #.
of a hundred are wholly to be put on the *::::
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H A
à
--- -
* - I -
~ *
3. Something that is in one's mind indefinitely.
I tell thee what, corporal, I could tear her. Shakeſpeare,
4. Which of ſeveral.
Whether it were the ſhortneſs of his forefight, the ſtrength
of his will, or the dazling of his ſuſpicions, or what it was,
certain it is, that the perpetual troubles of his fortunes could
not have been without ſome main errors in his nature. Bacon.
Comets are rather gazed upon than wiſely obſerved; that
is, what kind of comet for magnitude, colour, placing in the
heaven, or laſting, produceth what kind of effect. Bacon.
See what natures accompany what colours; for by that you
ſhall induce colours by producing thoſe natures. Bacon.
Shew what aliment is proper for that intention, and what
intention is proper to be purſued in ſuch a conſtitution. Arbuth.
5. An interjećtion by way of ſurpriſe or queſtion.
What! canſt thou not forbear me half an hour,
Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyſelf? Shakeſpeare.
What if I advance an invention of my own to ſupply the
defečt of our new writers. Dryden's juvenal.
6. WHAT Though. H/hat imports it though? notwithſtanding,
An elliptical mode of ſpeech.
J/hat though a child may be able to read; there is no doubt
but the meaneſt among the people under the law had been as
able as the prieſts themſelves were to offer ſacrifice, did this
make ſacrifice of no effect IHooker.
What though none live my innocence to tell,
I know it; truth may own a generous pride, -
I clear myſelf, and care for none beſide. Dryden.
7. What Time, I/hat Day. At the time when; on the day when.
JWhat day the genial angel to our fire -
Brought her, more lovely than Pandora. Milton:
Then balmy ſleep had charm'd my eyes to reſt,
What time the morn myſterious viſions brings,
While purer ſlumbers ſpread their golden wings. Pope.
Me ſole the daughter of the deep addreſs'd ;
J/hat time with hunger pin'd, my abſent mates
Roam'd the wild iſle in ſearch of rural cates. Pope.
8. [Pronoun interrogative..] Which of many interrogatively.
What art thou,
That here in deſart haſt thy habitance 2 Fairy Queen.
I/hat is't to thee if he neglect thy urn,
Or without ſpices lets thy body burn ? Dryden.
Whate'er I begg'd, thou like a dotard ſpeak'ſt
More than is requiſite; and what of this
Why is it mention'd now. Dryden.
What one of an hundred of the zealous bigots in all parties
ever examined the tenets he is ſo ſtiff in : Locke.
When any new thing comes in their way, children aſk the
common queſtion of a ſtranger, what is it 2 Locke.
9. To how great a degree, uſed either interrogatively or demon-
ſtratively.
Am I ſo much deform'd :
I/hat partial judges are our love and hate : Dryden.
Io. It is uſed adverbially for partly ; in part.
The enemy having his country waſted, what by himſelf,
and what by the ſoldiers, findeth ſuccour in no place. Spenſºr.
Thus, what with the war, what with the ſweat, what with
the gallows, and what with poverty, I am cuſtom ſhrunk. Sha.
The year before, he had ſo uſed the matter, that what by
force, what by policy, he had taken from the Chriſtians above
thirty ſmall caſtles. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
When they come to caſt up the profit and loſs, what be-
twixt force, intereſt, or good manners, the adventurer eſcapes
well, if he can but get off. L’Eſtrange.
If hat with carrying apples, grapes, and fewel, he finds him-
ſelf in a hurry. L’Eſtrange.
I/7 at with the benefit of their ſituation, the art and parſi-
mony of their people, they have grown ſo conſiderable, that
they have treated upon an equal foot with great princes. Tem.
They live a popular life, and then what for buſineſ, plea-
ſures, company, there's ſcarce room for a morning's reflexion.
Norris.
If theſe halfpence ſhould gain admittance, in no long ſpace
of time, what by the clandeſtine practices of the coiner, what
by his own counterfeits and thoſe of others, his limited quan-
tity would be tripled. Swift.
11. WHAT Ho. An interjećtion of calling.
H/hat ho, thou genius of the clime, what ho,
Ly’ſ thou aſleep beneath theſe hills of ſnow :
Stretch out thy lazy limbs. Dryden.
f - - -
WHA'TE y ER. {: [from what and ſever, JWhatſ, is
WHATso. -
W. ATsoev ER not now in uſe.
- -
1. Having one nature or another; being one or another either
generically, ſpecifically or numerically.
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
Caſtles, and what, over, and to be
Out of the king's protećtion. Skakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
If thence he 'ſcape into whatever world. AM ſton.
In whatſoever ſhape he lurk I'll know. AMilton.
Wiſely reſtoring whatſoever grace
It loſt by change of times, or tongues or place. Denham.
W H E
Holy writ abounds in accounts of this nature, as much as
*g. hiſtory whatſoever. Addiſon's Freehºlder.
. No contrivance, no prudence whatſoever can deviate from
his ſcheme, without leaving us worſe than it found us.
Atterbury.
Thus whatever ſucceſſive duration ſhall be bounded at one
** and be all paſt and preſent, muſt come infinitely ſhort
of infinity. Bentley's Sermons.
**ativer is read differs as much from what is repeated with-
out boºk, as a copy does from an original. Swifi.
• Any thing, be it what it will.
JWhatſoever our liturgy hath more than theirs, they cut it off.
Hooker.
Whatever thing
The ſcythe of time mows down, devour. Alſiltan.
. The ſame, be it this or that.
Be whate'er Vitruvius was before. Poſe.
4. All that ; the whole that; all particulars that. 7
From hence he views with his black lidded eye,
Whatſo the heaven in his wide vault contains. Spenſºr.
Whate'er the ocean pales or ſky inclips
Is thine. Shakeſpeare.
At once came forth whatever creeps. Milton.
WHEAL, n.ſ. [See We Al J A puſtule; a ſmall ſwelling fil-
led with matter.
The humour cannot tranſpire, whereupon it corrupts and
raiſes little wheals or bliſters. Wiſeman's Surgery.
WHEAT. m. ſ. [ppeare, Saxon; weyde, Dutch; triticum, Lat.]
The grain of which bread is chiefly made.
It hath an apetalous flower, diſpoſed into ſpikes; each of
them conſiſts of many ſtamina which are included in a ſqua-
moſe flower-cup, having awns: the pointal riſes in the center,
which afterwards becomes an oblong ſeed, convex on one ſide,
but furrowed on the other: it is farinaceous, and incloſed by
a coat which before was the flower-cup: theſe are produced
ſingly, and colle&amp;ted in a cloſe ſpike, being affixed to an in-
dented axis. The ſpecies are; 1. White or red wheat,
without awn. 2. Red wheat, in ſome places called Kentiſh
wheat. 3. White wheat. 4. Red-eared bearded wheat. 5. Cone
wheat. 6. Grey wheat, and in ſome places duck-bill wheat
and grey pollard. 7. Polonian wheat. 8. Many eared wheat.
9. Summer wheat. 10. Naked barley. 1 1. Long grained
wheat. 12. Six rowed wheat. 13. White eared wheat with
long awns: Of all theſe ſorts cultivated in this country, the
cone wheat is chiefly preſerved, as it has a larger ear and a ful-
ler grain than any other; but the feeds of all ſhould be annual-
ly changed; for if they are ſown on the ſame farm, they will
not ſucceed ſo well as when the ſeed is brought from a diſtant
country. Miller.
He mildews the white wheat, and hurts the poor creature of
the earth. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Reuben went in the days of wheat-harveſt. Gen. xxx.
Auguſt ſhall bear the form of a young man of a fierce aſpect;
upon his head a garland of wheat and rie. Peacham.
Next to rice is wheat; the bran of which is highly ace-
ſcent. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The damſels laughing fly: the giddy clown
Again upon a wheat-ſheaf drops a down. Gay.
WHEATEN. adj. [from wheat.j Made of wheat.
Of wheaten flour ſhalt thou make them. Excd xxix.
Here ſummer in her wheaten garland crown'd. Addison.
The aſſize of wheaten bread is in London. Arbuth.
His taſk it was the wheaten loaves to lay,
And from the banquet take the bowls away. Pope,
There is a project on foot for tranſporting our beſt wheaten
ſtraw to Dunſtable, and obliging us by law to take off yearly
ſo many tun of the ſtraw hats. Swift.
WHEATEAR. n.ſ. A ſmall bird very delicate.
What cook would loſe her time in picking larks, wheatears,
and other ſmall birds. Swift.
WHEATPLUM. n.ſ. A ſort of plum. Ainſworth.
To wheeple. v. 4. [Of this word I can find no etymolºgy,
though uſed by good writers, and Leº ſeems to mention it as
a cant word.j To entice by ſoft words; to flatter 3 to Per-
ſuade by kind words.
His bus'neſs was to pump and whº dº,
And men with their own keys unriddle,
To make them to themſelves give anſwers, -
For which they pay the necromancers. Hudibras.
A fox floodličking of his lips at the cock, and jºiding
him to get him down. - L’Eſtrange.
His º ſchool
Mars his forge ſent to Minerva's ſchools
º º the º, art of wheedling fools. . . Dryden.
He that firſt brought the word ſham, or wheel, in uſe, put
together as he thought fit, ideas he made it fland for. Locke.
A laughing, toying, wheedling, whimp'ring ſhe,
Shall make him amble on a gotiip’s meſſage. , Rºwe.
The world has never been prepared for theſe trifles by pre-
faces, wººd or troubled with excuſes. Pºpe.
Johnny<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H E
Johnny wheedl’d
- . - Q th * *
Tºll Phili, iii. º d,
L. º J. [ppeol, Saxon
Of his own Cdr.
ortune ſits all breathleſs
A fate ſo weighty, th
Some watches are m
Dryden.
** and admires to feel y
at it ſtops her whºl. Dryden.
ade with four wheels, others with five.
- Locke.
Plough is one of the beſt and eaſieſt draughts.
2. ** body. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
*t go thy hold wh ºr -
it tº: º eck * * * great wheel runs down a hill, leſ.
- th following it. £ x -z--
3. A carriage that runs upon . Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
he ſtar that foſe at ev'ning bright,
Towards heav'n's deſcent". ſtopt his weſtering wheel.
A wheel.
Milton.
Through the proud ſtreet ſhe moves the publick gaze,
he turning wheel before the palace ſtays. Pope.
4. An inſtru
ment on which criminals are tortured.
Let them pull all about mine ears, preſent me
Death on the wheel, or at wild horrºsiº. Shakeſpeare:
Thou art a ſoul in bliſs, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire. Shakeſp. King Lear.
For all the torments of her wheel
ay you as many pleaſures ſhare. JWaller.
His examination is like that which is made by the rack and
wheel. Addiſon.
5. The inſtrument of ſpinning.
Verſe ſweetens care, however rude the ſound,
All at her work the village maiden fings;
Nor as ſhe turns the giddy wheel around, -
Revolves the ſad viciſſitudes of things. Giffard.
6. Rotation ; revolution. - -
Look not too long upon theſe turning wheels of º:
left we become giddy. acon.
According to the common viciſſitude and wheel of things,
the proud and the inſolent, after long trampling upon others,
come at length to be trampled upon themſelves. South's Sermons.
7. A compaſs about; a tract approaching to circularity. ...
He throws his flight in many an airy wheel. Milton.
To WHEEL. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To move on wheels.
- turn On all 2X1S.
2 T}. moon carried about the earth always ſhews the º:
face to us, not once wheeling upon her own center. Bently.
To revolve ; to have a rotatory motion.
: To turn; to have viciſſitudes.
5. To fetch a compaſs. -
Spies forc’d to wheel
- hat I was forc * , -
º...; º: d Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Myrmidons, -
k what I'. "...}. where I wheel. . . Shakespeare.
º: * jºhn, about, he kept them in º: º
º without great danger, : to water his horſe. Knºl.
y
He at hand provokes -
His rage, and plies him with redoubled ſtrokes;
t
tºhºl, as he wheeli.
J/ º tº: draw off, and coaſt the ſouth th:
with ſtricteſt watch: theſ: other wheel the º -
8. circuit meets full * h *. º M. 'ton.
- he ſhield, half to the ſpear: , . -
Hº. i. through air his rapid flight,
Then wheeling dówn the ſteep of heav'n he flies
- » • . Po t’.
A d draws a radiant circle O CT the ſkies. p
Il
6. To tº: of juſtice wheel'd about,
ery prey to time.
And left thee but a ; §
h, devo ing where it rolls. Milton.
M ſt wheel on eart eVOurlin : . . . . .
Ul eel d º: put into a rotatory motion; to make to
W H F U. d. y
To HEEL.
whirl round. Heav'n rowl'd 's hand
Her motions, as the gº firſt Mºi,. Paradiſ. Lºft.
Firſt º "tial and barrow.] A carriage dri-
WHEE'LBAR -
ard on one wheel. cround, but not
VCIl ſº in a wheelbarrow upon rough ground,
Carry bo
- Bacon.
- leave ſome air. King.
filled full, º in wheelbarrows abound ker of wheels.
Pippins [from wheel]. A ſºlº. d from occu-
WHEE’L ER. f flames, the moſt havº been º ht. Camden.
After loca ... Smith, Braſier, ſºheeler, . of wheel-
ations, i. 'n f [wheel and wright.] A maker
warf'twº a fi - - th
carriages. tough wood, and all heart, being gº."
It is a So -
wheelwright.”
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
W H E
WHEELY. adj. [from wheel.] Circular;
Hinds exerciſe the pointed ſteel
On the hard rock, and give a wheely form
To the expected grinder. Philipi,
To Wheeze. v. n. Öreoron, Saxon.] To breath with noiſ.
The conſtrićtion of the trachaa ſtreightens the paſſage of
the air, and produces the wheezing in the afthma. Flyer.
It is eaſy to run into ridicule the beſt deſcriptions, when
** a mºnºis in the humour of laughing, till he wº.
his own dull jeſt. Dryden.
The fawning dog runs mad; the whetzing ſwine
With coughs is choak'd. Dryden's Virgil
Prepare bāſāmick cups, to wheezing lungs
Medicinal, and ſhort-breath'd. Philipi.
Wheezing aſthma loth to ſtir. Swift,
WHElk. n. ſ. [See to Welk..]
I. An inequality; a protuberance.
His face is all bubuckles, and whelks, and knobs
of fire.
2. A puſtule. [See Weal.] -
To WHELM. v. a. [applpan, Saxon; wilma, Iſlandick.)
1. To cover with ſomething not to be thrown off; to bury.
Grievous miſchiefs which a wicked fay
Had wrought, and many whelm'd in deadly pain. F.S.
This pink is my prize, or ocean whelm them all. Shii.
So the ſad offence deſerves,
Plung'd in the deep for ever let me lye,
//helm'd under ſeas.
Diſcharge the load of earth that lies on you,
the mountains under which the poets ſay, the giants and men
of the earth are whelmed. Pºpe,
Deplore
The whelming billow and the faithleſs oar. Gºy.
2. To throw upon ſomething ſo as to cover or bury it.
On thoſe curſed engines triple row,
They ſaw them whelm’d, and all their confidence
Under the weight of mountains bury'd deep. Miltºn.
J/helm ſome things over them and keep them there. Mºrtin.
Wº; n: ſ ſwep, Dutch; huopar, Iſlandick ; hwalb, Swe-
diſh.
I. * of a dog; a puppy.
They call'd us, for our fierceneſ, Engliſh dogs,
Now, like their whelps, we crying run away. Shaleft-ar.
%helpſ come to their growth within three quarters of a
year. Bacon's Natural Hiſory.
ſ/helps are blind nine days, and then begin toſse as general-
ly believed; but as we have elſewhere declared, it is ºut
their eye-lids open until the twelfth day. Brown.
2. The young of any beaſt of prey.
The lion's whelp ſhall be to himſelf unknown. Shakeſheart.
Thoſe unlickt bear wheps. Dønne,
3. A ſon. In contempt.
The young whelp of Talbot's raging brood
Did fleſh his puny ſword in Frenchmens blood. Shakſtart,
4. A young man. In contempt.
Slave, I will ſtrike your ſoul out with my foot,
Let me but find you again with ſuch a face. -
You whelp. Ben. johnſºn'; Catilin.
That aukward whelp, with his money-ba's, would have
made his entrance. Addison's Guardian.
To WHE LP. v. n. To bring young, Applied to braſs, gene.
rally beaſts of prey.
A lioneſs hath whelped in the ſtreets,
And graves have yawn'd. Shakeſpeare's juliuſ Cæſar,
In a bitch ready to whep, we found four puppies. Iºk.
In their palaces,
Where luxury late reign'd, ſea-monſters whº'd
And ſtabled. Mºlton's Paradiſ lºſ'.
WHEN. adv. [whan, Gothick; praenne, Sax, wanner, Dutch.]
1. At the time that.
Divers curious men judged that one Theodoſius ſhould ſº
ceed, when indeed Theodoſius did. Camden.
One who died ſeveral ages ago, raiſes a ſecret fondneſs :
benevolence for him in our minds, when we read history. Addison
2. At what time *
JWhen was it ſhe laſt walk’d 2– -
—Since his majeſty went into the ficki. Shalºft. Mºliſh.
If there's a pow'r above us,
And that there is all nature cries aloud, -
Through all her works; he muſt delight in virtue,
And that which he delights in muſt be happy. º
But when * or where Adiſºn,
3. Which time.
I was adopted heir by his conſent;
Since when, his oath is broke.
4. At which time.
By this the bloody troops were at the door,
JWhen as a ſudden and a ſtrange diſmay, ...]
Enforc'd them ſtrain who ſhould go in before. Daniel,
fter the time that.
5. Aft: I have once handed a report to another, hºw know
I how he may improve it? Gºvernment ºf the º,
ſuitable to rotation,
nobs, and flames
Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Adjin,
like one of
Shakſ eart's Himſ) VI,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H E
º
-
5. At what time.
Kings may
Take their advantage when and how they liſt. Daniel.
6. At what particular time.
His ſeed, when is not ſet, ſhall bruiſe my head. Miſion.
7. WHEN as. At the time when; what time.
This whºm as Guyon ſaw, he 'gan enquire
What meant that preace about that lady's throne, Fa.ºueen.
ſ/hem as ſacred light began to dawn
In Fden on the humid flow’rs, that breath'd
Their morning incenſe, came the human pair. Milton.
Wii exce. adv. [Formed from where by the ſame analogy with
hence from here.] -
1. From what place.
2. I'rom what perſon.
}%ence, feeble nature ' ſhall we ſummon aid,
If by our pity and our pride betray'd Prior.
3. From which premiſes.
Their practice was to look no farther before them than the
next line; whence it will follow, that they can drive to no cer-
tain point. Dryden.
4. From which place or perſon.
Grateful to acknowledge whence his good deſcends. Milt.
5. For which cauſe.
Recent urine, diſtilled with a fixed alkali, is turned into an
alkaline nature; whºmce alkaline ſalts, taken into a human
body, have the power of turning its benign ſalts into fiery and
volatile. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
6. From what ſource.
I have ſhewn whence the underſtanding may get all the ideas
it has. Locke.
7. From WHENce. A vitious mode of ſpeech.
From whence he views, with his black-lidded eye,
Whatſo the heaven in his wide vault contains. Spenſer.
To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His manſion, and his titles, in a place
From whence himſelf does fly.
8. Of WHENCE. Another barbariſm.
He aſk'd his guide,
What and of whence was he who preſs'd the hero's ſide
Dryden’s AFn.
WHE'NcEsoever. adv. [whence and ever.] From what place
ſoever.
Any idea, whenceſoever we have it, contains in it all the pro-
perties it has. - Lºcke.
Wretched name, or arbitrary thing!
Whence ever I thy cruel eſſence bring,
I own thy influence; for I feel thy ſting. Prior.
WHE'NEVER. }*. [when and ever, or ſaever.] At whatſo-
WHE'Nso EveR. § ever time.
O welcome hour whenever ! Why delays
His hand to execute : A/iſt. Paradiſe Loſt.
Men grow firſt acquainted with many of theſe ſelf-evident
truths, upon their being propoſed; not becauſe innate, but
becauſe the conſideration of the nature of the things, contained
in thoſe words, would not ſuffer him to think otherwiſe, how
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
or whenſoever he is brought to reflection. - Locke.
Our religion, whenever it is truly received into the heart,
will appear in juſtice, friendſhip, and charity. Rogers.
WHERE. adv. [pporn, Saxon; warr, Dutch..]
1. At which place or places.
She viſited that place, where firſt ſhe was ſo happy as to ſee
the cauſe of her unhap. Sidney.
God doth in publick prayer reſpect the ſolemnity of places,
where his name ſhould be called on amongſt his people. Hooker.
In every land we have a larger ſpace,
Where we with green adorn our fairy bow'rs. Dryden.
In Lydia born,
Jºhere plenteous harveſts the fat fields adorn. Dryden.
2. At what place.
º
Ah! where was Eloiſe 2 Pope.
3. At the place in which.
IV, ere I thought the remnant of mine age
Should have been cheriſh’d by her child-like duty,
I now am full reſolv'd to take a wife. Shakeſpeare.
4. Any WHERE. At any place.
Thoſe ſubterraneous waters were univerſal, as a diſſolution
of the exterior earth could not be made any where but it would
fall into waters. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
5. WHERE, like here, has in compoſition a kind of pronominal
ſignification: as, whereºf, of which.
6. It has the nature of a noun. Not now in uſe.
He ſhall find no where ſafe to hide himſelf. Spenſer.
Bid them farewel, Cordelia, though unkind:
Thou loſeſt here, a better where to find. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
WHE’REA Bour. adv. [where and about..]
1. Near what place.
2. Near which place.
Thou firm ſet carth,
Hear not my ſteps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very ſtones prate of my whereabout.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
W H E
3. Concerning which.
I he greatneſs of all actions is meaſured by the worthineſ,
of the ſubject from which they proceed, and the objećt where-
* they are converſant: we muſt of neceſſity, in both re-
ſpects, acknowledge that this preſent world affordeth not any
*ing comparable unto the duties of religion. Płożer.
WHEREA's adv. [where and as.] c -
1. When on the contrary.
Are not thoſe found to be the greateſt zealots who are moſt
notoriouſly ignorant? whereas true zeal ſhould always begin
with true knowledge. Sprat's Sºrmins.
The aliment of plants is nearly one uniform juice; whereas
animals live upon very different forts of ſubſtances. A luthnºt.
2. At which place. Obſolete.
They came to fiery flood of Phlegeton,
Whereas the damned ghoſts in torments frv.
Prepare to ride unto St. Alban's,
Whereas the king and queen do mean to hawk. Shakespeare H.VI.
3.The thing being ſo that. Always referred to ſomething different.
Whereas we read ſo many of them ſo much commended,
ſome for their mild and merciful diſpoſition, ſome for their
virtuous ſeverity, ſome for integrity of life; all theſe were the
fruits of true and infallible principles delivered unto us in the
word of God. - Hoºker.
Whereas all bodies ſeem to work by the communication of
their natures, and impreſſions of their motions; the diffuſion
of ſpecies viſible ſeemeth to participate more of the former,
and the ſpecies audible of the latter. aczn.
Whereas wars are generally cauſes of poverty, the ſpecial
nature of this war with Spain, if made by ſea, is like to be a
lucrative war. Bacon.
Wherea; ſeeing requires light, a free medium, and a right
line to the objects, we can hear in the dark, immured, and by
curve lines. - Holder's Elment, of Speech.
Whereas at firſt we had only three of theſe principles, their
number is already ſwoln to five. Baker on Learning.
One imagines that the terreſtrial matter, which is ſhowered
down with rain, enlarges the bulk of the earth: another fan-
cies that the earth will ere long all be waſhed away by rains,
and the waters of the ocean turned forth to overwhelm the dry
land: whereas, by this diſtribution of matter, continual provi-
fion is every where made for the ſupply of bodies. J/coavard.
WHE REA'T. adv. [where and at..] At which. -
This he thought would be the fitteſt reſting place, ’till we
might go further from his mother's fury; whereat he was no
leſs angry, and aſhamed, than deſirous to obey Zelmane. Sidn.
This is in man's converſion unto God, the firſt ſtage where-
at his race towards heaven beginneth. Hooker.
JWhereat I wak'd, and found
Before mine eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively ſhadow’d. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
WHERERY”. adv. [where and by..] By which.
But even that, you muſt confeſs, you have received of her,
and ſo are rather gratefully to thank her, than to preſs any fur-
ther, 'till you bring ſomething of your own, whereby to claim
it. Sidney.
Prevent thoſe evils whereby the hearts of men are loſt. Hook.
You take my life,
When you do take the means whereby I live. Shakeſpeare.
If an enemy hath taken all that from a prince wheel, he
was a king, he may refreſh himſelf by conſidering all that is
left him, whereby he is a man. - Taylor.
This is the moſt rational and moſt profitable way of learn-
ing languages, and whereby we may beſt hope to give account
to God of our youth ſpent herein. Milton.
This delight they take in doing of miſchief, whereby I mean
the pleaſure they take to put anything in pain that is capable
of it, is no other than a foreign and introduced diſpoſi-
tion. Locke.
Whe RE've R. adv. [where and ever.]. At whatſoever place.
Which to avenge on him they dearly vow d,
IWherever that on ground they mought him find. Fa. Queen.
Him ſerve, and fear !
Of other creatures, as him pleaſes beſt. -
Wherever plac'd, let him diſpoſe. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
Not only to the ſons of Abraham's loins
Salvation ſhall be preach'd; but to the ſons -
Of Abraham's faith, whºrever through the world. Miltºn.
Iłżere-'er thy navy ſpreads her canvas wings,
Hº: to 4. º to all ſhe brings. J/aller.
The climate, about thirty degrees, may paſs for the Heſpe-
rides of our age, whatever or where-ever the other was. Temp.
He cannot but love virtue, wherever it is. F. Alterbury.
mºrever he hath receded from the Moſaick account ºf the
earth, he hath receded from nature and matter of fact ºf oodw.
fºrever Shakeſpeare has invented, he is greatly below the
noveliſt; ſince the incidents he has added are neither neceſſary
Shakeſpeare Iluſtrated.
Fa. 9acen.
nor probable.
whe/RE for E. adv. [where and for.]
1. For which reaſon. -
The ox and the aſs defire their food, neither purpoſe they
unto themſelves any end wherefore. #: 4.
30 O<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H E
W H E.
There is no cauſe wherefore we ſhould think God more de-
firous to manifeſt his favour by temporal bleſfings wºº
ſt cauſe wherefºre abſolutely ye ſhould
to have your judgment
Hooker.
than towards us: -
Can ye alledge any J"
not conjeſcend, in this controverſy,
over-ruled by ſome ſuch definitive ſentence?
Shall I tell you why P
—Ay, fir, and wherefore ; for,
wherefore.
2. For what reaſon:
II herefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they ſaw ſome wondrous monumen. ? Shakeſpeare.
O wherefºre was my birth from heav’n foretold -
Twice by an angel? Milon's Agoniſies.
writºr ºn. Adv. [where and in-j In which.
whenever yet was your appeal denied ?
Iſ'herºin have you becn galled by the king? Shakespeare H. VI.
Try waters by weight, wherein you may find ſome diffe-
rence, and the lighter account the better. Bacon.
Heav'n
Is as the book of God before thee ſet,
fºrcin to read his wond’rous works.
Too ſoon for us the circling hours
This dreaded time have compaſt, wherein we
Muſt bide the ſtroke of that long threaten’d wound. Milton.
This the happy morn
1ſ/heroin the ſon of heav'n's eternal king, -
Our great redemption from above did bring! Milton.
Had they been treated with more kindneſs, and their queſ-
tions anſwered, they would have taken more pleaſure in im-
proving their knowledge, wherein there would be ſtill new-
neſs. Locke.
There are times wherein a man ought to be cautious * well
as innocent. Swift.
where’s to adv. [where and into ) Into which.
where's the palace, whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Shakeſp. Othello.
Another diſeaſe is the putting forth of wild ºats, whereinto
corn oftentimes degenerates. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
My ſubject does not oblige me to point forth the place
wherſ into this water is now retreated. Woodward.
Their treaty was finiſhed, wherein I did them ſeveral good
offices, by the credit I now had at court, and they made me a
viſit. Gulliver's Traveli.
whe'Reness. n.ſ.. [from where.], Ubiety.
A point hath no dimenſions, but only a whereneſ, and is
next to nothing. Grew’s Coſmol.
when EoſF. adj. [where and of..] Of which.
A thing whereºf the church hath, ever ſithence the firſt be-
ginning, reaped fingular commodity. Hooker.
How this world, when and whereºf created. Milton.
I do not find the certain numbers whereºf their armies did
conſiſt. Davies on Ireland.
'Tis not very probable that I ſhould ſucceed in ſuch a pro-
jea, whereof I have not had the leaſt hint from any ºf my
predeceſſors, the poets. Dryden.
WHEREo'N. adv. [where and on.] On which.
As for thoſe things whereºn, or elſe wherewith, ſuperſition
worketh, polluted they are by ſuch abuſe. Hooker.
Infected be the air whereon they ride. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
So looks the ſtrand, whereon th’ imperious flood
Hath left a witneſs'd uſurpation. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
He lik'd the ground whereºn ſhe trod. Milton.
W H F 'REso. adv. [where and ſoever.] In what place
WHERE so E'v ER. 5 ſoever. -
That ſhort revenge the man may overtake,
I/herſ, he be, and ſoon upon him light.
Poor naked wretches, wherefoe'er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitileſs ſtorm,
How ſhall your houſeleſs heads defend you -
From ſeaſons ſuch as theſe ? Shakespeare King Lear.
He oft
Frequented their aſſemblies, whereſ met. Miſt. Parad. Lºft.
Can miſery no place of ſafety know? -
The noiſe purſues me wherefºe'er I go.
WHERE To'.
WHERE UNTO’.
- She bringeth forth no kind of creature, whereto ſhe is want-
ing in that which is needful. Hooker.
b What Scripture doth plainly deliver, to that the firſt place
oth of credit and obedience is due; the next whereunto is
whatſoever any man can neceſſarily conclude by force of rea-
fon: after theſe, the voice of the church ſucceedeth. Hooker.
JJ’ I hold an old accuſtom'd feaſt,
#.ſ.*A. many a gueſt. Shakespeare Ram, and jul.
WHERE upo'N. n f º anſwer'd, not diſpleas'd. Milton.
The townſ ſ. [where and upon..] Upon which.
came thi men mutinied, and ſent to Eſſex; whereupon he
2. hither. Clarendºn
ſ".º. had riſen a general war betwixt them, if
cſmond had not been ſent into England.
Davies on Ireland.
they ſay, every why hath a
Shakespeare Comedy of Errours.
Milton.
Fairy Queen.
Dryden.
!adv. [where and to, or unto.] To which.
th
WHERE wi't H. adv. Twhere and wi º --
WHERE witHA'L. } tº: with, or withal.] With
a: thoſe things where with ſuperſition worketh, polluted
Her bliſs is all in pleaſure and delight,
I/herewith ſhe makes her lovers drunken.
Northumberland, thou ladder where withal
The mounting Bolingbroke aſcends my throne. Shalºſ,
- In regard of the troubles wherewith this king was ift
in England, this army was not of ſufficient ſtrength º,
an entire conqueſt of Ireland. Davi on Irela
‘the bºilers of Babel, ſtill with vainº.""
New Babels, had they wherewithal, would bid. Milton
You will have patience with a debtor, who has an indi.
tion to pay you his obligations, if he had wherewithal ready
about him. Wytherly. .
The frequency, warmth and affection, wherewih they
are propoſed. Roger's Sermºn. |
But it is impoſſible for a man, who openly declares againſt
religion, to give any reaſonable ſecurity that he will not be
falſe and cruel, whenever a temptation offers, which he valus
more than he does the power where with he was truſted? Swift.
Hicker.
Fairy &amp;ueen.
To WHERRET. v. a... [Corrupted, I ſuppoſe, from find.]
1. To hurry; to trouble; to teaze. A low colloquial word.
2. To give a box on the ear. Ainſwºrth.
WHE'RRY. n.ſ. [Of uncertain derivation.] A light boat uſed
On r1 VerS.
And falling down into a lake, |
Which him up to the neck doth take, -
His fury ſomewhat it doth ſlake,
He calleth for a ferry ;
What was his club he made his boat,
And in his oaken cup doth float,
As ſafe as in a wherry.
Let the veſſel ſplit on ſhelves,
With the freight enrich themſelves:
Safe within my little wherry,
All their madneſs makes me merry.
To whº T. v. a. [pretzan, Saxon; wetter, Dutch..]
1. To ſharpen by attrition.
Fool, thou whet'ſ a knife to kill thyſelf. Shaº.
Thou hid'ſt a thouſand daggers in thy thoughts,
Which thou haſt whetted on thy ſtony heart,
Toftab at half an hour of my frail life. Shakespeare . H. IV.
This viſitation
- Is but to what thy almoſt blunted purpoſe. Shakespeare Hamlet,
Unſophiſticated vitriol, rubbed on the whetted blade of a
knife, will not impart its colour. ... Bºk.
There is the Roman ſlave whetting his knife, and liſtening.
Addison ºn Italy.
Eloquence, ſmooth and cutting, is like a razor whildwº
oil. Swift.
2. To edge; to make angry or acrimonious. -
Peace, good queen ; -
O whet not on theſe too too furious Peº; *
For bleſſed are the peace-makers. Shahſ. H. VI.
Since Caſſius firſt did whet me againſt Ceſar, • * ~ *
I have not ſlept. Shakespeare. juſt Cº.
I will whet on the king. . Shakespeare King º
Héfavoured the Chriſtian merchants; * the more town
him forwards, the baſſa had cunningly infinuated into º
quaintance one Mulearabe: iſitº.
Let not thy deep bitterneſs begºt
Careleſs deſpair in me; for that will whet
Draytºn's Nymºliſ,
Swift,
R. III.
My mind to ſcorn. in bak sº
The cauſe why onions, ſalt, and pepper, in .. º
move appetite, is by vellication of thoſe nerves;
ppetite, y Bacon's Natural Hſiº.
whetteth. - d, whic
A diſpoſition in the king began tº be diº. º
nouriſhed and whetted on by bad counſellors, proV*''. ſub-
ſure out of his."
of his times; which was the cruſhing trea
jećts purſes, by penal laws. - h's
J 3rjääcºntemplation, that weſh?" ſacrifice therhº
in curiolity:
peace to the whetting and inflaming of a little º
Bacon's Hºº'."
way ºf Pit",
Great contemporaries whet and “” each other. Pº
Himſelf invented firſt i. tº: ſhare,
And whetted human induſtry by * * !.n'ſ Gº!!!"
Nor ſuffer'd ſloth to ruſt º reign. Dryden Geºrg
wrift. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The act of ſharpening:
2. Anything that makes hungry, as a dram.
An ivºry table is a certain whº Dryde".
You would not think how heartly he'll cat. to mentio"
He aſſiſted at four hundred bowls of punch, not Sºut".
ſps, drams, and wheti. - effing on?
wº. adv. [ppocºen, Saxon.] A particle .Cſ. c
part of a disjunctive queſtion in oppoſition tº the
As they, ſo we have likewiſe a tºº." may be *
God both morning and eventº whether ſcrinº Hºlº
OI Il O- - ... Rhº
Reſolve whether you will or no. Shaft, Peſkiºs'
how to ſerve
*
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H I
*
WHE'ſ HER. pronoun. Which of two.
Perkins's three counſelors regiſtered themſelves ſanétuary-
men ; and whether upon pardon obtained, or continuance
within the privilege, they were not Proceeded with. Bacon.
If we adjoin to the lofás, ºft. they prevail or not, we
engulph ourſelves into aſſured danger. Hayward.
Then did'ſt thou found that order, whether love
Or victory thy royal thoughts did move,
Each was a noble cauſe. Denham.
Epicletus forbids a man, on ſuch an occaſion, to conſult
with the oracle whether he ſhould do it or no, it being neceſ.
ſary to be done. Decay of Piety.
//hether by health or fickneſs, life or death, mercy is ſtill
$ºntriving and carrying on the ſpiritual good of all who love
God. - South's Sermons.
This aſſiſtance is only offered to men, and not forced upon
them, whether they will or no. Tillotſon.
When our foreign trade exceeds our exportation of commo-
dities, our money muſt £9 ° Pay our debts, whether melted or
not. Locke.
Whether it be that the richeſt of theſe diſcoveries fall not into
the pope's hands, or for ſome other reaſon, the prince of Farneſe
will keep this ſeat from being turned up, 'till one of his own
family is in the chair. Addison on Italy.
Whither when they came, they fell at words
!ºctºr of them ſhould be the lord of lord. Hubberd's Tale.
Mºther of them twain did the will of his father ? Mat. xxi.
I/7 ether is more beneficial, that we ſhould have the ſame
yearly quantity of heat diſtributed equally, or a greater ſhare
in Summer, and in Winter a leſs 2 Bentley.
Let them take whether they will: if they deduce all animals
from fingle pairs, even to make the ſecond of a pair, is to write
after a copy. Bentley.
WHET ston E. m. ſ. [whet and /*one.J Stone on which any
thing is whetted, or rubbed to make it ſharp.
The minds of the afflićted do never think they have fully
conceived the weight or meaſure of their own wºe: they uſe
their affection as a whetſtone both to wit and memory. Hooker.
What avail'd her reſolution chaſte,
Whoſe ſobereſt looks were whet/lones to deſire? Fairfax.
Whom the whet/?one ſharps to eat,
And cry, milſtones are good meat. Ben. johnſon.
Diligence is to the underſtanding as the whet/fone to the
razor; but the will is the hand, that muſt apply the one to
the other. - South.
A whºſºme is not an inſtrument to carve with; but it
ſharpens thoſe that do. Shakeſpeare Illuſtrated.
WHETTER. m. ſ. [ from whet. 1 One"that whº Ot
ſharpens.
Love and enmity are notable whetters and quickeners of the
ſpirit of life in all animals. More.
WHEY., n.ſ. [bpoeş, Saxon; wey, Dutch.]
1. The thin or ſcrous part of milk, from which the oleoſe or
grumous part is ſeparated.
I'll make you feed on curds and whey. Shakeſpeare.
Milk is nothing but blood turned white, by being diluted
with a greater quantity of ſerum or whey in the glandules of
the breaſt. Harvey on Conſumptions.
2. It is uſed of anything white and thin.
Thoſe linnen cheeks of thine
Are counſellors to fear. What, ſoldiers whey face | Shakespeare
WHEY EY. adj. [from whey..] Partaking of whey; reſem-
WHE’y is H. }
bling whey.
Thoſe medicines, being opening and piercing, fortify the
operation of the liver, in ſending down the whery part of the
blood to the reins. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
He that quaffs
Such wheyiſh liquors, oft with cholick pangs
He'll roar. Philips.
WHICH pron. [pplc, Saxon; we', Dutch.]
1. The pronoun relative; relating to things.
The apoſtles term it the pledge of our heavenly inheritance,
ſometimes the handſel or earneſt of that which is to come.
Hocker, b. v.
Do they not blaſpheme that worthy name, by the which ye
are called? - ja. ii. 7.
In deſtructions by deluge, the remnant which hap to be re-
ſerved are ignorant. Bacon.
To which their want of judging abilities, add alſo their
want of opportunity to apply to ſuch a ſerious conſideration as
may let them into the true goodneſs and evil of things, which
are qualities which ſeldom diſplay themſelves to the firſt view.
South's Sermons.
The queen of furies by their fide is ſet,
And ſnatches from their mouths th’ untaſted meat,
%ich, if they touch, her hiſing ſnakes ſhe rears. Dryden.
did, for the good of his church, ſtay thoſe eager
- Hooker.
pleaſeth him,
affections.
Poyou hear, fir, of a battle
7.;; hears that,
**, ºn diſtinguiſh found. Shakespeare King
Had been there, whift in a filly womn.?. King Lear.
The ſoldiers ſhould have toſs'd me on their pikes,
Before I Wººd have granted to that. Shºp. H. VI
he £ºve of which, as well as ºf *hº, is whoſe ; but wº.
as derived from whij, ’i. ſcarcely uſed but in pºtty 2/8,
Of man's firſt diſobesience, and the fruit -
Of that forbidden tree, whoſe mortal taſte. Milton
4. It is ſometimes a demonſtrative: aS, -
What is the night 2
-Almoſt at odds with morning, which is whº, Shaſeſ,
5. It is ſometimes an interrogative: as, which is the man. -
Two fair twins,
The puzzled ſtrangers which is which enquire. Tickel.
Wºr * Prº* [which and ſoever.] whether on.".
the other.
J/hichſºever of theſe he takes, and how often ſoever he
3.
take which you will.
doubles it, he finds that he is not one jot nearer the end ºf
ſuch addition than at firſt ſetting out. Lºcke.
WHIFF, aſ ſchwyth, Welſh.] "A blaſt; a puff of wind.
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage ſtrikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell ſword, -
Th'unnerved father falls. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Who,
If ſome unfavºry tºff betray the crime,
Invents a quarrel ſtraight. - Dryden.
Three pipes after dinner he conſtantly ſmokes, -
And ſeaſons his whiff; with impertinent jokes. Priºr.
Nick pulled out a boatſwain's whiſtle: upon the firſt whiff
the tradeſmen came jumping in. Arbuthºr.
To WH1’f Fle. v. n. [from whiff.] To move inconſtantly,
as if driven by a puff of wind. -
Yothing is more familiar than for a whiffing fop, that has
* one grain of the ſenſe of a man of honour, to play the
hero. Z, Zºrange.
A Perſon of a whifting and unſteady turn of mind cannot
keep cloſe to a point of controverſy, but wanders from it per-
petually. // atts.
Was our reaſon given, to be thus puff'd about,
Like a dry leaf, an idle ſtraw, a feather,
The ſport of ev'ry whiffling blaſt that blows: Rºwe.
WH1'FFLER, n.ſ.. [from ºf e.]
1. One that blows ſtrongly.
The beach
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,
Whoſe ſhouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth'd ſca,
Which, like a mighty whifter 'fore the king,
Seems to prepare his way. Shakespeare Henry V.
2. One of no conſequence; one moved with a whiff or puff.
Qur fine young ladies retain in their ſervice a great number
$f ſupernumerary and inſignificant fellows, which they uſe
like whiffers, and commonly call thoeing-horns. Speciator.
Every whiffer in a laced coat, who frequents the chocolate-
houſe, ſhall talk of the conſtitution. Swift.
WHIG. m.ſ. [Woº, Saxon.] -
1. Whey.
2. The name of a faction.
The ſouthweſt counties of Scotland have ſeldom corn
enough to ſerve them round the year; and the northern parts
Producing more than they need, thoſe in the weſt come in the
Summer to buy at Leith the ſtores that come from the north ;
and from a word, whiggam, uſed in driving their horſes, all
that drove were called the whiggamors, and ſhorter the whºgs.
Now in that year before the news came down of duke Hamil
ton's defeat, the miniſters animated their people to riſe and
march to Edinburgh; and they came up marching on the head
of their pariſhes with an unheard-of fury, praying and preach-
ing all the way as they came. The marquis of Argyle and his
Pºy came and headed them, they being about fix thouſand.
This was called the whiggamor's inroad; and ever aſter that,
all that oppoſed the court came in contempt to be called
whigs: and from Scotland the word was brought into Eng-
land, where it is now one of our unhappy terms of diſ-
union. - Burmet.
Whoever has a true value for church and ſtate, ſhould avoid
the extremes of whig for the ſake of the former, and the ex-
tremes of tory on the account of the latter. Swift.
WH1'GG1sh. adj. [from whig.) Relating to the whigs.
She'll prove herſelf a tory plain,
From principles the whigs maintain;
And, to defend the whiggiſh cauſe, "...ſº
Her topicks from the tories draws. Swift.
After the ſeveral earths, conſider the parts of the ſurface of wºod sº. n: ſ [from whig.] The notions of a whig.
this globe which is barren, as ſand and rocks. Locke.
. It formerly was uſed for who, and related likewiſe to perſons:
as in the firſt words of the Lord's prayer.
The Almighty, whº giveth wiſdom to whomſoever it
I could quote paſſages from fifty pamphlets, wholly made up
of whiggi in and atheiſm. ----- S. ſt.
HILE. m / [weil, German; Pfile, Saxon.j Time ; ſpace of
time. If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H I
W H I
If my beauty be any thing, then let it obtain this much of
you, that you will remain ſome while in this company, to eaſe
vour own travel and our ſolitarineſs. Sidney.
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, and again return to bed;
et all this while in a moſt faſt ſleep. Shakºp. Macleth.
One while we thought him innocent,
And then w' accus’d the conſul. Ben. Yohº ſºn's Catiline.
I hope all ingenuous perſons will advertiſe me fairly, if they
think it worth their while, of what they diſlike in it. Digby.
Pauſing a whic, thus to herſelf ſhe mus'd, Milton.
How couldſt thou look for other, but that God ſhould con-
demn thee for the doing of thoſe things for which thine own
conſcience did condemn thee, all the while thou waſt doing of
them * Tilot, on.
That which I have all this while been endeavouring to con-
vince men to, is no other but what God himſelf doth particu-
larly recommend. Tilotſon.
Few, without the hope of another life, would think it
worth their while to live above the allurements of ſenſe. Atterb.
What fate has diſpoſed of the papers, ’tis not worth while
to tell. Locke.
W H il E.
WHILEs. {* [ppile, Saxon. Whiles is now out of uſe ]
W H II.S.T.
r. During the time that.
JWhile, I was protećtor,
Pity was all the fault that was in me. Shakespeare Henry VI.
What we have, we prize not to the worth,
JPhiles we enjoy it; but being lackt and loſt,
Why, then we rack the value. Shakeſpeare.
Repeated, while the ſedentary earth
Attains her end. Milton.
2. As long as.
Uſe your memory, and you will ſenſibly experience a gra-
dual improvement, while you take care not to over-load it.
J/atts's Logick.
3. At the ſame time that.
JPhiles by the experiment of this miniſtration they glorify
God, for your profeſſed ſubječtion unto the Goſpel. 2 Cor. ix.
Can he imagine that God ſends forth an irreſiſtible ſtrength
againſt ſome fins, whiſt in others he permits men a power of
repelling his grace Decay of Piety.
To While. v. n. [from the noun..] To loiter.
Men guilty this way never have obſerved that the whiling
time, the gathering together, and waiting a little before din-
ner, is the moſt aukwardly paſſed away of any. Spectator.
WHI’le R.E. adv. [while and ere, or before.] A little while
ago.
* That curſed wight, from whom I 'ſcap'd whilere,
A man of hell, that calls himſelf deſpair. Fairy Queen.
Let us be jocund: will you troul the catch
You taught me but while-ere? Shakeſpeare.
Here lies Hobbinol, our ſhepherd whilere. Kaleigh.
He who, with all heav'n's heraldry, whilere
Enter'd the world, now bleeds to give us eaſe. Milton.
W H iſ loxi. adv. [pplom, Saxon, that is, once on a time.] For-
merly ; once; of old
Where now the ſtudious lawyers have their bowers,
There whilon wont the Templar knights abide,
*Till they decayed through pride. - Spenſºr.
In northern clime a val’rous knight
Did whi on kill his bear in fight,
And wound a fiddler.
Yet art thou not inglorious in thy fate;
For ſo Apollo, with unweeting hand,
J/hi/m did ſlay his dearly loved mate. Milton.
WHIM. n.ſ. [This word is derived by Skinner from a thing turn-
ing round; nor can I find any etymology more probable.] A
freak ; an odd fancy; a caprice; an irregular motion of
deſire.
All the ſuperfluous whim; relate,
That fill a female gameſter's pate. Swift.
To W.H.'MPER. v. n. [wimmeren, German.] To cry without
any loud noiſe. -
he father by his authority ſhould always ſtop this ſort of
Hudibras.
crying, and ſilence their whimpering. Locke.
A laughing, toying, wheedling, whimp'ring ſhe,
Shall make him amble on a goſſip's meſſage. Rºwe.
In peals of thunder now ſhe roars, and now
r She gently whimpers like a lowing cow. Swift.
Whiºpied ad. [I ſuppoſe from whimper.] This word ſeems
to mean diſtorted with crying.
This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
This ſignior junio's giant dwarf, Dan Cupid,
Rºgent of love-rhimes, lord of folded arms,
- º h anointed ſovereign of ſighs and groans. Shakespeare.
VH1'Msey. ”ſ. [Only another form of the word whim.] A
freak; *S*Price; an odd fancy; a whim.
º this rate a pretended freak or whimſey may be pal-
Aſ the ridicul L’Eſtrange.
- ** and extravagant ſhapes that can be ima-
ºned, all the fancies and whimſies of poets and Painters, and
Egyptian idolaters, if ſo be they are conſient with life and
propagation, would be now actually in being, if our º
notion were true. Ray on the C º
So now, as health or temper changes, Wh.
In larger compaſs Ahna ranges;
This day below, the next above,
As light or ſolid whºſeys move.
What I ſpeak, my fair Cloe, and what I write
The difference there is betwixt nature and art: 2
I court others in verſe, but I love thee in pºe,
And they have my whimſies, but thou haſ mºh. Prior
Oranges in whim ey-boards went round. ' -
Prior,
ſhows
Leſs ſhould I dawb it o'er with tranſitory praiſe King.
And water-colours of theſe days; &gt;
Theſe days! where e'en th’ extravagance of poetry
Is at a loſs for figures to expreſs
Men's folly, whimſes, and inconſtancy. Swift.
WH1'Msical adj. [from whimſey.]
oddly fanciful.
Another circumſtance in which I am very particular, or, as
my neighbours call me, whimſical : as my garden invites mº
it all the birds, I do not ſuffer any one to deſtroy their neſts.
- Addiſon's Speiatr.
wº. m. ſ. ſchwyn, Welſh; geniſła ſpinºſa, Latin.] A weed;
uſ ZC.
With whins or with furzes thy hovel renew. Tſir.
Plants that have prickles in their leaf are holly, juniper,
whim-buſh, and thiſtle. '''Bºº.
To WHINE... v. n. Iranian, Saxon; weenen, Dutch; ayne,
Welſh.] To lament in low murmurs; to make a plaintive
noiſe; to moan meanly and cffeminately.
They came to the wood, where the hounds were in couples
ſtaying their coming, but with a whining accent craving li-
Freakiſh; capricious;
berty. Sianº),
At his nurſe's tears
He whin'd and roar'd away your vićtory,
That pages bluſh'd at him. Shakespeare Coriolanuſ.
Twice and once the hedge-pig whin'd. Sºakeſ. Madeth.
Whip him,
*Till, like a boy, you ſee him cringe his face,
And whine aloud for mercy. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
All the common people have a whining tone and accent in
their ſpeech, as if they did ſtill ſmart or ſuffer ſome oppreſſion.
Davies an Ireland.
Then, if we whine, look pale,
And tell our tale, -
Men are in pain
For us again;
So, neither ſpeaking, doth become * -
The lover's ſtate, nor being dumb. Sucking,
He made a viler noiſe than ſwine -
Hudibraſ.
In windy weather, when they whine. -
Some, under ſheeps cloathing, had the properties of wolves,
that is, they could whine and howl as well as bite and de-
WQur. South's Sermºni.
I was not born ſo baſe to flatter crouds,
And move your pity by a whining tale. Dryd. Don Seloft.
Laughing at their whiling may perhaps be the Prº**
thod. Lai,
Life was given for noble purpoſes; and therefore º
not be ſacrificed to a quarrel, nor whined away in love. f iter.
Upon a general mourning, mercers and wº.
would in four and twenty hours raiſe their cloths and
above a double price; and, if the mourning continued .
then whining with petitions to the court, that they *::::
to ſtarve. - - V r f
WHIN F. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Plaintive noiſe; mean 0
fected complaint. -
The º oºinion of men comes oftentimº º 2 :
demure looks and affected whines, ſet off with * od j.
tional poſtures and grimaces.
Thy hateful whine of woe . .
Breaks in uron my ſorrows, and diſtraćts
My jarring ſenſes with thy beggar's cry.
To wºn; ºn ſhini, Lat. from the ſoul".
a noiſe like a horſe or colt.
WH1'NYARD. m. ſ. ſpinnan and ane, t
Skinner. I know not whether this word wº te
ouſly, and therefore perhaps it might be dº in COſlº
tempt from whin, a tool to cut whinil A ſwoſ .
tempt.
He ſpatch'd his whinyard up, that fled Hudibrai,
When he was falling off his ſteed. . h.]
To WHIP. v. a. ſpeopan, Saxon; wippº Dutch,
1. To ſtrike with anything tough and flexible.
He took
The harneſs'd ſteeds,
'; }. Short.
*f; make
- On
honour, Sax'".
o gain fed ſeri-
5 ever ult
d in con-
that ſtill with horror ſhook,
And plies them with the laſh, and whip. 'em on: Alſº,
And, as he whips, upbraids 'em with his ſon. -
2. To ſew ſlightly. - Gaº
In i º muſin needles uſeleſs hº
3. To
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H I
º
º
. To drive with laſhes. -
This unbeard ſawcineſs, and boyiſh troops
The king doth ſmile at ; and is well prepard
To whip this dwarfiſh war, theſe pigmy arms,
From out the circle of his territories. Shakespeare King john.
Let's whip theſe ſtragglers o'er the ſeas again;
Laſh hence theſe over-weening rags of France,
Theſe famiſh'd beggars. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Since I pluckt geeſe, play’d truant, and whipt top, I knew
not what’twas to be beaten 'till lately. Shakeſpeare.
If ordered every day to whip his top, ſo long as to make
him weary, he will wiſh for his book, if you promiſe it him
as a reward of having whipt his top luſtily quite out. Locke.
4. To correct with laſhes.
I'll leave you to the hearing of the cauſe,
Hoping you'll find good cauſe to whip them all. Shakespeare.
Reaſon with the fellow,
Before you puniſh him, where he heard this,
Leſt you ſhould chance to whip your information. Shakeſ?.
Hourly we ſee ſome raw pin-feather'd thing -
Attempt to mount, and fights and heroes ſing,
Who for falſe quantities was whipt at ſchool
But tºother day, and breaking grammar-rule.
How did he return this haughty brave,
Who whipt the winds, and made the ſea his ſlave? Dryden:
This requires more than ſetting children a taſk, and whipping
them without any more ado, if it be not done to our
fancy: Locke.
Oh chain me! whip me! let me be the ſcorn
Of ſordid rabbles and inſulting crowds!
Give me but life. Smith's Phaedra and Hippol.
Heirs to titles and large eſtates have a weakneſs in their
eyes, and are not able to bear the pain and indignity of
whipping. Swift.
5. To laſh with ſarcaſm.
They would whip me with their fine wits, 'till I was as creſt
fallen as a dried pear. Shakespeare A ſerry Wives of J/indſor.
6. To inwrap.
Its ſtring hath both ends neatly lapt over with another about
three inches in length, and ſo is firmly whipt about with ſmall
gut, that it may the eaſier move in the edge of the rowler.
Moxon's Mech. Exer.
To WHIP. v. a. To take anything nimbly.
In his lawleſs fit,
Behind the arras hearing ſomething ſtir,
He whips his rapier out, and cries a rat!
And in this brainiſh apprehenſion kills
The unſeen good old man. Shakespeare Ham'et.
She in a hurry whips up her darling under her arm. L’É/fr.
Raiſe yourſelf upon your hinder legs, and then ſtretch out
your head: I can eaſily whip up to your horns, and ſo out of
3
Dryden.
the well. L’Eſtrange.
Briſk Suſan whips her linnen from the rope,
Whilſt the firſt drizzling ſhow'r is born aſlope. Swift.
Thus diſpoſed, it lies ready for you to whip it out in a mo-
ment. Swift.
To WHIP. v. m. To move nimbly.
Two friends travelling together met a bear upon the way:
the one whips up a tree, and the other throws himſelf flat upon
the ground. L'E/?range.
The ſimple 'ſquire made a ſudden ſtart to follow; but the
juſtice of the quorum whipped between. ‘l atler.
WHIP. n.ſ.. [hpeop, Saxon.] An inſtrument of correction
tough and pliant.
There ſat infernal pain,
And faſt beſide him ſat tumultuous ſtrife;
The one in hand an iron whip did ſtrain,
The other brandiſhed a bloody knife.
- Put in ev'ry honeſt hand a whip,
To laſh the raſcal naked through the world. Shakespeare Othello.
Love is merely madneſs, and deſerves as well a dark-houſe
and a whip as madmen do. Shakeſpeare.
A whip for the horſe, a bridle for the aſs. Prov. xxvi. 3.
High on her head ſhe rears two twiſted ſnakes;
Her chain ſhe rattles, and her whip ſhe Shakespeare Dryden.
In his right hand he holds the whip, with which he is ſup-
poſed to drive the horſes of the ſun. Addiſon.
Each ſtaunch polemick
Came whip and ſpur, and daſh'd thro' thin and thick, Dune.
WH1'pcoRD. m. ſ. [whip and cord.] Cord of which laſhes are
made.
In Raphael's firſt works are many ſmall foldings, often re-
peated, which look like ſo many whipcºrds. Dryden.
WH1'PGRAFTING. m. ſ. [In gardening.]
If hipgrafting is done two ways: firſt, cut off the head
of the ſtock, and ſmooth it; then cut the graft from a
knot or bud on one ſide ſloping, about an inch and a half
long, with a ſhoulder, but not deep, that it may reſt on the
top of the ſtock: the graft muſt be cut from the ſhouldering
ſmooth and even, ſloping by degrees, that the lower end be
thin : place the ſhoulder on the head of the ſtock, and mark
Fairy Queen.
W H I
the length of the cut part of the graft, and with your knife
cut away ſo much of the ſtock as the graft did cover, but not
any of the wood of the ſtock: place both together, that the
cut part of both may join, and the ſap unite the one to the
other; and bind them cloſe together, and defend them from
the rain with tempered clay or wax, as before. The other
way of whipgrafting is, where the grafts and the ſtocks are of
an equal ſize: the ſtock muſt be cut ſloping upwards from one
ſide to the other, and the graft after the ſame manner from the
ſhoulder downwards, that the graft may exactly join with the
ſtock in every part, and ſo bind, and clay or wax them as
befºre. - A1 timer's Husbandry.
WH1'PHAND. n.ſ.. [whip and hand] Advantage over.
The archangel, when diſcord was reſtive and would not be
drawn from her beloved monaſtry with fair words, has the
whi hand of her, and drags her out with many ſtripes. Dryd.
WH1'PLAs H. n.ſ. The laſh or ſmall end of a whip.
Have whiplaſh wel knotted and cartrope inough. Tuſſºr.
WH1'ppe R. m. ſ. [from whip. J One who puniſhes with
whipping.
Love is meerly a madneſs, and deſerves as well a dark-houſe
and a whip as madmen do; and the reaſon why they are not
ſo puniſhed is, that the whippers are in love too. Shakeſpeare.
WH1'PPINGPost. m. ſ. [whip and poſł.] A pillar to which
criminals are bound when they are laſhed.
Could not the whippingpoſt prevail,
With all its rhet’rick, nor the jail,
To keep from flaying ſcourge thy ſkin,
And ankle free from iron gin
WH1'PsAw. n.ſ. [whip and ſaw.]
The whipſaw is uſed by joiners to ſaw ſuch great pieces of
ſtuff that the handſaw will not eaſily reach through. Moxon.
Whi'psta FF. n.ſ. [On ſhipboard.] A piece of wood faſtened
to the helm, which the ſteerſman holds in his hand to move
the helm and turn the ſhip. Bailey.
WH1'pst ER. m. ſ. [from whip.] . A nimble fellow.
am not valiant neither;
But ev'ry puny whipſier gets my ſword.
Give that whipſter but his errand,
He takes my lord chief juſtice' warrant. Prior.
WHIPT, for whipped.
In Bridewel a number be ſtript,
Leſſe worthie than theefe to be whipt. Taſer.
To WHIRL. v. a. [hpyńpan, Saxon; wirleen, Dutch..] To
turn round rapidly.
Five moons were ſeen to-night,
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
The other four in wond’rous motion. Shakespeare K. john.
My thoughts are whirled like a potter's wheel;
I know not where I am, nor what I do. Shakespeare Henry VI.
He whirl; his ſword around without delay,
Hudibras.
Shakeſp. Othello.
And hews through adverſe foes an ample way. Dryden.
With his full force he whirl’d it firſt around;
But the ſoft yielding air receiv'd the wound. Dryden:
With what a whirling force his lance he toſs'd!
Heav'ns what a ſpring was in his arm to throw ! Dryden.
The Stygian flood,
Falling from on high, with bellowing ſound,
//hiri; the black waves and rattling ſtones around. Addison.
With impetuous motion whirl'd apace,
This magick wheel ſtill moves, yet keeps its place. Granv.
They have ever been taught by their ſenſes, that the ſun,
with all the planets and the fixed ſtars, are whirled round this
little globe. //atti’s Improvement of the Mind.
To WHIRL. v. n. To run round rapidly.
He, rapt with whirling wheels, inflames the ſkyen,
with fire not made to burn, but fairly for to ſhine. Spºſºr.
As young ſtriplings whip the top for ſport
On the ſmooth pavement of an empty court,
The wooden engine flies and whirl; about,
Admir'd with clamours of the beardleſs rout.
She what he ſwears regards no mºre
Than the deaf rocks when the loud billows r03ſ;
But whirl'd away, to ſhun his hateful fight, - 27-
Hid in the foreſt. Dryden's Án.
wild and diſtraćted with their fears,
They juſtling plunge amidſt the ſounding deeps;
The flood away, the ſtruggling ſquadron ſweeps, -
And men and arms, and horſes whirling bears. Smith.
wgirl. n.ſ. [from the verb.]. - - - -
1. Gyration; quick rotation; circular motion; rapid circum-
volution. - - -
ºf were well your judgments but in plays did range;
But ev'n your follies and debauches change
with ſuch a whirl, the poets of your agº
Aretird, and cannot ſcore them on the ſtage. Drydºn.
Wings raiſe my feet; I'm pleas'd to mount on high,
Trace all the mazes of the liquid ſky; .
Their various turnings and their whirls declare, ---
And live in the vaſt regions of the air. Creº Manilius:
Nor.
Dryden.
30 P<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H I.
W H I
Nor whirl of time, nor flight of years can waſte. Crºft.
I have been watching what thoughts came up in the whirl
of fancy, that were worth communicating. Pope.
How the car rattles, how its kindling wheels
Smoke in the whirl: the circling ſand aſcends,
And in the noble duſt the chariot's loſt.
2. Anything moved with rapid rotation.
Though in dreadful whirls we hung
High on the broken wave;
I knew thou wert not ſlow to hear,
Nor impotent to ſave. Addiſon's Speciator.
whi'RLBAT. n.ſ.. [whirl and bat J Anything moved rapidly
round to give a blow. It is frequently uſed by the poets for
the ancient ceſtus.
At whºrhat he had ſlain many, and was now himſelf ſlain
by Pollux. L'E/?range.
The whirlbat's falling blow they nimbly ſhun,
And win the race e're they begin to run. Creech's Manil.
The guardian angels of kingdoms he rejected, as Dares
did the whirlºats of Eryx, when they were thrown before him
by Entellus. Dryden.
The whirlbat and the rapid race ſhall be
Reſerv'd for Caeſar, and ordain’d by me. Dryden's Pirgil.
WH1'RLBon E. m. ſ. The patella. Ainſworth.
WH1’R LIG i G. m.ſ.. [whºrl and gig.] A toy which children
ſpin round. -
He found that marbles taught him percuſſion, and whirligigs
the axis in peritrochio. Arbuthn. and Pope's Mart. Scribl.
That ſince they gave things their beginning,
And ſet this whirligig a ſpinning. Prior.
WH1'RL PIT. }". [hpyrrpole, Saxon.] A place where the
WH1'RLPool. 9 water moves circularly, and draws whatever
comes within the circle towards its center; a vortex.
Poor Tom whom the foul fiend hath led through ford and
whirlpool, o'er bog and quagmire. Shakespeare King Lear.
In the fathomleſs profound
Down ſunk they, like a falling ſtone,
By raging whirlpits overthrown.
This calm of heaven, this mermaid's melody,
Into an unſeen whirlpool draws you faſt,
And in a moment ſinks you. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Send forth, ye wiſe ! ſend forth your lab’ring thought:
Let it return with empty notions fraught,
Of airy columns every moment broke,
Of circling whirlpools, and of ſpheres of ſmoke. Prior.
There might ariſe ſome vertiginous motions or whirlpool, in
the matter of the chaos, whereby the atoms muſt be thruſt
and crowded to the middle of thoſe whirlpools, and there con-
ſtipate one another into great ſolid bodies. Bentley.
WH1'RLwin D. m. ſ. [werbelwind, German.] A ſtormy wind
moving circularly.
In the very torrent and whirlwind of your paſſion, beget a
temperance that may give it ſmoothneſs. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
With whirlwinds from bencath ſhe toſs'd the ſhip,
And bare expos'd the boſom of the deep. Dryden's AFn.
WH1'RRING. adj. A word formed in imitation of the found
expreſſed by it.
From the brake the whirring pheaſant ſprings,
And mounts exulting on triumphant wings. Pope.
WHISK. m. ſ. ſwijchen, to wipe, German.]
1. A ſmall beſom, or bruſh.
The white of an egg, though in part tranſparent, yet,
being long agitated with a wh/k or ſpoon, loſes its tranſpa.
rency. Boyle.
If you break any china with the top of the whiſ on the
mantle-tree, gather up the fragments. Swift.
2. A part of a woman's dreſs.
An eaſy means to prevent being one farthing the worſe for
the abatement of intereſt, is wearing a lawn whiſk inſtead of
a point de Venice. Child of Trade.
To WHisk. v. a. [wiſºhen, to wipe, German.]
1. To ſweep with a ſmall beſom.
2. To move nimbly, as when one ſweeps.
Cardan believ'd great ſtates depend
Upon the tip o' th' bear's tail's end;
That as ſhe whiſk’d it tºwards the ſun,
r Stow'd mighty empires up and down. Hudibras.
WH1's KER. n.J. [from whiſk.) The hair growing on the
cheek unſhaven; the muſtachio.
A ſacrifice to fall of ſtate,
Whoſe thread of life the fatal ſiſters
Smith.
Sandys.
Did twiſt together with its whiſkers. Hudibras.
Behold four kings in majeſty rever'd,
With hoary whiſtºrs and a foſkybºard. Pope.
^ſºdded a pair of wºr, to tie face. Addiſon.
ºsºft. ** [ºfferen, Dutch..] To ſpeak with a
...” ſo as not to be heard but by the ear cloſe to the
t º: º: With fearful countenance would deſire the king
olo - to himſelf; for that all the court and city were full of
*/Piri'... and expectation of ſome ſudden change. Sidney.
All that hate me whiſper together againſt me.
In ſpeech of man, the whiſpering or ſuſurrus, wh
louder or foſter, is an interiour ſound; but the fºliº ther
an exteriour ſound, and therefore you can never º Out is
nor ſing in whiſpering ; but in ſpeech you may. .
The king Aceſtis calls; acºn,
Then foſtly whiper'd in her faithful ear,
And bade his daughters at the rites appear. P
Pſ xli. 7,
It is as offenſive to ſpeak wit in a foopsco 4.
would be ill manners to whiſper in it: he is i. tº:
becauſe he is ignorant of what is ſaid. P.
He comes and whiſpers in his ear. S ºpe.
The hollow why?'ring breeze, the pliant fills wift.
Purle down amid’ the twiſted roots. Th
To WH1' PER. v. a. omſºn.
1. To addreſs in a low voice.
When they talk of him they ſhake their heads
And whiſper one another in the ear. Shakespeare Kºja
Give ſorrow words; the grief that does not ſpeak ºn.
I/hiſprs the o'erfraught heart, and bids it break. Swift
He firſt whiffer, the man in the ear, that ſuch aman mº
think ſuch a card. Bacon's Natural i.
The ſteward whiſpered the young Templer, thiſ. *
my knowledge. Tailºr
2. To utter in a low voice. -
You have heard of the news abroad, I mean the whiffer'ſ
ones; for they are yet but ear-kiffing arguments. Sºft.
They might buzz and whiſper it one to another, and ºil.
ly withdrawing from the apoſtles, noiſe it about the city, bent.
3. To prompt ſecretly. -
Charles the emperor,
Under pretence to ſee the queen his aunt,
For 'twas indeed his colour, but he came
To whiſper Wolſey, here makes viſitation. Shah. H. VIII.
WH1's PER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A low ſoft voice.
The extenſion is more in tones thin in ſpeech; therefore
the inward voice or whiſper cannot give a tone. Bacºn.
Strictly obſerve the firſt hints and whiſpers of good and evil
that paſs in the heart, and this will keep co-ſcience quick and
vigilant. South.
Soft whiſpers through th'aſſembly went. Dryden.
He uncall'd, his patron to controul,
Divulg'd the ſecret whiſpers of his ſoul. Dryden. .
WH1'sper ER. n.ſ.. [from whiſper.]
1. One that ſpeaks low.
2. A private talker.
Kings truſt in eunuchs hath rather been as to gºodſpils and
good whiſperers than good magiſtrates. Bacon.
Whist. [This word is called by Skinner, who ſeldom errs, an
interjećtion commanding ſilence, and ſo it is commonly uſed;
but Shakeſpeare uſes it as a verb, and 41ilton as an adjeclive.]
I. Are ſilent.
Come unto theſe yellow ſands,
And then take hands;
Curt'ſied when you have, and kiſt,
The wild waves why?.
2. Still; ſilent.
The winds, with wonder whiff,
Smoothly the waters kiſs'd,
Whiſpering new joys to the mild ocean.
3. Be ſtill. -
WHIST. n.ſ. A game at cards, requiring cloſe attention and
ſilence. wift
The clergyman uſed to play at whift and ſwobbers. Swift.
//hi/? awhile
Walks his grave round, beneath a cloud of ſmºkº
Wreath'd fragrant from the pipe. Thomſºn'ſ Alum.
To WHISTLE. v. n. [hpºrtlan, Saxon; fluk, Latº |
1. To form a kind of muſical ſound by an inarticulate modulº
tion of the breath.
I've watch'd and travell'd hard:
Shakespeare Timpſ.
Miltºn.
Some time I ſhall ſleep out, the reſt I'll whº Slaiſ,
His big manly voice -
Changing again toward childiſh treble pipes, Shaftart.
He whiſtles in his ſound.
Let * whiffle at the one end of a trunk, and *.
ear at the other, and the ſound ſhall ſtrike ſº '.
ſcarce endure it. Bacon'; Natural Hy!").
While the plowman near at hand -
I/hiſtles o'er the furrow'd land. Milton
Should Bertran ſound his trumpets,
And Torriſmond but whiſtle through his firgº, iſ ſºar.
He draws his army off. Dryden's Span Drydºn.
He whi/I'd as he went for want of thought.
The ploughman leaves the taſk of day, Gay.
And trudging homeward whiſtle on the ".
2. To make a found with a ſmall wind inſtrum"
3. To ſound ſhrill.
Soft whiſpers run along the leaſy Wºod; d
And mountains whiffle to the murmfl"; B. OdS.
Dryden.
Raº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H I
Rhetus from the hearth a burning brand
Selects, and whirling waves; 'till from his hand
The fire took flame, then daſh'd it from the right
On fair Charaxus' temples, near the fight
Then whiſtling paſt came on.
Dryden.
When winged deaths in whijiling arrows fly,
Wilt thou, though wounded, yet undaunted ſtay,
Perform thy part, and ſhare the dangerous day : Prior.
The wild winds whiſtle, and the billows roar,
The ſplitting raft the furious tempeſt tore. Pope.
To WHistle. v. a. To call by a whiſtle,
//hi/ile them backwards and forwards, ’till he is weary.
Soºth's Sermons.
He chanced to miſs his dog: we ſtood ſtill 'till he had
whiled him up. - Addiſon.
When ſimple pride for flatt'ry makes demands,
May dunce by dunce be whi/lled off my hands !
WH.’s TL E. m. ſ. ſhpirtle, Saxon.]
1. Sound made by the modulation of the breath in the mouth.
My fire in caves conſtrains the wind,
Can with a breath their clam’rous rage appeaſe;
They fear his whiſtle, and forſake the ſeas.
2. A ſound made by a ſmall wind inſtrument.
3. The mouth ; the organ of whiſtling.
Let's drink the other cup to wet our whiſtles, and ſo ſing
away all ſad thoughts. //alton's Angler.
4. A ſmall wind inſtrument.
The maſters and pilots were ſo aſtoniſhed that they knew
not how to direct; and if they knew, they could ſcarcely,
when they directed, hear their own whiſ.e.
Behold, -
Upon the hempen tackle ſhipboys climbing;
Hear the ſhrill whiffle, which doth order give
To founds confus’d. Shakespeare Henry V.
Small whiffle, or ſhepherds oaten pipes, give a ſound, be-
cauſe of their extreme ſlenderneſs, whereby the air is more
pent than in a wider pipe. Bacon's Natural Hylory.
Her infant grandame's whiffle next it grew,
The bells ſhe ging!'d, and the whiſtle blew.
5. The noiſe of winds.
6. A call, ſuch as ſportſmen uſe to their dogs.
Madam, here comes my lord.
—I have been worth the whiſtle.
The knight, purſuing this epiſtle, .
Believ'd he'd brought her to his whiſtle. Hudibras.
WH1's TLER. n.ſ.. [from whiſtle..] One who whiſtles.
The prize was a guinea to be conferred upon the ableſt
whiffler, who could whiſtle cleareſt, and go through his tune
without laughing. Addiſon.
WHIT. n. ſ. ſpiht, a thing; apıht, any thing, Saxon.] A
point; a jot.
We love, and are no whit regarded.
Pºpe.
Dryden.
Sidney.
Pope.
Shakeſp. King Lear.
Sidney.
The motive cauſe of doing it is not in ourſelves, but car- -
rieth us as if the wind ſhould drive a feather in the air; we no
whit furthering that whereby we are driven. Hooker.
Her ſacred book with bloodywrit,
That none could read, except ſhe did him teach;
She unto him diſcloſed every whit,
And heavenly documents thereout did preach. Fairy Queen.
Although the lord became the king's tenant, his country
was no whit reformed thereby, but remained in the former
barbariſm. Davies on Ireland.
Nature's full bleſfings would be well diſpens'd
In unſuperfluous, even proportion,
And ſhe no whit encumber'd with her flore. Milton.
In account of ancient times it ought to ſatisfy any enquirer,
if they can be brought any whit near one another. Tillotſon.
It is every whit as honourable to aſſiſt a good miniſter, as
to oppoſe a bad one. Addiſon's Foreholder, Nº. 48.
WHITE. adj. [hprt, Saxon; wit, Dutch.] -
1. Having ſuch an appearance as ariſes from the mixture of all
colours; ſnowy.
When the paper was held nearer to any colour than to the
reſt, it appeared of that colour to which it approached neareſt;
but when it was equally, or almoſt equally diſtant from all
the colours, ſo that it might be equally illuminated by them
all, it appeared white. Newton's Opticks,
Why round our coaches crowd the white-glov'd º:
ope.
Ulyſſes cut a piece from the chine of the white-tooth'd
boar, round which there was much fat. Broome.
2. Having the colour of fear; pale.
My hand will
That multitudinous ſea incarnadine,
Making the green one red.
—My hands are of your colour, but I ſhame
To wear a heart ſo white. Shakeſ, Macbeth.
3. Having the colour appropriated to happineſs and innocence.
Welcome, pure-ey’d faith, white-handed hope;
Thou hovering angel girt with golden wings,
And thou unblemiſh'd form of chaſtity.
Milton.
W H I
Wert thou that ſweet-ſmiling youth :
Or that crown'd matron, ſage, white-robed truth Milton,
Let this auſpicious morning be expreſt
With a white ſtone, diſtinguiſh'd from the reſt;
J/hite as thy fame, and as thy honour clear,
And let new joys attend on thy new-added year. Dryd
To feaſtful mirth be this white hour º, ryden.
And ſweet diſcourſe, the banquet of the mind. Pope.
A º er º world her olive-wand extend,
**-rob’d innocence from heay'
4. Grey with age. • rom heav'n deſcend. Pº.
| call you ſervile miniſters
That have with two pernicious ău
Your high-engender'd ba
So old and white as this. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
So minutes, hours, and days, weeks, months and years
Paſt over, to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
ghters join'd,
ttles 'gainſt a head
5. Pure; unblemiſhed. Shakeſpeare.
Unhappy Dryden in all Charles's days,
Roſcºmmon only boaſts unſpotted lays:
And in our own, excuſe ſome courtly ſtains,
No whiter Page than Addiſon's remains. Pope.
WHITE, n.ſ.
1. Whiteneſs; any thing white; white colour.
A friend coming to viſit me, I ſtopp'd him at the door
and before I told him what the colours were, or what I wº
doing, I aſked him which of the two whicſ wer. the beſt,
and wherein they differed and after he had at that diſtance
view'd them well, he anſwer'd, that they were both good
whites, and that he could not ſay which was beſt, nor wherein
their colours differ'd. Newton's Opticks.
My Nan ſhall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.
2. The mark at which an arrow is ſhot.
If a mark be ſet up for an archer at a great diſtance, let
him aim as exactly as he can, the leaſt wind ſhali ſãº his
arrow, and divert it from the white.
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
Remove him then, and all your plots fly ſure
Point blank, and level to the very white
Of your deſigns. Southern.
3. The albugineous part of eggs.
I'll fetch ſome flax and whi.e., of eggs -
Tº apply to's bleeding face. Shake?care.
The ſtrongeſt repellents are the whites of new jaij eggs
beaten to a froth, with alum. Jºſeman's Surgery.
, What principle manages the white and yoſk of an egg into
ſuch a variety of textures, as is requiſite to faſhion a
chick 2 Boyle.
The two in moſt regions repreſent the yolk and the mém.
brane that lies next above it; ſo the exterior region of the
earth is as the ſhell of the egg, and the abyſs under it as the
white that lies under the ſhell.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
4. The white part of the eye. -
Our general himſelf
Sanétifies himſelf with's hands,
And turns up the white o' th' eye to his diſcourſe. Shakespeare
The horny or pellucid coat of the eye, doth not lie in
the ſame ſuperficies with the white of the eye, but riſeth up
as a hillock, above its convexity. Ray.
To WHITE. v. a. [from the adjective.] To make white; to
dealbate.
His raiment became ſhining, exceeding white as ſnow; ſo
as no fuller on earth can white them. Mar. ix. 3.
Like unto whited ſepulchres, which appear beautiful out-
ward, but are within full of dead men's bones. Matt. xxiii.
WHITELE'AD. m. ſ.
White lead is made by taking ſheet-lead, and having cut it
into long and narrow ſlips, they make it up into rolls, but
ſo that a ſmall diſtance may remain between every ſpiral re-
volution. Theſe rolls are put into earthen pots, ſo ordered
that the lead may not ſink down above half way, or ſome
ſmall matter more in them: theſe pots have each of them
very ſharp vinegar in the bottom, ſo full as almoſt to touch
the lead. When the vinegar and lead have both been put
into the pot, it is covered up cloſe, and ſo left for d certain
time; in which ſpace the corroſive fumes of the vinegar will
reduce the ſurface of the lead into a more white coal, which
they ſeparate by knocking it with a hammer. There are two
ſorts of this ſold at the colour ſhops, the one called ceruſe,
which is the moſt pure part, and the other is called white
lead. - Quincy.
WH1’TELY. adj. [from white.] Coming near to white.
A white y wanton, with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls ſtuck in her face for cyes. Shakespeare
Now, governor, I ſee I muſt bluſh
Quite through this vaii of night a whitely ſhame,
To think I could deſign to make thoſe free,
Who were by nature ſlaves. Szuthern's Orocnoko.
WHITE-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H I
W H O
warrrmeat. n.ſ. [white and meat...] Foºd made of milk.
Much ſaltneſs in whitemeat is ill for the ſtone. Tuffer.
The Iriſh baniſhed into the mountains, lived only upon
whitemeat;.
Speºſer.
To WHI’re N. v. 6. [from white.] To make white. -
The ſmoke of ſulphur will not black a paper, and is com-
monly uſed by women to whiten tiffanies. - - Brown.
Fáx, the ſoil and climate are proper for whitening, by the
frequency of brooks, and alſo of winds. Temple.
Women of my complexion ought to be more modeſt,
eſpecially ſince our faces debar us from all artificial whitºn-
ings. Guardian, N°. 61.
Striking her cliff, the ſtorm confirms her pow'r,
The waves but whiten her triumphant ſhore.
Whether the darken'd room to muſe invite,
Or whiten’d wall provoke the ſkew'r to write;
In durance, exile, Bedlam, or the mint,
Like Lee or Budgell, I will rhyme and print.
To WHI’t EN. v. n. To grow white.
The bark cxpects its freight;
The looſen'd canvas trembles with the wind,
And the ſea whitems with auſpicious gales. Smith.
Whi^TENER. n.ſ. [from whiten.] One who makes anything white.
WH1'TEN Ess. n.ſ. [from white.]
1. The ſtate of being white ; freedom from colour.
This doth lead me to her hand,
Of my firſt love the fatal band,
Where whiteneſ; doth for ever fit;
Nature herſelf enamell'd it. Sidney, b. ii.
J/hitereſs is a mean between all colours, having diſpoſed
itſelf indifferently to them all, ſo as with equal facility to
be tinged with any of them. Newton's Opticks.
2. Paleneſs.
Thou trembleſt, and the whiteneſ of thy check,
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand. Shakeſpeare.
3. Purity; cleanneſs.
The leaſt ſpot is viſible on ermine; but to preſerve this
whiteneſs in its original purity, you have, like that ermine,
fortaken the common track of buſineſs, which is not always
ckean. Dryden.
WH1'ſ LPot. n.ſ. A kind of food.
Cornwall ſquab-pye, and Devon whitepot brings. King.
WHITEs. n.ſ. [jiaor albus.] It ariſes from a laxneſs of the
glands of the uterus, and a cold pituitous blood. &amp;incy.
WH1'ſ F THo’RN. m. ſ. A ſpecies of thorn.
As little as a whitethorn and a pear-tree ſeem of kin, a cion
of the latter will ſometimes proſper well, being grafted upon
a ſtock of the former. Boyle.
WH1't EwAs H. n.ſ. [white and waſh..] A waſh to make the
ſkin ſeen fair.
The clergy, during Cromwell's uſurpation, were very
much taken up in reforming the female world; I have heard
a whole ſcrmon againſt a whitewaſh. Addiſon.
WHITE win E. m. ſ. [white and wine.] A ſpecies of wine pro-
duced from the white grapes.
The ſeeds and roots are to be cut, beaten, and infuſed in
whitewine. //ſeman's Surgery.
WH1'THER. adv. [hryben, Saxon.] -
1. To what place interrogatively.
Siſter, well met; whither away ſo faſt?—
—No farther than the Tower. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The common people ſwarm like ſummer flies;
Prior.
Pope.
And whither fly the gnats, but to the ſun ? Shakeſpeare.
Ah! whither am I hurry'd ah! forgive,
Ye ſhades, and let your ſiſter's iſſue live. Dryden.
2. To what place : Abſolutely.
I ſtray'd I knew not whither. Milton.
3. To which place; relatively.
Hºhither, when as they came, they fell at words,
Whether of them ſhould be the lord of lords. Spenſer.
At Canterbury, whither ſome voice was run on before, the
mayºr ſeized on them, as they were taking freſh horſes. Iſºtton.
That lord advanced to Wincheſter, whither Sir John Berk-
ley brought him two regiments more of foot. Clarendon.
4. To what degree : Obſolete; perhaps never in uſe.
{{ºther at length wilt thou abuſe our patience
Still ſhall thy fury mock us? B. Johnſºn.
wºrvº. adv. [whither and ſever.] To whatſoever
place.
For whatever end faith is deſigned, and whitherſever the
nature and intention of the grace does drive us, thither we
w". go, and to that end we muſt direct all our actions. Taylºr.
IT IN G. m. ſ. ſºviţţi - - -
I. A ſmall º faitº, Dutch; allurnus, Lat.]
Some fiſh are gutted, ſplit,
and mackerel. and kept in pickle, as whiting
- Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
º lºº fibres of fiſhes are more tender than thoſe of
*! animals, and their whole ſubſtance more watery.
****, as whitings, can be inj.
water y
2. A ſoft chalk. [from white.] Arbuthnot on Aliments.
That this impregnated liquor may be improved, they pour
it upon whiting, which is a white chalk, or
dered, cleanſed, and made up into ball. clay finely pºw-
When you clean your plate, leave the ºil; Boyle.
be ſeen in all the chinks. » “ſiting *:::
WH1’rish. m. ſ. [from white.] Somewhat white. wift.
The ſame aqua-fortis, that will quickly chan
of red lead into a darkercolour, will, º . º
produce a whitiſh ſubſtance, as with copper it did º
WH1'Tish N Ess. n. J. [from whitiſh..] The quality º
ſomewhat white. sing
Take good venereal vitriol of a deep blue, and Compare
t
with ſome of the cntire cryſtals, purpoſely reſºr.
the ſubtile powder of the ſº º Wºº. of
conſiderable degree of whitiſhnſ. oyle on C
r -, 1. r ºlouri.
WH1't LEATHER. m. ſ. [white and lather.] Leatherd ſ
with alum, remarkable for toughneſs. reſſed
Whole bridle and ſaddle, whitlether and nal,
With collars and harneis. Tuſ,’ º
He bor'd the nerves through, from the § º:
and then knit t;
Both to his chariot, with a thong of whitkather.
Nor do I care much, if her pretty ſnout
Meet with her furrow'd chin, and both together
Hem in her lips, as dry as good whitlatºr.
WH1'TLow. n.ſ. [pyrº, Saxon, and *p, a wolf. Sºm.
pprº, Saxon, and lºw, a flame. M. Lye.j A ſwelling betwº
the cuticle and cutis, called the mild whitlow, or betwº the
perioſteum and the bone, called the malignant whitlow.
Paronychia is a ſmall ſwelling about the nails and end, of the
fingers, by the vulgar people generally called whiffaw. Iſſam.
WHITsou R. m. ſ. A kind of apple. See Apple.
WH1'rst ER, or whiter. n. / [from white.] A whitener.
Carry it among the whiſlers in Datchet mead. Shakespeare.
WH1'Tsul. n.ſ. A provincial word.
Their meat was whitſul, as they call it, namely, milk, ſour
milk, cheeſe, curds, butter. Carew,
WH1’TsUNTIDE. n.ſ. [white and Sunday; becauſe the con-
verts newly baptized, appeared from Eaſter to Whitſuntide in
white. Skinner.] The feaſt of Pentecoſt.
Strephon, with leafy twigs of laurel tree,
A garland made on temples for to wear;
For he then choſen was the dignity
Of village lord that I/hi/ontide to bear. Sidney.
This they employ in brewing and baking againſt Whit-
fºntide. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwall,
And let us do it with no ſhew of fear;
Nor with no more than if we heard that England
Were bufied with a Phitſºn morrice dance. Shakeſheart.
WH1’rt ENTREE. m. ſ. A ſort of tree. Ainſwºrth,
WHITTLE, n.ſ.. [hpy-el, Saxon.]
1. A white dreſs for a woman. Not in uſe.
2. [prytel, Saxon.] A knife.
There's not a whittle in th' unruly camp,
But I do prize it at my love, before
The reverend'ſt throat in Athens.
A dagger hanging at his belt he had,
Made of an antient ſword's well-temper'd blade; ...
He wore a Sheffield whittle in his hoſe. Betteriº Mir.
To Whi’ttle. v.a. [from the noun..] To cut with a knife;
to edge; to ſharpen. Not in uſe. |
When they are come to that once, and are tº:
whittled, then ſhall you have them caſt their wº." º
upon men's wives. Hºrwill on Prºvident.
To"whiz. v. n. [from the ſound that it expreſs.] To make
a loud humming noiſe. / he ai
The exhalations, whizzing in the air. . . -
Give ſo much light, that I may read by them. Shaiſtart.
Turn him about,
I know him, he'll but whiz, and ſtrait gº out.
Soon all with vigour bend their truſty bows,
And from the quiver each his arrow choſe:
Hippocoon's was the firſt ; with forceful ſway
It flew, and whizzing cut the liquid way.
Who. pronoun. [hpa, Saxon; wie, Dutch..]
1. A pronoun relative, applied to perſons,
We have no perfect deſcription of it, no. "
how, or by whom it is inhabited.
Oft have I ſeen a timely-parted ghoſ, odleſs
Of aſhy ſemblance, meagre, pale, and bloodleś,
Being all deſcended to the lab’ring heart, h
7th, in the conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the ſame for aidance 'gainſt the º: t
Were the grac'd perſon of our Banquop" enty
I/hom I may rather challenge for wººl, Malah
Than pity for miſchance. Shakºp.
The ſon of Duncan,
From whºm this tyrant holds the due of
Lives in the Engliſh court. -
A man can never be obliged to ſubmit º 4.
leſs he can be ſatisfied, who is the Perſon “” Like
exerciſe it.
a We
Chapman,
Suck ling.
Shahjaw.
Dryden,
Dryden.
knowledge
Abbºt.
Shał4.ſº.
irth,
ººff. Malth
8
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H O
Tell who loves who ;
And who is jilted.
We are ſtilſ as much at a loſs, who civil power
what favours ſome partake,
Dryden.
belongs
Locke.
* *, who ſhould ſay,
but I ſhall conquer
Collier againſ. Deſpair.
** well as of who, and is ap-
you are ſomewhat troubleſome now,
you.
3. Wººſe is the genitive of which,
plied to things.
Whoſe ſoever fins ye remit, they are remitted; and whoſe
ſoever ſins ye retain, they are retained. John xx. 23.
The queſtion whoſe ſolution I require,
Is what the ſex of women moſt deſire. Dryden,
Is there any other "ºrine, whºſe followersare puniſhed Addison
4. It has ſometimes a disjunctive ſenſe.
There thou tell'ſ of kings, and who aſpire;
Who fall, who riſe, who triumphs, who do moan.
Whoeve R. pronoun. [who and *] Any one, without limi-
tation or exception. -
Whoever doth to temperance apply
His ſtedfaſt life, and all his act. frame,
Truſt me, ſhall find no greater enemy,
Than ſtubborn perturbation to the ſame. Fairy Queen.
I think myſelf beholden, ºft. thews me my miſtakes.I.,
Whoe'er thou art, that fortune brings to keep
The rights of Neptune, monarch of the deep;
Thee firſt it fits, Ó tranger, to prepare
The due libation, and the film, prayer. Pope.
JWhoever is really brave, has always this comfort when he
is oppreſs'd, that he knows himſelf to be ſuperior to thoſe
who injure him, by forgiving it.
WHQLE. adj. [pals, Saxon; heal, Dutch.]
I. All; total; containing all.
Burn the whole ram upon the altar. Ex. xxix. 18.
All the whole army ſtood agaz'd at him. Shakeſpeare.
Fierce extremes,
Contiguous might diſemper the whole frame. Milton.
2. Uninjured; unimpaired.
Anguiſh is come upon me, becauſe my life is yet whole in
ne. 2 Sa. i. 9.
3. Well of any hurt or ſickneſs.
When they had done circumciſing all the people, they abode
in the camp, till they were whole. joſ v. 8.
WHole. n.). The totality; no Part omitted; the complex of
all the parts.
Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the
whole of man. Eccleſio/les.
Begin with ſenſe, of ev'ry art the ſoul;
Parts anſwering parts, ſhalíſide into a nº. Pope.
It contained the whole of religion amongſt the antients;
and made philoſophy more agreeable. Broome.
There is a metaphyſical whole, when the effºnce of a thing
is ſaid to conſiſt of two parts, the genus and the difference,
i. e. the general and the ſpecial nature, which, being joined
together, make up a definition. //atts's Logick.
WHo Les ALE. n.ſ.. [whole and Jak.] Sale in the lump, not in
ſeparate ſmall parcels.
Theſe are wholeſale chapmen to Satan, that do not truck
and barter one crime for another, but take the whole
herd. Gºvernment of the Tongue.
This coſt me at the wholeſale merchant's a hundré drachma's;
I make two hundred by ſelling it in retail. Addiſon.
Some from vanity, or envy, deſpiſe a valuable book, and
throw contempt upon it by wholeſale. Iłatts.
Who'lesome. adj. [*}” Putch ; heyſam, Teutonick,
both from pael, Saxon, health.]
I. Sound. Contrary to unfound in doctrine.
They ſuffer us to famiſh, repeal daily any wholeſome ad
eſtabliſhed againſt the rich, and provide more piercing ſtatutes
to chain up the poor. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
* I'is no leſs
To govern juſtly, make your empire flouriſh,
With who eſome laws, in riches, peace, and plenty;
Than, by the expence of wealth and blood, to make
New acquiſitions. Denham's Sºphy.
So the doctrine contain'd be but wholeſºme and edifying, a
Wººt of exactneſs in ſpeaking may be overlook'd. Alterbury.
2. Contributing to health.
ight not now, as ere man fell,
7%lſome and cool and mild ; but with black air -
{\ºmpany'd, with damps and dreadful gloom. Miltºn.
Beſides the *ſºme luxury which that place abounds with,
a kitchen garden is a moré Pleaſant ſight than the fineſt
orangery. Addison.
She held it wholeſºmer by much, -
To reſt a little on the couch. Prior.
3. Preſerving; ſalutary. Obſolete.
The Lord helpeth his anointed, and will hear him from
his holy heaven; even with the whºſome ſtrength of his
right hand. Pſalm xx. 6.
8
W H O
4. Kindly; pleaſing. A burleſque uſe.
Cannot make you a wholeſºme anſwer ; my wit’s diſs
eaſed. Shakespeare Hamlet,
To wail friends loſt, %. Hamle
Is not by much ſo *ſºme, profitable,
wº. at friends but newly found. Shakeſpeare.
El Y. adv. fr holeſºme. iouſly falº-
tiferouſly. 40. Lírom who ºſome.] Salubriouſly ; ſalu
ºtºsom RNess. m. / [from wholeſºme.]
1. Quality of conducing to health ; ſilubri. - -
We made a ſtandard of the healthfulneſs of the air, from
the proportion of *ute and epidemical diſeaſes, and of the
rom that of the chronical. Graunt.
- - - ewed us a great fountain of water, that
is in great eſteem for its wholeſºmeraſ;
- 3 weighing two ounces
tº a Pound leſs than the ſame *auſe of the lake water. Addison
2. Salutarineſs; conduciveneſs to good.
WHo'lly. a.o. [from whole.]
1. Completely; perfectly.
The thruſt was ſo trong, that he could not ſo wholy beat
it away, but that it met with his thigh, through which it
ran. Sidney, b. ii.
Nor wholl, loſt we ſo deſerv'd a prey;
For ſtorms rePenting part of it reſtor'd.
Thus equal deaths are deal with equal chance;
By turns they quit their ground, by turns advancé:
Victors, and vanquiſh'd in the various field,
Nor wholly overcome, nor wholy yield. Dryden.
his ſtory was written before Boccace; but its author being
*!y loſt, Chaucer is now become an original. Dryden.
They employ'd themſelves *lly in dºmeſtick life, and
Provided a woman could keep her houſe in order, ſhe never
troubled herſelf about regulating the commonwealth. Addison.
2. Totally; in all the parts or kinds.
etals are wholly ſubterrany.
WHoM. the accuſatiſe of whº, ſingular and plural.
There be men in the world, whom you had rather have
your ſon be with five hundred Pounds, than ſome other with
five thouſands. Locke on Education.
Hºsºkºv ER. pron. [who andſºever.] Any without exception.
With whomſºever thou findeſt thy goods, let him not
live. Gen. xxxi. 32.
Nature has beſtowed mines on ſeveral parts; but their
riches are only for the induſtrious and frugal. //homſºever
elſe they viſit, 'tis with the diligent and ſober only they
ſtay. Locke.
WHgo'BUB. n.ſ. Hubbub. See HUBBub.
In this time of |ºthargy, I pick'd and cut moſt of their
feſtival purſes: and had not the old man come in with a
whoebub againſt his daughter, and ſcar'd my choughs from
º: Shºt, I had not left a purſe in the whoſ. army. Shakeſp.
WHOOP. m.ſ. (See hoop.]
I. A ſhout of purſuit. -
Let them breathe a-while, and then
Cry whoop, and ſet them on again. Hudibras.
A fox croſſing the road, drew off a conſiderable detachment,
who clapp'd ſpurs to their horſes, and purſued him with
whoops and hallows. - Addison.
2. [Upupa, Latin.] A bird. Dić7.
To WHoop. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſhout with malig-
nity.
ty Treaſon and murder ever kept together,
As two yoke devils ſworn to either's purpoſe:
Working ſo groſly in a natºral cauſe, .
Dryden.
Bacon.
That admiration did not whoop at them. Shakeſpeare.
To WHoop. v. a. To inſult with ſhout.
While he truſts me, ’twere ſo baſe a part
To fawn, and yet betray ; I ſhou'd be hiſs'd
And whoop'd in hell for that ingratitude. Dryden.
WHORE. n.). [hon, Saxon; hoere, Dutch.] -
I. A woman who converſes unlawfully with men; a fornica-
treſs; an adultreſs; a ſtrumpet.
To put out the word where, thou doſt me wo,
Throughout my book; troth, Put out wonan too. B. jºhnſ.
2. A proſtitute; a woman who receives men for money.
Orontes
Conveys his wealth to Tiber's hungry ſhores,
And fattens Italy with foreign whore. Dryden.
We weary'd ſhould lie down in death:
This cheat of life would take no more;
If you thought fame but empty breath; -
Your Phyllis but a perjur’d whore. Prior.
To WHoRE. v. n. (from the noun..] To converſe unlawfully
with the other ſex.
'Tis a noble general's prudent part,
To cheriſh valour, and reward deſert:
Let him be daub'd with lace, live high, and whore;
Sometimes be louſy, but be never poor. - Dryden.
To WHO'RE. v. a. To corrupt with regard to chaſtity.
Who'RE Dom. n.ſ.. [from whore.] Fornication. -
Some let go whoredom as an indifferent matter, which *:
ſtrive for an holy-day, as for their life. Hall.
30 Q. Nor<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W H Y
W I C
Nor can that perſon who account; it his recreation to ſee
one man wallowing in his filthy revels, and another infamous
by his ſenſuality, be ſo impudent as to allege, that all the
..o.ous draughts of the one can leave the leaſt reliſh upon
the tip of hist ngue; or that all the fornications and whore-
dº ºf the other can quench his own luſt. South's Sermons.
wº, sº a sºrt R. l. n. ſ. [whore and maſter or monger.] Qne
Wº: who keeps whores, or converſes with a
ºrnicatreſs.
tº: is a whor, moſłer, fool? a fool in good cloaths and
foºething like thee. Shakeſpeare.
As if we were drunkards, by a planetary influence; an ad-
niable evaſion of whº remaſter man, to lay his goatiſh diſpo-
ſition on the change of a ſtar. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Art thou fully perſuaded that no wharemonger nor adulter-
cr ſhall have any inheritance in the kingdom of God? and doſt
thou continue to practiſe theſe vices: Tillotſon's Sermons.
A rank notorious whoremaſter, to chooſe,
To thruſt his neck into the marriage nooſe. Dryden.
If he were jealous, he might clip his wife's wings; but
what would this avail, when there were flocks of whorema-
ſler; perpetually hovering over his houſe. Addison's Guardian.
Who'Resos. n.ſ.. [whore and ſon.) A baſtard. It is gene-
rally uſed in a ludicrous diſlike.
//h.reſºn, mad compound of majeſty, thou art welcome.
- Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Thou where on Zed thou unneceſſary letter. Shakespeare.
How now, you whºrſºn peaſant,
Where have you been theſe two days loitering : Shakeſp.
Frog was a cunning, ſly whoreſon, quite the reverſe of John.
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Who'R is H. adj. [from whore.] Unchaſt; incontinent.
You, like a letcher, out of whoriſh loins
, Breed out your inheritors. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
By means of a whoriſh woman a man is brought to a piece
of bread. Prov. vi. 26.
WHo RTLEBERRY. m.ſ. [peontbenian, Saxon.] Bilberry. A
lant.
P The flower conſiſts of one leaf, ſhaped like a pitcher; from
whoſe empalement ariſes the pointal, fixed like a nail in the
upper part of the flower, which becomes a ſoft umbilicated
fruit or berry full of juice, in which are incloſed ſeeds, for the
moſt part ſmall. Miller.
WHose. m.ſ.
1. Genitive of who.
- Though I could
With barefac’d power ſweep him from my fight,
And bid my will avouch it, yet I muſt not;
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
l/hºſe loves I may not drop. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. Genitive of which.
Thy name afrights me, in whºſe ſound is death. Shakeſp.
Thoſe darts whoſe points make gods adore
His might, and deprecate his power. Prior.
Who so. pronoun. [who and ſever.] Any, without re-
WHosoe'v ER. W. ſtrićtion.
Jºoſ, is out of hope to attain to another's virtue, will ſeek
to come at even hand, by depreſſing another's fortune. Bacon.
Let there be perſons licenſed to lend upon uſury; let the
rate be ſomewhat more eaſy for the merchant than that he for-
merly payed; for all borrowers ſhall have ſome eaſe, be he
merchant or whºſºever. Bacon.
He inclos'd
Knowledge of good, and evil, in this tree,
That whoſo eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wiſdom. Miltºn's Paradiſe Loft.
Whoſoever hath Chriſt for his friend, ſhall be ſure of coun-
ſel, and whºſoever is his own friend will be ſure to obey it.
- South's Sermons.
WHURT. m. ſ. A whortleberry; a bilberry.
For fruits, both wild, as wharts, ſtrawberries, pears and
plums, though the meaner ſort come ſhort, the gentlemen
_ftep not far behind thoſe of other parts. Carew.
WHY. adv. [pp., Fonppi, Saxon ]
1. For what reaſon : , Interrogatively.
They both deal juſtly with you; why? not from any regard
they have for juſtice, but becauſe their fortune depends on their
credit. Swift.
2. For which reaſon. Relatively.
Mortar will not have attained its utmoſt compačtneſs till
fourſcore years after it has been cmployed ; and this is one rea-
ton why, in demoliſhing ancient fabricks, it is more eaſy to
break the ſtone than the mortar.
Boyle.
No ground of enmity
- Irº, he ſhould mean me ill. Milton.
Such, whoſe ſole bliſs is cating; who can give
“that one brutal reaſon, why they live. - -
3. For what reaſon. Relatiº. y they live Dryden.
Shall I tell you why –
-Ay, fir, and wherefore; for º ſay,
+very why hath a wherefºc. Shakeſpeare.
I was diſpatch'd for their defence and guard;
ànd liſten why, for I will tell you now. »
We examine the why, the what and the how o
Milton,
f thi ngs.
Turn the diſcourſe; I have a reaſon why L'Eſtranº,
I would not have you ſpeak ſo tenderly.
4. It is ſometimes id jºi. y Dryden.
Ninus' tomb, man; why, you muſt not ſpeak that t:
that you anſwer to Pyram. . -
f You have not been a-bed then 2 feare,
//hy, no; the day had broke before we parted. Sº r
Whence is this? why: from that º º
obedience has to the relation which is between a rational crea-
ture and his Creator. South', s:
WHYNo"T. adv. A cant word for violent or Peremploymcº.
dure. y proce-
Capoch'd your rabbins of the ſynod,
And ſnap'd their canons with a whynot. Hudibra:
W1. [Sax.] Holy. Thus wimund, holy peace; wilert emi.
for ſanctity; alwi, altogether holy, as Hierocles, Hºmº
Hoſius, &amp;c. Gilſºn's Cinº.
Wic, Wich. Comes from the Saxon plc, which according t
the different nature and condition of places, hath a thrº
ſignification; implying either a village, era bay made by the
winding banks of a river, or a caſtle. Gibſon's Camden.
Wick. m. ſ. [yeoce, Saxon; wiecke, Dutch..] The ſubſtan.
round which is applied the wax or tallow of a torch organ.
But true it is, that when the oil is ſpont, -
The light goes out, and wick is thrown away;
So, when he had reſign'd his regiment,
His daughter'gan deſpiſe his drooping day. Fa. Quan.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or ſnuff that will abate it. Shakſhare.
Bodies are inflamed wholly and immediately, withoiſt an
wick to help the inflammation. Bacon', Natural Hiſtory.
Little atoms of oil or melted wax continually aſcend apace
up the wick of a burning candle. Digly.
The fungous parcels about the wicks of candles only ſigni-
ficth a moiſt and pulvious air about them. Brown'; Vulgar Err.
WICKED. adj. [Of this common word the clymology is very
obſcure: Picca, is an enchanter; paccan, is to ºppreſſ; Pinian,
to curſe; picco, is crooked: all theſe however Skinner rejects
for vitiatus, Latin. Perhaps it is a compound of pic, vil,
bad, and head, malum caput.]
1. Given to vice; not good; flagitious; morally bad.
The dwelling place of the wicked ſhall come to nought jib,
And as the better ſpirit, when ſhe doth bear
A ſcorn of death, doth ſhew ſhe cannot die;
So when the wicked ſoul death's face doth fear,
Ev’n then ſhe proves her own eternity. David.
He of their wicked ways ſhall them admoniſh, Milan.
But ſince thy veins paternal virtue fires,
Go and ſucceed the rivals aims deſpiſe;
For never, never wicked man was wiſe. Pºpº'; 06/j.
2. It is a word of ludicrous or ſlight blame.
That ſame wicked baſtard of Venus, that blind raſcallybºy,
that abuſes every one's eyes becauſe his own are out, let him
be judge how deep I am in love, Shakeſpeare.
3. Curſed; baneful; pernicious; bad in effed.
The wicked weed which there the fox did lay, ..
From underneath his head he took away. Hullard,
As wicked dew as eler my mother bruſh'd,
With raven's feather from unwholſome fen,
- Drop on you both. Shaiſarº º
Wickedly. adv. [from wicked.] Criminally; coſ"?"'
badly.
I would now ſend him where they all ſhould ſº
Clear as the light his heart ſhine; where no man
Could be ſo wickedly or fondly ſtupid, - ſ
But ſhould cry out, he ſaw, touch'd, felt wickedne *
And graſp'd it. *:::::
He behaved himſelf with great modeſy and won i. done
pentance; being convinced in his conſcience that º º
wickedly. ºu
That thou may’ſ the better bring about Dryden.
Thy wiſhes, thou art wickedly devout.
'Tis phraſe abſurd to call a villain great; -
Who wickedly is wife, or madly brave, Pºpe,
Is but the more a fool, the more a knave. ion of manneſ ;
W1(ckEDNess. n.ſ.. [from wicked.] Corruption 9
uilt ; moral ill. -ºckednfl; ;
g it is not good that children ſhould know º:
old folks have diſcretion and know the wor" nts
Theſe tents thou ºſo º w: the te
ckedneſ ; wherein ſhall dwell his ſº ...I'ſ lºſt.
8. #. ºther.” Miltºn #.jº:
Wi’ck ER. adj. [vigre, a twig, Daniſh; twigger, Pu".
of ſmall ſticks.
Each one a little wicker baſket had
Made of fine twigs, entrailed curiouſly; Spºſºr.
In which they gather'd flow’rs. Th;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- W I D
---
-
2.
sº
*
sº
w
commonly uſed among the northern Iriſh, bu
the Scots, are brºught from the Scythians. Spenſºr.
The long broad ſhields,
made up of wicker rods, which are
teſpecially among
If your influence be quite damm'd up
With black uſurping miſts, ſome gentle taper,
Though a ruſh candle from the ºr hº
Of ſome clay habitation, viſit us
With thy long-levell'd rule of ſtreaming light. Milton.
A fooliſh painter drew January fitting in a wicker chair,
with four nightcaps on by the fire, and without doors green
trees, as if it had been in the midſt of July. Peacham.
Wicket. n.ſ.. [wicked, Welſh; guighet, Fr. wicket, Dutch.]
A ſmall gate.
When none yielded, her unruly page,
With his rude älv. the wicket open rent,
And let her in.
Fairy Queen.
Theſe wickets of the ſoul are plac'd on high,
Becauſe all ſounds do lightly mount aloft. Davies.
Now St. Peter at heav'ís wº ſeems
To wait them with his keys. Milton.
The cave was now a common way,
The wicket, often open'd, knew the key. Dryden.
The chaffering with diſſenters, and dodging about this or
the other ceremony, is like opening a few wikets, by which
nº more than one can get in at a time. Swift.
WIDE. adj. ſpice, Saxon; wijd, Dutch.]
I. Broad; extended far each way.
They found fat pakure, and the land was wid, and quiet.
W I D
ſºlves into a numerous train of miſchievous conſequences. South.
. He was accuſtomed to ſleep with a peaceable noſe, ſoftning
in his ſlumbers the wrinkles of it, and the anger which com-
monly mounted tº that part; but now his noîis were wide-
ned to the laſt degree of fury. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To Wiſden, v. n. To grow wide; to extend itſelf.
It is in this that the ſpecies of brutes are diſcriminated from
man, and that proper difference, wherein they are wholly
ſeparated, and which at laſt wide, toſ, vaſt a diſtance. Lock.
With her the temple ev'ry moment grew,
Upward the colum. ſhoot, the roofs aſcend,
And arches widen,
and long iſles extend. P .
I'd EN Ess. n: ſ [from º Xten ope
I. Breadth; large extent each way.
The rugged hair began to fall away;
The ſweetneſs of her eyes did only ſtay.
Though not ſo large; her crookéd hºns decreaſe;
The widentſ of her jaws and noſtrils ceaſe. Dryden.
2. Comparative breadth. -
Within the ſame annual time, the center of the earth is
carried above fifty times as far round the orbis magnus, whoſe
widentſ, we now aſſume to be twenty thouſand terreſtrial dia-
In eters. Bentley’s Sermons.
Wºon. A water-fowl not unlike a wild duck, but not ſo
arge.
Among the firſt ſort we reckon creyſers, curlews, and wid-
geon. Carew.
WIDOW. n.ſ. [prºpa, Sax. widºwe, Dutch ; weddw, Welſh;
I Chron. iv. 40.
He wand'ring long a wider circle made,
And many-languag’d nations he ſurvey’d. Pope.
2. Broad to a certain degree: as three inches wide.
3. Deviating; remote.
Many of the fathers were far wide from the underſtanding
of this place Raleigh.
92nfideſ the abſurdities of that diſtinaion betwixt the aët
and the obliquity, and the contrary being ſo wide from the
truth of ſcripture and the attributés of God, and ſo noxious
to good life, we may certainly conclude, that to the perpetra-
tion of whatſoever fin, there is not at all any predeſtination
of God. - Hammond's Fundamentals.
To move
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide. Milton.
Qft wide of nature muſt he aët a part,
Make love in tropes, in bombaſt break his heart. Tickell.
WIDE. adv.
1. At a diſtance. In this ſenſe wide ſeems to be ſometimes an
adverb.
- A little wide,
There was a holy chapel edify'd,
Wherein the hermit wont to ſay
His holy things each morn and even tide. Fairy Queen.
Of this I have heard more from others who livéd much
among the Chineſe; a people whoſe way of thinking ſeems to
lie as wide of ours in Europe as their country does. Temple.
2. With great extent.
Of all theſe bounds rich'd
With plenteous rivers, and wide ſkirted meads, -
We make thee lady. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
On the eaſt-ſide of the garden place,
Cherubic watch; and of a ſword the flame
Wide-waving; all approach far off to fright. Milton.
With huge two-handed ſway,
Brandiſh'd aloft, the horrid edge came down,
h'ide waſting
The ſouth wind roſe, and with black wings. Milion.
Wide hovering all the clouds together drove
From under heav'n. Millton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
Stretch'd at eaſe the panting lady lies, -
To ſhun the fervor of meridian ſkies;
While ſweating ſlaves catch ev'ry breeze of air,
And with wide-ſpreading fans refreſh the fair. Gay.
Yet wide was ſpread their fame in ages paſt,
And poets once had promis'd they ſhould laſt. Pope.
Wr'DELY. adv. [from wide.]
1. With great extent each way. -
Any that conſiders how immenſe the intervals of the chaos
are, in proportion to the bulk of the atoms, will hardly in-
duce himſelf to believe, that particles ſo widely diſſeminated
cºuld ever throng one another to a compact texture. Bentley.
2. Remotely ; far. - -
Let him exerciſe the freedom of his reaſon, and his mind
will be ſtrengthned, and the light which the remote parts of
truth will give to one another, will ſo aſſiſt his judgment, that
be will ſeldom be widely out. Locke.
To Wipes. v. a. [from wide.] To make wide; to extend.
So now the gates are ope; now prove good ſeconds;
'Tis for the followers, fortune widºn, them,
Not for the flyers. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Theſe accidents when they firſt happen, i.em but ſmall and
contemptible; but by degrees they branch out and widºn them.
-
&gt;
vidua, Latin.] "A woman whoſe huſband is dead.
To take the widow,
Catharine no more
Shall be call’d queen; but princeſs dowager,
Exaſperates, makes mad her fifter Gonerill. Shafºcare.
And widow to prince Arthur. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VIII.
Our fatherleſs diſtreſs was left unmoan'd,
Your widow-dolours likewiſe be unwept. Shakespeare Richari III,
And will ſhe yet debaſe her eyes on me,
That cropt the golden prime of this ſweet prince,
And made her widow to a woeful bed. Shakeſpeare.
The barren they more miſerable make,
And from the widow all her comfort take. Saudys.
He warns the widow, and her houſhold gods
To ſeek a refuge in remote abodes. Dryden.
Who has the paternal power whilſt the widow queen is with
child. Locke.
To WI'Dow. v. a. [from widow.]
I. To deprive of a huſband.
In this city he
Hath widow’d and unchildéd many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury.``" Shakespeare Cricanut,
Poor ropes you are begail'd,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiſd: -
He made you for a high way to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden widow’d. Shakeſpeare.
Thy little care to mend my widow’d nights,
Has forc'd me to recourſe of marriage rites,
To fill ån empty ſide. Drydº'
2. To endow with a widow-right. - -
For his poſſeſſions,
Although by confiſcation they are ours,
We do inſtate and widºw you withal,
To buy you a better huſband. Shakeſpeare,
3. To ſtrip of any thing good.
The widow’d iſle in mourning -
Dries up her tears. - Dryden.
For him you waſte in tears your widow’d hours. Dryden.
Inclement weather and froſty blaſts deface - -
The blithſome year, trees of their ſhrive'd fruits ---
Are widºw’d, dreary ſtorms o'er all prevail. Philips.
WI'dow E.R. m. ſ. [from widºw, J One who has loſt his wife.
The king, ſealing up all thoughts of love under the Image
of her memory, remained a widower inany years after. Sidney.
The main conſents are had, and here we'll ſtay
To ſee our widower's ſecond marriage day. Shakeſ are:
They that marry, as they that ſhall get no children; and
they that marry not, as the widowers. 2 Eſdr. xvi. 44.
WI’Dow Hood. n.ſ.. [from widow.J. The ſtate of a widow.
Cecropia, having in her widºwhºod taken this young Ar-
teſia into her charge, had taught her to think that theſe is no
wiſdom but in including both heaven and earth in one's ſelf.
Sidney.
Neween my right with flrength adown to tread,
Through weakneſs of my widowhoºd or woe, , ,
For truth is ſtrong. Fairy Qeen,
- She employed her laſt widowhood to works no leſs lountil
than charitable. Carew's Survey of Cornwal'.
It is of greater merit wholly to a fiain from things de-
ſireable, than after fruition to be content to leave them; as they
who magnify ſingle life prefer virginity much before #.
hood. otton.
6 - Cheriſh
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I G
W I L -
Cheriſh thy haſten’d widowhood with the gold -
Of matrimonial treaſon: ſo farewell: Milion.
2. Eſtate ſettled on a widow. Not in uſe.
For that dow'ry, | º:
idºwhood, be it that ſhe ſurvives me,
#. ind. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
wrpowevºter. n.ſ.. [widºw and hunter.] One who courts
- for a jointure.
wº º about town often afford them great di-
verſion. Addiſon's Spectator.
wipowma‘KER. m. ſ. [widow and maker.] One who deprives
women of their huſbands.
It grieves my ſoul
That I muſt draw this metal from my ſide
To be a widowmaker. Shakeſp. King john.
wi'pow-wail. n.ſ. [widow and wail] A plant. -
It hath a flower conſiſting of one leaf, which is deeply di-
vided into three parts: the cup of the flower is alſo of one
leaf, divided into three ſegments; the fruit conſiſts of three
hard berries cloſely joined together; in each of which is con-
tained one oblong ſeed; to which may be added, it hath the
appearance of a ſhrub, and the leaves are ſmall and º;
iller.
Width. n.ſ.. [from wide..] Breadth; wideneſs. A low word.
For the width of the morteſs gage this ſide, then for the
tennant, gage on that end of the quarter you intend the tennant
ſhall be made. Moxon.
Let thy vines in intervals be ſet,
Indulge their width, and add a roomy ſpace,
That their extremeſt lines may ſcarce embrace. Dryden.
To WIELD. v. a. ſpealban, Saxon ; to manage in the hand.]
To uſe with full command, as a thing not too heavy for the
holder.
Baſe Hungarian wight, wilt thou the ſpigot wield. Shakeſp.
His looks are full of peaceful majeſty,
His head by nature fram'd to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a ſcepter, and himſelf
Likely in time to bleſs a regal throne. Shakeſpeare.
There is that hand bolden'd to blood and war,
That muſt the ſword in wond’rous a&amp;tions wield. Daniel.
They are in the dark before they are aware; and then they
make a noiſe only with terms; which, like too heavy wea-
pons that they cannot wield, carry their ſtrokes beyond their
aim. Digby on Bodies.
The leaſt of whom could wield
Theſe elements, and arm him with the force
Of all their regions. Milton’s Paradiſe Lºft.
Part wield their arms, part curb the foaming ſteed. Milton.
If Rome's great ſenate could not wield that ſword,
Which of the conquer'd world had made them lord;
What hope had ours, while yet their pow'r was new,
To rule vićtorious armies, but by you? //aller.
He worthieſt, after him, his ſword to wield,
Or wear his armour, or ſuſtain his ſhield. Dryden.
W1'ElDY. adj. [from wield..] Manageable.
W1'ERY. adj. [from wire.]
1. Made of wire: it were better written wiry.
Your gown going off, ſuch beauteous ſtate reveals,
As when through flow'ry meads th' hill's ſhadow ſteals;
Off with that wiry coronet, and ſhew
The hairy diadem which on your head doth grow. Donne.
2. Drawn into wire.
Polymnia ſhall be drawn with her hair hanging looſe about
her ſhoulders, reſembling wiery gold. Peacham on Drawing.
3. [From paen, a pool.] Wet ; weariſh; moiſt. Obſolete,
Where but by chance a filver drop hath fall'n,
Ev’n to that drop ten thouſand wiery friends
Do glew themſelves in ſociable grief. Shakeſpeare.
WIFE. m. ſ. Plural wives ſpp., Saxon; wiff, Dutch..]
A woman that has a huſband. -
Your claim, fair ſiſter,
I bar it in the intereſt of my wiſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
There's no bottom, none
In my voluptuouſneſs: your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons and your maids could not fill up
The ciſtern of my liſt. - Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Why ſaidſt thou, ſhe is my ſiſter 2 ſo I might have taken
her to me to wife. Gen. xii. I9.
The wif, where danger or diſhonour lurks, -
Safeſt and ſeemlieſt by her huſband ſtays. Milton.
The wife her huſband murders, hē the wiſe. Dryden.
Fond of his friend, and civil to his wº, y
- &gt; is wife. Pope.
2. It is uſed for a woman of low employment.
Strawberry * lay two or three great ſtrawberries at the
wº of their pot, and all the reſt are little ones. Bacºn.
º: n. / H ig being a termination in the names of men ſignifics
*** * *iſe a heroe, from Figa, a word of that ſignification.
WIG. m. ſ. [Contraded from periwig.] Gilſon's Camden.
I. rºl worn on the head.
riumphing Tories and deſponding whics
Forget their feuds, and join . ſave ãº, ... Swift,
WIGHT. n.ſ. [r];t, Saxon.) A perſon Ainſwºrth.
- - ; a being. G
Beſhrew the witch! with venomºu, wight; i. º
y
Tedious as hell; but flies the graſps of love,
With wings more momentary ſwift than th
This world below did need 3. wight, ought. Shakespeare .
Which might thereof diſtinguiſh ev'ry part.
- 2. A ſort of cake.
This meaner wights, of truſt and crédit bare Davieſ,
Not ſo reſpected, could not look t'effect. &gt; Daniel
A ſight he was, whoſe very fight wou'd anieſ,
Entitle him mirror of knighthood. Hudik
The water flies all taſte of living wight. º:
How could'ſt thou ſuffer thy devoted knight, ilºn,
On thy own day, to fall by foe oppreſs'd,
The wight of all the world who lov’d thee beſt. Drd
ſ H. ſtation he yielded up to a wight as diſagreeable as .
elf. Audiſon' ul-
W1GHT. adj. Swift; nimble. Out of uſe. Jon's Guardian,
He was ſo winble and ſo wight,
From bough to bough he leaped light,
And oft the pumies latched. Sten/?,’
Wiſc Hºly adv. [from wight.] Swiftly; à. Paſtoral,
Her was her, while it was day-light,
But now her is a moſt wretched wight;
For day that was is wightly paſt,
And now at laſt the night doth haſt. - Spenſºr,
Wiht. An initial in the names of men, ſignifies ſtrong; intº
luſty; being purely Saxon. Gilſºn's Camdin.
WILD. adj. [pilo, Saxon; wild, Dutch.]
1. Not tame; not domeſtick.
For I am he am born to tame you, Kate,
And bring you from a wild cat to a kate,
Conformable as other houſhold kates. Shakeſtart,
Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geeſe fly that way. Shat.
All beaſts of the earth ſince wild. Miltºn.
2. Propagated by nature; not cultivated.
Whatſoever will make a wild tree a garden tree, will make
a garden tree to have leſs core or ſtone. Bacºn's Natral Hſiery.
Gooſe graſs or wild tanſy is a weed that ſtrong clays are ve-
ry ſubječt to. Martimer's Huſbandry.
The wild bee breeds in the ſtocks of old willows, in which
they firſt bore a canal, and furniſh afterwards with hangings,
made of roſe leaves: and to finiſh their work divide the whole
into ſeveral rooms or neſts. Grew's 4//eum.
3. Deſart ; uninhabited.
The wild beaſt where he wons in foreſt wild. Miltºn.
4. Savage; uncivilized.
Affairs that walk,
As they ſay ſpirits do, at midnight, have
In them a wilder nature, than the buſineſs
That ſeeks diſpatch by day. Shakespeari's Henry VIII.
Though the inundation deſtroyed man and beaſt generally,
yet ſome few wild inhabitants of the woods eſcaped. Bºwl.
When they might not converſe with any civil men witholº
peril of their lives, whither ſhould they fly but into the woods
and mountains, and there live in a wild and barbarou?”
inct. Davis, an Ireland.
May thoſe already curſt Eſſexian plains,
Where haſty death and pining ſickneſs reigns,
Prove as a deſart, and none there make ſtay,
But ſavage beaſts, or men as wild as they. Waller,
5. Turbulent; tempeſtuous; irregular.
His paſſions and his virtues lie confus'd,
And mixt together in ſo wild a tumult: . . . Addiº
That the whole man is quite disfigur'd in him. aſſº,
, licentious; ungoverned. r
6, lic that ºut tº tore the Thracian bard. Milºn.
Valour grown wild by pride, and pow'r by rage,
Did the true charms of majeſty impair:
Rome by degrees advancing more in agº .. -
Show’d º of what ń. once bºnfir, Pº
7. lº "...# fº, |
n the ruling paſſion, there alone, -
The wild are à. and the cunning know" Pºſt
8. Inordinate; looſe. .
Other bars he lays before me,
My riots paſt, my wild ſocieties.
Beſides, thou ärt a beau; what's that my c
A fop well-dreſt, extravagant and wild:
She that cries herbs has leſs impertinençº Dryden,
And in her calling, more of common ſenſe.
9. Uncouth ; flrange.
What are theſe, -
So wither'd, and ſo wild in their attºº: h
That look not like th' inhabitants o' the * º, Madith.
Sºftware.
hild?
- 'Jak, re
And yet are on t. ...
10. Done or made without any conſiſtent “..., they make
With mountains, as with weapons: "", Paradjº Lºft.
I?’ild work in heav'n. 4. º aſ
The ſea was very neceſſary to the ends of P en withou"
- it be
ld have been a very wild woº!" had º Hiſtºry.
would have Dº ry iſ....…". .#
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
*r. Meerly imaginary. - -
As univerſal as theſe appear to be, an effectual remedy might
be applied: I am not at preſent upon a wild ſpeculative pro-
jeºt, but ſuch a one as may be eaſily put in execution. Swift.
ILD, n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive..] A deſart; a tract unculti-
wated and uninhabited.
- We ſometimes
Who dwell this wild, conſtrain’d by want come forth
To town or village nigh. Milton's Paradiſe Regained.
This gentle knight
Forſook his eaſy couch at early day,
And to the weod and wild purſu'd his way. Dryden.
Then Libya firſt, of all her moiſture drain'd,
Became a barren waſte, a wild of ſand. Addiſon.
Is there a nation in the wild of Afric,
Amidſt the barren rocks and burning ſands
That does not tremble at the Roman name? Addiſon.
You rais'd theſe hallow’d walls; the deſart ſmil'd,
And paradiſe was open'd in the wild.
Wilp Baſil. n.ſ.. [acinus, Lat.] A plant.
It hath leaves like thoſe of the leſſer baſil; the cup of the
flower is oblong and furrowed; the flowers are produced in
bunches on the top of little footſtalks, which ariſe from be-
tween the footſtalk of the leaf and the ſtalk of the plants in
which it differs from ſerpyllum. Miller.
Wild Cucumber. n.ſ. [elaterium, Latin.] A plant.
The branches are ſomewhat like thoſe of the cucumber, but
have no tendrils; the fruit is prickly, and when ripe burſts
with great elaſticity, and abounds with fetid juice. Miller.
Wild Olive. n.ſ. [eleagnus, Latin, from ixaſ, an olive, and
#yvor vitex ;] This plant hath leaves like thoſe of the chaſte
tree, and a fruit like an olive. . Miller.
WILD.se/Rvice. m. ſ. [crataeguſ, Lat.] A plant.
The leaves are ſingle; the flower conſiſts of five leaves,
which expand in form of a roſe. The fruit is ſmall, and
ſhaped like a pear, in which are many hard ſeeds. Miller.
To WI'lder. v. a. [from wild.] To looſe or puzzle in an
unknown or pathleſs tract.
The little courtiers, who ne'er come to know
The depth of factions, as in mazes go,
Where intereſts meet, and croſs ſo oft, that they
With too much care are wilder'd in the way. Dryden.
Oh thou ! who free'ſt me from my doubtful ſtate,
Long loſt and wilder'd in the maze of fate,
Be preſent ſtill.
WI'lderness. n.ſ.. [from wild.
1. A deſert; a tract of ſolitude and ſavageneſs.
He travell'd through wide waſteful ground, -
That nought but deſert wilderneſ, ſhew’d all around. F. Qu.
When as the land ſhe ſaw no more appear,
But a wild wilderneſs of waters deep,
Then 'gan ſhe greatly to lament and weep.
O my poor kingdom, ſick with civil blows '
When that my care could not with-hold thy riots,
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care
O, thou wilt be a wilderneſs again,
Pope.
Pope.
Spenſer.
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants. Shakeſpeare.
But who can always on the billows lie
The wat'ry wilderneſ, yields no ſupply. Waller.
All thoſe animals have been obliged to change their woods
and wilderneſſes for lodgings in cities. Arbuth. &amp; Pope.
2. The ſtate of being wild or diſorderly. Not in uſe.
The paths and bow'rs, doubt not, but our joint hands
Will keep from wilderneſ, with eaſe. Milton.
wi'ldFire. n.ſ.. [wild and fire.] A compoſition of inflam-
mable materials, eaſy to take fire, and hard to be extin-
guiſhed. -
When thou rann'ſt up Gadſhill in the night to catch my
horſe, I did think thou had'ſt been an ignis fatuus, or a ball
of wildfire. Shakeſpeare.
Though brimſtone, pitch, wildfire, burn equally, and are
hard to quench, yet they make no ſuch firy wind as #.
powder. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt
Yet ſhall it in his boiling ſtomach turn
To bitter poiſon, and like wildfire burn;
He ſhall caſt up the wealth by him devour'd. Sandys.
No matter in the world ſo proper to write with as wildfire;
as no charaćters can be more legible than thoſe which are read
by their own light. Addison Guard.
In flames, like Semele's, be brought to bed,
While opening hell ſpouts wildfire at your head. Pope.
WILDGo'osechase. n.ſ. A purſuit of ſomething as unlikely
to be caught as the wildgooſe.
If our wits run the wildgooſechace, I have done; for thou
haſt more of the wildgooſe in one of thy wits, than I have in
my whole five. Shakeſpeare.
Let a man conſider the time, money, and vexation, that
this wildgooſechace has coſt him, and then ſay what have I
gotten to anſwer all this expence, but looſe, giddy frolick 2
L’Eſtrange.
Wilpins. n.ſ. [wildelinghe, Dut..] A wild ſour apple.
W I N
Ten ruddy wilding in the wood I found,
And ſtood on tip-toes, reaching from the ground. Dryd.
The red ſtreak, of all cyder fruit, hath obtained the pre-
ference, being but a kind of wilding, never pleaſing to the
palate.
---- Mortimer.
The wilding's fibres are contriv'd
To draw th’ earth's pureſt ſpirit, and reſiſt
Its feculence. Phillips.
*PHY, adv. [from wild.]
I. wº cultivation.
!”.ºhiºh grows wildly of itſelf, is worth nothing. Mr.
2. With diſorder; with º or diſtraćtion. g. Mo
Put your diſcourſe into ſome frame, and ſtart not ſo wildly
from my affair. Shakeſpear.
Mrs. Page, at the door, ſweating, blowing, and looking
wildly, would needs ſpeak with you. Shakeſpears.
Young mothers wildly ſtare with fear oppreſt,
And ſtrain their helpleſs infants to their bºaſt. Dryden.
His fever being come to a height, he grew delirious, and
talked very wildly. emale Quixote.
3. Without attention; without judgment.
As th’unthought accident is guilty
Of what we wildly do, ſo we profeſs
Qurſelves to be the ſlaves of chance, and flies
Of every wind that blows.
Shakeſpeare.
4. Irregularly.
She wildy wanton, wears by night away
The ſign of all our labours done by day. Dryden.
WildNess. n.ſ.. [from wild.]
1. Rudeneſs; diſorder like that of uncultivated ground.
The heath, which was the third part of our plot, I wiſh to
be framed, as much as may be, to a natural wildneſs. Bac.
2. Inordinate vivacity; irregularity of manners.
This ſame ſtarved juſtice hath done nothing but prated to
me of the wildneſs of his youth, and the feats he hath done
about Turnbal-ſtreet; º every third word a lie. Shakeſp.
He is giv'n
To ſports, to wildneſs, and much company. Shakeſpeare.
3. Savageneſs; brutality.
He came in like a wild man; but ſuch a wildneſ; as ſhewed
his eye-ſight had tamed him, full of withered leaves; which
though they fell not, ſtill threatened falling. Sidney.
Vainly thou tell'ſt me, what the woman's care
Shall in the wildneſs of the wood prepare. Prior.
4. Uncultivated ſtate.
Their wildneſs loſe, and quitting nature's part,
Obey the rules and diſcipline of art. Dryden.
5. Deviation from a ſettled courſe; irregularity.
A delirium is but a ſhort wildneſs of the imagination; and
a ſettled irregularity of fancy is diſtraćtion and madneſs.
Watts's Log.
6. Alienation of mind.
Ophelia, I wiſh
That your good beauties be the happy cauſe
Of Hamlet's wildneſs; ſo ſhall I hope your virtues
May bring him to his wonted way again. Shakeſp.
Wile. n.ſ. [pile, Saxon; wiel, Iſlandick.] A deceit; a
fraud; a trick; a ſtratagem; a practice artful, ſly, and inſi-
dious.
Their leader by his wiler had much obtain'd,
And done much miſchief on the Engliſh ſtate. Daniel.
My ſentence is for open war; of wiles
More unexpert, I boaſt not; them let thoſe
Contrive who need. Milton.
Life eſſay’d the ſureſt wiſe,
Gilding itſelf with Laura's ſmile. Roſcommon.
So Sforza, curs'd with a too fertile brain,
Loſt by his wiles the pow'r his wit did gain. Dryd.
The heart of man is ſo full of wie, artifices, and deceit,
that there is no gueſſing at what he is from his ſpeeches.
Addiſon's Guardian.
Wiſdom's above ſuſpecting wiler,
The queen of learning gravely ſmiles. Swift.
W’ILFul. adj. [will and full.] - -
1. Stubborn ; contumacious ; perverſe; inflexible.
2. Done or ſuffered by deſign.
Sthenoboea herſelf did choak
With wilful cord, for wanting of her will. Fairy Queen.
Thou to me
Art all things under heav'n, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art baniſh'd hence. Milton.
The filent ſtranger ſtood amaz'd to ſee
Contempt of wealth, and wilful poverty. Dryden.
WI’lfully. adv. [from wilful.]
1. Obſtinately ; ſtubbornly.
The mother, who being determinately, leaſt I ſhould ſay
of a great lady wilfully, bent to marry her to Demagoras;
tried all ways which a witty and hard-hearted mother could
deviſe. - Sidney.
Evil could ſhe conceal her fire, and wiftly perſºvered
ſhe in it. Sidney.
30 R Religion<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I L
W I L
Religion is matter of our freeſt choice; and if men will
- ilfully ſet themſelves againſt it, there is no
* and wilfully *";...
ion : on purpoſe.
2. Bºi. º, º if we do not wilfully betray our ſuccours,
through all difficulties. Hammond.
If you do not wifully paſs over any of your #. of-
fences, but confeſs particularly, and repent ſeriouſly of them,
God will more eaſily paſs by your leſſer infirmities. Bp Tayl.
This let him #. 5 h d
ſt, willfully offending, he preten
#:/ y £2 Milton.
WI'lfulness. n.ſ.. [from wilful..] Obſtinacy; ſtubbornneſs;
rverſeneſs.
So full of wilfulneſ, and ſelf-liking is our nature, that with-
out ſome definitive ſentence, which being given, may ſtand,
ſmall hope there is that ſtrifes will end. ooker.
Thy cauſeleſs ruth repreſs;
He that his ſorrow ſought through wilfulneſs,
And his foe fetter'd would releaſe again,
Deſerves to taſte his folly's fruit.
Never hydra-headed wilfulneſs
So ſoon did loſe his ſeat, and all at once,
As in this king. Shakeſpeare.
A ſtiff and ſtubborn obſtinacy, is not ſo much firmneſs and
reſolution, as wilfulneſs. - L’Eſtrange.
That is not haſtily to be interpreted obſtinacy or wilful-
neſ, which is the natural produćt of their age. Locke.
WI'lily, adv. [from wily.] By ſtratagem; fraudulently.
They did work wilil), and went and made as if they had
been ambaſſadors. joſ.
WILI'Ness. n.ſ.. [from wily.] Cunning; guile.
The ungodly, for his own luſt, doth perſecute the poor:
let them be taken in the crafty willneſs that they have ima-
ined. Pſalm x. 2.
She ſupplied the weakneſs of force by willneſs of art, and
advantage of treaty. How. Poc. Foreſt.
WILL, n.ſ. ſpilla, Saxon; wille, Dutch.]
1. Choice; arbitrary determination.
Will is the power, which the mind has to order the con-
ſideration of any idea, or the forbearing to conſider it, or to
prefer the motion of any part of the body to its reſt, and vice
verſa. Docke's Works.
Two principal fountains there are of human actions, know-
ledge and will; which will, in things tending towards any
end, is termed choice. Płocker, b. i.
Is it her nature, or is it her will,
To be ſo cruel to an humble foe
If nature, then ſhe may it mend with ſkill;
If will, then ſhe at will may will forego. Spenſer.
Theſe things have a ſhew of wiſdom in will worſhip and
humility. Col. ii. 23.
Will holds the ſceptre in the ſoul,
And on the paſſions of the heart doth reign. Sir j. Dav.
The truth is, ſuch a man underſtands by his will, and be-
lieves a thing true or falſe, merely as it agrees or diſagrees
with a violent inclination; and therefore, whilſt that inclina-
tion laſts in its ſtrength, he diſcovers nothing of the different
Fairy Queen.
degrees of evidence. Atterbury.
2. Diſcretion; choice.
Go then the guilty at thy will chaſtize. Pope.
3. Command; direction.
At his firſt fight the mountains are ſhaken, and at his will
the ſouth wind bloweth. Eccleſ. xliii. 16.
4. Diſpoſition ; inclination; defire.
I make bold to preſs upon you with ſo little preparation.
Your welcome ; what's your will P Shakeſpeare.
He hath a will, he hath a power to perform. Drummond.
He ſaid, and with ſo good a will to die,
Did to his breaſt the fatal point apply,
It found his heart.
5. Power; government.
eliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies. Pſal.
He had the will of his maid before he could go; he had
the maſtery of his parents ever fince he could prattle ; and
Wły, now he is grown up, muſt he be reſtrained; Loft,
6. Divine determination.
I would give a thouſand furlongs of ſea for an acre of
barren ground. The will above b: done; but I would fain
die a dry death. Shakeſpeare.
7. Teſtament; diſpoſition of a dying man's effects.
Another branch of their revenue ſtill }
Dryden.
Rºmains, beyond their boundieſ, right to kill,
º: father yet alive, impower'd tº makea ºil. Dryd.
**n make their laſt wills by word of mouth only
8. Good-will. Favour; kindneſs. Stephen's Sermons.
I'll to the doćtor, he hath my good-will,
And none but he to ma -
9. Good-will. Right º Nan Page. Shakeſp.
Some preach Chriſt of envy, and ſome of good will.
4. Phil. i. 15.
IO. º: Malice; malignity.
II. n ---- --- - - -
2. | mi º from William..] Will with a wiſp, Jack with
%ill with the wiſp is of a round figure, in bi -
flame of a candle; but ſometimes tºº, º: º
of twigs ſet on fire. It ſometimes gives a brighter li . e
that of a wax-candle; at other times more . and .
a purple colour. When viewed near at hand, it his leſ
than at a diſtance. They wander about in the air not f s
from the ſurface of the earth; and are more ſº
places that are unétuous, mouldy, marſhy, and º
with reeds. They haunt burying places, places of j
Junghills. They commonly appear in ſummer, and at tº:
beginning of autumn, and are generally at the height of
about ſix feet from the ground. Now they dilate #.
ſelves, and now contraćt. Now they go on like waves and
rain as it were ſparks of fire; but they burn nothing. T.
follow thoſe that run away, and fly from thoſe that follow,
them. Some that have been catched were obſerved to
conſiſt of a ſhining, viſcous, and gelatinous matter, like the
ſpawn of frogs, not hot or burning, but only ſhining; ſo that
the matter ſeems to be phoſphorus, Prepared and raiſed from
putrified plants or carcaſſes by the heat of the ſun; which,
condenſed by the cold of the evening, and then ſhines. Muſh,
// ill-a-wiſp miſleads night-faring clowns,
O'er hills and ſinking bogs. Gay.
To Will. v. a. [wilgan, Gothick; pillan, Saxon; wilá,
Dutch.]
1. To deſire that anything ſhould be, or be done.
To will, is to bend our ſouls to the having or doing of
that which they ſee to be good. Hºoker.
Let Richard be reſtored to his blood,
As will the reſt; ſo willeth Wincheſter. Shakeſpeare.
I ſpeak not of God's determining his own will, but his pre-
determining the acts of our will. There is as great difference
betwixt theſe two, as betwixt my willing a lawful thing my-
ſelf, and my inducing another man to do that which is un-
lawful. Hammond on Fundamental,
Whoſoever will; the doing of a thing, if the doing of it be
in his power, he will certainly do it; and whoſoever does
not do that thing, which he has in his power to do, does
not properly will it. South.
A man that ſits ſtill, is ſaid to be at liberty, becauſe he
can walk if he will; it. Locłe.
2. To be inclined or reſolved to have.
She's too rough for me; -
There, there, Hortenſio, will you any wiſe? Shaft.
3. To command; to direct.
St. Paul did will them of Corinth, every man to lay up
ſomewhat on the Sunday, and to reſerve it inflore ºf the
church of Jeruſalem, for the relief of the poor there. Hº"
How rarely does it meet with this time's guiſe, ſ
When man was willed to love his enemies. Shaitſ,
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the uſe of arms,
Our armours all as ſtrong, our cauſe the beſt;
Then reaſon wills our hearts ſhould be as good.
He willed him to be of good comfort, promiſing :
ſtow upon him whatſoever he ſhould win.
If they had any buſineſs, his Majeſty
Shaftſ,
o be-
nºli.
wild that they
ſhould attend. O | ill Carmdº,
'Tis your’s, ueen to 70tſ
The work, * duty ‘. me to fulfil. Drydin,
4. It has a looſe and ſlight ſignification. ill
Let the circumſtances of life be what, or whº *;
a man ſhould never neglect improvement. f which it i.
5. It is one of the ſigns of the future tenſe; of Whic
difficult to ſhow or limit the ſignification. …dºc
I will come. I am determined to come; impºrt**.
- lm-
Thou will come. It muſt be ſo that thou muſt **
orting neceſſity. - -
p % thou . * Haſ thou determined to come?”
ing choice.
He will come. He is reſolved to com
he muſt come, importing either choice or nº º
It will come. It muſt ſo be that it muſt com"
neceſſity. lar
The plural follows the analogy of the ſing” id, at this
will 1 and Pili, among the Engliſh Saxonº, ºlui is
day among the Germans, ſignified many. º 2ſt
the defender of many: wilfred, peace tº,”* Poly-
anſwered in ſenſe and fignification by Poly” Gl. Camd
crates, and Polyphilus.
WI’lling. adj. [from will.]
I. Inclined to any thing.
e; or it muſt be that
importing
forced all his ſkill to
'He willing to pleaſe one in authority, Wiſł.
make the reſemblance of the beſt faſhion.
Some other able, and as willing, PA)* Miltºn,
The rigid ſatisfaction. aian. than
Can : man truſt a better ſupport whº º:g
the friendſhip of Omnipotence, who is both a Bently,
and knows how to relieve him 2. Pleaſed;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I L
2. Pleaſed ; deſirous.
3. Favourable; well diſpoſed to any thing. - - -
As many as were willing hearted brought bracelets and
ear-rings. Ex. xxxv. 22.
4. Ready : complying.
Religion hath force to qualify all ſorts of men, to make
governors the apter to rule with conſcience, inferiors for con-
ſcience ſake the willinger to obey: Hooker.
We've willing dames enough. Shakeſpeare.
He ſtoop'd with weary wings and willing feet. 4Milt.
5. Choſen.
They're held with his melodious harmony,
In willing chains, and ſweet captivity. Milton.
6. Spontaneous.
Forbear, if thou haſt pity,
Theſe groans proceed not from a ſenſeleſs plant,
No ſpouts of blood run willing from a tree. Dryden.
7. Conſenting.
How can hearts not free ſerve willing. Milton.
WI'lling LY. adv. [from will.]
1. With one's own conſent; without diſlike; without reludance.
That preſervation of peace and unity amongſt Chriſtian
churches, ſhould be by all good means procured, we join
moſt willingly and gladly with them. Hooker.
I dare not make myſelf ſo guilty,
To give up willingly that noble title
Your maſter wed me to. Shakeſpeare.
This ranſom, if my whole inheritance
Milton.
May compaſs, it ſhall willingly be paid.
2. By one's own deſire. º
The condition of that people is not ſo much to be envied
as ſome would willingly repreſent it. Addiſon.
Wi'LLING Ness. n. ſ. [from willing.] Conſent; freedom from
reluctance; ready compliance.
We praiſe the things we hear with much more willingneſ,
than thoſe we ſee ; becauſe we envy the preſent, and reve-
rence the paſt; thinking ourſelves inſtructed by the one, and
overlaid by the other. Ben. johnſon.
It is not doing good after that ſame wonderful manner, that
Chriſt's example obligeth us unto, but to a like willingneſ, and
readineſs to do good as far as our power reacheth. Calamy.
Force never yet a generous mind did gain;
We yield on parley; but are ſtorm'd in vain;
Conſtraint, in all things, makes the pleaſure leſs,
Sweet is the love which comes with willingneſs. Dryden.
Willow. n.f ſpelie, Saxon, ſalix, Lat, gwilau, Welſh.] A
tree worn by forlorn lovers. -
It hath amentaceous flowers conſiſting of ſeveral ſtamina,
which are collected into a ſpike but are barren. The em-
bryoes are produced upon different trees from the male
flowers, and afterwards become a fruit or huſk, ſhaped like a
cone, opening in two parts, and containing downy ſeeds. Mil.
I offered him my company to a willow tree, to make him
a garland, as being forſaken, to bind him up a rod, as being
worthy to be whipt. Shakeſp.
In ſuch a night
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
Upon the wild ſea banks. Shakeſp.
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower ſhortly,
I wear the willow garland for his ſake. Shakeſpeare.
When heaven's burning eye the fields invades,
To marſhes he reſorts, obſcur'd with reeds,
And hoary willows, which the moiſture feeds. Sandy.
Afflićted Iſrael ſhall fit weeping down,
Their harps upon the neighb'ring willows hung, -
Nor joyous hymn encouraging their tongue. Prior.
Wi’llowish. adj. [willom.] Reſembling the colour of willow:
Make his body with greeniſh coloured crewel, or willowiſh
colour. Walton.
WI'llow wort. n.ſ. A plant.
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, produced from the
incloſures of the flower-cup, placed circularly, and expanded
like a roſe; from the centre of the flower-cup riſes the pointal,
which becomes a fruit of two cells, full of ſmall ſeeds, wrapped
up in the flower-cup. - Miller.
WI’ly. adj. [from wile.] Cunning; ſly; full of ſtratagem;
fraudulent. - - - -
They are ſo cautelous and wily headed, eſpecially being
men of ſmall practice in law matters, that you would wonder
whence they borrow ſuch ſubtilities and ſhifts. Spenſer.
In the wily ſnake
Whatever ſlights, none would ſuſpicions mark
• As from his wit, and native ſubtilty
Proceeding. Milton's Par. Loft.
Since this falſe, wily, doubling diſpoſition of mind, is ſo
intolerably miſchievous to ſociety, God is ſometimes pleaſed,
in mere compaſſion to men, to give them warning of it, by
ſetting ſome odd mark upon ſuch Cains." South's Serm.
My wily nurſe by long experience found,
And firſt diſcover'd to my ſoul its wound;
'Tis love ſaid ſhe Dryden.
wi'MBle. n. ſ. ſwimpel, old Dutch, from wemelen, to bore.]
An inſtrument with which holes are bored.
W I N
a.Atharveſt-home, trembling to approa h -
The little barrel, which he far. ºr. :
He ſays the wimble, often draws it back,
And deals to thirſty ſervants but a ſmack. Dryd.
As when a ſhipwright ſtands his workmen o'er;
Who plye the wimble ſome huge beam to bore;
Urg'd on all hands it nimbly ſpins about, -
The grain deep-piercing till it ſcoops it out. Pope.
he trepan is like a wimble, uſed by joiners. Sharp.
Wi’MBLE. adj. Aëtive, nimble, ſhifti
ſeems to be the meaning |. ifting to and fro. such
He was ſo winble and ſo wight
From bough to bough he leaped ight
- &gt;
And oft the pumies latched:
Therewith afraid I ran awa $
But he that earſt ſeem'd but to Play,
A ſhaft in earneſt ſnatched.
WIMPLE, h. ſ. [gāimple, Fr.] A hood; a veil.
in Spenſer perhaps by miſtake winble.
So fair and º, as faireſt flower in May,
For ſhe had laid her mournful ſtole aſide,
And widow-like ſad wimble thrown away. Fai,
The Lord will take away the changeable ſuits of apparel,
and the wimples, and the criſping-pins. Iſrael ii. 22.
To Wimple. v. a. To draw down as a hood or ºil.
The ſame did hide,
Under a veil that wimbled was full low. Fairy 2.
Win. Whether initial or final in the names of men, may
either denote a maſculine temper, from pin, which fignifies
in Saxon, war, ftrength, &amp;c. or elſe the general love and
eſteem he hath among the people; from the Saxon pine, i. e.
dear, beloved. In the name of places it implies a battle fought
there. - Gibſ.
To Win. v. 4. [Pret, wan and won; part. paſ, won, pinna,
Saxon; winnen, Dutch..]
1. To gain by conqueſt. -
The town of Gaza where the enemy lay encamped, was
not ſo ſtrong but it might be won. - Knolles.
His whole deſcent, who thus ſhall Canaan win. Milan.
Follow chearful to the trembling town;
Preſs but an entrance, and preſume it won.
2. To gain the vićtory in a conteſt,
oyalty is ſtill the ſame
Whether it win or loſe the game:
True as the dial to the ſun,
Altho' it be not ſhin'd upon,
I five years at Tarentum wan
The queſtorſhip, and then our love began.
Thy well breath'd horſe
Impels the flying car and wins the courſe. Drra.
3. To #. ſomething withheld.
eſolv'd to win, he meditates the way,
By force to raviſh, or by fraud betray. Pope.
4. To obtain. - -
Thy virtue wan me; with virtue preſerve me, Doſt thou
love me? Keep me then ſtill worthy to be beloved. Sidney.
When you ſee my ſon, tell him, that his ſword can never
win the honour that he loſes. Shakeſpeare.
Deviliſh Macbeth
By many of theſe trains hath ſought to win me. Shakespeare
5. To gain by play.
He had given a diſagreeable vote in parliament, for which
reaſon not a man would have ſo much correſpondence with
him as to win his money. Addiſon.
6. To gain by perſuaſion. :
They win great numbers to receive
With joy the tidings brought from heav'n.
7. To gain by courtſhip.
- She's beautiful; and therefore to be woo'd :
She is a woman, therefore to be won.
That flood witneſs'd his inconſtant flame,
When thus he ſwore, and won the yielding dame, Gay.
To WIN. v. n.
I. To gain the vićtory.
g N.'. it ought but juſt,
That he who in debate of truth hath won,
Should win in ...;
. To gain influence or favour. - -
2 $. expreſs yourſelf very deſirous to win upon the }.
ment of your maſter, and not upon his affections only. Bacon.
You have a ſoftneſs and beneficence winning on the hearts
Spenſer.
It is printed
Bryden.
Hudibras, b. iii.
Denham.
Milton.
Shakeſp.
Milton.
of others. Dryden.
thy words like muſick every breaſt controul;
Steal thro’ the air, and win upon the ſoul. Pope.
- ain ground. -
3. To #. #. will in time win upon power. Shakeſp.
4. To be conqueror or gainer at play. .
Charles I will play no more to night;
My mind's not on't, you are too hard for me.
—Sir, I did never win of you before.
—But little, Charles; r
Nor ſhall not when my fancy's on my play. *i;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I N
W I N
To wiscº. v. n. [gwingo, Welſh.] To kick as impatient of *
rider, i. ſº ict lamb
will ſit as quiet as a lamb,
I will not ſtir, 3. wince, nor ſpeak a word. Shakeſp.
Room, room, for my horſe will wince, -
If he came within ſo many yards of a prince, B. Jºhnſ.
The angry beaſt did ſtraight reſent
The wrong done to his fundament,
Began to kick, and fling, and wince, -
As if h’had been beſide his ſenſe. Hudibras.
WINch. m. { [guincher, French, to twiſt.] A windlace;
fomething held in the hand by which a wheel or cylinder is
turned. -
Put a winch with the wheel. Mortimer.
To winch. v. a. [The ſame with wince, or perhaps from
guincher, French, to twiſt; winch ſignifying ſometimes to
writhe or contort the body..] To kick with impatience ; to
ſhrink from any uneaſineſs.
e who have free ſouls,
It touches not, let the gall'd jade winch;
Our withers are unwrung. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Have theſe bones rattled, and this head
So often in thy quarrel bled !
Nor did I ever winch or grudge it.
This laſt alluſion gaul'd the panther more ;
Yet ſeem'd ſhe not to winch, tho' ſhrewdly pain'd. Dryd.
Their conſciences are gall'd, and this makes them winch
and fling, as if they had ſome mettle. Tillotſon.
WI’N copipe. m. ſ.
There is a ſmall red flower in the ſtubble-fields, which
country people call the wincopipe; which if it open in the
morning, you may be ſure, a fair day will follow. Bacon.
WIND. m. ſ. ſpinb, Saxon; wind, Dutch; gwynt, Welſh.]
1. Wind is when any trađt of air moves from the place it is
in, to any other, with an impetus that is ſenſible to us,
wherefore it was not ill called by the antients, a ſwifter courſe
of air; a flowing wave of air; a flux, effuſion, or ſtream of
air. - - Muſchenbroek.
The worthy fellow is our general. He's the rock, the oak
not to be wind ſhaken. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Love's heralds ſhould be thoughts,
Which ten times faſter glides than the ſun beams,
Driving back ſhadows over low'ring hills.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love;
And therefore hath the wind-ſwift Cupid wings. Shakespeare
Falmouth lieth farther out in the trade way, and ſo offereth a
fooner opportunity to wind-driven ſhips than Plymouth. Carew.
Wind is nothing but a violent motion of the air, produced
by its rarefaction, more in one place than another, by the ſun-
beams, the attractions of the moon, and the combinations of
the earth's motions. Cheyne.
2. Direétion of the blaſt from a particular point. As eaſtward;
weſtward.
I’ll give thee a wind.
I myſelf have all the other,
And the very points they blow ;
All the quarters that they know
T' th' ſhipman's card.
3. Breath; power or act of reſpiration.
If my wind were but long enough to ſay my prayers, I
would repent. Shakeſp.
His wind he never took whilſt the cup was at his mouth,
but juſtly obſerv'd the rule of drinking with one breath. Hake.
The perfume of the flowers, and their virtues to cure ſhort-
neſs of wind in purſy old men, ſeems to agree moſt with
Hudibrar.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
the orange. Temple.
It ſtop'd at once the paſſage of his wind,
And the free ſoul to flitting air reſign'd. Dryden.
4. Air cauſed by any action.
On each ſide her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like ſmiling Cupids
With divers colour'd fans, whoſe wind did ſeem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool. Shakeſp.
In an organ, from one blaſt of wind,
To many a row of pipes the ſound-board breathes. Milt.
5. Breath modulated by an inſtrument.
Where the air is pent, there breath or other blowing,
which carries but a gentle percuſſion, ſuffices to create ſound ;
as in pipes and wind inſtruments. Bacon.
Their inſtruments were various in their kind,
Some for the bow, and ſome for breathing wind. Dryden.
8. Air impregnated with ſcent.
A hare had long eſcap'd purſuing hounds,
By often ſhifting into diſtant grounds,
Till finding all his artifices vain,
To ſave his life, he leap'd into the main.
But there, alas ! he could no ſafety find,
A Pack of dog-fiſh had him in the wind. Swift.
7. Flatulence; windineſs.
- It turns
Wiſdom to folly, as nouriſhment to wind. Milton.
8. Any# inſignificant or light as wind,
hink not with wind of airy threats
, bºº." Ma.
A man that had a great veneration for an i * - 1 -
houſe, found that º: he prayed to it . º: #. his
the world, he mºre he went dºwn in, wiiſiº.
ro. To take or have the WIND. To gain or have the jº.
Let a king in council beware how he opens his º -
clinations too much, for elſe counſellors will but take *
wind of him; inſtead of giving free counſel, B e
To WIND. v. a. ſpinban, Sax, winden, Dutch, from the j
1. To blow; to ſound by inflation. un.]
The ſquire 'gan nigher to approach,
And wind his horn under the caſtle wall,
That with the noiſe it ſhook as it would fall. F. &amp;
Every Triton's horn is winding, - - -
Welcome to the */ plain. Dryden.
Ye vigºrous ſwains ! while youth ferments yourbº
Wind the ſhrill horn, or ſpread the waving net. P &gt;
2. To turn round; to twiſt. ºft,
Nero could touch and time the harp well; but in govern-
ment ſometimes he uſed to wind the pins too high, and ſome-
times let them down too low. Bacm
The figure of a ſturdy woman done by Michael Angº,
waſhing and winding of linen cloaths, in which aim.
wrings out the water that made the fountain. Wºtton,
Wind the wood-bine round this arbour. Milton,
3. To regulate in action.
He vaulted with ſuch eaſe into his ſeat,
As if an angel dropt down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a firy pegaſus,
And witch the world with noble horſemanſhip, Shah.
In a commonwealth or realm,
The government is call'd the helm;
With which, like veſſels under ſail,
They're turn'd and winded by the tail, Hudibrai,
4. To noſe ; to follow by ſcent.
5. To turn by ſhifts or expedients.
Whence turning of religion's made
The means to turn and wind a trade. Hudibrar,
6. To introduce by inſinuation. -
You have contriv'd to take
From Rome all ſeaſon'd offices, and to wind
Yourſelf into a power tyrannical. Shakespeare Coriolanuſ.
Edmund, ſeek him out, wind me into him, frame the bu-
fineſs after your own wiſdom. Shakeſ King Lear.
Little arts and dexterities they have to wind in ſuch thing
into diſcourſe. Government ºf the Tangut.
7. To change. - -
Were our legiſlature veſted in the prince, he might wind
and turn our conſtitution at his pleaſure, and ſhape our go-
vernment to his fancy. Addison.
8. To entwiſt; to enfold; to encircle.
Sleep thou and I will wind thee in my arms. Shah.
You know me well, and herein ſpend but time
To wind about my love with circumſtance. Shaiſ,
Sometime am I
All wound with adders who with cloven tongue:
Do hiſs me into madneſs. Shalºft.
9. To WIND out. To extricate. h
When he found himſelf dangerouſly embarked hebethougº
himſelf of all poſſible ways to diſentangle himſelf, and to wi
himſelf out of the labyrinth he was in. Clarendºn.
Io. 7, wind up. To bring to a ſmall compaſs, as **
of thread. intimat-
Without ſolemnly winding up one argument, and .
ing that he began another, he lets his thoughts which wº, º
poſſeſſed of the matter, run in one continued ſtrain. ſ *
11.7, wind up. [Uſed of a watch) To convolve the ſpring;
to put in order to a certain end. - toh, or
I frown the while, and perchance wind up my wººff.
play with ſome rich jewel.
Fate ſeemed to wind him up for fourſcore yº"
Yet freſhly ran he on, ten winters more:
Till like a clock worn out with calling time, Dryd.
The wheels of weary life at laſt ſtood ſtill: de an all"
will not the author of the univerſe, having *
tomaton, which can wind up itſelf, ſee wheth""" Grew
ſtill, or gone *r ſe by d
12. To WIND up. To raiſe by degrees. ºth.
Theſe he É. ſo wind º His purpoſe that º:
drew from the court. - im. they railed,
when they could not coolly convince hº . temptſ
and called him an heretick: thus they wºu" "P" Ater.
to a pitch, and treacherouſly made uſe of that º: Oſt
13. To WIND up. To ſtraiten a ſtring by turning
which it is rolled; to put in tune.
Hylas ! why fit we mute, -
Now that each bird ſaluteth the ſpring?
I/ind up the ſlacken'd ſtrings of º lute, Waller,
Neyer canſt thou want matter to fing. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I N
*tja: º
Your lute may wind its ſtrings but little higher
To tune their nôtes to that immortal quire. Prior.
#5. Tº WIND up. To Put in order for reg
watch.
O you kind gods !
Qºre this great breach of his abuſed nature;
Th’ untun'd and jarring ſenſes, O, wind *p,
Of this child changed father.
The weyrd ſiſters, hand in hand,
Poſters of the ſea and land,
Thus do go about, about,
Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
And thrice again to make up nine:
Peace, the charm's wº tºp.
To WIND. v. m.
I. To turn; to change.
So ſwift your judgments turn and wind,
You caſt our fleeteſ wit. a mile behind. Dryden.
2. To turn; to be Convolved.
Some plants can ſupport themſelves, and ſome others creep
along the ground, or ºil) about other trees, and cannot ſup-
port themſelves. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Stairs of a ſolid newel ſpread only upon one ſmall newel, as
the ſeveral folds of fans flººd jº their center; but theſe,
becauſe they ſometimes wind, and ſometimes fly off from that
*inding, take more room up in the ſtair-caſe. Moxon.
3. To move round.
If aught obſtruct thy courſe, yet ſtand not ſtill,
Shakeſ,
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
But wind about, 'till thou haſ topp'd the hill. Denham.
4. To proceed in flexures. -
It ſhall not wind with ſuch a deep indent,
As rob me of ſo rich a bottom here. Shakeſpeare.
He wind, with eaſe
Through the pure marble air his oblique way,
Amongſt innumerable flars. AMilton’s Paradiſ, Loft.
It was a rock winding with one aſcent. Milton.
The filver Thames, her own domeſtick flood,
Shall bear her veſſels, like a ſweeping train;
And often wind, as of his miſtreſs proud,
With longing eyes to meet hj again. Dryden.
You that can ſearch thoſe many corner'd minds,
Where woman's crooked fancy turns and wind;. Dryden.
Still fix thy eyes intent upon the throng,
And, as the paſſes open, wind along. Gay.
Swift aſcending from the azure wave,
He took the Path that winded to the cave. Pope.
5. To be extricated; to be diſentangled.
Long lab'ring underneath, ere they could wind
Out of ſuch priſon. Aſilion.
WisDBound alj, [wind and bound.] Confined by contrary
winds.
Yet not for this the wºund navy weigh'd;
Slack were their ſails, and Neptune diſobey'd. Dryden.
When I beſtir myſelf, it is high ſea in his houſe; and when
I fit ſtill, his affairs forſooth are windhound. Addiſon's Speciat.
Is it reaſonable that our Engliſh fleet, which uſed to be the
terror of the ocean, ſhould be windlound 2 Speciator.
W1'NDEGG. m.ſ. An ºg nºt, impregnated; an egg that does
not contain the principles of life.
Sound eggs ſink, and ſuch as are addled ſwim; as do alſo
thoſe termed hypenemia, or windºggs. Brown's W.ulgar Errours.
WINDER. n.ſ.. [from wind.]
1. An inſtrument or perſon by which any thing is turned
round.
To keep troubleſome ſervants out of the kitchen, leave the
**r ſticking on the jack to fall on their heads. Swift.
2. A plant that twiſts itſelf round others. -
Plants that put forth their ſap haſtily, have their bodies not
Proportionable to their length; and therefore they are winders
and creepers, as ivy and bryony. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Wi'NDFAll. n ſ. [wind and ſail J Fruit blown down froń,
the tree.
Gather now, if ripe, your Winter fruits, as apples, to
Prºvent, their falling by the great winds; alſo gather your
wind/alls. Evelyn's Kalendar.
Wº ºf Low ER. m. ſ. The anemone. A flow.
Wºps Ali. m. ſ. [wind and gall.]
Wººdgal's are ſoft, yielding, flatulent tumours or bladders,
full of corrupt jelly, which grow upon each ſide of the ſet-
lock joints, and are ſo painful in hot weather and hard ways,
that they make a horſe to halt. They are cauſed by violént
training, or by a horſe's ſtanding on a ſloping floor, or from
extreme labour and heat, or by blows. Farrier’s Dić.
His horſe infected with the faſhions, full of windgall, and
ſped with ſpavins. Ahºeſ. Taming of the Shrew.
VV 1's pous. m. ſ. [wind and g”.] Gun which diſcharges the
bullet by means of wind compreſſed.
The tº indgun is charged by the forcible compreſſion of air,
being injećted through a ſyringe; the ſtrife and diſtention of
the impriſoned air ſerving, by the help of little falls or ſhut.
within, to ſtop and keep cloſé the vents by which it was ad-
mitted. Aºilkins's Mai4. 44agick.
W I N
Forc’d from *indºwns, lead itſelf can fly,
And d’ - -
ular action: from a wº." rous ſlugs cut ſwiftly through the ſky. Pope.
FSS. n.ſ.. [from windy.]
I. Fulneſs of wind; flatulence.
A windineſ; and
and in the morning.
Orifices are Prepared for the letti
ſpirits in rućtus, or windineſs, the common effects of all fer.
mented liquors.
Player on the Humours.
* Tendency to generate wind. y
Sena loſeth !omewhat of its windineſ;
generally, ſubtile or windy ſpirits are ak. off by incenſion
or evaporation.
Bacon' -
3. Tumour; puffineſs. acon's Natural Hiſtory.
From this his modeſt and humble *ity, virtues which
rarely cohabit with the ſwelling windineſs of much knowledge
iſſued this. *erewood on Largº.
Wi'NDING.. n./ [from *ind.] Flexure; meander. &lt;&gt;
It was the pleaſanteſt Voyage in the world to follow the
*indings of this river Inn, through ſuch a variety of pleaſing
Addison on Italy.
Puffing up of your ſtomach after dinner,
Aarvey on Conſumptions.
"g forth of the rarefied
by decočting; and,
ſcenes as the courſe of it naturally led us.
The ways of heav'n are dark and intricate;
Our inderſtanding traces them in vain,
Sor ſees with how much at the windings run,
ºr where the regular confuſion ends. 4ddºn's Catz.
Wi"NDINGsHenr. n: /, [wind and ſheet.] A ſheet in which
the dead are enwrapped.
Theſe arms of mine ſhall be thy winding/at ;
My heart, ſweet boy, ſhall be thy ſepulchre;
For from my heart thine image ne'er ſhall go. Shakespeare H. VI.
he great windingſheets, that bury all things in oblivion, are
deluges and earthquakes. Bacon.
The chaſte Penelope, having, as ſhe thought, loſt Ulyſſes at
ſea, employed her time in PrºParing a winding/act for Laertes,
the father of her huſband. Speciator.
W1'Ndlass. "...ſ.. [wind and lace.]
* A handle by which a rope or lace is wrapped together round
a cylinder.
2. A handle by which anything is turned.
hus do we of wiſdom and of reach,
With winda/e, and with aſſays of byas,
By indirections find direction. Out.
WI'NDLE. * / [from 70 wind.]. A ſpindle.
WI'NDMILL: n, /.. [wind and *] A mill turned by the
wind.
We like Don Quixote do advance
Againſt a windmill our vain lance. Waller.
Such a ſailing chariot might be more Conveniently framed
with moveable fails, whoſºc. may be impreſſed from their
motion, equivalent to thoſe in a windmill. //ilkins.
*indmill, grind twice the Quantity in an hour that water.
mills do. - Mortimer's Huſſandry.
His fancy has made a giant of a windmill, and hº now
engaging it. A. Atterbury.
W1'Ndow. * / [windus, Daniſh. Skinner thinks it originally
wind-door.]
I. An aperture in a building by which air and light are intro-
mitted.
Being one day at my window all alone,
Shakespeare . Hamlet.
Many ſtrange things happened me to ſee. Spenſºr.
A fair view her windºw yields,
The town, the river, and thé fields. J/aller.
He through a little windºw caſt his ſight,
Though thick of bars that gave a ſcanty light;
it ev'n that glimmering ſerv'd him to deſcry
Th' inevitable charms of Emily. Dryden.
When you leave the windº, open for air, leave boºks on
the window-ſeat, that they may get air too. Swift.
2. The frame of glaſs or any other materials that covers the
aperture.
To thee I do commend my watchful ſoul,
Ere I let fall the window, of mine eyes:
Sleeping or waking, oh defend me ſtill Shakeſp. R. III.
In the ſun's light, ſet into my darkened chamber through a
ſmall round hole in my windºw-ſhutter, at about ten or twelve
fºet from the windºw, I placed a lens. Newton's Opt.
3. Lines croſſing each other. -
The favºrite, that juſt begins to prattle,
Is very humorſome, and makes great clutter, -
'Till he has windºws on his bread and butter. King.
4. An aperture reſembling a window.
To WINDow. v. a. ſſrom the noun.]
1. To furniſh with windows. -
Between theſe half columns above, the whole room was
windowed round. Wººtton's Architecture.
With pert flat eyes ſhe windºw’d well its head, -
A brain of feathers, and a heart of lead. Pope's Dunciad.
2. To place at a window. -
Would'ſt thou be wind w'a in great Rome, and ſee
Thy maſter thus with placht arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face ſubdu'd
To penetrative ſhame? Shakespeare  Ant. and Cleopatra.
39 S 3. To
Ainſworth. .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I N
W I N
. To break into openings. w
3 Poor naked wretches, whereſoe'er you are,
ide the pelting of this pitileſs ſtorm,
ſº ...; i.º. heads, and unfed ſides,
Your loop'á and window’d raggedneſs, defend you.
From ſeaſons ſuch as theſe ? Shakespeare King Lear.
wi'NDPipe. n.ſ. [wind and pipe.] The paſſage for the breath;
e aſpera arterta.
th %. gallows gape for dogs, let man go free,
And let not hemp his windpipe ſuffocate. - Shaiſ. H. V.
The wezzon, rough artery, or windpipe, is a part inſervient
to voice and reſpiration: thereby the air deſcendeth unto the
lungs, and is communicated unto the heart. Brown.
The quacks of government, who ſat
At th' unregarded helm of ſtate,
Conſider'd timely how t” withdraw,
And ſave their windpipes from the law. Hudibras.
Becauſe continual reſpiration is neceſſary for the ſupport of
our lives, the windpipe is made with annulary cartilages. Ray.
The windpipe divides itſelf into a great number of branches,
called bronchia: theſe end in ſmall air-bladders, capable to be
inflated by the admiſſion of air, and to ſubſide at the expul-
ſion of it. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
W1'NDwARD. adv. [from wind.] Towards the wind.
W1'NDY. adj. [from wind.]
1. Conſiſting of wind.
See what ſhowers ariſe,
Blown with the windy tempeſt of my ſoul
Upon thy wounds, that kill mine eyes and heart. Shakeſp.
Subtile or windy ſpirits are taken off by incenſion or evapo-
ration. Bacon.
2. Next the wind.
Lady, you have a merry heart.
—Yes, my lord, I thank it, poor fool,
It keeps on the windy ſide of care.
3. Empty; airy.
Why ſhould calamity be full of words?
Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Poor breathing orators of miſeries.
What windy joy this day had I conceiv'd,
Hopeful of his deliv'ry, which now proves
Abortive as the firſt-born bloom of Spring,
Nipt with the lagging rear of Winter's froſt. Milton.
Look, here's that windy applauſe, that poor tranſitory plea-
ſure, for which I was diſhonoured. South.
Of ev’ry nation, each illuſtrious name
Such toys as theſe have cheated into fame,
Exchanging ſolid quiet to obtain
The windy ſatisfaction of the brain.
4. Tempeſtuous; moleſted with wind.
On this windy ſea of land the fiend
Walk'd up and down. Milton.
It is not bare agitation, but the ſediment at the bottom,
that troubles and defiles the water; and when we ſee it windy
and duſty, the wind does not make but only raiſe duſt. South.
5. Puffy; flatulent.
In ſuch a windy colic, water is the beſt remedy after a ſur-
feit of fruit. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
WINE. m. ſ. ſpin, Saxon; vinn, Dutch.]
1. The fermented juice of the grape.
The wine of life is drawn, and the meer lees
Is left this vault to brag of. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Do not fall in love with me;
For I am falſer than vows made in wine. Shakespeare
The increaſe of the vineyards for the wine-cellars. Chron.
Be not amongſt wine-bibbers, amongſt riotous eaters. Prov.
Thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine-fat. Iſ.
They took old ſacks upon their aſſes, and wine-bottles old
and rent, and bound up. joſ. ix. 4.
Where the wine-preſs is hard wrought, it yields a harſh
wine that taſtes of the grape-ſtone. Bacon.
His troops on my ſtrong youth like torrents ruſht;
As in a wine-preſs, Judah's daughter cruſht. Sandys.
With large wine-offerings pour'd, and ſacred feaſt. Mill.
Shall I, to pleaſe another wine-ſprung mind,
Loſt all mine own God hath giv'n me a meaſure,
Short of his canne and body: muſt I find
Shakeſpears.
Shakespeare Rich. III.
Dryden's juvenal.
A pain in that, wherein he finds a pleaſure? Herbert.
The firſtlings of the flock are doom'd to die;
Rich fragrant wines the cheering bowl ſupply. Pope.
. If the hºgſhead falls ſhort, the wine-cooper had not filled it
in proper time. Swift's Direáiions to the Butler.
2. Preparations of vegetables by fermentations, called by the
general name of wines, have quite different qualities from the
plant; for no fruit, taken crude, has the intoxicating quality
wºQU77te. Arbuthnot.
G. m. ſ. Jächpinz, Saxon; winge, Daniſh.]
1. The limb of a bird by which ſhe flies.
As Venus' bird, the white ſwift lovely dove,
Poth on her wing her utmoſt ſwiftneſs prove,
Finding the gripe of falcon fierce not fur. Sidney.
- Ignorance is the curſe of God,
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heav'n,
- Shakeſ
An eagle ſtirreth up her neſt, ſpreadeth abroad he halft.
taketh them, and beareth them on her wing. t wing,
A ſpleenleſs wind ſo ſtretcht &amp; Deut. xxxii.
Her wings to waft us, and ſo urgid our keel. Chapman
The prince of augurs, Helitherſes, roſe; lung.
Preſcient he view'd th’ aerial tracts, and drew
A ſure preſage from ev’ry wing that flew. Pºpe', 0ſ).
2. A fan to winnow.
%ing, cartnave, and buſhel, peck, ready at hand. ſ
3. Flight; paſſage by the wing. Peck, ready at hand. Twº.
Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to th' rooky wood:
Good things of day begin to droop and drowze,
While night's black agents to their prey do rouze. Shai,
Thy affections hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy anceſtors. Shakeſp. HIV.
I have purſued her as love hath purſued me, on the wing of
all occaſions. Shakeſp. Merry Wives ºf Wij,
While paſſion is upon the wing, and the man fully enºi
in the proſecution of ſome unlawful object, no remedy ofºº
troul is to be expected from his reaſon. Sauth,
You are too young your power to underſtand;
Lovers take wing upon the leaſt command.
And ſtraight, with in-born vigour, on the wing,
Like mounting larks, to the new morning fing.
Then life is on the wing; then moſt ſhe finks,
When moſt ſhe ſeems reviv'd. Smith's Phadra and Hºl.
4. The motive of flight.
Fearful commenting
Is leaden ſervitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and ſnail-pac'd beggary:
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king. Shakespeare . R. III.
5. The ſide bodies of an army.
The footmen were Germans, to whom were joined as wing:
certain companies of Italians. Knolles' Hiſt, of the Turki,
The left wing put to flight,
The chiefs o'erborn, he ruſhes on the right. Dryden.
6. Any ſide piece.
The plough moſt proper for ſtiff black clays is long, large,
and broad, with a deep head and a ſquare earth-board, the
coulter long and very little bending, with a very large winſ.
Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Dryden,
Dryden,
To WING. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To furniſh with wings; to enable to fly.
The ſpeed of gods
Time counts i. tho' with ſwifteſt minutes win: Mil.
Who knows but he, whoſe hand the lightningforms,
Who heaves old ocean, and who wing; the ſtorms,
Pours fierce ambition in a Caeſar's mind, ind. P
Or turns young Ammon looſe to ſcourge mankind. Pºſt.
2. To ſupply with ſide bodies.
We ourſelf will follow
In the main battle, which on either ſide R. III
Shajibe wººd with our chiefeſt horſe. She'ſ ""
To WING. v. n. To paſs by flight.
I, an old turtle,
will wing me to ſome wither'd bough, and thº
My mate, that's never to be found again, '. Winter'. Tak
Lament ’till I am loſt. Shift are: Wintrº
warm'd with more particles of heav'nly flºº
He wing'd his upward flight, and ſoard to fame; Dryd
The reſt remain’d below, a crowd without a " rya.
Struck with the horrour of the fight, Prior,
She turns her head, and wings her flight.
From the Meotis to the northern ſca,
The goddeſs wings her deſp'rate way.
Wi’NG ED. adj. [from wing.] Furniſhed
ſwift; rapid.
Now we bear the king
Tow'rd Calais: grant him there,
Heave him away upon your winged
Athwart the ſea. - brief
Hie, good fir Michael, bear this ſealed "...iſ H. IV.
With winged haſte to the lord marſhal. d he wº
And ſhall grace not find . that finds
The ſpeedieſt of thy winged meſſengº, | Lºft,
To .# all thy º P jillºn's Parad/
Priºr,
with wings; flyiné:
and there being ſeen,
thoughts
...” Henry V.
We can fear no force IWallºr,
But winged troops, or Pegaſcan horſe:
The ºrg.a lion's not ſo fierce in fight: IWaller.
As Libri's hand preſents him to our ſig" f the quad!"
The cockney is ſurpriſed at many actions 0 Walti,
and winged animals in the fields. lant
WINoed PFA'. n / [ochrus, Latin.] A "...ſ. empalem."
It hath a papilionaceous flower, out ºf "... ºf the
riſes the pointal, which afterwards tºº º ſeeds.
moſt part round and cy lindrical, filled W" After
Wiscs#1.”<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I N
**
*
-
-
--
.*
Wºnoshell. n.ſ. ſwing and /hell.] The ſhell that covers Wi'NKINcly.
the wing of inſects.
The long-ſhelled goat-chaffer is above an inch long, and the
wingſhells of themſelves an inch, and half an inch broad ; ſo
‘leep as to come down below the belly on both ſides. Grew.
Wi’NGY, adj. [from wing.] Having wings.
They ſpring together out, and ſwiftly bear
The flying youth through clouds and yielding air;
With wingy ſpeed out-ſtrip the eaſtern wind,
And leave the breezes of the morn behind. Addiſon.
To WINK. v. m. ſpincean, Saxon; wincken, Dutch.]
1. To ſhut the eyes.
Let's ſee thine eyes; win; now, now open them:
In my opinion, yet, thou ſee'ſt not well. Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
They're fairies; he that ſpeaks to them ſhall die:
I'll win; and couch; no man their ſports muſt eye. Shakespeare
His falſe cunning
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
r Andgrew a twenty years removed thing,
While one would wink. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
He with great imagination,
Proper to madmen, led his pow'rs to death,
And, winking, leap'd into deſtruction. Shakespeare H. IV.
In deſpite of all this, he runs fooliſhly into his fin and ruin,
merely becauſe he winks hard, and ruſhes violently like a horſe
into the battle. Taylor.
The Scripture repreſents wicked men as without under-
ſtanding; not that they are deſtitute of the nati. faculty:
they are not blind, but they win;. Tillotſºn.
If any about them ſhoulá make them think there is any dif-
ference between being in the dark and winking, get it out of
their minds. Locke.
2. To hint, or direét by the motion of the eyelids.
You ſaw my maſter win; and laugh upon you. Shakeſp.
Send him a ſpoon when he wants a knife: ºat the foot-
man to leave him without a plate. Swift.
3. To cloſe and exclude the light.
While Hermes pip'd and ſung, and told his tale,
The keeper's winking eyes began to fail,
And drowſy ſlumber on the lids to creep,
"Till all the watchman was at length aſleep. Dryden.
When you ſhoot, and ſhut one eye,
You cannot think he would deny
To lend the t'other friendly aid,
Or wink, as coward, and afraid. Prior.
4. To connive; to ſeem not to ſee; to tolerate. - -
They be better content with one that will win; at their
faults, than with him that will reprove them. Whitgifte.
I, for winking at your diſcords too,
Have loſt a brace of kinſmen. Shakespeare. Romeo and juliet.
Let not night ſee my black and deep deſires;
The eye win; at the hand Shatſ. Macbeth.
The king gave him great gifts, and winked at the great ſpoil
of Boſworth-field, which came almoſt wholly to this man's
hands. Bacon's Henry VII.
Let us not write at a looſe rambling rate,
In hope the world will wink at all our faults. Roſcommon.
Some faults of courſe with childhood end;
We therefore wink at wags, when they offend, }
And ſpare the boy, in hopes the man may mend. Dryden.
Obſtinacy cannot be winked at, but muſt be ſubdued. Lock.
Cato is ſtern, and awful as a god:
He knows not how to wink at human frailty, -
Or pardon weakneſs that he never felt. Addiſon's Cato.
5. To be dim. -
The ſullen tyrant ſlept not all the night,
But, lonely walking by a winking light, * . L. -
Sobb'd, wept and groan'd, and beat his wither'd breaſt. Dry.
WINK. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
I. Aćt of cloſing the eye.
You doing thus, igh
To the perpetual wink for ay might put -
This º moral. y Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
At every wink of an eye ſome new grace will be born. Shakespeare
Since I receiv'd command to do this buſineſs, -
I have not ſlept one wink. Shakespeare Cymbeline,
The beams ſo reverend and ſtrong,
Do'ſt thou not think -
I could eclipſe and cloud them with a wink,
But that I would not loſe her fight ſo long? - Donne.
It raged ſo all night, that I could not ſleep a wink. Temple.
Not write but then I think;
And for my ſoul I cannot ſleep a wink. Pope.
2. A hint given by motion of the eye. -
Her wink each bold attempt forbids. Sidney.
The ſtockjobber thus from 'Change-alley goes down,
And tips you the freeman a wink; *
Let me have but your vote to ſerve for the town, -
And here is a guinea to drink. Swift.
Wi'NKER. n. / [from wink..] One who winks.
A ſet of nodders, winkers, and whiſperers, whoſe buſineſs
is to ſtangle all others offspring of wit in their birth. Pºpe.
I
4.
Wi'NNING. participal adj. [from win J Attractive; ch
W I N
cloſed.
If one beholdeth the light,
do that are purblind; but if a
"Pon it with a broad and full eye.
*NNER. m. ſ. [from *in.] One who wins.
A gameſter, having loſt all, borroweth of his next fellow-
y; which he ſetting unto
gameſter. ſomewhat to maintain pla
him again, ſhortly thereby winneth all from the winner.
Go together,
You precious win. all;
Partake to every one,
Beſhrew the winners; for the lay’d me falſ
Whether the winnerial, y play’d me falſe.
your exultation
and rather than quarrel with his own ſkill,
dice.
Yet leſs fair,
Leſs winning ſoft, leſs amiably mild,
Than that ſmooth wat'ry image. Milton', Paradiſ. Lºft.
On her, as queen,
A pomp of winning graces waited ſtill ;
And from about her ſhot darts of defit.
Into all eyes, to wiſh her ſtill in fight. Mill, Parad. Lº/?.
Cato's ſoul
Shines out in every thing ſhe aëts or ſpeaks,
While winning mildneſs and attractive ſmiles
Dwell in her looks, and with becoming grace
Soften the rigour of her father's virtuj Addiſon's Cato.
Wi’NNING.. n.ſ.. [from win.] The ſum won.
A ſimile in one of Congreve's Prologues compares a writer
to a buttering gameſter, that ſtakes all fis winnings upon every
caſt; ſo that if he loſes the laſt throw, he is ſure to be un-
done. Addiſon's Freeholder.
To W1'NNow. v. a. ſpinonian, Saxon; evanno, Latin.]
1. To ſeparate by means of the wind; to part the grain from
the chaff.
Were our royal faith martyrs in love,
We ſhall be winnow'd with ſo rough a wind,
That even our corn ſhall ſeem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partition. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
In the ſun your golden grain diſplay,
And thraſh it out and winnow it by day. Dryden's Pirgil.
2. To fan; to beat as with wings.
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air. 44ilton's Paradiſe Lºft.
3. To ſift; to examine.
*innow well this thought, and you ſhall find
'Tis light as chaff that flies before the wind. Dryden.
4. To ſeparate; to part.
Bitter torture ſhall
Winnow the truth from falſhood. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
To WINNow. v. n. To part corn from chaff.
Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way.
Ecclus v. 9.
WINNow ER, m ſ [from winnow..] He who winnows.
WINTER. m. ſ. ſpinten, Saxon; winter, Daniſh, German,
and Dutch..] The cold ſeaſon of the year.
Though he were already ſtept into the winter of his age,
he found himſelf warm in thoſe deſires, which were in his ſºn
far more excuſeable. Sidney.
After Summer evermore ſucceeds
The barren ſ/inter with his nipping cold. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Thoſe flaws and ſtarts
Impoſtors brow to fear, would well become
A woman's ſtory at a I/inter's fire. Shakeſp. Maclºth.
He hath bought a pair of caſt lips of Diana: a nun of Iłin-
ter's ſiſterhood kiſſes not more religiouſly; the very ice of cha-
ſtity is in them. Shakespeare. As you like it.
The two beneath the diſtant poles complain
Of endleſs I/inter and perpetual rain. Dryden.
Lieſ thou aſleep beneath thoſe hills of ſnow
Stretch out thy lazy limbs; awake, awake,
And Winter from thy furry mantle ſhake. Dryden.
Suppoſe our poet was your foe before,
Yet now, the bus'neſs of the field is o'er,
'Tis time to let your civil wars alone,
When troops are into //inter-quarters gone. Dryden.
He that makes no refle&amp;tions on what he reads, only loads
his mind with a rhapſody of tales, fit in Ił inter-nights for the
entertainment of others. - Lockey
The republick have ſent to prince Eugene to defire the em-
peror's protećtion, with an offer of // inter-quarters for four
thouſand Germans. - - . Addison on Italy.
Stern Winter ſmiles on that auſpicious clime,
The fields are florid with unfading prime. Pºpe.
r- - - s with
To define Winter, I conſider firſt wherein it agrees w
Summer, Spring, Autumn, and I find they are all ſeaſons of
the year; therefore a ſeaſon of the year is a genus: then I ob-
ſerve wherein it differs from theſe, and that . in º: ſhortneſs
----- - this may be called its ſpecial nature, or
of the days; therefore this ma P difference:
f
* [from winking.] with the eye almoſt
he vieweth it winkingly, as thoſe
"ything that is black, he lookeſh
Peacham on Drawing.
S.béniſer.
Shakespeare J/inter'; Tal.
Shakespeare.
ghs or no, the loſer will complain;
will do it at the
Temple.
arming.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I P
W I S
difference: then, by joining theſe together, I make 2. defini:
tion. If inter is that ſeaſon of the year wherein the days are
ſhortcſl. Iłatt's Lºgick.
To wi'N TER. v. n. [from the noun..] To paſs the Winter.
The fowls ſhall ſummer upon them, and all the beaſts of
the earth ſhall winter upon them. - - I/. xviii. 6.
Becauſe the haven was not commodious to twinter in, the
more part adviſed to depart. - Aº Xxvii. 12.
To wrºte R. v. a. To feed or manage in the Winter.
The cattle generally ſold for ſlaughter within, or exporta-
tion abroad, had never been handled or wintered at hand-
In Cat. Temple.
Young lean cattle may by their growth pay for their win-
tering, and ſo be ready to fat next Summer. AMortimer.
WINTER is often uſed in compoſition.
The king ſat in the winter-houſe, and there was a fire
burning before him. jer. xxxvi. 22.
If in November and December they fallow, 'tis called a
winter-fallowing. Mortimer.
Shred it very ſmall with thyme, ſweet margarome, and a
little winter-ſavoury. 1/alton's Angler.
W1'NTER BEAT EN. adj. [//inter and beat..] Harraſſed by ſevere
weather.
He compareth his careful caſe to the ſad ſeaſon of the year,
to the froſty ground, to the frozen trees, and to his own win-
terbeaten flocke. Spenſer.
Wi’N tº Ric HFRRY. m. ſ. [alºeſſenge.] A plant.
The fruit is about the bigneſs of a cherry, and incloſed in
the cup of the flower, which ſwells over it in form of a
bladder. Miller.
W (NTER cit Ron. n.ſ. A ſort of PEAR, which ſee.
WiNTER GREEN. m. ſ. ſpyrola, Latin.] A plant.
It hath a roſe-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of ſeveral leaves,
which are placed circularly; out of whoſe cup ariſes the
pointal, ending in a proboſcis, which afterwards turns to a
roundiſh fruit, which is channelled, generally umbellated, and
conſiſting of five cells, which are commonly full of ſmall
feeds. Miller.
Wi'N TER LY. adj. [Winter and like..] Such as is ſuitable to
Winter; of a wintry kind.
If't be Summer news,
Smile to't before; if winterly, thou necd'ſt
But keep that count'nance ſtill. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
W1'NTRY. adj. [from J/inter.] Brumal; hyemal.
He ſaw the Trojan fleet diſpers'd, diſtreſs'd
By ſtormy winds, and wintry heav'n oppreſs'd. Dryden.
Wi'NY. adj. [from wine.] Having the taſte or qualitics of
Wine.
Set cucumbers here and there among muſkmelons, and ſee
whether the melons will not be more winy, and better taſted.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To WIPE. v. a. [pipan, Saxon.]
1. To cleanſe by rubbing with ſomething ſoft,
Such a handkerchief, -
I'm ſure it was your wife's, did I to-day
See Caſio wipe his beard with.
She agentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wip'd them with her hair. Milton.
Then with her veſt the wound ſhe wipes and drics. Denh.
2. To take away by terſion.
Calumniate ſtoutly; for though we wipe away with never
ſo much care the dirt thrown at us, there will be left ſome
ſulliage behind. Decay ºf Piety.
3. To ſtrike off gently.
Let me wipe off this honourable dew,
That filverly doth progreſs on thy cheeks. Shakeſpeare.
Some natural tears they dropp'd, but wip'd them ſoon.
Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
- A young man, having ſuffered many tortures, eſcaped with
life, and told his fellow Chriſtians, that the pain of them had
been rendered tolerable by the preſence of an angel, who
fºod by him and wiped off the tears and ſweat. Addiſon.
4. To clear away.
- Macduff, this noble paſſion,
Child of integrity, hath from my ſoul
Iłºp'd the black ſcruples; reconcil'd my thoughts
To thy good truth and honour. Shakespeare Macbeth.
5. To cheat; to defraud.
The next bordering lords commonly incroach one upon
another, as one is ſtronger, or lie ſtill in wait to wipe them
out of their lands. Spenſer on Ireland.
6. To WIPE out. To efface.
This blot, that they objećt againſt your houſe,
Shall be wip'd out in the next parliament. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
º thou lov'ſ me, Camillo, wipe not out the reſt of thy
+. by leaving Ine now. Shakeſp. //inter’s Tale.
* ºn in whom decrepid old age has blotted out the
lº of his paſt knowledge, and clearly wiped out the ideas
..". was formerly ſtored with, and ſtopped up all the paſ-
intº º º: °nes to enter; or if there be ſome of the
º * "Pen, the impreſſions made are ſcarce per-
Locke.
Shakespeare Othell.
3. A bird,
Wr'PFR. m.ſ.. [from wipe. J An inſtrument or perſon ty
To WI'RED Raw. v. a. ſwire and draw.]
1. To ſpin into wire.
2. To draw out into length.
year at home, would do a young gent
than three years travel abroad.
Wisdom. n.ſ. Irrºom, Saxon; wiſion, Daniſh
the power of judging rightly.
eſſences of things, ſo wiſdom to their op
WISE. adj. [fºr, Saxon; wis, Dutch an
1. Sapient; judging rightly, particularly of m
having practical knowledge.
WIPE. a. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. An act of cleanſing.
2. A blow; a ſtroke; a jeer; a gybe; a ſarcaſm,
To ſtateſmen would you gived wipe,
You print it in Italick type:
When letters are in vulgăr ſhapes,
'Tis ten to one the wit eſcapes;
But when in capitals expreſi,
The dulleſt reader ſmoaks the jeſt. Sw!?
A.inſwºrth
which any thing is wiped.
The maids and their makes,
At dancing and wakes,
Had their napkins and poſes,
And the wipers for their noſes. Benjºhnſºn
WIRE. m. ſ. [virer, French, to draw round. Skinnir.] Met,
drawn into ſlender threads.
Tane was the damſel; and without remorſe
The king condemn'd her, guiltleſs, to the fire:
Her vail and mantle pluckt they off by force, .
And bound her tender arms in twiſted wire. fºr
Thou ſhalt be whipt with wire, and ſtew’d in line, -
Smarting in ling'ring pickle. Shalºp. Ant, and cº,
The ſoldier, that man of iron, I
Whom ribs of horror all environ,
That's ſtrong with wire inſtead of veins,
In whoſe embraces you're in chains. Beaumºnt and Flººr.
And the cherubick hoſt, in thouſand quires,
Touch their immortal harps of golden wire. Miltºn.
Some roll a mighty ſtone, ſome laid along,
And, bound with burning wires, on ſpokes of wheels are
hung. Dryden's ſtn,
A fluid moving through a flexible canal, when ſmall, by
its frićtion will naturally lengthen, and wiredraw the ſides of
the canal, according to the direction of its axis. Arluthnºt.
3. To draw by art or violence.
I have been wrongfully accuſed, and my ſenſe wiridrawn
into blaſphemy. Dryden.
Wi"REDR Aw ER. m. ſ. [wire and draw.) One who ſpins wire.
Thoſe who have need of unmixed ſilver, as gilders and
wiredrawers, muſt, beſides an equal weight of ſilver mixed
with other metals, give an overplus to reward the refineſs
ſkill. Locłe.
To Wis. v. a. pret. and part, paſſ wift. [wiſh, German;
wyſºn, Dutch..] To know. Obſolete.
Thus proud and fierce, unto the hearts he ſtept
Of them poor ſouls; and cutting reaſon's reins, -
Made them his own before they had it wift. Siły,
There be fools alive, I wis, *
Silver'd o'er; and ſo was this. Shahſ eart.
This book, adviſedly read and diligently followed but one
eman more good, lºi,
Aſham's Sºhºmºſir.
When Mammon ſaw his purpoſe miſt,
Him to entrap unwares, another's way he wiſh Fº §t".
Marry with a king,
A batchelor, a handſome ſtrippling too,
I wis your grandam had a . match. Sºft. R. III,
When for more worlds the Macedonian cry",
He wift not Thetys in her lap did hide
Another yet, a world reſerv'd for you, Iſºlºr
To make more great than that he did ſubduº, º:
j Sapience;
dneſs, and that
That which moveth God to work is goo hich perfººth
which ordereth his work is wiſdom, and that W Hººr.
his work is power.
'Tis much he dares, - -
And to that dauntleſs temper of his º:
He hath a wiſdom that doth guide his valouſ -
To act in º: § Shakespeare Macleth
If iſom and fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can, fra.
No chance may ſhake it. Shakespeare At and Cleºpatr
As from ſenſes reaſon's work doth ſpring,
So many reaſons underſtanding gain; , .
And many underſtandings knowledge bring, Davieſ.
And by much knowledge wiſdom we obtain. tare the be"
lſº, is that which makes men judge whº
ends, and what the beſt means to attain them, * Temple.
advantage of counſel and direction.
he
- - hich relateth to t
As ſcience is properly that º. Grºw's Cº."
d Daniſh.J
atteſS of life;
- - - d ſimple
I would have you wiſe unto that which is tº: º
concerning evil.
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I S
s
s
-
:
º
Heav'n is for thee too high; belowly wiſ. Milton.
All their writings were compoſed in verſe, which were jºi
runes, or viiſes, and from thence the term of wiſe came. Temp,
Since the floods demand
For their deſcent a prone and finking land:
Does not this due declivity declare,
A wiſe director's providential care : Blackmore.
The wiſ/? and beſt men in all ages, have lived up to the
religion of their country, when they ſaw nothing in it oppo-
ſite to morality. Addiſon.
2. Skilful; dextrous,
Speak unto all that are wiſe-hearted, whom I have filled
with the ſpirit of wiſdom, that they may make Aaron's gar-
Inents. - Ex. xxviii. 3.
Do we count him a wiſe man, who is wiſ, in anything but
his own proper profeſſion and employment, and wiſe for every
body but himſelf? Tillotſon.
They are wiſe to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. jer. iv. 22.
3, Skilled in hidden arts.
There was an old fat woman even now with me.
-Pray, was’t not the wie woman of Brainford Shakeſp.
4. Grave; becoming a wiſe man.
One eminent in wiſe deport ſpake much. Milton.
WISE. n.ſ. ſpire, Saxon; wiſe, Dutch ; weiſe, German;
guiſe, Fr., guia, Italian.]. Manner; way of being or acting.
This word, in the modern diale&amp;t, is often corrupted into wa :
This ſong ſhe ſings in moſt commanding iſ ; J
Come, ſhepherd's boy, let now thy heart be bow’d
To make itſelf to my leaſt look a ſlave. Sidney.
Ere we farther paſs, I will deviſe
A paſſport for us both, in fitteſt wiſe.
On this wiſe ye ſhall bleſs Iſrael.
The lovers ſtanding in this doleful wift,
A warrior bold approached. Jairfax.
With foam upon thy lips, and ſparkling eyes,
Thou ſay'ſt and do'ſt in ſuch outrageous wife,
That mad Oreſtes, if he ſaw the ſhow,
Wou'd ſwear thou wert the madder of the two. Dryden.
'Tis in no wife ſtrange that ſuch a one ſhould believe, that
things were blindly ſhuffled. J/oodward.
Wise AcRE. */ [It was antiently written wiſ/gger, as the
Dutch wiſ-ggher, a ſoothſayer.]
1. A wiſe, or ſententious man. Obſolete.
2. A fool ; a dunce.
Why, ſays a wiſeacre that ſat by him, were I as the king of
France, I would ſcorn to take part with footmen. S Addiſon.
W1's ELY. adv. [from wiſe.] Judiciouſly ; prudently.
If thou covet death, as utmoſt end
Of miſery; ſo thinking to evade
The penalty pronounc'd ; doubt not God
Hath wiftlier arm'd his vengeful ire. Aſilºn's Par. Lºft.
He ſits like diſcontented Damocles,
When by the ſportive tyrant wiſely ſhown.
Hubberd’s Tale.
Numb. vi. 23.
The dangerous pleaſure of a flatter'd throne. Dryden.
Admitting their principles to be true, they act wiſely: they
keep their end, evil as it is, ſteadily in view. Rogers.
The doćtors, tender of their fame,
Iſiſely on me lay all the blame:
We muſt confeſs his caſe was nice,
But he wou'd never take advice. Swift.
Wi’s E N Ess. n.ſ. [from wiſe.] Wiſdom; ſapience. Obſolete.
No leſs deſerveth his wittineſs in deviſing, his pithineſs in
uttering, his paſtoral rudeneſs, and his moral wiſenſ. Spenſer.
To WISH. v. m. [Frcian, Saxon.]
1. To have ſtrong deſire; to long.
The ſun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted,
and wiſhed in himſelf to die. jonah iv. 8.
That Noah or ſanus underſtood navigation, may be very well
ſupported by his image found upon the firſt Roman coins. One
ſide was ſtampt with a Janus bifrons, and the other with a
roſtrum, or prow of a ſhip. This is as good an argument as
an antiquary could wiſh for. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To be diſpoſed, or inclined.
Thoſe potentates, who do not wiſh well to his affairs,
have ſhewn reſpect to his perſonal character. Addiſon.
3. It has a ſlight ſignification of hope. -
I wiſh it may not prove ſome ominous foretoken of misfor-
tune, to have met with ſuch a miſer as I am. Sidney.
To W is H. v. a.
1. To deſire ; to long for.
He was fain to pull him out by the heels, and ſhew him
the beaſt as dead as he could wiſh it. Sidney, b. i.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To ſport would be as tedious as to work;
But when they ſeldom come, they wiſht for come. Shakeſp.
They have more than heart could wiſh. Pſ. lxxiii. 7.
There are ſhips prepar’d by my command, -
That ſhall convey you to the wiſht-for port. Addiſon's Cato.
2. To recommend by wiſhing.
Had I as many ſons as I have hairs,
I would not wiſh them to a fairer death. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
W I T
3. To imprecate.
If heavens have any grievous pl -
- - plague in ſtore
Exceeding thoſe that f an wiſh upon thee; &gt;
* let them keep it till thy fins be ripe,
4. ºften hurl down their indignation. Shakespeare Rich. III.
º º º the beſt way to make Antrim communi-
* *ffair to him, and to wiſh his aſſiſt larena
W is H. m. ſ. [from the vers. % his aſſiſtance. Clarendºn.
1. Longing defire.
. . To his wiſh, -
º: hope, Eve ſeparate he ſpies. Milton.
wiſh is properly the defire of a man ſitting or lying ſtill ;
but an act of the will, is a man o - - -
- f buſineſs vigorouſly goin
about his work. gorºuſly going
2. Thing deſired. South's Sermons,
What next I bring ſhall pleaſe thee; be aſſurd
Thy likeneſs, thy fit help, thy other ń. allurid,
Thy wiſh, exactly to thy heart's d ſire. : J. ---&gt; -
3. Deſire expreſſed. y y s deſire. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Shame come to Romeo
—Bliſter'd be thy tongue
For ſuch a wiſh. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
I admire your whig-principles of reſiſtance in the ſpirit of
the Barcelonians: I join in your wiſh for them. Pope.
Wi’s HEDLY. adv. [from wiſh...] According to deſire. Not uſed.
What could have happened unto him more wiſhedly, than
with his great honour to keep the town ſtill. Knolles.
Wish ER. n.ſ.. [from wiſh.] -
1. One who longs.
2. One who expreſſes wiſhes.
With half that wiſh, the wiſher's eyes be preſs'd, Shakespeare .
Wishful. adi, [from wiſh and full.] Longing; ſhowing defife.
From Scotland am I ſtol’n ev’n of pure love, o
To greet mine own land with my wiſhful fight. Shakeſpeare.
W1"sh FULLY. adv. [from wiſhful..] Earneſtly, with longing.
Wi's KET. n.ſ. A baſket. Ainſworth.
Wisp. n.ſ. [wiſp, Swediſh, and old Dutch..] A ſmall bundle,
as of hay or ſtraw.
A gentleman would faſt five days, without meat, bread, or
drink; but the ſame uſed to have continually a great wiſp of
herbs that he ſmelled on ; and amongſt thoſe, ſome eſcălent
herbs of ſtrong ſcent, as onions. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Jews, who their whole wealth can lay
In a ſmall baſket, on a wiſp of hay. Dryden,
Wist. pret, and part. of wis.
Wi’stful. adj.
1. Attentive; earneſt; full of thought.
Why, Grubbinel, doſt thou ſo wiſ'ful ſeem :
There's ſorrow in thy look. Gay's Paſtoral.
2. It is uſed by Swift, as it ſeems, for wiſhful.
Lifting up one of my ſaſhes, I caſt many a wiſtful melan-
choly look towards the ſea. Gulliver’s Travels.
Wistfully. adv. [from wiłſul..] Attentively; earneſtly.
With that he fell again to pry -
Through perſpective more wiftly.
WI's TLY. adv. [from wis...] Attentively; earneſtly.
Speaking it, he wiftly look'd on me;
As who ſhall ſay, -ſ would thou wert the man. Shakoff.
To WIT. v. n. [prºan, Saxon.] To know. This word is now
only uſed in the phraſe to wit ; that is to ſay.
There is an officer, to wit, the ſheriff of the ſhire, whoſe
office it is, to walk up and down his bailiwick. Speſſºr.
Yet are theſe feet, whoſe ſtrengthleſs ſtay is numb,
Unable to ſupport this lump of clay,
Swift-winged with deſire to get a grave;
As witting, I no other comfort have. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
WIT. n.ſ. [rzepit, Saxon; from prean, to know.]
1. The powers of the mind; the mental faculties; the intel-
lečts. This is the original ſignification.
Who would ſet his wit to ſo fooliſh a bird Shakeſpeare.
The king your father was reputed for
A prince moſt prudent, of an excellent
And unmatch'd wit and judgment. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
Will puts in practice what the wit deviſeth :
Will ever acts, and wit contemplates ſtill:
And as from wit the power of wiſdom riſeth,
All other virtues daughters are of will.
Will is the prince, and wit the counſellor,
Which doth for common good in council fit;
And when wit is reſolv’d, will lends her power
To execute what is advis'd by wit. Davies's Ireland.
For wit and pow'r, their laſt endeavours bend
T'outſhine each other. Dryden.
2. Imagination; quickneſs of fancy. -
They never meet, butthere's aſkirmiſh of witbetween them.--
—Alas, in our laſt conflićt four of his five wits went halting
off, and now is the whole man govern'd by one. Shakeſp.
flewd, ſhallow, hair-brain’d huffs, make atheiſm and con-
Hudibrar.
tempt of religion, the only badge and charaćter of wit. South. .
And though a tun in thy large bulk be writ,
Yet thou art but a kilderkin of wit. . Dryden.
32 T //it
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I T
W I T
ſt in the aſſemblage of ideas, and putting
J//it lying mo - -
ºft, with quickneſs and variety, wherein can be
5
found any reſemblance, or congruity, thereby to make up
pleaſant pictures in the fancy. Judgment, on the contrary,
lies in ſeparating carefully one from another, ideas, wherein
... be found the leaſt difference, thereby to avoid being
miſled by ſimilitude. - Locke.
Cou'd any but a knowing prudent cauſe
Begin ſuch motions, and aſſign ſuch laws?
If the great mind had form'd a different frame,
Might not your wanton wit the ſyſtem blame Blackmore.
3. Sentiments produced by quickneſs of fancy. -
All ſorts of men take a pleaſure to gird at me. The brain
of this fooliſh compounded clay, man, is not able to invent
any thing that tends more to laughter, than what I invent,
and is invented on me. I am not only witty in myſelf, but
the cauſe that wit is in other men. Shakeſpeare.
His works become the frippery of wit. B. johnſon.
The Romans made thoſe times the ſtandard of their wit,
when they ſubdu'd the world. Sprat.
The definition of wit is only this ; that it is a propriety of
thoughts and words; or, in other terms, thoughts and words
elegantly adapted to the ſubject. Dryden.
Let a lord once but own the happy lines;
How the wit brightens, and the ſtyle refines | Pope.
4. A man of fancy.
Intemperate wits will ſpare neither friend nor foe; and
make themſelves the common enemies of mankind. L’Eſtr.
A poet, being too witty himſelf, could draw nothing but
wits in a comedy: even his fools were infected with the diſeaſe
of their author. Dryden.
To tell them wou'd a hundred tongues require;
Or one vain wit’s, that might a hundred tire.
5. A man of genius.
Searching wits, of more mechanick parts;
Who grac'd their age with new-invented arts:
Thoſe who to worth their bounty did extend,
And thoſe who knew that bounty to commend.
How vain that ſecond life in others breath
Th” eſtate which wits inherit after death ;
Eaſe, health, and life, for this they muſt reſign,
Unſure the tenure, but how vaſt the fine !
The great man's curſe, without the gain endure;
Be envy'd, wretched; and be flatter'd, poor.
6. Senſe; judgment.
Strong was their plot,
heir practice cloſe, their faith ſuſpected not;
heir ſtates far off, and they of wary wit.
Come, leave the loathed ſtage,
And this more loathſome age;
Where pride and impudence in faction knit,
Uſurp the chair of wit. B. j.hnſon.
Though his youthful blood be fir’d with wine,
He wants not wit the danger to decline. Dryden.
7. In the plural. Sound mind; intellect not crazed.
If our wits run the wild-gooſe chace, I have done: for
thou haſt more of the wild-gooſe in one of thy wits, than I
have in my whole five. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
I had a ſon,
Now outlaw'd from my blood; he ſought my life:
The grief hath craz'd my wits. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Are his wits ſafe f is he not light of brain Shakeſpeare.
Sound ſleep cometh of moderate eating; he riſeth early,
and his wits are with him : but the pain of watching, and
choler, and pangs of the belly, are with an unſatiable
man. - Eccluſ, xxxi. 20.
Wickedneſs is voluntary frenzy, and every finner does more
extravagant things than any mán that is crazed, and out of
his wits, only that he knows better what he does. Tillotſon.
No man in his wits can ſeriouſly think that his own ſoul
hath exiſted from all eternity. Bentley.
8. Contrivance; ſtratagem ; power of expedients.
How can it chuſe but bring the finiple to their wits end ?
how can it chuſe but vex and amaze them : Hooker.
I was like to be apprehended for the witch of Brainford;
but that my admirable dexterity of wit, counterfeiting the
action of an old woman, delivered me. Shakeſpeare.
Sleights from his wit and ſubtlety proceed. AZilton.
The neighbourhood were at their wits end, to conſider
what would be the iſſue. L’Eſtrange.
Wºº AFT. n.ſ. [wit and craft.] Contrivance; invention.
Obſolete.
He was no body that could not hammer out of his name
an invention by this witcraft, and picture it accordingly.
W1/ - Camden's Remains.
TSRACKER. m. ſ. [wit and cracker.] A joker; one who
breaks a jeſt.
A college of witcrackers cannot flout me out of my hu-
"Yºur ; dolt thou think I care for a ſatire or an epigram Shakespeare
z -
W1'Two RM. *ſ. Itoit and worm.] One that feeds on wit; a
canker of wit.
Pope.
Dryden.
Pope.
Daniel.
Thus to come forth ſo ſudden
WITCH. n.ſ. [Picce, Saxon.]
I. A woman given to unlawful arts.
Wiſe judges have preſcribed, that men
lieve the confeſſions of with, nor .." lº be:
them. For the witches themſelves are imaginative: .
ple are credulous, and ready to impute accid. to º:
craft. - Bacon's Nat. H; .
The night-hag comes to dance ºff.
With Lapland witches, while the lab'ring In OOn
Eclipſes at their charms. c Mil
When I confider whether there are ſuch perſons as º º
my mind is divided : I believe in general that there is º:
thing as witchcraft, but can give no credit to any º d
inſtance of it. Addiſon's Spediator, No 1 º
2. [From pic, Saxon.] A winding ſinuous bank. y 7.
Leave me thoſe hills where harbrough nis to ſee;
Nor holy buſh, nor briar, nor winding with. º
To Witch. v. a. [from the noun..] To bewitch; wº
'Tis now the very witching time of night, -
When churchyards yawn. Shakespeare . Hamla
Me ill befits, that in der-doing arms, it. -
And honour's ſuit my vowed days do ſpend,
Unto thy bounteous baits, and pleaſing charms,
With which weak men thou witcheſt to attend. Spºnſºr
I'llºith ſweet ladies with my words and loºk, s.
Sit and witch me? Shoº Hºn. Vſ.
Wi’tchcraft. n.ſ. ſwitch and craft.] The practice of witches,
Urania name, whoſe force he knew ſo well,
He quickly knew what witchcraft gave the blow. Sidney.
If you cannot
Bar his acceſs to the king, never attempt
Anything on him, for he hath a witchcraft
Over the king in's tongue. Shakespeare . Hºn. VIII.
People are credulous, and ready to impute accidents and
natural operations to witchcraft. Bacon's Nat. Hſ.
What ſubtile witchcraft man conſtrains,
To change his pleaſure into pains. Denham,
W1’tch ERY. m. ſ. [from witch..] Enchantment.
Another kind of petty witchery, if it be not altogether de-
ly a witurn *
y . B. jºhn º,
ceit, they call charming of beaſts and birds. Raleigh.
Great Comus !
Deep-ſkill'd in all his mother's witcheries. Milton,
To WITE. v. a. ſpizan, Saxon.] Toblame; to reproach.
The palmer 'gan moſt bitterly
Her to rebuke, for being looſe and light;
Which not abiding, but more ſcornfully
Scofing at him, that did her juſtly wité, --
She turn'd her boat about. Fairy Queen, c. xii.
Witf. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Blame; reproach. Sº,
WITH, prepoſit. [pts, Saxon.]
1. By. Noting the cauſe.
Truth, tir’d with iteration,
As true as ſteel, as plantage to the moon.
I/ith ev'ry ſtab her bleeding heart was torſ,
iſith wounds much harder to be ſeen than born. "
2. Noting the means. -
Rude and unpoliſhed are all operations of the ſoul in t d
beginnings, before they are cultivated with art and ſtudy. Djá.
3. Noting the inſtrument. -
Boreas through the lazy vapour flies, les. Rºw
And ſweeps, withhealthy wings, the rankpolluted ſkies. º
By perflations with large bellows, miners g” º f
the air. IWººdward.
4. On the ſide of; for.
O madneſs of diſcourſe'
That cauſe ſets up with, and againſt thyſ.lf!
5. In oppoſition to ; in competition or conteſt. I
I do conteſt as hotly and as nobly with tº ºc rislanuſ,
As ever againſt thy valour. - sº Friar.
He ſhall lie with any friar in Spain. Dryden', pany
6. Noting compariſon. - ?
Cân blazing carbuncles with her compa”
. In ſociety.
7 God º man a ſoul that ſhould live for * †.
the body be deſtroyed; and thoſe who wer" goo Stillingfied
with him.
In all thy humours, whether graye ºf mellow,
Sha'ſhºrt,
heir
Shaftart.
Sanji.
low ;
Thou'rt ſuch a touchy, teſty, pleaſing fellow ; hec
Haſt ſo much wit, and mirth, and ſºlº" about t º ºr.
thout thee.
There is no living with thee, nor wi
8. In company of. ... lawing viſitiº
At . #: that your meſſenger car.” " º
tion was with me, a young doćtor from *.
9. In appendage; noting conſequence, 9. sº to regal
Men might know the perſons who had a rº Liſt.
power, and with it to their obedience.
10. In mutual dealing. ºf voº, wº
fºou, ſell with yº
with you, and ſo following; but I will not ca Shººt.
drink with you, nor pray with you. 11. Noi";
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I T
w I T
* - -
: …
-
- -
º
-
:
11. Noting confidence; as I truſt you with all my Jecret: ; or,
I truſt all my ſecrets with you.
12. In partnerſhip.
Though Jove himſelf no leſs content would be,
To part his throne, and ſhare his heaven with thee. Pope.
13. Noting connection.
Pity your own, or pity our eſtate,
Nor twiſt our fortunes with your ſinking fate.
14. Immediately after.
J/ith that ſhe told me, that, though ſhe ſpake of her
father Cremes, ſhe would hide no truth from me. Sidney, b. ii.
JWith that, he crawled out of his neſt,
Forth creeping on his caitiff hands and thighs. Fairy Queen.
In falling, both an equal fortune try’d;
Wou'd fortune for my fall ſo well provide
JWith this he pointed to his face, and ſhow'd
His hands, and all his habit ſmear'd with blood. Dryden.
With that, the God his darling phantom calls,
And from his falt’ring lips this meſſage falls. Garth.
15. Amongſt.
Jaſper Duke of Bedford, whom the king uſed to employ
with the firſt in his wars, was then ſick, Bacon.
Tragedy was originally with the antients, a piece of reli-
gious worſhip. Rymer’s Tragedies of loft Age.
Immortal powers the term of conſcience know,
But intereſt is her name with men below.
16. Upon.
Such arguments had invincible force with thoſe Pagan phi-
loſophers, who became Chriſtians. Addiſon.
17. In conſent. Noting parity of ſtate.
See where on earth the flow'ry glories lie:
Iłith her they flouriſh'd, and with her they die. Pope.
18. Jºith in compoſition ſignifies oppoſition, or privation.
Wi’t HAL. adv. [with and all.]
1. Along with the reſt; likewiſe ; at the ſame time.
Yet it muſt be withal confidered, that the greateſt part of
the world are they which be fartheſt from perfection. Hooker.
How well ſupply'd with noble counſellors
How modeſt in exception, and withal
How terrible in conſtant reſolution ?
The one contains my pićture, prince ;
If you chuſe that, then I am yours withal. Shakeſpeare.
This that prince did not tranſmit as a power, to make con-
queſt, but as a retinue for his ſon, and withal to enable him
to recover ſome part of Ulſter. Davies’s Ireland.
God, when he gave me ſtrength, to ſhew withal
How ſlight the gift was, hung it in my hair. Milton.
Chriſt had not only an infinite power to work miracles,
but alſo an equal wiſdom to know the juſt force and meaſure
of every argument, to perſuade, and withal to look through
and through all the dark corners of the ſoul of man, and to
diſcern what prevails upon them, and what does not. South.
I cannot, cannot bear ; ’tis paſt; 'tis done :
Periſh this impious, this deteſted ſon 1
Periſh his fire, and periſh I withal,
And let the houſe's heir, and the hop'd kingdom fall. Dryd.
2. It is ſometimes uſed by writers where we now uſe with.
Time brings means to furniſh him withal;
Let him but wait th’ occaſions as they fall. Paniel.
It is to know what God loves and delights in, and is
pleaſed withal, and would have us do in order to our happi-
neſs. - Tillotſon.
We owe to chriſtianity the diſcovery of the moſt per-
feót rule of life, that ever the world was acquainted
withal. Tillotſon.
To WITH DRA’w. v. a. [with and draw; from pið, or pièen,
Saxon, againſ, and draw.]
1. To take back; to deprive of.
It is not poſſible they ſhould obſerve the one, who from the
other withdraw unneceſſarily obedience. Hooker, b. v.
Impoſſible it is that God ſhould withdraw his preſence
from any thing, becauſe the very ſubſtance of God is
infinite. Hocker.
2. To call away; to make to retire.
Nauſicaa is withdrawn, and a whole nation introduced, for
a more general praiſe of Ulyſſes. Broome.
To WITHDRA’w. v. n. To retire; to retreat.
She from her huſband ſoft withdrew. Milton.
At this exceſs of courage all amaz'd,
The foremoſt of his foes a-while withdraw:
With ſuch reſpect in enter'd Rome they gaz'd,
Who on high chairs the godlike fathers ſaw. Dryden.
Duumvir has paſs'd the noon of life; but cannot withdraw
from entertainments, which are pardonable only before that
ſtage of our being. Tatler, N° 54.
WITH DRA'w INGRoom.. n.ſ. [withdraw and room..] Room be-
hind another room for retirement.
For an ordinary gentleman, a hall, a great parlour, with a
withdrawingroom, with a kitchen, butteries, and other con-
veniencies, is ſufficient. Mortimer’s Huſbandry.
Dryden,
Dryden.
Shakeſp. Hen. V.
WithE, n.ſ.
I. A willow twig.
. An Iriſh rebel put up a Petition, that he might be hanged
in a with, and not a halter, becauſe it had been ſo uſed
with former rebels. Bacon.
* A band, properly a band of twigs; [prºse ſignifies aband.]
Theſe cords and wythes will hold men's conſciences, when
force attends and twiſts them. K. Charles.
f Birch is of uſe for ox-yoaks, hoops, ſcrews, wythes for
T º: 44%rtimer's Huſbandry.
°.," "HER. v. n. [repºserob, Saxon, dry, faded.]
1. Tº fade; to grow ſapleſ, tº dry up.
That which is of God we defend, to the uttermoſt of that
; which ". #. that which is otherwiſe, let it
wither even in the root from whence it ha - J
When I have pluck'd thy roſe, th ſprung. Hooker.
I cannot give it vital growth again;
It needs muſt wither.
It ſhall wither in all the leaves of her ſpring. Ezek. xvii. 9.
The ſoul may ſooner leave off to ſubſiſt, than to lové.
and like the vine, it withers and dies, if it has nothing to em.
brace. South's Sermons.
2. To waſte, or pine away.
At there ſo many left of your own family, that you
ſhould deſire wholly to reduce it, by ſuffering the laſt branch
Shakeſp. Othella;
of it to wither away before its time. Temple.
3. To loſe, or want animal moiſture.
Vain men, how vaniſhing a bliſs we crave,
Now warm in love, now with'ring in the grave. Dryden.
To W1"the R. v. a.
I. To make to fade.
The ſun is no ſooner riſen with a burning heat, but it w;-
thereth the graſs, and the flower thereof falleth. ja. i. 11.
2. To make to ſhrink, decay, or wrinkle, for want of animal
moiſture.
Age cannot wither her, nor cuſtom ſtale her infinite va-
riety. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
Look how I am bewitch'd; behold, mine arm
Is, like a blaſted ſapling, withered up. Shakeſpeare.
What are theſe,
So wither'd, and ſo wild in their attire, .
That look not like th’ inhabitants o' th' earth,
And yet are on’t Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Thy youth, thy ſtrength, thy beauty, which will change
To wither'd, weak, and grey. Milton.
In Spain our ſprings, like old men's children be,
Decay’d and wither'd, from their infancy:
No kindly ſhowers fall on our barren earth,
To hatch the ſeaſons in a timely birth. Dryden.
Wi'THERED Ness. n.ſ. [from withered.] The ſtate of being
withered ; marcidity.
Water them as ſoon as ſet, 'till they have recovered their
witheredneſs. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
W1'THERBAND. m. ſ. A piece of iron, which is laid under a
ſaddle, about four fingers above the horſe's withers, to keep
the two pieces of wood tight, that form the bow. Farrier's Dić.
WITHERs. n.ſ. Is the joining of the ſhoulder-bones at the
bottom of the neck and mane, towards the upper part of the
ſhoulder. Farrier's Diff.
Let the gall'd beaſt wince;
We are unwrung in the withers. Shakeſpeare.
Rather than let your maſter take long journies, contrive
that the ſaddle may pinch the beaſt in his withers. Swift.
WITHERRUNG. m. ſ. Witherrung ſometimes is cauſed by a
bite of a horſe, or by a ſaddle being unfit, eſpecially when the
bows are too wide; for when they are ſo, they bruiſe the
fleſh againſt the ſpines of the ſecond and third vertebrae of
the back, which forms that prominence that riſes above their
ſhoulders. Farrier’s Di/?.
To WITH Ho'l D. v. a. '[with and hold.] Withheld, or with-
holden, pret. and part.
1. To reſtrain; to keep from action; to hold back.
That hand, which as no kind of imminent danger could
cauſe at firſt to withhold itſelf, ſo neither have any practices,
ſo many, ſo bloody, following ſince, been ever able to make
weary. Hooker, b. iv.
Sith mine he is, or free or bound ;
I/ithhold, O ſovereign prince, your haſty hand
From knitting league with him. Spenſºr.
The prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your grace;
And by his mother was perforce # ithheld. Shakeſpeare.
Be careful to withhold
Your talons from the wretched and the bold:
Tempt not the brave and needy to deſpair;
For though your violence ſhould leave them bare
Of gold and ſilver, ſwords and darts remain. - Dryden.
Volition is an act of the mind, knowingly exerting that do-
minion it takes itſelf to have over any part of man, by em."
ploying it in, or withholding it from any particular *:::::<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I T
W I T
**-
2. To keep back; to refuſe:
what difficulties there
till we be further an
i. ºn them will ſcorn or refuſe to hear.
Soon as Titan 'gan his head exault,
And ſoon again as he his light withhault, ‘.... ſº
Their wicked engines they againſt it bent. Fairy 34een.
withhold EN. part pºſſ of withhold. . -
The word keep back, ſheweth, that it was a thing for-
merly due unto God; for we cannot ſay that anything is
kept back, or withholden, that was not due before. Spelman.
WITH HoldeR. m. ſ. [from withhold Je who withholds.
witH1'N. prep. ſpišnnan, Saxon.]
1. In the inner part of.
Who then ſhall blame
His peſter'd ſenſes to recoil and ſtart,
When all that is within him does condemn
Itſelf for being there. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
By this means, not only many helpleſs perſons will be pro-
vided for, but a generation of men will be bred up, within
ourſelves, not perverted by any other hopes. Sprat.
*Till this be cur'd by religion, it is as impoſſible for a man
to be happy, that is, pleaſed and contented within himſelf, as
it is for a ſick man to be at eaſe. Tillotſon.
The river is afterwards wholly loſt within the waters of
the lake, that one diſcovers nothing like a ſtream, till within
about a quarter of a mile from Geneva. Addiſon.
2. In the compaſs of; not beyond; uſed both of place and time.
Next day we ſaw, within a kenning before us, thick clouds,
which put us in hope of land. Bacon.
A beet-root, and a radiſh root, which had all their leaves
cut cloſe to the roots, within ſix weeks had fair leaves. Bacon.
Moſt birds come to their growth within a fortnight. Bacon.
ſ/ithin ſome while the king had taken up ſuch liking of
his perſon, that he reſolved to make him a maſterpiece. J/otton.
The invention of arts neceſſary or uſeful to human life,
hath been within the knowledge of men. Burmet.
As to infinite ſpace, a man can no more have a poſitive
idea of the greateſt, than he has of the leaſt ſpace. For in
this latter, which is more within our comprehenſion, we are
capable only of a comparative idea of ſmallneſs, which will al-
ways be leſs than anyone, whereof we have the poſitive idea. Lo.
W. every action concluded within itſelf, and drew no
conſequences after it, we ſhould undoubtedly never err in
are, which as yet withhold our
d better ſatisfied, I hope no indif-
Hooker.
our choice of good. Locke.
This, with the green hills and naked rocks within the neigh-
bourhood, makes the moſt agreeable confuſion. Addiſon.
Bounding deſires within the line, which birth and fortune
have marked out, is an indiſpenſable duty. Atterbury.
3. Not longer ago than.
J/ithin theſe five hours Haſtings liv'd
Untainted, unexamin'd, free at liberty. Shakeſpeare.
//ithin theſe three hours, Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
And made what work I pleas'd.
4. Into the reach of.
When on the brink the foaming boar I met,
The deſp'rate ſavage ruſh'd within my force,
And bore me headlong with him down the rock. Otway.
5. In the reach of
Secure of outward force, within himſelf
The danger lics, yet lies within his pow'r ;
Againſt his will he can receive no harm. Milton.
I have ſuffer'd in your woe ;
Nor ſhall be wanting ought within my pow'r
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
For your relief. Dryden.
Though Aurengzebe return a conqueror,
Both he and ſhe are ſtill within my power. Dryden.
6. Into the heart or confidence of.
When by ſuch inſinuations they have once got within him,
and are able to drive him on from one lewdneſs to another,
no wonder if they rejoice to ſee him guilty of all villainy. South.
7. Not exceeding.
Be inform'd how much your huſband's revenue amounts to,
and be ſo good a computer, as to keep within it. Swift.
8. In the incloſure of.
No interwoven reeds a garland made,
To hide his brows within the vulgar ſhade ;
But poplar wreaths around his temples ſpread. Addison.
Sedentary and within-door arts, and delicate manufactures,
º . rather the finger than the arm, have a contrariety
wº, º ". ".ºn. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
I. In the inner parts; inwardly; internally.
This is yet the outward, faireſt ſide
Of our deſign. //ithin reſis more of fear, -
More dread of ſad event yet undeſcry’d. Daniel.
- Death thou haſt ſeen
º º ſhape on man; but many ſhapes
ºath, and many are the ways that lead
º his grim cave; all diſmall yet to ſenſe
ore terrible at th’ °ntrance, than within. AZilton.
2. In the mind.
Language ſeems too low a thing to Čxpreſs
and our ſouls are ſpeaking ſo much º * º
all foreign converſation. Drº" ey deſpiſe
yºn's State ºf j.n.
Theſe, as thy guards from outward harms, are ſent, Jr.
Ills from within thy reaſon muſt prevent. Dr.
WITH1'NSIDE. adv. [within and ſide.] In the interio rydºn.
The forceps for extracting the ſtone is º: º
open, that the teeth may be better ſeen withinſide a little
WITHo'UT. prºp. [Plºutan, Saxon.] -
1. Not with.
Many there are, whoſe deſtinies have prevented their de-
fires, and made their good motives the wards of the
cutors, not without miferable ſucceſs. Clſ exe-
2. In a ſtate of abſence from. Hall,
Haft ſo much wit, and mirth, and ſpleen about the
There is no living with thee, nor wiſhout thee, i.
3. In the ſtate of not having. ºr.
The virtuous bezoar is taken from the beaſ that feedeth
upon the mountains ; and that without virtue, ſºm thoſ.
that feed in the vallies. » ſº
Infallibility and inerrableneſs are aſſumed and incloſed by º
Romiſh church, without any inerrable ground to holditon, in
If the ideas be not innate, there was a time, when º
mind was without thoſe principles; and then they will not be
innate, but be derived from ſome other original. Lºis.
4. Beyond ; not within the compaſs of.
Eternity, before the world and after, is withºut our reach:
but that little ſpot of ground that lies betwixt thoſe two great
oceans, this we are to cultivate. Burnet'; Ihºr, ºf the Ent.
5. In the negation, or omiſſion of.
//ithout the ſeparation of the two monarchies, the mºſt
advantageous terms from the French, muſt end in our de-
ſtruction. Addiºn.
6. Not by ; not by the uſe of; not by the help of 'ſ
Exceſs of diet in coſtly meats and drinks fetched from be-
yond the ſeas, would be avoided: wiſe men will do it withºut
a law; I would there might be a law to reſtrain fools. Buſin,
7. On the outſide of.
//ithout the gate
Some drive the cars, and ſome the courſºrs rein. Drydºn.
8. Not within.
When the weather hinders me from takingmydiverſions with-
out doors, I frequently make a little party with ſelectſfiends...iſ.
9. With exemption from.
The great lords of Ireland informed the king, that the
Iriſhry might not be naturalized withºut damage to themſelves
or the crown. Davieſ'; Ireland.
Happineſs under this view, ev'ry one conſtantly purſues.
Other things acknowledged to be good, he can look ºn
without deſire, paſs by, and be content without. Lºft,
WITHo'UT. adv.
1. Not on the inſide. -
Forming trees and ſhrubs into fundry ſhapes, is done by
moulding them within, and cutting them withºut hº
Wiſe men uſe ſtudies; for they teach not their own uſe :
but that is a wiſdom without them, and above them, wº
obſervation. • * * º
Theſe were from without the growing micrº Miltºn,
Having gone as far as they could without, they º o
obſerve them within. fºil',
2. Out of doors. -
The reception of light into the body of the bui
very prompt from without, and from within;
Their doors are barr'd againſt a bitter flout; Drºit,
Snarl, if you pleaſe, but you ſhall ſnarl withºut. ”
. Externally; not in the mind. Jat in uſe,
&amp;." conjunct. Unleſs; if not; excº, Sº,
I find my love ſhall be proved no love, withºu ſhould
- - - - - - hts
love, being too unfit a veſſel in whom ſo high *g*. b. ii.
be engraved. - nurſelves
You will never live to my age, withº" i. yº
in breath with exerciſe, and in heart with jº Ilê oº::-
witHou'ren, prºp. [pºucan, Saxon.] W ithout,
Her face ſo fair, as fleſh it ſeemed º
But heavenly pourtrait of bright angel's º
Clear as the ſky, withouten blame or ; * Spºnſºr.
Through goodly mixture of sºlº". ainſtand; 19
To wiſh Asp. 9. a. [with and Jiaº) §
oſe ; to reſiſt. e ſtriveſ:
*"... of ſorrow is not at the *.*. follow-
withal, being like a mighty beaſt, ſoone; tım Sidh).
ing, than overthrown by with/landing.
The wonderful zeal and fervouſ. "
and the received orders of this church, whether evº
which cauſed me to enter unto conſº,ith you, Hº!
jian man fearing God, ſtand bºund"." iſ, but a
It is our frailty that in many things we a
Shaft,
lding, was
//#!".
I do aſſº, I
nomy 0
- - - - sº a teſtimo"
virtue that we would do amiſs in nothing, and
- in ſocyeſ
ſon of in toº
that virtue, that when we Pra.
that what º bove to **
• A- - - cd from *... . . . .
do offer itſelf, we may be ſtrengthen Hº º'
ſand it.
*
li-
9
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W I T
* --- t-
- i.
They ſoon ſet ſail; nor now the ſates withſtand;
Their forces truſted with a foreign hand. Dryden.
When Elymas withſtood Paul and Barnabas, and when Paul
ſays of Alexander, he hath greatly withſtood our words, do
we think the withſtanding there was without ſpeaking? Atterb.
WITHSTANDER. m.ſ.. [from wit/?and J. An opponent; re-
ſiſting power. -
War may be defined the exerciſe of violence under ſove-
reign command againſt withſtanders; force, authority, and
reſiſtance being the eſſential parts thereof. Raleigh.
With Y. m. ſ [pºix, Saxon.] Willow. A tree.
W1’t Less. adj. [from wit..] Wanting underſtanding.
Why then ſhould withſ; man ſo much miſween
That nothing is but that which he hath ſeen Fairy Queen.
I have ever lov'd the life remov’d;
And held in idle price to haunt aſſemblies,
Where youth, and coſt, and wit’ſ brav'ry keeps. Shakeſp.
So't pleas'd my deſtiny,
Guilty of my fin of going, to think me
As vain, as withſ, and as falſe as they
Which dwell in court.
Donne.
He kept us ſlaves, by which we fitly prove
That withſ, pity breedeth fruitleſs lové. Fairfax.
The apple's outward form
Delečtable, the withſ, ſwain beguiles,
'Till with a writhen mouth and ſpattering noiſe
He taſtes the bitter morſe! and rejects. Philipt.
WiT LING. m. ſ. [Diminutive of wit..] A pretender to wit:
a man of petty ſmartneſs.
You have taken off the ſenſeleſs ridicule, which for many
years the withings of the town have turned upon their fathers
and mothers. Addiſon's Spediator.
Thoſe half-learn'd witlings num’rous in our iſle,
As half-form'd inſe&amp;ts on the banks of Nile. Pope.
A beau and witling periſh'd in the throng,
One dy'd in metaphor, and one in ſong. Pope.
Wi"TNEss. n.ſ. [prºnerre, Saxon.]
1. Teſtimony; atteſtation.
The devil can cite ſcripture for his purpoſe;
An evil ſoul producing holy witneſ,
Is like a villain with a ſmiling cheek;
A goodly apple rotten at the heart. Shakeſpeare.
May we, with the warrant of womanhood, and the witneſs
of a good conſcience, purſue him any further revenge? Shakespeare
If I bear witneſs of myſelf, my witneſs is not true. john.
The ſpirit beareth witneſs with our ſpirit that we are the
children of God. Rom. viii. 16.
Many bare falſe witneſs, but their witneſs agreed not. Mar.
Nor was long his witneſs unconfirmed. Milton.
Ye moon and ſtars bear witneſs to the truth !
His only crime, if friendſhip can offend,
Is too much love to his unhappy friend. Dryden's AFneid.
Our ſenſes bear witneſs to the truth of each others report,
concerning the exiſtence of ſenſible things. Locke.
2. One who gives teſtimony.
The king's attorney
Urg'd on examinations, proofs, confeſſions
Of divers witneſſes. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
God is witneſ; betwixt me and thee. Gen. xxxi. 50.
Thy trial chooſe
With me, beſt witneſs of thy virtue try’d. Milton.
A fat benefice became a crime, and witneſs too againſt its
incumbent. Decay of Piety.
Nor need I ſpeak my deeds, for theſe you ſee;
The ſun and day arc witneſſes for me. Dryden.
3. Jºith a WITNEss. Effectually; to a great degree, ſo as to
leave ſome laſting mark or teſtimony behind. A low phraſe.
Here was a bleſfing handed out with the firſt pairs of ani-
mals at their creation; and it had effect with a witneſs. Wood.
Now gall is bitter with a witneſs;
And love is all delight and ſweetneſs. Pror.
To Wr’t Ness. v. a. [from the noun..] To atteſt.
There ran a rumour
Of many worthy fellows that were out,
Which was to my belief witneſs'd the rather,
For that I ſaw the tyrant's power a-foot. Shakeſpeare.
Heareſt thou not how many things they witneſ; againſt thee!
john xxvii. 13.
Though by the father he were hird to this,
He ne'er could witneſ; any touch or kiſs. Donne.
Theſe be thoſe diſcourſes of God, whoſe effects thoſe that
live witneſs in themſelves; the ſenſible in their ſenſible na-
tures, the reaſonable in their reaſonable ſouls. Raleigh.
To WITNEss. v. n. To bear teſtimony.
The ſea ſtrave with the winds which ſhould be louder,
and the ſhrouds of the ſhip with a ghaſtly noiſe to them that
were in it, witneſſed that their ruin was the wager of the
others contention. Sidney.
Mine eye doth his effigies witneſ,
Moſt truly limn’d and living in your face. Shakeſpeare.
W IT
JPitneſ; you ever-burning lights above!
You elements that clip us round about
Mitneſs that here Iago now doth give
The execution of his wit, hands and heart,
To Othello's ſervice. Shakespeare's Othello,
Lorenzo -
Shall witneſ; I ſet forth as ſoon as you,
And even but now return'd.
Shakeſpeare:
- I witneſ, to
The times that brought them in. Shakeſpeare.
Another beareth witneſs of me,
which he witneſſeth of me is true. john v. 32.
The Americans do acknowledge and ſpeak of the deluge in
their continent, as Acoſta witneſºth, and Laet in the hiſto-
ries of them. Burnet's Theory of the Earth
Witneſſ, ye heav'ns ! I live not by my ñº, ºf ria).
! ſtrove tº have deſerv'd the death I fought Dºdºn’, Eacid.
Lord Falkland witneſſes for me, that in a book there were
and I know that the witneſs
many ſubjects that I had thought on for the ſtage. Dryden.
//itneſ; for me ye awful gods,
I took not arms till urg’d by ſelf-defence,
The eldeſt law of nature. Rowe.
Wi’TNEss. interj. An exclamation ſignifying that perſon or
thing may atteſt it.
For want of words, or lack of breath,
Witneſs, when I was worried with thy peels. Alſº ton.
WitsNAPPER, n.ſ. [wit and ſnap.] One who affeds repartee.
Go in, firrah; bid them prepare for dinner.—
—That is done, fir; they have all ſtomachs.—
—What a witſnapper are you! Shakeſpeare.
Witt E.D. adj. [from wit..] Having wit: as a quick wittà boy.
WITTICISM. ºff [from witty..] A mean attempt at wit.
We have a libertine fooling even in his laſt agonies, with
a witticiſm between his teeth, without any regard to ſobriety
and conſcience. L’E/irange.
He is full of conceptions, points of epigram and witticiſms,
all which are below the dignity of heroick verſe. A diſon.
Witt ILY. adv. [from witty.]
I. Ingeniouſly; cunningly ; artfully.
But is there any other beaſt that lives,
Who his own harm ſo wittily contrives? Dryden.
2. With flight of imagination.
In converſation wittily pleaſant, pleaſantly gameſome. Sidney.
The old hermit, that never ſaw pen and ink, very wittiy
ſaid to a niece of king Gordobuck, that that is, is. Shakespeare
The obſtinate contemners of all helps and arts, ſuch as pre-
ſuming on their own natural parts, dare deride all diligence,
and ſeem to mock at the terms when they underſtand not the
things; think that way to get off wittily with their ignorance.
Ben. johnſºn.
Wi’TTINess, n.ſ.. [from witty..] The quality of being witty.
No leſs deſerveth his wittineſ, in deviſing, his pithineſs in
uttering, his paſtoral rudeneſs and his moral wiſeneſs. Spenſºr.
WITTINGLY. adv. [from witting, knowing; plean, Saxon,
to weet or know..] Knowingly; not ignorantly; with know-
ledge; by deſign.
Whatſoever we work as men, the ſame we do wittingly work
and freely; neither are we, according to the manner of na-
tural agents any way ſo tied, but that it is in our pºwer to
leave things we do undone. Hooker.
Withhold revenge, ’tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infring'd my vow. Shakespeare Henry VI.
During that dreadful ſiege, every particular accident for bre-
vity I wittingly paſs over. Knoles's Hiſł. of the Tºrks.
He knowingly and wittingly brought evil into the world Aſore
No forger of lies willingly and wittingly furniſhed out the
means of his own detection. J//l on the Rºſarre&amp;ion.
WI. TTOL. m. ſ. [prºtol, Sax.] A man who knows the falſe-
hood of his wife and ſeems contented; a tame cuckold.
O Mars, for what doth ſerve thy armed ax :
To let that witold beaſt conſume in flames -
Thy Venus child. Sidney.
Amaimon ſounds well; Lucifer well; yet they are the
names of fiends: but cuckold, wittal, the devil himſelf hath
not ſuch a name. Shakeſpeare's Merry //ives of I/indſor.
The Theban wittal, when he once deſcies
Jove is his rival, falls to ſacrifice.
WITTolly. adj. [from witt'ſ.) Cuckoldly.
The jealous wittolly knave hath maſſes of money.
WITTY. adj. [from wit..]
1. Judicious; ingenious. . -
The deep-revolving, witty Puckingham
No more ſhall be the neighbour to my counſels. Shakeſ”.
Thou art beautiful in thy countenance, and witty in thy
words. - Juaith xi. 23.
2. Full of imagination. - -
Hiſtories make men wiſe, poets witty, the mathematick
ſubtile. - - - Bacon.
Where there is a real ſtock of wit, yet the wittieſ? ſaying:
will be found in a great meaſure the iſſues cf chance. Sºut".
3o U In
Cleaveland.
Shakeſp.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O E
W O L
erſe the witty told their flame, -
a" sº choiceſt ſongs with Emma's name. Prior.
ick full of taunts.
3. sº who was ſo unmercifully wit, upon the wo-
men, has given the ladies ample ſatisfailion by marrying a
farmer's daughter. Addſºn' Spectator.
witwa l. n.ſ. A bird. - Ainſworth.
To wive. v. n. [from wife.] To marry ; to take a wife.
Were ſhe as rough
As are the ſwelling Adriatick ſeas,
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua. Shakeſpeare.
The ancient ſaying is no hereſy,
Hanging and wiving goes by deſtiny. Shakeſpeare.
A ſhop of all qualities that man loves woman for; beſides
that hook of wiving, fairneſs, which ſtrikes the eye. Shakeſp.
Deſign or chance makes others wive,
But nature did this match contrive. Waller.
To WI v E. v. a.
1. To match to a wife.
She dying gave it me;
And bid me, when my fate would have me wiv'd,
To give it her. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
2. To take for a wife.
If he have the condition of a ſaint, and the complexion of
a devil, I had rather he ſhould ſhrive me than wive me. Shakeſp.
WI’v FLY. adv. [from wives.] Belonging to a wife.
Baſilius could not abſtain from praiſing Parthenia, as the
perfect picture of a womanly virtue, and wively faithfulneſs. Sid.
Wives. n.ſ. The plural of wife.
A man of his learning ſhould not ſo lightly have been car-
ried away with old wives tales, from approvance of his own
reaſon. Spenſer's Ireland.
W1’z A R D. m. ſ. [from wiſe.] A conjurer ; an inchanter ; a
he-witch. It had probably at firſt a laudable meaning.
Patience, good lady; wizard, know their times. Shakºp.
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
And from the croſs-row plucks the letter G;
And ſays, a wizard told him that by G
His iſſue diſinherited ſhould be. Shakespeare Richard III,
That damn'd wizard, hid in ſly diſguiſe,
For ſo by certain ſigns I knew, had met
Already, ere my beſt ſpeed could prevent
The aidleſs innocent lady his wiſh'd prey. Milton.
The prophecies of wizards old -
Increas'd her terror, and her fall foretold. //aller.
The wily wizard muſt be caught,
For, unconſtrain'd, he nothing tells for nought. Dryden.
WO. m.ſ. ſpa, Saxon.]
1. Grief; ſorrow ; miſery; calamity.
The king is mad: how ſtiff is my vile ſenſe,
That I ſtand up and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge ſorrows ' better I were diſtraćt;
So ſhould my thoughts be ſever'd from my griefs;
And woes by wrong imaginations, loſe
The knowledge of themſelves. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
So many miſeries have craz'd my voice,
That my woe weary'd tongue is ſtill.
Her raſh hand in evil hour,
Forth reaching to the fruit, Eve pluck'd, ſhe cat:
Earth felt the wound; and nature from her ſeat
Sighing through all her works, gave ſigns of woe
That all was loſt. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt.
O'er dreary waſtes, they weep each other's wo. Pope.
2. It is often uſed in denunciations, wo be ; or in exclamations
of ſorrow wo is ; anciently wo wurth ; pa pump, Saxon.
All is but lip wiſdom which wants experience: I now, wo
is me, do try what love can do. Sidney.
I/6 is my heart;
That poor ſoldier, that ſo richly fought,
Whoſe rags ſham'd gilded arms; whoſe naked breaſt
Stept before ſhields of proof, cannot be found. Shakeſpeare.
Many of our princes, woe the while !
Lic drown'd and ſoak'd in mercenary blood. Shakespeare.
Happy are they which have been my friends; and we to my
lord chief-juſtice. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Howl ye, wo worth the day. Ezek. xxx. 2.
J/o be to the ſhepherds of Iſrael that do feed themſelves. Ez.
I/Q is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous, jer. x. 19.
If God be ſuch a being as I have deſcribed, wo to the world
if it were without him: this would be a thouſand times great-
er loſs to mankind than the extinguiſhing of the ſun. Tillotſºn.
Jºe to the vanquiſh'd, woeſ Dryden's Albion.
3. A denunciation of calamity; a curſe.
Can there be a wo or curſe in all the ſtores of vengeance
$qual to the malignity of ſuch a practice; of which one ſingle
inſtance could involve all mankind in one univerſal confuſion.
South's Sermons.
4. Wo ſeems in phraſes of denunciation or imprecation to be a
ſubſtantive, and in exclamation an adjective, as particularly in
the following lines.
Jºe are we, firl you may not live to wear
All your true followers out. Shał, Antony and Cleopatra.
Shakeſpeare.
5. wo i. uſed by *:::::: for a ſtop or ceſſation; from t
article 100 pronounce Carter - ui Ine
. have i. ſtop. y s to their horſes when they
- Love's a mighty lord;
And hath ſo humbled me is, I confeſs
There is no wo to his correction. &gt; Shakespeare
wº ". ſpan, Saxon J A plant. *a*ſtart,
The flower conſiſts of four leaves, whi - -
form of a croſs; out of whoſe flower sº lſ,
which afterwards turns to a fruit in the ſhape of a
flat at the edge, gaping two ways, having º one cell,
which is contained for the moſt part one oblon i. in
cultivated in England for the uſe of dyers, whº, i. | ls
ing the foundation of many colours. º
In times of old, when Britiſh nymphs were know iller,
To love no foreign faſhions like their own. In
When dreſs was monſtrous, and fig-leaves the mode
And quality put on no paint but woad. Gº
Wo'PEGos E. m. ſ. [wo and begone..] Loſt in wo, diffna.
in wo; overwhelmed with ſorrow. &gt; &amp;
Such a man,
So dull, ſo dead in look, ſo wºebegon,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night,
And wºuld have told him half his Troy was burn'd;
Pointal,
tongue,
But Priam found the fire, ere he his tongue. Sº,
Tancred he ſaw his life's joy ſet at º, hałºſtart,
So worbegºne was he with pains of love. Fairfax,
Wort. The obſolete participle paſſive from To Warr.
A braver choice of dauntleſs ſpirits
Than now the Engliſh bottoms have wiſ,
Did never float upon the ſwelling tide.
Wo'Ful. adj. [wo and full]
1. Sorrowful; afflicted; mourning.
The wºful Gynecia, to whom reſt was no eaſe, had left her
lothed lodging, and gotten herſelf into the ſolitary places thoſe
deſarts were full of. Sidnj.
How many woful widows left to bow
To ſad diſgrace'
In a tow'r, and never to be loos'd,
The wºful captive kinſmen are inclos'd.
2. Calamitous; aſiličtive.
3. Wretched; paltry; ſorry.
What woful ſtuff this madrigal would be,
In ſome ſtarv'd hackney-ſonneteer, or me?
But let a lord once own the happy lines,
How the wit brightens ! how the ſtyle refines!
Wo'FULLY. adv. [from wºful]
1. Sorrowfully; mournfully.
2. Wretchedly; in a ſenſe of contempt.
He who would paſs ſuch a judgment upon his condition, as
ſhall be confirmed at that great tribunal, from which their
lies no appeal, will find himſelf wofully deceived, if he jud-
ges of his ſpiritual eſtate by any of theſe meaſures. Sºuth
Wold. n.ſ. Ił%ld, whether ſingly or jointly, in the names of
places, ſignifies a plain open country; from the Sãº job,
a plain and a place without wood. Gilſºn'; Camdin.
Iſºld and wald with the Saxons ſignified a ruler or gº".
nour; from whence bertwold is a famous governour; athelwºld
a noble governour: herwald, and by inverſion wadi, age-
neral of an army. Gilſºn's Camán.
WO'LF. [palp, Saxon; woºf, Dutch.]
1. A kind of wild dog that devours ſheep.
Advance our waving colours on the walls,
Reſcu'd is Orleans from the Engliſh wºlveſ.
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and chuſe
To be a com'rade with the wolf and owl, , , Liar
Neceſſity’s ſharp pinch. Sºftarº King tº
If welves had at thy gate how!'d that ſtern time,
Trou ſhould'ſt have ſaid, go, porter, turn the key, g Lear
All cruels elſe ſubſcrib'd. Shalºp. King Lº".
2. An eating ulcer.
How dangerous it is in ſenſible things to ill ſwallow in
preſſions; and what abſurd conceits the vulgar will º having
the literals, an example we have in our profeſſion, w º
- alſ, common APP
called an eating ulcer by the name of “ſ; ſtar Errourſ.
henſion conceives a reality therein. Brown's Pugar
Woºlf DoG. n.ſ. ſwolf and dog.]
1. A dog of a º breed kept to guard º, gain
The luckleſs prey, how treach rous tumblers &amp; ºil.
And dauntleſs waſ lºgs ſhake the lion's mº"
2. A dog bred between a dog and wolf..., *
Woºlfish. adj. [from woj.] Reſembling” WO
or ſorm. -
Shakespeare ear.
Daniel's Civil War.
Drydºn.
Pºpe,
Shaiſtºrt,
uſe metaphorical”
If in qualities
Thy deſires
Are weftſ, bloody, ſtarv'd, and raveno”
I have another daughter,
Who, I am ſure, is kind and comfº,
When ſhe ſhall hear this of thee, wº. Kº Laº
Shall flea thy wolf/h viſage. *"...º. in
Nothing more common than thoſe wºlf/h L'Eſtraº
all our pretenſions, A prº-
Shakespeare:
5
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O M
A pretence of kindneſs is the univerſal ſale to all baſe pro-
jets: all wolfº deſigns walk under ſheeps cloathing. Gov. 1 on.
WolfsbA.N.E. n.ſ. ſºlº and bane.] A poiſonous plant; aconite.
It hath circumſcribed roundiſh divided leaves; the flower
conſiſts of four leaves, ſhaped like a monkey's hood: each of
theſe flowers are ſucceeded by three or more pods which con-
tain ſeveral rough ſeeds: the moſt part of theſe ſpecies are dead-
ly poiſon. Miller.
//olfbane is an early flower. Mortimer’s Hºſbandry.
Wo'LFsMilk. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſwºrth.
Wo'lvis H. adj. [from wolves, of wolf; wºlff is more proper.]
Reſembling a wolf.
Why in this wo'viſh gown do I ſtand here,
To beg of Hob and Dick. Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
My people are grown half wild, they would not worry one
another ſo in that wo'viſh belluine manner elſe. Howell.
There is a baſe wolviſh principle within that is gratified with
another's miſery. South's Sermons.
WOMAN. ſpirman, plmman, Saxon; whence we yet pro-
nounce women in the plural, wimmen, Skinner.]
1. The female of the human race.
. That man who hath a tongue is no man,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman. Shakeſpeare.
Thou dotard, thou art woman-tir’d, unrooſted
By thy dame Parlet here. Shakeſpeare's J/inter's Tale.
//omen are ſoft, mild, pitiful and flexible;
Thou ſtern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorſ leſs. Shakeſp.
And Abimelech took men-ſervants and wºmen ſervants. Gen.
O woman, lovely woman, nature form'd thee
To temper man: we had been brutes without thee. Otway.
Ceneus a woman once and once a man;
But ending in the ſex ſhe firſt began Dryden’s AEn.
1%men are made as they themſelves would chooſe,
Too proud to aſk, too humble to refuſe. Garth.
J/amen in their nature are much more gay and joyous than
men ; whether it be that their blood is more refined, their
fibres more delicate, and their animal ſpirits more light; vi-
vacity is the gift of women, gravity that of men. Addiſon.
2. A female attendant on a perſon of rank. -
I could not perſonally deliver to her
What you commanded me; but by her woman
I ſent your meſſage. Shakespeare's Henry VIII.
To Wo'MAN. v. a. [from the noun..] To make pliant like a
, WOſnail.
I've felt ſuch quirks of joy and grief,
That the firſt face of neither on the ſtart
Can woman me unto't. Shakeſpeare.
Wo MAN ED. adj. [from woman.] Accompanied; united with
a WOman.
I do attend here on the general,
And think it no addition, nor my wiſh,
To have him ſee me woman'd. Shakeſpeare's Olhello.
Wom ANHATE.R. m. ſ. [woman and hater.] One that has an
averſion from the female ſex.
How could it come into your mind,
To pitch on me of all mankind,
Againſt the ſex to write a ſatyr;
And brand me for a womanhater. Swift.
wo'MANHood. A n.ſ.. [from woman.] The character and col-
Wo'MAN HE AD. } lećtive qualities of a woman. Obſolete.
Ne in her ſpeech, ne in her haviour,
Was lightneſs ſeen, or looſer vanity,
But gracious womanhood and gravity. Fairy Queen.
There dwells ſweet love and conſtant chaſtity,
Unſpotted faith, and comely womanhood,
Regard of honour, and mild modeſty. . .
'Tis preſent death I beg; and one thing more,
That woman!ood denies my tongue to tell:
O keep me from their worſe than killing luſt. Shokeſpeare.
When my grave is broke up again,
Some ſecond gueſt to entertain ;
For graves have learn'd that womanhead
To be to more than one a bed. Donne.
Wo'MAN1sh adj. [from woman.] Suitable to a woman.
Neither doubt you, becauſe I wear a woman's apparel, I
will be the more womaniſh ; ſince I aſſure you there is nothing
I deſire more than fully to prove myſelf a man. Sidney.
Zelmane making a womaniſh habit to be the armour of her
boldneſs, giving up her life to the lips of Philoclea, humbly be:
ſought her to keep her ſpeech a while within the paradiſe of
her mind. Sidney.
A voice not ſoft, weak, piping, and womaniſh, but audible,
ſtrong, and manlike. Aſtham.
She then to him theſe womaniſh words 'gan ſay,
For love of me, leave off. Fairy Queen.
Our fathers minds are dead,
And we are govern'd with our mothers ſpirits;
Spºnſºr.
Our yoke and ſuffrance ſhew us womaniſh. Shakeſpeare.
I do not think he fears death;
He never was ſo womaniſh. Shakeſpeare.
During his baniſhment, he was ſo ſoftened and dejected,
as he wrote nothing but a few womaniſh epiſtles. Bacon.
In a ſad look or womaniſh complaint. Denham.
VV O N
I melt to womaniſh tears, and if I ſay,
I find my love my courage will betray. Dryden.
The godlike hero, in his breaſt
Diſdain'd, or was aſham'd to ſhow
So weak, ſo womaniſh a woe. Dryder.
To Wom AN". E. v. a. [from woman.] To emaſculate, to
effeminate; to ſoften. Proper, but not uſed.
This effeminate love of a woman doth womanize a man. Sº.
Wom Aski'Nd. m ſ [woman and kind.] The female ſex; the
race of women. -
Muſidorus had over bitterly glanced againſt the reputation
of womankind. Sidney.
So eaſy is tappeaſe the ſtormy wind
Of malice, in the calm of pleaſant womantini. Fairy Queen.
Becauſe thou doat'ſt on womankind, admiring
Their ſhape, their colour, and attractive grace,
None are, thou think'ſt, but taken with ºn toys. Milton.
Each inconvenience makes their virtue cold;
But womankind in ills is ever bold. Dr dºn's juvenal.
Juba might make the proudeſt of our ſex,
Any of womankind, but Marcia, happy.
She advanc'd, that womankind
Would by her model form their mind.
Wo'MANLY. adj. [from women J
I. Becoming a woman; ſuiting a woman; feminine; not maſ.
culine.
I’m in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable; to do good ſometime
Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas !
Do I put up that womanly defence,
Addison's Cato.
Swift.
To ſay I'd done to harm. Shakeſpeare.
She brings your froward wives
As priſoners, to her womanly perſuaſion. Shakespeare.
All will ſpy in thy face
A bluſhing womanly diſcovering grace. Donne.
Rage choaks my words; 'tis womanly to weep. Dryden.
Let him be taught to put off all thoſe tender airs, affected
ſmiles, and all the enchanting wºman'y behaviour that has made
him the objećt of his own admiration. Arbuthnºt and Pope.
2. Not childiſh; not girliſh.
Young perſons, under a woman'y age, are often troubled
with ſome of the ſame ſymptoms. Arbuthnot on Diet.
Wo'MANLY. adv. [from woman.] In the manner of a woman;
effeminately.
WOMB. n.ſ. [wamba, Goth. Pamb, Sax. warml, Iſlandick.]
1. The place of the faetus in the mother.
When yet he was but tender bodied, and the only ſon of
my womb. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
New-born children bring not many ideas into the world, ba-
ting ſome faint ideas of hunger and thirſt which they may have
felt in the womb. Lºcke.
Conceiving, as ſhe ſlept, her fruitful womb
Sweli’d with the founder of immortal Rome. Adiſºn.
2. The place whence any thing is produced.
The earth was form’d, but in the womb as yet
Of waters, embryon immature involv’d,
Appear'd not. Milto".
The womb of earth the genial ſeed receives. Dryden.
To Womb. v. a. [from the noun J. To incloſe; to breed in
ſecret. -
Not for all the ſun ſees, or
The cloſe earth wombs, will I break my oath
To this my fair belov’d. Shakeſpeare's Iſinter's Tale.
Wo'MBy, adj. [from womb.] Capacious.
He'll call you to ſo hot an anſwer for it,
That caves and w:inly vaultages of France
Shall chide your treſpaſs, and return your mock,
In ſecond accent to his ordnance. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Wo’MEN. Plural of woman.
Thus it ſhall befal
Milton.
Him who to worth in women over-truſts. .
Won. The preterite and participle paſſive of win.
All theſe the Parthian, -
From the luxurious kings of Antioch won. Milton.
Againſt myſelf I vićtorious have won,
And by my fatal abſence an undone. Drydºn.
My mother is wºn over to my ſide, but dare; not mention
me to my father, for fear of provoking him. Addiſon's Speciat.
Towon. v. n. (Funian, Saxon; wºmen, German.] To dwell;
to live; to have abode. Not in uſe.
Him fortuned
To come where vile Arcaſia does wºn.
Out of the º ſº
As from his lair, the wild beaſt where he wºn; - -
In foreſt wild. Aft’t n’s Paradiſe Lºſt.
A people near the northern pole that won; -
whom freland ſent from loughes and forets hore. Fairf.
Fairy Queen.
Wos. m. ſ. [frºm the verb.] Dwelling; habitation. Obſolete. .
what ſecret place, quoth he can ſafely hold
So huge a maſs, and hid from heaven's eye;
Or where haſt thou thy wºº, that ſo much gold
Thou can'ſ preſerve from wrong and robbey. Fairy &amp;T.
©<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O N
W O O
To wonDER. v. m. [Funbrian, Saxon; wonder, Dutch...]
To be fluck with admiration; to be pleaſed or ſurpriſed ſo as
iſhed. -
to º of theſe magazines of vićtuals I have oftentimes
complained of in England, and wondered at "...}..
His deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered
after the beaſt. Rev. xiii. 3.
No wonder to us, who have converſed with too many
ſtrange unparallel'd actions, now to wonder at any thing :
wonder is from ſurpriſe, and ſurpriſe ceaſes upon experience.
South's Sermons.
King Turnus wonder'd at the fight renew'd. Dryden.
Who can wonder that all the ſciences have been ſo over-
charged with inſignificant and doubtful expreſſions, capable to
make the moſt quick-ſighted very little the more *;
2. A tº.
I could not ſufficiently wonder at the intrepidity of theſe di-
minutive mortals, who durſt venture to mount and walk upon
my body. Swift.
Wo'NDER. n.ſ. [Funbon, Saxon; wonder, Dutch.]
1. Admiration; aſtoniſhment; amazement ; ſurpriſe cauſed by
ſomething unuſual or unexpected.
What is he, whoſe griefs
Bear ſuch an emphaſis ; whoſe phraſe or ſorrow
Conjure the wand'ring ſtars, and makes them ſtand
Like wonder-wounded hearers. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
JVander cauſeth aſtoniſhment, or an immoveable poſture of
the body; for in wonder the ſpirits fly not as in fear, but only
ſettle. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Cauſe of wonder; a ſtrange thing; ſomething more or great-
er than can be expected.
The Corniſh wonder-gatherer deſcribeth the ſame. Carew.
Great effects come of induſtry in civil buſineſs; and to try
things oft, and never to give over, doth wonders. Bacºn.
Lo, a wonder ſtrange |
Of every beaſt, and bird, and infect ſmall
Came ſevens, and pairs, Milton's Parad'ſ Loft.
What woman will you find,
Though of this age the wonder and the fame,
On whom his leiſure will vouchſafe an eye
Of fond deſire 2 Milton's Paradiſe Regained.
No wonder ſleep from careful lovers flies,
To bathe himſelf in Sachariſſa's eyes;
As fair Aſtrea once from earth to heav'n,
By ſtrife and loud impiety was driven. J/aller.
Drawn for your prince, that ſword could wonders do :
The better cauſe makes mine the ſharper now. J/aller.
3. Anything mentioned with wonder.
There Babylon the wonder of all tongues. Milton.
Ample ſouls among mankind have arrived at that prodigi-
ous extent of knowledge which renders them the wonder and
glory of the nation where they live. //atts.
Wo'NDERFUL. adj. [wonder and full J Admirable; ſtrange;
aſtoniſhing.
I uttered that which I underſtood not, things too wonderful
for me which I knew not. job xlii. 3.
Strange
Hath been the cauſe, and wonderful to hear. Milton.
All this is very wonderful, Shakeſpeare multiplies miracle up-
on miracle to bring about the ſame event in the play, which
chance with more propriety performs in the novel. Shakespeare Illuſt.
Wo'NDERFUL. adv. To a wonderful degree. Improperly uſed.
The houſe which I am about to build ſhall be wonderful
great. 2 Chron. ii. 9.
Wo'NDERFULLY. adv. [from wonderful..] In a wonderful
manner; to a wonderful degree.
He was much made on by the pope, who knowing him-
ſelf to be unprofitable to the Chriſtian world, was wonderfuly
glad to hear that there were ſuch echoes of him ſounding in
remote parts. Bacon's Henry VII.
There is ſomething wonderfully divine in the airs of this
pićture. Addison's Italy.
Wo'NDERMENT. n.ſ.. [from wonder.] Aſtoniſhment; amaze-
ment. Not in uſe, except in low language.
When my pen would write her titles true,
It raviſh'd, is with fancy's wonderment. Spenſºr.
Thoſe things which I here ſet down, do naturally take the
ſenſe, and not reſpect petty wonderments. Bacon.
The neighbours made a wonderment of it, and aſked him
what he meant. L’E/?range.
Wo's DERSTRUCK. adj. [wºnder and/rike..] Amazed.
Aſcanius, wonder/lruck to ſee
That image of his filial piety.
Wo's prous. adj.
der.]
1. Admirable; marvellous; ſtrange; ſurpriſing.
| The credit of whoſe virtue reſt with thee;
- - Dryden's Aneid.
[This is contračted from wonderous, of won-
**** indeed, if cauſe of ſuch effects. Milton.
• In ſuch charitics ſhe paſs'd the day;
Twas wond’rous how ſhe found an hour to pray. Dryden.
ſear- . - - -
Reſearches into the ſprings of natural bodics, and their ino-
tions, ſhould awaken us to admire the
Creator in all the works of nature. lſ att,
. ſIVondrous is barb. r alty.
2 ... s barbarouſly uſed for an adverb.] In a "range
From that part where Moſes remembereth the
ten by the ſons of good men upon the dau
did they ſtealthoſe wondrous great a
powerful giants.
To ſhun th' allurement is not hard
To minds reſolv'd, forewarn’d and well-prepard;
But wond’rous difficult, when once beſet, pard;
To ſtruggle through the ſtraits, and breakth. involving net
S “-v.
wondrous wiſdom of our
giants, becot.
ghters of the wick;
‘ts of their ancient kings and
alºi'.
S f You are ſo beautiful, Drydºn.
o wondrous fair, you juſtify rebellion. t
Sylphs, yet mindful of their ancient race, Drydºn,
Are, as when women, wond’rous fond of place. Pº.
Wo NDRously. adv. [from wondrous.] T o:
My lord led wondrouſly to fº. o a ſtrange degree.
This made Proſerpina
Make to them the greater ſpeed,
For fear that they too much ſhould bleed, s
Which wondrouſly her troubled. Draytºn
Such doctrines in the pidgeon houſe were taught."
You need not aſk how wºndrouſly they wrough. Drdºn
Of injur'd fame, and mighty wrongs receiv'd, "
Cloe complains, and wondrouſly's aggriev'd. ‘Granº,
To Won T. }". n. [Preterite and participle wint; mº,
To be Won T. W. Saxon; gewoonen, Dutch..] To be cº
ed; to uſe ; to be uſed.
A yearly ſolemn feaſt ſhe wont to make
The day that firſt doth lead the year around. F.,
Through power of that, his cunning thieveries
He wonts to work, that none the ſame eſpies. Hilº.
Jaſon the Theſſalian was went to ſay, that ſome things
muſt be done unjuſtly, that many things may be done juſt.
Bacºn,
Shakeſ tärt,
3. tºil,
I this night have dream'd;
If dream’d, not as I oft am wont, of thee,
But of offence and trouble. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft.
The eagle's fate and mine are one,
Which on the ſhaft that made him die
Eſpy'd a feather of his own,
Wherewith he wont to ſoar ſo high. J/ºr.
A mother was went always to indulge her daughters, when
any of them deſired ſquirrels or birds, but then they muſt keep
them well. Lºckr,
Another ſort of ſophiſm is wont to be called an imperfeit
enumeration or falſe indućtion, when from a few experiments
men infer general theorems. Watts's Lºick.
WONT. n.ſ.. [from the verb J Cuſtom; habit; uſe. Out of uſ.
Paſſing their time according to their wont, they waitº for
the coming of Phalantus. Sihº,
Things natural in that regard forget their ordinary pººl
want, that which is heavy mounting ſometime upwardiºlº
own accord. Hººker.
'Tis not his woºt to be the hindmoſt man, !..., "...ſ.
Whate'er occaſion keeps him from us now. Sha&amp;ſtart,
They are by ſudden alarm or watchword to be called out
to their military motions under ſky or covert, according to
the ſeaſon, as was the Roman want. Mizn.
Won T. A contračtion of will not. 1.
Wo'NTED. part, adj. [from the verb.] Accuſtomed; uſe!;
uſual.
Her champion ſtout, to aid his fricnd, ..., 01 ºn
Again his wonted weapon proved. - Fairy Sºtº.
So pray'd they, innocent, and to their thoughts Mºtºr
Firm peace recover'd ſoon and wonted calm. º
The pond-frog would fain have gotten the oth" "º.
but ſhe was wonºd to the place, and would not ****
Who have no houſe, fit round where once it **
And with full eyes each wonted room require;
Haunting the yet warm aſhes of the place, .
As murther'd men walk where they did expl".
Wo'NTEDNess. n.ſ. [from wonted.] State of bº
ed to. Not in uſe. r
Did I ſee any thing more of Chriſt in thoſe º
to other modes of government, I might ſuſped my !.
biaſed with prejudice or wantedneſs of º, ".
Wo’NT less. adj. [from wont. J Unaccuſtº u
Whither, love, wilt thou now carry hº
What wontieſ; fury do'ſt thou now iſºlº
Into my feeble breaſt, when full of the
To Woo. v. a [apogoo, courted, Saxon.] To c
to for love. -
we cannot fight for love, as men may do; Shaitºart.
we ſhould be woºd, and were not made tº *. ſº
Some lay in dead mens ſkulls; and in º Q
where eyes did once inhabit, there were “”
As 'twere in ſcorn of eyes, reflecting gº
That wood to the ſlimy bottom of the deep,
And moºd the dead bones that lay ſcatº" by,
Drº".
accuſtom-
C
Sº nºr.
ourt; to ſue
Saife".
Fancle
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">w O O
-
*
º
- Fancies and notions he purſues,
• Which ne'er had being but in thought.
Each like the Grecian artiſt was
The image he himſelf has wrought.
My proud rival woos
Another partner to his throne and bed.
Philips's Diſtreſ Mother.
Qh, ſtretch thy reign, fair peace! from ſhore to ſhore,
Till conqueſt ceaſe, and ſlav'ry be no more;
Till the freed Indians in their native groves
Reap their own fruits, and woo their ſable loves. Pºpe.
2. To court ſolicitouſly; to invite with importunity.
Yet can ſhe love a foreign emperor,
Whom of great worth and pow'r ſhe hears to be;
If ſhe be woo'd but by ambaſſador,
Or but his letters or his pićtures ſee:
So while the virgin ſoul on earth doth ſtay,
She woo'd and tempted is ten thouſand ways
By theſe great pow'rs, which on the earth bear ſway,
The wiſdom of the world, wealth, pleaſure, praiſe.
Prior.
Davies.
Sweet bird that ſhun'ſt the noiſe of folly,
Moſt muſical, moſt melancholy
Thee, chauntreſs oft the woods among,
I woo to hearthy even-ſong. Milton.
To Woo. v. n. To court; to make love.
With pomp, and trains, and in a crowd they woo,
When true felicity is but in two. Dryden.
WQOD. adj. [wods, Gothick; pob, Saxon; weed, Dutch.]
Mad ; furious ; raging. Obſolete.
Winds do rage, as winds were woºd,
And cauſe ſpring tides to raiſe great flood.
Coal-black ſteeds yborn of helliſh brood,
That on their ruſty bits did champ as they were wood.
Fairy Queen.
Tuſſºr.
Calm the tempeſt of his paſſion wood;
The banks are overflown, when ſtopped is the flood. Fa, Q,
Woop. m. ſ. [pube, Saxon; woud, Dutch..]
1. A large and thick plantation of trees.
The woºd-born people fall before her flat,
And worſhip her as goddeſs of the wood. Fairy Qween.
St. Valentine is paſt:
Begin theſe wood-birds but to couple now Shakeſpeare.
The wood, are ruthleſs, dreadful, deaf and dull:
There ſpeak and ſtrike. Shakeſpeare's Titus and Andronicus.
Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to the rooky wood. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Hecate, when ſhe gave to rule the wood, .
Then led me trembling through thoſe dire abodes. Dryden.
. The ſubſtance of trees; timber.
Balm his foul head with warm diſtilled waters,
And burn ſweet wood to make the lodging ſweet. Shakespeare .
The cavity of the tin plate was filled with a melted cement,
made of pitch, roſin, and wood-aſhes, well-incorporated.
Boy'e.
Having filled it about five inches with throughly kindled
wood-coals, we let it down into the glaſs. Boyle.
Of long growth there ſtood
A laurel's trunk, a venerable wºod. Dryden's Aneid.
The ſoft wood turners uſe commonly. AMoxon.
The ſize of faggots and wood-ſtacks differs in moſt countries.
Mort mer's Huſbandry.
2
Herrings muſt be ſmoked with wºod. Child.
Wood'A'NEMONE.. n.ſ. A plant.
Wº: }*/ [pubbins, Saxon.] Honeyſuckle.
Beatrice, e'en now
Couch'd in the woodbind coverture. Shakeſpeare.
The nymphs of the mountains would be drawn, upon their
heads garlands of wºodbine and wild roſes. Peacham.
Woo'd cock. m. ſ. ſpobucoc, Saxon.] A bird of paſſage with
a long bill; his food is not known. It is a word ludicrouſly
uſed for a dunce.
He hath bid me to a calve's head and a capon; ſhall I not
find a woodcock too. Shakeſpeare.
Soon as in doubtful day the woodcock flies,
Her cleanly pail the pretty houſewie bears. Gay.
Woo'ped, adj. [from wºod] Supplied with wood.
The lord Strutts have been poſſeſſed of a very great landed
eſtate, well-conditioned, wooded and watered. Arbuthnot.
Woo'DDR INK. n.ſ. Decočtion or infuſion of medicinal woods,
as ſaſſafras.
The drinking elder-wine or wºoddrinks are very uſeful.
Foyer on the Humours.
Woo'DEN. adj. [from wo:d.]
1. Ligneous; made of wood; timber.
Like a ſtrutting player, whoſe conceit
Lies in his hamſtring, he doth think it rich
To hear the wooden dialogue and ſound
Twixt his ſtretch'd footing and the ſcaffoldage. Shakespeare.
They uſed to vault or leap up; and therefore they had wood-
en horſes in their houſes and abroad. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
peg.
2. Clumſy; awkward.
W O O
Preſs'd with the burden, Ceneus pants for breath;
And on his ſhoulders bears the wooden death. Dryden.
The haberdaſher ſtole off his hat that hung upon a wooden
Addison's Sºedjatºr.
I'll win this lady Margaret: for whom *
Why, for my king: tuſh, that's a wooden thing. Shakeſpeare.
When * bold man is out of countenance, he makes a very
wooden figure on it. Cºllier ºf Confidence.
f -
WoodFRETTER. n.ſ.. [teres, Lat..] An inſect; a Woodworm.
Ainſworth.
Woo'PHole. n.ſ. ſwºod and hole.] Place where wood is laid
up.
What ſhould I do? or whither turn? amaz'd,
Sonfounded to the dark receſs I fly,
Of woodhole. Philips,
Woº'DLAND. m. ſ. [wºod and land.] Woods; ground covered
with woods.
This houſhold beaſt, that us’d the woodland grounds,
Was view'd at firſt by the young hero's hounds,
As down the ſtream he ſwam. Dryden's AFreid.
He that rides poſt through a country, may, from the tran-
ſient view, tell how in general the parts lie; here a moraſs,
and there a river, wood and in one part, and ſavanas in another.
- Docke,
By her awak'd, the woodland choir
To hail the common god prepares;
And tempts me to reſume the lyre,
Soft warbling to the vernal airs.
Fenton's Ode to Lord Gower.
Here hills and vales, the woºdland and the plain,
Here earth and water ſeems to ſtrive again. Pºpe.
Woodla’RK. n.ſ. A melodious ſort of wild lark.
Woo'Dlouse. m.ſ. [wºod and ſouſe..] An Inſect.
The millepes or wººdlºuſe is a ſmall inſcét of an oblong
figure, about half an inch in length, and a fifth of an inch in
breadth; of a dark blueiſh or livid grey colour, and having
its back convex or rounded: notwithſtanding the appellation
of millepes, it has only fourteen pair of ſhort legs; it is a very
ſwift runner, but it can occaſionally roll itſelf up into the form
of a ball, which it frequently does, and ſuffers itſelf to be ta-
ken. They are found in great plenty under old logs of wood
or large ſtones, or between the bark and wood of decayed trees.
Millepedes are aperient, attenuant, and detergent; and the
beſt way of taking them is ſwallowing them alive, which is
eaſily and conveniently done; and they are immediately de-
ſtroyed on falling into the ſtomach, Hill's Materia Medica.
Wrap thyſelf up like a woodlouſe, and dream revenge.
Congreve.
There is an inſe&amp;t they call a woodlouſ, - .
That folds up itſelf in itſelf, for a houſe,
As round as a ball, without head, without tail,
Inclos'd cap-a-pe in a ſtrong coat of mail. Swift.
Woo'DMAN. n.ſ. [woºd and ma ..] A ſportſman; a hunter.
Their cry being compoſed of ſo well ſorted mouths, that any
man would perceive therein ſome kind of proportion, but the
ſkilful woodmen did find a muſick. Sidney.
The duke is a better woodman than thou takeſt him for.
Shakeſpeare.
This is ſome one like us night foundered here,
Or elſe ſome neighbour woodman. Milton.
So when the woodman's toil her cave ſurrounds,
And with the Hunter's cry the grove reſounds,
With grief and rage the mother-lion ſlung,
Fearleſs herſelf, yet trembles for her young. Pºpe.
WoodMosc ER. n.ſ.. [w:od and monger. J A woodſeller.
Woo'd Nore. n.ſ. Wild muſick.
Then to the well-trod ſtage anon,
If Johnſon's learned ſock be on, , .
Of ſweeteſt Shakeſpear, fancy's child,
Warble his native wozdnºtes wild.
woodNy'MPH. [wºod and nymph.) Dryad. . .
soft ſhe withdrew, and like a wºodnymph light,
Oread, or Dryad, or of Delia's train, ... -- r
Bºrº. her . the groves. Milton's Paradiſe Loſł.
By dimpled brook and fountain brim,
The woodnymphs, deck'd with daiſies trim,
Their merry wakes and pattimes keep.
woopyrrºg. n.ſ. Wood burnt on the altar. r
we caſt the lots for the wood ſering. . Nºh. x, 34.
Woo'dpeck ER. n.ſ. [** and peck ; picus matia, La J A
*. ſtruaure of the tongue of the woºdpecker is very ſin-
ular, whether we look at its great length, its bones and muſ-
cles, its incompaſſing parts of the neck and head, the better
to exert itſelf in length, and, again, to retračt it into its cºll;
and laſtly, whether we look at its ſharp, horny, bearded §".
and the gluey matter at the end of it: the bºttº, º º *
draw little maggots out of wood. Perº" Phyſico-theolºgy.
woodpigeon or Iſºziculver. m. ſ. A wild Pigs": . . th
Wood Roc'F. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
35 X
Milton.
Milton.
Woo'ds.AR E.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O O
W O R
Wo º woodſare, being like a kind of ſpittle, is
herbs, as lavender and ſage. Bacon.
wº M. } [wood and ſere.] The time when there is
no ſap in the tree. -
From May to Oétober leave cropping; for why, .
In woodſeere, whatſoever ". º ſhall die. Tuffer.
'opsorrel. n.ſ. [ºys, Latin: plant. -
Wo *. :a:: : '. hatha bell-ſhaped flower, conſiſting
of one leaf, having its brim wide expanded, and cut into ſe-
Jai diviſions: the pointal, which riſes from the flowercup,
becomes an oblong membranous fruit, divided into ſeminal
cells, opening outward from the baſe.” the top, and incloſing
feeds, which often ſtart from their lodges, by reaſon of the
elaſtick force of the membrane which involves them. AMiller.
woºdward. n.ſ. [wood and ward. A foreſter,
woody. adj. [from wººd J
1. Abounding with wood.
Thou haſt led me up
A woody mountain, whoſe high top was plain. Milton.
Oft in glimmering bow'rs and glades
He met her, and in ſecret ſhades
Of woody Ida's inmoſt grove. Milton.
Four times ten days I’ve paſs'd
wand'ring this wºoly maze, and human food
Nor taſted, nor had appetite. Miltºn's Paradiſe Regain'd.
Diana's woody realms he next invades,
And, croſſes through the conſecrated ſhades, Addiſon.
2. Ligneous; conſiſting of wood.
in the woody parts of plants, which are their bones, the
principles are ſo compounded as to make them flexible without
joints, and alſo elaſtick. Grew.
Herbs are thoſe plants whoſe ſtalks are ſoft, and have
nothing woody in them, as graſs and hemlock. Locke.
3. Relating to woods.
With the woody nymphs when ſhe did play. Fairy Queen.
All the ſatyrs ſcorn their woody kind,
And henceforth nothing fair but her on earth they find.
Fairy Queen.
woo'e R. n.ſ.. [from woo.] One who courts a woman.
The wooers moſt are toucht in this oſtent,
To whom are dangers great and imminent. Chapman.
Ariſtippus ſaid, that thoſe that ſtudied particular ſciences,
and neglected philoſophy, were like Penelope's wovers, that
made love to the waiting woman. Bacon's Apºphthegms.
Uſurping wozers felt his thund'ring ſword,
And willing nations knew their native lord. Creech.
Woof. n.ſ.. [from wove.]
1. The ſet of threads that croſſes the warp; the weft.
The placing of the tangible parts in length or tranſverſe, as
in the warp and the woof of textile, is more inward or more
outward. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Texture; cloath.
A veſt of purple flow'd,
Iris had dipp'd the woof. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
I muſt put off
Theſe my ſky-robes, ſpun out of Iris' woof. Milton.
To ſpread the pall beneath the regal chair,
Of ſofteſt woof, is bright Alcippe's care. Pope's Odyſſey.
wº adv. [from wºoing.J. Pleaſingly; ſo as to invite
ay.
The temple-haunting martlet does approve,
By his lov'd manſionry, that heaven's breath
Smells wooingly here. Shakespeare King Lear.
WOOL. n.ſ. [pul, Saxon; wol'en, Dutch.]
1. The fleece of ſheep; that which is woven into cloath.
Baſe-minded wretches, for reſpect of gain, ſome paultry
wool may yield you, to let ſo much time paſs without know-
ing perfectly her eſtate. Sidney.
A gown made of the fineſt wool, |
Which from our pretty lambs we pull;
Fair lined ſlippers for the cold,
With buckles of the pureſt gold. Raleigh.
Concerning their complaint for price of wool, he would give
order that his commiſſioners ſhould cauſe clothiers to take wool,
paying only two parts of the price. Hayward.
- Struthium is a root uſed by the wool-dreſſers. Ariuthnot.
2. Any ſhort thick hair.
In the cauldron boil and bake;
Jºel of batt and tongue of dog. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
wº * n.ſ. [wool and fell.] Skin not ſtripped of the
OOl.
d Wool and wºolfels were ever of little value in this king-
VV 9m. - Davies on Ireland.
****S. adi, [from wool.] Made of wool not finely dreſſed,
and thence uſed likewiſe for anything coarſe.
I was wont
To call them woollen vaſtals, things created
To buy and ſell with groats. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I could not endure a huſband with a beard on his face: I had
rather lye in woollen Shakeſp. M. -
“. .4/uch Ado alout Nothing.
**llen cloth will tenter, linen {... &amp; al, Ozº ; :
**
At dawn of day our general cleft his pate,
Spite of his woollen night-cap.
Woo'll F N. m. ſ. Cloath made of wool. Drydº,
His breeches were of rugged woollen,
And had been at the ſiege of Bullen. Hud
Odious! in woollen / 'twould a ſaint provoke! udibra,
No, let a charming chintz and Bruſſels lace
Wrap my cold limbs and ſhade my lifeleſs face, p
He is a bel-eſprit and a woºllen draper. S #.
WoolpAck. wiſt,
Wools Ack. $nſ [woo!, pack, and ſack.]
1. A bag of wool; a bundle of wool.
2. The ſeat of the judges in the houſe of lords,
At bar abuſive, on the bench unable,
Knave on the woolſack, fop at council-table. Drida.
3. Any thing bulky without weight. jāti,
Chaos of preſbytry, where laymen guide
With the tame woolpack clergy by their fide. Clavihrd
wº adv. [wºol and ward.] In wool. Not ſº
have no ſhirt: I go woolward for penance. -
Wo'oll Y. adj. [from sº pe Shaiſſart,
1. Conſiſting of wool; cloathed with wool.
When the work of generation was
Between theſe woolly breeders,
The ſkilful ſhepherd peel'd me certain winds. Salſan
Some few, by temp'rance taught, approaching flow, -
To diſtant fate by eaſy journeys go:
Gently they lay 'em down, as ev'ning ſheep
On their own woolly fleeces ſoftly ſleep. Drydin,
2. Reſembling wool.
What ſignifies
My fleece of wooly hair, that now uncurs? Shaºjur.
Nothing profits more
Than frequent ſnows: O may'ſt thou often ſee
Thy furrows whiten’d by the woly rain,
Nutritious! j. Phili),
WORD. n.ſ. [ponb, Saxon; word, Dutch.]
1. A ſingle part of ſpeech.
If you ſpeak three word, it will three times report youthe
three words. Bacon,
As conceptions are the images of things to the mind within
itſelf, ſo are word; or names the marks of thoſe conceptions to
the minds of them we converſe with. South's Sermonſ.
Amongſt men who confound their ideas with wºrds, there
muſt be endleſs diſputes, wrangling, and jargon. Lºtt,
Each wight who reads not, and but ſcans and ſpells,
Each word catcher that lives on ſyllables. Pºt,
2. A ſhort diſcourſe.
Shall I vouchſafe your worſhip a wºrd or two? .
—Two thouſand, and I'll vouchſafe thee the hearing Shał,
A wºrd, Lucilius, -
How he receiv'd you. Shahſ, ſuiu Ceſar,
A friend who ſhaft own thee in thy loweſt cond". *
all thy wants, and, in a word, never leave thee. :
In a word, the Goſpel deſcribes God to us" all º
ſuch a one as we would wiſh him to be. Tilſºn,
3. Talk; diſcourſe.
why ſhould calamity be full of wºrd?
—Windy attorneys to their client woes! . .
Let them have ſcope, though what they do ºr. III,
Help nothing elſe, yet they do caſe the heart. Shaº. "
If you diſlike the play,
Pray make no word; on't 'till the ſecond day, it
Or third be paſt; for we would have Yº" *"...
The loſs will fall on us, not on the Poet ºl.
Ceaſe this contention: be thy wºrd." Drydº.
Sharp as he merits; but the ſword forbear. ht to be graº
Ifºrd, are ſometimes to be uſed, the "#" ht
kind, and ſober, repreſenting the ill, or unbecomingleſ º:
faults. ons, Ihop”
If I appear a little word-bound in º tºº Światºr.
it will be imputed to the long diſuſe of ſpeech.
4. Diſpute; verbal contention. ſ
In argument upon a caſe, Shałff.
Some word, ãº grew 'twixt Somerſet andmº ſ
5. Language. e? Sakſ.
Found you no diſpleaſure by word or by indignatiº"
iſ write thee a challenge, or Til deliver º #Nº.
him by word of mouth. c *. ri
He commanded the men to be ranged º s were prop"
to every ſquadron, giving them ſuch wºrd * “Gºd”.
the occaſion. t.Bºº
An eaſy way, by word of mou
6. Promiſe. keep th djuſtly
Obey thy parents, keep thy.” 2 -
†. princely word for theſe º Shał, H.IV.
—I give it you, and will maintain." º º !
The duke ſhall wield his conqu'ring W* Dji”
The king ſhall paſs his honeſt word.
. Signal; token. ... • -
7 Signa º, ſoldier, kill his priſoners; Shakespeare Henſ; W,
- ough. Accou"
Give the word throug 8.
countenant
th communic” to ſm
ſwear not. Shaiſ.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O R
8. Account; tydings; meſſage.
Bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it -
I may ſpur on my journey. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Why ſhould ſhe write to Edmund Might not you
Tranſport her purpoſes by word * Shakeſp. King Lear.
Two optick nerves ſhe ties,
Like ſpectacles acroſs the eyes;
By which the ſpirits bring her word,
Whene'er the balls are fix'd or ſtirr'd. Prior.
9. Declaration.
I know you brave, and take you at your word;
That preſent ſervice which you vaunt, afford.
Io. Affirmation.
Every perſon has enough to do to work out his own ſalva-
tion; which, if we will take the apoſtle's word, is to be done
with fear and trembling. Decay of Piety.
I deſire not the reader ſhould take my word, and therefore
I will ſet two of their diſcourſes in the ſame light for every
man to judge. Dryden.
11. Scripture; word of God.
They ſay this church of England neither hath the word
purely preached, nor the ſacraments ſincerely miniſtred. Whitg.
12. The ſecond perſon of the ever adorable Trinity. A ſcrip-
ture term.
Thou my Word, begotten ſon, by thee
This I perform.
To WoRD. v. n. [from the noun..] To diſpute.
He that deſcends not to word it with a ſhrew, does worſe
than beat her. L’Eſtrange.
To WoR D. v. a. To expreſs in proper words.
Let us blacken him what we can, ſaid Harriſon of the bleſſed
king, upon the wºrding and drawing up his charge againſt ap-
proaching trial. South's Sermons.
Whether I have improved theſe fables or no, in the wording
or meaning of them, the book muſt ſtand or fall to itſelf. L'Eſt.
The apology for the king is the ſame, but worded with
greater deference to that great prince. Addiſon.
Wo'RDY. adj. [from word..] Verboſe; full of words.
Phocion, beholding a wordy orator, while he was making a
magnificent ſpeech full of vain promiſes, ſaid, I now fix, my
eyes upon a cypreſs-tree; it has all the pomp imaginable in
its branches, leaves, and height; but it bears no fruit. Speciat.
We need not laviſh hours in wordy periods,
As do the Romans, ere they dare to fight. Philips's Briton.
Intempºrate rage, a wordy war, began. Pope.
WoRE. The preterite of wear.
This on his helmet wore a lady's glove,
And that a ſleeve embroider'd by his love.
My wife, the kindeſt, deareſt, and the trueſt
That ever wore the name. Rºwe's Royal Convert.
To WORK. v. n. pret, worked, or wrought. [peoncan, Saxon;
werken, Dutch.]
1. To labour; to travail; to toil. -
Good Kent, how ſhall I live and work
To match thy goodneſs life will be too ſhort. Shakeſp.
Go and work; for no ſtraw ſhall be given you. Ex. v. 18.
Whether we work or play, or ſleep or wake,
Our life doth paſs, and with time's wings doth fly. Davies.
2. To be in action; to be in motion.
Glory grows guilty of deteſted crimes,
When for fame's ſake
Dryden.
Milton.
Dryden.
We bend to that the working of the heart. Shakeſpeare.
In Morat your hopes a crown deſign'd,
And all the woman work'd within your mind. Dryden.
3. To act ; to carry on operations.
May be the Lord will work for us.
Our better part remains
1 Sa. xiv. 6.
To work in cloſe deſign. Milton.
4. To act as a manufacturer, -
They that work in fine flax. Iſ, xix. 9.
rincint.
5. Tº. wine and ſtrong beer put ſome like ſubſtances, while
they work, which may make them fume and inflame leſs. Bac.
Try the force of imagination upon ſtaying the working of
beer, when the barm is put in. Bacºn.
if in the wort of beer, while it worketh, before it be
tunned, the burrage be often changed with freſh, it will make
a ſovereign drink for melancholy. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
6. To operate; to have effect. -
With ſome other buſineſs put the king -
From theſe ſad thoughts that work too much upon him. Shº.
All things work together for good to them that love God.
Rom. viii. 28.
Gravity worketh weakly, both far from the earth, and alſo
within the earth. Bacon.
Although the ſame tribute laid by conſent, or by impoſing,
be all one to the purſe, yet it works diverſely on the courage:
no people overcharged with tribute is fit for empire. Bacon.
‘iheſe poſitive undertakings wrought upon many to think
that this opportunity ſhould not be loſt. Clarendon.
W O R
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To ſwerve from truth, or change his conſtant mind. Milton.
We ſee the workings of gratitude in the Iſraelites. South.
Objects of pity, when the cauſe is new,
Would work too fiercely on the giddy crowd.
Poiſon will work againſt the ſtars: beware,
For ev'ry meal an antidote prepare. Dryd, jun. juvenal.
- When this reverence begins to work in him, next confider
his temper of mind. Locke.
This ſo wrought upon the child, that afterwards he deſired
to be taught. Locke.
Humours and manners work more in the meaner ſort than
with the nobility. Addiſon on Italy.
The ibibaboca is a foot round, and three yards and a half
long: his colours are white, black, and red: Öf all ſerpents his
bite is the moſt pernicious, yet worketh the ſloweſt. Grew.
7. To obtain by diligence.
Without the king's aſſent
You wrought to be a legate. Shakeſp Henry VIII.
He hath wrought with God this day. Sa. xiv. 45.
8. To act internally ; to operate as a purge, or other phyſick.
Work on,
My medicine, work' thus credulous fools are caught. Shakespeare
I ſhould have doubted the operations of antimony, where
ſuch a potion could not work. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
It is benign, nor far from the nature of aliment, into which,
upon defe&amp;t of working, it is oft times converted. Brown.
Moſt purges heat a little; and all of them work beſt, that is,
cauſe the blood ſo to do, as do fermenting liquors, in warm
weather, or in a warm room. Grew's Coſmol.
9. To act as on an objećt. -
Let it be pain of body, or diſtreſs of mind, there's matter
yet left for philoſophy and conſtancy to work upon. L'E/fr.
Natural philoſophy has ſenſible objects to wºrk upon; but
then it often puzzles the reader with the intricacy of its no-
Dryden.
tions. Addiſon.
The predićtions Bickerſtaff publiſhed, relating to his death,
too much affected and worked on his imagination. Swift.
1e. To make way.
Body ſhall up to ſpirit work. Milton.
Who would truſt chance, ſince all men have the ſeeds
Of good and ill, which ſhould work upward firſt Dryden.
11. To be toſſed or agitated.
Vex'd by wint'ry ſtorms, Benacus raves,
Confus'd with working ſands and rolling waves. Addiſon.
To WoRk. v. a.
1. To make by degrees.
Sidelong he works his way. Milton.
Through winds, and waves, and ſtorms he works his way,
Impatient for the battle: one day more
Will ſet the vićtor thundering at our gates.
2. To labour; to manufacture.
He could have told them of two or three gold mines, and
a ſilver mine, and given the reaſon why they forbare to work
them at that time, and when they left off from working
them. Raleigh's Apology.
The chaos, by the Divine Power, was wrought from one
form into another, 'till it ſettled into an habitable earth. Burn.
This mint is to work off part of the metals found in the
neighbouring mountains. Addison.
The young men acknowledged in love-letters, ſealed with
a particular wax, with certain enchanting words wrought upon
the ſeals, that they died for her. Tatler.
They now begin to wºrk the wond’rous frame,
To ſhape the parts, and raiſe the vital flame. Blackmore.
The induſtry of the people works up all their native com-
modities to the laſt degree of manufacture. Swift.
3. To bring by action into any ſtate. - -
So the pure limpid ſtream, when foul with ſtains
Of ruſhing torrents and deſcending rains,
Works itſelf clear, and, as it runs, refines, -
'Till by degrees the floating mirrour ſhines. Addiſon's Cato.
4. To influence by ſucceſſive impulſes. , , -
If you would work any man, know his nature and faſhions,
and ſo lead him. Bacon.
to haſten his deſtruction, come yourſelf,
Addiſon.
And work your royal father to his ruin. A. Philips.
5. To produce; to effect:
Fly the dreadful war,
That in thyſelf thy leſſer parts do move, -
Outrageous anger, and woe-wººing jar. Fairy Queen.
Love worketh no ill to his neighbour. Rom. xiii. 1 o.
Our light affliction for a moment worketh for us a far more
eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. iv. 18.
we might work any effect, not holpen by the co-operation
of ſpirits, but only by the unity of nature. Bacon.
Moiſture, although it doth not paſs through bodies without
communication of ſome ſubſtance, as heat and cold do, yet it
worketh effects by qualifying of the heat and cold. Bacon.
Such power, being above all that the underſtanding of man
can conceive, may well work ſuch wonders. Drummond.
4. God,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O R
W O R
God, only wiſe, to puniſh pride of wit,
Among mens wits hath this confuſion wrought; ..., , ,
As he proud tow'r, whoſe points the clouds did hit,
By tongues confuſion was to ruin brought. Davies,
Of the tree,
which, taſted, work, knowledge of good and evil,
Thou may’ſ not: in the day thou eat it, thou dy'ſt. Milton.
6. To manage.
Mere perſonal valour could not ſupply want of knowledge
in building and working ſhips. Arbuthnot.
7. To put to labour; to exert.
Now, Marcus, thy virtue's on the proof;
Put forth thy utmoſt ſtrength, work every nerve,
And call up all thy father in thy ſoul. Addiſon’s Cato.
8. To embroider with a needle.
9. 7. Work out. To effect by toil.
Not only every ſociety, but every ſingle perſon has enough
to do to work out his own ſalvation. Decay of Piety.
The mind takes the hint from the poet, and works out the
reſt by the ſtrength of her own faculties. Addiſon.
Io. To WoRk out. To eraze; to efface.
Tears of joy for your returning ſpilt,
I/ºrk out and expiate our former guilt. Dryden.
11. To WoR k-ºp. To raiſe.
That which is wanting to work up the pity to a greater
height, was not afforded me by the ſtory. Dryden.
This lake reſembles a ſea, when worked up by ſtorms. Adaiſ.
The ſun, that rolls his chariot o'er their heads,
I/orks up more fire and colour in their checks. Addison Cato.
We ſhould inure ourſelves to ſuch tho ghts, ’till they have
worked up our ſouls into filial awe and love of him. Atterbury.
WoRK. m. ſ. [peonc, Saxon; we, é, Dutch J
1. Toil; labour; employment.
Bread, correótion, and work for a ſervant. Eccluſ, xxxiii.
In the bottom of ſome mines in Germany there grow
vegetables, which the work-folks ſay have magical virtue. Bac.
The ground, unbid, gives more than we can aſk;
But work is pleaſure, when we chuſe our taſk. Dryden.
2. A ſtate of labour.
All the world is perpetually at work, only that our poor mor-
tal lives ſhould paſs the happier for that little time we poſſeſs
them, or elſe end the better when we loſe them: upon this
occaſion riches came to be coveted, honours eſteemed, friend-
ſhip purſued, and virtues admired. Temple.
3. Bungling attempt.
It is pleaſant to ſee what work our adverſaries make with this
innocent canon: ſometimes 'tis a mere forgery of hereticks,
and ſometimes the biſhops that met there were not ſo wiſe as
they ſhould have been. Stillingfect.
4. Flowers or embroidery of the needle.
Round her work ſhe did empale,
With a fair border wrought of fundry flowers,
Inwoven with an ivy-winding trail. Spenſºr.
That handkerchief, you gave me: I muſt take out the
work: a likely piece of work, that you ſhould find it in your
chamber, and know not who left it there. This is ſome
minx's token, and I muſt take out the work º' There, give it
your hobbyhorſe: whereſoever you had it, I’ll take out no
work on't. Shakeſp. Othello.
5. Any fabrick or compages of art.
Nor was the work impair’d by ſtorms alone,
But felt th' approaches of too warm a ſun.
6. Aćtion; feat; deed.
The inſtrumentalneſs of riches to works of charity, have
rendered it neceſſary in every Chriſtian commonwealth by laws
to ſecure propriety. Hammond.
As to the compoſition or diſſolution of mixt bodies, which
is the chief work of elements, and requires an intire applica-
tion of the agents, water hath the principality and exceſs over
earth. Digby.
Nothing lovelier can be found in woman,
Pope.
Than good works in her huſband to promote. Milton.
While as the works of bloody Mars employ'd,
The wanton youth inglorious peace enjoy’d. Pope.
7. Anything made.
Where is that holy fire, which verſe is ſaid
To have 2 Is that enchanting force decay’d
Verſe, that draws nature's works from nature's law,
Thee, her beſt work, to her work cannot draw.
O faireſt of creation laſt and beſt
Of all God's wºrks creature, in whom excels
Whatever can to fight or thought be form'd;
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or ſweet,
How art thou loſt Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
8. Management; treatment.
* hiº, alone; I'll go another way to work with him. Shakespeare
9. Tº ſet on WoRk. To employ; to engage.
It ſetteth thoſe wits on wºrk in better things, which would be
ciſe employed in worſe.
* -- f Hooker.
Wo'RKER. * / [from wºrk.] One that works. Ø
Ye air nymphs, which oftentimes have loved
The cruel worker of your kindly ſmarts,
Prepare yourſelves, and open wide your hearts. Spºnſºr.
Workfellow. n.ſ. [work and flºw.]
Wo'RKHouse.
Wo'RKING House.
1. A Place in which any manufacture is carried on.
Wo'RKM ANLY. adv.
3. The art of working.
Wo'RKMAst ER. n ſ [work and maſter.]
Donne.
2. A woman that works for hire. * - - - -
Wo'RKY DAY. n.ſ. [Corrupted from workingda,
His father was a worker in braſs. Kings wif. I
You ſpoke me fair; but even then betrayed me: d º
from me, you profeſſors of holineſs, but workers of i.
South's sº.
One engaged i
- l
ſame work with another. £49ed in the
Timotheus, my workſellºw, and Lucius, ſalute you. Rºm
!". f [from work and houſe.]
The quick forge and workinghouſe of thought. Sº
- - ght. Shah.
Protogenes had his wºrkhouſe in a garden out of º ſº
he was daily finiſhing thoſe pieces he begun. bº,
2. A place where idlers and vagabonds are condemned tolabour
Haſt thou ſuffered at any time by vagabonds and
Eſteem and promote thoſe uſeful charities whichre
peſts into priſons and workhouſes.
pilferers?
move ſuch
Atterbury.
Working DAY. n.ſ. [work and day.] Day on which i.
is permitted; not the ſabbath.
How full of briars is this workingday world? What -
Will you have me, lady ? S. hałºſtart.
No, my lord, unleſs I might have another for wºrlin.
days; your grace is too coſtly to wear everyday. Sºft.
Wo'RKMAN. n.ſ. work and man.] An artificer; a makeſ ºf
any thing.
When workmen ſtrive to do better than well,
They do confound their ſkill in covetouſneſs. Shaiſ,
If prudence works, who is a more cunning workman? !//d.
There was no other cauſe preceding than his own
will, no other matter than his own power, no other wºrk.
man than his own word, and no other conſideration than his
own infinite goodneſs. Raleigh.
They have inſcribed the pedeſtal, to ſhew their value for
the wºrkman. Addison ºn Italy,
Wo'RKMANLY. adj. [from workman, j Skilful; well per-
formed ; workmanlike.
Skilfully; in a manner becoming a
workman.
In having but fortie foot workmanly dight,
Take ſaffron en ugh for a lord and a knight. Tuftr.
We will fetch thee ſtraight
Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs, that one ſhall ſwear ſhe bleeds,
And at that fight ſhall ſad Apollo weep,
So workmany the blood and tears are drawn. Shakespeare tart.
Wo'R K MANshi P. n.ſ [from workman.]
1. Manufacture; ſomething made by any one.
Nor any ſkill'd in workmanſhip emboſs'd,
Nor any ſkill'd in loops of fing ring fine,
Might in their diverſe cunning ever dare
With this ſo curious network to compare. Sºft.
By how much Adam exceeded all men in perſºl, by
being the immediate worlmarſhip of God, by ſo muchº
choſen garden exceed all parts of the world. Rºlºſh.
He moulded him to his own idea, delighting in the chº
of the materials; and afterwards, as great architects uſ."
in the wºrkmanſhip of his regal hand. Iſº
what more reaſonable than to think, that if we tº Gº"
workmanſhip, he ſhall ſet this mark of himſelf upon all º
able creatures: Tilliºn.
. The ſkill of a worker; the degree of ſkill diſcovered in any
manufacture.
The Tritonian goddeſs having heard *
Her blazed fame, which all the world had fil",
Came down to prove the truth, and due rewaſ
For her praiſe-worthy workmanſhip to yield. Sºſr.
If there were no metals, 'tis a myſtery tº ". º:
Tubal-cain could ever have taught the wºrkmanſhip and "
them. mºdward's Natural Hiſtory.
The performer "
any work. -
y What time this world's great workmaſk. did caſt
To make all things, ſuch as we now bhoº,
It ſeems that he before his eyes had plac'd
A goodly pattern, to whoſe perfect mould
He faſhion'd them ſo comely.
Every carpenter and workmaſter that labout"
Defire, which tends to know.
The works of God, thereby to glorify
The great workmo/ier, leads to no exceſs.
Spººr-
h. Eccl.xxxvil"
Aft Parad. Ly!.
Wo'RkwoMAN. n.ſ.. [work and woman.]
1. A woman ſkilled in needle-work.
The moſt fine-fingred workwoman on ground, Spºſºr.
Arachne, by his means was vanquiſhed.
j The dº
not the ſabbath.
Tell her but a workyday fortune.
The other days, and thou
Make up one man; whoſe face thou ".
The workydays are the back part;
The burden of the week lies there.
S! ałęſtart:
Hrhºrt.
Holydº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O R
Holydays, if haply ſhe were gone,
Like workydays, I wiſh would ſoon be done. Gay.
WORLD. n: /, ſporlo, Saxon; wereld, Dutch.]
1. Wºrld is the great collective idea of all bodies whatever. Loc.
2. Syſtem of beings.
Begotten before all worlds. Nicene Creed.
God, hath in theſe laſt days ſpoken unto us by his ſon, by
whom he made the worlds. Hebr. i. 2.
Know how this world
Of heav'n and earth conſpicuous firſt began. Milton.
3. The earth; the terraqueous globe.
He the world
Built on circumfluous waters. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
4. Preſent ſtate of exiſtence.
I'm in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable; to do good ſometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
I was not come into the world then. L'E/irange.
He wittingly brought evil into the world. More.
Chriſtian fortitude conſiſts in ſuffering for the love of God,
whatever hardſhips can befal in the world. Dryden.
5. A ſecular life.
Happy is ſhe that from the world retires,
And carries with her what the world admires.
Thrice happy ſhe, whoſe young thoughts fixt above,
While ſhe is lovely, does to heav'n make love;
I need not urge your promiſe, ere you find
An entrance here, to leave the world behind Waller.
By the world, we ſometimes underſtand the things of this
world; the variety of pleaſures and intereſts which ſteal away
our affections from God. Sometimes we are to underſtand
the men of the world, with whoſe ſolicitations we are ſo apt
to comply. Rogers's Sermons.
6. Publick life.
Hence baniſhed, is baniſh’d from the world;
And world exil'd is death. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
. Buſineſs of life; trouble of life.
Here I'll ſet up my everlaſting reſt,
And ſhake the yoke of man's ſuſpicious ſtars
From this world-wearied fleſh. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
8. Great multitude.
You a world of curſes undergo,
Being the agents, or baſe ſecond means. Shakeſpeare.
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company;
For you in my reſpect are all the world. Shakeſpeare.
I leave to ſpeak of a world of other attempts furniſhed by
kings. Raleigh's Apology.
What a world of contradićtions would follow upon the
contrary opinion, and what a world of confuſions upon the
contrary pračtice. Bp. Sanderſon.
Juſt ſo romances are, for what elſe
Is in them all, but love and battles
O' th' firſt of theſe we have no great matter
To treat of, but a world o' th' latter. Hudibras.
It brought into this world a world of woe. AMilton.
There were a world of paintings, and among the reſt the
pićture of a lion. L’Eſtrange.
Marriage draws a world of buſineſs on our hands, ſubjects
us to law-ſuits, and loads us with domeſtick cares. Dryden.
From thy corporeal poiſon freed,
Soon haſt thou reach'd the goal with mended pace;
A world of woes diſpatch'd in little ſpace.
Why will you fight againſt ſo ſweet a paſſion,
And ſteel your heart to ſuch a world of charms ? Addiſon.
9. Mankind; an hyperbolical expreſſion for many.
This hath bred high terms of ſeparation between ſuch and
the reſt of the world, whereby the one ſort are named the
brethren, the godly ; the other worldlings, time-ſervers,
pleaſers of men more than of God. Hooker.
'Tis the duke's pleaſure,
Whoſe diſpoſition, all the world well knows,
Will not be rubb’d nor ſtopp'd. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Why doſt thou ſhew me thus to th’ world P
Bear me to priſon. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
He was willing to declare to all the world, that, as he had
been brought up in that religion cſtabliſhed in the church of
England, ſo he could maintain the ſame by unanſwerable
reaſons. Clarendon.
1o. Courſe of life.
Perſons of conſcience will be afraid to begin the world un-
juſtly. Clariffa.
11. Univerſal empire.
Rome was to ſway the world.
This through the eaſt juſt vengeance hurl’d,
And loſt poor Antony the world. Prior.
12. The manners of men.
Children ſhould not know any wickedneſs. Old folks have
diſcretion, and know the world. Shakeſpeare.
What ſtart at this when ſixty years have ſpread
Their grey experience o'er thy hoary head
Is this the all obſerving age could gain
Or haſt thou known the world ſo long in vain
7
Dryden.
Milton.
Dryden.
W O R
If knowledge of the world makes man perfidious,
May Juba ever live in ignorance. Addiſon's Cats,
The girl might paſs, if we could get her
To know the orid a little better s
To know the world / a modern phraſe
For viſits, ombre, balls and plays. Swift
*3: A Sollection of wonders; a wonder, Obſolete. -
- The baſſa having recommended Barbaruſſa, it was a world
to ſee, how the court was changed upon him. Knolles.
14. Time. A ſenſe originally S - - ... Zºº
without end. ginally Saxon; now only uſed in ſpºria
15. In the world. In Poſſibility.
All the precautions in the world
riage of his younger brother.
16. For all the world. Exactly. A ludicrous ſenſe; nowl;
He had a pair of horns like a bull, his 'f. cloven, as
many eyes upon his body as my grey mare hath dapples and
for all the world ſo placed. Sidney 'º. ii
Worldliness. n.J. [from worldly.] Covetouſneſs; additieſ.
neſs to gain.
Wo'Ripling. "...ſ [from world..] A mortal ſet upon profit.
. Baſeminded wretches are your thoughts ſo deeply bemired
in the trade of ordinary worldlings, as for reſpect of gain
to let ſo much time paſs. Sºny.
The one ſort are nam'd the brethren, the godly; the
other worldlings, timeſervers, and pleaſers of men more than
pleaſers of God. Hooker.
God of the world and worldlings,
Great Mammon I greateſt god below the ſky. Fa. Queen.
For his weeping in the needleſs ſtream; *~,
Poor deer, quoth he, thou mak’ſ a teſtament
As worldings do, giving thy ſum of more
To that which had too much. Shakeſp. As Yºu Like It.
That other on his friends his thoughts beſtows:
The covetous worldling, in his anxious mind,
Thinks only on the wealth he left behind. Dryden.
If we conſider the expectations of futurity, the worldling
gives up the argument.
Wo'RLDLY. adj. [from world.]
I. Secular; relating to this life, in contradiſtinétion to the life
to Conne.
He is divinely bent to meditation;
And in no worldly ſuits would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy exerciſe. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Hall thou not worldly pleaſure at command?' Shakeſp.
Tell me, ye toad-ſwol'n, flinty Pharoah's, tell; J
Can worldly pleaſures equal pains of hell? N. Richard.
The fortitude of a chriſtian conſiſts in patience, not in
enterprizes which the poets call heroic, and which are
commonly the effects of intereſt, pride, and world, ho-
In Our. Dryden.
Compare the happineſs of men and beaſts no farther than
it reſults from worldly advantages. Atterbury.
2. Bent upon this world; not attentive to a future ſtate.
They'll pračtiſe how to live ſecure,
Worldly or diſſolute, on that their lords
Shall leave them to enjoy. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
3. Human; common; belonging to the world.
Many years it hath continued, ſtanding by no other worldly
mean, but that one only hand which erected it. Hooker.
Times and places are approved witneſſes of worldly
aćtions. Raleigh's Hiſ of the IP'ord.
Wo'RLDLY. adv. [from world.] With relation to the preſent life.
It is a token of a worldly wiſe man, not to contend in
vain againſt the nature of times wherein he liveth. Raleigh.
Subverting worldly ſtrong and worldly wiſe,
By ſimply meek. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
‘l his cannot be done, if my will be worldly, or voluptuouſly
diſpoſed. South's Sermons.
Since your mind is worldly bent,
Therefore of the two gifts in my diſpoſe,
Think ere you ſpeak, I grant you leave to chooſe. Dryden.
WORM. n.ſ. [pyrim, Saxon ; worm, Dutch ; vermis, Lat]
1. A ſmall harmleſs ſerpent that lives in the earth.
Both the princes
Thy broken faith hath made a prey to worms. Shakeſpeare.
Help me into ſome houſe,
Or I ſhall faint;-a plague o' both your houſes |
They have made worms meat of me. Shakespeare.
Though worms devour me, though I turn to mold,
Yet in my fleſh I ſhall his face behold:
I from my marble monument ſhall riſe
Again intire, and ſee him with theſe eyes. Sandy's Par.
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
were taken for the mar-
Addison.
ttle uſed.
Rogers.
Inſect or worm. AMºton.
2. A poiſonous ſerpent.
The mortal worm. Shakeſpeare.
3. Animal bred in the body. - - -
Phyſicians obſerve theſe worms engendered within the body
of man. Harvey on Conſumptions.
4. The animal that ſpins filk. -
Thou oweſt the worm no filk, the ſheep no wool. Shakeſp.
3o Y 5. Grubs<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O R
W O R
5. Grubs that gnaw wood and furniture.
'Tis no awkward claim, iſh’d d
ick'd from the worm-holes of long vani 'd days,
§: from the duſt of old oblivion rak'd. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
ething tormenting.
6. sº worm of *icience ſtill begnaw thy ſoul. Shakeſp.
The chains of darkneſs, and th' undying worm. Milton.
Any thing vermiculated, or turned round ; anything ſpiral.
The threads of ſcrews, when bigger than can be made in
ſcrew-plates, are called worms. The length of a wºr” begins
at the one end of the ſpindle, and ends at the other; the
breadth of the worm is contained between any two grooves on
the ſpindle; the depth of the worm is cut into the diameter
of the ſpindle, viz. the depth between the outſide of the
worm, and the bottom of the groove. Moxon.
To WoRM. v. n. [from the noun.] To work ſlowly, ſecretly,
and gradually.
When debates and fretting jealouſy,
Did worm and work within you more and more,
Your colour faded.
To WoRM. v. a.
1. To drive by ſlow and ſecret means.
They find themſelves wormed out of all power, by a new
ſpawn of independents, ſprung from your own bowels. Swift.
2. To deprive a dog of ſomething, nobody knows what, under
his tongue, which is ſaid to prevent him, nobody knows
why, from running mad.
Everyone that keepeth a dog, ſhould have him wormed. Mort.
Wo'RMEATEN. adj. [[worm and eaten.]
1. Gnawed by worms.
For his verity in love, I do think him as concave as a co-
vered goblet, or a wormeaten nut. Shakeſpeare.
2. Old ; worthleſs.
His chamber all was hanged about with rolls,
And old records from antient times deriv'd ;
Some made in books, ſome in long parchment ſcrolls.
That were all wormeaten, and full of canker holes. Spenſºr.
Things among the Greeks, which antiquity had worn out
of knowledge, were called ogygia, which we call worneaten,
or of defaced date. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the J/orld.
Thine's like wormeaten trunks cloath’d in ſeal's ſkin;
Or grave, that's duſt without, and ſtink within. , Donne.
Wo'RM wood. n.ſ.. [from its virtue to kill worms in the body.]
J/ormwood hath an indeterminate ſtalk, branching out into
many ſmall ſhoots, with ſpikes of naked flowers hanging
downward; the leaves are hoary and bitter. Of this plant
there are thirty-two ſpecies, one of which, the common
wormwood, grows in the roads; but it is alſo planted in gar-
dens for common uſe. Great variety of ſea wormwoods are
found in the ſalt marſhes of England, and ſold in the markets
for the true Roman wormwood, though they differgreatly. Mill.
She was wean'd ; I had then laid
I/ormwood to my dug. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Pituitous Cacochymia muſt be corrected by bitters, as
wºrmwood wine. Floyer on the Humours.
I aſk whether one be not invincibly conſcious to himſelf of a
different perception, when he actually taſtes wormwood, or
only thinks on that ſavour. Locke.
Wo'RMY. adj. [from worm J Full of worms.
Spirits that in croſsways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone.
Yet can I not perſuade me thou art dead,
Or that thy corſe corrupts in earth's dark womb,
Or that thy beauties lie in wormy bed.
WoRN. part. paſſ of wear.
His is a maiden ſhield,
Guiltleſs of fight: mine batter'd, hew’d and bor'd,
J/orn out of ſervice, muſt forſake his lord. Dryden.
What I now offer, is the wretched remainder of a fickly
age, worn out with ſtudy, and oppreſs'd by fortune. Dryden.
The greateſt part of mankind are given up to labour,
whoſe lives are worn out only in the proviſions for living. Locke.
Your cold hypocriſy’s a ſtale device,
A worn-out trick; would'ſt thou be thought in carneſt,
Cloath thy feign'd zeal in rage, in fire, in fury. Addison.
Wo'RNIL. m. ſ.
In the backs of cows in the ſummer, are maggots gene-
rated, which in Eſſex we call wornils, being firſt only a ſmall
knot in the ſkin. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
To Wo'RRY. v. a. [Forgen, Saxon : whence probably the
word warray.]
1. To tear, or mangle, as a beaſt tears its prey.
If we with thrice ſuch powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let us be worried. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
The fury of the tumults might fly ſo high as to worry and
tear thoſe in pieces, whom as yet they but play'd with in
their paws. K. Charles.
'Tis no new thing for the dogs that are to keep the wolves
from worrying the ſheep, to be deliver'd up to the enemy,
for fear the ſheep ſhould worry the wolves. L'//ºrange.
7.
Herbert.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
This revives and imitates that inhuman -
old heathen perſecutors, wrapping up º:
of wild beaſts, that ſo they might be worrija. tor ins
pieces by dogs. South's Serm, In
2. To harraſs, or perſecute brutally. 3hſ.
Then embraces his ſon-in-law; then again worrie; he hi
daughter with clipping her. Shakeſp. //inter, E.
For want of words, or lack of breath, t.
Witneſs when I was worried with thy peals.
It has pleaſed Providence at length tó give us right
inſtead of exaction, and hopes of religion to a church
with reformation.
Milton,
eouſneſs
worried
South'. Sermº,
All his care outh's Sermºns.
Was to preſerve me from the barbarous rage
- - - - - S*&gt;
Which worried him only for being mine.
- - - S
I ſhall not ſuffer him to worry any man's reputa authºrn.
tion, nor
indeed fall on any perſon whatſoever. Addison
Let them rail, jºn.
And then worry one another at their pleaſure. Rowe
Madam, contrive and invent, -
And worry him out, 'till he gives his conſent. Swift.
WoRs E. adj. The comparative of bad:
[pinr, Saxon.] More bad ; more ill.
Why ſhould he ſee your faces worſe liking than the chil.
dren of your ſort Danieli. 10.
Whether this or worſe, love not the faithfulfide. Milton,
In happineſs and miſery, the queſtion ſtill remains, how
men come often to prefer the worſe to the better, and to chuß.
that, which, by their own confeſſion, has made them miſ-
bad, wºrſe, waſi.
rable. Lºck.
WoR SE. adv. In a manner more bad.
The more one ſickens, the worſe at eaſe he is. Shaft.
The Worse. n.ſ. [from the adjective.]
1. The loſs; not the advantage; not the better.
Was never man, who moſt conqueſts atchiev'd,
But ſometimes had the worſe, and loſt by war. Shºſr.
Judah was put to the worſe before Iſrael; and they fled to
their tents. 2 King; xiv. 12,
2. Something leſs good.
A man, whatever are his profeſſions, always thinks the
worſe of a woman, who forgives him for making an attempt
on her virtue. Clarija.
To WoRs.e. v. a. [from the adjećlive.] To put to diſadvan.
tage. This word, though analogical enough, is not now uſed.
Perhaps more valid arms,
Weapons more violent, when next we meet, -
May ſerve to better us, and worſe our foes. Miltºn,
Wo'Rser. adj. A barbarous word, formed by corrupting wº
with the uſual comparative termination.
Gods ! take my breath from me;
Let not my worſer ſpirit tempt me again
To die before you pleaſe.
A dreadful quiet felt, and worſer far
Than arms, a fullen interval of war.
Wo'R'ship. n.ſ. [peontºrcype, Saxon.]
I. Dignity; eminence; excellence.
Thou madeſt him lower than the angels, to cº"
Shaftare,
Dryden,
him
with glory and worſhip. P. viii. 5.
Elfin born of noble ſtate, d
And muckle worſhip in his native land, Fºy Q tº:
Well could he tourney, and in liſts debate.
My train are men of choice, and rareſt Parts,
That all particulars of duty know ;
And in the moſt exact regard ſupport ', King Lear
The wºrſhip of their names. Shaiſsarº, Kiº Hº".
2. A character of honour. d affect
I belong to worſhip, and affee •
In honour, i..." p Shakeſpeare's Hºl
Dinner is on tablé; my father deſires yo; *jº
pany. Shakeſp. Merry Jºva ºf Hºnºr.
The old Romans freedom did beſtow,
Our princes worſhip with a blow.
What lands and lordſhips for their owner know
Hudibr45.
- dº?!.
- My quondam barber, but his worſhip now. Dryd
3. A term of ironical reſpect. ...it *
Againſt your worſhip, when had S-k wº Pºpe,
Or P-ge pour'd forth the torrent of his "**
4. Adoration; religious act of reverence. ...
They join their vocal worſhip to the 4* Miliºn.
Of creatures wanting voice. -
He wav'd a torch aloft, and, madly "' Drydºn,
Sought godlike worſhip from a ſervile *...ligiºn, and
}. º, of God is an eminent pº º is
prayer is a chief part of religious worſhip: he Tiltºn.
deſcribed by ſeeking God. articularly *
There were ſeveral inroads into Gº. from
voyage of the Egyptians under Oſiris."P the Arbuthnºl,
them the Suevi had their worſhip of Iſis. ſ
. Honour; reſpect ; civil deference. . . . ſthoſe
*"...º.º.º. in therº:
Sinct
who ſit at meat with him. lm<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O R.
W O R
Since God hath appointed government among men, it is
plain that his intention was, that ſome kind of worſhip
ſhould be given from ſome to others; for where there is a
Power to puniſh and reward, there is a foundation of worſhip
in thoſe who are under that power; which worſhip lies in ex-
preſſing a due regard to that power, by a care not to provoke
it, and an endeavour to obtain the favour of it, which
among mankind, is called civil worſhip.
6. Idolatry of lovers.
'Tis not your inky brows, your black ſilk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream
That can entame my ſpirits to your wºrſhip.
To Wo'RSHIP. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To adore; to honour or venerate with religious rites.
Thou ſhalt worſhip no other God. Exod. xxxiv. 14.
Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary hu-
mility and worſhipping of angels. Col. ii. 18.
Adore and worſhip God Supreme. AMilton.
Firſt wºrſhip God; he that forgets to pray,
Bids not himſelf good-morrow nor good-day. T. Randolph.
On the ſmooth rind the paſſenger ſhall fée
Thy name engrav'd, and wo ſhip Helen's tree. Dryden.
2. To reſpect; to honour; to treat with civil reverence.
Our grave,
Like Turkiſh mute, ſhall have a tongueleſs mouth,
Not worſhipp'd with a waxen epitaph. Shakeſp. Henry V.
To WoRSHIP. v. m. To perform acts of adoration.
I and the lad will go yonder and worſhip. Gen. xxii. 5.
The people went to worſhip before the golden calf. 1 Kings.
Wo'RSHIPFul. adj. [worſhip and full J
1. Claiming reſpect by any character or dignity.
This is worſhipful ſociety,
And fits the mounting ſpirit like myſelf.
When old age cºmes upon him, it comes alone, bringing
no other evil with it; but when it comes to wait upon a great
and worſhipful ſinner, who for many years has ate well and
done ill, it is attended with a long train of rheums. South.
2. A term of ironical reſpect.
Every man would think me an hypocrite indeed; and
what excites your moſt worſhipful thought to think ſo
Sh, keſpeare.
Suppoſe this worſhipful idol be made, yet ſtill it wants ſenſe
and motion. Stilin fleet.
Wo'R's HIPFULLY. adv. [from worſhipful..] Reſpectfully.
Haſtings will loſe his head, ere give conſent,
His maſter's ſon, as wºrſhipfully he terms it,
Shall loſe the royalty of England's throne. Shakeſpeare.
Wo'RSHIPPER. n.ſ.. [from worſhip.] Adorer; one that wor-
ſhips.
p What art thou, thou idol ceremony ?
What kind of god art thou that ſuffer'ſt more
Of mortal griefs, than do thy worſhipers. Shakespeare Henry V.
Thoſe places did not confine the immenſity of God, nor
give his worſhippers a nearer approach to heaven by their height.
- Sºuth's Sermons.
If poſterity takes its notions of us from our medals, they
muſt fancy one of our kings paid a great devotion to Minerva,
that another was a profeſſed worſhipper of Apollo. Addison.
WoRST. adj. The ſuperlative of bad, formed from worſe: bad,
wºrſe, worſ'.] Moſt bad; moſt ill.
If thou hadſt not been born the warſ? of men,
Thou had it been knave and flatterer. Shakeſpeare.
The pain that any one aétually feels is ſtill of all other the
wo/?; and it is with anguiſh they cry out. Locke.
Voks r. n ſ. The moſt calamitous or wicked ſtate; the ut-
moſt height or degree of any thing ill.
Who is't can ſay, I’m at the worſ”
I'm worſe than e'er I was,
And worſe I may be yet: the wºrſt is not,
So long as we can ſay, this is the wor/l. Shaºffrare.
That you may be armed againſt the worſ' in this unhappy
flate of affairs in our diſtreſſed country, I ſend you theſe con-
iderations on the nature and immortality of the ſoul. Digby.
Happy the man, and happy he alone,
He, who can call to-day his own:
He who ſecure within can ſay,
Tomorrow do thy wo:/?, for I have liv'd to day. Pryden.
Sir Roger gets into the frontiers of his eſtate, before he
beats about in ſearch of a hare, on purpoſe to ſpare his own
fields, where he is always ſure of finding diverſion when the
worſt comes to the worſt. Addiſon's Speciator.
To WoR st. v. a. [from the adjećtive.] To defeat; to over-
throw.
The caſe will be no worſe than where two duelliſts enter
the field, where the wor/ed party hath his ſword given him
gain without further hurt. Sucºli g.
The bear was in a greater fright,
Beat down and wo:/?e by the knight. Hudibras.
It is downright mºdelſ, to contend where we are ſure to be
wºr/ſed. L'Hºſłrange.
The vićtorious Philidines were ſtºr/fed by the captivated
2
Stillingfect.
Shakeſpeare.
*
**
º
Shakeſpeare.
ark, which foraged their country more than a conquering ar-
my. Soºtº's Sermºns.
She could have brought the chariot again, when the ſaw her
brother worſed in the duel. Pryde'. Ded.l.º.
W9'Rsted n.ſ.. [from %r/ed, a town in Norfolk famous
for the woolen manufacture.] Woolen yarn; wool ſpun.
A baſe, proud, ſhallow, beggarly three ſuited, hundred
pound, filthy tor/ted-ſtocking knave. Shaiºſpeare', King Lear.
There Ridpath, Roper cudgel'd might ye view;
The very worſt d ſtill lookdbäck and blue. Pope.
WoRT. nºſ. ſpire, Saxon; wort, Dutch.)
1. Originally a general name for an herb , whence it ſtill conti-
nues in many, as liverwort, ſpleenwort.
2. A plant of the cabbage kind.
3. [Pyre, Saxon.] New beer either unfermented, or in the
act of fermentation. y
If in the wort of beer, while it worketh
the burrage be often changed with freſh, it will make a ſo-
vereign drink for mela choly. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
WoRTH, or IParth. v. n. [PeonSan, Saxon.] To be. This
word is only now retained in wo worth, or wurth; wo be.
Wo worth the man
That firſt did teach the curſed ſteel to bite
In his own fleſh, and make way to the living ſprit. F. 2.
WoRTH. In the termination of the names of places comes from
poº, a court or farm, or Poºls, a ſtreet or road. Giſon.
WQRTH. n.ſ. [peop's, Saxon.]
I. Price; value -
Your clemency will take in good worth the offer of theſe
my ſimple and mean labours Picoker.
- What is wºrth in any thing,
But ſo much money as 'twill bring Hudibras.
A common marcaſite ſhall have the colour of gold exactly;
and yet upon trial yield nothing of worth but vitriol and ful.
phur. Woodwara's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Excellence; virtue. -
How can you him unworthy then decree;
In whoſe chief part your worth implanted be. Sidney.
Is there any man of worth and virtue, although not inſtruct-
ed in the ſchºol of Chriſt, that had not rather end the days
of this tranſitory life as Cyrus, than to fink down with them
of whom Elihu hath ſaid, wºme to mo, intºr. Booker.
Having from theſe ſuck'd all they had of wºrth,
And brought home that faith which you carried forth,
, before it be tunned,
I throug ly love. Lonne.
Her virtue, and the conſcience of her worth
That wou'd be woo'd. Milton.
A nymph of your own train
Gives us your character in ſuch a ſtrain,
As none but ſhe, who in that court did dwell,
Could know ſuch worth, or worth deſcribe ſo well. Waller.
3. Importance; valuable quality.
Peradventure thoſe things whereupon ſo much time was
then well ſpent, have ſithence that loſt their dignity and worth.
- Hooker.
Take a man poſſeſſed with a ſtrong deſire of any thing,
and the worth and excellency of that thing appears much
greater than when that deſire is quite extinguiſhed. South's Ser.
WoRT H. adj.
1. Equal in price to, equal in value to.
Women will love her that ſhe is a woman,
More worth than any man : men that ſhe is
The rareſt of all women. Shakespeare's Winter's Tale.
Your ſon and daughter found this treſpaſs worth
The ſhame which here it ſuffers. Shakeſpeare.
You have not thought it worth your labour to enter a pro-
feſled diſſent againſt a philoſophy, which the greateſt part of
the virtuoſi of Europe have deſerted, as a mere maze of words,
G anville's Sceptick.
As if 'tis nothing worth that lies conceal’d ;
And ſcience is not ſcience till reveal’d? Dryden.
At Geneva are merchants reckoned worth twenty hundred
thouſand crowns. Addison's Italy.
It is worth while to conſider how admirably he has turned
the courſe of his narration, and made his huſbandman con-
cerned even in what relates to the battle. Addiſon.
2. Deſerving of.
The caſtle appeared to be a place worth the keeping, and
capable to be made ſecure againſt a good army. Clarendon.
Here we may reign ſecure, and, in my choice,
To reign is wo, th ambition, though in hell. Milton.
Haſte hither Eve, and worth thy fight behold,
Eaſtward among thoſe trees, what glorious ſhape
Comes this way moving. Aiton's Paradiſe L9/?.
\\ hatſoever
Is worthy of their love is wort their anger.
This is life indeed ; life worth preſerving;
Such life as Juba never felt till now. Addison's Cats.
I have long had it in my tº oughts to trouble you with a let:
ter; but was diſcouraged for want of ſomething that I could
think wºrth ſending fifteen hundred miles. Berkºy tº fºe.
Many
Denham.
3<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O R
W O U
things are worth enquiry to one man, which are not
ſo Mºº º: I, provement of the Mind.
- l in poſleſſions to.
3. Equal in P Dang'rous rocks,
which touching but my gentle veſſel's ſide,
would ſcatter all the ſpices on the ſtream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my ſilks ;
And in a word, but even now worth this, -
And now wo: th nothing. Shakespeare Merchant of Penice.
Although worth nothing, he ſhall be proffered in marriage
the beſt endowed, and moſt beautiful virgin of their iſland.
Sa'id, ', journey.
Wo'rthily. adv. [from worthy.]
1. Suitably; not below the rate of.
The divine original of our ſouls hath little influence upon
us to engage us to walk worthily of our extraction, and to do
nothing that is baſe. Ray.
2. Deſervedly.
They are betray'd
While they pervert pure nature's healthful rules
To loathſome ſickneſs, worthily, ſince they
God's image did not reverence in themſelves. Milton.
You worthily ſucceed, not only to the honours of your an-
ceſtors, but alſo to their virtues. Dryden.
3. Juſtly; not without cauſe.
Chriſtian men having, beſides the common light of all men,
ſo great help of heavenly direction from above, together with
the lamps of ſo bright examples as the church of God doth
yield, it cannot but worthily ſeem reproachful for us to leave
both the one and the other. PHooker.
The king is preſent; if 't be known to him
That I gainſay my deed, how may he wound,
And worthily, my falſhood. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
A Chriſtian cannot lawfully hate any one; and yet I affirm
that ſome may very worthily deſerve to be hated; and of all,
the deceiver deſerves it moſt. South's Sermons.
Wo'RTHINEss. n.ſ. [from worthy.]
I. Deſert.
The prayers which our Saviour made were for his own wor-
thingſ; accepted, ours God accepteth not, but with this con-
dition, if they be joined with a belief in Chriſt. Hooker.
2. Excellence; dignity; virtue. t
Determining never to marry but him, whom ſhe thought
worthy of her ; and that was one in whom all worthineſſes
were harboured. Sidney.
He that is at all times good, muſt hold his virtue to you,
whoſe worthineſ would ſtir it up where it wanted, rather than
ſlack it where there is ſuch abundance. Shakeſpeare.
Who is ſure he hath a ſoul, unleſs
It ſee and judge, and follow worthineſ,
And by deeds praiſe it? he who doth not this,
May lodge an inmate ſoul, but 'tis not his. Donne.
What ſet my thoughts on work was the worthineſ, and cu-
rioſity of the ſubječt in itſelf. Holder.
3. State of being worthy; quality of deſerving.
She is not worthy to be loved, that hath not ſome feeling
of her own worthineſs. Sidney.
Wo’R Hless, adj [from worth J
1. Having no virtues, dignity, or excellence.
You, his falſe hopes, the truſt of England's honour,
Keep off aloof with worthleſ, emulation. Shakespeare.
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
And worthlºſs Valentine ſhall be forgot. Shakeſpeare.
On Laura's lap you lay,
Chiding the wºrthleſs crowd away. Rºſcommon.
2 Having no value.
My anxious pains we all the day,
In ſearch of what we like, employ:
Scorning at night the wºrth'ſ prey,
We find the labour gave the joy. Prior.
Am I then doom'd to fall
By a boy's hand? and for a worthleſs woman Addison.
Wo'RTHL Fss N Ess. m. ſ. [from worthlºſ...] Want of excellence;
want of dignity; want of value
But that mine own worth effeſ, ſpoils the conceit, I could
think our company parallel to the ſeven wiſe men of Greece.
- More's Divine Dialºgues.
A notable account is given us by the apoſtle of this wind
inſignificant charity of the will, and of the worthleſſneſs of it,
not enlivened by dee's. South's Sermons.
Wo'RTHY, adj. [from worth.]
I. Deſerving; ſuch as merits: with of before the thing deſerved.
She determined never to marry any but him, whom ſhe
thought wºrthy of her, and that was one in whom all worthi.
neſts were harboured. z Sidney.
Further, I will not flatter you,
That all I ſee in you is worthy love,
Than this; that nothing do I ſee in you
That ſhould merit hate. Shakeſpeare's King john.
Thou art wºrthy of the ſway,
To whom the heav'ns in thy nativity
*g'd an olive branch and laurd drown. Shakeſp. are.
2. Valuable; noble; illuſtrious; having exceller * -
If the beſt things have the ºft . ºe or digitſ.
- - beſt operation.
will follow, that ſeeing man is the worthieſ ãº. On º
and every ſociety of men more worthy than any man º
*
ſociety that is the moſt excellent which we call the church.
He now on Pompey's baſis lies along, Hosier,
No worthier than the duſt? Shakeſpeare's julius C
A war upon the Turks is more worthy than upon an :
Gentiles in point of religion and honour; though ho y : er
ceſs might invite ſome other choice. pe of ſuc-
Think of her worth, and think that God di
This wºrthy mind ſhould worthy things º,
Blot not her beauties with thy thoughts unclean -
Nor her diſhonour with thy paſſion baſe. y
Happier thou may'ſt be, wortlier canſ not be.
3. Having worth ; having virtue.
The doctor is well money'd, and his friends
Potent at court; he, none but he, ſhall have her,
Though twenty thouſand worthier come to crave it. Shakespeare
The amatter I handle is the moſt important within the wº
extent of human nature, for a worthy perſon to employ him.
ſelf about. Digly on the Saul.
We ſee, though order'd for the beſt,
Permitted laurels grace the lawleſs brow,
Th' unworthy rais d, the worthy caſt below. Drydºn.
4. Not good. A term of ironical celebration.
My worthy wife our arms miſlaid,
And from beneath my head my ſword convey'd;
The door unlatch'd; and with repeated calls
Invites her former lord within my walls. Drydºn.
5. Suitable for any quality good or bad; equal in value; equal
in dignity.
Flowers worthy of paradiſe. Milan,
Thou, Drances, art below a death from me:
Let that vile ſoul in that vile body reſt,
diſºn.
Davier.
Milton.
The lodging is well worthy of the gueſt. Dryden.
My ſuff'rings for you make your heart my due ;
Be worthy me, as I am worthy you. Dryden.
6. Suitable to any thing bad.
The mercileſs Macdonald,
J%rthy to be a rebel; for to that
The multiplying villanies of nature
Do ſwarm upon him.
7. Deſerving of ill. *
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death, Shaº,
If the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, the judge ſhal
cauſe him to be beaten. Deut. xxv.2.
Wo'RTHY. n.ſ.. [from the adjećtive..] A man laudable for aſ
eminent quality, particularly for valour.
Such as are conſtellated unto knowledge come ſhot ºf
themſelves if they go not beyond others, and muſt not ſ: down
under the degree of worthies. Brown's ſugar Enºuri.
- What do theſe worthies
But rob and ſpoil, burn, ſlaughter, and enſlave -
Peaceable nations. Alitºn's Paradiſe Rºgained
No worthies form'd by any muſe but thine f
Could purchaſe robes, to make themſelves ſo fine. Waller.
For this day's plm, and for thy former acts,
Thou Arthur haſt acquir'd a future fame,
And of three Chriſtian worthie art the firſt. . . Dº
The next worthy came in with a retinue of hiſtorians. º
To WoR rhy. v. 4. [from the adjective.] To renº worthy;
to aggrandiſe; to exalt. Not uſed.
He conju Čt, trip'd me behind;
And put upon him ſuch a deal of man, .
That worthied him; got praiſes of the king,
For him attempting, who was ſelf-ſubdu'l -
To Wot. v. n. [prºan, Saxon; whence tºº," * º
which the preterite was wo:, knew ; which by degrees -
miſtaken for the preſent tenſe.] To know: ****
ſolete.
The ſalve of reformation they mightily cal” * º
and what the fores are which need it, as they “ full ". lºr.
they think not greatly material to ſearch.
Shakeſpeare's Marleth.
Shakespeare.
Well I wºt, compar'd to all the reſt d
Of each degrº, that beggar's life is beſt. Hubber
More water glideth by the mill S}.}ſºrt.
Than wits the miller of
//ºt you, what I found? Shaljeart.
Forſooth, an inventory, thus importing:
Wove. The preterite and participle paſſive of weave.
Adam, waiting her return, had wºve Miltºn.
Of choiceſt flow’rs, a garland.
Wo've N. The participle paſſive of weave.
Would. The preterite of will. -
1. It is generally uſed as an auxiliary verb. with º
to which it gives the force of the ſubjunctive mº ºuld dº
If God's providence did not ſo order it, cheats it of the
be committed, which would juſtle private “” O Raj.
rights, and unhinge ſtates. -
n infinitive,
I Woul”
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W O U
* I Would dº it. My reſolution is that it ſhould be done by
me.
Thou Wou'ldest do it. Such muſt be the conſequence to thee.
He Would or it would. This muſt bethe conſequence to him or it.
3. The plural as the ſingular.
He by the rules of his own mind, could conſtrue no other
end of mens doings but ſelf-ſeeking, fuddenly feared what
they could do; and as ſuddenly ſuſpected what they would do,
and as ſuddenly hated them, as having both might and mind
ſo to do. Sidney.
4. Was or am reſolved; wiſh or wiſhed to.
She would give her a leſſon for walking ſo late, that ſhould
make her keep within doors for one fortnight. Sidney.
Jealous Philoclea, that was even jealous of herſelf; for Zel-
mane would needs have her glove. Sidney.
You would be ſatisfied ?–
Wºuld 2 nay, and will. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
They know not what they are, nor what they would be,
any further than that they would not be what they are. L’Eſir.
It will be needleſs to enumerate all the fimple ideas belong-
ing to each ſenſe: nor indeed is it poſſible if we would; there
being a great many more of them belonging to moſt of the
ſenſes than we have names for. Locke.
By pleaſure and pain I would be underſtood to ſignify, what-
ſoever delights or moleſts us, whether from the thoughts of
our minds, or anything operating on our bodies. Locke.
5. It is a familiar term for wiſh to do, or to have.
What would; thou with us? Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Mr. Slender, what would you with me?—
—lººd little or nothing with you.
Shak -
6. Should wiſh. Shakeſpeare
Celial if you apprehend
The muſe of your incenſed friend;
Nor would that he record your blame,
And make it live ; repeat the ſame;
Again deceive him, and again,
And then he ſwears he'll not complain. JWaller.
7. It is uſed in old authours for ſhould.
The exceſs of diet would be avoided. Bacon.
As for percolation, which belongeth to ſeparation, trial
would be made by clarifying by adheſion, with milk put into
new beer and ſtirred with it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
8. It has the ſignification of I wiſh, or I pray; this, I believe, is
improper; and formed by a gradual corruption of the phraſe,
would God; which originally imported, that God would,
might God will, might God decree; from this phraſe ill un-
derſtood came, would to God; thence, I would to God: And
thence I would, or elliptically, would come to ſignify, I wiſh :
and ſo it is uſed even in good authours, but ought not to be
imitated.
I would my father look'd but with my eyes.
I would this muſick would come.
I, this ſound I better know:
Wiſe men will do it without a law; I would there might be
a law to reſtrain fools. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Liſt I would I could hear mo. Ben. johnſon.
This is yet the outward, faireſt ſide
Of our deſign: within reſts more of fear
Than my moſt worthy lords, I would there were. Daniel.
JWould thou hadſt hearken'd to my words, and ſtay'd
With me, as I befought thee, when that ſtrange
Deſire of wand'ring, this unhappy morn,
Poſſeſs'd thee. Mlton's Paradiſe Loft.
J/ould God we might prevent the need of ſuch unkindly ex-
pedients, and by a thankful ſenſe of what we have, provide
to conſerve it. Decay of Piety.
I ſcarce am pleas'd, Itamely mount the throne,
//ould Aurengzebe had all their ſouls in one. -Dryden.
And would to heav'n the ſtorm you felt, would bring
On Carthaginian coaſts your wand'ring king. Dryden.
Wou'ld ING. m. ſ. [from would.j
tion to anything; propenſion; inclination; incipient purpoſe.
It will be every man's intereſt to join good performances
to ſpiritual purpoſes, to ſubdue the exorbitancies of the fleſh,
as well as to continue the wouldings of the ſpirit. Hammond.
Wound. m. ſ. ſpuns, Saxon; wonde, Dutch..] A hurt given
by violence.
I am faint; my gaſhes cry for help.–
—So well thy words become thee as thy wounds,
They ſmack of honour both. Shakepeare’s Macbeth,
Now ſhew the wound mine eyes have made in thee;
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
Some ſcar of it. Shakeſpeare.
He ſtooping, open'd my left ſide, and took
From thence a rib : wide was the wound,
But ſuddenly fill'd up and heal’d. Milton.
The aliment of ſuch as have freſh wounds ſhould be mild
without ſtimulating or ſaline ſubſtances. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
They feel the ſmart and ſee the ſcar of their former wounds;
and know that they muſt be made a ſacrifice to the leaſt at-
tempt towards a change. Swift.
Motion of deſire; diſpoſi-
W. R. A
To wogND. v. a. [from the noun.J. To hurt by violence.
Th'untented woundings of a father's curſe
Pierce ev'ry fence about thee, Shakeſpeare's King Lear,
I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal. Deut.
The battle went fore againſt Saul, and the archers hit him
and he was ſore wounded. 1 Sam. xxxi. 3.
$od ſhall wound the head of his enemies. Pſal" lxviii. 21.
He was *** for our tranſgreſſions, he was bruiſed for
our iniquities. Iſa, liii. 5.
when ye fin ſo againſt the brethren, and wound their weak
conſcience, ye fin againſt Chriſt. I Cor. viii. 12.
Adonis from his native rock
Ran purple to the ſea, ſuppos'd with blood
Of Thammuz, yearly wounded. Milton
Heroes of old, when wounded ſhelter ſought. Dryº.
The ſavages wounded Atkins, and fiew, i. followers.
Robin -
Woºp. The preterite and participle paſſive of º Croſse
.They took the body of Jeſus and wound it in finen cloaths
with the ſpices. john. xix.o.
All will be but like bottoms of thread cloſe wºund up. Horn.
The young men wound him up, and buried him. Mºs v.
Theſe mathematical engines cannot be ſo eaſily and ſpeedily
wºund up, and ſo certainly levelled as the other. //ilkins.
The Parliament being called here, and the main ſettlement
of Ireland wºund up in England, and put into the Duke of oil
mond's hands to paſs here into an act, all perſons came over in
a ſhoal. Temple,
You'Ndless, adj. [from wºund.J Exempt from wounds.
Wou'NDwort. n.ſ. [vulneraria, Latin.j A plant.
It hath a papilionaceous flower, out of whoſe tubular and
turgid empalement ariſes the pointal, which afterward becomes
a ſhort pod, filled with roundiſh ſeeds: the pod is enclos'd in
a membranous bladder was before the empalement. Miller.
Wou'NDY. adj. Exceſſive. A low bad word.
We have a world of holydays; that 'tis a wound, hindrance
to a poor man that lives by his labour. L’Eſtrange.
Theſe ſtockings of Suſan's coſt a woundy deal of pains the
pulling on. Gay.
* } Theoreteriteoſ
Woxe. } epreterite of wax. Became. Obſolete.
The ape in wond’rous ſtomach wox,
Strongly encourag’d by the crafty fox. Hubberd.
Not one puff of wind there did appear,
That all the three the great wox much afraid. Spenſer.
Wo'XEN. The participle of to wax. Obſolete.
Spenſºr.
WRAck. n. ſ. [wrack, Dutch; praecce, Saxon, a wretch ; the
poets uſe wrack or wreck indifferently as rhyme requires, the
later, writers of proſe commonly wreck. See Wreck.]
1. Deſtruction of a ſhip by winds or rocks.
Now, with full ſails into the port I move,
And ſafely can unlade my breaſt of love;
Quiet and calm; why ſhould I then go back,
To tempt the ſecond hazard of a wrack. Dryden,
2. Ruin; deſtruction. This is the true Saxon meaning.
With uſe of evil, growing more and more evil, they took
delight in ſlaughter, and pleaſed themſelves in making others
wrack the effect of their power. Sidney.
A world devote to univerſal wrack. Milton.
To WRAck. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To deſtroy in the water; to wreck. [See WReck.]
2. It ſeems in Milton to mean to rock, to ſhake.
Each on his rock transfix'd, the ſport and prey
Of wracking whirlwinds. Milton.
3. To torture, to torment. This is commonly written rack;
and the inſtrument of torture, always rack.
Merab rejoic’d in her wrack'd lover's pain,
And fortify'd her virtue with diſdain. Cowley.
Pharaoh's and Joſeph's dreams are oftentimes wracked beyond
their ſymbolization. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
To WRA'NG le. v. n. [from wrangheſeur, Dutch, Minſhew.
wrong, Skinner.] To diſpute peeviſhly; to quarrel perverſely;
to altercate; to ſquabble.
Yes, for a ſcore of kingdoms you ſhould wrangle,
And I would call it fair play. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Some unhatch'd praćtice
Hath puddled his clear ſpirit; and in ſuch caſes,
Men's natures wrangle with inferiour things,
Though great ones are their objećt. Shakeſpeare's Ohello.
How wounding a ſpectacle is it to ſee thoſe who were by
Chriſt deſigned for fiſhers of men, picking up ſhells on the
ſhore, and unmanly wrangling about them too. Decay of P.
In incompleat ideas we impoſe on ourſelves, and wrangle
with others. Locke.
Amongſt unthinking men, who examine not ſcrupulouſly
ideas, but confound them with words, there muſt be end-
leſs diſpute and wrangling. Locłe.
His great application to the law had not inſe&amp;ted his temper
with any thing litigious ; he did not know what it was to
wrange on indifferent points. Add/on's Freeholder.
3o Z Fill'd<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W R A
W R E
Fill'd with the ſenſe of age, the fire of youth,
A ſcorn of wronglºng, yet a zeal for truth. Pope.
And all the queſtion, wrangle e'er ſo long,
Is only this, if God has plac'd him wrong Pope.
WRA's clf. n.ſ. [from the verb.] A quarrel; a perverſe diſ-
te.
*†he giving the prieſt a right to the tithe would produce
law-ſuits and wrangles. - Swift.
WRA'NgleR. n.ſ. [from wrangle.] A perverſe, pceviſh, diſ-
utative man.
Tell him h'ath made a match with ſuch a wrangle",
That all the courts of France will be diſturb’d
With chaſes. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Lord, the houſe and family are thine,
Though ſome of them repine;
Turn out theſe wranglers, which defile thy ſeat:
For where thou dwelleſt all is neat. Herb.rt.
You ſhould be free in every anſwer, rather like well-bred
gentlemen in polite converſation, than like noiſy and conten-
tious wrangle, 3. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
To WRAP. v. a. [preorpian, Saxon, to turn ; wrºffer, Da-
niſh. J -
1. To roll together ; to complicate.
Peter ſeeth the napkin that was about his head wrapped to-
gether by itſelf. john xx. 7.
This ſaid, he took his mantle's foremoſt part,
He ‘gan the ſame together fold and wrap. Fairfax.
2. To involve; to cover with ſomething rolled or thrown round.
Nilus opens wide
His arms, and ample boſom to the tide,
And ſpreads his mantle o'er the winding coaſt:
In which he wraps his queen and hides the flying hoſt.
Dryden.
The ſword made bright is wrapt up for the ſlaughter. Ezek.
Their vigilance to elude, I wrapt in miſt
Of midnight vapour glide obſcure. Milton.
J%ap candles up in paper. Swift's Directionſ to the Butler.
3. To compriſe ; to contain.
Leontine's young wife, in whom all his happineſs was wrapt
up, died in a few days after the death of her daughter. Addiſon.
4. To WR Ap up. To involve totally.
Some dear cauſe
Will in concealment wrap me up a while ;
When I am known aright, you ſhall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
King John fled to Laſcus, who was careful how to comfort
him, wrapt up in ſo many calamities, after the loſs of his king-
dom. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Things reflected on, in groſs and tranſiently, carry the ſhew
of nothing but difficulty in them, and are thought to be wrap-
ped up in impenetrable obſcurity. Locke.
5. [It is often corruptly written for rap or rapt, from rapio,
Latin J. To ſnatch up miraculouſly.
Whatever things were diſcovered to St. Paul, when he was
wrapped up into the third heaven, all the deſcription he makes
is, that there are ſuch things as eye hath not ſeen, ear heard,
nor hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive. Locke.
6. To tranſport; to put in ecſtaſy.
Much more the reverent fire prepar'd to ſay,
J/rap'd with his joy; how the two armies lay. Cowley.
7. [Perhaps the following paſſage ſhould properly be rap’d; though
wrapped is now frequently uſed in this ſenſe.}
//rapt up in ſilent fear he lies. J/aller.
Jºrap'd in amaze the matrons wildly ſtare. Dryden.
WRA'PPER. n.ſ.. [from wrap.]
1. One that wraps.
2. 'That in which any thing is wrapped.
My arms were preſſed to my fides, and my legs cloſed to-
gether by ſo many wrappers, that I looked like an Egyptian
mummy. Addiſon's Spectator.
WRATH. n. ſ. ſyna’s, Saxon; wred, Daniſh; wreed, cruel,
Dutch. Anger; fury; rage.
Thou doſt the prayers of the righteous ſeed
Preſent before the majeſty divine,
And his avenging wrath to clemency incline. Fairy Queen.
With one fool's head I came to woo,
But I go away with two:
Sweet, adieu ! I'll keep my oath, -
Patiently to bear my wrath. Shakespeare Merch. of Penice.
I fear, T-left there be debates, envyings, wraths, ſtrics. Cor.
He hop’d not to eſcape, but ſhun
The preſent, fearing guilty what his wrath
r Might ſuddenly inflict. Milton.
W*A*rii FUL. adj. [wrath and full.] Angry; furious; ra-
9, 29. -
He cry’d, as raging ſeas are wont to roar,
When wintry ſtorm his wrathful wreck doth threat.
Fary &amp;ſeen.
c - Fly from wrath:
Sad be the fights, and bitter fruits of war,
And thouſand furies wait on wrathful ſwords, Fa. Qeen.
How now, your wrathful weapons drawn. Shake
- fe --
The true evangelical zeal ſhould abound more peace.
- - - in the mild
and good natured affections, than the vehement and wrathfºl
paſſions. Sprat's Sermºn.
WRA'th fully. adv. [from wrathſul] Fur
atcly. iouſly; paſſion.
Let's kill him bold. Gentle friends,
et's kill him boldly, but not wrathfly. Shakeſirar
WRA'THLEss, adj. [from wrath.] #. from sº ºffrare.
Before his feet, ſo ſheep and lions lay,
Fearleſs and wrathleſ, while they heard him play. Iſa.
To WR EAK. v. a. Old preterite and part, paſſ of wºol, [ º
can, Saxon; wrecken, Dutch; recken, German.] ... [ſ]ºſe-
1. To revenge.
In an ill hour thy foes thee hither ſent,
Another's wrongs to wreak upon thy ſelf.
Him all that while occaſion did provoke
Againſt Pyrocles, and new matter fram'd
Upon the old, him ſirring to be wroke
Of his late wrongs.
Pale death our valiant leader hath oppreſt,
Come wreak his loſs, whom bootleſs ye complain. Fairfix.
2. To execute any violent deſign. This is the ſenſe in which
it is now uſed.
On me let death wreak all his rage. Miltºn,
He left the dame,
Reſolv'd to ſpare her life, and ſave her ſhame,
But that deteſted object to remove,
To wreck his vengeance, and to cure her love. Drdºn,
Think how you drove him hence, a wand'ring exile,
To diſtant climes, then think what certain vengeance
Fairy.º.º.
F.airy &amp;ºn.
His rage may wreak on your unhappy orphan. Smith,
Her huſband ſcour'd away,
To wreak his hunger on the deſtin'd prey. Pºſt.
3. It is corruptly written for reck, to heed; to care.
My maſter is of churliſh diſpoſition,
And little wreaks to find the way to heav'n
By doing deeds of hoſpitality. Shakespeare A yºu like it.
WREAk. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Revenge; vengeance.
Fortune, mine avowed foe,
Her wrathful wreaks themſelves do now allay. Fa. 2 ten,
Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war
Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,
And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
2. Paſſion; furious fit.
What and if
His ſorrows have ſo overwhelm'd his wits,
Shall we be thus aſhlićled in his wreaks, -
His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterneſs? Shaºff. Tit, Andr,
WRE'Akful. adj. [from wreak.] Revengeful; angſ).
Call the creatures,
Whoſe naked natures live in all the ſpite t
Of wreakful heaven. Shakſtart.
She in Olympus' top
Muſt viſit Vulcan for new arms, to ſerve her wraiful ſon,
Chapman'. Iliad.
WRE'Akless. adj. [I know not whether this word * º
ten for reckleſs, careleſs; or comes from wreak, revenge, an
means unrevenging.]
So flies the wººl-ſ; ſhepherd from the wolf;
So firſt the harmleſs flock doth yield his fleece, VI
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife. Shaiſ H.VI.
WREATH. m.ſ. [pneo's, Saxon.] -
1. Anything curled or twiſted.
º ... of three was made a wreath of five: * º
three firſt titles of the two houſes, were added the author".
parliamentary and papal. Bacon's Hºnſ) VII.
Clouds began k |
To darken all the hill, and ſmoke to roll..., , ºff,
In duſky wreaths reluctant flames. . .” Par, Ly
He of his tortuous train Miltºn.
Curl’d many a wanton wreath.
Let altars ſmoak, di ſeroll
And richeſt gums, and ſpice, and in en'."..., and Hº.
Their fragrant wreath; to heav'n. Smit” pºd, and Hº!
2. A garland; a chaplet. - - -
Now are our brows bound with vić Shaktſ R. Ill.
Our bruiſed arms hung up for monumes: º -
Dropp'd from his head, a wreath º " Ryan".
orious weathſ,
i
The boughs of Lotos, form'd into a wreath,
This monument, thy maiden beauty's "" Djº.
High on a plane-tree ſhall be hung to V".
When for thy head the garland | prepare,
A ſecond wreat' ſhall bind Aminta's ha"; lai
And when my choiceſt ſongs thy worth proclaim" Priºr,
Alternate verſe ſhall bleſs Amiata's º are transcº
To prince Henry the laurels of his rival º that rival.
- ºd
• - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . of having conqº'º' ºutd.
with the additional wreath of 3. Shakespeare  carº !º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W R E
"...
.
º,
*
To WR FA rh. v.a. preterite wre...thed
wrathen. [from the noun.]
1. To curl ; to twiſt; to convolve.
Longaville
Did never ſonnet for her ſake compile,
Sor never laid his wreath… arms athwart -
His loving boſom, to keep down his heart. Shakeſpeare.
About his neck
Agreen and gilded ſnake had wreath a itſelf,
Who, with her head, nimble in threats approach'd
The opening of his mouth; but ſuddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlink'd itſelf, - - -
And with indented glides did ſlip away. Shakespeare A you like it.
The beard of an oat is *re-tºed at the bottom, and one
ſmooth entire ſtraw at the tºP: they take only the part that is
*reatºed, and cut off the other. Bacon.
2. It is here uſed for to writhe.
Impatient of the wound,
He rolls and wreath, his ſhining body round;
Then headlong ſhoots beneath the daſhing tide. Gay.
3. To interweave; to entwine one in another.
Two chains of pure gold of ºrºk ſhalt thou make
them, and faſten the wrathen chains to the ouches. Ex. xxviii.
As ſhakes breed in dunghills not ſingly, but in knots; ſo in
ſuch baſe noiſome hearts you ſhall ever ſee pride and ingrati-
; part, paſſ wreath.d,
tude indiviſibly weathed and twiſted together. South.
Here, where the labourer's hands have form'd a bow'r
Of wreathing trees, in ſinging waſte an hour. Dryden.
4. To encircle as a garland.
In the flow’rs that wreath the ſparkling bowl,
Fell adders hiſs, and poisºnous ſerpents rowl. Prior.
5. To encircle as with a garland.
For thee ſhe feeds her hair,
And with thy winding ivy wreathes her lance. Dryden.
The ſoldier, from ſucceſsful camps returning,
With laurel wreath'd, and rich with hoſtile ſpoil,
Severs the bull to Mars. Prior.
WR E(ATHY. adj. [from wreath J Spiral; curled; twiſted.
That which is preſerved at St. Dennis, nº. Paris, hath
wreatly ſpires, and cochleary turnings about, which agreeth
with the deſcription of an unicorn's horn in Ajian. Brown.
WRºck. m. ſ. ſprecce, Saxon, a miſèrable perſon; wracke,
Dutch, a ſhip broken.] -
*: Pºſtruction by being driven on rocks or ſhallows at ſea;
deſtruction by ſea.
Fair be ye ſure; but hard and obſtinate,
As is a rock amidſt the raging floods;
'Gainſ which a tip of ſuccour deſolate,
Doth ſuffer we both of herſelf and goods. Speºſer.
Like thoſe that ſee their wreck
Ev’n on the rocks of death; and yet they ſtrain,
That death may not them idly find t'attend
To their uncertain taſk, but work to meet their end. Daniel.
Think not that flying fame reports my fate;
I preſent, I appear, and my own wreck felate. Dryden.
2. Diſſolution by violence.
Not only Paradiſe,
In this commotion, but the ſtarry cope
Had gone to wreck. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
3. Ruin; deſtruction.
Whether he was
Combin'd with Norway, or did line the rebel
With hidden help and vantage; or that with both
He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not. Shakſ).
4. It is miſprinted here for wreak.
He cry'd as raging ſeas are wont to roar,
When wintry ſtorm his wrathful wreck doth threat. Spenſºr.
To WR Eck. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To deſtroy by daſhing on rocks or ſands. -
Have there been any more ſuch tempeſts, wherein ſhe hath
wretchedly been wrecked P Spenſer on Ireland.
A pilot's thumb,
177:eck'd as homeward he did come. Shakespeare Macheth.
The coral found growing upon wrecked ſhips and loſt an-
chors, that are daily dragged up out of the ſea, demonſtrates
that coral continues to be formed to this day. //oodward.
2. To ruin. -
Weak and envy'd, if they ſhould conſpire, -
They wreck themſelves, and he hath his deſire. Dan'el.
3. In the following paſſages it is ignorantly uſed for wreak, in its
different ſenſes of revenge and execute. -
Eighty odd years of ſorrow have I ſeen, /.
And each hour's joy wreck'd with a week of teen. Slakeſp.
I faint' I die! the goddeſs cry'd :
O cruel, could'ſt thou find none other
To wreck thy ſpleen on Parricideſ -
Like Nero, thou haſt ſlain thy mother. Prior.
To WR Eck. v. n. To ſuffer wreck.
With manlier objects we muſt try
His conſtancy, with ſuch as have more ſhew -
Of worth, of honour, glory, and popular praiſe, -
Rocks whereon greateſt men have often wreºd. A ſºn.
-
W R E
WR =s, n. ſ. [prenna, Saxon J A ſmall bird.
The poor wen,
The moſt diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her neſt, againſt the owl. Shakeſp. Macb.
^!! ages have conceived that thº. is the leaſt of birds,
Yet the diſcoveries of America have ſhewed us one far leſs,
the hum-bird not much exceeding a beetle.
Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To WR ENch. *, *, ſpringan, Saxon; wrenghen, Dutch.]
• To pull by Viºlence; to wreſt; to force.
//rench his ſword from him.
- Shakespeare Othello.
Oh form
How often do'ſ thou with thy caſe, thy habit,
//rench awe from fools, and tie the wiſer ſouls
To thy falſe ſeeming! Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. Shºp.
- Caeſar's *Y, wanting ſomething, demanded a miſſion Ot
diſcharge, though with nº intention it ſhould be granted; but
thought by that means to *rench him to their other défires.
Bacon.
Sing the Parthian, when transfix’d he lies,
//renching the Roman jav'lin from his thighs. Dryden.
Achilles wrench'd it out, and ſent again -
The hoſtile gift. Dryden.
Struggling to get looſe, I broke the ſtrings, and wrenched
out the pegs that faſtened my arm to the ground. Gull. Traveli.
2. To ſprain; to diffort.
O moſt ſmall fault I
How ugly didſt thou in Cordélia ſhow
Which, like an engine, wrºt my frame of nature
From the fix’d place; drew from my heart all love,
And added to the gali. Shakeſp. King Lear.
You wrenched your foot againſt a ſtone, and were forced to
ſtay. . Swift.
WRENcH. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A violent pull or twiſt.
2. A ſprain. -
Some ſmall part of the foot being injured by a wrench, the
whole leg thereby loſes its ſtrength. Locke.
3. WR ENches, in Chaucer, ſignifies means, ſleights, ſubtilties;
which is, I believe, the ſenſe here.
He reſolved to make his profit of this buſineſ, of Britain, as
a quarrel for war; and that of Naples as a wrench and mean
for peace. Bacon's Henry VII.
To WREST. v. a. ſphaerzan, Saxon.]
1. To twiſt by violence; to extort by writhing or force.
To wring this ſentence, to wrº/f thereby out of men's hands
the knowledge of God's doctrine, is without all reaſon. Aſcham.
To what wretched ſtate reſerv’d,
Better end here unborn 1 Why is life giv'n,
To be thus wrºſled from us? Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
Where you charged in perſon, you were a conqueror: the
rebels afterwards recovered ſtrength, and wreſted that vićtory
from others that they had loſt to you. Dryden.
Our country's cauſe,
That drew our ſwords, now wreſ'; 'em from our hand,
And bids us not delight in Roman blood,
Unprofitably ſhed. - Addiſon's Cato.
O prince, I bluſh to think what I have ſaid;
But fate has wreſted the confeſſion from me. Addiſon.
2. To diſtort; to writhe; to force.
So far to extend their ſpeeches, is to wreſ? them againſt
their meaning. Hooker.
My father's purpoſes have been miſłook,
And ſome about him have too laviſhly
//refted his meaning and authority. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
J/reſt once the law to your authority;
To do a great right, do a little wrong. Shakeſpeare.
WREST. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Diſtortion; violence. -
Whereas it is concluded, out of thoſe ſo weak premiſes,
that the retaining of divers things in the church of England,
which other reformed churches have caſt out, muſt needs argue
that we do not well, unleſs we can ſhew that they have done
ill: what needed this wreſ', to draw out from us an accuſation
of foreign churches ra • Hozier.
2. It is uſed in Spenſer and Shakeſpeare for an ačive or moving
power: I ſuppoſe, from the force of a tilter acting with his
lance in his reſt. .
Adown he keſt it with ſo puiſſant wrºft,
That back again it did aloft rebound,
And gave againſt his mother earth a groneful ſound. F. Q.
Antenor is ſuch a wreſt in their affairs,
That their negotiations all muſt ſlack'n,
Wanting his manage. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſda,
WR Est ER. m. ſ. [from wreſt.] He who wreſts.
To WRE’stle. v. n. [from wreſt.]
1. To contend who ſhall throw the other down.
You have loſt the ſight of good wreſtling. Shakespeare rare.
If ever he goes alone again, I'll never wreſtle for prize
in Ore. - Shakespeare A you like it.
Anºther,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W R E
W R I
Another, by a fall in wreſtling, ſtarted the end of the cla-
vicle from the ſternon. Wiſeman's Surgery.
To play or wreſtle well, it ſhould be uſed with thoſe that do
it better. Temple.
None in the leap ſpring with ſo ſtrong a bound,
Or firmer in the wreſtling preſs the ground. Pope.
2. To ſtruggle; to contend. -
I perſuaded them, if they lov’d Benedick,
To wiſh him wreſtle with affection,
And never to let Beatrice know of it. Shakeſpeare.
He knew not how to wreſtle with deſperate contingencies,
and ſo abhorred to be entangled in ſuch. Clarendon.
WRE'stleR. m. ſ. [from wreſtle.]
1. One who wreſtles; one who profeſſes the athletick art.
Was not Charles, the duke's wrºſłler, here? Shakeſp.
When the young wreſtlers at their ſport grew warm,
Old Milo wept, to ſee his naked arm. Denham.
'Tis not from whom, but where we live;
The place does oft thoſe graces give:
Great Julius, on the mountains bred,
A flock perhaps, or herd, had led ;
He that the world ſubdu'd, had been
But the beſt wreſtler on the green. J/aller.
2. One who contends in wreſtling.
So earneſt with thy God, can no new care;
No ſenſe of danger, interrupt thy prayer
The ſacred wreſtler, 'till a bleſfing giv'n,
Quits not his hold, but halting conquers heav'n. If aller.
Two wreſtlers help to pull each other down. Dryden.
WRETCH. n.ſ. [precca, Saxon.]
1. A miſerable mortal.
When I loved, I was a wretch. Accidence.
She weeps, and ſays her Henry is depos'd;
He ſmiles, and ſays his Edward is inſtall'd;
That ſhe, poor wretch, for grief can ſpeak no more. Shakespeare
The butcher takes away the calf,
And binds the wretch, and beats it when it ſtrives. Shakeſp.
Illuſtrious wretch! repine not, nor reply:
View not what heav'n ordains, with reaſon's eye;
For bright the objećt is, the diſtance is too high. Prior.
2. A worthleſs ſorry creature.
Baſe-minded wretches, are your thoughts ſo deeply bemired
in the trade of ordinary worldlings, as for reſpect of gain ſome
paultry wool may yield you, to let ſo much time paſs without
knowing perfectly her i. * Sidney.
He now
Has theſe poor men in queſtion: never ſaw I
4'retches ſo quake; they kneel, they kiſs the earth,
Forſwear themſelves as often as they ſpeak. Shakeſpeare.
Title of honour, worth and virtue's right,
Should not be given to a wretch ſo vile. Daniel's Civil War.
When they are gone, a company of ſtarved hungry wretches
ſhall take their places. L’E/irange.
3. It is uſed by way of ſlight, or ironical pity, or contempt.
When ſoon away the waſp doth go;
Poor wretch was never frighted ſo:
He thought his wings were much too ſlow,
O'erjoy'd they ſo were parted. Drayton's Nymphid.
Then, if the ſpider find him faſt beſet,
She iſſues forth, and runs along her loom:
She joys to touch the captive in her net,
And drags the little wretch in triumph home. Dryden.
4. º is ſometimes a word of tenderneſs, as we now ſay poor
thing.
Chaſtened but thus, and thus his leſſon taught,
The happy wretch ſhe put into her breaſt. Sidney.
WRETch Ed. adj. [from wretch.]
1. Miſerable; unhappy.
Theſe we ſhould judge to be moſt miſerable, but that a
*retcheder ſort there are, on whom, whereas nature hath be-
flowed ripe capacity, their evil diſpoſition ſeriouſly goeth about
therewith to apprehend God, as being not God. Hooker.
O cruel death ! to thoſe you are more kind,
Than to the wretched mortals left behind. Waller.
Why do'ſt thou drive me
To range all o'er a waſte and barren place,
To find a friend? The wretched have no friends. Dryden.
2. Calamitous; afflićtive.
3. Sorry; pitiful; paltry; worthleſs.
When God was ſerved with legal ſacrifices, ſuch was the
miſerable and wretched condition of ſome mens minds, that
the beſt of everything they had, being culled out for them-
Jºyei, if there were in their flocks any poor, ſtarved, or diſ-
eaſed thing not worth the keeping, they thought it good
enough for the altar of God. Hooker.
*fected noiſe is the moſt wretched thing,
|. * *tempt can empty ſcribblers bring. Rºſcommºn.
art ..". º of ... who, with their wretched
2 'e to tho o - "--
4. Deſpicable; hatefully sº you poſſeſs. Dryden.
*** worthy to be remembered for the unuſed ex-
amples therein, as well of true natural goodneſ
ungratefulneſs. goodneſs as of writid
WRE"rchedly. adv. [from wretched)
I. M. unhappily.
rom theſe two wars, ſo wretchedly - r
ruin took its date. &gt; y entered into, the duke,
2. Meanly; deſpicably.
When ſuch little ſhuffling arts come once to be ripped
and laid open, how poorly and wretchedly muſt that º º
who finds himſelf guilty and baffled too? sº
WRE'ſ ched NEss. n.ſ. [from wretched.] win-
1. Miſery; . afflićted ſtate.
My miſery cannot be greater than it is: fear not ºr
of my blind ſteps, I cannot fall worſe than I am, . º
obſtinately continue to infect thee with my wretchedniſ. Siân
He'gan inquire -
What hard miſhap him brought to ſuch diſtreſs,
And made that caitif's thrall the thrall of wretchedneſ. F.&amp;
Clarion did at laſt decline
To loweſt wretchedneſs; and is there then
Such rancor in the hearts of mighty men? Spºnſºr.
When they are weary of wars, and brought down to ex.
treme wretchedneſs, then they creep a little, and ſue for grace,
Sidney,
Clarend n,
'till they have recovered their ſtrength again. Spenſer,
I love not to ſee wretchedneſs o'ercharg’d,
And duty in his ſervice periſhing. Shaiſhare.
We have with the feeling loſt the very memory ºf ſuch
wretchedneſs as our forefathers endured by thoſe wars, of all
others the moſt cruel. Raleigh,
2. Pitifulneſs; deſpicableneſs.
WRE"tchless. n.ſ. [This is, by I know not whoſe corrup-
tion, written for reckleſ;..] Careleſs; mindleſs; heedleſs.
For any man to put off his preſent repentance, on contem-
plation of a poſſibility that his latter repentance may ſerve the
turn, is the moſt wretchlºſs preſumption, and hath no promiſ:
of mercy annexed to it. Hammond.
If perſons of ſo circumſpect a piety have been thus over-
taken, what ſecurity can there be for our wretchleſ, oſcitancy?
Government ºf the Tongue.
To WRI'GGLE. v. n. [prizan, Saxon; ruggelin, Dutch..] To
move to and fro with ſhort motions.
If ſheep or thy lamb fall a wrigling with tail,
Go by and by ſearch it, whiles help may prevail. Taſer.
The buſy importunities of theſe extenſional phantaſms I
look upon as contemptuouſly, as upon the quick wrigging up
and down of piſmires. Mrs.
The excellency of ſawing is to keep kerf exadly in the
line marked to be ſawn, without wrigging on either ſide.
Moxon's Mech. Extr.
To bed went the bridegroom and the bride:
Was never ſuch an ill-pair’d couple ty'd;
Reſtleſs he toſs'd, and tumbled to and fro,
Android and ºrigged farther off for woe. Pº
How wildly will ambition fleer! d
A vermin wriggling in th' uſurper's ear. - Dºdº.
And both he and his ſucceſſors would often writik º:
ſeats as long as the cuſhion laſted. - - ºft
To WRi'ccie. v. a. To put in a quick reciprocat"; motioſl;
to introduce by ſhifting motion.
Ralpho was mounted now, and gotten
O'erthwart his beaſt with ačtive vaulting,
I/riggling his body to recover ihraſ,
His ſeat, and caſt his right leg over... - #:
A ſlim thin-gutted fox made a hard ſhift to w;º
into a hen-rooſt. - - - WRIGGLE,
wriggletail. n.ſ. For wrigglingtail. Sº W*
My ragged ronts all ſhiver and ſhake; il
They wont in the wind, wagg their wrighlai ſy Sºſr.
Peark as a peacoke, but nought it avails. kman; all
WRIGHT. n.ſ. [prihta, pyrihta, Saxon.] A workm"
artificer; a maker; a manufacturer. - ithout being
It is impoſſible duly to confider theſe thing. ".
rapt into admiration of the infinite wiſdom.” ces of thº
Archite&amp;t, and contemning the arrogant preten dºdions of
world and animal wright, and much more ** Chryne.
chance. ........H. a work
The verb To write has the ſame ſound will tº very
man, right or equity, and rite or ceremo"); jº's Lºiº.
differently. * wrun!”
To Wºë. v. a. preter. and part. paſſ. wringed and
ſprungan, Saxon.] -
1. To twiſt; to turn round with violence. d burn it 9” thc
| The pſieſt ſhall wring off his head, " Lev. i. 15.
altar. -
2. To force out of any body by contortion.
He thruſt the fleece together, an
it, a bowl full of water. - d drink.
The dregs all the wicked ſhall wring out.” lichael Ängelº
The figure of a ſturdy woman, dº by Mic !.
waſhing and winding of linen cloths;
out the water that made the fountain. Apply
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W R I
-----
-----
3. To ſqueeze; to preſs.
5. To pinch. -
Apply mild detergents on pledgets of lint over it, with a
compreſs wºung out. Jºſeman.
In ſleep I heard him ſay, ſweet Deſdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves |
And then, ſir, would he gripe and wring my hand. Shakespeare
4. To writhe.
The filly owner of the gºods -
Weeps over them, and wrings his hapleſs hands. Shakeſp.
The king began to find where his ſhoe did wring him, and
that it was his depreſfing the houſe of York that did rankle and
feſter the affections of his people. Bacon's Henry VII.
If he had not been too much grieved, and wrung by an un-
eaſy and ſtreight fortune, he would have been an excellent
man of buſineſs.
6. To force by violence; to extort.
I had rather coin my heart,
And drop my blood for drachma's, than to wring
From the hard hands of peaſants their vile traſh
By any indirection. Shakespeare julius Caſar.
Who can be bound by any ſolemn vow
To wring the widow from her cuſtom'd right,
And have no other reaſon for his wrong,
But that he was bound by a ſolemn oath?
That which I muſt ſpeak,
Muſt either puniſh me, not being believ'd,
Or wring redreſs from you. . Shakespeare Maſ for Meaſure.
Thirty ſpies,
Threatening cruel death, conſtrain'd the bride
To wring from me, and tell to them my ſecret.
7. To harraſs; to diſtreſs; to torture.
He dives into the king's ſoul, and there ſcatters
Doubts, dangers, wringing of the conſcience,
Fear and deſpair, and all theſe for his marriage.
Pleaſure enchants, impetuous rage tranſports,
And grief dejects and wring; the tortur’d ſoul. Roſcommon.
Did'ſt thou taſte but half the griefs
That wring my ſoul, thou couldſt not talk thus coldly. Addison
8. To diſtort; to turn to a wrong purpoſe.
To wring this ſentence, to wreſt thereby out of men's
hands the knowledge of God's doćtrine, is without all reaſon.
Aſtham's Schoolmaſier.
Lord, how dare theſe men thus wring the ſcriptures? Whitg.
9. To perſecute with extortion.
The merchant-adventurers have been often wronged and
wringed to the quick; but were never quick and lively in
thanks to thoſe by whoſe endeavours they were freed. Hayw.
To WRING. v. n. To writhe with anguiſh.
'Tis all men's office to ſpeak patience
To thoſe that wring under the load of ſorrow;
But no man's virtue nor ſufficiency,
To be ſo moral, when he ſhall endure
The like himſelf. Shakespeare Much Ado about Nºthing.
wri's of R. n.ſ. (from wrºng..] One who ſqueezes the water
out of cloaths.
One Mrs. Quickly is in the manner of his nurſe, his laun-
dreſs, his waſher, and his wringer. Shakeſpeare.
WR1'NKLE. n.ſ. [prince, Saxon 3 wrinkel, Dutch.]
1. Corrugation or furrow of the ſkin or the face.
Give me that glaſs, and therein will I read:
No decper wrinkles yet? Hath ſorrow ſtruck
So many blows upon this face of mine,
And made no deeper wounds? Shakespeare. Richard II.
She hath continued a virgin without any viſible token, or
lcaſt wrinkle of old age. Howel's Wºcal Foreſ?.
To ſee a beggar's brat in riches flow, -
Adds not a wrinkle to my even brow.
Though you and all your ſenſeleſs tribe,
Could art, or time, or nature bribe,
To make you look like beauty's queen,
And hold for ever at fifteen ;
No bloom of youth can ever blind
The cracks and wrinkles of your mind:
All men of ſenſe will paſs your door,
And croud to Stella's at fourſcore.
2. Any roughneſs.
Our Britiſh heav'n was all ſerene;
No threatning cloud was nigh,
Not the leaſt wrinkle to deform the ſky.
To WR /NKLE. v. a. ſprincian, Saxon.]
1. To corrugate; to contract into furrows.
It is ſtill fortune's uſe
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow -
An age of poverty. . Shakespeare Merchant of Penice.
Scorn makes us wrinkle up the noſe, and ſtretch the noſtrils
Clarendon.
Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Milton.
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
Swift.
Dryden.
alſo, at the ſame time drawing up the upper lip. Bacon.
Here ſteams aſcend,
That in mixt fumes the wrinkled noſe offend. Gay.
Here ſtood ill-nature, like an ancient maid,
Her winkled form in black and white array'd. Pºpe.
VV R I
2. To make rough or uneven.
A keen north-wind, blowing dry,
Iſrinkled the face of deluge, as decay’d. Milton.
WRIST, n.ſ. ſpyrrº, Saxon.] The joint by which the hand
is joined to the arm.
He took me by the wriſt, and held me hard. Shakespeare.
The brawn of the arm muſt appear full, ſhadowed on one
fide; then ſhew the wri/?-bone thereof. Peacham.
The axillary artery, below the cubit, divideth unto two
Parts; the one running along the radius, and paſſing by the
wriſt, or place of the pulſe, is at the fingers ſubdivided unto
three branches. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
WR'stband. n.ſ. [wrift and land.] The faſtening of the
ſhirt at the hand. iſ! J go
WRIT. n.ſ. [from write.]
1. Anything written; ſcripture. This ſenſe is now chiefly uſed
in ſpeaking of the Bible.
The church, as a witneſs, preacheth his mere revealed
truth, by reading publickly the ſacred Scripture; ſo that a ſe-
cond kind of preaching is the reading of holy writ. Hooker.
Divine Eliza, ſacred empreſs,
Live ſhe for ever, and her royal places
Be fill'd with praiſes of divineſt wits,
That her eternize with their heavenly writs. Spenſer.
Bagdat riſes out of the ruins of the old city of Babylon, ſo
much ſpoken of in holy writ. Kncle's Hiſł. of the Turks.
- Others famous after known,
Although in holy writ not nam'd. Paradiſ. Rºgain'd.
He cannot keep his fingers from meddling with holy writ.
More's Divine Dialogues.
Sacred writ our reaſon does exceed. //aller.
His ſtory, filled with ſo many ſurpriſing incidents, bears ſo
cloſe an analogy with what is delivered in holy writ, that it is
capable of pleaſing the moſt delicate reader, without giving
offence to the moſt ſcrupulous. Addison's Speciator.
Of ancient writ unlocks the learned ſtore,
Conſults the dead, and lives paſt ages o'er. Pºpe.
2. A judicial proceſs.
Hold up your head: hold up your hand,
Wou'd it were not my lot to ſhew ye
This cruel writ, wherein you ſtand
Indićted by the name of Cloe.
3. A legal inſtrument. -
The king is fled to London,
To call a preſent court of parliament:
Let us purſue him, ere the writs go forth. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
I folded the writ up in form of th’ other, -
Subſcrib'd it, gave the impreſſion, plac'd it ſafely,
The changeling never known. Shakespeare.
For every writ of entry, whereupon a common recovery is
to be ſuffered, the queen's fine is to be rated upon the writ
original, if the lands compriſed therein be held. Ayliffe.
WRIT. The preterite of write.
When Sappho writ,
By their applauſe the criticks ſhow'd their wit. Priºr.
WRITATIve. A word of Pope's coining: not to be imitated.
Increaſe of years makes men more talkative, but leſs writa-
tive; to that degree, that I now write no letters but of plain
how d'ye's. Pºpe to Swift.
To WRITE. v. a. preterite writ or wrote; part, pafi written,
writ, or wrote. [prican, aphican, Saxon; ad rita, Iſlandick;
wreta, a letter, Gothick.]
1. To expreſs by means of letters.
I'll write you down, -
The which ſhall point you forth, at every fitting,
What you muſt ſay. Shakeſpeare:
Men's evil manners live in braſs, their virtues we write in
Water. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
when a man hath taken a wife, and ſhe find no favour in
his eyes, then let him write her a bill of divorcement. Deut.
I/rite ye this ſong for you, and teach it Iſrael. - Deut. xxxi.
David wrote a letter to Joab, and ſent it by Uriah. 2 Sa. xi.
The time, the place, the manner how to meet,
were all in punctual order plainly writ.
2. To engrave; to impreſs. -
Cain was ſo fully convinced that every one had a right to
deſtroy ſuch a criminal, that he cries out, every one that find-
eth me ſhall ſlay me; ſo plain was it writ in the hearts of all
mankind. Locke.
3. To produce as an author. -
when more indulgent to the writer's caſe,
You are ſo good, to be ſo hard to pleaſe;
No ſuch convulſive pangs it will require
To write—the pretty things that you admire.
. To tell by letter.
4. I § to write the thing I durſt not ſpeak -
To her I lov’d. Prior.
To WRITE. v. n.
1. To perform the aët of writing. -
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, take forth paper, fold it,
and write upon't. Shakespeare . Macbeth.
Prior,
Dryden.
Granville.
31 A Baſino
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W R I W R O
Baſſanio gave his ring away . . . WRITTEN. The participle paſſive of write.
Unto the judge that begg'd it; and his clerk, Their doctrine and their ſtory written left,
That took ſome pains in writing, he begg'd mine. Shakeſp. They die. - Mih.
2. To play the authour. - Language is a connexion of audible figns, the moſt º- .
Hearts, tongues, figures, ſcribes, bards, poets, cannot nature for communication of our thoughts: writt, hº Iſl
Think, ſpeak, caſt, write, ſing, number is a deſcription of the ſaid audible figns, by ſigns viſible º
His love to Antony. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra. WRoºkeN. The part, paſſ of Tº wreak. º
There is not a more melancholy object in the learned world WRONG. m. ſ. [prange, Saxon.] Sººjir,
than a man who has written himſelf down. Addiſon. I. Af º: a deſigned or known detriment.
. To tell in books. t is a harm, and no wrong which he hath recei -
3 I paſt the melancholy flood, She reſolved to ſpend all her years, which sº º
With that grim ferryman which poets write of. Shakespeare R. III. miſed ſhould be many, in bewailing the wrong, and yet º
4. To ſend letters. for the wrongdoer. . s
He wrote for all the Jews, concerning their freedom. I Eſdr. If he may not command them, then that law doth º:
5. To call one's ſelf; to be entitled; to uſe the ſtile of. that bindeth him to bring them forth to be juſtified. sº
About it, and write happy when thou'ſt done." Shakeſp. They ever do pretend -----
Let it not your wonder move, To have receiv'd a wrong, who wrong intend. Daniel
Leſs your laughter that I love; Imitation of an author is the moſt advantageous way ſº
Though I now write fifty years, tranſlator to ſhew himſelf, but the greateſt wrong which can be
I have had, and have my peers. Ben. johnſon. done to the reputation of the dead. Drydin
He writes himſelf divina providentia, whereas other biſhops Cowley preferred a garden and a friend, to thoſe whº
only uſe divina permiſſione. Ayliffe. our own wrong we call the great. Dryden.
6. To compoſe; to form compoſitions: Expecting more in my own wrong,
Chaſte moral writing we may learn from hence, Protracting life, I’ve liv'd a day too long, Dryden,
Negle&amp;t of which no wit can recompence; 2. Errour; not right.
The fountain which from Helicon proceeds, Be not blindly guided by the throng,
That ſacred ſtream, ſhould never water weeds. //aller: The multitude is always in the wrong. Rºſcommon.
They can write up to the dignity and charaćter of their One ſpake much of right and wrong. Miltºn.
authors. Felton on the Claſſicks. Proceed : quoth Dick, ſir, I aver
WR1'ſ ER. m.ſ.. [from write.] You have already gone too far;
1. One who pračtiſes the art of writing. When people once are in the wrong,
2. An authour. Each line they add is much too long:
All three were ruined by juſtice and ſentence, as delinquents; Who faſteſt walks, but walks aſtray,
and all three famous writers. Bacon. Is only fartheſt from his way. Priºr.
Peaceable times are the beſt to live in, though not ſo proper In the judgment of right and wrong, every man has a
to furniſh matcrials for a writer. Addiſon's Freeholder. ſelf. J/att's Lºgić.
J/riters are often more influenced by a deſire of fame, than WRoNG. adj. [from the noun.] "
a regard to the publick good. Addiſon's Freeholder. 1. Not morally right; not agreeable to propriety or truth.
Would a writer know how to behave himſelf with relation to I find you are an invincible Amazon, ſince you will over-
poſterity, let him conſider in old books what he finds that he come, though in a wrong matter. Sidney.
is glad to know, and what omiſſions he moſt laments. Swift. We never think of the main buſineſ of life, 'till a vain re-
To WRITH E. v. a. [prºban, Saxon.] pentance minds us of it at the wrºng end. Z'É/range.
1. To diſtort; to deform with diſtortion. When the dićtates of honour are contrary to thoſe of reli-
It cannot be this weak and writhed ſhrimp gion and equity, they give wrong, ambitious, and falſe ideas of
Should ſtrike ſuch terror in his enemies. Shakespeare Henry VI. what is good and laudable. Addison's Spºtiatºr.
Hatefuleſt diſreliſh writh'd their jaws 2. Not phyſically right; unfit; unſuitable,
With ſoot and cinders. Milton. Of Glo'ſter's treachery,
Her mouth ſhe writh'd, her forehead taught to frown, And of the loyal ſervice of his ſon,
Her eyes to ſparkle fires to love unknown: When I inform'd him, then he call'd meſot,
Her ſallow checks her envious mind did ſhew, And told me I had turn'd the wrong fide out. * K. Lear.
And ev'ry feature ſpoke aloud the curſtneſs of a ſhrew. Dry. Dividing a living of five hundred pounds a year into "Pºº
2. To twiſt with violence. ' is a contrivance, the meaning whereof hath gºt ºn the wrºng
Then Satan firſt knew pain, fide of my comprehenſion. - Swift.
And writh'd him to and fro convolv’d. Milton's Parad. Lºft. Singularity ſhews ſomething wrong in the mind. Clariſ.
Amid' the plaited ſcales it took its courſe, WRoNG. adv. Not rightly; amiſs. - in, Eid
And in the ſpinal marrow ſpent its force; If he go wrong, ſhe will give him over to his own ruin, t{(i.
The monſter hiſs'd aloud, and rag'd in vain, A thouſand odd capricio's, men's minds are aćled º:
And writh'd his body to and fro with pain; make one man quote another man's words wrong. º, t.
He bit the dart. Addiſon. Ten cenſure wrong, for one that writº amſ. º
3. To wreſt; to force by violence. To WRoNG. v. a. [ from the noun. J. To injure; to u
The reaſon which he yieldeth, ſheweth the leaſt part of unjuſtly. ly wrºn
his meaning to be that whereunto his words are writhed. Hook. So worthy a part of divine ſervice we ſhould . º º
4. To twiſt. if we did not eſteem preaching as the bleſſed or º:
The king of heav'n God. º
Bar'd his red arm, and launching from the ſky For fear the flones her tender foot ſhoul" º, ſir
His writhen bolt, not ſhaking empty ſmoke Be ſtrewed with fragrant flowers all along. fºr.
&gt; g empty &gt; e - - ; Shakºſiart.
Down to the deep abyſs the flaming felon ſtrook. Dryden. Judge me, you gods' wrong I mine enemy;
To WRITH E. v. n. To be convolved with agony or torture. Thank him who puts me loath to this º, Miltºn,
Let each be broken on the rack; On you, who wrong me not, for him who wrong 4.
Then, with what life remains, impaled, and left Once more farewel ! - - -
To writhe at leiſure round the bloody ſtake. Addison. And know thou wrong'ſ me, if thou think'ſt Allſºn.
To WR THLE v. a. [from writhe..] To wrinkle; to corrugate. Ever was love or ever grief like minº: ...; s perſon.
Her writhled ſkin, as rough as maple rind, WRoNGDoER. m. ſ. [wrong and doer.] - An ºng,
So ſcabby was, that would have loathed all womankind. Spenſ. She reſolved to ſpend all her years in bewailing Sidney.
WR1'TING.. n.ſ. [from writ.} and yet praying for the wrongdoer. hurchwarden
1. A legal inſtrument. If any ſeat be taken away by a ſtranger, the chu Aylift.
2. A compoſure; a book. - may have ačtion againſt the wrongdºer. . . . he that doº
. They thought no other writings in the world ſhould be flu-. WRo'NGER. m.ſ. (from wrong..] He that injures;
died, inſomuch as one of their great prophets exhorting them wrong. which doth mº
to caſt away all reſpects unto human writings, to his mo- Jealouſy is a green-ey’d monſter, whic *
tion they condeſcended. Hºoker. The meat it feeds on: that cuckold lives in er 'sal. Oth.
Such arguments had an invincible force with thoſe pagan Who, certain of his fate, loves not hiº. of his tre+"
philoſophers, who became Chriſtians, as we find in moſt of Many times a prince is driven to ſpend far mo le, than tº
their writings. Addiſon. ſure in puniſhing by war the wronger of his peopº Ralſº
3. A written paper of any kind. loſs of his people did amount unto. inious; uſ"
ºr - In at his windows throw - wro'No Full alſ. [wrong and full.] Inſ"? "
I. º, all tending to the great opinion I am ſo far from granting thy requeſt, Shaffºrt.
VV | hat Rome holds of his name. Shakespeare Yulius Caſar. That I deſpiſe thee for thy wrºngful ſuit. hat he know" not
º ... º: /; One who teaches to write. He that hath wronged ſo in daily º: º fault by alſº
if it º of which I ſpoke conſiſts not in bold ſtrokes, in what meaſure he hath done it, º: Tajº"
dom tº. gºat effect at a diſtance: that ſort of free: according to the value of his wrº/**
C ºr to a writingmaſter than a painter. Dryden. Theſ:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">W R O
Thoſe whom forms of laws
Condemn'd to die, when traitors judg’d their cauſe,
Nor want they lots, nor judges to review
The wrongful ſentence, and award a new.
Wºo's GFULLY. adv. [from wrongful..] Unjuſtly.
Dorus, ſaid Pamela, you blame your fortune very wrong-
fully, ſince the fault is not in fortune, but in you, that can-
not frame yourſelf to your fortune; and as wrongfully do re-
quire Mopſa to ſo great a diſparagement as to her father's
Dryden.
ſervant. Sidney.
This poor fellow,
He had thought to murder wrongfully. Shakeſp.
Salius then, exclaiming loud,
Urges his cauſe may in the court be heard,
And pleads, the prize is wrongfully conferr'd. Dryden.
I cry thee mercy, for ſuſpecting a friar of the leaſt good-
nature; what, would you accuſe him wrongfully. Dryden.
He who ſuffers wrongfully in a man's opinion, reſolves to
give him reaſon for his ſuſpicion. Speciator, N°. 170.
WR o'NGHE AD. adj. [wrong and head.] Having a per-
WRoNGHE/ADED. } verſe underſtanding.
Much do I ſuffer, much to keep in peace
This jealous, waſpiſh, wronghead, rhyming race. Pope.
WRo'NGLY. adv. [from wrong..] Unjuſtly ; amiſs.
What thou would'ſ highly
That would'ſt thou holily; would'ſt not play falſe,
And yet would'ſt wrongly win. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Madmen having joined together ſome ideas very wrongly,
err, as men do that argue right from wrong principles. Locke.
WRo"No lessly, adv. [from wrongleſ...] Without injury to
any.
Dearly eſteemed of her for his exceeding good parts, being
honourably courteous, and wronglºſsly valiant, confiderately
pleaſant in converſation, and an excelleut courtier, without
unfaithfulneſs. Sidney.
WRoTE. pret. and part. of write.
No man has the eſtate of his ſoul drawn upon his face, nor
the decree of his election wrote upon his forehead. He who
would know a man thoroughly, muſt follow him into the
cloſet of his heart; the inſpection of which is only the pre-
rogative of omniſcience. - South.
WRoth. adj. [prab, Sax. wrod, Daniſh.J Angry. Out of uſe.
The Lord ſaid unto Cain, why art thou wroth 2 Gen. iv.
Thou haſt reječted us ; thou art very wroth againſt us. La.
WRoug HT. [proxb, Saxon. The pret. and part, paſſ. as it
ſeems, of work; as the Dutch wercken, makes gerocht.]
1. Effected ; performed.
Why trouble ye the woman? for ſhe hath wrought a good
work upon me. - Matt. xxvi. Io.
He that doeth truth, cometh to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifeſt, that they are wrought in God. john iii.
The Jews wanted not power and ability to have convinced
the world of the falſhood of theſe miracles, had they never
been wrought. Stephens's Sermons.
2. Influenced ; prevailed on.
Had I thought the fight of my poor image
Would thus have wrought you, for the ſtone is mine,
I’d not have ſhewed it. Shakeſpeare.
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To ſwerve from truth.
Do not I know him could his brutal mind
Be wrought upon could he be juſt or kind 2
This Artemiſa, by her charms,
And all her ſex's cunning, wrought the king. Rowe.
3. Produced ; cauſed.
All his good prov’d ill in me, -
And wrought but malice. Milton.
They wrought by their faithfulneſs the publick ſafety. Dryd.
This wrought the greateſt confuſion in the unbelieving
Jews, and the greateſt convićtion in the Gentiles, who every
where ſpeak with aſtoniſhment of theſe truths they met with
in this new magazine of learning, which was opened. Addiſon.
4. Worked ; laboured.
They that wrought in filver, and whoſe works are unſearch-
able, are gone down to the grave. Bar. iii. 18.
Milton.
Dryden.
W R Y
Moſes and Eleazar took
- the gold, even all wrought
jewels.
Num. xvi. 22.
What might be wrought
Fuſil, or graven in metal.
5. Gained ; attained. -
We ventur'd on ſuch dang'rous ſeas,
That if we wrought out life 'twas ten to one. Shak
6. Operated. g &gt; e. Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
Such another field
They dreaded worſe than heli, ſo much the fear
9; thunder, and the ſword of Michael
Wrought ſtill within them. &gt;
His too eager love
Has made him buſy to his own deſtruction.
His threats have wrought this change of mind in Pyrrhus.
7 Worked Philips's Diſºrgſ? Mather.
Take an heifer which hath not been wrought wi
which hath not drawn in the yoke. º
As infection from body to body is received many times by
the bºdy paſſive, yet is it by the good diſpoſition ther. .
Pulſed and wrought out, before it beformed in a diſeaſ. Éa.
8. Aćtuated.
Vain Morat, by his own raſhneſs wrought,
Too ſoon diſcover'd his ambitious thought;
Believ'd me his, before I ſpoke him fair,
And pitch'd his head into the ready ſhare.
9. Manufactured.
It had been no leſs a breach of peace to have wrought any
mine of his, than it is now a breach of peace, to take a
town of his in Guiana, and burn it. Raleigh.
Celeſtial panoply, divinely wrought. AMilton.
Io. Formed.
He that hath wrought us for the ſame thing, is God. 2 Cºr.
II. Excited by degrees.
The two friends had wrought themſelves to ſuch an habi-
tual tenderneſs for the children under their direction, that
each of them had the real paſſion of a father. Addiſon.
Advantage was taken of the ſanguine temper which ſo
many ſucceſſes had wrought the nation up to. Swift.
12. Guided ; managed.
A ſhip by ſkilful ſteerſman wrought.
13. Agitated ; diſturbed.
We ſtay upon your leiſure.—
-Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought -
With things forgot. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
WRUNG. The preter, and part, paſſive of wring.
No mortal was ever ſo much at eaſe, but his ſhoe wrung
him ſomewhere. L’Eſtrange.
Mix'd with the tender anguiſh nature ſhoots
Through the wrung boſom of the dying man.
WRY. adj. [from writhe.]
1. Crooked; deviating from the right direction.
Sometimes to her news of myſelf to tell
I go about, but then is all my beſt
Wry words, and ſtamm'ring, or elſe doltiſh dumb ;
Say then, can this but of enchantment come Sidney.
Cutting the wry neck is never to be practiſed, but when the
diſorder is a contračtion of the maſtoideus muſcle. Sharp.
2. Diſtorted.
It is but a kick with thy heels, and a wry mouth, and Sir
Roger will be with thee. Arbuthnot.
Inſtrućtive workſ whoſe wry-mouth'd portraiture
Diſplay'd the fates her confeſſors endure. Pope.
3. Wrung; perverted; wreſted.
He mangles and puts a wry ſenſe upon proteſtant writers.Att.
To WRY. v. n. [from the adjective.] To be contorted and
writhed; to deviate from the right direction.
Theſe wry too much on the right hand, aſcribing to the
holy ſcripture ſuch kind of perfection as it cannot have. Sand.
To WRY. v. a. [from the adjective..] To make to deviate;
to diſtort.
To what paſs are our minds brought, that from the right
line of virtue are wryed to theſe crooked ſhifts : Sidney.
Milton,
Dryden.
Milton.
Thomſºn.
X.
Is a letter, which, though found in Saxon words, begins no word in the Engliſh language.
