<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">: ,
hi
V A C
Has two powers, expreſſed in modern Engliſh by
two characters, / conſonant and U vowel, which
ought to be conſidered as two letters; but as
they were long confounded while the two
uſes were annexed to one form, the old cuſtom
ftill continues to be followed.
U, the vowel, has two ſounds; one clear, expreſſed at other
times by eu, as obtuſe; the other cloſe, and approaching to
the Italian u, or Engliſh oo, as obtund.
• P', the conſonant, has a ſound nearly approaching to thoſe
of b and f. With b it is by the Spaniards and Gaſcons always
confounded, and in the Runick alphabet is expreſſed by the
ſame character with f, diſtinguiſhed only by a diacritical
point. Its ſound in Engliſh is uniform. It is never mute.
VA’cANCY. n.ſ.. [from vacant.]
1. Empty ſpace; vacuity.
How is't
That thus you bend your eye on vacancy,
And with th’incorporal air do hold diſcourſe Shakespeare Hamlet.
2. Chaſm ; ſpace unfilled.
The reader finds a wide vacancy, and knows not how to
tranſport his thoughts to the next particular, for want of
forme connecting idea. JWatts's Logick.
3- ſº Fr.] State of a poſt or employment when it is un-
ſupplied.
H. the vacancy of a biſhop, the guardian of the ſpiritualities
was ſummon'd to parliament in the biſhop's room. Ayliffe.
4. [Vacances, Fr.] Time of leiſure; relaxation; intermiſſion;
time unengaged.
If, ſometimes, each other's eyes we meet,
Thoſe little vacancies from toil are ſweet. Dryd. St. of In.
The daily intervals of time and vacancies from neceſſary
labour, together with the one day in ſeven in the chriſtian
world, allow ſufficient time. /Watts.
5. Liſtleſsneſs; emptineſs of thought.
When alone, or in company, they fit ſtill without doing
any thing, I like it worſe; for all diſpoſitions to idleneſs or
vacancy, even before they are habits, are dangerous. J/otton.
VACANT. adj. [vacant, Fr. vacans, Latin.]
1. Empty; unfilled; void.
Why ſhould the air ſo impetuouſly ruſh into the cavity of
the receiver, if there were before no vacant room to re-
ceive it. Boyle's Works.
A better race to bring into their vacant room. Mºlton.
2. Free; unencumbered ; uncrouded. -
Religion is the intereſt of all; but philoſophy of thoſe
only that are at leiſure, and vacant from the affairs of the
world. More's Divine Dialogues.
A very little part of our life is ſo vacant from uneaſineſſes,
as to leave us free to the attraction of remoter good. Locke.
3. Not filled by an incumbent, or poſſeſſor.
Leſt the fiend invade vacant poſſeſſion. Milton.
Others when they allowed the throne vacant, thought the
ſucceſſion ſhould immediately go to the next heir. Swift.
4. Being at leiſure; diſengaged.
They which have the government, ſcatter the army
abroad, and place them in villages to take their vićtuals of
them, at ſuch vacant times as they lie not in camp. Spenſer.
Sir John Berkley was the more vacant for that ſervice, by
the redućtion of Barnſtaple. Clarendon.
The memory relieves the mind in her vacant moments,
and prevents any chaſms of thought, by ideas of what is
paſt. Addiſon.
5. Thoughtleſs ; empty of thought; not buſy.
The wretched ſlave,
Who, with a body fill'd, and vacant mind,
Gets him to reſt, cramm'd with diſtreſsful bread. Shakespeare
The duke had a pleaſant and vacant face, proceeding from
a ſingular aſſurance in his temper. //otton's Buck.
Some vain amuſement of a vacant ſoul. Irene.
To VA’c.A.T.E. v. a. [vaco, Latin.]
1. To annul; to make void; to make of no authority.
V A G
That after-ači vacating the authority of the precedent, tells
the world that ſome remorſe touched even Strafford's moſt
implacable enemies. K. Charles.
2. To make vacant; to quit poſſeſſion of.
3. To defeat; to put an end to.
He vacates my revenge;
For while he truſts me, ’twere ſo baſe a part
To fawn, and yet betray.
VAGATION. n.ſ. ſvacation, Fr. vacatio, Latin.]
1. Intermiſſion of juridical proceedings, or any other ſtated
employments; receſs of courts or ſenates.
Pacation is all that time which paſſes between term and
term, at London. Cowel.
As theſe clerks want not their full task of labour durin
the open term, ſo there is for them whereupon to be ...;
in the vacation onlv. Bacon Off. of Alienat.
2. Leiſure; freedom from trouble or perplexity.
Benefit of peace, quiet, and vacation for piety, have ren-
dered it neceſſary in every chriſtian commonwealth, by laws
to ſecure propriety. Hammond's Fundamentals.
VA'ccARY. n.ſ. [vacca, Latin.] a cow-houſe; a cow-paſ-
ture. Bailey.
VACI'll ANCY. m. ſ. ſvacillons, from vacillo, Lat. vacillant, Fr.]
A ſtate of wavering; fluctuation; inconſtancy. Not much
in uſe.
I deny that all mutability implies imperfeótion, though ſome
does, as that vacillancy in human ſouls, and ſuch mutations
as are found in corporeal matter. More's Divine Dialogues.
VACILLA’t Ion. m. ſ. [vacillatio, from vacillo, Lat. vacillation,
Fr.] The act or ſtate of reeling or ſtaggering.
The muſcles keep the body upright, and prevent its falling,
by readily aſfifting againſt every vacillation. Derham.
VA'cuist. n.ſ. [from vacuum.] A philoſopher that holds a
vacuum : oppoſed to a pleniſt.
Thoſe ſpaces, which the vacuiſ's would have to be empty,
becauſe they are manifeſtly devoid of air, the pleniſts do not
prove repleniſhed with ſubtle matter. Boyle.
VAcuA'tion. n.ſ. [vacuus, Latin.] The act of emptying. Dićt.
VAcu'ity. n.ſ. [vacuitas, from vacuus, Lat. vacuité, Fr.]
1. Emptineſs; State of being unfilled.
Hunger is ſuch a ſtate of vacuity, as to require a freſh ſup-
ply of aliment. Arbuthnot.
2. Space unfilled; ſpace unoccupied. -
In filling up vacuities, turning out ſhadows and ceremo-
nies, by explicit preſcription of ſubſtantial duties, which
thoſe ſhadows did obſcurely repreſent. Hammond's Fund.
He, that ſeat ſoon failing, meets
Dryden.
A vaſt vacuity. Milton.
Body and ſpace are quite different things, and a vacuity is
interſperſed among the particles of matter. Bentley.
God, who alone can anſwer all our longings, and fill every
vacuity of our ſoul, ſhould intirely poſſeſs our heart. Rogers.
3. Inanity ; want of reality.
The ſoul is ſeen, like other things, in the mirror of its
effects: but if they'll run behind the glaſs to catch at it,
their expectations will meet with vacuity and emptineſs. Glanv.
VA'cuous. adj. [vacuus, Lat. vacuº, Fr;] Empty; unfilled.
Boundleſs the deep, becauſe I AM who fil
Infinitude: nor vacuous the ſpace. Milton's Par. Loft.
WACUUM. n.ſ. [Latin.] Space unoccupied by matter.
Our enquiries about vacuum, or ſpace and atoms, will
ſhew us ſome good practical leſſons. - Watts.
To VADE. v. n. [vada, Latin.] To vaniſh ; to paſs away. Spen-
ſer. A word uſeful in poetry, but not received.
Be ever gloried here thy ſovereign name:
That thou may'ſt ſmile on all which thou haſt made;
Whoſe frown alone can ſhake this earthly frame,
And at whoſe touch the hills in ſmoak ſhall vade, Jºotton.
Vaſo Abond. adj. [vagabundus, low Latin, vagabond, Fr.]
I. wandering without any ſettled habitation ; wanting a
home.
29 A - Let<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V A I
V A I
Let them pº the º ºrian death ;
'arah ile : yet I wou'd not buy
#. at #: price of one fair word. Shakespeare Cºr.
A galand debtor may be cited in whatever pla; or Ju-
riſdiction he is found. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Wandering; vagrant.
This common body,
Like to a vagabond flag upon the ſtream, -
Goes to, and back, lacquying the varying tide.
Their prayers by envious winds
Blown vagabond or fruſtrate.
VA/GABon D. m. ſ. [from the adj.]
1. A vagrant; a wanderer, commonly, in a ſenſe of reproach.
- We call thoſe people wanderers and vagabonds, that have
no dwelling-place. Raleigh's Hiſł. of the World.
Reduced, like Hannibal, to ſeek relief
From court to court, and wander up and down.
A vagabond in Afric. Addiſon's Cato.
2. One that wanders illegally, without a ſettled habitation.
Wagabond is a perſon without a home. IPatti.
VAGARY. m. ſ. [from vagus, Latin.] A wild freak; a capri-
cious frolick.
They chang'd their minds,
Flew off, and into ſtrange vagaries fell,
As they wou'd dance. Milton's Par. Loft. b. vi. l. 613.
Would your ſon engage in ſome frolic, or take a vagary,
were it not better he ſhould do it with, than without your
knowledge Locke on Education, $ 97.
VAG 1 NoPENNous. n. ſ. [vagina and penna, Latin.] Sheath-
winged; having the wings covered with hard caſes.
VAGo Us. adj. [vagus, Lat. vague, Fr.] Wandering; un-
ſettled. Not in uſe.
Such as were born and begot of a ſingle woman, thro’ a
vagous luſt, were called Sporii. Ayliffe.
VA'GRANc Y. m. ſ. [from vagrant..] A ſtate of wandering;
unſettled condition.
VA'GRANT. adj. Wandering; unſettled; vagabond; unfixed
in place.
}. not oppoſe popular miſtakes and ſurmiſes, or vagrant
and fićtitious ſtories. More's Divine Dialogues.
Take good heed what men will think and ſay;
That beauteous Emma vagrant courſes took,
- Her father's houſe, and civil ſife forſook.
Her lips no living bard, I weet,
May ſay how red, how round, how ſweet;
Old Homer only could indite
Their vagrant grace, and ſoft delight:
They ſtand recorded in his book,
When Helen ſmil'd, and Hebe ſpoke. Prior.
VA'GRANT, n.ſ. [vagant, Fr.] A ſturdy beggar; wan-
derer; vagabond; man unſettled in habitation. In an ill ſenſe.
Wagrants and outlaws ſhall offend thy view,
Shakespeare
Milton.
Prior.
Train'd to aſſault, and diſciplin'd to kill. Prior.
You'll not the progreſs of your atoms ſtay,
Nor to collect the vagrants find a way. Blackmore.
To relieve the helpleſs poor; to make ſturdy vagrants re-
lieve themſelves; to hinder idie hands from being miſchie-
vous, are things of evident uſe. F. Atterbury.
Ye vagrants of the ſky,
To right or left, unheeded, take your way.
VAgg E. adj. Ivague, Fr. vagus, Latin.]
1. Wandering; vagrant; vagabond.
Gray encouraged his men to ſet upon the vague villains,
good neither to live peaceably, nor to fight. Hayward.
2. Unfixed; unſettled ; undetermined; indefinite.
The perception of being, or not being, belongs no more
to theſe vague ideas, ſignified by the terms, whatſoever and
thing, than it does to any other ideas. Locke.
VA. L. m. ſ. [voile, French. This word is now frequently
writter veil, from velum, Latin; and the verb veil, from the
verb velo; but the old orthography commonly derived it, I
believe rightly, from the French.J
I. A curtain ; a cover thrown over any thing to be concealed.
While they ſuppoſed to lie hid in their ſecret fins, they
were ſcattered upder a dark wail of forgetfulneſs. Iſiſdom.
2. A part of female dreſs, by which the face and part of the
ſhape is concealed.
3. Money given to ſervants. It is commonly uſed in the plural.
See VALE.
To VAIL. v. a. To cover. See Veil.
To VA11. v. a. ſavaller le bonet, French.]
1. To let fall; to ſuffer to deſcend.
They ſtifly refuſed to wail their bonnets, which is reckoned
Pope.
intollerable contempt by ſeafarers. Carew.
The virgin 'gan her beavoir vale,
And thank'd him firſt, and thus began her tale. Fairfax.
2. To let fall in token of reſpect.
°ºn of the Turks gallies, which would not vall their
top ſails, the Venetians fiercely affailed. Knolles's Hiſt.
They had not the ceremony of veiling the bonnet in ſalu-
tations; for, in medals, they ſtill have it on their heads. Addison
3. To fall; to let ſink in fear, or for any other intereſt
That furious Scot, -
Gan vail his ſtomach, and did grace the ſhame
Of thoſe that turn'd their backs. Shalºſ
To §: ". To yield; to give place; to ſhew º:
ielding. In this ſenſe, the modern wri ave io
.veil. &gt; Writers have Ignorantly
Thy convenience muſt veil to thy neighbour's neceſſity:
and thy very neceſſities muſt yield to thy neighbour's &amp;
tremity. t
VAIN. adj. Ivain, Fr. vanus, Latin.] South.
1. Fruitleſs; ineffectual.
Let no man ſpeak again
To alter this ; for counſel is but vain.
Pain is the force of man,
To cruſh the pillars which the pile ſuſtain.
2. Empty; unreal; ſhadowy.
Before the paſſage horrid Hydra ſtands,
Gorgons, Geryon with his triple frame,
And vain chimera, vomits empty flame. Dryden's En.
Unmov’d his eyes, and wet his beard appears;
And ſhedding vain, but ſeeming real tears.
3. Meanly proud; proud of petty things.
No folly like vain glory; nor any thing more ridiculous
than for a vain man to be ſtill boaſting of himſelf. L'Eſtran.
He wav'd a torch aloft, and, madly vain,
Sought godlike worſhip from a ſervile train. Dryden,
The minſtrels play'd on ev'ry ſide,
Jain of their art, and for the maſtery vy'd. Dryden.
To be vain is rather a mark of humility than pride.
Pain men delight in telling what honours have been done
them, what great company they have kept, and the like;
by which they plainly confeſs, that theſe honours were more
than their due, and ſuch as their friends would not believe,
if they had not been told : whereas a man truly proud, thinks
the honours below his merit, and ſcorns to boaſt. Swift,
Ah friend to dazzle let the vain deſign;
To raiſe the thought, and touch the heart, be thine. Pope.
View this marble, and be vain no more. Pope,
4. Shewy ; oftentatious.
- Load ſome vain church with old theatrick ſtate.
5. Idle ; worthleſs ; unimportant.
- Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built their fond hopes of glory, or laſting fame, - -
Or happineſs. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
He heard a grave philoſopher maintain,
That all the actions of our life were vain,
Which with our ſenſe of pleaſure not conſpir’d. Denham.
To your vain anſwer will you have recourſe,
And tell 'tis ingenite active force.
6. Falſe; not true. -
7. In VAIN. To no purpoſe; to no end; ineffectually; with:
out effect. -
He tempts in vain. - - Milº.
Providence and nature never did anything in vain. L'Ejir,
Strong Halys ſtands in vain; weak Phlegys flies. Dyl.
The philoſophers of old did in vain enquire whether Jº".
mum bonum conſiſted in riches, bodily delights, viruſ,
contemplation. º
If we hope for what we are not likely to poſſeſs, we at
and think in vain, and make life a greater dream an. ſhadow
than it really is. Addison's Spellſ.
If from this diſcourſe one honeſt man ſhall recei'; º:
faction, I ſhall think that I have not written ºf lº
vain. Iſºft on the *...
VANGlorious. adj. Ivanus and glºrioſus, Latin! Boaſting
without performances; proud in diſproportion.” deſert.
Pain-glorious man, when flutt'ring wind does *}.
In his light wings is lifted up to ſky. Fairy Queen.
Strength to glory aſpires
Pºpe.
Blackmore.
- - - Miltºn,
Wain-glorious, and through infamy º: º: cſſeth #.
: - - - - - --- air-glorious expreſſion witncil” “.."
This his arrogant and vain-glorious exp e merit;
VAINGlo R Y. n.ſ. [vana gloria, Latin.] Pride abov
empty pride; pride in little things. -
He had nºthing of vain-glory, but yet kept ſtate *
jeſty to the height; being ſenſible, that majeſty ma en
people bow, but vain glory boweth to them, º. º to be
Expoſe every blaſt of vain-glory, every idle thought,
- - - - - - - aylºr.
chaſtened by the rod of ſpiritual diſcipline. rerſion to
This extraordinary perſon, out of his natural º the
vain-gloy, wrote ſeveral picces, which he did not a Addison.
honour of. - -
A monarch's ſword, when mad vain-glory d"
Not Waller's wreath can hide the nation's ſcar.
VA1'NLY. adv. [from vain.] -
1. Without effect; to no purpoſe; in vain.
Our cannons malice vainly ſhall be ſpent
Againſt th' invulnerable clouds of heav'n. Shakespeare.
In weak complaints you vainly waſte your breath ;
They are not tears that can revenge his death. Dryden.
2. Proudly; arrogantly.
My forepaſt proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall
<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V A L
Şhall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly fear'd too little. Shakespeare.
Humility teaches us to think neither vainly nor vauntingly
of ourſelves. - Delany.
3. Idly; fooliſhly.
- Nor vainly hope to be invulnerable. Milton.
If Lentulus be ambitious, he ſhall be vainly credulous;
preſuming his advancement to be decreed by the Sybilline
oracles. Grew's Coſmol,
VA. INNyss. n.ſ.. [from vain..] The ſtate of being vain. Pride;
falſhood; emptineſs.
I hate ingratitude more in a man,
Than lying, vainneſ, babbling. Shakeſpeare.
VA'ſvobº; n.ſ. Iwaiwad, a governor, Sclavonian.] A prince
of the Dacian provinces.
VALANCE. m.ſ.. [from Palencia, whence the uſe of them
came. Skinner.] The fringes or drapery hanging round the
teſter and ſtead of a bed. -
My houſe
Is richly furniſhed with plate and gold;
Palance of Venice, gold in needlework. Shakespeare.
Thruſt the valance of the bed, that it may be full in
fight. Swift.
To VALA'Nce. v. a. [from the noun..] To decorate with dra-
pery. Not in uſe.
Old friend, thy face is valanc'd ſince
I ſaw thee laſt; com'ſt thou to beard me. Shakespeare
VALE, n.ſ. [val, Fr. vallis, Latin.]
1. A low ground ; a valley; a place between two hills. Wale
is a poetical word.
In Ida vale: who knows not Ida vale 2
An hundred ſhepherds woned. Spenſer.
Met in the vale of Arde. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
Anchiſes, in a flow'ry vale,
Review’d his muſter'd race, and took the tale. Dryden.
2. [From avail, profit; or vale, farewell. If from avail, it muſt
be written vaiſ, as Dryden writes. If from vale, which I
think is right, it muſt be vale.] Money given to ſervants.
Since our knights and ſenators account
To what their ſordid, begging vails amount;
Judge what a wretched ſhare the poor attends,
Whoſe whole ſubſiſtence on thoſe alms depends. Dryden.
His revenue, beſides vales, amounted to thirty pounds. Swift.
VALEDI’ction. n. ſ. [valedico, Lat..] A farewel. Ain w.
A valedićion forbidding to weep. Donne.
VALEDI’ctoRY. adj. [from valedico, Lat..] Bidding farewel.
VALENTINE. m. ſ. A ſweetheart, choſen on Valentine's day.
Now all nature ſeem’d in love,
And birds had drawn their valentines. Watton.
VALE’RIAN. m. ſ. [valeriana, Lat. valerian, Fr.] A plant.
The leaves grow by pairs oppoſite upon the ſtalks; the
flower conſiſts of one leaf, divided into five ſegments; theſe
are ſucceeded by oblong flat ſeeds. Miller.
WALET. n.ſ. [valet, French..] A waiting ſervant.
Giving caſt-clothes to be worn by valets, has a very
ill effect upon little minds. Addiſon.
VALETUDIN ARIAN. Uadj. [valetudinaire, Fr. valetudo, Lat.]
VALETUDIN ARY. ; Weakly; ſickly; infirm of health.
Phyſic, by purging noxious humours, prevents ſickneſs in
the healthy, or recourſe thereof in the valetudinary. Browne.
Shifting from the warmer vallics, to the colder hills, or
from the hills to the vales, is a great benefit to the valetudi-
marian, feeble part of mankind. Lerham.
Cold of winter, by ſtopping the pores of perſpiration,
keeps the warmth more within ; whereby there is a greater
quantity of ſpirits generated in healthful animals, for the caſe
is quite otherwiſe in valetudinary ones. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Valetudinarians muſt live where they can command and
ſcold. Swift.
VALIANCE. m. ſ. [from valiant ; \vaillance, Fr.j Valour; per-
ſonal puiſſance ; fierceneſs; bravery.
With ſtiff force he ſhook his mortal lance,
To let him wect his doughty valiance. Spenſºr.
VALIANT. adj. [vailant, French.J Stout; perſonally puiſ-
fant; brave.
Only be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lord's bat-
tles. 1 Sam. xviii. 17.
A ſon of Jeſſe, a mighty valiant man. 1 Sam. xvi. 18.
VALIANTLY. adv. [from valiant..] Stoutly; with perſonal
ſtrength; with perſonal bravery.
Farewel, kind lord; fight valiantly to-day :
Thou art fram'd of the firm truth of valour. Shakespeare
It was the duty of a good ſoldier valiantly to withſtand his
enemies, and not to be troubled with any evil hap. Knolles.
VALIANTN Ess. m. ſ. [from valiant..] Valour; perſonal bra-
very; puiſiance; fierceneſs; ſtoutneſs.
Thy valiantneſs was mine; thou fuck'dſt it from me. Shakespeare
Achimetes having won the top of the walls, by the valiant-
neſ of the defendants was forced to retire. Knolles.
Shew not thy valiantneſs in wine. Ecclus, xxxi. 25.
VALID. adj. Ivalide, Fr. validus, Latin.]
1. Strong; powerful; efficacious ; prevalent.
V A L
r Perhaps more valid arms,
W eapons more violent, when next we meet,
May ſerve to better us, and worſe our foes. Milton.
2. Having force; prevalent; weighty; concluſive.
. A difference in their ſentiments as to particular queſtions,
is no valid argument againſt the general truth believed by
them, but rather a clearer and more joid proof of it. Stepheni.
VALIDITY. m. ſ. [validit. Fr. from valid.] -
I. Force to convince; certainty.
You are Perſuaded of the validity of that famous verſe,
'Tis expectation makes a bleſſing dear.
2. Value. A ſenſe not uſed. Pope.
To thee and thine, -
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom ;
No leſs in ſpace, validity, and pleaſure,”
Than that conferr'd on Goneriil. Shakeſpeare.
Vººsex. * / [from valance..] A large wig that ſhades the
2Ce.
But you, loud Sirs, who through your curls look big,
Criticks in plume and white vallany wig. Dryden.
VALLEY. m. ſ. [valie, Fr. vallis, Latin.] A low ground; a
hollow between hills.
Live with me, and be my love,
And we will all the pleaſure prove,
That hills and vallies yield. Raleigh.
Pallies are the intervals betwixt mountains. JWoodward.
Sweet interchange of hill and valley. Milton.
VA'Lokous. adj. [from valour.] Brave; ſtout; valiant.
The famous warriors of the antique world
Us’d trophies to erect in ſtately wiſe,
In which they would the records have enroll’d,
Of their great deeds and valorous empriſe. Spenſer.
Captain Jamy is a marvellous valorous gentleman. Shakespeare
VALOUR. m.J. [valeur, Fr. valor, Latin Anſ.] Perſonal.
bravery ; ſtrength; proweſs ; puiſiance; ſtoutneſs.
That I may pour the ſpirits in thine ear,
And chaſtiſe, with the valour of my tongue,
All that impedes thee. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Here I conteſt
As hotly and as nobly with thy love,
As ever in ambitious ſtrength I did
Contend againſt thy valºur. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
When valour preys on reaſon,
It eats the ſword it fights with. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleo.
An innate valour appeared in him, when he put himſelf
upon the ſoldiers defence, as he received the mortal ſtab. Howel.
For contemplation he, and valour form'd ;
For ſoftneſs ſhe, and ſweet attractive grace.
Such were theſe giants; men of high renown |
For, in thoſe days, might only ſhall be admir’d,
And valour, and heroic virtue, call’d. Milton.
Palour gives awe, and promiſes protećtion to thoſe who
want heart or ſtrength to defend themſelves. This makes
the authority of men among women; and that of a maſter-
buck in a numerous herd. Temple's Miſcel.
VALUABLE. adj. [valable, Fr. from value.]
1. Precious ; being of great price.
2. Worthy; deſerving regard.
A juſt account of that valuable perſon, whoſe remains lie
before us. F. Atterbury's Serm.
The value of ſeveral circumſtances in ſtory, leſſens very
much by diſtance of time; though ſome minute circumſtances
are very valuable. Swift's Thoughts.
VALUATION. n.ſ. [from value.]
1. Value ſet upon any thing.
No reaſon I, ſince of your lives you ſet
So flight a valuation, ſhould reſerve -
My crack'd one to more care. Shakeſp. Cymbeline:
Take out of men's minds falſe valuations, and it would
leave the minds of a number of men, pocº ſhrunken
things. Bacon.
The writers expreſſed not the valuation of the denarius,
without regard to its preſent valuation. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. The act of ſetting a value; appraiſement. - - -
Humility in man conſiſts not in denying any gift that is in
him, but in a juſt valuation of it, rather thinking too
meanly than too highly. Ray on the Creatiºn.
VALUA’roR. m. ſ [from value.] An appraiſer ; one who ſets
upon any thing its price. -
| W. !. the biſhops make uſe off Swift.
VALUE. m. ſ. [value, Fr. valor, Lat...]
1. Price; worth.
Ye are phyſicians of no value.
2. High rate. - -
Caeſar is well acquainted with your virtues,
And therefore ſets this value on your life: -
Let him but know the price of Cato's friendſhip, , ,
And name your terms. - Addison's Cato.
3. Rate; price equal to the worth of the thing bought.
He ſent him money ; it was with this obliging teſtimony,
that his deſign was not to pay him the value of his pictures,
becauſe they were above any price. Pºſ.
I
Milton.
job xiii.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">v A N
V A N
To value. v. a. [valoir, Fr. from the noun.]
, Torate at a certain price. - - -
I When the country grows betterinhabited, the tithes and other
obventions will be more augmented, and better valued. Spenſºr.
A mind valuing his reputation at the due Price, will repute
all diſhoneſt gain much inferior thereunto. Carew's Survey.
God alone values right the good. AMilton.
2. To rate highly ; to have in high eſteem.
Some of the fineſt treatiſes in dialogue, many very valued
pieces of French, Italian, and Engliſh appear. . . Addiſon.
He values himſelf upon the compaſſion with which he re-
lieved the afflicted. Atterbury's Sermons.
To him your orchard's early fruits are due,
A pleaſing off'ring, when 'tis made by you ;
He values theſe. Pope.
3. To appraiſe; to cſtimate. -
If he be poorer than eſtimation, the prieſt ſhall value
him. Lev. xxvii. 8.
4. To be worth; to be equal in worth to:
The peace between the French and us not valueſ
The coſt that did conclude it. Shakeſpeare's Hen. VIII.
5. To take account of.
If a man be in ſickneſs, the time will ſeem longer without
a clock than with ; for the mind doth value every mo-
Inent. Bacon.
6. To reckon at, with reſpe&amp;t to number or power.
The queen is valued thirty thouſand ſtrong:
Her faction will be full as ſtrong as ours. Shakeſpeare.
7. To conſider with reſpect to importance ; to hold important.
The king muſt take it ill,
So ſlightly valued in his meſſenger. Shakeſpear's K. Lear.
Neither of them valued their promiſes, according to rules
of honour or integrity. Clarendon, b. viii.
8. To equal in value; to countervail.
It cannot be valued with the gold of ophir. job. xxviii. 16.
9. To raiſe to eſtimation.
She ordered all things, reſiſting the wiſdom of the wiſeſt,
by making the poſſeſſor thereof miſerable; valuing the folly
of the moſt fooliſh, by making the ſucceſs proſperous. Sidney.
Some value themſelves to their country by jealouſies of the
CrOWI1. Temple.
Vanity, or a deſire of valuing ourſelves by ſhewing others
faults. Temple.
VA’lue less, adj. [from value.] Being of no value.
A counterfeit
Reſembling majeſty; which, touch'd and tried,
Proves valueleſ. Shake peare's K. john.
VA'LUER. m. ſ. [from value.] He that values.
VALVE. n.ſ. [valva, Latin.]
1. A folding door.
Swift through the valves the viſionary fair
Repaſs'd. Pope's Odyſ. b. Iv.
2. Anything that opens over the mouth of a veſſel.
This air, by the opening of the valve, and forcing up of
the ſucker, may be driven out. Boyle's I/orks.
3. [In anatomy..] A kind of membrane, which opens in cer-
tain veſſels to admit the blood, and ſhuts to prevent its
regreſs.
The arteries, with a contračtile force, drive the blood ſtill
forward; it being hindered from going backward by the
valves of the heart. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
VALyule. n.ſ. [valvule, Fr.] A ſmall valve.
VAMP. m. ſ. The upper leather of a ſhoe. Ainſworth.
To VAMP. v. a. [This is ſuppoſed probably enough by Skinner
to be derived from avant, Fr. before ; and to mean laying
on a new outſide.] To piece an old thing with ſome new
part.
You wiſh
To vamp a body with a dangerous phyſick,
That's ſure of death without. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
This opinion hath been vamped up by Cardan. Bentley.
I had never much hopes of your vampt play. Swift.
VAMPER. m. ſ. [from vamp.] One who pieces out an old
thing with ſomething new.
VAN, n.ſ.. [from avant, French..]
1. The front of an army; the firſt line.
Before each van prick forth the airy knights. Milton.
The foe he had ſurvey'd,
Arrang'd, as to him they did appear,
With van, main battle, wings and rear. PHudibras.
Pan to van the foremoſt ſquadrons meet,
The midmoſt battles haſt'ning up behind. Dryden.
* [* Fr. vannus, Latin.] Anything ſpread wide by which
a wind is raiſed; a fan.
The other token of their ignorance of the ſea was an oar,
they call it a corn-van. Notes on Odyſſ.
3. * wing with which the air is beaten. -
His ſail-broad vans
. He Preads for flight, and in the ſurging ſmoke
Up-lifted, ſpurns the ground. AMilton's Par. Loft.
- A fiery globe
Of angels on full ſail of wing drew nigh,
Who on their plumy vans receiv'd him ſoft
From his uneaſy ſtation, and upbore,
As on a floating couch, through the blithe air. Mill
His diſabled wing unſtrung: lſº,
He wheel'd in air, and ſtretch'd his vans in vain:
His vans no longer could his flight ſuſtain. &gt; Dryden.
The vanes are broad on one ſide, and narower on the .
both which miniſter to the progreſſive motion of the bird }.
VA'N courier. n.ſ. ſavantcourier. French.] A i. -
precuſſor. &gt;
VANE. m. ſ. [vaene, Dutch..] A plate hun -
Sãº J A p 9 on a pin to turn
A man ſhe wou'd ſpellbackward;
If tall, a lance ill-headed;
If ſpeaking, why a vane blown with all winds. Shaiſ,
VA'N GUARD. m. ſ. [avant garde, French..] The front, or #
line of the army.
The king's vant-guard maintained fight againſt the whole
power of the enemies. Bacon
Wanguard to right and left the front unfold, Min.
VANILLAn, ſ. [vanille, French..] A plant. It hath anºn.
malous flower, conſiſting of ſix leaves, five of which are
placed in a circular order, and the middle one is concave.
the empalement becomes an horned, ſoft, fleſhy fruit, filled
with very ſmall ſeeds. The fruit of thoſe plants is uſed to
ſcent chocolate. Miller.
When mixed with vanillios, or ſpices, it acquires the good
and bad qualities of aromatic oils. Arbuthnot on Aliment,
To VA Nish. v. n. [vane co, Latin. evanouir, Fr.]
1. To loſe perceptible exiſtence.
High honour is not only gotten and born by pain and dan-
ger, but muſt be nurſed by the like, or elſe vaniſheſh as ſoon
as it appears to the world. Sidney.
Whither are they vaniſh'd?
—Into the air; and what ſeem'd corporal
2.
Melted as breath into the wind. Skałºſpears.
While fancy brings the vaniſh'd piles to view,
And builds imaginary Rome anew. Pºpe,
2. To paſs away from the fight; to diſappear
Now I have taken heart, thou vanſhºff. Shakespeare
He cut the cleaving ſky,
And in a moment vaniſh'd from her eye. Pope's Odſ.
3. To paſs away; to be loſt.
All theſe delights will vaniſh. Milton.
That ſpirit of religion and ſeriouſneſs, by which we had
diſtinguiſhed ourſelves, vaniſhed all at once, and a ſpirit of
infidelity and prophaneneſs ſtarted up. Atterbury.
VANITY.. n.ſ. [vanitas, Lat. vanité, Fr.]
1. Emptineſs; uncertainty; inanity.
2. Fruitleſs deſire; fruitleſs endeavour.
Wanity poſſeſſeth many, who are deſirous to know thºr-
tainty of things to come. Sidney.
Thy pride,
And wand'ring vanity, when leaſt was ſafe,
Rejećted my forewarning.
3. Trifling labour. - -
To uſe long diſcourſe againſt thoſe things which are both
againſt ſcripture and reaſon, might rightly be judged a
vanity in the anſwerer, not much inferior to thºſ | the
inventor. Raleigh's Hiji. ºf the Jºrld.
4. Falſhood; untruth. - - - d
Here I may well ſhew the vanity of that which "º".
In the ſtory of Walſingham. Sirj. º:
5. Empty pleaſure; vain purſuit; idle ſhew ; unſubſtantial en-
joyment; petty object of pride.
J '. º ſº f'. ſhould have made ſuch"
of glorious creatures on earth, and leave them all to º :
ſumed in ſecular vanity, allowing none but the baſer ſort
Miltºn,
be employed in his own ſervice. ºfter.
I muſt l
Beſtow upon the eyes of this young couple. ,
Some vanity of º art. Shakeſpeare's Tempſf.
Caſt not her ſerious wit on idle things; Davieſ.
Maks her free will ſlave to vanity. Milton.
Sin, with vanity, had fill'd the works of men. heir dreſs;
The eldeſt equal the youngeſt in the vanity of . e º
and no other reaſon can be given of it, but that they .
if not ſurpaſs them, in the vanity of their deſires.
Think not when woman's tranſient breath * fled,
That all her vanities at once are dead;
Succeeding vanities ſhe ſtill regards,
And though ſhe plays no more, o'er
6. Oſtentation ; arrogance.
The º: thereof is true, however º º:
vanity, whilſt they would not ſeem to be ignoranº o, en'er.
upon build many forged hiſtories of their own anti!". j
whether it were out of the ſame vanity, which i. ub-
all thoſe learned philoſophers and poets, that P* * "...
liſhed, not under the right authors names, thoſe º the
he had read in the ſcriptures; or fearing the ſeverity I can-
Areopagite, and the example of his mºſier º: |World.
not judge. Raleigh's Hiſt, ºf the Caſ
looks the cards. *
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">v A P
º
i
º:
*
J-
:
&amp;
*
ºº- -
---
7. Petty pride; pride exerted upon flight grounds; pride ope-
rating on ſmall occaſions.
Can you add guilt to vanity, and take
A pride to hear the conqueſts which you make. Dryden.
'Tis an old maxim in the ſchools,
That vanity's the food of fool, 3
Yet now and then your men of wit
Will condeſcend to take a bit.
to winnow Not in uſe.
The corn, which in ºanning lieth loweſt is the beſt. Bacon,
To VANOUISH. v.a. [vaincre, French.]
*. To conquer; to overcome 5 to ſubdue.
Wert’t not a ſhame, that, whilſt you live at jar,
The fearful French, whom you late vanquiſhed,
Should make a ſtart o'er ſeas, and vanquiſh you ?, Shakeſ
They ſubdued and vanquiſhed the rebels in all el
1COun-
ters.
Clarendon, b. viii.
The gods the viàor, Cato the vanquiſh’d choſe :
But you have done what Cato could not do,
. ...To chuſe the vanquiſh'd, and refore him too.
2. To confute.
This bold aſſertion has been fully vanquiſhed in a late reply
to the biſhop of Meaux's treatiſe. F. Aftterbury.
VA'NQUISHER. m.ſ. [frºm vanquiſh.] Conqueror; ſubdueſ.
He would pawn his fortunes
To hopeleſs reſtitution, ſo he might
Be call’d your vanquiſher. Shakeſpeare.
I ſhall riſe vićtorious, and ſubdue
My vanquiſher; ſpoil'd of his vaunted ſpoil. Milton.
Troy's vanquiſher, and great Achilles' ſon. 4. Philips.
VANTAóE. m. ſ. (from advantage.]
I. Gain ; profit.
What great vantage do we get by the trade of a paſtor? Sydn.
2. Superiority; ſtate in which one had better means of action
than another.
With the vantage of mine own excuſe,
Hath he excepted moſt againſt my love. Shakeſpeare.
He had them at *ge, being tired and harraſſed with a
long march. Bacon,
The Pardoned perſon muſt not think to ſtand upon the
ºne vantage of ground with the innocent. South.
3. Opportunity ; convenience.
Be aſſur’d, Madam, 'twill be done
With his next vantage. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
o VANTAGE. v. a. [from advantage.] To profit.
We yet of preſent peril be afraid;
For needleſs fear did never vºltage none. Fairy Queen.
ANTERAss. n.ſ. ſavant bras, Fr.] Armour for the arm.
I'll hide my ſilver beard in a gold beaver,
And in my wantbrace put this wither'd brawn. Shaſeſ.
... Put on vanthraſ, and greves, and gauntlet. AMilton.
WAPID. adj. ſºapidus, Latin.] Dead; having the ſpirit eva-
Porated ; ſpiritleſs ; maukiſh; flat.
Thy wines let feed a-while
On the fat refuſe; left too ſoon disjoin'd,
. From ſpritely it to ſharp or vapid change. Philips.
The effects of a vapid and viſcous conſtitution of blood,
are ſtagnation, acrimony, and putrefaction. Arbuthnot.
WAPID: Ess. n.ſ.. [from ºpia.] The ſtate of being ſpiritleſs
or maukiſh; maukiſhneſs.
WAPORATION. m. ſ. (vaporation, Fr. vaporation, Lat. from va-
pour.] The act of eſcaping in vapours.
VA'Pokºr; n.ſ.. [from vapour.] A boaſter; a braggart.
This ſhews theſe vaporers, to what ſcorn they expoſe them-
ſelves. Government of the Tongue.
VA'poRISH. adj. [from vapºur.] Vaporous; Splenetick ; hu-
mourſome.
Pallas grew vapºriſh once and odd,
She would not do the leaſt right thing. Swift.
VAPQRous. adj. Ivaporeux, Fr. from vapour.]
I. Full of vapours or exhalations; fumy.
The vaporous night approaches. Shakeſpeare.
It proceeded from the nature of the vapouriſh place. Sandys.
This ſhifting our abode from the warmer and more".
Pºrº air of the vallies, to the colder and more ſubtile air of
the hills, is a great benefit to the valetudinarian part. Derham.
2. Windy; flatulent.
If the mother eat much beans, or ſuch vaporous food,
it endangereth the child to become lunatick. Bacon.
Some more ſubtile corporeal element, may ſo equally bear
againſt the parts of a little vaporous moiſture, as to form it
into round drops. 4%re's Antidote againſ: Atheiſm.
The food which is moſt vaporous and perſpirable, is the
moſt eaſily digeſted. Arbuthnot.
A little tube, jetting out from the extremity of an artery,
may $ºy of theſe vaporous ſteams of the biºd. Cheyne.
WAPOUR. m. ſ. [vapºr, Fr. &amp;apor, Latin.]
I. Any thing exhalable ; any thing that mingles with the air.
!ºur, and miſt, and exhilation hº Milton,
When firſt the ſun too pow'rful beams diſplays,
It draws up vapours which obſcure its rays:
Dryden.
Swift's Miſºl.
To VAN. v. a. [from **, Lat. vanner, Fr.j to .
V A R
# º º clouds at laſt adorn its way,
*...*W glories, and augment t -
2. Wind; flºº. &gt; g he day
In the Theſſalian witches, and the meetings of witches
that have been recorded, great wonders they tell, of carry-
!ng in the air, transforming themſelves into other bodiés.
Theſe fables are the effects of imagination: for ointments,
if laid on anything thick, by ſtopping of the pores, ſhut in
the *P*., and ſend them to th: head extremely. Bacon
3. Fume; ſteam. -
he morning is the beſt, becauſe the imagination is not
clouded by the vapours of meat. --- c Dryden.
In diſtilling hot ſpirits, if the head of the ſtill be taken off.
the vapour which aſcends out of the ſtill will take fij at the
flame of a candle, and the flame will run along the vapour
from the candle to the fill. Naitº, Optics.
For the impoſthume, the vapour of vinegar, and anything
which creates a cough, are proper. Arbuthnot ºn Diº.
4. Mental fume; vain imagination; fancy unreal. -
If his ſorrow bring forth amendment, he hath the grace of
hope, though it be clouded over with a melancholy vapour,
that it be not diſcernible even to himſelf. Hammond.
5: [In the plural.] Diſeaſes cauſe: by flatulence, or by diſeaſed
*...**3, hypochondriacal maladies, melancholy; ſpleen.
To this we muſt aſcribe the ſpleen, ſo frequent in ſtudious
*", as well as the vapours to which the other ſex are ſo
often ſubject. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 11 5.
To VAT'oùR. v. n. ſvaporo, Latin.]
1. To paſs in a vapour, or fume; to emit fumes; to fly off in
evaporations. -
When thou from this world wilt go,
The whole world vapours in thy breath. Donne.
Swift running waters vapour not ſo much as ſtanding
Waters. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. No. 767.
2. To bully; to brag ; -
Not true, quoth he Howe'er you vapour,
Pºpe.
I can what I affirm make appear. Hudibras.
Theſe are all the mighty powers
You vainly boaſt, to cry down ours;
And what in real value's wanting,
§pply with vapouring and ranting. Hudibrar.
That I might not be *Pºur'd down by inſignificant teſti-
monies, I uſed the name of your ſociety to annihilate all
ſuch arguments. Glanville's Prºy to Scºp.
Be you to us but kind;
Let Dutchmen vapour, Spaniards curſe,
No ſorrow we ſhall find. E. Dorſet's Song.
To VA'pour. v. a. To effuſe, or ſcatter in fumés or y.
Qur.
p - Break off this laſt lamenting kiſs,
Which ſucks two ſouls, and vapºur; both away. Donne.
He’d laugh to ſee one throw his heart away,
Anºther fighing vapour forth his ſoul,
A third to melt himſelf in tears. B. Johnſºn.
Opium loſeth ſome of his poiſonous quality, if vapºred
out, and mingled with ſpirit of wine. Bacon.
It muſt be hopen by ſomewhat which may fix the ſilver,
never to be reſtored, or vapoured away, when incorporated
into ſuch a maſs of gold. Bacon.
VARIABLE. adj. […ariable, Fr. variabilis, Latin.] Change-
able ; mutable; inconſtant.
O ſwear not by th’ inconſtant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb 5
Left that thy love prove likewiſe variable. Shakeſpeare.
Haply countries different, -
With variable objects, ſhall expel
This ſomething ſettled matter in his heart. Shakespeare
By the lively image of other creatures, did thoſe ancieſ:
repreſent the variable paſſions of mortals ; as by ſerpents were
ſignified deceivers. Raleigh's Hiſ of the //orld.
His heart I know how variable, and vain,
Self-left. 44iltºn's Par, Lºft, b. xi. l. 92.
VARIABLENEss. n. ſ. [from variable.] -
I. Changeableneſs ; mutability. -
You are not ſolicitous about the variableneſ of the wea-
ther, or the change of ſeaſons. Addiſon.
. Levity; inconſtancv. -
2 cº ſubject imate to the charge of variableneſ,
in judgment. Clariſſa.
VARIABLY. adv. [from variable.] Changeably; mutably ; in-
; uncertainly.
v. n.J. º vary..] Diſcord; diſagreement; diſ-
f ions to ſet a man at variance againſt his father. Matth.
A cauſe of law, by violent courſe, - ºrz-
Was, from a variance, now a war become. Danieſ', C. i. a 7".
Not ſo as to ſet any one doctrine of the goſpel at variance
with others, which are all admirably conſiſtent. Sprat.
She runs, but hopes ſhe does not run unſeen:
While a kind glance at her purſuer flies,
How much at variance are her feet and eyes 2 Pºpe.
29 B I:
- *<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V A. R.
V A R
ed would not ſometimes ſubmit to the ignorant;
e...: of the young; there would be no-
- erlaſting variance in the world. Swift.
thing but everlaſting v
Many bleed,
By ſhameful variance betwixt man and man. Thomſon.
VARIAtion. n.f. [variatiº, Lat. variation, French.]
I. Change; mutation ; difference from itſelf. -
After much variation of opinions, the priſoner was acquitted
of treaſon, but by moſt voices found guilty of felony. Hayw;
The operation of agents will eaſily admit of intention and
remiſſion, but the effences of things are conceived not capable
of any ſuch variation. Locke.
The fame of our writers is confined to theſe two iſlands,
and it is hard it ſhould be limited in time as much as place,
by the perpetual variations of our ſpeech: - Swift.
There is but one common matter, which is diverſified by
accidents; and the ſame numerical quantity, by variatiºns of
texture, may conſtitute ſucceſſively all kinds of body. Bent.
2. Difference; change from one to another.
In ſome other places are more females born than males ;
which, upon this variation of proportion, I recommend to
the curious. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
Each ſea had its peculiar ſhells, and the ſame variation of
ſoils; this tract affording ſuch a terreſtrial matter as is pro-
per for the formation of one ſort of ſhell-fiſh ; that of
another. J/oodward's Nat. Hiſt.
3. Succeſſive change.
Sir Walter Blunt,
Stain'd with the variation of each ſoil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this ſeat of ours. Shakeſp.
4. [In grammar.]. Change of termination of nouns.
The rules of grammar, and uſeful examples of the va-
riation of words, and the peculiar form of ſpeech, are often
appointed to be repeated. JWatts's Improv. of the Mind.
5. Change in natural phenomenons.
The duke run a long courſe of calm proſperity, without
any viſible eclipſe or wane in himſelf, amidſt divers variations
in others. J/otton's Lie of Buckingham.
6. Deviation.
If we admit a variation from the ſtate of his creation, that
variation muſt be neceſſarily after an eternal duration, and
therefore within the compaſs of time. Hale.
I may ſeem ſometimes to have varied from his ſenſe; but
the greateſt variations may be fairly deduced from him. Dryd.
7. Wariation of the compaſs 5 deviation of the magnetick needle
from an exact parallel with the meridian.
VA'R1cous. adj. [varicoſus, Latin.] Diſeaſed with dilation.
There are inſtances of one vein only being varicous, which
may be deſtroyed by tying it above and below the dila-
tation. Sharpe.
To VARIEGATE. v. a. [variegatus, ſchool Latin.] To di-
verſify; to ſtain with different colours.
The ſhells are filled with a white ſpar, which variegates
and adds to the beauty of the ſtone. J/oodward on Fºſſils.
They had fountains of variegated marble in their rooms. Arb.
Ladies like variegated tulips ſhow ;
'Tis to the changes half the charms we owe :
Such happy ſpots the nice admirers take,
Fine by defečt, and delicately weak. Pope's Epiº.
VARIEGA Tion. m. ſ. [from variegate.] Diverſity of colours.
Plant your choice tulips in natural earth, ſomewhat im-
poveriſhed with very fine ſand; elſe they will ſoon loſe their
variegations. Evelyn's Kalend.
VARI'ETY. m. ſ. [varieté, Fr. varietas, Latin.]
1. Change ; ſucceſſion of one thing to another; intermixture
of one thing with another.
All ſorts are here that all th’ earth yields ;
Wariety without end. Milton's Par. Loft.
Wariety is nothing elſe but a continued novelty. South.
If the ſun's light conſiſted of but one ſort of rays, there
would be but one colour in the whole world, nor would it be
poſſible to produce any new colour by reflections or refrac-
tions; and by conſequence that the variety of colours depends
upon the compoſition of light. Newton's Opticks.
2. One thing of many by which variety is made. In this ſenſe
it has a plural.
The incloſed warmth, which the earth hath in itſelf, ſtirred
up by the heat of the ſun, affiſteth nature in the ſpeedier
Procreation of thoſe varieties, which the earth bringeth
forth. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the JP'orld.
3. Difference; diſfimilitude.
- There is a variety in the tempers of good men, with rela-
tion to the different impreſſions they receive from different
objects of charity. F. Atterbury.
4. Variation ; deviation; change from a former ſtate.
It were a great vanity to reječt thoſe reaſons drawn from
the nature of things, or to go about to anſwer thoſe reaſons
y ſuppoſitions of a variety in things, from what they now
*Pººr - Hale's Origin. of Mankind.
VA’RIOUS. adj. [varius, Latin.] gin. of
1. Different; ſeveral; manifold.
Then were they known to men by various Ilaſnes
And various idols, through the heathen world. M.
2. Changeable ; uncertain ; unfixed; unlike itſelf. 07.
The names of mixed modes want ſtandards
whereby to adjuſt their ſignification; therefore th
various and doubtful.
in nature,
cy are very
2. Unlike each other. Lock.
He in deriſion ſets
Upon their tongues a various ſpirit,
To raſe quite out their native language. Milton
Vaſt crowds of vanquiſh'd nations march along, -
Warious in arms, in habit, and in tongue. Dryden
Warious of temper, as of face or frame, -
Each individual: his great end the ſame. Pºpe
So many and ſo various laws are given. Añº,
4. Variegated ; diverſified.
O Herbs ſudden flower'd,
pening their various colours.
V’ARIously. adu. [from various.] In a various ºn.”
Having been variouſly toſſed by fortune, directed his courſ:
to a ſafe harbour.
Various objećts from the ſenſe,
Wariouſly repreſenting. Milton.
Thoſe various ſquadrons, variouſly deſign'd,
Each veſſel freighted with a ſeveral load;
Each ſquadron waiting for a ſeveral wind;
All find but one, to burn them in the road. Dryden.
Different aliments, while they repair the fluids and ſolids, act
variouſly upon them according to their different natures. Arbuth,
WARIX. [Lat. varice, Fr.] A dilatation of the vein.
In ulcers of the legs, accompanied with varices or dila.
tations of the veins, the varix can only be affiſted by the
bandage. Sharpe,
VA'RLET. m. ſ. [varlet, old French, now valet.]
1. Anciently a ſervant or footman.
Such lords ill cxample do give,
Where varlets and drabs ſo may live. Tuſſºr's Huſſandy,
They ſpy'd
A varlet running towards them haſtily. Spenſºr.
2. A ſcoundrel; a raſcal. This word has deviated from its
original meaning, as fur in Latin.
I am the verieſt varlet that ever chew'd. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Where didſt thou leave theſe warlºt; ? Shakeſpeare,
Thou, varlet, doſt thy maſter's gains devour;
Thou milk'ſt his ewes, and often twice an hour. Dryden.
When the Roman legions were in a diſpoſition to mutiny,
an impudent varlet, who was a private centinel, reſolved to
try the power of his eloquence. Addſon.
VARLETRY. n.ſ.. [from varlet.] Rabble; croud; populace.
Shall they hoiſt me up,
And ſhew me to the ſhouting varietry
Of cenſºring Rome Shakespeare. Ant, and Clº.
VA'RNISH. m.J. [vernis, Fr. vernix, Latin.] .
1. A matter laid upon wood, metal, or other bodies, to mº
them ſhine.
We'll put on thoſe ſhall praiſe your excellence,
And ſet a double varniſh on the fame. Shakeſ,
The fame of Cicero had not borne her age ſo well,
if it had not been joined with ſome vanity? Like untº.”
miſh, that makes cielings not only ſhine, but laſt. Bacºn.
This the blue varniſh that the green endears,
The ſacred ruſt of twice ten hundred years. Pºp!,
2. Cover; palliation.
To VARNISH. v. a. [verniſºr, vernir, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To cover with ſomething ſhining.
O vanity - Sid
To ſet a pearl in ſteel ſo meanly varniſhed. 1ánty,
Clamber not you up to the caſements,
Nor thruſt your head into the publick ſtreet, Shaiſ,
To gaze on chriſtian fools with varniſh’d faces: arts
2. To cover; to conceal with ſomething ornamental
Specious deeds on earth, which glory excitº; Miltºn
Or cloſe ambition varniſh'd o'er with zeal. -
His manly heart was ſtill above Dryd.
Diſſembled hate, or varniſh'd love. . . . . aſhion, and
Men eſpouſe the well-endow'd opinion; in f ºn:
then ſeek arguments to make good their º Workſ.
over and cover their deformity. - Locke's
3. To palliate; to hide with colour of rhetorick.
Bacon,
To varniſh all their errors, and ſecure m,
Tº..."...iii.; Pº
Cato's voice was ne'er employ'd Addison.
To clear the guilty, and to varniſh crimes. s! Philipi.
Speak the plain truth, and varniſh not your Crimes :
VA'RNisher. n. ſ. [from varniſh.J
1. One whoſe trade is to varniſh. be of good
An oil obtained of common oil, may probably lº's Wari.
uſe to ſurgeons and varniſhers. Boyle
2. A diſguiſer; an adorner. - - -
Modeſt dulneſs lurks in thought's diſguiſ.; Pºpe.
Thou warniſher of fools, and cheat of all the "...º.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V A S
-
- -
ºs
º
:
f
VA'RVELs, n.ſ. [vervelles, Fr.] Silver rings about the leg of
_*hawk, on which the owner's name is engraved. Dić?.
To WARY.". [vario, Lat. varier, French.]
1. To change; to make unlike itſelf.
- Let your ceaſeleſs change
Kary to our great creator ſtill new praiſe. Milton,
2. To change to ſomething elſe.
- Gods that never change their ſtate,
Pary oft their love and hate. JWaller.
We are to vary the cuſtoms, according to the time and
country where the ſcene of a&amp;tion lies. Dryden.
The maſter's hand, which to the life Can trace
The airs, the lines, and features of the face;
May, with a free and bolder ſtroke, expreſs
A vary'd poſture, or a flatt'ring dreſs. Sir j. Denham.
He varies ev'ry ſhape with eaſe,
And tries all forms that may Pomona pleaſe. Pope.
3. To make of different kinds.
God hath divided the genius of men according to the dif-
ferent affairs of the World; and varied their inclinations,
according to the variety of a&amp;ions to be performed. Browne.
4. To diverſify; to variégate.
God hath here
Mary'd his bounty ſo with new delights. Milton.
To VA’RY. v. n.
* To be changeable; to appear in different forms.
Darkling ſtands
The varying ſhore oth' world. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleo,
So varied he, and of his tortuous train
Curl’d many a wanton wreath. Milton.
2. To be unlike each other.
Thoſe who made laws, had their minds poliſhed above
the vulgar: and yet unaccountably the public conſtitutions of
nations vary. Collier on Pride.
3. To alter; to become unlike itſelf.
He had a ſtrange interchanging of large and inexpeded
Pardons, with ſeveral executions; which could not tº im-
puted to any inconſtancy, but to a principle he had ſet unto
himſelf, that he would vary and try both ways in turn. Bac.
That each from other differs, firſt confeſs;
Next, that he varies from himſelf no leſs. Pope's Epift.
4. To deviate ; to depart.
The crime conſiſts in violating the law, and varying from
• the right rule of reaſon. Locke.
5. To ſucceed each other.
While fear and anger, with alternate grace,
Pant in her breaſt, and vary in her face. Addison's Cato.
6. To diſagree; to be at variance.
In judgment of her ſubſtance thus they vary,
And vary thus in judgment of her ſeat;
For ſome her chair up to the brain do carry,
Some ſink it down into the ſtomach's heat. Sir j. Davies.
7. To ſhift colours.
Will the falcon ſtooping from above,
Smit with her varying plumage, ſpare the dove
Admires the jay the inſect's gilded wings? Pope.
VA'RY, n. ſ. [from the verb. Change ; alteration. Not in
&gt; Sº
C.
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe ſooth every paſſion;
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks,
With every gale and vary of their maſters. Shakeſpeare.
VA'scula R. adj. [from vaſculum, Latin.]
1. Conſiſting of veſſels; full of veſſels.
Nutrition of the ſolids is performed by the circulating
liquid in the ſmalleſt vaſcular ſolids. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
VAsculi'FFR9vs. adj. Ivaſculum and fero, Latin.] Such plants
as have, beſides the common calyx, a peculiar veſſel to con-
tain the ſeed, ſometimes divided into cells; and theſe have
always a monopetalous flower, either uniform or dif-
form. 2uincy.
VA’s E. m. ſ. [vaſe, Fr. vaſa, Latin.] A veſſel; generally a
veſſel rather for ſhow than uſe.
- The toilet ſtands unveil'd,
Each ſilver vaſe in myſtick order laid. Pope.
VA/SSAL. m. ſ. [vaſſal, Fr. vaſſallo, Italian.]
1. One who holds by the will of a ſuperior lord. -
Every petty prince, vaſſal to the emperor, can coin what
money he pleaſeth. Swift's ſhort View of Ireland.
The vaſſals are invited to bring in their complaints to the
viceroy, who impriſons and chaſtiſes their maſters. Addiſon.
2. A ſubject; a dependant. - - - - -
She cannot content the lord with performance of his diſci-
pline, that hath at her ſide a vaſſal, whom Satan, hath
made his vicegerent, to croſs whatſoever the faithful ſhould
do. Hooker, b. viii. S. 34.
Such as they thought fit for labour, they received as vaſſals;
but imparted not the benefit of laws, but every one made his
will a law unto his own vaſſal. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The common people were free ſubjects to the king, not
flaves and vaſſals to their pretended lords. Sir j. Davies.
The mind hath not reaſon to remember, that paſſions
ought to be her vaſſals, not her maſters. Raleigh.
5
º
V A T
Waſal of his *ger, when the ſcourge
Inexorable, and th: torturing hour
Calls us to penance. - Milton.
- . As all his vaſſal; eagerly deſir'd ;
With mind averſe, he rather inderwent
His people's will, than gave his own conſent. Dryden,
He ſubjugated a king, and called him his vaſſal. Baker.
3. A ſervant; one who acts by the will of another.
I am his fortune's vaſſal, and I ſend him
The greatneſs he has got. Sh
4. A ſlave; a low ...“ Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
Thou ſwearſt thy Gods in vain
Ovaſal/ miſcreamti Shakeſp. K. Lear.
VA’ss Allage. m. / ſºftlage, Fr. from vaſſal.] %. ſtate of
a vaſſal ; tenure at will; ſervitude; ſlavery; dependance.
He renounc'd the v6/aiage
Of Rome again.
All my pow'rs do their beſtowing loſe,
Like vaſalage at unawares encountrin -
The eye of majeſty. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and C. effida.
They wou'd have brought the Achaeans from the condition
of followers and dependents union. wº/alage. Raleigh,
Lºtus not then purſue,
By force impoſſible, by leave obtain’d
Unacceptable, though in heav'n our ſtate
Of ſplendid vaſalage. Milton's Par. Lºft,
Curs'd vaſſage,
Firſt idoliz'd till love's hot fire be o'er;
Then ſlaves to thoſe who courted us before. Dryden.
VAST: adj. [vo/le, Fr. vº/ius, Latin.]
I. Large; great.
What the parliament meant to attempt with thoſe vaſ?
numbers of men, every day levied. Clarendon, book i.
That is an ample and capacious mind, which takes in vaſ?
and ſublime ideas without pain. Watts.
His open ſtores,
Though voſſ, were little to his ampler heart. Thomſon.
2. Viciouſly great; enormouſly extenſive or capacious.
The vicious language is vaſt, and gaping, ſwelling, and
irregular; when it contends to be high, full of rock, moun-
Fairy &amp;een.
tain, and pointedneſs. B. Johnſon.
They view'd the waſ unmeaſurable abyſs. 44ilton.
Others with vº/? Typhean rage more fell,
Rend up rocks. Milton.
VAST. n.ſ...[vºſtum, Latin.] An empty waſte. -
They ſhook hands, as over a vº/f; and embrac'd, as from
the ends of oppos'd winds. Shakeſpeare.
Through the vaſt of heav’n it ſounded. 44ilton.
The wat'ry vaſt, -
Secure of ſtorms, your royal brother paſt. Pope.
VASTATION. m.ſ. Iváñati, from vaſio, Latin.] waſte § 4.
population.
This wild-fire made the ſaddeſt vaſtations, in the many fatal
outrages which theſe eager contentions occaſion. Decay of Piety.
VASTI'DITY. m. ſ. [vaſſitas, Lat. from va/y.] Wideneſs; im-
menſity. A barbarous word.
Perpetual durance,
Through all the world's vaſlidity. Shakeſpeare.
VA's TLY. adv. [from vaſt.] Greatly; to a great degree.
Holland's reſolving upon its own defence, without our ſhare
in the war, would leave us to enjoy the trade of the world,
and thereby grow vaſtly both in ſtrength and treaſures. Temple.
It is vaſtly the concern of government, and of themſelves
too, whether they be morally good or bad. South.
VA'st Nºss. n.ſ.. [from v4/?..] Immenſity; enormous greatneſs.
Behemoth, biggeſt born of earth, upheav'd
His vaſtneſs. AZilton's Par. Lºft.
She by the rocks compell'd to ſtay behind,
Is by the vaſtneſs of her bulk confin'd. //zler.
When I compare this little performance with the vaſºnſ;
of my ſubject, methinks I have brought but a cockle-ſhell of
water from the ocean. Glanville.
Arioſto obſerved not moderation in the v6/?neſ of his
draught. Dryden.
Hence we may diſcover the cauſe of the vaſtneſs of the
Ocean. Bentley's Sermons.
VA'sty, adj. [from vaſ...] Large; enormouſly great, ,
I can call ſpirits from the va/ly deep. Shakespeare  are.
VAT. n.ſ. [vat, Dutch, Fat, Saxon.] A veſſel in which li-
quors are kept in the immature ſtate.
Plumpy Bacchus, with pink eyne,
In thy vats our cares be drown'd. . . . Shakeſp.
Let him produce his vats and tubs in oppoſition to heaps
of arms and ſtandards. - &gt; - - Addiſon.
wouldſ thou thy vats with gen'rous juice ſhould fºoth,
Reſpect thy orchats. - Philips.
VATIcIDE. n.ſ. [vates and cardo, Latin.] A murderer of poets.
The caitiff vaticide conceiv'd a prayer. Pope's Dunciad.
To VAT1'cINATE. v. n. [vaticinor, Latin.] To propheſy; to
&amp;tiſe predićtion. -
Priº ji admired of all prophane prophets, whoſe predic-
tions have been ſo much cried up, did valicinate here. Howel.
- - WAVA’sour.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V A U
U D D
…,aſ-ar, Fr.] One who himſelf holding
m. ſ. ſº. holding under him.
n taken of civil honours,
ſquire. Camden.
dºlla, Fr.] A ſong common among
A ballad; a
VA'v Aso UR.
of a ſuperior lord,
Names have bee
valvaſor, or º
f - Uatt
UDEv IL. h. J. ------ ----
V. vulgar, and ſung about the ſtreets, Trev.
trivial ſtrain.
VAtji T. n.ſ. [wºule, Fr. vºlta, Ital. voluta, low Latin.]
1. A continued arch. -
O, you . men º: i ſ
ad I your tongues and eyes, uſic thena 10
# hat iº imuli ſhould crack. Shakespeare K. Lear.
The word ſignifies an orb or ſphere. And this ſhews us
both the form of the Moſaical abyſs, which was included
within this vault: and the form of the habitable earth, which
was the outward ſurface of this vault, or the “” of the
abyſs. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. A cellar.
Creep into the kill-hole.
He will ſeek there; neither preſs, well, vault,
an abſtraćt for the remembrance of.
The wine of life is drawn, and the meer lces
but he hath
Shakeſp.
Is left this vault to brag of. Shakeſp.
Whether your fruitful fancy lies -
To baniſh rats that haunt our vault. Swift.
3. A cave ; a cavern. -
The filent vaults of death, unknown to light,
And hell itſelf, lie naked to his fight. Sandys.
4. A repoſitory for the dead.
Shall I not be ſtifled in the vault,
To whoſe foul mouth no healthſome air breathesin. Shakespeare .
To Vault. v. a. [votſter, Fr. from the noun.]
To arch; to ſhape of a vault.
Hath nature given them eyes
To ſee this vaulted arch, and the rich cope
Of ſea and land, which can diſtinguiſh 'twixt
The fiery orbs above, and the twinn’d ſtones
Upon th’ humbl’d beach Shakespeare Cymbeline.
2. To cover with an arch.
Over-head the diſmal hiſs
Of fiery darts in flaming vollies flew;
And flying vaulted either hoſt with fire.
To VAult. v. m. voltiger, Fr. volleggiare, Italian.
1. To leap ; to jump.
Paulting ambition, which o'erleaps itſelf,
And falls on th’ other. Shakeſpear's Macbeth.
The pretty vaulting ſea refus’d to drown me,
Knowing that thou would'ſt have me drown'd on ſhore. Shakespeare
He is vaulting variable ramps
In your deſpite, upon your purſe. Shakeſp.
If I could win a lady by vaulting into my ſaddle with my
armour on, I ſhould quickly leap into a wife. Shakeſp.
Leaning on his lance, he vaulted on a tree. -
If a man ſhou'd leap a garret, or vault down the monu-
ment, wou'd he leave the memory of a hero behind
him * Collier on Duelling.
Lucan vaulted upon Pegaſus with all the heat and intre-
pidity of youth. Addiſon.
2. To play the tumbler, or poſture-maſter.
VAULT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A leap ; a jump.
VAU'LTAGE. m. ſ. [from vault..] Arched cellar. Not in uſe.
He'll call you to ſo hot an anſwer for it,
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Shall chide your treſpaſs, and return your mock
In ſecond accent to his ordnance. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
VA’ULTED. adj. [from vault..] Arched; concave.
Reſtore the lock 1 ſhe cries, and all around
Reſtore the lock ' the vaulted roofs rebound. Pºpe.
Vº. m. ſ. [from vault..] A leaper; a jumper; a tum-
Cr.
VA'ULTY. adj. [from vault..] Arched; concave. A bad word.
I will kiſs thy deteſtable bones,
And put my eye-balls in thy vaulty brows,
And ring theſe fingers with thy houſhold worms. Shakeſp.
I'll ſay that is not the lark, whoſe notes do beat
The vaulty heav'ns ſo high above our heads. Shakespeare .
VA'UNMURE. m. ſ. ſavant mur, Fr.] A falſe wall; a work
raiſed before the main wall.
JMilton
With another engine named the warwolfe, he pierced
with one ſtone, and cut, as even as a thread, two vaunt-
itres. - - Camden's Remains.
This warlike captain, daily attempting the vanmureș, in
the end by force obtained the ſame ; and ſo poſſeſſed of the
j. deſperately kept it ’till greater help came running in,
i. * wonderful expedition, clapt up a ſtrong covering
T VºN - f wall and the vanmure. Knºlles'. Hi/?. of the Turks.
O '**'. v. 4. [vanter, Fr.] To boaſt; to diſplay wit
oſtentation. , Fr.] &gt; 1ſplay with
Whom f. Not that great champion
Å. poets verſe ſo much doth vaunt ;
So man º twelve huge labours high extoll'd,
Yºries and ſharp hits did haunt. Fairy Queen.
as king, knight,
Not any damſel which her vaunteth moſt,
In ſkilful knitting of ſoft ſilken twine. **
My vanquiſher ſpoil'd of his vaunted ſpoil, S}ºft-
To VA UN r. v. n. iltºn,
1. To play the braggart; to talk with oſtentation,
vain ſhow; to boaſt." 19n; to make
You ſay, you are a better ſoldier;
Let it appear ſo; make your vaunting true. Shalºft
- The illuſions of magick were put down, and their .
ing in wiſdom reproved with diſgrace. Wiſdom xvii ht-
So ſpake th' apoſtate angel, though in pain; vil. 7.
Iºanning aloud, but rack'd with deep deſpair. &gt; Mil
Pride which prompts a man to vaunt and overvalue º:
he is, does incline him to diſvalue what he has. G., ji. at
2. I ſcarcely know in what ſenſe Dryden has uſed thi, WO º:
leſs it be miſwritten for vaults. Id, un-
'Tis he I feel him now in ev'ry part;
Like a new world he vaunts about my heart.
VAUNT. n.ſ. (from the verb.] Brag; boaſt; vain oſtentation
Sir John Perrot bent his courſe not to that point, i.
ther quite contrary, in ſcorn, and in vain vaint of his Own
counſels. Spºnſºr
Him Iſeduc’d with other promiſes and other vauntºſ.
Such varints who can with patience read, •ws.
Who thus deſcribes his hero when he's dead?
In heat of action ſlain, he ſcorns to fall,
But ſtill maintains the war, and fights at all. Granº,
- - - *º-
WAUNT. m. ſ. [from avant, Fr.] The firſt part. Not uſed,
Our play
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firſtlings. Shaiſ):
VA’UNTER. m. ſ. [vauteur, Fr. from vaunt.] Boaſter; braggiº
man given to vain oſtentation. So"--&gt;
Some feign
To menage fleeds, as did this vaunter; but in vain, Spºnſºr,
Tongue-valiant hero, vaunter of thy might;
In threats the foremoſt, but the lag in fight. Dryden,
VA'UNT FUL. adj. [vaunt and full.] Boaſtful; oſtentatious,
Whiles all the heavens on lower creatures ſmil'd,
Young Clarion, with vauntful luſtihed,
After his guiſe did caſt abroad to fare. Spºnſºr,
VA’UNTINGLA. adv. [from vaunting.] Boaſtfully; oiteita.
tiouſly.
I heard thee ſay, and vauntingly thou ſpak'ſt it,
That thou wert cauſe of noble Glo'ſter's death. Shakespeare .
VA warp. m. ſ. [van and ward] Fore part
Since we have the vaward of the day,
My love ſhall hear the muſic of my hounds,
Marcius,
Their bands i'th’vaiwara are the Antiates
Of their beſt truſt. Shakespeare Cºriolanuſ.
He deſired nothing more than to have confirmed his all-
thority in the minds of the vulgar, by the preſent and ready
attendance of the vayvod. Knºlley's Hji, ºf the Turki,
U’BERTY. n.ſ.. [ubertas, Latin.] Abundance; fruitfulneſs.
UBIcA'tion. U n.ſ.. [from uli, Latin.] Local relation; where-
UBI'ETY. #: A ſcholaſtick term.
Relations, ulications, duration, the vulgar philoſºphy º
mits to be ſomething; and yet to enquire in what plºt they
are, were groſs. Glanville.
Ubiquit ARY. adj. [from ubique, Latin.]Exiſting everywhere.
For wealth and an ubiquitary commerce, none can º
her. 370.
UBI'QUITARY. m. ſ. [from ubique, Latin.] One that exiſts
every where.
How far wide is Aquinas, which faith, by the ſame reaſon
that an angel might be in two places, he might be in as may
as you will See now, either Xavier is every where, or elſe
the carcaſs of a friar is more ſubtle than the naturº º
angel. To conclude, either Aquinas is falſe, or the papi .
ubiquitaries. - º:
UBI QUITY. m. ſ. [from ubique, Latin.] Omnipreſence; ext
tence at the ſame time in all places. - f di-
In the one there is attributed to God death. whereo
vine nature is not capable; in the other ubiquity º
which human nature admitteth not. wVººr -
Pem ſhe hight,
A ſolemn wight,
As you ſhould mect,
In any ſtreet,
In that tubiquity. - -
Could they think that to be infinite and i
{..., of which they could thruſt into * Corner O South.
CIO ſet.
UDDER. m. ſ. ſuben, Saxon; uder; Dutch. º Lat.] The
breaſt or digs of a cow, or other large animal.
A lionneſs, with udders all drawn dry,
Dryden,
Shaft,
B. Jºhnſºn.
mmenſe, the uh-
f their
hakeſp.
Lay couching head on ground. Shakespeare 
Sithcnce the cow t
Produc’d an ampler ſtore of milk; th; ſhe-goat, Prior.
Not without pain, dragg'd her diffended tº
UDDERED. adj. [from widºr.] F urniſhed with udders. Gay.
Marian ſoft could ſtroke the udder d cow. WEAL-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E G
*
---
º
º
VeAL. m. ſ. [veel, a calf, veeler, veſſer, to bring forth a calf, old
French ; vitellus, Latin.] The fleſh of a calfkilled for the table.
Would'ſt thou with mighty beef augment thy meal
Seek Leadenhall; St. James's ſends thee veal. Gay.
VE'cTION. }". ſ: [večzio, veðito, Latin.] The aët of car-
VE'cTITATION. rying, or being carried.
Enervated lords are ſoftly lolling in their chariots; a ſpecies
of veðitation ſeldom uſed amongſt the antients. Arbuthnot.
VE/cture. [večura, Latin.] Carriage.
Three things one nation ſelleth unto another; the com-
modity as nature yieldeth it, the manufacture and the veſſure
or carriage. - Bacon's Eſſays.
To WEER. v. n. [virer, French.] To turn about.
If a wild uncertainty prevail,
And turn your veering heart with ev'ry gale;
You loſe the fruit of all your former care,
For the ſad proſpect of a juſt deſpair. Roſcommon.
Nigh rivers mouth, where wind
Weers oft, as oft he ſteers and ſhifts her ſail. Milton.
I have no taſte of the noiſy praiſe
Of giddy crouds, as changeable as winds;
Servants to change, and blowing with the tide
Of ſwol'n ſucceſs; but veering with its ebb. Dryden.
A-head the maſter pilot ſteers
And as he leads, the following navy veers. Dryden.
It is a double misfortune to a nation given to change,
when they have a ſovereign that is prone to fall in with all
the turns and veerings of the people. Addiſon's Freeholder.
The wind veered about to north-weſt. Derham.
To V EER. v. a.
I. To let out.
As it is a great point of art, when our matter requires it,
to enlarge and veer out all ſail; ſo to take it in and contračt
it, is of no leſs praiſe when the argument doth aſkit. B. Johnſ.
2. To turn; to change.
I ſee the haven nigh at hand,
To which I mean my weary courſe to bend;
Veer the main-ſheet, and bear up with the land. Spenſºr.
Sailing farther, it veers its lilly to the weſt, and regardeth
that quarter, wherein the land is nearer or greater. Brown.
VEGET AB 1'LITY. m. ſ. [from vegetable.] Vegetable nature ;
the quality of growth without ſenſation.
The coagulating ſpirits of ſalts, and lapidifical juice of
the ſea, entering the parts of the plant, overcomes its vege-
tability, and converts it unto a lapideous ſubſtance. Browne.
WE'GETABLE. m. ſ. [vegetabilis, ſchool Lat. vegetabile, Fr.]
Any thing that has growth without ſenſation, as plants.
Wegetables are organized bodies conſiſting of various parts,
containing veſſels furniſhed with differentjuices; and taking in
their nouriſhment from without, uſually by means of a root,
by which they are fixed to the earth, or to ſome other body,
as in the generality of plants; ſometimes by means of pores
diſtributed over the whole ſurface, as in ſub-marine
plants. Hill's Materia Medica.
Let brutes and vegetables that cannot drink,
So far as drought and nature urges, think. J/a"er.
In vegetables it is the ſhape, and in bodies, not propagated
by ſeed, it is the colour we moſt fix on. Locke.
Other animated ſubſtances are called vegetables, which ,
have within themſelves the principle of another ſort of life
and growth, and of various productions of leaves, flowers
and fruit, ſuch as we ſee in plants, herbs, trees. /Watts.
VE'GETABLE. adj. [vegetabilis, Latin.]
1. Belonging to a plant.
The vegetable world, each plant and tree,
From the fair cedar on the craggy brow,
To creeping moſs. Prior.
Both mechaniſms are equally curious, from one uniform
juice to extract all the variety of vegetable juices; or from
ſuch variety of food to make a fluid very near uniform to the
blood of an animal. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The well ſhower'd earth
Is deep enrich'd with vegetable life. Thomſon.
2. Having the nature of plants.
Amidſt them ſtood the tree of life,
High eminent, blooming ambroſial fruit
Of vegetable gold. Milton's Par. Loſt.
That vegetative terreſtrial hath been ever the ſtanding fund,
out of which is derived the matter of all animal and vegetable
bodies. - J/oodward's Nat. Hiſł.
To VEGFTATE. v. n. [vegeto, Latin J. To grow as plants; to
ſhoot out; to grow without ſenſation.
Rain-water may be endued with ſome vegetating or pro-
lifick virtue, derived from ſome ſaline or oleofe particles. Ray.
As long as the ſeeds remained lodged in a natural ſoil,
they would ſoon vegetate, and ſend forth a new ſet of
trec.S. JWoodward.
See dying vegetables life ſuſtain;
See life diſſolving vegetate again. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
VEGET ATION. m. ſ. [from vegeto, Latin.]
1. The power of producing the growth of plants.
The exterior ſurface conſiſted of a terreſtrial matter proper
8
V E H
for the nouriſhment of plants, being little entangled with
mººmineral matter, that was unfit for vegetation. Wºodward.
The ſun, deep-darting to the dark retreat
Of vegetation, ſets the ſteaming power
At large. Thomſon's Spring.
Love warbles through the vocal groves,
And vegetation paints the plain.
2. The power of growth without ſenſation.
Plants, though beneath the excellency of creatures en-
dued with ſºnſe, yet exceed them in the faculty of vegetation
and of fertility. Hºoker.
Theſe pulſations I attribute to a plaſtick nature, or vital
Principle, as the vegetation of plants muſt alſo be. Ray.
Vegetative. adj. [vegetatiſ, Fr. from vegetate J
I. Having the quality of growing without life.
Creatures vegetative and growing, have their ſeeds in
themſelves. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the IWorld.
2. Having the power to produce growth in plants.
Homer makes deities of the vegetatiº faculties, and vir-
tues of the field. Broome's Notes on Odyſſ.
VE'GETATIVENEss. m. ſ. [from vegetative.] The quality of
producing growth.
VeGETE. adj. [vigetus, Latin.] Vigorous; active; ſpritely.
The ſoul was vegete, quick and lively; full of the youth-
fulneſs and ſpritelineſs of youth. South.
The faculties in age muſt be leſs vegete and nimble than in
youth. //allis.
VE/GETIVE. adj. [from vegeto, Latin.]Vegetable; having the
nature of plants.
Nor rent off, but cut off ripe bean with a knife,
For hindering ſtalke of hir vegetive life. Tuff. Huſbandry.
VE'Getive. m. ſ. [from the adjective..] A vegetable.
Hence vegetives receive their fragrant birth,
And clothe the naked boſom of the earth.
The tree ſtill panted in th' unfiniſh'd part,
Not wholly vegetive; and heav'd her heart.
V. º: ; n. ſ. [vehementia, Latin.
1. Violence; force.
Univerſal hubbub wild,
Of ſtunning founds and voices all confus'd,
Aſſaults his ear with loudeſt vehemence.
2. Ardour; mental violence; terrour.
Think ye are men; deem it not impoſſible for you to err:
fift impartially your own hearts, whether it be force of reaſon,
or vehemency of affection, which hath bred, and ſtill doth
feed theſe opinions in you. Hooker's Pref.
The beſt perſuaſions
Fail not to uſe; and with what vehemency -
Th’ occaſion ſhall inſtruct you. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII:
Would it apply well to the vehemence of your affection,
that I ſhould win what you would enjoy Shakeſp.
The extremity of the condition produced ſome earneſtneſs
and vehemency of expreſſion more than ordinary. Clarendon.
This pure cauſe would kindle my rap’d ſpirits
To ſuch a flame of ſacred vehemence, -
That dumb things wou'd be mov’d to ſympathize. Milton.
He hurries on his action with variety of events, and ends
it in leſs compaſs than two months. This vehemence of his
is moſt ſuitable to my temper. Dryden.
Marcus is over-warm ; his fond complaints
Have ſo much earneſtneſs and paſſion in them,
I hear him with a ſecret kind of horror,
And tremble at his vehemence of temper. Addiſon's Cato.
VE HEMENT. adj. [vehement, Fr. vehemens, Latin.]
1. Violent; forcible. -
A ſtrong imagination hath more force upon light and ſubtile
motions, than upon motions vehement or ponderous. Bacºn.
Gold will endure a vehement fire for a long time, without
Anonymous.
Sandys.
Dryden.
Milton.
any change. Grew.
2. Ardent; eager; fervent.
By their vehement inſtigation,
In this juſt ſuit come I to move your grace. Shakespeare .
I Find
In all things elſe delight indeed; but ſuch,
As us’d or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement deſire. Milton's Par. Lºſł.
We'HEMENTLY. adv. [from vehement.]
1. Forcibly.
. Pathetically; urgently.
2 Pº .* religion inculcates kindneſs more vehe-
mently, and forbids malice and hatred more ſtrictly than any
religion did before. - Tillotſon.
VE'Hicle. n. ſ. [vehiculum, Latin.]
1. That in which any thing is carried. - -
Evil ſpirits might very properly appear in ºthick, of flame,
to terrify and ſurprize. - Addiſon's Guardian;
2. That part of a medicine which ſerves to make the principal
- ičnt potable.
ingº meat deſcends by one paſſage ; the drink, or
moiſtening vehicle by another, is a popular tenent. Brown.
3. That by means of which º º is conveyed. The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V A U
U D D
valvasour. "...ſ. vavaſſeur, Fr.] One who himſelf holding
jor fºrd, has others holding under him. -
ofs.". taken of civil honours, as king, knight,
-1/77 ſquire. Camden.
valvaſor, or vavaſar, ſquire. , -
vºir. m. ſ. ſvaudeville, Fr.] A ſong common among
the vulgar, and ſung about the fireets, Trev. A ballad , a
trivial ſtrain.
VAULT. n.ſ.. [wºulie,
1. A continued arch.
O, you are men of ſtone :
ad I your tongues and eyes, I'd uſe them, ſo -
#. iº É. ſhould crack. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
The word ſignifies an orb or ſphere. And this ſhews us
both the form of the Moſaical abyſs, which was included
within this vault: and the form of the habitable earth, which
was the outward ſurface of this vault, or the cover of the
abyſs. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. A cellar.
Fr. volta, Ital. voluta, low Latin.]
Creepinto the kill-hole.
He will ſeek there; neither preſs, well, vault, but he hath
an abſtraćt for the remembrance of. Shakeſp.
The wine of life is drawn, and the meer lces
Is left this vault to brag of. Shakeſp.
Whether your fruitful fancy lies -
To baniſh rats that haunt our vault. Swift.
3. A cave; a cavern.
The filent vaults of death, unknown to light,
And hell itſelf, lie naked to his fight. Sandys.
4. A repoſitory for the dead.
Shall I not be ſtifled in the vault,
To whoſe foul mouth no healthſome air breathesin. Shakespeare .
To Vault. v. a. ſ.voitter, Fr. from the noun.]
To arch; to ſhape of a vault.
Hath nature given them eyes
To ſee this vaulted arch, and the rich cope
Of ſea and land, which can diſtinguiſh 'twixt
The fiery orbs above, and the twinn'd ſtones
Upon th’humbl’d beach Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
2. To cover with an arch.
Over-head the diſmal hiſs
Of fiery darts in flaming vollies flew;
And flying vaulted either hoſt with fire.
To VAult. v. m. voltiger, Fr. volleggiare, Italian.
1. To leap ; to jump.
Paulting ambition, which o'erleaps itſelf,
And falls on th’ other. Shakeſpear's Macbeth.
The pretty vaulting ſea refus’d to drown me,
Knowing that thou would'ſt have me drown'd on ſhore. Shakespeare
He is vaulting variable ramps
In your deſpite, upon your purſe. Shakeſp.
If I could win a lady by vaulting into my ſaddle with my
armour on, I ſhould quickly leap into a wife. Shakeſp.
Leaning on his lance, he vaulted on a tree. Dryden.
If a man ſhou'd leap a garret, or vault down the monu-
ment, wou'd he leave the memory of a hero behind
him * Collier on Duelling.
Lucan vaulted upon Pegaſus with all the heat and intre-
pidity of youth. Addiſon.
2. To play the tumbler, or poſture-maſter.
VAULT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A leap ; a jump.
VAu'lt AGE. m. ſ. [from vault..] Arched cellar. Not in uſe.
He'll call you to ſo hot an anſwer for it,
That caves and womby vaultages of France
Shall chide your treſpaſs, and return your mock
In ſecond accent to his ordnance. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
VA’ULTED. adj. [from vault..] Arched; concave.
Reſtore the lock ' ſhe cries, and all around
Reſtore the lock the vaulted roofs rebound. Pºpe.
vº. m. ſ. [from vault..] A leaper; a jumper; a tum-
Cr.
VA'ULTY. adj. [from vault..] Arched; concave. A bad word.
I will kiſs thy deteſtable bones,
And put my eye-balls in thy vaulty brows,
And ring theſe fingers with thy houſhold worms. Shakeſp.
I'll ſay that is not the lark, whoſe notes do beat
The vaulty heav'ns ſo high above our heads. Shakſ).
VA'UNMURE. m. ſ. ſavant mur, Fr.] A falſe wall; a work
raiſed before the main wall.
JMilton
With another engine named the warwolfe, he pierced
with one ſtone, and cut, as even as a thread, two vaunt-
fºres. - Camden's Remains.
This warlike captain, daily attempting the vanmures, in
the end by force obtained the ſame ; and ſo poſſeſſed of the
Place, deſperately kept it ’till greater help came running in,
who, with wonderful expedition, clapt up a ſtrong covering
bºt the wall and the vanmure. Knºlles'; Hºff. of the Turks.
To WAUNT. v. a. [wanter, Fr.] To boaſt; to diſplay with
oftentation.
Not that great champion
Whom famous poets verſe ſo much doth vaunt ;
And hath for twelve huge labours high extoll’d,
So many furics and ſharp hits did haunt. Fairy Queen.
Not any damſel which her vaunteth moſt,
In ſkilful knitting of ſoft ſilken twine. **
My vanquiſher ſpoil'd of his vaunted ſpo Sºſr.
To VA UNT. v. n. unted ſpoil, 4Miltºn,
1. To play the braggart; to talk wi inn .
vain ãº. y to boaſt.” ith oſtentation; to make
L You ſay, ; are a better ſoldier;
et it appear ſo ; make your vaunting true.
The illuſions of º put º nº
ing in wiſdom reproved with diſgrace. Wiſdom vaunt.
So ſpake th' apoſtate angel, though in pain; xvii, 7.
Mainting aloud, but rack'd with deep deſpair. &gt; Mili:
Pride which prompts a man to vaunt and overvalue º
he is, does incline him to diſvalue what he has. G., jºi. at
2. I ſcarcely know"in what ſenſe Dryden has uſed this ongue.
leſs it be miſwritten for vaults.
'Tis he I feel him now in ev'ry part;
Like a new world he vaunts about my heart. Dryd
VAUNT. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Brag; boaſt; vain oflá; tº,
Sir John Perrot bent his courſe not to that point .
ther quite contrary, in ſcorn, and in vain vaint of his wn
counſels. Spenſºr
Him Iſeduc’d with other promiſes and other vaunts, Miº.
Such vaunts who can with patience read, -
Who thus deſcribes his hero when he's dead?
In heat of action ſlain, he ſcorns to fall,
But ſtill maintains the war, and fights at all. •.
VAUNT. n. ſ. [from avant, Fr.] }. firſt part. Nº."
Our play -
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firſtlings. Shaiſ):
VA’UNTER. m. ſ. [vauteur, Fr. from vaunt.] Boaſter; bagº.
man given to vain oſtentation. S5*** x
Some feign
To menage ſteeds, as did this vaunter; but in vain, Spenſºr.
Tongue-valiant hero, vaunter of thy might;
In threats the foremoſt, but the lag in fight. Dryden,
VA'UNT FUL. adj. [vaunt and full.] Boaſtful; oſtentatious,
Whiles all the heavens on lower creatures ſmil'd,
Young Clarion, with vauntful luſtihed,
After his guiſe did caſt abroad to fare. Spºnſºr,
VA’UNTINGLY. adv. [from vaunting.] Boaſtfully; oftenta-
tiouſly.
I heard thee ſay, and vauntingly thou ſpak'ſt it,
That thou wert cauſe of noble Glo'ſter's death. Shakespeare
VA'w ARD. m. ſ. [van and ward] Fore part
Since we have the vavard of the day,
My love ſhall hear the muſic of my hounds,
Marcius,
Their bands i'th’vaiward are the Antiates
Of their beſt truſt. Shakespeare Cºriolanuſ.
He deſired nothing more than to have confirmed his all-
thority in the minds of the vulgar, by the preſent and ready
attendance of the vayvod. Knºlles's Hſi. of the Turki.
U’BERTY. m. ſ. [ubertas, Latin.] Abundance; fruitfulneſs.
UbicA'tion. U n.ſ. (from uli, Latin.] Local relation; where-
UBI'ETY. łº! A ſcholaſtick term.
Relations, ulications, duration, the vulgar philoſophy ad-
mits to be ſomething; and yet to enquire in what place teſ
are, were groſs. Glanville.
UBI'QUITARY. adj. [from ubique, Latin.]Exiſting everywhere.
For wealth and an ubiquitary commerce, none can º
her. 370.
UbiquitARY. m. ſ. [from ubique, Latin.] One that *
every where.
How far wide is Aquinas, which faith, by the ſame reaſon
that an angel might be in two places, he might be in as may
as you will See now, either Xavier is every where, or elſe
the carcaſs of a friar is more ſubtle than the nature ºf."
angel. To conclude, either Aquinas is falſe, or the papiſts
ubiquitaries. Hall.
UBI QUITY. m. ſ. [from ubique, Latin.] Omnipreſence; exiſ-
tence at the ſame time in all places. - -
In the one there is attributed to God death, whereof di-
vine nature is not capable ; in the other ubiquity untº .
which human nature admitteth not. 20kºr.
Pem ſhe hight,
A ſolemn wight,
As you ſhould mect,
In any ſtreet,
In . ubiquity. B.jº:
Could tie, this that to be infinite and immº.
quity of which they could thruſt into a corn" of sº
cloſet. -
UDDER. m. ſ. ſuben, Saxon; uder, Dutch, uber, Lat] The
breaſt or digs of a cow, or other large animal.
A lionneſs, with udders all drawn dry,
Word, un-
Shaft,
Lay couching head on ground. Shakespeare .
Sithence the cow
Produc’d an ampler ſtore of milk; the ſhe-goat, Priºr,
Not without pain, dragg’d her diſtended udde:
U’DDERED. adj. [from udder.] Furniſhed with udders. Gay.
Marian ſoft could ſtroke the udder'd cow. v. -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E G
-
--
---
-1
-
…'
—-mºsº.
VEAL. m. ſ. [veel, a calf, veeler, veſſer, to bring forth a calf, old
French ; vitellus, Latin.] The fleſh of a calfkilled for the table.
Would'ſt thou with mighty beef augment thy meal
Seek Leadenhall; St. James's ſends thee weal. Gay.
WE'ction. }". ſ: [ved?io, veðito, Latin.] The aët of car-
VE'cTITATION. rying, or being carried.
Enervated lords are ſoftly lolling in their chariots; a ſpecies
of veðitation ſeldom uſed amongſt the antients. Arbuthnot.
VE/ct URE. [ve:fura, Latin.] Carriage.
Three things one nation ſelleth unto another; the com-
modity as nature yieldeth it, the manufacture and the veſſure
or carriage. - Bacon's Eſſays.
To VEER. v. n. [virer, French.] To turn about.
If a wild uncertainty prevail,
And turn your veering heart with ev'ry gale;
You loſe the fruit of all your former care,
For the ſad proſpect of a juſt deſpair.
Nigh rivers mouth, where wind
Weers oft, as oft he ſteers and ſhifts her ſail.
I have no taſte of the noiſy praiſe
Of giddy crouds, as changeable as winds;
Servants to change, and blowing with the tide
Of ſwoi'n ſucceſs; but veering with its ebb.
A-head the maſter pilot ſteers
And as he leads, the following navy veers. Dryden.
It is a double misfortune to a nation given to change,
when they have a ſovereign that is prone to fall in with all
the turns and veerings of the people. Addiſon's Freeholder.
The wind veered about to north-weſt. Derham.
To V EER. v. a.
I. To let out.
As it is a great point of art, when our matter requires it,
to enlarge and veer out all ſail; ſo to take it in and contračt
it, is of no leſs praiſe when the argument doth aſkit. B. johnſ.
2. To turn; to change.
I ſee the haven nigh at hand,
To which I mean my weary courſe to bend;
Weer the main-ſhect, and bear up with the land. Spenſºr.
Sailing farther, it veers its lilly to the weſt, and regardeth
that quarter, wherein the land is nearer or greater. Brown.
VEGETABI'LITY. m. ſ. [from vegetable.] Vegetable nature ;
the quality of growth without ſenſation.
The coagulating ſpirits of ſalts, and lapidifical juice of
the ſea, entering the parts of the plant, overcomes its vege-
tability, and converts it unto a lapideous ſubſtance. Browne.
VE'GETABLE. m. ſ. [vegetabilis, ſchool Lat. vegetabile, Fr.]
Any thing that has growth without ſenſation, as plants.
Vegetables are organized bodies conſiſting of various parts,
containing veſſels furniſhed with differentjuices; and taking in
their nouriſhment from without, uſually by means of a root,
by which they are fixed to the earth, or to ſome other body,
as in the generality of plants; ſometimes by means of pores
diſtributed over the whole ſurface, as in ſub-marine
plants. Hill's Materia Medica.
Let brutes and vegetables that cannot drink,
So far as drought and nature urges, think. J/a"er.
In vegetables it is the ſhape, and in bodies, not propagated
by ſeed, it is the colour we moſt fix on. Locłe.
Roſcommon.
Milton.
Dryden.
Other animated ſubſtances are called vegetables, which
have within themſelves the principle of another ſort of life
and growth, and of various productions of leaves, flowers
and fruit, ſuch as we ſee in plants, herbs, trees. /Watts.
VE'GETABLE. adj. [vegetabilis, Latin.]
1. Belonging to a plant.
The vegetable world, each plant and tree,
From the fair cedar on the craggy brow,
To creeping moſs. Prior.
Both mechaniſms are equally curious, from one uniform
juice to extract all the variety of vegetable juices; or from
ſuch variety of food to make a fluid very near uniform to the
blood of an animal. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The well ſhower'd earth
Is deep enrich'd with vegetable life. Thomſon.
2. Having the nature of plants.
Amidſt them ſtood the tree of life,
High eminent, blooming ambroſial fruit ...
Of vegetable gold. Milton's Par. Loſt.
That vegetative terreſtrial hath been ever the ſtanding fund,
out of which is derived the matter of all animal and vegetable
bodies. - JWoodward's Nat. Hiſł.
To VE'GETATE. v. n. [vegeto, Latin J To grow as plants; to
ſhoot out; to grow without ſenſation.
Rain-water may be endued with ſome vegetating or pro-
lifick virtue, derived from ſome ſaline or oleoſe particles. Ray.
As long as the ſeeds remained lodged in a natural ſoil,
they would ſoon vegetate, and ſend forth a new ſet of
treeS. JWoodward.
See dying vegetables life ſuſtain;
See life diſſolving vegetate again. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
VEGET ATION. m. ſ. [from vegeto, Latin.]
1. The power of producing the growth of plants.
The exterior ſurface conſiſted of a terreſtrial matter proper
8
V E H
for the nouriſhme - - - - -
mere mineral º ...; . entangled with
- getation. Woodward.
The ſun, deep-darting to the dark retreat
º: vegetation, ſets the ſteaming power
t large. Thomſon's Spring.
Love warbles through the vocal groves,
And vegetation paints the plain.
2. The power of growth withºut ſºnſation.
Plants, though beneath the excellency of creatures en-
dued with ſenſe, yet exceed them in the faculty of vegetation
and of fertility. #.
Theſe pulſations I attribute to a plaſtick nature or viſi
Principle, as the vegetation of plants muſt alſ, b. ' Ray
Vegetative. adj. [vegetatiſ, Fr. from vegetate J -
I. Having the quality of growing without life.
Creatures vegetative and growing, have their ſeeds in
themſelves. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the IWorld.
2. Having the power to produce growth in plants.
Homer makes deities of the vegetative faculties, and vir-
tues of the field. Broome's Notes on Odyſſ.
VE'GETATIVENEss. n. ſ. [from vegetative.] The quality of
producing growth.
VeGETE. adj. [vigetus, Latin.] Vigorous; ačive; ſpritely.
The ſoul was vegete, quick and lively; full of the youth-
Anonymous.
fulneſs and ſpritelineſs of youth. South.
The faculties in age muſt be leſs vegete and nimble than in
youth. J/allis.
VEGETIVE. adj. [from vegeto, Latin.] Vegetable; having the
nature of plants.
Nor rent off, but cut off ripe bean with a knife,
For hindering ſtalke of hir vegetive life. Tuff. Huſbandry.
VE"Getive. m. ſ. [from the adjective..] A vegetable.
Hence vegetives receive their fragrant birth,
And clothe the naked boſom of the earth. . Sandys.
The tree ſtill panted in th’ unfiniſh'd part,
Not wholly vegetive; and heav'd her heart.
V. ; m. ſ. [vehementia, Latin.
1. Violence; force.
Univerſal hubbub wild,
Of ſtunning founds and voices all confus'd,
Aſſaults his ear with loudeſt vehemence.
2. Ardour; mental violence; terrour.
Think ye are men; deem it not impoſſible for you to err:
fift impartially your own hearts, whether it be force of reaſon,
or vehemency of affection, which hath bred, and ſtill doth
feed theſe opinions in you. Hooker's Prºf.
The beſt perſuaſions
Fail not to uſe; and with what vehemency -
Th’ occaſion ſhall inſtruct you. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII:
Would it apply well to the vehemence of your affection,
that I ſhould win what you would enjoy Shakeſp.
The extremity of the condition produced ſome earneſtneſs
and vehemency of expreſſion more than ordinary. Clarendon.
This pure cauſe would kindle my rap’d ſpirits
To ſuch a flame of ſacred vehemence, -
That dumb things wou'd be mov’d to ſympathize. Milton.
He hurries on his ačtion with variety of events, and ends
it in leſs compaſs than two months. This vehemence of his
is moſt ſuitable to my temper. Dryden.
Marcus is over-warm ; his fond complaints
Have ſo much earneſtneſs and paſſion in them,
I hear him with a ſecret kind of horror,
And tremble at his vehemence of temper. Addiſon's Cato.
VE HEMENT. adj. [vehement, Fr. vehemens, Latin.]
I. Violent; forcible.
A ſtrong imagination hath more force upon light and ſubtile
motions, than upon motions vehement or ponderous. Bacon.
Gold will endure a vehement fire for a long time, without
any change. Grew,
2. Ardent; eager; fervent.
By their vehement inſtigation,
In this juſt ſuit come I to move your grace.
I Find
In all things elſe delight indeed; but ſuch,
As us’d or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement deſire. Milton's Par. Lºſł.
VE'HEMENTLY. adv. [from vehement.]
1. Forcibly.
2. Pathetically; urgently. - r
The chiſtian religion inculcates kindneſs more veh-
mently, and forbids malice and hatred more ſtrictly º any
religion did before. Tillotſon.
VE'Hicle. n. ſ. [vehiculum, Latin.]
1. That in which any thing is carried. - -
Evil ſpirits might very properly appear in ºthick, of flame,
to terrify and ſurprize. - Addiſon's Guardian,
2. That part of a medicine which ſerves to make the principal
ingredient potable. -
"gº. #: meat deſcends by one paſſage ; the drink, or
Dryden.
Milton.
Shakespeare.
moiſtening vehicle by another, is a popular tenent. Brown.
3. That by means of which º ºrs is conveyed. The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E I
V E L
ºx
f a diverting word, ſerves as a vehicle to Con-
d meaning of a thing. L’Eſtrange.
See VAIL. J
or any thing which conceals the
The gaiety o
vey the force an
To VEI L. v. n: ſve", Lat.
1. To cover with a veil,
face. - -
Her face was veil"d; yet to my fancied fight,
Love, ſweetneſs, goodneſs in her perſon ſhin'd. Milton.
It became the Jewiſh faſhion when they went to pray to
veil their heads and faces. Boyle.
2. To cover; to inveſt.
I deſcry, - ill
From wonder blazing cloud that veil; the hi
rom y - Miltºn.
One of the heav'nly hoſt.
3. To hide; to conceal.
Of darkneſs viſible ſo much be lent,
As half to ſhew, half veil the deep intent. Pope's Dunciad.
Veil. n.ſ. [velum, Latin.]
1. A cover to conceal the face.
To feed his fiery luſtful eye,
He ſnatch'd the veil that hung her face before. Fairy Queen.
The Paphian queen from that fierce battle borne,
With gored hand, and veil ſo rudely torn,
Like terror did among the immortals breed. JWaller.
The famous painter cou’d allow no place
For private ſorrow in a prince's face:
Yet, that his piece might not exceed belief,
JWaller.
He caſt a vei, upon ſuppoſed grief
As veils tranſparent cover, but not hide,
Such metaphors appear when right apply'd.
When through the phraſe we plainly ſee the ſenſe,
Truth with ſuch obvious meanings will diſpenſe. Granville.
She accepts the hero, and the dame
Wraps in her wail, and frees from ſenſe of ſhame.
2. A cover; a diſguiſe.
I will pluck the borrow'd veil of modeſty from the ſo
ſeeming Mrs. Page; divulge Page himſelf for a ſecure and
wilful Aéteon. Shakeſp. Merry I/ives of //indſor,
Knock on my heart; for thou haſt ſkill to find
If it ſound ſolid, or be fill'd with wind ;
And thro’ the veil of words thouview'ſt the naked mind. Dry.
The ill-natured man expoſes thoſe failings in human na-
ture, which the other would caſt a veil over. Addiſon.
VEIN. m. ſ. [veine, Fr. vena, Latin.]
The veins are only a continuation of the extreme capillary
arteries reflected back again towards the heart, and uniting
their channels as they approach it, till at laſt they all form
three large veins; the cava deſcendens, which brings the blood
back from all the parts above the heart; the cava aſcendens,
which brings the blood from all the parts below the heart ;
and the forta, which carries the blood to the liver. The
coats of the veins are the ſame with thoſe of the arteries,
only the muſcular coat is as thin in all the veins, as it is in
the capillary arteries ; the preſſure of the blood againſt the
ſides of the veins being leſs than that againſt the ſides of
the arteries. In the veins there is no pulſe, becauſe the blood
is thrown into them with a continued ſtream, and becauſe it
moves from a narrow channel to a wider. The capillary
veins unite with one another, as the capillary arteries. In
all the veins perpendicular to the horizon, excepting thoſe of
the uterus and of the porta, are ſmall membranes or
valves ; like ſo many half thimbles ſtuck to the ſide of
the veins, with their mouths towards the heart. In the
motion of the blood towards the heart, they are preſſed cloſe
to the fide of the veins; but if blood ſhould fif back, it
muſt fill the valves; and they being diffended, ſtop up the
channel, ſo that no blood can repaſs them. Quincy.
When I did firſt impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins; I was a gentleman.
Horror chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relax'd.
2. Hollow ; cavity.
Found where caſual fire
Had waſted woods, on mountain, or in vale,
Down to the veins of earth. Milton's Par. Loft.
Let the glaſs of the priſms be free from veins, and their
ſides, be accurately plane, and well poliſhed, without thoſe
numberleſs waves or curls, which uſually ariſe from ſand-
holes. 'ewton's Opticks.
3. Courſe of metal in the mine.
There is a vein for the ſilver. ob xxviii. 1.
Part hidden veins digg’d up, nor hath this earth
Entrails unlike, of mineral and ſtone. Milton.
It is in men as in ſoils, where ſometimes there is a vein of
gºld which the owner knows not of. Swift's Thoughts.
4- Tendency or turn of the mind or genius.
we ought to attempt no more than what is in the com-
paſs of our genius, and according to our vein. Dryden.
5. Favourable moment; time whº any inclination is predo-
In inant.
º have not only their growths and perfeótions, but
"kewiſe their veins and times. J/otton's Archite&amp;ure.
Pope.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
6. Humour; temper.
I put your grace in mind
o what you promis'd me.
am not in the giving vein to-day. Shai, -
Certainly he that hath a º vein, ºil. III.
- - ... ---. - maketh
others afraid of his wit, ſo he had need to b -
others. o be afraid of
They among themſelves in pleaſant vein Bacon.
Stood ſcoffing. Milton's Par Lºft
Speak'ſt thou in earneſt or in jeſting vein 2 Dºi -
The currier ſtruck the uſurer upon the right vein. fº.
7. Continued diſpoſition. 2 * *
wº I haºs º of running into ſpeculations of this
, upon a greater ſcene of trade, have coſt me this pre-
ſent ſervice. Templ;
8. Current; continued produćtion. ple.
He can open a vein of true and noble thinking.
9. Strain; quality. S
Now ſomewhat fing, whoſe endleſs ſouvenance
Among the ſhepherds may aye remain;
Whether thee liſt, thy loved laſs advance,
Or honour Pan with higher hymns of praiſe.
10. Streak; variegation, as the veins of the marble
VETNED.
VE'i NY.
1. Full of veins.
2. Streaked; variegated.
The root of an old white thorn will make very fine
boxes and combs, and many of th r
- » y o ºn are very finely
veined. Mortimer'; Huſbandº.
Effulgent, hence the veiny marble ſhines. Thºmſºn.
VELLE'ity. n.ſ. [velleité, Fr. velleitas, from well, Latin.]
Pelleity is the ſchool-term uſed to ſignify the loweſt degree
of deſire. Lºcłe.
The wiſhing of a thing is not properly the willing of it;
but it is that which is called by the ſchools an imperied vel-
leity, and imports no more than an idle, un-operative com-
placency in, and deſire of the end, without any conſidera-
tion of the means. South.
To VELLICATE. v. a. [vellico, Latin.] To twitch; to
pluck; to act by ſtimulation.
Thoſe ſmells are all ſtrong, and do pull and vellicate the
ſenſe. Bacon,
Convulſions ariſing from ſomething vellicating a nerve in
its extremity, are not very dangerous. Arbuthnot.
VEllication. m. ſ. [vellicatio, Lat.] Twitching; ſtimulation.
All purgers have a kind of twitching and vellication, be-
ſides the griping, which cometh of wind. Bacºn.
There muſt be a particular motion and vallication impreſt
upon the nerves, elſe the ſenſation of heat will not be
produced. Iſatº's Imprºvement ºf the Mind.
VF'llu M. n.ſ. [velin, Fr. ve'amen, Latin ; rather witulinum,
low Latin.j The ſkin of a calf dreſſed for the writer.
The ſkull was very tin, yielding to the leaſt pºſſire ºf
my finger, as a piece of wellum. Hºmº.
VELo'city. n.ſ. [velocité, Fr. Velocitus, Latin.] Speed; ſwift-
neſs ; quick motion.
Had the velocities of the ſeveral planets been greateſ of
leſs than they are now, at the ſame diſtances from the ſun;
or had their diſtances from the ſun, or the quantity ºf the
ſun's matter, and conſequently his attractive power, º
greater or leſs than they are now, with the ſame velocitieſ:
they would not have revolved in concentric circles, but
moved in hyperbola's or parabola's, or in ellipſes very ec-
centric. Bently' Sermº.
VE Lyºt. n.ſ. [veluto, Ital villus, Latin, velºur, Fr.) Silk
with a ſhort fur or pile upon it.
Clad in white velºt all their troop they led, d
With each an oaken chaplet on his head. - pº
The different ranging the ſuperficial parts of bodies, i.
velvet, watered ſilk, we think probably is nothing º .
different refraction of their inſenſible parts. Locke.
VE Lv ET. adj.
1. Made of velvet.
This was moulded on a porringer, -
A velvet diſh. p S. Taming ºf the Shrew.
2. Soft; delicate.
Through the velvet leaves the wind,
All unſeen, 'gan paſſage find.
Poor deer, quoth he, thou Inak'ſt a teſtament
As worldlings do, giving thy ſum of more
to that which had too much. Then beingalº"
Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends;
'Tis right, quoth he thus miſery doth part
The flux of company.
To VE'lvet. v. n. To paint velvet.
Verditure, ground with a weak gum a -
paleſt green #: is, but good to velvet upon lº.
drapery. Wel Áº ~
VELURE. m. ſ. ſwelours, Fr.] Velvet. An 9 - -
His º one girt, i. times pieced, and a woman.”
- - haitº.
crupper of velure, pieced with packthread. viºſ
Swift.
Spenſºr.
}a}. [veineux, Fr. from vein.]
Shaiſ,
Sharºff.
rabic water, ſº the
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E N
VENAL. adj. Ivºna, Fr. venalis, Latin.j
1. Mercenary; proſtitute. - -
This verſe be thine, my friend, nor thou refuſe
This, from no venator ungrateful muſe. Pope.
* [from vein.] Contained in the veins. A technical word.
It is unreaſonable to affirm, that the cool venal blood
ſhould be heated ſo high in the interval of two pulſes. Ray.
VENA ºrty. m. ſ. ſvenºliº, Fr. from venal.] Mercenarineſs;
proſtitution.
VRNA tick. adj. Ivenaticus, Latin.] Uſed in hunting.
VENA'tion. n.ſ. [venati, Latin.] The act or practice of
hunting.
The manner of their venation we ſhall find to be other-
ways than by ſawing away of trees. Brown'; Pulgar Errours.
To yºp. v. a. ſvendre, Fr. vendº, Lat..] To ſell; to offer
to ſale. - - - -
He had a great parcel of glaſſes packed up, which not hav-
ing the occaſion hē expected to vend, and make uſe of, lay
by him. - Boyle.
VENDEE. n.ſ.. [from vend...] One to whom any thing is ſold.
If a vicar ſows his glebe, or if he ſells his corn, and the
vendée cuts it, he muſt pay the tithes to the parſon. Ayliffe.
VE'NDER. m. ſ. [vendºur, Fr. from vend..] A ſeller.
Where the conſumption of commodity is, the venders ſeat
themſelves. - - Gaunt.
Thoſe make the moſt noiſe who have the leaſt to ſell, which
is very obſervable in the vendºr, of card-matches. Addison.
VENDIBLE, adj. Ivanºiſ, Latin.] Saleable; marketable.
Silence only is commendable
In a neat's tongue dried, and a maid not indi/. Shakespeare.
This ſo profitable and vendible a merchandize, riſeth not
to a Prºportionable enhancement with other left beneficial
commodities. . - Carew.
* The ignorant mine-man, aiming only at the obtaining a
quantity of ſuch a metal as may be vendible under ſuch a de-
terminate name, has neither the deſign nor ſkill to make nice
ſeparations of the heterogeneous bodies. Boyle.
ME's DIBLENEss. n.ſ.. [from vendible.j The ſtate of being ſaleable.
VENPT."rios. m.ſ. [venditatio, from vendii, Latin.] Boaſt-
ful diſplay.
Some, by a cunning proteſtation againſt all reading, and
venditation of their own naturals, think to divert the ſagacity
of their readers from themſelves, and cool the ſcent of their
own fox-like thefts; when yet they are ſo rank as a man may
... find whole pages together uſurped from one author. B. johnſon.
VEND, Ion. n.ſ. ivenditio, Fr. vendition, Latin.J Sale; the
act of ſelling. -
To VENEER. v. a. [among cabinet-makers.] To make a kind
of marquetry or inlaid work, whereby ſeveral thin ſlices of
fine woods of different ſorts are faſtened or glued on a ground
of ſome common wood. Bailey.
YE"NEFICE. m. ſ. [veneficium, Latin.] The pračice of poiſoning.
VENEFICIAL. adj. from vengficium, Latin.] Acting by poiſon;
bewitching. -
The magical virtues of miſſelto, and conceived efficacy
unto venºfcial intentions, ſeemeth a Pagan relique derived
from the antient Druides. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
VENEFI’ciously, adv. [from venºſcium, Latin.] By poiſon or
witchcraft.
Left witches ſhould draw or prick their names therein,
and venºfcial/y miſchief their perſons, they broke the
ſhell. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
VE NEMOUs, adj. [from venin, Fr. J Poiſonous. Commonly,
though not better, venomous.
The barbarians ſaw the venemous beaſt hang on his
hand. Ać’s xxviii. 4.
To VENENATE. v. a. [veneno, Latin.] To poiſon; to in-
fečt with poiſon.
Theſe miaſins entering the body, are not ſo energic, as to
wenenate the entire maſs of blood in an inſtant. Harvey.
By giving this in fevers after calcination, whereby the ve-
menate parts are carried off. //oodward on Fºſſils.
VENENATION. m. ſ. (from venenate.] Poiſon; venom.
This venemation ſhoots from the eye; and this way a baſi-
liſk may impoiſon. Brown's Pulgar. Erreurs.
VENE'NE. adj. [veneneux, Fr. from venenum, Latin.] Poi-
VEN ENo's E. ; ſonous ; venemous.
Dry air opens the ſurface of the carth to difincarcerate ve-
mene bodies, or to attract or evacate them hence. Harvey.
Malphigi, in his treatiſe of galls, under which he com:
prehends all preternatural and morboſe tumours of plants, de-
monſtrates that all ſuch tumours, where any inſects are
found, are raiſed up by ſome venenºſe liquor, which, toge-
ther with their eggs, ſuch inſe&amp;ts ſhed upon the leaves. Ray.
VENERABLE, adj. [venerable, Fr. venerabilis, Latin.] To
be regarded with awe; to be treated with reverence.
As by the miniſtry of ſaints, it pleaſed God there to ſhew
ſome rare effect of his power; or in regard of death, which
thoſe ſaints have ſuffered for the teſtimony of Jeſus Chriſt,
did thereby make the places where they died venºaº. Hººr.
To make the paſſage eaſy, ſafe, and plain,
That leads us to this venerable wall. Fairfix.
V E N
Ye lamps of heav'n the ſaid, and liſted high
is hands, now free. Thou venerable ſky c
Inviolable Pow’rs, ador'd with dread,
r Be all of you adjur’d. Dryden's Zn. II.
*NERABLY. adj. (from *..] In a manner that excite,
reverence.
The Palatine, proud Rome's imperial ſeat,
An awful pile ! ſtands venerally great.
Thither the kingdoms and the nations COne. Addiſon.
To VE'NERATE. v. º, Ivenerer, Fr. veneror, Latin.] To re-
Verence; to treat with veneration; to regard with awe.
When baſeneſs is exalted, do not bäte
The place its honour for th: perſon's ſake:
The ſhrine is that which thoji venerate,
And not the beaſt that bears it. its back. Herbert.
The lords and ladies here approaching paid
Their homage, with a low obeiſance made;
And ſeem'd to venerate the ſacred ſhade. Dryden.
A gºod clergyman muſt love and *enerate the goſpel that
he teaches, and prefer it to aliori. learning. Clariſſa.
VENERA rios. n.ſ. ſºneration, Fr. veerati, Lat..] Reverend
regard; awful reſpect.
Theology is the comprehenſion of all other knowledge,
directed to its true end, i. e. the honour and veneration of
the 'creator, and the happineſs of mankind. Locke.
We find a ſecret awe and "eneration for one who moves
above us in a regular and illuſtrious courſe of virtue. Addiſon.
VEs ERA tok. n. 7 [from venerate.] Reverencer.
If the ſtate of things, as they now appear, involve a re-
P"grançy to an eternal exiſtence, the arguments muſt be
concluſive to thoſe great Prieſts and venerators of nature. Hal.
VENER FAL. adj. [venereus, Latin.]
I. Relating to love.
Theſe are no venereal ſigns;
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand. Shakespeare
Then ſwol'n with pride, into the ſhare I fell,
Of fair fallacious looks, venereal trains,
Soften’d with pleaſure and voluptuous life. Milton.
They are averſe to veneral pleaſure. Addiſon.
2. Conſiſting of copper, called ºn, by chemiſts.
Blue vitriol, how venereal and unſophiſticated ſoever, rub-
bed upon the whetted blade of a knife, will not impart its
latent colour. Boyle.
VENER Hous. 44. [from venery..] Libidinous ; luſtful.
The male is leſſer than the female, and very venereous. Derh.
VENERY. n.ſ. [vsnerie, from vener, Fr.]
1. The ſport of hunting.
To the woods ſhe goes to ſerve her turn,
And ſeek her ſpouſe, that from her ſtill does fly,
And follows other game and venery. Fairy Queen.
Pºſëribing beaſts of venery and fiſhes, he hath ſparingly in-
ferted the vulgar conditions thereof. §ºwn, Pulg. Errours.
The Norman demoliſhed many churches and chapels in
New Foreſt, to make it fitter for his pleaſure and ve-
nery. Howel.
2. [From Venus.] The pleaſures of the bed.
Contentment, without the pleaſure of lawful venery, is
continence; of unlawful, chaſtity. Grew's Coſmol.
VE NEY. m. ſ. A bout; a turn.
I bruis'd my ſhin with playing at ſword and dagger, three
veneys for a diſh of ſtewed prunes. Shakeſpeare.
VENESECTIos. m. ſ. ſvena and ſectio, Latin.] Blood-letting;
the act of opening a vein; phlebotomy.
If the inflammation be ſudden, after evacuation by lenient
Purgatives, or a clyfter and venºjection, have recourſe to ano-
dynes. - I/ſeman's Surgery.
To VENGE. v. a. ſ.venger, French.] To avenge ; to puniſh.
You are above,
You juſtices, that theſe our nether crimes,
So ſpeedily can venge. Shakeſ,
VENGEABLE, adj. [from venge. J Revengeful; malicious.
A thrillant dart he threw,
Headed with ire, and vengeable deſpite. Spenſer.
VENGEANCE. m. ſ. [vengeance, French.]
I. Puniſhment; penal retribution; avengement. -
The right conceit which they had, that to perſury ven-
geance is due, was not without good effect as touching their
lives, who feared the wilful violation of oaths. Hooker.
All the ſtor’d vengeances of heaven fall x - ºr
On her ingrateful top ! shaftare’s K. Lear.
The ſouls of all that I had ". d
me to my tent, and every one did threat
Ş. vengeance on #: head of Richard. Shakeſp.
Let me ſee thy vengeance on them. - jer. xi. 29.
Reſolutions of future reforming *...", always º
- - - Ucrºſſe'a??ce IOT IOrmer miſcar-
º ".ſtice, nor prevent thy veng K. Charles.
Ś joye's and Latona's ſon his wrath expreſs'd,
In vengeance of his violated prieſt. - º:
The chorus interceeded with heaven for the innocent, an
implored its vengeance on the criminal. Addiſon's Speciator.
4. 2. It<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E N
V E N
It is uſed in familiar language. Tº do with a vengeance, ; to
2. 4, with vehemence; what a *ś". º what
Till the day appear, of reſpiration to the juſt, -
Milton.
d vengeance to the wicked.
Wi. the ſame king adventured to murmur, the pope
Threaten to teach him his duty with a vengeance. Raleigh.
Aſmodeus the fiſhy fume
Drove, though enamour'd, from the ſpouſe
Of Tobit's ſon, and with a vengeance ſent
coul
From Medea poſt to Egypt, there faſt bound. Milton.
But what a vengeance makes thee fly -
From me too, as thine enemy? Hudibras.
VE's deful. adj. [from vengeance and full.] Vindićtive; re-
vengeful; retributive.
g-su. ” Doubt not but God
Hath wiſelier arm'd his vengºſul ire.
Diſſembling for her ſake his riſing cares,
Milton.
And with wiſe ſilence pond'ring vengful wars. Prior.
VE'Niable. {a}. [veniel, Fr. from venia, Latin.]
VE NIAL.
1. Pardonable; ſuſceptive of pardon; excuſable.
If they do nothing 'tis a venial ſlip. Shakeſpeare.
More veniable is a dependence upon potable gold, whereof
Paracelſus, who died himſelf at forty-ſeven, gloried that he
could make other men immortal. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
What horror will invade the mind,
When the ſtrict judge, who would be kind,
Shall have few venial faults to find Rºſcommon.
While good men are in extirpating mortal fins, I ſhould
rally the world out of indecencies and venial tranſgreſ-
ſons. Addiſon.
2. Permitted ; allowed.
- No more of talk where God, or angel-gueſt,
With man, as with his friend, familiar us’d
To fit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repaſt; permitting him the while
Wenial diſcourſe unblam’d. Milton's Par. Loſt.
VE'N1AlNess. n. ſ. [from venial.] State of being excuſable.
VEN isos. m. ſ. [venaiſon, French..] Game , beaſt of chaſe;
the fleſh of deer.
Shall we kill us veniſºn 2
And yet it irks me, the poor dappled fools
Shou'd have their round haunches gor'd. Shakeſpeare.
We have a hot veniſºn paſty to dinner. Shakeſpeare.
In the records of Ireland, no mention is made of any
park, though there be vert and veniſon within this
land. Davies's Hiſt. of Ireland.
He for the feaſt prepar’d,
In equal portions with the venſon ſhar'd.
VENOM. m. ſ. [venin, French..] Poiſon.
Your eyes, which hitherto hath borne in them
The fatal balls of murthering baſiliſks:
The venom of ſuch looks we fairly hope
Have loſt their quality.
Beware of yonder dog;
Look, when he fawns, he bites; and, when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Like ſome tall tree, the monſter of the wood,
O'erſhading all that under him would grow,
He ſheds his venom on the plants below.
To VENOM. v. a. To infect with venom.
V E NoMous. adj. [from venom.]
1. Poiſonous.
Thy tears are ſalter than a younger man's,
And venomous to thy eyes. Shakeſp. Coriolanue.
2. Malignant; miſchievous. -
A poſterity not unlike their majority of miſchievous pro-
genitors; a venomous and deſtructive progeny. Brown.
This falſity was broached by Cochleus, a venomous writer;
one careleſs of truth or falſhood. Addiſon.
VE/NoMously. adv. [from venomous.] Poiſonouſly; miſchie-
vouſly; malignantly.
- His unkindneſs,
That ſtrip'd her from his benedićtion, turn'd her
To foreign caſualties. Theſe things ſting him
So venomouſly, that burning ſhame detains him
From his Cordelia. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
His praiſe of foes is venomouſly nice;
So touch'd, it turns a virtue to a vice. Dryden.
Vºsses. n. ſ. [from venomous.] Poiſonouſneſs; ma-
ignity.
VEN . . i. ſ. [ſente, French.]
I. A ſmall aperture : a hole : ſpi le: - -
thing is i. » ; a ſpiracle; paſſage at which any
Dryden.
Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Dryden.
- On her breaſt
There is a vent of blood, and ſomething blown;
The like is on her arm. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
hey at once their reeds
Put ſoºth, and to a narrow vent apply'd
With niceſt touch. Milton's Par. Loft.
ſpile ***ar the bung-hole a little vent-hole ſtopped with a
pile. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Scarce any countries that are much annoy
quakes, that have not one of theſe fiery
that fire, whereby it gains an exit.
To draw any drink, be not at the trouble of openin
or if you take out the vent, ſtay not to put it in.
ed with Carth.
vents, diſgorging
ºdºri
gavent;
Full o'er their heads the ſwelling bag herent Swift,
And all the furies iſſued at the vent. » P
2. Paſſage out of ſecrecy to publick notice. ºpt,
It failed by late ſetting-out, and ſome contrariety of w
ther, whereby the particular deſign took ºf i.
hand. - Watton.
3. The aët of opening.
The farmer's cades mature,
Now call for vent; his lands exhauſt, permit
Tº indulge a-while. Philip;
4. Emiſſion ; paſſage. pi,
The ſmother'd fondneſs burns within him;
When moſt it ſwells and labours for a vent,
The ſenſe of honour, and deſire of fame,
Drive the big paſſion back into his heart. Addison's Cºl.
5. Diſcharge ; means of diſcharge. -
Had, like grief, been 'dew'd in tears,
Without the vent of words. Miltºn,
Land-floods are a great improvement of land, where.
vent can be had. Mortimer's Huſbandy.
6. [vente, Fr. venditio, Lat.] Sale.
For the mart, it was alledged that the vent for Engliſh
cloaths would hereby be open in all times of war. Hariri
By this war there is no vent for any commodity but of
wool. Temple's Mjºln,
He drew off a thouſand copies of a treatiſe, which nºt
one in threeſcore can underſtand, can hardly exceed the ºn
of that number. Pope'. Letters,
To VENT. v. a. [venter, French, from the noun; finan,
Italian.]
1. To let out at a ſmall aperture.
2. To let out; to give way to.
Hunger broke ſtone walls; that the gods ſent not
Corn for the rich men only: with theſe ſhreds
They vented their complainings. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
When men are young, and have little elſe to do, they
might vent the overflowings of their fancy that way, Denham.
Lab’ring ſtill, with endleſs diſcontent,
The queen of heav'n did thus her fury vent.
3. To utter; to report.
Had it been vented and impoſed in ſome of the moſtlearned
ages, it might then, with ſome pretence of reaſon, have
been ſaid to be the invention of ſome crafty ſtateſman. Stepheni.
4. To emit; to pour out.
Revoke thy doom,
Or whilſt I can vent clamour from my throat,
I'll tell thee thou doſt evil. Shakeſpear' K. Lear.
5. To publiſh.
Their ſectators did greatly enrich their inventions, by
venting the ſtolen treaſures of divine letters, alter'd by profane
additions, and diſguiſed by poetical converſions. Raleigh,
6. To ſell; to carry to ſale. -
This profitable merchandize not riſing to a proportioniº
enhancement with other leſs beneficial commodities, they
impute to the owners not venting and venturing *
ſame. Carew,
Therefore did thoſe nations vent ſuch ſpice, ſweet gº
and pearls, as their own countries yielded. - Righ
To VENT. v. n. To ſnuff. As he winteth into the air. Sº
Ve’NTAIL. m. ſ. [from vantail, Fr.] That part of the helmet
Dryden,
made to lift up. Spºnſºr.
VENTA NNA. m. ſ. [Spaniſh.] A window.
What after paſs'd
Was far from the ventanna, when I ſate;
But you were near, and can the truth relate. Dryden,
WENTER. n.f. [Latin.] - ſt and
1. Any cavity of the body, chiefly applied to the head, breaſt an
abdomen, which are called by anatomiſts the three venterſ.
2. Womb ; mother.
A has iſſue B a ſon, and C a daughter, by *;
and D a ſon by another venter. If B purchaſes º to
dies without iſſue, it ſhall deſcend to the ſiſter, and n
Hale.
the brother of the half blood. -
VENTIduct. m. ſ. [ventus and dudu, Latin.] A paſſage for
the wind. - -
Having been informed of divers ventidući, lº º:
had the good fortune, when I was at Rome, * * Boyk,
of theſe organs. - -
To VENTilATE. v. a. ſ.ventil, Latin.]
1. To fan with wind. and
In cloſe, low, and dirty alleys, the air is penn'd up,
obſtructed from being ventilated by the winds. *º
Miners, by perflations with large bellows, to the air,
tubes, and ſinking new ſhafts, give free p *}.
which ventilates and cools the mines.
2. To winnow ; to fan.
3. To examine; to diſcuſs.
Nor
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E N
*:::
-:
º
\ſ
Nor is the right of the party, nor the judicial proceſs in
right of that party ſo far perempted; but that the ſame may
be begun again, and ventilated de novo. Ayliffe.
Ve NTILATION. m. ſ. [ventilatio, Lat. from ventilate.]
1. The aët of fanning; the ſtate of being fanned.
The ſoul, worn with too frequent culture, muſt lie fallow,
till it has recruited its exhauſted ſalts, and again enriched it-
ſelf by the ventilations of the air. Addiſon.
2. Vent; utterance. Not in uſe.
To his ſecretary Dočtor Maſon, whom he let lie in a pal-
let near him, for natural ventilation of his thoughts, he would
break out into bitter eruptions. J/otton's Buckingham.
3. Refrigeration.
Procure the blood a free courſe, ventilation and tranſpira-
tion by ſuitable and ecphračtic purges. Harvey.
VENTILA’tor. m. ſ. [from ventilate.] An inſtrument contrived
by Dr. Hale to ſupply cloſe places with freſh air. -
VE/NTRIcle. m. ſ. [ventricule, Fr. ventriculus, Latin.]
1. The ſtomach.
Whether I will or not, while I live, my heart beats, and
my ventricle digeſts what is in it. Hale.
2. Any ſmall cavity in an animal body, particularly thoſe of
the heart. -
Know'ſt thou how blood, which to the heart doth flow,
Doth from one ventricle to the other go Donne.
The heart being a muſcular part, the ſides are compoſed
of two orders of fibres running ſpirally from baſe to top,
contrarily one to the other; and ſo being drawn or con-
tracted, conſtringe the ventricles, and ſtrongly force out the
blood. Ray.
The mixture of blood and chyle, after its circulation
through the lungs, being brought back into the left ventricle
of the heart, is drove again by the heart into the aorta,
through the whole arterial ſyſtem. Arbuthnot.
VENTRI'loquist. n.ſ. (ventriloque, Fr. venter and loquor, Lat.]
One who ſpeaks in ſuch a manner as that the ſound ſeems
to iſſue from his belly.
VE/NTURE. m. ſ. ſavanture, Fr.]
1. A hazard; an undertaking of chance and danger.
When he reads
Thy perſonal venture in the rebel's fight,
His wonders and his praiſes do contend
Which ſhould be thine or his. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
For a man to doubt whether there be any hell, and there-
upon to live ſo as if abſolutely there were none; but when
he dies to find himſelf confuted in the flames, this muſt be
the height of woe and diſappointment, and a bitter conviction
of an irrational venture, and abſurd choice. South.
I, in this venture, double gains purſue,
And laid out all my ſtock to purchaſe you. Dryden.
When infinite happineſs is put in one ſcale, againſt infinite
miſery in the other; if the worſt that comes to the pious
man, if he miſtakes, be the beſt that the wicked can attain
to, if he be in the right, who can, without madneſs, run
the venture ? Locke.
2. Chance ; hap.
The king reſolved with all ſpeed to aſſail the rebels, and
yet with that providence and ſurety, as ſhould leave little to
venture or fortune. Bacon.
3. The thing put to hazard; a ſtake.
My ventures are not in one bottom truſted, -
Nor to one place. Shakeſp. Mer. of Venice.
On ſuch a full ſea are we now a-float:
And we muſt take the current when it ſerves,
Or loſe our ventures. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
Thrice happy you, that look as from the ſhore,
And have no venture in the wreck to ſee. Daniel.
4. At a VENTURE. At hazard; without much conſideration;
without any thing more than the hope of a lucky chance.
You have made but an eſtimate of thoſe lands at a venture,
ſo as it ſhould be hard to build any certainty of charge
upon it. Spenſer.
A bargain at a venture made, -
Between two partners in a trade. Hudibras.
A covetous and an envious man joined in a petition to
Jupiter, who ordered Apollo to tell them that their deſire
ſhould be granted at a venture. L'Eſtrange.
Here was no ſcampering away at a venture, withºut fear
or wit. L'Eſtrange.
If Ahab be deſigned for death, though a ſoldier in the
enemy's army draws a bow at a venture, yet the ſure, un-
erring directions of providence ſhall carry it in a direct courſe
to his heart. South.
To WE'NTURE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To dare.
A man were better riſe in his ſuit; for he that would have
ventered at firſt to have loſt the ſuitor, will not in the con-
cluſion loſe both the ſuitor and his own former favour. Bacon.
Origen mentioning their being caſt out of Jeruſalem, ven-
tures to aſſure them that they would never be re-eſtabliſhed,
ſince they had committed that horrid crime againſt the ſaviour
of the world. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
8
V E R
2. To run a hazard.
Nor is indeed that man leſs mad than theſe,
Who freights a ſhip to venture on the ſeas,
With one frail interpoſing plank to ſave
From certain death, roll'd on by ev'ry wave. Dryden.
- I am ſo overjoyd, I can ſcarce belićve I am at liberty;
like a bird that has often beaten her wing in vain againſt her
cage, dare hardly venture out, though ſhe ſee it open. Dryden.
*A, -
3. I 0 Vº TURE ar. To engage in ; or make attempts
To Ve’Nture on or upon.
without any ſecurity of ſucceſs,
upon mere hope.
That ſlander is ſound a truth now; and held for certain,
The king will venture at it. Shakeſpeare.
- It were a matter of great profit, ſave that it is too con-
jećtural to venture upon, if one could diſcern what Corn,
herbs, or fruits are like to be in plenty and ſcarcity,
ſigns in the beginning of the year.
I never yet the tragic ſtrain eſſay’d,
Deterr'd by that inimitable maid:
And when I venture at the comic ſtile,
Thy ſcornful lady ſeems to mock my toil. Waller.
Though they had ideas enough to diſtinguiſh gold from a
ſtone, yet they but timorouſly ventured on ſuch terms as
aurietas and ſaxietas. Locke.
Turco-Papiſmus I would deſire him to read, before he
ventures at capping of charaćters. Atterbury.
To VE/NTURE. v. a.
1. To expoſe to hazard.
In my ſchool-days, when I had loſt one ſhaft,
I ſhot his fellow of the ſelf-ſame flight;
By vent'ring both, I oft found both.
2. To put or ſend on a venture.
The fiſh ventured for France, they pack in ſtaunch hog-
ſheads, ſo as to keep them in their pickle.
VE/NTURER. m. ſ. [from venture.] He who ventures.
VE'NTURous. adj. [from venture.] Daring, bold, fearleſs;
ready to run hazards.
Charles was guided by mean men, who would make it their
maſter-piece of favour to give venturous counſels, which no
great or wiſe man would. Bacon.
He paus’d not, but with vent’rous arm
He pluck'd, he taſted. Milton's Par. Lo/?.
The vent'rous humour of our mariners coſts this iſland
many brave lives every year. Temple.
Savage pirates ſeek through ſeas unknown,
The lives of others, vent'rous of their own. Pºpe.
V’ENTURously. adv. [from venturous.] Daringly; fearleſsly;
boldly.
sº was laid to the fort by the Lord Gray, then deputy,
with a ſmaller number than thoſe were within the fort; ven-
turouſly indeed; but haſte was made to attack them before
the rebels came in to them. Bacon.
VE/NTURous Ness. n. ſ. [from venturous.] Boldneſs ; willing-
neſs to hazard.
Her coming into a place where the walls and cielings were
whited over, much offended her ſight, and made her repent
her vent'rouſneſs. Boyle on Colours.
VE/Nus' baſin.
VE/NUs’ comb.
VE/NUS’ hair,
VE'Nus' looking-glaſ.
VE’NUs’ navel-wort.
VERA’cITY.. n. ſ. [verax, Latin.]
1. Moral truth; honeſty of report.
2. Phyſical truth; conſiſtency of report with faët. Leſs proper:
When they ſubmitted to the moſt ignominious and cruel
deaths, rather than retraćt their teſtimony, there was no reaſon
to doubt the veracity of thoſe facts which they related. Addison.
VERAcious. adj. [verax, Latin.] Obſervant of truth. -
VERB. n.ſ. [verbe, Fr.verbum, Lat..] A part of ſpeech ſigni-
ing exiſtence, or ſome modification thereof, as action, paſ.
| And withal ſome diſpoſition or intention of the mind
relating thereto, as of affirming, denying, interrogating,
commanding. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
Men uſually talk of a noun and a ver”. Shakespeare
VERBAL. adj. [verbal, Fr. verbalis, Latin.]
1. Spoken, not written.
2. Oral; uttered by mouth.
Made ſhe no verbal queſt? —
- Yes, once or twice ſhe heav'd the name of father
Pantingly forth, as if it preſt her heart. Shakeſpeare.
3. Conſiſting in mere words. . . .
If young African for fame,
His waſted country freed from Punick rag";
The deed becomes unprais", the man at leaſt;
And loſes, though but verbal, his reward. - Milton.
Being at firſt out of the way to ſcience, in the progreſs
of their inquiries they muſt loſe themſelves, and the º:
in a verbal labyrinth. - Glanville.
It was ſuch a denial ºr confeſſion of him as would appear
in preaching; but this is managed in words and verbal pro-
South.
feſſion. 29 D Neglect
by ſome
Bacon.
Shakeſp.
Carew.
n. ſ. Plants.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E. R.
V E. R.
words. Out of uſe.
I am º
ou put me to forget a la y's manners,
}. tº. ſo verbal. Shakeſp.
5. Mińutely exact in words. .
à. Literal ; having word anſwering to word.
Neglect the rules each verbal critick lays,
For nºt to know ſome trifles is a praiſe. Pope.
whºſoever offers at verbal tranſlatiºn; ſhall have the mis-
fortune of that young traveller, who loſt his own language
j, and brought home no other inſtead of it... Denham.
The verbal copier is incumber'd with ſo many difficulties at
once, that he can never diſentangle himſelf from all. Dryden.
[verbal, Fr. in grammar.] A Jirbal noun is a noun derived
from a verb.
verſality. n.ſ. (from verbal.] Mere bare words.
Sometimes ić will ſeem to be charmed with words of
holy ſcripture, and to fly from the letter and dead verbality,
who muſt only ſtart at the life and animated materials
thereof. - Brown's Vulgar Errours.
vºnally. adv. [from verbal.]
. In words; orally. -
I The inner ºf our denying the deity of Chriſt herº Pro-
hibited, was by words and oral expreſſions verbally to
deny it. South's Sermons.
2. Word for word.
'Tis almoſt impoſſible to tranſlate verbally, and well, at
4. Verboſe ; full of
the ſame time, Dryden.
yº B7TIM adv. [Latin.] Word for word.
Think not, although in writing I preferr'd
The manner of thy vile outragious crimes,
That therefore I have forg'd, or am not able
yerbatim to rehearſe the method of my pen: Shakeſp.
See the tranſcripts of both charters verbatim in }.
allé.
Paris.
To vesser Are. v. a. [verhero, Lat.] To beat; tº ſtrike.
VERBERA'tion. n. ſ. [verberation, Fr. from verberate.] Blows;
beating.
Riding or walking againſt great winds is a great exerciſe,
the effects of which are redneſs and inflammation ; all the
effects of a ſoft preſs or verberation: Arbuthnot.
VERBO'SE. adj. [verboſus, Lat.] Exuberant in words; pro-
lix; tedious by multiplicity of words.
Let envy
Ill-judging and verboſe, from Lethe's lake,
Draw tuns unmeaſurable. - Prior.
They ought to be brief, and not too verlºſ in their way of
ſpeaking; and to propound the matter of their argument in
a mild and gentle manner. Ayliffe's Parergon.
VERhysºry.h. ſ. [verboſité, Fr. from verbºſe.J Exuberance
of words; much empty talk.
He draweth out the thread of his verbºſty
Finer than the ſtaple of his argument. Shakeſp.
To give an hint more of the verboſities of this philoſophy,
a ſhort view of a definition or two will be ſufficient evi-
dence. Glanville.
Homer is guilty of verboſity, and of a tedious prolix
manner of ſpeaking: he is the greateſt talker of all an-
tiquity. Broome.
VE DANT. n.ſ. [verdoiant, Fr. viridans, Lat.]. Green. This
word is ſo lately naturalized, that Skinner could find it only
in a dićtionary.
łº odorous buſhy ſhrub º
Fenc'd up the verdant wall. Milton.
VER DERER. n.ſ. [verdier, Fr. viridarius, low Lat..] An of-
ficer in the foreſt. e
Ve’RDIct. m. ſ. [verum dić'um, Latin.]
1. The determination of the jury declared to the judge.
Before the jury go together, 'tis all to nothing what the
verdić ſhall be. Spenſer.
2. Declaration ; deciſion ; judgment; opinion. -
Deceived greatly they are, who think that all they whoſe
names are cited amongſt the favourers of this cauſe, are on
any ſuch verdić agreed. Hooker.
Theſe were enormities condemned by the moſt natural
verdići of common humanity; and ſo very groſs and foul,
that no man could pretend ignorance avoided. South.
VER DIG Rise. m. ſ. The ruſt of braſs, which in time being
conſumed and eaten with tallow, turneth into green; in
Latin a rugo ; in French vert de gris, or the hoary
green. Pracham.
. . Braſs turned into green, is called verdigriſe. Bacon.
VERDITURE. m. ſ.
Perditure ground with a weak gum arabic water, is the
, ºft and paleſt green. Peacham.
VERDURE. m. ſ. verdure, Fr.] Green; green colour.
Its verdure clad
Her univerſal face with pleaſant green. Milton.
Let twiſted olive bind thoſe laurels faſt,
... Whoſe verdure muſt for ever laſt. - Prior.
VERDu Rous; adj. . [from verdure. J Green ; covered with
green; decked with green. - - - -
- Higher than their tops
The verd’rous wall of paradiſe up-ſprung;
Which to our general fire gave proſpect large. Milin,
There the lowing herds chew verd’rous paſture. Phip.
VERecu ND. adj. [verecond, old French ; verecundus, Latin.]
Modeſt; baſhful. Diä.
VERGE. n.ſ. [verge, Fr. virga, Latin.]
1. A rod, or ſomething in form of a rod, carried as an emblem
of authority. The mace of a dean.
Suppoſe him now a dean compleat,
Devoutly lolling in his ſeat;
The ſilver verge, with decent pride,
Stuck underneath his cuſhion ſide. Swift.
2. [vergo, Latin.] The brink; the edge; the utmoſt border.
Would the incluſive verge
Of golden metal, that muſt round my brow,
Were red-hot ſteel to fear me to the brain. Shaftſ,
I ſay, and will in battle prove,
Or here, or elſewhere, to the furtheſt verge,
That ever was ſurvey’d by Engliſh eye. Shakeſ,
You are old,
Nature in you ſtands on the very verge
Of her confine. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Serve they as a flow'ry verge to bind
The fluid ſkirts of that ſame watry cloud,
Leſt it again diſſolve and ſhow'r the earth. Milton,
Let fortune empty her whole quiver on me,
I have a ſoul, that, like an ample ſhield,
Can take in all, and verge enough for more. Dryden.
Every thing great, within the verge of nature, or out of it,
has a proper part aſſigned it in this poem. Addiſon.
Then let him chuſe a damſel young and fair,
To bleſs his age, and bring a worthy heir,
To ſooth his care, and, free from noiſe and ſtrife,
Conduct him gently to the verge of life. Pºpe.
3. In law.
Perge is the compaſs about the king's court, bounding the
juriſdiction of the lord ſteward of the Kings houſhold, and of
the coroner of the king's houſe, and which ſeems to have
been 12 miles round. Werge hath alſo another ſignification,
and is uſed for a ſtick, or rod, whereby one is admitted tº
nant, and, holding it in his hand, ſweareth fealty to the
lord of a manor; who, for that reaſon, is called tenant by
the verge. Cowel.
Fear not; whom we raiſe,
We will make faſt within a hallow'd verge. Shakespeare .
To VERGE. v. n. [vergo, Lat..] To tend ; to bend downwards.
They ſerve indifferently for vowels in reſped of the aper:
ture, and for conſonants in reſped of the peºp". and
fo much the more verging either way, according" the re-
ſpective occaſions. - Hilir,
The nearer I find myſelf verging to that period of life
which is to be labour and ſorrow, the more I prop myſ
upon thoſe few ſupports that are left. Swift.
such are indicated, when the juices of a hum" body verge
to putrefaction. Arbuthnot,
Man,
Perhaps aćts ſecond to ſome ſphere unknown ;
Touches ſome wheel, or verges to ſome gº”?
'Tis but a part we ſee, and not the whole. .
VERGER. n.ſ.. [from verge.] He that carries the mace before
the dean. into the
I can tip the verger with half a crown, and get º
beſt ſeat. Fº
VERT pical. adj. [veridicus, Latin.] Telling ... . argu"
VERIF icATIon. n.f. [from veriff.] Confirmation by *
ment or evidence. - non of
In verification of this we will mention a phenome Boyle.
our engine. • * * inſt lſº
To VE/RIFY. v. n. [verifier, Fr.] To juſtify againſt "s
falſhood; to confirm; to prove true. -
What ſeemeth to have *. uttered concern"; º
and their efficacy or neceſſity, in regard of . º:
muſt conſequently be verified in fundry other kin" Hºoker.
ing, if the matter be the ſame in all. hat whatſoever
‘i’his is verified by a number of examples, . ed. Batºn,
is gained by an abuſive treaty, ought to be rº Oreu.
so ſhºt thou beſt fulfill, beſt veriff Miltºn,
The prophets old, who ſung thy endl
So ſpake this ºthen % e
- ary, ſecond EWC, s w
Wºº of Mary, Milº Parº'
Though you may miſtake a year; -
Though your prognoſticks run too faſt, Swift.
They muſt be veriff'd at laſt. - - - -
Spain ſhall have three kings ; which is e are now
verſhed; for beſides the king of Portugal, º Prophº.
two rivals for Spain. swift, Merlin'
VE'Rily. adj. [from very. J
1. In º ‘. be lowly born
erfly 'tis better to be lowly born: . fºr?.
Than &amp; be perk'd up in a gliſt'ring grief. sº
eſs reign.
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E. R.
*:
*
y
•
º,
,-
2. With great confidence.
It was verily thought, that had it not been for four great
disfavourers of that voyage, the enterprize had ſuc-
ceeded. Bacon.
By repealing the ſacramental teſt, we are verily perſuaded
the conſequence will be an entire alteration of religion
among us. Swift on the Sacramental ſºft.
VER1s1'MILAR. adj. [veriſimilis, Latin.] Probable; likely.
VeRisimi litud E. Un. ſ. [veriſimilitudo, Latin.] Probability;
VERIsIMILITY. ; likelihood; reſemblance of truth.
Touching the veriſimility or probable truth of this rela-
tion, ſeveral reaſons ſeem to overthrow it. Brown.
A noble nation, upon whom if not ſuch verities, at leaſt
ſuch veriſimilities of fortitude were placed. Brown's Pºul Er.
/criſimilitude and opinion are an eaſy purchaſe; but true
knowledge is dear and difficult. Like a point, it requires an
acuteneſs to its diſcovery: while veriſimilitude, like the ex-
panded ſuperficies, is obvious, ſenſible, and affords a large
and eaſy field for looſe enquiry. Glanville.
The plot, the wit, the charaćters, the paſſions, are exalted
as high as the imagination of the poet can carry them, with
proportion to veriſimility. Dryden's Eſſay on Dramatick Poetry.
Though Horace gives permiſſion to painters and poets to
dare every thing, yet he encourages neither to make things
out of nature and veriſimility. Dryden.
VE'RITABLE. adj. [veritable, Fr.] True; agreeable to fact.
Indeed is't true :
Moſt veritable; therefore look to"t well. Shałoff.
The preſage of the year ſucceeding made from inſe&amp;ts in
oak-apples, is I doubt too indiſtinct, nor veritable from
event. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
VERITY. m. ſ. [verité, Fr. veritas, Latin.]
1. Truth; conſonance to the reality of things.
If any refuſe to believe us diſputing for the verity of religion
eſtabliſhed, let them believe God himſelf thus miraculouſly
working for it. Hooker.
I ſaw their weapons drawn; there was a noiſe;
That's verity. ..". Tempeſt.
The precipitancy of diſputation, and the ſtir and noiſe of
paſſions that uſually attend it, muſt needs be prejudicial to
verity; its calm inſinuations can no more be heard in ſuch a
buſtle, than a whiſtle among a croud of ſailors in a
ftorm. - Glanville.
It is a propoſition of eternal verity, that none can govern
while he is deſpiſed. We may as well imagine that there
may be a king without majeſty, a ſupreme without ſo-
vereignty. South.
2. A true aſſertion; a true tenet.
And that age, which my grey hairs make ſeem more than
it is, hath not diminiſhed in me the power to protećt an un-
deniable verity. Sidney.
Wherefore ſhould any man think, but that reading itſelf
is one of the ordinary means, whereby it pleaſeth God, of
his gracious goodneſs, to inſtil that celeſtial verity, which
being but ſo received, is nevertheleſs effectual to ſave
fouls. - Hooker.
If there come truth from them,
Why by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well ? Shakespeare .
Muſt virtue be preſerved by a lie :
Virtue and truth do ever beſt agree ;
By this it ſeems to be a verity, -
Since the effects ſo good and virtuous be. Davies.
3. Moral truth; agreement of the words with the thoughts.
WE’R JUIcE. m. ſ. [werjus, French..] Acid liquor expreſſed from
crab-apples. It is vulgatly pronounced varges.
Hang a dog upon a crab-tree, and he'll never love
ve: juice. L'E/ºrange.
The barley-pudding comes in place:
Then bids fall on ; himſelf, for ſaving charges,
A peel'd ſlic'd onion eats, and tipples verjuice. Dryden.
The native verjuice of the crab, deriv'd
Through th' infix’d graff, a grateful mixture forms
Of tart and ſweet. Philips.
PERMICE'LLI. n.ſ. [Italian.] A paſte rolled and broken in
the form of worms.
With oyſters, eggs, and vermicelli,
She let him almoſt burſt his belly. Prior.
VERM 1 cu LAR. adj. [cermiculus, Latin.] Aćting like a worm ;
continued from one part to another of the ſame body.
By the vermicular motion of the inteſtines, the groſſer
parts are derived downwards, while the finer are ſqueez’d
into the narrow orifices of the lačteal veſſels. Cheyne.
To VERM1'cular E. v. a. [vermiculé, Fr. vermiculatus, Lat.]
To inlay ; to work in chequer work, or pieces of divers
colours. Baily.
VERM iculatios. m. ſ. [from vermiculate.] Continuation of
motion from one part to another.
My heart moves naturally by the motion of palpitation;
my guts by the motion of vermiculation. . . Hale.
VE's Micu LE. m. ſ. [vermiculus, vermis, Latin.] A little grub,
worm.
V E R
! ſaw the ſhining oak-ball ichneumon ſtrike its terebra into
**k-apple, to lay its eggs therein; and hence are many ver-
V "icules ſeen towards the outſide of theſe apples. Derham
ER w - - - - --- -
yº, º, ſºulſº Lat.] Full of grubs.
... ". .*. [vermiforms, Fr. vermi; and fºrmz, Lat.]
Having the ſhape of a worm. -
VE/RMIFU GE. m. ſ. ſº - -
ine that deſt J. [from vermis and figs, Lat..] Any medi-
cine that deſtroys or expels worms.
WE’RM1L. - -
Vermºlios. "...ſ. ſtermeil, vermillºn, Fr.]
1. The cochineal; a grub of a particular plant.
2. Faëtitious or nºtive cinnabar; ſulphur mixed with
T his is the uſual, though not primitive fignification.
The imperfect metals are ſubject to ruſt, except mer-
cury, which is made into we million by ſolution or cal-
Clnation. -
mercury.
-- a- - - Bacon.
The faireſt and moſt principal red is termillion, called in
Latin minium. It is a poiſon, and found where great itore of
quickſilver is. Peacham
3. Any beautiful red colour.
How the red roſes fluſh up in her cheeks,
And the pure ſhow with goodly ve militain,
Like crimſon dy’d in grain. Spenſºr
There grew a goodly tree him fair beſide, -
Loaden with fruit and apples roſe red,
As they in pure vermillion had been dy'd,
Whereof great virtues over all were read. Fairy 3:een.
Simple colours are ſtrong and ſenſible, though tº are
clear as vermillion. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
To VERMI'lion. v. a. ſſrom the noun..] To die red." '
A ſprightly red vermilions all her face,
And her eyes languiſh with unuſual grace Granville.
VERMINE, n ſ [vermine, Fr. vermis, Latin.] Any noxious
animal. Uſed commonly for ſmall creatures.
What is your ſtudy ? -
- How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vernin. Shakeſp.
The head of a wolf, dried and hanged up in a doº-
houſe, will ſcare away vermin, ſuch as weazels and pole-
cats. . - Bacon.
An idle perſon only lives to ſpend his time, and eat the
fruits of the earth, like a vermin or a wolf. Taylor.
The ſtars determine
You are my priſoners, baſe vermin. Hudibra;.
A weazle taken in a trap, was charg’d with miſdemeanors,
and the poor vermin ſtood much upon her innocence. £’E/?r.
Great injuries theſe vermin, mice and rats, do in the
ficla. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
He that has ſo little wit
To nouriſh vermin, may be bit. Swift.
To VE/RMINATE. v. n. [from vermin J. To breed vermine.
VERMINA'tion. m. ſ. [from verminate.] Generation of ver-
mlne.
Redi diſcarding anomalous generation, tried experiments
relating to the vermination of ſerpents and fleſh. 19erham.
VERMINous. adj. [from vermine.] Tending to vermine; diſ-
poſed to breed vermine.
A waſting of childrens fleſh depends upon ſome obſtrućtion
of the entrails, or verminous diſpoſition of the body. Harvey.
VERM1'PARous. adj. [vermis and pario, Lat. J. Producing
Worms.
Hereby they confound the generation of vermiparous ani-
mals with oviparous. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs.
VERNA'cula R. adj. [ve: naculus, Latin.] Native; of one's
own country.
London weekly bills number deep in conſumptions; the
ſame likewiſe proving inſeparable accidents to moſt other
diſeaſes; which inſtances do evidently bring a conſumption
under the notion of a vernacular diſeaſe to England. Harvey.
The hiſtories of all our former wars are tranſmitted to us
in our vernacular idiom. I do not find in any of our chro-
nicles, that Edward the third ever reconnoiter'd the enemy,
though he often diſcovered the poſture of the French, and as
often vanquiſhed them. - Addison.
VE's NAL. adj. [vernus, Latin.] Belonging to the ſpring.
- - With the year
Seaſons return ; but not to me returns, -
Or fight of vernal bloom, or ſummer's roſe. Milton.
WE’RNANT, n.ſ. [vernans, Lat.] Flouriſhing as in the ſpring.
- Elſe had the ſpring
Perpetual ſmil'd on earth, with verman: flow’rs,
Equal in days and nights. , Mºon's Par. Lºft.
VERN'ílity. n.ſ. (verna, Lat..] Servile carriage; the ſub-
miſſive fawning behaviour of a ſlave. Bailey.
VERRE L. See FERP ULE - -
VFRsap,'Lity. A n.ſ. [verſabilis, Lat., Aptneſs to be turn’d
7 :'RSABLEN Ess. } or wound any way. . Dić.
VERSAL. adj. [A cant word fr univerſal.] Total ; whole.
- Some for brevity, -
Have caſt the verſal world's nativity.
VF/RSATILE. adj. [verſatilii, Lat.
-- -, *
1. That may be turized round.
Hădăraş,
2. Change ble;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E. R.
V E R
ble; variable. -
2. º:. to us ſtanding in one place, hath a contrary
- - ther; as in thoſe verſatile repreſentations in the
º: and folds ; ſcarlet. Glanville.
lied to a new talk. -
$º. m. ſ. [from verſatile.] The quality of be-
VER's ATI'LITY. ; ing verſatile. -
verse. n.ſ.. [vers, Fr. verſus, Latin.]
I. A line conſiſting of a certain ſucceſſion of ſounds, and num-
ber of ſyllables. -
Thou haſ by moonlight at her window ſung,
With feigning voice, verſes of feigning love:
2. [verſet, Fr.] A ſection or paragraph of a book. -
Thus far the queſtions proceed upon the conſtrućtion of
the firſt earth; in the following verſes they proceed upon the
demolition of that earth. Burnet.
3. Poetry; lays ; metrical language.
ſerſ embalms virtue; and tombs and thrones of rhymes
Preſerve frail tranſitory fame as much
As ſpice doth body from air's corrupt touch.
If envious eyes their hurtful rays have caſt,
More pow'rful verſe ſhall free thee from the blaſt. Dryden.
Whilſt ſhe did her various pow'r diſpoſe;
Shakeſp.
Donne.
Virtue was taught in verſe, and Athens' glory roſe. Prior.
You compoſe
In ſplay-foot verſe, or hobbling proſe. Prior.
4. A piece of poetry.
Let this verſe, my friend, be thine. Pope.
To VERs e. v.a. [from the noun..] To tell in verſe; to relate
poetically.
In the ſhape of Corin ſate all day,
Playing on pipes of corn, and º: love. Shakeſp.
Tº be VE/Rsed. v. n. [verſor, Lat..] To be ſkilled in ; to be
acquainted with.
She might be ignorant of their nations, who was not verſed
in their names, as not being preſent at the general ſurvey of
animals, when Adam aſſigned unto every one a name con-
cordant unto its nature. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
This, vers'd in death, th’ infernal knight relates,
And then for proof ſulfill'd their common fates. Dryden.
VERSE MAN. n. / [verſe and man.] A poet; a writer in
verſe.
The god of us verſemen, you know, child, the ſun. Prior.
VE’Rsicle. % [verſiculus, Lat.] A little verſe.
VERSIFICATION. n.ſ. [verſification, Fr. from verſy..] The
art or practice of making verſes.)
Donne alone had your talent, but was not happy to ar-
rive at your verſification. Dryden.
Some object to his verſification; which is in poetry, what
colouring is in painting, a beautiful ornament. But if the
proportions are juſt, though the colours ſhould happen to be
rough, the piece may be of ineſtimable value. Granville.
VeRsific A^Tor. }". ſ. [verſificateur, Fr. verſificator, Lat. J
VE’Rs 1F1E R. A verſifier ; a maker of verſes with or
without the ſpirit of poetry.
Statius, the beſt verſificator next Virgil, knew not how to
deſign after him. Dryden.
In Job and the Pſalms we ſhall find more ſublime ideas,
more elevated language, than in any of the heathen verſifiers
of Greece or Rome. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
To }:RSIFY. v. n. [verſifier, Fr. verſificor, Latin.] To make
Veries.
You would wonder to hear how ſoon even children will
begin to verſify. Sidney.
To follow rather the Goths in rhyming, than the Greeks
in true verſifying, were even to eat acorns with ſwine, when
we may freely eat wheat bread among men. Aſcham.
I'll verſy in ſpite, and do my beſt,
To make as much waſte paper as the reſt. Dryden.
To WE’R sIFY. v. a. To relate in verſe.
Unintermix'd with fictious fantaſies,
I'll verſify the truth, not poetize. Daniel.
VERSION. m.ſ. [verſion, Fr. verſio, Latin.]
I. Change ; transformation.
, Springs, the antients thought to be made by the verſion of
alſ into Water. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. Change of direétion.
Comets are rather gazed upon, than wiſely obſerved in
their effects; that is, what kind of comet, for magnitude,
colour, verſion of the beams, produceth what kind of
effects. Bacon.
3. Tranſlation.
This exact propriety of Virgil I particularly regarded; but
muſt confeſs, that I have not been able to make him appear
wholly like himſelf. For where the original is cloſe, no ver-
Jian can reach it in the ſame compaſs. Dryden.
4. The act of tranſlating.
VERT. m. ſ. vert, Fr.
Pert, in the laws of the foreſt, ſignifies every thing that
º, and bears, a green leaf within the foreſt, that may
cover and hide a deer. - Cowel.
I find no mention in all the records of Irel
ark or free - - and, of a
. ... wºn, notwithſtanding the great p lenty of vert
VE'rtebral. adj. [from vertebrae, Lat.) Riº Davies,
jº of the ſpine. ating to the
he carotid, vertebral, and ſplenick arter;
variouſly contorted, but here aſ: there dij, j.
the motion of the blood. Ray on the Crº:
vº* n.J. [vertebre, Fr. vertebra, Latin.) A joint .
The ſeveral vertebres are ſo elegantly compad
that }} are as ſtrong as if tºº. º º:
WERTEX n.ſ. [Latin.] • Ray.
1. Zenith; the point over head.
Theſe keep the vertex ; but betwixt the bear
And ſhining zodiack, where the planets err,
A thouſand figur’d conſtellations roll.
2. A top of a hill.
Mountains eſpecially abound with different ſpecies of vege-
tables ; every vertex or eminence affording new kinds. Derham
VERTICAL, adj. [vertical, Fr. from vertex.] -
1. Placed in the zenith.
'Tis raging noon; and vertical the ſun
Darts on the head direct his forceful rays.
2. Placed in a direction perpendicular to the horizon.
From theſe laws, all the rules of bodies aſcending or de-
ſcending in vertical lines may be deduced. Cheyne,
VERTISA'lity. m. ſ. [from vertical.] The ſtate of being intº
zenith.
Unto them the ſun is vertical twice a year; making two
diſtinct ſummers in the different points of the ºri.
lity. Brown's W.ulgar Erreurſ,
We'Rtically, adv. [from vertical.] In the zenith.
Although it be not vertical unto any part of Aſia, yet it
vertically paſſeth over Peru and Braſilia. Brown.
VeRT1c1(LLATE, adj. [from verticillum, Latin.]
Werticillate plants are ſuch as have their flowers intermixt
with ſmall leaves growing in a kind of whirls about the
joints of a ſtalk, as penny-royal, horehound, &amp;c. Qung,
VERTI'city... n. ſ. [from vertex.] The power of turning;
circumvolution; rotation.
Thoſe ſtars, do not peculiarly glance on us, but carry a
common regard unto all countries, unto whom their vert city
is alſo common. Brown's Wºgar Erreurs,
We believe the verticity of the needle, without a certificate
from the days of old. Glanville.
Whether they be globules, or whether they have a ver-
ticity about their own centers, that produce the idea of white-
neſs in us, the more particles of light are reflected from a
body, the whiter does the body appear. Lacie.
VE'RTIGINous, adj. [vertiginoſus, Latin.]
1. Turning round; rotatory.
This vertiginous motion gives day and night ſucceſſively
over the whole earth, and makes it habitable allaround. Bently.
2. Giddy. -
Theſe extinguiſh candles, make the workmen faint and
vertiginous ; and, when very great, ſuffocates and kills
them. Woºdward.
WERTI'GO. m. ſ. [Latin.] A giddineſs; a ſenſe of turning"
the head. -
Pertigo is the appearance of viſible objećts that are without
motion, as if they turned round, attended with a fear of fill-
ing, and a dimneſs of ſight. Qing.
The forerunners of an apoplexy are dulneſs, º
tremblings. Arbuthnºl.
That old vertigo in his head, -
Will never leave him till he's dead. Swift,
/
Vº }n. /. [verveine, Fr. verbena, Lat.) A plant.
It hath a labiated flower, conſiſting of one leaf, *
upper lip is upright, and commonly divided into º:
the under lip is cut into three parts; ſo that at firſt . b
appears like a flower with five leaves. Theſe are ſº º
four naked ſeeds, which fill the calyx. The *...*.
grow in ſpikes, but not in whorles, round the ſtalks. Miller.
The night-ſhade ſtrows to work him ill,
Therewith the vervain, and her dill,
Cretch.
Thomſºn,
That hindreth witches of their will. f pº
Some ſcatt'ring pot-herbs here and there he found,
Which cultivated with his daily care, Dryden.
And bruis'd with vervain, were his frugal fare.
WE’R v AIN mallow. n. ſ. A plant. If.
It hath the itſ." ..". mallow or althº %i.
fers from it in having its leaves deeply divided. k. Aftſ.
VE/Rveles. n. ſ. [vervelle, Fr.] Labels tied to a haw in ai.
VERY. adj. [wery, or vrai, French; whence */
tient Engliſh.]
1. True; real.
Why do I pity him,
That with his very heart deſpiſeth me.
In very deed, as the Lord liveth.
Shakespeare.
... xxv. 34.
1 Sam *; that
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V E S
º
º
!:
º
º
O that in very deed we might behold it. Dryd. and Lee.
2. Having any qualities, commonly bad, in an éminent de-
gree.
Thoſe who had drunk of Circe's cup, were turned into
very beaſts. Davies.
There, where very deſolation dwells,
By grots and caverns ſhagg'd with horrid ſhades,
She may paſs on. Milton,
3. To note the things emphatically, or eminently.
'Tis an ill office for a gentleman;
Eſpecially againſt his very friend. Shakeſp.
as not my love
The verier wago'th' two Shakeſpeare.
We can contain ourſelves,
Were he the verieſ? antick in the world. Shakeſp.
. In a ſeeing age, the very knowledge of former times paſſes
but for ignorance in a better dreſs. South.
The pictures of our great grandmothers in Queen Eliza-
beth's time, are cloathed down to the very wriſts, and up to
the very chin. Addiſon's Guardian.
4. Same.
Women are as roſes, whoſe fair flower
Being once diſplay’d, doth fall that very hour. Shakeſp.
The cocks beat the partridge, which ſhe laid to heart:
but finding theſe very cocks cutting one another, ſhe com-
forted herſelf. L’Eſtrange.
So catholick a grace is charity, that whatever time is
the ſpecial opportunity of any other chriſtian grace, that
very time is alſo the ſpecial opportunity of charity. Spratt.
VERY. adv. In a great degree; in an eminent degree.
The Greek orator was ſo very famous for this, that his an-
tagoniſt reading over the oration which had procured his ba-
niſhment, aſked them, if they were ſo much affected by the
bare reading of it, how much more they would have been
alarmed, had they heard him Addiſon.
To VE/SICATE. v. a. [veſica, Latin.] To bliſter.
Celſus propoſes, that in all theſe internal wounds, the ex-
ternal parts be veſiccated, to make more powerful revulſion
from within. Wiſeman's Surgery.
I ſaw the cuticula veſicated, and ſhining with a burning
heat. JWiſeman.
Vesic A^TION. m. ſ. [from veſtate.] Bliſtering; ſeparation of
the cuticle.
I applied ſome vinegar prepared with litharge, defending
the veſication with pledgets. l/ſeman's Surgery.
VesiſcAtoRY. m. ſ. [vºſcatorium, technical Latin.] A bliſter-
ing medicine. -
WE'sicle. n. ſ. [vſcula, Latin.] A ſmall cuticle, filled or
inflated.
Nor is the humour contained in ſmaller veins, but in a
veſicle, or little bladder. Browne's Vulgar Errours.
The lungs are made up of ſuch air pipes and vſcles in-
terwoven with blood-veſſels, to purify, ferment, or ſupply
the ſanguineous maſs with nitro-aerial particles. Ray.
Vesiºcular. adj. [from veſicula, Lat.J Hollow ; full of ſmall
interſtices. -
A muſcle is a bundle of veſicular threads, or of ſolid fila-
ments, involved in one common membrane. Cheyne.
WE/SPER. m. ſ. [Latin.] The evening ſtar; the evening.
Theſe ſigns are black Pºſper's pageants. Shakeſp.
VE’spers n.ſ. [without the fingular, from veſperus, Latin.]
The evening ſervice of the Romiſh church.
VE's PERTINE. adj. [ve/pertinus, Latin.J Happening or coming
in the evening ; pertaining to the evening.
VE/SSEL. n ſ. [vaſſelle, Fr. was, Lat.]
1. Any thing in which liquids, or other things, are put.
For Banquo's iſſue have I fill'd my mind;
Put rancours in the veſſel of my peace,
Only for them. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
If you have two veſſel to fill, and you empty one to fill
the other, there ſtill remains one veſſel empty. Burmet.
2. The containing parts of an animal body.
Of theſe elements are conſtituted the ſmalleſt fibres; of
thoſe fibres the veſſel; ; of thoſe veſſels, the organs of the
body. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Any vehicle in which men or goods are carried on the water.
The ſons and nephews of Noah, who peopled the iſles,
had veſſels to tranſport themſelves. Raleigh's Eſſays.
The veſſel is repreſented as ſtranded. The figure before
it ſeems to lift it off the ſhallows. Addiſon on Medals.
From ſtorms of rage, and dangerous rocks of pride,
Let thy ſtrong hand this little veſſel guide;
It was thy hand that made it: through the tide
Impetuous of this life, let thy command
Direct my courſe, and bring me ſafe to land. Prior.
Now ſecure the painted veſſel glides;
The ſun-beams trembling on the floating tides. Pope.
4. Any capacity; any thing containing.
I have my fill
Of knowledge, what this veſſel can contain. Milton.
To WE'ssel. v.a. [from the noun..] To put into a veſſel; tobarrel.
V E T
VE/ Take earth, and */ºl it; and in that ſet the ſeed. Bacon.
...” * ſ. A kind of cloth commonly made ". Suf-
- tler.
VE'ssicNos. n: ſ , [among horſemen J A windgall, †
vé': 9” he inſide and outſide of a horſº, i. Dić?.
... n.ſ. [veſiris, Lat.] An outer garment.
--- Over his ſucid arms
A military veſt of purple flow'd. Milton's Par. Loft,
When the queen in royal habit's dreſt
Old myſtick emblems grace th’ imperial *
To Vest. v.a. [from the noun.] -
1. To dreſs; to deck; to enrobe.
The verdant fields with thoſe of heav'n may vie,
With ether veſſed, and a purple ſky. Dryden.
Light ! Nature's reſplendent robe;
Without whoſe vºſting beauty all were wrapt
In gloom.
2. To dreſs in a long garment.
Juſt Simeon, and prophetic Anna ſpoke;
Before the altar and the veſſed prieſt.
3. To make poſſeſſor of; to inveſt with.
To ſettle men's conſciences, ’tis neceſſary that they know
the perſon, who by right is veſſed with power over them. Locłe,
Had I been vº/led with the monarch's pow'r,
Thou muſt have figh’d, unlucky youth ! in vain. Prior.
4. To place in poſſeſſion.
The militia their commiſſioners poſitively required to be
entirely veſted in the parliament. Clarendon.
Empire and dominion was veſſed in him, for the good and
behoof of others. Locke.
VE stal. n. ſ. [vºſalis, Latin.] A virgin conſecrated to
Pºſta ; a pure virgin.
Women are not -
In their beſt fortunes ſtrong; but want will perjure
The ne'er-touch'd veſial. Shakeſpeare.
How happy is the blameleſs vºſal's lot
The world forgetting, by the world forgot. Pope.
VE's TAL. adj. Iveſ!alis, Latin.] Denoting pure virginity.
Her ve/tal livery is but ſick and green,
And none but fools do wear it. - Shakeſpeare.
VE's TIBULE. m. ſ. [veſtibulum, Lat..] The porch or firſt en-
trance of a houſe.
VE's TIGE. m. ſ. [vſtigium, Lat.J Footſtep ; mark left be-
hind in paſſing.
The truth paſſes ſo ſlightly through men's imaginations,
that they muſt uſe great ſubtilty to track its vſtiges. Harvey.
Vººr. n. / Ivº/limentum, Latin.] Garment; part of
reis.
Were it not better that the love which men bear unto
God, ſhould make the leaſt things that are employed in his
ſervice amiable, than that their over-ſcrupulous diſlike of ſo
mean a thing as a veſtment, ſhould from the very ſervice of
God withdraw their hearts and affections. PHooker.
Heaven then would ſeem thy image, and reflect
Thoſe ſable vº/?ments, and that bright aſpect. J//aller,
The ſculptors could not give veſtments ſuitable to the qua-
lity of the perſons repreſented. Dryden.
WE's rRY. m.ſ. [vſtiaire, Fr. vºſłiarium, Latin.]
1. A room appendant to the church, in which the ſacerdotal
garments, and conſecrated things are repoſited.
Bold Amycus, from the robb’d veſtry brings
The chalices of heav'n ; and holy things -
Of precious weight. Dryaen.
2. A parochial aſſembly commonly convened in the veſtry. . .
The common-council are choſen every year, ſo many for
every pariſh, by the vº/lry, and common convention of the
people of that pariſh. Clarendon.
Go with me where paltry conſtables will º; us
to veſłries. aunt to Pope,
vº. n. ſ. [vºſture, old Fr. vºſiura, Italian.]
1. Garment; robe.
Her breaſt half hid, and half were laid to ſhow; .
Her envious veſſure greedy fight repelling. Fairfax.
What, weep you when you but behold -
Our Caeſar's veſſure wounded ? Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
To bear my lady's train, left the baſe earth
Should from her veſſure chance to ſteal a kiſs.
Here rudd y braſs, and gold refulgent blaz'd i.
There poliſh’d cheſts embroider'd vºures grac d. Pope.
. Dreſs; habit; external form.
2. D The ſo the ſmalleſt orb which thou behold'ſt,
But in his motion like º ſings,
But this muddy veſſure of decay --
Doth groſly º . in, we cannot hear it. Shakespeare
Rocks, precipices, and gulfs: apparell'd with a veſſure of
plants, would reſemble mountains and vallies. Bentley.
Vérch. n.ſ. [vicia, Lat.] A plant with a papilionaceous flower;
from the empalement ariſes, the pointal, which º
pod full of roundiſh or angular ſeeds: to which muſt be ad-
§ed, that the leaves grow by pairs on a middle rib, ending
in a tendril. Where
Smith,
Thomſon.
Milton.
, Shakeſp.
29 E.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U G L
V I B
where vetches, pulſe, and tares have ſtood,
And ſtalks of lupines grew. - Dryden.
An ervum is a ſort of vetch, or ſmall pea. Arbuthnot. -
Ve’rchy. m. ſ. [from vetch..] Made of vetches; abounding in
vetches; conſiſting of vetch or peaſe-ſtraw.
If to my cottage thou wilt reſort,
There may'ſt thou ligge in a vetchy bed,
Till fairer fortune ſhew forth his head. Spenſer.
VE/TERAN. n. ſ. [veteranus, Latin.] An old ſoldier ; a man
long practiſed in anything. -
We were forced to uncover, or be regarded as veterans in
the beau monde. Addiſon.
The Arians, for the credit of their faélion, took the eldeſt,
the beſt experienced, the moſt wary, and the longeſt-
praćtiſed veterans they had amongſt them. Hoºker.
If king Charles II. had made war upon France, he might
have conquered it by the many veterans, which had been
inured to ſervice in the civil wars. Addiſon.
Enſigns that pierc'd the foe's remoteſt lines, -
The hardy veteran with tears reſigns. Addiſon.
VE’rer AN. a.º. Long practiſed in war; long experienced.
There was a mighty ſtrong army of land-forces, to the
number of fifty thouſand veterºn ſoldiers Bacon.
The Britiſh youth ſhall hail thy wiſe command ;
Thy temper'd ardour, and thy veteran ſkill. Thºmſºn.
VETERINARIAN. n.ſ. [veterinarius, Lat..] One ſkilled in the
diſeaſes of cattle
That a horſe has no gall, is not only ſwallowed by com-
mon farriers, but alſo receiv'd by good veterinarians, and
ſome who have laudably diſcourſed upon horſes. Brown.
To VEX. v. a. [vexo, Latin.]
1. To plague ; to torment; to harraſs.
Do you think
The king will ſuffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vex'd 2 Shakespeare . Hºn. VIII.
Do poor Tom ſome charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. Shakespeare
When ſhe preſſed him daily, ſo that his ſoul was vexed
unto death, he told her all his heart. judges xvi. 16.
Still may the dog the wand'ring troops conſtrain
Of airy ghoſts, and vex the guilty train. Dryden.
You are the cauſe of all my care:
Your eyes ten thouſand dangers dart;
Ten thouſand torments vex my heart;
I love, and I deſpair. Prior.
2. To diſturb; to diſquiet.
Alack, 'tis he ; why, he was met even now,
As mad as the vext ſca; ſinging aloud. Shakeſp.
Rang'd on the banks beneath our equal oars,
White curl the waves, and the vex'd ocean roars. Pope.
&amp; To trouble with ſlight provocations.
V Ex A^T Ion. m. ſ. [from vex.]
1. The act of troubling.
O that huſband,
My ſupreme crown of grief, and thoſe repeated vexations
of it. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
2. The ſtate of being troubled; uneaſineſs; ſorrow,
Wexation almoſt ſtops my breath, -
That fundred friends greets in the hour of death. Shakeſp.
Paſſions too violent, inſtead of heightening our pleaſures,
afford us nothing but vexation and pain. Temple.
3. The cauſe of trouble or uneaſineſs.
Your children were vexation to your youth;
But mine ſhall be a comfort to your age. Shakeſp.
4. An act of harraſſing by law. -
Albeit the party grieved thereby, may have ſome reaſon to
complain of an untrue charge, yet may he not well call it
an unjuſt vexation. Bacon.
5. A flight teazing trouble.
Vºx A"rious. adj. [from vexation.]
1. Afflictive ; troubleſome , cauſing trouble.
Conſider him maintaining his uſurped title, by continual
texatiº wars againſt the kings of Judah. South.
/exatious thought ſtill found my flying mind,
Nor bound by limits, nor to place confin'd;
Haunted my nights, and terrify'd my days;
Stalk d through my gardens, and purſu'd my ways; !
Nor ſhut from artful bow'r, nor loſt in winding maze. Prior.
2. Full of trouble; full of uneaſineſs.
He leads a vexatious life, who in his nobleſt actions is ſo
*** with ſcruples, that he dares not make a ſtep without
the authority of another. Digby.
3. Teazing; flightly troubleſome.
V ºccº. adv. [from vexatious.] Troubleſomely; un-
2a111'.
v ExA’riousness. m. ſ. ſtrom vexatious.] Troubleſomeneſs; un-
- eaſineſs.
tºº, tº *…] He who vexes. - -
adu. [from gº.) Filthily; with deformity; in ſuch
a manner as to raiſe diſlike.
Vºn Ess. n.f. [from ugly.]
i. Deformity; contrariety to beauty.
All that elſe ſeem’d fair and freſh in fight,
Was turned now to dreadful uglingſ.
She takes her topicks from the advantages of old
uglineſs. -
2. Turpitude; loathſomeneſs; moral depravity.
Their dull ribaldry cannot but be very nauſeous
five to any one, who does not, for the ſake of
pardon the uglineſs of its circumſtances. Sout!
U’GLY. adj. [This word was antiently written ºugh wi:
Mr. Dier ingeniouſly deduces it from orphlºe, that is i.
an ouph, elf, or goblin. In Saxon oza is terrour. º
Gothic agan is to fear.] Deformed; offenſive to i. ..
contrary to beautiful. tº r
If Caſio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life,
Spenſºr.
age and
Drydºn.
and offen-
the fin itſelf,
That makes me ugly. Shakeſ,
O, I have paſs'd a miſerable night, ºakſ are.
So full of ugly fights, of ghaſtly dreams. Shalºft
Was this the cottage, and the ſafe abode
Thou toldít me off What grim aſpects are theſe,
Theſe ugly-headed monſters? Miltºn
VI’AL. m. ſ. [buzzº..] A ſmall bottle. -
Edward's ſeven ſons
Were as ſev’n vials of his ſacred blood. Shalºft.
You Gods' look down,
And from your ſacred vial, pour your grace
Upon my daughter's head. Shaiºſ.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this diſtilled liquor drink thou off. Shahſ.
Another lamp burnt in an old marble ſepulchre belong-
ing to ſome of the anticnt Romans incloſed in a gift
vial. Hºlºns.
I placed a thin vial, well ſtopped up, within the ſmoke of
the vapour, but nothing followed. Addison.
Chemical waters, that are each tranſparent, when ſeparate,
ferment into a thick troubled liquor, when mixed in the ſame
vial. Adijºn.
To Vi’Al. v. a. To incloſe in a vial.
This ſhe with precious vial"d liquors heals;
For which the ſhepherds at the feſtivals
Carol her goodneſs loud in ruſtick lays. Milton.
V1/AND. m. ſ. [viande, Fr. vivanda, Ital.] Food; meat dreſſed.
The belly only like a gulf remain'd,
I' th' midſt of the body idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand. Shalºft.
No matter, ſince
They’ve left their viand; behind, for we have ſtomachs.
Wilt pleaſe you taſte of what is here? Shaft.
. Theſe are not fruits forbidden; no interdićt
Defends the touching of theſe viand, pure;
Their taſte no knowledge works, at leaſt of evil. Milton.
From ſome forts of food leſs pleaſant to the taſte, perſºns
in health, and in no neceſſity of uſing ſuch viand, had better
to abſtain. - -
The tables in fair order ſpread;
Piands of various kinds allure the taſte,
Of choiceſt ſort and ſavour; rich repaſt ! Pºſt,
PIATICU.M. n.ſ. [Latin.]
1. Proviſion for a journey. -
2. The laſt rites uſed to prepare the paſſing ſoul for its depar-
ture. -
To V1'BRATE. v. a. (vibro, Latin.] -
1. To brandiſh ; to move to and fro with quick motion.
2. To make to quiver. dif
Breath vocalized, that is vibrated or undulated, m**
ferently affect the lips, and impreſs a ſwift tremulous ".
tion, which breath paſſing ſmooth doth not. Hºlder.
To V1/BRATE. v. n. -
1. To play up and down, or to and fro. -
#. .." compreſſed by the fall and weight of the i.
filver, would repel it a little upwards, and make * ‘.
a little up and down. º
Do not all fixed bodies, when heated beyond 3. .
degree, emit light, and ſhine : And is not º .
performed by the vibrating motions of their Paº tlviº
2. To quiver. -
The whiſper, that to greatneſs ſtill too neaſ, Pºpe.
Perhaps, yet vibrate on his ſovereign's ar. f moving,
VIDRA’11os. n.ſ. [from vibro, Latin.] The aćt o º i.
or being moved with quick reciprocations, or **
aćt of quivering. r
It º i. the coal upon the altar, with º:
of piety, the heats of devotion, and the fallies "“ Sºuth.
of an harmleſs activity. - bottom of
Do not the rays of light, in falling upon the º
the eye, excite vibrations in the tunica retina: * optic
tions being propagated along the ſolid fibrº * Newtºn.
nerves into the brain, cauſe the º ſccing.
Mild vibrations footh the parted foul, --------
New to the dawning of celeſtial day. Thºmſºn
- VICAR.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
-
V I C
--
-º
- *
--
-
*
--
º
º
VI’CAR. m. ſ. [vicarius, Latin.]
1. The incumbent of an appropriated or impropriated benefice.
- Procure the vicar
To ſtay for me at church, 'twixt twelve and one,
To give our hearts united ceremony. Shakeſp.
Yours is the prize;
The vicar my defeat, and all the village ſee. Dryden.
A landed youth, whom his mother would never ſuffer to
look into a book for fear of ſpoiling his eyes, upon hear-
ing the clergy decried, what a contempt muſt he entertain,
not only for his vicar at home, but for the whole order. Swift.
2. One who performs the functions of another; a ſubſtitute.
An archbiſhop may not only excommunicate and interdićt
his ſuffragans, but his vicar-general may do the ſame. Ayliffe.
V1(cARA GE. m. ſ. [from vicar.] The benefice of a vicar.
This gentleman lived in his vicarage to a good old age,
and having never deſerted his flock, died vicar of Bray. Swiſt.
VIcA’Rious. adj. [vicarius, Latin.] Deputed; delegated ; act-
ing in the place of another.
The ſoul in the body is but a ſubordinate efficient, and
vicarious and inſtrumental in the hands of the Almighty,
being but his ſubſtitute in this regiment of the body. Hale.
What can be more unnatural, than for a man to rebel
againſt the vicarious power of God in his ſoul.
V1/CARs HIP. m. ſ. [from vicar.] The office of a vicar.
VICE. m. ſ. [vitium, Latin.]
1. The courſe of action oppoſite to virtue; depravity of man-
ners; inordinate life.
- No ſpirit more groſs to love -
Pice for itſelf. Milton,
The foundation of error will lie in wrong meaſures of pro-
bability; as the foundation of vice in wrong meaſures of
good. Locke.
2. A fault; an offence. It is generally uſed for an habitual
fault, not for a ſingle enormity. -
No vice, ſo ſimple, but aſſumes
Some mark of virtue on its outward parts. Shakeſp.
Yet my poor country
Shall have more vices than it had before ;
More ſuffer by him that ſhall ſucceed. Shakespeare.
Ungovern'd appetite, a brutiſh vice. AMºlton.
I cannot blame him for inveighing ſo ſharply againſt the
vices of the clergy in his age. Dryden.
3. The fool, or punchinello of old ſhows.
I'll be with you again
In a trice, like to the old vice,
- Your need to ſuſtain;
Who with dagger of lath, in his rage and his wrath,
Cries, ah, ha! to the devil. Shakeſpeare.
His face made of braſs, like a vice in a game. Tuffer.
4. [Pºs, Dutch..] A kind of ſmall iron preſs with ſcrews, uſed by
workmen.
He found that marbles taught him percuſſion; bottle-ſcrews,
the vice; whirligigs, the axis in peritrochio. Arbuth, and Pope.
5. Gripe; graſp.
If I but fift him once; if he come but within my
vice. Shakeſpeare.
6. [Pice, Latin.] It is uſed in compoſition for one, qui vicem gerit,
who performs, in his ſtead, the office of a ſuperiour, or who has
the ſecond rank in command: as a viceroy; vice-chancellor.
To Vice. v. a. [from the noun..] To draw.
With all confidence he ſwears,
As he had ſeen't, or been an inſtrument
To vice you to"t, that you have touch'd his queen
Forbiddenly. Shakeſpeare's JPinter Tale.
VI/CEADMIRAL. m. ſ. [vice and admiral.]
1. The ſecond commander of a fleet.
The foremoſt of the fleet was the admiral : the rear-
admiral was Cara Mahometes, an arch-pirate. The vice-
admiral in the middle of the fleet with a great ſquadron of
gallies, ſtruck ſail directly. Knolles.
2. A naval officer of the ſecond rank.
Vºce AdmiRALTY. n.ſ. [from vice-admiral.] The office of a
vice-admiral.
The vice-admiralty is exerciſed by Mr. Trenanion. Carew.
Vice A/G ENT. m. ſ. lvice and agent.] One who acts in the
place of another.
A vaſſal Satan hath made his vice-agent, to croſs whatever
the faithful ought to do. Hooker.
V1(ce D. adj. [from viced.] Vitious ; corrupt.
Be as a planetary plague, when Jove
Will o'er ſome high-vic'd city hang his poiſon
In the ſick air. Shakeſp.
VICEGE’RENT. m. ſ. [vicem gerens, Lat..] A lieutenant;
one who is intruſted with the power of the ſuperiour, by
whom he is deputed. -
All precepts concerning kings are comprehended in theſe ;
remember thou art a man ; remember thou art God's
wicegerent. Bacon.
Employ it in unſeigned piety towards God; in unſhaken
duty to his vicegerent ; in hearty obedience to his church. Sprat.
4.
Norris.
Viſcontiels. In law v.
V I C
Great Father of the gods, when for our crimes
Thou ſend'ſt ſome heavy judgment on the times;
º tyrant . the terrour of his age,
e type and true vicegeren ; race
+. gerent of thy rage,
Thou great vicegerent of the king;
- - - º
In all affairs thou ſole director.
VIceGE’RENT, adj. [vicegerens, Lat.
power ; ačting by ſubſtitution. .
Whom ſend I to judge thee Whom but thee
Wicegerent ſon To thee I have transferr'd »
All judgment, whether in heav'n, or earth, or hell, Mººn,
VIcEGE’RENcy... n. ſ. [from vicegernt.] The office of a vice-
gerent ; lieutenancy; deputed power. -
The authority of conſcience ſtands founded upon its vice-
gerency and deputation under God. South.
Vicech A^N cellor. m. ſ. [vicecancellarius, Latin.] The ſecond
magiſtrate of the univerſities. - -
V1(cEN ARY. adj. [vicemarius, Lat.] Belonging to twenty. Bailey.
VI'CEROY. m. ſ. [viceroi, French..] He who governs in place
of the king with regal authority. -
Shall I, for lucre of the reſt unvanquiſh'd,
Detract ſo much from that prerogative,
As to be call’d but viceroy of the whole * Shakespeare.
Mendoza, viceroy of Peru, was wont to ſay, that the go-
vernment of Peru was the beſt place the king of Spain gave,
Dryden.
Swift.
J Having a delegated
ſave that it was ſomewhat too near Madrid. Bacon.
We are ſo far from having a king, that even the viceroy
is generally abſent four fifths of his time. Swift.
V1(ceroy ALTY. m. ſ. [from viceroy.] Dignity of a viceroy.
Theſe parts furniſh out vice-royalties for the grandees : but
in war are incumbrances to the kingdom. - Add ſon.
V1'cETY. n.ſ. [Of this word I know not well the meaning or
original: a nice thing is now called in vulgar language, point
vice, from the French perhaps, point de vice; whence the
barbarous word vicety may be derived.] Nicety; exačtneſs.
A word not uſed.
Here is to the fruit of Pem,
Grafted upon Stub his ſten;
With the peakiſh nicety,
And old Sherewood's vicety.
Vict’NITY. m. ſ. [vicinus, Latin.]
I. Nearneſs; State of being near.
The poſition of things is ſuch, that there is a vicinity be-
tween agents and patients, that the one inceſſantly invades
the other. - Hale.
The abundance and vicinity of country ſeats. Swift.
2. Neighbourhood. -
He ſhall find out and recall the wandering particles home,
and fix them in their old vicinity, Rºgers.
Gravity alone muſt have carried them downwards to the
vicinity of the ſun. Bentley.
V1'cINAG.E. n.ſ. (vicinia, Lat.] Neighbourhood; places adjoin-
ing - -
Yºº {a}. [vicinus, Lat..] Near ; ncighbouring.
Opening other vicine paſſages might obliterate any track;
as the making of one hole in the yielding mud, defaces the
print of another near it. Glanville.
Vicious. adj [from vice..] See Vitious. Devoted to vice;
not addićted to virtue.
He heard this heavy curſe,
Servants of ſervants on his vicious race.
Vict’ssitude. [viciſſitudo, Latin.]
1. Regular change; return of the ſame things in the ſame
ſucceſſion.
B. Jºhnſon.
Milton.
It makes through heav'n
Grateful viciſſitude, like day and night. Miltºn.
The rays of light are alternately diſpoſed to be reflºed Or
refracted for many viciſſitudes. - Newton.
. This ſucceſſion of things upon the earth, is the reſult of
the viciſſitude of ſeaſons, and is as conſtant as is the cauſe of
that vićiſitude, the ſun's declination. //oodward.
2. Revolution ; change. - . .
During the courſe of the war, did the viciſtaks of good
and bad fortune affect us with humility or thankfulneſs. Atterb.
verſe ſweetens toil, however ride the ſound.
All at her work the village maidenſings;
Nor as ſhe turns the giddy wheel around, -
Revolves the ſad viciſiude of things. Giffard.
- contiel rents are certain farms, for
which the ſheriff pays a rent to the king, and makes what
profit he can of them. Piºntiel writs are ſuch writs as are
triable in the county court, before the ſheriff. Baile. ,
V1/crim. n.ſ. [vićtinia, Latin.] -
1. A ſacrifice; ſomething ſlain for * ſacrifice.
All that were authors of ſo black a deed,
Be ſacrific'd as victims to his ghoſt. Denham.
And on the victim pour the ruddy wine. Dryden.
Chumnus' waves, for triumphs after war, ---
The victim ox, and ſnowy ſheep prepare. Aidſºn.
\ 2. Some -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I E
V I F.
thing deſtroyed. - - - - -
2. somº, where age's wretched vićlim lies;
See his head trembling, and his half-clos'd eyes. Prior.
VI'CTOR. m. ſ. [victor, Lat.] Conqueror; vanquiſher; he
that gains the advantage in any conteſt. Wićlor is ſeldom
uſed with a genitive, and never but with regard to ſome ſingle
action or perſon. We rarely ſay Alexander was vićior of
Darius, though we ſay he was victor at Arbela ; but we never
ſay he was victor of Perſia. -
This ſtrange race more ſtrange conceits did yield;
Who vićior ſeem’d, was to his ruin brought ;
Who ſeem'd o'erthrown, was miſtreſs of the field. Sidney.
Some time the flood prevails, and then the wind,
Both tugging to be vićtors, breaſt to breaſt,
Yet neither conqueror, nor conquered.
Although the victor, we ſubmit to Caeſar.
Say where and when -
Their fight; what ſtroke ſhall bruiſe the vićlor's heel. Milt.
Our Hebrew ſongs and harps in Babylon,
That pleas'd ſo well our victors ear, declare
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
That rather Greece from us theſe arts deriv'd. Milton.
Their hearts at laſt the vanquiſh'd re-aſſume,
And now the vićtors fall. Denham.
In love the victors from the vanquiſh'd fly;
They fly that wound, and they purſue that die. J/aller.
Fortune's unjuſt; ſhe ruins oft the brave,
And him who ſhould be victor, makes the ſlave. Dryden.
Loſe not a thought on me, I'm out of danger;
Heaven will not leave me in the vicior's hand. Addiſon.
Victo'Rious. adj. [vičiarieux, Fr.]
1. Conquering ; having obtained conqueſt; ſuperiour in conteſt.
Vićtory doth more often fall by errour of the vanquiſhed,
than by the valour of the victorious. Hayward.
The great ſon return'd vićiorious with his ſaints. Milton.
That happy ſun, ſaid he, will riſe again,
Who twice vićlorious did our navy ſee:
And I alone muſt view him riſe in vain,
Without one ray of all his ſtar for me.
2. Producing conqueſt.
Sudden theſe honours ſhall be ſnatch'd away,
And curs'd for ever this vićiorious day.
3. Betokening conqueſt.
Now are our brows bound with vićtorious wreaths;
Our bruiſed arms hung up for monuments. Shakespeare
Victo Riously. adv. [from vićiorious.] With conqueſt; ſuc-
ceſsfully; triumphantly.
That grace will carry us, if we do not wilfully betray our
ſuccours, vićioriouſly through all difficulties. JHammond.
Victorious N Ess. n. ſ. [from vićlorious.] The ſtate or quality
of being vićtorious.
VI'croRY. n.f. [vić'oria, Lat..] Conqueſt ; ſucceſs in con-
teſt; triumph.
Dryden.
Pope.
At his nurſe's tears
He whin’d and roar'd away your viºry,
That pages bluſh'd at him. Shakeſp.
Then to the heav'n of heav'ns he ſhall aſcend
With victory, triumphing o'er his foes. AMilton.
Obedience is a com, licated act of virtue, and many graces
are exerciſed in one act of obedience. It is an act of humi-
lity, of mortification and ſelf-denial, of charity to God, of
care of the publick, of order and charity to ourſelves. It is a great
inſtance of a victory over the moſt refractory paſſions. Taylor.
Victs Ess; n.ſ.. [from victor.] A female that conquers.
I'll lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
And ſhe ſhall be ſole vićirſ; ; Caeſar's Caeſar. Shakeſp.
V1'cTUAL. }". ſ' ſwiężuailles, Fr. vittonaglia, Ital.] Proviſion
V1/ctuals. of food ; ſtores for the ſupport of life; meat;
ſuſtenance.
He landed in theſe iſlands, to furniſh himſelf with vićlual;
and freſh water. Abbot's Deſcrip. of the J/orld.
You had muſty victuals, and he hath holp to eat it: he
hath an excellent ſtomach. Shakeſp.
. He was not able to keep that place three days for lack of
vićtual. Knolles.
They unprovided of tackling and viciual, are forced to
ſea by a ſtorm. K. Charles.
Tº Victual. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtore with provi-
fion for food.
Talbot, farewel;
V1. I muſt go vidual Orleans forthwith. Shakespeare
********R. m.ſ.. [from vičiuals.) One who provides vićtuals.
ſu º their artillery againſt the haven, to impeach
PP'y of victuals; yet the Engliſh vićtuallers ſurceaſed not
to º all things neceſſary. Hayward.
‘....Sonqueſt half is to the vičiualler due. King.
*ś, “”. [Latin.] To wit; that is. This word is
V ºily written viz.
*...*.*. n. ſ. [from viduus, Lat.] Widowhood.
i. To ſh v. a. [Of this word the etymology is very uncertain.]
- #. ow, or practice in competition.
high. * “P” and expence with thoſe that are too
5 L'Eſtrange.
You vie happineſs in a thouſand eaſy and ſweet d
verſions. F.
2. In this paſſage the meaning ſeems to be, to add; to *
mulate.
She hung about my neck, and kiſs on kiſs
She vied ſo faſt,
That in a twink ſhe won me to her love. Shakeſ
To VIE. v. n. To conteſt; to contend; to ſtrive ...
periority.
In a trading nation, the younger ſons may be placed in
ſuch a way of life, as may enable them to vie with the beſt
of their family. Addiſon
The wool, when ſhaded with Ancona's dye, -
May with the proudeſt Tyrian purple vie. Addison,
Now voices over voices riſe;
While each to be the loudeſt vies. Swift,
To VIEW. v. a. [veu, Fr. from veoir, or voir.] w
1. To ſurvey; to look on by way of examination.
Go, and view the country. jºſ. vii. 1,
Th' almighty father bent down his eye,
His own works and their works at once to view. Milan.
Piew not this ſpire, by meaſures giv'n,
To buildings rais'd by common hands. Priºr,
Whene'er we view ſome well-proportion'd dome ;
No ſingle parts unequally ſurprize;
All comes united to th’ admiring eyes. Pºe.
2. To ſee , to perceive by the eye.
With eyes aghaſt
/iew'd firſt their lamentable lot.
No more I hear, no more I view,
The phantom flies me, as unkind as you. Pºpe.
VIEW, n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Proſpect.
You ſhould tread a courſe
Pretty, and full of view; yea, haply, near
The reſidence of Poſthumus. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Vaſt and indefinite views, which drown all apprehenſions ºf
the uttermoſt objects, are condemned by good authors. Wºttºn,
The walls of Pluto's palace are in view. Drydºn,
Cut wide views through mountains to the plain,
You'll wiſh your hill, or ſhelter'd hill again. Pºt.
2. Sight; power of beholding.
Millin,
Some ſafer reſolution I’ve in view. Milton.
I go, to take for ever from your view, -
Both the lov'd object, and the hated too. Dryden.
Theſe things duly weigh'd, will give us a clear virw into
the ſtate of human liberty. Iºt.
Inſtruct me other joys to prize,
With other beauties charm my partial eyes;
Full in my view ſet all the bright abode,
And make my ſoul quit Abelard for God.
3. Aćt of ſeeing.
Th’ unexpected ſound
Of dogs and men, his wakeful ear does wound;
Rouz'd with the noiſe, he ſcarce believes his ear,
Willing to think th’ illuſions of his fear . . .
Had giv'n this falſe alarm ; but ſtraight his view
Confirms that more than all he fears is true. Dallan.
Objects near our view are thought greater than thoſe ºf
a larger ſize, that are more remote. Lºft,
4. Sight; eye.
She was not much ſtruck with thoſe objećts that nº Pº.
"Pºt,
ſented themſelves to her view. Female ºuixºtº.
5. Survey; examination by the eye.
Time never will renew,
While we too far the pleaſing path purſue, Dryden,
Surveying nature with too nice a view.
6. Intellectual ſurvey. - he in-
If the mind has made this inference by finding . e of
termediate ideas, and taking a view of the conſit º
them, it has proceeded rationally.
7. Space that may be taken in by th
The fame through all the neigh
When now the Trojan navy was in “”
8. Appearance; ſhow. -
In that accompliſh'd mind.
Helpt by the night, new graces find;
Which, by the ſplendour of her view,
Dazzl’d before we never knew. . d
9. Diſplay; exhibition to the fight or . ken
To give a right view of this " º: ...
would any one be a changeling, bº, e
by wiſe conſiderations than a wiſe man
1o Proſpect of intereſt. -
Noman ſets himſelf about anything,
or other, which ſerves him for a reaſon.
11. Intention ; deſign. - try, refers what he
He who ſojourns in a foreign colº.’... he makes
- *... with that vict"
ſees to the ſtate of things at home 3 with t Atterbury.
g from his expedi’
ocºt.
e eye; reach of fight.
hbºring nations fiew: ,
- Dryden.
I/aller,
art of liberty.
determiſt
ºff.
view
but upon ſome.*
P Lºtke.
all his reflections. in returnin
With a view to commerce, in ."
l ºpt. Art
tion againſt the Parthians, he paſſed through Fºr; 1/EWLBs3.
uthnºt.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I G
V I L
º
*
_*
º,
*
º
º
Viewºfss, adj. [from view.] Unſeen; not diſcernible by
the ſight.
#. be impriſon'd in the viewliſ, winds,
And blown with reſtleſs violence about
The pendant world Shakeſp.
Each ſtair myſteriouſly was meant, nor ſtood
There always, but drawn up to heav'n ſometimes
Viewleſs. Milton's Par. Loft.
Swift through the valves the viſionary fair
Repaſs'd, and viewleſ, mix'd with common air. Pope.
Light-bounding from the earth, at once they riſe;
Their feet half viewleſs quiver in the ſkies. Pope.
VIGES MA’tion. n.ſ...[vegeſimus, Latin.] The act of putting
to death every twentieth man. Bailey.
V,'GIL. n.ſ. [vigilia, Latin.]
1. Watch; devotions performed in the cuſtomary hours of reſt.
So they in heaven their odes and vigils tun'd. Milton.
Shrines where their vigils pale-ey'd virgins keep,
And pitying ſaints, whoſe ſtatues learn to weep. Pope.
2. A faſt kept before a holiday.
He that out-lives this day, and ſees old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feaſt his neighbours,
And ſay to-morrow is St. Criſpian. Shakeſp.
3. Service uſed on the night before a holiday.
No altar is to be conſecrated without reliques, which
placed before the church door, the vigils are to be celebrated
that night before them. Stillingfleet.
The rivals call my muſe another way,
To ſing their vigils for th’ enſuing day. Dryden.
4. Watch ; forbearance of ſleep.
Though Venus and her ſon ſhou’d ſpare
Her rebel heart, and never teach her care;
Yet Hymen may perforce her vigils keep,
And for another's joy ſuſpend her ſleep. //aller.
Nothing wears out a fine face like the vigils of the card-
table, and thoſe cutting paſſions which attend them. Addiſon.
/ - *-
W. }n. ſ. [vigilance, Fr. vigilantia, Lat.]
1. Forbearance of ſleep. -
Ulyſſes yielded unſeaſonably to ſleep, and the ſtrong paſ-
ſion for his country ſhould have given him vigilance. Broome.
2. Watchfulneſs ; circumſpection; inceſſant care.
Shall Henry's conqueſt, Bedford's vigilance,
Your deeds of war, and all our counſel die Shakeſp.
No poſt is free, no place,
That guard and moſt unuſual vigilance
Does not attend my taking. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
In this their military care, there were few remarkable oc-
caſions under the duke, ſaving his continual vigilancy, and vo-
luntary hazard of his perſon. //otton.
Of theſe the vigilance
I dread; and to elude, thus wrapp'd in miſt
Of midnight vapour, glide obſcure. Milton.
We are enabled to ſubdue all other creatures; and uſe
for our behoof the ſtrength of the ox, the ſagacity and vigi-
lancy of the dog. Ray.
3. Guard ; watch.
In at this gate none paſs
The vigilance here plac'd, but ſuch as come
Well known from heav'n. Milton.
VI'GILANT. adj. [vigilans, Latin.] Watchful; circumſpect;
diligent; attentive.
They have many prayers, but every of them very ſhort,
as if they were darts thrown out with a kind of ſudden
quickneſs; leſt that vigilant and erect attention of mind,
which in prayer is very neceſſary, ſhould be waſted or dulled
through continuance. Hooker.
Take your places, and be vigilant:
If any noiſe or ſoldier you perceive, - -
Let us have knowledge. Shakeſpeare.
The treaſurer, as he was vigilant in ſuch caſes, had notice
of the clerk's expiration ſo ſoon, that he procured the king
to ſend a meſſage to the maſter of the rolls. Clarend.
V1'gi LANTLY. adv. [from vigilant. J Watchfully ; atten-
tively; circumſpectly. * * * * *
Thus in peace, either of the kings ſo vigilantly obſerved
every motion of the others, as if they had lived upon the
alarm. Hayward.
V "Go Rous. adj. ſom vigor, Latin.] Forcible; not weaken-
ed; full of ſtrength and life.
Fam'd for his valour young;
At ſea ſucceſsful, vigorous and ſtrong ! //aller.
Their appetite is not dull'd by being gratified, but returns
always freſh and vigorous. Atterbury.
V1'Go Rously. adv. [from vigour.] With force; forcibly ;
without weakneſs.
The prince had two giant ſhips;
With his one ſo vigorouſly he preſs'd, -
And flew ſo home, they could not riſe again. Dryden.
If the fire burns bright and vigorouſly, it is no matter by
º
f
º
º
what means it was at firſt kindled. South,
That Prince whoſe cauſe you eſpouſe ſo vigoroiºſº, is the
Principal in the war, and you but a ſecond. ºvºi.
- - - -'
***ousness. n. / [from viºur.] Force; ſtrength.
ſ #. hath given excellent ſufferance and vigorotºnſ to the
U - - -
crers, arming them with ſtrange courage, heroical forti.
vº º: jº,* glorious patience. Taylor.
I. Force; ſtrength.
Someti -
With jº ſometimes ran, -
&gt; vely vigour led. Milton.
Shame to be overcome,
Wou'd utmoſt vigour raiſe, and rais'd unite. Mºſton
Pernicious fire wither'd all their ſtrength, ...”.
And of their wonted vigour left them dia.d. A ſilion.
The mind and ſpirit remains
Invincible, and vigour ſoon returns. Milton.
No deep within her gulf can hold -
Immortal vigour. Miltºn.
he vigour of this arm was never vain:
Witneſs theſe heaps of ſlaughter. Dryden.
2. Mental force; intellectual abjitv.
3. Energy; efficacy. -
- In the fruitful earth
His beams, unactive elſe, their vigour find. Aſºon.
How does Carteſius all his finews ſtrain, -
The earth's attractive vigour to explain Blackmºre.
VILE. adj. [vil, Fr. vilis, Lat.j Baſe; mean; worthleſs ;
ſordid ; deſpicable.
Our caſe were miſerable, if that wherewith we moſt en-
deavour to pleaſe God, were in his fight ſo vile and deſpicable
as men's diſdainful ſpeech would make it. 11ocker.
I diſdaining ſcorn'd, and craved death,
Rather than I would be ſo vile eſteem'd. Shakeſp.
He to-day that ſheds his blood with me,
Shall be my brother; be he ne'er ſo vile,
This day ſhall gentle his condition. Shakespeare.
The inhabitants account gold but as a vile thing. Abbot.
That ſinful creature man elected is,
And in our place the heavens poſſeſs he muſt ;
Mile man, begot of clay, and born of duſt. Fairfax.
A ſpontaneous production is againſt matter of fact; a thing
without example not only in man, but the vilſ of weeds. Bent.
2. Morally impure; wicked.
Reſtor'd by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance. Milton.
V1(LED. adj. [from vile, whence revil..] Abuſive; ſcurrilous;
defamatory. - -
He granted life to all except to one, who had uſed viſa
ſpeeches againſt king Edward. Hayward.
V1'LELY. adv. [from vile.] Baſely; meanly; ſhamefully.
The Volſcians vilely yielded the town. Shakespeare .
How can I
Forget my Hector, treated with diſhonour,
Depriv'd of funeral rites, and vilely dragg'd,
A bloody corſe, about the walls of Troy. A. Philips.
V1'LEN Ess. m. ſ. [from vile.] -
1. Baſeneſs; meanneſs; deſpicableneſs.
His vileneſ us ſhall never awe :
But here our ſports ſhall be:
Such as the golden world firſt ſaw,
Moſt innocent and free. Drayton.
Reflect on the eſſential vilenſ of matter, and its impo-
tence to conſerve its own being. Creech.
Conſidering the vileneſs of the clay, I wondered that no
tribune of that age durſt ever venture to aſk the potter,
what doſt thou make - Swift.
2. Moral or intellectual baſeneſs. -
- Then, vileneſs of mankind
Could one, alas! repeat me good or great,
Waſh my pale body, or bewail my fate P. jar.
To V1'LIFY. v. a. [from vile.] To debaſe ; to defame ; to
make contemptible.
Tomalin could not abide,
To hear his ſovereign viliff'd. Drayton.
Their maker's image ---
Forſook them, when themſelves they vilſy'd
To ſerve ungovern'd appetite; and took -
His image whom they ſerv'd. Milton.
The diſpleaſure of their prince, thoſe may expect, who would
put in practice all methods to vilify his perſon. Addison.
Many paſſions diſpoſe us to depreſs and vilify the merit of
one riſing in the eſteem of mankind. - Addison.
VILL. n. J. [ville, Fr. villa, Latin.] A village; a ſmall col-
lection of houſes. Little in uſe. -
This book gives an account of the manurable lands in
every manor, town, or will. Hale.
V1/1 L.A. m. ſ. [villa, Lat..] A country feat. - ---
The º Romans lay the foundations of their villas and
palaces within the very borders of the ſea. Aidºn.
All vaſt poſſeſſions; juſt the ſame the caſe, P
Whether you call then villa, park, or chace. ºr.
- * .."; " " " vºlt AG.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I L
V I N
VPLLAGE. n.ſ. [village, Fr.] A ſmall colle&amp;tion of houſes
- § than a town.
in the country, leſs - -
Beggars, with roaring voices, from low farms,
Or peſting villageſ, ſheep coats, and mills,
Inforce their charity. Shakeſpeare.
The early village cock
Hath twice done ſalutation to the morn. Shakeſp.
You have many enemies, that know not
Why they are ſo; but, like the village curs,
Bark when their fellows do. Shakeſpeare.
The country villages were burnt down to the ground. Knollet.
Thoſe village-words give us a mean idea of the thing. Dryd.
Seam'd o'er with wounds which his own ſabre gave,
In the vile habit of a village ſlave. . . . . Pope.
VI’llager. n. ſ. [from village.] An inhabitant of the village.
Brutus had rather be a villager,
Than to repute himſelf a ſon of Rome
Under ſuch hard conditions. Shakeſp.
When once her eye
Hath met the virtue of this magick duſt,
I ſhall appear ſome harmleſs villager, -
Whom thrift keeps up about his country geer. Milton.
If there are conveniencies of life, which common uſe
reaches not, it is not reaſon to reject them, becauſe every
villager doth not know them. Locke.
VI'll AGERY. m. ſ. [from village.] Diſtrićt of villages.
Robin Goodfellow, are you not he,
That fright the maidens of the villagery P Shakeſp.
VI'LLAIN. n.ſ. [vilain, Fr. villanus, low Latin.]
1. One who held by a baſe tenure.
The Iriſh inhabiting the lands fully conquered, being in
condition of ſlaves and villains, did render a greater revenue,
than if they had been made the king's free ſubjećts. Davies.
2. A wicked wretch.
We were prevented by a dozen armed knights, or rather
villains, who, uſing this time of their extreme feebleneſs, all
together ſet upon them.
O villain / villain / his very opinion in the letter. Ab-
horred villain / unnatural, deteſted, brutiſh villain / Shakeſp.
What in the world,
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies. Shakeſp.
He was ſtabbed to the heart by the hand of a villain, upon
the mere impious pretence of his being odious to the parlia-
ment. Clarendon.
Calm thinking villains, whom no faith could fix;
Of crooked counſels, and dark politicks.
VI'll ANAGE. m. ſ. [from villain.]
1. The ſtate of a villain; baſe ſervitude.
They exerciſe moſt bitter tyranny,
Upon the parts brought into their bondage:
No wretchedneſs is like to finful villanage. Fairy Queen.
Upon every ſuch ſurrender and grant, there was but one
freeholder, which was the lord himſelf; all the reſt were but
tenants in villanage, and were not fit to be ſworn in
Pope.
juries. Davies.
2. Baſeneſs; infamy.
If in thy ſmoke it ends, their glories ſhine;
But infamy and villanage are thine. Dryden.
To Viºlanize. v. a. [from villain..] To debaſe; to degrade;
to defame.
Were virtue by deſcent, a noble name
Could never villanize his father's fame;
But, as the firſt, the laſt of all the line,
Would, like the ſun, ev’n in deſcending ſhine. Dryden.
Theſe are the fools, whoſe ſtolidity can baffle all argu-
mºnts; whoſe glory is in their ſhame, in the debaſing and
villanizing of mankind to the condition of beaſis. Bentley.
Vi'ilanous, adj. [from villain.]
1. Baſe; vile; wicked.
2. Sorry.
Thou art my ſon; I have partly thy mother's word, partly
ºy own opinion; but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye
doth warrant me. Shakeſp.
3. It is uſed by Shakeſpeare to exaggerate any think deteſtable.
We ſhall loſe our time,
And all be turn'd to barnacles or apes,
* - / With foreheads villanous low. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Vi'Llanously, adv. [from villainous.] Wickedly; baſely.
The wandering Numidian falſified his faith, and villanouſly
flew Selymes the king, as he was bathing himſelf. Knoll.i.
r r --- - - - - -
ViºllanóusNess. n. /.. [from villainous...] Baſeneſs; wicked-
neſs.
Villa Ny. * ſ [from villain ; villonnie, old French.]
1. Wickedneſs; baſeneſs ; depravity.
Truſt not thoſe cunning waters of his eyes;
For *ainy is not without ſuch a rheum :
#!" he long traded in it, makes it rººm
*e rivers of remorſe and innocence. Shakeſp.
in . ls º: º: jeſter; and the commendation is not
* Wit, but in his villany. Shake
* A wicked action; a crime. º/p
No villamy, or flagitious action was
but a lie was firſt or #
Such villainies rous'd Horace into wrath ;
And 'tis more noble to purſue his path,
Than an old tale.
ºr yet, ommitted,
at the principal engine to effect it. South
Villaſtick, adj. [villaticus, Lat.] Belonging to wº
Evening dragon came, §ts.
Affailant on the perched rooſts,
And neſts in order rang'd,
Of tame villatick fowl. Mihºn
WPLLI. m. ſ. [Latin.]
In anatomy, are the ſame as fibres; and in botany, ſmall
hairs like the grain of pluſh or ſhag, with which, ...",".
º &gt; ind
of excreſcence, ſome trees do abound.
VI'llous. adj. [villoſus, Lat.] Shaggy; rough.
The liquor of the ſtomach, which with faſting grows
ſharp, and the quick ſenſation of the inward villa ºn of
the ſtomach, ſeem to be the cauſe of the ſenſe of hunger. Art
VIM1'Neous. adj. [vimineus, Latin.] Made of twig. -
As in the hive's vimineous dome,
Ten thouſand bees enjoy their home;
Each does her ſtudious action vary,
To go and come, to fetch and carry.
VI/NCIBLE.
rable.
He not vincible in ſpirit, and well aſſured that ſhortneſs of
proviſion would in a ſhort time draw the ſeditious to ſhorter
limits, drew his ſword. Hayward.
Becauſe ’twas abſolutely in my power to have attended
more heedfully, there was liberty in the principle, the miſtake
which influenced the action was vincible. Norris,
V1'NcibleNess. n.ſ.. [from vincible.] Liableneſs to be over.
Conne. Diff.
V1'Ncture. n.ſ.. [vinčura, Lat.] A binding. Baily.
VINDE/MIAL. adj. Ivindemia, Latin.] Belonging to a vintage.
To VINDE(MIAt E. v. n. [vindemia, Latin.] To gather the
vintage.
Now vindemiate, and take your bees towards the expiration
of this month. Evejn.
ViN DEMIATION. n.ſ. [vindemia, Lat..] Grape-gathering, Bail).
To VI'NDICATE. v. a. ſ.vindico, Lat.]
1. To juſtify; to ſupport; to maintain.
Where the reſpondent denies any propoſition, the opponent
muſt directly vindicate and confirm that propoſition; i.e. he
muſt make that propoſition the concluſion of his next ſyl-
logiſm. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. To revenge; to avenge. -
We ought to have added, how far an holy war is to be
purſued; whether to enforce a new belief, and to vindicate
or puniſh infidelity Bacon.
Man is not more inclinable to obey God than man; but
God is more powerful to exact ſubjection, and to windia;
rebellion. Pearſon on the Cred
The more numerous the offenders are, the more his
#iny.
- Priºr.
adj. [from vinco, Lat.] Conquerable; ſupe-
juſtice is concerned to vindicate the affront. Tilſºn,
Aſſemble ours, and all the Theban race,
To vindicate on Athens thy diſgrace. Dryden.
3. To aſſert; to claim with efficacy. - iuſ!!
Never any touch’d upon this way, which our pººl !
has vindicated to himſelf. Dryden's Prºf. tº Ovid
The beauty of this town, without a fleet,
From all the world ſhall vindicate her trade.
4. To clear; to protećt. ion of ter-
God's ways of dealing with us, are by propoſition º the
rors and promiſes. To theſe is added the authority o 0-
commander, vindicated from our neglect by the .
fition of the greateſt ſigns and wonders, in the *:º:
prophets, and of his ſon. ammº
I may aſſert eternal providence,
And vindicate the ways of God to man.
VINDIcaſtion. n. ſ. [vindication, Fr. from
fence; aſſertion; juſtification.
This is no windication of her condućt.
mean part, and, through fear, becomes an acº"P
deavouring to betray the Greeks.
V1'NDIcAtive. adj. [from vindicate.
revenge.
Dryden,
Miltºn.
windicate.] Dºº
She ſtill ačts 4
lice, in en-
Broºmſ,
l Revengeful; given"
He, in heat of a&amp;tion, Słºń.
Is more vindicative than jealous love. buſin
Publick revenges are for the moſt part º, e life
private revenges it is not ſo. Findicative perſons º they un-
of witches, who, as they are miſchievous, ſo e digm.
atc. - 3.
“...is of aduſted choler, and the evº
vindicative ſpirit. - - what
Do not !. many believe no zeal to be ſpiritual, º
is cenſorious or vindicative * Whereas no “” ...
that is not alſo charitable. - -- sº º thoſe
Diſtinguiſh betwixt a paſſion purely ºnairety h jagº
counſels where divine juſtice avenges the innocent.
Wisdica'ſ”
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I N
V I O
—-º-º-º-º-
***
... •
**
... n.
º,
* * * *
wº º
º
!
WINDICA’Tor. m. ſ. [from vindicate.] One who windicates;
an affertor.
He treats tyranny, and the vices attending it, with the ut-
moſt rigour; and conſequently a noble ſoul is better pleas'd
with a jealous vindicator of Roman liberty, than with a
temporizing poet. Dryden.
V1's pic Aror Y. adj. [from vindicator.]
1. Punitory; performing the office of vengeance.
The āfilićtions of Job were no vindicatory puniſhments to
take vengeance of his fins, but probatory chaſtiſements to
make trial of his graces. Bramhall's Anſwer to Hobbs.
2. Defenſory ; juſtificatory.
VINDi’ctive. adj. [from vindija, Latin.] Given to revenge;
revengeful.
I am vindićlive enough to repel force by force. Dryden.
Auguſtus was of a nature too vindictive, to have contented
himſelf with ſo ſmall a revenge. Dryden.
VINE. m. ſ. [vinea, Latin.] The plant that bears the grape.
The flower conſiſts of many leaves placed in a regular
order, and expanding in form of a roſe : the ovary, which is
ſituated in the bottom of the flower, becomes a round
fruit, full of juice, and contains many ſmall ſtones in each.
The tree is climbing, ſending forth claſpers at the joints, by
which it faſtens itſelf to what plant ſtands near it, and the fruit
is produced in bunches. The ſpecies are, 1. The wild vine,
commonly called the claret grape. 2. The July grape. 3. The
Corinth grape, vulgarly called the currant grape. 4. The
parſley leav'd grape. 5. The miller's grape. This is called
the Burgundy in England: the leaves of this ſort are very
much powdered with white in the ſpring, from whence it
had the name of miller's grape. 6. Is what is called in Bur-
gundy Pineau, and at Orleans, Auverna: it makes very good
wine. 7. The white chaſſelas, or royal muſcadine: it is a
large white grape; the juice is very rich. 8. The black
chaſſelas, or black muſcadine ; the juice is very rich. 9. The
red chaſſelas, or red muſcadine. 1 o' The burlake grape.
11. The white muſtat, or white Frontiniac. 12. The red
Frontiniac. 13. The black Frontiniac. 14. The damaſk
grape. 15. The white ſweet water. 16. The black ſweet
water. 17. The white muſcadine. 18. The raiſin grape.
19. The Greek grape. 20. The pearl grape. 21. The
St. Peter's grape, or heſperian. 22. The malmſey grape.
23. The malmſey muſcadine. 24. The red Hamburgh
grape. 25. The black Hamburgh, or warmer grape. 26. The
Switzerland grape. 27. The white muſcat, or Frontiniac of
Alexandria; called alſo the Jeruſalem muſcat and groſs muſ-
cat. 28. The red muſcat, or Frontiniac of Alexandria.
29. The white melie grape. 30. The white morillon.
31. The Alicant grape. 32. The white Auvernat. 33. The
grey Auvernat. 34. The raiſin muſcat. The late duke of
Tuſcany, who was very curious in colle&amp;ting all the ſorts of
Italian and Greek grapes into his vineyards, was poſſeſſed of
upwards of three hundred ſeveral varieties. Miller.
The vine-prop elm, the poplar never dry. Fairy Queen.
In her days every man ſhall eat in ſafety,
Under his own vine, what he plants. Shakespeare
The captain left of the poor to be vine-dreſſers. 2 Kings xxv.
Depending vines the ſhelving cavern ſcreen,
With purple cluſters bluſhing through the green. Pope.
V1'NE GAR. n. ſ. [vinaigre, Fr.]
1. Wine grown ſour.
Winegar is made by ſetting the veſſel of wine againſt the
hot ſun; and therefore vinegar will not burn, much of the
finer parts being exhaled. Bacon.
Heav'n's bleſt beam turns vinegar more ſour. Pope.
2. Any thing really or metaphorically four.
Some laugh like parrots at a bag-piper,
And others of ſuch vinegar aſpect,
That they'll not ſhow their teeth in way of ſmile. Shakeſp.
V1'NN Ew ED, or Winney, adj. Mouldy. Ainſworth.
V1/NEY ARD. m. ſ. [pingeanb, Saxon.] A ground planted with
WineS.
Let us not live in France; let us quit all,
And give our vineyards to a barb'rous people. Shakeſp.
Though ſome had ſo ſurfeited in the vineyards, and with
the wines, that they had been left behind, the generoſity of
the Spaniards ſent them all home again. Clarendon.
V1'Nous. adj. [from vinum, Latin.] Having the qualities of
wine ; conſiſting of wine. -
The motion of the oily drops may be in part due to ſome
partial ſolution made by the vinous ſpirit. Boyle.
Water will imbibe
The ſmall remains of ſpirit, and acquire
A vinous flavour. Philips.
V1's TAGE. m. ſ. (vinage, Fr.] The produce of the vine for
the year.
The beſt wines are in the drieſt vintages. Bacon.
Our firſt ſucceſs in war make Bacchus crown,
And half the vintage of the year our own. Waller.
• Vi’NTAGE R. m. ſ. [from vintage.] He who gathers the vin-
tage. Ainſworth.
V1'Nº NER. m. ſ. [from vinum, Lat.] One who ſells wine.
- 2.
The vintner may draw what religion he pleaſes. Howel.
The vintner, by mixing poiſon with his wines, deſtroys
more lives than any malignant diſeaſe. Swift.
VI'NTRY. m. ſ. The place where wine is ſold. Ainſworth.
V1'ol. n. ſ. [viole, Fr. viola, Ital.] A ſtringed inſtrument of
muſick.
My tongue's uſe is to me no more,
Than an unſtringed viol, or a harp. Shakeſp.
To ſtrain a ſtring, ſtop it with the finger, as in the neés
of lutes and viols.
Loud o'er the reſt Cremona's trump doth ſound;
Me ſofter airs befit, and ſofter ſtrings
Of lute, or viol, ſtill more apt for mournful things. Milton.
Violable, adj. [from violabilis, Lat.] Such as may be vio-
V lated or hurt.
Iola'ceous. adj. [from viola, Lat 1 Reſembling violets.
To Violate. tº ſº. Lat.] J ing violet
1. To injure; to hurt.
I queſtion thy bold entrance,
Employ'd to violate the ſleep of thoſe
JBacon.
Whoſe dwelling God haſh planted here in bliſs. Mihon.
Kindneſs for man, and pity for his fate,
May mix with bliſs, and yet not violate. Pryden.
To k hat k º:
o know what known will violate thy peace. -
2. To infringe; to break any thing º: Pope
Some of violated vows
*Twixt the ſouls of friend and friend. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe offences which are by their ſpecial qualities breaches
of ſupernatural laws, do alſo, for that they are generally evil,
violate in general that principle of reaſon, which willeth uni-
verſally to fly from evil. Hooker.
3. To injure by irreverence.
I would violate my own arm rather than a church. Brown.
Forbid to violate the ſacred fruit. Milton.
4. To raviſh ; to deflower.
The Sabines violated charms
Obſcur'd the glory of his riſing arms. Prior.
Violation. n.ſ. [violatio, Lat.)
1. Infringement or injury of ſomething ſacred.
Their right conceit that to perjury vengeance is due, was
not without good effect, as touching the courſe of their lives,
who feared the wilful violation of oaths. Hooker.
Men, who had no other guide but their reaſon, conſidered
the violation of an oath to be a great crime. Addiſon.
2. Rape; the act of deflowering.
If your pure maidens fall into the hand
. Of hot and forcing violation. Shakespeare
Viola/ToR. n.ſ. [violator, Lat.]
1. One who injures or infringes ſomething ſacred.
May ſuch places, built for divine worſhip, derive a bleſfing
upon the head of the builders, as laſting as the curſe that
never fails to reſt upon the ſacrilegious violators of them. South.
2. A raviſher.
Angelo is an adult’rous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin violator. Shakespeare
How does ſhe ſubject herſelf to the violator's upbraidin
and inſults. 3.
V1'ole Nce. n.ſ. [violentia, Latin.]
1. Force; ſtrength applied to any purpoſe.
To be impriſon'd in the viewleſs wind,
And blown with reſtleſs violence about. Shakeſp.
All the elements
At leaſt had gone to wreck, diſturb’d and torn
With violence of this conflićt, had not ſoon
Th’ eternal hung his golden ſcales. Milton.
2. An attack; an aſſault; a murder.
A noiſe did ſcare me from the tomb;
And ſhe, too deſperate, would not go with me:
But, as it ſeems, did violence on herſelf.
3. Outrage; unjuſt force.
Griev'd at his heart, when looking down he ſaw
The whole earth fill'd with violence; and all fleſh
Corrupting each their way. Milton's Par. Loſt.
4. Eagerneſs; vehemence.
That ſeal
You aſk with ſuch violence, the king
With his own hand gave me.
. Injury; infringement.
5. I § cannot, *. offering violence to all records, divine
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
and human, deny an univerſal deluge. Burnet.
6. Forcible defloration.
Violent, adj. [violentus, Lat.]
1. Forcible; acting with ſtrength.
A violent croſs wind blows: Milton.
d or continued by force. -
2. Fº we find #: in, according to his doćtrine,
muſt be look’d upon as unnatural and violent; and no violent
ſtate can be perpetual. Æarner.
3. Not natural, but brought by force.
Conqueror death diſcovers them ſcarce men ;
Wiolent or ſhameful death their due reward.
Milter.
4. Un-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I R
V I R
º
i
: | affiant; murderous. . - - !, a '
4. tº: violent had were laid on Humphry's life. Sºft.
A fee ſubtile or violent. Miltºn.
nſeaſonably vehement. . . -
- tº: º: be reckoned fierce and violent, to tear away
that, which, if our mouths did condemn, our conſciences
would ſtorm and repine thereat. Hºfer.
The covetous extortioner ſhould remember, that ſuch º-
ſºnſ, ſhall not take heaven, but hell by force. Lecºy ºf Płºy.
ºxtorted ; not voluntary. -
6. Ex vow, made in pain, are violent and void. - Milton.
Vroles T.I.Y. adv. [from violent.] With force; forcibly; ve-
hemently. t
Temp'rately proceed to what you would • -
Thus viºlently redreſs. Shakespeare . Gºrizatiº.
Flame burneth more violently towards the ſides, than in the
midſt. Bacºn.
Antient privileges muſt not, without great neceſſities, be
revoked, nºr forfeitures be cxacted violently, nor penal laws
urged rigorouſly. - Taylor's Rule ºf living holy.
Violet. n.ſ. [...iolette, Fr. viola, Lat.]. A plant.
It hath a polypetalous anomalous flower, ſomewhat re-
ſembling the papilionaceous flower; for its two upper petals
repreſent the ſtandard, the two ſide ones the wings; but the
lower one, which ends in a tail, reſembles the iris. Out of
the empalement ariſes the pointal, which becomes a three-cor-
nered fruit opening into three parts, and full of roundiſh
ſeeds. There are nine ſpecies. Miller.
When daiſies pied, and violets blue,
Do paint the meadows much bedight. Shakeſp.
- Sweet echo, ſweeteſt nymph that liv'ſt unſeen,
By ſlow Meander's margent green,
Milton.
And in the violet-embroider'd vale.
It alters not our ſimple idea, whether we think that blue
be in the violet itſelf, or in our mind only; and only the
power of producing it by the texture of its parts, to be in
the violet itſelf. Locke.
V1'olin. m. ſ. [violen, Fr. from viol.] A fiddle ; a ſtringed
inſtrument of muſick.
Praiſe with timbrels, organs, flutes;
Praiſe with violins, and lutes. Sandys.
Sharp violins proclaim
Their jealous pangs, and deſperation,
For the fair diſdainful dame. Dryden.
V1'olist. m. ſ. [from viol.] A player on the viol.
VIOLONCE/LLO. m. ſ. [Italian.] A ſtringed inſtrument of
muſick.
VIPER. m. ſ. [vipera, Lat.]
1. A ſerpent of that ſpecies which brings its young alive, of
which moſt are poiſonous.
A viper came out of the heat, and faſtened on his
hand. - Acts xxviii. 3.
He'll gall of aſps with thirſty lips ſuck in ;
The viper's deadly teeth ſhall pierce his ſkin. Sandys.
Piper-catchers have a remedy, in which they place ſuch
great confidence, as to be no more afraid of the bite of a
viper, than of a common punéture. This is no other than
... cxungia viperina, preſently rubbed into the wound. Derham.
2. Any thing miſchievous.
Where is this viper,
That would depopulate the city, and .
- Be every man himſelf? Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
V1'PER IN F. m. ſ. ſwiperinus, Lat.] Belonging to a viper.
V1(PFRoºs. adj. [vipereus, Lat. from viper.j Having the qua-
litics of a viper.
My tender years can tell,
Civil diſſention is a vip'rous worm,
That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth. Shaieff.
We are peremptory to diſpatch
This viperous traitor. Shakeſp.
Some vip’rous critick may bereave - -
Th' opinion of thy worth for ſome defect. Daniel's Mºſºph.
VIPER's buglºſs. n.ſ. [echium, Lat.] A plant.
... The characters are, the cup of the flower is large, and
divided into five long ſlender ſegments; the flower conſiſts of
one leaf, is ſhaped like a funnel, and ſomewhat inflected,
having its upper part ſtretched, but in a greater length than
the lower: the upper part, or galea of the flower, is divided
into two ; and the lower part, or beard, into three parts: in
produced five ſtamina (or
Each flower is ſucceeded by
Miller.
the middle of the flower are
threads) which are reflexed.
four feeds, which are in form of a viper's head.
VIPER’s graſs. n.ſ. [ſtarzonera, Lat.] A plant.
It hath a
ºne common empalement,
terwards become
down. . .
- PIRA'G O. m. ſ. [Latin.]
" *** warriour; a woman with the qualities of a man.
Melpomene repreſented
**jettick and grave countenanc.
* -
--
2. It is commonly uſed in deteſtation for an impudent tº:
n
- ſemi-fioſculous flower, conſiſting of many half
florets, which reſt upon the embryoes, which are included in
which is ſcaly: the embryoes af-
oblong ſeeds, which are furniſhed with
AAiler.
like a viraga or manly lady, with
Peacham.
To arms to arms the fierce vira” cries,
And ſwift as lightening to the combat flies.
Pºe
won nan.
V1's FLAY. m. ſ. ſvircley, viralai, Fr.] A ſort of little an
cient French poem, that conſiſted only of
ſhort verſes, with ſtops. y of two º
The mournful muſe in mirth now liſt ne maſk ºad,
As ſhe was wont in youngth and ſummer days; »
But if thou algate luſt like wirelays, J - x
And looſer ſongs of love to underſong.
The band of flutes began to play,
To which a lady ſung a virelay's
And ſtill at ev'ry cloſe ſhe would repeat
The burden of the ſong, the daiſy is ſo ſweet.
V1/2 ENT. adj. [virens, Lat.] Green; not faded.
In theſe, yet freſh and virent, they carve out the figures
of men and women. Brown'; Pulgar Errau,
Vi'RGE. m. ſ. [virga, Lat, better verge, from verge, Frenj
A dean's mace. -
Suppoſe him now a dean compleat,
Devoutly lolling in his ſeat;
The ſilver virge, with decent pride,
Stuck underneath his cuſhion ſide.
VI'RGIN. m. ſ. [viege, Fr. virgo, Lat.]
I. A maid ; a woman unacquainted with men.
This aſpect of mine hath fear'd the valiant;
The beſt regarded virgins of our clime
Have lov’d it too.
Senſeleſs baubleſ
Art thou a foedary for this ačt, and look'ſt
So virgin-like without 2 Shakespeare Cymbalin.
Drydºn,
Swift.
Shairſ.
The damſel was very fair, and a virgin. Gen. xxiv. 16.
Angelo is an adult'rous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin violator. Shahjari.
Much leſs can that have any place,
At which a virgin hides her face. Cºwl),
2. A woman not a mother. Unuſual.
Likeſt to Ceres in her prime,
Yet virgin of Proſerpina from Jove. Miltºn,
3. Anything untouched or unmingled.
Tapers of white wax, commonly called virgin wax, burn
with leſs ſmoke than common yellow wax. Byk.
I have found virgin earth in the peat-marſhes of
Cheſhire. IWººdward.
Below the upper was a deep bed of ſand only, which I
weighed, together with the virgin-mould. Derham.
4. The ſign of the zodiack in which the ſun is in Auguſt.
Thence down amain by Leo and the Wirgin. Milan.
V1'RGIN. adj. Befitting a virgin; ſuitable to a virgin; maidenly.
Can you blame her then, being a maid, yet roſed over
with the virgin crimſon of modeſty, if ſhe deny the appeal:
ance of a naked blind boy. Shaieſ, Hº. V.
What ſays the ſilver with her virgin hue? Shakeſ,
With eaſe a brother o'ercame Cºwl
gºtij,
- The formal decencies of virgin-ſhame. - -
To VI'RGIN. v. n. [a cant word..] To play the virgin.
A kiſs
Long as my exile, ſweet as my revenge .
I carried from thee, my dear; and my true lip , ,
Hath virgin'd it e'er ſince. Shakeſpeare's Crishnu.
V1'RGINAL. adj. [from virgin.] Maiden ; maidenly; per-
taining to a virgin.
On the earth more fair was never ſeen,
Of chaſtity and honour virginal.
Tears virginal
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire;
And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims,
Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
Purity is a ſpecial part of this ſuperſtructure, ".
of all deſires of the fleſh within the known limits of º l;
gal or virginal chaſtity. Hammond's F.*::::::
Tô V,'RGINAL. v. n. To pat; to ſtrike as on the virginal.
A cant word. Shakeſp.
Still virginalling upon thy palm. iº.
V1/RGINAL. º É..., virginal..] A º
ment ſo called, becauſe commonly uſed by }. ſing:
The muſician hath produced two means º º the #" O
The one is ſtopping them with º: the ſtring, as in
lutes and viols; the other is the Bacon.
harps and virginals. - - uain-
v. sity. n.ſ. [virginitas, Lat] Maidenhead; una"
tance with man.
You do impeach your modeſ
To truſt the opportunity of night,
And the ill counſel of a deſart P. Shaft.
With the rich worth of your virgº. table to
Natural virginity of itſelf is not * ſtate "...º.
God, but that which is choſen in ºr " brances. Tº
of religion, and ſeparation from worldly º not puerile;
VIRILÉ. A. ſ. ſºil, Lat.) Belonging”
not feminine.
Fairy $ºn.
Shakespeare
reſtraining
nju-
y too much,
VIRI'lity.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I R
º
-
-
-
º
º
C.
Viºlity...m. ſ. ſvirilité, Fr. virilitas, Lat. from virile.]
1. Manhood; charaćter of man.
. The lady made generous advances to the borders of
virility. - Rambler.
2. Power of procreation.
The great climacterical was paſt, before they begat chil-
dren, or gave any teſtimony of their virility; for none begat
children before the age of ... . Brown.
VIRM1'lion, n. ſ. Properly vermilion. A red colour.
Ægle, the faireſt Nais of the flood,
With a vermilion dye his temples ſtain'd. Roſcommon.
V1'Rtu AL. adj. [virtuel, Fr. from virtue.] Having the effi-
cacy without the ſenſible or material part.
Metalline waters have virtual cold in them. Put there-
fore wood into ſmith's water, and try whether it will not
harden. Bacon.
Heat and cold have a virtual tranſition, without commu-
nication of ſubſtance. Bacon.
Love not the heav'nly ſpirits? And how their love
Expreſs they by looks only or, do they mix
Irradiance : v rtual, or immediate touch Milton.
Every kind that lives,
Fomented by his virtual pow'r, and warm'd. Milton.
Neither an actual or virtual intention of the mind, but only
that which may be gathered from the outward acts. Stillingfleet.
Virtuality. n.ſ.. [from virtual.] Efficacy.
In one grain of corn there lieth dormánt a virtuality of
many other, and from thence ſometimes proceed an hundred
ears. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
V1'RTUALLY. adv. [from virtual.] In effect, though not formally.
They are virtually contained in other words ſtill con-
tinued. Hammond's Fundamentals.
Such is our conſtitution, that the bulk of the people wir-
tually give their approbation to every thing they are bound to
obey. - Addiſon.
To VI'RTUATE. v. a. [from virtue.] To make efficacious.
Potable gold ſhould be endued with a capacity of being
aſſimilated to the innate heat, and radical moiſture; or at
leaſt virtuated with a power of generating the ſaid eſſen-
tials. Harvey.
VI'RTUE. m. ſ. [virtus, Lat.]
1. Moral goodneſs.
Either I’m miſtaken, or there is virtue in that Falſtaff. Shakespeare
If there's a power above us,
And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works, he muſt delight in virtue,
And that which he delights in muſt be happy. Addison.
Pirtue only makes our bliſs below. Pope.
The charaćter of prince Henry is improved by Shakeſpear;
and through the veil of his vices and irregularities, we ſee a
dawn of greatneſs and virtue. Shakeſp. illuſtrated.
2. A particular moral excellence.
In Belmont is a lady,
And ſhe is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wond’rous virtues. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Remember all his virtues,
And ſhew mankind that goodneſs is your care.
3. Medicinal quality.
All bleſt ſecrets,
All you unpubliſh’d virtues of the earth,
Be aidant and remediate. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
The virtuous bezoar is taken from the beaſt that feedeth
upon the mountains; and that without virtue from thoſe that
feed in the vallies. Bacon.
4. Medicinal efficacy. -
An eſſay writer muſt pradiſe the chymical method, and
give the virtue of a full draught in a few drops. Addiſon.
5. Efficacy; power. - - -
If neither words, nor herbs will do, I'll try ſtones; for
there's a virtue in them. L’E/irange.
Where there is a full purpoſe to pleaſe God, there, what
a man can do, ſhall, by virtue thereof, be accepted. South.
They are not ſure, by virtue of ſyllogiſm, that the con-
cluſion certainly follows from the premiſes. ... Locke.
This they ſhall attain, partly in virtue of the promiſe made
by God; and partly in virtue of piety. Atterbury,
He uſed to travel through Greece, by virtue of this fable,
which procured him reception in all the towns. Addiſon.
6. Aćting power. - -
Jeſus knowing that virtue had gone out of him, turned
him about. - Mark v. 30.
7. Secret agency; efficacy, without viſible or material action.
She moves the body, which ſhe doth poſſeſs;
Yet no part toucheth, but by virtue's touch.
8. Bravery; valour. -
Truſt to thy ſingle virtue; for thy ſoldiers
Took their diſcharge. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
The conqueſt of Paleſtine, with fingular virtue they per-
formed, and held that kingdom ſome few generations. Raleigh.
. Excellence; that which gives excellence.
In the Greek poets, as alſo in Plautus, the oeconomy of
poems is better obſerved than in Terence; who thought the
Addiſon.
Davies.
ſole grace and virtue of their fable, the ſticking in of ſen-
tences, as ours do the forcing in of jeſts. B. Fohnſon.
io. One of the orders of the celeſia hierarchy. johnſon
Thrones, domination, princedoms, virtues, pow'rs. Milt.
A winged virtue through th' etherial ſky,
/ From orb to orb unwearied doff tho, fly.
"ºur less, adj. [from vitue.]
1. Wanting virtue; deprived of virtue.
2. Not having efficacy; without operating qualities.
All ſecond cauſes, together with nature herſelf, without
that operative faculty which God gave them, would become
altogether ſilent, virtueleſs, and dead. Raleigh
Wirtuelſ; ſhe wiſht all herbs and charms, -
Wherewith falſe men increaſe their patients harms. Fairfax.
Some would make thoſe glorious creatures virtueleſs. Hakewill.
WIRTUO’so, n.ſ. [Italian.] A man ſkilled in antique or na-
tural curioſities; a man ſtudious of Painting, ſtatuary, or
archite&amp;ture.
Methinks thoſe generous virtuoſi dwell in a higher region
than other mortals. Glanville.
%rtuºſº, the Italians call a man who loves the nobi. arts,
and is a critick in them. And amongſt our French painters,
the word vertueux is underſtood in the ſame ſignification. Dryd.
This building was beheld with admiration by the virtuoſ,
of that time. %. Nº. 52.
Showers of rain are now met with in every water-work;
and the virtuºſº's of France covered a little vault with arti-
ficial ſnów,
Tickell.
Addiſon.
VI'RTUOUS. adj. [from virtue.]
1. Morally good.
If his occaſion were not virtuous,
I ſhould not urge it half ſo faithfully. Shakeſpeare.
Wirtuous and holy, be thou conqueror. Shakeſpeare.
What ſhe wills to do or ſay,
Is wiſeſt, virtuouſºff, diſcreeteſt, beſt. Milton.
Favour'd of heav'n, who finds
One virtuous rarely found,
That in domeſtick good combines:
Happy that houſe ! his way to peace is ſmooth. Milton,
2. [Applied to women.] Chaſte.
Miſtreſs Ford, the modeſt wife, the virtuous creature, that
hath the jealous fool to her huſband Shakeſp.
3. Done in conſequence of moral goodneſs.
Nor love is always of a vicious kind,
But oft to virtuous acts inflames the mind.
4. Efficacious ; powerful. -
With one virtuous touch, th’ arch-chemic ſun,
Produces, with terreſtrial humour mix’d,
Here in the dark, ſo many precious things,
5. Having wonderful or eminent properties.
Out of his hand,
That virtuous ſteel he rudely ſnatch'd away.
Lifting up his virtuous ſtaff on high,
He ſmote the ſea, which calmed was with ſpeed. %.
He own'd that viºtuous ring and glaſs. ilton.
6. Having medicinal qualities. -
Some obſerve that there is a virtuous bezoar, and another
without virtue; the virtuous is taken from the beaſt that
feedeth where there are theriacal herbs; and that without
virtue, from thoſe that feed where no ſuch herbs are. Bacon.
The ladies ſought around
For virtuous herbs, which, gather'd from the ground,
They ſquezz'd the juice; and cooling ointment made. Dryd.
V1/RTuously, adv. [from virtuous.] In a virtuous manner;
according to the rules of virtue.
The Gods are my witneſſes, I deſire to do virtuouſly. Sidney.
In ſum, they taught the world no leſs virtuouſly how to
die, than they had done before how to live. Hooker.
They that mean virtuouſly, and yet do ſo,
The devil their virtue tempts not, they tempt heav'n. Shakespeare
Not from grey hairs authority doth flow,
Nor from bald heads, nor from a wrinkled brow ;
But our paſt life, when virtuouſly ſpent,
Muſt to our age thoſe happy fruits preſent. Denham.
The coffeeman has a little daughter four years old, who
has been virtuouſly educated. Addiſon.
V1'RTuousness. n.ſ.. [from virtuous.] The ſtate or character
of being virtuous. -
Many other adventures are intermeddled; as the love of
Britomért, and virtuouſneſs of Belphaebe; and the laſciviouſ-
neſs of Helenora. ... Speſſºr.
V1'Rule Nce. Un. ſ. [from virulent. ) Mental poiſon; malig-
VI'RULENcy. ; nity; acrimony of temper; bitterneſs.
Diſputes in religion are managed with viruleng and bitter-
neſs. - Decay of Piety.
It inſtils into their minds º: º ºf: º º
- ich is the perfection and ornament of reli-
. awi, which is the p - - Addiſon.
The whigs might eaſily have maintained a majority among
the clergy, if they had not too much encouraged this in-
temperance of ſpeech, and virulence of pen, in the * pro-
ſtitute of their party. 29 G V1/RUL #
Dryden.
Milton,
Fairy Queen.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I S
- V Is
V1'Rulent. adj. [virulent, Fr. virulentus, Lat.]
1. Poiſonous ; venemous. . . lignant
iſoned in the mind; bitter; malignant. - -
#. adv. [from virulent.] Malignantly; with bit-
terneſs. - A- - -
V1's Age. n.ſ. ſº Fr. viſaggio, Italian.]. Face; counte-
t
nance; look. is now rarely uſed but with ſome ideas of
diſlike or horrour.
Phebe doth behold laſ
er ſilver viſage in the watry glaſs,
É. º pearl the bladed graſs. Shakeſp.
when ſhe ſhall hear this of thee, with her nails
She'll flea thy wolfiſh viſage. Shakespeare . K. Lear.
Whereto ſerves mercy,
But to confront the viſage of offence.
With hoſtile frown,
And .. all inflam’d, firſt thus began. Milton.
By the rout, that made the hideous roar,
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
His goary viſage down the ſtream was ſent; -
Down the ſwift Hebrus to the Leſbian ſhore. Milton.
Love and beauty ſtill that viſage grace;
Death cannot fright 'em from their wonted place. , Waller.
To VI'scERATE. v.a. [viſcera, Latin.] To embowel; to ex-
entrate.
VFSCID. adj. [viſtidus, Latin.] Glutinous; tenacious.
Visci/dity. n. ſ. [from viſcid.]
1. Glutinouſneſs; tenacity; ropineſs.
This motion in ſome human creatures may be weak, in
reſpect to the viſcidity of what is taken, ſo as not to be able
to propel it. Arbuthnot.
2. Glutinous concretion.
Catharticks of mercurials precipitate the viſcidities by their
ſtypticity. Floyer.
Visco'sity. n.ſ. [viſcoſté, Fr. from viſcous.]
1. Glutinouſneſs; tenacity.
The air being mixed with the animal fluids, determines
their condition as to rarity, denſity, viſcºſity, tenuity. Arbuth.
2. A glutinous ſubſtance.
A tenuous emanation, or continued effluvium, after ſome
diſtance, retracteth unto itſelf, as is obſervable in drops of
ſyrups, and ſeminal viſcoſities. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
VI'SCOUNT. n.ſ. [vicecomes, Lat.]
Piſcount ſignifics as much as ſheriff; between which two
words there is no other difference, but that the one comes
from our conquerors the Normans, and the other from our
anceſtors the Saxons. Wiſcount alſo ſignifies a degree of no-
bilty next to an earl, which is an old name of office, but a
new one of dignity, never heard of amongſt us, till Henry
VI. his days. Cowel.
Viscou NTEss. m. ſ. [from viſcount. Wiſcount and viſounteſs
are pronounced vicount and vicountſ. J The lady of a viſ-
count; a peereſs of the fourth order.
V1'scous. adj. Iviſueux, Fr. viſcºus, Lat] Glutinous; ſticky;
tenacious. -
The cauſe of the ſcouring virtue of nitre is, that it hath
a ſubtle ſpirit, which ſevereth and divideth any thing that is
foul and viſcous. Bacon.
Holly is of ſo viſcous a juice as they make bird-lime of
the bark. Bacon.
VisiBI'lity. m. ſ. [viſibilité, Fr. from viſible.]
1. The ſtate or quality of being perceptible by the eye.
The colours of outward objects brought into a darkened
room, do much depend for their viſibility, upon the dimneſs
of the light they are beheld by. Boyle.
2. State of being apparent, or openly diſcoverable; conſpi-
cuouſneſs.
They produced this as an inſtance againſt the perpetual
viſibility of the church, and he brings it to prove that it ceaſed
to be a true church. Stillingfeet.
In theſe, the viſibility and example of our virtues will
§ conſiſt. Rogers's Sermans.
VISIBLE, n.ſ. [viſible, Fr. viſibilis, Lat.]
1. Perceptible by the eye.
Pºſibles work upon a looking-glaſs, which is like the pupil
of the eye; and audibles upon the places of echo, which re-
ſemble the cavern of the ear. Bacon.
On this mount he appeared ; under this tree
Stood viſible;
Here with him at this fountain talk'd. Milton.
Each thought was viſible, that roll'd within,
As through a cryſtal caſe the figur'd hours are ſeen. Dryden.
A long ſeries of anceſtors ſhews the native luſtre with
great advantage; but if he degenerate from his line, the leaſt
ſpot is viſible on ermine. Dryden.
2. Diſcovered to the eye.
If that the heavens do not their viſible ſpirits.
Send quickly down to tame the vile offences,
Humanity muſt perforce prey on itſelf,
Like monſters of the deep. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
3- Apparent; open; conſpicuous. -
b . re factions at court were greater, or more viſible than
CIOre. Clarendon.
V1's IBLENESS. m. ſ. ſſ . -
viſible. n: ſ [from viſible.] State or quality of being
V1'sibly, adv. [from viſible.] In a manner Perceptible by the
eye.
The day being viſibly governed by the ſun, is a li
longer than the revolution of the equator; ſo 'me itle
occaſioned by the advance of the ſun in his annual &amp;: ls
motion along the ecliptick. }.
By the head we make known more viſibly our ſpºº.
our threatnings; enough to ſee the face, and to underſämä
the mind at half a word. D º:
VISION. n.ſ. [viſion, Fr. viſio, Latin.] Tydºn.
1. Sight; the faculty of ſeeing.
Anatomiſts, when they have taken off from the bottom of
the eye that outward and moſt thick coat called th: du
mater, can then ſee through the thinner coats, the º:
of objećts lively painted thereon. And theſapiáur. º
pagated by motion along the fibres of the optick nº.
the brain, are the cauſe of viſion. Newton's Optici;
Theſe theorems being admitted into optics, there would i.
ſcope enough of handling that ſcience voluminouſly, after a
new manner; not only by teaching thoſe things which ºn
to the perfection of viſion, but alſo by determining mathe.
matically all kinds of phenomena of colours which coºk.
produced by refractions. 'ewton's Opticſ:
2. The aët of ſeeing. -
/iſion in the next life is the perfeółing of faith in this:
or faith here is turned into viſion there, as hope into º
joying. Hammond's Praśī. Catalin.
3. A ſupernatural appearance; a ſpectre; a phantom.
The day ſeems long, but night is odious;
No ſleep, but dreams; no dreams, but viſions ſtrange. Sidney.
Laſt night the very gods ſhew'd me a viſion. Shaft,
God's mother deigned to appear to me; 4.
And, in a viſion, full of majeſty,
Will'd me to leave my baſe vocation. Shalºft. Hºn. VI.
Him God vouchſaf’d,
To call by viſion, from his father's houſe,
Into a land which he will ſhew him. Miltºn's Par. Lt.
4. A dream; ſomething ſhewn in a dream. A dream happens
to a ſleeping, a viſion may happen to a waking man. A
dream is ſuppoſed natural, a viſion miraculous; but they art
confounded.
His dream returns; his friend appears again:
The murd’rers come; now help, or I am ſlainſ }
‘Twas but a viſion ſtill, and viſions are but vain. Dryden,
The idea of any thing in our mind, no more proves the
exiſtence of that thing, than the viſions of a dream make a
true hiſtory. Lockr.
V1's Ion ARY. adj. [viſionnaire, Fr. from viſion.]
1. Affected by phantoms; diſpoſed to receive impreſſions on
the imagination.
No more theſe ſcenes my meditation aid,
Or lull to reſt the viſionary maid. Pºpe's Eliſato Abelard.
2. Imaginary; not real; ſeen in a dream; perceived by the
imagination only.
The hounds at nearer diſtance hoarſly bray'd;
The hunter cloſe purſu'd the viſionary maid. Djºtº,
If you have any ſkill in dreams, let me know whether I
have the ſame place in the real heart, that I had in the vi.
Jonary one. Addison.
Our vićtories only led us to further viſiºnary proſpel;
advantage was taken of the ſanguine temper which ſucceſ
had wrought the nation up to. - - Swift.
V1'sion ARY. Un. ſ. [viſionaire, Fr J One whoſe imagina”
V1'sionist. ; diſturbed. ~ *
Thelovely viſionarygave him perpetual uneaſineſs. Finº.
To VI/SIT. v. a. [viſiter, Fr. viſito, Lat.]
I. To go to ſee. - ith
You muſt go viſit the lady that lies in-ſºft .
my prayers; but I cannot go thither. Shakespeare . Cori. p.
Virgins viſited by angel pow'rs. il .
2. [In ſcriptural language.] To ſend good or "J"
cially. - i. I
When God viſiteth, what ſhall I anſwer him? jºxxxi. :
Thou ſhalt be ſited of the Lord with thunder. Iſa. xxix.0.
when I ºff, ſwift their fin upontº.:
God viſit thee in good things. udit º
That venerable body is in little concern after what º
their mortal enemies intend to treat them, wºwift.
ſhall viſit us with ſo fatal an event.
3. To ſalute with a preſent.
Samſon viſited his wife with a kid. -
4. To come to a ſurvey, with judicial authority. ear in
The biſhop ought to viſit his dioceſe */ yAliff;
erſon.
T. V1's T. v. m. To keep up the intercour
ſalutations at the houſes of each other. f goingtº
V1'sit. n.ſ. [viſite, Fr. from the verb.] The aćt of g
ſee another. k
In a deſigned or accidental viſit, let ſome on" take º:
which may be agreeable, and read in it. Wiśi-
judge: XV. I.
ſº of ceremoi"
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I S
*
…”
-*
º
º:
V’IsIt Able. adj [from *] Liable to be viſited. -
All hoſpitals built ſincé thereformation, are viſitable by the
king or lord chancellor. Ayliffº's Parergon.
1's iTANT. n. / [from viſit..] One who goes to ſee another.
He alone
To find where Adam ſhelter'd, took his way,
Not unperceiv'd of Adam, who to Eve,
While the great viſitant approach'd, thus ſpake. Milton.
One viſit begins an acquaintance; and when the viſitant
comes again, he is no more a ſtranger. South.
Edward the firſt, who had been a viſitant in Spain, upon
aëtion in the holy land, fixed both our Pounds by the meaſures
of the Eaſt. Arbuthnot on Coins,
Griev'd that a viſitant ſo long ſhou’d wait
Unmark’d, unhonour’d, at a monarch's gate,
Inſtant he flew. Pºpe's Odyſſey. b. i. 1. 160.
VISITA’tion. m. ſ. [viſito, Latin.]
1. The act of viſiting.
He comes not
Like to his father's greatneſs ; his approach,
$o out of circumſtance and ſudden, tells us,
'Tis not a viſitation fram’d, but forc'd
By need and accident. Shakeſp. //inter Tale.
What would you with the princeſs
Nothing but peace and gentle viſitation. Shake peare.
2. Obječt of viſits. ºff
O flow’rs,
My early viſitation, and my laſt. Milton's Par. Lºft.
3. [/ſtation, Fr.] Judicial viſitor perambulation.
The biſhop ought to viſit his dioceſ: every year in perſon,
unleſs he omits the ſame becauſe he would not burthen his
churches; and then ought to ſend his arch-deacon, which
was the original of the arch-deacon's viſitation. Ayliffe.
4. Judicial evil ſent by God, ſtate of ſuffering judicial evil.
- That which thou doſt not underſtand when thou readeſt,
thou ſhalt underſtand in the day of thy viſitations. For many
ſecrets of religion are not Perceived till they be felt, and afé
not felt but in the day of a great calamit
5. Communication of divine lève.
The moſt comfortable ºſtation: God hath ſent men from
above, have taken eſpecially the times of prayer as their moſt
natural opportunities. Hooker.
Vis: TAto'Rial. adj. [from viſitor.] Belonging to a judicial
W11:tor.
Some will have it, that an archdeacon does of common
right execute this viſitatorial Pºwer in his archdeaconry; but
others ſay that an archdeacon has a viſitato ial power only of
common right per modum ſimplici; Jerutinii, as being biſhop's
vicar. 4}liffe's Paregon.
V1's TER. m. ſ. [from viſit.]
1. One who comes to ſee another.
Here's ado to lock up honeſty and honour from the acceſs
of gentle viſitors. ... Shakeſpeare.
You ſee this confluence, this great flood of viſiers. Shakespeare
Conſumptives of this degree entertain their viſiters with
#range rambling diſcourſes of their intent of going here and
there. - - Harvey.
I have a large houſe, yet I ſhould hardly prevail to find one
viſiter, if I were not able to hire him with a bottle of
wine. Swift to Gay.
2. [/iſiteur, Fr.] An occaſional judge ; one who regulates
the diſorders of any ſociety.
The viſiters expell'd the orthodox; they, without ſcruple
- Taylor.
or ſhame, poſſeſs'd themſelves of their colleges. //alton.
To him you muſt your ſickly ſtate refer ;
Your charter claims him as your viſiter. Garth.
Whatever abuſes have crept into the univerſities, might be
reformed by ſtrict injunctions to the viſitors and heads of
houſes. Swift's Projeć for the Adéancemen, of Religion.
V1's NoMY. m. ſ. ſcorrupted from Phyſiºgnomy..] Face; counte-
nance. Not in uſe.
Twelve gods do fit around in royal ſtate,
And Jove in midſt with awful majeſty,
To judge the ſtrife between them ſtirred late:
Each of the gods by his like viſnomy
Eath to be known, but Jove above them all,
By his great looks and pow'r imperial. - Spenſºr.
V1'sive. adj. [viſiſ, Fr. viſui, Lat..] Formed in the act of
ſeeing.
This happens when the axis of the viſive cones, diffuſed
from the object, fall not upon the ſame plane; but that
which is conveyed into one eye is more depreſſed or elevated
than that which enters the other. Brzº, Wulgar Errours.
VI'SOR. n ſ. [This word is variouſly written viſard, viſar,
viſºr, vizard, vizor. I prefer viſor, as neareſt the Latin
viſus, and concurring with viſage, a kindred word; viſiere,
French..] A maſk uſed to disfigure and diſguiſe.
I fear, indeed, the weakneſs of my government before,
made you think ſuch a maſk would be grateful unto me;
and my weaker government ſince, makes you pull off the
viſor, Sidney.
v 1 T
This loutiſh clown is ſuch
favoured a *ſar; his behaviour
degree of ridiculous.
that you never ſaw ſo ill-
ſuch, that he is beyond the
Sidney.
By which deceit doth maſk in viſor fair, idney
nd caſt her colours dyed deep in grain,
ºften like truth, whoſe ſhape ſhe well can ſain. Spenſºr,
But that thy face is, vizor-like, unchanging,
ade impudent with uſe of evil de
d
I wou'd eſſay, proud q eds,
‘l"*h, to make thee bluſh, Shakeſp.
: ºº ºr remains,
And that is Claudio; I know him by his bearing. Shakespeare.
The Cyclops, a people of Sicily, remarkable for cruelty,
might, perhaps, in their wars uſe a head-piece, or
2012.or.
B &gt; • -
Visor Ep. v. n. [from viſºr.] Maſked. ” Odºſ. Notes
Hence with thy brewd *antments, foul deceiver 1
X. my credulous innocene.
With viſord falſhdod, and baſe forgery. Milton.
t
WPST4. *{ [Italian.] View; Proſpect through an avenue.
In St. Pe
ter's, when a man ſtands under the dome, if he
looks upwards, he is aſtoniſhed at the ſpacious hollow of the
cupola, that makes one of the beautifulleſt viſła's that the
eye can paſs through. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy,
The finiſh’d garden to the view
Its viſa's opens, and is alleys green.
Visual. adj. Iviſºel, French..] Uſed in ſigh
Power of fight; inſtrumental" to ſight.
...An eye thruſt forth ſo as it hangs a pretty diſtance by the
"ſhal nerve, hath been without any power of fight; and
}* after being replaced, recovered ight. Bacon's Nat. Hya.
he air,
No where ſo clear, ſharpen'd his viſual ra
To objects diſtant far. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Then purg'd with euphraſy and rue t
The viſãal nerve; for he hāj, to ſee. Milton,
Inward light, alas,
Puts forth no viſual beam
VITAL. adj. [vitalis, Latin.]
I. Contributing to life; neceſſary to life.
His heart, broken with unkindneſs and afflićtion, ſtretched
ſo far beyond his limits with this exceſs of comfort, as it
Thomſon's Spring.
t; exerciſing the
Milton's Agoniſes.
was able no longer to keep ſafe his vital ſpirits. Sidney.
All nature laughs, the groves are freſh and fair;
The ſun's mild luſtre warms the vital air. Pope:
2. Relating to life.
Pºt not Bardolph's vital thread be Cut
With edge of Penny cord, and vile reproach. Shakeſpeare.
On the rock a ſcanty meaſure place
Of vital flax, and turn the wheel a-pace. Dryden.
3. Containing life. -
Spirits that live throughout;
Vital in ºvely part; not as frail man,
In intrails, heart, or head, liver, or reins,
Cannot but by annihilating die. 44ilton's Par. Loft.
On the watry calm, -
His brooding wings the ſpirit of God outſpreads;
And vital virtue infus'd, and vital warmth
Throughout the fluid maſs. Milton's Par. Loſt.
4. Being the ſeat of life.
The dart flew on, and pierc'd a vital part. Pope.
5 §o diſpoſed as to live. Little uſed, and rather Latin than
Engliſh. -
Pythagoras and Hippocrates not only affirm the birth of the
ſeventh month to be vital, that of the eighth mortal; but
the progreſſion thereto to be meaſured by rule. Brown.
6. Eſſential; chiefly neceſſary.
Know grief's vital part
Conſiſts in nature, not in art. ... Bp. Corbet.
VITA Lity. m. ſ. [from vital.] Power of ſubſiſting in life.
Whether that motion, vitality and º ": by ".
*tion, or how elſe, the manner is only known to
gº, &gt; ºr. ſºrld.
For the ſecurity of ſpecies produced only by ſeed, provi-
dence hath endued all ſeed with a laſting vitality, that if by
any accident it happen not to germinate the firſt year, it wiſ
continue its faecundity twenty or thirty years. Roy.
V1'TALLY. adv. [from vital.] In ſuch a manner as to give
ife.
l The organical ſtrućture of human bodies, whereby they
are fitted to live and move, and be vitally informed by the
ſoul, is the workmanſhip of a moſt wiſe, powerful, .
beneficent maker. ial † ey.
VI'TALs. n.ſ. [Without the fingular.] Parts eſſential to life.
By fits my ſwelling grief appears,
In riſing ſighs, and falling tears,
That ſhow too well the warm deſires,
The ſilent, ſlow, º fires,
ich on my inmoſt vitals prey, . . . .
X. melt º very ſoul away. - Phillips.
VITE'll ARY. n.ſ. [from vitellus, Latin.] The place where
the yolk of the egg ſwims in the white. A greater<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">v 1 T
V I V
- Wºº-
difficulty in the doćtrine of eggs is, how the
jº attaineth into every egg; ſince the vitellary,
is very high. Brown's Pulg. Brºuſ.
[vilio, Latin.] To deprave; to ſpoil ;
A greater
ſperm of the
or place of the yolk,
To VI/TIAT E. v. a.
leſs pure. - -
"...garden gives him the purity of ſºlº-
jeas, and of true nature, before ſhe was vitiated by
†y. Evelyn's Kalend.
The organs of ſpeech are managed by ſo many muſcles,
that ſpeech is not eaſily deſtroyed, though often ſomewhat
vitiated as to ſome particular letters. - Holder.
Spirits encountering foul bodies, and exciting a fermentation
of thoſe viliated humours, precipitate into putridfevers. Harvey:
This undiſtinguiſhing complaiſance will vitiate the taſte of
the readers, and miſguide many of them in their judgmentº,
where to approve and where to cenſure. Garth.
A tranſpoſition of the order of the ſacramental words,
in ſome men's opinion, vitiates baptiſm. .4/ſº Parergon.
viria’tion. n.ſ.. [from vitiate.] Depravation; corruption:
The foreſaid extenuation of the body is imputed to the
blood's vitiation by malign, putrid vapours ſmoking through-
out the veſſels. Harvey on ºf:
To vitiſ.I.TIGATE. v. n. [vitioſus and litigo, Lat.] To
contend in law.
Vitilitigation. n.ſ. [from vitilitigate.] Contention ; ca-
villation.
I'll force you by right ratiocination,
To leave your vitilitigation. Hudibras.
vitro'sity. n.ſ.. [from vitioſus, Lat..] Depravity; corruption.
He charges it wholly upon the corruption, perverſeneſs,
and vitioſity of man's will, as the only cauſe that rendered
all the arguments his doctrine came cloathed with, un-
ſucceſsful. South's Sermons.
VI/TIOUS. adj. [vizieux, Fr. vitioſus, Latin.]
1. Corrupt; wicked; oppoſite to virtuous. It is rather ap-
plied to habitual faults, than criminal actions.
Make known
It is no vitious blot, murder, or foulneſs
That hath depriv'd me of your grace. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Witneſs th’ irreverent ſon
Of him who built the ark; who, for the ſhame
Done to his father, heard his heavy curſe,
* Servant of ſervants,’ on his vitious race. Milton.
Wit's what the vitious fear, the virtuous ſhun;
By fools 'tis hated, and by knaves undone. Pope.
No troops abroad are ſo ill diſciplin’d as the Engliſh ;
which cannot well be otherwiſe, while the common ſoldiers
have before their eyes the vitious example of their leaders. Swift.
2. Corrupt; having phyſical ill qualities.
When vitious language contends to be high, it is full of
rock, mountain, and pointedneſs. B. Johnſon.
Here from the vicious air and ſickly ſkies,
A plague did on the dumb creation riſe Dryden.
V1'tiously. adv. [from vitious.] Not virtuouſly; corruptly.
V1"rious Ness. n.J. [from vitizus.] Corruptneſs; ſtate of be-
ing vitious.
When we in our vitiouſneſ, grow hard,
The wife gods ſeal our eyes. Shakeſpeare.
What makes a governor juſtly deſpiſed is vitiouſneſs and ill
morals. Virtue muſt tip the preacher's tongue, and the
ruler's ſcepter with authority. - - South.
VI'TREOUS. adj. [vitré, Fr. vitreus, Lat.] Glaſſy; conſiſt-
ing of glaſs ; reſembling glaſs.
The hole anſwers to the pupil of the eye; the cryſtalline
humour to the lenticular glaſs; the dark room to the cavity
containing the vitreous humour, and the white paper to the
retina. Ray on the Creation.
When the phlegm is too viſcous, or ſeparates into too
great a quantity, it brings the blood into a morbid ſtate : this
viſcous phlegm ſeems to be the vitreous petuite of the an-
tients. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
V1't Reousness. m. ſ [from vitreous.] Reſemblance of glaſs.
V1'TRIFICABLE. adj. [from vitrificate.] Convertible into glaſs.
To VITRIFICATE. v. a. [vitrum and facio, Lat.] To
change into glaſs.
We have metals vitrificated, and other materials, beſides
thoſe of which you make glaſs. Bacon.
VITR fica’rion, n.ſ. [vitrification, Fr. from vitrificate.] Pro-
dućtion of glaſs; act of changing, or ſtate of being changed
into glaſs.
For vitrification likewiſe, what metals will endure it? Alſo,
becauſe vitrification is accounted a kind of death of metals,
what vitrification will admit of turning back again, and
what not Bacon's Phyſical Remarks.
If the heat be more fierce, it maketh the groſſer part itſelf
run and melt; as in the making of ordinary glaſs ; and in
the vitrification of earth in the inner parts of furnaces; and
in the vitrification of brick and metals. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
"Pon the knowledge of the different ways of making
minerals and metals capable of vitrification, depends the art
of making counterfeit or fictitious gems. Boyle on Colours.
To V1'TRIFY. v. a. ſ.vitrifier, Fr. vitru ..
*. into glaſs. [vitrifier, m and facio, Lat.] To
etals will vitrify ; and perhaps ſome -
glaſs of metal º mixed º . pot of ". of º:
metal, will make the whole maſs more tough. 'b: aſs
Iron-ſlag, vitified, has in it cortices incompaſſing :
anºther, like thoſe in agats. Woodward
T. Yºurs. v. n. To become glaſs; to be changed in.
Chymiſts make veſſels of animal ſubſtances calcined which
will not vitrift in the fire; for all earth which hi.
or oil in it, will turn to glaſs. Arbuthnot on Ž.
V1'Tºol. n.ſ. [vitriol, Fr. vitriolum, Lat.] J.
Witriol is produced by addition of a metallick matter wi h
the foſſil acid ſalt. iº.
- - - - - ard.
I rubbed it with the vitriol-ſtone. Wiſeman's Surger
V1't Riolate. adj. [vitriolé, Fr. from vitrium, Lat.] †.
VI'TRIola TED. } pregnated with vitriol; conſiſting of Viti.
Iron may be diſſolved by any tart, ſalt, or vitriº
water. - - - - Bacon.
The water having diſſolved the imperfeótly calcined body
the vitriolate corpuſcles ſwimming in the liquor, by their .
curſions conſtituted little maſſes of vitriol, which gave the
water they impregnated a fair vitriolate colour. Bºyle.
VITRIo'Lick. }*. [vitriolique, Fr. from vitriolum, Lat..] Re-
VITRI’olous. ſembling vitriol ; containing vitriol.
Copperoſe of Mars, by ſome called ſalt of ſteel, made by
the ſpirits of vitriol or ſulphur, will, after ablution, beat.
tracted by the loadſtone: and therefore whether thoſe ſhoot-
ing ſalts partake but little of ſteel, and be not rather the vi.
triolous ſpirits fixed unto ſalt by the effluvium or odour of
ſteel, is not without good queſtion. Brown's Pulg. Errouri.
Theſe ſalts have ſomewhat of a nitrous taſte, but mix’d
with a ſmatch of a vitriolick. Grew's Muſeum:
By over-fermentation, or long-keeping, wine becomes
ſharp as in hock, like the vitriolick acidity. Flyer.
Viſtuline. adj. [vitulinus, Lat..] Belonging to a calf, or to
veal. Baily.
Vituſ per Able, adj. [vituperabilis, Lat..] Blame worthy. Aiſ.
To VITU PERAt E. v. a. [vituperer, Fr. vitupero, Latin.] To
blame; to cenſure.
VITUPERA'tion. n. / [vituperatio, Lat.] Blame; cenſure.
Such a writing oight to be clean, and free from any cavil
or vituteration of raſure. Aliffe's Parergon.
VIVA/CIOUS. adj. [vivax, Lat.]
1. Long-lived.
Though we ſhould allow them their perpetual calm and
equability of heat, they will never be able to prove, that
therefore men would be ſo vivacious as they would have us
believe. Bently,
2. Spritely; gay; ačtive; lively.
Viv Aſcious Ness.
Viva'city.
1. Livelineſs; Spritelineſs. -
They are eſteemed very hot in operation, and will in
convenient air, ſurvive ſome days the loſs of their head.”
hearts; ſo vigorous is their vivacity. Boyle,
He had a great vivacity in his countenance. Dryden.
2. Longaevity; length of life. -
Fables are rais'd concerning the vivacity of deer; for nei-
ther are their geſtation nor increment ſuch as may afford an
argument of long life. Brown's Pulgar Brrº.
VI'v ARY. n.ſ. (vivarium, Lat..] A warren. Ainſwºrth.
Vive. adj. [ºf Fr. virus, Latin.] Lively; forcible; prefing.
By a vive and forcible perſwaſion, he mov’d him tº ".
upon Flanders. - Bacºn.
VI’vency. n.ſ.. [vivo, I atin J Manner of ſupporting" Con-
tinuing life, or vegetation. -
Although not in a diſtinét and indiſputable way of viving,
or anſwering in all points the property of plants, Yº". In-
ferior and deſcending conſtitutions, they are determined by
ſeminalities. Brºwn's Vulgar Brrº”
V1’ves. n. ſ. A diſtemper among horſes. -
Wives * like §. *... and the chief difference
is, that for the moſt part the ſtrangles happel. " cols i.
}. horſes while they are at graſs, by feeding with their
eling inclines
eads downwards ; by which means the º: at any
d in the glands
Farriers Diä.
n. ſ. [vivacité, Fr. from vivaciºui.
more to the jaws; but the vives happenst
age and time, and is more particularly ſeate
and kernels under the ears.
VI'VID. adj. [vividus, Latin.]
1. Lively; quick; ſtriking.
The liquor, retaining i
clear again.
To make theſe experiments the more
ought to be choſen as have the fulleſt and moſt
and two of thoſe bodies compared together.
Ah! what avail his gloſſy varying dyes *
The vivid green his ſhining plumes unfold. ld. Pºpt.
His painted wings, and breaſt that flames with 3"
a. Spritely ;
was grown
Bºyle.
manifeſt, ſuch bodies
vivid colours,
ºwtºn.
ts former vivid colour,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V I Z
-
-
-
2. Spritely; ačtive.
Body is a fit workhouſe for ſprightly, vivid faculties to ex-
ciſe and exert themſelves in. South.
Where the genius is bright, and the imagination vivid,
the power of memory may loſe its improvement. JWatts.
VI'vidly. adv. [from vivid.] With life; with quickneſs ;
with ſtrength.
In the moon we can with excellent teleſcopes diſcern many
hills and vallies, whereof ſome are more, and ſome leſs
vividly illuſtrated ; and others have a fainter, others a deeper
ſhade. Boye on Colours.
Senſitive objects affect a man, in the ſtate of this preſent
life, much more warmly and vividly than thoſe which affect
only his nobler part, his mind. South.
VI'vidness. m. ſ. [from vivid.] Life; vigour; quickneſs.
Vivºcal: adj. Ivivificus, Lat.) Giving life. Baley.
To VIVI. FICATE. v. a. [vivifico, Lat J
1. To make alive ; to inform with life; to animate.
2. To recover from ſuch a change of form as ſeems to deſtroy
the eſſential properties. -
Vivification, n.ſ. [vivification, Fr. from vivificate.] The
ačt of giving life.
If that motion be in a certain order, there followeth wi-
vification (and figuration. Bacon.
Vivi Fick, adj. Ivivifique, Fr. vivificus, Latin J Giving life;
making alive.
Without the ſun's ſalutary and vivifick beams, all motion
would ceaſe, and nothing be left but darkneſs and death. Ray.
To VI'vity. v. a. ſ.vivifier, Fr. vivus and facio, Lat.] To
make alive ; to animate; to endue with life.
It hath been obſerved by the antients, that there is a
worm that breedeth in old ſnow, of a reddiſh colour, and
dull of motion; which would ſhew, that ſnow hath in it a
ſecret warmth, elſe it could hardly viviff. Bacon.
. Sitting on eggs doth vivify, not nouriſh. Bacon.
Gut-worms, as ſoon as vivified, creep into the ſtomach
for nutriment. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Vivi"parous. adj. [vivus and pario, Lat.] Bringing the young
alive ; oppoſed to oviparous.
When we perceive that batts have teats, it is not unrea-
ſonable to infer, they give ſuck; but whereas no other flying
animals have theſe parts, we cannot from them infer a vivi.
parous excluſion. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Their ſpecies might continue, though they had been vivi-
parous ; yet it would have brought their individuals to very
ſmall numbers. - More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
If birds had been viviparous, the burthen of their womb
had been ſo great and heavy, that their wings would have
failed them. Ray on the Creation.
V1/xEN. n.ſ. -
Pixen or fixen is the name of a ſhe-fox ; otherwiſe ap-
plied to a woman whoſe nature and condition is thereby com-
pared to a ſhe fox. Per/legan.
O ! when ſhe's angry, ſhe's keen and ſhrewd;
She was a vixen, when ſhe went to ſchool;
And though ſhe be but little, ſhe is fierce. Shakespeare .
See a pack of ſpaniels, called lovers, in a hot purſuit of a
two-legg'd vixen, who only flies the whole loud pack, to be
ſingled out by one. - - -- //ycherſy.
Viz. n.ſ.. [This word is videlicet, written with a contraction.]
To wit; that is. A barbarous form of an unneceſſary word.
That which ſo oft by ſundry writers
Has been apply'd t'almoſt all fighters,
More juſtly may b' aſcrib'd to this,
Than any other warrior, viz.
* None ever ačted both parts bolder,
Both of a chieftain and a ſoldier. Hudibras.
The chief of all ſigns which the Almighty endued man with,
is humane voice, and the ſeveral modifications thereof by the
organs of ſpeech, viz. the letters of the alphabet, form'd by
the ſeveral motions of the mouth. Holder.
Let this be done relatively, viz. one thing greater or
ſtronger, caſting the reſt behind, and rendering it leſs ſenſible
by its oppoſition. Dryden's Duff'ſhoy.
Vizard. n. ſ. [viſiere, Fr. See Visor.] A maſk uſed for
diſguiſe.
i. the ſuits of the maſkers be graceful, and ſuch as be-
come the perſon when the vizards are off. Bacon.
AFſchylus -
Brought vizards in a civiler diſguiſe. Roſemmon.
A lye is like a wizard, that may cover the face indeed,
but can never become it. - South.
Ye ſhall know them by their fruits, not by their well or ill
living; for they put on the vizard of ſeeming ſančtity. Atterb.
He miſtook it for a very whimſical ſort of maſk, but upon
a nearer view he found, that ſhe held her vizard in her
hand. Addiſon.
To V1'zARD. v. a. [from the noun..] To maſk. -
Degree being wizarded,
Th'unworthieſt ſhews as fairly in the maſk. Shakeſp.
V1/z1ER. m. ſ. [properly Hazir.] The prime miniſter of the
Turkiſh empire.
U M B
He made him vizier, which is the chief of all the
baſſa's. - Knolles's Hſ. of the Turks.
This grand vizier preſuming to inveſt
The chief imperial city of the weſt;
With the firſt charge compell'd in haſte to riſe,
His treaſure, tents and cannon left a prize. Waller.
U’LCER. n.ſ.. [uler, Fr. *kui, Latin.] A ſore of continu-
ance ; not a new wound.
Thou anſwer'ſt, ſhe is fair;
Pour'ſ in the open ulcer of my heart
Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voiceſ Shakeſp.
C My º .
orrupt and ſmell. Sandy's
Inteſtine ſtone and ulcer, colick pangs. y *::::::
While he was dreſſing that opening, other abſceſſes were
. and from the ſeveral apoſtemations finuous ulcers were
made. * eman's Surgery.
To U.tº ERATE. v. a. ſulcerer, Fr. ulcero, Latin.] To j.
with fores.
Some depend upon the intemperament of the part ulcerated;
others upon the continual afflux of lacerative humours. Harv -
An acrid and purulent matter mixeth with the blood, in
ſuch as have their lungs ulcerated. A buthnot on Aliments.
Ulcer A^TIon. n. ſ. ſuice aton, Fr. ulceratio, from ulcero, Lat.]
I. The act of breaking into ulcers.
2. Ulcer; ſore.
The effects of mercury on ulcerations are manifeſt. Arbuth.
Ulºcerous. adi ſulceroſus, Latin.) Afflicted with fores.
Strangely viſited people,
All ſwoln and ul’rous he cures. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
An ulcerous diſpoſition of the lungs, and an ulcer of the
lungs, may be appoſitely termed cauſes of a pulmonique con-
ſumption. Harvey on Conſumptions."
Ulcerousness. n.ſ. [from ulcerous.] The ſtate of being ul-
Cerous.
U’lgerED. adj. [ulceré, Fr. from ulcer.] Grown by time from
a hurt to an ulcer.
Æſculapius went about with a dog and a ſhe-goat; the
firſt for licking ulcered wounds, and the goat's milk for the
diſeaſes of the ſtomach. Temple.
ULi'GINous, adj. [uliginoſus, Latin.] Slimy; muddy.
The ulginous lacteous matter taken notice of in the coral
fiſhings upon the coaſt of Italy, was only a collection of the
corallin particles. //codward.
U’LTIMATE. adj. [ultimus, Latin.] Intended in the laſt re-
ſort; being the laſt in the train of conſequences.
I would be at the worſt; worſt is my port,
My harbour, and my ultimate repoſe. AMilton.
Many actions apt to procure fame, are not conducive to
this our ultimate happineſs. Addiſon.
The ultimate allotment of God to men, is really a conſe-
quence of their own voluntary choice, in doing good or
evil. Rogers's Sermons.
U'LTIMATELY. adv. [from ultimate.] In the laſt conſequence.
Charity is more extenſive than either of the two other
graces, which center ultimately in ourſelves; for we believe,
and we hope for our own ſakes : but love, which is a more
diſintereſted principle, carries us out of ourſelves, into deſires
and endeavours of promoting the intereſts of other be-
ings. Aterbury.
Truſt in our own powers, ultimately terminates in the
friendſhip of other men, which theſe advantages aſſure
to us. Rogers's Sermons.
Ulti/Mity. n. ſ. ſultimus, Latin.] The laſt ſtage; the laſt
conſequence. A word very convenient, but not in uſe.
Alteration of one body into another, from crudity to per-
fe&amp;t concoëtion, is the ultimity of that proceſs. Bacon.
U’ltRAMARINE. m. ſ. [ultra and marinus, Latin.] One of
the nobleſt blue colours uſed in painting, produced by calci-
nation from the ſtone called lapis lazuli. Hill.
Others, notwithſtanding they are brown, ceaſe not to be
ſoft and faint, as the blue of ultramarine. Dryden.
Ult RAMARINE. adj. [ultra marinus, Lat.] Being beyond
the ſea; foreign. Ainſworth.
UltraMo'NTANE. adi. [ultramontain, Fr. ultra montanus, Lat.]
Being beyond the mountains. -
ULTRAMU’NDANE. adj. [ultra and mundus, Lat.] Being be-
yond the world.
UiTRo’Neous. adj. [ultro, Lat.] Spontaneous; voluntary.
U’Mbel. n.ſ. In botany, the extremity of a ſtalk or branch
divided into ſeveral pedicles or rays, beginning from the ſame
point, and opening ſo as to form an inverted cone. Dić7.
UMBE’llATED. adj. In botany, is ſaid of flowers when many
of them grow together in umbels. Dići.
UM belli'Ferous. adj. [umbel and ferº, Latl In botany,
being a plant that bears many flowers, growing upon many
footſtalks, proceeding from the ſame centre; and chiefly
appropriated to ſuch plants whoſe flowers are compoſed of five
leaves, as fennel and parſnip. Dićf.
(MBER. m. ſ.
Fº is ſ ſad colour; which grind with gum-water, and
lighten it with a little ceruſe, and a ſhive of ſaffron. Prachai:
29 H I'll<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U M P
U N A
UMBRE'L.
UMBRE(LL.A.
+ ..ſelf in poor and mean attºº” - -
A'. º º º: ſmirch my face. - sº
Umbre is very ſenſible and earthy; there is *; d ut
ure black which "º" diſpute with 1t. - fift £71.
The umbres, ochres, and minerals found in the urº,
are much finº than i. found in the ſtrata. J/oodward.
hymalſus, Lat. -
2. Aftſ". and ...”. differ as the herring and pilcher
do : but though they may do ſo in other nations, thoſe in
England differ hothºg but in their names. J/alt. Angler.
Uſºr Ed. adj. I from umber or umbra, Lat. J Shaded ;
cd.
doº, camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
Fire anſwers fire; and through their paly flames
Each battle ſees the other's timber'd fice. Shakespeare. Hºn V.
UMºllical. adj. [untilizalº Fr. from unlilicus, Lat..] Be-
longing to the navel. -
Birds are nouriſhed by umbilical veſſels, and the navel 1S
manifeſt a day or two after excluſion. Brºwn's Julg. Errºrs.
In a calf, the umbilical veſſels terminate in certain bodies
divided into a multitude of carn-ows papillae, received into
ſo many ſockets of the cotyledons growing on the womb. Ray.
Umbles. n. ſ. ſumº; Fr. A deer's entrails. Dićf.
UMBO. m. ſ. [Latin, J The point, or prominent part of a
buckler.
Thy words together ty'd in ſmall hanks,
Cloſe as the Macedonian phalanx ;
Or like the umbo of the Romans,
which fierceſt foes could break by no means.
U’s ºr AoE. m. ſ. ſºmbrage, Fr.]
• Swift.
1. Shade ; ſkrcen of trees;
O, might I here
In ſolitude live ſavage; in ſome glade
Obſcur'd, where higheſt woods, impenetrable
To ſtar, or ſun-light, ſpread their unbrºº broad,
And brown as evening ! AAilton's Par. Lºſ!.
Men ſwelt’ring run
To grotts and caves, and the cool umbrage ſeck
Of woven arborets.
2. Shadow ; appearance.
The reſi" are umbraces quickly diſpelled ; the aſtrºloger
ſubjects liberty to the motions of heaven. Bramh, againſt Jizº.
The opinion carries no ſhew of truth nor umbrage of rea-
ſon of its ſide. // 22dward.
such a removal of the metal out of one part of the maſs,
and collecting of it in another, has miſled ſome, and given
umbrage to an opinion, that there is a growth of metal in
ore expoſed to the air. // 'codward on 1 off.5.
. Reſentment; offence ; ſuſpicion of injury.
Although he went on with the war, yet it ſhould be but
with his ſword in his hand, to bend the ſtiffneſs of the other
party to accept of peace: and ſo the king ſhould take no
imbrage of his arming and proſecution. Bacon.
UMBRAGEOUS. adj. [ambragicux, Fr.] Shady 3 yielding
ſhade.
Umbrageous grots and caves of cool receſs. Milton.
Walk daily in a pleaſant, airy, and umbrageºus garden. Harvey.
The ſtealing ſhower is ſcarce to patter heard,
Beneath th' umbrageous multitude of leaves. Thomſºn.
UMBRA/geouss Ess. m. ſ. [from umbrageºus J Shadineſs.
The exceeding unºrageouſneſs of this tree, he compareth
to the dark and ſhadowed life of man ; through which the
fun of juſtice being not able to pierce, we have all remained
in the ſhadow of death, till it pleaſed Chriſt to climb the
tree of the croſs, for our enlight'ning and redemption. Raleigh,
UMBRA/TILE. adj. [umbratilis, Latin.) Being in the ſhade.
}*{ [from umbra, Lat.] A ſkreen uſed in hot
countries to keep off the ſun, and in others
to bear off the rain.
I can carry your tumbrella, and fan your ladyſhip. Dryden.
Good houſewives
Defended by th' umbrella's oily ſhed,
Safe through the wet on clinking pattens tread. Gay.
UMERIE’RE. m. ſ. The viſor of the helmet. Sºcºſer.
UMBR.o's 1TY. m. ſ. Lumbrºſis, Lat.] Shadineſs; excluſion of
light.
Oled paper becometh more tranſparent, and admits the
* , viſible rays with much leſs umbroſity. Brºwn's /ug. Errours.
U’MPIRAGE. n.ſ. (from umpire.] Arbitration; friendly deci-
ſion of a controverſy. -
UM in E. m. J. [I his word Mºſlew, with great applauſe
from Skinner, derives from un pere, Fr. a father.] An arbi-
trator; one who, as a common friend, decides diſputes.
&gt; Give me ſome pre’ent counſel ; or, behold,
Twixt my extremes and me, this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire; arbitrating that,
y hich the commiſſion of thy years and art
Could to no iſſue of true hoſoir bring.
Juſt eath, kind um, ire of men's miſeries,
With ſweet enlargement doth diſmiſs me hence. Shakeſp.
Philips.
Shakeſp.
The learned Sennertus, in that book, takes not upon him
to play the advocate for the chymiſts, but the umpire º
them and the peripateticks. Boyle
The vaſt diſtance that fin had put between the ofº
creature and the offended Creator, required the help of ſome
great umpire and interceilor, to open him a new way of acceſs
to God; and this Chriſt did for us as mediator.
-- - - South.
The jealous ſects, that dare not truſt their cauſe Quth
So far from their own will as from the laws, , -
You for their umpire and their ſynod take. Drydºn
UN. A Saxon privative or negative particle anſwering to in of
the Latins, and z of the Greeks, on, Dutch. It is placed
almoſt at will before adjectives and adverbs. All the in-
ſtances of this kind of compoſition cannot therefore be in-
ſerted; but I have collected a number ſufficient, perhaps
more than ſufficient, to explain it.
UNAPA’s HED. adj. [from abafted.] Not ſhamed ; not confuſed
by modeſty.
Earlès on high, flood unabaſh'd Defoe,
And Tutchin flagrant from the ſcourge below.
UNA’BLE. adj. [from able.]
1. Not having ability.
The Amaſekites ſet on them, ſuppoſing that they had been
weary, and unable to reſiſt. Raleigh's Hſi. of the Hºrld.
Zeal mov’d thee: -
To pleaſe thy gods thou didſt it; gods unable
Pº,
Tº acquit themſelves, and proſecute their foes. Miliºn.
The prince unable to conceal his pain,
Gaz'd on the fair,
And figh'd, and look'd, and figh’d again. Dryden,
I intended to put it in practice, though far unable for the
attempt of ſuch a poem. Dryden,
Man, under the diſadvantages of a weak and fallen nº-
ture, was unable even to form an idea of happineſs worly
his reaſonable ambition. Rºgers'; Sermºni,
2. Weak ; impotent.
A love that makes breath poor, and ſpeech analº:
Beyond all manner of ſo much I love you. . Shakºftart.
UNAbolished. adj. [from aboliſhed.] Not repealed; remain-
ing in force.
The number of needleſs laws unaboliſhed, doth wºn tº
force of them that are neceſſary: Hooker.
UsAcceptable. adj. [from acceptable.] Not pleaſing; not
ſuch as is well received. -
The marquis at that time was very unacceptable to his
countrymen. * - Cºndºn.
Tis as indecent as unacceptable, and all mºnº willing to
ſlink out of ſuch company, the ſober for the hazards, and
jovial for the unpleaſantneſs. Government ºf the Tºngue.
Every method for deterring others from the like practices
for the future, muſt be unacceptable and diſpleaſing tº the
friends of the guilty. Addison's Fºllº.
if he ſhrinks from an unacceptable duty, tº . . ſecret
reſerve of infidelity at the bottom. Rºgerſ. Sººn,
UN accº/PTABLENEss. m. ſ. [from unacceptable.] State of *
leaſing.
P This alteration ariſes from the unacceptablemſ ºf the ſº-
jećt I am upon. . . Čºllier on Prid.
UğAccºrted. adj. [from accepted.] Nºt accepted.
By turns put on the ſuppliant, and the Lord
Offºrd again the unaccepted wreath,
And choice of happy love, or inſtant death.
UNAcc/Ess; BLENEss. m. ſ. [from acceſſiblemſ.]
being to be attained or approached.
Many excellent things are in nature: ".
the remoteneſs from us, and unacceſſibleh'ſ tº them,
within any of our faculties to apprehend.
UsAcconi MoDATED. adj. [from *
with external convenience.
incºmmodated man is no more than ſuch a P0
forked animal as thou art. -
UNAcco'MPANIED. adj. [from accº”
Seldom one accident, proſperous *
accºmpanied with the like. - • r... th’d : 1ſh-
vº. adj. [from accºmpliſhed.] Unfiniſh'd;
complete. - fur'd
Bºware of death, thou can't not die unperjur 97
Priºr,
State of not
which, by ºſmºſ
are not
- ſale.
dated.] Unſuriſhed
or, bºrº,
Shakespeare .
...] Not attended.
adverſe, cometh uh-
Hºward.
And leave an unaccompliſh'd love behind. Dryden.
Thy vows are mine. - ithdrew
The gods diſnay'd at his approach, withdrew': Dryden.
Nor duit their unaccºmpliſh'd crime purſue. w
UNAccoſus 1 ABLE. adj. [from accountabiº- educible
‘.... . not f
1. Not explicable ; not to be ſolved by reaſon; not
to rule. - l obſerved,
I ſail note difficulties, which are * uſually Glanvil.
though unaccountable. is paſs upon "
The ſoily is ſo ºnaccountable, that ene"? " L'Eſtrº
for friend. - ion of late, “’ fetch
There has been an unaccountable diſpoſition O Alſº
the faſhion from the French. What
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N A
---
---
What is yet more tº accºuntails, would he complain of
their reſiſting his omnipotence. Rºgers's Sermons.
The Chineſe are an unaccºuntable people, ſtrangely com-
pounded of knowledge and ignorance. Baker's Refteå. on Learn.
The manner whereby the ſoul and body are united, and
how they are diſtinguiſhed, is wholly unaccountable to us. Swift.
2. Not ſubjećt; not controlled.
UNAcco'UNTABLY. adv. Strangely.
The boy proved to be the ſon of the merchant, whoſe heart
had ſo unaccountably melted at the fight of him. Addiſon.
UNA’CCURATE. adj. [from accuate.] Not exačt.
Galileo uſing an unaccurate way, defined the air to be in
weight to water but as one to four hundred. Boyle.
UNA'ccuRATEN Ess. m. ſ. [from unaccurate.] Want of exact-
neſs.
It may be much more probably maintained than hitherto,
as againſt the unaccuratºſ, and unconcludingneſs of the ana-
lytical experiments vulgary to be relied on. Boyle.
UN accu's roMED. adj. [from accº/ſcaled.]
1. Not uſed ; not habituated.
I was chaſtiſed as a bullock unaccºmed to theyoke. jer. xxxi.
The neceſſity of air to the moſt of animals unacciyºomed to
the want of it, may beſt be judged of by the following ex-
pe iments. Bºyle.
2. New ; not uſual.
I'll ſend one to Mantua,
Where that ſame baniſh'd runagate doth live,
Shall give him ſuch an unaccuſtom'd dram,
That he ſhall ſoon keep Tibait company. Shakeſ?.
- Their priſtine worth
The Britons recollect, and gladly change . -
Sweet native home, for unaccuſtom'd air. Philips.
An old word ought never to be fixed to an unaccuſiomed
idea, without juſt and evident neceſſity. J/atts's Logick.
UN AcKNo'w LEDGED. adj. [from acknowledge.] Not owned.
The fear of what was to come from an unknown, at
leaſt an unacknowledged ſucceſſor to the crown, clouded much
of that proſperity. Clarendon.
UNA coy A/1NT ANCE. m. ſ. [from acquaintance.] Want of fami-
liarity ; want of knowledge.
The firſt is an utter unacquaintance with his maſter's de-
ſigns, in theſe words; the ſervant knoweth not what his
maſter doth. South.
UNAcq9 A'INTED. adj. [from acquainted.]
1. Not known ; unuſual ; not familiarly known.
She greatly grew amazed at the fight,
And th’ unacquainted light began to fear.
2. Not having familiar knowledge.
Feſtus, an infidel, a Roman, one whoſe ears were un-
acquainted with ſuch matter, heard him, but could not reach
unto that whereof he ſpake. Hooker.
Where elſe
Shall I inform my unacquainted feet
In the blind mazes of this tangled world : Milton.
Art thou a courtier,
Or I a king : My ears are unacquainted
With ſuch bold truths, eſpecially from thee.
Youth, that with joys had unacquainted been,
Envy'd grey hairs, that once good days had ſeen. Dryden.
Let us live like thoſe who expect to die, and then we ſhall
find that we fear'd death only becauſe we were unacquainted
with it. //ake's Preparation fºr Death.
Ux Act 1 v E. adj. [from adive.]
1. Not briſk; not lively.
Silly people commend tame, urađive children, becauſe
they make no noiſe, nor give them any trouble. Locke.
2. Having no employment.
Man hath his daily work of body, or mind,
Appointed, which declares his dignity;
While other animals unaciive range, -
And of their doings God takes no account. Miltºn.
3. Not buſy ; not diligent.
His life,
Private, unaåive, calm, contemplative ; - -
Little ſuſpicious to any king. Paradº Regain'd.
An homage which nature commands all underſlandings to
pay to virtue; and yet it is but a faint, unactive thing; for
in defiance of the judgment, the will may ſtill remain as
much a ſtranger to virtue as before. South's Sermons.
4. Having no efficacy. -
In the fruitful earth
His beams, unaciive elſe, their vigour find. Milton.
UNA’c’ru ATED. adj. Not actuated.
The peripatetick matter is a mere unacitated power. Glanv.
UN ADM 1 RED. adj. Not regarded with honour.
Oh! had I rather unadmir’d remain'd,
In ſome lone iſle, or diſtant northern land;
Where the gilt chariot never marks the way. Pope.
UNADC/RED. adj. Not worſhipped.
Nor was his name unheard, or unador'd
In antient Greece. Žilton.
Fairy Queen.
Denham.
+ - -
t’s Apo'RNER. adi. Not decorated; not embelliſhed
The earth, till then
Deſert, and bare, unſightly, unadorn'd,
Brought forth the tender graſs. Milton's Par. Lo/f.
But hoary winter, unaſºn’d and bare,
U Dwell, in the dire retreat, and freezes there. Addison.
**PW.E.NTURO U.S. adj. Not adventurous.
The wiſeſt, unexperienc'd, will be ever
Timorous and loth, with novice modeſty,
Irreſolute, unhard -----.” ---
- - » *y, unadvent'rous. Miltºn's Par. Regain!
UNAdvi's ED. adj. gain'd.
I. Imprudent; indiſcreet.
- Madam, I have unadvi,'d
Deliver'd you a paper that I ſhould Ilot, Shakeſp.
2. Done without due thought; raſh. -
This contract to-night
Is too raſh, too unadvis'd, too ſudden,
Too like the light'ning, which doth ceaſe to be,
Ere one can ſay, it lightens. Shakeſp Rome, and Julief.
Theſe proſperous proceedings were turned back by the un-
adviſed forwardneſs of divers chief counſellors, in making
ſudden and unreaſonable alterations. Hayward.
Specifick conformities can be no tina 'viſed produćtions;
but are regulated by the immediate efficiency of ſome know!
ing agent. Glanville.
UNAB viſsedly... adv. Imprudently; raſhly ; indiſcreetly.
A ſtrange kind of ſpeech unto chriſtian ears; and ſuch,
as I hope they themſelves do acknowledge unadviſºdly ut-
tered. - - A ſocker.
What man's wit is there able to ſound the depth of thoſe
dangerous and fearful evils, whereinto our weak and impo-
tent nature is inclinable to fink itſelf, rather than to ſhew
an acknowledgment of cror in that which once we have
*adviſed) taken upon us to defend, againſt the dream of a
contrary publick reſolution. Hocker.
What is done cannot be now amended;
Men ſhall deal unadviſedly ſometimes, -
Which after-hours give leiſure to repent of. Shakespeare
A word unadviſedly ſpoken on the one ſide, or miſunder-
ſtood on the other, has railed ſuch an averſion to him, as in
time has produced a perfect hatred of him. South.
UNADU/LTERATED. adj. Genuine; not ſpoiled by ſpurious
Illixtures. -
I have only diſcovered one of thoſe channels, by which
the hiſtory of our Saviour might be conveyed pure and un-
adulterated. Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
UNAFFE'cTED. m. ſ.
1. Real ; not hypocritical.
They bore the king
To lie in ſolemn ſtate, a publick fight:
Groans, cries, and howlings fill the crouded place,
And unaffºed ſorrow ſat on ev'ry face. Dryden.
2. Free from affectation; open ; candid; ſincere.
The maid improves her charms,
With inward greatneſs, unaffected wiſdom,
And ſanctity of manners.
Of ſofteſt manners, unaffe.7ed mind;
Lover of peace, and friend of human kind. Pope’s Epiſt.
3. Not formed by too rigid obſervation of rules; not la-
boured.
Men divinely taught, and better teaching
The ſolid rules of civil government,
In their majeſtic, unºfficied ſtile, -
Than all the oratory of Greece and Rome. Miltºn.
4. Not moved ; not touched.
UNAFFE'cTEDLY. adv. Really ; without any attempt to pro-
duce falſe appearances.
He was always unaffeºjedly cheerful ; no marks of any
thing heavy at his heart broke from him. Locke.
UNAFFE'cTiNG. adj. Not pathetick; not moving the paſſions.
UNAFFLI'cTED. adj. Free from trouble.
My unaffiºed mind doth feed . . . -
On no 'unholy thoughts for benefit. Daniel's Mºſºphilus.
UNAGREE/ABLE. adj. Inconſiſtent; unſuitable. - -
Advent’rous work yet to thy pow'r and mine.
Not unagreeable, to found a path - -
Over this main, from hell to that new world. Milton.
UNAGREE'ABLENESS. n ſ. Unſuitableneſs to; inconſiſtency with.
Papias, a holy man, and ſcholar of St. John, having de-
livered the mileſinium, men choſe rather to admit a doctrine,
whoſe unagreeableneſs to the goſpel. oeconomy rendered it
ſuſpicious, than think an apoſtolick man could ſeduce
them. Decay of Piety.
UNAIDARLE. adj. Not to be helped.
The congregated college have concluded,
That labouring art can never raniom nature
From her unaidable eſtate.
UNAI'PED. adj. Not aſſiſted; not helped.
- Their number, counting thoſe th' unaided eye
Can ſee, or by invented tubes deſery, -
The wideſt ſtretch of human thought exceeds. Blººmºre.
- - UNA’IMING,
Addison's Catz.
Shakeſpeare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N A
U N A
r . adj. Having no particular direétion.
UNAI *: º º: o'ercharg’d, lets fly,
And burſts, unaining in. the rended ſky:
Such frantick flights are like a madman's dream,
And nature º the wild .
* -- . * . Not feeling or cauſing pain.
UNA *śr. th’ making ſcars º I would hide,
As if I had received them for the hire -
Of their breath only. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Usa/Lienable. adj. Not to be transferred.
Hereditary right ſhould be kept ſacred, not from any un-
alienable right in a particular family, but to avoid the con-
ſequences that uſually attend the ambition of competitors. Swift.
UNAlla'YED. adj. Not impaired by bad mixtures.
Unalayed ſatisfactions are joys too heavenly to fall to
many men's ſhares on earth. Boyle.
UNALLIED. adj.
1. Having no powerful relation. -
2. Having no common nature; not congenial. . . -
He is compounded of two very different ingredients;
ſpirit and matter; but how ſuch unallied and diſproportioned
fübſtances ſhould act upon each other, no man's learning
yet could tell him. Collier on Pride.
Uša'lterable. adj. Unchangeable; immutable.
The law of nature, conſiſting in a fixed, unalterable rela-
tion of one nature to another, is indiſpenſable. South.
They fixt unalterable laws,
Settling the ſame effect on the ſame cauſe. Creech.
The truly upright man is inflexible in his uprightneſs,
and unalterable in his purpoſe. Atterbury.
UNA’lterable Ness. n. ſ. Immutability; unchangeableneſs.
This happens from the unalterableneſs of the corpuſcles,
which conſtitute and compoſe thoſe bodies. JWoodward.
UNa'lter ABLY. adv. Unchangeably ; immutably.
Retain unalterably firm his love intire. Milton's Par. Left.
The day and year are ſtandard meaſures, becauſe they are
wnalterably conſtituted by thoſe motions. Holder on Time.
UNA/LTERED. adj. Not changed; not changeable.
It was thought in him an unpardonable oftence to alter
anything ; in us intolerable that we ſuffer anything to re-
main unaltered. Hooker.
To whom our Saviour, with unalter'd brow ;
Thy coming hither, though I know thy ſcope,
I bid not, or forbid. Paradiſe Regain'd.
To ſhew the truth of my unalter'd breaſt,
Granville.
Know that your life was giv'n at my requeſt. Dryden.
Since theſe forms begin, and have their end,
On ſome unalter'd cauſe they ſure depend. Dryden.
Grains and nuts paſs often through animals unalter'd. Arbuth.
Amongſt the ſhells that were fair, unaltered, and free from
ſuch mineral inſinuations, there were ſome which could not
be match'd by any ſpecies of ſhell-fiſh now found upon the
ſea ſhores. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
UNAMA’z Ed. adj. Not aſtoniſhed; free from aſtoniſhment.
Though at the voice much marvelling; at length
Not unamaz'd, ſhe thus in anſwer ſpake. Milton,
UNAMBI'tious. adj. Free from ambition.
My humble muſe, in unambitious ſtrains,
Paints the green foreſts, and the flow'ry plains. Pope.
I am one of thoſe unambitious people, who will love you
forty years hence. Pope.
UNAME’s DABLE. adj. [inemendabilis, Lat.] Not to be changed
for the better.
He is the ſame man; ſo is every one here that you know :
mankind is unamendable. Pope to Swift.
UNAMIABLE. adj. Not raiſing love.
Thoſe who repreſent religion in an unamiable light, are
like the ſpies ſent by Moſes, to make a diſcovery of the land
of promiſe, when, by their reports, they diſcouraged the
people from entering upon it. Addiſon's Spectator.
Theſe men are ſo well acquainted with the unamiable part
of themſelves, that they have not the confidence to think
they are really beloved. Addiſon's Spectator,
Nor are the hills unamiable, whoſe tops
To heav'n aſpire.
UNANALY'SED. adj. Not reſolved into ſimple parts.
Some large cryſtals of refined and unanalyſed nitre, ap-
Philips,
peared to have each of them fix flat ſides. Boyle.
UNA'NchoRed, adj. Not anchored.
A port there is, inclos'd on either ſide,
Where ſhips may reſt, unanchord, and unty'd. Pope.
UNANE'LED. adj. ſun and knell. -- -
This ſenſe I º J. Without the bell rung
Thus was I, ſleeping, by a brother's hand
Cut off ev’n in the bloſſoms of my ſin,
Jnhouſel’d, unanointed, unanel’d. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
9NANIMATED, adj. Not enlivened, not vivified.
h º: ºn thoſe half lines as the imperfect produćts of a
º muſe : like the frogs in the Nile, part kindled into life,
AJ º, sº s lump of uninformed, unanimated matter. Dryden.
****.*ſ. Lunanimite,Fr.]Agreementindefignoropinion,
lº.º.º.º. ºf
- - &gt; • 1ame party aimin
at the ſame end by different views. Addison g
UNA’NIMOUS. adj. [unanime, Fr. unanimis, Lat J ſº
one mind; agreeing in deſign or opinion. 30
They wont to meet
So oft in feſtivals of joy, and love
Unanimous, as ſons of one great fire,
Hymning th' eternal father. Milton's Par Loft
With thoſe which Minio's fields and Phyrgig. **
All bred in arms, unanimous and brave. Boia
UNAN Mously. adv. [from unanimous.] With one mind. -
This particular is unanimouſly reported by all the antient
chriſtian authors. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religiºn
UNANo'INTED. adj. gton.
1. Not anointed.
2. Not prepared for death by extreme undion.
Thus was I, ſleeping, by a brother's hand
Cut off ev’n in the bloſſoms of my fin,
Unhouſel’d, unanointed, unanel’d.
UNA’Nswer Able. adj. Not to be refuted.
This is a manifeſt and unanſwerable argument. Raleigh.
I ſhall not conclude it falſe, though I think the emergent
difficulties, which are its attendants, unanſwerable. Ganj.
The pye's queſtion was wiſely let fall without a reply, to
intimate that it was unanſwerable. L’Eſtrange.
Theſe ſpeculations are ſtrong intimations, not only of the
excellency of a human ſoul, but of its independence on the
body; and if they do not prove, do at leaſt confirm, theſe
two great points, which are eſtabliſhed by many other rea-
ſons that are unanſwerable. Addiſon's Speiatºr.
As to the excuſe drawn from the demands of creditors, if
it be real, it is unanſwerable. Atterbury's Sermoni,
UNANswerably. adv. Beyond confutation.
It will put their little logick hard to it, to prove, that
there can be any obedience, where there is no command.
And therefore it unanſwerably follows, that the abettors of
the forementioned principle plead conſcience in a direct and
bare-faced contradićtion to God's expreſs command. South.
UNA’Nswer ED. adj.
1. Not oppoſed by a reply.
Unanſwer'd left thou boaſt.
Muſt I tamely bear
This arrogance unanſwer'd / Thou'rt a traitor.
2. Not confuted.
All theſe reaſons, they ſay, have been brought, and were
hitherto never anſwer'd ; beſides a number of merriments
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Milton's Par. Loft.
Addison.
and jeſts unanſwer'd likewiſe. Hooker.
3. Not ſuitably returned.
Quench, Corydon, thy long unanſwer'd fire;
Mind what the common wants of life require, Dryden.
UNAPPA'LLED. adj. Not daunted; not impreſs'd by fear.
If my memory muſt thus be thralled
To that ſtrange ſtroke, which conquered all my ſenſes;
Can thoughts ſtill thinking ſo reſt unappalled? Sidn').
Infernal ghoſts
Environ'd thee; ſome howl'd, ſome yell’d, ſome ſhriek'd;
Some bent at thee their fiery darts; while thou
Sat'ſt unappall'd in calm and ſinleſs peace. Miltºn,
As a lion, unappall'd with fear,
Springs on the toils, and ruſhes on the ſpear. D04".
Does this appear like guilt When thus ſerene,
With eyes erect, and viſage unappall'd,
Fixt on that awful face, I ſtand the charge; -
Amaz'd, not fearing. Smith's Ph.ed, and Hipºlitui.
UNAPPA'RRelled. adj. Not dreſſed; not cloathed.
In Peru, though they were an unapparelled people, and
had ſome cuſtoms very barbarous, yet the governmº."
the Incas had many parts of civilty. Bacºn's Holy Wari.
Till our ſouls be unapparelled
Of bodies, they from bliſs are baniſhed. I)annt,
UNAPPA'RENT. adj. Obſcure; not viſible.
- Thy potent voice he hears,
And longer will delay to hear thee tell
His generation, and the riſing birth Milton.
Of nature, from the unapparent deep.
UNAPPEA's ABLE. adj. Not to be pacified ; implicable. ſ
The unappeaſable rage of Hildebrand and his ſucce .
never left perſecuting him, by raiſing one rebelliºn, ſº
another. Raleigh's Elſº
I ſee thou art implacable ; more deaf
To pray'rs than winds to ſeas; yet winds to ſeas
Are reconcil'd at length, and ſeas to ſhore.
Thy anger, unappeaſable, ſtill rages,
Eternal tempeſt never to be calm'd. Miltºn.
UNAPPE'Ased. adj. Not pacified.
Sacrifice his fleſh, hakºff
That ſo the ſhadows be not unappeas'd. Shakeſp.
His ſon forgot, his empreſs unappear'd; Drydºn.
How ſoon the tyrant with new love is ſeiz'd.
UNAPPLI-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N A ºx
-
e
ºº
º
.*
º
UNA ºriticable adj. [from apply..] Such as cannot be applied.
Gratitude, by being confined to the few, has a very nar-
row Province to work on, being acknowledged to be unap-
plicable, and ſo conſequently ineffectual to all others. Hammond.
Their beloved earl of Mancheſter appeared now as un-
applicable to their purpoſes as the other. Carendon.
The ſingling out, and laying in order thoſe intermediate
ideas, that demonſtratively ſhew the equality or inequality of
unapºlicable quantities, has produced diſcoveries. Locke.
UNAPPREHE'Nded. adj. Not underſtood.
They of whom God is altogether unapprehended, are but
few in number, and for groſsneſs of wit ſuch, that they
hardly ſeem to hold the place of human being. Hooker.
UNAPPREHE'Nsive. adj. [from apprehend.]
1. Not intelligent; not ready of conception.
The ſame temper of mind makes a man unapprehenſive and
inſenſible of any miſery ſuffered by others. South.
2. Not ſuſpecting,
UNApproa’ched. adj. Inacceſſible.
God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity. Milton's Par, Loft.
UNapproved. adj. [from approve.] Not approved.
Evil into the mind
May come and go ſo unapprov'd, and leave
No ſpot behind.
UNA‘PT. adj. [from apt.]
1. Dull; not apprehenſive.
2. Not ready; not propenſe.
I am a ſoldier, and unapt to weep.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to ſtir at theſe indignities. Shakeſpeare.
3. Unfit; not qualified. -
Fear doth grow from an apprehenſion of deity indued with
irreſiſtible power to hurt; and is, of all affections (anger ex-
cepted) the unaptºft to admit any conference with rea-
ſon. Hooker.
A longing after ſenſual pleaſures is a diſſolution of the
ſpirit of a man, and makes it looſe, ſoft and wandering,
unapt for noble, wiſe, or ſpiritual employments. Taylor.
4. Improper; unfit; unſuitable.
UNA’FTLY. adv. [from unapt.] Unfitly; improperly.
He ſwims on his back; and the ſhape of his back ſeems
to favour it, being very like the bottom of a boat: nor do
his hinder legs unaptly reſemble a pair of oars. Grew.
UNA'pt Ness. n. ſ. [from unapt.]
1. Unfitneſs; unſuitableneſs. - º
Men's apparel is commonly made according to their con-
ditions; and their conditions are often governed by their gar-
ments: for the perſon that is gowned, is by his gown put in
mind of gravity, and alſo reſtrained from lightneſs by the very
unaptneſs of his weed. Spenſer.
2. Dulneſs; want of apprehenſion.
That unaptneſs made you miniſter
Thus to excuſe yourſelf. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
3. Unreadineſs; diſqualification;, want of propenſion.
The mind, by being engaged in a taſk beyond its ſtrength,
like the body, ſtrained by lifting at a weight too heavy, has
often its force broken, and thereby gets an unaptneſs, or
an averſion to any vigorous attempt ever after. Locke.
UNA/RGUED. adj. [from argue.]
1. Not diſputed.
What thou bid'ſt,
Unargu'd I obey; ſo God ordains. Milton's Par. Loft.
2. Not cenſured.
Not that his work liv'd in the hands of foes,
Unargu'd then, and yet hath fame from thoſe. B. johnſon.
To UNARM. v. a. [from arm.] To diſarm; to ſtrip of ar-
mour; to deprive of arms.
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight to-day.
Unarm me, Eros ; the long day's taſk is done,
And we muſt ſleep. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Galen would not leave unto the world too ſubtle a theory
of poiſons ; unarming thereby the malice of venemous
fpirits. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
UNA’RMED. adj. [from unarm.] Having no armour; having no
weapons.
Milton.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
On the weſtern coaſt
Rideth a puiſant navy: To our ſhores -
Throng many doubtful, hollow-hearted friends,
Unarm’d, and unreſolv'd to beat them back.
He all unarm'd
Shall chaſe thee with the terror of his voice
From thy demoniack holds, poſſeſſion foul;
Thee and thy legions, yelling they ſhall fly,
And beg to hide them in a herd of ſwine.
Though unarm'd I am,
Here, without my ſword or pointed lance,
Hope not, baſe man, unqueſtion'd hence to go. Dryden.
Whereas moſt other creatures are furniſhed with weapons
for their defence ; man is born altogether unarmed, Grew.
UNARRA’.GNED. adj. Not brought to a trial.
Shakeſp.
Milton.
U N A
As lawful lord, and king by juſt deſcent,
Should here be judg’d, unheard, and unarraign'd, Daniel,
NARRA'YED. adj. Not dreſſed.
As if this infant world yet unarray'd,
Naked and bare, in nature's lap were laid,
Half unarray'd, he ran to his relief,
$o haſty and ſo artleſs was his grief.
UNA'RTFUí. adj.
I. Having no art, or cunning.
A : chearful ſweetneſs in his looks he has,
nd innocence unartful in his face. D 's ºusema!.
2. Wanting ſkill. tſ ryden's juvenal,
How unartful would it have been to have ſet him in a
corner, when he was to have given light and warmth to all
the bodies round him Cheyne's Phil. Prin,
*:::::::::: adv. In an unartful manner.
n the report, although it be not unartfully drawn, and is
perfectly in the ſpirit of a pleader, there is no grºi re-
quired to detect the many miſtakes. Swift's Miſcellany.
UNARTIFI'cially, adv. Contrarily to art.
Not a feather is unartificially made, miſplaced, redundant,
or defe&amp;tive. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
UNA’skED. adj. Not ſought by ſolicitation.
With what eagerneſs, what circumſtance
Unaik'd, thou tak'ſt ſuch pains to tell me only
My ſon's the better man. Denham's Sophy.
The bearded corn enſu'd
From earth unaſ'd, nor was that earth renew’d. Dryden,
How, or why -
Shou'd all conſpire to cheat us with a lye?
Unaſ'd their pains, ungrateful their advice;
, Starving their gain, and martyrdom their price.
UNASPI'RING. adj. Not ambitious.
º be modeſt and unaſpiring, in honour preferring one
another.
Dryden,
Bryden,
Dryden.
- Rogers.
UNAssa’ILED. adj. Not attacked; not aſſaulted.
As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day,
It grieves my ſoul to leave thee unaffail’d. Shakeſpeare.
I believe
That he, the ſupreme good, t' whom all things ill
Are but as ſlaviſh officers of vengeance,
Would ſend a gliſt'ring guardian, if need were,
To keep my life and honour unaffail’d. Milton's Comus,
UNAssa’ILABLE. adj. Exempt from aſſault.
In the number, I do but know one,
That unaffailable holds on his rank,
Unſhak'd of motion. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
UNAssa'YED. adj. Unattempted.
What is faith, love, virtue unaffay'd
Alone, without exterior help ſuſtain'd. Milton,
UNAssi'stED. adj. Not helped.
Its vićtories were the vićtories of reaſon, unaſſifted by the
force of human power, and as gentle as the triumphs of
light over darkneſs. Addiſon's Freeholder.
What unaſſiſted reaſon could not diſcover, that God has ſet
clearly before us in the revelation of the goſpel: a felicity
equal to our moſt enlarged deſires; a ſtate of immortal and
unchangeable glory. Rogers's Sermons.
UNAssi'stiNG. adj. Giving no help.
With theſe I went, a brother of the war;
Nor idle ſtood, with unaſſling hands,
When ſavage beaſts, and men's more ſavage bands,
Their virtuous toil ſubdu'd : yet theſe I ſway’d. Dryden.
UNAssu'MING. adj. Not arrogant.
Unaſſuming worth in ſecret liv'd, -
And died neglected, Thomſºn's I/inter.
UNAssu’RED. adj.
I. Not confident.
The enſuing treatiſe, with a timorous and unaſſured coun-
tenance, adventures into your preſence. Glanville.
2. Not to be truſted.
The doubts and dangers, the delays and woes;
The feigned friends, the unaffired foes,
Do make a lover's life a wretch's hell. . . Spenſºr.
Unatta'inable. adj. Not to be gained or obtained; being
out of reach. - - - - -
Praiſe and prayerare God's due worſhip; which are natiºn.
able by our diſcourſe, ſimply conſidered, without the benefit of
divine revelation. Dryden's Religio Laici.
I do not expect that men ſhould be perfectly kept from
error; that is more than human nature can, by any means;
be advanced to: I aim at º unattainable Pºiº*.
hat they ſhould do. -
u....... Ž. State of being out of reach.
Defire is ſtopped by the opinion of the impoſſibility, or ul-
attainableneſs of the º .*. ſtayed Locke.
D. adj. Untried ; not allayed. . . -
Usº: º unattempted of deſtroying his ſon. Sidney.
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand,
when his fair angels would ſalute my palm ;
But that my hand, as unattempted yet,
Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich.
Shakeſp.
29 I It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N B
U N A
It purſues h
hings unattempted yet in proſe ºr hym”
Tº. nothing unattempted to deſtroy
t perjur'd race. -
§º ..". diſcouraged from any attempt of doing good,
by the poſſibility of our failing in it? How many of the beſt
§: would, at this rate, have been left unattempted? Atterb.
UNATTE'Nded. adj. Having no retinue, or attendants.
Your conſtancy
Hath left you unattended. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
with goddeſs-like demeanor forth ſhe went,
Milton.
Denham.
Not unattended. Milton's Par: Loft.
Such unattended generals can never make a revolution in
Parnaſſus. . Dryden.
UNATTE'NDING. adj. Not attending.
Ill is loſt that praiſe, -
Milton.
That is addreſs'd to unattending ears.
Ev’ry nymph of the flood, her treſſes rending,
Throws off her armlet of pearl in the main ;
Neptune in anguiſh his charge unattending:
Veſſels are found'ring, and vows are in vain.
UNATTE'NTIve. adj. Not regarding.
Man's nature is ſo unattentive to good, that there can ſcarce
be too many monitors. Government of the Tongue.
Such things are not accompanied with ſhow, and there-
fore ſeldom draw the eyes of the unattentive. Tatler, Nº. 55.
UNATTo/NED. adj. Not expiated.
Could you afford him ſuch a bribe as that,
A brother's blood yet unatton'd? Rowe.
UNA v A'ilable. adj. Uſeleſs; vain with reſpect to any pur-
poſe.
When we have endeavoured to find out the ſtrongeſt
cauſes, wherefore they ſhould imagine that reading is ſo un-
available, the moſt we can learn is, that ſermons are the or-
dinance of God, the ſcriptures dark, and the labour of read-
Dryden.
ing eaſy. Hooker.
UNAVA'ili NG. adj. Uſeleſs; vain.
Since my inevitable death you know,
You ſafely unavailing pity ſhow :
'Tis popular to mourn a dying foe. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
Supine he tumbles on the crimſon ſands,
Before his helpleſs friends and native bands, }
And ſpreads for aid his unavailing hands. Pope.
UNA voi'DABLE. adj.
1. Inevitable; not to be ſhunned.
Oppreſſion on one ſide, and ambition on the other, are
the unavoidable occaſions of war. Dryden.
It is unavoidable to all, to have opinions, without certain
proofs of their truth. Locke.
Single acts of tranſgreſſion will, through weakneſs and
ſurprize, be unavoidable to the beſt guarded. Rogers.
The merits of Chriſt will make up the unavoidable defi-
ciencies of our ſervice; will prevail for pardon to our ſincere
repentance. Rogers.
All ſentiments of worldly grandeur vaniſh at that unavoid-
able moment, which decides the deſtiny of men. Clariſſa.
2. Not to be miſſed in ratiocination.
That ſomething is of itſelf, is ſelf-evident, becauſe we ſee
things are; and the things that we ſee muſt either have had
ſome firſt cauſe of their being, or have been always, and of
themſelves : one of them is unavoidable. Tillotſon.
I think it unavoidable for every rational creature, that will
examine his own or any other exiſtence, to have the notion
of an eternal, wiſe being, who had no beginning. Locke.
UNavoi'DABLENEss. n. ſ. Inevitability.
How can we conceive it ſubject to material impreſſions f
and yet the importunity of pain, and unavoidableneſs of ſen-
ſations, ſtrongly perſuade that we are ſo. Glanville.
UNAvo'IDABLY. adv. Inevitably.
The moſt perfeót adminiſtration muſt unavoidably produce
oppoſition from multitudes who are made happy by it. Addiſon.
UNAvo'IDED. adj. Inevitable.
We ſee the very wreck that we muſt ſuffer;
And unavoided is the danger now. Shakeſp.
Rare poems aſk rare friends;
Yet ſatyrs, ſince the moſt of mankind be
Their unavoided ſubjećt, feweſt ſee. B. Johnſºn.
UNAU"THoRISED. adj. Not ſupported by authority; not pro-
perly commiſſioned.
To kiſs in private 2
An unauthorized kiſs. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
It is for you to ravage ſeas and land,
Unauthoriz'd by my ſupreme command.
UN Awa’RE.
UNAw A(Res.
1. Without thought; without previous meditation.
- It is my father's face,
Wºm, in this conflict, fundiºs have kill’d.
Firm We ſubſiſt; yet poſſible to ſwerve,
And fall into deception unaware.
Dryden.
}adv. [from aware, or wary.]
A pleaſant beverage he prepar’d before,
Of wine and honey mix’d; with added fore
Of opium : to his keeper this he brought,
Who ſwallow'd unawares the ſleepy draught
And ſnor'd ſecure. &gt;
'Tis a ſenſation like that of a limb lopp'd off; one
every minute unawares to uſe it, and finds it is not.
2. Unexpectedly; when it is not thought of; ſuddenly.
Take heed leſt you fall unawares into that incomy
you formerly found fault with.
Leſt deſtruction come upon him at unawares,
that he hath hid, catch himſelf. Pſalm xxxvi. 8
My hand, unawares to me, was, by the force of i.
endeavour it juſt before employed to ſuſtain the fallen weight
&gt;
Dryden,
IS trying
Pope.
enience
Spenſer.
and let i.
carried up with ſuch violence, that I bruiſed it. Boyle
He breaks at unawares upon our walks, jle.
And, like a midnight wolf, invades the fold. Dryden
Though we live never ſo long, we are ſtill ſurprized: we
put the evil day far from us, and then it catches us man
and we tremble at the proſpect. iſ...
UNA’w ED. adj. Unreſtrained by fear or reverence. *** -
The raging and fanatic dittemper of the houſe of COm-
mons muſt be attributed to the want of ſuch good miniſters
of the crown, as, being unawed by any guilt of their own,
could have watched other mens. Clarendºn.
Unforc’d by puniſhment, unaw’d by fear,
His words were ſimple, and his ſoul fincere. Drydºn,
UNBA/cKED. adj.
1. Not tamed ; not taught to bear the rider.
Then I beat my tabor;
At which, like unback'd colts, they prick'd their CarS,
Advanc'd their eyelids, liſted up their noſes,
As they ſmelt muſick. Shakeſ Tºmpſ.
A well wayed horſe will ſafely convey thee to thy journey's
end, when an unhacked filly may give thee a fall. Sutiling.
They flinch like unback'd fillies. Dennis’ Letters.
2. Not countenanced ; not aided.
Let the weight of thine own infamy
Fall on thee unſupported, and unback'd. Daniel's Civil War.
UNBA/LANced. adj. Not poiſed; not in equipoiſe.
Let earth unbalanc'd from her orbit fly,
Planets and ſuns run lawleſs through the ſky. Pºpe.
UNBA'll Asted. adj. Not kept ſteady by ballaſt; un-
ſteady.
They having but newly left thoſe grammatick flats, where
they ſtuck unreaſonably, to learn a few words with lamen-
table conſtruction; and now on the ſudden tranſported under
another climate, to be toſt and turmoiled with their unballaſted
wits, in fathomleſs and unquiet deeps of controverſy, do,
for the moſt part, grow into hatred of learning. Miliºn.
As at ſea th' unballaſt veſſel rides,
Caſt to and fro, the ſport of winds and tides:
So in the bounding chariot toſs'd on high, -
The youth is hurry'd headlong through the ſky. Addison.
UNB'ANd D. adj. [from band.] Wanting a ſtring, or band.
Your hoſe ſhould be ungarter’d, your bonnet unlanded,
and every thing demonſtrating a careleſs deſolation, Satº.
To UNE’AR. v. a. [from bar.] To open, by removing the
bars; to unbolt. -
'Tis not ſecure, this place or that to guard,
If any other entrance ſtand unbarr'd. Denham:
Theſe rites the king refus'd,
Deaf to their cries; nor would the gates unbar Dryden
rya --
Of ſacred peace, or looſe th’ impriſon'd war,
Unba’rbed, diff. [barba, Lat.] Not ſhaven. Qut ºf uſe.
Muſt I go ſhew them my unbarbed ſconce?
Muſt my baſe tongue give to my noble heart -
A lie Shakespeare Cº.
UNBA/RKED. adj. [from bark.] Decorticated; ſtripped of the
bark.
A branch of a tree,
and ſo ſet in the ground, hath grown.
UNBA'shful. adj. Impudent; ſhameleſs.
Nor did I with unbaſhful forehead wooe
The means of weakneſs and debility.
UNBA'TED. adj. [from bate.] Not repreſſe -
where is the horſe, that doth untread "3"
t the bottom,
unbarked ſome ſpace a Bacon.
Shałºńeart.
d; not blunted.
His tedious meaſures with th' unbated fire it.
That he did pace them firſt Shakespeare March, of Winiſt
UNBA'THED. adj. [from bath..] Not wet. . . ."
Fierce Paſmond, their paſſage to prevent,
Thruſt full on Cymon's back in his deſcen; Dryd,
The blade return'd unbath'd, and to the handle bent, Drya, º,
UNBA/TTE RED. adj. Not injured by blows:
I cannot ſtrike at wretched kernes, whoſe an.
Are hir'd to bear their ſtaves : or *
Or elſe my ſword, with an unbatter'4.9% , iſ, liff,
I ſheath º undeeded. Shakeſpearfº Macht
UNBEA'RING, adj. Bringing no fruit.
swift.
Milton.
Doct
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N B
º
-
-º:
:
:
iſ:
º
.
,
He with his pruning hook disjoins
Unbearing branches from their head,
And grafts more happy in their ſtead. Dryden.
To UNBA'Y. v. a. To ſet open; to free from the reſtraint of
mounds.
I ought now to looſe the reins of my affe&amp;tions, to unbay
the current of my paſſion, and love on without boundary or
meaſure. Norris's Miſcellany.
UN BEATEN. adj.
1. Not treated with blows.
His mare was truer than his chronicle;
For ſhe had rode five miles unſpurr'd, unbeaten,
And then at laſt turn'd tail towards Neweaton. Bp. Corbet.
2. Not trodden.
We muſt tread unbeaten paths, and make a way where we
do not find one ; but it ſhall be always with a ſight in our
hand. Bacon.
If your bold muſe dare tread unbeaten paths. Roſcommon.
Virtue, to crown her fav'rites, loves to try
Some new, unbeaten paſſage to the ſky. Swift.
UNBEco MING. adj. Indecent; unſuitable; indecorous.
Here's our chief gueſt.——
If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great feaſt,
And all things unbecoming. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
No thought of flight,
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
That argu'd fear. Milton's Par. Loft.
I ſhould rather believe that the noſe was the ſeat of
wrath in beaſts than in mankind; and that it was unbecoming
of any but Pan, who had very much of the beaſt in him,
to wrinkle up his noſe in anger. Dryden.
My grief lets unbecoming ſpeeches fall:
I ſhould have dy'd, and not complain’d at all. Dryden.
This petulancy in converſation prevails among ſome of
that ſex, where it appears the moſt unbecoming and un-
natural. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Men of wit, learning, and virtue, might ſtrike out every
offenſive or unbecoming paſſage from plays. Swift.
Such proceed upon debates without unbecomingwarmth. Swift.
UNBEco'MING NEss. n. ſ. Indecency; indecorum.
If words are ſometimes to be uſed, they ought to be grave,
kind and ſober, repreſenting the ill or unbecomingneſs of the
fault. Locke.
To UNBeſd. v. a. To raiſe from a bed.
Eels unbed themſelves, and ſtir at the noiſe of thun-
der. J/alton's Angler.
UNBEFI’rt ING. adj. Not becoming; not ſuitable.
Love is full of unbefitting ſtrains,
All wanton as a child, ſkipping in vain. Shakeſp.
Far be it that I ſhould write thee fin, or blame !
Or think thee unbefitting holieſt place. Milton.
He might ſeveral times have made peace with his diſcon-
tented ſubjects upon terms not at all unbefitting his dignity or
intereſt; but he rather choſe to ſacrifice the whole alliance
to his private paſſion. Swift.
To UN BEGE^T. v. n. To deprive of exiſtence.
Wiſhes each minute he could unbeget
Thoſe rebel ſons, who dare t'uſurp his ſeat.
/
tºº. łaj. [from begot.]
1. Eternal; without generation.
Why ſhould he attribute the ſame honour to matter,
which is ſubjećt to corruption, as to the eternal, unbegotten,
Dryden.
and immutable God : Stillingfleet.
2. Not yet generated. - -
God omnipotent, muſt’rin
Armies of peſtilence; and they ſhall ſtrike
Your children yet unborn, and unbegot. Shakeſp.
In thy pow'r
It lies yet, ere conception, to prevent
The race unbleſt, to being yet unbegot. Milton's Par, Loft.
Where a child finds his own parents his perverters, better
were it for him to have been unborn and unbegot, than aſk a
bleſfing of thoſe whoſe converſation breathes nothing but a
curſe. - South's Sermons.
To UN begui'le. v. a. To undeceive; to ſet free from the
influence of any deceit. -
Then unbiguile thyſelf, and know with me,
That angels, though on earth employ'd they be,
Are ſtill in heav'n. Bonne.
Their comelineſs unbeguiled the vulgar of the odd opinion
the loyaliſts had formerly infuſed into them, by their con-
cionatory invečtives. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
UNBEHE(LD, adj. Unſeen; not diſcoverable to the fight.
Theſe then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain.
UNBELI'EF. n. ſ.
1. Incredulity.
Milton.
'Tis not vain or fabulous,
What the ſage poets, taught by th’ heav'nly muſe,
-
U N B
Storied of old in high immortal verſe,
Of dire chimaera's, and enchanted iſles,
And fifted rocks, whoſe entrance leads to hell;
For ſuch there be, but unbelief is blind.
I'm juſtly plagu'd by this your unbelief,
And am myſelf the caſe of my own grief. Dryden.
Such an univerſal acquaintance with things will keep you
from an exceſs of credulity and unbelief; i.e. a readineſs to
believe, or to deny everything at firſt hearing. JWatts.
2. Infidelity; irreligion.
Where profeſs'd *elief is, there can be no viſible church
of Chriſt; there may be where ſound belief wanteth. H.
To UN believe. v. a
I. To diſcredit; not to truſt.
Heav'n'ſhield your grace from woe,
As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go. Shakeſp.
- So great a prince and favourite ſo ſuddenly metamorphoſed
into travellers with no greater train, was enough to
any man unbelieve his five ſenſes.
2. Not to think real or true.
Nor leſs than fight and hearing could convince,
Of ſuch an unforeſeen and unbeliev'd offence. Dryden.
UN BELIE’ver. n: ſ An infidel; one who believes not the
ſcripture of God.
The antient fathers being often conſtrained to ſhew, what
warrant they had ſo much to rely upon the ſcriptures, endeal
voured ſtill to maintain the authority of the books of God,
by arguments ſuch as unbeliever, themſelves muſt needs think
Milton.
make
//otton's Buckingham.
reaſonable, if they judged thereof as they ſhould. Hoofer.
What endleſs war wou'd jealous nations tear,
If none above did witneſs what they ſwear :
Sad fate of unbelievers, and yet juſt,
Among themſelves to find ſo little truſt. WWaller.
In the new teſtament, religion is uſually expreſſed by faith
in God and Chriſt, and the love of them. Hence it is that
true chriſtians are ſo frequently called believers; and wicked
and ungodly men unbelievers. Tillotſon.
He pronounces the children of ſuch parents as were, one
of them a chriſtian, and the other an unbeliever, holy, on ac-
count of the faith and holineſs of that one. Atterbury.
Men always grow vicious before they become unbeliever; ;
but if you would once convince profligates by topicks drawn
from the view of their own quiet, reputation, and health,
their infidelity would ſoon drop off. Swift's Miſcellanies.
UNBELIE’vING. adj. Infidel.
No pauſe,
No ſtay of ſlaughter found his vigorous arm;
But th' unbelieving ſquadrons turn'd to flight,
Smote in the rear. Phillips.
This wrought the greateſt confuſion in the unbelieving
Jews, and the greateſt convićtion in the Gentiles. Addiſon.
In the days of the apoſtle, when all who profeſſed them-
ſelves diſciples of Chriſt were converts of conſcience, this
ſevere cenſure might be reſtrained to the unbelieving part of
mankind. Rogers's Sermons.
UNBelo'ved. adj. Not loved.
Whoe'er you are, not unbelov’d by heav'n,
Since on our friendly ſhore your ſhips are driv'n.
To UNB E^ND. v. a. To relax; to remit; to eaſe.
You unbend your noble ſtrength, to think
So brain-ſickly of things. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
It is lawful to relax and unbend our bow, but not to ſuffer
it to be unready, or unſtrung. Taylor's Holy Living.
Here have I ſeen the king, when great affairs
Gave leave to ſlacken and unbend his cares,
Attended to the chace by all the flow'r of youth. Denham.
From thoſe great cares when eaſe your ſoul unbends,
Dryden.
Your pleaſures are deſign'd to noble ends. Dryden.
I muſt be in the battle; but I’ll go
With empty quiver, and unbended bow. Dryden.
UNBE'NDING. adj.
1. Not ſuffering flexure. -
. Not ſo, when ſwift Camilla ſcours the plain,
Flies o'erth' unbending corn, and ſkims along the main. Pope.
2. Devoted to relaxation. - -
Since what was omitted in the acting is now kept in, I
hope it may entertain your lordſhip at an unbending hour. Rowe.
UNBeNeſvolent. adj. Not kind... - -
A religion which not only forbids, but by its natural in-
fluence ſweetens all bitterneſs and aſperity of temper, and cor-
rečts that ſelfiſh narrowneſs of ſpirit, which inclines Inen to
a fierce, unbenevolent behaviour. Rogers's Sermons.
UNee’Neficed. adj. Not preferred to a benefice.
More vacant pulpits wou'd more converts make :
All wou'd have latitude enough to take :
The reſt unbenefic'd your ſects maintain:
UNEENizahted. adj. Never viſited by darkneſs.
Beyond the polar circles; tº them day
Had ºnbenighted ſhone, while the low ſun,
To recompence his diſtance, in their fight * Nº ...?
Had rounded ſtill the horizon. Milton’s Par. !!!.
9 UN BENI'GN.
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N B
U N B
tºREENI'GN. adj. Malignal: ; malevolent.
To th’ other five
Their planetary motions, and aſpects,
In ſextile, ſquare, and trine, and oppoſite,
Of noxious efficacy 3 and when to join
In ſynod unbenign. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x. l. 661.
UN BE'N T. adi. -
1. Not ſtrained by the ſtring.
Apollo heard, and conqu'ring his diſdain,
Unlent his bow, and Greece inſpir'd again. Dryden.
2. Having the bow unſtrung.
Why haſt thou gone ſo far,
To be mºnt when thou haſt ta'en thy ſtand,
Th’ elected deer before thee Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
3. Not cruſhed; not ſubdued. -
But thou, ſecure of ſoul, unbent with woes,
The more thy fortune frowns, the more oppoſe. Pryden.
4. Relaxed ; not intent.
Be not always on affairs intent,
Butlet thy thoughts be eaſy and ºntent:
when our mind's eyes are diſengag’d and free,
They clearer, further, and diſtinctly ſee.
Uniºrsef’M is G. ad;. Unbecoming.
No emotion of paſſion tranſported me by the indignity of his
carriage, to do or ſay anything unbeſcening myſelf. K. Charles.
Far be the ſpirit of the chace from them ;
Denham.
Uncomely courage, unbeſeeming ſkill. Thomſon.
UNBeso"U GHT. adj. Not intreated.
Left heat ſhould injure us, his timely care
Hath, unlºſºught, provided; and his hands
Cloath’d us unworthy; pitying while he judg’d. Milton.
UR BEstowed. adj. Not given; not diſpoſed of.
He had now but one ſon and one daughter unbºſtowed. Bacon.
UN HEra A YE D. adj. Not betrayed.
Many being privy to the fact,
How hard is it to keep it unbetray’d P Daniel's Civil War.
UN dew A/ILED. adj. Not lamented.
Let determin'd things to deſtiny
Hold unbewail'd their way. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
To UN bewitch. v.a. [from witch..] To free from faſcination.
To UNBI Ass. v. a. To free from any external motive 3 to
diſentangle from prejudice.
That our underſtandings may be free to examine, and rea-
ſon unbiaſed give its judgment; being that whereon a right
direction of our condućt to true happineſs depends; it is in
this we ſhould employ our chief care. Locke.
The ſtanding evidences of the goſpel, every time they are
conſider'd, gain upon ſincere, unbiaſ'd minds. Atterbury.
The trueſt ſervice a private man may do his country, is
by unliaſing his mind, as much as poſſible, between the rival
powers. Swift.
Where's the man who counſel can beſtow,
Unbiaſ'd, or by favour, or by ſpite ;
Not dully prepoſſeſs'd, nor blindly right. Pope.
UN B1*Assenly. adj. Without external influence; without pre-
judice.
I have ſought the true meaning; and have unbiaſedly em-
r based what, upon a fair enquiry, appeared ſo to me. Locke.
j NB iſ D. -
UN BI'd DEN. {a}.
1. Uninvited.
Unbidden gueſts
Are often welcomeſt when they are gone.
2. Uncommanded ; ſpontaneous.
Thorns alſo and thiſtles it ſhall bring thee forth
Unbid. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. x. l. 204.
Roſes unbid, and ev'ry fragrant flow'r,
Flew from their ſtalks, to ſtrow thy nuptial bow'r. Dryden.
Unbidden earth ſhall wreathing ivy bring,
And fragrant herbs the promiſes of ſpring.
UNB: Gort E.D. adj. Free from bigotry.
Eraſmus, who was an unbigotted Roman Catholick, was
ſo much tranſported with this paſſage of Socrates, that he
could ſcarce forbear looking upon him as a ſaint, and deſiring
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
him to pray for him. Addiſon.
To US 51/N D. v. a. [from bind.]. To looſe; to untie.
His own woe’s author, whoſo bound it finds,
As did Pyrocles, and it willfully unbinds. Fairy Queen.
Ye Latian dames,
If there be here, who dare maintain
My right, nor think the name of mother vain,
ºnlind your fillets, looſe your flowing hair,
And orgies, and * rites prepare. Dryden.
Qn the ſixth inſtant it was thought fit to unbind his
Tº: / Tatler, N°. 55.
****I's Hop. v.a. (from biſhop.] To deprive of epiſcopal orders.
* i.". look. upon Titus as ſo far unbiſhoped yet, but
UN º: e ſtill exhibits to us all the eſſentials of juriſdićtion, South.
* 1: 1 TED. adj. [from bit..] Unbridled ; unreſtrained,
ſtino e have reaſon to cool our raging motions, our carnal
tº: our *bitted luſts; whereof T take this love to be a
et or cyon. Shakeſp. Othello.
UNBLA'MABLE. adj. Not culpable; not to be charged with
a fault.
Much more could I ſay concerning this unbl -
lity of fines and rates. g this unblamable inequa.
He lov’d his people, him they idoliz'd; Bacon,
And thence proceeds my mortal hatred to him:
º thus unblamable to all beſide, &gt;
e err'd to me alone. Dryden's D -
UNBLAMABLY. adv. Without taint of É : Don Seloftian.
Ye are witneſſes, and God alſo, how holil -
and unblameably we behaved ourſelves. º
UNBLA'MED. adj. Blameleſs; free from fault.
Shall ſpend your days in joy unblam’d, and dwell
Long time in peace. 44ilton's Par. Loft, b. xii. l.2,
Unblam’d, abundance crown'd the royal board," "“
What time this dome rever'd her prudent lord, 2
Who now is doom'd to mourn. Pope's Odºſ,
UNBLE'Mished, adj. Free from turpitude; free from º.
free from deformity. -
O welcome, pure-ey’d faith, white-handed hope;
Thou hovering angel, girt with golden wings, &gt;
And thou unblemiſh'd form of chaſtity. Milton's Cºmuſ,
Under this ſtone lies virtue, youth,
Unblemiſh'd probity, and truth. Waller,
Is none worthy to be made a wife
In all this town Suppoſe her free from ſtrife,
Rich, fair, and fruitful; of unblemiſh'd life. Drydºn.
They appointed, out of theſe new converts, men of the
beſt ſenſe, and of the moſt unblemiſh’d lives, to preſide over
theſe ſeveral aſſemblies. Addison,
UNBle'NDED. adj. Not mingled.
None can boaſt a knowledge depurate from defilement,
within this atmoſphere of fleſh; it dwells no where in un-
blended proportions on this ſide the empyreum. Glanvill.
UNBLEN'cHED. adj. Not diſgraced ; not injured by any ſoil.
There, where very deſolation dwells,
She may paſs on with unblench'd majeſty:
Be it not done in pride, or in preſumption.
UNBLE'st. adj.
1. Accurſed; excluded from benedićtion.
It is a ſhameful and unbleſſed thing, to take the ſcum of
people, and wicked, condemned men, to be the people
with whom you plant. Bacºn,
2. Wretched; unhappy.
In thy pow'r
It lies yet, ere conception, to prevent
The race unbleft, to being yet unbegot.
What is true paſſion, if unbleſ it dies?
And where is Emma's joy, if Henry flies?
UNBLoo'DIED. adj. Not ſtained with blood.
Who finds the partridge in the puttock's neſt,
But may imagine how the bird was dead,
Although the kite ſoar with unibodied beak., ºft
UNBloo'DY. adj. Not cruel; not ſhedding blood; not ſtained
with blood.
Under the ledge of Atlas lies a cave,
The venerable ſeat of holy hermits,
Who there, ſecure in ſeparated cells,
From the purling ſtreams, and ſavage fruits,
Miltºn,
Milton.
Prior.
Have wholeſome bev'rage, and unbloody feats. Drydin.
UNBlown, adj. Having the bud yet unexpanded. |
Ah! my poor princes ! Ah my tender babes shalft
My unblown flowers, new-appearing ſweets !
UNBLU'NtED. adj. Not becoming obtuſe: -
A ſword, whoſe weight without a blow might ſlay; ...
Able, unblunted, to cut hoſts away. Cºwly; Davidai.
UNBo'DIED. adj.
I. Incorporeal; immaterial. bºdid
If we could conceive of things as angº and unbº ge
ſpirits do, without involving them in thoſe clouds º:
throws upon them, we ſhould ſeldom be in º. º iſk.
miſtakes as are perpetually committed. JWatts'ſ Lºg
2. Freed from the body. -
she hath the bonds broke of eternal night;
Her ſoul unbodied of the burdenous º Spºnſºr.
All things are but alter'd, nothing dº; -
And here and there th’ nºd ſpirit flies. D*
UNBo'ILED. ad. Not ſodden.
A quarter of a pint of rice unb
boiled.
To UNEo'Lt. v. a. To ſet open; to unbar.
I’ll call my uncle down ; - d. .
He ſhall º the gates. Shakespeare . Trºilus and #.
Unboited, adj. Coarſe ; groſs; not refin", *
bolting or ſifting. c
I º tread #. wnbolted villain into mortal: and º:
wall of a jakes with him. Shakeſpears”
Unbo'NNETTED. adj. Wanting a hat or bon”
This night, wherein
The lion, and the belly-pinched wolf
Keep their fur dry; unbonnetted he runs,
And bids what will, take all.
- .** ---" int
wild, will ariſe * ºſº
Shakeſp. K. Lear,
Usg00'Kish.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N B
º
º
º
º,
-:
º
**
ſ'
º
UN Boo'kish. adj.
I. Not ſtudious of books.
2. Not cultivated by erudition.
As he ſhall ſmile, Othello ſhall go mad;
And his unbookſ, jealouſy muſt conſtrue
Poor Caſio's ſmiles, geſtures, and light behaviour,
Quite in the wrong.
UNBo'RN. adj. Not yet brought into li
Conne.
Some unborn ſorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,
Is coming tow’rd me.
The woes to come, the children yet unborn
Shall feel this lay, as ſharp to them as thorn.
Never ſo much as in a thought unborn,
Did I offend you.
He on the wings of cherubim
Up-lifted, in paternal glory rode
**to chaos, and the world anbarn. Milton's Par. Lo/?.
To what wretched ſtate reſerv'd l
Better end here unborn 7 Why is life giv'n
To be thus waſted from us ?
A queen, from whom
The ſouls of kings ºnborn for bodies wait.
UNBo'RRowed. ºff. Genuine; native; one's OWn.
But the luxurious father of the fold,
With native purple, and unborrow'd gold,
Shakespeare's Othello. -
fe; future; being to To UNERA,
Shakeſp. Richard II.
Shakeſp.
Shakesp. A you like it.
AMilton's Par. Lo/?.
Dryden.
U N B
To UN Row #1. **. To exenterate 3 to eviſcerate.
In this chapter I'll *owed the ſtate of the queſtion. Haſſetti/
it is now become a new ſpecies of divinity, to branch out
with fond diſtinctions ºur holy faith, which th: pious fim-
Plicity of the firſt Chriſtians received to Pºlice; not to read
upon as an *my, unbowel and fift. to try experi-
IIlents.
Decay of Pier,
CE. v. a. ty ºf Piety.
I. To looſe; to relax.
With whoſe reproach and
The knight emboiling in his
Knit all his forces
His graſping hold.
omewhat of mournful ſu
ºns unbraced, with ſoldie
Nought ſhall the pſaltry a
hen the quick ſpirits their Warm march forbear
And numbing coldneſs has unbrac'd the ear. &gt;
Waſting years, that with. human race,
Exhauſt thy ſpirits, and thy arms unbrace.
2. To make the clothes i.
- Is it phyſical,
To walk unbrac'd, and ij. up the humours
Of the dank morning Shakeſp. Yul; Caeſar,
Hamlet, with his doublet all %. julius aſar
No hat upon his head, his ſtoc
odious menace,
haughty heart,
and gan ſoon unbrace
Tº my ears does wound ;
rs broken cries.
nd the harp avail,
Prior.
Pope's Iliad.
unbrac'd;
- - kings looſe. Shakeſp.
Beneath his Pompous fleece ſhall proudly ſweat. Dryden. UNBRE'Athen. v. ... Not exerciſed.
. In ſubſtances, eſpecially thoſe which the common and unbor- They now have toil'd their unbreath? memories,
ºw'd names of any language are applied to, ſome remarkable, With this ſame play againſt our nuptials. Shakeſp.
fenſible qualities, ſerve to diſtinguiſh one from another. Locke. ****ATHING. adj. Unanimated.
UN poºr TomEd. adj. They ſpake not a word ;
1. Without bottom ; bottomleſs. But like dumb ſtatues, or unbreathing ſtones,
The dark, unbottom’d, infinite abyſs. Milton. Star'd each on other, and look'd deadly pale. Shakeſp.
2. Having no ſolid foundation. UNPRED. adj.
This is a ſpecial act of chriſtian hope, to be thus unbat-
tºmed of ourſelves, and faſtened upon God, with a full re-
Hºse, truſt, and dependance on his mercy.
To UN Boſsom. v. a.
1. To reveal in confidence.
I lov'd thee, as too well thou knew'ſ 5
Too well, unboſom'd all my ſecrets to thee,
Not out of levity, but overpower'd º
By thy requeſt, who could deny thee nothing. Milton.
o we unboſom all our ſecrets to him, and hide nothing
that Paſſeth in the depth of our hearts frºm him; Atterbury.
2. To open ; to diſcloſe.
Should I thence, hurried on viewleſs wing,
Take up a weeping on the mountains wild, -
The gentle neighbourhood of grove and ſpring
Hammond.
Would ſoon unbºſºm all their echo's mild. Milton. .
JNBo'UGHT. adj.
I. Obtained without money.
The unlought dainties of the poor. Dryden's Horace.
2. Not finding any purchaſer.
The merchant will leave our native commodities unlought
upon the hands of the farmer, rather than export them to a
market, which will not afford him returns with profit. Locke.
unpo'UND. adj.
1. Looſe ; not tied.
2. Wanting a cover. -
He that has complex ideas, without particular names for
them, would be in no better caſe than a bookſeller, who had
volumes that lay unbound, and without titles; which he could
make known to others, only by ſhewing the looſe ſheets. Locke.
3. Preterite of unhind.
Some from their chains the faithful dogs unbound. Dryden, -
UNBo'UND, D. adj.
1. Infinite ; interminable.
Long were to tell what I have done;
I voyag'd the unreal, vaſt, unlounded deep -
Of horrible confuſion. Milton.
The wide, th’ unbounded proſpect lies before me; -
But ſhadows, clouds, and darkneſs reſt upon it. Addison,
2. Unlimitted; unreſtrained.
He was a man
Of an unbounded ſtomach, ever ranking
Himſelf with princes. - Shakeſpeare,
He had given his curioſity its full, unbounded range, and exa-
min’d not only in contemplation, but by ſenſitive experiment,
whatever could be good for the ſons of men. Decay of Piety.
UNBou'NDEDLY. adj. Without bounds; without limits.
So unboundedly miſchievous is ...that petulant member, that
heaven and earth are not wide enough for its range, but it
will find work at home too. Gºvernment of the Tongue.
UNBQ (NPFDNess. n.ſ. Exemption from limits. -
Finitude, applied to created things, imports the proportions
of the ſeveral properties of theſe things to one another. Infini-
tude, the unboundedneſs of theſe degrees of properties. Cheyne.
UN Boſwed. adj. Not bent.
He knits his brow, and ſhews an angry eye,
And paſſeth by with ſtiff, unlowed knee,
Diſdaining duty that to us belongs. Shakeſ?, Hen. VI.
- 3. Not tamed.
I. Not inſtrućted in civility; ill educated.
Onbred minds muſt be a little ſent abroad.
Children learn from *nºred or debauche
towardly tricks.
Sure never any thing was ſo unh
In 2n.
2. Not taught.
Gov. of Tongue.
d ſervants, un-
‘Azcée on Education.
** as that odious
Congreve's Iſay ºf the //orld.
A warriour dame, -
Wººd to ſpinning, in the ſoon unſkill’d. Dryden,
UNBREE(cHEd. adj. Having no breeches.
Looking on my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and ſaw myſelf unbreech'd,
In my green velvet coat. Shakeſpeare's Jºinter Tale.
UNPR1'BED, adj. Not influenced by money or gifts; not hired,
The ſoul gave all?
{*iºd it gave ; or, if a bribe appear,
No leſs than heav'n.
To ſuccour the diſtreſs'd ;
Unbrib'd by love; unterrify’d by threats.
UN BRI'dled. adj. Licentious; not reſtrained.
This is not well, raſh and unbridled boy,
To fly the favours of ſo good a king. Shakespeare
e have conſidered religious zeal, which tranſgreſſes in
wnbridled exceſs. Spratt's Sermons.
To what licence
Dares thy unbridled boldneſs run itſelf? B. johnſon,
º, 3-, ºn tº
1. Not violated.
God pardon all oaths, that are broke to me;
God keep all vows unbroke, are made to thee. Shakeſp.
Some married perſons, even in their marriage, do pleaſe
God, by preſerving their faith unbrº. Taylor.
He firſt broke peace in heav'n, and faith, till then
Unbroken.
2. Not ſubdued; not weakened.
From his feat the Pylian prince aroſe:
Two centuries already he fulfill'd ;
And now began the third, unbroken yet. Dryden.
How broad his ſhoulders ſpread by age unbroke / Pope.
Dryden.
4. Phillips.
Aſilton.
A lonely cow, - *-
Unworn with yokes, unbroken to the plow. Addison.
UNBR'o'THERLIke. }* Ill ſuiting with the character of a
"THERLY. brother.
Usº wnbrotherlike heat towards the eaſtern churches, fo-
mented that difference about Eaſter into a ſchiſm. Decoy of Piety.
UNBRU'Is ED. ad; Not bruiſed ; not hurt.
On Dardan plains, -
The freſh, and yet unbruiſed Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavillions. Shakeſp. º
Thou'ſt years upon thee, and º art too full
f the war's ſurfeits, to go rove with one - |
º: yet unbruis'd, Shakespeare . Coriolanus.
Care keeps his watch in ev'ry old man seye: -
And where care lodgeth, ſleep will never lie; -
But where unbruiſed youth, with unſtuft brain,
iºn couch his limbs, there golden ſleep doth reign. Shakeſ
29 K To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">UN C
U N C
is nº, ki.e. º. a. To looſe from buckles.
"To º been º ...'. ..". at
Afty, helms; fifting cach other S throat, .
º dead with nothing. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
He that unbuckle, this, till we do pleaſe
To doff't for our purpoſe, ſhall hear a ſtorm. Shakeſp.
His ſtarry helm unbuckled, ſhew'd him prime
In manhood, where youth ended. Milton's Par. Loft.
All unluckling the rich mail they wore,
Laid their bright arms along the ſable ſhore. Pope.
To UN build. v. a. To raze ; to deſtroy.
This is the way to kindle, not to quench ; -
Tº unbuild the city, and to lay all flat. Shakeſpeare.
What will they then but unbuild
His living temples, built by faith to ſtand ;
Their own faith, not another's Milton's Par. Loſł.
UN built. adj. Not yet erected.
Built walls you ſhun, unbuilt you ſee. Dryden.
UN bu'RIED. adj. Not interred; not honoured with the rites
of funeral.
Why ſuffer'ſt thou thy ſons, unburied yet,
To hover on the dreadful ſhore of Styx * Shakespeare.
The moſs which groweth upon the ſkull of a dead man
unburied, will ſtauch blood potently. Bacon.
The hardeſt ingredient to come by, is the moſs upon the
ſkull of a dead man unburied. Bacon.
Him double cares attend,
For his unburied ſoldiers, aud his friend. Dryden.
Breathleſs he lies; and his unbury'd ghoſt,
Depriv'd of funeral rites, pollutes your hoſt. Dryden.
The wand'ring ghoſts
Of king's unbury'd on the waſted coaſts.
UN bu'RNED. l;
UN BU’RNT. ; ady.
1. Not conſumed; not waſted; not injured by fire.
Creon denies the rites of fun'ral fires to thoſe,
Whoſe breathleſs bodies yet he calls his foes;
Unburn'd, unburied, on a heap they lie.
2. Not heated with fire.
Burnt wine is more hard and aſtringent, than wine un-
burnt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 898.
UN BU’s NING. adj. Not conſuming by heat.
What we have ſaid of the unburning fire called light,
ſtreaming from the flame of a candle, may eaſily be applied
to all other light deprived of ſenſible heat. Digby.
To UNBU'RTHEN. v. a.
1. To rid of a load.
We'll ſhake all cares and buſineſs from our age,
Conferring them on younger ſtrengths; while we
Unburden'd crawl tow'rd death. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
2. To throw off.
Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongue
Pope's Statius.
Dryden.
The envious load that lies upon his heart. Shakeſp.
3. To diſcloſe what lies heavy on the mind.
From your love I have a warranty
Tº unburthen all my plots and purpoſes,
How to get clear of all the debts I owe. Shakespeare
To UN bu'tton. v.a. To looſe anything buttoned.
Thou art fat-witted with drinking old ſack, and unbutton-
ing thee after ſupper. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Many catch cold on the breaſt, by leaving their doublets
unbuttoned. Harvey on Conſumptions.
His ſilk waiſtcoat was unbuttoned in ſeveral places, Addiſon.
UNcAlci'NED. adj. Free from calcination.
A ſaline ſubſtance, ſubtler than ſal ammoniack, carried up
with it, untakined gold in the form of ſubtile exhala.
tionS. Boyle.
UNCA'LLED. adj. Not ſummoned; not ſent for ; not demanded.
Baſilius had ſervants, who, though they came not un-
called, yet at call were ready. Sidney.
He, bolder now, uncall'd before her flood. Milton.
Mild Lucina came uncall'd, and ſtood
Beſide the ſtruggling boughs, and heard the groan,
Then reach'd her midwife hand to ſpeed the throes, Dryden.
To UN.ca/LM. adj. To diſturb.
What ſtrange diſquiet has uncalm'd your breaſt,
Inhuman fair, to rob the dead of reſt Dryden.
9Nea Scºlled, adj. Not eraſed; not abrogated.
I only mourn my yet uncancell’d ſcore;
You put me paſt the pow'r of paying more. Dryden.
UN CANo'Nical. adj.
US CAP A Blf. adj.
not ſuſceptible.
Thou art come to anſwer
- A ſtony adverſary, an inhuman wretch,
#. º Pity, void and empty
any dram of mercy. Shakespeare. Mer ºf Wenice.
He who believes j uncapable of "... º On
wº any care of reforming. Hammond.
afic i. whilſt they * under the deceit of it, makes them
* of conviction; and they applaud themſelves as zea-
Not agreeable to the canons.
lincapable, Fr. incapax, Lat..] Not capable;
lous champions for truth, when indeed they are contend
for error. L º:
UNCA'RED fºr adj. Not regarded; not attended to. “
Their kings, to better their worldly eſtate, left their ow
and their people's ghoſtly condition uncared for. Wn
UNcARNATE. adj. Not fleſhly.
Nor need we be afraid to aſcribe that to the incarnate ſon
which ſometimes is attributed unto the tlhéarnate ń.
ther. Brown's Pulgar Errº,
To UNcA'se. v. a. -
1. To diſengage from any covering.
See Pompey is uncaſing for the combat. Shake
Thou ſhalt be maſter, Tranio, in my ſtead. JPA
'Tis hatch'd, and ſhall be ſo: Tranio, at once
Uncaſe thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak Shalºft.
Partly by his voice, and partly by his ears, was diſ.
ver'd , and conſequently uncaſed, well laughed at, and .
cudgell’d. L'Eſtrange.
Uncaſe me, and do with me what you pleaſe. Addison.
2. To flay.
All men him uncaſed 'gan deride. Hubberd's Tak,
UNcA/UGHT. adj. Not yet catched.
Let him fly far;
Not in this land ſhall he remain uncaught,
And found diſpatch'd. Shakespeare . K. Lar.
His boſom glows with treaſures yet uncaughſ. Gaj.
UNCA'used. adj. Having no precedent cauſe.
UNCA’utious. adj. Nat wary; heedleſs.
Unforeſeen, they ſay, is unprepard:
Uncautious Arcite thought himſelf alone. Dryden,
UNcE'LEBRATED. adj. Not ſolemnized.
Thus was the firſt day, ev’n and morn;
Nor paſs'd uncelebrated, nor unſung
By the celeſtial choirs. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. vii, l. 253.
UN cRNs URED. adj. Exempt from publick reproach.
How difficult muſt it be for any ruler to live uncºnſº,
where every one of the community is thus qualified for mo-
delling the conſtitution ? Addison's Freehºlder.
Fear moſt to tax an honourable fool,
Whoſe right it is uncenſur'd to be dull. Pºp.
To be uncenſured, and to be obſcure, is the ſame
thing. Pºpe'. Letterſ.
UNcE'RTAIN. adj. [incertain, Fr. intertuſ, Lat.]
1. Doubtful; not certainly known.
That ſacred pile, ſo vaſt, ſo high,
That whether 'tis a part of earth or ſky,
Uncertain ſeems; and may be thought a proud
Aſpiring mountain, or deſcending cloud.
2. Doubtful; not having certain knowledge. -
Man, without the protection of a ſuperior being, is ſecure
of nothing that he enjoys, and uncertain of every thing that
Dºnlam.
he hopes for. Tiliatiºn.
Condemned on Caucaſus to lie,
Still to be dying, not to die;
With certain pain, uncertain of relief, - • *r
Granvillº.
True emblem of a wretched lover's gricf.
3. Not ſure in the conſequence.
I muſt be married to my brother's daughter,
Or elſe my kingdom ſtands on brittle glaſs:
Murther her brothers, and then marry her !. - II
Uncertain way of gain Sharºffear, ; Richard III.
Aſcanius young, and eager of his game,
Scon bent his bow, uncertain in his aim :
But the dire fiend the fatal arrow guides, . d
Which pierc'd his bowels through his panting ſides, Drydºn.
In the bright air the fauchion ſhone, Ga
Or whiſtling ſings diſmiſs'd th' uncertain ſton; - º
The ſearch of our future being, is but a needleſs, anxious,
and uncertain haſte to be knowing, ſooner than We i.
what, without all this ſolicitude, we ſhall k" " .
later. l
. Unſettled; unregular. -
4. As the form of our publick ſervice is not wº *
neither are the parts thereof uncertain ; but tº “ in the
down in ſuch order, and with ſuch choice, * hat '#ºr.
wiſdom of the church, ſeemed beſt. §
UNce/RTAIN ED. adj. Made uncertain. A ºn
The diverſity of ſeaſons are not ſo uniº y courſe,
and moon alone, who always keep one and the ſame liº.
but that the ſtars have alſo their working thº". “
UN ce/RTAINLY. adv. Not ſurely ; not certainly. ſt
They that are paſt all hope of good, alº Pº
All fear of ill: and yet if he be dead, jam.' *
Speak ſoftly, or uncertainly. Dº l
Go, mortals, now, and vex yourſelves"
For wealth, which ſo uncertainly muſt coºl". in
When what was brought ſo far, and with ſuch pa jººn.
Was only kept to loſe it nearer home. if the ideº be
Names muſt be of very unſteady meaning, be known “
referred to ſtandards without us, that “a” “ fe.
all, or but very imperfectly and uncertainy. User's TA3+"<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N C
UNCE’RTAINTY. n.ſ.
1. Dubiouſneſs; want of knowledge.
All great concernments muſt delays endure;
Raſhneſs and haſte make all things unſecure ;
And if uncertain thy pretenſions be,
Stay till fit time wear out uncertainty. Denham.
You common cry of curs, whoſe breath I hate,
Here then remain with your uncertainty;
Let ev'ry feeble rumour ſhake your hearts. Shakeſp.
That which makes doubtfulneſs and uncertainty in the ſig-
nification of ſome, more than other words, is the difference
of ideas they ſtand for. - Locke.
2. Contingency; want of certainty.
God's omniſcience is a light ſhining into every dark cor-
ner, ſtedfaſtly graſping the greateſt and moſt ſlippery uncer-
tainties. South's Sermons.
3. Something unknown.
Our ſhepherd's caſe is every man's caſe, that quits a moral
certainty for an uncertainty, and leaps from the honeſt buſi-
neſs he was brought up to, into a trade he has no
ſkill in. L’Eſtrange.
To UNCHA'IN. v. a. To free from chains.
Minerva thus to Perſeus lent her ſhield,
Secure of conqueſt, ſent him to the field:
The hero acted what the queen ordain'd ;
So was his fame complete, and Andromede anchain'd. Prior.
UNCHA'NGEABLE. adj. Immutable; not ſubject to varia-
tion.
If the end for which a law provideth, be perpetually ne-
ceſſary; and the way whereby it provideth perpetually alſo
moſt apt, no doubt but that every ſuch law ought for ever to
remain unchangeable. Hooker, b. iii. §. Io.
UNcha(NGED. adj.
I. Not altered.
When our fortunes are violently changed, our ſpirits are
unchanged. Taylor's Rule of Holy Living.
More ſafe I ſing with mortal voice; unchang'd
To hoarſe, or mute. Milton's Par. Loft.
2. Not alterable.
Diſmiſs thy fear,
And heav'n's unchang'd decrees attentive hear:
More pow'rful gods have torn thee from my ſide. Dryden.
Honour unchang'd, a principle profeſt,
Fixt to one ſide, but mod’rate to the reſt. Pope.
Uncha/NG EABLE Ness. n.ſ. Immutability.
This unchangeableneſs of colour I am now to deſcribe. Newt.
UNcHA/NGEABLY. adv. Immutably; without change.
All truth is unchangeably the ſame ; that propoſition, which
is true at any time, being ſo for ever. South.
Her firſt order, diſpoſition, frame,
Muſt then ſubſiſt unchangeably the ſame. Blackmore.
UschA’NGING. adj. Suffering no alteration.
But that thy face is, vizor-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with uſe of evil deeds,
I would eſſay, proud queen, to make thee bluſh. Shakeſp.
True expreſſion, like th’ unchanging ſun,
Clears and improves whate'er it ſhines upon : }
It gilds all objects, but it alters none. Pope.
To UNCHA’R G E. v. a. To retract an accuſation.
Even his mother ſhall uncharge the practice,
And call it accident. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
UNCHA'R1TABLE. adj. Contrary to charity; contrary to the
univerſal love preſcribed by chriſtianity.
All the rich mines of learning ranſack'd are
To furniſh ammunition for this war;
Uncharitable zeal our reaſon whets, -
And double edges on our paſſion ſets. Denham.
This fills the minds of weak men with uncharitable in-
terpretations of thoſe actions of which they are not compe-
tent judges. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 37.
UNch A/RITABLE Ness. m. ſ. Want of charity. -
The penitence of the criminal may have number'd him
among the ſaints, when our unretracted uncharitableneſ;
may ſend us to unquenchable flames. Govern. of the Tongue.
Heaven and hell are the proper regions of mercy and un-
charitablºngſ. Atterbury.
UNCHA(RITABLY. adv. In a manner contrary to cha-
r1tW.
º did not mean the cutting off all that nation with the
ſword; which, far be it from me that I ſhould ever think ſo
deſperately, or wiſh ſo uncharitably. Spenſer.
Urge neither charity nor ſhame to me;
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And ſhamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd. , Shakespeare.
Men, imprudently and uncharitably often, employ their
zeal for perſons. Sprat.
UNCHA'RY. adj. Not wary; not cautious.
I've ſaid too much unto a heart of ſtone,
And laid my honour too unchary out. Shakeſpeare.
UNCHA stE. adj. Lewd ; libidinous ; not continent; not
chaſte; not pure.
U N C
One, that in divers places I had heard before blazed, as
the moſt impudently unchyte woman of all Aſia. Sidney,
r x-, . In my maſter's garments,
Which he inforc'd from me, away he poſts
With uncloſe purpoſe, to violate
My lady's honour. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
He hath given her his monumental ring, and thinks him-
ſelf made in the unchaſte compoſition. Shakeſpeare.
Cannot reverence himſelf; and the
Whoſoever is unchaſe,
reverence of a man's ſelf is, next religion, the chiefeſt bridle
Bacon.
of all vices.
Milton.
Luſt, by unchaffe looks,
Lets in defilement to the inward parts.
If ſhe thinks to be ſeparated by ſeaſon of her huſband's
unchaſe life, then the man will be uncurably ruined. Taylor.
UNcHA'stity. m. ſ. Lewdneſs; incontinence. -
That generation was more particularly addićted to intem-
Perance, ſenſuality, and unchajlity. JP'oodward.
When the ſun is among the horned ſigns, he may pro-
duce ſuch a ſpirit of unchółity, as is dangerous to the honour
of your worſhips families. Arbuthnot.
UNcHEE’RFulness. n.ſ. Melancholy; gloomineſs of temper.
Many, by a natural uncheerfulneſs of heart, love to indulge
this uncomfortable way of life. Addiſon's Spectatºr.
Unche'cKED. adj. Unreſtrained; not fluctuateå.
What news on the Ryalto
—Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd, that Anthonio hath
a ſhip of rich lading wreck'd. Shakeſp. Mer. of Wenice.
Apt the mind, or fancy, is to rove
Uncheck'd, and of her roving is no end. Milton.
Thee on the wing thy uncheck’d vigour bore,
To wanton freely, or ſécurely ſoar. Smith to j. Phillips.
UNcheſ wed. adj. Not maſticated.
He fills his famiſh'd maw, his mouth runs o'er
With unchew'd morſels, while he churns the gore. Dryden.
To UNCHI’ld. v. a. To deprive of children.
He hath widow’d and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury.
UNCHRI's TIAN. adj.
I. Contrary to the laws of chriſtianity.
It's uncharitable, unchriſtian, and inhuman, to paſs a pe-
remptory ſentence of condemnation upon a try'd friend,
where there is any room left for a more favourable judg-
Shakeſp.
ment. # - a . 1.’Eſtrange.
Theſe unchriſtian fiſhers of men, are fatally caught in
their own nets. South.
I cou’d diſpenſe with the unphiloſophicalneſs of this their
hypotheſis, were it not unchrijian. Norris.
2. Unconverted; infidel.
Whereupon grew a queſtion, whether a chriſtian ſoldier
might herein do as the unchriſtian did, and wear as they
Wore. Hooker.
UNCHR1'stiANNEss. adj. Contrariey to chriſtianity.
The unchriſtianneſs of thoſe denials might ariſe from a
diſpleaſure to ſee me prefer my own divines before their mi-
niſters. K. Charles.
UNCIRCU Mct’s ED. adj. Not circumciſed; not a Jew.
Th'uncircumcis'd ſmil'd grimly with diſdain.
UNCIR cumcision. n ſ. Omiſſion of circumciſion.
God, that gives the law that a Jew ſhall be circumciſed,
thereby conſtitutes uncircumciſion an obliquity; which, had
he not given that law, had never been ſuch. Hammond.
UNcIRcu MscR1/BED. adj. Unbounded; unlimited.
Though I, unſcircumſcrib'd myſelf, retire,
And put not forth my goodneſs. Milton's Par. Loff.
An arbitrary prince is the maſter of a non-reſiſting peo-
ple; for where the power is uncircumſcribed, the obedience
ought to be unlimited. Addiſon.
The ſovereign was flattered by a ſet of men into a per-
ſuaſion, that the regal authority was unlimited and uncir-
cumſcrib'd. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 2.
UNc/Rcumspect, adj. Not cautious; not vigilant. -
Their uncircumſpect ſimplicity had been uſed, eſpecially in
matters of religion. Hayward.
UNcIRcuMsta'NTIAL. adj, Unimportant. A bad word.
The like particulars, although they ſeem uncircumſtantial,
are oft ſet down in holy ſcripture. Bºwne's Hºugar Errour.
UN civil. adj. [incivil, Fr. incivilis, Lat.] Unpolite; not agree-
able to rules of elegance, or complaiſance. - - -
Your undutiful, uncivil, and uncharitable dealing in this
Cowley.
your book, hath detected you. //higiſt.
They love me well, yet I have much to do,
To keep me from uncivil outrages. Shakespeare.
My friends are ſo unreaſonable, that they would have me
be uncivil to him. - Spectator, Nº. 475.
UNcI'villy, adv. Unpolitely ; not complaitantly.
Somewhat in it he would not have done, or deſired un-
done, when he broke forth as deſperately, as before he
had done undivity. Browne's Pulgar Erreurs.
UNcI'vilize D. adj. -
1. Not reclaimed from barbarity.
Eut<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

7
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N C
U N C
e, brave Britons, foreign laws deſpis'd,
• » iviliz'd :
d kept unconquer d, and zzzzczº. 112,
ſº #. he liberties of wit, and bold,
\, ſtill defy'd the Romans, as of old.
. Coarſe; indecent. - -
2 sºil, who have been poliſhed in France, make uſe of
the moſt coarſe, unciviliz’d words in our language. Addiſon.
US. LA/RIFIED. adj. Not purged; not purified. - -
One ounce of whey unclarified; one ounce of oil of vi-
triol, make no apparent alteration. Bacon's Phyſ Remarks.
T., UScLA’sp. v. 3. To open what is ſhut with clºſps.
Thou know'ſt no leſs, but all: I have undº/P'4
To thee the book, ev’n of my ſecret ſoul. Shakespeare .
Prayer can unclaſp the girdles of the north, ſaying to a
mountain of ice, be thou removed hence: and caſt into the
Taylor's I/ºrthy Communicant.
But w
Pope.
ſea.
UN classick. Not claſſick.
Angel of dulneſs, ſent to ſcatter round
Her magick charms o'er all unclaſſiº ground. Pope.
U's cle. n.). [on le, Fr.] The father's or mother's brother.
Hamlet puniſhes his uncle rather for his own death, than the
murther of his father. Shakeſpeare Illuſtrated.
Us clf A. N. n.ſ.
1. Foul ; dirty; filthy.
Charon,
A ſordid god : down from his hoary chin -
A length of beard deſcends, uncomb'd, unclean. Pryden,
Prieſts are patterns for the reſt ;
The gold of heav'n, who bear the God impreſs'd :
But when the precious coin is kept unclean,
The ſov’reign's image is no longer ſeen.
If they be ſoul, on whom the people truſt,
Well may the baſer braſs contract a ruſt. Dryden.
2. Not purified by ritual practices.
3. Foul with ſin.
Beſides how vile, contemptible, ridiculous,
What act more execrably unclean, profane : Milton.
What agonies muſt he endure ?, What difficulties over-
come, before he can cleanſe himſelf from the pollutions of
ſin, and be a fit inhabitant of that holy place, where no
unclean thing ſhall enter Rogers'; Sermons.
4. Lewd ; unchaſte. -
Let them all encircle him about,
And, fairy-like too, pinch the unclean knight,
And aſk him, why that hour of fairy revel,
In their ſo ſacred paths he dares to tread, -
In ſhape profane. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
Some tree, whoſe broad, ſmooth leaves together ſow'd,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Thoſe middle parts ; that this new comer, ſhame,
There ſit not, and reproach us as unclean. Milton.
UN cle A'N LINEss. m. ſ. Want of cleanlineſs.
This profane liberty and uncleanlineſs, the archbiſhop re-
ſolv'd to reform. Clarendon.
UN CLE ANLY. adj.
1. Fou!; filthy; naſty.
Civet is of a baſer birth than tar;
The very uncleanly flux of a cat.
2. Indecent; unchaſte.
'Tis pity that theſe harmonious writers have ever indulged
any thing uncleanly or impure to defile their paper. Watts.
Usci. RA/NN Ess. m. ſ.
1. Lewdneſs; incontinence.
In St. Giles's I underſtood that moſt of the vileſt and moſt
miſèrable houſes of uncleanneſ were. Graunt's Bill of Mortality.
2. Want of cleanlineſs ; naſtineſs.
Be not curious nor careleſs in your habit; be not trouble-
ſome to thyſelf, or to others, by unhandſomeneſs, or un-
cleanneſs. Taylor’s Guide to Devotion.
3. Sin ; wickedneſs.
I will ſave you from all your uncleanneſºs. Ez. xxxvi. 29.
4. Want of ritual purity.
UNCLE/AN's ED. adj. Not cleanſed.
Pond earth is a good compoſt, if the pond have been long
inclºſed : ſo the water be not too hungry. Bacon's Nat. Hiſſ.
To UNCLEw. v. a. [from clew.] To undo.
If I ſhould pay you for’t as 'tis extoll’d,
... It would unclew me quite. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
To UNCLE's CH. v. a. To open the cloſed hand.
The hero ſo his enterprize recalls;
His fift unclenches, and the weapon falls. Garth.
UNCLI'PPED. adj. Whole; not cut. -
As ſoon as there began a diſtinction between clipped and
r unclipped money, bullion aroſe. Locke.
To UNCLo'ATH. v. a. To ſtrip; to make naked.
"he boughs and branches are never uncleathed and left
naked. Ra eigh's Hiſt. of the //orld.
Poor orphans minds are left as uncleath'd and naked alto-
gether, as their bodies. - Atterbury.
Wa º º couch, over with thick woollen clothes, the
* Whereof will make it come preſently; which once
Perceived, forthwith uncleath it. 440rtiºner's Huſbandry.
Shakespeare.
To a diſtinct knowledge of things, we muſt und,all h
of all theſe mixtures, that we may contemplate them º
and in their own nature. - Watts' . *
To Usclo'G. v. a. * - Logick.
1. To diſencumber; to exonerate.
Could I meet 'em
But once a day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to't. Shalºft
2. To ſet at liberty. peare,
Then air, becauſe unclog'd in empty ſpace,
Flies after fire, and claims the ſecond place. Drd.
To UNcLoi's rer. v. n. To ſet at large. Jath,
Why did I not, uncloiſier'd from the womb,
Take my next lodging in a tomb
To UN clo's E. v.a. To open. Norrl,
Soon as thy letters trembling I unclºſe,
That well-known name awakens all my woes. Pºpe
UNcLo's ED. adj. Not ſeparated by incloſures.
The king's army would, through thoſe unclºſed parts, have
done them little harm. º
UN clo'UDED. adj. Free from clouds; clear from obſcuriº,
not darkened. - - y
The father unfolding bright
Tow'rd the right hand his glory on the ſon
Blaz'd forth unclouded deity. Milton's Par, Lºft
True virtues, with unclouded light, -
All great, all royal, ſhine divinely bright. Rºſłommon.
Bleſt with temper, whoſe unclouded ray,
Can make to-morrow cheerful as to-day. Pºpe.
UscLouded Ness. n.ſ. Openneſs; freedom from gloom.
The love I would perſuade, makes nothing more condu-
cive to it, than the greateſt uncloudedneſs of the eye, and the
perfeóteſt illuſtration of the object; which is ſuch, that the
cleareſt reaſon is the moſt advantageous light it can deſire to
be ſeen by. Bjk.
UN clo'UDY adj. Free from a cloud.
Now night in ſilent ſtate begins to riſe,
And twinkling orbs beſtrow th' uncloudy ſkies;
Her borrow'd luſtre growing Cynthia lends. Gaj.
To UN clu'rcH. v. a. To open.
If the terrors of the Lord could not melt his bowels, undulth
his griping hand, or diſſeize him of his prey; yet ſure it muſt
diſcourage him from graſping of heaven too. Decay ºf Pitt).
To UN coi'F. v. a. To pull the cap off.
Yonder are two apple-women ſcolding, and juſt ready to
uncoif one another. Arbuthnot and Pope.
To UN.co.il. v. a. [from coil.] To open from being colled or
wrapped one part upon another.
The ſpiral air-veſſels are like threads of cobweb, a little
uncoiled. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
UN coi'NED. adj. Not coined. -
While thou livºſt, Kate, take a fellow of plain, tº
conſtancy. Shakeſpeare's Hen, W.
An ounce of coined ſtandard filver, muſt be of equal"
lue to an ounce of uncoined ſtandard filver. Lºk.
UN collected. adj. Not collected; not recollected.
Aſham’d, confus'd, I ſtarted from my bed,
And to my ſoul yet uncollected ſaid;
Into thyſelf, fond Solomon return; -
Reflect again, and thou again ſhalt mourn. Pir.
UN colourED. adj. Not ſtained with any colour, or die.
Out of things uncoloured and tranſparent, we can repreſent
unto you all ſeveral colours. Bacon.
Whether to deck with clouds the uncolour'd ſky,
Or wet the thirſty earth with falling ſhow’rs;
Riſing, or falling, ſtill advance his praiſe.
Unco'MBEd. adj. Not parted or adjuſted by the comb,
They might perceive his head
To be unarmed, and curled, uncombed hairs,
Upſtarting ſtiff. Fairy Queen, b. 1 &amp; 9. f 22.
Their jocks are beds of uncomi’d ſnakes, that "'"
Miltºn.
About their ſhady brows in wanton ring; º:
Thy locks uncºmb'd, like a rough wood appear 4"..."
le. A low,
UN co’MEATABLE, adj. Inacceſſible ; unattainab
corrupt word.
UN com ELINEss. n. ſ. Want of grace; , a t-r- nd
The ruined churches are ſo unhandſom") *:
thatched, that men do even ſhun the placº for tº i. land.
lineſ; thereof. Sp ºº, ".
He prais'd women's modeſty, and gay" " t ººff.
behaved reproof to all uncomelingſ. . d; terzº, aſ
Thoſe arches which the Tuſcan writers call* º lº,
d; quarto acuto, becauſe they always concur". ºdie.
both for the natural imbecility of the angle º from judiº
wiſe for their very uncomelinſ, ought to.” exile ſhitetſure.
cious eyes. J%tton's “... they
Forgetting that duty of modeſt concealms. ". diſco-
owed to the father of their country, in ca" * Charleſ.
vered any real uncomelineſ. - in... wi
The beauty or uncomelineſ in good and ill º
make deeper impreſſions on them, in the *P*" i.i.
than from any rules. Usco/MELY.
want of beauty.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N C
UN cººrly adj. . Not comely; wanting grace. .
, Though he thought inquiſitiveneſs an uncomeſ, gueſt, he
could not but aſk who ſhe was. Sidney.
Neither is the fame accounted an uncomely manner of riá-
ing: for great warriors ſay, they never ſaw a more comely
man than the Iriſhman, nor that cometh on more bravely in
his charge. Spenſer's Ireland.
Many, who troubled them moſt in their counſels, durſt
not go thither, for fear of uncomely affronts. Clarendon.
Uncomely courage, unbeſeeming ſkill. Thomſon's Autumn.
UNco'MFoRTABLE. adj.
1. Affording no comfort; gloomy; diſmal; miſerable.
He much complaineth of his own uncomfortable exile,
wherein he ſuſtained many moſt grievous indignities, and en-
dured the want of ſundry, both pleaſures and honours, be-
fore enjoyed. PHooker.
Chriſtmaſs is in the moſt dead, uncomfortable time of the
year, when the poor people would ſuffer very much, if they
had not good cheer to ſupport them. Addiſon.
Ours is melancholy and uncomfortable portion here below !
A place, where not a day paſſes, but we eat our bread with
ſorrow and cares: the preſent troubles us, the future amazes;
and even the paſt fills us with grief and anguiſh. Wake.
The ſun ne'er views th’ uncomfortable ſeats,
When radiant he advances or retreats. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. Receiving no comfort; melancholy.
UNco'MFor TABLENEss. n. ſ. Want of cheerfulneſs.
The want of juſt diſpoſitions to the holy ſacrament, may
occaſion this uncomfortableneſs. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
UN co’M For TABLY. adv. Without cheerfulneſs.
UN.com MA'NDED. adj. Not commanded.
It is eaſy to ſee what judgment is to be paſſed upon all
thoſe affected, uncommanded, abſurd auſterities of the Romiſh
profeſſion. South.
Unco'MMON. adj. Not frequent; not often found or known.
Some of them are uncommon, but ſuch as the reader muſt
aſſent to, when he ſees them explained. Addiſon.
UNco'MM on LY. adv. Not frequently ; to an uncommon degree.
UNco'MMon NESS. m. ſ. Infrequency.
Our admiration of the antiquities about Naples and Rome,
does not ſo much ariſe out of their greatneſs as uncom-
monneſs. Addiſon.
Usco MPA/ct. adj. Not compačt; not cloſely cohering.
Theſe rivers were not ſtreams of running matter; for
how could a liquid, that lay hardening by degrees, ſettle in
ſuch a furrowed, uncompact ſurface Addiſon.
UN.com Mu'Nica TED. adj. Not communicated.
There is no ſuch mutual infuſion as really cauſeth the ſame
natural operations or properties to be made common unto
both ſubſtances; but whatſoever is natural to deity, the ſame
remaineth in Chriſt uncommunicated unto his manhood; and
whatſoever natural to manhood, his deity thereof is unca-
pable. Hooker.
UN.co/MPANIED. adj. Having no companion.
Thence ſhe fled, uncompanied, unſought. Fairfax.
UN.com PA'ssion ATE. adj. Having no pity.
Neither deep groans, nor ſilver-ſhedding tears,
Could penetrate her uncompaſſionate ſire. Shakeſp.
Hero and Leander were drowned in the uncompaſſionate
ſurges. Sandys's journey.
If thou in ſtrength all mortals doſt exceed;
In uncompaſſionate anger do not ſo. Milton's Agoniſłes.
UN.com PE'll ED. adj. Free from compulſion.
The amorous needle, once joined to the loadſtone, would
never, uncompelled, forſake the inchanting mineral. Boyle.
Keep my voyage from the royal ear,
Nor, uncompell'd, the dangerous truth betray,
Till twice ſix times deſcends the lamp of day. Pope.
UN complais A^N.T. adj. Not civil ; not obliging.
A natural roughneſs makes a man uncomplaiſant to others,
ſo that he has no deference for their inclinations. Locke.
UN comple/AT. adj. Not perfect; not finiſhed.
Various incidents do not make different fables, but are
only the uncompleat and unfiniſhed parts of the ſame fable. Pope.
UN co-ſpo'UNDED. adj.
1. Simple; not mixed.
Hardneſs may be reckoned the property of all uncompounded
nilatter. Newton's Opticks.
Your uncompounded atoms, you
Figures in numbers infinite allow ;
From which, by various combination, ſprings
This unconfin'd diverſity of things.
2. Simple; not intricate.
The ſubſtance of the faith was compriſed in that uncom-
pounded ſtyle, but was afterwards prudently enlarged, for the
repelling heretical invaders. Hammond's Fundamentals.
UN coviPRE'ss Ed. adj. Free from compreſſion.
We might be furniſhed with a reply, by ſetting down the
differing weight of our receiver, when emptied, and when
full of uncompreſid air. Boyle.
Blackmore.
U N C
Usecºnºuz'ssive. adj.
* 9mable to comprehend.
2. In Shakeſpeare it ſeems to ſignify incomprehenſible.
The providence, that's in a waſ hiſ ſtate,
Knows almoſt every grain of Pluto's gold;
inds bottom in th’ incomprehenſive deep.
Unconce/ivable. adj.
prehended by the mind.
In the communication of
Shakesp, *
Not to be underſtood ; not to be com-
- motion by impulſe, we can have
no other conception, but of the paſſing of motion out of one
body into another; which is as obſcure and unconcei
- - vable, as
how our minds move or ſto &gt;
our bodies b
Thoſe atoms º ſmall muſt * Locke.
Šmall to an unconceivabe degree;
Since though theſe radiant ſpoils diſpers'd in air,
Do ne'er return, and ne'er the ſun repair. Blackmore.
Unconce/IvableNess. m. ſ. Incomprehenſibility.
The unconceivableneſ of ſomething they find in one, throws
men violently, into the contrary hypotheſis, though altoge-
ther as unintelligible. Locke.
Unconce'rved. adj. Not thought; not imagined.
Vaſt is my theme, yet unconceiv'd, and brings
Untoward words, ſcarce looſen’d yet from things. Creech.
USconce'RN. m. ſ. Negligence; want of intereſt, freedom
from anxiety ; freedom from perturbation. -
Such things had been charged upon us by the malice of
enemies, the want of judgment in friends, and the unconcern
of indifferent perſons. Swift.
Unconce'RNED. adj.
I. Having no intereſt.
An idle perſon is like one that is dead, unconcerned in the
changes and neceſſities of the world. Taylor.
The earth's motion is to be admitted, notwithſtanding
the ſeeming contrary evidence of unconcerned ſenſes. Glanvill:
It ſeems a principle in human nature, to incline one way
more than another, even in matters where we are wholly
wnconcerned. Swift.
2. Not anxious; not diſturbed; not affected.
See the morn,
All unconcern'd with our unreſt, begins ,
Her roſy progreſs ſmiling. Milton's Par. Loft.
You call'd me into all your joys, and gave me
An equal ſhare ; and in this depth of miſery
Can I be unconcerned? Denham's Sophy.
The virgin from the ground
Upſtarted freſh, already clos'd the wound;
And unconcern'd for all ſhe felt before,
Precipitates her flight along the ſhore. Dryden,
Happy mortals, unconcern'd for more,
Confin'd their wiſhes to their native ſhore. Dryden.
We ſhall be eaſy and unconcerned at all the accidents of
the way, and regard only the event of the journey. Rogers.
UN conce'RNEDLY. adv. Without intereſt or affection; with-
out anxiety; without perturbation.
Not the moſt cruel of our conquering foes,
So unconcern'dly can relate our woes,
As not to lend a tear.
Death was denounc'd, that frightful ſound,
Which ev’n the beſt can hardly bear:
He took the ſummons, void of fear,
And unconcern'dly caſt his eyes around,
As if to find and dare the griefly challenger. Dryden.
Is heaven, with its pleaſures for evermore, to be parted
with ſo unconcernedly P Is an exceeding and eternal weight of
Benham.
glory too light in the balance againſt the hopeleſs death of the
atheiſt, and utter extinction. Bentley.
UN conce/RNED Ness. n.ſ. Freedom from anxiety, or pertur-
bation. -
No man, having done a kindneſs to another, would think
himſelf juſtly dealt with, in a total neglect, and unconcerned-
neſ of the perſon who had received that kindneſs. South.
UNéonce/RNING. adj. Not intereſting; not affecting; not be-
longing to one. -
Things impoſſible in their nature, or unconcerning to us,
cannot beget it. Decay ºf Piety.
The ſcience of medals, which is charged with ſo many
unconcerning parts of knowledge, and built on ſuch mean ma-
terials, appears ridiculous to thoſe that haye, not exº-
mined it. Addiſon on Antient Medals.
Unconce/RNMENT. n.ſ. The ſtate of having no ſhare. ,
Being privileged by an happy uncontrºllment in thoſe legal
murders, you may take a ſweeter reliſh of your own in-
noCenCC, - - - South,
Unconclu'dent. adj. Not deciſive : inferring no plain or
UN concLU^DING. } certain concluſion or conſequence.
Our arguments are inevident and unconcludent. Hale.
He makes his underſtanding only the warehouſe of other
mens falſe and unconcluding reaſonings, rather than a repoſitory
of truth for his own uſe. - - Locke.
Unconclu’ding Ness, n ſ. Quality of being unconcluding:
29 L Either<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N C
U N C
Fither may be much more probably maintained than hi-
thereto, as againſt the unaccurateneſs and the unconcludingneſ;
of the analytical experiments vulgarly relied on. Boyle.
Uncosco’cted, adj. Not digeſted; not matured:
we ſwallow cherry-ſtones, but void them uncon-
coded. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
in theology, I put as great a difference between our new
lights and antient truths, as between the ſun and an uncon-
coºled, evanid meteor. Glanville,
Did ſhe extend the gloomy clouds on high,
where all th’ amazing fireworks of the ſky,
In unconcodied ſeeds fermenting lie. Blackmore.
Unconde’MNED. adj. Not condemned.
It was a familiar and uncondemned practice amongſt the
Greeks and Romans, to expoſe, without pity, their inno-
cent infants. Locke.
UNcondi’tional. adj. Abſolute; not limited by any terms.
O paſs not, Lord an abſolute decree,
Or bind thy ſentence unconditional;
But in thy ſentence our remorſe foreſee, -
And, in that forefight, this thy doom recal. Dryden.
Our Saviour left a power in his church to abſolve men
from their fins; but this was not an abſolute and unconditional
power veſted in any, but founded upon repentance, and on
the penitent's belief in him alone. Ayliffe's Parergon.
UN con F1/NED. adj.
1. Free from reſtraint.
I wonder at it.
That ſhews thou art unconfin'd. Shakeſpeare.
Chaucer has refined on Boccace, and has mended the
ſtories he has borrowed: though proſe allows more liberty of
thought, and the expreſſion is more eaſy when unconfined by
numbers. Our countryman carries weight, and yet wins
the race at diſadvantage. IDryden.
Poets, a race long unconfin’d and free,
Still fond and proud of ſavage liberty,
Receiv'd his laws. Pope's Eſſay on Criticiſm.
2. Having no limits ; unbounded. -
If that which men eſteem their happineſs, were, like the
light, the ſame ſufficient and unconfined good, whether ten
thouſand enjoy the benefit of it, or but one, we ſhould ſee
men's good will and kind endeavours would be as uni-
verſal. Spectator, Nº. 6c 1.
Bleſt with a taſte exact, yet unconfin'd;
A knowledge both of books and human kind. Poſe.
UN confi'NAble. adj. Unbounded.
You rogue' you ſtand upon your honour ! why, thou un-
confinable baſeneſs, it is as much as I can do to keep mine
honour. Shakeſpeare's Merry Iłives of JWindſºr.
Uncon F1'RMED. adj.
1. Not fortified by reſolution; not ſtrengthened; raw ; weak.
The unexpected ſpeech
The king had made upon the new-rais'd force,
In th’ unconfirm'd troops, much fear did breed. Daniel.
2. Not ſtrengthened by additional teſtimony.
He would have reſign'd
To him his heav'nly office, nor was long
His witneſs unconfirm'd. Milton's Par. Regain'd.
3. Not ſettled in the church by the rite of confirmation.
UN con Fo'R.M. adj. Unlike ; diſfimilar; not analagous.
Not unconform to other ſhining globes. Milton.
UNcon Fo'RMABLE, adj. Inconſiſtent; not conforming.
Unto thoſe general rules, they know we do not defend,
that we may hold any thing unconformable. Hooker.
Moral good, is an action conformable to the rule of our
duty. Moral evil, is an action unconformable to it, or a ne-
gleet to fulfil it. Watts's Logick.
UN confo'RMITY.. n.ſ. Incongruity; inconſiſtency.
The moral goodneſs or evil of men's actions, which conſiſt
in their conformity or unconformity to right reaſon, muſt be
eternal, neceſſary, and unchangeable. South.
UNcon FU's ED. adj. Diſtinét ; free from confuſion.
It is more diſtinét and unconſuſed than the ſenſitive me-
mory. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
It in having our ideas in the memory ready at hand, con-
ſiſts quickneſs of parts; in this of having them unconfuſed,
and being able nicely to diſtinguiſh one thing from another,
conſiſts the exactneſs of judgment. Locke.
Us cºnfu'sedly. adv. Without confuſion.
Every one finds that he knows, when any idea is in his
underſtanding, and that, when more than one are there, he
º them, diſtinctly and unconfuſedly, from one an-
Otner. Locke.
Usco's Futable. adj. Irrefragable; not to be convićted of
errour.
One political argument they boaſted of as unconfutable,
that from the marriages of eccleſiaſticks, would enſue po-
'*)' in many of the children, and thence a diſgrace and bur-
den to the church. §rar, Sermons.
vº. E/ALEd. adj. Not concreted by cold.
º: ‘....",". after four months digeſtion in horſe-
remity of cold, the aqueous parts will
freeze, but the ſpirit retire, and be * -
center. p &gt; º, in the
Unco'NJUGAL. adi. Not conſiſtent with matti ºr ſtrºn.
not befitting a wife or huſband. monial faith;
My name
To all poſterity nº defam'd ;
§ ſº. mention'd, and the blot
alſhood moſt unconjugal traduc’d. &gt; -
UNconnected. adj. §. coherent, not †: º
tranſitions or dependence of parts; lax; looſe y y proper
Thoſe who contemplate only the fragments i.
from any ſcience, diſperſed in ſhort, unconnesia i. enof
can never ſurvey an entire body of truth. *;
Unconni'viNG: adj. Not forbearing penal notice Walli,
To that hideous place not ſo confin'd - -
By rigour unconniving; but that oſt &gt;
Leaving my dolorous priſon, I enjoy
Large liberty, to round this globe of earth. Mil
Unconger aſſie, adj. Not to be ſubj, iſ .
*: be overcome; invincible. 5 inſuperable;
uis was darting his thunder on the Alps - -
his enemies to feel the force of his º: ;
Spadillio, firſt unconquerable lord • Dryden,
Led off two captive trumps, and ſwept the board. Pº,
UN.co/NQUERAbly. adv. Invincibly; inſuperably. pt.
The herds of Iphyclus, detain'd in wrong;
Wild, furious herds, unconquerably ſtrong. c Pº,
UNco'NQUERED. adj. -
1. Not ſubdued; not overcome.
To die ſo tamely,
O'ercome by paſſion and misfortune,
And ſtill unconquer'd by my foes, ſounds ill. Denham,
Unconquer'd yet, in that forlorn eſtate,
His manly courage overcame his fate. Dryden.
2. Inſuperable ; invincible.
Theſe brothers had a-while ſerved the king of Pontus;
and in all his affairs, eſpecially of war, whereunto they were
; º º had ſhewed as unconquered courage, ſo rude a
aithfulneſs. Sidhri,
What was that ſhaky-headed gorgon ſhield, nj
That wiſe Minerva wore, unconquer'd virgin
Where with ſhe freez'd her focs to congeal’d ſtone,
But rigid looks, and chaſte auſterity,
And noble grace, that daſh'd brute violence,
With ſudden adoration and blank awe ? Miltºn,
Unconque'd lord of pleaſure and of pain. johnſºn,
UN.co'Nscio NABLE. adj. -
1. Exceeding the limits of any juſt claim or expelation,
A man may oppoſe an unconſcionable requeſt for an unjuſti-
fiable reaſon. L'Eſtrange,
2. Forming unreaſonable expectations.
You cannot be ſo unconſcionable as to charge me for not
ſubſcribing of my name, for that would reflect too groſsly
upon your own party, who never dare it. Dryden,
3. Enormous; vaſt. A low word.
His giantſhip is gone ſomewhat creſt-ſall'n,
Stalking with leſs unconſionable ſtrides, -
And lowerlooks, but iſ a ſuitry chaſe. Miltºn' 4".
4. Not guided or influenced by conſcience. :-wahl,
How infamous is the falſe, fraudulent, and ** tionall,
hardly ever did any man of no conſcience continue ** of
any credit long. Sºuth.
UNco'NscIon ABLENEss. n.ſ. Unreaſonableneſs of hope *
claim. -
UNco'Nscionably. adv. Unreaſonably.
Indeed 'tis pity you ſhould miſs
Th’ arrears of all your ſervices ;
And for th’ eternal obligation,
Y” have laid upon th’ungrateful nation,
Be uſed ſo unconſcionably hard, - ;: Cañf
As not to find a juſt reward. Hudºra', p. ii. cant. 3.
This is a common vice; though all thing”
Are ſold, and ſold unconſcionably dear. Dººjwºrldl.
Unconscious. adj. Having no mental percept*
Unconſcious cauſes only ſtill impart
Their utmoſt ſkill, their utmoſt power extſ:
Thoſe which can freely chuſe, diſcern, anº *; #mºrt,
Can more or leſs of art and care beſto". atºm7
A yearling bullock to thy name ſhall ſmoke, Pºpe.
Untam’d, unconſcious of the galling yoke. icated; not dº
Uncºcºred, adj. Not ſacred; not dº” "
voted.
The ſin of Iſrael had even unconſecrat
ſacred edifice, and robbed it of its only defence.
UN conse’NTED. adj. Not yielded. tures,
We ſhould extend it even to the weakneſſes of º d to
to our proneneſs to evil : for however theſe, *. º
will not be imputed to us... yet tº they me Death
ſorrow. jº, Prºparatiºnſ:
UNconsi’DERED. adj. Not conſidered; not attended to:
Love yourſelf; and in that love, Shakiſta”.
Not unconſidered leave your honour I If
d and proſanº º
culh.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N C
**,
º
º
*/
º,
.*
... fied by the word gold.
It will not be unconſidered, that we find no open track in
this labyrinth. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Unco'NsóNANT. adj. Incongruous; unfit; inconfiſtent.
It ſeemeth a thing unconſonant, that the world ſhould ho-
nour any other as the Saviour, but him whom it honoureth
as the creator of the world. Hooker.
Unco'Nst ANT. adj. [inconſtant, Fr. inconſtans, Lat.] Fickle;
not ſteady; changeable; mutable.
More uncºnſtant than the wind; who woos
Ev’n now the frozen boſom of the north ;
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping ſouth. Shakeſp.
Th’ unconſtant ſkies
Do change their courſe as ſev'ral winds ariſe. May's Virgil.
Unconstr A'i NED. adj. Free from compulſion.
Will you, with free and unconſtrained ſoul,
Give me your daughter Shakeſpeare.
Theſe be the miſeries which our firſt parents brought upon
all mankind, unto whom God, in his creation, gave a free
and unconſtrained will. Raleigh's Hiff. of the World.
Made for his uſe, yet he has form'd us ſo, .
We unconſtrain'd, what he commands us, do. Dryden.
His highneſs is return'd.
And unconſirain'd? But with what change
Of countenance did he receive the meſſage 2 Denham.
UN constr A/INE DLY. adv. Without force ſuffered.
Such a patron has frankly, generouſly, and unconſtrainedy
relieved me. South's Sermons.
UN constra'INT. n.ſ. Freedom from conſtraint; eaſe.
Mr. Dryden whit more like a ſcholar; and though the
greateſt maſter of poetry, he wanted that eaſineſs, that air of
freedom and unconſtraint, which is more ſenſibly to be per-
ceived, than deſcribed. Felton on the Claſſicks.
UN consu’lting. adj. [inconſultus, Lat.] Heady ; raſh; im-
provident; imprudent. -
It was the fair Zelmane, Plexirtus's daughter, whom un-
conſulting affection, unfortunately born to mewards, had made
borrow ſo much of her natural modeſty, as to leave her more
decent rayments. Sidney.
UN conte’s TED. adj. Certain; paſt diſpute.
UN consu'MED. adj. Not waſted; not deſtroyed by any waſt-
ing power.
Hope never comes,
That comes to all, but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge fed
with ever-burning ſulphur unconſum’d. Milton's Par. Lºſt.
Fixedneſs, or a power to remain in the fire unconſumed,
is an idea that always accompanies our complex idea, #.
0¢kt.
UN consu'MMATE. adj. Not conſummated.
Acron came to the fight,
who left his ſpouſe betroth'd, and unconſummatenight. Dryd.
UN conte’MNED. adj. Not deſpiſed.
- Which of the peers
Have uncontemm'd gone by him, or at leaſt
Stood not neglected 2 Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
UN conte’NTED. adj. Not contented; not ſatisfied.
Permit me, chief, -
To lead this uncontented gift away. Dryden.
UN conte/NTING NEss. n.ſ. Want of power to ſatisfy.
The decreed uncontentingneſs of all other goods, is richly
repaired by its being but an aptneſs to prove a riſe to our
love's ſettling in God. Boyle.
UN contest ABLE. adj. Indiſputable ; not controvertible.
Where is the man that has unconteſtible evidence of the
truth of all that he holds, or of the falſhood of all he con-
demns. Locke.
Unconte'sTED. adj. Not diſputed ; evident.
'Tis by experience unconteſted found,
Bodies orbicular, when whirling round,
Still ſhake off all things on their ſurface plac'd. Blackmore.
UNcontRiºt E. adj. Not religiouſly penitent.
The prieſt, by abſolving an uncontrite finner, cannot make
him contrite. Hammond's Pračiical Catechiſm.
Unco’NTRove'RTED. adj. Not diſputed ; not liable to de-
bate.
One reaſon of the uncontroverted certainty of mathematical
ſcience is, becauſe 'tis built upon clear and ſettled ſignifica-
tions of names. Glanville,
UN contRo'ULABLE. adj.
1. Reſiſtleſs; powerful beyond oppoſition.
Gaza mourns,
And all that band them to reſiſt
His uncontroulable intent. Milton.
2. Indiſputable; irrefragable.
The penſion was granted, by reaſon of the king of Eng-
land's uncontroulable title to England. Hayward.
This makes appear the error of thoſe, who think it an
ancontroulable maxim, that power is always ſafer lodged in
many hands, than in one ; thoſe many are as capable of
enſlaving as a fingle perſon. Swift.
U N C
UNcontro/ULABLY. adv. -
1. Without poſſibility of oppoſition.
2. Without danger of refutation.
Since this light was to reſt within them, and the judgment
of it wholly to remain in themſelves, they might ſafely and
uncontroulably pretend it greater or leſs. South.
Uncontroulably, and under general conſent, many opinions
are paſſant, which, upon due examination, admit of
doubt. - Brown's Vulg. Errours.
UNcontRouled. adj.
1. Unreſiſted; unoppoſed; not to be overruled.
Should I try the uncontrouled worth
Of this pure cauſe, 'twould kindle my rap’d ſpirits
To ſuch a flame of ſacred vehemence,
That dumb things would be mov’d to ſympathize. Milton.
O'er barren mountains, o'er the flow'ry plain,
Extends thy uncontroul’d and boundleſs reign. Dryden.
The Britiſh navy, uncontroul’d,
Shall wave her double croſs tº extremeſt clime
Terrific, and return with odorous ſpoils. Phillips,
2. Not convinced ; not refuted.
That Julius Caeſar was ſo born, is an uncontrouled re-
port. Hayward.
UN contRo'ULEDLY. adv. Without controul ; without oppo-
ſition.
Mankind avert killing, and being killed; but when the
phantaſm honour has once poſſeſſed the mind, no reluctance
of humanity is able to make head againſt it; but it con-
mands uncontrouledly. Decay of Piety.
UN conve'Rs ABLE. adj. Not ſuitable to converſation ; not
ſocial.
Faith and devotion are traduced and ridiculed, as mo-
roſe, unconverſable qualities. Rogers's Sermons.
UN conve'RTED, adj. Not perſuaded of the truth of chriſtianity.
Salvation belongeth unto none, but ſuch as call upon the
name of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt: which nations, as yet uncon-
verted, neither do, nor poſſibly can do, till they believe. Hooker.
The unconverted heathens, who were preſſed by the many
authorities that confirmed our Saviour's miracles, accounted
for them after the ſame manner. Addison on the Chriſt. Relig.
The apoſtle reminds the Epheſians of the guilt and miſery
of their former unconverted eſtate, when aliens from the com-
monwealth of Iſrael. Rogers'; Sermons.
UN convi'NcED. adj. Not convinced.
A way not to be introduced into the ſeminaries of thoſe,
who are to propagate religion, or philoſophy, amongſt the
ignorant and unconvinced. Locke.
To UNco'Rd. v. a. To looſe a thing bound with cords.
UNcoRRE/cTED. adj. Inaccurate; not poliſhed to exactneſs.
I have written this too haſtily and too looſely: it comes
out from the firſt draught, and uncorreółed. Dryden.
UN corru/PT. adj. Honeſt; upright; not tainted with wicked-
neſs; not influenced by iniquitous intereſt.
The pleaſures of fin, and this world's vanities, are cen-
ſured with uncorrupt judgment. - Hocker.
Men alledge they can ne'er can find
Thoſe beauties in a female mind,
Which raiſe a flame that will endure,
For ever uncorrupt and pure.
UN corru/PTED. adj. Not vitiated ; not depraved.
Such a hero never ſprings,
But from the uncorruped blood of kings.
Man, yet new,
No rule but uncorrupted reaſon knew, {
And with a native bent did good purſue. Dryden.
Nothing is more valuable than the records of antiquity: I
wiſh we had more of them, aed more uncorrupted. Locke.
UN corrupt Ness. n.ſ. Integrity; uprightneſs. -
In doctrine, ſhew uncorruptneſs, gravity, ſincerity. Tit. ii. 7.
To UN.co'VER. v. a.
1. To diveſt of a covering.
After you are up, uncover your bed, and open the cur-
tains to air it. Harvey.
Seeing an object ſeveral millions of leagues, the very inſtant
it is uncovered, may be ſhewn to be a miſtake in matter of
fact. Locke.
2. To deprive of cloaths. -
Thou wert better in thy grave, than to anſwer, with thy
uncovered body, this extremity of the ſkies. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
3. To ſtrip of the roof.
Porches and ſchools,
Uncover'd, and with ſcaffolds cumber'd ſtood.
4. To ſhew openly ; to ſtrip of a veil, or concealment.
He cover'd ; but his É. ſt
Uncover'd more: ſo roſe the Danite ſtrong; -
Shorn of his ſtrength. Milton's Par. Loft.
There will certainly come ſome day or other, to tuncover
every ſoul of us. - Pºpe's Letterſ.
5. To bare the head, as in the preſence of a ſuperiour.
Rather let my head dance on a bloody pole,
Than ſtand uncover'd to the vulgar groom. Shakespeare
4. UN cou N-
Swift.
Roſcommon.
Prior,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N C
al 'assetiable. adj. Not to be advi". w
uscº. been uncounſellable to have march'd to
any diſtance, and have left ſuch an enemy at their backs.
Clarendon.
ustable. adj. Innumerable: *
uscº, lº, glorious bodies, were not ſet in the
firmament for no other end than to adorn it. Raleigh.
RFEIT. adj. Genuine; not ſpurious.
useº : is not iy one ſingle affection of the ſoul, but
a ſtrong mixture of many holy affections, filling the heart
with .# pious intentions; all, not only unguntºſ it, but
, moſt fervent. Sprat's Sermons.
To UN.co/uple. v. a. To looſe dogs from their couples.
Uncouple in the weſtern valley, go :
Diſpatch, I ſay, and find the foreſter. Shakesp.
The hunt is up, the morn is bright and gray;
The fields are fragrant, and the woods are green;
Uncouple here, and let us make a bay. Shakeſp.
The land on which they fought, th' appointed place,
In which th' uncoupled hounds began the chace. Dryden.
Unco’urteous. adj. Uncivil ; unpolite.
In behaviour ſome will ſay, ever ſad, ſurely ſober, and
ſomewhat given to muſing, but never uncourteous. Sidney.
UNcourteously. adv. Uncivilly; unpolitely.
Though ſomewhat merrily, yet uncourteouſly he railed
upon England, objećting extreme beggary; and mere bar-
barouſneſs unto it. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
Uncourtliness. n. ſ. Unſuitableneſs of manners to a court;
inelegance. - -
The quakers preſented an addreſs, which, notwithſtanding
the uncourtlingſ of their phraſes, the ſenſe was very
honeſt. Addiſon.
Unco’URTLY. adj. Inelegant of manners; uncivil.
The lord treaſurer not entering into thoſe refinements of
paying the publick money upon private conſiderations, hath
been ſo uncourtly as to ſtop it. Swift.
UNco'UTH. adj. [uncut, Saxon.] Odd ; ſtrange; unuſual.
A very uncouth fight was to behold,
How he did faſhion his untoward pace;
For as he forward mov’d his footing old,
So backward ſtill was turn'd his wrinkled face. Fairy2ueen.
The lovers ſtanding in this doleful wiſe,
A warrior bold unwares approached near,
Uncouth in arms yelad, and ſtrange diſguiſe.
I am ſurprized with an uncouth fear;
A chilling ſweat o'erruns my trembling joints;
My heart ſuſpects more than mine eye can ſee.
}. trouble of thy thoughts this night
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil ſprung, I fear.
Say on ;
For I that day was abſent, as befel,
Bound on a voyage uncouth, and obſcure,
Far on excurſion toward the gates of hell. Milton,
It was ſo uncouth a fight, for a fox to appear without a tail,
that the very thought made him weary of his life. L’Eſtrange.
The ſecret ceremonies I conceal,
Uncouth, perhaps unlawful to reveal. Dryden.
I am more in danger to miſunderſtand his true meaning,
than if I had come to him with a mind unpoſſeſſed by
doćtors of my ſect, whoſe reaſonings will of courſe make
all chime that way, and make the genuine meaning of the
author ſeem harſh, ſtrained, and unºuth to me. Locke.
He made that a pleaſant ſtudy, which, in the hands of
Fairfax.
Shakeſp.
Milton.
Bartolus and Baldus, was uncouth and rugged. Baker.
UN co’UTHLY. adv. Oddly; ſtrangely.
Venetians do not more uncouthly ride,
Than did their lubber ſtate mankind beſtride. Dryden.
UNcout HNess. n.ſ. Oddneſs; ſtrangeneſs.
To deny himſelf in the leſſer inſtances, that ſo when the
greater come, they may not have the diſadvantage of un-
cauthnºſ, and perfect ſtrangeneſs, to enhance their difficulty,
muſt be acknowledged reaſonable. Decay of Piety.
To UNCREATE. v. a. To annihilate ; to reduce to nothing;
to deprive of exiſtence.
Who created thee, lamenting learn;
Who can uncreate thee thou ſhalt know.
Light dies before her uncreating word.
Thus at her felt approach, and ſecret might,
... Art ºfter art goes out, and all is night. Pºpe's Dunciad.
UNCR EaſtED. adj. -
1. Not yet created.
How haſt thou diſturb’d
Heav'n's bleſſed peace, and into nature brought
Miſery, uncreated till the crime
Milton,
Of thy rebellion P Milton.
2. [hº, Fr.] Not produced by creation.
T. hat cauſe within, or what without is found,
+. **n a being uncreated bound Blackmore.
God ... . Paragraph proves, that the idea we have of
himſelf; it being ſomething, as he ſays, un-
Locke.
created,
Uncº E dirArleness. n.ſ. want of reputation.
To all other diſſwaſives, we may add this of the tailºred,
tableneſs : the beſt that can be ſid is, that they .." º
fooliſhly, whereof the one part devours the other. Dec. of p.
Ncko'PPED. adj. Not cropped; not gathered. ºf riety.
Thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropp'd falls to the ground.
UNcRo'ssed. adj. Uncancelled.
Such gain the cap of him, that makes them fine
Yet keeps his book uncroft'd. Shakeſp. &amp;nu; r
Uncrouded. adj. Not ſtraitened by want of .”
An amphitheatre,
On its publick ſhows, unpeopled Rome,
And held uncrouded nations in its womb.
Miltºn.
To UNcRow N. v. a. To deprive of a crown; to sº
ſovereignty.
He hath done me wrong;
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere’t be long, Shaiſ,
Ye pow'rs -
See a ſacred king uncrown'd;
See your offspring, Albion, bound. Dryden's Alliºn.
U’Nction. n ſ. [unction, Fr.]
1. The act of anointing.
The unélion of the tabernacle, the table, the laver, the
altar of God, with all the inſtruments appertaining thereunto,
made them for ever holy. Hozier, b. v. J. 20.
2. Unguent; ointment.
The king himſelf the ſacred undion made;
As king by office, and as prieſt by trade.
3. The act of anointing medically.
Such as are of hot conſtitutions, ſhould uſe bathing in
hot water, rather than unétions. Arbuthnot on Aini.
4. Anything ſoftening, or lenitive.
Mother,
Lay not that flattering unction to your ſoul,
That not your treſpaſs, but my madneſs ſpeaks. Shaft.
5. The rite of anointing in the laſt hours.
Their extreme unction, adminiſtered as the dying man's
viaticum, which St. James mentioned as the ceremony of his
recovery, may be added. Hammond's Fundamental.
6. Anything that excites piety and devotion.
UNctuo'sity. m. ſ. [from uncluous.] Fatneſs; oilineſs.
Fuliginous exhalations contain an untiuoſity in them, and
ariſe from the matter of fuel. Brown's Vulgar Errouri.
U'Nctuous. adj. Fat; clammy; oily.
Dry up thy harrow'd veins, and plough-torn leas,
Whereof ingrateful man, with liqu'riſh draughts,
And morſels unctuous, greaſes his pure mind,
That from it all conſideration ſlips.
A wand'ring fire,
Compačt of unduous vapour, which the night
Condenſes, and the cold environs round,
Kindled through agitation to a flame. Milton's Par. Lº!,
The trees were undiuous fir, and mountain aſh. Drydºn.
Whether they und?uous exhalations are,
Dryden.
Shakeſheart,
Fir’d by the ſun, or ſeeming ſo alone. Dryden,
Th’ infernal winds,
Dilating, and with uncluous vapour fed, ---
Diſdain'd their narrow cells. Philipſ,
Camphire, oil-olive, linſeed-oil, ſpirit of turpentiº and
amber, are fat, ſulphureous, uncluous bodies, Newton.
U’Nctuous Ness. n.ſ. Fatneſs; oilineſs; clammineſs; greaſineſs,
A great degree of uncluouſneſs is not neceſſary to the .
dućtion of the like effects. Bºyle,
UNcu'll ED. adj. Not gathered.
A ſweaty reaper from his tillage brought
Firſt fruits, the green ear, and the yellow ſheſ, L
Uncull'd, as came to hand. Milton's Par, Lºft.
UNcu'lPAble. adj. Not blamable. hich
Thoſe canons do bind, as they are edićts of naturº." ;
the Jews obſerving as yet unwritten, and thereby º: ;
ſuch church orders, as in their law were not pº ker
notwithſtanding in that reſpect unculpable. 40kers
UNcu'ckold E.D. adj. Not made a cuckold. looſe-
As it is a heart-breaking to ſee a handſome man º:
wiv'd, ſo it is a deadly ſorrow to behold a foul º: tra
cuckolded. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
UNcu'LTIv At ED. adj. [incultus, Lat.]
1. Not cultivated ; not improved by tillage.
Our iſle, indeed, too fruitful was before;
But all uncultivated lay, Dryden.
Out of the ſolar walk. but ſince he
God gave the world to men in common; i eant it
gave it for their benefit, it cannot be ſuppoſed e in wit.
ſhould always remain common and uncultivate”
2. Not inſtructed; not civilized. -
The firſt tragedians found that ſerious ſtile Roſcommºn,
Too grave for their uncultivated age. - º atuſ:
Theſe are inſtances of nations, where unruhitº" cºt.
has been left to itſelf, without the help of letters.
UNcu'MBERED. adj. Not burthened; not embarrale bºº
Lord of yourſelf, uncumler'd with a wil". UN-
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
!,
ººº
º
.*
Uscu'RBABLE. adj. That cannot be curbed, or checked.
So much uncurbable her garboiles, Caeſar,
Made out of her impatience, which not wanted
Shrewdneſs of policy.
UN cu'R BED. adj. Licentious ; not reſtrained.
With frank, and with uncurbed plainneſs,
Tell us the Dauphin's mind.
To UNCU R L. v. a. To looſe from ringlets, or convolutions.
There ſtands a rock; the raging billows roar
Above his head in ſtorms; but when 'tis clear,
Unº! their ridgy, backs, and at his feet appear. Drydºn.
The lion's foe lies proſtrate on the plain,
He ſheaths his paws, uncurls his angry mane;
And, pleas'd with bloodleſs honours of the day,
Walks over, and diſdains th’inglorious prey.
The furies ſink upon their iron beds,
And ſnakes uncurl’d hang liſt’ning round their heads. Pope.
To UNCy's I. v. n. To fall from the ringlets.
My fleece of woolly hair now uncurls,
Even as an adder, when ſhe doth unrowl
To do ſome fatal execution ? Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
Uncu'RLED. adj. Not collected into ringſets.
Alike in feature both, and garb appear;
With honeſt faces, though uncurled hair.
But ſince, alas ! frail beauty muſt decay;
Curl’d or uncurl’d, ſince locks will turn to grey;
What then romains, but well our pow'r to uſe,
And keep good humour ſtill, whate'er we loſe Pope.
Uscu RRENT. adj. Not current; not paſſing in common pay-
ment.
Your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, is not crack'd
within the ring. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
I can no other anſwer make but thanks;
And thanks, and ever thanks: and oft good turns
Are ſhuffled off with ſuch uncurrent pay. Shakeſpeare:
To UNcu RSE. v.a. To free from any execration.
Uncurſe their ſouls; their peace is made
With head, and not with hands. Shakeſp. Richard II.
Dryden.
Dryden.
UNcu'Rs.T. adj. Not execrated.
Sir John Hotham unreproached, unthreatened, uncuſed by
any language or ſecret imprecation of mine, not long after
pays his own and his eldeſt ſon's heads. K. Charles.
Heav'n ſure has kept this ſpot of earth uncurſ,
To ſhew how all things were created firſt. J/aller.
UNcu'T. adj. Not cut.
We muſt reſign heav'n his great ſoul doth claim,
In ſtorms as loud as his immortal fame:
His dying groans, his laſt breath ſhake our iſle,
And trees uncut fall for his fun'ral pile. I/aller.
To UNDA/M. v.a. To open; to free from the reſtraint of mounds.
When the fiery ſuns too fiercely play,
And ſhrivell'd herbs on with'ring ſtems decay;
The wary ploughman on the mountain's brow,
Undamns his watry ſtores. Dryden's Georgicks.
UNDAMAGED. adj. Not made worſe ; not impaired.
Plants will frequent changes try,
Undamag’d, and their marriageable arms
Conjoin with others. Philips.
UNDA/UNTED. adj. Unſubdued by fear; not depreſſed.
Bring forth men children only;
For thy undaunted metal ſhould compoſe
Nothing but males.
With him went
Harman, who did the twice fir'd Harry ſave,
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
And in his burning ſhip undaunted fought. Dryden.
Mirror of antient faith in early youth !
Undaunted worth, inviolable truth !
No foe unpuniſh’d in the fighting field,
Shall dare thee. Dryden.
UNDA’UNTEDN Ess. n.ſ. Boldneſs; bravery ; intrepidity.
Luther took up a briſker air of aſſurance, and ſhewed a
particular undauntedneſs in the cauſe of truth, when it had
ſo mighty an oppoſer. - Atterbury.
The art of war, which they admired in him, and his un-
dauntedneſs under dangers, were ſuch virtues as theſe iſlanders
were not uſed to. Pope.
UNDA'UNTED ly, adv. Boldly; intrepidly; without fear.
It ſhall bid his ſoul go out of his body undauntedly, and lift
up its head with confidence, before ſaints and angels. South.
UNDA’zzle D. adj. Not dimmed, or confuſed by ſplendour.
Here matter new to gaze the devil met
Undazzled. Milton's Par. Loft. b. iii. l. 614.
As undazzled and untroubled eyes, as cagles can be ſup-
poſed to caſt on glow-worms, when they have been newly
gazing on the ſun. Boyle.
To UN DE/AF. v. a. To free from deafneſs.
Though Richard my life's counſel would not hear,
My death's ſad tale may yet undeaf his ear. Shakeſp.
UNDEBA/Uch ED. adi. Not corrupted by debauchery.
When the world was buckſome, freſh and young,
Her ſons were undebauch'd, and therefore ſtrong. Dryden.
Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Shakeſp. Hen. V.
U N ID
USPE'cAgos. m. ſ. [from undºcim, Lat. and 72%, Gr.] A
figure of eleven angles or ſides.
*P*.*.*.*ING. adj. Not ſuffering diminution or declenſion.
T he fragrant myrtle, and the juicy vine,
Their parents undecaying ſtrength declare, -
which with freſh labour, and unweary'd care,
Supplies new plants. Blackmore on the Creatiºn.
UNPEcA'YED. adj. Not liable to be diminiſhed, or im-
paired.
How fierce in fight, with courage undºza,' '
Judge if ſuch warriors want immºral aid.
It in the melancholy ſhades below
- - 2.
The flames of friends and lowers ceaſ. to glow :
Yet mine ſhall ſacred laſt; mine undecoyº &gt;
Burn on through life, and animate my ſhade. Po'e.
To Us Dece/ive. v. a. To ſet free from the influence of a
fallacy.
All men will try, and hope to write as well,
And, not without much pains, be undeceiv'd. Rºſammon.
My muſe enraged, from her urn,
Like ghoſts of murder'd bodies does return
Tº accuſe the murderers, to right the ſtage,
And undeceive the long-abuſed age. Denham.
So far as truth gets ground in the world, ſo far ſin loſes it.
Chriſt ſaves the world by undeceiving it. South.
Our coming judgments do in part undeceive us, and reſtify
the groſſer errors. Glanville.
UNDECE ivable. adj. Not liable to deceive.
It ſerves for more certain computation, by how much it
is a larger and more comprehenſive period, and under a more
undeceivable calculation. Holder on Time.
UND Echºv ED. adj. Not cheated; not impoſed on.
All of a tenour was their after life;
No day diſcolour'd with domeſtick ſtriſe:
No jealouſy, but mutual truth believ'd ;
Secure repoſe, and kindneſs undeceiv'd.
UNDEci'DED. adj. Not determined; not ſettled.
For one thing, which we have left to the order of the
church, they had twenty which were undecided by the expreſs
word of God, Hooker,
To whoſe muſe we owe that ſort of verſe,
Is undecided by the men of ſkill. Rºſłommon.
Ariſtotle has left undecided the duration of the ağion. Dryd.
When two adverſe winds engage with horrid ſhock,
Levying their equal force with utmoſt rage,
Dryden.
Dryden.
Long undecided laſts the airy ſtrife. Philips.
To UNDE'ck. v. a. To deprive of ornaments,
I find myſelf a traitor;
For I have given here my ſoul's conſent,
Tº undeck the pompous body of a king. Shakespeare.
UNDE^cKED. adj. Not adorned; not embelliſhed,
Eve was undeck'd, ſave with herſelf. Miltºn's Par. Loft.
UNDEC1's Ive. adj. Not deciſive; not concluſive.
Two nations differing about the antiquity of their lan-
guage, made appeal to an undeciſive experiment, when they
agreed upon the trial of a child brought up among the wild
inhabitants of the deſert. Ganville.
UNDEcL1(NED adj.
1. Not grammatically varied by termination.
2. Not deviating; not turned from the right way.
In his track my wary feet have ſtept;
His undeclined ways preciſely kept.
UNDE/DICATED. adj.
1. Not conſecrated; not devoted.
2. Not inſcribed to a patron.
I ſhould let this book come forth undedicated, were it not
that I look upon this dedication as a duty. Boyle.
UNDEE/DED. adj. Not ſignalized by action.
My ſword, with an unbatter'd edge,
I ſheath again undeeded. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
UNDEFA'ce D. adj. Not deprived of its form ; not disfigured.
Thoſe arms, which for nine centuries had brav'd
The wrath of time on antick ſtone engrav'd ;
Now torn by mortars, ſtand yet und:ſac'd, -
On nobler trophies by thy valour rais'd. Granville.
UNDEFE/Asible. adj. Not defeaſible; not to be vacated or
annulled. - -
UNDEFI’led. adj. Not polluted; not vitiated; not corrupted.
Virtue weareth a crown for ever, having gotten the
vićtory, ſtriving for undefiled rewards. //iſdºm iv. 3.
Whoſe bed is undfil'd, and chaſte, pronounc d. Milton.
Her Arethuſian ſtream remains unfoil'd,
Unmix'd with foreign filth, and undºff'd , -
Her wit was more than man, her innocence a child. Dryden.
UND EF1/Nep. adj. Not circumſcribed, or explained by a de-
fº. is no ſuch way to give defence to abſurd doctrines,
as to guard them round with legions of obſcure, º,
ºf... S. Øck e.
Uğºff. adj. Not to be marked out, or circumſcribed
by a definition. 29 M That
Sandy's Paraphaſe.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
U N D
indefinite, though it hath bounds, as not
hoſe bounds to us are und final le. Grew.
tº lºſinable is, that the ſeveral terms
ſeveral ideas, they can all, by no
poſition at
Locke.
That which is
being infinite, yet
why ſimple ideasºe
of a définition, fignifying -
In Call S2 repreſent an idea, which has no com
vireºn. adj. Not deformed; not di figured.
The ſight of ſo many gallant fellows, with all the pomp
and glare of war, yet and fºrm'd by battles, may poſſibly in-
vite your curioſity. Pope.
unpei 1"Ed. adj. Not ſet at defiance; not challenged.
Falſe traitor, thou broken haſt
The law of aims, to ſtrike foe vnd fied;
But thou thy treaſon's fruit, I hope, ſhalt taſte
Right ſour, and feel the law, the which thou haſt de-
fac’d. Fairy Queen, b. II. c. viii. ſ. 31.
Tarifa
Changed a blunt cane for a ſteel-pointed dart,
And meeting Ozmyn next,
Who wanting time for treaſon to provide,
He baſely threw it at him, undºſy'd. Dryden.
UNDEli'per. At ED. adj. Not carefully conſidered.
The prince's undeliberated throwing himſelf into that en-
gagement, tranſported him with paſſion. Clarendon.
UNDEli'GHTED. adj. Not pleaſed ; not touched with plea-
ſure.
The fiend
Saw undelightcd all delight; all kind
Of living creatures, new to ſight. Milton's Par. Loft.
UN deli'GHTFul. adj. Not giving pleaſure.
He could not think of involving himſelf in the ſame unde-
lightful condition of life. Clarendon.
UN DEMo'LisHED. adj. Not razed ; not thrown down.
She undemoliſh'd ſtood, and ev'n 'till now
Perhaps had ſtood. Philips.
They ſtood by, and ſuffered Dunkirk to lie unde-
moliſhed. Swift.
UN DEMo'Nst RABLE. adj. Not capable of fuller evidence.
Out of the precepts of the law of nature, as of certain,
common, and undemon/ºrable principles, man's reaſon doth
neceſſarily proceed unto certain more particular determina-
tions: which particular determinations being found out ac-
cording unto the reaſon of man, they have the names of hu-
man laws. Hooker.
UND EN1(ABLE. adj. Such as cannot be gainſaid.
That age which my grey hairs make ſeem more than it is,
hath not diminiſhed in me the power to protećt an undeniable
verity. Sidney.
Of thoſe of the ſecond claſs, we have a plain and unde-
niable certainty. JWoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
UNDEN I’ABLY. adv. So plainly, as to admit no contra-
dićtion.
This account was differently related by the antients; that
is, undenially rejećted by the moderns. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
I grant that nature all poets ought to ſtudy: but then this
alſo undeniably follows, that thoſe things which delight all
ages, muſt have been an imitation of nature. Dryden.
UN DEP Lo'RED. adj. Not lamented.
Riſe, wretched widow ! riſe; nor undºplor’d
Permit my ghoſt to paſs the Stygian ford;
But riſe prepar'd to mourn thy periſh'd lord. Dryden.
UN DFPRA’v ED. adj. Not corrupted.
Knowledge dwelt in our undepraved natures, as light in
the ſun; it is now hidden in us like ſparks in a flint. Glanville.
UNDEPRI've D. adj. Not diveſted by authority; not ſtripped
of any poſſeſſion.
He, undepriv'd, his benefice forſook. Dryden.
U’NDER. prºpºſition. [undar, Gothick; unben, Saxon; onder,
Dutch.]
1. In a ſtate of ſubječtion to.
When good Saturn, baniſh’d from above,
Was driven to hell, the world was under Jove, Dryden.
Every man is put under a neceſſity, by his conſtitution, as
an intelligent being, to be determined by his own judgment,
what is beſt for him to do ; elſe he would be under the de-
termination of ſome other than himſelf, which is want of
liberty. - Locke.
2. In the ſtate of pupillage to.
To thoſe that live
Under thy care, good rules and patterns give. Denham.
The princes reſpected Helim, and made ſuch improvements
ºrder him, that they were inſtructed in learning. Guardian.
s: Bºneath ; ſo as to be covered, or hidden.
Fruit put in bottles, and the bottles let down into wells
wºr water, will keep long. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
1. it ſtood always under this form, it would have been
* fire, if it had not been under water. Burmet.
s: by bees lodge under covert of the wind. Dryden.
*** * good poetick vein is buried under a trade, and
* Produces any thing for want of improvement. Locke.
4. Below in place; not above. This is th -
º º having the ſºils ſpread aloft. the ſenſe of under fall;
s they went under ſail by him, they -
and º ...! y him, they held up º
By that fire that burn'd the Carthage queen idney.
When the falſe Trojan under ſail was eºn. 'sh;
Miſſeltoe hath been found to put forth und, the º:
and not only above the boughs; ſo it cannot be an . S,
that falleth upon the bough. Bacon's N.';
He gather'd now, ye waters, under heav'n, % !ſt.
5. In a leſs degree than. Tiltºn.
Medicines take effect ſometimes under, and ſomet
above, the natural proportion of their virtue. º
If you write in your ſtrength, you ſtand revealed ſº ſ
º ſhould you write under it, you cannot avoid ſome º
lar graces. Dryden’ ..atiºn ºf
6. ... than. yden's Dedication tº Juvenal.
We are thrifty enough not to part with anything ſervice.
able to our bodies, under a good confideration; but mak
little account of what is moſt beneficial to our ſº. R
7. Leſs than ; below. ().
Man, once fallen, was nothing but a total pollution, and
not to be reformed by any thing under a new creation. &amp;m
Theſe men of forehead love to inſure a cauſe, and ſºn
talk under certainty and demonſtration. Collier on Confidence
There are ſeveral hundred pariſhes in England mur
twenty pounds a year, and many under ten. Swift.
8. By the ſhow of.
That which ſpites me more than all the wants,
He does it under name of perfect love. Shakeſpeare,
'Tis hard to bind any ſyllogiſm ſo cloſe upon the mind,
as not to be evaded under ſome plauſible diſtinction, Baier.
9. With leſs than.
Several young men could never leave the pulpit under half
a dozen conceits. Swift,
Io. In the ſtate of inferiority to ; noting rank or order of pre.
cedence. c
It was too great an honour for any man under a
duke. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 122.
11. In a ſtate of being loaded with.
He ſhall but bear them, as the aſs bears gold,
To groan and ſweat under the buſineſs. Shakeſpeare,
He holds the people
Of no more ſoul, nor fitneſs for the world,
Than camels in their war; who have their provender
Only for bearing burthens, and fore blows
For ſinking under them. Shakespeare. Cori.lanuſ.
12. In a ſtate of oppreſſion by, or ſubječtion to,
After all, they have not been able to give any conſiderable
comfort to the mind, under any of the great preſſures of
this life. Tillºtſon's Sermonſ.
At any rate we deſire to be rid of the preſent evil, which
we are apt to think nothing abſent can equal; becauſe, under
the preſent pain, we find not ourſelves capable of any; the
leaſt degree of happineſs. Lotke.
Women and childen did not ſhew the leaſt ſigns of ººº-
plaint, under the extremity of torture. Cºllier.
Illuſtrious parent now ſome token give,
That I may Clymene's proud boaſt believe,
Nor longer under falſe reproaches grieve.
13. In a ſtate in which one is ſeized or overborn.
The prince and princeſs muſt be under no leſ amaze-
ment. Pope's Lettr,
14. In a ſtate of being liable to, or limited by , , ,
That which we move for our better inſtructiºn” ſke,
turneth unto choler in them; they anſwer fumingly. .
in this their mood, they caſt forth ſomewhat, wº y
underpain of greater diſpleaſure, we muſt reſt contented. Hº".
The greate part of mankind is ſlow of apprehenſion; *.h
therefore, in many caſes, under a neceſſity of ſeeing "
other men's e South's Sermºni.
eyes. d princes
A generation ſprung up amongſt us, that **
Addison. }
- - - e
that they have a divine right to abſolute power. let
c r autho-
laws and conditions under which they enter "P" thei Locke
º: be what they will. -
t is not ſtrange to find a country *
ſo great a proportion of both ſexes is tie -
of ‘...." p Addison's Remark 0n lº
Things of another world are under the *.'y.
being diſtant, and therefore operate but faintly. 4”
15. In a ſtate of depreſſion, or dejection by:
There is none but he, der hi
Whoſe being I do fear; and, under him, {eſ}.
My genius iº, as Antony's was by Caeſar. Shaft
16. In the ſtate of bearing, or being known by: e very
This faction, under the name of Purit” º
turbulent, during the reign of Elizabeth. coining."
The raiſing of ſilver coin, has been only by CO! Lºt.
with leſs ſilver in it, under the ſame denominº”
17. In the ſtate of.
unpeopled, whº
ander ſuch vows
If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N ID
-
º
º,
*
º
º-
º
y
If they can ſucceed without blood, as under the preſent
diſpoſition of things, it is very poſſible they may, it is to be
hoped they will be ſatisfied. Swift.
18. Not having reached or arrived to ; noting time.
Three ſons he dying left under age;
By means whereof, their uncle Vortigern
Uſurp'd the throne during their pupillage.
19. Repreſented by.
Morpheus is repreſented by the antient ſtatuaries under the
figure of a boy aſleep, with a bundle of poppy in his
hand. Addiſon.
20. In a ſtate of protećtion.
Under favour, there are other materials for a common-
wealth, beſides ſtark love and kindneſs. Collier.
21. With reſpect to.
Mr. Duke may be mentioned under the double capacity of
a poet and a divine. Felton on the Claſſicks.
22. Atteſted by. -
Cato major, who had with great reputation borne all the
great offices of the commonwealth, has left us an evidence,
under his own hand, how much he was verſed in country
affairs. Locke on Education.
23. Subjećled to ; being the ſubječt of.
To deſcribe the revolutions of nature, will require a ſteady
eye; eſpecially ſo to connect the parts, and preſent them all
wnder one view. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Memory is the ſtorehouſe of our ideas. For the narrow
mind of man, not being capable of having ...} ideas under
view at once, it was neceſſary to have a repoſitory to lay
them up. - Locke.
The thing under proof is not capable of demonſtration,
and muſt be ſubmitted to the trial of probabilities. Locke.
Diſtinét conceptions, that anſwer their verbal diſtinétions,
ſerve to clear any thing in the ſubject under conſideration. Locke,
I rather ſuſpect my own judgment, than believe a fault to
be in that poem, which lay ſo long under Virgil's correction,
and had his laſt hand put to it. Addiſon.
24. In the next ſtage of ſubordination.
This is the only ſafe guard, under the ſpirit of God, that
dićtated theſe ſacred writings, that can be relied on. Locke.
25. In a ſtate of relation that claims protećtion.
U’NDER. adv. -
1. In a ſtate of ſubječtion.
Ye purpoſe to keep under the children of Judah for bond-
men and bond-women. 2 Chron. xxviii. Io.
2. Leſs : oppoſed to over or more. -
He kept the main ſtock without alteration, wader or
OW cr. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 264.
3. It has a ſignification reſembling that of an adjećtive; infe-
riour; ſubject; ſubordinate. But, perhaps, in this ſenſe it
ſhould be conſidered as united to the following word.
I will fight -
Againſt my canker'd country with the ſpleen
Of all the under ficnds. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
4. It is much uſed in compoſition, in ſeveral ſenſes, which the
following examples will explain.
UNDERA/Crios. m. ſ. Subordinate ačtion; ačtion not eſſen-
tial to the main ſtory.
The leaſt epiſodes, or underađions, interwoven in it, are
parts neceſſary, or convenient to carry on the main deſign. Dryd.
To UNDER BEA'R. v. a. [under and bear.]
1. To ſupport ; to endure.
What reverence he did throw away on ſlaves
wooing poor craftſmen with the craft of ſmiles,
And patient underhearing of his fortune. Shakeſpeare.
2. To line; to guard. Out of uſe.
The dutches of Milan's gown; not like your cloth of gold,
ſet with pearls, down-ſleeves, ſide-ſleeves, and ſkirts round,
inderborº, with a bluiſh tinſel. Shakeſp. Much Ado about Noth.
UNDER REA/RER. m. ſ. [under and bearer..] In funerals, thoſe
that ſuſtain the weight of the body, diſlinét from thoſe who
are bearers of ceremony, and only hold up the pall.
To UNDERb1 p. v. a. [under and bid.] To offer for any
thing leſs than it is worth. - -
UN prºcle/RK. m. ſ. [under and clerk.] A clerk ſubordinate
to the principal clerk. - -
Coleby, one of his under-ſwearers, was tried for robbing
the treaſury, where he was an underclerk. Swift.
To UNDER Go'. v. n. [under and do.]
1. To act below ones abilities.
You overaćt, when you ſhould underdo ;
A little call yourſelf again, and think. B. Johnſon.
2. To do leſs than is requiſite.
Nature much oftener overdoes than underdees: You ſhall
find twenty eggs with two yolks, for one that hath none. Grew.
UNDERFA'cºrios. m. ſ. ſunder and faction. J Subordnate fac-
tion ; ſubdiviſion of a faction. -
Chriſtianity loſes by conteſts of underfallions. Decay of Piety.
UN DERFE/llow. m. ſ. [under and fellow.] A mean man ; a
ſorry wretch.
Fairy Queen.
U N D
They carried him to a houſe of a principal officer, who
With no more civility, though with much more buſineſ than
thoſe *dºrfellºws had ſhewed, in captious manner put inter-
rogatories unto him. Sidney.
9Nº RFI'lling. n.ſ. [under and fill.] Lower part of an
edifice.
To found our habitation firmly, firſt examine the bed of
earth upon which we will build, and then the underfillings,
or ſubſtruction, as the antients called it. Wotton's Architecture.
z -
Tºro Nº. 9. a. [under and pangan, Saxon.] To take
Thou, Menalcas, that by thy trea
Didſt underfing my lady to .. ſo º
T i. well be known for ſuch thy villainy. Spenſer.
o UNDER F UR NISH. v. a. ſunder ; ... n.
with leſs than enough. [under and furniſh..] To ſupply
Can we ſuppoſe God would underfurniſh man for the ſtate
he deſigned him, and not afford him a ſoul large enough to
purſue his happineſs Collier on Kinnj.
To UNPER GI'rd. v. a. [under and gird..] To bind below, to
round the bottom.
When they had taken it up, they uſed helps, undergirding
the ſhip. 4:7: xxvii. 17.
To U'NDERGo. v. a. [under and go.]
I. To ſuffer; to ſuſtain ; to endure evil.
With mind averſe, he rather underwent
His people's will, than gave his own conſent. Dryden,
2. To ſupport; to hazard. Not in uſe.
I have mov’d certain Romans,
To undergo with me, an enterprize
Of honourable, dang'rous conſequence. Shakeſpeare.
Such they were, who might preſume t' have done
Much for the king, and honour of the ſtate,
Having the chiefeſt ačtions undergone. Daniel's Civil War.
3. To ſuſtain; to be the bearer of; to poſſeſs. Not in uſe.
Their virtues elſe, be they as pure as grace;
As infinite as man may undergo;
Shall, in the general cenſure, take corruption
From that particular fault. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
4. To ſuſtain; to endure without fainting.
It rais'd in me
An undergoing ſtomach, to bear up
Againſt what ſhould enſue.
5. To paſs through.
I carried on my enquiriess to try whether this riſing world,
when finiſh'd, would continue always the ſame; or what
changes it would ſucceſſively undergo, by the continued
ačtion of the ſame cauſes. Burnet's Theory of tho Earth.
Bread put into the ſtomach of a dying man, will vndergo
the alteration that is merely the effect of heat. Arbuthnot.
6. To be ſubjećt to.
Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either I muſt ſhortly
hear from him, or I will ſubſcribe him a coward. Shakeſp.
UNDERGRO(UND. m. ſ. [under and ground. J Subterraneous
ſpace.
They have promiſed to ſhew your highneſs
A ſpirit rais'd from depth of underground.
Waſh'd by ſtreams
From underground, the liquid ore he drains
Into fit molds prepared. Milton's Par. Loft.
UNDERGRowth. n.J. [under and growth..] That which grows
under the tall wood.
So thick entwin'd, -
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of ſhrubs, and tangling buſhes, had perplex'd
All path of man, or beaſt, that paſs'd that way. AMilton.
UNDERHA'ND. adv. [under and hand.]
1. By means not apparent; ſecretly.
Theſe multiplied petitions of worldly things in prayer,
have, beſides their direct uſe, a ſervice, whereby the church
underhand, through a kind of heavenly fraud, taketh there-
with the ſouls of men, as with certain baits. Hooker.
2. Clandeſtinely; with fraudulent ſecrecy:
She underhand dealt with the principal men of that country,
that they ſhould perſuade the king to make Plangus his
Shakeſp.
aſſociate. - Sidney.
They, by their precedents of wit,
Tº out faſt, out-loiter, and out-fit,
Can order matters underhand, - -
Hudibras.
To put all buſineſs to a ſtand. - -
It looks, as if I had deſired him underhand to write ſo ill
againſt me; but I have not brib'd him to do me this
ſervice. - Dryden.
such mean revenge, committed under”, Dryd
Has ruin'd many an acre of good land. ryden.
wood is ſtill working underhand to force his *:::::
4. wºff.
upon us. I'll haſten to my Roman ſoldiers,
Inflame the mutiny, and under”
Blow up their diſcontents. Addison's Cato.
U^NDER-
2.
Shakeſp. Tempeſ?,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
* 'sp. adj. Secret; clandeſtine ; fly:
Usº lº # my brother's purpoſe, and haº, under-
hand means, laboured to diſſuade him. Sha %.
I ſhould take it as a very great favour from ſome o my
if they would break all meaſures with
underhand detractors, i y • * &gt; Q
Inc. Addiſon's Speciator, No. 262.
Ujsla'sourER. m. ſ. [under and labourer.] A ſubordinate
wº. carriage of one ſtone for Amafis, the diſtance
of twenty days journey, for three years were employed two
thouſand choſen men, governors, beſides many underla-
bourers. J/ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
UNDER I’ved. adj. [from derived.] Not borrowed.
The ideas it is buſied about ſhould be, ſometimes at leaſt,
thoſe more congenial oncs, which it had in itſelf, underived
from the body. - Locke.
To UNDERLA'Y. v. a. [under and lay.] To ſtrengthen by ſome-
thing laid under. -
UNDERLE/AF. m. ſ. [under and leaf.] A ſpecies of apple. See
APPLE. -
The underleaf, whoſe cyder is beſt at two years, is a
plentiful bearer. Mortimer's Art of Huſbandry.
To UNDERLINE. v. a. [under and line.] To mark with lines
below the words.
By meer chance in appearance, though underlined with a
providence, they had a full fight of the infanta J/atton.
UNDERLING. m. ſ. [from under.] An inferiour agent; a ſorry,
mean feilow.
The great men, by ambition never ſatisfied, grew factious;
and the underlings, glad indeed to be underlings to them they
hated leaſt, to preſerve them from ſuch they hated moſt. Sidney.
Hereby the heads of the Septs are made ſtronger, whom
it ſhould be a moſt ſpecial policy to weaken, and to ſet up
and ſtrengthen divers of their underlings againſt them. Spenſer.
The fault is not in our ſtars,
But in ourſelves, that we are underlings.
O'er all his brethren he ſhall reign as king,
Yet every one ſhall make him underling. Milton.
They may print this letter, if the underlings at the poſt-
office take a copy of it. Pope and Swift.
A ſort of underling auxiliars to the difficulty of a work,
are commentators and criticks, who frighten many by their
number and bulk.
To UNDERM (N.E. v. a. [under and mine.]
1. To dig cavities under any thing, ſo that it may fall, or be
blown up; to ſap.
Though the foundation on a rock were laid,
The church was undermin’d and then betray'd. Denham.
An injudicious endeavour to exalt Virgil, is much the ſame,
as if one ſhould think to raiſe the ſuperſtructure by undermining
the foundation. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
2. To excavate under.
A vaſt rock undermin'd from one end to the other, and a
highway running through it, as long and as broad as the
mall. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
3. To injure by clandeſtine means.
Making the king's ſword ſtrike whom they hated, the
king's purſe reward whom they loved; and, which is worſt
of all, making the royal countenance ſerve to undermine the
royal ſovereignty. Sidney.
They, knowing Eleanor's aſpiring humour,
Have hir'd me to undermine the dutcheſs.
The father ſecure,
Vcntures his filial virtue,
Againſt whate'er may tempt, whate'er ſeduce,
Allure or terrify, or undermine. Milton.
The undermining ſmile becomes habitual; and the drift of
his plauſible converſation, is only to flatter one, that he may
betray another. Dryden.
He ſhould be warn'd who are like to undermine him, and
who to ſerve him. Locke on Education.
UNPERMINFR. m. ſ. [from undermine.]
I. He that ſaps ; he that digs away the ſupports.
The enemies and underminers thereof are Romiſh Ca-
tholicks. Bacon.
2. A clandeſtine enemy.
When I perceiv'd all ſet on enmity,
As on my enemies, where-ever chanc'd,
I us’d hoſtility, and took their ſpoil,
Tº pay my unºrminers in their coin. Miltºn's Agoni/?es.
The moſt experienced diſturbers and underminºr, of govern-
ment, have always laid their firſt train in contempt, endea-
X*g to blow it up in the judgment and eſteem of the
ſubject. South's Sermons.
UNDERMost. adj. [This is a kind of ſuperlative, anomalouſly
formed from under.]
1. Loweſt in place.
Wºng oil of almonds, we drew up with the undermoſt ſtone
a much greater weight. Boyle.
2. Loweſt in ſtate or condition.
It happens well for the Party that is undermg/?, when a work
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
of this nature falls into the hands of thoſe, who cont
themſelves to attack their principles, without expoſin .
perſons. - - Addison's Freeholder, N. .
This opinion, taken up by other ſectaries, was to lift *
longer than they were undermºff. Atter º
UNDERNE’ATH. adv. [Compounded from under and º
which we ſtill retain the comparative mether, but in º
ſenſe uſe beneath..] In the lower place; below; under: i.
neath. 5 DC-
Forthwith up to the clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The earth outſtretch'd immenſe, a proſped wide. Mill
And as I awake, ſweet muſick breathe
Above, about, or underneath;
277.
Sent by ſome ſpirit to mortals good. Milt,
Or fullen Mole that runneth underneath; iltºn,
Or Severn ſwift, guilty of maidens death. Miltºn.
The monſter caught in open day,
Inclos'd, and in deſpair to fly away,
Howls horrible from underneath. Drydºn
The ſlate did not lie flat upon it, but left a ſteerſ.
underneath. &gt;
UNDERNE’ATH. prep. Under.
Fellows in arms,
Bruis’d underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we march'd on. Shaft,
Pray God, ſhe prove not maſculine ere long!
If unde, neath the ſtandard of the French
She carry armour, as ſhe hath begun. Shakespeare . Han. VI.
Underneath this ſtone doth lie,
As much beauty as could die;
Which in life did harbour give,
To more virtue than could live. B. jºhnſºn.
What is, hath been ; what hath been ſhall enſue;
And nothing underneath the ſun is new. Sandy's Paraphroſ.
The north and ſouth, and each contending blaſt,
Are underneath his wide dominion caſt. Drydºn.
UNDER O'FFIcER. m. ſ. [under and ºfficer.] An inſeriouſ officer;
one in ſubordinate authority.
This certificate of excommunication by biſhops, of all
others, is moſt in uſe; and would be more ſo, were it not
for the manifold abuſes about its execution committed by
underºfficers. Aft's Parergon.
To UNDERPIN. v. a. [under and pin..] To prop; to ſupport.
Vićtors, to ſecure themſelves againſt diſputes of that kind,
underpin their acqueſt jure belli. Hale's Cºmmon Law.
UNDE(Rog AtoRY. adj. Not derogatory. - -
Of our happineſs the apoſtle gives a negative deſcription;
and to create in us apprehenſions underogatory from what we
ſhall poſſeſs, exalts them above all that we can fancy. Bºk.
U’NDERPART. n.ſ.. [under and part.] Subordinate, or un-
eſſential part.
The Engliſh will notbear a thorough tragedy, butareſkº
that it ſhould be lightened wth underpa is of miº. Drydºn.
UNDER PE’rtico AT. n.ſ.. [uuder and petticºat.] The petticoat
worn next the body. - -
They go to bed as tired with doing nothing, º º
quilting a whole under-petticoat. Addison Speciatºr, Nº. 606.
UNDER plot. m. ſ. [under and plot.] - in ſt
1. A ſeries of events proceeding collaterally with the main"
of a play, and ſubſervient to it. in deſign;
In a tragi-comedy, there is to be but on." º:
and though there be an underplot, yet it is ſubſervic, w l
chief fable. Dryden's Dedicatiºn tº juvenal.
2. A clandeſtine ſcheme. -
The huſband is ſo miſled by tricks, and ſo loſt in a
intrigue, that he ſtill ſuſpects an underplºt.
To UNDERPRA'ise. v.a. [under and praiſe.
deſert. ſ
In underpraiſing thy deſerts, ------
Here find £ ºft. of our tongº, } Pº :
To UNDER PRI'ze. v. a. [under and prize.] To valu
than the worth.
A.ddiſºn.
crooked
ºiſºn.
J To praiſe below
How far -
The ſubſtance of my praiſe doth wrong this ſhadow
In underprizing it; ſo far this ſhadow Shakeſheart.
Doth limp behind the ſubſtance. t; to iſlain.
To UNDER proſp. v. a. [under and prºp.] Tº ſupport;
Here am I left to underprop the land, If Shakespeare .
Who, weak with age, cannot ſupport myle a for the be:
There was made a ſhoring or underpºº “. be leviablº
nevolence, to make the ſums not brought tº “. Hºn. VII.
by courſe of law. Bacon's 11th.
Thou that art us’d tº attend the royalth" Fentºn,
And underprop the head that bears the cº". n] Having
UNdºpropoſitioned. adj. [under and p"
too little proportion. - wºrtiº
To ...'. and to make ſcanty and *†. vey
returns of civility, plainly tells people, dº.” on Pride,
mannerly. UNDERPu11”
9
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
U N D
rtº
5.
"spºº Pu'll ER. m. ſ. [under and puller.] Inferiour or ſub-
ordinate puller. -
The myſtery of ſeconds and thirds is ſuch a maſter-piece,
that no deſcription can reach. Theſe underpullers in deſtruction
*''..ſuch implicit mortals as are not to be atched. Collier.
To UN of RRATE. v.a. [ºnder and rate.] To rate too low.
UNDERRA’re. n.ſ. (ſºm the verb.] A price leſs than is
uſual. -
The uſeleſs brute is from Newmarket brought,
And at an underrate in Smithfield bought,
To turn a mill. Dryden.
To UNDERs A'y. v. n. [under and ſay..] To ſay by way of de-
rogation. Not in uſe.
They ſay, they con to heaven the highway;
But I dare tanderſay,
They never ſet foot on that ſame trode,
But balke their right way, and ſtrain abroad. Spenſºr.
UNDER stºck ETARY. º. /.. [under and Jecretary..] An inferiour.
or ſubordinate ſecretary.
The Jews have a tradition, that Elias fits in heaven, and
keeps a regiſter of all men's actions, good or bad. He hath
his under-ſecretaries for the ſeveral nations, that takes minutes
of all that paſſes. Bacon's Theory of the Earth.
To Us DERSE Lt. v. a. [under and ſell.] To defeat, by ſelling
for leſs; to ſell cheaper than another.
Their ſtock being rated at ſix in the hundred, they
may, with great gain, underſºll us, our ſtock being rated
at ten. Child's Diſcourſe of Trade.
USDERSERVANT. n.ſ. [under and fervant..] A ſervaiſt of the
lower claſs.
Beſides the nerves, the bones, as undeſervants, with the
muſcles, are employed to raiſe him up. Grew's Coſmology.
To UNDER set. ... à. [*der and ſet.] To prop; to ſup-
Ort.
p The merchant-adventurers, being a ſtrong company, and
well *ºſet with rich men, and good order, held out
bravely. Bacon's Hen. VII.
UNDERSE/TTER. m. ſ. [from *deſt.] Prop; pedeſtal; ſup-
Ol't. *
P The four corners thereof had undeſetters. I Kings vii. 36.
UNDERs E^TTING. m. ſ. [from #nderſet. Lower part; pedeſial.
Their underſettings, or pedeſtals, are, in height, a third
part of the column. . //atton's Architecfare.
UNDER SHE'RIFF. m. ſ. [under and /eriff] The deputy of the
ſheriff.
Since ’tis my doom, love's underſhrieve,
Why this reprieve
Why doth my ſhe advowſon fly Cleveland's Poems.
UNDERSHE's IFFRY. m. / [from underſheriff.] The buſineſs,
or office of an underſheriff.
The cardinals of Rome call all temporal buſineſs, of wars
and embaſſages, ſhirreria, which is underſheriffries ; as if
they were but matters for underſheriffs and catchpoles; though
many times thoſe underſheriffries do more good than their
high ſpeculations. Bacon.
UNPER shoºt.. part, adj. [under and ſhoot.] Moved by water
paſſing under it. - -
The impriſoned water payeth the ranſom of driving an
underſhoot wheel for his enlargement. Carew's Surv. of Cornwall.
UNPRRºo'ss: "...ſ.. [under and ſong..] Chorus; burtheſ of a ſong.
So ended ſhe and all the reſt around
To her redoubled that her underſºng. Spenſer.
The challenge to Damaetas ſhall belong;
Menalcas ſhall ſuſtain his underſong;
Each in his turn your tuneful numbers bring. Dryden.
To UNDERSTA'ND. v. a. preterite under/lood, [umbenrcan-
can, Saxon.]
1. To comprehend fully ; to have knowledge of. -
The Ulyſſes of Ovid upbraids his ignorance, that he un-
derſtood not the ſhield for which he pleaded. Dryden.
2. To conceive. ”
His fin might have been greater in that reſpect: but
that it was not ſo to be underſtood, appears by the oppoſi-
tion. Stillingfleet.
The moſt learned interpreters underſtood the words of fin,
and not of Abel. - Locke.
To UNDER st A^N D. v. n. - - - - -
I. To have uſe of the intelle&amp;tual faculties; to be an intelli-
gent or conſcious being. . -
I have given thee a wiſe and underſtanding heart. Chronicles.
2. To be informed.
I underſtood of the evil Eliaſhib did.
I under/land by Sanga, you have been
Solicited againſt the commonwealth
By one Umbrenus.
All my ſoul be
Imparadis'd in you, in whom alone
I under/and, and grow, and ſee. -
UNPERSTA'NDING. m. ſ. [from under/land.]
1. Intellectual powers; faculties of the mind, eſpecially thoſe
of knowledge and judgment, -
Neh. xiii. 7.
B. Johnſon's Cataline.
Donne.
I ſpeak as my */anding inſtructs me, and as mine ha-
neſty puts it to utterance. Shakeſp. //inter Taſ,
Make him of ‘ſuickunder/landing intheſearoffthe Lord. Iſaiah.
It maketh day-light under/landing, out of darkneſs. Bacon,
When ſhe rates things, and moves from ground to ground,
he name of reaſon ſhe obtains by this:
But when by reaſon ſhe h truth hath found,
And ſtandeth fix’d, ſhe inderſtanding is.
- - Davier.
Life and fenſe,
Fancy and *derſtanding: whence the ſoul -
Reaſon receives, and reaſon is her being. Milton."
- God is to the */anding of man, ... the light of the
º to our eyes, its firſt and moſt glorious object. Tilletſon.
2. III.
The Ander/andings of a ſenate are often enſlaved by three
or four leaders. Swift.
Right underſtanding conſiſts in the Perception of the viſible
or probable agreement or diſagreement of ideas. Locke.
Very mean people have raiſed their minds to a great ſenſe
and underſtanding of religion. Locke.
3. *lligence; terms of communication.
He hoped the loyalty of his ſubjects would concur with
him in the Preſerving of a good anderſtanding between him
and his people. Clarendon,
We have got into ſome underſtanding with the enemy, by
means of Don Diego. Arbuthnot,
UNDER sta'NDING. ºff. Knowing; ſkilful.
The preſent phyſician is a very, thqer/anding man, and
well read. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
UNDERStA'NDINGLY. adv, [from under/land.] With know-
ledge.
Sundays may be underſtandingly ſpent in theology.
UNDER stood. pret, and part. paſſive of under/land. -
UNDER stra/PPER. "...ſ.. [under and /rap.] A petty fellow ;
an inferior agent.
Every underſtrapper perk'd up, and expected a regiment,
or his ſon muſt be a major. Swi/?.
To UNDERTA'ke. v. a. preterite undertº ; participle paſſive
undertaken. [underfangen, German.]
I. To attempt; to engage in.
The taſk he undertakes
Milton,
Is numbring ſands, and drinking oceans dry, Shakespeare,
Hence our gen'rous emulation Came;
We undertºok, and we perform'd the ſame. Roſcommon.
Fiercer than cannon, and than rocks more hard,
The Engliſh undertake th' unequal war. Dryden.
Of dangers undertaken, fame atchiev’d,
They talk by turns. I}ryden.
2. To aſſume a character. Not in uſe.
His name and credit ſhall you undertake,
And in my houſe you ſhall be friendly lodga. Shakeſp.
3. To engage with 5 to attack.
It is not fit your lordſhip ſhould undertake every companion,
that you give offence to. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
You'll undertake her no more ? Shakeſpeare.
4. To have the charge of.
To th’ waterfide I muſt conduct your grace,
Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
Who undertakes you to your end. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
To UNDERTA'kE. v. n.
1. To aſſume any buſineſs or province. --
O Lord, I am oppreſſed, undertake for me. Iſa. xxxviii. 34-
I undertook alone to wing th’ abyſs. Mliton,
2. To venture; to hazard.
It is the cowiſh terror of his ſpirit, -
That dare not undertake. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
3. To promiſe; to ſtand bound to ſome condition.
If the curious ſearch the hills after rains, I dare undertake
they will not loſe their labour. Woodward's Nat. Hi/.
UNDERTA'KEN. part, paſſive of undertake.
UNDERTA'KER. m. ſ. [from undertate.]
1. One who engages in proječts and affairs.
Antrim was naturally a great undertaker. Clarendon.
Undertakers in Rome purchaſe the digging of fields, and
arrive at greateſtates by it. - - 4āºn.
This ſerves to free the enquiry from the perplexities that
ſome undertakers have encumber'd it with. JWoodward.
Oblige thy favºrite undertakers -
To throw me in but twenty acres. Prior.
2. One who engages to build for another at a certain price.
Should they build as faſt as write, iſ?’s Miſell
'Twould ruin undertakers quite. Swift's Miſcellany.
. One who manages funerals. -
à...". #. ſ, [from undertake..] Attempt; enterprize;
noragement. -
e Mighty men they are called ; which ſheweth a ſtrength ſur-
affing others: and men of renown, that is, of great inder-
... and adventurous actions. Raleigh's Hiſ of the Hºrld.
If this ſeem too great an undertaking for the humour of our
age, then ſuch a ſum of money ought to lie ready for taking
4. -
- - r - - T. le.
off all ſuch pieces of sº ſhall be brought in tº:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
U N D
der and tenant..] A ſecondary te-
- / . ſ. ſt
UNDERTE'NANT. m. ſ. ſº from him that holds from the
nant; one who holds
owner.
Settle and ſecure the undertenants, to the end there may
- ſtabliſhment of every ſubječt's eſtate, lord
º: * * }... º.
UNEER rook. part, paſſive of undertake.
Usºv Alu A'qion. n.ſ. [under and value.] Rate not equal
to the worth. - - - -
There is often failing by an undervaluation; for in divers
children their ingenerate powers are of ſlow diſcloſure. Wottºn.
To Underva'luf, v. a. [under and value.]
1. To rate low; to eſteem lightly ; to treat as of little worth.
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalu'd -
To Cato's daughter. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
My chief delight lay in diſcharging the duties of my ſta-
tion; ſo that in compariſon of it, I undervalu'd all enſigns of
authority. - - - Atterbury.
c. To depreſs; to make low in eſtimation ; to deſpiſe.
I write not this with the leaſt intention to undervalue the
other parts of poetry. - Dryden.
In a kingdom grown glorious by the reputation of a ſove-
reign, multitudes leſſen and undervalue it. Addiſon.
Schooling Luther is an undervaluing term, and would
make one think that Eraſmus had a mean opinion of him.
Atterbury.
UNDER value. n. ſ. [from the verb. J. Low rate ; vile
rice.
p The unſkilfulneſs, careleſsneſs, or knavery of the traders,
added much to the undervalue and diſcredit of theſe commo-
dities abroad. Temple.
UNDER va’luer. n.ſ.. [from undervalue.] One who eſteems
lightly.
- *…wlu. of money was Sir Henry Wotton. IWalton.
UNDERw e^N.T. preterite of undergo.
U’NDER wood. m. ſ. [under and wood.] The low trees that
grew among the timber.
- When you fell underwood, ſow haws and floes. Mortimer.
U’s DER work. n.ſ.. [under and work.] Subordinate buſineſs ;
petty affairs. **
Thoſe that are proper for war, fill up the laborious part of
life, and carry on the underwork of the nation. Addi, on.
To UNDER wo's K. v.a. preterite underworked, or underwrought ;
participle paſſive underworked, or underwrought.
1. To deſtroy by clandeſtine meaſures.
Thou from loving England art ſo far,
That thou haſt underwrought its lawful king,
To cut off the ſequence of poſterity.
2. To labour leſs than enough.
Apelles ſaid of Protogenes, that he knew not when to give
over. A work- may be overwrought as well as under-
wrought. Dryden.
UNDER wo'RKMEN. m. ſ. [under and workman.] An inferiour,
or ſubordinate labourer.
Underworkmen are expert enough at making a ſingle wheel
in a clock, but are utterly ignorant how to adjuſt the ſeveral
parts. Swift.
To UNDER wri'TE. v. a. [under and write.] To write under
ſomething elſe.
He began firſt with his pipe, and then with his voice,
thus to challenge Dorus, and was by him anſwered in the
anderwritten ſort. Sidney.
What addition and change I have made, I have here
underwritten. - Sanderſon.
UNDER writer. n.ſ.. [from underwrite.] An inſurer; ſo
called from writing his name under the conditions.
UNDEscR1'BED. adjº Not deſcribed.
They urge, that God left nothing in his word undeſcribed,
whether it concerned the worſhip of God, or outward
polity. Hooker.
This is ſuch a ſingular pračtice, that I had rather leave it
undeſcribed, than give it its proper charaćter. Collier on Pride.
UNDEscR1'ED. adj. Not ſeen; unſeen; undiſcovered.
UNDESE/Rv Ed. adj.
1. Not merited; not obtained by merit.
This vićtory, obtained with great, and truely not unde-
ſerved, honour to the two princes, the whole eſtates, with one
conſent, gave the crown to Muſidorus. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Not incurred by fault. -
The ſame virtue which gave him a diſregard of fame,
made him impatient of an undeſerved reproach. Addiſon.
UNRESE’R v Edix. adv. [from undeſerved.] Without deſert,
whether of good or ill.
Our deſire is to yield them a juſt reaſon, even of the leaſt
things, wherein undeſervedly they have but as much as dreamed
that we do amiſs. Hooker, b. v. S. 7.
re º, which ſpeaketh no more than edifieth, is undeſervedly
Prehended for much ſpeaking. Hooker, b. v. §. 32.
Theſe oft as undeſervedly inthral
His outward freedom. -
Science diſtin
athletick brute
Shakeſpeare.
- Milton's Par. Loft.
guiſhes a man of honour from one of thoſe
°, whom undeſervedly we call heroes. Dryden,
2. Not limited; not regulated.
UNDESE/Rv ER. m. ſ. One of no merit.
You ſee how men of merit are ſought after; the und.
ferver may ſleep, when the man of action is called on Shak -
UN Dese/Rv1NG. adj. ſp.
1. Not having merit; not having any worth.
It exerts itſelf promiſcuouſly towards the deſerving and the
undeſerving, if it relieves alike theidle and the indigen.
Shall we repine at a little miſplaced charity," • Ziddiſon.
wife being ſhowers down every day his benefits
thankful and undeſerving.
Who loſe a length of undeſerving days,
Would you uſurp the lover's dear-bought praiſe? p,
2. Nº. . particular advantage or hurt. With, pt.
was carried to miſlike, then to hate; laſt! '..
ſon undeſerving deſtrućtion. y to deſtroy this
My felicity is in retaining the good opinion of hone
who think me not quite undeſerving of it.
UNDFsi'G's ED. adj. Not intended; not purpoſed.
Great effects by inconſiderable means are ſometimes brought
about ; and thoſe ſo wholly undeſigned by ſuch as are the º:
mediate actors. South
Where you condućt find, -
Uſe and convenience; will you not agree,
That ſuch effects could not be undeſign'd,
Nor could proceed, but from a knowingmind? Blacintrº,
UNDESI/GNING. adj.
1. Not acting with any ſet purpoſe.
Could atoms, which, with undireéted flight,
Roam'd through the void, and rang'd the realms of night,
In order march, and to their poſts advance, &gt;
Led by no guide, but undeſigning chance?
2. Having no artful or fraudulent ſchemes; ſincere.
He looks upon friendſhip, gratitude, and ſenſe of honour,
as terms to impoſe upon weak, undeſigning ninds. South.
UNDES1(RAble. adj. Not to be wiſhed; not pleaſing.
To add what wants
In female ſex, the more to draw his love,
And render me more equal; and perhaps,
A thing not undeſirable, ſome time
Superior; for inferior, who is free ? Milton's Par. Lºft.
UNDES1’RED adj. Not wiſhed; not ſolicited.
O goddeſs-mother, give me back to fate;
Your gift was undºff'd, and came too late. Dryden.
UNDesi(RING. adj. Negligent; not wiſhing.
The baits of gifts and money to deſpiſe,’
And look on wealth with undeſiring eyes:
When thou canſt truly call theſe virtues thine,
Be wiſe, and free, by heav'n's conſent and mine. Drydºn.
UNDestro'YABLE. adj. Indeſtructible; not ſuſceptive of de-
ſtruction.
Common glaſs, once made, ſo far refiſts the violence of
the fire, that moſt chymiſts think it a body more undºffreyable
than gold itſelf. Boyle.
UNDEstroyed. adj. Not deſtroyed. -
The eſſences of thoſe ſpecies are preſerved whole and *
deſtroyed, whatever changes happen to any, or all of the in-
dividuals. Locłt.
Undete'RMINAble. adj. Impoſſible to be decided. . . .
On either ſide the fight was fierce, and ſurely undetermind-
ble without the death of one of the chiefs. - Waun.
Rather an heir had no ſuch right by divine inſtitution,
than that God ſhould give ſuch a right, but yet leave it
doubtful and undeterminable who ſuch heir is. Lock.
UNDETE(RMINATE. adj.
1. Not ſettled; not decided; contingent.
Surely the Son of God could not die by chance, nor the
greateſt thing that ever came to paſs in nature, be left .
undeterminate event. outh.
2. Not fixed. - - M.
Fluid, ſlippery, and underminate it is of itſelf. rt,
UNDETERMINATENEss. }n.ſ. [from undeterminate.]
UNDETERMINATIon.
1. Uncertainty; indeciſion. • * -
He is not left barely to the undeterminatiºn, inceº
and unſteadineſs of the operation of his facultiº, "" ou
certain, ſecret, prediſpoſition of them to what is right.
2. The ſtate of not being fixed, or invincibly directed. art
The idea of a free agent is undeterminatentſ tº 5. .
before he has made choice. Mºrº, Divine Dialºg”
UN Det E/RM IN ED. adj.
1. Unſettled ; undecided.
when an all-
on the un-
4tterbury.
Sidney,
ſt men,
Pºpe.
Blackmore.
alt,
f he had ſaid
He has left his ſucceſſion as undetermined, asi Locke.
nothing about it.
Extended wide Miltºn.
In circuit, undetermin'd ſquare or round.
ſhould be as
g Ou l
It is difficult to conceive that any ſuch thin £,
matter, undetermined by ſomething called form.
UN Devo'TED. adj. Not devoted. d moſt
The lords Say and Brooke, two popular men, ºn ſuch
undevoted to the church, poſitively refuſed to make º; ii
proteſtation. carº • ***
i-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
*
-
**
… *
*
º
-ms-a-
*NDIA'Phanous. * Not pellucid; not tranſparent.
When the materials of glaſs melted
have compoſed a maſs undiaphanous a
enamel is the baſis of all con.
enamelling.
UND1'D, the preterite of undo. *
This ſo undid all I had done before :
I could attempt, and he endº In O norc.
UNDIGE'sted. alſ. Not concočted.
Ambition, the diſeaſe of virtue, bred
Like ſurfeits from an ºndigeſted fulneſs,
Meets death in that which is the means of fife.
The glaring ſun breaks in at ev'ry chink;
Yet plung'd in ſloth we lie, and ſnore ſupine,
As fill'd with fumes of undige/fed wine.
appetite, wind coming upward
conſtitution.
have a preſent tenſe.
From her fair head her fillets ſhe undight,
- And laid her ſtole aſide, -
UNd,'NTED. adj. Not impreſſed by a blow.
I muſt rid all the ſea of Pirates: this 'greed upon, \
To part with unhackt edges, and bear back -
Our barge undinted. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
NDIMI’NIshed. adj. Not impaired; not leſſened.
I ſtill accounted myſelf undiminiſhed of my largeſt conceſ.
fions. K. Charles.
Think not, revolted ſpirit ! thy ſhape the ſame,
Or undiminiſh'd brightneſs, to be known
As when thou ſtood’ſ in heav'n, upright and pure. Milton.
Sergius, who a bad cauſe bravely try’d,
All of a piece, and undiminiſh'd, dy'd,
The deathleſs muſe, with undiminiſh'd rays,
Through diſtant times the lovely dame conveys. Addison.
When ſacrilegious hands had raſed the church, even to
the foundation, theſe charities they ſuffered to ſtand undmi-
miſh'd, untouch'd. Atterbury.
UNdi'pped. [un and dip.] Not dipped; not plunged. "
I think thee -
Impenetrably good; but, ike Achilles,
Thou had'ſt a ſoft Egyptian heel undp’d,
And that has made thee mortal. Dryden's Cleomenes.
UNDIRE'cted. adj. Not dirºij,
The realm was left, like a ſhip in a ſtorm, amidſt all the
*ging ſurges, unruled and undireºd of any : for they to whom
the was committed, fainted or forſook ºil. charge. Spenſer.
Could atoms, which, with undirected flight,
Roam'd through the void, and rang'd the realms of night,
Of reaſon deſtitute, withºut intent,
In order march. Blackmore on the Creation.
UNDiscº'RNible. adj. Not to be diſcerned; inviſible.
I ſhou'd be guiltier than my guiltineſs,
To think I ſhould be undiſcernible,
When I pereceive your grace. Shakeſpeare.
The apoſtle knowing that the diſtinčion of theſe charaćters
was undiſcernible by men in this life, admoniſhes thoſe, who
had the moſt comfortable aſſurances of God's favour, to be
nevertheleſs apprehenſive. Rogers's Sermons.
ND1sce/RNIBLY. adj. Inviſibly; imperceptibly.
Many ſecret indiſpoſitions will undiſcernibly ſteal upon the
ſoul, and it will require time and cloſe application to recover
it to the ſpiritualities of religion. South's Sermons.
tNdisce RNED. adj. Not obſerved ; not diſcovered ; not
deſcried. -
Qºr profeſſion, though it leadeth us into many truths
andſºerned by others, yet doth diſturb their communica-
tions. Browne's Vug. Errours.
Broken they break, and rallying they renew,
In other forms, the military ſhew':
At laſt in order undiſcern'd they join,
And march together in a friendly line.
UNDiscº RNEDLY, adv. So as to be undiſcovered.
Some aſſociated particles of ſalt-petre, by lurking undiſcern-
*y in the fixed nitre, had eſcaped the analyſing violence of
the fire. Boyle.
UNP scººr NING. adj Injudicious; incapable of making due
diſtinétion.
Undiſcerning muſe, which heart, which eyes,
In this new couple doſt thou prize Donne.
His long experience informed him well of the flate of
England; but of foreign tranſactions, he was entirely undſ.
cerning and ignorant. Clarendon.
Thus her blind ſiſter, fickle fortune, reigns,
And undiſcerning ſcatters crowns and chains. Pope.
UNDisco RDING. adj. Not diſagreeing; not jarring in muſick.
We on earth, with undſ. ding voice,
May rightly anſwer that melodiois noiſe;
As once we did, 'till diſproportion'd in
Jarr'd againſt nature's chine.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Milton,
•, with calcined tin,
* and white, this white
Concretes, that goldſmiths employ in
Boyle on Colours.
Roſcommon.
Denham.
• * . Dryden.
Meat remaining in the ſtoniach undige/ed, dejećtion of
** are ſigns of a phlegmatick
z - Arbuthnot on Diet.
Pºit, preterite put off. It is queſtionable whether it
Aairy Queen.
tºpºeirisºn. ad.
1. Not ſubdued to regularity and order.
if Tº be diſpenſed with. **n argument of natural infirmity,
if it be neceſſary 5, but if it be not, it ſignifies an andſciplined
and "Amortified ſpirit. Taylor's Rule ºf Holy Living:
Divided from thoſe climes where art prevails;
Undiſciplin'd by precepts of the wife;
ºr inborn paſſions will not brook controuſ }
e follow nature.
2. Untaught; uninſtructed.
A gallant man had rather fight t
the field, in gilt to
plin'd rabble.
Pºy is a man of a clear head, but few wºrds; and gains
the ſame advantage over Puzzle, that a ſmall body of regu-
lar troops would gain over a numberleſ, undiſciplind ºi-
litia. . - Spediator, Nº. 477.
*::coverable. adj. Not to be found out.
He was to make up his accounts, and by an eaſy, undiſco-
ºrable cheat, he could Provide againſt the impending
Rogers
diſtreſs. -- -
UNDisco'vered. adj. Not ſeen; not deſcried; not found out.
Coming into the fºlling of a way, which led'. into a
Place, of each fide whereºf men might eaſily keep them.
ſelves undiſcovered, I was encompaſſed ſuddenly by a great
Sidney.
troop of enemies.
Job were exceeding great, his worós
Philips,
When the griefs of
*cordingly to open them were many: howbeit,
ſtill unto
his ſeeming they were undiſcovered. Hooker.
Time glides, with ... haſte;
The future but a length behind the paſt. Dryden.
. By your counſels we are brought to view -
A rich and indiſcover'd world in you. Dryden.
In ſuch Paſlages I diſcover'd ſome beauty yet undiſco-
ver'd. - Dryden.
UNPIscree’r, adj. Not wiſe ; imprudent.
If thou be *mong the undiſcreet, obſerve the time.
Ecclus xxvii.
UND1scui'sed. 6%. Open; artleſs; plain; expoſed to view.
If thou art Venus,
Diſguis'd in habit, andīguis'd in ſhape; -
9 help us, captives, from our chain. t’ſcape. Dryden.
If once they can dare to *PPear openly and undiſguiſed,
when they can turn the ridicuſ. upon ſeriouſneſs and piety,
the contagion ſpreads like a peſtilence. Fogers's Sermons.
UNDisho'Noured. adj. Not diſhonoured. -
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed :
I live diſtained, thou undiſhonoured. - Shakeſpeare.
UNDISMA'YED. adj. Not diſcouraged ; not depreſſed" with
fear. -
He in the midſt thus undſnaya began, Milton's P. Loft.
He aim'd a blow againſt his undiſmay’d adverſary. Arbuth.
Thºugh oft repuls'd, again
They rally undimoyd. *
UNPIsobii'GING. adj. Inoffenſive. :
All this he would have expatiated upon, with connexions
of the diſcourſes, and the moſt eaſy, und/obliging tran-
ſitions. Broome's Notes on the Iliad.
UNDISPE(Rsed. adj. Not ſcattered. - -
We have all the redolence of the perfumes we burn upon
his altars; the ſmoke doth vaniſh er: it can reach the ſky;
and whilſt it is undiſperſed, it but clouds it. Boyle.
UNDisposed. adj. Not beſtowed. - , - -
The employments were left undiſpoſed of, to keep alive
the hopes of impatient candidates. - Swift.
UNPIsPu‘TED. adj. Incontrovertible; evident. -
Yºu, by an undiſputed title, are the king of poets. Dryden.
That virtue and vice tend to make theſe men happy, or
miſèrable, who ſeverally praśliſe them, is a propoſition of
undoubted, and by me undiſputed, truth. Atterbury.
UN pisse/MBLED. adj.
I. Openly declared. d
2. Honeſt, not feigned. : . . . . . . -
Ye are the . of a clergy, whoſe undiſſembled and unli:
mited veneration for the holy ſcriptures, hath not hindered
them from paying an inferiour, but profound regard to the
beſt interpreters of it, the primitive writers. Atterbury.
UNDi’ssipated. adj. Not ſcattered; not diſperſed. -
Such little primary maſſes as our propoſition *;
may remain undiſſipated. - Boyle.
UNDisso'lving. adj. Never melting: .
Not cold Scythia's †. º: d bore
'd Lybian ſands thy huſband bore, -
Addison's Remarks on Italy.
NBISTE'MPERED. adj.
I. Free from ... - * *
rturbation. - * , . . . . . .
2. Fº laws may be confidered, in ſome parliament
that ſhall be at leiſure, from the urgency of more j;
Philips,
affairs, and ſhall be cool and und/fempered. Temp<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
tin-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
º
º
Usosri'soulshahºº: "º
iſłinétly ſeen. -
1. Not to be diſtinctly 11 and and ſinguiſhable,
ſe things ſeem fina -
}. far off mountains turned into clouds. Shakespeare,
aint mazes in the wanton green,
rººf tread, are undiſlinguiſhable. - Shakespeare rare.
Its lineaments are deſtroy'd, and the materials mixt in an
indi/?inguiſhable confuſion. - Rogers.
2. Not to be known by any pecular property. -
No idea can be undiſtinguiſhable from another, from which
it ought to be different. Locke.
UN disºri'NGUIs HED. adj. -
1. Not marked out by objects or intervals:
'Tis longer ſince the creation of angels than of the world,
by ſeven hundred years: whereby we would mark out ſo
much of that undiſtinguiſh'd duration, as we ſuppoſe would
have admitted ſeven hundred annual revolutions 'ſ º:
fun. ºca e.
2. Not ſeen, or not to be ſeen otherwiſe than confuſedly; not
ſeparately and plainly deſcried. -
- 'Tis like the milky way, all over bright ; -
But ſown ſo thick with ſtars, 'tis undiſtinguiſh’d light. Dryden.
Wrinkles undiſtinguiſh’d paſs,
For I'm aſham'd to uſe a glaſs. Swift.
3. Admitting nothing between ; having no intervenient ſpace.
Oh indiſingiſh’d ſpace of woman's will Shakeſpeare.
The undiſtinguiſh'd ſeeds of good and ill,
Heav'n, in his boſom, from our knowledge hides. Dryden.
4. Not marked by any particular property.
Sleep to thoſe empty lids º
Is grown a ſtranger; and day and night,
As undiſtinguiſh’d by my ſleep, as fight. Denham.
5. Not treated with any particular reſpect.
Sad chance of war now deſtitute of aid,
Falls undſtinguiſh’d by the vićtor ſpade. Pope.
UN dist1/N GUIs His G. adj. Making no difference.
The promiſcuous and undiſtinguiſhing diſtribution of good
and evil, which was neceſſary for carrying on the deſigns of
providence in this life, will be rečtified in another. Addiſon.
Undiſlinguiſhing complaiſance will vitiate the taſte of the
readers. Garth.
2. Not to be plainly diſcerned. -
UND1st RA’ct ED. adj. Not perplexed by contrariety of thoughts
or deſires.
When Enoch had walked with God, he was ſo far from
being tired with that laſting aſſiduity, that he admitted him
to a more immediate, and more undy'racied communion with
himſelf. Boyle.
RJN DISTRA’cTEDLY. adv. Without diſturbance from contra-
riety of ſentiments.
St. Paul tells us, that there is difference betwixt married
and ſingle perſons; the affections of the latter being at liberty
to devote themſelves more undiſtračiedly to God. Boyle.
UND1st RA’cTEDN Ess. n. ſ. Freedom from interruption by
different thoughts. -
The ſtrange confuſions of this nation diſturb that calmneſs
of mind, and und://ractedneſs of thoughts. Boyle.
UND 1st U/REED. adj.
1. Free from perturbation ; calm ; tranquil.
To our high-rais'd phantaſy preſent
That undiſturbed ſong of pure content. Milton.
The peaceful cities of th’ Auſonian ſhore,
Lull'd in their eaſe, and undi/?urb’d before,
Are all on fire. Dryden.
A ſtate, where our imitation of God ſhall end in the un-
diſturbed fruition of him to all eternity. Atterbury.
To be undiſturbed in danger, ſedately to conſider what is
fitteſt to be done, and to execute it ſteadily, is a complex
idea of an action, which may exiſt. But to be undi/?urbed
in danger, without uſing one's reaſon, is as real an idea as
the other. Locke.
2. Not interrupted by any hindrance or moleſtation.
Nature ſtints our appetite,
And craves no more than undiffurb’d delight;
Which minds, unmix’d with cares and fears, obtain ;
A foul ſerene, a body void of pain. - Dryden.
Unvex'd with quarrels, undi/turb’d with noiſe,
The country king his peaceful realm enjoys. Dryden.
The Engliſh, und/urb’d, ſubmiſs obey. Philips.
3. Not agitated.
A good conſcience is a port which is land-lock'd on every
fide, where no winds can poſſibly invade. There a man
*y not only ſee his own image, but that of his maker,
clearly reflected from the undiſturb’d and filent waters. Dryden.
UND}siu're pl.x. adv. Calmly ; peacefully.
* minds are ſo weak, that they have need of all the
*nces can be procured, to lay before them undiſturbºdy
U the h;ead and coherence of any diſcourſe. Locke.
sº DABLE. adj. Not ſeparable ; not ſuſceptive of diviſion.
The beſt actors in the world for tragedy, paſtoral, ſcene
**dalk, or poem unlimited, sº Shakeſp. Hamlet.
UN DIVI’DED. adj. Unbroken; whole; not parted
UNDo'ING.. n.ſ. Ruin; deſtruction;
How comes it, huſband,
That thou art thus eſtranged from thyſelf?
Thyſelf, I call it, being range to me; -
That undividable, incorporate, &gt;
Am better than thy dear ſelf's better part. Shilºſ,
‘ºpºrt,
Love is not divided between God and Č. enemy:
muſt love God with all our heart; that is, give him w:
and undivided affection. Taylor's Rul. jº.
He extends through all extent; * Living.
Spreads undivided, operates unſpent. P
UN Div U'LGED. adj. Secret; not promulgated. ºt,
Let the great gods &amp;
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wº h
That haſt within thee undivulged crimes, Ch,
Unwhipp'd of juſtice. Shakº. K. Lºr,
To UND'o. v. a. preterite undid; Participle paſſive tº
[from do.] *…..
1. To ruin; to bring to deſtruction.
As this immoderate favour of the multitude did him no
good, ſo will it undo ſo many as ſhall truſt unto it. Hºward
Subdued, undone, they did at laſt obey,
And change their own for their invader's way, Rºſmº.
Where, with like haſte, though ſeveral Ways they run
*- - y
Some to undo, and ſome to be undone. Dºla.
Hither ye come, diſlike, and ſo und,
The players, and diſgrace the poet too. Dºłº,
When I behold the charming maid,
I'm ten times more undºne; while hope and far,
With variety of pain diſtract me. Addison's Cº.
2. To looſe ; to open what is ſhut or faſtened; to lººd.
They falſe and fearful do their hands und,
Brother, his brother; friend doth friend forſake. Sººn,
Pray und, this button. Shaºffeare's K.L.
We implore thy powerful hand,
o und, the charned band
Of true virgin here diſtreſs'd. Jſº,
Were men ſo dull, they cou’d not ſee
That Lyce painted, ſhould they flee,
Like ſimple birds, into a net,
So groſsly woven and ill-ſet ;
Her own teeth would undo the knot,
And let all go that ſhe had got. Hºllar,
3. To change any thing done to its former flatt; to recall, or
annul any action.
They may know, that we are far from preſuming to
think that men can better anything which Gºd hath done,
even as we are from thinking, that men ſhould preſume to
undo ſome things of men, which God doth know they can-
not better.
!
4%; tr.
- It was a torment
To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorix
Could not again undo. Shakesepare's Tempest.
We ſecm ambitious God's whole work tunº
Of nothing he made us, and we ſtrive too,
To bring ourſelves to nothing back.
They make the Dcity do and unde, go forwa
wards. Burnet'; Theºry
By granting me ſo ſoon, -
He h.i. . of the gift undºne. º
Without this our repentance is not real, becauſe .
not done what we can to undo our fault. Tillºſiſ,
Now will this woman, with a ſingle glºº, Addison
Undo what I've been labouring all this while. **
When in time the martial maid
Found out the trick that Venus play'd,
She ſhakes her helm ; ſhe knits her brows,
And, fir’d with indignation, vows,
Tomorrow e'er the ſetting fun, Saiff,
She’d all undo, that ſhe had done. w
Dºrºt,
rd and back-
ºf the Earl,
• rº, Z - ininºr : ućtive. ... hº
UN Do'ING. adj. Ruining; deſtr - As meſ, sº
South.
The great and undoing miſchief which be
their being miſrepreſented. fital miſchief iáneſs ºf
... ... […, {}riºtné!S
To the utter undoing of ſome, many * º for-
law may be done, which equity and hone H:ºr.
biddeth. on hter to her *
d Falſe luſtre could dazzle my poor º Guada".
0.1713. - e deceive us ;
Fools that we arc, we know that “ º uS
Yet act, as if the fraud was Peº
*
…] (ºr?
*_ " -- - - º, Rºyal C*
And our undoing joy.
UNDo'NE. adj. [from undo.]
1. Not done; not performed.
Do you ſmell a fault’
I cannot wiſh the fault undone, tº S! iſºar." K. Lºr,
Iſſue of it being ſo proper. S//dkºſi
2. Ruined ; brought to deſtruction.
Already is the work begun; nºn, Cº."
And we reſt all undone, till aſ “ gene. Damiº Th
cſ:
*
--
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N D
There was no opportunity to call either of theſe two great
perſons to account for what they had done, or what they had
left undone. Clarendon.
- UNDo'UBTED. adj. Indubitable ; indiſputable ; unqueſtion-
- able.
His fačt, till now, came not to an undoubted proof. Shakeſp.
Thou, ſpirit, who ledſt this glorious eremite
º Into the deſart, his vićtorious field,
Againſt the ſpiritual foe, and brought'ſt him thence,
By proof th’ undoubted ſon of God, inſpire. Milton.
The relations of your trials may be received as undoubted
records of certain events, and as ſecurely be depended on, as
the propoſitions of Euclid. Glanville.
Made the world tremble with a num’rous hoſt,
And of undoubted vićtory did boaſt. //aller.
- Though none of theſe be ſtrict demonſtration, yet we have
- an undoubted aſſurance of them, when they are proved by the
beſt arguments that the nature of the thing will bear. Tillotſon.
UN Doubt EDLY. adv. Indubitably; without queſtion; with-
s
out doubt.
Some fault undoubtedly there is in the very reſemblance of
idolaters. Hooker.
This cardinal, undoubtedly
Was faſhion'd to much honour. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
Undoubtedly God will relent, and turn
From his diſpleaſure. Milton's Par. Lºft.
The original is undoubtedly one of the greateſt this age has
produced. Dryden.
He that believes the chriſtian doćtrine, if he adhere to it,
and live accordingly, ſhall undoubtedly be ſaved. Tilliſºn.
. UNDoubt ING, adj. Admitting no doubt.
They to whom all this is revealed, and received with an
undoubting faith, if they do not preſently ſet about ſo eaſy
and ſo happy a taſk, muſt acknowledge themſelves in the
number of the blind. Hammond.
UNDRA’wN. adj. Not pulled by any external force.
Forth ruſh'd
The chariot of paternal deity undrawn,
Flaſhing thick flames, wheel within wheel;
Itſelf inſtinét with ſpirit, but convoy'd
By four cherubick ſhapes.
UNDRE/ADED. adj. Not feared.
Better far,
Than ſtill at hell's dark threſhold thave ſat watch,
Unnam’d, undreaded, and thyſelf half ſtarv’d.
UNDRE/AMED. adj. Not thought on.
A courſe more promiſing,
Than a wild dedication of yourſelves
To unpath’d waters, undream'd ſhores; moſt certain
To miſeries enough. Shakesp. Winter Tale.
To UNDRE'ss. v. a. [from dreſs.]
-- 1. To diveſt of cloaths; to ſtrip.
Milton's Par. Loft.
Milton.
Undreſs you, and come now to bed. Shakeſpeare.
All were ſtol’n aſide,
. . To counſel and undreſs the bride. Suckling,
Her fellows preſs'd,
And the reluctant nymph by force undreſs'd. Addiſon's Ovid.
2. To diveſt of ornaments, or the attire of oſtentation.
Lndreſs'd at evening, when ſhe found
Their odours loſt, their colours paſt,
She chang'd her look. Prior.
-&gt; U'NDRess. "{ A looſe or negligent dreſs.
eform her into eaſe,
… And put her in undreſs to make her pleaſe. Dryden.
º UNDRE'ss ED. adj.
1. Not regulated. 5
- Thy vineyard lies half prun'd, and half undrºſt'd. Dryden.
ſº 2. Not prepared for uſe.
The common country people wore perones, ſhoes of un-
dreſſed leather. , Arbuthnot on Coins.
UNDRI'ED. adj. Not dried.
Their titles in the field were try’d:
witneſs thefreſhlaments, and fun ral tears undry'd Dryden.
. Four pounds of undried hops, thorough ripe; will, make
. one of dry. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
º: UNDRI've N. adj. Not impelled either way.
º As wint'ry winds contending in the ſky,
- With equal force of lungs their titles try 5
º The doubtful rack of heav'n -
Stands without motion, and the tide undriv'n,
UNDRo'ss Y. adj. Free from recrement.
When a noontide ſun, with ſummer beams
Darts through a cloud, her watry ſkirts are edg'd ---
With lucid amber, or undroſy gold. Philips.
UNdu'BITABLE. adj. Not admitting doubt; unqueſtionable.
Let that principle, that all is matter, and that there is no-
thing elſe, be received for certain and undubitable, and it will
be eaſy to be ſeen, what conſequences it will lead us
º into. Locke,
UNdu'e. adj. [indué, Fr.]
1. Not right; not legal.
Dryden.
U N E
Tº: Proceeding being at that time taxed for rigorous and
* in matter and manner, makes it very probable there
was ſome greater matter againſt her.
2. Not agreeable to duty.
He will * Proſtitute his power to mean and undue ends,
U". ſtoop to little and low arts of courting the people. Atterb,
******, *. (from undulo, Lat.] Playing like waves;
playing with intermiſſions.
.The blaſts and undulary breaths thereof maintain no cer.
tainty in their courſe. Browne's Pulgar Errours.
To UNDULATE. v. a. [from undulo, Lat.] To drive back-
ward and forward; to make to play as waves.
- Breath vocalized, i.e. vibrated and undulated, may in a
different manner affečt the lips, or tongue, or palate, and
impreſs a ſwift, tremulous motion, which breath alone paſſing
ſmooth doth not. Holder's Elements of Speech.
To U'NDULATE. v. n. To play as waves in curls.
Through undulating air the ſounds are ſent,
And ſpread o'er all the fluid element. Pºpe.
UNDVLA'tion. n.ſ. [from undulate.] Waving motion.
Worms and leeches will move both was ; and ſo will
moſt of thoſe animals, whoſe bodies conſiſt of round and an
nulary fibres, and move by undulation, that is, like the
waves of the ſea. Browne's /u/gar Ernours.
All tuneable ſounds are made by a regular vibration of the
ſonorous body, and undulation of the air, proportionable to
the acuteneſs and gravity of the tone. Iłoſder.
Two parallel walls beat the ſound back on each other, till
the undulation is quite worn out. Addiſon.
U’NDULA toRY adj. [from undulate.] Moving in the mainer
of waves. -
A conſtant undulatory motion is perceived by looking through
teleſcopes. Arbuthnºt on Air.
UNDU/LY. adv. Not properly ; not according to duty.
Men unduely exerciſe their zeal againſt perſons; not only
againſt evil perſons, but againſt thoſe that are the moſt vene-
rable. Sprat's Sermons.
tºvº. adj. Not performing duty; irreverent; diſobe-
1ent.
Bacon.
She and I, long ſince contraßed,
Are now ſo ſure, that nothing can diſſolve us.
And this deceit loſes the name of craft,
Cf diſobedience, or unduteous title. Shakeſp.
In Latium ſafe he lay,
From his unduteous ſon, and his uſurping ſway. Dryden:
UNDU'TIFUL. adj. Not obedient; not reverent.
England thinks it no good policy to have that realm planted
with Engliſh, left they ſhould grow ſo undutiful as the Iriſh,
and become more dangerous. Spenſºr's Ireland.
No man's reaſon did ever dićtate to him, that it is fit for
a creature not to love God; to be undutiful to his great ſo-
vereign, and ungrateful to his beſt benefactor. ‘. ...lºtſon.
UNDu't IFULLY. adv. [from undutiful..] Not according to duty.
The fiſh had long in Caeſar's ponds been fed,
And from its lord # fled. Dryden's juvenal.
UNDU'tiful NESS. n, ſ. ant of reſpect; irreverence; diſ-
obedience.
I would have thought they would rather have held in, and
ſtaid all the other from undutifulneſs, than need to be forced
thereunto themſelves. Spenſºr's Ireland.
Forbidding undutifulneſs to ſuperiours, ſedition and rebel-
lion againſt magiſtracy. Tillotſºn.
UNDY ING. adj. Not deſtroyed ; not periſhing.
Driven down "
To chains of darkneſs, and th’ undy'ng worm. Milton.
UNEA/RNED. adj. Not obtained by labour or merit.
As I am honeſt Puck,
If we have unearned luck,
Now to 'ſcape the ſerpent's tongue,
We will make amends ere long.
Our work is brought to little, though begun
Early, and th’ hour of ſupper comes unearn'd.
Wilt thou rather º bleſ:
To lie ſupinely, hoping heav'n will bleſs ---
Thy i. ... give thee bread unearn'd / Philipſ;
UNEA/RTHEd. adj. Driven from the hold.
The mighty robber of the fold, *
Is from his craggy, winding haunts wnearth'd.
UNEA/RTHly. adj. Not terreſtrial.
The ſacrifice d h!
nious, ſolemn, and unearthly
jº."ºr tº:
* . adv. Not without pain.
usº: º uneaſily under the burden. , -- L'Eſtrange.
They make mankind their enemy by their unjuſt actions,
and conſequently live more uneaſily in the world than other
men. , - Tillºtſon,
UNEZAsiness. n.ſ. Trouble; perplexity; ſtate of diſquiet.
Not a ſubjećt
Sits in heart-grief and uneaſºnſ, -
under the ſweet ſhade of your government. Shaºffſ.”
29 O Thr
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
Thomſºn,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N E
U N E
º
ſame uneaſineſ, which ev'ry thing
gº Our ... muſt alſo bring. - Denham.
we may be ſaid to live like thoſe who have their hope in
another life, if we bear the uneaſineſſes that befall us here
with conſtancy: Atterbury.
- Men are diſſatisfied with their flation, and create to them-
ſelves all the uneaſineſs of want. They fancy themſelves poor,
j under this perſuaſion feel all the diſquiet of real Po-
verty. Rogers's Sermons.
His Majeſty will maintain his juſt authority over them ;
and whatever uneaſinºſ; they may give themſelves, they can
create none in him. Addiſon's Freeholder.
The libels againſt his grandfather, that fly about his very
court, give him uneaſineſs. Swift.
UN e^As Y. adj.
1. Painful; giving diſturbance.
Thºſt of the Gentiles forbad any libations tº be made
for dead infants, as believing they paſſed into happineſs
through the way of mortality, and for a few months wore an
uneaſy garment. Taylor's Rule of Holy Living:
Öſ a lottering pinacle the ſtanding is "*); and the fall
deady. Decay of Piety.
His preſent thoughts are uneaſy, becauſe his preſent ſtate
does not pleaſe him. L’E/irange.
Uneaſy life to me,
Still watch'd and importund, but worſe for thee. Dryden.
2. Diſturbed ; not at eaſe.
Happy low! lie down;
Uneaſ, lies the head that wears a crown. Shakeſpeare.
Uneaſy juſtice upward flew,
And both the fiſters to the ſtars withdrew. Dryden.
The paſſion and ill language proceeded from a gall'd and
uneaſy mind. Tillotſon.
It is ſuch a pleaſure as makes a man reſtleſs and uneaſy,
exciting freſh deſires. Addiſon.
Öº would wonder how any perſon ſhould deſirº to hº
king of a country, in which th: (ſtabliſhed religion is directly
oppoſite to that he profeſſies... Were it poſſible for ſuch a one
to accompliſh his deſigns, his own reaſon might tell him,
there could not be a more uneqy prince, nor a mºrº unhappy
people. Alºiſon's Freeholder.
If we imagine ourſelves intitled to any thing we have not,
we ſhall be uneaſy in the want of it; and that uneaſineſs will
expoſe us to all the evil perſuaſions of poverty. Rogers.
The ſoul, uneaſy and confin'd from home,
Reſts and expatiates in a life to come. Pope.
3. Conſtraining; cramping.
Some ſervile imitators
Preſcribe at firſt ſuch ſtrict, uneaſ rules,
As they muſt ever ſlaviſhly obſerve.
4. Not unconſtrained; not diſengaged.
In converſation, a ſolicitous watchfulneſs about one's be-
haviour, inſtead of being mended, will be conſtrained, un-
eaſy, and ungraceful. Locke.
5. Peeviſh ; difficult to pleaſe.
A ſout, untractable nature, makes him uneaſy to thoſe who
approach him. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 469.
6. Difficult. Out of uſe. -
we will, not appearing what we are, have ſome queſtion
with the ſhepherd: from his fimplicity, I think it not uncºſy
Roſcommon.
to get the cauſe of my ſon's reſort thither. Shakeſp.
This ſwift buſineſs
I muſt uneaſy make ; left too light winning -
Make the prize light. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Divers things, knowable by the bare light of nature, are
yet ſo uneaſy to be ſatisfactorily underſtood, that, let them be
delivered in the cleareſt expreſſions, the notions themſelves
will appear obſcure. Boyle.
UNEA/TÉN. adj. Not devoured.
Though they had but two horſes left uneaten, they had
never ſuffered a ſummons to be ſent to them. Clarendon.
UNE’ATH. adv. [from eath, eaS, Saxon; eaſy.]
1. Not eaſily. Out of uſe.
Uneath may ſhe endure the flinty ſtreet,
To tread them with her tender feeling feet: Shakespeare.
2. It ſeems in Spenſer to ſignify the ſame as beneath. Under ;
below.
- A roaring, hideous ſound,
That all the air with terror filled wide,
... And ſeem'd uneath to ſhake the ſtedfaſt ground. Fairy &amp;ueen.
UNE/DIFYING. adj. Not improving in good life.
Our practical divinity is as ſound and affecting, as that of
our popiſh neighbours is flat and unedifying. Atterbury.
UNELE/cTED. adj. Not choſen.
Putting him to rage,
You ſhould have ta'en th’ advantage of his choler,
And paſs'd him uncle&amp;ied. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
UNE1.1(GIBLE, adj. Not worthy to be choſen.
Both extremes, above or below the proportion of our cha-
raēter, are dangerous; and 'tis hard to determine, which is
moſt uneligible. Rogers's Sermons.
UNEMPLo’YED. adj.
1. Not buſy; at leiſure ; idle.
R º: creatures, all day lon
ove idle, unemploy'd, and leſs need reſt. Milton'
Wilt thou then ſerve Philiſtines with § Par. Lºft,
Which was expreſly given thee to annoy them P
Better at home lie bedrid, not only idle, -
Inglorious, unemploy'd, with age out-worn. Mill
...Our wiſe creator has annexed to ſeveral objećts, and to º:
ideas we receive of them, as alſo, to ſeveral of o, though e
a concomitant pleaſure, that thoſe faculties which we º: ts,
dowed with, might not remain idle and unemployed. L .
2. Not engaged in any particular work. 0ſkt,
Pales unhonour'd, Ceres unemploy'd,
Were all forgot. Dryd
Men, ſoured with poverty, and unemployd, eaſily ãº i.-
any proſpect of change. Addſ Q
UNE’MPTIABLE. adj. Not to be emptied ; inexhauſtible ſh,
Whatſoever men or angels know, it is as a drop ºf that
unemptiable fountain of wiſdom, which hath diverſy imparted
her treaſures. Hºoker
UNENDow ED. adj. Not inveſted; not graced. -
A man rather unadorned with any parts of quickneſs, and
wnendowed with any notable virtues, than notorious ſº any
defect of underſtanding. Clarend,
Aſpiring, factious, fierce and loud, thūſh,
With grace and learning unendow’d. Swift.
UNENGA(GED. adj. Not engaged ; not appropriated.
When we have ſunk the only unengaged revenues left, our
incumbrances muſt remain perpetual. Swift.
UNENJoy'ED. adj. Not obtained ; not poſſeſſed.
Each day's a miſtreſs, unenjoy'd before :
Like travellers, we're pleas'd with ſeeing more. Drydin,
UNENJo’y in G. adj. Not uſing; having no fruition.
The more we have, the meaner is our ſtore;
Th’ unenjoying, craving wretch is poor. Critch,
UN ENLI'GHTENED. adj. §. illuminated.
Moral virtue natural reaſon, unenlightened by revelation,
preſcribes. Atterbury.
UNENLA'Rorp. adj. Not enlarged; narrow, contracted.
Uncharged ſouls are diſguſted with the wonders which the
microſcope has diſcovered concerning the ſhape of little.”
mals, which equal not a pepper-corn; Watti.
UNENSLAVED. adj. Free not enthralled.
By thee -
She fits a ſov’reign, unenſlav'd and free: Addison.
UNENTERTA'inisc. adj. Giving no delight; gºing”
tainment. -
it was not mentertaining to obſerve by what *g". I
ceaſed to be a witty writer. Pope,
UNE'Nvi ED. adj. Exempt from envy.
The fortune, which no body ſees, makes a man happy
and unenvied. Bacºn.
This loſs
Thus far at leaſt recover'd, hath much mo"
Eſtabliſh’d in a ſafe, unenvied throne,
Yielded with full conſent. Miltºn's Par. Lºft.
Theſe unenvied ſtand ;
Since what they act, tranſcends whattheycommand.P."
What health promotes, and gives unenvy'd peace,
Is all expenceleſs, and procur'd with eaſe. Blackmºrt.
Heneith our humble cottage let us ha", '; Od,
And here, unenvyd, rural dainties tattº Pºp',0'ſ).
UNENTo'MBED. adj. Unburied ; uninterred. wd
Thinkſ thou unentomb'd to croſs the floods? Drydºn,
UNEquable. adj. Different from itſelf; diverſe. moſt
Niarch and September, the two cquin”. º: Mºſſ,
unſettled and unequable of ſeaſons. Bently's Strm'
UNEQUAL. adj. [inagualii, Latl
I. Not even.
There fits deformity to mock my body; S}^{eſprert.
To ſhape my legs of an unequal ſize. C. º ;
You have here more than one example of Chau D
equal numbers.
2. Not equal; inferiour. - Miltºn.
Among unequals, what ſociety : ..
Tjis unknown my lofty ſoulaſ” ſºlºt
My lot unequal to my vaſt deſires. aſ CS
3. Partial; not beſtowing on both the ſame advan"E"
When to conditions of unequal peasº;
He ſhall ſubmit, then may he not poſſeſs Denham,
Kingdom nor life. - d
4. [Inegal, Fr.] Diſproportionate ; ill matched.
's un-
Unequal work we find. .. Miltºn.
Againſt une?ual arms to fight in pain.
From his ſtrong arm I ſaw his rival run, Dºdº.
And in a croud th’ unequal comº." ſhun.
Fierce Belinda on the baron flºº Pºſt,
Nor fear'd the chief th’ inequal fight to "?"
5. Not regular; not uniform. Dryde'.
so ſtrong, yet ſo unequal pulſes beat. UN-
- 6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N E
2. '
:
º
º:
e
º
º:
º
º
º
UN Fºg Alable, adj. Not to be equalled; not to be pa-
ralelled.
Chriſt's love to God is filial and unequalable. Boyle.
NE QUAL LED. ad. 9"Paralleled; unrivalled in excellen.
By thoſe unequalled and invaluable bleſfings, he manifeſted
how much he hated fin, and how much he loved finners. Boyle.
Dorinda came, diveſted of the ſcorn,
Which the unequall'd maid ſo long had worn. Roſcommon.
UNE’ogally. adv. In different degrees; in diſproportion one
to the other.
When we view ſome well-proportion'd dome,
No ſingle parts unequally ſurprize;
All comes united to th’ admiring eyes. Pope,
HN: 39ALNEss. n.ſ. Inequality ºf being unequal.
UNEQUITA ble, adj. Not impartial; not juſt.
We force him to ſtand to thoſe meaſures which we think
too unequitable to preſs upon a murderer. Decay of Piety.
UNEgg vocal. adj. Not equivocal.
This conceit is ****, making putrefactive generations
correſpondent unto ſeminal productions, and conceiving un-
*A*ivºcal effects, and univocal conformity unto the effi-
cient. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
UNE’R RABLENEss. "...ſ. Incapacity of errour.
How much more than poſſible that has been, the many
innovations of that church witneſs ; and conſequently the
danger of Preſuming upon the unerrallenſ of a guide.
Decay of Piety.
UNERRING, adj. [inerrans, Lat.]
1. Committing no miſtake.
The irreliſtible infirmities of our nature, make a perfeół
and unerring obedience impoſſible. Aogers's Sermons.
Faſt in chains conſtrain the various God;
Who bound obedient to ſuperior force,
Unerring will preſcribe your deſtin’d courſe. Pope.
His javelin threw,
Hiſing in air th' unºrring weapon flew. Dryden.
2. Incapable of failure; certain.
The king a mortal ſhaft lets fly
From his werring hand. Denham,
Is this th’unerring power the ghoſt reply'd;
Nor Phoebus flatter'd', nor his anſwer, ly’d. Dryden.
Lovers of truth, for truth's ſake; there is this one une, ring
mark, the not entertaining any propoſition, with greater
aſſurance than the proof, it is built upon will warran. Locke.
UNE’RRINGLY. adv. Without miſtake.
What thoſe figures are, that ſhould be mechanically adapt-
ed, to fall ſo unerringly into regular compoſitions, is beyond
our faculties to conceive. Glanville.
UN Esch EwABLE. adj. Inevitable; unavoidable ; not to be
eſcaped.
He give the mayor ſufficient warning to ſhift for ſafety, if
an unſchewable deſtiny had not haltered him. Carew.
UNESPIED. adj. Not ſeen; undiſcovered; undeſcried.
Treachery, guile, and deceit, are things which may for a
while, but do not long go untſpied. Iłooker.
From living eyes her open ſhame to hide, -
And live in rocks and caves long uneſy’d. Fairy Queen.
, Nearer to view his prey, and une py'd
To mark what of their ſtate he more might learn. Milton.
The ſecond ſhaft came ſwift and une py'd;
And pierc'd his hand, and nail'd it to his ſide. Dryden.
UNEsse’Nti A L. adj. -
1. Not being of the laſt importance; not conſtituting eſſence.
Tillotſon was moved rather with pity, than indignation,
towards the perſons of thoſe who differed from him in the
whºſential parts of chriſtianity. Aldiſon's Freeholder.
2. Void of real being. -
The void profound -
Of unſential night receives him next. Milton.
UNESTA’BLISHED. adj. Not eſtabliſhed. -
From plain principles, doubt may be fairly ſolved, and not
clapped up from petitionary foundations unºftabliſhed. Brown.
UNE’v EN. adj. -
1. Not even ; not level.
Theſe high wild hills, and rough, uneven ways,
Draw out our miles, and make them weariſome. Shakeſp.
Some ſaid it was beſt to fight with the Turks in that
* mountain country, where the Turks chief ſtrength
conſiſting in the multitude of his horſemen, ſhould ſtand
him in ſmall ſtead. Knolles's Hiſł. of the Turks.
They made the ground uneven about their lieſt, inſomuch
_
that the ſlate did not lie flat. Addiſon.
2. Not ſuiting each other; not equal.
The Hebrew verſe conſiſts of uneven feet. Peacham.
UNE've NNESs. m. ſ.
1. Surface not level; inequality of ſurface.
This ſoftneſs of the foot, which yields to the ruggedneſs
and unevenneſ of the roads, renders the feet leſs capable of
being worn, than if they were more ſolid. Ray on the Creation.
That motion which can continue long in one and the ſame
part of the body, can be propagated a long way from one
Part to another, ſuppoſing the body homogeneal; ſo that the
motion may not be reflected, refraéled, interrupted or diſ-
ordered by *y ºvemnſ of the body. Newton
2. Turbulence; changeable ſtate. -
Edward II. though an unfortunate Prince, find by reaſon
of the troubles and unevenneſs of his reig
itſelf had ºny interruptions; yet it held it. -
- u
ſtate his father had Îeſ. it in.' y S Current in that
3. Not ſmoothneſs. Hale.
Notwithſtanding any ſuch *Venneſ; or indiſtinčineſ, in
the ſtyle of thoſe places, *ring the origin and form ºf
the earth. * * * , Burnet'; Theory of the Earth.
NE vitable. adj. [inevitabilis, Lat. inevitable, Fr.] Inevi-
table; not to be eſcaped.
So jealous is ſhe of my love to her *ughter, that I never
yet begin to 9Pen my mouth to the uneviñº, Philoclea, but
that her unwiſhed preſence gave my tale a concluſion Sº
it had a beginning. 'sº,
UNExA’cteD. adj. Not exačted; not taken by force. y.
All was common, and the fruitful earth
Was free, to give her unexaced birth. Dryden.
UNExA(MINED. aſh. Not ºnquired; not tried; not diſcſ.
Yet within theſe five hours Haſtings liv'd
Untainted, unexamin'd, free at liberty. Shakeſpeare.
They utter all they think, with a violence and indiſpo-
ſition, unexamin'd, without relation to Perſon, place, or
n, the very law
fitneſs. B. Johnſºn.
The moſt pompous ſeeming knowledge, that is fluijſ on
the tº examined prejudices of ſenſe, ſtands not. Glanville.
UNExºMPLED. adj. Nºt known by any precedent or ex-
ample. -
Charles returned with wnexampled love from Algiers. Raleigh.
O unexam! I'd love
Love no where to be foundler, than divine. AZilton.
God vouchſaf’d Enoch an *pled exemption from
death. Boyle.
Your twice-conquer'd vaſſals,
Firſt, by your courage, then your clemency,
Here humbly vow to ſacrifice their lives,
The gift of this your unexampled mercy,
To your command. - Denham's Sºphy.
I tune my pipe afreſh, each night and day,
Thy unexampled goodneſs to extoll. Philips.
UNExcºrtion ABLE ay. Not is to any objećtion.
Perſonal prejudices ſhould not hinder from purſuing,
with joint hands and hearts, the unexceptionable deſign of
this pious inſtitution. 4tterbury.
UNE&amp;’ortable, adj. Not to be found Out.
Wherein can man reſemble his *nexcogitable power and
perfeótneſs. Aaleigh's Hiſt. of the ſtºriº,
UNExecuted. adj. Not performed, not j
Leave unexecuted your own renowned knowledge. Shakespeare .
UNExciſsed, adj. Nót ſubject to the payment of exciſe.
UNExE'MPLIFIED. adj. Not made kilown by if tance or
example.
Thoſe wonders a generation returned with ſo wnexemplifted
an ingratitude, that it is not the lºſt of his wonders, that
he would vouchiafe to work any of them. Boyle.
This being a new, unexemplºy'd kind of policy, muſt paſs
for the wiſdom of this particular age, ſcorning the examples
of all former ages. * South.
UN ExeRc1's ED. adj. Not Pračiſed ; not experienced.
Meſãpus, with his ardour, warms
A heartleſs train, unexerciº'd in arms. Dryden.
Abſtract ideas are not ſo obvious to the yet unexerciſed mind,
as particular ones. Zocke.
UNEXE(MPT, adj. Not frce by peculiar privilege.
You invert the cov'nants of her truſt,
And harſhly deal like an ill borrower,
With that which you receiv'd on other terms,
Scorning the unexempt condition
By which all mortal frailty muſt ſubſt. Aſhen,
UNEXHAU's TED. adj. [inexhalftus, Lat.j Not ſpent; not drain-
cd to the bottom.
What avail her unexhauffed ſtores? - -
While proud oppreſſion in her vallies reigns. Addison.
UNExPA'NDED. adj. Not ſpread out.
Every foetus bears a ſecret hoard;
With ſleeping, unexpanded iſſue ſtor'd. Blackmºre.
UNExpect Ed. adj. Not thought on ; ſudden; not provided
againſt.
Have wiſdom to provide always beforehand, that thoſe
evils overtake us not, which death unexpecied doth uſe to
bring upon careleſs men; and although it be ſudden in 1t-
ſelf, nevertheleſs, in regard of our prepared minds, it may
not be ſudden, Hooker, b. v. §. 46.
Sith evils, great and unexpected, do cauſe otentimes even
them to think upon divine power with fearfulleſt ſuſpicions,
which have been otherwiſe the moſt ſacred adorers thereof;
how ſhould we look for any conſtant reſolution of mind in
ſuch caſes, ſaving only where unfeigned affection to God,
hath bred the moſt aſſured confidence to be aſſiſted by his
Azaker, b. v. R. i.
h and * O an-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N E
U N F
àed ſtroke worſe than death.'. •
Mº leave thee, º º Milton's Par. Loſt.
unexpected joy ſurpriz'd, -
wºgreat § Meſſiah blaz'd. - Milton.
Their unexpected loſs and plaints out-breath'd. Milton.
Some amazement ;
But ſuch as ſprung from wonder, not from fear,
It was ſo unexpected. Denham's Sophy.
To the pale foes they ſuddenly draw near,
And ſummon them to unexpected fight. Dryden.
Deep was the wound ; he ſtagger'd with the blow,
And turn'd him to his unexpected foe. Dryden.
When Barcelona was taken by a moſt unexpected accident
of a bomb lighting on the magazine, then the Catalonians
revolted. Swift.
UNExPE’ct EDLY, adv. Suddenly ; at a time unthought of.
Oft he ſeems to hide his face,
But unexpectedly returns. Milton's Agoniſłes.
A moſt bountiful preſent, when I was moſt in want of it,
came moſt ſeaſonably and unexpectedly to my relief. Dryden.
If the concernment be poured in unexpeciedly upon us, it
overflows us. Dryden.
You have fairer warning than others, who are unexpectedly
cut off. //ake.
My heart was filled with a deep melancholy, to ſee ſeveral
dropping unexpectedly in the midſt of mirth. Addiſon.
Though you went away ſo unexpectedly, yet we have inform-
ed ourſelves of everything that hath happened to you. Gay.
UNExpe/cted Ness. n.ſ. Suddenneſs ; unthought of time or
in anner.
He deſcribes the unexpededneſs of his appearance. Iſatts.
UNExpe'RIENcED. adj. Not verſed; not acquainted by trial
or practice.
The wiſeſt, unexperienc'd, will be ever
Timorous and loth, with novice modeſty,
Irreſolute, unhardy, unadvent'rous. Milton.
Long uſe may ſtrengthen men againſt many ſuch incon-
veniences, which, to unexperienc'd perſons, may prove very
hazardous. Wilkins's Math. Magic.
The pow'rs of Troy;
| Not a raw and unexperienc'd train, -
But a firm body of ambattl’d men. Dryden.
Theſe reproaches are the extravagant ſpeeches of thoſe un-
experienced in the things they ſpeak againſt. Tillotſon.
Unexperienced young men, if unwarned, take one thing
for another. Locke.
The ſmalleſt accident intervening, often produces ſuch
changes, that a wiſe man is juſt as much in doubt of events,
as the moſt ignorant and unexperienced. Swift.
UNExpe'DIENT. adj. Inconvenient; not fit.
The like would not be unexpedient after meat, to aſſiſt and
cheriſh nature in her firſt concoction, and ſend their minds
back to ſtudy in good tune. , Milton on Education.
UNExPE(Rt. adj. [inexpertus, Lat..] Wanting ſkill or knowledge.
Receive the partner of my inmoſt ſoul:
Him you will find in letters, and in laws
Not unexpert. Prior.
UNExplo'Red. adj.
1. Not ſearched out.
Oh! ſay what ſtranger cauſe, yet unexplor’d
Could make a gentle ń. rječ . lord # 2 Pope.
2. Not tried; not known.
Under thy friendly condućt will I fly,
To regions unexplor’d. Dryden.
UNExpo's ED. adj. . Not laid open to cenſure.
They will endeavour to diminiſh the honour of the beſt
treatiſe, rather than ſuffer the little miſtakes of the author
to paſs unexpoſed. *atts's Improvement of the Mind.
UNEXPRE'ssibie, adj. Ineffable; not to be uttered.
What unexpreſſible comfort does overflow the pious ſoul,
from a conſcience of its own innocency. Tillotſon.
UNExpre’ssive, adj.
1. Not having the power of uttering or expreſfing. This is the
natural and analogical ſignification.
2. Inexpreſſible; unutterable; ineffable ; not to be expreſſed.
Improper, and out of uſe.
un, run, Orlando, carve on every tree
The fair, the chaſte, and inexpreſſive ſhe.
With nećtar pure his ouzy locks he laves,
And hears the unexpreſſive, nuptial ſong,
** beſt kingdoms, meck, of joy and love. Milton.
The helined cherubim,
And ſworded ſeraphim,
Are ſeen in glitt'ring ranks, with wings diſplay'd,
Arping in loud and ſolemn quire,
usº: º to heaven's new-born heir. Milton.
no dimenſions. “ſ. Occupying no aſſignable ſpace; having
How inconceivable is it, that a ſpiritual, i.e. an unextended
*** ſhould repreſent tº mind an extended one, as a
triangle Locke
***** --
Shakeſpeare.
-
UN exti'NGUIshAble. adj. [inextinguible, Fr.] Unquenchable:
not to be put out. &gt;
Pain of unextinguiſhable fire
Muſt exerciſe us, without hope of end. Miltºn
What native, unextinguiſhable beauty muſt be impºr:
through the whole, which the defedation of ſo many parts
by a bad printer, and a worſe editor, could not hinder from
ſhining forth Bently
UNExtinguished. adj. [inextindus, Lat.] J-
1. Not quenched ; not put out.
The ſouls, whom that unhappy flame invades,
Make endleſs moans, and, pining with deſire,
Lament too late their unextinguiſh'd fire. Dryden
Ev’n o'er your cold, your ever-ſacred urn, J -- “.
His conſtant flame, ſhall unextinguiſh'd burn. Lyttleton.
2. Not extinguiſhable.
An ardent thirſt of honour; a ſoul unſatisfied with all it
has done, and an unextinguiſh’d deſire of doing more. Dryden.
UNFA'DED. adj. Not withered.
A lovely flow'r,
Unfaded yet, but yet unfed below,
No more to mother earth, or the green ſtem ſhallowe, Drjd.
UNFA%DING. adj. Not liable to wither.
For her th’ unfading roſe of Eden blooms,
And wings of ſeraphs ſhed divine perfumes. Pºpe.
UNFATLING. adj. Certain; not miſſing.
Nothing the united voice of all hiſtory proclaims ſo loud,
as the certain, unfailing curſe, that has purſued and overtook
ſacrilege. South's Sermoni.
Thou, ſecure of my unfailing word, -
Compoſe thy ſwelling ſoul, and ſheath the ſword. Dryden.
UNFA'iR. adj. Bºi. ; ſubdolous;- not honeſt.
You come, like an unfair merchant, to charge me with
being in your debt. Swift.
UNFA'ithful. adj.
1. Perfidious; treacherous.
If you break one jot of your promiſe, I will think you
the moſt atheiſtical break-promiſe, and the moſt unworthy,
that may be choſen out of the groſs band of the un-
faithful. Shakeſpeare,
My feet, through wine, unfaithful to their weight,
Betray'd me tumbling from a tow'ry height. Pºpe.
2. Impious; infidel.
Thence ſhall come d
To judge th' unfaithful dead; but to rewar
His #. ... them into bliſs. Miltºn's Par. Lºft.
UNFA’ITH FULLY. adv. Treacherouſly; perfilºuſly.
There is danger of being unfaithfully counſelled; and more
for the good of them that counſel, than for him that “
counſelled. Bacon.
UNFA'ithfulness. n.ſ. Treachery; perfidiouſneſs. -
As the obſcurity of what ſome writers deliveſ, makes it
very difficult to be underſtood; ſo the unfaithfulnſ of º
many others, makes it unfit to be relied on. Bºyle.
UNFA'llow Ed. adj. Not fallowed.
Th’ unfallow'd glebe
Yearly overcomes the granaries with ſtores hill
Of golden wheat. Philip.
UNFAMI'liar. adj. Unaccuſtomed; ſuch as is not *
In On.
The matters which we handle, ſeem, by rea
neſs, dark, intricate, unfamiliar. --- deters
Chaucer's uncouth, or rather unfamiliar, langº.".
many readers. Warton's º:
Unfa'shionable. adj. Not modiſh; not according "
reigning cuſtom.
# i. writes good ſenſe, but he has not a happy º
of expreſſion. Perhaps he uſes obſolete and º itk
language. Patti's Løgtº:
UNFA’s Hionable Ness. n.ſ. Deviation from ºad
Natural unfaſhionableneſs is much better than apilh, ".
poſtures. -
UNFA's HIon ED. adj.
1. Not modified by art.
Mark but how terribly his eyes appear ...
And yet there is ſomething roughly noble there;
Which, in unfaſhion'd nature, looks divine, Dryden.
And, like a gem, does in the quarry ſhine.
2. Having no regular form. *
A lifeleſs lump, unfaſhion'd and unfram d, Dryden.
Of jarring ſeeds, and juſtly chaos nam'd.
UNFA's Hionably. adv. [from unfaſhionable.]
1. Not according to the faſhion.
2. Unartfully. -
Deform’d, unfiniſh'd, ſent before my time. ...
Into this breathing world, ſcarce * made up 3
And that ſo lamely and unfaſhionably, * - D. -
That dogs bark . In C, º * Rich, III
To UNFA'stEN. v. a. To looſe ; to uphs; a wave
He had no ſooner unfaſtened his hold, but '..., b. ii.
ſon of new-
Hooker, b. i.
forcibly ſpoiled his weaker hand of hold. His<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N F
U N F
His foes are ſo enrooted with his friends,
That plucking to unfix an enemy,
He doth unſoften ſo, and ſhake a friend. Shakeſpeare.
Then in the key-hole turns
Th’intricate wards, and every bolt and bar
Of maſſy iron, or ſolid rock, with eaſe
Unfo/ens. A4ilton's Par. Loft. b. ii. 1. 876.
UNFathered. adj. Fatherleſs; having no father.
They do obſerve
(ºfther'd heirs, and loathly births of nature. Shakeſp.
UNFA"Thomable. n.ſ.
1. Not to be ſounded by a line.
In the midſt of the plain a beautiful lake, which the in-
habitants thereabouts pretend is unfathomable. Addiſon.
Beneath unfathomable depths they faint,
And ſecret in their gloomy caverns pant. Addiſon's Ovid.
2. That of which the end or extent cannot be found.
A thouſand parts of our bodies may be diverſified in all
the dimenſions of ſolid bodies; which overwhelm, the fancy
in a new abyſs of unfathomable number. Bentley's Sermons.
UNFATHoMABLY. adv. So as not to be ſounded.
Cover'd pits, unfathomably deep. Thomſon.
UNFATHomed, adj. Not to be ſounded.
The Titan race
He fing'd with light'ning, rowl within the unfathom'd ſpace.
Dryden.
UNFATI'gued, adj. Unwearied; untired.
Over dank, and dry,
They journey toilſome, unfatigu'd with length
Of march. Phillips.
UNFA'vour ABLY. adv.
1. Unkindly; unpropitiouſly.
2. So as not to countenance, or ſupport.
Baçon ſpeaks not unfavourably of this. Glanville.
UNFE A/RED. adj.
1. Not affrighted; intrepid ; not terrified.
Juſt men
Though heaven ſhould ſpeak with all his wrath at Once,
That with his breath the hinges of the world
Did crack, we ſhould ſtand upright and unfear'd. B. Johnſon.
2. Not dreaded ; not regarded with terrour.
UNFE'Asible. adj. Impračticable.
UNFE/ATHERED. adj. Implumous; naked of feathers.
The mother nightingale laments alone;
Whoſe neſt ſome prying churl had found, and thence
By ſtealth convey'd th’ unſcather'd innocence. Dryden.
UNFE/ATURED. adj. Deformed; wanting regularity of ſea-
tureS.
Viſage rough,
Deform'd, unſeatur'd, and a ſkin of buff. Dryden.
UNFE'D. adj. Not ſupplied with food. -
Each bone might through his body well be read,
And every finew ſeen through his long faſt;
For nought he car'd, his carcaſs long unfed. Fairy Queen.
A griſly foaming wolf unſed. Roſcommon.
UNFEE'D. adj. Unpaid.
It is like the breath of an unſeed lawyer; you gave me no-
thing for’t. Shakespeare 's K. Lear.
UNFEE'LING. adj. Inſenſible; void of mental ſenſibility.
Dull, unfeeling, barren ignorance,
Is made my goaler to attend on me. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
Unlucky Welſted! thy unfeeling maſter,
The more thou tickleſt, gripes his fiſt the faſter. Pope.
UNFe(IGNED. adj. Not counterfeited; not hypocritical; real;
fincere.
Here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Never to marry her. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Thouſand decencies that daily flow
From all her words and actions, mix'd with love,
And ſweet compliance, which declare unſeigned
Union of mind. Milton's Par. Loft.
Sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Milton.
Employ it in unfeigned piety towards God. Sprat.
UNFE'IGNEDLY. adv. Really; fincerely; without hypocriſy.
He pardoneth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedy
believe his holy goſpel. ommon Prayer.
How ſhould they be unfeignedly juſt, whom religion doth
not cauſe to be ſuch ; or they religious, which are not found
ſuch by the proof of their juſt actions Hooker.
Prince dauphin, can you love this lady?
I love her moſt unfeignedy. Shakeſp. K. john.
Thou haſt brought me and my people unfeignedly to repent
of the fins we have committed. K. Charles.
UNFe'l.T. adj. Not felt; not perceived.
All my treaſu
Is but yet unfelt thanks, which, more enrich'd,
Shall be your love and labour's recompence, Shakeſpeare.
Her looks, from that time infus'd
Sweetneſs into my heart, unfelt before. Milton's Par. Loſt.
'Tis pleaſant, ſafely to behold from ſhore
The rowling ſhips, and hear the tempeſt roar;
Not that another's pain is our delight,
But pains unfelt prod th
Unrº. .# Produce the pleaſing fight. Dryden.
I. Nº. of fortification.
'd play inceſſantly u on theſe i -
#. | unfenced j jades;
°ºve them as naked as the v ir.
2. Not ſurrounded by any ...sº all" Shakeſpeare.
UN FERME/Nted. adj. Not fermented.
All ſuch vegetables muſt be *"fermented ; for fermenta-
tion changes their nature. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
us';RTILE, adj. Not fruitful; not prolifick.
eace is not ſuch a dr tºe, ſuch a ſapleſs, unfºrtil, thi
but that it might º increaſe. Pleis, %.%
To UNFe’tter. v. a. To unchain; to free from ſhackles.
Unſetter me with ſpeed,
I ſee you troubled that I bleed. Dryden.
This moſt uſeful principle may be unfetter'd, and reſtored
to its native freedom of exerciſe. Addison's Spectator.
The ſoul in theſe inſtances is not entirely looſe and in.
fetter'd from the body. Addiſon's Spediator.
Th'unfetter'd mind by thee ſublim’d. Thomſon.
UNFIGURED. adj. Repreſenting no animal form. -
In unfigured paintings the nobleſt is the imitation of mar-
bles, and of architecture, as arches, freezes. //otton.
UNFILLED. adj. Not filled; not ſupplied.
Come not to table, but when thy need invites thee; and
if thou beeſt in health, leave ſomething of thy appetite un-
filled. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
The air did not preciſely fill up the vacuitieſ of th: veſſel,
fince it left ſo many unfilled. Boyle.
The throne of my forefathers
Still ſtands unfill’d.
UNFI'R.M. adj.
I. Weak; feeble.
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm
Than women's are. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
So, is the unfirm king
In three divided; and his coffers ſound
With hollow poverty and emptineſs. Shakeſpeare.
2. Not ſtable.
Take the time, while ſtagg'ring yet they ſtand,
With feet unfirm, and prepoſſeſs the ſtrand. Dryden.
UNFI'LLAL. adj. Unſuitable to a ſon.
You offer him a wrong,
Addiſon's Cato.
Something unfilial. Shakhar.
Teach the people, that to hope for heaven is a *;
legal, and therefore unfilial, affection. Boyle.
UNFI'NISHED. adj. Incomplete; not brought to an end; not
brought to perfection; imperfeót; wanting the laſt hand.
It is for that ſuch outward ornament
Was laviſh'd on their ſex, that inward gifts
Were left for haſte unfiniſh'd. Milton.
I dedicate to you a very unfiniſhed piece. Dryden.
His haſty hand left his pictures ſo unfiniſhed, that the beauty
in the picture faded ſooner than in the perſon after whom it
was drawn. Spectator, N°. 83.
This collećtion contains not only ſuch pieces as come under
our review, but many others, even unfiniſhed. Swift.
UNFI'T. adj.
1. Improper; unſuitable.
They eaſily perceive how unfit that were for the preſent,
which was for the firſt age convenient enough. PHooker.
Neither can I think you would impoſe upon me an unfit
and over-ponderous argument. Milton on Education.
2. Unqualified. -
Unfit he was for any worldly thing,
And eke unable once to ſtir or go. Spenſer.
Old as I am, for ladies love unfit,
The pow'r of beauty I remember yet. Dryden.
A genius that can hardly take in the connection of three
propoſitions, is utterly unfit for ſpeculative ſtudies. Watts.
To UNFI’t. v. a. To diſqualify. - - -
Thoſe excellencies, as they qualified him for dominion,
ſo they unfitted him for a ſatisfaction or acquieſcence in
his vaſſals. Government of the Tongue.
UNFITTING: adj. Not proper. . . -
Although monoſyllables, ſo rife in our tongue, are unfitting
for verſes, yet are they the moſt fit for expreſſing briefly the
firſt conceits of the mind. Camden.
tly. adv. Not properly; not ſuitably. . .
*::::::: to É. church thoſe books which the apoſtles
- - h. Hooker.
wrote, are neither untruly nor unfitly ſaid to preach,
“. kingdom of France may be not unfitly compared to a
body that hath all its blood drawn up into the arms, }.
and back. Howel.
UNF1't Ness. m. ſ.
I. Want of qualifications.
In ſetting down the form of common prayer, there was
ed that the book ſhould mention either the learning
; ..". or the unfitneſs of an ignorant miniſter. *f;
29 P<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">–
-
;
!
U N F
It is looked upon as a great weakneſs, and unfitneſs for
buſineſs, for a man to be ſº 9Pºn: "* really to think ..
only what he ſays, but what he ſwears. South.
2. Want of propriety.
To UNFI'x. v. a.
...”. looſen; to make leſs faſt.
Plucking to unfix an enemy,
He doth unfaſten a friend. Shakeſpeare's Hºn. IV.
who can impreſs the foreſt, bid the tree
Unfix his earth-bound root Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. To make fluid.
Stiff with eternal ice, and hid in ſnow,
The mountain ſtands; nor can the riſing ſun
Unfix her froſts, and teach them how to run. Dryden.
UNF1'xED. adj.
1. Wandering; erratick; inconſtant; vagrant.
So vaſt the noiſe, as if not fleets did join ;
But lands unfix’d, and floating nations ſtroye. Dryden.
Her lovely looks a ſprightly mind diſcloſe,
Quick as her eyes, and as unſix’d as thoſe. Pope.
2. Not determined.
Irreſolute on which ſhe ſhou'd rely:
At laſt unfix’d in all, is only fix’d to die. Dryden.
UN Fle/do ED. adj. That has not yet the full furniture of fea-
thers; young; not completed by time ; not having at-
tained full growth.
The friends thou haſt, and their adoption try’d,
Grapple them to thy ſoul with hooks of ſteel:
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg’d comrade. Shakeſpeare.
In thoſe unſledg'd days was my wife a girl. Shakeſpeare.
Unfiedg’d actors learn to laugh and cry. Dryden.
UNFLE’s HED. adj. Not fleſhed ; not ſeaſoned to blood ;
raW.
Nature his limbs only for war made fit;
With ſome leſs foe thy unfiſh'd valour try. Cowley.
As a generous, unfleſh'd hound, that hears
From far the hunter's horn and chearful cry,
So will I haſte. Dryden's Cleomenes.
UNFo'ILED. adj. Unſubdued; not put to the worſt.
The uſurped powers thought themſelves ſecure in the
ſtrength of an unfoiled army of ſixty thouſand men, and in a
revenue proportionable. Temple.
To UN Foºl D. v. a.
1. To expand; to ſpread ; to open.
I ſaw on him riſing
Out of the water, heav'n above the clouds
Unfold her cryſtal doors ; thence on his head
A perfect dove deſcend. Paradiſe Regain'd.
Invade his hiſſing throat, and winding ſpires,
*Till ſtretch'd in length th' unfolded foe retires. Dryden.
Ah, what avail
The vivid green his ſhining plumes unfºld. Pope.
Sloth unfolds her arms, and wakes ;
Liſt’ning envy drops her ſnakes. Pope's St. Cecilia.
2. To tell; to declare.
What tidings with our couſin Buckingham —
—Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold. Shakeſp.
Unfºld to me why you are heavy. Shakeſpeare.
Unfold the paſſion of my love;
Surprize her with diſcourſe of my dear faith. Shakeſp.
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold. Shakeſpeare.
How comes it thus Unfold, celeſtial guide Milton.
Things of deep ſenſe we may in proſe unfold;
But they move more, in lofty numbers told. Roſcommon.
3. To diſcover; to reveal.
Time ſhall unfold what plaited cunning hides,
Who covers faults, at laſt with ſhame derides. Shakespeare
If the object be ſeen through two or more ſuch convex or
concave glaſſes, every glaſs ſhall make a new image, and the
object ſhall appear in the place, and of the bigneſs of the laſt
image; which conſideration unfold; the theory of microſcopes
and teleſcopes. Newton's Opticks.
4. To diſplay; to ſet to view.
We are the inhabitants of the earth, and endowed with
underſtanding; doth it then properly belong to us, to exa-
mine and unfold the works of God Burnet.
UNFo'LPIN.G. adj. Directing to unfold.
The unfolding ſtar calls up the ſhepherd. Shakeſpeare.
To UNFoo’l. v. a. To reſtore from folly.
r Have you any way to unſol me again? Shakeſpeare.
UN for biºd. - ºr -- -
UN for Bi’DDEN. {a}. Not prohibited.
If unforbid thou may’ſt unfold
V hat We, not to explore the ſecrets, aſk -
Qf his eternal empire. Milton's Par. Loft.
l heſe * the inforbidden trees; and here we may let
º the reins, and indulge our thoughts. W.
are .." not only forbears thoſe gratifications, which
hi ſº en by **aſon and religion, but even reſtrains
*If in unfºrbidden inſtances, 4tterbury-
U N F
Usfor pipdenness. "...ſ. The ſtate of being unforbidde
The bravery you are ſo ſevere to, is no whº Shakespeare
prohibited in ſcripture; and this unforbiddinneſ, ‘.
ſufficient to evince, that the ſumptuouſneſs you dº think
not in its own nature ſinful. º ls
UN Fo'RcED. adj. ºk.
1. Not compelled; not conſtrained.
- This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet
Sits ſmiling to my heart. Shaºffeare's Hanlı
Unfore’d by puniſhment, unaw’d by fear. -
His words were ſimple, and his ſoul ſincere. Dryd
2. Not impelled. jatn,
No more can impure man retain and move
In that pure region of a worthy love,
Than earthly ſubſtance can, unſor'd, aſpire,
And leave his nature to converſe with fire. Dºnnt
3. Not feigned.
Upon theſe tidings they broke forth into ſuch unfºrced and
unfeigned paſſions, as it plainly appeared that good-nature;
work in them. Hayward
4. Not violent. -
Windſor the next above the valley ſwells
Into my eye, and doth itſelf preſent
With ſuch an eaſy and unforc'd aſcent,
That no ſtupendous precipice denies
Acceſs, no horror turns away our eyes. Denham,
5. Not contrary to eaſe.
If one arm is ſtretched out, the body muſt be ſomewhat
bowdon the oppoſiteſide, in a ſituation whichisunfred. Dºi
UN Fo'Rc1Ble. adj. Wanting ſtrength.
The ſame reaſon which cauſeth to yield that they are of
ſome force in the one, will conſtrain to acknowledge, that
they are not in the other altogether unforcible. Havier,
UN For EBo'B ING. adj. Giving no omens.
Unnumbered birds glide through th'aerial way,
Vagrants of air, and unfºrebºding ſtray... Pºpº's 0}ſ.
UN FoRE KNowN. adj. Not foreſeen by preſcience.
Which had no leſs prov’d certain, unforeknown. Millm.
UN For F skin ED. adj. Circumciſed.
Won by a Philiſtine from the unfºreſkin'd race. Milton,
UN FoRESEE/N. adj. Not known before it happened.
Unforeſcen, they ſay, is unprepard. Drydºn,
UNFoRFEITED. adj. Not forfeited.
This was the antient, and is yet the unfºrfeited glory of
our religion. Rogers'; Sermons.
UN FoRGo"TTEN. adj. Not loſt to memory.
The thankful remembrance of ſo great a benefit received,
ſhall for ever remain unfºrgotten. Knolles's Hiſt, ºf the Turki,
UN For G1/v1NG. adj. Relentleſs; implacable.
The low with her broad ſnout for rooting up
Th’ intruſted ſeed, was judg’d to ſpoil the crop;
The covetous churl, of unforgiving kind,
Th' offender to the bloody prieſt reſign'd. Dryden,
UNFo's MED. adj. Not modified into regular ſhape. -
All putrefaction being a diſſolution of the firſt form, is a
mere confuſion, and unformed mixture of the parts. Bacon,
The ſame boldneſs diſcovers itſelf in the ſeveral adventure
he meets with during his paſſage through the region. of un-
formed matter. Speciator, Nº. 399,
UN For sA'KEN. adj. Not deſerted. - - -
They extend no farther to any ſort of fins continued."
unforſaken, than as they are reconcileable with fincere endea-
vours to forſake them. Hammond's Fundamentali.
UNF’ortIFIED. adj. -
1. Not ſecured by walls or bulwarks.
Their weak heads, like towns unfortiff'd,
"Twixt ſenſe and nonſenſe daily change their ſide. Pºpe.
2. Not ſtrengthened; infirm ; weak; feeble.
It ſhews a will moſt incorrect to heav'n
A heart unfortiff'd, a mind impatient; Shakespeare eart.
An underſtanding ſimple, and unſchool'd,
3. Wanting ſecurities.
They will not reſtrain a ſecret miſchief, w
ing the unfortify'd ſtate of mankind, is a grea; -
UNFö'RTUNAT. adj. Not ſucceſsful; unpropº”
ing luck; unhappy. hand
All things religiouſly taken in hand, are pr - -
becauſe . the end have that which ...
allow to deſire, or that which it teacheth them cºº
to ſuffer, they are in neither event unfortuñº. d ſtudy
Whoſoever will live altogether out of himſelf, and *
other men's humours, ſhall never be unfºrtuna”
Vindictive perſons live the life of wicthes, "
are miſchievous, end unfortunate. is not un-
He that would hunt a hare with an elephant " ". aſl
fortunate for miſſing the mark, but fooliſh for chuſing #.lºr,
unapt inſtrument. -
The virgins ſhall on feaſtful days ...
Viſit his tomb with flowers, only bewailing
His lot unfortunate in nuptial choice, • r. 1 ºffei.
From º: captivity and loſs of eyes. Milton'ſ 4:
hich, conſider-
defect. Collier.
Want-
oſperouſly ended;
aleigh.
ho, as they
Bacºn
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N F
º
---
Unfortunately aft. Unhappily;
Unconſulting affection unfortunate
made Zelmane borrow ſo mº, of her natural modeſty, as
to leave her more decent raiments. Sidney,
Moſt of theſe artiſts unfortunately miſcarry'd, by falling
down and breaking their arms. //ilkins,
She kept her countenance when the lid remov’d,
Diſclos'd the heart, ºfortunately lov’d. Dryden.
ºvsarests. adj. [from *fºrtunate.] Ill luck. Not
IIl ule.
O me, the only ſubjećt of the deſti
greateſt fortunateneſs is
greateſt infortunateneſ.
UNF9'UGHT, adj. [ºn and fought.] Not fought.
They uſed ſuch diligence in taking the paſſages, that it
was not poſſible they ſhould eſcape unfought with. Knolles.
• UN Fou'led. adj. Unpolluted; uncorrupted; not ſoiled.
The humour and tunicle: * Purely tranſparent, to let
in light unſoul’d and unſophiſticated by any inward tincture.
without good luck,
ly born to mewards,
nies diſpleaſure, whoſe
more unfortunate, than my ſiſter's
Sidney.
Alſore.
TJNFou’ND. “ºff. Not found; not met with.
Somewhat in her excelling all her kind,
Excited a defire till then unknown;
Somewhat unfound, or found in her alone. Dryden,
SFRAMABLE. adj. Not to be moulded.
The cauſe of their diſpoſition ſo unframable unto ſocieties,
wherein they live, is for that they diſcern not aright what
force theſe laws ought to have. Hooker,
****MEP; adj. Not formed; not faſhioned.
A lifeleſs Jump, unfaſhionºd and unfram’d,
Of jarring ſeeds, and juſtly chaos nam'd. Dryden,
UNFRE'que Nir. aff. Uncommon; not happening often.
Part thereof is viſible unto any ſituation; but being only
diſcoverable in the night, and when the air is clear, it be.
comes unfrequent. Browne's Vulgar Érrour.
To UNFREQUENT. v.a. To leave; to ceaſe to frequent. A
bad word.
Glad to ſhun his hoſtile gripe,
They quit their thefts, and unfrequent the fields.
NFREggen TED. adj. Rarely viſited; rarely entered.
Many unfrequented plots there are,
Philips,
Fitted by kind for rape and villainy. Shakeſpeare.
Retiring from the Pop'lar noiſe, I ſeek
This unfrequented place to find ſome eaſe. AMilton.
How well your cool and un/requented ſhade
Suits with the chaſte retirements ºf a maid : Roſcommon,
Can he not paſs an aſtronomick line,
Norfarther yet in liquid aether roll,
Till he has gain’d ſome *frequented place Blackmore.
With what caution does the hen provide herſelf a neſt in
places *frequented, and free from noiſe. Addiſon.
UNF REQUE'N'rly, adj. Not commonly. .
They, like Judas, deſire death, and not unfrequently pur-
ſue it. Brown's Vulgar Erreurs.
UN FRIE’NDED. adj. Wanting friends; uncountenanced; un-
ſupported.
Theſe parts to a ſtranger,
Unguided and unfriended, ºften prove
Rough and unhoſpitable. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
Great acts require great means of enterprize;
Thou art unknown, "ſiended, low of birth. Milton.
God |
Who me umfriended brought'ſt, by wond’rous ways,
The kingdom of my fathers to póſſeſs. Dryden.
UNFR1E/NDLINEss. n: ſ [from unfriendly..] Want of kind-
neſs; want of favour.
You might be apt to look upon ſuch diſappointments as
the ‘Rººts of an unfriendlineſ; in nature or j to your
• particular attempts. Boyle.
UN FRIE’NDLY. adj. Not benevolent; not kind.
What ſignifies an unſ iendly parent or brother ? 'Tis friend-
fhip only that is the cement which effectively combines man-
kind. Government of the Tºngue.
This fear is not that ſervile dread, which flies from God
as an hoſtile, unfriendly being, delighting in the miſery of his
CreatureS. ogers's Sermons.
UNFRoºze N. adj. Not congealed to ice. . -
Though the more aqueous parts will, by the loſs of their
motion, be turned into ice, yet the more ſubtile parts re-
main unfrozen. Boyle.
UNFRUITFul. adj.
1. Not prolifick.
Ah! hopeleſs, laſting flames I like thoſe that burn
To light the dead, and warm th: unfruitful urn. Pope.
2. Not fructiferous.
The naked rocks are not unfruitful there;
Their barren tops with luſcious foºd abound. Waller,
3. Not fertile.
Pay down ſome general rules for the knowing of fruitful
and unfruitful ſoils. 443rtimer's Haſandy.
4. Not producing good effects.
U N. G
Usfulfilled. aff. Not fulfilled. -
Still ºfulfil ierce deſire,
**ſaffled with pain of longing, pines. Milton
o UNFU'KL. v. * To expand; tº ºf jj 3 to open.
The **t motion is that of *"fiºling the fań, in which
are ſeveral little flirts and vibrations. Addison.
er ſhips anchor'd, and her fails unfurl’d
In either Indies. Prior,
... His ſails by Cupid's hand unſurl’d,
To keep the fair, he gave the world. Prior,
To UNFurnism. ...’,
1. To deprive; to ſtrip; to diveſt.
- Thy ſpeeches
Will bring me to confider that which ma
º me of reaſon. Shakeſpeare's Iſlater Tale.
2. To leave naked.
The Scot on his unfºrmiſh'd kingdom
- * Pouring like a tide into a breach.
UNFU'RNishºp. adj.
* Not accommodated with ute
IIlents.
It derogates not more from the goodneſs of God, that he
has given us minds "furniſh'd with thoſe ideas ºf himſelf,
than that he hath ſenſus into the world with bodi. un-
clothed. Locke.
| live in the corner of a vaſt unfurniſh'd houſe. Swift.
2. Unſupplied.
r w
§. łaj. [ungen3, Saxon.] Aukward; uncouth.
An ungainly ſtrut in their walk.
Shakeſ,
nfils, or decorated with Orna-
- Swift.
UNGA’lled. adj. Unhurt ; unwounded.
Let the ſtricken deer go weep,
he hart ungalled play;
or ſome muſt watch, while ſome muſt ſleep;
So runs the world away. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet,
UNGARTERED. adj. Being without garters.
You chid at Sir Protheus, for going ungartered. Shakeſp.
UNGATHERED. adj. Not cropped; not picked.
We wonder'd why ſhe kept her fruit ſo long :
For whom ſo late thé tºngather'd apples hung. Dryden.
UNGE"Ner Atep. adj. Unbegotten; having no beginning.
Millions of ſouls muſt have been *generated, and have
had no being. Raleigh's Hà. of the J7%rld.
UNGENERATIve. adſ, Begetting nothing.
He is a motion *generative, that's infallible.
UNGE'NeRous. adj.
I. Not noble; not ingenuous; not liberal.
To look into letters already opened or dropped, is held
an ungenerous act,
Shakespeare.
Pope.
2. Ignominious.
The vićtor never will impoſe on Cato
Øgenerous terms. His enemies conſº
The virtues of humanity are Caeſar's. Addiſon.
UNGENIAL. adj. Not kind or favourable to nature.
The northern ſhires have a more cloudy, ungenial air,
than any part of Ireland. Swift to Pope.
Sullen ſeas waſh th' ungenial pole. Thomſon.
UNGE'Ntle. adj. Harſh; rude : rugged.
Smile, gentle heav'n or ſtrike, ungentle death !
For this world frowns, and Edward's ſun is clouded. Shakespeare .
He is
Vicious, ungentle, fooliſhly blunt, unkind. Shakeſpeare.
Love, to thee I ſacrifice
All my ungentle thoughts. Denham's Sophy.
UNGENTLEMANLY. adj. Illiberal; not becoming a gentlé.
man.
The demeanor of thoſe under Waller, was much more un-
gentlemanly and barbarous. Çarºndon, b. viii.
This he contradićts in the almanack publiſhed for the pre-
ſent year, and in an ungentlemanly manner. Swift.
UNGE"NTLENEss. n.ſ. Harſhneſs; rudeneſs; ſeverity.
Reward not thy ſheepe, when ye take off his cote,
With twitches and patches as broad as a groat: -
Let not ſuch ungentlenºſ happen to thine. Taſer.
UNGE'NTLY. adv. º rudely.
You've ungently, Brutus, &gt; -
Stole from my i. y sºft-ar. ; julius Cæſar.
Why ſpeaks my father ſo wgºntſy?. Shakeſp. Tempeſ.
Nor was it ungently received by Lindamira. Arbuth, and Pºpe.
UNGENT LENEss. n. ſ. Unkindneſs ; incivility.
You have done me much ungentleneſ;
To ſhew the letter that I writ to you. Shakeſpeare.
UNGEOMETRICAL. adj. Not agreeable to the laws of geo- .
"...ſhe attempts before Sir Iſaac Newton, to explain the
regular appearances of nature, were ungeometrical, and all of
them inconſiſtent and unintelligible. Cheyne.
UNG1'LDED. adj. Not overlaid with gold.
You, who each day can theatres behold,
Like Nero's palace, ſhining all with gold, d
Qur mean, ungilded ſtage will ſcorn. Dr; #.
5<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N G
hing bound with a girdle.
and gave them ſtraw and
Gen. xxiv. 32.
To Unor's p. v. a. To looſe anyt
To The man ungirded his camels,
T.
provende The bleſt parent
Ungirt her ſpacious boſom, and diſcharg'd -
The pond’rous birth. Prior.
UNorrt. adj. Looſely dreſſed.
One tender foot was bare, the other ſhod;
Waller.
Her robe ungirt.
Mulciber aſſigns the proper place
For Carians, and th’ungirt Numidian race. Dryden.
UNdlorified. adj. Not honoured; not exalted with praiſe
and adoration.
Left God ſhould be any way unglorified, the greateſt part
of our daily ſervice conſiſteth, according to the bleſſed apo-
ſºle's own preciſe rule, in much variety of pſalms and hymns;
that out of ſo plentiful a treaſure, there might be for every
man's heart to chuſe out for his own ſacrifice. Hooker.
UN Gloved. adj. Having the hand naked.
When we were come near to his chair, he ſtood up, hold-
ing forth his hand ungloved, and in poſture of bleſfing. Bacon.
UNGI'viNG. adj. Not bringing gifts.
In vain at ſhrines th’ungiving ſuppliant ſtands:
This 'tis to make a vow with empty hands. Dryden.
To UNGlu E. v. a. To looſe anything cemented.
Small rains relax and unglue the earth, to give vent to in-
flamed atoms. Harvey on the Plague.
She ſtretches, gapes, unglues her eyes,
And aſks if it be time to riſe. Swift.
To UNGod. v. a. To diveſt of divinity.
Were we wak'ned by this tyranny,
T’ungod this child again, it could not be
I ſhould love her, who loves not me. Donne.
Thus men ungodded may to places riſe,
And ſects may be preferr'd without diſguiſe. Dryden.
UN Go'DLILY. adv. Impiouſly; wickedly.
'Tis but an ill eſſay of that godly fear, to uſe that very
goſpel ſo irreverently and ungodlily. Government of the Tongue.
UNGo'DLINEss. n.ſ. Impiety; wickedneſs; neglect of God.
How groſsly do many of us contradict the plain precepts of
the goſpel by our ungodlineſ, and worldly luſts Tillotſon.
UNGo'DLY. adj.
1. Wicked; negligent of God and his laws.
His juſt, avenging ire,
Had driven out th' ungodly from his ſight,
And the habitations of the juſt. Milton's Par. Loft.
The ſinner here intended is the ungodly ſinner: he who for-
gets or defies his God. Rogers.
2. Polluted by wickedneſs. -
Let not the hours of this ungodly day
Wear out in peace.
UNGo'RED. adj. Unwounded; unhurt.
I ſtand aloof, and will no reconcilement;
*Till by ſome elder maſters of known honour,
I have a voice and precedent of peace,
To keep my name ungor'd.
UN Go/R&amp;ED. adj. Not filled; not ſated.
The hell-hounds, as ungorged with fleſh and blood,
Purſue their prey. Dryden.
Oh ungor'd appetite | Oh ravenous thirſt
Of a ſon's blood. Smith's Phaedra and Hippolytus.
UNGover NABLE. adj.
1. Not to be ruled; not to be reſtrained.
They'll judge every thing by models of their own; and
thus are rendered unmanagable by any authority, and ungo-
vernable by other laws, but thoſe of the ſword. Glanville.
2. Licentious ; wild; unbridled.
So wild and ungovernable a poet, cannot be tranſlated lite-
rally; his genius is too ſtrong to bear a chain. Dryden.
He was free from any rough, ungovernable paſſions, which
hurry men on to ſay and do very offenſive things. Atterbury.
UNGover Ne D. adj.
I. Being without government.
The eſtate is yet ungovern'd.
It pleaſeth God above,
And all good men of this ungovern'd iſle.
2. Not regulated; unbridled; licentious.
Seek for him,
Left his ungovern'd rage diſſolve the life
That wants the means to lead it. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
- Themſelves they vilify'd
To ſerve ungovern'd appetite. Milton's Par. Loft,
Nor what to bid, or what forbid, he knows;
Shakeſpeare,
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Shakeſpeare.
Th'ungovern'd tempeſt to ſuch fury grows. Dryden.
From her own back the burthen would remove,
And lays the load on his ungºvern'd love. Dryden.
UNG'ot, adj.
1. Not gained; not acquired.
2. Not begotten.
He is as free from touch or ſoil with her,
As ſhe from one ungot. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
His loins yet full of ungot princes; all
U Hi, glory in the bud. Wallr
NGRA’ceful. adj. Wanting elegance; - -
N Rophael anſwer'd j. wanting beauty.
or are thy lips ungraceful, ſire of men.
A ſolicitous "...# about one's behaviour t.
jº mended, it will be conſtrained, uneaſy, and º:
tll.
He enjoyed the greateſt ſtrength of good ſenſe º:
moſt exquiſite taſte of politeneſs. Without the firſt Ram, e
but an incumbrance; and without the laſt is ungraceful. Addison ls
UNGRA’ceful Ness. n.ſ. Inelegance; awkwardſeſ. ſon,
To attempt the putting another genius upon him, will
be labour in vain; and what is ſo plaiſtered on, will hº º
ways hanging to it the ungracefulneſs of conſtraint. Lºck
UNGRA’cious. adj. é,
1. Wicked; odious; hateful.
He, catching hold of her ungracious tongue,
Thereon an iron lock did faſten firm and ſtrong. Spenſºr:
I’ll in the mature time, -
With this ungracious paper ſtrike the fight
Of the death-practis'd duke. Shakeſ, K. Lar
Do not, as ſome ungracious paſtors do, -
Shew me the ſteep and thorny way to heav'n;
Whilſt he, a puft and reckleſs libertine,
Himſelf the primroſe path of dalliance treads,
And recks not his own rede. Shakeſp. Hamlt,
To the gods alone
Qur future offspring, and our wives are known;
Th'audacious ſtrumpet, and ungracious ſon. Dryden,
2. Offenſive; unpleaſing.
Show me no parts which are ungracious to the fight, as all
pre-ſhortenings uſually are. Dryden,
2. Unacceptable ; not favoured.
They did not except againſt the perſons of any, though
ſeveral were moſt ungracious to them. Clarendºn.
Anything of grace towards the Iriſh rebels, was as ungra-
cious at Oxford, as at London. Carendºn.
Neither is it rare to obſerve among excellent and learned
divines, a certain ungracious manner, or an unhappy tone of
voice, which they never have been able to ſhake off. Swift.
UNGRA’NTED. adj. Not given; not yielded; not beſtowed.
This only from your goodneſs let me gain,
And this ungranted, all rewards are vain. Dryden.
UNGRA’t e FUL. adj.
1. Making no returns, or making ill returns for kindneſs. .
No perſon is remarkably ungratºſul, who was not alſo in-
ſufferably proud. South.
2. Making no returns for culture.
Moſt when driv'n by winds, the flaming ſtorm
Of the long files deſtroys the beauteous form;
Nor will the wither'd ſtock be green again; -
Butthewild oliveſhoots,and ſhadesth'ungratſulphin P04.
3. Unpleaſing ; unacceptable.
It cannot be ungrateful, or without ſome pleaſure to poſte-
rity, to ſee the moſt exact relation of an action ſº full of
danger. Clarendºn.
What is in itſelf harſh and ungrateful, muſt make harſh
and ungrateful impreſſions upon us. Atterbury.
UNG RA^TEFULLY. adv.
1. With ingratitude.
When call'd to diſtant war,
His vanquiſh'd heart remain’d a vićtim here:
Oriana's eyes that glorious conqueſt made; ille
Nor was his love ungratefully repaid. Granvi :
We often receive the benefit of our prayers, when %.
ungratefully charge heaven with denying our Petitº" 4kſ.
2. Unacceptably; unpleaſing.
UNGRATEFULNess. n.ſ.
1. Ingratitude; ill return for good. htſ, ab-
Čni, without the deliable flain of wº.
ſtain from loving him, who, far exceeding the beauti . to
of his ſhape with the beautifulneſs of his minº.
abaft himſelf asto become Dametas's ſervantform)”
2. Unacceptableneſs; unpleaſing quality.
UNGRA’vely. adv. Without ſeriouſneſs.
His preſent portance -
Gibingly, and iº, he did faſhion. Shakeſtart
UNGRou’NDED. odj. Having no foundation. . . er to it
Ignorance, with an indifferency for truth, is ". reat
than opinion with ungrounded inclination, which is t E.
ſource of errour. • , :
This is a confidence the moſt wº:
For upon what ground can a man promiſe him: 3. suth.
repentance, who cannot promiſe himſelf a futury heartly;
Uğupºgly adv, without ill will; willingly;"
cheerfully.
If, when all his art and time is ſpent,
He ſay 'twill ne'er be found, yet be content;
Receive from him the doom ungrudging), Dannt.
Becauſe he is the mouth of deſtiny. UNGUARDFP.
9.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N H
tº NGUARD ED. adj.
1. Undefended.
Proud art thou met Thy hope was to have reach'd
The throne of God unguarded, and his fide
Abandon'd. A4iltºn's Par. Lºft, b. vi. l. 133.
All through th' unguarded gates with joy reſort,
To ſee the flighted camp, the vacant port. Denham.
No door there was th’unguarded houſe to keep,
On creaking hinges turn'd, to break his ſleep. Dryden.
2. Careleſs; negligent. -
All the evils that proceed from an untied tongue, and an
unguarded, unlimited will, we put upon the accounts of
drunkenneſs. Taylor.
The ſpy, which does this treaſure keep,
Does ſhe ne'er ſay her pray'rs, nor ſleep?
Or have not gold and flatt'ry pow'r,
To purchaſe one unguarded hour * Prior.
With an unguarded look ſhe now devour’d
My nearer face; and now recall'd her eye,
And heav'd, and ſtrove to hide a ſudden figh. Prior.
It was intended only to divert a few young ladies, of good
ſenſe and good humour enough to laugh not only at their ſex's
little unguarded follies, but at their own. Pope.
Are we not encompaſſed by multitudes, who watch every
careleſs word, every unguarded ačtion of our lives Rºgerſ.
UNGUIDED, adj. Not directed; not regulated.
The blood weeps from my heart, when I do ſhape,
In forms imaginary, th’ unguided days,
And rotten times that you ſhall look upon,
When I am ſleeping with my anceſtors. Shakeſpeare.
Can unguided matter keep itſelf to ſuch exact conformi-
ties, as not in the leaſt ſpot to vary from the ſpecies Glanville.
They reſolve all into the accidental, unguided motions of
blind matter. Locke.
Nature, void of choice,
Does by unguided motion things produce,
Regardleſs of their order. Blackmore on the Creation.
U’NGUENT. m. ſ. [unguentum, Lat.] Ointment.
Pre-occupation of mind ever requireth preface of ſpeech,
like a fomentation to make the unguent enter. Bacon.
There is an intercourſe between the magnetick unguent and
the vulnerated body. Glanville.
With unguents ſmooth, the lucid marble ſhone. Pope.
UNGUE'ssED. adj. Not attained by conjećture. -
He me ſent, for cauſe to me ungueſs'd. Fairy Queen.
UNHA/BITABLE. adj. [inhabitable, Fr. inhabitabilis, Lat..] Not
capable to ſupport inhabitants; uninhabitable.
The night and day was always a natural day of twenty-four
hours, in all places remote from the unhabitable poles of the
world, and winter and ſummer always meaſured a year. Holder.
Though the courſe of the ſun be curbed between the tro-
picks, yet are not thoſe parts directly ſubjećt to his perpendi-
cular beams, unhabitable, or extremely hot. Ray.
UNHA'ckED. adj. Not cut; not hewn; not notched with
CutS.
With a bleſſed, and unvex'd retire,
With unhack'd ſwords, and helmets all unbruis'd,
We will bear home that luſty blood again. Shakeſpeare.
Part with unhack'd edges, and bear back
Our targe undinted. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
To UNHA'llow. v. a. To deprive of holineſs; to profane;
to deſecrate.
Perhaps the fact
Is not ſo heinous now, foretaſted fruit;
Profan'd firſt by the ſerpent ; by him firſt
Made common, and unhallow'd, ere our taſte. Milton.
The vanity unhallows the virtue. I’E/hange.
This one uſe left ſuch an indelible ſacredneſs upon them,
that the impiety of the deſign could be no ſufficient reaſon to
wnhallow and degrade them to common uſe. South.
UNHA'llowed. adj. Unholy; profane.
Thy curriſh ſpirit
Govern’d a wolf, who hang'd for human ſlaughter:
Ev’n from the gallows did his fell ſoul fleet;
And while thou lay'ſt in thy unhallow'd dam
Infus'd itſelf in thee. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
I had not unlock'd my lips
In this unhallow'd air, but that this jugler
Would think to charm my judgment, as mine eyes,
Obtruding falſe rules, pranck'd in reaſon's garb. Milton.
Nor ſhall preſume to violate theſe bands,
Or touch thy perſon with unhallow'd hands. Dryden.
Here ceaſe thy flight, nor with unhallow'd lays
Touch the fair fame of Albion's golden days. Pope.
To UNHA'ND. v. a. To looſe from the hand.
Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen. Shakeſpeare.
Unhand me, traitors. Denham's Sophy.
UNHA'ND LED. adj. Not handled; not touched.
A race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wenice.
U N H
Cardinal Campeius
Hath left the cauſe oth king unhandled. Shakeſp, Han. VIII.
NHA'NdsoME. n.ſ.
1. Ungraceful; not beautiful.
I was glad I had done ſo good a deed for a gentlewoman
**andſome, whom befor: I had ini. ſort helped. Sidne
- She that ſo far the reſt out-ſhind ; y.
Silvia the fair, while ſhe was kind,
Seems only not unhandſome now.
As I cannot admit that
regular; ſo much leſs ca
- Waller.
there is anything unhandſome or ir-
n I grant that there i ino in-
commodious in the globe. g at there 15 ".
2. Illiberal; diſingenuous. -
UNHA'Ndsom Ely, adv. [from unhandſome.]
1. Inelegantly; ungracefully.
The ruined
thatched, that
neſs thereof.
churches are ſo *nhandſomely patched and
men do even ſhun the places for the uncomeli-
2. Difingenuouſly; illiberally. Spenſer:
He raves, Sir and to cover my diſdain,
Unhandſºmely would his denial feign. Dryden.
UNHA'Ndsome Ness. n.
I. Want of beauty.
The ſweetneſs of her countenance did give ſuch a grace
to what ſhe did, that it did make handſome the unhandſomeneſ;
of it; and make the eye force the mind to believe, that there
was a praiſe in that unſkilfulneſs. Sidney, b. ii.
2. Want of elegance.
Be not troubleſome to thyſelf, or to others,
neſ, or uncleanneſs.
3. Illiberalneſs; diſingenuity.
UNHANDY. adj, Awkward; not dexterous.
UNHANGED. adj. Not put to death by the gallows.
There live not three good men unhang'd in England. Shakespeare
UNHA'P. n.ſ. Miſsluck; ill fortune.
She viſited that place, where firſt ſhe was ſo happy as to
ſee the cauſe of her unhap. Sidney.
UNHA'PPIED. [This word ſeems a participle from unhappy,
which yet is never uſed as a verb.] Made unhappy.
You have miſled a prince,
A happy gentleman in blood and lineament,
By you unhappied, and disfigur'd clean.
UNHA'PP11.x, adv. [from unhappy..] Miſerably;
wretchedly; calamitouſly.
You hold a fair aſſembly: you do well, lord:
You are a churchman, or I'll tell you, cardinal,
I ſhould judge now moſt unhappily. Shakeſpeare.
He was unhappily too much uſed as a check upon the lord
Coventry. Clarendon.
I unweeting have offended,
Unhappily deceiv'd Milton's Par. Loft.
There is a day a coming, when all theſe witty fools ſhall
be unhappily undeceived. Tillotſon's Sermons.
UNHA(ppiness. n.ſ.
1. Miſery; infelicity.
If ever he have child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
And that be heir to his unhappineſ. Shakeſpeare.
The real foundation of our unhappineſ would be laid in our
reaſon, and we ſhould be more miſerable than the beaſts, by
how much we have a quicker apprehenſion. Tillotſon.
It is our great unhappineſs, when any calamities fall upon
us, that we are uneaſy, and diſſatisfied. Wake.
2. Calamity; diſtreſs.
She hath often dream'd of unhappineſ, and waked herſelf
with laughing. Shakeſp. Much Ado about Nothing.
3. Misfortune; ill luck.
St. Auſtin hath laid down a rule to this purpoſe, though
he had the unhappineſ; not to follow it always,himſelf. Burnet.
UNHA'PPY. adj. Wretched; miſerable ; unfortunate ; cala-
mitous ; diſtreſſed.
Deſire of wand'ring this unhappy morn.
You know not, while you here attend,
Th’ unworthy fate of your unhappy friend :
Breathleſs he lies, and his unbury'd ghoſt
Depriv'd of funeral rites.
To UNHA/R bour. v. a. To drive from ſhelter.
UNHA’R Bou RED. adj. Affording no ſhelter.
'Tis chaſtity:
She that has that is clad in complete ſteel;
And, like a quiver'd nymph, with arrows keen,
May trace huge foreſts, and unharbour'd heaths,
Infamous hills, and ſandy perilous wilds.
UNHARDEN.Ed. adj. Not confirmed; not made hard. .
Meſſengers
Of ſtrong prevailment in unharden'd youth.
UNHA'Rdy. adj. Feeble; tender ; timorous.
The wifeſt, unexperienc'd, will be ever
Tim’rous and loth, with novice modeſty;
Irreſolute, unhard, undavent'rous.
29 Q-
J. [from unhandſome.]
by unhandſome-
Taylor.
Shakeſpeare.
unfortunately;
Milton.
Dryden.
Milton.
Shakeſ eart.
Milton.
UN-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N H U N H
Nor hath love's mind of any judgment taſie;
UNHARMED. adj. Unhurt; not injured.
- of of chaſtity well armed, Wings and no eyes, figure unhººd, haſ -
rº '..., childiſh º: lives unharm'd. Shakespeare So have I ſeen ſome †: i.” te Shaiſ,
Though great light be inſufferable to our eyes; yet Sav'd with care from winter's nip;
the higheſt degree of darkneſs does not diſeaſe them, for The pride of her carnation train
tauſing no diſorderly motion, it leaves that curious organ un- Pluck'd up by ſome unheedy ſwain. Mil
harmed. Locke. To Ushe'le. v. a. To uncover; to expoſe to view. $. tºn,
The Syrens once deluded, vainly charm'd ; - UNHELPED. adj. Unaſſiſted; having no auxiliary; unſ. penſºr,
Ty'd to the maſt, Ulyſſes ſail'd unharm'd. Granville. Unhelp'd I am, who pity'd the diſtreſ,d, Pported,
UNHARMful. adj. Innoxious ; innocent. And none oppreſſing, am by all oppreſs'd. Dryd
Themſelves unharmful, let them live unharm'd ; UNHe'lpful. adj. Giving no aſſiſtance. ryden,
Their jaws diſabled, and their claws diſarm'd. Dryden. . . . I bewail good Glo'ſter's caſe
UNHARMo'Nious. adj. With ſad, unhelpful tears. Shakespeare . Hºn. VII
1. Not ſymmetrical; diſproportionate. UN HE/w N. part. adj. Not hewn. • W 11-
Thoſe pure, immortal elements, that know In occaſions of merriment, this rough-caſt, unhavn Oetry
No groſs, no unharmonious mixture foul, was inſtead of ſtage plays. Dryden's Dedication tº º: }
Eject him, tainted now, and purge him off. Milton. UNH1'debound. adj. Lax of maw ; capacious. ºnal.
2. Unmuſical ; ill-ſounding. Though plenteous, all too little ſeems
His thoughts are improper to his ſubjećt, his expreſſions To ſtuff this maw, this vaſt, unhid.lound corps. Mil.
unworthy of his thoughts, or the turn of both is unharmo- To UNH1'NG E. v. a. ſºn.
nious. Dryden. 1. To throw from the hinges.
That barbarous cuſtom of abbreviating words, to fit them 2. To diſplace by violence.
to the meaſure of verſes, has formed harſh, unharmonious For want of cement, ribs of rock disjoin'd
ſounds. Swift. Without an earthquake, from their baſe would ſtart,
And hills unhing'd, from their deep roots depart. Blackmur,
To UNHA' R N Ess. v. a. - -
3. To diſorder; to confuſe.
I. To looſe from the traces.
The ſweating ſteers unharneſs'd from the yoke, Rather than not accompliſh my revenge,
Bring back the crooked plough. Dryden. Juſt or unjuſt, I would the world unhing. JWaller
The mules unharneſs'd range beſide the main. Pope. If God's providence did not order it, cheats would m
If there were ſix horſes, the poſtillion always unharneſſed only juſtle private men out of their rights, but unhing, ſtates
four, and placed them on a table. Swift. and run all into confuſion. Rayon tlºcºmº
2. To diſarm ; to diveſt of armour. - UNHo'LINEss. n.ſ. Impiety; profaneneſs; wickedneſ,
UNHA'zARDED. adj. Not adventured; not put in danger. Too foul and manifeſt was the unholinſ of obtruding upon
Here I ſhou'd ſtill enjoy thee day and night men remiſſion of fins for money. Kaligh.
Whole to myſelf, unhazarded abroad, UNHo'LY. adj.
Fearleſs at home. Milton's Agoniſies, 1.807. I. Profane ; not hallowed,
Doth it follow that all things now in the church are unhol,
UNHA’tch ED. adj. -
which the Lord hath not himſelf preciſely inſtituted? Hºi.
1. Not diſcloſed from the eggs.
2. Not brought to light. 2. Impious; wicked.
Some unhatch'd pračtice We think not ourſelves the holier, becauſe we uſe it; ſo
Hath puddled his clear ſpirit. Shakeſpeare. neither ſhould they with whom no ſuch thing is in uſe, think
UN HEA'LTH FUL. adj. Morbid; unwholeſome. us therefore unholy, becauſe we ſubmit ourſelves unto that,
- The diſeaſes which make years unhealthful, are ſpotted which, in a matter ſo indifferent, the wiſdom of authority
fevers; and the unhealthful ſeaſon is the autumn. Graunt. and law have thought comely. Hºoker,
At every ſentence ſet his life at ſtake, From the paradiſe of God,
Though the diſcourſe were of no weightier things, Without remorſe, drive out the ſinful pair,
Than ſultry ſummers, or unhealthful ſprings. Dryden. From hallow’d ground th’ unholy. Milton's Par. Lºft.
UNHEA/LTHY, adj. Sickly; wanting health. Far other dreams my erring ſoul employ;
No body would have a child cramm'd at breakfaſt, who Far other raptures of unholy joy. Pºſt,
would not have him dull and unhealthy. Locke on Education. UNHo'NourED. adj.
He, intent on ſomewhat that may eaſe 1. Not regarded with veneration; not celebrated.
Unhealthy mortals, and with curious ſearch Unhonour'd though I am, at leaſt, ſaid ſhe,
Examines all the properties of herbs. Philips. Not unreveng'd that impious act ſhall be. Dryden,
To UNHEA/Rt. v. a. To diſcourage; to depreſs. Pales unhonour'd, Ceres unemploy'd,
To bite his lip, Were all forgot. Drydºn.
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me. Shakespeare 2. Not treated with reſpect.
Griev'd that a viſitant ſo long ſhou'd wait,
UN HEA'RD. adj.
1. Not perceived by the ear. Unmark'd, unhonour'd, at a monarch's gate. Pºp!,
For the noiſe of drums and timbrels loud, To UNHoo'P. v. a. To diveſt of hoops.
Their childrens cries unheard. Milton's Par. Lºft. Unhoop the fair ſex, and cure this faſhionable tympany gºt
2. Not vouchſafed an audience. among them. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 127,
What pangs I feel, unpitied and unheard / Dryden. UNHo'PED. adj. Not expected; greater than hope had
3. Unknown in celebration. UNHoºped for. } promiſed.
Nor was his name unheard, or unador'd. Milton. With unhop'd ſucceſs r
4. UNHEARD of . Obſcure; not known by fame. Th’ embaſſadors return with promis'd peace. Dryden.
Free from hopes or fears, in humble eaſe, Heav'n has inſpir'd with a ſudden thought,
Unheard of may I live and die in peace. Granville. Whence your unhop'd-for ſafety may be wrought. Dryden.
5. UN HEARD of Unprecedented. UNHo'peful. adj. Such as leaves no room to hope.
There is a foundation laid for the moſt unheard of confuſion Benedićt is not the unhopefulleſt huſband that I know.; thus
that ever was introduced into a nation. Swift. far I can praiſe him ; he is of approved valour. Shałºff.
UN HEATED. adj. Not made hot. I thought the rouſing ſtyle I wrote in, mightprºº.".
Neither ſalts, nor the diſtilled ſpirits of them can penetrate hopeful way to procure ſomewhat conſiderable from thoſe
the narrow pores of unheated glaſs. Boyle. great maſters of chymical arcana. Bºyle.
UNHEE/ded, adj. Diſregarded; not thought worthy of no- To UNHo'Rse. v. a. To beat from an horſe; to throw from
tice. - the ſaddle.
True experiments may, by reaſon of the eaſy miſtake of He would unhorſe the luſticſ challenger. sº
ſome unheeded circumſtance, be unſucceſsfully tried. Boyle. The emperor reſcúed a noble gentleman, whº ".
He of his fatal guile gave proof unheeded. Milton. and fore wounded, the enemy was ready to have ſlain. Knºliº
Her hair On a fourth he flies, and him unhorſes too. Daniel.
In a ſimple knot was ty’d above; They are forc’d - all
Sweet negligence unheeded bait of love. Dryden. To quit their boats, and fare like men unhºrs'd, IWaller.
The triumph ceas'd–tears guſh'd from ev’ry eye, The knights unhºrs'd may riſe ſrom off the plain, d
The world's great victor paſs'd unheeded by. Pope. And fight on foot, their honour to regain, . º º
Ustie Eſpin G. adj. Negligent; careleſs. UNHospitable. adj. [inhoſpitalis, Lat J Affording” kindne
H I º ... him ; if I did, or entertainment to ſtrangers; cruel; barbarous.
°,Pats'd unmark'd by my unheeding eyes. Dryden. The cruel nation, covetous of prey,
UNH E E^DY. adj. Precipitate y ſudden. g ey y Stain'd with my blood th’ unhºſpitable coaſt. Dryden.
wº his ſhip from thoſe white rocks to ſave, UNHC's TILE. adj. Not belonging to an enemy.
ich all along the ſouthern ſea-coaſt lay, The high-prancing ſteeds
Threat'ning unheedy w -- - - - : ...-- - -
- y *cedy wreck, and raſh decay, Spurn their diſmounted riders; they expire lºf,
He nam'd Albion. Fairy Queen, b. ii, c. 1, Indignant, by unhº/tile wounds deſtroy'd. - Ph.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">**.
U N I
º,
º,
To UNgou'se. v.a. To drive from the habitation.
Seek true religion : O where Mireus
Thinking her unheus'd here, and fled from us, -
Seek her at Rome. - Donne.
Death unawares with his cold, kind embrace,
Unhºus’d thy virgin ſoul from her fair biding place. Mihon.
UNHou'sed. adj. -
1. Homeleſs; wanting a houſe.
Call the creatures,
Whoſe naked natures live in aſ the ſpight -
Of wreakful heav'n ; whoſe bare, unhouſed trunks,
To the conflicting elements expos'd,
Anſwer meer nature. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
2. Having no ſettled habitation. -
But that I love the gentle Deſdemona,
I would not my unhouſed, free condition
Put into circumſcription and confine. Shakoff. Othello.
Hear this,
You unhous'd, lawleſs, rambling libertines. - Southern.
UNHouſselled. adj. Having not the ſacrament.
Thus was I ſleeping, by a brother's hand,
Of life, of crown, of queen at once diſpatch'd;
Cut off even in the bloſſoms of my fin,
Unhouſel"d, unanointed, unaneirã. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
UNHU’MBled. *}. Not humbled; not touched with ſhame
or confuſion.
Should I of theſe the liberty regard,
Who, freed as to their antient patrimony,
Unhumbled, unrepented, unreformed,
Headlong would follow. Milton's Par. Rºgain'd.
UNHuºt dº. Free from harm.
Of fifteen hundred, eight hundred were ſlain in the field ;
and of the remaining ſeven hundred, two men only came off
unhurt. Bacon's I/ar with Spain.
I tread more lightly on the ground;
My Himble feet from unhurt flowis rºtond ;
I walk in air. - Pryden's State of Innocence.
Supported by thy care, -
Through burning climes I paſs'd unhurt,
And breath’d in tainted air. Addiſon's Spediator.
The ſtars ſhall fade away;
But thou ſhalt flouriſh in immortal youth,
Unhurt, amidſt the war of elements, -
The wrecks of matter, and the cruſh of worlds. Addison.
UNHU'RTFUL. adj. Innoxious; harmleſs ; doing no harm.
* You hope the duke will return no more, or
You imagine me too unhurtful an oppoſite. Shakeſpears.
Flames unhurtful, hovering, dance in air. Blackmore.
UN HU’RT FULLY. adv. Without harm; innoxiouſly. ,
We laugh at others as innocently and as unhurtfully, as
at ourſelves. . - Pope to Swift.
U’NicokN. m.ſ.. [unicornis, unus and cornu, Lat.]
1. A beaſt, whether real or fabulous, that has only one horn.
Wert thou the unicorn, pride and wrath would confound
thee. Shakeſpeare's Timon of Athens.
Unicorns may be betray'd with trees, *
Bears with glaſſes, men with flatterers. Shakeſpeare.
Nature in cornigerous animals haſh placed the horns in-
verted upwards, as in the rhinoceros, Indian aſs, and unicorn
beetles. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
It is not of conſequence, that becauſe Dioſcorides hath
made no mention of unicorns horn, there is therefore no ſuch
thing in nature. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Some unicorns we will allow even among inſects, as thoſe
naficornous beetles deſcribed by Muffetus. Brown.
Will the fierce unicorn thy voice obey,
Stand at the crib, and feed upon the hay ? Sandys.
2. A bird. - * *
Of the unkorn bird, the principal marks are theſe ; headed
and footed like the dunghill cock, tailed like a gooſe, horned
on his forehead, with ſome likeneſs, as the unicorn is pictured;
ſpur'd on his wings, bigger than a ſwan. Grew.
UN For M. adj. [unus and forma.]
1. Keeping its tenour; ſimilar to itſelf. * * * -
Though when confuſedly mingled, aS in this ſtratum, it
may put on a face never ſo uniform and alike, Čt 1ſt IS in
reality very different. • - Žoodward.
2. Conforming to one rule; aćting in the ſame manner; agree-
ing with each other. - * -
The only doubt is about the manner of their unity, how
far churches are bound to be uniform in their ceremonies,
and what way they ought to take for that purpoſe. Hooker.
Creatures of what condition ſoever, though each in dif-
ferent manner, yet all with uniform conſent, admire her, as
the mother of their peace and joy. - Hooker.
Numbers, being neither unifºrm in their deſigns, nor direct
in their views, neither could manage nor maintain the power
they got. - Swift.
UNIFo'RMITY.. n.ſ. [uniformité, Fr.]
1. Reſemblance to itſelf; even tenour.
There is no uniformity in the deſign of Spenſer; he aims
at the accompliſhment of no one ačtion. Dryden.
4.
U N I
Queen Elizabeth was remarkable for that ſteadineſs and
*femity which ran through all her actions. Addiſon.
2. onformity * one pattern; reſemblance of one to another.
The unity of that viſible body and church ºf Chriſt, con-
ifteth in that *iformity, which all the ſeveral perſons there-
unto belonging have, by reaſon of that one Lord, whoſe
†. they all profeſs themſelves; that one faith which they
*! acknowledge; that one baptiſm wherewith they are all
initiated. Hooker, b. iii
(NIFoRMly. adv. [from uniform.] &gt; w- i it.
I. Without Yºriation; in an eventeiour. -
...That faith received from the apoſtles, the church, though
diſperſed throughout the world, doth notwithſtanding kee
as ſafe, as if it dwelt within the walls &lt;cep
and as *niformly hold, as if it had but one only heart ani
ſoul. Hooker, b. v.
The capillamenta of the nerves are each of theº ſolid
and uniform; and the vibrating motion of the aethereal me-
dium may be Propagated along them from one end to the
other aniformly, and without interruption. Newton's Opticks.
2. Without diverſity of one from another.
UNIMA/GINAble. adj. Not to be imagined by the fancy;
not to be conceived.
Things to their thought
So unimaginable, as hate inhº. Aſton's Par. Left.
The ſkilful organiſt plies his grave-fancied deſcant in lofy
fugues, or the whole ſymphony, with artful and unimaginalſ.
tºuches, adorns and graces the weiß. chords of ſome
choice compoſer. 44 ſton on Educatiºn.
An infinite ſucceſſion of the generations of men, without
any permanent foundation, is utterly unimaginall. Tillotſon.
UNIMAGINABLY. adv. To a degree not to be imagined.
Little commiſſures, where they adhere, may not be porous
enough to be pervious to the unimaginally ſubtle corpuſcles,
that make up the beams of light. Boyle.
UNI MITABLE. adj. ſinimitable, Fr. inimitabilis, Lat.] Not to
be imitated. -
Both theſe are unimitable. Burner', Theory of the Earth.
UNiM Mortal adj. Not immortal; mortal.
They betook them ſeveral ways,
Both to deſtroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds. - Milton.
UNIMPATRABLE. adv. Not liable to waſte or diminution.
If the ſuperior be unimpairable, it is a ſtrong preſumption,
that the inferiors are likewiſe unimpaired. Hakewill.
UNIMPA/IRED. adj. Not diminiſhed ; not worn out.
Yet unimpair'd with labours, or with time,
Your age but ſeems to a new youth to climb. Dryden.
If our ſilver and gold diminiſhes, our publick credit coma
tinues unimpaired. Addiſon on the State of the War.
UNIMPLO’RED. adj. Not ſolicited. -
If anſwerable ſtile I can obtain
Of my celeſtial patroneſs, who deigns
Her nightly viſitation unimplºr’d. Milton's Par, Loft.
UNIMP9'RTANT: adj. Aſſuming no airs of dignity.
A frce, unimportant, natural, eaſy manner; diverting others
juſt as we diverted ourſelves. Pope to Swift.
UNIM Portu'NED. adj. Net ſolicited 3 not teazed to com-
liance.
P Who ever ran -
To danger unimportun'd, he was then
No better than a ſanguine, virtuous man. Donne.
UNIMPROVABLE. adj. Incapable of melioration.
UNIMPROVABLENEss. n. ſ. [from unimprovable.] Quality of
not being improveable. - -
This muſt be imputed to their ignorance and unimprovable-
... nºſ; in knowledge, being generally without literature. Ham.
UNIMPRO/v ED. adj.
I. Not made hºnowing. - -
Not a maſk went unimprov'd away. Pope.
2. Not taught; not meliorated by inſtruction.
- Young Fortinbraſs, y
Of unimproved mettle hot and full. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Shallow, unimproved intelle&amp;ts, are confident pretenders to
certainty. - - Glanville.
UNINCREA's ABLE. adj. Admitting no increaſe. -
That love, which ought to be appropriated to God, re-
ſults chiefly from an altogether, or almoſt unincreaſable “lºvº-
tion and vaſtneſs of affection. - * Boyle.
UNINP'FFERENT. adj. Partial; leaning to a fide. . .
His opinion touching the catholick church was as unindiffe-
rent, as, touching our church, the opinion of them that fa-
vour this pretended reformation 1S. Hooker, b. iv.
UNINDU’s Trious. adj. Not diligent; not laborious.
Pride we cannot think ſo ſluggiſh or uninduſtrious an agent,
as not to find out expedients for its purpoſe. Decay of Piety.
UNiNFLAMMABLE. adj. Not capable of being ſet on º
The uninflammable ſpirit of ſuch concretes, may be Pº -
ed to be but a º º ſalt. Boyle.
; . adj. Not ſet on fire. - - -
Usº º: tº come to be inflamed, they gather a
much greater heat than others have uninflamed. *<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N I
U N I
UNINFo's MEd. adº
ht; uninſtructed.
1. Untaught; Nor uninform'd
Of nuptial ſanctity, and marriage rites. Milton's P. Loft.
No uninformed minds can repreſent virtue ſo noble to us,
that we neceſſarily * to her. Pope.
imated ; not enlivened.
tº: adj. Illiberal ; diſingenuous.
Did men know how to diſtinguiſh between reports and
certainties, this ſtratagem would be as unſkilful, as it is un-
ingenuous. - - Decay of Piety.
UNINHA'bit ABLE. adj. Unfit to be inhabited.
If there be any place upon earth of that nature that para-
diſe had, the ſame muſt be found within that ſuppoſed un-
inhabitable burnt zone, or within the tropicks. Raleigh.
Had not the deep been form'd, that might contain
All the collected treaſures of the main ;
The earth had ſtill o'erwhelm'd with water ſtood,
To man an uninhabitable flood. Blackmore.
UNINHABITABLE Ness. m. ſ. Incapacity of being inhabited.
Divers radicated opinions, ſuch as that of the uninhabitable-
neſ of the torrid zone, of the ſolidity of the celeſtial part of
the world, are generally grown out of requeſt. Boyle.
UNINHA/BITED. adj. Having no dwellers.
The whole iſland is now uninhabited.
Uninhabited, untill’d, unſown
It lies, and breeds the bleating goat alone. Pope.
I caſt anchor on the leeſide of the iſland, which ſeemed
to be uninhabited. Gulliver's Travels.
UNI'NJURED. adj. Unhurt; ſuffering no harm.
You may as well ſpread out the unſun'd heaps
Of miſers treaſure by an outlaw's den,
And tell me it is ſafe; as bid me hope
Danger will let a helpleſs maiden paſs,
Uninjur'd in this wild, ſurrounding waſte.
Then in full age, and hoary holineſs
Retire, great teacher to thy promis'd bliſs:
Untouch'd thy tomb, uninjur’d be thy duſt,
As thy own fame among the future juſt. Prior.
UNINscR1(BED. adj. Having no inſcription.
Make ſacred Charles's tomb for ever known;
Obſcure the place, and uninſcrib'd the ſtone.
Oh fact accurſt Pope.
UNINSPI'Re D. adj. Not having received any ſupernatural in-
ſtrućtion or illumination.
Thus all the truths that men, uninſpired, are enlightened
with, came into their minds. Locke.
My paſtoral muſe her humble tribute brings,
And yet not wholly uninſpir’d ſhe fings. Dryden.
UNINSTRU’ctED. adj. Not taught; not helped by inſtitution.
That fool intrudes, raw in this great affair,
And uninſtructed how to ſtem the tide. Dryden.
It will be a prejudice to none but widows and orphans,
and others uninſtructed in the arts and management of more
ſkilful men. Locke.
It is an unſpeakable bleſfing to be born in thoſe parts
where wiſdom flouriſhes; though there are even in theſe
parts, ſeveral poor, uninſtructed perſons. Addiſon.
Though we find few amongſt us, who profeſs themſelves
Anthropomorphites, yet we may find, amongſt the ignorant
and uninſtruded chriſtians, many of that opinion. Locke.
UN INSTRU’ctive. adj. Not º: any improvement.
Were not men of abilities thus communicative, their wiſ.
dom would be in a great meaſure uſeleſs, and their experience
uninſtručiive. Addiſon.
UNINTE'LLIGENT: adj. Not knowing; not ſkilful; not hav-
ing any conſciouſneſs. -
We will give you ſleepy drinks, that your ſenſes may be
unintelligent of our inſufficience. Shakeſp. Winter Tale.
The viſible creation is far otherwiſe apprehended by the
Philoſophical enquirer, than the unintelligent vulgar. Glanville.
This concluſion, if men allow'd of, they would not de-
ſtroy ill-formed produćtions. Ay, but theſe monſters, Let
them be ſo; what will your drivélling, unintelligent, untraćt-
able changeling be - Locke.
Why then to works of nature is aſſign'd
An author unintelligent and blind;
When ours proceed from choice Blackmore.
I The obvious products of unintelligent nature. Bentl.
Usist El Ligieriity. n: ſ Quality of not being intelligible.
Credit the wnintelligibility of this union and motion. Glanville.
If we have truly proved the unintelligibility of it in all other
.. this argumentation is undeniable. Burnet.
i. t ººr. adj. [inintelligible, Fr.] Not ſuch as can
a.º.º.º.º.º. hundred }. before Tully, was as un-
...”.” his time, as the Engliſh and French of the ſame
Period are now. Swift.
Theſe arms Did Thetis
For th º labour'd for her ſon prepare;
oul to ſtare with ſtupid eyes,
". the learn'd wnintelligible prize
Sandys.
Milton.
Dryden.
This notion muſt be deſpiſed as harmleſs, *intelligible en-
thuſiaſm. -
UNINTE'llig IBLY. adv. In a manner ..º.
ſtood. under-
Sound is not unintelligibly explained by a vibratin
communicated to the medium. Lock
To talk of ſpecifick differences in nature, without .
rence to general ideas, is to talk unintelligibly. 1.
tºº stional. adj. Not deſigned; happening whº
ign.
Beſides the unintentional deficiencies of my ſtyle, I have
g motion
purpoſely tranſgreſſed the laws of oratory, in making my pe.
riods over-long #.
UNI'NTERE'ss F d. - ** - - *.
UNI’Nterested. adj. Not having intereſt.
The greateſt part of an audience is always uninterſ,
though #. knowing. - y nterſed,
UN INTERMI’ttED. adj. Continued; not interrupted.
This motion of the heavenly bodies ſeems to be partly con-
tinued and uninterrupted, as that motion of the firſt moveable
Dryden,
partly interpolated and interrupted. Hale'. Origin.
UNINTERMI'xED. adj. Not mingled. e
Unintermix'd with fićtious fantaſies,
I verify the truth, not poetize. Daniel's Civil War.
UNINTERRU'PTED. adj. Not broken; not interrupted.
Thy conſtant quiet fills my peaceful breaſt
With unmixt joy, uninterrupted reſt. Roſcommon.
Governments ſo divided among themſelves in matters of
religion, maintain uninterrupted union and correſpondence,
that no one of them is for invading the rights of another, Addison
The hills riſe inſenſibly, and leave the eye a vaſt, unints.
rupted proſpect. Addison.
The uninterrupted ſtitch in ſuperficial wounds, is re-
jećted. Sharp's Surgery.
UNINTERRUPTEDLY. adv. Without interruption.
The will thus determined, never lets the underſtanding
lay by the object; but all the thoughts of the mind, and
powers of the body are uninterruptedly employ'd, Locłe,
UN INTRE’Nch ED. adj. Not intrenched.
It had been cowardice in the Trojans, not to have at-
tempted anything againſt an army that lay unfortified and un-
intrenched. Pºpe.
UNINVE's TIGAble. adj. Not to be ſearched out.
The number of the works of this viſible world being un-
inveſtigable by us, afford us a demonſtrative proof of the un-
limited extent of the creator's ſkill. Ray.
UNINVITED. adj. Not aſked.
His honeſt friends, at thirſty hour of duſk, ---
Come uninvited. Philips,
UNJoi'NtED. adj.
1. Disjoined; ſeparated.
I hear the ſound of words; their ſenſe the air . .
Diſſolves unjointed ere it reach my ear. Milan's 4ºft.
2. Having no articulation. -
They are all three immoveable or unjointed, of th: thick-
neſs of a little pin. Grew's Muſeum.
U’NIon. m. ſ. [unio, Lat.]
1. The act of joining two or more, ſo as to make them
Onc.
Adam, from whoſe dear ſide I boaſt me ſprung,
And gladly of our union hear thee ſpeak, &gt;
One heart, one ſoul in both ! Milton's Pº! ºff.
One kingdom, joy, and union without end. Miltºn.
2. Concord; conjunction of mind or intereſts. God
The experience of thoſe profitable emanations from : 3.
moſt commonly are the firſt motive of our love; but w .
we once have taſted his goodneſs, we love the ſpring for º
own excellency, paſſing from conſidering ºurſº, '#ſ
wnion with God. Taylor's Rule ºf Living Hºlſ.
3. A pearl. Not in uſe.
The king ſhall drink to Hamlet's better breath;
And in the cup an union ſhall he #:
Richer than that which four ſucceſſive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn. - Shakeſ, i.
4. [Inlaw.] Union is a combining or conſolidatiº. º: Yatroll
in one, which is done by the conſent of the biſhop, the . tº:
and incumbent. And this is properly called an º: ſub-
there are two other ſorts, as when one church is ma both
jećt to the other, and when one man is made pre . * º
and when a conventual is made cathedral. " us £il.
in the firſt ſignification, there was a ſtatute, an: łº,
VIII. chap. 21. that it ſhould be lawful in " i. the
whereof the value of the one is not above flºº"...".
king's books, of the firſt fruits, and not. above one cro-
diſtant from the other. Union in this ſignificatº" " f at
nal, and that is for the life of the incumbent ; * º:
is, perpetual, whoſoever is incumbent. . . . t s d
UNI'EARous. adj. [unus and pario. J. Bring"? "
birth. ...], the du-
Others make good the paucity of their breed with º in
ration of their days, whereof there want ſº.
animals uniparzº. Brown's Jº *ºs.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N I
º
-
2.
U’Nisos. adj. [unus and ſºmus, Lat.] Sounding alone.
Sounds intermix’d with voice
Choral, or uniſon,
UN ison. m. ſ.
1. A ſtring that has the ſame ſound with another.
When moved matter meets with any thing like that, from
which it received its primary impreſs, it will in like manner
move it, as in muſical ſtrings tuned uniſons. Glanville.
2. A ſingle unvaried note. -
Loſt was the nation's ſenſe, nor could be found,
While a long, ſolemn uniſon went round. Dunciad, b. iv.
U’NIT. n.ſ.. [unus, unitus, Lat J One ; the leaſt number ;
or the root of numbers.
If any atom ſhould be moved mechanically, without attrac-
tion, 'tis above a hundred million millions odds to an unit,
that it would not ſtrike upon any other atom, but glide
through an empty interval without contact. Bently's Sermons.
Unit, are the integral parts of any large number. Watts.
To UNITE. v. a. [unitus, Lat.]
1. To join two or more into one. -
The force, which wont in two to be diſperſed,
In one alone right hand he now unites. Fairy Queen.
Whatever truths
Redeem'd from error, or from ignorance,
Thin in their authors, like rich veins of ore,
Your works unite, and ſtill diſcover more. Dryden,
A propoſition for uniting both kingdoms was begun. Swift.
2. To make to agree.
The king propoſed nothing more than to unite his king-
dom in one form of worſhip.
3. To make to adhere.
The peritonaeum, which is a dry body, may be united
with the muſculous fleſh. #iftman's Surgery.
4. To }.
n the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony. Shakeſpeare:
Let the ground of the pićture be well united with colours
of a friendly nature. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
5. To join in intereſt.
Unto their aſſembly, mine honour be not thou united. Geneſs.
To UNITE. v. n.
1. To join in an act; to concur; to act in concert.
If you will now unite in your complaints,
And force them with a conſtancy, the cardinal
Cannot ſtand under them. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
2. To coaleſce; to be cemented; to be conſolidated.
3. To grow into one.
uni'TEDLY. adv. With union; ſo as to join.
The eyes, which are of a watry nature, ought to be
much painted, and unitedly on their lower parts; but boldly
touch'd above by the light and ſhadows. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
UNI'ſ ER. n. ſ. The perſon or thing that unites.
Suppoſe an uniter of a middle conſtitution, that ſhould par-
take of ſome of the qualities of both. Glanville's Scept.
UNI'tion. n.ſ.. [union, Fr. from unite.] The aët or power
of uniting ; conjunction ; coalition. A word proper, but
little uſed.
As long as any different ſubſtance keeps off the unition,
hope not to cure a wound. Wiſeman's Surgery.
U’NITIVE. adj. [from unite.] Having the power of unit-
Ing.
That can be nothing elſe but the unitive way of reli-
gion, which conſiſts of the contemplation and love of
God. JNorris.
U’NITY.. n.ſ.. [unitas, Lat.]
1. The ſtate of being one.
Thoſe hereticks introduced a plurality of Gods; and ſo
made the profeſſion of the unity part of the ſymbolum, that
ſhould diſcriminate the orthodox from them. Hammond.
The production of one being the deſtrućtion of another,
although they generate, they increaſe not; and muſt not be
ſaid to multiply, who do not tranſcend an unity. Brown.
Man is to beget
Like of his like; his image multiply'd :
In unity defective ; which requires
Collateral love, and deareſt amity. Milton's Par. Loft.
Whatever we can conſider as one thing, ſuggeſts to the
underſtanding the idea of unity. Locke.
2. Concord ; conjunction.
That which you hear, you'll ſwear
You ſee, there is ſuch unity in the proofs. Shakeſpeare.
We, of all chriſtians, ought to promote unity among our-
ſelves and others. - Sprat's Sermons.
3. Agreement; uniformity.
To the avoiding of diſſenſion, it availeth much, that
there be amongſt them an unity, as well in ceremonies as in
doćtrine. Hooker, b. iv.
4. Principle of dramatick writing, by which the tenour of the
ſtory, and propriety of repreſentation is preſerved.
The unities of time, place, and action, are exactly ob-
ſerved. Dryden's Prºf. to All for Lºve.
Milton's Par. Loft, b. vii.
Clarendon.
U N I
Although in poetry it be abſolutely neceſſary that the unitſ.
of time, place, and action ſhould be thoroughly underſtood,
there is ſtill ſomething more eſſential, that elevates and afto:
hiſhes the fancy.
5. [In law.] Addison.
Unit, of poſſeſſion is a joint poſſeſſion of two rights by ſº-
veral titles. . For example, I take a leaſe of land from one
"Pon a certain rent; afterwards I buy the fee-fimple. This
is an unity of poſſeſſion, whereby the leaſe is extinguiſhed;
by reaſon that I, who had before the occupation only for my
rent, am become lord of the ſame, and am to pay my rent
to none.
- - - - C l.
UNJU'PGED. adj. Not judicially determined. Jºe
Cauſes unjudg’d diſgrace the loaded file,
And ſleeping laws the king's neglect revile. Prior.
UNIVE/RSAL. adj. [univerſalis, Lat.]
1. General; extending to all.
All ſorrowed: if all the world could have ſeen’t, the woe
had been univerſal. Shakeſp. Winter Tale.
Appetite, an univerſal wolf,
So doubly ſeconded with will and power,
Muſt make perforce an univerſal prey, -
And laſt eat up itſelf. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
This excellent epiſtle, though, in the front of it, it bears a
Particular inſcription, yet in the drift of it is univerſal, as
deſigning to convince all mankind of the neceſſity of ſeeking
for happineſs in the goſpel. South.
2. Total; whole.
From harmony, from heav'nly harmony,
This univerſal frame began. Dryden.
3. Not particular ; compriſing all particulars.
“From things particular
She doth abſtraćt the univerſal kinds. Davies.
An univerſal was the object of imagination, and there was
no ſuch thing in reality. Arbuthnot and Pope.
UNIVE/RSAL. n.ſ. The whole; the general ſyſtem of the uni-
verſe. Not in uſe.
To what end had the angel been ſet to keep the entrance
into paradiſe after Adam's expulſion, if the univerſal had
been paradiſe. Raleigh's Hiſ of the IWorld.
Plato calleth God the cauſe and original, the nature and
reaſon of the univerſal. Raleigh.
UNIVERSA'lity. n.ſ.. [univerſalitas, ſchool Lat.] Not parti-
cularity; generality; extenſion to the whole.
This catalogue of ſin, is but of ſin under a limitation; an
wniverſality of ſin under a certain kind; that is, of all fins of
direét and perſonal commiſſion. South's Sermont.
The univerſality of the deluge I inſiſt upon ; and that ma-
rine bodies are found in all parts of the world. Woodward.
A ſpecial concluſion cannot be inferred from a moral uni-
verſality, nor always from a phyſical one; though it may be
always inferred from an univerſality that is metaphyſical. Watts.
Unive/Rs ALLY. adv. [from univerſal.] Throughout the whole ;
without exception.
Thoſe offences which are breaches of ſupernatural laws,
violate in general that principle of reaſon which willeth uni-
verſally to fly from evil. Hººker.
There beſt beheld, where univerſally admir’d. 44ilton.
What he borrows from the antients, he repays with ;
of his own, in coin as good, and as univerſally valuable. Dryd.
This inſtitution of charity-ſchools univerſally prevailed. Addison
U’NIverse. n. ſ. [univers, Fr. univerſum, Lat..] The general
ſyſtem of things. -
Creeping murmur, and the poring dark, -
Fills the wide veſſel of the univerſe. Shakeſpeare.
God here ſums up all into man; the whole into a part;
the univerſe into an individual. South', Sermons.
Father of heav'n | -
Whoſe word call'd out this univerſe to birth. Prior.
Unive'Rsity. n.ſ.. [univerſitas, Lat..] A ſchool, where alſ
the arts and faculties are taught and ſtudied.
While I play the good huſband at home, my ſon and ſer-
vants ſpend all at the univerſity. Shakespeare . Taming ºf the Shrew.
The univerſities, eſpecially Aberdeen, flouriſhed under many
excellent ſcholars, and very learned men. Clarendon.
UNI'vocal. adj. [univocus, Lat.]
1. Having one meaning. - - -
Uniºcal words are ſuch as ſignify but one idea, ºr but one
ſort of thing: equivocal words are ſuch, as ſignify two or
more different ideas, or different ſorts of objects. Watts.
2. Certain; regular; perſuing always one tenour. -
This conceit makes putrefactive generations correſpon:
dent unto ſeminal productions; and conceives inequivocal
effects, and univocal conformity unto the efficient. Brºwn.
UNI vocally. adv. ". univocal.]
: in one ſenie.
I. hº º: mivocally diſtinguiſhed into venial and mortal:
if the venial be not fin; - - Hall.
It were too great preſumption to think, that there is any
thing in any created nature, that can bear any perfect reſem-
bjāºe of the incomprehenſible perfection of the divine na.
29 R ture :<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N K
U N K
º
ture: ver, being itſelf dºes * predicate univocally touching
God, and any jeated being, and intellect, and will, as we
y - -
- attribute them to him. Hale.
2. In one tenour.
All creatures are generate -
kind; there is no ſuch thing as ſpontaneous generation.
i UNJo’YoUs. ad. Not gay; not cheerful.
Morn late riſing o'er the drooping world, -
| Liſts her pale eye unjoyotº. Thomſon's JWinter.
UNJu'st. adj. [injº/le, Fr. injuſtus, Lat J Iniquitous ; contrary
tº equity; contrary to juſtice. It is uſed both of perſons
and things.
d univocally by parents of their own
Ray,
I ſhould forge
Quarrels unjuſt againſt the good and loyal,
Deſtroying them for wealth. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The Picroics,
Finding his uſurpation moſt unjuſt,
Endeavour'd my advancement to the throne. Shakeſp.
He that is º the leaſt, is unjuſt alſo in much. Lukexvi.
Succeeding kings juſt recovery of their right, from unjuſt
uſurpations and extortions, ſhall never be prejudiced by any
ačt of mine. K. Charles.
Th’ unjuſt the juſt hath ſlain. Milton.
He who was ſo unjuſt as to do his brother an injury, will
ſcarce be ſo juſt to condemn himſelf for it. Locke.
UNJU'st, FIAt le. adj. Not to be defended; not to be juſti-
fied.
If theſe reproaches, which aim only at oſtentation of wit,
be ſo unjuſtifiable, what ſhall we ſay to thoſe that are drawn,
that are founded in malice 2 Government of the Tongue.
In a juſt and honourable war we engaged; not out of am-
bition, or any other unjuſtifiable motive, but for the defence
of all that was dear to us. Atterbury.
If we could look into effects, we might pronounce boldly :
but for a man to give his opinion of what he ſees but in part,
is an unjuſtifiable piece of raſhneſs. Addiſon.
UNJu's rif IA pl; Ness. n.ſ. The quality of not being juſtifiable.
He wiſhed them to conſider of the illegality of all thoſe
commiſfions, and of the unjuſtifiableneſs of all the proceed-
ings which had been by virtue of them. Clarendon.
UNJU's TIFIABLY. adv. In a manner not to be defended.
UNJu’stly. adj. In a manner contrary to right.
If aught againſt Iny life
Thy country ſought of thce, it ſought unjuſtly. Milton.
Whom, but for voting peace, the Greeks purſue,
Accus’d unjuſly, then unjuſtly ſlew. Denham.
Your choler does unjuſtly riſe,
To ſee your friends purſue your enemies. Dryden.
Moderation the one ſide very juſtly diſowns, and the other
as unjuſtly pretends to. Swift.
UNke/MPT. adj. Not combed. Obſolete.
Thenot, to that I choſe thou doſt me tempt;
But ah! too well I wot my humble vaine,
And how my rhimes been rugged and unkempt. Spenſºr.
To UNKE/NNel. v. a.
1. To drive from his hole.
Search, ſeek, find out. I warrant we'll unkennel the fox.
Let me ſtop this way firſt. So, now uncape. *:::::
I warrant you, colonel, we'll unkennel him. ryden.
2. To rouſe from its ſecrecy, or retreat.
If his occult guilt
Do not itſelf unkennel in one ſpeech,
It is a damned ghoſt that we have ſeen. Shakeſp.
UNKE N.T. adj. [un and ken, to know..] Unknown. Obſolete.
Go, little book, thyſelf preſent,
As child whoſe parent is unkent,
To him, that is the preſident
Of nobleneſs and chivalrie.
UNRE'PT. adj.
1. Not kept; not retained.
2. Unobſerved ; unobeyed.
. Many things kept generally heretofore, are now in like
S'penſer.
ſort generally unkept, and aboliſhed, every where. Hooker.
UNKI'ND. adj. Not favourable; not benevolent.
In nature there's no blemiſh but the mind;
None can be call’d deform’d, but the unkind. Shakeſp.
- - - To the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor, when givers prove unkind. Shakeſp.
To Nimrod our author ſeems a little unkind; and ſays,
that he, againſt right, enlarged his empire. Locke.
A real joy I never knew,
Till I believ'd thy paſſion true;
A real grief I ne'er can find,
'Till thou prov'ſt perjur'd or unkind. Prior.
UNK1'Ndly, adj. [un and Kind.]
1. Unnatural; contrary to nature.
They, with their filthineſs,
Polluted this ſame gentle ſoil long time,
That their own mother loath'd their beaſtlineſs,
And 'gan abhor her brood's unſ indly crime,
*!! were they born of her own native ſlimé, Fairy Queen.
All works of nature,
Abortive, monſtrous, or unkindly mix’d,
2. Malignant; unfavourable.
The goddeſs, that in rural ſhrine,
Pwell'ſ here with Pan, or Sylvan, by bleſ ſong
Forbidding every bleak, unkindly fog, §
To touch the proſperous growth of this tallwood M.
UNki'Ndly, adv. Without kindneſs, without affei. i
The herd, unkindly wiſe, Il.
Or chaces him from thence, or from him flies. Denh
If we unkindly part, am,
U Will not the poor fond creature break her heart. Drydºn
NK1's DNEss. m. ſ. ſfrom unkind. alignitv ill-u. -
of affection. J. [ J Malignity; ill-will; want
Take no unkindneſs of his haſty words.
His unjuſt tº: in all º ſhould hº
her love, hath, like an impediment in the º: it
more violent and unruly. Shakeſp. Mojº.
After their return, the duke executed the ſame autº f
conferring all favours, and in revenging himſelf º
who had manifeſted any untindneſ; towards him. tº:
Eve --As one who loves, and ſome unkindne; Incets wn-
With ſweet, auſtere compoſure, thus reply'd, - iñº
Chriſt, who was the only perſon to have reſented this º:
Kindneſs, finds an extenuation of it. South's sm,
She ſigh'd, ſhe wept, ſhe low'd; 'twas all ſhe coºd."
And with unkindneſs ſeem'd to tax the God. Dºi,
To UNK1'No. v. a. To deprive of royalty. -
God ſave king Henry, unting'd Richard ſays,
And ſend him many years of ſunſhine days. Shakespeare.
It takes the force of law : how then, my lord!
If as they would unking my father now,
To make you way.
UNKI'ss ED. adj. Not kiſſed.
Foul words are but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul
breath, and foul breath is noiſome; therefore I will depart
unkſ. Shakeſp. Much Adº about Nºthing.
UNKN1'GHTLY. adj. Unbecoming a knight.
With fix hours hard riding through wild places, I overgo:
them a little before night, near an old ill-favoured caſtle, the
place where I perceived they meant to perform their unknight)
errand. Sidh), b. ii.
To UNKNI’t. v. a.
1. To unweave; to ſeparate.
Would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himſelf
The noble knot he made.
2. To open.
Unknit that threat'ning, unkind brow,
And dart not ſcornful glances from thoſe eyes. Shalºft.
U’Nkle. v.a. [oncle, French..] The brother of a father or
mother. See UNCLE.
The Engliſh power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff. Shalºftware.
Give me good fame, ye pow'rs and make me juſt:
Thus much the rogue to publick ears will truſt:
In private then:—when wilt thou, mighty Jove!
My wealthy uncle from this world remove
To UNKNo/w. v.a. To ceaſe to know.
- It's already known; - -
Oh! can you keep it from yourſelves, unknºw it? sºft
UNKNoºw ABLE. adj. Not to be known. y
Diſtinguiſh well between knowables and unknowable, Waiti.
UNKNo’w ING. adj. .
1. Ignorant; not knowing.
Let me ſpeak to th’yet unknowing world, 1.
How theſe things came about. - Shakespeare Hºt
Though unknowing perſons may accuſe other; Yºtº." º
never the more abſolve themſelves. bed Day ºf Pit).
Unknowing I prepar'd thy bridal bed;
With imº of iº, iſſue fed. Dryden.
Unknowing he requires it; and when known,
Milton,
han.
Southern,
Shakſ, Cºriolanuſ.
Dryden.
He thinks it his ; and values it, 'tis gone. Dryden.
His hounds, unknowing of his change, purſue r
The chace, and their miſtaken maſter ſlew. Dryden.
Proteus, mounting from the hoary deep, Pope
Surveys his charge, unknowing of deceit. pe.
2. Not practiſed; not qualified. -
So Lybian huntſmen, on ſome ſandy plain,
From ſhady coverts rouz'd, the lion chaº.
The kingly beaſt roars out with loud diſdain, Dryden.
And ſlowly moves, unknowing to give place, 'd ry
Theſe were they, whoſe ſouls the furies ſteel Pº.
And curs'd, with hearts unknowing how tº yield.d I
UNKNow INGLY. adv. Ignorantly; without knowledge.
The beauty I behold has ſtruck me dead: Drydºn.
Unknowingly ſhe ſtrikes, and kills by chang", c.: º
They are like the Syrians, who were firſt º C4-
blindneſs, and unknowingly led out of their Wº º: hºlder.
pital of their enemy's country. Addiſon's Frtº
UN-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N L
*
º
UNKNowN. ad;.
1. Not known.
'Tis not unknown to you,
How much I have diſabled my eſtate.
Many are the trees of God, that grow
In paradiſe, and various, yet unknown
To us.
Here may I always on this downy graſs,
Unknown, unſeen, my eaſy minutes paſs. Roſcommon.
If any chance has hither brought the name
Of Palamedes, not unknown to famie,
Accus’d and ſentenc'd for pretended crimes. Dryden.
Though inceſt is indeed a deadly crime,
You are not guilty, ſince unknown 'twas done,
And known, had been abhorr'd. Dryden's Don Sebaſtián.
At fear of death, that ſaddens all
With terrors round, can reaſon hold her throne
Deſpiſe the known, nor tremble at th' unknºwn.
2. Greater than is imagined.
The planting of hemp and flax would be an unknown ad-
Pope.
vantage to the kingdom. Bacon.
3. Not having cohabitation.
I am yet
Unknown to woman; never was forſworn. Shakeſpeare.
4. Without communication.
We ſtopped at a little inn, where the man of the houſe,
formerly a ſervant in the knight's family, to do honour to
his old maſter, had, unknown to Sir Roger, put him up in a
ſign-poſt. Addison's Spediator, N°. 122.
UNLA’bou RED. adj.
1. Not produced by labour.
Unlaboured harveſts ſhall the fields adorn,
And cluſter'd grapes ſhall bluſh on ev'ry thorn.
2. Not cultivated by labour.
Not eaſtern monarchs on their nuptial day,
In dazzling gold and purple ſhine ſo gay,
As the bright natives of th’ unlabour'd field,
Unvers'd in ſpinning, and in looms unſkill’d.
3. Spontaneous; voluntary.
Their charms, if charms they have, the truth ſupplies,
And from the theme unlabour’d beauties riſe. Tickell.
To UNLA’ce. v. a.
1. To looſe any thing faſtened with ſtrings.
He could not endure ſo cruel caſe,
But thought his arms to leave, and helmet to unlace.
Spenſer.
Dryden.
Blackmore.
A little river roll’d,
By which there ſat a knight with helm unlac'd,
imſelf refreſhing with the liquid cold. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The helmet from my brow unlac'd, Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To looſe a lady's dreſs.
Can I forget, when they in priſon placing her,
With ſwelling heart, in ſpite, and due diſdainfulneſs,
She lay for dead, till I help'd with unlacing her. Sidney.
Unlace yourſelf, for that harmonious chine
Tells me from you that now it is bed-time. Donne.
3. To make looſe ; to put in danger of being loſt. Not in
uſe. -
You unlace your reputation,
And ſpend your rich opinion for the name of a night-
brawler. Shakeſpeare's Othelle.
To UNLA/D E. v. a.
I. To remove from the veſſel which carries.
He's a fooliſh ſeaman,
That, when his ſhip is ſinking, will not
Unlade his hopes into another bottom.
2. To exonerate that which carries.
The vent'rous merchant, who deſign'd for far,
And touches on our hoſpitable ſhore,
Charm'd with the ſplendour of this northern ſtar,
Shall here unlade him, and depart no more.
3. To put out. Uſed of a veſſel. -
We landed at Tyre; for there the ſhip was to unlade her
burden. Acts xxi. 3.
UNLA/ID. adj.
1. Not placed; not fixed. -
Whatſoever we do behold now in this preſent world, it
was inwrapped within the bowels of divine mercy, written
in the book of eternal wiſdom, and held in the hands. of
omnipotent power, the firſt foundations of the world being
Denham.
Dryden.
as yet unlaid. Hooker, b. v.
2. Not pacified ; not ſtilled.
No evil thing that walks by night,
Blue, meage hag, or ſtubborn unlaid ghoſt,
Hath hurtful pow'r o'er true virginity. Milton.
UNLAM E/NTED. adj. Not deplored.
After ſix years ſpent in outward opulency, and inward
murmur that it was not greater, he died unlamented by
any. Clarendon.
Thus unlamented paſs the proud away,
The pride of fools, and pageant of a day. Pope,
Shakeſpeare.
Milton's Paradiſ: Lºſt.
U N L
To UNLA’tch. v.a. To open by lifting up the latch.
My worthy wife
The door unlatch'd; and, with repeated calls,
Invites her former lord within my walls. Dryden.
ºwºut. adj. Contrary to law; not permitted by the
aW.
Before I be convić by courſe of law,
I ° threaten me with death is moſt unlawful. Shakeſp.
º, is an unlawful thing for a Jew to come unto one of
another nation. Afts x. 28
Shew me when it is our duty, and when unlawful to take
theſe courſes, by ſome general rule of a perpetual, never-
failing truth. &gt;
South.
U The ſecret ceremonies I conceal, 02:
ncouth, perhaps, unlawful to reveal. Dryde
Unlawfully. ..." f ryden.
I. In a manner contrary to law or right. -
He that gains all that he can lawfully this year, next year
will be tempted to gain ſomething unlawfully. Taylor.
2. Illegitimately; not by marriage.
I had rather my brother die by the law, than my ſon
ſhould be unlawfully born. Shakeſpeare.
Give me your opinion, what part I, being unlawfully
born, may claim of the man's affection, who begot me. Ž ...”
UNLA'wful Ness. n. /. Contrariety to law ; ſtate of being
not permitted.
If thoſe alledged teſtimonies of ſcripture did indeed con-
cern the matter to ſuch effect as was pretended, that which
they ſhould infer were unlawfulneſs. Hooker.
The original reaſon of the unlawfulneſ of lying is, that it
carries with it an act of injuſtice, and a violation of the
right of him, to whom we were obliged to ſignify our
minds. South's Sermons.
To UNLE'ARN. v. a. To forget, or diſuſe what has been
learned.
Antiſthenes, being aſked of one, what learning was moſt
neceſſary for man's life 2 anſwered, to unlearn that which is
naught. Bacon.
This were to imply, that all books in being ſhould be de-
ſtroyed; and that all the age ſhould take new pains to un-
learn thoſe habits which have coſt them ſo much labour. Hºlder.
The government of the tongue is a piece of morality
which fober nature dićtates, which yet our greateſt ſcholars
have unlearnt. Decay of Piety.
Some cyders have by art, or age, unlearn'd
Their genuine reliſh, and of fundry wines
Aſſum'd the flavour. Philips,
What they thus learned from him in one way, they did
not unlearn again in another. Atterbury.
A wicked man is not only obliged to learn to do well,
but unlearn his former life. Rogers's Sermons.
UNLE’ARNED adj.
1. Ignorant; not informed; not inſtructed.
This ſelected piece, which you tranſlate,
Foretells your ſtudies may communicate,
From darker dialect of a ſtrange land,
Wiſdom that here th’ unlearn'd ſhall underſtand. D'avenant.
And by ſucceſſion of unlearned times,
As bards began, ſo monks rung on the chimes. Roſcommon.
Some at the bar, with ſubtilty defend
The cauſe of an unlearned, noble friend. Dryden.
Though unlearned men well enough underſtood the words
white and black, yet there were philoſophers found, who
had ſubtlety enough to prove that white was black. Locke.
2. Not gained by ſtudy; not known.
Mere words, or ſuch things chiefly as were better un-
learned. ' ' AMilton on Education.
3. Not ſuitable to a learned man. -
I will prove thoſe verſes to be very unlearned, neither ſa-
vouring of poetry, wit, or invention. Shakeſpeare.
UNLE’ARNEDLY. Ignorantly; groſsly. -
He, in his epiſtle, plainly affirmeth, they think unlearnedly,
who are of another belief. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
UNleaſvened, adj. Not fermented; not mixed with fer-
menting matter. - -
They baked unleavened cakes of the dough, for it was not
leavened. - Exod. ii. 39.
Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new
lump, as ye are unleavened. I Cor. v. 7.
UNLeisured Ness. n.ſ. Buſineſs; want of time; want of
leiſure. Not in uſe. - - -
My eſſay touching the ſcripture having been written partly
in England, partly in another kingdom, it. were ſtrange if
there did not appear much unevenneſs, and if it did not be-
tray the unleiſuredneſs of the wandering author. Boyle.
UNLÉ'ss. conjūnâ. Except ; if not ; ſuppoſing that not.
Let us not ſay, we keep the commandments of the one,
when we break the commandments of the other: for, unk y
we obſerve both, we obey neither. Hooker.
Unleſs I look on Sylvia in the day,
There is no day for me to look upon. Shakeſpeare.
What<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U’N L
U N L
what hidden ſtrength, . -
Unleſ; the ſtrength of heav'n, if you mean that. Milton.
For ſure I am, unleſ; Iwiń. in arms,
To ſtand excluded from Emilia's charms;
Nor can my ſtrength avail, unleſ, by thee,
Endu’d with force, I gain the victory. Dryden.
The commendation of adverſaries is the greateſt triumph
of a writer, becauſe it never comes unleſs extorted. Dryden.
No poet ever ſweetly ſung,
Unleſ; he were, like Phoebus, young;
Nor ever nymph inſpir'd to rhyme, -
Unleſ, like Venus, in her prime. Swift.
UNle'sson ED. adj. Not taught.
The full ſum of me
Is an unleſſºn'd girl, unſchool’d, unpračtis'd ;
Happy in this, ſhe is not yet ſo old
But ſhe may learn.
UNLE'TTE RED. adj. Unlearned ; untaught.
When the apoſtles of our Lord were ordained to alter the
laws of heatheniſh religion, St. Paul excepted, the reſt were
unſchooled and unlettered men. Hooker, b. iv.
Such as the jocund flute, or gameſome pipe
Stirs up among the looſe, unletter'd minds,
Shakeſpeare.
Who thank the gods amiſs. Milton.
Th’ unletter'd chriſtian, who believes in groſs,
Plods on to heav'n, and ne'er is at a loſs. Dryden.
UNle’velled. adj. Not cut even.
All unlevell'd the gay garden lies. Tickell.
UNLIBI’DINous. adj. Not luſtful.
In thoſe hearts
Love unlibidinous reign'd, nor jealouſy
Was underſtood, the injur'd lover's hell. Milton.
UNLI’cENSED. adj. Having no regular permiſſion.
Aſk what boldneſs brought him hither
Unlicenſed. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. iv.
Warn the thoughtleſs, ſelf-confiding train,
No more, unlicens'd, thus to brave the main. Pope.
UNL1(cKED. adj. Shapeleſs; not formed: from the opinion that
the bear licks her young to ſhape.
Shape my legs of an unequal ſize,
To diſproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or unlick'd bear-whelp. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe unlickr bear-whelps. - Donne.
The bloody bear, an independent beaſt,
Unlick'd to form, in groans her hate expreſt. Dryden.
UNLI'GHTED. adj. Not kindled ; not ſet on fire.
There lay a log unlighted on the earth :
For th' unborn chief the fatal fiſters came,
And rais'd it up, and toſs'd it on the flame. Dryden.
The ſacred wood, which on the altar lay,
Untouch'd, unlighted glows. Prior,
UNLI'GHTsom E. adj. Dark; gloomy; wanting light.
Firſt the ſun,
A mighty ſphere ! he fram’d, unlightſºme firſt,
Though of aethereal mould. Milton's Par. Loft.
UNLI’k E. adj.
1. Diflimilar ; having no reſemblance.
Where caſes are ſo unlike as theirs and ours, I ſee not how
that which they did, ſhould induce, much leſs inforce us to
the ſame pračtice, Hooker, b. v.
So the twins humours, in our Terence, are
Unlike : this harſh and rude, that ſmooth and fair. Denham.
Unlike the niceneſs of our modern dames 3.
Affected nymphs, with new affected names. Dryden.
Our ideas, whilſt we are awake, ſucceed one another, not
much unlike the images in the infide of a lanthorn. Locke.
. Some ſhe diſgrac'd, and ſome with honours crown'd;
Unlike ſucceſſes equal merits found. Pope.
2. Improbable ; unlikely; not likely.
Make not impoſſible that which but ſeems unlike. Shakeſp.
What befel the empire of Almaigne were not unlike to
befal to Spain, if it ſhould break. Bacon.
UNLI'kelihood.
UNLI'KELINEss.
- The work was carried on, amidſt all the unlikelihood; and
diſcouraging circumſtances imaginable; the builders holding
** ſword in one hand, to defend the trowel working with
the other. South's Sermons.
There are degrees herein, from the very neighbourhood of
demonſtration, quite down to improbality and unlikelineſs,
tº to the confines of impoſibility. Locke.
UNLI'kely. adj.
I. Improbable ; not ſuch as can be reaſonably expected.
º Mopſa ; for a very unlikely envy ſhe hº
.. idney.
2. Not promiſing any particular cvent. ey
S y advice and actions both have met
i. 1n things unlikely. Denham's Sophy.
his collection we thought not only unlikely to reach the
} [from unlikely.] Improbability.
"º unworthy of the preſent age. Swift.
... -- S are In or or -
#ey means. iraculous and ftrange, when they g”),#.
Unlikely; adv. Improbably.
The pleaſures we are to enjoy in that c -
unlikely may proceed from the i. ... not
cate to another, of God and nature. In Inuni-
UNLI'KEN Ess. n.ſ. Diffinilitude; want of reſemblance
Imitation pleaſes, becauſe it affords matterſ, emi
into the truth or falſhood of imitation, by Comparin ..
neſs, or unlikeneſ with the original. g its like-
UNLI'MITABLE. adj. Admitting no bounds.
He tells us 'tis unlimited and unlimitable. Luck
UN Li'MITED. adj. ºt.
I. Hºs no bounds; having no limits.
So unlimited is our impotence to recom
God's dilećtion, that it . our very * or .
It is ſome pleaſure to a finite underſtanding, to view .
mited excellencies, which have no bounds, though it º
comprehend them. Tilſºn
2. Undefined; not bounded by proper exceptions. -
With groſs and popular capacities, nothing doth more re-
vail than unlimited generalities, becauſe of § º: at
the firſt fight; nothing leſs, with men of exad judgment
becauſe ſuch rules are not ſafe to be truſted over fa. #.
3. Unconfined; not reſtrained. -
All the evils that can proceed from an untied tongue, and
an unguarded, unlimited will, we put upon the ºf
drunkenneſs. Taylºr.
Aſcribe not unto God ſuch an unlimited exerciſe of mercy
as may deſtroy his juſtice. Rºgrºm.
Huſbands are counſelled not to truſt too much to their
wives owning the doctrine of unlimited conjugal fidelity. Art,
UNLI'M It EDLY. adv. Boundleſsly; without bounds.
Many aſcribe too unlimitedly to the force of a good mean-
ing, to think that it is able to bear the ſtreſs of whatſoevet
commiſſions they ſhall lay upon it. Decay ºf Pitt),
UNLI'NEAl. Not coming in the order of ſucceſſion,
They put a barren ſcepter in my gripe,
Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,
No ſon of mine ſucceeding. Shakespeare . Madeth,
To UNLI'NK. v. a. To untwiſt; to open.
About his neck
A green and gilded ſnake had wreath'd itſelf;
Who with her head, nimble in throats, approach'd
The opening of his mouth; but ſuddenly
Seeing Orlando, it unlink'd itſelf. Shakespeare eare,
UNLI'QUIFIED. adj. Unmelted; undiſſolved.
Theſe huge, unwieldy lumps remained in the melted mat-
ter, rigid and unliquified, floating in it like cakes of ice
in a river. Addison's Remarks ºn Italy.
To UNLo'AD. v. a.
1. To diſburden; to exonerate.
Like an aſs, whoſe back with ingots bows,
Thou bear'ſt thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloadeth thee. Shakespeare . Miaſ fºr Maſºrt.
Vain man forbear, of cares unload thy mind;
Forget thy hopes, and give thy fears to wind. Craſh.
Some to unload the fertile branches run. Pipt,
2. To put off any thing burdenſome.
To you duke Humphry muſt unload his grief. Shift.
Nor can my tongueunlºad my heart's great burthen. Shakespeare
To UNLock. v. a.
1. To open what is ſhut with a lock. r
I have ſeen her unlock her cloſet, take forth paper. Shalºft.
She ſprings a light,
Unlocks the door, and entring out of breath,
The dying ſaw, and inſtruments of death.
2. To open in general. ſt
My purſe, my perſon, my extremeſt means, !.
Lie i unlock'd {. your º: Shakespeare Mr.; Wenit.
I had not thought to have unlock'd my lips
In this unhallow'd air, but that this jugler.
Would think to charm my judgment, as minº")" law.
Obtruding falſe rules, pranck'd in reaſon's garb. *
I yielded, and unlock'd her all my heart, -
Who with a grain of manhood well reſolv’d, Milton
Might eaſily have ſhook off all her ſhares... º,
Sand is an advantage to cold clays, in that." ..º
and unlocks their binding qualities. Martimer's fiº n ić
A lixivium of quick-ſime unlocks the ſalts that * }.#.
in the viſcid juices of ſome ſcorbutick perſons. rºl
Thy foreſts, Windſor and thy green retreats
Invite my lays. Bc preſent, ſylvan maids! Pºpe,
Unlock your ſprings, and open all your ſhades.
UNLock ED. adj. Not faſtened with a lock.
UNLoo'KED. .22; - een.
UNLoo'ked for. łaj Unexpected; not º king of
Yet perhaps had their number prevailed, if * sing:
Pontus had not come unlock'd for to their ſuccº.” ha} ...
How much unlook'd for is this expedition! Shałºff
God, I pray him l
That none of you may live your natural agº, -
But by ſome º *::::: cut off. Shakespeare tart
Pope.
Dryden.
Dryden,
Whatſoever
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N L
---
.
2
Whatſoever is new is unlocked for ; and ever it mends ſome,
and pares others. Bacon.
From that high hope, to what relapſe
Unlook'd for are we fall'n.
Your affairs I have recommended to the king, but with un-
Paradiſe Regain'd.
look'd ſucceſs. , -
Nor fame I ſlight, nor for her favours call;
She comes unlook'd fºr, if ſhe comes at all. Pope.
UNLoo's a B.L.E. adj. [A word rarely uſed.] Not to be looſed.
Whatever may be ſaid of the unloºſable mobility of atoms,
yet divers parts of matter may compoſe bodies, that need no
other cement to unite them, than the juxta-poſition, and
reſting together of their parts, whereby the air, and other
fluids that might diſſipate them, are excluded. Boyle.
To UNLoo's E. v. a. To looſe. A word perhaps barbarous
and ungrammatical, the particle prefixed implying negation;
ſo that to unlooſe, is properly to bind.
York, unlooſe your long impriſon'd thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart. Shakeſpeare.
The weak, wanton Cupid,
Shall from your neck unlooſe his am’rous fold;
And, like a dew-drop from the lion's mane,
Be ſhook to air. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
Turn him to any cauſe of policy;
The gordian knot of it he will unlooſe,
Familiar as his garter.
It reſted in you,
Tº unlooſe this tied-up juſtice, when you pleas'd. Shakeſp.
The latchet of his ſhoes I am not worthy to ſtoop down
and unlooſe. Mark i. 7.
He that ſhould ſpend all his time in tying inextricable
knots, only to baffle the induſtry of thoſe that ſhould attempt
to unlooſe them, would be thought not much to have ſerved
his generation. Decay of Piety.
To UNLoo's E. v. n. To fall in pieces; to loſe all union and
connexion. -
Without this virtue, the publick union muſt unlooſe; the
ſtrength decay; and the pleaſure grow faint. Collier.
UNLo've D. adj. Not loved.
As love does not always reflect itſelf, Zelmane, though
reaſon there was to love Palladius, yet could not ever perſwade
her heart to yield with that pain to Palladius, as they feel,
that feel unloved love. Sidney, b. ii.
What though I be not fortunate;
But miſerable moſt to love unlov'd / Shakeſpeare.
He was generally unlºved, as a proud and ſupercilious
perſon. - Clarendon, b. viii.
UN lo’v ELINEss. n.ſ. Unamiableneſs; º to create love.
The old man, growing only in age and affection, follow-
ed his ſuit with all means of unhoneſt ſervants, large pro-
miſes, and each thing elſe that might help to countervail his
own unlovelineſs. Sidney, b. ii.
UNLovely. adj. That cannot excite love. There ſeems by
this word generally more intended than barely negation. See
UNLovE LINEss.
UNLovis G. adj. Unkind; not fond.
Thou, bleſt with a goodly ſon,
Didſt yield conſent to diſinherit him;
Which argu'd thee a moſt unloving father.
UNLU'ckily. adv. Unfortunately ; by ill luck.
Things have fallen out ſo unluckily,
That we have had no time to move our daughter. Shakespeare
An ant dropt unluckily into the water. L’Eſtrange.
A fox unluckily croſſing the road, drew off a conſiderable
detachment. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 3.
UNLU'cKY. adj.
1. Unfortunate; producing unhappineſs. This word is gene-
rally uſed of accidents ſlightly vexatious.
You may make an experiment often, without meeting with
any of thoſe unlucky accidents which make ſuch experiments
miſcarry. Boyle.
2. Unhappy; miſerable ; ſubjećt to frequent misfortunes.
Then ſhall I you recount a rueful caſe,
Said he the which with this unlucky eye
I late beheld. - Fairy Queen, b. i.
3. Slightly miſchievous ; miſchievouſly waggiſh.
His friendſhip is counterfeit, ſeldome to truſt;
Denham.
Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Shakeſpeare.
His doings unluckie, and ever unjuſt. Taſer.
Why, cries an unlucky wag, a leſs bag might have
ſerved. L'Eſtrange.
A lad, th' unluckieſ of his crew,
Was ſtill contriving ſomething bad, but new. King.
4. Ill-omen’d ; inauſpicious.
When I appear, ſee you avoid the place, -
And haunt me not with that unlucky face. Dryden,
UNLu's TRous, adj. Wanting ſplendour; wanting luſtre.
Should I join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falſhood, as with labour;
Then glad myſelf with peeping in an eye,
Baſe and unluſtrous as the ſmoaky light
That's fed with ſtinking tallow. Shakeſpeare.
U N M
To Us Lu’re. v. a. To ſeparate veſſels cloſed with chymical
Cement.
9" ſtimony thus handled, affordeth us an ounce of ſul-
phur, of ſo ſulphureous a ſmell, that upon the unluting the
Yºſſels, it infected the room with a ſcarce ſupportable
ſtink. -
UNMA(DE. adj. Boyle.
I. Not yet formed ; not created.
T hou waſ bºgot in Demogorgon's hall,
And ſaw it the ſecrets of the world unmad. Fair, Q, ca.
Then might'ſt thou tear thy hair, .' **-,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the meaſure of an anmade grave.
2. Deprived of form or qualities.
. The firſt earth was perfectly unmad, again, taken all to
pieces, and framed a-new. hoodward's Nat. Aft.
3 Omitted to be inade,
You may the world of more defects upbraid,
That other works by nature are unmade;
That ſhe did never at her own expence
A palace rear. Blackmore.
UNMA’im D. adj. Not deprived of any eſſential part.
An interpreter ſhould give his author entire and anmaimed;
the diction and tº verification only are his proper pro-
Vince. Pope's Preſa e to the Iliad.
UNMA’KABLF. adj. Not poſſible to be made.
If the principles of bodies are unalterable, they are alſo
unnakable by any but a divine power. Grew's Coſmolºgy.
To UNMAKE. J. a. To deprive of former qualities before
poſleſſed. To deprive of form or being.
They've made themſelves, and their fitneſs now
Does unmake you. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
God does not make or unmake things, to try experi-
incintS. Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
Empire I thou poor and deſpicable thing,
When ſuch as theſe make, or unmake a king. Dryden.
Bring this guide of the light within to the trial. God,
when he makes the prophet, does not unmake the man. Locke.
To UNMA'N. v. a.
I. To deprive of the conſtituent qualitics of a human being, as
reaſon. -
What, quite unmann'd in folly Shakespeare . Macbeth.
Groſs errors unman, and ſtrip them of the very principles of
reaſon, and ſober diſcourſe. South's Sermons.
2. To emaſculate. - -
3. To break into irreſolution; to dejećt.
Her clamours pierce the Trojans ears,
Unman their courage, and augment their fears.
Ulyſſes veil'd his penſive head;
Again unman'd, a ſhower of ſorrows ſhed. Pope.
UNMA/NAGEABLE. adj.
1. Not manageable; not eaſily governed.
They'll judge every thing by models of their own, and
thus are rendered unmanageable by any authority but that of
abſolute dominion. Glanville.
None can be concluded unmanageable by the milder me-
thods of government, till they have been thoroughly tried
upon him; and if they will not prevail, we make no excuſes
for the obſtinate. Lock.
2. Not eaſily wielded.
UNMA/NAGED. adj.
1. Not broken by horſemanſhip.
Like colts, or unmanaged horſes, we ſtart at dead bones
and lifeleſs blocks. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
2. Not tutored ; not educated.
Savage princes flaſh out ſometimes into an irregular greatneſs
of thought, and betray, in their actions, an unguided force,
and unmanaged virtue. Felton on the Claſſicks.
UNMANLIKE, ! aſ:
UNMA'NLY. } J.
1. Unbecoming a human being. -
It is ſtrange to ſee the unmanlike cruelty of mankind, who,
not content with their tyrannous ambition; to have brought
the others virtuous patience under them, think their matter-
hood nothing, without doing injury to them. Sidney.
Where the act is unmanly, or the º contradictious
: attri God, our hopes we ought never to en-
** Gº, ” "... p.
2. Unſuitable to a man; effeminate. - -
By the greatneſs of the cry, it was the voice of man;
though it were a very unmanlike voice, ſo to cry. Sidney.
New cuſtoms,
never ſo ridiculous,
º them be unmanly, yet are follow'd. Shakeſpeare.
This is in thce a nature but º s
oor unmanly melancholy, ſprung . . .
Fº change *m. - Shakeſp. Timon ºf Athens.
My ſervitude, ignoble, • 1, - -
Unmanly, ignominious, infamous. Milton's Agoniſłes.
Think not thy friend can ever feel the ſoft ſiſ.
Unmanly warmth, and tenderneſs of love. Alliºn.
29 S Wnmanly
Shakespeare.
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N M
U N M
Unmanly dread invades the French aſtony'd, hil;
And ſtreight their uſeleſs arms they quit. Philipt.
UNMA’s NERED. adi. Rude : brutal; uncivil.
You have a . ...; º tongue,
our rude mouth, and favouring yourſeſ, - ---
#. B. johnſon's Catiline.
If your barking dog diſturb her eaſe,
Thºmanner'd malefactor is arraign'd. Dryden's juvenal.
UNMA’NNER LINEss. n. ſ. Breach of civility; ill behaviour.
A ſort of unmannerlingſ is apt to grow up with young peo-
ple, if not early reſtrain'd; and that is a forwardneſs to in-
terrupt others ſpeaking. Locke on Education.
UNMA’NNERLY. adj. Ill bred; not civil; not complaiſant.
Sweetheart,
I were unmannerly to take you out,
And not to kiſs you. Shakespeare Hen. VIII.
He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a ſlovenly, unhandſome coarſe
Betwixt the wind and his nobility. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
He will prove the weeping philoſoper, when he grows old,
being ſo full of unmannerly ſadneſs in his youth. Shakeſpeare.
Bare-faced ribaldry is both unmannerly in itſelf, and ful-
ſome to the reader. Dryden.
A divine dares hardly ſhew his perſon among fine gentle-
men; or, if he fall into ſuch company, he is in continual
apprehenſion that ſome pert man of pleaſure ſhould break an
unmannerly jeſt, and render him ridiculous. Swift.
UNMA’NNERLY. adv. Uncivilly.
Forgive me,
If I have us'd myſelf unmannery.
UNMANU/RED. adj. Not cultivated.
The land,
In antique times was ſavage wilderneſs; -
Unpeopl’d, unmanur'd, unprov’d, unprais'd. Fairy Queen.
UNMA’RKED. adj. Not obſerved; not regarded. -
I got a time, unmarked by any, to ſteal away, I cared not
Shakespeare.
whither, ſo I might eſcape them. Sidney.
This place unmark'd, though oft I walk'd the green,
In all my progreſs I had never ſeen. Dryden.
Entring at the gate, conceal’d in clouds,
He mix’d, unmark'd, among the buſy throng,
Borne by the tide, and paſs'd unſeen along. Dryden.
Unmark'd, unhonour’d at a monarch's gate. , Pope.
UNMA'RRIEd. adj. Having no huſband, or no wife.
Unmarried men are beſt friends, beſt maſters, beſt ſervants,
but not always beſt ſubječts, for they are light to run
away. Bacon.
Huſbands and wives, boys and unmarry'd maids. Dryden.
To UNMA’sk. v. a.
1. To ſtrip of a maſk.
2. To ſtrip of any diſguiſe.
With full cups they had unmaſ'd his ſoul. Roſcommon.
Though in Greek or Latin they amuſeus, yet a tranſlation
unmaſks them, whereby the cheat is tranſparent. Glanville.
To UNMA’sk, v. n. To put off the maſk.
My huſband bids me; now I will unmaſk.
This is that face was worth the looking on. Shakeſpeare.
UNMA'skED. ad. Naked; open to the view.
O I am yet to learn a ſtateſman's art;
My kindneſs, and my hate unmaſk'd I wear,
For friends to truſt, and enemies to fear. Dryden.
tº rena BLE, adj. Unconquerable ; not to be ſub-
u€Ol.
The fetor is unmaſterable by the natural heat of man; not
to be dulcified by concočtion, beyond unſavoury condi-
tion. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
UNMA’s TERED. adj.
1. Not ſubdued.
2. Not conquerable.
Weigh what loſs your honour may ſuſtain, if you
Or loſe your heart, or your chaſte treaſure open -
Tº his unmaſter'd importunity. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
He cannot his unmaſter'd grief ſuſtain,
T But yields to rage, to madneſs and diſdain. Dryden.
UNMA ****BLE, adj. Unparalelled; unequalled.
The ſoul of Chriſt, that ſaw in this life the face of God,
was, through ſo viſible preſence of Deity, filled with all
* of graces and virtues in that unmatchable degree of
perfection; for which, of him we read it written, that God
with the oil of gladneſs anointed him. Hooker, b. v.
... Mºſt radiant, exquiſite, and immichall. beauty, tell me,
if this be the lady of the houſe. Shakeſpeare.
England brecds very valiant creatures; their maſtiffs are
of *atchable courage. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
UN MA *S*D. adj. Matchleſs; having no match, or equal.
As º glorious day, which two ſuch navies ſaw,
N ... *d, might to the world give law;
*** yet doubtful whom he ſhould obey,
Hºld to them both the tº -
" -- * - trident of the ſea. Dryden.
U *º *. Expreſſing no meaning, y
* Found, unmeaniºface. Pope.
UNME'ANT. adj. Not intended.
The flying ſpear was after Ilus ſent:
But Rhaetus happen'd on a death unmeant.
UNME'Asurable. adj. Boundleſs; unbounded,
Common mother thou
Whoſe womb unmeaſurable, and infinite breaſt
Teems and feeds all. Shakeſp. Timon of Athen:
You preſerved the luſtre of that noble family, which
unmeaſurable profuſion of anceſtors had eclipſed. Swift
UNMEA's U Red. adj. -
1. Immenſe; infinite.
Does the ſun dread th’ imaginary ſign,
Nor farther yet in liquid aether roll,
Till he has gain’d ſome unfrequented place,
Loſt to the world, in vaſt, unmeaſur’d ſpace.
2. Not meaſured ; plentiful.
From him all perfectgood, unmeaſur'd out, deſcends. Mihn.
UNME'DITATED. adj. Not formed by previous thought.
Neither various ſtyle,
Nor holy rapture, wanted they, to praiſe
Their maker, in fit ſtrains pronounc'd, or ſun
Unmeditated. - Milton's Par. Lºft, b. v.
UNME’dled with. adj. Not touched; not altered.
The flood-gate is opened and cloſed for ſix days, conti-
nuing other ten days unmedled with.
UN Mee T. adj. Not fit; not proper; not worthy.
Madam was }. unmeet the rule of ſway. Spenſir,
am unmeet ;
Dryden,
Blackmort,
Carew.
For I cannot flatter thee in pride. Shakeſpeare.
O my father
Prove you that any man with me convers'd
At hours unmeet, refuſe me, hate me. ' Shakeſpeare,
Alack my hand is ſworn
Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn;
Vow, alack for youth unmeet,
Youth ſo apt to pluck a ſweet. Shakeſpeare.
Its fellowſhip unmeet for thee,
Good reaſon was thou freely ſhould'ſt diſlike. Milton.
That muſe deſires the laſt, the loweſt place,
Who, though unmeet, yet touch'd the trembling ſtring
For the fair fame of Anne. Prior.
UNME’llowed. adj. . Not fully ripened.
His years but young, but his experience old; -
His head unmellow'd, but his judgment ripe. Shakſtart.
UNME/Lted, adj. Undiſſolved by heat. . . -
Snow on AEtna does unme'ted lie, - “...
Whence rowling flames, and ſcatter'd cinders fly. Wallºr.
UNME'NtionED. adj. Not told; not named. . . . .
They left not any error in government unmentiºned or un-
preſſed, with the ſharpeſt and moſt pathetical expreſſions:0".
Oh let me here ſink down
Into my grave, unmention'd and unmourn'd / . Southern,
UNME'RchANTABLE. adj. Unſaleable; not vendible.
They feed on ſalt, unmerchantable pilchard. Carew.
UNME'Rciful. adj.
1. Cruel; ſevere; inclement. - - - le.
For the humbling of this unmerciful pride in #: j Č,
providence has found out a way. - L'E/ º:
The pleaſant luſtre of flame delights children atá". º
when experience has convinced them, by the exquiſite pain
has put them to, how cruel and unmerciful it * *
afraid to touch it. - - *
Whatſoever doćtrine repreſents God as unjuſt and º:-
ciful, cannot be from God, becauſe it ſubvert. the vºy º
dation of religion. " Roger's Strniini.
2. Unconſcionable; exorbitant. --- -
Not only the peace of the honeſt, unwriting º:
daily moleſted, but unmerciful demands were made of º:-
lauſe.
Uścruity. adv. Without mercy; without º:
A little warm fellow fell moſt unmercifully upon his };
majeſty.
Uśiro LNess.n.ſ. Inclemency;cruelty; wantoft, into un-
Confider the rules of friendſhip, left juſtice." ing Holy.
mercifulneſs. jaylor's Rule ºf §
UNME’RITED. adj. Not deſerved ; not obtained 9
than by favour.
#. day, in whom all nations ſhall be bleſt,
Favour unmerited by me, who ſought Miltºn.
Forbidden knowledge by forbidden means. Gov. Tongue.
A tottering pinnacle unmerited greatneſs . . . ;
UNME’Ritabi.e. adj. Having no deſert. Not,”
Your love deſerves my thanks; but my **
Unmeritable, ſhuns your high requeſt. ed
UNME/RITEDNEss. n.ſ. State of being undeſervº love ; we
As to the freeneſs or unmeritedneſs of 9. wº his
need but confider, that we ſo little could at firſt deſ: %jlt.
love, that he loved us even before we had a being:
JNMI'lkED. adj. Not milked. -
U The wºul folded, with diſtended thighs, Pºpt,
Unmilºd, lay bleating in diſtreſsful cries. UN-
nderneſs.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N M
!,
º
º
|*
;:
#!
!
º
UNMI'NDED. adj. Not heeded; not regarded.
He was
A poor, unminded outlaw, ſneaking home;
My father gave him welcome to the ſhore. Shakeſpeare.
He, after Eve ſeduc’d, unminded, ſlunk
Into the wood. Milton.
UNMI's DFul. adj. Not heedful ; not regardful; negligent;
inattentive.
Worldly wights in place
Leave off their work, unmindful of this law,
To gaze on them. Fairy Queen.
I ſhall let you ſee, that I am not unmindful of the things
you would have me remember. Boyle.
Who now enjoys thee, credulous, all gold ;
Who always vacant, always amiable,
Hopes thee; of flattering gales
Unmindful. Milton.
Unmindful of the crown that virtue gives,
After this mortal change, to her true ſervants,
Amongſt the enthroned gods on ſainted ſeats. Milton.
He, not unmindful of his uſual art,
Firſt in diſſembled fire attempts to part;
Then roaring beaſts he tries. Dryden's Virgil.
When thoſe who diſlike the conſtitution, are ſo very zea-
lous in their offers for the ſervice of their country, they are
not wholly unmindful of their party, or themſelves. Swift.
To UNM INGLE. v. a. To ſeparate things mixed.
It will unmingle the wine from the water; the wine aſcend-
ing, and the water deſcending. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
UNMI's GLED. adj. Pure ; not vitiated by any thing ming-
led.
As eaſy may'ſt thou fall
A drop of water in the breaking gulph,
And take unmingled thence your drop again,
Without addition or diminiſhing. Shakeſpeare.
Springs on high hills, are pure and unmingled. Bacon.
His cup is full of pure and unmingled ſorrow. Taylor.
Veſſels of unmingled wine,
Mellifluous, undecaying, and divine. Pope.
UNMI'NGLEABLE. adj. Not ſuſceptive of mixture. Not uſed.
The ſulphur of the concrete loſes by the fermentation, the
property of oil being unmingleable with water. Boyle.
The unmingleable liquors retain their diſtinct ſurfaces. Boyle.
UNMI'RY. adj. Not fouled with dirt.
Paſs, with ſafe, unmiry feet,
Where the rais'd pavement leads athwart the ſtreet. Gay.
UNMI/TIGATED. adj. Not ſoftened.
With publick accuſation, uncovered ſlander, unmitigated
rancour. Shakeſpeare's Much Ado about Nothing.
UNMI'xED. Wadj. Not mingled with any thing ; pure ; not
UNMI'xt. } corrupted by additions.
Thy commandment all alone ſhall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixt with baſer matter. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
It exhibits a mixture of new conceits and old ; whereas
the inſtauration gives the new, unmixed otherwiſe than with
ſome little aſperſion of the old. Bacon.
Thy conſtant quiet fills my peaceful breaſt,
With unmix’d joy, uninterrupted reſt. Roſcommon.
What is glory but the blaze of fame, -
The people's praiſe, if always praiſe unmixt P Milton.
Thy Arethuſan ſtream remains unſoil'd ;
Unmixt with foreign filth, and undfil'd, Dryden.
Together out they fly,
Inſeparable now, the truth and lie :
And this or that unmixt, no mortal ear ſhall find. Pope.
UNMo'ANED. adj. Not lamented.
Fatherleſs diſtreſs was left unmoan'd;
Your widow dolours likewiſe be unwept.
UN Moi'st. adj. Not wet.
Volatile Hermes, fluid and unmoiſ?,
Mounts on the wings of air. Philips.
UN Moi's TENED. adj. Not made wet. -
The incident light that mects with a groſſer liquor, will
have its beams more or leſs interruptedly reflected, than they
would be if the body had been unmoiſtened. Boyle.
UN Mole'sTED. adj. Free from diſturbance ; free from exter-
nal troubles.
The fowls of the air, and the beaſts of the field, are ſup-
plied with every thing, unmol/led by hopes or fears. Rogers.
Cleopatra was read o'er,
While Scot, and Wake, and twenty more,
That teach one to deny one'sſelf,
Stood unmoleſled on the ſhelf. Prior.
Safe on my ſhore each unmol/fed ſwain,
Shall tend the flocks, or reap the bearded grain. Pope.
To UN Moo'R. v. a.
1. To looſe from land, by taking up the anchors.
We with the riſing morn our ſhips unmoor'd,
And brought our captives, and our ſtores aboard. Pope.
Shakeſpeare.
i
2. Prior ſeems to have taken it for caſting anchor.
Soon as the Britiſh ſhips unmar,
And jolly long-boat rows to ſhore.
NMºQ RALIZED. adj. Untutored by morality.
This is cenſured as the mark of a diſſolute and unmoralized
temper.
UNMörtgaged. aff. Not mortgaged.
Is there one God unſworn to my deſtrućtion ?
The leaſt, unmortgag'd hope ; for, if there be
Methinks I cannot fill. Dryden's Allfor Love,
This he has repeated ſo often, that at preſent there is ſearce
a fingle gabel unmortgaged. Addiſon's Rem r
NMo’rtified. adj. Not ſubdued by #. and º
If our conſcience reproach us w -
is the hope of an hypocrite.
UNMoveable. adj. Such as cannot be remo
- - - ved or altered.
Wherein conſiſts the preciſe and unmow.bi. boundaries of
that ſpecies.
L -
UN Move D. adj. ocke
I. Not put out of one place into another.
Vipers that do fly
The light, oft under unmov’d ſtalls do lie. May's Pirgil.
Nor winds, nor winter's rage o'erthrows
His bulky body, but unmov’d he grows. Dryden.
Cheſs-men, ſtanding on the ſame ſquares of the cheſs-
board, we ſay they are all in the ſame place, or unmoved ;
though, perhaps, the cheſs-board hath been carried out of
one room into another. Locke.
2. Not changed in reſolution.
Among innumerable falſe, unmov’d,
Unſhaken, unſeduc’d. Milton.
3. Not affected; not touched with any paſſion.
Caeſar, the world's great maſter and his own,
Unmov’d, ſuperior ſtill in ev'ry ſtate,
And ſcarce deteſted in his country's fate.
4. Unaltered by paſſion.
I meant to meet
My fate with face unmov’d, and eyes unwet. Dryden.
UNMo’v ING. adj.
I. Having no motion.
The celeſtial bodies, without impulſe, had continued un-
aćtive, unmoving heaps of matter. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
2: Having no power to raiſe the paſſions; unaffecting.
To UNMo'ULD. v. a. To change as to the form.
Its pleaſing poiſon -
The viſage quite transforms of him that drinks,
And the inglorious likeneſs of a beaſt
Fixes inſtead, unmoulding reaſon's mintage,
Charaćter'd in the face. Milton.
UNMo'URNED. adj. Not lamented; not deplored.
O let me here ſink down t
Into my grave unmention'd and unmourn'd. Southern.
To UNMU’zzle. v. a. To looſe from a muzzle.
Now unmuzzle your wiſdom.
Have you not ſet mine honour at the ſtake,
And baited it with all th’ unmuzzl"d thoughts
Thy tyrannous heart can think? Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
To UNMu'ffle. v. a. To put off a covering from the face.
Unmuffle, ye faint ſtars l and thou, fair moon,
That wont'ſt to love the traveller's benizon,
Stoop thy pale viſage through an amber cloud,
And diſinherit chaos, that reigns here
In double night, of darkneſs and of ſhades. Milton.
UNMU's IcAL. adj. Not harmonious ; not pleaſing by ſound.
Let argument bear no unmuſical ſound,
Nor jars interpoſe, ſacred friendſhip to grieve. B. johnſºn.
One man's ambition wants ſatisfaction, another's avarice,
a third's ſpleen; and this diſcord makes up the very unmu-
ſcal harmony of our murmurs. Decay of Piety.
UNNA/MED. adj. Not mentioned.
Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt,
Unnam'd in heav'n. AMilton's Par. L9/?, b. vi.
UNNA/TURAL. adj.
1. Contrary to the laws of nature; contrary to the common
inſtinčts.
Priºr,
Norris.
Rogers's Sermons.
Pope.
Shakeſpeare.
Her offence
Muſt be of ſuch unnatural degree,
That monſters it. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
People of weak heads on the one hand, and vile affections
on the other, have made an unnatural divorce between being
wiſe and good. Glanville's Scºpſ.
'Tis irreverent and unnatural, to ſcoff at the infirmities of
old age. L’Eſtrange,
2. Aćing without the affections implanted by nature.
- so Rome, whoſe gratitude
Tow'rds her deſerving children, is enroll’d
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam, -
Should now eat up her own. Shakeſpeare's Corillanuſ.
If the tyrant were, to a ſon ſo noble, ſo unnatural,
What will be be to us? Denham's Sophy.
e 3. Forced ;
ith unmortified fin, our hope
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N N
U N O
not agreeable to the real ſtate of perſons or
Shakeſpeare.
are nauſeous, becauſe they are unnatural. Would any man,
be avoided; the firſt, are ſuch as are affected and unnatural;
unnaturalneſs. Sidney.
cozen themſelves. Tillotſon.
Like a ſwift ſtream from mountains pours along. Cowley.
The helm let politick experience guide:
UNNE/cess ARILY. adv. Without neceſſity ; without need ;
the antient, received cuſtom of the whole church. Hooker.
ſtory, and conſequently unneceſſarily. Broome.
unneceſſarineſs of an undertaking. Decay of Piº.
Thou whoreſon zed ; thou unneceſſary letter. Shakeſpeare.
Mine be the care new people to provide. Dryden.
They did not only ſhun perſecution, but affirmed, that
yelled at laſt; but the unneceſſary intricacies in unravelling it,
Parnaſius is but a barren mountain, and its inhabitants
Theſe two chriſtian armies might combine
Scaliger calls them fine and lively in Muſæus; but abjećt,
that they weaken and unnerve his verſe. Addiſon.
Th’ unnerv’d father falls. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Diggon, I am ſo ſtiffe and ſtanke,
Spenſºr.
A ſhepherd's boy,
That now innethe, their feet could'em uphold. Spenſºr.
3. Forced ;
º, admire only glittering trifles, that in a ſerious poem
who is ready to die for love, deſcribe his paſſion lº, *:
iſſus ? ry 77.
Cl In an heroic poem, two kinds of thoughts are carefully to
the ſecond, ſuch as are mean and vulgar. Addiſon.
UNNATURALN Ess. m. ſ. Contrariety to nature.
The God, which is the God of nature, doth never teach
UNNA’tur ALLY. adv. In oppoſition to nature. - -
All the world have been frighted with an apparition of
their own fancy, or they have moſt unnaturally conſpired to
UNNA/vigable. adj. Not to be paſſed by veſſels; not to be
navigated.
Pindar's unnavigable ſong,
Some who the depths of eloquence have found,
In that unnavigable ſtream were drown'd. Dryden.
Let wit her ſails, her oars let wiſdom lend;
Yet ceaſe to hope thy ſhort-liv'd bark ſhall ride - }
Down ſpreading fate's unnavigable tide. Prior.
The Indian ſeas were believ'd to be unnavigable. Arbuthnot.
needleſsly.
To abrogate, without conſtraint of manifeſt harm thereby
ariſing, had been to alter unneceſſarily, in their judgment,
'Tis highly imprudent in the greateſt of men, unneceſſarily
to provoke the meaneſt. L’Eſtrange.
Theſe words come in without any connexion with the
UNNE/cEss ARINEss. n.ſ. Needleſsneſs.
Theſe are ſuch extremes as afford no middle for induſtry to
exiſt, hope being equally out-dated by the deſperateneſs or
UNNeſcº'ss ARY. adj. Necdleſs; not wanted; uſeleſs.
The doing of things unneceſſary, is many times the cauſe
why the moſt neceſſary are not done. Hooker, b. v.
Let brave ſpirits, fitted for command by ſea or land, not
be laid by, as perſons unneceſſary for the time. Bacon.
Lay that unneceſſary fear aſide;
Unneceſſary coinage, as well as unneceſſary revival of words,
runs into affectation ; a fault to be avoided on either
hand. Dryden.
it was unneceſſary for their followers to bear their religion
through ſuch fiery trials. Addiſon.
The reader can eaſily diſcover how the plot will be unra-
ſtill remain to be accounted for. Shakeſp. Illuſtrated.
UNNE/IGHBou RLY. adj. Not kind; not ſuitable to the duties
of a neighbour.
make it more ſo, by their unneighbourly deportment. Garth.
UNNE/IGHBou RLY. adv. In a manner not ſuitable to a neigh-
- - - - C
bour; with malevolence; with mutual miſchief.
The blood of malice in a vein of league,
And not to ſpend it ſo unneighboury.
UNNE’R v A.T.E. adj. Weak; feeble. A bad word.
unnervate, and unharmonious in Homer. Broome.
To US NERVE v. a. To weaken; to enfeeble.
The precepts are often ſo minute and full of circumſtances,
UNNER v ED. adj. Weak; feeble.
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage ſtrikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell ſword,
UN NETH. {*. [This is from un and eat, Saxon, eaſy; and
UN NE"TH Es. ought therefore to be written uneath..] Scarce-
ly ; hardly ; not without difficulty. Obſolete.
That unneth I may ſland any more;
And how the weſtern wind bloweth fore,
Beating the wither'd leaf from the tree.
When winter's waſteful ſpight was almoſt ſpent,
!ed forth his flocke, that had been long ypent ;
So faint they waxe, and feeble in the fold,
UNNo' Ble. *... Mean; ignominious; ignoble.
I have offended reputation;
A moſt unnºble ſwerving,
Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
UNNo'TED. adj. Not obſerved; not regarded:
not celebrated. S 3 not heeded;
Till They may jeſt,
*Till their own ſcorn return to them unnoted. Sº,
He drew his ſeat familiar to her fide, ałºſtart,
Far from the ſuitor train, a brutal crowd;
Where the free gueſt unnoted might relate,
If haply conſcious of his father's fate.
A ſhameful fate now hides my hopeleſs head, Pºp!,
Unwept, unnoted, and for ever dead. Pºpe's Odſ,
UNNU/MBER ED. adj. Innumerable.
The ſkies are painted with unnumber'd ſparks;
They are all fire, and every one doth ſhine. Shakespeare,
Our bodies are but the anvils of pain and diſeaſes, aft: o:
minds the hives of unnumbered cares and paſſions. 'º.
Of various forms, unnumber'd ſpectres, more gh,
Centaurs, and double ſhapes, beſiege the door. Dryden
Pitchy and dark the night ſometimes appears; -
Qur joy and wonder ſometimes ſhe excites,
With ſtars unnumber'd. Prior
Usoº q91ousness. n.ſ. Incompliance; diſobedience."
They make one man's particular failings, confining laws
to others; and convey them, as ſuch, to their ſucceeders,
who are bold to miſname all unalſ.guiouſneſs to their incog-
tancy, preſumption. Brown's Pulgar Errºr.
UN obe/YED. adj. Not obeyed.
Not leave
Unworſhipp'd, unabey'd, the throne ſupreme. Miltºn.
UNobjected, adj. Not charged as a fault, or contrary argu-
incut.
What will he leave unobjećled to Luther, when he makes
it his crime that he defied the devil. Atterbury.
UN obnoxious. adj. Not liable; not expoſed to any hurt.
So unobnoxious now; ſhe hath buried both;
For none to death ſins, that to fin is loth. Donne,
In fight they ſtood
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pain'd. Milton's Par. Lºft.
UNobse/Rvable. adj. Not to be obſerved; not diſcover-
able.
A piece of glaſs reduced to powder, the ſame which, when
entire, freely tranſmitted the beams of light, acquiring by
contuſion, a multitude of minute ſurfaces, reflects, in a con-
fuſed manner, little and ſingly unobſervable images of the
lucid body, that from a diaphanous, it degenerates into a
white body. Bºyle on Colºuri.
UNobse'Rv ANT. adj.
I. Not obſequious.
2. Not attentive.
The unobſervant multitude may have ſome general, con-
fuſed apprehenſions of a beauty, that gilds the outſide fºllº
of the univerſe. Glanville.
UNobserved. adj. Not regarded; not attended to; notheed-
ed; not minded. - -
The motion in the minute parts of any ſolid body, which
is the principal cauſe of violent motion, though nº
paſſeth without ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
They the ſon of God, our Saviour meek,
Sung vićtor; and from heav'nly feaſt refreſh'd,
Brought on his way with joy; he, wnobſerv'd, •r
Home to his mother's houſe private return'd. Miltºn.
Every unwonted meteor is portentous, and the *::::
of any unobſerved ſtar, ſome divine prognoſtick. Glanville.
Such was the Boyne, a poor, inglorious ſtream,
That in Hibernian vales obſcurely ſtray'd, 1.
And, unobſerv'd, in wild meanders play'd, Addison.
Had I err'd in this caſe, it had been a well-mean
and might have paſs'd unobſerved.
Unobserving. aii. Inattentive; not heedful.
His fimilitudes are not placed, as our unº
tell us, in the heat of any action; but commº"
clining.
UN obst RU’ct FD. adj. Not hindered; not ſtopped.
Unobſtructed matter flies away, -------
Riº void, and knows not where to ſtay. Blackmore.
UN obstructive. adj. Not raiſing any obſtacle.
Why ſhould he halt at either ſatiºn? why Blackmºre.
Not forward run in unobſtructive ſky
UNobTA/INED. adj. Not gained ; not acquitº".
As the will doth now work upon that obje
t miſtake,
Atterluy.
rving criticks
lvin its de-
Dryden.
ired. 3 by deſire,
ºned: ſo like-
which is motion towards the end, as yet *. alſo by
wiſe upon the ſame hereafter received, it ſhall wo 20 *.
love.
UN obvious. adj. Not readily occurring.
Of all the metals, not any ſo conſtantly diſcloſeth its *
l lºuri.
obvious colour, as copper. Bºyle on C.
UNo'ccupied adj. Unpoſſeſſed. | find
If we ſhall diſcover further to the north pole. " ſhal Ray,
all that tract not to be vain, uſeleſs, or **** ſories, tº
The fancy hath power to create them in the ſen º:*g.
anoccupied by external impreſſions. Grew's Cº.
UNCF-
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N P
-amº----
Unoffered. adj. Not propoſed to acceptance.
For the ſad buſineſs of Ireland, he could not expreſs a
greater ſenſe, there being nothing left on his part tunºffered or
undone. Clarendon.
NoFFE'NDING. adj.
I. Harmleſs; innocent.
Thy unºffending life I could not ſave; -
ºr weeping could I follow to thy gravč. Dryden.
2. Sinleſs ; pure from fault.
If thoſe holy and wºffending ſpirits, the angels, veil their
faces before the throne of his majeſty; with what awe ſhould
we, ſinful duſt and aſhes, *PProach that infinite power we
have ſo grievouſly offended. -
To UNø IL. v. a. To free from oil.
A tight maid, ere he for wine can aſk,
Gueſſes his meaning, and uncil, the flaſk.
UNo'PENING. adj. Not opening.
Benighted wanderers, the foreſt o'er,
Curſe the ſav'd candle, and unopening door. Pope.
UNo PERATIVE. adj. Producing no effects. -
The wiſhing of a thing is not Properly the willing of it;
but an imperfect velleity, and imports no more than an idle,
ºperative complacency in the end, with a dire: abhorrence
of the means. South's Sermons.
Usorro'sed, adj. Not encountered by any hoſtility or ob-
ſtruction.
Proud, art thou met thy hope was to have reach'd
The height of thy aſpiring an ºppos'd,
The throne of God unguarded.
To every nobler portion of the town,
The curling billows roll their reſtleſs tie :
In parties now they ſtruggle up and down,
Aogers's Sermons.
Dryden.
Milton's Par. Lºft.
As armies, unoppos'd, for prey divide. Dryden.
The people, like a headlong torrent go,
And ev'ry dam they break or overflow:
But unoppos'd they either loſe their force,
9r wind in volumes to their former courſe. Dryden.
UN off DERLY. Diſordered; irregular. -
Since ſome ceremonies muſt be uſed, every man would
have his own faſhion; whereof what other old be the
iſſue, but infinite diſtraction, and unorderſy confuſion in the
church. Sanderſon.
UNo'RDINARY. adj. Uncommon ; unuſual.
I do not know how they can be excuſed from murder, who
kill monſtrous births, becauſe of an unordinary ſhape, with-
out knowing whether they have a rational ſoul or no. L.
Uso'RGANIZEP. ºff. Having no parts inſtrumental to the
nouriſhment of the reſt.
It is impoſſible for any organ to regulate itſelf: much leſs
may we refer, this regulation to the animal ſpirits, an ºn-
organized fluid. Grew's Coſmology.
TINor I'GINAL.
UNOR1'GINATED.
I toil'd out my uncouth paſſage, forc'd to ride
Th'untračtable abyſs, plung'd in the womb
Of unºriginal night, and chaos wild. Milton's Par. Loft.
In ſcripture, Jehovah ſignifics, that God is underived,
unoriginated, and ſelf-exiſtent. Stephens's Sermons.
UNo'RTHopox. adj. Not holding pure doariné.
A fat benefice became a crime againſt its incumbent; and
he was ſure to be unorthodox, that was worth the plun-
dering. Decay ºf Piety.
U.Now ED. adj. Having no owner.
England now is left
To tug and ſcramble, and to part by th’ teeth
The unawed intereſt of proud, ſwelling ſtate. Shakespeare.
UNo'w NED. adj.
1. Having no owner.
2. Not acknowledged.
Of night or lonelineſs it recks me not;
I fear the dread events that dog them both,
Leaſt ſome ill-greeting touch attempt the perſon -
Of our unowned ſiſter. - Milton,
- Oh happy, unown'd youths your limbs can bear
The ſcorching dog-ſtar, and the winter's air; -
While the rich infant, nurs'd with care and pain,
Thirſts with each heat, and coughs with ev'ry rain. Gay.
To UNPA cK. v. a.
1. To diſburden; to exonerate.
I, the ſon of a dear father murther'd,
Muſt, like a whore, unpack my heart with words. Shakeſp.
2. To open any thing bound together. -
He had a great parcel of glaſſes packed up, which, when
he had unpacked, a great many cracked of themſelves. Boyle.
UNPACKED. adj. Not collected by unlawful artifices.
The knight
Reſolv'd to leave him to the fury
}a}. Having no birth; ungencrated.
Of juſtice, and an unpack'd jury. Hudibras.
UNPA'ID. adj.
1. Not diſcharged. - - -
Receive from us knee tribute not unpaid. Milton,
-
N2 hecatomb unſain, nor vows unpaid;
w - -
On Greeks, accurs'd, this dire confuſiºn bring.
→ Dryden.
What can *one, oh ever-injur'd ſhade y
Thy fate unpity'd, and thy rites unpaid 2 Pope.
* Nº receiving dues or debt.
How often are relations *glected, and tradeſmen unpaid,
for the ſupport of this vanity
* - - Collier.
h embroider'd ſuit, at leaſt, he deem'd his prey;
Th; ſuit, an *paid taylor ſnatch'd away. Pope.
3. UNPA'id for. That ſº which the price is not yet given;
taken on truſt.
Richer, than dºing nothing for a bauble;
Prouder, than Fuſiling in unpaid fºr fiſk. Shakeſpeare.
UNPA'INed. ad;. Suffering no pain.
Too unequal work we find,
Againſt unequal arms to fight in pain;
Againſt unpain'd, impaſſive.
UNPA inful. Adj. Giving no pain.
That is generally called hard, which will put us to pain,
ſooner than change figure; and that ſoft, which changes the
ſituation of its parts, "ſºn ºn eaſy and unpainful touch. Lock.
UNPA/LArab E. adj, Nauſeous; diſguſting.
The man who laugh’d but once to ſee an aſ
Mumbling to make the croſs-grain'd thiſtles paſs,
Might laugh again to ſee a jury chaw
The prickles of unpalatable law. Dryden.
A good man will be no more diſturbed at the me.
thods of correction, than by ſeeing his friend take unpala-
table phyſick. Collier on Kindneſs.
UNPAſ&amp;AgoNED. adj. Unequalled ; unmatched.
Either your *Paragon'd miſtreſs is dead, or ſhe's out-priz'd
by a trifle. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
NPARA’LLELED. adj. Not matched; not to be matched;
having no equal.
Milton's Par. Lºft.
I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His fame, ºarallelled, haply amplified. Shakeſpeare.
Who had thought this clime had held
A deity ſo unparall!"d 2 A4ilton's Arcades.
The father burſt out again in tears, upon receiving this in-
ſtance of an unparalled fidelity from one, who he thought
had given herſelf up to the poſſeſſion of another. Adijon.
9 fast unparallell'd / C Charlesſ C) beft of kings |
What ſtars their black, diſaſtrous influence ſhed
On thy nativity? Phillips.
UNPA/R dos ABLE. ad;... [impardonable, Fr.] Irremiſſible.
It was thought in him an unpardonable offence to alter any
thing: in us as intolerable, that we ſuffer any thing to remain
unaltered. Hooker.
Oh, tis a fault too unpardºnable. Shakeſpeare.
The kinder the maſter, the more unpardonable is the
traitor. L’E/ºrange.
Conſider how unpardonable the refuſal of ſo mº, grace
muſt render us. Fogers's Sermons.
UNPAR Don Aply. adv. Beyond forgiveneſs.
Luther's conſcience turns theſe reaſonings upon him, and
infers, that Luther muſt have been unpardonably wicked in
uſing maſſes for fifteen years. Atterbury.
UNPA/R Don Ed. adj.
I. Not forgiven.
How know we that our ſouls ſhall not this night be required,
Jaden with thoſe unpardoned fins, for which we propoſed to
repent tomorrow. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Not diſcharged; cancelled by a legal pardon. -
My returning into England unpardoned, hath deſtroyed
that opinion. Raleigh.
UNPA'RpoNING, adj. Not forgiving.
Curſe on th’ unpard'ning prince, whom tears can draw
To no remorſe; who rules by lion's law;
And deaf to pray'rs, by no ſubmiſſion bow’d,
Rends all alike, the penitent and proud. Dryden.
UNPA's LIAMENTA 5 INEss. n.ſ. Contrariety to the uſage or
conſtitution of parliament. -
Senſible he was of that diſreſpect; reprehending them for
the unparliamentarineſs of their remonſtrance in print. Clar.
UNPA'RLIAMENTARY. adj. Contrary to the rules of parlia-
mº. ſecret of all this unprecedented proceeding in their
maſters, they muſt not impute to their freedom. in debate,
but to that unparliamentary abuſe of ſetting individuals upon
their ſhoulders, who were hated by God and man. Swift.
UNPA'RTED. adj. Undivided ; not ſeparated.
Too little it eludes the dazzl’d fight,
Becomes mix’d ...; *::: #.
UNPARTIAL. adj. Equal; honeſt. Not in uſe. -
Clear evidence of truth, after a ſerious and *:::::: -
Prior.
mination. - - -
UNPA'RTIALLY. adv. Equally ; º: ... I
Deem it not impoſſible for you to err; fift unpartially .
own hearts, whether it be force of reaſon, or vehemency o
affection, which hath bred theſe opinions in you. Płooter.
&gt; 29 T UN*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N P
T. r. A ' . adj. Admitting no paſſage.
vº. which ſhill not dº. according to theſe
things, ſhall be made not only unpaſable for men, but moſt
hateful to wild beaſts. - - Efth. xvi 24.
They are vaſt and unpaſable mountains, which the labour
and curioſity of no mortal has ever yet known. Temple.
Making a new ſtandard for money, muſt make all mo-
ney which is lighter than that ſtandard, unpaſable. Locke.
You ſwell yourſelf as though you were a man of learning
already; you are thereby building a moſt unfºſſible barrier
againſt all improvement. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
UNPA'ssion ATE. Wadi. Free from paſſion; calm ; impar-
UNPA'ssion ATE D. ; tial.
He attended the king into Scotland, and was ſworn a
counſellor in that kingdom; where, as I have been inſtructed
by unpaſſionate men, he did carry himſelf with fingular ſweet-
neſs. //otton's Buckingham.
More ſober heads have a ſet of miſconceits, which are as
abſurd to an unpaſſionated reaſon, as thoſe to our unbiaſed
ſenſes. Glanville's Scepſ. c. 13.
The rebukes, which their faults will make hardly to be
avoided, ſhould not only be in ſober, grave, and unpaſſionate
words, but alſo alone and in private. Locke on Education.
UNPA'ssion Ately. adv. Without paſſion.
Make us unpaſſionately to ſee the light of reaſon and re-
ligion. K. Charles.
UNPATHED. adj. Untracked; unmarked by paſſage.
A courſe more promiſing,
Than a wild dedication of yourſelves
To unfath’d waters, undream'd ſhores; moſt certain
To miſeries enough. Shakeſp. Jºinter Tale.
UNPA'ws Ed., adj. Not given to pledge.
He roll'd his eyes, that witneſs'd huge diſmay,
Where yet, unpaign'd, much learned lumber lay. Pope.
To Us PA^x. v. a. To undo. A low Judicrous word.
Pay her the debt you owe her, and unpay the villainy you
have done her: the one you may do with ſterling money,
and the other with current repentance. Shakeſpeare.
UNPEA’ceABLE. adj. Quarrelſome , inclined to diſturb the
tranquillity of others.
Lord, purge out of all hearts thoſe unpracrall, rebellious,
mutinous, and tyrannizing, cruel ſpirits; thoſe prides and
haughtineſſes, judging and condemning, and deſpiſing of
others. Hammond's Fundamentals.
The deſign is to reſtrain men from things, which make
them miſerable to themſelves, unpeaceable and troubleſome to
the world. Tillºtſon.
To UNPE'o. v. a. To open anything cloſed with a peg.
Unfºg the baſket on the houſe's top;
Let the birds fly. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
UNPE'ssios ED. adj. Not kept in dependance by a penſion.
Could penſion'd Boileau laſh in honeſt ſtrain
Flatt’rers and bigots, ev’n in Louis' reign;
And I not ſtrip the gilding off a knave,
Unplac'd, unpenſion'd, no man's heir or ſlave Pote.
To Us PE'ople. v. a. To depopulate; to deprive of inhabi-
tants.
The land
In antique times was ſavage wilderneſs,
Unpeopl"d, unmanur’d. Fairy Queen.
Shall war wipeople this my realm ? Shakeſpeare.
To few unknown
Long after ; now unpeopl’d, and untrod. Milton.
The lofty mountains feed the ſavage race,
Yet few; and ſtrangers in th’ unpeopl’d place. Dryden.
He muſt be thirty-five years old, a doctor of the faculty,
and eminent for his religion and honeſty; that his raſhneſs
and ignºrance may not unemple the commonwealth. Addison.
UNPERCE(iv E. adſ. Not obſerved ; not heeded; not ſenſibly
diſcovered ; not known.
The aſhes, wind unperceived ſhakes off. Bacon.
He alone
To find where Adam ſhelter'd, took his way,
Not unperceiv'd of Adam. Milton's Par. Loft.
Thus daily changing, by degrees I’d waſte,
Still quitting ground, by unperceiv'd decay,
And ſteal myſelf from life, and melt away. Dryden.
Unperceiv'd the heav'ns with ſtars were hung. Dryden. .
Oſt in pleaſing taſks we wear the day,
While ſummer ſuns roll unperceiv'd away. Pope.
UNPºkce'rvedly, adv. So as not to be perceived.
Some oleaginous particles, unperceivedly, aſſociated them-
ſelves to it. Boyle.
UNPE(RFEct, adj. [impe fait, Fr. imperfºlus, Lat.] Incompletc.
APelles' picture of Álexander at Epheſus, and his Venus,
which he left at his death unperfect in Chios, were the
chiºſ. Peacham on Drawing.
Usrº ****TNESS. m. ſ. Imperfeółion; incompleteneſs.
Virgil and Horate ſpying the unperfectneſs in Ennius and
Plautus, by true imitation of Homer and Euripides, brought
Poetry to perfectineſs. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
UNPER for M.Ed. adj. Undone; not done.
A good law without execution, is like an tº therſ.”
º, ºftº
º adj. Laſting to Pºpºuty; exempt fº
We are ſecured to reap in another world everlaſ;
periſhable ſclicities. Hammond's gº..
UNPE/R.JURED. adj. Frce from perjury. “udientals,
Heware of death; thou can't not die ºperjur’d
And leave an unaccompliſh'd love behind. 2
Thy vows are mine. Drd
UNPER PLE'xED. aff. Diſentangled; not embarraſſ.J. 1jden,
In learning, little ſhould be propoſed to the mind at Once:
and that being fully maſtered, proceed to the next adjoin,
part, yet unknown, ſimple, unperplexed propoſition. º
UNPER spi’RAble. adj. Not to be emitted through the º:
of the ſkin.
Bile is the moſt unperſpirable of animal fluids. Arbuthnot
UNPERSUA’DABLE. adj. Inexorable; not to be perſuaded -
He, finding his ſiſter’s unperſuadable melancholy, irº
the love of Amphialus, had for a time left her Co. .
UNPE*TR. F. Ed. adj. Not turned to ſtone. J.
In many concreted plants, ſome parts remain unpetrift'4;
that is, the quick and livelier parts remain as wood, mi
were never yet converted. Brown's hugar Erzur.
UNPHiloso/PHICAL. adj. Unſuitable to the rule of Philoſº-
phy, or right reaſon.
Your conceptions are unphilºſºphical. You forget that the
brain has a great many ſmall fibres in its texture; which,
according to the different ſtrokes they receive from theaſ.
mal ſpirits, awaken a correſpondent idea. Cºlier.
It became him who created them, to ſet them in ordſ.
and, if he did ſo, it is unphilºſºphical to ſeek for any other
origin of the world, or to pretend that it nºgh' ºr of
a chaos by the mere laws of nature.
UNPHILoso PHicALLY. adv. In a manner contrary to the
rules of right reaſon.
They forget that he is the firſt cauſe of all thing, and
diſcourſe moſt tº ilºſºphically, abſurdly, and unſuitabſ, to the
nature of an infinite being ; whoſe influence muſt ſet the firſt
wheel a-going. South's Sºmani,
Uº. m. ſ. Incongruity with philoſophy.
I could diſpenſe with the unphilºſºphianſ of this their
hypotheſis, were it not unchriſtian. Morris,
To UNPHilo'sophize. v. a. To degrade from the character
of a philoſopher. A word made by Pºpe. '
Our paſſions, our intereſts flow in upon us, and unphilºſ-
phize us into mere mortals. Pºpe.
UNPIE’Rced. adj. Not penetrated ; not pierced.
Th’ unpierc'd ſhade imbrown'd the noontide bow'rs, Milt.
True Witney broad-cloth, with its ſhag unſhorn,
Umpierc'd, is in the laſting tempeſt worn. Gay.
UNPI'll A RED. adi. Diveſted of pillars.
See the cirque falls ' th' unillar'd temple nods!
Streets pav'd with heroes Tiber choak'd withgods! Pºſt,
UNP1’llow ED. adj. Wanting a pillow.
Perhaps ſome cold bank is her bolſter now,
Or'gainſt the rugged bark of ſome broad elm,
Leans her unpillºw'd head, fraught with ſad fears. Milº.
To UNPI'N. v. a. To open what is ſhut, or ſiſtened with:
pin.
My love doth ſo approve him,
That even his ſtubbornneſs, his checks and frowns.
(Prythee unpin me) have grace and favour in them. Shaft.
Unpin that ſpangled breaſt-plate which you wear,
That th' eyes of buſy fools may be ſtopt there.
Who is the honeſt man f
He that doth ſtill and ſtrongly good purſue;
To God, his neighbour, and himſelf moſt true:
Whom neither force, nor fawning can Herbert
Unpin, or wrench from giving º i. wrºt/7,
UNPI'NKED. adi. Not marked with eyelet holes;
Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'di' th'heel. i.ſº
UN PITIED. adj. Not compaſſionated; not regarded with ly
pathetical º b hand, at hand -
Richard yet lives; but at hand, a :-
Inſues his º and unpitied end. sº Rich. III.
Rich in the world's opinion, and men's Prº**
And full in all we cou’d deſire, but days:
He that is warn'd of this, and ſhall forbear
To vent a figh for him, or ſhed a tear;
May he live long ſcorn'd, and unfity d fall, B), Cºrld,
And want a mourner at his funeral. p.
But he whoſe words and fortunes diſagree, Rºſamº.
Abſurd, unpity'd, grows a publick jeſt. ãº in
He that does not ſºure himſelf of a ſtock of "P" his ad-
his greatneſs, ſhall moſt certainly fall ampitied }.Effragº.
verſity. -
As the greateſt curſe that I can give, - zºt,
Unpitied i: depos'd, and after live. Dryden'ſ Aurenzº
As
Dºnne.
Newtº: (º, -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N P
T
U N P
As ſome ſad turtle his loſt love deplores;
Thus, far from Delia, to the winds I mourn,
Alike unheard, unfity'd, and forlorn. Pope.
Paſſion unfity'd, and ſucceſsleſs love,
Plant daggers in my heart, and aggravate -
My other griefs. - Addiſon's Cato.
UNP1"tifully adv. Unmercifully; without mercy.
He beat him moſt pitifully.
-Nay, that he did not; he beat him moſt unpitifully. Shakespeare
UNPITYING. adj. Having no compaſion.
To ſhame, to chains, or to a certain grave,
Lead on, unpitying guides, behold your ſlave.
UNPLA'er D. adj. Having no place of dependance.
Could penſion'd Boileau laſh in honeſt ſtrain
Flatt’rers and bigots, ev’n in Louis’ reign :
And I not ſtrip the gilding off a knave,
Unplac'd, unpenſion'd? Pope.
UNPLAGUED. adj. Not tormented.
Ladies, that have your feet -
Unplagu'd with corns, we’ll have a bout with you. Shakeſp.
UNPLANTED. adj. Not planted; ſpontaneous.
Figs there unplanted through the fields do grow,
Such as fierce Cato did the Romans ſhow. J/aller.
UNPLA'Us. BLE. adj. Not plauſible; not ſuch as has a fair ap-
pearance.
There was a mention of granting five ſubſidies; and that
meeting being upon very unpopular, and unplauſible reaſons,
immediately diſſolved, thoſe five ſubſidies were exacted, as if
an act had paſſed to that purpoſe. Clarendon.
I, under fair pretence of friendly ends,
And well-plac'd words of gloſing courteſy,
Baited with reaſons not unplauſºle,
Win me into the eaſy-hearted man,
And hug him into ſnares. Milton,
UNFLA’us;y E. adi. Not approving.
'Tis like he'll queſtion me,
Why ſuch unplºſive eyes are bent on him. Shakeſpeare.
UNPLEA's ANT. adj. Not delighting; troubleſome ; uneaſy.
Their ſkilful ears perceive certain harſh and un, leaſant diſ-
cords in the found of our common prayer, ſuch as the rules
of divine harmony, ſuch as the laws of God cannot bear. Hooker.
O ſweet Portial
Here are a few of the un, lºſº/? words
That ever blotted paper. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
Wiſdom is very unpleaſant to the unlearned. Eccleſ v. 20.
Upon Adam’s diſobedience, God chaſed him out of para-
diſe, the moſt delicious part of the earth, into ſome other,
the moſt barren and &amp;npleaſant. //oodward's Nat. Hiſł.
UNPLEA's ANTLY, adv. Not elightfully ; uneaſily.
We cannot boaſt of good-breeding, and the art of life;
but yet we don't live unpleaſantly in primitive ſimplicity and
good humour. - - - Pope.
UNPLE'AsANT: Ess. n.ſ. Want of qualities to give delight.
As for unpleaſantneſs of found, if it doth happen the good
of men's ſouls (oth deceive our cars, that we note it not, or
arm them with ºatience to endure it. Hooker.
Many people annot at all endure the air of London, not
only for its unple, an "ºft, but for the ſuffocations which it
cauſes. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
All men are willing to ſkulk out of ſuch company; the
fober for the hazards, and the jovial for the unpleaſantneſs
of it. Government of the Tongue.
DNPLEA's ED. adj. Not pleaſed ; not delighted.
Me rather had, my heart might feel your love,
Granville.
Than my unpleas'd eye feel your courteſy. Shakeſpeare.
Condemn'd to live with ſubjects ever mute,
A ſalvage prince, unpleas'd, though abſolute. Dryden.
UNPLEA's ING. adj. Offenſive 3 diſguſting; giving no delight.
Set to dreſs this garden : -
How dares thy tongue ſound this unpleaſing news? Shakespeare .
Hence the many miſtakes, which have made learning ſo
wnpleaſing and ſo unſucceſsful. . . Milton.
If all thoſe great painters, who have left us ſuch fair plat-
forms, had rigorouſly obſerved it in their figures, they had
made things more regularly true, but withal very un-
pleaſing. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Howe'er unpleaſing be the news you bring,
I blame not you, but your imperious king. - * Dryden.
UNPL1(ANT. adj. Not eaſily bent ; not conforming to the
will.
The chizel hath more glory than the pencil; that being ſo
hard an inſtrument, and working upon ſo umpliant ſtuff, can
et leave ſtrokes of ſo gentle appearance. J/otton.
UNPLo'w ED. adj. Not plowed. -
Good found land, that hath lain long unplºwed. Mºrtimer.
To UNPLU'Mr. adj. To ſtrip of plumes; to degrade.
In the moſt ordinary phaenomena in nature, we ſhall find
enough to ſhame confidence, and unplume dogmatizing. Glanv.
UNPoE/TICAL.
UN Poe TICK.
Nor for an epithet that fails,
Bite off your unpoetick nails.
łaj. Not ſuch as becomes a poet.
Unjuſt why you ſhou'd in ſuch veins;
Reward your fingers for your brains f
UNPo'LisHFI, adj.
1. Not ſmoothed; not brightened by attrition.
Palladio, having noted in an old arch at Verona, ſome
Part of the materials cut in fine forms, and ſome unpoliſhed,
doth conclude, that the antients did leave the outward face
of their marbles, or free-ſtone, without any ſculpture, till
they were laid in the body of the building. //otton.
He affirms it to have been the antient cuſtom of all the
Greeks, to ſet "Pºpoliſhed ſtones inſtead of images, to the
honour of the gods. Stillingfleet.
2. Not civilized; not refined.
Finding new words,
Such as of old wifebards employ'd to make
Unpºliſh'd men their wild retreats forſakº. Waller
Thoſe firſt unpoliſh'd matrons, big and bold, -
Gave ſuck to infants of gigantick mould. Dryden.
UNPoli TE, adj. [imtoli, Fr. in pºlitus, Lat.] Not elegant:
not refined ; not civil. S**** &gt;
Diſcourſes for the pulpit ſhould be caſt into a plain me-
thod, and the reaſons ranged under the words, firſt, ſecondl
and thirdly; however they may be now fancied to fºnd º:
polite, or unfaſhionable. Watts's Improv. of the Mind.
ºv'rº. *j, ſimpollutuſ, Lat J. Not corrupted; not del
ed.
Bp. Corbet.
Lay her i' th' earth;
And from her fair and unpolluted fleſh
May violets ſpring ! Shakeſpeare's Hamlet:
"Till oft converſe with heav'nly habitants
Begin to caſt a beam on th’ outward ſhape,
The unpolluted temple of the mind,
And turns it by degrees to the ſoul's eſſence,
*Till all be made immortal. Milton.
Though unpolluted yet with adual ill,
She half commits, who fins but in her will.
UNP9'PULAR. adj. Not fitted to pleaſe the people.
The practices of theſe men, under the covert of feigned
zeal, made the appearance of ſincere devotion ridiculous and
unpopular. Addiſon's Freeholder, No 37.
UNP9 #1 ABLE. adj. [un and portable.] Not to be carried.
Had their cables of iron chains had any great length, they
had been unportable ; and being ſhort, the ſhips muſt have
funk at an anchor in any ſtream of weather or counter-
tide. Raleigh.
UN rosse'ss ED. adj. Not had ; not obtained.
He claims the crown.
—ſs the chair empty is the ſword unſway’d
Dryden.
Is the king dead the empire unpoſſ;'d? Shakeſpeare.
Such vaſt room in nature unfº/js'd
By living ſoul, deſert, and deſolate,
Only to ſhine, yet ſcarce to contribute
Each orb a glimpſe of light. Milton.
The cruel ſomething unpoffſ'd,
Corrodes and leavens all the reſt. Prior.
UNPosse'ssING. adj. Having no poſſeſſion.
Thou unpaſſaſſing battard, doſt thou think,
That I would ſtand againſt thee * Shakeſpeare.
UNPRA’cticABLE. adj. Not feaſible.
I try’d ſuch of the things that came into my thoughts, as
were not in that place and time unpracticable. Boyle.
UNPRA’ct ISED. adj. Not ſkilful by uſe and experience;
raw ; being in the ſtate of a novice.
The full ſum of me
Is an unleſſon'd girl, unſchool’d, unpračis'd. Shakeſpeare.
Unpracáis'd, unprepar'd, and ſtill to ſeek. 44ilton.
I am young, a novice in the trade;
The fool of love, unpractis'd to perſuade,
And want the ſoothing arts. Dryden.
His tender eye, by too direét a ray, -
Wounded, and flying from unpractis'd day. Prior.
b'NPR AI's ED. adj. Not celebrated; not praiſed.
The land,
In antique times was ſalvage wilderneſs ; , , -
Unpeopl’d, unmanur'd, unprov’d, unprais'd, Fairy Queen.
If all the world -
Sould in a pet of temperance feed on pulſe, -
Drink the clear ſtream, and nothing wear but frieze,
Th’ all-giver would be unthank'd, wou'd be unprais'd, Milt.
- If young African for fame
His waſted country freed from Punick rage,
The deed becomes unprais'd, the man at leaſt, -
And loſes, though but verbal, his reward. Milton.
Nor paſs unprais'd the veſt and veil divine, .
Which wand'ring foliage, and rich flow’rs entwine. Dryden.
UNPREcA'Rious. adj. Not dependent on another; .
The ſtars, which grace the high expanſion bright,
By their own beams, and unprecarious light,
At a vaſt diſtance from each other lie. Blackmore.
UNPRE/ceden rep. adj. Not juſtifiable by any example. , .
The ſecret of all this unprecedented proceeding in their
maſters, they muſt not impute to freedom. sº.
e<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N P
U N P
irs Epiſcr. v. a. To retraćt predition.
To tº I muſt uſe, thou ſay'ſ prediction clfe
wiji ºradº, and fail me of the throne.
UNPREFER Ed. adj. Not advanced. - -
To make a ſcholar, keep him under, while he is young, or
unpreferred. Collier on Pride.
UNPRE'GN ANT. adj. Not prolifick.
This deed unſhapes me quite, makes me unpregnant,
And dull to all proceedings. Shakeſpeare.
UNPREJu'dicate. adj. Not prepoſſeſſed by any ſettled notions.
A pure mind in a chaſte body, is the mother of wiſdom,
fincere principles, and unprejudiciate underſtanding. Taylor.
UNPRE'Judiced. adj. Free from prejudice; free from pre-
poſſeſhon ; not pre-occupied by opinion ; void of precon-
ceived notions.
The meaning of them may be ſo plain, as that any
unprejudiced and reaſonable man may certainly underſtand
them. Tillotſon.
Several, when they had informed themſelves of our Sa-
viour's hiſtory, and examined, with unprejudiced minds, the
doëtrines and manners of his diſciples, were ſo ſtruck, that
they profeſſed themſelves of that ſect. Addiſon.
UNPRELATICAL. Unſuitable to a prelate.
The archbiſhop of York, by ſuch unprelatical, ignominious
arguments, in plain terms adviſed him to paſs that act. Claren.
UNPREME'DITATE D. adj. Not prepared in the mind before-
hand.
Aſk me what queſtion thou canſ poſſible,
And I will anſwer unpremeditated. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
He didates to me ſlumb'ring; or inſpires
Eaſy my unpremeditated verſe. Milton's Par. Loft.
The ſlow of ſpeech make unpremeditated harangues, or
converſe readily in languages that they are but little acquaint-
Milton.
ed with. Addiſon.
UNPRE PA/RED. adj.
1. Not fitted by previous meaſures.
Unpractis'd, unfrey ar'd, and ſtill to ſeek. Milton.
To come unprepar'd before him, is an argument that we
do not eſteem God. Duºpa's Rules for Devotion.
Fields are full of eyes, and woods have ears;
For this the wiſe are ever on their guard,
For, unforeſeen, they ſay, is unprepar’d.
2. Not made fit for the dreadful moment of departure.
I would not kill thy unprepared ſpirit;
No ; heavens forefeild. Shakeſp. Othello.
My unprepar'd, and unrepenting breath,
Was ſnatch'd away by the ſwift hand of death. Roſcommon.
UNPR EPA'Red N Ess. m. ſ. State of being unprepared.
I believe my innocency and unpreparedneſs to aſſert my
rights and honour, make me the moſt guilty in their eſteem;
who would not ſo eaſily have declared a war againſt me, if
I had firſt aſſaulted them. K. Charles.
UNPREposse'ssed. Not prepoſſeſſed ; not pre-occupied by
notionS.
The unprepºſſed on the one hand, and the well-diſpoſed
on the other, are affected with a due fear of theſe things. South.
It finds the mind naked and unprepaſſed with any former
notions, and ſo eaſily and inſenſibly gains upon the aſſent. South.
UNPRE'sse D. adj.
1. Not preſſed.
Have I my pillow left unºreſ'd in Rome
In theſe ſoft ſhades, unpreſs'd by human feet,
Thy happy Phoenix keeps his balmy ſeat.
2. Not inforced.
They left not any error in government unmentioned, or
wnpreſſed, with the ſharpeſt and moſt pathetical expreſ-
ſions. Carendon.
UNPRETE'NDING. adj. Not claiming any diſtinctions.
Bad writers are not ridiculed, becauſe ridicule ought to
be a pleaſure; but to undeceive and vindicate the honeſt and
unpretending part of mankind from impoſition. Pope.
UNPREVAILING. adj. Being of no force.
Throw to earth this unprevailing woe. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
UNPREve/NTED. adj.
I. Not previouſly hindered.
A pack of ſorrows, which wou'd preſs you down,
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Tickel.
If unprevented, to your timeleſs grave. Shakeſpeare
1. Not preceded by any thing. &amp; ſº
Thy grace
Comes unprevented, unimplor’d, unſought. Milton.
UNPR'NcFly. adj Urſuitable to a prince.
I could not have given my enemies greater advantages,
than by ſo unprincely in inconſtancy. K. Charles.
UNPºrep. aff. Not printed.
º it, till you have finiſhed theſe that are yº, 117.1-
910&amp;.
UNPR1'Nciplep. adj. Not ſettled in tenets or opinions. pe
r º Ilot think my fifter ſo to ſeek,
**ś.
Could ſtir the Conſ ant of light and noiſe -
Oth .* ºnſtant mood of her calm thoughts. Milºn.
thers betake them to ſtate affairs, with ſouls ſo unprinci-
pled in º and true generous breeding,
court ſhifts, and tyrannous aphoriſ -
higheſt points of wiſdom. pnoriſms, %. to them the
UNPRI's able. adj. Not valued ; not of diº. Educatiºn.
A baubling veſſel was he captain of, -
For ſhallow draught and bulk unprºfable.
UNPRocla, M ED. adj. Not notified by a publick ded
The Syrian king, who to ſurprize 3.
§: man, afīāſān-like, had levy'd war,
ar unproclaim'd Milton' -
UNP º adj. Uſeleſs; ſerving º: Hºff, i. xi.
e church being eaſed of unprºfita **--
offices may the i. be ... ." Jitable labours, i.
Should he reaſon with unprofitable talk : h vºker.
- My ſon Onefimus I have begotten in my bonds; º 3.
º.." was to thee unprofitable, but now proß to º
They receive aliment ſufficient, and yet no mor
can well digeſt ; and withal ſweat out the coarſeſ and
fitably juice. Bacon'; ºiſ.
It is better to fall honourably, than to ſurvive in in ift.
profitable and unglorious life. it.
Then they who brothers better claim diſown hgº,
Defraud their clients, and to lucre ſold, 2
Sit brooding on unprofitable gold.
With ſhame and ſorrow fill’d,
For plotting an unprofitable crime.
An ox that waits the coming blow,
Old and unprofitable to the plough.
With tears ſo tender,
As any heart, but only her’s, could move;
Trembling before her bolted doors he flood,
And there pour'd out th' unprofitable flood.
UNPRI’son ED adj. Set free from confinement,
Several deſires led parts away,
Water declin'd with earth, the air did ſtay;
Fire roſe, and each from other but unty'd,
Themſelves unpriſon'd were, and puriſy'd,
UNPR1 zED. adj. Not valued.
Not all the dukes of wat'riſh Burgundy,
Can buy this unpriz'd, precious maid of me. Shalºſar.
UNPR of ANE D. adj. Not violated.
Unſpoil'd ſhall be her arms, and unprºftºn'd
Her holy limbs with any human hand:
And in a marble tomb laid in her native land.
UNPRo', 1 TABLE Ness. m. ſ. Uſeleſsneſs.
We are ſo perſuaded of the unprofitablºnſ of your ſcience,
that you can but leave us where you find us; but if you ſuc-
ceed, you increaſe the number of your party. Addison,
UNPRO(FITABLY. adv. Uſeleſsly; without advantage,
I ſhou’d not now unprofitably ſpend
Myſelf in words, or catch at empty hope, *
By airy ways, for ſolid certainties. B. jºhſin,
Our country's cauſe,
That drew our ſwords, now wreſts’em from our hands,
And bids us not delight in Roman blood
Unprofitably ſhed.
UNPROFITED. adi. Having no gain.
Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds,
Rather than make unprofited return.
UNPRoll'Fick. adj. Barren ; not produćtive. -
Great rains drown many inſects, and render their eggs
unprolifick, or deſtroy them. Hall.
UNPRO/MIsiNG. adj. Giving no promiſe of excellence; hav-
ing no appearance of value. • ----.
If he be naturally liſtleſs and dreaming, this unprºmiſing
that flattery, and
Shalºft,
ration.
hilemon II.
e than they
Drydºn.
Dryden,
Dryden.
Dryden.
Dºnne.
Dryden. }
Addison's Cali,
Sha'ºzart,
diſpoſition is none of the eaſieſt to be dealt with: #.
An attempt as difficult and unpromiſing of ſucceſ, as f
ſhould make the eſſay, to produce ſome new kinds of º: .
out of ſuch ſenſeleſs materials. Bently.
UNPRONou Nce D. adj. Not uttered; not ſpoken.
Mad'ſt imperfect words, with childiſh trips, Miltºn.
Half-pronounc'd, ſlide through my infant lips.
UN PROPER. adj. Not peculiar. bed
Millions nightly lie in thoſe unproper beds, 17. ,
Which they . iº peculiar. sha {ſ}. º
UNPRO/PERLY." adv. Contrarily to propriety; impº”
I kneel before thee, and unproperly
Shew duty as miſtaken all the while '; Cºriolanuſ
Between the child and parent. sºftarº Cºriº
UNPRoP1"rious, adj. Not favourable; inauſpiciou"
'Twas when the dog-ſtar's unprofitious ray
Smote ev'ry brain, and wither'd ev'ry bay, Pft,
Sick was the ſun. ing elſ
UNPRoportion Ed. adj. Not ſuited to ſomething”
Give thy thoughts no tongue, art.
Nor any ºpºrind thought his act. Shałºff:
UNpropped. d. Not ſupported; not uphºld.
He lives at random, careleſsly diffus'd,
With languiſh’d head unprop'd,
As one paſt hope, abandon'd, . . . y ſki,
And by himſelf given over. Miltºn's 4".
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N P
-
-
The fatal fang drove deep within his thigh,
And cut the nerves; the nerves no more ſuſtain
The bulk; the bulk, unpropºd, falls headlong on the plain.
Dryden.
UNPROPo's ED. adj. Not propoſed.
The means are unpropos'd.
UNPRO'sperous. adj. [improſper, Lat.] Unfortunate; not proſ-
perous.
The winter had been very unproſperous and unſucceſsful to
Clarendon.
the king.
Nought unproff'rous ſhall thy ways attend,
Born with good omens, and with heav'n thy friend. Pope.
Usºſ. É Unſucceſsfully.
men a prince fights juſtly, and yet unproſperouſly, if he
cº". "..."...º.º.º.º.º.
he would think it the moſt reaſonable thingin the world. Taylor.
UNPROTE'cTED. adj. Not protected; not ſupported.
By woeful experience, thy both did learn, that to forſake
the true God of heaven, is to fall into all ſuch evils upon the
face of the earth, as men, either deſtitute of grace divine,
may commit, or unprotećled from above, endure. Hooker.
UNPRO'v Ed. adj. Not evinced by arguments,
The land,
In antique times was ſavage wilderneſs,
Unpeopl’d, unmanur'd, unproved, unprais'd. Spenſer.
There I found a freſh, unproved knight,
Whoſe manly hands, imbru'd in guilty blood,
Had never been. Fairy Queen, b. i.
There is much of what ſhould be demonſtrated, left un-
proved by thoſe chymical experiments. Boyle.
To UNPRovi D.E. v. a. To diveſt of reſolution or qualifications.
I'll not expoſtulate with her, left
Her beauty unprovide my mind again. Shakeſp. Othello.
Proſperity inviting every ſenſe,
With various arts to unprovide my mind;
What but a Spartan ſpirit can ſuſtain
The ſhock of ſuch temptations Southern.
UNPRovi'D ED. adj.
1. Not ſecured or qualified by previous meaſures.
Where ſhall I find one that can ſteal well ? O, for a fine
thief of two and twenty, or thereabout; I am heinouſly un-
provided. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
With his prepared ſword he charges home
My unprovided body, lanc'd my arm.
Tears, for a ſtroke foreſeen, afford relief;
But unprovided for a ſudden blow,
Like Niobe we marble grow,
And petrify with grief.
2. Not furniſhed.
Thoſe unprovided of tackling and vićtual, are forced to
ſea. K. Charles.
The ſeditious had neither weapons, order, nor counſel; but
being in all things unprovided, were ſlain like beaſts. Hayward.
Th'ambitious empreſs with her ſon is join'd,
And, in his brother's abſence, has deſign'd
Th’ unprovided town to take. Dryden.
True zeal is not a ſolitary, melancholy grace, as if only
fit to dwell in mean minds ; ſuch as are utterly unprovided of
all other natural, moral, or ſpiritual abilities. Sprat.
Courts are ſeldom unprovided of perſons under this cha-
raćter, on whom moſt enployments naturally fall. Swift.
UNPRovo/KED. adj. Not provoked. - *
The teeming earth, yet guiltleſs of the plough,
And unprovok'd, did fruitful ſtores allow. Dryden.
Let them forbear all open and ſecret methods of encou-
raging a rebellion ſo deſtructive, and ſo unprovoked. Addiſon.
UNPRU's ED. adj. Not cut ; not lopped.
The whole land is full of weeds;
Her fruit trees all unprun'd. Shakeſpeare.
UNPU'N is H.E.D. adj. [impunis, Lat.] Not puniſhed; ſuffered to
continue in impunity.
Bind not one fin upon another, for in one thou ſhalt not
be unpuniſhed. Ecclus vii. 8.
Divine juſtice will not let oppreſſion go unpuniſhed. L'E/ºr.
The vent'rous victor, march'd unpuniſh'd hence,
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
And ſeem'd to boaſt his fortunate offence. Dryden.
UNPU'RchAs ED. adj. Unbought.
Unpurchas'd plenty our full tables loads,
And part of what they lent, return tour gods. Denham.
UNPu‘R GED. adj. Not purged.
Is Brutus ſick 2
And will he ſtcal out of his wholeſome bed,
To tempt the rheumy and umpurged air,
To add unto his ſickneſs Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
UNPu'RPos ED. adj. Not deſigned.
Do it
Or thy precedent ſervices are all
But accidents unpurpos'd. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
UNPU'Blick. adj. Private; not generally known.
Virgins muſt be retired and unpublick: for all freedom of
ſociety is a violence done to virginity, not in its natural, but
in its moral capacity; that is, it loſes part of its ſeverity and
Dryden.
-
ſtriëneſs, by publiſhing that perſon,
whoſe thoughts muſt dwell in heaven
Us Pu‘blished. adj.
1. Secret; unknown.
All bleſt ſecrets;
º º virtues of the earth,
, Spring with my tears. Shakeſp. K.
2. Not given to the publick. ºakeſp. K. Lear,
Apply your care wholl - - a -
- - y to thoſe which are unpubliſh'd. Pope.
UNPURGEd. adj. Not purged; unpurified. publiſh ope
In her viſage round thoſe ſpots; unpurg'd
Vapours not yet into her ſubſtance tºrºi.
UNPURIFIED. adj.
I. Not freed from recrement.
2. Not cleanſed from ſin.
Our ſinful nation having been long in the furnace, is now
come out, but unpurified. Decay of Piety.
UNPURsuſed. adj. Not purſued.
All night the dreadleſs angel unpurſu'd
Through heav'n's wide champain É his way. Milton.
UNPUTRIFIED. adj. Not corrupted by rottenneſs.
Meat and drink laſt longer unputrified, or unſowered,
in winter than in ſummer. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
No animal unputrified, being burnt, yields any alkaline ſalt,
but putrified, yields a volatile alkali. Arbuthnot.
UNQUA/LIFIED. adj. Not fit.
"Till he has denudated himſelf of all theſe incumbrances,
he is utterly unqualified for theſe agonies. Decay of Piety.
All the writers againſt chriſtianity, ſince the revolution,
have been of the loweſt rank in regard to literature, wit,
and ſenſe; and upon that account wholly unqualified to pro-
pagate hereſies, unleſs among a people already abandoned. Sw.
Tories are more hated by the zealous whigs, than the
very papiſts, and as much unqualified for the ſmalleſt offices. Sw.
To UNQUALIFY. v. a. To diſqualify; to diveſt of qualifi-
Catlon.
Arbitrary power ſo diminiſhes the baſis of the female fi-
gure, as to unqualify a woman for an evening walk. Addison.
Our private misfortunes may unqualify us for charity: but
reflect, whether they may not have been inflićted by God, as
a juſt puniſhment of our former unmercifulneſs. Atterbury.
Deafneſs unqualifies me for all company. Swift.
UNQUA’RRELLABLE. adj. Such as cannot be impugned.
There ariſe unto the examination ſuch ſatisfactory and un-
quarrelable reaſons, as may confirm the cauſes generally re-
ceived. Brown's Wugar Errours.
To UNQUEE/N. v. a. To diveſt of the dignity of queen.
Embalm me,
Then lay me forth; although unqueen’d, yet like
A queen, and daughter to a king, inter me. Shakeſpeare.
UNQy E'Nch A Ble. adj. Unextinguiſhable.
Werepreſent wildfires burning inwater and unquenchable. Bac.
The people on their holidays,
Impetuous, inſolent, unquenchable. Milton’s Agoniſłes.
The criminal's penitence may have number'd him among
the ſaints, when our unretracted uncharitableneſs may ſend us
to unquenchable flames. Government of the Tongue.
Our love of God, our unquenchable deſires to promote our
well-grounded hopes to enjoy his glory, ſhould take the chief
place in our zeal. Sprat's Sermons.
UNQUE/NcHED. adj.
1. Not extinguiſhed.
We have heats of dungs, and of lime anquenched. Bacon.
2. Not extinguiſhable. - - -
Sadneſs, or great joy, equally diffipate the ſpirits, and im-
moderate exerciſe in hot air, with unquenched thirſt. Arbuth.
UNQUE'Nch AbleNEss. n. ſ. Unextinguiſhableneſs. -
I was amazed to ſee the unquenchallenſ of this fire. Haševil.
UNQUE'stion ABLE. adj.
1. Indubitable; not to be doubted.
The duke's carriage was ſurely noble throughout ; of un-
queſtionable courage in himſelf, and rather fearful of fame
than danger. - J/atton.
One reaſon that mathematical demonſtrations are uncon-
troverted, is becauſe intereſt hath no place in thºſe "ſºft”.
able verities. Glanville'. Scºpſ.
There is an unqueſtionable magnificence in every Part of
Paradiſe Loſt. - - - | - Addison.
2. Such as cannot bear to be queſtioned without impatience ;
this ſeems to be the meaning here.
what were his marks? !--- ~ 1. '
A lean cheek, which you have not; an unqueſtionable
ſpirit, which you have not; - - Shakeſpeare.
UNQUE'stion ABLY. adv. Indubitably; without doubt. -
If the fathers were unqueſtionably of the houſhºld of faith,
and all to do good to them ; then certainly their children can-
not be ſtrangers in this houſhold: Sprat.
St. Auſtin was unqueſtionably a man of parts, but in-
terpoſing in a controverſy where his talent did not lie,
ſhºwed his zeal againſt the antipodes to very ill purpoſe. Burnet.
UNQUE'stios ED. adi. -
1. Not doubted; paſſed * doubt. Other
whoſe work is religion,
- Taylºr.
Milton.
-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N R
U N R
thors, though we do not poſitively
ions i dau
Other relations in goo 'd by ſome. Brown.
- ſlig
deny, yet have they ºf been unqueſtion,
ūrūtable; not to be oppoſed. .
2. º . pleaſe the gods, who inſtrućt the people;
Ajºmughion a pleaſures muſt be ſerv'd. B. Johnſºn.
3. Not interrogated; not examined.
Muttºring pray'rs as holy rites ſhe meant,
Through the divided crowd wnqueſtion'd went.
UNQUI"ck. adj. Motionleſs. -
His ſenſes droop, his ſteady eyes unquick ; -
And much he ails, and yet he is not ſick. Daniel's Civ. Iłar.
UNQUI'cKFNED. adj. Not animated; not ripened to vitality.
Every foetus bears a ſecret hoard,
With ſleeping, unexpanded iſſue ſtor'd ;
Which num’rous, but unquicken'd progeny,
Claſp'd, and enwrapp'd, within each other lie. Blackmore.
UNQUI'et. adj. [inquiet, Fr. inquietus, Lat.]
1. Moved with perpetual agitation; not calm ; not ſtill.
From grammatick flats and ſhallows, they are on the ſud-
den tranſported to be toſſed and turmoiled with their un-
ballaſted wits, in fathomleſs and unquiet depths of contro-
verſy. Milton.
2. Diſturbed; full of perturbation; not at peace.
Go with me to church, and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend;
For never ſhall you lie by Portia's ſide -
With an unquiet ſoul. Shakeſp. Mr. of Venice.
º love hopeful to regain,
Dryden.
From thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breaſt are riſ'n. Milton.
3. Reſtleſs; unſatisfied.
She glares in balls, front boxes, and the ring;
A vain, unquiet, glitt'ring, wretched thing. Pope.
Mirth from company is but a fluttering, unquiet motion,
that beats about the breaſt for a few moments, and after
leaves it empty. Pope.
UNQUIETLY. adv. Without reſt.
Who's there beſides foul weather 2–
One minded like the weather, moſt
Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Unquiety.
UNQUI'ETN Ess. n.ſ.
1. Want of tranquillity.
Thou, like a violent noiſe, cam'ſ ruſhing in,
And mak’ſt them wake and ſtart to new unquietneſs. Denham.
2. Want of peace.
It is moſt enemy to war, and moſt hateth unquietneſs. Spenſ.
3. Reſtleſsneſs; turbulence.
What pleaſure can there be in that eſtate, -
Which your unquietneſs has made me hate :
4. Perturbation; uneaſineſs.
Is my lord angry
—He went hence but now,
And certainly in ſtrange unquietneſs. Shakeſp. Othello.
From inordinate love, and vain fear, comes all unquietneſ;
of ſpirit, and diſtraćtion of our ſenſes. Taylor.
UNRA'cKED. adj. Not poured from the lees.
Rack the one veſſel from the lees, and pour the lees of the
racked veſſel into the unracked veſſel. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
UNRA'KED. adj. Not thrown together and covered. Uſed
only of fires.
Cricket, to Windſor chimnies ſhalt thou leap :
Where fires thou find'ſt unrak'd, and hearths unſwept,
There pinch the maids. Shake? Merry ſºlves of it indſºr.
UNRA'N's Acked. adj. Not pillaged.
He gave that rich city for a prey unto his ſoldiers, who left
neither houſe, nor corner thereof unranſacked. Knolles.
UNRA'ssom Ep., adj. Not ſet free by payment for liberty.
Unranſom'd here receive the ſpotleſs fair,
Accept the hecatomb the Greeks prepare,
To UNRA^vel. v. a.
I. To diſentangle; to extricate; to clear.
There unravel all
This dark deſign, this myſtery of fate. Addiſon's Cato.
With Machiavelian ſagacity thou unravellº intrigues of
ſtate. Arbuthnot.
2. To diſorder ; to throw out of the preſent conſtitution.
How can anything ſucceed well with people that are to be
pleaſed with nothing, unleſs the ball of the univerſe may be
unravelled, and the laws of providence reverſed. L'A/irange.
O the traytor's name
I'll know it; I will: art ſhall be conjur'd for it,
And nature all unravell’d. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
. So prophane and ſceptical an age, takes a pride in unravel-
*g all the received principles of reſon and religion. Tillotſºn.
3. Tº clear up the intrigue of a play.
The ſolution, or unravelling of the intrigue, commences,
wº: the reader begins to ſee the doubts clared up. Pope.
hus ſupernaturally is the plot brought to perfestion;
nor is the unravelling of it leſs happily imagined. Shakespeare. II.
UNRAzor ED. adj. tºº. PP11y imagi ºakeſp. Illuſt.
** ſmooth as Hebe's their unrazor'a lips.
Dryden,
Pope's Iliad.
Milton.
UNRE'Acned, adj. Not attained.
Labour with unequal force to climb
That lofty hill, unreach'd by former time.
UNRE/AD. adj.
1. Not read; not publickly pronounced.
º books are ſafer and better to be
7"ead.
Drydºn,
left Publickly tºh-
His muſe had ſtarv'd, had not a piece ...” b. v.
And by a player bought, ſupply'd her bread.
2. Untaught; not learned in books. Drydin.
Th Uncertain whoſe the narrower ſpan,
e clown unread, or half-read gentleman
UNRE'ADIN Ess. n.ſ. g Dryán.
I. Want of readineſs; want of promptneſs.
This impreparation and unreadinºſ, when they find in is
*
then turn it to the foothing up of themſelves in t
fancy.
2. Want of preparation.
Nothing is ſo great an enemy to tranquillity,
tented ſpirit, as the amazement and confuſions O
and inconſideration.
UN READY. adj.
1. Not prepared; not fit.
The fairy knight -
Departed thence, albe his wounds wide,
Not throughly heal’d, unready were to ſide.
How now, my lords what all unready ſo
2. Not prompt; not quick.
F rom a temperate inactivity, we are unready to put in exe-
cution the ſuggeſtions of reaſon; or by a conteit in every
ſpecies of truth, we embrace the ſhadow thereof.
3, Awkward; ungain.
Young men, in the condućt of ačtions, uſe extreme reme-
dies at firſt, and, that which doubleth all errors, will not
acknowledge or retract them; like an unready horſe, thiſ
hat accurſed
Hooker, b. W.
and a con-
f unreadinſ,
Taylor's Rule %f Living Hj.
Fairy &amp;ltºn,
* Shakpart,
Brown.
will neither ſtop nor turn. Bacon.
UNREAL. adj. Unſubſtantial.
Hence, terrible ſhadow !
Unreal mock’ry, hence Shakespeare , Madith,
with pain
Voyag'd th’ unreal, vaſt, unbounded deep
Of horrible confuſion. Aſſion's Par, Lºft, b. x.
UNRE'Ason Able. adj.
1. Exorbitant; claiming, or inſiſting on more than is fit.
Since every language is ſo full of its own proprieties, that
what is beautiful in one, is often barbarous in another, it
would be unreaſonable to limit a tranſlator to the narrow com-
paſs of his author's words. Dryden's Prºf. to Ovid.
My intention in prefixing your name, is not to deſire your
protection of the following papers, which I take to be a very
unreaſonable requeſt; ſince, by being inſcribed to you, you
cannot recommend them without ſome ſuſpicion of par-
tiality. Swift's Project for the Advancement ºf Religiºn.
2. Not agreeable to reaſon.
No reaſon known to us; but that there is no reaſon theſe:
of, I judge moſt unreaſonable to imagine. Hair, ki
It is unreaſonable for men to be judges in their own caſe:
ſelf-love will make men partial to themſelves and º
friends. - Lºk.
She entertained many unreaſonable prejudices againſt him,
before ſhe was acquainted with his perſonal worth. Adijn.
3. Greater than is fit; immoderate. -
Thoſe that place their hope in another world, havº, ""
great meaſure, conquer'd dread of death, and unreſº"
of life. Atterbury.
UNRE'Ason ABLENEss. n.ſ.
1. Exorbitance; exceſſive demand. -
The unreaſonableneſs of propoſitions is not mº" evident,
than that they are not the joint deſires of thºſ,”
number. K. Charti.
A young univerſity diſputant was complaining of the ".
ſonableneſs of a lady, with whom he was engaged in §.
of controverſy. Addiſon's Freehºlder, 32.
2. Inconſiſtency with reaſon.
The ... and preſumption of thoſe º º
jećt, have not ſo much as a thought, all their ". -
advance ſo far as attrition.
UNR (Aso NABLY. adv.
I. In a manner contrary to reaſon.
2. More than enough.
I'll not over the threſhold, till my lord
Wars. —
—Fye you confine yourſelf moſt unreaſºnal}. jº.
To UNRE/Ave. v. a. [now unravel; from *, * fº
ravel; perhaps the ſame with rive, to teal, or break aſundº'
To unwind; to diſentangle.
Penelope, for her Ulyſſes' ſake,
Devis'd a web her woers to deceive ;
In which the work that ſhe all day did make,
The ſame at night ſhe did unreave.
eturn from the
Sºnjir,
UN-
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N R
ºº
UNREBA^r Ed. adj. Not blunted. - -
A number offencers try it out with unrelated ſwords. Halew.
UNREPU'KFABLE. adj. Obnoxious to no cenſure.
Keep this commandment without ſpot, unrebukeable, until
the appearing of Chriſt. 1 Tim. vi. 14.
UNREceive D. adj. Not received.
Where the ſigns and ſacraments of his grace are not,
thrºugh contempt, unreceived, or received with contempt, they
really give what they promiſe, and are what they ſignify. Hooker.
UNRF cla’IMF D. adj.
1. Not turned.
A ſavageneſs of unreclaimed blood,
Of general aſſault.
2. Not reformed.
This is the moſt favourable treatment a finner can hope
for, who continues unreclaimed by the goodneſs of God. Rogers.
UNR econci'LEA Ble. adj.
1. Not to be appeaſed ; implacable.
He had many infirmities and fins, unreconcileable with per-
fect righteouſneſs. Hammond's Pract. Catechiſm.
2. Not to be made conſiſtent with.
Let me lament,
That our ſtars, unreconcileable, ſhould have divided
Our equalneſs to this. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleep.
UNRE^concile D. adj. Not reconciled.
If you bethink yourſelf of any crime
Unreconcil'd as yet to heav'n and grace, -
Solicit for it ſtraight. . Shakespeare. Othello.
UNREco'RDED. adj. Not kept in remembrance by publick mo-
nunnentS.
Unrecorded left through many an age,
Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Worthy thave not remain'd ſo long unſung. Milton.
The great Antilocus a name -
Not unrecorded in the rolls of fame. Pope's Odyſſey.
UNREco'UNTED. adj. Not told ; not related.
This is yet but young, and may be left
To ſome ears unrecounted. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
UNRECRU'it a BLR. adj. Incapable of repairing the deficiencies
of an army.
Empty and unrecruitable colonels of twenty men in a com-
pany. A4ilton on Education.
UNREcu'RING. adj. Irremediable.
I found her ſtraying in the park,
Seeking to hide herſelf; as doth the deer,
That hath received ſome unrecuring wound.
UNREDU'cED. adj. Not reduced.
The earl divided all the reſt of the Iriſh countries unreduced,
into ſhires. Davies’s Ireland.
UNREFo'RMABLE. adj. Not to be put into a new form.
The rule of faith is alone unmoveable and unreformable;
to wit, of believing in one only God omnipotent, creator of
the world, and in his ſon Jeſus Chriſt, born of the virgin
Mary. - Hammond's Fundamentals.
UN REFo'R.M.F.D. adj.
1. Not amended; not correóted.
This general revolt, when overcome, produced a general
reformation of the Iriſhry, which ever before had been un-
refºrmed. Davies's Ireland.
We retain the Julian conſtitution of the year, unreformed,
without confideration of the defective minutes. Holder.
2. Not brought to newneſs of life.
If he may believe that Chriſt died for him, as now he is, an
unreformed chriſtian, then what needs he reformation Hamm.
Unhumbled, unrepentant, unreform'd. AMilton.
UNREFRA'cTED. adj. Not refraćted.
The ſun's circular image is made by an unrefraćed beam
of light. Newton's Opticks.
UNREFRE's HED. adj. Not cheared; not relieved.
Its ſymptoms are a ſpontaneous laſhtude, being unrefreſhed
by ſleep. Arbuthnot.
UNREGA/RDED. adj. Not heeded; not reſpected; neglected.
We, ever by his might,
Had thrown to ground the unregarded right.
Do'ſt ſee, how unregarded now
That piece of beauty paſſes :
There was a time when I did vow
To that alone;
Shakespeare.
Fairy Queen.
But mark the fate of faces. Suckling.
On the cold earth lies th’ unregarded king;
A headleſs carcaſs, and a nameleſs thing. Denham.
Me you have often counſell'd to remove
My vain purſuit of unregarded love. Dryden.
Laws againſt immorality have not been executed, and pro-
clamations to inforce them, are wholly un, egal ded. Swift.
UNRE'GISTERED. adj. Not recorded.
Hotter hours,
Unregiſter'd in vulgar fame, you have
Luxuriouſly pick'd out. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
UNREGE'NERATE. adj. Not brought to a new life.
This is not to be underſtood promiſcuouſly of all men,
unregenerate perſons, as well us regenerate. Stephens.
UNRE'ſsed. ad; Not reſtrained by the bridle.
Reft fºom thy flying ſteed unreina, as once
Rºllerophon, though from a lower clime
Diſmounted, on th’ Aleian field I fall.
UNRE LENTING: adj. Hard, cruel ; feeling no pity.
By many hands your father was ſubdu'd;
But only ſlaughter'd by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford.
Place pitchy barrels on the fatal ſtake,
That ſo her torture may be ſhortened.
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts : Shakespeare,
Theſe are the realms of unrelenting fate; -
And awful Rhadamanthus rules the fiate.
Milton,
Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
- Dryden.
Falſe tears ſhall wet his unreſenting eyes,
And his glad heart with artful fighs ſhall heave. Smith.
UNRELIA’vable. adj. Admitting no ſuccour.
As no degree of diſtreſs is un elievable by his power, ſo no
extremity of it is inconſiſtent with his compaſſion. Boyle.
UNREli‘eved. adj. -
I. Not ſuccoured.
The goddeſs griev'd, -
Her favour'd hoſt ſhou'd periſh unreliev'd. Dryden.
2. Not eaſed. - -
The uneaſineſs of unrelieved thirſt is not leſſened by conti-
nuance, but grows the more unſupportable. - Boyle.
UNREMA'RKArle. adj.
1. Not capable of being obſerved.
Our underſtanding, to make a complete notion, muſt add
ſomething elſe to this fleeting and unremarkable ſuperficies,
that may bring it to our acquaintance. Digby.
2. Not worthy of notice.
UNREME/D] ABLE, adj. Admitting no remedy.
He ſo handled it, that it rather ſeemed he had more come
into a defence of an unemediable miſchief already committed,
than that they had done it at firſt by his conſent. Sidney.
UNREME/M.B.ERING. adj. Having no memory.
That unrememb'ring of its former pain,
The ſoul may ſuffer mortal fleſh again. Dryden.
UNREME/MBERED. adj. Not retained in the mind; not recol-
lečted.
I cannot paſs unremembered, their manner of diſguiſing the
ſhafts of chimnies in various faſhions, whereof the nobleſt is
the pyramidal. J/otton's Architeºſure.
UNREME'MBRANCE. m. ſ. Forgetfulneſs ; want of remem-
brance.
Some words are negative in their original language, but
ſeem poſitive, becauſe the negation is unknown; as amneſty,
an unremembrance, or general pardon. JWatts's Logick.
UNREMo’ve ABLE. adj. Not to be taken away.
Never was there any woman, that with more unremoveable
determination gave herſelf to love, after ſhe had once ſet before
her mind the worthineſs of Amphialus. Sidney, b. ii.
You know the fiery quality of the duke,
How unremoveable and fixt he is
In his own courſe,
UNREMo’ved. adj.
1. Not taken away. - -
It is impoſſible, where this opinion is imbibed and unre-
moved, to found any convincing argument. Hammond.
We could have had no certain proſpect of his happineſs,
while the laſt obſtacle was unremoved. Dryden's Wirgil.
2. Not capable of being removed. -
Like Teneriff or Atlas unremov’d. Milton.
UNREMove AELY. adv. In a manner that admits no re-
moval.
His diſcontents are unremoveably coupled to his nature. Sha.
UNREPA/ID. adj. Not recompenſed; not compenſated.
Hadſt thou full pow'r
To meaſure out his torments by thy will; -
Yet what could'ſt thou, tormentor, hope to gain
Thy loſs continues, unrepaid by pain. Dryden.
UNREPEALED. adj. Not revoked; not abrogated: -
When you are pinched with any unrepealed aćt of parlia-
ment, you declare you will not be obliged by it. Dryden.
Nature's law, and unreſ eaſ'd command, 1.
That gives to lighter things the greateſt height, Blackmore.
UNREPE's Ep. adj. Not regarded with penitential ſorrow.
They are no fit ſupplicants to ſeek his mercy in the behalf
of others, whoſe own unºfented fins provoked his juſt indig-
nation. Hooker, b. v.
Shakeſkeare.
If I, vent'ring to diſpleaſe
God for the fear of º º º º,
hind ; which in his jealouſy -
§. unrepented, find º Milion's Agoniſłes.
As in unreſented fin ſhe dy d. -
Doom'd to the ſame bad place, is puniſh'd for her pride. Dryd.
with what confuſion will he hear all his unrepeated fins
produced before men and angels? . Rogers's sermº.
UNREPE(NTING. aff. Not repenting; not penitent; not
UNREPENTANT: ; ſorrowful for fin.
Should
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">UN R
U N R
Should I of theſe the liberty regard,
who freed, as to their º”
ſ biºd, unrepentaº, unreform tº ..., , ---&gt;
Hº would ºff. - Aſººn s Par. Regain'd.
My unprepar’d, and unreſenting breath,
was ſnatch'd away by the ſwift hand of death. Roſcommon.
All his arts reveal,
From the firſt moment of his vital breath,
To his laſt hour of unrepenting death.
Nortyrants fierce, that unrepenting die,
E'er felt ſuch rage as thou. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
UN Repi'NING. adj. Not peeviſhly complaining.
Barefoot as ſhe trod the flinty pavement,
Her footſteps all along were mark'd with blood ;
Yet ſilent on ſhe paſs'd, and unrepining.
UNREPLE'N1s H.E.D. adj. Not filled.
Some air retreated thither, kept the mercury out of the
unrepleniſhed ſpace. Boyle.
UNREPR lev Able. adj. Not to be reſpited from penal death.
Within me is a hell; and there the poiſon
Is, as a fiend, confin'd, to tyrannize
In unreprievable condemned blood. Shakeſp. K. john.
UNRE pRo'Ached. adj. Not upbraided; not cenſured.
Sir John Hotham, unreproached, uncurſed by any impre-
cation of mine, pays his head. K. Charles.
UNRE pRove Abi E. adj. Not liable to blame.
You hath he reconciled, to preſent you holy, unblame-
able, and un, proveable in his ſight. Col. i. 22.
UN Rep Row ED. adj.
1. Not cenſured.
Chriſtians have their churches, and unreproved exerciſe of
religion. - - Sandys's journey.
2. Not liable to cenſure.
The antique world, in his firſt flow'ring youth,
With gladſome thanks, and unreproved truth,
Dryden.
Rowe.
The gifts of ſov’reign bounty did embrace. Fairy Queen.
If I give thee honour due,
Mirth, admit me of thy crew,
To live with her, and live with thee,
In unreprºved pleaſures free. Milton.
UNREPU'GN ANT. adj. Not oppoſite.
When ſcripture doth yield us natural laws, what particular
order is thereunto moſt agreeable ; when poſitive, which way
to make laws unrefugnant unto them. Hooker, b. iii.
UNRE'putable. adj. Not creditable.
When we ſee wiſe men examples of duty, we are con-
vinced that piety is no unreputable qualification, and that we
are not to be aſhamed of our virtue. Rogers.
UNREQUE's TED. adj. Not aſked. -
With what ſecurity can our embaſſadors go, unrequeſted of
the Turkiſh emperor, without his ſafe conduct Knolles.
UNREQUI"TABLE. adj. Not to be retaliated.
Some will have it that all mediocrity of folly is fooliſh, and
becauſe an unrequitable evil may enſue, an indifferent conve-
nience muſt be omitted. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
So unrequitable is God's love, and ſo inſolvent are we,
that that love vaſtly improves the benefit, by which alone we
might have pretended to ſome ability of retribution. Boyle.
UNRESE/NTED. adj. Not regarded with anger.
The failings of theſe holy perſons, paſſed not unreſented by
God; and the ſame ſcripture which informs us of the fin,
records the puniſhment. Rogers.
UNRESE R v ED. adj.
1. Not limited by any private convenience.
The piety our heavenly father will accept, muſt conſiſt in
an entire, unreſerved obedience to his commands; ſince whoſo-
ever offends in one precept, is guilty of the whole law. Rogers.
2. Open; frank; concealing nothing.
Use ºf RVEBN Ess. m. ſ. Unlimitedneſs; frankneſs; largeneſs.
The tenderneſs and unreſervedneſs of his love, made him
think thoſe his friends or enemies, that were ſo to God. Boyle.
UNRESE/Rvedly. adv.
I. Without limitations.
I am not to embrace abſolutely and unreſervedly the opinion
of Ariſtotle. Boyle.
2. Without concealment; openly.
I know your friendſhip to me is extenſive; and it is what I
owe to that friendſhip, to open my mind unreſervedy to
you. Pope.
USRºse'RVED.NEss. n.ſ. Openneſs; frankneſs.
I write with more unreſervednes than ever man wrote. Pope.
UNRESI's TED. adj.
1. Not oppoſed.
The aetherial ſpaces are perfeótly fluid ; they neither aſſiſt,
nor retard, the planets, which roll through as free and un-
'º'; as if they moved in a vacuum. Bentley's Sermons.
* Reſiſtleſs; ſuch as cannot be oppoſed.
Thoſe gods ! whoſe unreſiſted might
Have ſent me to theſe regions void of light. Dryden.
- What wonder then, thy hairs ſhould feel
The conqu'ring force of anreffled ſteel? Pope.
UNR rs' ſisa. gdi Not oppoſing ; not making reſiſtance
What noiſe that ſpirit's poſſeſs'd with haſte, ce.
That wounds th' unreffling poſtern with theſe ſtrokes.S.
The ſheep was ſacrific'd on no pretence, S. Jha,
But meck and unºffling innocence:
A patient, uſeful creature. Dryden
Since the planets move horizontally through the liqui
unreffling ſpaces of the heav'ns, where no bodies at º and
inconſiderable ones, occur, they may preſerve the º:
locity which the firſt impulſe impreſs'd. Bently, sº
UNREsolvable. adj. Not to be ſolved; inſoluble.
For a man to run headlong, while his ruin ſtares him
the face; ſtill to preſs on to the embraces of fin m in
blem unreſºlvable upon any other ground, but th:
tuates before it deſtroys.
UNREso'lved. adj.
1. Not determined; having made no reſolution.
On the weſtern coaſt
Rideth a puiſſant navy: to our ſhores
Throng many doubtful, hollow-hcarted friends,
is d pro-
fin inſa-
South's Sermºn.
Unarm’d, and un, eſolv'd to beat them back. Shake?
Turnus, unreſºlv'd of flight, atºp.
Moves tardy back, and juſt recedes from fight. Drydºn.
2. Not ſolved; not cleared.
I do not ſo magnify this method, to think it will perſedly
clear every hard place, and leave no doubt unreſolved. Locł.
UN Resolving. adj. Not reſolving.
She her arms about her unre ºving huſband threw. Dºg
UNRespective. adj. Inattentive; taking little notice,
I will converſe with iron-witted fools,
And unreſte&amp;live boys; none are for me
That look into me with conſid’rate eyes. Sha'eſhtara.
UNRE's T. m. ſ. Diſquiet; want of tranquillity; unquietieſ.
Wiſe beheſt, thoſe creeping flames by reaſon to ſubdue,
Before their rage grew to ſo great unreſt. Fairy Queen,
Repoſe, ſweet gold, for their unreſ,
That have their alms out of the empreſs' cheſt. Shaºffsart,
Diſmay’d confuſion all poſſeſs'd;
Th' afflicted troop, hearing their plot deſtry'd:
Then runs amaz'd diſtreſs, with ſad unreſ,
To this, to that; to fly, to ſtand, to hide.
Silence, in truth, would ſpeak my ſorrows beſt;
For deepeſt wounds, can leaſt their feelings tell;
Yet, let me borrow from mine own unreſt,
But time to bid him, whom I lov'd, farewell.
Up they roſe,
As from unreſt; and each the other viewing,
Soon found their eyes how open'd, and their minds
How darken'd / Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
UNREsto'r ED. adj.
1. Not reſtored. -
2. Not cleared from an attainder.
The ſon of an unreſtored traitor has no pretence to the
quality of his anceſtors. Cºllier on Dueling.
UNRESTRA/INED. adj.
1. Not confined; not hindered.
My tender age, in luxury was train'd,
With idle eaſe, and pageants entertain'd,
My hours my own, my pleaſures unreſtrain'd. Pº.
2. Licentious ; looſe.
The taverns he daily doth frequent,
With unreſtrained, looſe companions.
3. Not limited. -
Were there in this aphoriſm an unreſtrained truth)".
it not reaſonable to infer from a caution, a non-uº "
abolition. Brown's Vulgar Brrºº
UNRETRA/cted. adj. Not revoked; not recalled. d him
The penitence of the criminal may have º .
amongſt the ſaints, when our unretracted º :
may ſend us to unquenchable flames. Gº", ſº *".
Daniel,
I/ºtton.
Shalºſheart.
Nothing but plain malevolence can juſtify º, º
levolence ſhewn in a ſingle, outward act, unraº, lſhi
habitual ill-nature. Cºller on Friendſ”
UNREve’Aled. aff. Not told ; not diſcovered.
Had ye once ſeen theſe her celeſtial treaſures,
And unrevealed pleaſures, ... . - Spriſºr.
Then would ye wonder, and her praiſes "g
Dear, fatal name reſt ever unrevealº Pºp!,
Nor paſs theſe lips, in holy ſilence ſeal’d.
UNREve NG ED. adj. Not revenged. ...
So might we die, not envying them that live; Fairfax.
So would we die, not un evenged all. ai'ſ
Unhonour'd though I am, Dryden.
Not un eveng'd that impious act ſhall be: ſlow
Great Pompey's ſhade complains that wº". Alſº
And Scipio's ghoſt walks unreveng'd amongſt us. y
UNRE’ver end. adj. Irreverent; diſreſpectful. eſt.cº.
See not ºil. in theſe unreverent robes. Shakespeare ."
Fie! unreverend tongue to call her bº,
Whoſe ſov’reignty ſo oft thou haſt preferr d, Shałº!"
With twenty thouſand ſoul-confirming oaths. *E.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N R
U N R
UNRE's ERENTLY. adv. Diſreſpeaſully.
I did unreverently blame the gods,
Who wake for thee, though thou ſhore for thyſelf. B. Johnſ.
UNREve'RSED. adj. Not revoked; not repealed.
She hath offer'd to the doom,
Which unreverſed ſtands in effectual force,
A ſea of melting tears.
UNREvo’KED. adj. Not recalled.
Hear my decree, which unrevok'd ſhall ſtand. Milton.
UNREwA'RDED. adj. Not rewarded; not recompenſed.
Providence takes care that good offices may not paſs un-
Shakeſpeare.
rewarded. L'Aſirange.
Since for common good I yield the fair,
My private loſs let grateful Greece repair;
Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
That he alone has fought and bled in vain. Pope.
To UNRI'DDL.E. v. a. To ſolve an enigma; to explain a pro-
blem.
Some kind power unriddle where it lies,
Whether my heart be faulty, or her eyes | Suckling.
The Platonick principles will not unriddle the doubt. Glamº.
A reverſe often clears up the paſſage of an old poet, as the
poet often ſerves to unriddle the reverſe. Addiſon.
UNRID1ſculous. adj. Not ridiculous.
If an indifferent and unridiculous objećt could draw this au-
ſtereneſs unto a ſmile, he hardly could with perpetuity reſiſt
proper motives thereof. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
To UNRI'G. v. a. To ſtrip of the tackle.
- Rhodes is the ſovereign of the ſea no more;
Their ſhips unrigg'd, and ſpent their naval ſtore. Dryden.
UNRI'GHT. Wrong. In Spenſer, this word ſhould perhaps
be untight. -
What in moſt Engliſh writers uſeth to be looſe, and as it
were unright, in this author is well grounded, timely framed,
and ſtrongly truſſed up together. Gloſſary to Spenſer's Kal.
Shew that thy judgment is not unright. J/iſdom xii.
UNRI'GHTEous. adj. Unjuſt ; wicked; ſinful; bad.
Oćtavius here lept into his room,
And it uſurped by unrighteous doom ;
But he his title juſtify’d by might.
Within a month !
Ere yet the ſalt of moſt unrighteous tears,
Had left the fluſhing in her galled eyes,
She married.—Oh moſt wicked ſpeed Shakeſpeare.
Let the wicked man forſake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord. I a.k.
UNRI'GHTEously. adv. Unjuſtly; wickedly; ſinfully.
For them
Their foes a deadly Shibboleth deviſe:
By which unrighteouſly it was decreed,
That none to truſt, or profit ſhould ſucceed,
Who would not ſwallow firſt a poiſºnous wicked weed. Dryd.
A man may fall undeſervedly under publick diſgrace, or is
wnrighteouſly oppreſſed. Collier on Pride.
UNR1'GHTEous Ness. n.ſ. Wickedneſs; injuſtice.
Our Romaniſts can no more abide this propoſition
converted, than themſelves. All ſin, ſay they, is a tranſ-
greſſion of the law; but every tranſgreſfion of the law is not
ſin. The apoſtle, therefore, turns it for us: all unrighteouſ-
neſs, ſays he, is ſin; but every tranſgreſſion of the law is un-
righteouſneſs, faith Auſtin upon this place. Hall.
Some things have a natural deformity in them, as perjury,
perfidiouſneſs, unrighteouſneſs, and ingratitude. Tillotſon.
UNR.'GHTFul. adj. Not rightful; not juſt.
Thou, which know'ſt the way
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again
To pluck him headlong from th' uſurped throne. Shakeſp.
To UNR1'N G. v. a. To deprive of a ring.
Be forc'd to impeach a broken hedge,
And pigs unring'd at viſ, franc. pledge. Hudibras.
To UNRI'P. v. a. [This word is improper; there being no
difference between rip and unrip; and the negative particle
is therefore of no force; yet it is well authoriſed.] To cut
open.
Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Like a traitor
Didſt break that vow, and, with thy treach'rous blade,
Unrip’dſ the bowels of thy ſov’reign's ſon. - Shakeſpeare.
He could not now, with his honour, ſo unrip, and put a
lye upon all that he had ſaid and done before, as to deliver
*him up. Bacon's Hen. VII.
We are angry with ſearchers, when they break open
trunks, and unrip packs, and open ſealed letters. Taylor.
Cato well obſerves, that friendſhip ought net to be un-
ripped, but unſtitched. Collier.
UNR1/PE. m. ſ.
1. Immature; not fully concočted.
Purpoſe is of violent birth, but poor validity;
Which now, like fruits unripe, ſticks on the tree,
But fall unſhaken when they mellow be. Shakeſpeare.
In this northern tract our hoarſer throats,
Utter unri e and ill-conſtrained notes. //aller.
He fix’d his unipe vengeance to defer,
Sought not the garden, but retir’d unſeen,
To brood in ſecret on his gather'd ſpleen.
2. Too early. -
Who hath not heard of the valiant, wiſe,
laus, whoſe unripe death doth yet,
tears from virtuous eyes }
"Nº PENED. adj. Not matured.
Were you with theſe, you'd ſoon forget
The pale, anripen'd beauties of the north. Addison's Cata.
UNR; *Nºss. ", ſ. Immaturity; want of ripeneſs.
The ripeneſs, or unripeneſ, of the occaſion, muſt ever be
well weighed; and generally it is good to commit the begin-
nings of all great actions to Argus, with his hundred eyes;
and the ends to Briareus, with his hundred hands.
Dryden,
and juſt Dori-
ſo many years ſince, draw
Sidney, b. ii.
- Bacon.
UNRI'vALLED. adj.
I. Having no competitor.
Honour forbid at whoſe unrival’d ſhrine,
Eaſe, pleaſure, virtue, all our ſex reſign. Pope,
2: Having no peer or equal.
To UNRoºl. v. a. Te-open what is rolled or convolve;
O horror
The queen of nations, from her antient ſeat,
Is ſunk for ever in the dark abyſs;
Time has unroll'd her glories to the laſt,
And now clos'd up the volume. Dryden's All for Love.
UNRoMA'NTIck. adj. Contrary to romance.
It is a baſe, uniomantick ſpirit not to wait on you.
To UNRooſ F. v.a.
houſes.
The rabble ſhould have firſt unroof"d the city,
Ere ſo prevail'd with me. Shakeſp. Coriolamur,
UNRoo's TED. adj. Driven from the rooſt.
Thou dotard ' thou art woman-tir’d, unrooſted,
By thy old dame Partlet here. Shakeſp. //inter Tale,
UNRough. adj. Smooth.
Siward's ſon,
And many unrough youths, that even now
Proteſt their firſt of manhood. Shakeſp. Macbeth,
To UNRooſt. v.a. To tear from the roots; to extirpate; to
eradicate.
Since you’ve made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold; you do ſo grow in my requital,
That nothing can unroot you,
Unroot the foreſt oaks and bear away
Flocks, folds, and trees, an undiſtingſåſh'd prey, Dryden,
UNRo'UNDED. adj. Not ſhaped, not cut to a round.
Thoſe unfil’d piſtolets,
That more than cannon-ſhot avails or lets;
Which, negligently left unrounded, look
Like many-angled figures in the book
Of ſome dread conjurer.
UNRoſYAL. adj. Unprincely; not royal.
By the advice of his envious counſellors, he ſent them with
unroyal reproaches to Muſidorus and Pyrocles, as if they had
done traiterouſly. Sidney.
To UNRU'FFle. v. n. To ceaſe from commotion, or agitation.
Where'er he guides his finny courſers,
The waves unruffle, and the ſea ſubſides.
UNRU FFLED. adj. Calm; tranquil ; not tumultuous.
Vent all thy paſſion, and I'll ſtand its ſhock,
Calm and unruffled as a ſummer's ſea,
When not a breath of wind flies o'er its ſurface. Addison.
UNRu’led. adj. Not directed by any ſuperiour power.
The realm was left, like a ſhip in a ſtorm, amidſt all the
raging ſurges, un uled and undireéted of any ; for they to
whom ſhe was committed, fainted in their labour, º:
their charge. penſer.
UNR º: m. ſ. [from unruly, J Turbulence; tumultuouſ-
neſs ; licentiouſneſs.
By the negligence of ſome who were hardly to be com-
manded, and by the un, ulineſs of others, who without leave were
gone a-ſhore, ſo fair an occaſion of vićtory was negle&amp;ted. Knol,
No care was had to curb the unrulineſs of anger, or the
exorbitance of deſire. Amongſt all their ſacrifices, they
never ſacrificed ſo much as one luſt. South', Sermons,
UN RU/LY. adj. Turbulent ; ungovernable ; licentious ; tu-
ltuous.
Inu In ſacred bands of wedlock ty'd
To Therion, a looſe unuly ſwain ; -
Who had more joy to range the foreſt wide, -
And chace the ſavage beaſt with buſy pain. Fairy Queen,
Down I come, like gliſt'ring Phaeton, -
wanting the manage of un uyjades. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
The beii and ſoundeſt of his time hath been but raſh;
then muſt we look from his age, to receive but tunruly way-
wardneſs. Shakespeare , K. Lear.
the tongue is an unrul evil, full of deadly poiſon. ja, iii,
Thou doſt a better life, and nobler vigour give;
Doſt each unruly appetite controul. Rºſcommon,
29 X Love
Swift,
To ſtrip off the roof or covering of
Shakeſpeare,
Donne,
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N S
U N S
inſults, diſguiſed in the cloud,
Aºi. fºrce of that un ul, croud. //aller.
paſſions kept their place, and tranſgreſſed not the bounda-
ries of their proper natures; nor Wºłº the diſorders º,
which are occaſioned by the licence of unruly appetites. Glanv.
You muſt not go where you may dangers meet.
Th: an-uly ſword will no diſtinction make,
And beauty will not there give wounds, but take, Dryden.
UNs a Fe. adj. Not ſecure ; hazardous ; dangerous. . .
If they would not be drawn to ſeem his adverſaries, yet
others ſhould be taught how unſafe it was to continue his
friends. Hooker, b. v.
With ſpeed retir’d
Where erſt was thickeſt fight, th’ angelick throng,
And left large field, unſafe within the wind -
Of ſuch commotion. Milton's Par. Io/?, b. vi.
Uncertain ways unſaf/? are,
And doubt a greater miſchief than deſpair.
Phlegyan robbers made unſafe the road.
UN'sA'FELY. adv. Not ſecurely; dangerouſly.
, Take it, while yet 'tis praiſe, before my rage,
Unſafely juſt, break looſe on this bad age;
So bad, that thou thyſelf hadſt no defence
From vice, but barely by departing hence. Dryden.
As no man can walk, ſo neither can he think, uneaſily or
wſafely; but in uſing, as his legs, ſo his thoughts amiſs,
Denham.
Dryden.
which a virtuous man never doth. Grew.
UN'sA'ID. adj. Not uttered ; not mentioned.
Chanticleer ſhall wiſh his words unſaid. Dryden.
That I may leave nothing material unſaid, among the fe-
veral ways of imitation, I ſhall place tranſlation and para-
phraſe. Felton's Claſſicks.
UNsA'LTED. adj. Not pickled or ſeaſoned with ſalt.
The muriatick ſcurvy, induced by two great quantity of
ſea-ſalt, and common among mariners, is cured by a diet of
freſh unſalted things, and watery liquor acidulated. Arbuthnot.
UNSALU'ted, adj. [inſalutatus, Lat..] Not ſaluted.
Gods ! I prate;
And the moſt noble mother of the world
, Leave unſaluted. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
UN'sA'NctiFi ED. adj Unholy; not conſecrated.
Her obſequies have been ſo far enlarged
As we have warrantry; her death was doubtful;
And but that great command o'erſways the order,
She ſhould in ground unſanctify'd have lodg'd
*Till the laſt trump. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
UNsa'riable. adj. [inſatiabilis, Lat.] Not to be ſatisfied ;
greedy without bounds.
Unſatiable in their longing to do all manner of good to all
the creatures of God, but eſpecially men. Hooker, b. i.
- Craſſus the Roman, for his unſatiable greedineſs, was called
the gulph of avarice. Raleigh.
UN'sATIsfactor INEss. n. ſ. Failure of giving ſatisfac:
tlon.
That which moſt deters me from ſuch trials, is their un-
Jatiyačtorineſs, though they ſhould ſucceed. Boyle.
UN's A T is FA'croR Y. adj. Not giving ſatisfaction; not clearing
thc difficulty.
That ſpeech of Adam, The woman thou gaveſt me to be
with me, ſhe gave me of the tree, and I did eat, is an un-
fatisfactory reply, and therein was involved a very impious
cIror. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
Latria to the croſs, is point blank againſt the definition of
the council of Nice ; and it is an unſatisfactory anſwer to
ſay, they only were againſt latria given to images for them-
ſelves. Stillingfleet.
UN's ATIsr IEDN Ess. m. ſ. [from unſatisfied.] The ſtate of be-
ing not ſatisfied; want of fulneſs.
Between my own unſatisfiedneſs in conſcience, and a ne-
ceſſity of ſatisfying the importunities of ſome, I was per-
ſwaded to chuſe rather what was ſafe, than what ſeemed
juſt. K. Charles.
That unſatisfiedneſs with tranſitory fruitions, that men de-
plore as the unhappineſs of their nature, is indeed the privi-
lege of it, as it is the prerogative of men not to be pleaſed
with ſuch fond toys as children doat upon. Boyle.
UNSA’tis FIED. adj. -
1. Not contented; not pleaſed.
Q: Elizabeth being to reſolve upon a great officer, and
being by ſome put in ſome doubt of that perſon, whom ſhe
meant to advance, ſaid, ſhe was like one with a lanthorn
**king a man, and ſeemed unſatisfied in the choice of a man
for that place. , Bacon.
Flaſhy wits, who cannot fathom a large diſcourſe, muſt be
very much unſatisfied of me. Digby.
Concerning the analytical preparation of gold, they leave
perſons unſatisfied. Boyle.
2. Not filled; not gratified to the full. y
Though he were unſatisfied in getting,
Yet in bºttowing he was moſt Princely. Shakeſpeare.
Whether ſhall I, by juſtly plaguing
Him whom I hate, bé more unjuſly trud
To her I love ; or, being kind to her,
Be cruel to myſelf, and leave unſatisfied
My anger and revenge Denham's S,
Eternity, human nature can't look into, without .
gious awe : our thoughts are loſt in the endleſ, view sº l-
ºn to us weary and unſatiſfied, without finding tº.
pla; to fix on. - Rºger's Sermºn
UNs a risfyiso, adj. Unable to gratify to the fill. -
Nor is fame only unſatisfying in itſelf, but th: deſire of
lays us open to many accidental troubles. Addiſ It
UNSA'vour INEss. adj. [from unſavoury.] ſon,
1. Bad taſte.
2. Bad ſmell.
If we concede a national unſavourineſ, in *la tº
ſhall we find the Jews leſs º hereto º people, yet
UN's A^vo URY. adj. y.
I. Taſtleſs.
Can that which is unſavoury be eaten without ſalt? or
there any taſte in the white of an egg ji wi .
2. Having a bad taſte. - ww.
- Unſavoury food, perhaps,
To ſpiritual natures.
3. Having an ill ſmell; fetid.
Some may emit an unſavoury odour, whi
from the º, of what £, i. tiºn. ch may happen
4. Unpleaſing ; diſguſting.
Things of ſo mean regard, although neceſſary to be or,
dered, are notwithſtanding very unſavoury, when they come
to be diſputed of; becauſe diſputation pre-ſuppoſeth ſome
difficulty in the matter. Hooker, b, v
Unſavoury news; but how made he eſcape sidiº,
To UN'sA^X. v. a. To retract; to recant; to deny what has
been ſaid.
Call you me fair that fair again unſay;
Demetrius loves you, fair. -
Say and unſay, feign, flatter, or abjure.
ow ſoon
Would height recall high thoughts, how ſoon unſ.)
What feign'd ſubmiſſion ſwore. Milton's Par. Lyſ.
To ſay, and ſtrait unſay, pretending firſt
To fly pain, profeſſing next the ſpy,
Argues no leader, but a liar trac'd. Milton.
There is nothing ſaid there, which you may have occaſion
Brown,
Milton's Par. Lºft,
rºtum.
Shaiſhtara
Milton.
to unſay hereafter. Attºrbury.
UNscaly. adj. Having no ſcales. -
The jointed lobſter, and unſtaly ſoale. Gaj.
UNscA'RRED. adj. Not marked with wounds.
And muſt ſhe die for this O let her live;
So ſhe may live unſtarr'd from bleeding ſlaughter,
I will confeſs ſhe was not Edward's daughter. Shahjart.
UN schola's tick, adj. Not bred to literature.
Notwithſtanding theſe learned diſputants, it was to the un-
ſcholo/lick ſtateſman, that the world owed their peace and
liberties. ºcłº,
UN schoo'LED. adj. Uneducated; not learned.
When the apoſtles were ordained to alter the laws of hº
theniſh religion, they were, St. Paul excepted, unſhºld and
unlettered men. Hoster, b. iv.
UNsco'Rched, adj. Not touched by fire.
His hand,
Not ſenſible of fire, remain'd unſcarch'd. Shakespeare.
UNsco'URED. adj. Not cleaned by rubbing.
Th’ enrolled penalties,
Which have, like unſour'd armour, hung by th’ wall,
And none of them been worn. Shakeſpeare.
UNscRA'tchED. adj. Not torn.
I with much expedient march
Have brought a counter-check before your gates,
To ſave unſcratch'd your city's threaten’d cheeks.
UNscREE'NED. adj. Not covered; not protected.
Thoſe balls of burniſhed braſs, the tops of churches º:
adorned with, derive their glittering brightneſs from *; .
ing expoſed, unſcreened, to the ſun's refulgent beams. Bºy!"
UN scr 1/PTURAL. adj. Not defenſible by ſcripture: f
The doctrine delivered in my ſermon was neith" ...",".
Shaiſ.
wnſcriptural, nor in itſelf falſe. Atterbury.
To UNSE’Al. v.a. To open any thing ſealed.
This new glare of light Dryden,
Caſt ſudden on his face, unſeal’d his fight.
UN SE/ALED. adj.
1. Wanting a ſeal.
Your oaths kefteårt
Are words, and poor conditions but unſeal’d. Shalºffat.
2. Having the ſeal broken.
To UN's E(AM. v. a. To rip ; to cut open. -
He ne'er ſhook hands, nor bid farewel to him"
*Till he unſeam'd him from the nape to th’chº
And fix'd his head upon our battlements. Shake tº:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N S
*
Usse A'RCHABLE, adj. Inſcrutable; not to be explored.
All is beſt, though we often doubt
What th' unſearchable diſpoſer
Of higheſt wiſdom brings about,
And ever beſt found in the cloſe.
Thou haſt vouchſaf’d
This friendly condeſcenſion, to relate
Things elſe by me unſearchable.
Milton's Agoniſłes.
- Milton's Par. Loſt.
Job diſcourſeth of the ſecrets of nature, and unſearchable
perfections of the works of God Tillotſon.
Theſe counſels of God are to us unſearchable; neither has
he left us in ſcripture any marks, by which we may infallibly
conclude ourſelves in that happy number he has choſen. Rogers.
It is a vaſt hindrance to the enrichment of our underſtand-
ingº, if we ſpend too much of our time among infinites and
unſearchables. . //atts's Logick.
Uns: ARchABLENEss. n.ſ. Impoſſibility to be explored
The unſearchalleneſs of God's ways ſhould be a bridle to
reſtrain preſumption, and not a ſanctuary for ſpirits of
... error. Bramhall's Anſw. to Hobbes.
UNSE’Asonable. adj.
1. Not ſuitable to time or occaſion; unfit; untimely; ill-timed.
Zeal, unleſs it be rightly guided, when it endeavours the
moſt buſily to pleaſe God, forceth upon him thoſe unſeaſonable
offices which pleaſe him not. Hooker, b. v.
Their counſel muſt ſeem very unſeaſonable, who adviſe
men to ſuſpect that wherewith the world hath had, by their
own account, twelve hundred years acquaintance. Hooker.
It is then a very unſeaſonable time to plead law, when
ſwords are in the hands of the vulgar. Spenſer's Ireland.
The commiſſioners pulled down or defaced all images in
churches, in ſuch unſeaſonable faſhion, as is done in hoſti-
lity. Hayward.
This digreſſion I conceived not unſeaſonable for this place,
nor upon this occaſion. Clarendon.
- Haply mention may ariſe
Of ſomething not unſeaſonable to aſk. Milton.
Timothy lay out a-nights, and went abroad often at un-
ſeaſonable hours. Arbuthnot.
2. Not agreeable to the time of the year.
Like an unſeaſonable ſtormy day,
Which makes the ſilver rivers drown their ſhores,
As if the world were all diſſolv’d in tears. Shakeſpeare.
. Late ; as, unſeaſonable time of night.
tº: n. ſ. Diſagreement with time or place.
The moral goodneſs, unfitneſs, and unſeaſonableneſs of
moral or natural actions, falls not within the verge of a
brutal faculty. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
UNse AsonABLY. adv. Not ſeaſonably; not agreeably to time
... or occaſion.
Some things it aſketh unſeaſonably, when they need not to
, be prayed for, as deliverance from thunder and tempeſt,
, when no danger is nigh. Hooker, b. v.
Leave to fathom ſuch high points as theſe,
Nor be ambitious, ere the time, to pleaſe ;
Unſeaſonably wiſe, till age and cares
Have form'd thy ſoul to manage great affairs. Dryden.
By the methods preſcribed, more good, and leſs miſchief,
will be done in acute diſtempers, than by medicines impro-
perly and unſeaſonably applied. Arbuthnot.
Ulyſſes yielded unſeaſonably, and the ſtrong paſſion for his
country ſhould have given him vigilance. Broome.
UN's E'Aso's ED. adj.
1. Unſeaſonable; untimely; ill-timed. Out of uſe.
Your majeſty hath been this fortnight ill,
And theſe unſeaſon'd hours perforce muſt add
Unto your ſickneſs. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
I think myſelf in a better plight for a lender than you are ;
the which hath ſomething emboldened me to this unſeaſoned
intruſion. Shakeſpeare.
2. Unformed ; not qualified by uſe. -
'Tis an unſeaſon'd courtier; adviſe him. Shakeſpeare.
3. Irregular; inordinate. - -
The commiſſioners pulled down or defaced all images in
churches, in ſuch unſeaſonable and unſeaſoned faſhion, as if
done in hoſtility. Hayward.
4. Not kept till fit for uſe.
5. Not ſalted; as, unſeaſoned meat.
UNSE'cos DeD. adj.
1. Not ſupported.
Him did you leave
Second to none, unſeconded by you,
To look upon the hideous god of war
In diſadvantage.
2. Not exemplified a ſecond time.
Strange and unſeconded ſhapes of worms ſucceeded. Brown.
To UN's E^cket. v. a. To diſcloſe ; to divulge.
He that conſulteth what he ſhould do, ſhould not declare
what he will do ; but let princes beware, that the unſecreting
ef their affairs comes not from themſelves. Bacon.
Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Ussh'cret, adj. Not cloſe; not truſty.
Who ſhall be true to uS,
When we are ſo unſecret to ourſelves Shakeſpeare
Unsecu” d; 24”- “... v.
U’RE. adj. Not ſafe.
Love, though moſt ſure,
Yet always to itſelf ſeems unſecure. Denham.
Usse DU’ced. adj. Not drawn to ill.
..If ſhe remain unſeduc’d, you not making it appear other-
wiſe; for your ill opinion, and th'aſſault you have made to
her chaſtity, you ſhall anſwer me with your ſword. Shakeſ?.
Among innumerable falſe, unmov’d, -
Unſhaken, unſeduc’d, unterrify'd. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
UNSEE'ING. adj. Wanting the power of viſion.
I ſhou'd have ſcratch'd out your unſeeing eyes,
To make my maſter out of love with thee.
To UN'see'm. y: Not to ſeem. Not in uſe. Shakeſpeare.
You wrong the reputation of your name,
In ſo unſeeming to confeſs receipt
Of that, which hath ſo faithfully been paid. Shakeſpeare.
UNSEE/MLINEss. m. ſ. Indecency; indecorum ; uncomelineſs.
All as before his fight, whom we fear, and whoſe pre-
ſence to offend with any the leaſt unſeemlineſ, we would be
ſurely as loth as they, who moſt reprehend or deride that
we do. Hooker, b. v.
Unsee'MLY. n. ſ. Indecent ; uncomely; unbecoming.
Contentions as yet were never able to prevent two evils;
the one, a mutual exchange of unſeemly and unjuſt diſgraces
offered by men, whoſe tongues and paſſions are out of rule;
the other a common hazard of both, to be made a prey
by ſuch as ſtudy how to work with moſt advantage in
private. - Hooker.
Let us now deviſe
What beſt may for the preſent ſerve to hide
The parts of each from other, that ſeem moſt
To ſhame obnoxious, and unſeemliſ; ſeen. Milton.
Her gifts
Were ſuch, as under government well ſeem’d ;
Unſeemly to bear rule. Milton's Par. Loft.
My ſons, let your unſeemly diſcord ceaſe;
If not in friendſhip, live at leaſt in peace. Dryden.
I wiſh every unſeemly idea, and wanton expreſſion had been
baniſh'd from amongſt them. //atts.
UNSEE(MLY. adv. Indecently; unbecomingly.
Charity doth not behave itſelf unſeemly, ſeeketh not her
OWn. I Cor. xiii. 5.
Unmanly dread invades the French aſtony'd;
Unſeemly yelling; diſtant hills return
The hideous noiſe.
UNSEE/N. adj.
1. Not ſeen; not diſcovered.
A jeſt unſeen, inſcrutable, inviſible,
As a noſe on a man's face, or a weathercock on a ſteeple. Shakespeare
Her father and myſelf
Will ſo diſpoſe ourſelves, that ſeeing, unſeen,
We may of the encounter frankly judge. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
A painter became a phyſician; whereupon one ſaid to him,
you have done well; for before the faults of your work were
ſeen, but now they are unſeen. Bacon.
Here may I always on this downy graſs,
Unknown, unſeen, my eaſy minutes paſs. Roſcommon.
Millions of ſpiritual creatures walk the earth
Unſeen, both when we wake, and when we ſleep. Milton.
At his birth a ſtar
Unſeen before in heaven, proclaims him come ;
And guides the eaſtern ſages who enquire
His place, to offer incenſe, myrrh, and gold.
He that on her his bold hand lays,
With Cupid's pointed arrows plays:
They with a touch, they are ſo keen,
Wound us unſhot, and ſhe unſeen.
The footſteps of the deity he treads,
And ſecret moves along the crowded ſpace, &gt;
Unſeen of all the rude Phaeacian face. Pope's Odyſſy.
2. Inviſible; undiſcoverable. -
The weeds of hereſy being grown into ripeneſs, do, even
in the very cutting down, ſcatter oftentimes thoſe ſeeds which
for a while lie unſeen and buried in the earth ; but afterward
freſhly ſpring up again no leſs pernicious than at the firſt. Hooker.
On ſhe came, hough unſ.
Led by her heav'nly maker, though unſet". .
And *::: by his º: Milton's Par. Lºf.
. Unſkilled : unexperienced.
3 He was not : in the affections of the court, but had
not reputation enough to reform it. . . Clarendºn.
UNse/LFish. adj. Not addicted to private intereſt.
The moſt intereſted cannot purpoſe any thing ſo much to
their own advantage, notwithſtanding which the inclination is
nevertheleſs unſºft/h. Speciator, N° 588.
UNse'NT. adj.
1. Not ſent.
Philips.
Milton.
J%aller.
2. UN-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N S
U N S
-
1sºrs r £r. Not called by letter or meſſenger.
2. ‘iºſi. ſhould º houſe to houſe unſent for,
and enquire what woman hath a cancer, or whº in an a
fiſtula, he would be as unwelcºme as the diſeaſe itſelf. Taylor.
Somewhat of weighty conſequence brings you here ſo
often, and unſent ſºr . . Dryden.
UNsº parable. adj. Not to be parted ; not to be divided.
Oh world, thy ſlippery turns ! Friends now faſt ſworn,
Who twine as 'twere in love
Unſeparable, ſhall, within this hour,
Break out to bittereſt enmity.
UNse/PARATED. adj. Not parted.
There ſeek the Theban bard;
To whom Perſephone, entire and whole,
Gave to retain th' unſeparatad ſoul. Pope's Odyſſy.
UNse'Rv1ce Able. adj. Uſeleſs ; bringing no advantage or
convenience.
The beaſt, impatient of his ſmarting wound, }
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Thought with his wings to fly above the groºnd;
But his late wounded wing unſerviceable found. Spenſer.
'Tis certainly demonſtrated, that the condenſation and ex-
panſion of any proportion of the air, is always proportional
to the weight incumbent upon it: ſo that if the atmoſphere
had been much greater or leſs than it is, it would on the
ſurface of the earth, have been unſerviceable for vegetation
and life. Bentley's Sermons.
It can be no unſerviceable deſign to religion, to undeceive
men in ſo important a point. Rogers's Seryons.
UNs E/Rv1ce ABLY. adj. Without uſe; without advantage.
It does not enlarge the dimenſions of the globe, or lie idly
and unſerviceably there, but part of it is introduced into the
plants which grow thereon, and the reſt either remounts
again, with the aſcending vapour, or is waſh’d down into
rivers. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
UN se’r. adj. Not ſet; not placed.
They urge that God left nothing in his word undeſcribed,
nothing unſet down; and therefore charged them ſtrictly to
keep themſelves into that without any alteration. Hooker.
To UN's E't TL.E. v. a.
1. To make uncertain.
Such a doćtrine unſettles the titles to kingdoms and eſtates;
for if the actions from which ſuch ſettlements ſpring were
illegal, all that is built upon them muſt be ſo too; but the
laſt is abſurd, therefore the firſt muſt be ſo likewiſe. Arbuthnot.
2. To move from a place.
As big as he was, did there need any great matter to un-
ſettle him. D'Eſtrange.
3. To overthrow.
UN's E!TTLED. adj.
1. Not fixed in reſolution; not determined; not ſteady.
Impartially judge, whether from the very firſt day that our
religion was unſettled, and church government flung out of
doors, the civil government has ever been able to fix upon a
fure foundation. South's Sermons.
A ſolemn air, and the beſt comforter
To an unſettled fancy, cure thy brains. Shakeſp.
Prepar'd I was not
For ſuch a buſineſs; there am I found
So much unſettled. Shakeſpeare.
With them, a baſtard of the king deceas'd, *
And all th’ unſettl"d humours of the land,
Raſh, inconſiderate, fiery, voluntary. Shakeſpeare.
Uncertain and unſettled he remains
Deep vers'd in books, and ſhallow in himſelf. Milton.
A covetous man deliberated betwixt the qualms of a warm-
bling ſtomach, and an unſettled mind. L’Eſtrange.
Unſettled virtue ſtormy may appear; -
Honour, like mine, ſerenely is ſevere. Dryden.
2. Unequable ; not regular; changeable.
March and September, the two equinoxes, are the moſt
windy and tempeſtuous, the moſt unſettl'd and unequable ſea-
ſons in moſt countries. Bentley's Sermons.
3. Not eſtabliſhed.
My cruel fate,
And doubts attending an unſettled ſtate,
Forc'd me to guard my coaſt. Dryden.
4. Not fixed in a place or abode.
David ſuppoſed that it could not ſtand with the duty which
he owed unto God, to ſet himſelf in an houſe of cedar trees,
and to behold the ark of the Lord's covenant unſettled. Hooker.
UN's E^rt LEDN Ess. m. ſ.
1. Irreſolution; undetermined ſtate of mind.
2. Uncertainty; fluctuation.
The *ſettledneſs of my condition has hitherto put a ſtop
tº my thoughts concerning it. Dryden.
3. Want of fixity.
When the ſun ſhines upon a river, though its waves roll
this way and that by the wind, yet, for all their unſettledneſs,
I the ſun ſtrikes them with a direct and certain beam. South.
Usse’vered. adj. Not parted; not divided.
I' Honour and policy, like unſever'd friends,
th' war do grow together. Shakeſp. Coriolanus
Their bands, though ſlack, no diſſoluti -
Th'un ever'd parts . greateſt preſſure tº a &gt;
Though looſe, and fit to flow, they ſtill cohere' Blackmur
To UNse'x. v. a. To make otherways than the ſex Gre.
monly is. - COUn-
- All you ſpirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unſex me here
And fill me, from the crown to th’ toe, top fill
Of direct cruelty. Shakespeare . Mada;
UNSHA'Dowr D. adj. Not clouded; not darkened. eth.
He alone ſces all things with an unſhadowed, com
viſion, who eminently is all. prehenſive
UNSHA’ke Able. adj. Not ſubjećt to concuſſion. Nº:
Your iſle ſtands, C.
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
With rocks unſhakeable, and roaring waters. Shaiſ,
UNSHA’k Ed. adj. Not ſhaken. Not in uſe.
I know but one,
That unaffailable holds on his rank,
Unſhak'd of motion.
UNSHA/KEN. adj.
1. Not agitated; not moved.
Purpoſe is
Of violent birth, but poor validity;
Which now, like fruits unripe, ſticks on the tree,
But fall unſhaken, when they mellow be. Shakeſpear.
The wicked's ſpite againſt God, is but like a madman's
running his head againſt the wall, that leaves the wall.
ſhaken, but daſhes his own brains out. Bºyle.
2. Not ſubject to concuſſion. -
3. Not weakened in reſolution; not moved.
Among innumerable falſe, unmov’d,
Unſhaken, unſeduc’d, unterriſy'd.
Ill waſt thou ſhrouded then,
O patient ſon of God yet only ſtood'ſt
Shakespeare . jul, Ceſar.
Milton's Par, Lyft.
Unſhaken. Milton's Par. Regain'd, b. iv.
Employ it in unfeigned piety towards God, in unſhalenduty
to his vicegerent. Sprat.
His principles were founded in reaſon, and ſupported by
virtue, and therefore did not lie at the mercy of ambition:
his notions were no leſs ſteady and unſhafen, than juſt and
upright. Addison.
To UN sha'KLE. v. a. To looſe from bonds.
A laudable freedom of thought unſhackles their minds from
the narrow prejudices of education, and opens their eyes to
a more extenſive view of the publick good. Addiſon.
UNsha(MED. adj. Not ſhamed.
The brave man ſeeks not popular applauſe;
Unſham'd, though foil'd, he does the beſt he can:
Force is of brutes, but honour is of man. Dryden.
UNSHA'PEN. adj. Miſhapen; deformed. -
This unſhapen earth we now inhabit, is the form it was
found in, when the waters had retired. - Burnet.
Gaſping for breath, th’ unſhapen Phocae die, --
And on the boiling wave extended lie. Addison.
UNsha'RED. adj. Not partaken; not had in common.
Bliſs, as thou haſt part, to me is bliſs; !
Tedious unſhar'd with thee, and odious ſoon. Miltºn,
To UNshe’ATH. v. a. To draw from the ſcabbard.
Executioner, unſheath thy ſword; -
Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue. Shakespeare.
Mowbray, the biſhop Scroop, Haſtings, and all
Are brought to the correction of your law : ^ ---
There is not now a rebel's ſword unſheath'd, Shahjart.
Viewing the Trojan reliques, ſhe unſheath'd
AFneas's ſword. *:
Arcite, his ford unſheath’d. ryan.
Far hence be ſouls profane !
Now, Trojan, take the way thy fates afford; Dryden,
Aſſume thy courage, and unſheath thy ſword.
The Roman ſenate has º k
*Till time give better proſpects, ſtill to keep iſ,
The A. its edge on Ceſar. Addison.
Each chief his ſev’nfold ſhield diſplay'd, Pºpe,
And half unſheath'd the ſhining blade.
UNSHE/D. adi. Not ſpilt. -
To ſº ...} the rivers muſt be turn'd. . º:
UHsheltered. Adj. Wanting a ſcreen , wa"; "
tlCI1. • . L.
He is breeding that worm, which will ſm” this *:
and leave him unſheltered to that ſcorchin with *
which will make the improvement of onah's jº
wiſh, that God would take away his life, his mo Pittſ.
deſire. - Decay ºf
UNshi(ELDED. adj. Not guarded by the ſº
He try’d a tough, well-choſen ſpear!
Though Cygnus then did no defence provide, Drydth:
But ſcornful offer'd his unſhielded ſide.
To UNshi(P. v. a. To take out of a ſhip.
At the cape we landed for freſh water; -
leak, we unſhipped our goods, and watered there.
but diſcover"?"
'illiºtſ.
Usshop.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N S
U N S
º
ſ
-
:
.
º
Hº
$5.
#.
º
UN’s Ho'ck FD. adj. Not diſguſted ; not offended.
Thy ſpotleſs thoughts unſhock'd the prieſt may hear.
Tickell.
Ussho’D. adj. [from unſhord.] Having no ſhoes.
Their feet unſhod, their bodies wrapt in rags;
And both as ſwift on foot, as chaſed flags. Fairy 3ºzen.
Withhold thy foot from being unſhod. jer. ii.
The king's army, naked and unſhod, would, through
thoſe incloſed parts, have done them little harm. Clarenden.
UN's Hoo'k. part, adj. Not ſhaken.
Pit, box, and gall'ry in convulſions hurl’d,
Thou ſtand'ſt tinſbook amidſt a burſting world.
UNsho(R.N. adj. Not clipped.
This ſtrength, diffus'd
No leſs through all my finews, joints and bones,
Than thine, while I preſerv'd theſe locks un/horn,
The pledge of my unviolated vow. Milton's Agoniſłes.
Straight as a line in beauteous order ſtood,
Of oaks un/horn, a venerable wood.
Unshoºr. part. adj. Not hit by ſhot.
He that on her his bold hand lays,
With Cupid's pointed arrow plays;
They, with a touch, they are ſo keen, .
Wound us unſhot, and ſhe unſeen. J/aller.
To UN's Ho’UT. v. a. To annihilate, or retrašt a ſhout.
Unſhout the noiſe that baniſh’d Marcius;
Repeal him, with the welcome of his mother. Shakeſpeare.
UNSHo'ws RED. adj. Not watered by ſhowers.
Nor is Oſiris ſeen
In Memphian grove or green,
Trampling th' unſhower'd graſs with lowings loud. Milton.
UNSHR1'NKING. adj. Not recoiling; not ſhunning danger or
pain.
Your ſon, my lord, has paid a ſoldier's debt;
He only liv'd but till he was a man;
The which no ſooner had his proweſs confirm’d,
In the unſhrinking ſtation where he fought,
But, like a man, he died. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
UN SHU'NNA Bi.e. adj. Inevitable.
'Tis the plague of great ones,
Prerogativ'd are they leſs than the baſe;
'Tis deſtiny unſhunnable like death.
UNsi'FTED. adj.
1. Not parted by a ſieve.
The ground one year at reſt, forget not thou
With richeſt dung to hearten it again,
Or with unſified aſhes.
2. Not tried.
Affection puh ! you ſpeak like a green girl,
Unſiſted in ſuch perilous circumſtance. Shakeſpeare.
UNsi'GHT. adj. Not ſeeing. A low word, uſed only with
unſeen, as in the example following. Probably formed by
corruption of unſighted.
They’ll ſay our buſineſs to reform
The church and ſtate is but a worm ;
For to ſubſcribe, unſight, unſeen,
To an unknown church diſcipline.
UNSI/GHTED. adj. Inviſible; not ſeen.
Beauties that from worth ariſe,
Are like the grace of deities,
Still preſent with us, though unſighted. Suckling.
UN's "GHTLINEss. n.ſ.. [from unſightly..] Deformity; diſagree-
ableneſs to the eye.
The unſightlineſs in the legs, may be helped, by wearing
a laced ſtocking. //iſeman's Surgery.
UN's I'd HTLY. adj. Diſagreeable to the fight.
On my knees I beg,
That you'll vouchſafe me raiment, bed, and food.—
—Good Sir, no more : theſe are unſightly tricks. Shakeſp.
Thoſe bloſſoms alſo, and thoſe dropping gums,
That lie beſtrown, unſightly, and unſmooth,
Pope.
Dryden.
Shakeſp. Othello.
May's Pirgil.
Hudibras.
Aſk riddance, if we mean to tread with eaſe. Milton.
Amongſt the reſt, a ſmall, unſightly root,
But of divine effect, he cull'd me out. Milton.
It muſt have been a fine genius for gardening, that could
have formed ſuch an unſightly hollow, into ſo beautiful an
a ſcal. Speciator, N° 477.
UN six ce'R E. adj. [inſincerus, Lat.]
1. Not hearty; not faithful.
2. Not genuine; impure ; adulterated.
I have ſo often met with chymical preparations, which I
have found unſincere, that I dare ſcarce truſt any. Boyle.
3. Not ſound ; not ſolid.
Myrrha was joy'd the welcome news to hear;
But, clogg'd with guilt, the joy was unſincere. Dryden.
UN's IN CE’R 1TY. adj. Adulteration; cheat.
A ſpirit of ſea-ſalt may, without any unſincerity, be ſo
prepared, as to diſlolve crude gold. Boyle.
To UN's 'NEw. v. a. To deprive of ſtrength.
Nor are the nerves of his compacted ſtrength,
Stretch'd and diſſolv’d into unſinew'd length. Denham.
Now toys and trifles from their Athens Come,
And dºes and pepper have unſ.newa Rome. Dryden,
The affected pirity of the French has wn ºnew'd their he.
rºck, verſe. The language of an “Pick poem is almoſt
wholly figurative: yet are they ſo fearful of a metaphor
that no example of Virgil can encourage them to be tºld
with ſafety. Dryde
UN's N'GED. Not ſcorched; not touched by fire yden.
&gt;
By the command of Domitian, when caſt into a chaldron
º oil, iſ: out unſinged. Brown', Pulgar Errours.
ree men Pailed through a fiery furnace, untouch'd, un-
Jºnged. Stephens's S
UNsi'NKING. adj. Not finking. ephens's Sermons.
Anxur feels the cool refreſhing breeze
Blown off the ſea, and all the dewy ſtrand
Lies cover'd with a ſmooth, unſºnsing ſand.
UNSI New ED. adj. Nerveleſs; weak.
Two ſpecial reaſons
May to you, perhaps, ſeem much unſnew’d,
And yet to me are ſtrong. Sºſpeare's Hamlet
UNsi'NNING. adj. Impeccable. - -
A Perfect uſ/inning obedience, free from particular aas of
tranſgreſſion.
UNSKANNED. adj. Not meaſured; not computed.
This tiger-footed rage, when it ſhall find
The harm of unſkann'd ſwiftneſs will, too late,
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
UNski'LLED. adj. Wanting ſkill; wanting knowledge.
Unſkill'd in Hellebore, if thou ſhouldſt try c
To mix it, and miſtake the quantity,
The rules of phyſick would againſt thee cry. Dryden.
Unſkill'd and young, yet ſomething ſtill ſ writ,
Of Ca'ndiſh beauty, join'd to Cecil's wit.
Not eaſtern monarchs on their nuptial day,
In dazzling gold and purple ſhine ſo gay,
As the bright natives of th’ unlabour'd field,
Unvers'd in ſpinning, and in looms unſkill'd.
Poets, like painters, thus unſkill'd to trace
The naked nature, and the living grace,
With gold and jewels cover every part,
And hide with ornaments their want of art.
UNski'LFUL. adj. Wanting art; wanting knowledge.
This overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the
unſkilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve. Shakeſp.
Hear his ſighs, though mute:
Unſkilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him. Milton's Par. Loft.
A man, unſkilful in ſyllogiſm, could perceive the weak.
neſs and inconcluſiveneſs of a long, artificial, and plauſible
diſcourſe. Locke.
Uſing a man's words, according to the propriety of the
language, though it be not always underſtood, leaves the
blame on him, who is ſo unſkilful in the language, as not
to underſtand it, when uſed as it ought. Locke.
UNSK1/LFULLY. adv. Without knowledge; without art.
You ſpeak unſkilfully ; or, if your knowledge be more, it
is much darkened in your malice. Shakeſpeare.
UNski'lful Ness. n.ſ. Want of art; want of knowledge.
The ſweetneſs of her countenance did give ſuch a grace
to what ſhe did, that it did make handſome the unhandſome-
neſs, and make the eye force the mind to believe that there
was a praiſe in that unſkilfulneſs. Sidney.
Let no prices be heightened by the neceſſity or unſkilfulneſ;
of the contractor. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
UNsla'1N. adj. Not killed.
If there were any who felt a pity of ſo great a fall, and
had yet any ſparks of unſlain duty left in them towards me,
yet durſt they not ſhew it. Sidney, b. iii.
Not hecatomb unſlain, nor vows unpaid,
Addiſon.
Æogers.
Prior.
Blackmore.
Pope.
On Greeks accurs'd, this dire contagion bring. Dryden.
UNSLA/KED. adj. Not quenched. *
Her deſires new rous'd,
And yet unſak'd, will kindle in her fancy,
And make her eager to renew the feaſt. Dryden.
Wheat ſteep'd in brine, drawing the brine from it, they
mix with un/lack'd lime beat to powder, and ſo ſow it. Mortimer.
UNslee'PING. adj. Ever wakeful.
And roſeate dews diſpos'd -
All but th' unſleeping eyes of God to reſt. Milton's Par. Loſt.
UNslipping. adj. Not liable to ſlip; faſt.
To knit your hearts A
Wi unſlipping knot, take, Antony,
Şº to %. §". Ant. and Cleopatra.
UNSMI'Rch Ed. adj. Unpolluted ; not ſtained.
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me baſtard ;
Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
Ev’n here, between the chaſte and unſmirch'd brow
Of my true mother. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
UN's MoſkEd. adj. Not ſmoked.
His antient pipe in ſable dy'd, -
And half un moak'd lay by his ſide. Swift.
29 Y UN-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">r
U N S
U N S
\'ssMooſph. adj. Rough not even ; not level. Not uſed.
" " Thoſe blóſſoms, and thoſe dropping gums
That lie beſtrown, unſightly, and unſmooth, -
Aſk riddance, if we mean to tread with eaſe. Milton.
Ussºciable. adj. [inſºciabilis, Latl. Not kind; not commu-
nicative of good ; not {uitable to ſociety. - - -
By how much the more we are accompanied with plenty,
by ſé much the more greedily is our end deſired, whom when
time hath made unſociable to others, we become a burden to
ourſelves. Raleigh's Hiff. of the IWorld.
Such a behaviour deters men from a religious life, by re-
preſenting it as an unſociable ſtate, that extinguiſhes all
joy. Addison's Speciator, N° 497.
Ussociably. adv. Not kindly; without good-nature.
Theſe are pleas'd with nothing that is not unſociably ſour,
ill-natur'd, and troubleſome. L'E/ºrange.
UNso'Ilen. adj. Not polluted; not tainted; not ſtained.
Who will believe thee, Iſabel ”
My unſoil'd name, th’ auſtereneſs of my life,
Will your accuſation overweigh. Shakeſpeare.
The humours are tranſparent, to let in the light, unſailed
‘and unſophiſticated by any inward tinčture. Ray.
Her Arethuſian ſtream remains unſoil'd,
Unmix'd with foreign filth, and undefil’d. Bryden.
UN sold. adj. Not exchanged for money.
Mopſus the ſage, who future things foretold,
And t'other ſeer, yet by his wife unſold. Dryden.
Adieu, my children better thus expire
Unſtall'd, unſold; thus glorious mount in fire. Pope.
Usso'ldier like. adj. Unbecoming a ſoldier.
Perhaps they had ſentinels waking while they ſlept; but
even this would be unſoldierlike in our age. Broome.
UNso'll D. adj. Fluid ; not coherent.
The extenſion of body is nothing but the coheſion of ſolid,
ſeparable, moveable parts; and the extenſion of ſpace, the
continuity of unſolid, inſeparable and unmoveable parts. Locke.
UN soo’t. for unſweet. Spenſer. -
UNsoPH1'stic At E.D. adj. Not adulterated.
The humour and tunicles are purely tranſparent, to let in
light and colours, unfouled and unſophiſłicated by any inward
tinéture. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
Blue vitriol, how venereal and unſophiſticated ſoever, rubb’d
upon the whetted blade of a knife, will not impart its latent
colour. Boyle.
If authors will not keep cloſe to truth by unvaried terms,
and plain, unſophiſticated arguments; yet it concerns readers
not to be impoſed on, by fallacies. Locke.
UNso'Lv ED. adj. Not explicated.
Why may not a ſincere ſearcher of truth, by labour and
prayer, find out the ſolution of thoſe perplexities, which
have hitherto been unſolved P JWatts.
As Virgil propounds a riddle which he leaves unſºlved;
ſo I will give you another, and leave the expoſition to your
acute judgment. Dryden.
UNso's TED. adj. Not diſtributed by proper ſeparation.
Their ideas, ever indifferent and repugnant, lie in the brain
unſorted, and thrown together without order. Watts.
UNso'UGHT. adj.
1. Had without ſeeking.
Mad man, that does ſeek
Occaſion of wrath, and cauſe of ſtrife;
She comes unſought; and ſhunned, follows eke. Fairy Queen.
Her virtue, and the conſcience of her worth,
That wºuld be woo'd, and not unſought be won. Mihon.
They new hope reſume,
To find whom at the firſt they found an %ught. Milton.
The ſea o'er-fraught would ſwell, and th’ unſºught dia-
monds
Would ſo emblaze the forehead of the deep. Milton.
Slumber, which forgot
When call'd before to come, now came unſought. Milton.
. If ſome foreign and unſought ideas offer themſelves, reject
them, and keep them from taking off our minds from its
preſent purſuit. Locke.
Thou that art ne'er from velvet ſlipper free,
Whence comes this unſought honour unto me?
2. Not ſearched.
Hopeleſs to find, yet loth to leave unſought,
9r that, or any place that harbours men.
UNSo'UND. adj.
I. Sickly; wanting health.
. Intemp'rate youth
Ends in an age imperfect, and unſºund. Denham.
An animal whoſe juices are unſound, can never be duly
nouriſhed; for unſºund juices can never duly repair the fluids
and ſolids. Arbuthnot.
2. Not free from cracks.
3. Rotten; corrupted.
4. Not orthodox.
Theſe arguments being ſound and ood, it cannot be un-
ſºund or evil to º ſtill the fine .. Hoºker.
Fenton.
Shakeſpeare.
Eutyches of ſound belief, as touching thei
copulation, become unſound, by denying the i.
ſtill continueth between the one and the other Ildture #. .
5. Not honeſt; not upright. • Rooker,
Do not tempt my miſery,
Leſt it ſhould make me ſo unſound a man,
As to upbraid you with thoſe kindneſſes
That I have done for you.
6. Not true; not certain.
With f . vain humours, fed
ith fruitleſs follies and unſound delights. ~
7. Not faſt; not calm. ſ § Hullard's Tal,
The now ſad king,
Toſs'd here and there, his quiet to confound,
Feels ſudden terror bring cold ſhivering;
Liſts not to eat; ſtill muſes; ſleeps unſound.
8. Not cloſe; not compačt.
Some lands make unſound cheeſe, notwithſtanding all the
care of the good houſewife. 44ortimer's Hiſland
9. Not ſincere; not faithful. ry,
This Boobyclod ſoon drops upon the ground
A certain token that his love's unſound;
While Lubberkin ſticks firmly. Gar
Io. Not ſolid; not material. y:
Of ſuch ſubtle ſubſtance and unſºund,
That like a ghoſt he ſeem’d, whoſe grave-cloaths are un-
Shałºffear.
Daniel.
bound. Fairy Quin,
II. Erroneous; wrong.
What fury, what conceit unſºund,
Preſenteth here to death ſo ſweet a child? Fairfax,
His puiſſance, truſting in th' Almighty's aid,
I mean to try, whoſe reaſon I have try’d
Unſound and falſe. -
12. Not faſt under foot.
UNso'UNDED. adj. Not tried by the plummet.
Glo'ſter is
Unſºunded yet, and full of deep deceit. Shake?. Hen. VI.
Orpheus lute was ſtrung with poets ſinews,
Whoſe golden touch could ſoften ſteel and ſtones;
Make tygers tame, and huge leviathans
Forſake unſºunded deeps to dance on ſands.
UNso'UND NEss. n.ſ.
1. Erroneouſneſs of belief; want of orthodoxy.
If this be unſound, wherein doth the point of unſºundneſs
lie Hooker, b. iv.
2. Corruptneſs of any kind. -
Neither is it to all men apparent, which complain of un-
ſound parts, with what kind of unſºundnſ. *}. partis
poſſeſſed. acker, b. iv.
3 Want of ſtrength; want of ſolidity. *
The unſoundneſs of this principle has been often cº,
and is univerſally acknowledged. Addison.
UN so’URED. adj.
1. Not made ſour. * ! :----.
Meat and drink laſt longer unputrified and unſºrdinº,
ter than in ſummer. Bacºn'; Nat Hiff,
2. Not made moroſe.
Secure theſe golden early joys,
That youth unſour’d with ſorrow bears.
UNso’wn. adj. Not propagated by ſcattering ſeed.
Muſhrooms come up haſtily in a night, and Yºtº."
Miltºn.
Shakespeare,
Dryden,
fown Bacºn,
- - -flowers will not
If the ground lie fallow and unſown, wºº Nat. Hji.
COInc. • *
The flow’rs unſºwn in fields and meadows reg d, dºn
And weſtern winds immortal ſpring maintain d. Drydºm.
UN SPA'RED. adj. Not ſpared.
Whatever thing
The ſcythe of time mows down, devour unſard. Miltºn,
UNsp.A’RING. adj. Not ſparing; not parſimon”
She gathers tribute large, and on the board
'ton,
Heaps with unſparing hand. Miltº
To UNspe’Ak. v. a. To retract; to recant.
I put myſelf to thy direction, and . .
Unſpeak mine own detračtion; here abjuſt Shaieffºrt.
The taints and blames I laid upon myſelf.
UNspe’Akable. adj. Not to be expreſſed. . d zeal of
A thing, which uttered with true devotion ". to the
heart, affordeth to God himſelf that glory, ". comfort,
weakeſt ſort of men, to the moſt perfect that ‘. b. W.
which is unſpeakable. - ... nº
A heavier taſk could not have been impº",
Than I to ſpeak my grief unſpeakable.
Both addreſt for fight -
Unſpeakable: for who, though with the * ſº.
Of angels, can relate - - han the cap”
The comfort it conveys is ſomething bigg" d not to *
cities of mortality; mighty, and unpeatable '. Sermºni.
underſtood, till it comes to be felt. . º fears, aſ
This fills the minds of weak men with gºn Jºlº. Addiº.
unſpeakable rage towards their fellow ſubjects. -
Shakºfta"
Ux-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N S
ºtº ºn
UNSPE(AKAbly, adv. Incxpreſſibly ; ineffably.
When nature is in her diſſolution, and preſents us with no-
thing but bleak and barren Propects, there is ſomething un-
JPeakably chearful in a ſpot of ground which is covered with
trees; that ſmile amidſt all the rigours of winter. Spectator.
Unsºcified. adj. Not particularly mentioned.
Were it not requiſite that it ſhould be concealed, it had
not paſſed unpecified. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
UNSPE culative. adj. Not theoretical.
Some ºfteculative men may not have the ſkill to examine
their aſſertions. Government of the Tongue.
UNSPE'D. adj. Not diſpatched; not performed.
Venutus withdraws,
Uºffed the ſervice of the common cauſe. Garth.
UNspe’NT. adi. Not waſted; not diminiſhed; not weakened;
not exhauſted.
The ſound incloſed within the fides of the bell, cometh
forth at the holes unſpent and more ſtrong. Bacon.
Thy fame, not circumſcrib'd with Engliſh ground,
Flies like the nimble journeys of the light,
And is, like that, unſpent too in its flight.
To UNSPHE’RE. v. a. To remove from iśb.
You put me off with limber vows, but I,
, Though you wou'd ſeek tº unſphere the ſtars with oaths,
Should yet ſay, Sir, no going. Shakeſpeare.
Let my lamp at midnight hour
Be ſeen in ſome high lonely tow'r,
Where I may oft out-watch the bear,
With thrice-great Hermes; or unſphere
The ſpirit of Plato, to unfold
What worlds, or what vaſt regions hold
Th’ immortal mind.
UNSPI'ED. adj. Not diſcovered ; not ſeen.
With narrow ſearch I muſt walk round
This garden, and no corner leave wn py'd.
Reſolv’d to find ſome fault, before unºpy’d;
And diſappointed, if but ſatisfy'd. -
UNSPI'LT. adj.
1. Not ſhed.
Thiſ blood which thou and thy great grandfire ſhed;
And all that ſince theſe ſiſter nations bled,
Had been unſpilt, had happy Edward known,
That all the blood he ſpilt had been his own.
2. Not ſpoiled ; not marred.
To borrow to-daie, and to-morrow to mis,
For lender or borrower noiance it is ;
Then have of thine owne, without lending unſpilt. Tºſºr.
To UNSPIRIT. v. a. To diſpirit; to depreſs; to deječt.
Denmark has continued ever ſince weak and unſpirited,
bent only upon ſafety. Temple.
Could it be in the power of any temporal loſs, ſo much
to diſcompoſe and unſpirit my ſoul? Norris.
UNspo’ILED. adj.
1. Not plundered ; not pillaged. - - -
All"the way that they fled, for very deſpight, in their return
they utterly waſted whatſoever they had before left un-
ſpoiled. Spºnſer's State of Ireland.
The Engliſh ſearch'd the rivers in ſuch ſort, as they left
few ſhips unſpoiled or untaken. Hayward.
U’ſºil'd ſhall be her arms, and unprofan'd
Her holy limbs.
2. Not marred.
UN's Poºr'ſ ED. adj.
1. Not marked with any ſtain.
A milk-white hind,
Without unſhotted, innocent within.
Seven bullocks yet unyok'd for Phoebus chuſe,
And for Liana ſeven unſpotted ewes.
2. Immaculate ; not tainted with guilt.
Satyran bid him other buſineſs ply, - -
Than hunt the ſteps of pure, unſpotted maid. Fairy Queen.
A heart unſpotted is not eaſily daunted. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
There is no king, be his cauſe never ſo ſpotleſs, if it come
to the arbitrement of ſwords, can try it out with all unſpotted
ſoldiers. Shaft. Hºn.V.
Pure religion and undefiled is this, to viſit the fatherleſs
and widows in their afflićtion, and to keep himſelf unſpotted
from the world. - james !. 27.
Wiſdom is the grey hair to men, and an unſpotted life is
Dryden.
Milton.
Milton.
Tickell.
Denham.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Dryden.
old age. Apocrypha.
Make her his eternal bride;
And from her fair unſpotted ſide -
Two bliſsful twins are to be born. Milton.
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathſome grave
His prey, nor ſuffer my unſpotted ſoul -
For ever with corruption there to dwell. Milton.
Vindicate the honour of religion, by a pure and unſpotted
obedience to its precepts. Rogers's Sermons.
UNSQUA’RED. adi. Not formed; irregular.
When he ſpeaks,
'Tis like a chime a mending, with terms unſºuard;
*
U N S.
Which, from the tongue of roarin
Would ſeem hyperboles.
NRTA'BLE, adj. |iºabilis, Lat.]
1. Not fixed; not faſt.
Where gentry, title, wiſdom,
Cannot concludé by the yea and ho
f #. ignorance, it muſt omit
*ºceſſities, and give way the while
Tº unſtable ſlightneſs. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
A Popular ſtate not founded on the general intereſts of the
Peºple, is of all others the moſt uncertain, unſtable, and
ſubječt . the moſt eaſy changes. #º.
us air was void of li ht, and earth un - *
See harneſs'd ſteeds deſºrt #. ſtony town, ºffable. Dryden
And wander roads */table, not their own. Gay.
2. Inconſtant; irreſolute.
A double-minded man is wnſtable.
UNSTA/ID. adj. Not cool; not prudent;
cretion ; not ſteady ; mutable.
. His unſtayed youth had lºng wandered in the common labv-
rinth of love; in which time, to warn young people of his
unfortunate folly, he compiled theſe twelve oeglogues. Spenſºr.
To the gay gardens his unſaid deſire
Him wholly carried, to refreſh is ſprights.
g Typhon dropt,
Shakeſp. froilus and c. */ida.
James i. 8.
not ſettled into diſ-
Spenſer.
Will the king come, that I may breathe my laſt 'penſer
In wholeſome counſel to his unſaid youth. Shakeſpeare.
Tell me, how will the work repute me,
ºr undertaking ſo un/laid a journey
I fear it will make me ſcandized. Shakeſpeare.
Wo to that land,
Which gaſps beneath a child's un/laid command. Sandys.
Vice leads
Vain unſay'd youth to beggary and ſhame. Richards.
UNst AIDNEss. n: ſ Indiſcretion; volatile mind.
The oft changing of his colour, with a kind of ſhaking
un/?aidneſs over all his body, he might ſee in his Countenance
ſome great determination mixed with fear. Sidney.
UNSTA’INE R. adj. Not ſtained; not died ; not diſcoloured.
Pure and unftained religion ought to be the higheſt of all
cares appertaining to public regimen. Hooker, b.v.
Ne let her waves with any filth be dy'd,
But ever, like herſelf, un/?ained hath been try'd. Fa. Queen:
I do commit into your hand
Th’ un/lained ſword that you have us’d to bear,
With this remembrance, that you uſe the ſame
With a like bold, juſt, and impartial ſpirit,
As you have done gainſt me. - Shakeſp. Hen. IV,
I will do it without fear or doubt,
° live an uglain'd wife to my ſweet love. Shakeſpeare.
Your youth,
And the true blood which Peeps forth faintly through it,
D9 plainly give you out an unſtain'd ſhepherd. Shakeſpeare.
The hooked chariot ſtood
Unſtain'd with hoſtile blood. Milton.
That good earl, once preſident
Qf England's council, and her treaſury;
Who liv'd in both unſtain'd with gold or fee,
And left them both, more in himſelf content. Milton.
Her people guiltleſs, and her fields unſtain'd. Roſcommon.
Theſe, of the garter call’d, of faith unſtain'd,
In fighting fields the laurel have obtain'd.
To UnsiaſtE. v. a. To put out of ſtate.
High-battled Caeſar will
º/atº his happineſs, and be ſtag'd to th' ſhew
Againſt a ſworder. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
I wou’d un/late myſelf, to be in a dué reſolution. Shakeſp.
UNSTATUTABLE. adj. Contrary to ſtatute.
That plea did not avail, although the leaſe were notoriouſly
unſtatutable, the rent reſerv'd, being not a ſeventh part of the
real value. Swift.
UNSTAUNCHE.P. adj. Not ſtopped, not ſtayed.
With the iſſuing blood
Stifle the villain, whoſe un/launched thirſt
York and young Rutland could not ſatisfy,
UNst E(ADILY. adv.
1. Without any certainty.
2. Inconſtantly; not conſiſtently. º -
He that uſes his words looſely and unſteadily, will not be
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
minded, or not underſtood. - Locke.
UNSTE'ADINess. n.ſ. Want of conſtancy; irreſolution; mu-
tability.
A prince of this charaćter, will inſtruct us by his example,
to fix the unſteadineſs of our politicks.: Addiſon.
In the reſult, we find the ſame ſpirit of cruelty, the ſame
blindneſs, and obſtinacy, and unſteadineſs. Swift.
UNSTE/AD Y. adj.
1. Inconſtant; irreſolute. 9
And her unſteady hand hath often plac'd
Men in high pow'r, but ſeldom holds them faſt. Denham.
No meaſures can be taken of an unſteady mind; ſtill 'tis
too much or too little. 4%;
- l<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N S
U N' S
while choice remains, he will be ſtill u/eady,
And nothing but neceſſity can fix him.
2. Mutable; variable; changeable. -
# . motion of the ſun were as uncqual as that of a ſhip
driven by unſteady winds, it would not at all help us to mea-
ſure time. Locke.
3. Not fixed ; not ſettled.
ÜNstE’ADFAst. adj. Not fixed; not faſt.
I'll read you matter,
As full of peril and advent’rous ſpirit,
As to o'erwalk a current, roaring loud,
On the unſteadfaſt footing of a ſpear.
UNst EE/PED. adj. Not ſoaked.
Other wheat was ſown unſeeped, but watered twice
a day. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
To UNst ING. v. a. To diſarm of a ſting.
He has diſarmed his afflićtions, unſtung his miſeries; and
though he has not the proper happineſs of the world, yet he
has the greateſt that is to be enjoyed in it. South's Sermons.
UNsti’NTED. adj. Not limited. -
In the works of nature is unſtinted goodneſs ſhewn us by
their author. Skelton.
UNst 1'R RED. adj. Not ſtirrred ; not agitated.
Such ſeeming milks ſuffered to ſtand unſtirred, let fall to
the bottom a reſinous ſubſtance. Boyle on Colours.
To UNSTI'rch. v. a. To open by picking the ſtitches.
Cato well obſerves, though in the phraſe of a taylor, friend-
ſhip ought not to be unripped, but unſtiched. Collier.
Ussroo'PING. adj. Not bending; not yielding.
Such neighbour nearneſs to our ſacred blood
Should nothing priv'lege him, nor partialize
Th'unſlooping firmneſs of my upright ſoul. Shakeſpeare.
To UN's To P. v. a. To free from ſtop or obſtruction; to
olden.
"sº white fumes have been afforded, by unſtopping a li-
quor diaphonous and red. Boyle on Colours.
The eyes of the blind ſhall be opened, and the ears of the
deaf unſtopped. Iſa. xxxv. 5.
. One would wonder to find ſuch a multitude of nitches un-
ſtopped. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
UN stopped, adj. Meeting no reſiſtance.
- The flame unſopp'd, at firſt more fury gains,
And Vulcan rides at large with looſen'd reigns.
UN's TRA'1NED. adj. Eaſy; not forced.
By an eaſy and unſtrained derivation, it implies the breath
Rowe.
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
of God. Hakewill on Providence.
UN's TRA/ITENED. adj. Not contraćted.
• The eternal wiſdom, from which we derive our beings, en-
riched us with all theſe ennoblements that were ſuitable to
the meaſures of an unſtraitened goodneſs, and the capacity of
ſuch a creature. Glanville.
UNSTRE/NGTHENED adj. Not ſupported; not aſſiſted.
The church of God is neither of capacity ſo weak, nor
ſo unſtrengthened with authority from above, but that her laws
may exact obedience at the hands of her own children. Hooker.
To UN ST R1'NG. v. a.
1. To relax any thing ſtrung; to deprive of ſtrings.
My tongue's uſe is to me no more,
Than an unſtringed viol or harp.
Eternal ſtructures let them raiſe,
On William and Maria's praiſe;
Nor fear they can exhauſt the ſtore,
*Till nature's muſick lies un/irung :
Till thou, great God ſhalt loſe thy double pow'r,
And tough thy lyre, and ſhoot thy beams no more. Prior.
His idle horn on fragrant myrtles hung;
His arrows ſcatter'd, and his bow unſtrung.
2. To looſe; to untie.
Invaded thus, for want of better bands,
His garland they unſtring, and bind his hands.
UNSTRUCK. adj. Not moved; not affected.
Over dank and dry,
They journey toilſome, unfatigu'd with length
Of march, inſtruck with horror at the fight
Of Alpine ridges bleak.
Unsºu prép. adj. Not premeditated; not laboured.
In Yºur converſation I cou'd obſerve a clearneſs of notion,
expreſs'd in ready and unſtudied words. Dryden.
Uss‘ru'FFED. adj. Unfilled; unfurniſhed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye;
And where care lodgeth, ſleep will never lie :
But where unbruiſed youth, with unſtuft brain,
. Doth couch his limbs, theſe golden ſleep doth reign. Shakespeare
Ussy EsrANTIAL. aff
I. Nºt ſolid; not palpable.
Welcome, thou unſubſtantial air that I embrace;
The wretch that thou haſt blown unto the worſt,
Owes nothing to thy blaſts. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
. . Darkneſs now roſe,
As daylight ſunk, and brought in low'ring night,
Her ſhadowy offspring, unſubſtantial both,
Privation mere of light and abſent day.
Shakſ). Rich. III.
Smith.
Dryden.
Philips.
Milton.
2. Not real.
| ſuch empty, wift'ſ antial beings may be ever made tſ.
of on this occaſion, there were never any more nicely
gined and employed. - V Ima-
Unsuccee Dr D. adj. Not ſucceeded.
Unjuſt equal o'er equals to jet reign;
One over all, with unſucceeded power. Miłºn
UNsuccessful. 4d. Not having the wiſhed event; i. i.
tunate; not well received.
O the ſad fate of unſacceſſal fin
You ſee yon heads without, there's worſe within, Clveland,
Ye pow'rs return’d
From unſucceſſful charge be not diſmay’d. Miltºn,
Hence appear the many miſtakes, which have made learn.
ing generally ſo unpleaſing and ſo unſucceſsful. Milton
My counſels may be unſucceſsful, but my prayers -
Shall wait on all your actions. Denham
The corruption, perverſeneſs, and vitioſity of man, wi
he charges as the only cauſe that rendered all the affirm,
his doćtrine came cloathed with, unſucceſsful. t South,
Had Portius been the unſucceſsful lover,
The ſame compaſſion would have fall'n on him. Addison.
Succeſsful authors do what they can to exclude a compe-
titor, while the unſucceſſful, with as much eagents, lay
their claim to him as their brother. Addison.
Thoſe are generally more unſucceſſful in their purſuit fºr
fame, who are more deſirous of obtaining it. Addison,
Leave dang'rous truths to unſuc €/yul ſatire. Pºpe,
UNsucce’ssfully. adv. Unfortunately; without ſucceſs.
The humble and contented man pleaſes himſelf innocently;
while the ambitious man attempts to pleaſe others finfilly,
and, perhaps, in the iſſue unſucceſsfully too. South,
UNsuccessful NEss. n.ſ. Wantof ſucceſs; eventcontrarytowiſh.
Admonitions, fraternal or paternal, then more publick re-
prehenſions, and upon the unſucceſsfulneſs of all theſe milder
medicaments, the cenſures of the church. Hammºnd,
UNsuccessive. adj. Not proceeding by flux of parts.
We cannot ſum up the unſucceſſive and ſtable direction of
God. Brown's Pulgar Erturi.
The unſucceſſive duration of God with relation to himſelf,
doth not communicate unto other created beings, the ſame
manner of duration. Hall.
UNsu'ckeD. adj. Not having the breaſts drawn.
Unſuck'd of lamb or kid, that tend their play, Milton,
UNsu'FFERABLE. n.ſ. Not ſupportable; intolerable; not to
be endured.
The irkſome deformities, whereby through endleſs and
ſenſeleſs effuſions of indigeſted prayers, they oftentimes diſ-
grace, in moſt unſuffraile mainer, the worthieſt part ºf
chriſtian duty towards God. - Hozier, b. V.
That glorious form, that light unſufferable,
And that far-beaming blaze of majeſty,
Wherewith he wont at heav'n's high council table
To ſit the midſt of trinal unity, !!,
He laid aſide. - Miltºn.
A ſtinking breath, and twenty ill ſmells beſides, * *
unſufferable by her natural ſluttiſhneſs. --- tº:
Unsuffi'cIEN ce. n. ſ. (inſuffſance, Fr.) Inability to anſwº
the end propoſed. ke it
The error and unſºff.ience of the arguments, doth ma i.
on the contrary ſide againſt them, a ſtrong preſumption h
God hath not moved their hearts to think ſuch tº t
hath not enabled them to %. F J Unabl ſº W,
UNsufficient. adj. [inſuffiant, Fr.] Unable; " -
Malebranche fº †. the difficulties of º º:
ways, and how unſufficient they are, to give * º ºrs
count of the ideas we have, erects this, of ſeeing all t .
in God, upon their ruin, as the true. ºf-
Unsu'GARED. adj. Not ſweetened with ſugar. d into
Try it with ſugar put into water formerly º Hji.
other water un ugared. Bacon'; . º
UNsu'itable. adj. Notcongruous; notequal; nº Pº out 0
- Virginity, like an old courtier, wear. her * and
ſ.ſhion; richly ſuited, but unſuitable, juſt like thesºd.º.
the tooth-pick, which we wear not now. ------,
- - * ſt ble to
He will ſmile upon her, which will now º: º: caſi-
her diſpoſition, being addićted to a melanch, #welfth Night.
not but turn him into contempt. Shaft. º ..
Tºw.jikisáremier contemptile";
Hard recompence, unſuitable return
For ſo much good. - *ahle to 4
All that ſº and happineſs ſignifies is º
wicked man; and therefore could be no fellº" º ſtic
Conſider whether they be not unneceſſay * Žiº
as are unſuitable to our circumſtances. f friars, with."
To enter into a party, as into an order o ... whº
reſigned an obedience to ſuperiours, is vºy . ...ºf
civil and religious fiberties we ſo zealouſly º -
UNsu'i TABLEN Ess. m. ſ. Incongruity ; unfitneſs. nother nº
The unſuitablenes of one man's aſpect º º a peſº
fancy, has raiſed ſuch an averſion, as has Pº” Satº
4.dajºn,
Millen's Par. Rºgain d.
aſſ,
intº
hatred of him.
Ussu'irº
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N S
***.
UNsu’iring. adj. Not fitting; not becoming.
Whilſt you were here, o'erwhelmed with your grief,
A paſſion moſt */uiting ſuch a man,
Caffio came hither.
Shakeſp. Othelh.
Leave thy joys, un hiting ſuch an age, ſp. Othe
To a freſh Somer, and reſign the ſtage. den.
UNsu'llie D. adj. Not fouled ; not diſgraced 5 pure. Dry
- My maiden honour yet is pure
As the unſu lied lilly.
- - Shakeſpeare,
To royal authority, a moſt dutiful obſervance has evé been
the proper, unſallied honour of Yºur church. Sprat's Sermons.
Rays which on Hough's unſully'd mitre ſhine. Pope.
Theſe an altar raiſe:
An hecatomb of pure, unjuly'd lays
That altar crowns. Pope.
UNsu'NG: adj. Not celebrated in verſe not recited in verſ,
Thus was the firſt day ev'n and morn,
Nor paſs'd uncelebrated, nor unſung
By the coeleſtial choirs. A4ilton's Par. Left.
Half yet remains unſung; but narrow. bound
Within the viſible diurnal ſphere. Milton's Par. Left.
Here the muſe ſo oft her harp has ſtrung,
hat not a mountain rears its head unſung. Addiſon.
UNsu’NNed. adj. Not expoſed to the ſun. -
Ithought her as chaſte as unſunn’d ſnow. Shakeſpeare.
You may as well ſpread out the unſunn'd heaps
Qf miſers treaſure by an outlaw's den,
And tell me it is ſafe, as bid me hope
Danger will wink an opportunity,
And let a ſingle, helpleſs maiden paſs
Uninjur'd in this wild ſurrounding waſte. Milton.
UNsuperfluous. adj. Not more than enough.
Nature's full bleſfings would be well diſpens'd
In unſuperfluous, even proportion,
And ſhe no whit encumber'd with her ſtore. Milton.
NSUPPLANTED. adj.
1. Not forced, or thrown from under that which ſupports it.
Gladſome they quaff, yet not encroach on night,
Seaſon of reſt; but well bedev'd repair
Each to his home with un upplanted feet. Philips.
2. Not defeated by ſtratagem. -
NSUPPLIED. adi. Not ſupplied ; not accommodated with
ſomething neceſſary.
Prodigal in ev'ry other grant,
Her fire left unſupply'd her only want. ryden.
Every man who enjoys the poſſeſſion of what he naturally
wants, and is unmindful of the unſupplied diſtreſs of other
men, betrays the ſame temper. Spectator.
UNsuppo'RTABLE: adj. [inſpportable, Fr.] Intolerable; ſuch
as cannot be endured.
The uneaſineſs of unrelieved thirſt, by continuance grows
the more unſupportable. Boyle.
The waters mounted up into the air, thicken and cool it;
and by their interpoſition betwixt the earth and the ſun, fence
off the ardent heat, which would be otherwiſe unſupport-
able. Hºodward's Nat. Hiſł.
UNsupportably, adv. Intolerably.
For a man to do a thing, while his conſcience aſſures him
that he ſhall be infinitely, unſupportably miſerable, is certainly
unnatural. South.
UN suppo'RTED. adj.
1. Not ſuſtained; not held up.
Them ſhe up-ſtays
Gently with myrtle band; mindleſs the while -
Herſelf, though faireſt unſupported flow'r, Milton.
2. Not affiſted.
Nor have our ſolitary attempts been ſo diſcouraged, as to
deſpair of the favourable look of learning upon our ſingle and
unſupported endeavours. Brown's Prºf. to Pulgar Errours.
UNsu'RE. Not fixed; not certain.
What is love * 'tis not hereafter :
Preſent mirth hath preſent laughter;
What's to come is ſtill unſure.
The men he preſt but late,
To hard aſſays unfit, unſure at need, -
Yet arm'd to point in well attempted plate. Fairfax.
The king, ſuppoſing his eſtate to be moſt ſafe, when in-
decd moſt unſure, advanced many to new honours. Hayward.,
How vain that ſecond life in others breath !
Th' eſtate which wits inherit after death
Eaſe, health, and life, for this they muſt reſign:
Unſure the tenure, but how vaſt the fine ! Pope.
USSURMo'UNTABLE. adj. [ inſurmontable, Fr. J Inſuperable;
not to be overcome.
Shakeſpeare.
What ſafety, is it, for avoiding ſeeming abſurdities, and un- .
ſurmountable rubs in one opinion, to take refuge in the contrary,
which is built on ſomething altogether as inexplicable L2.É.
UN suscr'ptible, adj. Incapable ; not liable to admit.
She a goddeſs died in grain, -
Was unſuſceptible of ſtain. Swift.
U N T
UNsuspect.
adj. N t 3. -
NSUSPE^cTED. } *i. **nſidered as likely to do or mean
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
he dangerous and unſuſpeºfed Haſtings. Shakeſp. Rich. III. -
- Author unftºpes,
Ffiendly to man, far from deceit or guile. Milton.
On the coaſt averſe
From ºntrance, or cherubick watch, by ſtealth
Found unſuſpeded way. AMilton's Par. Loſt.
Wh his day, my Perſicus, thou ſhalt perceive,
ether I keep myſelf thoſe rules I glve,
º elſe an unſifteåed glutton live. ... Dryden.
ey are perſons of unqueſtionable abilities, altogether
"ſºftected of avarice or corruption. - Swift
NSUSPE^cTING. adj. Not imagining that any ill is deſ, né.
When Albion ſends her eager ſons to war, gned.
Pleas'd, in the gºn'ral's fight, the hoſt lie down
Sudden, before ſome */tºpečing town;
The captive race, one inſtant makes our
And high in air Britannia's ſtandaj flies.
UNsuspicious. 44ff. Having no ſuſpicion.
He his guide requeſted to let him an
With both his arms on thoſe two maſſy pillars,
That to the arched roof gave main ſupport:
He unſuſpicious led him. Milton'
he eaſy queen receiv'd my faint addreſs,
With eager hope and unſuſpicious faith.
UNsusta‘INED. adj. Not ſupported ; not held up.
Its head, though gay,
Hung drooping, unjuſº. Milton's Par. Lºft.
All unſiftain'd between the wave and ſky,
Beneath my feet the whirling billows fly.
To Usswa'THE. v. a. Toffº. folds or convoluti
bandage.
In the morning an old woman came to º, me. Addison.
UNswa’yable. ... Not tº be governed or influenced by
another.
He bºw’d his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unſwayable and free. Shakeſpeare.
UNswa’Yed. adj. Not wielded; not held in the hand.
He makes for England, here to claim the ji.
-Is the chair empty? is the ſword unſway'd?
Is the king dead the empire unpoſſeſs'd Shakeſpeare.
To UNSwe’AR. v. n. Not to ſwear; to recant anything ſworn.
The ape was glade to end the ſtrife ſo light,
And thereto ſwore; for who would not oft ſwear,
And oft unſwear, a diadem to bear? Hubbard’s Tale.
To UNswe’AT. v. a. To eaſe after fatigue; to cool after
exerciſe. º
The interim of unſweating themſelves regularly, and con-
venient reſt before meat, may, with profit and delight, be
taken up with ſolemn muſick. 44ilton on Education.
UNswe’ATING. adj. Not ſweating.
In froſt and ſnow, if you complain of heat,
They rub th’un weating brow, and ſwear they ſweat. Dryd.
UNsweet, adj. Not ſweet; diſagreeable.
Long were to tell the troublous ſtorms that toſs
The private ſtate, and make the life unweet. Fairy Queen.
UNswe’pt. adj. Not bruſhed away; not cleaned by ſweeping.
What cuſtom wills in all things, ſhould we dot,
The duſt of antique time would lie unwept. Shakeſp.
UNswo'RN. adj. Not bound by an oath.
You are not yet unſworn :
When you have vow’d, you muſt not ſpeak with men. Shał.
UNTA'INTED. adj.
I. Not ſullied; not polluted.
Sweet prince, th’untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet div'd into the world's deceit. Shakespeare ?.
What ſtronger breaſt-plate than a heart untainted? Shº,
Ireland's untainted loyalty remain'd. Rºſcommon.
Compare the ingenuous pliableneſs to virtuous counſels in
youth, as it comes freſh and untainted, out of the hands of
nature, with the confirmed obſtinacy in an aged ſinner. South.
This untainted year is all your own;
Your glories may, without our crimes, be ſhown. Dryden.
The moſt untainted credit of a witneſs will ſcarce be able
to find belief. - - - Locke.
Keep the air of the room untainted with fire, ſmoke, or
the breaths of many people. Arbuthnot.
. Not charged with any crime. - • 3
2. N And ;: within ãº five hours Haſtings liv d
Untainted, unexamin'd, free at liberty, Shakeſpeare.
- ted by mixture.
3 Nº. walls conceal the fatal ſecret; -
Th’ untainted winds refuſe th' infecting load. Smith.
UNTA/KEN. adj.
I. Nº. day remaineth the vall untaken away. 2 Cºr. º
The Engliſh ſearched the rivers in ſuch ſort, as they º:
few ſhips unſpoiled or *. *::::ſe
Prize,
Pope.
* Agoniſłes.
Smith.
Pope.
ons of
i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N T
U N T
º
• - - //aller.
iſpoſe already of th’ intº ſpoil. -
oº:: the º buſineſs had miſcarried, and Jeruſa-
Icm remain'd untaken. * - L_* 1)ryden.
A thouſand ſchemes the monarch's mind employ;
Plate in thought, he ſacks untaken Troy. Poſe.
2. UNTAKEN up. Not filled. -
The narrow limits of this diſcourſe, will leave no more
room untaken up by heaven. - -
UNTA’lked of adj. Not mentioned in the world.
Spread thy cloſe curtain, love-performing night,
That the runaway's eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to theſe arms, untalº'd of and unſeen. Shakeſpeare.
No happineſs can be, where is no reſt;
Th’ unknown, untalº'd of man is only bleſt. Drydew.
UNTA’MEA ble. adj. Not to be tamed ; not to be ſubdued.
Gold is ſo untameable by the fire, that after many meltings
and violent heats, it does ſcarce diminiſh. // ilkins.
He is ſwifter than any other bull, and untameal le. Grew.
UNTA/MED. adj. Not ſubdued; not ſuppreſſed.
A people very ſtubborn and untamed ; or, if ever tamed,
yet låtely have quite ſhooken off their yoke, and broken
the bonds of their obedience. Spenſer's Ireland.
What death has heav'n deſign'd,
For ſo untam’d, ſo turbulent a mind Dryden.
Man alone acts more contrary to nature, than the wild and
moſt untamed part of the creation. Locke.
To UNTA/NGLE. v. a. To looſe from intricacy or convolu-
tion.
O time, thou muſt untangle this, not I;
It is too hard a knot for me t'untie.
This is that very Mab,
That cakes the elflocks, in foul, ſluttiſh hairs,
Which, once untangld, much misfortune bodes. Shałęſp.
I'll give thce up my bow and dart ;
Untangle but this cruel chain,
And freely let me fly again. Prior.
UNTA'St Ed. adj. Not taſted; not tried by the palate.
The tall ſtag reſolves to try
The combat next; but if the cry
Invades again his trembling ear,
He ſtraight reſumes his wonted care;
Leaves the unta/ied ſpring behind,
And, wing'd with fear, outflies the wind. //aller.
If he chance to find
A new repaſt, or an untaſted ſpring,
Bleſſes his ſtars, and thinks it luxury.
UNT A's TING. adj.
1. Not perceiving any taſte.
Cydonian oil,
Whoſe balmy juice glides o'er th' wit:yling tongue. Smith.
2. Not trying by the palate.
UNT A UGHT. adj.
1. Uninſtructed ; uneducated; ignorant; unlettered.
A lie is continually in the mouth of the untaught. Eccluſ xx.
Taught, or untaught, the dunce is ſtill the ſame;
Yet ſtill the wretched maſter bears the blame.
On ev'ry thorn delightful wiſdom grows,
In ev'ry ſtream a ſweet inſtruction flows ;
But ſome untaight o'erhear the whiſp'ring rill,
In ſpite of ſacred leiſure, blockheads ſtill. 1%ung.
2. Debarr'd from inſtruction.
He, that from a child untaught, or a wild inhabitant of the
woods, will expect principles of ſciences, will find himſelf
miſtaken. - Locke.
3. Unſkilled ; new ; not having uſe or pračtice.
Suffolk's imperial tongue is ſtern and rough,
Us'd to command, untaught to plead for favour. Shakespeare.
To UNT EVACH. v. a. To make to quit, or forget whº has
been inculcated.
That elder berries are poiſon, as we are taught by tra-
dition, experience will unteach us. Brown's ſugar Erraurs.
Their cuſtoms are by nature wrought;
But we, by art, unted.h what nature taught.
UNT E MPERED adj. Not tempered.
One built up a wall, and others daubcd it with untsmered
mortar. Ezek. xiii. 10.
UNT E/MPTED. adj.
1. Not cºmbarraſſed by temptation.
In temptation diſpute not, but rely upon God, and con-
tend not with him but in prayer, and with the help of a pru-
dent tintempted guide. Taylor's Rule of Living Hoy.
2. Not invited by any thing alluring. -
Untempted, or by wager or by price,
He would attempt to climb the precipice. Cotton on the Peak.
UNTE's ABLE. adj.
1. Not to be held in poſſeſſion.
2. Not capable of defence.
He produced a warrant, that the town being untenable,
he ſhould retire. Carººn, W. viii
w ... wrix º' . -
**ubon abandons a poſt that was untenniſ. Dryden.
sºar.
Addison's Cato.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Boyle.
º adj. Having no tenant.
The country ſeems to be full ſtock'd wi
being º ock'd with cattle, no ground
UNTE'SPED. adj. Not having any attendance.
They fall, unbleſt, untºnded, and unmourn'd. 7,
UNTE'NDER. adj. Wanting ſoftneſs; wanting aft 1)
Goes thy heart with this?– o QIn
—Aye, my lord
–So young, and ſo untender *—
- So young, my lord, and true.
UNT ENDERED, a j. Not offered.
Caſhbelan granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thºuſand pounds; which by thee lately
Is left antender d. Shakespeare's Cy beli
To UNTE/NT. v. a. To bring out of a tent. ymbeline,
U Will he not, upon our fair requeſt,
ºntent his perſon, and ſhare the air with us? ---
UNTE'NTF p. adj. [from tent.] Having no º:
Blaſts and fogs upon thee! Pplied,
.. untented woundings of a father's curſe
ierce every fence about thee! Shakespeare'
UNTERRIFIED, adj. Not affrighted; not ić ...”
Among innumerable falſe, unmov’d, -
Unſhaken, unſeduc’d, unterriff'd. Miltºn
To ſuccour the diſtreſt; to give help *** whº
To an afflicted mother,
Unbrib'd by love, unterriff’d by threats;
Theſe are exploits worthy Achilles' ſon. 4. Pº
UNT HA'NKED. adj. -
1. Not repaid with acknowledgment of a kindneſs.
If all the world
Should in a pet of temperance feed on pulſe,
Drink the clear ſtream, and nothing wear but freeze,
Th' all-giver wou'd be u thank'd, wou'd be unprais'd, Mill,
Their batter'd admiral too ſoon withdrew,
Unthank'd by ours for his unfiniſh'd fight. Dryden.
2. Not received with thankfulneſs.
Forc'd from her preſence, and condemn'd to live:
Unwelcome freedom, and unthank'd reprieve. Dryden,
UNTHA'NKFUL. adj. Ungrateful; returning no acknowledg-
ment for good received.
The caſting away of things profitable for ſuffenance, is an
unthanºſul abuſe of the fruits. Aſſºcker.
He is kind to the unthanºſul. Lučevi. 35.
They which he created, were unthanful unto him which
prepared life for them. 2 Eſdr. viii.
If you reckon that for evil, you are unthanºuſ for the
bleſſing. Taylor's Rule ºf Hil; Living,
The bare ſuppoſal of one petty loſs, makes us untharºſal
for all that's left. L'Eſtrange.
UNTHA/NKFULLY. adv. Without thanks; without gratitude.
I judged it requiſite to ſay ſomething, to prevent my being
thought to have unthan ſiliy taken one of the chief paſſages
of my diſcourſe from a book, to which I was utterly a
ſtranger. Bºyk,
UNT HA’NKFULNess. n. ſ. Neglect or omiſſion of acknow-
ledgement for good received; want of ſenſe of benefits; in-
ratitude.
£ Thou dieſt in thine unthamſunſ; and thine ignorinº
makes thee away. Shakespeare raſt,
Immoderate favours breed firſt unthan ſalºſ, and º:
hate. ujiwar
The unthankful ſtand reckoned among the moſt enormous
ſinners, which evinces the virtue oppoſite to uffalº !, to
bear the ſame place in the rank of duties. Sºut” Sermoni,
UNT HA/w ED. adj. Not diſſolved after froſt.
Your wine lock'd up,
Or fiſh deny'd, the river yet unthaw'd. Pºſt,
To UNTH1'NK. v. a. To recal, or diſmiſs a thought. 1.4
Unthink your ſpeaking, and ſay ſo no more. Sº,
UNTH1'NKING, adj. Thoughtleſs; not given tº reflection.
Grey-headed infant ' and in vain grown old;
Art thou to learn, that in another's gold
Lie charms refiftleſs that all laugh to find Dryden
Unthinking plainneſs ſo o'erſpread thy mind. h ry i.
An effectual remedy for the wandering of º *
cver ſhall propoſe, would do great ſervice to the ſtu *;oft,
perhaps help inthinking men to become thinking; rerſion to
The unthinking part contračt an unreaſonable *:
that eccleſiaſtical conſtitution. -
With earneſt eyes, and round anthinking face, Pºſt.
He firſt the ſnuff-box open'd, then the caſe.
UNTHo’s N.Y. adj. Not obſtructed by prickles: . dire vuluſ
It were ſome extenuation of the curſe, if in ſ * ſtill
tui were confinable unto corporal exercitation*, * t Brºſ.
remained a paradiſe, or unthorny place of knowledge.
UNTHo'UGHT of adj. Not regarded; not heeded.
That ſhall be the day, whene'er it lights,
This gallant Hotſpur, this all-praiſed knight, Shakespeare"
And your unthought of Harry chance to mººt **T,
Temple,
r
onjons
Shahjart.
8
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N T
---.
º
To Unt HR RAD. v. a. To looſe.
He with his bare wand can unthread thy joints,
And crumble all thy finews.
UNTHREATENED, adj. Not menaced.
Sir John Hotham was unreproached, and unthreatened, by
any language of mine.
UNTHRI'FT. n.ſ. An extravagant; a prodigal.
My rights and royalties
Pluckt from my arms perforce, and giv'n away
To upſtart untſ rifts. Shakeſpeare.
The curious unthrift makes his cloaths too wide,
And ſpares himſelf, but would his taylor chide. Herbert.
Yet nothing ſtill ; then poor and naked come &gt;
Thy father will receive his unthift home,
And thybieſ! Saviour's blood diſcharge the mighty ſum. Dryd.
UNTHRI'FT. adj. Profuſe; waſteful ; Prodigal; extravagant.
In ſuch a night,
Did Jeſſica ſteal from the wealthy Jew,
And, with an unthrift love, did run from Venice. Shakeſp.
UNTHRI'FTILY. adv. ithout frugality.
Our attainments cannot be overlarge, and yet we manage
a narrow fortune very unthriftily. Collier.
UNTH R1 FTIN Ess. n. 7. Waſte; prodigality; profuſion.
The third ſort are the poor by idleneſs or unthriftingſ, as
riotous ſpenders, vagabonds, loiterers. Hayward.
The more they have hitherto embezzled their parts, the
more ſhould they endeavour to expiate that unthriſtineſs, by a
more careful managery for the future. Govern. of the ſangue.
UN THRI'FTY. adj.
1. Prodigal; profuſe ; laviſh ; waſteful.
The caſtle I found of good ſtrength, having a great mote
round about it ; the work of a noble gentleman, of whoſe
unthrifty ſon he had bought it. Sidney, b. ii.
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty ſon Shakeſpeare.
Our abſence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge. Shakeſp.
2. Not eaſily made to thrive or fatten. A low word.
Grains given to a hide-bound or unthrifty horſe, recover
him. . - Mortimer's Huſbandry.
UN THRI’v ING. adj. Not thriving; not proſpering ; not grow-
ing rich.
Let all who thus unhappily employ their inventive faculty,
conſider, how unthriving a trade it is finally like to prove,
that their falſe accuſations of others will rebound in true ones
on themſelves. Government of the Tongue.
To UNTH Ro'N E. v. a. To pull down from a throne.
Him to unthrone, we then
May hope, when everlaſting fate ſhall yield
To fickle chance, and chaos judge the ſtrife.
To UNTI E. v. a. -
1. To unbind; to frec from bonds.
Though you untie the winds, and let them fight
Againſt the churches; though the yeſty waves
Cºnfound and ſwallow navigation up. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
2. To looſen from convolution or knot.
All that of myſelf is mine,
Lovely Amoret, is thine;
Sachariſſa’s captive fain
Would untie his iron chain ;
And thoſe ſcorching beams to ſhun,
To thy gentle ſhadow run.
* The chain I’ll in return untie,
And freely thou again ſhalt fly. -
The fury heard; while on Cocytus' brink,
Her ſnakes untied, ſulphureous waters drink.
3. To ſet free from any obſtruction.
All the evils of an untied tongue, we put upon the ac-
counts of drunkenneſs. Taylor.
4. To reſolve ; to clear. - - -
They quicken ſloth, perplexities untie ; ...
Make roughneſs ſmooth, and hardneſs mollifie. Denham.
A little more ſtudy will ſolve thoſe difficulties, untie the
knot, and make your doubts vaniſh. JWatts.
UNTI/ED. adj. -
1. Not bound ; not gathered in a knot.
Her hair laid
Unty’d, and ignorant of artful aid,
º her iº looſely lay diſplay’d.
2. Not faſtened by any binding, or knot. -
Your hoſe ſhould be ungartered, your ſhoe untied, and
every thing about you demonſtrating a careleſs deſola-
tion. Shakeſpeare.
UNT1'L. adv.
1. To the time that.
Treaſons are ačted,
As ſoon as thought; though they are never believ'd
K. Charles.
Milton,
//aller.
Prior.
Pope.
Prior,
Until they come to act. Denham.
2. To the place that.
In open proſpect nothing bounds our eye,
Until the carth ſeems join'd unto the ſky. Dryden.
Uſed of time. The other uſe is ob-
UsT11. trº. To.
ſolete.
Milton. -
So ſººn as he from far deſcry’d
Thoſe gift ring arms, that heavén with light did fill,
Herous d himſelf full blithe, and haſten'd them until Speºſer.
JNT1'lled. adj. Not cultivated.
The glebe wntill'd, might plenteous crops have born :
Rich fruits and flow’rs, without the gard’ner's pains, *
Might ev'ry hill have crown'd, have honour’d all the plains.
- Blackmore on the Cºatza.
Lands lain long until"d, contrast a fºr juice, which
cauſes the land to run to unprofitable trumpery. Mortimer
The ſoil titilla, a ready harveſt yields; - - - - -
with wheat and barley wave the golden fields. Pope
NTI'MBERED. adj. Not furniſhed with timber; weak.
Where's then the ſaucy boat,
Whoſe weak untimlera ſide, but CVen now
Co-rival’d greatneſs? or to harbour fled,
Or made a toaſt for Neptune? Shakespeare.
UNTI'MELY, adj. Happening before the natural time.
Boundleſs intemp'rance hath been
Th’untimely emptying of the happy throne. Shakespeare
Matrons and maids
With tears lament the knight's untimely fate. Dryden
Such were the notes thy once-lov’d poet ſung,
Till death untinely ſtopp'd his tuneful tongue.
Oh juſt beheld and loſt'ſ Pope
UNT1'MELY. adv. Before the natural time.
He only fair, and what he fair hath made;
All other fair, like flowers untimely fade. Spenſer
If ever he have child, abortive be it;
Prodigious and untimely brought to light. Shakeſpeare
Butchers, and villains !
How ſweet a plant have you untimely cropt Shakeſpeare
Call up our friends,
And let them know what we mean to do,
And what's untimely done. Shakeſp. Hamlet
Why came I ſo untimely forth
Into a world, which, wanting thee,
Cou'd entertain us with no worth? Waller
UNT1'NG ED. adj.
I. Not ſtained; not diſcoloured.
It appears what beams are untinged, and which paint the
primary, or ſecondary iris. Boyle on Colours.
2. Not infected.
Your inattention I cannot pardon; Pope has the ſame de-
feót, neither is Bolingbroke untinged with it. Swift to Gay.
UNT, RABLE. adj. Indefatigable; unwearied.
A moſt incomparable man, breath'd as it were
To an untirable and continuate goodneſs. Shakeſpeare.
UNTI'RED. adj. Not made weary.
Hath he ſo long held out with me untir’d,
And ſtops he now for breath Shakespeare. Rich. III.
See great Marcellus ! how untir’d in toils, -
He moves with manly grace, how rich with regal ſpoils Dryden.
UNT1't LED. adj. [un and title..] Having no title.
O nation miſerable !
With an untitled tyrant, bloody ſcepter'd ;
When ſhalt thou ſee thy wholeſome days again Shakeſp.
U’NTo prep. [It was the old word for to; now obſolete.] To.
O continue thy loving kindneſs unto them. Psalm. xxxvi.
It was their hurt untruly to attribute ſuch great º unto
falſe gods. Hooker.
She, by her wicked arts, and wily ſkill,
Unawares me wrought unto her wicked will. Spenſºr.
The uſe of the navel is to continue the infant unto the mo-
ther, and by the veſſels thereof convey its ſuſtentation. Brown. .
Children permitted the freedom of both hands, often con-
fine unto the left. - Brown.
Me, when the cold Digentian ſtream revives,
What does my friend believe I think or aſk
Let me yet leſs poſſeſs, ſo I may live,
Whate'er of life remains unto myſelf. Temple
UNTo'LD. adj. -
I. Not related.
Better a thouſand ſuch as I,
Their grief untold, ſhould pine and die;
Than her bright morning, overcaſt,
With ſullen clouds, ſhould be defac'd, Waller
2. Not revealed. . . . -
Characters where obſcene words are very indecent to be
heart: for that reaſon, ſuch a tale ſhall be left untold
by me Dryden.
UN roſuchED. adj.
1. not reached. - - -
I. Achilles. though dipt in Styx, yet having his heel untºuched
by that water, was ſlain in that part. Brown's Pug. Errours.
furnace untouched,
men paſſed through a fiery w
Three p c Stephens's Sermons.
Temple.
J/aller.
unſinged.
d; not affected. - - - - -
2. Nº. perſons wholly untouched with his agonies, and
unmºved with his paſſionate intreaties, fleep away all concern
- - Sidney.
for him or themſelves. 3. N.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N T
ddled with.
3. Not mº purſue the ſylvan lands ;
Th" abode of nymphs, untouch'd by former hands. Dryden.
Several very antient trees grºw "Pºº the ſpot, from whence
- that theſe particular tracts muſt have lain un-
they conclude, tha p Addiſon.
tou.}'d for ſome ages.
UN row ARD. adj. - -
I. Froward; perverſe; vexatious; ºt eaſily guided, or taught.
Have to my window; and if ſhe be froward,
Tº haſ thou taught Hortenſio to be untoward. Shakespeare .
The ladies prove averſe,
And more untoward to be won,
Than by Caligula the moon. Hudibrar,
The rabbins write, when any Jew
Did make to God or man a vow,
which afterwards he found untoward,
Or ſtubborn to be kept, or too hard ;
Any three other Jews o' th'nation, -
Might free him from the obligation. #Hudibras.
They were a croſs, odd, untoward people. South.
Some men have made a very untoward uſe of this, and
ſuch as he never intended they ſhould. JP'oodward.
2. Aukward; ungraceful.
vaſt is my theme, yet unconceiv'd, and brings
Untoward words, ſcarce looſen'd from the things. Creech.
Some clergymen hold down their heads within an inch of
the cuſhion; which, befides the untoward manner, hinders
them from making the beſt advantage of their voice. Swift.
UNToºw AR ply. adj. Aukward; perverſe ; froward.
They learn, from umbred or debauched ſervants, untowardly
tricks and vices. Locke on Education.
UNToºw ARdly. adv. Aukwardly; ungainly ; perverſely.
He that provides for this ſhort life, but takes no care for
eternity, ačis as untowardly and as croſsly to the reaſon of
things, as can be. - Tillotſon.
He explained them very untowardly, Tillotſon.
UNTRA’ceABLE. adj. Not to be traced.
The workings of providence are ſecret and untraceable, by
which it diſpoſes of the lives of men. South's Sermons.
UNTRA'cED. adj. Not marked by any footſteps.
Nor wonder, if advantag'd in my flight,
By taking wing from thy auſpicious height,
Through untrac'd ways, and airy paths I fly,
More boundleſs in my fancy than my eye. Denham.
unt Ractable. adj. [intraitable, Fr. intračiabilis, Lat.]
1. Not yielding to common meaſures and management; not
governable; ſtubborn.
The French, ſuppoſing that they had advantage over the
Engliſh, began to be ſtiff, and almoſt untračiable, ſharply
preſſing for ſpeedy reſolutions and ſhort meetings. Hayword.
If any father have a ſon thus perverſe and untractable, I
know not what more he can do but pray for him. Locke.
Ulcers untraciable in the legs, with a gangrenous appear-
ance in the ſkin. Arbuthnot on Diet.
2. Rough; difficult.
ſforºd to ride th' untra?able abyſs. Milton.
UNTRA/cTABLENEss. m. ſ. Unwillingneſs, or unfitneſs to be
regulated or managed ; ſtubbornneſs.
The great difference in mens intelle&amp;tuals ariſes from a
defeót in the organs of the body, particularly adapted to
think; or in the dulneſs or untractableneſ of thoſe faculties,
for want of uſe. Locke.
UNTRA/DING. adj. Not engaged in commerce.
Men leave eſtates to their children in land, as not ſo liable
to caſualties as money, in untrading and unſkilful hands. Locke.
UNTRAINED. adj.
1. Not educated; not inſtructed; not diſciplined.
My wit untrain'd in any kind of art. Shakeſpeare.
The king's forces charged lively, and they again as ſtoutly
received the charge ; but being an untrained multitude, with-
out any ſoldier or sº º were ſoon put to flight. Hayw.
lſe,
To noble and ignoble, is more ſweet
Untrain’d in arms, where raſhneſs leads not on. Milton.
No expert general will bring a company of raw, untrained
men into the field; but will, by little bloodleſs ſkirmiſhes,
inſtruct them in the manner of the fight. Decay of Piety.
2. Irregular ; ungovernable. -
Gad not abroad at ev'ry queſt and call
Of an untrained hope or paſſion:
To court each place of fortune that doth fall,
Is wantonneſs in contemplation. Herbert.
UNTRANSFE/RRAble. adj. Incapable of being given from olie
to another.
} In parliament there is a rare co-ordination of power,
though the ſovereignty remain ſtill entire and untransferable,
U. the Prince. - Howel's Pre-eminence of Parliament.
#. adj. Not diaphanous ; opaque.
l] ough held againſt the light they appear'd of a tranſparent
}. 9%, Yºº looked on with one's back turn'd to the light,
they exhibited an untranſparent blue. Boyle on Colours.
UNTRA’velle D. adj.
I. Nº. º by paſſengers.
e find no open track, or conſtant man !-- . . .
labyrinth, but are oft times fain to wander . in this
untravelled parts. Brºwn's Prºf. to Pulgar }. and
Long untravell'd heaths. &amp; #.
2. * never ſeen foreign countries. !omſºn,
n untravelled Engliſhman cannot reliſh all t -
Italian pictures; becauſe the poſtures ...'. ties of
often ſuch as are peculiar to that country. %.
Tºº Read. v. a. To tread back; tº go back in the im.
We will untread the ſteps of damned flight,
And, like a bated and retired flood,
Leaving our rankneſs and irregular courſe,
Stoop low within thoſe bounds we have o'erlook'd, Shahºft
UNTRE'Asured, adj. Not laid up; not repoſited, ºp.
Her attendants
Saw her a-bed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreaſur'd of their miſtreſs. Shah
UNTRE’atable, adj. Not treatable; not practicable, ſº,
Men, are of ſo untreatable a temper, that nothing can be
obtained of them. Decay of Pi
UNTRI'ED. adj. tly,
1. Not yet attempted
It behoves,
From hard eſſays, and ill ſucceſſes paſt,
A faithful leader, not to hazard all -
Through ways of danger, by himſelf untry'd. Mihm,
That ſhe no ways nor means may leave untry'd,
Thus to her ſiſter ſhe herſelf apply'd, Denham,
2. Not yet experienced.
Never more
Mean I to try, what raſh untry'd I ſought,
The pain of abſence from thy ſight. Milton's Par. Lyi.
The happieſt of mankind overlooking thoſe ſolid bleſing
which they already have, ſet their hearts upon ſomewhat which
they want ; ſome untry'd pleaſure, which, if they could but
taſte, they ſhould then be compleatly bleſt. Atterbury,
Self-preſervation, the long acquaintance of ſoul and body,
the untry'd condition of a ſeparation, are ſufficient reaſons not
to turn our backs upon life, out of an humour. Callier,
Eternity thou pleaſing, dreadful thought!
Through what variety of untry'd being,
Through what new ſcenes and changes muſt we paſs? Allſ.
3. Not having paſſed trial.
The father ſecure,
Ventures his filial virtue, though untry'd,
Againſt whate'er may tempt. Milton's Par. Rºgain'd.
UNTRIU'MPHABLE. adj. Which allows no triumph.
What towns, what garriſons might you,
With hazard of this blood ſubdue ;
Which now y’are bent to throw away -
In vain, untriumphable fray ? Hudibra.
ºrs. łaj. Not paſſed; not marked by thefoot.
The way he came, not having mark'd, return , , ,
Was difficult, by human ſteps unred. Paradiſ? Rgain'd.
Now while the heav'n by the ſun's team untred,
Hath took no print of the approaching light,
And all the ſpangled hoſt keep watch. Miltºn,
A garland made of ſuch new bays,
And ſought in ſuch untrodden ways,
As no man's temples e'er did crown. - I/aller,
Who was the firſt to explore th' untrudden path, -
When life was hazarded in ev'ry ſtep . . .44"|* Cato,
UNTRolled. adj. Not bowled; not rolled along
Hard fate" untrol"d is now the charming *;
Drydin,
The playhouſe and the parks unviſited muttº.
UNTRo'UBLED. adj.
1. Not diſturbed by care, ſorrow, or guilt.
Quiet untroubled ſoul, awake! awake ! !.2%
Arm, fight and conquer, for fair England's ſake. Shakespeare
2. Not agitated ; not confuſed. -
Our Saviour meck, and with unaroukº mind,
After his airy jaunt, though hurry'd fore, Milton,
Hungry and cold, betook him to his reſt. a rºwſis
3. Not interrupted in the natural courſe:
Would they think with how ſmall allowance
Untroubled nature doth herſelf ſuffice, Fair, Qifth.
Such ſuperfluities they would deſpiſe. airy &amp;
4. Tranſparent; clear.
The equal diſtribution of the ſpiritsinth
gible parts, ever repreſenteth bodies clear and untr
UNTRU’E. adj.
1. Falſe; contrary to reality. i-
By what ..º. ſhall any man make thoſe sº
ſons true, holding that diſtinétion untº. . like ºr
That a veſſel filled with aſhes, will recº", the ll iº, is
tity of water, that it would have done if it had been 9 i.
- - ... 1... a fifth paſt.
utterly untine, for the water will not go" by a fifth P 2. Halº:
eliquor with thetan-
a 10...
ºubled. Baiº.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N T
2. Falſe; not faithful.
I cannot break ſo ſweet a bond,
Unleſs I prove untrue;
Nor can I ever be ſo fond,
To prove untrue for you.
Flora commands thoſe nymphs and knights,
Who liv'd in ſlothful eaſe, and looſe delights:
Who never acts of honour durſt purſue,
The men inglorious knights, the ladies all untrue. Dryden.
UNTRULY. adv. Falſely; not according to truth.
It was their hurt untruly to attribute ſo great power unto
falſe gods. Hooker, b. v.
On theſe mountains it is generally received that the ark
reſted, but untruly. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the World.
UNTRU'stiness. n.ſ. Unfaithfulneſs.
Secretary Peter, under pretence of gravity, covered much
Suckling.
untruſtineſs of heart. Hayward.
UNTRU'TH. n.ſ.
1. Falſehood; contrariety to reality.
2. Moral falſehood; not veracity. -
He who is perfect, and abhors untruth,
With heavenly influence inſpires my youth. Sandys.
3. Treachery; want of fidelity.
I would,
So my untruth had not provok'd him to it,
. . The king had cut off my head with my brother's. Shakeſp.
4. Falſe aſſertion.
In matter of ſpeculation or practice, no untruth can poſſibly
avail the patron and defender long; and things moſt truly,
are likewiſe moſt behovefully ſpoken. Hooker, b. iii.
There is little hope for common juſtice in this diſpute,
from a man, who lays the foundations of his reaſonings in ſo
notorious an untruth. - Atterbury.
UNTU/NABLE. adj. Unharmonious; not muſical.
My news in dumb filence will I bury,
For they are harſh, untunable, and bad. Shakeſpeare.
A luteftring, merely unequal in its parts, giveth a harſh
and untunable ſound ; which ſtrings we call falſe. Bacon.
His harſh untunable pipe is no more fit than a raven's, to
join with the muſick of a choir. Tatler, No 54.
To UNTU/NE. v. a.
1. To make incapable of harmony.
Take but degree away, untune that ſtring,
And hark what diſcord follows.
When the laſt and dreadful hour,
This crumbling pageant ſhall devour,
The trumpet ſhall be heard on high,
The dead ſhall live, the living die,
And muſick ſhall untune the ſky.
The captives, as their tyrant ſhall require,
That they ſhould breathe the ſong, and touch the lyre,
Shall ſay ; can Jacob's ſervile race rejoice,
Untun'd the muſick, and diſus’d the voice Prior.
2. To diſorder.
O you kind gods !
Cure this great breach in his abuſed nature;
Th’ untuned and jarring ſenſes, O wind up
Of this child-changed father. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
UNTU'RN.E.D. adj. Not turned.
New crimes invented, left unturn’d no ſtone,
To make my guilt appear, and hide his own. Dryden.
So eager hath the inquiſitive part of mankind been to bring
this matter to a fair iſſue, that no ſtone hath been left unturned,
no way, whereby theſe things could have been brought forth
of the ſea, but one or other hath pitch’d upon. JWoodward.
UNTU'Tor ED. adj. Uninſtructed; untaught.
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some ſtern untutor’d churl; and noble ſtock
Was graft with crab-tree ſlip, whoſe fruit thou art. Shakeſp.
Thy even thoughts with ſo much plainneſs flow,
Their ſenſe untutor'd infancy may know :
Yet to ſuch height is all that plainneſs wrought, -
Wit may admire, and letter'd pride be taught. Prior.
To UNTwi'N.E. v. a. -
1. To open what is held together by convolution.
But ſince the ſiſters did ſo ſoon untwine
So fair a thread, I'll ſtrive to piece the line.
2. To open what is wrapped on itſelf. -
It turns finely and ſoftly three or four turns, cauſed by the
untwining of the beard by the moiſture. - Bacon.
3. To ſeparate that which claſps round anything.
Divers worthy gentlemen of England, all the Syren
ſongs of Italy could never untwine from the maſt of God's
word. Aſcham.
To UNTwi'st. v. a. To ſeparate anythings involved in each
other, or wrapped up on themſelves.
Untwiſting his deceitful clew,
He ‘gan to weave a web of wicked guile. Fairy Queen.
The intereſt of prince and people is ſo enfolded in a mu-
tual embrace, that they cannot be untwiſted without pulling a
limb off. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
JWaller.
U N V
Untwiſting all the chains that tie
The hidden ſoul of harmony. Milton
No, I'll untwiſ, you ; -
I have occaſion for your ſtay on earth. Dryden,
fº hempen ropes cut ſmall and untwiſted, are bene-
lands. . Mortimer's Huſbandry.
ºntwiſ a wire, and from her gums
A ſet of teeth completely comes. Swift
To UNTy'. ** [See UNTIE.] To looſe. ift.
1...gºis, not I:
* hard a knot for met unty. Shakeſpeare.
TºVA'il. v.a. To uncover, ſº ſtrip of a jº.
W., ºft.** “cºnsis is jºy.'s.
» -
Troy reviv'd, her mourning face unvail’d.
Now unveil'd, the toilet ſtands diſplay'd,
Each ſilver vaſe in myſtick orderlaid. Po
y - - - pe.
UNvA’lu Able. adj. Ineſtimable; being above price.
Secure the innocence of children, by imparting to them the
unvaluable bleſſing of a virtuous and Pious education. Atterb.
UNvA’lued, adj.
1. Not prized; neglected.
He may not, as unvalued perſons do,
Carve for himſelf; for on his choice depends
The ſafety and the health of the whole ſtate.
2. Ineſtimable; above price.
I thought I ſaw a thouſand fearful wrecks;
Ineſtimable ſtones, unvalu'd jewels.
UNvA'NQUISHED. Not conquered; not overcome.
Shall I for lucre of the reſt unvanquiſh'd,
Detract ſo much from that prerogative,
As to be called but viceroy of the whole Shakeſpeare.
Vićtory doth more often fall by error of the unvanquiſhed,
than by the valour of the vićtorious. Hayward,
They riſe unvanquiſh'd, Milton's Par. Loft, b. vi.
UNYA/RIABLE, adj. [invariable, Fr.] Not changeable; not mut-
able.
The two great hinges of morality ſtand fixt and unvariable
as the two poles: whatever is naturally conducive to the com-
mon intereſt, is good; and whatever has a contrary influence,
is evil. Norris.
UNvA'RIED. adj. Not changed ; not diverſified.
If authors cannot be prevailed with to keep cloſe to truth
and inſtruction, by unvaried terms, and plain, unſophiſticated
arguments; yet it concerns readers not to be impoſed on. Locke.
They ring round the ſame unvaried chimes,
With ſure returns of ſtill-expected rhymes. Pºpe.
UNvA'RNISHED. adj.
1. Not overlaid with varniſh.
2. Not adorned; not decorated.
I will a round, unvarniſh'd tale deliver,
Of my whole courſe of love; what drugs, ...
I won his daughter with. Shakeſp. Othello.
UNvA’RYING. ; Not liable to change. p
We cannot keep by us any ſtanding, unvarying meaſure of
duration, which conſiſts in a conſtant fleeting ſucceſſion, as
we can of certain lengths of extenſion, as inches marked out
in permanent parcels of matter. Locke.
To UN ve/Il. v. a. [See Veil and VAIL ]
1. To uncover; to diveſt of a veil.
The moon,
Apparent queen, unveil'd her peerleſs light.
To the limpid ſtream direct thy way,
When the gay morn unveils her ſmiling ray. Pope.
2. To diſcloſe ; to ſhow.
The providence, that's in a watchful ſtate,
Knows almoſt every grain of Pluto's gold;
Does ev’n our thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles. Shakespeare
UNve’ILEDLY. adv. Plainly ; without diſguiſe.
Not knowing what uſe you will make of what has been
wnveiledly communicated to you, I was unwilling that ſome
things, which had coſt me pains, ſhould fall into any man's
hands, that ſcorns to purchaſe knowledge with pains. Boyle.
UNve'N't ILATED. adj. Not fanned by the wind.
This animals, to ſuccour life, demand ;
Nor ſhould the air unventilated ſtand;
The idle deep corrupted would contain - -
Blue deaths. Blackmore's Creation,
UNve/Ritable. adj. Not true. .
All theſe proceeded upon unveritable grounds.
UNve/Rsed. adj. Unacquainted; unſkilled.
Not eaſtern monarchs, on their nuptial day,
In dazzling gold and purple ſhine ſo gay,
As the bright natives of th’ unlabour'd field,
Unvers'd in ſpinning, and in looms unſkill'd,
Unvexed. adj. Untroubled; undiſturbed.
With a bleſt and unvext retire,
with unhack'd ſwords, and helmets all unbruis'd,
We will bear home that luſty blood again. Shakeſpeare.
Unvex'd with thought of wants which may betide ;
Or for to-morrow's dinner to provide, Dryden's juvenal.
3o A Us-
Denham.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
Brown.
Blackmore.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N U -
U N W
tºnviolat ED. adj Not injured ; not broken.
Herein you war againſt your reputatiºn,
And draw within the compaſs of ſuſpect r r
Th; unviolated honour of your wife. - Shaº are.
He, with ſingular conſtancy, preſerved his duty and fidelity
to his majeſty unviolated. . C arendon.
This ſtrength diffus'd
No leſs through all my finews, joints, and bones,
Than thine, while I preſerv'd theſe locks unſhorn,
The pledge of my unviolated vow.
UN v1/p + Jous. adj. Wanting virtue. -
If they can find in their hearts that the poor, unvirtuºus, fat
knight ſhall be any further afflicted, we two will be the
miniſters. Shakeſp. Merry J/ives of J/indſor.
Usvi/si TED. ad’. Not reſorted to.
In ſome wild zone
Dwell, not unviſited of heav'n's fair light,
Secure. Miltºn's Par. Lºft, b. ii.
The playhouſe and the park unviſited muſt lie. Dryden.
UNU'N IFor M. adj. Wanting unifornity.
Such an †† piety is in many ſo exactly apportioned
to Satan's intereſt, that he has no cauſe to wiſh the change
of his tenure.
UN vo'y AGEABLE. adj. Not to be paſſed over or voyaged.
Not this unvoyageable gulph obſcure,
Detain from following thy illuſtrious track. Milton.
UNU/RG ED. adj. Not incited ; not preſſed.
The time was once, when thou unurg’d would'ſt vow,
That never words were muſick to thine ear,
Unleſs I ſpake. Shakeſp. Comedy of Errours.
UNU's ED. adj.
1. Not put to uſe; unemployed.
She, whoſe huſband about that time died, forgetting the
abſent Plangus, or, at leaſt, not hoping of him to attain ſo
aſpiring a purpoſe, left no art uniſed, which might keep
the line from breaking, whereat the fiſh was already
Milton.
taken. Sidney.
Sure he that made us with ſuch large diſcourſe,
Looking before and aſter, gave us not
That capability and godlike reaſon,
To ruſt in us unus’d. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
2. Not accuſtomed.
He, unuſed to ſuch entertainment, did ſhortly and plainly
anſwer what he was. Sidney, b. ii.
One, whoſe eyes,
Albeit unuſed to the melting mood,
Dropt tears as faſt as the Arabian trees
Their medicinal gum.
What art thou ?
Not from above: no, thy wan looks betray
Diminiſh’d light, and eyes unus’d to day.
UNU's EFUL. adj. Uſeleſs; ſerving no purpoſe.
I was perſuaded, by experience, that it might not be un-
vſful in the capacities it was intended for. Glanville.
Birds flutter with their wings, when there is but a little
down upon them, and they are as yet utterly unuſeſul for
Shakeſp. Othello.
Dryden.
flying. 42%re's Antidote againſt Ætheim.
As when the building gains a ſurer ſtay,
We take th' unuſeful ſcaffolding away. Dryden.
Pleas'd to find his age
Declining, not unuſul to his lord. Philips.
Usu's UAL. adj. Not cºmmon; not frequent; rare.
With this unuſual and ſtrange courſe they went on, till
God, in whoſe heavieſt worldly judgments I nothing doubt
but that there may lie hidden mercy, gave them over to their
own inventions. Hooker.
You gain your point, if your induſtrious art
Can make unuſual words eaſy and plain. Roſcommon.
A ſprightly red vermilions all her face;
And her eyes languiſh with unuſual grace. Granville.
That pecular turn, that the words Thould appear new, yet
not untſºal, but very proper to his auditors. Felton.
The river flows redundant, and attacks
The ling ring remnant with anywal tide. Philips.
UNU's UALN Ess. m. ſ. Uncommonneſs; infrequency.
It is the wrºſs of the time, not the appearance, that
ſurprizes Alcinous. Broome.
Usu’ſ 1 ERABLE. aff. Ineffable ; incxpreſſible.
Sighs now breath d
Uniterable ; which the ſpirit of pinyºr
Inſpir’d, and wing'd for heav'n wrº: ſpeedier flight
Than loudeſt oraory. Aſton's Par. Lºft, b. xi.
- It wounds my ſoul
To think of your un tºerable ſorrows,
When you ſhall find Hippolius was guiltleſs. Smith.
UNvu"LNERALLE. adj. Exempt from wound: not vulner-
able.
The god of ſoldiers inform
ºſº With nobleneſs, that thou may’ſ prove
ºulnerable, and ſtick i' th' wars
Like a great ſea mark, ſtanding every flaw. Shakeſpeare.
Decay of Piety.
Uswa'kes ED. adj. Not rouſed from ſleep,
he more
tº *: was, to find unwaken'd Eve
ith treſſes diſcompos’d. 14---&gt;
tº: adj. #". no walls. Milton’s P. Lºft, i.v.
e came to Tauris, a great and rich city,
U and ºf no º Śled] Knolles's ºº jº.
N.W.A' REs adv. Uncxpc&amp;cdly ; befor - -
pectation. P y ; * *y caution, or ex-
She, by her wicked arts,
Too falſe and ſtrong for carthly ſkill or might,
Unggar's me wrought unto her wicked wi.”
His loving mother came upon a da
Unto the woods, to ſee her little ſon,
And chanc'd unwares to meet him in the way
After his ſports and cruel paſtime done. ºft b. ?
Still we ſail, while proſperous blows the wind, * b. I,
Fairy Qun,
Till on ſome ſecret rock inwares we light. -
UNw A'Rily. adv. Without caution; tºº. Fairfax,
The beſt part of my powers
}. in the waſhes all unwarily
evour’d by the unexpected flood.
If I had not unwarily engaged myſelf for ::
publiſhing it, I ſhould have kept it till I had º
OVer it. Dig),
By ſuch principles, they renounce their legal claim to .
berty and property, and unwarily ſubmit to what they really
abhor. - Freeholder, N° 13
UNw ARINEss. n.ſ.. [from unwary..] Want of caution. sº
leſſneſs. &gt;
The ſame temper which inclines us to a deſire of fame
naturally betrays us into ſuch ſlips and unwarineſs, as are º
incident to men of a contrary diſpoſition. Speiau, No 2.É.
UNw A/R LIKE, adj. Not fit for war; not uſed to War; not i.
litary.
He ſafely might old troops to battle lead,
Aºi...ſº tº unwa like Perſian, and the Mede;
Whole haſty flight did from a bloodleſs field,
More ſpoils than hºnour to the victor yield. Waller,
Avert unwarlike Indians from his Rome,
Triumph abroad, ſecure our peace at home. Dryden,
UNWA'RN ED. adj. Not cautioned; not made wary.
Unexperienced young men, if unwarn'd, take one thing
for another, and judge by the outſide. Locke.
M. hypocrites,
That ſlyly ſpeak one thing, another think,
Drink on unwarn'd, till by inchanting cups
Infatuate, they their wily thoughts diſcloſe. Philipſ.
UN wa RRANTABLE. adj. Not defenſible; not to be juſtified;
not allowed.
At very diſtant removes an extemporary intercourſe is ſea-
ſible, and may be compaſſed without unwarrantable correſpon-
dence with the people of the air. Glanville.
He who does an unwarrantable action through a falſe infor-
mation, which he ought not to have believed, cannot in rea-
ſon make the guilt of one fin the excuſe of another. ... Sºuth.
UNWA'RRANTABLY. adv. Not juſtifiably; not defenſibly. .
A true and humble ſenſe of your own unworthineſs, will
not ſuffer you to riſe up to that confidence, which ſome
men unwarrantably pretend to, nay, unwarrantably ſºlº
of others. J/aſe's Preparation fºr Death.
UN waſ RRANTED. adj. Not aſcertained; uncertain.
The ſubjects of this kingdom believe it is not legal fºr
them to be enforced to go beyond the ſeas, without their
own conſent, upon hope of an unwarranted conſºº
to reſiſt an invading enemy the ſubject muſt be command-
out of the counties where they inhabit. Baº,
UN waſ R Y. adj. -
1. Wanting caution; imprudent; haſty; precipitate.
Nor think me ſo unwary,
To bring my feet again into the ſhare • A-.... ſ.r.
Where once I have been caught. Millon'. Agrifti.
So ſpake the falſe archangel, and infus'd li
Bad influence into th’ unwary breaſt. Miliºn.
So talk'd the ſpirited ſly ſnake; and Eve, Mil
Yet more amaz'd, unway thus reply'd, . Milton.
Turning ſhort, he ſtruck with all his might
Full on the helmet of th' unwary knight:
Deep was the wound.
Propoſitions about religion are inſin
as well as unbiaſed underſtandings of ch
there by long cuſtom.
2. Unexpected. Obſolete.
All in the open hall amazed ſtood,
At ſuddenneſs of that unwary fight,
And wonder'd at his breathleſs haſty m
UNWA'shep. {a}. Not waſhed; not cleanſed by waſhing.
UN wa A: | ſh'd artificer
Another lean unwaſh'd artifice º:
Cuts off his tale, and talks of Arthur's º, *:
f
Dryden,
ſinuated into the unway,
- and rivet
ildren, Lºck,
º
ood. Fairy &amp;#"
To eat with unwaſhen hands defileth not **<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
U N W.
--
*
-*
*
- º
-----
He accepts of no unclean, no unwaſhed ſacrifice; and if re-
pentance uſher notin, prayer will never find admittance. Duppa.
When the fleece is ſhorn, if ſweat remains 4.
Unwaſh'd, it ſoaks into their empty veins. Dryden.
NWA's TED. adj. Not conſumed; not diminiſhed.
Why have thoſe rocks ſo long unwaſſed ſtood,
Since, laviſh of their ſtock, they through the flood
Have, ages paſt, their melting cryſtal ſpread,
And with their ſpoils the liquid regions fed : Blackmore.
NWA STING: adi. Not growing leſs ; not decaying.
Pureft love's unwaſting treaſure;
Conſtant faith, fair hope, long leiſure;
Sacred Hymen theſe are thine. Pope.
UNWA^ E.D. adj. Not uſed to travel; not ſeaſoned in the road.
Beaſts,that have been rid off their legs, are as much for a
man's uſe, as colts that are unwayed, and will not goat all. Suckl.
UN we’AKENED. adj. Not weakened.
By reaſon of the exſuction of ſome air out of the glaſs,
the claſtical power of the remaining air was very much debi-
litated, in compariſon of the unweakened preſſure of the ex-
ternal air. Boyle.
UN we’Apon ED. adj. Not furniſhed with offenſive arms.
As the beaſts are armed with fierce teeth, paws, horns,
and other bodily inſtruments of much advantage againſt un-
weaponed men; ſo hath reaſon taught man to ſtrengthen his
hand with ſuch offenſive arms, as no creature elſe can well
avoid. Raleigh.
UN we’ARIABLE. adj. Not to be tired.
Deſire to reſemble him in goodneſs, maketh them un-
weariable. Hooker, b. i.
t]Nwe’ARIEd. adj. -
1. Nottired ; not fatigued.
The Creator from his work
Deſiſting, though unwearied, up return'd. Milton.
Their bloody taſk unweary'd, ſtill they ply. J/aller.
Still th' unweary'd fire purſues the tuneful ſtrain. Dryden.
2. Indefatigable ; continual ; not to be ſpent; not ſinking under
fatigue.
Joy'd to range abroad in freſh attire,
Through the wide compaſs of the airy coaſt,
And with unwearied limbs each part t' enquire. Stenſºr.
Godlike his unweary'd bounty flows :
Firſt loves to do, then loves the good he does. Denham.
A winged virtue through th' etherial ſky,
From orb to orb, unweary'd doſt thou fly. Tickell.
An unwearied devotion in the ſervice of God, recommend-
ed the goſpel to the world. Rogers's Sermons.
The righteous ſhall certainly be ſaved, but then the chriſtian
character of a righteous man implies a conſtant, unwearied
perſeverance in many painful inſtances of duty. Rogers.
To UNw E/ARY. v. a. To refreſh after wearineſs.
It unwearies, and refreſhes more than anything, after too
great labour. Temple.
UNw E. D. adj. Unmarried.
This ſervitude makes you to keep tºwed. Shakespeare .
UNw E/DGEABLE. adj. Not to be cloven.
Merciful heav'n
Thou rather with thy ſharp and ſulph’rous bolt
Split'ſt the unwedgeable and gnarled oak,
Than the ſoft myrtle. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
UN wee'DED. adj. Not cleared from weeds.
Fie! 'tis an unweeded garden,
That grows to ſeed; things rank, and groſs in nature,
Poſſeſs it merely. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
UNwe E/PED. adj. Not lamented. Now unwept.
He muſt not float upon his watry bier
Unweept, and welter to the parching wind,
Without the meed of ſome melodious tear, Milton.
UNw EETING. adj. Ignorant; unknowing.
Her ſeeming dead he found with feigned fear,
As all unweeting of that well ſhe knew ;
And pained himſelf with buſy care to rear
Her out of careleſs ſwoon. Fairy Queen, b. i.
But contrary, unweeting he fulfilled
The purpos'd counſel, pre-ordain’d and fix’d . -
Of the moſt high. Paradiſe Regain'd.
UNw E/IGHED. adj.
1. Not examined by the balance.
Solomon left all the veſſels unweighed, becauſe they were
exceeding many. I Kings vii.
2. Not conſidered; negligent. -
What unweighed behaviour hath this Flemiſh drunkard pickt
out of my converſation, that he dares in this manner eſſay
me why he hath not been thrice in my company. Shakeſp.
Daughter, what words have paſs'd thy lips unweigh'd,
Deem not unjuſtly by my doom oppreſt,
Of human race the wifeit, and the beſt.
UN we’IGHING. adj. Inconfiderate; thoughtleſs.
Wiſe why, no queſtion but he was—a very ſuperficial,
ignorant, unweighing fellow. Shakeſpeare.
Pope's Odyſy.
UNWE'lcom E. adj. Not pleaſing; not grateful; not well re-
ceived.
U N W.
&gt; Such welcome and unwelcome things at once,
Tis hard to reconcile. Sºakſ. Aža.beth.
Soon as th' unwel ome news
From carth arriv'd at heaven-gate, diſpleas'd
All were who heard. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. x.
Though he that brings unwelcome news -
Has but a loſing office, yet he that ſhews
Your danger firſt, and then your way to ſafety,
May heal that wound he made. Denham’s Sºphy.
Foºd from her preſence, and condemnºd to live;
Unwelcome freedom, and unthank'd reprieve. Dryden.
- From the vey firſt inſtances of perception, ſome things
are grateful, and"others unwelcome to them ; ſome things that
they incline to, and others that they fly. Loº.
Such haſty nights as theſe, would give very unwelcome inter-
ruptions to our labours. Bentley's Sermons.
UN we'PT. adj. Not lamented; not bemoaned.
Our fatherleſs diſtreſs was left unmoan'd;
Your widow dolours likewiſe be unwept. Shºff. Rich. III.
We, but the ſlaves that mount you to the throne:
A baſe, ignoble crowd, without a name;
Unwept, unworthy of the fun'ral flame;
. By duty bound to forfeit each his life. Dryden.
UN we’r. adj. Not moiſt.
Once I meant to meet
My fate with face unmov’d, and eyes unwet;
Yet ſince I have thee here in narrow room,
My tears ſhall ſet thee firſt afloat within thy tomb. Dryden.
UN whi'PT. adj. Not puniſhed; not corrected with the rod.
Tremble, thou wretch,
That haſt within thee undivulged crimes,
Unwhipt of juſtice. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Once I caught him in a lie;
And then, unwhipt, he had the grace to cry, Pote.
UNw Ho'LEsoME. adj.
1. Inſalubrious; miſchievous to health.
The diſcovery of the diſpoſition of the air, is good for the
prognoſticks of wholeſome and unwholeſome years. Bacºn.
There I a priſoner chain'd, ſcarce freely draw
The air impriſon’d alſo, cloſe and damp,
Unwholeſome draught ; but here I find amends,
The breath of heav'n freſh-blowing, pure and ſweet,
With day-ſpring born ; here leave me to reſpire. A ſiliºn.
How can any one be aſſured, that his meat and drink are
not poiſoned, and made unwholeſome before they are brought to
him * South.
Rome is never fuller of nobility than in ſummer; for the
country towns are ſo infeſted with unwholeſome vapours, that
they dare not truſt themſelves in them, while the heats
laſt. Addison on Italy.
Children born healthy, often contraćt diſeaſes from an
unwholeſome nurſe. A buthnot on Diet.
2. Corrupt; tainted. - - - -
We'll uſe this unwholeſºme humidity; this groſs, watry
pumpion : we'll teach him to know turtles from jays. Shakespeare.
UN with LDILY. adv. Heavily ; with difficult motion.
Unwieldily they wallow firſt in ooze :
Then in the ſhady covert ſeek repoſe. Dryden.
UNwi'ELLINEss. n.ſ. Heavineſs; difficulty to move, or be
moved.
To what a cumberſome unwieldineſs,
And burdenous corpulence my love had grown,
But that I made it feed upon
That which love worſt endures, diſcretion. Donne.
The ſuppoſed unwieldingſ of its maily bulk, grounded upon
our experience of the inaptitude of great and heavy bodies to
motion, is a mere impoſture of our ſcnſes. Glanville.
Unwiſe Loy. adj. Unmanageable ; not eaſily moving or
moved; bulky; weighty; ponderous, -
An ague, meeting many humours in a fat, unwield, body
of fifty-eight years old, in four or five fits, carried him Out
of the world. Clarendºn.
Part, huge of bulk | - -
Wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait, --
Tempeſt the ocean. - Milton s Par. Lºſ!, b. vii.
Unwiclăy ſums of wealth, which higher mount,
Than files of marſhal'd figures can account. Dryden.
Nothing here th’ unwieldy rock avails,
Rebounding harmleſs from º º ſcales, d
ly join'd, preſerv'd him from a wound,
º ãº all around. Addiſon's Ovid.
What carriage can bear away all the rule and unwieldy !op;
pings of a branchy tree, at once : If atº's Impr. ºf the Mind.
UN willing. adj. Loath; not contented; not inclined ; not
ing by inclination.
sº of man is unwilling to continue doing that
wherein it ſhall always condemn itſelf. I looker, b. v.
If thou doſt find him tractable,
Encourage him, and tell him all our reaſons.
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling, - To - ?
Be thou ſo too, Shał ſearc', Rich, III.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
If
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U N W
U N W
-
|
If the ſunriſe unwilling to his race, , .
Clouds on his brows, and ſpots upon his face,
Suſpect a drizzling day. - Dryden.
ºf avºn's unchang'd decrees attentive hear;
More pow'rful gods have torn thee from my ſide,
Dryden.
Unwilling to reſign, and doom'd a bride. -
UN will INGLY. adv. Not with good-will; not without loath-
eſs. º
n The whining ſchool-boy, with his ſatchel,
And ſhining morning face, creeping like ſnail
Unwillingly to ſchool. Shakeſp. As You Like It.
A feaſt the people hold to Dagon, and forbid
Laborious works, unwillingly this reſt
Their ſuperſtition yields.
Still diſmay’d
By ſeas or ſkies, unwillingly they ſtay’d. Denham.
Theſe men were once the prince's foes, and then
Unwillingly they made him great : but now,
Being his friends, ſhall willingly undo him. Denham.
The dire contagion ſpreads ſo faſt,
That where it ſeizes, all relief is vain;
And therefore muſt unwillingly lay waſte
That country, which would elſe the foe maintain. Dryden.
UN will ING Ness. m. ſ. Loathneſs; diſinclination.
Obedience, with profeſſed unwillingneſs to obey, is no bet-
ter than manifeſt diſobedience. Hooker, b. v.
What moved the man to yield to her perſuaſions : Even
the ſame cauſe that hath moved all men ſince, an unwil-
lingneſ to grieve her, and make her ſad, left ſhe ſhould pine,
and be overcome with ſorrow. Raleigh's Hiſt, of the World.
I ſee with what unwillingneſs
You lay upon me this command, and through your fears
Diſcern your love, and therefore muſt obey you. Denham.
There is in moſt people a reluctance and unwillingneſs to
be forgotten. We obſerve, even among the vulgar, how
fond they are to have an inſcription over their grave. Swift.
To UN wiſ'ND. v. a. pret, and part. paſſive unwound.
1. To ſeparate any thing convolved; to untwiſt; to untwine.
All his ſubječts having by ſome years learned, ſo to hope
for good and fear harm, only from her, that it ſhould
have needed a ſtronger virtue than his, to have unwound ſo
deeply an entered vice. Sidney, b. ii.
Empirick politicians uſe deceit:
You boldly ſhew that ſkill which they pretend,
And work by means as noble as your end;
Which ſhould you veil, we might unwind the clue,
As men do nature, till we came to you. Dryden.
2. To diſentangle; to looſe from entanglement.
Deſiring to ſerve God as they ought; but being not ſo
ſkillful as in every point to unwind themſelves, where the
ſnares of gloſing ſpeech lie to entangle them, are in mind
not a little troubled, when they hear ſo bitter invečtives againſt
that, which this church hath taught them to reverence as
holy. Hooker, b. v.
As you unwind her love from him,
Leſt it ſhould ravel, and be good to none,
Bottom it on me. Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Verona.
To UNw I'ND. v. n. To admit evolution.
Put the bottoms into clean ſcalding water, and they will
eaſily unwind. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
UN wipe D. adj. Not cleared.
Their hands and faces were all badg’d with blood,
So were their daggers, which unwip’d we found
Upon their pillows. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
UNw 1's E. adj. Weak; defeótive in wiſdom.
O good, but moſt unwiſe patricians ! why,
You grave, but reckleſs ſenators, have you thus
Giv'n Hydra here to chuſe an officer Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Be not ta'en tardy by unwiſe delay. Shakeſpeare.
He who of thoſe delights can judge, and ſpare
To interpoſe them oft, is not unwiſe. Milton.
This the Greeks ſay, this the barbarians; the wiſe and the
unwiſe. Tillotſºn.
When kings grow ſtubborn, ſlothful, or unwiſe,
Each private man for publick good ſhould riſe. Dryden.
When the balance of power is duly fixt in a ſtate, nothing
is more dangerous or unwiſe, than to give way to the firſt
ſteps of popular encroachments. Swift.
UN wiſ's ELY. adv. Weakly; not prudently; not wiſely.
Lady Zelmane, like ſome, unwiſely liberal, that more
delight to give preſents than pay debts, choſe rather to be-
Milton's Agoniſłes.
ſtow her love upon me, than to recompenſe him. Sidney.
. Unwiſely we the wiſer Eaſt
§y, ſuppoſing them oppreſs'd
With tyrant's force. Waller.
To UN wish. 9. a. To wiſh that which is, not to be.
Wi My liege, would you and I alone,
thout more help, could fight this royal battle.
-Why now thou haſt unwiſh’d five thouſand men ;
Which likes me better than to wiſh us one. Shakeſpeare.
To deſire there were no God, were plainly t º/l. All-
own being, which muſt be annihilated º i. i. their
that eſſence, which ſubſtantially ſupporteth them. . of
UN wiſs HED. adj. Not ſought; not deſired. rºwn,
So jealous is ſhe of my love to her daughter, that I nev
yet begin to open my mouth to the unevitable philol. ;
that her unwiſhed preſence gave my tale a concluſion, tº:
it had a beginning. -
ºfo his unwiſhed yoke Sidney.
My ſoul conſents not to give ſov’reignty. Shakºftware
While heaping unwiſh'd wealth I diſtant roam :
The beſt of brothers at his natal home &gt;
By the dire fury of a traitreſs wife,
Ends the ſad evening of a ſtormy life. Pºe
UNwi'st. adj. Unthought of; not known. sº
To UN wit. v. a. To deprive of underſtanding. Not º -
- Friends all but now ; even now -
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
Diveſting them for bed; and then, but now,
As if ſome planet had unwitted men,
Swords out, and tilting one at other's breaſts. Shakeſpeare,
UN witHDRA’win G. adj. Continually liberal.
Wherefore did nature pour her bounties forth,
With ſuch a full and unwithdrawing hand,
Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks Milan.
UN witHstoo'D. adj. Not oppoſed.
Creſſy plains,
And Agincourt, deep ting'd with blood, confeſs
What the Silures vigour unwithſtood,
Cou'd do in rigid fight. Philipſ,
UN wi'TN Essed. adj. Wanting evidence; wanting notice.
Leaſt their zeal to the cauſe ſhould any way be unwit-
neſſed. Hooker.
UN wrºttingly... adv. [Properly unweetingh, from unwitting.]
Without knowledge; without conſciouſneſs.
In theſe fatal things it falls out, that the high-working
powers make ſecond cauſes unwittingly acceſſary to their dé.
terminations. Sidney.
Thoſe things are termed moſt properly natural agents,
which keep the law of their kind unwittingſ, as the heavens
and elements of the world, which can do no otherwiſe than
they do. Hºoker, b. i.
Atheiſts repudiate all title to heaven, merely for preſent
pleaſure; beſides the extreme madneſs of running ſuch a de-
ſperate hazard after death, they unwittingly deprive themſelves
here of that tranquillity they ſeek for. Bently.
UN wo’NTED. adj.
1. Uncommon; unuſual; rare; infrcquent.
His ſad, dull eyes, ſunk deep in hollow pits,
Could not enduré th' unwanted ſun to view. Fairy &amp;ºm.
My father's of a better nature
Than he appears by ſpeech; this is unwonted
Which now came from him. Shahjart.
Every unwonted meteor is portentous, and ſon.”
prognoſtick. Glanville.
Thick breath, quick pulſe, and heaving of my heart,
All ſigns of ſome unwonted change appear. Dryden.
2. Unaccuſtomed; unuſed. -
Philoclea, who bluſhing, and withal ſmiling, making
ſhamefaſtneſs pleaſant, and pleaſure ſhamefaſt, tenderly moved
her feet, unwanted to feel the naked ground. Sº b. ii.
Sea calves unwonted to freſh waters fly. Maj.
O how oft ſhall he
On faith and changed gods complain; and ſeas
Rough with black winds and ſtorins,
Unwonted ſhall admire.
UNwok/ki NG. adj. Living without labour. . .
Lazy and unworking ſhopkeepers in this being worſe º
gameſters, do not only keep ſo much of the º a
country in their hands, but make the publick pay }.
for it. -
UN wo'Rs HIPPED. adj. Not adored.
He reſolv’d to leave
Unworſhipp'd, unobey'd the throne ſupreme. ,
UNwo'RTHILY. adv. Not according to deſert; *
or below merit.
I vow’d, baſe knight,
To tear the garter from thy craven leg,
Which I have done, becauſe unworthily Hºn. WI
Thou waſt inſtalled. Shalºft. Het V"
Fearing left my jealous aim might err,
And ſo unworthily diſgrace the man,
I gave him gentle looks.
If we look upon the Odyſſey as all a fi tſu
anºthily. It ought to be read as a ſtory founded *:::
adorned with embelliſhments of poetry.
UN wo'RTHINEss. n.ſ. Want of worth ; want of º
A mind fearing the unworthingſ of every word * in this
be preſented to her ears, at length brought it º b. ii.
Inanntſ. O let
Miltºn,
Milton.
her above
Shakeſ eart.
Čtion, we conſider it<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U. N. Y.
V O C
-
º:
º
-
ºt
--
O let not an excellent ſpirit do itſelf ſuch wrong, as té
think where it is placed, embraced, and loved, there can be
any unworthinſ ; ſince the weakeſt miſt is not eaſier driven
away by the ſun, than that is chaſed away with ſo high
thoughts. - Sidney.
Every night he comes with ſongs compos'd
To her unworthings it nothing ſteads us
To chide him from our eaves, for he perſiſts. Shakespeare.
I fear'd to find you in another place;
But, ſince you're here, my jealouſy grows leſs: -
You will be kind to my unworthinés. Drydºn.
Have a true and humble ſenſe of your own unworthingſ,
which will not ſuffer you to riſe to a coilfidence º;
pretended to by ſome. //aſe on Death.
UN wo'RTHY. adj.
1. Not deſerving.
The Athanaſian creed and doxology ſhould remain in uſe,
the one as a moſt divine explication of the chiefeſ: articles of
our chriſtian belief; the other as an heavenly acclamation of
joyful applauſe to his praiſes, in whom we believe: neither
the one nor the other unworthy to be heard founding, as they
are in the church of Chriſt. Hooker.
Every particular accident, not unworthy the remembrance,
-
for brevity I wittingly paſs over. Knolles.
2. Wanting merit.
Degree being vizarded,
Th’ unworthieſ; ſhews as fairly in the maſk. Shakeſpeare.
Are there unworthy men choſen to offices : Jºitgifte.
So may I, blind fortune leading me,
Miſs that which one unworthier may attain; -
And die with grieving. Shakeſp. 44erch, ºf Wenice.
. Mean.
3 Tell me, Philoclea, did you ever ſee ſuch a ſhepherd
did you ever hear of ſuch a prince and then tell me if a
ſmall or unworthy aſſault have conquered me Sidney.
4. Not ſuitable ; not adequate.
I laid at her fect a work, which was unwºrthy her, but
which I hope ſhe will forgive. - Drydin.
Our friend's papers are in my hands, and I will take care
to ſuppreſs things unworthy of him. Pope to Swift.
' Care is taken to interſperſe additions in ſuch a manner,
that ſcarce any book can be bought, without purchaſing ſome-
thing unworthy of the author. Swift.
5. Unbecoming; vile.
The brutal action rous'd his manly mind:
Mov’d with unworthy uſage of the maid,
He, though unarm’d, reſolv'd to give her aid. Drydºn.
UN wo'UND. part, paſt, and pret. of unwind. Untwiſted.
Thatchers tie with withs, but old pitch'd ropes unwound are
more laſting. 44%rtimer's Hºſſandy.
UN wo'UN DED. adj.
I. Not wounded.
We may offend
Our yet unwounded enemies.
2. Not hurt.
Oh! bleſt with temper:
She who can love a ſiſter's charms, or hear
Sighs for a daughter with unwounded ear. Pope.
To UNw RE/ATH. v. a. To untwine.
The beards of wild oats, and of divers other wild plants,
continually wreath and unwreath themſelves, according to the
temperature of the ambient air. Boyle.
UNw R1'TING. adj. Not aſſuming the charaćter of an author.
The peace of the honeſt unwriting ſubject was daily mo-
leſted. - - Arbuthnot.
UN wri’TT EN. adj. Not conveyed by writing; oral; traditional.
A rule of right unwritten, but delivered by tradition from
one to another. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
As to his underſtanding, they bring him in void of all no-
tion, a rude, unwritten blank ; making him to be created as
much an infant, as others are born. South's Sermons.
The laws of England may be divided into the written law,
and the unwritten. - Hale.
UN wro'U GHT. adj. Not laboured ; not manufactured.
Or prove at leaſt to all of wiſer thought,
Their hearts were fertile land, although unwrought. Fairfax.
Yet thy moiſt clay is pliant to command;
Unwrought and eaſy to the potter's hand :
Now take the mold, now bend thy mind to feel
The firſt ſharp motions of the forming wheel.
UNw RU’s G. adj. Not pinched.
We that have free ſouls, it touches us not; let the galled
jade winch, our withers are unwrung. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
UNYIELDED. adj. Not given up.
O'erpower'd at length, they force him to the ground,
Unyielded as he was, and to the pillar bound. Dryden.
To Uſ NYo’K E. v. a.
1. To looſe from the yoke.
Our army is diſpers'd already :
Like youthful ſteers unyak'd, they took their courſe
Eaſt, weſt, north, ſouth, Shakespeare . Hen. IV.
Milton's Par. Lºſº, b. vi.
Dryden.
Homer cºli, them * gods, and yet gives them the em.
ployment of ſlaves; they unyo/e the miles. -
--- - - B - 2 -
2. To part; to disjoin. *02/mie
shall *; hands, ſo lately purg'd of blood,
; º 4 in love, ſo ſtrong in borº,
% this ſeizure, and this king ſº. * *
UNye’ £ºn. adj. 2 na regreet. Sla'ſ care.
I. Having never worn a yoke.
Sev’n bullocks yet unyºd for Phoebus chuſe,
And for Diana ſeven unſpotted ewes. Drydºn.
2. Licentious; unreſtraß.
I will a-whie uphold
- -
The tººd hug ur of your idleneſ. Shakespeare . Hº. IV.
UNzo's ED. adj. Not bound ºt. girdle.
Eaſy her motion ſeem’d, ſerene her air;
Fºll, though wizon'ſ, her boſom. Priºr.
Vogaºglary. * f [vºcabulwich, Eat. vºcalileire, Fr.] A
dictionary; a lexicon; a wººd bººk.
Some have delivered the Pºſity of ſpirits, and that they
ſland in awe of conjurations, which ſignify nothing, not only
-
in the dictionary of man, but in the ſubtier vºcal ulory of
Satan. - Brown's ſug. Errºrs.
. Among other books, we ſhould be furniſhed with ...
*ies and dictionaries of ſeveral ſorts. Jºats.
VOCAL. adj. [vºcal, Fr. vacaº, Lat.]
I. Having a voice.
Eyes are vocal, tears have tongues;
And there be words not made with lungs;
Sententious ſhow’rs! O let them fall,
Their cadence is rhetorical. Crº/aw.
Witneſs if I be ſilent, morn or even,
To hill, or valley, fountain, or freſh ſhade,
Made vocal by my ſong, and taught his praiſe. A4ilton.
Smooth-ſiding Mincius, crown'd with vºcal reeds,
That ſtrain I heard was of a higher mood. Milton.
None can animate the lyre,
And the mute ſtrings with vocal ſouls inſpire,
As Helen, in whoſe eyes ten thouſand Cupids dwell. Dryden.
Memnon, though ſtone, was counted vocal;
But 'twas the god, mean while, that ſpoke all.
Rome o't has heard a croſs haranguing,
With prompting prieſt behind the hanging. Prior.
2. Uttered or modulated by the voice. -
They which, under pretence of the law ceremonial being
abrogated, require the abrogation of inſtrumental muſick,
*PProving nevertheleſs the uſe of vocal melody to remain,
muſt ſhew ſome reaſon wherefore the one ſhou'd be thought
a legal ceremony, and not the other. Hoºker.
And join'd their vocal worſhip to the choir
Of creatures wanting voice. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Vocality. n.ſ. Ivocalias, Lat. from vocal] Power of utter-
ance ; quality of being utterable by the voice. -
I, aird R being in extremes, one of roughneſs, the other
of ſmoothneſs and freeneſs of vocality, are not eaſy in tract of
vocal ſpeech to be pronounced ſpiritally. Hºlder.
To Vo’cALIzE. v. a. [from vocal.] To form into voice.
It is one thing to give an impulſe to breath alone; another
thing to vocalize that breath, i. e. in its paſſage through the
larynx, to give it the ſound of human voice. Hºlder.
Vo’cALLY. adv. [from vocal.] In words; articulately.
Although it is as natural to mankind, to expreſs their de-
fires vocally, as it is for brutes to uſe their natural vocal ſigns;
yet the forming of languages into this or that faſhion, is a
buſineſs of inſtitution. Hale's Origin ºf Ažankind.
Voca’ſ Ion. m. ſ. [vocation, Fr. vocatio, Lat.]
1. Calling by the will of God. -
Neither doth that which St. Paul, or other apoſtles, teach,
enforce the utter diſability of any other men's vocation thought
requiſite in this church for the ſaving of ſouls. Hºer, b. v.
They which thus were in God eternally by their intended
admiſſion to life, have, by vocation or adoption, Gºd actually
now in them. Hozier, b. v.
2. Summons. - -
What can be urged for them who not having the vocation
of poverty to ſcribble, out of meer wantonneſs ſnake them-
ſelves ridiculous Drydºn.
. Trade; employment. - -
3 He ... his ſervice greatly rewarded, if he might
obtain by that means to live in the fight of his prince, and
yet practiſe his own choſen vocatiº - Sidney, b. i.
God's mother, in a viſion full of majeſty,
Will'd me to leave my baſe vocation. Siaºſ. Hºn. VI.
God has furniſhed men with faculties ſufficient to direct
them in the way they ſhould take, if they will ſeriouſly cm-
ploy them, when their ordinary vocations allow them the
leiſure. - Lºcke.
A whore in her vocation, -
Kceps punctual to an aſſignation. ºil.
VoſcArive meſ. [rosatiſ, Fr. vºcativus, Lat..] The gramma-
tical caſe uſed in calling or ſpeaking to:
30 B * Woci-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V O I
V O L
i
Vocifer Arios. m.ſ. [vociferatio, vocifero, Lat, ) Clamour;
º: lungs, kept too long upon the ſtretch by vºciferation,
or loud ſinging, may produce the ſame cffect. 4. buthnot.
Voºrous. adj. [wifero, Lat.]. Clamorous; noiſy. . .
Several templars, and others of the more, vºciferº kind
of critics, went with a reſolution to hiſs, and confeſs'd they
were forced to laugh. Pope.
Žogue. n.ſ. ſvºgue, Fr. from vaguer, to float, or fly at large.]
Faſhion; mode.
It is not more abſurd to undertake to tell the name of an
unknown perſon by his looks, than to vouch a man's ſaint-
ſhip from the vºgue of the world. South.
Uſe may revive the obſoleteſt words,
And baniſh thoſe that now are moſt in vogue. Roſcommon.
What factions th’ have, and what they drive at
In publick vogue, or what in private. Hudibras.
In the vogue of the world, it paſſes for an exploit of ho-
nour, for kings to run away with whole countries that they
have no pretence to. L’Eſtrange.
No periodical writer, who always maintains his gravity,
and does not ſometimes ſacrifice to the graces, muſt expect to
keep in vogue for any time. Addiſon.
At one time they keep their patients ſo cloſe and warm,
as almoſt to ſtifle them; and all on a ſudden the cold regimen
is in vogue. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
VOICE, n.ſ. [vºix, Fr. vocis, Lat.]
1. Sound emitted by the mouth.
2. Sound of the mouth, as diſtinguiſhed from that uttered by
another mouth.
Air in ſounds that are not tones, which are all equal, ad-
mitteth much variety, as in the voices of living creatures,
and in the voices of ſeveral men; for we can diſcern ſeveral
men by their voices. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
3. Any ſound made by breath.
O Marcus, I am warm'd ; my heart
Leaps at the trumpet's voice, and burns for glory. Addiſon.
4. Vote; ſuffrage; opinion expreſſed. -
Are you all reſolved to give your voices *
But that's no matter, the greater part carries it. Shakeſp.
I’ve no words;
My voice is in my ſword ' thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out. Shakespeare. Macbeth.
The ſtate was betrayed by the multitude and corruption of
voices, and muſt ſhortly periſh, if not committed to the
grave judgment of ſome few ; for two hundred gave voices,
reducing that multitude to fifty, who, for their experience,
were holden for men of greateſt gravity. Knolles.
Some laws ordain, and ſome attend the choice
Of holy ſenates, and elect by voice. Dryden.
To Voice. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To rumour; to report. Out of uſe.
Is this th’ Athenian minion, whom the world
Woic’d ſo regardfully Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
It was voiced that the king purpoſed to put to death Edward
Plantagenet, priſoner in the tower; whereat there was great
Inuſ IIllir. Bacon's Hen. VII.
Many ſought to feed
The eaſy creditors of novelties,
By voicing him alive.
2. To vote.
Your minds, pre-occupied with what
You rather muſt do, than what you ſhould do,
Made you, againſt the grain, to voice him conſul. Shakeſp.
To Voice. v. n. To clamour; to make outcries. Obſolete.
Stir not queſtions of juriſdićtion; and rather aſſume thy
right in ſilence, than voice it with claims. Bacon.
It is not the gift of every perſon to harangue the multitude,
to voice it loud and high. South's Sermons.
Voiced, adj. [from the noun..] Furniſhed with a voice.
That's Erythaea,
Or ſome angel vºic'd like her. 'Tis ſhe my ſtruggling
ſoul -
Would fain go out to meet and welcome her Denham.
VOID. adj. [vuide, Fr.]
1. Empty; vacant.
The earth was without form and void, and darkneſs was
upon the face of the deep. Geneſis i. 2.
I'll get me to a place more void, and there
Speak to great Caeſar as he comes along.
2, Vain; ineffectual; null; vacated.
If it be void, and to no purpoſe, that the names of men
** ſo frequent in their books, what did move them to bring
Daniel's Civil War.
Shakeſpeare.
them in Hooker.
My word ſhall not return vºid, but accompliſh that which
I pleaſe. Iſa. lv. I 1.
- º made their whole government void, as an en-
É. uilt againſt human ſociety, worthy to be fired and pulled
º h the wi Bacon.
to 4. | ° wiſdom of a future parliament may find cauſe
b are this, or that act of parliament void, yet there will
c the ſame temper requiſite to repeal it. Clarendon.
The two houſes declared, that nothing which
that time paſs under the great ſeal, ſhould . † ſºn
but void and null. $ºod and ºld,
Some kind of ſubjećtion is due from eve
man, which cannot be made void by an
ſoever.
3. ‘ī; unoccupied.
ucen Elizabeth, importuned much to ſupply di.
offices that had been long void, anſwered º: eat
ter, but roſe up on the ſudden, and ſaid, I am ſ C Inat-
will not be long void. emy office
4. Wanting; unfurniſhed; empty. Camdº,
If ſome be admitted into the miniſtry, void of leum
or lewd in life, are all the reſt to be condemned 2 ſº
How void of reaſon are our hopes and fears p;
Being void of all friendſhip and enmity, they *:
krºndºn, i.
Ty man to tWe
y power what.
Swift,
plain. - Swi
5. Unſubſtantial ; unreal. wift.
Senſeleſs, lifeleſs idol, void and vain. Pº
Void. n.ſ.. [from the adjeºl An empty ſpace; vacuum;y
Pride, where wit fails, ſteps in to our defence
And fills up all the mighty void of ſenſe. 2. P
With what power ºft,
Were firſt th’ unwieldy planets launch'd along
Th’illimitable void 2 Thºmſºn,
To Void. v. a. [from the adjećlive; vuider, Fr.] y”
1. To quit; to leave empty.
If they will fight with us, bid them come down
Or void the field. Jºhn V
How in our voiding lobby haſt thou ſtood, -
And duly waited for my coming forth : Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
Towards this Paſlage, ſomewhat darker than the chambº
which he voided, this aſſaſſinate gave him, with a back blow,
a deep wound into his left ſide. Wºtton's Buckingham.
2. To emit ; to pour out.
The aſcending water is vented by fits, every circumvol.
tion voiding only ſo much as is contained in one helix. Willini,
3. To emit as excrement.
Excrements ſmell ill to the ſame creature that with
acancy.
them ; and the cat burieth what ſhe voidth. Bacºn,
Believ'd the heav'ns were made of ſtone,
Pecauſe the ſun had voided one. Hādibra,
By the uſe of emulſions, and frequent emo"iemt injections,
his urine vºided more eaſily. Hºſtman's Surgery.
Fleſhy filaments, or matter voided by utine, are ſuſpicious
ſymptoms of a ſtone in the kidnies, eſpecially if the patient
has been ſubject to voiding of gravel. Arbuthnot.
4. To vacate; to nullify; to annul.
It was become a practice, upon any ſpecious pretences, to
void the ſecurity that was at any time given for money ſo bºr-
rowed. Clarendan.
Vo'IDABLE. adj. [from void.]. Such as may be annulled.
If the metropolitan, pretºnding the party deceaſed had tº
notabilia in divers dioceſes, grants letters of adminiſtratº,
ſuch adminiſtration is not void, but voidable by a ſentence. A.
Vo’IDER. m. ſ. [from void.] A baſket, in which broken mº
is carried from the table.
A voider for the nonce,
I wrong the devil ſhould I pick their bones. Claviland.
VoIDNEss. n.ſ.. [from void.]
1. Emptineſs; vacuity:
2. Nullity; inefficacy.
3. Want of ſubſtantiality. - f
If thereby you underſtand their nakedneſs and voidiſ; º
all mixt bodies, good divines are of opiniº, thº' the :
of the creation was not in itſelf diſtinguiſhed by dº Hakew,
PO'ITURE. n.ſ. [French..] Carriage; tranſportation by car-
riage. Not in uſe. face. Arbuthnſt
They ought to uſe exerciſe by voiture or carriagº.” tiºnwi-
Vo'LANT. adj. [volans, Lat. volant, Fr.]
1. Flying; paſſing through the air. . -
Thºm, or #. automata, are ſuch mº .
trivances as have a ſelf-motion, whereby tº ji ick.
aloft in the air, like birds. pºlkins'; Math, 44.3%
2. Nimble ; ačtive.
His volant touch igh -
Inſtinét through all proportions, low, and high, Miltºn.
Fled, and pufu'd tranſverſe the reſonant tº
Blind Bâtiſh bards, with volant touch,
Traverſe loquacious ſtrings, whoſe ſolemn notes Philipi.
Provoke to harmleſs revels.
Vo’LATILE. adj. [volatilis, Lat.]
1. Flying ; paſſing through the air.
la-
The caterpillar towards the end -
of ſummer waxeth #
- n's Nat.
tile, and turneth to a butterfly. . . Bacº • animal but
There is no creature only volatile, º ilo *: ſufficient
- - 1S -
hath feet as well as wings; becauſe *. on the Crºat”
food for them always in the air.
2. [Volatile, Fr.] Having the power to P
evaporation. - - bind -
In vain, though by their pow'rful at they b. iii.
Jºlatile Hºme.” y Milton's Parádſ, 19%.
$
aſ jī by ſpontadº”
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V O L
---
-*.
when arſenick with ſoap gives a regulus, and with mer-
cury ſublimate a volatile fuſible ſalt, like butter of antimony;
doth not this ſhew that arſenick, which is a ſubſtance totally
volatile, is compounded of fix’d and volatile parts, ſtrongly
cohering by a mutual attraction ; ſo that the volatile will not
afeend without carrying up the fixed
3. Lively; fickle; changeable of mind; full of ſpirit.
Aétive ſpirits, who are ever ſkimming over the ſurface of
things with a volatile temper, will fix nothing in their
mind. J/atts's Hºprovement of the Mind.
Newton.
You are as giddy and volatile as ever, juſt the reverſe of
Mr. Pope, who hath always loved a domeſtick life.
VO’LATILE. n.ſ. [volatile, Fr.] A winged animal.
The air conveys the heat of the ſun, maintains fires, and
ſerves for the flight of volatiles. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
'LATILENESS: * - - , ,- -
VO’L }n. ſ: [volatilité, Fr. from volatile.]
Swift.
Vol. ATI'LITY:
1. The quality of flying away by evaporation; not fixity.
Upon the compound body, chiefly obſerve the colour, fra-
ility, or pliantneſs, the volatility or fixation, compared with
ãº bodies. Bacon.
Of volatility, the utmoſt degree is, when it will fly away
without returning. Bacon.
Heat cauſeth the ſpirits to ſearch ſome iſſue out of the
body, as in the volatility of metals. Bacon.
The animal ſpirits cannot, by reaſon of their ſubtilty and
volatileneſs, be diſcovered to the ſenſe. Hale.
The volatility of mercury argues that they are not much
bigger ; nor may they be much leſs, left they loſe their
opacity. Newton's Opticks:
By the ſpirit of a plant, we underſtand that pure, elabo-
rated oil, which, by reaſon of its extreme volatility, exhales
fpontaneouſly, in which the odour or ſmell conſiſts. Arbuthnot.
2. Mutability of mind.
Vol Atilization. m. ſ. [from volatilize.] The act of making
volatile.
Chemiſts have, by a variety of ways, attempted in vain
the volatilization of the ſalt of tartar. Boyle.
To Voſlatilize. v. a. [volatiliſer, Fr. from volatile ] To
make volatile ; to ſubtilize to the higheſt degree.
Spirit of wine has a refractive power, in a middle degree
between thoſe of water and oily ſubſtances, and accordingly
ſeems to be compoſed of both, united by fermentation: the
water, by means of ſome ſaline ſpirits with which it is im-
pregnated, diſſolving the oil, and volatilizing it by the
action. Newton's Opticks.
Spirituous liquors are ſo far from attenuating, volatilizing,
and rend'ring perſpirable the animal fluids, that it rather con-
denſeth them. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Vole. n.ſ. (voie,Fr.] A deal atcards, that draws the wholetricks.
Paſt ſix, and not a living ſoul!
I might by this have won a vols. - Swift.
WOLCANO. n.ſ. [Italian, from Vulcan.] A burning moun-
taln.
Navigators tell us there is a burning mountain in an
iſland, and many volcano's and fiery hills. Brown.
When the Cyclops o'er their anvils ſweat,
From the volcano's groſs eruptions riſe,
And curling ſheets of ſmoke obſcure the ſkies. Garth.
Subterraneous minerals ferment, and cauſe earthquakes,
and cauſe furious eruptions of volcano's, and tumble down
broken rocks. Bentley's Sermons.
Vo/LERY. n.ſ. [volerie, Fr.] A flight of birds.
An old boy, at his firſt appearance, is ſure to draw on
him the eyes and chirping of the whole town volery; amongſt
which, there will not be wanting ſome birds of prey, that
will preſently be on the wing for him. Locke.
Vol.1TArion. n.ſ. (voito, Lat.] The act or power of fly-
ing
Birds and flying animals are almoſt erect, advancing the
head and breaſt in their progreſſion, and only prone in the
aćt of volitation. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Vol.1"tion. n.ſ. [volitio, Lat..] The act of willing; the power
of choice exerted.
There is as much difference between the approbation of
the judgment, and the actual volitions of the will, as between
a man's viewing a deſirable thing with his eye, and reaching
after it with his hand. South's Sermons.
Polition is the actual excrciſe of the power the mind has to
order the conſideration of any idea, or the forbearing to con-
fider it; or to prefer the motion of any part of the body to
its reſt, by directing any particular action, or its forbear-
an Ce. Locke.
Vo'Litive. adj. Having the power to will.
They not only perfect the intellectual faculty, but the vo-
litive; making the man not only more knowing, but more
wife and better. Hale.
Vo'LLEY. m. ſ. ſvolée, Fr.]
1. A flight of ſhot.
From the wood a volly of ſhot ſlew two of his com-
pany. Raleigh's Apolºgy.
... More on his guns relies, than on his ſword,
From whence a fatal volley we receiv'd.
2. A burſt; an emiſſion of many at once.
A fine volly cf words, gentlemen, and quickly ſhot
off. Soakeſpeare.
* Pºe. !
To Vo'ſ LEY. v. n. To throw out. -
The holding every man ſhall beat as loud
tr.../ As his ſtrong ſides can volly. Shakespeare Ant, and Cºpatra:
Vo'LLIED. adj. [from vºlley.] Diſploded; diſcharged with a
volley.
I ſtood
Thy fierceſt, when in battle to thy aid
haller.
Diſtruſtful ſenſe with modeſ caution ſpeaks;
It ſtill looks home, and ſhort excurſions nakes;
But rattling nonſenſe in full vallies breaks.
The blaſting volley'd thunder made all ſpeed. Miltºn.
The Gallick navy, impotent to bear
His volley'd thunder, torn, diffever'd, ſcud. Philips.
Volt. n.ſ. (vºlte, Fr. J Polº ſignifies a round or a ciºr
tread; a gate of two treads made by a horſe going fideways
round a center; ſo that theſe two treads make parallel trađs,
the one which is made by the fore feet larger, and the other
by the hinder fect ſmaller; the ſhoulders bearing outwards,
and the croupe approaching towards the center. Farrier's Dić.
Volubi'lity. n.f. [volubilité, Fr. volubilitas, from volubilis,
Lat.]
1. The aët or power of rolling.
Kolubility, or aptneſs to roll, is the property of a bowl,
and is derived from its roundneſs. //atts's Logick.
Then caleſtial ſpheres ſhould forget their wonted motions,
and by irregular volubility, turn themſelves any way, as it might
happen. Hºoker, b. i.
2. Activity of tongue; fluency of ſpeech.
Say ſhe be mute, and will not ſpeak a word,
Then I'll commend her volubility. Shakeſpeare.
He expreſs'd himſelf with great volubility of words, natu-
ral and proper. Clarendon.
He had all the French aſſurance, cunning, and volubility
of tongue. Addiſon.
She ran over the catalogue of diverſions with ſuch a volu-
bility of tongue, as drew a gentle reprimand from her
father. Female Quixote.
3. Mutability; liableneſs to revolution.
He that's a vićtor this moment, may be a ſlave the next :
and this volubility of human affairs, is the judgment of pro-
vidence, in the puniſhment of oppreſſion. L’Eſtrange.
Wo'Lu BLE. adj. [volubilis, Lat.]
1. Formed ſo as to roll eaſily; formed ſo as to be eaſily put in
In Otton.
Neither the weight of the matter of which a cylinder is
made, nor its round voluble form, which, meeting with a
precipice, do neceſſarily continue the motion of it, are any
more imputable to that dead, choiceleſs creature in its firſt
motion. Hammond.
The adventitious corpuſcles may produce ſtability in the
matter they pervade, by expelling thence thoſe voluble parti-
cles, which, whilſt they continued, did by their ſhape unfit
for coheſion, or, by their motion, oppoſe coalition. Boyle.
2. Rolling; having quick motion.
This leſs voluble earth,
By ſhorter flight to th’eaſt, had left him there.
Then voluble, and bold; now hid, now ſeen,
Among thick-woven arborets. Milton's Par. Ly?, b. iv.
3. Nimble; active. Applied to the tongue.
A friend promiſed to diffect a woman's tongue, and exa-
mine whether there may not be in it certain juices, which
render it ſo wonderfully voluble and flippant. Addiſon.
Theſe with a voluble and flippant tongue, become mere
echo's. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
4. Fluent of words. It is applied to the ſpecch, or the
ſpeaker. -
Caſio, a knave very voluble; no further conſcionable,
than in putting on the meer form of civil and humane ſeem-
ing, for the better compaſſing of his looſe affection. Shakeſp.
If voluble and ſharp diſcourſe be marr'd,
Unkindneſs blunts it more than marble hard. Shakespeare.
VO’LUME. m. ſ. [volumen, Latil -
1. Something rolled, or convolved.
2. As much as ſeems convolved at once ; as a ſold of a ſerpent,
a wave of water.
- Threeſcore and ten I can º well;
Within the volume of which time I’ve ſeen
Hours dreadful, and things ſtrange. Shakespeare . Maclºth.
Unoppos'd they either loſe their force,
Milton.
Or wind in volumes to their former courſe. Dryden.
Behind the gen'ral mends his weary Pace,
And filently to his revenge he ſails:
So glides ſome trodden ſerpent on the graſs,
And long behind his wounded volume trails. Dryden.
Thames' fruitful tides,
Fentºn.
Slow through the vale in ſilver vºlumes play. B
y<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V O Í,
V O M
- ty the inſinuations of theſe cryſtals, the vºlumes of alr
are driven out of the watery particles, and many of them
uniting, form larger volumes, which thereby have a gºater
force to expand themſelves. Cheyne.
3. [Pºlume, Fr.] A bººk: ſo called, becauſe books were an-
tiently rolled upon a ſtaff. . . -
Guyon all this while his book did read,
Ne yet has ended ; for it was a great
And ample volume, that doth far exceed
My leiſure, ſo long leaves here to repeat.
Calmly, I do beſeech you.
Aye, as an hoſtler, that for the pooreſt piece
Will bear the knave by th’ volume. Shakespeare.
I ſhall not now enlarge on the wrong judgments whereby
men miſlead themſelves. This would make a vºlume. Locke.
If one ſhort volume cou’d comprize
All that was witty, learn’d and wiſe :
How wou'd it be eſteem’d and read : Swift.
Volu'M INous, adj. [from volume.]
1. Conſiſting of many complications.
The ſerpent roll'd vºluminºus and vaſt. Milton.
2. Conſiſting in many volumes, or books.
If heav'n write aught of fate, by what the ſtars
Wºluminous, or ſingle charaćters
In their conjunction met, give me to ſpell. Milton.
There is pleaſure in doing ſomething new, though never
ſo little, without peſtering the world with voluminºus tran-
ſcriptions. Graunt's Bills ºf Mortality.
3. Copious; diffuſive.
He did not bear contradićlion without much paſſion, and
was too voluminous in diſcourſe. Clarendºn.
The moſt ſevere reader makes allowances for many reſts
and nodding-places in a voluminous writer. Speciator, N° 124.
Volu'MINously, adv. [from voluminous...] In many volumes
or books.
The controverſies are hotly managed by the divided ſchools,
and voluminouſly every where handled. Granville.
Vo'LUNTAR ILY. adv. [volentiers, Fr. from voluntary.J Spon-
taneouſly ; of one's own accord; without compulſion.
Sith there is no likelihood that ever voluntarily they will
ſeek inſtruction at our hands, it remaineth that unleſs we
will ſuffer them to periſh, ſalvation itſelf muſt ſeek them. Hooker.
To be agents voluntarily in our own deſtruction, is againſt
God and nature. Haoker, b. v.
Self-preſervation will oblige a man voluntaily, and by
choice, to undergo any leſs evil, to ſecure himſelf but from
the probability of an evil incomparably greater. South.
VOLUNTARY. adj. [voluntaire, Fr. voluntarius, Lat.]
1. Aćting without compulſion; atting by choice.
God did not work as a neceſſary, but a voluntary agent;
intending before-hand, and decrecing with himſelf, that
which did outwardly proceed from him. Hooker, b. i.
The lottery of my deſtiny
Bars me the right of voluntary chufing.
2. Willing; acting with willingneſs.
Then virtue was no more, her guard away,
She ſell to luſt a voluntary prey. Pope's Odyſºſ.
3. Done without compulſion.
/ºluntary forbearance denotes the forbearance of an action,
conſcquent to an order of the mind. Locke.
The old duke is baniſhed; the new duke, and three or
four loving lords, have put themſelves into voluntary exile
with him. Shakeſp. As Yºu Like It.
They muſt have recourſe to abſtinence, which is but vo-
luntary faſting, and to exerciſe, which is but voluntary la-
bour. Seed's Sermon.
4. Acting of its own accord; ſpontaneous:
The publick prayers of the people of God in churches
thoroughly ſettled, did never uſe to be voluntary dictates, pro-
cceding from any man's extemporal wit. Hooker, b. v.
Thoughts which voluntary move
Harmonious numbers. Milton.
Voſius TARY. m. ſ. [from the adjective.]
1. A volunteer; one who engages in any affair of his own accord.
All th’ unſettled humours of the land;
Raſh, inconſid rate, fiery voluntaries. Shakespeare.
Ajax was here the vºlintary, and you as under an im-
preſs: Shakeſpeare.
The bordering wars were made altogether by voluntaries,
upon their own head. - Davies's Ireland.
Aids came in partly upon miſſives, and partly voluntaries
from all parts. Bacon.
2. * Piece of muſick play’d at will, without any ſettled
Iulle. ,
Whiſtling winds, like organs, play’d,
Until their volunta, ics made
The waken'd carth in odours riſe,
To be her morning ſacrifice. Cleare’and.
* voluntary before the firſt leſſon, we are prepard for
miſſion of thoſe divine truths, which we are thortly to re-
CC1VC. Sfºg -
Speciator, N 630.
Fairy Queen.
Shakeſpeare.
Vol. UNT FE/P. m. ſ. [coluntaire, Fr.
the ſervice of his own accord.
Congreve, and the author of the Relapſe,
cipals in the diſpute, I ſatisfy them ; as ſo
J A ſoldier who cnter, into
r the vºlunter,
they will find themſelves affected wi -
. cs affected with the misfortune of their
All Aſia now was by the cars; Collier,
And Gods beat up for vºlunteers
To Greece and Troy. -
To VoI. UNT FE'R. v. m. To go for a ſºldier. Priºr,
A cant woºd,
ſpeaking
king : " '
c. *
Leave of theſe wagers, for in conſcience
The city needs not your new tricks for brea
And if you gallants loſe, to all appearing,
You'll want an equipage for volintº.
Volu'PTUARY. n ſ [wolipinaire, Fr. velºpiarius Lat
given up to pleaſure and luxury. x *-al.
Does not the voluptuary underſtand in all the liberties of
looſe and a lewd converſation, that he runs the riſk i. d
and ſoul ? #. ody
The parable was intended againſt the º
who liv'd like heathens, diſſolutely, without regdiº men
the reſtraints of religion. º of
V91.0 PTUOCŞ. iſ ſvoluptuºſº, Lat, ºn... ."
Given to exceſs of pleaſure; luxurious. , Fr. J
He them deceives; deceiv'd in his deceit;
Made drunk with drugs of dear voluptuous receipt. Senſºr
If a new ſect have not two properties, it will not ſº
The one is the ſupplanting, or the oppoſing of alſº
eſtabliſhed; the other is the giving licenſe to Pleaſures, and ,
voluptuºus life. Bacºn
Thou wilt bling me ſoon -
To that new world of light and bliſs, among
The gods, who live at eaſe, where I ſhall reign
At thy right hand voluttuous, without end. Aſia.
Then ſwol'n with pride, into the ſnare I fell
Of fair fallacious looks; venereal trains,
Soft'ncd with pleaſure, and voluptuous life. Miltºn.
Speculative atheiſm ſubſiſts only in our ſpeculation; whereas
really human nature cannot be guilty of the crime. In-
deed a few ſenſual and voluptuºus perſons may for a ſeaſºn
eclipſe this native light of the ſoul, but can never wholly
ſmother and extinguiſh it. Bentley's Sermºni.
Volu'PTuously. adv. [from vol.ptuous.) Luxuriouſly; with
indulgence of exceſſive pleaſure.
Had I a dozen ſons, I had rather eleven died nobly for
their country, than one voluptuouſly ſurfeit out of action. Shaft.
This cannot be done, if my will be ſo worldly or vºluptuºuſly
diſpoſed, as never to ſuffer me to think of them; but perpe-
tually to carry away, and apply my mind to other things. South.
Volu'PTuouss Ess. m. ſ. [from voluptuous.] Luxuriouſneſs; ad-
dictedneſs to exceſs of pleaſure.
There’s no bottom
In my voluptuouſneſs : your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids, could not fillup
The ciſtern of my luſt. Shaiſ. Malºh.
If he fill'd his vacancy with his voluptuouſiſ,
Full ſurfeits, and the dryneſs of his bones
Call on him for’t. Shakeſp. Ant, and Chºti.
Here where ſtill ev'ning is, not noon nor night;
Where no voluptuouſneſ, yet all delight. - - - -
Theſe ſons of Epicurús, for voluptuºſºft and indigo,
muſt paſs for the only wits of the age. Sºuth.
You may be free, unleſs
Your other lord forbids, vºluptuouſneſſ,
Volu’ſ E. m. ſ. [volute, Fr.] A member of a column. nd
That paſt of the capitals of the Ionick, Corinº .
Compoſite orders, which is ſuppoſed to repreſent the baſkº
trees twiſted and turned into ſpiral lines, or, according.”
others, the head-dreſſes of virgins in their long hair. *
cording to Vitruvius, thoſe that appear above the º
the Corinthian order, are ſixteen in every capital, four º:
Ionick, and eight in the Compoſite. Theſe º:
eſpecially remarkable in the Ionick capital, º: ...
pillow or cuſhion laid between the abacus an º i.
whence that antient architcét calls the gluº pulvinus. †.
It is ſaid there is an Ionick pillar in the Santº * ".
tevere, where the marks of the compaſs are ſtill to . rk-
on the volute; and that Palladio learnt from * º,.
ing of that difficult problem. “.
PO’ſ ICA, n.ſ. [Latin.] An ency fled hum d a vºmité,
If the ulcer is not broke, it is commonly calle * becauſe
attended with the ſame ſymptoms as an º lungs,
the vomica communicating with the veſſels of º
muſt neceſſarily void ſome of the putrid º, on Die!.
blood. A. Väizº-
Vo'Mick NUT. m. ſ.
/omic: nut is à. nucleus of a fruit of an Ea ſnakewo
the wood of which is the lignum colubrinu" º of the
of the ſhops. It is flat, compreſſed, and º cºwſ:
breadth of a ſhilling, and about the thickneſs of a
... and
- - - - - --- º birds aſl
Picce, It is certain poiſon to quadrºſ eds and tº
Dryºn,
JA ºn
Dºnne.
Dryden.
cur in the lungº
fl-Indian tree,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V O T
V O U
taken internally, in ſmall doſes, it diſturbs the whole human
frame, and brings on convulſions. Hill's Mat. Medica.
To VO MIT. v. n. ſtomo, Latin.]
i. To caſt up the contents of the ſtomach. -
The dog, when he is ſick at the ſtomach, knows his cure,
falls to his graſs, vomits, and is well. AMore.
To Vo'Mit. v.a. [womir, Fr.]
1. To throw up from the ſtomach.
Haft thou found honey eat ſo much as is ſufficient, leſt
thou be filled there with, and vomit it. Prov. xxv. 16.
The fiſh vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. jonah ii.
Fºmiting is of uſe, when the foulneſs of the ſtomach re-
quires it. Wiſeman's Surgery.
Weak ſtomachs vomit up the wine that they drink in too
great quantities, in the form of vinegar. Arbuthnot.
2. To throw up with violence from any hollow.
Vo'MIT. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
I. The matter thrown up from the ſtomach.
He ſhall caſt up the wealth by him devour’d,
Like vomit from his yawning entrails pour’d. Sandys.
2. An emetick medicine; a medicine that cauſes vomit.
Whether a vomit may be ſafely given, muſt be judged by
the circumſtances; if there be any ſymptoms of an inflam-
mation of the ſtomach, a vomit is extremely dangerous. A buth.
VoM1 rios. m. ſ. [from vomo, Lat..] The act or power of vo-
miting.
How many have ſaved their lives, by ſpewing up their de-
bauch Whereas, if the ſtomach had wanted the faculty of
vomition, they had inevitably died. Grew's Coſmology.
Vo MITIVE. adj. [vomitif, Fr.] Emetick; cauſing vomits.
From this vitrioious quality, mercurius dulcis, and vitriol
, vomitive, occaſion black ejećtions. Brown's Vulg. Errours.
Vo'MITory, adj. [vomitoire, Fr. vomitorius, Lat.] Procuring
vomits; emetick.
Since regulus of ſtibium, or glaſs of antimony, will com-
municate to water or wine a purging or vomitory operation,
yet the body itſelf, after iterated infuſions, abates not virtue
or weight. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Some have vomited up ſuch bodies as theſe, namely, thick,
ſhort, blunt pins, which, by ſtraining, they vomit up again,
or by taking vomitories privately. Harvey on Conſumptions.
VORA/CIOUS, adj. [vorace, Fr. vorax, Lat.]
1. Greedy to eat; ravenous ; c.dacious.
So voracious is this humour grown, that it draws in every
thing to feed it. Government of the Tongue.
VoRA/ciously. adv. [from voracious.] Greedily; ravenouſly.
VoRA'ciousness. Un.J. [voracité, Fr, voracitas, Lat. from vo-
VoRA’c.1TY. } racious.] Greedineſs; ravine ; ravenouſ-
neſs.
He is as well contented with this, as thoſe that with the
rarities of the earth pamper their voracities. Sandys.
Creatures by their voracity pernicious, have commonly
fewer young. Derham's Phyſic:-Theology.
VO’RTEX. n.ſ. In the plural vortices. [Latin.] Any thing
whirled round. -
If many contiguous vortices of molten pitch were each of
them as large as thoſe which ſome ſuppoſe to revolve about
the ſun and fix’d ſtars; yet theſe, and all their parts would,
by their tenacity and ſtiffneſs, communicate their motion to
one another. Newton's Opticks.
Nothing elſe could impel it, unleſs the etherial matter be
ſuppoſed to be carried about the ſun, like a vortex, or whirl-
pool, as a vehicle to convey it and the reſt of the
planets. Bentley's Sermons.
The gath'ring number, as it moves along,
Involves a vaſt involuntary throng;
Who gently drawn, and ſtruggling leſs and leſs,
Roll in her vortex, and her power confeſs. Pope.
Vo/RT1cAL. adj. [from vortex.] Having a whirling motion.
If three equal round veſſels be filled, the one with cold
water, the other with oil, the third with molten pitch, and
the liquors be ſtirred about alike, to give them 2. vortical mo-
tion; the pitch, by its tenacity, will loſe Its motion quickly ;
the oil, being leſs tenacious, will keep it longer; and the
water being ſtill leſs tenacious, will keep it longeſt, but yet
will loſe it in a ſhort time. Newton's Opticks.
It is not a magnetical power, nor the effect of a vortical
motion; thoſe common attempts towards the explication of
gravity. Bentley’s Sermons.
V&amp;rAR1st. n. ſ. [devotus, Lat.] One devoted to any perſon
or thing; one given up by a vow to any ſervice or worſhip;
votary.
I wiſh a more ſtrićt reſtraint
Upon the ſiſterhood, the votariſis of St. Clare. Shakeſpeare.
Earth, yield me roots | What is here
Gold yellow, glittering, precious gold !
No, gods, I am no idle votariſ?. Shakeſpeare.
The grey-hooded ev'n,
Like a ſad votariſ in palmer's weed,
Roſe from the hindmoſt wheels of Phoebus' wain. Milton.
VotARY, n.ſ. One devoted, as by a vow,
ſervice, worſhip, ſtudy, or ſtate of life.
Wherefore waſte I time to counſ. thec 2
Thou art a votary to fond deſire. -
Thou, faint god of ſleep forget that I
as ever known to be thy votary.
No more my pillow ſhall thine altar be
Nor will I offer any more to thee, &gt;
Myſelf a melting ſacrifice. Craſhaw
By theſe means, men Worſhip the idols have been ſet. in
their minds, and ſtamp the characters of divinity upon .."
: and errors, become zealous *aries to bulls and mon-
les.
The enemy of our happineſs has his ſervants and ºf:
...'s thoſe who are called by the name of the ſon of
OCl.
How can heav'nly wiſdom prove
An inſtrument to earthly love
Know'ſt thou not yet, that men commence
Thy votaries for want of ſenſe. Swift
Vo"TARY. adj. Conſequent to a vow. * -
Superſtition is now ſo well advanced, that men of the firſt
blood are as firm as butchers by occupation; and votary reſolu-
tion is made equipollent to cuſtom, evenin matter offijóo. Bac.
Vo’TAREss. n.J. [female of *tary..] A woman devoted to
any worſhip or ſtate.
The imperial vot’rſ; paſſed on,
In maiden meditation, fancy free. Shakeſpeare.
His mother was a wat'reſs of my order;
And, in the ſpiced Indian air by night,
to any particular
Shałęſpeare.
Rogers's Sermºns.
Full often ſhe hath goſſip'd by my ſide. Shakeſpeare.
No roſary this vot’reſs needs,
Her very ſyllables are beads. Cleaveland.
Thy vot’reſ from my tender years I am;
And love, like thee, the woods and ſylvan game. Dryden.
What force have pious vows the queen of love
His ſiſter ſends, her vot’reſ from above. Pope.
VOTE_n.ſ. [votum, Lat.] Suffrage; voice given and numbered.
He that joins inſtruction with delight,
Profit with pleaſure, carries all the votes. Roſcommon.
How many have no other ground for their tenets, than the
ſuppoſed honeſty or learning of thoſe of the ſame profeſſion ?
as if truth were to be eſtabliſhed by the vote of the multi-
tude. Locke.
The final determination ariſes from the majority of opi-
pions, or votes in the aſſembly, becauſe they ought to be
ſway’d by the ſuperior weight of reaſon. //atts.
To Vote. v. a.
1. To chuſe by ſuffrage; to determine by ſuffrage.
You are not only in the eye and ear of your maſter; but
you are alſo a favourite, the favourite of the time, and ſo are
in his boſom alſo ; the world hath alſo voted you, and doth
ſo eſteem of you. Bacon.
2. To give by vote.
The parliament voted them one hundred thouſand pounds
by way of recompence for their ſufferings. Swift.
Voºre R. n.ſ...[from vote.] One who has the right of giving
his voice or ſuffrage.
Elections growing chargeable, the voters, that is, the bulk
of the common people, have been univerſally ſeduced into
bribery, perjury, drunkenneſs, malice, and ſlander, Swift.
He hates an action baſe;
Can ſometimes drop a voter's claim,
And give up party to his fame. Swift.
Wo'TIVE. adj. [votivus, Lat.] Given by vow.
Such in Iſis’ temple you may find,
On votive tablets to the life pourtray'd. Dryden.
Venus ! take my votive glaſs;
Since I am not what I was,
What from this day I ſhall be,
Venus ! iet me never ſee. Prior.
To VOUCH. v. a. [voucher, Norman French.]
1. To call to witneſs; to obteſt.
The ſun and day are witneſſes for me ;
Let him who fights unſeen relate his own,
And vouch the ſilent ſtars and conſcious ſnoon. Dryden.
2. To atteſt; to warrant; to maintain. -
You do not give the cheer; the feaſt is ſold
That is not often vouched, while 'tis making
'Tis given with welcome. Shakespeare . Macbeth.
The conſiſtency of the diſcourſe, and the pertinency of it
to the deſign he is upon, vouches it worthy of our great
apoſtle. Locke.
They made him aſhamed to vouch the truth of the rela-
tion, and afterwards to credit it. Alterbury.
To Vouch. v. n. To bear witneſs; to appear as a witneſs ;
ive teſtimony.
to i. i. will not believe her, until the eleētor of
Hanover ſhall vº.h for the truth of what ſhe hath ſo ſo-
fir d. Swift.
lemnly affirme 30 C Vouc H.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V O W
U P
m the verb.] Warrant; atteſtation. -
ouldſt thou beſtow on a deſerving wº 1n-
i; ... that in the authority of her merit, did juſtly put
. * of very malice itſelf ? - Shakespeare , Othello.
V... n.ſ.. [from vouch..] One who gives witneſs to any
thing.
Better to ſtarve,
Than crave the hire which firſt we do deſerve:
why in this wolviſh gown ſhould I ſtand here,
To #: of Hob and 5ick, that do appear,
Their needleſs voucher ? Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
The ſtamp is a mark, and a public voucher, that a piece of
ſuch denomination is of ſuch a weight, and of ſuch a fine-
neſs, i.e. has ſo much ſilver in it. Locke.
All the great writers of that age ſtand up together as
vouchers for one another's reputation. Spectator, Nº. 253.
I have added nothing to the malice or abſurdity of them,
which it behoves me to declare, ſince the vouchers themſelves
will be ſo ſoon loſt. Pope.
To Vouchs A^FE. v. a. [vouch and ſafe.]
1. To permit anything to be done without danger.
2. To condeſcend to grant.
He grew content to mark their ſpeeches, then marvel at
ſuch wit in ſhepherds, aſter to like their company, and laſtly
to vouchſafe conference. Sidney.
Shall I vouchſafe your worſhip a word or two
—Two thouſand, fair woman, and I'll
Pouchſafe thee hearing. Shakespeare .
But if the ſenſe of touch ſeem ſuch delight
Beyond all other, think the ſame vouchſaf’d
To cattle and each beaſt. Milton.
It is not ſaid by the apoſtle, that God vouchſafed to the
heathens the means of ſalvation; and yet I will not affirm
that God will ſave none of thoſe, to whom the ſound of the
goſpel never reached. South's Sermons.
To Vouchs A‘f E. v. n. To deign; to condeſcend; to yield.
Do I not ſee Zelmane, who does not think a thought
which is not firſt weigh’d by wiſdom and virtue doth not ſhe
vouchſafe to love me with like ardour * Sidney, b. ii.
/ouchſafe, divine perfection of a woman,
Of theſe ſuppoſed crimes to give me leave
By circumſtance but to acquit myſelf. , Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Wouchſafe, illuſtrious Ormond, to behold
What pow'r the charms of beauty had of old. Dryden.
Vouchsa'FEMENT. n.ſ.. [from vouchſafe.] Grant; conde-
ſcenſion.
The infinite ſuperiority of God's nature, places a vaſt diſpa-
rity betwixt his greateſt communicated vouchſafements, and
his boundleſs, and therefore to his creatures incommunicable
perfections. Boyle.
Vow. n.ſ. [varu, Fr. votum, Lat.]
1. Any promiſe made to a divine power; an ačt of devotion,
by which ſome part of life, or ſome part of poſſeſſions is con-
ſecrated to a particular purpoſe.
The gods are deaf to hot and peeviſh vows;
They are polluted offerings. Shakeſpeare.
If you take that vow and that wiſh to be all one, you are
miſtaken; a wiſh is a far lower degree than a vow. Hammond.
She vows for his return, with vain devotion, pays. Dryd.
2. A ſolemn promiſe, commonly uſed for a promiſe of love or
matrimony.
By all the vows that ever men have broke,
In number more than ever women ſpoke. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe who wear the woodbine on their brow,
Were knights of love, who never broke their vow ;
Firm to their plighted faith. Dryden.
To Wow. v.a. [wouer, Fr. voveo, Lat.] To conſecrate by a
ſolemn dedication; to give to a divine power.
David often vºweth unto God the ſacrifice of praiſe and
Vouch. n.ſ. (fro
What praiſe c
thankſgiving in the congregation. Hooker.
To Maſter Harvey, upon ſome ſpecial confideration, I have
vowed this my labour. Spenſer.
how and pay unto the Lord. - Pſ. lxxvi.
When we have not only vowed, but delivered them over
into the poſſeſſion of Almighty God, for the maintenance of
his publick worſhip, and the miniſters thereof, they are not
now arbitrable, nor to be revoked. Spelman.
Whoever ſees theſe irreligious men,
With burden of a ſickneſs, weak and faint,
But hears them talking of religion then,
Aiºl vowing of their ſoul to ev'ry ſaint. Davies.
...This plant Latinus, when his town he wall’d,
Then found, and from the tree Laurentum call'd :
And laſt, in honour of his new abode,
He vºw'd the laurel to the laurers god. Dryden.
o V ow. v. h. To make vows or ſolemn promiſes.
Poſt ſee how unregarded now
That piece of beauty paſſes :
T here was a time, when I did vow
** alone: but mark the fate of faces. Suckling,
2.
T
Vowfellow. n.ſ. (vow and fellow J One bound by t
Vºwº, hiſ ſºyelle, Fr. vocalis, Lat.] A letter which can
be uttered by itſelf.
I diſtinguiſh letters into vowel; and conſonants
wholly upon their reaſon, that a vowel may be ſoundi !
a conſonant not without a vowel; which will not be .
all true; for many of the conſonants may be found. .
and ſome joined together without a vowel, as tº i. ;
we pronounce the latter ſyllable of people, rifle. #.
Virgil makes the two vowels meet without an eliſion ºlder,
, yet not
Brºwn.
WOW. he ſame
T Who are the votaries,
hat are vowfellows with this virtuous king
VO/YAGE. jº. Fr.] king Shalºft.
1. A travel by ſea.
Guyon forward 'gan his voyage make,
With his black palmer, that him guided ſill. Fai
- ry Queen.
Our ſhips went ſundry voyages, as well to the pillars of
Hercules, as to other parts in the Atlantick and Mi.
ranean ſeas. Bac r-
This great man acted like an able pilot in a long *.
contented to fit in the cabin when the winds were allay'd i.
ready to reſume the helm when the ſtorm aroſe. Fº
2. Courſe ; attempt; undertaking. A low phraſe. -
If he ſhou'd intend his voyage towards my wife, I wou'd
turn her looſe to him ; and what he gets more of it than
ſharp words, let it lie on my head. Shałºffian
If you make your voyage upon her, and prevail, I am º
further your enemy. Shakespeare . Cymbeliu,
3. The practice of travelling.
All nations have interknowledge of one another, by vºyage
into foreign parts, or ſtrangers that come to them. “Bái,
To Vo’YAGE. v. n.ſvoyager, Fr. from the noun..] To travel by ſea.
For voyaging to learn the direful art,
To taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart;
Ilus refus’d t'impart the baneful truſt. Pope's 0&amp;ſj.
To Vo’YAc E. v. a. To travel; to paſs over.
I with pain
Woyag'd th’ unreal, vaſt, unbounded deep
Of horrible confuſion. Milton's Par, Lºft.
Vo’YAGE.R. m.ſ. [voyageur, Fr. from voyage.] One who tri-
vels by ſea. f
łºin not in thy conſtant travelling
To do as other voyagers, and make
Some turns into leſs creeks, and wiſely take
Freſh water at the Heliconian ſpring. Donnt.
How comfortable this is, voyagers can beſt tell, Chyne.
Deny your veſſels, ye deny in vain;
A private voyager I paſs the main. Pºpº';0'ſ),
Up. adv. [up, Saxon; op, Dutch and Daniſh]
1. Aloft; on high ; not down.
From thoſe two Mytilene brethren, admire the wondeſſ
changes of worldly things, now up now down, as if the life
of man were not of much more certainty than a flage play.
Knolley's Hiſ ºf the Turki,
Thither his courſe he bends; but up or down,
By center, or eccentrick, hard to tell,
Or longitude. Miltºn,
2. Out of bed; in the ſtate of being riſen from reſt.
Helen was not up 2 was ſhe Shakespeare.
His chamber being commonly ſtived with ſuiters, when he
was up, he gave his legs, arms, and breaſt to his ſervants to
dreſs him; his eyes to his letters, and ears to petition” Wºtton.
3. In the ſtate of being riſen from a ſeat... h
Upon his firſt riſing, a general whiſper ran º e
country people, that Sir Roger was up. Addison.
4. From a ſtate of decumbiture or concealment.
Now morn with roſy light had ſtreak'd the ſky,
Up roſe the ſun, and up roſe Emily; Drydin
Addreſs'd her early ſteps to Cynthia's fame. ryati,
5. In a ſtate of being built. - -
Up with my tent; here will I lie to-night; Shakesp
But where tomorrow —well, all's one for that, Shakespeare,
6. Above the horizon. -
As ſoon as the ſun is up, ſet upon the city. judge is.
. To a ſtate of advancement. -
7 Till we have wrought ourſelves up into this Ž
chriſtian indifference, we are in bondage. fterbury.
8. In a ſtate of exaltation. low ;
Thoſe that were up themſelves, kept otheº º y
Thoſe that were low themſelves held others”. Qºr.
Ne ſuffered them to riſe, or greater gº Fairy
Henry the fifth is crown'd ; up Vanity {eſ}.
Down }. ſtateſ all you ſage counſellors hence. Shaº?
9. In a ſtate of climbing.
io. In a ſtate of inſurrection. f York is up
The gentle archbiſhop of York is " r IV.
With wº powers. Shaiſ. Hºn. IV
Rebels there are up, Sºft.**
And put the Engliſhmen unto the ſword. "hou
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U P B
Thou haſt fir'd me; my ſoul's up in arms,
And mans each part about me.
11. In a ſtate of being increaſed, or raiſed.
Grief and paſſion are like floods raiſed in little brooks by a
ſudden rain; they are quickly up,' and if the concernment be
pour'd unexpectedly in upon is, it overflows us. Dryden.
12. From a remoter place, coming to any perſon or place.
. As a boar was whetting his teeth, up comes a fox to
him. L’Eſtrange.
13. From younger to elder years.
I am ready to die from my youth up. Pſ. lxxxviii.
14. Up and down. Diſperſedly; here and there.
Abundance of them are ſeen ſcattered up and down like ſo
many little iſlands when the tide is low. Addiſon.
15. UP and down. Backward and forward.
Our deſire is, in this preſent controverſy, not to be carried
up and down with the waves of uncertain arguments, but ra-
ther poſitively to lead on the minds of the fimpler ſort by plain
and eaſy degrees, till the very nature of the thing itſelf do
make manifeſt what is truth. Hooker, b. v.
The ſkipping king he rambled up and down,
With ſhallow jeſters.
Up and down he traverſes his ground;
Now wards a ſelling blow, now ſtrikes again:
Then nimbly ſhifts a thruſt, then lends a wound;
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Now back he gives, then ruſhes on amain. Daniel.
Thou and death
Shall dwell at eaſe, and up and down unſeen
Wing filently the buxom air. Milton.
On this windy ſea of land, the fiend
Walk'd up and down alone, bent on his prey. Milton.
What a miſerable life doſt thou lead, ſays a dog to a lion,
to run ſtarving up and down thus in woods. L’Eſtrange.
—She moves | life wanders up and down
Through all her face, and lights up every charm. Addiſon.
16. Up to. To an equal height with.
Tantalus was puniſhed with the rage of an eternal thirſt,
and ſet up to the chin in water, that fled from his lips when-
ever he attempted to drink it. Addiſon.
17. Up to. Adequately to.
The wiſeſt men in all ages have lived up to the religion of
their country, when they ſaw nothing in it oppoſite to mo-
rality. Addiſon.
They are determined to live up to the holy rule, by which
they have obliged themſelves to walk. Atterbury.
We muſt not only .# all theſe paſſions that ſolicit us,
but we muſt learn to do well, and act up to the poſitive pre-
cepts of our duty. Rogers's Sermons.
18. Up with. A phraſe that ſignifies the ačt of raiſing any
thing to give a blow.
She, quick and proud, and who did Pas deſpiſe,
Up with her fiſt, and took him on the face;
Another time, quoth ſhe, become more wiſe:
Thus Pas did kiſs her hand with little grace. Sidney.
19. It is added to verbs, implying ſome accumulation, or increaſe.
If we could number up thoſe prodigious ſwarms that ſettled
in every part of the Campania of old Rome, they would a-
mount to more than can be found in any ſix parts of Europe
of the ſame extent. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
20. Up, interjećt.
21. A word exhorting to riſe from bed.
Up, up / cries gluttony, 'tis break of day;
Go drive the deer, and drag the finny prey. Pope.
22. A word of exhortation, exciting or rouſing to ačtion.
Up then, Melpomene, the mournful muſe of nine;
Such cauſe of mourning never hadſt afore.
Up, griſly ghoſts; and up my rueful rime;
Matter of mirth now ſhalt thou have no more. Spenſºr.
But up, and enter now into full bliſs. Milton.
Up, up, for honour's ſake; twelve legions wait you,
And long to call you chief. Dryden.
Up. prep. From a lower to a higher part; not down.
In going up a hill, the knees will be moſt weary; in going
down, the thighs: for that in lifting the feet, when a man
goeth up the hill, the weight of the body beareth moſt upon
the knees, and in going down, upon the thighs. Bacon.
To UPBEAR. v. a. preter, uplore ; part, paſſ upborn. [up and
bear.]
1. To ſuſtain aloft; to ſupport in elevation.
U, born with indefatigable wings.
Rang'd in a line the ready racers ſtand,
Start from the goal, and vaniſh o'er the ſtrand :
Swift as on wings of wind, upborn they fly,
And drifts of riſing duſt involve the ſky. Pope.
2. To raiſe aloft.
This with pray’r,
Or one ſhort figh of human breath, upborn,
Ev’n to the ſeat of God. AMilton's Par. Loft.
A monſtrous wave upbore
The chief, and daſh'd him on the craggy ſhore. Pope.
Milton.
U P C
3. To ſupport from falling.
Vital pow'rs'gan wax both weak and wan,
For want of food and ſleep; which two upbear,
Like Weighty pillars, this frail life of man. Fairy Queen.
To UPERA'id. * * [upsebnoeban, upzebreban, Saxon.]
I. To charge °ontemptuouſly with anything diſgraceful
The fathers, when they were upbraided with that defect,
cºmforted themſelves with the mediation of God's moſt gra-
$****, who did not therefore the leſs accept of their
hearty affection. Hooker, b. v
&gt; w- w -
It ſeem'd in me
But as an honour ſnatch'd with boiſ”
And I had many living to upbraid
My gain of it by their aſſiſtances,
Which daily grew to quarrel.
If you refuſe your aid, yet do not
Upbraid us with our diſtreſs. Shakeſp. Coriolanus,
Vain man! how long wilt thou thy God upbraid P
And, like the roaring of a furious wind,
rous hand,
Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
Thus vent the vile diſtemper of thy mind? Sandy.
How cunningly the ſorcereſs diſplays
Her own tranſgreſſions, to upbraid me mine. Milton,
'Tis a general complaint againſt you, and I muſt upbraid
you with it, that becauſe you need not write, you will
In Ot. Dryden.
You may the world of more defe&amp;ts upbraid,
That other works by nature are unmade;
That ſhe did never at her own expence
A palace rear.
2. To obječt as matter of reproach.
Thoſe that have been bred together, are more apt to envy
their equals when raiſed: for it doth upbraid unto them their
own fortunes, and pointeth at them. Bacon.
Any of theſe, without regarding the pains of churchmen,
grudge or upbraid to them thoſe ſmall remains of antient
piety, which the rapacity of ſome ages has ſcarce left. Sprat.
May they not juſtly to our climes upbraia,
Shortneſs of night, and penury of ſhade. Prior.
3. To urge with reproach.
I have too long born
Your blunt upbraidings, and your bitter ſcoffs. Shakespeare
He that knowingly commits an ill, has the upbraidings of
his own conſcience. Decay of Piety.
4. To reproach on account of a benefit received from the re-
proacher.
Blackmore.
Ev'ry hour
He flaſhes into one groſs crime or other;
His knights grow riotous, and he himſelf upbraids us
On ev'ry trifle. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
If any lack wiſdom, let him aſk of God, that giveth libe-
rally, and upbraideth not. ja. i. 5.
Be aſhamed of upbraiding ſpeeches before friends: and
after thou haſt given upbraid not. Eccluſ. xli. 22.
5. To bring reproach upon; to ſhew faults by being in a ſtate
of compariſon.
Ah, my ſon, how evil fits it me to have ſuch a ſon, and
how much doth thy kindneſs upbraid my wickedneſs : Sidney.
The counſel which I cannot take,
Inſtead of healing, but upbraids my weakneſs.
6. To treat with contempt. Not in uſe.
There alſo was that mighty monarch laid,
Low under all, yet above all in pride ;
That name of native fire did foul upbraid,
And would, as Ammon's ſon, be magnify’d. Fairy Queen.
UPBRA/IDINGLY. adv. By way of reproach.
The time was, when men would learn and ſtudy good
things, not envy thoſe that had them. Then men were had
in price for learning; now letters only make men vile. He
is upbraidingly called a poet, as if it were a contemptible nick-
name. B. johnſon.
To Upera’y. v. a. [A word formed from upbraid by Spenſer,
for the ſake of a rhyming termination.] To ſhame.
Vile knight, -
That knights and knighthood doſt with ſhame upbray,
And ſhew'ſt th' enſample of thy childiſh might,
With filly, weak, old women thus to fight. Spenſer.
Upbrought. part, paſſ of upbring. Educated; nurtured.
Divinely wrought,
And of the brood of angels, heav'nly born,
And with the crew of bleſſed ſaints upbrºught,
Each of which did her with her gifts adorn.
UPHAND. adj. [up and hand.] Lifted by the hand.
The uphand ſledge is uſed by underworkmen, when the work
is not of the largeſt, yet requires help to batter. T hey uſe it
with both their hands before them, and fºom liſt their ham-
mer higher than their head. A43xan’, Mºch. Exer.
U/pcast. [Participle º to coff up. The verb to upcoſt is not
- ..] Thrown upwards. -
in "...} with º eyes forſake their ſhade,
And gaze, as if I were to be obey'd.
Addiſon.
Spenſer.
Dryden.
UpcA's r.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U P O
U P H
Old Saturn, here with upcºſ' eyes, -
Beheld his abdicated ſkies. .. Addison.
U/pcast. n.ſ. A term of bowling; a throw ; a caſt. • * *
was there ever man had ſuch luck 2 when I kiſs'd the
jack, upon an upcoſ to be hit away ! Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
T. Uro Aºther. v. a. [up and gather.] To contract.
Himſelf he cloſe upgather'd more and more
Into his den, that his deceitful train,
By his there being might not be bewraid,
Ne any noiſe, ne any queſtion made. Spenſºr.
Up He'ld. pret. and part, paſſ of uphold. Maintained ; ſuſtained.
He who reigns
Monarch in heav'n, 'till then, as one ſecure,
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute. Milton.
Urhill. adj. [up and hill.] Difficult ; like the labour of
climbing an hill.
What an uphill labour muſt it be to a learner, who has
thoſe firſt rudiments to maſter at twenty years of age, which
others are taught at ten. Clariffa.
To Upho/ARD. v. a. [up and hoard.] To treaſure; to ſtore;
to accumulate in private places.
Heaps of huge words uphoarded hideouſly
With horrid ſound, though having little ſenſe,
They think to be chief praiſe of poetry;
And thereby wanting due intelligence,
Have marr'd the face of goodly poeſie,
And made a monſter of their fantaſie. Spenſºr.
If thou haſt uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treaſure, in the womb of earth,
Speak of it. Shakeſpeare.
To Up Hold. v. a. preter, upheld; and part, paſt. upheld, and
upholden. [up and hold.]
1. To lift on high.
The mournful train with groans and hands upheld,
Befought his pity. Dryden.
2. To ſupport; to ſuſtain ; to keep from falling.
While life uphold; this arm,
This arm upholds the houſe of Lancaſter. Shakeſp.
This great man found no means to continue and uphold
his ill-purchaſed greatneſs, but by reječting the Engliſh law,
and aſſuming, in lieu thereof, the barbarous cuſtoms of the
Iriſh. Davies's Ireland.
Poetry and painting were upheld by the ſtrength of imagina-
- tion. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
3. To keep from declenſion.
There is due from the judge to the advocate ſome com-
mendation, where cauſes are fair pleaded; for that upholds in
the client the reputation of his council, and beats down in
him the conceit of his cauſe. Bacon.
Never was a time, when the interpoſition of the magiſtrate
was more neceſſary, to ſecure the honour of religion, and
uphold the authority of thoſe great principles, by which his own
authority is beſt upheld. Atterbury.
4. To ſupport in any ſtate of life.
Many younger brothers have neither lands nor means to
uphold themſelves. Raleigh.
5. To continue; to keep from defeat,
Divers, although peradventure not willing to be yoked
with elderſhips, yet were contented to uphold oppoſition againſt
biſhops, not without greater hurt to the courſe of their whole
proceedings. Hooker.
6. To keep from being loſt.
Faulconbridge,
In ſpite of ſpite, alone uphold, the day. Shakeſpeare.
7. To continue without failing.
A deaf perſon, by obſerving the motions of another man's
mouth, knows what he ſays, and upholds a current communi-
cation of diſcourſe with him. Płolder.
8. To continue in being.
As Nebuchodnoſor liveth, who hath ſent thee for the up-
holding of every living thing. judith xi. 7.
A due proportion is held betwixt the parts, as well in the
natural body of man, as the body politick of the ſtate, for
the upholding of the whole. Hakewill.
UPHo LDER. m. ſ. [from uphold.]
1. A ſupporter.
Suppoſe then Atlas ne'er ſo wiſe:
Yet when the weight of kingdoms lies
Too long upon his ſingle ſhoulders,
Sink down he muſt, or find upholders. Swift.
2. A ſuſtainer in being.
The knowledge thercof is ſo many manudućtions to the
*nowledge and admiration of the infinite wiſdom of the crº-
tor and upholder of them. Hale.
3. An undertaker; one who provides for funerals.
The Sºmpany of upholders have a right upon the bodies of
the ſubjects. c Arbuthnot.
Where the braſs knocker wrapt in flannel band,
Forbid; the thunder of the footman's hand ;
I h uphelder, rueful harbinger of death,
Waits with impatience for i. dying breath. Gay.
Ui Ho'1's TE RER. m. ſ. [A corruption of nºi,
furniſhés houſes; * ſº º who
furniture. eds and
If a corner of the hanging wan cle nai
the uphol/lerer. ging tº a ſingle nail, ſend for
Mere wax as yet, you faſhion him with eaſe
Your barber, cook, uphºlſterer. 2
Uſer:A.N.D. m.ſ.. [up and land.] Higher ground.
Men at firſt, after the flood, liv'd in the upland; and fi
of the mountains, and by degrees ſunk into the plains hº
U‘PLAND. adj. Higher in ſituation. -
Thoſe in Cornwall do no more by nature than others elſ
where by choice, conceive themſelves an eſtranged º,
from the u, and dwellers, and carry an emulation . ety
Swift.
P%é.
des
7tſ.
gainſt
them. Carew's Survey of Cº.
Sometimes with ſecure delight, y ºf Cornwall,
The upland Hamlets will invite. Miltºn
UPLA's Dish. adj. [from upland.] Mountainous; inhabiting
In Ouilt a 111s.
S Lion-like, uplandiſh, and mere wild,
lave to his pride; and all his nerves being naturally ---
Of º ſtrength; ſtalks out and prey. º
heep. Chapman's Iliad:
To UPLA’Y. v. a. ſup and lay.] To hoard; to º
We are but farmers of ourſelves; yet may,
If we can ſtock ourſelves and thrive, uplay
Much, much good treaſure for the great rent-day. Donne
To UPLI'Ft. v. a. [up and lift.] To raiſe aloft. -
Mechanick ſlaves,
With greaſy aprons, rules, and hammers, ſhall
Uplift us to the vicw. Shakeſp. Ant, and Chºtara.
The baniſh'd Bolingbroke repeals himſelf, -
And, with uplifted arms, is ſafe arriv'd
At Ravenſpurg. Shaft, Rich. II.
Together both, with next t'almighty arm
Uplifted imminent, one ſtroke they aim'd. Milton.
Satan talking to his neareſt mate,
With head uplift above the wave, and eyes
That ſparkling blaz'd. Milton's Par. Lºft, b, i.
When by juſt vengeance guilty mortals periſh,
The gods behold their puniſhment with pleaſure,
And lay th’ uplifted thunder-bolt aſide. Ziºn's Cato.
Songs, ſonnets, epigrams, the winds uplift,
And whiſk them back to Evans, Young and Swift. Pope.
U'PMost, adj. [an irregular ſuperlative formed from up. J
Higheſt; topmoſt.
Away! ye ſkum,
That ſtill riſe upmoſt when the nation boils;
That have but juſt enough of ſenſe to know
The maſter's voice, when rated to depart. Dryden.
Upo'N. prep. [up and on.]
1. Not under; noting being on the top or outſide.
As I did ſtand my watch upon the hill,
I look'd toward Birnam; and anon methought
The wood began to move. Shałºff. Malth.
2. Thrown over the body, as cloaths.
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, throw her night-gown
wpon her. Shakespeare. Malth,
3. By way of imprecation or inflićtion.
Hard-hearted Clifford take me from the world;
My ſoul to heav'n, my blood upon your heads. Shakſtart.
4. It expreſſes obteſtation, or proteſtation.
How that I ſhould murder her ? -
Upon the love, and truth, and vows, which I ! Shakesp
Have made to thy command!–I, her -her blood! Shah.
5. It is uſed to expreſs any hardſhip or miſchief
If we would neither impoſe upon ourſelves, nº º:
we muſt lay aſide that fallacious method of sº
lump. -
6. In *nºne of. Now little in uſe. laint
Let me not find you before me again upºn an complai
whatſoever. Shakeſp. Meaſureſ. º:
Then the princes of Germany had but a du | . am-
greatneſs of Spain, upon a general apprehenſion of º:
bitious deſigns of that nation. ificence that
They were entertained with the greateſt magnihº Bacon.
could be, upon no greater warning. ſecond cogita-
I wiſh it may not be concluded, leſt, upon ſeco #.
tions, there ſhould be cauſe to alter. diſcontent
Theſe forces took hold of divers; in ſome *. º º
in ſome upon annbition, in ſome upon lº. . mo
change, and in ſome few upon conſcience and belief, bu ſome 0
upon ſimplicity; and in divers out of dependance upon diſh.
the better ſort, who did in ſecret favour theſe bruits. did rebel
He made a great difference between people º l Batºn.
upon wantonneſs, and them that did rebel upon wº they are
Upon pity they were taken away, upºn ignoranc Hººd.
again demanded. lieved to be
Promiſes can be of no force, unleſs they" º rced by
conditional, and unleſs that duty propoſed to be into -
iticſ, 1%."
them, be acknowledged to be part of that conditiºn, º:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U P O
-
º performance of which thoſe promiſes do, and upon the neglećt
~, of which thoſe promiſes ſhall not belong to any. Hammond.
sº The carl of Cleveland, a man of ſignal courage, and an
excellent officer upon any bold enterpriſe, advanced. Clarendon.
The king had no kindneſs for him upon an old account,
as remembering the part he had acted againſt the earl of
Strafford. Clarendon, b. viii.
º, Though fin offers itſelf in never ſo pleaſing and alluring a
- dreſs at firſt, yet the remorſe and inward regrets of the ſoul,
tºpon the commiſſion of it, infinitely overbalance thoſe faint
and tranſient gratifications. South's Sermons.
The common corruption of human nature, upon the bare
ſtock of its original depravation, docs not uſually proceed
--- fo far. South's Sermons.
When we make judgments upon general preſumptions,
they are made rather from the temper of our own ſpirit, than
- from reaſon. Burnet.
º, 'Tis not the thing that is done, but the intention in doing
- - it, that makes good or evil. There's a great difference betwixt
* - what we do upon force, and what upon inclination. L’Eſtrange.
- The determination of the will u, on enquiry, is following
the direétion of that guide. Locke.
There broke out an irreparable quarrel between their pa-
rents; the one valuing himſelf too much upon his birth, and
the other upon his poſleſſions. Spectator, N° 164.
--- The deſign was diſcovered by a perſon, as much noted for
º- his ſkill in gaming, as in politicks, upon the baſe, mercenary
- - end of getting money by wagers. Swift.
6. In immediate conſequence of.
--- Waller ſhould not make advantage upon that enterprize,
to find the way open to him to march into the weſt. Clarendon.
A louder kind of ſound was produced by the impetuous
eruptions of the halituous flames of the ſalt-petre, upon caſt-
ing a live coal thereon. Boyle.
- - - So far from taking little advantages againſt us for every
º failing, that he is willing to pardon our moſt wilful miſcar-
-- riages, upon our repentance and amendment. Tillotſon.
Upon lefſening intereſt to four per cent. you fall the price of
your native commodities, or leſſen your trade. Locke.
The mind, u on the ſuggeſtion of any new notion, runs
immediately after ſimilies, to make it the clearer. Locke.
- If, upon the peruſal of ſuch writings, he does not find
himſelf delighted; or if, upon reading the admired paſſages in
ſuch authors, he finds a coldneſs and indifference in his
thoughts, he ought to conclude, that he wants the faculty of
diſcovering them. Speciator, N° 409.
This advantage we loſt upon the invention of fire-arms. Addison
7. In a ſtate of view. -
Is it upon record or elſe reported
Succeſſively, from age to age : Shakeſp. Rich. III.
- The next heroes we meet with upon record were Romulus
--- Numa. Temple.
The atheiſts taken notice of among the antients, are left
branded upon the records of hiſtory. Locke.
- 8. Suppoſing a thing granted. - -
- If you ſay neceſſity is the mother of arts and inventions,
and there was no neceſſity before, and therefore theſe things
were ſlowly invented, this is a good anſwer upon our ſup-
poſition. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
9. Relating to a ſubject.
Ambitious Conſtance would not ceaſe,
--- *Till ſhe had kindled France, and all the world,
- Upon the right and party of her ſon. Shakeſp. K. john.
º Yet when we can intreat an hour to ſerve,
- Would ſpend it in ſome words upon that buſineſs,
• If you would grant the time. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
-: Upon this, I remember a ſtrain of refined civility, that
when any woman went to ſee another of equal birth, ſhe
- worked at her own work in the other's houſe. Temple.
... ºr 10. With reſpect to. -
- The king's ſervants, who were ſent for, were examined
apon all queſtions propoſed to them. Dryden.
11. In conſideration of. -
Upon the whole matter, and humanly ſpeaking, I doubt
there was a fault ſomewhere. - Dryden.
Upon the whole, it will be neceſſary to avoid that perpetual
º, rcpetition of the ſame epithets which we find in Homer. Pope.
• 12. In noting a particular day. - - -
* , Conſtantia he looked upon as given away to his rival, utºn
the day on which their marriage was to be ſolemnized. Addison.
13. Noting reliance or truſt.
-- We now may boldly ſpend upon the hope
º Of what is to come in. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
- God commands us, by our dependance upon his truth and
his holy word, to believe a fact that we do not underſtand :
and this is no more than what we do every day in the works
of nature, upon the credit of men of learning. Swift.
14. Near to ; noting ſituation.
- The enemy lodged themſelves at Aldermaſton, and thoſe
- from Newberry and Reading, in two other villages upon the
river Kennet, over which he was to paſs. Clarendon.
U P R
, The LuçHueſe plead preſcription for hunting in one of the
duke's foreſts, that lies tºpon their frontiers. c Addicn
I 5. On pain of. 2, vſ.
. To ſuch a ridiculous degree of truſting her ſhe had br
him, that ſhe cauſed him ind uS .*. wpon º
we ſhould do whatſoever ſhe commanded us. Sidney, b. ii
16. At the time of; on occaſion of … x * * * * *
Impartially examine the merits and condućt of the prºſy-
º º . great events, and the pretenſions to fa-
our which they challenge u - -
17. By iº. ge upon them. Swift.
º it, º diſcourſes of government and obedience,
*pon his principlcs, would be to n -
18. Noting º, o purpoſe. Lºcke.
He preſently loſt the fight of what he on : his mix
was filled ... º confuſion. was upon ; º
19. Noting particular pace. -
Provide ourſelves of the virtuoſo's ſaddle, which will be
ſure to amble, when the world is upon the hardeſt trot. Dryden
20. Exactly; according to. ------
In goodly form comes on the enemy;
And by the ground they hide, I judge the number
Upon or near the rate of thirty thouſand. Shakespeare.
21. By ; noting the means of ſupport.
Upon a cloſer inſpection of theſe bodies, the ſhells are
affixed to the ſurfaces of them in ſuch a manner, as bodies,
lying on the ſea-ſhores, upon which they live. J/oodward.
U(PPER. adj. [a comparative from up.]
1. Superiour in place; higher.
Give the forehead a majeſtick grace, the mouth ſiniling ;
which you ſhall do by making a thin upper lip, and ſhadow.
ing the mouth line a little at the corners. Peacham.
Our knight did bear no leſs a pack
Of his own buttocks on his back;
Which now had almoſt got the upper
Hand of his head, for want of crupper. Hudibra;.
The underſtanding was then clear, and the ſoul's upper
region lofty and ſerene, free from the vapours of the inférior
affections. South's Semons.
With ſpeed to night repair:
For not the gods, nor angry Jove will bear
Thy lawleſs wand'ring walks in upper air.
Deep as the dark infernal waters lie,
From the bright regions of the chearful ſky;
So far the proud aſcending rocks invade
Heav'n's upper realms, and caſt a dreadful ſhade. Addiſon.
2. Higher in power.
The like corrupt and unreaſonable cuſtom prevailed far,
and got the upper-hand of right reaſon with the greateſt
part. Hocker, b. i.
Uppe R Most. adj. [ſuperlative from upper.]
1. Higheſt in place.
The waters, called the waters above the heavens, are
but the clouds, and waters engendered in the uppermoſt
air. - Raleigh.
In all things follow nature, not painting clouds in the
bottom of your piece, and waters in the uppe, mºſt
parts. 1 ryden.
2. Higheſt in power or authority.
The lower powers are gotten uppermº/?, and we ſee like
men on our heads, as Plato obſerved of old, that on the right
hand, which is indeed on our left. Glanville.
'Tis all one to the common people who's uppermºff. L'E/ir.
This ſpecies of diſcretion will carry a man ſafe through all
parties, ſo far, that whatever faction happens to be uſperºn:/t,
Dryden. {
his claim is allowed for a ſhare. Swift.
3. Predominant; moſt powerful.
As in perfumes compos'd with art and coſt,
'Tis hard to ſay what ſcent is uppermºſt 5
Nor this part muſk or civet can we call,
Or amber, but a rich reſult of all ;
So ſhe was all a ſweet. Dryden.
Uppish. adj. [from up..] Proud; arrºgant. A low word.
To UPRA’Ise. v. a. ſup and raiſe.] To raiſe up 3 to exalt.
This would interrupt his joy iſ:
In our confuſion, and our joy upraſ. y --
In his diſturbance. A/ilton's Par. Lºft, b. ii.
To Upre’AR, v.a. [up and rear.]. To re; on high.
Heav'n-born charity thy bleſſings ſhed ;
Bid meagre want uprºar he ſickly head. . . . Gay.
Upright. ºff. [up and right. This word, with its derivatives,
is in proſe accented on the firſt ſyllable ; but in poetry ſeems
to be accented indifferently on ºft or ſecond.]
. Straight up; perpendicularly erº. - -
I *... hair; look! look it flands ºf ight. Shº.
They are a right as the palm-tree. fºr x.
In the morning, taking of ſomewhat of eaſy digeſtion,
as milk, furthers houriſhment: but this would be done ſitting
at the milk may paſs more ſpeedily to the fºr
at th y Bacon's Nat. Hiſſ.
upright, th
mach.
36 D A tree
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U P R
U P S
A tree at firſt ſetting, ſhould not be ſhaken; and therefore
put two little forks about the bottom of your trees, to keep
them utright. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Circe, the daughter of the ſun; whoſe charms
whoever taſted loſt his upright ſhape,
And downward fell into a grov'ling ſwine. Milton.
Forthwith upright he rears from off the pool -
His mighty ſlature. Milton's Par. Loft, b. i.
You have the orthography, or upright of this ground-plat,
and the explanation thereof, with a ſcale of feet and
inches. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
2. Ereğted; pricked up.
All have their ears upright, waiting when the watchword
ſhall come, that they ſhould all ariſe unto rebellion. Sº enſer.
Stood Theodore ſurpriz'd in deadly fright,
With chatt’ring teeth, and briſtling hair upright. Dryden.
3. Honeſt; not declining from the right. - - -
Such neighbour nearneſs ſhou'd not partialize
Th’ unſtooping firmneſs of my upright ſoul. Shakespeare  care.
How haſt thou inſtill'd
Thy malice into thouſands, once upright
And faithful, now prov’d falſe ! Milton's Par. Loft.
The moſt upright of mortal men was he ,
The moſt ſincere, and holy woman, ſhe. Dryden.
Uprightly. adv. [from upright.]
1. Perpendicularly to the horizon.
2. Honeſtly; without deviation from the right.
Men by nature apter to rage than deceit ; not greatly am-
bitious, more than to be well and uprightly dealt with. Sidney.
Princes in judgment, and their delegate judges, muſt judge
the cauſes of all perſons uprightly and impartially, without
any perſonal conſideration. Taylor.
To live uprightly then is ſure the beſt,
To ſave ourſelves, and not to damn the reſt. Dryden.
U/PRIGHTNEss. n.ſ. (from upright.]
1. Perpendicular erection.
So the fair tree, which ſtill preſerves
Her fruit and ſtate, while no wind blows,
In ſtorms from that uprightneſs ſwerves,
And the glad earth about her ſtrows
With treaſure from her yielding boughs. J/aller.
2. Honeſty; integrity.
The hypocrite bends his principles and practice to the faſhion
of a corrupt world; but the truly upright man is inflexible in
his uprightneſs, and unalterable in his purpoſe. Atterbury.
To UPR1's E. v. m. [up and riſe J
I. To riſe from decumbiture.
Early, before the morn with crimſon ray,
The windows of bright heaven opened had,
Through which into the world the dawning day
Might look, that maketh every creature glad,
Uproſe Sir Gyon. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Thouknoweſt my down-ſitting and mine spriſing. P/.cxxxix.
proſe the virgin with the morning light,
Obedient to the viſion of the night. Pope.
2. To riſe from below the horizon.
Uproſe the ſun. Cowley.
3. To riſe with acclivity.
Was that the king that ſpurr'd his horſe ſo hard
Againſt the ſteep upriſing of the hill Shakeſpeare.
UPR1's E m. ſ. Appearance above the horizon.
Did ever raven ſing ſo like a lark,
That gives ſweet tidings of the ſun's upriſº Shakeſpeare.
U“PROAR. m. ſ. ſoproer, Dutch. This word likewiſe is ac-
cented on the firſt ſyllable in proſe; in verſe, indifferently on
either. J Tumult; buſtle; diſturbance; confuſion.
The Jews which believed not, ſet all the city on an
wproar. Acis Xvii. 5.
It were well if his holineſs had not ſet the world in an
1proar, by nouriſhing of war. Raleigh.
He levied forces in a diſorder'd uproar, albeit the treaſon
reſted in him and ſome other his complices. Hayward.
Others with vaſt Typhaean rage more fell, -
Rend up both rocks and hills, and ride the air
In whirlwind ; hell ſcarce holds the wild uproar. Milton.
Horror thus prevail'd,
And wild uproar! ah, who at length will end
This long pernicious fray ? Philips.
The impiety of this ſentiment ſet the audience in an up-
roar; and made Socrates, though an intimate friend of the
pºet, go out of the theatre with indignation. Addison.
Tº 9°Foa R. v. a. [from the noun..] To throw into confuſion.
Not in uſe.
Had I power, I ſhould
Pour the ſweet milk of concord into hell,
Lºcar the univerſal peace, confound
All unity on earth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To U'P Roof. v.a. [up and rººt.] To tear up by the root.
Orpheus could lºad the ſavage race, -
And trees ufrºsted left their place,
Scquacious of the lyre:
But bright Cecilia rais'd the wonder higher
When to her organ vocal breath was º,
An angel heard, and ſtraight appear'd,
Miſtaking earth for heav'n, Drydºn
To UPR of Use - ryder,
9/9*. º. a. [up and rouſe.] To waken from ſ.
to excite to action. P;
Thou art uprous’d by ſome diſemperature.
U’pshot. n ſ. ſº and ſº Č. end ; jº.
final event. &gt; mount;
With this he kindleth his ambitious ſpighte
To like deſire and praiſe of noble fame, *
The only upſhot, whereto he doth aim. Hºllard, Talk
I cannot purſue with any ſafety this ſport to the upſhot. shi.
In this upſhot, purpoſes miſtook -
Fall on th’ inventor's heads. Shakeſheare', Hamla
Every leading demonſtration to the main ºn of i.
which is the proportion betwixt the ſphere and cylinder, is .
pledge of the wit and reaſon of that mathematičian. M.
Upon the upſhot, afflictions are but the methods of a mer.
ful providence, to force us upon the only means of ſetting
matters right. L'Eſtrange.
Here is an end of the matter, ſays the prophet: here is the
upſhot and reſult of all ; here terminate both the prophecies
of Daniel and St. John. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
Let's now make an end of matters Peaceably, as we ſhall
quickly come to the upſhot of our affair. Arbuthnºt,
At the upſhºt, after a life of perpetual application, to re-
flect that you have been doing nothing for yourſelf, and that
the ſame or leſs induſtry might have gained you a friendſhip
that can never deceive or end; a glory, which, though not
to be had till aſter death, yet ſhall be felt and enjoy'd to eter.
nity. Pott.
U’pside down. [an adverbial form of ſpeech..] With total re-
verſement; in complete diſorder; with the lower part above
the higher.
In his lap a maſs of coin he told,
And turned upſide down to feed his eye,
And covetous deſire, with his huge treaſure. Fairy Queen.
The flood did not ſo turn upſide dºwn the face of the earth,
as thereby it was made paſt knowledge, after the waters were
decreaſed. Raleigh's Hiſ ºf the World.
The ſevere notions of chriſtianity turned all this ºftle
down, filling all with ſurprize and amazement. They came
upon the world, like light darting full upon the face of a
man aſleep, who had a mind not to be diſturbed. South.
U’PsPRING.. n.ſ.. [up and ſpring.] This word ſeems to ſignify
upſtart; a man ſuddenly exalted.
The king doth wake to-night, and takes his rouſe;
Keeps waffel, and the ſwaggring upſpring reels. Shatſº;
To Upst A'Nd. v. n. [up and ſland.j To be erected.
Sea calves unwonted to freſh rivers fly;
The water ſnakes with ſcales upſtanding die. Maj.
To Upsta’Y. v. a. [up and ſay..] To ſuſtain; to ſupport
Them ſhe up/lays
Gently with myrtle band; mindleſs the while !
Herſelf, though faireſt unſupported flow'r. . . Milton,
To Upsta'RT. v. n. [up and ſtart.] To ſpring "P ſud-
denly.
He upſtarted brave
Out of the well, wherein he drenched lay,
As eagle freſh out of the ocean wave. Sºſr,
Thus having ſpoke, he ſat ; thus anſwer'd then,
Up/?arting from his throne, the king of men, den
His breaſt with fury fill’d. - º:
U’rst ART. n.ſ. [up and ſtart.] One ſuddenly raiſed”" t
power, or honour; what ſuddenly riſes and appeº". d
Two hundred in a place will be enough for the º:
of that country, and keeping under all ſudden º . d
ſhall ſeek to trouble the peace thereof. spºnſºr's Iraq".
My rights and royalties d gi ay
Pluckt from my arms perforce, and given aw
To upſtart º sº.
Muſhrooms have two ſtrange properties; * *º: up
they yield ſo delicious a meat; the other, that they º an
ſo haſtily, even in a night, and yet they arº unlow º
therefore ſuch as are upſtarts in ſtate, they call in º ift
muſhrooms. Bacºn'; Nat. H%
# where theſe
The king did not negle&amp;t Ireland, the ſoil *:
muſhrooms and up/art weeds, that ſpring "P" " .
did chiefly proſper.
A place of bliſs - -
In the purlieus of heav'n, and therein plac'd
A race of upſtart creatures, to ſupply... , b. ii
Perhaps our vacant room. 2. Milton's Par. Lyl, b. '
- Inordinate deſires,
And up/?art paſſions, catch the government..., ºf-
From #. &gt; g Milton f º %.
Mean up/arts, when they come once to be ºE.i. ange,
get their fathers. Trade,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U R C
Trade, he ſaid, carried from us the commodities of our
country, and made a parcel of up/?arts, as rich as men of
the moſt antient families. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 22.
* . Tº Urswa RM. v. a. [up and ſwarm.j To raiſe in a fºam.
sº Out of uſe.
You've taken up the ſubječts of my father;
And both againſt the voice of heav'n and him
- Have here up waſ m'd them. . Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
To UPTA'ke. º. a. [up and take.j To take into the hands.
º: He hearkned to his reaſon, and the child
- Uptaking, to the palmer gave to bear. Fairy Queen.
To Upt RAIN. v. a. [up and train..] To bring up 3 to edu-
-- cate. Not uſed.
- King Lear in happy peace long reign'd,
But had no iſſue male him to ſucceed,
"... But three fair daughters, which were well up train'd
“. . In all that ſeem'd fit for kingly ſeed. Fairy Queen.
-- To UPTU'RN. v. a. [up and turn..] To throw up ; to furrow.
So ſcented the grim feature, and upturn'd
-- His noſtrils wide into the murky air. Milton.
Beyond all marks, with many a giddy round
- Down ruſhing, it upturns a hill of ground. Pope.
º U’Pw ARD. adj. [up and pearb, Saxon.] Directed to a higher part.
- Spread upon a lake, with upward eye,
A plump of fowl behold their foe on high. Dryden.
- The angel ſaid,
-- With upward ſpecd his agile wings he ſpread. Prior.
- U'Pw ARD. m. ſ. The top. Out of uſe
- From th' extreameft upward of thy head,
To the deſcent and duſt below thy foot,
A moſt toad-ſpotted traitor.
/
§:... ładv. [up and peanb.]
1. Towards a higher place.
I thought
To ſmooth your paſſage, and to ſoften death:
For I j have you, when you upward move,
Speak kindly of me to our friends above.
- - In ſheets of rain the ſky deſcends,
- * And ocean ſwell'd with waters upwards tends;
-- One riſing, falling one ; the heav'ns and ſea
* * * Meet at their confines, in the middle way. Dryden.
- - A man on a cliff, is at liberty to leap twenty yards down-
. wards into the ſea, not becauſe he has power to do the con-
- trary action, which is to leap twenty yards upwards, for that
he cannot do; but he is therefore free, becauſe he has a
power to leap, or not to leap. Locke.
2. Towards heav'n and God.
Looking inward, we are ſtricken dumb ; looking upward,
we ſpeak and prevail. Hooker, b. v.
3. With reſpect to the higher part.
Dagon, ſea-monſter upward man,
And downward fiſh. Milton's Par. Loft, b. i.
- 4. More than ; with tendency to a higher or greater number.
- * Their counſel muſt ſeem very unſeaſonable, who adviſe
men now to ſuſpect that, wherewith the world hath had, by
their own account, twelve hundred years acquaintance and
wpwards, enough to take away ſuſpicion. Hooker, b. v.
I have been your wife in this obedience
Upward of twenty years; and have been bleſt
With many children by you. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
º 5. Towards the ſource.
Be Homer's works your ſtudy;
º Thence form your judgment, thence your notions bring,
-- And trace the muſes upward to their ſpring. Pope.
To Upwi'Nd. v. a. pret. and paſſ, upwound. [up and wind.]
To convolve. w
Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Dryden.
º As ſhe lay upon the dirty ground, 2
- Her huge long tail her den all overſpread; -
- Yet was in knots and many boughts upwound. Fa. Queen.
URBA/Nity. n.ſ.. [urbanité, Fr. urbanitas, Lat..] Civility; ele-
gance ; politeneſs; merriment; facetiouſneſs.
A ruſtical ſeverity baniſhes all urbanity, whoſe harmleſs
condition is conſiſtent with religion. Brown's Pulg. Erreurs.
. . Raillery is the ſauce of civil entertainment; and without
*. ſome ſuch tinéture of urbanity, good humour falters. L'Eſtr.
Moral doćtrine, and urbanity, or well-mannered wit, con-
&amp; ſtitute the Roman ſatire. - - Dryden.
U’Rchi N. n.ſ.. [heureuchin, Armorick; erinaceus, Lat.]
º 1. A hedge-hog.
Urchins ſhall, for that vaſt of night that they may work,
º, All exerciſe on thee. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ?.
A thouſand fiends, a thouſand hiſing ſnakes,
Ten thouſand ſwelling toads, as many urchins,
Would make ſuch fearful and confuſed cries,
- As any mortal body, hearing it, -
º Would ſtraight fall mad. Shakespeare. Titus Andronicus.
That nature deſigns the preſervation of the more infirm
creatures, by the defenſive armour it hath given them, is
demonſtrable in the common hedge-hog, or urchin. Ray.
* A name of ſlight anger to a child.
Pleas'd Cupid heard, and check'd his mother's pride :
And Who's blind now, mamma; the urº 'd.
Tis Cloe's eye, and cheek, and lip, and breaſt:
Friend Howard's genius fancy'd all the reſt.
URE. n.ſ. Pračice; uſe ; habit. Obſolete.
s the warrant ſufficient for any man's conſcience to build
ſuch Fººdings upon, as are and have been put in ure for
the eſtabliſhment of that cauſ. - Hooker.
He wºuld keep his hand in ºr, with ſomewhat of greater
value, till he was brought to juſtice. L'Érang.
U'Ret ER. m.ſ. [uretere, ºf JU, eters are two long and ſmāśī.
from the baſon of the kidnies, one on each ſide. They lie be-
tween the doubling of the Pºitonaeum, and deſcending in the
form of an S, pierce the bladder near its neck, where the
run firſt ſome ſpace betwixt its coats, and then they sº
in its cavity. Their uſe is to carry the urine from the
kidnies to the bladder. &amp;Miny -
The kidnies and ureters ſerve for expurgation. Iſºmº,
U‘RETHRA, n.ſ.. [uretre, Fr J. The paſſage of the urine.
Caruncles are looſe fleſh, ariſing in the urethra. It’.iſeman.
To URGE. v. a. ſurgeo, Lat.] -
I. To incite; to puſh.
You do miſtake your buſineſs: my brother
Did urge me in his act. $%ałºp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
He pleaded ſtill not guilty; - -
The king's attorney, on the contrary,
Urg'd on examinations, proofs, confeſſions,
Of divers witneſſes. Shakeſp. Hen, VIII.
What I have done my ſafety urg'd me to. Shakeſpeare.
This urges me to fight, and fires my mind. Dryden.
High Epidaurus urges on my ſpeed,
Fam'd for his hills, and for his horſes breed. Dryden.
The heathens had but uncertain apprehenſions of what urger
men moſt powerfully to forſake their fins. Tillotſon.
He, ſeiz'd with horror, in the ſhades of night, ""
Through the thick deſarts headlong urg’d his flight. Pope.
2. To provoke 5 to exaſperate.
Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
But think upon my grief.
3. To follow cloſe, ſo as to impell. -
Man 2 and for ever ? wretch! what wouldſ; thou have 2
Prior.
Shakeſ, tare.
Heir urges heir, like wave impelling wave. Pope.
4. To labour vehemently.
5. To preſs; to enforce.
The enemy's in view ; draw up your powers;
Your haſte is now urg'd on you. Shakeſpeare.
Urge your petitions in the ſtreet. Shakeſp. jul. Caſar.
And great Achilles urge the Trojan fate. Dryden.
6. To preſs as an argument.
Urge the neceſſity and ſtate of times,
And be not peeviſh. Shakeſpeare's Rich. III.
7. To importune; to ſolicit.
He urged ſore,
With piercing words and pitiful implore,
Him haſty to ariſe. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
. To preſs in oppoſition, by way of objećtion.
Though every man have a right in diſpute to urge a falſe
religion, with all its abſurd conſequences; yet it is barbarous
incivility ſcurrilouſly to ſport with that which others account
religion. Tillotſon.
To URGE. v. n. To preſs forward.
A palace, when 'tis that which it ſhould be,
Stands ſuch, or elſe decays:
But he which dwells there is not ſo ; for he
Strives to urge upward, and his fortune raiſe. Dznne.
U’RGENCY. m. ſ. [from urgent.] Preſſure of difficulty or neceſ-
... ſity." -
"sing for ſome hours extremely preſſed by the neceſſities of
mature, I was under great difficulties between urgency and
ſhame. Gulliver's Travels.
U(RGENt. adj. [urgent, Fr. urgens, Lat.]
1. Cogent; preſſing; violent. - -
Things ſo ordained are to be kept ; howbeit not neceſſarily,
any longer than till there grow ſome urgent cauſe to ordain
the contrary. ' Hooker, b. iv.
8
Not alone
The death of Fulvia, but more urgent touches, -
Do ſtrongly ſpeak t'us. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
This ever hath been that true cauſe of more wars, than
upon all other occaſions, though it leaſt partakes of the urgent
neceſſity of ſtate. - - Raleigh.
Let à father ſeldom ſtrike, but upon very urgent neceſſity,
and as the laſt remedy. Locke on Education.
2. Importunate; vehement in ſolicitation.
The Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they
might ſend them out in haſte. Exod. xii. 33.
U’rdently. adv. [from urgent.] Cogently ; violently; vehe-
mently ; importunately.
Acrimony
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U S -
U S E
Acrimony in their blood, and afflux of humours to their
lungs, urgently indicate phlebotomy. - - Harvey.
U’rcer. n.ſ. (from urge.] One who preſſes; importuner.
I wiſh Pope were as great an urger as 1. Swift.
U/Roſewonder. n.ſ. A ſort of grain.
This barley is called by ſome urgewonder.
PRIM. m. /.
U Urim ſº thummim were ſomething in Aaron's breaſt-
plate; but what, criticks and commentators are by no means
agreed. The word urim ſignifies light, and thummim per-
föötion. It is moſt probable that they were only names given
to ſignify the clearneſs and certainty of the divine anſwers
which were obtained by the high prieſt conſulting God with
his breaſt-plate on, in contradiſtinétion to the obſcure, enig-
matical, uncertain, and imperfect anſwers of the heathen
oracles. Newton's Notes on Milton.
He in coeleſtial panoply, all arm'd
Of radiant urim, work divinely wrought. Milton.
U'RIN al. n.ſ. [urinal, Fr. from urine.] A bottle, in which
water is kept for inſpection.
Theſe follies ſhine through you, like the water in an uri-
mal. Shakeſpeare's Two Gentlemen of Perona.
A candle out of a muſket will pierce through an inch
Mortimer.
board, or an urinal force a nail though a plank. Brown.
This hand, when glory calls,
Can brandiſh arms, as well as urinals. Garth.
Some with ſcymitars in their hands, and others with uri-
mals, ran to and fro. Speciator, N° 159.
URINARY. adj. [from urine.] Relating to the urine.
The urachos or ligamentous paſſage is derived from the
bottom of the bladder, whereby it diſchargeth the wateriſh
and urinary part of its contents. Brown's Wulg. Er, ours.
Diureticks that relax the urinary paſſages, ſhould be tried
before ſuch as ſtimulate. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
U’RIN AT ve. adj. Working by urine; provoking urine.
Medicines urinative do not work by rejection and indigeſtion,
as ſolutive do. - Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
UR INA'tor. m. ſ. ſurinate:r, Fr. urinator, Lat.] A diver; one
who ſearches under water.
The precious things that grow there, as pearl, may be
much more eaſily fetched up by the help of this, than by any
other way of the urinators. //ilkins's Math. A/gic.
Thoſe relations of urinators belong only to thoſe places
where they have dived, which are always rocky. Ray.
URINE. m. ſ. [u ine, Fr. u, ina, Lat..] Animal water.
Drink, Sir, is a great provoker of noſe-painting, ſleep,
and urine. Shakeſpeare.
As though there were a ſeminality in urine, or that, like
the ſeed, it carried with it the idea of every part, they fooliſhly
believe we can viſibly behold therein the anatomy of every
particle. Brown's /ulgar Errours.
The chyle cannot paſs by urine nor ſweat. Arbuthnot.
To URINE. v. n. [u, iner, Fr. from the noun..] To make
Water.
Places where men urine commonly, have ſome ſmell of
violets. Bacon’s Nat. Hi/?.
No oviparous animal, which ſpawn or lay eggs, doth urine,
except the tortoiſe. Brown's /ulg. Errours.
URINous. adj. [from urine.] Partaking of urine.
The putrid matter being diſtilled, affords a water impreg-
nated with an urinous ſpirit, like that obtainable from animal
ſubſtances. Arbuthnot on Aliments,
URN. n.ſ.. [urne, Fr. urna, Lat.]
1. Any veſſel, of which the mouth is narrower than the body.
Minos, the ſtrict inquiſitor,
Lives, and crimes, with his affeſſors, hears;
Round, in his urn, the blended balls he rolls;
Abſolves the juſt, and dooms the guilty ſouls. Dryden.
2. A water pot ; particularly that in the ſign of Aquarius.
The fiſh oppoſe the maid, the watry urn
With adverſe fires ſees raging Leo burn. Creech.
3. The veſſel in which the remains of burnt bodies were put.
Orlay theſe bones in an unworthy urn,
Tombleſs, with no remembrance over them. Shakespeare.
A ruſtick digging in the ground by Padua, found an urn, or
carthen pot, in which there was another urn ; and in this
leſſer, a lamp clearly burning. JWilkins.
His ſcatter'd limbs with my dead body burn;
And once more join us in the pious urn. Dryden.
URoscopy, n.ſ. [862, and ax:12.] Inſpection of urine.
In this work, attempts will exceed performances; it being
compoſed by ſnatches of time, as medical vacations, and
uroſcopy would permit. Brown's /ug. Errours.
U’RRY. n.ſ. A mineral. -
In the coal-mines they dig a blue or black clay, that lies
near the coal, commonly called urry, which is an unripe
: º is very proper for hot lands, eſpecially paſture-
In Cl. fortimer’s Hºſham/,”
Us, the oblique caſe of wº. Aſortimer’s Huſbandry.
The lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with
*, ºven us, who are all of us here alive this day, D.ut. v.
Many, O Lord, are thy wonder -
which #. to try wºrd. y wonderful works, and thy thoughts
U’SAGE. m. ſ. [uſage, Fr.] Pſ, xi. 5.
1. Treatment.
- Which way
Might'ſ thou deſerve, or they impoſe this uſ.
Coming from us? sº
The luſtre in your eye, heav'n in your º K. Lear,
Plead you fair uſage. Shakeſp. Troiſ mac
- My brother I - ºftla.
Is priſºner to the biſhop, at whoſe hands
tºº, and great liberty.
at “ſage have I met with from this .
paſſes by the very words I tranſlated, and º who
ſages; and then hectors and cries out of my jº. paſ;
Are not hawks brought to the hand, aid to . . :
3.
Shakespeare Hen. VI,
lions reclaimed by good uſage 2 -
Neptune took unkindly to be bound, L'Eſtrange,
And Eurus never ſuch hard uſage found
In his AEolian priſon. Drd
jaen.
2. Cuſtom ; practice long continued.
. Of things once received and confirmed by uſe, long war,
is a law ſufficient. In civil affairs, when there is no oit,
law, cuſtom itſelf doth ſtand for law. --
3. Manners; behaviour. Obſolete. W Hewler, b. ii.
A gentle nymph was found,
Hight Aſtery, excelling all the crew,
In courteous uſage, and unſtained hue. Spenſir
U’sAGER. m. ſ. [uſager, Fr. from uſage. -
uſe of any thing in truſt for .. | One who has the
He conſum'd the common treaſury;
Whereof he being the fimple wager
But for the ſtate, not in propriety,
Did alient’ his minions.
U’s ANce. n.ſ.. [uſance, Fr.]
I. Uſe ; proper employment.
What art thou,
That here in deſert haſt thine habitance,
And theſe rich heaps of wealth doſt hide apart
F rom the world's eye, and from her rightiſance? Speſ,
2. Uſury; intereſt paid for money.
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of uſance. Shaftºp. Merch, ºf Pºnia,
Use.. [uſus, Lat.]
1. The act of employing any thing to any purpoſe.
The ſat of the beaſt that dieth of itſelf, may be uſed in any
other uſe. Lev. vii. 24.
Number, the mind makes uſe of in meaſuring all things
by us meaſurable. Lºtke.
Conſider the hiſtory, with what'ſ our authormakesofit. Lt.
2. Qualities that make a thing proper for any purpoſe.
Rice is of excellent uſe for illneſſes of the ſtomach, that
proceed from cold or moiſt humours; a great digeſter and
reſtorer of appetite. Temple,
3. Need of; occaſion on which a thing can be employed.
This will ſecure a father to my child;
That done, I have no father uſe for life. A. Philipi,
4. Advantage received; power of receiving advantage.
More figures in a picture than are neceſſary, our authºr
calls figures to be let ; becauſe the picture has no uſt for
them. Dryden's Dufrºſº,
5. Convenience; help. -
Diſtinct growth in knowledge, carries its own light in
every ſtep of its progreſſion; than which nothing is of mº"
uſe to the underſtanding. Locłe.
Nothing would be of greater uſe towards the imprº
of knowledge and politeneſs, thān ſome effectual method for
correcting, enlarging, and aſcertaining our language; Sºft.
When will my friendſhip be of je to thee? 4. Philipi.
6. Uſage; cuſtomary ačt. -
That which thoſe nations did uſe, having been alſo in ºft
with others, the antient Roman laws do forbid. Hºº'."
He, that firſt brought the word ſham, wheedle, or banter
in uſe, put together, as he thought fit, thoſe ideas he made
it ſtand for. ºf,
7. Practice; habit.
Sweetneſs, truth, and ev'ry grace,
Which time and uſ are wont to teach,
The eye may in a moment reach,
And read diſtinctly in her face.
8. Cuſtom ; common occurrence.
O Caeſar! theſe things are beyond all iſ, . Caeſar
And I do fear them. shaftºp. juliº aſar,
. Intereſt; money paid for the uſe of money.
9 If it be º haſt received it from God, º º
thou art more obliged to pay duty and tribute, "ſº º: º
cipal to him. Taylor's Rule of Hºly º
Moſt of the learned, both heathen and £hriſtian, 0
the taking of uſe to be utterly unlawful; yet tº º it
the reformed church beyond the ſeas, do sº º
to be lawful. 8 91% To
Daniel's Civil War,
JW,allºr,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U S E
To Use. v. a. [uſir, Fr. uſiº, Lat.]
1. To employ to any purpoſe.
ou're welcome,
Moſt learned rev'rend Sir, into our kingdom ;
Uſe us and it. Shakespeare. Hen. VIII.
They could uſe both the right hand and the left, in hurl-
ing ſtones and ſhooting arrows. I Chr. xii. 2.
Two trumpets of ſilver, that thou mayeſt uſe for the calling
of the aſſembly. Num:. x. 2.
He was unhappily too much uſ… ** a check upon the Lord
Coventry; and when that lord PerPlexed their counſels with
inconvenient objections, the authority of the Lord Mancheſter
was ſtill called upon. Clarendon.
Theſe words of God to Cain, are, by many interpreters,
underſtood in a quite different ſenſe than what our auth.
1ſes them in. Locke.
That prince was %"g all his endeavours to introduce po-
pery, which he openly profeſſed. Swift.
2. To accuſtom ; to habituate.
He that intends to gain th’ Olympick prize,
Muſt we himſelf to hunger, heat and cold. Roſcommon.
Thoſe who think only of the matter, uſe themſelves only
to ſpeak extempore. Zºcke on Education.
I’ve hitherto been uſed to think
A blind officious zeal to ſerve my king,
The ruling principle. Addison's Cato.
A people long uſed to hardſhips, loſe by degrees the very
notions of liberty; they look upon themſelves as at mercy. Sw.
3. To treat.
Why doſt thou "ſº me thus? I know thee not. Shakespeare
When he came to aſkiaye ºf Solyman that he might de-
part, he was Courteouſly uſed of him. Anoles.
know
My Auſºngzebe would ne'er have nº mc ſo. Dryden.
if Virgi' or Ovid be thus iſed, 'tis no longer to be called
their work, when neither the thoughts nor words are drºwn
from the original. Dryden.
I love to uſe people according to their own ſenſe of good-
breeding. - Tatler, No 86.
Cato has us'd me ill; he has refus'd
His daughter Marcia to my ardent vows. Addison's Cat.
Sºy is gºd as the friends of tories are by whigs, and gene-
rally by tories too. Pope to Swift.
4. To practiſe.
Uſe hoſpitality one to another, without grudging. I Pet. iv.
5. To behave. Out of uſe.
Pray forgive me, if I have us'd myſelf unmannerly. Shakeſp.
To U : v. n.
I. Tº be accuſtomed; to praaiſe cuſtomarily.
They tº to place him that ſhalibºr Captain upon a
ſtone, always reſerved for that Purpoſe, and placed com-
monly upon a hill. *pºſer's State of Ireland.
In polling of trees, many do uſe to leave a bough or two
on the top, to help to draw up the ſap. Bacon.
A prudent governor, to advance religion, will not confider
men's, duty but their practice; not what they ought to do,
but what they uſe to do. South's Sermons.
2. To be cuſtomarily in any manner; to be wont.
Fea's ſº to be repreſented in ſuch an imaginary faſhion, as
they rather dazzle men's eyes, than open them. Bacon.
Snakes that ºſe within the houſe for ſhade,
Securely lurk, and, like a plague, invade
Thy cattle with venom. May's Pirgil.
The waters going and returning as the waves and great
commotioſis of the ſea uſe to do, retired leiſurely. Burnet.
Condućt me well , v. -
In theſe ſtrange ways, where never foot did 1.%. Spenſer.
3. To frequent. Obſolete.
Ye vallies low, where the mild whiſpers uſ:
Of ſhades, and wanton winds, and guſhing brooks. Milton.
U's EFUL. adj. [uſe and fall.] Convenient; profitable to any
end; conducive or helpful to any purpoſe.
Providence would only enter mankind into the uſful
knowledge of her treaſures, leaving the reſt to employ our
induſtry. A%re's Antidote.
Gold and ſilver being little uſeful to the life of man, in
Proportion to food, raiment, and carriage, has its value only
from the conſent of men. Locke.
That the legiſlature ſhould have power to change the ſuc-
ceſſion, is very "ſºſul towards preſerving our religion and li-
berty. Swift.
Peliver a particular account of the great and iſºſul things
already performed. Swift.
U's EFULLY. adv. [from "ſºftd.] In ſuch a manner as to help
forward ſome end.
In this account they muſt conſtitute two at leaſt, male and
female, in eyery ſpecies; which chance could not have made
ſo very nearly alike, without copying, nor ſo % differing,
without contrivance. entley's Sermons.
U's EFU LNess. n. J. Conduciveneſs or helpfulneſs to ſome
cnd.
U S U
. The grandeur of the °ºmmonwealth ſhows itſelf chiefly
in works that were neceſſary or convenient. On the con-
trary, the magnificence of Rome, under the emperors, was
rather for oſtentation, than any real uſefulneſs. Addiſon
'selessly. adv, ſf. ! Wi -' - ºyz.
- • adv, [from "ſºft.] Without the quality of an-
ſwering any purpoſe.
In a ſauntering humour, ſome, out of cuſtom, let a
Part of their lives run uſeleſsly *Way, without buſine
TeCreation.
UselessNess. * / [from uſelſ...] Unfitneſ, to any end.
. He made a learned diſcº. on the trouble, "ſºftneſs, and
indecency of foxes wearing tails. L'A/irange.
He would convince them of the vanity and "ſºftneſs of that
learning, which makes not the poſſeſſor a better man. South.
º adj. [from uſ...] Anſwering "9 Purpoſe; having no
CI101.
good
ſs or
Locke.
So have I ſeen the loſt clouds pour
Into the ſea an uſeleſs ſhow'r;
And the vext ſailor; curſe the rain,
For which poor ſhepherds pray'd in vain. J/aller.
The hurtful teeth ºf vipers are uſe'ſs to us, and yet are
parts of their bodies. Boyle.
His friend, on whoſe affiſtance he moſt relied, either proves
falſe and ºrſakes him, or looks on with an uſelſ; pity, and
cannot help him. *gers's Sermons.
The waterman forlorn along the ſhore,
Penſive reclines "Pon his uſely; oar. Gay.
USER. m. ſ. [from uſe,] One who uſes.
Such things, which, by imparting the delight to others,
makes the uſer thereof welcome, as muſick, dancing, hunt.
ing, feaſting, riding. - Sidney.
My lord received from the counteſs of Warwick, a lad
powerful in the $ourt, and indeed a virtuous tºſer of her
Pºwº, the beſt advice that was ever given. //otton.
U’SHER. m. ſ. ſhuiſer, Fr.]
I. One whoſe buſineſs is to introduce trangers, or walk before
a perſon of high rank.
The wife of Antony
Should have an army for an uſher, and
The neighs of horſe to tell her approach
Long erg ſhe did appear. Shakeſp. /nt, and Cleopatra.
You make guards and 4%rs march before, and then enters
your prince. Zatºrs, Nº. 53.
Gay paid his courtſhip with the croud,
As far as modeſt pride allow'd ;
Rejects a ſervile */her's place,
And leaves St. James's in diſgrace. Swift.
2. An under-teacher; one who introduces young ſcholars to
higher learning.
Though grammar profits leſs than rhetorick's, -
Yet ev’n in thoſe his uſher claims. ſhare. Dryden.
To U's HER. v. a. [from the houn..] To introduce as a fore-
runner or harbinger; to forerun.
No fun ſhall ever uſher forth my honours,
Or gild again the nobic troops that waited -
Upon my ſmiles. Shakeſpeare's Hºn. VIII.
The ſun,
Declin'd, was haſting now with prone career
To th’ ocean iſles, and in th’ aſcending ſcale
Of heav'n, the ſtars, that 1/er evening, roſe. Miłon.
As the deluge is repreſented a diſruption of the abyſs, ſo
the future combuſtion of the earth is to be iſher'd in, and ac-
companied with violent impreſſions upon nature, and the
chief will be earthquakes. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
With ſongs and dance we celebrate the day,
And with due honours uſher in the May. Dryden.
The Examiner was uſher'd into the woºd by a letter, ſetting
forth the great genius of the author. 4&amp;ſjºn.
Oh name for ever ſad for ever dear !
Still breath'd in ſighs, ſtill uſher'd with a tear. - Pºc.
Usq9 EBAUGH. m. ſ. [An Iriſh and Erſe word, which ſignifies
the water of life.] It is a compounded diſtilled ſpirit, being
drawn on aromaticks; and the Iriſh ſort is particularly diſtin-
guiſhed for its pleaſant and mild flavour The Highland ſort
is ſomewhat hotter; and, by corruption, in Scottiſh they call
it whi/{y. -
vº, [ºffen, Fr. */us, Lat.] The act of burning;
the ſtate of being burned. - - -
UsTo'RIows, adj. Ivylum, Latin.] Having the quality of burn-
ing. - - - - - -
The power of a burning glaſs is by an 1/?arious quality in
the mirror or glaſs, ariſing from a certain unknown ſubſian-
tial form. //atts.
Usual. adj. [uſic, Fr.] Common; frequent; cuſtomary;
tly occurring.
*... wift oracles was a thing very uſual and fre-
uent in their times. IHooker, b. i.
Could I the care of Providence deſerve,
Heav'n muſt deſtroy me, if it would preſerve:
And that's my fate, or ſure it would have ſent
- iſ! nt, Dryden.
Some uſual evil for º line U's UALLY.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U S U
U T I
usually adv, [from uſual.] Commonly; frequently; cuſ-
tomarily.
If men's deſires are uſually as large as their abilitics, what
-- ormer, by that we might engage
º: took to allure the f , Dy South's .
t wº men err againſt this method, it is uſually on pur-
poſe, and to ſhew their learning. - Swift.
U’vain Pss. n.ſ [from uſual.] Commonneſs; frequency:
UsucA/Prios. m. ſ. [uſus and cafio, Lat.) In the civil law,
the acquiſition of the property of a thing, by poſſeſſion and
enjoyment thereof for a certain term of years º º
w. t 1 Cſ.
vºwer. m. ſ. ſºftuit, Fr. iſſus and fruºus, Lat.] The
temporary uſe, enjoyment of the profits, without power to
alienate.
The perſons receiving the ſime, have only the uſſuff
thereof, and not any fee or inheritance therein. - Ayliffe.
Usuf RU'cTUARY. m.ſ.. [uſufructuaire, Fr. 1/1ſ ué?uarius, Lat.]
One that has the uſe and temporary profit, not the property
of a thing. - -
The parſons of pariſhes are not in law accounted pro-
prietors, but only uſfucital ies, as having no right of fee
imple veſted in them. Ayliff's Paragon.
To U'suº F. n.ſ.. [uſura, Lat.] To practice uſury; to take
intereſt for money.
Is this the balſam that the uſuring ſenate
Pours into captains wounds : Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
U’s URE.R. m. ſ. [uſurier, Fr. Uſºra, Lat.] One who puts mo-
ney out at intereſt. Commonly uſed for one that takes exor-
bitant intereſt.
Fie; thou ſham'ſt thy ſhape, thy love, thy wit;
Which, like an uſurer, abound'ſt in all,
And uſeſt none in that true uſe indeed,
Which ſhould bedeck thy ſhape, thy love, thy wit. Shakespeare
When u, urers tell their gold i' th' field,
And bawds and whores do churches build. Shakeſpeare.
If thou lend money to any that is poor, thou ſhalt not be
to him as an uſurer, nor lay upon him uſury. Ex. xxii. 25.
There may be no commutative injuſtice, while each retains
a mutual benefit, the 1ſurer for his money, the borrower for
his induſtry. Child on Trade.
The aſſes uſurae occaſioned great tumults among the peo-
ple; yet he that took it was not reckoned to tranſgreſs any
law; and there were ſome greedy lºſure that exacted double,
triple. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Usu'Rious. adj. [uſuaire, Fr. from uſury. ] , Given to the
practiſe of uſury; exorbitantly greedy of profit.
For every hour that thou wilt ſpare me now,
I will allow, -
Uſurious god of love, twenty to thee,
When with my brown my grey hairs equal be. Donne.
To Usu's P. v. a. It ſuper, Fr. uſurpo, Lat.] To poſſeſs by
force or intruſion; to ſeize, or poſieſ, without right.
So ugly a darkneſs, as if it would prevent the night's
coming, uſurped the day's right. Sidney, b. ii.
Not having the natural ſuperiority of fathers, their power
muſt be uſurped, and then unlawful; or if lawful, then
granted or concated unto, by them over whom they
exerciſe the ſame, or elſe given them extraordinarily from
God. Hooker.
In as much as the due eſtimation of heavenly truth de-
pendeth wholly upon the known and approved authority of
thoſe famous oracles of God, it greatly behoveth the church
to have always moſt ſpecial care, humane inventions uſurp
the room and title of divine worſhip, Iłooker, b. v.
Vićtorious prince of York
Before I ſee thee ſeated in that throne,
Which now the houſe of Lancaſter ºftºps,
Theſe eyes ſhall never cloſe. Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
What art thou, that uſup/f this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form : Shakespeare .
Their fox-like thefts are ſo rank, as a man may find
whole pages uſurp'd from one author. B. Johnſon.
So he dies,
But ſoon revives; death over him no pow'r
Shall long ſup: ere the third dawning light
Return, the ſtars of morn ſhall ſee him riſe
Out of his grave. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. xii.
All fountains of the deep
Broke up, ſhall heave the ocean to a tºp
Beyond all bounds, 'till inundation fiſe
Above the higheſt hills. Miltºn.
Farewell court,
Where vice not only hath uſurpt the place,
But the reward, and even the name of virtue. Denham.
Your care about your banks infers a fear
Of threat'ning floods and inundations near:
If ſo, a juſt reprize would only be
Of what the land uſurp’d upon the ſea. Dryden.
Who next uſurps, will a juſt prince appear,
So much your ruin will his reign endear. Dryden.
Struggling in vain, impatient of he
And i. underneath #. º: §:
The more ſhe ſtrove to ſhake him from her ieſ
With more and far ſuperior force he preſs'd 2.
Commands his entrance, and, without cºol
(Jºhºr organs, and inſpires her ſoul. 3. Dr.
Who's this, that dares 1ſºrp Tydºn,
The guards and habit of Numidº's prince; Aldſºn', C.
Us!. RPA'ſ ros. [uſurpation, Fr. from "ſup.) Forciſe º
illegal ſeizure or poſſeſſion. le, unjuſt
The Piercies,
Finding his uſurpation moſt unjuſt,
Endeavour'd my advancement to the throne. Saleſ.
Succeeding kings recovery of their right from jº.
pations, ſhall never be prejudiced by any act of mine. K º
To raiſe a tempeſt on the ſea was tſurpatiºn on i. º
rogative of Neptune, who had given him no ſea. D .
Q baſeneſs to ſupport a tyrant throne, !yden,
And cruſh your freeborn brethren of the world ! -
Nay, to become a part of uſ...rpation,
Tº eſpouſe the tyrant's perſon and her crimes. Dryin
Whatever oppoſition was made to the uſu pation; of K.
James, proceeded altogether from the church of England. swift.
Usu'RPER. m. ſ. [from iſſup.) One who ſeizes of poiſº,
to which he has no right. It is generally uſed of one who
excludes the right heir from the throne.
Ever fithence he hath continued his firſt uſurped power
and now exacteth upon all men what he liſt; ſo that . .
ſubdue or expel an uſurper, ſhould be no unjuſt enterprize
but a reſtitution of a tient right unto the crown, sº
Richard duke of York,
Was rightful heir unto the Engliſh crown;
And that your majeſty was an uſurper. Shakſtart.
But this uſurper, his encroachment proud,
Stays not on man; to God his tow'r intends
Siege and defiance. Miltºn,
Few uſurpers to the ſhades deſcend
By a dry death, or with a quiet end. Dryden,
He griev'd, the land he freed ſhould be oppreſs'd,
And he leſs for it than uſurpers do. Dryden.
Usu'RPINGLY. adv. [from turp.] Without juſt claim.
Lay aſide the ſword,
Which ſways uſurfingly theſe ſeveral titles,
And put the ſame into young Arthur's hand,
Thy right royal ſovereign. Shakespeare'. K. jºhn.
U’s URY.. [uſitré, Fr. uſura, Lat.]
1. Money paid for the uſe of money; intereſt.
He that high does fit, and all things ſce,
With equal eyes, their merits to reſtore;
Behold, what ye this day have done for me, -
And what I cannot quit, requite with uſuy. Fairy &amp; ten.
The wiſhed day is come at laſt,
That ſhall, for all the pains and ſorrows paſt,
Pay to her uſury of long delight. Spºnſºr.
Our angles are like money put to uſary; they may dº,
though we fit ſtill and do nothing. Wilºn; 4.
What he borrows from the antients, he repays with "7
of his own; in coin as good, and almoſt as univerſally Wa-
luable. Tryden's Dedication tº jºk
2. The practice of taking intereſt. It is commonly uſed with
ſome reproach. - s: f
Uſury bringeth the treaſure of a realm into few hº ſ
the uſurer being at certainties, and others at º:
the end, moſt of the money will be in the box, . t º:
U’TENsil. n.ſ.. [utenſile, Fr. utenſile, low Lat..] An º:
for any uſe, ſuch as the veſſels of the kitchen, or * *
trade. b ſ!
Burn but his books; he has brave utenſils, º
Which, when he has a houſe, he'll deck withal Shałºń.
Mules after theſe, camels and dromedaries, Miltºn
And waggons fraught with utenſils of war. |at ..i.
Tithes and lands given to God are never; and p sº.
ments, and other ſacred tenſils, are ſeldom º , Jº
The ſprings of life their former vigouſ tº p.2,
Such ... he had for that vile utenſil. Garth's º:
U’TERIN E. adj. [uterin, Fr. uterinus, Lat.] Belonging
womb. * : ... ---
In hot climates, and where the uterine parts º ºº
by the coldneſs of ſome fimple, they may b: º Errºuri.
conceptive conſtitution. Brown'; º ce of the
The veſſes of the interior glandulous ſº that they
womb, are contorted with turnings and meanders, Upture to
might accommodate themſelves without danger of rur J.
the neceſſary extenſion of the uterine ſubſtance.
UTERU.S. m. ſ. ſilatin. The womb. "," aſ : Dºo"
UT1/LITY. ::/ Ér. utilitas, Lat. J Uſefulneſs; P
fit ; convenience ; advantageouſneſs.
Thoſe things which have long gone º but though
rate; whereas new things piece not ſo wel her incomfor
they help by their wtility, yet they trouble jº Nat. Hiſ
mity. Should
are confede.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">U T. T.
Should we blindly obey the refraints of phyſicians and
aſtrologers, we ſhould confine the utility of phyſick unto a
º few days. Brown's /uſgar Errours.
M. Zulichem deſired me that I would give a relation of
the cure of the gout, that might be made publick, as a thing
which might prove of common ſtility to ſo great numbers
as were ſubject to that diſeaſe. Temple.
U’rīs. n.ſ. A word which probably is corrupted, at leaſt, is
not now underſtood.
Then here will be old utis : it will be an excellent ſtra-
tagem. Shakeſpeare's Hen. IV.
U”. Most. adj. ſurmoerº, Saxon; from utter.]
1. Extreme ; placed at the extremity.
Much like a ſubtile ſpider, which doth fit
In middle of her web, which ſpreadeth wide;
If ought do touch the utmoſt thread of it,
She feels it inſtantly on ev'ry fide. Davies.
As far remov’d from God and light of heav'n,
As from the center thrice to th’ utmºſt pole. Milton.
I went
To view the utmoſt limits of the land. Dryden.
2. Being in the higheſt degree.
I'll undertake to bring him,
Where he ſhall anſwer by a lawful form, -
In peace, to his utmoſt peril. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
U^T Most. n.ſ. The moſt that can be ; the greateſt power;
the higheſt degree.
What miſcarries,
Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
To the utmg/l of a man. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
I will be free,
Even to the utmºſt as I pleaſe in words. Shakeſpeare.
Such a conſcience, as has employed the utmoſ of its ability
to give itſelf the beſt information, and cleareſt knowledge of
its duty, that it can, is a rational ground for a man to build
ſuch an hope upon. South.
Try your fortune.
—I have to the utmºſì. Doſt thou think me deſperate
Without juſt cauſe : Dryden's All for Love.
A man, having carefully enquired into all the grounds of
probability and unlikelineſs, and done his utmoſt to inform
himſelf in all particulars, may come to acknowledge on which
ſide the probability reſts. Locke.
The enemy thinks of raiſing threeſcore thouſand men: let
us perform our utmºſ', and we ſhall overwhelm them with
our multitudes. Addiſon.
Utt E.R. adj. [uzzer, Saxon.]
1. Situate on the outſide, or remote from the center.
In my flight
Through utter and through middle darkneſs borne,
I ſung of chaos, and eternal night. Milton’s P. Loft, b. iii.
2. Placed without any compaſs; out of any place.
Purſue theſe ſons of darkneſs; drive them out
From all heav'n's bounds, into the utter deep. Milton.
3. Extreme ; exceſſive; utmoſt. This ſeems to be Milton's
meaning here.
Such place eternal juſtice had prepar'd
For thoſe rebellious; here their priſon ordain'd
In utter darkneſs; and their portion ſet
As far remov’d from God, and light of heav'n,
As from the center thrice to th’ utmoſt pole.
4. Complete; irrevocable.
The parliament thought the utter taking it away, ab-
ſolutely neceſſary for the preſervation of the kingdom.
Clarendon.
There could not be any other eſtimate made of the loſs,
than by the utter refuſal of the auxiliary regiments of London
and Kent to march farther. Clarendon, b. viii.
They feel fewer corporal pains, and are utter ſtran-
gers to all thoſe anxious thoughts which diſquiet man-
kind. - Atterbury.
To U/TTER. v. a. [from the adjective; to make publick, or
let out ; palam facere.]
1. To ſpeak; to pronounce ; to expreſs. - - -
Men ſpake not with the inſtruments of writing, neither
writ with the inſtruments of ſpeech ; and yet things recorded
with the one, and utiered with the other, may be preached
Milton.
well enough with both. - Hooker.
Theſe very words I’ve heard him utter. Shakeſpeare.
There's more gold : but, firrah,
We ſay the dead are well. Bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt, aad pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat. Shakeſpeare.
Conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falſe-
hocó. Iſa. lix. 13.
Shall not they teach thee and tell thee, and utter words out
of their heart 2 job viii. 10.
Who knows but his poor, bleeding heart,
Amidſt its agonies, remember'd Marcia,
And the laſt words he uter d, call'd me cruel ! Addison.
2. To diſcloſe; to diſcover; to publiſh.
When do partial and finiſter affections more utter then.
ſelves, than when an election is committed to many Iſhitz.
Were it folly to be modeſt in uttering what is kilown to all
the world Raleigh.
I meant my words ſhould not reach your ears; but what
I atter'd was moſt true. Dryden's All fºr L2.
3. To ſell; to vend. ryden's All ſºr Lºve.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law
Js. death to any he that utters them. Shakeſp Rom. and juliet.
They bring it home, and ºr it commonly by the name
of Newfoundland fiſh. Abbot's Deſt, ip. of the J/orld.
The Devonſhire and Somerſetſhire graſiers feed yearly
great droves of cattle in the north quarter of Cornwali, and
utter them at home. - Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
4. To diſperſe; to emit at large.
To preſerve us from ruin, the whole kingdom ſhould con-
tinue in a firm reſolution never to receive or it... this fatal
CO111. - Swift.
tºº. adj. [from utter.] Expreſſible; ſuch as may be
uttered.
UTTE RANce. n.ſ. [from utter. J
I. Pronunciation; manner of ſpeaking.
He, with utt’rance grave, and countenance ſad,
From point to point diſcours'd his voyage. Fa. Queen.
2. [Outrance, Fr. J. Extremity; terms of extreme hoſtility.
Of him I gather'd honour;
Which he to ſeek of me again perforce,
Behoves me keep at utterance.
Mine eternal jewel
Giv'n the common enemy of man,
To make them kings; the ſeed of Banquo kings |
Rather than ſo, come, fate, into the liſt, -
And champion me to th’ utterance. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. Vocal expreſſion; emiſſion from the mouth.
'Till Adam, though no leſs than Eve abaſh'd,
At length gave utterance to theſe words conſtrain'd. Milton.
Speaking is a ſenſible expreſſion of the notions of the mind,
by ſeveral diſcriminations of utterance of voice, uſed as ſigns,
having by conſent ſeveral determinate ſignificancies. Hºlder.
There have been ſome inventions, which have been able
for the utterance of articulate ſounds, as the ſpeaking of cer-
tain words. I/ilkins's Math. Aſagick.
Many a man thinks admirably well, who has a poor ut-
terance ; while others have a charming manner of ſpeech,
but their thoughts are trifling. //atts.
UTTERER. n. J. [from utter.]
I. One who pronounces.
2. A divulger; a diſcloſer.
Utterers of ſecrets he from thence debarr'd;
Babblers of folly, and blazers of crime. Fa. 9ºzen.
3. A ſeller; a vender.
UTTERLY. adv. [from utter.] Fully; completely; perfedly.
For the moſt part, in an ill ſenſe.
God, whoſe property is to ſhew his mercies then greateſt,
when they are neareſt to be utte ly deſpaired. Hooker, b. iv.
Arguments taken from the authority of men, may not only
ſo far forth as hath been declared, but further alſo be of ſome
force in human ſciences; which force, be it never ſo ſmall,
doth ſhew that they are not utterly naught. Hºoker, b. ii.
All your int’reſt in thoſe territorics
Is utterly bereft you; all is loſt. Shºeſ. Hºn. VI.
He was ſo uttery tired with an employment ſo contrary to
his humour, that he did not conſider the means that would
lead him out of it. Clarendon, b. viii.
While in the fleſh we cannot be uttery inſenſible of the
afflićtions that befalus. 4:erbu y.
U^1 tº RMost. adj. [from utter.] -
1. Extreme; being in the higheſt degree.
Bereave me not,
Whereon I live thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counſel, in this uttermºſt diſtreſs.
2. Moſt remote. -
The land, from the uttermg/? end of the ſtraits on Peru
ſide, did go towards the ſouth. Albot's Dºcrip. ºf the J/ºrld.
UTT ERMost. m. ſ. The greateſt degree.
There needed neither promiſe nor perſuaſion to. make her
do her uttermoſt for her father's ſervice. Sidney, b. ii.
He cannot have ſufficient honour done unto him; but the
uttermoſt we can do, we muſt. Hoºter, b, i.
Uve'ous. adj. [from uva, Latl
The uvºo, coat, or iris of the eye, hath a muſculous
power, and can dilate and contract that round hole in it,
called the pupil. - Rayon the C. eation.
PULCANO. m.ſ.. [Italian.]. A burning mountain; volcano.
Earth calcin'd, flies off into the air ; the aſhes of burning
mountains, in vulcano's, will be carried to great diſtances. 4. &amp;.
Vuºlo AR. adj. [vulgaire, Fr. ulgariº, Lat.] -
1. Plebeian ; ſuiting to the common people; practiſed among
the common people.
Men
Shakespeare Cynbelius.
Miltºn.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">V U L
U X O
ho have paſſed all their time in low and vulgar life,
Men w º . idea of the ſeveral beauties and ble-
Addiſon.
cannot have
miſhes in the actions of great men.
2. Mean; low; being of the common rate; -
It requiring too great a ſagacity for vulgar minds to draw
the line between virtue and vice, no wonder if moſt men at-
tempt not a laborious ſcrutiny into things themſelves, but
only take names and words, and ſo reſt in them. South.
Now waſting years my former ſtrength confound,
And added woes have bow'd me to the ground:
Yet by the ſtubble you may gueſs the grain,
And mark the ruins of no vulgar man.
3. Publick; commonly bruited.
Do you hear aught of a battle toward
—Moſt ſure, and vulgar; every one hears that.
Vulgar. n.ſ. [vulzaire, Fr.] The common people.
I'll about;
Drive away the vulgar from the ſtreets. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe men, and their adherents, were then looked upon
by the affrighted vulgar, as greater protectors of their laws
and liberties than myſelf. R. Charles.
The vulgar imagine the pretender to have been a child im-
poſed upon the nation by the fraudulent zeal of his parents,
and their bigotted counſellors. Swift.
VULg A'RITY. m. ſ. [from vulgar.]
1. Meanneſs; ſtate of the loweſt people.
Although their condition may place them many ſpheres
above the multitude; yet are they ſtill within the line of vul-
garity and democratical enemies to truth. Brown.
True it is, and I hope I ſhall not offend their vulgarities,
if I ſay they are daily mocked into error by deviſers. Brown.
2. Particular inſtance or ſpecimen of meanneſs.
Is the grand ſophos of Perſius, and the ſublimity of Ju-
venal to be circumſcribed with the meanneſs of words, and
vulgarity of expreſſion ? Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
VU'LGARLY. adv. [from vulgar..] Commonly; in the ordi-
nary manner; among the common people.
He was, which people much reſpect
In princes, and which pleaſes vulgary,
Of goodly pers'nage, and of ſweet aſpećt. Daniel.
He, that believes himſelf uncapable of pardon, goes on
without thought of reforming; ſuch an one we call vulga, ly
a deſperate perſon. - Hammond's Pračical Catechiſm.
As it is vulgarly underſtood, that he cut a paſſage for his
army through theſe mighty mountains, it may ſeem incre-
dible. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
Vu LNERABLE. adj. [vulnerable, Fr. vulnerabilis, Lat.] Suſ-
ceptive of wounds; liable to external injuries.
Brocme.
Shakeſp.
Let fall thy blade on vulnerall. creſts :
I bear a charmed life, which muſt not yed
To one of woman born. Shakespeare . M.
Achilles though dipt in Styx, yet having his #. adeſh.
by that water, although he were ſortifi,j elſewhere º
ſlain in that part, as only vulnerable in the inferior º º
• V º*** adj. [vul eraire, Fr. º ºf: Errºl.
in the cure of wounds. * Lat..] Uſeful
Try whether the ſame effect will not enſue
wulnerary plaiſters. Brown's P.
- - gar Erro
I kept the orifice open, and preſcribed him vº...”
To Vºls ERATE. v. a.ſvulnero, Lat.] To º -
De facio there is ſuch an intercourſe betweenth. hº
unguent and the vulnerated body. Gºi. .
VU LPIN E. adj. [vulpinus, Lat.] Belonging to a fox. *}.
Vu LTURE. m. ſ. [vultur, Lat..] A large bird of Prey remark
able for voracity. - -
Nor the night raven, that ſtill deadly yells,
Nor griefly vultures make us once affeará. Sººr
We’ve willing damcs enough, there cannot be ‘’’’
That ºdºre in you to devour ſo many,
As will to greatneſs dedicate themſelves. &amp;alſ,
A rav'nous vulture in his open'd ſide, ‘...t."
Her crooked beak and cruel alons try’d. Drin.
Vu'LTUR NE. ºff. [cºſturinus, Lat..] Belonging to avºi.
Uvu'l A. m. ſ. ſºvula, Lat. In anatomy, a round ſºft ſpon-
geous body, ſuſpended from the palate near the foramina of
the noſtrils over the glottis. Diº.
By an inſtrument bended up at one end, I got up behind
the uvula. //eman', Surge J.
UXORIOUS. adj. [uxorius, Lat..] Submiſſively foºd of ,
wife; infected with connubial dotage.
Towards his queen he was nothing uxºriºus, nor ſcarce in-
dulgent; but companionable and reſpective.
That us oriºus king, whoſe heart, though large,
Beguil'd by fair idolatreſſes, fell
To idols foul.
How would'ſ thou inſult,
When I muſt live uxorious to thy will
In perfect thraldom, how again betray me? Aſiliºn.
-Uxo'Riously.adv.[from tºxorious. With fond ſubmiſfontoawiſe.
If thou art thus uxoriouſly inclin'd
To bear thy bondage with a willing mind,
Prepare thy neck. Drºlm', 'jºnal
Uxo'Riousn Ess. n.ſ. ſſrom uxorious.) Connubial dºge ;
fond ſubmiſſion to a wife.
Aſia's Paadſ. Itſ.
