</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A B
A liquid conſonant, which preſerves always the
ſame ſound in Engliſh. In the Saxon it was aſ-
pirated a plar, loºf; ploeroix, lady. . .
At the end of a monoſyllable it is always
9 doubled; as, ſhall; ſtill ; ſº except after a diph-
thong; as, fail; fºl; veal; coal. In a word of more ſyl-
lable; it is written fingle; as, channel; canal; tendril. It is
ſometimes put before e, and ſounded feebly after it; as bible;
itle.
ºne. [corrupted by an effeminate pronunciation from
b.] See; look; behold. -
Layou! if you ſpeak ill of the devil,
How he takes it at heart. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
LARDANUM. n.ſ. A refin of the ſofter kind, of a ſtrong and
not unpleaſant ſmell, and an aromatick, but not agreeable
taſte. This juice exſudates from a low ſpreading ſhrub, of the
ciſtus kind, in Crete, and the neighbouring iſlands; and the
Grecian women make balls of it with a ſmall admixture of
ambergreaſe, by way of a perfume. It was formerly uſed
externally in medicine, but is now neglected. PHill.
To LA'BEFY. v. a. [labefacio, Latin.] To weaken; to im-
pair. Dić7.
LA'bel. n.ſ. [labellum, Latin.]
1. A ſmall ſlip or ſcrip of writing.
When wak'd, I found
This label on my boſom; whoſe containing
Is ſo from ſenſe in hardneſs, that I can
Make no colle&amp;tion of it. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
2. *; thing appendant to a larger writing.
n the label of lead, the heads of St. Peter and St. Paul
are impreſſed from the papal ſeal. Ayliffe's Parergon.
3. [In law.] A narrow ſlip of paper or parchment affixed to
a deed or writing, in order to hold the appending ſeal. So
alſo any paper, annexed by way of addition or explication to
any will or teſtament, is called a label or codicil. Harris.
God join'd my heart to Romeo's ; thou our hands;
Andere this hand by thee to Romeo ſeal’d,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this ſhall ſlay them both. Shakeſpeare.
}*NT, adj. [labens, Lat.] Sliding; gliding; flipping."Dići.
LA's Al, adj. [labialis, Latin.] úttered by the ips.
The Hebrews have affigned which letters are labial, which
dental, and which guttural. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
$ome particular affection of ſound in its paſſage to the lips,
Will ſeem to make ſome compoſition in any vowel which is
litial. Holder's Elements of Speech.
Amated. adj. [labium, Latin.] Formed with lips.
**10DENTAL. adj. [labium and dentalis.] Formed or pro-
"ºnced by the co-operation of the lips and teeth.
The dental conſonants are very eaſy; and firſt the labio-
ºul f, v, alſo the linguadentals th; dh. Hold. Elm. of Sp.
*ANT. n.ſ. [laborans, Lat.] A chemiſt. Not in uſe.
} can ſhew you a ſort of fixt ſulphur, made by an induſ-
trious laborant, Boyle.
ºw. n. ſ. [laboratoire, French.] A chemiſt's work-
It would contribute to the hiſtory of colours, if chemiſts
. in their laboratory take a heedful notice, and give us a
º account, of the colours obſerved in the ſteam of bo-
“º either ſublimed or diſtilled. Boyle on Colours.
ſuſ * flames of love will perform thoſe miracles they of the
º boaſt of, would they employ themſelves in this labº-
LAºi - - - Decay of Piety.
º RIOUs, aff. [labºrieux, French; laboriºſus, Latin.]
"gent in work, fiduous.
That which makes the clergy glorious, is to be knowing
º º, unſpotted in their lives, active and labo-
and º leir charges, bold and reſolute in oppoſing ſeducers,
Courte "g to look vice in the face; and laſtly, to be gentle,
*, and compaſſionate to all. South's Serm.
L A B
To his laborious youth conſum’d in war,
And laſting age, adorn’d and crown'd with peace. Prior,
2. Requiring labour; tireſome ; not eaſy.
A ſpacious cave within its farmoſt part,
Was hew’d and faſhion'd by laborious art,
Through the hill's hollow ſides. Dryd. An, 6.
Do'ſt thou love watchings, abſtinence, and toil,
Laborious virtues all learn them from Cato. Addison Cato.
LABO'Riously. adv. [from laborious...] With labour; with
toil. --
The folly of him, who pumps very laboriouſly in a ſhip,
yet neglects to ſtop the leak. Decay of Piety.
I chuſe laboriouſly to bear
A weight of woes, and breathe the vital air. Pope's Odyſ.
LAbo'RiousNess. n. ſ. [from laborious.] -
1. Toilſomeneſs; difficulty.
The parallel holds in the gainleſſneſs as well as the labo-
riouſneſs of the work; thoſe wretched creatures, buried in
earth and darkneſs, were never the richer for all the ore they
digged; no more is the inſatiate miſer. Decay of Piety.
2. Diligence; aſſiduity.
LA/BOUR, n.ſ.. .[labeur, French; labor, Latin.]
1. The aët of doing what requires a painful exertion of ſtrength,
or weariſome perſeverance; pains ; toil; travail; work.
If I find her honeſt, I loſe not my labour; if ſhe be other-
wiſe, it is labour well beſtowed, Shakeſ M. W. of Windſor.
I ſent to know your faith, left the tempter have tempted
you, and our labour be in vain. 1 Theſ, iii. 5.
2. Work to be done.
Being a labour of ſo great difficulty, the exačt performance
thereof we may rather wiſh than look for. Hooker.
You were wont to ſay,
If you had been the wife of Hercules -
Six of his labours you'd have done, and ſav'd
Your huſband ſo much ſweat. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. Exerciſe; motion with ſome degree of violence.
Moderate labour of the body conduces to the preſervation
of health, and curing many initial diſeaſes ; but the toil of
the mind deſtroys health, and generates maladies, Harvey.
4. Childbirth; travail.
Sith of womens labours thou haſt charge,
And generation goodly doeſt enlarge, ..
Incline thy will to effect our wiſhful vow. Spenſ. Epith.
Not knowing 'twas my labour, I complain
Of ſudden ſhootings, and of grinding pain;
My throws come thicker, and my cries encreas'd,
Which with her hand the conſcious nurſe ſuppreſs'd. Dryd.
Not one woman of two hundred dies in labour. Graunt.
His heart is in continual labour; it even travails with the
obligation, and is in pangs ’till it be delivered. South's Serm.
To LAbou R. v. n. [labora, Latin.]
1. To toil; to ačt with painful effort.
When ſhall I come to th’ top of that ſame hill?
—You do climb up it now ; look how we labour. Shakespeare
For your highneſs’ good I ever labour'd,
More than mine own. Shakeſpear's Hen. VIII.
Who is with him : -
—None but the fool, who labours to out-jeſt
His heart-ſtruck injuries. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
Let more work be laid upon the men, that they may la-
bour therein. . - Exod. v. 9.
2. To do work; to take pains. -
Epaphras ſaluteth you, always labºuring fervently for you
-
in prayers, that ye may ſtand perfect. Col. iv. 12.
A labouring man that is given to drunkenneſs ſhall not be
rich. Eccluſ, xix. I.
That in the night they may be a guard to us, and labour
on the day. Neh. iv. 22.
Yet is there no end of all his labours; neither faith he,
for whom do I labour. Eccl. iv. 8.
1 5 A - As<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A C
L A B
As a man had a right to aſ he could employ his labour
upon, ſo he had no temptation to labour for more than he
could make uſe of. Lºcke.
3. To move with difficulty.
The ſtone that labours up the hill,
Mocking the labourer's toil, returning ſtill,
Is love. Granville.
4. To be diſeaſed with. [Morbo laborare, Latin.]
They abound with horſe,
Of which one want our camp doth only labour,
And I have found 'em coming. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
I was called to another, who in childbed laboured of an
ulcer in her left hip. //jøman.
5. To be in diſtreſs; to be preſſed.
To this infernal lake the fury flies,
Here hides her hated head, and frees the labºring ſkies. Dryd.
Trumpets and drums ſhall fright her from the Throne,
As ſounding cymbals aid the labºring moon. Dryd. Aur.
This exerciſe will call down the favour of heaven upon
you, to remove thoſe afflictions you now labour under from
you. Iłake's Preparation fºr Death.
6. To be in child-birth; to be in travail.
There lay a log unlighted on the earth,
When ſhe was labºring in the throws of birth;
For th’ unborn chief the fatal ſiſters came,
And rais'd it up, and toſs'd it on the flame. Dryd. Ovid.
Here, like ſome furious prophet, Pindar rode,
And ſeem'd to labour with th' inſpiring God. Pope.
He is ſo touch'd with the memory of her benevolence and
protećtion, that his ſoul labours for an expreſſion enough to
repreſent it. Notes on the Odiffy.
To La'Bour, v. a. -
1. To work at ; to move with difficulty; to form with la-
bour; to proſecute with effect.
To uſe brevity, and avoid much labouring of the work, is
to be granted to him that will make an abridgment. 2 Mac.
The matter of the ceremonies had wrought, for the moſt
part, only upon light-headed, weak men, whoſe ſatisfaction
was not to be laboured for. Clarendon.
The pains of famiſh’d Tantalus ſhall feel,
And Siſyphus that labours up the hill,
The rowling rock in vain, and curſt Ixion's wheel. Dryd.
Had you requir'd my helpful hand,
Th’ artificer and art you might command,
To labour arms for Troy. Dryden's AFneis.
An eager defire to know ſomething concerning him, has
occaſioned mankind to labour the point under theſe diſadvan-
tages, and turn on all hands to ſee if there were any thing
left which might have the leaſt appearance of informal
tion. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
2. To beat; to belabour.
Take, ſhepherd, take a plant of ſtubborn oak,
And labour him with many a ſturdy ſtroak. Dryden's Pīrg.
LA'BourER. m. ſ. [laboureur, French.j
1. One who is employed in coarſe and toilſome work.
If a ſtate run moſt to noblemen and gentlemen, and that
the huſbandmen be but as their work-folks and labourers, you
may have a good cavalry, but never good ſtable foot. Bacon.
The ſun but ſeem'd the labºrer of the year,
Each waxing moon ſupply'd her wat'ry ſtore,
To ſwell thoſe tides, which from the line did bear
Their brimful veſſels to the Belgian ſhore. Dryden.
Labourers and idle perſons, children and ſtriplings, old men
and young men, muſt have divers diets. Arbuth. on Aliments.
Not balmy ſleep to labºrers faint with pain,
Not ſhow’rs to larks, or ſun-ſhine to the bee,
Are half ſo charming, as thy fight to me. Pope's Autumn.
Yet hence the poor are cloth'd, the hungry fed,
Health to himſelf, and to his infants bread,
The labºrer bears. Pope, Ep. iv. l. 167.
The prince cannot ſay to the merchant, I have no neéd
of thee; nor the merchant to the labourer, I have no need
of thee. Swift's Miſcel.
2. One who takes pains in any employment.
Sir, I am a true labourer; I earn that I eat; get that I
wear; owe no man hate; envy no man's happineſs. Shakespeare
The ſtone that labours up the hill,
Mocking the labºrer's toil, returning ſtill,
f Is love, Granville.
LA/Bºuksome. adj. [from labour.] Made with great labour
and diligence.
Forget
Your labourſºme and dainty trims, wherein
You made great Jove angry. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
He hath, my lord, by lahau, ſºme petition,
Wrung from me my low leave. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
LA'BRA, n.ſ. [Spaniſh. A lip. Hanmer.
Word of denial in thy labras here;
Word of denial, froth and ſcum thou lieſt. Shakeſpeare.
LA'BYRINTH. n. ſ. [labyrinthus, Latin.] A maze; a place
formed with incxtricable windings.
- Suffolk, ſtay :
Thou may’ſ not wander in that hºlyrinth ;
There Minotaurs, and ugly treaſons lurk.
Words, which would tear
The tender labyrinth of a maid’s foſt car.
My clamours tear
The ear’s ſoft Wałyrinth, and cleft the air. Sanº's Paraph.
The earl of Eſſex had not proceeded with his accuſtomed
warineſs and ſkill; but run into labyrinthi, from whence he
could not diſentangle himſelf. Clarendon, b. viii.
My ſoul is on her journey; do not now
Divert, or lead her back, to loſe herſelf
I' th' maze and winding labyrinths o' th' world.
LA c. m. ſ.
Lac is uſually diſtinguiſhed by the name of a gun, but
improperly, becauſe it is inflammable and not ſoluble in wa-
ter. We have three ſorts of it, which are all the product of
the ſame tree. 1. The ſtick lac. 2. The ſeed laa. 3. The
ſhell lac. Authors leave us uncertain whether this drug be-
longs to the animal or the vegetable kingdom. Płill.
LACE. m. ſ. [lacet, French; laqueus, Latin.]
I. A ſtring; a cord.
There the fond fly entangled, ſtruggled long,
Himſelf to free thereout; but all in vain:
For ſtriving more, the more in laces ſtrong
Himſelf he tied, and wrapt his winges twaii,
In limy ſnares, the ſubtil loops among. Spenſer.
2. A ſnare; a gin.
The king had ſhared been in love's ſtrong lace. Fairfax.
3. A platted ſtring, with which women faſten their clothes.
O! cut my lace, left my heart cracking, it
Break too. Shakeſpeare's J/7nter's Tale,
Doll ne'er was call'd to cut her lace,
Or throw cold water in her face. Swift.
4. Ornaments of fine thread curiouſly woven.
Our Engliſh dames are much given to the wearing of coſt-
ly laces; and, if they be brought from Italy, they are in
great eſteem. Bacon's Advne to Williers.
5. Textures of thread, with gold or filver.
He wears a ſtuff, whoſe thread is coarſe and round,
Herbert.
Shałºcare.
Donne.
Denham.
But trimm'd with curious lace.
6. Sugar. A cant word.
If haply he the ſe&amp;t purſues,
That read and comment upon news;
He takes up their myſterious face,
He drinks his coffee without lace.
To LA ce. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten with a ſtring run through eilet holes.
I cauſed a fomentation to be made, and put on a laced
ſock, by which the weak parts were ſtrengthened. Jºſeman.
At this, for new replies he did not ſtay,
But lac'd his creſted helm, and ſtrode away. Dryden.
Theſe glitt'ring ſpoils, now made the victor's gain,
He to his body ſuits; but ſuits in vain:
Meſſapus’ helm he finds among the reſt, *
And laces on, and wears the waving creſt Dryd. Æneis.
Like Mrs. Primly's great belly; ſhe may lace it down be-
fore, but it burniſhes on her hips. Congr. //ay of the J/orld.
When Jenny's ſtays are newly lac'd,
Fair Alma plays about her waiſt. - Prior.
2. To adorn with gold or ſilver textures ſewed on. -
It is but a night-gown in reſpect of yours; cloath of gold
and coats, and lac'd with ſilver. Shakespeare Much ado about Not.
3. To embelliſh with variegations.
Look, love, what envious ſtreaks
Do lace the ſevering clouds in yonder Eaſt;
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Prior,
Stands tiptoe on the miſty mountains tops. Sha&amp;ſpeare.
Then clap four ſlices of pilaſter on't,
That, lac'd with bits of ruſtick, makes a front. Pope.
4. To beat; whether from the form which L’E/irange uſes, or
by corruption of laſh.
Go you, and find me out a man that has no curioſity at
all, or I'll lace your coat for ye. L’É/irange.
LAce D Mutton. An old word for a whore.
Ay, Sir, I, a loſt mutton, gave your letter to her a lac'd
mutton, and ſhe gave me nothing for my labour. Shakespeare
LA'ce MAN. m. ſ. [lace and man.] One who deals in lace. ”
I met with a nonjuror, engaged with a laceman, whether
the late French king was moſt like Auguſtus Caeſar, or
Nero. Addison's Spectator, Nº. 424.
LA'cFR A BLE. adj. [from lacerate.] Such as may be torn.
Since the lungs are obliged to a perpetual commerce with
the air, they muſt neceſſarily lie open to great damages,
becauſe of their thin and lacerable compoſure. Harvey.
To LACERATE. v. a. [lacero, Latin.] To tear; to rend;
to ſeparate by violence.
And my ſons lacerate and rip up, viper like, the womb
that brought them forth. Hºwel's England's 7 cars.
The heat breaks through the water, ſo as to lacerate and
lift up great bubbles too heavy for the air to buoy up, and
cauſeth boiling. Perham's Phyſico-Theºlºgy.
Here
</p></div><p>
            End of Title Page.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="TableofContents" id="TableofContents"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Table of Contents</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L. A C
I, A D
II, relaterated friendſhip claims a tear; Wa. of human Hºſhes.
LacrºRA'tion. n.J. [from lacerate.] The act of tearing or
f nding; the breach made by tearing.
re Th: effects are, extenſion of the great veſſels, compreſ-
ſon of the leſler, and lacerations upon ſmall cauſes. Arbuth.
LAceRATIVE. adj. [from lacerate.] Tearing; having the
aſ.
pº upon the intemperament of the part ulce-
aj, others upon the continual afflux of locerative hu-
i. º Harvey on Conſumptions.
Iºwa. adj. [lachrymal, French..] Generating tears.
it is of an exquiſite ſenſe, that, upon any touch, the tears
might be ſqueezed from the lachrymal glands. to waſh and
ºn it. Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
Lººky MARy. adj. [lachryma, Latin.] Containing tears.
How many dreſſes are there for each particular deity ?
what a variety of ſhapes in the ancient urns, lamps, and la-
chrymory veſſels. Addiſon's Travels through Italy.
Lºſsy; Ation. n.ſ. [from lachryma.] The act of weep-
ing, or ſhedding tears. - - - -
LºrymatoRY. n.ſ. [lachrimatoire, French..] A veſſel in
which tears are gathered to the honour of the dead. . .
Lacrºslated. adj. [from lacinia, Lat..] Adorned with fringes
, and borders.
To LACK. v. a. [lacken, to leſſen, Dutch..] To want; to
need; to be without. -
Every good and holy deſire, though it lack the form, hath
notwithſtanding in itſelf the ſubſtance, and with him the
force of prayer, who regardeth the very moanings, groans,
and fighs of the heart. Hooker, b.v. l. 348.
A land wherein thou ſhalt eat bread without ſcarceneſs;
thou ſhalt not lack anything in it. Deut. viii. 9.
One day we hope thou ſhalt bring back,
Dear Bolingbroke, the juſtice that we lack.
Intreat they may ; authority they lack,
To LAck. v. m.
1. To be in want.
The lions do lack and ſuffer hunger.
2. To be wanting,
Peradventure there ſhall lack five of the fifty righteous;
wilt thou deſtroy all the city for lack of five Gen. viii. 28.
There was nothing lacking to them: David recovered all.
I Sam. xxx. 1d.
That which was lacking on your part, they have #.
plied. I Cor. xvi. 17.
LAck. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Want; need; failure.
In the ſcripture there neither wanteth anything, the lack
whereof might deprive us of life. Hooker, b. i. p. 41.
Many that are not mad
Have ſure more lack of reaſon. Shakespeare Meaſ for Meaſ.
He was not able to keep that place three days, for lack
of vićtuals. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The trenchant blade, toledo truſty,
For want of fighting was grown ruſty,
And eat into itſelf, for lack
Of ſomebody to hew and hack. Hudibras, p. i. c. 1.
2. Lacº, whether noun or verb, is now almoſt obſolete.
LA'ckºaiN. n.ſ. [lack and brain.] One that wants wit.
What a lackbrain is this? Our plot is as good a plet as
ever was laid. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
LACKER. m. ſ. A kind of varniſh, which, ſpread upon a
white ſubſtance, exhibits a gold colour.
To La'cKER. v. a. [from the noun..] To do over with lacker.
What ſhook the ſtage, and made the people ſtare :
Cato's long wing, flower'd gown, and lacker'd chair. Pope.
LA'cKEY. n. J. [lacquais, French..] An attending ſervant; a
foot-boy.
Daniel.
Daniel.
Common Prayer.
They would ſhame to make me
w ait elſe at door : a fellow counſellor,
'Mºng boys, and grooms, and lackeys 1 Shalºſ. Hºn.VIII.
Though his youthful blood be fir’d with wine,
He's cautious to avoid the coach and ſix,
And on the lackeys will no quarrel fix. Dryden's juvenal.
Lacqueys were never ſo ſaucy and pragmatical as they are
now-a-days. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 481.
º'cKEY. v. a. [from the noun...] To attend ſervilely.
º not whether Milton has uſed this word very pro-
perly.
- This common body,
Jºke to a vagabond flag upon the ſtream,
Goes to, and back, lacqueying the varying tide,
To rot itſelf with motion. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
So dear to heav'n is ſaintly chaſtity,
That when a ſoul is found ſincerely ſo,
A thouſand liveried angels lackey her,
T jºing far off each thing of fin and guilt. Milton,
***CKEY. v. n. To act as a foot-boy ; to pay ſervile at-
tendance.
Cº have I ſervants ſeen on horſes ride,
he ſee and noble lacquey by their ſide.
94 Italian tranſlator' of the Æneis is a
4
Sandys's Par.
foot poet ; he
lacºys by the ſide of Virgii, but never mounts behind
him. - Dryd. Ded. Æn.
LA'ckLINE.N. adj. [lack and linen..] Wanting ſhirts.
I ſcorn you, ſcurvy companion; what your poor, baſe,
raſcally, cheating, lacklimen mate ; away, you mouldy rogue,
away; I'm made for your maſter. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
LA'cklustr E. adj. [lack and tºffre.] Wanting brightneſs.
And then he drew a dial from his poke,
And looking on it with tackliſire eye,
Says very wiſely, it is ten a clock. Shakeſpeare.
LACO'NICK, adj. [laconicus, Lat. lacºnique, Fr.] Short; brief;
from Lacones, the Spartans, who uſed few words.
I grow laconicº even beyond laconiciſm; for ſometimes I
return only yes; or no, to queſtionary or petitionary epiſtles
of half a yard long. Pope to Swift.
LA/con is M. m. ſ. [laconiſme, French ; laconiſmus, Latin.] A
conciſe ſtile : called by Pope laconiciſm. See LACONICK.
As the language of the face is univerſal, ſo it is very
comprehenſive : no laconiſm can reach it. It is the ſhort-
hand of the mind, and crowds a great deal in a little
room. Collier of the Aſpeci.
LA'conically, adv. [from laconick.] Briefly; conciſely.
Alexander Nequam, a man of great learning, and de-
firous to enter into religion there, writ to the abbot laco-
nically. t Camden's Remains.
LA'cTARY. adj. [lactii, Lat.] Milky; full of juice ike milk.
From laetary, or milky plants, which have a white and
lacteous juice diſperſed through every part, there ariſe flowers
blue and yellow. Brown's Wulgar Errors, b. vi. c. 10.
LA’ct ARY. m. ſ. [lactarium, Latin.] A dairy houſe.
Lºries. n. ſ. [lacio, Latin.] The act or time of giving
uck.
LA'cTEAL. adj. [from lac, Latin.] Conveying chyle.
- As the food paſſes, the chyle, which is the nutritive part,
is ſeparated from the excrementitious by the latteal veins;
and from thence conveyed into the blood. Locke.
LA'cTEAL. n.ſ. The veſſel that conveys chyle.
The mouths of the lacieals may permit aliment, acrimo-
nious or not, ſufficiently attenuated, to enter in people of
lax conſtitutions, whereas their ſphinéters will ſhut againſt
them in ſuch as have ſtrong fibres. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
LACTE'ous. adj. [lacicus, Latin.]
1. Milky.
Though we leave out the lačieous circle, yet are there more
º four than Philo mentions. Brown's Wugar Errors.
2. Lačteal; conveying chyle.
The lungs are ſuitable for reſpiration, and the latteous veſ-
ſels for the reception of the chyle. Bentley's Serm.
LAcTEscENce. m. ſ. [laciºſco, Latin.] Tendency to milk.
This lacieſcence does commonly enſue, when wine, being
impregnated with gums, or other vegetable concretions, that
abound with ſulphureous corpuſcles, fair water is ſuddenly
poured upon the ſolution. Boyle on Colours.
LActes'cENT. adj. [lačieſcens, Latin.] Producing Milk.
Amongſt the pot-herbs are ſome lacłęſcent plants, as let-
tuce and endive, which contain a wholeſome juice. Arbuth.
LAct 1'FERous. adj. [lac and fero.] What conveys or brings
milk.
He makes the breaſts to be nothing but glandules, made
up of an infinite number of little knots, each whereof hath
its excretory veſſel, or lačiferous dućt. Ray on the Creation.
LAD. n.ſ. [leobe, Saxon, which commonly ſignifies people,
but ſometimes, ſays Mr. Lye, a boy.]
1. A boy; a ſtripling, in familiar language.
We were
Two lads, that thought there was no more behind,
But ſuch a day to-morrow as to-day,
And to be boy eternal. Shakeſpeare's JPinter's Tale.
The poor lad who wants knowledge, muſt ſet his inven-
tion on the rack, to ſay ſomething where he knows no-
thing. Eocke.
Too far from the ancient forms of teaching ſeveral good
grammarians have departed, to the great detriment of ſuch
/ads as have been removed to other ſchools. WWatts.
2. A boy, in paſtoral language. -
For grief whereof the lad would after joy,
But pin'd away in anguiſh, and ſelf-will'd annoy. Fa. Qi.
The ſhepherd lad,
Whoſe offspring on the throne of Judah ſat --
So many ages. Milton's Par. Rºg. b. ii. 1. 439.
LA'DDER. m. ſ. [planne, Saxon.] -
1. A frame made with ſteps placed between two upright
pieces. - - - -
Whoſe compaſt is rotten, and carried in time,
And ſpread as it ſhould be, thrift's ladder may clime. Tºff.
Now ſtreets grow throng'd, and buſy as by day,
Some run for buckets to the hallow'd quire;
Some cut the pipes, and ſome the engines play,
And ſome more bold mount ladders to the fire. Dryden.
I ſaw a ſtage crected about a foot and a half from the
ground, capable of holding four of the inhabitants with two
or three ladders to mount it. Gullive”: Traveli.
Eaſy
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A G
Eaſy in words thy ſtile, in ſenſe ſublime;
'Tis like the ladder in the patriarch's dream,
Its foot on earth, its height above the ſkies. Priºr.
2. Anything by which one climbs. -
Then took ſhe help to her of a ſervant near about her
huſband, whom ſhe knew to be of a haſty ambition; and
ſuch a one, who wanting true ſufficiency to raiſe him, would
make a ladder of any miſchief. Sidney, b. ii.
I muſt climb her window, -
The ladder, made of cords. Shakespeare Two Gent. of Perona.
Northumberland, thou ladder, by the which
Mi. Bolingbroke aſcends my throne. Shakespeare
owlineſs is young ambition's ladder,
Whereto the climber upward turns his face. Shakespeare
3. A gradual riſe.
Endow’d with all theſe accompliſhments, we leave him
in the full career of ſucceſs, mounting faſt towards the top
of the ladder eccleſiaſtical, which he hath a fair probability
to reach. Swift.
LADE. n.ſ.
Lade is the mouth of a river, and is derived from the
Saxon labe, which ſignifies a purging or diſcharging; there
being a diſcharge of the waters into the ſea, or into ſome
greater river. Gibſon's Camden.
To LADE. v. a. preter. and part, paſſive, laded or laden. [from
placen, Saxon.] It is now commonly written load.
1. To load; to freight; to burthen.
And they laded their aſſes with corn, and departed thence.
Gen. xlii. 26.
The experiment which ſheweth the weights of ſeveral bo-
dies in compariſon with water, is of uſe in lading of ſhips,
and ſhowing what burthen they will bear. Bacon's Ph. Rem.
The veſſels, heavy laden, put to ſea
With proſp’rous winds; a woman leads the way. Dryden.
Though the peripatetick doćtrine does not ſatisfy, yet it is
as eaſy to account for the difficulties he charges on it, as for
thoſe his own hypotheſis is laden with. Locke.
2. [placan, to draw, Saxon.] To heave out; to throw out.
He chides the ſea that ſunders him from them,
Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way. Shakespeare
They never let blood; but ſay, if the pot boils too faſt
there is no need of lading out any of the water, but only of
taking away the fire; and ſo they allay all heats of the blood
by abſtinence, and cooling herbs. Temple.
If there be ſprings in the ſlate marl, there muſt be help to
lade or pump it out. Mortimer's Huſband.
LA'DING. m. ſ. [from lade.] Weight; burthen. -
Some we made prize, while others burnt and rent
With their rich lading to the bottom went. //aller.
The ſtorm grows higher and higher, and threatens the
utter loſs of the ſhip: there is but one way to ſave it, which
is, by throwing its rich lading overboard. South's Serm.
It happened to be foul weather, ſo that the mariners caſt
their whole lading overboard to ſave themſelves. L’E//range.
Why ſhould he ſink where nothing ſeem'd to preſs?
His lading little, and his ballaſt leſs. Swift.
LA/DLE. m. ſ. [placele, Saxon, from planan; leaugh, Erſe.]
1. A large ſpoon; a veſſel with a long handle, uſed in throw-
ing out any liquid.
Some ſtirr'd the molten ore with ladles great. Fa. Qu.
When the materials of glaſs have been kept long in fuſion,
the mixture caſts up the ſuperfluous ſalt, which the workmen
take off with ladles. Boyle.
A laddle for our ſilver diſh
Is what I want, is what I wiſh. Prizr.
2. The receptacles of a mill wheel, into which the water falling
turns it.
LA'DLE-FUL. n.ſ. [ladle and fall.]
If a footman be going up with a diſh of ſoup, let the cook
with a ladle-ful dribble his livery all the way up ſtairs. Sw.
LA'DY. m. ſ. [placp.ºrg, Saxon.] -
1. A woman of high rank: the title of lady properly belongs
to the wives of knights, of all degrees above them, and to
the daughters of earls, and all of higher ranks. -
I am much afraid, my lady, his mother, play’d falſe with
a ſmith. Shakeſpeare’s Merch. of Perona.
l ! would thy huſband were dead; I would make thee my
aay.
——I your lady, Sir John ; alas, I ſhould be a pitiful
Iady. Shakespeare Merry Wives of I/indſor.
I am ſorry my relation to ſo deſerving a lady, ſhould be
any occaſion of her danger and afflićtion. K. Charles.
2. An illuſtrious or eminent woman.
O fooliſh fairy's ſon, what fury mad
Hath thee incens’d to haſte thy doleful fate?
Were it not better I that !ady had,
Than that thou hadſt repented it too late?
I love and hate her ; for ſhe's fair and royaſ,
And that ſhe hath all courtly parts more exquiſite
Than lady ladies; winning from each one
The beſt file hath, and ſhe of all compounded
Out-ſells them all. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline,
Before Homer's time this great lady was ſcarce heard of. Ral.
Fairy 24.
May every lady an Evadne prove,
That ſhall divert me from Aſpaſia's love. J/...//, ".
Shou'd I ſhun the dangers of the war,
With ſcorn the Trojans wou'd reward my pains,
And their proud ladies with their ſweeping trains. Drydºn.
We find on medals the repreſentations of ladiº, that have
given occaſion to whole volumes on the account only of a
face. Aldſºn on ancient Aſºdals.
Of all theſe bounds, even from this line to this,
With ſhadowy foreſts, and with champaigns rich'd,
With plenteous rivers, and wide-ſkirted meads,
We make thee lady. Shaft/peare's King Lººr.
4. A word of complaiſance uſed of women.
Say, good Caeſar,
That I ſome lady trifles have reſerv’d,
Immoment toys, things of ſuch dignity
As we greet modern friends withal. Shakespeare Ant. and Cl.
I hope i may ſpeak of women without offence to the la-
dies. Guardian.
LA/DY-BEDst Raw. m. ſ. [Gallium.] It is a plant of the ſtel-
late kind ; the leaves are neither rough nor knappy, and pro-
duced at the joints of the ſtalks, five or ſix in number, in a
radiant form : the flower conſiſts of one leaf, expanded to-
ward the upper part, and divided into ſeveral ſegments; eath
of theſe flowers is ſucceeded by two dry ſeeds. A Miller.
LA'DY-BIRD.
LA'DY-cow. { n. ſ. A ſmall red inſect vaginopennous.
LA'DY-FLY.
Fly lady-bird, north, ſouth, or eaſt or weſt,
Fly where the man is found that I love beſt. Gay's Paſt.
... This lady-fly I take from off the graſs,
Whoſe ſpotted back might ſcarlet red ſurpaſs. Gay.
Lady-day. m. ſ. [lady and day.] The day on which the an-
nunciation of the bleſſed virgin is celebrated.
LA'DY-LIKE, adj. [lady and like..] Soft ; delicate; elegant.
Her tender conſtitution did declare,
Too lady-like a long fatigue to bear. Dry. Hind and Panth.
LA/DY-MANTLE. m. ſ. [Alchimilla.] The leaves are ſerrated,
the cup of the flower is divided into eight ſegments, expand-
ed in form of a ſtar; the flowers are collected into bunches
upon the tops of the ſtalks; each ſeed veſſel generally con-
tains two ſeeds. Miller.
LA'dyship. n.ſ.. [from lady..] The title of a lady. -
Madam, he ſends your ladſhip this ring. Shakeſpeare.
If they be nothing but mere ſtateſmen,
Your ladſhip ſhall obſerve their gravity,
And their reſervedneſs, their many cautions,
Fitting their perſons. Benj. Jºhnſºn's Catiline.
I the wronged pen to pleaſe,
Make it my bumble thanks expreſs -
Unto your lady/hip in theſe. //aller.
*Tis dº. ; let her ladſhip but peep. Dryden's juv.
LA/DY's-slipp ER. m. ſ. [Calceolus] It hath an anomalous
flower, conſiſting of ſix diſſimilar leaves, four of which are
placed in form of a croſs, the other two paſs the middle, one
of which is bifid, and reſts on the other, which is ſwelling,
and ſhaped like a ſhoe; the empalement becomes a fruit,
open on three ſides, to which adhere the valves, pregnant
with very ſmall ſeeds like duſt. - Miller.
LA/DY’s-smock. m. ſ. [Cardamine.] The flower conſiſts of
four leaves ſucceeded by narrow pods, which when ripe roll
up, and caſt forth their ſeeds: the leaves for the moſt part
are winged. The firſt ſort is ſometimes uſed in medicine;
the third ſort is a very beautiful plant, continuing a long
time in flower: they are preſerved in botanick gardens, and
ſome of them merit a place in ſome ſhady part of every cu-
rious garden, for their odd manner of caſting forth their
ſeeds on the ſlighteſt touch when the pods are ripe. A Miſer.
When dazies pied, and violets blue,
And lady's-ſmocks all ſilver white,
Do paint the meadows much bedight. Shakeſpeare.
See here a boy gathering lilies and lady-ſnocks, and there a
girl cropping culverkeys and cowſlips, all to rake gar-
lands. J/alton's Anger.
Lady's-ſmocks have ſmall ſtringy roots that run in the ground,
and comes up in divers places. Mortimer’s Higº and y.
LAG. adj. [laens, Saxon, long; lagg, Swediſh, the end.]
1. Coming behind ; falling ſhort.
could be well content
To entertain the lag end of my life
With quiet hours. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
The floweſt footed who come lag, ſupply the ſhow of a
Carew's Survey.
reer-ward.
I am ſome twclve or fourteen moonſhines
Lag of a brother.
2. Sluggiſh ; flow ; tardy. It is retained in Scotland.
He, poor man, by your firſt order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear;
Some tardy cripple had the countermand,
That came too lag to ſee him buried.
We know your thoughts of us, that laymen are
Lag fouls, and rubbiſh of remaining clay,
VVl.ich
Shakespeare’s King Lear.
Shakespeare Rich. III.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            End of Table of Contents.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section" id="Section"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A M
L A M
Which heav'n, grown weary of more perfeół work,
Set upright with a little puff of breath,
And bid us º inen.
, Laſt; lon delayed.
3 Pack i. their old play-fellows; there I take
They may, cum privilegio, wear away
ii. i. end of their iewdneſs, and be laugh'd at. Shakespeare
G. 77. / . -
º &amp; claſs; the rump; the fag end.
The reſt of your foes, O gods, the ſenators of Athens,
together with the common lag of people, what is ami's in
them, make ſuitable for deſtruction. Shakeſp. Tim. of Athens.
2. He that comes laſt, or hangs behind.
The laſt, the lag of all the race. Dryd. Pirg, Æheis.
what makes my ram the lag of all the flock.
To LAG. v. 7.
1. To loiter; to move ſlowly. •
She paſs'd, with fear and fury wild;
The nurſe went lagging after with the child.
The remnant of his days he ſafely paſt,
Nor ſound they logg’d too ſlow, nor flow'd too faſt. Prior.
2. To ſay behind; not to come in:
º Behind her far away a dwarf did lºg. Fairy Queen.
I ſhall not lag behind, nor err
-
The way, thou leading: Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. x.
The knight himſelf did after ride,
Leading Crowdero by his ſide,
º And tow'd him, iſ he lºgg'd behind,
Like boat againſt the tide and wind.
It he finds a fairy is in light,
He drives the wretch before, and laſhes into night. Dryd.
She hourly preſs'd for ſomething new ;
Ideas came into her mind
So faſt, his leſſons lagg'd behind.
LA'co ER. m. ſ. [from lag.] A loiterer; an idler; one that
loiters behind. -
|
LAicAL. adj. [laigue, French; laicus, Latin; A&amp;@P.] Belong-
ing to the laity, or people as diſtinct from the clergy.
In all ages the clerical will flatter as well as
LAID. Preterite participle of lay.
Money laid up for the relief of widows and fatherleſs chil-
dren. 2 Mac. iii. Io.
A ſcheme which was writ ſome years ſince, and laid by
to be ready on a fit occaſion.
LAIN. Preterite participle of lye.
Mary ſeeth two angels in white, fitting, the one at the
head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jeſus
had lain.
tween four and five years.
LAIR. m. ſ. [lai, in French, ſignifies a wild ſow, or a foreſt:
the derivation is eaſy in either ſenſe ; or from leger, Dutch.]
. The couch of a boar, or wild beaſt.
Out of the ground uproſe,
As from his lair, the wild beaſt, where he wons -
In foreſt wild, in thicket, brake or den. Milton's P. Loſt.
But range the foreſt, by the ſilver ſide
Of ſome cool ſtream, where nature ſhall provide
Green graſs and fatt'ning clover for your fare,
And moſy caverns for your noon-tide lair. Dryd. Wirg.
LAIRD. n.ſ. ſplayore, Saxon.] The lord of a manor in the
Scottiſh dialect.
Shrive but their title, and their moneys poize,
A laird and twenty pence pronounc'd with noiſe,
When conſtru’d but for a plain yeoman go,
And a good ſober two pence, and well ſo.
Larry, n.J. [243A..] -
1. The people, as diſtinguiſhed from the clergy.
An humble clergy is a very good one, and an humble
lait too, ſince humility is a virtue that equally adorns every
ſtation of life. Swift's Sentiments of a Ch. of Engl. Man.
2. The flate of a layman.
The more uſual cauſe of this deprivation is a mere laity,
Ayliffe's Parergon.
or want of holy orders.
LAKE, r. ſ. [lac, French; lacus, Latin.]
* i. i. largé diſuſion of inland water.
†e adds the running ſprings and ſtanding lakes,
And bounding banks for winding rivers makes. Dry. Ovid.
* Small plain of water.
l 3. A middle colour, betwixt ultramarine and vermilion, yet
it s rºther ſweet than harſh.
lº. n: /, ſlamb, Gothick and Saxon.]
*" i.he young of a ſhccp.
I'm young; but ſomething
You may dº ſºlve of him through me, , and wiſdom
Tº ofter tºp a weak, poor, innocent lamb,
Tº aſ an encry ºd.
| !he aud, thy riot dooms to bleed to day,
| - Had he thy
2. Typically, the Saviour of the world.
* * of Gºd that takeſt away the fins of the
Common Prayer.
World, have mere -
, *, * mercy upon us.
Dryden's Don Sebaſſian,
Hud. p. i. c. 3.
John xx. 12.
The parcels had lain by, before they were opened, be-
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
knowledge would he ſkip and play :
LA'MBK.I.N. m. ſ. -[from amb.] A little lamb.
'Twixt them both they not a lamkin left,
And when lambs fail'd, the old ſheeps lives they
reft. Hulberd's Ta e.
- Pan, thou god of ſhepherds all,
Which of our tender anºn, takeſt, keep. Spetſ. Paſ?.
Clean as young amb{ins, or the gooſe's down,
And like the goldfinch in her Sunday gown. Gay.
LA MBAT I v E. adj. [from lambo, to lick.] Taken by licking.
In affections both of lungs and weazon, phyſicians mäke
uſe of ſyrups, and lamhative medicines. Brººf, jºi. E.,.
LAM'Bative. m. ſ. A medicine taken by licking with the
tongue. - SP
I ſtitch’d up the wound, and applied aſtringents, with
compreſs and retentive bandage, then put him into bed, and
a let him blood in the arm, adviſing a lambative, to be taken
as neceſſity ſhould require. Wiſeman's Surgery.
LAMBs-wool. n.ſ. [link and wºol.] Ale mixed with the buſ,
of roaſted apples.
A cup of lambs-wool they drank to him there.
- -Song of the King and the Miller.
LA'MBENT: adj. [lambens, Lat..] T'laying about; gliding over
without harm.
From young Iſilus head
A lambent flame aroſe, which gently ſpread
Around his brows, and on his temples fed. Dryd. Æneſs.
His blows thick fogs, inſtead of glories, grace,
And lambent dulneſs played around his face. Dryden.
LAM Doi DAL. m. ſ. [3,4,32 and ºGº.] Having the form of
the letter lamda or A.
The courſe of the longitudinal finus down through the
middle of it, makes it adviſeable to trapan at the lower part
of the os parietale, or at leaſt upon the lamdoidal ſu-
ture. * - Sharp's Surgery.
LAME. adj. [laam, lama, Saxon; lam, Dutch.]
1. Crippled ; diſabled in the limbs.
Who reproves the lame, muſt go upright. Daniel.
A fºund, of a mouſe colour, lame of one leg, belongs
to a lady. Arbuth. and Pope’s Mart. Scrib.
2. Hobbling; not ſmooth: alluding to the feet of a verſe.
Our authors write,
Whether in proſe, or verſe, ’tis all the ſame;
The proſe is fuſtian, and the numbers lame. Dry. Perſ:
3. Imperfect; unſatisfactory. -
Shrubs are formed into ſundry ſhapes, by moulding
them within, and cutting them without ; but they are but
lame things, being too ſmall to keep figure.
Swift, who could neither fly nor hide,
Came ſneaking to the chariot ſide;
And offer'd many a lame excuſe,
He never meant the leaſt abuſe. Swift.
To LAM E. v. a. [from the adjective.] To make lame; to
cripple. -
I never heard of ſuch another encounter, which lames re-
port to follow it, and undoes deſcription to do it. Shakeſp.
The ſon and heir
Affronted once a cock of noble kind,
And either lam'd his legs, or ſtruck him blind. Dryd.
If you happen to let the child fall, and lame it, never
confeſs. - Swift.
L'AMELLATED. adj. [lamella, Latin.] Covered with films or
lates. * -
P The lamellated antennae of ſome inſe&amp;ts are ſurpriſingly
beautiful, when viewed through a microſcope. Derham.
LAME'LY. adj. [from lame.] -
1. Like a cripple; without natural force or ačtivity.
Thoſe muſcles become callous, and, having yielded to the
extenſion, the patient makes ſhift to go upon it, though
lamely, I/iſeman's Surgery.
2. Imperfectly; without a full or complete exhibition of all the
parts.
Look not ev'ry lineament to ſee, }
Bacon.
Some will be caſt in ſhades, and ſome will be
So lamely drawn, you ſcarcely know 'tis ſhe. Dryden.
LA/MEN Ess. n.ſ. [from lame.]
1. The ſtate of a cripple ; loſs or inability of limbs.
Let blindneſs, lameneſs come ; are legs and eyes
Of cqual value to ſo great a prize : ſº
Lameneſs kept me at home Digby to Pope.
2. Imperfection; weakneſs.
If the ſtory move, or the actor help the lamentſ of it
with his performance, either of theſe are ſufficient to effect
a preſent liking. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
To ilAMENT. v. n. [lamentor, Latin; lamenter, French..] To
mourn; to wail; to grieve ; to expreſs ſorrow.
The night has been unruly where we lay;
And chimneys were blown down ; and, as they ſay,
Lamentings heard i' th' air, ſtrange ſcreams of death. Shakespeare.
Ye ſhall weep and lament, but the world ſhall rejoice. john.
Jeremiah lamented for Joſiah, and all the ſinging-men, and
women ſpake of Joſiah in their lamentations. 2 Chrºn.
15 B In
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">-
L A M
in their wailing they ſhall take up * lamentation for thee,
and lament over thee. Ezek. xxvii. 32.
Farieſ. I now himent for one whole world
Of wicked ſons deſtroy'd, than 1.79%;
For one man found ſo . ... ld
uchſafes to raiſe another wor -
...” Milton's Par, Loft, b. xi. 1. 874.
To LAMENT. v. a. To bewail; to mourn; to bemoan ; to
T.
*::::. now tow'rds sº . holy load,
nd ſtill, as you are weary of this weight,
#. you, º: I lament §: Henry's corſe. Shakeſpeare.
The pair of ſages praiſe;
One pity'd, one contemn'd the woful times,
One iaugh’d at follies, one lamented crimes. Dryden.
LA/MENT. n.ſ. [lamentum, Latin, from the verb.] -
1. Sorrow audibly expreſſed; lamentation; grief uttered in
complaints or cries. - - -
Long ere our approaching heard within
Noiſe, other than the ſound of dance, or ſong! -
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage. Milton.
The loud laments ariſe, .
Of one diſtreſs'd, and maſtiffs mingled cries. Dryden.
2. Expreſſion of ſorrow.
To add to . º: hearſ.
Wherewith you now bedev king Henry's hearſe,
I muſt . you of a diſmal É. Shakespeare Henry VI.
LA/MENTABLE. adj. [lamentabilis, Latin; lamentable, French,
from lament.]
1. To be lamented; cauſing ſorrow.
The lamentable change is from the beſt; -
The worſt returns to laughter. Shakespeare King Lear.
2. Mournful; ſorrowful; expreſfing ſorrow.
Ahmentable tune is the ſweeteſt muſick to a woful
mind. - Sidney.
The victors to their veſſels bear the prize,
And hear behind loud groans, and lamentable cries: . Dryd.
3. Miſerable, in a ludicrous or low ſenſe; pitiful; deſpicable.
This biſhop, to make out the diſparity between the hea-
thens and them, flies to this lamentable refuge. Stillingſleet.
LA'MENTABLY. adv. [from lamentable.]
1. With expreſſions or tokens of ſorrow; mournfully.
The matter in itſelf lamentable, lamentably expreſſed by
the old prince, greatly moved the two princes to compaſ-
fion. Sidney, b. ii.
2. So as to cauſe ſorrow.
Our fortune on the ſea is out of breath,
And ſinks moſt lamentably. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
3. Pitifully; deſpicably.
LAMENTA’tion. n.ſ. [lamentatio, Latin.] Expreſſion of ſor-
row ; audible grief.
Be’t lawful that I invocate thy ghoſt,
To hear the lamentations of poor Anne. Shakeſ R. III.
His ſons buried him, and all Iſrael made great lamenta-
tion for him. 1 Mac. ii. Io.
LAMENTER. n.ſ.. [from lament.] He who mourns or laments.
Such a complaint good company muſt pity, whether they
think the lamenter ill or not. Spectator, N°. 429.
LA'MENTINE. n.ſ. A fiſh called a ſea-cow or manatee, which
is near twenty feet long, the head reſembling that of a cow,
and two ſhort feet, with which it creeps on the ſhallows and
rocks to get food; but has no fins: the fleſh is commonly
eaten. Bailey.
LAMINA. n.ſ. [Lat.] Thin plate; one coat laid over another.
LA/MINATED. adj. [from lamina.] Plated: uſed of ſuch bo-
dies whoſe contexture diſcovers ſuch a diſpoſition as that of
plates lying over one another.
From the appoſition of different coloured gravel ariſes, for
the moſt part, the laminated appearance of a ſtone. Sharp.
To LAMM. v. a. To beat ſoundly with a cudgel. Die?.
LA/MMAs. n. ſ. [This word is ſaid by Bailey, I know not on
what authority, to be derived from a cuſtom, by which the
tenants of the archbiſhop of York were obliged, at the time
of maſs, on the firſt of Auguſt, to bring a lamb to the al-
tar. In Scotland they are ſaid to wean lambs on this day.
It º elſe be corrupted from lattermath.] The firſt of Au-
guit. -
In 1578 was that famous lammas day, which buried the
reputation of Don John of Auſtria. Bacon.
LAMP. m. ſ. [lampe, French; lampas, Latin.]
1. A light made with oil and a wick.
O thieviſh night,
Why ſhould'ſt thou, but for ſome felonious end,
In thy dark lanthorn thus cloſe up the ſtars
That nature hung in heaven, and fill'd their lamps
With everlaſting oil, to give due light
To the miſled and lonely traveller? Milton.
in lamp furnaces I uſed ſpirit of wine inſtead of oil, and
with the ſame flame has melted foliated gold. Boyle.
2. Any kind of light, in poetical language, real or metapho-
rical.
Thy gentle eyes ſend forth a quick’ning ſpirit,
And feed the dying lamp of life within me. Rowe.
t L A N
Cynthia, fair regent of the night,
O may thy filver lamp from heaven's high bow'r, -
Direct my footſteps in the midnight hour. Gay.
LA/Mpass. n.ſ.. [tampas, French..] A lump of fleſh, about the
bigneſs of a nut, in the roof of a horſe's mouth, which riſes
above the teeth. - * * * * Farrier's Dićf.
His horſe poſſeſt with the glanders, troubled with the lam-
paſs, infected with the faſhions. . . . Shakeſpeare.
LA/MPBLAck. m. ſ. [lamp and black.] It is made by holding
a torch under the bottom of a baſon, and as it is furred ſtrike
it with a feather into ſome ſhell, and grind it with gum
Water. Peacham on Drawing.
LAM'PING, adj. [azpráðww.] Shining; ſparkling.
Happy lines, on which with ſtarry light
Thoſe lamping eyes will deign ſometimes to look. Spenſºr.
LAMPO'ON. n.ſ. (Bailey derives it from lampons, a drunken
ſong. It imports, let us drink, from the old French lamper,
and was repeated at the end of each couplet at carouſals.
Trev.] A perſonal ſatire; abuſe; cenſure written not to re-
form but to vex.
They ſay my talent is ſatire; if ſo, it is a fruitful age:
they have ſown the dragon's teeth themſelves, and it is but
juſt ". ſhould feap each other in lampoons. Dryden.
Make ſatiré a lampoon. Pope.
To LAMPo'on. v. a. [from the noun..] To abuſe with perſo-
nal ſatire.
LAMpo'on ER. m. ſ. [from lampoon..] A ſcribbler of perſonal
ſatire.
We are naturally diſpleaſed with an unknown critick, as
the ladies are with a lampooner, becauſe we are bitten in the
dark. Dryden's Aºn.
The ſquibs are thoſe who are called libellers, lampooners,
and pamphleteers. Tatler, Nº. 88.
LA'MPREY. n.ſ. (lamprove, French; lampreye, Dutch.] -
Many fiſh much like the eel frequent both the ſea and freſh
rivers; as, the lamprel, lamprey, and lamperne. //alton.
LAMP Ron. m. ſ. A kind of ſea fiſh.
Theſe rocks are frequented by lamprons, and greater fiſhes,
that devour the bodies of the drowned. Notes on the Odyſſey.
LANCE. n.ſ. [lance, French; lancea, Latin.] A long ſpear,
which, in the heroick ages, ſeems to have been generally
thrown from the hand, as by the Indians at this day. In
later times the combatants thruſt them againſt each other on
horſeback. -
He carried his lances which were ſtrong, to give a lancely
blow. Sidney.
Plate ſin with gold,
And the ſtrong lance of juſtice hurtleſs breaks:
Arm it in rags, a pigmy's ſtraw doth pierce it. Shakespeare
They ſhall hold the bow and the lance. jer. 1. 42.
To LAN ce. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To pierce; to cut.
- In fell motion,
With his prepared ſword he charges home
My unprovided body, lanc'd my arm. Shakeſpeare.
In their cruel worſhip they lance themſelves with knives.
Glanville's Scºp. c. 16.
Th’ infernal miniſter advanc'd,
Seiz'd the due vićtim, and with fury lanc'd
Her back, and piercing through her inmoſt heart,
Drew backward. Dryden's Theod, and Honoria.
2. To open chirurgically; to cut in order to a cure.
We do lance
Diſeaſes in our bodies. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
Fell ſorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
Than when it bites, but lanceth not the ſore. Shakespeare
That differs as far from our uſual ſeverities, as the lancings
of a phyſician do from the wounds of an adverſary. D. of Pi.
Lance the ſore,
And cut the head; for till the core is found
The ſecret vice is fed. Dryden's Georg. l. 691.
The ſhepherd ſtands,
And when the lancing knife requires his hands, {
Vain help, with idle pray'rs, from heav'n demands. Dry.
LA'NCELY. adj. [from lance.] Suitable to a lance. Not in uſe.
He carried his lances, which were ſtrong, to give a lancely
blow. Sidney, b. ii.
LANCEPE'sade. m. ſ. [lance ſpezzate, French.] The officer
under the corporal: not now in uſe among us.
To th’ Indies of her arm he flies,
Fraught both with eaſt and weſtern prize,
Which, when he had in vain eſſay’d,
Arm'd like a dapper lancepcſade
With Spaniſh pike, he broach'd a pore. Cleaveland.
LA'Ncet. n.ſ. [lancette, French.] A ſmall pointed chirurgical
inſtrument.
I gave vent to it by an apertion with a lancet, and diſ-
charged white matter. Jºſeman's Surgery.
It differeth from a vein, which in an apparent blue ruń-
neth along the body, and if dexterouſly pricked with a lancet
emitteth a red drop. Brown's Pulgar Brrors. h. iii.
Hippocrates ſaith, blood-letting ſhould be done with broad
- lancets
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A N
in order to make a large orifice: the man-
then was by ſtabbing or pertuſion, as
- Arbuthnot on ancient Coint.
To Lasch. v. 4. [lancer, French. This word is too offen
...unch, it is only a vocal corruption of lance.] To
ſº to caſt as a lance; to throw ; to let fly.
'see whoſe arm can lanch the ſurer bolt, - -
And who's the better Jove. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
Me, only me, the hand of fortune bore, *
U.ſ. to tread that interdicted ſhore:
When Jove tremendous in the ſable deep, - –
Launchd his red light'ning at our ſcatter d ſhips. - Pope.
Lascination. m. ſ. [from lancino, Latin.] Tearing; la-
lºcets dr fwords, in
ner of opening a vein
in horſts.
ceration. - -
To LA'NciNATE. v. 4. [lancino, Latin.] To tear; to rend;
to lacerate.
LAND. m. ſ. [lant, Gothick, Saxon, and ſo all the Teuto-
I º ! region; diſtinét from other countries.
- All the nations of Scythia, like a mountain flood, did
overflow all Spain, and quite drowned and waſhed away
whatſoever reliques there were left of the land-bred people.
Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Thy ambition,
Thou ſcarlet fin, robb'd this bewailing land
Of noble Buckingham. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
what had he done to make him fly the land? Shakespeare
The chief men of the land had great authority; though
the covernment was monarchical, it was not deſpotick.
b Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
2. Earth; diſtinét from water. - -
The princes delighting their conceits with confirming their
knowledge, ſeeing wherein the ſea-diſcipline differed from
the landjervice, they had pleaſing entertainment. Sidney.
He to-night hath boarded a land-carrack;
If it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever. Shakeſpeare.
By land they found that huge and mighty country. Abbot.
With eleven thouſand land-ſoldiers, and twenty-ſix ſhips of
war, we within two months have won one town. Bacon.
Neceſſity makes men ingenious and hardy; and if they
have but land-roºm or ſea-room, they find ſupplies for their
hunger. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Yet, if thougo'ſt by land, tho' grief poſſeſs
My ſoul ev'n then, my fears would be the leſs:
But ah! be warn'd to ſhun the wat'ry way. Dryden.
They turn their heads to ſea, their ſterns to land,
And greet with greedy joy th’Italian ſtrand. Dryden.
, I writ not always in the proper terms of navigation, or
land-ſervice. r Dryden's Aeneis.
The French are to pay the ſame duties at the dry ports
through which they paſs by land-carriage, as we pay upon
importation or exportation by ſea. Addison Freeholder.
The Phoenicians carried on a land-trade to Syria and
Meſopotamia, and ſtopt not ſhort, without puſhing their
trade to the Indies. Arbuthnot on Coins,
The ſpecies brought by land-carriage were much better
than thoſe which came to Egypt by ſea. Arbuthnot.
3. Ground; ſurface of the place. tººl.
Beneath his ſteely caſque he felt the blow,
And roll'd, with limbs relax’d, along the land. Pope.
4. An eſtate real and immoveable.
To forfeit all your goods, land, and tenements,
Caſtles, and goods whatſoever, and to be
Qut of the king's protećtion. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
He kept himſelf within the bounds of loyalty, and enjoy-
tº certain land; and towns in the borders of Polonia. Knolºs.
This man is freed from ſervile hands,
Of hope to riſe, or fear to fall:
Lord of himſelf, though not of lands,
And having nothing, yet hath all. JWotton.
5. Nation; people.
Theſe anſwers in the filent night receiv'd,
The king himſelf divulg'd, the land believ'd. Dryden.
Uine [pions, Saxon.] "As
Probably this was a coarſe expreſſion in the cant ſtrain,
"merly in common uſe, but findelaid aſide and forgotten,
which meant the taking away a man's life. For land or lant
** old word for urine, and to ſtop the common paſſages
* functions of nature is to kill.
You are abuſed, and by ſome putter on,
That will be damn'd foºt; would I knew the villain,
T | would land-damn him. Shakespeare Winter Tale.
****P. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſet on ſhore.
- You ſhall hear
The legions, now in Gallia, ſooner landed
our, not fearing Britain. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
I told him of the army that was landed;
He laughed at it. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
e who rules the raging wind,
To thee, Q ſacred ſhip, be kind,
by committed pledge reſtore,
And land him ſafely on the ſhore. Dryden's Horace.
LA'NDING.
LA'NDING-place.
Hanmer.
... Another Typhis ſhall new ſeas explore, – .
Another Argo land the chiefs upon th’ Iberian ſhore. Dry.
To LAND. v. n. To come to ſhore.
Let him land, * ,
And ſolemnly ſee him ſet on to London. Shakespeare H. n. V.
Land ye not, none of you, and provide to be gone from
this coaſt within ſixteen days. Bacon's New Atlantis.
I land, with luckleſs omens; then adore
Their gods. Dryden’s AEmeis.
LAND-Forces. n. ſ. [land and force..] Watlike powers not
naval; ſoldiers that ſerve on land. -
We behold in France the greateſt land-fºrces that have ever
been known under any chriſtian prince. Temple.
LAN'DED. adj. [from land.] Having a fortune, not in money
but in land. - - - º
A landleſs knight makes thee a landed ſquire. Shakespeare
Men, whoſe living lieth together in one ſhire, are con-
monly counted greater landed than thoſe whoſe livings are
diſperſed, Bacon's Collection of Good and Evil.
Cromwell's officers, who were for levelling lands while
they had none, when they grew landed fell to crying up
magna charta. - - Temple.
A houſe of commons muſt conſiſt, for the moſt part, of
landed men. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 29.
LANDFAll. n.ſ. ſland and fall.] A ſudden tranſlation of pro-
perty in land by the death of a rich man.
LAND'flooD. m. ſ. [land and flood.] Inundation.
Apprehenſions of the affections of Kent, and all other
places, looked like a landflood, that might roll they knew
not how far. Clarendon.
LA'NDHolder. n.ſ. [land and holder.] One whoſe fortune is
in land.
Money, as neceſſary to trade, may be conſidered as in his
hands that pays the labourer and landholder; and if this man
want money, the manufacture is not made, and ſo the trade
is loſt. Locke.
LA'Ndjobber. n. ſ. [land and job.] One who buys and ſells
lands for other men.
If your maſter be a miniſter of ſtate, let him be at home
to none but his land-jobbers, or his inventor of new funds.
Swift's Direétions to the Steward.
LA'NDGRAVE. m. ſ. ſland and grave, a count, German.] A
German title of dominion.
}n. J. [from land.] The top of ſtairs.
Let the ſtairs to the upper rooms be upon a fair, open
newel, and a fair landing-place at the top. Bacon.
The landing-place is the uppermoſt ſtep of a pair of ſtairs,
viz. the floor of the room you aſcend upon. Moxon.
There is a ſtair-caſe that ſtrangers are generally carried
to ſee, where the eaſineſs of the aſcent, the diſpoſition of
the lights, and the convenient landing, are admirably well
contrived. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
What the Romans called veſtibulum was no part of the
houſe, but the court and landing-place between it and the
ſtreet. Arbuthnot on Coins.
LA'NDLADY. n.ſ. [land and lady.]
1. A woman who has tenants holding from her.
2. The miſtreſs of an inn.
If a ſoldier drinks his pint, and offers payment in Wood's
halfpence, the landlady may be under ſome difficulty. Swift.
LA'Ndless. [from land.] Without property; without fortune,
Young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle, hot and full,
Hath in the ſkirts of Norway, here and there,
Shark'd up a liſt of landleſs reſolutes. Shakespeare Ham'et.
A landleſ, knight hath made a landed ſquire. Shakespeare
LA'Ndlocked. adj. [land and lock.] Shut in, or incloſed with
land.
There are few natural parts better landlocked, and cloſed
on all ſides, than this ſeems to have been. Addison on Italy.
LA'NDloper. n.ſ. [land and loopen, Dutch..] A landman; a
term of reproach uſed by ſeamen of thoſe who paſs their
lives on ſhore.
LA'Ndlor D. n.ſ. [land and lord]
1. One who owns land or houſes, and has tenants under him.
This regard ſhall be had, that in no place, under any
1andlord, there ſhall be many of them placed together,
but diſperſed. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The univerſal landlord. Shakespeare Ant. and Gleopatra.
It is a generous pleaſure in a landlord, to love to ſee all his
tenants look fat, ſleek, and contented. Cariſſa.
2. The maſter of an inn.
Upon our arrival at the inn, my companion fetched out
the jolly landlord, who knew him by his whiſtle. Addiſon.
LA(NDMARK. m. ſ. [and and mark.] Anything ſet up to pre-
ſerve the boundaries of lands.
I' th' midſt, an altar, as the land-mark, ſtocd,
Ruſtick, of graſſy ſod. Milton's Par. / off, b. xi, l. 432.
Then land-marks limited to each his Right; -
For all before was common as the light. Dryden.
Though they are not ſelf-evident principles, yet if they
have
,"
-- A Tºº-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A N
I, A N
have been made out from them by a wary and unqueſtion-
able deduction, they may ſerve as land-marás, to ſhew what
lies in the direct way of truth, or is quite beſides it. Lºcke.
LANDscAPE. m. ſ. [andºhºe, Dutch. J -
1. A region; the proſpect of a country.
Lovely ſeem'd
That landſhaft. ' and of pure, now purer air,
Meets his approach. A filton's Par. Lºft, b. iv. d. 153.
He ſcarce upriſen,
Shot parallel to th’ carth his dewy ray,
Diſco ring in wide lan ºf all the eaſt -
Of parºdite, and Eden's happy plains. Alſº ºn.
Straight mine cyc hath caught new pleaſures,
Whilſt the lººſcape round it meaſures,
Ruſſet lawns and fallows grey,
Where the nibbling flocks do ſtray. A/iltºn.
We are like men entertained with the view of a ſpacious
landſcape, where the eye paſſes over one pleaſing proſpect into
another. - Addison.
2. A picture, repreſenting an extent of ſpace, with the various
objects in it.
As good a poet as you are, you cannot make finer land-
ſcapes than thoſe about the king's houſe. Addison Guard.
Oft in her glaſs the muſing ſhepherd ſpies
The wat'ry landºape of the pendant woods,
And abſent trees, that tremble in the floods. Pope.
LAND-TAx. m. ſ. [land and tax.] Tax laid upon land and
houſes.
If mortgages were regiſtered, land-taxes might reach the
lender to pay his proportion. - - Locke.
LAND-wA1'ſ ER. m. ſ. [land and waiter.] An officer of the
cuſtoms, who is to watch what goods are landed.
Give a guinea to a knaviſh land-waiter, and he ſhall con-
nive at the merchant for cheating the queen of an hun-
dred. - Swift's Examiner, Nº. 27.
LA's Dw ARD. adv. [from land.] Towards the land.
They are invincible by reaſon of the overpouring moun-
tains that back the one, and ſlender fortification of the other
to landward. Sandys's journey.
LARE. m. ſ. [laen, Dutch; lana, Saxon.]
1. A narrow way between hedges.
All flying -
Through a ſtraight lane, the enemy full-hearted
Struck down ſome mortally. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
I know each lane, and every alley green,
Dingle or buſhy dell, of this wild wood,
And every boſky bourn. - AM:/ton.
Through a cloſe lane as I purſu'd my journey. Otway.
A pack-horſe is driven conſtantly in a narrow lane and dir-
ty road. Locke.
2. A narrow ſtreet; an alley.
There is no ſtreet, not many lames, where there does not
live one that has relation to the church. Sprat's Sermons.
3. A paſſage between men ſtanding on each ſide.
The earl's ſervants ſtood ranged on both fides, and made
the king a lane. Bacon's Henry VII.
LA'NERET. n.ſ. A little hawk.
LANGUAGF. m. ſ. [language, French ; lingua, Latin.]
1. Human ſpeech.
We may define language, if we conſider it more materially,
to be letters, forming and producing words and ſentences;
but if we conſider it according to the deſign thereof, then
language is apt ſigns for communication of thoughts. Hºlder.
2. The tongue of one nation as diſtinét from others.
O! good my lord, no Latin ;
I am not ſuch a truant ſince my coming, -
As not to know the language I have liv'd in. Shakespeare .
He not from Rome alone, but Greece,
Like Jaſon, brought the golden fleece;
To him that language, though to none
Of th’ others, as his own was known. Denham.
3. Stile ; manner of expreſſion.
Though his language ſhould not be refin'd,
It muſt not be obſcure and impudent. Roſcommon.
Others for language all their care expreſs,
And value books, as women, men, for dreſs:
Their praiſe is ſtill – the ſtile is excellent;
The ſenſe, they humbly take upon content. Pope.
LA's GUAGED. adj. [from the noun.]
Having various languages,
He wand'ring long a wider circle made,
And many languag’d nations has ſurvey’d. Pope.
LANGUAGE-M Ast ER. n.ſ. [language and maſter.] One whoſe
profeſſion is to teach languages. -
The third is a ſort of language-maſter, who is to inſtruct
them in the ſtile proper for a miniſter. Speciator, Nº. 305.
LANGUE r. m. ſ. [languette, French..] Any thing cut in the
form of a tongue.
LANGUID. ad. [languidus, Latin.]
1. Faint; weak; feeble."
Whatever renders the motion of the blood languid, diſ-
poſºth to an acid acrimony; what accelerates the mºon of
the blood, diſpoſºth to an alkaline acrimony. Zººt.
No ſpace can be aſſigned ſo vaſt, but ºil a lar cr may be
imagined ; no motion ſo ſwift or lººt, but a feater ye-
locity or ſlowneſs may ſtill be conceived. i.e.: y’s Sºrº.
2. Dull; heartleſs.
- I'll haſ on to my troops,
And fire their languid ſouls with Cato's virtue.
LA’s GUIDLY. adv. [from languid J Weekly ; feebly.
The menſtruum work'd as languidly upon the cora!, as it
did before they were put into the receiver. Bºle.
LAN’Gu IDN Ess. m. ſ. [from languid.] Weakneſs; feebleneſs ;
want of ſtrength. -
To LA'NGUISH. v. m. ſlanguºr, French : languez, Latin. J
1. To grow feeble; to pinc away; to loſe ſtrength.
Let her languiſh
A drop of blood a-day; and, being aged,
Die of this folly. Shaº'ſ car's Cymbeline.
We and our fathcrº do languſ of ſuch diſeaſes. 2 #/ºr.
What can we expect, but that her languiſhings ſhould end
in death. Decay ºf Piety.
His ſorrows bore him off"; and ſoftly laid
His languiſh’d limbs upon his homely bed. Dryden's ºl.
2. To be no longer vigorous in motion ; not to be vivid in ap-
pearance.
Alºn.
The troops with hate inſpir’d,
Their darts with clamour at a diſtance drive,
And only keep the langiº'd war alive. Dryden's Aºn.
3. To ſink or pine under ſorrow, or any ſlow paſſion.
What man who knows
What woman is, yea, what ſhe cannot chuſe
But muſt be, will his free hours languiſh out
For aſſur’d bondage. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
The land ſhall mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein
languiſh. Hºſ. iv. 3.
I have been talking with a ſuitor here,
A man that languiſhes in your diſpleaſure. Shakespeare Othell.
I was about fifteen when I took the liberty to chuſe for
myſelf, and have ever ſince languiſhed under the diſpleaſure
of an inexorable father. Addison's Speciator, N°. 181.
Let Leonora conſider, that, at the very time in which ſhe
Ianguiſhes for the loſs of her deceaſed lover, there are perſons
juſt periſhing in a ſhipwreck. Addison's Spect. Nº. 163.
4. To look with ſoftneſs or tenderneſs.
What poems think you ſoft, and to be read
With languiſhing regards, and bending head
LA/NGUISH. n.ſ. [from the verb..] Soft appearance.
And the blue languiſh of ſoft Allia's eye. Pºpe.
Then forth he walks,
Beneath the trembling languiſh of her beam,
With ſoften’d ſoul. Thomſºn's Spring, l. 1635.
LA/NGUISHINGLY. adv. [from languiſhing.]
1. Weakly; feebly; with feeble ſoftneſs.
Leave ſuch to tune their own dull rhimes, and know
What's roundly ſmooth, or languiſhingly ſlow. Pope.
2. Dully; tediouſly.
Alas! my Dorus, thou ſeeſt how long and languiſhingly the
weeks are paſt over fince our laſt talking. Sidney.
LA's GUIs HMENT. n.ſ. [languiſºnment, French ; from languiſh.]
1. State of pining.
By that count, which lovers books invent,
The ſphere of Cupid forty years contains ;
Which I have waſted in long languiſhment,
That ſeem'd the longer for my greater pains. Spenſºr.
2. Softneſs of mein.
Humility it expreſſes, by the ſtooping or bending of the
head; languiſhment, when we hang it on one ſide. Dryden.
LA'NG UoR. m. ſ. [languor, Latin ; langueur, French.] Languor
and laſſitude ſignifies a faintneſs, which may ariſe from want
or decay of ſpirits, through indigeſtion, or too much exer-
ciſe; or from an additional weight of fluids, from a diminu-
tion of ſecretion by the common diſcharges. &amp;tiny.
Well hoped I, and fair beginnings had,
That he my captive languor ſhould redeem. Spenſ. Fa, Q.
For theſe, theſe tribunes, in the duſt I write -
My heart's deep languor, and my ſoul's ſad teats. Shºeſ.
Academical diſputation gives vigour and briſkneſs to the
mind thus exerciſed, and relieves the languor of private ſtudy
and meditation. // atts's Improvement of the Mind.
To iſles of fragrance, lily-ſilver'd vales
Diffuſing languor in the panting gales. Dunciad.
LA'Nduokous. adj. [languoreux, Fr.] Tedious; melancholy.
Dear lady, how ſhall I declare thy caſe,
Whom late I left in languorous conſtraint. Spenſ. Fa. Qu.
To LA(NIAt E. v. a. [unio, Latin.] To tear in pieces; to
rend ; to lacerate.
LA'N if ice. m. ſ. [lanſficium, Latin.] Woollen manufacture.
The moth breedeth upon cloth and other lanifices, eſpe-
cially if they be laid up dankiſh and wet. Bacon.
LA'N1GERous. adj. [lenger, i.atin.] Bearing wool.
Dryden.
LANK.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A P
L A P
:K. ad;. ſ.lancke, Dutch.]
lº. ºff: up; not ſtiffened out; not fat; not plump;
*. commons haſt thou rack'd ; the clergy's bags
Are lant and lean with thy extortions. Shakeſpeare.
Name not Winterface, whoſe ſkin's ſlack,
Lant, as an unthrift's purſe: Bonne.
we ſet down into the receiver a great bladder well tied
at the neck, but very lank, as not containing above a pint
of air, but capable of containing ten times as much. Boyle.
Moſt earth produces corn and graſs, but both
Too rank and too luxuriant in their growth.
fºr not my land ſo large a promiſe boaſt,
Left the lank ears in length of ſtem. be loſt.
Now, now my bearded harveſt gilds the plain.
Thus dreams the wretch, and vainly thus dreams on,
Dryden.
Till his lank purſe declares his money gone. Dryden.
Meagre ...! lank with faſting grown,
And nothing left but ſkin and bone; -
They juſt keep life and ſoul together. Swift.
ñº flems to uſe this word for faint; languid.
2. *:::::: of her woes, rear'd her º head,
And gave her to his daughters to imbathe
in nºtard lavers ſtrew'd with aſphodil.
LANKness. n.ſ...[from 'anºl Want of plumpneſs.
LANNER. m. ſ. ſlamitſ. Fr. lannarius, Lat.] A ſpecies of hawk.
LA'NsquENET. n. f (lance and knecht, Dutch.]
1. A common foot-ſoldier.
2. A game at cards. º - - -
LANTERN. m. ſ. Ilanterne, French; laterna, Latin: it is by
miſtake often written lan:horn.] A tranſparent caſe for a
candle.
Milton.
God ſhall be ;. hope, h
ſtay, my guide, my lanthorn to my feet. Shakespeare
#. #. .*. y thou beareſt * lanthorn in º
poop, but 'tis in the noſe of thee; thou art the knight of
the burning lamp. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
A candle laſteth longer in a lanthorn than at large. Bacon.
Amongſt the excellent aćts of that king, one hath the pre-
eminence, the erection and inſtitution of a ſociety, which we
call Solomon's houſe; the nobleſt foundation that ever was,
and the lanthorn of this kingdom. - Bacon's Atlantis.
O thieviſh night;
Why ſhouldſt thou, but for ſome felonious end,
In thy dark lanthorn thus cloſe up the ſtars,
That nature hung in heav'n, and fill'd their lamps
With everlaſting oil, to give due light
To the miſled and lonely traveller. Milton.
Vice is like a dark lanthorn, which turns its bright ſide
only to him that bears it, but looks black and diſmal in an-
other's hand. - Govern. Tong.
Judge what a ridiculous thing it were, that the continued
ſhadow of the earth ſhould be broken by ſudden miraculous
eruptions of light, to prevent the art of the lantern-maker.
More's Divine Dialogues.
There are at Paris, Madrid, Liſbon, Rome, great hoſpi-
tals, in the walls of which are placed machines in the ſhape
of large lanthorns, with a little door in the ſide of them. Addison
Our ideas ſucceed one another in our minds, not much
unlike the images in the inſide of a lanthorn, turned round
by the heat of a candle. Locke.
2. A º a light hung out to guide ſhips.
aprea, where the lanthorn fix’d on high
Shines like a moon through the benighted Sky,
While by its beams the wary ſailor ſteers. . Addiſon.
LANTERN jaws. A term uſed of a thin viſage, ſuch as if a
candle were burning in the mouth might tranſmit the light.
Being very lucky in a pair of long lanthorn-jaws, he wrung
his face into a hideous grimace. Addiſon's Speci. No. 173.
*Voinous. adj. [lanuginoſus, Latin. Downy; covered
with ſoft hair.
*.*.ſ (leppe, Saxon; loppe, German.]
* The looſe part of a garment, which may be doubled at
pleaſure.
If joint of meat falls on the ground, take it up gently,
Wºpe it with the lap of your coat, and then put it into the
diſh. Swift's Directions to a Footman.
* The part of the cloaths that is ſpread horizontally over the
“...as one fits down, ſo as anything may lie in it.
It ſeeds each living plant with liquid ſap, -
And fills with flowers fair Flora's painted }. Spenſer.
Upon a day, as love lay ſweetly ſlumb'ring
All in his mothers lap,
Agentle bee, with his loud trumpet murm'ring,
...About him flew by hap. Spenſºr.
I'll make my haven in a lady's lap,
And 'witch ſweet ladies with my words and looks. Shakespeare
She bids you
All on the wanton ruſhes lay you down,
And teſt your gentle head upon her lap,
And ſhe will fing the ſong that pleaſeth you. Shakespeare
- Let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our ſtirring
Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
The ne'er-luſt-wearied Antony. Shakespeare Ant, and Cºcºa.
Heav'n's almighty fire
Melts on the boſom of his love, and pours
Himſelf into her lap in fruitful ſhow’rs. Craſhaw.
Men expect that religion ſhould coſt them no pains, and
that happineſs ſhould drop into their laps. Tillºn.
He ſtruggles into breath, and cries for aid;
Then, helpleſs, in his mother's lap is laid.
He creeps, he walks, and iſſuing into man,
Grudges their life from whence his own began :
Retchleſs of laws, affects to rule alone,
Anxious to reign, and reſtleſs on the throne.
To LAP. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To wrap or twiſt round any thing. -
He hath a long tail, which, as he deſcends from a tree,
he laps round about the boughs, to keep himſelf from fall-
ing. Grew's Muſeum,
About the paper, whoſe two halves were painted with red
and blue, and which was ſtiff like thin paſteboard, I lapped
ſeveral times a ſlender thread of very black ſilk. Newton.
2. To involve in any thing.
As through the flow'ring foreſt raſh ſhe fled,
In her rude hairs ſweet flowers themſelves did lap,
And flouriſhing freſh leaves and bloſſoms did enwrap. Spenſ.
The thane of Cawder 'gan a diſmal conflićt,
Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
Confronted him. º Macbeth.
When we both lay in the field,
Frozen almoſt to death, how he did lap me,
Ev’n in his garments, and did give himſelf,
Dryden.
All thin and naked, to the numb cold night. Shakeſpeare.
Ever againſt eating cares,
Lap me in ſoft f. airs. Milton.
Indulgent fortune does her care employ,
And ſmiling, broods upon the naked boy;
Her garment ſpreads, and laps him in the folds,
And covers with her wings from nightly colds. Dryden.
Here was the repoſitory of all the wiſe contentions for
power between the nobles and commons, lapt up ſafely in
the boſom of a Nero and a Caligula. Swift.
To LAP. v. n. To be ſpread or twiſted over any thing.
The upper wings are opacous; at their hinder ends, where
they lap over, tranſparent, like the wing of a fly.__ Grew.
To LAP. v. n. [lappian, Saxon; lappen, Dutch..] To feed by
quick reciprocations of the tongue.
The dogs by the river Nilus' ſide being thirſty, lap haſtily
as they run along the ſhore. Digby on bodies.
They had ſoups ſerved up in broad diſhes, and ſo the fox
fell to lapping himſelf, and bade his gueſt lº, wel-
Conne. L’Eſtrange, Fab. 31.
The tongue ſerves not only for taſting, but for maſtica-
tion and deglutition, in man, by licking; in the dog and cat
kind, by lapping. Ray on Creation.
To LAP. v. a. To lick up.
For all the reſt
They'll take ſuggeſtion, as a cat laps milk. Shakeſpeare.
Upon a bull
Two horrid lyons rampt, and ſeis'd, and tugg’d off, bel-
lowing ſtill, º .
Both men and dogs came; yet they tore the hide, and
lapt their fill. Chapman's Iliad, b. xviii.
LA'pdog, n.ſ. [lap and dog..] A little dog, fondled by ladies
in the lap. - -
One of them made his court to the lap-dºg, to improve
his intereſt with the lady. " . Collier.
Theſe if the laws § that exchange afford, , .
Would ſave their lap-dog ſooner than their lord. Dryden.
Lap-dogs give themſelves the rowſing ſhake,
And ſleepleſs lovers juſt at twelve awake. Pope.
º n.J. [lap and full.] As much as can be contained
in the lap. -
One found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild goards
his lapful, and ſhred them into the pot of pottage; 2 Kings.
Wiſ four per cent. increaſe the number of lenders? if it
will not, then all the plenty of money theſe conjurers beſtow
upon us, is but like the gold and filver which old women be-
lieve other conjurers ºff. by whole lapſulls on poor cre-
dulous girls. ocłe.
La Picide. n.ſ. [lapicida, Latin.] A ſtonecutter. Dićf.
LA'pidaky. n.ſ.. [apidaire, Fr. J. One who deals in ſtones or
emS. -
£ As a cock was turning up a dunghil, he eſpicq a diamond:
well (ſays he) this ſparkling foolery now to a lapidary would
have been the making of him ; but, as to any uſe of mine,
a barley-corn had been worth forty on't, L’Eſtrange.
Of all the many ſorts of the gem kind reckoned up by the
lapidaries, there are not above three or four that are ori-
ginal. I/ozdward's Nat. Hył.
To
15 C<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A R
L A P
To LA'pidate. v. a. ſlopidº, flatin.] To ſtone; to *...*
107.
l - -
Lºos. n.ſ. ſiapidatio; Lat. lapidation, Fr.] A ſtoning.
IXrºpeous. adj. [apideus, Latin.] Stony; of the nature of
ſtone. - - - -
There might fall down into the lapideous matter, before it
was concreted into a ſtone, ſome ſmall toad, which might
remain there impriſoned, till the matter about it were con-
denſed. - Ray on Creation.
Lapºpe'scence. n. ſ. [lapidſ”, Latin.] Stony concretion. .
Of lapis ceratites, or cornu foſſile, in ſubterraneous cavi-
ties, there are many to be found in Germany, which are
but the lapideſcencies, and putrefactive mutations, of hard
bodies. Brown's Vulgar Errors, b. iii. c. 22.
LArºpe'scent. adj. [lapideſcens, Latin.] Growing or turning
to ſtone.
Larrºrication. [lapidification, French.] The act of form-
ing ſtones. -
induration or lapidfication of ſubſtances more ſoft, is an-
other degree of condenſation. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Lapprººk. adj. [lapidifique, French.J Forming ſton.
The atoms of the lapidifick, as well as ſaline principle, be-
ing regular, do concur in producing regular ſtones. Grew.
Laºdist. n.ſ.. [from lapides, Latin.] A dealer in ſtones or
ems.
g Hardneſs, wherein ſome ſtones exceed all other bodies,
being exalted to that degree, that art in vain endeavours to
counterfeit it, the faditious ſtores of chemiſts in imitation
being eaſily detected by an ordinary lapidi/?. Ray on Creation.
IA'PIS. n.ſ. [Latin.] A ſtone.
LA/PIs Lazuli.
The lapis lazuli, or azure ſtone, is a copper ore, very
compaćt and hard, ſo as to take a high poliſh, and is work:
ed into a great variety of toys. It is found in detached
lumps, º of the ſize of a man's fiſt, of an elegant blue
colour, beautifully variegated with clouds of white, and veins
of a ſhining gold colour: that of Aſia and Africa, is much
ſuperior to the Bohemian or German kind: it has been uſed
in medicine, but the preſent practice takes no notice of it:
to it the painters are indebted for their beautiful ultra-marine
colour, which is only a calcination of lapis lazuli. Hill.
LA'PPER. m. ſ. [from lap.]
1. One who wraps up.
They may be lappers of linen, and bailiffs of the ma-
nor. Swift's Conſideration on Two Bills.
2. One who laps or licks.
LA/PPET. n.ſ.. [diminutive of lap.] The parts of a head dreſs
that hang looſe.
How naturally do you apply your hands to each other's
lappets, and ruffles, and mantuas. Swift.
LAPSE. n.ſ. [lapſus, Latin.]
1, Flow; fall; glide.
Round I ſaw
Hill, dale, and ſhady woods, and ſunny plains,
And liquid lapſe of murm'ring ſtreams. Milton.
Notions of the mind are preſerved in the memory, not-
withſtanding lapſe of time. Hale's Original of Mankind.
2. Petty error; ſmall miſtake.
. Theſe are petty errors and minor lapſes, not confiderably
injurious unto truth. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi. c. I3.
The weakneſs of human underſtanding all will confeſs;
yet the confidence of moſt pračtically diſowns it; and it is
eaſier to perſuade them of it from others lapſes than their
own. Glanville's Scºp. c. 9.
This ſcripture may be uſefully applied as a caution to
guard againſt thoſe lapſes and failings, to which our infirmities
daily expoſe us. Rogers's Sermon.
It hath been my conſtant buſineſs to examine whether I
could find the ſmalleſt lapſe in ſtile or propriety through m
whole colle&amp;tion, that I might ſend it abroad as the mo
finiſhed piece. Swift.
3. Tranſlation of right from one to another.
In a preſentation to a vacant church, a layman ought to
. º: months, and a clergyman within fix,
otherwiſe a devolution, or lapſe of right, happens. Ayliffe.
To LAPse. v. n. [from the º gnt, napp ºff.
1. To glide ſlowly; to fall by degrees.
This diſpoſition to ſhorten our words, by retrenching the
vowels, is nothing elſe but a tendency to lapſe into the bar-
barity of thoſe northern nations from whom we are de-
ſcended, and whoſe languages labour all under the ſame de-
feet. . . Swift's Letter to the Lord Treaſurer.
2. To fail in any thing; to ſlip.
I have ever narrified my friends,
Qf whom he's chief, with all the ſize that verity
Would without lapſing ſuffer. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
To lapſe in fulneſs -
Is ſorer than to lie for need; and falſhood
Is worſe in kings than beggars. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
3. To ſlip by inadvertency or miſtake.
Homer, in his characters of Vulcan and Therfites, has
lapſed into the burleſque character, and departed from that
ſerious air eſſential to an epick poem. Addison Speciator.
-
Let there be no wilful nerverſion of another's mean" :
no ſudden ſeizure of a lapſed ſyllable to play upon it. Hºº.
3. To loſe the proper time:
Myſelf flood out;
For which if I be lapſed in this place, --
I ſhall pay dear. Sha}ºffeare's Tºrº! Nºt.
As an appeal may be deſerted by the appellent's lºng
the term of law, ſo it may alſo be deſerted by a lapſe of the
term of a judge. - Aylºff's Parergoz.
4. To fall by the negligence of one proprietor tº another.
If the archbiſhop ſhall not fill it up within ſix months en-
ſuing, it lapſes to the king. Ayliffe's Parergin.
5. To fall from perfection, truth or faith:
Once more I will renew
His lapſed pow'rs, though forfeit, and inthrall’d
By fin to foul exorbitant deſires. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft.
Indeed the charge ſeems deſigned as an artifice of diver-
ſon, a ſprout of that fig-tree which was to hide the naked-
neſs of latſed Adam. Decay of Piety.
All publick forms ſuppoſe it the moſt principal, univerſal,
and daily requiſite to the lapſing ſtate of human corrup-
tion. Decay of Piety.
Theſe were looked on as lapſed perſons, and great ſeveri-
ties of penance were preſcribed them, as appears by the ca-
nons of Ancyra. Stillingfleet's Diſc. on Romiſh Idolatry,
LA'pwing. m. ſ. [lap and wing.] A clamorous bird with long
WingS.
*Ah ! but I think him better than I ſay,
And yet would herein others eyes were worſe:
Far from her neſt the lapwing cries away;
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curſe. Shakespeare
And how in fields the lapwing Tereus reigns,
The warbling nightingale in woods complains. Dryden.
LA'pwork. m. ſ. [lap and work.] Work in which one part is
interchangeably wrapped over the other. -
A baſket made of porcupine quills: the ground is a pack-
thread caul woven, into which, by the Indian women, are
wrought, by a kind of lap-work, the quills of porcupines,
not ſplit, but of the young ones intire ; mixed with white
and black in even and indented waves. Grew's Muſeum.
LA'RBoARD. m. ſ.
The left-hand ſide of a ſhip, when you ſtand with your
face to the head. Harris.
Or when Ulyſſes on the larboard ſhunn'd
Charybdis, and by the other whirlpool ſteer'd. Milton.
Tack to the larboard, and ſtand off to ſea,
Veer ſtarboard ſea and land. Dryden.
LA'RCENY. n.ſ. [larcin, Fr. latrocinium, Lat.] Petty theft.
Thoſe laws would be very unjuſt, that ſhould chaſtīze
murder and petty larceny with the ſame puniſhment. Speciat.
LaRch. m. ſ. [Larix.]
The leaves, which are long and narrow, are produced
out of little tubercles, in form of a painter's pencil, as in
the cedar of Libanus, but fall off in winter; the cones are
ſmall and oblong, and, for the moſt part, have a ſmall
branch growing out of the top; theſe are produced at re-
mote diſtances from the male flowers, on the ſame tree:
the male flowers are, for the moſt part, produced on the un-
der ſide of the branches, and, at their firſt appearance, are
very like ſmall cones. Miller.
Some botanical criticks tell us, the poets have not rightly
followed the traditions of antiquity, in metamorphoſing the
ſiſters of Phaëton into poplars, who ought to have been
turned into larch trees; for that it is this kind of tree which
ſheds a gum, and is commonly found on the banks of the
Po. Addiſon on Italy.
LARD. m. ſ. [lardum, Latin; lard, French.] -
1. The greaſe of ſwine.
So may thy paſtures with their flow'ry feaſts,
As ſuddenly as lard, fat thy lean beaſts. Donne.
2. Bacon; the fleſh of ſwine.
By this the boiling kettle had prepar’d,
, And to the table ſent the ſmoaking lard;
On which with eager appetite they dine,
A ſav'ry bit, that ſerv'd to reliſh wine. Dryden's Ovid.
The ſacrifice they ſped;
Chopp'd off their nervous thighs, and next prepar'd
T” involve the lean in cauls, and mend with lard. Dryden.
To LaRD, v. a. [larder, French; from the noun.]
1. To ſtuff with bacon.
The larded thighs on loaded altars laid. Dryd. Homer.
No man lards ſalt pork with orange peel,
Or garniſhes his lamb with ſpitch-cockt eel. King.
2. To fatten. ~
Now Falſtaff ſweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along. Shakeſp.
Brave ſoldier, doth he lie
Larding the plain. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
3. To mix with ſomething elſe by way of improvement.
I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery; an exact command,
Larded with many ſeveral ſorts of reaſons. Shakespeare Hamlet.
I Let
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">LA R
L A S
Let no alien interpoſe
To lard with wit thy hungry Epſom proſe. . Dryden.
He lords with flouriſhes his long harangue,
'Tis fine, ſayſt thou. Dryd.
aring by heaven; the poets think this nothing, their
... ſº º Aarded with it. Colier's Wiew of the Stage.
iº. n.f. [lardier, old French ; from lard.] The room
where meat is kept or falted. -
This fimilitude is not borrowed of the larder houſe, but
out of the ſchool houſe. - Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
Fleſh is ill kept in a room that is not cool; whereas in
a cool and wet larder it will keep longer. Bacon.
So have I ſeen in larder dark,
Of veal a lucid loin. Dorſet.
Old age,
Moroſe, perverſe in humour, diffident - -
The more he ſtill abounds, the leſs content: - *
His larder and his kitchen too obſerves, -
And now, leſt he ſhould want hereafter, ſtarves. King.
LARDERER. [larder.] One who has the charge of the larder.
TARDON. a. ſ. [French.] A bit of bacon.
LARGE. adj. [large, French ; largus, Latin.]
ig; bulky. -
I. *... i. aſked me, What could be the reaſon, that in
mountainous countries the men were commonly larger, and
yet the cattle of all ſorts ſmaller. Temple.
Great Theron fell,
Great Theron, large of limbs, of giant height. Dryden.
Warwick, Leiceſter, and Buckingham, bear a Iarge boned
ſheep of the beſt ſhape and deepeſt ſtaple. Mortimer's Huſø.
2. Wide; extenſive. -
Their former large peopling was an effect of the countries
impoveriſhing. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for it is
large enough for them. Gen. xxxiv. 21.
There he conquered a thouſand miles wide and large.
- Abbot's Deſcription of the JWorld.
3. Liberal; abundant; plentiful.
Thou ſhalt drink of thy fiſter's cup deep and large. Ezek.
Vernal ſuns and ſhowers
Diffuſe their warmeſt, largeſt influence. Thomſon's Autumn.
4. Copious; diffuſe.
Skippon gave a large teſtimony under his hand, that they
had carried themſelves with great civility. Clarendon, b. viii.
I might be very large upon the importance and advan-
tages of education, and ſay a great many things which have
been ſaid before.
5. At LARGE. Without reſtraint.
If you divide a cane into two, and one ſpeak at the one
end, and you lay your ear at the other, it will carry the voice
farther than in the air at large. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Thus incorporeal ſpirits to ſmalleſt forms -
Reduc’d their ſhapes immenſe; and were at large,
Though without number ſtill. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
The children are bred up in their father's way; or ſo
plentifully provided for, that they are left at large.
Your zeal becomes importunate;
I've hitherto permitted it to rave
And talk at large; but learn to keep it in,
Leſt it ſhould take more freedom than I'll give it. Addison
6. At LARGE. Diffuſely. -*
Diſcover more at large what cauſe that was,
For I am ignorant, and cannot gueſs. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
It does not belong to this place to have that point debated
at large.
LARGEly, adv. [from large.]
1. Widely; extenſively.
2. Copiouſly; diffuſely. -
Where the author treats more largely, it will explain the
ſhºrter hints and brief intimations. Watts's Imp. on the Mind.
3. Liberally; bounteouſly. -
- How he lives and eats :
How largely gives; how ſplendidly he treats.
Thoſe, who in warmer climes complain,
From Phoebus' rays they ſuffer pain,
Muſt own, that pain is largely paid
y gen'rous wines beneath the ſhade.
4. Abundantly.
They their fill of love, and love's diſport
, Took largely; of their mutual guilt the ſeal.
LA "GENEss, n.ſ.. [from large.]
I. *. bulk.
, London excels any other city in the whole world, either
In largentſ, or number of inhabitants. Sprat's Sermons.
Nor muſt Bumaſtus, his old honours loſe,
In length and largeneſ; like the dugs of cows.
* Greatneſs; elevation.
There will be occaſion for largenſ of mind and agreeable-
neſs of temper. Collier of Friendſhip.
3. Extenſion; amplitude.
They which would file away moſt from the largenſ of
* offer, do in more ſparing terms acknowledge little
leſs, Hººker, b. Y. ſ. 27.
Felton on the Claſſicks.
Dryden.
Swift.
Milton.
Dryden.
Sprat. .
Watts. .
* ==_
The ample propoſition that hope makes
In all deſigns begun on earth below, - .
Falls in the promiſed largeneſs. Shakeſp. Trail. and Creſ.
Knowing beſt the !argeneſs of my own heart toward my
people's good and juſt contentment. King Charles.
Shall grief contract the largeneſ of that heart, "
In which nor fear nor anger as a part : I/7 lºr,
Man as far tranſcends the beaſts in largeneſs of deſire, as
dignity of nature and employment. - G inville's Apology.
If the largerieſ of a man's heart carry him bevoni pra-
dence, we may reckon it illuſtrious weakneſs. L'Eſtrange.
4. Wideneſs. - * • * *
Suppoſing that the multitude and largeneſ of rivers ought
to continue as great as now ; we can eaſily prove, that the
extent of the ocean could be no leſs. Bentley's Sermºns.
LA'RGEss. n.f. [largeſſe, Fr.] A preſent; a gift; a bounty.
- - Our coffers with too great a court,
And liberal largeſ, are grown ſomewhat light. Sºft.
He left me; having aſſigned a value of about two thoſi-
ſand ducats, for a bounty to me and my fellows: for they
-- give great largeſſes where they come. Bacon's New Atlantiš.
A pardon to the captain, and a largeſ; .
Among the ſoldiers, had appeas'd their fury. Denham.
The paltry largeſs too ſeverely watch'd, ---
That no intruding gueſts uſurp a ſhare. Dryden's juv.
I am enamoured of Irus, whoſe condition will not ad-
mit of ſuch largeſſes. Addiſon's Spediator.
LARGITION. n.ſ. [largitio, Lat..] The aët of giving. Dià.
LARK. m. ſ. [lapence, Saxon; lerk, Daniſh; lavrack, Scot-
tiſh.] A ſmall ſinging bird. - , A.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn. Shakeſpeare.
Look up a height, the ſhrill-gorg'd lark ſo far
Cannot be ſeen or heard. Shakeſpeare’s King Lear.
Th’ example of the heav'nly lark,
Thy fellow poet, Cowley, mark. Cowley.
Mark how the lark and linnet fing;
With rival notes
They ſtrain their warbling throats,
†. welcome in the ſpring. Dryden.
LA'RKER. m. ſ. [from lark.] A catcher of larks. I)ic?.
LA'RKSPUR. n.ſ.
Its flower conſiſts of many diffimilar petals, with the up-
permoſt contračted, which ends in a tail, and receives an-
other bifid petal, which alſo ends in a tail; in the middle
riſes a pointal, which becomes a fruit of many pods colle&amp;ted
into a head, and filled with ſeeds generally angular. Miller.
LA'RVATED. adj. [larvatus, Latin.j Maſked. Dić7.
LA'RUM. m. ſ. [from alarum or alarm.]
1. Alarm; noiſe noting danger.
Utterers of ſecrets he from thence debarr'd,
His larum bell might loud and wide be heard,
When cauſe requir’d, but never out of time, --
Early and late it rung, at evening and at prime. Fa. Qu.
The peaking cornute her huſband dwelling in a continual
larum of jealouſy, comes to me in the inſtant of our en-
counter. Shakeſpeare's Merry Hººves of Hindſor.
How far off lie theſe armies - .
—Within a mile and half.
—Then ſhall we hear their larum, and they ours. Shakespeare
She is become formidable to all her neighbours; as ſhe
puts every one to ſtand upon his guard, and have a continual
larum bell in his ears. Howell's Vocal Foreſ.
2. An inſtrument that makes a noiſe at a certain hour.
Of this nature was that larum, which, though it were
ut three inches big, yet would both wake a man, and of
itſelf light a candle for him at any ſet hour. J/ilkins.
I ſee men as luſty and ſtrong that eat but two meals a
day, as others that have ſet their ſtomachs, like larums, to
call on them for four or five. Locke on Education.
The young AEneas all at once let down,
Stunn'd with his giddy larum half the town. Dunciad.
LARY'NGotoMY. n.ſ. [A&amp;puy; and rºuww; laryngotomie, Fr.]
An operation where the fore-part of the larynx is divided
to aſſiſt reſpiration, during large tumours upon the upper
parts; as in a quinſey. Hunty.
LARYNx. n.ſ. [xapuy;..] The upper part of the trachea, which
lies below the root of the tongue, before the pharynx, Quincy.
There are thirteen muſcles for the motion of the five car-
tilages of the larynx. Derham Phyſico-Theology.
LAsci’v1ENT. adj. ['aſciviens, Lat.] Frolickſome 5, wantoning.
LAscI'vious. adj. [ldſtivus, Latin.] Leud; luſtful.
In what habit will you go along
—Not like a woman; for I would prevent
The looſe encounters of laſcivious men.
He on Eve
Began to caſt loſivious eyes; ſhe him
As wantonly repaid ; in luſt they burn. Milton's Par. Loft,
Notwithſtanding all their talk of reaſon and philoſophy,
and thoſe unanſwerable difficulties which, over their cups,
they pretend to have againſt chriſtianity; perſuade but the
covetous man not to deify his money, the laſcivious man to
throw off his leud amours, and all their giant-like objections
againſt chriſtianity ſhall preſently variſh. Sºuth's Sermons.
2. Wanton ;
Shakespeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A S
L A S
, Wanton; ſoft; luxurious. . . . . . . . .
2 *. º war hath ſooth'd his wrinkl'd fibnt;
And now, inſtead of mounting barbed ſteeds,
To fright the ſouls of º ...”
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber, -
To ãºng of a lute. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Lasciviousness. n.ſ.. [from laſtivious.] Wantonneſs; looſe-
*. reaſon pretended by Auguſtus was the loſiviouſºſ ºf
his elegies, and his art of love. - Dryd. Preface to id.
iAscºviously. adv. [from laſciviour.] Leudly; wantonly;
looſely. -
LASH.a.ſ. [The moſt probable etymology of this word ſeems
to be that of Skinner, from ſchlagen, Dutch, to ſtrike;
whence ſlaſh and laſh..] - -
1. A ſtroke with anything pliant and tough. -
From hence are heard the groans of ghoſts, the pains
Of ſounding laſhes, and of dragging chains. Dryden's An.
Rous’d by the laſh of his own ſtubborn tail,
Our lion now will foreign foes aſſail. - Dryden.
2. The thong or point of the whip which gives the cut or
blow.
Her whip of cricket's bone, her laſh of film,
Her waggoner a ſmall grey-coated ghat. . . Shakeſpeare.
I obſerved that your whip wanted a laſh to it. Addison Spect.
3. A leaſh, or ſtring in which an animal is held; a ſnare: out
of uſe.
The farmer they leave in the laſh,
With loſſes on every ſide.
4. A ſtroke of ſatire; a ſarcaſm.
The moral is a laſh at the vanity of arrogating that to
Tuffer's Huſbandry,
ourſelves which ſucceeds well. L’Eſtrange.
To Lash. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſtrike with any thing pliant; to ſcourge.
Lucagus to laſh his horſes bends,
Prone to the wheels. Dryden.
Lets whip theſe ſtragglers o'er the ſeas again,
Laſh hence theſe over-weening rags of France. Shakeſp.
Let men out of their way laſh on ever ſo faſt, they are
not at all the nearer their journey's end. South's Serm.
He charg'd the flames, and thoſe that diſobey'd
He laſh'd to duty with his ſword of light. Dryden.
And limping death, laſh'd on by fate,
Comes up to ſhorten half our date. Dryden's Horace.
Stern as tutors, and as uncles hard,
We laſh the pupil, and defraud the ward. Dryden's Perſ.
Leaning on his lance he mounts his car,
His fiery courſers laſhing through the air.
2. To move with a ſudden ſpring or jirk.
The club hung round his ears, and batter'd brows;
He falls; and laſhing up his heels, his rider throws. Dryd.
3. To beat; to ſtrike with a ſharp ſound.
The winds grow high,
Impending tempeſts charge the ſky;
The lightning flies, the thunder roars,
And big waves laſh the frighted ſhoars. Prior.
4. To ſcourge with ſatire.
Could penſion'd Boileau laſh in honeſt ſtrain,
Flatt’rers and bigots ev’n in Louis' reign. Pope's Horace.
. To tie any thing down to the fide or maſt of a ſhip.
#, Lash. v. n. To ply the whip.
They laſh aloud, each other they provoke,
And lend their little ſouls at every ſtroke. Dryden's AEn.
Gentle or ſharp, according to thy choice,
To laugh at follies, or to }} at vice. . Dryden's Perſus.
Wheels claſh with wheels, and bar the narrow ſtreet;
The laſhing whip reſounds. Gay's Trivia.
Lasher, n.ſ.. [from laſh.] One that whips or laſhes.
Lass. n.ſ.. [from lad is formed laddeſs, by contraćtion loſs.
Hicket.] A girl; a maid; a young woman: uſed now only
of mean girls.
Now was the time for vig'rous lads to ſhow
What love or honour could invite them to;
A goodly theatre, where rocks are round
With reverend age, and lovely laſes crown'd. Waller.
A girl was worth forty of our widows; and an honeſt,
downright, plain-dealing laſ, it was. L’Eſtrange.
They ſometimes an haſty kiſs
Steal from unwary laſes; they with ſcorn,
And neck reclin'd, reſent. Philips.
La'ssirups, n.ſ. [laſſitude, Latin; laſſitude, French.] Weari-
neſs; fatigue.
Laſitude is remedied by bathing, or anointing with oil and
**ºn water; for all laſſitude is a kind of contuſion and com-
preſſion of the parts; and bathing and anointing give a re-
laxation or emolition. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Affiduity in cogitation is more than our embodied ſouls can
bear without laſtude or diſtemper. Glanville, Scep. 14.
. She lives and breeds in the air; for the largeneſs and
lightneſs of her wings and tail ſuſtain her without laſſitude.
- More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
Po not over-fatigue the ſpirits, left the mind be ſeized
Garth's Ovid.
with a laſtude, and thereby be tempted to natºtº, ºn!
grow tired. //atts's Improvement ºf the Aind.
From mouth and noſe the briny torrent rail, -
And loſt in laſſitude lay all the man. Pºpe's oº://ey.
Laſitude generally expreſſes that wearineſs which pro- ecd,
from a diſtempered ſtate, and not from exerciſe, which
wants no remedy but reſt: it proceeds from an increaſe "'
bulk, from a diminution of proper evacuation, or from “”
great a conſumption of the fluid neceſſary to maintain the
ſpring of the ſolids, as in fevers; or from a vitiated {ecretion
of that juice, whereby the fibres are not ſupplied. ..., &amp;tin).
LA'sslor N. n.ſ. [laſ; and lorn.] Forſaken by his miſtreſs.
Brown groves,
Whoſe ſhadow the diſmiſſed batchelor loves,
Being laſ/orn. Shapeſpeare's Tºmpºſ'.
LAST. n.ſ. [lazere, Saxon; laet/?, Dutch.]
1. Lateſt; that which follows all the reſt in time.
I feel my end approach, and thus embrac'd,
Am pleas'd to die; but hear me ſpeak my laſt. Dryden.
Here, laſt of Britons, let your names be read :
Are none, none living let me praiſe the dead. Pope.
Wit not alone has ſhone on ages paſt,
But lights the preſent, and ſhall warm the loft. Pope.
2. Hindmoſt ; which follows in order of place.
3. Beyond which there is no more.
Unhappy ſlave, and pupil to a bell,
Unhappy to the laſt the kind releaſing knell. Cowley.
The ſwans, that on Cayſter often try’d
Their tuneful ſongs, now ſung their laſt, and dy'd. Addison
O ! may fam'd Brunſwick be the laſt,
The laſt, the happieſt Britiſh king,
Whom thou ſhalt paint, or I ſhall ſing. Addison.
But, while I take my loſt adieu,
Heave thou no figh, nor ſhed a tear. Prior.
4. Next before the preſent, as loſt week.
5. Utmoſt.
Fools ambitiouſly contend
For wit and pow'r ; their laſt endeavours bend
Tº outſhine each other. Dryden's Lucretius.
6. At Last. In concluſion; at the end.
Gad, a troop ſhall overcome him: but he ſhall overcome
at the laſt. Gen. xlix. 19.
Thus weather-cocks, that for a while
Have turn’d about with ev'ry blaſt,
Grown old, and deſtitute of oil,
Ruſt to a point, and fix at laſt. Freind.
7. The LAst; the end.
All politicians chew on wiſdom paſt,
And blunder on in buſineſs to the laſt. Pope.
Last. adv. -
1. The laſt time; the time next before the preſent.
How long is't now ſincelaſt yourſelf and I
Were in a maſk. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
When laſ! I dy'd, and, dear! I die
As often as from thee I go,
I can remember yet that I
Something did ſay, and ſomething did beſtow. Donne.
2. In concluſion.
Pleas'd with his idol, he commends, admires,
Adores; and laſt, the thing ador'd deſires. Dryden.
To Last. v. n. [laeſzan, Saxon.] To endure; to continue;
to perſevere.
All more laſting than beautiful. Sidney.
I thought it agreeable to my affection to your grace, to
prefix your name before the eſſays: for the Latin volume of
them, being in the univerſal language, may laſt is long as
books laſt. Bacon's Eſſay.
With ſeveral degrees of laſting, ideas are imprinted on the
memory. Locke.
Theſe are ſtanding marks of facts delivered by thoſe who
were eye-witneſſes to them, and which were contrived with
great wiſdom to laſt till time ſhould be no more. Addison.
Last. n.ſ. [laert, Saxon.]
1. The mould on which ſhoes are formed.
The cobler is not to go beyond his loff. L'Eſtrange's Fab.
A cobler produced ſeveral new grins, having been uſed to
cut faces over his laſt. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 174.
Should the big laſt extend the ſhoe too wide,
Each ſtone would wrench th' unwary ſtep aſide. Gay.
2. [Last, German.] A load; a certain weight or meaſure.
LA'stERY. n.ſ. A red colour.
The baſhful blood her ſnowy cheeks did ſpread,
That her became as poliſh'd ivory,
wº. . craftſman's hand hath overlaid,
ith fair vermilion, or pure laſtery. Spenſ. Fairy Queen.
LASTA'GE. m. ſ. [leſſage, French ; laſtagie -
Saxon, a tº [leſſag !/fagie, Dutch ; piaert,
1. Cuſtom paid for freightage.
2. The ballaſt of a ſhip. *
LA'sting. participial adj. [from laſt.]
1. Continuing ; durable.
E Very
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A T
Every violence offered weakens and impairs, and renders
the body leſs durable and º Ray on Creation.
long continuance; peºctual.
2. oº: parents may ". black children, as negroes ſome-
times have lºng white ones. - Boyle on Colours.
The grateful work is done,
The ſeeds of diſcord ſow'd, the war begun:
Frauds, fears and fury, have poſſeſs'd the ſtate, -
And fix’d the cauſes of a laſting hate. Dryden's Żn.
A finew cracked ſeldom recovers its former ſtrength, and
the memory of it leaves a laſting caution in the man, not to
put the part quickly again to any robuſt employment. Locke.
Lºringiy. adv. [from lºſing.J. Perpetually, -
iſ, risoness. n.ſ.. [from loſing:l Durableneſs; continuance.
All more laſting than beautiful, but that the conſideration
of the exceeding laſtingneſ made the eye believe it was ex-
ceeding beautiful. - . . . . Sidney.
Conſider the loftingneſ of the motions excited in the bot-
tom of the eye by light. Newton's Opticks.
LA's TLY. º ſº laſt.]
la 2CC. -
I. * º, the quarrel; ſecondly, balance the forces;
and, lofty, propound variety of deſigns for choice, but not
adviſe the choice. Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
2. In the concluſion; at laſt. - -
£ATCH. n.ſ. ſlºtſ, Dutch; laccio, Italian.] A catch of a
door moved by a ſtring, or a handle.
The latch mov’d up. Gay's Paſłorals.
Then comes roſy health from her cottage of thatch,
Where never phyſician had lifted the latch. Smart.
To LATch. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten with a latch.
He had ſtrength to reach his father's houſe: the door was
only latched; and, when he had the latch in his hand, he
turned about his head to ſee his purſuer. Locke.
2. To faſten; to cloſe, perhaps in this place: unleſs it rather
ſignifies to waſh from lather.
But haſt thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes
With the love juice, as I did bid thee do Shakeſp.
LA'tches. n.ſ.
Latches or laſkets, in a ſhip, are ſmall lines like loops, faſten-
ed by ſewing into the bonnets and drablers of a ſhip, in or-
der to lace the bonnets to the courſes, or the drablers to
the bonnets. Harris.
LA'tchet. n.ſ. [lacet, Fr.] The ſtring that faſtens the ſhoe.
There cometh one mightier than I, the latchet of whoſe
ſhoes I am not worthy to unlooſe. Mark i. 7.
LATE, adj. [lat, Saxon; laet, Dutch.j,
1. Contrary to early; flow; tardy; long delayed.
My haſting days flie on with full career,
But my late ſpring no bud nor bloſſom ſheweth. Milton.
Juſt was the vengeance, and to lateſt days
Shall long poſterity reſound thy praiſe. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. Laſt in any place, office, or charaćter.
All the difference between the late ſervants, and thoſe who
ſtaid in the family, was, that thoſe latter were finer gentle-
Intn. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 107.
3. The deceaſed; as the works of the late Mr. Pope.
4. Far in the day or night.
LATE, adv.
1. After long delays; after a long time.
O boy' thy father gave thee life too ſoon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late. Shakeſp. H. VI.
Second Silvius after theſe appears,
Silvius Aeneas, for thy name he bears;
For arms and juſtice equally renown'd,
Who late reſtor'd in Alba ſhall be crown'd.
He laughs at all the giddy turns of ſtate,
hen mortals ſearch too ſoon, and fear too late. Dryden.
The later it is before any one comes to have theſe ideas, the
*ºr alſo will it be before he comes to thoſe maxims. Locke.
I might have ſpar'd his life,
But now it is too late. Philips's Diſtreſ Mother.
* In a latter ſeaſon.
o make roſes, or other flowers, come late, is an experi-
"nt of pleaſure; for the antients eſteemed much of the
roſa ſera. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Dryd. Æn.
There be ſome flowers which come more early, and others
which come more late, in the year.
3. Lately; not long ago.
They arrived in that pleaſant iſle,
Where ſleeping late, ſhe left her other knight. Fairy Qu.
ºn have of late made uſe of a pendulum, as a more
eady regulator. Locke.
. The goddeſs with indulgent cares,
And ſocial jºys, the late transform'd repairs. Pope's Odyſ.
From freſh paſtures, and the dewy field,
*lºwing herds return, and round them throng +
With leaps and bound, thºr. impriſon'd young. Pºpe.
4. Far in the day of night. c
Was it ſo late, friend, ere you went to bed,
hat you do lic ſolº
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
—Sir, we were caroufing till the ſecond cock.
Late the noćturnal ſacrifice begun; -
- Nor ended, till the next returning ſun. . . Dryden’s AFn.
LATED, adj. [from late.] Belated; ſurpriſed by the night.
I am ſo lated in the world, that I -
Have loſt my way for ever. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleºpatra.
The weſt glimmers with ſome ſtreaks of day:
Now ſpurs the lated traveller apace
To gain the timely inn. - Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
LATELY. adv. [from late.] Not long ago.
Paul found a certain Jew named Aquila, lately come from
Italy. - - - - - - A:fs xviii. 1.
LATEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from late.] Time far advanced.
Latenſ; in life might be improper to begin the world with.
- Swift to Gay:
LATFNT. adj. [latens, Latin.] Hidden; concealed; ſecret.
If we look into its retired movements, and more ſecret
late: ſprings, we may there trace out a ſteady hand pro-
ducing good out of evil. 1320dward's Natural Hiſtory.
Who drinks, alas ! but to forget; nor ſees,
hat melancholy ſloth, ſevere diſeaſe,
Mem'ry confus'd, and interrupted thought, *
Death's harbingers lie latent in the draught. Prior.
What were Wood's viſible coſts I know not, and what
were his latent is variouſly conječtured. Swift.
LATERAL. adj. [lateral, French; latera, Latin.]
1. Growing out on the ſide; belonging to the ſide.
Why may they not ſpread their lateral branches till their
diſtance from the centre of gravity depreſs them. Ray.
The ſmalleſt veſſels, which carry the blood by lateral
branches, ſeparate the next thinner fluid or ſerum, the dia-
meters of which lateral branches are leſs than the diameters
of the blood-veſſels. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. º, or ačting in a direction perpendicular to a horizontal
111C.
Forth ruſh the levant, and the ponent winds
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noiſe,
Sirocco and Libecchio. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
Latera'lity. n. /.. [from lateral.] The quality of having
diſtinét ſides. - -
We may reaſonably conclude a right and left laterality in
the ark, or naval .. of Noah. Brown's Vulgar Errours,
LA'TERALLY. n.ſ.. [from lateral.] By the ſide; ſide-wiſe.
The days are ſet laterally againſt the columns of the golden
number. Holder on Time.
LATEWARD. adv. [late and peare, Saxon.] Somewhat late.
LATH. n.ſ. [lacca, Saxon; late, latte, French.] A ſmall long
piece of wood uſed to ſupport the tiles of houſes.
With dagger of lath. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
Penny-royal and orpin they uſe in the country to trim their
houſes; binding it with a lath or ſtick, and ſetting it againſt
a wall. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 29.
Laths are made of heart of oak, for outſide work, as tiling
and plaiſtering; and of fir for inſide plaiſtering, and pantile
lathing. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
The god who frights away,
With his lath ſword, the thieves and birds of prey. Dryd.
To LATH. v.a. [latter, Fr. from the noun..] To fit up with laths.
A ſmall kiln conſiſts of an oaken frame, lathed on every
Shºſp;
ſide. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
The plaiſterers work is commonly done by the yard ſquare
for lathing. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
LATH. n. ſ. [lae's, Saxon. It is explained by Du Cange, I
ſuppoſe from Spelman, Portio comitatus major tres vel plures
hundredas continens : this is apparently contrary to Spenſer, in
the following example..] A part of a county.
If all that tything failed, then all that lath was charged
for that tything; and if the lath failed, then all that hun-
dred was demanded for them; and if the hundred, then the
ſhire, who would not reſt till they had found that undutiful
fellow, which was not ameſnable to law. Spenſer's Ireland.
The fee-farms reſerved upon charters granted to cities and
towns corporate, and the blanch rents and lath ſilver anſwer-
ed by the ſheriffs. Bacon's Office of Alienatien.
LATHE. m. ſ. The tool of a turner, by which he turns about
his matter ſo as to ſhape it by the chizel.
Thoſe black circular lines we ſee on turned veſſels of
wood, are the effects of ignition, cauſed by the preſſure of an
edged ſtick upon the veſſel turned nimbly in the lathe. Ray.
To LATHER. v. n. [lebnan, Saxon.] To form a foam.
Chuſe water pure,
Such as will lather cold with ſoap. Baynard.
To LA'THER. v. a. To cover with foam of water and ſoap.
LA'THER. m. ſ. [from the verb.] A foam or frothe made com-
monly by beating ſoap with water.
LATIN. adj. [Latinus J Written or ſpoken in the language
of the old Romans. .
Auguſtus himſelf could not make a new Latin word, Locke.
LA't IN... n.ſ. An excrciſe practiſed by ſchool-boys, who turn
Engliſh into Latin.
In learning farther his ſyntaxis, he ſhall not uſe the com-
mon order in ſchools for making of Latius. Aſham.
1 5 ID LA/11s Is M.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A V
L A T
French ; latiniſhui, !". Latin.] A
Latin idiom ; a mode of ſpeech Pº "ºniº,
* Milton has made uſe of frequent tra"P9. y t ic
antiquated words and phraſes, that he might ºr c º,
viate from vulgar and ordinary expreſſions. ſ: iſon's Kem.
Laºist. n.ſ.. [from ſº! One ſkilled in Latin. Purit
LATI’s Iry. m.ſ. ſº French; latinitas, Latin.] Purity
- iſe : the Latin tongue. -
of hº was able to read Plautus with eaſe: º:
in Lotnity could be hard to him. Dennis '#. º
To LA/TiNize. [Latiniſer, French ; from Latin.] O ulc
wj, or phraſes borrowed from the Latin. 'yd
I am liable to be charged that I latinize too much. Dryd.
He uſes coarſe and vulgar words, or terms and phraſes that
are latinized, ſcholaſtick, and º º be underſtood. Hatts.
Tish. adj. [from late.] Somewhat late:
É..." adj. ſh and roſtrum, Lat.] Bºº.
In quadrupeds, in regard of the figure of their º i
eyes are placed at ſome diſtance; in latry|rºus and flat- IIIC
birds they are more laterally ſeated. Brºwn's Vulg. º:
LA/r1 rancy. m. ſ. [from latitans, Latin.] Deliteſcence; the
ſtate of lying hid. -
In º The has abridged their malignity by their ſeceſſion
or latitancy. Brown's Pulgar. Errours, b. iii. c. 16.
ILA'ritan r. adj. [latitans, Latin.] Deliteſcent; concealed ;
Jving hid. -
Jy This is evident in ſhakes and lizzards, latitant many
months in the year, which containing 2 weak heat in a co-
pious humidity, do long ſubſiſt without nutrition, Brown.
Force the ſmall latitant bubbles of air to diſcloſe them-
ſelves and break. - Boyle.
it muſt be ſome other ſubſtance latitant in the fluid mat-
ter, and really diſtinguiſhable from it. Mºre.
laritation. n.ſ. (from latito, Latin.] The ſtate of lying
concealed.
LA Titude. m. ſ. [latitude, French ; latitude, Latin.]
1. Breadth; width; in bodies of unequal dimenſions the ſhorter
axis, in equal bodies the line drawn from right to left.
Whether the exact quadrat, or the long ſquare, be the
better, I find not well determined; though i muſt prefer the
latter, provided the length do not exceed the latitude above
one third part. IWotton's Architecture.
2. Room; ſpace; extent.
There º: difference of degrees in men's underſtandings, to
ſo great a latitude, that one may affirm, that there is a greater
difference between ſome men and others, than between ſome
then and beaſts. - Locke.
3. The extent of the earth or heavens, reckoned from the
equator to either pole. -
4. A particular degree, reckoned from the equator.
Another effect the Alps have on Geneva is, that the ſun
here riſes later and ſets ſooner than it does to other places of
the ſame latitude. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
. Unreſtrained acceptation; licentious or lax interpretation.
In ſuch latitudes of ſenſe, many that love me and the
church well, may have taken the covenant. King Charles.
Then, in comes the benign latitude of the doćtrine of good-
will, and cuts aſunder all thoſe hard, pinching cords. South.
6. Freedom from ſettled rules; laxity.
In human actions there are no degrees, and preciſe na-
tural limits deſcribed, but a latitude is indulged. Taylor.
I took this kind of verſe, which allows more latitude than
any other. Dryden.
7. §. diffuſion. - y
Albertus, biſhop of Ratiſbon, for his great learning, and
latitude of knowledge, firnamed Magnus; beſides divinity,
hath written many tracts in philoſophy. Brown.
Mathematicks, in its latitude, is uſually divided into pure
and mixed. Wilkins's Mathematical Magick.
I pretend not to treat of them in their full latitude; it ſuf.
fices to ſhew how the mind receives them, from ſenſation
and refle&amp;tion. Locke.
LA'ritudis ARIAN. adj. [latitudinaire, French ; latitudina-
* º Not reſtrained; not confined; thinking or
aćting at large.
Latitudinarian love will be expenſive, and therefore I would
be informed what is to be gotten by it. Collier on Kindneſs.
LA" Itudis ARIAN. n. ſ. One who departs from orthodoxy.
LATRANT. adi, [latrans, Latin.] Barking.
Thy care be firſt the various gifts to trace,
- The minds and genius of the latrant race.
LAIRPA. [? &amp;#42; lairie, Fr.] The higheſt kind of worſhip.
diſlinguiſhed by the papiſts from aulia, or inferior worſhip.
!he practice of the catholick church makes genuflections,
º, ſupplications, and other acts of iatria to the
Crois, - Stillingfleet on Romiſh Idolatry.
LA/T TEN. m. ſ [kton, French ; latoºn, Dutch ; #. wj
Brºſ. 3 * mixture of copper and calaminaris ſtone.
To make lamp-black, take a torch or link, and hold it
under the bottom of a latten baſon, and, as it groweth black
within, trike it with a feather into ſome ſhell.
LAT TER. adj. [This is the comparative of late,
verſally written with tt, contrary to analo
fla'risis M. [Latiniſme,
Peacham.
though uni-
gy, and to our own
Tickell. -
pračtice in the ſuperlative lateſ. When the thing of wiłł
the compariſon is made is mentioned, we uſe later; as, tº
fruit is later than the reſ?, but latter when no compariſon is
expreſſed ; as, thºſe are latter fruits.
Polet uſes
Qºm pene: arbitrium ºff, &amp; vis, 3 norma loquendi..]
1. Happening after ſomething elſe.
2. Modern; lately done or paſt. -
Hath not navigation diſcovered, in theſe latter ages, whole
nations at the bay of Soldania. Locke.
3. Mentioned laſt of two. - -
The difference between reaſon and revelation, and in what
ſenſe the latter is ſuperior. JWatts.
Latterly. adv. [from latter.] Of late; in the laſt part of
life: a low word lately hatched.
LATTICE. m. ſ. [latiis, French; by junius written lettice,
and derived from lect inen, a hindring iron, or iron ſtop; by
Skinner imagined to be derived from latte, Dutch, a lath, or
to be corrupted from nettice or network: I have ſometimes
derived it from let and eye; leteyes, that which lets the eye.
It may be deduced from laterculus.] A reticulatcd window;
a window made with ſticks or irons croſſing each other at
ſmall diſtances.
My good window of lattice fare thee well; thy caſement
I need not open, I look through thce. Shakeſpeare.
The mother of Siſera looked out at a window, and cried
through the latteſ. Judg. v. 28.
Up into the watch-tower get,
And ſee all things deſpoil'd of fallacies:
Thou ſhalt not peep through lattices of eyes,
Nor hear through labyrinths of ears, nor learn -
-
By circuit or collections to diſcern. Donne.
The trembling leaves through which he play'd,
Dappling the walk with light and ſhade,
Like lattice windows, give the ſpy
Room but to peep with half an eye. Cleaveland.
To LA’ttice. v. a. [from the noun..] To decuſate; to mark
with croſs parts like a lattice. -
LAvA't LoN. m. ſ. ſlavatio, Latin.] The aët of waſhing.
Such filthy ſtuff was by looſe lewd varlets ſung before the
chariot on the ſolemn day of her lavation. Hakewill.
LA’vator Y. m. ſ. [from lavo, Latin.] A waſh; ſomething in
which parts diſeaſed are waſhed.
Lavatories, to waſh the temples, hands, wriſts, and jugu-
lars, do potently profligate, and keep off the venom. Harvey.
LAUD. n.ſ. [laus, Latin.]
1. Praiſe; honour paid; celebration.
Doubtleſs, O gueſt, great laud and praiſe were mine,
Reply'd the ſwain, for ſpotleſs faith divine:
If, after ſocial rites, and gifts beſtow'd,
I ſtain'd my hoſpitable hearth with blood. Pope's Odiſy.
2. That part of divine worſhip which conſiſts in praiſe.
We have certain hymns and ſervices, which we ſay daily,
of laud and thanks to God for his marvellous works. Bacon.
In the book of Pſalms, the lauds make up a very great
part of it. . Government of the Tºngue.
To LAUD. v. a. [lauda, Latin.] To praiſe ; to celebrate.
O thou almighty and eternal Creator, having conſidered
the heavens the work of thy fingers, the moon and the ſtars
which thou haſt ordained, with all the company of heaven,
we laud and magnify thy glorious name. Bently's Sermons.
LA'UDABLE. adj. [laudabilis, Latin.]
1. Praiſe-worthy; commendable.
I'm in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable; but to do good, ſometime
Accounted dang'rous folly. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Affectation endeavours to correót natural defects, and has
always the laudable aim of pleaſing, though it always miſſes
it. Locke.
2. Healthy; ſalubrious. º
Good blood, and a due projećtile motion or circulation,
are neceſſary to convert the aliment into laudable animal
juices. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
LAUDABLENEss. n.ſ. [laudable.] Praiſe-worthineſs.
LA'UDABLY. adv. [from laudable.] In a manner deſerving
praiſe.
Obſolete words may be laudally revived, when either they
are ſounding or ſignificant. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
LA/UDANUM. n. ſ. [A cant word, from laude, Latin.] A ſo-
porifick tincture.
To LAve. v. a. [lavo, Latin.]
1. To waſh; to bathe.
Unſafe, that we muſt lave our honours
In theſe ſo flatt’ring ſtreams. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
But as I roſe out of the laving ſtream,
Heav'n open'd her eternal doors, from whence
The ſpirit deſcended on me like a dove. Paradiſe Rºg.
With roomy decks, her guns of mighty ſtrength,
Whoſe low-laid mouths each mounting billow laves,
Deep in her draught, and warlike in her length,
She ſeems a ſea-waſp flying on the waves. Drydºn.
2. [Lever, French..] To throw up ; to lade ; to draw out.
Though
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A U
L A U
—--
Though hills were ſet on hills,
And ſeas met ſeas to guard thee, I would through:
I'd plough up rocks, ſteep as the Alps, in duſt,
And lave the Tyrrhene waters into clouds, ---
But I would reach thy head. Benj. johnſon's Catiline.
Some flow their oars, or ſtop the leaky ſides,
Another bolder yet the yard beſtrides,
And folds the ſails; a fourth with labour laves
Th’ intruding ſeas, and waves ejects on waves. Dryden.
To Lave. v. n. To waſh himſelf; to bathe.
In her chaſte current oft the goddeſs laves,
And with celeſtial tears augments the waves. Pope,
i To LAve/ER. v. n. To change the direction often in a courſe.
How eaſy 'tis when deſtiny proves kind,
with full-ſpread ſails to run before the wind :
But thoſe that 'gainſt ſtiff gales laveering go,
Muſt be at once reſolv'd, and ſkilful too.
- 'VENDER. m. ſ.
- - LA It is one 5%. verticillate plants, whoſe flower conſiſts of
one leaf, divided into two lips; the upper lip, ſtanding up-
right, is roundiſh, and, for the moſt part, bifid; but the un-
der lip is cut into three ſegments, which are almoſt equal:
theſe flowers are diſpoſed in whorles, and are colle&amp;ted into
t a ſlender ſpike upon the top of the ſtalks. - Miller.
The whole lºvender plant has a highly aromatick ſmell
and taſte, and is famous as a cephalick, nervous, and ute-
rine medicine. Hill's Materia Medica.
And then again he turneth to his play,
To ſpoil the pleaſures of that paradiſe:
The wholeſome ſage, and lavender ſtill grey,
Rank ſmelling rue, and cummin good for eyes. Spenſºr.
LA'veR. n.f. [lavoir, French; from lave..] A waſhing veſſel.
- Let us go find the body where it lies
Soak'd in his enemies blood, and from the ſtream
With liver; pure, and cleanſing herbs, waſh off
The clodded gore. Milton's Agoniſies, l. 1727.
He, piteous of her woes, rear'd her lank head,
And gave her to his daughters, to imbathe
Dryden.
| In nećtar'd lavers ſtrew’d with aſphodil. Milton.
Young Aretus from forth his bridal bow'r
i Brought the full laver o'er their hands to pour, }
n And caniſters of conſecrated flour. Pope's Odyſſey.
To LAUGH. v. n. [plapan, Saxon; lachen, German and
| Dutch; lach, Scottiſh.]
1. To make that noiſe which ſudden merriment excites,
You ſaw my maſter wink and laugh upon you. Shakeſp.
There's one did laugh in's ſleep, and one cried, Mur-
ther -
They wak'd each other. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
At this fuſly ſtuff
| The large Achilles, on his preſt-bed lolling,
From his deep cheſt laughs out a loud applauſe. Shakeſp.
Laughing cauſeth a continued expulſion of the breath with
the loud noiſe, which maketh the interjection of laughing,
ſhaking of the breaſt and fides, running of the eyes with
water, if it be violent. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. [In poetry.] To appear gay, favourable, pleaſant, or fertile.
Entreat her not the worſe, in that I pray
You uſe her well; the world may laugh again,
And I may live to do you kindneſs, if -
You do it her. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. i.
Then laughs the childiſh year with flowrets crown'd. Dry.
The plenteous board, high-heap'd with cates divine,
And o'er the foaming bowl the laughing wine. Pope.
3. Tº LAUGH at. To treat with contempt; to ridicule.
Preſently prepare thy grave;
Lie where the light foam of the ſea may beat
Thy grave-ſtone daily; make thine epitaph,
That death in me at others lives may laugh. Shakespeare
'Twere better for you, if 'twere not known in council;
you'll be laugh’d at. Shakeſp. Merry Iłives of I/indſor.
. The diſſolute and abandoned, before they are aware of
º, are often betrayed to laugh at themſelves, and upon re-
"ection find, that they are merry at their own expence.
Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 45.
No wit to flatter left of all his ſtore;
T No fool to lºugh at, which he valued more.
• LAUGH. v. a. ſo déride ; to ſcorn.
Be bloody, bold and reſolute; laugh to ſcorn
Pºpe.
he pow'r of man. Shakeſpeare's Macheth,
A wicked ſoul ſhall make him to be laugha to ſcorn of his
Cnemies, Eccluſ. vi. 4.
*GH. n.ſ. [from the verb.] The convulſion cauſed by mer-
*; an inarticulate expreſſion of ſudden merriment.
Megentle Delia beckons from the plain, * ,
hen hid in ſhades, eludes her eager ſwain;
But ſeigns a laugh, to ſee me ſearch around,
LA And by that laugh the willing fair is found. Pope's Spring.
º *E. adj. [from laugh..] Such as may properly excite
“lighter.
Nature hath fram'd ſtrange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their cye
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper; -
And others of ſuch vinegar aſpect, -
That they'll not ſhow their teeth in way of ſmile,
Though Neſtor ſwear the jeſt be laughall. Shakeſpeare:
Caſaubon confeſſes his author Perius was not good at
turning things into a pleaſant ridicule; or, in other words,
that he was not a laughable writer. Dryden's juvenal,
LA/UGHER. m. ſ. [from Waugh..] A man fond of merriment.
I am a common laugher. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar,
Some ſober men cannot be of the general opinion, but the
laughers are much the majority. Pºpe,
Lºuisers. adv. [from laughing.] In a merry way; mer-
rily,
LAUGHINGstock. n.f. [laugh and/lock.] A butt
of ridicule.
The forlorn maiden, whom your eyes have ſeen
The laughingſtock of fortune's mockerie. Spenſ. Fa. Qu.
Pray you let us not be laughing/locks to other mens hi.
In Ours. Shakeſpeare's Merry Iłives of Iłindſºr,
Supine credulous frailty expoſes a man to be both a pre
and laughing/lock at once. - L’Eſtrange's Fible,
LA/UGHTER. m. ſ. [from laugh.j Convulſive merriment; an
inarticulate expreſſion of ſudden merriment.
To be worſt,
The loweſt, moſt deječted thing of fortune,
Stands ſtill in eſperance; lives not in fear.
The lamentable change is from the beſt,
The worſt returns to laughter. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The act of laughter, which is a ſweet contračtion of the
muſcles of the face, and a pleaſant agitation of the vocal
organs, is not merely voluntary, or totally within the juriſ.
diction of ourſelves. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vii.
We find not that the laughter loving dame
Mourn'd for Anchiſes. //aller.
- Pain or pleaſure, grief or laughter. Prior.
LA/VISH, adj. [Of this word I have been able to find no ſa-
tisfactory etymology.]
1. Prodigal; waſteful; indiſcreetly liberal.
His jolly brother, oppoſite in ſenſe, *. ;
; an object
Laughs at his thrift; and laviſh of expence,
uaffs, crams, and guttles, in his own defence. Dryd.
he dame has been too laviſh of her feaſt,
And fed him till he loaths. Rowe's jane Shore,
2. Scattered in waſte; profuſe, -
3. Wild; unreſtrained. -
Bellona's bridegroom, lapt in proof,
Confronted him, - - -
Curbing his laviſh ſpirit. Shakeſheare's Macbeth,
To LAvis H. v. a. [from the adječtive.] To ſcatter with pro-
fuſion. º
Should we thus lead them to a field of ſlaughter,
Might not th' impartial world with reaſon ſay,
We laviſh'd at our deaths the blood of thouſands. Addison
LA/vish ER. m. ſ. [from laviſh..] A prodigal; a profuſe man.
Lavis HLY. adv. [from laviſh..] Profuſely ; prodigally.
My father's purpoſes have been miſtock;
And ſome about him have too laviſhly
Wreſted his meaning and authority. Shakespeare. Henry IV.
Then laughs the childiſh year with flowrets crown'd,
And laviſhly perfumes the fields around. Dryden.
Praiſe to a wit is like rain to a tender flower; if it be mo-
derately beſtowed, it chears and revives; but if too laviſhly,
overcharges and depreſſes him. Pope.
Hº } m. ſ. [from laviſh.J Prodigality; profuſion.
Firſt got with guile, and then preſerv'd with dread,
And after ſpent with pride and laviſhneſs. Fairy Q;ſeen.
To LAUNCH. v. n. [It is derived by Skinner from lance, be-
cauſe a ſhip is puſhed into water with great force.]
1. To force into the ſea.
Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a
draught, Luše v. 4.
So ſhort a ſtay prevails;
He ſoons equips the ſhip, ſupplies the ſails, *
And gives the word to launch. Dryden.
For general hiſtory, Raleigh and Howel are to be had.
He who would launch farther into the ocean, may conſult
Whear. Locke.
2. To rove at large; to expatiate. -
From hence that gen'ral care and flººdy ſprings, -
That launching and progreſſion of the mind. Davier.
whoever purſues his own thoughts, will find them launch
out beyond the cxtent of body into the infinity of ſpace. Locke.
In our language Spenſer has not contented himſelf with
this ſubmiſſive manner of imitation: he launches out into very
flowry paths, which ſtill conduct hiºn into one great road.
- Prior's Preface to Solomºn.
He had not acted in the character of a ſuppliant, if he
had launched out into a long oration.
I have launched out of my ſubject on this article. A vutº.
./ Te
Broome's Odyſſey.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A W -
L A. W.
º
To LANěH. º:
- O lea. - -
I Tº º º uſed to ſink epiſcopacy, and launch preſbytery,
in England. * --&gt; King Charles.
With ſays and cordage laſt he rigg'd, the ſhip,
And roll'd on leavers, launch'd her in the deep. Pope.
2. To dart from the hand. . This perhaps, for diſtinétion ſake,
might better be written lanch. -
The King of Heav'n, obſcure on high,
Bard his red arm, and launching from the ſky
His writhen bolt, not ſhaking empty ſmoke,
town to the deep abyſs the flaming fellow ſtrook. Dryd.
Laund. m. ſ. [lande, French; lawn, Welſh.] Lawn a plain
extended between woods. Hanmer.
Under this thick-grown brake we'll ſhroud ourſelves,
For through this laund anon the decr will come;
And in this covert will we make our ſtand,
Culling the principal of all the deer. ... Shakespeare . Henry VI.
LA'UNDRess. n.ſ. [lavandiere, French: Skinner imagines that
lavandreſſ may have been the old word..] A woman whoſe
employment is to waſh cloaths. - -
The counteſs of Richmond would often ſay, On condition
the princes of Chriſtendom would march againſt the Turks, ſhe
would willingly attend them, and be their º Camden.
Take up theſe cloaths here quickly; carry them, to the
laundreſ, in Datchet mead. Shakespeare Merry IPves of Windſºr.
Thé laundreſs muſt be ſure to tear her ſmocks in the waſh-
ing, and yet waſh them but half. Swift,
LA'UNDRY. m.ſ.. [as if lavanderie.]
1. The room in which clothes are waſhed.
The affairs of the family ought to be conſulted, whether
they concern the ſtable, dairy, the pantry, or laundry. Swift
2. The aët or ſtate of waſhing.
Chalky water is too fretting, as appeareth in laundry of
cloaths, which wear out apace. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
LAWOLTA. m. ſ. [la volte, French.] An old dance, in which
was much turning and much capering. Hanmer.
I cannot ſing,
Nor heel the high lavolt; nor ſweeten talk;
Nor play at ſubtle games. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
LA'UREATE. adj. [laureatus, Lat..] Decked or inveſted with a
laurel.
Bid Amaranthus all his beauty ſhed,
And daffodillies fill their cups with tears,
To ſtrew the laureate hearſe where Lycid lies, Milton.
Soft on her lap her laureate ſon º: Dunciad.
LAUREA'troN. m. ſ. [from laureate.] It denotes, in the Scot-
tiſh univerſities, the act or ſtate of having degrees conferred,
as they have in ſome of them a flowery crown, in imita-
tion of laurel among the antients.
LAUREL. m. ſ. [laurus, Lat. laurier, French.] A tree, called
alſo the cherry bay.
It hath broad thick ſhining ever-green leaves, ſomewhat
like thoſe of the bay tree; the cup of the flower is hollow,
and funnel-ſhaped, ſpreading open at the top, and is divided
into five parts: the flower conſiſts of five leaves, which ex-
pand in form of a roſe, having many ſtamina in the centre;
the fruit, which is like that of the cherry tree, is produced
in bunches, and the ſtone is longer and narrower than that
of the cherry. Miller.
The laurus or laurel of the antients is affirmed by natura-
liſts to be what we call the bay tree. }.
The laurel, meed of mighty conquerors,
And poets ſage. Spenſer's Fairy Queen.
The laurel orcherry-bay, by cutting away the fide branches,
will riſe to a large tree. Martimer's Huſbandry.
LAURELED. adj.[from laurel.]Crowned ordecorated withlauré.
Hear'ſt thou the news? my friend! th' expreſs is come
With laurell'd letters from the camp to Rome. Dryden.
Then future ages with delight ſhall ſee
How Plato's, Bacon's, Newton's, looks agree ;
Or in fair ſeries laurell'd bards be ſhown
A Virgil there, and here an Addiſon. Pope.
LAW, n.ſ.. [laza, Saxon; loi, French; dawgh, Erſe.]
:1. A rule of ačtion.
Unhappy man! to break the pious laws
Of nature, pleading in his children's cauſe. Dryden.
2. A decree, edićt, ſtatute, or cuſtom, publickly eſtabliſhed as
a rule of juſtice.
He hath reſiſted law,
And therefore law ſhall ſcorn him further trial
Than the ſeverity of publick power. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
Thou art a robber,
A law-breaker, a villain; yield thee, thief. Shakeſpeare.
Our nation would not give laws to the Iriſh, therefore
how the Iriſh gave laws to them. Davies on Ireland.
One law is ſplit into two. Baker Refteå. on Learning.
3. Judicial proceſs.
When every caſe in law is right. Shakespeare King Lear.
Who has a breaſt ſo pure,
But ſome uncleanly apprehenſions
$ºp lects and law days, and in ſeſſions ſit,
With meditations lawful, Shakeſpeare Othello.
Tom Touchy is a fellow famous for taking the law of
every body: there is not one in the town where he lives that
he has not ſued at a quarter-feſſions. Addison's Speciator.
4. Conformity to law; any thing lawful.
In a rebellion,
When what's not meet, but what muſt be, was law,
Then were they choſen. Shakeſpeare's (ºriolanºs.
5. An eſtabliſhed and conſtant mode or proceſs; a fixed cor-
reſpondence of cauſe and effect.
I dy'd, whilſt in the womb he ſtay'd, º
Attending Nature’s law. Shakespeare's Cºmheline.
LA/wful. adj. [law and full.] Agreeable to law; conform-
able to law; allowed legal by law; legitimate.
It is not lawful for thee to have her. Aſat. xiv. 4.
Gloſter's baſtard ſon was kinder to his father, than my
daughters, got 'tween the lawful ſheets. Shakespeare King Lear.
LA'wfully, adv. [from lawful..] Legally; agreeably to law.
- This bond is forfeit ;
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of fleſh. Shakeſp. Marchant of Penice.
Though it be not againſt ſtrićt juſtice for a man to do
thoſe things which he might otherwiſe lawfully do, albeit his
neighbour doth take occaſion from thence to conceive in his
mind a falſe belief, yet Chriſtian charity will, in many caſes,
reſtrain a man. South's Sermons.
I may be allowed to tell your lordſhip, the king of poets,
what an extent of power you have, and how lawfully you
may exerciſe it. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
LA'wful Ness. n.ſ.. [from lawful..] Legality; allowance of
law.
I think it were an error to ſpeak further, till I may ſee
ſome ſound foundation laid of the lawfulneſs of the action.
Bacon's Holy I/ar.
LA'wolver. n.ſ. [law and giver.] Legiſlator; one that makes
laws.
Solomon we eſteem as the lawgiver of our nation. Bacon.
A law may be very reaſonable in itſelf, although one does
not know the reaſon of the lawgivers. Swift.
L'Awgiving. adj. [law and giving.] Legiſlative.
Lawgiving heroes, fam'd for taming brutes,
And raiſing cities with their charming lutes. J/aller.
LA'wless. adj. [from law.]
1. Unreſtrained by any law; not ſubječt to law.
The neceſſity of war, which among human actions is the
moſt lawlſ, hath ſome kind of affinity with the neceſſity of
law, Raleigh's Eſſays.
The lawleſ, tyrant, who denies
To know their God, or meſſage to regard,
Muſt be compell’d. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. xii.
Orpheus did not, as poets feign, tame ſavage beaſts,
But men as lawleſs, and as wild as they. Rºſcommon.
Not the gods, nor angry Jove will bear
Thy lawleſ wand'ring walks in open air. Dryd. An.
Blind as the Cyclops, and as blind as he,
They own’d a lawlſ, ſavage liberty,
Like that our painted anceſtors ſo priz'd,
Ere empire's arts their breaſts had civiliz'd. Dryden.
He Meteor-like, flames lawleſ, through the void,
Deſtroying others, by himſelf deſtroy'd. Pºpe.
2. Contrary to law; illegal. -
Take not the quarrel from his powerful arms,
He needs no indirect nor lawleſ courſe
To cut off thoſe that have offended him. Shakespeare R. III.
We cite our faults,
That they may hold excus'd our lawleſ lives. Shakespeare.
Thou the firſt, lay down thy lawlſ, claim;
Thou of my blood who bear'ſt the Julian name. Dryden.
LA'wlesly. adv. [from lawlſ...] In a manner contrary to
law.
Fear not, he bears an honourable mind,
And will not uſe a woman lawleſy. Shakeſpeare.
LA'w MAKER. m. ſ. [law and maker.] Legiſlator; one who
makes laws ; a lawgiver.
Their judgment is, that the church of Chriſt ſhould ad-
mit no lawmakers but the evangeliſts. Hooker, b. iii.
LawN. m. ſ. [land, Daniſh; lawn, Welſh; land, French.]
I. An open ſpace between woods,
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks,
Grazing the tender herb, were interpos'd. Mill. Pa. Lºſt.
His mountains were in a few years ſhaded with young
trees, that gradually ſhot up into groves, woods, and for
reſts, intermixed with walks, and lawns, and gardens.
Addiſon's Speciator, No. 58.
Stern beaſts in trains that by his truncheon fell, -
Now griſly forms ſhoot o'er the lawns of hell. Pope.
Interſpers'd in lawns and opening glades,
Thin trees ariſe that ſhun each other's ſhades. Pope.
2. [Liºn, French..] Fine linen, remarkable for being uſed in
the ſleeves of biſhops.
Should'ſt thou bleed,
To ſtop the wounds my fineſt lawn I'd tear, -
Waſh them with tears, and wipe them with my hair. Prior.
Frou
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A Y
L A Y
From high life high charaºters are drawn,
A faint in crape is twice a ſaint in laign. - Pope.
Ağ. awe did the ſlow ſolemn knell inſpire : -
The duties by the lawn rob’d prelate pay'd, -
And the laſt words, that duſt to duſt convey’d l Tilkell.
LA'wsuit. n.ſ. [law and ſuit..] A proceſs in law ; a litiga-
“he giving the prieſt a right to the tithe would produce
lºſits and wrangles; his neceſſary attendance on the courts
avy ſtice would leave his people without a ſpiritual guide.
Swift's Propoſal.
Law'YER. m. ſ. [from law.] Profeſſor of law ; advocate ;
"...i. the breath of an unfeed lawyer, you gave me no-
thing for it. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Is the law evil, becauſe ſome lawyers in their º:
it 2 bitgift.
* entered into a work touching laws, in a middle
term, between the ſpeculative and reverend diſcourſes of phi-
loſophers, and the writings of lawyers. - Bacon's Holy War.
Thénymphs with ſcorn beheld their foes,
when the defendant's council roſe;
And, what no lawyer ever lack'd,
of ju
With impudence own’d all the fact. Swift.
Lax, adj. [laxus, Latin.] - - t
1. Looſé; not confined; not cloſely joined. -
- inhabit lax, ye pow'rs of heav'n' Milton's Par. Lºſt.
In mines, thoſe parts of the earth which abound with
firata of flone, ſuffer much more than thoſe which conſiſt of
gravel, and the like laxer matter, which more eaſily give
way. ioidl &amp; //oodward.
... Wague; not rigidly exact.
2 "... were ... lax and moral diſcourſes. * -
3. Looſe in body, ſo as to go frequently to ſtool; laxative
medicines are ſuch as promote that diſpoſition. Quincy.
4. Slack; not tenſe. -
By a branch of the auditory nerve that goes between the
ear and the palate, they can hear themſelves, though their
outward ear be ſtopt by the lax membrane to all ſounds that
come that way. Holder's Elements of Speech.
LAx. n.ſ. A looſeneſs; a diarrhoea. Dić7.
LAXA'tion. n.ſ. [laxatio, Latin.] -
1. The aët of looſening or ſlackening.
2. The ſtate of being looſened or ſlackened.
LA'xATIVE. adj. [laxatiſ, French; laxo, Latin.] Having the
power to eaſe coſtiveneſs.
Omitting honey, which is of a laxative power itſelf; the
powder of ſome loadſtones in this doth rather conſtipate and
bind, than purge and looſen the belly. Brown's Wulg. Err.
The oil in wax is emollient, laxative, and anodyne.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
LAXATIVE. n. ſ. A medicine ſlightly purgative; a medicine
that relaxes the bowels without ſtimulation.
Nought profits him to ſave abandon'd life,
Nor vomits upward aid, nor downwald laxative. Dryd.
LAXATIVENEss. n.ſ. [laxative..] Power of eaſing coſtiveneſs.
LAxity, n.ſ. [laxias, Latin.]
1. Not compreſſion; not cloſe coheſion. -
The former cauſes could never beget whirlpools in a chaos
of ſo great a laxity and thinneſs. Bentley's Sermons.
* Sontrariety to rigorous preciſion.
3. Looſeneſs; not coſtiveneſs.
. If ſometimes it cauſe any laxity, it is in the ſame way with
ſon unprepared, which will diſturb ſome bodies, and work
by purge and vomit. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
4. Slickneſs; contrariety to tenſion. º
Laxity of a fibre, is that degree of coheſion in its parts
which a ſmall force can alter, ſo as to increaſe its length be-
yond what is natural. - $ºtincy.
. In conſideration of the laxity of their eyes, they are ſub-
ject to relapſe. //ſeman's Surgery.
5. Openneſs; not cloſeneſs.
Hold a piece of paper cloſe by the flame of a candle, and
by little and little remove it fifther off, and there is upon
the paper ſome part of that which I ſee in the candle, and it
gºw's ſtill leſs and leſs as I remove; ſo that if I would
"ult my ſenſe, I ſhould believe it as very a body upon the
** as in the candle, though infeebled by the laxity of
the channel in which it flows. Digby on Bºdies.
'•' .. - - -
º n. J. Laxity; not tenſion; not preciſion; not co-
|Veneſs,
Baker.
For the free paſſage of the ſound into the car, it is requi-
te that the tympanum be tenſe, and hard ſtretched; other-
wiſe the !axneſs of that membrane will certainly dead and
r damp the ſound. Holder's Elements ºf SA-ech.
**Y. Preterite of lye.
Q', would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw ſhort breath to day,
But I and Harry Monmouth. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
e was familiarly acquainted with him at ſuch time as he
dy * at Conſtantinople. Anoles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
To L.A.Y. v. a. [lecsan, Saxon; lºggen, Dutch.]
1. To place along.
3. To keep from riſing; to ſettle; to ſtill.
. To fix deep.
8. To ſpread on a ſurface.
When Ahab ad heard thoſe words he faſted, and lay in
ſackcloth. 1 Kings xxi. 27.
I try’d whatever in the Godhead lay. Dryden.
He rode to rouze the prey, -
That ſhaded by the fern in harbour lay,
And thence diſlodged. Drydºn's Knight's Tale,
Leaving Rome, in my way to Sienna, I lay the firſt night
at a village in the territories of the antient Veii. Adijon.
How could he have the retiredneſs of the cloiſter, to
perform all thoſe acts of devotion in, when the burthen of
the reformation lay upon his ſhoulders : Francis Atterbury.
The preſbyterians argued, that if the pretender ſhould in-
vade thoſe parts where the numbers and eſtates of the diſſen-
ters chiefly lay, they would fit ſtill. Swift,
Seek not to be judge, being not able to take away iniqui-
ty, left at any time thou fear the perſon of the mighty, and
lay a ſtumbling-block in the way of thy uprightneſs. Eccluſ.
2. To beat down corn or graſs.
Another ill accident is laying of corn with great rains in
harveſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Let no ſheep there play,
Nor friſking kids the flowery meadows lay. May's Virgil,
I'll uſe th' advantage of my power,
And lay the ſummer's duſt with ſhowers of blood. Shakespeare
It was a ſandy ſoil, and the way had been full of duſt ;
but an hour, or, two before a refreſhing fragrant ſhower of
rain had laid the duſt. Ray on Creation.
Schiſmaticks, outlaws, or criminal perſons, are not fit to
lay the foundation of a new colony. Bacon’s Adv. to Williers.
I lay the deep foundations of a wall, -
And Enos, nam'd from me, the city call. Dryden.
Men will be apt to call it pulling up the old foundations
of knowledge; I perſuade myſelf, that the way I have pur-
ſued lays thoſe foulidations ſurer. Locke.
. To put ; to place.
Then he offered it to him again; then he put it by again;
but, to my thinking, he was very loth to lay his fingers
Qll 16.
They ſhall lay hands on the fick, and recover. ark.
They, who ſo ſtate a queſtion, do no more but ſeparate
and diſentangle the parts of it, one from another, and lay
them, when ſo diſentangled, in their due order. Locke.
We to thy name our annual rites will pay,
And on thy altars ſacrifices lay. Pope's Statius.
6. To bury; to interr.
David fell on ſleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and
ſaw corruption. - Acis xiii. 36.
7. To ſtation or place privily.
Lay thee an ambuſh for the city behind thce. joſ. viii. 2.
The wicked have laid a ſnare for me. Pſal.
Lay not wait, O! wicked man, againſt the dwelling of
the righteous. Prov. xxiv. 15.
The colouring upon thoſe maps ſhould be laid on ſo thin,
as not to obſcure or conceal any part of the lines. Watts.
9. To paint; to enamel.
The pictures drawn in our minds are laid in fading co-
lours; and, if not ſometimes refreſhed, vaniſh and diſap-
pcar. Locke.
1o. To put into any ſtate of quiet.
They bragged, that they doubted not but to abuſe, and
lay aſleep, the queen and council of England. Bacon.
11. To calm ; to ſtill ; to quiet; to allay.
Friends, loud tumults are not laid
With half the eaſineſs that they are rais'd. B. Johnſºn.
Thus paſs'd the night ſo foul, till morning fair
Came forth with pilgrim ſteps in amice grey,
Who with her radiant finger ſtill'd the roar
Of thunder, chas'd the clouds and laid the winds. Milton.
After a tempeſt, when the winds are laid,
The calm ſea wonders at the wrecks it made. Waller.
I fear'd I ſhould have found
A tempeſt in your ſoul, and came to lay it. Denham.
At once the wind was laid, the whiſp'ring ſound
Was dumb, a riſing earthquake rock'd the ground. Dryd.
12. To prohibit a ſpirit to walk.
The huſband found no charm to lay the devil in a petti-
coat, but the rattling of a bladder with beans in it. L’É//r.
13. To ſet on the table.
I laid meat unto them.
Hºſ. xi. 4.
14. To propagate plants by fixing their twigs in the ground.
The chief time of lying gllyflowers is in July, when the
flowers are gone. Al ſortimer's Huſbandy.
15. To wager.
But ſince you will be mad, and fince you may
Suſpect my courage, if I ſhould not ſay;
‘I he pawn I proffer ſhall be full as good. Dryden's Wirg.
15 E. 16. To
Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A Y
- fit any thing.
16. º ñund an houſe, and the ſwallow a neſt,
for herſelf, where ſhe may loy her yº"&amp; Pſal. lxxxiv. 3.
ale. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
mº, piece of chalk for an egg, and ſits upon
it; ſhe is inſenſible of an increaſe or diminution 1Il §: num-
ter of thoſe ſhe ſays. l Addison's Speciator, N°. 120.
rº- ly with violence. -
18. ; againſt it, and build a fort againſt it, and caſt
a mount againſt it. * Ezek. iv. 2.
Never more ſhall my torn mind be heal’d,
Nor taſte the gentle comforts of repoſe
A dreadful band of gloomy cares ſurround me,
And lay ſtrong fiege to my diſtracted ſoul.
. To apply nearly.
19 She % her id: to the ſpindle, and her hands, hold
the diſtaff. Prov. xxxi. 19.
It is better to go to the houſe of mourning than to go tº
the houſe of feaſting; for that is the end of all men, and
the living will lay it to his heart. Eccl. yii. 2.
The peacock laid it extremely to heart, that, being Juno's
darling bird, he had not the nightingale's voice. L’Eſtrange.
He that really lays theſe two things to heart, the extrem:
neceſſity that he is in, and the ſmall poſſibility of help, will
never come coldly to a work of that concernment. Duppa.
20. To add; to conjoin.
Wo unto ãº lay field to field. Iſa. v. 8.
* 1. To put in any ſtate.
Phillips.
Till us death lay
To ripe and mellow; we're but ſtubborn clay. Donne.
If the ſinus lie diſtant, lay it open firſt, and cure that
apertion before you divide that in ano. Iſiſeman's Surgery.
The wars for ſome years have laid whole countries waite.
Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 198.
22. To ſcheme; to contrive.
Every breaſt ſhe did with ſpirit inflame,
Yet ſtill freſh proječts lay'd the grey-ey'd dame. Chapman.
Homer is like his Jupiter, has his terrors, ſhaking Olym-
pus; Virgil, like the ſame power in his benevolence, coun-
ſelling with the gods, laying plans for empires. Pope.
Don Diego and we have laid it ſo, that before the rope is
well about thy neck, he will break in and cut thee down. Arbuth.
23. To charge as a payment.
A tax laid upon land ſeems hard to the landholder, he-
cauſe it is ſo much money going out of his pocket. Locke.
24. To impute; to charge.
Preoccupied with what
You rather muſt do, that what you ſhould do,
Made you againſt the grain to voice him conſul,
Lay the fault on us. Shakeſpeare.
How ſhall this bloody deed be anſwered
It will be laid to us, whoſe providence
Should have kept ſhort, reſtrain'd, and out of haunt,
This mad young man. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
We need not lay new matter to his charge. Shakespeare
Men groan from out of the city, yet God layeth not folly
to them. job xxiv. 12.
Let us be glad of this, and all our fears
Lay on his providence. Paradiſe Regain'd, b. i.
The writers of thoſe times lay the diſgraces and ruins of
their country upon the numbers and fierceneſs of thoſe ſavage
nations that invaded them. Temple.
They lay want of invention to his charge; a capital
Crime. Dryden's AFneis.
You repreſented it to the queen as wholly innocent of
thoſe crimes which were laid unjuſtly to its charge. Dryden.
They loy the blame on the poor little ones. Locke.
There was eagerneſs on both fides; but this is far from
laying a blot upon Luther. Atterbury.
25. To impoſe; to enjoin.
The wearieſt and moſt loathed life
That age, ach, penury, impriſonment,
Can lay on nature, is a paradiſe
To what we fear of death. Shakeſp. Meaſ fºr Meaſ.
Thou ſhalt not be to him as an uſureſ, neither ſhalt théu
lay upon him uſury. Exod. xx. 25.
The Lord ſhall lay the fear of you, and the dread of you,
upon all the land. - Deut. xi. 25.
It ſeemed good to the Holy Ghoſt, and to us, to lay upon
you no greater burden. Aéis xv. 28.
Whilſt you lay on your friend the favour, acquit him of
the debt. //ycherley.
A prince who never diſobey'd,
Not when the moſt ſevere commands were laid, ;
Nor want, nor exile, with his duty weigh’d. Dryden.
You ſee what obligation the profeſſion of Chriſtianity lays
upon us to holineſs of life. Tillotſºn's Sermons. '
Theſe words were not ſpoken to Adam ; neither, indeed,
was there any grant in them made to Adam, but a puniſh-
ment laid upon Eve. Locke.
Negle&amp; the rules each verbal critick lays, -
For not to know ſome trifles is a praiſe. Pºe,
26. To exhibit; to offer.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man
to die, before that he which is accuſed have the accuſers
face to face, and have licence to anſwer for himſelf concern-
ing the crime laid againſt him. Act; xxv. 16.
Till he lays his indictment in ſome certain country, we do
not think cºrſelves bound to anſwer an indefinite charge.
Francis Alterbury.
27. To throw by violence.
He bringeth down them that dwell on high ; the lofty city
he layeth it low, even to the ground. A/a. xxvi. 5.
Brave Caeneus laid Ortygius on the plain,
The vićtor Caeneus was by Turnus ſlain.
He took the quiver, and the truſty bow
Achates us’d to bear; the leaders firſt
He laid along, and then the vulgar pierc'd.
28. To place in compariſon.
Lay down by thoſe pleaſures the fearful and dangerous
thunders and lightnings, and then there will be found no
compariſon. Kaleigh.
29. To LAY apart. To reječt; to put away.
Lay apart all filthineſs.
30. Tº LAY aſide. To put away; not to retain.
Let us lay aſide every weight, and the fin which doth ſo
eaſily beſet us. Heb. xii. I.
Amaze us not with that majeſtick frown,
But lay aftile the greatneſs of your crown. JWaller.
Roſcommon fift. then Mulgrave roſe, like light;
The Stagyrite, and Horace, laid aſide,
Inform'd by them, we need no foreign guide. Granville.
Retention is the power to revive again in our minds thoſe
ideas which, after imprinting, have diſappeared, or have been
laid aſide out of fight. Locke.
When by juſt vengeance guilty mortals periſh,
The gods behold their puniſhment with pleaſure,
And lay the uplifted thunder-bolt aſide. Addiſon's Cato.
31. To LAY away. To put from one ; not to keep.
Queen Eſther laid away her glorious apparel, and put on
the garments of anguiſh. Eſther xiv. 2.
32. Tº Lay before. To expoſe to view; to ſhew; to diſplay.
I cannot better ſatisfy your piety, than by laying feſºre
you a proſpect of your labours. . //ake's Prºpar. for Diath.
That treaty hath been laid %. the houſe of commons.
Swift's Preface to Remarks on the Barrier Treaty.
Their office it is to lay the buſineſs of the nation befºre
him. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 46.
33. To LAY by. To reſerve for ſome future time.
Let every one lay by him in ſtore, as God hath proſpered
him. I Cor. xvi. 2.
34. To LAY by. To put from one ; to diſmiſs.
Let brave ſpirits that have fitted themſelves for command,
either by ſea or land, not be laid by as perſons unneceſſary
for the time. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
She went away, and laid by her veil. Gen. xxxviii. 19.
Did they not ſwear to live and die
With Eſſex, and ſtraight laid him by.
For that look, which does your people awe,
When in your throne and robes you give 'em law,
Lay it by here, and give a gentler ſmile. JPaller.
Darkneſs, which faireſt nymphs diſarms,
Defends us ill from Mira's charms;
Mira can lay her beauty by,
Take no advantage of the eye,
Quit all that Lely's art can take,
And yet a thouſand captives make. J/allºr,
Then he lays by the publick care, -
Thinks of providing for an heir;
Learns how to get, and how to ſpare.
The Tuſcan king,
Laid by the lance, and took him to the ſling.
Where Daedalus his borrow’d wings laid ly,
To that obſcure retreat I chuſe to fly. Dryden's juvenal.
My zeal for you muſt lay the father ly,
And plead my country's cauſe againſt my ſon.
Fortune, conſcious of your deſtiny,
E’en then took care to lay you ſoftly by;
And wrapp'd your fate among her precious things,
Dryden's Án.
Dryden.
James i. 21.
Hudibras.
Denham. ;
Dryden.
Dryden.
Kept freſh to be unfolded with your king's. Dryden.
Diſmiſs your rage, and lay your weapons by,
Know I protect them, and they ſhall not dić. Drydºn.
When their diſpleaſure is once declared, they ought not
preſently to lay by the ſeverity of their brows, but reſtore
their children to their former grâce with ſome difficulty. Lºc.
35. To LAY down. To depoſit as a pledge, equivalent, or fa-
tisfaºtion. º
I lay down my life for the ſheep.
For her, iny Lord,
I dare my life lay down, and will dot, Sir,
Pleaſe you tº accept it, that the queen is ſpotleſ,
I' th' cyes of heaven. Shakespeare ſº inter's 7.2.
3%. 7 º'
jºin X. I 5.
º 3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A. Y.
L A Y
3%. T, LAY ºwn. To quit; to reſign. - . * ...
The ſoldier being once brought in for the ſervice, I w!!
not have him to lay ºn his arms any more. Spenſ. Ireland.
Ambitious conquerors, in their mad career,
Check'd by thy voice, lay down the ſword and ſpear.
Blackmore's Creation, b. ii.
The ſtory of the tragedy is purely fiction; for I take it up
where the hiſtory has laid it down. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
T, LAY dºwn. To commit to repoſe.
I will lay me down in peace and ſleep. Pſal. xlviii.
And they lay themſelves dºwn upon cloaths laid to pledge,
by every altar. - - Amos i. 8.
wely us dºwn, to ſleep away our cares; night ſhuts up
the ſenſes. Glanville's Scep.
Some god condućt me to the ſacred ſhades,
Or liſt me high to Haemus' hilly crown, -
Or in the plains of Tempe lay me down. , Dryden's Wirg.
38. T., LAY down. To advance as a propoſition.
I have laid down, in ſome meaſure, the deſcription of the
old known world. Abbot's Deſcrip. of the World.
Kircher lays it dºwn as a certain principle, that there
never was any people ſo rude, which did not acknowledge
and worſhip one ſupreme deity. Stillingfleet on Rom. Idolatry.
I muſt lay down this for your encouragement, that we are
no longer now under the heavy yoke of a perfect unfinning
obedience. Iłake's Preparation for Death.
Plato lays it down as a principle, that whatever is permit-
ted to befal a juſt man, whether poverty or ſickneſs, ſhall,
either in life or death, conduce to his good. Addiſon's Spect.
From the maxims laid down many may conclude, that I
had a mind the world ſhould think there had been occaſion
given by ſome late abuſes among men of that calling. Swift.
39. To LAY for. To attempt by ambuſh, or inſidious prac-
tlCCS.
He embarked himſelf at Marſeilles, after a long and dan-
gerous journey, being not without the knowledge of Solyman
hardly laid for at ſea by Cortug-ogli, a famous pirate. Knolles.
40, 7, LAY forth. To diffuſe; to expatiate.
O bird the delight of gods and of men and ſo he lays
himſelf forth upon the gracefulneſs of the raven. L’Eſtrange.
41. Tº LAY forth. To place when dead in a decent poſture.
Embalm me,
Then lay me fºrth; although unqueen’d, yet like
A queen, and daughter to a king, interr me. Shakeſpeare.
42. To LAY hold of. To ſeize; to catch. -
Then ſhall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and
bring him out. Deut. xxi. 19.
Favourable ſeaſons of aptitude and inclination, be heed-
fully laid hold of Locke.
43. To LAY in. To ſtore; to treaſure.
Let the main part of the ground employed to gardens or
corn be to a common ſtock; and laid in, and ſtored up, and
then delivered out in proportion. Bacon's Eſſays.
An equal ſtock of wit and valour
He had laid in, by birth a taylor. Hudibras, p. i.
They ſaw the happineſs of a private life, but they thought
they had not yet enough to make them happy, they would
have more, and laid in to make their ſolitude luxurious. Dryd.
Readers, who are in the flower of their youth, ſhould la-
bour at thoſe accompliſhments which may ſet off their per-
* when their bloom is gone, and to lay in timely proviſions
fºr manhood and old age. Addiſon's Guardian.
44. To lay on. To apply with violence.
We make no excuſes for the obſtinate: blows are the pro-
Pºiremedies; but blows laid on in a way different from the
ordinary. Locke on Education.
45. Tº Lay open. To ſhew; to cxpoſe.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and ſpeak,
Lay open to my earthy groſs conceit,
Smother'd in errours, feeble, ſhallow, weak,
The folded meaning of your word's deceit. Shakeſpeare.
A fool layºth open his folly. Prov. xiii. 16.
*...* over. To incruſt; to cover; to decorate ſuper-
tally. s
Wo unto him that faith to the wood, awake; to the dumb
*.. ariſe, it ſhall teach : behold, it is laid over with gold
*River, and there is no breath at all in the midſt of it.
Hab. ii. 19.
37.
** Lay out. To expend.
Fathers are wont to lay up for their ſons,
hou for thy ſon art bent to lay out all. Milton.
Yºho Brahe laid out, beſides his time and induſtry, much
ſº º of money on inſtruments than any man we ever
Ot. - Boyle.
The blood and treaſure that's laid 9tut, !)
$ thrown away, and goes for nought.
You can get a
charge; *-
Hudibras.
- good tutor, you will never repent the
but will always have the ſatisfaction to think it the
º of all other, the beſt laid out. Locke.
Anº in this venture, double gains purſue,
laid ºut all my ſtock to purchaſe you. Dryden.
–
-
My father never at a time like this
Would lay out his great ſoul in words, and waſ e
Such precious moments. Aaltºn's Cºlo:
. A melancholy thing to ſee the diſorders of a hotſhold that
is under the conduct of an angry Itateſwoºan, who lays out
all her thoughts upon the publick, and is only attentive to
find out miſcarriages in the miniſtry. Addiſon's Freeholder,
When a man ſpends his whole life among the ſtars and
F. or lºys ºut a twelve-month on the ſpots in the fun,
lowever noble his ſpeculations may be, they are very apt
to fall into burleſque. Addison an ancient Medals:
Nature has laid out all her art in beautifying the face; ſhe
- - S 3.
has touched it with vermilion, planted in it a double row of
ivory, and made it the ſeat of ſmiles and bluſhes. Addison.
48. Tº LAY out. To diſplay; to diſcover. - -
He was dangerous, and takes occaſion to !ay out bigotry;
and falſe confidence, in all its colours. -
49. To LAY out. To diſpoſe; to plan.
The garden is laid out into a grove for fruits, a vineyard,
and an allotment for olives and herbs. Notes on the Odyſſey:
50. Tº LAY out. With the reciprocal pronoun, to exert; to
put forth.
No ſelfiſh man will be concerned to lay out himſelf for
the good of his country. Smalridge.
51. To LAY to. To charge upon. - º
When we began, in courteous manner, to lay his unkind-
neſs unto him, he, ſeeing himſelf confronted by ſo many,
like a reſolute orator, went not to denial, but to juſtify his
cruel falſhood. - Sidney.
52. Tº LAY to. To apply with vigour.
We ſhould now lay to our hands to root them up, and can-
not tell for what. Oxford Reaſons againſt the Covenant.
Let children be hired to lay to their bones,
From fallow as needeth, to gather up ſtones.
53. To LAY to. To harraſs; to attack.
The great maſter having a careful eye over every part of
the city, went himſelf unto the Engliſh ſtation, which was
then hardly laid to by the Baſſa Muſtapha. Knolles.
Whilſt he this, and that, and each man's blow
Doth eye, defend, and ſhift, being laid to fore;
Backwards he bears. ' Daniel's Civil War.
54. To LAY together. To colle&amp;t; to bring into one view.
If we lay all theſe things together, and conſider the parts,
riſe, and degrees of his ſin, we ſhall find that it was not
for nothing. South's Sermons.
Many people apprehend danger for want of taking the true
meaſure of things, and laying matters rightly together. L'E/fr.
My readers will be very well pleaſed, to ſee ſo many uſe-
ful hints upon this ſubject laid together in ſo clear and con-
ciſe a manner, Addiſon's Guardian, N°. 96.
One ſeries of conſequences will not ſerve the turn, but
many different and oppoſite deductions muſt be examined,
and laid together, before a man can come to make a right
4tterbury.
Tuffer.
judgment of the point in queſtion. Locke.
55. To LAY under. To ſubject-to. -
A Roman ſoul is bent on higher views,
To civilize the rude unpoliſh'd world,
And lay it under the reſtraint of laws. Addison's Cato,
56. To LAY up. To confine.
In the Eaſt-Indies, the general remedy of all ſubječt to
the gout, is rubbing with hands till the motion raiſe a vio-
lent heat about the joints: where it was chiefly uſed, no one
was ever troubled much, or laid up by that diſeaſe. Temple.
57. To LAY up. To ſtore; to treaſure.
St. Paul did will them of the church of Corinth, every
man to lay up ſomewhat by him upon the Sunday, and to
reſerve it in ſtore, till himſelf did come thither, to ſend it
to the church of Jeruſalem for relief of the poor there.
Hºoker, b. iv. ſect. 13.
Thoſe things which at the firſt are obſcure and hard, when
memory hath laid them up for a time, judgment afterwards
growing explaineth them. Hºoker, b. v. ſº. 22.
That which remaineth over, lay up to be kept until the
morning. Exod. xvi. 23.
The king muſt preſerve the revenues of his crown with-
out diminution, and lay up treaſure in ſtore againſt a time
of extremity. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Fathers are wont to lay up for their ſons, -
Thou for thy ſon art bent to lay out all. Milton.
The whole was tilled, and the harveſt laid up in ſeveral
granaries. --- - Temple.
I will lay up your words for you till time ſhall ſerve. Dryd.
This faculty of laying up, and retaining ideas, ſeveral other
animals have to a great degree, as well as man. Locke.
What right, what true, what fit, we juſtly call,
Let this be all my care; for this is all .
To lay this harveſt up, and hoard with haſte
What every day will want, and moſt, the laſt. Pºpe.
58. Tº Lay upºn. To importune; to requeſt with earneſtneſs
and inceſſantly. Obſolete.
All the people laid ſo earneſtly upºw him to take that war
1ſt<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L A Y
* L A Z -
in hand, that they ſaid they would never bear arms, mºre
º the #. if he omitted that occaſion. Knolles.
To LAY. v. n.
I. "ß"...iº, eat the herb which will make them
lay the better. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
2. To contrive. -
Which mov’d the *: d
ll the apteſt means could be procur'd,
#. 7, to #: him in by any train. Daniel's Civil JWar.
3. To LAY about. To ſtrike on all ſides; to act with great
diligence and vigour.
At once he wards and ſtrikes, he takes and pays,
Now forc'd to yield, now forcing to invade,
Before, behind, and round about him lays. Fa. Queen.
And laid about in fight more buſily, "-- ..
Than th’Amazonian dame Pentheſile. Hudibras.
In the late ſucceſsful rebellion, how ſtudiouſly did they lay
about them, to caſt a ſlur upon the king. South's Sermons.
He provides elbow-room enough for his conſcience to lay
about, and have its full play in. South's Sermons.
4. To LAY at. To ſtrike; to endeavour to ſtrike.
Fiercely the good man did at him lay,
The blade oft groaned under the blow. Spenſer's Paſtoral.
• The ſword of him that layeth at him cannot hold. - job.
5. To LAY in for. To make overtures of oblique invitation.
I have laid in for theſe, by rebating the ſatire, where juſ:
tice would allow it, from carrying too ſharp an edge. Pryd.
6. To LAY on. To ſtrike; to beat.
His heart laid on as if it try’d,
To force a paſſage through his ſide.
Anſwer, or anſwer not, 'tis all the ſame,
He lays me on, and makes me bear the blame.
7. To Lay on. To act with vehemence.
My father has made her miſtreſs
Of the feaſt, and ſhe lays it on. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
8. To LAY out. To take meaſures.
Thoſe ants knew ſome days after they had nothing to fear,
and began to lay out their corn in the ſun. Addison Guard.
I made ſtrict enquiry wherever I came, and laid out for in-
telligence of all places, where the intrails of the earth were
laid open. JWoodward.
LAY. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A row ; a ſtratum.
A viol ſhould have a lay of wire-ſtrings below, as cloſe to
the belly as the lute, and then the ſtrings of guts mounted
upon a bridge as in ordinary viols, that the upper ſtrings
ſtrucken might make the lower reſound, Bacon.
Upon this they lay a layer of ſtone, and upon that a lay
of wood. Martimer's Huſbandry.
2. A wager.
It is eſteemed an even lay, whether any man lives ten
years longer: I ſuppoſe it is the ſame, that one of any ten
might die within one year. Graunt's Bills of Mºriality.
LAY. n.ſ. [ley, leag, Saxon; ley, Scottiſh.j Gfaſly ground;
meadow ; ground unplowed, and kept for cattle: more fre-
quently, and more properly, written lea.
A tuft of daiſies on a ſlow'ry lay
They ſaw. - Dryden's Flower and Leaf.
The plowing of layes is the firſt plowing up of graſs ground
for corn. }}...; Huſbandry.
LAY. m. ſ. [lay, French. It is ſaid originally to ſignify ſor-
rºw or complaint, and then to have been transferred to poems
written to expreſs ſorrow. It is derived by the French from
!ſus, Latin, a funeral ſong; but it is found likewiſe in the
Teutonick dialect: ley, leoč, Saxon; !cey, Daniſh..] A ſong;
a poem.
I º maiden's ſounding timbrels ſung,
n well attuned notes, a joyous lay. Spenſ. Fairy 9aeen.
Soon he ſlumber'd, fº nº hº y Queen
The whiles with a loud lay, º him ſweetly charm'd.
enſer's Fairy Queen, b. ii.
This is a moſt majeſtick º, º y &amp;#een, b. ii
Harmonious charming lays. Shakeſpeare's Tempſ.
Nor then the ſolemn nightingale
Ceas'd warbling, but all night tun'd her ſoft lays. Milton.
- - If Jove's will
Have link'd that amorous power to thy ſoft lay,
Now timely ſing. Milton.
He reach'd the nymph with his harmonious la 3.
Whom all his charms could not incline to ſtay. It aller.
9a Ceres let him call, and Ceres praiſe
With uncouth dances, and with country lays. Dryd. Virg.
Vºn gods incline their raviſh'd ears,
And tune their own harmonious ſpheres
To his immortal lays.
LAY. adi. [laicus, Latin,
Hudibras.
Dryden.
ſº.] Not cl Dennis.
- 2.2 (G-&gt;. ot clerical ; regarding or
belonging to the people as diſtinct from the der. S
All this they had by law, and none repin'd,
The prefrence was but due toilº kij :
But when ſome lay preferment fºil by chance,
The Gourmands made it their inhº. Dryden.
Lay perſons, married or unmarried, being doctors of the
civil law, may be chancellors, officials, &amp;c. Ayliffe's Parerg.
It might well ſtartle -
Our lay unlearned faith. Rowe's Ambitious Stºp Mºther.
LA'YER. m. ſ. [from lay.]
1. A ſtratum, or row; a bed; one body ſpread over another.
A layer of rich mould beneath, and about this natural
earth to nouriſh the fibres. Evelyn's Kalendar.
The terreſtrial matter is diſpoſed into ſtrata or layers,
placed one upon another, in like manner as any carthy ſº.
diment, ſetting down from a flood in great quantity: will
naturally be. J/oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. A ſprig of a plant. - -
Many trees may be propagated by layers: this is to be
performed by ſlitting the branches a little way, and laying
them under the mould about half a foot; the ground ſhould
be firſt made very light, and, after they are laid, they ſhould
have a little water given them : if they do not comply well
in the laying of them down, they muſt be pegged down
with a hook or two ; and if they have taken ſufficient root
by the next winter, they muſt be cut off from the main
ſº and planted in the nurſery: ſome twiſt the branch,
or bare the rind; and if it be out of the reach of the ground,
they faſten a tub or baſket near the branch, which they fill
with good mould, and lay the branch in it. Miller.
Tranſplant alſo carnation ſeedlings, give your layers freſh
earth, and ſet them in the ſhade for a week. Evelyn's Kal.
3. A hen that lays eggs.
The oldeſt are always reckoned the beſt fitters, and the
youngeſt the beſt layers. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
LA'YMAN. m. ſ. [lay and man.]
1. One of the people diſtinét from the clergy.
Laymen will neither admoniſh one another themſelves, nor
ſuffer miniſters to do it. Government of the Tongue.
Since a truſt muſt be, ſhe thought it beſt
To put it out of laymens pow'r at leaſt, ;
And for their ſolemn vows prepar'd a prieſt. Dryden.
Where can be the grievance, that an eccleſiaſtical land-
lord ſhould expect a third part value for his lands, his title
as antient, and as legal, as that of a layman, who is ſeldom
guilty of giving ſuch beneficial bargains. Swift.
2. An image.
You are to have a layman almoſt as big as the life for
every figure in particular, beſides the natural figure before
you. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
LA'Ystall. n.ſ. An heap of dung.
Scarce could he footing find in that foul way,
For many corſes, like a great lay-/fall
Of murdered men, which therein ſtrewed lay. Fa. $24.
LA’z.A.R. m. ſ. [from Lazarus in the goſpel.] One deformed
and nauſeous with filthy and peſtilential diſeaſes.
They ever after in moſt wretched caſe,
Like loathſome lazars, by the hedges lay. Fairy 9teen.
I'll be ſworn and ſworn upon't, ſhe never ſhrowded any
but lazars. Shakeſpeare's Troil. and Creſſidº.
I am weary with drawing the deformities of life, and la-
zars of the people, where every figure of imperfection more
reſembles me. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
Life he labours to refine
Daily, nor of his little ſtock denies
Fit alms, to lazars, merciful, and meek. Philips.
LAZAR-House. } n. ſ. [lazaret, French ; lazzeretto, Italian;
LAZARETTo. from lazar.] A houſe for the reception of
the diſeaſed; an hoſpital.
A place
Before his eyes appear'd, ſad, noiſome, dark,
A lazar-houſe it ſeem’d, where were laid
Numbers of all diſeas'd. 41ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
LA’za Rwort. n.ſ. A plant.
LA’zily, adv. [from lazy.] Idly; ſluggiſhly; heavily.
Watch him at play, when following his own inclinations;
and ſee whether he be ſtirring and active, or whether he la-
zily and liſtleſly dreams away his time. Locke.
The eaſtern nations view the riſing fires,
Whilſt night ſhades us, and lazily retires. Creech.
LA'ziness. n.ſ.. [from lazy.] Idleneſs; ſluggiſhneſs; heavi-
neſs to action. wº
That inſtance of fraud and lazineſ, the unjuſt ſteward,
who pleaded that he could neither dig nor beg, would quick-
!y have been brought both to dig and to beg too, rather than
ſtarve. South's Sermons.
My fºrtune you have reſcued, not only from the power of
others, but from my own modeſty and Iazineſs. Dryden
LA’z.ING: adj. [from lazy..] Sluggiſh; idle. -
The hands and the feet mutinied againſt the belly: the
knew no reaſon, why the one ſhould be Jazing, and pº
Pering itſelf with the fruit of the other's labour. L'E/irange
The for cried, Utinam hoc eſºt taborare, while he ſº
(azing and lolling upon his couch. South's Sermon;
LA’zuli. m. ſ. -
The ground of this ſtone is blue, veined and ſpotted with
-
white,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L E A
L E A
white, and a gliſtering or metallick yellow : it appears to be
compoſed of, firſt, a white ſparry, or cryſtalline matter;
ſecondly, flakes of the golden or yellow talc; thirdly, a
ihining yellow ſubſtance; this fumes off in the calcination of
the ſtone, and caſts a ſulphureous ſmell; fourthly, a bright
blue ſubſtance, of great uſe among the painters, under the
name of ultramarine ; and when rich, is found, upon trial,
to yield about one-ſixth of copper, with a very little ſilver.
Woodward's Metallick Foſſils.
LAZY. adj. [This word is derived by a correſpondent, with
I would have the tower two ſtories, and goodly lead; upon
the top, raiſed with ſtatues interpoſed. Bacon.
To Lead. v. a. [from the noun.j To fit with lead in any
manner.
He faſhioneth the clay with his arm, he applieth himſelf
to lead it over; and he is diligent to make clean the fut-
nace. - - Eccluſ, xxxviii. 30.
There is a traverſe placed in a loſt, at the right hand of
the chair, with a privy door, and a carved window of glaſs
leaded with gold and blue, where the mother fitteth. Bºon.
great probability, from a l'aiſe, French ; but it is how- To PEAP...v.a. preter. I led. [laeoan, Saxon; leiden, Dutch..]
£ver Teutonick: liffer in Daniſh, and loſgh in Dutch, 1. To guide by the hand.
have the ſame meaning; and Spelman gives this account of
the word: Dividebantur antiqui Saxones, ut teſtatur Nithar-
dus, in tres ordines; Edhilingos, Frilingos &amp; Lazzos; hoc
eſt nobiles, ingenuos &amp; ſerviles: quam &amp; nos diſtinétionem
diuretinuimus. Sed Ricardo autem ſecundo pars ſervorum
maxima ſe in libertatem vindicavit; ſic ut hodie apud Anglos
rarior inveniatur ſervus, qui mancipium dicitur. Reſtat ni-
hilominus antiquae appellationis commemoratio. Ignavos
enim hodie lazie dicinus.]
1, Idle; ſluggiſh; unwilling to work.
Our ſoldiers, like the night-owl's lazy flight,
Or like a lazy thraſher with a flail, . . .
Fall gently down, as if they ſtruck their friends. Shakeſp.
Wicked condemned men will ever live like rogues, and
2.
There is a cliff, whoſe high and bending head
Looks fearfully on the confined deep:
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
jº repair the miſery, thou doſt bear,
With ſomething rich about me: from that place
I ſhall no leading need. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Doth not each on the ſabbath looſe his ox or his as from
the ſtall, and lead him away to watering Luke xiii. 15.
They thruſt him out of the city, and led him unto the
brow of the hill. Luke iv. 29,
To conduct to any place, -
Save to every man his wife and children, that they may
lead them away, and depart. I San, xxx. 22.
Then brought he me out of the way, and led me about
not fall to work, but be lazy, and ſpend vićtuals. Bacon. the way without unto the utter gate. Ezek. xlvii. 2.
Whoſe lazy waters without motion lay. Roſcommon. He maketh me to lie down in green paſtures; he leadeth
The lazy glutton ſafe at home will keep, me beſide the ſtill waters, Pſal. xxiii. 2.
Indulge his ſloth, and batten with his ſleep. Dryden. 3. To condućt as head or commander.
Like Eaſtern kings a lazy ſtate they keep, Would you lead forth your army againſt the enemy, and
And cloſe confin'd in their own palace ſleep. Pope. ſeek him where he is to fight , Spenſer on Ireland.
What amazing ſtupidity is it, for men to be negligent of
falvation themſelves to fit down lazy and unactive. Rogers.
2. Slow ; tedious.
The ordinary method for recruiting their armies, was now
too dull and lazy an expedient to reſiſt this torrent. Clarendon.
LD. is a contraction of lord.
LEA. n.ſ. [ley, Saxon, a fallow ; leag, Saxon, a paſture.]
Ground incloſed, not open.
Greatly agaſt with this pittious plea ;
Him reſted the good man on the lea.
Ceres, moſt bounteous lady, thy rich leas
Spenſ. Paſtorals. .
He turns head againſt the lion's armed jaws;
And being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads antient lords, and rev'rend biſhops, on
To bloody battles. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
I wonder much,
Being men of ſuch great leading as you are,
That you foreſee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p, i.
If thou wilt have
The leading of thy own revenges, take
One half of my commiſſion, and ſet down
Of wheat, rye, barley, fetches, oats and peas. Shakespeare As beſt thou art experienc'd. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Her fallow leas He led me on to mightieſt deeds,
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory Above the nerve of mortal arm,
Doth root upon. Shakeſpeare's Henry V. Againſt the uncircumcis'd, our enemies :
Dry up thy harrow'd veins, and plough-torn leas,
Whereof ingrateful man with liqu'riſh draughts,
But now hath caſt me off.
Chriſt took not upon him fleſh and blood, that he might
And morſels unctuous, greaſes his pure mind. Shakeſp. conquer and rule nations, lead armies, or poſſeſs places. South.
Such court guiſe, He might muſter his family up, and lead them out againſt
As Mercury did firſt deviſe, the Indians, to ſeek reparation upon any injury. Locke.
With the mincing Dryades, 4. To introduce by going firſt.
On the lawns, and on the leas. Milton. Which may go out before them, and which may go in be-
LEAD. m. ſ. [lab, Saxon.]
1. Lead is the heavieſt metal except gold; for, though it is
conſiderably lighter than quickſilver, as this wants mallea-
bility, it ought not to be reckoned in the claſs of metals.
Lead is the ſofteſt of all the metals, and very dućtile, though
leſs ſo than gold : it is very little ſubject to ruſt, and the leaſt
ſonorous of all the metals except gold. The ſpecifick gra-
vity of lead is to that of water as 11322 to Iooo. Lead,
when kept in fuſion over a common fire, throws up all other
bodies, except gold, that are mixed, all others being lighter,
except Mercury, which will not bear that degree of heat:
it afterwards vitrifies with the baſer metals, and carries them
off, in form of ſcoriae, to the ſides of the veſſel. The
weakeſt acids are the beſt ſolvents for lead : it diſſolves very
readily in aqua fortis diluted with water, as alſo in vinegar.
Gold, or filver, or copper, become brittle on being mixed
with lead in fuſion; and, if lead and tin be melted together,
the tin is thrown up to the ſurface in little duſty globes.
Lead is found in various countries, but abounds particularly
in England, in ſeveral kinds of ſoils and ſtones. The ſmoke
5.
6.
7.
fore them, and which may lead them out, and which may
bring them in. Numb. xxvii. 17.
His guide, as faithful from that day,
As Heſperus that leads the ſun his way.
To guide; to ſhow the method of attaining.
Human teſtimony is not ſo proper to lead us into the
knowledge of the eſſence of things, as to acquaint us with
the exiſtence of things. //atts's Logick.
To draw 3 to entice; to allure.
Appoint him a meeting, give him a ſhew of comfort, and
lead him on with a fine baited delay. Shakeſpeare.
The lord Cottington, being a maſter of temper, knew
how to lead him into a miſtake, and then drive him into
choler, and then expoſe him. Carendon.
To induce; to prevail on by pleaſing motives.
What I did, I did in honour,
Led by th’ impartial conduct of my ſoul. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
He was driven by the neceſſities of the times, more than
led by his own diſpoſition, to any rigour of ačtions. K. Charles.
What I ſay will have little influence on thoſe whoſe ends
Fairfax, b, i.
of the lead works at Mendip in Somerſetſhire is a prodi- lead them to wiſh the continuance of the war. Swift.
gous annoyance, and ſubjects both the workmen, and the 8. To paſs; to ſpend in any certain manner.
cattle that graze about them, to a mortal diſeaſe; trees that The ſweet woman leads an ill life with him. Shakeſp.
grow near them have their tops burnt, and their leaves and
outſides diſcoloured and ſcorched.
Thou art a ſoul in bliſs, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire; that mine own tears
Do ſcald like molten lead. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Of lead, ſome I can ſhew you ſo like ſteel, and ſo unlike
common lead ore, that the workmen call it ſteel ore. Boyle.
Head is employed for the refining of gold and filver by the
Cupel; hereof is made common ceruſs with vinegar; of ce-
Hill. .
his death was the death of the righteous.
So ſhalt thou lead
Safeſt thy life, and beſt prepar'd endure . .
Thy mortal paſſage when it comes. Aſilion's Par. Lºft.
Him, fair Lavinia, thy ſurviving wife
Shall breed in groves, to lead a ſolitary life. Dryden.
Luther's life was led up to the doctrines he preached, and
Celibacy, as then practiſed in the church of Rome, was
Milton's Agoniſłes. -
Fr. Alterbury.
commonly forced, taken up under a bold vow, and led in all
|
tº red lead; of plumbum uſtum, the beſt yellow ochre; uncleanneſs. - - Francis Atterbury.
ºf lead, and half as much tin, ſolder for lead. Grew. This diſłemper is moſt incident to ſuch as lead a ſedentary
* [In the plural.] Flat roof to walk on. life. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Stalls, bulks, windows, To LEAD. v. n.
Are ſmother'd up, leads fill’d, and ridges hors'd 1. To go firſt, and ſhow the way,
With variable complexions; all agreeing I will lead on ſoftly, according as the cattle that goeth
In earneſtneſs to ſee him. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus. before me, and the º be able to endure. Gen. ...”.
I 5 -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">L E A
L E A
2. To conduct as a commander. - -
Cyrus was beaten and ſlain under the leading of a woman,
whoſe wit and conduct made a great figure in antient ſtory.
- Temple.
3. To ſhew the way, by going firſt.
He left his mother a counteſs by patent, which was a new
leading example, grown before ſomewhat rare, ſince the days
of queen Mary. Wotton.
The way of maturing of tobacco muſt be from the heat
of the earth or fun; we ſee ſome leading of this in muſk-
melons town upon a hot-bed dunged below. Bacon.
The veſſels heavy-laden put to ſea
With proſp'rous gales, and woman lead; the way. Dryden.
LEAD. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Guidance; firſt place: a low
deſpicable word.
Yorkſhire takes the lead of the other countries. Herring.
LEADEN. adj. [leaven, Saxon.]
1. Made of lead.
This tiger-footed rage, when it ſhall find
The harm of unſkann'd ſwiftneſs, will, too late,
Tye leaden pounds to 's heels. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
º O murth’rous ſlumber 1
Lay'ſt thou the leaden mace upon my boy,
That plays thee muſick. Shakeſ, julius Cæſar,
A leaden bullet ſhot from one of theſe guns againſt a ſtone
wall, the ſpace of twenty-four paces from it, will be beaten
into a thin plate. //ilkins's Mathematical Magick.
2. Heavy; unwilling; motionleſs.
If thou do'ſt find him tractable to us,
Encourage him, and tell him all our reaſons:
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
Be thou ſo too. Shakeſpeare's Rich. III.
3. Heavy; dull.
I'll ſtrive with troubled thoughts to take a nap ;
Left leaden ſlumber poize me down to-morrow,
When I ſhould mount with wings of vićtory.
LEADER. m. ſ. [from lead.]
1. One that leads, or condućts.
2. Captain ; commander.
Shakeſp.
In my tent
I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
Limit each leader to his ſeveral charge,
And part in juſt proportion our ſmall ſtrength. Shakeſp.
I have given him for a leader and commander to the
people. Iſa. lv. 4.
Thoſe who eſcaped by flight excuſed their diſhonour, not
without a ſharp jeſt againſt ſome of their leaders, affirming,
that, as they had followed them into the field, ſo it was good
reaſon they ſhould follow them out. Hayward.
When our Lycians ſee
Our brave examples, they admiring ſay,
Behold our gallant leaders. Denham.
The brave leader of the Lycian crew. Dryden,
. One who goes firſt.
Nay keep your way, little gallant; you were wont to be a
follower now you are a leader. Shakeſpeare.
4. One at the head of any party or faction: as the deteſtable
Wharton was the leader of the whigs. -
The underſtandings of a ſenate are enſlaved by three or four
teaders, ſet to get or to keep employments. Swift.
LEADING, participial adj. Principal.
In organized bodies, which are propagated by ſeed, the
ſhape is the leading quality, and moſt charaćteriſtical part,
that determines the ſpecies. Locke.
Miſtakes ariſe from the influence of private perſons upon
great numbers ſtiled leading men and parties. Swift.
LEADING-striNGs. m. ſ. [lead and ſhring.] Strings by which
children, when they learn to walk, are held from falling,
Sound may ſerve ſuch, ere they to ſenſe are grown,
Like leading://rings, 'till they can walk alone. Dryden.
Was he ever able to walk without leading-ſīrings, or ſwim
without bladders, without being diſcovered by his hobbling
and his ſinking : - Swift.
LEADMAN. n.ſ. [lead and man.] One who begins or leads a
dance. -
Such a light and mettl’d dance
Saw you never,
And by leadmen for the nonce,
That turn round like grindle ſtones. Benj. johnſon.
LEADwo RT, n.ſ. [lead and wort.] º
This flower conſiſts of one leaf, which is ſhaped like a
funnel, and cut into ſeveral ſegments at the top, out of
whoſe fiſtulous flower-cup riſes the pointal, which afterward
becomes one oblong ſeed, for the moſt part ſharp-pointed,
which ripens in the flower-cup, Miller.
LEAF. n.J. leaves, plural. [leap, Saxon; leaf, Dutch..]
1. The green deciduous parts of plants and flowers.
This is the ſtate of man; to-day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow bloſſoms. Shakespeare
A man ſhall ſeldom fail of having cherries borne by his
graft the ſame year in which his inciſion is made, if his
graft have bloſſom buds; whereas if it were only leaf buds,
it will not bear fruit till the ſecond ſeaſon. Boy'e.
**
Thoſe things which are removed to a diſtant view, ought
to make but one maſs ; as the leaves on the trees, and the
billows in the ſea. Dryden's Dyrºſnay.
2. A part of a book, containing two pages.
Happy ye leaves, when as thoſe ſilly hands
Shall handle you.
Peruſe my leaves through ev'ry part,
And think thou ſeeſt my owner's heart
Scrawl'd o'er with trifles. Swift.
3. One ſide of a double door.
The two leaves of the one door were folding.
4. Anything foliated, or thinly beaten.
Eleven ounces two pence ſterling ought to be of ſo pure
filver, as is called leaf ſilver, and then the melter muſt add
of other weight ſeventeen pence halfpenny farthing. Camden.
Leaf gold, that flies in the air as light as down, is as
truly gold as that in an ingot. Digby on Bodies.
To LeAF. v. n. [from the noun..] To bring leaves; to bear
leaves.
Moſt trees ſprout, and fall off the leaves at autumn ; and
if not kept back by cold, would leaf about the ſolſtice.
Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. ii.
LEAFL Ess, adj. [from lesſ.] Naked of leaves.
Bare honeſty without ſome other adornment, being looked
on as a leaftſ; tree, nobody will take himſelf to its ſhelter.
Government of the Tºngue.
Where doves in flocks the leaſeſ trees o'er ſhade,
And lonely woodcocks haunt the wat'ry glade. Pope.
LEAFY. adj. [from leaf.] Full of leaves. -
The frauds of men were ever ſo,
Since ſummer was firſt leaſy. Shakeſpeare.
What chance, good lady, hath bereſt you thus
—Dim darkneſs, and this leafy labyrinth. Milton.
O'er barren mountains, o'er the flow'ry plain,
Dryd. {
1 Kings.
The leaſy foreſt, and the liquid main,
Extends thy uncontroul’d and boundleſs reign.
Her º arms with ſuch extent were ſpread,
That hoſts of birds, that wing the liquid air,
Perch'd in the boughs. Dryden's Fower and Leaf.
So when ſome ſwelt’ring travellers retire
To leaſy ſhades, near the cool ſunleſs verge
Of Paraba, Braſilian ſtream; her tail
A griſly hydra ſuddenly ſhoots forth.
LEAGUE. n.f. [ligue, French; ligo, Latin.]
I. A confederacy; a combination.
You peers, continue this united league :
I every day expect an embaſſage
From my Redeemer, to redeem me hence.
And now in peace my ſoul ſhall part to heav'n,
Since I have made my friends at peace on earth. Shakespeare.
We come to be informed by yourſelves,
What the conditions of that league muſt be. Shałęſ.
Thou ſhalt be in league with the ſtones of the field; and
the beaſts of the field ſhall be at peace with thee, job v. 23.
Go break thy league with Baaſha, that he may départ from
Ine, . 2 Chron. xvi. 3.
It is a great error, and a narrowneſs of mind, to think,
that nations have nothing to do one with another, except
there be either an union in ſovereignty, or a conjunction in
pacts or leagues: there are other bands of ſociety and implicit
confederations. Bacon's Holy J/ar.
I, a private perſon, whom my country
As a league breaker gave up bound, preſúm'd
Single rebellion, and did hoſtile acts. Milton's Agoniſter,
Oh Tyrians, with immortal hate
Purſue this race : let there be
'Twixt us and them no league nor amity.
To LEAGUE. v. m. To unite; to confederate.
Where fraud and falſhood invade ſociety, the band pre-
ſently breaks, and men are put to a loſs where to league and
to faſten their dependances. South's Sermons.
LEAGUE. m. ſ. [lieué, French.]
I. A league; leuca, Latin ; from lech, Welſh; a ſtone that
was ulcd to be erected at the end of every league. Camden.
2. A meaſure of length, containing three miles.
Ere the ſhips could meet by twice five leagues,
Philips.
Benham.
We were encount’red by a mighty rock. Shakeſpeare.
Ev’n Italy, though many a league remote,
In diſtant echo's anſwer'd. Addison.
LEAGUED. adj. [from league.] Confederated.
And now thus leagu'd by an eternal bond,
What ſhall retard the Britons bold deſigns. Philips.
LE'AGUER. m. ſ. [belºggeren, Dutch..] Siege ; inveſtment of a
to Wil,
We will bind and hoodwink him ſo, that he ſhall ſuppoſe
no other but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adver-
ſaries, when we bring him to our own tents. Shakeſpeare.
LEAK. m. ſ. [leck, leke, Dutch..] A breach or hole which lets
in water.
There will be always evils, which no art of man can
cure; breaches and leaks more than man's wit hath hands
to ſtop. Fíooker.
The
Spºnſºr.
º
*.
º
-
-
s
º
:
--&gt;
sº a<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            End of Section.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section" id="Section"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 1</div><p class="Text">L E A
The water ruſhes in, as it doth uſually in the leak of a
{hip. Wilkins's Mathematical Magick.
whether ſhe ſprung a leak I cannot find,
Or whether ſhe was over ſet with wind;
- Or that ſome rock below her bottom rent,
But down at once with all her crew ſhe went.
To Leak. v. n.
1. To let water in or out. - -
They will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we leak in your
chimney. Shakeſpeare.
The water, which will perhaps by degrees leak into ſeveral
parts, may be emptied out again. Wilkins's Math. Magick.
His feet ſhould be waſhed every day in cold water; and
have his ſhoes ſo thin, that they might leak, and let in
Water. locke.
2. To drop through a breach. -
Golden ſtars hung o'er their heads,
And ſeemed ſo crowded, that they burſt upon 'em,
And dart at once their baleful influence
In leaking fire. Dryden's and Lee's Oedipus:
Leakage. n.ſ.. [from leak.] Allowance made for accidental
loſs in liquid meaſures.
leaky, adj. [from leak.] -
1. Battered or pierced, ſo as to let water in or out.
Thou'rt ſo leaky,
That we muſt leave thee to thy ſinking; for
Thy deareſt quit thee: Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
If you have not enjoy'd what youth could give,
But life ſunk through you like a leaky ſieve,
Accuſe yourſelf, you liv'd not while you might.
2. Loquacious; not cloſe. -
Women are ſo leaky, that I have hardly met with one
that could not hold her breath longer than ſhe could keep a
Dryden.
Dryden.
ſecret. L'Eſtrange.
To LEAN. v. m. peter. leaned or leant. [plinan, Saxon; lenen,
Dutch.]
1. To incline againſt; to reſt againſt.
Lean thine aged back againſt mine arm,
| - And in that caſe I'll tell thee my diſeaſe. Shakeſpeare,
Security is expreſſed among the medals of Gordianus, by a
lady leaning againſt a pillar, a ſcepter in her hand, before
an altar. - Peacham on Drawing.
The columns may be allowed ſomewhat above their ordi-
nary length, becauſe they lean unto ſo good ſupporters. Wott.
Upon his iv'ry ſceptre firſt he leant,
Then ſhook his head, that ſhook the firmament. Dryden,
Oppreſs'd with anguiſh, panting and o'erſpent,
His fainting limbs againſt an oak he leant. Dryden's Aen.
If he be angry, all our other dependencies will profit us no-
thing; every other ſupport will fail under us when we come
to lean upon it, and deceive us in the day when we want it
moſt. Rogers's Sermons.
Then leaning o'er the rails he muſing ſtood. Gay,
Mid the central depth of black'ning woods,
High rais'd in ſolemn theatre around
Leans the huge elephant.
2. To propend; to tend towards. -
They delight rather to lean to their old cuſtoms, though
Thomſon's Summer.
they be more º and more inconvenient. Spenſer.
Truſt in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto
thine own underſtanding. Prov. iii. 5.
A deſire leaning to either ſide, biaſes the judgment ſtrange-
ly. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. To be in a bending poſture.
She leans me out at her miſtreſs's chamber window, bids
me a thouſand times good night. Shakeſpeare.
Wearied with length of ways, and worn with toil,
She laid her down; and leaning on her knees,
Invok'd the cauſe of all her miſeries. Dryden.
The gods came downward to behold the wars,
Sharp'ning their fights, and leaning from their ſtars, Dryd.
LEAN. al. [Elene, Saxon.]
1. Not fat; meagre; wanting fleſh; bare-boned.
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean famine, quartering ſteel, and climbing fire. Shakeſp.
Lean raw-bon'd raſcals who would e'er ſuppoſe,
They had ſuch courage and audacity Shakeſpeare.
Lean look’d prophets whiſper fearful change. Shakespeare
I would invent as bitter ſearching terms,
With full as many ſigns of deadly hate,
As lean-fac’d envy in her loathſome cave. Shakeſpeare.
Seven other kine came up out of the river, ill-favoured
and lean-fleſhed, Gen. xli. 3.
Let a phyſician beware how he purge after hard froſty wea-
ther, and in a lean body, without preparation. Bacon.
And fetch their precepts from the cynic tub,
Praiſing the lean, and fallow, abſtinence. Milton.
Swear that Adraſtus; and the lean-look'd prophet,
Are joint conſpirators. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
*º people often ſuffer for want of fat, as fat people may
by obſtruction of the veſſels. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
No laughing graces wanton in my eyes;
uthagger'd grief, lean looking ſallow care, I
L E A
Dwell on my brow.
2. Not unctuous; thin; hungry. -
There are two chief kinds of terreſtrial liquors, thoſe that
are fat and light, and thoſe that are lean and more earthy,
like common water. Burnet's 7%eory of the Earth.
3. Low ; poor; in oppoſition to great or rich.
That which combin'd us was moſt great, and let not
A leaner ačtion rend us. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
LEAN. m. ſ. That part of fleſh which éonſiſts of the muſcle
without the fat.
With razors keen we cut our paſſage clean
. Through rills of fat, and deluges of jan.
LEANLY: adv. [from lean.] Meagerly;
LE'ANNEss. n.ſ.. [from lean.]
1. Extenuation of body; want of fleſh; meagreneſs.
If thy leanneſs loves ſuch food,
There are thoſe, that, for thy ſake,
Po enough. Benj. Johnſºn's Fºrºſ.
The ſymptoms of too great fluidity are exceſs of univerſal
ſecretions, as of perſpiration, ſweat, urine, liquid dejećtures,
leanneſs, and weakneſs. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Want of bulk. -
The poor king Reignier, whoſe large ſtyle
Agrees not with the leanneſs of his purſe.
To LEAP. v. n. [pleapan, Saxon; loup, Scottiſh.]
1. To jump; to move upward or progreſſively without change
of the feet.
If I could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into my
ſaddle with my armour on, I ſhould quickly leap into a
wife. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
A man leapeth better with weights in his hands than with.
out ; for that the weight, if it be proportionable, ſtrength-
eneth the finews by contračting, them. In leaping with
weights the arms are firſt caſt backwards and then forwards
with ſo much the greater force; for the hands go backward
before they take their riſe. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt,
In a narrow pit
He ſaw a lion, and leap'd down to it. Cowley's David.ir.
Thrice from the ground ſhe leap'd, was ſeen to wield
Her brandiſh’d lance. - Dryden's Aew,
2. To ruſh with vehemence.
God changed the ſpirit of the king into mildneſs, who in
a fear leaped from his throne, and took her in his arms, till
ſhe came to herſelf again. E/ih. xv. 8.
After he went into the tent, and found her not, he leaped
out to the people. judith xiv. 17.
He ruin upon ruin heaps,
And on me, like a furious giant, leaps.
Strait leaping from his horſe he rais'd me up.
3. To bound; to ſpring.
Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy.
I am warm’d, my heart
Leaps at the trumpet's voice, and burns for glory. Addison.
4. To fly; to ſtart. -
He parted frowning from me, as if ruin
Leap'd from his eyes: ſo looks the chaſed lion
Upon the daring huntſman that has gall'd him ;
Then makes him nothing. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and ſparks of fire leap
out. , job xli. 19.
To LEAP. v. a.
1. To paſs over, or into, by leaping.
Every man is not of a conſtitution to leap a gulf for the
ſaving of his country. L’Eſtrange.
As one condemn'd to leap a precipice,
Who ſees before his eyes the depth below, -
Stops ſhort. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
She dares purſue, if they dare lead:
As their example ſtill prevails,
She tempts the ſtream, or leaps the pales.
2. To compreſs; as beaſts. -
Too ſoon they muſt not feel the ſting of love:
Let him not leap the cow. Dryden's Georg.
LEAP. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Bound; jump; act of leaping.
2. Space paſſed by leaping.
After they have carried their riders ſafe over all leaps, and
through all dangers, what comes of them in the end but to
be broken-winded. L’Eſtrange.
3. Sudden tranſition.
Wickedneſs comes on by degrees, as well as virtue; and
ſudden leaps from one extreme to another are unnatural.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
The commons wreſted even the power of chuſing a king
intirely out of the hands of the nobles; which was ſo great
a leap, and cauſed ſuch a convulſion in the ſtate, that the
Rowe's jane Shore.
- Farquhar.
without plumpneſs.
Shakeſpeare.
Sandys.
Rowe.
Luke vi. 23.
Prior.
conſtitution could not bear. Swift.
4. An aſſault of an animal of prey.
The cat made a leap at the mouſe. L’Eſtrange.
5. Embrace of animals.
How ſhe cheats her bellowing lovers eye;
The ruſhing leap, the doubtful progeny. . . Dryden's 4º.
6. Hazard,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 2</div><p class="Text">L E A
L E A
6, Hazard, or effe&amp;t of leaping.
Methinks, it were an eaſy leap
To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd moon. Shakespeare
You take a precipice for no leap of danger, -
And woo your own deſtruction. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Behold that dreadful downfal of a rock,
Where yon old fiſher views the waves from high
'Tis the convenient leap I mean to try. Dryd. Theocritus.
Leap-Frog. m. / [leap and frog.) A play of children, in
which they imitate the jump of frogs.
. If I could win a lady at leap-frog, I ſhould quickly leap
into a wife. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
LEAP-YEAR. m. ſ.
£eap-year or biſextile is every fourth year, and ſo called from
its leaping a day more that year than in a common year:
ſo that the common year hath 365 days, but the leap-year
366 and then February hath 29 days, which in common
.. hath but 28. To find the leap-year you have this
Tule :
Divide by 4; what's left ſhall be
For leap-year of for paſt 1, 2, 3. Harris.
That the ſun conſiſteth of 365 days and almoſt fix hours,
wanting eleven minutes; which ſix hours omitted will, in
proceſs of time, largely deprave the compute; and this is
the occaſion of the biſextile or leap-year. Brown's Vulg. Err.
To LEARN. v. a. [leornian, Saxon.]
1. To gain the knowledge or ſkill of.
Learn a parable of the fig-tree. Mat. xxiv. 32.
He, in a ſhorter time than was thought poſſible, learned
both to ſpeak and write the Arabian tongue. Knolles.
Learn, wretches learn the motions of the mind,
And the great moral end of humankind. Dryd. Perſius.
You may rely upon my tender care,
To keep him far from perils of ambition:
All he can learn of me, will be to weep I A. Philips.
2. To teach... [It is obſervable, that in many of the European
languages the ſame word ſignifies to learn and to teach ; to
gain or impart knowledge.] -
He would learn
The lion ſtoop to him in lowly-wiſe,
A leſſon hard. Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i.
You taught me language, and my profit on't
Is, I know not how to curſe: the red plague rid you,
For learning me your language. §. Tempeſt.
A thouſand more miſchances than this one,
Have learn'd me how to brook this patiently. Shakespeare
Haſt thou not learn'd me how
To make perfumes * , Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which
is written. I Cor. iv. 6.
To LEARN. v. n. To take pattern.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek
and lowly. Mat. xi. 29.
In imitation of ſounds, that man ſhould be the teacher is
no part of the matter; for birds will learn one of another.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 237.
LEARNED. adj. [from learn.] -
1. Verſed in ſcience and literature.
It is indifferent to the matter in hand, which way the
learned ſhall determine of it. Locke.
Some by old words to fame have made pretence:
Such labour'd nothings, in ſo ſtrange a ſtyle,
Amaze th' unlearn'd, and make the learned ſmile. Pope.
The learned met with free approach,
Although they came not in a coach. Swift.
The beſt account is given of them by their own authors:
but I truſt more to the table of the learned biſhop of Bath.
Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. Skilled; ſkilful; knowing.
Though train’d in arms, and learn'd in martial arts,
Thou chuſeſt not to conquer men but hearts. Granville.
3. Skilled in ſcholaſtick knowledge.
Till a man can judge whether they be truths or no, his
underſtanding is but little improved: and thus men of much
reading are greatly learned, but may be little knowing. Locke.
LEARNEDLY. adv. [from learned.] With knowledge; with
ſkill.
Much
He ſpoke, and learnedly, for life; but all
Was either pitied in him, or forgotten. Shakespeare H. VIII.
The apoſtle ſeemed in his eyes but learnedly mad. Hooker.
Ev'ry coxcomb ſwears as learnedly as they. Swift.
LEARNING. m. ſ. [from learn.]
1. Literature; ſkill in languages or ſciences; generally ſcho-
laſtick knowledge.
Learning hath its infancy, when it is almoſt childiſh;
then its youth, when luxuriant and juvenile; then its ſtrength
of years, when ſolid; and, laſtly, its old age, when dry and
exhauſt. Bacon's Eſſays.
To tongue or pudding thou haſt no pretence,
Learning thy talent is, but mine is ſenſe. Prior.
As Moſes was learned in all the wiſdom of the Egyptians,
ſo it is manifeſt from this chapter, that St. Paul was a great
maſter in all the learning of the Greeks. Bentley's Serºtons.
2. Skill in any thing good or bad.
An art of contradiction by way of ſcorn, a learning where-
with we were long ſithence forewarned, that the miſerable
times whereunto we are fallen ſhould abound. Hoºker.
Le’ARNER. m. ſ. [from learn.] One who is yet in his rudi-
ments; one who is acquiring ſome new art or knowledge.
The late learners cannot ſo well take the ply, except it be
in ſome minds that have not ſuffered themſelves to fix. Bacon.
Nor can a learner work ſo cheap as a ſkilful practiſed artiſt
can. Graunt's Bills ºf Arta ity.
LEASE. m. ſ. [laiſer, French. Spelman.]
1. A contract by which, in conſideration of ſome payment, a
temporary poſſeſſion is granted of houſes or lands.
Why, couſin, wer’t thou regent of the world,
It were a ſhame to let this land by ſeaſe. Shakeſpeare.
Lords of the world have but for life their leaſe,
And that too, if the leſſor pleaſe, muſt ceaſe. Denham.
I have heard a man talk with contempt of biſhops leaſes,
as on a worſe foot than the reſt of his eſtate. Swift.
2. Any tenure.
Our high-plac'd Macbeth
Shall live the leaſe of nature. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Thou to give the world increaſe,
Short'ned haſt thy own life's leaſe. Milton.
To LEAse. v. a. [from the noun..] To let by leaſe.
Where the vicar leaſes his glebe, the tenant muſt pay the
great tithes to the rector or impropriator, and the ſmall tithes
to the vicar. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To LEASE. v. n. [lºſen, Dutch..] To glean; to gather what
the harveſt men leave.
She in harveſt us’d to leaſe ;
But harveſt done, to chare-work did aſpire,
Meat, drink, and two-pence, was her daily hire. Dryden.
LE'As ER. n.ſ.. [from leaſe.] Gleaner; gatherer after the reaper.
There was no office which a man from England might
not have ; and I looked upon all who were born here as
only in the condition of leaſers and gleaners. Swift.
LEASH. n.ſ. [leſſe, French; letſe, Dutch ; laccio, Italian.]. A
leather thong, by which a falconer holds his hawk, or a
courſer leads his greyhound. Hammer.
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leaſh, -
To let him ſlip at will. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
What I was, I.am ;
More ſtraining on, for plucking back; not following
My leaſh unwillingly. Shakeſpeare's J/inter's Tale.
The raviſhed ſoul being ſhewn ſuch game, would break
thoſe leaſhes that tie her to the body. Boyle.
2. A tierce; three.
I am ſworn brother to a leaſh of drawers, and can call
them all by their Chriſtian names. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Some thought when he did gabble
Th'ad heard three labourers of Babel,
Or Cerberus himſelf pronounce
A leaſh of languages at once. Hudibras, p. i.
3. A band wherewith to tie any thing in general.
Thou art a living comedy; they are a leaſh of dull de-
vils. - Dennis's Letters.
To LEASH. v. a. [from the noun..] To bind; to hold in a
ſtring.
Then ſhould the warlike Harry, like himſelf,
Aſſume the port of Mars; and, at his heels,
Leaſht in like hounds, ſhould famine, ſword, and fire,
Crouch for employment. Shakespeare Henry V.
LE'As.ING.. n.ſ. [leare, Saxon.] Lies; falſhood.
O ye ſons of men, how long will ye have ſuch pleaſure in
vanity, and ſeek after leaſing * Pſal. iv. 2.
He 'mongſt ladies would their fortunes read
Out of their hands, and merry leaſings tell. Hub. Tale.
He hates foul leaſings and vile flattery, -
Two filthy blots in noble gentery. Hubbard's Tale.
That falſe pilgrim which that leaſing told,
Was indeed old Archimago. Spenſ. Fairy Queen.
I have ever marrified my friends
With all the ſize that verity
Would without lapſing ſuffer: nay, ſometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a ſubtle ground
I’ve tumbl’d paſt the throw ; and in his praiſe
Have almoſt ſtampt the leaſing. - Shakespeare Coriolanus.
As folks, quoth Richard, prone to leaſing,
Say things at firſt, becauſe they're pleaſing;
Then prove what they have once aſſerted,
Nor care to have their lie deſerted:
Till their own dreams at length deceive them,
And oft repeating they believe them. Prior.
t Trading free ſhall thrive again,
Nor leaſings leud affright the ſwain. Gay's Paſłorals.
LEAst, adj. the ſuperlative of little. [laert, Saxon. This word
IWallis would perſuade us to write lºſſ, that it may be
analogous<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 3</div><p class="Text">L E. A
L E A
analogous to lſ; but ſurely the profit is not worth the
ºngº. Little beyond others; ſmalleſt. -
I am not worthy of the legſ? of all the mercies ſhewed to
thy ſervant. - - Gen. xxxii. Io.
A man can no more have a poſitive idea of the greateſt
than he has of the leaſt ſpace. Locke.
LEast. adv. In the loweſt degree; in a degree below others;
leſs than any other way. . . . .
He reſolv'd to wave his ſuit,
Or for a while play leaſt in ſight.
Ev’n that avert; I chuſe it not ; -
Buſtaffe it as the legſ unhappy lot. Dryd. Knight's Tale.
No man more truly knows to place. a right value on your
friendſhip, than he who leaſt deſerves it on all other accounts
than his due ſenſe of it. Pope's Letters.
Hudibras, p. i.
A. L.A.T. . ) To ſay no more; not to demand or affirm
At LEAst WISE. § more than is barely ſufficient at the loweſt
degree.
Upon the maſt they ſaw a young man, at leaſ; if he were
a man, who ſate as on horſeback. - - Sidney.
Every effect doth after a ſort contain, at leaſiwiſe reſemble,
the cauſe from which it proceedeth. Hooker, b. i.
The remedies, if any, are to be propoſed from a conſtant
courſ of the milken diet, continued at leaſt a year. Temple.
A fiend may deceive a creature of more excellency than
himſelf, at leaſt by the tacit permiſſion of the omniſcient
Being. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
it uſeful obſervations be at leaſt ſome part of the ſubject
of your converſation. I/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Leagy, adj. [This word ſeems formed from the ſame root
with loiſir, French, or looſe..] Flimſy; of weak texture.
He ſever leaveth, while the ſenſe itſelf be left looſe and
". Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
tºº. n.ſ. [leten, Saxon; leadr, Erſe.]
8. Dreſſed hides of animals. -
He was a hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about
his loins. - 2 Kings i. 8.
The ſhepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle ;
Is far beyond a prince's delicates. Shakespeare Henry VI.
And if two boots keep out the weather,
What need you have two hides of leather. Prior.
2. Skin; ironically. -
Returning ſound in limb and wind,
Except ſome leather loſt behind. Swift. -
LEATHER coat. n.ſ. [leather and coat.] An apple with a
tough rind.
There is a diſh of leathercoats for you. Shakespeare H. IV.
LEATHERDREssex. n.ſ. [leather and dreſſer.] He who dreſſes
leather.
He removed to Cumae; and by the way was entertained
at the houſe of one Tychius, a leather-dreſſer. Pope.
LEATHER-MoUTHED. adj. [leather and mouth.]
By a leather-mouthed fiſh, I mean ſuch as have their teeth
in their throat; as, the chub or cheven. JWalton's Anger.
LEATHERy. adj. [from leather.] Reſembling leather.
Wormius calls this cruſt a leathery ſkin. Grew's Muſeum.
LEATHERN. adj. [from ſeather.] Made of leather.
I ſaw her hand; ſhe has a leathern hand,
A free-ſtone colour'd hand: I verily did think
That her old gloves were on. Shakeſp. As you like it.
The wretched animal heav'd forth ſuch groans,
That their diſcharge did ſtretch his leathern coat
Almoſt to burſting. Shakespeare As you like it.
In ſilken or in leathern purſe retain
A ſplendid ſhilling. Philips.
LEATHERSELLER. m. ſ. [leather and ſeller.] He who deals in
leather, and vends it.
LEAVE. m. ſ. [leare, Saxon; from lyran, to grant.]
1. Grant of liberty; permiſſion; allowance. - *
By your leave, Ireneus, notwithſtanding all this your care-
ful forefight, methinks I ſee an evil lurk uneſpied. Spenſer.
When him his deareſt Una did behold,
Diſdaining life, deſiring leave to dye. Spenſer.
I make bold to preſs upon you.
—You're welcome; give us leave, drawer. Shakeſpeare.
The days
Of Sylla's ſway, when the free ſword took leave
To act all that it would. Benj. johnſon's Cataline,
Thrice happy ſnake that in her ſleeve
ay boldly creep, we dare not give
Out thoughts ſo unconfin’d a leave. J/aller.
No friend has leave to bear away the dead. Dryden.
Offended that we fought without his leave,
He takes this time his ſecret hate to ſhew. Dryden.
9; thing more I crave leave to offer about ſyllogiſm, be-
fore I leave it. Locke.
I muſt have leave to be grateful to any who ſerves me, let
him be never ſo obnoxious to any party: nor did the tory
Fººty put me to the hardſhip of aſking this leave. Pope.
3. Farewel; adieu.
Take leave and part, for you muſt part forthwith. Shał.
Evils that take leave,
*—
II. To ceaſe to do; to deſiſt from.
On their departure, moſt of all ſhew evil. Shakespeare.
* There is further compliment of leave taking between France
and him. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Here my father comes;
A double bleſfing is a double grace;
Occaſion ſmiles upon a ſecond leave. Shakespeare. Hamlet,
But my dear nothings, take your leave,
No longer muſt you me deceive. Suckling.
Many ſtars may be viſible in our hemiſphere, that are
not ſo at preſent; and many which are at preſent ſhall take
*ave of our horizon, and appear unto ſouthern habitations.
Brown's Wugar Frrours, b. iv. c. 1 3.
Tº: º † pret. ſºft I have left. [Of the derivation
of this word the etymologiſts give no ſatisfact
I. To quit; to ... gilts g ory account J
A man ſhall leave his father and his mother, and cleave to
his wife. Gen. ii. 2
...When they were departed from him, they left him in º:
diſeaſes. - - 2 Chron. xxiv. 2 5.
E If º love . º leave the luſty wine,
. P.nvy them not their palates with the ſwine, - -
2. T. to †. B Johnſon.
He that is of an unthankful mind, will leave him in danger
that delivered him. Eccluſ. xxix. 17.
3. To have remaining at death.
There be of them that have left a name behind them.
Eccluſ. xliv. 8.
4. Not to deprive of. - ºf xliv. 8
They ſtill have left me the providence of God, and all the
promiſes of the goſpel, and my charity to them too. Taylor.
5. To ſuffer to remain.
If it be done without order, the mind comprehendeth leſs
that which is ſet down; and beſides, it leaveth a ſuſpicion,
as if more might be ſaid than is expreſſed. Bacon.
Theſe things muſt be left uncertain to farther diſcoveries
in future ages. Abbot's Deſcription of the ſºrld.
Who thoſe are, to whom this right by deſcent belongs,
he leaves out of the reach of any one to diſcover from his
writings. Locke.
6. Not to carry away.
They encamped againſt them, and deſtroyed the increaſe
of the earth, and left no ſuſtenance for Iſrael. judg. vi. 4.
He ſhall eat the fruit of thy cattle; which alſo ſhall not
leave thee either corn, wine, or oil. Deut. xxviii. 48.
Vaſtius gave ſtrićt commandment, that they ſhould leave
behind them unneceſſary baggage. Knolles's Hiſtory.
. To fix as a token or remembrance. - -
This I leave with my reader, as an occaſion for him to
conſider, how much he may be beholden to experience. Locke.
8. To bequeath; to give as inheritance.
That peace thou leav'ſ to thy imperial line,
That peace, Oh happy ſhade, be ever thine.
9. To give up ; to reſign. * * . .
Thou ſhalt not glean thy vineyard; thou ſhalt leave them
for the poor and ſtranger. - - Lev. xix. 10.
If a wife man were left to himſelf, and his own choice,
to wiſh the greateſt good to himſelf he could deviſe; the ſum
of all his wiſhes would be this, That there were juſt ſuch a
being as God is. Tillotſon, Serm. 1.
10. To permit without interpoſition.
Whether Eſau were a vaſſal, I leave the reader to judge.
Locke.
Dryden.
Let us return, leſt my father leave caring for the aſſes, and
take thought for us. 1 Sam. ix. 5.
12. To LEAve off. To deſiſt from ; to forbear.
If, upon any occaſion, you bid him leave off the doing of
any Thing, you muſt be ſure to carry the point. Lºcke.
In proportion as old age came on, he left off fox-hunting.
Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 115.
13. To LEAVE off. To forſake. . . -
He began to leave off ſome of his old acquaintance, his
roaring and bullying about the ſtreets: he put on a ſerious
air. - Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of Jºhn Bull.
14. To LEAVE out. To omit; to neglect.
My good Camillo;
I am ſo fraught with curious buſineſs, that -
I leave out ceremony. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
Shun they to treat with me too :
No good lady, -
You may partake: I have told 'em who you are.
I ſhould be loth to be left out, and here too. Ben. Jºhnſºn.
What is ſet down by order and diviſion doth demonſtrate,
that nothing is % out or omitted, but all is there. Bacon.
º efriend till utmoſt end
Of all thy dues be done, and none left out,
Ere nice morn on the Indian ſteep
From her cabin'd loop-hole peep.
We aſk, if thoſe ſubvert
Reaſon's cſtabliſh'd maxims, who aſſert
That we the world's exiſtence may conceive,
Though we one atom out of matter leave. Blackmºre.
- 15 G I always
4. ton.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 4</div><p class="Text">r L E. E.
I always thought this paſſage ºft.* with a great deal of
- ! - ſº. dićt a
judgment, by Tucca and Varius, as it ſeems to contra
º: in the fixth Æneid. Addiſon on Italy.
To LEAVE. v. n.
1. To ceaſe; to deſiſt.
She is my eſſence, and I leave to be,
If I be not by her fair influence -
#,A#, iº, cheriſh'd, kept alive. Shakeſpeare.
And fince this buſineſs ſo far fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won. Shakespeare H. IV.
He began at the eldeſt, and left at the youngeſt. Genºſ,
2. To Leave off. To deſiſt.
Grittus, hoping that they in the caſtle would not hold out,
left off to batter or undermine it, wherewith he perceived he
little prevailed. Knolles's Hiff. of the Turks.
É. when you find that vigorous heat abate,
Leave off, and for another ſummons wait. Roſcommon.
3. To LEAVE off. To ſtop. -
wrongs do not leave off there where they begin, . !
But ſtill beget new miſchiefs in their courſ": Daniel.
To Leave. v. ... [from levy; lever, French;) To levy; to
raiſe: a corrupt word, made, I believe, by Spenſºr, for a
rhyme.
y An army ſtrong ſhe leav'd, y
To war on thoſe which him had of his realm bereav'4: ..
spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. ii.
LE'Aved. adj. [from leaves, of leaf.]
1. Furniſhed with foliage.
2. Made with leaves or folds. -
I will looſe the loins of kings, to open before him the
two leaved gates. , , Iſa. xlv. 1.
LEAVEN. n.ſ. [levain, French; levare, Latin.] ...
1. Ferment mixed with any body to make it light; particularly
uſed of four dough mixed in a maſs of bread. -
It ſhall not be baken with leaven. Lev. vi. 17.
All fermented meats and drinks are eaſilieſt digeſted; and
thoſe unfermented, by barmorleaven, are hardlydigeſted. Flyer.
2. Any mixture which makes a general change in the maſs.
Many of their propoſitions favour very ſtrong of the old
leaven of innovations. King Charles.
To LE'Av EN. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ferment by ſomething mixed.
You muſt tarry the leav'ning. Shakespeare Trail, and Crºſſida.
Whoſoever eateth leavened bread, that ſoul ſhall be cut
off. Exod. xii. 17.
Breads we have of ſeveral grains, with divers kinds of
leavenings, and ſeaſonings; ſo that ſome do extremely move
appetites. Bacon's Atlantis.
2. To taint; to imbue.
That cruel ſomething unpoſſeſt,
Corrodes and leavens all the reſt. Prior.
LE'Aver. n.ſ. [leave..] One who deſerts or forſakes.
Let the world rank me in regiſter
A maſter-leaver, and a fugitive. Shakeſpeare.
LEAves. m. ſ. The plural of leaf.
Parts fit for the nouriſhment of man in plants are, ſeeds,
roots, and fruits; for leaves they give no nouriſhment at all.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
LE'Avings. n.ſ.. [from leave..] Remnant; relicks; offal: it
has no ſingular.
My father has this morning call'd together,
To this poor hall, his little Roman ſenate,
The leavings of Pharſalia. Addiſon's Cato.
Then who can think we'll quit the place,
Or ſtop and light at Cloe's head,
With ſcraps and leavings to be fed. Swift.
LE'Av Y. adj. [from leaf.] Full of leaves; covered with leaves.
Strephon, with leavy twigs of laurel tree,
A garland made on temples for to wear,
For he then choſen was the dignity
Of village lord that Whitſontide to bear. Sidney.
Now, near enough: your leavy ſcreens throw down,
And ſhow like thoſe you are. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To Lech. v. a. [lecher, #j To lick over. Hanmer.
Haſt thou yet leched the Athenian's eyes
With the love juice. Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
LE'CHER.. n.ſ. [Derived by Skinner from luxure, old French:
luxuria is uſed in the middle ages in the ſame ſenſe..] A whore-
maſter.
I will now take the leacher; he's at my houſe; he cannot
'ſcape me. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
You, like a letcher, out of whoriſh loins
Are pleas'd to breed out your inheritors. Shakeſpeare.
The lecher ſoon transforms his miſtreſs; now
In Io's place appears a lovely cow. Dryden.
The ſleepy leacher ſhuts his little eyes,
About his churning chaps the frothy bubbles riſe. Dryden.
She yields her charms
To that fair letcher, the ſtrong god of arms. Pope's Odyſ.
To LECHER. v. n. [from the noun...] To whore.
Die for adultery; no. The wren goes to t, and the ſmall
gilded fly does letcher in my fight. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Gut eats all day, and letchers all the night. B. Johnſon.
Lec'Herous. adj. [from lecher.] Leud : luſtful.
The ſapphire ſhould grow foul, and loſe its beauty, when
worn by one that is lºcherous; the emerald ſhould fly to
pieces, if it touch the ſkin of any unchaſte perſon. Derham.
Lºgously. adv. [from lecherous.] Lºudly; luſtfully.
Lºcherousness. n.ſ.. [from letherº".] Leudneſs.
LE'chery. m. ſ. [from lecher.] Leudneſs; luſt.
The reſt welter with as little ſhame in open lechery, as
ſwine do in the common mire. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
Againſt ſuch leudſters, and their lechery,
Thoſe that betray them do no treachery. Shakeſpeare.
Lection. n.ſ. [lectio, Lat.] A reading; a variety in copies.
Every critick has his own hypotheſis: if the common text
be not favourable to his opinion, a various ledion ſhall be
made authentick. J/atts's Logick.
LECTURE. m. ſ. [leåure, French.]
1. A diſcourſe pronounced upon any ſubject.
Mark him, while Dametas reads his ruſtick lecture unto
him, how to feed his beaſts before noon, and where to ſhade
them in the extreme heat. Sidney, b. ii.
Wrangling pedant,
When in muſick we have ſpent an hour,
Your lecture ſhall have leiſure for as much. Shakespeare
When letters from Ceſar were given to Ruſticus, he re-
fuſed to open them till the philoſopher had done his lec-
furtſ. Taylor's Holy Living.
Virtue is the ſolid good, which tutors ſhould not only read
leåures and talk of, but the labour and art of education
ſhould furniſh the mind with, and faſten there. Locke.
Numidia will be bleſt by Cato's lediures. Addiſon's Cato.
2. The aët or practice of reading; peruſal.
In the legiure of holy ſcripture, their apprehenſions are
commonly confined unto the literal ſenſe of the text. Browne.
3. A j reprimand.
To LE'cture. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To inſtruct formally.
2. To inſtruct inſolently and dogmatically.
LE'cturer. n.ſ.. [from ledure.] An inſtructor; a teacher b
way of lećture; a preacher in a church hired by the º
to aſſiſt the rector or vicar.
If any miniſter refuſed to admit into his church a leđurer
recommended by them, and there was not one orthodox or
learned man recommended, he was preſently required to at-
tend upon the committee. Clarendon.
LE'ctureship. n.ſ.. [from ledure.] The office of a lecturer.
He got a leđureſhip in town of ſixty pounds a year, where
he preached conſtantly in perſon. Swift.
LED. part. pret. of lead.
Then ſhall they know that I am the Lord your God,
which cauſed them to be led into captivity among the hea-
then. Ezek. xxxix. 28.
The leaders of this people cauſed them to err, and they
that are led of them are deſtroyed. Iſa. ix. 16.
As in vegetables and animals, ſo in moſt other bodies, not
propagated by ſeed, it is the colour we moſt fix on, and are
moſt led by. Locke.
LEDGE. n.ſ. [leggen, Dutch, to lie.]
1. A row; layer; ſtratum.
The loweſt ledge or row ſhould be merely of ſtone, cloſely
laid, without mortar: a general caution for all parts in build-
ing contiguous to board. Wotton's Architecture.
2. A ridge riſing above the reſt.
The four parallel ſticks riſing above five inches higher than
the handkerchief, ſerved as ledges on each ſide. Gulliver.
3. Any prominence, or riſing part.
Beneath a ledge of rocks his fleet he hides,
The bending brow above, a ſafe retreat provides. Dryden.
LEDHoRse. n.ſ. [led and horſe.) A ſumpter horſe.
LEE. m. ſ. [lie, French.]
1. Dregs; ſediment; refuſe.
§ cloaths, my ſex, exchang'd for thee,
I'll mingle with the people's wretched lee. . Prior.
2. [Sea term ; ſuppoſed by Skinner from l’eau, French.] It is
generally that ſide which is oppoſite to the wind, as the lee
ſhore is that the wind blows on. To be under the lee of the
ſhore, is to be cloſe under the weather ſhore. A leeward
ſhip is one that is not faſt by a wind, to make her way ſo
good as ſhe might. To lay a ſhip by the lee, is to bring her
ſo that all her ſails may lie againſt the maſts and ſhrowds flat,
and the wind to come right on her broadſide, ſo that ſhe will
make little or no way. - Die?,
If we, being ſtorm-beaten in the bay of Biſcay, had had
a port under our lee, that we might have kept our tranſport-
ing ſhips with our men of war, we had taken the Indian
fleet, and the Azores. Raleigh's Apology,
The Hollanders were wont to ride before Dunkirk with
the wind at north weſt, making a lee ſhore in all weathers.
Raleigh's Eſſays.
Unprovided of tackling and vićtualling, they are forced to
ſea by a ſtorm ; yet better do ſo than venture ſplitting and
ſinking on a lee ſhore, King Charles.
- Him,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 5</div><p class="Text">L E. E.
--~~
Him, haply flumb'ring on the Norway foam,
The pilot of ſome ſmall night-founder'd ſkiff,
Deeming ſome iſland, oft, as ſeamen tell,
with fixed anchor in his ſcaly rind, -
Moors by his ſide under the lee, while night -
Inveſts the ſea. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
Batter'd by his lee they lay,
The paſſing winds through their torn canvaſs play. Dryden,
LEEch. n.ſ. [lac, Saxon.] -
1. A phyſician; a profeſſor of the art of healing: whence we
ſtill uſe cowleech. -
A leech, the which had great infight
In that diſeaſe of grieved conſciences -
And well could cure the ſame ; his name was patience. .
Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i.
Her words prevail'd, and then . . leach
is cunning hand 'gan to his wounds to lay,
H. all ãº. .. the which his art did teach. Fa. 24.
Phyſick is their bane.
he learned leaches in deſpair depart,
º: ſhake their heads, deſponding of their art. Dryden.
Wiſe leeches will not vain receipts obtrude:
Deaf to complaints they wait upon the ill,
Till ſome ſafe criſis. ... Dryden.
The hoary wrinkled leech has watch'd and toil'd,
Tried every health reſtoring herb and gum,
And wearied out his painful ſkill in vain. Rowe's j. Shore.
A ſkilful leach,
- ſay, had wrought this bleſſed deed;
† h; Arbuthnot was yelept. Gay's Paſtorals.
2. A kind of ſmall water ſerpent, which faſtens on animals,
and ſucks the blood: it is uſed to draw blood where the lan-
cet is leſs ſafe, whence perhaps the name.
I drew blood by leeches behind his ear. . . Wiſeman's Surg.
Sticking like leeches, till they burſt with blood,
Without remorſe inſatiably. Roſcommon.
To Leech. v. a. [from the noun..] To treat with medica-
mentS.
LE'Echcraft. n.ſ. [leech and craft.] The art of healing.
We ſtudy ſpeech, but others we perſuade :
We leechcraft learn, but others cure with it. Davies.
Deef, adj. [lieve, lºve, Dutch..] Kind; fond.
Whilome all theſe were low and leefe,
And lov'd their flocks to feed;
They never ſtrove to be the chief,
And ſimple was their weed. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
Leek. n.ſ. [leac, Saxon; loock, Dutch ; leechº, Erſe.]
Its flower conſiſts of ſix pedals, and is ſhaped, as it were,
like a bell; in the center ariſes the pointal, which after-
ward becomes a roundiſh fruit, divided into three cells, which
contain roundiſh ſeeds: to theſe notes may be added, the ſta-
mina are generally broad and flat, ending in three capilla-
ments, of which the middle one is furniſhed with a chive;
the flowers are alſo gathered into almoſt globular bunches:
the roots are long, cylindrical, and coated, the coats ending
in plain leaves. Miller.
Know'ſt thou Fluellen —Yes.
—Tell him I'll knock his leek about his pate,
Upon St. David's day. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Leek to the Welſh, to Dutchmen butter's dear. Gay.
We uſe acrid plants inwardly and outwardly in gangreens;
in the ſcurvy, water-creſſes, horſe-radiſh, garlick, or leek
pottage. - Floyer on Humours.
LEER. n.ſ. [pleane, facies, Saxon.]
1. An oblique view.
I ſpy entertainment in her; ſhe gives the leer of invitation.
Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſor.
Aſide the devil turn’d
For envy, yet with jealous leer malign
Ey'd them aſkance. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iv.
2. A laboured caſt of countenance. -
Damn with faint praiſe, concede with civil leer. Pope.
I place a ſtateſman full before my fight;
A bloated monſter in all his geer, -
With ſhameleſs viſage, and perfidious leer. Swift.
To Leer. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To look obliquely; to look archly.
I will leer upon him as he comes by ; and do but mark
the countenance that he will give me. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
I wonder whether you taſte the pleaſure of independency,
º, whether you do not ſometimes leer upon the court. Swift.
* To look with a forced countenance.
Bertran has been taught the arts of courts,
To gild a face with ſmiles, and leer a man to ruin. Dryd.
*S. m. ſ. [lie, French..] Dregs; ſediment: it has ſeldom a
ſingular.
.This proceeded by reaſon of the old humour of thoſe coun-
lies, where the memory of King Richard was ſo ſtrong,
that it lay like lees in the bottom of mens hearts; and if the
“ſel was but ſtirred, it would come up. Bacon's Henry VII.
If they love lees, and leave the luſty wine,
Envy them not their palates with the iwine. B. johnſºn.
L E G
Thoſe lees that trouble it refine
- The agitated ſoul of generous wine. Dryden,
To Leese. v. a. [lºſen, É. To loſe : an old word.
Then ſell to thy profit both butter and cheeſe,
Who buieth it ſooner the more he ſhall leeſe. Tuſſºr,
No cauſe, nor client fat, will Cheyril leeſe,
But as they come on both ſides he takes fees;
And pleaſeth both : for while he melts his greaſe
For this, that wins for whom he holds his peace. B. johnſ.
How in the port our fleet dear time did leeſe,
Withering like priſoners, which lie but for fºes. Dame.
Leet. n. ſ.
Leete, or leta, is otherwiſe called a law-day. The word
ſeemeth to have grown from the Saxon lese, which was a
court of juriſdićtion above the wapentake or hundred, com-
prehending three or four of them, otherwiſe called thirſh-
ing, and contained the third part of a province or ſhire:
theſe juriſdictions, one and other, be now aboliſhed, and ſwal-
lowed up in the county court. Cowell.
Who has a breaſt ſo pure,
But ſome uncleanly apprehenſions
Keep leets and law-days, and in ſeſſions fit
With meditations lawful. Shakeſpeare's Othells.
You would preſent her at the leet,
y Becauſe ſhe bought ſtone jugs, and no ſeal’d quarts. Shakespeare
*:WARD. adj. [lee and peanb, Saxon.]
1. Towards the wind. See Lee.
The claſſicae were called long ſhips, the onerariae round,
becauſe of their figure approaching towards circular: this
figure, though proper for the ſtowage of goods, was not the
fitteſt for ſailing, becauſe of the great quantity of leeward
way, except when they ſailed full before the wind. Arbuth.
Let no ſtateſman dare,
A kingdom to a ſhip compare;
Left he ſhould call our commonweal
A veſſel with a double keel;
Which juſt like ours, new rigg’d and man'd,
And got about a league from land,
By change of wind to leeward fide,
The pilot knew not how to guide. Swift.
Left. participle preter. of leave.
Alas, poor lady! deſolate and left;
I weep myſelf to think upon thy words. Shakeſpeare.
Had ſuch a river as this been left to itſelf, to have found
its way out from among the Alps, whatever windings it had
made, it muſt have formed ſeveral little ſeas. Addiſon.
Were I left to myſelf, I would rather aim at inſtrućting
than diverting; but if we will be uſeful to the world, we
muſt take it as we find it. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 179.
Left. adj. [lufte, Dutch; larvus, Latin.]. Siniſtrous; not
right.
*hat there is alſo in men a natural prepotency in the right,
we cannot with conſtancy affirm, if we make obſervation
in children, who permitted the freedom of both hands, do oft-
times confine it unto the left, and are not without great diffi-
culty reſtrained from it. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.
The right to Pluto's golden palace guides,
The left to that unhappy region tends,
Which to the depth of Tartarus deſcends. Dryden's Án.
The gods of greater nations dwell around,
And, on the right and left, the palace bound;
The commons where they can. Pryden,
A raven from a wither'd oak,
Left of their lodging was oblig'd to croak: -
That omen lik'd him not. Dryden.
The left foot naked when they march to fight,
But in a bull's raw hide they ſheathe the right. Dryden.
The man who ſtruggles in the fight,
Fatigues left arm as well as right. Prior.
LEFT-HANDED. adj. [left and hand.] Uſing the left-hand ra-
ther than right.
The limbs are uſed moſt on the right-ſide, whereby cuſtom
helpeth; for we ſee, that ſome are left-handed, which are
ſuch as have uſed the left-hand moſt. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
For the ſeat of the heart and liver on one ſide, whereby
men become left-handed, it happeneth too rarely to counte-
nance an effect ſo common: for the ſeat of the liver on the
left-ſide is very monſtrous. Brown's ſugar Errours.
Left-H ANDEDs Ess. n.ſ. [from left-handed.] Habitual uſe of
the left-hand.
Although a ſquint lº ?-handedneſs
B' ungracious; yet we cannot want that hand. Donne.
LEG. m. ſ. [leg, Daniſh ; leggiºr, Iſlandick.]
1. The limb by which we walk; particularly that part between
the knee and the foot.
They haſte; and what their tardy feet deny'd,
The truſty ſtaff, their better leg, ſupply'd, Dryden.
Purging comfits, and ants eggs, -
Had almoſt brought him off his legs. Hudibras.
Such intrigues people cannot meet with, who have ro-
thing but legs to carry them. Addiſon's cº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 6</div><p class="Text">L E G
L E. G
2. An act of obeiſance.
At court, he that can
his hand, and ſay nothing,
cap.
annot make a lºg, Pº off his cap, kiſs -
has neither leg, hands, lip, nor
Shakespeare. All's well that ends well.
Their horſes never give * blow, - ...
º . make # leg, and bow. Hudibras, tº:
If the boy ſhould not Put off his hat, nor make *,W º
ºracefully, a dancing-maſter will cure that defect. S ot. .
*†. mááe his leg, and went away: - wift.
. To ſtand on his own legs; to ſupport himſelf. ſtood
perſºns of their fortune and quality could well have tº
upon their own legs, and needed not to lay in for i.
nance and ſupport. Collier ºf . ſhip.
4. That by which anything is ſupported on the gro"; aS2
the leg of a table.
LE/GAcy. m. ſ. [legatum, Latin.]
icular thing given by laſt will and teſta:
Legacy is a part Cowell.
ent.
1n If there be no ſuch thing apparen: "Pºº record, º do
as if one ſhould demand a kgº) by force and virtuº of ſome
written teſtament, wherein ther" being no ſuch thing ..
fied, he pleadeth that there it muſt needs be, and º
arguments from the love or good-will which always the .
ſtator bore him ; imagining, that theſe, or the like proofs,
will convićt a teſtament to have that in it, which other "º".
can no-where by reading find. Hooker, b. iii.
Go you ºº:::::::: ; ine
teh the will hither, and we that “ criml
i. to cut off ſome charge in º: º j. º
- beſt legacy a father can leave a cº-
Good counſel is the gacy L’Eſtrange's Fables.
When he thought you gone
Tº augment the number of the bleſs'd above,
He deem'd 'em legacies of royal love;
Nor arm’d, his brothers portions, to invade,
But to defend the preſent you had made. Dryden.
when the heir of this vaſt treaſure knew,
How large a legacy was left to you,
He wiſely ty'd it to the crown again. Dryden.
Leave to thy children tumult, ſtrife, and war, - a
Portions of toil, and legacies of caſe. Prior.
LEGAL. adj. [legal, French ; lºgº, Latin.]
1. Done or conceived according to law.
whatſoever was before, was before time of memory; and
what is fince is, in a legal ſenſe, within the time of me-
mory. Hall's Hiſt, of the Common Law of England.
2. Lawful; not contrary to law. -
His merits
To ſave them, not their own, though legal, works. Milt.
Legality. n.ſ. [legalité, French.] Lawfulneſ:
T., Lºgalizeſ v. a [legaliſer, French ; from legal.] To au-
thorize; to make lawful. -
If anything can legalize revenge, it ſhould be injury from
an extrêmely obliged perſon: but revenge is ſo abſolutely the
peculiar of heaven, that no confideration San impower, even
the beſt men, to aſſume the execution of it. South's Sermons.
Lºgally. adv. [from legal.] Lawfully; according to law:
A prince may not, much leſs may inferior judges, deny
juſtice, when it is legally and competently demanded. Taylor.
Léo ATARY. n.ſ. [legataire, French ; from legatum, Latin.]
One who has a legacy left.
An executor ſhall exhibit a true inventory of goods, taken
in the preſence of fit perſons, as creditors and legataries are,
unto the ordinary. -
LEGATINE. adj. [from legate.] Made by a legate.
When any one is abſolved from excommunication, it is
provided by a legatine conſtitution, that ſome one ſhall pub-
liſh ſuch abſolution. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Belonging to a legate of the Roman ſee.
All thoſe you have done of late,
By your power legatine within this kingdom,
Fall in the compaſs of a praemunire. Shakeſpeare.
LE'GATE. m. ſ. [legatus, Latin; legat, French; legato, Italian.]
1. A deputy; an ambaſſador.
The legates from th’ AFtolian prince return:
Sad news they bring, that after all the coſt,
And care employ'd, their embaſſy is loſt. Dryden. Ænei.
2. A kind of ſpiritual cmbaſſador from the pope; a commiſ-
fioner deputed by the pope for eccleſiaſtical affairs.
Look where the holy legate comes apace,
To give us warrant from the hand of heav'n. Shakeſp.
Upon the legate's ſummons, he ſubmitted himſelf to an ex-
amination, and appeared before him. Atterbury.
LEGATE/e. n.ſ. [from legatum, Lat.] One who has a legacy
left him. -
If he chance to 'ſcape this diſmal bout,
The former legatees are blotted out. Dryden's juvenal.
My will is, that if any of the above-named legatees ſhould
die before me, that then the reſpective legacies ſhall revert
to myſelf. Swift.
LEGA’ſ Ios. m. ſ. [legatio, Latin.] Deputation; commiſſion ;
embaſſy.
. It will be found, that after a legation ad res repetendas, and
a refuſal, and a denunciation or indiction of a Yaº the war
is no more confined to the Place of the quarrel, but is left
at large. Bacon’s J/ar with Spain.
In the attiring and ornament of their bodies the duke had
a fine and unaffected politeneſs, and upon occaſion coſtly, as
in his legations. //otton.
LEGA'rof. n.ſ.. [from lºgo, Latin.] One who makes a will,
and leaves legacies:
Suppoſe debate
Betwixt pretenders to a fair eſtate,
Bequeath’d by ſome legator's laſt intent. 1)ryden.
LE'GEND. {{ [legenda, Latin.]
I. A chronicle or regiſter of the lives of ſaints. . .
Legend, being grown in a manner to be nothing elſe but
heaps of frivolous and ſcandalous vanities, they have been
even with diſdain thrown out, the very neſts which bred them
abhorring them. Płooker, b. v.
Tijare in Rome two ſets of antiquities, the chriſtian
and the heathen; the former, though of a freſher date, are
ſo embroiled with fable and legend, that one receives but little
ſatisfaction. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
2. Any memorial or relation.
And in this legend all that glorious deed
Read, whilſt you arm you; arm you whilſt you read.
Fairfax, b. i.
3. An incredible unauthentick narrative.
who can ſhow the legends, that record
More idle tales, or fables ſo abſurd. Blackmore.
It is the way and means of attaining to heaven, that makes
profane ſcorners ſo willingly let go the expectation of it. It
is not the articles of the creed, but the duty to God and their
neighbour, that is ſuch an inconſiſtent incredible legend.
- Bentley's Sermons.
4. Any inſcription; particularly on medals or coins.
Compare the beauty and comprehenſiveneſs of legends on
ancient coins. Addiſon on Medals.
Lºger. n.ſ.. [from legger, Dutch. To lie or remain, in a
place.] Anything that lies in a place; as, a leger ambaſſa-
dor; a reſident; one that continues at the court to which he
is ſent; a leger-book, a book that lies in the compting-
houſe. -
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heav'n,
Intends you for his ſwift ambaſſador,
where you ſhall be an everlaſting leiger. Shakeſpeare.
I've giv'n him that,
Which, if he take, ſhall quite unpeople her º
Of leidgers for her ſweet. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
If lºgier ambaſſadors or agents were ſent to remain near the
courts of princes, to obſerve their motions, and to hold cor-
reſpondence with them, ſuch were made choice of as were
vigilant. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Who can endear -
Thy praiſe too much? thou art heav'n, leiger here,
wórking againſt the ſtates of death and hell. Herbert.
He withdrew not his confidence from any of thoſe who
attended his perſon, who, in truth, lay leiger for the cove-
nant, and kept up the ſpirits of their countrymen by their
intelligence. Clarendon, b. ii.
I call that a ledger bait, which is fixed, or made to reſt, in
one certain place, when you ſhall be abſent; and I call that
a walking bait which you have ever in motion. Walton.
Legger DeMain. n.ſ. [contračted perhaps from legereté de main,
French.] Slight of hand; juggle; power of deceiving the
eye º: motion; trick; deception ; knack.
e ſo light was at legerdemain,
That what he touch'd came not to light again. Hubberd.
Of all the tricks and legerdemain by which men impoſe
upon their own ſouls, there is none ſo common as the plea
of a good intention. South's Sermons.
Leo’ERITY.. n. ſ. [legereté, French..] Lightneſs; nimbleneſs ;
quickneſs. A word not in uſe.
When the mind is quicken'd,
The organs though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowſy grave, and newly move
With caſted ſlough and freſh legerity. Shakeſpeare.
Leſcoe D. adj. [from leg.] Having legs; furniſhed with legs.
LE'Gible. n.ſ. [legibilis, Latin.]
1. Such as may be read.
You obſerve ſome clergymen with their heads held down
within an inch of the cuſhion, to read what is hardly
legible. Swift.
2. Apparent; difcoverable.
People's opinions of themſelves are legible in their counte-
nances. Thus a kind imagination makes a bold man have
vigour and enterprize in his air and motion; it ſtamps value
and ſignificancy upon his face. Collier.
bºx. adv. Ifrom legible.] In ſuch a manner as may be
read.
LE'GION. [legio, Latin.]
1. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 7</div><p class="Text">L E G
1. A body of Roman ſoldiers, conſiſting of about five thou-
º *: moſt remarkable piece in Antoninus's pillar is, the
figure of Jupiter Pluvius ſending rain on the fainting army of
. Aurelius, and thunderbolts on his enemies, which
; ſhe greateſt confirmation poſſible of the ſtory of the Chriſ-
tian lºgion. Addison.
military force. -
2. A y She to foreign realms
Sends forth her dreadful legions. Philips.
mber.
3. Any great nu Not in the legions
Of horrid hell, can come a devil more damn'd, Shakeſp.
The partition between good and evil is broken down; and
where one fin has entered, legions will force their way through
the ſame breach. - Rogers's Sermons.
Legion ARY. adj. [from legion.]
1. Relating to a legion.
2. Containing a legion: -
3. Containing a great indefinite number. - -
Too many applying themſelves betwixt jeff and earneſt,
make up the legionary body of error. Brown's W.ulg. Errours.
Legislation. n. ſ. [from legiſlator, Lat..] The act of giving
S.
"fºr joined legiſlation to his philoſophy, and, like
others, pretended to miracles and revelations from God, to
give a more venerable ſanction to the laws he preſcribed.
c Littleton on the Converſion ºf St. Paul.
Legislative. adj. [from legiſlator.] Giving laws; law-
giving: - a- - - -
Their legiſlative frenzy they repent,
Enaaing it ſhould make no precedent. Denham.
The poet is a kind of lawgiver, and thoſe qualities are
proper to the /…/ative ſtyle. - - Dryden.
LÉGjSLATOR. m. ſ. [legiſlator, Latin ; legiſlatºur, French.]
A lawgiver; one who makes laws for any community.
It ſpoke like a legiſlator: the thing ſpoke was a law. South.
Heroes in animated marble frown,
And legiſlatºrs ſeem to think in ſtone. Pºpe.
Legislature. n.ſ. [from legiſlator, Latin.] The power that
makes laws.
Without the concurrent conſent of all three parts of the
legiſlature, no law is or can be made. Hale's Com. Law.
In the notion of a legiſlature is implied a power to change,
repeal, and ſuſpend laws in being, as well as to make new
laws. - Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 16.
By the ſupreme magiſtrate is properly underſtood the legiſ-
lative power; but the word magiſtrate ſeeming to denote a
fingle perſon, and to expreſs the executive power, it came to
paſs that the obedience due to the legiſlature was, for want of
conſidering this eaſy diſtinétion, miſapplied to the admini-
ſtration. Swift's Sentinents of a Ch. of England Man.
LEGi'TIMACY. m. ſ. [from legitimate. J
1, Lawfulneſs of birth. *
In reſpect of his legitimacy, it will be good. Ayliffº.
2. Genuineneſs; not ſpuriouſneſs.
The legitimacy or reality of theſe marine bodies vindicated,
I now inquire by what means they were hurried out of the
Ocean. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
LEGITIMATE. adj. [from legitimus, Lat. lºgitime, French.]
Born in marriage; lawfully begotten.
Legitimate Edgar, I muſt have your land;
Our father's love is to the baſtard Edmund. Shakeſpeare.
An adulterous perſon is tied to make proviſion for the
children begotten in unlawful embraces, that they may do
no injury to the legitimate, by receiving a common portion.
Yaylºr's Rule of Hºly Living.
To LEGITIMATE. v. a. [legitimer, Fr. from the adjective.]
1. To procure to any the rights of legitimate birth.
Legitimate him that was a baſtard. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. To make lawful. *
It would be impoſſible for any enterprize to be lawful, if
that which ſhould legitimate it is ſubſequent to it, and can have
no influence to make it good or bad. Decay of Piety.
Lic"TIMATELY. adv. [from lºgitimate.] Lawfully; genuinely.
By degrees he roſe to Jove's impºrial feat,
This difficulties prove a ſoul legitimately great. Dryden.
*ITIMATION. m. ſ. [legitimatiºn, French; from lºgitimate.]
1. Lawful birth.
I have diſclaim'd my land;
Higitimation, name, and all is gone:
- Then, good my mother, let me know my father. Shaft.
From whence will ariſe many queſtions of legitimation, and
what in nature is the difference betwixt a wife and a con-
cubine. Locke.
2. The * of inveſting with the privileges of lawful birth.
####. n, f: ['egime. I nch : lºgºmon, Lat. Seeds
EGU'MEN. ; not reape, out gathºred by the hand; as,
beans: in general, all larger ſeeds; pulſe.
. Sºme ºmens, as peas or beans, if newly gathered and
*illed in a reſort, will afford an acid ſpirit.
deſtructive mildew upon the corn and legumes.
LEGU'MINous, adj. [igumineux, French ; from legumen.] Be-
longing to pulſe; conſiſting of pulſe.
for if I die, I will die at leiſure.
Boyle. ,
In the ſpring fell great rains, upon which enſued a moſt
Arbuthnot.
The propereſt food of the vegetable kingdom is taken from
the farinaceous ſeeds: as oats, barley, and wheat; or of ſome
of the ſiliquoſe or leguminous ; as, peas or beans. Arbuthnot.
Leisur ABLY. adv. [from leiſurable.] At leiſure; without tu-
mult or hurry.
Let us beg of God, that when the hour of our reſt is
come, the patterns of our diſſolution may be Jacob, Moſes,
Joſhua, and David, who {{...} ending their lives in peace,
prayed for the mercies of God to come upon their poſterity.
- Hooker, b. v.
Le'Is URABLE. adj. [from leiſure.] Done at leiſure; not hur-
ried ; enjoying leiſure.
A relation inexcuſeable in his works of leiſurable hours, the
examination being as ready as the relation. Brown.
LE/ISURE. n.ſ. (loiſir, French.]
1. Freedom from buſineſs or hurry; vacancy of mind; power
to ſpend time according to choice.
A gentleman fell very ſick, and a friend ſaid to him, Send
for a phyſician; but the ſick man anſwered, It is no matter;
Bacon's Apophthegms.
Where ambition and avarice have made no entrance, the
deſire of leiſure is much more natural than of buſineſs and
C.1ſ C. Temple.
O happy youth !
For whom thy fates reſerve ſo fair a bride:
He figh'd, and had no leiſure more to ſay,
His honour call d his eyes another way. Dryden's Ovid.
You enjoy your quiet in a garden, where you have not
only the wºre of thinking, but the pleaſure to think of no-
thing which can diſcompoſe your mind. Dryden.
2. Convenience of time.
We'll make our leiſures to attend on yours. Shakespeare
They ſummon'd up their meiny, ſtrait took horſe;
Commanded me to follow, and attend
The leiſure of their anſwer. Shakespeare. King Lear.
I ſhall leave with him that very rational and emphatical
rebu e o Tully, To be conſidered at his leiſure. Locke.
3. Want of leiſure. Not uſed.
More than I have ſaid, loving countrymen;
The leiſure and enforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell on. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Le'Isu RELY. adj. [from leiſure.] Not haſty; deliberate; done
without hurry.
He was the wretchedſt thing when he was young,
So long a growing, and ſo leiſurely,
That, if the rule were true, he ſhould be gracious.
Shakeſpeare,
The earl of Warwick, with a handful of men, fired Leith
and Edinburgh, and returned by a leiſurely march. Hayward.
The bridge is human life: upon a more leiſurely ſurvey of
it, I found that it conſiſted of threeſcore and ten intire arches.
Addiſon's Spc.?ator, Nº. 159,
LE'Isu RFLY. adv. [from leiſure.] Not in a hurry; ſlowly.
The Belgians hop'd, that with diſorder'd haſte,
Our decp-cut keels upon the ſands might run;
Or if with caution leiſurely we paſt,
Their numerous groſs might charge us one by one. Dryd.
We deſcended very leiſurely, my friend being careful to
count the ſteps. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 47.
LE'MAN. m. ſ. (Generally ſuppoſed to be laimant, the lover,
French ; but imagined by junius, with almoſt equal proba-
bility, to be derive from left, Dutch, or leo; , Saxon, i.e-
loved and man. This etymology is ſtrongly ſupported by the
antient orthography, according to which it was written leve-
man.] A ſweetheat; a gallant; or a miſtreſs. Hanmer.
Hold for my take, and do him not to dye;
But vanquiſh J, thine eternal bondſlave make,
And me thy worthy meed unto thy leman take.
A cup of wine,
That's briſk and fine,
And drink unto the leman mine.
Fa. &amp;.
sºft Henry IV. ;
LE/MM A. n.ſ. [X%up... ; lemme, French.] A propoſition pre-
viouſly aſiuided.
LE/MON. m. ſ. [limax, French ; limonium, low Latin.]
1. The fruit of the lemon-tree. -
The juice of lemons is more cooling, and aſtringent than
that of oranges. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
The dyers uſe it for dying of bright yº!ows and lemon co-
lours. A ſortimer's Huſbandry.
- Pear me, Pomonal
To where the hºmon and the piercing line,
With the deep orange, glowing through the green,
Their lighter glories blend. Tºmſon's Sermons.
2. The tree that bears lemons.
The fºr tree hath large ſtiff leaves; the flower conſiſts
of many leaves, which expand in form of a roſe : the fruit
is almoſt of an oval figure, and divided into ſeveral cells, in
15 H. which<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 8</div><p class="Text">L E N
L E N
which are lodged hard ſeeds, ſurrounded by a thick fleſhy
ſubſtance, which, for the moſt part, is fill of an acid Juice.
There are many varieties of this tree, and the fruit is yearly
imported from Lº in great plenty. Miller.
LEMONA'DE. m. ſ. ſº lºmon.] Liquor made of water, ſu-
the juice of lemons. -
*i. º thy wife, and children, ſhould walk in my
gardens, buy toys; and drink lemonade. Arbuth. j. Bull.
Tº LENſ). ... a. [la'nan, Saxon; leenen, Dutch.]
1. To afford, on condition of repayment,
Thou ſhalt not give him thy money upon uſury, nor land
him thy vićtuals for increaſe. Lev. xxv. 37.
They dare not give, and e'en refuſe to knº',
To their poor º, or a wanting friend. Dryden.
2. To ſuffer to be uſed on condition that it be reſtored.
In common worldly things 'tis call’d ungrateful
With dull unwillingneſs to pay a debt,
Which, with a bounteous hand, was kindly lent ;
Much more to be thus oppoſite with heav'n, Shakespeare.
I'll land it thee, my dear, but have no pºwer tº gº
it from me. Shakeſp. All's well that end well.
The fair bleſfing we vouchſafe to ſend;
Nor can we ſpare you long, though often we may lend.
Dryden to the Dutcheſs of Ormond.
3. To afford; to grant in general. - - -
º Covetouſneſs, like the º º: º º: of all ri-
thrillor unlike it in lending any back again.
vers, though far g any Decay of Piety.
Painting and poeſy are two ſiſters ſo like, that they lend to
each other their name and office: one is called a dumb poeſy,
and the other a ſpeaking picture. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
From thy new hope, and from thy growing ſtore,
Now lend affiſtance, and relieve the poor. Dryden's Peſ.
Cato, lend me for a while thy patience,
And condeſcend to hear a young man ſpeak. Addison.
Cephiſa, thou
Wilt lend a hand to cloſe thy miſtreſs’ eyes. A. Philips.
LE'NDER. n.ſ.. [from lend.]
1. One who lends any thing.
2. One who makes a trade of putting money to intereſt.
Let the ſtate be anſwered ſome ſmall matter, and the reſt
left to the lender; if the abatement be but ſmall, it will not
diſcourage the lender: he that took before ten in the hun-
dred, will ſooner deſcend to eight than give over this trade.
Bacon's Eſſays.
Whole droves of lenders croud the bankers doors
To call in money. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
Intereſt would certainly encourage the lender to venture in
ſuch a time of danger. Addison's Freeholder, N°. 20.
LENGTH. m. ſ. [from lenz, Saxon.]
1. The extent of any thing material from end to end; the
longeſt line that can be drawn through a body.
There is in Ticinum a church that is in length one hun-
dred feet, in breadth twenty, and in heighth near fifty: it
reporteth the voice twelve or thirteen times. Bacon.
2. Horizontal extenſion.
Mezentius ruſhes on his foes,
And firſt unhappy Acron overthrows;
Stretch'd at his length he ſpurns the ſwarthy ground. Dryd.
3. A certain portion of ſpace or time.
Large lengths of ſeas and ſhores
Between my father and my mother lay. Shakespeare . K. jºhn.
To get from th’ enemy, and Ralph, free;
Left danger, fears, and focs, behind,
And beat, at leaſt three lengths, the wind. Hudibras.
Time glides along with undiſcover'd haſte,
The future but a length beyond the paſt. Dryden's Ovid.
What length of lands, what oceans have you paſs'd,
What ſtorms ſuſtain'd, and on what ſhores been caſt? Dryd.
4. Extent of duration.
Having thus got the idea of duration, the next thing is to
get ſome meaſure of this common duration, whereby to judge
of its different lengths. Locke.
5. Long duration or protraction.
May heav'n, great monarch, ſtill augment your bliſs
With length of days, and every day like this. Dryden.
Such toil requir'd the Roman name,
Such length of labour for ſo vaſt a frame. Dryden's Żn.
In length of time it will cover the whole plain, and make
one mountain with that on which it now ſtands. Addison.
6. Reach or expanſion of any thing.
I do not recommend to all a purſuit of ſciences, to thoſe
extenſive lengths to which the moderns have advanced them.
Hatts's Improvement ºf the Mind, p. i.
7. Full extent; uncontračted ſtate.
If Lætitia, who ſent me this account, will acquaint me
with the worthy gentleman's name; I will inſert it at length
in one of my papers. Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 40.
8. Diſtance.
He had marched to the length of Exeter, which he had
ſome thought of beſieging. Clarendon, b. viii.
; Fnd ; latter part of any aſſignable time.
9 §º. ... º burdenfome, all was brought
at the length into that wherein now we ſtand. Hooker, b. iv.
A croºked flick is not ſtraitened unleſs it be bent as far
on the clear contrary ſide, that ſo it may ſettle itſelf at the
length in a middle ſtate of evenneſs between them both. Hooker.
ro. Tº fºrt. [It was formerly written at the length.] At
laſt; in concluſion. -
A, lºngth, at length, I have thee in my arms,
Though our malevolent ſtars have ſtruggled hard,
And held us long aſunder. Dryden's King Arthur.
To Leſsor HEN. v. a. [from length.]
1. To draw out; to make longer; to elongate.
Relaxing the fibres, is making them flexible, or eaſy to be
lengthened without rupture. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Falling dews with ſpangles deck'd the glade,
And the low ſun had lengthen'd ev'ry ſhade. Pope.
2. To protract; to continue.
Break off thy fins by righteouſneſs, and thine iniquities by
ſhewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of
thy tranquillity. Dan. iv. 27.
Frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thouſand harms, and lengthens life. Shakespeare
It is in our power to ſecure to ourſelves an intereſt in the
divine mercies that are yet to come, and to lengthen the
courſe of our preſent proſperity. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. To protract pronunciation. -
The learned languages were leſs conſtrained in the quan-
tity of every ſyllable, beſides helps of grammatical figures
for the l lº. or abbreviation of them. Dryden.
4. To LE'NGTHEN out. [The particle out is only emphatical.]
To protract; to extend.
What if I pleaſe to lengthen out his date
A day, and take a pride to cozen fate.
I’d hoard up every moment of my life,
To lengthen out the payment of my tears. Dryden.
It lengthens out every act of worſhip, and produces more
laſting and permanent impreſſions in the mind, than thoſe
which accompany any tranſient form of words. Addiſon.
To LE'NGTHEN. v. n. To grow longer; to increaſe in length.
One may as well make a yard, whoſe parts lengthen and
ſhrink, as a meaſure of trade in materials, that have not
Dryden's Aur.
always a ſettled value. - Locke.
Still 'tis farther from its end ;
Still finds its error lengthen with its way. Prior.
LE'NGTH wise, adv, [length and wiſe.] According to the length.
Le’N: ENT. adj. [leniens, Latin.]
1. Ailuaſive; ſoftening; mitigating.
Conſolatories writ
With ſtudy'd argument, and much perſuaſion ſought,
Lenient of grief and anxious thought. Milton's Agoniſłes.
In this one paſſion man can ſtrength enjoy; -
Time, that on all things lays his lenient hand,
Yet tames not this; it ſticks to our laſt ſand. Pope.
2. Laxative; emollient.
Oils relax the fibres, are lenient, balſamick, and abate
acrimony in the blood. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
LENIENT. n. ſ. An emollient, or aſſuaſive application.
I dreſſed it with lenients. Jºſeman's Surgery.
To LE'NIFY. v. a. [lenifer, old French; lenio, Latin.] To
aſſuage; to mitigate.
It is uſed for ſquinancies and inflammations in the throat,
whereby it ſeemeth to have a mollifying and lenifying virtue.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 554.
All ſoft'ning ſimples, known of ſov’reign uſe,
He preſſes out, and pours their noble juice;
Theſe firſt infus'd, to lenify the pain,
He tugs with pincers, but he tugs in vain. Dryden.
LE'NITIVE. adj. [lenitif, Fr. lenia, Lat..] Aſſuaſive; cmolient.
Some plants have a milk in them; the cauſe may be an
inception of putrefaction : for thoſe milks have all an acri-
mony, though one would think they ſhould be lenitive. Bacon.
There is aliment lenitive expelling the foeces without ſti-
mulating the bowels; ſuch are animal oils. Arbuthnot.
LE/NITIVE. n.ſ.
I. Any thing applied to eaſe pain.
2. A palliative.
There are lenitives that friendſhip will apply, before it
would be brought to decretory rigours. South's Sermons.
Le’NITY.. n.ſ. [lenitas, Lat.] Mildneſs; mercy; tenderneſs;
ſoftneſs of temper. -
Henry gives conſent,
Of meer compaſſion, and of lenity,
To eaſe your country. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Lenity muſt gain
The mighty men, and pleaſe the diſcontent. Daniel.
Albeit ſo ample a pardon was proclaimed touching trea-
ſon, yet could not the boldneſs be beaten down either with
ſeverity, or with lenity be abated. Hayward.
Theſe jealouſies
Have but one root, the old impriſon'd king,
Whoſe
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 9</div><p class="Text">L E O
L E S
whoſe knity firſt pleas'd the gaping crowd:
But when long try’d, and found ſupinely good, -
Like AEſop's log, they leapt upon his back. Dryden.
lºſſpherically convex on both fides, is uſually called a
In , ſuch as is a burning-glaſs, or ſpectacle-glaſs, or an ob-
ject glaſs of a teleſcope. Newton's Opticks.
According to the difference of the lenſes, I uſed various
diſtances. Newton's Opticks.
Lºst, part. paſſ from lend.
By Jove the ſtranger and the poor are ſent,
And what to thoſe we give, to Jove is lent. Pope's Odyſ.
LENT. n.f. [lenten; the ſpring, Saxon.] The quadrageſimal
faſt; a time of abſtinence. .
Lºnt is from ſpringing, becauſe it falleth in the ſpring; for
which our progenitors, the Germans, uſe. glent. Camden.
LE'NtEN. adj. [from lent.] Such as is uſed in lent; ſparing.
My lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertain-
ment the players ſhall receive from you. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
She quénch'd her fury at the flood,
And with a lenten ſallad cool'd her blood.
Their commons, though but coarſe, were nothing ſcant.
- Dryden's Hind and Panther.
LE's ricular. adj. [lenticulaire, French..] Doubly convex; of
the form of a lens.
The cryſtalline humour is of a lenticular figure, convex on
both fides. Ray on Creation.
LENTIFoRM. adj. [lens and forma, Latin.] Having the form
of a lens.
LE'N TIGINous. adj. [from lentigo..] Scurfy ; furfuraceous.
LENTIGO. m. ſ. [Latin.] A freckly or ſcurfy eruption upon
the ſkin; ſuch eſpecially as is common to women in child-
bearing. &amp;inºy.
LE'Ntil. n.ſ. [kni, Latin; lentille, French.]
It hath a papilionaceous flower, the pointal of which be-
comes a ſhort pod, containing orbicular ſeeds, for the moſt
part convex; the leaves are conjugated, growing to one mid-
rib, and are terminated by tendrils. AMiller.
The Philiſtines were gathered together, where was a piece
of ground full of lentiles. 2 Sam. xxiii. II.
LE'Ntisck. m. ſ. [lentiſcus, Latin; lentiſue, French.]
Lentiſ: wood is of a pale brown colour, almoſt whitiſh,
reſinous, of a fragrant ſmell and acrid taſte: it is the wood
of the tree which produces the maſtich, and is eſteemed
aſtringent and balſamick in medicine. Hill's Mat. Medica.
Lentift is a beautiful evergreen, the maſtich or gum of
, which is of uſe for the teeth or gums. Mortimer's Huſh.
LE's TITUDE. m. ſ. [from lentus, Latin.] Sluggiſhneſs; ſlow-
neſs. Dić7.
LE'NTNER. m. ſ. A kind of hawk.
I ſhould enlarge my diſcourſe to the obſervation of the
baggard, and the two ſorts of lentners. //alton's Angler.
LENTOR. m. ſ. [lentor, Latin; lenteur, French.]
1. Tenacity; viſcofity.
Some bodies have a kind of lentor, and more depećtible
nature than others. Bacon.
2. Slowneſs; delay.”
The lentor of eruptions, not inflammatory, points to an
acid cauſe. Arbuthnot on Diet.
3. In phyſick.] It expreſſes that fizy, viſcid, coagulated part
"...the blood, which, in malignant fevers, obſtructs the ca-
- pillary veſſels. * Quincy.
LENTéus. adj. ſlentus, Latin.] Viſcous; tenacious ; capable
to be drawn out.
h this ſpawn of a lentous and tranſparent body, are to be
diſcerned many ſpecks which become black, a ſubſtance more
$ºmpacted and terreſtrious than the other; for it riſeth not
m diſtillation. - Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii.
EOD. m. ſ.
Leod ſignifies the people; or, rather, a nation, country,
&amp;c, Thus, leadgar is one of great intereſt with the people
º ſlation. Gibſon's Camden.
Por, n.ſ.
Lºf denotes love; ſo leofwin is a winner of love; leoffan,
“t beloved: like theſe Agapetus, Eraſmus, Philo, Aman-
dus, &amp;c. Gibſon's Camden.
*śNE, adj. [leoninus, Latin.]
I. Belonging to a lion; having the nature of a lion.
**mine verſes are thoſe of which the end rhymes to the
middle, ſº named from Leo the inventor: as,
lºop Glºria factorum temere conceditur horum.
º * f [leo and pardus, Latin.] A ſpotted beaſt of
Sheep run not half ſo tim’rous from the wolf,
A. horſe or oxen from the leopard,
º fly from your oft-ſubdued ſlaves. Shakespeare. Hen. VI.
his ..". is every way, in ſhape and actions, like a cat:
ebº teeth, tongue, feet, claws, tail, all like a cat's :
* with his fore-feet, as a cat doth her kittens; leaps
** Prey, as a cat at a mouſe; and will alſo ſpit much
after the ſame manner: ſo that they ſeem to differ, juſt as 2.
kite doth from an eagle. Grew's Muſæum.
Before the king tame leopard, led the way,
And troops of lions innocently play. Dryden.
LE/PER. m. ſ. [lºpra, leproſus, Latin.] One infected with a
leproſy.
I am no loathſome leper; look on me. Shakeſpeare.
The leper in whom the plague is, his cloaths ſhall be rent.
Lev. xiii. 45.
The number of their lepers was very great. Hakewill.
LEPERCU.S. adj. [Formed from leprous, to make out a verſe.]
Cauſing leproſy ; infected with leproſy ; leprous.
Upon my ſecure hour thy uncle ſtole,
With juice of curſed hebenon in a viol,
And in the porches of mine ears did pour
The leperous diſtilment. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
LE'PoRINE. adj. [leporinus, Lat.] Belonging to a hare; having
the nature of a hare.
LE PRO's IT Y. m. ſ. [from leprous...] Squamous diſeaſe.
If the crudities, impurities, and leproſities of metals were
cured, they would become gold. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Le PRosY. m. ſ. [lepra, Latin; lepre, French..] A loathſome
diſtemper, which covers the body with a kind of white ſcales.
Itches, blains,
Sow all the Athenian boſoms, and their crop
Be general leproſy. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
It is a plague of leproſy. Lev. xiii. 3.
Between the malice of my enemies and other mens miſ-
takes, I put as great a difference as between the itch of no-
velty and the leproſy of diſloyalty. King Charles.
Authors, upon the firſt entrance of the pox, looked upon
it ſo highly infectious, that they ran away from it as much
as the Jews did from the leproſy. I/ſeman's Surgery.
LE/PRous. adj. [lepra, Latin; lepreux, French..] Infected with
a leproſy.
The filly amorous ſucks his death,
By drawing in a leprous harlot's breath. Donne.
LERE. m. ſ. [laene, Saxon; leere, Dutch..] A leſſon; lore;
doćtrine. This ſenſe is ſtill retained in Scotland.
The kid pitying his heavineſs,
Aſked the cauſe of his great diſtreſs;
Though he that had well yeond his lere,
Thus melled his talk with many a teare. Spenſer.
Le'RRY. [from lere.] A rating; a lecture. ruſtick word.
Less. A negative or privative termination. [lear, Saxon; loos,
Dutch..] Joined to a ſubſtantive, it implies the abſence or
privation of the thing expreſſed y that ſubſtantive: as, a
withſ; man, a man without wit ; childleſ, without children;
fatherleſ, deprived of a father; pennyleſs, wanting money.
LÉss. adj. [lear, Saxon.] The comparative of little: oppoſed
to greater.
And alſo who, and whence, that he were, }
Mary, the mother of James the leſ. Mar. xv. 4o.
Yet could he not his cloſing eyes withdraw,
Though lºſs and lºſs of Emily he ſaw. Dryden.
He that thinks he has a poſitive idea of infinite ſpace
will find, that he can no more have a poſitive idea of the
greateſt than he has of the leaſt ſpace; for in this latter we
are capable only of a comparative idea of ſmallneſs, which
will always be lºſs than any one whereof we have the poſitive
idea. Lockr.
All the ideas that are conſidered as having parts, and are
capable of increaſe by the addition of any equal or leſ; parts,
affords us, by their repetition, the idea of infinity. Locke.
'Tis leſs to conquer, than to make wars ceaſe,
And, without fighting, awe the world to peace. Hallifax.
LEss. n.ſ. Not ſo much ; oppoſed to more.
They gathered ſome more, ſome lºſs. Exod. xvi. 17.
Thy ſervant knew nothing of this, leſ, or more. 1 Sam.
Less. adv. In a ſmaller degree; in a lower degree.
This opinion preſents a leſs merry, but not lºſs dangerous,
temptation to thoſe in adverſity. Decay of Piety.
The leſs ſpace there is betwixt us and the obječt, and the
more pure the air is, by ſo much the more the ſpecies are
preſerved and diſtinguiſhed; and, on the contrary, the more
ſpace of air there is, and the leſ; it is pure, ſo much the
more the object is confuſed and embroiled. Dryden.
Their learning lay chiefly in flouriſh ; they were not much
wifer than the lºſs pretending multitude. Collier on Pride.
The leſs they themſelves want to receive from others, they
will be iſ careful to ſupply the neceſſities of the indigent.
Smalridge's Sermons.
Happy, and happy ſtill, ſhe might have prov'd,
Were ſhe leſ; beautiful, or leſs belov’d. Pope's Statius,
LE'ssee. n.ſ. The perſon to whom a leaſe is given.
To Less EN. v. a. from lºſs.]
1. To diminiſh in bulk.
2. To diminiſh in degree of any quality.
Kings may give
To beggars, and not lºſſºn their own greatneſs. Denhan.
º
Though
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 10</div><p class="Text">L F. T.
L E S
charity alone will not make one happy ºn the
*. yet i. ſhall leſſºn his puniſhment. Calany's Serm.
Collect into one ſum as grº", * number as you pleaſe, this
multitude, how great ſoever, leſſºns not one jot the power
of adding to it, or bring; him any nearer the end of the ſº-
exhauſtible ſtock of number. . . - Locke.
This thirſt after fame betrays him into ſuch indecencies
as are a leſſºning to his reputation, and is looked upon as a
weakneſs in the greateſt character. Addison's Speciatºr.
Nor are the pleaſures which the brutal part of the creation
enjoy, ſubject to be lºffened by the uneaſineſs which ariſes
from fancy. Mºrtury's Sermons.
3. To degrade; to deprive of power or dignity.
Who ſeeks
To lºſſºn thee, againſt his purpoſe ſerves,..., ,
To #. the more thy might. Men's Par. Lºft,
St. Paul choſe to magnify his office, when ill men conſpired
to leſſen it. Alterbury Sermºns.
T.I... v. n. To grow leſs; to ſhrink; * * dimi-
niſhed. ak
All government may be effecmed to grow ſtrong of Wºº,
as the eneral opinion in thoſe that go” " ſeen to º
increaſe. t -
1I] #. objection lºſſºns very much, and comes to no more
than this, there was one witneſs of no good reputatiº.
At lºry's Sºrmºns.
LE'sser. adj. A barbºrous corruption of lºſs, formed by the
vulgar from the habit of terminating comparativºs " " '
afterwards adopted by poets, and then by writers of proſe.
what great deſpite doth fortune tº thee bear,
Thus lowly to abaſe thy beauty bright, ,
ºrji ſhºuld not deface all other Iſr light. Fº: Qu.
It is the leſſºr biot, modeſty finds, - -
women to change their ſhares than mºn their minds.
Shakeſpeare's Two Gentlemen ºf Perona.
The mountains, and higher parts of the earth, gº" lºſer
and leſſºr from age to age : ſometimes the roots of them, ºr
weakened by ſubterraneous fires, and ſometimes tumbled
by earthquakes into thoſe caverns that are under them.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Cain, after the murder of his brother, cries out, Every
man that findeth me ſhall ſlay me. By the ſame reaſº "y
a man, in the ſtate of nature, puniſh the lºſer breach.” of
that law. Locke.
Any heat whatſoever promotes the aſcent of mineral mat-
ter, but more eſpecially of that which is ſubtile, and is con-
ſequently moveable more eaſily, and with a leſſºr power.
Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
The larger here, and there the lºſer lambs,
The new-fall'n young herd bleating for their dams. Pºpe.
LE'sse R. adv. [formed by corruption from left.]
Some ſay he's mad; others, that leſſºr hate him;
Do call it valiant fury. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Lesses. n.ſ. [laiſies, French..] The dung of beaſts left on the
ground.
LESSON. m. ſ. [le; on, French ; lectio, Latin.]
1. Any thing read or repeated to a teacher, in order to im-
provement.
I but repeat that leſſºn
Which I have learn'd from thee.
2. Precept; notion inculcated.
This days enſample hath this leſſºn dear
Deep written in my heart with iron pen,
That bliſs may not abide in ſtate of mortal men. Fa. 94.
Be not jealous over the wife of thy boſom, and teach her
not an evil lºſſon againſt thyſelf. Eccluſ. ix. I.
3. Portions of ſcripture read in divine ſervice.
Notwithſtanding ſo eminent properties, whereof lºſſºns are
happily deſtitute; yet lºſſons being free from ſome inconve-
niences whereunto ſermons are more ſubject, they may, in
this reſpect, no leſs take, than in other they muſt give the
hand which betokeneth pre-eminence. Hooker, b. v.
4. Tune pricked for an inſtrument.
Thoſe good laws were like good leſſºns ſet for a flute out of
tune; of which leſſons little uſe can be made, till the flute be
made fit to be played on. Davies on Ireland.
5. A rating lečture.
She would give her a leſſºn for walking ſo late, that ſhould
make her keep within doors for one fortnight. Sidney.
To LE'ssos. v. a. [from the noun..] To teach ; to inſtruct.
Even in kind love, I do conjure thee,
To leſſºn me. Shakeſp. Two Gentlemen of Wºrona.
t Well haſt thou lºſſºn'd us, this ſhall we do. Shakeſp.
Children ſhould be ſeaſoned betimes, and leſſºned into a
contempt and deteſtation of this vice. L'E/irange's Fables.
LE'ssoR. m. ſ. One who lets any thing to farm, or otherwiſe,
by leaſe.
Lords of the world have but for life their leaſe,
And that too, if the leſſor pleaſe, muſt ceaſe. Denham.
If he demiſes the glebe to a layman, the tenant muſt pay
4. -
Denham's Sophy.
* - -
the ſmall tithes to the vicar, and the great tithº to the
leſſor. Aliff's Paragon.
Leśr. conj. [from the adjećtive leaſt.] That not. if
Forty Gripes he may give him, and not exceed; l/? i ne
ſhould exceed, then thy brother ſhould ſeem vile. ID, ut. xxv.
King Luitprand brought hither the corps, º/ * might º
abuſed by the barbarous nations. Addison on Italy.
'ST FR COC K. 77. /* s
LE *. the º coaſt, for want of good harbours they
hay," a device of two ſticks filled with corks, and croſſed flat-
long, out of whoſe midſt there riſeth a thread, and at the
ſame hangeth a ſail; to this engine, termed a lºſ' rºck, they
tie one end of their boulter, ſo as the wind coming from the
ſhore filleth the fail, and the ſail carrieth the boulter into the
ſea, which, after the reſpite of ſome hours, is drawn in again
by a cord faſtened at the nearer end. Carew on Cornwall.
To LET. v. a. ſhe-an, Saxon.]
1. To allow; to ſuffer; to permit. -
Nay, nay, quoth he, let be your ſtrife and doubt. Fairf.
Where there is a certainty and an uncertainty, let the un-
certainty.go, and hold to that which is certain. Bp. Sanderſºn.
On the croud he caſt a furious look,
And wither'd all their ſtrength before he ſpoke ,
Back on your lives, let be, ſaid he, my prey,
And let my vengeance take the deſtin'd way. Drydºn.
Remember ne; ſpeak, Raymond, will you lºt him :
Shall he remember 1.eonora. Dryden's S aniſh Friar.
We muſt not let go manifeſt truths, becauſe we cannot
anſwer all queſtions about them. Collier.
One who fixes his thoughts intently on one thing, ſo as to
take but little notice of the ſucceſſion of ideas in his mind,
Its ſlip out of his account a good pºrt of that duration. Lºcke.
A ſolution of mercury in aqua fortis being poured upon
iron, copper, tin, or lead, diſlolves the metal, and lets go
the mercury. Newton's Opticks.
2. A ſign of the optative mood uſed before the firſt and impe-
rative before the third perſon. Before the firſt perſon ſingular
it ſignifies reſolution; fix a purpoc, or ardent wiſh.
Let me die with the Philiitines. . judget.
Here is her picture : let me ſee ; I think, '
If I had ſuch a tire, this face of mine
Were full as lovely as in this of her’s. Shakespeare.
3. Before the firſt perſon plural, let implies exhortation. -
Riſe; let us go. Aſtrº.
4. Before the third perſon, ſingular or plural, lºt implies per-
miſſion or precept.
Let the ſoldiers ſeize him for one of the aſſaſſinates. Dryd.
5. Before a thing in the paſſive voice, let implies command.
Let not the objećts which ought to be contiguous be ſepa-
rated, and let thºſe which ought to be ſeparated be appa-
rently ſo to us; but lºt this be done by a ſmall and pleaſing
difference. Iºyden's Dºrſºy,
6. Let has an infinitive mood after it without the particle 12.
but one ſubmiſſive word which you let fall,
Will make him in good humour with us ail. Dryden.
The ſeventh year thou (; alt let it reſt, and lie ſtill. Exºd.
7. To leave.
They did me too much injury,
That ever ſaid I hearken'd for your death.
If it were ſo, I might have let alone
Th’ inſulting band of Douglas over you. Shakespeare.
The publick outrages of a deſtio).ng tyranny are but
childiſh appetites, let alone till they are grown ungovern-
able. L'E/ºrange's Fables.
Let me alone to accuſe him afterwards. Dryd. Sp. Friar.
This is of no uſe, and had been better let alone: he is
fain to reſolve all into preſent poſition. Locke.
Neſtor, do not let us alone till you have ſhortened our
necks, and reduced them to their antient ſtandard. A ſºn.
This notion might be let alone and deſpiſed as a picce of
harmleſs unintelligible enthuſiaſm.
8. To more than permit.
There's a letter for you, Sir, if your name be Horatio, as
I am ſet to know it is. Shakespeare's Hanſet.
9. To put to hire; to grant to a tenant. -
Solomon had a vineyard at Baal Hamon ; he Jet the vine.
yard unto keepers. Cºnt. viii. 1 1.
Nothing deadens ſo much the compoſition of a picture, as
figures which appertain not to the ſubject: we may call them
figures to be ſet. Dryden Difrºſ.ºy.
She let her ſecond floor to a very genteel youngiſh man.
Tatler, No. 88.
A law was enacted, prohibiting all biſhops, and other ec-
cleſiaſtical corporations, from letting their lands for above the
term of twenty years.
Io. To ſuffer any thing to take a courſe which requires no in-
pulſive violence.
She ſet them down by a cord through the window. }ſ.
Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a
draught. - -
Rorers’s Sermº.
2gers 5 º tººl.2725.
Like v. 4.
Let
Swift.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 11</div><p class="Text">— – T =- * = º-
- -
L E T L E. T.
Le down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink. have the impediments of honour, and the torments of con-
Gen. xxiv. 14. ſcience. Sidney.
My heart finks in me while I hear him ſpeak, To glorify him in all things, is to do nothing whereby the
And every ſlacken'd fibre drops its hold ; • *-* name of God may be blaſphemed; nothing whereby the ſal-
Like nature letting down the ſprings of life: - vation of Jew or Grecian, or any in the church of Chriſt,
much the name of father awes me ſtill. Dryden. may be let or hindered. Hooker, b. i.
From this point of the ſtory, the poet is let down to his Leave, ah leave off, whatever wight thou be,
traditional poverty. - Pope s Eſſay on Homer. To let a weary wretch from her due reſt,
You muſt let it down, that is, make it foſter. by temper- And trouble dying ſoul's tranquillity. Fairy Queen.
ing it. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes. - Wherefore do ye let the people from their works; go you
l To permit to take any ſtate or courſe. unto your burdens. - Exod. v. 4.
II. Finding an eaſe in not underſtanding, he let looſe his The myſtery of iniquity doth already work; only he who
lly to pleaſure. Sidney, b. ii.
* º lºmity in anything, and the will of
man doth let it go. - - - Hooker, b. i.
The beginning of ſtrife is as when one letteth out water.
Prov. xvii. 14.
As terebration doth meliorate fruit, ſo doth pricking vines
or trees after they be of ſome growth, and thereby letting
forth gum or tears. ' .. Bacon'; Natural Hiſtory.
And if I knew which way to do't, -
Your honour ſafe, I'd let you out. - Hudibras.
The letting out our love to mutable objects doth but en-
large our hearts, and make them the wider marks for for-
une to be wounded. Boyle.
He was let looſe among the woods as ſoon as he was able
to ride on horſeback, or carry a gun; Addiſon's Speciator.
12. Tº Let blood, is elliptical for to let out blood. To free it
from confinement; to ſuffer it tº ſtream out of the vein.
Be rul’d by me;
Let's purge this choler without letting blood. Shakepſ are:
Hippocrates let great quantities of blood, and opened ſeveral
veins at a time. - - Arbuthnot on Coins.
13. To Let blºod, is uſed with a dative of the perſon whoſe
is let.
blood is l Tell him, Cateſby,
His antient knot of dangerous adverſaries
To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret caſtle. Shakeſpeare.
Asterebration doth meliorate fruit, ſo doth letting plants
blood, as pricking vines, thereby letting forth tears. Bacon.
14. To LET in. To admit. - - -
Let in your king, whoſe labour'd ſpirits,
Sore wearied in this action of ſwift ſpeed,
Crave harbourage within your city walls. Shakeſpeare.
Roſcetes preſented his army before the gates of the city,
in hopes that the citizens would raiſe ſome tumult, and let
him in. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
What boots it at one gate to make defence,
And at another to let in the foe,
Effeminately vanquiſh'd, Milton's Agoniſłes.
The more tender our ſpirits are made by religion, the
more eaſy we are to let in grief, if the cauſe be innocent.
Taylor's Rule of Holy Living.
They but preſerve the aſhes, thou the flame,
True to his ſenſe, but truer to his fame,
Fording his current, where thou find'ſt it low,
Let'ſ in thine own to make it riſe and flow. Denham.
To give a period to my life, and to his fears, you're
welcome; here's a throat, a heart, or any other part, ready
to let in death, and receive his commands. Denham.
It is the key that ſets them into their very heart, and en-
ables them to command all that is there. South's Sermons.
There are pićtures of ſuch as have been diſtinguiſhed by
their birth or miracles, with inſcriptions, that let you into the
name and hiſtory of the perſon repreſented. Addiſon.
Moſt hiſtorians have ſpoken of ill ſucceſs, and terrible
events, as if they had been let into the ſecrets of providence,
and made acquainted with that private condućt by which the
world is governed. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 483.
Theſe are not myſteries for ordinary readers to be let
into. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 221.
As ſoon as they have hewn down any quantity of the
rocks, they let in their ſprings and reſervoirs among their
works. Addiſon on Italy.
As we rode through the town, I was let into the characters
of all the inhabitants; one was a dog, another a whelp, and
another a cur. Addison's Freeholder.
15. To LET in. To procure admiſſion.
They ſhould ſpeak properly and correótly, whereby they
may let their thoughts into other mens minds the more
eaſily. Locke.
16. To Let off. To diſcharge. Originally uſed of an arrow
diſmiſſed from the gripe, and therefore ſuffered to fly off the
firing; now applied to guns.
Charging my piſtol only with powder, I firſt cautioned
the emperor not to be afraid, and then let it off in the air.
Swift.
17. To Let out. To leaſe out; to give to hire or farm.
18. To LET. [lettan, Saxon.] To hinder; to obſtrućt; to
oppoſe.
Their ſenſes are not letted from enjoying their objećts: we
now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. 2 Theſ,
I will work, and who will let it. Iſa. xliii. 11.
And now no longer letted of his prey,
He leaps up at it with enrag’d defire,
O'erlooks the neighbours with a wide ſurvey,
And nods at every houſe his threatening fire.
19. To Let, when it ſignifies to permit or leave, has lºt in the
preterite and part, paſſive ; but when it ſignifies to hinder, it
has letted; as, malia me impedierunt, many things have letted
777e. Introduction to Grammar.
To LET. v. n. To forbear; to withold himſelf.
After king Ferdinando had taken upon him the perſon of
a fraternal ally to the king, he would not let to counſel the
king. - Bacon's Henry VII.
LeT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Hindrance; obſtacle; obſtruc-
tion; impediment.
The ſecret lets and difficulties in public proceedings are
innumerable and inevitable. Hooker, b. i.
Solyman without let preſented his army before the city of
Belgrade. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Türks.
It had been done e'er this, had I been conſul; .
We had had no ſtop, no let. Benj. Johnſon's Catiline.
Juſt judge, two lets remove ; that free from dread,
I may before thy high tribunal plead. Sandys on job.
To theſe internal diſpoſitions to fin add the external op-
portunities and occaſions concurring with them, and re-
moving all lets and rubs, out of the way, and making the
‘path of deſtruction plain before the finner's face; ſo that he
may run his courſe freely. South.
LET, the termination of diminutive words, from lyze, Saxon,
little, ſmall.
LETHA'Rock, adj, ſlethargique, Fr. from lethargy..] Sleepy,
beyond the natural power of ſleep.
Vengeance is as if minutely proclaimed in thunder from
heaven, to give men no reſt in their fins, till they awake from
the lethargick ſleep, and ariſe from ſo dead, ſo mortiferous a
ſtate. Hammond's Fundamental.
Let me but try if I can wake his pity
From his lethargick ſleep. Denham's Sophy.
A lethargy demands the ſame cure and diet as an apo-
plexy from a phlegmatick caſe, ſuch being the conſtitution of
the lethargick. Arbuthnot on Diet.
LETHA'RGIckNess. m. ſ. [from lethargick.] Sleepineſs; drow-
ſineſs. -
A grain of glory mixt with humbleneſs,
Cures both a fever, and lethargickneſs. , Herbert.
LE’THARGY. m. ſ. [2.92.6%. , lethargie, Fr.] A morbid
drowſineſs; a ſleep from ... one cannot be kept awake.
The lethargy muſt have his quiet courſe;
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to ſavage madneſs. Shakeſpeare's Othelſe.
Though his eye is open, as the morning's,
Towards luſts and pleaſures; yet ſo faſt a lethargy
Has ſeiz'd his powers towards publick cares and dangers,
He ſleeps like death. Denham's Sophy.
Europe lay then under a deep lethargy; and was no other-
wiſe to be reſcued from it, but by one that would cry
mightily. Atterbury.
A lethargy is a lighter ſort of apoplexy, and demands the
ſame cure and diet. Arbuthnot on Diet.
LE"THARGIED. adj. [from the noun..] Laid aſleep; entranced.
His motion weakens, or his diſcernings
Are lethargued. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Leºth E. m. ſ. [2.É.Sº...] Oblivion; a draught of oblivion.
The conquering wine hath ſteept our ſenſe
In ſoft and delicate lethe. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleºpatra.
Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her wat'ry labyrinth, which who ſo drinks
Forgets both joy and grief.
LE"tt E.R. m. ſ. [from let.]
1. One who lets or permits.
2. One who hinders. -
. One who gives vent to any thing; as a blood letter.
ETTER. m. ſ. [lettre, French; litera, Latin.]
1. One of the elements of ſyllables.
A ſuperſcription was written over him in letters of Greek,
Latin, and Hebrew. Ltºke xxiii. 38.
Thou whoreſon Zed thou unneceſſary letter / Shakespeare
AMilton.
1 5 I 2. A
Dryden.
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 12</div><p class="Text">L E V
L E. V.
-
2. A written meſſage; an epiſtle. ,
They uſe to write it on the top of letters. Shakeſpeare.
I have a letter from her
Of ſº as you will wonder at. Shakeſpeare.
When a Spaniard would wite a lººr by him, the Indian
would marve; how it ſhould be poſſible, that he, to whom
he came, ſhould be able to know all things. Ahlot.
Tº... .ſies will do very well for trumpeterº and the harcs
will make excellent letter carriers. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
The ſtile of letters ought to be frce, cays and natural;
as near approaching to familiar converſation as poſſible: the
two beſt qualities in converſation are, good humour and good
breeding; thoſe letters are therefore certainly the beſt that
ſhew the moſt of theſe two qualities. J/a/h.
Mrs. P. B. has writ to me, and is one of the beſt letter
writers I know ; very good ſenſe, civility, and friendſhip,
without any ſtiffneſs or conſtraint. Swift.
3. The literal or expreſſed meaning. . -
Touching tranſlations of holy ſcripture, we may not diſ.
allow of their painful travels herein, who ſtrictly have tied
themſelves to the very original letter. *- Hooker, b. v.
In obedience to human laws, we muſt obſerve the letter of
the law, without doing violence to the reaſon of the law,
and the intention of the lawgiver. Taylor's holy living.
Thoſe words of his muſt be underſtood not according to
the bare rigour of the letter, but according to the allowances
of expreſſion. South's Sermons.
What! ſince the pretor did my fetters looſe,
And left me freely at my own diſpoſe,
May I not live without controul and awe,
Excepting ſtill the letter of the law Dryden's Perſius.
4. Letters without the fingular: learning. -
The Jews marvelled, ſaying, How knoweth this man let-
ters, having never learned john vii. 15.
5. Anything to be read. -
Good laws are at beſt but a dead letter. Addison Freeholder.
6. Type with which books are printed.
The iron ladles that letter founders uſe to the caſting of
printing letters, are kept conſtantly in melting metal. Moxon.
To Le'ºrt ER. v. a. [from letter.] To ſtamp with letters.
I obſerved one weight lettered on both ſides; and I found
on one ſide, written in the dialect of men, and underneath
it, calamities; on the other ſide was written, in the lan-
guage of the gods, and underneath, bleſlings. Addison.
LETTERED. adj. [from letter.] Literate; educated to learn-
ing.
A martial man, not ſweetened by a lettered education, is
apt to have a tinéture of ſourneſs. Collier on Pride.
Leºttuce. n. ſ. laeluca, Latin.]
The lettuce hath a fibrous root, which is, for the moſt
part, annual; the leaves are ſmooth, and grow alternately
upon the branches; the ſtalks are, for the moſt part, tender,
ſlender, and ſtiff, and commonly terminate in a ſort of um-
bel; the cup of the flower is oblong, ſlender, and ſcaly; the
ſeeds are oblong, depreſſed, and generally terminate in a
point; the ſpecies are, common or garden lettuce ; cabbage
lettuce ; Sileſia lettuce; white and black cos; white cos; red
capuchin lettuce. Miller.
Fat colworts, and comforting purſeline,
Cold lettice, and refreſhing roſemarine. Spenſer.
Lettuce is thought to be poiſonous, when it is ſo old as to
have milk. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The medicaments proper to diminiſh milk, are lettice,
purſlane, endive. //ſeman's Surgery.
LEVANT. adj. [levant, French..] Eaſtern.
Thwart of thoſe, as fierce
Forth ruſh the levant, and the ponent winds,
Eurus and Zephyr. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x.
Lev A'NT. n. ſ. The eaſt, particularly thoſe coaſts of the Me-
diterranean eaſt of Italy.
LE/A"TOR. m. ſ. [Lat..] A chirurgical inſtrument, whereby
depreſſed parts of the ſkull are lifted up.
Some ſurgeons bring out the bone in the bore; but it will
be ſafer to raiſe it up with your levator, when it is but lightly
retained in ſome part. //iſeman's Surgery.
Leucoph LEGM Acy. m. ſ. [from leucophlegmatick.] Paleneſs,
with viſcid juices and cold ſweatings.
Spirits produce debility, flatulency, fevers, leucºphlegmacy,
and dropſies. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Leucophiegmatrick. adj. [2.9%3; and ºxygz.] Having
ſuch a conſtitution of body where the blood is of a pale co:
lour, viſcid, and cold, whereby it ſtuffs and bloats the ha-
bit, or raiſes white tumours in the feet, legs, or any other.
Parts; and ſuch are commonly aſthmatick and dropſical.
C) . . . . . .
- - &amp;#incy.
º Perſons have voracious appetites, and for want
of a right ſanguification are leucophlegmatick. Arbuthnot.
LE/EE, n. ſ. [French.]
1. The time of riſing.
* The concourſe of thoſe who croud round a man of power
in a morning.
The ſervile rout their careful Caeſar praiſe ;
Him they extol, they worſhip him alone,
They croud his levees, and ſupport his throne. Dryden.
Woud'ſt thou be firſt miniſter of ſtate :
To have thy levees crouded with reſort,
Of a depending, gaping, ſervile court. Drydºn's juvenal.
None of her Sylvan ſubjects made their court,
Levees and couchees paſs'd without reſort. Drydºr.
LEVEL. adj. [lae, el, Saxon.]
1. Even; not having one part higher than another.
The garden, ſcated on the ſevel floor,
She left behind, and locking ev'ry door,
Thought all ſecure. Dryden's Boccace.
Be level in preferments, and you will ſoon be as level in
your learning. Bentley.
2. Even with any thing elſe; in the ſame line with anything.
Our navy is addreſſed, our pow'r collected,
Our ſubſtitutes in abſence well inveſted, -
And ev'rything lies level to our wiſh. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
There is a knowledge which is very proper to man, and
lies level to human underſtanding; and that is, the know-
ledge of our Creator, and of the duty we owe to him.
Tillotſon's Sermons.
To Level. v. a. [from the adjećtive.]
1. To make even ; to free from inequalities.
2. To reduce to the ſame height with ſomething elſe.
Reaſon can never aſſent to the admiſſion of thoſe brutiſh
appetites which would over-run the ſoul, and level its ſupe-
rior with its inferior faculties. Decay ºf Piety.
Behold the law
And rule of beings in your maker's mind:
And thence, like limbecks, rich ideas draw,
To fit the levell'd uſe of humankind. Dryden.
3. To lay flat.
We know by experience, that all downright rains do ever-
more diffever the violence of outrageous winds, and beat
down and level the ſwelling and mountainous billows of the
ſea. Raleigh.
He will thy foes with ſilent ſhame confound,
And their proud ſtructures level with the ground. Sandy.
With unreſiſted might the monarch reigns,
He levels mountains, and he raiſes plains;
And not regarding diff'rence of degree,
Abas'd your daughter, and exalted me. Dryden.
4. To bring to equality of condition.
5. To point in taking aim ; to aim.
One to the gunners on St. Jago's tow'r,
Bid 'em for ſhame,
Level their canon lower.
6. To direct to any end.
The whole body of puritans was drawn to be abettors of
all villainy by a few men, whoſe deſigns from the firſt were
levelled to deſtroy both religion and government. Swift.
To LE’vel. v. m.
I. To aim at ; to bring the gun or arrow to the ſame direc-
tion with the mark.
The glory of God, and the good of his church, was the
thing which the apoſtles aimed at, and therefore ought to be
the mark whereat we alſo level. Hooker, b. iv.
2. To conjecture; to attempt to gueſs.
I pray thee overname them; and as thou nameſ them I
will deſcribe them; and, according to my deſcription, level
at my affection. Shakespeare Aſerchant of Penice.
3. To be in the ſame dire&amp;tion with a mark.
He to his engine flew,
Plac'd near at hand in open view,
And rais'd it till it levell'd right,
Againſt the glow-worm tail of kite.
4. To make attempts; to aim.
Ambitious York did level at thy crown. Shakeſpeare.
LE'VEL. m. ſ. [from the adjective.]
I. A plane; a ſurface without protuberances or inequalities,
After draining of the level in Northamptonſhire, innume-
rable mice did upon a ſudden ariſe. Hale's Original of Mank.
Thoſe bred in a mountainous country overſize thoſe that
dwell on low ſeve's. Sandys's Travels.
2. Rate; ſtandard.
Love of her made us raiſe up our thoughts above the or-
dinary level of the world, ſo as great clerks do not diſdain
our conference. Sidney.
It might perhaps advance their minds ſo far
Above the level of ſubjection, as
Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
Hudºras, p. ii.
Tº aſſume to them the glory of that war. Daniel.
The praiſes of military men inſpired me with thoughts
above my ordinary level. Dryden.
3. A ſtate of equality.
The time is not far off when we ſhall be upon the level;
I am reſolved to anticipate the time, and be upon the level
with them now : for he is ſo that neither ſeeks nor wants
them, Atterbury to Pope.
Providence,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 13</div><p class="Text">L E V
L E. W. - -
Providence, for the moſt part, i º 3. º and
ind of proportion in its diſpenſations towards us.
obſerves a kin prop ... Spectator, Nº. 255.
I ſuppoſe, by the ſtile of old friend, and the like, it muſt
be ſomebody there of his own level; among whom his party
have, indeed, more friends than I could wiſh. Swift.
An inſtrument whereby maſons adjuſt their work.
"The ºvel is from two to ten feet long, that it may reach
over a conſiderable length of the work: if the plumb-line
hangjuſt upon the perpendicular, when the lºve! is ſet flat
down upon the work, the work is level; but if it hangs. on
either fide the perpendicular, the floor or work muſt be raiſed
on that ſide, till the plumb-line hang exactly on the perpen-
dicular. Moxon's Aechanical Exerciſes.
5. Rule: borrowed from the mechanick level.
- Be the fair level of thy actions laid,
As temp'rance wills, and prudence may perſuade;
And try if life be worth the liver's care. Prior.
6. The line of direction in which any miſſive weapon is aimed.
- ſtood i' th' level
Of a full charg’d confederacy, and gave thanks -
To you that choked it. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun, -
Did murther her. Shakespeare Romeo and juliet.
Thrice happy is that humble pair,
Beneath the level of all care,
Over whoſe heads thoſe arrows fly,
Of ſad diſtruſt and jealouſy.
7. The line in which the fight paſſes. -
Fir’d at firſt fight with what the muſe imparts,
In fearleſs youth we tempt the heights of arts;
While from the bounded level of our mind
Short views we take, nor ſee the lengths behind.
LE'veller. n.ſ.. [from level.]
1. One who makes any thing even. -
2. One who deſtroys ſuperiority; one who endeavours to bring
all to the ſame ſtate of equality.
You are an everlaſting leveller; you won't allow encourage-
ment to extraordinary merit. Collier on Pride.
LE'velNess. n.ſ.. [from level.]
1. Evenneſs; equality of ſurface.
2. Equality with ſomething elſe.
The river Tiber is expreſſed lying along, for ſo you muſt
remember to draw rivers, to expreſs their levelneſs with the
earth. Peacham.
Lºves. n.ſ. [levain, French.]
1. Ferment; that which being mixed in bread makes it riſe
and ferment.
2. Anything capable of changing the nature of a greater maſs;
any thing that tinétures the whole.
The matter fermenteth upon the old leven, and becometh
more acrid. //iſeman's Surgery.
As to the peſtilential levains conveyed in goods, it is a ſafe
opinion. Arbuthnot on Air.
LEVER, n.ſ. [levier, French.] -
The ſecond mechanical power, is a balance ſupported by
a hypomochlion; only the centre is not in the middle, as
in the common balance, but near one end ; for which rea-
ſon it is uſed to elevate or raiſe a great weight; whence
comes the name lever. Harris.
Have you any leavers to lift me up again, being down.
- Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Some draw with cords, and ſome the monſter drive
With rolls and levers. Denham.
Waller.
Pope.
In a leaver, the motion can be continued only for ſo ſhort.
a ſpace, as may be anſwerable to that little diſtance betwixt
the ſulciment and the weight; which is always by ſo much
leiſer, as the diſproportion betwixt the weight and the power
is greater, and the motion itſelf more eaſy. JPilkins's Magick.
... Some hoiſting leavers, ſome the wheels prepare. Dryd.
You may have a wooden lever, forked at the ends. Mort.
EVERET, []eivre, French..] A young hare.
Their travels o'er that ſilver field does ſhow,
Like track of lºverets in morning ſnow. 17%ller.
Levelt. n. ſ. [from lever, French.] A blaſt on the trumpet;
probably that by which the ſoldiers are called in the morning.
He that led the cavalcade,
Wore a ſowgelder's flagellet,
On which he blew as ſtrong a levet ; -
As well-fec’d lawyer on his breviate. Hudibras.
LEVERook. n. ſ. [layere, Saxon.] This word is retained in
Scotland, and denotes the lark.
The ſmaller birds have their particular ſeaſons; as, the
liverock. - - //alton's Angler.
r If the lufft faa 'twill ſmoore aw the leverooks. Scotch Prov.
*"ABLE, adj. [from levy.] That may be levied.
. The ſums which any agreed to pay, and were not brought
º, were to be leviable by courſe of law. Bacon's Henry VII.
LEWIATHAN. m. ſ. Innº.] A water animal mentioned in
* book of job. By ſome imagined the crocodile, but in
Pºetry generally taken for the whale.
... We may, as bootleſs, ſpend our vain command
Upon th’ enraged ſoldiers in their ſpoil,
As ſend our precepts to th’ leviathan, -
To come aſhore. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Canft thou draw out leviathan with an hook? job.
More to embroil the deep; leviathan,
And his unwieldy train, in dreadful ſport -
Tempeſt the looſen’d brine. Thomſºn's Winter.
To LE/VIGATE. v. a. [Irvigo, Latin.J.
1. To rub or grind to an impalpable powder.
2. To mix till the liquor becomes ſmooth and uniform.
The chyle is white, as conſiſting of ſalt, oil, and water,
much levigated or ſmooth. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
Lev IGATIon. m. ſ. [from levigate.] .
Levigation is the reducing of hard bodies, as coral, tutty,
and precious ſtones, into a ſubtile powder, by grinding upón
marble with a muller; but unleſs the inſtruments are ex-
tremely hard, they will ſo wear as to double the weight of
the medicine. - - &amp;iny.
Le'vite. n. ſ. [levita, Latin, from Levi.] .
1. One of the tribe of Levi ; one born to the office of prieſt-
hood among the Jews.
In the Chriſtian church, the office of deacons ſucceeded in
the place of the levites among the Jews, who were as mi-
niſters and ſervants to the prieſts. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. A prieſt: uſed in contempt. - -
Levi'TIcAL. adj. [from levite.] Belonging to the levites;
making part of the religion of the Jews.
By the levitical law, both the man and the woman were
ſtoned to death; ſo heinous a crime was the fin of adultery.
- - Ayliffe's Parergon.
Le’v ITY.. n.ſ. [levitas, Latin.]
I. Lightneſs; not heavineſs: the quality by which any body
has leſs weight than another.
He gave the form of levity to that which aſcended; to that
which deſcended, the form of gravity. Raleigh.
This bubble, by reaſon of its comparative levity to the
fluidity that encloſes it, would neceſſarily aſcend to the top.
Bentley's Sermons.
2. Inconſtancy; changeableneſs.
They every day broached ſome new thing; which reſtleſs
levity they did interpret to be their growing in ſpiritual per-
fection. Hooker.
Where wigs with wigs, with ſword-knots ſword-knots
ſtrive,
Beaus baniſh beaus, and coaches coaches drive,
This erring mortals levity may call. Pope.
3. Unſteadineſs; laxity of mind. -
I unboſom'd all my ſecrets to thee;
Not out of levity, but over-pow'r'd º
By thy requeſt. Milton's Agoniſłer.
4. Idle pleaſure ; vanity, ,
He never employed his omnipotence out of levity or often-
tation, but as the neceſſities of men required. Calamy.
5. Trifling gaiety; want of ſeriouſneſs.
Our graver buſineſs frowns at this levity. Shakeſpeare.
Hopton abhorred the licence, and the levities, with which
he ſaw too many corrupted. Clarendon, b. viii.
That ſpirit of religion and ſeriouſneſs vaniſhed, and a
ſpirit of levity and libertiniſin, infidelity and prophaneneſs,
ſtarted up in the room of it. . 4tterbury's Sermons.
To LE VY. v. a. [lever, French.]
1. To raiſe; to bring together men. . .
He reſolved to finiſh the conqueſt of Ireland, and to that
end levied a mighty army. Davies on Ireland.
2. To raiſe money. - - - - - - - * -
Levy a tribute unto the Lord of the men of war. Numb.
Inſtead of a ſhip, he ſhould levy upon his county ſuch a
ſum of money. - - - Clarendon.
3. To make war. This ſenſe, though Milton's, ſeems im-
proper.
They live in hatred, enmity, and ſtrife,
Among themſelves, and levy cruel wars.
LE’v Y. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The act of raiſing money or men. -
They have already contributed all their ſuperfluous hands,
and every new levy they make muſt be at the expence of
their farms and cominerce. Addiſon's State of the J/ar:
2. War raiſed. - -
Treaſon has done his worſt : nor ſteel, nor poiſon,
Malice domeſtick, foreign le y, nothing
Can touch him further' Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
LEWD. adj. lae, ede, Saxon.]
1. Lay; not clerical. Obſolete. - -
For levy 1 men this book I writ. Biſhop Grºſihead,
So theſe great clerks their little wiſdom ſhew
, To mock the lewd, as learn'd in this as they.
2. Wicked; bad ; nºughty.
If ſome be admitted into the miniſtry, cither void of
learning, or lewd in life, are all the reſt to be con-
demned : - J; hitgift.
AMilton,
Davies.
Before
A Ly"
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 14</div><p class="Text">L I B
L I B
- by colour of a
Before they did oppreſs the people, only y -
lewd º they did afterwards uſe the ºº:
warrant.
. Luſtful; libidinous.
3. L He is not lolling on a lewd love bed, ": Rich. III
But on his knees at meditation. Shakespeare's Rich. III.
Then lºwd Anchemolus he laid in duſt,
who maind his ſtepdam's bed with impious luſt. Pryde".
LE'wdly. adj. [from lºvd.]
1. Wickedly; naughtily.
A ſort of naughty perſons, lewdly bent,
Have practis'd dangerouſly againſt your ſtate. Shakeſp.
2. Libidinouſly; luſtfully. 2.
He lov’d fair lady Eltred, lewdly lov d.
whoſe wanton pleaſures him too much did pleaſe,
That quite his heart from Guendeline remov’d. Spenſer.
So lewdly dull his idle works appear,
The wretched texts deſerve no comments here. Dryden.
Lewdness. n.ſ.. [from lewd.] Luſtful licentiouſneſs.
Suffer no lewdneſs, nor indecent ſpecch,
Th' apartment of the tender youth to reach. Dyyd. juv.
Damianus's letter to Nicholas is an authentick record of
the lewdneſs committed under the reign of celibacy. Atterbury.
Lewdsºr E.R. n.ſ.. [from lewd.] A lecher; one given to crº-
minal pleaſures. -
Againſt ſuch lewdºers, and their lechery,
Thoſe that betray them do no treachery. Shakeſpeare.
IE'IPIS D'OR. n.ſ. [French.]. A golden French coln, in
value twelve livres, now ſettled at ſeventeen ſhillings. Dići,
Lexico'GRAPHE R. m. ſ. [Aſſºv and 763.9%; lexicºgraphe,
French.] A writer of dictionaries; a harmleſs drudge, that
buſes himſelf in tracing the original, and detailing the ſigni-
fication of words.
Commentators and lexicographers acquainted with the Sy-
riac language, have given theſe hints in their writings on
feripture. I/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Lexico'GRAPHY, n.ſ. [??ºxy and y:zºw.] The art or prac-
tice of writing dictionaries. -
LEXICON. n.ſ. [x::123,..] A dićtionary; a book teaching
the ſignification of words.
Though a linguiſt ſhould pride himſelf to have all the
tongues that Babel cleft the world into, yet if he had not
ſtudied the ſolid things in them as well as the words and lexi- -
cons, yet he were nothing ſo much to be eſteemed a learned
man as any yeoman competently wiſe in his mother dialečt
only. Milton.
LEY. m. ſ.
Ley, lee, lay, are all from the Saxon leax, a field or paſ.
ture, by the uſual melting of the letter; or g. Gilſºn's Cam.
Li’ABLE. m. ſ. [liable, from lier, old French..] Obnoxious;
not exempt; ſubječt.
But what is ſtrength without a double ſhare
Of wiſdom vaſt, unwieldy, burthenſome,
Proudly ſecure, yet liable to fall
By weakeſt ſubtleties. Milton's Agoniſes.
The Engliſh boaſt of Spenſer and Milton, who neither of
them wanted genius or learning; and yet both of them are
liable to many cenſures. Dryden's juvenal.
This, or any other ſcheme, coming from a private hand,
might be liable to many defects. Swift.
LIAR. m. ſ. [from lie. This word would analogically be lier;
but this orthography has prevailed, and the convenience of
diſtinction from lier, he who lies down, is ſufficient to con-
firm it..] One who tells falſhood; one who wants veracity.
She's like a liar, gone to burning hell
‘Twas I that kill'd her. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
He approves the common liar, fame,
Who ſpeaks him thus at Rome. Shakespeare . Ant, and Cleop.
I do not reject his obſervation as untrue, much leſs con-
tlemn the perſon himſelf as a liar, whenſoever it ſeems to
be contradićted. Boyle.
Thy better ſoul abhors a liar's part,
Wiſe is thy voice, and noble is thy heart. Pope', Odyſſey.
Li'ARD. adj.
"I. Mingled roan. w Markham,
* Fiard in Scotland denotes gray-haired: as, he's a ſºj
In an.
LIBA'tion. m. ſ. [libatio, Latin.]
I. º: ačt of pouring wine on the ground in honour of ſome
eity. -
In digging new earth pour in ſome wine, that the vapour
: the earth and wine may comfort the ſpirits, provided it
° not taken for a heathen ſacrifice, or libation to the earth.
2. The wine ſo poured. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
They had no other crime to obi . - *--
- - jećt againſt the Chriſtians
but that they did not offer up liation; and the ſmoke of
ſacrifices, to dead men Stilling #
- - feet on Rom. Idolatry.
The goblet then ſhe took, with #: crown'd, oiatry
Sprinkling the firſt libations ºn the ground. Dryden's Án.
4. -
LI'bbard. n.ſ. [lichard, German; leopardus, Lat.] A leopard.
Make the libbard ſtern, -
Leave roaring, when in rage he for revenge did yearn. . .
Spenſer's Fairy Queen, b. i.
The liblarºl, and the tiger, as the mole -
Riſing, the crumbled earth above them threw. . . Milton.
The torrid parts of Africk are by Piſo reſembled to a
libhard's ſkin, * diſtance of whoſe ſpots repreſent the diſ-
perſneſs of habitations, or towns of Africk, Brerewood.
LIBEL. m. ſ. [libellus, Latin ; libelle, French.]
1. A ſatire; defamatory writing; a lampoon.
Are we reproached for the name of Chriſt that ignominy
ſerves but to advance our future glory; every ſuch libel here
becomes panegyrick there. Decay of Piety.
Good heav'n that ſots and knaves ſhould be ſo vain,
To wiſh their vile reſemblance may remain
And ſtand recorded, at their own requeſt,
To future days, a libel or a jeſt. Dryden.
2. [In the civil law.] A declaration or charge in writing againſt
a perſon in court.
To Li'bel. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſpread defamation;
generally written or printed.
Sweet ſcrauls to fly about the ſtreets of Rome:
What's this but libelling againſt the ſenate Shakeſpeare.
He, like a privileg'd ſpy, whom nothing can
Diſcredit, libels now 'gainſt each great man. Donne.
To Li'BEL. v. a. To ſatiriſe; to lampoon;
Is then the peerage of England any thing diſhonoured
when a peer ſuffers for his treaſon if he be libelled, or any
way defamed, he has his ſcandalum magnatum to puniſh the
offender. Dryden.
But what ſo pure which envious tongues will ſpare
Some wicked wits have libelled all the fair. Pope.
Li'Beller. n.ſ.. [from libel.] A defamer by writing; a lam-
pooner.
Our common libellers are as free from the imputation of
wit, as of morality. Dryden's juvenal.
The ſquibs are thoſe who, in the common phraſe, are
called libellers and lampooners. Tatler.
The common libellers, in their invečtives, tax the church
with an inſatiable deſire of power and wealth, equally com-
mon to all bodies of men. Swift.
LI'Bellous. n.ſ.. [from libel.J. Defamatory.
It was the moſt malicious ſurmiſe that had ever been brew-
ed, howſoever countenanced by a libellous pamphlet. Iſºtton.
Li'BERAL. adj. [liberalis, Latin; liberal. French.]
1. Not mean; not low in birth; not low in mind.
2. Becoming a gentleman. . .
3. Munificent; generous; bountiful; not parcimonious.
Her name was Mercy, well known over all
To be both gracious and eke liberal. ... Spenſ. Fa. Queen.
Sparing would ſhew a worſe fin than ill doćtrine.
Men of his way ſhould be moſt liberal,
They're ſet here for examples. Shakespeare . Henry VIII.
Needs muſt the pow'r
That made us, and for us this ample world,
Be infinitely good, and of his good
As liberal and free, as infinite. Milton.
There is no art better than to be liberal of praiſe and
commendation to others, in that wherein a man's ſelf hath
any perfection. - Bacon's Eſſays.
The liberal are ſecure alone ;
For what we frankly give, for ever is our own. Granville.
Several clergymen, otherwiſe little fond of obſcure terms,
are; in their ſermons, very liberal of all thoſe which they
find in eccleſiaſtical writers, as if it were our duty to under-
ſtand them. Swift.
LIBERA'LITY.. n.ſ. [liberalitas, Latin; liberalité, Fr.] Mu-
nificence; bounty; generoſity; generous profuſion.
Why ſhould he deſpair, that knows to court
With words, fair looks, and liberality? Shakeſpeare.
Such moderation with thy bounty join,
That thou may’ſt nothing give that is not thine;
That liberality is but caſt away,
Which makes us borrow what we cannot pay. Denham.
bºx. adv. [from liberal.] Bounteouſly; bountifully;
argely.
If any of you lack wiſdom, let him aſk of God, that
giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. James i. 5.
LIBERTINE. n.ſ. [libertin, French.]
I. One unconfined ; one at liberty.
When he ſpeaks,
The air, a charter'd libertine, is ſtill ;
And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears,
To ſteal his ſweet and honied ſentences. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
2. One who lives without reſtraint or law.
Man, the lawleſs libertine, may rove
Free and unqueſtion'd. Rowe's jane Shore.
Want of power is the only bound that a liberine puts to
his views upon any of the ſex. Clariſſa.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
2. One
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 15</div><p class="Text">L I B
2. One who pays no regard to the precepts of religion,
They ſay this town is full of couzenage,
. As nimble jugglers, that deceive the eye 3
Diſguiſed cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many ſuch like libertines of ſin. - Shakeſpeare,
That word may be applied to ſome few libertine; in the
audience. . - - Collier's Wiew of the Stage.
.TIn law; libertinus, Lat.] A freedman; or rather, the ſon
all. - - - -
** are forbidden to be accuſers on the ſcore of
their ſex, as women; others on the ſcore of their age, as
pupils and infants; others on the ſcore of their conditions, aS
#bºrtines againſt their patrons. - -Ayliff's Parergon.
Alibertise. adj. [libertin, French..] Licentious; irreligious.
There are men that marry not, but chuſe rather a libertine
and impure ſingle life, than to be yoked in marriage. Bacon.
Might not the queen make diligent enquiry, if any perſon
about her ſhould happen to be of libertine principles or mo-
, rals. Swift's Projed for Advancement of Religion.
LiberTiNISM, n.ſ. [from libertine.] Irreligion; licentiouſneſs
of opinions and practice. - . . . . -
That ſpirit of religion and ſeriouſneſs vaniſhed all at once,
and a ſpirit of liberty and libertiniſm, of infidelity and pro-
fameneſs, ſtarted up in the room of it. Atterbury's Sermons.
Li'BERTY. m. ſ. [liberté, French; libertas, Latin.]
1. Freedom, as oppoſed to ſlavery. - - -
My maſter knows of your being here, and hath threatened
to put me into everlaſting liberty, if I tell you of it; for he
he'll turn me away. . . . Shakeſpeare.
*3 liberty! thou goddeſs, heav'nly bright !
Profuſe of bliſs, and pregnant with delight,
Eternal pleaſures in thy preſence reign, Addiſon.
2. Freedom, as oppoſed to neceſſity. -
Liberty is the power in any agent to do, or forbear, any
particular aćtion, according to the determination, or thought
of the mind, whereby either of them is preferred to the
other. - - Locke.
As it is in the motions of the body, ſo it is in the thoughts
of our minds: where any one is ſuch, that we have power
to take it up, or lay it by, according to the preference of the
mind, there we are at liberty. Locke.
2. Privilege; exemption; immunity. .
His majeſty gave not an intire country to any, much leſs
did he grantjura regalia, or any extraordinary liberties. Davies,
4. Relaxation of reſtraint.
.5. Leave; permiſſion. --
I ſhall take the liberty to conſider a third ground, which,
with ſome men, has the ſame authority. Locke.
LIBI'DINous, n.ſ. [libidinoſus, Latin.] Lewd; luſtful.
None revolt from the faith; becauſe they muſt not look upon
a woman to luſt after her, but becauſe they are much more
reſtrained from the perpetration of their luſts. If wanton
glances and libidinous thoughts had been permitted by the goſ-
... pel, they would have apoſtatized nevertheleſs. Bentley.
LIBI'DINously, adv. [from libidinous.] Lewdly; luſtfully.
Li'BRAL. adj. [libralis, Latin.] Of a pound weight. Diff.
LIBRARIAN. n.ſ. (librarius, Latin.]
1. Qne who has the care of a library.
2. One who tranſcribes or copies books.
Charybdis thrice ſwallows, and thrice refunds, the waves:
this muſt be underſtood of regular tides. There are indeed
but two tides in a day, but this is the error of the libra-
rians. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
Lºkaky, n.ſ. [librarie, Fr.] A large collection of books,
publick or private.
Then as they 'gan his library to view,
And antique regiſters for to avife,
There chanced to the prince's hand to riſe
An ancient book, hight Briton's monuments. Fa. Qu.
Make choice of all my library,
And ſo beguile thy ſorrow. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
I have given you the library of a painter, and a catalogue
of ſuch books as he ought to read. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
° L'ºrate. v. a. [litro, Latin.] To poiſe; to balance;
to hold in equipoiſe.
*ATION. n.ſ. [libratio, Latin; libration, French.]
I. The ſtate of being balanced.
. This is what may be ſaid of the balance, and the libra-
tiºn, of the body. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Their pinions ſtill
In looſe librations ſtretch'd, to truſt the void
Trembling refuſe. Thomſon's Spring,
* [In aſtronomy.]
Libration is the balancing motion or trepidation in the fir-
*ment, whereby the declination of the fun, and the lati-
tude of the ſtars, change from time to time. Aſtronomers
likewiſe aſcribe to the moon a libratory motion, or motion of
trºpidation, which they pretend is from eaſt to weſt, and
* nºrth to ſouth, becauſe that, at full moon, they ſome-
* diſcover parts of her diſk which are not diſcovered at
L I C
other times. Theſe kinds are called, the one a ſtratiºn
in longitude, and the other a libration in latitude. Beſides
this, there is a third kind, which they call an apparent libra-
tion, and which conſiſts in this, that when the moon is at
her greateſt elongation from the ſouth, her axis being then
almoſt perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptick, the ſun
muſt enlighten towards the north pole of the moon ſome
parts which he did not before, and that, on the contrary,
ſome parts of thoſe which he enlightened towards the oppo-
ſite pole are obſcured; and this produces the ſame effect which
the libration in latitude does. Dić7. Trev.
Thoſe planets which move upon their axis, do not all
make intire revolutions; for the moon maketh only a kind
of libration, or a reciprocated motion on her own axis. Grew.
Libratory. adj. [from libro, Lat.] Balancing; playing like
, a balance. -
Lice, the plural of louſe. -
Red bliſters riſing on their paps appear,
And flaming carbuncles, and noiſome ſweat,
And clammy dews, that loathſome lice beget;
Till the ſlow creeping evil eats his way. Dryden's Pirg,
Lºckhan.E. n.ſ. [lice and bane.] A plant.
LICENSE. n.ſ. [licentia, Latin; licence, French.]
1. Exorbitant liberty; contempt of legal and neceſſary reſtraint.
Some of the wiſer ſeeing that a popular licence is indeed the
many-headed tyranny, prevailed with the reſt to make Mu-
ſidorus their chief. Sidney.
Taunt my faults
With ſuch full licence, as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
They baul for freedom in their ſenſeleſs moods,
And ſtill revolt when truth would ſet them free;
Zicºnce they mean, when they cry liberty. Milton.
The privilege that ancient poets claim,
Now turn'd to licenſe by too juſt a name. Roſcommon.
Though this be a ſtate of liberty, yet it is not a ſtate of
licence; though man, in that ſtate, have an uncontroulable
liberty to diſpoſe of his perſon or poſſeſſions, yet he has not
liberty to deſtroy himſelf. Locke.
2. A grant of permiſſion.
They ſent ſome to bring them a licence from the ſenate.
- * Judith xi. 14.
Thoſe few abſtraćt names that the ſchools forged, and put
into the mouths of their ſcholars, could never yet get admit-
tange into common uſe, or obtain the licence of publick ap-
probation. - Locke.
We procured a licence of the duke of Parma to enter the
theatre and gallery. Addiſon on Italy.
3. Liberty; permiſſion.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man
to die, before that he which is accuſed have the accuſers
face to face, and have licence to anſwer for himſelf. Acts.
To Li'cense. v. a. ſlicencier, French.]
1. To ſet at liberty. -
He would play well, and willingly, at ſome games of
greateſt attention, which ſhewed, that when he liſted he
could licenſe his thoughts. //otton.
2. To permit by a legal grant.
- Wit's titans brav'd the ſkies,
And the preſs groan'd with licens'd blaſphemies. Pope.
LicensER. m. ſ. [from licenſe..] A granter of permiſſion; com-
monly a tool of power.
Lice NTIATE. m. ſ. [licentiatus, low Latin.]
1. A man who uſes licenſe.
The licentiate; ſomewhat licentiouſly, leaſt they ſhould
prejudice poetical liberty, will pardon themſelves for doubling
or rejećting a letter, if the ſenſe fall aptly. Camden.
2. A degree in Spaniſh univerſities.
A man might, after that time, ſue for the degree of a li-
_centiate or maſter in this faculty. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To Lice'NTIAte. v. a. [licentier, French.] To permit; to
encourage by licenſe.
We may not hazard either the ſtifling of generous inclina-
tions, or the licentiating of anything that is coarſe. L’E/irange.
Lice/NTIous. n.ſ. [licencieux, French; licentioſus, Latin.]
I. Unreſtrained by law or morality.
Later ages pride, like corn-fed ſteed,
Abus'd her plenty, and fat ſwoln encreaſe,
To all licentious iuſt, and gan exceed
The meaſure of her mean, and natural firſt need. Fa. Qu.
How would it touch thee to the quick,
Should'ſt thou but hear I were licentious *
And that this body, conſecrate to thee,
With rufian luſt ſhould be contaminate. Shakeſpeare.
2. Preſumptuous; unconfined.
The Tyber, whoſe licentious waves,
So often overflow'd the neighbouring fields,
Now runs a ſmooth and inoffenſive courſe. Roſcommon.
Lice"Ntiously, adv. [from licentious.] With too much liber-
ty; without juſt reſtraint.
15 K The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 16</div><p class="Text">L I C
L I E
The Hechtiates ſomewhat licentiouſ, leaſt they ſhould pre-
judice poetical liberty, will pardon themſelves for doubling
or rejecting a letter. - Camden's Remains.
Ice'n'rious N Ess. n.ſ.. [from licentious.] Boundleſs liberty ;
iuſt reſtraint.
*:::::::A; ſo fruitful, as it begetteth a thouſand chil-
dren, if the licentiouſneſ; thereof be nºt timely reſtrained. Ral.
This cuſtom has been always looked upon, by the wiſeſt
men, as an effect of licentiouſneſs, and not of liberty. Swift.
During the greateſt licentiouſneſs of the preſs, the character
of the queen was inſulted. Swift.
Lich. n.). [lice, Saxon.]. A dead carcaſe; whence lichwake,
the time or ačt of watching by the dead; lichgate, the gate
through which the dead are carried to the grave; Lichfield,
the field of the dead, a city in Staffordſhire, ſo named from
martyred chriſtians. , Salve magna parens. Lichwałe is ſtill
retained in Scotland in the ſame ſenſe.
Li'chowl. n.ſ. [lich and owl.] A ſort of owl, by the vulgar
ſuppoſed to fortetel death.
To illick. v. a. ſlicean, Saxon; lecken, Dutch.]
1. To paſs over with the tongue.
AEſculapius went about with a dog and a ſhe-goat, both
which he uſed much in his cures; the firſt for licking all ul-
cered wounds, and the goat's milk for the diſeaſes of the
ſtomach and lungs. Temple.
A bear's a ſavage beaſt;
Whelp'd without form, until the dam
Has lick'd it into ſhape and frame. Hudibras, p. i.
He with his tepid rays the roſe renews,
And lick; the drooping leaves, and dries the dews. Dryden.
I have ſeen an antiquary lick an old coin, among other
trials, to diſtinguiſh the age of it by its taſte. Addiſon.
2. To lap; to take in by the tongue.
- At once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The ſweet which is their poiſon. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
3. Tº Lick up. . To devour.
Now ſhall this company lick up all that are round about us,
as the ox licketh up the graſs. Numb, xxii. 4.
When luxury has lick'd up all thy pelf, -
Curs'd by thy neighbours, thy truſtees, thyſelf:
Think how poſterity will treat thy name. Pope's Horace.
Ilick. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A blow ; rough uſage: a low
word.
He turned upon me as round as a chafed boar, and gave
me a lick acroſs the face. Dryden.
LI'ck ERISH.
Lt(ckEROUS.
1. Nice in the choice of food; ſqueamiſh.
Voluptuous men ſacrifice all ſubſtantial ſatisfactions to a
liquoriſh palate. . L'Eſtrange.
2. Eager; greedy.
Then is never tongue-tied, where fit commendation,
whereof womankind is ſo lickeriſh, is offered unto it. Sidney.
Strephon, fond boy, delighted, did not know
That it was love that ſhin'd in ſhining maid;
But lick’rous, poiſon'd, fain to her would go. Sidney.
Certain rare manuſcripts, ſought in the moſt remote parts
by Erpenius, the moſt excellent linguiſt, had been left to his
widow, and were upon ſale to the jeſuits, liquoriſh chapmen
of all ſuch ware. - J/otton.
In vain he profer'd all his goods to ſave
His body, deſtin'd to that living grave;
The liquoriſh hag rejects the pelf with ſcorn,
And nothing but the man would ſerve her turn. Dryden.
In ſome provinces they were ſo liquoriſh after man's fleſh,
that they would fuck the blood as it run from the dying
In all. - Locke,
3. Nice; delicate; tempting the appetite.
Wouldſt thou ſeek again to trap me here
With lickeriſh baits, fit to enſnare a brute? Milton.
LicKERI'sHNESS. m. ſ. [from lickeriſh..] Niceneſs of palate.
LišoR1cf. "...ſ. (Yºkºz; liquoricia, Italian; glycyrrhºza,
Latin.] A root of ſweet taſte.
liquorice hath a papilionaceous flower; the pointal which
ariſes from the empalement becomes a ſhort pod, containing
ſeveral kidney-ſhaped ſeeds; the leaves are placed by parts
jº to the mid-rib, and are terminated by an odd
ope. AMiller.
Liquorice root is long and ſlender, externally of a ãº,
reddiſh brown, but within of a fine yellow, full of juice
void of ſmell, and of a taſte ſweeter than ſugar, it grow.
wild in many parts of France, Italy, Spain, ind Germany.
º roºt is excellent in coughs, and all diſorders of the
angs, The inſpillated juice of this root is brought to us
tom Spain and Holland; from the firſt of which places it
º the name 9f Spaniſh juice. Hill's Materia Medica.
LPCTOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] A beadle that attended the conſuls
to apprehend or puniſh criminals.
... " Saucy lićiors
. Will catch at us like flamº. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra,
}ad. [liccena, a glutton, Saxon.]
Proconſuls to their provinces
Hafting, or on return, in robes of ſtate, -
Lictor; and rods the enſigns of their power. Milton,
Democritus could feed his ſpleen, and ſhake
His fides and ſhoulders till he felt 'em ake;
Though in his country-town no lićiors were,
Nor rods, nor ax, nor tribune. Dryden's juvenal.
LID. ſplib, Saxon; lied, German.] -
1. A cover; any thing that ſhuts down over a veſſel; a lid,
cover, or ſtopple that enters the mouth.
Hope, inſtead of flying off with the reſt, ſtuck ſo cloſe to
the lid of the cup, that it was ſhut down upon her. Addiſon.
2. The membrane that, when we ſleep or wink, is drawn over
the eye. -
b. not for ever with thy veiled lids,
Seek for thy noble father in the duſt. Shakeſp. Hamlet,
Our eyes have lids, our ears ſtill ope we keep. Davies.
The fields fair eyes ſaw her, and ſaw no more,
But ſhut their flow'ry lids for ever night,
And winter ſtrew'd her way. Craſhaw.
That eye dropp'd ſenſe diſtinét and clear,
As any muſe's tongue could ſpeak;
When from its lid a pearly tear
Ran trickling down her beauteous cheek. Prior.
The rod of Hermes
To ſleep could mortal eye-lids fix,
And drive departed ſouls to Styx:
That rod was juſt a type of Sid's,
Which o'er a Britiſh ſenate’s lids
Could ſcatter opium full as well,
And drive as many ſouls to hell. Swift.
Lie. m. ſ. [lie, French.] Any thing impregnated with ſome
other body; as, ſoap or ſalt.
Chamber-lie breads fleas like a loach. Shakeſpeare.
All liquid things concocted by heat become yellow; as,
lye, wort, &amp;c. - Peacham on Drawing.
Lie. m. ſ. [lize, Saxon.] -
1. A criminal falſhood.
My name's Macbeth.
—The devil himſelf could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear.
—No; nor more fearful.
-Thou lieſt, abhorred tyrant; with my ſword
I’ll prove the lie thou ſpeak'ſt. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
A lye is properly an outward ſignification of ſomething con-
trary to, or at leaſt beſide, the inward ſenſe of the mind; ſo
that when one thing is ſignified or expreſſed, and the ſame
thing not meant, or intended, that is properly a lye. South.
Truth is the obječt of our underſtanding, as good is of
our will ; and the underſtanding can no more be delighted
with a lye, than the will can chaſe an apparent evil. Dryden.
When I hear my neighbour ſpeak that which is not true,
and I ſay to him, this is not true, or this is falſe, I only
convey to him the naked idea of his error; this is the pri-
mary idea; but if I ſay it is a lie, the word lie carries alſo a
ſecondary idea; for it implies both the falſhood of the ſpeech,
and my reproach, and cenſure of the ſpeaker. Watts's Logic:.
2. A charge of falſhood.
That lie ſhall lye ſo heavy on my ſword,
That it ſhall render vengeance and revenge;
Till thou the lie giver, and that lie, reſt
In earth as quiet as thy father's ſkull. Shakespeare Rich. IF,
It is a contradićtion to ſuppoſe, that whole nations of men
ſhould unanimouſly give the lie to what, by the moſt invin-
cible evidence, every one of them knew to be true. Loci,
Men will give their own experience the Aye, rather than
admit of any thing diſagreeing with theſe tenets. Locke.
3. A fiction. - -
The cock and fox, the fool and knave imply ;
The truth is moral, though the tale a lic. Dryden.
To LIE. v. m. ſleozan, Saxon; liegen, Dutch.]
1. To utter criminal falſhood.
. I know not where he lodges; and for me to deviſe a lodg-
ing, and ſay, he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in
mine own throat. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
If a ſoul lye unto his neighbour in that which was deliver-
ed him to keep, he ſhall reſtore that which was delivered.
- Levit. vi. 1.
Should I lye againſt my right job xxxiv. 6.
Inform us, will the emp'ror treat
Or do the prints and papers lye P Pope.
1iggen, Dutch.]
1. To reſt horizontally, or with very great inclination againſt
ſomething elſe.
2. To reſt; to lean upon.
Death lies on her like an untimely flow'r;
Upon the ſweeteſt flow'r of all the field. Shakeſpeare.
Lie heavy on him, earth, for he - -
Laid many a heavy load on thee. Epitaph on Vanbrugh.
To LIE. v. m. pret. I lay; I have lain or lien. [liesan, Saxon;
3. Te
t
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

3.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 17</div><p class="Text">L I E
3 +. ſited in the grave. -
"... of the nations lie in glory, every one in his
own houſe. - - Iſa. xiv. 18.
I will lie with my fathers, and thou ſhalt carry me out of
Egypt; and bury me in your burying place. Gen. xlvii. 30.
#. be in a ſtate of decumbiture. -
4. How many good young princes would do ſo; their fathers
in, ſo ſick as yours at this time is. Shakespeare Henry IV.
iſ little daughter lieth at the point of death; I pray thee
toº and lay thy hands on her, that ſhe may *::::::: 23.
the time of ſleep. -
;. To paſs The watchful traveller, - -
That by the moon's miſtaken light did riſe,
jown again, and clos'd his weary eyes. Dryden,
forlorn he muſt, and perſecuted flie; i. -
Climb the ſteep mountain: in the cavern lie. Prior,
6. To be laid up or repoſited. - -
I have ſeen where copperas is made great ºny of
them, divers of which I have yet lying by me. oyle.
7. To remain fixed. - -
The Spaniards have but one temptation to quarrel with us,
the covering of Jamaica, for that has ever lien ºf their
hearts. Temple.
3. T; #. well, ſhalt thou not be accepted and if thou
doeſ not well, fin lieth at the door. Gen. iv. 7.
..To be placed or ſituated.
we have gone through deſerts, where there lay no way.
Wiſd. v. 7.
I fly
To thoſe happy climes that lie,
where day never ſhuts his eye,
Up in the broad fields of the ſky. Milton.
There lies our way, and that our paſſage home. Dryd.
Envy lie; between beings equal in nature, though unequal
in circumſtances. Collier of Envy.
The buſineſs of a tutor, rightly employed, lies out of the
road. Lock, on Education.
What lies beyond our poſitive idea towards infinity, lies in
obſcurity, and has the undeterminate confuſion of a nº.
idea. ocke.
10. To preſs upon.
Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou haſt afflićted me
with all thy waves. Pſal. lxxxviii. 7.
He that commits a ſin ſhall find
The preſſing guilt lie heavy on his mind, -
Though bribes or favour ſi aſſert his cauſe. Creech.
Shew the power of religion, in abating that particular
anguiſh which ſeems to lie ſo heavy on Leonora. Addiſon.
31. To be troubleſome or tedious.
Suppoſe kings, beſides the entertainment of luxury, ſhould
have ſpent their time, at leaſt what lay upon their hands, in
chemiſtry, it cannot be denied but Princes may paſs their
time advantageouſly that way. Temple.
I would recommend the ſtudies of knowledge to the fe-
male world, that they may not be at a loſs how to employ
thoſe hours that lie upon their hands. Addiſon's Guardian.
12. To be judicially fixed.
If he ſhould intend his voyage towards my wife, I would
turn her looſe to him; and what he gets more of her than
ſharp words, let it lie on my head. Shakespeare.
13. To be in any particular ſtate.
If money go before, all ways do lie open. Shakeſpeare.
The highways lie waſte, the wayfaring man ceaſeth. Iſa.
The ſeventh year thou ſhalt let it reſt and lie ſtill. Exod.
Do not think that the knowledge of any particular ſubjećt
cannot be improved, merely becauſe it has lain without im-
provement. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
14. To be in a ſtate of concealment. -
Many things in them lie concealed to us, which they who
were concerned underſtood at firſt ſight. Locke.
15. To be in priſon.
Your impriſonment ſhall not be long;
I will deliver you, or elſe lye for you.
16. To be in a bad ſtate.
Why will you lie pining and pinching yourſelf in ſuch a
lonºſome, ſtarving courſe of life. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
The generality of mankind lie pecking at one another, till
one by one they are all torn to pieces. L’Eſtrange's Fab.
Are the gods to do your drudgery, and you lie bellowing
with your finger in your mouth? L’Eſtrange's Fables.
17. To be in a helpleſs or expoſed ſtate. -
To ſee a hated perſon ſuperior, and to lie under the an-
guiſh of a diſadvantage, is far enough from diverſion. Collier.
* is but a very ſmall comfort, that a plain man, lying
"ºde a ſharp fit of the ſtone for a week, receives from this
fine ſentence. Tillotſon's Sermons.
. As a man ſhould always be upon his guard againſt the
Yºº to which he is moſt expoſed, ſo we ſhould take a
* than ordinary care not to lie at the mercy of the wea-
ºf in our moral conduct, Addison's Fresholder.
Shakeſp. Rich. III.
L I E
The maintenance of the clergy is precarious, and colle&amp;-
ed from a moſt miſerable race of farmers, at whoſe mercy
every miniſter lies to be defrauded. Swift,
18. To conſiſt,
The image of it gives me content already; and I truſt it
will grow to a moſt proſperous perfection,
-It lies much in your holding up; haſte you ſpeedily to
Angelo, Shakeſpeare's Meaſure fºr Meaſure
He that thinks that diverſion may not º º labour,
forgets the early riſing, and hard riding of huntſmen. Locke.
19. To be in the power; to belong to.
He ſhews himſelf very malicious if he knows I deſerve
º and yet goes about to blaſt it, as much as in him
teſ. . Stillinºfficet on Id ".
Do'ſt thou endeavour, as much as in tº. to :
the lives of all men. Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
Mars is the warrior's god; in him it lies -
On whom he favours to confer the prize. Dryden.
20. To be charged in any thing; as, an action lieth againſt
Oile.
21. To coſt; as, it lies me in more money.
22. To Lie at. To importune; to teaze.
23. To LIE by. To reſt; to remain ſtill.
Ev'rything that heard him play,
Ev’n the billows of the ſea,
Hung their heads, and then lay by ;
In ſweet muſick is ſuch art, ,
Killing care, and grief of heart,
Fall aſleep, or hearing die. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
To Lie down. To reſt; to go into a ſtate of repoſé.
The leopard ſhall lie down with the kid, Iſa. Ki. 6.
The needy ſhall lie down in ſafety, Iſa. xiv. 30.
To LIE down. To ſink into the grave.
His bones are full of the ſin of his youth, which ſhall lie
down with him in the duſt. job xx. 11.
26. To Lie in. To be in childbed.
As for all other good women that love to do but little
work, how handſome it is to lie in and ſleep, or to louſe
themſelves in the ſun-ſhine, they that have been but a while
in Ireland can well witneſs, Spenſer on Ireland.
You confine yourſelf moſt unreaſonably. Come; you
muſt go viſit the lady that lies in. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
She had lain in, and her right breaſt had been apoſte-
mated. Wiſeman's Surgery.
The doćtor has pračtiſed both by ſea and land, and there-
fore cures the green ſickneſs and lyings in. Speciator.
When Florimel deſign'd to lie privately in ;
She choſe with ſuch prudence her pangs to conceal,
That her nurſe, nay her midwife, ſcarce heard her once
24.
25.
ſqueal. Prior.
Hyſterical affections are contračted by accidents in lying
in Arbuthnot on Diet.
27. 7, Lie under. To be ſubječt to.
A generous perſon will lie under a great diſadvantage.
." Smalridge's Sermons.
This miſtake never ought to be imputed as a fault to
Dryden, but to thoſe who ſuffered ſo noble a genius to lie
under the neceſſity of it. Pope's Notes on the Iliad.
Europe lay then under a deep lethargy, and was no other-
wiſe to be reſcued but by one that would cry mightily. Atterb.
28. To LIE upon. To become an obligation or duty.
Theſe are not places merely of favour, the charge of ſouls
lies upon them; the greateſt account whereof will be required
at their hands. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
It ſhould lie upon him to make out how matter, by undi-
rečted motion, could at firſt neceſſarily fall, without ever
erring or miſcarrying, into ſuch a curious formation of hu-
man bodies. Beutley's Sermons.
29. To LIE with. To converſe in bed,
Pardon me, Bafanio,
For by this ring ſhe lay with me. Shakespeare,
LIEF. adj. [leop, Saxon; lief, Dutch..] Dear; beloved.
My liefſ lord, ſhe thus beguiled had,
For he was fleſh; all fleſh doth frailty breed.
You, with the reſt,
Cauſeleſs have laid diſgraces on my head;
And with your beſt endeavour have ſtirr'd up -
My lieſ/fliege to be mine enemy. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
LIEF. adv. Willingly.
If I could ſpeak ſo wiſely under an arreſt, I would ſend
for certain of my creditors; and yet to ſay the truth, I had
as lief have the foppery of freedom, as the morality of im-
priſonment. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure,
Liece. adj. [lige, French; ligio, Italian; ligius, low Latin.]
Fa. QR,
1. Bound by ſome feudal tenure; ſubject: whence liegeman for
ſubječt. - -
2. Sovereign. [This fignification ſeems to have accidentally
riſen from the former, the lord of liege men, being by miitake
called liege lord.]
Did not the whole realm acknowledge Henry VIII, of ſa-
mous memory, for their king and lig- lord. sº
Q
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 18</div><p class="Text">L I. F
My lady liege, ſaid he, Dryd
- ſex deſire is ſovereignty. ryden,
Wºº. . º founded on the law of nature, may be
filed natural religion; that is.” ſay, a devotedneſs unto
Č. o. ii., lord, ſo as to act in all things according to his
º l -
will. Grew's Coſmology
. ſ. Sovereign; ſuperior lord.
Liter, ſº me, ; liege 1 but for my tears
I had foreſtall'd this §: º
e other part reſerv’ y content,
Fº my {j liege was in my debt. Shakeſpeare.
You with your beſt endeavour have ſtirred up -
My lieſeſt liege to be mine enemy. Shakeſpeare:
The natives, dubious whom -
They muſt obey, in conſternation wait .
Till rigid conqueſt will pronounce their liege.
Liedeman. n.ſ. [from liege and man.]. A ſubjećt.
This liegeman }. º * F. º
n he felt the folly of his lord, -
A. *. kind, he * himſelf unfold. Fairy Queen:
Sith then the anceſtors of thoſe that now live, yielded º:
ſelves then ſubječts and liegemen, ſhall it not tye º; º
dren to the ſame . 2 Spenſºr on Ireland.
tand, ho who is there -
—#. to this ground, and liegemº tº the Dane. Shakespeare
Li’EGER. n.f. [from liege.] A reſident ambaſſador,
His paſſions and his fears
Lie liegers for you in his breaſt, and there
Negotiate {j º
'EN, the participle of lie. - - -
LI'E One .*. * might lightly have lien with thy wife.
Gen. xxvi. Io.
LIENTE'Rick. adj. [from lientery.] Pertaining to a lientery.
There are many medicinal preparations of iron, but none
equal to the tincture made without acids; eſpecially in ob-
itrućtions, and to ſtrengthen the tone of the parts; as in lien-
terick and other like caſes. Grew's Muſeum.
Li'entery, n.ſ.. [from Atſov, lave, ſmooth, and #1spoy, in-
teſlinum, gut; lienterie, French...] A particular looſeneſs, or
diarrhoea, wherein the food paſſes ſo ſuddenly through the
ſtomach and guts, as to be thrown out by ſtool with little or
no alteration. - Quincy.
Liter. n.ſ.. [from to lie..] One that reſts or lies down; or re-
mains concealed. -
There were liers in ambuſh againſt him behind the city.
joſ. viii. 14.
LIEU. n.ſ. [French.] Place; room; it is only uſed with in :
in lieu, inſtead. -
God, of his great liberality, had determined, in lieu of
man's endeavours, to beſtow the ſame by the rule of that
juſtice which beſt beſeemeth him. Hooker, b. i.
In lieu of ſuch an increaſe of dominion, it is our buſineſs
to extend our trade. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Lieve. adv. [See LIEP.] Willingly. -
Speak the ſpeech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,
trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of
our players do, I had as lieve the town crier had ſpoke my
lines. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Aétion is death to ſome ſort of people, and they would as
lieve hang as work. L’Eſtrange.
LIEUTENANcy, n.ſ. [lieutenance, French; from lieutenant.]
1. The office of a lieutenant,
If ſuch tricks as theſe ſtrip you out of your lieutenancy, it
had been better you had not kiſſed your three fingers ſo
oft. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
2. The body of lieutenants.
The liſt of undiſputed maſters, is hardly ſo long as the
liſt of the lieutenancy of our metropolis. Felton on the Claſſicks.
LIEUTENANT, n.ſ. [lieutenant, French.J
1. A deputy; one who acts by vicarious authority,
Whither away ſo faſt
—No farther than the tower,
To gratulate the gentle princes there,
—We'll enter all together,
And in good time here the lieutenant comes. Shakeſpeare.
I muſt put you in mind of the lords lieutenants, and de-
puty fieutenants, of the counties: their proper uſe is for or-
dering the military affairs, in order to oppoſe an invaſion
from abroad, or a rebellion or ſedition at home. Bacon.
Killing, as it is conſidered in itſelf without all undue cir-
cumſtances, was never prohibited to the lawful magiſtrate,
who is the vicegerent or lieutenant of God, from whom he
derives his power of life and death. Bramhall againſt Hobbes.
Sent by our new lieutenant, who in Rome,
And ſince from me, has heard of your renown:
I come to offer peace. Philips's Briton.
2. In war, one who holds the next rank to a ſuperior of any
denomination; as, a general has his lieutenant generals, a
Solonel his lieutenant colonel, and a captain ſimply his
lieutenant.
It were meet that ſuch captains only were employed as
Shakeſpeare,
Philips.
Denham's Sophy.
have formerly ſerved in that country, and been at leaſt liet.--
tenants there. - - i. Spenſºr on Ireland.
According to military cuſtom the place was good, and the
lieutenant of the colonel's company might well Pretend to the
next vacant captainſhip. - - //otton.
The earl of Eſſex was made lieutenant general of the ar-
my; the moſt popular man of the kingdom, and the darling
of the ſword men. - . Clarendon.
His lieutenant, engaging againſt his poſitive orders, being
beaten by Lyſander, Alcibiades was again baniſhed: Swift.
Cañſt thou ſo many gallant ſoldiers ſee,
And captains and lieutenants ſlight for me. - Gay.
LIEUTENANT ship. n.ſ.. [from lieutenant..] The rank or office
of lieutenant. - - - -
Life. n.ſ. plural lives. [lipian, to live, Saxon.]
1. Union and co-operation of ſoul with body.
On thy life no more.
—My life I never held but as a pawn . .
To wage againſt thy foes ; nor fear to loſe it, -
Thy ſafety being the motive. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
She ſhews a body rather than a life,
A ſtatue than a breather. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra,
Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature
that hath life. Gen. i. 20.
The identity of the ſame man conſiſts in nothing but a
participation of the ſame continued life, by conſtantly fleeting
particles of matter, in ſucceſſion vitally united to the ſame
organized body. Locke.
So peaceful ſhalt thou end thy bliſsful days,
And ſteal thyſelf from life by ſlow decays. Pope,
2. Preſent ſtate.
O life, thou nothing's younger brother!
So like, that we may take the one for t'otherſ
Dream of a ſhadow ! a refle&amp;tion made
From the falſe glories of the gay reflected bow,
Is more a ſolid thing than thou !
Thou weak built iſthmus, that do'ſt proudly riſe
Up betwixt two eternities;
Yet canſt not wave nor wind ſuſtain,
But, broken and o'erwhelm’d, the ocean meets again.
Cowley.
When I conſider lift 'tis all a cheat,
Yet fool'd by hope men favour the deceit,
Live on, and think to-morrow will repay;
To-morrow's falſer than the former day;
Lies more; and when it ſays we ſhall be bleſt º
With ſome new joy, takes off what we poſſeſt.
Strange cozenage none would live paſt years again,
Yet all hope pleaſure in what yet remain;
And from the dregs of life think to receive
What the firſt ſprightly running could not give :
I'm tird of waiting for this chemick gold,
Which fools us young, and beggars us when old. Drydºn,
Howe'er 'tis well that while mankind
Through life's perverſe meanders errs,
He can imagin'd pleaſures find,
To combat againſt real cares. Prior.
3. Enjoyment, or poſſeſſion of terreſtrial exiſtence.
Then avarice 'gan through his veins to inſpire
His greedy flames, and kindle life devouring fire. Fa. Qu.
Their complot is to have my life:
And, if my death might make this iſland happy,
And prove the period of their tyranny, -
I would expend it with all willingneſs. Shakeſpeare.
Nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou liv'ſt
Live well, how ſong or ſhort permit to heav'n. Milton,
Untam'd and fierce the tyger ſtill remains, -
And tires his life with biting on his chains. Prior.
He entreated me not to take his life, but exact a ſum of
In OneV. Notes on the Odyffy.
4. Blood, the ſuppoſed vehicle of life.
His guſhing entrails ſinoak'd upon the ground,
And the warm life came iſſuing through the wound. Pope.
5. Condućt; manner of living with reſpect to virtue or vice.
Henry and Edward, brighteſt ſons of fame, .
And virtuous Alfred, a more ſacred name;
After a life of glorious toils endur’d,
Clos'd their long glories with a figh. Pºpe.
I'll teach my family to lead good lives. Mrs. Barker.
6. Condition; manner of living with reſpect to happineſs and
miſery.
Such was the life the frugal Sabines led;
So Remus and his brother god were bred. Dryden's Wirg.
7. Continuance of our preſent ſtate.
And ſome have not any clear ideas of the greateſt part of
them all their lives. Locke.
The adminiſtration of this bank is for lift, and partly in
the hands of the chief citizens. Addiſon on Italy.
8. The living form; reſemblance exactly copied.
Galen hath explained this point unto the life, Brown.
He
---- -
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 19</div><p class="Text">L I F
I, I F
That is the beſt part of beauty which a pićture cannot ex-
preſs, no, nº the firſt fight of the life. Bacon's Eſſays.
Lºt him viſit eminent perſons of great name abroad, that
he may tell how the life agreeth with the fame. . Bacon.
He that would be a maſter, muſt draw by the life as well
as copy from originals, and join theory and experience toge-
ther. Collier of the Entertainment of Books.
. Exačt reſemblance.
I believe no character of any perſon was ever better drawn
to the life than this. - • 9 Denham.
Rich carvings, portraiture, and imag’ry,
where ev'ry figure to the life expreſs'd -
The Godhead's pow'r, Dryden's Knight's Tale.
He ſaw in order painted on the wall
The wars that fame around the world had blown,
All to the life, and ev'ry leader known. Dryden's AEn.
10. General ſtate of man.
Studious they appear
Of arts that poliſh % inventors rarel
Unmindful of their Maker. . Milton's Par. Loft.
All that cheers or ſoftens life,
The tender ſiſter, daughter, friend, and wife. Pope.
11. Common occurrences; human affairs; the courſe of ".
This I know, not only by reading of books in my ſtudy,
but alſo by experience of life abroad in the world. Aſcham,
Not to know at large of things remote
From uſe, obſcure and ſubtile; but to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
. Is the prime wiſdom. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
12. Living perſon. •
Why ſhould I play the Roman fool, and die -
On my own ſword whilſt I ſee lives the gaſhes
Do better upon them. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
13. Narrative of a life paſt.
- Plutarch, that writes his life,
Tells us, that Cato dearly lov'd his wife. Pope.
14. Spirit; briſkneſs; vivacity; reſolution.
The Helots bent thitherward with a new life of reſolution,
as if their captain had been a root out of which their courage
had ſprung. Sidney.
They have no notion of life and fire in fancy and in words;
and anything that is juſt in grammar and in meaſure is as
good oratory and poetry to them as the beſt. Felton.
Not with half the fire and life,
With which he kiſs'd Amphytrion's wife, Prior,
15. Animated exiſtence; animal being.
- Full nature ſwarms with life. Thomſon.
Li'FebLoop. m. ſ. [life and blood.] The blood neceſſary to life;
the vital blood.
This ſickneſs doth infect
The very lifeblood of our enterpriſe. Shakespeare Henry IV.
How could'ſt thou drain the lifeblood of the child. Shakespeare
They loved with that calm and noble value which dwells
in the heart, with a warmth like that of lifeblood. Spediator,
Money, the lifeblood of the nation,
Corrupts and ſtagnates in the veins,
. Unleſs a proper circulation
Its motion and its heat maintains. Swift.
His forehead ſtruck the ground,
Lifeblood and life ruſh'd mingled through the wound. Dryd.
Lifeeverlast ING. An herb. Ainſworth.
L'Eglying, n.ſ. [life and giving.] Having the power to
give life. - -
His own heat,
Kindled at firſt from heaven's ºwns fire.
- He ſat deviſing deat
To them who liv'd; nor on the virtue thought
Of that liftgiving plant. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft.
lººp. m. ſ. [life and guard.] The guard of a king's
perion.
Littless, adj. [from life.]
J. Dead; deprived of life. -
The other vićtor-flame a moment ſtood,
Then fell, and lifelſ, left th' extinguiſh'd wood. Dryden.
I who make the triumph of to-day,
ay of to-morrow's pomp one part appear,
Ghaſtly with wounds, and lifelºſ, on the bier. Prior.
2. Unanimated ; void of life. -
Was I to have never parted from thy fide
As good have grown there ſtill a lifelſ, rib Mill. P. L.
Thus began
Qutrage from lifeleſ; things. Milton's Paradiſ. Loft.
he power which produces their motions, ſprings from
ſomething without themſelves: if this power were ſuſpended,
they would become a lifeleſs, unačtive heap of matter. Cheyne.
B And empty words ſhe gave, and ſounding ſtrain,
ºf ſenſeleſs, lifeleſ, l idol void and vain. Pope's Dunciad.
3. Without power, force, or ſpirit.
Hopeleſs and helpleſs doth Ægeon wend,
Spenſer.
But to procraſtinate his lifeleſs end. Shakeſpeare.
jºknowing to command, proud to obey
A liftºft king, a royal ſhade I lay. Prior.
Lifel Esly, adv, [ſtom lifelºſ...] Without vigour; frigidly;
jejunely. º -
Li'Fellº.e. m. ſ. [lift and like..] Like a living perſon.
Minerva, lifelike, on embodied air -
Impreſs'd the form of Ipthema the fair. Pope's Odºſy.
Li'FestriNG; n.ſ. [life and ſtring.] Nerve; ſtrings imagined
to convey life.
Theſe lines are the veins, the arteries,
The undecaying lifftrings of thoſe hearts
That ſtill ſhall pant, and ſtill ſhall exerciſe - -
The motion ſpirit and nature both impart. Danieſ, Muſ.
Li'fetime. n.ſ. [life and time.] Continuance or duration of life.
Jordain talked proſe all his life-time, without knowing
what it was. Addiſon on ancient Medal.
Lifewe'arx, adj. [lift and weary.) Wretched; tired of living.
Let me have
A dram of poiſon, ſuch ſoon ſpeeding geer
As will diſperſe itſelf through all the veins,
That the lifeweary taker may fall dead.
To Lift. v. a. [lyffra, Swediſh; loffer, Daniſh.]
1. To raiſe from the ground; to heave; to elevate; to hold on
high.
Shakeſpeare
Filial ingratitude : -
Is it not as this mouth ſhould tear this hand - -
For lifting food to't. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Your gueſts are coming;
Lift up your countenance, as 'twere the d
Of celebration of that nuptial. Shakeſp. Winter Tale.
Propp'd by the ſpring, it lifts aloft the head,
But of a ſickly beauty ſoon to ſhed,
In ſummer living, and in winter dead. Dryden.
2. To bear; to ſupport. Not in uſe.
So down he fell, that th' earth him underneath
Did groan, as feeble ſo great load to lift. Fairy Queen.
3. To rob ; to plunder. 4.
So weary bees in little cells repoſe,
But if night robbers lift the well-ſtor'd hive, -
An humming through their waxen city grows. Dryden,
4. To exalt; to elevate mentally.
My heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord.
Of Orpheus now no more let poets tell,
To bright Caecilia greater pow'r is given,
His numbers rais'd a ſhade from hell,
Hers ſ the ſoul to heav'n. Pope's St. Caecilia.
5. To raiſe in fortune. - - -
The eye of the Lord lifted up his head from miſery. Eccluſ.
6. To raiſe in eſtimation. -
Neither can it be thought, becauſe ſome leſſons are choſen
out of the Apocrypha, that we do offer diſgrace to the word
2 Chron.
of God, or lift up the writings of men above it. Hooker,
7. To exalt in dignity.
See to what a godlike height - -
The Roman virtues lift up mortal man, Addiſon's Cato.
8. To elevate; to ſwell with pride.
Lifted up with pride. - Tim, iii. 6.
Our ſucceſſes have been great, and our hearts have been
too much #. up by them, ſo that we have reaſon to
humble ourſelves. Atterbury's Sermons.
9. Up is ſometimes emphatically added to lift.
He lift up his ſpear againſt eight hundred, whom he ſlew
at one time. 2 Sam. xxiii. 8.
Ariſe, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand. Geneſs.
To LIFt. v. n. To ſtrive to raiſe by ſtrength.
Pinch cattle of paſture while ſummer doth laſt,
And lift at their tailes 'yer a winter be paſt. Taſer's Huff.
The mind, by being engaged in a taſk beyond its ſtrength,
like the body ſtrained by lifting at a weight too heavy, has
often its force broken. Locke.
LIFT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] The aët of lifting; the manner
of lifting.
In the lift of the feet, when a man goeth up the hill, the
weight of the body beareth moſt upon the knees. Bacon.
In races, it is not the large ſtride, or high lift, that makes
the ſpeed. Bacon's Eſſays.
The goat gives the fox a lift, and out he ſprings. L'Ér.
2. [In Scottiſh.j The ſky: for in a ſtarry night they ſay, How
clear the lift is / - -
3. Effect; ſtruggle. Dead lift is an effort to raiſe what with
the whole force cannot be moved; and figuratively any ſtate
of impotence and inability.
Myſelf and Trulla made a ſhift
To help him out at a dead liſt. . .
Mr. Dočtor had puzzled his brains
In making a ballad, but was at a ſtand. - -
For you freely muſt own, you were at a dead liſt. Swift.
4. Lift, in Scotland, denote; a load or ſurcharge of any thing;
as alſo, if one be diſguiſed much with liquor, they ſay, He
has got a great lift. -
5. Lifts of a ſail are ropes to raiſe or lower them at pleaſure.
Li fºr R. m. ſ. [from lift.] One that lifts. . . . . -
Thou, O Lord, art my glory, and the lifter u of mine
head. 'ſel. int, 3.
15 L I Q
Hudibras, p. i.
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 20</div><p class="Text">L I G
L I G
To LIG. v. n. [leggen, Dutch..] To lie.
Thou kenſt the great care
I have of thy health and thy welfare,
Which many wild beaſts liggen in wait,
For to entrap in thy tender ſtate. Spenſer's Paſłorals.
LIGAMENT. m. ſ. ſligamentum, from ligo, Latin; ligament,
French.]
Ligament is a white and ſolid body, ſofter than a cartilage,
but harder than a membrane; they have no conſpicuous ca-
vities, neither have they any ſenſe, leſt they ſhould ſuffer
upon the motion of the joint: their chief uſe is to faſten the
bones, which are articulated together for mofon, left they
ſhould be diſlocated with exerciſe. &amp;ſincy.
... Be all their ligaments at once unbound,
And their disjointed bones to powder ground. Sandys.
The incus ſituate between the two former is one way join-
ed to the malleus, the other end being a proceſs is fixed with
a ligament to the ſtapes. Holder's Elements oſ Speech.
2. [In popular or poetical language.] Anything which connects
the parts of the body.
Though our ligaments betimes grow weak,
We muſt not force them till themſelves they break. Denh.
3. Bond; chain; entanglement.
Men ſometimes, upon the hour of departure, do ſpeak and
reaſon above themſelves; for then the ſoul, beginning to be
freed from the ligaments of the body, reaſons like herſelf, and
diſcourſes in a ſtrain above mortality. Addiſon's Spediator.
LIGAME'Ntal. }*ſ [from ligament.] Compoſing a liga-
LIGAME'NTous. ment.
The urachos or ligamental paſſage is derived from the bot-
tom of the bladder, whereby it diſchargeth the watery and
urinary part of its aliment. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The clavicle is inſerted into the firſt bone of the ſternon,
and bound in by a ſtrong ligamentous membrane. Jºſeman.
Ligation. n.ſ. ſligatio, Latin.]
1. The aët of binding.
2. The ſtate of being bound.
The ſlumber of the body ſeems to be but the waking of
the ſoul: it is the ligation of ſenſe, but the liberty of reaſon.
Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 487.
Li'GATURE. m. ſ. ſligature, French; ligatura, Latin.]
1. Anything bound on ; bandage.
He deludeth us alſo by philters, ligatures, charms, and
many ſuperſtitious ways in the cure of diſeaſes. Brown.
If you ſlit the artery, and thruſt into it a pipe, and caſt a
ſtrait ligature upon that part of the artery; notwithſtanding
the blood hath free paſſage through the pipe, yet will not the
artery beat below the ligature ; but do but take off the liga-
ture it will beat immediately. Ray on Creation.
The many ligatures of our Engliſh dreſs check the circu-
lation of the blood. Spectator, Nº. 576.
I found my arms and legs very ſtrongly faſtened on each ſide
to the ground; I likewiſe felt ſeveral ſlender ligatures acroſs
my body, from my arm-pits to my thighs. Gulliver's Trav.
2. #. .# of binding.
The fatal nooſe performed its office, and with moſt ſtrićt
ligature ſqueezed the blood into his face. Arbuth. j. Bull.
Any ſtoppage of the circulation will produce a dropſy, as
by ſtrong ligature, or compreſion. Arbuthnot on Diet.
3. The ſtate of being bound.
Sand and gravel grounds eaſily admit of heat and moiſture,
for which they are not much the better, becauſe they let it
paſs too ſoon, and contračt no ligature. Martimer's Huſø.
LIGHT. n.ſ. [leope, Saxon.]
1. That quality or ačtion of the medium of fight by which we
ſee.
Light is propagated from luminous bodies in time, and
ſpends about ſeven or eight minutes of an hour in paſſing
from the ſun to the earth. Newton's Opticks.
2. Illumination of mind; inſtrućtion; knowledge.
Of thoſe things which are for direétion of all the parts of
our life needful, and not impoſſible to be diſcerned by the
light of nature itſelf, are there not many which few mens na-
tural capacity hath been able to find out. Hooker, b. i.
Light may be taken from the experiment of the horſe-
tooth ring, how that thoſe things which aſſuage the ſtrife of
the ſpirits, do help diſeaſes contrary to the intention deſired.
Bacon's Natural Hiſłory, Nº. 968.
I will place within them as a guide º
My umpire conſcience, whom if they will hear
Light after light well us’d they ſhall attain,
And to the end perſiſting ſafe arrive. Milton's Par. Lºft.
I opened Arioſto in Italian, and the very firſt two lines
gave me light to all I could deſire. Dryden.
If this internal light, or any propoſition which we take for
inſpired, be conformable to the principles of reaſon, or to
the word of God, which is atteſted revelation, reaſon war-
rants it. Locke.
The ordinary words of language, and our common uſe of
them, would have given us light into the nature of our ideas,
if conſidered with attention. Locke.
The books of Varro concerning navigation are loſt, which
7
no doubt would have given us great light in thoſe mat-
ters. Arbuthnot on Coins.
3. The part of a piéture which is drawn with bright colours,
or in which the light is ſuppoſed to fall."
Never admit two equal lights in the ſame pićture; but the
greater light muſt ſtrike forcibly on thoſe places of the pic-
ture where the principal figures are ; diminiſhing as it comes
nearer the borders. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
4. Reach of knowledge; mental view.
Light, and underſtanding, and wiſdom, like the wiſdom
of the gods, was found in him. Dan. v. 11.
We ſaw as it were thick clouds, which did put us in ſome
hope of land, knowing how that part of the South ſea was
utterly unknown, and might have iſlands or continents that
hitherto were not come to light. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
They have brought to light not a few profitable experi-
ments. Bacon's Natural Hi/?ory.
5. Point of view; ſituation; direction in which the light falls.
Frequent conſideration of a thing wears off the ſtrangeneſs
of it; and ſhews it in its ſeveral lights, and various ways of
appearance, to the view of the mind. South.
It is impoſſible for a man of the greateſt parts to conſider
anything in its whole extent, and in all its variety of lights.
Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 409.
An author who has not learned the art of ranging his
thoughts, and ſetting them in proper lights, will loſe himſelf
in confuſion. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 291.
6. Explanation.
I have endeavoured, throughout this diſcourſe, that every
former part might give ſtrength unto all that follow, and
every latter bring ſome light unto all before. Hooker, b. i.
We ſhould compare places of ſcripture treating of the ſame
Point: thus one part of the ſacred text could not fail to give
light unto another. Locke's Aſſay on St. Paul's Epſiles.
• Anything that gives light; a pharos; a taper.
That light we ſee is burning in my hall;
How far that little candle throws his beams,
So ſhines a good deed in a naughty world. Shakespeare.
Then he called for a light, and ſprang in, and fell down
before Paul. Acts xvi. 29.
. I have ſet thee to be a light of the Gentiles, for ſalva.
tion unto the ends of the earth. 47; xiii. 47.
Let them be for figns,
For ſeaſons, and for days, and circling years;
And let them be for lights, as I ordain
Their office in the firmanent of heav'n,
To give light on the earth. Milton's Par. Loft,
I put as great difference between our new lights and an-
cient truths, as between the ſun and an evanid meteor.
Glanville's Scºp.
Several lights will not be ſeen,
If there be nothing elſe between ;
Men doubt becauſe they ſtand ſo thick i' th' ſky,
If thoſe be ſtars that paint the galaxy. Cowley.
I will make ſome offers at their ſafety, by fixing ſome
marks like lights upon a coaſt, by which their ſhips may
avoid at leaſt known rocks. Temple.
He ſtill muſt mourn
The ſun, and moon, and ev'ry ſtarry light, -
Eclips’d to him, and loſt in everlaſting night. Prior.
LIGHT. adj. [leoht, Saxon.]
1. Not tending to the center with great force; not heavy.
Hot and cold were in one body fixt,
And ſoft with hard, and light with heavy mixt. Dryden.
Theſe weights did not exert their natural gravity till they
were laid in the golden balance, inſomuch that I could not
gueſs which was light or heavy whilſt I held them in my
hand. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 463.
2. Not burdenſome ; eaſy to be worn, or carried, or lifted ;
not Onerous.
Horſe, oxen, plough, tumbrel, cart, waggon, and wain,
The lighter and ſtronger the greater thy gaine. 7 ºffer.
It will be light, that you may bear it
Under a cloke that is of any length. Shakeſpeare.
A king that would not feel his crown too heavy, muſt
wear it every day; but if he think it too light, he knoweth
not of what metal it is made. Bacon's Eſſays.
3. Not afflictive; eaſy to be endured.
Every light and common thing incident into any part of
man's life. - - - Hooker, b. ii.
Light ſuffrings give us leiſure to complain,
We groan, but cannot ſpeak, in greater pain. Dryden.
4. Eaſy to be performed ; not difficult; not valuable.
Forgive
If fištions light I mix with truth divine,
And fill theſe lines with other praiſe than thine. Fair dº.
Well pleas'd were all his friends, the taſk was #.ht
The father, mother, daughter, they invite. Dºan.
5. Eaſy to be acted on by any power.
Apples of a ripe flavour, freſh and fair,
Mellow'd by winter from their cruder juice,
Light of digeſtion now, and fit for uſe. Dryden's juvenal.
6. Not
s
6
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 21</div><p class="Text">L I G
L I G
avily armed. . . . . . . .
6. Nº. º, with a company of light horſemen, lay
cloſe in ambuſh, in a convenient place for that purpoſe. Knol.
7. Adº; hiº. - -
He ſo light was at legerdemain, . -
That what he touch'd came not to light again. Spenſºr.
Aſ hel was as light of foot as a wild roe. 2 Sam. ii. 18.
There Stamford came, for his honour was lame
Of the gout three months together ; -
But it prov'd, when they fought, but a running gout,
For heels were lighter than ever. . Denham.
Youths, a blooming band;
ºft bounding from the earth at once they riſe,
- #. fºr half viewleſs quiver in the ſkies. Pope's Odyſ.
8. Unencumbered; unembarraſſed; clear of impediments.
Unmarried men are beſt maſters, but not beſt ſubjećts;
for they are light to run away. Bacon.
jobt: great.
- sº in the manner of making the following trials
was enough to render ſome of them unſucceſsful. Boyle.
12. Not craſs; not groſs. .
In the wilderneſs there is no bread, nor water, and our
ſoul loatheth this light bread. Num. xxi. 5.
Light fumes are merry: groſſer fumes are ſad,
Both are the reaſonable ſoul run mad. Dryd. Nun's Tale.
11. Eaſy to admit any influence; unſteady ; unſettled; looſe.
Faiſe of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand. Shakeſpeare.
Theſe light vain perſons ſtill are drunk and mad -
with ſurfeitings, and pleaſures of their youth. Davies.
They are light of belief, and great liſteners after news.
Howell.
There is no greater argument of a light and inconſiderate
perſon, than prophanely to ſcoff at religion. Tilletſºn's Serm.
12. Gay ; airy; without dignity or ſolidity; trifling.
Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light. Shakespeare
13. Not chaſte; not regular in condućt. -
Let me not be light,
For a light wife doth make a heavy huſband. Shakeſpeare.
14. [From light, n, ſ] Bright; clear:
As ſoon as the morning was light, the men were ſent
away. Gen. xliv. 3.
The horſes ran up and down with their tails and mains on
a light fire. Knolles.
15. Not dark; tending to whiteneſs.
In painting, the light and a white colour are but one and
the ſame thing: no colour more reſembles the air than white,
and by conſequence no colour which is lighter. Dryden.
Two cylindric bodies with annular ſulci, found with ſharks
teeth, and other ſhells, in a light coloured clay. J/oodward.
LIGHT, adv, [for lightly, by colloquial corruption.] Lightly;
cheaply. -
Shall we ſet light by that cuſtom of reading, from whence
ſo precious a benefit hath grown. Hooker, b. v.
To LIGHT. v. a. [from .# , m. ſ]
1. To kindle; to inflame; to ſet on fire.
Swinging coals about in the wire, throughly lighted .
0\le.
This truth ſhines ſo clear, that to go about to proºf.
were to light a candle to ſeek the ſun. Glanville's Scºp.
The maids, who waited her commands,
Ran in with lighted tapers in their hands.
Be witneſs gods, and ſtrike Jocaſta dead,
If an immodeſt thought, or low deſire,
Inflam'd my breaſt ſince firſt our loves were lighted.
Dryden and Lee's Oedipus.
Abſence might cure it, or a ſecond miſtreſs
Dryden.
Light up another flame, and put out this. Addison's Cato.
* To give light to; to guide by light. -
A beam that falls,
Freſh from the pure glance of thine eye,
Lighting to eternity. . Craſhaw.
Ah hopeleſs, laſting flames like thoſe that burn
To light the dead, and warm th' unfruitful urn. Pope.
3. To illuminate.
. The ſun was ſet, and veſper to ſupply
His abſent beams, had lighted up the ſky. Dryden.
4. Up is emphatically joined to light.
No fun was lighted up the world to view. Dryd. Ovid.
5. [From the adjective..] To lighten ; to eaſe of a burthen.
. . Land ſome of our paſſengers,
T And light this weary veſſel of her load. Fairy Queen.
"Right. v. n. [hiſ, by chance, Dutch.]
1. To happen; to fall upén by chance.
No more ſettled in vºlour than diſpoſed to juſtice, if either
they had lighted on a better friend, or could have learned to
*śiendſhip a child, and nothe the father of virtue. Siamey.
he prince, by chance, did on a lady light,
*Was right fair, and freſh as morning roſe. Fa. Qu.
Shakeſpeare.
*ply, your eye ſhall ſight upon ſome toy
* have deſire to purchaſe.
As in the tides of people once up, there want not ſtirring
down from the chariot to meet him.
3. To fall in any particular direction.
4. To fall; to ſtrike on.
To L1'GHTEN. v. n. [pre, ligt, Saxon.]
1. To flaſh, with thunder,
winds to make them more rough; ſo this people did #
upon two ringleaders. - Bacon's Henry VIIth.
Q. late years, the royal oak did light upon count Rh.
dophil. Howel's Pocal Foreſ.
The way of producing ſuch a change on colours may be
eaſily enough lighted on, by thoſe converſant in the ſolutions
of mercury. - Boyle on Colours.
He ſought by arguments to ſooth her pain;
Nor thoſe avail'd : at length he lights on One,
Before two moons their orb with light adorn,
If heav'n allow me life, I will return. Dryden.
Truth, light upon this way, is of no more avail to usºn.
error; for what is ſo taken up by us, may be falſe as well aS
true; and he has not done his duty, who has thus ſtumbled
upon truth in his way to preferment. Locke.
Whoſoever firſt lit on a parcel of that ſubſtance we call
gold, could not rationally take the bulk and figure to de-
pend on its real eſſence. Locke.
As wily reynard walk'd the ſtreets at night,
On a tragedian's maſk he chanc'd to /ight,
Turning it o'er, he mutter'd with diſdain, -
How vaſt a head is here without a brain. Addison.
A weaker man may ſometimes light on notions which
have eſcaped a wiſer. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. [Aliābran, Saxon.] To deſcend from a horſe or carriage.
When Naaman ſaw him running after him, he lighted
2 Kings v. 21.
I ſaw 'em ſalute on horſeback,
Beheld them when they lighted, how they clung
In their embracement. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when ſhe ſaw Iſaac, ſhe
lighted off the camel. Gen. xxiv. 64.
The god laid down his feeble rays, -
Then lighted from his glittering coach. Swift.
The wounded ſteed curvets; and, rais'd upright,
Lights on his feet before: his hoofs behind
$pring up in air aloft, and laſh the wind. Dryden's Án,
He at his foe with furious rigour finites,
That ſtrongeſt oak might ſeem to overthrow ;
The ſtroke upon his ſhield ſo heavy lights,
That to the ground it doubleth him full low. Fairy 2u.
At an uncertain lot none can find themſelves grieved on
whomſoever it lighteth. #. b. i.
They ſhall hunger no more; neither ſhall the ſun light on
them, nor any heat. Rev. vii. 16.
On me, me only, as the ſource and ſpring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due. Milt. Pa. L.
A curſe lights upon him preſently after; his great army is
utterly ruined, he himſelf ſlain in it, and his head and right
hand cut off, and hung up before Jeruſalem. South's Serm.
5. To ſettle; to reſt.
I plac'd a quire of ſuch enticing birds, .
That ſhe will light to liſten to their lays. Shakeſpeare,
Then as a bee which among weeds doth fall, -
Which ſeem ſweet flow’rs, with luſtre freſh and gay,
She lights on that, and this, and taſteth all, - -
But pleas'd with none, doth riſe and ſoar away. Davir.
Plant trees and ſhrubs near home, for them to pitch on at
their ſwarming, that they may not be in danger of being
loſt for want of a lighting place. AMortimer's Huſbandry;
This dreadful night,
That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
As doth the lion. Shakeſpeare's julius Caeſar,
Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of his contract to night;
It is too raſh, too unadvis'd, too ſudden, -
Too like the light'ning, which doth ceaſe to be
Ere one can ſay it lightens. Shakeſp. Romeo and Juliet.
The lightning that tighteneth out of the one part under hea-
ven, ſheweth unto the other part. Luke xvii. 24.
2. To ſhine like lightning.
Yet looks he like a king: behold his eye,
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth ~ : º
Controlling majeſty. - Shakeſp. Richard II.
3. To fall or light. [from light.]
O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us, as our truſt is in
thee. Common Prayer.
To Li'GHTEN. v. a. [from light.]
1. To illuminate; to enlighten.
Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
A precious ring, that ſightens all the hole. Shakeſpeare.
O light, which mak’it the light which makes the day,
Which ſett'ſt the eye without, and mind within ;
- Lightºn my ſpirit with one clear heav'nly ray,
which now to view itſelf doth firſt begin. Davies.
A key of fire ran all along the ſhore, -
And lighten’d all the river with a blaze, Pyºn.
- - . Nature
A ſº *ſ
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 22</div><p class="Text">L I G
L I G
º
:
- Nature from the ſtorm
Shines out afreſh; and through the lighten’d air
A higher luſtre, and a clearer calm,
Diffuſive tremble. Thomſon's Summer.
2. To exonerate; to unload.
The mariners were afraid, and caſt forth the wares that
were in the ſhip into the ſea, to lighten it of them. Jon. i. 7.
3. To make leſs heavy:
Long ſince with woe
Nearer acquainted, now I feel by proof,
That fellowſhip in pain divides not ſmart,
Nor lightens aught each man's peculiar load. Parad. Reg.
Strive
In offices of love how we may lighten
Each other's burden.
4. To exhilarate; to cheer.
A truſty villain, very oft,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humour with his merry jeſts. Shakeſpeare.
The audience are grown weary of continued melancholy
ſcenes; and few tragedies ſhall ſucceed in this age, if they
are not lightened with a courſe of mirth. Dryd. Span. Friar.
Li'GHTER. n.ſ.. [from light, to make light.] A heavy boat into
which ſhips are lightened or unloaded.
They have cock boats for paſſengers, and lighters for bur-
then. Carew's Survey of Cornwall,
He climb'd a ſtranded lighter's height,
Shot to the black abyſs, and plung’d downright. Pope.
Iºwas. n: / [lighter and man.] One who manages a
19.hter.
*... much ſhipping is employed, whatever becomes of
the poor merchant, multitudes of people will be certain
gainers; as ſhipwrights, butchers, carmen, and lightermen.
Child's Diſcourſe on Trade.
LIGHTF1'NGERED. adj. [light and finger.] Nimble at con-
veyance; thieviſh.
Li'ghtfoot. adj. [light and foot.J Nimble in running or
dancing; active.
And eke the lightfoot maids that keep the deer. Spenſºr.
Him ſo far had born his lightfoot ſteed,
Pricked with wrath and fiery fierce diſdain,
That him to follow was but fruitleſs pain. Fairy Queen.
t And all the troop of lightfoot Naiades
Flock all about to ſee her lovely face. Spenſer's Fa, Qu.
Milt. Pa. Lº/?.
Lightfo'ot. n.ſ. Veniſon. A cant word.
IIGH THE'ADED. ad. [light and head.]
1. Unſteady; looſe; thoughtleſs; weak.
The Engliſh liturgy, how piouſly and wiſely ſoever framed,
had found great §
upon lightheaded, weak men, yet learned men excepted
againſt ſome particulars. Clarendon.
2. Delirious ; diſordered in the mind by diſeaſe.
Lighth E'ADEDNEss. m. ſ. Deliriouſneſs ; diſorder of the
mind. *
LIGHTHE'ARTED. adj, ſlight and heart.] Gay; merry; airy;
cheerful.
LIGHTHo'Use. n.ſ. ſlight and houſe..] An high building, at
the top of which lights are hung to guide ſhips at ſea.
He charged himſelf with the riſque of ſuch veſſels as car-
ried corn in winter; and built a pharos or lighthouſe. Arbuth.
Build two poles to the meridian, with immenſe lighthouſes
on the top of them. Arbuthnot and Pope.
LightLE'GGED. adj. [light and leg.] Nimble; ſwift.
Lightlegged Pas has got the middle ſpace. Sidney,
Li'GHTLess. adj. [from light.J Wanting light; dark.
Li'GHTLY. adv. [from light.]
1. Without weight.
This grave partakes the fleſhly birth,
Which cover lightly, gentle earth.
2. Without deep impreſſion.
The ſoft ideas of the cheerful note,
Lightly receiv'd, were eaſily forgot. Prior.
3. Eaſily; readily; without difficulty; of courſe.
If they write or ſpeak publickly but five words, one of
them is lightly about the dangerous eſtate of the church of
England in reſpect of abuſed ceremonies. Hooker, b. iv.
Believ’t not lightly that your ſon
Will not exceed the common, or be caught
With cautelous baits and pračtice. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Short Summer lightly has a forward ſpring. Shakeſp.
The traitor in faction lightly goeth away with it. Bacon.
4. Without reaſon. -
Flatter not the rich; neither do thou willingly or lightly
appear before great perſonages. Taylor's Guide.
Let every man that hath a calling be diligent in purſu-
ance of its employment, ſo as not lightly, or without reaſon-
able occaſion, to neglect it. Taylor's Holy Living.
5. Without afflićtion; cheerfully.
Bid that welcome
Which comes to puniſh us, and we puniſh it,
. Seeming to bear it lightly. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Benj. johnſºn.
J.
ion; the ceremonies had wrought only
6. Not chaſtly. * * * ,
If I were lightly diſpoſed, I could ſtill perhaps have offers,
that ſome, who hold their heads higher, would be glad to
accept. Swift's Story of an injurra Lady.
7. Nimbly; with agility; not heavily or tardily.
Nº. I ſtood on a wide river's bank;
When on a ſudden, Toriſmond appear'd,
Gave me his hand, and led me lightly o'er;
Leaping and bounding on the billows heads,
Till ſafely we had reach'd the farther ſhore. Dryden.
8. Gaily; airily; with levity; without heed or care.
Lic HTM1'NDED. adj. [light and mind.] Unſettled; unſteady.
He that is haſty to give credit is lightminded. Eccl. xix. 4.
Li'GHTNEss. n.ſ. [from light.]
1. Levity; want of weight; abſence of weight.
Some are for maſts of ſhips, as fir and pirſe, becauſe of
their length, ſtraightneſs, and lightnſ. Bacon's Nat. Iłż.
Suppoſe many degrees of littleneſs and lightneſ; in particles,
ſo as many might float in the air a good while before they
fell. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. Inconſtancy; unſteadineſs.
For, unto knight there is no greater ſhame,
Than lightneſ; and inconſtancy in love. Fairy Queen.
Of two things they muſt chuſe one; namely, whether
they would, to their endleſs diſgrace, with ridiculous lightneſs,
diſmiſs him, whoſe reſtitution they had in ſo importunate
manner deſired, or elſe condeſcend unto that demand. Hooker.
As I blow this feather from my face,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greateſt guſt;
Such is the lightneſs of you common men. Shakespeare eare.
3. Unchaſtity; want of condućt in women.
Is it the diſdain of my eſtate, or the opinion of my light-
neſ, that have emboldened ſuch baſe fancies towards me
Sidney, b. ii.
Can it be,
That modeſty may more betray our ſenſe,
Than woman's lightneſs. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
4. Agility; nimbleneſs. -
Li'GHTNING. m. ſ. [from lighten, lightening, lightning.]
1. The flaſh that attends thunder.
Lightning is a great flame, very bright, extending every
way to a great diſtance, ſuddenly darting upwards, and there
ending, ſo that it is only momentaneous. Muſchenbroek.
Senſe thinks the lightning born before the thunder;
What tells us then they both together are 2 Davies.
Salmoneus, ſuff'ring cruel pains I found
For emulating Jove ; the rattling ſound
Of mimick thunder, and the glitt'ring blaze
Of pointed lightnings, and their forky rays. Dryd. Æn,
No warning of the approach of flame,
Swiftly, like ſudden death, it came;
Like travellers by lightning kill'd,
I burnt the moment I beheld. Granville.
2. Mitigation; abatement.
#. oft when men are at the point of death,
Have they been merry which their keepers call
A lightning before death. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
We were once in hopes of his recovery, upon a kind meſ-
ſage from the widow; but this only proved a lightning before
death. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 517.
Lights. n.ſ.. [ſuppoſed to be called ſo from their lightneſs in
proportion to their bulk.] The lungs; the organs of breath-
IIlg.
*rhe complaint was chiefly from the lights, a part as of no
quick ſenſe, ſo no ſeat for any ſharp diſeaſe. Hayward.
Li'GHTsom E. adj. [from light.] -
1. Luminous; not dark; not obſcure ; not opake.
Neither the ſun, nor any thing ſenſible is that light itſelf,
which is the cauſe that things are lightſome, though it make
itſelf, and all things elſe, viſible; but a body moſt enlighten-
ed, by whom the neighbouring region, which the Greeks
call aether, the place of the ſuppoſed element of fire, is effect-
ed and qualified. Raleigh.
White walls make rooms more lightſome than black. Bac.
Equal poſture, and quick ſpirits, are required to make co-
lours lightſome. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
The Sun
His courſe exalted through the Ram had run
Through Taurus, and the lightſome realms of love. Dryd.
2. Gay; airy; having the power to exhilarate.
It ſuiteth ſo fitly with that lightſºme affection of joy,
wherein God delighteth when his faints praiſe him. Hooker.
The lightſome paſſion of joy was not that which now often
uſurps the name; that trivial, vaniſhing, ſuperficial thing,
that only gilds the apprehenſion, and plays upon the ſurface
of the ſoul. - South's Sermons.
LI'GHTsome Ness. n. / [from lightſome.]
1. Luminouſneſs; not opacity; not obſcurity; not darkſome-
neſs,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 23</div><p class="Text">L I K
L I K
T.
-
It is to our atmoſphere that the variety of colours, which
are painted on the ſkies, the lightſomeneſ; of our air, and the
twilight, are owing. Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
2. Cheerfulneſs; merriment; º: -
fijioes. n.ſ. [lignum aloes, Latin.J. Aloes wood.
The vallies ſpread forth as gardens by the river's ſide, as
the trees of lignales which the Lord hath planted, and as
cedar trees beſide the water. . - Num. xxiv. 6.
Lºgous, adj. [ligneus, Latin ; ligneux, French..] Made of
wood; wooden; reſembling wood. .
It ſhould be tried with ſhoots of vines, and roots of red
roſes; for it may be they, being of a more, ligneous nature,
will incorporate with the tree itſelf. Bacon's Nat. Hiſ'.
Ten thouſand ſeeds of the plant harts-tongue, hardly
make the bulk of a pepper-corn: now the covers, and the
true body of each ſeed, the parenchymous and ligneous part
ºf both, and the fibres of thoſe parts, multiplied one by an-
other, afford a hundred thouſand millions of formed atoms,
but how many more we cannot define. Grew's Coſmol.
IIGNUMVITAF, n.ſ. (Lat..] Guiacum; a very hard wood.
it hath pinnated leaves; the flower conſiſts of ſeveral pe-
tals, which are placed orbicularly, and expand in form of
a roſe; the pointal of the flower, which ariſes from the cen-
ter of the calyx, becomes a fleſhy, roundiſh; ſtony fruit, or
the ſtony ſeeds are ſurrounded with a thin pulp. Miller.
Lºcure. n.ſ. A precious ſtone.
The third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyſt. Exod.
LIKE, adj. [lic, Saxon; liik, Dutch.]
1. Reſembling; having reſemblance. -
Whom art thou like in thy greatneſs. Ezek. xxxi. 2.
His ſon, or one of his illuſtrious name,
How like the former, and almoſt the ſame. Dryd. Æn.
As the earth was deſigned for the being of men, why
might not all other planets be created for the like uſes, each
for their own inhabitants. Bentley's Sermons.
This plan, as laid down by him, looks liker an univerſal
art than a diſtinét logick. Baker's Reflect. on Learning.
2. Equal; of the ſame quantity.
More clergymen were impoveriſhcd by the late war, than
ever in the like ſpace before. Sprat's Sermons.
3. [For likely.) Probable; credible.
The trials were made, and it is like that the experiment
would have been effectual. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. Likely; in a ſtate that gives probable expectations. This
1. is, I think, an improper, though frequent, uſe.
If the duke continues theſe favours towards you, you are
like to be much advanced. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
He is like to die for hunger, for there is no more bread.
er. xxxviii. 9.
The yearly value thereof is already increaſed double of that
it was within theſe few years, and is like ë. to riſe higher,
till it amount to the price of our land in England. Davies.
Hopton reſolved to viſit Waller's quarters, that he might
judge whether he were like to purſue his purpoſe. Clarendon.
£i. were not eaſy to be governed, nor like to conform
themſelves to ſtrict rules. Clarendon, b. viii.
If his rules of reaſon be not better ſuited to the Mind than
his rules for health are fitted to our bodies, he is not like to .
be much followed. Baker's Refteåions on Learning.
Like. n.ſ. [This ſubſtantive is ſeldom more than the adjec-
tive uſed elliptically; the like for the like thing, or life
perſon.] -
1. Some perſon or thing reſembling another.
He was a man, take him for all in all,
I ſhall not look upon his like again. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Every like is not the ſame, O Caeſar. Shakespeare jul. Caeſar.
Though there have been greater fleets for number, yet for
the bulk of the ſhips never the like. Bacon's War with Spain.
Albeit an eagle did bear away a lamb in her talons, yet a
raven endeavouring to do the like was held entangled. Hayw.
One offers, and in offering makes a ſtay;
Another forward ſets, and doth no more;
A third the like. Daniel’s Civil War.
His deſire
By converſation with his like to help,
Or ſolace his defects. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii.
Two likes may be miſtaken. L’Eſtrange's Fab.
She'd ſtudy to reform the men,
Or add ſome grains of folly more,
To women than they had before;
This might their mutual fancy ſtrike,
Since ev'ry being loves its like. Swift.
2. Near approach; a ſtate like to another ſtate. A ſenſe com-
mon, but not juſt. -
Report being carried ſecretly from one to another in m
ſhip, had like to have been my utter overthrow. Rºž
Ike. adv. -
1. In the ſame manner ; in the ſame manner as.
The joyous nymphs, and lightfoot fairies,
Which thither came to hear their muſick ſweet;
Nºw hearing them ſo heavily lament,
Like heavily lamenting from them went. Spenſºr.
Like as a father pitieth his children, ſo the Lord pitieth
them that fear him. Pſal. ciii. 13.
Are we proud and paſſionate, malicious and revengeful?
Is this to be like-minded with Chriſt, who was meek and
lowly Tillotſºn's Sermons.
What will be my confuſion, when he ſees me
Neglected, and forſåken like himſelf. Philips's Diff. Mºther.
They roar'd like lions caught in toils, and rag'd :
The man knew what they were, who heretofore
Had ſeen the like lie murther'd on the ſhore.
2. In ſuch a manner as befits.
Be ſtrong, and quit yourſelves like men. 1 Sam. iv. 9.
3. Likely; probably. A popular uſe hot analogical.
I like the work well, ere it be demanded,
As like enough it will, I'd have it copied.
To Like. v. a. [lican, Saxon; liken, Dutch.]
1. To chuſe with ſome degree of preference.
As nothing can be ſo reaſonably ſpoken as to content all
men, ſo this ſpeech was not of them all liked. Knolls.
He gave ſuch an account as made it appear that he ſº
the deſign. Clarendon, b. viii.
We like our preſent circumſtances well, and dream of no
change. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. To approve ; to view with approbation, not fondneſs.
He ſtayed behind to bring the ſhepherds with whom he
meant to confer to breed the better Zelmane's liking, which
he only regarded. Sidney, b. i.
Though they did not like the evil he did, yet they lifra
him that did the evil. Sidney, b. ii.
He grew content to mark their ſpeeches, then to marvel at
ſuch wit in ſhepherds, after to like their company. Sidney.
He proceeded from looking to liking, and from liking to
loving. Sidney.
Jłaller.
Shakeſpeare.
For ſeveral virtues
I have lik'd ſeveral women; never any
With ſo full ſoul. Shakeſpeare's Tºpºff.
I look'd upon her with a ſoldier's eye;
That liked, but had a rougher taſk in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of love. Shakeſpeare.
Scarce any man ºft to a liking of fin in others, but by
firſt practiſing it himſelf. South's Sermons,
Beaſts can like, but not diſtinguiſh too,
Nor their own liking by refle&amp;tion know.
3. To pleaſe; to be agreeable to. Now diſuſed.
Well hoped he, ere long that hardy gueſt,
If ever covetous hand, or luſtful eye,
Or lips he laid on thing that lik’d him beſt,
Should be his prey. Spºſer's Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Say, my fair brother now, if this device -
Do like you, or may you to like entice. Hubberd's Tale,
This deſire being recommended to her majeſty, it liked
her to include the ſame within one entire leaſe. Bacar.
He ſhall dwell where it liketh him beſt. Deut. xxiii. 16.
There let them learn, as likes them, to deſpiſe
God and Meſſiah. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi.
To LIKE. v. n.
1. To be pleaſed with, with of before the thing approved.
Obſolete.
Of any thing more than of God they could not by any
means like, as long as whatſoever they knew beſides God,
they apprehended it not in itſelf without dependancy upon
God. Hooker, b. i.
The young ſoldiers did with ſuch cheerfulneſs like #. this
reſolution, that they thought two days a long delay. Knolles.
It is true, there are limits to be ſet betwixt the boldneſs
and raſhneſs of a poet; but he muſt underſtand thoſe limits
who pretends to judge, as well as he who undertakes to
write: and he who has no liking to the whole, ought in rea-
ſon to be excluded from cenſuring of the parts. Dryden.
2. To chuſe; to liſt; to be pleaſed.
The man likes not to take his brother's wife, Deut. xxv. 7.
He that has the priſon doors ſet open is perfeótly at liber-
ty, becauſe he may either go or ſtay, as he beſt likes. Locke.
LI'KELIHooD. from likel
LI'KELINEss. }n.ſ. [from likely.]
1. Appearance; ſhew. Obſolete.
What of his heart perceive you in his face,
By any likelihood he ſhow'd to-day
—That with no man here he is offended.
2. Reſemblance; likeneſs. Obſolete.
The mayor and all his brethren in beſt fort,
Like to the ſenators of antique Rome,
Go forth and fetch their conqu'ring Caeſar in.
As by a low, but loving likelihood, .
Were now the general of our gracious empreſs,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
How many would the peaceful city quit,
To welcome him. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
There is no likelihood between pure light and black dark-
neſs, or between righteouſneſs and reprobation. Raleigh.
3. Probability; veriſimilitude; appearance of truth. '
As it noteth one ſuch to have been in that age, ſo had
15 M there
Dryden.
Shakespeare eare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 24</div><p class="Text">L I K
L I M
the e been moe, it would by likelihood as well have noted
many. - Hooker, b. ii.
Many of likelihood informed me of this before, which hung
ſo tottering in the balance, that I could neither believe nor
miſdoubt. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
It never yet did hurt,
To lay down likelihood, and forms of hope. Shakeſpeare,
As there is no likelihood that the place could be ſo altered,
ſo is there no probability that theſe rivers were turned out of
their courſes. Raleigh's Hiſt. of the I/orld.
Where things are leaſt to be put to the venture, as the
eternal intereſts of the other world ought to be; there every,
even the leaſt, probability, or likelihood of danger, ſhould be
provided againſt. South's Sermons.
There are predićtions of our Saviour recorded by the Evan-
geliſts, which were not completed till after their deaths, and
had no likelihood of being ſo when they were pronounced by
our bleſſed Saviour. Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
Thus, in all likelihood, would it be with a libertine, who
ſhould have a viſit from the other world: the firſt horror it
raiſed would go off, as new diverſions come on. Atterbury.
LI'KELY. adj. [from like. J -
1. Such as may be liked; ſuch as may pleaſe. Obſolete.
Theſe young companions make themſelves believe they
love at the firſt looking of a likely beauty. Sidney.
Sir John, they are your likelift men; I would have you
ſerved with the beſt. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
2. Probable; ſuch as may in reaſon be thought or believed;
ſuch as may be thought more reaſonably than the contrary.
Li'kely. adv. Probably; as may reaſonably be thought.
While man was innocent, he was likely ignorant of no-
thing that imported him to know. Glanville's Scºp.
To Li'KEN. v. a. [from like.] To repreſent as having reſem-
blance; to compare.
The prince broke your head for likening him to a ſinging
man of Windſor. Shakespeare . Henry IV. p. ii.
For who, though with the tongue
Of angels, can relate or to what things
Liken on earth conſpicuous, that may lift
Human imagination to ſuch heighth
Of God-like power Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi.
Li'KENEss. n. ſ. [from like.]
1. Reſemblance; ſimilitude.
They all do live, and moved are
To multiply the likeneſ of their kind. Sponſºr.
A tranſlator is to make his author appear as charming as
he can, provided he maintains his character, and makes him
not unlike himſelf. Tranſlation is a kind of drawing after
the life, where there is a double ſort of likenſ, a good one
and a bad one. Dryden.
In ſuch caſes there will be found a better likeneſ, and a
worſe; and the better is conſtantly to be choſen. Dryden.
2. Form ; appearance.
Never came trouble to my houſe in the likeneſ of your
grace; for trouble being gone, comfort ſhould remain. Shakespeare
It is ſafer to ſtand upon our guard againſt an enemy in the
likeneſ of a friend, than to embrace any man for a friend in
the likeneſ of an enemy. L’Eſtrange.
3. One who reſembles another.
Poor Cupid, ſobbing, ſcarce could ſpeak,
Indeed mamma, I did not know ye:
Alas! how eaſy my miſtake
I took you for your likeneſs Cloe. Prior.
Li'KEWISE. adv. [like and wiſe.] In like manner; alſo; more-
Over ; too.
Jeſus ſaid unto them, I alſo will aſk you one thing, which
if ye tell me, I likewiſe will tell you by what authority I
do theſe things.
So was it in the decay of the Roman empire, and likewiſe
in the empire of Almaigne, after Charles the Great, every
bird taking a feather. Bacon's Eſſays.
Spirit of vitriol poured to pure unmixed ſerum, coagulates
it as if it had been boiled. Spirit of ſea-ſalt makes a perfect
coagulation of the ſerum likewiſe, but with ſome different
phaenomena. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Li'kiNG. adj. [Perhaps becauſe plumpneſs is agreeable to the
fight.] Plump; in a ſtate of plumpneſs.
I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat
and your drink; for why ſhould he ſee your faces worſe
liking, than the children which are of your ſort. Dan, i. 1 o.
LI'KING. m. ſ. [from like.]
1. Good ſtate of body; plumpneſs.
I'll repent, and that ſuddenly, while I am in ſome liking;
I ſhall be out of heart ſhortly, and then I ſhall have no
ſtrength to repent. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Their young ones are in good liking; they grow up with
COTIl. job xxxix. 4.
Cappadocian ſlaves were famous for their luſtineſs; and,
being in good liking, were ſet on a ſtall when expoſed to ſale,
to ſhºw the good habit of their body. Dryden's Notes to Perſ.
2. State of trial.
Aſat. xxi. 24. .
The royal ſoul, that, like the lab’ring moon,
By charms of art was hurried down;
Forc'd with regret to leave her native ſphere,
Came but awhile on liking here. Dryden.
3. Inclination.
Why do you longer feed on loathed light,
Or liking find to gaze on earthly mold.
Li'l Ach. n.ſ. [lilac, lilis, French.] A tree.
The white thorn is in leaf, and the lilach tree. Bacon.
Li'lied. adj. [from lily.] Embelliſhed with lilies.
Nymphs and ſhepherds dance no more
By ſandy Ladon's lillied banks. A/i/ºon.
LI'LY. m. ſ. [lilium, Latin.] -
The liy hath a bulbous root, conſiſting of ſeveral fleſhy
ſcales adhering to an axis; the ſtalk is greatly furniſhed with
leaves; the flower is compoſed of ſix leaves, and is ſhaped
Fairy Queen.
ſomewhat like a bell: in ſome ſpecies the petals are greatly.
reflexed, but in others but little ; from the centre of the
flower riſes the pointal, which becomes an oblong fruit, com-
monly triangular, divided into three cells, and full of com-
preſſed ſeeds, which are bordered, lying upon each other in
a double row. There are thirty-two ſpecies of this plant,
including white lilies, orange lilies, red lilies, and martagons
of various ſorts. - - AMiller.
Oh! had the monſter ſeen thoſe lily hands
Tremble, like aſpen leaves, upon a lute,
And make the filken ſtrings delight to kiſs them;
He would not then have touch'd them for his life. Shakespeare
Shipwreck’d upon a kingdom where no pity!
No friends ! no hope no kindred weep for me !
Almoſt no grave allow'd me! like the lily,
That once was miſtreſs of the field, and flouriſh'd,
I'll hang my head, and periſh. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Arnus, a river of Italy, is drawn like an old man,
by his right ſide a lion, holding forth in his right paw a red
lily, or flower-de-luce. Peacham on Drawing.
Take but the humbleſt lily of the field ;
And if our pride will to our reaſon yield;
It muſt by ſure compariſon be ſhown,
That on the regal ſeat great David's ſon,
Array'd in all his robes, and types of pow'r,
Shines with leſs glory than that ſimple flow’r. Prior.
Go, gentle gales, and bear my fighs along:
For her the feather'd quires forget their ſong,
For her the lilies hang their heads, and die. Pºpe.
LILY-DAF Fodil. n.ſ. [liſio-narciſſus.] A forcign flower.
LILY-HYAcIN TH. n.ſ. [lilio-hyacinthus.]
It hath a lily flower, compoſed of ſix leaves, ſhaped like the
flower of hyacinth, whoſe pointal becomes a globular pointed
fruit, three-cornered, and divided into three cells, in which
are contained many ſeeds, almoſt round : the roots are ſcaly,
and ſhaped like thoſe of the lily. There are three ſpecies of
this plant; one with a blue flower, another white, and a
third red. Miller.
LILYº the Walley, or May lily. m. ſ. [lilium convallium.]
he flower conſiſts of one leaf, is ſhaped like a bell, and
divided at the top into ſix ſegments; the ovary becomes a
ſoft globular fruit, containing ſeveral round ſeeds. It is very
common in ſhady woods. Miller.
Iily of the valley has a ſtrong root that runs into the
ground. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Lily li’v ERED. adj. [liy and liver.] Whitelivered; cowardly.
A knave, a raſcal, an eater of broken meats; a baſe,
proud, ſhallow, beggarly, three-ſuited, hundred pound, fil-
thy worſted-ſtocking knave; a lilylivered, action-taking
knave. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Li'MAt URE. m. ſ. [limatura, Lat.] Filings of any metal; the
particles rubbed off by a file.
LIM B. m. ſ. [lim, Saxon and Scottiſh ; lem, Daniſh.]
1. A member; a jointed or articulated part of animals.
A ſecond Hector, for his grim aſpect,
And large proportion of his ſtrong knit limbs. Shaft.
O ! that I had her here, to tear her limb meal. Sha&amp;ſp.
Now am I come each limb to ſurvey,
If thy appearance anſwer loud report. Milton's Agoniſłes.
2. [Limbe, French ; limbus, Latin.] An edge; a border. A
philoſophical word.
By farther moving the priſms about, the colours again
emerged out of the whiteneſs, the violet and the blue at its
inward limb, and at its outward limb the red and yellow.
Newton's Op:...
To LIMB. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſupply with limbs.
As they pleaſe,
They limb themſelves, and colour, ſhape, and ſize
Aſſume, as likes them beft, condenſe, or rare. Milton.
2. To tear aſunder; to diſmember. - -
LI'MBECK. m. ſ. [corrupted by popular pronunciation from
alembick.] A ſtill. -
Her cheeks, on which this flreaming nećtar fell,
Still'd through the limbeck of her diamond eyes. Faiſax.
- * . All
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 25</div><p class="Text">L I. M.
-ºr--T
All others from all things draw all that's good,
Life, ſoul, form, ſpirit, where they being have ;
I, by love's limbeck. . . . Donne.
Fires of Spain, and the line,
Whoſe countries limbecks to our bodies be,
Canſt thou for gain bear 2 - Donne.
Call up, unbound,
In various ſhapes, old Proteus from the ſea, -
Drain'd through a limbeck to his naked form. . . Milton:
The earth, by ſecret conveyances, lets in the ſea, and
ſends it back freſh, her bowels ſerving for a limbeck. Howell.
He firſt ſurvey'd the charge with careful eyes,
Yet judg’d, like vapours that from limbeck, riſe,
It would in richer ſhowers deſcend again. Dryden.
The warm limbeck draws ---
Salubrious waters from the nocent brood. Philips.
Liºned. adj. [from limb.] Formed with regard to limbs.
A ſteer of five years age, large limb'd, and fed, -
To Jove's high altars Agamemnon led. ..., Pope's Iliad.
LIMBER. adj. Flexible; eaſily bent; pliant; lithe.
You put me off with limber vows. Shakeſpeare.
I wonder how, among theſe jealouſies of court and ſtate,
Edward Atheling could ſubſiſt, being then the apparent and
indubitate heir of the Saxon line: but he had tried, and found
him a prince of limber virtues; ſo as though he might have
ſome place in his caution, yet he reckoned him beneºh his
fear. //otton.
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
Inſea, or worm: thoſe wav'd their limber fans
For wings; and ſmalleſt lineaments exact
In all the liveries deck'd of Summer's pride. Milton.
She durſt never ſtand at the bay, having nothing but her
long ſoft limber ears to defend her. More on Atheiſm.
The muſcles were ſtrong on both ſides of the aſpera arte-
ria, but on the under ſide, oppoſite to that of the oeſopha-
gus, very limber. Ray on Creation.
At laſt the ulcer is covered over with a limber callus. Harv.
Li'MBERNess. n.ſ. [from limber.] Flexibility; pliancy.
Li'Mbo. m. ſ. [Eo quod ſit limbus inferorum. Du Cange.]
1. A region bordering upon hell, in which there is neither plea-
ſure nor pain. Popularly hell.
No, he is in tartar limbo, worſe than hell,
A devil in an everlaſting garment bath him,
One whoſe hard heart is button'd up with ſteel. Shakeſp.
Oh what a ſympathy of woe is this
As far from help as limbo is from bliſs. Shakeſp.
All theſe up-whirl’d aloft
Fly o'er the backfide of the world far off,
Into a limbo large, and broad, ſince call’d
The paradiſe of fools. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
2. Any place of miſery and reſtraint.
For he no ſooner was at large,
But Trulla ſtraight brought on the charge;
And in the ſelf-ſame limbo put
The knight and ſquire, where he was ſhut. Hudibras.
Friar, thou art come off thyſelf, but poor I am left in
limbo. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
LiMe. m. ſ. [lim, xelyman, Saxon, to glue.]
I. A viſcous ſubſtance drawn over twigs, which catches and
entangles the wings of birds that light upon it.
Poor bird ' thoud'ſt never fear the net or lime,
The pitfall, nor the gin. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
You muſt lay line, to tangle her deſires,
By wailful ſonnets, whoſe compoſed rhimes
Should be full fraught with ſerviceable vows. Shakeſp.
Monſter, come put ſome lime upon your fingers, and
away with the reſt. Shakeſpeare's Tempſf.
Jollier of this ſtate
Than are new-benefic'd miniſters, he throws,
Like nets or lime twigs, wherefo'er he goes,
His title of barriſter on every wench. Donne.
A poor thruſh was taken with a buſh of lime twigs.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Then toils for beaſts, and lime for birds were found,
And deep-mouth'd dogs did foreſt walks ſurround. Dryden.
Or court a wife, ſpread out his wily parts
Like nets, or lime twigs, for rich widows hearts. Pope.
* Matter of which mortar is made: ſo called becauſe uſed in
Cement.
There are ſo many ſpecies of lime ſtone, that we are to
underſtand by it in general any ſtone that, upon a proper de-
§ree of heat, becomes a white calx, which will make a
gºat ºbullition and noiſe on being thrown into water, falling
ºntº a looſe white powder at the bottom. The lime we have
in London is uſually made of chalk, which is weaker than
that made of ſtone. Hill's Materia Medica.
hey were now, like ſand without lime, ill bound toge-
ther, eſpecially as many as were Engliſh, who were at a
$", lºoking ſtrange one upon another, not knowing who
was faithful to their ſide. Bacon's Henry VII.
To LIME. v. a. [from lime.]
I. To entangle; to enſnare.
2. To ſmear with lime.
4. To manure ground with lime.
L I M
. ... As when a lofty pile is rais'd,
We never hear the workmen prais'd,
Who bring the line, or place the ſtones,
But all admire Inigo Jones. Swift.
Line is commonly made of chalk, or of any ſort of ſtone
... that is not ſandy, or very cold; as freeſtone, &amp;c. AMºrtimer,
LIME tree, or Lisden. n.ſ.
[Line, Saxon.] The linden tree.
. The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, placed orbicularly,
in the form of a roſe, having a long narrow leaf growing to
the footſtalk of each cluſter of flowers, from whoſe cup riſes
the pointal, which becomes teſticulated, of one capſule
containing an oblong ſeed. The timber is uſed by cºver.
and turners. Theſe trees continue found many years, and
grow to a conſiderable bulk. Sir Thomas Browſ, mºtion.
one, in Norfolk, fixteen yards in circuit.
- **- Millar.
Go, gentle gales l and bear my fighs along. 1itar
For her the limes their pleaſing ſhades deny,
For her the lilies hang their heads, and die. Pope.
4. A ſpecies of lemon. [lime, French.]
Bear me, Pomonal to thy citron groves;
To where the lemon and the piercing line,
With the deep orange glowing through the green,
Their lighter glories blend. Thomſon's Summer.
Oh boſom, black as death !
Oh limed ſoul, that, ſtruggling to be free,
Art more engaged. Shakespeare Hamlet,
Example, that ſo terrible ſhows in the wreck of maiden-
hood, cannot, for all that, diſſuade ſucceſſion, but that they
are limed with the twigs that threaten them. Shakeſpeare.
The bird that hath been limed in a buſh, .
With trembling wings miſdoubeth cv'ry buſh;
And I, the hapleſs male to one ſweet bird,
Have now the fatal obječt in my eye,
Where my poor young was lin'd, was caught, and kill’d.
- Shał ſpeare's Henry VI.
Myſelf have lim'd a buſh for her,
And place a quire of ſuch enticing birds, -
That ſhe will light to liſten to their lays. Shakespeare.
Thoſe twigs in time will come to be lined, and then you
are all loſt if you do but touch them. L'Aſirange.
3. To cement.
I will not ruinate my father's houſe,
Who gave his blood to lime the ſtones together,
And ſet up Lancaſter. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
The reaſon why they did ſo was, becauſe of the encourage-
ment which that abatement of intereſt gave to landlords and
tenants, to improve by draining, marling, and liming. Child.
All ſorts of peaſe love limed or marled land. Mortimer.
Li'MEKILN. m. ſ. [lime and kiln.] Kiln where ſtones are burnt
to lime.
The counter gate is as hateful to me, as the reek of a
lime kiln. Shakeſp. Merry //ives of Iłindſor.
They were found in a lime kiln, and having paſſed the
fire, each is a little vitrified. - J/oodward.
LIM Eston E. n.ſ. [lime and /?ome.] The ſtone of which lime
is made.
Fire ſtone and lime ſºone, if broke ſmall, and laid on cold
lands, muſt be of advantage. A1artimer's Huſſandry.
LIM E-war E.R. m. ſ.
Lime water, made by pouring water upon quick lime, with
ſome other ingredients to take off its ill flavour, is of great
ſervice internally in all cutaneous eruptions, and diſeaſes of
the lungs. Hill's Materia Medica.
He tried an experiment on wheat infuſed in lime water
alone, and ſome in brandy and lime water mixed, and had
from each grain a great increaſe. Mºrtimer's Hºſłańdy.
LIMIT. n.). [limite, French; limitor, Latin.] Bound; bor-
der ; utmoſt reach.
The whole limit of the mountain round about ſhall be
moſt holy. - Exod. xliii. 12.
To Li'MIT. v. a. [limiter, French, from the noun.] To con-
fine with certain bounds; to reſtrain; to circumſcribe ; not
to leave at large.
They tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Iſrael.
- - Pſal. lxxviii. 4 I.
Thanks I muſt you con,
That you are thieves proſeſt 5
For there is boundleſs theft
In limited profeſſions. Shakespeare. Timºn of Ahºns.
If a king come in by conqueſt, he is no leager a limited .
Sºviſt.
monarch.
2. To refrain from a lax or general ſignification; as, tº ºr
verſe is here limited to this earth. -
Limita's ecus. adj. [fºom limit.] B-longing to thº. bounds.
Dicionary.
LI'M ITARY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 26</div><p class="Text">L I M
L I N
Li'MITARy. adj. [from limit.] Placed at the boundaries as a
guard or ſuperintendant.
. Then, when I am thy captive, talk of chains,
Proud limitary cherubſ Milton's Paradiſe Loft,
LiMItA'tion. n.ſ.. [limitation, French; limitatio, Latin.]
1. Reſtriótion; circumſcription. -
Limitation of each creature, is both the perfeótion and the
preſervation thereof. Hooker, b. v.
- Am I yourſelf, -
But, as it were; in ſort of limitation, Shakeſp. jul. Caeſar.
I deſpair, how this limitation of Adam's empire to his line
and poſterity, will help us to one heir. This limitation, in-
deed, of our author, will ſave thoſe the labour, who would
look for him amongſt the race of brutes; but will very little
contribute to the diſcovery amongſt men. Locke.
If a king come in by conqueſt, he is no longer a limited
monarch; if he afterwards conſent to limitations, he becomes
immediately king de jure. Swift.
2. Confinement from a lax or undeterminate import.
The cauſe of error is ignorance; what reſtraints and limi-
tations all principles have in regard of the matter whereunto
they are applicable. - Hooker, b. v.
Li'MMER. n.ſ. A mongrel. Ainſ.
To LIMN. v. a. [enluminer, French, to adorn books with pic-
tures.] To draw; to paint anything.
Mine eye doth his effigies witneſs,
Moſt truly limn'd, and living in your face. Shakeſpeare.
Emblems limned in lively colours. Peacham.
How are the glories of the field ſpun, and by what pencil
are they limned in their unaffected bravery : Glanville.
Li'MNER. n.ſ.. [corrupted from enlumineur, a decorator of
books with initial pićtures.] A painter; a pićture-maker.
That divers limners at a diſtance, without either copy or
deſign, ſhould draw the ſame picture to an undiſtinguiſhable
exactneſs, is more conceivable than that matter, which is
ſo diverſified, ſhould frame itſelf ſo inerringly, according to
i. i. ºf it, ind, Glanville's Scept.
Poets are limners of another kind,
To copy out ideas in the mind;
Words are the paint by which their thoughts are ſhown,
And nature is their obječt to be drawn. Granville.
Li'Mous. adj. [limoſaſ, Latin.] Muddy; ſlimy.
That country became a gained ground by the muddy and
limous matter brought down by the Nilus, which ſettled by
degrees unto a firm land. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
They eſteemed this natural melancholick acidity to be the
limous or ſlimy foeculent part of the blood. Floyer.
LIMP. adj. [limpia, Italian.] -
1. Wapid; weak.
The chub eats wateriſh, and the fleſh of him is not firm,
limp and taſteleſs. Walton's Angler.
2. It is uſed in ſome provinces, and in Scotland, for limber,
flexile. -
To LIMP. v. n. [limpen, Saxon.] To halt; to walk lamely.
An old poor man,
Who after me hath many a weary ſtep
Limp'd in pure love. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Son of ſixteen,
Pluck the lin'd crutch from thy old limping fire. Shakeſp.
How far
The ſubſtance of my praiſe doth wrong this ſhadow
In underpriſing 't ; ſo far this ſhadow
Doth limp behind the ſubſtance. Shakeſpeare.
When Plutus, which is riches, is ſent from Jupiter, he
limps and goes ſlowly ; but when he is ſent by Pluto, he
runs, and is ſwift of foot. Bacon.
Limping death, laſh'd on by fate,
Comes up to ſhorten half our date. Dryden's Horace.
The limping ſmith obſerv'd the ſadden’d feaſt,
And hopping here and there put in his word. Dryden.
Can ſyllogiſm ſet things right
No: majors ſoon with minors fight:
Or both in friendly cenſort join'd,
The conſequence limps falſe behind. Prior.
1.1'MPET. m. ſ. A kind of ſhell fiſh. Ainſworth.
Li'MPID, adj. [limpide, French ; limpidus, Lat..] Clear; pure;
tranſparent. -
The ſprings which were clear, freſh, and limpid, become
thick and turbid, and impregnated with ſulphur as long as
the earthquake laſts. . Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
The brook that purls along
The vocal grove, now fretting o'er a rock,
Gently diffus'd into a limpid plain. Thomſon's Summer.
Li'MPIDNEss. n.ſ.. [from limpid.] Clearneſs; purity.
Li'MPING, Y, adv. [from limp.] In a lame halting manner.
Li'My adj. [from lime.]
1. Viſcous; glutinous.
Striving more, the more in laces ſtrong
Himſelf he tied, and wrapt his winges twain
In limy ſnarcs the ſubtil loops among. Spenſºr.
2. Containing lime.
5
A human ſkull covered with the ſkin, having been bu-
ried in ſome limy ſoil, was tanned, or turned into a kind of
leather. Grew's Ma, eum.
To LIN. v. n. [ablinnan, Saxon.] To ſtop; to give over.
Unto his foe he came,
Reſolv’d in mind all ſuddenly to win,
Or ſoon to loſe before he once would lin. Fairy ºn.
Li'Nchpin, n.ſ. [linch and pin..] An iron pin, that keep the
wheel on the axle-tree. Die?.
Li'Nctus. n.ſ. [from lingo, Latin.] Medicine licked up by
the tongue.
LiN DEN. n.ſ. [lint, Saxon.] The lime tree. See LIME.
Hard box, and linden of a ſofter grain. Dryden.
Two neighb'ring trees, with walls encompaſs'd round,
One a hard oak, a ſofter linden one. Dryden.
LINE. m. ſ. [linea, Latin.]
1. Longitudinal extenſion.
Even the planets, upon this principle, muſt gravitate no
more towards the Sun; ſo that they would not revolve in
curve lines, but fly away in direct tangents, till they ſtruck
againſt other planets. Bentley's Sermons.
2. A ſlender ſtring.
Well ſung the Roman bard; all human things,
Of deareſt value, hang on ſlender ſtrings;
O ſee the then ſole hope, and in deſign
Of heav'n our joy, ſupported by a line. //aller.
A line ſeldom holds to ſtrein, or draws ſtreight in length,
above fifty or ſixty feet. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
3. A thread extended to direét any operations.
We as by line upon the ocean go, º
Whoſe paths ſhall be familiar as the land. Dryden.
4. The ſtring that ſuſtains the angler's hook. t
Vićtorious with their lines and eyes,
They make the fiſhes and the men their prize. Waller.
5. Lineaments, or marks in the hand or face.
Long is it ſince I ſaw him,
But time hath nothing blurr'd thoſe lines of favour
Which then he wore. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
I ſhall have good fortune; go to, here's a ſimple line of
life; here's a ſmall trifle of wives. Shakeſpeare.
Here, while his canting drone-pipe ſcan'd
The myſtic figures of her hand,
He tipples palmeſtry, and dines
On all her fortune-telling lines. Cleaveland.
6. Delineation; ſketch.
You have generous thoughts turned to ſuch ſpeculations:
but this is not enough towards the raiſing ſuch buildings as
I have drawn you here the lines of, unleſs the direction of
all affairs here were wholly in your hands. Temple.
The inventors meant to turn ſuch qualifications into per-
ſons as were agreeable to his character, for whom the line
was drawn. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
7. Contour; outline.
Oh laſting as thoſe colours may they ſhine,
Free as thy ſtroke, yet faultleſs as thy line ! Pope.
8. As much as is written from one margin to the other. a
verſe.
In the preceding line, Ulyſſes ſpeaks of Nauſicaa, yet im-
mediately changes the words into the maſculine gender.
Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
In many lines theſe few epiſtles tell
What fate attends. Garth.
9. Rank.
Io. Work thrown up; trench,
Now ſnatch an hour that favours thy deſigns,
Unite thy forces, and attack their lines. Dryden's An.
11. Method; diſpoſition.
The heavens themſelves, the planets, and this center,
Obſerve degree, priority, and place,
Infiſture, courſe, proportion, ſeaſon, form,
Office and cuſtom, in all line of order.
12. Extenſion; limit.
Eden ſtretch'd her line
From Auran eaſtward to the roval tow’rs
Of great Seleucia. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
13. Equator; equinoctial circle.
When the ſun below the line deſcends,
Then one long night continued darkneſs joins. Creech.
14, Piogeny; family, aſcending or deſcending.
He chid the ſiſters
When firſt they put the name of king upon me,
And bade them ſpeak to him ; then prophet like,
They hail'd him father to a line of kings. Shakeſpeare,
He ſends you this moſt memorable line,
In ev'ry branch truly demonſtrative,
Willing you overlook this pedigree. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Some lines were noted for a ſtern, rigid virtue, ſavage,
haughty, parſimonious and unpopular ; others were ſweet
and affable. Dryden.
His empire, courage, and his boaſted line,
Were all prov'd mortal,
Shakeſpeare.
Rºſcommºn.
A golden
|--
*
i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 27</div><p class="Text">L I N
L I N
_--Tº
- - - - - - -
A golden bowl
The queen commanded to be crown'd with wine,
The bowl that Belus us'd, and all the Tyrian line. Dryd.
The years
Ran ſmoothly on, produćtive of a line
Of wiſe heroick kings. .
15. A line is one tenth of an inch. -
ń. [In the plural.] A letter; as, I read your lines.
- 2X.
#. Hº! a. [ſuppoſed by junius from linum, linings being
made of linen.]. .
1.To cover on the inſide. - -
A box lined with paper to receive the mercury that might
be ſpilt. - - - Boyle.
2. To put anything in the inſide. &gt;
The charge amounteth very high for any one man's purſe,
except lined beyond ordinary, to reach unto. Carew.
Her women are about her: what if I do line one of their
hands. - - Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
He, by a gentle bow, diving
How well a cully's purſe was lin'd.
uard within.
- "º. they had lined ſome hedges with muſque-
teers, they were totally diſperſed. Clarendon, b. viii.
4. To ſtrengthen by inner works.
Line and new repair our towns of war
With men of courage, and with means defendant. Shakespeare
5. To cover.
Philips.
Locke.
Swift.
Son of ſixteen,
Pluck the lin'd crutch from thy old limping fire. Shakespeare .
6. To double ; to ſtrengthen. -
Who lin'd himſelf with hope,
Eating the air, on promiſe of ſupply. Shakeſpeare.
My brother Mortimer doth ſtir
About his title, and hath ſent for you
To line his enterpriſe. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
The two armies were affigned to the leading of two ge-
nerals, both of them rather courtiers, and aſſured to the
ſtate, than martial men; yet lined and aſſiſted with ſubordi-
nate commanders of great experience and valour. Bacon.
7. To impregnate, applied to animals generating.
Thus from the Tyrian paſtures lin'd with Jove
He bore Europa, and ſtill keeps his love. Creech.
LINEAGE. m. ſ. [linage, French..] Race ; progeny; family,
aſcending or deſcending.
Both the lineage and the certain ſire
From which I ſprung, from me are hidden yet. Fa. Qu.
Joſeph was of the houſe and lineage of David. Luke ii. 4.
The Tirſan cometh forth with all his generation or lineage,
the males before him, and the females following him; and
if there be a mother from whoſe body the whole lineage is
deſcended, there is a traverſe where ſhe fitteth. Bacon.
Men of mighty fame,
And from th’ immortal gods their lineage came.
No longer ſhall the widow’d land bemoan
A broken lineage, and a doubtful throne,
But boaſt her royal progeny's increaſe,
And count the pledges of her future peace. Addiſon.
This care was infuſed into them by God himſelf, in or-
der to aſcertain the deſcent of the Meſfiah, and to prove that
he was, as the prophets had foretold, of the tribe of Ju-
dah, and of the lineage of David. Atterbury's Sermons.
LINEAL. adj. [linealis, from linea, Latin.]
1. Compoſed of lines; delineated.
- When any thing is mathematically demonſtrated weak,
it is much more mechanically weak; errors ever occurring
more eaſily in the management of groſs materials than lineal
deſigns. J/otton's Architecture.
2. Deſcending in a direét genealogy.
To re-eſtabliſh, de facto, the right of lineal ſucceſſion to
Paternal government, is to put a man in poſſeſſion of that
government which his fathers did enjoy, and he by lineal ſuc-
ceſſion had a right to. Locke.
3. Claimed by deſcent.
Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
Quijuſt and lineal entrance to our own. Shaky. K. john.
4. Allied by direct deſcent.
Queen Iſabel, his grandmother,
Wis lineal of the lady Ermengere. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Q that your brows my laurel had ſuſtain'd
Well had I been depos'd if you had reign'd :
The father had deſcended for the ſon;
.* or only you are lineal to the throne.
***A*ly, adv. [from lineal.] In a dire&amp;t line.
. If he had been the perſon upon whom the crown had
inal, and rightfully deſcended, it was good law. Clarendon.
ºtest: n, ſ. ſlineament, French; lineamentum, Latin.]
*; diſcriminating mark in the form.
When that my mother went with child
Qf that inſatiate Edward, noble York
Found that the iſſue was not his begot:
Dryden.
Dryden.
:
LI'NEN. adj. [lineus, Latin.]
1. Made of linen.
2. Reſembling linen.
2. [Linghe, Dutch..] A kind of ſea fiſh.
LING.
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble duke, my father. Shakeſp.
In companions -
There muſt needs be a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of ſpirit. Shakeſpeare.
. . Six wings he wore, to ſhade
His lineaments divine. Milton's Paradiſe Left, b. v.
Man he ſeems
In all his lineaments, though in his face
The glimpſes of his father's glory ſhine. Paradiſe Reg.
There are not more differences in mens faces, and the
outward lineaments of their bodies, than there are in the
makes and tempers of their minds; only there is this dif-
ference, that the diſtinguiſhing characters of the face, and
the lineaments of the body, grow more plain with time, but
the peculiar phyſiognomy of the mind is moſt diſcernible in
children. Locke.
Advance religion and morals, by tracing ſome few linea-
ments in the charaćter of a lady, who hath ſpent all her life
in the pračtice of both. Swift.
The utmoſt force of boiling water is not able to deſtroy
the ſtructure of the tendereſt plant: the lineaments of a white
lily will remain after the ſtrongeſt decoction. Arbuthnot.
Li'NEAR. adj. [linearis, Latin.j Compoſed of lines; having
the form of lines.
Where-ever it is freed from the ſand ſtone, it is covered
with linear ſtriae, tending towards ſeveral centers, ſo as to
compoſe flat ſtellar figures. Iłoodward on Fºſſils.
LINEA"tion, n.ſ. [lineatio, from linea.] Draught of a line or
lines.
There are in the horney ground two white lineations, with
two of a pale red. J/oodward.
Li'NEN. m. ſ. [linum, Latin.] Cloth made of hemp or flax.
Here is a baſket, he may creep in ; throw foul linen upon
him, as if going to bucking. Shakeſp. M. Iſives ºf Hºnºr.
Unſeen, unfelt, the fiery ſerpent ſkims
Between her linen and her naked limbs. Dryden's Zn.
A linen ſtock on one leg, and a kerſey boot hoſe on the
other, gartered with a red and blue liſt. Shakeſpeare.
Death of thy ſoul thoſe linen checks of thine
Are counſellors to fear. What ſoldiers, whey-face Shaft.
LINENDR'APER. m.ſ. [linen and draper.] He who deals in linen.
LING.. n.ſ. [ling, Iſlandick.]
1. Heath. This ſenſe is retained in the northern counties; yet
Bacon ſeems to diſtinguiſh them.
Heath, and ling, and ſedges. Bacon's Natural Hiſory.
When harveſt is ended take ſhipping, or ride,
Ling, ſalt fiſh, and herring, for lent to provide. Tºſºr.
Our Engliſh bring from thence good ſtore of fiſh, but
eſpecially our deepeſt and thickeſt ling, which are therefore
called iſland lings. Abbot's Deſcript. of the Jºrld.
The termination notes commonly diminution; as,
kitling, and is derived from Klein, German, little; ſome-
times a quality; as, firſtling, in which ſenſe Skinner deduces
it from langen, old Teutonick, to belong.
To Li'NGER. v. m. [from len3, Saxon, long.]
1. To remain long in languor and pain.
Like wretches, that have linger'd long,
We'll ſhatch the ſtrongeſt cordial of our love.
Better to ruſh at once to ſhades below,
Than linger life away, and nouriſh woe.
Dryden,
Pope's Odyſſey.
2. To heſitate; to be in ſuſpenſe.
Perhaps thou ling’reſt, in deep thoughts detain'd
Of th’ enterprize ſo hazardous and high. Paradiſº Rºg.
3. To remain long. In an ill ſenſe.
Let order die,
And let this world no longer be a ſtage
To feed contention in a ling ring act. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Ye breth’ren of the lyre, and tuneful voice,
Lament his lot; but at your own rejoice.
Now live ſecure, and linger out your days;
The gods are pleas'd alone with Purcel's lays. Dryden.
Your very fear of death ſhall make ye try
To catch the ſhade of immortality;
Wiſhing on earth to linger, and to ſave
Part of its prey from the devouring grave. Prior.
4. To remain long without any aćtion or determination.
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page
and my couſin Slender, and this day we ſhall have our an-
ſwer. Shakeſp. Merry JWives of JWindſºr.
5. To wait long in cxpectation or uncertainty.
I muſt follicit
All his concerns as mine :
And if my eyes have pow'r, he ſhould not ſuc
In vain, not linger with a long delay. Dryden’s Cleometer.
6. To be long in producing effect.
She doth think, ſhe has ſtrange ling'ring poiſons. sºft,
15 N o
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 28</div><p class="Text">L I N
L I N
To Li'NGER. v. a. To protract; to draw out to length. Out
of uſe.
I can get no remedy againſt this conſumption of the purſe.
Borrowing only ſingers and lingers it out, but the diſeaſe is
incurable. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
She lingers my deſires, Shakeſpeare.
Let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our ſure deſtructions on. Shakeſpeare.
I.1'NGERER. m. ſ. [from linger.] One who lingers.
Li'No ERING LY. adj. [from lingering.] With delay; tediouſly.
Of poiſons, ſome kill more gently and lingeringly, others
more violently and ſpeedily, yet both kill. Hale.
LI'NGE r. m. ſ. [from langue: ; lingot, French.] A ſmall maſs
of metal.
Other matter hath been uſed for money, as among the
Lacedemonians, iron lingets quenched with vinegar, that they
may ſerve to no other uſe. Camden.
LINGO. m. ſ. [Portugueſe.] Language; tongue; ſpeech. A
low cant word.
I have thoughts to learn ſomewhat of your lingo, before I
croſs the ſeas. Congreve's IPay of the I/orld.
LINGUA’cious. ad. [linguax, Latin.) Full of tongue; loqua-
cious; talkative.
LINGUADE'NTAL. adj. [lingua and dens, Latin.] Uttered by
the joint action of the tongue and teeth.
The linguadental f, v, as alſo the lingnalental; th; dh, he
will ſoon learn. Holder's Elements of Speech.
LI'NGUIs T. n. / [from lingua.] A man ſkilful in languages.
Though a linguiſt ſhould pride himſelf to have all the
tongues that Babel cleft the world into, yet, if he had not
ſtudied the ſolid things in them, as well as the words and
lexicons, he were nothing ſo much to be eſteemed a learned
man, as any yeoman or tradeſman competently wiſe in his
mother dialect only. Milton on Educatiºn.
Our linguiſt received extraordinary rudiments towards a
good education. Addison's Speciator.
Li'NG wort. m. ſ. An herb.
Li's IMENT. n.ſ. [liminent, French; lininentum, Lat..] Oint-
ment; balſain ; unguent.
The noſtrils, and the jugular arteries, ought to be anoint-
ed every morning with this liminent or balſam. H. rvey.
The wiſe author of nature hath provided on the rump two
glandules, which the bird catches hold upon with her bill,
and ſqueezes out an oily pap or liniment, fit for the inunction
of the feathers. Ray on Creation.
Li'N ING. m. ſ. [from line.]
1. The inner covering of any thing; the inner double of a
garment.
Was I deceived, or did a ſable cloud
Turn forth her ſilver lining on the night. Milton.
The folds in the griſtle of the noſe is covered with a lining,
which differs from the facing of the tongue. Grew's Coſmol.
The gown with ſtiff embroid'ry ſhining,
Looks charming with a ſlighter lining. Prior.
2: That which is within.
The lining of his coffers ſhall make coats
To deck our ſoldiers for theſe Iriſh wars.
LINK. m. ſ. [gelenºke, German.]
1. A ſingle ring of a chain.
The Roman ſtate, whoſe courſe will yet go on
The way it takes, cracking ten thouſand curbs
Of more ſtrong links aſunder, than can ever
Appear in your impediment. Shakeſpeare's Cºriolanus.
The moral of that poetical fiction, that the uppermoſt link
of all the ſeries of ſubordinate cauſes, is faſtened to Jupiter's
chair, ſignifies an uſeful truth. Hale.
Truths hang together in a chain of mutual dependance;
you cannot draw one link without attracting others. Glanville.
While ſhe does her upward flight ſuſtain,
Touching each link of the continued chain,
At length ſhe is oblig'd and forc'd to ſee
A firſt, a ſource, a life, a deity. Prior.
2. Aºy thing doubled and cloſed together.
Make a link of horſe hair very ſtrong, and faſten it to the
end of the ſtick that ſprings. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
3. A chain ; any thing connecting.
Nor airleſs dungeon, nor ſtrong links of iron,
Can be retentive to the ſtrength of ſpirit. Shakeſp care.
I feel
The link of nature draw me; fleſh of fleſh,
Bone of my bone thou art. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. ix.
Fire, flood and earth, and air, by this were bound,
And love, the common link, the new creation crown'd.
Dryden's Knight's Tale.
4. Any ſingle part of a ſeries or chain of conſequences; a gra-
dation in ratiocination ; a propoſition joined to a foregoing
and following propoſition.
The thread and train of conſequences in intelle&amp;tive ra-
tiocination is often long, and chained together by divers
links, which cannot be done in imaginative ratiosination º
ſome attributed to brutes. judge Halº,
5. A ſeries: this ſenſe is improper. Addison has uſed link for
' chain. -
Shakeſpeare.
Though I have here only choſen this ſingle link of martyr.,
I might find out others among thoſe names which are ſtill
extant, that delivered down this account of our Saviour in a
ſucceſſive tradition. Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
6. [From 2 ſ;zyos.] A torch made of pitch and hards.
O, thou art an everlaſting boneſire light; thou haſt ſaved.
me a thouſand marks in links and torches, walking with thee
in the night betwixt tavern and tavern. Shakespeare . Henry IV.
Whereas hiſtory ſhould be the torch of truth, he makes
her in divers places a fulginous link of lies. Płowel.
Round as a globe, and liquor'd every chink,
Goodly and great he ſails behind his link. Dryden.
One that bore a link
On a ſudden clapp'd his flaming cudgel,
... Like Linſlock, to the horſe's touch-hole. Hudibras, p. ii.
7. Perhaps in the following paſſage it may mean lamp-black.
There was no link to colour Peter's hat;
And Walter's dagger was not come from ſheathing. Shakespeare
To LINK. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To complicate ; as, the links of a chain.
Deſcending tread us down
Thus drooping; or with link, d thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this gulph. MI. Par. Lºft.
Againſt citing carcs,
Lap me in ſoft Lydian airs;
Married to immortal verſe,
Such as the meeting ſoul may pierce
In notes, with many a winding bought
Of linked ſweetneſs long drawn out. Miltºn.
2. To unite ; to conjoin in concord.
They’re ſo link'd in friendſhip,
That young prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.
Shakespeare's Henry VI. p. iii.
3. To join.
Link towns to towns with avenues of oak,
Incloſe whole downs in walls, 'tis all a joke. Pope’s H.r.
So from the firſt eternal order ran,
And creature ini'd to creature, man to man. Pºpe.
4. To join by confederacy or contrast.
They make an offer of themſelves into the ſervice of that
encry, with whoſe ſervants they link themſelves in ſo near a
bond. Haier, b. ii.
Be adviſed for the beſt,
Ere thou thy daughter link in holy band
Of wedlock, to that new unknown gueſt. Fairy Qºn.
Blood in princes link'd not in ſuch ſort,
As that it is of any pow'r to tye. Daniel's Civil J/ar.
5. To connect.
New hope to ſpring
Out of deſpair; joy, but with fear yet link'd. Milton.
God has linkt our hopes and our duty together. Dec. of Pi.
So gracious hath God been to us, as to link together our
duty and our intereſt, and to make thoſe very things the in-
ſtances of our obedience, which are the natural means and
cauſes of our happincfs. Tillotſon's Sermons.
6. To unite or concatenate in a regular ſeries of conſequences.
Theſe things are inted, and, as it were, chained one to
another: we labour to eat, and we eat to live, and we live
to do good ; and the good which we do is as ſeed ſown, with
reference unto a future harveſt. Hooker, b. i.
Tell me, which part it does neceſſitate
Ill chuſe the other ; there I’ll link th’ effect;
A chain, which fools to catch themſelves proječt Dryd.
By which chain of ideas thus viſibly linked together in
train, i. e. each intermediate idea agreeing on each ſide with
thoſe two, it is immediately placed between, the ideas of
men and ſelf-determination appear to be connected. Locke.
LINK Boy. n.ſ. [link and boy..] A boy that carries a torch to
accommodate paſſengers with light.
What a ridiculous thing it was, that the continued ſha-
dow of the earth ſhould be broken by ſudden miraculous diſ-
cluſions of light, to prevent the officiouſneſs of the ſinkhoy.
AMore's Divine Dialogues.
Though thou art tempted by the linkman's call,
Yet truſt him not along the lonely wall. Gay.
In the black form of cinder wench ſhe came.
O may no linkboy interrupt their love. Gay's Trivia.
Li'NNET. n.ſ. (linot, French..] A ſmall ſinging bird.
The ſwallows make uſe of celandine, the linnet of euphra-
gia, for the repairing of their fight. Aſare's Antidºte.
Is it for thee the linnet pours his throat Pope.
LIN's E'ED. m. ſ. [ſºmen lini, Latin.] The ſeed of flax, which is
much uſed in medicine.
The joints may be cloſed with a cement of lime, liſed
oil, and cotton. 4/artimer's Huſbandry.
Li'N's Eywoc LSE Y. adj. [änen and v2z/.] Made of linen and
wool mixed. Vile ; mean ; of different and unſuitable parts.
A lawleſs linſeywoolſie brother,
Half of one order, half another. Hudibras, p. i.
Peel'd, patch'd and pyebald, limſywºolſey brothers,
Grave mummers' ſleeveleſs ſome, and ſhirtleſs others.
Pope's Dunciad; b. iii.
Li'N stock.
-
-
º
-t
.
º
--
-
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 29</div><p class="Text">– TT -
|
|
1, I P
LI'ssrock. n.ſ. [lunt, or lºnte, Teutonick, lint and ſlack.] A
ſtaff of wood with a match at the end of it, uſed by gunners
in firing cannon. - Hanmer.
The nimble gunner h
rith ºnſlock now the deviliſh cannon touches,
Yº... goes all before him. Shakeſp. Henry V.
The diſtance judg’d for ſhot of ev'ry ſize, -
The lin/locks touch, the pond’rous ball expires. Dryden.
LiNT, n. f. [linteum, Latin; llin, Welſh and Erſe.]
1. The ſoft ſubſtance commonly called flax. -
- Linen ſcraped into ſoft woolly ſubſtance to lay on fores. -
2. I dreſſed them up with unguentum baſilicicum vitello ovi,
upon pledgits of limt. - Iłºſeman's Surgery.
Li'NTFL. m. f [linteaux, from lintral, French..] That part of
tº door frame that lies croſs the door poſts over head. . .
"Take a bunch of hyſop, and dip it in the blood that is in
the baſon, and ſtrike the lintel and the two ſide poſts. Exod.
When you lay any timber on brick work, as lintel, over
windows, lay them in loam, which is a great preſerver. of
timber. º: Mechanical Exerciſes.
Silver the lintals deep projecting o'er,
And gold the ringlets that command the door. Pope's Odyſ.
Lion. n.). [lion, French ; ſº, Latin.] The fierceſt and moſt
magnanimous of fourfooted beaſts. - - - - - -
King Richard's firmame was Cor-de-Lion, for his lion-like
courage. Camden's Remains.
Diſmay’d not this
Our captains Macbeth and Banquo: – Yes,
As ſparrows, eagles, or the hare, the lion. Shakespeare.
Be lion mettled; proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conſpirers are ;
Macbeth ſhall never vanquiſh'd be. Shakespeare Macbeth.
The ſphinx, a famous monſter in Egypt, had the face of
a virgin, and the body of a lion. Peacham on Drawing.
They rejoice
Each with their kind, lion with lioneſs;
So fitly them in pairs thou haſt combin'd. Milt. Pa. Loft.
The lion for the honours of his ſkin,
The ſqueezing crab, and ſtinging ſcorpion ſhine
For aiding heaven, when giants dar'd to brave
The threat'ned ſtars. Creech's Manilius.
See lion hearted Richard,
Piouſly valiant, like a torrent ſwell'd
With wintry tempeſts, that diſdains all mounds,
Breaking away impetuous, and involves
Within its ſweep trees, houſes, men, he preſs'd,
Amidſt the thickeſt battle. Philips.
Li'oness. n.ſ.. [feminine of lion.] A ſhe lion.
Under which buſh's ſhade, a lioneſ;
Lay couching head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the ſleeping man ſhould ſtir. Shakespeare.
The furious lioneſ,
Forgetting young ones, through the fields doth roar. May.
The greedy lioneſ; the wolf purſues,
The wolf the kid, the wanton kid the browze. Dryden.
If we may believe Pliny, lions do, in a very ſevere man-
ner, puniſh the adulteries of the lioneſ. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Li'onle AF. m. ſ. [leontopetalon, Latin.]
It hath a thick tuberoſe perennial root; the flower is
naked, and conſiſts of five or ſix petals, which expand in
form of a roſe, garniſhed with five ſtamina; in the middle
of the flower ariſes the pointal, which afterward becomes a
bladder, containing many ſpherical ſeeds. AMiller.
Lion's-Mouth.
Li'0N's-PAw.
Licn's-TAIL.
Lion’s-tooth.
LiP. m. ſ. ſlippe, Saxon.]
I. The outer part of the mouth, the muſcles that ſhoot beyond
the teeth, which are of ſo much uſe in ſpeaking, that they
are uſed for all the organs of ſpeech.
Thoſe happieſt ſmiles
That play'd on her ripe lip, ſeem'd not to know
What gueſts were in her eyes. Shakeſp. King Lear.
No falſhood ſhall defile my lips with lies,
Or with a vail of truth diſguiſe. Sandys's Paraph. on job.
Her lips bluſh deeper ſweets. Thomſon's Spring.
2. The edge of any thing.
In many places is a ridge of mountains ſome diſtance from
the ſea, and a plain from their roots to the ſhore; which
Plain was formerly covered by the ſea, which bounded againſt
thoſe hills as its firſt ramparts, or as the ledges or lips of its
veſſel. - Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
!n wounds, the lips fink and are flaccid; a gleet followeth,
and the fleſh within withers. J/ijtman's Surgery.
3. To make a lip; to hang the lip in ſullenneſs and contempt.
A letter for me ! It gives me an eſtate of ſeven years
*alth; in which time I will make a lip at the phyſician.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
To Lip. v. a. [from the noun..] To kiſs. Obſolete.
- A hand, that kings
Have lipt, and trembled kiffing. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
n.ſ.. [from lion.] The name of an herb.
L I Q.
. . . . Oh! 'tis the fiend's arch mock,
To lip a wanton, and ſuppoſe her chaſe. Shakeſpeare.
LIPLA'bour. n.ſ. [É, and labour.] Aétion of the lips without
*S*ſence of the mind; words without ſentiments.
Faſting, when -
- :’s Prayer is not directed to its own purpoſes,
1S but tiplabour. * r - r * Taylor's Rule of holy living.
Lipo THYMous. adj. ſ^* and 39.2:...] Swooning; flinting.
If the patient be ſurpriſed with a ſpothymous anguor, and
great ºppreſſion about the ſtomach and hypochonders, expe&amp;t
no relief from cordials. Barºy on the Plague.
Lipo"THYMy. * / [2tºroºvºſo...] Swoon; fainting fit.
The ſenators falling into a lipothymy, or deep ſwooning,
made up this pageantry of death with a repreſenting of it
unto life. Taylor's worthy Cºmmºnian.
In liºthynys or ſwoonings, he uſed the frication of this fin-
ger with ſaffron and gold. Brown's Pugar Errouri.
L.P.P.E.D. adj. [from lip.] Having lips. -
Li'PP1t UDE. m. ſ. ſlippitude, Fr. lippitude, Latin.] Bleared-
neſs of eyes.
Diſeaſes that are infectious are, ſuch as are in the ſpirits
and not ſo much in the humours, and therefore paſs eaſily
from body to body; ſuch are peſtilences and lippitides. B.
Li'PW18Dom. m. ſ. Lºp and wiſdom.J Wiſdom in talk without
practice.
I find that all is but it wiſdºm, which wants experience; I
now, woe is me, do try what love can do. Sidney, b. i.
Llºy ABLE. adj. [from liquo, Latin.] Such as may be melted.
Li'99 ATION. m. / [from liquo, Latin.]
1. The art of melting.
2. Capacity to be melted.
The common opinion hath been, that cryſtal is nothing
but ice and ſnow concreted, and by duration of time, con:
gealed beyond liquation. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. ii.
To Li'QUATE. v. n. [liquo, Latin.] To melt; to liquefy.
If the ſalts be not drawn forth before the clay is baked,
they are apt to liquate. J/oodward on Foſſils,
L. QUEFA’ction. m. ſ. [liqueſadiſo, Lat. liquefaction, French.]
The act of melting; the ſtate of being melted.
Heat diſſolyeth and melteth bodies that keep in their ſpirits,
as in divers liquºfaciions; and ſo doth time in honey, which
by age waxeth Inore liquid. Bacon's Natural Hiſory.
The burning of the earth will be a true liqueAddison or diſ-
ſolution of it, as to the exterior region. Burnet.
Li'QUEFIABLE. adj. [from liquefy.jSuch as may be melted.
There are three cauſes of fixation, the even ſpreading of
the ſpirits, and tangible parts, the cloſeneſs of the tangible
parts, and the jejuncheſs or extreme comminution of ſpirits;
the two firſt may be joined with a nature liq::fille, the laſt
In Ot. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 799.
To LI'QUEFY. v., a. [iquifer, French; liſugaº, Latin.]
To melt; to diſſolve.
That degree of heat which is in lime and aſhes, being a
ſmothering heat, is the moſt proper, for it doth neither liqueſy
nor rarefy 3 and that is true maturation. Bacon's Nat, Hji.
To L: QUFFY. v. n. To grow limpid.
The blood of St. Januarius liquified at the approach of the
ſaint's head. Addison's Remarks an Italy.
Lique'scENCY. m. ſ. [liqi, ſentia, Latin. Aptneſs to melt.
L. QUE'scen T. n.ſ.. [iqueſ, ens, Latin.] Melting.
Li'QUID. adj. [liquide, French ; liquidus, Latin.]
I. Not ſolid; not forming one continuous ſubſtance; fluid.
Gently rolls the liquid glaſs. Daniel.
2. Soft; clear.
- Her breaſt, the ſug’red neſt
Of her delicious ſoul, that there does lie,
Bathing in ſtreams of liquid melody. Craſhaw.
3. Pronounced without any jar or harſhneſs.
The many liquid conſonants give a pleaſing ſound to the
words, though they are all of one ſyllable. Dryden's fit.
Let Carolina ſmooth the tuneful lay,
Lull with Amelia's liquid nº me the nine,
And ſweetly flow through all the royal line. Pope's Horace.
4. Diſſolved, ſo as not to be obtainable by law.
If a creditor ſhould appeal to hinder the burial of his
debtor's corpſe, his appeal ought not to be received, ſince thc
buſineſs of burial requires a quick diſpatch, though the debt
be entirely liquid. Aft's Pa, ºgon.
LIQUID. m. ſ. Liquid ſubſtance; liquor.
Be it thy choice, when Summer heats annoy,
To fit beneath her leafy canopy,
Quaffing rich liquids. Philips.
To L, QUIDATE. v. a. [from liquid.] To clear away; to ſcſ-
ſen debts. -
Liquº'DITY. m. ſ. [from liquid.] Subtilty. -
- The ſpirits, for their liquidity, are more incapable than the
fluid medium, which is the conveyer of ſounds, to perſevere
in the continued repetition of vocal airs. Glanville's Scºp.
Li'QUIDNess. n. ſ. [from liquid.] Quality of being liquid;
fluency. - -
Oiſ of anniſeeds, in a cool place, thickened into the con-
ſiſtence of white butter, which, with the leaſt heat, reſumed
its former ligaidh'ſs. Boyle.
LI'QUCR.
- - - --
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 30</div><p class="Text">L I S
L I S
Latin; liqueur, French:1. . . .
1. Anything liquid; it is commonly uſed of fluids inebriating,
or impregnated with ſomething, ". made by decočtion.
Nor envy'd them the grape
whoſe heads that turbulent liquor fills with fumes. Miltºn.
Sintaken into the ſoul, is like a liquor poured into a veſ-
ſel, ſo much of it as it fills, it alſo ſeaſons. South's Sermºni.
2. Strong drink; in familiar language. -
To Ligoń. tº a [from the non.j To drench or moiſten.
Cart wheels ſqueak not when they are liquored. Bacon.
L1Rico'NFANCY. m. ſ. A flower.
Lisne. n.ſ. A cavity; a hollow.
In the liftie of a rock at Kingſcote in Glouceſterſhire, I
found a buſhel of petrified cockles, each near as big as my
fiſt. judge Hal's Originat. of Mankind.
To LISP. v. m. [Flirp, Saxon.] To ſpeak with too frequent
appulſes of the tongue to the teeth or palate, like children.
Come, I cannot cog, and ſay, thou art this and that, like
a many of theſe liſhing hawthorn buds, that come like wo-
men in mens apparel, and ſmell like Bucklerſbury in fimpling
Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
Scarce had ſhe learnt to liſp a name
Of martyr, yet ſhe thinks it ſhame
Life ſhould ſo long play with that breath,
Which ſpent can buy ſo brave a death.
They ramble not to learn the mode,
How to be dreſt, or how to liſp abroad. Cleaveland.
Appulſe partial, giving ſome paſſage to breath, is made to
the upper teeth, and cauſes a liſping found, the breath being
ſtrained through the teeth. Holder's Elements of Speech.
As yet a child, nor yet a fool to fame,
I liſp'd in numbers, for the numbers came. Pope.
Lisp. m. ſ. [from the verb.] The act of liſping.
I overheard her anſwer, with a very pretty liſp, O! Stre-
phon, you are a dangerous creature. Tatler, Nº. 60.
Li'sfer. m. ſ. [from liſp..] One who liſps.
List. m. ſ. [lifte, French.]
1. A roll; a catalogue.
He was the ableſt emperor of all the liſt. Bacon.
Some ſay the loadſtone is poiſon, and therefore in the liſts
of poiſons we find it in many authors. Brown's Wulg. Errours.
Bring next the royal liſt of Stuarts forth,
Undaunted minds, that rul'd the rugged north. Prior.
2. [Lice, French..] Incloſed ground in which tilts are run, and
combats fought.
The ocean, overpeering of his lift,
Fats not the flats with more impetuous haſte
Than young Laertes in a riotous head
O'er-bears your officers. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
She within //'s my ranging mind hath brought,
That now beyond myſelf I will not go.
Till now alone the mighty nations ſtrove,
The reſt, at gaze, without the lifts did ſtand;
And threat'ning France, plac'd like a painted Jove,
Kept idle thunder in his lifted hand. Dryden.
Paris thy ſon, and Sparta's king advance,
In meaſur’d liffs to toſs the weighty lance;
And who his rival ſhall in arms ſubdue,
His be the dame, and his the treaſure too. Pope's Iliad.
3. [Lyrcan, Saxon.] Deſire; willingneſs; choice.
Alas, ſhe has no ſpeech
—Too much ;
I find it ſtill when I have lift to ſleep. Shakespeare . Othello.
Nothing of paſſion or peeviſhneſs, or liſt to contradict,
ſhall have any bias on my judgment. King Charles.
He ſaw falſe reynard where he lay full low;
I need not ſwear he had no lift to crow.
4. [Zicium, Latin; Iſø, French..] A ſtrip of cloth.
A linen ſtock on one leg, and a kerſey boot hoſe on the
other, gartered with a red and blue liſt. Shakeſpeare.
Inſtead of a lift of cotton, or the like filtre, we made uſe
of a ſiphon of glaſs.
A lift the cobler's temples ties,
- To keep the hair out of his eyes. Swift.
5. A border.
They thought it better to let them ſtand as a lift, or mar-
ginal border, unto the Old Teſtament. Hooker, b.v.
To List. v. m. [lyrzan, Saxon.] To chuſe; to deſire; to be
diſpoſed; to incline.
Let other men think of your devices as they lift, in my
judgment they be mere fanfies. ſ/hitgift.
Unto them that add to the word of God what them li/feth,
and make God’s will ſubmit unto their will, and break God's
commandments for their own tradition's ſake, unto them it
ſeemeth not good. Hooker, b. ii.
They imagine, that laws which permit them not to do as
they would, will endure them to ſpeak as they lift. Hooker.
To fight in field, or to defend this wall,
Point what you liſt, I nought refuſe at all. Fairy Queen.
Now by Iny mother's ſon, and that's myſelf,
It ſhall be moon, or ſtar, or what I liſt, Shakeſpeare.
LIQUOR. n.ſ. [liquor,
time,
Craſhaw.
Davies.
Dryden.
Boyle. '
Kings, lords of times, and of occaſions, may -
Take their advantage when, and how, they lift. Daniel.
When they lift, into the womb
That bred them they return; and howl, and gnaw
My bowels, their repaſt. 41ſton's Paradiſe Lºſ!.
To List. v. a. [from liſt, a roll.]
1. To enliſt; to enrol or regiſter.
For a man to give his name to Chriſtianity in thoſe days,
was to liſt himſelf a martyr, and to bid farewel not only to
the pleaſures, but alſo to the hopes of this life. , South.
They liſt with women each degen'rate name,
Who dares not hazard life for future fame. Drydºn’, E.
2. To retain and enrol ſoldiers.
The lords would, by liſting their own ſervants, perſuade
the gentlemen in the town to do the like. Clarendºn, p. viii.
The king who raiſed this wall appointed a million of ſo-
diers, who were lifted and paid for the defence of it againſt
the Tartars. Temple.
Two hundred horſe he ſhall command;
Though few, a warlike and well-choſen band,
Theſe in my name are liſted. Dryden.
3. [From liſt; encloſed ground..] To encloſe for combats.
How dares your pride preſume againſt my laws,
As in a lifted field to fight your cauſe
Unaſk'd the royal grant. Dryden's Knight's Tal.
4. [From liſ', a ſhred or border.]. To ſew together, in ſuch
a ſort as to make a particoloured ſhew.
Some may wonder at ſuch an accumulation of benefits,
like a kind of embroidering or liſting of one favour upon
another. J/ºtton's Life of Buckingham.
5. FContracted from liſten..] To hearken to ; to liſten; to at-
tend.
Then weigh, what loſs your honour may ſuſtain,
If with too credent ear you liſt his ſongs;
Or loſe your heart, or your chaſte treaſure open
To his unmaſter'd importunity. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
I, this ſound I better know:
Li/?! I would I could hear mo. Benj. johnſºn.
Li's TED. adj. Striped; particoloured in long ſtreaks.
Over his head beholds
A dewy cloud, and in the cleud a bow
Conſpicuous, with three lifted colours gay,
Betok'ning peace from God, and cov'nant new. Miltºn.
As the ſhow'ry arch
With liſted colours gay, or, azure, gules,
Delights, and puzzles the beholder's eyes. Philips.
To List EN. v. a. To hear; to attend. Obſolete.
Lady, vouchſafe to liſten what I ſay. Shakespeare.
One cried, God bleſs us ! and, amen the other;
As they had ſeen me with theſe hangman's hands,
Liºning their fear I could not ſay, amen. Shakeſpeare.
He, that no more muſt ſay, is liſtened more
Than they whom youth and eaſe have taught to gloſe.
Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
The wonted roar was up amidſt the woods,
And filled the air with barbarous diſſonance,
At which I ceas'd and liſten’d them a while. A/; fon.
To Li's TEN. v. n. To hearken; to give attention.
Liſten to me, and if you ſpeak me fair,
I'll tell you news. Shakespeare . Taming ºf the Shrew.
Antigonus uſed often to go diſguiſed, and //?ºn at the tents
of his ſoldiers; and at a time heard ſome that ſpoke very ill
of him : whereupon he ſaid, If you ſpeak ill of me, you
ſhould go a little farther off. Bacon’s Apophthegms.
Liſten, O iſles, unto me, and hearken, ye people. Iſa. xlix.
When we have occaſion to 1/len, and give a more parti-
cular attention to ſome ſound, the tympanum is drawn to a
more than ordinary tenſion. Halder's Elements of Speech.
On the green bank I ſat, and //en'd long;
Nortill her lay was ended could I move,
But wiſh'd to dwell for ever in the grove. Dryden.
He ſhall be receiv'd with more regard,
And liſten’d to, than modeſt truth is heard. Dryden.
To this humour moſt of our late comedics owe their ſuc-
ceſs: the audience liſtens after nothing elſe. Adiſºn.
LI's TNER. n.ſ.. [from liſten..] One that hearkens: a hearkener.
They are light of belief, and great liftners after news.
Howell.
Li/eners never hear well of themſelves. Z'E/ºrange.
If ſhe conſtantly attends the tea, and be a good ºftenºr,
ſhe may make a tolerable figure, which will ſerve to draw
in the young chaplain. Swift.
The huſh word, when ſpoke by any brother in a lodge,
was a warning to the reſt to have a care of 1://eners. Swift.
Li'st 1. Ess. adj. [from liſt.]
1. Without inclination; without any determination to one
thing more than another,
Intemperance and ſenſuality clog mens ſpirits, make them
groſs, liſłkſ, and una&amp;tive. 7 iſlatſºn's Sermons.
If your care to wheat alone extend,
Let Maja with her ſiſters firſt deſcend,
Before<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 31</div><p class="Text">L I T
L I T
–T
Before you truſt in earth your future hope, -
Or elſe expect a liftleſ, lazy, crop. Dryden's Wirg.
Lazy lolling ſort .
Of ever liftly; loit’rers, that attend
No cauſe, no truſt. Pope.
I was liftleſ and deſponding. Gulliver.
2. Careleſs; heedleſs.
The ſick for air before the portal gaſp,
Or idle in their empty hives remain,
Benum'd with cold, and liftleſs of their gain. Dryden.
Listlesly. adv. [from liſtleſ.] Without thought; without
attention.
To know this perfectly, watch him at play, and ſee whe-
ther he be ſtirring and active, or whether he lazily and lift-
lſ, dreams away his time. Locke on Education.
Lºílessess. n.ſ.. [from liftleſ...] Inattention; want of de-
fire. - - - - -
It may be the palate of the ſoul is indiſpoſed by liftleſheſ;
or ſorrow. - - Taylor.
LIT, the preterite of light; whether to light ſignifies to happen,
or to ſet on fire, or guide with light.
Believe thyſelf, thy eyes,
That firſt inflam’d, and lit me to thy love,
Thoſe ſtars, that ſtill muſt guide me to my joy. Southern.
I lit my pipe with the paper. Addiſon's Speciatºr.
LITANy. A.J. [x1&amp;siz; litanie, French.] A form of ſuppli-
catory prayer. - ~ 1 -
Supplications, with ſolemnity for the appeaſing of God's
wrath, were, of the Greek church, termed litanies and ro-
gations of the latin. Hooker, b. v.
Recollect your fins that you have done that week, and all
your life-time; and recite humbly and devoutly ſome peni-
tential litanies. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
LITERAL. adj. [literal, French ; litera, Latin.]
1. According to the primitive meaning, not figurative.
Through all the writings of the antient fathers, we ſee
that the words, which were, do continue ; the only dif-
ference is, that whereas before they had a literal, they now
have a metaphorical uſe, and are as ſo many notes of re-
membrance unto us, that what they did ſignify in the letter,
is accompliſhed in the truth. Hooker, b. iv.
A foundation, being primarily of uſe in architecture, hath
no other literal notation but what belongs to it in relation
to an houſe, or other building, nor figurative, but what is
founded in that, and deduced from thence. Hammond.
2. Following the letter, or exact words.
The fitteſt for publick audience are ſuch as, following a
middle courſe between the rigour of literal tranſlations and the
liberty of paraphraſts, do with greater ſhortneſs and plainneſs
deliver the meaning. Hooker, b. v.
3. Conſiſting of letters; as, the literal notation of numbers
was known to Europeans before the cyphers.
Li'TERAL. m. ſ. Primitive or literal meaning.
How dangerous it is in ſenſible things to uſe metaphorical
expreſſions unto the people, and what abſurd conceits they
will ſwallow in their literals, an example we have in our
profeſſion. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. iv.
Li'TERAlly. adv. [from literal.]
I. * to the primitive import of words; not figura-
tively.
That a man and his wife are one fleſh, I can comprehend
the meaning of; yet literally taken, it is a thing impoſſible.
- Swift.
2. With cloſe adherence to words.
Endeavouring to turn his Niſus and Euryalus as cloſe as I
was able, I have performed that epiſode too literally; that
glying more ſcope to Mezentius and Lauſus, that verſion,
which has more of the majeſty of Virgil, has leſs of his con-
Clſeneſs, Dryden.
$o wild and ungovernable a poet cannot be tranſlated lite-
*; his genius is too ſtrong to bear a chain. Dryden.
Litiga'lity. n.ſ.. [from literal.] Original meaning.
. Not attaining the true deuteroſcopy and ſecond inten-
tion of the words, they are fain to omit their ſupercon-
ſequences, coherences, figures, or tropologies, and are not
ſometimes perſuaded by fire beyond their literalities. Brown.
LITERATI, m. ſ. [Italian.] The learned.
I ſhall conſult ſome Iterati on the projećt ſent me for the
ſcovery of the longitude. Speciator, Nº. 581.
I ºver. m. ſ. [literatura, Latin.] Learning; ſkill in
€rS.
- This kingdom hath been famous for good literature; and
if Preferment attend deſervers, there will not want ſupplies.
- Bacon's Advice to Williers.
When men of learning are a&amp;ed by a knowledge of the
world, they give a reputation to literature, and convince the
woºd of its uſefulneſ. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 377.
*THARGE. m. ſ. [litharge, French; lithargyrum, Latin.]
*::::::: is properly lead vitrified, either alone or with a
f . of copper. This recrement is of two kinds, litharge
* **, and litharge of filver. It is collected from the fur-
naces where ſilver is ſeparated from lead, or from thoſe where
gold and filver are purified by means of that metal. The H-
tharge ſold in the ſhops is produced in the copper works,
where lead has been uſed to purify that metal, or to ſeparate
ſilver from it. It is uſed in ointments and plaiſters, and is
drying, abtergent, and flightly aſtriótive. Hill's Mat. M. d.
I have ſeen ſome parcels of glaſs adhering to the teſt or
cupel as well as the gold or litharge. Boyle.
If the lead be blown off from the filver by the bellows, it
will, in great part, be collected in the form of a darkiſh
powder; which, becauſe it is blown off from filver they
call litharge of ſilver. 2Boyle.
Lº. adj. [liče, Saxon.] Limber; flexible; pliant; eaſily
ent.
Th’ unwieldy elephant,
To make them mirth, us'd all his might, and wreath'd
His lithe proboſcis. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſi,
LI'THEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from lithe..] Limberneſs; flexibility.
Li'THER. adj. [from lithe..] Soft; pliant. -
Thou antick, death,
Two Talbots winged through the lither ſky,
In thy deſpight ſhall 'ſcape mortality. Shakeſpeare.
[Lºben, Saxon.] Bad; ſorry; corrupt. It is in the work of
Robert of Glouceſter written luther.
LITHO'GRAPHY, n. ſ. [Aſso; and 7 p.2.p2.] The art or prac-
tice of engraving upon ſtones.
LITHoMANcy. n.ſ. [xišo, and u2:1ſ2.] Predićtion by ſtones.
As ſtrange muſt be the lithomancy, or divination, from this
ſtone, whereby Helenus the prophet foretold the deſtruction
of Troy. Brown's Wu'ar Errours, b. ii.
LITHoN TRI'ptick. adj. [x:30; and Tpic2 ; lithontriptique,
French.] Any medicine proper to diſſolve the ſtone in the
kidneys or bladder.
LITHo"roMIST. n. ſ. [x($o; and Téºvo.] A chirurgeon who
extracts the ſtone by opening the bladder.
LITHoºtoMY. m. ſ. [x:30; and ríºva.] The art or pračtice of
cutting for the ſtone.
Li'TIGANT. n.ſ. [litigans, Latin; litigant, French.] One en-
gaged in a ſuit of law.
The caſt litigant ſits not down with one croſs verdićt, but
recommences his ſuit. Decay of Piety.
The litigants tear one another to pieces for the benefit of
ſome third intereſt. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
LI(TIGANT. adj. Engaged in a juridical conteſt.
Judicial ačts are thoſe writings and matters which relate to
judicial proceedings, and are ſped in open court at the in-
ſtance of one or both of the parties litigant. Ayliffe's Parerg.
To LIT/IGATE. v. a. [litigo, Latin.] To conteſt in law ; to
debate by judicial proceſs.
To LI'rid Are. v. n. To manage a ſuit; to carry on a cauſe.
The appellant, after the interpoſition of an appeal, ſtill
litigates in the ſame cauſe. Ayliffe's Parergon.
LITIGATION. m. ſ. [litigatio, Latin; from litigate.] Judicial
conteſt; ſuit of law.
Never one clergyman had experience of both litigationſ,
that hath not confeſſed, he had rather have three ſuits in
Weſtminſter-hall, than one in the arches. Clarendon.
Lit1'Gious. adj. [litigieux, French.]
1. Inclinable to law-ſuits; quarrelſome ; wrangling.
Soldiers find wars, and lawyers find out ſtill
Litigious men, who quarrels move. Donne.
His great application to the law, had not infected his tem-
per with any thing poſitive or litigious. Addiſon.
2. Diſputable; controvertible.
In litigiºus and controverſed cauſes, the will of God is to
have them to do whatſoever the ſentence of judicial and
final deciſion ſhall determine. Hooker.
No fences parted fields, nor marks, nor bounds,
Diſtinguiſh'd acres of litigious grounds. ... Dryden's Geºrg.
LITI'Giously. adv. [from litigious.] Wranglingly.
Litigious Ness. m. ſ. [from litigious...] A wrangling diſpoſi-
‘tion.
LITTER. n.ſ. [litiere, French.] - -
1. A kind of vehiculary bed; a carriage capable of containing
a bed hung between two horſes.
To my litter ſtrait; -
Weakneſs poſſeſſeth me. Shakespeare King john.
He was carried in a rich chariot litterwiſe, with two horſes
at each end. Bacon's New Atlantis,
The drowſy fighted ſteeds,
That draw the litter of cloſe curtain'd fleep.
Here modeſt matrons in ſoft litter driv'n,
In ſolemn pomp appear. •
Liters thick beſiege the donor's gate, .
And begging lords and teeming ladies wait &gt;
The promis'd dole. Dryden’s juvenal.
2. The flaw laid under animals, or on Plants.
To crouch in litter of your ſtable planks. -
Take off the litter from your kernel beds. Evelyn.
Their litter is not toſs'd by ſows unclean. Dryd. P'ing.
3. A brood of young. 15 O I do
Milton.
Dryden's Aºn.
Shakeſpeare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 32</div><p class="Text">ſº
L I V
L I T
I do here walk before thee like a ſow that hath over-
whelmed all her litter but one. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Reflect upon that numerous litter of ſtrange, ſenſeleſs opi-
nions, that crawl about the world. South's Serm.
A wolf came to a ſow, and very kindly offered to take
care of her litter. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Full many a year his hateful head had been
For tribute paid, nor ſince in Cambria ſeen:
The laſt of all the litter 'ſcap'd by chance,
And from Geneva firſt infeſted France. Dryden.
4. Any number of things thrown fluttiſhly about.
Strephon, who found the room was void,
Stole in, and took a ſtrict ſurvey
Of all the litter as it lay. Swift.
5. A birth of animals.
Fruitful as the ſow that carry'd
The thirty pigs at one large litter farrow'd. Dryd, juv.
To Liºtt ER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To bring forth : uſed of beaſts, or of human beings in ab-
horrence or contempt.
Then was this iland,
Save for the ſon that ſhe did litter here,
A freckled whelp, hag-born, not honour’d with
A human ſhape. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſ'.
My father named me Auétolicus, being littered under Mer-
cury, who, as I am, was likewiſe a ſnapper up of uncon-
ſidered trifles. Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
The whelps of bears are, at firſt littering, without all
form or faſhion. Hakewill on Providence.
We might conceive that dogs were created blind, becauſe
we obſerve they were littered ſo with us. Brown.
2. To cover with things negligently, or fluttiſhly ſcattered
about.
They found
The room with volumes litter'd round. Swift.
3. To cover with ſtraw.
He found a ſtall where oxen ſtood,
But for his eaſe well litter'd was the floor. Dryden.
4. To ſupply cattle with bedding. -
LITTLE, adj. [comp. lºſs, ſuperlat. leaſt; leitel, Gothick;
lyzel, Saxon.]
1. Small in quantity.
The coaſt of Dan went out too little for them. Joſh. xix.
2. Not great; ſmall; diminutive; of ſmall bulk.
He ſought to ſee Jeſus, but could not for the preſs, be-
cauſe he was little of ſtature. Luče xix. 3.
His ſon, being then very little, I confidered only as wax,
to be moulded as one pleaſes. Locke.
3. Of ſmall dignity, power, or importance.
When thou waſt little in thine own ſight, waſ thou not
made the head of the tribes. 1 Sam. xv. 17.
All that is paſt ought to ſeem little to thee, becauſe it is
fo in itſelf. - Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
4. Not much; not many.
5. Some ; not none.
I leave him to reconcile theſe contradićtions, which may
plentifully be found in him, by any one who will but read
with a little attention. Locke.
Little. n.ſ.
1. A ſmall ſpace. -
Much was in little writ; and all convey'd
With cautious care, for fear to be betray'd. Dryden,
2. A ſmall part; a ſmall proportion.
He that deſpiſeth little things, ſhall periſh by little and
Jittle. - Eccluſ.
The poor remnant of human ſeed which remained in their
mountains, peopled their country again ſlowly, by little and
/ittle. Bacon's New Atlantis.
By freeing the precipitated matter from the reſt by filtra-
tion, and diligently grinding the white precipitate with wa-
ter, the mercury will little by little be gathered into drops. 7
Boy'e.
I gave thee thy maſter's houſe, and the houſe of Iſrael
and Judah; and if that had been too little, I would have
given ſuch and ſuch things. 2 Sam. xii. 8.
They have much of the poetry of Mecaenas, but little of
his liberality. Dryden's Preface to All for Love.
Nor grudge I thee the much that Grecians give,
Nor murm'ring take the little I receive. Dryden's Homer.
There are many expreſſions, which carrying with them
no clear ideas, are like to remove but little of my igno-
rance. Locke.
3. A ſlight affair.
As if 'twere little from their town to chaſe,
I through the ſeas purſued their exil'd race. Dryden's An.
I view with anger and diſdain,
How little gives thee joy or pain:
A print, a bronze, a flow'r, a root. Prior.
4. Not much.
Theſe they are fitted for, and ſittle elſe, Cheyne,
LI'TTLE, adv,
* *
3. To continue in life.
1. In a ſmall degree. -
The received definition of names ſhould be changed as
little as poſſible. Jſ atts's Lºgi.A.
2. In a ſmall quantity.
3. In ſome degree, but not great.
Where there is too great a thinneſs in the fluids, ſub-
acid ſubſtances are proper, though they are a little aſtlin-
gent. A luthnºt on Aliºt.
4. Not much. -
The tongue of the juſt is as choice ſilver; the heart of
the wicked is little worth. Prov. x. 20.
Finding him little ſtudious, ſhe choſe rather to endue him
with converſative qualities of youth; as, dancing and fen-
cing. Jººfton.
That poem was infamouſly bad; this parallel is little bet-
ter. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
Several clergymen, otherwiſe little fond of obſcure terms,
yet in their ſermons were very liberal of all thoſe which they
find in eccleſiaſtical writers. Sicit.
Liºtt LEN Ess. n.ſ. [from little.]
1. Smalneſs of bulk.
All trying, by a love of littlenºſ,
To make abridgments, and to diaw to leſs;
Even that nothing which at firſt we were. I)2nne.
We may ſuppoſe a great many degrees of littlenºſ, and
lightneſs in theſe earthy particles, ſo as many of them might
float in the air. - Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
2. Meanneſs; want of grandeur.
The Engliſh and French, in verſe, are forced to raiſe their
language with metaphors, by the pompouſneſs of the whole
phraſe, to wear off any littlemſ; that appears in the parti-
cular parts. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
3. Want of dignity.
The angelick grandeur, by being concealed, does not
awaken our poverty, nor mortify our littlenºſ; ſo much, as if
it was always diſplayed. Collier of Envy.
Li’ttoRAL. v. a. [littoris, Latin.] Belonging to the ſhore.
Li'TURGY. m. ſ. [xiaºyſz; liturgie, Fr.) Form of prayers;
formulary of publick devotions,
We dare not admit any ſuch form of liturgy, as either ap-
pointeth no ſcripture at all, or very little to be read in the
church. - Hooker, b. v.
The bleſſedeſt of mortal wights began to be importuned,
ſo that a great part of divine liturgy was addreſſed ſolely to
her. Płºwell.
It is the greateſt ſolemnity of prayer, the moſt powerful
liturgy and means of impetration in this world. Taylor.
To Liv E. v. n. [lyrian, lyrižan, Saxon.]
1. To be in a ſtate of animation; to be not dead.
She ſhall be
A pattern to all princes living with her,
And all that ſhall ſucceed. Shakeſpeare's Hºnry VIII.
Is’t night's predominance, or the day's ſhame,
That darkneſs does the face of earth intomb,
When living day ſhould kiſs it Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
To ſave the living, and revenge the dead,
Againſt one warrior's arms all Troy they led. Dryden.
2. To paſs life in any certain manner with regard to habits;
good or ill, happineſs or miſery.
O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a
man that liveth at reſt. Eccluſ. xli. 1.
Dr. Parker, in his ſermon before them, touched them ſo
near for their living, that they went near to touch him for
his life. - Hayward.
The condition required of us is a conjuncture of all
goſpel graces rooted in the heart, though mixed with much
weakneſs, and perhaps with many fins, ſo they be not wil-
fully lived and died in. Hammond.
A late prelate, of a remarkable zeal for the church, were
religions to be tried by lives, would have lived down the
pope, and the whole conſiſtory. Atterbury.
If we act by ſeveral broken views, we ſhall live and die
in miſery. Addison's Speciator, Nº. 162.
If we are firmly reſolved to live up to the dićtates of rea-
ſon, without any regard to wealth and reputation, we may
go through life with ſteadineſs and pleaſure. Addiſon.
Our high-plac'd Macbeth
Shall live the leaſe of nature, and pay his breath
To time and mortal cuſtom. Shakespeare.
See the minutes how they run ;
How many makes the hour full complete,
How many hours bring about the day,
How many days will finiſh up the year,
How many years a mortal man may five. Shakespeare
The way to live long muſt be, to uſe our bodies ſo as is
moſt agreeable to the rules of temperance. Ray on Creation.
4. To live emphatically ; to be in a ſtate of happineſs.
What greater curſe could envious fortune give,
Than juſt to dic when I began to five. Drydºn.
5. To<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 33</div><p class="Text">L I V
L I V
* ----------
mpt from death, temporal or ſpiritual.
5. Tº and judgments, } a man do, he ſhall live in
them. Lev. xviii. 5.
He died for us, that whether we wake or ſleep, we ſhould
ſº together with him. I Thºſ. v. 10.
. To remain undeſtroyed. -
6 ji was a miraculous providence that could make a veſſel,
ſo ill manned, live upon ſea; that kept it from being daſhed
ſt the hills, or overwhelmed in the deeps. . Burnet.
Mark how the ſhifting winds from weſt ariſe,
And what collected night involves the ſkies'
Nor can our ſhaken veſſels live at ſea, .
Much leſs againſt the tempeſt force their way.
... To continue; not to be loſt. - -
w" Mens evil manners live in braſs, their virtues
We write in water. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
Sounds which addreſs the ear are loſt and die
In one ſhort hour; but that which ſtrikes the eye
Lives long upon the mind; the faithful fight
Engraves the knowledge with a beam of light.
The tomb with manly arms and trophies grace.
There high in air memorial of my name *
Fix the ſmooth oar, and bid me live to fame. Pope.
onverſe; to cohabit.
8. To §. ſhepherd ſwains ſhall dance and fing,
For thy delight each May morning.
If theſe delights thy mind may move,
Then live with me, and be my love.
9. To feed. - - -
Thoſe animals that live upon other animals have their fleſh
more alkaleſcent than thoſe that live upon vegetables. Arbut.
10. To maintain one's ſelf.
A moſt notorious thief; lived all his life-time of ſpoils and
robberies. - - Spenſer.
They which miniſter about holy things, live of the things
of the temple. I Cor. ix. I3.
His treaſure and goods were all ſeized upon, and a ſmall
portion thereof appointed for his poor wife to live upon.
Knolles's Hiſł. of the Turks.
The number of ſoldiers can never be great in proportion
to that of people, no more than the number of thoſe that
are idle in a country, to that of thoſe who live by labour.
Temple.
He had been moſt of his time in good ſervice, and had
ſomething to live on now he was old. Temple.
11. To be in a ſtate of motion or vegetation.
In a ſpacious cave of living ſtone,
The tyrant AEolus, from his airy throne,
With pow'r imperial curbs the ſtruggling winds. Dryden.
Cool groves and living lakes
again
Dryden.
JWatts.
Shakeſpeare.
Give after toilſome days a ſoft repoſe at night. Dryden.
12. To be unextinguiſhed. º
Pure oil and incenſe on the fire they throw :
Theſe gifts the greedy flames to duſt devour,
Then on the living coals red wine they pour. Dryden.
LIVE, adj. [from alive.]
1. Quick; not dead. -
If one man's ox hurt another that he die, they ſhall ſell
the live ox, and divide the money. Exod. xxi. 35.
2. Active; not extinguiſhed.
Alouder ſound was produced by the impetuous eruptions
ºf the halituous flames of the ſaltpetre upon caſting of a
live coal upon it. Boyle.
lºveliss, adv. [from live.J Wanting life; rather lifeleſs.
Deſcription cannot ſuit itſelf in words,
To demonſtrate the life of ſuch a battle,
In life ſo livelſ, as it ſhews itſelf. Shakespeare Henry V.
'''Elihoop. m. ſ. [It appears to me corrupted from livelode.]
Support of life; maintenance; means of living.
Ah! luckleſs babe born under cruel ſtar,
And in dead parents baleful aſhes bred;
Full little weeneſt thou what ſorrows are,
Left thee for portion of thy livelihood. Fairy Queen.
..That rebellion drove the lady from thence, to find a live-
*d out of her own eſtate. Clarendon, b. viii.
He brings diſgrace upon his character, to ſubmit to the
picking up of a livelihood in that ſtrolling way of canting and
begging. - I’Eſtrange.
It is their profeſſion and livelihood to get their living by
thoſe practices, for which they deſerve to forfeit their lives.
South's Sermons.
º have been as often baniſhed out of moſt other places;
: Mich muſt very much diſperſe a people, and oblige them to
% a livelihood where they can find it. Addiſon's Speči.
rade employs multitudes of hands, and furniſhes the
Pooreſt of our fellow ſubjects with the opportunities of gain-
***honeſt livelihood: the ſkilful or induſtrious find their
- º lin it. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 42.
ºises. n: ſ [from lively.]
“Pearance of life.
**winſ, which the freedom of the pencil makes ap-
pear, may ſeem the living hand of nature. Dryden's Duſºſ.
2. Vivacity; ſprightlineſs.
Extravagant young fellows, that have livelingſ; and ſpirit,
come ſometimes to be ſet right, and ſo make able and great
men; but tame and low ſpirits very ſeldom attain to any
thing. Locke on Education.
LI'velode. n.ſ. [live and lode, from lead; the means of lead-
ing life.] Maintenance; ſupport; livelihood.
She gave like bleſfing to each creature,
As well of worldly livelode as of life,
That there might be no difference nor ſtrife. Hubberd.
LI'veloNG. adj. [ſive and long..] Tedious; long in paſſing:
Many a time, and oft,
Have you climb'd up to walls and battlements,
Your infants in your arms; and there have ſate
The livelong day, with patient expectation
To ſee great Pompey paſs. Shakeſp. julius Caſºr.
The obſcur'd bird clamour'd the livelong night. Shakespeare
Young and old come forth to play,
On a ſun-ſhine holiday,
Till the livel»ng day-light fail. Milton.
Seek for pleaſure to deſtroy
The ſorrows of this livelong night. Prior.
How could ſhe fit the livel»ng day,
Yet never aſk us once to play ? Swift.
2. Laſting; durable.
Thou, in our wonder and aſtoniſhment,
Haſt built thyſelf a livelong monument. AMiltºn.
LI'v ELY. adj. [live and like.]
1. Briſk; vigorous; vivacious.
But wherefore comes old Manoa in ſuch haſte,
With youthful ſteps ? much livelier than ere while
He ſeems; ſuppoſing here to find his ſon,
Or of him bringing to us ſome glad news
2. Gay; airy.
Form'd by thy converſe, happily to ſteer
From grave to gay, from lively to ſevere. Pope.
3. Repreſenting life.
Since a true knowledge of nature gives us pleaſure, a
lively imitation of it in poetry or painting muſt produce a
much greater. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
4. Strong; energetick.
His faith muſt be not only living, but lively too; it muſt
be brightened and ſtirred up by a particular exerciſe of thoſe
virtues ſpecifically requiſite to a due performance of this
duty. - South's Sermons.
The colours of the priſm are manifeſtly more full, intenſe
and lively, than thoſe of natural bodies. Newton's Opticks.
Imprint upon their minds, by proper arguments and re-
fle&amp;tions, a lively perſuaſion of the certainty of a future
ſtate. Atterbury's Sermons.
LiveLily. a
LI'v ELY. }a ‘J.
1. Briſkly; vigorouſly.
They brought their men to the ſlough, who diſcharging
lively almoſt cloſe to the face of the enemy, did much amaze
them. Hayward.
2. With ſtrong reſemblance of life.
That part of poetry muſt needs be beſt, which deſcribes
moſt lively our actions and paſſions, our virtues and our
vices. Dryden's Prºf. to his State of Innocence.
Guided to what may great or good appear,
Liver. m. ſ. [from live.]
And try if life be worth the liver's care. Prior. }
1. One who lives.
Be thy affections undiſturb’d and clear,
2. One who lives in any particular manner with reſpect to vir-
tue or vice, happineſs or miſery.
Milton's Ag,
The end of his deſcent was to gather a church of holy
chriſtian livers over the whole world. Hammond's Fund.
If any looſe liver have any goods of his own, the ſheriff
is to ſeize thereupon. Spenſer on Ireland.
Here are the wants of children, cf diſtracted perſons, of
ſturdy wandering beggars and looſe diſorderly livers, at one
view repreſented. Atterbury.
3. [From lipene, Saxon.] One of the entrails.
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come:
And let my liver rather heat with wine,
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans. Shakespeare.
Reaſon and reſpect
Make livers pale, and luſtihood dejected.
LI've Rcolour. adj. [liver and colour.] Dark red.
The uppermoſt ſtratum is of gravel; then clay of various
colours, purple, blue, red, livercolour. J/oodward.
LI'v ERG Row.N. adj. [liver and grown.] Having a great liver.
I inquired what other caſualtics was moſt like the rickets,
and found that livergrown was neareſt. Graunt.
LI've Rwor T. n.ſ. [liver and wort..] A plant.
That ſort of liverwort which is uſed to cure the bite of
mad dogs, grows on commons, and open heaths, where the
graſs is ſhot, on declivities, and on the ſides of pits. . This
ſpreads
Shakeſpeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 34</div><p class="Text">L O A
L I V
ground, and, when in perfec-
bit, as it grows old, it alters,
Miller.
ſpreads on the ſurface of the
tion, is of an aſh colour;
and becomes of a dark colour.
LI've RY. m. ſ. [from #urer, French.]
ºf giving or taking pºſſeſſion, .
I. Thº...º.º. ſeize Hereford's right,
Call in his letters * º: he hath
is attorneys general to fue
#. º: . deny his offered homage. Shakeſp.
2. Releaſe from wardſhip. - --
Had the two houſes firſt ſued out their livery, and once
effeaually redeemed themſelves from the wardſhip of the tº-
mults, I ſhould then ſuſpect my own judgment. K. Charles.
2. The writ by which poſſeſſion is obtained.
. The ſtate of being kept at a certain rate:
What livery is, we by common uſe in England know well
enough, namely, that it is an allowance of horſe meat; as
they commonly uſe the word ſtabling, as to keep horſes at
livéry; the which word, I gueſs, is derived of livering or
delivering forth their nightly food; ſo in great houſes, the
livery is ſaid to be ſerved up for all night, that is, their even-
ing allowance for drink; and livery is alſo called the upper
wººd which a ſerving man wears; ſo called, I ſuppoſe, for
that it was delivered and taken from him at pleaſure; ſo it
is apparent, that, by the word livery, is there meant horſe
meat, like as by the coigny is underſtood man's meat. Some
ſay it is derived of coin, for that they uſed in their coignies
not only to take meat but money; but I rather think it is
derived of the Iriſh, the which is a common uſe amongſt
landlords of the Iriſh to have a common ſpending upon their
tenants, who being commonly but tenants at will, they uſed
to take of them what vićtuals they liſt; for of vićtuals they
were wont to make a ſmall reckoning. Spenſer on Ireland.
4. The cloaths given to ſervants.
My mind for weeds your virtue's livery wears. Sidney.
Perhaps they are by ſo much the more loth to forſake this
argument, for that it hath, though nothing elſe, yet the
name of ſcripture, to give it ſome kind of countenance more
than the pretext of livery coats affordeth. Hooker.
I think, it is our way,
If we will keep in favour with the king,
To be her men, and wear her livery. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery,
That ſee I by our faces. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
£º. lady cloath’d in white,
And crown'd with oak and laurel ev'ry knight,
Are ſervants to the leaf, by liveries known
Of innocence. Dryden's Flower and Leaf.
On others int’reſt her gay liv'ry flings,
Int’reſt that waves on party-colour'd wings;
Turn'd to the ſun ſhe caſts a thouſand dyes,
And as ſhe turns the colours fall or riſe. Dunciad.
If your dinner miſcarries, you were teized by the footmen
coming into the kitchen ; and to prove it true, throw a ladle-
ful of broth on one or two of their liveries. Swift.
5. A particular dreſs; a garb worn as a token or conſequence
of any thing.
Of fair Urania, fairer than a green,
Proudly bedeck'd in April's livery. Sidney.
Miſtake me not for my complexion
The ſhadow’d livery of the burning ſun,
To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred. Shakeſp.
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
Inſect, or worm : thoſe wav'd their limber fans,
For wings, and ſmalleſt lineaments exact,
In all the liveries deck'd of ſummer's pride,
With ſpots of gold and purple, azure, green. Milton.
Now came ſtill evening on, and twilight grey
Had in her ſober livery all things clad. Åhlé, Pa. Loft.
Li'VERY MAN. n.ſ. [livery and man.]
1. One who wears a livery ; a ſervant of an inferior kind.
- The witneſſes made oath, that they had heard ſome of the
lºerºmen frequently railing at their miſtreſs. Arbuthnot.
2. [In London.] A freeman of ſome ſtanding in a company.
Lives. n. ſ. [the plural of life.]
So ſhort is life, that every peaſant ſtrives,
f In a farm houſe, or field, to have three lives. Donne.
LIVID. adj..[lividus, Latin; livia, French..] Diſcoloured,
as with a blow; black and blue.
* was a peſtilent fever, not ſeated in the veins or hu-
mours, for that there followed no carbuncles, no purple or
*ºots, the maſs of the blood not bºn. tainted. Bacon.
Upon my livid lips beſtow a kiſs : S.
O ºvy not the dead, they feel not bliſs I Dryden.
T. hey beat their breaſts with many a bruiſing blow,
|ill they turn'd livid, and corrupt the ſnow. Dryden.
Livi'Drty.
- m. ſ. ſ lividiić - frrºr. 1:...] T TY: -
tion, as by &amp; ilé, French; from livid.] Diſcoloura
livi *** a tendency to ſuch a flate, are darkneſs or
dity of the countena -
f In Ce. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Li Ying. m. ſ. [from live.] º
I. Support; maintenance; fortune on which one lives.
The Arcadians fought as in unknown place, having no
ſuccour but in their hands; the Helots, as in their own place,
fighting for their livings, wives, and children. Sidney.
All they did caſt in of their abundance; but ſhe of her
want did caſt in all that ſhe had, even all her living. AZará.
2. Power of continuing life.
There is no living without truſting ſome body or other, in
ſome caſes. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
2. Livelihood.
For ourſelves we may a living make. Hubberd's Tale.
Then may I ſet the world on wheels, when ſhe can ſpin
for her living. Shakeſpeare.
Iſaac and his wife, now dig for your life,
Or ſhortly you'll dig for your living. Denham.
Aćtors muſt repreſent ſuch things as they are capable to
perform, and by which both they and the ſcribbler may get
their living. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
3. Benefice of a clergyman.
Some of our miniſters having the livings of the country
offered unto them, without pains, will, neither for any love
of God, nor for all the good they may do, by winning ſouls
to God, be drawn forth from their warm neſts. Speºſer.
The parſon of the pariſh preaching againſt adultery, Mrs.
Bull told her huſband, that they would join to have him
turned out of his living for uſing perſonal reflections. Arbuth.
LI'v INGLY. adv. [from living.] In the living ſtate.
In vain do they ſcruple to approach the dead, who livingly
are cadaverous, or fear any outward pollution, whoſe tem-
per pollutes themſelves. Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. iv.
LP/RE. m. ſ. [French.] The ſum by which the French rec-
kon their money, equal nearly to our ſhilling.
L1x1'v1AL. adj. [from lixivium, Latin.]
1. Impregnated with ſalts like a lixivium.
The ſymptoms of the excretion of the bile vitiated, were
a yellowiſh colour of the ſkin, and a lixivial urine. Arbuth.
2. Obtained by lixivium.
Helmont conjectured, that lixivial ſalts do not pre-exiſt in
their alcalizate form. Boyle.
Li'xivi At E. adj. [lixivieux, French; from lixivium.] Making
a lixivium.
In theſe the ſalt and lixiviated ſeroſity, with ſome portion
of choler, is divided between the guts and the bladder.
Brown's /ulgar Errours, b. iii.
Lixiviate ſalts, to which pot aſhes belong, by piercing the
bodies of vegetables, diſpoſe them to part readily with their
tinéture. Boyle.
LIXI/IUM. m. ſ. [Lat.J Lye ; water impregnated with ſalt
of whatſoever kind; a liquor which has the power of ex-
traštion.
I made a lixivium of fair water and ſalt of wormwood,
and having frozen it with ſnow and ſalt, I could not diſcern
any thing more like to wormwood than to ſeveral other
plants. Boyle.
Li'zARD. m. ſ. [liſarde, French; lacertus, Latin.] An animal
reſembling a ſerpent, with legs added to it.
There are ſeveral forts of lizards; ſome in Arabia of a
cubit long. In America they eat lizards; it is very probable
likewiſe that they were eaten ſometimes in Arabia and Ju-
daea, ſince Moſes ranks them among the unclean creatures.
Calmet.
Thou'rt like a foul miſ-ſhapen ſtigmatick,
Mark'd by the deſtinies to be avoided,
As venomous toads, or lizards dreadful ſtings. Shakespeare.
Adder's fork, and blind worm's ſting,
Lizard's leg, and owlet's wing. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
LIZA'RDITAL. m. ſ. A plant.
Liz A'Roston E. m. ſ. [lizard and ſtone..] A kind of ſtone.
L.L.D. m.ſ. [legum doctor.] A doctor of the canon and civil laws.
Lo. interject. [Ia, Saxon.] Look; ſee; behold. It is a word
uſed to recall the attention generally to ſome objećt of fight;
ſometimes to ſomething heard, but not properly ; often to
ſomething to be underſtood.
Lo / within a ken our army lies. Shakespeare.
Now muſt the world point at poor Catharine,
And ſay, lo / there is mad Petruchio's wife. Shakeſpeare.
Lo! I have a weapon,
A better never did itſelf ſuſtain
Upon a ſoldier's thigh.
Thou did'ſt utter,
I am yours for ever.
—Why lo you now, I’ve ſpoke to the purpoſe twice. Shakespeare
For lo! he ſung the world’s ſtupenduous birth. Rºſcom.
Lo / heav'n and earth combine
To blaſt our bold deſign.
Loach. m. ſ. [loche, French.]
The loach is a moſt dainty fiſh; he breeds and feeds in
little and clear ſwift brooks or rills, and lives there upon the
gravel, and in the ſharpeſt ſtreams: he grows not to be above
a finger long, and no thicker than is ſuitable to that length:
he is of the ſhape of an eel, and has a beard of wate's like
a barbel: he has two fins at his fides, four at his belly, and
one at his tail, dappled with many black or brown ſpots:
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Dryden's Albion.
his
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 35</div><p class="Text">L C A
I, O A
—-T ****
his mouth, barbel-like, under his noſe. This fiſh is uſually
full of eggs or ſpawn, and is by Geſner, and other learned
phyſicians, commended for great nouriſhment, and to be
vety grateful both to the palate and ſtomach of ſick perſons,
and is to be fiſhed for with a very ſmall worm, at the bot-
tom, for he very ſeldom or never riſes above the gravel.
J/alton's Angler.
load. m. ſ. [place, Saxon.]
1. A burthen; a frcight; lading.
Then on his back he laid the precious load,
And ſought his wonted ſhelter. Dryden's Nun's Tale.
2. Anything that depreſſes.
How a man can have a quiet and cheerful mind under a
great burden and load of guilt, I know not, unleſs he be
very ignorant. Ray on Creation.
3. As much drink as one can bear.
There are thoſe that can never ſleep without their load,
nor enjoy one eaſy thought, till they have laid all their cares
to reſt with a bottle. L’Eſtrange.
To Load. v. a. [plaban, Saxon.]
1. To burden; to freight.
At laſt, laden with honour's ſpoils,
Returns the good Andronicus to Rome. Shakeſpeare.
Your carriages were heavy lºaden; they are a burden to
the beaſt. Iſa. xlvi. 1.
2. To encumber; to embarraſs. -
He that makes no reflexions on what he reads, only loads
his mind with a rhapſody of tales, fit in winter nights for
the entertainment of others. Locke.
3. To charge a gun.
A mariner having diſcharged his gun, and loading it ſud-
denly again, the powder took fire. I/iſeman.
4. To make heavy by ſomething appended or annexed.
Thy dreadful vow, loaden with death, ſtill ſounds
In my ſtunn'd ears. Addiſon's Cato.
LoAD. m. ſ. [more properly lode, as it was anciently written
from laeoan, Saxon, to lead..] The leading vein in a mine.
The tin lay couched at firſt in certain ſtrakes amongſt the
rocks, like the veins in a man's body, from the depth whereof
the main load ſpreadeth out his branches, until they approach
the open air. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Their manner of working in the load mines, is to follow
the load as it lieth. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Lo'ADER. n. ſ. [from load.] He who loads,
lºss. n, ſ, [lode and man.] He who leads the way; a
pilot.
Lo'Adstar. m. ſ. [more properly as it is in Maundeville, lode-
ſiar, from laeban, to lead..] The poleſtar; the cynoſure;
the leading or guiding ſtar.
She was the leadſar of my life; ſhe the bleſºng of mine
eyes; ſhe the overthrow of my deſires, and yet the recom-
pence of my overthrow. Sidney.
My Helice, the load/lar of my life. Spenſer.
O happy fairſ
Your eyes are load/fars, and your tongue ſweet air;
More tuneable than lark to ſhepherd's ear
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. Shakespeare
That clear majeſty
Which ſtandeth fix’d, yet ſpreads her heavenly worth,
Lodeſtone to hearts, and led ſtar to all eyes. Davies.
Lºadstone. n. ſ. [properly iodºſiºne or ladingſ:nº. See
Loadstar.] The magnet; the ſtone on which the mari-
ners compaſs needle is touched to give it a direction north
and ſouth.
The loadſtone is a peculiar and rich ore of iron, found in
large maſſes, of a deep iron-grey where freſh broken, and
often tinged with a browniſh or reddiſh colour: it is very
heavy, and confiderably hard, and its great character is that
of affecting iron. This ore of iron is found in England,
and in moſt other places where there arc mines of that metal.
Hill's Materia Medica.
The uſe of the loadſtone was kept as ſecret as any of the
other myſteries of the art. Swift.
Loaf, n.f. [from hlar or lar, Saxon.]
I. A maſs of bread as it is formed by the baker: a loaf is
thicker than a cake.
Eaſy it is
Of a cut loaf to ſteal a ſhive, we know. Shakeſpeare.
The bread and bread corn in the town ſufficed not for fix
days: hereupon the ſoldiers entered into proportion; and,
tº give example, the lord Clinton limited himſelf to a loaf a
day. Hayward.
With equal force you may break a lºaf of bread into more
and leſs parts than alump of lead of the ſame bigneſs. Digby.
* Any maſs into which a body is wrought.
Your wine becomes ſo limpid, that you may bottle it with
3 piece of leaf ſugar in each bottle. Mort.
AM. m. ſ. [lim, laam, Saxon; limus, Latin; from 2 ſºn,
a fen, junius.] Fat, unctuous, tenacious, earth; marl.
The pureſt treaſure
Is ſpotleſs reputation; that away,
Men are but gilded ban, or painted clay. Shakeſpeare.
Alexander returneth to duit; the duſt is earth; of earth
we make lºan; and why of that lºan might they not ſtop a
beer barrel Sha&amp;#xtre's Hamlet.
To Lo AM. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſmear with loam,
marl, or clay; to clay.
The jºiſt ends, and girders which be in the walls, muſt
be loamed all over, to preſerve them from the corroding of the
mortar. . 44-yan's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Lo'AMY. adj. [from loam.] Marl
The mellow earth is the beſt, between the two extrennes
of clay and ſand, eſpecially if it be not loamy and binding.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſ. Nº. 665.
Auricula ſeedlings beſt like a loamy ſand, or light moſt
earth; yet rich and ſhaded. Evelyn's Kalºmir.
LoAN. n.ſ. [plan, Saxon.] Anything lent; any thing given
to another, on condition of return or repayment.
The better ſuch ancient revenues ſhall be anſwered and
. the leſs need her majeſty aſk ſubſidies, fifteens, and
away.
Bacon.
- You're on the fret,
Becauſe, in ſo debauch'd and vile an age,
Thy friend and old acquaintance dares diſown
The gold you lent him, and forſwear the law. Dryden,
LoATH. adj. [lab, Saxon.j Unwilling; diſliking; not ready ;
not inclined. -
Theſe freſh and delightful brooks, how ſlowly they ſide
away, as loth to leave the company of ſo many things united
in perfection. Sidney.
With lofty eyes, half leth to look ſo low,
She thanked them in her diſdainful wiſe,
Ne other grace vouchſafed them to ſhow
Of princeſs worthy. Fairy Queen, b. i.
When he heard her anſwers lath, he knew
Some ſecret ſorrow did her heart diſtrain. Fairy Q:ſecn.
To ſpeak ſo indirectly, I am ſath ;
I'd ſay the truth; but to accuſe him ſo,
That is your part. Shakeſp. Megſ, for Meaſure.
Long doth ſhe ſtay, as ºth to leave the land,
From whoſe ſoft ſide ſhe firſt did iſſue make,
She taſtes all places, turns to ev'ry hand,
Her flow'ry banks unwilling to forſake. Davier.
Then wilt thou not be loth
To leave this paradiſe, but ſhalt poſſeſs -
A paradiſe within thee, happier far ! Milton's Par. Loft.
To pardon willing, and to puniſh loth;
You ſtrike with one hand, but you heal with both :
Lifting up all that proſtrate lie, you grieve
You cannot make the dead again to live. Waller.
When Æneas is forced to kill Lauſus, the poet ſhews him
compaſſionate, and is loth to deſtroy ſuch a maſter-piece of
Inature. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
As ſome faint pilgrim ſtanding on the ſhore, -
Firſt vicws the torrent he would venture o'er ;
And then his inn upon the farther ground,
Loth to wade through, and lather to go round :
Then dipping in his ſtaff does trial make
How deep it is ; and, fighing, pulls it back. Dryden.
I know you ſhy to be oblig'd :
And ſtill more leath to be oblig'd by me. Southern.
To Lo ATHE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To hate; to look on with abhorrence.
Parthenia had learned both liking and miſliking, loving
and loathing. - Sidney.
They with their filthineſs
Polluted this ſame gentle ſoil long time,
That their own mother leath'd their beaſtlineſs. Fa. 28.
The fiſh in the river ſhall die, and the river flink ; and
the Egyptians ſhall leath to drink of the water. Exod. vii. 18.
How am I caught with an unwary oath, -
Not to reveal the ſecret which I loath ! IZºller.
For thee the lion leaths the taſe of blood,
And roaring hunts his female through the wood. Dryden.
Why do I ſtay within this hated place,
Where every object ſhocks my loathing eyes. Rowe.
Now his exalted ſpirit baths * ,-
Incumbrances of food and cloaths. Swift,
2. To conſider with the diſguſt of ſatiety.
Loathing the honey'd cakes, I long for brºad. Cowley.
Our appetite is extinguiſhed with the ſatifaction, and is
ſucceeded by loathing and ſatiety. Kagers's Sermons.
3. To ſee food with diſlike. -
Lating is a ſymptom well known to attend diſorders of
the ſtomach ; and the cure muſt have regard to the cauſe.
- 9:/iny.
To Lo Artie. ... n. To create diſguſt; to cauſe abhorrence.
where I was wont to ſeek the honey bce,
The griſly toadflool grown there might I ſee, ſ
And kathing paddocks lording on the ſame. Spenſer.
1 5 P Lo"ATHER.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 36</div><p class="Text">L O C
L O B
Loather. n.ſ. [from bath.J.9." " loaths,
i.ºrg.ul. adj. [loath and fººl
ing; hating.
**śith halful eyes behold.
He would no more endure.
- d; hated.
2. Asºº the reach of loathful ſinful luſt,
whoſe baſe effect, through cowardly diſtruſt
of his weak wings, dare not to heaven flie. Spenſer.
Loarningly. adv. [from loathe..] In a faſtidious manner.
Loathly. adj. [from loath..] Hateful; abhorred ; czciting
hatred. -- - -
An huge great dragon, horrible in fight,
Bred in the loathly lakes of Tartary, - -
With murd’rous ravin. hey do obſ Fairy Queen, b. i.
The people fear me; for they do obſerve
uß. '. and loathly § of nature. Shakeſp.
Sour-ey'd diſdain, and diſcord ſhall beſtow
The unión of your bed with weeds ſo leathy, •
That you ſhall hate it. ... Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Loſarily adv. [from loath..] Unwillingly; without liking or
inclination. -
The upper ſtreams make ſuch haſte to have their part of
embracing, that the nether, though bthly, muſt needs give
place unto them. Sidney.
Hubberd's Tale.
Lothly oppoſite I ſtood -
To his unnat'ral purpoſe. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
This ſhews that you from nature lothly ſtray,
That ſuffer not an artificial day. Donne.
LoathNess. n.ſ.. [from leath.] Unwillingneſs.
The fair ſoul herſelf
Weigh’d between lothneſ, and obedience,
Which end the beam ſhould bow.
Pray you, look not ſad,
Nor make replies of lothneſs. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
Should we be taking leave,
As long a term as yet we have to live, -
The lothneſs to depart would grow. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
After they had ſat about the fire, there grew a general
filence and lothneſs to ſpeak amongſt them; and immediately
one of the weakeſt fell down in a ſwoon. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Lo'ATH some. adj. [from loath.]
1. Abhorred; deteſtable.
The freſh young fly
Did much diſdain to ſubject his deſire
To loathſome ſloth, or hours in eaſe to waſte. Spenſer.
While they pervert pure nature's healthful rules
To loathſome ſickneſs. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
If we conſider man in ſuch a loathſome and provoking con-
dition, was it not love enough that he was permitted to en-
joy a being. South's Sermons.
2. Cauſing ſatiety or faſtidiouſneſs.
The ſweeteſt honey
Is loathſome in its own deliciouſneſs,
And in the taſte confounds the appetite. Shakeſpeare.
lº. n: ſ [from loathſome.] Quality of raiſing
hatred.
The catacombs muſt have been full of ſtench and loathſºme-
meſ, if the dead bodies that lay in them were left to rot in
open nitches. Addiſon.
Loaves, plural of loaf.
Democritus, when he lay a dying, cauſed loaves of new
bread to be opened, and he poured a little wine into them;
and ſo kept himſelf alive with the odour till a feaſt was paſt.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt, No. -
LoB. m. ſ. ift 934
1. Any one heavy, clumſy, or ſluggiſh.
Farewel, thou lob of ſpirits, I'll be gone,
Our queen and all her elves come here anon. Shakeſp.
2. Lob's pound; a priſon. Probably a priſon for idlers, or
fturdy beggars.
Crowdero, whom in irons bound,
Thou baſely threw'ſt into lob's pound. Hudibras.
3. A big worm.
For the trout the dew worm, which ſome alſo call the lab
worm, and the brandling are the chief. Walton's Angler.
To LoB. v. a. To let fall in a ſlovenly or lazy manner.
The horſemen fit like fixed candleſticks,
?. poor jades
* down their heads, dropping the hide and hips. Shakespeare
Lo'BBY, n.ſ. [laube, German.] . opening sº IOOIIl. 'ſ
- ... His lobbies fill with 'tendance,
Rain ſacrificial whiſp'rings in his ear,
Make ſacred even his ſtirrop. Shakeſp. Tim. of Athens.
- Before the duke's riſing from the table, he ſtood expecting
till he ſhould paſs through a kind of lobby between that room
and the next, where were divers attending him. Wotton.
Try your back ſtairs, and let the /obby wait,
A ſtratagem in war is no deceit. King's Horace.
Lobs. n.ſ. ſlobe, French; *$3:..] A diviſion; a diſtinct part:
uſed commonly for a part of the lungs.
Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Nor could the lobes of his rank liver ſwell
To that prodigious maſs, for their eternal meal. Dryden.
Air bladders form lobuli, which hang upon the bronchia
like bunches of grapes; theſe lobuli conſtitute the lobes, and
the lobes the lungs. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
Loºster. n.ſ. ſlobrzen, Saxon.] A cruſtaceous fiſh.
Thoſe that caſt their ſhell, are the lobſter, the crab, and
craw-fiſh. Bacon's Nat. Hiſ?. Nº. 732.
It happeneth often that a lobſter hath the great claw of one
ſide longer than the other. Brown's Vulgar Errour.
LOCAL. adj. [local, French; locus, Latin.j
1. Having the properties of place.
By aſcending, after that the ſharpneſs of death was over-
come, he took the very local poſſeſſion of glory, and that to
the uſe of all that are his, even as himſelf before had wit–
neſſed, I go to prepare a place for you. Hooker, b. v.
A higher flight the vent'rous goddeſs tries,
Leaving material worlds, and local ſkies. Prior-
2. Relating to place.
The circumſtance of local nearneſs in them unto us, might
haply enforce in us a duty of greater ſeparation from them.
than from thoſe other. Hooker, b. iv.
Where there is only a local circumſtance of worſhip, the
ſame thing would be worſhipped, ſuppoſing that circumſtance
changed. Stillingfleet.
3. Being in a particular place.
Dream not of their fight,
As of a duel, or the local wounds
Of head, or heel. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xiii.
How is the change of being ſometimes here, ſometimes
there, made by local motion in vacuum, without a change in
the body moved Digby on Bodies.
Loca'lity. m. ſ. [from local.] Exiſtence in place; relation of
place, or diſtance.
That the ſoul and angels are devoid of quantity and di-
menſion, and that they have nothing to do with groſſer loca-
lity, is generally opinioned. Glanville's Scºp.
Loca’lly, adj. [from local.] With reſpect to place.
Whether things, in their natures ſo divers as body and
ſpirit, which almoſt in nothing communicate, are not eſſen-
tially divided, though not locally diſtant, I leave to the rea-
ders. Glanville's Scep-
Location. n.ſ. [locatio, Latin.] Situation with reſpect to
place; ačt of placing; ſtate of being placed.
To ſay that the world is ſomewhere, means no more than
that it does exiſt; this, though a phraſe borrowed from place,
fignifying only its exiſtence, not location. Locke.
Loch. n.ſ. A lake. Scottiſh.
A lake or loch, that has no freſh water running into it,
will turn into a ſtinking puddle. Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
Lock. m. ſ. [loc, Saxon, in both ſenſes.]
1. An inſtrument compoſed of ſprings and bolts, uſed to faſten
doors or cheſts.
No gate ſo ſtrong, no lock ſo firm and faſt,
But with that piercing noiſe flew open quit or braſt. F. Qu.
We have locks to ſafeguard neceſſaries,
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves. Shakeſpeare.
As there are locks for ſeveral purpoſes, ſo are there ſeveral
inventions in locks, in contriving their wards or guards. Moxon.
2. The part of the gun by which fire is ſtruck.
A gun carries powder and bullets for ſeven charges and
diſcharges: under the breech of the barrel is one box for the
powder; a little before the lock, another for the bullets; be-
hind the cock a charger, which carries the powder to the
further end of the lock. Grew's Muſeum.
3. A hug; a grapple.
They muſt be pračtiſed in all the locks and gripes of wreſt-
ling, as need may often be in fight to tugg or grapple, and
to cloſe. ilton on Education.
4. Any incloſure.
Sergeſthus, eager with his beak to preſs
Betwixt the rival gally and the rock,
Shuts up th’ unwieldy centaur in the lock. Dryden's Aen.
5. A quantity of hair or wool hanging together.
Well might he perceive the hanging of her hair in locks,
ſome curled, and ſome forgotten. Sidney.
A goodly cypreſs, who bowing her fair head over the wa-
ter, it ſeemed ſhe looked into it, and dreſſed her green locks
by that running river. Sidney.
His grizly locks, long growen and unbound,
Diſordered hung about his ſhoulders round. Fairy Qu.
The bottom was ſet againſt a lock of wool, and the ſound
was quite deaded. Bacon.
They nouriſh only a lock of hair on the crown of their
heads. Sandys's Travels.
A lock of hair will draw more than a cable rope. Grew.
Behold the locks that are grown white
Beneath a helmet in your father's battels. Addiſon's Cato.
Two locks graceful hung behind
In equal curls, and well-conſpir'd, to deck
With ſhining ringlets her ſmooth iv'ry neck. Pºpe.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
6. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 37</div><p class="Text">L O D
6. A tuft. - - -
I ſuppoſe this letter will find thee picking of daiſies, or
ſmelling to a lock of hay. Addiſon's Spectator.
To Lock. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſhut or faſten with locks.
The garden, ſeated on the level floor,
She left behind, and locking ev'ry door, -
Dryden.
Thought all ſecure.
2. To ſhut up or cogfine, as with locks.
I am lockt in one of them ;
If you do love me, you will find me out. Shakeſpeare:
We do lock
Our former ſample in our ſtrong-barr'd gates. Shakeſp.
Then ſeek to know thoſe things which make us bleſt,
And having found them, lock them in thy breaſt. Denham.
- The frighted dame
The log in ſecret lock'd. Dryden's Ovid.
If the door to a council be kept by armed men, and all
ſuch whoſe opinions are not liked kept out, the freedom of
thoſe within are infringed, and all their acts as void as if they
were locked in. Dryden's Án.
One conduces to the poets completing of his work; the
other ſlackens his pace, and locks him up like a knight-errant
in an enchanted caſtle. Dryden's Dedicat. To the Æn.
The father of the gods
Confin'd their fury to thoſe dark abodes,
And lock'd'em ſafe within, oppreſs'd with mountain loads.
* Dryden's Án.
If one third of the money in trade were locked up, muſt
not the landholders receive one third leſs. Locke.
Always lack up a cat in a cloſet where you keep your china
plates, for fear the mice may ſteal in and break them. Swift.
Your wine lock'd up,
Plain milk will do the feat.
3. To cloſe faſt.
Death blaſts his bloom, and locks his frozen eyes. Gay.
To Lock. v. n.
1. To become faſt by a lock. -
For not of wood, nor of enduring braſs,
Doubly diſparted it did lock and cloſe, -
That when it lacked, none might through it paſs. Fa. ©g.
2. To unite by mutual inſertion.
Either they lack into each other, or ſlip one upon another's
ſurface; as much of their ſurfaces touches as makes them
Boyle.
Pope's Horace.
cohere.
Lºcker. n.ſ.. [from lock.] Any thing that is cloſed with a
lock; a drawer.
I made lºckers or drawers at the end of the boat. R. Cruſºe.
lºcket. n.ſ. ſequet, French.J A ſmall lock; any catch or
ſpring to faſten a necklace, or other ornament.
Where knights are kept in narrow liſts,
With wooden lockets 'bout their wriſts. Hudibras, p. ii.
LockRAM. n.ſ. A ſort of coarſe linen. Hanmer.
The kitchen malkin pins
Her richeſt lockram 'bout her reeky neck, -
Clamb'ring the walls to eye him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Lockron. n.). A kind of rānunculus.
LocoMotion. n.ſ. [lacus and motus, Lat.J Power of change-
ing place.
. All progreſſion, or animal locomotion, is performed by draw-
ing on, or impelling forward, ſome part which was before at
quiet. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
LºcoMotive, adj. [lacus and moves, Lat] Changing place;
having the power of removing or changing place.
I ſhall conſider the motion, or locomotive faculty of ani-
Derham's Phyſico-Theol.
In the night too oft he kicks,
Prior.
Or ſhows his locomotive tricks.
An animal cannot well be defined from any particular, or-
ganical part, nor from its locomotive faculty, for ſome adhere
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
mals.
to rocks.
Lo'cust. n.ſ. ſlocuſa, Latin.]
The Hebrews had ſeveral ſorts of locuſis, which are
not known among us: the old hiſtorians and modern tra-
vellers remark, that locuſ's are very numerous in Africk, and
many places of Aſia; that ſometimes they fell like a cloud
upon the country, and cat up every thing they meet with,
Moſes deſcribes four ſorts of locº/?s. Since there was a pro-
hibition againſt uſing locuſes, it is not to be queſtioned but
that theſe creatures were commonly eaten in Paleſtine, and
the neighbouring countries. Calmet.
To-morrow will I bring the locuſ's into thy coaſt. Exod.
Air replete with the ſteams of animals, rotting, has pro-
duced peſtilential fevers; ſuch have likewiſe been raiſed by
great quantities of dead locuſ’s. Arbuthnot on Air.
Locust-tree. m. ſ.
The locuſ-tree hath a papilionaceous flower, from whoſe
calyx ariſes the pointal, which afterwards becomes an uni-
capſular hard pod, including roundiſh hard ſeeds, which are
ſurrounded with a fungous ſtringy ſubſtance, AMiller.
Lodestar. See Loapstar.
lobestone. See Loadstone.
-º-º-º-º-º-º-º-ºur-
To Lodge. v. a. [logian, Saxon; lºger, French.]
1. To place in a temporary habitation. -
When he was come to the court of France, the king
ſtiled him by the name of the duke of York; lodged him,
and accommodated him, in great ſtate. Bacon's Henry VII,
2. To afford a temporary dwelling; to ſupply with harbour for
a night.
Dryden-
Ev'ry houſe was proud to lodge a knight.
3. To place; to plant. -
When on the brink the foaming boar I met,
And in his ſide thought to have lodg’d my ſpear,
The deſp'rate ſavage ruſh'd within my force,
And bore me headlong with him down the rock. Orway.
He lodg’d an arrow in a tender breaſt,
That had ſo often to his own been preſt. Addison's Ovid.
In viewing again the ideas that are lodged in the memory,
the mind is more than paſſive. Locke.
4. To fix; to ſettle.
By whoſe fell working I was firſt advanc'd,
And by whoſe pow'r I well might lodge a fear .
Shakeſpeare.
To be again diſplac'd.
I can give no reaſon,
More than a lodg’d hate, and a certain loathin -
I bear Antonio. Shakeſpeare's Merch. of Wenice.
5. To place in the memory. -
ld not underſtand, though he
This cunning the king wou
lodged it, and noted it, in ſome particulars. Bacon's H. VII.
6. To harbour or cover.
The deer is lodg’d, I’ve track'd her to her covert;
Ruſh in at once. Addiſon's Cato.
7. To afford place to: -
The memory can hage a greater ſtore of images, than all
the ſenſes can preſent at one time. Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
8. To lay flat.
Though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down,
Though caſtles topple on their warders heads. Shałºff.
We'll make foul weather with deſpiſed tears;
Our fighs, and they, ſhall lodge the Summer corn,
And make a dearth in this revolting land. Shakeſpeare,
To Lodge. v. n.
1. To reſide; to keep reſidence.
. Care keeps his watch in ev'ry old man's eye,
And where care lodgeth, ſleep will never lie. Shakeſp.
Something holy lodges in that breaſt, -
And with theſe raptures moves the vocal air
To teſtify his hidden reſidence. Milton,
And dwells ſuch rage in ſofteſt boſom then f
And lodge ſuch daring ſouls in little men Pope.
2. To take a temporary habitation. . .
Why commands the king,
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himſelf keepeth in the cold field Shafft.
I know not where he lodges; and for me to deviſe a lodg-
ing, and ſay, he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in
mine own throat. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the
2 Sam. xvii. 8.
people.
3. To take up reſidence at night.
My lords
And ſoldiers, ſtay and lodge by me this night. Shakespeare .
Oh, that I had in the wilderneſs a lºdging place of way-
faring men, that I might leave my people. jer. ix. 4.
Here thou art but a ſtranger travelling to thy country; it
is therefore a huge folly to be afflićted, becauſe thou haſ a
leſs convenient inn to lodge in by the way. Taylor.
4. To lie flat.
Long cone wheat they reckon in Oxfordſhire beſt for rank
clays; and its ſtraw makes it not ſubject to lodge, or to be
mildewed. 44%rtimer's Huſandy.
LoDo E. m. / [logis, French.]
I. A ſmall houſe in a park or foreſt.
He brake up his court, and retired himſelf, his wife and
children, into a certain foreſt thereby, which he calleth his
deſart, wherein he hath built two fine dodges. Sidney.
1 fºnd him as melancholy as a lodge in a warren. Sº,
He and his lady both are at the Iodge,
Upon the north ſide of this pleaſant Chace. Shakespeare eare.
Thus at their ſhady lodge arriv'd, both ſtood,
Both turn'd, and under open ſky ador'd
The God that made both ſky, air, earth. Milton
Whenever I am turned out, my lºdge deſcends upon .
low-ſpirited family. Swi
2. Any ſmall houſe; as, the porter's lodge. ºft.
loºpGEMENT, n.ſ.. [from lºgº, logºmº, French.]
1. Accumulation, or collocation in a certain Place.
The curious lodgement and inoſculation of the auditory
"Wºrd diaphragm from a me Derham.
- * **ement of extra.
vaſated matter. - Sharp's Sur
2. Pºiº i. the . s work. gery.
e military pedant is makin -
battels, from one end of the year . #. and ſº
Lo'ccer.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 38</div><p class="Text">L O G
L O G
LoºpG ER. m. ſ. [from lºdge.] . .
1. Cne who ſº in rooms hired in the houſe of another.
te, call'ſ thou me hoſt now, I ſcorn the term ;
nº Nell keep lºdgers. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
There were in a family, the man and his wife, three chil-
dren, and three ſervants or lodgers. Graunt’s Bill.
Thoſe houſes are ſooneſt infected that are crowded with
multiplicity of lodgers, and naſty families. Harvey.
The gentlewoman begged me to ſtep ; for that a º
ſhe had taken in was run mad. Tatler, N . 88.
Sylla was reproached by his fellow lºdger, that whilſt the
fellow lodger paid eight pounds one ſhilling and fivepence
halfpeny for the uppermoſt ſtory, he paid for the reſt twenty-
four pounds four ſhillings and fourpence halfpeny. Artuthnot.
2. One that reſides in any place.
Look in that breaſt, moſt dirty dear;
Say, can you find but one ſuch lodger there Pºpe.
(DG ING.. n.ſ.. [from lodge.
º ºftº: ; * hired in the houſe of another.
I will in Caſio's lodging loſe this napkin,
And let him find it. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Let him change his lºdging from one end of the town to
andther, which is a great adamant of acquaintance. Bacon.
At night he came
To his known lºgings, and his country dame. . Dryden.
He defired his ſiſter to bring her away to the lodgings of
his friend. Addiſon's Guardian, Nº. 155.
Wits take lodgings in the ſound of Bow. Pope.
2. Place of reſidence. - -
, Fair boſom fraught with virtue's richeſt treaſure,
The neſt of love, the lodging of delight,
The bower of bliſs, the paradiſe of pleaſure,
The facred harbour of that heavenly ſpright. Spenſºr.
3. Harbour; covert, -
The hounds were uncoupled; and the ſtag thought it bet-
ter to truſt to the nimbleneſs of his feet, than to the ſlender
fortification of his lodging, Sidney.
. Convenience to ſleep on.
Their feathers ſerve to ſtuff our beds and pillows, yielding
us ſoft and warm lodging. Ray on Creation.
Loft. m. ſ. [Ilyſt, Welſh; or from lift.]
1. A floor.
There is a traverſe placed in a loft above. Bacon.
2. The higheſt floor.
To lull him in his ſlumber ſoft,
A trickling ſtream from high rock tumbling down,
And ever drizzling rain upon the loft,
Mixt with a murmuring wind.
3. Rooms on high.
Paſſing through the ſpheres of watchful fire,
And hills of ſnow, and lofts of piled thunder. Milton.
A weaſel once made ſhift to ſlink
In at a corn lºft, through a chink. Pope.
Lo's TILy; adv. [from lofty.
1. Qn high; in an elevated place.
2. Proudly; haughtily.
They ſpeak wickedly concerning oppreſſion; they ſpeak
loftily. Pſal. lxxiii. 8.
3. With elevation of language or ſentiment; ſublimely.
My lowly verſe may ſºftly ariſe,
And lift itſelf unto the higheſt ſkies.
Lo'FTINess, n.ſ.. [from lºfty.]
I. Height; local elevation.
2. Sublimity; elevation of ſentiment.
Three poets in three diſtant ages born;
The firſt in lºftingſ of thought ſurpaſs'd,
The next in majeſty; in both the laſt,
3. Pride; haughtineſs.
Auguſtus and Tiberius had loftingſ; enough in their tem-
per, and affected to make a ſovereign figure. , Collier.
Lorry, adj. [from lºft, or lift.j l
I. High 3 hovering; elevated in place.
See lºfty Lebanon his head advance, -
See nodding foreſts on the mountains ince. Pºpe's Mºffah.
2. Sublime; elevated in ſentiment.
He knew
Himſelf to fing and build the lofty rhyme.
3. Proud; haughty.
Man, the tyrant of our ſex, I hate,
A lowly ſervant, but a lºfty mate. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
£ºſy and ſour to them that lov’d him not ;
But to thoſe men that ſought him, ſweet as Summer, Shakesp
Log. n.ſ. [The original of this word is not known. Skinner
derives it from lºan, Saxon, to lie ; Junius from lºgge,
Dutch, ſluggiſh; Pºrhaps the Latin lignum, is the true j’
ginal.] A ſhapeleſ bulky piece of wood.
Would the light'ning had
Burnt up thoſe logs that thoji injoin'd to pile.
Fairy Queen, b. i.
Fairy Queen.
Dryden.
Milion.
Shakeſp.
he worms with ºny feet are bred under lºgs of timber,
and many times in gardens, where no logs are. Bacon.
Some lºg, Perhaps, upon the water. ſwam, .
An uſeleſs drift, which rudely cut within,
And hollow'd firſt a floating trough became,
And croſs ſome riv'let paſſage did begin.
The frighted dame &gt; -
The log in ſecret lock'd. Dryden's Ovid.
2. An Hebrew meaſure, which held a quarter of a cab, and
conſequently five-ſixths of a pint. According to Dr. Ar-
buthnot it was a liquid meaſure, the ſeventy-ſecond part of
the bath or ephah, and twelfth part of the hin. Calnet.
A meat offering, mingled with oil, and one log of oil.
Lev. xiv. Io.
Lo"G ARITH Ms. m. ſ. [lgarithme, Fr. 2.470; and 323.42.]
Lºgarithms, which are the indexes of the ratio's of num-
bers one to another, were firſt invented by Napier lord Mer-
Shiſon, a Scottiſh baron, and afterwards completed by Mr.
Briggs, Savilian profeſſor at Oxford. They are a ſeries of
artificial numbers, contrived for the expedition of calculation,
and proceeding in an arithmetical proportion, as the numbers
they anſwer to do in a geometrical one: for inſtance,
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7, 8 9
I, 2 4, 8 16 32 64 138 256 512
Where the numbers above, beginning with (o), and arith-
metically proportional, are called logarithms. The addition
and ſubtraction of lºgarithms anſwers to the multiplication and
diviſion of the numbers they correſpond with ; and this ſaves
an infinite deal of trouble. In like manner will the extrac-
tion of roots be performed, by diffecting the logarithms of
any numbers for the ſquare root, and trifecting them for thc
cube, and ſo on. Harris.
Lo'GGATs. n.ſ.
Lºgºats is the ancient name of a play or game, which is
one of the unlawful games enumerated in the thirty-third ſta-
tute of Henry VIII. It is the ſame which is now called kit-
tlepins, in which boys often make uſe of bones inſtead of
wooden pins, throwing at them with another bone inſtead of
Dryºn.
bowling. Hanmer.
Did theſe bones coſt no more the breeding, but to play at
toggats with them. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
LogoERHEAP. m. ſ. ſlogge, Dutch, ſtupid and head, or rather
from lºg, a heavy motionleſs maſs, as blockhead..] A dolt; a
blockhead; a thickſcul.
Where haft been, Hal
With three or four lºggerhead, amongſt three or fourſcore
hogſheads. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV.
Says this lºggerhead, what have we to do to quench other
peoples fires. L’Eſtrange.
To fall to Logg ER HEADs. łº ſcuffle ; to fight without wea-
To go to Log GER HEADs. pons.
A couple of travellers that took up an aſs, fell to logger-
head; which ſhould be his maſter. L’Eſtrange.
lº *abro. adj. [from loggerhead..] Dull; ſtupið ,
doltiſh.
You,”gerheaded and unpoliſh'd groom, what no at-
tendance 2 Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
LOGICK. m. ſ. ſlogique, French; *gica, Latin, from x4) of..]
The art of reaſoning.
Žºgº is the art of uſing reaſon well in our inquiries after
truth, and the communication of it to others. Jºiº, Logick.
Talk lºgic; with acquaintance,
And practiſe rhetorick in your common taſk. Shakeſpeare.
By a logick that left no mán any thing which he might call
his own, they no more looked upon it as the caſe ºf One
man, but the caſe of the kingdom. Clarendon.
Here foam’d rebellious /ºgicæ, gagg'd and bound,
There ſtript fair rhetorick ń on the ground. Pope.
Logical, adj. [from lºgicł.]
1. Pertaining to logick; taught in logick.
The heretick complained greatly of St. Auguſtine, as be-
ing too full of logical ſubtilties. Hooker, b. iii.
Thoſe who in a logical diſpute keep in general terms, would
hide a fallacy. Dryden's Prºf. to Ann. Mirab.
We ought not to value ourſelves upon our ability, in
giving ſubtile rules, and finding out lºgical arguments, ſince
it wºuld be more perfection not to want them. Baker.
2. Skilled in logick; furniſhed with logick.
A man who ſets up for a judge in criticiſm, ſhould have a
clear and logical head. Addison's Speci. Nº. 291.
Lººx. * [from lºgical.] According to the laws of
logick.
How can her old good man
With honour take her back again
From hence I lºgically gather,
The woman cannot live with cither. Prior.
LoGI’cIAN, n. ſ: [lºgicien, French; logicus, Latin.] A teacher
or profeſſor of logick; a man verſed in logick.
If a man can play the true brician, and have as well judg-
mºnt as invention, he may do great matters. Bacon.
-j If we may believe our logicians, man is diſtinguiſhed from
'all other creatures by the faculty of laughter. Addiſon.
Each flaunch polemick ſtubborn as a rock,
Each fierce logician ſtill expelling Locke,
Came whip and ſpur. Dunciad, b. iv.
A logician<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 39</div><p class="Text">L O ſ,
L O N
A logician might put a caſe that would ſerve for an excep-
tion. Swift.
The Arabian phyſicians were ſubtile men, and moſt of
them ſo icians; accordingly they have given method, and
ſhed ſubtilty upon their author. Baker.
Lo'GMAN. n.ſ. (lºg and man.] One whoſe buſineſs is to carry
logs.
8 For your ſake
Am I this patient logman. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Lo'Gomachy, n.ſ. [2070,2x2.] A contention in words; a
contention about words.
Forced terms of art did much puzzle ſacred theology with
diſtinctions, cavils, quiddities; and ſo transformed her to a
meer kind of ſophiſtry and logomachy. Howel,
Lo'Gwood. m. ſ.
Logwood is of a very denſe and firm texture; it is brought
to us in very large and thick blocks or logs, and is the heart
only of the tree which produces it. It is very heavy, and
remarkably hard, and of a deep, ſtrong, red colour. It
grows both in the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, but no where ſo
plentifully as on the coaſt of the bay of Campeachy. It has
been long known by the dyers, and was but lately intro-
duced in medicine, and is found to be an excellent aſtrin-
Hill's Aſat. Med.
gent. - - -
To make a light purple, mingle ceruſe with logwood wa-
ter, Peacham on Drawing.
Lo Hock. m. ſ.
Lohock is an Arabian name for thoſe forms of medicines
which are now commonly called Eclegma's, lambatives, or
linétus's. 2uincy.
Lohocks and pećtorals were preſcribed, and veneſe&amp;tion re-
peated. ///eman's Surgery.
Lois. n.ſ. [llwyn, Welſh.]
1. The back of an animal carved out by the butcher.
2. Loins; the reins.
My face I'll grime with filth,
Blanket my loinſ. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Thou ſlander of thy heavy mother's womb
Thou loathed iſſue of thy father's loins. Shałºp. Rich. III.
Virgin mother, hail I
High in the love of heav'n yet from my loins
Thou ſhalt proceed, and from thy womb the ſon
Of God moſt high. 44ilton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
A multitude l like which the populous north
Pour'd never from her frozen loins, to paſs
Rhene, or the Danaw, when her barbarous ſons
Came like a deluge on the ſouth. Milton,
To LOTTER. v. n.[lateren, Dutch..] To linger; to ſpend
time careleſsly; to idle.
Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to take
ſoldiers up in the countries. Shakespeare.
Whence this long delay
You liter, while the ſpoils are thrown away. Dryden.
, Mark how he ſpends his time, whether he unactively liters
it away. Locke.
If we have gone wrong, let us redeem the miſtake; if we
have litered, ſet us quicken our pace, and make the moſt of
the preſent opportunity. Rogers's Sermons.
L01TERER. m.ſ.. [from kiter.] A lingerer; an idler; a lazy
wrºtch; one who lives without buſineſs; one who is ſluggiſh
and dilatory. -
Give gloves to thy reapers a largeſs to cry,
And daily to kiterers have a good eye. 7:/ºr's Hºſ.
The poor, by idleneſs or unthriftineſs, are riotous ſpenders,
vagabonds, and literers. Hayward.
Where haſt thou been, thou loiterer P
Though my eyes clos'd, my arms have ſtill been open'd,
To ſearch if thou wert come. Otway,
Providence would only enter mankind into the uſefál
knºwledge of her treaſures, leaving the reſt to employ our
induſtry, that we live not like idle loiterers and truants. More.
Ever liſtleſs loit’rers, that attend
No cauſe, no truſt, no duty, and no friend. Pope.
Tº LOLL. v. n. (Of this word the etymology is not known.
Perhaps it might be contemptuouſly derived from llard, a
name of great reproach before the reformation; of whom
ºne tenet was, that all trades not neceſſary to life are un-
lawful.]
1. To lean idly; to reſt lazily againſt any thing.
$o hangs, and loll, and weeps upon me; ſo ſhakes and
pulls me. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
He is not lolling on a lewd love bed,
But on his knees at meditation. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Cloſe by a ſoftly murm'ring ſtream,
Where lovers us’d to loll and dream. Hudibras, p. i.
To loll on couches, rich with cytron ſteds,
And lay your guilty limbs in Tyrian beds. Dryden.
Void of care he loll ſupine in ſtate,
And leaves his buſineſs to be done by fate. Dryd, Perſ.
But wanton now, and lolling at our eaſe,
We ſuffer all the invetrate ills of peace, Dryden.
------ ---
- - A lazy, lolling ſort . . - -
Of ever liſtleſs loit’rers. Dunciad, h. iv.
2. To hang out. Uſed of the tongue hanging out in wearineſ:
or play.
The triple porter of the Stygian ſeat, -
With lºlling tongue lay fawning at thy feet. ... Drydºr.
With harmleſs play amidſt the bowls he paſs'd,
And with his loſing tongue aſſay'd the taſte. Dryden.
To Loll. v. a. To put out: uſed of the tongue exerted.
All authors to their own defe&amp;ts are blind;
Hadſt thou but, Janus-like, a face behind,
To ſee the people, when ſplay mouths they make,
To mark their fingers pointed at thy back, -
Their tongues /bla out a foot. Dryden's Perſus.
By Strymon's freezing ſtreams he ſat alone,
Trees bent their heads to hear him ſing his wrongs,
Fiercetygers couch'd around, and loll"d their fawning tongues.
Dryden's Wirgi';
By the wolf were laid the martial twins;
Intrepid on her ſwelling dugs they hung,
The foſter-dam bl/d out her fawning tongue. Dryden.
LoMP. n.ſ. A kind of roundiſh fiſh.
LoNE. adj. [contračted from alone.]
1. Solitary. -
Here the ſome hour a blank of life diſplays. Savage,
Thus vaniſh ſceptres, coronets and balls,
And leave you in ſome woods, or empty walls.
2. Single; without company.
No lone houſe in Wales, with a mountain and a rookery,
is more contemplative than this court. Pope.
Lo'NELINEss. n. / [from lonely..] Solitude; want of compa-
ny; diſpoſition to avoid company.
The huge and ſportful aſſembly grew to him a tedious
Joneſineſs, eſteeming nobody ſound ſince Daiphantus was loſt.
Sidney.
- 1 ſee
The myſtery of your lonelineſ, and find -
Your ſalt tears head. Shakeſpeare.
Lonely, adj. [from lone..] Solitary; addićted to ſolitude.
I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon; that his fen
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than ſeen. Shakeſp.
Why thus cloſe up the ſtars
That nature hung in heav'n, and fill'd their lamps
With everlaſting oil, to give due light
To the miſled and lonely traveller. AMilton.
Time has made you dote, and vainly tell
Pope.
Of arms imagin'd, in your lonely cell. Dryden's An.
When, faireſt princeſs,
You lonely thus from the full court retire,
Rowe.
Love and the graces follow to your ſolitude.
Lo'NENEss. m. ſ. [from lone..] Solitude; diſlike of company.
If of court life you knew the good,
You would leave (oneneſ. IDonne.
I can love
Her who loves loneneſ, beſt. IDonne.
Lo'Nesome. adj. [from Zone..] Solitary; diſmal.
You either muſt the earth from reſt diſturb,
Or roll around the heavens the ſolar orb;
Elſe what a dreadful face will nature wear 7
Blackmore,
How horrid will theſe loneſºme ſeats appear !
LoN.G. adj. [long, French; longus, Latin.j
1. Not ſhort.
He talked a long while, even till break of day. Ali, xx.
He was deſirous to ſee him of a long ſeaſon. Luke xxiii.
2. Having one of its geometrical dimenſions in a greater de-
gree than either of the other.
His branches became long becauſe of the waters. Ezek,
We made the trial in a long necked phial left open at the
top. - - Boyle,
3. Of any certain meaſure in length.
Women eat their children of a ſpan long. Lam, ii. 20.
4. Not ſoon ceaſing, or at an end.
Eccl. xii. 5.
Man goeth to his long home.
Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy day
long upon the land. y 2 %. º:
The phyſician cutteth off a long diſeaſe, Eccluſ, x, Io.
5. Dilatory.
Death will not be long in coming, and the covenant of
the grave is not ſhewed unto thee. Accluſ xiv. 12.
“ſ.rom the ..", tº lºng..] Longing; deſirous; or perhaps,
ong ºntinued, from the diſpoſition to continue looki
* thing deſired. P e looking at
raying for him, and caſting a lºng look that way, h
the galley leave the purſuit, S y; º:
By ev'ry circumſtance I know he loves; y.
Yet he but doubts, and Parlies, and caſts out
Many a long look-for ſuccour. Dryden
15 Q. Yet
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 40</div><p class="Text">L O N
L O N
* , , hing to a great diſtance. -
/ . Fºº *: i. too long for thee. Deut. xix. 24.
They are old by reaſºn of the very long journey. Jºſ. º:
8. In muſick and pronunciation.] Protraćted; as, a long note ;
| a long ſyllable.
LoN G. adv. length
1. To a great length. -
The marble brought, erects the ſpacious dome,
rforms the pillars long-extended rows
8. which .." planted º and penſile garden grows:
Prior.
, Not for a ſhort time. -
2 With mighty barres of long-enduring braſs. Fairfax.
When the trumpet ſoundeth long, they ſhall come up to the
mount. Exod. xix. 13.
The martial Ancus
Furbiſh'd the ruſty ſword again,
Reſum'd the lº. ſhield. - Dryden;
One of theſe advantages, that which Corneillº has laid
down, is the making c . º * º
- n the action of the play is to -
pećted day, whereo P. . Dramatick Poſy.
So ſtood the pious prince unmov’d, and long *
Suſtain'd the madneſs of the noiſy throng. Dryden's Aºn.
The muſe reſumes her long-forgotten lays,
And love, reſtor'd, his ancient realm ſurveys. Dryden.
No man has complained that you have diſcourſed too long
on any ſubject, for you leave us in an eagerneſs of learning
in 101 C. Dryden.
Perſia left for you
The realm of Candahar for dow'r I brought,
That long-contended prize for which you fought. Dryden.
It may help to put an end to that long-agitated and unrea-
ſonable queſtion, whether man's will be free or no? Locke.
Heav'n reſtores
To thy fond wiſh the long-expected ſhores. Pope's Odyſſey.
3. In the comparative, it ſignifies for more time; and in the
ſuperlative, for moſt time.
When ſhe could not longer hide him, ſhe took for him an
ark of bullruſhes. Exod. ii. 3.
Eldeſt parents ſignifies either the eldeſt men and women
that have had children, or thoſe who have longeſ? had
iſſue. Locke.
4. Not ſoon.
Not long after there aroſe againſt it a tempeſtuous wind.
Acts xxvii. 14.
5. At a point of duration far diſtant.
If the world had been eternal, thoſe would have been
found in it, and generally ſpread long ago, and beyond the
memory of all ages. Tillotſºn's Sermons.
Say, that you once were virtuous long ago?
A frugal, hardy people. Philips's Briton.
6. [For along ; au long, Fr.] All along; throughout.
Them among
There ſat a man of ripe and perfect age,
Who did them meditate all his life long. Fairy Queen.
Some ſay, that ever 'gainſt that ſeaſon comes,
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning fingeth all night long,
And then they ſay no ſpirit walks abroad.
The nights are wholeſome, then no planets ſtrike,
No fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm,
So hallow'd and ſo gracious is the time. Shakespeare . Hamlet.
He fed me all my life long to this day. Gen. xlviii. 15.
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation. Pſal.
LoNº. v. h.[selang, a fault, Saxon.] By the fault; by the
failure. A word now out of uſe, but truly Engliſh.
Reſpective and wary men had rather ſeek quietly their
own, and wiſh that the world may go well, ſo it be not long
of them, than with pains and hazard make themſelves ad.
viſers for the common good. Hooker, b. v.
Maine, Bloys, Poietiers, and Tours are won away,
Lºgº all of Somerſet, and his delay. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Miſtreſs, all this coyl is long of you. Shakeſpeare.
If we owe it to him that we know ſo much, it is perhaps
lºng of his fond adorers that we know ſo little more. Glanv.
To LoNG. v. n. [gelangen, German, to aſk. Skinner.] To
deſire earneſtly to wiſh with eagerneſs continued, with for
or after before the thing deſired.
Freſh expectation troubled not the land
With any lºng'd fºr change, or better ſtate. Shakeſpeare.
And thine eyes ſhall look, and fail with longing for them.
Deut. xxviii. 32.
If carſt he wiſhed, now he lenged fore. Fairfax, b. i.
| The great maſter perceived, that Rhodes was the place the
!. Turkiſh tyrant inged after. Knolles's Hiſt, of the Turks.
If the report be good, it cauſeth love
And longing hope, and well aſſured joy.
His ſons, who ſeek the tyrant to ſuſtain,
And long for arbitrary lords again,
He dooms to death deſervd.”
&gt;
Davies.
Dryden's AEn.
Glad of the gift, the new made warrior goes;
And arms among the Greeks, and ſº ſº equal foes. Pryd.
Eiſe whence this pleaſing hope, this fond deſire,
This longing after immortality Addison's Cato.
There's the tie º *.
ou lºng to call him father: Marcia's charms
W. ; your heart unſeen, and plead for Cato. Allſºn.
Nicomedés longing for herrings, . º: .." freſh
his cook, though at a great diſtance from the ſea.
ones by &gt; 5 9. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Through ſtormy ſeas
I courted dangers, and I lºng'd ſo death. A. Philips.
LoNGANIM1ty. n.ſ. [longaniºtitas, Latin; longaminlité, Fr.]
Forbearance; patience of offences.
It had overcome the patience of Job, as it did the meek-
neſs of Moſes, and ſurely had maſtered any but the longa-
nimity and laſting ſufferance of God. Brºwn's Pulg, Errours.
That innocent and holy matron had rather go clad in the
ſnowy white robes of meekneſs and lºngahimity, than in the
purple mantle of blood. Howell's England's Tears.
Ló'Nóboat. n.ſ. The largeſt boat belonging to a ſhip.
At the firſt deſcent on ſhoar, he did countenance the land-
ing in his longboat. Wotton.
They firſt betray their maſters, and then, when they find
the veſſel finking, ſave themſelves in the ſongboat. L’Eſtrange.
LoNGE'vity. n.ſ. [longaevus, Latin.] Length of life.
That thoſe are countries ſuitable to the nature of man,
and convenient to live in, appears from the longevity of the
natives. Ray on Creation.
The inſtances of longevity are chiefly amongſt the abſte-
mious. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
LoNG1'MANous, adj. [longuemain, French ; longimanus, Lat.]
Long-handed; having long hands.
The villainy of this Chriſtian exceeded the perſecution of
heathens, whoſe malice was never ſo longimanous as to reach
the ſoul of their enemies, or to extend unto the exile of their
elyſiums. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vii.
LoNG1(MetRY. m. ſ. ſlangus and werpia ; longimetrie, French.]
The art or pračtice of meaſuring diſtances.
Our two eyes are like two different ſtations in longimetry,
by the affiſtance of which the diſtance between two objects is
meaſured. Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
Lo'NGIN G. m. ſ. [from long.] Earneſt deſire ; continual wiſh.
When within ſhort time I came to the degree of uncer-
tain wiſhes, and that thoſe wiſhes grew to unquiet longings,
when I would fix my thoughts upon nothing, but that within
little varying they ſhould end with Philoclea. Sidney.
I have a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am ſick withal, -
To ſee great Hector in the weeds of peace. Shakeſpeare.
The will is left to the purſuit of nearer ſatisfactions, and
to the removal of thoſe uneaſineſſes which it then feels in its
want of, and longings after, them. Locke.
Lo'NGINGLY. adv. [from longing.] With inceſſant wiſhes.
To his firſt bias longingly he leans,
And rather would be great by wicked means. Dryden.
Lo'NG is H. adj. [from long.] Somewhat long.
LONGITUDE. n.ſ. [longitude, French; longitude, Latin.]
1. Length; the greateſt dimenſion.
The ancients did determine the longitude of all rooms,
which were longer than broad, by the double of their lati-
tude. Wotton's Architect.
The variety of the alphabet was in mere longitude only;
but the thouſand parts of our bodies may be diverſified by
ſituation in all the dimenſions of ſolid bodies; which muj-
tiplies all over and over again, and overwhelms the fancy in
a new abyſs of unfathomable number. Bentley's Sermons.
This univerſal gravitation is an inceſſant and uniform ac-
tion by certain and eſtabliſhed laws, according to quantity of
matter and longitude of diſtance, that it cannot be deſtroyed
nor impaired. Bentley's Sermºns.
2. The circumference of the earth meaſured from any meri-
dian.
Some of Magellanus's company were the firſt that did
compaſs the world through all the degrees of longitude. Allot.
3. The diſtance of any part of the earth to the eaſt or weſt of
any place.
- To conclude;
Of longitudes, what other way have we,
But to mark when and where the dark eclipſes be? Donne.
His was the method of diſcovering the longitude by bomb
veſſels. Arbuth, and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
4. The poſition of anything to eaſt or weſt.
The longitude of a ſtar is its diſtance from the firſt point
of numeration toward the eaſt, which firſt point, unto the
ancients, was the vernal equinox. Brown's Pulg. Errours.
LoNGITU'DINAL. adj. [from longitude; Iongitudinal, French.]
Meaſured by the length ; running in the longeſt direction. -
Lºngitudinal is oppoſed to tranſverſe: thºſe veſicula are
diſtended, and their longitudinal diameters ſtraitened, and ſo
the length of the whole muſcle ſhortened. C.
Lo's GLY.
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 41</div><p class="Text">L O O
L () ()
Lo'NGly. adv. [from lºng..] Longingly; with great liking.
Maſter, you look’d ſo longly on the maid,
Perhaps, you mark not what's the pith of all. Shaſ ſº.
Lo'No some. adj. [from long.] Tedious ; weariſome by its
length.
They found the war ſo churliſh and ſongſºme, as they grew
then to a reſolution, that, as long as º ſtood in ſtate
ut conſume them-
to ſuccour thoſe countries, they ſhould
Bacon's J/ar with Spain.
ſelyes in an endleſs war.
When chill'd by adverſe ſnows, and beating rain,
Prior.
We tread with weary ſteps the longſome plain.
Lo'NGSUFFERING. adj. [long and ſuffering.] Patient; not eaſily
provoked. -
The Lord God, merciful and gracious, longſºffring, and
abundant in goodneſs. Axod. xxxiv. 6.
Lo's Gsuffering. m. ſ. Patience of offence; clemency.
We infer from the mercy and longſift-ring of God, that
they were themſelves ſufficiently ſecure of his favour. Rogers.
Lo'NGTAIL. m. / [long and tail.J Cut and long tail: a cant-
ing term for, one or another.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
–Aye, that I will come cut and lºngtail under the degree
of a ſquire. Shakeſpeare's Merry //?ves of //indſor.
Lo's owAys. adv. [This and many other words ſo terminated
are corrupted from wiſe.] In the longitudinal direétion.
This iſland ſtands as a vaſt mole, which lies ſongways, al-
moſt in a parallel line to Naples. Addiſon on Italy.
Lo'Now INDED. adj. [long and wind...] Long-breathed; tedious.
My ſimile you minded,
Which, I confeſs, is too long winded. Swift.
Lo'NGwise. adv. [ſong and wife.] In the longitudinal direc-
tion.
They make a little croſs of a quill, longwiſe of that part of
the quill which hath the pith, and croſſwiſe of that piece
of the quill without pith. Bacon.
He was laid upon two beds, the one joined longwiſe unto
the other, both which he filled with his length. Hakewiſ.
Loo. m. ſ. A game at cards.
A ſecret indignation, that all thoſe affections of the mind
ſhould be thus Vilely thrown away upon a hand at loo, Addison
In the fights of loo. Pope.
Lo'obily, adj. [looby and like..] Aukward; clumſy.
The plot of the farce was a grammar ſchool, the maſter
ſetting his boys their leſſons, and a loobily country fellow put-
ting in for a part among the ſcholars. L’E/ºrange.
Loof. h. ſ. It is that part aloft of the ſhip which lies juſt be-
fore the cheſs-trees, as far as the bulk head of the caſtle.
Sea Die?ionary.
To Loof. v. a. To bring the ſhip cloſe to a wind.
Lo'oby. m. ſ. [Of this word the derivation is unſettled. Skin-
nºr mentions lapp, German, fºol/h; and junius, ſale, a
clown, Welſh, which ſeems to be the true original.] A lub-
ber; a clumſy clown.
The vices trace
From the father's ſcoundrel race.
Who could give the looby ſuch airs 2
Were they maſons, were they butchers ? Swift.
Loofed, adj. [from alºof..] Gone to a diſtance.
She once being lºft, Antony
Chips on his ſea-wing, like a doating mållard,
Leaving the fight. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
To Look. v. m. ſlocan, Saxon.]
1. To direct the eye to or from any object.
Your queen died, ſhe was more worth ſuch gazes
Than what you look on now. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
The gods look down, and the unnat'raſſcene
They laugh at. Shakeſpeare' Coriolanus.
Abimelech loºked out at a window, and ſaw Iſaac. Gen.
Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, ſo that I am
not able to look up. Pſal. xl. 12.
He was ruddy, and of a beautiful countenance, and goodly
I Sam. xvi. 12.
to lack to.
The fathers ſhall not look back to their children. jer.
He had lºrd round about on them with anger. A ſarà iſi.
The ſlate would caſt the eye, and look about to ſec, whe-
ther there were any head under whom it might unite. Bacon.
Fine devices of arching water without ſpilling, be pretty
things to look on, but nothing to health. Bacon's Eſſays.
Froth appears white, whether the ſun be in the meridian,
or anywhere between it and the horizon, and from what
Place foever the beholders ſook upon it. Boyle on Colouri,
They'll rather wait the running of the river dry, than take
Pains to loºk about for a bridge. L'A/trange.
Thus pond'ring, he look’d under with his cyes,
And ſaw the woman's tears. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Bertran; if thou dar'ſt, loºk out
Upon yon ſlaughter'd hoſt. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
cannot, without ſome indignation, look on an ill copy of
* excellent original; much leſs can I behold with patience
Virgil and Homer abuſed to their faces, by a botching in-
Dryden.
terpreter.
Intellectual being, in their conſtant endeavours after true
fºlicity, can ſuſpend this proſecution in particular caſes, till
they have looked before them, and informed themſelves, whe-
ther that particular thing he in their way to dº
- ºcate.
end.
- - - - - :^*...--&gt;
There may be in his reach a book, containing pictures
and diſcourſes capable to delight and inſtruct him, which yet
he may never take the pains to look into. - Zºe.
Towards thoſe who communicate their thoughts in print,
I cannot but look with a friendly regard, provided there is no
tendency in their writings to vice. Addiſon's Freeholder.
A ſolid and ſubſtantial greatneſs of ſoul looks down with a
generous neglect on the cenſures and applauſes of the multi-
tude. Addison's Speciator, N°. 255.
I have nothing left but to gather up the reliques of a
wreck, and look about me to ſee how few friends I have
Pope to Swift.
left.
The optick nerves of ſuch animals as lºok the ſame way
with both eyes, as of men, meet before they come into the
brain; but the optick nerves of ſuch animals, as do not lºok
the ſame way with both eyes, as of fiſhes, do not meet.
e ſame way yes, 'Nºwº, Opticks.
2. To have power of ſeeing. -
Fate ſees thy life lodg'd in a brittle glaſs,
Dryden.
And looks it thfough, but to it cannot paſs.
3. To direct the intelle&amp;tual eye.
In regard of our deliverance paſt, and our danger preſent
and to come, let us ſºok up to God, and every man reform
Bacon's New Atlantis.
his own ways. -
We are not only to look at the bare action, but at the rea-
Stillingſleet.
ſon of it.
The man only ſaved the pigeon from the hawk, that hº
might eat it himſelf; and if we look well about º we ſhall
find this to be the caſe of moſt mediations. . 'E/ºrange,
They will not look beyond the received notions of the place
and age, nor have ſo preſumptuous a thought as to *::::
Oc/ea.
than their neighbours.
Every º he would look into himſelf, would find ſome
defect of his particular genius. - - Locée.
Change a man's view of things; let him lºok into the fu-
ture ſtate of bliſs or miſery, and ſee there God, the righteous
Judge, ready to render every man according to his *}.
. To expect.
4. p Being once chaft, he ſpeaks
What's in his heart; and that is there, which ſºft -
With us to break his neck. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
If he long deferred the march, he muſt look to fight an-
other battle before he could reach Oxford, Clarendon.
5. To take care; to watch.
I lºok that ye bind them faſt. Shakeſpeare.
He that gathered a hundred buſhels of apples, had thereby
a property in them : he was only to look that he uſed them
before they ſpoiled, elſe he robbed others. Locke,
6. To be directed with regard to any objećt. . .
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look
ſtraight before thee. Prov. iv. 25.
7. To have any particular appearance.
I took the way,
Which through a path, but ſcarcely printed, lay;
And look'd as lightly preſs'd by fairy feet. Dryden.
That ſpotleſs modeſty of private and publick life, that ge-
nerous ſpirit, which all other Chriſtians ought to labour after,
ſhould look in us as if they were natural. Spratt's Serm.
Piety, as it is thought a way to the favour of God; and
fortune, as it looks like the effect either of that, or at leaſt of
prudence and courage, beget authority. Temple,
Cowards are offenſive to my fight;
Nor ſhall they ſee me do an act that looks
Below the courage of a Spartan king. Dryd. Cleomener.
Should I publiſh any favours done me by your lordſhip, I
am afraid it would look more like vanity than gratitude. Addison
Something very noble may be diſcerned, but it looketh
cumberſome. Felton on the Caſºs.
Late, a ſad ſpe&amp;tacle of woe, he trod
The deſart ſands, and now he looks a god. Pºpe's Odyſ.
From the vices and follies of others, obſerve how ſuch a
Prašice ºr in another perſon, and remember that it ſº,
- Watts.
as ill, or worſe, in yourſelf.
8. To ſeem.
To complain of want, and yet refuſe all offers of a ſup-
ply, ſooks very ſullen. Burnet'; 7heory of the Earth.
This makes it lºok the more like truth, natár. being fru-
gal in her principles, but various in the effºds thence ari-
ſing. - Cheyne's Philºſºphical Principles
9. To have any air, mien, or manner. -
Nay look not big, nor ſtamp, nor flare, nor fret
I will be maſter of what is mine OWn. Sºft a'47"
- What haſte looks through his eyes? peare.
Sº ſhould he lººk that ſeems to ſpeak things ſtrange. Shat,
Give me your hand, and truſt me you ſº well, and bear
your years very well. Sºare's Henry IV.
Can
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 42</div><p class="Text">º
|
L O O
can theſe, or ſuch, be ſºy ſº,” us?
J.2% they as they were built to ſhake the world, ºf r
Or be a moment to our ent"Pºº ? ... Benj. % ºn.
Though I cannot tell what a man ſays; if he will be ºn-
cere, I may eaſily know what he lºoks. - Collier.
It will be his lot to look ſingular in looſe and licentious
times, and to become * by-word. Atterbury's Sºrmons.
re. To form the air in any particular manner, in regarding or
beholding. -
I wºlcome the condition of the time,
which cannot look more hideouſly on me,
Than I have drawn it in my fantaſy. Shºff. Henry IV.
That which was the worſt now leaſt afflicts me:
Blindneſs, for had I fight, confus'd with ſhame,
How could I once took up, or heave the head. Milton.
Theſe lºok up to you with reverence, and would be ani-
mated by the fight of him at whoſe ſoul they have taken
fire in his writings. Swift to Pope.
11. To Look about one. To be alarmed ; to be vigilant.
It will import thoſe men who dwell careleſs to lock about
them; to enter into ſerious conſultation, how they may avert
that ruin. Decay of Piety.
If you find a waſting of your fleſh, then look about you,
eſpecially if troubled with a cough. Harvey on Conſumptions.
John's cauſe was a good milch cow, and many a man ſub-
ſiſted his family out of it: however, John began to think it
high time to look about him. Arbuthnot's Hiſł. ºf j. Bull.
12. Tº Look after. To attend; to take care of; to obſerve
1, O O
-
16. To Look on. To conſider.
He looked upon it as morally impoſitle, for perſons infi-
nitely proud to frame their minds to dº impartial conſidera-
tion of a religion that taught nothing but ſelf-denial and the
croſs. South's Sermons.
Do we not all profeſs to be of this excellent religion? but
who will believe that we do ſo, that ſhall lººk ºn the ac-
tions, and conſider the lives of the greateſt part of Chriſ-
tians. Tilotſºn's Sermons.
In the want and ignorance of almoſt all things, they ſº-
ed upon themſelves as the happi it and wifeit people of the
univerſe. Locke on human Un/ierſianding.
Thoſe prayers you make for your recovery are to be looked
upºn as beſ, heard by God, if they move him to a longer
continuance of your ſickneſs. Jºaº's Prepar. for Death.
17. To Look on. To be a mºre idle ſpectator.
I'll be a candle-holder, and loºk ºn. Shakeſpeare.
Some come to nect their friends, and to make merry :
others come only to ſº on. Bacon's Apº.5.
c- - --- - -
18. To Look over. To examine ; to try one by one.
Look o'er the preſent and the former time,
If no example of ſo vile a crime
Appears, then mourn. Dryden's juvenal.
- A young child, diſtracted with the number and variety of
his play-games, tired his maid ever day to look them over.
Lºcke on Education.
19. Tº Look out. To ſearch ; to ſeek.
When the thriving tradeſman has got more than he can
well employ in trade, his next thoughts are to look out for a
with care, anxiety, or tenderneſs. --
| Mens hearts failing them for fear, and for loºking after purchaſe. Locłe. º
s thoſe things which are coming on the earth. Luke xxi. 26. Where the body is affeded with pain or ſickneſs, we are -
º Politeneſs of manners, and knowledge of the world, ſhould forward enough to look out for remedies, to litten greedily to
principally be looked after in a tutor. Locke on Education. every one that ſuggeſts them and immediately to apply them.
A mother was wont to indulge her daughters, when any Atterbury, Sermons. º
of them deſired dogs, ſquirrels, or birds; but then they muſt Where a foreign tongue is elegant, expreſſive, and com-
be ſure to look diligently after them, that they were not ill pact, we muſt look out for words as beautiful and comprehen- --
- uſed. - - Locke on Education. five as can be found. 1 ...tºn on the Clºſi, K. t
My ſubject does not oblige me to look after the water, or The curious are looking out, ſome for flattery, ſome for -
º point forth the place whereunto it is now retreated. JWoodw. ironies, in that poem; the four folks think they have found -
- 13. To Look for. To expect. out ſome. Swit to Pºpe. -
- Phalantus's diſgrace was engrieved, in lieu of comfort, of 20. To Look out. To be on the watch. :/ -
Arteſia, who telling him ſhe never lºſſed fºr other, bad him Is a man bound to look at ſharp to plague himſelf? Colli.r. * -
- ſeck ſome other miſtreſs. Sidney. 21. To Look to. To watch; to take care of. - --
- Being a labour of ſo great difficulty, the exact performance There is not a more fearful wild fowl than your lion - *
thereof we may rather wiſh than loºk fºr. Hooker, b. v. living; and we ought to look to it. Shaº ſpeare. --
". - - - - Thou Who knocks ſo loud at door "...
Shalt feel our juſtice, in whoſe eaſicſt paſſage Look to the door there, Francis. Shakespeare Henry IV. - -
* Look for no leſs than death. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale. Let this fellow be looked to : let ſome of my people have a --&gt;
| If we fin wilfully after that we have received the know- ſpecial care of him. Shał ſeare's Twelfth Night : -
ledge of the truth, there remaineth no more ſacrifice for Uncleanly ſcruples fear not you; hºt. y sº. - *-
fins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment. Heb. x. Know the ſtate of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds.
In dealing with cunning perſons, it is good to ſay little to Prov. xxvii. 33 * - ...
º . which . º º Bacon's Eſſays. When it came once among our people, that the ſtate of- º
h is m º e *: .." n . they #. :/. and, though fered conditions to ſtrangers that would ſtay, we had work * --
| e º: * Orm . º i ‘. to, yet the ſub- enough to get any of our men to lººk to our ſhip. Bacon. -
- º: . he accuſation . i. ill inſiſted on. Clarendon. If any took ſanctuary for caſe of treaſon, the king might --
i. - º: º anxiety, i. ". lary ſcruples in confeſſion, appoint him keepers to look to him in ſanctuary. Bacon. - .
inſtead of ſetting you tree, which is the benefit to be looked The dog's running away with the fleſh, bids the cook look
for by confeſſion, perplex you the more. Taylor. better to it another time. L’Eſtrange * . .
Look now for no enchanting voice, nor fear For the truth of the theory I am in nowife concerned; the - .
The bait of honied words. Milton ſer of i - !-- , * --
Drown'd i ſ:-- - compoſer of it muſt look to that. Woodward.
Drown'd in deep deſpair, 22. To Look to. To behold. - - -
| He dares not offer one repenting prayer: To Look. v. a. ** *
Aº and º º for death. . Dryden's juv. 1. To ſeek; to ſearch for. ** -
I muſt with patience all the term; attend, Looking my love, I go from place to place - ". --
Till mine is call'd ; and that long look'd for day Like a young fawn that late hath loſt the hi . --
Is ſtill encumber'd with ſome new delay. Dryden's juv. And ſeek each where oit the hind, S º
Thie lirnitat. • - - -- --- - - - emiſer. º
This limitation of Adam's empire to his line, will ſave My father is here look'd for every day f ... "
thoſe the labour who would look for one heir amongſt the race To paſs aſſurance of a dower &gt; Shakesp ; :
- - - - -- - Jú - Maº - -- º
of brutes, but will very little contribute to the diſcovery of 2. To turn the eye upon. eſpeare " * *
one amongſt men. Locke. Let us look one another in the f -- - *…
14. To Look into. To examine; to ſift; to inſpect cloſely; To infl In the face. 2 Kings xiv. 8. º:
- - y; 3. To influence by looks. -*.
to obſerve narrowly. - Such a ſpirit muſt be left behind º
His nephew's levies to him appear'd A ſºil fi pirit muſt be left behind - s
- : --- ?––. ſpirit fit to ſtart into an empire º
To be a preparation 'gainſt the Polack; And look the world to 1 tºil ºx - *-r
But better look'd into, he truly found Tº L * Wºw grid to law. - Dryden's Cleomenes. : * *
It w - - 4. To Look out. To diſcover by ſearching. *
t was againſt your highneſs. Shakeſp. Ham's - c
* c Shakeſp. Hamlet. Caſting my eye upon ſo many of the general bill
The more frequently and narrowly we look into the works Cane t ñānā found ***) general bus as next -
of nature, the more occaſion we ſhall have to admire thei 9 hand, I found encouragement from them to look cut
beauty mºre their all the bills I could. Graunt's Bills of Mortalit
º ; : Atterbury's Sermons. Whoever has ſuch t - - riality:
It is very well worth a traveller's while to look into all th: s ſuch treatment when he is a man, will loºk
lies in his way. Addiſon on 1 A. Cºat other company, with whom he can be at eaſe. Lºcke.
15. To Look on. To reſpect: Addison an Italy. Look. interj. [properly the imperative mood of the verb: it is - -
- -... o reſpect; to regard; to eſteem ; to con- ſ -: lock y See | ; : 1 - - * &lt;!.
ſider; to View ; to think on º h : See lo behold obſerve. "rº- -
Ambitious men. - - - ook, where he comes, and my good ma : he' º, “t .
if they be checked in th - » my gººd man too; he's as * * * *
come ſecretly diºmen. º look upon men º be- far from jealouſy as I am from giving him cauſe. Shakeſp. !
an evil eye. 2 B d §º. Lock you, he muſt ſeem thus to the world: fear not your ... . .
- I - - - - a-- acon 5 tº ſays. advancement. $2/. Jº
I lºoked on Virgil as a ſuccinét, majeſtick writer; one who Look, when the * Shakeſpeare. sº
| weighed not only every thought, but ev d &gt; d ook, when the world hath feweſt barbarous people, but * * *
ble. ght, ery word an º ſuch as will not marry, except they know means to live, as *
- ryaen. it is almoſt everywhere at this day. - "... “ º
º If a harmleſs mai erywher his day, except iſ artary, there is º
f i. ere a wife become a nurſe, s maid no danger of inundations of people. B.º. Ajays. &amp;
er friends would look on her the worſe. Prior. º
Loºk * :
º
.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 43</div><p class="Text">L O O
L O O
Leº rou! we that pretend to be ſubječt to a conſtitution,
muſt not carve out our own quality; for at this rate a cobler
may make himſelf a lord. Collier on Pride,
Look, "...ſ. +
1. Air of the face; mien; caſt of the countenance.
Thou cream-fac’d lown,
Where got'ſ thou that gooſe look P Shakespeare.
Thou wilt ſave the afflicted people, but wilt bring down
high lººkſ. Pſal. xviii. 27.
Them gracious heav'n for nobler ends deſign'd,
Their lºſs erected, and their clay refin'd. J. Dryden, jun.
And though death be the king of terrors, yet pain, diſ-
grace, and poverty, have frightful looks, able to diſcompoſe
moſt men. Lºcke.
2. The aët of looking or ſeeing.
Then on the croud he caſt a furious kok,
And wither'd all their ſtrength. Dryden.
When they met they made a ſurly ſtand,
And glar'd, like angry lions, as they paſs'd,
And wiſh'd that ev'ry look might be their laſt. Dryden.
Lo'oker. m. ſ. [from lºok.]
1. One that looks.
2. Lo'oker on. Spectator, not agent.
Shepherds poor pipe, when his harſh ſound teſtifies anguiſh,
into the fair lºoker on, paſtime not paſſion enters. Sidney.
Such labour is then more neceſſary than pleaſant, both to
them which undertake it, and for the lookers on. Booker.
My buſineſs in this ſtate
Made me a looker on here in Vienna :
Where I have ſeen corruption boil and bubble
Till it o'er-run the ſtew. Shakeſp. Meaſ, for Meaſure.
Did not this fatal war affront thy coaſt,
Yet ſatteſt thou an idle leaker on. Fairfax, b, i.
The Spaniard's valour lieth in the eye of the looker on ;
but the Engliſh valour lieth about the ſoldier's heart: a valour
of glory and a valour of natural courage are two things. Bac.
The people love him;
The lºokers on, and the enquiring vulgar,
Will talk themſelves to action. Denham's Sophy.
He wiſh'd he had indeed been gone,
And only to have ſtood a looker on. Addison's Ovid.
Looking-Glass. m. ſ. [look and glaſs...] Mirror; a glaſs which
ſhews forms reflected.
Command a mirror hither ſtraight,
That it may ſhew me what a face I have.
—Go ſome of you and fetch a looking-glaſs. Shakeſpeare.
There is none ſo homely but loves a looking-glaſ. South.
We ſhould make no other uſe of our neighbours faults,
than we do of a looking-gloſs to mend our own manners by.
L'Eſtrange.
The ſurface of the lake of Nemi is never ruffled with the
leaſt breath of wind, which perhaps, together with the clear-
neſs of its waters, gave it formerly the name of Diana's look-
ing-glºſs. Addison on Italy.
Loom, hiſ [from glomus, a bottom of thread, Minſhow. Lome
is a general name for a tool or inſtrument, junius.] The
frame in which the weavers work their cloath.
He muſt leave no uneven thread in his loom, or by indulg-
ing to any one ſort of reproveable diſcourſe himſelf, defeat
all his endeavours againſt the reſt. Governm, of the Tongue.
Minerva, ſtudious to compoſe
Her twiſted threads, the web ſhe ſtrung,
And o'er a loom of marble hung. Addiſon,
A thouſand maidens ply the purple loom,
Prior.
To weave the bed, and deck the regal room.
To Loom. v. n. [leoman, Saxon.] To appear at ſea. Skinner.
Loox. m. ſ. A bird.
A lºom is as big as a gooſe ; of a dark colour, dappled
with white ſpots on the neck, back, and wings; each fea-
ther marked near the point with two ſpots: they breed in
Farr Iſland. Grew's Muſæum.
Loos. n. ſ. [This word, which is now uſed only in Scotland,
is the Engliſh word lown.] A ſorry fellow ; a ſcoundrel; a
raſcal,
Thou cream-fac’d loon |
Where got'ſ thou that gooſe look Shakeſp. Macbeth,
The falſe ſoon, who could not work his will
By open force, employ'd his flatt’ring ſkill:
I hope, my lord, ſaid he, I not offend;
Dryden.
Are you afraid of me that are your friend ?
his young lord had an old cunning rogue, or, as the
T
Scots call it, a falſe lion of a grandfather, that one might
call a Jack of all trades. Arbuthnot's Hiff. of j. Bull.
LOOP, n.ſ.. [from loopen, Dutch, to run.] A double through
. a ſtring or lace is drawn; an ornamental double or
Iinge.
No. any ſkill'd in loops of fing'ring fine,
Might in their diverſe cunning ever dare
With this, ſo curious network, to compare, Spenſºr,
Make me to ſee’t, or at leaſt ſo prove it,
That the probation bear no hinge, nor lººp, -
To hang a doubt on. Shakespeare's Cº.
Bind our crooked legs in hoops -
Made of ſhells, with ſilver loops. Benj. jº.
An old fellow ſhall wear this or that fort of cut in his
cloaths with great integrity, while all the reſt of the world
are degenerated into buttons, pockets, and lºops. 444/*
Lo'oped. adj. [from loop.j Full of holes.
Poor naked wretches, whereſoe'er you are,
That 'bide the pelting of this pitileſs ſtorm -
How ſhall your houſeleſs heads and unſed ſides, -
Your loop'd and window'd raggedneſs, defend you -
From ſeaſons ſuch as theſe. Shakespeare . King Lear.
Loſophole. m. / [loop and hole.]
1. Aperture; hole to give a paſlage.
The Indian herdſman ſhunning heat,
Shelters in cool, and tends his paſturing herds;
At lºophole, cut through thickeſt ſhade, 4%lton's Par. Lºſſ. -
Ere the blabbing Eaſtern ſcout
The nice morn on the Indian ſteep, -
From her cabin'd loophole peep. - AMilton,
Walk not near yon corner houſe by night; for there are
blunderbuſes planted in every loºphole, that go off at the
ſqueaking of a fiddle. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
2. A ſhift; an evaſion.
Needleſs, or needful, I not now contend,
Dryden,
For ſtill you have a loophole for a friend.
Loſopholºpſ adj. [from lºophole.J Full of holes; full of "Pº"
ings, or void ſpaces.
This uneaſy loophol"d gaol,
In which y' are hamper'd by the fetlock, - --
Cannot but put y' in mind of wedlock. Hadºra, A, i.
Loord. n.ſ.. [Iberd, Dutch ; from lºrdant: French; lurdan,
Erſe; a heavy, ſtupid, or witheſs fellow. D. Trevoux derives
lºan from lºrd, or ſourde, a village in Gaſcoigny, the in-
habitants of which were formerly noted robbers, ſay they.
in robbing implies ſome degree of ſubtily, from
at, at this day,
But º - -
which the Gaſcoigns are ſo far removed, that -
o a proverb. The Erſe in-
they are aukward and heavy t - - - -
ports ſome degree of knavery, but then it is uſed in a ludi-
crous ſenſe, as in Engliſh, you pretty rogue; though in gº
neral it denotes reproachful heavineſs, or ſtupid lazineſs.
spenſºr's Scholiaſt ſays, lord was wont, anong the old Bri-
tons, to ſignify a lord ; and therefore the Danes, that uſurp-
ed their tyranny here in Britain, were called, for mºre dread
, whoſe inſolence and
than dignity, lurdan, i. e. lord Danes - - -
pride was ſo outrageous in this realm, that, if it fortuned a
d ſaw the Dane ſet foot
Briton to be going over a bridge, and,
ſt return back till the Dane was clean
upon the ſame, he mu
p &gt; ſt abide no leſs than preſent death; but be-
over, elſe he mu -
ing afterward expelled, the name of lurdane became ſo odious
unto the people whom they had long oppreſſed, that, even
at this day, they uſe for more reproach to call the quarian
ague the fever lurdane. So far the Scholiaſt, but crroneouſly;
From Spenſer's own words, it ſignifies ſomething of ſtupid
dulneſs rather than magiſterial arrogance. Macbean.]. A
drone.
Siker, thou's but a lazy lord,
And rekes much of thy ſwinke,
That with fond terms and witleſs words
To bleer mine eyes do'ſt think. Spenſºr's Pofforal,
To Loose. v. a. [leran, Saxon.]
1. To unbind; to untie any thing faſtened.
The ſhoes of his feet I am not worthy to lºoſe, Aºi.
Canſt thou looſe the bands of Orion. job xxxviii. 31,
Who is worthy to looſe the ſeals thereof. Rev. v. 2,
This is to cut the knot when we cannot loºſe it, Burnet,
2. To relax. -
The joints of his loins were lºſºd. Dan, v. 6.
. To unbind any one bound.
Looſe and bring him to me, Luke xix. 30,
He loºſed, and ſet at liberty, four or five kings of the peo-
ple of that country, that Berok kept in chains, Abbot.
4. To free from impriſonment.
Looſe thoſe appointed to death. Pſal. cil. 20,
The captive haſteneth that he may be lºſºd. ſaiah,
5. To free from any obligation.
Art thou looſed from a wife, ſeek not a wife. I Cor. vii,
6. To free from any thing that ſhackles the mind.
Ay; there's the man, who, loos'd from luſt and pelſ,
Leſs to the pretor owes than to himſelf, Dryden's Perſus,
7. To free from any thing painful.
Woman, thou art lºſed from thy infirmity, Luke xiii. 12,
8. To diſengage,
When heav'n was nam'd, they key'd their hold again,
Then ſprung ſhe forth, they follow'd her amain, Ijºn.
Tºr. v. n. To ſet ſail; to depart by Jooſing the an:
Chor. -
Ye ſhould have hearkened, and not have kºſed from Crete,
4:# xxvii. 21,
#5 R The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 44</div><p class="Text">L O O
L O O
!
ºº
The emperor lºg from Barcelºna, Sãº. * the port of
Mago, in the iſland of Minorca. Kncle;’s Iº. of the Turks.
jº. thence by night, they were driven by ‘.
winds back into his Port. Raleigh.
Loºp, adj. [from the verb.]
1. Unbound; untied. - -
if he ſhºuld intend his voyage towards my wife, I would
turn her lºſe to him; and what he gets more of her than
ſharp words, let it lie on my head. Shaºffrare.
Loſ I ſee four men loºſe walking. Dan. iii. 25.
2. Not faſt; not fixed. -
Thoſe few that claſhed might rebound after the colliſion;
or if they cohered, yet by the next conflict might be ſepa,
rated again, and ſo on in an eternal viciſſitude of faſt and
loºſe, though without ever conſociating intº the bodies of
planets. Bentley's Sermons.
3. Not tight: as, a looſe robe.
4. Not crouded; not cloſe. -
with extended wings a hoſt might paſs, -
with horſe and challots, rank'd in lººſe array. Milton.
5. Wanton; not chaſte. -
Fair Venus ſecm'd unto his bed to bring
Her, whom he waking evermore did ween
To be the chaſteſt flower that ay did ſpring
On earthly branch, the daughter of a king,
Now a loºſe leman to vile ſervice bound.
When lººſe epiſtles violate chaſte eyes,
She half conſents who filently denies.
6. Not cloſe; not conciſe; lax.
If an author be loºſe and diffuſe in his ſtile, the tranſlator
needs only regard the propriety of the language. Felton.
7. Vague ; indeterminate. --- - -
It is but a looſe thing to ſpeak of poſſibilitics, without the
particular deſigns; ſo is it to ſpeak of lawfulneſs without the
particular caſes. Bacon's holy Iſar.
It ſeems unaccountable to be ſo exact in the quantity of
liquor where a ſmall error was of little concern, and to be ſo
lºſe in the doſes of powerful medicines. Arbuthnot.
8. Not ſtričt; not rigid.
Becauſe conſcience, and the fear of ſwerving from that
which is right, maketh them diligent obſervers of circuin-
ſtances, the looſe regard whereof is the nurſe of vulgar folly.
Hooker, b. v.
Fairy 3:leen.
Dryden's Ovid.
9. Unconnected; rambling.
I dare venture nothing without a ſtrićt examination ; and
am as much aſhamed to put a looſe indigeſted play upon the
publick, as I ſhould be to offer braſs money in a payment.
Dryden's Dedication to his Spaniſh Friar.
Vario ſpends whole mornings in running over looſe and un-
connected pages, and with freſh curioſity is ever glancing
over new words and ideas, and yet treaſures up but little
knowledge. Iłatts's Improvement of the Mind, p. i.
Io. Lax of body; not coſtive.
What hath a great influence upon the health, is going to
ſtool regularly: people that are very looſe have ſeldom ſtrong
thoughts, or ſtrong bodies. Locke on Education.
11. Diſengaged; not enſlaved.
Their prevailing principle is, to fit as loºſe from thoſe plea-
ſures, and be as moderate in the uſe of them, as they can.
- Atterbury's Sermons.
12. Diſengaged from obligation.
Now I ſtand
Loºſ of my vow; but who knows Cato's thoughts. Addison
13. Free from confinement.
They did not let priſoners looſ homeward.
Wiſh the wildeſt tempeſts looſe;
That thrown again upon the coaſt,
I may once more repeat my pain. Prior.
14. Remiſs; not attentive.
15. To break Loose. To gain liberty,
If to break looſe from the condućt of reaſon, and to want
that reſtraint of examination which keeps us from chufing
the worſe, be liberty, madmen and fools are only the free-
in 1611. Locke.
Like two black ſtorms on either hand,
Our Spaniſh army and the Indians ſtand;
This only ſpace betwixt the clouds is clear,
Where you, like day, broke loºſe from both appear. Dryd.
16. To let Lôose. To ſet at liberty; to ſet at large; to free
from any reſtraint. - -
And let the living bird looſe into the open field. Lev. xiv. 7.
We ourſelves make our fortunes good or bad ; and when
God let; loºſe a tyrant upon us, or a ſickneſs, if we fear to
die, or know not to be patient, the calamity fits heavy upon
ll.S. - - Taylor's holy Living.
• In addition and diviſion, either of ſpace or duration, it is
the number of its repeated additions or diviſions that alone
remains diſtinét, as will appear to any one who will let his
- thoughts */? in the vaſt expanſion of ſpace, or diviſibility of
Inatter, Locłe,
Iſa. xiv. 17.
If one way of improvement cannot be made a recreation,
they muſt be let lºoſe to the childiſh play they fancy; which
they ſhould be weaned from, by being made ſurfeit of it.
Locke on Education.
Loos F. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Liberty; freedom from reſtraint.
Come, and forſake thy cloying ſtore,
And all the buſy pageantry
That wife men ſcorn, and fools adore :
Come, give thy ſoul a lºſe, and taſte the pleaſures of the
poor. Dryden's Horace.
Lúcia, might my big ſwoln heart
Vent all its griefs, and give a looſe to ſorrow,
Marcia could anſwer thee in ſighs. Addison's Catz.
The fiery Pegaſus diſdains
To mind the rider's voice, or hear the reins;
When glorious fields and opening camps he views, , ,
He runs with an unbounded looſe. Prior.
Poets ſhould not, under a pretence of imitating the an-
tients, give themſelves ſuch a looſe in lyricks, as if there were
no connection in the world. Felton on the Claſſicks.
2. Diſmiſſion from any reſtraining force.
Air at large maketh no noiſe, except it be ſharply percuſ-
ſed; as in the found of a ſtring, where air is percuſſed by a
hard and ſtiff body, and with a ſharp looſe. Bacon.
Loose LY. adv. [from looſe.]
1. Not faſt; not firmly.
I thought your love eternal: was it ty'd
So looſely, that a quarrel could divide Dryden's Aureng.
2. Without bandage.
Her golden locks for haſte were loºſely ſhed
About her ears. Fairy Queen, b, i.
3. Without union or conneétion.
He has eminently, and within himſelf, all degrees of per-
fection that exiſt looſely and ſeparately in all ſecond beings.
Norris's Miſcellany.
4. Irregularly.
In this age, a biſhop, living looſely, was charged that
his converſation was not according to the apoſtles lives.
Camden's Remains.
5. Negligently; careleſsly.
We have not looſely through ſilence permitted things to paſs
away as in a dream. Hooker.
The chiming of ſome particular words in the memory,
and making a noiſe in the head, ſeldom happens but when
the mind is lazy, or very looſely and negligently employ-
ed. Locke.
6. Unſolidly; meanly; without dignity.
A prince ſhould not be ſo looſely ſtudied, as to remember
ſo weak a compoſition. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. ii.
7. Unchaſtly.
The ſtage how looſely does Aſtrata tread,
Who fairly puts all characters to bed. Pope.
To LooseN. v. n. (from looſe.] To part.
When the polypus appears in the throat, extrađt it that
way ; it being more ready to loºſen when pulled in that di-
rection than by the noſe. Sharp's Surgery.
To Loose.N. v. a. (from looſe.]
1. To relax any thing tied.
2. To make leſs coherent.
After a year's rooting, then ſhaking doth the tree good,
by looſening of the earth. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
3. To ſeparate a compages.
She breaks her back, the loſin'd fides give way,
And plunge the Tuſcan ſoldiers in the ſea. Dryden's AEn.
4. To free from reſtraint.
It reſolves thoſe difficulties which the rules beget; it looſens
his hands, and aſſiſts his underſtanding. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
5. To make not coſtive. -
Fear looſeneth the belly; becauſe the heat retiring towards
the heart, the guts are relaxed in the ſame manner as fear
alſo cauſeth trembling. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory, Nº. 41.
Lo'oseNess. n.ſ. [from loºſe.]
1. State contrary to that of being faſt or fixed. -
The cauſe of the caſting of ſkin and ſhell ſhould ſeem to
be the loºſeneſ of the ſkin or ſhell, that ſticketh not cloſe to
the fleſh. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. Latitude; criminal levity.
A general ‘. of principles and manners hath ſeized
on us like a peſtilence, that walketh not in darkneſs, but
waſteth at noon-day. Atterbury's Sermons.
3. Irregularity; neglect of laws.
He endeavoured to win the common people, both by ſtrain-
ed curteſy and by looſeneſs of life. Hayward,
4. Lewdneſs; unchaſtity.
Courtly court he made ſtill to his dame,
Pour'd out in looſeneſ; on the graſſy ground,
Both careleſs of his health and of his fame, Fairy Qā.
5. Diarrhoea; flux of the belly.
!*
;:
i
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
Taking
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 45</div><p class="Text">L O R
L O R
º
Taking cold moveth lºngſ by contračtion of the ſkin
and outward parts. Bacon's Natural Hiſłory.
In peſtilent diſeaſes, if they cannot be expelled by ſweat,
they fall likewiſe into ſºftneſs. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Fat meats, in phlegmatick ſtomachs, procure loºſeneſs and
hinder retention. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Loosest RIFE. n.ſ. [Aftmachia, Lat.] An herb.
The leaves are entire, oblong, and produced ſometimes
by pairs, or three or four at each joint of the ſtalk: the
flower conſiſts of one leaf, which expands in a circular or-
der, and is cut into ſeveral ſegments at the top; the fruit is
globular, and open at the top, incloſing many ſeeds fixed to
the placenta: it produces large ſpikes of fine yellow flowers
in July, and is preſcribed in medicine. Al/iller.
To LOP. v. a. [It is derived by Skinner from laude, German,
a leaf.]
1. To cut the branches of trees.
Gentle niece, what ſtern ungentle hands
Have lºpp'd, and hew'd, and made thy body bare
Of her two branches, thoſe ſweet ornaments. Shakeſp.
Like to pillars,
Or hollow'd bodies, made of oak or fir,
With branches lopp'd in wood, or mountain fell’d. Milt.
The plants, whoſe luxury was lopp'd,
Or age with crutches underprop'd. Cleaveland.
The oak, growing from a plant to a great tree, and then
Locke.
lºpped, is ſtill the ſame oak.
The hook ſhe bore, inſtead of Cynthia's ſpear,
To lip the growth of the luxuriant year.
2. To cut anything.
Flowel.
The gardener may lap religion as he pleaſe.
So long as there's a head,
Hither will all the mountain ſpirits fly;
Lop that but off. Dryden's Sp. Friar.
All that denominated it paradiſe was lopped off by the de-
luge, and that only left which it enjoyed in common with
its neighbour countries. J/oodward's Nat. Hiſt.
I'm ſure in needleſs bonds it poets ties,
Procruſtus like, the ax or wheel applies,
To lap the mangled ſenſe, or ſtretch it into ſize. Smith.
Lop. m.ſ. (from the verb.]
1. That which is cut from trees.
Or ſiker thy head very tottie is,
So on thy corbe ſhoulder it leans amiſs;
Now thyſelf hath loſt both lop and top,
As my budding branch thou would'ſt crop. Spenſºr.
Nor ſhould the boughs grow too big, becauſe they give
opportunity to the rain to ſoak into the tree, which will
quickly cauſe it to decay, ſo that you muſt cut it down, or
elſe both body and lap will be of little value. Martimer.
2. [Lºppa, Swediſh.J A flea.
Lope. pret, of leap. Obſolete. This is retained in Scotland.
With that ſprang forth a naked ſwain,
With ſpotted wings like peacock's train,
And laughing lope to a tree. Spenſer's Paſtoral.
Lo'PPER, n.J. [from lop.] One that cuts trees.
Lofrered, adj. Coagulated; as, loppered milk, Ainſworth.
And thus it is ſtill called in Scotland. -
Loggacious. adj. [leguax, Latin.J -
1. Full of talk; full of tongue. Ž
To whom ſad Eve,
Confeſſing ſoon; yet not before her judge -
Bold, or loquacious, thus abaſh'd reply'd. Miſt, Pa. Lo/?.
Pope.
In council ſhe gives licence to her tongue,
Lºquacious, brawling, ever in the wrong. Dryden.
2. Speaking.
Blind Britiſh bards, with volant touch
Traverſe loquacious ſtrings, whoſe ſolemn notes
Provoke to harmleſs revels. Philipt.
3. Blabbing; not ſecret.
Loq9A'city. n. f. [loquacitus, Latin.J Too much talk.
Why leguacity is to be avoided, the wiſe man gives ſuff-
cient reaſon for, In the multitude of words there wanteth not
fin. Ray on Creation.
Too great loquacity, and too great taciturnity by fits. Arb.
IORD. n: ſ [blapono, Saxon.]
1. Monarch; ruler; governour.
Man over man
He made not lord. Milton.
Of Athens he was lord. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
We have our author's only arguments to prove, that heirs
are lords over their brethren. Locke.
They call'd their lord Aétaeon to the game,
He ſhook his head in anſwer to the name. Addison.
O'er love, o'er fear, extends his wide domain,
Unconquer'd lºrd of pleaſure and of pain. /a, of hu. Wiſhes,
* Maſter; ſupreme perſon.
But now I was the lord
Of this fair manſion, maſter of my ſervants,
Queen o'er myſelf; and even now, but now,
This houſe, theſe ſervants, and this ſame myſelf
Are yours, my lord. Shakeſp, Merchant ºf Wenice,
To LoRD. v. n.
3. A tyrant; an oppreſſive ruler.
Now being aſſembled into one company, rather without a
Iord than at jiberty to accompliſh their miſery, they fall to
Hayward.
diviſion.
'Tis death to fight, but kingly to controu!
Lord-like at eaſe, with arbitrary pow'r,
To peel the chiefs, the people to devour. Dryden.
4. A huſband.
I oft in bitterneſs of ſoul deplor’d
My abſent daughter, and my dearer ſºrd. Pºe's Odyſſey.
5. One who is at the head of any buſineſs; an overſeer.
Grant harveſt lord more by a peny or two,
To call on his fellows the better to doo. Tuſcr's Huſø.
6. A nobleman.
Shakeſpeare.
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lºrd.
7. A general name for a peer of England.
ſo clear, as to
Nor were the crimes objected againſt him
give convincing ſatisfaction to the major part of both houſes,
eſpecially that of the lords. King Charles.
8. A baron. - * - a -
9. An honorary title applied to offices; as, lord chief juſtice,
lord mayor, and lord chief baron. -
To domineer; to rule deſpotically.
Unrighteous lord of love' what law is this,
That me thou makeſt thus tormented be
The whiles ſhe ordeth in licentious bliſs
Of her free will, ſcorning both thee and me. Spenſer.
I ſee them lording it in London ſtreets. Shakeſpeare.
Thoſe huge tracts of ground they Iorded over begat wealth,
wealth uſhered in pride. Hºwel's Pocal Foreſt.
They had by this poſſeſs'd the tow’rs of Gath,
Andºd over them whom now they ſerve. .44"'; 4.
I ſhould chooſe rather to be tumbled into the duſt in blood,
bearing witneſs to any known truth of our lord, than by a
denial of truths, through blood and Perjury, wade to a ſcep-
tre, and ord it in a throne. hybreaſt South's Sermony.
But if thy paſſions lord it in thy breaft,
y p y Dryden's Prſus.
Art thou not ſtill a ſlave
The valour of one man th’ afflicted throne
Imperial, that once lorded o'er the world, ---
Suſtain'd. Philipi.
The civilizers 1 the diſturbers ſay,
The robbers, the corrupters of mankind'
Proud vagabonds ! who make the world yo; home, .
Philips's Briton.
And lord it where you have no right. -
Jord.J Lord in contempt or ridicule.
Lo'RDIN c. n.ſ.. [from -
I'll queſtion you
Of my lord's tricks, and yours, when yo; wº boys, , ,
You were pretty lordings then Shakespeare , Winter's Tale.
. To lordings proud I tune my lay,
Who feaſt in bower or hall;
Though dukes they be, to dukes I ſay,
Swift,
That pride will have a fall.
Lo'RDLING. m. ſ. A diminutive lord.
Traulus, of amphibious breed,
By the dam from lºrding ſprung,
By the fire exhal'd from dung. Swift,
Lo'Roliness. n.ſ.. [from lordy.]
1. Dignity; high ſtation.
Thou vouchſafeſt here to viſit me,
Doing the honour of thy lordlineſ;
To one ſo weak. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleopatra.
2. Pride; haughtineſs.
Lo'RDLY. adj. [from lord.]
1. Befiting a lord.
South.
Lordy fins require lordly eſtates to ſupport them.
2. Proud; haughty; imperious ; inſolent.
So bad a peer-
—As who, my lord 2
—Why, as yourſelf, my lord *
An’t like your lordly, lord protećtorſhip 2 Shakeſpeare.
Of me as of a common enemy,
So dreaded once, may now exaſperate them,
I know not: lords are ordiºſ in their wine. Mill. 4;an,
Expect another meſſage more imperious,
More lordly thund'ring than thou well wilt bear. Miltºn.
Ev'ry rich and lordy ſwain,
With pride wou'd drag about her chain. Swift.
Lo'Rdly, adv. Imperiouſly; deſpotically; proudly.
So when a tyger ſucks the bullock's blood,
A famiſh'd lion, iſſuing from the wood,
Roars lordy fierce, and challenges the food. Dryden,
Lo'RDSHIP. n.ſ.. [from lord.]
1. Dominion; power.
Let me never know that any baſe affection ſhould get any
lordſhip in your thoughts. Sidne
- It being ſet upon ſuch an inſenſible riſing of the gºſ,
it gives the eye lordſhip over a good large circuit. sº.
They which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles .
erciſe lorºp over them, and their great ones exerciſe alth.
rity upon thcm. 2Mark x, 42
There
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 46</div><p class="Text">L O S
Lo T
|
- "... wherein the maſter doth much
There º º ... line of his own poſſeſſions.
joy, when he walke //otton's Archite&amp;ure.
Needs muſt the lordſhip there from virtue ſlide. Fairfax.
ioni - naill. -
2. *i. º: grants of the kings be avoided, wº
wronging of thoſe lords which had thoſe lands and lordſhips
iven them Spenſºr on Ireland.
g What lands and lordſhips for their owner know
My quondam barber, but his worſhip now. Dryden.
3. Title of honour uſed to a nobleman not a duke.
I aſſure your lordſhip,
The extreme horrour of it almoſt turn'd me -
To air, when firſt I heard it. Benj. Jºhnſºn's Cataline.
I could not anſwer it to the world, if I gave not your lord-
ſhip my teſtimony of being the beſt huſband now living. Dry.
4. Titulary compellation of judges, and ſome other perſons in
authority and office. - -
LoR.E. n.ſ.. [from laejian, to learn.J Leſſon; doćtrine; in-
ſtruction. -
And, for the modeſt lore of maidenhood
Bids me not ſojourn with theſe armed men.
Oh whither ſhall I fly?
The law of nations, or the lore of war.
Calm region once,
And full of peace; now toſt, and turbulent
For underſtanding rul’d not; and the will
Heard not her lore / but in ſubječtion now
To ſenſual appetite. A4ilton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ix.
The ſubtile fiend his lore
Soon learn'd, now milder, and thus anſwer'd ſmooth. Milt,
Lo! Rome herſelf, proud miſtreſs now no more
Of arts, but thund'ring againſt heathen lore. Pope.
LoRE. [leoſian, Saxon.] Loſt; deſtroyed.
Lo'REL. m. ſ. (from looſan, Saxon.] An abandoned ſcoundrel.
Obſoletc.
Siker thou ſpeak'ſ like a lewd lorell
Of heaven to deemen ſo :
How be I am but rude and borrell,
Yet nearer ways I know.
To Lo'Rica TE. v. a. To plate over.
Nature hath loricated, or plaiſtered over, thc ſides of the
tympanuin in animals with car-wax, to ſtop and entangle
any infects that ſhould attempt to creep in there. Ray.
Lo'RIMER. }*.ſ. [lorinier, French.] Bridlecutter.
Fairfax.
Fairfax.
Spenſºr's Pºſłoral.
Lo'RINER.
Lo'RIOT. n.ſ. A kind of bird.
LoRN. pret. paſſ of lonian, Saxon.] Forſaken; loſt.
Who after that he had fair Una lorn,
Through light miſdeeming of her loyalty. Fairy 9aeen.
To Lose. ... [leoran, Saxon.] yalty ry Q.
1. To forfeit by unlucky conteſt; the contrary to win.
The lighten’d courſers ran;
They ruſh'd, and won by turns, and ſºft the day. Dryden.
2. To be deprived of.
He lºſ? his right hand with a ſhot, and, inſtead thereof,
ever after uſed a hand of iron. Knolley's Hiſt. of the Turks.
Who conquer'd him, and in what fatal ſtrife
The youth, without a wound, could loſe his life. Dryden.
3. To ſuffer deprivation of.
The fear of the Lord goeth before obtaining of authority;
but roughneſs and pride is the loſing thereof. Ecº).
If ſalt have left his favour, wherewith ſhall it be it...?
44att. v. 13.
4. To poſſeſs no longer; contrary to keep.
They have lºſt their trade of woolleń drapery. Graunt.
No youth ſhall equal hopes of glory give,
The Trojan honour and the Roman Éoiá,
Admir’d when living, and ador'd when loſt. Dryden.
We ſhould never quite loſe fight of the country, though
we are ſometimes entertained with a diſtant proſpect of it.
- Addison's Eſſay on the Georgicks.
5. To have any thing gone ſo as that it cannot be found, or
had again.
But if to honour lºft 'tis ſtill decreed
For you my bowl ſhall flow, my flocks ſhall bleed;
Judge and aſſert my right, impartial Jove. Pope's Odſ.).
When men are openly abandoned, aid left to all ſhame,
they have no reaſon to think it hard, if their memory be re-
proached. Swi
6. To bewilder. wift.
- I will go loſe myſelf,
And wander up and down ... the city. Shakespeare.
... *Sonſtant forms of prayer more likely to flat and
hinder the ſpirit of prayer and devotion, than unpremeditated
and confuſed variety to diſtract and !oſe it. King Charles.
... When the mind purſues the idea of infinity, it uſes the
ideas and repetition of numbers, which are ſo many diſtinét
ideas, kept beſt by numb. - - od lyr,
wº"s"-ºvº.
7. To deprive of. -
How ſhould you go ab C, 1 ; - -
fo much º: É° about to lºſe him a wife he º
8. To kill; to deſtroy.
9. To throw away; to employ ineffectually.
He has merit, good nature, and integrity, that are toº,
often lºſt upon great men, or at leaſt are not all three a match
for flattery. Pºe's A.cº.
10. To miſs; to part with, ſo as not to recover.
Theſe ſharp encounters, where always many more men
are lºft than are killed or taken priſoners, put fach a ſtop to
Middleton's march, that he was glad to retire. Clarendº.
To Los E. v. n.
1. Not to win.
We'll hear poor rogues
Talk of court news, and we'll talk with them too,
Who lºſs, and who wins; who's in, who's out. 3:41, .
2. To decline; to fail. - -
Wiſdom in diſcourſe with her
Loſes diſcount'nanc'd, and like folly ſhows. Aſi.º.
Lo's EABLE, adj. [from 1/2.) Subject to privation.
Conſider whether motion, or a propenſity to it, be an in-
herent quality belonging to atoms in gencrál, and not lºſºil.
by them. Boyſ.
Lo's EL. m. ſ. [from lorian, to periſh.] A ſcoundrel; a ſorry
worthleſs fellow. A word now obſolete.
Such lºſºl, and ſcatterlings cannot eaſily, by any ſheriff, be
gotten, when they are challenged for any ſuch faſt. Spenſºr.
A lºſe wand'ring by the way,
One that to bounty never caſt his mind,
Ne thought of honour ever did aſlay
His baſer breaſt. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
And lºſels lifted high, where I did look,
I mean to turn the next leaf of the book. Hubberd's Tale
Be not with work of loſel, wit defamed, -
Ne let ſuch verſes poetry be named. Hubberd's 7a'.
By Cambridge a towne I do know,
Whoſe loſſes by lºſſel, doth ſhew
More heere then is needful to tell. Tºſºr's Hºſandry.
A groſs hag!
And, lºſºl, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
That wilt not ſtay her tongue. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Lo's ER; n.ſ.. [from lºſe..] One that is deprivéd of anything;
one that forfeits anything; one that is impaired in his poſ:
feſſion or hope; the contrary to winner or gainer.
With the loſers let it ſympathize,
For nothing can ſeem foul to thoſe that win. Shaiſºff.
No man can be provident of his time that is not prudent
in the choice of his company; and if one of the ſpeakers be
vain, tedious, and trifling, he that hears, and he that an-
ſwers, are equal loſers of their time. Taylor's holy Living.
Lºſers and malécontents, whoſe Portion and inheritance is
a freedom to ſpeak. South's Sermons.
It cannot laſt, becauſe that act ſeems to have been car-
ried on rather by the intereſt of Particular countries, than by
that of the whole, which muſt be a !oſer by it. Temple.
A bull with gilded horns,
Shall be the portion of the conquering chief,
A ſword and helm ſhall chear the 10/er's grief.
Loss. n.ſ.. [from loſe.]
I. Forfeiture; the contrary to gain.
The only gain he purchaſed was to be capable of loſ; and
detriment for the good of others. ooker, b. v.
An evil natured ſon is the diſhonour of his father that be-
gathim; and a fooliſh daughter is born to his 7, #: , Eccluſ.
The abatement of price of any of the landholder's com.
modities, leſſens his income, and is a clear lºſs. Locke
2. Miſs. •
If he were dead, what would betide of me?
-No other harm but loſs of ſuch a jord.
-The lºſs of ſuch a lord includes all harms. Shakespeare .
3. Deprivation. - -
4. Deſtruction.
Her fellow ſhips from far her loſ; deſery'd;
But only ſhe was ſunk, and all wºre ſafe beſide. Dryden.
There ſucceeded an abſolute Victory for the Engliſh, with
the ſlaughter of above two thouſand of the enemy, with the
//; but of one man, though not a few hurt. Bacon
5. Fault; puzzle. -
Not the leaſt tranſaction of ſenſe and motion in man, but
philoſophers are at a loſs to comprehend. South’s $º.
Reaſon is always ſtriving, and always at a lºſs, while it i.
exerciſed about that which is not its Proper objećt. Dryden.
A man may ſometimes be at a lºſs which ſide to cloſe
with. Baker's Refl. -
6. Uſeleſs application. - ºff on Learning.
It would be loſs of time to explain any farther our ſuperiori-
ty to the enemy in numbers of men aná horſe. Addison.
Lost, participial adj. [from lo e.] No longer perceptible.
In ſeventeen days appear'd your pleaſing coaſt,
And wººdy mountains, half in vapours */?. Pope's Oºſ.
Lot. n: ſ [hlaut, Gothick; Plot, Saxon; lot, Dutch.] * -
1. Fortune; ſtate aſſigned.
Kala at length concluded my ling'ring ºf .
Diſdain me not, although I bºmoiº.
Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 47</div><p class="Text">f, O V
L O Vº
who is an heir of many hundred ſheep,
Doth beauty keep which never fun can burn, ... -
Nor ſtorms do turn. - - Sidney, b. i.
our own lot is beſt; and by aiming at what we have not,
we loſe what we have already. L’E/ºrange's Fables.
Prepard I ſtand; he was but born to try -
The it of man, to ſuffer and to die. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. A die, or any thing uſed in determining chances.
Aaron ſhali caſt lots upon the two goats; one lot for the
Lord, and the other lot for the ſcape-goat, Lev. xvi. 8.
l Their taſks in equal portions ſhe divides, -
And where unequal, there by lots decides. Dryden's Pirg,
Ulyſſes bids his friends to ca ſ lots, to º: that he would
- oſe them to ſo imminent danger.
not voluntarily exp Note in the Odyſſey.
3. It ſeems in Shakeſpeare to ſignify a lucky or wiſhed chance.
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks -
My name hath touch'd your ears; it is Menenius. Shakespeare
4. A portion; a parcel of goods as being drawn by lot; as,
what lot of filks had you at the ſale
5. Proportion of taxes: as, to pay ſcot and lot.
free or nettle tree. n.ſ. [Celtis.] See Lotos.
lº. of the late tree are like thoſe of the nettle; the
flowers conſiſt of five leaves, expanded in form of a roſe,
containing many ſhort ſtamina in the boſom; the fruit, which
is a roundiſh berry, grows ſingle in the boſom of its leaves.
The fruit of this tree is not ſo tempting to us, as it was
to the companions of Ulyſſes: the wood is durable, and uſed
to make pipes for wind inſtruments: the root is proper for
hafts of knives, and was highly eſteemed by the Romans for
its beauty and uſe. See L Miller.
LOTOS. n.ſ. [Latin.] See Lot E.
The #4. around them all their food produce,
Lotos, the name divine, nećtareous juice. Pope's Odyſſey.
Lotion. n.ſ. [latio, Latin; lation, French.]
A lation is a form of medicine compounded of aqueous li-
quids, uſed to waſh any part with ; from lavo, to waſh.
Quincy.
In lations in women's caſes, he orders two potions of helle-
bore macerated in two cotylae of water. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Lottery, n.ſ. [lotterie, §. from lot..] A game of chance;
a ſortilege; diſtribution of prizes by chance; a play in which
lots are drawn for prizes. -
Let high-fighted tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by lottery. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
The lottery that he hath deviſed in theſe three cheſts of gold,
filver, and lead, will never be choſen by any but whom you
ſhall rightly love. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice.
Every warriour may be ſaid to be a ſoldier of fortune, and
the beſt commanders to have a kind of lottery for their work.
Sºuth's Servions.
Fortune, that with malicious joy
Does man, her ſlave, oppreſs,
Still various and unconſtant ſtill,
Promotes, degrades, delights in ſtrife,
And makes a lottery of life.
Lo'vage. n.ſ. [leviſficum, Latin.]
The lobes of the lovage leaves are cut about their borders
like thoſe of parſley; the flower conſiſts, for the moſt part,
of five leaves, which expand in form of a roſe; each of
theſe flowers are ſucceeded by two oblong, gibboſe, furrowed
ſeeds, which on one ſide have a leafy border. This plant is
often uſed in medicine. Miller.
LOUD. adj.
I. Noiſy; ſtriking the ear with great force.
Contending on the Leſbian ſhore,
His proweſs Philomelides confeſs'd, -
And loud acclaiming Greeks the vićtor bleſs'd. Pope.
The numbers ſoft and clear,
Gently ſteal upon the ear;
Now louder, and yet louder riſe, • * *
And fill with ſpreading ſounds the ſkies. Pope's St. Cacilia.
2. Clamorous; turbulent.
She is lºud and ſtubborn; her feet abide not in her houſe.
Prov. vii. 11.
Dryden's Horace.
Lo'UDLY. adv. [from loud.]
1. Noiſily; ſo as to be heard far.
The ſoldier that philoſopher well blam’d,
Who long and loudly in the ſchools declaim'd.
1. Clamourouſly.
I read above fifty pamphlets, written by as many preſby-
terian divines, loudly diſclaiming toleration. Swift.
Loudness. n. ſ. Noiſe; force of ſound; turbulence; vehe-
mence or furiouſneſs of clamour.
Had any diſaſter made room for grief, it would have moved
according to prudence, and the proportions of the provoca-
tion: it would not have fallied out into complaint or loud-
nºſ. South's Sermons.
ToI.OVE. v. a. ſlurian, Saxon.]
*To regard with paſſionate affection, as that of one ſek te
the other,
Denham.
–
5. To regard with reverent unwillingneſs to offend.
3. Courtſhip.
Good ſhepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to lºve.
7–It is to be made all of ſighs and tears;
It is to be made all of faith and ſervice;
It is to be all made of fantaſy,
All made of paſſion, and all made of wiſhes;
All adoraticn, duty, and obedience;
All humbleneſs, all patience, all impatience, ,
All purity, all trial, all obſervance. Shakeſp. As you like it.
I could not love I'm ſurc
One who in love were wiſe. . . - Cowley.
The jºalous man wiſhes himſelf a kind of deity to the peſ.
ſon he loves ; he would be the only employment of her
thoughts. Addison's Speciator, N. 170.
2. To regard with the affection of a friend.
... None but his brethren he, and ſiſters, knew,
Whom the kind youth prefer'd to me,
And much above myſelf. I lov'd them too.
3. To regard with parental tenderneſs.
. He that loveth me ſhall be lºved of my father, and I will
*we him, and will manifeſt myſelf to him. jºhn xiv. 21.
4. To be pleaſed with.
Fiſh uſed to ſalt water delight more in freſh : we ſee that
ſalmons and ſmelts love to get into rivers, though againſt the
ſtream. Bacon's Nat. Hi/?. No. 793.
Wit, eloquence, and poetry,
Arts which f lºv’d.
Cowley.
He lov'd my worthleſs rhimes.
Cowley.
Love the Lord thy God with all thine heart. Deut. vi. 5.
Love. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
I. The paſſion between the ſexes.
Hearken to the birds love-learned ſong,
The dewie leaves among ! Spenſer's Epithalam.
While idly. I ſtood looking on, -
I found th' effect of love in idleneſs. Shakeſpeare.
My tales of love were wont to weary you; , --
I know you joy not in a love diſcourſe. . . . Shakeſpeare,
What! have I 'ſcaped love letters in the holiday-time of
my beauty, and am I now a ſubject for them Shakeſpeare.
I look'd upon her with a ſoldier's eye,
That lik'd, but had a rougher taſk in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of love. Shakeſpeare.
What need a vermil-tinétur'd lip for that,
Love-darting eyes, or treſſes like the morn. Milton.
Love †. oft in pleaſing concord end, .
Not wedlock treachery, endang'ring life. Milton's Agon.
. A love potion works more by the ſtrength of charm than
Inature. - Collier on Popularity.
You knowy' are in my pow'r by making iove. Dryden.
Let mutual joys our mutual truſt combine,
And love, and love-born confidence be thine. Pope.
Cold is that breaſt which warm'd the world before,
And theſe love-darting eyes muſt roll no more. Pope.
2. Kindneſs; good-will; friendſhip.
Death grin on me, and I will think thou ſmil'ſt,
And kiſs me as thy wife; miſery's love, *
O come to me ! Shakeſpeare's King john.
What love, think'ſt thou, I ſue ſo much to get?
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
That love which virtue begs, and virtue grants. ºff:
God brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the
prince. Dan. i. 9.
The one preach Chriſt of contention, but the other of
Jove. Phil. i. 17.
By this ſhall all men know that ye are my diſciples, if ye
have love one to another. Rom. xiii. 35.
Unwearied have we ſpent the nights,
Till the Ledean ſtars, ſo fam'd for love, -
Wonder'd at us from above. Cowley.
Demetrius
Made love to Nedar’s daughter Helena, -
And won her ſoul. Shakespeare Midſummer Night's Dream.
If you will marry make your loves to me, **.
My lady is beſpoke. Shakespeare's King Lear.
I to your aſſiſtance do make love, -
Maſking the buſineſs from the common eye. Shakeſpeare.
The enquiry of truth, which is the love-making or wooing
of it; the knowledge of truth, the preference of it; and the
belief of truth, the enjoying of it, is the ſovereign good of
human nature. Bacon’s Eſſays.
4. Tenderneſs; parental care.
No religion that ever, was ſo fully repreſents the goodneſs
of God, and his tender love to mankind, which is the moſt
powerful argument to the love of God. Tillotſon's Sermons.
5. Liking; inclination to: as, the lºve of one's country.
6. Object beloved.
Open the temple gates unto my love. Spenſºr.
If that the world and love were young,
And truth in every ſhepherd's tongue; *
Theſe pretty pleaſures might me move,
To live with thee, and be thy love. Shakeſpeare.
15 S The
Cºwky. -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 48</div><p class="Text">Y, O V
L O V
º
The baniſh'd never hopes his lºve to ſee. Dryden.
The lover and the love of human kind. Pope.
7. Lewdneſs.
He is not lolling on a lewd lºve bed,
But on his knees at meditation.
able liking,
8. tº: to fin makes a man fin againſt his own reaſon.
Taylor's holy living.
Men in lºve with their opinions may not only ſuppoſe
what is in queſtion, but allege wrong matter of fact. Locke.
9. Fordàeſs ; concord.
Come love and health to all !
Then I'll ſit down: give me ſome wine; fill full. - Shakespeare
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the
ſpirit of meekneſs t I Cor. iv. 21.
to. Principle of union.
Love is the great inſtrument of nature, the bond and ce-
ment of ſociety, the ſpirit and ſpring of the univerſe : More 1S
ſuch an affection as cannot ſo properly be ſaid to be in the
ſoul, as the ſoul to be in that: it is the whole man wrapt
up into one deſire. South's Sermons.
11. Pictureſque repreſentation of love.
The lovely babe was born with ev'ry grace:
Such was his form as painters, when they ſhow -
Their utmoſt art, on naked loves beſtow. Dryden's Ovid.
12. A word of endearment. -
'Tis no diſhonour, truſt me, love, ’tis none; -
I would die for thee. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
13. Due reverence to God. -
I know that you have not the lºve of God in you. john.
Love is of two ſorts, of friendſhip and of deſire; the one
betwixt friends, the other betwixt lovers; the one a rational,
the other a ſenſitive love ; ſo our love of God confiſts of two
Parts, as eſteeming of God, and deſiring of him. Hammond.
The love of God makes a man chaſte without the labo-
rious arts of faſting, and exterior diſciplines; he reaches at
glory without any other arms but thoſe of love. Taylor.
14. A kind of thin ſilk ſtuff. Ainſ.
This leaf held near the eye, and obverted to the light,
appeared ſo full of pores, with ſuch a tranſparency as that of
a ſieve, a piece of cypreſs, or lovehood. Boyle on Colours.
LovEApple. n.ſ.
The lºveapple has a flower conſiſting of one leaf, which
expands in a circular order; the ſtyle afterwards becomes a
roundiſh, ſoft, fleſhy fruit, divided into ſeveral cells, which
contain many flat ſeeds. Millar.
Ho'VEKNor, n. ſ. [love and #not..] A complicated figure, by
which affection interchanged is figured.
Lo'VEHETTER. m. ſ. [love and letterj Letter of courtſhip.
The children are educated in the different notions of their
parents: the ſons follow the father, while the daughters read
Joveletters and romances to their mother. Addiſon's Spect.
LovELILY, adv. [from lovely.] Amiably; in ſuch a manner
as to excite love.
Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Thou look'ſt
Lovelily dreadful. Otway's Venice Preſerv'd.
LoveLINess... n.ſ.. [from lovely.] Amiableneſs; qualities of
mind or body that excite love.
Carrying thus in one perſon the only two bands of good-
will, lovelineſ, and lovingneſs. Sidney.
- When I approach
Her lovelineſ, ſo abſolute ſhe ſeems,
That what ſhe wills to do, or ſay,
Seems wiſeſt, virtuouſeſt, diſcreeteſt, beſt. Mih. Pa. Loſt.
If there is ſuch a native *velineſ in the ſex, as to make
them vićtorious when they are in the wrong, how reſiſtleſs
is their power when they are on the fide of ºth Addiſon.
LovELoRN. adj. [love and lorn.] Forſaken of one's love.
The love-lorn nightingale,
Nightly to thee her ſad ſong mourneth well.
Lovely. adj. [from *] Amiable; exciting love.
- The breaſt of Hecuba,
When ſhe did ſuckle Hector, look'd not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus,
Saul and Jonathan were *wely and pleaſant in their lives,
and in their death they were not divided. 2 Sam, i. 23.
The flowers which it had preſs'd
Appeared to my view,
More freſh and lovely than the reſt,
That in the meadows grew. Denham.
The Chriſtian religion gives us a more lovely chara&amp;ter of
God than any religion ever did. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
- The fair
With cleanly powder dry their hair;
And round their !ºvely breaſt and head
» - -
Lov º flow’rs their ming!'d odours ſhed.
r ONGER.
fairs of love.
Thou art an old lov
Loy E.R. n.ſ. [from love.
1. One who is in love,
Milton,
Prior.
* f [love and ”ger.] One who deals in af.
”gºr, and ſpeakeſt ſkilfully. Shai,
Love is blind, and lovers cannot fºr -
The pretty follies that themſelves conin it.
$º?car.
Let it be never ſaid, that he whoſe breaſt
Is Hill'd with love, ſhould break a lºver's reſt. Dryden.
2. A friend; one who regards with kindnæſ.
Your brother and his lover have embrac'd. Sºft.
I tell thee, fellow,
Thy general is my lover: I have been
The book of his good act, whence men have read
His fame unparallel'd haply amplified. Shakeſpeare.
3. One who likes any thing.
To be good and gracious, and a lover of knowledge, arc
amiable things. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Loſov ER. n. / [ from l'ouvert, French, an opening...] An open-
ing for the ſmoke to go out at in the roof of a cottage. Speºſ.
Loves ESRET. n.ſ. [lºve and ſecret.] Secret between lovers.
What danger, Arimant, is this you fear?
Or what loveſecret which I muſt not hear. Dryden's Aur.
Lovesick. adi, [lºve and ſº.) Diſordered with ſoye ; lan-
guiſhing with amorous deſire.
See, on the ſhoar inhabits purple ſpring,
Where nightingales their loveſick ditty fing.
To the dear miſtreſs of my loveſ: mind,
Her ſwain a pretty preſent has deſign'd.
Of the reliefs to eaſe a loveſick mind,
Flavia preſcribes deſpair. Granville.
LovEsome. adj. [from love.] Lovely. A word not uſed.
Nothing new can ſpring
Without thy warmth, without thy influence bear,
Or beautiful or loveſome can appear. Dryden's Lucretius.
Loºvesong. ": [love and ſong..] Song expreſſing love.
oor Romeo is already dead Î
Stabb'd with a white wench's black eye,
Run through the ear with a loveſong. Shakeſpeare.
Loveſong weeds and ſatyrick thorns are grown,
Where ſeeds of better arts were early ſown.
Loves it... n.ſ.. [love and ſuit.] Courtſhip.
His loveſuit hath been to me
As fearful as a ſiege. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Lovetale. n.ſ. [love and tale.] Narrative of love.
The lovetale
Infected Sion's daughters with like heat;
Whoſe wanton paſſions in the ſacred porch
Ezekiel ſaw. A4ilton's Paradſ: Lºft, b. i.
Cato's a proper perſon to entruſt
A lovetale with. Addiſon's Cato.
Love thought. m. ſ. [love and thought.] Amorous fancy.
Away to ſweet beds of flowers,
Lºvethought lie rich when canopied with bowers. Shakeſø.
Lovetox. m. ſ. [love and toy..] Smål preſents given by lovers.
Has this amorous gentleman preſented himſelf with any
lovetoys, ſuch as gold ſnuff-boxes. Arbuth. and Pope's Ma. S.
LovETRick. m. ſ. [love and triº.J. Art of expreſſing love.
Other diſports than dancing jollities;
Other lovetricks than glancing with the eyes. Donne.
Lough. n.ſ. [loch, Iriſh, a lake..] A lake; a large inland
ſtanding water.
A people near the northern pole that won,
Whom Ireland ſent from laughes and foreſts hore,
Pivided far by ſea from Europe's ſhore.
Lough Neſs never freezes.
Loyºng, participial adj. [from love.]
1. Kind; affectionate.
So lºving to my mother,
That he permitted not the winds of heav'n
To viſit her face too roughly. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
This earl was of great courage, and for this cauſe much
loved of his ſoldiers, to whom he was no leſs loving again.
Bayward.
Dryden.
Dryden's Ping.
Donne.
Airfax.
Phil. ranſ.
2. Expreſſing kindneſs.
The king took her in his arms till ſhe came to herſelf,
and comforted her with loving words. Efth. xv. 8.
Lo'VINGKINDNess. Tenderneſs; favour; mercy. A ſcrip-
tural word.
. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving-
kindneſſes. Pſal. xxv. 6.
He has adapted the arguments of obedience to the imper-
fečtion of our underſtanding, requiring us to confide: him.
ºnly under the amiable attributes of goodneſs and loving-
*indhºſ, and to adore him as our friend and patron. Rºgers.
LovinčLY. adv. [from *ving.] Affectionately; with kind.
neſs. -
The new king, having no leſs lovingly performed all du-
ties to him dead than alive, purſued on the ſiege of his un-
natural brother, as much for the revenge of his father, as
for the eſtabliſhing of his own quiet. Sidney, b. ii.
It is no great matter to live !ºing!y with good-natured and
meek perſons; but he that can do ſo with the froward and
perverſe, he only hath true charity. Taylor.
LovincNess. n.ſ.. [from loving.] Kindneſs; affection.
Carrying<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 49</div><p class="Text">L O W,
* -
Carrying thus in one perſon the only two bands of good-
will, lovelineſs and !ovingneſs. - §: ney, b. i.
10tiſs D'OR. m. ſ. [French.) A golden coin of France, va-
lued at about ſeventeen ſhillings. -
if he is deſired to change a lºuis d'or, he muſt conſider of
- Speciator, Nº. 305.
it. - - -
To idle; to live
To Lou NGE. v. m.
lazily. -
f R. m. ſ. [from lounge.] An idler.
#: 77. %; Latin.] A tall gangrel. Ainſ.
LOUSE. n.ſ. plural lice. [lur, Saxon; ſuys, Dutch.] A ſmall
animal, of which different ſpecies live on the bodies of men,
beaſts, and perhaps of all living creatures.
There were lice upon man and beaſt. Exod. viii. 18.
Frogs, lice, and flies, muſt all his palace fill
With loath'd intruſion. - Milton.
it is beyond even an atheiſt's credulity and impudence to
affirm, that the firſt men might proceed out of the tumours
of leaves of trees, as maggots and flies are ſuppoſed to do
now, or might grow upon trees;, or perhaps might be the
lice of ſome prodigious animals, whoſe ſpecies is now extinct.
Bentley's Sermons.
Not that I value the money the fourth part of the ſkip of
- Swift.
T. ń. v. a. [from the noun..] To clean from lice. ift
As for all other good women, that love to do but little
work, how handſome it is to louſe themſelves in the ſun-
ſhine, they that have been but a while in Ireland can well
witneſs. Spenſer on Ireland.
You ſat and lous'd him all the ſun-ſhine day. Swift.
Lousewort. n.ſ. The name of a plant; called alſo rattle
and cock's-comb. - -
There are four different kinds of this plant, which grow
wild, and in ſome low meadows are veryºtroubleſome; eſpe-
cially one ſort with yellow flowers, which riſes to be a foot
high or more, and is often in ſuch plenty as to be the moſt
predominant plant; but it is very bad food for cattle. Miller.
Lousily. adv. [from louſe.]. In a paltry, mean, and ſcurvy way,
Lousiness. n.J. [from louſy..] The ſtate of abounding with
lice.
Lousy. adj. [from louſe.]
1. Swarming with lice; over-run with lice.
Let him be daub'd with lace, live high and whore,
Sometimes be louſy, but be never poor. Dryden's juv.
Sweetbriar and gooſeberry are only louſy in dry times, or
very hot places. Mortimer's Huſſandry.
2. Mean; low born; bred on the dunghil.
I pray you now remembrance on the louſy knave mine hoſt.
A louſy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries. Shakeſp.
Lout. n.ſ.. [loete, old Dutch. Mr. Lye.] A mean aukward
fellow; a bumpkin; a clown.
Pamela, whoſe noble heart doth diſdain, that the truſt of
her virtue is repoſed in ſuch a lout's hands, had yet, to ſhew
ſundren, Dutch.]
an obedience, taken on ſhepherdiſh apparel. Sidney.
This lowt, as he exceeds our lords, the odds
Is, that we ſcarce are men, and you are gods. Shakeſp.
I have need of ſuch a youth, -
That can with ſome diſcretion do my buſineſs;
For 'tis no truſting to yon fooliſh lout. Shakeſpeare.
Thus wail'd the louts in melancholy ſtrain. Gay's Paſ?.
To Lout. s. n. [pluran, to bend, Saxon.] To pay obeiſance;
to bend; to bow; to ſtoop. Obſolete. It was uſed in a
good ſenſe. In Scotland they ſay, a fellow with lowtan or
littan, ſhoulders ; that is, one who bends forwards; his
ſhoulders or back.
He fair the knight ſaluted, louting low,
Who fair him quitted, as that courteous was. Fa. Qu.
Under the ſand-bag he was ſeen,
Louting low, like a for'ſter green. Ben. johnſºn's Underw.
The palmer, grey with age, with count'nance lowting low,
His head ev'n to the earth before the king did bow. Drayton.
To Lowt. v. a. This word ſeems in Shakeſpeare to fignify,
to overpower.
I am lowted by a traitor villain,
And cannot help the noble chevalier. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Lo'Utish. adj. [from lout..] Clowniſh; bumpkinly.
This lautiſh clown is ſuch, that you never ſaw ſo ill-fa-
voured a viſar; his behaviour ſuch, that he is beyond the de-
gree of ridiculous. Sidney,
Loukishly, adv. [from lout..] With the air of a clown;
with the gait of a bumpkin.
Low, adj.
1. Not high.
* Not riſing far upwards.
It became a ſpreading vine of low ſtature.
3. Not elevated in ſituation.
O mighty Caeſar! do'ſt thou lye ſo low *
Are all thy conqueſts, glories, triumphs, ſpoils,
Shrunk to this little meaſure : Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
, Whatſoever is waſhed away from them is carried down
into the lower grounds, and into the ſea, and nothing is
brought back, Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Ezek. xvii. 6.
L O W
4. Deſcending far downwards; deep.
5. Not deep, not ſwelling high ; ſhallow : tiſed of water.
As two men were walking by the ſea-ſide at low water,
they ſaw an oyſter, and they both pointed at it together.
- - L'E/?range.
It is ** ebb ſure with his accuſer, when ſuch peccadillo's
ate put in to ſwell the charge. Atterbury.
6. Not of high price: as, corn is lºw.
7. Not loud; not noiſy.
As when in open air we blow,
The breath, though ſtrain'd, ſounds flat and lºw:
But if a trumpet take the blaſt,
It lifts it high, and makes it laſt. J/aller.
The theatre is ſo well contrived, that, from the very deep
of the ſtage, the lowſ? found may be heard diſtinctly to the
fartheſ part of the audience 3 and yet, if you raiſe your voice
as high as you pleaſe, there is nothing like an echo to callſ.
confuſion. Addiſon on Italy.
8. In latitudes near to the line.
They take their courſe either high to the north, or lºw to
the ſouth. Abbot's Deſcript. of the IVorld.
9. Not riſing to ſo great a ſum as ſome other accumulation of
particulars. -
Who can imagine, that in fixteen or ſeventeen hundred
years time, taking the lower chronology, that the earth had
then ſtood, mankind ſhould be propagated no farther than
Judaea. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
10. Late in time: as, the lower empire.
II. Dejected; depreſſed.
- To be worſt,
The lºweſt, moſt dejećted, thing of fortune,
Stands ſtill in eſperance.
His ſpirits are ſo low his voice is drown'd,
He hears as from afar, or in a ſwoon,
Like the deaf murmur of a diſtant ſound.
Though he before had gall and rage,
Which death or conqueſt muſt aſſwage;
He grows diſpirited and low,
He hates the fight, and ſhuns the foe.
12. Impotent; ſubdued. ---
To keep them all quiet, he muſt keep them in greater
awe and leſs ſplendor; which power he will uſe to keep them
as low as he pleaſes, and at no more coſt than makes for his
own pleaſure. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
13. Not elevated in rank or ſtation; abjećt. - -
He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor. Shakespeare .
Try in men of low and mean education, who have never
elevated their thoughts above the ſpade. Locke.
14. Diſhonourable; betokening meanneſs of mind ; as, low
tricks.
15. Not ſublime; not exalted in thought or dićtion.
He has not ſo many thoughts that are low and vulgar, but,
at the ſame time, has not ſo many thoughts that are ſublime
and noble. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 279.
In compariſon of theſe divine writers, the nobleſt wits of
the heathen world are low and dull. Felton on the Claſſicks.
16. Reduced ; in poor circumſtances; as, I am low in the world.
Low. adv.
1. Not aloft; not at a high price; meanly: it is chiefly uſed
in compoſition. -
Proud of their numbers and ſecure in ſoul,
The confident and over-luſty French:
Do the low-rated Engliſh play at dice Shakeſp. Hen. W.
This is the prettieſt low-born laſs, that ever
Ran the greenſord; nothing ſhe does or ſeems,
But ſmacks of ſomething greater than herſelf,
Too noble for this place. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale,
There under Ebon ſhades and low-brow'd rocks,
As ragged as thy locks,
In dark Cimmerian deſert ever dwell.
My eyes no objećt met
But low-hung clouds, that dipt themſelves in rain,
To ſhake their fleeces on the earth again.
No luxury found room
In low-rooft houſes, and bare walls of lome. -
Vaſt yellow offsprings are the German's pride ;
But hotter climates narrower frames obtain,
And low-built bodies are the growth of Spain. Creech.
Whenever I am turned out, my lodge deſcends upon a
dow-ſpirited creeping family. Swift.
We wand'ring go through dreary waſtes,
Where round ſome mould'ring tow'r pale ivy creeps,
And lºw-brow’d rocks hang nodding o'er the deeps. Pope.
Corruption, like a general flood,
Shall deluge all; and av'rice creeping on,
Spread like a low-born miſt, and blot the ſun.
2. In times near our own. -
In that part of the world which was firſt inhabited, even
as low down as Abraham's time, they wandered with their
Shakeſpeare.
Dryden.
Prior,
Milton.
Dryden,
Dryden,
Pote.
flocks and herds. f th - Lock.
. With a depreſion of the voice. • * ~ *
3 Lucia, ſpeak low, he is retir'd to reſt. Addiſon's †.
4-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 50</div><p class="Text">L O W
L O W
4. atc of ſubjcótion. -
3 "ß". connes iºns, having been once ſo lºw brought, and
------- - - r ſo
th...hiſ ſubjected, they afterwards lifted up themſº
ſtrongly º - *-- Spenſer on tº:
To flow. v. a. ſº º adjedive.] To ſink; to make low.
- iforinted for 10twer. -
Pº º, guineas was lowed from one-and-twenty ſhil-
ſings and ſixpence to one-and-twenty ſhillings. Swift.
T., Low. v. H. [ploran, Saxon. The adjective low, not high,
is pronounced lo; the verb lºw, to bellºw, lou.] To bellow
, a cow.
| aS ñº. the wild aſs bray when he has graſs 2 or loweth the
| ox over his fodder? job vi. 5.
The maids of Argos, who, with frantick cries,
And imitated lowings, fill'd the ſkies. Roſcommon.
- Fair Io grac'd his ſhield, but Io now,
with horns exalted ſtands, and ſeems to *. -
Had he been born ſome ſimple ſhepherd's heir, -
- The lºwing herd, or fleecy ſheep his care. Prior.
* Lowbell. n.). [laye, Dutch; less Saxon; or leg, Iſlandick,
- a flame, and bell.] A kind of fowling in the night, in which
the birds are wakened by a bell, and lured by a flame into
a net. Lºwe denotes a flame in Scotland; and to ***, to
flame.
Lowe. m. ſ. -
Lowe, loe, comes from the Saxon pleap, a hill, heap, or
barrow ; and ſo the Gothick hlaiv is a monument or bar-
Gibſon's Camden.
Dryden.
row.
To Lo'w ER. v. a. [from low.] -
1. To bring low; to bring down by way of ſubmiſſion.
As our high veſſels paſs their wat'ry way,
Let all the naval world due homage pay;
With haſty reverence their top-honours lower,
Confeſſing the aſſerted power.
The ſuppliant nations
Bow to its enſigns, and with lower'd ſails
Confeſs the ocean's queen. Smith's Phaedrus and Hippolytus.
2. To ſuffer to ſink down.
When the water of rivers iſſues out of the apertures with
more than ordinary rapidity, it bears along with it ſuch par-
ticles of looſe matter as it met with in its paſſage through the
ſtone, and it ſuſtains thoſe particles till its motion begins to
remit, when by degrees it lowers them, and lets them fall.
Wºodward's Nat. Hiſt.
8. To leſſen; to make leſs in price or value.
" The kingdom will loſe by this lowering of intereſt, if it
makes foreigners withdraw any of their money. Locke.
Some people know it is for their advantage to lower their
intereſt. Child on Trade.
To Lower. v. n. To grow leſs; to fall; to ſink.
º The preſent pleaſure,
- By revolution low'ring, does become
The oppoſite of itſelf. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
To Lo'wer. v. n. [It is doubtful what was the primitive
meaning of this word: if it was originally applied to the ap-
pearance of the ſky, it is no more than to grow low, as the
ſky ſeems to do in dark weather: if it was firſt uſed of the
countenance, it may be derived from the Dutch loeren, to
look aſkance.]
. To appear dark, ſtormy, and gloomy; to be clouded.
Now is the winter of our diſcontent
Made glorious Summer by this ſon of York;
And all the clouds that lower'd upon our houſe,
In the deep boſom of the ocean buried. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The low'ring ſpring, with laviſh rain,
Beats down the ſlender ſtem and bearded grain. Dryden.
When the heavens are filled with clouds, and all nature
wears a lºwering countenance, I withdraw myſelf from theſe
uncomfortable ſcenes. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 83.
The dawn is overcaſt, the morning low'r,
And heavily in clouds brings on the day. Addiſon's Cato.
If on Swithin's feaſt the welkin lºuri,
And cv'ry penthouſe ſtreams with haſty ſhow’rs, .
Twice twenty days ſhall clouds their fleeces drain. Gay.
To frown; to pout; to look ſullen.
There was Diana when Acteon ſaw her, and one of her
fooliſh nymphs, who weeping, and withal lowering, one might
tec the workman meant to ſet forth tears of anger. Sidney.
He mounts the throne, and Juno took her place,
But fullen diſcontent ſat low'ring on her face ;
Then, impotent of tongue, her filence broke
Thus turbulent in rattling tone ſhe ſpoke. »
Low ER, "...ſ. (from the verb.]
1. Cloudineſs; gloomineſs.
2. Cloudineſs of look.
Philoclea was jealous for Zelmane, not without ſo mighty
º Iºwer as that face could yield. Sidney, Ží.
i. ******, *[from lower..] With cloudineſ, ; gloomily.
1C) "º. adj. [from **, lower, and moſt.] Loweſt.
- lants have their ſeminal Parts uppermoſt, living creatures
have them lºwermoſi. Bacon's Not. Hiſt
It will alſo happen, that the ſame part of the pipe which
was now lºwermoſ, will preſently become higher, ſo that
the water does aſcend by deſcending; aſcending in compa-
Prior.
2
Dryden.
riſon to the whole inſtrument, and deſcending in reſpect of
its ſeveral parts. J/ilkins'; Dædalº.
LowLAND. m. ſ. ſlow and land.]. The country that is low in
reſpect of neighbouring hills; the marſh.
What a devil's he
His errand was to draw the lowland damps.
And noiſome vapcurs, from the foggy fens, -
Then breathe the baleful ſtench with all his force. Dryd.
No nat'ral cauſe ſhe found from brooks or bogs,
Or marſhy lowlands, to produce the fogs.
Lowlily. adv. [from lºwly.]
1. Humbly; without pride.
2. Meanly; without dignity.
Lowlis Ess. n.ſ.. [from lowly.]
1. Humility; freedom from pride.
Lowlingſ is young ambition's ladder,
Whereto the climber upward turns his face.
The king-becoming graces,
As juſtice, verity, temp'rance, ſtableneſs,
Bounty, perſev’rance, mercy, lowlineſs,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude; -
I have no reliſh of them. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Eve,
With lowlineſ majeſtick, from her ſeat,
And grace, that won who ſaw to wiſh her ſtay,
Roſe. Milton's Par. Loft, b. viii.
If with a true Chriſtian lowlineſs of heart, and a devout
fervency of ſoul, we perform them, we ſhall find, that they
will turn to a greater account to us, than all the warlike pre-
parations in which we truſt. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. Meanneſs; want of dignity; abjećt depreſſion.
They continued in that lowlineſ; until the time that the di-
viſion between the two houſes of Lancaſter and York aroſe.
Spenſer's State of Ireland.
The lowlineſ of my fortune has not yet brought me to
flatter vice; and it is my duty to give teſtimony to virtue.
Dryden's Preface to Aurengzebe.
Dryder.
Shakeſpeare.
-
Lo'wly. adj. [from low.]
1. Humble; meek; mild.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am
meek and lowly in heart. 4Matt. xi. 29.
He did bend to us a little, and put his arms abroad: we
of our parts ſaluted him in a very lowly and ſubmiſfive man-
ner, as looking that from him we ſhould receive ſentence of
life or death. Bacon's New Atlantis.
With cries they fill'd the holy fane;
Then thus with lowly voice Ilioneus began. Dryden.
The heavens are not pure in his ſight, and he charges even
his angels with folly; with how lowly a reverence muſt we
bow down our ſouls before ſo excellent a being, and adore a
nature ſo much ſuperior to our own. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Mean; wanting dignity; not great.
For from the natal hour diſtinétive names,
One common right the great and lowly claims.
3. Not lofty; not ſublime.
For all who read, and reading not diſdain,
Theſe rural poems, and their lowly ſtrain,
The name of Varus oft inſcrib'd ſhall ſee.
Lo'wly. adv. [from low.]
1. Not highly ; meanly; without grandeur; without dignity.
I will ſhew myſelf highly fed, and lowly taught; I know
my buſineſs is but to the court. Shakeſpeare.
'Tis better to be lowly born,
And range with humble livers in content,
Than to be perk'd up in a gliſt'ring grief,
And wear a golden ſorrow. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
2. Humbly; meekly; modeſtly.
Heav'n is for thee too high
To know what paſſes there; be lowly wiſe :
Think only what concerns thee, and thy being. Miton.
Another crowd
Preferr'd the ſame requeſt, and lowly bow’d. Pope.
Low N. m. ſ. [liun, Iriſh; locn, Dutch, a ſtupid drone..] A
ſcoundrel; a raſcal.
King Stephen was a worthy peer,
His breeches coſt him but a crown,
He thought them ſixpence all too dear,
And therefore call'd the taylor lown.
Low Ness. n.ſ.. [from low.
1. Abſence of height; ſmall diſtance from the ground.
They know
By th’ height, the lowneſ, or the mean, if dearth,
Or foizon follow. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
The lowneſs of the bough where the fruit cometh, maketh
the fruit greater, and to ripen better; for you ſhall even ſee,
in apricots upon a wall, the greateſt fruits towards the bot-
tonn. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. N°. 432.
In our Gothick cathedrals, the narrowneſs of the arch
makes it riſe in height, the lowneſs often opens it in breadth.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
2. Meanneſs of condition, whether mental or external.
Nothing could have ſubdu'd nature
To ſuch a lownſ, but his unkind daughter. Shakeſpeare.
Now
Pope.
Dryd. Silenus.
Shakeſpeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 51</div><p class="Text">L O Z
- Fan-T
|
Now I muſt
To the young man ſend humble treaties,
And palter in the ſhift of lowneſs.
3. Want of rank; want of dignity. -
The name of ſervants has of old been reckoned to imply
a certain meanneſs of mind, as well as lownſ of condition.
South's Sermons.
Shakeſpeare.
4. Want of ſublimity; contrary to loftineſs.
A tranſcendent height, as lowneſs me,
Makes her not ſee, or not ſhow. Donne.
His ſtyle is accommodated to his ſubjećt, either high or
low; if his fault be too much lowneſs, that of Perſius is the
hardneſs of his metaphors. - Dryden.
5. Submiſſiveneſs. - -
The people were in ſuch lowneſ of obedience as ſubjećts
were like to yield, who had lived almoſt four-and-twenty
years under ſo politick a king as his father. Bacon.
6. Depreſſion; dejection. - - - -
Hence proceeded that poverty and lowneſs of ſpirit to which
a kingdom may be ſubject, as well as a particular perſon.
Swift.
Lowthoughted. adj. [low and thought.] Having the thoughts
with-held from ſublime or heavenly meditations; mean of
ſentiment; narrow mindedneſs. -
Above the ſmoak and ſtir of this dim ſpot,
Which men call earth, and with lowthoughted care,
Strive to keep up a frail and feveriſh being Milton.
O grace ſcrene Oh virtue heav'nly fairſ
Divine oblation of lowthoughted care
Freſh blooming hope, gay daughter of the ſky,
And faith our early immortality Pope.
LowsPIRITED. adj. [low and ſpirit..] Dejećted; depreſſed; not
lively; not vivacious; not ſpritely.
Severity carried to the higheſt pitch breaks the mind; and
then, in the place of a diſorderly young fellow, you have a
lºwſpirited moped creature. Locke.
LoxoproMick. m. ſ. [xož3; and ºwo; ; loxodromus, Lat.]
Loxodromick is the art of oblique ſailing by the rhomb,
which always makes an equal angle with every meridian;
that is, when you ſail neither directly under the cquator, nor
under one and the ſame meridian, but acroſs them : hence
the table of rhumbs, or the tranſverſe tables of miles, with
the table of longitudes and latitudes, by which the ſailor may
practically find his courſe, diſtance, latitude, or longitude,
is called loxodromick. Harris.
LOYAL. adj. [loyal, Fr.]
1. Obedient; true to the prince.
Of Gloſter's treachery,
And of the loyal ſervice of his ſon,
When I inform'd him, then he call'd meſot. Shakeſp.
The regard of duty in that moſt loyal nation overcame all
other difficulties. Knolles.
Loyal ſubjećts often ſeize their prince,
Yet mean his ſacred perſon not the leaſt offence. Dryden.
2. Faithful in love; true to a lady, or lover.
Hail wedded love by thee
Founded in reaſon loyal, juſt, and pure.
There Laodamia with Evadne moves,
Unhappy both but lºyal in their loves. Dryden's Aºn.
Loſ Alist, n.ſ.. [from loyal.] One who profeſſes uncommon
adherence to his king.
The cedar, by the inſtigation of the loyalifts, fell out with
the homebians. Howel's Wocal Foreſt.
Loyally, adv. [from loyal.] With fidelity; with true adhe-
rence to a king.
The circling year I wait, with ampler ſtores,
And fitter pomp, to hail my native ſhores;
Then by my realms due homage would be paid,
, For wealthy kings are loyally obey'd. Pope's Odyſſey.
lºyalty. n.f. [Ibiault, French.]
1. Firm and faithful adherence to a prince.
Though loyalty, well held, to fools does make
Our faith meer folly; yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord,
Does conquer him that did his maſter conquer. Shakeſp.
To day ſhalt thou behold a ſubject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Commiſſions flaw'd the heart
Of all their loyalties. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
He had never had any veneration for the court, but only
Milton.
ſuch lºyalty to the king as the law required. Clarendon.
•r Abdiel faithful found
Unſhaken, unſeduc’d, unterrify'd,
His lºyalty he kept. Milton.
2. Fidelity to a lady, or lover.
***NGE, n. ſ. [/ſenge, French..] Of unknown etymology.
1. A rhomb. - -
The beſt builders reſolve upon rectangular ſquares, as a
*an between too few and too many angles; and through
**qual inclination of the ſides, they are ſtronger than the
rhomb or lºſenge. Iſotton's Architeåure.
* * iſ a form of a medicine made into ſmall pieces,
L U B
to be held or chewed in the mouth till melted or waſted.
3. A cake of preſerved fruit: both theſe are ſo denominated
from the original form, which was rhomboidal.
LP, a contračion for lordſhip.
Lu'ebA.D. m. ſ. [from histºr.] A lazy ſturdy fellow.
Yet º wine and their vićtuals thoſe curmudgeon lub-
ºra'ſ
Lock up from my fight, in cellars and cupboards. Swift.
LU'BBER. m. ſ. ſof this word the beſt derivation ſeems to be
from lubbed, ſaid by junius to fignify in Daniſh fat..] A ſtur-
dy drone; an idle, fat, bulky loſel; a booby.
For tempeſt and ſhowers deceiveth a many,
And ling’ring lubbers looſe many a penie. ' Tuffer's Huſø.
Theſe chaſe the ſmaller ſhoals of fiſh from the main ſea
into the havens, leaping up and down, puffing like a fat
lubber out of breath. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwall.
They clap the lubber Ajax on the ſhoulder,
As if his feet were on brave Hestor's breaſt,
And great Troy ſhrinking. Shakeſp. Troil, and Crºffda.
A notable lubber thou reporteſt him to be. Shakeſp.
Tell how the drudging goblin ſweat;
His ſhadowy flail hath threſh'd the corn,
That ten day labourers could not end;
Then lies him down the lubber fend.
Venetians do not more uncouthly ride,
Than did your lubber ſtate mankind beſtride. Dryden.
How can you name that ſuperannuated lubber P Congreve.
Lu'Bºerly. adj. [from lubber.J Lazy and bulky.
I came at Eaton to marry Mrs. Anne Page; and ſhe's a
great lubbery boy. Shakespeare.
Lu’BBERLY. adv. Aukwardly; clumſily.
Merry andrew on the low rope copies lithberly the ſame
tricks which his maſter is ſo dexterouſly performing on the
high. Dryden's Dedication.
Milton.
Lu. n.ſ. A game at cards.
Ev’n mighty pam who kings and queens o'erthrew,
And mow’d down armies in the fights of lu. Pºpe.
To Lu'BRicate. v. a. [from lubricus, Lat.] To make ſmooth
or ſlippery; to ſmoothe. -
There are aliments which, beſides this lubricating quality,
ſtimulate in a ſmall degree. Arbuthnot on Arments.
The patient is relieved by the mucilaginous and the ſapo-
naceous remedies, ſome of which lubricate, and others both
lubricate and ſtimulate. Sharp's Surgery.
To LU'BR1citATE. v. n. [from lubricus, Latin.] To ſmooth;
to make ſlippery.
LUBR1'city. n.ſ. [lubricus, Latin; lubricité, French.]
1. Slipperineſs; ſmoothneſs of ſurface.
2. Aptneſs to glide over any part, or to facilitate motion.
Both the ingredients are of a lubricating nature; the mu-
cilage adds to the lubricity of the oil, and the oil preſerves
the mucilage from inſpiſlation. Ray on Creation.
3. Uncertainty; flipperineſs; inſtability.
The manifold impoſſibilities and hºricities of matter can-
not have the ſame conveniences in any modification. More.
He that enjoyed crowns, and knew their worth, excepted
them not out of the charge of univerſal vanity; and yet the
politician is not diſcouraged at the inconflancy of human af-
fairs, and the lubricity of his ſubječt. Glanville's Apolºgy.
A ſtate of tranquillity is never to be attained, but by keep-
ing perpetually in our thoughts the certainty of death, and
the lubricity of fortune. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
4. Wantonneſs; lewdneſs.
From the letchery of theſe fauns, he thinks that ſatyr is
derived from them, as if wantonneſs and lubricity were eſſen-
tial to that poem which ought in all to be avoided. Dryden.
Lu'BRick. adj. [lubricus, Latin.]
1. Slippery; ſmooth on the ſurface.
- A throng
Of ſhort thick ſobs, whoſe thund'ring volleys float
And roul themſelves over her lubrick throat,
In panting murmurs.
2. Uncertain; unſteady.
I will deduce him from his cradle through the deep and
lubrick waves of ſtate, till he is ſwallowed in the gulph of fa-
tality. J7%tton.
2. Wanton; lewd. [lubrique, French.]
Why were we hurry'd down
This lubrick and adult’rate age;
Nay, added fat pollutions of our own,
Tº encreaſe the ſteaming ordures of the ſtage. Dryden.
Lu'BR1cous. adj. [lubricus, Latin.]
1. Slippery; ſmooth. -
}.. * of water being voluble and lubricous as well as
fine, it eaſily infinuates itſelf into the tubes of vegetables,
and by that means introduces into them the matter it bears
Iſoodward's Nat. Hiſł.
Craſhaw.
along with it.
2. Uncertain. - - -
The judgment being the leading power, if it be ſtored
with lubricous opinions inſtead of clearly conceived truths, and
peremptorily reſolved in them, the practice will be as º
gular as the conceptions. Glanville's Scºp.
15 T LU'BR -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 52</div><p class="Text">L U C
L U D
|
jº, and fiz. Latin.] The act of
Lubririca’rios. */ [lubricts an fº, J
". liquor is prepared for the inunction and lubrift-
caſiºn of the heads ºf the bones; an oily one, º: :
the marrow ; * mucilaginous, ſupplied by certain glandules
ſeated in the articulations. . - Ray 671 ::::::::
i...ºrion, n.ſ. [lubricus and faciº, Latin.] The act o
lubricating or ſmoothing. - - - -
The cauſe is lubrifaciian and relaxatio, as in medicines
emollient; ſuch as milk, honey: and mallows. Bacon.
Luce. n.ſ. [perhaps from lupuſ, Latin.]. A pike full grown.
They give the dozen white lutes in their cºat. Shakeſp.
Lucent. adj. [lucenº, Latin.] Shining;. bright; ſplendid.
I meant the day-ſtar ſhould not brighter riſe, -
Noriend like influence from his hºrnt ſeat. Benj. jºhnſºn.
A ſpot like which perhaps
Aſtronomer in the ſun's lucent orb,
Through his glaz'd optick tube yet never ſaw.
1U city ºf [illiduſ, Latin; lucids, French.
1. Shining; bright; glittering.
1. Shining; bright; g Öºr his hid arms
A military veſt of purple flow'd; • *
Livelier than Meliboean. - -- Milton.
it contracts it, preſerving the eye from being injured by
too vehement and lucid an object, and again dilates it for the
apprehending objects more remote in a fainter light. Ray.
If at the ſame time a piece of white paper, or * white
cloth, or the end of one's fingers be held at the diſtance of
about a quarter of an inch, or half an inch, from. that part
of the glaſs where it is moſt in motion, the electrick vapour
which is excited by the friction of the glaſs againſt the hand
will, by daſhing againſt the white Paºr, cloth, or finger,
be put into ſuch an agitation as to emit light; and make the
white paper, cloth; or finger, appear lucid like a glow-worm.
Newton's Optickſ.
The pearly ſhell its lucid globe unfold,
And Phoebus warm the rip'ning ore to gold. Pope.
Milton.
2. Pellucid; tranſparent.
On the fertile banks
Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid ſtreams. Milt. Pº. Hº:
On the tranſparent ſide of a globe, half ſilver and half of
a tranſparent metal, we ſaw certain ſtrange figures circularly
drawn, and thought we could touch them, till wº found our
fingers ſtopped by that lucid ſubſtance. Gulliver's Trav.
Bāght with the radiance of intellect; not darkened with
madneſs. . . . .
The long diſſentions of the two houſes, which, although
they had had lucid intervals and happy pauſes, yet they did
ever hang over the kingdom, ready to break forth. Bacon.
Some beams of wit on other ſouls may fall,
Strike through and make a lucid interval;
But Shadwell's genuine night admits no rays
His riſing fogs prevail upon the day. Drydºn.
I believed him in a lucid interval, and deſired he would
pleaſe to let me ſee his book. - ‘latler.
A few ſenſual and voluptuous perſons may, for a ſeaſon,
cclipſe this native light of the ſoul; but can never ſo wholly
ſmother and extinguiſh it, but that, at ſome lucid intervals;
it will recover itſelf again, and ſhine forth to the conviction
of their conſcience. Bentley's Sermons.
Luci'pity. m. ſ. [from lucid.] Splendor; brightneſs. Dić.
Luci'FERous: adj. [fucifer, Latin.] Giving light; affording
means of diſcovery.
The cxperiment is in itſelf not ignoble; and luciferous
cnough, as ſhewing a new way to produce a volatile ſalt.
- - - - Boyle.
Lucifick, adj. [lux and faciº, Latin.]. Making light; pro-
ducing light. -
When made to converge; and ſo mixed together; though
their lucifick motion be continued, yet by interfering, that
equal motion, which is the colorifick, is interrupted. Grew.
luck. n.ſ. (geluck, Dutch.]
1. Chance; accident; fortune; hap; caſual event.
He fore’d his neck into a nooze,
To ſhew his play at faſt and looſe ;
And when he chanc'd tº eſcape, miſtook
For art and ſubtlety, his luck. Hudibrar.
Some ſuch method may be found by human induſtry or
ick, by which compound bodies may be reſolved into other
ſubſtances than they are divided into by the fire. Boyle.
2. Fortune, good or bad.
Glad of ſuch luck the luckleſs lucky maid,
A long time with that ſavage people ſtaid,
To gather breath in many miſeries. Spenſer.
Farewel, good Saliſbury, and good luck go with thee.
- Shakeſpeare' -
I did demand what news from sº s Henry V
He told me, that rebellion had ill luck,
And that young Harry Percy's ſpur was cold. Shakeſpeare.
That part of mankind who have had the juſtice, or the
luck, to paſs, in common opinion, for the wifeſt, have fol-
lowed a very different ſcent. Temple.
3
Such, how highly ſoccer they may have the luck to be
thought of, are far from being Iſraelites indeed. South.
The gueſts are found too mum’rous for the treat,
But all, it ſeems, who had the tº to eat,
- Swear they ne'er taſted more delicious meat. Tate's juv.
Lu'ckily. adv. [from lucky.] Fortunately; by good hap.
It is the pencil thrown luckily full upon the horſe's mouth;
to expreſs the foam, which the painter with all his ſkill could
not form. - - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
It happens luckily for the cſtabliſhment of a new race of
kings upon the Britiſh throne, that the firſt of this royal line
has all high qualifications. Addiſon.
Lu'ckINEss. n.ſ.. [from lucky.j Good fortune; good hap; ca-
ſual happineſs. -
He who ſometimes lights on truth, is in the right but by
chance; and I know not whether the luckineſs of the acci-
dent will excuſe the irregularity of his proceeding. Locke.
Lu'ckless. adj. [from luck.] Unfortunate ; unhappy.
Glad of ſuch luck, the luckleſs lucky maid,
A long time with that ſavage people ſtaid,
To gathe; breath in many miſeries.
N
Fairy Queen.
ever ſhall my thoughts be baſe,
Though luckleſ, yet without diſgrace. Suckling.
What elſe but his immoderate luſt of pow'r,
Pray'rs made and granted in a luckleſ; hour? Dryden.
LU'cky m. ſ. [from luck; gelucis, Dutch..] Fortunate; happy
by chance.
But I more fearful, or more lucky wight,
Diſmay’d with that deformed, diſmal fight,
Fled faſt away. Fairy Queen, b. x.
Perhaps ſome arm more lucky than the reſt,
May reach his heart, and free the world from bondage.
Addison's Cato.
LU'cRative: adj. [lucratif, French ; lucrativus, Lat..] Gain-
ful; profitable; bringing money.
The trade of merchandize being the moſt lucrative, may
bear uſury at a good rate; other contračts not ſo. Bacon.
The diſpoſition of Ulyſſes inclined him to purſue the more
dangerous way of living by war, than the more lucrative ºne-
thod of life by agriculture. Notes on the Odyffy.
Lu'cRE. m. ſ. ſlurrum, Latin.] Gain; profit; pecuniary ad-
vantage. In an ill ſenſe.
Malice and lucre in them
Have laid this woe here. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
They all the ſacred myſteries of heav'n
To their own vile advantages ſhall turn,
Of lucre, and ambition. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
A ſoul ſupreme in each hard inſtance try'd,
Above all pain, all anger, and all pride,
The ; of pow'r, the blaſt of publick breath,
The luſt of lucre, and the dread of death. Pope.
What can be thought of the procuring letters by fraud,
and the printing them merely for lucre º Pope.
LucRI'FERous. adj. [lucrum and fero, Latin.] Gainful; pro-
fitable.
Silver was afterwards ſeparated from the gold, but in ſo ſmall
a quantity, that the experiment, the coſt and pains conſider-
ed, was not lucriferous. - Boyle.
Luc Rí'Fick. adj. [lucrum and faciº, Latin.) Producing gain.
Dićf.
LU'cTATION. m. ſ. [luđor; Latin.] Struggle; effort; conteſt.
To Luſcu BRATE. m. ſ. [lucubror, Lat.j To watch; to ſtudy
by night.
uću BRATI N. m. ſ. [lucibratio, Latin.] Study by candle-
light; noćturnal ſtudy; anything compoſed by night.
Thy lucubrations have been peruſed by ſeveral of our
friends. Tatler, Nº 78.
Lucu BRA'roRY. adj. [lucubratorius, from iucubror, Latin.]
Compoſed by candle-light.
You muſt have a ſober diſh of coffee, and a ſolitary candle
at your ſide, to write an epiſtle lucubratory to your friend.
- Pete.
LU'culeNT. adj. [luculentus, Latin ) 4.
1. Clear; tranſparent; lucid. This word is perhaps not uſed
in this ſenſe by any other writer.
And luculent alofg
The purer rivers flow. Thomſºn's IP'inter, I. 715.
2. Certain; evident.
They are againſt the obſtinate incredulity of the Jews, the
moſt luculent teſtimonies that Chriſtian religion hath. Hooker.
L’UDICROUS. adj. [ludicer, Lat..] Burleſque; merry; ſpor-
tive; exciting laughter.
Plutarch quotes this as an inſtance of Homer's judgment,
in cloſing a ludicrous ſcene with decency and inſtruction.
-- - Notes on the Odyſſey.
Lu'Dicrously, adv. [from iudicrous.) Sportively; in bur-
leſque; in a manner that may excite laughter. -
Lu'Dicrous Ness. n. ſ. (from ludicrous.] Burleſque; ſportive-
neſs; merry caſt or manner; ridiculouſneſs.
LUDIFICA’tion. m. ſ. [ludiſicor, Latin.] The aët of mocking,
or making ſport with another. - Dick.
LUFF.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 53</div><p class="Text">L UK
L U M
LUFF. n. f [in Scotland.] The palm of the hand; as, clap
mearles in my luff. -
To Luff, v. n. [or loof.] To keep cloſe to the wind. Sea
“"contraa your ſwelling ſails, and luff to wind. Dryden.
To Luc. v. a. ſalutºn, Saxon, to pull ; lºga, Swediſh, the
hollow of º: hand.] ll with d violence
ll or drag; to pull with rugged violence.
1. To hall or drag You gods ! why this
will lug your prieſts and ſervants frºm your ſides, Shakeſp.
Thy bear is ſafe, and out of peril, -
Though lugg'd indeed, and wounded very ill.
when ſavage bears agree with bears,
Shall ſecret ones lug ſaints by th' ears.
See him drag his feeble legs about .
Like hounds ill coupled: Jowler lugs him ſtill
Hudibras.
Hudibras, p. iii,
through hedges. Dryden.
'i \. †. is to ſee a ſtrumpet tear -
A cynick's beard, and lug him by the hair. Dryden.
pither every fingle animal ſpirit muſt convey a whole re-
preſentation, or elſe they muſt. divide the image amongſt
ãº, and ſo lug off every one his ſhare. Collier.
2. To LUG ºut. To draw a ſword, in burleſque language.
- But buff and beltmen never know theſe cares,
No time, nor trick of law, their action bars;
They will be heard, or they lug out and cut. Drydºn.
To Luc. v. n. To drag; to come heavily: perhaps only miſ-
- for lags.
º,y flagging ſoul flies under her own pitch,
Like'fowl in air, too damp, and lºgs along,
As if ſhe were a body in a body. Dryden,
LUG. 7?. I.
1. A à of ſmall fiſh. * . . -
They ſeed on ſalt unmerchantable pilchards, tag worms,
higs, and little crabs. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
2. [In Scotland.] An ear. - -
3. Lug, a land meaſure; a pole or perch.
That ample pit, yet far renown'd
For the large leap which Debon did compel
Ceaulin to make, being eight lugs of ground. Fá. §u.
Luſogacs. n.ſ.. [from lug.] Any thing cumbrous and un-
weilly that is to be carried away; any thing of more weight
than value.
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back. Shakeſ?.
hat do you mean
To doat thus on ſuch luggage * Shakeſpeare's Tempſ.
Think not thou to find me ſlack, or need
Thy politick maxims, or that cumberſome ** *
Luggage of war there ſhewn me. Milton's Par. Rºgain'd.
How durſt thou with that ſullen luggage
O' th' ſelf, old ir’n, and other baggage,
Tº oppoſe thy lumber againſt us? Hudibras, p. i.
The mind of man is too light to bear much certainty
among the ruffling winds of paſſion and opinion; and if the
luggage be prized cqually with the jewels, none will be caſt
out till all be ſhipwrecked. Glaxv.
A lively faith will bear aloft the mind,
And leave the laggage of good works behind. Dryden.
I am gathering up my luggage, and preparing for my jour-
, ney. Swift tº Pope.
Lugu'BRious. adj. [lugubre, French; lugubris, Lat.] Mourn-
ful; ſorrowful.
A demure, or rather a lugubrious look, a ſad or whining
tone, makes up the ſum of many mens humiliations.
- - - - - * ...
LUKEWARM. adj. [The original of this word is doubted.
l/armth, in Saxon, is bleos; in old Friſick hlij; in Dutch
licwte; whence probably our luke, to which warm may be
added, to determine, by the firſt word, the force of the ſe-
cond; as we ſay, boiling hat..] -
1. Moderately or mildly warm ; ſo warm as to give only a
pleaſing ſenſation.
A dreary corſe, whoſe life away did paſs,
All wallow'd in his own, yet lukewarm blood,
That from his wound yet welled freſh alas ! Fairy Queen.
; May you a better feaſt never behold,
You knot of mouth friends; ſmoke and lukewarm water
Is your perfeótion. Shakespeare . Timon of Athens.
Bathing the body in lukewarm water is of great advantage
to contemperate hot and ſharp humours. Hiſeman's Surgery.
Whence is it but from this attractive power that water,
which alone diſtils with a gentle lukewarm heat, will not diſtil
from ſalt of tartar without a great heat Newton's Opticks.
2. Indifferent; not ardent; not zealous.
If ſome few continue ſtedfaſt, it is an obedience ſo luke-
warm and languiſhing, that it merits not the name of paſ-
ſon. Dryden.
This ſober condućt is a mighty virtue
In hitewarm patriots.
Luºwarmiº. adv. [from the adještive.]
1. With moderate Warmth.
2. With indifference.
"Kewarminer n.ſ.. [from lukewarm.]
Aidſºn's Cºtº.
...Yºur faction, and reproach them with lukewaranº,
To Lull. v. a. ſhulu, Daniſh; dall, Latin.] */
1. To compoſe to ſleep by a pleaſing ſound.
To LU'MBER. v. n.
1. Moderate or pleaſing heit.
2. Indifference; want of ardour.
- -- - - - - f
- ºkind of zeal counts all merciful moderation ºz.
1Uarmineſs. - . . King Charles.
... The deſed of zeal is lukewarmneſ, or coldneſs in 1eligion;
the exceſs is inordinate heat and ſpiritual fury. Sprat!
Go dry your chaff and ſtubble, give fire to the zeal of
Swift.
There trickled ſoftly down
A gentle ſtream, whoſe murmuring wave did play
Emongſt the pumy ſtones, and made a found
Tº lull him ſoft a ſleep, that by it lay. Fairy Qyzan, i. ii.
Such ſweet º doth in mu::ck lic,
To lull the daughters of neceſſity. Milton,
Theſe ſull'd by nightingales embracing ſlept. Milton,
2. To compoſe; to quiet; to put to reſt.
To find a foe it ſhall not be his hap, - -
And peace ſhall lui him in her flow'ry lap. Miltºn.
No more theſe ſcenes my meditations aid,
Or full to reſt the viſionary maid. Pºp.
By the vocal woods and waters lull'd,
And loſt in lonely muſing in a dream. Thomſºn's Spring.
Lu'll ABY. m. ſ. [lais, Latin. Quem nutricum fuiſe devin .
contendit Turnebus, from lull: it is obſervable that the
nurſes call ſleep ly, by ; lullaly is therefore lail to ſlºp.] A
ſong to ſtill babes.
Only that noiſe heav'ns rolling circles keſt,
Sung lullaly, to bring the world to reſt. Fairfax,
Philomel, with melody, -
Sing in your ſweet lullaly;
£ida, lºa, lu aly; ſula, lu'la, º, aly. Shał ſpeare:
If you will let your lady know I am here to ſpeak with
her, and bring her along with you, it may make my bounty
further.
–Marry, Sir, lullaly to your bounty till I come again. Shakesp,
Drinking is the lullaly uſed by nurſes to ſtill crying chil-
dren. Locke on Education.
LUMBA'Go. m. ſ. [lumbi, Lat, the loins.]
Lumbago's are pains very troubleſome about the loins, and
ſmall of the back, ſuch as precede ague fits and ſevers: they
are moſt commonly from fullneſs and acrimony, in commoil
with a diſpoſition to yawnings, ſhudderings; and erratick
pains in other parts, and go off with evacuation, generally
by ſweat, and other critical diſcharges of fevers. &amp;iſing.
LUMBER. m. ſ. [loma, ºeloma, Saxon, houſholdſtuff, lem-
mering, the dirt of an houſe, Dutch..] Any thing uſeleſs or
cumberſome; any thing of more bulk than value.
The very bed was violated
By the coarſe hands of filthy dungeon villains,
And thrown amongſt the common lumber. Ofteny:
- One ſon at home
Concerns thee more than many gueſts to come.
If to ſome uſeful art he be not bred, -
He grows mere lumber, and is worſe than dead. Dryden.
Thy neighbour has remov’d his wretched ſtore,
Few hands will rid the lumber of the poor. Dryden's jaw.
If God intended not the preciſe uſe of every ſingle atom,
that atom had been no better than a piece of lºr:ber. Grew,
The poring ſcholiaſts mark;
Wits, who, like owls, ſee only in the dark ; -
A lunºrr-houſe of books in ev'ry head. Pope's Dun, i.i.d.
To Lººper. v. a. [from the noun..] To heap like uſeleſs
goods irregularly.
In Rollo we muſt have ſo much ſtuff luntered together,
that not the leaſt beauty of tragedy can appear. Rymer:
To move heavily, as burthened with his
own bulk.
Firſt let them run at largc,
Nor himber o'er the meads, nor croſs the wood. Dryin.
Lu'MINARY. m. ſ: [luminare, Latin; luminaire, French.]
1. Any body which gives light.
- The great it::minary
Diſpenſes light from far.
* -- .
4.1.114:1.
2. Any thing which gives intelligence.
Sir John Graham, I know not upon what lumiharies he
eſpied in his face, diſſuaded him from marriage. J/otton.
ny one that inſtructs mankind. - -
The circulation of the blood, and the weight and ſpring
of the air, had been reſerved for a late happy diſcovery by
two great luminaries of this iſland. R. affey's Sºrmº.,.
LUMINA’rio N. m. ſ. [from lamen.] Emiſſion of light, ..º.
LU'M INous. n. ſ. ſlumineiº French.
1. Shining; emitting light.
Fire burneth wood, making it firſt luminois, then black
and brittle, and laſtly, broken and incinerate. f?.: "..
ts firſt convex divideº
The hominous inferior orbs incios'd,
From chaos. A/ºr.
How came the ſun to be lum.:24: ' Yet from the nºvel-
fity of natural cauſes. A “tº' Serºvº.
. ...ith: ºn"J.
. . . . . . . /*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 54</div><p class="Text">-
L U N
L U N
º
i
Earth may, induſtrio". of herſelf, fetch day,
Travelling eaſt; and with her part averſe -
From the ſun's beam, meet nights, her other º, b. viii
Still luminous by his ray- Milton's Paradiſe Lºſ', b. **
3. Shining; bright. - ick col are the yel-
- The moſt luminous of the priſmatick colours -
theſ affºa'the ſenſes more ſtrongly ""
Newtºn's Opticº.
2. Enlightened.
low and orange :
all the reſt together.
LUMP. n.ſ. ºf: Dutch.]
all maſs of any matter.
I. Aſ. weed kal is § the Egyptians uſed firſt for fuel, º
then they cruſh the aſhes into jumps like a ſtone. and ſo §
them to the Venetians. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
without this various agitation of the water, how could
lumps of ſugar or ſalt caſt into it be ſo. perfectly diſſolved º
it, that the lumps themſelves totally diſappear Boyle.
An Ombite wretch is prisºner made;
whoſe fleſh torn off by lumps, the rav'nous foe
In morſels cut.
Ev'ry fragrant flow'r, and od’rous green,
were ſorted well, with lumps of amber laid betwº". Dr.
To conceive thus of the ſoul's intimate uniºn with an in-
finite being, and by that union receiving of ideas, leads one
into as groſs thoughts, as a country-maid would have of an
infinite butter-print, the ſeveral parts whereof being applied
to her lump of butter, left on it the figure or idea there was
preſent need of. Locke.
2. A ſhapeleſs maſs.
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigeſted lump;
As crooked in thy manners as thy ſhape. Shaº. Henry VI.
Buſh, bluſh, thou lump of foul deformity. Shºp are:
why might not there have been, in this great maſs, huge
lumps of ſolid matter, which, without any form or order,
might be jumbled together. Keil againſ? Burnet.
3. Maſs undiſtinguiſhed.
Tate.
All mens honours
Lie like one lump before him, to be faſhion'ſ
Into what pinch he pleaſe. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
It is rare to find any of theſe metals pure; but CoPPer,
iron, gold, ſilver, lead, and tin, all promiſcuouſly in one
lump. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
4. The whole together; the groſs. -
If my readers will not go to the price of buying my pa-
pers by retail, they may buy them in the lump. ddiſon.
Other epidemical vices are rife and predominant only for
a ſeaſon, and muſt not be aſcribed to human nature in the
lump. - Bentley's Sermons.
The principal gentlemen of ſeveral counties are ſtigmatized
in a lump, under the notion of being papiſts. Swift.
To LUMP. v. a. To take in the groſs, without attention to
particulars.
The expences ought to be lumped together. , Ayliff's Par.
Boccalini, in his political balance, after laying France in
one ſcale, throws Spain into the other, which wanted but
very little of being a counterpoiſe: the Spaniards upon this
reckoned, that if Spain of itſelf weighed ſo well, they could
not fail of ſucceſs when the ſeveral parts of the monarchy
were lumped in the ſame ſcale. Addiſon.
Lu’s prisiſ. [lump and fiſh; lumpus, Lat..] A ſort of fiſh.
Lu'MPING, adj. [from lump.] Large; heavy; great. A low
word.
Nick, thou ſhalt have a lumping pennyworth. Arbuthnot.
Lu'MPIs H. adj. [from lump.] Heavy; groſs; dull; unactive 3
bulky.
Out of the carth was formed the fleſh of man, and there-
fore heavy and lumpiſh. Raleigh's Hſi. of the ſºorld.
Sylvia is lumpiſh, heavy, mclancholy. Shakeſpeare.
Love is all ſpirit: fairies ſooner may
Be taken tardy, when they night tricks play,
Than we ; we are too dull and lumpiſh. Suckling.
Little terreſtrial particles ſwimming in it after the groſſeſt
were ſunk down, which, by their heavineſs and lumpiſh
fºure, made their way more Ípeedily. Burnet.
How dull and how inſenſible a beaſt
Is man, who yet wou'd lord it o'er the reſt ?
Philoſophers and poets vainly ſtrove
In every age the lumpiſh maſs to move. Dryden.
lºus. adv. [from lumpiſh.] With heavineſs; with ſtu-
pidity.
Lt'MPishness. m. ſ. [from the adjećtive..] Stupid heavineſs.
º adj. [from lump.] Full of lumps; full of compačt
in a11es. -
One of the beſt ſpades to dig hard lumpy clays, but t
final for light ºil. c º, .
Lu’s Acy. ºf [from luna, the moon.] A kind of madneſs
influenced by the moon; madneſs in general.
Love is merely madneſs, and deſerves as well a dark houſe
º a whip as madmen do; and the reaſon why they are not
: º and “urºº is, that the lunacy is ſo ordinary, that
e whippers are in love too. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Your kindled ſhun your houſe, - -
As beaten hence by your ſtrange hºº. Shaº, care.
There is difference of lunacy: I had rather be mad with
him, that, when he had nothing, thought …. the ſhips that
came into the haven his, than with you, who, when you
have ſo much coming in, think you have notºng. Sººng.
LUNAR. I adj. [lunaire, Fr. ſangris, Latin. Relating to the
LU'N ARY. } moon; under the dominion of the moon.
They that have reſolved that theſe years were but lunary
wears, viz. of a month, or Igyptian years are eaſily con-
futed. Raleigh's Hit. ºf the J/ºrld.
They have denominated ſome herbs ſolar and ſome lunar,
and ſuch like toys put into great words. Bacºn's Yat. Hiſt.
The figure of its ſeed much reſembles a horſhoe, which
Baptiſła Porta hath thought too low a ſignificatiºn, and raiſed
the ame unto a lunary repreſentation. Brown's hug. 1 rours.
We upon our globe's laſt verge ſhall go,
And view the ocean leaning on the ſky;
From thence our rolling neighbours we ſhall know,
And on the lunar world ſcourely pry. Dryd, r.
Lu's ARY. m. ſ. ['unaria, Latin; lunaire, Fr] Moonwort.
Then ſprinkles ſhe the juice of rue -
With nine drops of the midnight dew,
From lunary diſtilling. Drayton's Nymphid.
Lu’NATED. adj. [from luna.] Formed like a half moon.
L'UNA tick. adj. [lunaticus, Latin.] Mad; having the ima-
gination influenced by the moon.
Bedlam beggars, from low farms,
Sometimes with lunatick bans, ſometimes with prayers,
Enforce their charity. Shakeſpeare.
Lu’NAT1ck. m. ſ. A madman.
The lunatick, the lover, and the poet,
Are of imagination all compact:
One ſees more devils than vaſt hell can hold ;
The madman. Shakeſp. Midſummer Night's Dream.
I dare enſure any man well in his wits, ſor one in the
thouſand that he ſhall not die a lunatick in Bedlam within
theſe ſeven years; becauſe not above one in about one thou-
ſand five hundred have done ſo. Graant's Bills.
See the blind beggar dance, the cripple ſing,
The ſot a hero, lunatick a king. Pope.
The reſidue of the yearly profits ſhall be laid out in pur-
chaſing a piece of land, and in building thereon an hoſpital
for the reception of idiots and lunaticºs. Swift.
LUNA"rios. m. ſ. [lumaiſon, French ; luna, Latin.] The re-
volution of the moon. -
If the lunations be obſerved for a cycle of nineteen years,
which is the cycle of the moon, the ſame obſervations will
be verified for ſucceeding cycles for ever. Holder on Time.
LUNch. m. ſ. [Minſhaw derives it from lºc, Spaniſh ;
LU'Nch EoN. } Skinner from kleinken, a ſmall piece, Teu-
tonick. It probably comes from cutch or clunch..] As much
food as one's hand can hold. -
When hungry thou ſtood’ſ ſtaring, like an oaf,
I ſlic'd the luncheon from the barley loaf;
With crumbled bread I thicken'd well the meſs. Gay.
LUNE. m. ſ. [luna, Latin.]
1. Anything in the ſhape of an half moon.
2. Fits of lunacy or frenzy, mad freaks. The French ſay of
a man who is but fantaſtical or whimſical, Il a des lunes.
Hanmer.
Beſtrew them
Theſe dangerous, unſafe lunes i' th' king;
He muſt be told on’t, and he ſhall : the office
Becomes a woman beſt. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
3. A laiſh: as, the lune of a hawk. -
LUNETTE. m. ſ. [French.] A ſmall half moon.
Lunette is a covered place made before the courtine, which
conſiſts of two faces that form an angle inwards, and is com-
monly raiſed in foſſes full of water, to ſerve inſtead of a
fauſe braye, and to diſpute the enemy's paſſage: it is fix
toiſes in extent, of which the parapet is four. Trevoux.
LUNGs. m. ſ. [lungen, Saxon; long, Dutch..] The lights; the
part by which breath is inſpired and expired.
More would I, but my lungs are waſted ſo,
That ſtrength of ſpeech is utterly denied me. Shakeſpeare.
The bellows of his lungs begin to ſwell,
Nor can the good receive, nor bad expel. Drydºn.
Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues,
And throats of braſs inſpir'd with iron ling;
I could not half thoſe horrid crimes repeat, -
Nor half the puniſhments thoſe crimes have met. Dºn.
LUNGED. adj: [from lung.] Having lungs; having the nature
of lungs; drawing in and emitting air: as, the lungs in an
animal body.
The ſmith prepares his hammer for the ſtroke,
While the lung'd bellows hiſing fire provoke. Dryden.
LUN G-G Row N. adj. [lung and grown.] -
The lungs ſometimes grow faſt to the ſkin that lines the
breaft within ; whence ſuch as are detained with that acci-
dent are lºng-grown.
- r - -
Harvy on Cºyamptions.
~
-
I.L.'s Gwo RT .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 55</div><p class="Text">L U R
L U S
*scwort. n.ſ. [pulmonaria, Lat.] -
Lu ºf. flower #. of one leaf, which is ſhaped like a
funnel, whoſe upper part is cut into ſeveral ſegments; from
its fiſhilous flower-cup, which is for the moſt part pentago-
ill, riſes the pointal encompaſſed by four embrios, which
afterwards become ſo many ſeeds incloſed in the flower-
Cup. AMiller.
Lusiso LAR. adj. [luniſºlaire, French; luna and ſolaris, Lat.]
Compounded of the revolution of ſun and moon. -
LUNT. n. ſ. [lante, Dutch..] The matchcord with which guns
are fired. -
Leptºr. n.ſ. [lupin, French ; lupinus, Latin.] A kind of
ulſe. -
P It has a papilionaceous flower, out of whoſe empalement
riſes the pale, which afterward turns into a pod filled with
either plain or ſpherical ſeeds: the leaves grow like fingers
upon the foot ſtalks. Miller.
when Protogenes would undertake any excellent piece, he
uſed to diet himſelf with peas and lupines, that his invention
might be quick and refined. Peacham on Drawing.
Where ſtalks of lupines grew,
Th’ enſuing ſeaſon, in return, may bear
The bearded product of the golden year. Dryden's Georg.
Protogenes, drawing the pićture of jº, took no other
nouriſhment than lupines mixed with water, for fear of clogg-
ing his imagination by the luxury of his food. Dryden.
LURCH. n.ſ. [This word is derived by Skinner from Pourche,
a game of draughts, much uſed, as he ſays, among the
Dutch; ourche he derives from arca; ſo that, I ſuppoſe,
thoſe that are loſt are left in lorche, in the lurch or box :
whence the uſe of the word.]
Tº leave in the LURch. To leave in a forlorn or deſerted con-
dition; to leave without help.
Will you now to peace incline,
And languiſh in the main deſign,
And leave us in the lurch.
But though th’ art of a different church,
I will not leave thee in the lurch. Hudibras, p. 1.
Have a care how you keep company with thoſe that, when
they find themſelves upon a pinch, will leave their friends in
the lurch. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Can you break your word with three of the honeſteſt beſt-
meaning perſons in the world It is baſe to take advantage
of their ſimplicity and credulity, and leave them in the lurch
at laſt. Arbuthnot's Hiff, of j. Bull.
Flirts about town had a deſign to caſt us out of the faſhion-
able world, and leave us in the lurch, by ſome of their late
refinements. Addiſon's Guardian.
To LURCH. v. n. [lºeren, Dutch; or rather from the noun.]
I. To ſhift; to play tricks,
I myſelf, ſometimes leaving the fear of heav'n on my left-
hand, and hiding mine honour in my neceſſity, am fain to
ſhuffle, to hedge, and to lurch. Shakeſpeare.
2. To lie in wait: we now rather uſe lurk.
While the one was upon wing, the other ſtood lurching
upon the ground, and flew away with the fiſh. L'E/irange.
To LURCH. v. a. ſlurror, Latin.] -
1. To devour; to ſwallow greedily.
Too far off from great cities may hinder buſineſs; or too
near lurcheth all proviſions, and maketh every thing dear.
Bacon's Eſſays.
2. To defeat; to diſappoint. A word now uſed only in bur-
leſque. [from the game lurch.]
He waxed like a ſea ;
And, in the brunt of ſeventeen battles ſince,
He lurcht all ſwords o' th' garland. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
God never deſigned the uſe of them to be continual; by
Putting ſuch an emptineſs in them, as ſhould ſo quickly fail
and lurch the expectation. - South’s Sermons.
This is a ſure rule, that will never deceive or lurch the fin-
Cere communicant. South's Sermons,
To ſteal privily; to filch; to pilfer.
URCHER. m. ſ. [from lurch.] -
1. One that watches to ſteal, or to betray or entrap.
I cannot repreſent thoſe worthies more naturally than un-
der the ſhadow of a pack of dogs, made up of finders,
lurchers, and ſetters. Tatler, Nº. 59.
His thefts ſome tradeſman ſpies,
Świſt from his play the ſcudding lurcher flies;
Whilſt ev'ry honeſt tongue ſtop thief reſounds. Gay.
* [Lurco, Latin.] A glutton; a gormandizer. Not uſed.
LURE. nºſ. [leurre, French; lore, Dutch..]
'. Something held out to call a hawk. -
My faulcon now is ſharp and paſſing empty,
And, till ſhe ſtoop, ſhe muſt not be full-gorg'd,
Fºr then ſhe never looks upon her lure. Shakeſpeare.
. This lure ſhe caſt abroad, thinking that this fame and be-
lief would draw, at one time or other, ſome birds to ſtrike
upon it. Bacon's Henry VII.
* great eſtate to an heir, is as a lar to all the birds of
Pº round about to ſeize on him. Bacon.
Denham.
To Lure. v. n. [from the noun..] To call hawks.
A falc'ner Henry is, when Emma hawks;
With her of tarſels, and of lure, he talks. Prior.
2. Any enticement; any thing that promiſes advantage.
How many have with a ſmile made ſmall account
Of beauty, and her lures, eaſily ſcorn'd -
All her aſſaults, on worthier things intent. Mih. Par. Reg.
This ſtiffneck'd pride, nor art nor force can bend
Nor high-flown hopes to reaſon's lure deſcend. Duham.
Standing near one that lured loud and ſhrill, I had ſudden-
ly an offence, as if ſomewhat had broken, or been diſlocated
in my ear, and immediately after a loud ringing. Bacon
To LURE. v. a. To attract; to entice; to draw.
As when a flock
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
Againſt the day of battle, to a field
Where armies lie encamp'd, come flying, lur’d
With ſcent of living carcaſes. AMilton's Par. Lºft.
A man ſpent one day in labour, that he might paſs the
other at eaſe; and lured on by the pleaſure of this bait, when
he was in vigour he would provide for as many days as he
could. Temple.
Should you lure
From this dark haunt, beneath the tangled roots
Of pendant trees, the monarch of the brook,
Behoves you then to ply your fineſt art. Thomſºn's Spring.
Volumes on ſhelter'd ſtalls expanded lie,
And various ſcience lures the learned eye. Gay's Trivia.
LU'RID. adj. [luridus, Latin.] Gloomy; diſmal.
Slow ſettling o'er the lurid grove,
Unuſual darkneſs broods. Thomſºn's Summer.
To LURK. v. n. [probably lurch and lurk are the ſame word.
See LURCH.] To lie in wait; to lie hidden; to lie cloſe.
Far in land a ſavage nation dwelt,
That never taſted grace, nor goodneſs felt;
But like wild beaſts, lurking in loathſome den,
And flying faſt as roebuck through the fen;
All naked. Fairy 24een, b. ii.
Milbrook lurketh between two hills, a village of ſo
eighty houſes, and borrowing his name from a mill and litt
brook running there through. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
They lay not to live by their worke,
But theeviſhly loiter and ſurée. Tuſer's Huſbandry.
If ſinners entice, conſent not; if they ſay, let us lay wait
for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent. Prov. i. 1 1.
The wife, when danger or diſhonour lurks,
Safeſt, and ſeemlieſt by her huſband ſtays. Milton.
See
The lurking gold upon the fatal tree: -
Then rend it off. Dryden's 42n.
The king unſeen
Lurk'd in her hand, and mourn’d his captive queen;
He ſprings to vengeance. Pope.
I do not lurk in the dark: I am not wholly unknown to
the world : I have ſet my name at length. Swift.
Lu'RKER. m. ſ. [from lurk.] A thief that lies in wait.
LU'RKING PLACE. n.ſ. [lurk and place..] Hiding place ; ſecret
place.
Take knowledge of all the lurkingplaces where he hideth
himſelf. I Sam. xxiii. 23.
LU'scious. adj. [from delicious, ſay ſome ; but Skinner more
probably derives it from luxurious, corruptly pronounced.]
1. Sweet, ſo as to nauſeate.
2. Sweet in a great degree.
The food that to him now is as luſcious as loches, ſhall
ſhortly be as bitter as coloquintida. Shakeſp. Othell.
With brandiſh’d blade ruſh on him, break his glaſs,
And ſhed the luſcious liquor on the ground. Milton.
Blown roſes hold their ſweetneſs to the laſt,
And raiſins keep their luſious native taſte. Dryden.
3. Pleaſing; delightful.
He will bait him in with the luſcious propoſal of ſome
gainful purchaſe. South’s Sermons.
Lü'sciously. adv. [from lºſious.] Sweet to a great degree.
Lu’sciousness. n.ſ.. [from luſcious.] Immoderate ſweetneſs.
Can there be greater indulgence in God, than to embitter
ſenſualities whoſe luſciouſneſs intoxicates us, and to clip wings
which carry us from him. Decay ºf Piety.
Peas breed worms by reaſon of the lºſiºſºſ, and ſweet-
neſs of the grain. Martimer's Huſbandry.
Lu's ERN. n.ſ. lupus cervarius, Latin.) A lynx.
Lush. adj. Of a dark, deep, full colour, oppoſite to pale and
faint; from louſche. Hanmer.
How luſh and luſty the graſs looks? how green Shaº.
Lusk. adj. [liſhe, French..] Idle; lazy; worthleſs. Dict.
Lu'skish. adj. [from luſk..] Somewhat inclinable to lazineſs
or indolence.
Lu'skishly. adv. [from luſºſh.] Lazily; indolently. .
Lu’skishness. adv. [from lºſłſh.] A diſpoſition to lazineſs.
Speniſ: f".
Luso'Rious. adi, [luſºrius, Latin.] Uſed in play; ſportive.
15 U Things
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 56</div><p class="Text">L U S
- L U T
|
- to exception, yet unjuſtly condemned
- Things º the i. tº, dancing and ſtage-
. unlawful 5 Biſhop Sanderſon.
P*... ... ri,ºrint. Latin.] Uſed in play.
z uſ?rius, Latin. play -
LU ºº |. many †: contrivances for the in-
ſtruction of ãhildren in geometry and geography, in ſuch al-
luring and luſºry methods, which would make a moſt i.
...iaſſing impreſſion. Watt's Improvement ºf the *
LÜsºr. n.ſ...[lure, Saxon; luff, Dutch.]
1. Carnal deſire. -
This our court, infected with their manners,
Shews like a riotous inn, Epicuriſm and */
Make it more like a tavernor a brothel, - ºr
Than a grac'd palace. Shakespeare's King Lear.
Luft, and rank thoughts. Shakespeare's Cymbeline.
They are immoderately given to the luft of the fleſh,
making no conſcience to get baſtards. Allºt.
when a temptation of luff aſſaults thee, do not reſiſt it by
diſputing with it, but flie from it, that is, think not at all of
it. Taylor's holy Living.
2. Any violent or irregular deſire. -
I º divide the . my luft ſhall be ſatified upon them.
- Exod. xv. 9.
The ungodly, for his own luft, doth perſecute. the poor :
let them be taken in the crafty wilineſs they imagined. Pſal.
Virtue was repreſented by Hercules: he is drawn offering
to ſtrike a dragon; by the dragon are meant all manner. of
luſ!'s. Peacham on Drawing.
All weigh our ačts, and whate'er ſeems unjuſt,
Impute not to neceſſity, but luff. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
The luft of lucre. Pope.
3. Vigour; active power. Not uſed. - - -
Trees will grow greater, and bear better fruit, if you put
ſalt, or lees of wine, or blood, to the root: the cauſe may
be, the increaſing the luft or ſpirit of the root. Bacon.
To LUsT. v. n.
1. To deſire carnally.
Inconſtant man, that loveth all he ſaw,
* And luſted after all that he did love. Roſcommºn.
2. To deſire vehemently.
Giving ſometimes prodigally; not becauſe he loved them
to whom he gave, but becauſe he lufted to give. Sidney.
The Chriſtian captives in chains could no way move them-
ſelves, if they ſhould unadviſedly luft after liberty. Knoller.
3. To liſt; to like. ... Out of uſe.
Their eyes ſwell with fatneſs; and they do even what they
luſ!. Pſal. lxxiii. 7.
4. To have irregular diſpoſitions.
The mixed multitude fell a luſting ; and the children of
Iſrael alſo wept, and ſaid, Who ſhall give us fleſh to eat?
Num. xi. 4.
The ſpirit that dwelleth in us lufteth to envy, jam. iv. 5.
LU'stful. adj. [luſi and full.]
1. Libidinous; having irregular deſires.
Turning wrathful fire to luſtful heat,
With beaſtly fin thought her to have defil’d. Fairy Qu.
There is no man that is intemperate or luſtful, but be-
ſides the guilt likewiſe ſtains and obſcures his ſoul. Tillotſon.
2. Provoking to ſenſuality; inciting to luſt.
Thence his luſtful orgies he enlarg’d. Milton.
LU'st FULLY. adv. [from º With ſenſual concupiſcence.
Lu'stfulness. n.ſ.. [from luſtful..] Libidinouſneſs.
LU'stihed. }". J. [from lu/ly.] Vigour; ſprightlineſs; cor-
Lu'stihood. $ poral ability. Not now in uſé.
- A goodly perſonage,
Now in his freſheſt flower of liftyhed,
Fit to inflame fair lady with love's rage.
Reaſon and reſpect
Make livers pale, and lu/lihood dejećted.
I'll prove it on his body;
Deſpight his nice fence, and his active practice,
His May of youth and bloom of lu/lyhood. Shakeſpeare.
Lu'stily. adv. [from lu/ly.] Stoutly; with vigour;" with
mettle.
I determine to fight lu/lily for him.
Now, gentlemen,
Let's tune, and to it luftily a while. Shakeſpeare.
Barbaroſla took upon him that painful journey, which the
old king luftily performed. Knolles.
r He has fought luftily for her, and deſerves her. Southern.
Lu'stiNess. n.j. [from lufty.] Stoutneſs; ſturdineſs; ſtrength;
vigour of body. &gt;
Freſh Clarion being ready dight,
. gºod ſpeed began to take his flight,
W. the fields in his frank luſtineſs. Spenſer's Muiopotmos.
... "tº there is ſo great a prevention of the ordinary time,
**.*.*/intſ of the child; but when it is leſs, it is j
indiſpoſition of the mother. Bacon's Nat. fift. Nº. 353.
- Cappadocian ſlaves were famous for their luſtineſs, and be-
º .#. liking, were ſet on a ſtalſ to ſhew the good habit
º and made to play tricks before the buyers, to
ractivity and ſtrength. Dryden's Perſius.
Fa. Qu.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſp. Henry V.
Lu’stless. adj. [from lºft.] Not vigorous; weak. Senſºr.
Lu'stral. adj. [lºſirale, French ; luftralis, Latin.] Uſed in
purification.
His better parts by luſtral waves refin'd,
More pure, and nearer to aethereal mind. Garth.
LustRation. n.ſ. [luſtration, French; lyiratio, Lat..] Pu-
rification by water.
Job's religious care,
His ſons aſſembles, whoſe united prayer,
Like ſweet perfumes, from golden cenſors riſe;
He with divine luſtrations ſanctifies. Sandys's Paraphraſ.
That ſpirits are corporeal ſeems a conceit derogative unto
himſelf, and ſuch as he ſhould rather labour to overthrow ;
yet thereby he eſtabliſheth the doctrine of luſtrations, amu-
lets, and charms. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. i.
What were all their luftrations but ſo many ſolemn puri-
fyings, to render both themſelves and their ſacrifices accept-.
able to their gods. South's Sermons.
Should Io's prieſt command
A pilgrimage to Meroe's burning ſand;
Through deſarts º wou'd ſeek the ſecret ſpring,
And holy water for luſtration bring. Dryden's juvenal.
By ardent pray’r, and clear luſtration,
Purge the contagious ſpots of human weakneſs;
Impure no mortal can behold Apollo.
Lu'stre. n.ſ. [luſtre, French.]
1. Brightneſs; ſplendour; glitter. .
You have one eye left to ſee ſome miſchief on him.
—Left it ſee more prevent it; out, vile gelly; where is
thy luſtre now Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To the ſoul time doth perfeótion give,
Prior.
And adds freſh luſtre to her beauty ſtill. Davies.
The ſcorching ſun was mounted high,
In all its luſtre, to the noonday ſky. Addiſon's Ovid.
Paſs but ſome fleeting years, and theſe poor eyes,
Where now without a boaſt ſome luftre lies;
No longer ſhall their little honours keep,
But only be of uſe to read or weep.
All nature laughs, the groves are freſh and fair,
The ſun's mild luſtre warms the vital air. Pope.
2. A ſconce with lights.
Ridotta ſips, and dances till ſhe ſee
The doubling luſtres dance as quick as ſhe. Pope's Horace.
3. Eminence; renown.
His anceſtors continued about four hundred years, rather
without obſcurity than with any great lu/?re. Wotton.
I uſed to wonder how a man of birth and ſpirit could en-
dure to be wholly inſignificant and obſcure in a foreign coun-
try, when he might live with luſtre in his own. Swift.
4. [From luftre, Fr. luſtrum, Latin.]. The ſpace of five years.
Both of us have cloſed the tenth luſtre, and it is high time
to determine how we ſhall play the laſt ačt of the farce.
Bolingbroke to Swift.
Lu'striNG. n.ſ.. [from luftre.] A ſhining ſilk; commonly
pronounced lute/tring.
LU'strous. adj. [from luſºre.] Bright; ſhining; luminous.
Noble heroes, my ſword and yours are kin, good ſparks
and luſtrous. Shakeſp. Alf’s well that ends well.
The more luſtrous the imagination is, it filleth and fixeth
the better. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 956.
Lu's twoRT. n.ſ. [luſ? and wort.] An herb.
Prior.
Lu'sty. adj. [luftig, Dutch..] Stout; vigorous; healthy; able
of body.
This luſty lady came from Perſia late,
She with the Chriſtians had encounter'd oft.
Fairy Qu.
If luſty love ſhould go in queſt of beauty,
Where ſhould he find it fairer than in Blanch Shakespeare .
We yet may ſee the old man in a morning,
Luſty as health, come ruddy to the field,
And there purſue the chaſe. Otway.
Lºur. n: ſ [from lute.] One who plays upon the
ute.
LUTA'Rious. adj. [lutarius, Latin.] Living in mud; of the
colour of mud. 2.
A ſcaly tortoiſe-ſhell, of the lutarious kind.
LUTE. n.ſ. [luth, lut, French.]
1. A ſtringed inſtrument of muſick.
Orpheus with his lute made trees,
And the mountain tops that freeze,
Bow themſelves when he did ſing. Shakeſp. Hen
May muſt be drawn with a ſweet and #. º:
nance, upon his head a garland of roſes, in one hand a ſº.
Peacham on Drawing.
Grew.
L In a ſadly pleaſing ſtrain
et the warbling lute complain. Pope's St. Cecil;
A lute ſtring will bear a iºd weight *: º:
but at the ſame time cannot exert its elaſticity. .
Lands of finging, or of dancing ſlaves, -
Love-whiſp'ring woods, and lute reſounding waves. Dunc.
2. [From lut, French ; lutum, Lat.] A compoſition like clay
with which chemiſts cloſe up their veſſels. &gt;
Some
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 57</div><p class="Text">L U X
Some temper late, ſome ſpacious veſſels move,
Theſe furnaces erect, and thoſe approve. . Garth.
To Lute. v. a. [from the noun..] To cloſe with lute, or che-
mº, veſſel of iron, and let it have a cover of iron well
had, after the manner of the chemiſts. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
Iron may be ſo heated, that, being clºſely luted in a glaſs,
it ſhall conſtantly retain the fire. Wilkins’; Math. Magick.
Lºrulent. adj. [utulentus, Latin:] Muddy; turbid.
To Lux. }* a. [luxer, French; luxo, Latin.] To put
LU'xATE. out of joint; to disjoint. -
To He complained of extremity . pain, and ſuſpected his
hip luxated. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Confider well the luxated joint, and which way it ſlipped
out; for it requireth to be returned in the ſame manner.
Wiſeman's Surgery.
Deſcending careleſs from his couch, the fall ---
Lºdhisjoint neck, and ſpinal marrow bruis'd. Philips.
Luxation. m. ſ. [from luxo, Latin.]
1. The act of disjointing.
2. Anything disjointed. -
The undue ſituation, or connexion of parts, in fraćtures
and luxations, are to be reëtified by chirurgical means. Floyer.
LUXE.. n.ſ. (French, luxius, Lat..] Luxury; voluptuouſneſs.
The pow'r of wealth I try'd,
And all the various luxe of coſtly pride. Prior.
Luxu'Riance. Un. ſ. [from luxurians, Latin.] Exuberance;
Luxu'RIANCY. } abundant or wanton plenty or growth.
A fungus prevents healing only by its luxuriancy. Wiſeman.
Flowers grow up in the garden in the greateſt luxuriancy
and profuſion. - Spectator, Nº. 47.
While through the parting robe th' alternate breaſt
In full luxuriance roſe. Thomſon's Summer.
Luxu'RIANT. adj. [luxurians, Lat.] Exuberant; ſuperfluouſly
plenteous.
A fluent and luxuriant ſpeech becomes youth well, but not
age. Bacon's Eſſays.
The mantling vine gently creeps luxuriant. Milton.
If the fancy of Ovid be luxuriant, it is his chara&amp;ter to be
ſo. Dryden's Prof. to Ovid's Epiſtles.
Prune the luxuriant, th’ uncouth refine,
But ſhow no mercy to an empty line. Pope.
To Luxu'RIAt E. v. n. [luxurior, Latin.] To grow exube-
rantly; to ſhoot with ſuperfluous plenty.
Luxu'rious. adj. [luxurieux, Fr. luxurioſus, Latin.]
1. Delighting in the pleaſures of the table.
2. Adminiſtring to luxury. -
The luxurious board.
3. Luſtful; libidinous.
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed:
Her bluſh is guiltineſs, not modeſty.
I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, falſe, deceitful.
4. Voluptuous; enſlaved to pleaſure.
Thoſe whom laſt thou ſaw'ſt
In triumph, and luxurious wealth, are they
Firſt ſeen in ačts of proweſs eminent,
And great exploits; but of true virtue void.
Luxurious cities, where the noiſe
Of riot aſcends above their loftieſt tow’rs.
5. Softening by pleaſure.
Repel the Tuſcan foes, their city ſeize,
Protect the Latians in luxurious eaſe.
6. Luxuriant; exuberant.
Anon.
Shakeſpeare.
Shakeſpeare.
Milton.
Milton.
Dryden,
- Till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows
Luxurious by reſtraint. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
Luxuriously. adv. [from luxurious.] Deliciouſly; volup-
tuouſly. -
Hotter hours you have
Luxuriouſly pick'd out. Shakeſpeare.
Where mice and rats devour’d poetick bread,
And with heroick verſe luxuriouſly were fed.
He never ſupt in ſolemn ſtate;
Nor day to night luxuriouſly did join. Dryden.
LU'XURY. n.ſ. [luxuré, old French; luxuria, Latin.]
* Voluptuouſneſs; addićtedneſs to pleaſure.
Egypt with Aſſyria ſtrove
In wealth and luxury. Milton.
Siches expoſe a man to pride and luxury, and a fooliſh
elation of heart. Addiſon's Speciator, Nº. 464.
2. Luſt; lewdneſs.
- Urge his hateful luxury,
His beſtial appetite in change of luſt,
Dryden.
3. Luxuriance; exuberance. -
Young trees of ſeveral kinds ſet contiguous in a fruitful
4. Delicious fare.
LY. v. n.
LYekE. adj. for like.
LY'ING, the participle of lie, whether it ſignifies to be rectiºn-
Ly'Mphated. adj. [lymphatus, Latin.] Mad.
LY'MPHatick. n.ſ. [lymphatique, Fr. from lympha, Latin.]
LY'Rick.
Which ſtretch'd unto their ſervants, daughters, wives.
Shakeſpeare's Richard IIf:
ground, with the very luxury of the trees will incorporate.
Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 479.
He cut the ſide of the rock for a garden, aid by laying on
it earth, furniſhed out a kind of luxury for a hermit. Addison.
[A very frequent termination both of names of
places and of adjectives and adverbs: when ly terminates the
name of a place, it is derived from leaz, Saxon, a field;
when it ends an adjective or adverb, it is contracted from lich,
like; as, beaſily, beg/like; plainly, plainlike.]
Lyca'N THROPY. n.ſ. [lycantropie, French; xúxxv and 2,922–
woºl. A kind of madneſs, in which men have the qualities of
wild beaſts.
He ſees like a man in his ſleep, and grows as much the
wiſer as the man that dreamt of a lycanthropy, and was for
ever after wary not to come near a river.
Taylor.
Spenſer. -
bent, or to ſpeak falſely, or otherwiſe.
They will have me whipt for ſpeaking true, thou wilt have
me whipt for lying, and ſometimes I am whipt for holding
my peace. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
*} tears and temptations befal me by the lying in wait
of the Jews. Aës Xx. 19.
LYMPH. n.ſ. [lymphe, French; lympha, Lat.] Water; tran-
ſparent colourleſs liquor.
When the chyle paſſeth through the meſentery, it is mix-
ed with the lymph, the moſt ſpirituous and elaborated part of
the blood. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Dić7.
The lymphaticks are ſlender pellucid tubes, whoſe cavities
are contračted at ſmall and unequal diſtances: they are car-
ried into the glands of the meſentery, receiving firſt a fine
thin lymph from the lymphatick dućts, which dilutes the chy-
lous fluid. Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
Upon the death of an animal, the ſpirits may ſink into the
veins, or lymphaticks and glandules. Floyer.
LY'MPHEduct. n. ſ. [lympha and duéjuſ, Latin.] A veſſel
which conveys the lymph.
The glands,
All artful knots, of various hollow threads,
Which lympheduéïs, an art'ry, nerve, and vein,
Involv’d and cloſe together wound, contain. Blackmore.
L1(MX. n.ſ. [Latin.] A ſpotted beaſt, remarkable for ſpeed
and ſharp fight. -
He that has an idea of a beaſt with ſpots, has but a con-
fuſed idea of a leopard, it not being thereby ſufficiently di-
ſtinguiſhed from a lynx. Locke.
What modes of fight betwixt each wide extreme,
The mole's dim curtain, and the linx's beam. Pope.
LYRE. m. ſ. [lyre, French ; lyra, Latin.] A harp; a muſical
inſtrument to which poetry is, by poetical writers, ſuppoſed
to be ſung.
With other notes then to th’ Orphean lyre. Milton.
My ſofteſt verſe, my darling lyre,
Upon Euphelia's toilet lay. Prior.
He never touched his lyre in ſuch a truly chromatick man-
ner as upon that occaſion. Arbuth. and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
LYR'ical. }*. [lyricus, Latin; lyrique, French..] Pertaining
to an harp, or to odes or poetry ſung to an
harp; ſinging to an harp.
All his trophies hung and acts enroll'd
In copious legend, or ſweet lyrick ſong. Milton's Agoniſł.
Somewhat of the purity of Engliſh, ſomewhat of more
equal thoughts, ſomewhat of ſweetneſs in the numbers; in
one word, ſomewhat of a finer turn, and more lyrical verſe,
is yet wanting. Bryden.
The lute neglected, and the lyrick muſe,
Love taught my tears in ſadder notes to flow,
And tun'd my heart to elegies of woe. Pºpe.
LY'Rick. n.ſ. A poet who writes ſongs to the harp,
The greateſt conqueror in this nation, after the manner of
the old Grecian lyricks, did not only compoſe the words of
his divine odes, but ſet them to muſick himſelf. Addiſon.
Ly’R1st. [yriſles, Latin.] A muſician who plays upon the
harp.
His tender theme the charming lyriſt choſe
Minerva's anger, and the direful woes
Which voyaging from Troy the victors bore. Pope.
