</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">-
t
|
H A B
Is in Engliſh, as in other languages, a note of
aſpiration, ſounded only by a ſtrong emiſſion of
the breath, without any conformation of the or-
gans of ſpeech, and is therefore by many gramma-
rians accounted no letter. The h in Engliſh is
ſcarcely ever mute at the beginning of a word, or where it im-
mediately precedes a vowel; as houſe, behaviour: where it is
followed by a conſonant it has no ſound, according to the
preſent pronunciation: but anciently, as now in Scotland, it
made the ſyllable guttural; as right, bought.
HA. interjeet. [ha, Latin.]
1. An expreſſion of wonder, ſurpriſe, ſudden queſtion, or ſudden
exertion.
You ſhall look fairer ere I give or hazard:
What ſays the golden cheſt? ha / let me ſee. Shakeſp.
Ha! what art thou ! thou horrid headleſs trunk
It is my Haſtings Rowe's jane Shore.
2. An expreſſion of laughter.
He ſaith among the trumpets ha, ha, and he ſmelleth the
battle afar off. job xxxix. 25.
Ha, ha, ’tis what ſo long I wiſh'd and vow'd;
Our plots and deluſions
Have wrought ſuch confuſions,
That the monarch's a ſlave to the crowd. Dryd. Allion.
HAAk. n ſ. A fiſh. Ainſworth.
HA"BEAS CORPUS. [Latin.] A writ, the which, a man
indićted of ſome treſpaſs, being laid in priſon for the ſame,
may have out of the King's Bench, thereby to remove
himſelf thither at his own coſts, and to anſwer the cauſe
there. Cowel.
HARERDA's HER. m. ſ. [This word is ingeniouſly deduced by
Minſhew from habt ihr daſ, German, have you this, the ex-
preſſion of a ſhopkeeper offering his wares to ſale..] One who
ſells ſmall wares; a pedlar.
Becauſe theſe cunning men are like haberdoſhers of ſmall
wares, it is not amiſs to ſet forth their ſhop. Bacon's Eſſays.
A haberdaſher, who was the oracle of the coffeehouſe, de-
clared his opinion. Addiſon's Spectator, Nº. 48.
HA’BERDIN E. n.ſ. A dried ſalt cod. Ainſworth.
HA'BERG EoN. n.ſ.. [haubergeon, French; halbergium, low Lat.]
Armour to cover the neck and breaſt; breaſtplate; neckpiece;
orget.
g And halbert ſome, and ſome a haberion;
So every one in arms was quickly dight. Fairfax, b, i.
The ſhot let fly, and grazing
Upon his ſhoulder, in the paſſing,
Lodg'd in Magnano's braſs habergeºn. Hudibras, p. i.
HABI'LIMENT. n.ſ.. [habilement, French.] Dreſs; cloaths;
garment. -
He the faireſt Una found,
Strange lady, in ſo ſtrange habiliment,
Teaching the ſatyres. Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 6.
My riches are theſe poor habiliments,
Of which if you ſhould here disfurniſh me,
You take the ſum and ſubſtance that I have. Shakeſpeare.
The clergy ſhould content themſelves with wearing gowns
and other habiliments of Iriſh drapery. Swift.
To HABILITATE. v. m. [habiliter, French.J. To qualify;
to entitle.
Divers perſons in the houſe of commons were attainted,
and thereby not legal, nor habilitate to ſerve in parliament,
being diſabled in the higheſt degree. Bacon's Henry VII.
HABILITA'tion. m. ſ. [from habilitate.] Qualification.
The things formerly ſpoken of, are but habilitations towards
arms; and what is habilitation without intention and act
Pacon, Eſſay 30.
HA'bility. n.ſ. ſhalilite, French.] Faculty; power.
HA’BIT. m. ſ. [habitus, Latin.]
1. State of any thing: as, habit of body.
2. Dreſs; accoutrement.
I ſhifted
Into a madman's rags, tº aſſume a ſemblance
The very dogs diſdain'd; and in this habit
Mict I my father. Shakespeare's King Lear.
H A B
If you have any juſtice, any pity;
If ye be any thing, but churchmen's habits. Shakeſpeare.
Both the poets being dreſſed in the ſame Engliſh habit,
ſtory compared with ſtory, judgment may be made be-
twixt them. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
The ſcenes are old, the habits are the ſame
We wore laſt year. Dryden's Indian Emperor.
There are among the ſtatues ſeveral of Venus, in #.
habits. Addiſon on Italy.
The clergy are the only ſet of men who wear a diſtinct
habit from others. Swift.
3. Habit is a power or ability in man of doing any thing, when
it has been acquired by frequent doing the ſame thing. Locke.
He hath a better bad habit of frowning than the count
Palatine. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
4. Cuſtom; inveterate uſe.
This is the laſt fatal ſtep but one, which is, by frequent
repetition of the ſinful ačt, to continue and perſiſt in it, 'till
at length it ſettles into a fixed confirmed habit of fin; which
being properly that which the apoſtle calls the finiſhing of fin,
ends certainly in death; death not only as to merit, but alſo as
to actual inflićtion. South's Sermºns.
No civil broils have ſince his death aroſe,
But faction now by habit does obey;
And wars have that reſpect for his repoſe,
As winds for halcyons when they breed at ſea. Dryden.
The force of education is ſo great, that we may mould the
minds and manners of the young into what ſhape we pleaſe,
and give the impreſſions of ſuch habits as ſhall ever afterwards
remain. Aftterbury's Sermons.
To Ha'pit. v. a. [from the noun..] To dreſs; to accoutre;
to array.
Preſent yourſelf and your fair princeſs
Before Leontes:
She ſhall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Shakeſp. Winter's Tall.
Having called to his memory Sir George Villiers, and the
cloaths he uſed to wear, in which at that time he ſeemed to be
habited, he thought him to be that perſon. Clarendon.
They habited themſelves like thoſe rural deities, and imi-
tated them in their ruſtick dances. Dryden.
HA'BlTABLE. adj. [habitable, Fr. habitabilis, Lat.] Capable
of being dwelt in ; capable of ſuſtaining human creatures.
By means of our ſolitary ſituation, we know well moſt
part of the habitable world, and are ourſelves unknown. Bacon.
That was her torrid and inflaming time;
This is her habitable tropidue clime. Donne.
Look round the babitable world, how few
Know their own good, or knowing it, purſue. Dryden.
HA'BITABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from habitable.] Capacity of being
dwelt in.
The cutting of the Equinoćtial line decides that contro-
verſy of the babitableneſ of the Torrid zone. More.
Thoſe ancient problems of the ſpherical roundneſs of the
earth, the being of antipodes, and of the habitableneſ of the
torrid zone, are abundantly demonſtrated. Ray.
HA’BIt a Nce. n.ſ.. [habitatio, Latin.] Dwelling; abode.
What art thou, man, if man at all thou art,
That here in deſart haſt thine habitance 2
And theſe rich heaps of wealth do'ſt hide apart
From the world's eye, and from her right uſance. Fa. Qu.
HA'bit ANT. m.ſ. [ habitant, Fr. habitans, Latin.] Dweller;
one that lives in any place; inhabitant.
Not to earth are thoſe bright luminaries
Officious; but to the earth's habitant :
And for the heav'n's wide circuit, let it ſpeak
The maker's high magnificence. Milton's Paradiſ. Ioff.
Pow’rs celeſtial to each other's view
Stand ſtill confeſt, though diſtant far they lie,
Or habitants of earth, or ſea, or ſky. Pope's Odſey.
HABITATION. m. ſ. [ habitation, French ; habitatio, Latin.]
1. The act of dwelling; the ſtate of a place receiving
dwellers.
7 Amplitude
r
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A B
H A G
º,
.
º
3
Amplitude almoſt immenſe, with ſtars
Numerous, and ev'ry ſtar perhaps a world
Of deſtin'd habitation. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
Palaces,
For want of habitation and repair,
Diſſolve to heaps of ruins. Denham's Sophy.
Rocks and mountains, which in the firſt ages were high
and craggy, and conſequently then inconvenient for habi-
tation, were by continual deterration brought to a lower
pitch. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Place of abode; dwelling, -
Wiſdom, to the end ſhe might ſave many, built her houſe
of that nature which is common unto all; ſhe made not this
or that man her habitation, but dwelt in us. Hooker, b. v.
God oft deſcends to viſit men
Unſeen, and through their habitations walks
To mark their doings. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xii.
HABITATOR, n.ſ. [Latin.] Dweller; inhabitant.
So is his preſence more continued unto the northern inha-
bitants; and the longeſt day in Cancer is longer unto us than
that in Capricorn unto the northern habitators. Brown.
Habi'Tual. adj. [habituel, from habit, French.] Cuſtomary;
accuſtomed; inveterate; eſtabliſhed by frequent repetition.
Sin, there in pow'r before
Once ačtual; now in body, and to dwell
Płabitual habitant. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x,
Art is properly anhabitual knowledge of certain rules and
maxims. South.
By length of time
The ſcurf is worn away of each committed crime:
No ſpeck is left of their habitual ſtains;
But the pure ether of the ſoul remains. Dryden's AEn.
'Tis impoſſible to become an able artiſt, without making
your art habitual to you. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
HABITUALLY. adv. [from habitual.] Cuſtomarily; by habit.
Internal graces and qualities of mind ſanctify our natures,
and render us habitually holy. Atterbury's Sermons.
To HABITUATE. v. a. [habituer, French..] To accuſtom; to
uſe one's ſelf by frequent repetition.
Men are firſt corrupted by bad counſel and company, and
next they habituate themſelves to their vicious practices. Tillot.
Such as live in a rarer air are habituated to the exerciſe of a
greater muſcular ſtrength. Arbuthnot on Air.
HA'bitude. n.ſ.. [habitudo, Latin; habitude, French.]
1. Relation; reſpect; ſtate with regard to ſomething elſe.
We cannot conclude this complexion of nations from the
vicinity or habitude they hold unto the ſun. Brown's Wul. Err.
The will of God is like a ſtreight unalterable rule; but the
various comportments of the creature, either thwarting this
rule, or holding conformity to it, occaſions ſeveral habitudes
of this rule into it. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
It reſults from the very nature and being of things, as they
ſtand in ſuch a certain habitude, or relation to one another.
South's Sermons.
As by the objećtive part of perfeót happineſs we under-
Rand that which is beſt and laſt, and to which all other things
are to be referred; ſo by the formal part muſt be underſtood
the beſt and laſt habitude of man toward that beſt objećt. Norr.
In all the habitudes of life
The friend, the miſtreſs, and the wife;
Variety we ſtill purſue. Swift.
2. Familiarity; converſe; frequent intercourſe.
His knowledge in the nobleſt uſeful arts,
Was ſuch dead authors could not give;
But habitudes with thoſe who live. Dryden.
To write well, one muſt have frequent habitudes with the
beſt company. Dryden.
3. Long cuſtom; habit; inveterate uſe.
Mankind is not more liable to deceit than willing to con-
tinue in a pleaſing errour, ſtrengthened by a long habitude.
Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Thy ear, inur'd to charitable ſounds,
And pitying love, muſt feel the hateful wounds
Of jeſt obſcene, and vulgar ribaldry,
The ill-bred queſtion, and the loud reply,
Brought by long habitude from bad to worſe;
Muſt hear the frequent oath, the direful curſe. Prior.
4. The power of doing any thing acquired by frequent repe-
titlon.
It is impoſſible to gain an exačt habitude, without an infi-
nite number of ačts and perpetual practice. Dryd. Dufreſnoy.
HA'BNA b. adv. [hap ne hap, or map; as would ne would, will
ne will; that is, let it happen or not..] At random; at the
mercy of chance; without any rule or certainty of effect.
He circles draws and ſquares,
With cyphers, aſtral charaćters;
Then looks 'em o'er to underſtand 'em,
Although ſet down habnab at random. Hudibras, p. ii.
To HACK. v. a. ſpaccan, Saxon; hacken, Dutch; hacher, Fr.
from acare, an axe, Saxon.]
*
1. To cut into ſmall pieces; to chop; to cut ſlightly with fre-
quent or unſkilful blows.
He put on that armour, whereof there was no one piece
wanting, though hacked in ſome places, bewraying ſome fight
not long ſince paſſed. S dies.
What a ſlave art thou, to hack thy ſword as thou haſt done,
and ſay it was in fight! Shakeſt care's Henry IV. p. i.
Richard the ſecond here was hack'd to death. Shakesp R. III.
I'll fight 'till from my bones my fleſh be backt. Shakeſp.
One flouriſhing branch of his moſt royal root
Is hackt down, and his ſummer leaves all faded,
By envy's hand, and murder's bloody axe. Shakeſp Rich. II.
Burn me, hack me, hew me into pieces. Dryden,
But fate with butchers plac'd thy prieſtly ſtall,
Meek modern faith to murder, hack and mawl. Pope.
Not the hack'd helmet, nor the duſty field,
But purple veſts and flow'ry garlands pleaſe. Addison Ovid.
2. To ſpeak unreadily, or with heſitation.
Diſarm them, and let them queſtion; let them keep their
limbs whole, and hack our Engliſh. Shakespeare.
To Hack. v. n. To hackney; to turn hackney or pro-
ſtitute. Hanmer.
I could be knighted. —What! thou lieſt. Sir Alice Ford,
º, knights will hack, * ſo thou ſhouldſt alter the article
Of thy gentry. bakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
Hº: y Raw ſilk; any #, #4 º iſ,
Take the hackle of a cock or capon's neck, or a plover's
top: take off one ſide of the feather, and then take the hackle
filk, gold or filver thread, and make theſe faſt at the bent of
the hook. JWalton's Angler.
To HA'ckle. v.a. [from hack.] To dreſs flax.
HA'ckNEY. n.ſ. ſhacnai, Welſh ; hackeneye, Teuton. haguenée,
French.]
1. A pacing horſe.
2. A hired horſe; hired horſes being uſually taught to pace, or
recommended as good pacers.
Light and lewd perſons were as eaſily ſuborned to make an
affidavit for money, as poſt-horſes and hackneys are taken to
hire. Bacon's Off. ºf Alienation.
Who, mounted on a broom, the nag
And hackney of a Lapland hag,
In queſt of you came hither poſt,
Within an hour, I’m ſure, at moſt.
3. A hireling; a proſtitute.
Three kingdoms rung
Hudibras, p. iii.
With his accumulative and hackney tongue. Roſcommon.
That is no more than every lover
Does from his hackney lady ſuffer. Płudibras.
Shall each ſpurgall'd hackney of the day,
Or each new penſion'd ſycophant, pretend
To break my windows.
4. Anything let out for hire.
Awit can ſtudy in the ſtreets;
Not quite ſo well, however, as one mought ;
A hackney coach may chance to ſpoil a thought. Pope.
5. Much uſed; common.
Theſe notions young ſtudents in phyſick derive from their
hackney authors. Harvey on Conſumptions.
To HA'ckNEY. v. a. [from the noun..] To practiſe in one
thing; to accuſtom to the road.
He is long hackney'd in the ways of men. Shakeſpeare.
HA'cqueton. n.ſ.. [haquet, old French, a little horſe.] Some
piece of armour. -
You may ſee the very faſhion of the Iriſh horſeman in his
long hoſe, riding ſhoes of coſtly cordwain, his hacqueton, and
his habergeon. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
HAD. The preterite and part. paſſ of have.
I had rather be a country ſervant maid,
Than a great queen with this condition,
To be thus taunted. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Had we not better leave this Utica,
To arm Numidia in our cauſe : Addiſon's Cato.
HA’ddock. n.ſ.. [hadot, French..] A ſea-fiſh of the cod kind,
but ſmall. -
The coaſt is plentifully ſtored with pilchards, herrings, and
haddocks. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
HAFT. n.ſ. [ paert, Saxon; hºſt, Dutch, from To have or
hold.] A handle; that part of any inſtrument that is taken
into the hand.
This brandiſh'd dagger
I'll bury to the haft in her fair breaſt. Dryd, and Lee's Qedip.
Theſe extremities of the joints are the hafts and handles of
the members. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
A needle is a ſimple body, being only made of ſteel; but a
ſword is a compound, becauſe its haft or handle is made of
materials different from the blade. J/atti's Logick.
To Haft. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſet in a haft. Ainſw.
HAG. n.ſ. [przerre, a goblin, Saxon; heckle, a witch, Dutch.]
1. A fury; a ſhe monſter.
Pope, Dial. 2.
Thus
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A I
H A I
º
i
Thus ſpoke th' impatient prince, and made a pauſe ;
His foul hag, rais'd their heads, and clapt their hands;
And all the powers of hell, in full applauſe,
Flouriſh'd their ſnakes, and toſt their flaming brands. Craſh.
2. A witch; an enchantreſs.
Out of my door, you witch! you hag, you baggage, you
poulcat, you runnion. Shakespeare Merry Wives of //indſor.
3. An old ugly woman.
- Such affectations may become the young;
But thou, old hag, of threeſcore years and three,
Is ſhewing of thy parts in Greek for thee? Dryden's juven.
To HAG. v a. [from the noun..] To torment; to harraſs
with vain terrour.
That makes them in the dark ſee viſions,
And hag themſelves with apparitions. Hudibrat, p. iii.
How are ſuperſtitious men hagged out of their wits with the
fancy of omens, tales, and viſions ! L’Eſtrange.
HA’GARD. adj. [hagard, French. J
1. Wild; untamed; irreclaimable.
To let them down before that his flights end,
As hagard hawk, preſuming to contend
With hardy fowl above his able might,
His weary pounces all in vain doth ſpend,
To truſ, the prey too heavy for his flight. Fairy Queen.
2. [Hager, German.] Lean. To this ſenſe I have put the fol-
lowing paſſage; for ſo the author ought to have written.
A hagged carion of a wolf, and a jolly ſort of dog, with
good fleſh upon's back, fell into company together. L'Eſtr.
3. [Hage, Welſh.) Ugly ; rugged; deformed; wildly diſordered.
She's too diſdainful;
I know her ſpirits are as coy and wild,
As hagard as the rock. Shakeſpeare.
Fearful beſides of what in fight had paſs'd,
His hands and hagard eyes to heav'n he caſt. Dryden's Án.
Where are the conſcious looks, the face now pale,
Now fluſhing red, the down-caſt hagard eyes,
Or fixt on earth, or ſlowly rais'd! Smith's Phad. and Hipp.
HA’G GAR D. m. ſ.
1. Any thing wild or irreclaimable.
I will be married to a wealthy widow,
Ere three days paſs, which has as long lov'd me
As I have lov'd this proud diſdainful haggard. Shakeſpeare.
2. A ſpecies of hawk.
Does the wild haggard tow'r into the ſky, -
And to the South by thy direétion fly - Sandys.
I enlarge my diſcourſe to the obſervation of the aires, the
brancher, the ramiſh hawk, and the haggard. Walton's Angler.
3. A hag. So Garth has uſed it for want of underſtanding it.
- Beneath the gloomy covert of an yew,
In a dark grot, the baleful haggard lay,
Breathing black vengeance, and infecting day. Garth.
HA'GGARDLY. adv. [from haggard.] Deformed; ugly.
For her the rich Arabia ſweats her gum ;
And precious oils from diſtant Indies come, }
How haggardly ſoe'er ſhe looks at home. Dryd, juven.
HA'GG Ess. m. ſ. [from hog or hack.] A maſs of meat, gene-
rally pork chopped, and incloſed in a membrane. In Scotland
it is commonly made in a ſheep's maw of the entrails of
the ſame animal, cut ſmall, with ſuet and ſpices.
HA'GGIs H. adj. [from hag.] Of the nature of a hag; de-
formed; horrid.
He laſted long;
But on us both did haggiſh age ſteal on,
And wore us out of act. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
To HA'GGLE. v. a. [corrupted from hackle or hack.] To cut;
to chop ; to mangle.
Suffolk firſt died, and York all haggled o'er
Comes to him where in gore he lay inſteep'd. Shakeſp H.V.
To HA'GGLE. v. n. To be tedious in a bargain; to be long in
coming to the price.
HA'GGLER. m. ſ. [ from higgle. J
1. One that cuts.
2. One that is tardy in bargaining. - -
HA'G Iod RAPHER. "{ [&amp;yºr and yé4%.] A holy writer.
The Jews divide the Holy Scriptures of the Old Teſtament
into the law, the prophets, and the hagiographers.
HAH. interject. An expreſſion of ſudden effort.
Her coats tuck'd up, and all her motions juſt,
She ſtamps, and then cries hah / at ev'ry thruſt. Dryden.
HAIL. m. ſ. ſha;el, Saxon. J .
1. Drops of rain frozen in their falling. - Locks.
As thick as hail
Came poſt on poſt.
To HAIL. v. m. To pour down hail.
My people ſhall dwell in a peaceable habitation when it
ſhall hai', coming down on the foreſt. Iſ, xxxii. 19.
HA L. interj. [hoºl, health, Saxon : hail, therefore, is the ſame
as ſalve of the Latins, or Özizſºs of the Greeks, health be to
you...] A term of ſalutation now uſed only in poetry; health
be to you.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Hail, hail, brave friend
Say to the king the knowledge of the broil
As thou did'ſt leave it. Shakeſpeare's lºacleth.
Her ſick head is bound about with clouds:
It does not look as it would have a hail
Or health wiſh'd in it, as on other morns. Ben. jobſºn.
The angel hail
Beſtow'd, the holy ſalutation us'd
Long after to bleſt Mary, ſecond Eve. Milt. Parad. Left.
Farewel, happy fields,
Where joy for ever dwells hail horrors hail
Infernal world ! and thou profoundeſt hell
Receive thy new poſſeſſor Mi ton’ Paradiſe Lºſº, b. i.
All hail, he cry'd, thy country's grace and love;
Once firſt of men below, now firſt of birds above. Dryd.
Hail to the ſun from whoſe returning light
The chearful ſoldier's arms new luſtre take,
To deck the pomp of battle. Rowe's Tamerlane.
To HAIL. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſalute; to call to.
A galley well appointed, with a long boat, drawing near
unto the ſhore, was hailed by a Turk, accompanied with a
troop of horſemen. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Thrice call upon my name, thrice beat your breaſt,
And hail me thrice to everlaſting reſt Dryden.
HA'ILED. adj. [from hail.] Struck with hail. -
Ha'il shot. n.ſ. [ hail and ſlot..] Small ſhot ſcattered like
hail.
The maſter of the artillery did viſit them ſharply with mur-
dering haſ/hot, from the pieces mounted towards the top of the
hill. - Hayward.
HA'Ilstone. n ſ [hail and ſtone..] A particle or fingle ball
of hail.
You are no ſurer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hail/lone in the ſun. - Shakeſpeare.
Hard haiſtones lye not thicker on the plain,
Nor ſhaken oaks ſuch ſhow’rs of acorns rain. Dryden.
HAI'ly. adj. [from hail.] Conſiſting of hail.
From whoſe dark womb a rattling tempeſt pours,
Which the cold North congeals to baily ſhowers. Pºpe.
HAIR. m. ſ. [hæn, Saxon.]
1. One of the common teguments of the body. It is to be
found upon all the parts of the body, except the ſoles of the
feet and palms of the hands. When we examine the hairs
with a microſcope, we find that they have each a round bul-
bous root, which lies pretty deep in the ſkin, and which draws
their nouriſhment from the ſurrounding humours: that each
hair conſiſts of five or ſix others, wrapt up in a common tegu-
ment or tube. They grow as the nails do, each part near the
root thruſting forward that which is immediately above it, and
not by any liquor running along the hair in tubes, as plants
grow. Sºiliny.
2. A ſingle hair. -
My fleece of woolly hair uncurls. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr.
Shall the difference of hair only, on the ſkin, be a mark of
a different internal conſtitution between a changeling and a
drill Locke.
Naughty lady, -
Theſe hairs which thou do'ſt raviſh from my chin,
Will quicken and accuſe thee. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Much is breeding;
Which, like the courſer's hair, hath yet but life,
And not a ſerpent's poiſon. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleºpatra:
3. Anything proverbially ſmall.
If thou tak'ſt more
Or leſs than juſt a pound; if the ſcale turn
But in the eſtimation of a hair,
Thou dieſt. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Penice.
He judges to a hair of little indecencies, and knows better
than any man what is not to be written. Dryden.
4. Courſe; order; grain; the hair falling in a certain direction.
Mr. doćtor, he is a curer of ſouls, and you a curer of bo-
dies: if you ſhould fight, you go againſt the hair of your pro-
feſſion. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indſor.
HA'IRBRAINE D. adj. [This ſhould rather be written hare-
brained, unconſtant, unſettled, wild as a hare.] Wild; irre-
gular; unſteady.
Let's leave this town; for they are hairbrain'd ſlaves,
And hunger will enforce them be more eager. Shakespeare H.VI.
HA'iR BREAD I H. m. ſ. [ hair and breadth.] A very ſmall diſ-
tance; the diameter of a hair.
Seven hundred choſen men left-handed could ſling ſtones at
an hairbreadth, and not miſs. judg. xx. 16.
J ſpoke of moſt diſaſtrous chances,
Of moving accidents by flood and field ;
Of hairbreadth 'ſcapes in th’ imminent deadly breach. Shakespeare
HAI'R BE L. m. ſ. The name of a flower; the hyacinth.
HAIR clot H. n.ſ.. [hair and cloth.) Stuff made of hair, very
rough and prickly, worn ſometimes in mortification.
It is compoſed of reeds and parts of plants woven together,
like a piece of hairakth. Grew's 41-yaum.
HAI'R Lac E.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A L
H A L
HAIRLAſcE. m.ſ.. [hair and lace J The fillet with which wo-
men tie up their hair.
Worms are commonly reſembled to a woman's hairlace or
fillet, thence called tenia. Harvey on Conſumptions.
If Molly happens to be careleſs,
And but neglects to warm her hairlace,
She gets a cold as ſure as death. Swift.
HA'iR less. adj. [from hair.] Without hair.
White beards have arm'd their thin and hairleſ ſcalps
Againſt thy majeſty. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
HA'iRINess. n.ſ.. [from hairy..] The ſtate of being covered
with hair, or abounding with hair. -
HA'IR Y. adj. [from hair.]
1. Overgrown with hair; covered with hair.
She his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of flowers. Shakespeare Midſum. Night's Dream.
Children are not hairy, for that their ſkins are more perſpir-
able. , Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Conſiſting of hair.
Storms have ſhed
From vines the hairy honours of their head. Dryd, Virgil.
IIAk E. m. ſ. A kind of fiſh.
The coaſt is plentifully ſtored with mackrel and hake.
Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
HA'kor. n.ſ.. [from hake.] A kind of fiſh. Ainſworth.
{AL is derived-like al from the Saxon pealle, i. e. a hall, a pa-
lacc. In Gothick alb ſignifies a temple, or any other famous
building. Gibſon's Camden.
HALBERD. n.ſ. ſhallarde, French; hallebarde, Dutch, from
barle, an ax, and hal'e, a court, halberds being the common
weapons of guards.] A battle-ax fixed to a long pole.
Advance thy halberd higher than my breaſt,
Or || ſtrike thee to my foot. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Our half ºrd, did ſhut up his paſſage. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Four kilºves in garbs ſuccinct, a truſty band,
Tºss on their heads, and halherds in their hand,
foºth to cºmbat on the velvet plain. Pope.
- m. f. thalebardier, French, from halberd..] One
. . . . . . with a halberd.
I he dºt heſs appointed him a guard of thirty perſons, hal-
ºrders, in a livery of murrey and blue, to attend his perſon.
Bacon's Henry VII.
The king had only his haller deers, and fewer of them than
uſed to go with him. . Clarendon.
HA’lcyos. n.ſ.. [halcyo, Latin.] A bird, of which it is ſaid
that ſhe breeds in the ſea, and that there is always a calm
during her incubation.
Such ſmiling rogues, as theſe, ſooth ev'ry paſſion,
Bring oil to fire, ſnow to their colder moods;
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With ev'ry gale and vary of their maſters. Shakespeare K. Lear.
Amidſt our arms as quiet you ſhall be,
As halcyons brooding on a Winter ſea. Dryden's Ind. Emp.
HA'lcyon. adj. [from the noun..] Placid; quiet; ſtill;
peaceful.
When great Auguſtus made war's tempeſts ceaſe,
His halcyon days brought forth the arts of peace. Denham.
No man can expect eternal ſerenity and halcyon days from
fo incompetent and partial a cauſe, as the conſtant courſe of
the ſun in the equinoćtial circle. Bentley's Sermons.
HA le. adj. [This ſhould rather be written hail, from hal,
health.] Healthy; ſound; hearty; well complexioned.
My feely ſheep like well below,
For they been hale enough I trow,
And liken their abode. Spenſer's Paſtorals.
Some of theſe wiſe partizans concluded the government
had hired two or three hundred hale men, to be pinioned, if
not executed, as repreſentatives of the pretended captives.
Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 7.
His ſtomach too begins to fail;
Laſt year we thought him ſtrong and hale,
But now he's quite another thing:
I wiſh he may hold out 'till Spring. Swift.
To HALE. v. a. ſhalen, Dutch; haler, French..] To drag by
force; to pull violently.
Fly to your houſe;
The plebeians have got your fellow tribune,
And hale him up and down. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
My third comfort,
Starr'd moſt unluckily, is from my breaſt
Płal"d out to murder. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
Give diligence that thou mayeſt be delivered from him, leſt
he hale thee to the judge. Lu. xii. 58.
He by the neck hath hal’d, in pieces cut,
And ſet me as a mark on every butt. Sandys.
Thither by harpy-footed furies hal’d,
At certain revolutions, all the damn'd
Are brought. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
This finiſtrous gravity is drawn that way by the great artery,
which then ſubſideth, and haleth the heart unto it. Brown.
Who would not be diſguſted with any recreation, in itſelf
r
indifferent, if he ſhould with blows be haled to it when he had
no mind Locke.
In all the tumults at Rome, though the people proceeded
ſometimes to pull and hale one another about, yet no blood
was drawn 'till the time of the Gracchi. Swift.
HA'LER. m. ſ. [from hale.] He who pulls and hales.
HALF. n.ſ. plural. [pealp, Saxon, and all the Teutonick dia-
lećts. The l is often not ſounded.]
1. A moiety; one part of two; an equal part.
An half acre of land. I Sa. xiv. 14.
Many might go to heaven with half the labour they go to
hell, if they would venture their induſtry the right way.
Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
Well choſen friendſhip, the moſt noble
Of virtues, all our joys makes double,
And into halves divides our trouble. Denham,
Or what but riches is there known
Which man can ſolely call his own;
In which no creature goes his half,
Unleſs it be to ſquint and laugh? Hudibras, p. ii.
No mortal tongue can half the beauty tell; *
. For none but hands divine could work ſo well. Dryden.
Of our manufacture foreign markets took off one half, and
the other half were conſumed amongſt ourſelves. Locke.
The council is made up half out of the noble families, and
half out of the plebeian. Addiſon on Italy.
Half the miſery of life might be extinguiſhed, would men
alleviate the general curſe by mutual compaſſion. Addiſon.
Her beauty, in thy ſofter haf
Bury'd and loſt, ſhe ought to grieve. Priºr.
Natural was it for a prince, who had propoſed to himſelf
the empire of the world, not to neglect the ſea, the half of
his dominions. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. It ſometimes has a plural ſignification when a number is
divided.
Had the land ſele&amp;ted of the beſt,
Half had come hence, and let the world provide the
reſt. Drydºn.
3. It is much uſed in compoſition to ſignify a thing imperfect,
as the following examples will ſhow.
HALF. adv. In part; equally.
I go with love and fortune, two blind guides, -
To lead my way; half loth, and half conſenting. Dryden.
HALF-BlooD. m. ſ. One not born of the ſame father and
mother.
Which ſhall be heir of the two male twins, who, by the
diſſection of the mother, were laid open to the world Whe-
ther a ſiſter by the half-blood ſhall inherit before a brother's
daughter by the whole-blood? Locke.
HALF-BlooDE D. adj. [half and blood.] Mean; degenerate.
The let alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine, lord.
Half-blooded fellow, yes. Shakespeare King Lear.
HALF-cAP. n.ſ. Cap imperfectly put off, or faintly moved.
After diſtaſteful looks, and theſe hard fractions,
With certain half-caps and cold moving nods,
They froze me into filence. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
HA'LF ENDEAL. n.ſ. [ half and bael, Saxon.) Part. Speſſºr.
HALF-F AcED. adj. [half and faced.] Showing only part of the
face; ſmall faced.
Proud incroaching tyranny
Burns with revenging fire, whoſe hopeful colours
Advance, a half-faced ſun ſtriving to ſhine. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
This ſame half-faced fellow, Shadow ; give me this man:
he preſents no mark to the enemy: the foeman may with as
great aim level at the edge of a penknife. Shakespeare Henry IV.
HALF-HATched. adj. [half and hatch..] Imperfectly hatched.
Here, thick as hailſtones pour,
Turnips, and half-hatch'd eggs, a mingled ſhow'r,
Among the rabble rain. Gay's Trivia.
HALF-Heard. adj. Imperfeótly heard; not heard to an end.
Not added years on years my taſk could cloſe;
Back to thy native iſlands might'ſt thou ſail,
And leave half-heard the melancholy tale. Pope's Odyſſey.
HALF-Moon. n.ſ.
1. The moon in its appearance when at half increaſe or decreaſe.
2. Anything in the figure of a half moon.
See how in warlike muſter they appear,
In rhombs and wedges, and half-moons and wings. . Milton.
Half-peny. n.ſ. plural half-pence. [ half and . A copper
coin, of which two make a peny.
There ſhall be in England ſeven half-peny loaves ſold for a
peny. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
Bardolph ſtole a lute-caſe, bore it twelve leagues, and ſold
it for three half-pence. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
I thank you; and ſure, dear friend, my thanks are too dear
of a half-peny. - Shakeſpears.
Hécheats for half-pence, and he doffs his coat
To ſave a farthing in a ferryboat. Dryden's Perſ.
Never admit this pernicious coin, no not ſo much as one
ſingle half-puny. ... Swift.
gle half Io X - - º:
... "… --
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A L
H A L
You will wonder how Wood could get his majeſty's broad
ſeal for ſo great a ſum of bad money, and that the nobility
here could not obtain the ſame favour, and make our own half-
pence as we uſed to do. - - Swift.
HALF-pike. n.ſ. [ half and pike.] The ſmall pike carried by
officers.
The various ways of paying the ſalute with the half-
pike. Tatler, Nº. 60.
HALF-p1NT. n.ſ. [ half and pint.] The fourth part of a
quart.
One haſ-pint bottle ſerves them both to dine;
And is at once their vinegar and wine. Pope's Horace.
HALF-schola R. m. ſ. Imperfectly learned.
We have many half ſcholars now-a-days, and there is much
confuſion and inconſiſtency in the notions and opinions of
ſome perſons. I/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
HALF-seas over. A proverbial expreſſion for any one far ad-
vanced. It is commonly uſed of one half drunk.
I am half-ſeas o'er to death;
And ſince I muſt die once, I would be loth
To make a double work of what's half finiſh'd. Dryden.
HALF-sight ED. adj. [ half and ſight.] Seeing imperfectly;
having weak diſcernment.
The officers of the king's houſhold had need be provident,
both for his honour and thrift: they muſt look both ...}. elſe
they are but half-ſighted. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
HALF-spher E. n.ſ. [half and ſphere.] Hemiſphere.
Let night grow blacker with thy plots; and day,
At ſhewing but thy head forth, ſtart away
From this haſºſphere. Ben. Johnſºn's Catiline.
HALF-stra 1N Ed. adj. [ half and ſtrain..] Half-bred; im-
perfeót. -
I find I’m but a half-ſtrain’d villain yet,
But mungril-miſchievous; for my blood boil'd
To view this brutal act. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
HALF-swcRD. n.ſ. Cloſe fight; within half the length of a
ſword. -
I am a rogue, if I were not at half ſword with a dozen of
them two hours together. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
HALF-w AY. adv. [haf and way.] In the middle.
Fearleſs he ſees, who is with virtue crown'd,
The tempeſt rage, and hears the thunder found;
Ever the ſame, let fortune ſmile or frown :
Serenely as he liv'd reſigns his breath;
Meets deſtiny half-way, nor ſhrinks at death. . Granville.
HALF-wit. n.ſ. [ half and wit..] A blockhead; a fooliſh
fellow.
Half-wit, are fleas, ſo little and ſo light,
We ſcarce could know they live, but that they bite. Dryden.
HALF-witted. adj. [from haft-wit..] Imperfectly furniſhed
with underſtanding.
I would rather have truſted the refinement of our language,
as to ſound, to the judgment of the women than of half-
witted poets. Swift.
Jack had paſſed for a poor, well-meaning, half-witted,
crack-brained fellow : people were ſtrangely ſurpriſed to find
him in ſuch a roguery. Arbuthnºt's Hiſł. of jºhn Bull.
HA'LIBUT. m. ſ. A ſort of fiſh. Ainſworth.
HA'LiDom. m.ſ. [pali; bom, holy judgment, or pali; and dame,
for lady..] Our bleſſed lady.
By my halidom, quoth he,
Ye a great maſter are in your degree: Hubberd’s Tale.
HA'LIM Ass. n.ſ. [pali; and maſs. J The feaſt of All-ſouls.
My queen to France; from whence ſet forth in pomp,
She came adorned hither like ſweet May;
Sent back like halimaſ, or ſhorteſt day. Shakespeare Rich. II.
HA'LITUous. adj. [halitus, Latin.] Vaporous; fumous.
We ſpeak of the atmoſphere as of a peculiar thin and half-
tuous liquor, much lighter than ſpirit of wine. Boyle.
HALL. m. ſ. [ pal, Saxon; halle, Dutch.]
1. A court of juſtice. -
2. A manour-houſe ſo called, becauſe in it were held courts for
the tenants.
Captain Sentry, my maſter's nephew, has taken poſſeſſion
of the hall houſe, and the whole eſtate. Addiſon's Speciator.
3. The publick room of a corporation.
With expedition on the beadle call,
To ſummon all the company to the hall. Garth.
4. The firſt large room of a houſe.
That light we ſee is burning in my hall. Shakeſpeare.
Courteſy is ſooner found in lowly ſheds
With ſmoky rafters, than in tap'ſtry halls
And courts of princes., , Milton.
HAL LELUIAH. n.J. [..T.’"ºn] Praiſe ye the Lºrd. A ſong
of thankſgiving. -
Then ſhall thy ſaints
Unfained hallelujahs to Thee fing,
Hymns of high praiſe. Milton's Paradiſ, Loft, b. vi.
Singing thoſe devout hymns and heavenly anthems, in
which the church militant ſeems ambitious to emulate the
triumphant, and echo back the ſolemn praiſes and hallelujahs
of the celeſtial choirs. Boyle.
HA'Lloo. interj. [The original of this word is controverted :
ſome imagine it corrupted from a lui, to him others from
allons, let us go! and Skinner from haller, to draw.] A word
of encouragement when dogs are let looſe on their game.
Some popular chief,
More noiſy than the reſt, but cries halloo,
And, in a trice, the bellowing herd come out. Dryden.
To HAL loo. v. n. [haler, Fr. J. To cry as after the dogs.
A number of country folks hallooed and houted after me, as
at the arranteſt coward that ever ſhewed his ſhoulders to his
enemy. Sidney, b. ii.
A cry more tuneable
Was never halloo'd to, nor cheer'd with horn. Shakespeare.
To HA'lloo. v. a.
1. To encourage with ſhouts.
If, whilſt a boy, Jack ran from ſchool,
Fond of his hunting-horn and pole,
Though gout and age his ſpeed detain,
Old John halloos his hounds again. Priºr.
2. To chaſe with ſhouts.
If I fly, Marcius,
Halloo me like a hare.
3. To call or ſhout to.
When we have found the king, he that firſt lights on him,
Halloo the other. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
To HAL Low. v. a. [balºlan, pally, Saxon, holy.]
1. To conſecrate; to make holy.
When we ſanétify or hallow churches, it is only to teſtify
that we make them places of publick reſort; that we inveſt
God himſelf with them, and that we ſever them from com-
mon uſes. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 12-
With us it cannot be endured to hear a man openly profeſs
that he putteth fire to his neighbour's houſe, but yet ſo hal-
loweth the ſame with prayer, that he hopeth it ſhall not burn.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 29.
Is’t Cade that I have ſlain, that monſtrous traitor :
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee o'er my tomb, when I am dead. Shakespeare.
My prayers
Are not words duly hallow'd, nor my wiſhes
More worth than vanities; yet pray'rs and wiſhes
Are all I can return. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
And from work
Now reſting, bleſs'd and hallow'd the ſeventh day,
As reſting on that day from all his works,
But not in ſilence holy kept. Milton.
Then baniſh’d faith ſhall once again return,
And veſłal fires in hallow'd temples burn. Dryden's Wirgil.
No ſatyr lurks within this hallow’d ground;
But nymphs and heroines, kings and gods abound. Granv.
2. To reverence as holy; hallowed be thy name.
HALLUcINATION. n.ſ.. [hallucinatio, Latin.] Errour; blun-
der; miſtake; folly.
A waſting of fleſh, without cauſe, is frequently termed a
bewitched diſeaſe; but queſtionleſs a meer hallucination of the
vulgar. Harvey on Conſumptions.
This muſt have been the hallucination of the tranſcriber,
who probably miſtook the daſh of the I for a T. Addison Spei.
HALM. m. ſ. [pealm, Saxon.] Straw. Pronounced hawm.
HA'Lo. m. ſ. A red circle round the ſun or moon.
And, if the hail be a little flatted, the light tranſmitted may
grow ſo ſtrong, at a little leſs diſtance than that of twenty-ſix
degrees, as to form a halo about the ſun or moon; which hak,
as often as the hailſtones are duly figured, may be coloured.
Newton's Opt.
I ſaw by reflexion, in a veſſel of ſtagnating water, three
halo's, crowns or rings of colours about the ſun, like three
little rainbows, concentrick to his body. Newton's Opt.
HA'lse NING. adj. [ hals, German; haſ, Scottiſh, the neck.]
Sounding harſhly ; inharmonius in the throat or tongue.
This ill halſening horny name hath, as cornuto in Italy,
opened a gap to the ſcoffs of many. Carew.
HALSE.R. n.ſ.. [from palr, neck, and reel, a rope. It is now
in marine pronunciation corrupted to hawſer.] A rope ſcſs
than a cable.
A beechen maſt then in the hollow baſe
They hoiſted, and with well-wreath'd halſers hoiſe
Their white ſails. Chapman's Odyſy, b. ii.
No halers need to bind theſe veſſels here, -
Nor bearded anchors; for no ſtorms they fear. Dryd. Wing.
To HALt. v. n. [pealtz, Saxon, lame; pealtan, to limp.]
1. To limp ; to be lame.
And will ſhe yet debaſe her eyes
On me, that haſt and am miſ-ſhapen thus : Shakespeare R. III.
Shakeſpeare's Coriolanuſ.
Thus inborn broils the factions would engage,
Or wars of exil'd heirs, or foreign rage, ;
*Till halting vengeance overtook our age. Dryden.
Spenſer himſelf affects the obſolete,
And Sidney's verſe halts ill on Roman feet. Pºpe.
2. To ſtop in a march.
I was forced to halt in this perpendicular march. Addison.
3. To heſitate; to ſtand dubious.
- How
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A M
H A N
ſ:
º
d
ſſ.
|*
#1
How long halt ye between two opinions? I Kings xviii,
4. To fail; to faulter.
Here's a paper written in his hand;
A halling ſonnet of his own pure brain,
Faſhion'd to Beatrice. Shakeſp. Much Ado about Nothing.
All my familiars watched for my halting, ſaying, peradven-
ture he will be enticed, and we ſhall prevail againſt him. Jer.
HALt. adj. [from the verb ] Lame; crippled.
Bring in hither the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the
blind. Lu. xiv. 21.
HALT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The act of limping; the manner of limping.
2. [Alte, French..] A ſtop in a march.
- The heav'nly bands
Down from a ſky of jaſper lighted now
In Paradiſe, and on a hill made halt. Milt. Paradiſe Loſt.
Scouts each coaſt light armed ſcour
Each quarter to deſcry the diſtant foe,
Where lodg’d, or whether fled, or if for fight
In motion, or in halt. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi.
Without any halt they marched between the two armies.
Clarendon, b. viii.
He might have made a halt ’till his foot and artillery came
up to him. Clarendºn, b. ii.
HA'LTER. n.ſ.. [from halt.] He who limps.
HA'lt E.R. n.ſ. [pealrene, Saxon, from palr, the neck.]
1. A rope to hang malefactors.
He's fled, my lord, and all his pow'rs do yield;
And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
Expect your highneſs' doom of life or death. Shakespeare H. VI.
Anſwer was made, it was by the ſword if they ſtood upon
defence, and by the halter if they yielded; wherefore they
made choice to die rather as ſoldiers than as dogs. Hayward.
Were I a drowſy judge, whoſe diſmal note
Diſgorgeth halters, as a juggler's throat
Doth ribbands.
When the times begin to alter,
None riſe ſo high as from the halter. Hudibras, p. iii.
He gets renown, who, to the halter near,
Cleaveland.
But narrowly eſcapes, and buys it dear. Dryden's juvenal.
2. A cord; a ſtrong ſtring.
Whom neither halter binds nor burthens charge. Sandy.
To HA'LTER. v. a. [from the noun..] To bind with a cord;
to catch in a nooſe.
He might have employed his time in the frivolous delights
of catching moles and haltering frogs. Atterbury,
To HALve. v. a. [from half, halves.] To divide into two
parts.
HALves. interj. [from half, halves being the plural.] An ex-
preſſion by which any one lays claim to an equal ſhare.
Have you not ſeen how the divided dam
Runs to the ſummons of her hungry lamb
But when the twin cries halves, ſhe quits the firſt. Cleaveland.
HAM, whether initial or final, is no other than the Saxon pam,
a houſe, farm, or village. Gibſºn's Camden.
HAM. n.ſ. [pam, Saxon; hamme, Dutch.]
1. The hip ; the hinder part of the articulation of the thigh
with the knee.
The ham was much relaxed; but there was ſome contrac-
tion remaining. JWiſeman.
2. The thigh of a hog ſalted.
Who has not learn'd, freſh ſturgeon and ham pye
Are no rewards for want and infamy. Pope's Horace.
HA'MATED. adj. [hamatus, Latin.] Hooked; ſet with hooks.
To HA'Mble. v. a. [from ham..] To cut the ſinews of the
thigh; to hamſtring.
HAME. n.ſ. [pama, Saxon.] The collar by which a horſe
draws in a waggon.
HA(MLET. n.ſ. [ pam, Saxon, and let, the diminutive termi-
nation.] A ſmall village.
Within the ſelf-ſame lordſhip, pariſh, or hamlet, lands have
divers degrees of value. Bacon's Off of Aliciation.
He pitch'd upon the plain
His mighty camp, and, when the day return'd,
The country waſted and the hamlets burn'd. Dryden's Fables.
HAMMER. m. ſ. [pamen, Saxon; hammer, Daniſh.]
1. The inſtrument conſiſting of a long handle and heavy head,
with which anything is forged or driven.
The armourers,
with buſy hammers cloſing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
The ſtuff will not work well with a hammer. Bacon.
It is broken not without many blows, and will break the
beſt anvils and hammers of iron. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Every morning he riſes freſh to his hammer and his anvil.
- South's Sermons.
The ſmith prepares his hammer for the ſtroke. Dryd.juv.
2. Any thing deſtructive.
That renowned pillar of truth and hammer of hereſies, St.
Auguſtine. Hakewill on Providence,
To HA'MMER. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To beat with a hammer.
5
His bones the hammer'd ſteel in ſtrength ſurpaſs. Sands,
2. To forge or form with a hammer.
Some hammer helmets for the fighting field. Dryd. Æn.
Drudg’d like a ſmith, and on the anvil beat,
*Till he had hammer'd out a vaſt eſtate. Dryden's juvenal.
I muſt pay with hammered money inſtead of milled. Dryden.
3. To work in the mind; to contrive by intelle&amp;tual labour.
Wilt thou ſtill be hammering treachery,
To humble down thy huſband and thyſelf? Shaſeſ. H. VI.
He was nobody that could not hammer out of his name an
invention by this witcraft, and picture it accordingly. Camden.
Some ſpirits, by whom they were ſtirred and guided in the
name of the people, herºered up the articles. Hayward.
To HA'MM ER. v. n. -
1. To work; to be buſy.
Nor need'ſt thou much importune me to that,
Whereon this month I have been hammering. Shakespeare,
I have been ſtudying how to compare
This priſon where I live unto the world;
And, for becauſe the world is populous,
And here is not a creature but myſelf,
I cannot do it; yet I’ll hammer on't.
2. To be in agitation.
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand;
Blood and revenge are hammering in my head. Shakespeare. Tit. Andr,
HA'MMERER. n.ſ. [from hammer.] He who works with a
hammer.
HA’MMER HARD. m. ſ. ſhammer and hard.]
Hammerhard is when you harden iron or ſteel with much
hammering on it. AZavon's Mech. Exer.
HA’M Mock. m. ſ. [ pamaca, Saxon.] A ſwinging bed.
Prince Maurice of Naſſau, who had been accuſtomed to
hammocks, uſed them all his life. Temple.
HA'MPER. m. ſ. [Suppoſed by Aºinſ ev to be contraćted from
hand panier; but handperium appears to have been a word long
in uſe, whence haraper, hamſer.] A large baſket for carriage.
What powder'd wigs' what flames and darts!
What hampers full of bleeding hearts. Swift.
To HA'MPER. v. a. [The original of this word, in its preſent
meaning, is uncertain: junius obſerves that hamplyns in Teu-
tonick is a quarrel: others imagine that hamper or hanaper,
being the tieaſury to which fines are paid, to hamper, which
is commonly applied to the law, means originally to fine.]
1. To ſhackle; to entangle in chains.
O looſe this frame, this knot of man untie!
That my free ſoul may uſe her wing,
Which now is pinion'd with mortality,
Shakeſpeare.
As an entang!'d, hamfer'd thing. Herbert.
We ſhall find ſuch engines to aſſail,
And hamfer thee, as thou ſhalt come of force. Milton.
What was it but a lion hampered in a net! L’Eſtrange.
They hamper and entangle our ſouls, and hinder their flight
upwards. Jilºtſon's Sermons.
2. To enſnare; to inveigle; to catch with allurements. -
She'll hamfer thee, and dandle thee like a baby. Shakespeare
Wear under wizard-maſks their talents, -
And mother wits before their gallants;
Until they're hamper'd in the nooze,
Too faſt to dream of breaking looſe.
3. To complicate; to tangle. ,
Engend'ring heats, theſe one by one unbind,
Stretch their ſmall tubes, and hamfer'd nerves unwind. Bac.
4. To perplex; to embarraſs by many lets and troubles.
And when th’ are hamper’d by the laws,
Releaſe the lab’rers for the cauſe. Hudibras, p. iii. cant 2.
HA'Mst RING.. n.ſ.. [ham and ſtring.] The tendon of the
ham.
Huáilras, p. iii.
A ſtrutting player, whoſe conceit
Lies in his hamſiring, doth think it rich
To hear the wooden dialogue, and ſound
'Twixt his ſtretch'd footing and the ſcaffoldage. Shakeſp.
On the hinder ſide it is guarded with the two hamſ' in 3.
j/iſeman's Surgery.
To HA'mist RING. v. a. preter. and part paſſ harmºrung. [from
the noun..] To lame by cutting the tendon of the ham.
Hamſiring'd behind, unhappy Gyges dy'd ;
Then Phalaris is added to his ſide. Dryden's Aºn.
HAN for have, in the plural. Speºſer.
Ha’NAPER. n.ſ. ſhanafterium, low Latin.] . A treaſury; an
exchequer. The clerk of the hanafer receives the fees due
to the king for the ſeal of charters and patents. -
The fines for all original writs were wont to be immediate-
ly paid into the handper of the Chancery. Bacon.
HA'N'ces. n.ſ. [In a ſhip.] Falls of the fife-rails placed on bºn-
niſters on the poop and quarter-deck down to the gangway Har.
HANces. [In architecture.] The ends of elliptical arches;
and theſe are the arches of ſmaller circles than the ſcheme, or
middle part of the arch. Harris.
The ſweep of the arch will not contain above fourteen
inches, and perhaps you muſt cement pieces to many of the
courſes in the hajice, to make them long enough to contain
fourteen inches, A16.svn's 44tch. EA er.
H AND,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A N
H A N
HAND. m. ſ. [pano, ponb, Saxon, and in all the Teutonick
diale&amp;ts.]
1. The paſm with the fingers; the member with which we hold
or uſe any inſtrument.
They ſaid hand; upon him, and bound him hand and foot.
Knolles's Hiſtory ºf the Turks.
So hand in hand they paſs'd, the lovelieſt pair
That ever ſince in love's embraces met. Milt. Parad. Loſt.
They hand in hand, with wandering ſteps and ſlow,
Through Eden took their ſolitary way. Milton.
That wonderful inſtrument the hand, was it made to be
idle * Berkley.
2. Meaſure of four inches; a meaſure uſed in the matches of
horſes; a palm.
3. Side, right or left.
For the other ſide of the court-gate on this hand, and that
hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits. Ex. xxxviii. 15.
4. Part; quarter; ſide.
It is allowed on all hands, that the people of England are
more corrupt in their morals than any other nation this day
under the ſun. Swift.
5. Ready payment with reſpect to the receiver.
Of which offer the baſſa accepted, receiving in hand one
year's tribute. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Theſe two muſt make our duty very eaſy; a conſiderable
reward in hand, and the aſſurance of a far greater recompence
hereafter. Tillotſon's Sermons.
6. Ready payment with regard to the payer.
Let not the wages of any man tarry with thee, but give it
him out of hand. Tob. iv. 14.
7. Rate; price.
Time is the meaſure of buſineſs, as money of wares: buſi-
neſs is bought at a dear hand, where there is ſmall diſpatch.
Bacon, Eſſay 26.
8. Terms; conditions.
With ſimplicity admire and accept the myſtery; but at no
hand by pride, ignorance, intereſt, or vanity wreſt it to ignoble
ſenſes. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
It is either an ill ſign or an ill effect, and therefore at no hand
conſiſtent with humility. Taylor's Rule ºf living holy.
9. Aćt; deed; external action.
Thou ſaweſt the contradićtion between my heart and
hand. King Charles.
Io. Labour; ačt of the hand.
Alnaſchar was a very idle fellow, that never would ſet his
hand to any buſineſs during his father's life. Addiſon's Speciat.
I rather ſuſpect my own judgment than I can believe a fault
to be in that poem, which lay ſo long under Virgil's correc-
tion, and had his laſt hand put to it. Addiſon.
1 1. Performance.
Where are theſe porters,
Theſe lazy knaves Y’ave made a fine band I fellows,
There's a trim rabble let in. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
12. Power of performance.
Will. Honeycomb has told me, that he had a great mind to
try his hand at a Spectator, and that he would fain have one
of his writing in my works. Addiſon's Spediator.
A friend of mine has a very fine hand on the violin.
Addiſon's Guardian, N°. 98.
13, Attempt; undertaking.
Out of them you dare take in hand to lay open the original
of ſuch a nation. Spenſer on Ireland.
14. Manner of gathering or taking.
As her majeſty hath received great profit, ſo may ſhe, by a
moderate hand, from time to time reap the like. Bacon.
15. Workmanſhip; power or act of manufacturing or making.
An intelligent being, coming out of the hands of infinite
perfeótion, with an averſion or even indifferency to be re-
united with its Author, the ſource of its utmoſt felicity, is
ſuch a ſhock and deformity in the beautiful analogy of things,
as is not conſiſtent with finite wiſdom and perfection. Cheyne.
16. Manner of a&amp;ting or performing.
The maſter ſaw the madneſs riſe;
His glowing cheeks, his ardent eyes;
And while he heav'n and earth defy'd,
Chang'd his hand, and check'd his pride.
17. Agency; part in action.
God muſt have ſet a more than ordinary eſteem upon that
which David was not thought fit to have an hand in. South.
18. The aët of giving or preſenting.
Let Tamar dreſs the meat in my fight, that I may eat it at
Dryden.
her hand. 2 Sa. xiii. 5.
To-night the poet's advocate I ſtand,
And he deſerves the favour at my hand. Addiſon.
19. Act of receiving any thing ready to one's hand, when it only
waits to be taken.
His power reaches no farther than to compound and divide
the materials that are made to his hand; but can do nothing
towards the making or deſtroying one atom of what is already
in being. Locke.
Many, whoſe greatneſs and fortune were not made to their
hand, had ſufficient qualifications and opportunities of riſing
to theſe high poſts. Addison's Freeholder.
20. Care; neceſſity of managing.
Jupiter had a farm a long time upon his hands, for want of
a tenant to come up to his price. , L'Eºrange.
When a ſtateſman wants a day's defence,
Or envy holds a whole week's war with ſenſe,
Or ſimple pride for flatt'ry makes demands,
May dunce by dunce be whiſtled off my hand. Pope.
21. Diſcharge of duty.
Let it therefore be required, on both parts, at the hands of
the clergy, to be in meanneſs of eſtate like the apoſtles; at
the hands of the laity, to be as they who lived under the
apoſtles. Hooker, Preface.
22. Reach; nearneſs: as, at hand, within reach, near, ap-
proaching.
Your huſband is at hand, I hear his trumpet.
Couſins, I hope the days are near at hand
That chambers will be ſafe. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you ſalutation. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
The fight of his mind was like ſome fights of eyes; rather
ſtrong at hand than to carry afar off. Bacon's Henry VII.
Any light thing that moveth, when we find no wind, ſhew-
eth a wind at hand. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A very great ſound near hand hath ſtrucken many deaf.
Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory, N°. 128.
It is not probable that any body ſhould effect that at a diſ-
tance, which, nearer hand, it cannot perform. Brown.
When mineral or metal is to be generated, nature needs
not to have at hand ſalt, ſulphur, and mercury. Boyle,
23. Manual management.
Nor ſwords at hand, nor hiſſing darts afar,
Are doom'd tº avenge the tedious bloody war. Dryd, juven.
24. State of being in preparation.
Where is our uſual manager of mirth
What revels are in hand? Is there no play,
Shakespeare,
To eaſe the anguiſh of a torturing hour Shakeſpeare.
25. State of being in preſent agitation.
I look'd upon her with a ſoldier's eye;
That lik'd, but had a rougher taſk in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of war. Shakeſpeare.
It is indifferent to the matter in hand which way the learned
ſhall determine of it. Locke.
26. Cards held at a game.
There was never an hand drawn, that did double the reſt of
the habitable world, before this; for ſo a man may term it, if
he ſhall put to account that which may be hereafter, by the
occupation and colonizing of thoſe countries. Bacºn.
27. That which is uſed in oppoſition to another.
He would diſpute,
Confute, change hands, and ſtill confute.
28. Scheme of ačtion.
Conſult of your own ways, and think which hand
Is beſt to take. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
. They who thought they could never be ſecure, except the
king were firſt at their mercy, were willing to change the hand
in carrying on the war. Clarendon, b. viii.
29. Advantage; gain; ſuperiority.
The French king, ſuppoſing to make his hand by thoſe rude
ravages in England, broke off his treaty of peace, and pro-
claimed hoſtility. Playward.
30. Competition; conteſt.
She in beauty, education, blood,
Holds hand with any princeſs of the world. Shakeſp K. Lear.
31. Tranſmiſſion; conveyance; agency of conveyance.
The ſalutation by the hand of me Paul. Col. iv. 18.
32. Poſſeſſion; power.
Sacraments ſerve as the moral inſtruments of God to thatpur-
poſe; the uſe whereof is in our hands, the effect in his. Hooker.
And though you war, like petty wrangling ſtates,
You're in my hand; and when I bid you ceaſe,
You ſhall be cruſh'd together into peace. Dryden.
Between the landlord and tenant there muſt be a quarter of
the revenue of the land conſtantly in their hands. Locke.
It is fruitleſs pains to learn a language, which one may
gueſs by his temper he will wholly neglect, as ſoon as an ap-
proach to manhood, ſetting him free from a governour, ſhall
put him into the hands of his own inclination. Locke.
Večtigales Agri were lands taken from the enemy, and
diſtributed amongſt the ſoldiers, or left in the hands of the pro-
prietors under the condition of certain duties. Arbuthnot.
33. Preſſure of the bridle.
There are no tricks in plain and ſimple faith;
But hollow men, like horſes hot at hand,
Make gallant ſhow and promiſe of their mett'e.
34. Method of government; diſcipline; reſtraint.
Menelaus bare an heavy hand over the citizens, having a
malicious mind againſt his countrymen. 2 Mac. v. 23.
He kept a ſtrict hand on his nobility, and choſe rather to
advance clergymen and lawyers. Bacon's Henry VII.
However
Hudibras, p. i.
Shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A N
H A N
º
However ſtrićt a hand is to be kept upon all deſires of fancy,
yet in recreation fancy muſt be permitted to ſpeak. Locke.
35. Influence; management.
Flattery, the dang'rous nurſe of vice, 4 -
Got hand upon his youth, to pleaſures bent. Daniel.
36. That which performs the office of a hand in pointing.
The body, though it moves, yet changing perceivable diſ-
tance with other bodies, as faſt as the ideas of our own minds
do naturally follow one another, the thing ſeems to ſtand ſtill;
as is evident in the hands of clocks and ſhadows of ſun-
dials. Locke.
37. Agent; perſon employed. - -
The wiſeſt prince, if he can ſave himſelf and his people
from ruin, under the worſt adminiſtration, what may not his
ſubječts hope for when he changeth hands, and maketh uſe of
the beſt ? Swift.
38. Giver, and receiver.
This tradition is more like to be a notion bred in the mind
of man, than tranſmitted from hand to hand through all ge-
nerations. Tillotſon, Sermon I.
39. An actor; a workman; a ſoldier.
Your wrongs are known: impoſe but your commands,
This hour ſhall bring you twenty thouſand hands. Drydºn.
Demetrius appointed the painter guards for his ſecurity,
pleaſed that he could preſerve that hand from the barbarity and
inſolence of ſoldiers. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
A dićtionary containing a natural hiſtory requires too many
hands, as well as too much time, ever to be hoped for. Locke.
40. Catch or reach without choice.
The men of Iſrael ſmote as well the men of every city as
the beaſt, and all that came to hand. judg. xx. 48.
A ſweaty reaper from his tillage brought
Firſt fruits, the green ear, and the yellow ſheaf,
Uncull'd as came to hand. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi.
41. Form or caſt of writing.
Here is th’ indićtment of the good lord Haſtings,
Which in a ſet hand fairly is engroſs'd;
Eleven hours I’ve ſpent to write it over. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Solyman ſhewed him his own letters intercepted, aſking
him if he knew not that hand, if he knew not that ſeal. Knoll.
Being diſcovered by their knowledge of Mr. Cowley's hand,
I happily eſcaped. Denham, Dedication.
}; my debtors do not keep their day,
Deny their hands, and then refuſe to pay, ,
I muſt attend. Dryd.juvenal.
Whether men write court or Roman hand, or any other,
there is ſomething peculiar in every one's writing. Cockburn.
The way to teach to write, is to get a plate graved with the
charaćters of ſuch hand you like. Locke.
Conſtantia ſaw that the hand writing agreed with the con-
tents of the letter. Addiſon's Spectator.
I preſent theſe thoughts in an ill hand; but ſcholars are bad
penmen: we ſeldom regard the mechanick part of writing.
Felton on the Claſſicks:
They were wrote on both ſides, and in a ſmall hand. Arbut.
42. HANd over head. Negligently; raſhly ; without ſeeing what
one does.
So many ſtrokes of the alarum bell of fear and awaking to
other nations, and the facility of the titles, which, hand over
head, have ſerved their turn, doth ring the peal ſo much the
louder. - Bacon's War with Spain.
A country fellow got an unlucky tumble from a tree: thus
'tis, ſays a paſſenger, when people will be doing things hand
over head, without either fear or wit. L’Eſtrange.
43. HAND to HAND. Cloſe fight.
In ſingle oppoſition, hand to hand,
He did confound the beſt part of an hour. Shakeſp. H. IV.
He iſſues, ere the fight, his dread command,
That ſlings afar, and poiniards hand to hand,
Be baniſh’d from the field. Dryden's Fables.
44. HAND in HANd. In union; conjointly.
Had the ſea been Marlborough's element, the war had been
beſtowed there, to the advantage of the country, which would
then have gone hand in hand with his own. Swift.
45. HAND in HAND. Fit; pat.
As fair and as good, a kind of hand in hand compariſon,
had been ſomething too fair and too good for any lady in Bri-
tany. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
46. HAND to mouth. As want requires. -
I can get bread from hand to mouth, and make even at the
year's end. L’Eſtrange.
47. To bear in HAND. To keep in expectation; to elude.
A raſcally yea forſooth knave, to bear in hand, and then
ſtand upon ſecurity. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
48. To be HAND and Glove. To be intimate and familiar.
To HAND. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To give or tranſmit with the hand.
Judas was not far off, not only becauſe he dipped in the
fame diſh, but becauſe he was ſo near that our Saviour could
hand the ſop unto him. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Reports, like ſnowballs, gather ſtill the farther they roll;
and when I have once handed it to another, how know ſhow
he may improve it? Government of the Tongue.
I have been ſhewn a written prophecy that is banded among
them with great ſecrecy. - Addison's Freeholder.
2. To guide or lead by the hand. -
Angels did hand her up, who next God dwell;
For ſhe was of that order whence moſt fell. Donne.
By ſafe and inſenſible degrees he will paſs from a boy to a
man, which is the moſt hazardous ſtep in life: this therefore
ſhould be carefully watched, and a young man with great dili-
gence handed over it. Locke.
3. To ſeize; to lay hands on.
Let him, that makes but trifles of his eyes,
Firſt hand me: on mine own accord, I'll off. Shakespeare.
4. To manage; to move with the hand.
'Tis then that with delight I rove
Upon the boundleſs depth of love:
I bleſs my chains, I hand my oar,
Nor think on all I left on ſhoar. - Priºr.
5. #. tranſmit in ſucceſſion; to deliver down from one to an-
Other.
They had not only a tradition of it in general, but even of
ſeveral the moſt remarkable particular accidents of it likewiſe,
which they handed downwards to the ſucceeding ages. Wºodw.
know no other way of ſecuring theſe monuments, and
making them numerous enough to be handed down to future
ages. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
Arts and ſciences conſiſt of ſcattered theorems and practices,
which are handed about amongſt the maſters, and only revealed
to the filii artis, ’till ſome great genius appears, who colle&amp;ts
theſe disjointed propoſitions, and reduces them into a regular
ſyſtem. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
One would think a ſtory ſo fit for age to talk of, and in-
fancy to hear, were incapable of being handed down to us.
Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
HAND is much uſed in compoſition for that which is manage-
able by the hand, as a handſaw; or born in the hand, as a
handbarrow. -
HA'ND-BARRow, n.ſ. A frame on which any thing is carried
by the hands of two men, without wheeling on the ground.
A hand-barrow, wheelbarrow, ſhovel and ſpade. Tuffār.
Set the board whereon the hive ſtandeth on a hand-barrow,
and carry them to the place you intend. Mortim. Husbandry.
HAND-basket. n.ſ. A portable baſket.
You muſt have woollen yarn to tie grafts with, and a ſmall
hand-basket to carry them in. Martimer's Husbandry.
HAND-BELL. m. ſ. A bell rung by the hand.
The ſtrength of the percuſſion is a principal cauſe of the
loudneſs or ſoftneſs of ſounds; as in ringing of a hand-bell
harder or ſofter. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
HAND-BReadth. n.ſ. A ſpace equal to the breadth of the
hand; a palm.
A border of an hand-breadth round about.. Ex. xxv. 25.
Within were hooks an hand-breadth, faſtened round about.
Ezek. xl. 43.
The eaſtern people determined their hand-breadth by the
breadth of barley-corns, ſix making a digit, and twenty-four
a hand's breadth. Arbuthnot on Coins.
HA'NDED. adj. [from hand.]
1. Having the uſe of the hand left or right.
Many are right handed, whoſe livers are weakly conſti-
tuted; and many uſe the left, in whom that part is ſtrongeſt.
Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iv. c. 5.
2. With hands joined.
Into their inmoſt bow'r
Handed they went. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
HA'NDER. n.ſ.. [from hand.] Tranſmitter; conveyor in ſuc-
ceſſion. -
They would aſſume, with wond’rous art,
Themſelves to be the whole, who are but part,
Of that vaſt frame the church; yet grant they were
The banders down, can they from thence infer
A right tº interpret? Or would they alone, . "
Who brought the preſent, claim it for their own? Dryden:
HA'NDFAst. n.ſ.. [hand and faſt.] Hold; cuſtody. Obſolete.
If that ſhepherd be not in handſoft, let him fly. Shakeſp.
HA'NDFUL. n.ſ.. [hand and full.]
1. As much as the hand can gripe or contain.
In the park I ſaw a country gentleman at the fide of Roſa-
mond's pond, pulling a handful of oats out of his pocket, and
gathering the ducks about him. Freeholder, N°. 44.
2. A palm; a hand's breadth; four inches.
Take one veſſel of ſilver and another of wood, each full
of water, and knap the tongs together about an handful from
the bottom, and the ſound will be more reſounding from the
veſſel of filver than that of wood. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The peaceful ſcabbard where it dwelt,
The rancour of its edge had felt;
For of the lower end two handful
It had devour'd, it was ſo manful:
3. A ſmall number or quantity.
- 1o Y Being
Hudibrar, p. i.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A N
H A N
TTº
Being in poſſeſſion of the town, they had their handful to
defend themſelves from firing. Raleigh's Apology.
* He could not, with ſuch a handful of men, and without
cannon, propoſe reaſonably to fight a battle. larendon.
HAND-G Allop. n.ſ. A ſlow eaſy gallop, in which the hand
preſſes the bridle to hinder increaſe of ſpeed.
º Ovid, with all his ſweetneſs, has as little variety of num-
. bers and ſound as he he is always upon a hand-gallop, and his
- verſe runs upon carpet ground. Dryden.
HAND-gu N. n.ſ. A gun wielded by the hand.
. They have names given them, ſome from ſerpents or rave-
nous birds, as culverines or colubrines; others in other re-
ſpects, as cannons, demicannons, handguns and muſkets. Camd.
HA'Ndic RAF.T. n.f [hand and crºft.] Manual occupation ;
work performed by the hand.
The nurſeries for children of ordinary gentlemen and han-
dicrafts are managed after the ſame manner, Gulliver's Trav.
The cov’nants thou ſhalt teach by candle-light,
When puffing ſmiths, and ev'ry painful trade
Of handicrafts, in peaceful beds are laid. Dryden's juvenal.
Particular members of convents have excellent mechanical
genius's, and divert themſelves with painting, ſculpture, archi-
tecture, gardening, and ſeveral kinds of handicrafts. Addiſon.
HAN Dick A'FT's MAN. n.ſ.. [handicraft and man.] A manufac-
turer; one employed in manual occupation.
O miſerable age! virtue is not regarded in handicraftſmen.
Shakeſpeare's Henry V 1. p. ii.
He has ſimply the beſt wit of any handicraftſman in Athens.
Shakeſpeare's Midſummer Night's Dream.
The principal bulk of the vulgar natives are tillers of the
ground, free ſervants, and handicraftſmen ; as ſmiths, maſons
and carpenters. Bacon, Eſſay 30.
The profaneneſs and ignorance of handicraftſmen, ſmall
traders, ſervants, and the like, are to a degree very hard to be
imagined greater. Swift.
It is the landed man that maintains the merchant and ſhop-
º keeper, and handicraftſman. Swift.
Ha'Ndi ly, adv. [from handy.J. With ſkill; with dexterity.
HA'N DIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from handy.) Readineſs; dexterity.
HA'Ndlwork. m. ſ. [handy and work.] Work of the hand;
product of labour; manufacture.
. In general they are not repugnant unto the natural will of
God, which wifheth to the works of his own hands, in that
they are his own handiwork, all happineſs; although perhaps,
for ſome ſpecial cauſe in our own particular, a contrary deter-
mination have ſeemed more convenient. Hooker, b. v.
As proper men as ever trod upon neats-leather have gone
upon my handiwork. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
ſheweth his handiwºrk. Pſ. xix. 1.
He parted with the greateſt bleſfing of human nature for
the handiwork of a taylor. L’Eſtrange.
HA'NDKERCHIEF. m. ſ. [ hand and Kerchief. J A piece of ſilk
or linen uſed to wipe the face, or cover the neck.
She found her fitting in a chair, in one hand holding a let-
ter, in the other her handkerchief, which had lately drunk up
the tears of her eyes. Sidney, b, ii.
He was torn to pieces with a bear: this avouches the ſhep-
herd's ſon, who has not only his innocence, but a handkerchief
and rings of his, that Paulina knows. Shakespeare Jºinter's Tale.
They did not make uſe of handkerchief, but of the lacinia
or border of the garment, to wipe their face. Arbuthnot.
sº To HA'NDLE. v. a. [handelen, Dutch, from hand.]
1. To touch ; to feel with the hand.
The bodies which we daily handle make us perceive, that
whilſt they remain between them, they hinder the approach of
the parts of our hands that preſs thern. Locke.
2. To manage; to wield.
That fellow handles his bow like a cowkeeper. Shakeſpeare.
3. To make familiar to the hand by frequent touching.
An incurable ſhyneſs is the general vice of the Iriſh horſes,
and is hardly ever ſeen in Flanders, becauſe the hardneſs of the
Winters forces the breeders there to houſe and handle their
colts ſix months every year. Temple.
4. To treat in diſcourſe.
He leſt nothing fitting for the purpoſe
Untouch'd, or ſlightly handled in diſcourſe. Shakespeare. R. III.
I tell thee, I am mad -
In Creſſid's love: thou anſwer'ſt, ſhe is fair;
Pour'ſt in the open ulcer of my heart
Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice,
Thou handleſ in thy diſcourſe. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
- Leaving to the author the cxaćt handling of every parti-
f - cular, and labouring to follow the rules of abridgment. 2 Mac.
Of a number of other like inſtances we ſhall ſpeak more,
when we handle the communication of ſounds. Pacon.
By Guidus Ubaldus, in his treatiſe, for the explica-
- tion of this inſtrument, the ſubtleties of it are largely and
excellently handled. J/ilkins's Dardalus.
In an argument, handled thus briefly, everything cannot be
ſºid. - Atterbury's Sermons, Preface.
5. To deal with ; to praćiſe.
2
They that handle the law know me not. jer. ii. 8.
6. To treat well or ill.
Talbot, my life, my joy, again return'd
How wert thou handled, being priſoner Shakespeare Henry VI.
They were well enough pleaſed to be rid of an enemy that
had handled them ſo ill. Clarendan, b. viii.
7. To practiſe upon; to do with.
Pray you, my lord, give me leave to queſtion; you ſhall ſee
how I'll handle her. Shakeſp. 44%aſ far Meaſure.
HA'NDLE. m. ſ. [panble, Saxon.]
1. That part of anything by which it is held in the hand.
No hand of blood and bone
Can gripe the ſacred handle of our ſceptre,
Unleſs he do prophane, ſteal, or uſurp. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
Fortune turneth the handle of the bottle, which is eaſy to
be taken hold of; and after the belly, which is hard to graſp.
Bacon's Ornam. Ration.
There is nothing but hath a double handle, or at leaſt we
have two hands to apprehend it. , Taylor’s Rule of living hºly.
A carpenter, that had got the iron work of an ax, begged
only ſo much wood as would make a handle to it. L'E/irange.
Of bone the handles of my knives are made,
Yet no ill taſte from thence affects the blade,
Or what I carve; nor is there ever left
Any unfav'ry haut-gouſt from the haft. Dryden's juveral.
A beam there was, on which a beechen pail
Hung by the handle on a driven mail. 12-yden's Fables.
2. That of which uſe is made.
They overturned him in all his intereſts by the ſure but
fatal handle of his own good nature. South's Sermºns.
HA'ND LEss. adj. [hand and left.] Without a hand.
Speak, my Lavinia, what accurſed hand
Hath made thee handleſ 2 Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus.
Płis mangled Myrmidons,
Noſeleſs, handleſs, hackt and clipt, come to him,
Crying on Hector. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Crºſſida.
HA'NDMA. D. m. ſ. A maid that waits at hand.
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France
Stay, let thy humble handmaid ſpeak to thee. Shakespeare Hen. WI.
She gave the knight great thanks in little ſpeech,
And ſaid ſhe would his handmaid poor remain. Fairfax.
I will never ſet politicks againſt ethicks, eſpecially for that
true ethicks are but as a handmaid to divinity and religion. Bac.
Heav'n's youngeſt teamed ſtar
Hath fix’d her poliſh'd car,
Her ſleeping Lord with handmaid lamp attending. Milton,
Love led them on ; and faith, who knew them beſt
Thy handmaids, clad them o'er with purple beams
And azure wings, that up they flew ſo dreſt,
And ſpeak the truth of thee on glorious themes
Before the judge. Milton,
Thoſe of my family their maſter ſlight,
Grown deſpicable in my handmaid’s ſight. Sandji.
By viewing nature, nature's handmaid, art,
Makes mighty things from ſmall beginnings great;
Thus fiſhes firſt to ſhipping did impart,
Their tail the rudder, and their head the prow. Dryden.
Since he had placed his heart upon wiſdom, health, wealth,
vićtory and honour ſhould always wait on her as her hand-
maids. Addiſon's Guardian.
The great maſter will deſcend to hear
The humble ſeries of his handmaid’s care. Prior.
Then criticiſm the muſe's handmaid prov’d,
To dreſs her charms and make her more belov’d. Pºpe.
HA'ND MILL. m. ſ. [ hand and mill. J A mill moved by the
hand.
Oft the drudging aſs is driv'n with toil;
Returning late, and loaden home with gain
Of barter'd pitch, and handmills for the grain. Dryd. Wirg.
HANDs off. A vulgar phraſe for keep off; forbear.
They cut a ſtag into parts; but as they were entering upon
the dividend, hands off, ſays the lion. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
HA'NDSAILs. n.ſ. Sals managed by the hand.
The ſeamen will neither ſtand to their handſails, nor ſuffer
the pilot to ſteer. Temple.
HA'NDSAw. m. ſ. Saw manageable by the hand.
My buckler cut through and through, and my ſword hack'd
like a handſaw. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
To perform this work it is neceſſary to be provided with a
ſtrong knife and a ſmall handſaw. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
HA NDsel. n. ſ. [ hanſel, a firſt gift, Dutch..] The firſt act of
uſing anything; the firſt act of ſale.
The apoſtles term it the pledge of our inheritance, and the
hanſel or earneſt of that which is to come. Hºoker.
Thou art joy's handſel ; heav'n lies flat in thee,
Subječt to ev'ry mounter's bended knee. Herbert.
To HA'NDSEL. v. a. To uſe or do anything the firſt time.
In timorous deer he handſels his young paws,
And leaves the rugged bear for firmer claws. Cowley.
I'd ſhow you
How eaſy 'tis to die, by my example,
And handſºl fate before you. Pryden.
HA'NDSOME.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A N
H A N
HA'NDSOME. adj. [handſåem, Dutch, ready, dexterous. J
1. Ready ; gainly ; convenient.
For a thief it is ſo handſome, as it may ſeem it was firſt
invented for him. Spenſer.
2. Beautiful with dignity; graceful.
A great man entered by force into a peaſant's houſe, and,
finding his wife very handſome, turned the good man out of his
dwelling. . Addiſon's Guardian.
3. Elegant; graceful.
That eaſineſs and handſºme addreſs in writing, which is
hardeſt to be attained by perſons bred in a meaner way, will
be familiar to you. Felton on the Claſſicks.
4. Ample; liberal: as, a handſome fortune.
5. Generous; noble: as, a handſome action.
To HA'NDsoME. v. a. [from the adječtive.] To render ele-
gant or neat.
Him all repute
For his device in handſoming a ſuit;
To judge of lace he hath the beſt conceit. Donne.
HA'NDsoMELY. adv. [from handſome.]
1. Conveniently ; dexterouſly.
Under it he may cleanly convey any fit pillage that cometh
handſomely in his way. Spenſer on Ireland.
Where the kind nymph, changing her faultleſs ſhape,
Becomes unhandſome, handſomely to 'ſcape. J/aller.
2. Beautifully ; gracefully.
3. Elegantly; neatly.
A carpenter, after he hath ſawn down a tree, hath wrought
it handſomely, and made a veſſel thereof.
4. Liberally; generouſly.
I am finding out a convenient place for an alms-houſe,
which I intend to endow very handſomely for a dozen ſuper-
annuated huſbandmen. Addiſon.
HA'NDsom ENESS. n.ſ.. [from handſome. J Beauty; grace;
elegance. -
Accompanying her mourning garments with a doleful coun-
tenance, yet neither forgetting handſomeneſs in her mourning
garments, nor ſweetneſs in her doleful countenance. Sidney.
For handomeneſs ſake, it were good you hang the upper
glaſs upon a nail. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
In cloths, cheap handſomeneſ; doth bear the bell. Herbert.
Perſons of the fairer ſex like that handſomen'ſ for which .
they find themſelves to be the moſt liked. Boyle.
HA'Ndvice. n.ſ. [hand and vice..] A vice to hold ſmall work
1ſl. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
HA'NDwRITING. m.ſ.. [hand and writing.] A caſt or form of
writing peculiar to each hand.
That you beat me at the mart, I have your hand to ſhow;
If the ſkin were parchment, and the blows you gave me ink,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think. Shakespeare
To no other cauſe than the wiſe providence of God can be
referred the diverſity of handwritings. Cockburn.
HA'NDY. adj. [from hand.]
1. Executed or performed by the hand.
Proudly vaunting, that although they were but few, yet
they would eaſily overthrow the great numbers of them, if
ever they came to handy blows. . Knollei's Hiſt. of the Turks.
Both parties now were drawn ſo cloſe,
Almoſt to come to handy blows. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
2. Ready ; dexterous; ſkilful.
She ſtript the ſtalks of all their leaves; the beſt
She cull'd, and them with handy care ſhe dreſt. Dryden.
The ſervants waſh the platter, ſcour the plate;
And each is handy in his way. Dryden.
3. Convenient.
- The ſtrike-block is a plane ſhorter than the jointer, and is
more handy than the long jointer. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
HA'NDY DANDY. n.ſ. A play in which children change hands
and places.
See how yond juſtice rails upon yond ſimple thief! Hark in
thine ear: change places, and, handydandy, which is the juſ-
tice, which is the thief. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Neither croſs and pile, nor ducks and drakes, are quite ſo
ancient as hand, dandy. Arbuthn. and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
To HANG. v. a. preter. and part, paſſ hanged or hung, an-
ciently hong. [panºan, Saxon.]
1. To ſuſpend ; to faſten in ſuch a manner as to be ſuſtained not
below, but above. -
Strangely viſited people he cures;
Hanging a golden ſtamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
His great army is utterly ruined, he himſelf ſlain in it, and
his head and right hand cut off, and hung up before Jeru-
ſalem. South's Sermons.
2. To place without any ſolid ſupport.
Thou all things haſt of nothing made,
That hung'ſ the ſolid earth in fleeting air, -
Vein'd with clear ſprings, which ambient ſeas repair. Sandys.
3. To choak and kill by ſuſpending by the neck, ſo as that the
ligature intercepts the breath and circulation.
He hath commiſſion from thy wife and me
To hang Cordelia in the priſon. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
*
//ſil. xiii. 11.
Hanging ſuppoſes human ſoul and reaſon;
This animal's below committing treaſon:
Shall he be hang'd, who never could rebel?
That's a preferment for Achitophel. Dryden.
Virgil has deſcribed hanging more happily than Homer.
Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
4. To diſplay; to ſhow aloft.
This unlucky mole miſled ſeveral coxcombs; and, like the
hanging out of falſe colours, made ſome of them converſe with
Roſalinda in what they thought the ſpirit of her party. Addison
5. To let fall below the proper ſituation; to decline.
There is a wicked man that hangeth down his head ſadly;
but inwardly he is full of deceit. Eccluſ. xix. 26.
The beauties of this place ſhould mourn;
Th’ immortal fruits and flow’rs at my return
Should hang their wither'd head; for ſure my breath
Is now more pois'nous. Dryden's State of Innocence.
The roſe is fragrant, but it fades in time;
The violet ſweet, but quickly paſt the prime;
White lilies hang their heads, and ſoon decay;
And whiter ſnow in minutes melts away. Dryden.
The cheerful birds no longer fing;
Each drops his head, and hangs his wing. Prior.
6. To fix in ſuch a manner as in ſome directions to be moveable.
The gates and the chambers they renewed, and hanged doors
upon them. I Mac. iv. 57.
7. To adorn by hanging upon.
Hung be the heav'ns with black, yield day to night ! Shakespeare
The pavement ever foul with human gore;
Heads and their mangled members hung the door. Dryden,
8. To furniſh with ornaments or draperies faſtened to the wall.
Muſick is better in chambers wainſcotted than hanged. Bac.
If e'er my pious father for my ſake
Did grateful off’rings on thy altars make,
Or I increas'd them with my filvan toils,
And hung thy holy roofs with ſavage ſpoils,
Give me to ſcatter theſe. . - Dryden’s AEn.
Sir Roger has hung ſeveral parts of his houſe with the tro-
phies of his labours. Addiſon's Spectator.
To HANG. v. n.
1. To be ſuſpended; to be ſupported above, not below.
Over it a fair portcullis hong,
Which to the gate directly did incline,
With comely compaſs and compacture ſtrong Fairy Qāſeen.
2. To depend; to fall looſely on the lower part; to dangle.
A tower full of aſhes had a round inſtrument, which every
ſide hanged down. - 2 Mac. xiii. 5.
Upon her ſhoulders wings ſhe wears -
Like hanging ſleeves, lin'd through with ears. Hudibrar.
If gaming does an aged fire entice,
Then my young maſter ſwiftly learns the vice, }
And ſhakes in hanging ſleeves the little box and dice. Dry.
3. To bend forward. - -
By hanging is only meant a poſture of bending forward to
ſtrike the enemy. - Addiſon.
4. To float; to play.
And fall theſe ſayings from that gentle tongue,
Where civil ſpeech and ſoft perſuaſion hung. Prior.
5. To be ſupported by ſomething raiſed above the ground.
Whatever is placed on the head may be ſaid to hang; as we
call hanging gardens ſuch as are planted on the top of the
houſe. Addison on Italy.
6. To reſt upon by embracing.
She hung about my neck, and kiſs on kiſs
She vied. Shakeſpeare's Taming of the Shrew.
To-day might I, hanging on Hotſpur's neck,
Have talk'd of Monmouth's grave. º Henry IV.
Fauſtina is deſcribed in the form of a lady ſitting upon a
bed, and two little infants hanging about her neck. Peacham.
7. To hover; to impend.
With this ſtrange virtue
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy;
And ſundry bleſfings hang about his throne,
That ſpeak him full of grace. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Odious names of diſtinétion, which had ſlept while the
dread of popery hung over us, were revived. Alterbury's Serm.
8. To be looſely joined.
Whither go you?
To ſee your wife: is ſhe at home?
—Ay, and as idle as ſhe may hang together, for want of com-
pany. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Windſor.
9. To drag; to be incommodiouſly joined.
In my Lucia's abſence .
Life hangs upon me, and becomes a burden. Addiſ Cato.
10. To be compact or united.
In the common cauſe we are all of a piece; we hang toge-
ther. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Your device hangs very well together; but is it not liable to
the ſame exceptions you made to ſuch explications as have
nothing but the writer's imagination to ſupport them? Addiſon.
I 1. To adhere. -
A cheerful temper ſhines out in all her converſation, and
diſſipates
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A N
H A P
diffipates thoſe apprehenſions which hang on the timorous or
the modeſt, when admitted to her preſence. ... Addison.
Shining landſkips, gilded triumphs, and beautiful faces,
diſperſe that gloomineſs which is apt to hang upon the mind in
thoſe dark diſconſolate ſeaſons. Addiſon's Spediator.
12. To reſt. -
Sleep ſhall neither night nor day y -
Hang upon his penthouſe lid. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth,
Two women, the babes hanging at their breaſis, were caſt
headlong from the wall. 2 Mac. vi. 10.
13. To be in ſuſpenſe; to be in a ſtate of uncertainty.
Thy life ſhall hang in doubt before thee, and thou ſhalt fear
day and night, and ſhalt have none aſſurance of thy life. Deut.
14. To be delayed; to linger.
A noble ſtroke he lifted,
Which hung not, but ſo ſwift with tempeſt fell -
On the proud creſt of Satan. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi.
She thrice eſſay’d to ſpeak: her accents hung,
And fault'ring dy'd unfiniſh'd on her tongue. Dryden.
15. To be dependant on.
Oh, how wretched
is that poor man that hangs on princes favours. Shakeſp.
Great queen! whoſe name ſtrikes haughty monarchs pale,
On whoſe juſt ſceptre hangs Europa's ſcale. Prior.
16. To be fixed or ſuſpended with attention.
Though wond'ring ſenates hung on all he ſpoke, , ,
The club muſt hail him maſter of the joke. Pope's Epiſtler.
17. To have a ſteep declivity.
Suſſex marl ſhews itſelf on the middle of the ſides of hang-
ing grounds. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
18. To be executed by the halter.
The court forſakes him, and fir Balaam hangs. Pope.
19. To decline; to tend down.
His neck obliquely o'er his ſhoulders hung,
Preſs'd with the weight of ſleep that tames the ſtrong. Pope.
Ha'NGER. n.ſ.. [from hang.] That by which anything hangs:
as, the pot hangers.
HA'NGER. n.ſ.. [from hang. ) . A ſhort broad ſword.
HA'NG FR-on. n.ſ.. [from hang.] A dependant; one who eats
and drinks without payment.
If the wife or children were abſent, their rooms were ſup-
plied by the umbrae, or hangers-on. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
They all excuſed themſelves ſave two, which two he
reckoned his friends, and all the reſt hangers-on. L’Eſtrange.
He is a perpetual hanger-on, yet nobody knows how to be
without him. Swift.
HA'NGING. m. ſ. [from hang.] Drapery hung or faſtened
againſt the walls of rooms by way of ornament.
A ſtorm, or robbery, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangingſ, nay, my leaves, -
And left me bare to weather. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
Like rich hangings in an homely houſe,
So was his will in his old feeble body. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Being informed that his breakfaſt was ready, he drew
towards the door, where the hangings were held up. Clarendon.
Now purple hangings cloath the palace walls,
And ſumptuous feaſts are made in ſplendid halls. Dryden.
Lucas Van Leyden has infected all Europe with his deſigns
for tapeſtry, which, by the ignorant, are called ancient hang-
ings. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Rome oft has heard a croſs haranguing, -
With prompting prieſt behind the hanging. Prior.
HA'NGING. participial adj. [from hang.]
1. Foreboding death by the halter.
Surely, #. a good favour you have ; but that you have a
hanging look. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
What Ethiops lips he has
How foul a ſnout, and what a hanging face! Dryd. Juven.
2. Requiring to be puniſhed by the halter.
HA'NG MAN. n.ſ.. [hang and man.] The publick executioner.
This monſter ſat like a hangman upon a pair of gallows; in
his right hand he was painted holding a crown of laurel, and
in his left hand a purſe of money. Sidney, b. ii.
One cried, God bleſs us! and amen the other;
As they had ſeen me with theſe hangman's hands:
Liſtening their fear, I could not ſay amen,
When they did ſay God bleſs us. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bowſtring, and the lit-
tle hangman dare not ſhoot at him. Shakespeare.
Who makes that noiſe there 2 Who are you?
—Your friend, ſir, the hangman : you muſt be ſo good, ſir,
to riſe, and be put to death. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſure.
Men do not ſtand
In ſo ill caſe, that God hath with his hand
Sign'd kings blank charters to kill whom they hatc;
Nor are they vicars, but hangmen to fate. Donne.
I never knew a critick, who made it his buſineſs to laſh the
faults of other writers, that was not guilty of greater himſelf;
as the hangman is generally a worſe malefactor than the crimi-
nal that ſuffers by his hand. Addiſon's 1/hig Examiner.
HANK. m. ſ. [ hank, Iſlandick, a chain or coil of rope.]
1. A ſkein of thread,
2. A tyc; a check; an influence. A low word.
Do we think we have the hank that ſome gallants have oa
their truſting merchants, that, upon peril of loſing all former
ſcores, he muſt ſtill go on to ſupply Decay of Piety.
o Ha'NKER. v. n. [hankeren, Dutch. J. To long importu-
nately; to have an inceſlant wiſh. -
And now the ſaints began their reign,
For which th' had yearn'd ſo long in vain,
And felt ſuch bowel hankerings,
To ſee an empire all of kings. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 2.
Among women and children, care is to be taken that they
get not a hankering after theſe juggling aſtrologers and fortune.
tellers. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
The ſhepherd would be a merchant, and the merchant
hankers after ſomething elſe. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Do'ſt thou not hanfer after a greater liberty in ſome things?
If not, there's no better ſign of a good reſolution. Calamy.
The wife is an old coquette, that is always hankering after
the diverſions of the town. Addiſon's Spe:lator.
The republick that fell under the ſubječtion of the duke of
Florence, ſtill retains many hankerings after its ancient li-
berty. Addison on Italy.
HAN't, for has not, or have not.
That roguiſh leer of your's makes a pretty woman's heart
ake: you han’t that ſimper about the mouth for nothing. Addison
HAP. n.ſ.. [anhap, in Welſh, is misfortune J
1. Chance; fortune.
Things caſual do vary, and that which a man doth but
chance to think well of cannot ſtill have the like bap. Hooker.
Whether art it were, or heedleſs hap,
As through the flow'ring foreſt raſh ſhe fled,
In her rude hairs ſweet flowers themſelves did lap,
And flouriſhing freſh leaves and bloſſoms did enwrap. F. Q.
A fox had the hap to fall into the walk of a lion. L'Eſir.
2. That which happens by chance or fortune.
Curſt be good hapí, and curſt be they that build
Their hopes on haps, and do not make deſpair
For all theſe certain blows the ſureſt ſhield. Sidney.
To have ejećted whatſoever that church doth make account
of, without any other crime than that it hath been the hap
thereof to be uſed by the church of Rome, and not to be
commanded in the word of God, might haply have pleaſed
ſome few men, who, having begun ſuch a courſe themſelves,
muſt be glad to ſee their example followed. Hooker, b. iv.
3. Accident; caſual event; misfortune.
Solyman commended them for their valour in their evilhapi,
more than the vićtory of others got by good fortune. Knoll.i.
Nor feared ſhe among the bands to ſtray
Of armed men; for often had ſhe ſeen
The tragick end of many a bloody fray:
Her life had full of haps and hazards been. Fairfax, b.vi.
HAP-HAzARD. m. ſ. Chance; accident.
The former of theſe is the moſt ſure and infallible way; but
ſo hard that all ſhun it, and had rather walk as men do in the
dark by hap-hazard, than tread ſo long and intricate mazes for
knowledge ſake. Hocker, b. i. ſ. 7.
We live at haphazard, and without any infight into cauſes
and effects. L’Eſtrange.
We take our principles at hap-hazard upon truſt, and
without ever having examined them; and then believe a whole
ſyſtem, upon a preſumption that they are true. Locke.
To HAP. v. n. [from the noun.] }. come by accident; to
fall out; to happen.
It will be too late to gather proviſion from abroad, for the
furniſhing of ſhips or ſoldiers, which peradventure may need
to be preſently employed, and whoſe want may hap to hazard
a kingdom. Spenſer on Ireland.
Run you to the citadel,
And tell my lord and lady what hath hap’d. Shakespeare Othello.
In deſtructions by deluge, the remnant which hap to be
reſerved are ignorant people. - Bacon.
HA'PLY. adv. [from hap.]"
1. Perhaps; peradventure; it may be.
This love of theirs myſelf have often ſeen,
Haply when they have judg'd me faſt aſleep. Shakeſpeare.
To warn
Us, haply too ſecure, of our diſcharge
From penalty, becauſe from death releas'd
Some days. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. xi.
Then haply yet your breaſt remains untouch'd,
Though that ſeems ſtrange. Rowe's Rºyal Convert.
Let us now ſee what concluſions may be found for inſtruc-
tion of any other ſtate, that may haply labour under the like
circumſtances. Swift on the Diſſent. in Athens and Rome.
2. By chance; by accident.
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugeſt, that ſwim the ocean ſtream,
Him haply flumb'ring on the Norway foam,
The pilot of ſome ſmall night-founder'd ſkiff
Deeming ſome iſland oft, as ſeamen tell,
With fixed anchor in his ſcaly rind,
Moors by his fide. A4iiton's Paradiſ Lºft, b, i.
HA'PL Ess, a j. [from hap.] Unhappy; unfortunate; luckleſs;
unlucky, I Hapleſ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A R
- H A R
º
.
:
:
.
Hapleſ, AEgeon, whom the fates have mark'd
To bear th’ extremity of dire miſhap !
Here hapleſ; Icarus had found his part,
Had not the father's grief reſtrain'd his art. Dryden's Án.
Did his hapleſ; paſſion equal mine,
I would refuſe the bliſs. Smith's Phaedra and Hippolitus.
To HA(PPEN. v. n. [from hap.]
1. To fall out; to chance; to come to paſs.
Bring forth your ſtrong reaſons, and ſhew us what ſhall
Shakeſpeare.
happen. * , Iſ xl. 22.
Say not I have ſinned, and what harm hath happened unto
me. Eccluſ. v. 4.
If it ſo fall out that thou art miſerable for ever, thou haſt
no reaſon to be ſurprized, as if ſome unexpected thing had
happened to thee. Tillotſon's Sei mons.
2. To light; to fall by chance.
I have happened on ſome other accounts relating to morta-
lities. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
HAPPILY. adv. [from happy.]
1. Fortunately; luckily; ſucceſsfully.
Were ſhe as rough
As are the ſwelling Adriatick ſeas,
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua:
If wealthily, then happily in Padua. Shakespeare.
Preferr'd by conqueſt, happily o'erthrown,
Falling they riſe to be with us made one. JWaller.
Neither is it ſo trivial an undertaking to make a tragedy
end happily; for 'tis more difficult to ſave than kill. Dryden.
2. Addreſsfully; gracefully; without labour.
Form'd by thy converſe, happily to ſteer
From grave to gay, from lively to ſevere. Pope.
3. In a ſtate of felicity: as, he lives happily.
4. By chance; peradventure. In this ſenſe happily is written
erroneouſly for haply.
One thing more I ſhall wiſh you to deſire of them, who
happily may peruſe theſe two treatiſes. Digby.
Ha'PPIN ess. n. ſ. [from happy.]
1. Felicity; ſtate in which the deſires are ſatisfied.
Happineſ, is that eſtate whereby we attain, ſo far as poſſibly
may be attained, the full poſſeſſion of that which ſimply for
itſelf is to be deſired, and containeth in it after an eminent
ſort the contentation of our deſires, the higheſt degree of all
our perfection. Hooker, b. i.
Oh! happineſ of ſweet retir’d content,
To be at once ſecure and innocent. Denham.
The various and contrary choices that men make in the
world, argue that the ſame thing is not good to every man
alike: this variety of purſuits ſhews, that every one does not
place his happineſs in the ſame thing. Locke.
2. Good luck; good fortune.
3. Fortuitous elegance; unſtudied grace.
Certain graces and happin'ſſes, peculiar to every language,
give life and energy to the words. Denham.
Some beauties yet no precepts can declare;
For there's a happineſ, as well as care. Pope on Criticiſm.
HA'PPY. adj. [from hap; as lucky for luck.]
1. In a ſtate of felicity; in a ſtate where the deſire is ſatisfied.
At other end Úran did Strephon lend
Her happy making hand. Sidney.
Am I happy in thy news?
—If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget you happineſs, be happy then ;
For it is done. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Truth and peace, and love, ſhall ever ſhine
About the ſupreme throne
Of him, tº whoſe happy making ſight alone, -
When once our heav'nly guided ſoul ſhall climb. Milton.
Though the preſence of imaginary good cannot make us
happy, the abſence of it may make us miſerable. Addiſon.
2. Lucky; ſucceſsful; fortunate.
Chymiſts have been more happy in finding experiments than
the cauſes of them. Boyle.
Yet in this agony his fancy wrought,
And fear ſupply'd him with this happy thought.
3. Addreſsful; ready.
One gentleman is happy at a reply, and another excels in a
rejoinder. Swift.
HA'Qy Eton. n.ſ. A piece of armour. Spenſer.
HARA'NGUe. n.ſ.. [harangue, French. The original of the
French word is much queſtioned: Menage thinks it a corrup-
tion of hearing, Engliſh ; junius imagines it to be diſcours au
rang, to a circle, which the Italian arringo ſeems to favour.
Perhaps it may be from orare, or orationare, orationer, oraner,
aranger, haranguer.] A ſpeech; a popular oration.
Gray-headed men, and grave, with warriors mix'd,
Aſſemble, and harangues are heard; but ſoon
In factious oppoſition. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xi.
Nothing can better improve political ſchoolboys than the
art of making plauſible or implauſible harangues, againſt the
very opinion for which they reſolve to determine. Swift.
A multitude of preachers negle&amp;t method in their harangues.
Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
Dryden.
To HARA'NGUE. v. n. [haranguer, French. J To make a
ſpeech; to pronounce an oration.
HARA'NGUER. m. ſ. [from harangue.] An orator; a publick
ſpeaker: generally with ſome mixture of contempt.
To HARAss. v. a. [haraſſer, French, from haraſſe, a heavy
buckler, according to Du Cauge.] To weary; to fatigue; to
tire with labour and uneaſineſs. - .
Theſe troops came to the army but the day before, haraſſed
with a long and weariſome march. Bacon's I/ar with Spain.
Our walls are thinly mann'd, our beſt men ſlain;
The reſt, an heartleſs number, ſpent with watching,
And haraſs'd out with duty. Drydºn's Spaniſh Fryar.
Nature oppreſs'd, and haraſ'd out with care,
Sinks down to reſt. Addiſon's Cato.
HA(RAss. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Waſte; diſturbance.
The men of Judah, to prevent
The haraſs of their land, beſet me round. Milton's Agoniſł.
HA'RBINGER. m. ſ. [herberger, Dutch, one who goes to pro-
vide lodgings or an harbour for thoſe that follow.] A fore-
runner; a precurſor.
Make all our trumpets ſpeak, give them all breath,
Thoſe clam’rous harbingers of blood and death. Shakespeare Macbeth.
I'll be myſelf the harbinger, and make joyful
The hearing of my wife with your approach. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Sin, and her ſhadow death, and miſery,
Death's harbinger. Milt. Par. Loft, b. ix. l. 13.
And now of love they treat, 'till th' evening ſtar,
Love's harbinger, appear'd. Milt. Par. Loſt, b. xi.
Before him a great prophet, to proclaim
His coming, is ſent harbinger, who all
Invites. A4ilton's Paradiſe Regain'd, b, i.
As Ormond's harbinger to you they run;
For Venus is the promiſe of the Sun. Dryden.
Hººk. n.ſ, [herberge, French; herberg, Dutch; allerge,
talian.] -
1. A lodging; a place of entertainment.
For harbour at a thouſand doors they knock'd ;
Not one of all the thouſand but was lock'd. Dryd. Fables.
Doubly curs'd
Be all thoſe eaſy fools who give it harbour. Rºwe's j. Shora,
2. A port or haven for ſhipping.
Three of your *.
Are richly come to harbour ſuddenly._Shakespeare Merch. of Wen.
They leave the mouths of Po,
That all the borders of the town o'erflow ;
And ſpreading round in one continu'd lake,
A ſpacious hoſpitable harbour make. Addison on Italy.
3. An aſylum; a ſhelter; a place of ſhelter and ſecurity.
To HA'RBour. v. n. [from the noun..] To receive entertain-
ment; to ſojourn; to take ſhelter.
This night let's harbour here in York. Shakespeare Henry VI.
They are ſent by me,
That they ſhould harbour where their lord would be. Shakespeare
Southwards they bent their flight,
And harbour'd in a hollow rock at night:
Next morn they roſe, and ſet up every ſail;
The wind was fair, but blew a mackrel gale. Dryden,
Let me be grateful; but let far from me
Be fawning cringe, and falſe diſſembling look,
And ſervile flattery, that harbours oft
In courts and gilded roofs. Phillips.
To HA'R Bour. v. a.
1. To entertain; to permit to reſide:
My lady bids me tell you, that though ſhe harbours you as
her uncle, ſhe's nothing allied to your diſorders. Shakeſpeare.
Knaves I know, which in this plainneſs
Harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends,
Than twenty ſilky ducking obſervants,
That ſtretch their duties nicely. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Let not your gentle breaſt harbour one thought
Of outrage from the king. Rowe's Royal Convert.
We owe this old houſe the ſame kind of gratitude that we
do to an old friend who harbours us in his declining condition,
may even in his laſt extremities. Pope.
How people, ſo greatly warmed with a ſenſe of liberty,
ſhould be capable of harbouring ſuch weak ſuperſtition; and
that ſo much bravery and ſo much folly can inhabit the ſame
breaſts. Pope.
2. To ſhelter; to ſecure.
Harbour yourſelf this night in this caſtle, becauſe the time
requires it; and, in truth, this country is very dangerous for
murthering thieves to truſt a ſleeping life among them. Sidney.
HA'Rhour AG.E. n.ſ.. [herbergage, Fr. from harbour. 1 Shelter;
entertainment.
Let in us, your king, whoſe labour'd ſpirits,
Forewearied in this action of ſwift ſpeed,
Crave harbourage within your city walls. Shakeſp. King john.
HA'R BourER. m. ſ. [from harbour, J One that entertains
another.
HAR Bourless. adj. [from harbour.] Without harbour; with-
out lodging; without ſhelter. -
HAR BRough for harbour. Spenſer.
Io Z HARD.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A R
|
HARD. adj. [pearb, Saxon; hard, Dutch j
1. Firm; reſiſting penetration or ſeparation; not ſoft ; not eaſy
to be pierced or broken.
Repoſe you there, while I to the hard houſe,
More hard than is the ſtone whereof 'tis rais'd;
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. Difficult; not eaſy to the intelle&amp;t. -
Some diſeaſes, when they are eaſy to be cured, are hard to
be known. Sidney, b. ii.
The hard cauſes they brought unto Moſes; but every ſmall
matter they judged themſelves. Ex. xviii. 26.
When hard words, jealouſies, and fears,
Set folks together by the ears.
'Tis hard to ſay if Clymene were mov’d
More by his pray’r, whom ſhe ſo dearly lov’d,
Or more with fury fir’d. ' Dryden.
As for the hard words, which I was obliged to uſe, they are
either terms of art, or ſuch as I ſubſtituted in place of others
that were too low. Arbuthnot.
3. Difficult of accompliſhment; full of difficulties.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Gen. xviii. 14.
Poſſeſs
As lords a ſpacious world, t'our native heav'n
Little inferior, by my adventure hard
With peril great atchiev'd. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. x.
Long is the way
And hard, that out of hell leads up to light:
Our priſon ſtrong. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
He now diſcerned he was wholly to be on the defenſive,
and that was like to be a very hard part too. Clarendon, b. viii.
Nervous and tendinous parts have worſe ſymptoms, and
are harder of cure, than fleſhy ones. JWiſeman on Inflammation.
The love and pious duty which you pay,
Have paſs'd the perils of ſo hard a way.
4. Painful; diſtreſsful; laborious.
Rachael travelled, and ſhe had hard labour. Gen. xxxv. 16.
Worceſter's horſe came but to-day;
And now their pride and mettle is aſleep,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
That not a horſe is half of himſelf. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Continual hard duty, with little fighting, leſſened and di-
miniſhed his army. Clarendan, b. viii.
When Sebaſtian weeps, his tears
Come harder than his blood. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
A man obliged to hard labour is not reduced to the neceſſity
of having twice as much vićtuals as one under no neceſſity to
work. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
. Cruel; oppreſſive; rigorous.
The bargain of Julius III. may be accounted a very hard
one. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. iii. c. 23.
Whom ſcarce my ſheep, and ſcarce my painful plough, {
Hudibras, p. i.
Dryden's AEn.
5
The needful aids of human life allow ;
So wretched is thy ſon, ſo hard a mother thou. Dryden.
If you thought that hard upon you, we would not refuſe
you half your time. Dryden's jnven. Dedication.
It will be a loſs to all thoſe, who have their eſtates in money,
of one third of their eſtates; which will be a very hard caſe
upon a great number of people. Locke.
No people live with more eaſe and proſperity than the ſub-
jećts of little commonwealths; as, on the contrary, there are
none who ſuffer more under the grievances of a hard govern-
ment than the ſubjećts of little principalities. Addison.
Rough ungovernable paſſions hurry men on to ſay or do
very hard or offenſive things. Atterbury's Sermons.
To find a bill that may bring puniſhment upon the inno-
cent, will appear very hard. Swift.
6. Sower; rough; ſevere.
What, have you given him any hard words of late? Shakespeare
7. Unfavourable; unkind.
As thou lov'ſt me, do him not that wrong,
To bear a hard opinion of his truth. Shakeſpeare.
Abſalom and Achitophel he thinks is a little hard on his
fanatick patrons. Dryden's Fables, Preface.
Some hard rumours have been tranſmitted from t'other ſide
the water, and rumours of the ſevereſt kind. Swift.
8. Inſenſible; untouched.
If I by chance ſucceed
In what I write, and that's a chance indeed,
Know I am not ſo ſtupid, or ſo hard,
Not to feel praiſe, or ſame's deſerv'd reward. Dryd Perſ
9. Unhappy ; vexatious.
It is a very hard quality upon our ſoil or climate, that ſo
excellent a fruit, which proſpers among all our neighbours,
will not grow here. Temple.
Io. Vehement; keen; ſevere: as, a hard Winter.
: 1. Unreaſonable; unjuſt.
It is a little hard, that in an affair of the laſt conſequence to
the very being of the clergy, this whole reverend body
ſhould be the ſole perſons not conſulted. Swift.
It is the hardy! caſe in the world, that Steele ſhould take
up the reports of his faction, and put them off as additional
fears. * Swyi.
12. Forced; not eaſily granted.
If we allow the firſt couple, at the end of one hundred
years, to have left ten pair of breeders, which is no hard ſup-
poſition; there would ariſe from theſe, in fifteen hundred
years, a greater number than the earth was capable of. Burnet.
13. Powerful.
The ſtag was too hard for the horſe, and the horſe flies for
ſuccour to one that's too hard for him, and rides the one to
death, and outright kills the other. 1.’ f/irange's Faſtles.
Let them conſider the vexation they are treaſuring up for
themſelves, by ſtruggling with a power which will be always
too hard for them. Addison's Freeholder.
A diſputant, when he finds that his adverſary is too hard
for him, with ſlyneſs turns the diſcourſe. J/atts.
14. Auſtere; rough, as liquids.
In making of vinegar, ſet veſſels of wine over againſt the
noon ſun, which calleth out the more oily ſpirits, and leaveth
the ſpirit more ſour and hard. Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
15. Harſh; ſtiff; conſtrained.
Others, ſcrupulouſly tied to the practice of the ancients,
make their figures harder than even the marble itſelf. Dryden.
His dićtion is hard, his figures too bold, and his tropes,
particularly his metaphors, inſufferably ſtrained. Dryden.
16. Not plentiful; not proſperous.
You have got a famous vićtory: there are bonfires decreed;
and, if the times had not been bard, my billet ſhould have
burnt too. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
17. Avaricious; faultily ſparing.
HARD., adv. [hardo, very old German.]
1. Cloſe; near.
Hard by was a houſe of pleaſure, built for a Summer re-
tiring place. Sidney.
They doubted a while what it ſhould be, ’till it was caſt up
even hard before them; at which time they fully ſaw it was a
Inan. Sidney.
- A little lowly hermitage it was,
Down in a dale hard by a foreſt's ſide,
Far from reſort of people that did paſs
In travel to and fro. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Scarce had he ſaid, when hard at hand they ſpie
That quickſand nigh, with water covered. Fairy Queen,
When theſe marſhal the way, hard at hand comes the
maſter and main exerciſe. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
Abimeleck went hard unto the door of the tower, to burn
it with fire. judg. ix. 52.
Hard by a cottage chimney ſmokes,
From betwixt two aged oaks. Al/ilton.
2. Diligently; laboriouſly; inceſſantly; vehemently; ear-
neſtly ; importunately.
Geneura roſe in his defence,
And pray'd ſo hard for mercy from the prince,
That to his queen the king th' offender gave. Dryden,
An ant works as hard as a man who ſhould carry a very
heavy load every day four leagues. Addiſon's Guardian.
Whoever my unknown correſpondent be, he preſſes hard
for an anſwer, and is earneſt in that point. Atterbury.
3. Uneaſily; vexatiouſly. -
When a man's ſervant ſhall play the cur with him, look
you it goes hard. Shakespeare Two Gentlemen ºf Perona.
4. Vehemently; diſtreſsfully.
The queſtion is hard ſet, and we have reaſon to doubt. Bro.
A ſtag, that was hard ſet by the huntſmen, betook himſelf
to a ſtall for ſanétuary. L'A/ºrange.
5. Faſt; nimbly.
The Philiſtines followed hard upon Saul. 2 Sa. xxxi. 2.
The wolves ſcampered away as hard as they could drive.
L'Eſtrange's Fables.
6. With difficulty; in a manner requiring labour. -
Solid bodies foreſhow rain, as boxes and pegs of wood
when they draw and wind hard. Bacon's Natural Hijiory.
7. Tempeſtuouſly; boiſterouſly.
When the North wind blows hard, and it rains ſadly, none
but fools ſit down in it and cry; wiſe people defend themſelves
againſt it. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
HAR D Bou ND. adj. [hard and bound.] Coſtive.
Juſt writes to make his barrenneſs appear, .
And ſtrains from hardhound brains eight lines a year. Pope.
To HA'RDEN. v. m. [from hard.] To grow hard.
The powder of loadſtone and flint, by the addition of whites
of eggs and gum-dragon, made into paſte, will in a few days
harden to the hardneſs of a ſtone. Bacon’s Natural Hiſtory.
To HA'RD EN. v. a. [from hard.]
1. To make hard; to indurate.
Sure he, who firſt the paſſage try’d,
In harden'd oak his heart did hide, }
And ribs of iron arm'd his fide,
Who tempted firſt the briny flood. Dryden.
A piece of the hardened marl. Wººdward on Fºſſils.
2. To confirm in effrontery; to make impudent.
3. To confirm in wickedneſs; to make obdurate.
But
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A R
H A R
4. To make inſenſible; to ſtupify.
Put exhort one another daily, leſt any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulneſs of ſin. - Hebr. iii. 13.
He ſtiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning
unto the Lord. 2 Chro. xxxvi. 13.
It is a melancholy conſideration, that there ſhould be ſeveral
among us ſo hardened and deluded as to think an oath a proper
ſubječt for a jeſt. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Our religion ſets before us not the example of a ſtupid
ſtoick, who had by obſtinate principles hardened himſelf
againſt all ſenſe of pain; but an example of a man like our-
ſelves, that had a tender ſenſe of the leaſt ſuffering, and yet
patiently endured the greateſt. Tillotſºn's Sermons.
Years have not yet hardened me, and I have an addition of
weight on my ſpirits ſince we loſt him. Swift to Pope.
5. To make firm ; to endue with conſtancy.
Then ſhould I yet have comfort 2 yea, I would harden my-
ſelf in ſorrow. job vi. c.
One raiſes the ſoul, and hardens it to virtue; the other
ſoftens it again, and unbends it into vice. Dryden.
HA'RD ENER. m. ſ. [from harden.] One that makes anything
hard.
HARDFA'you RED. adj. [hard and favour.] Coarſe of feature;
harſh of countenance.
When the blaſt of war blows in your ears, w
Stiffen the finews, ſummon up the blood,
Diſguiſe fair nature with hardfavour'd looks,
Then lend the eye a terrible aſpect. Shakespeare. Henry V.
The brother a very lovely youth, and the fiſter hard-
favoured. L’Eſtrange.
When Vulcan came into the world he was ſo hardfavoured
that both his parents frowned on him. Dryden.
HARDHA'NDED. adj. [hard and hand.] Coarſe; mechanick;
one that has hands hard with labour.
What are they that do play it?
—Hardhanded men that work in Athens here,
Which never labour'd in their minds’till now. Shakeſpeare.
HA'RD HEAD. m.ſ. ſhard and head.] Claſh of heads; manner
of fighting in which the combatants daſh their heads toge-
ther.
I have been at hardhead with your butting citizens; I have
routed your herd, I have diſperſt them. Dryden's Span. Fryar.
HARDHEARTE D. adj. [hard and heart.] Cruel; inexorable;
mercileſs; pitileſs; barbarous; inhuman; ſavage; uncom-
paſſionate.
Hardhearted Clifford, take me from the world;
My ſoul to heav'n. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
Can you be ſo hardhearted to deſtroy
My ripening hopes, that are ſo near to joy Dryden.
John Bull, otherwiſe a good-natured man, was very hard-
hearted to his ſiſter Peg. Arbuthnot's Hiſ of john Bull.
HARDHEARTEDNEss. n.ſ.. [from hardhearted.] Cruelty; want
of tenderneſs; want of compaſſion.
Hardheartedneſ; and cruelty is not only an inhuman vice,
but worſe than brutal. L’Eſtrange.
How black and baſe a vice ingratitude is, may be ſeen in
thoſe vices which it is always in combination with, pride and
hardheartedneſs, or want of compaſſion. South's Sermons.
Hardheartedneſs is an eſſential in the character of a liber-
tine. Clariſſa.
HA'RDIHEAD. }". [from hardy..] Stoutneſs; bravery. Ob-
HA'RDIHooD. ſ. ſolete.
... Enflam'd with fury and fierce hardyhead,
He ſeem'd in heart to harbour thoughts unkind,
And nouriſh bloody vengeance in his bitter mind. Fa. Qu.
If you have this about you,
Boldly aſſault the necromancer's hall,
Where if he be, with dauntleſs hardihood. Milton.
HARD IMENT, n.ſ. [ from hard, hardiment, adv. French.]
Courage; ſtoutneſs; bravery.
But full of fire and greedy hardiment,
The youthful knight could not for aught be ſaid. Fa. Qu.
On the gentle Severn's ſedgy bank,
In ſingle oppoſition, hand to hand, *
He did confound the beſt part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower. Shakespeare H. Iv.
Zeal was the ſpring whence flowed her hardiment. Fairf.
HARDIS Ess. n.ſ.. [ha diffe, French, from hardy J
1. Hardſhip; fatigue.
They are valiant and hardy; great endurers of cold, hun-
ger, and all hardineſs. º Spenſer.
2. Stoutneſs; courage; bravery.
If with thrice ſuch powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let us be worried; and our nation loſe
The name of hardingſ, and policy. Shakespeare Henry V.
Perkin had gathered together a power of all nations, neither
in number nor in the hardingſ, and courage of their perſons
contemptible, Bacon's Henry VII.
He has the courage of a rational creature, and ſuch an har-
dinºſ, we ſhould endeavour by cuſtom and uſe to bring children
to. Locke.
t
Criminal as you are, you avenge yourſelf againſt the ºrdi-
meſ of one that ſhould tell you of it. Specia; r.
3. Effrontery; confidence.
HAR DLA'bo URED. adj. [hard and labour.] Elaborate; ſtudied;
diligently wrought. -
How chearfully the hawkers cry t
A ſatire, and the gentry buy
While my hard abour’d poem pines, -
Unfold upon the printer's lines. Swift.
HA'RDLY. adv. [from hard.]
1. With difficulty; not eaſily. -
For the moſt part it ſo falleth out, touching things which
generally are received, that although in themſelves they be
moſt certain, yet, becauſe men preſume them granted of all,
we are hardieſ able to bring ſuch proof of their certainty as
may ſatisfy gainſayers, when ſuddenly and beſides expectation
they require the ſame at our hands. Hooker, b. v. f. 2.
There are but a few, and they endued with great ripeneſs
of wit and judgment, free from all ſuch affairs as might trou-
ble their meditations, inſtructed in the ſharpeſt and ſubtleſt
points of learning; who have, and that very hardy, been
able to find out but only the immortality of the ſoul. Hooker.
God hath delivered a law as ſharp as the two-edged ſword,
piercing the very cloſeſt and moſt unſearchable corners of the
heart, which the law of nature can hardly, human laws by no
means, poſſibly reach unto. Hooker, b. i.
There are in living creatures parts that nouriſh and repair
eaſily, and parts that nouriſh and repair hardly. Bacon.
The barks of thoſe trees are more cloſe and ſoft than thoſe
of oaks and aſhes, whereby the moſs can the hardlier iſſue
Out. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Falſe confidence is eaſily taken up, and hardly laid
down. South's Sermons.
The father, mother, daughter they invite;
Hardly the dame was drawn to this repaſt. Dryden:
Recov’ring hardly what he loſt before,
His right endears it much, his purchaſe more. Dryden.
2. Scarcely; ſcant; not lightly.
The fiſh that once was caught, new bait will hardly bite.
Fairy &amp;een, b. ii. cant. I.
They are worn, lord conſul, ſo -
That we ſhall hardly in our ages ſee -
Their banners wave again. Shałºffeare's Coriolarus.
Hardly ſhall you find any one ſo bad, but he deſires the
credit of being thought good. South's Sermons.
The wand'ring breath was on the wing to part, ,
Weak was the pulſe, and hardly heav'd the heart. Dryden.
There is hardly a gentleman in the nation who hath not a
near alliance with ſome of that body. - Swift.
3. Grudgingly; as an injury. -
If I unwittingly
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
By any in this preſence, I deſire
To reconcile me.
4. Severely ; unfavourably. -,
If there are ſome reaſons inducing you to think hard-
ly of our laws, are thoſe reaſons demonſtrative, are they
neceſſary, or meer poſſibilities only Hooker, Preface.
5. Rigorouſly; oppreſſively. -
Many men believed that he was hardly dealt with. Clarend.
They are now in priſon, and treated hardly enough ; for
there are fifteen dead within two years. Addison on Italy.
They have begun to ſay, and to fetch inſtances, where he
has in many things been hardy uſed. Swift.
6. Unwelcomely; harſhly.
Such information, even from thoſe who have authority over
them, comes very hardly and harſhly to a grown man ; and,
however ſoftened, goes but ill down. . ... Locke.
7. Not ſoftly; not tenderly; not delicately. '
Heav'n was her canopy, bare earth her bed;
So hardly lodg’d. Dryden.
HA'RDMouth E.D. adj. [hard and mouth.] Diſobedient to the
rein; not ſenſible of the bit. º
'Tis time my hardmºuth'd courſers to controul,
Apt to run riot, and trangreſs the goal, -
And therefore I conclude. Dryden's Falks.
But who can youth, let looſe to vice, reſtrain? -
When once the hardmouth'd horſe has got the rein,
He's paſt thy pow'r to ſtop. Dryden's juvenal.
HA'RDNEss. n.ſ.. [from hard.]
1. Durity; power of reſiſtance in bodies.
Hardnji is a firm coheſion of the parts of matter that make
up maſſes of a ſenſible bulk, ſo that the whole does not ea-
ſily change its figure. Locke.
From the various combinations of theſe corpuſcles happen
all the varieties of the bodies formed out of them, in colour,
taſte, ſmell, hardneſs, and ſpecifick gravity. J/oodward.
2. Difficulty to be underſtood. -
I found
This label on my boſom, whoſe containing
Is ſo from ſenſe in hardneſs, that I can
Make no colle&amp;tion of it. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
3. Difficulty
w
Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A R
H A R
|
3. Difficulty to be accompliſhed.
It was time now or never to ſharpen my intention to pierce
through the hardneſs of this enterprize. Sidney.
Concerning the duty itſelf, the hardneſ, thereof is not ſuch
as needeth much art. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 31.
4. Scarcity; penury.
The tenants poor, the hardneſs of the times,
Are ill excuſes for a ſervant's crimes. Swift.
5. Obduracy; profligateneſs.
Every commiſſion of fin introduces unto the ſoul a certain
degree of hardneſs, and an aptneſs to continue in that fin.
South's Sermons.
6. Coarſeneſs; harſhneſs of look: -
By their virtuous behaviour they compenſate the hardneſ of
their favour, and by the pulchritude of their ſouls make up
what is wanting in the beauty of their bodies. Ray.
7. Keenneſs; vehemence of weather or ſeaſons.
If the hardneſ of the Winter ſhould ſpoil them, neither the
loſs of ſeed nor labour will be much. Mortimers Husbandry.
8. Cruelty of temper; ſavageneſs; harſhneſs; barbarity.
We will aſk,
That if we fail in our requeſt, the blame
May hang upon your hardneſs. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
They quicken ſloth, perplexities unty,
Make roughneſs ſmooth, and hardneſs mollify. Denham.
9. Stiffneſs; harſhneſs.
Sculptors are obliged to follow the manners of the painters,
and to make many ample folds, which are inſufferable hard-
neſſes, and more like a rock than a natural garment. Dryden.
10. Faulty parſimony; ſtingineſs.
A'RDock. n.ſ. I ſuppoſe the ſame with burdock.
Why he was met ev'n now,
Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers. Shakeſp.
HARDs. m. ſ. The refuſe or coarſer part of flax.
HA'RDSHIP. m. ſ. [from hard.]
I. Injury; oppreſſion.
#. are ripe for a peace, to enjoy what we have con-
quered for them; and ſo are we, to recover, the effects of their
hardſhips upon us. Swift.
2. Inconvenience; fatigue.
They were expoſed to hardſhip and penury. Sprat's Serm.
You could not undergo the toils of war,
Nor bear the hardſhips that your leaders bore. Addison Cato.
... In journeys or at home, in war or peace,
By hardſhips º: many fall by eaſe. Prior.
HA'RDw ARE. m. ſ. ſhard and ware.] Manufactures of metal.
HA'R Dw AR EMAN. m. ſ. [ hardware and man.] A maker or
ſeller of metalline manufactures. -
One William Wood, an hardwareman, obtains by fraud a
patent in England to coin 108,000 l. in copper to paſs in
Ireland, º; us liberty to take or refuſe. Swift.
HA'RDY. adj. [hardi, French.]
1. Bold; brave; ſtout; daring.
Try the imagination of ſome in cock-fights, to make one
cock more hardy, and the other more cowardly. Bacon.
- Recite
The feats of Amazons, the fatal fight }
Betwixt the hardy queen and hero knight. Dryd. Fables.
Who is there hurdy enough to contend with the reproach
which is prepared for thoſe, who dare venture to diſſent frem
the received opinions of their country? Locke.
Could thirſt of vengeance, and deſire of fame,
Excite the female breaſt with martial flame *
And ſhall not love's diviner pow'r inſpire
More hardy virtue, and more gen’rous fire : Prior:
2. Strong; hard; firm.
Is a man confident of his preſent ſtrength An unwhol-
ſome blaſt may ſhake in pieces his hardy fabrick. South.
3. Confident; firm.
HARE and HERE, differing in pronunciation only, ſignify both
an army and a lord. So Harold is a general of an army;
Hareman, a chief man in the army; Herwin, a vićtorious
army; which are much like Stratocles, Polemarchus, and Hege-
fiſtratus among the Greeks. Gibſºn's Camden.
HARE. m. ſ. [ pana, Saxon; Karh, Erſe.]
1. A ſmall quadruped, with long ears and ſhort tail, that moves
by leaps, remarkable for timidity, vigilance, and fecundity;
the common game of hunters.
Diſmay’d not this
Our captains Macbeth and Banquo?
—Yes,
As ſparrows, eagles; or the bare, the lion. Shakeſp. Macb.
We view in the open champaign a brace of ſwift grey-
hounds courſing a good ſtout and well breathed hare. More.
Your dreſſings muſt be with Galen's powder and hare's fur.
- Wiſeman's Surgery.
Poor is the triumph o'er the timid hare. Thomſ. Autumn.
2. A conſtellation.
The hare appears, whoſe active rays ſupply
A nimble force, and hardly wings deny. Creech.
5
To HaRE. v. n. ſharier, French.] To fright; to hurry with
terrour.
To hare and rate them, is not to teach but vex them. Locłe.
HA'REBELL. m. ſ. ſhare and bell.] A blue flower campaniform.
Thou ſhalt not lack
The flow'r that's like thy face, pale primroſe; nor
. The azur'd harebell, like thy veins. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
HA’RE BRAIN ED. adj. [from hare the verb and brain..] Volatile;
unſettled; wild; fluttering; hurried.
That harebrained wild fellow begins to play the fool, when
others are weary of it. . . . Bacon's Henry VII.
HA'REFoot, n.ſ.. [hare and foot.]
1. A bird. Ainſworth.
2. An herb. - Ainſwºrth.
HA'RELIP. m. ſ. A fiſſure in the upper lip with want of ſub-
ſtance, a natural defe&amp;t. 3:ing.
The blots of nature's hand
Shall not in their iſſue ſtand;
Never mole, harelip, nor ſcar,
Shall upon their children be. Shakespeare Midſ. Night's Dream.
The third ſtitch is performed with pins or needles, as in
barelips. Wiſeman's Surgery.
HA’RE sea R. m. ſ. [bupleurum, Latin.] A plant.
The chara&amp;ters are: the leaves grow alternately upon the
branches, and for the moſt part ſurround the ſtalk, having no
footſtalk: the ſeeds are oblong, ſmooth, and furrowed. Miller.
HA'RIER. m.ſ. [from hare.] . A dog for hunting hares. Ainſw.
To HARK. v. n. [Contračted from hearken.] To liſten.
The king,
To me inveterate, harks my brother's ſuit. Shakeſpeare.
Pricking up his ears, to hark
If he could hear too in the dark. Hudibras, p. iii.
HARK. interj. [It is originally the imperative of the verb hark.]
Liſt I hear ! liſten |
What harmony is this My good friends, hark / Shafeſ.
The butcher ſaw him upon the gallop with a piece of fleſh,
and called out, hark ye, friend, you may make the beſt of
your purchaſe. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Hark! methinks the roar that late purſu'd me,
Sinks like the murmurs of a falling wind. Rowe's ja. Shore.
Hark how loud the woods
Invite you forth !
HAR L. n.ſ.
1. The filaments of flax.
2. Any filamentous ſubſtance.
The general ſort are wicker hives, made of privet, willow,
or harl, daubed with cow-dung. AMortimer's Husbandry.
HA'RLEQUIN... n.ſ. [This name is ſaid to have been given by
Francis of France to a buſy buffoon, in ridicule of his enemy
Charles le quint. Menage derives it more probably from a
famous comedian that frequented M. Haray's houſe, whom
his friends called Harlequino, little Harley. Trev.] A buf-
foon who plays tricks to divert the populace; a Jack-pudding;
2 Zani.
The joy of a king for a vićtory muſt not be like that of
a harlequin upon a letter from his miſtreſs. Dryden.
The man in graver tragick known,
Though his beſt part long ſince was done,
Still on the ſtage deſires to tarry;
And he who play'd the harlequin,
After the jeſt ſtill loads the ſcene, -
Unwilling to retire, though weary. Prior.
HA'RLOT. n.ſ.. [herlodes, Welſh, a girl. Others for bare-
let, a little whore. Others from the name of the mother of
William the Conqueror. Hurlet is uſed in Chaucer for a low
male drudge.j º whore; a ſtrumpet.
Away, my diſpoſition, and peſſeſs me with
Some harlot's ſpirit. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
They help thee by ſuch aids as geeſe and harſals. Ben.johnſ.
The barbarous harlots crowd the publick place;
Go, fools, and purchaſe an unclean embrace. Dryd.juven.
HA'RLotRY. m. ſ. [from harlet.]
1. The trade of a harlot; fornication.
Nor ſhall,
From Rome's tribunal, thy harangues prevail
'Gainſt harlotry, while thou art clad ſo thin. Dryd. Juven.
2. A name of contempt for a woman.
A peeviſh ſelf-will'd harlotry,
That no perſuaſion can do good upon. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
HARM. m. ſ. [peanm, Saxon.]
1. Injury; crime; wickedneſs.
2. Miſchief; detriment; hurt.
We, ignorant of ourſelves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wiſe powers
Deny us for our good. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleºpatra.
They ſhould be ſuffered to write on : it would keep them
out of harms way, and prevent them from evil courſes. Swift.
To HARM. v. a. To hurt; to injure.
What ſenſe had I of her ſtol’n hours or luſt 2
I ſaw’t not, thought it not, it harm'd not me. Shakespeare Othele.
Paſſions ne'er could grow
To harm another, or impeach your reſt. J/aller.
After
Thºmſºn's Spring.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A R
H A R
.
*
After their young are hatched, they brood them under their
wings, left the cold, and ſometimes the heat, ſhould harm
thcm. Ray on the Creation.
HA'RMFUL. adj. [ harm and full. J Hurtful; miſchievous;
noxious; injurious; detrimental.
His dearly loved ſquire
His ſpear of heben-wood behind him bare,
Whoſe harmful head, thrice heated in the fire,
Had riven many a breaſt with pike-head ſquare. Fa. 9teen.
Let no man fear that harmful creature leſs, becauſe he ſees
the apoſtle ſafe from that poiſon. Hall.
The earth brought forth fruit and food for man, with-
out any mixture of harmful quality. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
For flax and oats will burn the tender field,
And ſleepy poppies harmful harveſts yield. Dryden's Georg.
HARM FULLY. adv. [from harmful..] Hurtfully; noxiouſly;
detrimentally.
A ſcholar is better occupied in playing or ſleeping, than
ſpending his time not only vainly, but harmful y in ſuch kind
of exerciſe. Aſtham's Schoolmaſter.
HA'RMFULNES5. m. ſ. ſ from harmful. J Hurtfulneſs; miſ-
chievouſneſs; noxiouſneſs.
HA'RMLEss. adj. [from harm.]
1. Innocent; innoxious ; not hurtful.
Touching ceremonies harmleſ; in themſelves, and hurtful
only in reſpect of number, was it amiſs to decree that thoſe
things that were leaſt needful, and newlieſt come, ſhould be
the firſt that were taken away ? Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
She, like harm'ſ lightning, throws her eye
On him, her brothers, me, her maſter; hitting
Each obječt with a joy. Shakespeare's Cymbeline.
2. Unhurt; undamaged.
The ſhipwright will be careful to gain by his labour, or at
leaſt to ſave himſelf harmleſs, and therefore ſuit his work
ſlightly, according to a ſlight price. Raleigh's Eſſays.
HA'RMLEssLY. adv. [from harmleſ...] Innocently; without
hurt; without crime.
He ſpent that day free from worldly trouble, harmleſly,
and in a recreation that became a churchman. Walton.
Bullets batter the walls which ſtand inflexible, but fall harm-
leſ; y into wood or feathers. Decay of Piety.
HA'RMLEssN Ess. n.ſ.. [from harmleſ...] Innocence; freedom
from injury or hurt.
When, through taſteleſs flat humility,
In dough-bak'd men ſome harmleſſneſ; we ſee, {
'Tis but his phlegm that's virtuous, and not he. Donne.
Compare the harmleſſneſs, the credulity, the tenderneſs, the
modeſty, and the ingenuous pliableneſs to virtuous counſels,
which is in youth untainted, with the miſchievouſneſs, the
ſlyneſs, the craft, the impudence, the falſhood, and the con-
firmed obſtinacy in an aged long-practiſed ſinner. South.
HA'RMonic Al. adj. [&amp;tºoyºzº; ; harmonique, French..] Pro-
HA'R Mon Ick. } portioned to each other; adapted to each
other; concordant; muſical.
After every three whole notes, nature requireth, for all har-
monical uſe, one half note to be interpoſed. Bacon’s N. Hiſt:
Harmonical ſounds, and diſcordant ſounds, are both active
and poſitive; but blackneſs and darkneſs are, indeed, but pri-
vatives. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
So ſwells each wind-pipe; aſs intones to aſs,
Harmonick twang of leather, horn, and braſs. Pope.
HARMo'Nious. adj. [harmonieux, French, from harmony J
1. Adapted to each other; having the parts proportioned to each
other.
All the wide-extended ſky,
And all th’ harmonius worlds on high, }
And Virgil's ſacred work ſhall dye. Cowley.
God has made the intelle&amp;tual world harmonious and beauti-
ful without us; but it will never come into our heads all at
once; we muſt bring it home piece-rfieal. Locke.
2. Having ſounds concordant to each other; muſical.
Harmony in wedded pair,
More grateful than harmonious ſounds to th’ ear. Milton.
The verſe of Chaucer is not harmonious to us: they who
lived with him, and ſome time after him, thought it muſical.
Dryden's Fables, Prºface.
HA'Rºtos Iously. cd.v. [from harmonious.]
1. With juſt adaptation and proportion of parts to each other.
Not chaos-like, together cruſh'd and bruis’d ;
But as the world, harmoniouſly confus'd :
Where order in variety we ſee,
And where, though all things differ, they agree. Pope.
That all theſe dittances, motions, and quantities of matter
{hould be ſo accurately and haſ mºniouſly adjuſted in this great
variety of our ſyſtem, is above the fortuitous hits of blind
naterial cauſes, and muſt certainly flow from that eternal
fountain of wiſdom. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Muſically ; with concord of ſounds.
If we look upon the world as a muſical inſtrument, well-
tuned, and harmoniouſly ſtruck, we ought not therefore to
worſhip the inſtrument, but him that makes the muſick.
Stillingfleet's Def of Diſc. on Rom, Idol.
HARMo'NIoussess. n. / [f -
** *- J - - - - - - rom harmonious. Proportion :
muſicalneſs. 1 P In 3
o HA'RMonize. v. a. [from harmony.] To adjuſt in fit pro-
Portions ; to make muſical.
ove firſt invented verſe, and form'd the rhime,
The motion meaſur'd, harmoniz'd the chime. Dryden. .
HARMONY. n.ſ. [3&amp;ovia ; harmonie, French. J
1. The juſt adaptation of one part to another.
. The pleaſures of the eye and ear are but the effects of equa-
lity, good Proportion, or correſpondence; ſo that equality
and correſpondence are the cauſes of harmony. Bacon.
The harmony of things,
As well as that of ſounds, from diſcord ſprings. Denham.
Sure infinite wiſdom muſt accompliſh all its works with con-
ſummate harmony, proportion, and regularity. Cheyne.
2. Juſt Proportion of ſound; muſical concord.
Harmony is a compound idea, made up of different ſounds
united. J/atts's Logick.
3. Concord; correſpondent ſentiment.
In us both one ſoul,
Barmºny to behold in wedded pair!
More grateful than harmonious ſounds to th' ear. Men.
I no ſooner in my heart divin'd,
My heart, which by a ſecret harmºny
Still moves with thine, join'd in connexion ſweet! Milton,
HARNESS. hiſ ſharnois, French, ſuppoſed from irn or
hiern, Runnick; hiairn, Welſh and Erſe, iron.]
I. Armour; defenſive furniture of war.
A goodly knight, all dreſs'd in harneſ, meet,
That from his head no place appeared to his feet. F. Queen.
Doff thy harneſs, youth:
I am to-day i' th' vein of chivalry. Shakeſp. Trail, and Crºſſ.
Of no right, nor colour like to right,
He doth fill fields with harneſs, , , Shakespeare Henry IV. p. i.
Were I a great man, I ſhould fear to drink:
Great men ſhould drink with harneſ on their throats. Shakespeare
2. The traces of draught horſes, particularly of carriages cf
pleaſure or ſtate: of other carriages we ſay gºer.
Or wilt thou ride? Thy horſes ſhall be trapp'd,
Their harneſ, ſtudded all with gold and pearl. Shakeſpeare.
Their ſteeds around,
Free from their harneſ, graze the flow'ry ground. Drydin.
To HARNess. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. To dreſs in armour.
He was harneſ light, and to the field goes he. Shakeſp.
Full fifty years, harnºſ'd in rugged ſteel,
I have endur'd the biting Winter's blaſt. Rowe,
2. To fix horſes in their traces.
Before the door her iron chariot ſtood,
All ready harneſſed for journey new. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Harneſs the horſes, and get up the horſemen, and ſtand
forth with your helmets. jer. xlvi. 4.
When I plow my ground, my horſe is harneſd and chained
to my plough. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
To the harneſſed yoke
They lend their ſhoulder, and begin their toil. Thomſºn.
HARP. n.ſ. [peanp, Saxon; harpe, French. It is uſed through
both the Teutonick and Roman dialects, and has been long
in uſe.
Romanuſ; lyré flaudat tibi, Barbarus harpá, Ven. Fort.]
I. # lyre; an inſtrument ſtrung with wire and ſtruck with the
nger.
g Arion, when through tempeſts cruel wreck
He forth was thrown into the greedy ſeas,
Through the ſweet muſick which his harp did make,
Allur'd a dolphin him from death to eaſe. Spenſer,
They touch'd their golden harps, and hyming prais'd
God and his works. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
Nor wanted tuneful harp, nor vocal quire,
The muſes ſung, Apollo touch'd the lyre. Dryden.
2. A conſtellation.
Next ſhines the harp, and through the liquid ſkies
The ſhell, as lighteſt, firſt begins to riſe;
This when ſweet Orpheus ſtruck, to liſt'ning rocks . . .
He ſenſes gave, and ears to wither'd oaks. Creech's Manilus.
To HARP. v. n. [harper, French, from the noun.]
1. To play on the harp. - -
I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps. Rev.
Things without life giving ſound, whether pip; or harp,
except they give a diſtinction in the ſounds, how ſhall it be
known what is piped or harped. I Cor. xiv. 7.
The helmed cherubim,
And ſworded ſeraphim, -
Are ſeen in glitt'ring ranks with wings diſplay'd,
Harping in loud and ſolemn quire, - -
with unexpreſſive notes to heav'n's new-born heir. Milton.
I conceive you harp a little too much upon one ſtring:
Collier on Pride.
2. To touch any paſſion, as the harper touches a ſtring; to
dwell on a ſubject.
Gracious duke,
Harp not on that, nor do not baniſh reaſon
1 1 A For
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A R
H A R
For inequality; but let your reaſon ſerve
; : To make the truth appear. Shakeſp. Mºſ. for 44.6ſ.re.
- Macbeth, beware Macduff' -
Beware the thane of Fife: diſmiſs me: enough.
Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks:
Thou'ſt harp'd my fear aright. Shakespeare's AZacbeth.
He ſeems - * * * *
Proud and diſdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. Sºakſ. Art. aud Cºpatra.
HA*RPER. n.ſ. (from harp J. A player on the harp.
Never will I truſt to ſpeeches penn'd,
Nor to the motion of a ſchoolboy's tongue;
Nor wooe in rhime, like a blind harper's ſong. Shakeſpeare.
I'm the god of the harp: ſtop, my faireſt:-in vain;
Nor the harp, nor the harper, could fetch her again. Tickell.
HA'RPING Iron. n ſ. [from harpago, Latin.] A bearded dart
with a line faſtened to the handle, with which whales are
ſtruck and caught
The boat which on the firſt aſſault did go,
Struck with a hºrſing in on the younger foe;
Who, when he felt his ſide ſo rudely goºd,
Loud as the ſea that nouriſh’d him he roar'd. I?’a'ler.
HARPoNE'E.R. m. ſ. ſharponeur, French, from harpoon..] He
that throws the harpoon in whalefiſhing.
HARPo'on. m. ſ. ſharpon, French.] A harping iron.
HA'RpsicoRD. m. ſ. A muſical inſtrument.
HA'RPY. m. ſ. ſharpyia, Latin ; harpie, harpyr, French.]
The harpies were a kind of birds which had the faces of
women, and foul long claws, very filthy creatures; which,
when the table was furniſhed for Phineus, came flying in, and
devouring or carrying away the greater part of the vićtuals,
did ſo defile the reſt that they could not be endured. Raleigh.
That an harpy is not a centaur is by this way as much a
truth, as that a ſquare is not a circle. Locke.
2. A ravenous wretch.
I will do you any ambaſſage to the pigmies, rather than hold
three words conference with this harpy. Shakeſpeare.
HA'Roy EPUss. n.ſ. [See ARQUEBUSE.] A handgun.
HA'Rq9E Bussie R. n.ſ. [from harquebuſs.] One armed with
a harquebuſs.
About thirty paces off were placed twenty thouſand nimble
harquebuffers, ranged in length, and but five in a rank. Knolles.
HARRIDA’N. m. ſ. [ corrupted from haridele, a worn-out
worthleſs horſe..] A decayed ſtrumpet.
She juſt endur'd the Winter ſhe began,
And in four months a batter'd harridan;
Now nothing's left, but wither'd, pale, and ſhrunk,
To bawd for others, and go ſhares with punk. Swift.
HARRow. n ſ. [charroue, French; harcke, German, a rake.]
A frame of timbers croſſing cach other, and ſet with teeth,
drawn over ſowed ground to break the clods and throw the
earth over the ſeed.
The land with daily care
Is exercis'd, and with an iron war
Of rakes and harrows. Dryden's Georgick.
Two ſmall harrows, that clap on each ſide of the ridge,
harrow it right up and down. Mortimer's Husbandry.
o HA'RRow. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To break with the harrow.
Friend, harrow in time, by ſome manner of means,
Not only thy peaſon, but alſo thy beans. Tiff. Husbandry.
Can'ft thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow :
or will he harrow the valleys after thee? job xxxix. 10.
Let the Volſcians
Plow Rome, and harrow Italy, I'll never
Be ſuch a goſling to obey inſtinét. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. To tear up; to rip up.
I could a tale unfold, whoſe lighteſt word
Would harrow up thy ſoul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like ſtars, ſtart from their ſpheres. Shakespeare
Imagine you behold me bound and ſcourg'd,
My aged muſcles harrow'd up with whips;
r hear me groaning on the rending rack. Rowe.
3. To pillage; to ſtrip; to lay waſte. See HARRY, which in
Scottiſh is the ſame thing.
As the king did excel in good commonwealth laws, ſo he
had in ſecret a deſign to make uſe of them, as well for col-
leáing of treaſure as for corre&amp;ting of manners; and ſo mean-
ing thereby to harrow his people, did accumulate them the
rather. Bacon's Henry VII.
4. To invade; to haraſs with incurſions. [From pengan,
Saxon.]
And he that harrow'd hell with heavy flowre,
The faulty ſouls from thence brought to his heavenly bowre.
Fairy Queen, b. i. cant. Io.
Moſt glorious Lord of life, that on this day
JDid'ſt make thy triumph over death and ſin;
And having harrow'd hell, did it bring away
t Captivity thence captive, us to win. Spenſer's Sonnets.
5. To diſturb , to put into commotion. [This ſhould rather
be written harry, harer, French.]
Moſt like: it harrºt's me with fear and wonder, Shakespeare
Amaz'd I ſtocq, karrow’d with grief and care. Aſ ten.
Harrow now out and weal away, he cried;
What diſmal day hath ſent this curſed light,
To ſee my lord ſo deadly damnify’d Fairy Qāsen, b. ii.
HA'RRow. interj. An exclamation of ſudden diſtreſs. Now
out of uſe.
HA'ſ Row ER. m. ſ. [from barrºw.]
1. He who harrows.
2. A kind of hawk. Ainſworth.
To HARRY. v. a. ſharer, French.]
1. To teazc; to hare; to ruſſie.
Thou muſt not take my former ſharpneſs ill.
—I repent me much
That i ſo harry'd him. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
2. In Scotland it ſignifies to rob, plunder, or oppreſs: as, one
harricq a neſ’; that is, he took the young away : as alſo, he
harried me out ºf houſe and home; that is, he robbed me of my
goods, and turned me out of doors. See Tº H.A.R. 3 ow.
HARSH. adj. [herwiſche, German, Skinner.]
1. Auſtere; roughly four.
Our nature here is not unlike our wine ;
Some ſorts, when old, continue briſk and fine:
So age's gravity may ſeem ſevere,
But nothing harſh or bitter ought t'appear. Dººhan.
Sweet, bitter, four, barſh and ſalt, are all the epithets we
have to denominate that numberleſs varicty of icliſhes. Lººe.
The ſame defect of heat which gives a fierceneſs to our na-
tures, may contribute to that rough::cts of our language,
which bears ſome analogy to the harſh fruit of colder coun-
tries. Swift to the Lºrd High I reaſirir.
2. Rough to the ear.
A name unmuſical to Volſcian ears,
And harſh in ſound to thine. Shakeſp. Cºrolanº.
Age might, what nature never gives the young,
Have taught the ſmoothneſs of thy native tongue;
But ſatire needs not that, and wit will ſhine
Through the harſh cadence of a rugged line. Dryden.
The unneceſſary conſonants made their ſpelling tedious,
and their pronunciation harſh. Dryden.
Thy lord commands thee now
With a harſh voice, and ſupercilious brow,
To ſervile duties. Dryden's Perſ. Sat. 5.
3. Crabbed ; moroſe; peewiſh.
He was a wiſe man and an eloquent ; but in his nature
harſh and haughty. Bacon’s Henry VII.
Bear patiently the harſh words of thy enemies, as knowing
that the anger of an enemy admoniſhes us of our duty. Taylºr.
No harſh refle&amp;tion let remembrance raiſe;
Forbear to mention what thou can'ſt not praiſe. Prior.
A certain quickneſs of apprehenſion inclined him to kindle
into the firſt motions of anger; but, for a long time before
he died, no one heard an intemperate or harſh word proceed
from him. Atterbury's Sermon.
4. Rugged to the touch.
Black feels as if you were feeling needles points, or ſome
harſh ſand; and red feels very ſmooth. Bºyle on Colours.
5. Unpleaſing; rigorous.
With eloquence innate his tongue was arm'd;
Though harſh the precept, yet the preacher charm'd. Dryd.
HA'R's HLY. a.º. [from harſh.j
1. Sourly; auſterely to the palate, as unripe fruit.
2. With violence; in oppoſition to gentleneſs, unleſs in the ſol-
lowing paſſage it rather ſignifies unripely.
'Till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
Into thy mother's lap; or be with eaſe -
Gather'd not harſhy pluck'd. Milton's Paradiſe Igº, b. xi.
3. Severely ; moroſely; crabbedly.
I would rather he was a man of a rough temper, that would
treat me harſºl, than of an effeminate nature. Addison.
4. Ruggedly to the ea.
My wife is in a wayward mood to-day:
I tell you, 'twould ſound harſhly in her ears. Shakespeare.
Get from him why he puts on this confuſion,
Grating ſo harſhy all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dang'rous lunacy. Shakeſp. Hamiet.
A hollow groan, a murm'ring wind aroſe;
The rings of iron that on the doors were hung,
Sent out a jarring ſound, and harſhy rung. Dryd. Fałks,
HA'RSHINESS. m. ſ. from harſh.]
1. Sourneſs; auſtere taſte.
Take an apple and roll it upon a table hard: the rolling
doth ſoften and ſweeten the fruit, which is nothing but the
ſmooth diſtribution of the ſpirits into the parts; for the un-
equal diſtribution of the ſpirits maketh the harſhneſs. Eacºn.
2. Roughneſs to the ear.
Neither can the natural harſhneſs of the French, or the per-
petual ill accent, be ever refined into perfect harmony like the
Italian. Dryden.
Cannot I admire the height of Milton's invention, and the
ſtrength of his expreſſion, without defending his antiquated
words, and the perpetual harſhneſs of their ſound: Dryden.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
'Ti,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">*.
.*
H A S
H A R
'Tis not enough no harſhneſ, gives offence; - .
The found muſt ſeem an echo to the ſenſe. Pºpe.
3. Ruggedneſs to the touch. -
Fºſºft and ruggedneſs of bodies is unpleaſant to the
touch. - - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
4. Crabtedneſs; moroſeneſs; peeviſhneſs.
No, Regan, you ſhall never have my curſe:
Thy tender-hefted nature ſhall not give
Thee o'er to harſhneſs : her eyes are fierce, but thine
lºo comfort and not burn. Shakeſp. King Lear.
HART. n.ſ. [peort, Saxon.j A he-deer of the large kind;
the male of the roe.
That inſtant was I turn’d into a hart,
And my deſires, like fell and cruel hounds,
E’er ſince purſue me. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
- The deer
And fearful harts do wander every where
Amidſt the dogs. May's Virgil's Georg.
HA'RTsior N. n.ſ.
Har ſºorn is a drug that comes into uſe as many ways, and
under as many forms, as any one in the whole materia medica.
What is uſed here are the whole horns of the common male
deer, which fall off every year. This ſpecies is the fallow
deer; but ſome tell us, that the medicinal hartſhorn ſhould be
that of the true hart or ſtag, called the red deer. The ſalt of
&amp;art/horn is a great ſudorifick, and the ſpirit has all the virtues
3f volatile alkalies: it is uſed to bring people out of faintings
by its pungency, holding it under the noſe, and pouring down
ſome drops of it in water. Hill's Mat. Med.
Ramoſe concretions of the volatile ſalts are obſervable upon
the glaſs of the receiver, whilſt the ſpirits of vipers and hartſ:
... ºn are drawn, - JWoodward on Fºſſils.
HA'Rºſs HoRN. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
HA'RT-Rox. L. m. ſ. A plant. A ſpecies of buckthorn plan-
tain. .
HARTSTON GUE. m. ſ. [lingua cervina, Latin.] A plant. .
It commonly grows out from the joints of old walls and
buildings, where they are moiſt and ſhady. There are very
few of them in Europe. Aºiller.
Hart/lºgue is propagated by parting the roots, and alſo by
ſeed. Mortimer's Husbandry. .
HA'RT wort. n.ſ. ſtardylium, Latin.]. It is an umbelliferous
plant, with a roſe-ſhaped flower, conſiſting of five unequal
heart-faſhioned petals, which are placed circularly and reſt on
the empalement, which afterward becomes an almoſt round
fruit, compoſed of two flat ſeeds, which eaſily caſt off their
covering with a raiſed border, which are commonly indented.
It is an annual plant, and periſhes ſoon after it has perfeóted
its ſeed. It is found wild in ſeveral parts of England. Miller.
HARVEST. n.ſ. [paprerz, Saxon.] - -
1. The ſeaſon of reaping and gathering the corn.
As it ebbs, the feedſman
Upon the ſlime and ooze ſcatters his grain,
And ſhortly comes to harveſ!. Shakespeare Ant, and Cectatra.
With harveſ work he is worſe than he was in the Spring.
- - - - - - - - L'Eſtrange.
2. The corn ripened, gathered and inned.
From Ireland come I with my ſtrength,
And reap the harveſt which that raſcal ſow'd. Shakespeare H. VI.
When the father is too fondly kind, -
Such ſeed he ſows, ſuch harveſ ſhall he find. Dryden.
3. The product of labour.
Let theſe ſmall cotts and hills ſuffice:
Let us the harveſ of our labour eat;
* f is labour makes the coarſeſt diet ſweet. Dryden's juven.
HAR v ºst-Ho M.E. n.ſ.
I. The ſong which the reapers ſing at the feaſt made for having
inned the harveſt. - -
Your hay it is mow’d, and your corn is reap'd;
Your barns will be full, and your hovels heap'd :
Come, my boys, come,
Come, my boys, come,
And merrily roar out harveſt-home. Dryden's K. Arthur.
2. The time of gathering harveſt.
At harveſt-ºrie, and on the ſhearing-day,
When he ſhould thanks to Pan and Pales pay,
And better Ceres, trembling to approach
The little barrel.
3. The opportunity of gathering treaſure.
His wife ſecms to be well favoured: I will uſe it as the key
of the cuckoldy rogue's coffer; and there's my harveſ?-home.
- Shakespeare's Merry //ives of I/indſºr.
IIA'Rwest-LoRD. m. ſ. The head reaper at the harveſt.
Grant harveſ?-lºrd more by a peny or two,
To call on his fellows the better to do. Tiff. Haslandy. -
HA'R v EstER. m. ſ. [from haſ vºſ'.] One who works at the
harveſt. -
HA's y Esq. MAN. m. ſ. I hart ºff and man, J A labourer in
harveſt.
Like to a harveſ?man, that's taſk’d to mow
Or all, or loſe his hire. Shakeſpeare's Cºriolanus.
Dryden's Perſ. Sat. 4. -
Tº Hºsh, v. m. ſhather, French. To mince; to chop intº
ſmall pieces, and mingle.
He rais'd his arm
Above his head, and rain’d a ſtorm
Of blows ſo terrible and thick, . .
As if he meant to haſh her quick. Hudibras, p. i.
... What have they to complain of but too great variety, tho’
ſome of the diſhes be not ſerved in the exacteſt order, and
politeneſs; but haſhed up in haſte. Garth.
H^sk. . ſ. This ſeems to ſignify a caſe or habitation made
of ruſhes or flags. -
Phoebus, weary of his yearly taſk,
Eſtabliſhed hath his fleeds in lowly lay, -
And taken up his inn in fiſhes haſk. Spenser's Paſtoral.
HA’s LET. }"| [haſa, Iſlandick, a bundle; haſterel, haſ-
HA's ET. S. tereau, hºſier, French.] The heart, liver, and
lights of a hog, with the windpipe and part of the throat
to it. - -
HASP. m. ſ. ſpapr, Saxon, whence in ſome provinces it is yet
called haſ ſº..] A claſp folded over a ſtaple, and faſtened on
with a padlock. -
Have doors to open and ſhut at pleaſure, with haſh; to
them. 41.1 timer's Huſiandry.
To HASP. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſhut with a haſp.
HA'ssock. m. ſ. [ haſ...}, German. Skinner.]
1. A thick mat on which men kneel at church.
He found his pariſhioners very irregular; and in order to
make them kneel, and join in the reſponſes, he gave every
one of them a haſ:ck and common prayer book. Addison.
2. In Scotland it is applied to any thing made of ruſhes or privet,
on which a perſon may ſt: it is therefore probable that haſ...}
and haſ are the ſame.
HAST. The ſecond perſon fingular of have. .
HASTE. m. ſ. [hºſe, French ; hae/fe, Dutch.]
1. Hurry; ſpeed ; nimbleneſs; precipitation.
Spare him, death !
Let not pity with her tears
Keep ſuch diſtance from thine ears:
But O, thou wilt not, canſt not ſpare!
Haffe hath never time to hear. Craſhaw.
Our lines reform’d, and not compos'd in hºſºe, -
Poliſh’d like marble, would like marble laſt;
But as the preſent, ſo the laſt age writ;
In both we find like negligence and wit. //aller.
In as much haſe as I am, I cannot forbear giving an ex-
ample. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The wretched father, running to their aid
With pious haſte, but vain, they next invade. Dryden.
2. Paſſion; vehemence. - -
I ſaid in my laſe, all men are liars." Pſ. cxvi. 1 1,
To HAST E. {v. n. [haſer, French ; haeffen, Dutch..].
To HA's TEN.
1. To make haſte; to be in a hurry; to be buſy; to be ſpeedy.
I have not hoſened from being a paſtor to follow thce. jer.
2. To move with ſwiftneſs.
'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait;
He is a friend. Cinna, where hºſe you ſo Shakeſpecre.
They were troubled and haſed away. Pſ xlviii. 5;
All thoſe things are gaſed away like a ſhadow, and as a po
that hoſted by. J/ſd. v. 9.
Fºſſing to pay his tribute to the ſea,
Like mortal life to meet cternity. Denham.
Theſe rites perform'd, the prince, without delay, • 2.
Hºſe, to the nether world, his deſtin'd way. Dryden’s £n.
ſo diſtant Sparta, and the ſpacious waſte 2. /7.
Of ſandy Pyle, the royal youth ſhall hºſie. Pºpe's Cº.ſy.
Soon as file ſun awakes the ſprightly court, - -
Leave their repoſe, and hºſten to the ſport. Prizr.
To HAs re. v.a. To puſh forward; to urge on 3 to Prº-
To HA's TEN. ! cipitate; to drive to a ſwifter pace.
Let it be ſo hºſted, that ſupper be ready at the fºlkſ by
five of the clock. Šakºſ. Merry IVºes ºf I/ºr.
All hopes of ſuccour from your arºs is Paſt;
To ſave us now, you muſt our ruin º. *
Each ſees his lamp with diff'rent luftre crown'd ;
Each knows his courſe with diff'ren: periods bound;
And in his paſſage through the liquid ſpace, P, i.
Nor haSpenser, nor retards his neighbour's º - tor.
HA'st Es E.R. m.ſ. [from hºl One that haſtens or hurries.
HA's Tily. adj. [from ſº. * -
1. In a hurry; ſpeedily; nimbly; quickly.
A voice, that called loud and clear,
Drydºn.
* Come hither, hither, O come haftily { - Fa. Queen.
- If your grace incline that we ſhould live, r
You muſt not, ſir, too haſtily forgivº. . Iſºaller.
The next to danger, hot purſu'd by fate,
Half cloth'd, half naked, haftily retire. Dryden.
: precipitately. -
2. *... conſequences, we hoſtić engaged in
a war which hath coſt us ſixty millions. Swift.
3. Paſionately; with vehemºnºe.
HASTINEss. n ſ [from haft.
1. Haſts;
4. -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A T
H A T
1. Haſte; ſpeed.
A fellow being out of breath, or ſeeming to be for haſte,
with humble haſhingſ told Baſilius. Sidney, b. i.
2. Hurry; precipitation.
There is moſt juſt cauſe to fear, leſt our hoſlineſ to embrace
a thing of ſo perilous conſequence, ſhould cauſe poſterity to
feel thoſe evils. Hooker, Preface.
The turns of his verſe, his breakings, his propriety, his
numbers, and his gravity, I have as far imitated as the po
verty of our language, and the haſlingſ of my performance,
would allow. Dryden.
4. Angry teſtineſs; paſſionate vehemence.
HA's TINGs. n.ſ.. [from haſly..] Peas that come early. -
The large white and green hoſlings are not to be ſet 'till
the cold is over. Martimer's Husbandry.
HA'sty. adj. [haſiſ, French, from haſle; haeſtig, Dutch..]
1. Quick; ſpeedy.
Is all the counſel that we two have ſhar'd,
The ſiſters vows, the hours that we have ſpent,
When we have chid the haſty footed time
For parting us. Shakespeare Midſummer Night's Dream.
2. Paſſionate; vehement.
He that is ſlow to wrath is of great underſtanding; but he
that is haſly of ſpirit exalteth folly. Prov. xiv. 29.
3. Raſh; precipitate. - -
Seeſt thou a man that is haſy in his words? There is more
hope of a fool than of him. Prov. xxix. 20.
Be not raſh with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be
haſty to utter any thing before God. Eccl. v. 2.
4. Early ripe. -
Beauty ſhall be a fading flower, and as the hoſty fruit before
the Summer. Iſ, xxviii. 4.
HA's Ty-pudding. n.ſ. A pudding made of milk and flower,
boiled quick together; as alſo of oatmeal and water boiled
together.
Sure haffy-pudding is thy chiefeſt diſh,
With bullock's liver, or ſome ſtinking fiſh. Dorſet.
HAT. n.ſ. [pact, Saxon; hatt, German.] A cover for the
head.
She's as big as he is; and there's her thrum hat, and her
muffler too. Shakeſpeare's Merry I/ives of Windſor.
Out of meer ambition you have made
Your holy hat be ſtampt on the king's coin. Shakespeare H. VIII.
His hat was like a helmet, or Spaniſh montera. Bacon.
Hermes o'er his head in air appear'd,
And with ſoft words his drooping ſpirits cheer'd ;
His hat adorn'd with wings diſclos'd the god,
And in his hand he bore the ſleep compelling rod. Dryden.
HA"rBAND. m. ſ. [hat and band..] A ſtring tied round the
hat.
They had hats of blue velvet, with fine plumes of divers
colours, ſet round like hatbands. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Room for the noble gladiator' ſee
His coat and hatband ſhew his quality. Dryden's juven.
HA'rcase, n.ſ [hat and caſe.] A ſlight box for a hat.
I might mention a hatcaſe, which I would not exchange
for all the beavers in Great Britain. Addiſon's Spectator.
To HATch. v. a. [hecken, German, as Skinner thinks, from
heghen, eghen, ces, egg, Saxon.]
1. To produce young from eggs by the warmth of incubation.
When they have laid ſuch a number of eggs as they can
conveniently cover and hatch, they give over, and begin to
fit. Ray on the Creation.
He kindly ſpreads his ſpacious wing,
And hatches plenty for th' enſuing Spring. Denham.
The tepid caves, and fens and ſhores,
Their brood as numerous hatch from th' eggs, that ſoon
Burſting with kindly rupture, forth diſclos'd
Their callow young. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. vii.
2. To quicken the egg by incubation.
Others hatch their eggs and tend the birth, 'till it is able to
• ſhift for itſelf. Addiſon's Speciat.r.
3. To produce by precedent ačtion.
4. To form by meditation; to contrive.
Which thing they very well know, and, I doubt not, will
eaſily confeſs, who live to their great both toil and grief,
where the blaſphemies of Arrians are renewed by them; who,
to hatch their hereſy, have choſen thoſe churches as fitteſt neſts
where Athanaſius's creed is not heard. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 42.
He was a man harmleſs and faithful, and one who never
hatched any hopes prejudicial to the king, but always intended
his ſafety and honour. Hayward.
5. [From hacher, to cut.] To ſhade by lines in drawing or
graving.
Who firſt ſhall wound, through others arms, his blood
appearing freſh,
Shall win this ſword, ſilver'd and hatcht. Chapm. Iliad.
Such as Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold up high in braſs; and ſuch again
As venerable Neſtor, hatch'd in ſilver,
Should with a bond of air, ſtrong as the axle-tree
On which heav'n rides, knit all the Grecian ears
To his experienc'd tongue. Shakeſp. Troil, and Cºrſida.
Thoſe tender hairs, and thoſe hatching ſtrokes of the pen-
cil, which make a kind of minced meat in painting, are ne-
ver able to deceive the fight. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To HATCH. v. m.
1. To be in the ſtate of growing quick.
He obſerved circumſtances in eggs, whilſt they were
hatching, which varied. Bºyle.
2. To be in a ſtate of advance towards effect.
HATCH. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A brood excluded from the egg.
2. The aët of excluſion from the egg.
3. Diſcloſure; diſcovery.
Something's in his ſoul,
O'er which his melancholy ſits on brood;
And, I do doubt, the hatch and the diſcloſe
Will be ſome danger. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet,
4. [Haeca, Saxon; hecke, Dutch, a bolt..] The half door; the
opening over the door.
Something about, a little from the right,
In at the window, or elſe o'er the hatch. Shakeſp K. Yºln.
5. [In the plural.] The doors or openings by which they deſcend
from one deck or floor of a ſhip to another.
To the king's ſhip, inviſible as thou art,
There ſhalt thou find the mariners aſleep
Under the hatches. Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
There ſhe's hid;
The mariners all under hatches ſtow'd. , Shakespeare. Tempſ.
So ſeas, impell'd by winds with added pow'r,
Aſſault the ſides, and o'er the hatches tow’r. Dryden.
A ſhip was faſten’d to the ſhore;
The plank was ready laid for ſafe aſcent,
For ſhelter there the trembling ſhadow bent, }
And ſkip'd and ſculk'd, and under hatches went. Dryden.
6. To be under HATches. To be in a ſtate of ignominy, po-
verty, or depreſſion.
He aſſures us how this fatherhood began in Adam, con-
tinued its courſe 'till the flood, got out of the ark with Noah,
made and ſupported all the kings of the earth, 'till the capti-
vity in Egypt, and then the poor fatherhood was undr
hatches. Locke.
7. Hatches. Floodgates. Ainſworth.
To HATCHEL. v. a. ſhachelen, German. J. To beat flax ſo
as to ſeparate the fibrous from the brittle part.
This aſbeſtos ſeems different from that mentioned by
Kircher in his deſcription of China; which he ſays, put into
water, moulders like clay, and is a fibrous ſmall excreſcence,
like hairs growing upon the ſtones; and for the hatcheling,
ſpinning, and weaving it, he refers to his mundus ſubterraneus.
Woodward on 1 ºffils.
HA'tchel. n.ſ.. [from the verb; hachel, German.] The in-
ſtrument with which flax is beaten.
HA’t chell ER. n.ſ.. [from hatchel.] A beater of flax.
HATCHET. m. ſ. ſhache, hachette, French ; aſcia, Latin J
A ſmall axe.
The hatchet is to hew the irregularities of pieces of ſtuff.
Moxon's Mech. Exer.
His harmful hatchet he hent in his hand,
And to the field he ſpeedeth. Spenſer's Paſtoral.
Ye ſhall have a hempen caudle then, and the help of a
hatchet. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. ii.
Nails, hammers, hatchets ſharp, and halters ſtrong,
Swords, ſpears, twice dipt in the dire ſtains
Of brothers blood. Croſław.
Tyrrheus, the foſter-father of the beaſt,
Then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fiſt. Dryden's Żn.
Our countryman preſented him with a curious hatchet; and
aſking him whether it had a good edge, tried it upon the
donor. Addiſon's Freeholder.
HA"rcHet-face. n.ſ. An ugly face; ſuch, I ſuppoſe, as
might be hewn out of a block by a hatchet.
An ape his own dear image will embrace;
An ugly beau adores a hatchet-fa, e. Dryden.
HAT cri M. ENT. n.ſ. [Corrupted from atchievement. See AT-
chieve MEMT.] Armorial eſcutchcon placed over a door at
a funeral.
His means of death, his obſcure funeral,
No trophy, ſword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
No noble rites nor formal oſtentation,
Cry to be heard. Shakeſpeare's Ham'et.
HA’ſ ch w a Y. m. ſ. ſhatches and way. ] The way over or
through the hatches.
To HA E. v. a. ſparian, Saxon.] To deteſt; to abhor; to
abominate; to regard with the paſſion contrary to love.
You are, I think, aſſur'd I love you not.
—I am aſſurd, if I be meaſur’d rightly,
Your majeſty bath no juſt cauſe to hate me. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
Do all inen kill the thing they do not love?
—Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
—Ev'ry offence is not a hate at firſt. Shakeſºfare.
Thoſe old inhabitants of thy holy land thou hats/? for doing
moſt odious works. ///d xii. 4.
But
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A V
H A V
But whatſoever our jarring fortunes prove,
Though our lords hate, methinks we two may love. Dryden.
IIAt E. n.ſ. [pate, Saxon.] Malignity; deteſtation; the con-
trary to love.
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favours nor your hate. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Hate to Mezentius, arm'd five hundred more,
Whom Mincius from his fire Benacus bore. Dryden's AEm.
Nauſicaa teaches that the afflićted are not always the obječts
of divine hate. , Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
HATEFUL. adj. [hate and full.] …'
1. That which cauſes abhorrence; odious; abominable; de-
teſtable. r --
My name's Macbeth.
—The devil himſelf could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear. Shakespeare's Marheth.
There is no vice more hateful to God and man than ingra-
titude. Peacham.
What owe I to his commands
Who hates me, and hath hither thruſt me down,
To fit in hateful office here confin'd,
- Inhabitant of heav'n, and heav'nly born ? Milt. Par. Loft.
I hear the tread
Of hateful ſteps: I muſt be viewleſs now.
But Umbriel, hateful gnome 1 forbears not ſo;
He breaks the vial whence the ſorrows flow.
2. Abhorrent; deteſting; malignant; malevolent.
Palamon, compell’d
No more to try the fortune of the field;
And, worſe than death, to view with hateful eyes
His rival's conqueſt, and renounce the prize.
HATEFULLY. adv. [from hateful.]
1. Odiouſly; abominably.
2. Malignantly ; maliciouſly.
All their hearts ſtood hatefully appaid
Long ſince. Chapman's Iliads.
They ſhall deal with thee hatſu'ly, take away all thy labour,
and leave thee naked and bare. Ezek. xxiii. 29.
HATEFULNEss. n.ſ.. [from hateful..] Odiouſneſs.
HA't E R. n. ſ. [from hate.] One that hates; an abhorrer; a
deteſter. -
I of her underſtood of that moſt noble conſtancy in my
lord Argalus; which whoſoever loves not, ſhews himſelf to
be a hater of virtue, and unworthy to live in the ſociety of
mankind. Sidney.
Whilſt he ſtood up and ſpoke,
He was my maſter, and I wore my life
To ſpend upon his haters. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
An enemy to God, and a hater of all good. Bi own.
They never wanted ſo much knowledge as to inform and
convince them of the unlawfulneſs of a man's being a mur-
derer, an hater of God, and a covenant-breaker. South.
HA(TRED. m.ſ.. [from hate.] Hate; ill-will; malignity; ma-
devolence; diſlike; abhorrence; deteſtation; abomination;
the paſſion contrary to love.
Hatred is the thought of the pain which any thing preſent
or abſent is apt to produce in us. Locke.
I wiſh I had a cauſe to ſeek him there,
To oppoſe his hatred fully.
Hatred is the paſſion of defiance, and there is a kind of
averſation and hoſtility included in its very eſſence; but then,
if there could have been hatred in the world when there was
ſcarce any thing odious, it would have acted within the com-
paſs of its proper object. South's Sermons.
Hatreds are often begotten from ſlight and almoſt innocent
occaſions, and quarrels propagated and continued in the
world. Locke.
Retain no malice nor hatred againſt any: be ready to do
them all the kindneſs you are able. //ake's Preparat. for Death.
She is a Preſbyterian of the moſt rank and virulent kind,
and conſequently has an inveterate hatred to the church. Swift.
Milion.
Pope.
Dryden.
To HATTER. v. a. [Perhaps corrupted from batter. J. To .
haraſs; to weary; to wear out with fatigue.
He's hatter'd out with pennance. `
HATTER. m. / [from hat..] A maker of hats.
A hatter ſells a dozen of hats for five ſhillings a piece, Swift.
HA'ſ rock. m. ſ. [attack, Erſe.] A ſhock of corn. Dic?.
Hau’BFR K, n.ſ.. [hauberg, old French..] A coat of mail; a
breaſtplate.
Him on the hauherk ſtruck the princeſs fore,
That quite diſparted all the linked frame,
And picreed to the ſkin. Fairy Qween, b. ii.
Haiderö and helms are hew’d with many a wound;
The mighty maces with ſuch haſte deſcend,
They break the bones, and make the ſolid armour bend.
Dryden's Knight's Tale.
To HAv F. v. a pret, and part, paſſ. had. [haban, Gothick;
pab'an, Saxon; hebten, Dutch; avoir, French ; avere, ital.]
. . 1. Not to be without.
I have brought him before you, that after examination had
I might have ſomething to write. 4.75 xxv. 26.
Drydin.
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. To carry; to wear. -
Upon the maſt they ſaw a young man, who ſat as on horſe-
back, having nothing upon him. Sidney.
3. To make uſe of.
I have no Levite to my prieſt.
4. To poſſeſs.
He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that ga-
thered little had no lack. Ex. xvi. 18.
5. To bear; to carry; to be attended with or united to, as an
accident or concomitant. -
I will never truſt a man again for keeping his ſword clean;
nor believe he can have every thing in him, by wearing his
apparel neatly. Shakeſpeare's All's well that ends well.
6. To obtain; to enjoy.
Now, O Father, glorify me with thine own ſelf, with the
glory which I had with thee before the world was. jo. xvii. 5.
7. To take; to receive.
A ſecret happineſs, in Petronius, is called curioſa felicitas,
and which I ſuppoſe he had from the feliciter audere of Ho-
race. Dryden.
8. To be in any ſtate.
Have I need of madmen, that ye have brought this fel-
low - Sa. xxi. 15-
9. To put; to take.
With toſſing and raking, and ſetting on cox,
Graſs lately in ſwathes is meat for an oxe;
That done, go and cart it, and have it away. Tuff. Husb.
10. To procure ; to find.
I would fain have any one name to me that tongue, that
any one can ſpeak as he ſhould do, by the rules of grammar.
Locke on Education.
judg. xvii. 13.
11. Not to negle&amp;t; not to omit.
. . I cannot ſpeak; if my heart be not ready to burſt: Well,
ſweet Jack, have a care of thyſelf. Shakespeare's Henry IV.
Your plea is good; but ſtill I ſay beware:
Laws are explain’d by men; ſo have a care.
12. To hold; to regard.
Of the maid ſervants ſhall I be had in honour. 2 Sa. vi. 22.
The proud have had me greatly in deriſion. Pſ. cxix. 51.
13. To maintain ; to hold opinion.
Sometimes they will have them to be natural heat, whereas
ſome of them are crude and cold; and ſometimes they will
have them to be the qualities of the tangible parts, whereas
they are things by themſelves. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
14. To contain.
You have of theſe pedlars that have more in 'em than
you'd think, ſiſter. Shakeſpeare's Winter's Ta'z.
Pope.
15. To require ; to claim.
What would theſe madmen have *
Firſt they would bribe us without pence,
Deceive us without common ſenſe,
And without pow'r enſlave.
16. To be a huſband or wife to another.
If I had been married to him, for all he was in woman's
apparel, I would not have had him. Shakeſpeare.
17. To be engaged, as in a taſk.
If we maintain things that are eſtabliſhed, we have to ſtrive
with a number of heavy prejudices, deeply rooted in the hearts
of men. , Hoºker, b. i. ſ. 1.
The Spaniards captain never hath to meddle with his ſol-
diers pay. Spºnſer on Ireland.
You did ſet your courſe to treat of the evils which hin-
dered the peace and good ordering of that land, among which
that of the inconvenience of the laws was the firſt which you
had in hand. Speºſer on Ireland.
Kings have to deal with their neighbours, their wives, their
children, their prelates or clergy, their nobles, their merchants
and their commons. Bacon's Eſſays.
18. To wiſh ; to deſire.
I had rather be a door-keeper in the houſe of my God, than
to dwell in the tents of wickedneſs. Pſ. lxxxiv. o.
I would have no man diſcouraged with that kind of life or
ſeries of ačtions, in which the choice of others, or his own
neceſſities, may have engaged him. Addison.
19. To buy.
If theſe trifles were lated only by art and artfulneſs, we
ſhould have them much cheaper. Cºllier on human Reaſon.
20. It is moſt uſed in Engliſh, as in other European languages,
as an auxiliary verb to make the tenſes. Have the preter-
perfect, and had the preterpluperfest.
If there had been words enow between them to have ex-
preſſed provocation, they had gone together by the ears. Cong.
I have heard one of the greateſt genius's this age has pro-
duced, who had becn trained up in all the polite ſtudies of an-
tiquity, aſſure me, upon his being obliged to ſearch into re-
cords, that he at laſt took an incredible pleaſure in it. Addison.
I have not here conſidered cuſtom as it makes things eaſy,
but as it renders them delightful; and though others have
made the ſame refle&amp;tions, it is impoſſible they may not have
drawn thoſe uſes from it. Addison.
Dryden:
i i B That
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A U.
That admirable precept which Pythagoras is ſaid to have
given to his diſciples, and which that philoſopher muſt have
drawn from the obſervation I have enlarged upon. Addiſon.
The gods have placed labour before virtue. Addison.
This obſervation we have made on man. Addſon.
Evil ſpirits have contraćted in the body habits of luſt and
fenſuality, malice and revenge. Addiſon.
There torments have already taken root in them. Addiſon.
It has been finely improved by many divines. Addiſon.
That excellent author has ſhewn how every particular cuſ-
tom and habit of virtue will, in its own nature, produce the
heaven, or a ſtate of happineſs, in him who ſhall hereafter
practiſe it. Addiſon.
21. Have at, or w’th, is an expreſſion denoting reſolution to
make ſome attempt.
He that will caper with me for a thouſand marks, let him
lend me the money, and have at him. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. ii.
I can bear my part; 'tis my occupation: have at it with
you Shakeſpeare's Winter's Tale.
I never was out at a mad frolick, though this is the maddeſt
I ever undertook: have with you, lady mine; I take you at
your word. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
HAVEN. m. ſ. [ haven, Dutch ; havre, French. J
1. A port; a harbour; a ſafe ſtation for ſhips.
Only love was threatened and promiſed to him, and ſo to
his couſin, as both the tempeſt and haven of their beſt
years. - Sidney, b. ii.
Order for ſea is given:
They have put forth the haven. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopat.
After an hour and a half ſailing, we entered into a good
haven, being the port of a fair city. Bacon’s New Atlantis.
The queen beheld, as ſoon as day appear'd,
The navy under ſail, the haven clear'd. Denham.
We may be ſhipwreckt by her breath:
Love, favour'd once with that ſweet gale,
Doubles his haſte, and fills his ſail,
*Till he arrive, where ſhe muſt prove
The haven, or the rock of love. Waller.
2. A ſhelter; an aſylum.
All places, that the eye of heaven viſits,
Are to a wiſe man ports and happy havens. Shakeſp R. II.
HA'v FNER. m.ſ.. [from haven.] An overſeer of a port.
Theſe earls and dukes appointed their ſpecial officers, as
receiver, havenºr, and cuſtomer. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
HA've R. n.ſ. (from have..] Poſſeſſor; holder.
Valour is the chiefeſt virtue, and
Moſt dignifies the haver. Shakeſp. Coriolanus:
HA’ver is a common word in the northern counties for oats:
as, haver bread for oaten bread.
When you would anneal, take a blue ſtone, ſuch as they
make haver or oat cakes upon, and lay it upon the croſs bars
of iron. Peacham.
HAUGHT. adj. [haut, French.]
1. Haughty; inſolent; proud; contemptuous; arrogant.
The proud inſulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
Have wrought the eaſy melting king, like wax. Shakeſp.
No lord of thine, thou haught inſulting man;
Nor no man's lord. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
2. High ; proudly magnanimous.
His courage haught,
Deſir'd of foreign foemen to be known,
And far abroad for ſtrange adventures ſought. Fairy Queen.
HAU'GHT ILY. adv. [from haughty.] Proudly; arrogantly ;
contemptuouſly.
Her heav'nly form too haughtily ſhe priz'd;
His perſon hated, and his gifts deſpis'd. Dryden.
HA’UGHT INEss. n.ſ. [from haughty.] Pride; arrogance; the
quality of being haughty.
By the head we make known our ſupplications, our threat-
nings, our mildneſs, our haughtineſ, our love, and our ha-
tred. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
HAUGHTY. adj. [ hautaine, French.]
1. Proud; lofty; inſolent; arrogant; contemptuous.
His wife, being a woman of a haughty and imperious na-
ture, and of a wit ſuperior to his, quickly reſented the diſre-
ſpect ſhe received from him. Clarendon, b. viii.
I ſhall ſing of battles, blood and rage,
And haughty ſouls, that mov’d with mutual hate,
In fighting fields purſu'd and found their fate. Dryd. Æn:
2. Proudly great.
Our vanquiſh'd wills that pleaſing force obey:
Her goodneſs takes our liberty away ;
And haughty Britain yields to arbitrary ſway. Prior;
3. Bold ; adventurous.
Who now ſhall give me words and ſound
Equal unto this haughty enterprize 3
Or who ſhall lend me wings, with which from ground
My lowly verſe may loftily ariſe? Fairy ºften, b. ii.
HA'v IN G. r. ſ. [from have.]
1. Poſſeſſion ; eſtate; fortune.
My having is not much;
I'll make diviſion of my preſent with you :
Hold, there's half my coffer. Shakespeare. Twelfth Night.
2. The aët or ſtate of poſſeſſing.
Of the one ſide was alleged the having a pićture, which
the other wanted; of the other ſide, the firſt ſtriking the
ſhick!. Stany.
Thou art not for the faſhion of theſe times,
Where none will ſweat but for promotion;
And having that, do choak their ſervice up,
Even with the having. Shakespeare As you like it.
3 Behaviour; regularity. This is ſtill retained in the Scot-
tiſh dialect.
The gentleman is of no having: he kept company with
the wild prince and Poinz: he is of too high a región; he
knows too much. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
HA’v Iou R. n.ſ.. [for behaviour.] Condućt; manners. -
Their ill haviour garres men miſſay
Both of their doctrines and their fay. Spenſer’s Paſtoral.
To HAUL. v. a. ſhaler, French, to draw.] To pull; to draw;
to drag by violence. A word which, applied to things, im-
Plies violence; and, to perſons, aukwardneſs or rudeneſs.
Thy Dol, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,
Is in baſe durance and contagious priſon,
Hcul'd thither by mechanick dirty hands. Shakespeare Henry IV.
The youth with ſongs and rhimes, -
Some dance, ſome haul the rope. Denham.
Some the wheels prepare,
And faſten to the horſes feet; the reſt
With cables haul along th' unwieldly beaſt. Dryden's AEm.
In his grandeur he naturally chuſes to haul up others
after him whoſe accompliſhments moſt reſemble his own. Swift.
Thither they bent, and haul’d their ſhips to land;
The crooked keel divides the yellow ſand, Pope's Odſey.
While romp-loving miſs
Is haul’d about in gallantry robuſt. Thomſon's Autumn.
HAUL. n.ſ. [from the verb.] Pull; violence in dragging.
The leap, the ſlap, the haul; and ſhook to notes
Of native muſick, the reſpondent dance. Thomſ. Winter.
HAUM. m. ſ. ſ or hame, or balm; pealm, Saxon; halm, Dutch
and Daniſh.] Straw.
In champion countrie a pleaſure they take
To mow up their haume for to brew and to bake:
The haume is the ſtraw of the wheat or the rie,
Which once being reaped, they mow by and by. Tºſºr.
Having ſtripped off the heum or binds from the poles, as
you pick the hops, ſtack them up for their ſecurity in Winter.
Mortimer’s Husbandry.
HAUNCH. m.ſ...[hancke, Dutch; hanche, French; anca, Italian.]
1. The thigh; the hind hip.
Hail, groom! didſt thou not ſee a bleeding hind,
Whoſe right haunch earſt my ſtedfaſt arrow ſtrake?
If thou didſt, tell me. Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 3:
To make a man able to teach his horſe to ſtop and turn
quick, and to reſt on his haunches, is of uſe to a gentleman
both in peace and war. Decke.
2. The rear; the hind part.
OWeſtmorland, thou art a Summer bird,
Which ever in the haunch of Winter fings
The lifting up of day. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
To HAUNT. v. a. [hanter, French.]
1. To frequent; to be much about any place or perſon.
A man who for his hoſpitality is ſo much haunted, that no
news ſtir but come to his ears. Sidney.
Now we being brought known unto her, the time that we
ſpent in curing ſome very dangerous wounds, after once we
were acquainted, and acquainted we were ſooner than our-
ſelves expected, ſhe continually almoſt haunted us. Sidney.
I do haunt thee in the battle thus,
Becauſe ſome tell me that thou art a king. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
She this dang'rous foreſt haunts,
And in ſad accents utters her complaints. J/aller.
Earth now
Secur'd like to heav'n, a ſeat where gods might dwell,
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt
Her ſacred ſhades. Milton's Paradiſe Left, b. vii.
Celeſtial Venus haunts Idalia's groves;
Diana Cynthus, Ceres Hybla loves. Pope's Spring.
2. It is uſed frequently in an ill ſenſe of one that comes unwel-
COIne.
You wrong me, fir, thus ſtill to haunt my houſe;
I told you, fir, my daughter is diſpos'd of. Shakeſpeare.
Oh, could I ſee my country-ſeat
There leaning near agentle brook,
Sleep, or peruſe ſome ancient book;
And there in ſweet oblivion drown
Thoſe cares that haunt the court and town. Swift.
3. It is eminently uſed of apparitions or ſpectres that appear in
a particular place.
Faul
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A w.
H A Y
ºr.
ºr.
d; ºr,
gº
ºis
in 14
ºat
gº
J.
*ſſ,
º
tº gº
s
ºw:
ſ: we
ºn ſuſ-
jº,
Hº".
ſº
jº
º, } º
Foul ſpirits haunt my reſting place,
And ghaſtly viſions break my ſleep by night.
All theſe the woes of Oedipus have known,
Your fates, your furies, and your haunted town. Pºpe.
To HAUNT. v. n. To be much about ; to appear frequently.
I’ve charged thee not to haunt about my doors:
In honeſt plainneſs thou haſt heard me ſay,
My daughter's not for thee. Shakespeare's Othelle,
Where they moſt breed and haunt, I have obſerv'd
The air is delicate. Shakeſpeare', AJacbeth.
HAUNT. n.ſ. (from the verb.] -
1. Place in which one is frequently found.
We ſet toils, nets, gins, ſnares and traps for beaſts and
birds in their own haunts and walks, and without any ſeal of
faith and confidence. L’E/irange.
To me pertains not, ſhe replies,
To know or care where Cupid flies;
What are his haunts, or which his way,
Where he would dwell, or whither ſtray. Prior.
A ſcene where, if a god ſhould caſt his ſight,
A god might gaze and wonder with delight !
Joy touch d the meſſenger of heav'n ; he ſtay'd
Entranc'd, and all the bliſsful haunt ſurvey'd. Pope's Odyſſ.
2. Habit of being in a certain place. -
- The haunt you have got about the courts will one day or
another bring your family to beggary. Arluthn. john Bull.
HA(UNTER. n.ſ.. [from haunt..] Frequenter; one that is often
found in any place.
The ancient Grecians were an ingenious people, of whom
the vulgar ſort, ſuch as were haunters of theatres, took plea-
ſure in the conceits of Ariſtophanes. Wotton on Education.
O goddeſs, haunter of the woodland green,
Queen of the nether ſkies. Dryden's Fables.
Ha'vock. n.ſ.. [hafog, Welſh, devaſtation.] Waſte; wide and
general devaſtation; mercileſs deſtruction.
Having been never uſed to have any thing of their own,
and now being upon ſpoil of others, they make no ſpare of
any thing, but havock and confuſion of all they meet with.
Spenſer on Ireland.
Fairfix.
Saul made havock of the church. Aéis viii. 3.
Ye gods, what havock does ambition make
Among your works Addison's Cato.
The Rabbins, to expreſs the great havock which has been
made of them, tells us, that there were ſuch torrents of holy
blood ſhed, as carried rocks of a hundred yards in circum-
ference above three miles into the ſea. Addiſon's Speciator.
If it had either air or fuel, it muſt make a greater havock
than any hiſtory mentions. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
HA’vock, interj. [from the noun..] A word of encourage-
ment to ſlaughter.
Why ſtand theſe royal fronts amazed thus
Cry havock, kings! Shakeſp. King john.
Até by his ſide,
Cries havock / and lets looſe the dogs of war. Shakeſpeare.
To Ha'vock. v. a. [from the noun..] To waſte; to deſtroy;
to lay waſte. -
Whatſoever they leave, the ſoldier ſpoileth and havocketh
likewiſe; ſo that, between both, nothing is very ſhortly left.
Spenſer's State of Ireland.
See with what heat theſe dogs of hell advance,
To waſte and havock yonder world, which I
So fair and good created Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
HA'ut boy. n.ſ.. [haut and boi..] A wind inſtrument.
I ſaw it, and told John of Gaunt he beat his own name;
for you might have truſs'd him and all his apparel into an eel-
fkin: the caſe of a treble hautboy was a manſion for him, a
court; and now hath he land and beeves. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Now give the hautboys breath; he comes, he comes. Dry.
HA’UT Boy Strawberry. See Sºr RAw BERRY. -
HA w. n.ſ. [ pax, Saxon. J
1. The berry and ſeed of the hawthorn. -
Now ſow and go harrow, where ridge ye did draw
The ſeed of the bremble with kernel and haw. Tuſſer.
Years of ſtore of haws and hips commonly portend cold
Winters. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
His quarrel to the hedge was, that his thorns and his bram-
bles did not bring forth raiſins, rather than haws and black-
berries. L'Eſtrange.
2. An excreſcence in the eye.
3. [paga, Saxon; haw, a garden, Daniſh.] A ſmall piece of
ground adjoining to an houſe. In Scotland they call it haugh.
Upon the haw at Plymouth is cut out in the ground the
portraiture of two men, with clubs in their hands, whom they
term Gog and Magog. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
HA'w THoRN. m. ſ. [ pae; Sonn, Saxon.] A ſpecies of med-
lar; the thorn that bears haws.
The great uſe to which it is applied in England is to make
hedges and fences; and there are two or three varieties of it
about London; but that ſort which produces the ſmalleſt
leaves is preferable, becauſe its branches always grow cloſe
together. Miller, w 7
There is a man haunts the foreſt, that abuſes our young
plants with carving Roſalin on their barks; hangs odes upon
bawthorns, and elegies on brambles. Shik. As you like it.
The hawthorn fly is all black, and not big. Halton's Angler,
Some in their hands, beſide the lance and ſhield,
The boughs of woodbine, or of hawthorn held. Dryden
Now hawthorns bloſſom, now the daifies ſpring. Pºpe.
The hawthorn whitens, and the juicy groves
"Put forth their buds. Thomſon's Spring.
To HAw. v. n. [Perhaps corrupted from hawk or hack.J. To
ſpeak ſlowly with frequent intermiſſion and heſitation.
'Tis a great way; but yet, after a little humming and haw-
ing upont, he agreed to undertake the job. L’Eſtrange.
HAwk. n.ſ. [ habeg, Welſh; paroc, Saxon.]
I. t bird of prey, uſed much anciently in ſport to catch other
irds.
Do'ſt thou love hawking? Thou haſt hawks will ſoar
Above the morning lark. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
It can be no more diſgrace to a great lord to draw a fair
pićture, than to cut his hawk's meat. Peacham on Drawing.
Whence borne on liquid wing
The ſounding culver ſhoots; or where the hawk,
High in the beetling cliff, his airy builds. Thomſºn's Spring.
2. [ Hoch, Welſh.] An effort to force phlegm up the throat.
To Hawk. v. n. [from hawk.]
1. To fly hawks at fowls; to catch birds by means of a hawk.
'Tis his highneſs' pleaſure -
You do prepare to ride unto St. Alban's,
Whereas the king and queen do mean to hawk. Shakeſpeare.
Do'ſt thou love hawking * Thou haſt hawks will ſoar
Above the morning lark. Shakeſpeare.
One followed ſtudy and knowledge, and another hawking
and hunting. Locke.
He that hawks at larks and ſparrows has no leſs ſport, though
a much leſs conſiderable quarry, than he that flies at nobler
game. - Locke.
A falc'ner Henry is, when Emma hawks ;
With her of tarſels and of lures he talks. Prizr,
2. To fly at ; to attack on the wing. -
A faulcon tow'ring in her pride of place, -
Was by a mouſing owl hawk'd at and kill’d. Shakeſp Macb.
Whether upward to the moon they go,
Or dream the Winter out in caves below, }
Or hawk at flies elſewhere, concerns us not to know. Dry. ).
3. [Hoch, Welſh J To force up phlegm with a noiſe.
Come, ſit, fit, and a ſong.——Shall we clap into’t round-
ly, without hawking or ſpitting, or ſaying we are hoarſe,
which are the only prologues to a bad voice. Shakeſpeare.
She complained of a ſoreneſs of her throat, and of a ſtink-
ing tough phlegm which ſhe hawked up in the mornings.
JWiſeman's Surgery:
Blood, caſt out of the throat or windpipe, is ſpit out with
a hawking or ſmall cough that out of the gums is ſpit out
without hawking, coughing, or vomiting. Harvey on Conſumpt.
4. To ſell by proclaiming it in the ſtreets. [From hock, German,
a ſaleſman.]
His works were hawk'd in ev'ry ſtreet;
But ſeldom roſe above a ſheet. Swift.
HA’w KED. adj. [from hawk.] Formed like a hawk's bill.
Flat noſes ſeem comely unto the Moor, an aquiline or
hawked one unto the Perſian, a large and prominent noſe unto
the Roman. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
HA'wkER. m. ſ. [from hock, German.] One who ſells his
wares by proclaiming them in the ſtreet.
I ſaw my labours, which had coſt me ſo much thought and
watching, bawled about by common hawkers, which 1 once
intended for the weighty conſideration of the greateſt perſon.
ºft. Windication of Iſaac Bickeſtaff.
To grace this honour'd day the queen proclaims,
By herald hawkers, high heroick games :
She ſummons all her ſons; an endleſs band
Pours forth, and leaves unpeopled half the land. Pope,
HA'wkweed. n.ſ.
The charaćters are: the ſtalks are branched and ſlender,
the leaves produced alternately, and the flower conſiſts of
many leaves placed in an orbicular order, and open in form
of a marigold: the ſeeds are ſlender and angular, or furrowed;
the whole plant hath a milky juice, Oxtongue is a ſpecies of
this plant. Miller. -
HA'wses. n.ſ. [of a ſhip.] Two round holes under the ſhip's
head or beak, through which the cables paſs when ſhe is at
anchor. Harris.
HAY. n.ſ. [prez, p15, Saxon; hey, Dutch..] Graſs dried to
fodder cattle in Winter.
Make hay while the ſun ſhines. Camden’s Remains.
Make poor men's cattle break their necks;
Set fire on barns and hay ſtacks in the night,
And bid the owners quench them with their tears. Shakeſp.
We have beats of dungs, and of hays and herbs laid up
moiſt. Bacon's New *::::
e<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H A Z
H E A
|
!
Or if the earlier ſeaſon lead -
To the tann'd hay cock in the mead. Miltºn.
Bring them for food ſweet boughs and oſlars cut,
Nor all the Winter long thy hay rick ſhut. May's Wigil.
Some turners turn long and ſlender ſprigs of ivory, as ſmall
as an hay ſtalk, Mºxon's Mech. Exer.
The beſt manure for meadows is the bottom of hay mows
and hay ſtacks. Mrtimer’s Huslandry.
Hay and oats, in the management of a groom, will make
ale. * Swift.
By ſome haycock, or ſome ſhady thorn,
He bids his beads both even ſong and morn. Dryden.
Blouzelinda, in a gameſome mood,
Behind a haycock loudly ſaughing flood. Gay's Paſłorals.
The hum of bees inviting ſleep ſincere,
Into the guiltleſs breaſt, beneath the ſhade, -
Or thrown at large amid’ the fragrant hay. Thomſ. Autumn.
Tº dance the HAY. To dance in a ring: probably from dancing
round a hay cock.
I will play on the tabor to the worthies,
And let them dance the hay. Shakeſp. Love's Lalour Lºſt.
This maids think on the hearth they ſee,
When fires well nigh conſumed be,
There dancing hays by two and three,
Juſt as your fancy caſts them. Draytºn's Nymphid.
The gum and gliſt’ning, which with art
And ſtudy’d method, in each part
Hangs down the heart,
Looks juſt as if that day
Snails there had crawl'd the hay. Suckling.
HAY. n.ſ.. [from haie, French, a hedge.] A net which incloſes
the haunt of an animal
Coneys are deſtroyed by hays, curs, ſpaniels, or tumblers
bred up for that purpoſe. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
HA’Y MAKER. m. ſ. [hay and make.] One employed in drying
graſs for hay. -
As to the return of his health and vigour, were you here,
ou might enquire of his haymakers. Pope to Swift.
HAZARD. m. ſ. [hazard, French ; azar, Spaniſh ; haſ i, Ru-
nick, danger.] -
1. Chance; accident : fortuitous hap.
I have ſet my life upon a caſt,
And I will ſtand the hazard of the die. Shalºft. Rich. III.
I will upon all hazards well believe
Thou art my friend, that know'ſt my tongue ſo well. Shakespeare
Where the mind does not perceive this connection, there
mens opinions are not the produćt of judgment, but the
effe&amp;ts of chance and hazard, of a mind floating at all adven-
tures, without choice and without direction. Locke.
2. Danger ; chance of danger.
We are bound to yield unto our Creator, the father of all
mercy, eternal thanks, for that he hath delivered his law unto
the world ; a law wherein ſo many things are laid open, as a
light which otherwiſe would have been buried in darkneſs,
not without the hazard, or rather not with the hazard, but
with the certain loſs of thouſands of ſouls, moſt undoubtedly
now ſaved. Hooker, b. i.
The hazard I have run to ſee you here, ſhould inform you
that I love not at a common rate. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Men are led on from one ſtage of life to another in a con-
dition of the utmoſt hazard, and yet without the leaſt appre-
henſion of their danger. Rºgers's Sermons.
3. A game at dice.
The duke playing at hazard at the groom-porter's, in much
company, held in a great many hands together, and drew a
huge heap of gold. Swift.
To HA’za R D. v. a. [hazarder, French..] To expoſe to chance;
to put into danger.
They might, by perſiſting in the extremity of that opinion,
hazard greatly their own eſtates, and ſo weaken that part
which their places now give. Hooker, b. v.
It was not in his power to adventure upon his own fortune,
or bearing a publick charge to hazard himſelf againſt a man
of private condition, Hayward.
To HA'zARD. v. n.
1. To try the chance.
I pray you tarry : pauſe a day or two,
Before you hazard; for in chufing wrong,
I loſe your company. Shakespeare. 4Merchant ºf Wenice.
2. To adventure.
She from her fellow-provinces would go,
Rather than hazard to have you her foe. J/Zºller.
HA'zARDABLE. aff. [from hazard.] Ventureſome; liable to
chance. -
An hazarda'le determination it is, unto fluòuating and indiſ-
fºrer; effects, to affix a poſitive type or period. Brown,
HA'z &amp; 2 ER. m / [from hazard.j He who hazards.
HAZA PR Y. m.ſ.. [from hazard..] Temerity; precipitation;
ra,h adventurouſneſs. Obſolete.
Haſty writh, and heedleſs hazardry,
Do breed repentaace late, and laſting infamy.
Fairy ºfteen.
--
HA". A R cous. adj. [hazardºx, Fr. from hazard J Dangerous;
expoſed to chance.
Grant that our hazardous attempt prove vain,
We feel the worſt, ſecur'd from greater pain. Drydºn.
HA’za R Dously, adv. [from hazardous.] With danger or
chance.
HAzE. m. ſ. [The etymology unknown.] I’cg; miſt.
To HAzE. v. n. To be foggy or miſty.
To HAze. v. a. To fright one.
HAZEL. m. ſ. [paerel, Saxon; corylus, Latin.]
It hath male flowers growing at remote diſtances from the
fruit on the ſame tree: the nuts grow in cluſters, and are cloſe-
Iy joined together at the bottom, each being covered with an
outward huſk or cup, which opens at the top, and when the
fruit is ripe it falls out: the leaves are roundiſh and intire.
The ſpecies are hazelnut, cobnut, and filbert. The red and
white filberts are moſtly eſteemed for their fruit. Miller.
Kate, like the hazel twig,
Is ſtraight and ſlender; and as brown in hue -
As hazelnuts, and ſweeter than the kernels. Shakespeare.
Her chariot is an empty hazel nut. Shakespeare Rom, and yu.
Why fit we not beneath the grateful ſhade,
Which hazel, intermix’d with elms, have made Dryden.
There are ſome from the ſize of a hazle nut to that of a
man's fiſt. J/oodward on Foſſils.
HA'z EL. adj. [from the noun..] Light brown; of the colour
of hazle.
Chuſe a warm dry ſoil, that has a good depth of light hazel
mould. Mortimer's Husbandry.
HA'ze LLY. adj. Of the colour of hazel; a light brown.
Uplands conſiſt either of ſand, gravel, chalk, rock or ſtone,
hazely loam, clay, or black mould. Mortimer's Husbandry.
HA’zy. adj. [from haze.] Dark; foggy; miſty.
Our cleareſt day here is miſty and hazy; we ſee not far, and
what we do ſee is in a bad light. Burner's Theory of the Earth.
- - Oft engender'd by the hazy North,
Myriads on myriads, inſect armies waft. Thomſºn.
HE. proncan. gen, him; plur. they ; gen, them. [ hy, Dutch; pe,
Saxon. It ſeems to have borrowed the plural from ºr,
plural bar, dative brum.]
1. The man that was named before.
All the conſpirators, ſave only he,
Did that they did in envy of great Caeſar.
If much you note him,
You ſhall offend him, and increaſe his paſſion;
Feed and regard him not. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I am weary of this moon; would he would change. Shakesp.
Adam ſpoke;
So cheer'd he his fair ſpouſe, and ſhe was cheer'd. Milton.
When Adam wak'd, he on his ſide
Ainſworth.
Shakeſpeare:
Leaning half rais'd hung over her. Milton.
Thus talking, hand in hand along they paſs'd
On to their bliſsful bow'rs. Milton.
Extol
Him firſt, him laſt, him midſt. Milton.
2. The man; the perſon. It ſometimes ſtands without refe-
rence to any foregoing word.
He is never poor
That little hath, but he that much deſires. Daniel.
3. Man or male being. -
Such mortal drugs I have ; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them. Shakeſp. Ram and jul.
Ay, crook-back, here I ſtand to anſwer thee, or any he the
proudeſt of thy ſort. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. iii.
Tros and his race the ſculptor ſhall employ, -
And he the god who built the walls of Troy. Dryd. Wirg.
4. Male: as, a he bear, a he goat. It is uſed where the male
and female have not different denominations.
The he's in birds have the faireſt feathers. Bacon’s N. Hiſſ.
5. In the two laſt ſenſes he is rather a noun than pronoun.
HEAD. n.ſ.. [beapon, bearb, Saxon; hººfd, Dutch ; heved, old
Engliſh, whence by contračtion head...]
1. The part of the animal that contains the brain or the organ
of ſenſation or thought.
Vein healing verven, and head purging dill. Spenſer.
Over head up-grew
Inſperable height of loftieſt ſhade. Milton's Parad Loft.
My head geers off, what filthy work you make. Dryden.
. The dewy paths of meadows we will tread,
For crowns and chaplets to adorn thy head. JDryden:
I could ſtill have offers, that ſome, who hold their heads
higher, would be glad to accept. - Swift.
2. Perſon as expoſed to any danger or penalty.
What he gets more of her than ſharp words, let it lie on
my head. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives ºf Windſºr.
Who of all ages to ſucceed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by une, will curſe
My head P ill fare our anceſtor impure. Milt. Parad. Lºft.
3, HEAD and Ears. The whole perſon.
In jingling rhimes well fortify'd and ſtrong,
He fights intrench'd o'er head and ears in ſong. Granville.
4. Denomination of any animals. -
When
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
When Innocent XI. deſired the marquis of Carpio to fur-
niſh thirty thouſand head of ſwine, he could not ſpare them;
but thirty thouſand lawyers he had at his ſervice. Addiſon,
The tax upon paſturage was raiſed according to a certain
rate per head upon cattle. - Arbuthnot on Coins.
5. Chief; principal perſon; one to whom the reſt are ſubordi-
nate ; leader; commander.
For their commons, there is little danger from them, ex-
cept it be where they have great and potent heads. Bacon.
Your head I him appoint;
And by myſelf have ſworn, to him ſhall bow
All knees in heav'n, and ſhall confeſs him lord. Milton.
The heads of the chief ſe&amp;ts of philoſophy, as Thales,
Anaxagoras, and Pythagoras, did likewiſe conſent to this
tradition. - Tillotſon's Sermons.
6. Place of honour; the firſt place.
Notwithſtanding all the juſtices had taken their places upon'
the bench, they made room for the old knight at the head of
them. Addiſon's Spediator.”
7. Place of command.
An army of fourſcore thouſand troops, with the duke of
Marlborough at the head of them, could do nothing againſt
an enemy. Addiſon on the War.
8. Countenance; preſence.
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head. Shakespeare. R. II.
With Cain go wander through the ſhade of night,
And never ſhew thy head by day or light. Shakespeare Rich. II.
Ere to-morrow's ſun ſhall ſhew his bead. Dryden.
9. Underſtanding; faculties of the mind.
The wenches laid their head; together. L'Eſtrange.
A fox and a goat went down a well to drink: the goat fell
to hunting which way to get back; oh, ſays Reynard, never
trouble your head, but leave that to me. L’Eſtrange.
Work with all the eaſe and ſpeed you can, without break-
ing your head, and being ſo very induſtrious in ſtarting
foruples. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The lazy and inconſiderate took up their notions by
chance, without much beating their heads about them. Locke.
If a man ſhews that he has no religion, why ſhould we
think that he beats his head and troubles himſelf to examine
the grounds of this or that doćtrine. - Locke.
When in ordinary diſcourſe we ſay a man has a fine head,
we expreſs ourſelves metaphorically, and ſpeak in relation to
his underſtanding; and when we ſay of a woman ſhe has a
fine head, we ſpeak only in relation to her commode. Addiſon.
We laid our heads together, to conſider what grievances
the nation had ſuffered under king George. Addison Freeholder.
10. Face; front; fore part.
- The gathering crowd purſues;
The raviſhers turn head, the fight renews.
1 1. Reſiſtance; hoſtile oppoſition.
Then made he head againſt his enemies,
And Hymner flew. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Dryden.
Sometimes hath Henry Bolingbroke made head againſt my .
power. - Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Two valiant gentlemen firſt making bead againſt them, ſe-
conded by half a dozen more, made forty of them run away.
- - Raleigh's Apology.
Sin having depraved his judgment, and got poſſeſſion of his
will, there is no other principle left him naturally, by which
he can make head againſt it. South's Sermons.
12. Spontaneous reſolution.
The bordering wars in this kingdom were made altogether
by voluntaries, upon their own head, without any pay or com-
miſſion from the ſtate. Davies on Ireland.
13. State of a deer's horns, by which his age is known.
It was a buck of the firſt head. Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loft.
The buck is called the fifth year a buck of the firſt bead. Shakespeare
14. Individual. It is uſed in numbers or computation.
If there be ſix millions of people, then there is about four
acres for every head. Graunt's Bill of Mortality.
15. The top of anything bigger than the reſt.
His ſpear's head weighed ſix hundred ſhekels of iron. I Sa:
As high
As his proud head is Hºra towards the ſky,
So low tow'rds hell his roots deſcend. Denham.
Trees, which have large and ſpreading heads, would lie
with their branches up in the water. Woodward.
If the buds are made our food, they are called heads or
tops; ſo heads of aſparagus and artichoaks. Watts's Logick.
It is an equivocal term; for it ſignifies the head of a nail,
or of a pin, as well as of an animal.
16. Place of chief reſort.
The horſe took the alarm, and made their eſcape to Win-
cheſter, the head quarters.
17. The fore part of any thing, as of a ſhip.
Clarendon, b. viii.
By gallies with brazen head; ſhe might tranſport over In- .
dus at once three hundred thouſand ſoldiers.
- Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
On oozy ground his gallies moor;
Their heads are turn'd to ſea, their ſterns to ſhore. Dryden.
Hatts's Logick. .
18. That which riſes on the top.
Let it ſtand in a tub four or five days before it be put into
the caſk, ſtirring it twice a day, and beating down the head or
yeaſt into it. Mortimer's Huſbandy.
19. The blade of an axe.
. . . A man fetcheth a ſtroke with the axe to cut down the tree,
and the head ſlippeth from the helve. Deutr. xix. 5.
20. Upper part of a bed.
Iſrael bowed upon the bed's head.
21. The brain.
As eaſtern prieſts in giddy circles run,
And turn their heads to imitate the ſun.
22. Dreſs of the head.
Politick ladies think they gain a great point when they have
teazed their huſbands to buy them a laced head, or a fine petti-
Gen. xlvii. 31.
Pope's Eſſays,
COat. Swift.
23. Principal topicks of diſcourſe.
Theſe heads are of a mixed order, and we propoſe only
ſuch as belong to the natural world. Burnet's Theo. of the Earth.
Theſe heads are ſet down more fully in the arguments of
each chapter, Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
'Tis our great intereſt, and our chief duty, to ſatisfy our-
ſelves on this head, upon which our whole conduct depends.
- Atterbury's Sermons, Preface.
24. Source of a ſtream.
It is the glory of God to give; his very nature delighteth in
it: his mercies in the current, through which they would paſs,
may be dried up, but at the bead they never fail. Hooker.
The current by Gaza is but a ſmall ſtream, riſing between
it and the Red ſea, whoſe head from Gaza is little more than
twenty Engliſh miles. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Some did the ſong, and ſome the choir maintain,
Beneath a laurel ſhade, where mighty Po
Mounts up to woods above, and hides his head below. Dry.
25. Criſis ; pitch.
The indiſpoſition which has long hung upon me, is at laſt
grown to ſuch a head, that it muſt quickly make an end of
me, or of itſelf. - Addiſon's Spectator.
26. Power; influence; force; ſtrength; dominion.
Within her breaſt though calm, her breaſt though pure,
Motherly cares and fears got head, and rais'd
Some troubled thoughts. Milton's Paradiſe Regain'd.
God will not admit of the paſſionate man's apology, that
he has ſo long given his unruly paſſions their head, that he can-
not now govern nor controul them. South's Sermºns.
–27. Body; conflux.
People under command chuſe to conſult, and after to march
in order; and rebels, contrariwiſe, run upon an head together
in confuſion... - Bacon's Henry VII.
Let all this wicked crew gather
Their forces to one head. Ben. johnſon's Catiline.
28. Power; armed force. .
My lord, my lord, the French have gather'd head. Shakespeare
At ſixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he ſought
Beyond the mark of others. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanuſ.
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
As ever offer'd foul play in a ſtate. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Far in the marches here we heard you were, -
Making another head to fight again. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
-29. Liberty in running a horſe.
He gave his able horſe the head,
And bounding forward ſtruck his agile heels
Againſt the panting ſides of his poor jade
Up to the rowel-head. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
30. It is very improperly applied to roots.
- How turneps hide their ſwelling heads below,
And how the cloſing coleworts upwards grow. Gay.
31. He AD and Shoulders. By force; violently. -
People that hit upon a thought that tickles them, will be
ſtill bringing it in by head and ſhoulders, over and over, in
ſeveral companies. - L’Eſtrange.
They can bring in every odd exception ingrammar, every
figure of ſpeech, head and ſhoulders by main force, in ſpite of
nature and their ſubječt. Felton on the Claſſicks.
To HEAD. v. a...[from the noun.]
1. To lead; to influence; to direct; to govern.
Nor is what has been ſaid of princes leſs true of all other
governours, from him that heads an army to him that is maſter
of a family, or of one ſingle ſervant. South.
Abas, who ſeem'd our friend, is either fled,
Or, what we fear, our enemies does head. Dryd. Aurengz.
This lord had headed his appointed bands,
In firm allegiance to his king's commands. Prior.
2. To behead; to kill by taking away the head.
If you bead and hang all that offend that way but for ten
years together, you'll be glad to give out a commiſſion for
more heads. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
3. To fit anything with a head, or principal part.
Headed with flints and feathers bloody dy'd,
Such as the * in their quivers hide.
I I
Pairy Queen.
Of
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
H E A
Of cornel-wood a ſpear upright. . . .
Headed with piercing ſteel, and poliſh'd bright. Dryden.
4. To lop trees. - - -
You muſt diſbranch them, leaving only the ſummit entire:
unleſs the ſoil be very good, it may be neceſſary to head them
too. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Headach, n.ſ. [ head and ach.] Pain in the head.
From the cruel headach,
Riches do not preſerve. Sidney, b. i.
Nothing more expoſes to headachs, colds, catarrhs, and
coughs, than keeping the head warm. Locke.
In the headach he orders the opening of the vein of the
forehead. - Arbuthnot.
At ſome dear idle time,
Not plagu'd with headachs, or the want of rhyme. Pope.
HE'ADBAND. m. ſ. [ head and band.]
1. A fillet for the head; a topknot.
The Lord will take away the bonnets, and the head-
bands. Iſ. iii. 20.
2. The band at each end of a book.
He’Adborough. m. ſ. [head and borough..] A conſtable; a
ſubordinate conſtable.
Here lies John Dod, a ſervant of God, to whom he is gone,
Father or mother, ſiſter or brother, he never knew none;
A headborough and a conſtable, a man of fame,
The firſt of his houſe, and laſt of his name. Camden.
This none are able to break through,
Until they're freed by head of borough.
He'ADDREss. n.ſ.. [head and dreſs.]
Hudibras, p. i.
1. The covering of a woman's head.
There is not ſo variable a thing in nature as a lady's head-
dreſs; I have known it riſe and fall. Addiſon's Spediator.
If ere with airy horns I planted heads,
Or diſcompos'd the headdreſs of a prude. Pope.
2. Anything reſembling a headdreſs, and prominent on the
head. -
Among birds the males very often appear in a moſt beauti-
ful headdreſs, whether it be a creſt, a comb, a tuft of feathers,
or a natural little plume, erected like a kind of pinnacle on the
very top of the head. Addiſon's Spectator.
He’ADER. m.ſ.. [from head J
1. One that heads nails or pins, or the like.
2. The firſt brick in the angle.
If the header of one ſide of the wall is toothed as much as
the ſtretcher on the outſide, it would be a ſtronger toothing,
and the joints of the headers of one ſide would be in the mid-
dle of the headers of the courſe they lie upon of the other
ſide, - Moxon's Mech. Exer.
HE'Apo ARGle. n.ſ.. [head and gargle.] A diſeaſe, I ſup-
poſe, in cattle. -
For the headgargle give powder of fenugreek. Mortimer.
He’AD IN Ess. n.ſ.. [from heady..] Hurry; raſhneſs; ſtubborn-
neſs; precipitation; obſtinacy.
If any will raſhly blame ſuch his choice of old and un-
wonted words, him may I more juſtly blame and condemn,
either of witleſs headineſs in judging, or of headleſs hardineſs
in condemning. - Spenſer.
He’ADLAND. m.ſ.. [head and land.]
1. Promontary; cape.
An heroick play ought to be an imitation of an heroick
poem, and conſequently love and valour ought to be the ſub-
ject of it: both theſe ſir William Davenant began to ſhadow;
but it was ſo as diſcoverers draw their maps, with headland;
and promontories. Dryden. :
2. Ground under hedges. -
Now down with the graſs upon headland, about,
That groweth in ſhadow ſo rank and ſo ſtout. Tuſſºr.
HEADLess adj. [from head.]
I. Without an head; beheaded.
His ſhining helmet he 'gan ſoon unlace,
And left his headleſs body bleeding at the place. Fairy Queen.
Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood, -
I would remove theſe tedious ſtumbling blocks,
And ſmooth my way upon their headleſs necks. Shaft. H. VI.
On the cold'earth lies th' unregarded king,
A herd'ſ carkaſs, and a nameleſs thing. Pºlan.
_Prickly ſtubs, inſtead of trees, are found; -
Headleſ, the moſt, and hideous to behold. Dryden.
2. Without a chief.
They reſted not until they had made the empire ſtand head-
leſ; about ſeventeen years. Raleigh's Eſſays.
3. Obſtinate; inconſiderate; ignorant; wanting intellects:
perhaps for heedleſs.
If any will raſhly blame ſuch his choice of old unwonted . -
words, him may I more juſtly blame and condemn, either of
witeſ, headineſs in judging, or of headlºſs hardineſs in con-
demning. Spenſer.
HEAD long. adj.
* . Raſh; thoughtleſs. -
2. Sudden ; precipitate.
" "enly fell from an exceſs of favour, which, many ex-
amples having taught them, never ſtopt his race 'till it came to
a headlong overthrow. Sidney, b. ii
HE/Adlon G. adv. [head and long.] . …"
1. With the head foremoſt. It is often doubtful whether this
word be adjective or adverb.
I'll look no more,
Leſt my brain turn, and the deficient fight
Topple down headlong. Shakeſp King Lar
Who, while he ſteering view'd the ſtars, and bo."
His courſe from Africk to the Latian ſhore,
Fell headlong down. Dryden's Żn, b.vi
Headlong from thence the glowing fury ſprings, -
And o'er the Theban palace ſpreads her wings. Pºpe
2, Raſhly ; without thought; precipitately. -
To give Ahab ſuch warning, as might infallibly have pre-
vented his deſtruction, was eſteemed by him cvil; and to puſh
him on headlong into it, becauſe he was fond of it, was a
counted good. . - South's Sermons.
Some aſk for envy'd pow'r, which publick hate
Purſues and hurries headlong to their fate; -
Down go the titles. Dryden's juv. Sai,x,
3. Haſtily; without delay or reſpite.
- Unhappy offspring of my teeming womb
Dragg'd headlong from thy cradle to thy tomb. Dryden,
4. It is very negligently uſed by Shakeſpeare.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill, which ſhall be thy grave. Shaieff. H. VI.
He'ADMoULD-shot. n.ſ.. [head, mould, and ſhot..] This is when
the ſutures of the ſkull, generally the coronal, ride; that is,
have their edges ſhot over one another; which is frequent
in infants, and occaſions convulſions and death. &amp;#ing.
He’ADPIEce. m. ſ. [head and piece.]
1. Armour for the head; helmet; morion.
I pulled off my headpiece, and humbly intreated her pardon,
or knowledge why ſhe was cruel. Sidney, b. ii.
The word is giv'n; with . ſpeed they lace
The ſhining headpiece, and the ſhield embrace. Dryden.
Another reaſon for this fiction was their wearing a head-
piece, or martial vizor, that had but one fight through it.
Broome's Notes on the Odºſy.
This champion will not be in ſuch haſte to come into the
field, before his great blunderbuſs can be got ready, his old
ruſty breaſtplate ſcoured, and his cracked headpiece mended.
Swift,
2. Underſtanding; force of mind.
'Tis done by ſome ſeverals
Of headpiece extraordinary, lower meſſes
Perchance are to this buſineſs purblind. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
Eumenes had the beſt headpiece of all Alexander's cap-
tains. Prideaux.
HE'AdqJARTERs. n.ſ.. [head and quarters..] The place of ge-
neral rendezvous, or lodgment for ſoldiers. -
Thoſe ſpirits, poſted upon the out-guards, immediately
ſcour off to the brain, which is the headquarters, or office of
intelligence, and there they make their report. Collier.
HE'Adship. n.ſ.. [from head..] Dignity; authority; chief
place.
Heads MAN. n.ſ.. [head and man.] Executioner; one that
cuts off heads. -
* Rods broke on our aſſociates bleeding backs,
And headſmen lab'ring 'till they blunt their ax? . . Pryº.
He'abst Ali... n.ſ.. [head and ſial.] Part of the bridle that
covers the head. 1:
His horſe near legg'd before, and with a half-cheek" bit,
and a head/fall of ſheep's leather, which being reſtrained to
keep him from ſtumbling, hath been often burſt, and now re-
paired with knots. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew;
Headstone. n.ſ.. [head and ſome.j The firſt or capital
ſtone.
The ſtone, which the builders refuſed, is become the hº
ſtone. Pſ. cxviii. 24.
Hé'Adstrong. adj. [head and/frong.] Unreſtrained; ...
ungovernable; reſolute to run his own way: as a horſe whoſe
head cannot be held in. leſ
An example, for head/irong and inconſiderate zeal, no leſs
fearful than Achitophel for proud and irreligious wiſdom. .
Hooker, Dedication.
How now, my headſtrong / where have you been gadding?
—Where I have learnt me to repent the fin ‘full
Of diſobedient oppoſition. Shakespeare. Rome, andjulid.
But ſuch a headſtrong potent fault it is, !, Night.
That it but mocks reproof. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
He ill aſpires to rule
Cities of men or headſtrong multitudes, iſ Loff
Subject himſelf to anarchy within. Milton's Paradiſe i.
There's no oppoſing the torrent of a headſtrº; " ti-
tude. L'Eſtrage.
Now let the head/rong boy my will controul: .
Virtue's no ſlave of man; no ſex confines the ſoul?
I, for myſelf, th’ imperial ſeat will gain,
And he ſhall wait my leiſure for his reign. Dryd, Autº:
Your
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
H E A
.
º
º:
---
Your father's folly took a head/frong courſe;
But I'll rule yours, and teach you love by force.
I'll try if yet I can reduce to reaſon -
This head/rºng youth, and make him ſpurn at Cato. Addison
Why there it is, you will be both judge and party: I am
ſorry thou diſcovereſt ſo much of thy headjiring humour. Arb.
Can we forget how the mad head/rong rout
Defy'd their prince to arms, nor made account
Of faith or duty, or allegiance ſworn ?
He’Adwork MAN. m. ſ. [head work and man.] The foreman,
or chief ſervant over the reſt.
Can Wood be otherwiſe regarded than as the mechanick,
the headworkman, to prepare his furnace, metal, and ſtamps?
Swift's Addreſs to Parliament.
Dryden.
He’AD.Y. adj. [from head Î -
1. Raſh; precipitate; haſty; violent; ungovernable; hurried
on with paſſion.
Take pity of your town and of your people,
While yet the cool and temp'rate wind of grace
O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
Of heady murther, ſpoil and villany. Shakeſp. Henry V.
I am adviſed what I ſay:
Neither diſturb’d with the effect of wine,
Nor, heady raſh, provok'd with raging ire;
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiſer mad. Shakeſpeare.
I’ll forbear,
And am fall'n out with my more heady will,
To take the indiſpos'd and ſickly fit -
For the ſound man. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Never came reformation in a flood
With ſuch a heady current ſcow’ring faults;
Nor ever hydra-headed wilfulneſs
So ſoon did loſe his ſeat, and all at once,
As in this king. Shakespeare's Henry V.
Wives, the readieſt helps
To betray head huſbands, rob the eaſy. Ben. johnſ. Catil.
Men, naturally warm and heady, are tranſported with the
greateſt fluſh of good nature. Addiſon's Freeholder.
2. Apt to affect the head. -
I was entertained with a ſort of wine which was very
heady, but otherwiſe ſeemed to be ſack. Boyle.
Since hearty beef and mutton will not do,
Here's julep-dance, ptiſan of ſong and ſhow:
Give you ſtrong ſenſe, the liquor is too heady;
You're come to farce, that's aſſes milk, already.
Flow, Welſted flow, like thine inſpirer, beer;
- Heady, not ſtrong; and foaming, though not full. Pºpe.
To HEAL. v. a. ſhagan, Gothick; paelan, Saxon; heelen,
Dutch.]
1. To cure a perſon; to reſtore from hurt or ſickneſs.
I will reſtore health, and heal thee of thy wounds.jer. xxx.
Who would not believe that our Saviour healed the fick, and
raiſed the dead, when it was publiſhed by thoſe who themſelves
often did the ſame miracles Addiſon.
Phyſicians, by juſt obſervations, grow up to an honourable
degree of ſkill in the art of healing. Iłatts's Imp. of the Mind.
2. To cure a wound or diſtemper. -
Thou haſt no healing medicines. jer. xxx. 13.
A fontanel had been made in the ſame leg, which he was
forced to heal up, by reaſon of the pain. Iłºſeman's Surgery.
3. To perform the act of making a ſore to cicatrize, after it is
cleanſed.
After ſeparation of the eſchar, I deterged and healed. Iſºſºm.
4. To reconcile: as, he healed all diſſenſions.
To HEAL. v. m. To grow well. Uſed of wounds or ſores.
Thoſe wounds heal that men do give themſelves. Shakespeare
Abſceſſes will have a greater or leſs tendency to heal, as
they are higher or lower in the body. Sharp's Surgery.
He’ALER. n.ſ.. [from heal.] One who cures or heals.
I will not be an healer. Iſ iii. 7.
HE'Ali NG. participial adj. [from heal. J. Mild; mollifying;
geºlºš aſſuaſive: as, he's of a healing pacifick temper.
HEALTH. n ſ [from peel, Saxon.]
1. Freedom from bodily pain or ſickneſs.
Health is the faculty of performing all adions proper to a
human body, in the moſt perfect manner. $2nincy.
Our father is in good health, he is yet alive. Gen. xliii. 28.
May be he is not well;
Infirmity doth ſtill neglect all office,
Whereto our health is bound. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. Welfare of mind; purity; goodneſs; principle of ſalvation.
There is no health in us, Common Prayer.
The beſt preſervative to keep the mind in health, is the
faithful admonition of a friend. Bacºn, Eſſay 28.
3. Salvation ſpiritual and temporal.
My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me, and art ſo
fºr frºm my health, and from the words of my complaint? Pſ.
4. Wiſh of happineſs in drinking.
Come, love and health to all;
I drink to th’ general joy of the whole table.
Shakespeare ; eart's Macbeth.
Dryden.
Phillips.
He aſked leave to begin two hºll's : the firſt was to the
king's miſtreſs, and the ſecond to his wife.
For peace at home, and for the publick wealth,
. . I mean to crown a bowl to Caeſar's health. Dryden's Perſ.
HEALTH FUL. adj [health and full.]
1. Free from ſickneſs.
Adam knew no diſeaſe, ſo long as temperance from the for-
bidden fruit ſecured him: nature was his phyſician, and inno-
cence and abſtinence would have kept him healthful to immor-
tality. South's Sermons.
2. Well diſpoſed.
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
Had you an healthful ear to hear it. Shakeſp julius Cæſar.
3. Wholeſome; ſalubrious.
There be many good and healthful airs that do appear by
habitation and proofs, that differ not in ſmell from other airs.
Bacºn's Natural Hiſłry:
While they pervert pure nature's healthful rules .
To loathſome ſickneſs; worthily ſince they -
God's image did not reverence in themſelves. Miń. P. Left.
Our healthful food the ſtomach labours thus,
At firſt embracing what it ſtraight doth cruſh. Dryden.
4. Salutary; produćtive of ſalvation.
Pour upon them the healtſal ſpirit of thy grace. Com. Prayer.
HEALTH FULLY. adv. [from healthful]
1. In health.
2. Wholſomely.
HEALTHFULNess. n.ſ.. [from healthful. J
1. State of being well.
2. Wholſomeneſs; ſalubrious qualities.
You have taſted of that cup whereof I have liberally drank,
which I look upon as God's phyſick, having that in Halthful.
nºſ, which it wants in pleaſure. King Charles.
We ventured to make a ſtandard of the healthfulneſ, of the
air from the proportion of acute and epidemical diſeaſes. Graunt.
To the winds the inhabitants of Geneva aſcribe the health-
fulneſs of their air; for as the Alps ſurround them on all fides,
there would be a conſtant ſtagnation of vapours, did not the
north wind put them in motion. Addison on Italy.
HE'AltHiLY. adv. [from healthy. ] Without ſickneſs or
pain.
He’ALTHINEss. n.ſ.. [from healthy..] The ſtate of health.
He’ALTHLEss: adj. [from health..] Weak; fickly; infirm.
He that ſpends his time in ſports, is like him whoſe gar-
ment is all made of fringes, and his meat nothing but ſauces;
they are healthleſs, chargeable, and uſeleſs. Taylor.
He’ALTHsome, adj. [from health..] Wholſome; ſalutary.
Shall I not then be ſtifled in the vault, -
To whoſe foul mouth no healthſome air breathes in,
And there be ſtrang!'d eremy Romeo comes Shakeſpeare.
He’ALTHY, adj. [from health..] In health; free from ſickneſs;
hale; ſound. - -
The huſbandman returns from the field, and from manuring
his ground, ſtrong and healthy, becauſe innocent and labo-
rious. South's Sermons.
Gardening or huſbandry, and working in wood, are fit and
healthy recreations for a man of ſtudy or buſineſs. Locke.
Temperance, induſtry, and a publick ſpirit, running thro'
the whole body of the people in Holland, hath preſerved an
infant commonwealth, of a ſickly conſtitution, through ſo
many dangers, as a much more łº, one could never have
ſtruggled againſt without thoſe advantages. Swift.
Air and exerciſe contribute to make the animal healthy. Arl.
HEAM. n.ſ. In beaſts the ſame as the after-birth in women.
HEAP. m. ſ. [peap, Saxon; hoop, Dutch and Scottiſh.]
1. Many ſingle things thrown together; a pile; an accumulation.
The way to lay the city flat,
And bury all which yet diſtinétly ranges,
In heaps and piles of ruin. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
The dead were fallen down by heaps, one upon another.
///d. xviii. 23.
Huge heaps of ſlain around the body riſe. Dryden's AEn.
One may form from it an idea of Venice in its firſt begin-
nings, when it had only a few heaps of earth for its domi-
nions. - Addiſon 0.71 Italy.
2. A crowd; a throng; a rabble.
A cruel tyranny, bathed in the blood of their emperors; a
heap of vaſſals and ſlaves, no freemen, no ihheritance, no
ſtirp or ancient families. Bacon's holy War.
3. Cluſter; number driven together.
An univerſal cry reſounds aloud;
The ſailors run in heaps, a helpleſs crowd.
To HEAP. v. a. [from the noun J
1. To throw on heaps; to pile; to throw together.
Heap on wood, kindle the fire, conſume the fleſh, and
ſpice it well. Ezek. xxiv. 10.
2. To accumulate; to lay up.
Though the wicked heap up ſilver as the duſt, and raiment
as the clay; but the juſt ſhall put it on, and the innocent ſhall
divide the ſilver. job xxvii. 16.
How great the credit was, wherein that oracle was pre-
ſerved,
A lowel.
Dryden.
-
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
H E A
º
sº
.
ſerved, may be gathered from the vaſt riches which were there
heaped up from the offerings of all the Grecian nations. Temple.
They who will make profeſſion of painting, muſt heap up
treaſures out of their reading, and there will find many won-
derful means of raiſing themſelves above others. Dryden.
3. To add to ſomething elſe.
For thoſe of old,
And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
We reſt your hermits. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
HEAPER. n.ſ.. [from heap.] One that makes piles or heaps.
HE/APY. adj. [from heap..] Lying in heaps.
Where a dim gleam the paly lanthorn throws -
O'er the mid pavement, heapy rubbiſh grows. Gay.
Scarce his head
Rais'd o'er the heaſy wreath, the branching elk
Lies ſlumb'ring ſulſen in the white abyſs. Thomſ. Winter.
To HEAR. v. m. [ pynan, Saxon; hooren, Dutch..]
1. To enjoy the ſenſe by which ſounds are diſtinguiſhed.
Sound is nothing but a certain modulation of the external
air, which, being gathered by the external ear, beats, as is
ſuppoſed, upon the membrana tympani, which moves the
four little bones in the tympanum: in like manner as it is beat
by the external air, theſe little bones move the internal air
which is in the tympanum and veſtibulum; which internal
air makes an impreſſion upon the auditory nerve in the laby-
rinth and cochlea, according as it is moved by the little bones
in the tympanum; ſo that, according to the various reflexions
of the external air, the internal air makes various impreſſions
upon the auditory nerve, the immediate organ of hearing; and
theſe different impreſfions repreſent different ſounds. Quincy.
The obječt of hearing is ſound, whoſe variety is ſo great,
that it brings in admirable ſtore of intelligence. Holder.
2. To liſten; to hearken.
Since ’tis your command, what you ſo well
Are pleas'd to hear, I cannot grieve to tell. Denham.
3. To be told; to have an account.
I have heard by many of this man. Aéïs ix. 13.
I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was diſmayed at
the ſeeing of it. Iſ Xxi. 3.
Prepare to hear of ſuch a crime
As tragick poets, ſince the birth of time,
Ne'er feign'd. - Tate's juven. Sat. 15.
This, of eldeſt parents, leaves us more in the dark, who,
by divine inſtitution, has a right to civil power, than thoſe
who never heard anything at all of heir or deſcent. Locke.
To HEAR. v. a.
1. To perceive by the ear.
The trumpeters and fingers were as one ſound to be heard
in praiſing the Lord. 2 Chro. v. 13.
2. To give an audience, or allowance to ſpeak.
He ſent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in
Chriſt. Acts xxiv. 24.
I muſt beg the forbearance of cenſure, ’till I have been heard
out in the ſequel of this diſcourſe. Locke.
3. To attend; to liſten to; to obey. -
Hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from
me. Ezek. iii. 17.
4. To attend favourably.
They think they ſhall be heard for their much ſpeaking, Mat.
5. To try; to attend judicially.
Hear the cauſes, and judge righteouſly: Deutr. i. 16.
6. To acknowledge. A Latin phraſe.
Or hearſ; thou rather pure ethereal ſtream,
Whoſe fountain who ſhall tell ? Milton.
Hear'ſ thou ſubmiſfive, but a lowly birth : Prior.
HEARD ſignifies a keeper, and is ſometimes initial; as heard-
bearht, a glorious keeper: ſometimes final, as cyneheard, a
royal keeper. Gibſºn's Camden. It is now written herd: as,
cºwherd, a cowkeeper; bymb, Saxon.
He’ARER. m. ſ. [from hear] One who attends to any doćtrine
or diſcourſe delivered orally by another.
And ſo was ſhe dulled withal, that we could come ſo near
as to hear her ſpeeches, and yet ſhe not perceive the hearers of
her lamentation. Sidney, b. ii.
St. John and St. Mathew, which have recorded theſe ſer-
mons, heard them; and being hearers, did think themſelves
as well reſpected as the phariſees. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 19.
Words, be they never ſo few, are too many, when they
benefit not the hearer. Hooker, b. v.
The hearers will ſhed tears,
And ſay, alas, it was a piteous deed! Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Tell thou the lamentable fall of me,
And ſend the hearers weeping to their beds.
Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
Plays in themſelves have neither hopes nor fears;
Their fate is only in their hearers ears. Ben, johnſon.
Her hearers had no ſhare •
In all ſhe ſpoke, except to ſtare. Swift,
HEARING; n.ſ.. [from hear.]
1. The ſenſe by which ſounds are perceived,
Bees are called with ſound upon braſs, and therefore th
have hearing. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Audience.
The French ambaſſador upon that inſtant
Crav'd audience; and the hour, I think, is come
To give him hearing. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
3. Judicial trial.
Agrippa and Bernice entered into the place of hearing. Aar.
The readers are the jury to decide according to the merits
of the cauſe, or to bring it to another hearing before ſome
other court. Dryden's Fables, Prºf.
Thoſe of different principles may be betrayed to give you a
fair hearing, and to know what you have to ſay for yourſelf.
Addiſon's Freeholder.
4. Reach of the ear.
If we profeſs, as Peter did, that we love the Lord, and
profeſs it in the hearing of men; charity is prone to hear all
things, and therefore charitable men are likely to think we do
ſo. Hooker, b. iii.
In our hearing the king charged thee, beware that none
touch Abſalom. 2 Sa. xviii. 12.
You have been talked of ſince your travels much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Wherein they ſay you ſhine. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
The fox had the good luck to be within hearing. L'Eſtrange.
To HEARKEN. v. n. [peancnian, Saxon.]
1. To liſten by way of curioſity.
The youngeſt daughter, whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from acceſs of ſuitors. Shakeſpeare:
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams. Shakespeare R. III.
They do me too much injury,
That ever ſaid I hearken'd for your death:
If it were ſo, I might have let alone
Th’ inſulting hand of Douglas over you. Shakeſpeare.
The gaping three-mouth'd dog forgets to ſnarl;
The furies hearken, and their ſnakes uncurl. Dryd. Virgil.
Louder, and yet more loud, I hear the alarms
Of human cries:
I mount the terraſs, thence the town ſurvey,
And hearken what the fruitful ſounds convey. Dryden:
He who makes much neceſſary, will want much; and,
wearied with the difficulty of the attainment, will incline to
bearken after any expedient that offers to ſhorten his way to
it. Rogers's Sermons.
2. To attend; to pay regard.
Hearken unto me, thou ſon of Zippor. Nu. xxiii. 18.
Thoſe who put paſſion in the place of reaſon, neither uſe
their own, nor hearken to other people's reaſon, any farther
than it ſuits their humour. Locke.
There's not a bleſfing individuals find, -
But ſome way leans and hearkens to the kind. Pope.
He’ARKENER. n.ſ.. [from hearken. J Liſtener; one that
hearkens. -
He’ARSAY. n.ſ.. [hear and ſay..] Report; rumour; what is
not known otherwiſe than by account from others.
For prey theſe ſhepherds two he took,
Whoſe metal ſtiff he knew he could not bend
With hearſay pićtures, or a window look. Sidney.
He affirms by hearſay, that ſome giants ſaved themſelves
upon the mountain Baris in Armenia. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
All the little ſcramblers after fame fall upon him, publiſh
every blot in his life, and depend upon hearſay to defame
him. Addiſon's Freeholder.
He Arse. n.ſ.. [of unknown etymology.]
1. A carriage in which the dead are conveyed to the grave.
2. A temporary monument ſet over a grave.
To add to your laments, -
Wherewith you now bedev king Henry's hearſe,
I muſt inform you of a diſmal fight. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
HEART. n.ſ. [peone, Saxon; hertz, German.]
1. The muſcle which by its contračtion and dilation propels
the blood through the courſe of circulation, and is therefore
conſidered as the ſource of vital motion. It is ſuppoſed in
popular language to be the feat ſometimes of courage, ſome-
times of affection.
He with providence and courage ſo paſſed over all, that the
mother took ſuch ſpiteful grief at it, that her heart brake
withal, and ſhe died. Sidney.
Thou wouldſt have left thy deareſt heart blood there,
Rather than made that ſavage duke thine heir,
And diſinherited thine only ſon. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Snakes, in my heart blood warm'd, that ſting my heart.
Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
Our battle is more full of names than your’s,
Our men more perfeót in the uſe of arms,
Our armour all as ſtrong, our cauſe the beſt;
Then reaſon wills our hearts ſhould be as good. Shakespeare H. IV.
I thank you for my veniſon, maſter Shallow.
-Maſter Page, much good do it your good heart, Shakeſp.
But
I
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
*
*
-:
.
e
gain their old poſſeſſions.
But ſince the brain doth lodge the pow'rs of ſenſe,
How makes it in the heart thoſe paſſions ſpring :
The mutual love, the kind intelligence
*Twixt heart and brain, this ſympathy doth bring. Davies.
We all ſet our hearts at reſt, ſince whatever comes from
above is for the beſt. L’Eſtrange.
The only true zeal is that which is guided by a good light
in the head, and that which conſiſts of good and innocent af-
fections in the heart. Spratt's Sermons.
Preſt with heart corroding grief and years,
To the gay court a rural ſhed prefers. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. The chief part; the vital part.
Barley being ſteeped in water, and turned upon a dry floor,
will ſprout half an inch; and, if it be let alone, much more,
until the heart be out. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
3. The inner part of any thing: -
Some Engliſhmen did with great danger paſs by water into
the heart of the country. Abbot's Deſcription of the JWorld.
The king's forces are employed in appeaſing diſorders more
near the heart of the kingdom. - Hayward.
Generally the inſide or heart of trees is harder than the
outward parts. Boyle.
Here in the heart of all the town I'll ſtay,
And timely ſuccour, where it wants, convey. Dryden.
If the foundations be bad, provide good piles made of heart
of oak, ſuch as will reach ground. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
4. Perſon; charaćter. Uſed with reſpećt to courage or kindneſs.
The king's a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
A lad of life, an imp of fame. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Hey, my hearts; cheerly, my hearts. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
What ſays my heart of elder? Ha! is he dead, bully-ſtale
Is he dead? Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſºr.
5. Courage; ſpirit. -
If it pleaſe you to make his fortune known, as I have done
Erona's, I will after take heart again to go on with his falſe-
hood. Sidney, b. ii.
There did other like unhappy accidents happen out of Eng-
land, which gave heart and good opportunity to them to re-
Spenſer on Ireland.
Wide was the wound; and a large lukewarm flood,
Red as the roſe, thence guſhed grievouſly,
That when the painim ſpy'd the ſtreaming blood,
Gave him great heart and hope of vićtory. Fairy Queen.
Eve, recov’ring heart, reply'd. Milton.
Having left that city well provided, and in good heart, his
majeſty removed with his little army to Bewdley. Clarendon.
}. inding that it did them no hurt, they took heart upon't,
went up to"t, and viewed it. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
The expelled nations take heart, and when they fly from
, one country invade another. -- Temple.
6. Seat of love. -
Ah! what avails it me the flocks to keep,
Who loſt my heart while I preſerv'd my ſheep? Pope.
7. Affection; inclination.
Joab perceived that the king's heart was towards Abſalom.
2 Sa. xiv. I.
Means how to feel, and learn each other's heart,
By th' abbot's ſkill of Weſtminſter is found. Daniel.
Nor ſet thy heart, - -
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine. Milton.
'Tis well to be tender; but to ſet the heart too much upon
any thing, is what we cannot juſtify. . . . L’Eſtrange.
A friend makes me a feaſt, and ſets all before me; but I
ſet my heart upon one diſh alone, and if that happen to be
thrown down, I ſcorn all the reſt. º Temple.
Then mixing pow'rful herbs with magick art, -
She chang'd his form who could not change his heart. Dryd.
What did I not, her ſtubborn heart to gain?
But all my vows were anſwer'd with diſdain.
8. Memory. . . . -
Whatſoever was attained to, concerning God and his work-
ing in nature, the ſame was delivered over by heart and tradi-
tion from wiſe men to a poſterity equally zealous. Raleigh.
We call the committing of a thing to memory the getting
it by heart; for it is the memory that muſt tranſmit it to the
heart; and it is in vain to expect that the heart ſhould keep
its hold of any truth, when the memory has let it go. South.
Shall I in London ačt this idle part? .
- Compoſing ſongs for fools to get by heart. Pope.
9. Good-will; ardour of zeal. To take to heart any thing, is to
be zealous or ſolicitous or ardent about it. -
If he take not their cauſes to heart, how ſhould there be
but in them frozen coldneſs, when his affections ſeem be-
numbed, from whom theirs ſhould take fire Hooker.
If he would take the buſineſs to heart, and deal in it effec-
tually, it would ſucceed well. Bacon's Henry VII.
The lady marchioneſs of Hertford engaged her huſband to
take this buſineſs to heart. Clarendon, b. viii.
Amongſt thoſe, who took it moſt to heart, ſir John Stawel
was the chief. Clarendon, b. viii.
Every prudent and honeſt man would join himſelf to that
ſide which had the good of their country moſt at heart. Addison
Dryden.
Leitned men have been now a long time ſearching after the
happy country from which our firſt parents were xiled; if
they can find it, with all my heart. Ił%:dward’, Nat. Hiſtory.
I would not be ſorry to find the Preſbyterians miſtaken in
this point, which they have moſt at heart. Swift.
What I have moſt at heart is, that ſome method ſhould be
thought on for aſcertaining and fixing our language. Swift,
Io. Paſſions; anxiety; concern.
Set your heart at reſt;
The fairyland buys not the child of me.
11. Secret thoughts; receſſes of the mind.
Michal, ſaw king David leaping and dancing before the
Lord, and ſhe deſpiſed him in her heart. 2 Sa. vi. 16.
The next generation will in tongue and heart, and every
way elſe, become Engliſh; ſo as there will be no difference or
diſtinction, but the Iriſh ſea, betwixt us. Davies on Ireland.
Thou ſaweſt the contradićtion between my heart and
Shakeſpeare.
hand. King Charles.
Would you have him open his heart to you, and aſk your
advice, you muſt begin to do ſo with him firſt. Locke.
Men, ſome to pleaſure, ſome to buſineſs take;
But every woman is, at heart, a rake. Pope, Epiſtle ii.
12. Diſpoſition of mind. -
Doing all things with ſo pretty a grace, that it ſeemed ig-
norance could not make him do amiſs, becauſe he had a hºt
to do well. Sidney.
13. The heart is conſidered as the ſeat of tenderneſs: a had
heart therefore is cruelty. - -
I've ſeen thee ſtern, and thou haſt oft beheld -
Heart hardening ſpectacles. Shakeſp. Coriolanºs.
Such iron hearts we are, and ſuch -
The baſe barbarity of human kind. Rowe's jane Shore.
14. To find in the HEART. To be not wholly averſe.
For my breaking the laws of friendſhip with you, I could
find in my heart to aſk you pardon for it, but that your now
handling of me gives me teaſon to confirm my former deal-
ing. Sidney.
I 5. Secret meaning; hidden intention.
I will on with my ſpeech in your praiſe,
And then ſhew you the heart of my meſſage. Shakespeare.
16. Conſcience; ſenſe of good or ill.
Every man's heart and conſcience doth in good or evil,
even ſecretly committed, and known to none but itſelf, either
like or diſallow itſelf. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 9.
17. Strength; power. -
Try whether leaves of trees, ſwept together, with ſome
chalk and dung mixed, to give them more heart, would not
make a good compoſt. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
He keeps a ſabbath of alternate years,
That the ſpent earth may gather heart again, -
And, better'd by ceſſation, bear the grain. Dryden's Georg.
Care muſt be taken not to plow ground out of heart, becauſe
if 'tis in heart, it may be improved by marl again. Mortimer.
18. Utmoſt degree.
. . . This gay charm,
Whoſe eye beck'd forth my wars, and call'd thee home,
Whoſe boſom was my crownet, my chief end,
Like a right gipſy, hath, at faſt and looſe,
Beguil'd me to the very heart of loſs. Shakeſheare.
19. Life. For my heart ſeems ſometimes to ſignify, if life was
at ſtake; and ſometimes for tenderneſs.
I bid the raſcal knock upon your gate,
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
I gave it to a youth,
A prating boy, that begg'd it as a fee : -
I could not for my heart deny it him. Shakeſp Mr. of Venice.
Profoundly ſkill'd in the black art,
As Engliſh Merlin for his heart. Hndibras, p. i.
20. It is much uſed in compoſition for mind, or affection.
Heart-Ach. m. ſ. [heart and ach..] Sorrow ; pang; anguiſh
of mind.
Shakeſpeare.
To die—to ſleep— . .
No more; and, by a ſleep, to ſay we end
The heartach, and the thouſand natural ſhocks -
That fleſh is heir to. Shakeſpeare's Ham'et.
HEART-BREAK, n.ſ.. [heart and break J. Overpowering ſor-
roW.
Better a little chiding than a great deal of heartbreak. Shakespeare .
HeaRT-BREAKER. n.ſ. A cant name for a woman's curls,
ſuppoſed to break the heart of all her lovers.
Like Sampſon's heartbreakers, it grew
In time to make a nation rue. Hudibras, p. i.
HEART-BREAKING. adj. Overpowering with ſorrow.
Thoſe piteous plaints and ſorrowful ſad tine,
Which late you poured forth, as ye did ſit
Beſide the ſilver ſprings of Helicone,
Making your muſick of heartbreaking mone.
HEART-BREAKING.. n.ſ. Overpowering grief.
What greater heartbreaking and confuſion can there be to
one, than to have all his ſecret faults laid open, and the ſen-
tence of condemnation paſſed upon him? Hakewiil,
Stenſºr.
-
I I ID - HEART-BURN39.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
H E A
:
Heart-burned. adj. [heart and burn.] Having the heart
inflamed. -
How tartly that gentleman looks I never can ſee him but
I am heart-burn’d an hour after. Shakespeare Much Ado about Nothing.
HEART-burning. n.ſ.. [heart and burn.]
I. Pain at the ſtomach, commonly from an acrid humour.
Fine clean chalk is one of the moſt noble abſorbents, and
powerfully corrects and ſubdues the acrid humours in the
#omach: this property renders it very ſerviceable in the car-
dialgia, or heart-burning. Woodward on Foſſils.
2. Diſcontent; ſecret enmity.
In great changes, when right of inheritance is broke, there
will remain much heart-burning and diſcontent among the
meaner people. Swift to Pope.
HE ART-DEAR. adj. Sincerely beloved.
The time was, father, that you broke your word,
When you were more endear'd to it than now;
When your own Percy, when my heart-dear Harry,
Threw many a northward look to ſee his father
Bring up his pow'rs; but he did long in vain! Shakespeare H. IV.
HEART-E Ase. n.ſ. Quiet ; tranquillity.
What infinite heart-eaſe muſt kings negle&amp;t,
That private men enjoy Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
HEART-E Asin G. adj. Giving quiet.
But come, thou goddeſs fair and free,
In heav'n yelep'd Euphroſyne, - -
And by men heart-eaſing mirth. Milton.
He ART-F Flt. adj. Felt in the conſcience.
What nothing earthly gives, or can deſtroy,
The ſoul's calm ſun-ſhine, and the heart-felt joy,
Is virtue's prize. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
HEART-PEAs. n.ſ. A plant.
The chara&amp;ters are: it hath a trailing ſtalk, emitting claſpers,
whereby it faſtens itſelf to whatever plant ſtands near it: the
flower-cup conſiſts of three leaves, the flower of eight leaves,
and are of an anomalous figure: the ovary becomes a fruit
like a bladder, divided into three cells, in which are contained
round ſeeds in form of peas, of a black colour, having the
figure of an heart of a white colour upon each. Miller.
HEART-QUELLING, adj. Conquering the affection.
And let fair Venus, that is queen of love, -
With her heart-quelling ſon, upon you ſmile. Spenſer.
HEART-RENDING. adj. Killing with anguiſh.
Heart-rending news, and dreadful to thoſe few
Who her reſemble, and her ſteps purſue;
That death ſhould licence have to rage among
The fair, the wiſe, the virtuous, and the young! I/aller.
HEART-Robbing. adj. Ecſtatick; depriving of thought.
Sweet is thy virtue, as thyſelf ſweet art;
For when on me thou ſhinedſt, late in ſadneſs,
A melting pleaſance ran through every part, -
And me revived with heart-robbing gladneſs. Spenſer.
HEART-SICK, adj.
1. Pained in mind.
If we be heart-ſick, or afflićted with an uncertain ſoul, then
we are true deſirers of relief and mercy. Taylor.
2. Mortally ill; hurt in the conſtitution.
č. Romeo, hide thyſelf.
—Not I, unleſs the breath of heart-ſick groans,
Miſt like, infold me from the ſearch of eyes. Shakeſpeare.
HEARTS-EASE. m. ſ. A plant.
Hearts-caſe is a ſort of violet that blows all Summer, and
often in Winter: it ſows itſelf. Mortimer.
HEART-sore. n.ſ. Struck with ſorrow.
Wherever he that godly knight may find,
His only heart-ſore and his only foe. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
HeART-striNG. n.ſ.. [ſtring and heart.] The tendons or
nerves ſuppoſed to brace and ſuſtain the heart.
He was by Jove deprived
Qf life himſelf, and heart-ſtrings of an eagle rived. Fa. Qu.
How, out of tune on the ſtrings
-Not ſo; but yet ſo falſe, that he grieves my very heart-
J?rings. Shakeſpeare's Two Gentlemen of Verona.
That grates my heart-ſtrings: what ſhould diſcontent him!
Except he thinks I live too long. Denham's Sophy.
If thou thinkeſt thou ſhalt periſh, I cannot blame thee to be
ſad’till thy heart-ſtrings crack. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
There's the fatal wound,
That tears my heart-ſtrings; but he ſhall be found,
My arms ſhall hold him. Granville.
HEART-ST RUck. adj.
1. Driven to the heart; infixed for ever in the mind.
Who is with him
—None but the fool who labours to out-jeſt
His heart-ſtruck injuries. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
2. Shocked with fear or diſmay.
He added not ; for Adam, at the news
Heart-ſtruck, with chilling gripe of ſorrow ſtood,
That all his ſenſes bound Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
HEART-swel LING. adj. Rankling in the mind.
Drawn into arms, and proof of mortal fight,
Through proud ambition and heart-ſwelºng hate. Spenser.
HeART-whole, adj.
1. With the affections yet unfixed.
You have not ſeen me yet, and therefore I am confident
you are heart-whole. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Cupid hath clapt him o' th' ſhoulder; but I'll warrant him
heart-whole. Shakeſpeare's As you like it,
2. With the vitals yet º -
HEART-wounded, adj. Filled with paſſion of love or grief.
Mean time the queen, without refle&amp;tion due,
Heart-wounded, to the bed of ſtate withdrew. Pºpe's Odyſ.
HEART-wou NDING. adj. Filling with grief.
With a ſhriek heart-wounding loud ſhe cry'd,
While down her cheeks the guſhing torrents ran,
Faſt falling on her hands. Rowe's jane Shore.
HE'ARTED. adj. It is only uſed in compoſition: as, hard
hearted.
To He'ART EN. v. a. [from heart J
1. To encourage; to animate; to ſtir up.
Palladius blaming thoſe that were ſlow, heartening them that
were forward, but eſpecially with his own example leading
them, made an impreſſion into the ſquadron. Sidn'y.
, My royal father, cheer theſe noble lords,
And hearten thoſe that fight in your defence:
Unſheath your ſword, good father; cry, St. George! Shakespeare
This rare man, Tydides, would prepare;
That he might conquer, hearten’d him, and taught him
tricks. Chapman's Iliadi,
Thus hearten’d well, and fleſh’d upon his prey,
The youth may prove a man another day. Drydºn.
2. To meliorate with manure.
The ground one year at reſt; forget not then
With richeſt dung to hearten it again. May’s Wirg. Georz.
He ARTH. n.ſ. The pavement of a room in which a fire is
made; the ground under the chimney.
Hoop'd out of Rome: now this extremit
Hath brought me to this hearth. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Cricket, to Windſor chimneys ſhalt thou leap,
Whereas thou find'ſt unrak'd, and hearth; unſwept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry. Shakespeare
Good luck befriend thee, ſon; for at thy birth
The fairy ladies danc'd upon the hearth. Milton.
The vanquiſh'd, fires withdraw from every place;
Or, full with feeding, ſink into a fleep:
Each houſhold genius ſhews again its face,
And from the hearths the little lares creep. Dryden.
He’ARtil Y. adv. [from hearty.]
1. Sincerely; actively ; diligently; vigorouſly.
Where his judgment led him to oppoſe men on a publick
account, he would do it vigorouſly and heartily; yet the op-
poſition ended there. Atterbury's Sermons.
2. From the heart; fully.
I bear no malice for my death;
But thoſe that ſought it, I could wiſh more Chriſtians;
Be what they will, I heartily forgive them. Shakespeare H. VIII.
If to be ſad is to be wiſe,
I do moſt heartily deſpiſe
Whatever Socrates has ſaid, -
Or Tully writ, or Wanley read. . Prior.
3. Eagerly; with deſire.
As for my eating heartily of the food, know that anxiety
has hindered my eating 'till this moment. Addiſon's Guardian.
HE'ARTINEss. n.ſ. [from hearty.]
1. Sincerity; freedom from hypocriſy.
This entertainment may a free face put on; derive a liberty
from heartineſs, and well become the agent. Shakespeare.
2. Vigour; diligence; ſtrength.
The anger of an enemy repreſents our faults, or admo-
niſhes us of our duty, with more heartineſ than the kindneſs
of a friend. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
HE'ART less. adj. [from heart..] Without courage; ſpirit-
leſs.
Ijoyed oft to chaſe the trembling pricket,
Or hunt the heartleſ hare 'till ſhe were tame. Spenser.
Then hopeleſs, heartleſ, 'gan the cunning thief, -
Perſuade us die, to ſtint all further ſtrife. Fuiry Queen, b. i.
What, art thou drawn among theſe heartleſs hinds :
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death. Shakeſpeare.
Thouſands beſides ſtood mute and heartleſ, there,
Men valiant all; nor was I us’d to fear. Cowley.
The peaſants were accuſtomed to payments, and grew
heartleſ as they grew poor. Temple.
Heartleſ; they fought, and quitted ſoon their ground,
While our's with eaſy vićtory were crown'd. Dryden.
He'ART lessly. adv. [from heartleſs. J. Without courage;
faintly; timidly.
HE'Art Less N Ess. n.ſ.. [from heartleſ...] Want of courage or
ſpirit; dejećtion of mind.
HE/ARTY. adj. [from heart.]
1. Sincere; undiſſembled; warm ; zealous.
They did not bring that hearty inclination to peace, which
they hoped they would have done. Clarendin, b, viii.
But<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
º
ſ:
º
But the kind hoſts their entertainment grace
With hearty welcome and an open face ;
In all they did, you might diſcern with eaſe
A willing mind, and a deſire to pleaſe. Dryden:
Every man may pretend to any employment, provided he
has been loud and frequent in declaring himſelf hearly for the
government. -- Swift.
2. In full health.
3. Vigorous; ſtrong.
Whoſe laughs are hearty, though his jeſts are coarſe,
And loves you beſt of all things but his horſe. Pope.
4. Strong; hard ; durable.
Oak, and the like true hearty timber, being ſtrong in all
poſitions, may be better truſted in croſs and tranſverſe work.
Wotton's Archite&amp;ure.
HEARTY-H Ale. adj. [heart and hale.] Good for the heart.
Vein-healing verven, and head-purging dill,
Sound ſavory, and baſil hearty-hale. Spenſer.
HEAT. n.ſ.. [bear, paee, Saxon; heete, Daniſh.]
1. The ſenſation cauſed by the approach or touch of fire.
Heat is a very briſk agitation of the inſenſible parts of the .
obječt, which produces in us that ſenſation from whence we
denominate the obječt hot; ſo what in our ſenſation is heat,
in the objećt is nothing but motion. . Locke.
The word heat is uſed to ſignify the ſenſation we have when
we are near the fire, as well as the cauſe of that ſenſation,
which is in the fire itſelf; and thence we conclude, that there
is a ſort of heat in the fire reſembling our own ſenſation:
whereas in the fire there is nothing but little particles of mat-
ter, of ſuch particular ſhapes as are fitted to impreſs ſuch
motions on our fleſh as excite the ſenſe of heat. Watts.
2. The cauſe of the ſenſation of burning.
The ſword which is made fiery doth not only cut by reaſon
of the ſharpneſs which ſimply it hath, but alſo burn by means
of that heat which it hath from fire. Hooker, b.v.
After they came down into the valley, and found the in-
tolerable heats which are there, and knew no means of lighter
apparel, they were forced to begin the cuſtom of going naked.
Bacon's New Atlantis.
3. Hot weather.
Mark well the flow'ring almonds in the wood;
The glebe will anſwer to the ſylvan reign; -
Great heats will follow, and large crops of grain. Dryden.
The pope would not comply with the propoſal, as fearing
the heats might advance too far before they had finiſhed their
... work, and produce a peſtilence among the people. Addison.
4. State of any body under the aëtion of the fire.
The heats ſmiths take of their iron are a blood-red heat,
a white flame heat, and a ſparkling or welding heat. Moxon.
5. One violent action unintermitted.
The continual agitations of the ſpirits muſt needs be a
weakening of any conſtitution, eſpecially in age; and many
cauſes are required for refreſhment betwixt the heats. Dryden.
6. The ſtate of being once hot.
I’ll ſtrike my fortune with him at a heat,
And give him not the leiſure to forget. Dryden's Aurengz.
7. A courſe at a race, between each of which courſes there is
an intermiſſion.
Feign'd zeal, you ſaw, ſet out the ſpeedier pace;
But the laſt heat, plain dealing won the race. Dryden.
8. Pimples in the face; fluſh.
It has raiſed animoſities in their hearts, and heats in their
faces, and broke out in their ribbans. Addiſon's Freeholder.
9. Agitation of ſudden or violent paſſion; vehemence of a&amp;tion.
They ſeeing what forces were in the city with them, iſſued
againſt the tyrant while they were in this heat, before practices
might be uſed to diſſever them. Sidney, b. ii.
The friend hath loſt his friend;
And the beſt quarrels, in the heat, are curſt
By thoſe that feel their ſharpneſs. Shakeſp. King Lear.
It might have pleaſed in the heat and hurry of his rage, but
muſt have diſpleaſed in the cool ſedate refle&amp;tions of his mind.
South's Sermºns.
We have ſpilt no blood but in the heat of the battle, or the
chaſe. Atterbury's Sermons.
One playing at hazard, held in many hands together, and
drew a huge heap of gold ; but, in the heat of play, never
obſerved a ſharper, who ſwept it into his hat. Swift.
10. Fačtion; conteſt; party rage.
Our ſtate thinks not ſo: they are in a moſt warlike prepa-
ration, and hope to come upon them in the heat of their divi-
ſion. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
I was ſorry to hear with what partiality and popular heat
elections were carried. King Charles.
What can more gratify the Phrygian foe
Than thoſe diſtemper'd heats 2
1 1. Ardour of thought or elocution.
Plead it to her
With all the ſtrength and heats of eloquence,
Fraternal love and friendſhip can inſpire. Addiſon's Cato,
To Heat. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To make hot; to endue with the power of burning,
Dryden's Homer.
He commanded that they ſhould heat the furnace one ſeven
times more than it was wont to be heated. Dan. iii. 19.
2. To cauſe to ferment.
Hops lying undried heats them, and changes their colour,
- Mortimer's Husbandry,
3. To make the conſtitution feveriſh. -
Thou art going to lord Timon's feaſt.
-Ay, to ſee meat fill knaves, and wine heat fools. Shotoſ.
Whatever increaſeth the denſity of the blood, even with-
out increaſing its celerity, heats, becauſe a denſer body is hotter
than a rarer. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
4. To warm with vehemence of paſſion or deſire.
A noble emulation heats your breaft,
And your own fame now robs you of your reſt. Dryden,
5. To agitate the blood and ſpirits with ačtion.
When he was well heated the younger champion could not
ſtand before him; and we find the elder contended not for the
gift, but for the honour. Dryden's AEn. Dedication.
He’ATER. m. ſ. [from heat..] . An iron made hot, and put into
a box-iron, to ſmooth and plait linnen.
HEATH. n.ſ.. [erica, Latin.]
1. A plant. - -
It is a ſhrub of low ſtature: the leaves are ſmall, and abide
green all the year: the flower conſiſts of one leaf, is naked,
and, for the moſt part, ſhaped like a pitcher: the ovary, which
is produced in the bottom of the flower, becomes a roundiſh
fruit, divided into four cells, in which are contained many
ſmall ſeeds. Miller.
In Kent they cut up the heath in May, burn it, and ſpread
the aſhes. Mortimer's Husbandry.
- Oft with bolder wing they ſoaring dare
The purple heath. - Thomſon's Spring.
2. A place overgrown with heath.
Say, from whence
You owe this ſtrange intelligence? or why
Upon this blaſted heath you ſtop our way
With ſuch prophetick greeting. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
3. A place covered with ſhrubs of whatever kind.
Some woods of oranges, and heaths of roſemary, will ſmell
a great way into the ſea. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
HEATH-cock, n.ſ.. [heath and cock.] A large fowl that fre-
quents heaths.
Cornwall hath quail, rail, partridge, pheaſant, heatb-cock,
and powte. - Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Heath-Pout. n.ſ.. [heath and pout J A bird.
- Not heath-pout, or the rarer bird
Which Phaſis or Ionia yields,
More pleaſing morſels would afford
Than the fat olives of my fields. Dryden,
He ATH-PEAs. n.ſ. A ſpecies of bitter Vetch, which ſee.
HEATH-Rose. n.ſ.. [heath and roſe..] A plant. , Ainſworth.
HEATHEN. n.ſ.. [heyden, German.] The gentiles; the pa-
gans; the nations unacquainted with the covenant of grace.
Deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy
holy name. 1 Chro. xvi. 35.
If the opinions of others, whom we think well of, be a
ground of aſſent, men have reaſon to be heathens in Japan,
mahometans in Turkey, papiſts in Spain, and proteſtants in
England. - - Locke.
In a paper of morality, I confider how I may recommend
the particular virtues I treat of, by the precepts or examples
of the ancient heathens. Addiſon's Spectator.
He’ATHEN. adj. Gentile; pagan. - -
It was impoſſible for a heathen author to relate theſe things,
becauſe, if he had believed them, he would no longer have
been a heathen. Addiſon.
He’ArHE NIsh. adj. [from heathen.]
1. Belonging to the gentiles. -
When the apoſtles of our Lord and Saviour were ordained
to alter the laws of heatheniſh religion, choſen they were, St.
Paul excepted; the reſt unſchooled altogether, and unlettered
men. , Hooker, b. iv.
2. Wild; ſavage; rapacious; cruel.
.The Moors did tread under their beatheniſh feet whatever
little they found yet there ſtanding. . . Spenſer.
That execrable Cromwel made a heatheniſh or rather inhu-
man edićt againſt the poor epiſcopal clergy, that they ſhould
neither preach, pray in publick, baptize, marry, bury, nor
teach ſchool. South's S.rmc.ms.
Heathenishly, adv. [from heatheniſh.] After the manner of
heathens. - - -
Heathenism. n.ſ.. [from heathºn.1 Gentiliſm 3 paganiſm.
It fignifies the acknowledgment of the true God, in oppº
ſition to heatheniſm. - Hammond's Pradº. Catech.
He’Athy. adj. [from heath..] Full of heath.
This ſort of land they order the ſame way with the heathy
land. - Mortimer's Huſbandry,
To HEAVE. v. a. pret. heaved, anciently have; part, heavid,
or hoven.
1. To lift; to raiſe from the ground.
- So ſtretch'd out huge in length the arch fiend lay,
Chain'd on the burning lake; nor ever hence
4. Had
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
H. E. A
Had ris'n, or heav'd his head, but that the will
And high permiſſion of all-ruling heaven - -
Left him at large. 41ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b, i.
2. To carry. - -
Now we bear the king -
Tow'rd Calais: grant him there; º º: being ſeen,
eave him away upon your winged thoughts
*... the . pony Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
3. To raiſe; to lift. - -
So daunted, when the giant ſaw the knight,
His heavy hand he heaved up on high,
And him to duſt thought to have batter'd quite. Fa. Queen.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth: I love your majeſty
According to my bond, no more nor leſs. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
He dy'd in fight;
Fought next my perſon, as in conſort fought,
Save when he heav'd his ſhield in my defence,
And on his naked ſide receiv'd my wound. Dryd. Don Seb.
4. To cauſe to ſwell. - -
The groans of ghoſts, that cleave the earth with pain,
And heave it up: they pant and ſtick half way. Dryden.
The glittering finny ſwarms,
That heave our friths and croud upon our ſhores. Thomſon.
5. To force up from the breaſt.
Made ſhe no verbal queſt ?
—Yes, once or twice ſhe heav'd the name of father
Pantingly forth, as if it preſt her heart. Shakespeare King Lear.
The wretched animal heav'd forth ſuch groans, .
That their diſcharge did ſtretch his leathern zoat -
Almoſt to burſting. Shakeſp. As you like it.
6. To exalt; to elevate.
Poor ſhadow, painted queen; -
One heav'd on high, to be hurl’d down below. Shakespeare R. III.
7. To puff; to elate.
The Scots, heaved up into high hope of vićtory, took the
Engliſh for fooliſh birds fallen into their net, forſook their hill,
and marched into the plain. Hayward.
To HEAv E. v. n.
1. To pant; to breathe with pain.
'Tis ſuch as you,
That creep like ſhadows by him, and do figh
At each his needleſs heavings; ſuch as you
Nouriſh the cauſe of his awaking. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
He heaves for breath, which, from his lungs ſupply'd,
And fetch'd from far, diſtends his lab'ring ſide. Dryden.
2. To labour.
The church of England had ſtruggled and heaved at a re-
formation ever ſince Wickliff's days. Atterbury.
3. To riſe with pain; to ſwell and fall.
Thou haſt made my curdled blood run back,
My heart heave up, my hair to riſe in briſtles. Dryden.
The wand'ring breath was on the wing to part;
Weak was the pulſe, and hardly heav'd the heart. Dryden.
No objećt affects my imagination ſo much as the ſea or
ocean: I cannot ſee the heaving of this prodigious bulk of
waters, even in a calm, without a very pleaſing aſtoniſh-
ment... . Addiſon's Spectator.
Frequent for breath his panting boſom heaves. Prior.
The heaving tide
In widen'd circles beats on either ſide. Gay's Trivia.
4. To keck; to feel a tendency to vomit.
HEAve. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Lift ; exertion or effort upwards.
None could gueſs whether the next heave of the earthquake
would ſettle them on the firſt foundation, or ſwallow them.
Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
2. Riſing of the breaſt. -
There's matter in theſe ſighs; theſe profound heaves
You muſt tranſlate; 'tis fit we underſtand them. Shakeſp.
3. Effort to vomit.
4. Struggle to riſe.
But after many ſtrains and heaves,
He got up to his ſaddle eaves. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
Heave Offering. n.ſ. An offering among the Jews.
Ye ſhall offer a cake of the firſt of your dough for an heave
offering, as ye do the heave offering of the threſhing floor. Num.
HEAVEN. m. ſ. [peopon, which ſeems to be derived from
peopb, the places over head, Saxon.]
1. The regions above; the expanſe of the ſky.
A ſtation like the herald Mercury,
New lighted on a heaven kiſſing hill.
Thy race in time to come
Shall ſpread the conqueſts of imperial Rome;
Rome, whoſe aſcending tow’rs ſhall heav'n invade,
Involving earth and ocean in her ſhade. Dryden's AEn.
The words are taken more properly for the air and ether
than for the heavens, as the beſt Hebrecians underſtand them.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
This act, with ſhout, heav'n high, the friendly band
Applaud. ! Dryden's Fables.
Shakespeare Hamlet.
2. The habitation of God, good angels, and pure ſouls departed.
It is a knell
That ſummons thee to heaven, or to hell. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Theſe, the late
Heav'n baniſh’d hoſt, left deſert utmoſt hell. Milton.
All yet left of that revolted rout,
Heav'n fall’n, in ſtation ſtood, or juſt array,
Sublime with expectation. 44lton's Paradſ, Loft, b. x.
3. The ſupreme power; the ſovereign of heaven. -
Now heav'n help him Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
The will
And high permiſſion of all-ruling heav'n -
Left him at large. Milton.
The prophets were taught to know the will of God, and
thereby inſtruct the people, and enabled to Propheſy, as a
teſtimony of their being ſent by heaven. Temple.
4. The pagan gods; the celeſtials.
- Our brows
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers. Shai. Cymbel.
Take phyſick, pomp; -
Expoſe thyſelf to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may'ſt ſhake the ſuperflux to them,
And ſhow the heaven, more juſt. Shakeſp King Lear.
They can judge as fity of his worth, o
As I can of thoſe myſteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Heav'ns / what a ſpring was in his arm, to throw
How high he held his ſhield, and roſe at ev'ry blow. Dryd.
5. Elevation; ſublimity.
O, for a muſe of fire, that would aſcend
The brighteſt heav'n of invention. Shakeſp. Henry V. Pral.
6. It is often uſed in compoſition.
HEAVEN-begot. Begot by a celeſtial power.
If I am heav'n-begot, aſſert your ſon
By ſome ſure ſign. Dryden.
HEAVEN-born. Deſcended from the celeſial regions; native
of heaven. -
If a fever fires his ſulphurous blood,
In ev'ry fit he feels the hand of God,
And heav'n-born flame. Dryden's juvenal, Sat.13.
Oh heav'n-born ſiſters ſource of art |
Who charm the ſenſe, or mend the heart;
Who lead fair virtue's train along,
Moral truth, and myſtick ſongi Pºpe.
HFAv=N-bred. Produced or cultivated in heaven.
Much is the force of heav'n-bred poeſy. Shakespeare.
Heaven-built. Built by the agency of gods. -
My ſoul inſpire,
As when we wrapt Troy's heav'n-built walls in fire. Pope.
His arms had wrought the deſtin’d fall
Of ſacred Troy, and raz'd her heav'n-built wall. Pºpe.
Heav EN-DIRECTED. . *
1. Raiſed towards the ſky.
Who taught that heav'n-directed ſpire to riſe? Pope.
2. Taught by the powers of heaven.
O ſacred weapon' left for truth's defence;
To all but heaven-directed hands deny'd;
The muſe may give it, but the gods muſt guide. Pope.
He’Av ENLY. adj. [from heaven.]
1. Reſembling heaven; ſupremely excellent.
As the love of heaven makes one heavenly, the love of vir-
tue virtuous, ſo doth the love of the world make one become
worldly. Sidney.
Not Maro's muſe, who ſung the mighty man; .
Nor Pindar's heav'nly lyre, nor Horace when a ſwan. Dryd.
2. Celeſtial; inhabiting heaven.
Adoring firſt the genius of the place,
Then earth, the mother of the heav'nly race. Dryd. Æa.
HE'Ave NLY. adv.
1. In a manner reſembling that of heaven.
In theſe deep ſolitudes and awful cells,
Where heav'nly penſive contemplation dwells,
And ever-muſing melancholy reigns,
What means this tumult in a veſtal’s veins: Pope.
2. By the agency or influence of heaven.
Truth and peace and love ſhall ever ſhine
About the ſupreme throne
Qf him, t' whoſe happy-making fight alone,
Our heav'nly guided ſoul ſhall climb. - Aſiſtan.
HE'Ave Nw ARD. adv. [heaven and pearb, Saxon.] Towards
heaven.
I proſtrate lay,
By various doubts impell’d, or to obey,
Or to obječt; at length, my mournful look
Heav'nward erect, determin'd, thus I ſpoke. Prior.
HE'Av ILY. adv. [from heavy.]
1. With great ponderouſneſs, - -
2. Grievouſly; afflićtively.
Eaſe muſt be impracticable to the envious: they lie under
a double misfortune; common calamities and common bleſſ-
ings fall heavily upon them. Collier of Envy.
3. Sorrowinly ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E A
H E C
!
.
s
7. Drouſy; dull; torpid.
3. Sorrowfully; with an air of dejećtion.
I came hither to tranſport the tydings,
Which I have heavily born. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Why looks your grace ſo heavily to-day :
—O, have paſt a miſerable night. Shakeſpeare's R. III.
This O'Neil took very heavily, becauſe his condition in
the army was leſs pleaſant to him. Clarendºn.
HE'Avi NESS. n.ſ. [from heavy, J -
1. Ponderouſneſs; the quality of being heavy; weight.
The ſubject is concerning the heavingſ of ſeveral bodies, or
the proportion that is required betwixt any weight and the
power which may move it. Wilkins.
2. Dejection of mind; depreſſion of ſpirit.
We are, at the hearing of ſome, more inclined unto ſorrow
, and heavingſ; ; of ſome more milified, and ſoftened in mind.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 38.
Heavineſ in the heart of man maketh it ſtoop; but a good
word maketh it glad. Prov. xii. 25.
Ye greatly rejoice; though now for a ſeaſon ye are in
heavineſs, through manifold temptations. 1 Pet. i. 6.
Againſt ill chances men are ever merry;
But heavine's foreruns the good event. Shakespeare Henry IV.
Let us not burthen our remembrance with
An heavineſs that's gone. Shakeſpeare's Tºmteſt.
3. Inaptitude to motion or thought; ſluggiſhneſs; torpidneſs;
du!, eſs of ſpirit; languidneſs; languor.
Our ſtrength is all gone into heavineſ,
That makes the weight. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
What means this heavineſ that hangs upon me?
This lethargy that creeps through all my ſenſes? Addison Cato.
He would not violate that ſweet receſs,
And found beſides a welcome heavineſ,
Which ſeiz'd his eyes. Dryden.
A ſenſation of drouſineſs, oppreſſion, heavineſs, and laſfi-
tude, are ſigns of a too plentiful meal. Arbuthn. on Aliment.
4. Oppreſſion; cruſh; affiićtion.
5. Deepneſs or richneſs of ſoil.
As Alexandria exported many commodities, ſo it received
ſome from other European ports, which, by reaſon of the fat-
neſs and heavineſs of the ground, Egypt did not produce; ſuch
as metals, wood, and pitch. Arbuthnot on Coins.
HEAVY. adj. [beariz, Saxon.]
1. Weighty; ponderous; tending ſtrongly to the center; con- .
trary to light.
, Merſennus tells us, that a little child, with an engine of an
hundred double pulleys, might move this earth, though it were
much heavier than it is. Wilkins.
2. Sorrowful; deješted; depreſſed.
. Let me not be light;
For a light wiſe doth make a beavy huſband. Shakeſpeare.
3. Grievous; oppreſſive; affictive.
Menelaus bore an heavy hand over the citizens, having a
malicious mind. 2 Mac. v. 23.
Let not your ears deſpiſe my tongue for ever,
Which ſhall poſſeſs them with the heavieſ ſound
That ever yet they heard. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
łf the cauſe be not good, the king himſelf hath a heavy
reckoning to make. Shakespeare's Henry V.
Are you ſo goſpell’d
To pray for this good man, and for his iſſue 2
Whoſe heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave,
And beggar'd yours for ever. Shakespeare's Macleth.
* Chartres, at the levee, w
Tells with a ſneer the tydings heavy. Swift.
4. Wanting alacrity; wanting briſkneſs of appearance.
My heavy eyes, you ſay, confeſs
. A heart to love and grief inclin'd. Prior.
5. Wanting ſpirit or rapidity of ſentiment; unanimated.
A work was to be done, a heavy writer to be encouraged,
and accordingly many thouſand copies were beſpoke. Swift.
. 6. VV anting ačtivity; indolent; lazy. -
Fair, tall, his limbs with due proportion join'd;
But of a heavy, dull, degenerate mind. Dryden's Fables.
Peter and they that were with him were heavy with
ſleep. - Lu. ix. 33.
8. Slow ; ſluggiſh. . 33
But let thy ſpiders, that ſuck up thy venom,
And h;avy gaited toads ie in their way. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
. 9. Stupid ; fooliſh.
This heavy headed revel, Eaſt and Weſt
Makes us traduc'd, and tax'd of other nations. Shakeſp.
I would not be accounted ſo baſe minded, or heavy headed,
that I will confeſs that any of them is for valour, power, or *
fortune better than myſelf. Knolles’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
ic. Burdenſome ; troubleſome ; tedious.
I put into thy hands what has been the diverſion of ſome of
my ifle and heavy hours. " Locke's Epiſtle to the Reader.
When afone, your time will not lie heavy upon your hands
for want of ſome trifling amuſement. Swift.
1 1. [..oaded ; incumbered ; burthened. -
I ſcaring that there were forces coming againſt him, and not
willing that they ſhould find his men heavy and laden with
booty, he returned unto Scotland. Bacon's Henry VII.
12. Not eaſily digeſted; not light to the ſtomach.
Such preparations as retain the oil or fat, are moſt heavy to
the ſtomach, which makes baked meat hard of digeſtion. Arb.
13. Rich in ſoil; fertile, as heavy lands.
14. Deep ; cumberſome, as heavy roads.
hº adv. As an adverb it is only uſed in compoſition;
eavily.
Y. carriages were heavy laden; they are a burden to the
weary beaſt. 1ſ. xlvi. 1.
Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you reſt. Mat. ii. 28.
HEBDOMAD. n.ſ.. [heldomas, Latin.] A week; a ſpace of
ſeven days.
Computing by the medical month, the firſt held-mad or ſep-
tenary conſiſts of ſix days, ſeventeen hours and a half. Brown.
HEBDO'MA DAL. } % [from heldomcs, Latin. J Weekly ;
HEB Co’MADARY. S. conſiſting of ſeven days. -
As for hºbdomadal periods, or weeks, in regard of their
ſabbaths, they were obſerved by the Hebrews. Brºwn.
To HEBETATE. v. a. Thebeto, Latin; hełster, French..] To
dull; to blunt; to ſtupify.
The eye, eſpecially if hebetated, might cauſe the ſame per-
ception. - - Harvey on Conſumptions.
Beef may confer a robuſtneſs on the limbs of my ſon, but
will hebetate and clog his intellectuals. Arb, and Pope's M.Scrib.
HE BETA(tion. m.ſ.. [from hebetate.] -
-1. The aët of dulling.
2. The ſtate of being dulled.
He'BETUDE. n.ſ.. [hebitudo, Latin.] Dulneſs; obtuſeneſs;
bluntneſs.
The peſtilent ſeminaries, according to their groſſneſs or
ſubtilty, ačtivity or hebetude, cauſe more or leſs truculent
plagues. Harvey on the Plague.
HE/BRAIs M. n.ſ.. [hebraſſme, French; hebraſmus, Latin.] A
Hebrew idiom.
Milton has infuſed a great many Latiniſms, as well as Græ-
ciſms, and ſometimes Hebraiſms, into his pocm. Speciator.
HE/BRA1st. m. ſ. [hebratus, Latin.] A man ſkilled in Hebrew.
HE'BR1c1AN. m. ſ. [from Hebrew.] One ſkilful in Hebrew.
The words are more properly taken for the air or ether than
the heavens, as the beſt Hebrecians underſtand them. Raleigh.
The nature of the Hebrew verſe, as the meaneſt Hebrician
knoweth, conſiſts of uneven feet. Peacham.
HE'cAto M.B. m. ſ. ſhecatomile, French; izzrégºn.] A ſacri-
fice of an hundred cattle.
In rich mens homes
I bid kill ſome beaſts, but no hecatombs;
None ſtarve, none ſurfeit ſo. Donne.
One of theſe three is a whole hecatomb,
And therefore only one of them ſhall die. Dryden.
Her triumphant ſons in war ſucceed,
And ſlaughter'd hecatombs around 'em bleed. Addiſon.
". .
#: }a}. [he&amp;lique, French, from £1:..]
1. Habitual ; conſtitutional.
This word is joined only to that kind of fever which
is ſlow and continual, and ending in a conſumption, is the
contrary to thoſe fevers which ariſe from a plethora, or
too great fulneſs from obſtruction, becauſe it is attended
with too lax a ſtate of the excretory paſſages, and gene-
rally thoſe of the ſkin; whereby ſo much runs off as
leaves not reſiſtance enough in the contractile veſſels to keep
them ſufficiently diſtended, ſo that they vibrate oftener, agitate
the fluids the more, and keep them thin and hot. &amp;tiny.
A heclick fever hath got hold
Of the whole ſubſtance, not to be controul’d. Donne.
2. Troubled with a morbid heat.
No hedick ſtudent ſcars the gentle maid. Taylor.
He'cTick. n.ſ. An hectick fever.
Like the helick in my blood he rages,
And thou muſt cure me. • Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
HE'croR. m.ſ.. [from the name of Hedor, the great Homeric
warriour.]
1. A bully; a bluſtering, turbulent, pervicacious, noiſy fellow.
Thoſe uſurping hectors, who pretend to honour without re-
ligion, think the charge of a lye a blot not to be waſhed out
but by blood. South's Sermons.
We'll take one cooling cup of nećlar,
And drink to this celeſtial hector. Prior.
To HE'croR. v. a. [from the noun..] To threaten; to treat
with inſolent authoritative terms.
They reckon they muſt part with honour together with
their opinion, if they ſuffer themſelves to be hectored out of
it. - Government of the Tongue.
The weak low ſpirit, fortune makes her ſlave;
But ſhe's a drudge, when heelor'd by the brave. Dryden.
An honeſt man, when he came home at night, found another
fellow domineering in his family, heółoring his ſervants, and
calling for ſupper. Arbuthnot's Hiſt, of john Bull.
1 : E To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E D - H E. E.
To HF'ctor. v. n. To play the bully; to blufler. Hedo E-Hyssop. n.ſ.. [hedge aud hyſſºp.] A ſpecies of wil.
They have attacked me, ſome with piteous moans and out- low-wort. -
crics, others grinning and only ſhewing their teeth, others Hedge-hyſſºp is a purging medicine, and a very rough one:
ranting and bºring, others ſcolding and reviling. Stillingfleet. externally it is ſaid to be a vulnerary. Hill's Mat. Medica.
One would think the hººfering, the ſtorming, the ſullen, HEDGE-Musta R D. m. ſ. A plant.
and all the different ſpecies of the angry, ſhould be cured. Sped. The flower has four leaves, expanded in a crucial form:
Don Carlos made her chief director, the pointal becomes a long, ſlender, bivalve pod, divided by a
That ſhe might o'er the ſervants he for. Swift. partition into two cells, which contain many round ſeeds.
He per Aſceous, adj. [hederaceus, Lat..] Producing ivy. Dići. The ſpecies are five. Miller.
HEDGF. m. ſ. [ pe;e, Saxon.] A fence made round grounds HEDGE-NETTLE. m. ſ. A plant. Ainſworth.
with prickly buſhes. HEDGE-Note: n.ſ.. [hedge and note.] A word of contempt
It is a good wood for fire, if kept dry; and is very uſeful for low writing.
for ſtakes in hedges. Mortimer's Husbandry. When they began to be ſomewhat better bred, they left
The gardens unfold variety of colours to the eye every theſe hedge-notes for another ſort of poem, which was alſo full
morning, and the hedges breath is beyond all perfume. Pope. of pleaſant raillery. Dryden's juvenal, Dedication.
Through the verdant maze He DGE-PIG. m. ſ. ſhedge and pig.] A young hedge-hog.
Of ſweet-briar hedges I purſue my walk. Thomſon. Thrice the brinded cat hath mºw’d,
HF do e, prefixed to any word, notes ſomething mean, vile, of Thrice and once the hedge-pig whin'd. Shakespeare Macbeth.
the loweſt claſs: perhaps from a hedge, or hedge-born man, a HE DGE-Row. n.ſ.. [hedge and row.] The ſeries of trees or
man without any known place of birth. buſhes planted for incloſures.
There are five in the firſt ſhew: the pedant, the braggart, Sometime walking not unſeen.
thc hedge-prieſ?, the fool, and the boy. Shakeſpeare. By hedge-row elms, on hillocks green. Milton.
The clergy do much better than a little hedge, contemptible, The fields in the northern ſide are divided by hedge-rows of
illiterate vicar can be preſumed to do. Swift. myrtle. Berkley to Pope.
A perſon, who, by his ſtile and literature, ſeems to have HEDGE-SPARRow. n.ſ.. [hedge and ſparrow.] A ſparrow that
been the corrector of a hedge-preſs in Little Britain, proceeded lives in buſhes. -
gradually to an author. Swift. The hedge-ſparrow fed the cuckoo ſo long,
To HE DG E. v. a. [from the noun.] That it had its head bit off by its young. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
1. To incloſe with a hedge, or fence of wood dry or growing. He’dgING-BILL. m. ſ. ſhedge and bill.] A cutting hook uſed in
Hedge thy poſſeſſion about with thorns. Eccluſ, xxviii. 21. making hedges.
Thoſe alleys muſt be hedged at both ends, to keep out the Comes maſter Dametas with a hedging-bill in his hand,
wind. Bacon, Eſſay 47. chaffing and ſwearing. Sidney.
2. To obſtrućt. He'd GER. m. ſ. [from hedge.] One who makes hedges.
I will hedge up thy way with thorns. Hoſ. ii. 6. The labour'd ox
3. To incircle for defence. In his looſe traces from the furrow came,
England, hedg'd in with the main, And the ſwink'd hedger at his ſupper ſat. Milton.
That water-walled bulwark, ſtill ſecure He would be laughed at, that ſhould go about to make a
And confident from foreign purpoſes. Shakeſp King john. fine dancer out of a country hedger at paſt fifty. Locke.
There's ſuch divinity doth hedge a king, To HEED. v. a. [ peban, Saxon.] To mind; to regard; to
That reaſon can but peep to what it would. Shakespeare Hamlet. take notice of; to attend.
4. To ſhut up within an incloſure. With pleaſure Argus the muſician heeds ;
It muſt not be paid and exported in ready money; ſo ſays But wonders much at thoſe new vocal reeds. Dryden.
our law; but that is a law to hedge in the cuckow, and ſerves He will no more have clear ideas of all the operations of
for no purpoſe: for if we export not goods, for which our his mind, than he will have all the particular ideas of any
merchants have money due to them, how can it be paid by bills landſcape or clock, who will not turn his eyes to it, and with
of exchange 2 Docke. attention heed all the parts of it. latée.
5. To force into a place already full. This ſeems to be miſtaken HEED. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
for edge. To edge in, is to put in by the way that requires leaſt 1. Care; attention.
room; but hedge may ſignify to thruſt in with difficulty, as into With wanton heed and giddy cunning,
a hedge. The melting voice through mazes running. Milton.
Bay not me, Take heed that, in their tender years, ideas, that have no
I'll not endure it: you forget yourſelf natural coheſion, come not to be united in their heads. Locke.
To hedge me in : I am a ſoldier. Shakeſp julius Caſar. Thou muſt take heed, my Portius;
When I was haſty, thou delay’dſt me longer: The world has all its eyes on Cato's ſon. Addison's Cato.
I pr’ythee, let me hedge one moment more 2. Caution; fearful attention; ſuſpicious watch.
Into thy promiſe; for thy life preſerv'd. Dryden. Either wiſe bearing or ignorant carriage is caught as men
When you are ſent on an errand, be ſure to hedge in ſome catch diſeaſes, one of another; therefore, let men take heed of
buſineſs of your own. Swift's Direáions to the Foºtman. their company. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
To HEDGE. v. n. To ſhift; to hide the head. Take heed, have open eye; for thieves do foot by night:
I myſelf ſometimes, hiding mine honour in my neceſſity, am Take heed ere Summer comes, or cuckoo birds affright.
fain-to ſhuffle, to hedge, and to lurch; and yet you rogue will Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſºr.
enſconce your rags, your catamountain looks, your red-lettice 3. Care to avoid.
phraſes. Shakeſpeare. We ſhould take beed of the negle&amp;t or contempt of his
HE DG E-bor N. adj. [hedge and born.] Of no known birth; worſhip. Tillotſon's Sermons.
meanly born. 4. Notice; obſervation.
He then, that is not furniſh’d in this ſort, Speeth muſt come by hearing and learning; and birds give
Doth but uſurp the ſacred name of knight, more heed, and mark words more than beaſts. Bacon.
And ſhould, if I were worthy to be judge, 5. Seriouſneſs; ſtaidneſs.
- Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born ſwain, He did unſeal them; and the firſt he view'd,
That doth preſume to boaſt of gentle blood. Shakespeare Hen. VI. He did it with a ſerious mind; a heed
HEDGE-FUM Tor Y. n.ſ. A plant. Ainſworth. Was in his countenance. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
HEDGE-Hog. m. ſ. [ hedge and hog. ) 6. Regard; reſpectful notice.
1. An animal ſet with prickles, like thorns in an hedge. It is a way of calling a man a fool, when no heed is
Like hedge-hogs, which given to what he ſays. - L’Eſtrange.
Lie tumbling in my bare-foot way, and mount HE'EDFul. adj. [from heed.]
Their pricks at my ſoot-fall. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt. 1. Watchful; cautious; ſuſpicious.
Few have belief to ſwallow, or hope enough to experience, Give him heedful note;
the collyrium of Albertus; that is, to make one ſee in the For I mine eyes will rivet to his face;
dark: yet thus much, according unto his receipt, will the And, after, we will both our judgments join,
right eye of an hºdge-hog, boiled in oil, and preſerved in a In cenſure of his ſeeming. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
brazen veſſel, effect. Brown's P'u'gar Errours, b. i. 2. Attentive; careful; obſerving.
The hedge-hog hath his backſide and flanks thick ſet with I am commanded
ſtrong and ſharp prickles; and beſides, by the help of a muſ- To tell the paſſion of my ſovereign's heart;
cle, can contract himſelf into a globular figure, and ſo with- Where fame, late ent'ring at his heedful ears,
draw his whole under part, head, beliy and legs, within his Hath plac'd thy beauty's image and thy virtue. Shakespeare H. VI.
thicket of prickles. Ray on the Creation. To him one of the other twins was bound,
2. A term of reproach. - Whilſt I had been like heedful of the other. Shakeſpeare.
Did'ſt thou not kill this king Thou, heedful of advice, ſecure proceed;
—I grant ye. My praiſe the precept is, be thine the deed. Pope's Odyſſey.
Do'ft grant me, hedge-hogº Shakespeare Richard III. He'EDFULLY. adv. [from heedful..] Attentively; carefully;
3. A plant. Ainſworth. cautiouſly.
... The globe-fiſh. Ain worth. Let the learner maintain an honourable opinion of his in-
2 ftrućtor,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E F
H E I
s
*
º
º
s
.
*
º
§
ºt
Kºº,
{trućtor, and heedfully liſten to his inſtructions, as one willing
to be led. //atts.
He'Edfulness. n.ſ.. [from heedful.] Caution; vigilance; at-
tention.
HE'EDILY. adv. Cautiouſly; vigilantly. Dić.
He'ED1Ness. n ſ. Caution; vigilance. Dić7.
HE'EDLEss. adi, [from heed.] Negligent; inattentive; care-
leſs; *:::::::: regardleſs; unobſerving.
The heedleſ lover does not know
Whoſe eyes they are that wound him ſo. Waller.
Heedleſs of verſe, and hopeleſs of the crown,
Scarce half a wit, and more than half a clown. Dryden.
Some ideas, which have more than once offered themſelves
to the ſenſes, have yet been little taken notice of; the mind
being either heedleſs, as in children, or otherwiſe employed, as
in men. Locke.
He'edlessly. adv. [from heedleſs.] Careleſsly; negligently;
inattentively.
Whilſt ye diſcharge the duty of matrimony, ye heedleſsly
ſlide into ſin. A, buthnot and Pope's Mart. Scriblerus.
HE'Edless Ness. n.ſ.. [from heedleſ...] Careleſſneſs; thought-
leſſneſs; negligence; inattention.
In the little harms they ſuffer from knocks and falls, they
fhould not be pitied, but bid do ſo again; which is a better
way to cure their heedleſſneſs. Ilocke.
HEEL. m. ſ. [pele, Saxon.]
1. The part of the foot that protuberates behind.
He calls to mind his ſtrength, and then his ſpeed,
His winged heels, and then his armed head;
With theſe t'avoid, with that his fate to meet;
But fear prevails, and bids him truſt his feet. Denham.
If the luxated bone be diſtorted backward, it lieth over the
beel bone. Wiſeman's Surgery.
2. The whole foot of animals.
Pegaſus appeared hanging off the ſide of a rock, with a
fountain running from his heel. Addiſon's Guardian.
3. The feet, as employed in flight.
Nothing is commoner, in times of danger, than for men to
leave their maſters to bears and tygers, and ſhew them a fair
pair of heels for’t. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
4. To be at the HEELs. To purſue cloſely; to follow hard.
Sir, when comes your book forth
—Upon the heels of my preſentment.
But is there no ſequel at the heels of this
Mother's admiration ?
Could we break our way
By force, and at our heel; all hell ſhould riſe
With blackeſt inſurre&amp;tion, to confound
Heav'n's pureſt light. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
SShakeſp. Timon.
SShakeſp. Hamlet.
5. To purſue as an enemy.
The Spaniards fled on towards the North to ſeek their for-
tunes, being ſtill chaſed by the Engliſh navy at their heels, un-
til they were fain to give them over for want of powder. Bacon.
Want! hungry want! that hungry meagre fiend,
Is at my heels, and chaces me in view. Otway.
6. To follow cloſe as a dependent.
Through proud London he came ſighing on,
After th’ admired heels of Bolingbroke. Shakespeare Henry IV:
7. To lay by the H E Fls. To fetter; to ſhackle; to put in gyves.
If the king blame me for't, I’ll lay ye all
By th' heel, and ſuddenly; and on your heads
Clap round fines for neglect. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
One half of man, his mind,
Is, ſui juris, unconfin'd,
And cannot be laid by the heels. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 3.
I began to ſmoke that they were a parcel of mummers; and
wondered that none of the Middleſex juſtices took care to lay
ſome of them by the heels. Addiſon's Freeholder.
8. Any thing ſhaped like a heel.
At the other ſide is a kind of heel or knob, to break clots
with. Mortimer's Husbandry.
9. The back part of a ſtocken: whence the phraſe to be out at
heel, to be worn out.
I’ve watch'd and travell'd hard ;
Some time I ſhall ſleep out, the reſt I’ll whiſtle:
A good man's fortune may grow out at heels. Shakespeare K. Lear.
To Her L. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To dance.
I cannot ſing,
Nor heel the high lavolt, nor ſweeten talk.
2. To lean on one ſide: as, the ſhip heels.
He e'll ER. n.ſ. [from heel..] A cock that ſtrikes well with his
heels.
He’El-piece. n.ſ.. [heel and piece.] A piece fixed on the hinder
part of the ſhoe, to ſupply what is worn away.
To HE's L-PIEcE. v. a. [heel and piece.] To put a piece of
leather on a ſhoe-heel.
Some blamed Mrs. Bull for new heel-piecing her ſhoes. Arb,
HE F.T. n.ſ.. [from heave.]
1. Heaving; effort.
May be in the cup
A ſpider ſteep'd, and one may drink; depart,
Shakeſpeare.
And yet partake no venom; for his knowledge
Is not infected: but if one preſent
Th’ abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his fides
With violent hefts. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
2. [For haft.] Handle.
His oily ſide devours both blade and heft. Waller.
He'gira.. n.ſ. [ Arabick, J A term in chronology, ſigni-
fying the epocha, or account of time, uſed by the Åra-
bians and Turks, who begin their computation from the day
that Mahmet was forced to make his eſcape from the city of
Mecca, which happened on Friday July 16, A. D. 622, un-
der the reign of the emperor Heracleus. Harris.
HE'if ER. n.ſ. [peaſ)rone, Saxon.] A young cow.
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding freſh,
And ſees faſt by a butcher with an ax,
But will ſuſpect ’twas he that made the ſlaughter? Shakeſp.
A heifer will put up her noſe, and ſnuff in the air, againſt
Taln. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
For her the flocks refuſe their verdant food,
Nor thirſty heifers ſeek the gliding flood. Pºpe's I/inter.
HEIGH-Ho. interj.
1. An expreſfion of ſlight languour and uneaſineſs.
Heigh-hº an’t be not four by the day, I'll be hang'd. Shakespeare
2. It is uſed by Dryden, contrarily to cuſtom, as a voice of
exultation.
We'll toſs off our ale 'till we cannot ſtand,
And heigh-ho for the honour of old England. Dryden.
HEIGHT. m. ſ. [from high.]
1. Elevation above the ground; any place affigned.
Into what pit thou ſee'ſt,
From what height fall'n. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b, i.
2. Altitude; ſpace meaſured upwards. w
Abroad I'll ſtudy thee,
As he removes far off, that great heights takes. Donne.
There is in Ticinium, in #. a church that is in length
one hundred feet, in breadth twenty, and in height near fifty.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
... An amphitheatre appear'd,
Rais'd in degrees, to ſixty paces rear'd;
That when a man was plac'd in one degree,
Height was allow'd for him above to ſee. Dryden.
An amphitheatre's amazing height
Here fills the eye with terror and delight. Addiſon.
3. Degree of latitude.
Guinea lieth to the North ſea, in the ſame height as Peru
to the South. Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
4. Summit; aſcent; towering eminence.
From Alpine heights the father firſt deſcends;
His daughter's huſband in the plain attends. Dryden's AFm.
Every man of learning need not enter into their difficulties,
nor climb the heights to which ſome others have arrived. Watts.
5. Elevation of rank; ſtation of dignity.
By him that rais'd me to this careful height,
From that contented hap which I enjoy'd,
I never did incenſe his majeſty -
Againſt Clarence. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
Ten kings had from the Norman conqu'ror reign'd,
When England to her greateſt height attain'd,
Of pow'r, dominion, glory, wealth and ſtate. Daniel.
6. The utmoſt degree; full completion.
Putrefaction doth not riſe to its height at once. Bacon.
Did not ſhe
Of Timna firſt betray me, and reveal
The ſecret, wreſted from me in the height
Of nuptial love profeſs'd? Milton's Agoniſter.
Hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my height
Of happineſs! Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x.
7. Utmoſt exertion.
Come on, ſir; I ſhall now put you to the height of your
breeding. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
8. State of excellence; advance towards perfeótion.
Social duties are carried to greater heights, and enforced
with ſtronger motives, by the principles of our religion. Addiſ,
To He’IGHT EN. v. a. [from height.]
1. To raiſe higher. -
2. To improve; to meliorate.
3. To aggravate.
Foreign ſtates gave us their aſſiſtance in reducing our coun-
try to a ſtate of peace; and which of them uſed their endea-
vours to heighten our confuſions, and plunge us into all the
evils of a civil warf Addiſon's Freeholder.
4. To improve by decorations.
As in a room, contrived for ſtate, the height of the roof
ſhould bear a proportion to the area; ſo in the heightenings of
poetry, the ſtrength and vehemence of figures ſhould be ſuited
to the occaſion. Dryden's Span. Fryar, Dedication.
HEINOUS. adj. [haineux, French, from hain, hate; or from
the Teutonick boon, ſhame.] Atrocious; wicked in a high
degree.
To abrogate or innovate the goſpel of Chriſt, if men .
angels
-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E L
H E L
ancels ſhould attempt, it were moſt heinº and accurſed ſa-
crilege. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. Io.
his is the man ſhould do º: º deed:
The image of a wicked heinous fault » ºr -
Lives in . eye. Shałſzaré's King john.
As it is a moſt hºnous, ſo it is a moſt dangerous implety to
deſpiſe him that can deſtrºy.us. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
Hj...div. [from heinous.] Atrociouſly: wickedly.
Hºss. n.ſ.. [from heinºus.] Atrociouſneſs; wicked-
neſs. • * - -
fie who can treat offences provoking to God as jeſs and
trifles, muſt have very little ſenſe of the heinouſneſ of them.
- Rogers's Sermons.
HEIR. m.ſ. [Heire, old Fr. hare, Latin J One that is inhe-
ritor of anything after the preſent poſſeſſor.
An heir ſignifies the eldeſt, who is, by the laws of England,
to have all his father's land. Lºcke,
What lady is that -
—The heir of Alanſon, Roſaline her name. Shakespeare.
That I'll give my voice on Richard's ſide,
To bar my maſter's heirs in true deſcent,
God knows, I will not do it. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Being heirs together of the grace of life. | Pet. iii. 7.
The young extravagant heir had got a new ſteward, and
was reſolved to look into his eſtate before things grew
deſperate. - Swift.
Sunk is the hero, and his glory loſt, •
And I his heir in miſery alone. Pope's Odyſſey.
the heirs to titles and large eſtates have a weakneſs in
their eyes, and a tenderneſs in their conſtitutions. Swift.
To HEIſ. ... a. [from the noun..] To inherit.
His ſons in blooming youth were ſnatch'd by fate;
One only daughter heir'd the royal ſtate. Dryden's 4ºn.
HE'iRFss. n.ſ.. [from heir.] An inheritrix; a woman that
inherits.
An heireſ, ſhe, while yet alive;
All that was her’s to him did give. . //aller.
AEneas, though he married the heireſ of the crown, yet
claimed no title to it during the life of his father-in-law. Dryd.
Heir less. adj. [from heir] Without an heir ; wanting one
to inhcrit after him.
- I ſtill think of
The wrong I did myſelf; which was ſo much, -
That heirlſ; it hath made my kingdom, Shakespeare Wint. Tale.
He'iRship. n.f. [from heir.] The ſtate, character, or privi-
leges of an heir. - . . .
A layman appoints an heir or an executor in his will, to
build an hoſpital within a year, under pain of being deprived
of his heirſhip. . Ayliffe's Parergon.
He'ſ RLoom.. n.ſ.. [heir and zeloma, goods, Sax.] Any furni-
ture or moveable decreed to deſcend by inheritance, and there-
forc inſeparable from the freehold.
Achilles' ſceptre was of wood, -
Tranſmitted to the hero's line; ſ
Thence through a long deſcent of kings
Came an heirloom, as Homer ſings.
HELD. The preterite and part paſſ. of hold.
- A rich man beginning to fall, is held up of friends. Eccluſ.
If Minerva had not appeared and he'd his hand, he had
executed his deſign. Dryden.
HELI’ACAL. adj. [heliaque, Fr. from A^2.] Emerging from
the luſtre of the ſun, or falling into it.
Had they aſcribed the heat of the ſeaſon to this ſtar, they
would not have computed from its heliacal aſcent. Brown.
He'll AcALLY. adv. [from heliacal.]
From the riſing of this ſtar, not coſmically, that is, with
the ſun, but heliacally, that is, its emerſion from the rays of
the ſun, the ancients computed their canicular days. Brown.
Hc is tempeſtuous in the Summer, when he riſes heliacally;
and rainy in the Winter, when he riſes achronically. Dryden.
HELICAL, adv. [helice, Fr. from £2.É. J Spiral; with many
circumvolutions. - * -
The ſcrew is a kind of wedge, multiplied or continued by
a helical revolution about a cylinder, receiving its motion not
- from any ſtroke, but from a veðis at one end of it. If iºns.
HELIC ID Parabola, in mathematicks, or the parabolick ſpiral,
is a curve which ariſes from the ſuppoſition of the axis of
the common Apollonian parabola's being bent round into the
periphery of a circle, and is a line then paſſing through the
cxtremities of the ordinates, which do now converge towards
the centre of the ſaid circle. Harris.
HEliº Eſsº Rick. adj. [heliocentrigue, Fr. Alſº, and 247;ov.]
The heliocentrick place of a planet is ſaid to be ſuch as it
would appear to us from the ſun, if our eye were fixed in its
CC Intre. - Harris.
Swift.
w - - - - r y
HE". Iºscope. n.ſ. [helioſcope, Fr. X.GP and axo~£2.] A ſort of .
!..ſ.º. - -
teleſcope fitted ſo as to look on the body of the fun, without
r offence to the eyes. Harr is.
HE ºn RoPF; n.ſ.. [??º and retro; heliotrope, French;
hºtropium, Latin.] A plant that turns towards the ſun;
but more particularly the turnſol, or ſun-flower.
1. Dogs of hell.
'Tis a common obſervation of flatterers, that they are like
the helidrºpe; they open only towards the ſun, but ſhut and
contračt themſelves at night, and in cloudy weather.
Government of the 7.
HE'LISPHER1cAL. adj. [helix and ſphere.] ºf the Tongue,
The heliſpherical line is the rhomb line in navigation, and
is ſo called becauſe on the globe it winds round the 2
rally, and ſtill comes nearer and nearer to it, but cannot tºr-
minate in 11. - Harris
HELIX. n.ſ.. [helice, Fr. º.º.) A ſpiral line; a circumvoli.
tion.
Find the true inclination of the ſcrew, together with the
certain quantity of water which every helix does contain.
Hikins's Da
HELL. n.ſ. [pelle, Saxon.] dalus.
1. The place of the devil and wicked ſouls.
For it is a knell - -
That ſummons thee to heaven, or to hell. Shakeſp Mada.
If a man were a porter of hell gates, he ſhould have old
turning the key. Shakespeare's Madith.
Let none admire -
That riches grow in hell; that ſoil may beſt
Deſerve the precious bane.
Hell's black tyrant trembled to behold
The glorious light he forfeited of old.
2. The place of ſeparate ſouls, whether good or bad.
I will go down to my ſon mourning to hell. Gen vi. 35.
He deſcended into hell. Apºſiles Creed.
3. Temporal death.
The pains of hell came about me; the ſnares of death over-
took me. Pſalm xviii. 4.
4. The place at a running play to which thoſe who are caught
are carried.
Then couples three be ſtraight allotted there;
They of both ends the middle two do fly;
The two that in mid-place, hell called were,
Muſt ſtrive with waiting foot, and watching eye,
To catch of them, and them to hell to bear,
That they, as well as they, hell may ſupply.
5. The place into which the taylor throws his ſhreds.
This truſty ſquire, he had, as well
As the bold Trojan knight, ſeen hell;
Not with a counterfeited paſs
Of golden bough, but true gold lace.
In Covent-garden did a taylor dwell,
Who might deſerve a place in his own hell. King's Coºktry.
6. The infernal powers.
Much danger firſt, much did he ſuſtain,
While Saul and bell croſt his ſtrong ſate in vain. Cºwley.
7. It is uſed in compoſition by the old writers more than by the
modern.
HELL-BLACK. adj. Black as hell.
The ſea, with ſuch a ſtorm as his bare head
In hell-black night endur'd, would have boil'd up,
And quench'd the ſtelled fires. Shakespeare King Lear.
HELL-BRE D. adj. [hell and bred.] Produced in hell.
Heart cannot think what courage and what cries,
With foul enfouldred ſmoak and flaſhing fire,
The hell-bred beaſt threw forth unto the ſkies. Fairy ºn.
HELL-ERoth. n.ſ. [hell and broth.] A compoſition boiled "P
for infernal purpoſes. ,
Adder's fork, and blind worm's ſting,
Lizard's leg, and owlet's wing;
For a charm of pow'rful trouble,
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble. Shakespeare Madit}.
HELL-Doo M.E.D. adj. [hell and doºm.] Conſigned to Hºl.
And reckon it thou thyſelf with ſpirits of hea"'"
Jell-don'd / and breath'ſ defiance here and ſºrº --
Where I reign king : ``jº, Paradiſe Lºft, b. ii.
HELL-Gover NED. adj. Direéted by hell. . -
Earth gape open wide and eat him quick,
pole ſpi-
Cºwlty-
Sidney.
Hudſlraſ, p. i.
... . As thou doſt ſwallow up this good king's blood,
Which his heli-gºvern'd arm hath butcher'd. Shakespeare R. III.
HELL-HATE.D. adj. Abhorred like hell.
Back do I toſs theſe treaſons to thy head, -
. . With the hell-hoted lie o'erwhelm thy heart; Shakespeare K. º:
HELL-HAUNTED. adj. [hell and haunt. J Haunted by the
devil.
Fierce Oſmond clos'd me in the bleeding bark,
And bid me ſtand czpoſed to the bleak winds,
And Winter's ſtorms, and heav'n's inclemency,
. . . Bound to the fate of this hell-haunted grove.
HF : L-Hous D. m. ſ. ſpelle punb, Saxon.]
Dryden.
1 hou had'ſ a Clarence too, and Richard kill'd him:
. From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept III
A hel hound, that doth hunt us all to death. shakespeare. R. H.
Now the hell-houn's with ſuperior ſpeed
Had reach'd the dame, and, fift'ning on her ſide,
The ground with iſſuing ſtreams of purple dy'd.
2. Agent of hell, - -
Dryden.
I call’d
* - º
*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">*r
H E L
H E L
I call’d -
My hell-hound, to lick up the draff, and filth,
Which man's polluting ſin with taint had ſhed - -
On what was pure. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x.
HELL-kit e. n.ſ.. [hell and kite.] Kite of infernal breed. The
term hell prefixed to any word notes deteſtation.
All my pretty ones :
Did you ſay all? What, all? Oh, hell-kite / all?
What, all my pretty chickens, and their dam,
At one fell ſkoop 3 Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He'lle Bor E. m. ſ. ſhelleborus, Latin.] Chriſtmas flower.
It hath a digitated leaf: the flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves
placed orbicularly, and expanding in form of a roſe: in the
centre of the flower riſes the pointal, encompaſſed about the
baſe with ſeveral little horns between the chives and petals,
which turn to a fruit, in which the membranaceous huſks are
gathered into a little head, ending in an horn, opening long-
wife, and full of roundiſh or oval ſeeds. Miller.
He'll Ebor E JWhite. m. ſ. [veratrum, Latin.] A plant.
The flower is naked, conſiſting of ſix leaves, expanding in
form of a roſe: in the middle ariſes the pointal, ſurrounded
by fix threads, which turn to a fruit; in which three mem-
branaceous ſheaths are gathered into a little head, and are full
of oblong ſeeds reſembling a grain of wheat, and compaſſed
by a leafy wing, Miller. - -
There are great doubts whether any of its ſpecies be the
true hel'ebore of the ancients. Miller.
He'll ENIs M. n.ſ. [ xxnvirº. J. An idiom of the Greek.
- Ainſworth.
He'llish. adj. [from hell.]
1. Having the qualities of hell; infernal; wicked; deteſtable.
No benefits ſhall ever allay that diabolical rancour that fer-
ments in ſome helliſh breaſts, but that it will foam out at its
foul mouth in ſlander.
Victory and triumph to the ſon of God,
Now entering his great duel, not of arms,
But to vanquiſh by wiſdom helliſh wiles. Paradiſe Regain'd.
2. Sent from hell; belonging to hell.
O thou celeſtial or infernal ſpirit of love, or what other
heavenly or helliſh title thou liſt to have, for effects of both I
find in myſelf, have compaſſion of me. Sidney, b. i.
He'llis HLY. adv. [from hell/h.] Infernally; wickedly; de-
teſtably.
Hºsts. m.ſ. [ from he'liſh. J Wickedneſs; abhorred
qualities.
He'llwar D. adv. [from hell.] Towards hell.
Be next thy care the ſable ſheep to place
Full o'er the pit, and hellward turn their face. Pope's Odyſſ.
HE LM denotes defence: as Eadhelm, happy defence; Sigheim,
vićtorious defence; Berthelm, eminent defence: like Amyntas
and Boetius among the Greeks. Gibſon's Camden.
HELM. n.ſ. [pelm, Saxon, from helan, to cover, to protect.]
1. A covering for the head in war; a helmet; a morrion; an
headpiece.
France ſpreads his banners in our noiſeleſs land;
With plumed helm thy ſlay’r begins his threats. Shakeſpeare.
Mneſtheus lays hard load upon his helm. Dryden.
2. The part of a coat of arms that bears the creſt.
More might be added of helms, creſis, mantles, and ſup-
porters. Camden's Remains.
3. The upper part of the retort.
The vulgar chymiſts themſelves pretend to be able, by re-
peated cohobations, and other fit operations, to make the diſ-
tilled parts of a concrete bring its own caput mortuum over the
helm. . . Boyle.
4. [pelma, Saxon.] The ſteerage; the rudder.
They did not leave the helm in ſtorms'
And ſuch they are make happy ſtates. Ben. Johnſ Catiline.
More in proſperity is reaſon toſt
Than ſhips in ſtorms, their helms and anchors loſt. Denh.
Fair occaſion ſhews the ſpringing gale,
And int’reſt guides the helm, and honour ſwells the ſail. Pri.
5. The ſtation of government.
I may be wrong in ſome of the means; but that is no ma-
terial objection againſt the deſign: let thoſe who are at the
helm contrive it better. Swift.
6. In the following line it is difficult to determine whether
feeſman or dºſender is intended: I think ſteerſman.
You ſlander
The helms o' th' ſtate, who care for you like fathers,
When you curſe them as enemies. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
To HEL.M. v. a. ſ from the noun. J. To guide; to con-
dućt. Hanmer.
The very ſtream of his life, and the buſineſs he hath helmed,
muſt give him a better proclamation. Shakeſp. Meaſ, for Meaſ.
HE'LM E D. adj. [from helm.] -
1. Furniſhed with a headpiece.
The helmed cherubim
Are ſeen in glittering ranks with wings diſplay’d. Milton.
HE'LM ET. n.ſ. [Probably a diminutive of helm.] A helm ; a
headpiece; armour for the head.
South's Sermons.
I ſaw him down; thrice up again, and fighting:
From helmet to the ſpur all bleeding o'er. S/a...?. H. W.
Put in their hands thy bruiſing irons of wrath, `
That they may cruſh down with a heavy fall
Th'uſurping helmets of our adverſaries. Shakespeare Rich. III.
Sev’n darts are thrown at once, and ſome rebound
From his bright ſhield, ſome on his helmet ſound. Dryden.
HELMI'NTHick, adj. [ from ºsCº. J Relating to
WOrns. Diº.
To HELP, v, a preter, helped, or hop; part, he ed, or Johen.
[h ſpan, Gothick; belpan, Saxon.]
I. To aſſiſt; to ſupport; to aid.
- Let us work as valiant men behoves; . . .
For bºldeſt hearts good fortune helpeth out. Fairfax, b. ii.
God helped him againſt the Philiſtines. 2 Chro. xxvi. 7.
They helped them in all things with filver and gold. 1 Eſdr.
A man reads his prayers out of a book, as a means to help.
his underſtanding and direét his expreſſions.
This he conceives not hard to bring about,
If all of you ſhould join to help him out. Dryden.
What I offer is ſo far from doing any diſkindneſs to the cauſe
theſe gentlemen are engaged in, that it does them a real ſer-
Yice, and helps them out with the main thing whereat they
Stillingfe. f.
ſtuck. ſtºodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
The god of learning and of light,
Would want a god himſelf to h.p him out. Swift.
2. To remove, or advance by help.
Woe to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not
another to help him up. Eccl. iv. I c.
Having never learned any laudable manual art, they have
recourſe to thoſe fooliſh or ill ways in uſe to hºp off their
time. Locke.
Wherever they are at a ſtand, help them preſently over the
difficulty without any rebuke. Locke.
3. To free from pain or diſeaſe.
Help and eaſe them, but by no means bemoan them. Lººſe.
4. To cure ; to heal.
Love doth to her eyes repair,
To help him of his blindneſs. Shakespeare. Tw, Gent. ºf Pºrºna.
5. To remedy; to change for the better.
Ceaſe to lament for that thou can'ſ not help;
And ſtudy help for that which thou lament'ſt. Shºſcare.
If they take offence when we give none, it is a thing we
cannot help, and therefore the whole blame muſt lie upon
them. - Sanderſon.
It is a high point of ill nature to make ſport with any man's
imperfections, that he cannot he p. L’Eſtrange.
Thoſe cloſing ſkies might ſtill continue bright;
But who can help it, if you'll make it night. Dryden.
... She, betwixt her modeſty and pride,
Her wiſhes, which ſhe could not help, would hide. Dryden.
It is reckoned ill manners for men to quarrel upon diffe-
rence in opinion, becauſe that is a thing which no man can
help in himſelf. Swift.
Thoſe few who reſide among is, only becauſe they cannot
help it. Swift.
6. To forbear; to avoid.
He cannot help believing, that ſuch things he ſaw and
heard. Atterbury's Sermons.
I cannot hel) remarking the reſemblance betwixt him and
our author in qualities, fame, and fortune. t Pope.
7. To promote; to forward.
If you make the earth narrower at the bottom than at the
top, in faſhion of a ſugar-loaf reverſed, it will help the expe-
riment. .. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
8. To Help to. To ſupply with; to furniſh with. -
Whom they would help to a kingdom, thoſe reign; and
whom again they would, they diſplace. 1 Mac. viii. 1 3.
The man that is now with Tireſias can help him to his
oxen again. L'Eſtrange.
In plenty ſtarving, tantaliz'd in ſtate, -
And complaiſantly he'p'd to all I hate;
Treated, careſs'd, and tir’d, I take my leave. Pºpe.
To H E LP. v. n.
1. To contribute aſſiſtance.
Sir, how come it you
Have holp to make this reſcue Shakeſp Coriolanus.
Diſcreet followers and ſervants help much to reputation. Bac.
Bennet's grave look was a pretence,
And Danby's matchleſs impudence
Help'd to ſupport the knave. Dryden.
A generous preſent heps to perſuade as well as an agreeable
perſon. Garth.
2. To bring a ſupply.
Some, wanting the talent to write, made it their care that
the actors ſhould help out where the muſes failed. Rymer.
He LP. n.ſ. [from the verb; hulpe, Dutch..]
1. Aſſiſtance; aid; ſupport; ſuccour.
Mulcaſſes, deſpairing to recover the city, hardly cſcaped his
enemies hands by the good help of his uncle. Knoles.
11 F He
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E M
H E M º
:
He may be behelden to experience and acquired notions,
where he thinks he has not the leaſt help from them. Locke.
So great is the ſtupidity of ſome of thoſe, that they may
have no ſenſe of the help adminiſtred to them. Smalridge.
2. That which forwards or promotes
Coral is in uſe as an help to the teeth of children. Bacon.
3. That which gives help.
Though theſe contrivances increaſe the power, yet they
proportionably protraćt the time: that which by ſuch helps one
man may do in a hundred days, may be done by the imme-
diate ſtrength of a hundred men in one day. JWilkins.
Virtue is a friend and an help to nature; but it is vice and
luxury that deſtroys it, and the diſeaſes of intemperance are
the natural produćt of the ſins of intemperance. South.
Another help St. Paul himſelf affords us towards the attain-
ing the true meaning contained in his epiſtles. Locke.
4. Remedy.
There is no help for it, but he muſt be taught accordingly
to comply with that faulty way of writing. Holder on Speech.
He'lpes. n.ſ.. [from help.]
1. An aſſiſtant; an auxiliary; an aider; one that helps or affiſts.
There was not any left, nor any helper for Iſrael. 2 Kings.
We ought to receive ſuch, that we might be fellow helpers
to the truth. 3 jo. viii.
It is impoſſible for that man to deſpair who remembers that
his helper is omnipotent. Taylor's Rule of living hºly.
2. One that adminiſters remedy.
Compaſſion, the mother of tears, is not always a mere idle
ſpectator, but an helper oftentimes of evils. Mºre.
3. A ſupernumerary ſervant.
I live in the corner of a vaſt unfurniſhed houſe: my family
conſiſts of a ſteward, a groom, a helper in the ſtable, a foot-
man, and an old maid. - Swift to Pºpe.
4. One that ſupplies with any thing wanted.
Heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a huſband. Shakespeare All's well that end, well.
He'lpful. adj. [help and full.]
1. Uſeful; that which gives aſſiſtance.
Let's fight with gentle words,
*Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful ſwords. Shakespeare
He orders all the ſuccours which they bring; -
The helpful and the good about him run,
And form an army. Dryden's Ann. Mirab.
2: Wholſome; ſalutary. -
A ſkilful chymiſt can as well, by ſeparation of viſible ele-
ments, draw helpful medicines out of poiſon, as poiſon out of
the moſt healthful herbs. Raleigh's Hylory of the World.
HELPL Ess. adj. [from help.]
1. Wanting power to ſuccour one's ſelf.
One dire ſhot
Cloſe by the board the prince's main-maſt bore;
All three now helpleſ by each other lie. Dryd. Ann. Mirab.
Let our enemies rage and perſecute the poor and the helpleſs;
but let it be our glory to be pure and peaceable. Rogers.
2. Wanting ſupport or aſſiſtance.
How ſhall I then your helpleſ, ſame defend ?
'Twill then be infamy to ſeem your friend. Pope.
3. Irremediable; admitting no help.
Such helpleſ, harms it's better hidden keep,
Than rip up grief, where it may not avail. Fairy Queen.
4. Unſupplied; void.
Naked he lies, and ready to expire,
Helpleſ of all that human wants require. Dryden.
HE'LPLEssly. adv. [from helpleſ...] Without ſuccour; with-
out ability.
tºº. n.ſ [from helpleſ...] Want of ſuccour; want
of ability. -
HE LTER-skElt R. adv. [As Skinner fancies, from peolrten
rceabo, the darkneſs of hell; hell, ſays he, being a place of
confuſion.]. In a hurry; without order; tumultuouſly.
Sir John, I am thy Piſtol, and thy friend;
And helter-ſkeller have I rode to England, -
And tidings do I bring. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
He had no ſooner turned his back but they were at it halter-
feller, throwing books at one another's heads. L’Eſtrange.
HELVE. m. ſ. ſpelpe, Saxon.] The handle of an axe.
The ſlipping of an axe from the heke, whereby another is
ſlain, was the work of God himſelf. Raleigh's Hiſtºry.
To H E Lv E. v. a. [from the noun..] To fit with a helve or
handle.
H.M. m. ſ. [ pem, Saxon. J
i. The edge of a garment doubled and ſewed to keep the threads
from ſpreading
Rowlers muſt be made of even cloth, white and gentle,
without hºm, ſeam, or thread hanging by. Wiſeman.
2. [Hemmen, Dutch..] The noiſe uttered by a ſudden and violent
expiration of the breath.
I would try if I could cry hem, and have him. Shakeſpeare.
He loves to clear his pipes in good air, and is not a little
pleaſed with any one who takes notice of the ſtrength which
he ſtill exerts in his morning hers. Addiſon's Speciatºr.
3. interječ. Heml [Latin.] -
To HE M. v. a.
1. To cloſe the edge of cloath by a hem or double border ſewed
together.
2. To border; to edge.
All the ſkirt about
Was hem'd with golden fringe. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Along the ſhoar of ſilver ſtreaming Thames,
Whoſe ruſhy bank, the which his river hems. Spenſer.
3. To encloſe; to environ; to confine; to ſhut.
So of either ſide, ſtretching itſelf in a narrow length, was
it hemmed in by woody hills, as if indeed nature had meant
therein to make a place for beholders. Sidney, b. ii.
What lets us then the great Jeruſalem
With valiant ſquadrons round about to hem. Fairfax, b.i.
Why, Neptune, haſt thou made us ſtand alone,
Divided from the world for this, ſay they;
Hemm'd in to be a ſpoil to tyranny,
Leaving afflićtion hence no way to fly? Daniel's Civ. Iſar.
I hurry me in haſte away,
And find his honour in a pound,
Hernm’d by a triple circle round,
Chequer'd with ribbons, blue and green. Pºpe.
To HEM. v. n. [hemmen, Dutch..] To utter a noiſe by violent
expulſion of the breath. º
HE'Mic'R ANY. n.ſ.. [**qw, half, and x86 vov, the ſkull, or
head..] A pain that affects only one part of the head at a
time. Quincy.
HEM icycle. n.ſ.. [nuſzuxxG2.] A half round.
HE'M INA. m. ſ. An ancient meaſure: now uſed in medicine to
ſignify about ten ounces in meaſure. £uincy.
HEMIPLEGY.. n.ſ. [**qw, half, and rx'rra, to ſtrike or ſeize.)
A palſy, or any nervous affection relating thereunto, that
ſeizes one ſide at a time; ſome partial diſorder of the ner-
vous ſyſtem.
HEMISPHERE. m. ſ. [**1st&amp;ietov; hemiſphere, French. J
The half of a globe when it is ſuppoſed to be cut through its
centre in the plane of one of its greateſt circles.
That place is earth, the ſeat of man; that light
His day, which elſe, as th' other hemiſphere,
Night would invade. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii.
God ſaw the light was good,
And light from darkneſs by the hemiſphere
Divided. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
A hill
Of Paradiſe, the higheſt from whoſe top
The hemiſphere of earth, in cleareſt ken
Stretch'd out to th' ampleſt reach of proſpect lay. Mih. P. L.
The ſun is more powerful in the northern hemiſphere, and
in the apogeum; for therein his motion is ſlower. Brown.
In open proſpećt nothing bounds our eye,
Until the earth ſeems join'd unto the ſky;
So in this hemiſphere our utmoſt view
Is only bounded by our king and you. Dryden.
HEMISPHE’R1cAl. }*. [ from hºmiſ here. J Half round;
HEMISPHE/R1ck. containing half a globe.
The thin film of water ſwells above the ſurface of the
water it ſwims on, and commonly conſtitutes hemiſpherial
bodies with it. Boyle.
A pyrites, placed in the cavity of another of an hemiſh-
rick figure, in much the ſame manner as an acorn in its
cup. J/oodward on Pºſis.
HE'Mistick. m. ſ. ſºutsix or ; hemiſtiche, Fr.] Half a verſe.
He broke off in the hemiſtick, or midſt of the verſe; but
ſeized, as it were, with a divine fury, he made up the latter
part of the hemiſtick. Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
HEM lock. m. ſ. pemloc, Saxon.] An herb.
The leaves are cut into many minute ſegments: the petals
of the flower are bifid, heart-ſhaped, and unequal: the flower
is ſucceeded by two ſhort chanelled ſeeds. One ſort is ſome-
times uſed in medicine, though it is noxious; but the bein-
lock of the ancients, which was ſuch deadly poiſon, is gene-
rally ſuppoſed different. Miller.
He was met even now,
As mad as the vext ſea, ſinging aloud;
Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
With hardocks, hemlock. Shakeſp. King Lear.
We cannot with certainty affirm, that no man can be nou-
riſhed by wood or ſtones, or that all men will be poiſoned by
hemlock. Locke.
HE'MoRRHAGF. l. n.ſ. [ xiao;;zyſz; hemorragie, French..] A
HE'MoRR HAG Y. W. violent flux of blood.
Great hemorrhagy ſucceeds the ſeparation. Ray.
Twenty days faſting will not diminiſh its quantity ſo much
as one great hemorrhage. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
HEMORRHOIDS. m. ſ. [...go; vić; ; hemorrhoid, French.)
The piles; the emrods.
I got the hemorrhoids. Swift.
He'sſoRRHoIDAL. adj. [hemorrhoidal, Fr. from hemorrhºid.
Belonging to the veins in the fundament.
Beſides there are hemorrhages from the noſe and hºrrºrrhºidal
veins, and fluxes of rheum. Ray on the Creatiºn.
Emboſt
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E N
º
º
Emboſt upon the field, a battle ſtood -
Of leeches, ſpouting hemorrhoidal blood. Garth's Diſpenſat.
HEMP. n.ſ. [paenep, Saxon; hampe, Dutch..] A fibrous plant
of which coarſe linen and ropes are made.
It hath digitated leaves oppoſite to one another: the flowers
have no viſible petals; it is male and female in different plants.
It is propagated in the rich fenny parts of Lincolnſhire in great
quantities for its bark, which is uſeful for cordage, cloth, &amp;c.
and the ſeed affords an oil uſed in medicine. Miller.
Let gallows go for dog; let man go free,
And let not hemp his windpipe ſuffocate. Shakespeare Hen.V.
Hemp and flax are commodities that deſerve encouragement,
both for their uſefulneſs and profit. Mortimer's Husbandry.
HEMP Agrimony. n.ſ. A plant.
The common hemp agrimony is found wild by ditches and
ſides of rivers. Miller.
He'n PEN. adj [from hemp J Made of hemp.
In foul reproach of knighthood's fair degree,
About his neck a hempen rope he wears. Fairy Queen, b. i.
- Behold
Upon the hempen tackle ſhip-boys climbing. Shakespeare Hen. V.
Ye ſhall have a hempen caudle then, and the help of a
hatchet. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. iii.
I twitch'd his dangling garter from his knee; -
He wift not when the hempen ſtring I drew. Gay.
HEN. m. ſ. [penne, Saxon and Dutch; han, German, a cock.]
1. The female of a houſe-cock. - -
2. The female of any land-fowl.
The peacock, pheaſant, and goldfinch cocks have glorious
colours; the hens have not. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
whilſt the hen bird is covering her eggs, the male generally
takes his ſtand upon a neighbouring bough within her hear-
ing, and by that means diverts her with his ſongs during the
whole time of her fitting. Addiſon's Spečiator.
The wild duck hence
O'er the rough moſs, and o'er the trackleſs waſte
The heath hen flutters. Thomſon's Spring.
HEN-DRIVER, n.ſ.. [hen and driver.] A kind of hawk.
The hen-driver I forbear to name. Walton's Angler.
He'N-HARM. n.ſ. A kind of kite. Ainſw. So called
HE'N-HARRIER. } probably from deſtroying chickens.
HEN-HEARTED. adj. [hen and heart.] Daſtardly; cowardly;
like a hen. A low word.
HEN-Pecked. adj. [hen and pecked.] Governed by the wife.
A ſtepdame too I have, a curſed ſhe,
Who rules my hen-peck'd fire, and orders me. Dryd. Virgil.
- The neighbours reported that he was hen-pecked, which was
impoſſible, by ſuch a mild-ſpirited woman as his wife. Arbuthn.
Hºooº. n.ſ.. [hen and royi.] The place where the poultry
reit. -
Many a poor devil ſtands to a whipping poſt for the pilfer-
ing of a ſilver ſpoon, or the robbing of a hen-rooft. L’Eſir.
Her houſe is frequented by a company of rogues, whom
ſhe encourageth to rob his hen-roofs. Swift.
If a man proſecutes gipſies with ſeverity, his hen-rooft is ſure
to pay for it. Addiſon's Spectator.
They oft have ſally'd out to pillage
The hen-roofts of ſome peaceful village. Tickell.
HENS-FEET. n.ſ. A kind of plant. Ainſworth.
HE'N BANE. n.ſ.. [hyoſcyamus, Latin.] A plant.
The leaves are ſoft and hairy, growing alternately upon the
branches: the cup of the flower is ſhort, bell-ſhaped, and
divided into five ſegments: the flower conſiſts of one leaf,
the bottom part of which is tubeloſe, but is expanded at the
top, and divided into five ſegments, having five obtuſe ſta-
mina: the fruit, which is incloſed within the calyx, reſembles
a pot with a cover to it, and is divided by a partition into two
cells, which contain many ſmall ſeeds. It is very often found
growing upon the ſides of banks and old dunghills. This is a
very poiſonous plant. Miller. -
That to which old Socrates was curs'd,
Or kenbane juice, to ſwell 'em 'till they burſt.
He’NBIT. n.ſ. A plant.
In a ſcarcity in Sileſia a rumour was ſpread of its raining
millet-ſeed; but it was found to be only the ſeeds of the ivy-
leaved ſpeedwell, or ſmall hembit. Derham's Phyſ. Theology.
HENCE. adv. or interſ. [peonan, Saxon; hennet, old Engliſh.]
1. From this place to another. • . -
Diſcharge my follow’rs; let them hence away,
From Richard's night to Bolinbroke's fair day. Shakespeare R. II.
Th' Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy; will not drive us hence. Milton's P. L.
A ſullen prudence drew thee hence
From noiſe, fraud and impertinence.
2: Away; to a diſtance.
Be not found here; hence with your little ones. Shakespeare Mach:
Hence with denial vain, and coy excuſe. . Aſilion.
3. At a diſtance; in other place.
Why ſhould I then be falſe, ſince it is true
That I muſt die here, and live hence by truth? Shakeſpeare.
All members of our cauſe, both here and hence,
That are inſinewed to this action. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
4. From this time; in the future.
Dryden.
Roſcommon.
He who can reaſon well to-day about one ſort of matters,
cannot at all reaſon to-day about others, though perhaps a year
hence he may. Locłe.
Let not poſterity a thouſand years hence look for truth in the
voluminous annals of pedants. Arbuthnot.
5. For this reaſon; in conſequence of this.
Hence perhaps it is, that Solomon calls the fear of the Lord
the beginning of wiſdom. Tillotſon, Sermon i.
6. From this cauſe; from this ground.
By too ſtrong a projećtile motion the aliment tends to pu-
trefaction: hence may be deduced the force of exerciſe in help-
ing digeſtion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
7. From this ſource; from this original; from this ſtore.
My Flora was my ſun; for as
One ſun, ſo but one Flora was:
All other faces borrowed hence
Their light and grace, as ſtars do thence. Suckling.
8. From hence is a vitious expreſſion, which crept into uſe even
among good authors, as the original force of the word hence
was gradually forgotten.
An ancient author propheſy'd from hence,
Behold on Latian ſhores a foreign princeſ
From the ſame parts of heav'n his navy ſtands,
To the ſame parts on earth. Dryden's Zn. b vii.
To HENCE. v. a. [from the adverb.] To ſend off; to diſpatch
to a diſtance. Obſolete.
Go, bawling curl thy hungry maw go fill
On yon foul flock, belonging not to me; -
With that his dog he henc'd, his flock he curſt. Sidney.
HENCEFo'RTH. adv. [penonpons, Saxon. J. From this time
forward.
Thanes and kinſmen,
*g. be earls. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
ever henceforth ſhall I joy again;
Never, oh never, ſhall I ſee more joy. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Happier thou may'ſt be, worthier can'ſt not be ;
Taſte this, and be henceforth among the gods,
Thyſelf a goddeſs. Milton's Par. Loft, b. v.
I never from thy ſide henceforth will ſtray,
*Till day droop. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xi.
If we treat gallant ſoldiers in this ſort,
Who then henceforth to our defence will come 2 Dryden.
Hence Fo'Rw ARD. adv. [hence and forward.] From this time
to all futurity.
Hencefºrward will I bear
Upon my target three fair ſhining ſuns. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Henceforward it ſhall be treaſon for any that calls me other
than lord Mortimer. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI, p. ii.
Pardon, I beſeech you;
Henceforward I am ever rul’d by you. Shakespeare Rºmeo and jul.
The royal academy will admit hencefºrward only ſuch who
are endued with good qualities. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
He'Nch MAN. m.ſ.. [bync, a ſervant, and man, Skinner; pen;re,
a horſe, and man, Spelman.] A page ; an attendant. Ob-
ſolete. - - -
Why ſhould Titania croſs her Oberon 2
I do but beg a little changeling boy, -
To be my henchman. Shakeſpeare's Midſ. Night's Dream.
Three henchmen were for ev'ry knight aſſign'd,
All in rich livery clad, and of a kind. Dryden.
To HEND. v. a. ſpenban, Saxon, from hendo, low Latin, which
ſeems borrowed from hand or hond, Teutonick.]
1. To ſeize; to lay hold on.
With that the ſergeants hent the young man ſtout,
And bound him likewiſe in a worthleſs chain. Fairfax, b. ii.
2. To croud; to ſurround. Perhaps the following paſſage is
corrupt, and ſhould be read hemmed.
The generous and graveſt citizens
Have bent the gates, and very near upon
The duke is entering. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Meaſure.
He’ND EcAGoN. n.ſ. [v]exo, and yovſz.] A figure of eleven
ſides or angles.
HEPAT IcAL. A. adj. [hepaticus, Latin; hepatique, French, from
HEPAT Ick. } #rae.] Belonging to the liver.
If the evacuated blood be florid, it is ſtomach blood; if
red and copious, it's hepatick. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The cyſtick gall is thick, and intenſely bitter; the hepatick
gall is more fluid, and not ſo bitter. Arbuthn. on Aliments.
HEPs. n.ſ. Hawthorn-berries, commonly written hips. Ainſw.
In hard Winters there is obſerved great plenty of hºps and
haws, which preſerve the ſmall birds from ſtarving. . Bacon.
HeptacA'psulAR. adj. [ialz and capſula.] Having ſeven ca-
vities or cells.
HEPTAGON. n.ſ.. [heptagone, French; £42 and yovſz.] A
figure with ſeven ſides or angles.
HePTA/G on AL. adj. [from heptagon.] Having ſeven angles or
ſides.
He'ptARchy. n.ſ.. [heptarchie, Fr. wºla, and 28%.] A ſeven-
fold government.
In the Saxon heptarchy I find.little noted of arms, albeit the
Germans, of whom they deſcended, uſed ſhields. , Camden.
England began not to be a people, when Alfred reduced it
8 lſ, to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E. R.
H E R
into a monarchy; for the materials thereof were extant be-
fore, namely, under the heptarchy. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
The next returning planetary hour
Of Mars, who ſhar'd the heptarchy of pow'r,
His ſteps bold Arcite to the temple bent. . . Dryden.
HE R. pron. [pera, ber, in Saxon, ſtood for their, or of them,
which at length became the female poſſeſſive.]
1. Belonging to a female; of a ſhe ; of a woman:
About his neck
A green and gilded ſnake had wreath’d itſelf,
Who with her head, nimble in threats, approach'd
The opening of his mouth. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Still new favourites ſhe choſe,
*Till up in arms my paſſion roſe,
And caſt away her yoke. Cowley.
One month, three days, and half an hour,
Judith held the ſov’reign pow'r ;
Wond’rous beautiful her face;
But ſo weak and ſmall her wit,
That ſhe to govern were unfit,
And ſo Suſanna took her place. Cowley.
2. The oblique caſe of ſhe.
England is ſo idly king'd,
Her ſceptre ſo fantaſtically borne,
That fear attends her not. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
She cannot ſeem deform'd to me,
And I would have her ſeem to others ſo. . Cowly.
The moon aroſe clad o'er in light,
With thouſand ſtars attending on her train;
With her they riſe, with her they ſet again. Cowley.
Should I be left, and thou be loſt, the ſea,
That bury'd her I lov’d, ſhould bury me. Dryden.
HERs, pronoun. This is uſed when it refers to a ſubſtantive go-
ing before: as, ſuch are her charms, ſuch charms are hers.
This pride of hers,
Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her. Shakeſpeare.
- Thine own unworthineſs,
Will ſtill that thou art mine not hers confeſs. Cowley.
Some ſecret charm did all her ačts attend,
And what his fortune wanted, hers could mend. Dryden.
I bred you up to arms, rais'd you to power,
Indeed to ſave a crown, not hers, but yours. Dryden.
HERALD. m.ſ.. [herault, French; herald, German.]
1. An officer whoſe buſineſs it is to regiſter genealogies, adjuſt
enſigns armorial, regulate funerals, and anciently to carry
meſſages between princes, and proclaim war and peace.
May none, whoſe ſcatter'd names honour my book,
For ſtriët degrees of rank or title look;
'Tis 'gainſt the manners of an epigram,
And I a poet here, no herald am. Ben. Johnſºn's Epigrams.
When time ſhall ſerve, let but the herald cry,
And I'll appear again. Shakeſp. King Lear.
After my death I wiſh no other herald,
No other ſpeaker of my living ačtions, -
But ſuch an honeſt chronicler as Griffith. Shakespeare Hºn.VIII.
Embaſſador of peace, if peace you chuſe;
Or herald of a war, if you refuſe. Dryden's Ind. Emperor.
Pleaſe thy pride, and ſearch the herald's roll,
Where thou ſhalt find thy famous pedigree. Dryden.
2. A precurſor; a forerunner; a harbinger.
It is the part of men to fear and tremble,
When the moſt mighty gods, by tokens, ſend
Such dreadful heralds to aſtoniſh us. Shakespeare julius Cæſar.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn. Shakeſpeare.
To HE'RALD v. a. [from the noun..] To introduce as an
herald. A word not uſed.
- We are ſent
To give thee from our royal maſter thanks;
Only to herald thee into his fight,
Not pay thee. Shakeſpeare's Macleth.
HERALDR Y. m. ſ. [heraulderſe, French, from herald.]
1. The art or office of a herald.
I am writing of heraldry. Peacham.
Grant her, beſides, of noble blood that ran
In ancient veins, ere heraldry began. Dryden's juvenal.
'Twas no falſe heraldry, when madneſs drew
Her pedigree from thoſe who too much knew. Denham.
2. Blazonry.
Metals may blazon common beauties; ſhe
Makes pearls and planets humble heraldry. Cleaveland.
HERB. m.ſ.. [herbe, French ; herba, Latin.j
Herbs are thoſe plants whoſe ſtalks are ſoft, and have no-
thing woody in them; as graſs and hemlock. Lºcke.
In ſuch a night
Medea gather'd the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Aiſon. Shakespeare. Merch, of Penice.
With ſweet-ſwelling herbs
Eſpouſed Eve deck'd firſt her nuptial bed. Milton.
Unhappy, from whom ſtill conceal’d does lie
Of herbs and roots the harmleſs luxury. Cowley.
If the leaves are of chief uſe to us, then we call them
her's ; as ſage and mint, If atts's Logick,
Herb eating animals, which don't ruminate, have ſtrong
grinders, and chew much. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
HERB Chriſtºpher, or Bane-berries. n.ſ. A plant.
The flower conſiſts of five leaves, placed orbicularly in form
of a roſe: in its centre ariſes the ovary, which becomes a ſoft
fruit or berry of an oval ſhape, and filled with ſeeds in a
double row, which for the moſt part adhere together. Miller.
HERBA'ceous. adj. [from herba, Latin.]
1. Belonging to herbs.
Ginger is the root of neither tree nor trunk; but an herba-
ceous plant, reſembling the water flower-de-luce. Brown.
2. Feeding on vegetables.
Their teeth are fitted to their food; the rapacious to catch-
ing, holding, and tearing their prey; the herbaceous to gather-
ing and comminution of vegetables. Derham's Phyſ. Thalºgy.
HER BAGE. m.ſ.. [herbage, French.]
1. Herbs colle&amp;tively; graſs; paſture.
Rocks lie cover'd with eternal ſnow;
... Thin herbage in the plains, and fruitleſs fields. Dryden.
At the time the deluge came the earth was loaded with
herbage, and thronged with animals. Woodward's Nat. Hiſt.
2. The tythe and the right of paſture. Ainſworth.
HE’RBAL. m. ſ. [from herb.] A book containing the names
and deſcription of plants. -
We leave the deſcription of plants to herbals, and other
like books of natural hiſtory. Bacon's Natural Hjory.
Such a plant will not be found in the herbal of nature. Bro.
As for the medicinal uſes of plants, the large herbals are
ample teſtimonies thereof. 44ore's Antid againſt Atheiſm.
Our herbals are ſufficiently ſtored with plants. Baker.
He'RBA List. n.ſ.. [from herbal.] A man ſkilled in herbs.
Herbaliſ's have thus diſtinguiſhed them, naming that the
male whoſe leaves are lighter, and fruit and apples rounder.
Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 6.
He'RBAR. n.ſ. [A word, I believe, only to be found in Spenſer.]
Herb; plant.
The roof hereof was arched over head,
And deck'd with flowers and herbars daintily. Fairy Queen.
He'R BAR1st. n.ſ.. [herbarius, from herba, Latin.] One ſkilled
in herbs. -
Herbariffs have exerciſed a commendable curioſity in ſub-
dividing plants of the ſame denomination. Boyle.
He was too much ſwayed by the opinions then current
amongſt herbariffs, that different colours or multiplicity of
leaves in the flower were ſufficient to conſtitute a ſpecifick
difference. Ray on the Creation.
As to the fuci, their ſeed hath been diſcovered and ſhewed
me firſt by an ingenious herbari/?. Derham's Phyſ. Theology.
HE'R BELET. n.ſ. [Diminutive of herb, or of herbala, Latin I
A ſmall herb.
Even ſo -
Theſe herbelets ſhall, which we upon you ſtrow. Shakeſp.
HER BL'scENT. adj. [herbeſcens, Latin.] Growing into herbs.
HE’R BID. adj. [herbidus, Latin.] Covercq with herbs.
HE'RBORIST. n.ſ.. [from herb.] One curious in herbs. This
ſeems a miſtake for herbarift.
A curious herborſ has a plant, whoſe flower periſhes in
about an hour. - Ray.
HE'R Borou GH. n.ſ.. [herberg, German.] Place of temporary
reſidence. Now written harbour.
The German lord, when he went out of Newgate into the
cart, took order to have his arms ſet up in his laſt he borough;
ſaid he was taken and committed upon ſuſpicion of treaſon,
no witneſs appearing againſt him. Ben. johnſon's Diſcoveries.
He'R Bous. adj. [ herboſus, Latin.] Abounding with herbs.
He'R BULEN T. adj. [from herbula..] Containing herbs. Diº.
HE'R Bwoy AN. m. ſ. [herb and woman.] A woman that ſells
herbs. -
I was like to be pulled to pieces by brewer, butcher, and
baker; even my herbwoman dunned me as I went along. Arb.
HE'RBY. adj. [ſtom herb.] Having the nature of herbs.
No ſubſtance but earth, and the procedures of earth, as tile
and ſtone, yieldeth any moſs or herly ſubſtance. Bacon.
HERD. m. ſ. [peono, Saxon.]
1. A number of beaſts together. It is peculiarly applied to black
cattle. Flocks and herds are ſheep and oxen or Áine.
Note a wild and wanton herd,
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds. Shakespeare Merchant of Penice.
There find a herd of heifers, wand'ring o'er
The neighbouring hill, and drive them to the ſhore. Addison.
2. A company of men, in contempt or deteſtation.
Survey the world, and where one Cato ſhines,
Count a degenerate herd of Catilines. Dryden's juver.
I do not remember where ever God delivered his oracles by
the multitude, or nature truths by the herd. Locke.
3. It anciently ſignified a keeper of cattle, and in Scotland it
is ſtill uſed. [pynb, Saxon,] a ſenſe ſtill retained in compo-
ſition: as goatherd.
To HERD. v. n. [from the noun.]
r. To run in herds or companics.
Weak women ſhould, in danger, herd like deer. Dryden.
It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E R
H E R
º
It is the nature of indigency, like common danger, to en-
dear men to one another, and make them herd together, like
fellow-ſailors in a ſtorm. Norris.
2. To aſſociate.
I'll herd among his friends, and ſeem
One of the number. Addiſon's Cat".
Run to towns, to herd with knaves and fools,
And undiſtinguiſh'd paſs among the crowd. Walſh.
To HERD. v. a. To throw or put into an herd.
The reſt,
However great we are, honeſt and valiant, ---
Are herded with the vulgar. Ben. jºhnſºn's Catiline.
HERDG Room. n.ſ.. [herd and groom.] A keeper of herds.
But who ſhall judge the wager won or loſt 2
That ſhall yonder herdgroom, and none other,
Which over the pouſſe hitherward doth poſt. Spenser,
He'RDMAN. Un: ſ [herd and man.] One employed in tend-
He'RDSM *...} ing herds: formerly, an owner of herds.
A herdſman rich, of much account was he, - - -
In whom no evil did reign, or good appear. Sidney.
And you, enchantment,
worthy enough a herdſman, if e'er thou
Theſe rural latches to his entrance open,
I will deviſe a death cruel for thee. Shakeſp Winter's Tale.
Scarce themſelves know how to hold
A ſheephook, or have learn'd ought elſe the leaſt -
That to the faithful herdman's art belongs. Milton.
There oft the Indian herdſman, ſhunning heat,
Shelters in cool, and tends his paſturing herds
At loop-holes cut through thickeſt ſhade. Milt. Par. Loft.
So ſtands a Thracian herdſman with his ſpear
Full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear.
The herdſmen, round
The chearful fire, provoke his health in goblets crown'd.
Dryden's Virgil’s Georgicks.
When their herdſmen could not agree, they parted by con-
ſent. - Locke.
HERE. adv. [ben, Saxon; hier, Dutch.]
1. In this place.
Before thy here approach,
Old Siward, with ten thouſand warlike men,
All ready at appoint, was ſetting forth. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
I, upon my frontiers here,
Dryden.
Keep reſidence. Milton.
Here nature firſt begins -
Her fartheſt verge. Milton.
How wretched does Prometheus' ſtate appear,
While he his ſecond mis’ry ſuffers here ! Cowley.
To-day is ours, we have it here. Cowley.
2. In the preſent ſtate. -
Thus ſhall you be happy here, and more happy hereafter.
Bacon's Advice to Williers.
3. It is uſed in making an offer or attempt.
Then here's for earneſt:
'Tis finiſh'd, and the duſk that yet remains
Is but the native horrour of the wood. Dryden’s K. A thur.
However, friend, here's to the king, one cries;
To him who was the king, the friend replies. Prizr.
4. It is often oppoſed to there. Diſperſedly; in one place and
another. -
Good-night: mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping
—'Tis neither here nor there. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
We are come to ſee thee fight, to ſee thee foigne, to ſee
thee traverſe, to ſee thee here, to ſee thee there. Shakeſpeare.
Then this, then that man's aid, they crave, implore;
Poſt here for help, ſeek there their followers. Daniel.
I would have in the heath ſome thickets made only of ſweet
briar and honey-ſuckle, and ſome wild vine amongſt; and the
ground ſet with violets; for theſe are ſweet, and proſper in the
ſhade; and theſe to be in the heath here and there, not in
order. Bacon's Eſſays.
The devil might perhaps, by inward ſuggeſtions, have
drawn in here and there a ſingle proſelyte. Gover. of the Tongue.
You remember how your city, after the dreadful fire, was
rebuilt, not preſently, by raiſing continued ſtreets in any one
part; but at firſt here a houſe, and there a houſe, to which
others by degrees were joined. Spratt's Sermons.
He that rides poſt through a country may be able to give
fome looſe deſcription of here a mountain and there a plain,
here a molaſs and there a river, woodland in one part, and
favanas in another. Locke.
5. Here ſeems, in the following paſſage, to mean this place.
Bid them farewel, Cordelia, though unkind;
Thou loſeſt here, a better where to find. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
Her EA Bo'Uts, adv. [here and about..] About this place.
I ſaw hereabouts nothing remarkable, except Auguſtus's
bridge. Addison on Italy.
HERE A/F TER. adv. [here and after.]
1. In time to come; in futurity.
How worthy he is, I will leave to appear hereafter, rather
than ſtory him in his own hearing. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
e
The grand-child, with twelve ſons increas'd, departs
From Canaan, to a land hereafter call’d
Egypt. 4|ilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. xii.
Hereafter he from war ſhall come,
And bring his Trojans peace.
2. In a future ſtate.
HEREA'FTE R. n.ſ. A future ſtate,
'Tis the divinity that ſtirs within us 3.
'Tis heaven itſelf that points out an hereafter,
And intimates eternity to man. Addiſon's Cato.
I ſtill ſhall wait
Some new hereafter, and a future ſtate. Prior.
HEREA't adv. [here and at..] At this.
9ne man coming to the tribune, to receive his donative,
with a garland in his hand, the tribune, offended hereat, de-
manded what this ſingularity could mean. Hooker, b. ii.
HEREBY', adv. [here and by.j By this. -
- In what eſtate the fathers reſted, which were dead before,
it is not hereby either one way or other determined. Hºi.
Hereby the Moors are not excluded by beauty, there being
in this deſcription no conſideration of colours. Brown.
The acquiſition of truth is of infinite concernment: here-
by we become acquainted with the nature of things. Watts.
Here'DITAble. adj. [hares, Latin.] Whatever may be occu-
pied as inheritance.
Adam being neither a monarch, nor his imaginary monarchy
hereditable, the power which is now in the world’is not that
which was Adam's. Locłe.
He'REDITAMENT. n.ſ.. [hæredium, Latin.] A law term de-
nºting inheritance, or hereditary eſtate.
HEREDITARY. adj. [hereditaire, French; hereditarius, Lat.]
Poſſeſſed or claimed by right of inheritance; deſcending by
inheritance.
To thee and thine, hereditary ever,
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom. Shakeſpeare:
Theſe old fellows
Have their ingratitude in them hereditary.
He ſhall aſcend
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign -
With earth's wide bounds, his glory with the heav'ns. Milt.
Thus while the mute creation downward bend
Their fight, and to their earthly mother tend,
Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes
Beholds his own hereditary ſkies.
When heroick verſe his youth ſhall raiſe,
And form it to hereditary praiſe. Dryden's Virgil.
Here pit ARILY, adv. [from hereditary.] By inheritance.
Here is another, who thinks one of the greateſt glories of
his father was to have diſtinguiſhed and loved you, and who
loves you hereditarily. Pope to Swift.
Her EI'N. adv, [here and in..] In this.
How highly ſoever it may pleaſe them with words of truth
to extol ſermons, they ſhall not herein offend us. Hooker, b, v.
My beſt endeavours ſhall be done herein. Shakeſpeare.
Since truths, abſolutely neceſſary to ſalvation, are ſo clearly
revealed that we cannot err in them, unleſs we be notoriouſly
wanting to ourſelves, herein the fault of the judgment is re-
ſolved into a precedent default in the will. South.
Here!'Nto. adv. [here and into.] Into this.
Becauſe the point about which we ſtrive is the quality of our
laws, our firſt entrance hereinto cannot better be made than
Dryden.
Shakespeare.
Dryden's Ovid.
with conſideration of the nature of law in general. Hooker.
Hereo'F. adv. [here and of..] From this; of this.
Hereof comes it that prince Harry is valiant. Shakespeare.
He REO'N. adv. [here and on..] Upon this.
If we ſhould ſtrićtly inſiſt hereon, the poſſibility might fall
into queſtion. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi.
He Reo'Ut. adv. [here and out..]
1. Out of this place.
A bird all white, well feather'd on each wing,
Here-out up to the throne of God did fly. Spenser.
2. All the words compounded of here and a prepoſition, except
hereafter, are obſolete, or obſoleſcent; never uſed in poetry,
and ſeldom in proſe, by elegant writers, though perhaps not
unworthy to be retained. - -
Here M1'Tical: adj. [It ſhould be written eremitical, from ere-
mite, of ignºGP, a deſart; heremitique, French.J Solitary;
ſuitable to a hermit.
You deſcribe ſo well your heremitical ſtate of life, that none
of the ancient anchorites could go beyond you for a cave in a
rock. • ef Pope.
He'Resy, n.ſ.. [herſe, French; harºſs, Latin; &amp;#ick.] An
opinion of private men different from that of the catholick
and orthodox church. -
Herºſ prevaileth only by a counterfeit ſhew of reaſon,
whereby notwithſtanding it becometh invincible, unleſs it be
convićted of fraud by manifeſt remonſtrance clearly true, and
unable to be withſtood. Hocker, b. iii.
As for ſpeculative herºſes, they work mightily upon mens
wits; yet they do not produce any great alterations in ſtates.
Bacon, Eſſay 59.
1 * G Let
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E R
H E. R.
Let the truth of that religion I profeſs be repreſented to her
judgment, not in the odious diſguiſes of levity, ſchiſm, heriff,
novelty, cruelty, and diſloyalty. King Charlº,
He'Resi arch, n.ſ. [herºſiarque, French; &amp;#tris and 28%.]
A leader in hereſy; the head of a herd of hereticks.
The pope declared him not only an heretick, but an here-
ſtarch. Stillingfeet.
HÉ'RETICK. m.ſ.. [heretique, Fr. Gigerizès.] One who i.
gates his private opinions in oppoſition to the catholick church.
I rather will ſuſpect the ſun with cold
Than thee with wantonneſs; thy honour ſtands,
In him that was of late an heretick,
As firm as faith. Shakespeare Merry Wives ºf I/indſºr.
Theſe things would be prevented, if no known heretick or
ſchiſmatick be ſuffered to go into thoſe countries. Bacon.
No hereticks deſire to ſpread
Their wild opinions like theſe Epicures. Davier.
Bellarmin owns, that he has quoted a heretick inſtead of a
father. Baker on Learning.
When a Papiſt uſes the word hereticks, he generally means
Proteſtants; when a Proteſtant uſes the word, he means any
perſons wilfully and contentiouſly obſtinate in fundamental
errouns. Watts's Logick.
H-Re'tical. adj. [from heretick.] Containing hereſy.
How exclude they us from being any part of the church of
Chriſt under the colour of hereſy, when they cannot but grant
it poffible even for him to be, as touching his own perſonal per-
ſuaſion, heretical, who in their opinion not only is of the
church, but holdeth the chiefeſt place of authority over the
fame * Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
Conſtantinople was in an uproar, upon an ignorant jealouſy
that thoſe words had ſome heretical meaning. Decay of Pitty. .
HERE'T1cAlly. adv. [from heretical.] With hereſy.
HERE Toº. adv. [here and to J. To this; add to this.
HER frofo'Re. adv. [hereto and fore.] Formerly; anciently.
Lord Amphialus, ſaid ſhe, I have long deſired to know you
heretofore, with honouring your virtue, though I love not your
perſon. Sidney.
So near is the conneétion between the civil ſtate and religi-
bus, that heretofore you will find the government and the prieſt-
hood united in the ſame perſon. South's Sermons.
We now can form no more
Long ſchemes of life, as heretofore. Swift.
HER EUNTo' adv. [here and unto.J. To this.
They which rightly conſider after what ſort the heart of man
hereunto is framed, muſt of neceſſity acknowledge, that whoſo
aſſenteth to the words of eternal life, doth it in regard of his
authority whoſe words they are. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
Agreeable hereunto might not be amiſs to make children,
as ſoon as they are capable of it, often to tell a ſtory of any
thing they know. Locke.
HERE witH. adv. [here and with..] With this.
You, fair ſir, be not herewith diſmaid,
But conſtant keep the way in which ye ſtand. Fai. Qizen.
Her with the cattle of Hame was ſuddenly ſurpriſed by the
Scots. Hayward.
HE’Rior. m. ſ. [penegilb, Saxon.] A fine paid to the lord at
the death of a landholder, commonly the beſt thing in the
landholder's poſſeſſion.
This he detains from the ivy; for he ſhould be the true
poſſeſſory lord thereof, but the olive diſpenſeth with his con-
ſcience to paſs it over with a compliment and an heriot every
year. Howel's Vocal Foreſ.
Though thou conſume but to renew,
Yet love, as lord, doth claim a heriot due. Cleaveland.
I took him up, as your heriot, with intention to have made
the beſt of him, and then have brought the whole produce of
him in a purſe to you. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
HE'ºit ABLE. adj. [hares, Latin.] A perſon that may inherit
whatever may be inherited.
By the canon law this ſon ſhall be legitimate and heritable,
according to the laws of England. Hale's Common Law.
HE(RITAGE. n.ſ.. [heritage, French.]
I. Inheritance; eſtate devolved by ſucceſſion; eſtate in general.
Let us our father's heritage divide. Hubberd's Tale.
He conſiders that his proper home and heritage is in another
world, and therefore regards the events of this with the indif-
ference of a gueſt that tarries but a day. Rogers's Sermons.
2. [In divinity..] The people of God.
O Lord, ſave thy people, and bleſs thine heritage. Com. Pr.
HERMAPHRODITE. n.ſ.. [hermaphrodite, French, from #9.7s
and 22:03, tw.] An animal uniting two ſexes.
Man and wife make but one right
Canonical hermaphrodite. Cleaveland.
Monſtrofity could not incapacitate from marriage, witneſs
hermaphrodites. Arbuthn. and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
HERMAPHRodi'itical. adj. [from hermaphrodite.] Partaking
of both ſexes,
There may be equivocal ſeeds and hermaphroditical princi-
Ples, that contain the radicality and power of different forms.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
HERMETICAL. }*. [from Hermes, or Mercury, the ima-
HERMETICK.’ ſ gined inventer of chymiſtry; hermetique,
French.] Chymical.
An hermetical ſeal, or to ſeal any thing hermetically, is to
heat: the neck of a glaſs 'till it is juſt ; to melt, and then
with a pair of hot pincers to twiſt it cloſe together. Quincy.
The tube was cloſed at one end with diachylon, inſtead of
an hermetical ſeal. Boyle.
HERME'T1cAlly, adv. [from hermetical.] According to the
hermetical or chimick art.
He ſuffered thoſe things to putrefy in hermetically ſealed
glaſſes, and veſſels cloſe covered with paper; and not only ſo,
but in veſſels covered with fine lawn, ſo as to admit the air
and keep out the inſects: no living thing was ever produced
there. - Bentley.
HE/RMIT. n.ſ.. [hermite, French; contraćted from eremie,
ignºns.]
1. A ſolitary; an anchoret; one who retires from ſociety to
contemplation and devotion.
A wither'd hermit, fiveſcore Winters worn,
Might ſhake off fifty looking in her eye. Shakeſpeare.
You were pleaſed to lay this command upon me, to give
ou my poor advice for your carriage in ſo eminent a place:
}. return you mine opinion, ſuch as an hermit rather
than a courtier can render. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
He had been duke of Savoy, and, after a very glorious reign,
took on him the habit of a hermit, and rctired into this ſoli-
tary ſpot. Addison on Italy.
Come, inſpiration, from thy hermit ſeat,
By mortals ſeldom found. Thomſºn's Summer.
2. A beadſman; one bound to pray for another. Improper.
For thoſe of old,
And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
We reſt your hermit. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He'RMIT AGE. m. ſ. [hermitage, French.] The cell or habita-
tion of a hermit. -
By that painful way they paſs
Forth to an hill, that was both ſteep and high;
On top whereof a ſacred chapel was,
And eke a little hermitage thereby.
Go with ſpeed
To ſome forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleaſures of the world. Shakeſpeare.
And may at laſt my weary age
Find out the peaceful hermitage,
The hairy gown and moſſy cell,
Where I may fit and rightly ſpell
Of every ſtar that heav'n doth ſhew,
And ev'ry herb that ſips the dew. Milton.
About two leagues from Fribourg we went to ſee a hermi-
tage: it lies in the prettieſt ſolitude imaginable, among woods
Fairy Queen, b, i.
and rocks. Addison on Italy.
He'RMITEss. n. ſ. [from hermit..] A woman retired to devo-
tion.
He'RMITIcAL. adj. [from hermit. J Suitable to a hermit.
He'RMoD Act Y L. n.ſ.. [itºn; and 34×lvXGP.]
Hermodaćlyl is a root of a determinate and regular figure,
and repreſents the common figure of a heart cut in two, from
half an inch to an inch in length. This drug was firſt brought
into medicinal uſe by the Arabians, and comes from Egypt
and Syria, where the people uſe them, while freſh, as a vomit
or purge; and have a way of roaſting them for food, which
they eat in order to make themſelves fat. The dried roots,
which we have, are a gentle purge; but they are now little
uſed. Hill's Mat, Zlºčd.
HERN. n.ſ. [Contraćted from HERoN, which ſee.]
Birds that are moſt eaſy to be drawn are the mallard, ſwan,
hern, and bittern. Peacham on Drawing.
He'RNHILL. n.ſ.. [hern and hill.] An herb. Ainſworth.
HERNIA. n.ſ. [Latin.] Any kind of rupture, diverſificd by
the name of the part affected.
A hernia would certainly ſucceed.
HERO. m. ſ. [heros, Latin; nº.]
1. A man eminent for bravery.
In which were held, by ſad deceaſe,
JWiſeman's Surgery.
Heroes and heroeſſes. Chapman's Odyſſey.
I ſing of heroes and of kings,
In mighty numbers mighty things. Cºwley.
Heroes in animated marble frown. Pope.
In this view he ceaſes to be an hero, and his return is no
longer a virtue. Pope's Odyſſey, Notes.
Theſe are thy honours, not that here thy buſt
Is mix'd with heroes, or with kings thy duſt. Pope.
Heroes, kings,
Joy thy wiſh'd approach to ſee. II ºffed.
2. A man of the higheſt claſs in any reſpect. -
He'Roess. n.ſ.. [from hero; heroi, Latin.] A heroine; a fe-
male hero.
In which were held, by ſad deceaſe, -
Heroes and heroeſſes. Chapman's Odſºy,
HzRoſic AL.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E R
H E T
IIERoſic AL. adj. [from hero.] Befitting an hero; heroick.
Muſidorus was famous over all Aſia for his heroical enter-
prizes. Sidney, b. ii.
Though you have courage in an heroical degree, I aſcribe it
to you as your ſecond attribute. Dryden's Fables, Dedic.
He Rö'IcAll Y. adv. [from heroical J After the way of a hero;
ſuitably to an hero. -
Not heroically in killing his tyrannical couſin. Sidney, b. ii.
Free from all meaning, whether good or bad;
And, in one word, heroically mad. Dryden.
HERo'ick. adj. [from hero ; beroique, French.]
1. Produćtive of heroes.
Bolingbroke
From John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree,
Being but the fourth of that heroick line. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
2. Noble; ſuitable to an hero; brave; magnanimous ; intrepid;
enterpriſing; illuſtrious.
Not that which juſtly gives heroick name
To perſon, or to poem.
Verſe makes heroick virtue live,
But you can life to verſes give. Waller.
3. Reciting the aëts of heroes.
Methinks heroick poeſy, 'till now,
Like ſome fantaſtick fairy land did ſhow. Cowley.
I have choſen the moſt heroick ſubjećt which any poet could
deſire: I have taken upon me to deſcribe the motives, the be-
ginning, progreſs and ſucceſſes of a moſt juſt and neceſſary
War. Dryden's Ann. Mirab. Preface.
An heroick poem is the greateſt which the ſoul of man is
capable to perform: the deſign of it is to form the mind to
heroick virtue by example. Dryden.
HERo'ickly. adv. [from heroick..] Suitably to an hero. He-
roically is more frequent, and more analogical.
Samſon hath quit himſelf
Like Samſon, and heroickly hath finiſh'd -
A life heroick. Milton's Agoniſtes.
He'Ro1Ne. m. ſ. [from hero; heroine, French..] A female
hero. Anciently, according to Engliſh analogy, heroeſ.
But inborn worth, that fortune can controul,
New-ſtrung, and ſtiffer bent her ſofter ſoul;
The heroine aſſum'd the woman's place,
º
Confirm'd her mind, and fortify'd her face. Dryden.
Then ſhall the Britiſh ſtage
More noble charaćters expoſe to view,
And draw her finiſh’d heroines from you. Addiſon.
HE'Rois M. m. ſ. [heroiſme, French..] The qualities or chara&amp;ter
of an hero.
If the Odyſſey be leſs noble than the Iliad, it is more in-
ſtructive: the Iliad abounds with more heroiſm, this with more
morality. Broome's Notes to the Odyſſey.
HERON. n.ſ.. [heron, French.]
1. A bird that feeds upon fiſh.
So lords, with ſport of ſtag and heron full,
Sometimes we ſee ſmall birds from neſts do pull. Sidney.
The heron, when ſhe ſoareth high, ſheweth winds. Bacon.
2. It is now commonly pronounced hern.
The tow'ring hawk let future poets fing,
Who terror bears upon his ſoaring wing;
Let them on high the frighted hern ſurvey,
And lofty numbers paint their airy fray. Gay.
He'RoNRY. }" f. [from heron; commonly pronounced hern-
HE'Ron's HAw. § ry.] A place where herons breed.
They carry their load to a large heronry above three miles.
Derham's Phyſico-Thelogy.
HE'RPes. n.ſ.. [fºrts.] A cutaneous inflammation of two
kinds: miliaris, or piſtularis, which is like millet-feed upon
the ſkin; and exedens, which is more corroſive and pene-
trating, ſo as to form little ulcers, if not timely taken care
of. $2uincy.
A farther progreſs towards acrimony maketh a herpes; and,
if the acceſs of acrimony be very great, it maketh an herpes
exedens. Wiſeman's Surgery.
HºG. m. ſ. ſhareng, French; paening, Saxon.] A ſmall
ca-Illin.
The coaſt is plentifully ſtored with round fiſh, pilchard,
herring, mackrel, and cod. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwal.
Buy my herring freſh. Swift.
He Rs. pron. The female poſſeſſive uſed when it refers to a
* going before: as, this is her houſe, this houſe is
e?"J. -
How came her eyes ſo bright not with ſalt tears;
If ſo, my eyes are oftner waſh'd than hers. Shakeſpeare.
Whom ill fate would ruin, it prefers;
For all the miſerable are made hers. Waller,
I ſee her rowling eyes;
And panting, lo! the god, the god, ſhe cries;
With words not hers, and more than human ſound,
She makes th' obedient ghoſts peep trembling through the
ground. Roſcommon.
HERSE. n.ſ.. [herſa, low Latin; ſuppoſed to come from
penian, to praiſe.]
I. A temporary monument raiſed over a grave.
Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
2. The carriage in which corpſes are drawn to the grave.
When mourning nymphs attend their Daphnis' herſ,
Who does not weep that reads the moving verſe? Reſºn.
Crowds of dead in decent pomp are born;
Their friends attend the herſe, the next relations mourn.
Dryden's Wirgil's Georg. b. iv.
On all the line a ſudden vengeance waits,
And frequent herſes ſhall beſiege your gates. Pope.
To Herse. v. a. [from the noun...] To put into an herſe.
I would my daughter were dead at my foot, and the jewels
in her ear. O, would ſhe were hers'd at my foot, and the
ducats in her coffin. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
The Grecians ſpritefully drew from the darts the corſe,
And hers'd it, bearing it to fleet. Chapman's Iliads.
The houſe is hers'd about with a black wood,
Which nods with many a heavy-headed tree:
Each flower's a pregnant poiſon, try’d and good; -
Fach herb a plague. º Craſhaw.
HERSELF. pronoun. The female perſonal pronoun, in the
oblique caſes reciprocal.
The jealous o'er-worn widow and herſelf,
Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen,
Are mighty goffips in this monarchy. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The more ſhe looks, the more her fears increaſe,
At nearer fight; and ſhe's herſelf the leſs. Dryden.
He'Rs E LIKE. adj. [herſe and like..] Funereal; ſuitable to fu-
nerals.
Even in the Old Teſtament, if you liſten to David's harp,
you ſhall hear as many herſelike airs as carols. Bacon.
To He'RY. v. a. [penian, Saxon, to praiſe, to celebrate.] To
hallow; to regard as holy. Now no longer in uſe.
Thenot, now nis the time of merrymake,
Nor Pan to hery, nor with love to play;
Like mirth in May is meeteſt for to make,
Or Summer ſhade, under the cocked hay. Spenſer's Paſº.
Thenceforth it firmly was eſtabliſhed,
And for Apollo's honour highly herica. Fairy Queen.
But were thy years green as now be mine,
Then wouldſt thou learn to carol of love,
And hery with hymns thy laſs's glove. Stenſºr.
He'sſt ANcy. n.ſ.. [from hºſtate.] Dubiouſneſs; uncertainty;
ſuſpence.
The reaſon of my heſitancy about the air is, that I forgot to
try whether that liquor, which ſhot into cryſtals expoſed to
the air, would not have done the like in a veſſel accurately
ſtopped. Boyle.
Some of them reaſoned without doubt or heſitancy, and lived
and died in ſuch a manner as to ſhew that they believed their
own reaſonings. Atterbury's Sermons.
To HE'SITATE. v. a. [haſito, Latin; heſter, French..] To be
doubtful; to delay; to pauſe; to make difficulty.
A ſpirit of revenge makes him curſe the Grecians in the
ſeventh book, when they heſitate to accept Hector's chal-
lenge. Broome's Nstes on the Iliad.
Willing to wound, and yet afraid to ſtrike,
Juſt hint a fault, and heſitate diſlike;
Alike reſerv'd to blame or to commend,
A tim’rous foe, and a ſuſpicious friend. Pope.
Hesit A'Tion. n.ſ.. [from hºſtate.] -
1. Doubt; uncertainty; difficulty made.
I cannot foreſee the difficulties and heſitations of every one:
they will be more or fewer, according to the capacity of each
peruſer. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Intermiſſion of ſpeech; want of volubility.
Many clergymen write in ſo diminutive a manner, with
ſuch frequent blots and interlineations, that they are hardly
able to go on without perpetual heſitations. wift.
Hest. n.jſ ſpare, Saxon.j Command; precept; injunction.
If thou be the moſt kind preſerver
Of living wights, the ſovereign lord of all,
How falls it then, that, with thy furious fervour,
Thou doſt afflićt the not deſerver,
As him that doth thy lovely heſis deſpiſe. Spenſer.
Thou waſ a ſpirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
Refuſing her grand heſis. - Shakeſpeare's Tempºff.
HETEROCLITE. n.ſ. [heteroclite, Fr. heteroclitum, Latin;
irº; and xxiv.o.)
1. Such nouns as vary from the common forms of declenſion,
by any redundancy, defect, or otherwiſe. Clarke's Lot. Gram.
The heteroclite nouns of the Latin ſhould not be touched in
the firſt learning of the rudiments of the tongue. Watts.
2. Anything or perſon deviating from the common rule.
Heteroclitical. adj. [from heteroclite.] Deviating from
the common rule.
Of fins heteroclitical, and ſuch as want either name or pre-
ſident, there is oft times a fin, even in their hiſtories:
Brown's Wulgar Errourſ:
Heſterodox. adj. [heterodoxe, French ; £rs;&amp;’ and 3%.]
Deviating from the eſtabliſhed opinion; not orthodox.
Partiality<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H E X
H I D
Partiality may be obſerved in ſome to vulgar, in others to
heterodox tenets. Locke.
HE"rr Rodox. n.ſ. An opinion peculiar. - - -
Not only a ſimple heterodox, but a very hard paradox it will
ſeem, and of great abſurdity, if we ſay attraction is unjuſtly
appropriated unto the loadſtone. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Het ERoge’Neal. adj. [heterºgene, French; its;os and yévos.]
Not of the ſame nature; not kindred. -
Let the body adjacent and ambient be not commaterial,
but merely heterogeneal towards the body that is to be pre-
ſerved: ſuch are quickſilver and white amber to herbs and
flies. Bacºn's Natural Hiſtºry.
The light, whoſe rays are all alike refrangible, I call ſim-
ple, homogeneal, and ſimilar; and that whoſe rays are ſome
more refrangible than others, I call compound, heterogeneal,
and diſſimilar. Newton's Opt.
HETERogeneſity. n.ſ.. [heterogeneité, Fr. from heterogeneous.]
1. Oppoſition of nature; contrariety or diſſimilitude of qualities.
2. Oppoſite or diſfimilar part.
Guaiacum, burnt with an open fire in a chimney, is ſe-
queſtered into aſhes and ſoot; whereas the ſame wood, diſ-
tilled in a retort, does yield far other heterogeneities, and is
reſolved into oil, ſpirit, vinegar, water and charcoal. . . Boyle.
HETEROGENEOUS. adj. [rigo; and yºos.) Not kindred;
oppoſite or diſſimilar in nature.
I have with great care obſerved the condition of ſuch hete-
rogeneous boies, which I found immerſed and included in the
maſs of this ſandſtone. - J/o dward.
Hetero'scIANs. n.ſ. [rego; and axix.] Thoſe whoſe ſha-
dows fall only one way, as the ſhadows of us who live north
of the Tropick fall at noon always to the North.
To HEW. v. a. part, hewn or hewed. [peapan, Saxon ; hauwen,
Dutch.]
1. To cut with an edged inſtrument; to hack.
Upon the joint the lucky ſteel did light,
And made ſuch way that hew'd it quite in twain. Spenſer.
I had purpoſe
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn, -
Or loſe my arm for’t. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
He was hewn in pieces by Hamilton's friends. Hayward.
One Vane was ſo grievouſly hewn, that many thouſands have
died of leſs than half his hurts, whereof he was cured. Hayw.
2. To chop; to cut.
Scarce can I ſpeak, my choler is ſo great:
Oh! I could hew up rocks, and fight with flint. Shakeſp.
He from deep wells with engines water drew,
And us’d his noble hands the wood to hew. Dryd. Fables.
3. To fell, as with an ax. -
He that depends
Upon your favours, ſwims with fins of lead,
And hews down oaks with ruſhes. Shakeſp. Coriolanuſ.
Brave followers, yonder ſtands the thorny wood,
Which, by the heav'n's aſſiſtance and your ſtrength,
Muſt by the roots be hewn up yet ere night. Shakespeare H. VI.
Yet ſhall the axe of juſtice hew him down,
And level with the root his lofty crown. Sandys.
He from the mountain hewing timber tall,
Began to build a veſſel of huge bulk. Milton's Parad Loft.
We'll force the gate where Marcus keeps his guard,
And hew down all that would oppoſe our paſſage. Addiſon.
4. To form or ſhape with an axe.
Thou haſt hewed thee out a ſepulchre here, as he that hewed
him out a ſepulchre on high. Iſ, xxii. 16.
Nor is it ſo proper to hew out religious reformations by the
ſword, as to poliſh them by fair and equal diſputations. K. Ch.
This river riſes in the very heart of the Alps, and has a long
valley that ſeems hewn out on purpoſe to give its waters a paſ-
ſage amidſt ſo many rocks. Addiſon on Italy.
Next unto bricks are preferred the ſquare hewn ſtone. Mort.
5. To form laboriouſly.
The gate was adamant; eternal frame!
Which, hew’d by Mars himſelf, from Indian quarries came,
The labour of a god. Dryden's Fables.
I now paſs my days, not ſtudious nor idle, rather poliſhing
old works than hewing out new. Pope to Swift.
HE'w ER. n.ſ.. [from hew..] One whoſe employment is to cut
wood or ſtone
At the building of Solomon's temple there were fourſcore
thouſand hewers in the mountains. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
HEXAGON. n.ſ [hexagone, French; £ and yovſz.] A figure
of ſix ſides or angles: the moſt capacious of all the figures that
can be added to each other without any interſtice; and there-
fore the cells in honeycombs are of that form.
HEXA'Go NAL. adj. [from hexagon.] Having ſix ſides or cor-
Inci S.
As for the figures of cryſtal, it is for the moſt part hexago-
nal, or ſix-cornered. Brºwn's Vulgar Errours.
Many of them ſhoot into regular figures; as cryſtal and
baſtard diamonds into hexagonal.
HEXAGONY, m ſ [from hexagon.] A figure of ſix angles.
When I read in St. Ambroſe of hexagonies, or ſexangular
Ray on the Creation.
cellars of bees, did I therefore conclude that they were ma-
thematicians? r Bramh, againſt Hobbs.
Hex'A'METER. n.ſ. (£ and wºreov.] A verſe of ſix feet.
The Latin hexameter has more feet than the Engliſh he-
roick. Dryden.
Hexa’NGULAR, adj. [# and angulus, Latin.] Having ſix
Corners.
Hexangular ſprigs or ſhoots of cryſtal, of various fizes,
ſome clear, and others a little ſoiled. //oodward on Fºſſil.
Hexaºpop. m. ſ. [ſã and wéðs;..] An animal with fix feet.
I take thoſe to have been the hexapods, from which the
greater ſort of beetles come; for that ſort of hexapods are eaten
in America. Ray on the Creation. .
Hexa’s tick. n.ſ. [É and rixo;..] A poem of fix lines.
Hey: interſ. [from high.] An expreſſion of joy, or mutual
exhortation; the contrary to the Latin hei.
Shadwell from the town retires,
To bleſs the wood with peaceful lyrick;
Then hey for praiſe and panegyričk. Prior.
He'YDAY. interj. [for high day J. An expreſſion of frolick and
exultation, and ſometimes of wonder. -
Thou'lt ſay anon he is ſome kin to thee,
Thou ſpend'ſt ſuch heyday wit in praiſing him. Shakeſpeare.
'Twas a ſtrange riddle of a lady,
w Not love, if any lov’d her, heyday f
HE'Y DAY. n.ſ. A frolick; wildneſs.
At your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
... . And waits upon the judgment. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
He'YDEGives. n.ſ. A wild frolick dance,
But friendly fairys met with many graces,
And light-foot nymphs can chaſe the ling'ring night
With heyd-gives, and trimly trodden traces. Spenser.
HiATION. m. ſ. [from hio, Latin.] The act of gaping.
Men obſerving the continual hiatiºn, or holding open its
mouth, conceive the intention thereof to receive the aliment
ºf air; but this is alſo occaſioned by the greatneſs of the
lungs. Brown's Wulgar Erreurs.
HiATUs. n.ſ.. [hiatus, Latin J
I. An aperture; a breach.
Thoſe hiatus's are at the bottom of the ſea, whereby the
abyſs below open into and communicates with it. Hºdéard.
2. The opening of the mouth by the ſucceſſion of an initial to
a final vowel.
. The hiatus ſhould be avoided with more care in poetry than
in oratory; and I would try to prevent it, unleſs where the
Sutting it off is more prejudicial to the ſound than the hiatus
itſelf. Pope.
HiRF'RNAL. adj. [hibernus, Latin.] Belonging to the Winter.
This ſtar ſhould rather manifeſt its warming power in the
Winter, when it remains conjoined with the fun in its hiber-
nal converſion. Brºwn's Wugar Errours.
HICCIUS DOCCIUS. m. ſ. [corrupted, I fancy, from hic eff
dočius, this or here is the learned man. Uſed by jugglers
of themſelves.] A cant word for a juggler ; one that plays
faſt and looſe. - -
An old dull ſot, who told the clock
For many years at Bridewell dock,
At Weſtminſter and Hicks's hall,
And hiccius doccius play’d in all;
Where, in all governments and times,
H' had been both friend and foe to crimes. Hºlras, p. iii.
Hiccoſu GH. n.ſ.. [hicken, Daniſh..] A convulſion of the flo-
mach producing ſobs. - -
So by an abbey's ſkeleton of late
I heard an eccho ſupererogate
Through imperfection, and the voice reſtore,
As if ſhe had the hiccough o'er and o'er. Craveland.
Sneezing cureth the hitcough, and is profitable unto women
in hard labour. Brown's Wulgar Erreurs.
If the ſtomach be hurt, ſingultus or hiccough follows, with
vomiting and nauſea. //iſeman's Surgery.
Hudibras, p. i.
. To HI'ccoug H. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſob with con-
vulſion of the ſtomach.
To HI'CKUP. v. n. [corrupted from hiccough..] To ſob with a
convulſed ſtomach.
Quoth he, to bid me not to love,
Is to forbid my pulſe to move,
My beard to grow, my ears to prick up,
Or, when I'm in a fit, to hickup. Hudibras, p. ii.
H1'ckwall. - -
m. ſ. A bird. worth.
H1'ckw AY. } ſ 1I Ainſwort
#.,...}part ºf of hiº.
HI'DDEN.
Thus fame ſhall be atchiev'd, renown on earth;
And what moſt merits fame, in ſilence hid. AMirzr.
Nature and nature's laws lay hid in night;
God ſaid, let Newton be, and all was light. Pºpe's Epſi.
To HIDE. v. a. preter, hid; part, paſſ, hid or hidden. [Pisan,
Saxon.] To conceal; to withold or withdraw from fight or
knowledge.
* and quit my fight; let the carth hide thee! Siak.
- - - His<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H f D
H.I E
*
º
.
º
His reaſons are as two grains of wheat hid in two buſhels
of chaff. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
Nile hears him knocking at his ſev'nfold gates,
And ſeeks his hidden ſpring, and fears his nephews fates. Dr.
Thus the fire of gods and men below:
What I have hidden, hope not thou to know. Dryden.
The ſev'ral parts lay hidden in the piece;
Th’ occaſion but exerted that, or this. Dryden.
Then for my corps a homely grave provide,
Which love and me from publick ſcorn may hide. Dryden.
Seas hid with navies, chariots paſſing o'er
The channel, on a bridge from ſhore to ſhore. Dryden.
With what aſtoniſhment and veneration may we look into
our own ſouls, where there are ſuch hidden ſtores of virtue and
knowledge, ſuch inexhauſted ſources of perfection? Addiſon.
The crafty being makes a much longer voyage than Ulyſſes,
puts in practice many more wiles, and hides himſelf under a
greater variety of ſhapes. Addison.
Hell trembles at the fight, and hides its head
In utmoſt darkneſs, while on earth each heart
Is filled with peace. Rowe's Rºyal Convert.
To HIDE. v. n. To lye hid; to be concealed. -
A fox, that had been hard run, begged of a countryman, at
work in a wood, to help him to ſome hiding place. L’Eſtrange.
Our bolder talents in full view diſplay’d;
Your virtues open faireſt in the ſhade: .
Bred to diſguiſe, in publick 'tis you hide,
Where none diſtinguiſh 'twixt your ſhame and pride,
Weakneſs or delicacy. Pope.
Hide and Seek. n.ſ. A play in which ſome hide themſelves,
and another ſeeks them.
The boys and girls would venture to come and play at hide
and ſeek in my hair. Gulliver's Travels.
HIDE. n.ſ.. [byöe, Saxon; haude, Dutch.]
1. The ſkin of any animal, either raw or dreſſed.
The trembling weapon paſt
Through nine bull hides, each under other plac'd
On his broad ſhield.
Piſiſtratus was firſt to graſp their hands,
And ſpread ſoft hides upon the yellow ſands. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. The human ſkin: in contempt.
Oh, tyger's heart, wrapt in a woman's hide?
How could'ſt thou drain the life-blood of the child? §hakeſ.
His mantle, now his hide, with rugged hairs
Cleaves to his back; a famiſh’d face he bears. Dryden.
3. A certain quantity of land, [Hide, hyde, French ; hida, bar-
barous Latin, as much as one plough can till.] Ainſworth.
One of the firſt things was the perfecting of the Wincheſter
book, being a more particular inquiſition than had been before
of every hide of land within the precinéts of his conqueſt,
and how they were holden. Wotton.
HIDE Bou'ND. adj. [hide and bound.] -
1. A horſe is ſaid to be hidebound when his ſkin ſticks ſo hard
v to his ribs and back, that you cannot with your hand pull up
or looſen the one from the other. It ſometimes comes by
poverty and bad keeping; at other times from over-riding, or
a ſurfeit. Farriers Dićf.
2. [In trees.] Being in the ſtate in which the bark will not give
way to the growth. -
A root of a tree may be hidebound, but it will not keep open
without ſomewhat put into it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Like ſtinted hidebound trees, that juſt have got
Sufficient ſap at once to bear and rot.
3. Harſh; untračtable.
And ſtill the harſher and hidebounder,
The damſels prove, become the fonder. Hudibras, p. ii.
4. Niggardly; penurious; parſimonious. Ainſworth.
HIDEOUS. adj. I hideux, French. J Horrible; dreadful;
ſhocking.
If he could have turned himſelf to as many forms as Pro-
teus, every form ſhould have been made hideous. Sidney, b. ii.
Thou echo'ſt me,
As if there were ſome monſter in thy thoughts,
Too hideous to be ſhewn. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
I fled, and cry’d out death !
Hell trembled at the hideous name, and figh’d
From all her caves, and back reſounded death.
Her eyes grew ſtiffen'd, and with ſulphur burn;
Her hideous looks and helliſh form return ;
Her curling ſnakes with hiſings fill the place,
And open all the furies of her face. Dryden's AEn.
'Tis forced through the hiatus's at the bottom of the ſea with
ſuch vehemence, that it puts the ſea into the moſt horrible diſ-
order, making it rage and roar with a moſt hideous and
amazing noiſe. Woodward's Natural Hiſtory.
HI'deously, adv. [from hideous.] Horribly; dreadfully; in
a manner that ſhocks.
I arm myſelf
To welcome the condition of the time;
Which cannot look more hideouſly on me,
Than I have drawn it in my fantaſy. Shakeſp, Henry IV.
Dryden.
Swift.
Milton.
This, in the preſent application, is hideºuſly profane; but
the ſenſe is intelligible. Collier's Defence,
Hi'DEousNess. n.ſ.. [from hideous.] Horribleneſs; dreadful-
neſs; terrour.
H1'DER. n.ſ.. [from the verb, J He that hides.
To HIE. v. n. [piezan, Saxon.] -
1. To haſten; to go in haſte. - -
When they had mark'd the changed ſkies,
They wiſt their hour was ſpent; then each to reſt him hier,
Fairy Queen, b. ii. cant. 2.
In a fair moon-ſhine night thither he hith to dig it up.
Carew's Survey ºf Cºrnwall.
My will is even this,
That preſently you hie you home to bed.
Well, I will hie,
And ſo beſtow theſe papers as you bade me. Shakespeare ju, Caſ
Some to the ſhores do fly, -
Some to the woods, or whither fear advis'd;
But running from, all to deſtrućtion hie. Daniel’s Civ. War,
The ſnake no ſooner hiſt, -
But virtue heard it, and away ſhe hy’d.
Thither, full fraught with miſchievous revenge,
Accurs'd, and in a curſed hour, he hies. Milt. Parad, Lºft,
Thus he advis'd me, on yon aged tree -
Hang up thy lute, and his thee to the ſca. Waller.
The youth, returning to his miſtreſs, hies. Dryden,
2. It was anciently uſed with the reciprocal pronoun. It is now
almoſt obſolete in all its uſes.
Auſter ſpy’d him; -
Cruel Auſter thither hy'd him. Craſhaw,
HIERARCH. n.ſ. [fºr and &amp;xi; ; hierarque, Fr.] The
chief of a ſacred order.
Angels, by imperial ſummons call’d,
Forthwith from all the ends of heav'n appear'd,
Under their hierarchs in orders bright. Milt. Parad. Iºff.
HIERA'RChical. adj. [hierarchique, French; from hierarch 1
Belonging to ſacred or eccleſiaſtical government.
H1'ERAR chy. n.ſ.. [hierarchie, French, from hierarch.]
1. A ſacred government; rank or ſubordination of holy beings:
Out of the hierarchies of angels ſheen,
The gentle Gabriel call'd he from the reſt. . . Fairfax, b, i.
He rounds the air, and breaks the hymnick notes
In birds, heav'n's choriſters, organick throats;
Which, if they did not die, might ſeem to be
A tenth rank in the heavenly hierarchy.
Theſe the ſupreme king -
Exalted to ſuch pow'r, and gave to rule,
Each in his hierarchy, the orders bright. Milton's Par. Loft.
Jehova, from the ſummit of the ſky,
Environ'd with his winged hierarchy, -
The world ſurvey’d. - Sandyſ,
The bleſſedeſt of mortal wights, now queſtionleſs the high-
eſt ſaint in the celeſtial hierarchy, began to be ſo importuned,
that a great part of the divine liturgy was addreſ;d ſolely to
her. Howel's Wºcal Forſt.
2. Eccleſiaſtical eſtabliſhment.
The preſbytery had more ſympathy with the diſcipline of
Scotland than the hierarchy of England. Bacon.
While the old levitical hierarchy continued, it was part of
the miniſterial office to flay the ſacrifices. South.
Confider what I have written, from regard for the church
eſtabliſhed under the hierarchy of biſhops. Swift.
HIEROGLYPH. n.ſ. ſhieroglyphe, French; #3s, ſacred,
HIEROGLYPHICK. } and yaſºo, to carve.] --.
1. An emblem; a figure by which a word was implied. Hiero-
glyphicks were uſed before the alphabet was invented.
This hierocythick of the Egyptians was erected for parental
affection, manifeſted in the protection of her young ones,
when her neſt was ſet on fire. Brown's Vulgar Erreurs.
A lamp amongſt the Egyptians is the hierºglypºck of life.
If ilkins's Dadalus.
The firſt writing they uſed was only the fingle pictures and
gravings of the things they would repreſent, which way of
expreſſion was afterwards called hieroglyphicé. J/oodward.
Between the ſtatues obelisks were plac'd,
And the learn'd walls with hieroglyphicks grac'd, Pope.
2. The art of writing in picture.
No brute can endure the taſte of ſtrong liquor, and conſe-
quently it is againſt all the rules of hieroglyph to align thoſe
animals as patrons of punch. - Swiſt.
Hieroglyphica L. adj. [ hieroglyphique, French; from the
HIERog LY'PHick. } noun. J. Emblematical; expreſſive of
ſome meaning beyond what immediately appears. º
In this place ſtands a ſtately hieroglyphical obelisk of Theban
Shakeſpeare.
C, aJha19.
Donne,
marble. Sandys's Travels.
Th’ Egyptian ſerpent figures time,
And, ſtripp'd, returns into his prime;
If my affection thou would'ſt win,
Firſt caſt thy hieroglyphick skin. Claveland.
The original of the conceit was probably hierºglyphical,
which after became mythological, and, by a proceſs of tradiº
i 1 H - * tio.;2<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H I.G
tion, ſtole into a total verity, which was but partly true in its
morality. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Hieroglyphically. adv. [from hierºglyphical.] Emblema-
tically.
Čier. have ſpoken emblematically and hieroglyphically as
the Egyptians, and the phoenix was the hieroglyphick of
the ſun. - Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Hiero'GRAPHY. n.ſ.. [is??, and 7.6% w.] Holy writing.
Hie'Rophant, n.ſ.. [ſiºns.]." One who teaches rules of
religion; a prieſt. -
Herein the wantonneſs of poets, and the crafts of their
heatheniſh prieſts and hierophants, abundantly gratified the fan-
cies of the people. , Hales's Origin of Mankind.
To HIGGLE. v. n. [of uncertain etymology; probably cor-
rupted from haggle ]
1. To chaffer; to be penurious in a bargain. -
In good offices and due retributions we may not be pinch-
ing and niggardly : it argues an ignoble mind, where we have
wronged, to higgle and dodge in the amends. Hale.
aſe thou art
To higgle thus for a few blows, --
To gain thy knight an op'lent ſpouſe. Hudibrat, p. ii.
Why all this higgling with thy friend about ſuch a paultry
ſum : Does this become the generoſity of the noble and rich
John Bull Arbuthnot's H/lory of john Bull.
2. To go ſelling proviſions from door to door. This ſeems the
original meaning.
HIGGle DY-P1G Geldy. adv. A cant word, corrupted from
biggle, which denotes any confuſed maſs, as higglers carry a
huddle of proviſions together.
H1'Go LER. n.ſ.. [from higgle.] One who ſells proviſions by
retail. º
HIGH. adj. [peap, Saxon; hoogh, Dutch.]
1. Long upwards; riſing above from the ſurface, or from the
Centre.
They that ſtand high have many blaſts to ſhake them,
And, if they fall, they daſh themſelves to pieces. Shakespeare. R. III.
Their andes, or mountains, were far higher than thoſe with
us; whereby the remnants of the generation of men were, in
ſuch a particular deluge, ſaved. Bacon, Eſſay 59.
The higher parts of the earth being continually ſpending,
and the lower continually gaining, they muſt of neceſſity at
length come to an equality. Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. Elevated in place; raiſed aloft.
High o'er their heads a mould'ring rock is plac'd,
That promiſes a fall, and ſhakes at ev'ry blaſt. Dryd. Æn.
Reaſon elevates our thoughts as high as the ſtars, and leads
us through the vaſt ſpaces of this mighty fabrick; yet it comes
far ſhort of the real extent of even corporeal being. Locke.
3. Exalted in nature.
4. Elevated in rank or condition: as, high prieſt.
O mortals! blind in fate, who never know
To bear high fortune, or endure the low.
. Exalted in ſentiment.
Solomon liv'd at eaſe, nor aimed beyond'
Higher deſign than to enjoy his ſtate.
6. Difficult; abſtruſe.
They meet to hear, and anſwer ſuch high things. Shakeſp.
. Boaſtful; oſtentatious.
His forces, after all the high diſcourſes, amounted really
but to eighteen hundred foot. Clarendon, b. viii.
8. Arrogant; proud; lofty.
The governor made himſelf merry with his high and threat-
ning language, and ſent him word he would neither give nor
receive quarter. Clarendºn, b. viii.
9. Severe; oppreſſive.
When there appeareth on either fide an high hand, violent
Proſecution, cunning advantages taken, and combination,
then is the virtue of a judge ſeen. Bacon.
lo. Noble ; illuſtrious.
Truſt me, I am exceeding weary.
—Is it come to that I had thought, wearineſs durſt not
have attacked ſo high blood.—It doth me, though it diſcolours
the complection of my greatneſs to acknowledge it. Shakeſp.
. He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor. Shakespeare
11. Violent; tempeſtuous; loud. Applied to the wind.
More ſhips in calms on a deceitful coaſt,
Qr unſeen rocks, than in high ſtorms are loſt. Denham.
Spiders cannot eaſily weave their nets in a high wind.
Duppa's Rules for Devotion.
At length the winds are rais'd, the ſtorm blows high;
Be it your care, my friends, to keep it up
In its full fury.
12. Tumultuous; turbulent; ungovernable.
- Not only tears
Rain’d at their eyes, but high winds worſe within,
Began to riſe; high paſſions, anger,
Miſtruſt, ſuſpicion, diſcord, hate, ſhook fore
Their inward ſtate of mind. Mihº, Pºliſ. Loſt, b. ix.
Can heav'nly minds ſuch high reſentment #.
Or exerciſe their ſpight in human woe: Dryden's Zn.
13. Full; complete.
Dryden's Aºn.
5
Milton.
7
Addison's Cato.
High time now 'gan it wax for Una fair,
To think of thoſe her captive parents dear. Fairy Qºum
Sweet warriour, when ſhall I have peace with you? i
High time it is this war now ended were. Spenser
It was high time to do ſo; for it was now certain, tha'i.
were already upon their march towards the Weſt. Clar.
It was high time for the lords to look about them. Clarº.
14. Strong taſted; guſtful. -
Solomon liv'd at eaſe, and full
Of honour, wealth, high fare, aim'd not beyond
Higher deſign than to enjoy his ſtate. Miſt. Parad Lºft
High ſauces and rich ſpices are fetched from the Indies. -
Baker's Refittiions on Learning.
15. Advancing in latitude from the line.
They are forced to take their courſe either high to the North
or low to the South. Abbot's Dſcription of the iſº.
16. At the moſt perfect ſtate; in the meridian: as, by the ſin,
is high noon.
It is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle ſhould
be gathered. Gen. xxix. 7.
17. Far advanced into antiquity.
The nominal obſervation of the ſeveral days of the week,
is very high, and as old as the ancient Egyptians, who named
the ſame according to the ſcven planets. Brown'; Pulgar Err.
18. Dear; exorbitant in price.
If they muſt be good at ſo high a rate, they know they may
be ſafe at a cheaper. South's Sermoni.
19. Capital; great; oppoſed to little: as, high treaſon, in op-
poſition to petty.
High, n ſ. High place; elevation; ſuperiour region.
Which when the king of gods beheld from lish,
He ſigh’d. Dryden,
On High. Aloft; above; into ſuperiour regions.
Wide is the fronting gate, and rais'd on high, -
With adamantine columns threats the ſky. Lºryden', En.
HIGH is much uſed in compoſition with variety of meaning,
Hic H-Ble'st, adj. Supremely happy. º
The good which we enjoy from heav'n deſcends;
But that from us ought ſhould aſcend to heavin
So prevalent, as to concern the mind
Of God high-bleſ, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may ſeem. 11 ſton's Paradiſº Lo?, b. xi.
H1'GH-blow N. Swelled much with wind; inuch ini...ted.
I have ventur'd,
Like little wanton boys that ſwim on bladders,
Theſe many Summers on a ſea of glory;
But far beyond my depth: my high-blºwn pride
At length broke under me, and now has left me,
Weary, and old with ſervice, to the mercy
Of a rude ſtream, that muſt for ever hide me. Sh, H.VIII.
Hi'GH-BoRN. Of noble extraction.
Caſt round your eyes
Upon the high-born beautics of the court;
There chuſe ſome worthy partner of your heart.
H1'GH-BUILT. adj.
1. Of lofty ſtructure.
I know him by his ſtride,
The giant Harapha of Gath; his look - -
Haughty as is his pile, high-built and proud. Mit. Agºniſłą,
2. Covered with lofty buildings.
In dreadful wars
The high-lwi't elephant his caſtle rears,
Rowe.
Looks down on man below, and ſtrikes the ſtars. Creech.
HIGH-co'Lou RED. Having a deep or glaring colour. . .
If a fever happens in a rancid oily ſtate of blood, it pro-
duces a ſcorbutić ſever, with high-cºloured urine, ". ſpots in
the ſkin. Flyer on the Humours.
High-DFsic.NING. Having great ſchemes:
His warlike mind, his ſoul devoid of far,
His high-deſigning thoughts were figur'd there.
HIGH-FE'D. Pampered. -
A favourite mule, high-fed, and in the pride of º i.
metal, would ſtill be bragging of his family. L º gé.
High-fla'M ING. Throwing the flame to a great hºs"
Hecatombs of bulls to Neptune ſlain, . Pºpe
High-faming, pleaſe the monarch of the main. .
High-Fl'ER. n.ſ. One that carries his opinions * *
vagance. -
She openly profeſſeth herſelf to be a high-fier;
improbable ſhe may alſo be a papiſt at heart.
Hi'gh-flown. adj. [high and flºwn, from ſº.]
1. Elevated; proud. d
This ſtiff neckt pride nor art nor force can ben 'berian.
Nor high-flºwn hopes to reaſon's lure deſcend. tº-fa
2. Turgid ; extravagant. iſeries of
This fable is a high-flown hyperbole upon the }. Grange.
marriage. - - E.J.
HIGH-FLYING. Extravagant in claims or opinion”
Clip the wings rail.
Of their high-flying arbitrary kings. Dryd W.irgil
High-HE'APFD. adj.
1. Covered with high piles.
Dryden.
and it is not
Swift.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H I G
1.
*
sit
ºf;
º
!--
-
The plenteous board high-heap'd with cates divine,
And o'er the foaming bowl the laughing wine. Pope.
2. Raiſed into high piles.
I ſaw myſelf the vaſt unnumber'd ſtore -
Of braſs, high-heap'd amidſt the regal dome. Pope's Odſey.
HIGH-H E/E LED. Having the heel of the ſhoe much raiſed.
By theſe embroider'd high-heel'd ſhoes, ,
. She ſhall be caught as in a nooſe. - Swift.
H1'GH-HUN G. Hung aloft.
By the high-hung taper's light,
I could diſcern his cheeks were glowing red.
HIGH-ME'TTLED. Proud or ardent of ſpirit.
He fails not in theſe to keep a ſtiff rein on a high-mettled
Pegaſus; and takes care not to ſurfeit here, as he had done on
other heads, by an erroneous abundance. Garth.
High-M1'ND F D. Proud; arrogant.
My breaſt I'll burſt with ſtraining of my courage,
But I will chaſtiſe this high-minded ſtrumpet. Shakespeare H.VI.
Becauſe of unbelief they were broken off, and thou ſtandeſt
by faith: be not high-minded, but fear. Kom. ii. 20.
HIGH-PR1'Nciple D. Extravagant in notions of politicks.
This ſeems to be the political creed of all the high-principled
men I have met with. - Swift.
HIGH-RE'D. Deeply red.
Oil of turpentine, though clear as water, being digeſted
upon the purely white ſugar of lead, has in a ſhort time af-
forded a high-red tinéture. Boyle on Colours.
HIGH-se'asoned. Piquant to the palate.
Be ſparing alſo of ſalt in the ſeaſoning of all his vićtuals,
and uſe him not to high-ſeaſoned meats. Locke.
HIGH-S1’GHTED. Always looking upwards.
Let high-ſghted tyranny range on,
*Till each man drop by lottery;
But if theſe countrymen bear fire enough,
What need we any ſpur but our own cauſe:
HIGH-spi'RITED. Bold; daring; inſolent.
High-sto'M AcHE D. Obſtinate; lofty.
High-ſtomach'd are they both, and full of ire;
In rage, deaf as the ſea, haſty as fire. Shakespeare.
High-TA's TE D. Guſtful; piquant.
Flatt'ry ſtill in ſugar'd words betrays,
And poiſon in high-toſted meats conveys.
HIGH-vi'ce D. Enormouſly wicked.
Be as a planetary plague, when Jove
Will o'er ſome high-vić'd city hang his poiſon
In the ſick air. Shakeſpeare's Timon of Athens.
H1'GH-wrought. Accurately finiſhed; nobly laboured.
Thou triumph'ſt, vićtor of the high-wrought day,
And the pleas'd dame, ſoft ſmiling, lead'ſt away. Pope.
H1'GHLARD. m.ſ.. [high and land J Mountainous region.
The wond'ring moon
Beholds her brother's ſteeds beneath her own;
The highland, ſmoak'd, cleft by the piercing rays. Addison.
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
Denham.
Ladies in the highlands of Scotland uſe this diſcipline to
their children in the midſt of Winter, and find that cold wa-
ter does them no harm. Locke.
Highla'Nde R. n.ſ. [ from highland. J. An inhabitant of
mountainS.
His cabinet council of highlanders.
HI'd HLY. adv. [from high.]
1. With elevation as to place and ſituation.
2. In a great degree.
Whatever expedients can allay thoſe heats, which break us
into different factions, cannot but be uſeful to the publick,
and highly-tend to its ſafety. Addiſon's Freeholder.
It cannot but be highly requiſite for us to ſupport and en-
liven our faith, by dwelling often on the ſame conſiderations.
Atterbury’s Sermons.
Addiſon.
3. Proudly; arrogantly; ambitiouſly.
What thou wouldſt highly,
That thou wouldſt holily; wouldſ not play falſe,
And yet wouldſt wrongly win. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
4. With eſteem; with eſtimation.
Every man that is among you, not to think of himſelf
more highly than he ought to think. Rom. xii. 3.
Hi'GH Most... adi, [An irregular word.] Higheſt; topmoſt.
Now is the ſun upon the highmoſi hill
Of this day's journey; and from nine 'till twelve,
Is three long hours. Shakespeare Romeo and juliet.
H1'GHN Ess. n.ſ.. [from high. J
1. Elevation above the ſurface.
2. The title of princes, anciently of kings.
Moſt royal majeſty,
I crave no more than that your highneſ, offer'd. Shakeſpeare.
How long in vain had nature ſtriv'd to frame
A perfect princeſs, ere her highneſs came * Waller.
Beauty and greatneſs are eminently joined in your royal
highneſs. Dryden.
3. Dignity of nature; ſupremacy.
Deſtrućtion from God was a terrour to me, and by reaſon
of his highneſs I could not endure. job xxxi. 23.
Hight. [This is an imperfect verb, uſed only in the preterite
tenſe with a paſſive ſignification: patan, to call, Saxon; hiſºn,
to be called, German.]
I. Was named ; was called. - -
The city of the great king hight it well,
Wherein eternal peace and happineſs doth dwell. Fa. Queen,
Within this homeſtead liv'd, without a peer -
For crowing loud, the noble Chanticleer,
So hight her cock. Dryden's Nun's Prieſ?.
2. It is ſometimes uſed as a participle paſſive, and ſignifies called;
named. It is now obſolete, except in burleſque writings.
Amongſt the reſt a good old woman was,
Hight mother Hubberd. Hubberd’s Tale,
Hº: wATER. m. ſ. [high and water.] The utmoſt flow of the
tide. -
They have a good way in Eſſex of draining of lands that
lie below the highwater, and that are ſomething above the low-
water mark. Mortimer’s Husbandry.
HighwA'Y. n.ſ.. [high and way.] Great road; publick path.
So few there be
That chuſe the narrow path, or ſeek the right:
All keep the broad highway, and take delight
With many rather for to go aſtray. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Two inſcriptions give a great light to the hiſtories of Appius,
who made the highway, and of Fabius the dićtator. Addiſon.
Ent’ring on a broad highway,
Where power and titles ſcatter'd lay,
He ſtrove to pick up all he found. - Swift.
I could mention more trades we have loſt, and are in the
highway to loſe. Child on Trade.
Hi'GHwa YMAN. m.ſ.. [highway and man.] A robber that plun-
ders on the publick roads.
'Tis like the friendſhip of pickpockets and highwaymen,
that obſerve ſtrićt juſtice among themſelves. Bentley's Sermons.
A remedy like that of giving my money to an high-
wayman before he attempts to take it by force, to prevent
the fin of robbery. Swift.
H1'GLAPER. m. ſ. An herb. * . . Ain, wºn th:
Hila'RITY.. n.ſ.. [hiaritas, Latin J Merriment; gayety.
Averroes reſtrained his hilarity, and made no more thereof
than Seneca commendeth, and was allowable in Cato; that is,
a ſober incaleſcence from wine. Brºwn's Jugar Errouri.
HILD, in 4:/rick's grammar, is interpreted a lord or lady: ſo
Hildebert is a noble lord; Mahtild, an heroick lady; and in
the ſame ſenſe is //ga alſo found. Gib. Camden.
H1'LDING.. n.ſ. [pilo, Saxon, ſignifies a lord: perhaps hilding
means originally a little lord in contempt, for a man that has
only the delicacy or bad qualities of high rank; or a term of re-
proach abbreviated from hindering, degenerate. Highe's Spenſ.]
1. A ſorry, paltry, cowardly fellow.
He was ſome hilding fellow, that had ſtol'n
The horſe he rode on. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
If your lordſhip find him not a hiding, hold me no more in
your reſpe&amp;t. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
You are curb’d from that enlargement by
The conſequence o' th' crown, and muſt not foil
The precious note of it with a baſe ſlave,
A hilding for a livery, a ſquire's cloth. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
This idle toy, this hiding ſcorns my power,
And ſets us all at naught. Rowe's jane Shore.
2. It is uſed likewiſe for a mean woman.
Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench;
Helen and Hero, hildings and harlots. Shakespeare Kom. and jul.
HILL. n.ſ. [pil, Saxon.] An elevation of ground leſs than a
mountain.
My ſheep are thoughts, which I both guide and ſerve;
Their paſture is fair hills of fruitleſs love. Sidney, b. ii.
Jeruſalem is ſeated on two hills, -
Of height unlike, and turned ſide to ſide. Fairfax:
Three ſides are ſure imbar'd with crags and hills,
The reſt is eaſy, ſcant to riſe eſpy'd;
But mighty bulkwarks fence the plainer part: --
So art helps nature, nature ſtrengtheneth art. Fairfax, b. iii.
When our eye ſome proſpect would purſue,
Deſcending from a hill, looks round to view. Granville.
A hill is nothing but the neſt of ſome metal or mineral,
which, by a plaſtick virtue, and the efficacy of ſubterranean
fires, converting the adjacent earths into their ſubſtance, do
increaſe and grow. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
HI'llock. º [from hill.] A little hill.
Yet weigh this, alas! great is not great to the greater:
What, judge you, doth a hillock ſhow by the lofty Olympus!
Sidney, b. i.
Sometime walking not unſeen
By hedge-row elms, on hillocks green. Milton.
This mountain, and a few neighbouring hillºcks that lie
ſcattered about the bottom of it, is the whole circuit of theſe
dominions. Addiſon on Italy.
HI'lly. adj. [from hill.] Full of hills; unequal in the ſur-
face.
Towards the hilly corners of Druina remain yet her very
Aborigenes, fatally thruſt amongſt an aſſembly of mountains.
Howe’s V.cal Forreſt.
Climbing
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H I N
H I N
Climbing to a hilly ſteep,
He views his herds in vales afar. Dryden.
Lo! how the Norick plains
Riſe hilly, with large piles of ſlaughter'd knights. Phillips;
Hilly countries afford the moſt entertaining proſpects, tho’
aman would chuſe to travel through a plain one. Addiſon.
Hilt. n ſ. [pile, Saxon, from pealban, to hold.] The handle
of any thing, particularly of a ſword.
Now ſits expectation in the air,
And hides a ſword from hilt unto the point,
With crowns imperial; crowns and coronets,
Promis'd to Harry and his followers. Shakespeare Henry V.
Take thou the hilt,
And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
Guide thou the ſword. Shakeſpeare's julius Caſar.
Be his this ſword, whoſe blade of braſs diſplays
A ruddy gleam ; whoſe hilt, a ſilver blaze. Pope's Odyſſey.
HIM. [ plm, Saxon.]
1. The oblique caſe of he.
Me he reſtored unto my office, and him he hanged. Gen. xli.
2 Him was anciently uſed for it in a neutral ſenſe.
H1'M's ELF. pron. [him and ſelf] *
1. In the nominative the ſame as he, only more emphatical.
It was a ſparing ſpeech of the ancients to ſay, that a friend
is another himſelf; for that a friend is far more than him-
ſelf. Bacon.
With ſhame remembers, while himſelf was one
Of the ſame/herd, himſelf the ſame had done. Denham.
2. In ancient authors it is uſed neutrally for itſelf.
She is advanc'd
Above the clouds as high as heav'n himſelf. Shakeſpeare.
3. In the oblique caſes it has a reciprocal ſignification.
I perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil diſpoſi-
tion made him ſeek his death; but a provoking merit, ſet
awork by a reproveable badneſs in himſelf. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
4. It is ſometimes not reciprocal.
Nothing in nature can ſo peculiarly gratify the noble diſpo-
ſitions of humanity, as for one man to ſee another ſo much
himſelf as to figh his griefs, and groan his pains, to ſing his
joys, and do and feel every thing by ſympathy. South.
Hin. m. ſ. [...]n J A meaſure of liquids among Jews, con-
taining about ten pints.
With the one lamb a tenth deal of flour, mingled with the
fourth part of an him of beaten oil. Ex. xxix. 40.
HIND, adj, compar, hinder; ſuperl, hindmoſ'. [bynban, Saxon.]
Backward; contrary in poſition to the face: as, hind legs. See
HIND E R and H1N1) Most.
Bringing its tail to its head, it bends its back ſo far ’till its
head comes to touch its hind part, and ſo with its armour ga-
thers itſelf into a ball. Ray on the Creation.
The flag
Hears his own feet, and thinks they ſound like more,
And fears his hind legs will o'ertake his fore. Pope.
HINo. n.f ſpinpe, Saxon, from hinnus, Latin.]
1. The ſhe to a ſtag; the female of red deer.
How he ſlew, with glancing dart amiſs,
A gentle hind, the which the lovely boy
Did love as life. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Can'ſt thou mark when the hind; do calve * job xxxix. 1.
Nor Hercules more lands or labours knew,
Not though the brazen-footed hind he ſlew. Dryden's Żn.
2. [pine, Saxon.] A ſervant. -
A couple of Ford's knaves, his hind, were called forth by
their miſtreſs, to carry me in the name of foul cloaths to
Datchet-lane. Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of Iłindſºr.
3. ſpineman, Saxon.] A peaſant; a boor; a mean ruſtick.
The Dutch, who came like greedy hind, before,
To reap the harveſt their ripe ears did yield,
Now look like thoſe, when rolling thunders roar,
And ſheets of lightning blaſt the ſtanding field. Dryden.
He cloth'd himſelf in coarſe array,
Hº: º ºn. ſpberri Polº, ſº:
- ** - - - as raſpberries. 177/10077th.
To HINDER. ** [pinbrian, Saxon.j To obſtruct; to ſtop;
to let; to impede.
Flinder me not, ſeeing the Lord hath proſpered my way.
Th - - Gen. xxiv. 56.
The whole world ſhined with clear light, and none were
hindered in their labour. //iſd. xvii. 20.
You minimus of hindring knot-graſs made;
* º: You acºrn, Shakeſpeare's Midſ. Night's Dream.
not d. alms were hindered only by intreaty, the hinderer is
from th to reſtitution, becauſe intreaty took not liberty away
i. - Taylºr's Rule of living holy.
ſome co jection hinders not but that the heroick action of
cuted ...'. for the Chriſtian cauſe, and exe-
- What }. y be written. Dryden's juv. Dedicat.
$ younger b a; - - -
from having the jº, being fathers of ſº
H1'NDER. ad; - - - -
64. [from hind...] That wh - - -
trary to that of the º at which is in a poſition con
Theſe beaſts, fighting with any man, ſtand upon their hind,
feet, and ſo this did, being ready to give me a ſhrewd €In-
bracement. Sidney, b. i
As the hinder feet of the horſe ſtuck to the mountain wi.
the body reared up in the air, the poet with great i.
kept himſelf from ſliding off his back. Miljº &amp;.
Hi'NDERANCE. m. ſ. [from hinder.] Impediment; let; fl.
obſtruction. # Itop;
Falſe opinions, touching the will of God to have things
done, are wont to bring forth mighty and violent pračtices
againſt the hinderances of them, and thoſe practices new opi-
nions more pernicious than the firſt; yea, moſt extrem:
ſometimes oppoſite to the firſt. Hooker, }.
They muſt be in every Chriſtian church the ſame, except
mere impoſſibility of ſo having it be the hinderance. Hai.
What hinderance have they been to the knowledge of what
is well done? Dryden's Dufreſhoy.
Have we not plighted each our holy oath,
One ſoul ſhould both inſpire, and neither prove
His fellow's hind’rance in purſuit of love? Dryden.
He muſt conquer all theſe difficulties, and remove all theſe
hinderances out of the way that leads to juſtice. Atterbury.
H1'NDER eR. m. ſ. [from hinder.] He or that which hindés
or obſtructs.
Brakes, great hinderer of all plowing, grow. May.
Hi'NDERLING.. n.ſ.. [from hind or hinder.] A paltry, worth-
leſs, degenerate animal.
H1'NDERMost, adj. [This word ſeems to be leſs proper than
hindmoſł.] Hindmoſt ; laſt; in the rear.
He put the handmaids and their children foremoſt, and Leah
and her children after, and Rachel and Joſeph hindermºſi, Gen.
Like to an enter'd tide, they all ruſh by,
And leave you hindermoſł. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºfth.
H1'NDMost, adj. [hind and moſł.] The laſt; the lag; that
which comes in the rear.
'Tis not his wont to be the hindmoſ' man,
Whate'er occaſion keeps him from us now Shakespeare. H. VI.
He met thee by the way, and ſmote the lindnji of thee,
even all that were feeble behind. Deutr. xxy. 18,
Let him retire, betwixt two ages caſt, -
The firſt of this, and binding/l of the laſt,
A loſing gameſter. Dryden's Aurengz, Prºlºgue.
The race by vigour, not by vaunts is won ;
So take the hindmºſ', hell—he ſaid, and run. Pºpe,
HING.E. n.ſ. [or hingle, from hangle or hang.]
I. Joints upon which a gate or door turns.
At the gate
Of heav'n arriv'd, the gate ſelf-open'd wide,
On golden hinges turning. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft, b.v.
Then from the hinge their ſtrokes the gates divorce,
And where the way they cannot find, they force. Denham.
Heav'n's imperious queen ſhot down from high;
At her approach the brazen hinges fly,
The gates are forc'd. Dryden's En.
2. The cardinal points of the world, Eaſt, Weſt, North, and
South.
If when the moon is in the hinge at Eaſt,
The birth breaks forward from its native reſt;
Full eighty years, if you two years abate, ---
This ſtation gives. Cresch's Maniliuſ.
And theſe being hinges of the world, create ---
New powers in ſtars. Creech's Maniliuſ.
3. A governing rule or principle.
The other hinge of puniſhment might turn upon a law,
whereby all men, who did not marry by the age of hº and
twenty, ſhould pay the third part of their revenue. Temple:
4. To be ºff the Hinges. To be in a ſtate of irregularity and
diſorder. -
The man's ſpirit is out of order and off the hinges; and -
'till that be put into its right frame, he will be perpetually diſ-
quieted. Tillotſºn, Sermon 4.
To HING.E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To furniſh with hinges.
2. To bend as an hinge.
Be thou a flatt’rer now, and hinge thy knee;
And let his very breath, whom thou’lt obſerve,
Blow off thy cap. siaiſ Timon ºf 4th,
To HINT. v. a. ſenter, French. Skinner.] To bring tº mind
by a ſlight mention or remote alluſion; to mention imper-
fectly.
Willing to wound, and yet afraid to ſtrike,
Jº hint a fault, and heſitate diſlike. Pºpe.
n waking whiſpers, and repeated dreams,
To hint ºf tºº, and wº the favour’d ſoul. Thºſ”
To HINT. at. To allude to; to touch ſlightly upon. s
Speaking of Auguſtus's actions, he ſtill remembers that º:
culture ought to be ſome way hinted at throughout tº whole
poem. Addison on the Georgiº.
HINT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] - - -
I. Faint notice given to the mind; remote alluſion; diſtant in-
ſinuation.
4. Let
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H I R.
H I S
!
º
º
º
.
s
*
º
flet him ſtriðly obſerve the firſt ſtirrings and intimations,
the firſt hints and whiſpers of good and evil, that paſs in his
heart. South's Sermons.
2. Suggeſtion; intimation.
On this hint I ſpake,
She lov'd me for the dangers I had paſt. Shakespeare Othello.
Aćtions are ſo full of circumſtances, that, as men obſerve
ſome parts more than others, they take different hints, and
put different interpretations on them. Addiſon's Speciator.
HIP. m. ſ. [bype, Saxon.]
1. The joint of the thigh; the fleſhy part of the thigh.
How now, which of your hips has the moſt profound
feiatica. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
Hippocrates affirmeth of the Scythians, that, uſing conti-
nual riding, they were generally moleſted with the ſciatica,
or hip gout. Brown's Wulgar Errours, b. v.
So ſhepherds uſe
To ſet the ſame mark on the hip
Both of their ſound and rotten ſheep. Hudibras, p. ii.
Againſt a ſtump his tuſk the monſter grinds,
And ranch'd his hips with one continu'd wound. Dryden.
2. To have on the HIP. [A low phraſe.] To have an advantage
over another. It ſeems to be taken from hunting, the hip or
haunch of a deer being the part commonly ſeiſed by the dogs.
If this poor brach of Venice, whom Icheriſh
For his quick hunting, ſtand the putting on,
I'll have our Michael Caſſio on the hip. Shakeſp. Othello.
HIP. n.ſ.. [from peopa, Saxon.] The fruit of the briar or the
dogroſe.
Eating hips and drinking watry foam. Hubberd's Tale.
Why ſhould you want? Behold, the earth hath roots;
The oaks bear maſts, the briars ſcarlet hips. Shakeſpeare.
Years of ſtore of haws and hips do commonly portend cold
Winters. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To HIP. v. a. [from hip.]
1. To ſprain or ſhoot the hip.
His horſe was hipp'd, with an old motly ſaddle, and the ſtir-
rups of no kindred. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
2. Hip-Hop. A cant word formed by the reduplication of
hop.
op Your different taſtes divide our poets cares;
One foot the ſock, t'other the buſkin wears:
Thus while he ſtrives to pleaſe, he's forc'd to do't,
Like Volſcius hip-hop in a ſingle boot. Congreve.
HIP. interječi. An exclamation, or calling to one; the ſame
as the Latin eho, hews &amp; - Ainſworth.
#. S.H. }ad. A corruption of hypochondriack. Ainſworth.
Hippocr’NTAUR. n.ſ. [Trox{1zvg|GP; hippotentaure, French.]
A fabulous monſter, half horſe and half man.
How are poetical fićtions, how are hippocentaurs and chi-
meras to be imaged, which are things quite out of nature,
and whereof we can have no notion? Dryden.
H1'ppocrass. n.ſ.. [hypºcras, French; quaſi vinum Hippocratis.]
A medicated wine.
Sack and the well-ſpic'd hippocraſ, the wine,
Waſſail the bowl with ancient ribbands fine. King.
Hi'PPocRAtes's Sleeve. n.ſ. A woollen bag made by joining
the two oppoſite angles of a ſquare piece of flannel, uſed to
ſtrain ſyrups and decočtions for clarification. Quincy.
Hippock IFF. n.ſ.. [ww.G' and yeſ! ; hippogriffe, French.]
A winged horſe.
He caught him up, and without wing
Of hippogriff' bore through the air ſublime. Milt. Par. Loft.
Hippo'for AMUs. n.ſ. [wwo; and rárzº&amp;’.] The river
horſe. An animal found in the Nile.
H1'pshot. adj. [hip and ſhot..] Sprained or diſlocated in the
hip. º
Why do you go nodding and waggling ſo like a fool, as if
you were hipſhot * ſays the gooſe to the goſling. L’Eſtrange.
H1'Pwort. n.ſ. ſhip and wort.] A plant. Ainſworth.
To HIRE. v. a. ſpyman, Saxon.] º
1. To procure any thing for temporary uſe at a certain price.
His ſordid avarice rakes
In excrements, and hires the jakes. Dryden's juvenal.
2. To engage a man to temporary ſervice for wages.
They weigh filver in the balance, and hire a goldſmith, and
he maketh it a god. Iſ xlvi. 6.
I cannot ſtrike at wretched kerns, whoſe arms
Are hir'd to bear their ſtaves. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
3. To bribe.
Themetes firſt, 'tis doubtful whether hird,
Or ſo the Trojan deſtiny requir’d,
Mov'd that the ramparts might be broken down. Dryd. Æn.
4. To engage himſelf for pay.
They that were full, hired out themſelves for bread; and
they that were hungry, ceaſed. - I Sa. ii. 5.
HIRE. m. ſ. ſpyne, Saxon.]
1. Reward or recompence paid for the uſe of anything.
2. Wages paid for ſervice.
Great thanks and goodly meed to that good fire;
He thence departing gave for his pains hire. Fairy Queen,
I have five hundred crowns,
The thriſty hire I ſav'd under your father. Shakeſpeare,
Though little was their hire, and light their gain,
Yet ſomewhat to their ſhare he threw. Dryden,
All arts and artiſts Theſeus could command, -
Who ſold for hire, or wrought for better fame. Dryden.
H1'RELING.. n.ſ.. [from hire.]
1. One who ſerves for wages.
The hireling longs to ſee the ſhades aſcend,
That with the tedious day his toil might end,
And he his pay receive. Sandyſ.
In the framing of Hiero's ſhip there were three hundred car-
penters employed for a year, beſides many other hirelings for
carriages. Wilkins's Daedalus,
'Tis frequent here to ſee a freeborn ſon
On the left hand of a rich hireling run.
2. A mercenary; a proſtitute.
Now ſhe ſhades thy evening walk with bays,
No hireling ſhe, no proſtitute to praiſe. Pope.
Hi'RELING. adj. Serving for hire; venal; mercenary; doing
what is done for money. -
Then trumpets, torches, and a tedious crew
Of hireling mourners for his funeral due. Dryd. Perſ. Sat.
Hi'RER. n.ſ.. [from hire.]
I. One who uſes anything paying a recompence; one who em-
ploys others paying wages.
2. In Scotland it denotes one who keeps ſmall horſes to let:
HIRSUTE. adj. [hirſutus, Latin.] Rough; rugged.
There are bulbous, fibrous, and hirſute roots: the hirſute is
a middle ſort, between the bulbous and fibrous; that, beſides the
putting forth ſap upwards and downwards, putteth forth in
round. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
HIS. pronoun pºſſeſſive. [pyr, Saxon.]
1. The maſculine poſſeſſive. Belonging to him that was before
mentioned.
England his approaches makes as fierce
As waters to the ſucking of a gulph. Shakeſp. Henry V.
If much you note him, r
You ſhall offend him, and extend his paſſion. Shakespeare Macb.
Heav'n and yourſelf
Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,"
And all the better is it for the maid:
Your part in her you could not keep from death;
But heav'n keeps his part in eternal life. Shakespeare Ro. and jul.
If our father carry authority with ſuch diſpoſition as he
bears this laſt ſurrender of his, it will but offend us. Shakeſp.
He that is nouriſhed by the acorns he picked up under an
oak in the wood, has appropriated them to himſelf: nobody
can deny but the nouriſhment is his. Locke.
Whene'er I ſtoop, he offers at a kiſs;
And when my arms I ſtretch, he ſtretches his. Addison Ovid.
2. It was anciently uſed in a neutral ſenſe, where we now ſay
4tſ.
Dryd, juvenal.
Who can impreſs the foreſt, bid the tree
Unfix his earth-bound root ? Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Not the dreadful ſpout, *
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear
In his deſcent. Shakeſpeare's Troilus and Creſſida.
There's not the ſmalleſt orb, which thou behold'ſt,
But in his motion like an angel ſings,
Still quiring to the young-ey’d cherubims. Shakeſpeare.
This rule is not ſo general, but that it admitteth his excep-
tions. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Opium loſeth ſome of his poiſonous quality, if it be va-
poured out, mingled with ſpirit of wine. Bacon.
3. It is ſometimes uſed as a ſign of the genitive caſe: as, the
man his ground, for the man's ground.
- Where is this mankind now who lives to age
Fit to be made Methuſalem his page? Donne.
By thy fond conſort, by thy father's cares, •
By young Telemachus his blooming years. . Pope's Odyſſey.
4. It is ſometimes uſed in oppoſition to this man's.
Were I king,
I ſhould cut off the nobles for their lands,
Deſire his jewels, and this other's houſe. Shakespeare Macbeth.
5. Anciently before ſelf.
Every of us, each for his ſelf, laboured how to recover
him. Sidney.
To Hiss. v. n. [hiſm, Dutch..] To utter a noiſe like that of a
ſerpent and ſome other animals. It is remarkable, that this
word cannot be pronounced without making the noiſe which
it ſignifies.
In the height of this bath to be thrown into the Thames,
and cool'd glowing hot, in that ſurge, like a horſeſhoe; think
of that; hiſing hot. Shakespeare Merry Wives of Windſor.
The merchants ſhall hiſ at thee. Ezek. xxvii. 36.
See the furies ariſe:
See the ſnakes that they rear,
How they hiſ in their hair. Dryden's Alexander's Fºoſ.
Againſt the ſteed he threw º
His forceful ſpear, which, hiſing as it flew, -
Pierc'd through the yielding planks. Dryden,
11 I To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H I S
H T
:
To Hiss. v. a. [bircean, Saxon.]
1. To condemn by hiſſing; to explode. ... --
Every one will hiſ him out to his diſgrace. E. cluſ, xxii. 1.
Men ſhall purſue with merited diſgrace;
Hiſ, clap their hands, and from his country chaſe. Sandys,
She would ſo ſhamefully fail in the laſt ačt, that, inſtead of
a plaudite, ſhe would deſerve to be hiſed off the ſtage. More.
I have ſeen many ſucceſſions of men, who have ſhot them-
ſelves into the world, ſome bolting out upon the ſtage with
vaſt applauſe, and others hiſ d off, and quitting it with diſ-
racc. - Dryden.
Will you venture your all upon a cauſe, which would be
hiſ d out of all the courts as ridiculous Colier on Dueling.
2. To procure hiſſes or diſgrace.
Thy mother plays, and I
Play too; but ſo diſgrac'd a part, whoſe iſſue
Will hiſ me to my grave. Sakſ. Iłinter's Tale.
What's the neweſt grief?
—That of an hour's age doth hiſ the ſpeaker,
Each minute teems a new one. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Hiss. n.ſ. (from the verb.]
1. The voice of a ſerpent, and of ſome other animals.
2. Cenſure; expreſſion of contempt uſed in thcatres.
He heard
On all ſides, from innumerable tongues,
A diſmal univerſal hiſs, the ſound
Of publick ſcorn! Aſſiſtan's Paradiſe Loſt, b. x.
Fierce champion fortitude, that knows no fears
Of hiſºs, blows, or want, or loſs of cars. Hºpe's Dunciad.
Hist, ini.j. [Of this word I know not the original: probably
it may be a corruption of buſh, huſh it, luſht, hiſ?..] An excla-
mation commanding ſilence.
Hiſ Romeo, hiſ O for a falc'her's voice,
To lure this taffeigentle back again. Shakeſp. Rom, and jul.
Mute ſilence hiſ along!
'Leſs Philomel will deign a ſong,
In her ſweeteſt ſaddeſt plight,
Smoothing the rugged brow of night. Milton.
Hiſt, hiſ', ſays another that ſtood by, away, doćtor; for
here's a whole pack of diſmals coming. Swift.
Histo'RIAN. m. ſ. [ hiſtoricus, Latin; hiſtorien, French. J A
writer of fačts and events; a writer of hiſtory.
What thanks ſufficient, or what recompence
Equal, have 1 to render thee, divine
Hiſtorian / Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. viii.
Our country, which has produced writers of the firſt figure
in every other kind of work, has been very barren in good
hiſtorians. Addison's Freeholder.
Not added years on years my taſk could cloſe,
The long hiſtorian of my country’s woes. Pope's Odyſſey.
HISTO'RICAL. di. Thiſ?orique, Fr. hiſ?oricus, Lati
#3:::::" at ſhiftorique, Fr. literia, Latin.]
1. Containing or giving an account of fačts and events.
Becauſe the beginning ſeemeth abrupt, it needs that you
know the occaſion of theſe ſeveral adventures; for the me-
thod of a poet hiſtorical is not ſuch as of an hiſtoriogra-
pher. . Spenſer.
Here riſing bold, the patriot's honeſt face;
There warriors frowning in hiſtorick braſs. Pope.
2. Suitable or pertaining to hiſtory or narrative.
In an hiſtorical relation we uſe terms that are moſt proper
and beſt known. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
With equal juſtice and hiſtorick care, -
Their laws, their toils, their arms with his compare. Prior.
Histo'Rically, adv, [from hylorical.] In the manner of
hiſtory; by way of narration.
The goſpels, which are weekly read, do all hiſtorically de-
clare ſomething which our Lord Jeſus Chriſt himſelf either
ſpoke, did, or ſuffered in his own pcrſon. Hooker, b. v.
When that which the word of God doth but deliver hiſto-
rically, we conſtrue as if it were legally meant, and ſo urge it
further than we can prove it was intended, do we not add to
the laws of God Hocker, b. iii. ſ. 5.
After his life has been rather invented than written, I ſhall
conſider him hiſtorically as an althor, with regard to thoſe
works he has leſt behind him. Pope's Eſſay on Homer.
To Histo'RIFY. v. a. [from hiſtory..] To relate; to record
in hiſtory.
O, muſe, hiſtoriſy
Her praiſe, whoſe praiſe to learn your ſkill hath framed
Inc. . Sidney, b, i.
The third age they term hiſtoricon; that is, ſuch wherein
matters have been more truely hiſtorified, and therefore may
be believed. Brown's /ugar Errours, b. vi. c. 6.
Historio'GRAPHER. m.ſ. ſireéſz and Yºzºw; hiſtoriographe,
Fr.] An hiſtorian; a writer of hiſtory.
Becauſe the beginning ſeemeth abrupt, it needs that you
know the occaſion of theſe knights ſeveral adventures; for the
method of a poet hiſtorical is not ſuch as of an hiſtoriogra-
pher Spenſer.
What poor ideas muſt ſtrangers conceive of theſe perſons
who have been famous among us, ſhould they form their no-
tions of them from the writings of thoſe our hiſtori graſhers 2
- Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 3 K.
I put the journals of all tranſactions into a ſtrong box, after
the manner of the hiſtºriographers of ſome eaſtern monarchs.
Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of jºhn Bull.
Historio'GRAPHY., n ſ. [...ofſa and 7:222.] The art or
employment of an hiſtorian.
HIS FORY.. n.ſ. [1;c;z; hiſtoria, Latin; hiſtoire, French.]
1. A narration of events and facts delivered with dignity.
Juſtly Caeſar ſcorns the poet's lays;
It is to hiſtory he truſts for praiſe. Pºpe.
2. Narration; relation.
The hiſtory part lay within a little room. Wiſeman's Surgery.
What hiſtories of toil could I declare :
But ſtill long-weaty'd nature wants repair. Pope's Odſey.
3. The knowledge of facts and events. -
Hiſtory, ſo far as it relates to the affairs of the Bible, is
neceſſary to divines. J/atti's Improvement of the Mind.
H1's Tor Y Piece. m. ſ. A pićture repreſenting ſome memorable
event.
The former makes his works reſemble a large hiſtory piece,
where even the leſs important figures have ſome convenient
place. Pope's Eſſay on Homer's Battles.
HISTRIO'NICAL. Nadj. . [from hiſtrio, Latin; hiſłrian, Fr.]
HISTRIO'NICK. } Befitting the ſtage; ſuitable to a player;
becoming a buffoon; theatrical.
Histric/Nically, adv. [from hiſºrionical.] Theatrically; in
the manner of a buffoon. -
To HIT. v. a. [from it?us, Latin, Mirſhºw, from hitte, Daniſh,
to throw at random, junius.]
1. To ſtrike; to touch with a blow.
When I firſt ſaw her I was preſently ſtricken; and I, like a
fooliſh child, that when anything hits him will ſtrike himſelf
again upon it, would needs look again, as though I would per-
ſuade mine eyes that they were deceived. Sidney, b i.
His conſcience ſhall hit him in the teeth, and tell him his
ſin and folly. South's Sermons.
2. To touch the mark; not to miſs.
Is he a god that ever flies the light 2
Or naked he, diſguis'd in all untruth :
If he be blind, how hitteth he ſo right? Sidney, b. ii.
So hard it is to tremble, and not to err, and to hit the
mark with a ſhaking hand. South's Sermins,
3. To attain; to reach the point.
Were I but twenty-one,
Your father's image is ſo hit in you,
His very air, i ſhould call you brother,
As I did him. - Shakeſpeare's lºinter's Tale.
Search every comment that your care can find,
Some here, ſome there, may hit the poet's mind. Roſcomm.
Birds learning tunes, and their endeavours to hit the notes
right, put it paſt doubt that they have perception, and retain
ideas, and uſe them for patterns. Locke.
Here's an opportunity to ſhew how great a bungler my au-
thor is in hitting features. Atterlury.
4. To ſtrike a ruling paſſion.
Hail, divineſt melancholy
Whoſe ſaintly viſage is too bright
To hit the ſenſe of human ſight. Milton.
There you hit him: St. Dominick loves charity exceeding-
ly; that argument never fails with him. Dryd. Spaniſh Fryar.
5. Tº Hit off. To ſtrike out; to fix or determine luckily.
What prince ſoever can hit off this great ſecret, need know
no more either for his own ſafety, or that of the people he
governs. - 7 emple.
6. To HIT out. To perform by good luck.
Having the ſound of theſe ancient poets ſtill ringing in his
ears, he mought needs in ſinging hit out ſome of their tunes.
Spenſer's Paſłorals.
To HIT. v. n.
1. To claſh; to collide.
If bodies be extenſion alone, how can they move and hit
one againſt another; or what can make diſtinét ſurfaces in an
uniform extenſion? Locke.
The bones, teeth, and ſhells being ſuſtained in the water
with theſe metallick corpuſcles, and the ſaid corpuſcles meet-
ing with and hitting upon thoſe bodies, become conjoined with
them. Iłoodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. To chance luckily; to ſucceed by accident; not to miſs.
Oft expectation fails, and moſt off there
Where moſt it promiſes; and oft it hits
Where hope is coldeſt, and deſpair moſt fits. Shakeſpeare.
There is a kind of conveying of effectual and imprinting
paſſages amongſt compliments, which is of fingular uſe, if a
man can hit upon it. Bacon, Eſſay 53.
3. To ſucceed; not to miſcarry.
The experiment of binding of thoughts would be diver-
ſfied, and you are to note whether it bits for the moſt part.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
But
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H I T
H O A
it. "
º:
-**
.
…”
f
...a
*:::::::
º
º
**
tº:
ºt.
-
º: in his
ſtunt;
!.
º
But thou bring'ſ valour too and wit, -
Two things that ſeldom fail to hit. Hudibras, p. i.
This may hit, 'tis inore than barely poſſible; for friars have
free admittance into every houſe. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
All human race would fain be wits,
And millions miſs for one that hits. Swift.
4. To light on.
You've hit upon the very ſtring, which touch'd,
Echoes the ſound, and jars within my ſoul;
There lies my grief. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
It is much, if men were from eternity, that they ſhould
not find out the way of writing before that time: ſure he
was a fortunate man, who, after men had been eternally ſo
dull as not to find it out, had the luck at laſt to hit upon
it. Tillotſon's Sermºns.
There's a juſt medium betwixt eating too much and too lit-
tle; and this dame had hit upon’t, when the matter was ſo
ordered that the hen brought her every day an egg, L'Aſir.
None of them hit upon the art. Addiſon's Guardian.
There's but a true and a falſe predićtion in any telling of
fortune; and a man that never hits on the right ſide, cannot be
called a bad gueſſer, but muſt miſs out of deſign. Bentley.
HIT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A ſtroke.
The king hath laid, that in a dozen paſſes between you and
him, he ſhall not exceed you three hits. Shakespeare Hamlet.
So he the fam'd Cilician fencer prais'd,
And at each hit with wonder ſeem'd amaz'd. Dryd, juven.
2. A lucky chance.
Have all his ventures fail'd What, not one hit P Shakespeare
To ſuppoſe a watch, by the blind hits of chance, to per-
form diverſity of orderly motions, without the regulation of
art, this were the more pardonable abſurdity. Glanville.
If the rule we judge by be uncertain, it is odds but we
ſhall judge wrong; and if we ſhould judge right, yet it is not
properly ſkill, but chance; not a true judgment, but a lucky
Hit. South's Sermons.
But with more lucky hit than thoſe
That uſe to make the ſtars depoſe. Hudibras, p. i.
The fiſherman's waiting, and the lucky hit it had in the
concluſion, tells us, that honeſt endeavours will not fail. L'Eſt.
Theſe hits of words a true poet often finds, without ſeek-
ing. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
If caſual concourſe did the world compoſe,
And things and hits fortuitous aroſe,
Then anything might come from anything;
For how from chance can conſtant order ſpring? Blackmore.
If at firſt he minds his hits,
And drinks champaigne among the wits,
Five deep he toaſts the tow'ring laſies. Prior.
To Hitch. v. n. [plexan, Saxon, or hocher, French. Skinner.]
To catch; to move by jerks. I know not where it is uſed but
in the following paſſage. .
Whoe'er offends, at ſome unlucky time
Slides in a verſe, or hitches in a rhyme;
Sacred to ridicule his whole life long,
. . . And the ſad burthen of ſome merry ſong. Pope's Horace.
To HI’rcH E L. v. a. [See HATCHEL.] To beat or comb flax
or hemp.
H1't c Hel. n.ſ.. [heckel, German.] The inſtrument with which
flax is beaten or combed.
HITHE. n.ſ. [pyöe, Saxon.] A ſmall haven to land wares out
of veſſels or boats: as Queenhithe, and Lambhithe, now Lam-
beth.
HI'THER. adv. [prèen, Saxon. J
1. To this place from ſome other.
Caeſar, tempted with the fame
Of this ſweet iſland, never conquered,
And envying the Britons blazed name,
O hideous hunger of dominion, hither came. Fairy 3ueen.
Men muſt endure
Their going hence, even as their coming hither.
Who brought me hither
Will bring me hence, no other guide I ſeek. Parad. Reg.
2. º is uſed in oppoſition: hither and thither, to this place and
that. -
3. To this end; to this deſign; to this topick of argument:
[huc, Latin. Huc refer exitum.]
Hereupon dependeth whatſoever difference there is between
the ſtates of ſaints in glory ; hither we refer whatſoever be-
longeth unto the higheſt perfection of man, by way of ſer-
vice towards God. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 8.
Hither belong all thoſe texts, which require of us that we
ſhould not walk after the fleſh, but after the ſpirit. Tillotſon.
Hi'THE R. adj. ſuperl, hithermoff. Nearer; towards this part.
After theſe,
But on the hither ſide, a different ſort,
From the high neighb'ring hills deſcended. Milton's P. Lºſt.
An eternal duration may be ſhorter or longer upon the
hiher end thereof, namely, that extreme wherein it is finite.
Hale's Origin ºf Mankind.
Shakeſp.
Hi'r HERMost. adj. [of hither, adv.] Neareſt on this ſide.
That which is eternal cannot be extended to a greater ex-
tent at the hithermoſi and concluding extreme. Bale.
H1'THERT.o. adv. [from hither.]
1. To this time; yet; in any time till now.
More ample ſpirit than hitherto was wont,
Here needs me, whiles the famous anceſtries
Qf my moſt dreadful ſovereign I recount. Fairy Queen.
Hitherto I have only told the reader what ought not to be
the ſubjećt of a pićture or of a poem. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
2. At every time till now.
In this we are not their adverſaries, tho' they in the other
hitherto have been ours. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
Hitherto, lords, what your commands impos'd
I have perform’d, as reaſon was, obeying. Milton's Agoniſł.
Hitherto ſhe kept her love conceal’d,
And with thoſe graces ev'ry day beheld
The graceful youth. Dryden's Fables.
He could not have failed to add the oppoſition of ill ſpirits
to the good; they have alſo their deſign ever oppoſite to that
of heaven, and this alone has hitherto been the pračtice of the
moderns. É. Dedication.
We ought to ſtruggle with thoſe natural diſadvantages, and
be careful whom we employ, whenever we deſign to correół
them, which is a work that has hitherto been aſſumed by the
leaſt qualified hands. - Swift.
Hi'THERward. adv. [by Serpeano, Saxon.) This way;
H1'THERw Akps. } towards this place.
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. Shakeſpeare's Coriolamut.
The king himſelf in perſon hath ſet forth,
Or hitherwards intended ſpeedily,
With ſtrong and mighty preparation.
A puiſſant and mighty pow'r
Of gallow-glaſſes and ſtout kernes,
Is marching hitherward in proud array. Shakespeare Henry VI.
Look now for no enchanting voice, nºr fear
The bait of honey'd words; a rougher tongue
Draws hitherward. - Milton's Agoniſtes.
HIVE. m. ſ. ſpype, Saxon.]
I. The habitation or cell of bees.
. So bees with ſmoke, and doves with noiſome ſtench,
Are from their hives and houſes driv'n away. Shakespeare H. VI.
So wand'ring bees would periſh in the air, -
Did not a ſound, proportion'd to their ear, -
Appeaſe their rage, invite them to the hive. Waller.
Bees, of which we are told ſo many wonderful things, have
each of them a hole in their hives: their honey is their own,
and every bee minds her own concerns. Addiſon's Guardian.
2. The bees inhabiting a hive.
The commons, like an angry hive of bees
That want their leader, ſcatter up and down. Shakespeare H. VI.
3. A company being together. -
What modern maſons call a lodge was by antiquity called
a hive of free maſons; and therefore, when a diſſention hap-
pens, the going off is to this day called ſwarming, Swift,
To HIV E. v.a. [from the noun.]
1. To put into hives; to harbour.
Mr. Addiſon of Oxford has been troubleſome to me: after
his bees, my latter ſwarm is ſcarcely worth hiving. Dryden.
When they are fully ſettled, and the cluſter at the biggeſt,
hive them. - Mortimer's Husbandry.
2. To contain in hives.
Ambitious now to take exciſe
Of a more fragrant paradiſe,
He at Fuſcara's ſleeve arriv'd,
Where all delicious ſweets are hiv'd.
To Hive. v. n. To take ſhelter together.
He ſleeps by day *
More than the wildcat.: drones hive not with me, -
Therefore I part with him. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice,
In Summer we wander in a paradiſaical ſcene, among groves
and gardens; but at this ſeaſon we get into warmer houſes,
and hive together in cities. Pºpe's Letters.
HI’ver, n.ſ.. [from hive..] One who puts bees in hives.
Let the hiver drink a cup of good beer, and waſh his hands
and face therewith. Mortimer's Husbandry,
Ho. I interj. [eho! Latin.] A call; a ſudden exclamation to
Hoa. } give notice of approach, or anything elſe.
What noiſe there, ho P Shakeſpeare.
Here dwells my father Jew: hoa, who's within : Shakespeare
Stand, hot ſpeak the word along, Shakeſp julius Caſar.
When I cried hea 1
Like boys, kings would ſtait forth, and cry,
Your will. Shakeſpeare,
Ho, ho, come forth and flee. Zech. ii. 6.
Ho, ſwain, what ſhepherd owns theſe ragged ſheep? Dry.
HOAR. adj. [pan, Saxon.]
1. White.
Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Cleaveland.
A people, - -
Whom Ireland ſent from loughs and forreſts hare. *::::
all<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O A
H O B
Iſland of bliſs, all aſſaults
Baffling, like thy hoar cliffs the loud ſea-wave.
2. Grey with age.
It govern'd was and guided evermore
Through wiſdom of a matron grave and hoar. Fai, Queen.
Now ſwarms the populace, a countleſs throng;
Youth and hoar age, and man drives man along.
3. White with froſt.
Hoar-Frost. n.ſ.. [hoar and froſt.] The congelations of dew
in froſty mornings on the graſs.
When the dew was gone up, behold upon the face of the
wilderneſs there lay a ſmall round thing, as ſmall as the har-
froſt on the ground. Ex. xvi. 14.
In Farenheit's thermometer, at thirty-two degrees, the wa-
ter in the air begins to freeze, which is known by boar-froſti.
Arbuthnot on Air.
HOARD. n. / [ponb, Saxon. J A ſtore laid up in ſecret; a
hidden ſtock; a treaſure.
I have a venturous fairy, that ſhall ſeek
The ſquirrel's hoard, and fetch thee thence new nuts. Shakespeare
They might have even ſtarved, had it not been for this pro-
vidential reſerve, this hoard, that was ſtowed in the ſtrata un-
derneath, and now ſeaſonably diſcloſed. Woodw. Nat. Hiſtory.
To HoARD. v. n. To make hoards; to lay up ſtore.
He fear'd not once himſelf to be in need,
Nor car'd to hoard for thoſe whom he did breed. Fa. Queen.
Happy always was it for that ſon,
Whoſe father for his hoarding went to hell? Shakespeare Hen. VI.
To Hoard. v. a. To lay in hoards; to huſband privily; to
ſtore ſecretly.
The hºarded plague of the gods requite your love? Shakespeare
I have juſt occaſion to complain of them, who, becauſe
they underſtand Chaucer, would hoard him up as miſers
do their grandam gold, only to look on it themſelves,
and hinder others from making uſe of it. Dryd. Fab. Preface.
You hoard not health for your own private uſe,
But on the publick ſpend the rich produce. Dryden's Fables.
The baſe wretch, who hoard; up all he can,
Is prais'd, and call'd a careful thrifty man. Dryden's juven.
You will be unſucceſsful, if you give out of a great man,
who is remarkable for his frugality for the publick, that he
ſquanders away the nation's money; but you may ſafely relate
that he hoard; it. Arbuthnot's Art of political Lying.
A ſuperfluous abundance tempts us to forget God, when it
is hoarded in our treaſures, or conſidered as a ſafe, independent
proviſion laid up for many years. Rogers, Sermon 2.
HoA'RDER. m.ſ.. [from hoard.] One that ſtores up in ſecret.
Since commodities will be raiſed, this alteration will be an
advantage to nobody but hoarders of money. Locke.
Ho'AR Hound. m. ſ. [marrubium, Latin.] A plant.
It is a verticillate plant with a lip flower, conſiſting of one
leaf, whoſe upper lip or creſt is upright, with two horns; but
the under lip or beard is divided into three parts: the pointal
is fixed to the hinder part of the flower, and attended by four
embryoes, which become ſo many oblong ſeeds, incloſed in
the flower-cup. Miller.
Hoarhound has its leaves and flower-cup covered very thick
with a white hoarineſs: it is famous for the relief it gives in
moiſt aſthmas, and in all diſeaſes of the breaſt and lungs, of
which a thick and viſcous matter is the cauſe; but it is now
little uſed. Hill's Mat, Med.
Ho’ARINEss. n.ſ.. [from hoary..] The ſtate of being whitiſh;
the colour of old mens hair.
He grows a wolf, his hoarineſ, remains,
And the ſame rage in other members reigns. Dryden.
HOARSE. adj. [par, Saxon; heerſch, Dutch. J Having the
voice rough, as with a cold; having a rough ſound.
Come, fit, fit, and a ſong.
Clap into't roundly, without hawking or ſpitting, or
ſaying we are hoarſe. Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
The raven himſelf is hoarſ,
That crokes the fatal entrance of Dúncan
Under my battlements. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He ſped his ſteps along the hºarſe reſounding ſhore. Dry.
The ſtock-dove only through the foreſt coors,
Mournfully hoarſe. Thomſon's Summer.
Ho’ARSELY. adv. [from hoarſe.J. With a rough harſh voice.
The hounds at nearer diſtance hoarſely bay’d;
The hunter cloſe purſu'd the viſionary maid. Dryden.
Ho'ARSEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from hoarſe.] Roughneſs of voice.
The voice is ſometimes intercluded by an hoarſeneſ, or
Thomſºn.
Pope.
viſcuous phlegm. Holder.
She fings them back in my deſpight!
I had a voice in heav'n, ere ſulph'rous ſteams
Had damp'd it to a hoarſeneſs. Dryden's King Arthur:
The want of it in the wind-pipe occaſions hoarſenºſ in the
gullet, and difficulty of ſwallowing. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
HQARY. adj. ſpan, papung, Saxon. See HoAR.]
1. White; whitiſh.
... Thus ſhe reſted on her arm reclin'd,
The hoary willows waving with the wind,
7
Addison,
2. White or grey with age.
A concly palmer, clad in black attire,
Of ripeſt years, and hairs all hoary grey. Sperfºr.
Solyman, marvelling at the courage and majeſty of the
hoary old prince in his ſo great extremity, diſmiſſed him, and
fent him again into the city. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Has then my hoary head deſerv'd no better Rowe.
Then in full age, and hoary hclineſs,
Retire, great preacher, to thy promis'd bliſs. Prior,
3. White with froſt.
Through this diſemperature we fee
The ſeaſons alter; hoary headed froſts
Fall in the freſh lap of the crimſon roſe. Shakespeare.
4. Mouldy; moſſy; ruſty.
There was brought out of the city into the camp ver
coarſe, hoary, moulded bread. Knolles’s Hiſtory of the Turkſ.
Hoºbnob. This is probably corrupted from lab nab by a
coarſe pronunciation. See HAB Nab.
His incenſement at this moment is ſo implacable, that ſatiſ.
fačtion can be nene, but pangs of death and ſepulchre: hab-
nob is his word; givet, or take’t. Shakespeare Twelfth Night,
To HO'BBLE. v. n. [to hop, to hºpple, to hobble.]
1. To walk lamely or awkwardly upon one leg more than the
other; to hitch.
The friar was hobbling the ſame way too, accidentally again.
Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Some perſons continued a kind of hobbling march on the
broken arches, but fell through. Addiſon's Speciator.
Was he ever able to walk without leading-ſtrings, without
being diſcovered by his hobbling. Swift.
2. To move roughly or unevenly. Feet being aſcribed to verſes,
whatever is done with feet is likewiſe aſcribed to them.
Thoſe ancient Romans had a ſort of extempore poetry, or
untuneable hobbling }: Dryden.
- While you Pindarick truths rehearſe,
She hºbbles in alternate verſe. Prior.
Ho's Ble. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Uneven awkward gait.
One of his heels is higher than the other, which gives him
a hobble in his gait. Gulliver's Traveli.
Ho’BBLeR. n.ſ.. [from hobby.]
For twenty hobblers armed, the Iriſhmen were ſo called,
becauſe they ſerved on hobbies, he paid fix-pence a-piece per
diem. Davies on Ireland.
Ho’ebLINGLY. adv. [from hobble.] Clumſily; aukwardly;
with a halting gait. -
Ho’BBY. m. ſ. [hobereau, French.]
1. A ſpecies of hawk.
They have ſuch a hovering poſſeſſion of the Waltoline, as
an hobby hath over a lark. Bacon.
The common people will chop like trouts at an artificſál
fly, and dare like larks under the awe of a painted hºbby.
L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Larks lie dar'd to ſhun the hobby's flight. Dryden.
2. [Hoppe, Gothick, a horſe; holin, French, a pacing horſe.]
n Iriſh or Scottiſh horſe; a pacing horſe; a garran.
3. A ſtick on which boys get aſtride and ride.
Thoſe grave contenders about opiniative trifles look like
aged Socrates upon his boy's hobby horſe. Glanv. Scepſ, c. 27.
As young children, who are try’d in
Go-carts, to keep their ſteps from ſliding,
When members knit, and legs grow ſtronger,
Make uſe of ſuch machine no longer;
But leap pro libitu, and ſcout
On horſe call'd hobby, or without. Priºr.
No hobby horſe, with gorgeous top,
Could with this rod of Sid compare. Swift.
4. A ſtupid fellow.
I have ſtudied eight or nine wiſe words to ſpeak to you,
which theſe hobby horſes muſt not hear. Shakeſpeare.
Hobgo'BLIN. n.ſ.. [according to SHinner, for rolgoblins, from
Robin Goodfellow, Hob being the nickname of Rabin : but
more probably, according to Wallis and junius, hopgoblins em-
puſe, becauſe they do not move their feet; whence, ſays Wal-
lis, came the boys play of fox in the hole, the fox always
hopping on one leg. y
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
Attend your office and your quality:
Crier hºbgoblin, make the fairy o-yes. Shakespeare.
Hoſpit. m. ſ. A ſmall mortar to ſhoot little bombs.
Ho'BNAIl n.ſ.. [from hobby and mail.] . A nail uſed in ſhoing
a hobby or little horſe; a nail with a thick ſtrong head.
Steel, if thou turn thine edge, or cut not out the burly-
bon'd clown in chines of beef, ere thou ſleep in thy ſheath, I
beſeech Jove on my knees thou may’ſt be turn'd into hot-
nails. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. iii.
We ſhall buy maidens as they buy hobnails, by the hun-
dred. • Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. i.
Ho’ENAItED. adj. [from hobnail J Set with hobnails.
Would'ſt thou, friend, who haſt two legs alone,
Would'ſt thou, to run the gantlet, theſe expoſe
To a whole company of hobnail'd ſhoes? Dryden's juvenaſ.
Hock.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O G
H O L
º
*
º,
Hock. n.ſ. [The ſame with hough ; pop, Saxon.] The joint
between the knee and the fetlock.
To Hock. v. a. [from the noun..] To diſable in the hock.
Hock. n.ſ.. [from Hokkeim on the Maine.] Old
Ho’ck A MoR E. } ſtrong Rheniſh.
Reſtor'd the fainting high and mighty,
With brandy, wine, and aqua vita ;
And made 'em ſtoutly overcome
With bachrach, hockamore and mum. Hudibras, p. iii.
Wine becomes ſharp, as in hock, like the vitriolick acidity.
Floyer on the Hamours.
If cyder-royal ſhould become unpleaſant, and as unfit to
bottle as old hockamore, mix one hogſhead of that and one of
tart new cyder together. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Ho'ck HERB. m. ſ. ſhock and herb.] A plant; the ſame with
mallows. Ainſworth.
To Ho'ck I. E. v. a. [from hock.] To hamſtring; to cut the
ſincws about the ham or hough. Hammer.
HOCUS POCUS. [The original of this word is referred
by Tillotſon to a form of the Romiſh church. junius
derives it from hocced, Welſh, a cheat, and poke or pocus,
a bag, jugglers uſing a bag for conveyance. It is corrupted
from ſome words that had once a meaning, and which per-
haps cannot be diſcovered.] A juggle; a cheat.
This gift of hocus pocuſing, and of diſguiſing matters, is
ſurpriſing. , L'Eſtrange.
HOL), n.f. [corrupted perhaps in contempt from hood, a hod
being carried on the head..] A kind of trough in which a
labourer carries mortar to the maſons.
A fork and a hook to be tampering in clay, -
A lath, hammer, trowel, a hod or a tray. Tuſſ. Husband.
Ho'DMAN. m. ſ. [ had and man. J A labourer that carries
mortar.
Hodma ND 'D. m.ſ. A fiſh.
Thoſe that caſt their ſhell are the lobſter, the crab, the
crawfiſh, and the hidnandod or dodman. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
Hop GE-Podg E. m. ſ. ſhache poché, hochepot, quaſi hachis en pot,
French..] A medley of ingredients boiled together.
They have made our Engliſh tongue a gallimaufrey, or
bodie-podge of all other ſpeeches. Spenſer.
It produces excellent corn, whereof the Turks make their
trachana and bouhourt, a certain hodge-podge of ſundry ingre-
dients. Sandys's Travels.
Hopi E'RNAL. adj. [hodiernus, Latin.] Of to-day.
Hoe. m. ſ. [houe, French; houwe, Dutch..] An inſtrument to
cut up the earth, of which the blade is at right angles with
the handle. -
If they come up too thick, they ſhould be thinned with a
hoe. Mortimer's Husbandry.
To Hoe. v. a. [houer, French; houwen, Dutch..] To cut or
dig with a hoe.
If it be a dry Spring, they muſt be continually kept with
weeding and hoeing. Mortimer's Husbandry.
HOG.. n.ſ.. [hwch, Welſh.]
1. The general name of ſwine.
This will raiſe the price of hogs, if we grow all to be pork-
eatcrS. Shakeſpeare's Merchant of Venice.
The hog, that plows not nor obeys thy call,
Lives on the labours of this Lord of all. Pope.
2. A caſtrated boar.
3. To bring Hogs to a fair market. To fail of one's deſign.
You have brought your hogs to a fair market. Spedator.
Ho'ocot F. m. ſ. ſhog and cate.] A houſe for hogs; a hogſty.
Out of a ſmall hogcate ſixty or eighty load of dung hath been
raiſed. 4/ortimer’s Husbandry.
Ho'o GERE L. m. ſ. A two year old ewe. Ainſworth.
HoGH. m. ſ. [otherwiſe written he, how, or hough, from hoogh,
iXutch. A hill; riſing ground; a cliff. Obſolete.
That well can witneſs yet unto this day,
The weſtern hogh, beſprinkl'd with the gore
Of mighty Goemot. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Hoo: R D. m.ſ. ſhog and pyjib, a keeper.] A keeper of hogs.
The terms hoºkerd and cowkeeper are not to be uſed in our
Poetry; but there are no finer words in the Greek language.
- - Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
He cºsiſ, ad. [from hºg.] Having the qualities of an hog;
brutiſh ; greedy; ſelfiſh. -
Suſpicion Miſo had, for the hoggiſh ſhrewdneſs of her brain,
and Mopſa, for a very unlikely envy. Sidney.
Ho'ocisiºx. adv. [from hºggiſh.J., Greedily; ſelfiſhly.
flºggish Siss. n.ſ.. [from hºgiſh..] Brutality; greedineſs;
ſelfiſhneſs.
} ſo 'cs BEANs. \
} Ho'º, ºf R E A D. n. ſ. Plants. Ainſworth.
jo'G's Mits H Rooxis. Ş
i to GSF Fºx El... n ſ. ſhºg and ſºnnel.] A plant. Ainſworth.
! lo'osſ E A D. m. ſ. ſhºg and head.]
1. A meafºre of liquids containing ſixty gallons. -
Varro teiis, that every jugerum of vincs yielded ſix hundred
urns of wige : according to this proportion, our acre ſhould
wick, ſº-five hagical, and a little more. Arbuthnot on Coins,
2. Any large barrel.
Blow ſtrongly with a pair of bellows into a hogſhead, putting
into it before that which you would have preſerved; and in
the inſtant that you withdraw the bellows, ſtop the hole. Bacon.
They flung up one of their largeſt hogſheads: I drank it off;
for it did not hold half a pint. Gulliver's Travels.
Hoost ¥'. n.ſ. ſhog and ſy..] The place in which ſwine are
ſhut to be fed.
The families of farmers live in filth and naſtineſs, with-
out a ſhoe or ſtocking to their feet, or a houſe ſo convenient
as an Engliſh hogſ!y. Swift.
IIocw A's H. n.ſ. (hog and waſh.] The draff which is given to
ſwine. - -
Your butler purloins your liquor, and the brewer ſells you
hogwaſh. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Ho'DEN. a. ſ. [hoeden, Welſh; formina levioris famie, Latin.]
An ill-taught awkward country girl.
To Ho"IDEN. v. n. [from the noun..] To romp indecently.
Some of them would get a ſcratch; but we always diſco-
vered, upon examining, that they had been holdening with the
young apprentices. Swift.
To House. U v. a. [ hauffer, French. J. To raiſe up on
To Ho IST. { high.
"Tis the ſport to have the engineer hoiſt up with his own
petar. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Join you with me;
We'll quickly hiſ duke Humphrey from his ſeat. Shakeſp.
Hoiſe ſail, and fly;
And in thy flight aloud on Cratis cry. Chapman's Odyſſey.
Auria had hoiſed ſail, and was on his way toward the bay of
Naupačtus. Knolley's Hiſtory of the Türks.
They looſed the rudder-bands, and boiſed up the mainſail to
the wind, and made toward ſhore. Aé?: xxvii. 4o.
That man which prizeth virtue for itſelf, and cannot endure
to hoiſe and ſtrike his ſails, as the divers natures of calms and
ſtorms require, muſt cut his ſails of mean length and breadth,
and content himſelf with a ſlow and ſure navigation. Raleigh.
What made Abſalom kick at all the kindneſſes of his fa-
ther, but becauſe his ambition would needs be fingering the
ſceptre, and hoſling him into his father's throne, South's Serm.
We thought for Greece -
The ſails were hoiſted, and our fears releaſe. Dryden's Án.
They hoiſi him on the bier, and deal the dole,
And there's an end. - - Pryden's Perſ:
What haſte ſhe made to hoiſ? her purple ſails |
And to appear magnificent in flight,
Drew half our ſtrength away. Dryden's All for Love.
Their navy ſwarms upon the coaſts: they cry
To hiſ their anchors, but the gods deny. Dryden's Aºn.
Seize him, take, hoiſt him up, break off his hold,
And toſs him headlong from the temple's wall. Southern.
If 'twas an iſland where they found the ſhells, they ſtraight-
ways concluded that the whole iſland lay originally at the bot-
tom of the ſea, and that it was hoiſted up by ſome vapour from
bencath. //oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
Hold, in the old gloſſaries, is mentioned in the ſame ſenſe with
wold, i. e. a governour or 'chief officer; but in ſome other
place for love, as holdie, lovely. Gibſon's Camden.
To HOLD. v. a. preter. held; part, paſſ held or holden. [haldan,
Gothick; palban, Saxon; henden, Dutch.]
1. To graſp in the hand; to gripe; to clutch.
France, thou may’ſt hold a ſerpent by the tongue,
A faſting tyger ſafer by the tooth,
Than keep in peace that hand which thou do'ſt hold. Shah.
2. To keep; to retain; to gripe faſt.
- Too late it was for ſatyrs to be told,
Or ever hope recover her again;
In vain he ſeeks, that having cannot hold. Fairy Queen.
The loops held one curtain to another. Ex. xxxvi. 12.
Prove all things: hold faſt that which is good. 2 Thºſ. v.
3. To maintain as an opinion.
Men with aſſurance hold and profeſs, without ever
having examined. Locke.
4. To conſider as good or bad; to hold in regard.
I as a ſtranger to my heart and me -
PHold thee from this for ever. Shakespeare King Lear:
I hold him but a fool, that will endanger
His body for a girl that loves him not. Shakeſpeare.
One amongſt the fair'ſt of Greece,
That hold; his honour higher than his eaſe. Shakeſpeare.
This makes thee bleſſed peace ſo light to hold,
Like Summer's flies that fear not Winter's cold. Fairfax.
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladneſs, and
hold ſuch in eſteem. St. Paul.
He would make us amends, and ſpend ſome time with us,
if we held his company and conference agreeable. Bacon.
As he is the father of Engliſh poetry, ſo I hold him in the
ſame degree of veneration as the Grecians held Homer, or the
Romans Virg). º Dryden's Fables, Preface.
1 1 K Yc
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O L
- - Ye Latian dames, if any here
Hºld your unhappy queen Amata dear! 3.
The orgies and noćturnal rites prepare. Dryden's Án.
5. To have any ſtation.
The ſtar bids the ſhepherd fold; -
Now the top of heav'n doth hold. Milton.
And now the ſtrand, and now the plain they held;
Their ardent eyes with bloody ſtreaks were fill’d. Dryden.
Obſerve the youth who firſt appears in ſight,
And holds the neareſt ſtation to the light. Dryden's AFn.
How pleaſant and joyful a thing is it to have a light held us
forth from heaven to guide our ſteps. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
6. To poſſeſs; to enjoy.
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leaſh,
To let him ſlip at will. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
The caſtle, holden by a garriſon of Germans, he commanded
to be beſieged. - Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Aſſuredly it is more ſhame for a man to loſe that which he
holdeth, than to fail in getting that which he never had. Hayw.
7. To poſſeſs in ſubordination. -
The duke was willing to yield himſelf unto Solyman as his
vaſſal, and of him to hold his ſeigniory for a yearly tribute.
- Rncle's Hiſtory of the Turks,
8. To ſuſpend; to refrain. -
Death ! what do'ſt? O hold thy blow !
What thou do'ſt, thou do'ſt not know. Craſhaw,
9. To ſtop 5 to reſtrain. cº
We cannot hold mortality's ſtrong hand. Shakespeare K. john.
Fell, banning hag! inchantreſs, hold thy tongue. Shakeſp.
Men in the midſt of their own blood, and ſo furi-
ouſly affailed, held their hands, contrary to the laws of na-
ture and neceſſity. Bacon's War with Spain.
When ſtraight the people, by no force compell’d,
Nor longer from their inclination held,
Break forth at once. JValler.
Unleſs thou find occaſion, hold thy tongue;
Thyſelf or others, careleſs talk may wrong. Denham.
Hold your laughter, and then divert your fellow-ſervants.
Swift's Directions to the Fºotman.
10. To fix to any condition.
His gracious promiſe you might,
As cauſe had call'd you up, have held him to. Shakespeare Coriol.
1 f. To preſerve; to keep.
Stay but a little; for my cloud of dignity
Is held from falling with ſo weak a wind,
That it will quickly drop: my day is dim. Shakespeare Hen. IV.
12. To confine to a certain ſtate.
The moſt High then ſhewed ſigns for then, and held ſtill the
flood, 'till they were paſſed over. 2 Eſdr. xiii. 14.
13. To detain.
Him God hath raiſed up, having looſed the pains of death,
becauſe it was not poſſible that he ſhould be holden of it. Acłs.
14. To retain; to continue.
Theſe ſeaſons mov’d her ſtar-like huſband's heart;
But ſtill he held his purpoſe to depart. Dryden.
To ſolemnize; to celebrate.
The queen this day here hºld; her parliament,
But little thinks we ſhall be of her council. Shakeſp. H. VI.
He held a feaſt in his houſe, like the feaſt of a king. 1 Sa.
16. To offer; to propoſe.
Chriſtianity came into the world with the greateſt ſimplicity
of thought and language, as well as life and manners, holding
forth nothing but piety, charity, and humility, with the belief
of the Meſſiah and of his kingdom. Temple.
My account is ſo far from interfering with Moſes, that it
holds forth a natural and unforced interpretation of his ſenſe.
- J/codward's Natural Hiſtory.
17. To conſerve; not to violate.
Her huſband heard it, and held his peace. Numb. xxx. 7.
She ſaid, and held her peace: AEneas went,
Unknowing whom the ſacred ſibyl meant. Dryden's 4ºn.
18. To manage; to handle intelle&amp;tually.
Some in their diſcourſe deſire rather commendation of wit,
in being able to hold all arguments, than of judgment in diſ-
cerning what is true. Bacon, Eſſay 33.
19. To maintain. -
Whereupon they alſo made engines againſt their engines,
and he'd them battle a long ſeaſon. I Mac. vi. 52.
2c. To form; to plan.
The Phariſees went out, and held a counſel againſt him.
Aſat. xii. 14.
5
21. To carry on; to continue.
He came to the land's end, where he holding his courſe, in a
narrow paſſage towards the Weſt, for the ſpace of divers days,
did at length peaceably paſs through the ſtraits. Abbot.
22. To Hold forth. To offer to exhibit.
Obſerve the connection of theſe ideas in the propo-
ſitions, which thoſe books hold fºrth and pretend to teach
as truths. Locke.
23. Tº Holp in. To reſtrain; to govern by the bridle.
I have lately ſold my nag, and honeſtly told his greateſt
fault, which is, that he became ſuch a lover of liberty that I
could ſcarce hold him in. Swift.
24. To Hold in. To reſtrain in general.
Theſe mens haſtineſs the warier ſort of you doth not com-
mend; ye wiſh they had held themſelves longer in, and not ſo
dangerouſly flown abroad. Hooker, Preface.
25. To Hold off. To keep at a diſtance.
Although 'tis fit that Caſio have his place;
Yet if you pleaſe to hold him off a while,
You ſhall by that perceive him. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
The objećt of fight doth ſtrike upon the pupil of the eye
directly, without any interception; whereas the cave of the
ear doth hold off the ſound a little from the organ. Bacon.
I am the better acquainted with you for abſence, as men
are with themſelves for afflićtion: abſence does but he'd off
a friend, to make one ſee him truly. Pope to Swift.
26. To Hold on. To continue; to protračt; to puſh forward.
They took Barbaroſla, holding on his courſe to Africk, who
brought great fear upon the country. Knºlley's Hi/. of the Turks.
If the obedience challenged were indeed due to theſe laws,
then did our brethren both begin the quarrel and hold it on.
Sanderſºn's judgment in one ſiew.
27. To Hold out. To extend; to ſtretch forth.
The king held out to Eſther the golden ſceptre that was in
his hand. Eih. v. 2.
28. To Hold out. To offer; to propoſe.
Fortune holds out theſe to you, as rewards. Ben. jºhnſºn.
29. To Hold out. To continue to do or ſuffer.
He cannot long hold out theſe pangs,
Th’ inceſſant care and labour of his mind. Shakſ. H. IV.
30. To Hold up. To raiſe aloft.
I ſhould remember him: does he not hold up his head, as it
were; and ſtrut in his gait? Shakesp. Merry Iſive ºf Iliadºr.
The hand of the Almighty viſibly held up, and prepared to
take vengeance. Locke.
31. Tº Hold up. To ſuſtain; to ſupport.
There is no man at once either excellently good or extreme-
!y evil, but grows either as he holds himſelf up in virtue, or
lets himſelf ſlide to viciouſneſs. Sidney.
It followeth, that all which they do in this ſort proceeded,
originally from ſome ſuch agent as knoweth, appointeth, hol-
eth up, and actually frameth the ſame. Hazker, b. i. ſ. 3.
The time miſorder'd doth in common ſenſe
Crowd us, and cruſh us to this monſtrous form,
To hold our ſafety up. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
And ſo ſucceſs of miſchief ſhall be born,
And heir from heir ſhall hold his quarrel up. Shºeſ. HIV.
Thoſe princes have held up their ſovereignty beſt, which
have been ſparing in thoſe grants. Davies on Ireland.
We have often made one conſiderably thick piece of marble
take and hold up another, having purpoſely cauſed their flat
ſurfaces to be carefully ground and poliſhed. Boyle.
Then do not ſtrike him dead with a denial,
But hold him up in life, and cheer his ſoul
With the faint glimmering of a doubtful hope. Addison Cats.
To Hold. v. n. - -
1. To ſtand; to be right; to be without exception.
To ſay that ſimply an argument, taken from man's autho-
rity, doth hold no way, neither affirmatively nor negatively,
is hard. Hoºker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
This holdeth not in the ſea-coaſts, becauſe the vapour of the
ſea, without ſhowers, doth refreſh. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The laſting of plants is moſt in thoſe that are largéſ of
body as oak, elm, and cheſtnut, and this holdeth in trees;
but in herbs it is often contrary. Bacon's Natnral Hi/ory.
When the religion formerly received is rent by diſcords,
and when the holineſs of the profeſſors of religion is decayed,
and full of ſcandal, and withal the times be ſtupid, ignorant,
and barbarous, you may doubt the ſpringing up of a new ſect;
if then alſo there ſhould ariſe any extravagant and ſtrange
ſpirit, to make himſelf author thereof; all which points held
when Mahomet publiſhed his law. Bacon, Eſſay 59.
Nothing can be of greater uſe and defence to the mind than
the diſcovering of theſe colours, ſhewing in what caſes they
hold, and in what they deceive. Bacon.
Where outward force conſtrains, the ſentence hold, ;
But who conſtrains me? Milton.
So doth he deal with the teſtimonies of the fathers, let them
be never ſo expreſs againſt all ſorts of prayers and invocations:
they hold only of ſuch a ſort of prayer. Stillingfeet.
The reaſons given by them againſt the worſhip of images,
will equally hºld againſt the worſhip of images amongſt
Chriſtians. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſc. on Rom. I...
None of his ſolutions will hold by mere mechanicks. A ſore.
This unſeen agitation of the minute parts will hold in light
and ſpirituous liquors. Bºyle.
It hold; in all operative principles whatſoever, but eſpecially
in ſuch as relate to morality; in which not to proceed, is cer-
tainly to go backward. South's Sermons.
The drift of this figure hºld good in all the parts of the
creation. * . 1. Eºrange.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O L
H O L
º
The proverb holds, that to be wife and love,
Is hardly granted to the gods above. Dryden's Fables.
As if th’ experiment were made to hºld
For baſe produćtion, and reječt the gold. Dryden.
This remark, I muſt acknowledge, is not ſo proper for the
colouring as the deſign; but it will hold for both. Dryden.
Our author offers no reaſon; and when any body does, we
fhall ſee whether it will hold or no. Locke.
The rule holds in land as well as all other commodities, Loc.
This ſeems to hold in moſt caſes. Addiſon's Spediator.
The analogy holds good, and preciſely keeps to the ſame pro-
perties in the planets and comets. Cheyne.
Sanétorius's experiment of perſpiration, being to the other
ſecretion as five to three, does not hold in this country, ex-
cept in the hotteſt time of Summer. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
In words, as faſhions, the ſame rule will hold;
Alike fantaſtick, if too new or old. Pope on Criticiſm.
2. To continue unbroken or unſubdued.
Our force by land hath nobly held. Shakeſpeare.
3. To laſt; to endure. -
We ſee, by the peeling of onions, what a holding ſubſtance
the ſkin is. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Never any man was yet ſo old,
But hop'd his life one Winter more might hold. Denham.
4. To continue.
He did not hold in this mind long. L’Eſtrange.
5. To refrain.
His dauntleſs heart would fain have held
From weeping, but his eyes rebell’d. Dryden.
6. To ſtand up for ; to adhere.
Through envy of the devil came death into the world, and
they that do hold of his ſide do find it. Wiſd. ii. 24.
They muſt, if they hold to their principles, agree that things
had their produćtion always as now they have. Hale.
When Granada for your uncle held,
You was by us reſtor'd, and he expell’d.
- Numbers hold
With the fair freckled king and beard of gold:
So vigºrous are his eyes, ſuch rays they caſt, ~
So prominent his eagle's beak is plac'd. Dryden's Fables.
7. To be dependent on.
The other two were great princes, though holding of him;
men of giant-like both hugeneſs and force. Sidney, b. ii.
The mother, if the houſe holds of our lady, had rather,
yea and will, have her ſon cunning and bold, in making him
to live trimly. Aſtham’s Schoºlmaſter.
The great barons had not only great numbers of knights,
but even petty barons hºlding under them. Temple.
My crown is abſolute, and holds of none. Dryden.
8. To derive right. *
'Tis true, from force the nobleſt title ſprings;
I therefore hold from that which firſt made kings. Dryden.
9. To Hold forth. To harangue; to ſpeak in publick; to ſet
forth publickly.
A petty conjurer, telling fortunes, held forth in the market-
place. L'Eſtrange's Fables.
lo. To Hot D in. To reſtrain one's ſelf.
I am full of the fury of the Lord: I am weary with holding
in. jer. vi. I 1.
11. To Hold in. To continue in luck.
A duke, playing at hazard, held in a great many hands to-
gether. Swift.
I 2. #. Hold off. To keep at a diſtance without cloſing with
Oilers.
Theſe are intereſts important enough, and yet we muſt be
wooed to conſider them; nay, that does not prevail neither,
but with a perverſe coyneſs we hold off. Decay of Piety.
13. To Hold on. To continue; not to be interrupted.
The trade held on for many years after the biſhops became
Proteſtants; and ſome of their names are ſtill remembered
with infamy, on account of enriching their families by ſuch
ſacrilegious alienations. Swift.
14. To Hold on. To proceed.
He he'd on, however, 'till he was upon the very point of
breaking. L'Eſtrange.
15. To Hold out. To laſt; to endure.
Before thoſe dews that form manna come upon trees in the
valleys, they diſſipate, and cannot hold out. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
As there are mountebanks for the natural body, ſo are there
mountebanks for the politick body; men that perhaps have
been lucky in two or three experiments, but want the grounds
of ſcience, and therefore cannot hold out. Bacon's Eſſays.
Truth, fidelity, and juſtice, are a ſure way of thriving,
and will hold out, when all fraudulent arts and devices will
fail. Tillºtſon's Sermons.
By an extremely exact regimen a conſumptive perſon may
"hold out for years, if the ſymptoms are not violent, Arbuthnot.
16. To Hold out. Not to yield; not to be ſubdued.
The great maſter, leaving a ſufficient number of ſoldiers
for the keeping of that fort, went with the reſt of his company
8
Dryden.
to a place where the Spaniards, fore charged by Achimetes,
had much ado to hold out. Knºlles's Hiſtory of the 7trº.
You think it ſtrange a perſon, obſequious to thoſe he loves,
ſhould hold out ſo long againſt importúnity. Bºyle.
Nor could the hardeſt irºn hºld out
Againſt his blows. Hudlºras.
I would cry now, my eyes grow womaniſh;
But yet my heart holds ºut. 19nyden's Spaniſh Fryar.
The citadel of Milan has he'd out formerly, after the con-
queſt of the reſt of the dutchy. Addison an Italy.
- As to the holding out againſt ſo many alterations of ſtate,
it ſometimes proceeds from principles. Cºllier ºn Pride.
Pronounce your thoughts: äre they ſtill fixt
To hold it out, and fight it to the laſt :
Qr are your hearts ſubdu'd at length, and wrought
By time and ill ſucceſs to a ſubmiſſion : Addison's Catz.
17. To Hold together. To be joined. -
Thoſe old Gothick caſtles, made at ſeveral times, hºld tº-
gether only, as it were, by rags and patches. Dryd. Diſ; ſnoy.
18. To Hold tºgether. To remain in union.
Even outlaws and robbers, who break with all the world
beſides, muſt keep faith amongſt themſelves, or elſe they can-
not hold together. Lºcke.
19. To Hold up. To ſupport himſelf.
All the wife ſayings and advices which philoſophers could
muſter up to this purpoſe, have helped only to ſupport ſome
few ſtout and obſtinate minds, which, without the aſſiſtance
of philoſophy, could have held up pretty well of themſelves.
Tillºtſon, Sermon 5.
20. To Hold up. Not to be foul weather.
Though nice and dark the point appear,
Quoth Ralph, it may hold up and clear.
21. Tº Hold up. To continue the ſame ſpecd.
When two ſtart into the world together, the ſucceſs of the
firſt ſeems to preſs upon the reputation of the latter; for why
could not he ſold up Collier ºf Envy.
Hold has the appearance of an interjećtion; but is the
imperative mood. Forbear; ſtop; be ſtill.
Hold, ho! lieutenant—fir–Montano Gentlemen,
Have you forgot all ſenſe of place and duty
The general ſpeaks to you—hold, hold, for ſhame | Saº.
Hold, hold! are all thy empty wiſhes ſuch -
A good old woman would have ſaid as much. Dryde's P. ſ.
Hol. D. m. ſ. [rom the verb.]
1. The act of ſeizing; gripe; graſp; ſeizure.
Thoſe bards, Caeſar writeth, delivered no certain truth of
anything; neither is there any certain hºld to be taken of any
antiquity which is received by tradition. Speºſer on Ireland.
The wits of the multitude are ſuch, that many things they
cannot lay hold on at once. Hºr, Dedication.
Uzzah put forth his hand to the aſk of God, and took loºd
of it; for the oxen ſhook it. 2 Sq. vi. 6.
This is to give him liberty and power:
Rather thou ſhould'ſt lay hold upon him, ſend him
To deſerv'd death, and a juſt puniſhment. Ben. Johnſ. Catil.
Let but them
Find courage to lay hold on this occaſion. Milt. Agoni/?rs.
The devil himſelf, when let looſe upon Job, could not
tranſport that patient good man beyond his temper, or make
him quit his hold. L'Aſirange.
He ſeiz'd the ſhining bough with griping hºld,
And rent away with eaſe the ling’ring gold. Dryden's ºn.
The head is divided into four fingers bending forwards, and
one oppoſite to them bending backwards, and of greater ſtrength
than any of them ſingly, which we call the thumb, to join with
them ſeverally or united, whereby it is fitted to lay hºld of
obječts of any ſize or quantity. Ray on the C cat.cº.
Yet then, from all my grief, O Lord,
Thy mercy ſet me free,
Whilſt, in the confidence of pray’r,
My ſoul took hold on thee. Addison's Sºciator.
We are ſtrangely backward to lay hold of this ſafe, this only
method of cure. - Atterlury's Serm:::::.
He kept his hold,
Nor loſt 'till beauty was decay’d and old,
And love was by poſſeſſion pall'd and cold.
2. Something to be held; ſupport.
If a man be upon an high place, without rails or good hold,
he is ready to fall. Bacon's Yatıra. Hiſtºry.
3. Catch; power of ſeizing or keeping.
The law hath yet another hold on you. Shakespeare.
Let it conſiſt with ſuch a man's intereſt and ſafety to wrong
you, and then it will be impoſſible you can have any hºld upon
him, becauſe there is nothing left to give him a check, or to
put in the balance againſt his profit. Swift.
4. Priſon; place of cuſtody.
They lay him in hill, becauſe it was not declared what
was to be done with him. Hooker, b. iii.
The priſoner to his hold retir’d,
His troop with cqual emulation fir’d,
Hadilraſ, p. ii.
Granville. ;
Dryºſ.
4. Power;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">|:-----
º
H O L
5. Power; influence.
Rural recreations abroad, and books at home, are the inno-
cent pleaſures of a man who is early wiſe ; and gives fortune
no more h li of him than of neceſſity he muſt. Dryden.
Fear is that paſſion which hath the greateſt power over us,
and by which God and his laws take the ſureſt hold of us. Till.
6. Cuſtody. -
King Richard, he is in the mighty hºld
Of Bolinbroke. Shakeſpeare's Richard II.
7. Hold of a Ship. All that part which lies between the keel-
ſon and the lower deck. Harris.
Now a ſea into the hold was got,
Wave upon wave another ſea had wrought. Dryden's juv.
8. A lurking place: as, the hold of a wild beaſt or dear.
9. A fortified place; a fort.
It was his policy to leave no hold behind him; but make all
plain and waſte. Spenſer.
Hö'LDER. m. ſ. [from hºld.]
1. One that-holds or gripes any thing in his hand.
The makers and hºlders of plows are wedded to their own
particular way. Mºrtimer's Husbandry.
2. A tenant; one that holds land under another.
In times paſt not holdings were ſo plentiful, and holders ſo
fearce, as well was the landlord, who could not get one to be
his tenant. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Hold ERFo'RT H. m. ſ. ſho'd and forth.] An haranguer; one
who ſpeaks in publick.
Whence ſome tub holdersforth have made
In powd'ring tubs the richeſt trade. Hudibras, p. iii.
He was confirmed in this opinion upon ſeeing the holder-
frth. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Hold F Ast. m. ſ. [ hold and fºſ!..] Any thing which takes
hold; a catch; a hook. -
The ſeveral ſorts of teeth are furniſhed with holdſ ºff; ſuit-
able to the ſtreſs that they are put to. Ray on the Creation.
Hold IN G. n.ſ.. [from hold.]
1. Tenure; farm.
Hºldings were ſo plentiful, and holders ſo ſcarce, as well
was the landlord who could not get a tenant. Carew.
2. It ſometimes ſignifics the burthen or chorus of a ſong. Hanm.
The holding every man ſhall beat as loud
As his ſtrong ſides can volly. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
Hole. n.ſ.. [hol, Dutch ; pole, Saxon.]
1. A cavity narrow and long, either perpendicular or hori-
zontal. -
The carth had not a hole to hide this decd. Shake?.
Tickling is moſt in the ſoles, and under the arm holes and
ſides. Bacon.
A loadſtone is ſo diſpoſed, that it ſhall draw unto it, on a
reclined plane, a bullet of ſteel, which, as it aſcends near to
the loadſtone, may fall down through ſome hole, and ſo return
to the place whence it began to move. J/ilkins's Dardalus.
There are the tops of the mountains, and under their roots
in holes and caverns the air is often detained. Burnet.
2. A perforation; a ſmall interſtitial vacuity.
Look upon linen that has ſmall holes in it: thoſe holes appear
very black, and men are often deceived in taking holes for ſpots
of ink; and painters, to repreſent holes, make uſe of black.
Boyle on Colours.
3. A cave; a hollow place.
Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
A precious ring, that lightens all the hole. Shakeſpeare.
4. A cell of an animal.
A tortoiſe ſpends all his days in a hole, with a houſe upon his
head. L’Eſtrange.
I have fighted ants with my fingers, and purſued them as
far as another hole, ſtopping all paſſages to their own neſt,
and it was natural for them to fly into the next hole. Addiſon.
5. A mean habitation. Hole is generally uſed, unleſs in ſpeak-
ing of manual works, with ſome degree of diſlike.
When Alexander firſt beheld the face
Of the great cynick, thus he did lament:
How much more happy thou, that art content
To live within this little hole, than I
Who after empire, that vain quarry, fly. Dryde's juven.
6. Some ſubterfuge or ſhift. Ainſw.
Ho'LIDAM. m.ſ. (hºly dame.] Bleſſed lady. Jºanzer.
By my holidam, here comes Catharine. Shakespeare.
Ho'LILY. adv. [from holy. ]
1. Piouſly; with ſančtity.
Thou wouſd'ſt be great,
Art not without ambition ; but without
The illneſs ſhould attend it: what thou would'ſt highly,
That would'ſt thou holily. Shakeſpeare's Aſacbeth.
2. Inviolably; without breach.
Friendſhip, a rare thing in princes, more rare between
princes, that ſo hºly was obſerved to the laſt of thoſe two ex-
Cellent men. Sidney, b. ii.
Ho L INFss. n.ſ. (from holy.] ~
1. Sanctity ; piety; religious goodneſs.
I will not hence and leave my huſband here;
H O Í,
And iſ it doth beſeem your ſºliºſ
To ſeparate the huſband and the wife. Shakespeare Com. of Err.
Religion is rent by diſcords, and the holineſs of the pro-
ſeſſors is decayed, and full of ſcandal. Iacon's Eſſays.
Then in full age, and hoary hilingſ,
Retire, great teacher, to thy promis'd bliſs. Priºr.
We ſee piety and holineſs ridiculed as moroſe ſingularities.
Rogers, Sermon 1 5-
2. The ſtate of being hallowed; dedication to religion.
3. The title of the pope.
I here appeal unto the pope,
To bring my whole cauſe 'fore his holineſs. Shakespeare H. VIII.
His holineſ, has told ſome Engliſh gentlemen, that thoſe of
our nation ſhould have the privileges. Addiſon on Italy. .
Ho'll A. interſ, [hola, French..] A word uſed in calling to any
one at a diſtance.
Liſt, liſt I hear
Some far off hollow break the filent air. Milton.
To Ho'll A. v. n. [from the interjećtion. This word is new
vitiouſly written hollo by the beſt authors: ſometimes hallo.]
To cry out loudly. -
But I will find him when he lies aſleep,
And in his ear I'll holla, Mortimer! Shakeſp. Henry IV.
What halloing and what ſtir is this to-day Shakeſpeare.
Ho'LL AND. m.ſ. Fine linen made in Holland.
Some for the pride of Turkiſh courts deſign'd,
For folded turbants fineſt holland bear. Dryden,
Hollow. adj. [from hole.]
1. Excavated; having a void ſpace within; not ſolid.
It is fortune's uſe
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow -
An age of poverty. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Some ſearch for hollow trees, and fell the woods. Dryden.
He frets, he fumes, he ſtares, he ſtamps the ground;
The hollºw tow’rs with clamours ring around. Dryden.
2. Noiſy, like ſound reverberated from a cavity.
The ſouthern wind,
Now by his hollow whiſtling in the leaves,
Foretels a tempeſt. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
Thence iſſu’d ſuch a blaſt and hollow roar,
As threaten’d from the hinge to heave the door. Drydºn.
3. Not faithful; not ſound; not what one appears.
Who in want a hollow friend doth try,
Directly ſeaſons him his enemy. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Hollow church papiſts are like the roots of nettles, which
themſelves ſting not; but yet they bear all the ſtinging leaves.
Bacon's Ornam. Ratiºn.
He ſeem'd
For dignity compos'd, and high exploit;
But all was falſe and hoſlºw. Milton's Par. Loft, 3. ii.
What could be expected from him, but knotty and crooked
hollow hearted dealings? Howel's Vºcal Forreſt.
The hollºw hearted, diſaffe&amp;ted,
And cloſe malignants are detected. Hudibras, p. iii.
H. 'llow. n.ſ.
1. Cavity; concavity.
I've heard myſelf proclaim’d,
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Eſcap'd the hunt. Shakeſp. King Lear.
I ſuppoſe there is ſome vault or hollow, or iſle, behind the
wall, and ſome paſſage to it. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
Againſt the horſe's fide his ſpear
He throws, which trembles with encloſed fear;
Whilſt from the hollows of his womb proceed
Groans, not his own. Denham.
Himſelf, as in the hollow of his hand,
Holding, obedient to his high command, ~' -
The deep abyſs. Prizr.
2. Cavern; den; hole.
Who art thou, that lately did'ſt deſcend -
Into this gaping hollºw of the carth? Shakespeare. Titus Andronict.
Foreſts grew
Upon the barren hollows, high o'erſhading -
The haunts of ſavage beaſts. Prizr.
2. Pit.
* A fine genius for gardening thought of forming ſuch an un-
fightly hºllºw into ſo uncommon and agreeable a ſcene. Addison
4. Any opening or vacuity. --
He touched the hollow of his thigh. Gen. xxii. 25.
5. Paſſage; canal. -
The little ſprings and rills are conveyed through little chan-
nels into the main hollow of the aqucdućt. Addiſon on Italy.
To Hollow. v. a. [from the noun..] To make hollow; to
CXCaVatC.
Trees, rudely hollow'd, did the waves ſuſtain,
'Ere ſhips in triumph plow'd the watry plain. Dryd. Ovid.
Multitudes were employed in the ſinking of wells, the
digging of trenches, and the hºllºwing of trees. Speciator.
To fio'llow. v. n. [This is written by neglect of etymology
for £ola. See Holl A.] To ſhout ; to hoot. Th:
.S<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O L
H o M
º
:
riſ.
This unſeen judge will wait, and in your ear
Will hollow rebel, tyrant, murderer. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
I paſs for a diſaffected perſon and a murderer, for no other
reaſon but becauſe I do not hoot and hollow, and make a noiſe.
Addiſon's Spectator.
He with his hounds comes hollowing from the ſtable,
Makes love with nods, and kneels beneath a table. Pope.
Ho'llowLY. adv. [from hollow.]
1. With cavities.
2. Unfaithfully; inſincerely; diſhoneſtly.
O earth, bear witneſs,
And crown what I profeſs with kind event,
If I ſpeak true; if hollºwly, invert
What beſt is boaded me, to miſchief! Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
You ſhall arraign your conſcience,
And try your penitence, if it be ſound, , ,
Or hºllowy put on. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Ho'llow Ness. n.ſ.. [from hºllow.] -
1. Cavity; ſtate of being hollow.
If you throw a ſtone or a dart, they give no ſound; no more
do bullets, except they happen to be a little hollowed in the
caſting, which hollowneſ; penneth the air. Bacºn's Natur. Hiſł.
I have ſeen earth taken up by a ſtrong wind, ſo that there
remained great empty hollowneſs in the place. Hakewill.
An heap of ſand or fine powder will ſuffer no hollowneſ,
within them, though they be dry ſubſtances. Burnet.
2. Deceit ; inſincerity; treachery.
Thy youngeſt daughter does not love thee leaſt;
Nor are thoſe empty hearted, whoſe low ſound
Reverbs no hollowneſs. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
People, young and raw, and ſoft natured, think it an eaſy
thing to gain love, and reckon their own friendſhip a ſure
price of any man's : but when experience ſhall have ſhewn
them the hardneſs of moſt hearts, the hollowneſs of others, and
the baſeneſs and ingratitude of almoſt all, they will then find
that a friend is the gift of God, and that he only who made
hearts can unite them. South's Sermons.
Hollow Root. m. ſ. [hollow and root.] A plant. Ainſworth.
Ho'LLY. n. ſ. [poleyn, Saxon.] A plant.
The leaves are ſet about the edges with long, ſharp, ſtiff
prickles: the berries are ſmall, round, and generally of a red
colour, containing four triangular ſtriated ſeeds in each. Of
this tree there are ſeveral ſpecies; ſome variegated in the
leaves, ſome with yellow berries, and ſome with white. Mill.
Faireſt bloſſoms drop with every blaſt;
But the brown beauty will like hollies laſt. Gay.
Some to the holly hedge
Neſtling repair, and to the thicket ſome;
Some to the rude protećtion of the thorn. Thomſºn's Spring.
Ho'LLYHock. n.ſ. [polipoc, Saxon, commonly called holyoak..]
Roſemallow.
It is in every reſpect larger than the common mallow : its
leaves are rougher, and its flowers, which are in ſome ſpecies
double, adhere cloſely to the ſtalk. They flower in July. Mill.
Holyocks far exceed poppies for their durableneſs, and are
very ornamental. Mortimer's Husbandry.
r
#...}ºſ Plants. Ainſworth.
Holm E. m. ſ.
1. Holme or howme, whether jointly or ſingly, comes from the
Saxon polme, a river iſland; or if the place be not ſuch, the
ſame word ſignifies alſo a hill, or mountain. Gibſon's Camden.
2. The ilex; the evergreen oak.
Under what tree did'ſt thou take them companying toge-
ther ? who anſwered, under a holm tree. * Suſ. lviii.
The carver holme, the maple ſeldom inward ſound. Spenſ.
Holocaust. n.ſ. [3AGP and xzío..] A burnt ſacrifice; a ſa-
crifice of which the whole was conſumed by fire, and nothing
retained by the offerer.
Iſaac carried the wood for the ſacrifice, which being an
h locauſ', or burnt offering, to be conſumed unto aſhes, we
cannot well conceive a burthen for a boy. Brown's Vulg. Err.
Let the eye behold no evil thing, and it is made a ſacrifice;
let the tongue ſpeak no filthy word, and it becomes an obla-
tion; let the hand do no unlawful ačtion, and you render it
a halocauſt. - Ray on the Creation.
Eumenes cut a piece from every part of the vićtim, and by
this he made it an holocauſ', or an entire ſacrifice. Broomé.
HologRAPH. m. ſ [ćAG” and 7.6% to J. This word is uſed in
the Scottiſh law to denote a deed written altogether by the
granter's own hand.
Holp. The old preterite and participle paſſive of help.
His great love, ſharp as his ſpur, hath holp him
To's home before us. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Ho'LPEN. The old participle paſſive of help.
In a long trunk the ſound is holpen, though both the mouth
and the ear be a handful from the trunk; and ſomewhat more
helpen when the hearer is near, than when the ſpeaker. Bacon.
Ho'LSTER. m.ſ. [peolrten, Saxon, a hiding place..] A caſe for
a horſeman's piſtol.
In’s ruſty hoſters put what meat
Into his hoſe he cou’d not get. Butler.
Holt, whether at the beginning or ending of the name of any
place, ſignifies that it is or hath been woody, from the Saxon
pole, a wood ; or ſometimes poſſibly from the Saxon pol, i. e.
hollow, eſpecially when the name ends in tun or dun. Gibſºn.
HO'LY. adj. Ibalº, Saxon; heyſigh, Dutch, from pal, healthy,
or in a ſtate of ſalvation J
1. Good; pious; religious.
See where his grace ſtands 'tween two clergymen
And ſee a book of prayer in his hand,
True ornaments to know a holy man. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Doubtleſs
With joy he will embrace you; for he's honourable,
And, doubling that, moſt holy. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
2. Hallowed; conſecrated to divine uſe.
State, holy or unhallow'd, what of that? Shakespeare Hen. VI.
Bare was his hoary head; one holy hand
Held forth his laurel crown, and one his ſceptre.
3. Pure; immaculate.
Common ſenſe could tell them, that the good God could
not be pleaſed with anything cruel; nor the moſt holy God
with any thing filthy and unclean. South's Sermons.
4. Sacred.
An evil ſoul producing holy witneſs,
Is like a villain with a ſmiling cheek. Shakespeare March. of Ven.
He has deſerv'd it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus' car. Shakeſpeare's Ant, and Cleopatra.
Holy-GHost. m. ſ. [pali; and 3art, Saxon.] The third per-
ſon of the adorable Trinity.
If ſtrength of perſuaſion be the light which muſt guide us,
I aſk, how ſhall any one diſtinguiſh the inſpirations of the
Holy-ghoſt P Locke.
Ho'LY-THURSDAY. m. ſ. The day on which the aſcenſion of
our Saviour is commemorated, ten days before Whitſuntide.
Ho'LY-week. n.ſ. The week before Eaſter.
Ho'LYDAY. n.ſ. (holy and day.]
1. The day of ſome eccleſiaſtical feſtival.
2. Anniverſary feaſt. -
This vićtory was ſo welcome unto the Perſians, that in
memorial thereof they kept that day as one of their ſolemn
boydays for many years after. Knole.’s Hiſtory of the Turks.
Rome's holydays you tell, as if a gueſt
With the old Romans you were wont to feaſt.
3. A day of gayety and joy.
He writes verſes, he ſpeaks holyday, he ſmells April and
May; he will carry it. Shakespeare AMerry Wives of ſpºndſºr.
What, have I'ſcaped love-letters in the holyday time of my
beauty, and am I now a ſubječt for them : Shakeſpeare.
4. A time that comes ſeldom.
Courage is but a holyday kind of virtue, to be ſeldom exer-
ciſed. Dryden's Faber, Dedication.
HO'MAGE. m. ſ [hommage, French; homagium, low Latin.]
1. Service paid and fealty profeſſed to a ſovereign or ſuperior
lord.
Dryden.
Waller.
Call my ſovereign yours,
And do him homage as obedient ſubječts. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
The chieſs, in a ſolemn manner, did their homages, and
made their oaths of fidelity to the earl marſhal. Pavi, º,
2. Obeiſance; reſpect paid by external action.
The gods great mother, when her heav'nly race
Do homage to her.
A tuft of daiſies on a flow'ry lay
They ſaw, and thitherward they bent their way;
To this both knights and dames their homage made,
Denham.
And due obeiſance to the daiſy paid. Dryden.
Go, go, with homage yon proud vićtors meet!
Go, lie like dogs beneath your maſters feet. Dryden.
To Homage. v. a. [from the noun..] To reverence by exter-
nal action; to pay honour to ; to profeſs fealty.
Ho'MAGER. n.ſ. ſ hommager, Fr. from homage. J One who
holds by homage of ſome ſuperior lord.
As I'm Egypt's queen,
Thou bluſheſt, Antony; and that blood of thine
Is Caeſar's hºmager. Shakeſp. Ant, and Cleºpatra.
His ſubjećts, traytors, are received by the duke of Bretagne
his homager. - Bacon's Henry VII.
HOME. n.ſ. [pam, Saxon.]
1. His own houſe; the private dwelling.
I’m now from home, and out of that proviſion
Which ſhall be needful for your entertainment. Shakeſpeare.
Home is the ſacred refuge of our life,
Secur'd from all approaches but a wife. Dryden.
When Heółor went to ſee
His virtuous wife, the fair Andromache,
He found her not at home; for ſhe was gone. Dryden.
Thoſe who have homes, when home they do repair,
To a laſt lodging calls their wand'ring friends. Dryden.
2. His own country.
How can tyrants ſafely govern home,
Unleſs abroad they purchaſe great alliance? Shakeſp H. VI.
Their determination is to return to their homes, and to
trouble you no more, Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
11 L With
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O M
H O M
º
ºº
With honour to his home let Theſeus ride,
With love to friend. Dryden's Fables.
At home the hateful names of parties ceaſe,
And factious ſouls are weary'd into peace. Dryden.
They who paſs through a foreign country, towards their
native home, do not uſually give up themſelves to the pleaſures
of the place. Atterbury's Sermont.
3. The place of conſtant reſidence.
Flandria, by plenty made the hºme of war,
Shall weep her crime, and bow to Charles reſtor'd. Prior.
4. United to a ſubſtantive, it ſignifies domeſtick.
Let the exportation of home commodities be more in value
than the importation of foreign. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
How E. adv. [from the noun.]
1. To one's own habitation.
One of Adam's children in the mountains lights on a glit-
tering ſubſtance; home he carries it to Adam, who finds it to
be hard, to have a bright yellow colour, and exceeding great
weight. Locke.
2. To one's own country.
3. Cloſe to one's own breaſt or affairs.
He that encourages treaſon lays the foundation of a doc-
trine, that will come home to himſelf. L’Eſtrange.
This is a conſideration that comes home to our intereſt. Addison
Theſe conſiderations, propoſed in general terms, I am ſure,
madam, you will, by particular application, bring home to
your own concern. //ake's Preparation {. Death.
4. To the point deſigned; to the utmoſt ; cloſely ; fully.
Crafty enough either to hide his faults, or never to ſhew
them, but when they might pay home. Sidney, b. ii.
In fell motion,
With his prepared ſword he charges home
My unprovided body. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
A loyal ſir -
To him thou follow'ſt: I will pay thy graces
Home both in word and deed. Shakeſpeare's Tempſ?.
Her cauſe and yours -
I'll perfect him withal; and he ſhall bring you
Before the duke, and to the head of Angelo
Accuſe him home and home. Shakeſp. Meaſure for Meaſure.
Men of age objećt too much, adventure too little, and ſel-
dom drive buſineſs home to the full period; but content them-
ſelves with a mediocrity of ſucceſs. Bacon.
That cometh up home to the buſineſs, and taketh off the
objećtion clearly. Sanderſon.
Break through the thick array
Of his throng'd legions, and charge home upon him. Addison
He makes choice of ſome piece of morality; and in order
to preſs this home, he makes leſs uſe of the force of reaſoning.
Pope's View of Epick Poems.
I can only refer the reader to the authors themſelves, who
ſpeak very home to the point. Atterbury's Serm. Preface.
5. United to a ſubſtantive, it implies force and efficacy.
Poiſon may be falſe;
The hºme thruſt of a friendly ſword is ſure. Dryden.
I am ſorry to give him ſuch home thruſts; for he lays him-
ſelf ſo open, and uſes ſo little art to avoid them, that I muſt
either do nothing, or expoſe his weakneſs. Stillingfeet.
HoME Bo'RN. adj. [home and born.]
1. Native; natural.
Though to be thus elemented, arm
Theſe creatures from homeborn intrinſick harm. Donne.
2. Domeſtick; not foreign.
Num’rous bands
With homeborn lyes, or tales from foreign lands. Pope.
Ho'ME BRE D. adj. [home and bred.]
1. Native; natural.
God hath taken care to anticipate every man, to draw him
early into his church, before other competitors, homebred luſts,
or vicious cuſtoms of the world, ſhould be able to pretend to
him. Hammond on Fundamentals.
2. Not poliſhed by travel; plain; rude; artleſs; uncultivated.
Only to me two homebred youths belong. Dryden's juven.
3. Domeſtick; not foreign.
But if of danger, which hereby doth dwell,
And homebred evil, ye deſire to hear,
I can you tydings tell.
This once happy land,
By homebred fury rent, long groan'd. Phillips.
Ho'ME FELT, adj. [home and felt.] Inward; private.
Yet they in pleaſing ſlumber lull'd the ſenſe,
And in ſweet madneſs robb’d it of itſelf;
But ſuch a ſacred and homefelt delight,
Such ſober certainty of waking bliſs,
I never heard 'till now. AMilton,
Happy next him who to theſe ſhades retires,
Whom nature charms, and whom the muſe inſpires,
Whom humblerjoys of homefelt quiet pleaſe,
Succeſſive ſtudy, exerciſe, and eaſe. Pope.
Ho'MELILY, adv, [from homey..] Rudely; inelegantly.
Ho'MELINESS. m. ſ. [from homey. ] Plainneſs; rudeneſs;
coarſeneſs.
Fairy Queen, cant, i.
Homer has opened a great field of raillery to men of more
delicacy than greatneſs of genius, by the homelineſs of ſome of
his ſentiments. Addiſon's Spediator.
Ho'MELY. adj. [from home.] Plain; homeſpun , not elegant;
not beautiful; not fine; coarſe; rude.
Each place handſome without curioſity, and homely without
loathſomeneſs. Sidney.
Within this wood, out of a rock did riſe
A ſpring of water, mildly tumbling down;
Whereto approached not in any wiſe
The homely ſhepherd, nor the ruder clown. Spenſer.
Like rich hangings in an homely houſe,
So was his will in his old feeble body. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Be plain, good ſon, and homely in thy drift: , ,
Riddling confeſſion finds but riddling ſhrift. Shakeſpeare.
Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits. Shakeſpeare.
Our ſtomachs will make what's homely ſavoury. Shakeſp.
It is for homely features to keep home;
They had their name thence. Milton.
It is obſerved by ſome, that there is none ſo homely but
loves a looking-glaſs. South's Sermons.
Their homely fare diſpatch'd, the hungry band
Invade their trenchers next. Dryden's An, b. vii.
Now Strephon daily entertains
His Chloe in the homeli'ſ ſtrains. Swift.
Homely perſons, the more they endeavour to adorn them-
ſelves, the more they expoſe the defects they want to hide. Clar.
Ho'MELY. adv. Plainly; coarſely; rudely.
Thus like the god his father, homely dreſt,
He ſtrides into the hall a horrid gueſt. Dryden's AFn.
Ho'Melyn, n.ſ. A kind of fiſh. Ainſworth.
Hom EMA'be. adj. [home and made.] Made at home; not
manufactured in foreign parts.
A tax laid on your native produćt, and homemade commo-
dities, makes them yield leſs to the firſt ſeller. Locke.
Ho MER. n.ſ. A meaſure of about three pints.
An homer of barley-ſeed ſhall be valued at fifty ſhekels of
ſilver. - Lev. xxvii. 16.
Ho’MESPUN. adj. [home and ſun.]
I. Spun or wrought at home; not made by regular manufac-
turers.
Inſtead of homeſpun coifs were ſeen
Good pinners, edg'd with colberteen. Swift.
2. Not made in foreign countries. -
He appeared in a ſuit of Engliſh broad-cloath, very plain,
but rich: every thing he wore was ſubſtantial, honeſt, home-
ſpun ware. Addiſon,
3. Plain; coarſe; rude; homely; inelegant.
They ſometimes put on, when they go aſhore, long ſleeve-
leſs coats of homeſpun cotton. Sandys's Travels.
We ſay, in our hºmeſpun Engliſh proverb, He killed two
birds with one ſtone; pleaſed the emperor, by giving him the
reſemblance of his anceſtors, and gave him ſuch a reſemblance
as was not ſcandalous in that age. Dryden’s AEn. Dedicat.
Our homeſpun authors muſt forſake the field,
And Shakeſpeare to the ſoft Scarlatti yield. Addiſon.
Ho MESPU'N. m. ſ. A coarſe, inelegant, rude, untaught, ruſtick
Inan.
What hempen homeſpuns have we ſwaggering here,
So near the cradle of the fairy queen? Shakeſpeare.
Ho'M EST ALL. }": ſpam and rcebe, Saxon.] The place of
Ho'MEstEAD. § the houſe.
Both houſe and homeſtead into ſeas are born,
And rocks are from their old foundations torn. Dryden.
Ho'MEwARD. }*: [ pam and peanb, Saxon. J Towards
Ho'MEwARDs. $ home; towards the native place; towards
the place of reſidence.
Then Urania homeward did ariſe,
Leaving in pain their well-fed hungry eyes. Sidney.
My affairs -
Do even drag me homeward. Shakeſp. Winter’s Tale.
Since ſuch love's natural ſtation is, may ſtill
My love deſcend, and journey down the hill,
Not panting after growing beauties; ſo
I ſhall ebb on with them who homeward go. Donne.
Look homeward, angel now, and melt with ruth; -
And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapleſs youth! Milton.
Like a long team of ſnowy ſwans on high,
Which clap their wings, and cleave the liquid ſky,
Which homeward from their wat'ry paſtures born,
They fing, and Aſia's lakes their notes return. Dryd. Æn.
What now remains,
But that once more we tempt the wat'ry plains, -
And, wand'ring homewards, ſeek our ſafety hence. Dryden.
Ho'MIcid E. n.ſ.. [homicide, French ; homicidium, Latin.]
1. Murder; manquelling, -
The apoſtles command to abſtain from blood: conſtrue this
according to the law of nature, and it will ſeem, that homicide
only is forbidden; but conſtrue it in reference to the law of the
Jews, about which the queſtion was, and it ſhall eaſily appear
to have a clean other ſenſe, and a truer, when we expound. it
of eating, and not of ſhedding blood, Hººker, b. iv.
2. Deſtruction.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O N
º
:
º
2, Deſtruction. In the following lines it is not proper.
What wonder is't that black detračtion thrives |
The homicide of names is leſs than lives. Dryden.
3. [Homicide, Fr. homicida, Lat.] A murderer; a manſlayer.
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my ſleep,
To undertake the death of all the world,
So might I live one hour in your ſweet boſom.
—If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
Theſe nails ſhould rend that beauty from my cheeks. Shakespeare
Hećtor comes, the homicide, to wield
His conqu'ring arms, with corps to ſtrew the field. Dryden.
Homici'DAL. adj. [from homicide..] . Murderous; bloody.
The troop forth iſſuing from the dark receſs,
With homicidal rage, the king oppreſs. Pope's Odſey.
Homile"ric Al. adj. Löpixnrixò;..] Social; converſible.
His life was holy, and, when he had leiſure for retirements,
ſevere: his virtues aétive chiefly, and homiletical; not thoſe
lazy ſullen ones of the cloyſter. Atterbury.
Ho'Mily. n.ſ.. [homilie, French; dºx{2.] Aidiſcourſe read to
a congregation. -
Homilies were a third kind of readings uſual in former times;
a moſt commendable inſtitution, as well then to ſupply the
caſual, as now the neceſſary defe&amp;t of ſermons. Booker.
What tedious homily of love have you wearied your pa-
riſhioners withal, and never cried have patience, good people.
Shakeſpeare's As you like it.
If we ſurvey the homilies of the ancient church, we ſhall
diſcern that, upon feſtival days, the ſubject of the homily was
conſtantly the buſineſs of the day. Hammond's Fundamentals.
HOMOGE'NEAL. Uad. [homogene, Fr. Guoysvºs.] Having
HOMOGE/NEOUS. } the ſame nature or principles; ſuitable
to each other.
The means of redućtion, by the fire, is but by congrega-
tion of homogeneal parts. Bacon's Phyſ. Rem.
Ice is a ſimilary body, and homogeneous concretion, whoſe
material is properly water. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
An homogeneous maſs of one kind is eaſily diſtinguiſhable
from any other; gold from iron, ſulphur from alum, and ſo
of the reſt. Woodward’s Natural Hiſtory.
The light, whoſe rays are all alike refrangible, I call fimple,
hºmogeneal, and ſimilar; and that whoſe rays are ſome more
refrangible than others, I call compound, heterogeneal, and
diſſimilar. Newton's Opt.
HoMoge's EALNess. ) n. ſ. [from homogeneouſ, or homogeneal.]
Homogen E(ITY. } Participation of the ſame principles or
Homoge’Neousness. ) nature; ſimilitude of kind.
The mixtures acquire a greater degree of fluidity and ſimi-
larity, or homogeneity of parts. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Upon this ſuppoſition of only different diameters, it is im-
poſſible to account for the homogeneity or ſimilarity of the ſe-
cerned liquors. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
Ho'Mogen Y. n.ſ. [3,07syſz.] Joint nature.
By the driving back of the principal ſpirits, which preſerve
the conſiſtence of the body, their government is diſſolved, and
every part returneth to his nature or homogeny. Bacon.
HoMo'logous. adj. [homologue, Fr. GuéxoyGP.] Having the
ſame manner or proportions.
Ho Mo'NYMoUs, adj. [homonyme, Fr. daºwup.G..] Denomi-
nating different things; equivocal; ambiguous.
As words ſignifying the ſame thing are called ſynonymous,
ſo equivocal sº, or thoſe which ſignify ſeveral things, are
called homonymous, or ambiguous; and when perſons uſe ſuch
ambiguous words, with a deſign to deceive, it is called equi-
vocation. Watts's Logick.
Homo'NYMY. n.ſ.. [homonymie, French; duovuuſz.] Equivo-
cation; ambiguity.
HoMo' to Nous, adj. [Sporáv(GP.] Equable: ſaid of ſuch diſ-
tempers as keep a conſtant tenour of riſe, ſtate, and declen-
ſion. &amp;uincy.
HoNE. n.ſ. [This word M. Caſaubºn derives from 2×ovº; ju-
nius from hogſaen, Welſh; Skinner, who is always rational,
from paen, Saxon, a ſtone; paenan, to ſtone J A whetſtone
for a raſor.
A home and a parer, to pare away graſ. Tuſſer's Husband.
Tºr. v. n. [pongian, Saxon.] To pine; to long for any
thing. -
HONEST. adj. [honeſe, French; honeſius, Latin.]
1. Upright; true; ſincere.
What art thou?
—A very honºff hearted fellow, and as poor as the king. Shakespeare
The way to relieve ourſelves from thoſe ſophiſms, is an
honeſ? and diligent enquiry into the real nature and cauſes of
things. Watts's Logick.
2. Chaſte.
Wives may be merry, and yet honºff too. Shakeſpeare.
3. Juſt ; righteous; giving to every man his due.
4. It is ſometimes uſed criminally for diſhoneſt; baſe.
I'll deviſe ſome honºff ſlanders
To ſtain my couſin with: one doth not know
How much an ill word doth impoiſon liking. Shakeſpeare.
Ho'N EstLY. adv. [from homeſ.]
1. Uprightly; juſtly.
It doth make me tremble,
4.
There ſhould thoſe ſpirits yet breathe, that when they cannot
Live honeſiſ, would rather periſh baſely. Ben jobſ. Catil.
For ſome time paſt all endeavours or propoſals from private
perſons to advance the publick ſervice, however homºſil, and
innocently deſigned, have been called flying in, the king's
face. - Swift.
2. With chaſtity; modeſtly. -
Ho’NEST Y. m. ſ. ſhonne/leté, French; hone/?as, Latin.] Juſtice;
truth; virtue; purity.
Thou ſhalt not have thy huſband's lands. -
Why, then mine honºſy ſhall be my dower. Shakespeare.
Goodneſs, as that which makes men prefer their duty and
their promiſe before their paſſions or their intereſt, and is pro-
perly the objećt of truſt, in our language goes rather by the
name of honeſty; though what we call an honeſt man, the Ro-
mans called a good man; and honeſty in their language, as well
as in French, rather ſignifies a compoſition of thoſe qualitics
which generally acquire honour and eſteem. Temple,
Ho’NIED. adj. [from hony J -
1. Covered with honey.
The bee with honied thigh, -
That at her flow'ry work doth fing. Milton.
2. Sweet; luſcious. -
When he ſeaks,
The air, a charter'd libertine, is ſtill ;
And the mute wonder lurketh in mens ears,
To ſteal his ſweet and h nied ſentences. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Look now for no enchanting voice, nor fear
The bait of honey'd words; a rougher tongue
Draws hitherward. A4ilton's Agoniſter.
HO'NEY. m. ſ. [puniz, Saxon; honig, Dutch; hones, horag,
German.] - --
1. A thick, viſcous, fluid ſubſtance, of a whitiſh or yellowiſh
colour, ſweet to the taſte, ſoluble in water; and becoming
vinous on fertmentation, inflammable, liquable by a gentle
heat, and of a fragrant ſmell. We have three kinds of honey:
the firſt and fineſt is virgin honey, not very firm, and of a
fragrant ſmell: it is the firſt produce of the ſwarm, ob-
tained by draining from the combs without preſſing. The
ſecond is thicker than the firſt, often almoſt ſolid, procurcd
from the combs by preſſure: and the worſt is the common
yellow honey, extračted by heating the combs over the fire,
and then preſſing them. In the flowers of plants, by certain
glands near the baſis in the petals, is ſecreted a ſweet juice,
which the bee, by means of its proboſis or trunk, ſucks up,
ſwallows it, flies away with it to the hive, and diſcharges
again from the ſtomach through the mouth into ſome of the
cells of the comb. The honey thus taken up into the body of
the bee, and depoſited again into the cells of the comb, is
deſtined for the food of the young offspring; but in hard ſea-
ſons the bees are ſometimes reduced to the neceſſity of feeding
on it themſelves, and die of hunger after they have eat it all
up. Honey, taken out of the new combs early in the Sum-
mer, is vaſtly preferrable to that taken from the ſame hive in
Autumn. Honey is an excellent pectoral, is detergent, ape-
rient, and diuretick. Hill's Mat. Med.
So work the honey bees,
Creatures that by a uling nature teach
The art of order to a peopled kingdom. Shakespeare Hen. V.
The like contention is found among the Greeks, touching
his education and firſt foſtering: ſome affirm, that he was fed
by honey bees. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the 14 orld.
In ancient time there was a kind of hºney, which, either of
its own nature, or by art, would grow as hard as ſugar, and
was not ſo luſcious as ours. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
When the patient is rich, there's no fear of phyſicians about
him, as thick as waſps to a honey pot. L'Eſtrange.
Honey is the moſt elaborate produćtion of the vegetable
kind, being a moſt exquiſite vegetable ſope, reſolvent of the
bile, balſamick and pectoral: honey contains no inflammable
ſpirit, before it has felt the force of fermentation ; for by diſ-
tillation it affords nothing that will burn in the fire. Arbuthn.
New wine, with honey temper'd milk we bring;
Then living waters from the cryſtal ſpring. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. Sweetneſs; luſciouſneſs.
The king hath found
Matter againſt him, that for ever mars
The honey of his language. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
Is fancy's ſpring, but ſorrow's fall. Shakeſpeare.
3. A name of tenderneſs; ſweet; ſweetneſs. [Mel; corcu.um...]
Honey, you ſhall be well deſir'd in Cyprus;
I've found great love amongſt them. Oh, my ſwect,
I prattle out of faſhion, and I dote
In mine own comfort. Shakeſpeare's Othell.
Why, honey bird, I bought him on purpoſe for thee: did ſt
not thou ſay, thou long'dſt for a Chriſtian ſlave? Dryden.
To Ho'N E Y. v. m. [from the noun..] To talk fondly.
Nay, but to live
In the rank ſweat of an inceſtuous bed,
Stew’d in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the naſty ſty. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
Ho'N E Y-BAG.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O N
H O N
º -
YN E Y-5A G. n.f. [honey and bag.]
The honey-bag is the ſtomach, which they always fill to
- ſatisfy, and to ſpare, vomiting up the greater part of the honey
to be kept againſt Winter. Grew's Muſeum.
Io'N Ey-co MB. n.ſ. [honey and comb.] The cells of wax in
which the bee ſtores her honey.
All theſe a milk-white honey-comb ſurround,
Which in the midſt the country banquet crown'd. Dryden.
HoN'EY-co M BED. adj. [honey and comb.] Spoken of a piece of
ordnance flawed with little cavities by being ill caſt.
A mariner having diſcharged his gun, which was honey-
comfed, and loading it ſuddenly again, the powder took
fire. Wiſeman.
Ho'N E Y-DEw. m. ſ. [honey and dºw.] Sweet dew.
There is a honey-dew which hangs upon their leaves, and
breeds inſects. Mortimer's Husbandry.
How honey-dews embalm the fragrant morn,
- And the fair oak with luſcious ſweets adorn.
Ho'N E Y-Flow E.R. m. ſ. [ melanthus, Latin. J A plant.
- It hath a perennial root, and the appearance of a ſhrub :
the leaves are like thoſe of burnet; the cup of the flower is
divided into ſeveral parts: the flower conſiſts of four leaves,
and is of an anomalous figure, ſometimes in the ſhape of a
fan, and at other times conical: the ovary becomes a fruit,
Garth.
and pregnant with roundiſh ſeeds. This plant produces large
ſpikes of chocolate-coloured flowers in May, in each of which
is contained a large quantity of black ſweet liquor, from
whence it is ſuppoſed to derive its name. A ſiller.
Ho’NEY-GNAT. n.ſ.. [melio, Latin ; honey and gnat..] An in-
: ſe&amp;t. Ainſworth.
º Ho'N E Y-Moon. n.ſ. [honey and moon.] The firſt month after
º marriage, when there is nothing but tenderneſs and pleaſure.
º A man ſhould keep his finery for the latter ſeaſon of mar-
| riage, and not begin to dreſs 'till the honey-moon is over. Addison
Ho'N E Y-suckle. n.ſ. [caprifolium, Latin.] Woodbine.
It hath a climbing ſtalk, which twiſts itſelf about whatſo-
cver tree ſtands near it: the flowers are tubulous and oblong,
conſiſting of one leaf, which opens towards the top, and is
divided into two lips ; the uppermoſt of which is ſubdivided
into two, and the lowermoſt is cut into many ſegments: the
tube of the flowers is bent, ſomewhat reſembling a huntſman's
horn. They are produced in cluſters, and are very ſweet.
Miller enumerates ten ſpecies, of which three grow wild in
our hedges.
Bid her ſteal into the pleached bower,
Where honey-ſuckles, ripen'd by the ſun,
Forbid the ſun to enter; like to favourites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Againſt the power that bred it. Shakeſpeare.
* Watch upon a bank
With ivy canopied, and interwove
With flaunting hºneyſuckle. Milton.
Then mêlfoil beat, and honey-ſuckles pound;
With theſe alluring favours ſtrew the ground. Dryd. Virgil.
Ho'NEYı. Ess, adj. [from honey..] Without honey.
But for your words, they rob the Hybla bées,
And leave them honeyeſs. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
Ho'N E Y-w or T. n.ſ.. [cerinthe, Latin.] A plant.
It hath glaucous deep green leaves, which are, for the moſt
part, beſet with prickles: the flowers are cylindrical, conſiſt-
ing of one leaf, in ſhape like thoſe of comfrey, and are pen-
- dulous: each flower turns to the top of the ſecond page of the
- third leaf following. Miller.
HoNor ARY. adj. [hon.rarius, Latin.]
1. Done in honour. -
There was probably ſome diſtinétion made among the Ro-
mans between ſuch honorary arches ere&amp;ted to emperors, and
thoſe that were raiſed to them on the account of a vićtory,
which are properly triumphal arches. Addiſon on Italy.
This monument is only honorary; for the aſhes of the em-
peror lie elſewhere. Addison on Italy.
2. Conferring honour without gain.
The Romans abounded with theſe little honorary rewards,
that, without conferring wealth and riches, gave only place
and diſtinétion to the perſon who received them. Addiſ Cuard.
HONOUR. m. ſ. [honeur, French; honor, Latin.]
1. Dignity; high rank.
2. Reputation; fame.
A man is an ill huſband of his honour, that entereth into
any action, the failing wherein may diſgrace him more than
the carrying of it through can honour him. Bacon's Eſſays.
3. The title of a man of rank.
- Return unto thy lord,
Bid him not fear the ſeparated councils:
His honour and myſelf are at the one;
And at the other is my good friend Cateſby. Shakeſp R. III.
4. Subject of praiſe. y y. Shakespeare
- Thou happy father,
Think that the cleareſt gods, who make them honours
Of man's impoſſibilitics, have preſerv'd thee. Shakeſp.
reſembling a bladder four cornered, divided into four cells,
5. Nobleneſs of mind; ſcorn of meanneſs; magnanimity.
Now ſhall I ſee thy love; what motive may
Be ſtronger with thee than the name of wife?
—That which upholdeth him, that thee upholds,
His honour. Oh, thine honour, Lewis; thine honour. Shakespeare
If by honour is meant any thing diſtinét from conſcience,
'tis no more than a regard to the cenſure and eſteem of the
world. - Rogers's Sermons.
6. Reverence; due veneration.
They take thee for their mother,
And every day do honour to thy grave.
There, my lord,
The high promotion of his grace of Canterbury,
Who holds his ſtate at door, 'mongſt purſuivants.
— Ha! 'tis he, indeed!
Is this the honour they do one another Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
This is a duty in the fifth commandment, required towards
our prince and our parent, under the name of honour; a re-
ſpect, which, in the notion of it, implies a mixture of love
and fear, and, in the objećt, equally ſuppoſes goodneſs and
power. Rogers's Sormoni,
7. Chaſtity.
Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Be ſhe honour flaw'd,
I have three daughters, the eldeſt is eleven;
If this prove true, they’ll pay for't. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
She dwells ſo ſecurely on the excellency of her honour, that
the folly of my ſoul dares not prevent itſelf: ſhe is too bright
to be looked againſt. Shakeſp. Merry J/ives of Windſºr.
8. Dignity of mien.
Two of far nobler ſhape, erect and tall,
Godlike erect! with native honour clad,
In naked majeſty, ſeem'd lords of all. Milton's Parad Lºft.
9. Glory; boaſt.
A late eminent perſon, the honour of his profeſſion for inte-
grity and learning. Bunet's Theory of the Earth.
10. Publick mark of reſpect.
He ſaw his friends, who whelm'd beneath the waves,
Their fun'ral honours claim’d, and aſk'd their quiet graves.
Dryden's Án. b. vi.
Such diſcourſes, on ſuch mournful occaſions as theſe, were
inſtituted not ſo much in honour of the dead, as for the uſe of
the living. Atterbury's Sermons.
Numbers engage their lives and labours, ſome to heap toge-
ther a little dirt that ſhall bury them in the end; others to gain
an honour, that, at beſt, can be celebrated but by an inconſi-
derable part of the world, and is envied and calumniated by
more than 'tis truly given. //ake's Preparalion fºr Death.
11. Privileges of rank or birth.
Henry the ſeventh, truly pitying
My father's loſs, like a moſt royal prince,
Reſtor'd to me my honours; and, from ruins,
Made my name once more noble. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
12. Civilities paid.
Then here a ſlave, or if you will a lord,
To do the honours, and to give the word.
13. Ornament; decoration.
The fire then ſhook the honours of his head,
And from his brows damps of oblivion ſhed.
My hand to thee, my honour on my promiſe.
To Ho’NôUR. v. a. [homorer, French; honoro, Latin.]
1. To reverence; to regard with veneration.
He was called our father, and was continually honoured of
all men, as the next perſon unto the king. Eſth. xvi. 1 1.
The poor man is honºured for his ſkill, and the rich man is
honoured for his riches. Eccluſ x. 30.
He that is honoured in poverty, how much more in riches?
Eccluſ x. 31.
How lov’d, how honour’d once, avails thee not. Pope.
2. To dignify; to raiſe to greatneſs.
In ſoothing them, we nouriſh 'gainſt our ſenate
The cockle of rebellion, inſolence, ſedition,
Which we ourſelves have plow'd for, ſow'd and ſcatter'd,
By mingling them with us, the honour'd number. Shakeſp.
I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that he ſhall follow after them,
and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his hoſt,
that the Egyptians may know that I am the Lord. Ex. xiv.
Ho'Nour ABLE. adj. [honorable, French.]
1. Illuſtrious; noble. -
Sir, I'll tell you,
Since I am charg'd in honour, and by him
That I think honourable. Shakespeare, I/inter's Tale.
Who hath taken this counſel againſt Tyre, the crowning
city, whoſe merchants are princes, whoſe traffickers are the
honourable of the earth : Iſ, xxiii. 8.
2. Great; magnanimous ; generous.
Think'ſt thou it honourable for a nobleman
Still to remember wrongs. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanui.
3. Conferring honour. -
Then warlike kings, who for their country fought,
And honºurable wounds from battle brought, Dryden' 4".
Pope's Horace.
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
I was
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">º
.
Many of thoſe perſons, who put this honourable taſk on me,
were more able to perform it themſelves. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
4. Accompanied with tokens of honour.
Sith this wretched woman overcome,
Of anguiſh, rather than of crime hath been,
Preſerve her cauſe to her eternal doom ;
And in the mean, vouchſafe her honourable tomb. Fa. Qu.
5. Not to be diſgraced.
Here's a Bohemian tartar tarries the coming down of thy
fat woman: –let her deſcend, my chambers are honourable. Shakespeare
6. Without taint; without reproach.
As he was honourable in all his acts, ſo in this, that he took
Joppe for an haven. 1 Mac. xiv. 5.
Methinks I could not die any where ſo contented as in the
king's company, his cauſe being juſt and his quarrel honour-
able. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
7. Honeſt; without intention of deceit.
The earl ſent again to know if they would entertain their
pardon, in caſe he ſhould come in perſon, and aſſure it: they
anſwered, they did conceive him to be ſo honourable, that from
himſelf they would moſt thankfully embrace it. Hayward.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpoſe marriage, ſend me word to-morrow. Shakeſp.
8. FGuitable.
Ho'Nou RABLEN Ess. n.ſ.. [from honourable.] Eminence; mag-
nificence; generoſity.
Ho'Nou RABLY. adv. [from honourable.]
1. With tokens of honour.
The rev'rend abbot,
With all his convent, honourably receiv'd him. Shakespeare H. VIII.
2. Magnanimouſly; generouſly.
After ſome ſix weeks diſtance of time, which the king did
honourably interpoſe, to give ſpace to his brother's interceſſion,
he was arraigned of high treaſon, and preſently after con-
demned. Bacon's Henry VII.
3. Reputably; with exemption from reproach.
'Tis juſt, ye gods ! and what I well deſerve:
Why did I not more honourably ſtarve! Dryden's juvenal.
Ho'Nour ER. n.ſ.. [from honour.] One that honours; one that
regards with veneration.
I muſt not here omit to do juſtice to Mr. Gay, whoſe zeal
in your concern is worthy a friend and honourer. Pope.
Hood, in compoſition, is derived from the Saxon pab, in Ger-
man heit, in Dutch heid. It denotes quality; charaćter; con-
dition: as, knighthoºd; childhood; fatherhood. Sometimes it is
uſed after the Dutch, as maidenhead. Sometimes it is taken
collectively; as, brotherhood, a confraternity; ſiſterhood, a
company of ſiſters. - -
HOOD. m. ſ. [pop, Saxon, probably from perob, head.]
1. The upper covering of a woman's head.
In velvet, white as ſnow, the troop was gown'd;
Their hoods and ſleeves the ſame. Dryden's Fables.
2. Anything drawn upon the head, and wrapping round it.
Undertaking ſo to geſture and muffle up himſelf in his hood,
as the duke's manner was to ride in cold weather, that none
ſhould diſcern him. Wotton.
The lacerna came, from being a military habit, to be a
common dreſs: it had a hºod, which could be ſeparated or
joined to it. Arbuthnot on Coins.
3. A covering put over the hawk's eyes, when he is not to fly.
4. An ornamental fold that hangs down the back of a graduate,
to mark his degree.
To Hood. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To dreſs in a hood.
The cobler apron'd, and the parſon gown'd,
The friar hooded, and the monarch crown'd. Pope.
2. To blind, as with a hood.
While grace is ſaying, I’ll hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and figh, and ſay, amen. Shakeſpeare.
3. To cover.
An hollow cryſtal pyramid he takes,
In firmamental waters dipt above;
Of it a broad extinguiſher he makes,
And hoods the flames that to their quarry ſtrove. Dryden.
Ho'o DMAN's Blind. m. ſ. A play in which the perſon hooded is
to catch another, and tell the name; blindman's buff.
What devil was’t,
That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman blind 2 Shakespeare Haml.
To Ho'od-wink. v. a. ſhocá and wink.]
1. To blind with ſomething bound over the eyes.
They willingly hood-winking themſelves from ſeeing his
faults, he often abuſed the virtue of courage to defend his foul
vice of injuſtice. Sidney.
We will bind and hood-wink him ſo, that he ſhall ſuppoſe he
is carried into the leaguer of the adverſaries. Shakeſpeare.
You may
Convey your pleaſures in a ſpacious plenty,
And yet ſeem cold, the time you may ſo hood-wink. Shakespeare
Then ſhe who hath been hood-wink'd from her birth,
Doth firſt herſelf within death's mirrour ſee. Davies.
So have I ſeen, at Chriſtmaſs ſports, one loſt,
And, hood-wink'd, for a man embrace a poſt. Ben. johnſºn.
-
Satan is fain to hood-wink thoſe that are apt to ſtart.
Decay of Piety.
Prejudice ſo dexterouſly hood-winks mens minds as to keep
them in the dark, with a belief that they are more in the
light. - - Locke.
Muſt I wed Rodogune? -
Fantaſtick cruelty of hood-wink'd chanceſ Rowe.
On high, where no hoarſe winds or clouds reſort,
The hºod-wink'd goddeſs keeps her partial court. Garth.
2. To cover; to hide.
* Be patient; for the prize, I'll bring thee to,
Shall hood-wink this miſchance. Shakespeare's Tempeſt.
3. To deceive ; to impoſe upon.
She delighted in infamy, which often ſhe had uſed to her
huſband's ſhame, filling all mens ears, but his, with reproach;
while he, hood-winked with kindneſs, leaſt of all men knew
who ſtruck him. Sidney.
HQQF. n.ſ. [pop, Saxon; hoºf, Dutch..] The hard horny
ſubſtance on the feet of graminivorous animals.
With the hºofs of his horſes ſhall he tread down all thy
ſtreets. Ezek. xxvi. 1 1.
The bull and ram know the uſe of their horns as well as
the horſe of his boſs. More's Ant dote againſt Atheiſm.
Ho'of ED. adj. [from, hoof.] Furniſhed with hoofs.
Among quadrupeds, the roe-deer is the ſwifteſt; of all the
hoofed, the horſe is the moſt beautiful; of all the clawed, the
lion is the ſtrongeſt. Grew's Coſmol. Sac. b. ii. c. 8.
Hoof-bound, adj. [hoof and bound J
A horſe is ſaid to be hoof-bºund when he has a pain in the
forefeet, occaſioned by the dryneſs and contračtion or narrow-
neſs of the horn of the quarters, which ſtraitens the quarters
of the heels, and oftentimes makes the horſe lame. A h of-
bound horſe has a narrow heel, the ſides of which come too
near one another, inſomuch that the fleſh is kept too tight,
and has not its natural extent. Farrier's Dicł.
HOOK. n.ſ. [ poce, Saxon; hoeck, Dutch.]
1. Anything bent ſo as to catch hold: as, a ſhepherd's hook and
pot hoºks.
This falling not, for that they had not far enough under-
mined it, they aſſayed with great hooks and ſtrong ropes to have
pulled it down. Knolles.
2. The curvated wire on which the bait is hung for fiſhes, and
with which the fiſh is pierced.
Like unto golden hook,
That from the fooliſh fiſh their baits do hide. Spenser.
My bended hook ſhall pierce
Their ſlimy jaws. Shakeſp Ant. and Cleopatra.
Though divine Plato thus of pleaſures thought,
They us with hooks and baits, like fiſhes, caught. Denham.
3. A ſnare ; a trap.
A ſhop of all the qualities that man
Loves woman for, beſides that hook of wiving,
Fairneſs, which ſtrikes the eye. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
4. A ſickle to reap corn.
Peaſe are commonly reaped with a hook at the end of a long
ſtick. Morimer's Husbandry.
5. An iron to ſeize the meat in the caldron.
About the caldron many cooks accoil'd,
With hooks and ladles, as need did require;
The while the viands in the veſſel boil’d. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
6. Any inſtrument to cut or lop with.
Not that I’d lop the beauties from his book,
Like ſlaſhing Bentley with his deſperate hook. Pope.
7. The part of the hinge fixed to the poſt: whence the proverb,
off the hooks, for in diſorder.
My doublet looks,
Like him that wears it, quite off o' the hooks. , Cleaveland.
She was horribly bold, meddling and expenſive, eaſily put
off the hooks, and monſtrous hard to be pleaſed again. L'Eſtr.
While Sheridan is off the hooks, -
And friend Delany at his books. Swift.
8. Hook. [In huſbandry.] A field ſown two years running. Ainſ.
9. Hook or Crook. One way or other; by any expedient; by
any means direct or oblique.
Which he by hook or crook had gather'd, - ---
And for his own inventions father'd. Hudibras, p. iii.
He would bring him by hook or crook into his quarrel. Dryd.
To Hook. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To catch with a hook.
The huge jack he had caught was ſerved up for the firſt
diſh: upon our ſitting down to it, he gave us a long account
how he had hooked it, played with it, foiled it, and at length
drew it out upon the bank. Addiſon's Spectator.
2. To intrap; to enſnare.
3. To draw as with a hook.
But ſhe
I can hook to me.
4. To faſten as with an hook.
5. To be drawn by force or artifice.
There are many branches of the natural law no way redu-
cible to the two tables, unleſs hooked in by tedious conſe-
quences. Norris.
11 M Ho'ok FD.
Shakeſpeare's I/inter's Tale.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O O
H O P
s
.
ſ
Ho'ok ED. adj. [from hook.] Bent ; curvated.
Gryps ſignifies eagle or vulture ; from whence the epi-
thet grypus, for an booked or aquiline noſe. Brown.
Now thou threaten'ſt, with unjuſt decree,
To ſeize the prize which I ſo dearly bought:
Mean match to thine; for ſtill above the reſt,
Thy hook'd rapacious hands uſurp the beſt. Dryden.
Caterpillars have claws and feet: the claws are hooked, to
take the better hold in climbing from twig to twig, and hang-
ing on the backſides of leaves. Grew's Coſmol. Sac.
Ho'oke DNess. m. ſ. [from hooked. State of being bent like a
hook. -
Hook No's ED. adj. [hoot and nºſe.] Having the aquiline noſe
riſing in the middle.
I may juſtly ſay with the hºok-noſed fellow of Rome there,
Caeſar, I came, ſaw, and overcame. Shakespeare Henry IV. p. ii.
HOOP. m. ſ. [hoep, Dutch. J
1. Anything circular by which ſomething elſe is bound, parti-
cularly caſks or barrels.
Thou ſhalt prove a ſhelter to thy friends,
A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
That the united veſſel of their blood
Shall never leak. - Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
If I knew
What hoop would hold us ſtaunch, from edge to edge
O' th' world I would purſue it. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopat.
A quarrel, ho, already what's the matter?
—About a boop of gold, a paltry ring. Shakespeare Mirch. of P'en.
To view ſo lewd a town, and to refrain,
What hoops of iron could my ſpleen contain' Dryd, juven.
And learned Athens to our art muſt ſtoop,
Could ſhe behold us tumbling through a hoop. Pope.
3. The whalebone with which women extend their petticoats; a
farthingale.
A petticoat without a hoop. - Swift.
At coming in you ſaw her ſtoop;
The entry bruſh'd againſt her hop. Swift.
All that hºops are good for is to clean dirty ſhoes, and to
keep fellows at diſtance. Clariſſa.
2. Anything circular.
I have ſeen at Rome an antique ſtatue of time, with a
wheel or hoop of marble in his hand. Addiſon on Italy.
To Hoc P. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To bind or encloſe with hoops.
The three hoop'd pot ſhall have ten hoops, and I will make
it felony to drink ſmall beer. Shakeſpeare's H. nry VI. p. ii.
The caſk for his majeſty's ſhipping were hooped as a wine-
caſk, or hooped with iron. Raleigh's Eſſays.
2. To encircle ; to claſp; to ſurround.
If ever henceforth thou
Shalt hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I will deviſe a death. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
I hºop the firmament, and make
This my embrace the zodiack. Cleaveland.
That ſhelly guard, which hººps in the eye, and hides the
greater part of it, might occaſion his miſtake. Grew's Aſtſ.
To Hoc P. v. m. [from wopgan or wopyan, Gothick; or hºuffer,
French, derived from the Gothick. This word is generally
written whoop, which is more proper, if we deduce it from
the Gothick; and hoop, if we derive it from the French.]
To ſhout ; to make an outcry by way of call or purſuit.
To Hoop. v. a.
1. To drive with a ſhout.
Daſtard nobles
Suffer'd me, by th’ voice of ſlaves, to be
Hoop'd out of Rome. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
2. To call by a ſhout.
Ho'ope R. m. ſ. [from hºop, to incloſe with hoops.] A cooper;
one that hoops tubs.
Ho'opi NG-cou GH. n.ſ. [or whooping-cºugh, from hoop, to
ſhout J A convulſive cough, ſo called from its noiſe; the
chine cough.
To Hoot. v. n. [hwt, Welſh; huer, French.]
1. To ſhout in contempt.
A number of country folks happened to paſs thereby, who
hollowed and hoted after me as at the arranteſt coward. Sidney.
Matrons and girls ſhall hoot at thee no more. Dryd, juv.
2. To cry as an owl.
Some keep back
The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots, and wonders
At our queint ſports. Shakeſp, Midſum. Night's Dream.
To Hoot. v. a. To drive with noiſe and ſhouts.
We lov’d him; but, like beaſts,
Our coward nobles gave way to your cluſters,
Who did host him out o' th' city. Shakespeare. Coriolanus.
- The owl of Rome, whom boys and girls will hºot /
That were I ſet up for that wooden god
That keeps our gardens, could not fight the crows,
Or the leaſt bird, from muting on my head. Ben. johnſºn.
Patridge and his clan may hoot me for a cheat and im-
poſłor, if I fail in any particular of moment. Swift.
Hoot. n.ſ.. [huée, French, from the verb.] Clamour; ſhout;
noiſe.
Its aſſertion would be entertained with the hoot of the
rabble. Glanville's Stepſ.
To HOP. v. n. [poppan, Saxon; hoppen, Dutch.]
1. To jump; to ſkip lightly.
would have thee gone,
And yet no further than a wanton's bird,
That lets it hºp a little from her hand,
And with a filk thread plucks it back again. Shakeſpeare.
Go, hop me over every kennel home;
For you ſhall hop without my cuſtom, ſir. Shakeſpeare.
Be kind and curteous to this gentleman,
Hop in his walks, and gambol in his eyes. Shai eſpeare.
The painted birds, companions of the Spring,
Hopping from ſpray to ſpray, were heard. Dryden.
Your Ben and Fletcher, in their firſt young flight,
Did no Volpone, nor no Arbaces write;
But hºpp'd about and ſhort excurſions made
From bough to bough, as if they were afraid. Dryden.
Why don't we vindicate ourſelves by trial ordeal, and hºp
over heated ploughſhares blindfold. C llier on Dueling.
I am highly delighted to ſee the jay or the thruſh hopping
about my walks. Speciator.
2. To leap on one leg.
Men with heads like dogs, and others with one huge foot
alone, whereupon they did hop from place to place. Abbot.
3. To walk lamely, or with one leg leſs nimble or ſtrong than
the other; to limp ; to halt.
The limping ſmith obſerv'd the ſadden’d feaſt,
And hopping here and there, himſelf a jeſt,
Put in his word. Dryden's Homer.
4. To move ; to play.
Softly feel
Her feeble pulſe, to prove if any drop
Of living blood yet in her veins did hop. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Hop. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A jump ; a light leap.
2. A jump on one leg.
When my wings are on, I can go above a hundred yards at
a hop, ſtep, and jump. Addison's Guardian.
3. A place where meaner people dance. Ainſwºrth.
HOP. m. ſ. [hip, Dutch ; lupulus, Latin.] A plant.
It has a creeping root: the leaves are rough, angular, and
conjugated; the ſtalks climb and twiſt about whatever is near
them; the flowers are male and female on different plants:
the male flower conſiſts of a calyx divided into five parts, which
ſurrounds the ſtamina, but has no petals to the flower: the
female plants have their flowers collected into ſquamoſe heads,
which grow in bunches: from each of the leafy ſcales is pro-
duced an horned ovary, which becomes a ſingle roundiſh
ſeed. Miller.
If hop yard or orchard ye mind for to have,
For hop poles and crotches in lopping go ſave. Tuſſ. Husb.
The planting of hop yards is profitable for the planters, and
conſequently for the kingdom. Bacon’s Advice to Williers.
Beer hath malt firſt infuſed in the liquor, and is afterwards
boiled with the hop. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Next to thiſtles are hop ſtrings, cut after the flowers are
gathered. Derham's Phyſico-Theolºgy.
Have the poles without forks, otherwiſe it will be trouble-
ſome to part the hop vines and the poles. Morimer's Husband.
When you water hops, on the top of every hill put diſſolved
dung, which will enrich your hop hills. Mortimer's Husbandry.
In Kent they plant their hop gardens with apple-trees and
cherry-trees between. Mºrtiner's Husbandry.
The price of hoeing of hop ground is forty ſhillings an
aCre. A ſortimer's Husbandry.
Hop poles, the largeſt ſort, ſhould be about twenty foot
long, and about nine inches in compaſs. 4.ortimer’s Hustand.
To Hop. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To impregnate with hops.
Brew in March or October, and hºp it for long keeping.
Mortimer's Husbandry.
To increaſe the milk, diminiſhed by fleſh-meat, take malt-
drink not much hºpped. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
HOPE. m. ſ. [popa, Saxon; hope, Dutch J
1. Expectation of ſome good; an expectation indulged with
pleaſure.
There is hºpe of a tree, if cut down, that it will ſprout
again. job xiv. 7.
Hope is that pleaſure in the mind, which every one finds in
himſelf, upon the thought of a profitable future enjoyment of
a thing, which is apt to delight him. Lake.
When in heav'n ſhe ſhall his eſſence ſee,
This is her ſov’reign good, and perfect bliſs;
Her longing, wiſhings, hopes, all finiſh'd be ;
Her joys are full, her motions reſt in this. Davies.
Sweet hope / kind cheat! fair fallacy by thee
We are not where or what we be;
But what and where we would be: thus art thou -
Our abſent preſence, and our future now. Craſhaw.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
Faith
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O P
H O R.
&amp;
º
º
º
Faith is oppoſed to infidelity, and hope to deſpair. Taylor.
He ſought them both, but wiſh'd his hap might find
Eve ſeparate: he wiſh'd, but not with hope
Of what ſo ſeldom chanc'd : when to his wiſh,
Beyond his hoe, Eve ſeparate he ſpies. Milton's Parad. Loft.
The Trojan dames
To Pallas' fane in long proceſſion go,
In h fes to reconcile their heav'nly foe. Dryden's Virg. Æn.
Why not comfort myſelf with the hope of what may be, as
torment myſelf with the fear on't L’Eſtrange.
To encourage our hopes it gives us the higheſt aſſurance of
moſt laſting happineſs, in caſe of obedience. Tillotſon.
The deceaſed really lived like one that had his hºpe in an-
other life; a life which he hath now entered upon, having ex-
changed hope for fight, deſire for enjoyment. Atterbury.
Young men look rather to the paſt age than the preſent,
and therefore the future may have ſome hopes of them. Swift.
2. Confidence in a future event, or in the future condućt of
any body.
ſt is good, being put to death by men, to look for hope from
God, to be raiſed up again by him. 2 Mac. vii. 14.
Bleſled is he who is not fallen from his hope in the Lord.
Eccluſ xiv. 2.
I had hope of France,
Ev’n as I have of fertile England's ſoil. Shakespeare Henry VI.
3. That which gives hope; that on which the hopes are fixed,
as an agent by which ſomething deſired may be effected.
I might ſee from far ſome forty truncheoneers draw to her
ſuccour, which were the hºpe of the Strand, where ſhe was
quarter'd. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
4. The obječt of hope.
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And yet brought forth leſs than a mother's hope; -
To wit, an indigeſted deform'd lump Shakespeare Henry VI.
She was his care, his hope, and his delight,
Moſt in his thought, and ever in his fight. Dryden.
Hop E. n ſ. Any ſloping plain between the ridges of moun-
tains. Ainſworth.
To Hop E. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To live in expectation of ſome good.
Hope for good ſucceſs, according to the efficacy of the
cauſes and the inſtrument; and let the huſbandman hope for a
good harveſt. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
My muſe, by ſtorms long toft,
Is thrown upon your hoſpitable coaſt;
And finds more favour by her ill ſucceſs,
Than ſhe could hºpe for by her happineſs. Dryden.
Who knows what adverſe fortune may befall!
Arm well your mind, hope little, and fear all. Dryden.
2. To place confidence in futurity.
He ſhall ſtrengthen your heart, all ye that hºpe in the
Lord. Pſ, xxxi. 24.
To Hope. v. a. To expe&amp;t with deſire.
The ſun ſhines hot; and if we uſe delay,
Cold-biting Winter mars our hop'd for hay. Shakespeare Hen. VI.
So ſtands the Thracian herdſman with his ſpear
Full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear. Dryden's Fables.
Ho'PEFU L. adj. [hºpe and full.]
1. Full of qualities which produce hope; promiſing; likely to
obtain ſucceſs; likely to come to maturity; likely to gratify
deſire, or anſwer expectation.
He will advance thee:
I know his noble nature, not to let
Thy hopeful ſervice periſh. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
You ſerve a great and gracious maſter, and there is a moſt
hºpeful young prince whom you muſt not deſert. Bacon.
What to the old can greater pleaſure be,
Than hopeful and ingenious youth to ſee ? Denham.
They take up a book in their declining years, and grow very
hopeful ſcholars by that time they are threeſcore. Addiſon.
2. Full of hope; full of expe&amp;tation of ſucceſs. This ſenſe is
now almoſt confined to Scotland, though it is analogical, and
found in good writers.
Men of their own natural inclination hopeful and ſtrongly
conceited, whatſoever they took in hand. Hoºker, b. v.
I was hopeful the ſucceſs of your firſt attempts would en-
courage you to make trial alſo of more nice and difficult expe-
riments. Boyle.
Whatever ills the friendleſs orphan bears, -
Bereav'd of parents in his infant years,
Still muſt the wrong'd Telemachus ſuſtain,
lf hopeful of your aid, he hopes in vain.
Ho'PEFU LLY. adv. [from hopeful.]
1. In ſuch a manner as to raiſe hope; in a promiſing way.
He left all his female kindred either matched with peers of
the realm ačtually, or hºpefully with earls ſons and heirs. Iſott.
They were ready to renew the war, af,d to proſecute it hope-
fully, to the redućtion or ſuppreſſion of the Iriſh. Clarendon.
2. With hope; without deſpair. This ſenſe is rare.
From your promiſing and generous endeavours we may hope-
July expect a conſiderable enlargement of the hiſtory of na-
(uſe. Glanv Sceſſ Preface.
Pope's Odſey.
Ho'PEFULNEss. n.ſ.. [from hºpeful J Promiſe of good; likeli-
hood to ſucceed. . -
Set down beforehand certain ſignatures of hopefulneſs, or
chara&amp;ers, whereby may be timely deſcribed what the child
will prove in probability. //ºtton.
Hopf LF'ss. adj. [from hope.] **
1. Without hope; without pleaſing expe&amp;tation.
Are they indifferent, being uſed as ſigns of immoderate
and hopeleſ, lamentation for the dead? Hooker, b. iv.
Alas, I am a woman, friendleſs, hºpeleſſ Shakeſpeare.
He watches with greedy hope to find
His wiſh, and beſt advantage, us aſunder;
Hopeleſs to circumvent us join'd, where each -
To other ſpeedy aid might lend at need. Milt. Parad, Lºft.
The fall’n archangel, envious of our ſtate,
And hºpeleſ to prevail by open force,
Seeks hid advantage. Dryden's State of Innocence.
Hopeleſ of ranſom, and condemn'd to lie
In durance, doom'd a ling’ring death to die. Dryden's Flb.
2. Giving no hope; promiſing nothing pleaſing.
The hopeleſs word of never to return,
Breathc I againſt thee upon pain of life. Shakespeare. R. II.
Ho'PER. n.ſ.. [from hope.] One that has pleaſing expectations.
I except all hofers, who turn the ſcale, becauſe the ſtrong ex-
pećtation of a good certain ſalary, will outweigh the loſs by
bad rents. Swift on the Sacramental Tºſſ.
Ho'PING LY. adv. [from hºping.] With hope; with expecta-
tion of good. -&gt; -
One ſign of deſpair is the peremptory contempt of the con-
dition which is the ground of hope; the going on not only in
terrours and amazement of conſcience, but alſo boldly, hop-
ingly, and confidently in wilful habits of ſin. Hammond.
Ho'PPER. m. ſ. [from hop.] He who hops or jumps on one
leg. Ainſworth.
Hoppers. [commonly called Scoºch hºppers..] A kind of play
in which the actor hops on one leg.
Hopper. n ſ [ſo called becauſe it is always hop; in-, or in agi-
tation. It is called in French, for the ſame reaſon, tremie or
tremue.] -
1. The box or open frame of wood into which the corn is
ut to be ground.
The ſalt of the lake Aſphaltites ſhooteth into perfeół cubes:
ſometimes they are pyramidal and plain, like the hopper of
a mill. Grew's Coſmºl. Sac.
Granivorous birds have the mechaniſm of a mill: their
maw is the hopper which holds and ſoftens the grain, letting
it drop by degrees into the ſtomach. Arbuthnºt on Aliments.
Juſt at the hºpfer will I ſtand,
In my whole life I never ſaw griſt ground,
And mark the clack how juſtly it will found. Betterton.
2. A baſket for carrying ſeed. Ain, worth.
Ho'RAL. adj. [from hora, Latin.] Relating to the hour.
Howe'er reduc’d and plain,
The watch would ſtill a watch remain;
But if the hºra' orbit ceaſes,
The whole ſtands ſtill, or breaks to pieces. Prizr.
Ho'RAR Y. adj. [horaire, French ; horarius, Latin.]
1. Relating to an hour.
I'll draw a figure that ſhall tell you
What you perhaps forgot befell you,
By way of hºrary inſpection,
Which ſome account our worſt erection. Hndibrat, p. ii.
In his anſwer to an horary queſtion, as what hour of the
night to ſet a fox-trap, he has largely diſcuſſed, under the
charaćter of Reynard, the manner of ſurpriſing all ſharpers.
Tatler, Nº. 56.
2. Continuing for an hour.
When, from a baſket of Summer-fruit, God by Amos fore-
told the deſtruction of his people, thereby was declared the
propinquity of their deſolation, and that their tranquility was
of no longer duration than thoſe horary or ſoon decaying fruits
of Summer. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
HoRDE. n.ſ. A clan; a migratory crew of people.
Of loſt mankind, in poliſh’d ſlavery ſunk,
Drove martial horde on borde with dreadful ſweep,
And gave the vanquiſh'd world another form. Thomſ. Winter.
HORIZON. m.ſ. ſºy. ] The line that terminates the
view. The horizºn is diſtinguiſhed into ſenſible and real : the
ſenſible horizon is the circular line which limits the view ; the
real is that which would bound it, if it could take in the he-
miſphere. It is falſely pronounced by Shakeſpeare hºrizon.
When the morning ſun ſhall raiſe his car
Above the border of this horizon, - -
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates. Shakeſp.
She began to caſt with herſelf from what coaſt this blazing
ſtar ſhould firſt appear, and at what time it muſt be upon the
horizon of Ireland. Bacon's Henry VII.
Far in th’ horizon to the North appear'd,
From ſkirt to ſkirt, a fiery region. AZ ſton's Paradiſe Lºft.
In his Eaſt the glorious lamp was ſeen,
Regent of day; and all th’ horizon round - --
Inveſted with bright rays. Milton's Paradſ: I ºff, *.
- 4. - - :
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H. O. R.
H O R
-
The morning lark, the meſſenger of day,
Saluted in her ſong the morning gray;
And ſoon the ſun aroſe with beams ſo bright,
That all th’ horizon laugh'd to ſee the joyous ſight, Dryden.
When the ſea is worked up in a tempeſt, ſo that the horizon
on every ſide is nothing but foaming billows and floating
mountains, it is impoſſible to deſcribe the agreeable horrour
that riſes from ſuch a proſpect. Addison's Speciator.
HoR1zo’NTAL. adj. [horizontal, French, from horizon.]
I. Near the horizon.
As when the ſun, new riſen,
Looks through the horizontal miſty air,
Shorn of his beams; or from behind the moon,
In dim eclipſe, diſaſtrous twilight ſheds -
On half the nations. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. i.
2. Parallel to the horizon; on a level. -
An obeliſk erected, and golden figures placed horizontal
about it, was brought out of Egypt by Auguſtus. Brºwn.
The problem is reduced to this; what perpendicular height
is neceſſary to place ſeveral ranks of rowers in a plane inclined
to a horizontal line in a given angle Arbuthnot on Coinſ.
HoR1zo'NT ALLY. adv. [from horizontal.] In a direction par
rallel to the horizon.
As it will not ſink into the bottom, ſo will it neither float
above, like lighter bodies; but, being near in weight, lie
ſuperficially, or almoſt horizºntally unto it. Brown's Pulg. Err.
The ambient ether is too liquid and empty to impel them
hºrizontally with celerity. Bentley's Sermons.
HORN. n.ſ.. [haurn, Gothick; born, Saxon; bºrn, Dutch..]
1. The hard pointed bodies which grow on the heads of ſome
graminivorous quadrupeds, and ſerve them for weapons.' ...
No beaſt that hath horns hath upper teeth. Bacon's N. Hiſł.
Zetus riſes through the ground,
Bending the bull's tough neck with pain,
That toſſes back his horns in vain. Addiſon on Italy.
All that proceſs is no more ſurpriſing than the eruption of
h rms in ſome brutes, or of teeth and beard in men at certain
periods of age. Bentley's Sermons.
2. An inſtrument of wind-muſick made of horn.
The ſquire 'gan ngher to approach,
And wind his horn under the caſtle-wall,
That with the noiſe it ſhook as it would fall. Fairy 9teen.
There's a poſt come from my maſter, with his horn full of
good news. Shakeſp. Marchant of Venice.
The goddeſs to her crooked horn
Adds all her breath: the rocks and woods around,
And mountains, tremble at th' infernal ſound. Dryden.
Fair Aſcanius, and his youthful train, -
With horns and hounds a hunting match ordain. Dryden.
3. The extremity of the waxing or waining moon, as mentioned
by poets.
y p She bleſs'd the bed, ſuch fruitfulneſs convey'd,
That ere ten moons had ſharpen'd either horn,
To crown their bliſs, a lovely boy was born. Dryden.
The moon
Wears a wan circle round her blunted horns. Thomſon.
4. The feelers of a ſnail. Whence the proverb, To pull in the
horns, to repreſs one's ardour.
Love's feeling is more ſoft and ſenſible,
Than are the tender horns of cockled ſnails. Shakeſpeare.
Aufidius,
Hearing of our Marcius's baniſhment,
Thruſt forth his horns again into the world,
Which were inſhell'd when Marcius ſtood for Rome,
And durſt not once peep out. Shakeſp. Coriolcnus.
5. A drinking cup made of horn.
6. Antler of a cuckold.
If I have horns to make one mad,
Let the proverb go with me, I’ll be horn mad. Shakeſpeare.
Merchants, vent'ring through the main,
Slight pyrates, rocks, and horns for gain. Hudibras, p. ii.
7. HoRN mad. Perhaps mad as a cuckold.
I am glad he went not in himſelf: if he had, he would have
been horn mad. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of JWindſor.
#º ºn./. A kind of fiſh Ainſworth
HoRN F 1's H. ; - - - - -
Ho'RN BE AM. n.ſ.. [horn and boem, Dutch, for tree, from the
hardneſs of the timber.]
It hath leaves like the elm or beech-tree: the katkins are
placed at remote diſtances from the fruit on the ſame tree, and
the outward ſhell of the fruit is winged. This tree was for-
merly much uſed in hedges for wilderneſſes and orangeries.
The timber is very tough and inflexible, and of excellent
uſe. Miller.
Ho'RNBook. n.ſ.. [horn and book J The firſt book of children,
covered with horn to keep it unſoiled.
He teaches boys the hornbook. Shakespeare Love's Labour Lo/?.
Nothing has been conſidered of this kind out of the ordi-
nary road of the hornbºok and primer. Locke.
To maſter John the Engliſh maid
A hornbook gives of ginger-bread;
And that the child may learn the better,
As he can name, he eats the letter. Prior.
Ho'RNED. adj. [from horn.] Furniſhed with horns.
As when two rams, ſtirr'd with ambitious pride,
Fight for the rule of the rich fleeced flock,
Their horned fronts ſo fierce on either ſide
Do meet, that, with the terrour of the ſhock,
Aſtoniſhed both ſtand ſenſeleſs as a block. Fairy Queen, b. i.
O, that I were
Upon the hill of Baſan, to out-roar
The horned herd. Shakeſp Ant. and Cleopatra.
Thither all the horned hoſt reſorts,
To graze the ranker mead. Denham.
Thou king of horned floods, whoſe plenteous urn
Suffices fatneſs to the fruitful corn. Dryden.
Ho'RNER. n.ſ.. [from horn.] One that works in horn, and ſells
horns.
The ſkin of a bull's forehead is the part of the hide made
uſe of by horners, whereupon they ſhave their horns. Grew.
HoRNET. n.ſ...[bynnerce, Saxon, from its horns J A very
large ſtrong ſtinging fly, which makes its neſt in hollow trees.
Silence, in times of ſuff'ring, is the beſt;
'Tis dangerous to diſturb a hornet's neſt. Dryden.
Hornets do miſchief to trees by breeding in them. Mºrtin.
I have often admired how hornets, that gather dry materials
for building their neſts, have found a proper matter to glue
their combs. Derham's Phyſico-Theºlogy.
HoRNFoot, n.ſ. ſhorn and foot..] Hoofed.
Mad frantick man,
That did not inly quake
With hornfºot horſes, and braſs wheels,
Jove's ſtorms to emulate. Hakewill on Providence.
Ho'RNowl. n.ſ. A kind of horned owl." Ainſworth.
Ho'RNPipe. n.ſ.. [horn and pipe.] A county dance, danced
commonly to a horn.
A luſty tabrere,
That to thee many a hornpipe play'd,
Whereto they dauncen each one with his maid. Spenser.
There many a hºrnpipe he tun'd to his Phyllis. Raigh.
Let all the quickſilver i' the mine
Run tº the feet-veins, and refine
Your firkhum jerkhum to a dance
Shall fetch the fiddlers out of France,
To wonder at the hornpipes here
Of Nottingham and Derbyſhire. Pan. johnſºn.
Florinda danced the Derbyſhire hornpipe in the preſence of
ſeveral friends. Tatler, N°. 106.
Ho'RNstone. m. ſ. A kind of blue ſtone. Ainſworth.
Ho'RN work. m. ſ. A kind of angular fortification.
Ho'RN.Y. adj. [from horn.]
1. Made of horn.
2. Reſembling horn.
He thought he by the brook of Cherith ſtood,
And ſaw the ravens with their horny beaks
Food to Elijah bringing even and morn. Milton's Pa. Lºft.
The hºrny or pellucid coat of the eye doth not lie in the
ſame ſuperficies with the white of the eye, but riſeth up above
its convexity, and is of an hyperbolical figure. Ray.
Rough are her ears, and broad her hºrny feet. Dryd. Wirg.
The pineal gland was encompaſſed with a kind of horny
ſubſtance. - Addiſon's Speciat.
As the ſerum of the blood is reſolvable by a ſmall heat, a
greater heat coagulates it ſo as to turn it horny, like parch-
ment; but when it is thoroughly putrified, it will no longer
COncrete. Arbuthnot on A/iments.
3. Hard as horn; callous.
Tyrrheus, the foſter-father of the beaſt,
Then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fiſt. Dryden's A.m.
HoRo"GRAPHY. n.ſ.. [horographie, Fr. &amp;;2 and 7:222.] An
account of the hours.
Ho'Roloc E. }": [horologium, Latin.] Any inſtrument that
Ho'Roloc Y. S. tells the hour: as a clock; a watch ; an hour-
laſs.
§ 'Tis evermore the prologue to his ſleep;
He'll watch the horolge a double ſet,
If drink rock not his cradle. Shakeſpeare's Othel.
Before the days of Jerome there were horologies, that mea-
ſured the hours not only by drops of water in glaſſes, called
clepſydra, but alſo by ſand in glaſſes, called clepſammia. Brººn.
HoRo"METRY. n.ſ.. [herometrie, French ; 3:2 and as Féio.] The
art of meaſuring hours. -
It is no eaſy wonder how the hor:metry of antiquity diſco-
vered not this artifice. Brown's ſugar Errours.
Ho' Roscope. m. ſ. [horoſiope, French; &amp;zozó'.) The con-
figuration of the planets at the hour of birth.
How unlikely is it, that the many almoſt numberleſs con-
junétions of ſtars, which occur in the progreſs of a man's
life, ſhould not match and countervail that one horoſcºpe or
cc.njunction which is found at his birth : Drummand.
Á proportion of the horoſcope unto the ſeventh houſe, or op-
poſite ſigns every ſeventh year, oppreſſeth living natures. Bro.
Him born beneath a boding horoſcope,
His fire, the blear-ey'd Vulcan of a ſhop,
From Mars his forge ſent to Minerva's ſchool. Dryd, juven.
Where
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O R
H O R
ſº,
A.
...”
u-
The Greek names this the horoſcope;
This governs life, and this marks out our parts, -
Our humours, manners, qualities and arts. Creech's Manil.
They underſtood the planets and the zodiack by inſtinct,
and fell to drawing ſchemes of their own horoſcopes in the ſame
duſt they ſprung out of. Bentley’s Sermons.
HORRIBLE, adj. [horrible, French; horribilis, Lat..] Dread-
ful; terrible; ſhocking; hideous; enormous.
No colour affecteth the eye much with diſpleaſure: there be
ſights that are horrible, becauſe they excite the memory of
things that are odious or fearful. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Eternal happineſs and eternar miſery, meeting with a per-
ſuaſion that the ſoul is immortal, are, of all others, the firſt
the moſt deſireable, and the latter the moſt horrible to human
apprehenſion. South's Sermons.
Ho'RRIBLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from horrible.] Dreadfulneſs; hideouſ-
neſs; terribleneſs; fearfulneſs.
Ho'RRIBLY. adv. [from horrible.]
1. Dreadfully; hideouſly.
What hideous noiſe was that
Horribly loud.
2. To a dreadful degree.
The contagion of theſe ill precedents, both in civility and
virtue, horribly infects children. - Locke.
HO'RRID. adj. [horridus, Latin.]
1. Hideous ; dreadful ; ſhocking.
Oh
Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may ſeem to thoſe
Which chance to find us. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
* Not in the legions
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd,
In evils to top Macbeth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. Shocking; offenſive; unpleaſing: in womens cant.
Already I your tears ſurvey, -
Already hear the horrid things they ſay. Pope.
3. Rough , rugged.
Horrid with fern, and intricate with thorn,
Few paths of human feet or tracks of beaſts were worn. Dry.
Ho'RR1DN ss. n.ſ. (from hºrrid.] Hideouſneſs; enormity.
A bloody deſigner ſuborns his inſtrument to take away
ſuch a man's life, and the confeſſor repreſents the horridneſs
of the fact, and brings him to repentance. Hammond.
Ho'RRIF ick. adj. [horrificus, Latin.] Cauſing horrour.
His jaws horrifick, arm'd with three-fold fate,
Here dwells the direful ſhark. Thomſºn's Summer.
HoRRI'sonous. adj. [horriſonus, Latin...] Sounding dread-
fully. IDić7.
Ho'RRour. n ſ. [horror, Latin; horreur, French.]
1. Terrour mixed with dēteſtation; a paſſion compounded of
fear and hate, both ſtrong.
Over them ſad horrour, with grim hue,
Did always ſoar, beating his iron wings ;
And after him owls and night ravens flew,
The hateful meſſengers of heavy things. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
I have ſupt full with hºrrours;
Direneſs, familiar to my ſlaught'rous thoughts,
Cannot once ſtart me. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Doubtleſs all ſouls have a ſurviving thought,
Therefore of death we think with quiet mind;
But if we think of being turn'd to nought,
A trembling hºrrour in our ſouls we find. Davieſ.
Me damp horrºur chill'd
At ſuch bold words, vouch'd with a deed ſo bold. Milton.
Deep horrour ſeizes ev'ry human breaſt;
Their pride is humbled, and their fear confeſt. Dryden.
2. Gloom; drearineſs.
Her gloomy preſence ſaddens all the ſcene,
Shades ev'ry flow'r, and darkens ev'ry green;
Deepens the murmur of the falling floods,
Milton's Agoniſłes.
And breathes a browner horrour on the woods. Pope.
3. [In medicine.] Such a ſhuddering or quivering as precedes
an ague-fit; a ſenſe of ſhuddering or ſhrinking: $2aincy.
All objects of the ſenſes, which are very offenſive, do cauſe
the ſpirits to retire ; and, upon their flight, the parts are in
ſome degree deſtitute, and ſo there is induced in them a trepi-
dation and horrour. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
HORSE. m. ſ. ſponr, Saxon.]
1. A neighing quadruped, uſed in war, and draught and car-
ridge.
Duncan's horſes, the minions of the race,
Turn'd wild in nature, broke their ſtalls. Shakespeare Macbeth.
A horſe / a horſe / my kingdom for a horſe / Shakespeare R. III.
I would ſell my horſe, and buy ten more
Better than he. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
Thy face, bright centaur, Autumn's heats retain,
The ſofter ſeaſon ſuiting to the man; -
Whilſt Winter's ſhivering goat afflićts the horſe
With froſt, and makes him an uneaſy courſe. Creech.
We call a little horſe, ſuch a one as comes not up to the ſize
of that idea which we have in our minds to belong ordinarily
to horſes. Locke.
I took horſe to the lake of Conſtance, which is formed by
the entry of the Rhine. - Addiſon on Italy.
2. It is uſed in the plural ſenſe, but with a ſingular termination,
for horſes, horſemen, or cavalry. -
I did hear -
The galloping of horſe: who was’t came by? Shakespeare Macb.
The armies were appointed, conſiſting of twenty-five thou-
ſand horſe and foot, for the repulſing of the enemy at their
landing. Bacon's War with Spain.
If they had known that all the king's horſe were quartered
behind them, their foot might very well have marched away
with their horſe. Clarendon, b. viii.
Th’Arcadian horſe
With ill ſucceſs engage the Latin force. Dryden’s AFn.
3. Something on which anything is ſupported: as, a horſe to dry
linnen on.
4. A wooden machine which ſoldiers ride by way of puniſh-
ment. It is ſometimes called a timber-mare.
5. Joined to another ſubſtantive, it ſignifies ſomething large or
coarſe: as, a horſeface, a face of which the features are large
and indelicate.
To HoRs E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To mount upon a horſe.
He came out with all his clowns, horſed upon ſuch cart-
jades, and ſo furniſhed, as in good faith I thought with myſelf,
if that were thrift, I wiſht none of my friends or ſubjects ever
to thrive. Sidney, b. ii.
After a great fight there came to the camp of Gonſalvo, the
great captain, a gentleman proudly horſed and armed: Diego
de Mendoza aſked the great captain, Who's this? Who an-
ſwered, It is St. Ermin, who never appears but after the
ſtorm. - Bacon's Apophthegms.
2. To carry one on the back. - -
3. To ride any thing.
Stalls, bulks, windows
Are ſmother'd, leads fill'd, and ridges hors'd
With variable complexions; all agreeing
In earneſtneſs to ſee him. Shakeſpeare.
4. To cover a mare. º
If you let him out to horſe more mares than your own, you
muſt feed him well. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Ho'R's EBAck. m. ſ. [horſe and back.] The ſeat of the rider;
the ſtate of being on a horſe.
I've ſeen the French,
And they can well on horſeback.
I ſaw them ſalute on horſeback,
Beheld them when they lighted. Shakespeare care's Henry VIII.
He fought but one remarkable battle wherein there were
any elephants, and that was with Porus, king of India; in
which notwithſtanding he was on horſeback. Brºwn's Wul. Err.
When manniſh Mevia, that two-handed whore,
Aſtride on horſeback hunts the Tuſcan boar. Dryd, juvenal.
If your ramble was on horſeback, I am glad of it, on ac-
count of your health. Swift to Gay.
HoRs EBEA’N. m. ſ. [horſe and bean, 1 A ſmall bean uſually
given to horſes.
Only the ſmall horſºlean is propagated by the plough. Mort.
Ho'R's E Block. m. ſ. [horſe and block.] A block on which they
climb to a horſe.
HoR sebo A/r. n.ſ.. [horſe and boat.] . A boat uſed in ferrying
horſes.
HoRSE Bo'Y. m.ſ.. [horſe and boy..] A boy employed in dreſſing
horſes; a ſtableboy.
Some horſeboys, being awake, diſcovered them by the fire in
their matches. Knollei'; Hiſtory of the Turks.
Ho'Rs EBREAKER. m.ſ.. [horſe and break.] One whoſe employ-
ment it is to tame horſes to the ſaddle.
Under Sagittarius are born chariot-racers, horſ breakers, and
tamers of wild beaſts. Creech.
HoRs eche's NUT. n.ſ.. [horſe and cheſnut..] A plant.
It hath digitated or fingered leaves: the flowers, which con-
fiſt of five leaves, are of an anomalous figure, opening with
two lips: there are male and female upon the ſame ſpike:
the female flowers are ſucceeded by nuts, which grow in green
prickly huſks. Their whole year's ſhoot is commonly
performed in three weeks time, after which it does no more
than increaſe in bulk, and become more firm; and all the lat-
ter part of the Summer is occupied in forming and ſtrengthen-
ing the buds for the next year's ſhoots. Miller.
I may bring in the horſechſiut, which grows into a goodly
ſtandard. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Ho'R's ecourser. n.ſ.. [horſe and courſer. junius derives it
from horſe and coſe, an old Scotch word, which ſignifies to
change; and it ſhould therefore, he thinks, be writ horſe:oſer.
The word now uſed in Scotland is horſecouper, to denote a
jockey, ſeller, or rather changer of horſes. It may well be
derived from courſe, as he that ſells horſes may be ſuppoſed to
courſe or exerciſe them.]
1. One that runs horſes, or keeps horſes for the race.
2. A dealer in horſes. -
A ſervant to a ho ſcourſer was thrown off his horſe. Wiſem.
A Florentine bought a horſe for ſo many crowns, upon
I i N condition
-
Shakespeare's Hamlet.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O R
H O S
sº
condition to pay half down : the horſecourſer comes to him
next morning for the remainder. L’Eſtrange.
Ho'R's ecr AB. m. ſ. A kind of fiſh. Ainſworth.
HoRs Ecu'cu Mber. n.ſ. [horſe and cucumber.] A plant.
The horſecucumber is the large green cucumber, and the beſt
for the table, green out of the garden. - Mortimer.
Ho'R's EDUNG. m.ſ.. [horſe and dung.] The excrements of
horſes.
Put it into an ox's horn, and, covered cloſe, let it rot in hot
horſed, ng. Peacham on Drawing.
HoRs E.F(MM ET. n.ſ.. [horſe and emmet..] Ant of a large kind.
Ho'R's EFL E Shakespeare M. ſ. [horſe and fleſh.] The fleſh of horſes.
The Chineſe eat horſefieſh at this day, and ſome gluttons
have colts fleſh baked. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
An old hungry lion would fain have been dealing with a
good piece of hoſºfteſh that he had in his eye; but the nag he
thought would be too fleet for him. L'E/irange.
Horse Fly. n ſ. [horſe and fy J A fly that ſtings horſes, and
ſucks their blood.
Ho'R's E Foot. m. ſ. An herb The ſame with coltsfoot. Ainſ.
Ho'R's EH AIR. m. ſ. [horſe and hair.] The hair of horſes.
His glitt'ring helm, which terribly was grac'd
With waving horſehair. Dryden's AEm.
Ho'Rsf HE El. n.J. An herb. Ainſworth.
Ho'Rs ELAUGH. n.ſ.. [horſe and laugh..] A loud violent rude
laugh.
A horſe'augh, if you pleaſe, at honeſty;
A joke on Jekyl. Pope.
Ho'RSELE ech. n. J. [horſe and leech.]
1. A great leech that bites horſes.
The horſeleech hath two daughters, crying give, give. Prov.
Let us to France; like horſeſeeches, my boys,
The very blood to ſuck. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
2. A farrier. Ainſworth.
Ho'R's Elittr R. m. ſ. [horſe and litter.] A carriage hung upon
poles between two horſes, in which the perſon carried lyes
along.
He that before thought he might command the waves of the
ſea, was now caſt on the ground, and carried in an horſe-
litter. 2 Mac. ix. 8.
Horse MAN. m. ſ. [hoſe and man.]
1. One ſkilled in riding.
A ſkilful horſeman, and a huntſman bred. Dryden's An.
2. One that ſerves in wars on horſeback.
Encounters between horſemen.on the one ſide, and foot on
the other, are ſeldom with extremity of danger; becauſe as
horſemen can hardly break a battle on foot, ſo men on foot can-
not poſſibly chaſe horſemen. Hayward.
In the early times of the Roman commonwealth, a horſe-
man received yearly tria millia aris, and a foot-ſoldier one
mille; that is, more than ſix-pence a day to a horſeman,
and two-pence a day to a foot-ſoldier. Arbuthnot on Coins.
3. A rider; a man on horſeback.
With deſcending ſhow’rs of brimſtone fir’d,
.The wild Barbarian in the ſtorm expir'd;
Wrapt in devouring flames the horſeman rag’d,
And ſpurr'd the ſteed in equal flames engagd. Addiſon.
A horſeman's coat ſhall hide
Thy taper ſhape, and comelineſs of fide. Prior.
Ho'R's EMANs HIP. m.ſ.. [from horſeman.] The art of riding;
the art of managing a horſe.
He vaulted with ſuch eaſe into his ſeat,
As if an angel dropt down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegaſus,
And witch the world with noble horſemanſhip. Shakespeare H. IV.
They pleaſe themſelves in terms of hunting or horſeman-
ſhip. //otton.
His majeſty, to ſhew his horſemanſhip, ſlaughtered two
or three of his ſubjects. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Peers grew proud, in horſemanſhip tº excel;
Newmarket's glory roſe, as Britain's fell. Pope.
Ho'R's E MARTEN. m.ſ. A kind of large bee. Ainſworth.
Ho'R's EMAtch. n.ſ. A bird. Ainſworth.
Ho'RSE MEAT. n.ſ.. [horſe and meat..] Provender.
Though green peas and beans be eaten ſooner, yet the dry
ones that are uſed for horſ meat are ripe laſt. Bac. Nat. Hiſł.
Ho'RSE MINT. n.ſ. A large coarſe mint.
Ho'RSE MUscL E. m.ſ. A large muſcle.
The great horſemuſcle, with the fine ſhell, that breedeth in
ponds, do not only gape and ſhut as the oyſters do, but re-
move from one place to another. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Hºrway. m. ſ. [horſe and play.] Coarſe, rough, rugged
play.
He is too much given to horſ play in his raillery, and comes
to battle like a dićtator from the plough. Dryd. Fab. Preface.
Ho'RSEPo ND. m. ſ. [horſe and pond..] A pond for horſes.
HoRSERA'ce. n.ſ.. [hoſe and race.] A match of horſes in
running.
In horſ races men are curious to foreſee that there be not the
leaſt weight upon the one horſe more than upon the other.
Bacon’s Natural Hiſłory.
Trajan, in the fifth year of his tribuneſhip, entertained the
people with a horſ race. Addiſon on ancient Medals.
Ho'RSE RADISH. m. ſ. [horſe and radiſh..] A root acrid and
biting: a ſpecies of ſcurvygraſs.
Horſeradiſh is increaſed by ſprouts ſpreading from the old
roots left in the ground, that are cut or broken off. Mortimer.
Stomachicks are the creſſe acrids, as horſeradiſh and ſcurvy-
graſs, infuſed in wine. Floyer on the Humours.
Ho'R's ESHoe. n.ſ.. [horſe and ſhoe.]
1. A plate of iron nailed to the feet of horſes.
I was thrown into the Thames, and cool’d glowing hot in
that ſurge, like a horſ/hoe. Shakeſp. Merry Iſives of //indſor.
2. An herb. Ainſwºrth.
HoRSESTEA'LeR. m. / [horſe and ſteal.] A thief who takes
away horſes. -
He is not a pickpurſe, nor a horſ/tealer; but for his verity
in love, I do think him as concave as a covered goblet, or a
WOrm-eaten nut. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Ho'RSETAIL. n.ſ. A plant.
Ho'RSEton GU E. m. ſ. An herb. Ainſwºrth.
Horseway, n.ſ.. [horſe and way.] A broad way by which
horſes may travel.
Know'ſt thou the way to Dover ?
—Both ſtile and gate, horſ way and footpath. Shakespeare K. Lear.
HoRTATION. n ſ ſhortatio, Latin.] The act of exhorting;
a hortatory precept; advice or encouragement to ſomething.
Ho'RTATIVE. m. ſ. [from hortor, Latin.) Exhortation; pre-
cept by which one incites or animates. -
Generals commonly in their hortatives put men in mind of
their wives and children. Bacon, Eſſay 8.
Ho'RTAtoRy. adj. [from hortor, Latin.]. Encouraging, Ani-
mating; adviſing to any thing: uſed of precepts, not of per-
ſons; a hortatory ſpeech, not a hortatory ſpeaker.
HoRTICU'LTURE. m.ſ. [hortus and cultura, Latin.] The art
of cultivating gardens.
Ho'RTULAN. a.d. ſhortulanus, Latin.] Belonging to a garden.
This ſeventh edition of my hortulan kalendar is yours.
Evelyn's Kalendar.
Ho's ANNA. m. ſ. [3rzwa..] An exclamation of praiſe to God.
Through the vaſt of heav'n
It ſounded, and the faithful armies rung
Hoſanna to the Higheſt. 44 lion's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. vi.
The publick entrance which Chriſt made into Jeruſalem
was celebrated with the hyanna's and acclamations of the
people. Fides's Sermonſ.
HOSE. m.ſ. plur. hoſen. [pora, Saxon; hoſan, Welſh; Jan,
Erſe, affanen, plur, chauffe, French.] - -
1. Breeches. -
Guards on wanton Cupid's hoſ. Shakespeare.
Here's an Engliſh taylor come hither for ſtealing out of a
French hoſ. Shakeſpeare's Macheth.
Theſe men were bound in their coats, hoſn, hats, and other
garments, and caſt into the midſt of the burning fiery fur-
Ilace. Dan. iii. 21.
He croſs examin'd both our hoſ,
And plunder'd all we had to loſe. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 3.
2. Stockings; covering for the legs.
He º in love, could not ſee to garter his hoſe;
And you, being in love, cannot ſee to put on
Your hoſe. Shakeſp Two Gentlemen of Werona.
Will ſhe thy linen waſh, or hoſen darn,
And knit thee gloves . Gay's Paſłorals.
Ho's ER. m. ſ. [from hoſe..] One who ſells flockings.
You are as arrant a cockney as any hºſier in Cheapſide.
Swift to Gay.
HO'SPITABLE. adj. [hoſpitabilis, Latin.] Giving entertain-
ment to ſtrangers; kind to ſtrangers.
- I'm your hoſt:
With robbers hands my hoſpitable favour
You ſhould not ruffle thus. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Receive the ſhip-wreck'd on your friendly ſhore;
With hoſpitable rites relieve the poor. Dryden's /En.
Ho's PITA BLY. adv. [ from hoſpitable. J With kindneſs to
ſtrangers.
Ye thus hoſpitably live,
And ſtrangers with good cheer receive. Prior.
The former liveth as piouſly and hoſpitall, as the other. Swift.
HO'SPITAL. m. ſ. [hoſpital, French; hoſpitalis, Latin.]
1. A place built for the reception of the ſick, or ſupport of the
OOI".
p They who were ſo careful to beſtow them in a college when
they were young, would be ſo good as to provide for them
in ſome hoſpital when they are old. 12 ction.
I am about to build an hoſpital, which I will endow hand-
ſomely for twelve old huſbandmen. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. A place for ſhelter or entertainment.
They ſpy’d a goodly caſtle, plac'd
Foreby a river in a pleaſant dale,
Which chufing for that evening's hoſpital,
They thither march'd. airy ºueen, b. ii.
Hospit A'LITY.. n.ſ. [ hoſpitalité, French. J The practice of
entertaining ſtrangers.
4.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O T'
&amp;
3.
The Lacedemonians forbidding all acceſs of ſtrangers into
their coaſts, are, in that reſpect, deſervedly blamed, as being
enemies to that hoſpitality which, for common humanity ſake,
all the nations on earth ſhould embrace. Hooker, b, i.
My maſter is of a churliſh diſpoſition,
And little recks to find the way to heav'n -
By doing deeds of hoſpitality. Shakeſp. As you like it.
tº. has this ſpirit of faction broke all the laws of charity,
neighbourhood, alliance, and hoſpitality P Swift.
Hospit ALLER. m. ſ. [hºſpitallier, French; hoſpitalarius, low
Latin, from hoſpital.] One reſiding in an hoſpital in order
to receive the poor or ſtranger. -
The firſt they reckon ſuch as were granted to the hoſpitallers
in titulum beneficii. Ayliff's Parergon.
To Ho's P1’ſ ATE. v. a. [hoſitor, Latin.] To reſide under the
roof of another. -
That always chuſes an empty ſhell, and this hoſpitates with
the living animal in the ſame ſhell. Grew's Muſeum.
HOST. m.ſ. [hoſle, French ; hopes, heſpitis, Latin.]
1. One who gives entertainment to another.
Homer never entertained either gueſts or hoſts with long
ſpeeches, ’till the mouth of hunger be ſtopped. Sidney.
Here, father, take the ſhadow of this tree
For your good hºſt.
2. The landlord of an inn.
Time's like a faſhionable hoſt,
That ſlightly ſhakes his parting gueſt by th’ hand;
But with his arms out-ſtretch'd, as he would fly,
Graſps in the comer. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
The frighted friend aroſe by break of day,
And found the ſtall where late his fellow lay;
Then of his impious hoſt enquiring more,
Was anſwer'd that his gueſt was gone before. Dryden.
3. [From hoſtis, Latin.] An army; numbers aſſembled for
War.
Let ev'ry ſoldier hew him down a bough,
And bear’t before him; thereby ſhall we ſhadow
The numbers of our hoſt. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Then through the fiery pillar, and the cloud,
God looking forth, will trouble all his hoſt,
And craze your chariot-wheels. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
After theſe came arm’d, with ſpear and ſhield,
An hºſt ſo great as cover'd all the field. Dryden.
4. Any great number.
Give to a gracious meſſage
An hoſt of tongues; but let ill tidings tell
Themſelves, when they be felt. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
5. [Hoſia, Latin; hoſtie, French.] The ſacrifice of the maſs in
the Romiſh church; the conſecrated wafer.
To Host. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To take up entertainment.
Go, bear it to the centaur, where we hoſt;
- And ſtay there, Dromio, 'till I come to thee. Shakeſpeare.
2. To encounter in battle.
Strange to us it ſeem'd
At firſt, that angel ſhould with angel war,
And in fierce hoſtings meet. Milton's Paradiſe Left, b. vi.
From his loins
New authors of diffenſion ſpring; from him
Two branches, that in hoſting long contend
For ſov’reign ſway. Phillips.
3. To review a body of men; to muſter.
Lords have had the leading of their own followers to the
general hoſtings. Spenſer on Ireland.
Host AGE. n.ſ. [oſlage, French. J . One given in pledge for
ſecurity of performance of conditions.
Your hºſłages I have, ſo have you mine;
And we ſhall talk before we fight. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopat.
Do this meſſage honourably;
And if he ſtand on hoſtage for his ſafety,
Bid him demand what pledge will pleaſe him beſt. Shakespeare
He that hath wife and children, hath given hoſtages to for-
tune; for they are impediments to great enterpriſes, either of
virtue or miſchief. Bacon, Eſſay 8.
They who marry give hoſtages to the publick, that they will
not attempt the ruin or diſturb the peace of it. Atterbury.
The Romans having ſeized a great number of hºſtages, ac-
quainted them with their reſolution. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Ho’s T E L. } l !--&gt; - -
Hºjsy, m.ſ.. [hºſtel, hºſte'erie, French..] An inn. Ainſ.
Ho's Tess. n.ſ.. [hoſlºſe, French, from hy?..] A female hoſt;
a woman that gives entertainment.
Fair and noble hoſteſ, -
We are your gueſt to-night. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Ye were beaten out of door,
And rail'd upon the hºſieſ of the houſe. Shakeſpeare.
Be as kind an hoſteſ, as you have been to me, and you can
never fail of another huſband. Dryden's Aºn. Dedicat.
Ho's TESS-SHIP. n.ſ.. [from hoſ'ſ...] The chara&amp;ter of an
hoſteſs,
It is my father's will I ſhould take on me
The hºſºft-ſhip o' th' day: you're welcome, firs. Shakeſp.
-
Shakeſp. King Lear.
HO'STILE. adj. [hºſtilis, Latin.] Adverſe; oppoſite; ſuitable
to an enemy.
- He has now at laſt
Giv'n hºſtile ſtrokes, and that not in the preſence
Of dreaded juſtice, but on the miniſters
That do diſtribute it.
Fierce Juno's hate,
Added to hoſtile force, ſhall urge thy fate.
Shakespeare Coriºlarius.
Dryden’s AFn.
Ho'stility. m. ſ. [hoſtilité, Fr. from hoſiile.] The practices
of an open enemy; open war; oppoſition in war.
Neither by treaſon nor hyſłility
To ſeek to put me down, and reign thyſelf. Shakeſp. H.VI.
Hºſtility being thus ſuſpended with France, preparation was
made for war againſt Scotland. Hayward.
- What peace can we return,
But, to our pow'r, hoſtility and hate,
Untam'd reluctance and revenge Milt. Parad. Loft, b. ii.
In this bloody diſpute we have ſhewed ourſelves fair, nay,
generous adverſaries; and have carried on even our hºſtilities
with humanity. Atterbury's Sermons,
Ho's TL.E.R. m. / [hºſteller, from hoſtel..] One who has the care
of horſes at an inn.
The cauſe why they are now to be permitted is want of
convenient inns for lodging travellers on horſeback, and
hoſłlers to tend their horſes by the way. Spenſer on Ireland.
HOSTRY. m. ſ. [corrupted from hºſtelry..] A place where the
horſes of gueſts are kept.
Swift rivers are with ſudden ice conſtrain'd,
And ſtudded wheels are on its back ſuſtain'd;
An hoſlry now for waggons, which before -
Tall ſhips of burden on its boſom bore. Dryden's Geºrg.
HOT. adj. [pat, Saxon; hat, Scottiſh.]
1. Having the power to excite the ſenſe of heat; contrary to
cold; fiery.
What is thy name
——Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.
–No, though thou call'ſt thyſelf a hotter name
Than any is in hell. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.,
The great breezes which the motion of the air in great
circles, ſuch as are under the girdle of the world, produceth,
do refrigerate; and therefore, in thoſe parts, noon is nothing
ſo hot as about nine in the forenoon. Bacon's Natural Hyłory.
Hot and cold were in one body fixt;
And ſoft with hard, and light with heavy mixt. Dryden.
Black ſubſtances do ſooneſt of all others become hot in the
ſun's light, and burn; which effect may proceed partly from
the multitude of refračtions in a little room, and partly from
eaſy commotion of ſo very ſmall corpuſcles. Newtºn's Opt.
2. Luſtful; lewd.
What hotter hours,
Unregiſter'd in vulgar fame, you have -
Luxuriouſly pick'd out. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
Now the hot blooded gods aſſiſt me! remember, Jove, thou
was’t a bull for thy Europa. Shakeſp.
3. Strongly affected by ſenſible qualities: in alluſion to dogs
hunting.
Nor law, nor checks of conſcience will he hear,
When in hot ſcent of gain and full career. Dryden.
4. Violent; furious; dangerous.
That of Carthagena, where the Spaniards had warning of
our coming, and had put themſelves in their full ſtrength, was
one of the hotteſt ſervices, and moſt dangerous aſſaults, that
hath been known. Bacon's Iſar with Spain.
He reſolved to ſtorm; but his ſoldiers declined that hot ſer-
vice, and plied it with artillery. Clarendon, b. viii.
To court the cry directs us, when we found
Th' aſſault ſo hot, as if 'twere only there. Denham.
Our army
. Is now in hot engagement with the Mocrs. Dr, den.
5. Ardent; vehement; precipitate.
Come, come, lord Mortimer, you are as ſlow,
As hot lord Percy is on fire to go. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Nature to youth hot raſhneſs doth diſpenſe,
But with cold prudence age doth recompenſe. Denham.
Achilles is impatient, hot, revengeful; Æneas, patient,
confiderate, and careful of his people. Dryd. Fabes, Preface.
6. Eager; keen in deſire. -
It is no wonder that men, either perplexed in the neceſ.
ſary affairs of life, or hot in the purſuit of pleaſures, ſhould
not ſeriouſly examine their tenets. Loºke.
Quoth Ralph, a jointure,
Which makes him have ſo hºt a mind tº her.
7. Piquant; acrid. -
Hot RED. m. ſ. A bed of earth made hot by the fermentation
of dung.
The bed we call a hothed is this: there was taken horſedung,
old and well rotted ; this was laid upon a bank half a foot
high, and ſupported round about with planks, and upon the
top was caſt fifted earth two fingers deep. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtºry.
Preſerve the hotbed as much as poſſible from rain. Eve',”.
Hot BRA'1NED. ad;. ſhot and brain. J. Violent; vehement;
furious.
Hudibrar.
You
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O V
H O U
You ſhall find 'em either hotbrain'd youth,
Or needy bankrupts. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Hotco'ckles. m. ſ. [hautes coquilles, French..] A play in which
one covers his eyes, and gueſſes who ſtrikes him.
The chytindra is certainly not our hitcockles; for that was
by pinching, not by ſtriking. Arbuthn, and Pope's Mar. Scrill.
As at hotcockles once I laid me down,
And felt the weighty hand of many a clown,
Buxoma gave a gentle tap, and I
Quick roſe, and read ſoft miſchief in her eye. Gay's Paſº.
Hor H EA'DE D. cdj. [hot and head.] Wehement; violent ;
paſſionate.
One would not make the ſame perſon zealous for a ſtand-
ing army and publick liberty; nor a hotheaded, crackbrained
coxcomb forward for a ſcheme of moderation. Arbuthnot.
Hot House. n.ſ. ſhot and houſe.]
1. A bagnio ; a place to ſweat and cup in.
Now ſhe profeſſes a hothouſe, which, I think, is a very ill
houſe too. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
2. A brothel.
Where lately harbour'd many a famous whore,
A purging bill, now fix’d upon the door,
Tells you it is a hothouſe; ſo it may,
And ſtill be a whorehouſe: th’ are ſynonyma. Ben. johnſºn.
Hot L Y. adv. [from hot...]
1. With heat; not coldly.
2. Violently; vehemently.
The ſtag was in the end ſo hotly purſued, that he was driven
to make courage of deſpair. Sidney.
I do conteſt .
As hotly and as nobly with thy love,
As ever in ambitious ſtrength I did
Contend againſt thy valour. Shakespeare Coriolanut.
The enemy, now at hand, began hºtly to ſkirmiſh in divers
places with the Chriſtians. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Though this controverſy be revived, and hºtly agitated, I
doubt whether it be not a nominal diſpute. Boyle.
3. Luſtfully.
Voracious birds, that hotly bill and breed,
And largely drink, becauſe on ſalt they feed. Dryden.
Hot MoU'THE D. adj. [hot and mouth. J Headſtrong; ungo-
vernable. º -
I fear my people's faith,
That hotmouth'd beaſt that bears againſt the curb,
Hard to be broken. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Ho"TN ess. n.ſ.. [from hot..] Heat; violence; fury.
Ho'ºrchpotch. n.ſ.. [haché en poche, French; or hachee en pot,
French, as Camden has it, as being boiled up in a pot; yet the
former corruption is now generally uſed.] A mingled haſh;
a In 1Xture.
Such patching maketh Littleton's hotchpot of our tongue,
and, in effect, brings the ſame rather to a Babelliſh confuſion
than any one entire language. Camden's Remains.
A mixture of many diſagreeing colours is ever unpleaſant to
the eye, and a mixture or hotchpotch of many taſtes is unplea-
ſant to the taſte. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Nor limbs, nor bones, nor carcaſs would remain;
But a maſh'd heap, a hotchpotch of the ſlain. Dryd, juvenal.
Ho'ºtspur. m. ſ. [hot and ſpur.]
1. A man violent, paſſionate, precipitate and heady.
My nephew's treſpaſs may be well forgot;
It hath the excuſe of youth and heat of blood,
A harebrain'd hotſpur, govern'd by a ſpleen. Shakespeare H. IV.
Wars are begun by hairbrained diſſolute captains, paraſitical
fawners, unquiet hotſpurs, and reſtleſs innovators. Burton.
2 A kind of pea of ſpeedy growth.
Of ſuch peas as are planted or ſown in gardens, the hºtſpur
is the ſpeedieſt of any in growth. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Ho’ſ SPURRED. adj. [from hotſpur. J. Vehement; raſh;
heady.
º, draw Mars like a young Hippolytus, with an effeminate
countenance, or Venus like that hotſpurred Harpalice in Virgil,
this proceedeth from a ſenſeleſs judgment. Peacham.
lfov E. The preterite of heave.
Hovel. n.ſ. [Diminutive of pope, houſe, Saxon.]
1. A ſhed open on the ſides, and covered overhead.
So likewiſe a hovel will ſerve for a roome,
To ſtacke on the peaſe, when harveſt ſhall come. Tuſſºr.
If you make a large hovel, thatched, over ſome quantity of
ground, plank the ground over, and it will breed ſaltpetre.
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Your hay it is mow’d, your corn it is reap'd,
Your barns will be full, and your hovel, heap'd. Dryden.
2. A mean habitation; a cottage.
The men clamber up the acclivities, dragging their kine
with them, where they feed them and milk them, and do all
the dairy-work in ſuch ſorry hovels and ſheds as they build to
inhabit in during the Summer. Ray on the Creation.
To Hov E L. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſhelter in an hovel.
And was’t thou fain, poor father, -
To hovel thee with ſwine and rogues forlorn,
In ſhort and muſly ſtraw? Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
3
Ho've N. part, paſſ. [from heave..] Raiſed; ſwelled; tumefied,
Tom Piper hath hoven and puffed up cheeks;
If cheeſe be ſo hºven, make Ciſle to ſeek creeks. Tuſſºr.
To Ho've R. v. n. [haviº, to hang over, Welſh )
1. To hang in the air over head, without flying off one way or
other.
Some fiery devil hovers in the ſky,
And pours down miſchief. Shakespeare King jihn.
Ah, my poor princes' ah, my tender babes'
If yet your gentle ſouls fly in the air,
And be not fix’d in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings,
And hear your mother's lamentation. Shakespeare Richard IIIt
A hovering miſt came ſwimming o'er his fight,
And ſeal’d his eyes in everlaſting night. Dryden's £n.
Great flights of birds are hovering about the bridge, and
ſettling upon it. Addiſon's Speciator.
'Till as the earthly part decays and falls,
The captive breaks her priſon's mould'ring walls;
Hovers a-while upon the ſad remains,
Which now the pile, or ſepulchre, contains,
And thence with liberty unbounded flies,
Impatient to regain her native ſkies. Prior.
Some leſs refin'd, beneath the moon's pale light,
Hover, and catch the ſhooting ſtars by night. Pºpe.
2. To ſtand in ſuſpenſe or expectation.
The landlord will no longer covenant with him; for that he
daily looketh after change and alteration, and hovereth in ex-
pećtation of new worlds. Speºſer on Ireland.
3. To wander about one place.
We ſee ſo warlike a prince at the head of ſo great an army,
hovering on the borders of our confederates. Addiſon.
The truth and certainty is ſeen, and the mind fully poſſeſſes
itſelf of it; in the other, it only hovers about it. Locke.
Hou GH. n.ſ. [pox, Saxon.]
1. The lower part of the thigh.
Blood ſhall be from the ſword unto the belly, and dung of
men unto the camel's hough. 2 Eſd. xiii. 36.
2. [Hué, French.J. An adz; an hoe. See Hoe.
Did they really believe that a man, by houghs and an ax,
could cut a god out of a tree ? Stillingfleet.
To Hou GH. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To hamſtring; to diſable by cutting the finews of the ham.
Thou ſhalt hough their horſes. joſ. ii. 6.
2. To cut up with an hough or hoe.
3. To hawk. This orthography is uncommon. See To Hawk.
Neither could we hough or ſpit from us; much leſs could
we ſneeze or cough. Grew's Coſmol. Sac. b. i.
Houlet. m. ſ. The vulgar name for an owl. The Scots and
northern counties ſtill retain it.
Hoult. n.ſ. [pole, Saxon.] A ſmall wood. Obſolete.
Or as the wind, in hoults and ſhady greaves,
A murmur makes among the boughs and leaves. Fairfax-
HOUND. n.ſ. [puno, Saxon; huna, Scottiſh. J A dog uſed
in the chaſe.
Hounds and greyhounds, mungrels, ſpaniels, curs,
Are cleped all by the name of dogs. Stakeſpeare’s Macbeth.
Jaſon threw, but fail'd to wound
The boar, and ſlew an undeſerving hound, :
And through the dog the dart was nail'd to ground. Dryd.
The kind ſpaniel and the faithful hound,
Likeſt that fox in ſhape and ſpecies found,
Purſues the noted path and covets home. Priºr.
To Hound. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſet on the chaſe. -
God is ſaid to harden the heart permiſfively, but not ope-
ratively nor effectively; as he who only lets looſe a greyhound
out of the ſlip, is ſaid to hound him at the hare. B, amhall.
2. To hunt; to purſue.
If the wolves had been hounded by tygers, they ſhould have
worried them. L’Eſtrange.
Ho'UNDFIs H. n.ſ. A kind of fiſh. Ainſworth.
Houndsto'N GUE. m.ſ.. [cynoglºſſum, Latin.] . A plant.
The cup of the flower conſiſts of one leaf, deeply cut into
five parts: the flower conſiſts of one leaf, is funnel-ſhaped,
and cut into five ſegments: the pointal, which ariſes from the
bottom of the flower, changes into a fruit compoſed of four
rough, each for the moſt part burry cells, and containing a
flat ſeed affixed to a pyramidal and quadrilateral placenta. The
proper ſeaſon to take the roots up is ſoon after the leaves
decay. Miller. -
Ho'UNDTRE e. n.ſ. A kind of tree. Ainſworth.
Houp. n.ſ.. [upupa, Latin.] The puet. Ainſworth.
HOUR. m. ſ. [heure, French ; hora, Latin.] -
1. The twenty-fourth part of a natural day; the ſpace of fixty
minutes.
See the minutes how they run :
How many makes the hour full compleat,
How many hours bring about the day,
How many days will finiſh up the year, r
How many years a mortal man may live. Sha&amp;#. H. VI.
2. A particular time.
Wexation
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O U
H C U
$
º,
;
:
:
.
:
Vexation almoſt ſtops my breath,
hat ſunder'd friends greet in the hour of death.
When we can intreat an hour to ſerve,
We'll ſpend it in ſome words upon that buſineſs,
If you would grant the time. Shakespeare's Macleth.
The conſcious wretch muſt all his arts reveal,
From the firſt moment of his vital breath,
To his laſt hour of unrepenting death.
3. The time as marked by the clock.
The hour runs through the rougheſt day. Shakeſpeare.
Our neighbour let her floor to a genteel man, who kept
good hours. - 7atler, N°. 88.
They are as loud any hour of the morning, as our own
countrymen at midnight. Addiſon's Guardian.
Ho'UR GLAss. n.ſ.. [hour and glaſs.]
1. A glaſs filled with ſand, which, running through a narrow
hole, marks the time.
Next morning, known to be a morning better by the hour-
glaſs than by the day's clearneſs. Sidney.
If a man be in ſickneſs, the time will ſeem longer without a
clock or hourglaſ than with it; for the mind doth value every
Shakeſp.
Dryden's ACn.
Inoment. “ Bacon.
O, recollečt your thoughts!
Shake not his hourg'aſ, when his haſty ſand
Is ebbing to the laſt. Dryden’s Spaniſh Fryar.
2. Space of time.
elegant.
We, within the hourglaſ of two months, have won one
town, and overthrown great forces in the field. Bacon.
Ho'URLY. adj. [from hour.] Happening or done every hour ;
frequent; often repeated.
Alcyone
Computes how many nights he had been gone,
Obſerves the waining moon with hourly view,
Numbers her age, and wiſhes for a new. Dryden.
We muſt live in hourly expe&amp;tation of having thoſe troops
recalled, which they now leave with us Swift.
Ho’URLY. adv. [from hour.] Every hour; frequently.
She deſerves a lord, -
That twenty ſuch rude boys might tend upon,
And hourly call her miſtreſs. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
Our eſtate may not endure
Hazard ſo near us, as doth hourly grow
Out of his lunacies. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
They with ceaſeleſs cry
Surround me, as thou ſaw'ſt 5 hourly conceiv'd,
And hourly born, with ſorrow infinite
To me ! Milton’s Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii.
Great was their ſtrife, which hourly was renew’d,
*Till each with mortal hate his rival view’d. Dryden.
Hou'RPLATE. m. ſ. ſhour and plate.] The dial; the plate on
which the hours pointed by the hand of a clock are inſcribed.
If eyes could not view the hand, and the characters
of the hourplate, and thereby at a diſtance ſee what o'clock
it was, their owner could not be much benefited by that acute-
neſs. Locke.
HOUSE. m. ſ. ſpur, Saxon; huſs, Dutch; huſ, Scottiſh )
1. A place wherein a man lives; a place of human abode.
Sparrows muſt not build in his houſe eaves. Shakeſpeare.
Houſes are built to live in, not to look on ; therefore let uſe
be preferred before uniformity, except where both may be
had. Bacºn, Eſſay 46.
In a houſe the doors are moveable, and the rooms ſquare;
yet the houſe is neither moveable nor ſquare. //atts.
2. Any place of abode.
The bees with ſmoke, the doves with noiſome ſtench,
Are from their hives and houſes driven away. Shakeſpeare.
3. Place in which religious or ſtudious perſons live in common ;
monaſtery; college.
Theodoſius arrived at a religious hotſ in the city, where
now Conſtantia reſided. Addison's Spediator.
4. The manner of living; the table.
He kept a miſerable houſe, but the blame was laid wholly
upon madam. Swift.
5. Station of a planet in the heavens, aſtrologically confidered.
Pure ſpiritual ſubſtances we cannot converſe with, therefore
have need of means of communication, which ſome make to
be the celeſtial houſes: thoſe who are for the celeſtial houſes
worſhip the planets, as the habitations of intelle&amp;tual ſub-
ſtances that animate them. Stillingfleet.
6. Family of anceſtors, deſcendants, and kindred; race.
The red roſe and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our ſtriving houſes. Shakespeare Henry VI.
An ignominious ranſom and free pardon
Are of two houſes; lawful mercy ſure
Is nºthing kin to foul redemption. Shakespeare Meaſ for Meaſure.
By delaying my laſt fine, upon your grace's acceſſion to the
patrimonies of your houſe, I may ſeem to have made a for-
feiture. Dryden's Fables, Dedication.
A poet is not born in ev'ry race;
Two of a houſe few ages can afford,
One to perform, another to record.
A manner of ſpeaking rather affected than
Dryden's Fables.
House BREA'KING. m. ſ. [houſe and break.] Burglary.
. A body of the parliament; the lords or commons colleśvely
confidered. -
Nor were the crimes obſeéted againſt him ſo clear, as to give
convincing ſatisfaction to the major part of both houſe, eſpe-
cially that of the lords. King Charles.
To Hous E. v. a. [from the noun.]
. To harbour; to admit to reſidence.
Palladius wiſhed him to houſe all the Helots, and make them-
ſelves maſters of the gates. Sidney.
Upon the North-ſea a valley houſath a gentleman, who hath
worn out his former name. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
Slander lives upon ſucceffion,
For ever houſed where it gets poſſeſſion. Shakeſpeare.
Mere cottagers are but houſed beggars. Bacon.
Oh, can your counſel his deſpair defer,
Who now is houſed in his ſepulchre Sandys,
We find them houſing themſelves under ground in dens.
South's Sermons.
In expe&amp;tation of ſuch times as theſe,
A chapel hºus’d 'em, truly call'd of eaſe. Dryden.
2. To ſhelter; to keep under a roof.
As we houſe hot country plants to ſave them, ſo we may
houſe our own to forward them. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Houſe your choiceſt carnations, or rather ſet them under a
pent-houſe, to preſerve them in extremity of weather. Evelyn.
Wit in northern climates will not blow,
Except, like orange-trees, ’tis hous’d from ſnow. Dryden.
To Hobsº. v. n.
1. To take ſhelter; to keep abode; to reſide.
Ne ſuffer it to hºuſ: there half a day. Huhberd’s Tºle.
Graze where you will, you ſhall not houſe with me. Shakespeare
Summers three times eight, ſave one,
She had told ; alas, too ſoon,
After ſo ſhort time of breath,
To houſe with darkneſs and with death. Milton.
2. To have an aſtrological ſtation in the heavens.
In fear of this, obſerve the ſtarry ſigns -
Where Saturn houſes, and where Hermes joins. Dryden.
I houſing in the lion's hateful ſign,
Bought ſenates and deſerting troops are mine. Dryden.
Hous EBREA’KER. m. ſ. [houſe and break.] Burglar; one who
makes his way into houſes to ſteal.
All houſebreakers and ſharpers had thief written in their
foreheads. - L’E/irange.
When he hears of a rogue to be tried for robbing or houſ-
breaking, he will ſend the whole paper to the govern-
Inent. Swift.
House Doc. n.ſ. ſhowſ and dºg..] A maſtiff kept to guard
the houſe.
A very good hoºfdog, but a dangerous cur to ſtrangers,
had a bell about his neck. L’Eſtrange.
You ſee the goodneſs of the maſter even in the old houſe-
dºg. Addiſon's Spectator.
House Hot D. n.ſ.. [houſe and hold.]
1. A family living together.
Two houſ/olds, both alike in dignity,
In fair Verona, where we lay our ſcene,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. Shakeſpeare.
A little kingdom is a great huſhold, and a great houſhed a
little kingdom. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Of God obſerv’d
The one juſt man alive, by his command,
Shall build a wond’rous ark, as thou beheld'ſt,
To ſave himſelf and hotſhold from amidſt
A world devote to univerſal wreck. Milt. Parad. Lºff, b. xi.
He has always taken to himſelf, amongſt the ſons of men,
a peculiar houſhold of his love, which at all times he has che-
riſhed as a father, and governed as a maſter: this is the pro-
per houſhold of faith; in the firſt ages of the world, 'twas
fometimes literally no more than a ſingle hotſhold, or ſome few
families. Spratt's Sermons.
Great crimes muſt be with greater crimes repaid,
And ſecond funerals on the former laid;
Let the whole houſho'd in one ruin fall,
And may Diana's curſe o'ertake us all.
Learning's little houſhºld did embark,
Dryden's Fables.
With her world's fruitful ſyſtem in her ſacred ark. Swift.
In his own church he keeps a ſeat,
Says grace before and after meat; *
And calls, without affecting airs,
His houſhold twice a day to prayers. Swift.
2. Family life; domeſtick management.
An inventory, thus importing
The ſeveral parcels of his plate, his treaſure,
Rich ſtuffs, and ornaments of hotſhold. Shakeſp. H. VIII.
3. It is uſed in the manner of an adjective, to ſignify domeſtick;
belonging to the family.
Cornelius called two of his houſho'd ſervants. Acºs x. 7.
II O - For
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O U
H O W *
For nothing lovelier can be found
in woman, than to ſtudy hºuſhold good; -
And good works in her huſband to promote. Milt. Pa. Loff.
It would be endleſs to enumerate the oaths and blaſphemies
among the men, among the women the neglect of hºſhºld
affairs. Swift.
Household ER. m.ſ. [from houſehold.] Maſter of a family.
A certain houſeholder planted a vineyard. Mat. xxi. 33.
Hou'se Holds UFF. m. ſ. [houſehold and /luff] Furniture of
an houſe; utenſils convenient for a family.
In this war that he maketh, he ſtill flieth from his foe, and
lurketh in the thick woods, waiting for advantages: his cloke
is his bed, yea and his houſhold/iuff. Speºſer on Ireland.
A great part of the building was conſumed, with much
coſtly houſholdſtuff. Bacon's Henry VII.
The poor woman had her jeſt for her houſho!d/luff, and paid
her phyſician with a conceit for his money. L'E/irange.
Hou's E KEEP E.R. n ſ. [houſe and keep.]
1. Houſeholder; maſter of a family.
To be ſaid an honeſt man and a good houſekeeper, goes as
fairly as to ſay a graceful man and a great ſcholar. Shakeſpeare.
If I may credit houſekeepers and ſubſtantial tradeſmen, all
ſorts of proviſions and commodities are riſen exceſſively. Locke.
2. One who lives in plenty. º
The people are apter to applaud houſekeepers than houſe-
raiſers. //otton.
3. One who lives much at home.
How do you both You are manifeſt houſekeepers. What
are you ſewing here Sºakeſpeare's Cºriolanus.
4. A woman ſervant that has care of a family, and ſuperintends
the other maid ſervants.
Merry folks, who want by chance
A pair to make a country-dance,
Call the old houſekeeper, and get her
To fill a place for want of better. Swift.
5. A houſedog.
Diſtinguiſh the hºuſekeeper, the hunter. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Hou’s E KEE PIN G. adj. [houſe and keep. J Domeſtick; uſeful to
a family.
His houſe, for pleaſant proſpect, large ſcope, and other houſe-
keeping commodities, challengeth the pre-eminence. Carew.
Hous E KEE PIN G. m. ſ. Hoſpitality; liberal and plentiful table.
I hear your grace hath ſworn out houſekeeping. Shakeſpeare.
His table was one of the laſt that gave us an example of the
old hotſ keeping of an Engliſh nobleman: an abundance reigned,
which ſhewed the maſter's hoſpitality. Prior.
Ho'Use L. n.ſ. [purl, Saxon, from hunſel, Gothick, a ſacrifice,
or hoſtia, dimin. hoſłioſa, Latin.] The holy euchariſt.
To Ho'U's El. v. a. [from the noun J. To give or receive the
euchariſt. Both the noun and verb are obſolete.
Ho’Us E LEEK. m. ſ. [houſe and leek.] A plant.
The flower conſiſts of ſeveral leaves, which are placed or-
bicularly, and expanded in form of a roſe; out of whoſe
flower-cup riſes the pointal, which afterwards turns to a
fruit, compoſed, as it were, of many ſeed-veſſels reſemblin
huſks, which are collected into a ſort of head, and full of
ſmall ſeeds. The ſpecies are ſix. Mill, r. -
The acerbs ſupply their quantity of cruder acids; as juices
of apples, grapes, the ſorrels, and houſeleck. Floyer.
Hous El Ess. adj. [from houſe..] Without abode; wanting ha-
bitation.
Poor naked wretches,
How ſhall your houſelys heads and unfed ſides,
Your loop'd and window’d raggedneſs, defend you. Shakespeare
This hungry, houſelſ, ſuffering, dying Jeſus, fed many
thouſands with five loaves and two fiſhes. If eſt.
Hous E M A. D. m. ſ. [houſe and maid.] A maid employed to
keep the houſe clean.
The houſemaid may put out the candle againſt the looking-
glaſs. Swift.
Ho'Use Room. n.ſ.. [h uſe and room..] Place in a houſe.
Houſeroom, that coſts him nothing, he beſtows;
Yet ſtill we ſcribble on, though ſtill we loſe. Dryden's juv.
Hous EsNAIL. n.ſ. A kind of ſnail.
Ho'Us EwARM IN G. m. ſ. [houſe and warm.] A feaſt or merry-
making upon going into a new houſe.
Hous No. m. ſ. [from houſe.]
1. Quantity of inhabited building.
London is ſupplied with people to increaſe its inhabitants,
according to the increaſe of houſing. Graunt.
2. From hoiſſeaux, he ſes, or houſes, French J Cloath originally
uſed to keep off dirt, now added to ſaddles as ornamental.
Hºus is G. adj. [from houſe ] Provided for entertainment at
firſt entrance into a houſe; houſewarming.
His own two hands the holy knot did knit,
That none but death for ever can divide;
His own two hands, for ſuch a turn moſt fit,
The he ſing fire did kindle and provide. Fairy 3ueen, b. i.
Houss. 7. / [from hºuſeaux, or hºuſes, French..] Covering of
cloath originally uſed to keep off dirt, row added to ſaddles
as ornamental; houſings. This word, though uſed by Dry-
dºm, I do not remember in any other place. `
Six lions hides, with thongs together faſt,
His upper part defended to his waiſt;
And where man ended, the continu’d veſt,
Spread on his back, the houſ; and trappings of a beaſt. Dryd.
Ho'Us E wife. m. ſ. [houſe and wife. This is now frequently
written huſwife, or huſſy..] The miſtreſs of a family.
You will think it unfit for a good bºuſewife to ſtir in or to
buſy herſelf about her houſewifry. Spenſer on Ireland.
I have room enough, but the kind and hearty hºuſewife is
dead. Pope to Swift.
3. A female oeconomiſt. -
Fitting is a mantle for a bad man, and ſurely for a bad
houſewife it is no leſs convenient; for ſome of them, that be
wandering women, it is half a wardrobe. Spenſer on Ireland.
Let us ſit and mock the good houſ-wiſe, fortune, from her
wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be diſpoſed equally. Shakespeare
Farmers in degree,
He a good huſband, a good hou'eviſe ſhe. Dryden.
Early houſewives leave the bed,
When living embers on the hearth are ſpread. Dryden.
The faireſt among the daughters of Britain ſhew themſelves
good ſtateſwomen as well as good houſewives. Addiſ, Freehold.
3. One ſkilled in female buſineſs.
He was bred up under the tuition of a tender mother, 'till
ſhe made him as good an houſewife as herſelf: he could pre-
ſerve apricocks, and make jellies. Addiſon's Spectator.
HousewifeLY. adj. [from houſewife.] Skilled in the acts be-
coming a houſewife.
Housewif Ely. adv. [from hºuſewife.] With the ceconomy
of a houſewife.
Housewiff Ry. m. ſ. [from houſewife.]
1. Domeſtick or female buſineſs; management becoming the
miſtreſs of a family.
You will think it unfit for a good houſewife to ſtir in or to
buſy herſelf about her houſewifery. Spenſer on Jr. land.
He ordain’d a lady for his priſe,
Generally praiſeful; fair and young, and ſkill'd in houſe-
wiferies. - Chapman's Iliads.
Little butter was exported abroad, and that diſcredited by
the houſewifery of the Iriſh in making it up. 7 ºf le.
2. Female oeconomy.
Learn good works for neceſſary uſes; for St. Paul expreſſes
the obligation of Chriſtian women to good houſewifery, and
charitable proviſions for their family and neighbourhood. Tayſ.
HOW. adv. [pu, Saxon; hoe, Dutch.]
1. In what manner; to what degree.
How long wilt thou refuſe to humble thyſelf tº; me?
X. X, 7.
How much better is it to get wiſdom than gold and toget
underſtanding rather to be choſen than ſilver ? Prov, xvi. 16.
How oft is the candle of the wicked put out And hºw oft
cometh their deſtruction upon them : job xxi. 17.
O how love I thy law: it is my meditation. Pſ. cxix. 97.
How many children's plaints, and mother's cries'
How many woful widows left to bow
To ſad diſgrace Danie’s Civil Iſ ar.
Conſider into how many differing ſubſtances it may be ana-
lyſed by the fire. Loyle,
2. In what manner.
Mark'd you not,
How that the guilty kindred of the queen
Look'd pale, when they did hear of Clarence death Shakespeare
Proſecute the means of thy deliverance
By ranſom, or how elſe. A ſilton's Mºoniſłes.
We examine the why, the what, and the how of things.
L’É/ºrange.
'Tis much in our power hºw to live; but not at all when
or hºw to die. L'Aſirange.
It is pleaſant to ſee how the ſmall territories of this little re-
publick are cultivated to the beſt advantage. Addison an Italy.
3. For what reaſon; from what cauſe.
How now, my love? Why is your cheek ſo pale :
How chance the roſes there do fade ſo faſt : Shakeſpeare.
4. By what means.
How is it thou haſt found it ſo quickly. Gen. xxvii. 10.
Men would have the colours of birds feathers, if they
could tell how; or they will have gay ſkins inſtead of gay
clothes. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
5. In what ſtate. -
For how ſhall I go up to my father ? Gen. xliv. 34.
Whence am I forc'd, and whither am I born ?
How, and with what reproach ſhall I return? Dryden's Żn.
6. It is uſed in a ſenſe marking proportion or correſpondence.
Behold, he put no truſt in his ſervants, how much leſs on
them that dwell in houſes of clay, whoſe foundation is in the
duſt. job iv. 19.
A great diviſion fell among the nobility, ſo much the more
dangerous by how much the ſpirits were more active and
high. Hayward.
By how much they would diminiſh the preſent extent of
the ſea, ſo much they would impair the fertility, and fountains
and rivers of the earth. Lentity's Sermony.
7. It
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H O VV
H U D
7. It is much uſed in exclamation.
H w are the mighty fallen Sam.
How doth the city fit ſolitary as a widow. Lam. i. 1.
8. In an affirmative ſenſe, not eaſily explained; that ſo it is ;
that.
Thick clouds put us in ſome hope of land, knowing how
that part of the South ſea was utterly unknown, and might
have iſlands or continents. Bacon's New Atlantis.
How BE/IT. ladv. [how be it..] Nevertheleſs; notwithſtand-
How B E. } ing; yet; however. Not now in uſe.
Siker thou ſpeak'ſt like a lewd lorrel,
Of heaven to deemen ſo,
Howbe I am but rude and borrel,
Yet nearer ways I know. Spenser.
Things ſo ordained are to be kept, howbeit not neceſſarily,
any longer than 'till there grow ſome urgent cauſe to ordain
the contrary. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
There is a knowledge which God hath always revealed
unto them in the works of nature: this they honour and
eſteem highly as profound wiſdom, howbeit this wiſdom ſaveth
them not. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 22.
There was no army tranſmitted out of England, howbeit
the Engliſh colonies in Ireland did win ground upon the
Iriſh. Davies on Ireland.
How Dºy E. [Contračted from how do ye.] In what ſtate is your
health. A meſſage of civility.
Years make men more taikative, but leſs writative; ſo that
I now write no letters but of plain buſineſs, or plain howd'ye's,
to thoſe few I am forced to correſpond with. Pope.
How E"v ER. adv. [how and ever.] -
1. In whatſoever manner; in whatſoever degree.
- This ring he holds
In moſt rich choice; yet in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not ſeem too dear,
Howe'er repented of. Shakeſp All's well that ends well.
To trace the ways
Of higheſt agents, deem'd however wiſe. Milton's Par. Loft.
2. At all events; happen what will; at leaſt.
..Our chief end is to be freed from all, if it may be, however
from the greateſt evils; and to enjoy, if it may be, all good,
however the chiefeſt. Tillotſon, Sermon 1.
3. Nevertheleſs; notwithſtanding; yet.
In your excuſe your love does little ſay;
You might howe'er have took a fairer way. Dryden.
Its views are bounded on all fides by ſeveral ranges of moun-
tains, which are however at ſo great a diſtance, that they leave
a wonderful variety of beautiful proſpects. Addison on Italy.
I do not build my reaſoning wholly on the caſe of perſecu-
tion, however I do not exclude it. Atterbury.
Few turn their thoughts to examine how thoſe diſeaſes in a
ſtate are bred, that haſten its end; which would, hºwever, be
a very uſeful enquiry. Swift.
To HowL. v. n. [huglen, Dutch; ululo, Latin J
1. To cry as a wolf or dog. -
Methought a legion of foul fiends
Environ'd me, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very noiſe
I trembling wak'd. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
If wolves had at thy gate hºwl'd that ſtern time,
Thou ſhould'ſt have ſaid, Go, porter, turn the key. Shakespeare
He found him in a deſert land, and in the waſte howling
wilderneſs. Deutr. xxxii. 10.
As when a ſort of wolves infeſt the night,
With their wild howings at fair Cynthia's light. //aller.
Hard as his native rocks, cold as his ſword,
Fierce as the wolves that howl'd around his birth;
He hates the tyrant, and the ſuppliant ſcorns. Smith.
2. To utter cries in diſtreſs. -
Therefore will I howl, and cry out for all Moab. jer. xlviii.
The damned uſe that word in hell,
Howlings attend it. - Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Each new morn
New widows howl, new orphans cry, new ſorrows
- Strike heaven on the face, that it reſounds
As if it felt with Scotland. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I have words
That would be howl"d out in the deſart air,
Where hearing ſhould not catch them. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The noiſe grows louder ſtill:
Rattling of armour, trumpets, drums and ataballes;
And ſometimes peals of ſhouts that rend the heav'ns,
Like victory: then groans again, and howlings
Like thoſe of vanquiſh'd men. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar
- qu J 'paniſh Fryar.
3. To ſpeak with a belluine cry or tone.
Peace, monſter, peace! Go tell thy horrid tale
To ſavages, and howl it out in deſarts'
Me would'ſt thou make the accomplice of thy crimes?
- A. Phillips's Diſtreſ Mother.
4. It is uſed poetically of any noiſe loud and horrid.
HowL. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The cry of a wolf or dog.
Murther,
Alarm'd by his ſentinel the wolf, -
Whoſe howl's his watch. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth:
Theſe and the like rumours are no more than the laſt hºwl;
of a dog diſſected alive. Swift.
2. The cry of a human being in horrour.
She raves, ſhe runs with a diſtracted pace,
And fills with horrid howls the publick place. Dryden's Án.
Howsoever, adv. [how and ſoever.] -
1. In what manner ſoever. See However.
Beroſus, who, after Moſes, was one of the moſt ancient,
howſoever he hath been ſince corrupted, doth in the ſubſtance
of all agree. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
2. Although.
The man doth fear God, howſºever it ſeems not in him.
Shakeſpeare's Much Ado about Nothing.
To Hox. v. a. [from pog, Saxon.] To hough; to ham-
ſtring.
Thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honeſty behind, reſtraining
From courſe required. Shakeſp. Winter’s Tale.
Lodronius, perceiving the old ſoldier's meaning, alighted,
and with his ſword hoxed his horſe, ſaying aloud, This day,
valiant ſoldiers, ſhall you have me both your general and fel-
low ſoldier, fighting on foot as one of yourſelves. Knolles.
Hoy. n.ſ.. [hou, old French.] A large boat ſometimes with
one deck.
He ſent to Germany, ſtrange aid to rear;
From whence eftſoons arrived here three hºys
Qf Saxons, whom he for his ſafety employs. Fairy Queen.
To define a barge and hoy, which are between a boat and a
ſhip, is hard. //att,’s Logick.
HU’BBU B. n.ſ.. [I know not the etymology, unleſs it be from
up up, or hobnºb.] A tumult; a riot.
People purſued the buſineſs with all contempt of the go-
vernment; and in the hubbub of the firſt day there appeared
nobody of name or reckoning, but the actors were really of
the dregs of the people. Clarendon.
An univerſal hubbub wild
Of ſtunning ſounds, and voices all confus'd,
Borne through the hollow dark, aſſaults his ear
With loudeſt vehemence. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. ii.
Why wolves raiſe a habbub at her,
And dogs howl when ſhe ſhines in water. Hudibras, p. ii.
Hu'ck ABAck. n.ſ. A kind of linen on which the figures are
raiſed.
HU'ckle BAcked. adj. [hocker, German, a bunch, and back.]
Crooked in the ſhoulders.
HU'ckle Bon E. n.ſ.. [from hucken, Dutch, to ſit down ) The
hipbone. -
HU’cksT E R. }". ſhock, German, a pedlar; hockſter, a ſhe-
HU'ckst E RER. S. pedlar.]
1. One who ſells goods by retail, or in ſmall quantities; a
pedlar. º -
There cannot be a more ignominious trade than the being
huckſters to ſuch vile merchandiſe. Government of the Tongue.
God deliver the world from ſuch guides, or rather ſuch
huckſters of ſouls, the very ſhame of religion. South's Sermons.
Should thy ſhoe wrench aſide, down, down you fall,
And overturn the ſcolding hucyler's ſtall,
The ſcolding huck/her ſhall not o'er thee moan,
But pence expect for nuts and pears o'erthrown. Gay.
There ſhould be a general confederacy of all the ſervants in
every family, for the publick good, to drive thoſe China huck-
łers from the doors. Swift.
Thoſe huck/terers or money-jobbers will be found neceſſary,
if this braſs money is made current. Swift.
2. A trickiſh mean fellow.
Now the ape wanted his huckſler man. Hulb. Tale.
To Hu'ckstER. v. n. [from the noun..] To deal in petty
bargains.
They muſt pay a ſhilling, for changing their piece into ſil-
ver, to ſome huc'ſlering fellow who follows that trade. Swift.
To Hu'DDL.E. v. a. [probably from hood.]
1. To dreſs up cloſe ſo as not to be diſcovered; to mobble.
2. To put on careleſly in a hurry.
At twelve ſhe roſe with much ado;
Her cloaths were huddl'd on by two. Priºr.
Now all in haſte they huddle on
Their hoods, their cloaks, and get them gone. Swift.
3. To cover up in haſte.
4. To perform in a hurry. --
I have given much application to this poem: this is not a
play huddled up in haſte. Dryden.
When continu’d rain
The lab’ring huſband in his houſe reſtrain,
Let him forecaſt his work with timely care,
Which elſe is huddled when the ſkies are fair. Dryd. Virgil.
5. To throw together in confuſion.
Our adverſary, huddling ſeveral ſuppoſitions together, and
that in doubtful and general terms, makes a medley and con-
fuſion. Locke.
Te
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H U F
To Hººp: 1. E. v. 7. To come in a ciowd or hurry.
Giance an eye of pity on his loſſes,
That have of late ſo had..!ed on his back,
Enough to preſs a royal merchant down. Shakeſpeare.
Brown anſwcred after his blunt and huddling manner, Bacºn,
Thyrſis, whoſe artful ſtrains have oft delay'd
The hudding brook to hear his madrigal,
And ſweeten’d every muſkroſe of the dale. Milton.
Their eyes are more imperfect than others; for they will
run againſt things, aſ:d, huddling forwards, fall from high
places. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Hu'DD LE. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Crowd; tumult; confuſion.
That the Ariſtotelian philoſophy is a huddle of words and
terms inſignificant, has been the cenſure of the wiſeſt. Glanv.
Your carrying buſineſs in a huddle,
Has forc'd our rulers to new model. Hudibras, p. iii.
Nature doth nothing in a huddle. L’Eſtrange.
The underſtanding ſees nothing diſtinétly in things remote,
and in a huddle. Locke.
Several merry anſwers were made to my queſtion, which
entertained us 'till bed-time, and filled my mind with a huddle
of ideas. Addiſon's Speciator.
Hu e. n.ſ. [ piepe, Saxon. J
1. Colour; die.
For never in that land
Face of fair lady ſhe before did view,
Or that dread lyon's look her caſt in deadly hue. Fairy Qw.
For now three months have changed thrice their hue.
Fairy &amp;een, canto viii.
To add another hue unto the rainbow,
Is waſteful and ridiculous exceſs. Shakespeare King john.
Flow’rs of all hue, and without thorn the roſe. A.ilton.
To whom the angel, with a ſmile that glow'd
Celeſtial roſy red, love's proper hue,
Anſwer'd. A ſilton's Paradiſe Loft, b. viii.
Your's is much of the camelion hue,
To change the die with diſtant view. Dryden.
2. [ Huſe, French.) A clamour; a legal purſuit; an alarm
given to the country.
Hue and cry, villain, go ' Aſſiſt me, knight, I am undone:
fly, run, hue and cry! villain, I am undone. Shakeſpeare.
Immediately comes a hue and cry after a gang of thieves,
that had taken a purſe upon the road. L’Eſtrange.
If you ſhould hiſs, he ſwears he'll hiſs as high;
And, like a culprit, join the hue and cry. Addiſon.
The hue and cry went after Jack, to apprehend him dead
or alive, wherever he could be found. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
HUE'R. m. ſ. [huer, French, to cry..] One whoſe buſineſs is
to call out to others. -
They lic hovering upon the coaſt, and are directed by a
balker or huer, who ſtan 'eth on the cliff-ſide, and from thence
diſcerneth the courſe of the pilchard. Carew's Surv. of Cornw.
HUFF. n.ſ.. [from hove, or hoven, ſwelled: he is huffed up by
diſempers. So in ſome provinces we ſtill ſay the bread huffs up,
when it begins to heave or ferment: buff, therefore, may be
ferment. . To be in a huff is then to be in a ferment, as we
now ſpeak.]
1. Swell of ſudden anger or arrogance.
Quoth Ralpho, honour's but a word
* To ſwear by only in a lord;
In others it is but a huff,
To vapour with inſtead of proof.
His frowns kept multitudes in awe,
Before the bluſter of whoſe hºff
All hats, as in a ſtorm, flew off. Hudibras.
We have the apprehenſions of a change to keep a check
upon us in the very huff of our greatneſs. L’Eſtrange.
A Spaniard was wºnderfully upon the huff about his ex-
traction. L’Eſtrange.
No man goes about to enſnare or circumvent another in a
Paºl, to lay train, and give ſecret blows in a preſent
huff. South's Sermons.
2. A wretch ſwelled with a falſe opinion of his own value.
Lewd ſhallow-brained buff, make atheiſm and contempt of
religion the ſole badge and character of wit. South.
As for you, colonel hiſ/-cap, we ſhall try before a civil
magiſtrate who's the greater plotter. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
To Huf F. v. a. [from the noun.J
Hudibras, p. ii.
1. To ſwell; to puff.
In many wild birds the diaphragm may eaſily be huffd up
with air, and blown in at the windpipe. Grew's Coſmºl. Sa.
2. To hector; to treat with inſolence and arrogance, or brutality.
To HUEF. v. 4. To bluſter; to ſtorm; to bounce; to ſwell
with indignation or pride. -
| his ſenſeleſs arrogant conceit of theirs made them huff at
the doctrine of reperſtance, as a thing below them. South.
A ºffing, ſhining, flatt'ring, cringing coward,
A cankerworm of peace, was rais'd above him. Otway.
A thief and juſtice, fool and knave,
A hºſſing officer and ſlave. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. 3.
Huffing to cowards, fawning to the brave,
To knaves a fool, to cred lous fools a knavé. Roſammon.
Now what's his end ? O charming glory, ſay!
What, a fifth ačt to crown his huff.g. play Dryd, juvenal.
What a ſmall pittance of reaſon and truth is mixed with
thoſe huffing opinions they are ſwelled with. Locke.
When Peg received John's meſſage, ſhe huffed and ſtormed
like the devil. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Hu'FF ER. m. ſ. [from huff..] A bluſterer; a bully.
Nor have I hazarded my art
To be expos'd i' th' end to ſuffer,
By ſuch a braggadocio luffer. Hudilras, p. ii. cant. 3.
HU'FF is H. adj. [from huff..] Arrogant; inſolent; hectoring.
Hu'FFISHLY. adv. [from huffſh.] With arrogant petulance;
with bullying bluſter.
Hu'F Fish Ness. n.ſ. Petulance; arrogance; noiſy bluſter.
To HU G. v. a. [pegian, Saxon, to hedge, to incloſe.]
1. To preſs cloſe in an embrace.
He bewept my fortune,
And hugg’d me in his arms. Shake?. Richard III.
What would not he do now to hug the creature that had
given him ſo admirable a ſerenade L'Iſtrange.
Ev’n in that urn their brother they confeſs,
And hug it in their arms, and to their boſom preſs. Dryden.
King Xerxes was enamoured upon an oak, which he would
hug and kiſs. Harvey on Conſumptions.
2. To fondle; to treat with tenderneſs.
I, under fair pretence of friendly ends,
And well-plac'd words of glozing courteſy,
Baited with reaſons not unplauſible,
Win me into the eaſy-hearted man,
And hug him into ſnares. Miltºn.
We hug deformities, if they bear our names. Glanville.
Admire yourſelf,
And, without rival, hug your darling book. Roſcommon.
Though they know that the flatterer knows the falſehood
of his own flatteries, yet they love the impoſtor, and with
both arms hug the abuſe. South's Sermons.
Mark with what joy he hugs the dear diſcovery Rowe.
3. To hold faſt.
Age makes us moſt fondly hug and retain the good things of
life, when we have the leaſt proſpect of enjoying them. Auerb.
Hug. n.ſ.. [from the noun..] Cloſe embrace.
Why theſe cloſe hug; 2 I owe my ſhame to him. Gay.
HUGE. adj. [hoogh, high, Dutch.]
I. Vaſt; immenſe. -
Let the ſtate of the people of God, when they were in the
houſe of bondage, and their manner of ſerving God in a
ſtrange land, be compared with that which Canaan and Jeru-
ſalem did afford; and who ſeeth not what huge difference there
was between them 2 Hooker, b. iv.
This ſpace of earth is ſo huge, as that it equalleth in great-
neſs not only Aſia, Europe and Africa, but America. Allot.
2. Great even to deformity or terribleneſs.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder. Shakeſp.
Through forreſts huge, and long untravell'd heaths,
With deſolation brown he wanders waſte. Thºmſon's Sºring.
HU'cel Y. adv. [from huge.]
1. Immenſely; enormouſly.
Who cries out on pride,
That can therein tax any private party 2
Doth it not flow as hugely as the ſea? Shakespeare As yºu like it.
2. Greatly; very much.
I am hugely bent to believe, that whenever you concern
yourſelves in our affairs, it is for our good. Swift.
Hü'GENEss. m. ſ. [from huge.] Enormous bulk; greatneſs.
My miſtreſs exceeds in goodneſs the hugeneſs of your un-
worthy thinking. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline. -
Hu'Goek MUGGER. m.ſ.. [corrupted perhaps from huger marcker,
or hug in the dark. Afrcker in Daniſh is darkneſs, whence
our murky. It is written by Sir Thomas More, lošer moºr.
Hiker, in Chaucer, is peeviſh, crºſſgrained, of which moker may
be only a ludicrous reduplication. ... Hºče, is likewiſe in Ger-
man a corner, and moky is in Engliſh dark. I know not how
to determine.] Secrecy; bye-place. , ,
Now hold in huggºrmugger in their hand,
And all the reſt do rob of goods and land. Hubberd's ſale.
But if I can but find them out,
Where e'er th’ in hºggºrmugger lurk,
I'll make them rue their handy-work. Hudibras, p. i.
There's a diſtinétion betwixt what's done openly and bare-
faced, and a thing that's done in huggermügger, under a ſeal of
ſecrecy and concealment. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Hu/cy. adj. [See HUGE.] Vaſt : great; huge.
This hugy rock one finger's force
Apparently will move. . . Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
HUKE... n.ſ. ſhuque, French..] A cloak.
As we were thus in conference, there came one that ſeemed
to be a meſſenger in a rich huše. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Hulk. n.ſ.. [hulke, Dutch; pulc, Saxon.]
1. The body of a ſhip. -
There's a whole merchant's venture of Bourdeaux ſtuff in
him: you have not ſeen a hulk better ſtuffed in the hold. Shakespeare .
3
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H U M
The cuſtom they had of giving the colour of the ſea to the
hulk, ſails, and mariners of their ſpy-boats, to keep them
from being diſcovered, came from the Veneti. Arbuthnat.
They Argo's hulk will tax,
And ſcrape her pitchy ſides for wax. Swift.
The ſooty hulk
Steer'd ſluggiſh on. Thomſon's Autumn.
2. Anything bulky and unwieldy. This ſenſe is ſtill retained
in Scotland: as, a hulk of a fellow.
And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk fir John,
Is priſoner to your ſon. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
To Hulk. v. a. To exenterate: as, to hulk a hare. Ainſw.
HULL. m. ſ. ſhulgan, Gothick, to cover.]
1. The huſk or integument of any thing; the outer covering:
as, the hull of a nut covers the ſhell. [Hule, Scottiſh.]
2. The body of a ſhip; the hulk. Hull and hulk are now con-
founded; but hulk ſeems originally to have ſignified not merely
the body or hull, but a whole ſhip of burden, heavy and
bulky.
'ber in their hull; our deadly bullets light,
And through the yielding planks a paſſage find. , Dryden.
So many arts hath the Divine Wiſdom put together, only
for the hull and tackle of a ſenſible and thinking creature.
Grew's Coſmol. Sac. b. i. e. 5.
To HULL. v. n. [from the noun...] To float; to drive to and
fro upon the water without ſails or rudder.
They ſaw a ſight full of piteous ſtrangeneſs; a ſhip, or ra-
ther the carcaſe of the ſhip, or rather ſome few bones of the
carcaſe, hulling there, part broken, part burned, and part
drowned. Sidney.
Will you hoiſt ſail, ſir? here lies your way.
—No, good ſwabber, I am to hull here a little longer. Shakespeare
He look'd, and ſaw the ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated. Milton's Parad. Loft, b. xi.
People walking down upon the ſhore, ſaw ſomewhat come
hulling toward them. L’Eſtrange.
Hu’lly. adj. [from hull.] Siliquoſe; huſky. Ainſworth.
Hu'lver. n.ſ. Holly.
Save hulver and thorn, thereof flail for to make. Tuffer.
To HUM. v. a. [hommelen, Dutch.]
1. To make the noiſe of bees.
The humming of bees is an unequal buzzing. Bacon.
An airy nation flew,
Thick as the humming bees that hunt the golden dew
In Summer's heat. Dryden's Aen. b. vi.
So weary bees in little cells repoſe;
But if night-robbers lift the well-ſtor'd hive,
An humming through their waxen city grows. Dryden.
2. To make an inarticulate and buzzing ſound.
I think he'll hear me: yet to bite his lip,
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me. Shakeſp.
Upon my honour, ſir, I heard a humming,
And that a ſtrange one too, which did awake me. Shakeſp.
The cloudy meſſenger turns me his back,
And hums; as who ſhould ſay, you'll rue. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. To pauſe in ſpeaking, and ſupply the interval with an au-
dible emiſfion of breath. -
Having pump'd up all his wit,
And humm'd upon it, thus he writ.
* I ſtill acquieſt,
And never humm’d and haw'd ſedition,
Nor ſnuffled treaſon. Hudibras, p. iii. cant. 2.
The man lay humming and hawing a good while; but, in
the end, he gave up himſelf to the phyſicians. L’Eſtrange.
Still humming on, their drowſy courſe they keep,
And laſh'd ſo long, like tops, are laſh'd aſleep. Pope.
4. To fing low.
The muſical accents of the Indians, to us, are but inarti-
culate hummings; as are ours to their otherwiſe tuned or-
gans. Glanv. Apol.
Hum half a tune. Pope.
5. To applaud. Approbation was commonly expreſſed in pub-
lick aſſemblies by a hum, about a century ago.
HUM. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The noiſe of bees or inſe&amp;ts.
To black Hecat's ſummons
The ſhard-born beetle, with his drowſy hums,
Hath rung night's yawning peal. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Nor undelightful is the ceaſeleſs hum,
To him who muſes through the woods at noon. Thomſºn.
2. The noiſe of buſtling crowds.
From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
The hum of either army ſtilly ſounds. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
Tower'd cities pleaſe us then,
And the buſy hum of men. Milton.
One theatre there is of vaſt reſort,
Which whilome of requeſts was call'd the eourt;
But now the great exchange of news 'tis hight,
And full of hum and buz from noon 'till night. Dryden.
3. Any low dull noiſe.
Who ſat the neareſt, by the words o'ercome,
Slept faſt; the diſtant nodded to the hum. Pope'; Dunciad.
Hudibras, p. iii.
4. A pauſe with an inarticulate ſound.
Theſe ſhrugs, theſe hums and haws,
When you have ſaid ſhe's goodly, come between,
'Ere you can ſay ſhe's honeſt. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
Your excuſes want ſome grains to make 'em current: hum
and ha will not do the buſineſs. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
5. In Hudibraſ; it ſeems uſed for ham.
And though his countrymen the Huns,
Did ſtew their meat between their hums
And the horſes backs o'er which they ſtraddle,
And ev'ry man eat up his ſaddle. #. p. i. eant. 11.
6. An expreſſion of applauſe.
You hear a hum in the right place. Spediator.
HUM. interječi. A ſound implying doubt and deliberation.
Let not your ears deſpiſe the heavieſt ſound
That ever yet they heard.
—Hum ! I gueſs at it.
See ſir Robert–hum!
And never laugh for all my life to come. Pope.
HUMAN. adj. [humanus, Latin; humain, French.]
1. Having the qualities of a man.
It will not be aſked whether he be a gentleman born, but
whether he be a human creature. Swift.
2. Belonging to man. -
The king is but a man as I am : the violet ſmells to him as it
doth to me; all his ſenſes have but human conditions. Shakespeare
For man to tell how human life began
Is hard ; for who himſelf beginning knew Milton's P. L.
Thee, ſerpent, ſubtil'ſt beaſt of all the field,
I knew ; but not with human voice indu'd. Milt. Par. Lºſt.
Intuitive knowledge needs no probation, nor can have any,
this being the higheſt of all human certainty. Locke.
HUMA'NE. adj. [humaine, French J Kind; civil; benevolent;
good-natured.
Love of others, if it be not ſpent upon a few, doth naturally
ſpread itſelf towards many, and maketh men bºom! humane
and charitable. Bacon's Eſſays.
Envy, malice, covetouſneſs and revenge are aboliſhed: a
new race of virtues and graces, more divine, more moral,
more humane, are planted in their ſtead. Spratt's Sermons.
HUMA'Nelly. adv. [from humane. J Kindly; with good-
Inature.
If they would yield us the ſuperfluity, while it were whole-
ſome, we might gueſs they relieved us humanely. Shakeſpeare.
Hu'MAN1st. n.ſ.. [humaniſle, French..] A philologer; a gram-
inarian.
Hu Ma'nity. n.ſ.. [humanité, French; humanitas, Latin.]
1. The nature of man.
Look to thyſelf; reach not beyond humanity, Sidney.
A rarer ſpirit never did ſteer humanity. Shakeſpeare.
The middle of humanity thou never kneweſt, but the extre-
mity of both ends. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens,
To preſerve the Hebrew intire and uncorrupt, there hath
been uſed the higheſt caution humanity could invent. Brown.
2. Humankind; the collective body of mankind.
If he can untie thoſe knots, he is able to teach all humanity,
and will do well to oblige mankind by his informations. Glan.
3. Benevolence; tenderneſs.
All men ought to maintain peace, and the common offices
of humanity and friendſhip in diverſity of opinions. Ilocke,
How few, like thee, enquire the wretched out,
And court the offices of ſoft humanity ?
Like thee reſerve their raiment for the naked,
Reach out their bread to feed the crying orphan,
Or mix their pitying tears with thoſe that weep Rowe.
4. Philology; grammatical ſtudies.
To Hu'MANize. v. a. [humaniſer, French.] To ſoften ; to
make ſuſceptive of tenderneſs or benevolence.
Here will I paint the charaćters of woe,
And here my faithful tears in ſhowers ſhall flow,
To humanize the flints whereon I tread. //ºtton.
Was it the buſineſs of magick to humanize our natures with
compaſſion, forgiveneſs, and all the inſtances of the moſt ex-
tenſive charity ? Addiſon on the Chriſtian Religion.
Hu'MANKIND. n.ſ.. [human and £ind. J. The race of man;
mankind.
Bleſt with a taſte exaët, yet unconfin'd;
A knowledge both of books and humankind. Pope.
Hu'MANLY. adv. [from human.]
1. After the notions of men; according to the power of men.
Thus the preſent happy proſpect of our affairs, humanly
ſpeaking, may ſeem to promiſe. Atterbury.
2. Kindly; with good-nature. This ſhould be humanely,
Though learn'd, well bred; and though well bred, ſincere;
Modeſtly bold, and humanly ſevere. Pºpe's Eſ, on Criticiſm.
Hu'MBIRD. n.ſ.. [from hum and bird..] The humming bird.
All ages have conceived the wren the leaſt of birds,
yet our own plantations have eved us one far leſs; that is,
the hambird, not much exceeding a beetle. Brown's Pulg. Err.
HUMBLE. adj. [humble, French; humilis, Latin.]
1. Not proud; modeſt; not arrogant. - -
And mighty proud to humble weak does yield. Fairy Qu.
iſ P Now
Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H U M
H U M
Now we have ſhewn our power,
Łet us ſeem humbler after it is done,
Than when it was a doing.
Thy humle ſervant vows obedience,
And faithful ſervice, ’till the point of death. Shakespeare H. VI.
We ſhould be as humble in our imperfections and fins as
Chriſt was in the fulneſs of the ſpirit, great wiſdom, and per-
fect life. Taylor's Rule of living holy.
Chuſe you for me; for well you underſtand
But if an humble huſband may requeſt,
Provide and order all things for the beſt. Dryden.
Ten thouſand trifles light as theſe,
Nor can my rage nor anger move:
She ſhould be humble, who would pleaſe;
And ſhe muſt ſuffer, who can love. Priºr.
2. Low ; not high; not great.
Th’ example of the heav'nly lark,
Thy fellow-poet, Cowley, mark!
Above the ſkies let thy proud muſick ſound,
Shakesp. Cºriolanus.
Thy humble neſt build on the ground. - Cowley.
Denied what ev'ry wretch obtains of fate,
An humble roof and an obſcure retreat. 17'den.
Ah! prince, hadſt thou but known the joys which dwell
With humbler fortunes, thou wouldſt curſe thy royalty. Rowe.
Far humbler titles ſuit my loſt condition. Smith.
To Hu'MB le. v. a. [from the adječtive. -
1. To make humble; to make ſubmiſſive; to make to bow
down with humility.
Take this purſe, thou whom the heaven's plagues
Have humbled to all ſtrokes. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The executioner
Falls not the axe upon the humb'ed neck,
But firſt begs pardon. Shakeſp. As you like it.
Humble yourſelves under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you. 1 Pet. v. 6.
Hegekiah humbled himſelf for the pride of his heart. 2 Chro.
w; do I humble thus myſelf, and ſuing
For peace, reap nothing but repulſe and hate. Milton.
Let the finner put away the evil of his doings, and humble
himſelf by a ſpeedy and ſincere repentance: let him return to
God, and then let him be aſſured that God will return to
him. Rogers's Sermºns.
2. To cruſh; to break; to ſubdue; to mortify.
Yearly injoin'd, ſome ſay, to undergo
This annual humbling certain number'd days,
To daſh their pride, and joy, for man ſeduc’d. Milt. P. L.
We are pleaſed, by ſome implicit kind of revenge, to ſee
him taken down and humbled in his reputation, who had ſo
far raiſed himſelf above us. Addiſon's Speciat.
The miſtreſs of the world, the ſeat of empire,
The nurſe of heroes, the delight of gods,
That humbled the proud tyrants of the earth. Addison Cato.
Men that make a kind of inſult upon ſociety, ought to be
humbled as diſturbers of the publick tranquillity. Freeholder.
Fortune not much of humbling me can boaſt;
Though double tax'd, how little have I loſt Pope.
3. To make to condeſcend.
This would not be to condeſcend to their capacities, when
he humbles himſelf to ſpeak to them, but to loſe his deſign in
ſpeaking. Locke.
4. To bring down from an height.
In proceſs of time the higheſt mountains may be humbled
into valleys; and again, the loweſt valleys exalted into moun-
tains. Hakewill on Providence.
Hu'MBLE BE E. m. ſ. [hum and bee.] A buzzing wild bee.
The honeybags ſteal from the humblebees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs. Shakeſpeare.
This puts us in mind once again of the humblebees and the
tinderboxes. Atterbury.
HU’M ELE BE E. m. ſ. A herb. Ainſworth.
HU/MBLE BEE Eater. n. ſ. A fly that eats the humblebee. Ainſ.
Hºrse. m. ſ. [from humble.] Humility; abſence of
pride.
With how true humbleneſ;
They look'd down to triumph over pride : Sidney.
I am rather with all ſubjected humbleneſ to thank her ex-
cellencies, ſince the duty thereunto gave me rather heart to ſave
myſelf, than to receive thanks for a deed which was her only
inſpiring. - Sidney, b. i.
It was anſwered by us all, in all poſſible humbleneſs; but yet
with a countenance, that we knew that he ſpoke it but mer-
rily. Bacon's New Atlantis.
A grain of glory, mixt with humbleneſs,
Cures both a fever and lethargickneſs. Jºſerbert.
Hºibl ER. m. ſ. [from hunt e.] One that humbles or ſubdues
himſelf or others.
HUM LI.E.MoUTHED. adj. [himble and mouth.] Mild; meck.
You are meek and humblemouth'd; but your heart
Iscramm'd with arrogancy, ſpleen and pride. Shakespeare H.VIII.
Hu’M LE PLAN r. n.ſ. A ſpecies of ſenſitiveplant.
The humibºlant is ſo called becauſe, as ſoon as you touch it,
it proſtrates itſelf on the ground, and in a ſhort time elevates
itſelf again, is raiſed in hotbeds. Mortimer's Husbandry.
Hu'MBLEs. m. ſ. Entrails of a deer.
Hu'M Bless. n.ſ.. [from humble.] Humbleneſs; humility.
And with meek humbleſ, and afflićted mood,
Pardon for thee, and grace for me intreat. Spenser.
HU'MBLY. adv. [from humble.]
1. Without pride; with humility.
They were us’d to bend,
To ſend their ſmiles before them to Achilles,
To come humbly as they us’d to creep to holy altars. Shakespeare .
Here the tam’d Euphrates humbly glides,
And there the Rhine ſubmits her ſwelling tides. Dryden.
Write him down a ſlave, who, humbly proud,
With preſents begs preferments from the crowd. Dryden.
In midſt of dangers, fears, and death,
Thy goodneſs I'll adore;
And praiſe thee for thy mercies paſt,
And humbly hope for more.
2. Without height; without elevation.
Hu'MDRUM. adj. [from hum, drone, or humming drone..] Dull;
droniſh; ſtupid.
Shall we, quoth ſhe, ſtand ſtill humdrum,
And ſee ſtout Bruin all alone,
By numbers baſely overthrown 2 Hudibra, p. i.
I was talking with an old humdrum fellow, and, before I
had heard his ſtory out, was called away by buſineſs. Addiſon.
To HUME/CT. v. a. [humedo, #. ; humedler, Fr.]
To HUME/CTATE. } To wet; to moiſten.
The Nile and Niger do not only moiſten and contemperate
the air by their exhalations, but refreſh and humediate the
earth by their annual inundations. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Her rivers are wheeled up into ſmall cataraćts, and ſo di-
vided into ſluices, to humediate the bordering ſoil, and make
it wonderfully produćtive. H.wel's Vocal Forreſt.
The medicaments are of a cool humedling quality, and not
too much aſtringent. //ſeman's Surgery.
HUM Ecta’tion. n.ſ.. [humediation, Fr. from humeciate.] The
act of wetting; moiſtening.
Plates of braſs, applied to a blow, will keep it down from
ſwelling: the cauſe is repercuſſion, without humeciation, or
entrance of any body. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
That which is concreted by exſiccation, or expreſſion of
humidity, will be reſolved by humeciation, as earth and clay.
- Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Hu'MeRAL. adj. [humera', Fr. from humerus, Latin.] Belong-
ing to the ſhoulder.
The largeſt crooked needle ſhould be uſed, with a ligature,
in taking up the humeral arteries in amputation. Sharp.
HUMICUBA"tion. m. ſ. [humi and cubo, Latin.] The act of
lying on the ground.
Faſting and ſackcloth, and aſhes and tears, and humicuba-
Addiſon's Spediatºr.
tions, uſed to be companions of repentance. Bramhall.
HU‘MID. adj. [humide, French; humidus, Lat.] Wet; moiſt;
watery. *
Iris there, with humid bow,
Waters the odorous banks that blow +”
Flowers of more mingl’d hue
Than her purpled ſcarff can ſhew. Milton.
The queen, recover'd, rears her humid eyes,
And firſt her huſband on the poop eſpies. Dryden.
If they ſlip eaſily, and are of a fit ſize to be agitated by
heat, and the heat is big enough to keep them in agitation,
the body is fluid ; and if it be apt to ſtick to things, it is
humid. Newton's Opt.
HUMI'DITY. m.ſ.. [humidité, Fr. from humid.] That quality which
we call moiſture, or the power of wetting other bodies. It dif-
fers very much from fluidity, depending altogether on the con-
gruity of the component particles of any liquor to the pores
or ſurfaces of ſuch particular bodies as it is capable of adhering
to. Thus quickſilver is not a moiſt liquor, in reſpect to our
hands or clothes, and many other things it will not ſtick to;
but it may be called ſo in reference to gold, tin, or lead, to
whoſe ſurfaces it will preſently adhere. And even water itſelf,
that wets almoſt every thing, and is the great ſtandard of hu-
midity, is not capable of wetting every thing; for it ſtands
and runs eaſily off in globular drops on the leaves of cabbages,
and many other plants; and it will not wet the feathers of
ducks, ſwans, and other water-fowl. Quincy.
We'll uſe this unwholſome humidity, this groſs watry pum-
pion : we'll teach him to know turtles from jays. Shakespeare.
O bleſfing-breeding ſun, draw from the earth
Rotten humidity: below thy ſiſter's orb
Infect the air. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
Young animals have more tender fibres, and more humidity,
than old animals, which have their juices more exalted and
reliſhing. Arbuthnºt on Diet.
HUMILIATION. m. ſ. [French.]
1. Deſcent from greatneſs; act of humility.
The former was an humiliation of Deity, the latter an humi-
liation of manhood; for which cauſe there followed upon the
latter
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H U M
H U M
tatter an exaltation of that which was humbled; for with
power he created the world, but reſtored it by obedience.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 55.
º
º
Thy humiliation ſhall exalt
With thee thy manhood alſo to this throne. Milt. Pa. Loft.
2. Mortification; external expreſſion of fin and unworthineſs.
John fared poorly, according unto the apparel he wore, that
is, of camel's hair; and the doćtrine he preached was humi-
Jiation and repentance. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
With tears
Watering the ground, and with our fighs the air
* Frequenting, ſent from hearts contrite, in ſign
Of ſorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek. Milt, Pa. Lºſt.
3. Abatement of pride. . .
It may ſerve for a great leſſon of humiliation to mankind,
to behold the habits and paſſions of men trampling over in-
tereſt, friendſhip, honour, and their own perſonal ſafety, as
well as that of their country. Swift.
HuMI'lity. n.ſ.. [humilité, Fiend J
1. Freedom from pride; modeſty; not arrogance.
When we make profeſſion of our faith, we ſtand; when
we acknowledge our fins, or ſeek unto God for favour, we
fall down; becauſe the geſture of conſtancy becometh us beſt
- in the one, in the other the behaviour of humility. Hooker.
I do not know that Engliſhman alive,
With whom my ſoul is any jot at odds,
More than the infant that is born to-night;
I thank my God for my humility. Shakespeare Richard III.
What the height of a king tempteth to revenge, the humi-
lity of a Chriſtian teacheth to forgive. King Charles.
The humility of the ſtyle gained them many friends, Claren.
There are ſome that uſe
Humility to ſerve their pride, and ſeem
Humble upon their way, to be the prouder
-" At their wiſh’d journey's end. Denham's Sophy,
| It is an eaſy matter, when there is no danger of a trial, to
t- extol humility in the midſt of honours, or to begin a faſt after
* dinner. South's Sermonſ.
As high turrets, for their airy fleep,
º Require foundations in proportion deep;
º And lofty cedars as far upwards ſhoot,
. - As to the nether heavens they drive the root;
e So low did her ſecure foundation lye,
She was not humble, but humility.
** 2. Aćt of ſubmiſſion. -
With theſe humilities they ſatisfied the young king, and by
their bowing and bending avoided the preſent ſtorm. ... Davieſ.
Hu'MMER. n.ſ.. [from hum.] An applauder. Ainſworth.
Hu'MoRAL. adj. [from humour. J Proceeding from the hu-
In OurS.
This ſort of fever is comprehended under continual humoral
fevers. Harvey on Conſumptions.
:- Hu'MoR1st. n.ſ.. [humoriſto, Italian; humoriſe, French.]
º - 1. One who conducts himſelf by his own fancy; one who gra-
wº tifies his own humour. "
The wit finks imperceptibly into an humoriſt. Spediator.
The notion of a humoriſt is one that is greatly pleaſed, or
greatly diſpleaſed, with little things; his ačtions ſeldom dire&amp;ted
by the reaſon and nature of things. //atts's Logick.
º
Dryden.
º This humoriſt keeps to himſelf much more than he wants,
* and gives a vaſt refuſe of his ſuperfluities to purchaſe heaven.
-º Addiſon's Speciator.
2. One who has violent and peculiar paſſions.
: By a wiſe and timous inquiſition the peccant humours and
º humoriſ's muſt be diſcovered and purged, or cut off: mercy,
d in ſuch a caſe, in a king, is true cruelty. Bacon to Williers.
Hu'MoRous. adj. [from humour.]
1. Full of groteſque or odd images.
Some of the commentators tell us, that Marſya was a law-
º yer who had loſt his cauſe; others that this paſſage alludes to
ſtº the ſtory of the ſatire Marſyas, who contended with Apollo,
sº which I think is more humorous. Addiſon on Italy.
º Thy humorous vein, thy pleaſing folly,
º Lics all negle&amp;ted, all forgot;
23 And penſive, wav'ring, melancholy,
º Thou dread'ſt and hop'ſt thou know'ſt not what. Prior.
º 2. Capricious ; irregular; without any rule but the preſent
º: whim. -
º I am known to be a humorous patrician; ſaid to be ſome-
thing imperfect, in favouring the firſt complaint; haſty and
-: tinder-like, upon too trivial motion. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
º Thou fortune's champion, that do'ſ never fight
.* But when her humorous ladyſhip is by,
To teach thee ſafety. Shakespeare King john.
; : He's bumorous as Winter, and as ſudden
º As flaws congeal’d in the ſpring of day. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
º O, you awake then: come away,
Times be ſhort, are made for play;
The humºrous moon too will not ſtay:
What doth make you thus delay ?
Vaſt is his courage, boundleſs is his mind,
Rough as a ſtorm, and humorous as the wind.
Ben. johnſon.
Dryden,
º
He that would learn to paſs a juſt ſentence on perſons and
things, muſt take heed of a fanciful temper of mind, and an
humorous condućt in his affairs. //atts's Logick.
3. Pleaſant; jocular. Ainſworth.
Hu'MoRously. adj. [from humorous.]
1. Merrily ; jocoſely.
A cabinet of medals Juvenal calls, very humourouſly, con-
ciſam argentum in titulos facie/que minutas. Addiſon on Medals.
We reſolve by halves, and unadviſedly; we reſolve raſhly,
fillily, or humorouſly, upon no reaſons that will hold. Calamy.
It has been humorºuſly ſaid, that ſome have fiſhed the very
jakes for papers left there by men of wit. Swift.
2. With caprice; with whim.
Hu'MoRoussess. n.ſ.. [from humorows | Fickleneſs; capri-
cious levity.
Hu'MoRSoME. adj. [from humºur.]
J. Peewiſh; petulant.
2. Odd; humorous.
Our ſcience cannot be much improved by maſquerades,
where the wit of both ſexes is altogether taken up in conti-
nuing ſingular and humorſome diſguiſes. Swift.
Hºost. Y. adv. [from humoſome.] Peeviſhly; petu-
antly. -
HUMOUR. m./ [humeur, French ; humor, Latin.]
1. Moiſture.
The aqueous humour of the eye will not freeze, which is
very admirable, ſeeing it hath the perſpicuity and fluidity of
common water. - Ray on the Creation.
2. The different kind of moiſture in man's body, reckoned by
the old phyſicians to be phlegm, blood, choler, and melan-
choly, which, as they predominated, were ſuppoſed to deter-
mine the temper of mind.
Believe not theſe ſuggeſtions, which proceed
From anguiſh of the mind and humours black, -
That mingle with thy fancy. Milton's Agoniſłes.
3. General turn or temper of mind.
As there is no humour, to which impudent poverty cannot
make itſelf ſerviceable; ſo were there enow of thoſe of de-
ſperate ambition, who would build their houſes upon others
ruin. Sidney, b. ii.
There came with her a young lord, led hither with the
humour of youth, which ever thinks that good whoſe good-
neſs he ſees not. Sidney.
King James, as he was a prince of great judgment, ſo he
was a prince of a marvellous pleaſant humour: as he was go-
ing through Luſen by Greenwich, he aſked what town it
was ; they ſaid Luſen. He aſked, a good while after, what
town is this we are now in They ſaid ſtill it was Luſen: ſaid
the king, I will be king of Luſen. Bacon's Apophthegms.
Examine how your humour is inclin'd,
And which the ruling paſſion of your mind. Roſcommºn.
They, who were acquainted with him, know his humour to
be ſuch, that he would never conſtrain himſelf. Dryden.
In caſes where it is neceſſary to make examples, it is the
humour of the multitude to forget the crime, and to remember
the puniſhment. Addison's Freeh-kler,
Good humour only teaches charms to laſt, -
Still makes new conqueſts, and maintains the paſt. Pope.
4. Preſent diſpoſition.
It is the curſe of kings to be attended
By ſlaves, that take their humours for a warrant
To break into the blood-houſe of life. Shakespeare K. john.
Another thought her nobler humour fed. Fairfax, b. ii.
Their humours are not to be won,
But when they are impos'd upon.
Tempt not his heavy hand;
But one ſubmiſſive word which you let fall,
Will make him in good humºur with us all.
5. Groteſque imagery; jocularity ; merriment.
6. Diſeaſed or morbid diſpoſition. -
He was a man frank and generous ; when well, denied
himſelf nothing that he had a mind to eat or drink, which
gave him a º full of humours, and made his fits of the
gout frequent and violent. Temple.
7. Petulance; peeviſhneſs.
Is my friend all perfection, all virtue and diſcretion ? Has
he not humours to be endured, as well as kindneſses to be en-
joyed * South's Sermons.
8. A trick; a pračtice.
I like not the humour of lying: he hath wronged me in
ſome humºurs: I ſhould have born the humour'd letter to her.
Shakeſpeare's Merry //ives ºf Windſor.
9. Caprice; whim; predominent inclination.
In private, men are more bold in their own humours; and
in conſort, men are more obnoxious to others humours ; there-
fore it is good to take both. Bacon's I ſays.
To Hu'MoU R. v. a. [from the noun l
1. To gratify; to footh by compliance.
If I had a ſuit to maſter Shallow, I would humour his men;
if to his men, I would curry with maſter Shallow. Shakeſp.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Caſſius,
He ſhould not humºur me. Shakeſp. julius Cºſa".
Obedience
Hudibras, p. iii.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H U N
Obedience and ſubjećtion were never enjoined by God to
humour the paſſions, luſts, and vanities of thoſe who are com-
manded to obey our governours. - Swift.
You humºur mé, when I am ſick;
Why not when I am ſplenetick? Pope.
Children are fond of ſomething which ſtrikes their fancy
moſt, and ſullen and regardleſs of every thing elſe, if they
are not humoured in that fancy. - Watts's Logick.
2. To fit; to comply with.
To after age thou ſhalt be writ the man, -
That with ſmooth air could'ſt humour beſt our tongue. Milt.
"Tis my part to invent, and the muſicians to humour that
invention. Dryden's Preface to Albion.
Fountainbleau is ſituated among rocks and woods, that give
a fine variety of ſavage proſpects: the king has humoured the
genius of the place, and only made uſe of ſo much art as is
neceſſary to regulate nature. Addiſon's Guardian.
HUMP. m. ſ. [corrupted perhaps from bump. See Bump.] The
protuberance formed by a crooked back.
Theſe defe&amp;ts were mended by ſucceeding matches; the
eyes were opened in the next generation, and the hump fell.
Tatler, N°.74.
HU’MPBAck. m. ſ. [hump and back. J Crooked back; high
ſhoulders.
The chief of the family was born with an humpback and
very high noſe. Tatler.
HUMP B A'cked. adj. Having a crooked back.
To HUNCH. v. a. [huſch, German.]
1. To ſtrike or punch with the fiſts.
Jack's friends began to hunch and puſh one another: why
don't you go and cut the poor fellow down? Arbuthnot.
2. [Hocker, a crooked back, German.] To crook the back.
Thy crooked mind within hunch'd out thy back,
And wander'd in thy limbs: to thy own kind
Make love, if thou can'ſt find it in the world. Dryden.
Hu Nchba'ckED. adj. [hunch and back.] Having a crooked
back.
His perſon deformed to the higheſt degree, flat-noſed, and
hunchbacked. i L'Eſtrange.
But I more fear Creon I
To take that hunchback'd monſter in my arms, -
Th’ excreſcence of a man. Dryd, and Lee's Oedipus.
The ſecond daughter was peeviſh, haggard, pale, with ſaucer-
eyes, a ſharp noſe, and hunchbacked. Arbuthn. Hiſt. of j. Bull.
HU'NDRED. adj. | punb, punbneb, Saxon; honderd, Dutch.]
The number conſiſting of ten multiplied by ten.
A baſe, proud, three ſuited, hundred pound, filthy, worſhed
ſtocking knave. Shakeſpeare's %. Lear.
A hundred altars in her temple ſmoke, -
A thouſand bleeding hearts her pow'r invoke. Dryd. Æn.
Many thouſands had ſeen the tranſa&amp;ions of our Saviour,
and many hundred thouſands received an account of them from
the mouths of thoſe who were eye-witneſſes. Addiſon.
Hu'NDRED. n.ſ. -
1. A company or body conſiſting of an hundred.
Very few will take this propoſition, that God is pleaſed
with the doing of what he himſelf commands, for an innate
moral principle: whoſoever does ſo, will have reaſon to think
bundreds of propoſitions innate. Locke.
Lands, taken from the enemy, were divided into centuries
or hundreds, and diſtributed amongſt the ſoldiers. Arbuthnot.
2. A canton, or diviſion of a county, perhaps once containing
an hundred manors. [Hundredum, low Latin; hundrede, old
French.]
Impoſts upon merchants do ſeldom good to the king's re-
venue; for that that he wins in the hundred, he loſeth in the
ſhire. Bacon.
For juſtice they had a bench under a tree, where Ket uſual-
ly ſat, and with him two of every hundred whence their com-
panies had been raiſed: here complaints were exhibited. Hayw.
Hu'ND REDTH... adj. [punoneonceozopa, Saxon.] The ordinal
of an hundred; the tenth ten times told.
We ſhall not need to uſe the hundredth part of that time,
which themſelves beſtow in making invečtives. Hooker.
If this medium is rarer within the ſun's body than at its ſur-
face, and rarer there than at the hundredth part of an inch from
its body, and rarer there than at the orb of Saturn, I ſee no
reaſon why the increaſe of denſity ſhould ſtop any where.
Newton's Opt.
HUNG. The preterite and part. paſſ of hang.
A wife ſo hung with virtues, ſuch a freight,
What mortal ſhoulders can ſupport Dryden's juvenal.
A room that is richly adorned, and hung round with a great
Variety of pićtures, ſtrikes the eye at once. Watts.
HUNGER. n.ſ. [pungen, Saxon; honger, Dutch.]
I. Deſire of food; the pain felt from faſting.
An uneaſy ſenſation at the ſtomach for food. When the
ſtomach is empty, and the fibres in their natural tenſion, they
draw up ſo cloſe as to rub againſt each other, ſo as to make that
ſenſation : but when they are diſtended with food, it is again
removed; unleſs when a perſon faſteth ſo long as for want of
ſpirits, or nervous fluid, to have thoſe fibres grow too flaccid
to corrugate, and then we ſay a perſon has faſted away his flo-
mach; and this is occaſioned by the attrition of the coats of
the ſtomach againſt each other. &amp;uincy.
Thou ſhalt ſerve thine enemies in hunger and in thirá.
Deutr. xxviii. 48.
The ſub-acid part of the animal ſpirits, being caſt off by
the lower nerves upon the coats of the ſtomach, vellicates the
fibres, and thereby produces the ſenſe we call hunger. Grew.
Something viſcous, fat and oily, remaining in the ſtomach,
deſtroys the ſenſation of hunger. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Any violent deſire. -
The immaterial felicities we expect, do naturally ſuggeſt
the neceſſity of preparing our appetites and hungers for them,
without which heaven can be no heaven to us. Decay ºf Piety.
To Hu'NGER. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To feel the pain of hunger.
Widely they gape, and to the eye they roar,
As if they hunger'd for the food they bore.
2. To deſire with great eagerneſs.
Do'ſt thou ſo hunger for my empty chair,
That thou wilt needs inveſt thee with my honours,
Before thy hour be ripe O, fooliſh youth,
Thou ſeek'ſt the greatneſs that will overwhelm thee!
Stay but a little. Shakeſpeare's Henry IV. p. ii.
My more having, would be as a ſauce
To make me hunger more. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I content me,
And from the ſting of famine fear no harm,
Nor mind it, fed with better thoughts that feed
- Me hung’ring more to do my father's will. Milton's P. Loft.
Hu'nger bit. adj. I hunger and bit. J Pained or weak-
Hu'NGERBitten. } ened with hunger.
His ſtrength ſhall be hungerbitten, and deſtrućtion ſhall be
ready at his ſide. job xviii. 12.
Thyſelf
* Bred up in poverty and ſtraits at home;
Loſt in a deſert here, and hungerbit. Milton's Parad. Reg.
HU'NGERLY. adj. [from hunger.] Hungry; in want of nou-
riſhment.
Cowley.
His beard
Grew thin and hungerly, and ſeem'd to aſk
His ſops as he was drinking. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew.
Hu'NGERLY. adv. With keen appetite.
You have ſav'd my longing, and I feed
Moſt hungerly on your ſight. Shakespeare. Timon of Athens.
They are all but ſtomachs, and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and, when they're full,
They belch us. Shakeſpeare's Otheſ.
HU'NGER starved. adj. [hunger and ſtarved.] Starved with
hunger; pinched by want of food.
All my followers to th' eager foe
Turn back, and fly like ſhips before the wind,
Or lambs purſu'd by hunger/larved wolves. Shakespeare. H. VI.
O'ertake me, if thou can'ſt; Iſcorn thy ſtrength:
Go, go, chear up thy hungerſtarved men. Shakeſp. H. VI.
As to ſome holy houſe th’ afflićted came,
Th’ hunger/larv'd, the naked, and the lame, }
Want and diſeaſes, fled before her name. Dryden.
Hu'NGRED. adj. [from hunger.] Pinched by want of food.
Odours do in a ſmall degree nouriſh, and we ſee men an
hungred love to ſmell hot bread. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Hu'NGR 11 Y. adv. [from hungry.] With keen appetite.
Thus much to the kind rural gods we owe,
Who pity'd ſuff'ring mortals long ago;
When on harſh acorns hungrily they fed,
‘And gave 'em nicer palates, better bread. Dryden's juven.
HU'NGRY. adj. [from hunger.]
1. Feeling pain from want of food.
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touch'd, would not have ſtain'd with blood.
Shakeſpeare's Henry VI. p. iii.
They that talk thus may ſay that a man is always hungry,
but that he does not always feel it; whereas hunger conſiſts in
that very ſenſation. Lo.ke.
2. Not fat; not fruitful; not prolifick; more diſpoſed to draw
from other ſubſtances than to impart to them.
Caſſius has a lean and hungry look. Shakeſp jul. Cafar.
The more fat water will bear ſoap beſt; for the hungry wa-
ter doth kill its unétuous nature. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
In ruſhy grounds ſprings are found at the firſt and ſecond
ſpit, and ſometimes lower in a hungry gravel. 4%rtimer.
To this great day of retribution our Saviour refers us, for
reaping the fruits that we here ſow in the moſt hungry and
barren ſoil. Smalridge's Sermons.
HUNks. m.ſ. ſhunſºur, ſordid, Iſlandick.] A covetous ſordid
wretch; a miſer; a curmudgeon.
The old hunks was well ſerved, to be tricked out of a whole
hog for the ſecuring of his puddings. L’Eſfrange.
She has a huſband, a jealous, covetous, old hunks. Dryden.
Irus has given all the intimations of being a cloſe hunkſ,
worth money. - Addison's Speciator.
6 To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">- H U N
H U R
;
| --
:
To HUNT. v. a. ſpunzian, Saxon, from punb, a dog.]
1. To chaſe wild animals.
The man that once did ſell the lion's ſkin,
While the beaſt liv'd, was kill'd in hunting him. Shakespeare H.V.
Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion, or fill the appetite of
the young lions job xxxviii. 39.
We ſhould ſingle every criminal out of the herd, and hunt
him down, however formidable and overgrown; and, on the
contrary, ſhelter and defend virtue. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. To purſue; to follow cloſe.
Evil ſhall hunt the violent man to overthrow him. Pſ. cxl.
The heart ſtrikes five hundred ſort of pulſes in an hour,
and is hunted unto ſuch continual palpitations, through anxiety,
that fain would it break. Harvey on Conſumptions.
3. To ſearch for.
Not certainly affirming any thing, but by conferring of
times and monuments, I do hunt out a probability. Spenſer.
All that is found in books is not rightly deduced from the
principles it is pretended to be built upon : ſuch an examen
every reader's mind is not forward to make, eſpecially in thoſe
who have given themſelves up to a party, and only hunt for
what may favour and ſupport the tenets of it. Locke.
4. To direct or manage hounds in the chace.
He hunts a pack of dogs better than any, and is famous for
finding hares. Addiſon's Speciator. .
To HUNT. v. n.
1. To follow the chaſe.
When he returns from hunting,
I will not ſpeak with him. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Eſau went to the field to hunt for veniſon. Gen. xxvii. 5.
One followed ſtudy and knowledge, and another hawking
and hunting. Locke.
On the old pagan tombs maſks, hunting matches, and Bac-
chanals are very common. Addiſon on Italy.
2. To purſue or ſearch.
Very much of kin to this is the hunting after arguments to
make good one ſide of a queſtion, and wholly to negle&amp;t and
refuſe thoſe which favour the other ſide. Locke.
HUNT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A pack of hounds.
The common hunt, though from their rage reſtrain'd
By ſov’reign pow'r, her company diſdain'd,
Grinn'd as they paſs'd. Dryden's Hind and Panther.
2. A chace. *
The hunt is up, the morn is bright and gray;
The fields are fragrant, and the woods are green. Shakeſp.
3. Purſuit.
I've heard myſelf proclaim'd;
And by the happy hollow of a tree,
Eſcap'd the hunt. ‘Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Hu'NTER. m. ſ. [from hunt.]
1. One who chaſes animals for paſtime.
If thoſe Engliſh lords had been good hunters, and reduced
the mountains, boggs, and woods within the limits of foreſts,
chaccs and parks, the foreſt law would have driven them into
the plains. Davies on Ireland.
Down from a hill the beaſt that reigns in woods,
Firſt hunter then, purſu'd a gentle brace,
Goodlieſt of all the foreſt, hart and hind. Milt. Par. Loft.
Another's crimes th’ unhappy hunter bore,
Glutting his father's eyes with guiltleſs gore. Dryden's Żn.
This was the arms or device of our old Roman hun-
ters ; a paſſage of Manilius lets us know the pagan hunters
had Meleager for their patron. Addiſon on Italy.
Bold Nimrod firſt the ſavage chace began,
A mighty hunter, and his game was man. Pope.
2. A dog that ſcents game or beaſts of prey.
Of dogs, the valu'd file
Diſtinguiſhes the ſwift, the ſlow, the ſubtle,
The houſekeeper, the hunter. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Hu'NTING HoRN. n.ſ.. [hunting and born. J A bugle; a horn
uſed to cheer the hounds.
Whilſt a boy, Jack ran from ſchool,
Fond of his huntinghorn and pole. Prior.
Hºrº n: ſ [from hunter.] A woman that follows the
Cl2CC.
And thou thrice crowned queen of night, ſurvey
With thy chaſte eye, from thy pale ſphere above,
Thy huntreſs’ name, that my full life doth ſway. Shakeſp.
Shall I call
Antiquity from the old ſchools of Greece,
To teſtify the arms of chaſtity ?
Hence had the huntreſ, Dian her dread bow,
Fair ſilver-ſhafted queen, for ever chaſte. Milton.
Let old Arcadia boaſt her ample plain,
Th’ immortal huntreſs, and her virgin train;
Nor envy Windſor. Pope's Windſºr Foreſ.
Homer repreſents Diana with her quiver at her ſhoulder;
but at the ſame time he deſcribes her as an huntreſ. Broºm.
Hu'NTSM N. n.ſ. ſhunt and man.]
1. One who delights in the chace.
Like as a huntſman, after weary chace,
Seeing the game eſcape from him away, -
Sits down to reſt him. Spenser's Sonnett.
Such game, whilſt yet the world was new,
The mighty Nimrod did purſue:
What huntſman of our feeble race,
Or dogs, dare ſuch a monſter chace : Waller,
2. The ſervant whoſe office it is to manage the chace.
Apply this moral rather to the huntſman, that managed the
chace, than to the maſter. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
HUN’Ts MANs HIP. n.ſ.. [from huntſman.] The qualifications
of a hunter.
At court your fellows every day
Give th’ art of rhiming, huntſmanſhip, or play. Donne.
HU’RDLE. m. ſ. [pynbel, Saxon.] A texture of ſticks woven
together; a crate.
Settle your fine joints 'gainſt Thurſday next,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither. Shakeſpeare.
The blackſmith was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Ty-
burn; taking pleaſure upon the hurdle, to think that he ſhould
be famous in after times. Bacon's Henry VII.
The ſled, the tumbril, hurdles and the flail,
Theſe all muſt be prepar’d. Dryden's Georg.
HURDs. n.ſ. The refuſe of hemp or flax. Ainſworth.
To HURL. v. a. [from huorlt, to throw down, Iſlandick; or,
according to Skinner, from whirl.]
1. To throw with violence; to drive impetuouſly.
If heav'ns have any grievous plagues in ſtore,
O, let them keep it ’till thy fins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee. Shakeſpeare's Richard III.
He holds vengeance in his hand,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law. Shakespeare R. III.
I with my nails digg'd ſtones out of the ground,
To hurl at the beholders of my ſhame. Shakespeare Henry VI.
If he thruſt him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of
wait. Num. xxxv. 20.
They uſe both the right hand and the left in hurling ſtones.
Chron. xii. 2.
Ben. johnſon.
Hurlink and wit,
As madmen ſtones.
His darling ſons,
Hurl’d headlong to partake with us, ſhall curſe
Their frail original and faded bliſs. Milton's Parad. Loft.
She ſtrikes the lute; but if it ſound,
Threatens to hurl it on the ground. Waller.
Corrupted light of knowledge hurl’d
Sin, death, and ignorance o'er all the world. Denham.
Young Phaeton,
From Eaſt to North irregularly hurl’d,
Firſt ſet himſelf on fire, and then the world. Dryd, juven.
Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
And hurl them headlong to their fleet and main. Pope's Iliad.
2. To utter with vehemence. [Hurler, French, to make an
howling or hideous noiſe.]
The glad merchant that does view
His ſhip far come from watry wilderneſs,
He hurls out vows. Spenſer.
Highly they ragd againſt the Higheſt,
Hurling defiance toward the vault of heav'n. Milton.
3. To play at a kind of game. -
Hurling taketh its denomination from throwing of the ball,
and is of two ſorts; to goals, and to the country: for hurling
to goals there are fifteen or thirty players, more or leſs, choſen
out on each ſide, who ſtrip themſelves, and then join hands in
ranks, one againſt another: out of theſe ranks they match
themſelves by pairs, one embracing another, and ſo paſs away;
every of which couple are to watch one another during this
play. Carew’s Survey of Cornwal.
HURL. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Tumult; riot; commotion.
He in the ſame hurl murdering ſuch as he thought would
withſtand his deſire, was choſen king. Knolles.
Hu'Rlp At. n.ſ.. [hurl and bat.] Whirlbat. Ainſworth.
Hu'RLER. m. ſ. [from hurl.] One that plays at hurling.
The hurlerſ muſt hurl man to man, and not two ſet upon
One man at On Ce. Carew's Survey of Cornwal.
Hu'rlwind. n.ſ.. [hurl and wind.] A whirlwind; a violent
guſt. A word not in uſe.
Like ſcatter'd down by howling Eurus blown,
By rapid hurlwinds from his manſion thrown. Sandys.
HU'RLY. n ſ. [I have been told that this word owes its
HU'RLYBURLY. { original to two neighbouring families named
Hurly and Burly, or Hurleigh and Burleigh, which filled their
part of the kingdom with conteſts and violence. If this ac-
count be rejected, the word muſt be derived from hurl, hurly,
and burly, a hudicrous reduplication. Hurlade, French; hur-
lubrelu, inconfiderately.] Tumult; commotion; buſtle.
Winds take the ruffian billows by the top,
That with the hurley death itſelf awakes. Shakespeare. H. IV.
Poor diſcontents, -
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news -
Of hurlyburly innovation. Stateſ. Henry IV. p. i.
|
11 Q. Methinks,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">i
H U S
H U R
º
º
4.
i
Mcthinks, I ſee this hurly all on foot. Shakeſp. K. john.
All places were filled with tumult and hurlyburly, every man
meaſured the danger by his own fear; and ſuch a pitiful cry
was in every place, as in cities preſently to be beſieged. Knolles.
HU’RR1cAN E. W. n.ſ. ſhuracan, Spaniſh; ouragan, French..] A
HU'R RIcANo. } violent ſtorm, ſuch as is often experienced in
the eaſtern hemiſphere.
Blow winds, and crack your cheeks;
Your cataraćts and hurricanoes ſpout. Shakespeare K. Lear.
A ſtorm or hurricano, though but the force of air, makes a
frange havock where it comes. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
A poet who had a great genius for tragedy, made every
man and woman too in his plays ſtark raging mad: all was
tempeſtuous and bluffering; beaven and earth were coming
together at every word; a mere hurricane from the beginning
to the end. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The miniſters of ſtate, who gave us law,
In corners with ſele&amp;ted friends withdraw ;
There, in deaf murmurs, ſolemnly are wiſe,
Whiſpring like winds, ere hurricanes ariſe. , Dryden.
So, where our wide Numidian waſtes extend,
Sudden th’ impetuous hurricanes deſcend,
Wheel through the air, in circling eddies play,
... Tear up the ſands, and ſweep whole plains away. Addison.
To Hu'RRY. v. a. [per;ian, to plunder, Saxon: hurs was like-
wiſe a word uſed by the old Germans in urging their horſes
to ſpeed; but ſeems the imperative of the verb.] To haſten;
to put into precipitation or confuſion; to drive confuſedly.
Your nobles will not hear you ; but are gone
To offer ſervice to your enemy;
And wild amazement hurries up and down
The little number of your doubtful friends. Shakeſpeare.
For whom all this haſte
Of midnight march, and hurry'd meeting here Miltºn.
Impetuous luſt hurries him on to ſatisfy the cravings of it.
South's Sermons.
That harry'd o'er
Such ſwarms of Engliſh to the neighb'ring ſhore. Dryden.
A man has not time to ſubdue his paſſions, eſtabliſh his ſoul
in virtue, and come up to the perfection of his nature, before
he is hurried off the ſtage. Addſon's Spectator.
Stay theſe ſudden guſts of paſſion,
That hurry you away. Rowe's Royal Cºnvert.
If a council be called, or a battle fought, you are not
coldly informed, the reader is hurried out of himſelf by the
poet's imagination. Pope's Preface to the Iliad.
To HU'RRY. v. n. To move on with precipitation.
Did you but know what joys your way attend,
You would not hurry to your journey's end. Dryd. Aurengz.
HU'RRY. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Tumult; precipitation; com-
motion.
Among all the horrible hurries in England, Ireland was then
almoſt quiet. Hayward.
It might have pleaſed him in the preſent heat and hurry of
his rage; but muſt have diſpleaſed him infinitely in the ſedate
refle&amp;tion. South's Sermons.
After the violence of the hurry and commotion was over,
the water came to a ſtate ſomewhat more calm. //codw.
Ambition raiſes a tumult in the ſoul, it inflames the mind,
and puts it into a violent hurry of thought. Addison Speiator.
A long train of coaches and fix ran through the heart, one
after another, in a very great hurry. Addiſon's Guardian.
I do not include the life of thoſe who are in a perpetual hur-
ry of affairs, but of thoſe who are not always engaged. Addison
The pavement founds with trampling feet,
And the mixt hurry barricades the ſtreet. Gay's Trivia.
HURST. h. ſ. [pyrrº, Sax.]. A grove or thicket of trees. Ainſ.
To HURT. v. a. preter. I hurt; part, paſſ. I have hurt. [pyrº,
wounded, Saxon; heurter, to ſtrike, French..] .
1. To miſchief; to harm.
Virtue may be affail'd, but never hºrt ;
Surpriz'd by unjuſt force, but not enthrall’d. Milton.
2. To wound; to pain by ſome bodily harm.
My heart is turn'd to ſtone: I ſtrike it, and it hurts my
hand. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
The Adonis of the ſea is ſo called, becauſe it is a loving and
innocent fiſh, that hurts nothing that has life. If allºn's Alger.
It breeds contempt
For herds to liſten, or preſume to pry,
When the hurt lion groans within his den. Dryd. Don Seb.
HURT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Harm; miſchief.
The hurt which cometh thereby is greater than the good.
Spenſer's State ºf Ireland.
I found it ſland there uncorrected, as if there had been no
hurt done. Baker on Learning.
2. Wound or bruiſe.
Where is he wounded ? -
-There will be large cicatrices to ſhew the people: he re-
ccived ſeven hurts i' th' body. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
... Carter adventured bravely, and received two great hºrts in
his body, Ilayward,
. . . 8
The pains of ſickneſs and hurts, hunger, thi:ſt and cold,
all men feel. Locke-
In arms and ſcience 'tis the ſame,
Our rival's hurts create our fame. Prior.
Hu'RTER. n.ſ. (from hurt.] One that does harm.
Hu'RTFUL. adj. [hurt and full.] Miſchievous; pernicious.
Secret negle&amp;t of our duty is but only our own hurt: one
man's contempt of the common prayer of the church of God
may be moſt hurtful unto many. Ho-ker, b. v.
The hurtful hazle in thy vineyard ſhun,
Nor plant it to receive the ſetting ſun. Dryden's Georg.
HU'RT FULLY. adv. [from hurtful. J Miſchievouſly; perni-
ciouſly.
Hu'RT FULN ess. n.ſ.. [from hurtful..] Miſchievouſneſs; per-
niciouſneſs.
To Hu'RTLF. v. n. [heurter, French ; urtare, Italian.] To
claſh; to ſkirmiſh; to run againſt any thing; to joſtle; to
meet in ſhock and encounter. Hanmer.
. The noiſe of battle hurtled in the air. Shakespeare jul. Caſar.
Kindneſs, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature ſtronger than his juſt occaſion,
Made him give battle to the lioneſs, * *
Who quickly fell before him ; in which hurting, -
From miſerable ſlumber I awak'd. Shakeſp. As you like it.
To Hu'RTL E. v.a. . To move with violence or impetuoſity.
This is probably the original of hºrſ.
His harmful club he 'gan to hurtle high,
And threaten battle to the fairy knight. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
HURTLE BERRY. m. ſ. [hiort bar, Daniſh.] Bilberry.
HU'RTL Ess. adj. [from hurt.]
1. Innocent; harmleſs; innoxious; doing no harm.
Unto her home he oſt would go,
Where bold and hurtleſ, many a play he tries,
Her parents liking well it ſhould be ſo;
For ſimple goodneſs ſhined in his eyes. Sidney.
She joy'd to make proof of her cruelty
On gentle dame, ſo hurtleſ; and ſo true.
- Shorter ev'ry gaſp he takes,
And vain efforts and hurtleſ; blows he makes. Dryden's AFn.
2. Receiving no hurt.
Hu'RTL Essly. adv. [from hurtleſ...] Without harm.
Your neighbours have found you ſo hurtleſ ly ſtrong, that
they thought it better to reſt in your friendſhip than make new
trial of your enmity. Sidney.
HU'RTLEssNess. n.ſ.. [from hurtleſ...] Freedom from any per-
nicious quality.
Fairy Queen.
HU'SBAND. m.ſ.. [hoſband, maſter, Daniſh, from haſ: and
bonda, Runick, a maſter.]
1. The correlative to wife; a man married to a woman. .
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy ſovereign. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes again: he
ſo takes on yonder with my husband, and ſo rails againſt all
married mankind. Shakeſp. Merry //ives of Iłindſor.
This careful husband had been long away,
Whom his chaſte wife and little children mourn. Dryden.
The contract and ceremony of marriage is the occaſion of
the denomination or relation of husband. Locke.
2. The male of animals.
Ev’n though a ſnowy ram thou ſhalt behold,
Prefer him not in haſte, for husband to thy fold. Dryden.
3. An oeconomiſt; a man that knows and practiſes the methods
of frugality and profit. Its ſignification is always modified by
ſome epithet implying bad or good.
Edward I. ſhewed himſelf a right good husband; owner of
a lordſhip ill huſbanded. Davies on Ireland.
I was conſidering the ſhortneſs of life, and what ill husbands
we are of ſo tender a fortune. Collier on Fame.
4. A tiller of the ground; a farmer.
Husband's work is laborious and hard. Hubberd's Tale.
I heard a great husband ſay, that it was a common error to
think that chalk helpeth arable grounds. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
In thoſe fields
The painful husband plowing up his ground,
Shall find all fret with ruſt, both pikes and ſhields. Haševill.
lf continu'd rain
The labºring husband in his houſe reſtrain,
Let him forecaſt his work. Dryden's Georgicks.
To Hu's BAN D. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſupply with an huſband.
Think you I am no ſtronger than my ſex, .
Being ſo father'd and ſo huſband d? Shakespeare julius Caſar.
If you ſhall prove
This ring was ever her’s, you ſhall as eaſy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet ſhe never was:
In my right,
By me inveſted, he compeers the beſt.
—That were the moſt, if he ſhould husband you. Shałºż.
2. To manage with frugality. -
It will be paſtime paſſing excellert,
If it be husbanded with modeſty. Shakespeare.
Shakeſpeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H U T
º
º
The French, wiſely husbanding the poſſeſſion of a vićtory,
kept themſelves within their trenches. Bacon's Henry VII.
If thou be maſter-gunner, ſpend not all
That thou can'ſt ſpeak at once; but huſband it, -
And give men turns of ſpeech. Herbert.
3. To till ; to cultivate the ground with proper management.
A farmer cannot husband his ground, if he ſits at a great
rent. - Bacon's Eſſays.
Hu'sBANDLEss. adj. [from husband.] Without an husband.
A widow, husbandleſ, ſubject to fears;
A woman, naturally born to fears. Shakeſp. King john.
HU's BANDLY. adj. [from husband.] Frugal; thrifty.
Bare plots full of galls, if ye plow overthwart;
And compaſs it then, is a husbandly part. Tuſſ. Husbandry.
Hu'sBANDMAN. m.ſ.. [husband and man.] One who works in
tillage.
#. Davy ſerves you for good uſes; he is your ſerving-
man, and your husbandman. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
The mule being more ſwift in his labour than the ox, more
ground was allowed to the mule by the husbandman. Broome.
Hu's BANDRY. m. ſ. [from husband.]
1. Tillage; manner of cultivating land. . -
He began with a wild method to run over all the art of
husbandry, eſpecially employing his tongue about well dunging
of a field. Sidney, b. ii.
Aſkt if in husbandry he ought did know,
To plough, to plant, to reap, to ſow. Hubberd's Tale.
Husbandry ſupplieth unto us all things neceſſary for food.
Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Peace hath from France too long been chas'd;
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
Corrupting in its own fertility.
Her plenteous womb
Expreſſeth its full tilth and husbandry. Shakeſpeare.
The ſeeds of virtue may, by the husbandry of Chriſtian
counſel, produce better fruit than the ſtrength of ſelf-
nature. - Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Husbandry the Spaniards wanting in the valley of Mexico,
could not make our wheat bear ſeed. Raleigh's H. of the World.
A family governed with order, will fall naturally to the
ſeveral trades of husbandry, tillage, and paſturage. Temple.
Let any one conſider the difference between an acre of land
ſown with wheat, and an acre of the ſame land lying without
any husbandry upon it, and he will find that the improvement
of labour makes the value. Locke.
2. Thrift; frugality; parſimony:
There's husbandry in heaven;
The candles are all out. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
You have already ſaved ſeveral millions to the publick, and
that what we aſk is too inconſiderable to break into any rules
of the ſtričteſt good husbandry. Swift.
3. Care of domeſtick affairs.
- Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
__ The husbandry and manage of my houſe. Shakeſpeare.
HU . intºſ. [Without etymology.] Silence be ſtill! no
IIOlle
The king hath done you wrong; but huſh / 'tis ſo. Shakespeare
There's ſomething elſe to do; buſh and be mute,
Or elſe our ſpell is marr'd. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt:
HUSH. adj. [from the interjećtion.] Still; ſilent; quiet.
- As we often ſee, againſt ſome ſtorm,
A ſilence in the heav'ns, the rack ſtand ſtill,
The bold winds ſpeechleſs, and the orb below
As huſh as death. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
T; * v. n. [from the interjećtion.] To be ſtill; to be
filent.
This frown'd, that fawn'd, the third for ſhame did bluſh;
Another ſeemed envious or coy;
Another in her teeth did gnaw a ruſh;
But at theſe ſtrangers preſence every one did huſh. F. Queen.
To HUSH. v. a. To ſtill ; to filence; to quiet; to appeaſe.
Yet can I not of ſuch tame patience boaſt,
Shakeſp. Henry V.
As to be huſht, and nought at all to ſay. Shakeſp. Rich. IH.
It was my breath that blew this tempeſt up,
Upon your ſtubborn uſage of the pope;
But ſince you are a gentle convertite,
My tongue ſhall huſh again this ſtorm of war, -
And make fair weather in your bluſtring land. Shakespeare K. john.
Speak ſoftly;
All's huſht as midnight yet. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
My love would ſpeak; my duty huſhes ºft º
When in a bed of ſtraw we ſhrink together,
And the bleak winds ſhall whiſtle round our heads,
Wilt thou then talk thus to me? Wilt thou then
Huſh my cares thus, and ſhelter me with love? Otway.
Huſh'd as midnight ſilence go; -
He will not have your acclamations now. Dryden.
Her fire at length is kind,
Calms ev'ry ſtorm, and huſhes ev'ry wind;
Prepares his empire for his daughter's eaſe,
And for his hatching nephews ſmooths the ſeas. Dryden,
Upon his riſing the court was huſſed, and a whiſper ran.
- Addiſon's Speciator.
To HUSH up. v. a. To ſuppreſs in ſilence; to forbid to be
mentioned. - -
This matter is huſhed up, and the ſervants are forbid to talk
of it. - Pope.
HU's HMONEY. n.ſ.. [huſh and money..] A bribe to hinder infor-
mation; pay to ſecure ſilence.
A dext’rous ſteward, when his tricks are found,
Huſhmoney ſends to all the neighbours round;
His maſter, unſuſpicious of his pranks, -
Pays all the coſt, and gives the villain thanks. Swift.
HUSK. n. ſ: [huldſch, Dutch, or huſcken, from huys...] The
outmoſt integument of fruits. -
Do but behold yon poor and ſtarved band,
And your fair ſhew ſhall ſuck away their ſouls,
Leaving them but the ſhales and husks of men. Shakespeare H. V.
Moſt ſeeds, in their growing, leave their husk or rind about
the root. , Bacon's Naural Hiſtory.
Thy food ſhall be
The freſh brook muſſels, withered roots, and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
Fruits of all kinds, in coat .
Rough, or ſmooth rind, or bearded husks, or ſhell
She gathers; tribute large! and on the board
Heaps with unſparing hand. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b. v.
Some ſteep their ſeeds, and ſome in cauldrons boil
O'er gentle fires; the exuberant juice to drain,
And ſwell the flatt'ring husks with fruitful grain. Dryden.
Some when the preſs, by utmoſt vigour ſcrew’d,
Has drain'd the pulpous maſs, regale their ſwine
With the dry refuſe; thou, more wiſe, ſhalt ſteep
The husks in water, and again employ
The pond’rous engine. - Phillips.
Barley for ptiſan was firſt ſteeped in water ’till it ſwelled ;
afterwards dried in the ſun, then beat 'till the husk was taken
off, and ground. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Do not content yourſelves with mere words, leſt you only
amaſs a heap of unintelligible phraſes, and feed upon husks in-
ſtead of kernels. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
To HUSK. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtrip off the outward
integument.
HU's KED. adj. [from husk..] Bearing an huſk; covered with a
huſk.
HU's KY. adj. [from husk..] Abounding in huſks; conſiſting of
huſks. ,
- Moſt have found
A husky harveſt from the grudging ground. Dryden's Wirgil.
With timely care
Shave the goat's ſhaggy beard, left thou too late
In vain ſhould'ſt ſeek a ſtrainer, to diſpart
The hu-ky terrene dregs from purer muſt. Philips.
HU'ss Y. n.ſ. [corrupted from houſewife: taken in an ill ſenſe.]
A ſorry or bad woman ; a worthleſs wench. It is often uſed
ludicrouſly in ſlight diſapprobation.
Get you in, huſy, go: now will I perſonate this hopeful
youngjade. Southern's Innocent Adultery.
HU’s TINGs. n.ſ. [purcinº, Saxon.] A council; a court held.
To HU'stle. v. a. [perhaps corrupted from hurtle.] To ſhake
together. -
Hu's wife. n.ſ.. [corrupted from hºuſewife.]
1. A bad manager; a ſorry woman. It is common to uſe houſe-
wife in a good, and huſwife or huſy in a bad ſenſe.
Bianca,
A huſwife, that, by ſelling her deſires,
Buys herſelf bread and cloth.
2. An oeconomiſt; a thrifty woman.
Why ſhould you want?
The bounteous huſwife, nature, on each buſh
Lays her fulneſs before you. Shakeſpeare.
To Hu's wife. v. a. [from the noun..] To manage with ceco-
nomy and frugality.
But huſwifing the little heav'n had lent,
She duly paid a groat for quarter-rent;
And pinch'd her belly, with her daughters two,
To bring the year about with much ado. Dryden.
Hu'swif ERY. m. ſ. [from ht, wife.]
1. Management good or bad.
Good huſwifery tricth
To riſe with the cock;
Ill huſwifery lyeth
*Till nine of the clock. Tuſgr.
2. Management of rural buſineſs committed to women.
If cheeſes in dairie have Argus his eyes,
Tell Ciſley the fault in her buſwifery lies. Tuſ Husbandry.
}HUT. m. ſ. [putte, Saxon ; hute, French.] A poor cottage.
Our wand'ring ſaints, in woful ſtate,
To a ſmall cottage came at laſt,
Where dwelt a good old honeſt yeoman,
Who kindly did theſe ſaints invite
In his poor hut to paſs the night. Swift.
Sore
Shakeſpeare's Othello,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H Y D
H Y G
Sore pierc'd by wintry wind,
How many ſhrink into the ſordid hut -
Of chearleſs poverty. Thomſºn.
Hutch. n.ſ. [praecca. Saxon; huche, French..] A corn cheſt.
The beſt way to keep them, after they are threſhed, is to
dry them well, and keep them in hutches, or cloſe caſks. Mort.
. To #. v. n. [from the ſound.] To buzz; to murmur.
Huzza'. interj. A ſhout; a cry of acclamation.
The huzzas of the rabble are the ſame to a bear that they
are to a prince. L’Eſtrange.
It was an unfair thing in you to keep a parcel of roar-
ing bullies about me day and night, with huzzas and hunting
horns never let me cool. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory ºf john Bull.
All fame is foreign, but of true deſert;
Plays round the head, but comes not to the heart:
One ſelf-approving hour whole years outweighs
Of ſtupid ſtarers and of loud huzzas. Pope's Eſſay on Man.
To Huzza'. v. n. [from the interjection.] To utter acclama-
tlCI).
A caldron of fat beef, and ſtoop of ale,
On the huzzaing mob ſhall ſtill prevail.
To HUzz A'. v. a. To receive with acclamation.
He was huzzard into the court by ſeveral thouſands of
weavers and clothiers. Addison.
HY'Acı NTH. m. ſ. [...w3&amp;P ; hyacinthe, Fr. hyacinthus, Lat.]
1. A plant.
1: hath a bulbous root: the leaves are long and narrow: the
ſtalk is upright and naked, the flowers growing on the upper
part in a ſpike: the flowers conſiſt each of one leaf, are naked,
tubuloſe, and cut into ſix diviſions at the brim, which are re-
flexed: the ovary becomes a roundiſh fruit with three angles,
which is divided into three cells, which are filled with roundiſh
ſeeds. Miller. -
The ſilken fleece, impurpl’d for the loom,
Rival'd the hyacinth in vernal bloom. Pope's Odyſſey.
2. The hyacinth is the ſame with the lapis lyncurius of the an-
cients. It is a leſs ſhewy gem than any of the other red ones,
but not without its beauty, though not gaudy. It is ſeldom
ſmaller than a ſeed of hemp, or larger than a nutmeg. It is
found of various degrees of deepneſs and paleneſs; but its
colour is always a deadiſh red, with a conſiderable admixture
of yellow, which even ſometimes ſeems predominant: but its
moſt uſual is that mixed red and yellow, which we know by
the name of flame-colour. This gem is found in ſeveral parts
of Europe; but the fineſt ſort comes from the Eaſt and Weſt
Indies. Hill on Foſſils.
Hy Aci'N THINE. adj. [CaxºSwº.] Made of hyacinths.
HY'A Des. 2} ſtellati
HY'A Ds. }n.ſ. [Jºss.] A watry conſtellation.
Then ſailors quarter'd heav'n, and found a name
For ev'ry fix’d and ev'ry wand'ring ſtar;
The pleiads, hyads. Dryden's Georgiaks.
Hy’ALINE. adj. [2xiwGP.] Glaſſy; cryſtalline; made glaſs;
reſembling glaſs.
From heav'n-gate not far, founded in view
On the clear hyaline, the glaſſy ſea. Milton's Parad. Loft.
HY'BRidous, adj. [361; ; hybrida, Latin.] Begotten between
animals of different ſpecies.
Why ſuch different ſpecies ſhould not only mingle together,
but alſo generate an animal, and yet that that hybridous pro-
dućtion ſhould not again generate, is to me a myſtery. Ray.
HYDATIDEs. n.ſ. [from $326.] Little tranſparent bladders of
water in any part: moſt common in dropſical perſons, from a
diſtention or rupture of the lymphedućts; for they happen
moſtly in parts abounding with thoſe veſſels. Quincy.
All the water is contained in little bladders, adhering to the
liver and peritoneum, known by the name of hydatides. If iſºm.
HYDRA. n.ſ. I hydra, Latin.] A monſter with many heads
ſlain by Hercules ; whence any multiplicity of evils is termed
a hydra.
King's Coºkery.
New rebellions raiſe
Their hydra heads, and the falſe North diſplays
Her broken league to imp her ſerpent wings. AMilton.
More formidable hydra ſtands within,
Whoſe jaws with iron-teeth ſeverely grin. Dryden's Án.
Subdue
The hydra of the many-headed hiſing crew. Dryden.
HYDRAGoG U Es. n.ſ. [$3.26 and &amp;yw; hydragogue, Fr.] Such
medicines as occaſion the diſcharge of watery humours, which
is generally the caſe of the ſtronger catharticks, becauſe they
ſhake moſt forcibly by their vellications the bowels and their
appendages, ſo as to ſqueeze out water enough to make the
ſtools ſeem to be little elſe. Quincy.
HYDRAU/Lic Al. Nadj. [from hydraulick.] Relating to the con-
HY DR AU'Lick. } veyance of water through pipes.
Among the engines in which the air is uſeful, pumps may
be accounted not contemptible ones, and divers other hydrau-
lical engines. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
We have employed a virtuoſo to make an hydraulick engine,
in which a chymical liquor, reſembling blood, is driven
through elaſtick channels. Arbuthn, and Pope's Mart. Scrib/era.
HYDRAULICKS. m. ſ. [Wºod, water, and 20x0s, a pipe.]
2
The ſcience of conveying water through pipes or conduits.
HYDRockle. n.ſ. ſºoxº; hydrocele, Fr.]. A watery rupture.
Hydroce'PH Alus. n.ſ. [3%; and zip22.3.] A dropſy in the
head.
A hydrocephalus, or dropſy of the head, is only incurable
when the ſerum is extravaſated into the ventricles of the
brain. Arbuthnot on Diet.
HYDRO'GRAPHER. m. ſ. [$3.26 and 7.6% w; hydrographe, Fr.]
One who draws maps of the ſea.
It may be drawn from the writings of our hydrogra-
pher. Boyle.
HYDRography... n. ſ. [$3.26 and yºzºw; hydrographie, Fr.]
Deſcription of the watery part of the terraqueous globe.
HydroMANcy. m.ſ. [ºwe and waſío. 5 hydromantie, Fr.]
Predićtion by water. -
Divination was invented by the Perſians: there are four
kinds of divination; hydromancy, pyromancy, aeromancy, and
geomancy. Ayliffe's Parergon.
HYDRomel. n.ſ. [$3.26 and ºff. , hydromel, Fr.J Honey and
Water. -
Hydromel is a drink prepared of honey, being one of the
moſt pleaſant and univerſal drinks the northern part of Europe
affords, as well as one of the moſt ancient. Mortimer's Husb.
In fevers the aliments preſcribed by Hippocrates were
ptiſans and cream of barley; hydrome', that is, honey and
water, when there was no tendency to a delirium. Arbuthnot.
Hydro'METER. n. ſ. [ºwe and airtov J An inſtrument to
meaſure the extent of water.
Hydro'Metry. n.ſ.. [tºwe and ºrpov.] The aët of mea-
ſuring the extent of water. -
Hydrophobia. n.ſ. [ºpoſ:(2 : hydrophobie, Fr.] Dread of
Water. -
Among thoſe diſmal ſymptoms that follow the bite of a mad
dog, the dread of water is the moſt remarkable. &amp;uincy.
HYDRo'Pica L. }*. [tºgorizè, ; hydropique, French ; from
HYDR o'Pick. hydrºps, Tatin.] j. diſeaſed with ex-
travaſated water.
Cantharides heats the watery parts of the body; as urine,
and hydropical water. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
The world's whole ſap is ſunk:
The general balm th’ hydropick earth hath drunk; }
Whither, as to the bedsfeet, life is ſhrunk,
Dead and interr'd. Donne.
Some mens hydropick inſatiableneſs learned to thirſt the
more, by how much more they drank. King Charleſ.
Hydropical ſwellings, if they be pure, are pellucid. Wiſem.
Every luſt is a kind of hydropick diſtemper, and the more
we drink the more we ſhall thirſt. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Hydrºpick wretches by degrees decay,
Growing the more, the more they waſte away;
By their own ruins they augmented lye,
With thirſt and heat amidſt a deluge fry. Blackmore.
One ſort of remedy he uſes in dropſies, viz. the water of
the hydropicks, which is a remedy for the diſeaſe. Arbuthnot.
HYDROSTATICAL. adj. . [Sjøe and ralizī.] Relating to
hydroſtaticks; taught by hydroſtaticks.
A human body forming in ſuch a fluid, will never be recon-
cilable to this hydroffatical law: there will be always ſomething
lighter beneath, and ſomething heavier above; becauſe bone,
the heavieſt in ſpecie, will be ever in the midſt. Bentley.
HYDRost A'TIcALLY. adv. [from hydroſlatical J According to
hydroſtaticks. -
The weight of all bodies around the earth is ever propor-
tional to the quantity of their matter: for inſtance, a pound
weight, examined hydroffatically, doth always contain an equal
quantity of ſolid maſs. - Bentley's Sermons.
HYDRost A'ticks. n.ſ. [326 and rºº; hydrºffatigue, Fr.]
The ſcience of weighing fluids; weighing bodies in fluids.
Hydroſtick, n.ſ. [ºf ; hydrotique, French.] Purger of
water or phlegm.
He ſeems to have been the firſt who divided purges into
hydroticks and purgers of bile. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Hy'EN. Un. ſ. [/yene, French; hyaena, Latin.] An animal like
HYe'NA. } a wolf, ſaid fabulouſly to imitate human voices.
I will weep when you are diſpoſed to be merry; I will
laugh like a hyen, when you are inclined to ſleep. Shakeſpeare.
A wonder more amazing would we find;
The hyena ſhews it, of a double kind:
Varying the ſexes in alternate years,
In one begets, and in another bears. Dryden's Fables.
The hyena was indeed well joined with the bever, as having
alſo a bag in thoſe parts, if thereby we underſtand the hyena
odorata, or civet cat. Brown's Pulgar Errºurs.
The keen hyena, felleſt of the fell. Thomſon's Summºr.
Hy GRO'M ET e R. m.ſ.. [Jygè; and wélé;w; hygrºmetre, French-l
An inſtrument to meaſure the degrees of moiſture.
A ſponge, perhaps, might be a better hygrometer than the
earth of the river. Arbuthnºt on Air.
Hy'd Roscop E. m. ſ. [ćy;&amp;’ and axon &amp; hygrºſcºpe, Fr.] An
inſtrument to ſhew the moiſture and dryneſs of the air, and
to meaſure and eſtimate the quantity of either extreme. Qui, cy.
Moiſture in the air is diſcovered by hygroſcºpes. Arbuthnºt-
HYLA'RCHIcAl.
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H Y P
H Y P
º
º:
HyLA'R ch (cAL: adj. [ºn and dex.] Preſiding over matter.
HY M. n.ſ. A ſpecies of dog.
Avaunt, you curs'
Maſtiff, greyhound, mungi il grin,
Hound or ſpaniel, brache or hym;
Or bobtail tike, or trundle tail,
Tom will make him weep and wail. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Hy'MEN. m. ſ. [Cºnv.]
1. The god of marriage.
2. The virginal membrane.
* - /
#º. }nſ [Jºva.132.] A marriage ſong,
And heav'nly choirs the hymenean ſung. AMilt. Par. Loft.
For her the ſpouſe prepares the bridal ring;
For her white virgins hymeneals ſing. Pope.
HYMEN E ‘AL.
HYMENE'AN.
The ſuitors heard, and deem'd the mirthful voice
A ſignal of her hºmeneal choice. Pope's Odyſſey.
HYMN. n.ſ. ſhynne, Fr. Juv'G'.] An encomiaſtick ſong, or
ſong of adoration to ſome ſuperiour being.
As I earſt, in praiſe of mine own dame,
do now in honour of thy mother dear, -
An honourable hymn I eke ſhould frame. Spenſer.
Our ſolemn hymns to ſullen dirges change;
Our bridal flow’rs ſerve for a buried coarſe. Shakeſpeare.
When ſteel grows.
Soft as the paraſite's filk, let hymns be made
An overture for the wars. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
There is an hymn ſung ; but the ſubjećt of it is always the
praiſes of Adam, and Noah and Abraham, concluding ever
with a thankſgiving for the nativity of our Saviour. Bacon.
Farewel, you happy ſhades,
Where angels firſt ſhould pračtiſe hymns, and ſtring
- Their tuneful harps, when they to heav'n would fing. Dryd.
To HYMN. v. a. [Juvío..] To praiſe in ſong; to worſhip with
hymns.
To HYMN. v. n. To fing ſongs of adoration.
They touch'd their golden harps, and hymning prais'd
God and his works. Milton.
He had not left alive this patient ſaint,
This anvil of affronts, but ſent him hence
To hold a peaceful branch of palm above,
And hymn it in the quire. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
HY'MNIck. adj. [juvoº..] Relating to hymns.
He rounds the air, and breaks the hymnick notes
In birds, heav'n's choriſters, organick throats;
Which, if they did not die, might ſeem to be
A tenth rank in the heavenly hierarchy. Donne.
To HYP. v. a. [barbarouſly contračted from hypochondriack.] To
make melancholy ; to diſpirit. -
I have been, to the laſt degree, hypped ſince I ſaw you. Spe&amp;#.
HYPAL LA Ge. n.ſ. (Jaro.xxzyń.] A figure by which words
change their caſes with each other.
HYPER. m. ſ. [A word barbarouſly curtailed by Prior from
hypercritick.] A hypercritick; one more critical than neceſ-
ſity requires Prior did not know the meaning of the word.
Criticks I read on other men,
And hypers upon them again. Prior.
HYPE’RBOL.A. m.ſ. (hyperbole, Fr. Čirić and 33XX&amp;.] In geo-
metry, a ſection of a cone made by a plane, ſo that the axis of
the ſection inclines to the oppoſite leg of the cone, which in the
parabola is parallel to it, and in the ellipſis interſe&amp;ts it. The
axis of the hyperbolical ſection will meet alſo with the oppoſite
ſide of the cone, when produced above the vertex. Harris.
}a}. Pertaining to marriage.
Had the velocities of the ſeveral planets been greater or leſs .
than they are, or had their diſtances from the ſun, or the
quantity of the ſun's matter, and conſequently his attractive
power been greater or leſs than they are now, with the ſame
velocities, they would not have revolved in concentrick circles,
but have moved in hyperbola's very eccentrick. Bentley’s Serm.
HYPER Bole. n.ſ.. [hyperbole, Fr. Jwit30x.] A figure in rhe-
torick by which anything is increaſed or diminiſhed beyond
the exact truth: as, he runs faſter than lightning. His poſſeſſions
are fallen tº duſt. He was ſo gaunt, the caſe of a flagellet was
a manſion for him. Shakeſp. 2 !ſe of a fi
Terms unſquar’d,
Which, from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropt,
Would ſeem hyperboles. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Taffata phraſes, ſilken terms preciſe,
Three pil'd hyperboles, ſpruce affectation,
Figures pedantical, theſe Summer flies,
Have blown me full of maggot oſtentation. Shakeſpeare.
They were above the hyperboles, that fond poetry beſtows
upon its admired objećts. Glanv. Sceſſ, c. 1.
Hyperboles, ſo daring and ſo bold,
Diſdaining bounds, are yet by rules control'd;
Above the clouds, but yet within our ſight,
They mount with truth, and make a tow'ring flight. Granv.
The common people underſtand raillery, or at leaſt rheto-
rick, and will not take hyperboles in too literal a ſenſe. Swift.
HYPER Bo' ic A L. } adj. I hºpertolique, French; from hyper-
HYPER Bo'll cK. bola. -
1. Belonging to the hyperbola ; having the nature of an hy-
perbola.
Cancellated in the middle with ſquares, with triangles be-
fore, and behind with hyperbolick lines. Grew's Muſæum.
The horny or pellucid coat of the eye riſeth up, as a hil-
lock, above the convexity of the white of the eye, and is of
an hyperbolical or parabolical figure. Ray on the Creation.
2. [From hyperbole..] Exaggerating or extenuating beyond fact.
It is parabolical, and probably hyperbolical, and therefore not
to be taken in a ſtrićt ſenſe. Boyle.
HYPER Polic ALLY. adv. [from hyperbolical.]
1. In form of an hyperbola.
2. With exaggeration or extenuation.
Yet may all be ſolved, if we take it hyperbolically. Brown.
Scylla is feated upon a narrow mountain, which thruſts
into the ſea a ſteep high rock, and hyperbolically deſcribed by
Homer as inacceſſible. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
HYPERBO'LIFor M. adj. [hyperbola and forma.] Having the
form, or nearly the form of the hyperbola.
HYPER Bo'RE AN. m. ſ. [/yperboreen, French; hyperboreus, Lat.]
Northern.
Hyper critick. n.ſ.. [hytºrcritique, Fr. ºrse and kºrizos.]
A critick exact or captious beyond uſe or reaſon.
Thoſe hypercriticks in Engliſh poetry differ from the opi-
nion of the Greek and Latin judges of antiquity, from the lia-
lians and French, and from the general taſte of all ages. Dryd.
HYPE RCRITICAL. adj. [from hypercritick.] Critical beyond
neceſſity or uſe.
We are far from impoſing thoſe nice and hytercritical punc-
tilio's, which ſome aſtrologers oblige our gardeners to. Evelyn.
Such hypercritical readers will confider my buſineſs was to
make a body of refined ſayings, only taking care to produce
them in the moſt natural manner. Swit.
Hype'RMETER. m. ſ [ºws; and ºrgov.] Any thing greater
than the ſtandard requires.
When a man riſes beyond ſix foot, he is an hypermeter, and
may be admitted into the tall club. Addiſon's Guardian.
HYPER sarco'sis, m. ſ ſºrt;74:27:, Jºsé and r2643;, ]
The growth of fungous or proud fleſh.
Where the §4. was great, I ſprinkled it with pre-
cipitate, whereby I more ſpeedily freed the ulcer of its putre-
faction. //iſeman's Surgery.
HYPHEN. m. ſ. [Up?v.] A note of conjunction: as, vir-tue,
ever-living.
HYPNo’ tick. m. ſ. [ Jarvo;. J. Any medicine that induces
eep.
Hºchondres. n ſ. [hypocondre, Fr. Jwoxévégiov.] The
two regions lying on each ſide the cartilago enſiformis, and
thoſe of the ribs, and the tip of the breaſt, which have in one
the liver, and in the other the ſpleen. Quincy.
The blood moving too ſlowly through the celiack and me-
ſenterick arteries, produce various complaints in the lower
bowels and hypochondres; from whence ſuch perſons are called
hypochondriack. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
HYPochos DR1'AcAL. }*, [ hypocondriaque, French, from
HYPochon DRI Ack. hypochondres.]
1. Melancholy; diſordered in the imagination.
Socrates laid down his life in atteſtation of that moſt fun-
damental truth, the belief of one God; and yet he's not re-
corded either as fool or hypochondriack. Decay of Piety.
2. Producing melancholy.
Cold ſweats are many times mortal, and always ſuſpected ; .
as in great fears, and hypochondriacal paſſions, being a relaxa-
tion or forſaking of the ſpirits. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtºry.
HY'Pocis T. n. ſ. [Jiróxist; ; hypoci/?e, French.]
Hypºci/? is an inſpiſlated juice in large flat maſſes, conſi-
derably hard and heavy, of a fine ſhining black colour, when
broken. It is brought from the Levant, ſometimes from
France, and other parts of Europe. The ſtem of the plant,
from which it is produced, is thick and fleſhy; and, what is
fingular, much thicker at the top than towards, the bottom.
The fruits contain a tough glutinous liquor, which are ga-
thered before they are ripe; and the juice is expreſſed, then
evaporated over a gentle fire, formed into cakes, and dried in
the ſun. It is an aſtringent medicine of conſiderable power.
- Hill's Mat. Med.
Hypo'crisy. n.ſ.. [hypocriſe, Fr. Jirózews. J Diſfimulation.
with regard to the moral or religious character.
Next ſtood hypocriſy with holy leer,
Soft ſmiling and demurely looking down;
But hid the dagger underneath the gown. Dryden's Fables,
Hypocry is much more eligible than open infidelity and
vice: it wears the livery of religion, and is cautious of giving
ſcandal: nay, continued diſguiſes are too great a conſtraint:
men would leave off their vices, rather than undergo the toil
of pračtiſing them in private. w Swift.
HYPOCRITE. n ſ. [ hypocrite, French; Jazz:1;;. J . A
diſſembler in morality or religion. ,
1 I R. He<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          No page number
        </div><p class="Text">H Y P
H Y S
He heartily prays ſome occaſion may detain us longer: I HYPOTHESIS. n.ſ. [ hypotheſe, Fr. JaráSeri;. J A ſuppoſi-
dare ſwear he is no hypocrite, but prays from his heart. Shakespeare
A wiſe man hateth not the law ; but he that is an hypocrite
therein, is as a ſhip in a ſtorm. Eccluſ, xxxiii. 3.
Fair hypocrite, you ſeek to cheat in vain;
Your filence argues, you aſk time to reign. Dryden.
The making religion neceſſary to intereſt might increaſe
hypocriſy; but if one in twenty ſhould be brought to true
piety, and nineteen be only hypocrites, the advantage would
ſtill be great. Swift.
- Beware, ye honeſt: the third circling glaſs
Suffices virtue: but may hypocrites,
Who ſlily ſpeak one thing, another think,
Hateful as hell, ſtill pleas'd unwarn'd drink on,
And through intemp'rance grow a while ſincere. Phillips.
Hypocritical. adj. [from hypocrite.] Diſſembling; inſin-
HY focriſtick. } cere; appearing differently from the
reality.
Now you are confeſſing your enormities; I know it by that
hypocritical, down-caſt look. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
Whatever virtues may appear in him, they will be eſteemed
an hypocritical impoſture on the world; and in his retired plea-
ſures, he will be preſumed a libertine. Roger's Sermons.
Let others ſkrew their hypocritick face. Swift.
HypocriticALLY. adv. [from hypocritical.] With diſlimu-
lation; without ſincerity; falſely.
Simeon and Levi ſpake not only falſely, but infidiouſly, nay
hypocritically, abuſing at once their proſelytes and their reli-
gion. Government ºf the Tongue.
HY Pog A'strick. adj. [hypogaſhique, French; two and Yzsºč J
Scated in the lower part of the belly.
The ſwelling we ſuppoſed to riſe from an effuſion of ſerum
through all the hypogo/trick arterics. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Hypo GE'u M. m. ſ. ['wo and yi, J A name which the ancient
architects gave to all the parts of a building that were under
ground, as cellars and vaults Harris.
H O'STASS. m. ſ. (hypºſiaſe, French; twd's 274, J
1. Diſtinét ſubſtance.
2 Perſonality. A term uſed in the doćtrine of the Holy Trinity.
The oneneſs of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, referring to the
ſeveral hypoſtaſe, in the one eternal, indiviſible, divine nature,
and the eternity of the Son's generation, and his co-eternity
and conſubſtantiality with the Father, are aſſertions equivalent
to thoſe before compriſed in the ancient more ſimple article.
Hammond on Fundamentals.
Hypost A'TIcAL. adj. [hypoffa'ique, French, from hypoſtaſis. J
1. Conſtitutive; conſtituent as diſtinct ingredients.
Let our Carneades warn men not to ſubſcribe to the grand
doctrine of the chymiſts, touching their three hypoſtatical
principles, ’till they have a little examined it. Boyle.
2. Perſonal diſtinctly perſonal.
Hyport Nu's s. n ſ. [hypotenuſ, Fr. Jirá13272.] The line that
ſubtends the right angle of a right-angled triangle ; the ſub-
tenſe.
The ſquare of the hypotentiſe in a right-angled triangle, is
equal to the ſquares of the two other ſides. Locke.
tion; a ſyſtem formed upon ſome principle not proved.
The mind caſts and turns itſelf reſtleſly from one thing to
another, 'till at length it brings all the ends of a long and va-
rious hypotheſis together; ſees how one part coheres with ano-
ther, and ſo clears off all the appearing contrarieties that ſeemed
to lie croſs, and make the whole intelligible. South's Serm.
With imagin'd ſovereignty
Lord of his new hypothºſis he reigns:
He reigns: how long ’till ſome uſurper riſe;
And he too, mighty thoughtful, mighty wife,
Studies new lines, and other circles feigns. Prior.
Hypothe'T1cAl. Nadj. [hypothetique, Fr. from hypotheſis.] In-
HYpothe'Tick. } cluding a ſuppoſition; conditional.
Conditional or hypothetical propoſitions are thoſe whoſe parts
are united by the conditional particle if ; as, if the ſun be
fixed, the earth muſt move. //atts's Logick.
Hypothetically. adv. [from hypothetical J Upon ſuppoſi-
tion; conditionally. -
The only part liable to imputation is calling her a goddeſs;
yet this is propoſed with modeſty and doubt, and hypºtheti-
cally. Broome's Notes to Pope's Odyſſey.
HYRst,
HuRst, ław all from the Saxon pynre, a wood or grove. Gilſ.
HERst,
HY'ssop. m.ſ.. [hyſſope, Fr. hyſºpus, Lat.] A verticillate plant,
with long narrow leaves: the creſt of the flower is roundiſh,
erect, and divided into two parts: the beard is divided into three
parts; the middle part is hollowed like a ſpoon, having a
double point, and is ſomewhat winged: the whorles of the
flowers are ſhort, and at the lower part of the ſtalk are placed
at a great diſtance; but toward the top are cloſer joined, ſo
as to form a regular ſpike. It hath been a great diſpute,
whether the hyflop commonly known is the ſame which is
mentioned in Scripture. Miller.
The hyſſop of Solomon cannot be well conceived to be our
common hyſſop; for that is not the leaſt of vegetables obſerved
to grow upon walls; but rather ſome kind of capillaries,
which only grow upon walls and ſtony places. Brown.
HYst E(Ric Al.
Hyste'Rick.
1. Troubled with fits; diſordered in the regions of the womb.
In hyſter ick women the rarity of ſymptoms doth oft ſtrike
ſuch an aftoniſhment into ſpectators, that they report them
poſſeſſed with the devil. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Many hyterical women are ſenſible of wind paſſing from the
womb. Floyer on the Humours.
2. Proceeding from diſorders in the womb.
Parent of vapours, and of female wit,
Who gave th’ hyſterick or poetick fit. Pope's Ra. of the Lock.
This terrible ſcene made too violent an impreſſion upon a
woman in her condition, and threw her into a ſtrong hyſierick
fit. Arbuthn and Pope's Mart. Sci ibl.
Hyst E'Ricks. n.ſ. ſºrtiz; J Fits of women, ſuppoſed to
proceed from diſorders in the womb.
{a}. [hy?erique, French ; Ursfixes.]
