<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A B
Is called the canine letter, becauſe it is uttered with
ſome reſemblance to the grow] or ſnarl of a cur:
it has one conſtant ſound in Engliſh, ſuch as it
has in other languages; as red, roſe, more, mu-
5 ratiº in word, iriveſ from tº Gº, is
followed by an h, rhapſºdy: r is never mute, unleſs the ſe-
cond r may be accounted mute, where two rr are uſed; as
myrrh.
To RA’BATE. v. n. [rabattre, Fr.] In falconry, to recover a
hawk to the fiſt again. Ainſworth.
To RA/BBET. v. a. [rabatre, raboter, Fr.] To pare down
ieces of wood ſo as to fit one another.
The rabbet plane is to cut part of the upper edge of a
board ſtraight or ſquare down, that the edge of another board,
cut down in the ſame manner, may join into the ſquare of
the firſt ; and this lapping over of two boards is called
rabbcting. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
The window frame hath every one of its lights rabbetted
on its outſide about half an inch into the frame, and all theſe
rabbets, but that on the ground-ſell, are groved ſquare.
Adºxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
RA/EB ET. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] A joint made by paring two
pieces ſo that they wrap over one another.
Having drove in the hooks, they ſet the rabbets of the door
within the rablets of the door-poſt. A foxon's A4echan. Exer.
$... m. ſ. A dodor among the Jews.
The Hebrew rabbins ſay, that nature hath given man, for
the pronouncing of all letters, the lips, the teeth, the tongue,
the palate and throat. - Camden’s Remains.
Be not ye called rabbi; for one is your maſter, even Chriſt,
and all ye are brethren. Mat. xxiii. 8.
RA/bbit. n.ſ. [robbe, robbekin, Dutch..] A furry animal that
lives on plants, and burrows in the ground.
I knew a wench married, as the went to the garden for
parſly to ſtuff a rabbit. Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew.
A company of ſcholars, going to catch conics, carried one
with them which had not much wit, and gave in charge, that
if he ſaw any, he ſhould be ſilent for fear of ſcaring of them ;
but he no fooner eſpied a company of rabbits, but he cried
aloud, ecce multi cuniculi ; which he had no ſooner ſaid, but
the conies ran to their burrows ; and he being checked by
them for it, anſwered, who would have thought that the
rabbits underſtood Latin Bacon's Apophthegms.
RA/BBLE. m. ſ. [rabula, Lat. rabulari, low Lat.] A tumul-
tuous croud; an aſſembly of low people.
Countrymen, will ye relent, and yield to mercy,
Or let a rabble lead you to your deaths Shakespeare
Go bring the rabble here to this place. Shakeſp.
Of theſe his ſeveral raviſhments, betrayings, and ſtealing
away of men's wives, came in all thoſe ancient fables, and
all that rable of Grecian forgeries. - Raleigh.
The better ſort abhors ſcurrility,
And often cenſures what the rabble like. Roſcommon.
That profane, atheiſtical, epicurean rabble, whom the
whole nation ſo rings of, are not the wiſeſt men in the
world. South's Sermons.
To gratify the barbarous audience, I gave them a ſhort
rabble ſcene, becauſe the mob are repreſented by Plutarch and
Polybius with the ſame character of baſeneſs and cowardice.
Dryden's Preface to Cleomenes.
In change of government,
The rabble rule their great oppreſſors fate,
Do ſov’reign juſtice and revenge the ſtate. Dryden.
His enemies have been only able to make ill impreſſions
upon the low and ignorant rabble, and to put the dregs of
the people in a ferment. Addison's Freeholder, Nº. 24.
RA’ebl EMENT. n.ſ. [from rabble.] Croud; tumultuous aſ-
ſembly of mean people.
A rude rabblement,
Whoſe like he never ſaw, he durſt not bide,
But got his ready ſtced, and faſt away 'gan ride. Fa. Qu.
R A C
The rabblement houted, clap'd their chopt hands, and ut-
tered a deal of ſtinking breath. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
There will be always tyrants, murderers, thieves, traitors,
and other of the ſame rabblement. Camden's Remains.
RA'BID. ad. [rabidus, Lat.] Fierce; furious; mad.
RA’BINET. n. ſ. A kind of ſmaller ordnance. Ainſworth.
RACE. m. ſ. [race, Fr. from radice, Lat.]
1. A family aſcending. -
2. Family deſcending.
He in a moment will create
Another world; out of man, a race
Of men innumerable, there to dwell.
Milton.
Male he created thee, but thy conſort
Female for race. Milton.
High as the mother of the gods in place,
And proud like her of an immortal race. Dryden.
Hence the long race of Alban fathers come. Dryden.
3. A generation; a collective family.
A race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
4. A particular breed.
Inſtead
Of ſpirits malign, a better race to bring
Into their vacant room. Milton.
In the races of mankind and families of the world, there
remains not to one above another the leaſt pretence to have
the right of inheritance. Locke.
5. RAce of ginger. [rayz de gengibre, Spaniſh.] A root or ſprig
of ginger.
6. A particular ſtrength or taſte of wine, applied by Temple to
any extraordinary natural force of intellect.
Of gardens there may be forms wholly irregular, that may
have more beauty than of others ; but they muſt owe it to
ſome extraordinary diſpoſitions of nature in the ſeat, or ſome
great race of fancy or judgment in contrivance. Temple.
7. [Ras, Iſlandick.] Conteſt in running.
To deſcribe races and games
Or tilting furniture. Milton.
8. Courſe on the feet.
The flight of many birds is ſwifter than the race of any
beaſts.
9. Progreſs; courſe.
It ſuddenly fell from an exceſs of favour, which many ex-
amples having taught them, never ſtopt his race till it came
to a headlong overthrow.
Bacon.
Sidney.
My race of glory run, and race of ſhame. Milton.
Their miniſtry perform'd, and race well run. Milton.
The great light of day yet wants to run
Much of his race though ſteep. Milton.
He ſafe return'd, the race of glory paſt,
New to his friends embrace. Pope's Odyſſey.
10. Train; proceſs.
An offenſive war is made, which is unjuſ in the aggreſſor;
the proſecution and race of the war carrieth the defendant to
invade the ancient patrimony of the firſt aggreſſor, who is
now turned defendant; ſhall he ſit down, and not put him-
ſelf in defence 2 Bacon.
The race of this war fell upon the loſs of Urbin, which he
re-obtained. Bacon.
RA'cf Horse. m. ſ. [race and hºrſ...] Horſe bred to run for
prizes
The reaſon Hudibras gives, why thoſe, who can talk on
trifles, ſpeak with the greateſt fluency, 1S, that the tongue is
like a racehorſe, which runs the faſter the leſs weight it
carrics. Addison.
RAcEMATION. m. ſ. [racemus, Lat. J Cluſter, like that of
*... will in one day fertilitate the whole race?iation or
cluſter of eggs, which are not excluded in many weeks
after. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
RAcEMI/Fe Rous. a j. [racemus and fero, Latin.] Bearing
cluſters.
RAce R.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A C
R A D
Runner; one that contends in ſpeed.
w ... [from race.] - -
RA cº ſº founder'd jade can trot as high
er pegaſus can fly ;
º: #: º nimbler in the mud,
Than all the ſwift-finn'd racers of the flood. Dorſet.
A poet's form ſhe plac'd before their eyes,
And bade the nimbleſt racer ſeize the prize. . Pope.
Racings. n.ſ. (from ray.]. The quality of being racy.
Rack. m. ſ. [racke, Dutch, from racken, to ſtretch.]
ngine to torture. -
1. An º not his ghoſt; O let him paſs! he hat's him.
That would, upon the rack of this rough woºl",
h hi t longer. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Stretch him ou g the rack afflićt himſelf, becauſe he
Did ever any man upon - * r *
had received a croſs anſwer from his miſtreſs. Taylor.
Let them feel the whip, the ſword, the fire, -
And in the tortures of the rack expire. Addiſon.
2. Torture; extreme pain. . . -
A fit of the ſtone puts a king to the rack, and makes him
as miſerable as it does the meaneſt ſubject. - - Temple.
A cool behaviour ſets him on the rack, and is interpreted
as an inſtance of averſion or indifference. Addiſon.
3. Any inſtrument by which extenſion is performed. -
Theſe bows, being ſomewhat like the long. bows in uſe
amongſt us, were bent only by a man's immediate ſtrength,
without the help of any bender or raft that are uſed to
others. ///kins's Mathematical Magick.
4. A diſtaff; commonly a portable diſtaff, from which they
ſpin by twirling a ball.
The ſiſters turn the wheel,
Empty the woolly ract, and fill the recl. Dryden.
5. [Racie, Dutch, a track.] The clouds as they are driven by
the wind.
That, which is now a horſe, even with a thought
The rack diſlimns, and makes it indiſtinct
As water is in water. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
The great globe itſelf,
Yea, all, which it inherit, ſhall diſſolve ;
And, like this inſubſtantial pageant, faded,
Leave not a rack behind. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
We often ſee againſt ſome ſtorm,
A ſilence in the heav'ns, the rack ſtand ſtill,
The bold winds ſpeechleſs, and the orb below
As huſh as death. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The winds in the upper region, which move the clouds
above, which we call the rack, and are not perceived below,
paſs without noiſe. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
As wint'ry winds contending in the ſky,
With equal force of lungs their titles try;
They rage, they roar: the doubtful rack of heav'n
Stands without motion, and the tide undriv'n. Dryden.
6. [pracca, the occiput, Saxon ; racca, Iſlandick, hinges or
joints.] A neck of mutton cut for the table.
7. A grate.
8. A wooden grate in which hay is placed for cattle.
Their bulls they ſend to paſtures far,
Or hills, or feed them at full racks within. May's Wirgil.
The beſt way to feed cattle with it, is to put it in rac{s,
becauſe of the great quantity they tread down. Mortimer.
He bid the nimble hours
Bring forth the ſteeds; the nimble hours obey:
From their full racks the gen’rous ſteeds retiré. Addiſon.
9. Arrack; a ſpirituous liquor. See ARRAck.
To RACK. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſtream as clouds before
the wind.
Three glorious ſuns, each one a perfed ſun,
Not ſeparated with the racking clouds,
But ſever'd in a pale clear-ſhining ſky. Shakeſp.
To Rack. v. 4. [from the noun.]
1. To torment by the rack.
... Hold, O dreadful Sir,
You will not rack an innocent old man. Dryden and Lee.
2. To torment; to harraſs.
Th' apoſtate angle, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but rack'd with deep deſpair. Milton.
3. To harraſs by exaction.
The landlords there ſhamefully rack their tenants, exačting
of them, beſides his covenants, what he pleaſeth. Spenſer.
The commons haſt thou rac{’d; the clergy's bags
Are lank and lean with thy extortions. Shak
He took poſſeſſion of his juſt eſtate, eff.
Nor rac{d his tenants with increaſe of rent. Dryden.
4. To ſcrew ; to force to performance.
They racking and ſtretching ſcripture further than by God
wº are drawn into fundry inconveniencies. Hooker.
aº. º the heathens racked their wits, and caſt
Y, managing every little argument to the ut-
moſt advantage. * f : . .” -
5. To ſtretch , to extend. Tillotſºn's Sermons.
Nor have I money nor commodity
º º a preſent ſum ;
.." What my credit can in Venice do
That ſhall bé raced event, the memoſ. Shakespeare.
6. To defecate; to draw off from the lees. I know not whence
this word is derived in this ſenſe; rein, German, is clear,
pure, whence our word to rinſe; this is perhaps of the ſame
Iſa CC.
It is common to draw wine or beer from the lees, which
we call racking, whereby it will clarify much the ſooner.
Bacon.
Some roll their caſk about the cellar to mix it with º:
lees, and, after a few days reſettlement, rack it off. Mortim.
Rºº. m. ſ. [rack and rent.] Rent raiſed to the utter-
in Olt.
Have poor families been ruined by rack-rents, paid for the
lands of the church 2 Swift's Miſcellanies.
Rack-RENTER. m. ſ. [rack and renter.] One who pays the
uttermoſt rent.
Though this be a quarter of his yearly income, and the
publick tax takes away one hundred; yet this influences not
the yearly rent of the land, which the rack-renter or under-
tenant pays. Locke.
RAcket. n. ſ. [of uncertain derivation; M. Caſaubon derives
it, after his cuſtom, from £2x12, the daſh of fluctuation
againſt the ſhore.]
1. An irregular clattering noiſe.
That the tennis court keeper knows better than I, it is a
low ebb of linen with thee, when thou keepeſt not racket
there. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
2. A confuſed talk, in burleſque language.
Ambition hath removed her lodging, and lives the next
door to faction, where they keep ſuch a racket, that the whole
pariſh is diſturbed and every night in an uproar. Swift.
3. [Raquette, Fr.] The inſtrument with which players ſtrike
the ball. Whence perhaps all the other ſenſes.
When we have matcht our rackets to theſe balls,
We will in France play a ſet,
Shall ſtrike his father's crown into the hazard. Shakeſp.
The body, into which impreſſion is made, either can yield
backward or it cannot : if it can yield backward, then the
impreſſion made is a motion; as we ſee a ſtroke with a
racket upon a ball, makes it fly from it. Digby on the Soul.
He talks much of the motives to do and forbear, how they
determine a reaſonable man, as if he were no more than a
tennis-ball, to be toiled to and fro by the rackets of the ſecond
cauſes. Bramhall againſt Hobbs.
RA'ck 1 No. m. ſ.
Racing pace of a horſe is the ſame as an amble, only that
it is a ſwifter time and a ſhorter tread; and though it does
not rid ſo much ground, yet it is ſomething eaſier. Far. Dić.
RA’ckoo N. m. ſ.
The rackoon is a New England animal, like a badger, hav-
ing a tail like a fox, being cloathed with a thick and deep
furr: it ſleeps in the day time in a hollow tree, and goes out
a-nights, when the moon ſhines, to feed on the ſea ſide, where
it is hunted by dogs. Bailey.
RA'CY. adj. [perhaps from rayz, Spaniſh, a root.] Strong ;
flavorous ; taſting of the ſoil.
Rich racy verſes in which we
The ſoil, from which they come, taſte, ſmell, and ſee.
Cowley.
From his brain that Helicon diſtil,
Whoſe racy liquor did his offspring fill. Denham.
The cyder at firſt is very luſcious, but if ground more
early, it is more racy. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
The hoſpitable ſage, in ſign
Of ſocial welcome, mix’d the racy wine,
Late from the mellowing caſk reſtor'd to light,
By ten long years refin'd, and roſy bright. Pope.
RAD. the old pret. of read. Speºſer.
RAD.
Rad, red and rod, differing only in dialest, ſignify coun-
ſel; as Conrad, powerful or ſkilful in counſel; Ethelred, a
noble counſellor; Rodbert, eminent for counſel; Eubulus
and Thraſybulus have almoſt the ſame ſenſe. Gibſon.
RA'd Dock, or ruddock. n.ſ. A bird.
The raddock would,
With ciraritable bill, bring thee all this. Shakeſp.
§...}, ſ fair, Lt. Sparkinguliº gº.
By the ſacred radiance of the ſun,
By all the operations of the orbs,
Here I diſclaim all my paternal care. Shakespeare ?. K. Lear.
Whether there be not too high an apprehenſion above Its
natural radianº, is not without juſt doubt; however it *
granted a very ſplendid gum, and whoſe ſparkles may ſome-
what reſemblé the glances of fire. Brown's Wulgar Errouri.
The ſon
Girt with omnipotence, with radiance crown'd -
Of majeſty divine. - Milton.
A glory ſurpaſſing the ſun in its greateſt radianº, which,
though we cannot deſcribe, will bear ſome reſemblance.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The rapid radiance inſtantaneous ſtrikes
- - - - * -
Th’ illumin'd mountain. Thomſºn's Spring.
4. RA'DIANT.
i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A D
R A G
RA’d ANT. adj. [radians, Lat.] Shining; brightly ſparkling;
emitting rays.
There was a ſun of gold radiant upon the top, and before,
a ſmall cherub of gold with wings diſplayed. Bacon.
Mark what radiant ſtate ſhe ſpreads,
In circle round her ſhining throne,
Shooting her beams like ſilver threads,
This, this is ſhe alone. Milton's Arcades.
Virtue could ſee to do what virtue would |
By her own radiant light, though ſun and moon
Were in the flat ſea ſunk. Milton.
I ſee the warlike hoſt of heaven,
Radiant in glitt'ring arms and beamy pride,
Go forth to ſuccour truth below. Milton.
To RA’DIATE. v. n. [radio, Lat..] To emit rays; to ſhine;
to ſparkle.
Though with wit and parts their poſſeſſors could never en-
gage God to ſend forth his light and his truth; yet now that
revelation hath diſcloſed them, and that he hath been pleaſed
to make them radiate in his word, men may recollect thoſe
ſcatter'd divine beams, and kindling with them the topicks
proper to warm our affections, enflame holy zeal. Boyle.
Light radiates from luminous bodies directly to our eyes,
and thus we ſee the ſun or a flame; or it is reflected from
other bodies, and thus we ſee a man or a pićture. Locke.
RA'diate D. adj. [radiatus, Lat.] Adorned with rays.
The radiated head of the phoenix gives us the meaning of
a paſſage in Auſonius. Addiſon.
RAdia"tion. n. ſ. [radiatio, Lat. radiation, Fr.]
1. Beamy luſtre; emiſſion of rays. ,
We have perſpective houſes, where we make demonſtra-
tions of all lights and radiations, and of all colours. Bacon.
Should I ſay I liv'd darker than were true,
Your radiation can all clouds ſubdue, {
But one ; 'tis beſt light to contemplate you. Donne.
2. Emiſſion from a center every way.
Sound paralleleth in many things with the light, and ra-
diation of things viſible. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
RA'DICAL. adj. [radical, Fr. from radix, Latin.]
1. Primitive; original.
The differences, which are ſecondary and proceed from
theſe radical differences, are, plants are all figurate and de-
terminate, which inanimate bodies are not. Bacon.
Such a radical truth, that God is, ſpringing up together
with the eſſence of the ſoul, and previous to all other thoughts,
is not pretended to by religion. Bentley.
2. Implanted by nature.
The emiſſion of the looſe and adventitious moiſture doth
betray the radical moiſture, and carrieth it for company. Bac.
If the radical moiſture of gold were ſeparated, it might be
contrived to burn without being conſumed. //ilkins.
The ſun beams render the humours hot, and dry up the
radical moiſture. Arbuthnot.
3. Serving to origination.
RA'DicALITY.. n.ſ.. [from radical.] Origination.
There may be equivocal ſeeds and hermaphroditical prin-
ciples, that contain the radicality and power of different
forms; thus, in the ſeeds of wheat, there lieth obſcurely the
ſeminality of darnel. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
RA'DicALLY. adv. [from radical.] Originally; primitively.
It is no eaſy matter to determine the point of death in in-
ſeóts, who have not their vitalities radically confined unto one
part. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
- Theſe great orbs thus radically bright,
Primitive founts, and origins of light :
Enliven worlds deny'd to human ſight. Prior.
Ra'DicALNess. n. ſ. [from radical.] The ſtate of being
radical.
To RADICATE. v. a. [radicatus, from radix, Lat.] To
root; to plant deeply and firmly.
Meditation will radicate theſe ſeeds, fix the tranſient gleam
of light and warmth, confirm reſolutions of good, and give
them a durable conſiſtence in the ſoul. Hammond.
Nor have we let fall our pen upon diſcouragement of un-
belief, from radicated beliefs, and points of high pre-
ſcription. Brown's Wugar Errours.
If the obječt ſtays not on the ſenſe, it makes not impreſſion
enough to be remembered; but if it be repeated there, it leaves
plenty enough of thoſe images behind it, to ſtrengthen the
knowledge of the object: in which radicated knowledge, if
the memory conſiſt, there would be no need of reſerving thoſe
atoms in the brain. Glanvill's Defence.
RAdication. m. ſ. [radication, Fr. from radicate.] The act
of fixing deep. -
They that were to plant a church, were to deal with men
of various inclinations, and of different habits of ſin, and
degrees of radication of thoſe habits; and to each of theſe
ſome proper application was to be made to cure their ſouls.
Hammond's Fundamentals.
RA'Dicle. m. ſ. [radicule, Fr. from radix, Lat.]
Radicle is that part of the ſeed of a plant, which, upon its
vegetation, becomes its root. &amp;uincy.
RA'dish. m. ſ. | rate 7. di rai orſ |
dic Sax. alazſ -
O » &gt; if: 3. F I. raphanus, Lat.
The flower of the radiſh conſ,
placed in the form of a croſs; out of the flower-cup riſes
the pointal, which afterward turns to a pod in form of an
horn, that is thick, ſpungy, and furniſhed with a double row
of roundiſh ſeeds, which are ſeparated by a thin membrane :
there are five ſpecies; of that which is commonly cºated
in the kitchen-gardens for its root, there are ſeveral varie-
ies; as the ſmall topped, the deep-fed, and the long topped
ſtripped radiſh.
RA/DIUS. n. ſ. [Latin.] 44iller.
I. The ſemi-diameter of a circle.
2. A bone of the fore-arm, which accompani th
the elbow to the wriſt. &gt; panies the ulna from
To RAFF. v. a. To ſweep; to huddle : - -- -
out diſtinétion. P; e; to take haſtily with-
Their cauſes and effects I thus raff up together.
To RA/FFL.e. v. n. [roffer, to ... #. º caſt š.
a prize, for which every one lays down a ſtake.
. Letters from Hampſtead give me an account, there is a late
inſtitution there, under the name of a raffing ſhop Tatler.
RA/FFle. n.ſ. [raffe, Fr. from the verb..] A ſpecies of game
or lottery, in which many ſtake a ſmall part of the value of
ſome ſingle thing, in conſideration of a chance to gain it.
The toy, brought to Rome in the third triumph of Pompey,
being a pair of tables for gaming, made of two precious ſtones,
three foot broad, and four foot long, would have made a fine
raffe. Arbuthnot on Coins.
RAFT, n. ſ. [probably from ratis, Latin.] A frame or float
made by laying pieces of timber croſs each other,
Where is that ſon
ſts of four leaves, which arc
That floated with thee on the fatal raft. Shakeſp.
Fell the timber of yon lofy grove, -
And form a raft, and build the riſing ſhip. Pope.
RAF.T. part, paſſ of reave or raff. Spenſºr. Torn; rent.
RA/FTER. m. ſ. [raerten, Sax. rafter, Dutch; corrupted, ſays
junius, from roof tree.] The ſecondary timbers of the
houſe; the timbers which are let into the great beam.
The rafters of my body, bone,
Being ſtill with you, the muſcle, finew and vein,
Which tile this houſe, will come again.
Shepherd,
I truſt thy honeſt offer'd courteſy,
Which oft is ſooner found in lowly ſheds
With ſmoky rafters, than in tap'ſtry halls.
On them the Trojans caſt
Stones, rafters, pillars, beams.
From the Eaſt, a Belgian wind
His hoſtile breath through the dry rafters ſent;
The flames impell’d.
The roof began to mount aloft,
Aloft roſe every beam and rafter,
The heavy wall climb'd ſlowly after. Swift's Miſel.
RA/FTERED. adj. [from rafter.] Built with raſters.
No raft’red roofs with dance and tabor ſound,
No noon-tide bell invites the country round.
RAG. n.ſ. [pracobe, torn, Saxon ; ;&amp;zº.]
1. A piece of cloth torn from the reſt; a tatter.
Cowls, hoods and habits, with their wearers toſł, -
And flutter'd into rags. Milton.
Rags are a great improvement of chalky lands. Mortimer.
2. Any thing rent and tattered; worn out cloaths.
Fathers that wear rags,
Do make their children blind;
But fathers that bear bags,
Shall ſee their children kind.
Worn like a cloth,
Gnawn into rags by the devouring moth.
Content with poverty, my ſoul I arm ;
And virtue, though in rags, will keep me warm. Dryden,
3. A fragment of dreſs.
He had firſt matter ſeen undreſt;
He took her naked all alone,
Before one rag of form was on. Hudibras, p. i.
RAGAMU'FFIN. m. ſ. [from rag and I know not what elſe.]
I have led my ragamuffins where they were pepper’d; there's
not three of my hundred and fifty left alive ; and they are
for the town's end to beg during life. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Shall we brook that paltry aſs
And feeble ſcoundrel, Hudibras,
With that more paltry ragamuffin, - -
Ralpho, vapouring and huffing. Hudibras, p. i.
Attended with a crew of ragamuffins, ſhe broke into his
houſe, turned all things topſy-turvy, and then ſet it on
fire. Swift.
RAGE. m. ſ. [rage, Fr.]
1. Violent anger; vehement fury. .
This tiger-ſooted rage, when it ſhall find
The harm of unſkann'd ſwiftneſs, will, too late,
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
21 C Deſire
Donne.
Milton.
Denham.
Dryden.
Pope.
Shakespeare. King Lear.
Sandyſ.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A I
R A I
Deſire net
- - - -- or ith
T, allay my rage, and reveng's wº
&amp; º, reaſons. Shakeſp.
Argument more heroick than the rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia diſeſpous’d. - - Milton.
3. Vehemence or exacerbation of any thing painful. . . -
The party hurtr who hath been in great rage of Pain, till
the weapon was re anointed. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Tºrment and loud lament and furious rºgº: Milton.
The rage of thirſt and hunger now ſuppreſt. Pope.
To RAGE. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To be in fury; to be heated with exceſſive anger.
wine is a mocker, ſtrong drink is raging ; and whoſoever
is deceived thereby, is not wiſe. Prov. xx. 1.
why do the heathen rage. Pſalm ii. 1.
At this he inly rag'd, and as they talk'd, -
Smote him into the midriff. Milton.
2. To ravage ; to exerciſe fury.
- Heart-rending news,
That death ſhould licenſe have to rage among
The fair, the wiſe, the virtuous. JWaller.
3. To act with miſchievous impetuouſ ty. -
The chariots ſhall rage in the ſtreets, they ſhall juſtle one
againſt another, ſeem like torches, and run like the light-
enings. Nah. ii. 4.
The madding wheels of brazen chariots rég'4. Milton.
After theſe waters had raged on the earth, they bºg".”
leſſen and ſhrink, and the great fluctuations of this deºP being
quieted by degrees, the waters retired. Burnet.
Raºceful adj. [rage and full.] Furious; violent.
This courteſy was worſe than a baſtinado to Zelmane; ſo
that again with rageful eyes ſhe bad him defend himſelf; for
no leſs than his life would anſwer it. Sidney, b. ii.
A popular orator may repreſent vices in ſo formidable ap-
pearances, and ſet out each virtue in ſo amiable a form, that
the covetous perſon ſhall ſcatter moſt liberally his beloved
idol, wealth, and the rageful perſon ſhall find a calm. Hamm.
Ra'GGED. adj. [from rag.
1. Rent into tatters.
How like a prodigal,
The ſkarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugg’d and embraced by the ſtrumpet wind;
How like the prodigal doth ſhe return
With over-weather'd ribs and ragged ſails,
Lean, rent, and beggar'd by the ſtrumpet wind. Shakeſp.
As I go in this ragged tattered coat, I am hunted away
from the old woman's door by every barking cur. Arbuthnot.
2. Uneven ; conſiſting of parts almoſt diſunitcd.
The earl of Warwick's ragged ſtaff is yet to be ſeen pour-
trayed in their church ſteeple. Carew's Survey ºf Cornwall.
That ſome whirlwind bear
Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock,
And throw it thence into the raging ſea. Shakeſp.
The moon appears, when looked upon with a good glaſs,
rude and ragged. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
3. Dreſſed in tatters.
Since noble arts in Rome have no ſupport,
And ragged virtue not a friend at court. Dryden.
4. Rugged; not ſmooth.
The wolf would barter away a ragged coat and a raw-
boned carcaſe, for a ſmooth fat one. L'E/ºrange.
a What ſhepherd owns thoſe ragged ſheep Dryden.
Ra'GGEDNEss. n.ſ.. [from ragged...] State of being dreſſed in
tatters.
Poor naked wretches, whereſo'er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitileſs ſtorm
How ſhall your houſeleſs heads and unfed ſides,
z Your loop'd and window’d raggedneſs defend you. Shakespeare .
§Agingly. adv. [from raging.] With vehement fury.
RA'gMAN. m. ſ. [rag and man.] One who deals in rags.
RAGOUT. n.ſ. [French J Meat ſtewed and highly ſeaſoned.
To the ſtage permit
Ragouts for Tereus or Thyeſtes dreſ,
'Tis taſk enough for thee t'expoſe a Roman feaſt. Dryden.
No fiſh they reckon comparable to a ragout of ſnails. Addison
when art and nature join, th’ effect will be
Some nice ragout, or charming fricaſy. King's Cookery.
RA'GworT. n. ſ. [rag and wort.] A plant.
Ragwort hath a radiated flower, the tube of which is al-
... of . º ". and the ſeeds are faſtened to a
wn ; the leaves are deeply laciniate - -
RA'GST on E. m. ſ. [rag ...}. d or jagged. Miller.
* A ſtone ſo named from its breaking in a ragged, uncertain
irregular manner. *" irº, Fift.
2. The ſtone with which they ſmooth the edge of a tool new
R grºund and left ragged.
AIL. n; f. [riegel, German.] -
I. *:::: beam fixed at the ends in two upright poſts.
unt you make another ſquare, and alſo a tennant on each
ºnanted end of the ſtiles, and another morteſs on the to
and bottom rail, you may put them together M. p
2. A ſeries of poſts connected'with beam. b . . oxon.
is incloſed : a pale is a ſeries off eams, by which any thing
- ** ſeries of ſmall upright poſts riſing above
is aſtoniſhed at the raining of it.
the croſs beam, by which they are conneded : a rail is a ſe-
ries of croſs beams ſupported with poſts, which do not riſe
much above it.
A man, upon a high place without rails, is ready to fall.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A large ſquare table for the commiſſioners, one ſide bein
ſufficient for thoſe of either party, and a rail for others which
went round. Clarendon.
3. A kind of bird.
Of wild birds Cornwall hath quail, rail, partridge and
pheaſant. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
4. Inaºle, Saxon.] A woman's upper garment. This is pre-
ſerved only in the word nightrail.
To Rail. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To incloſe with rails.
The hand is ſquare, with four rounds at the corners; this
ſhould firſt have been planched over, and railed about with
balliſters. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
As the churchyard ought to be divided from other profane
places, ſo it ought to be fenced in and tailed. Aylºff.
Sir Roger has given a handſome pulpit-cloth, and railed in
the communion-table. Addiſon's Spectatºr, N° 112.
2. To range in a line.
They were brought toLondon all railed in ropes, like a team
of horſes in a cart, and were executed ſome of them at London
and Wapping, and the reſt at divers places upon the ſea
coaſt. Bacºn's Henry VII.
To RAIL. v. n. [railler, Fr. rallen, Dutch..] To uſe inſolent
and reproachful language; to ſpeak to, or to mention in op-
probrious terms.
Your huſband is in his old lunes again; he ſo rails againſt
all married mankind, curſes all Eve's daughters. Shaº.
what a monſtrous fellow art thou ; thus to rail on one,
that is neither known of thee, nor knows thce. Shakesp.
*Till thou can'ſt rail the ſeals from off my bond,
Thou but offend'ſt thy lungs to ſpeak ſo loud. Shaftºff.
He tript me behind; being down, inſulted, rail'd,
And put upon him ſuch a deal of man,
That worthied him. Shakespeare King Lear.
Of words cometh railings and evil ſurmiſings. 1 Tim. vi.
Angels bring not railing accuſation againſt them. 2 Pet. ii.
If any is angry, andrails at it, he may ſecurely. Lak.
T Hou art my blood, where Johnſon has no part;
Where did his wit on learning fix a brand,
And rail at arts he did not underſtand , Dryden.
Leſbia for ever on me rail,
To talk of me ſhe never fails. - Swift.
RAI’ler. m. ſ [from rail.] One who inſults or defames by
opprobious language.
If I build my felicity upon my reputation, I am as happy
as long as the railer will give me leave. South's Sermon.
Let no preſuming impious railer tax
Creative wiſdom. Thomſºn's Summer.
RAI'll ERY. m. ſ. [raillerie, Fr.] Slight ſatire; ſatirical mer-
riment.
Let raillery be without malice or heat. , Benj. jºhnſºn.
A quotation out of Hudibras ſhall make them treat with
levity an obligation wherein their welfare is concerned as to
this world and the next: raillery of this nature is enough to
make the hearer tremble. Addiſon's Freeholder, N• 6.
Studies employed on low objects ; the very naming
of them is almoſt ſufficient to turn them into raillery.
Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
To theſe we are ſolicited by the arguments of the ſubtile,
and the railleries of the prophane. Rogers'; Sermony.
RAI’MENT. n.ſ.. [for arrainent, from arrº] Weſture; weſt-
ment; cloaths; dreſs; garment. A word now little uſed
but in poetry.
His raimºnts, though mean, received handſomeneſs by the
grace of the wearer. Sidney.
O Protheus, let this habit make thee bluſh |
Be thou aſham’d, that I have took upon ſhe
Such an immodeſt raiment. -
Living, both food and rainent ſhe ſupplies.
To RAIN. v. n. [renian, Saxon; regene”, Dutch.]
Sha}£ſp -
Dryden.
1. To fall in drops from the clouds.
Like a low-hung cloud, it rain, ſº faſt, • * * *
That all at once it falls. Dryin's Knight's Tale:
The wind is South-Weſt, and the weather lowring, and
like to rain. Locke.
2. To fall as rain.
The eye marvelleth at the whiteneſ, thereof, and the hº
Eccluſ. xliii. 18.
They ſat them down to weep; nor only tears z:
Rain’d at their eyes, but high winds ſolº within. Miltºn.
3. It RAINs. The water falls from the clouds.
That which ſerves for gain,
And follows but for form,
Will pack when it begins to rain,
And leave thee in the ſtorm.
To RAIN. v. a. To pour down as rain.
It rain’d down fortune, ſhow'ring on Your
Shakeſp. King Lear.
head. Sºak.
Rain
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A I
R A K
º,
ſº.
º,
h
!)
º
- To RAISE. v. a. [reſa, Swediſh; reiſer, Daniſh.]
Rain ſacrificial whiſp'rings in his ear,
Make ſacred even his ſtirrop. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
Iſrael here had famiſh'd, had not God
Rain'd from heav'n manna. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
RAIN. m. ſ. [ren, Saxon.] The moiſture that falls from the
clouds.
When ſhall we three meet again;
In thunder, lightning, or in rain. Shakeſp.
With ſtrange rains, hails, and ſhowers were they perſe-
cuted. JWiſdom xvi. 16.
The loſt clouds pour
Into the ſea an uſeleſs ſhow'r,
And the vext ſailors curſe the rain,
For which poor farmers pray'd in vain. J/aller.
Rain is water by the heat of the ſun divided into very ſmall
parts aſcending in the air, till encountering the cold, it be
condenſed into clouds, and deſcends in drops. Ray.
RAINBow. n.ſ. [rain and bow.] The iris; the ſemicircle of
various colours which appears in ſhowery weather.
Caſting of the water in a moſt cunning manner, makes a
erfect rainbow, not more pleaſant to the eye than to the
mind, ſo ſenſibly to ſee the proof of the heavenly iris. Sidney.
To add another hue unto the rainbow. Shakeſp.
The rainbow is drawn like a nymph with large wings diſpread
in the form of a ſemicircle, the feathers of ſundry colours. Peach.
They could not be ignorant of the promiſe of God never
to drown the world, and the rainbow before their eyes to put
them in mind of it. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
This rainbow never appears but where it rains in the ſun-
ſhine, and may be made artificially by ſpouting up water,
which may break aloft, and ſcatter into drops, and fall down
like rain; for the ſun, ſhining upon theſe drops, certainly
cauſes the bow to appear to a ſpectator ſtanding in a true po-
ſition to the rain and ſun; this bow is made by refraction of
the ſun's light in drops of falling rain. Newton's Opticks.
The dome's high arch reflects the mingled blaze,
And forms a rainbow of alternate rays. Pope.
RAI'NDEER. [pranar, Saxon; rangifer, inj A deer with
large horns, which, in the northern regions, draws ſledges
through the ſnow.
RAININEss. n.ſ.. [from rainy..] The ſtate of being ſhowery.
RAIN-w ATER. n.ſ. [rain and water.] Water not taken from
ſprings, but falling from the clouds.
Court holy water in a dry houſe, is better than the rain-
water out o' doors. Shakeſp. King Lear.
We took diſtilled rain-water. Boyle.
Rain-water is to be preferred before ſpring-water. Mort.
RAI'NY. adj. [from rain..] Showery ; wet.
Our gayneſs and our gilt are all beſmirch'd,
With rainy marching in the painful field. Shakeſp. Hen. V.
A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a conten-
tious woman are alike. Prov. xxvii. 15.
1. To lift; to heave.
The elders went to raiſe him up from the earth. 2 Sam. xii.
Such a bulk as no twelve bards could raiſe
- Twelve ſtarv'ling bards. Pope.
2. To ſet upright: as, he raiſed a maſ?.
3. To erect; to build up.
Take his carcaſe down from the tree, caſt it at the enter-
ing of the gate, and raiſe thereon a heap of ſtones. joſ. viii.
. To exalt to a ſtate more great or illuſtrious.
Counſellors may manage affairs, which nevertheleſs are far
from the ability to raiſe and amplify an eſtate. Bacon.
Thou ſo pleas'd,
Can’ſ raiſe thy creature to what height thou wilt -
Of union. l Milton.
. To amplify ; to enlarge.
5 †. * . thine was firſt fram'd fleſh,
To raiſe my fortunes. Shakeſp. King Lear.
6. To increaſe in current value.
The plate-pieces of eight were raiſed three-pence in the -
piece. Temple's Miſcellanies.
.7. To elevate ; to exalt. -
The Perſians gazing on the ſun,
Admir’d how high 'twas plac'd, how bright it ſhone #
But as his pow'r was known, their thoughts were rais'd,
And ſoon they worſhip'd, what at firſt they prais'd. Prior.
8. To advance; to promote ; to prefer. -
This gentleman came to be raiſed to great titles. Clarend.
9. To excite; to put in action: --
He raiſeth the ſtormy wind. Pſalm cvii. 28.
- He might taint
Th’ animal ſpirits, that from pure blood ariſe,
Thence raiſe diſtemper'd thoughts. Milton.
Gods encountering gods, Jove encouraging them with his
thunders, and Neptune raiſing his tempeſts. Pope.
10. To excite to war or tumult; to ſtir up.
He firſt rais'd head againſt uſurping Richard. Shakeſp.
They neither found me in the temple diſputing with any
man, neither raiſing up the people. Aéis xxiv. 12.
AEneas then employs his pains
In parts remote to raiſe the Tuſcan ſwains. Dryden.
11. To rouſe; to ſtir up.
They ſhall not awake, nor be raiſed out of their ſleep, job.
12. To gºe beginning to; as, he raiſed the family.
13. To bring into being.
Marry her, and raiſe up ſeed. Gen. xxxviii. 8.
I raiſed up of your ſons for prophets. Amos i. 11.
I will raiſe up for them a Plant of renown, and they ſhall
be no more conſumed with hunger. Ezek. xxxiv. 29
I will raiſe up evil againſt thee. 2 Samuixi. 11.
One hath ventur'd from the deep to raiſe - - - - -
New troubles. Milton
God youchſafes to raiſe another world -
From him. Milton
14. To call into view from the ſtate of ſeparate ſpirits. -
The ſpirits of the deceaſed, by certain ſpells and infernal
ſacrifices, were raiſed. Sandys's journey.
Theſe are ſpectres, the underſtanding raiſes to itſelf, to
flatter its own lazineſs. Locke.
15. To bring from death to life.
. He was delivered for our offences, and raiſed again for our
juſtification. Romans iv. 25.
It is ſown in diſhonour, it is raiſed in glory; it is ſown in
weakneſs, it is raiſed in power. I Cor. xv. 23.
16. To occaſion; to begin.
Raiſe not a falſe report. Exodus xxiii. 1.
The common ferryman of Egypt, that waſted over the
dead bodies from Memphis, was made by the Greeks to be
the ferryman of hell, and ſolemn ſtories raiſed after him: Brº.
Wantonneſs and pride
Raiſe out of friendſhip hoſtile deeds in peace. Milton.
17. To ſet up ; to utter loudly.
All gaze, and all admire, and raiſe a ſhouting ſound. Dr.
Soon as the prince appears, they raie a cry. Dryder.
18. To collect ; to obtain a certain ſum.
Britain, once deſpisºd, can raiſe
As ample ſums, as Rome in Caeſar's days.
I ſhould not thus be bound,
If I had means, and could but raiſe five pound. Gay.
19. To collect; to aſſemble; to levy.
He out of ſmalleſt things could without end
Arbuthnot.
Have rais'd inceſſant armies. Milton.
20. To give riſe to.
Higher argument
Remains, ſufficient of itſelf to raiſe
That name, unleſs years damp my wing. Milton.
21. To RAISE paſſe. To form paſte into pies without a diſh.
Miſs Liddy can dance a jig, and raiſe paſte. Speciator.
RAI'ser. n.ſ.. [from raiſe.] He that raiſes.
Then ſhall ſtand up in his eſtate a raiſer of taxes. Dan. xi.
They that are the firſt raiſers of their houſes, are moſt
indulgent towards their children. Bacon.
He that boaſts of his anceſtors, the founders and raiſers of
a family, doth confeſs that he hath leſs virtue. Taylor.
Raiſer of human kind by nature caſt,
Naked and helpleſs. Thomſon's Autumn.
RAI'sin. n.ſ. [racemus, Lat. raiſin, Fr.]
Raiſins are the fruit of the vine ſuffered to remain on the
tree till perfectly ripened, and then dried either by the ſun or
the heat of an oven: grapes of every kind, preſerved in this
manner, are called raiſins, but thoſe dried in the ſun are much
ſweeter and pleaſanter than thoſe dried in ovens ; they are
called jar raiſins, from their being imported in earthen jars: the
fineſt are the fruit of the vitis Damaſcena. Hill's Materia M.d.
Dried grapes or raiſins, boiled in a convenient proportion
of water, make a ſweet liquor, which, being betimes diſtilled,
afford an oil and ſpirit much like the raiſins themſelves. Boyle.
RAKE. m. ſ. [raſtrum, Lat. race, Sax. racche, Dutch.]
1. An inſtrument with teeth, by which the ground is divided,
or light bodies are gathered up.
At Midſummer down with the brembles and brakes,
And after abroad with thy forkes and thy rakes. 74/ºr.
O that thy bounteous deity wou’d pleaſe
To guide my rake upon the chinking ſound
Qf ſome vaſt treaſure hidden underground. . . Dryden.
He examines his face in the ſtream, combs his ruful locks
with a rake. Garth.
2. [Racaille, Fr. the low rabble; or rekel, Dutch, a worthleſs
cur dog..] A looſe, diſorderly, vicious, wild, gay, thought-
leſs fellow ; a man addicted to pleaſure. -
The next came with her ſon, who was the greateſt rake in
the place, but ſo much the mother's darling, that the left her
huſband for the ſake of this graceleſs youth. Addison.
Rakes hate ſober grave gentlewomen. Arbuthnot.
Men, ſome to bus'neſs, ſome to pleaſure take :
But ev'ry woman is at heart a rake. Pºpe.
The fire ſaw ſmiling his own virtues wake;
The mother begg'd the bleſſing of a rake. Pope.
To RAke. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To gather with a rake. . . -
Mow barlie, and rake it, and ſet it on cocks. Tuffer.
Harrows iron teeth ſhall every where. ... -
Rake helmets up. Aſay's Pirgil's cº'ſ
f<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A L
R A M
4. To ſour; to ſearch with eager and whement diligence.
recious jewel as the world takes it for, yet
... rake it º of dunghills; and accordingly
e ſuitable to its extract. South.
If it b
they are forced tº
ji. gives it a valu
2. To clear with a rake. -
As they rake the green appearing ground,
The ruſſét hay-cock riſes.
. To draw together by violence. - -
3 An eager deſire to rake together whatſoever might preju-
dice or any way hinder the credit of apocryphal books, hath
cauſed the collector's pen ſo to run as it ... *...*
ind, which ſhould guide it, had no leiſure to think.
the mind, whic c &gt; Hooker, b. v. ſ. 20.
what piles of wealth hath he accumulated
How, i' th' the name of thrift,
foºh. rake this together. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
- A ſport more formidable - -
Had rak'd together village rabble. Hudibras, p. 1.
Ill-gotten goods are ſquandered away with as little conſcience
as they were raked together. L’Eſtrange.
Thomſºn.
The ſtateſman rakes the town to find a plot. Swift.
5. To heap together and cover.
Here i' th' ſands
Thee I’ll rake up, the poſt unſanétified
Of murth’rous lechers. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The blazing wood may to the eye ſeem great,
But 'tis the fire rak’d up that has the heat,
And keeps it long.
To RAKE. v. n.
1. To ſearch; to grope. It has always an idea of coarſeneſs
or noiſomneſs.
Suckling.
If you hide the crown
Ev’n in your hearts, there will he rake for it. Shakeſp.
It is as offenſive, as to rake into a dunghill. South.
Another finds the way to dye in grain ;
Or for the golden ore in rivers rakes,
Then melts the maſs. Dryden's Perſius.
One is for raking in Chaucer for antiquated words, which
are never to be reviv'd, but when ſound or ſignificancy is
wanting. Dryden.
After having made eſſays into it, as they do for coal in
England, they rake into the moſt promiſing parts. Addiſon.
2. To paſs with violence.
When Pas hand reached him to take,
The fox on knees and elbows tumbled down :
Pas could not ſtay, but over him did rake,
And crown'd the earth with his firſt touching crown. Sidn.
The Belgians tack upon our rear,
And raking chaſe-guns through our ſterns they ſend. Dryd.
RA’ke R. m. ſ. [from rake..] One that rakes.
RA'KEHEL. n.ſ. [of this word the etymology is doubtful: as
it is now written, it is apparently derived from rake and hell,
and may aptly repreſent a wretch whoſe life is paſſed in places
of lewdneſs and wickedneſs: Skinner derives it from racaille,
French, the rabble; junius, from rexel, Dutch, a mongrel
dog..] A wild, worthleſs, diſſolute, debauched, ſorry fellow.
Out of the fie of theſe raighell horſe-boys, growing up
in knavery and villainy, are their kern ſupplied. Spenſer.
The king, when he heard of Perkins's fiege of Exeter,
ſaid in ſport, that the king of rakehells was landed in the
Weſt, and that he hoped now to ſee him. Bacon.
A rakehell of the town, whoſe character is ſet off with ex-
ceſſive prodigality, prophaneneſs, intemperance and luſt, is re-
warded with a lady of great fortune to repair his own, which
his vices had almoſt ruined. Swift.
RAKEH Elly. adv. [from rakehell.] Wild ; diſſolute.
I ſcorn the rakehely rout of our ragged rhimers, which
without learning boaſt, without judgment jangle, and with-
out reaſon rage and foam. Spenſer's Paſłorals.
No breaking of windows or glaſſes for ſpight,
/ And ſpoiling the goods for a raſhelly prank. Benj. Johnſºn.
RA'kish. adi, ſfrom rake..] Looſe; lewd; diſſolute.
There ſeldom can be peculiarity in the love of a rakiſh
heart, - Clari/a.
To RALLY. v. a. [rallier, Fr.]
1. To put diſordered or diſperſed forces into order.
With rallied arms to try what may be yet
Regain'd in heav'n. Milton.
Publick arguing ſerves to whet the wits of hereticks, and
by ſhºwing weak parts of their doctrines, prompts them to
rally all their ſophiſtry to fortify them with fallacy. D. of Pie.
uther deters men from folitarineſs; but he does not mean
from a ſober ſolitude, that rallies our ſcattered ſtrengths, and
2 º any new encounters from without. Atterb.
- Ajº..." treat with ſlight contempt; to treat with
cº not º a month, for theſe forty years,
life. moke of London, and rallies me upon a country
If after the readi - - - Addison's Speciator.
humour rathe ºng of this letter, you find yourſelf in a
defi e; º ** and ridicule, than to comfort me, I
* You would throw it into the fire. Addiſon.
4.
Strephon had long confeſs'd his am’rous pain,
Which gay Corinna rally'd with diſdain. Gay.
To RA’ll Y. v. n.
1. To come together in a hurry.
If God ſhould ſhew this perverſe man a new heaven and
a new earth, ſpringing out of nothing, he might ſay, that
innumerable parts of matter chanced juſt then to rally toge-
ther, and to form themſelves into this new world. Tillºn.
2. To come again into order.
The Grecians rally, and their pow'rs unite;
With fury charge us. Dryden's AFneiſſ,
3. To exerciſe ſatirical merriment.
RAM. m. ſ. [nam, Saxon; ram, Dutch.]
1. A male ſheep; in ſome provinces, a tup.
The ewes, being rank, turned to the rams. Shalºſ,
An old ſheep-whiſtling rogue, a ram tender. Shaº.
You may draw the bones of a ram's head hung with ſtriºs
ef beads and ribbands, Peacham on Drawn.
A ram their off ring, and a ram their meat. Drya.
The ram, having paſs'd the ſea, ſerenely ſhines,
And leads the year. Creech's Manilius.
2. An inſtrument with an iron head to batter walls.
Antony,
Let not the piece of virtue, which is ſet
As the cement of our love,
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
The fortreſs of it. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleºpatra.
Judas calling upon the Lord, who without any rams or
engines of war did caſt down Jericho, gave a fierce aſſault
againſt the walls. 244ae. xii. 15.
To RAM. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To drive with violence, as with a battering ram.
Ram thou thy faithful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren. Shakespeare
Having no artillery nor engines, and finding that he coºd
do no good by ramming with logs of timber, he ſet one of
the gates on fire. Bacon's Henry VII.
The charge with bullet, or paper wet and hard ſtopped,
or with powder alone rammed in hard, maketh no great dif-
ference in the loudneſs of the report. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
A mariner loading his gun, while he was ramming in a
cartridge, the powder took fire. ///eman's Surgery.
Here many poor people roll in vaſt balls of ſnow, which
they ram together, and cover from the ſun ſhine. Addison.
A ditch drawn between two parallel furrows, was filled
with ſome ſound materials, and rammed to make the founda-
tion ſolid. * Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To fill with anything driven hard together.
As when that deviliſh iron engine wrought
In deepeſt hell, and fram’d by furies ſkill,
With windy nitre and quick ſulphur fraught,
And ramm'd with bullet round ordain'd to kill. Fa. Queen.
He that proves the king,
To him will we prove loyal ; till that time,
Have we ramm’d up our gates againſt the world. Shakeſp.
They mined the walls, laid the powder, and rammed the
mouth, but the citizens made a countermine. Hayward.
This into hollow engines, long and round,
Thick ramm’d, at th' other bore with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate, ſhall ſend forth
Such implements of miſchief, as ſhall daſh
To pieces. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vi.
Leave a convenient ſpace behind the wall to ram in clay.
Mortimer's Huſbandry.
To RAMBLE. v. n. [rammelen, Dutch, to rove looſely in luſt ;
ramb, Swediſh, to rove.] To rove looſely and irregularly;
to wander.
Shame contračis the ſpirits, fixes the ramblings of fancy,
and gathers the man into himſelf. South.
He that is at liberty to ramble in perfeit darkneſs, what is
his liberty better than if driven up and down as a bubble by
the wind. Lºcke-
Chapman has taken advantage of an immeaſurable length
of verſe, notwithſtanding which, there is ſcarce any para-
phraſe ſo looſe and rambling as his. Pope. .
Never aſk leave to go abroad, for you will be thought an
idle rambling fellow. Swift's Direáions to Footinen.
G'er his ample ſides the rambling ſprays -
Luxuriant ſhoot. Thomſºn's Spring.
RAMBLE. n. ſ. [from the verb.] Wandering irregular ex-
curſion.
This conceit puts us upon the ramble up and down fºr ſº-
lief, 'till very wearineſs brings us at laſt to ourſelves. L'Eſt'.
Coming home after a ſhort Chriſtmas ramble, I found a
letter upon my table. Swift.
She quits the narrow path of ſenſe - - - -
For a dear ramble through impertinence. Swift's Aſſel.
RA'MBLER. n.ſ.. [from ramble.] Rover; wandere;
Says the rambler, we muſt e'en beat it out. L'Eſtrange.
RA/M Booze. }*ſ A drink made of wine, ale, eggs and ſugar
RA/M buse. in the winter time; or of wine, milk, ſug”
and roſewater in the ſummer time. f Bailey.
RA'MEKIN.
k
2
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A M
R A N
rºl
RA'MEKIN. }: ſ. [rameguins, Fr.] In cookery, ſmall ſlices
RA'MEQUINs. of bread covered with a farce of cheeſe and
eggs. Bailey.
RAMENTs. n. ſ. [ramenta, Lat..] Scrapings; ſhavings. Diet.
RAM151cation. n.ſ.. [ramification, Fr. from ramus, Latin.]
Diviſion or ſeparation into branches; the aët of branching Out.
By continuation of profane hiſtories or other monuments
kept together, the genealogies and ramifications of ſome ſingle
families to a vaſt extenſion may be preſerved. Hale.
As the blood and chyle paſs together through the ramifica-
tions of the pulmonary artery, they will be ſtill more per-
fečtly mixed; but if a pipe is divided into branches, and theſe
again ſubdivided, the red and white liquors, as they paſs
through the ramifications, will be more intimately mixed; the
more ramifications, the mixture will be the more perfeót. Arb.
To RAMIFY. v. a. [ramifier, Fr. ramus and facio, Lat..] To
ſeparate into branches. -
The mint, grown to have a pretty thick ſtalk, with the
various and ramified roots, which it ſhot into the water, pre-
ſented a ſpectacle not unpleaſant to behold. Boyle.
To RA’M FY. v. n. To be parted into branches.
Aſparagus affects the urine with a foetid ſmell, eſpecially if
cut when they are white; when they are older, and begin to
ramify, they loſe this quality. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
RA'MMER. m. ſ. [from ram.]
1. An inſtrument with which any thing is driven hard.
The maſter bricklayer muſt try the foundations with an
iron crow and rammer, to ſee whether the foundations are
ſound. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
2. The ſtick with which the charge is forced into the gun.
A mariner loading a gun ſuddenly, while he was ramming
in a cartridge, the powder took fire, and ſhot the rammer out
of his hand. Jºſeman's Surgery.
RA/MMISH. adj. [from ram.] Strong ſcented.
RA'Mous. adj. [from ramus, Latin J Branchy; conſiſting of
branches.
Which vaſt contraćtion and expanſion ſeems unintelligible,
by feigning the particles of air to be ſpringy and ramous, or
rolled up like hoops, or by any other means than a repulſive
power. Newton's Opticks.
A ramous effloreſcence, of a fine white ſpar, found hang-
ing from a cruſt of like ſpar, at the top of an old wrought
CaVern. Woodward on }}.
To RAMP. v. n. [ramper, French; rampare, Italian; nempen,
Saxon.]
1. To leap with violence.
Foaming tarr, their bridles they would champ,
And trampling the fine element, would fiercely ramp. F. Q.
Out of the thickeſt wood
A ramping lyon ruſhed ſuddenly,
Hunting full greedy after ſavage blood. Fairy Queen.
They gape upon me with their mouths; as a ramping and
roaring lion. Pſalm xxii. 13.
Upon a bull, that deadly bellowed,
Two horrid lions rampt, and ſeiz'd, and tugg’d off. Chapm.
Sporting the lion ramp'd ; and in his paw
Dandled the kid. Milton.
2. To climb as a plant.
Furniſhed with claſpers and tendrils, they catch hold of
them, and ſo ramping upon trees, they mount up to a great
height. Ray on the Creation.
Ramp. n.ſ.. [from the verb..] Leap ; ſpring.
He is vaulting variable ramps,
In your deſpight, upon your purſe.
The bold Aſcalonite
Fled from his lion ramp, old warriors turn’d
Their plated backs under his heel. Milton's Agoniſłes.
RAMPA'lli AN. m. ſ. A mean wretch. Not in uſe.
Away you ſcullion, you rampallian, you fuſtilarian. Shakespeare
RAMPA'Ncy. n.ſ. [from rampant..] Prevalence; exuberance.
As they are come to this height and rampancy of vice, from
the countenance of their betters, ſo they have took ſome ſteps
in the ſame, that the extravagances of the young carry with
them the approbation of the old. South.
RAMPANT. adj. [rampant, Fr. from ramp.]
1. Exuberant; overgrowing reſtraint.
The foundation of this behaviour towards perſons ſet apart
for the ſervice of God, can be nothing elſe but atheiſm ; the
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
growing rampant fin of the times. South.
The ſeeds of death grow up, till, like rampant weeds,
they choak the tender flower of life. Clariſſa.
2. [In heraldry.]
Rampant is when the lion is reared up in the eſcutcheon, as
it were ready to combate with his enemy. Peacham.
If a lion were the proper coat of Judah, yet were it not
probable a lion rampant, but couchant or dormant. Brºwn.
The lion rampant ſhakes his brinded mane. Milton.
To RAMPART. A v. a. [from the noun..] To fortify with
To RA'MPIRE. } ramparts. Not in uſe.
- Set but thy foot
Againſt our rampir'd gates, and they ſhall ope. Shakeſp.
The marquis direéted part of his forces to rampart the gates
and ruinous places of the walls. Playward.
RA/MPART.
RAMPIRE. }*/ [rent art, Fr.
I. The platform of the wall behind the parapet
2. The wall round fortified places. parap:
She felt it, When paſt preventing, like a river; no rampires
being built againſt it, till already it have overflowed. Sº.
Yo' have cut a way for virtue, which our great men
Held ſhut up, with all Tamparts, for themſelves. B. %hºſ.
He who endeavours to knºw his duty, and practiſes what
he knows, has the equity of God to ſtañja. mighty wall or
”Part between him and damnation for any infirmitiés. Sº,
The ſon of Thetis, rampire of our hoſt, ---
Is worth our care to keep D
- - den:
The Trojans round the place a rampire caſt, ryaen
And paliſades about the trenches plac'd, Dryden.
No ſtandards, from the hoſtile ramparts torn,
Qan any future honours give
To the vićtorious monarch's name.
RAMPIONS. n.ſ. [rapunculus, Lat.] A plant.
The flower of rampions conſiſts of one leaf, in its form ap-
proaching to a bell-ſhape; but is ſo expanded and cut, that
it almoſt repreſents the figure of a ſtar: the pointal is com-
monly ſplit into two horned diviſions, and the flower-cup be-
comes a fruit, which is divided into three cells incloſing many
ſmall ſeeds. Miller.
**piºn is a plant, whoſe tender roots are eaten in the
ſpring, like thoſe of radiſhes. 44ortimer’s Huſbandry.
RA'Msons. n.ſ. An herb. Ainſworth.
RAN. preterite of run.
The dire example ran through all the field, -
Till heaps of brothers were by brothers kill’d. . Addison.
To RANch. v. a. [corrupted from wrench..] To ſprais; to
injure with violent contortion. This is the proper ſenſe, but,
in Dryden, it ſeems to be to tear.
Againſt a ſtump his tulk the monſter grinds,
And ranch'd his hips with one continu’d wound. Dryder.
Emeticks ranch, and keen catharticks ſcour. Garth.
RANCID. adj. [rancidus, Lat..] Strong ſcented.
The oil, with which fiſhes abound, often turns rancid, and
lies heavy on the ſtomach, and affects the very ſweat with a
rancid ſmell. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
RA'NcIDNEss. }'ſ [from rancid; rancor, Lat.] Strong ſcent,
Prior.
RANcI'DITY. as of old oil.
Rºscº ous adj. [from rancour.] Malignant; malicious;
ſpiteful in the utmoſt degree.
So flam'd his eyen with rage and rancorous ire. Fa. &amp;.
Becauſe I cannot
Duck with French nods and apiſh courteſy,
I muſt be held a rancorous enemy. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
The moſt powerful of theſe were Phariſees and Sadduces;
of whoſe chief doćtrines ſome notice is taken by the evange-
liſts, as well as of their rancorous oppoſition to the goſpel of
Chriſt. //gſt on the Rºſarreàion.
RA'NCOUR. m. ſ. [rancoeur, old Fr.] Inveterate malignity;
malice ; ſtedfaſt implacability; ſtanding hate.
His breaſt full of rancor like canker to freat. Tuſſºr.
As two brave knights in bloody fight
With deadly rancour he enranged found. Fairy Queen.
All the way that they fled for very rancour and deſpite ; in
their return, they utterly conſumed and waſted whatſoever
they had before left unſpoiled. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Rancour will out, proud prelate ; in thy face
I ſee thy fury. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
It iſſues from the rancour of a villain,
A recreant and moſt degen'rate traitor. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
For Banquo's iſſue, Duncan have I murther'd ;
Put rancour in the veſſel of my peace
Only for them.
Such ambuſh
Waited with helliſh rancour imminent, Milton.
No authors draw upon themſelves more diſpleaſure, than
thoſe who deal in political matters, which is juſtly incurred,
conſidering that ſpirit of rancour and virulence, with which
works of this nature abound. Addison's Freeholder, N° 4o.
Preſbyterians and their abettors, who can equally go to a
church or conventicle, or ſuch who bear a perſonal rancºur
towards the clergy. - Swift.
RAND. m. ſ. [rand, Dutch..] Border; ſeam: as, the rand of
a woman's ſhoe. -
RA'Ndom. n.ſ. [randon, Fr.] Want of direétion; want of
rule or method ; chance; hazard; roving motion. -
Thy words at random argue thy inexperience. Milton.
He lies at random careleſly diffus'd,
With languiſh’d head unpropt,
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
As one paſt hope abandon'd. AMilton,
Fond love his darts at random throws, -
And nothing ſprings from what he ſows. J/aller.
The ſtriker muſt be denſe, and in its beſt velocity: the
angle, which the miſſive is to mount by, if we will have it
go to its furtheſt randºn, muſt be the half of a right one ;
and the figure of the miſſive muſt be ſuch, as may give ſcope
to the air to bear it. Digby.
, 21 D In<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A N
R A N
s of old the birds º at º: in . º
- - - in time thcy Inoved for the ictting
º, of º ; but in til y L'E/trange's Fables.
"P". . govern the dependance of one event upon
anºther, if that event happened at random, and was not caſt
into a certain relation to ſome foregºing purpºſe to direct. cath.
Tis one thing when a perſon of true merit is drawn as like
as we can ; and another, when we make a fine thing at ran-
dºm, and perſuade the next vain creature that 'tis his own
likeneſs. - - - Pºpe.
RANDox. adj. Done by chance; roving without direction.
Virtue borrow'd but the arms of chance,
And ſtruck a random blow ! 'twas fortune's work,
And fortune take the praiſe. Drydºn.
RA's force. n.ſ. The ring of a gun next the touch-hole. Baily.
RANG. preterite of ring.
Complaints were ſent continually up to Rome, and rang
all over the empire. Grew's Cºſmoſ.
To RANGE. v. a. [ranger, Fr. rhenge, Welſh.]
1. To place in order; to put in ranks. -
Maccabeus ranged his army by bands, and went againſt
Timotheus. 2 A ſac. xii. 20.
He ſaw not the marquis till the battle was ranged. Clarend.
Somewhat rais'd
By falſe preſumptuous hope, the ranged pow'rs
Diſband, and wand'ring each his ſeveral way
Purſues. Milton.
. Men, from the qualities they find united in them, and
wherein they obſerve ſeveral individuals to agree, range them
into ſorts for the convenience of comprehenſive ſigns. Locke.
A certain form and order, in which we have long accuſ-
In the day
tomed ourſelves to range our ideas, may be beſt for us now,
though not originally beſt in itſelf. //atts.
2. To rove over.
To the copſe thy leſſer ſpaniel take,
Teach him to range the ditch and force the brake. Gay.
To RANGE. v. n.
Y. To rove at large.
Caeſar's ſpirit ranging for revenge,
With Ate by his ſide come hot from hell,
Shall in theſe confines, with a monarch's voice,
Cry havock, and let ſlip the dogs of war. Shakeſp.
'Tis better to be lowly born,
And range with humble livers in content,
Than to be perk'd up in a gliſt'ring grief,
And wear a golden ſorrow. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
I ſaw him in the battle range about ,
And watch'd him, how he ſingled Clifford forth. Shakespeare
As a roaring lion and a ranging bear ; ſo is a wicked ruler
over the poor people. Prov. xxviii. 15.
Other animals unačtive range,
And of their doings God takes no account. Milton.
Thanks to my ſtars, I have not rang’d about
The wilds of life, e're I could find a friend.
2. To be placed in order.
That is the way to lay the city flat,
To bring the roof to the foundation,
And bury all which yet diſtinctly ranges
In heaps of ruin.
RANGE. n.ſ. [rangée, Fr. from the verb.]
1. A rank; anything placed in a line.
- You fled
From that great face of war, whoſe ſeveral ranges
Frighted each other. Shakeſp. Autony and Cleofatra.
The light, which paſſed through its ſeveral interſtices,
painted ſo many ranges of colours, which were parallel and
contiguous, and without any mixture of white. Newton.
From this walk you have a full view of a huge range of
mountains, that lie in the country of the Griſons. Addison.
Theſe ranges of barren mountains, by condenſing the va-
Pours and producing rains, fountains and rivers, give the very
plains that fertility they boaſt of. Bentley's Sermons.
2. A claſs ; an order.
The next range of beings above him are the immaterial
intelligences, the next below him is the ſenſible nature. H.
3. Excurſion; wandring.
He may take a range all the world over, and draw in all
that wide circumference of fin and vice, and center it in his
own breaſt. South's Sermons.
4. Room for excurſion. .
A man has not enough range of thought, to look out for
ºy good which does not relate to his own intereſt. Addiſon.
5. Sompaſs taken in by anything excurſive, extended , or ranked
Addison.
Shakºp. Coriolanus.
in order.
Far as creation's ample range extends,
The ſcale of ſenſual mºntal pow'rs aſcends. Pope.
Judge we by nature ? habit can efface;
Affections : they ſtill take a wider range. Pope.
6. Step of a ladder.
º he liturgy, practiſed in England, would kindle that jea-
tº: | º Prºlogue to that deſign, and as the firſt range of
*** which ſhould ſerve to mount over all their
cuſtoms.
Clarendºn.
7. A kitchen grate.
Its door forth right to him did open,
Therein an hundred ranges weren pight,
And hundred furnaces all burning bigºt.
It was a vault youilt for great diſpence,
With many ranges rear'd along the wall,
And one great chimney. Fairy &amp;rar,
The buttery muſt be viſible, and we need for out , , ...,
a more ſpacious and luminous kitchen. Jºoſtºn's Arº.
he implements of the kitchen are ſpits, range, cabirons
and pots. Bºon's Pºſia. Remains.
He was bid at his firſt coming to take off tie range, and
let down the cinders. -
RA N G E *. m. ſ. [from range.]
1. One that ranges; a rover ; a robber.
They walk not widely, as they were woont,
For fear of ratingers and the great hoont,
But privily prolling to and irº. Sºrºſºr's Pººrak.
Come, ſays the ranger, here's neither honour nor money
to be got by ſtaying. 4.1/hange.
2. A dog that beats the ground. -&gt;
Let your obſequious ranger ſearch around,
Nor will the roving ſpy direct in vain,
But numerous coxey's gratiy thy pain. Gay's Rural sports.
3. An officer who tends the game of a foreſt.
Their father Tyrrheus did his fodder bring,
Tyrrheus chief ranger to the Latian king. Dryden.
RANK. adj. [ranc, Saxon.
1. High growing; ſtrong ; luxuriant.
Down with the graſſe,
That groweth in ſhadow ſo ranke and ſo ſtout. Tºſºr.
Is not thilk ſame gotcheard proud,
That ſits in younder bank,
Whoſe ſtraying heard themſelfe ſhrowde
Emong the buſhes rank. Spenſºr.
Who would be out, being before his beloved miſtreſs
—That ſhould you, if I were your miſtreſs, or I ſhould
think my honeſty ranker than my wit. Shakºp.
ln which diſguiſe,
While other jeſts are ſomething rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to ſlip
Away with Slender. Shakeſp. Merry Wives ºf Windſºr.
Seven ears came up upon one ſtalk, rank and good. Gen.
They fancy that the difference lies in the manner of ap-
pulſe, one being made by a fuller or ranker appuiſe than the
other. Holder's Elements of Speech.
The moſt plentiful ſeaſon, that gives birth to the fineſt
flowers, produces alſo the rankeſt weeds. Addison.
2. Fruitful; bearing ſtrong plants.
Seven thouſand broad-tail'd ſheep graz'd on his downs;
Three thouſand camels his rank paſtures fed. Sandys.
Where land is rank, 'tis not good to ſow wheat after a
fallow. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
3. [Rancidus, Lat..] Strong ſcented; rancid.
Rank ſmelling rue, and cuminin good for eyes. Sfeſſºr.
In their thick breaths,
Rank of groſs diet, ſhall we be enclouded, -
And forc'd to drink their vapour. Shakespeare . Cymbeline.
The ewes, being rank,
Jºy &amp;ren.
Lºw-range.
In the end of Autumn turned to the fams. Shakeſ?.
The drying marſhes ſuch a ſtench convey, -
Such the rank ſteams of recking Albula. Addison.
Hircina, rank with ſweat, preſumes
To cenſure Phillis for perfumes.
4. High taſted ; ſtrong in quality. -
Such animals as feed upon fleſh, becauſe ſuch kind of food
is high and rank, qualify it; the one by ſwallowing the hair
of the beaſts they prey upon, the other by devouring ºne
part of the feathers of the birds they gorge themſelves with.
Ray on the Creation.
Divers ſea fowl taſte rank of the fiſh on which they
feed. Boyle.
5. Rampant ; highgrown.
For you, moſt wicked Sir, whom to call brother
Would infect my mouth, I do forgive
Thy ranke/? faults. Shºeſ. Tempeſt.
This Epiphanius cries out upon as rank idolatry, and ths
device of the devil, who always brought in idolatry unºr fºr
pretences. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſcourſe ºn Roman Idºl.
'Tis pride, rank pride, and haughtineſs of ſºul, -
The Romans call it ſtoiciſm. Addiſon's Caº.
6. Groſs; coarſe.
My wife's a hobby-horſe, deſerves name
As rank as any flax wench, that puts to . . r "; Tººl
Before her tróth-plight. shºff. If inter's º
This power of the people in Athens, claimed a i
undoubted privilege of an Athenian born, was the "º.
encroachment and the groſleſt degeneracy from the ſoºn
Solon left. Swift.
7. The iron of a plane is ſet rank, when its edge flºº
flat below the ſole of the plane, that in working it will take
off a thick ſhaving. ...ºn, Aſahanical Exerºſ”
-&gt; RANK.
Swift's Mºſellanies.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A N
R A N
º,
º
}:
*
RANK. m. / [rang, Fr.]
1. Line of men placed a-breaſt,
Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
In ranks, and ſquadrons, and right form of war,
Which drizzled blood upon the capitol. Shakeſp.
I have ſeen the cannon,
When it hath blown his ranks into the air. Shakeſp.
Is’t not pity,
That we, the ſons and children of this iſle,
Fill up her enemies ranks Shakeſp. King john.
If you have a ſtation in the file,
And not in the worſt rank of manhood, ſay it. Shakeſp.
2. A row.
Weſt of this place down in the neighbour bottom,
The rank of oſiers, by the murmuring ſcream,
Left on your right hand brings you to the place. Shakeſp. -
A ſylvan ſcene, and as the ranks aſcend
Shade above ſhade, a woody theatre. AMilton.
If ſhe walk, in even ranks they ſtand,
Like ſome well-marſhall'd and obſequious band. JValler.
He cou’d through ranks of ruin go,
With ſtorms above and rocks below.
3. Range of ſubordination.
The wiſdom and goodneſs of the maker plainly appears in
the parts of this ſtupendous fabrick, and the ſeveral degrees
and ranks of creatures in it. Locke.
4. Cla's ; order.
The enchanting power of proſperity over private perſons is
remarkable in relation to great kingdoms, where all ranks
and orders of men, being equally concerned in publick bleſ-
ſings, equally join in ſpreading the infection.
5. Degree of dignity.
Her charms have made me man, her rayiſh’d love
In rank ſhall place me with the bleſs'd above. Dryden.
Theſe all are virtues of a meaner ramé,
Perfeſtions that are plac'd in bones and nerves. Addison.
Lepidus's houſe, which in his conſulate was the fineſt in
Rome, within ti.irty-five years was not in the hundredth
rank. Arbuthnot on Coins.
6. Dignity; high place : as, he is a man of rank.
To RANK. v. a. [ranger, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To place a-breaſt.
In view ſtood rank'd of ſeraphim another row. Milton.
2. To range in any particular claſs.
f four woe delights in fellowſhip,
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs; -
Why follow'd not, when ſhe ſaid Tybalt's dead,
Thy father or thy mother. Shakespeare.
He was a man
Cf an unbounded ſtomach, ever ranking
Himſelf with princes. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Hereſy is ranked with idolatry and witchcraft.
Decay of Piety.
I have ranked this diverſion of chriſtian pračtice among the
effects of our contentions. Decay of Piety.
Poets were ranked in the claſs of philoſophers, and the an-
cients made uſe of them as preceptors in muſick and mo-
rality. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
3. To arrange methodically.
Who now ſhall rear you to the ſun, or rank
Your tribes. Milton.
Ranking all things under general and ſpecial heads, renders
the nature or uſes of a thing more eaſy to be found out, when
we ſeck in what rank of beings it lies. Watts's Logick.
To RANK. v. n. To be ranged; to be placed.
Let that one article rank with the reſt;
IDryden's Horace.
And thereupon give me your daughter. Shakeſp.
From ſtraggling mountaineers, for publick good,
To rank in tribes, and quit the ſavage wood. Tate.
To RA/NKLE. v. n. [from rank.] To feſter; to breed cor-
ruption; to be inflamed in body or mind.
As when two boars with rankling malice met,
Their gory ſides freſh bleeding fiercely fret. Fa. Queen.
I little ſmart did feel ;
But ſoon it fore increaſed,
And now it rankleth more and more, -
And inwardly it feſtereth ſore. Spenſºr's Paſłorals.
The gricf thereof him wondrous ſore diſeaſed,
Ne might his rankling pain with patience be appeaſed.
Fairy Queen.
Fairy Queen.
That freſh bleeding wound
Whilome doth rankle in my riven breaſt.
Beware of yonder dog;
Look, when he fawns, he bites; and, when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death. Shakespeare
The ſtorm of his own rage the fool confounds,
And envy's ran ling ſting th’ imprudent wounds. Sandys.
Thou ſhalt feel, enrag'd with inward pains,
The hydra's venom rankling in thy veins. Addison.
I have endur'd the rage of ſecret grief,
A malady that burns and rankles inward. Rowe.
On the rank!"d ſoul the fury falls. Thomſºn.
2
Atterbury. .
- - - - - - - - - *** * * * ** – º Y.
RANKLY: adv. [from rank.] Coarſely; groſy.
- 'Tis given out, that, ſleeping in my garden,
A ſerpent ſtung me: ſo the whole ear of Denmark
Is, by a forged proceſs of my death,
Rankly abus’d.
RA'NKN Ess.
growth.
It bringeth forth abundantly,
things leſs profitable,
Shakeſp. Hamlet,
* / [from rank.] Exuberance; ſuperfluity of
through too much rankneſs,
- • - whereby that which principally it ſhould
yield, being either prevented in place, or defrauded of nouriſh-
ment, faileth. Hººker, b. v. f. iii.
Begin you to grow upon me; I will phyſick your rank-
neſs. - Shakeſp. As Yºu Like it.
Among the crowd i' th' abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedg'd in more; I am ſtifled t
With the mere rankneſs of their joy. Shakeſp. Hºn. VIII.
We'll like a bated and retired flood,
Leaving our ran ºnes and irregular courſe,
Stoop low within thoſe bounds, we have o'erlook'd. Shakespeare
The crane's pride is in the rankneſs of her wing. L’É/ir.
He the ſtubborn ſoil manur’d,
With rules of huſbandry the ran ºneſs cur'd;
Tam'd us to manners. Dryden.
RA'NN.Y. m. ſ. The ſhrewmouſe.
The musaraneus, the ſhrewmouſe or ranny. Brown.
To RAN's Ack. v. a. ſnan, Saxon, andſaka, Swediſh, to ſearch
for or ſeize. J
I. To plunder ; to pillage.
A covetous ſpirit,
Varily awaited day and night,
From other covetous fiends it to defend,
Who it to rob and ranſack did intend. Fairy Queen.
Their yow is made to ranſack Troy. Shakeſp.
Men by his ſuggeſtion taught,
Ranſack'd the centre, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of the earth. Milton.
The ranſack'd city, taken by our toils,
We left, and hither brought the golden ſpoils. Dryden.
The ſpoils which they from ranſacº'd houſes brought,
And golden bowls from burning altars caught. Dryden.
2. To ſearch narrowly.
I ranſack the ſeveral caverns, and ſearch into the ſtore-
houſes of water, to find out where that mighty maſs of water,
which overflowed the earth, is beſtowed. //codward.
3. To violate; to deflower.
With greedy force he 'gan the fort aſſail,
Wherof he weened poſſeſſed ſoon to be,
And with rich ſpoil of ranſacked chaſtity. Fairy Queen.
RA'NSOME. n. ſ. [rançon, Fr.] Price paid for redemption
from captivity or puniſhment.
By his captivity in Auſtria, and the heavy ranſom that he
paid for his liberty, Richard was hindered to purſue the con-
queſt of Ireland. Davies on Ireland.
Ere the third dawning light
Return, the ſtars of morn ſhall ſee him riſe,
The ranſom paid, which man from death redeemes,
His death for man. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft,b. xii.
Has the prince loſt his army or his liberty 2
Tell me what province they demand for ranſom. Denham.
This as a ranſom Albemarle did pay,
For all the glories of ſo great a life. Dryden.
To adore that great myſtery of divine love, God's ſending
his only ſon into this world to ſave finners, and to give his
life a ranſom for them, would be noble exerciſe for the pens
of the greateſt wits. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Th’ avenging pow'r
Thus will perſiſt, relentleſs in his ire,
Till the fair ſlave be render'd to her fire,
And ranſºm free reſtor'd to his abode. Dryden.
To RANsom E. v. a. [rançonner, Fr.] To redeem from capti-
vity or puniſhment.
How is't with Titus Lartius *
—Condemning ſome to death and ſome to exile,
Ranſºming him, or pitying, threatning the other. Sha'eſp.
I will ran on them from the grave, and redeem them from
death. - Hºſea Xiii. 14.
He'll dying riſe, and riſing with him raiſe -
His brethren, ranſom'd with his own dear life. Milton.
RA'Nsom Elºss, adj. [from ranſome.] Free from ranſºme.
Ranſomeleſs here we ſet our priſoners free. Shakeſp.
Deliver him -
Up to his pleaſure ranſonicleſ; and free. Shakeſp.
To RAN r. v. n. [randºn, Dutch, to rave.] To rave in vio-
lent or high ſounding language without proportionable dignity
of thought.
Look where my ranting hoſt of the garter comes ; there
is either liquor in his pate, or money, in his purſe, when he
looks ſo merrily. Shºp. Merry I/ives ºf I/indſor.
Nay, an thoul't mouth, I'll rant as well as thou. Shakespeare
They have attacked me: ſome with piteous moans, others
grinning and only ſhewing their teeth; others ranting and
hectoring, others ſcolding and reviling. Stillingfleet.
- RAN'r.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A P
R A P
ar Rast. n.ſ.. [from the Yeº.] High ſounding language unſuſ-
ionity of thought. -
º *ś. to pleaſe a frantick age,
| was forc'd to let his judgment ſtºp to rage,
To a wild audience he conform d his voice, hoice ;
- Comply'd to cuſtom, but not err'd through Choice ;
Deem then the people's, not the writer s fin,
Almanſor's rage, and rants of Maximin. - -
This is a ſtoical rant, without any foundation in hº nature
of man or reaſon of things. - Atterbury's Prºface.
- RA's ter. n.ſ. [from rant..] . A ranting fellow. d f t.]
º RA'Ntipole, adj. [this word is wantonly formed from rant.
wild; roving; rakiſh. A low word. t h;
| what at years of diſcretion, and compo; yourſelf ; º; .
| rantipºle rate | Congrevº's Pł ay of the J/orld.
i To RANT, pole. v. n. To run about wildly. It is a low word.
The eldeſt was a termagant imperious wench; ſhe uſed to
º rantipole about the houſe, pinch the children, kick the ſer-
vants, and torture the cats and dogs. Arlathnot.
RA'NUL.A. n. ſ. ſ Latin.) - -
Al Ranula º ſwelſing, poſſeſſing thoſe ſalivals under the
tongue: it is made by congeſtion, and its progreſs filleth up
the ſpace between the jaws, and maketh a tumour externally
ſº.-------' - C-...-
under the chin. //ſeman's Surgery.
RANu'nculus. n.ſ. , Crowfoot. - -
Ranunculuſ's excel all flowers in the richneſs of their co-
lours: of them there is a great variety: - - Mºrtimer.
To RAp. v. n. [hraeppan, Saxon.] To ſtrike with a quick
ſmart blow.
Granville.
Knock me at this gate
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate. Shakeſp.
With one great peal they rap the door,
Like footmen on a viſiting day. Prior.
He was provoked in the ſpirit of magiſtracy, upon diſco-
vering a judge, who rapped out a great oath at his footman.
Addison.
To RAP. v. a. [from rapio extra ſº, Lat.]
1. To affect with rapture; to ſtrike with extaſy; to hurry out
of himſelf.
Theſe are ſpeeches of men, not comforted with the hope
of that they deſire, but rapped with admiration at the view
of enjoyed bliſs. Hooker.
Beholding the face of God, in admiration of ſo great
excellency, they all adore him; and being rapt with the love
of his beauty, they cleave inſeparably for ever unto him. Hook.
What, thus raps you ? are you well ? Shakeſp.
The government } caſt upon my brother,
And to my ſtate grew ſtranger, being tranſported
And rapt in ſecret ſtudies. Shakespeare .
You're rapt in ſome work, ſome dedication
To the great lord. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
I'm rapt with joy to ſee my Marcia's tears. Addison Catz.
It is impoſible duly to conſider theſe things, without being
raft into admiration of the infinite wiſdom of the divine ar.
chite&amp;. Cheyne's Philoſºphical Principles.
Rapt into future times, the bard begun,
A virgin ſhall conceive, a virgin bear a ſon Pope.
Let heav'n ſeize it, all at once 'tis fir’d,
Not touch'd, but rapt; not waken'd, but inſpir’d. Pºpe.
2. To ſnatch away.
He leaves the welkin way moſt beaten plain,
Andraft with whirling wheels, inflames the ſkyen,
With fire not made to burn, but fairly for to ſhyne. F. 3.
Underncath a bright ſea flow'd
Of jaſper, or of liquid pearl, whereon
Who after came from earth, ſailing arriv'd
Wafted by angels, or flew o'er the lake
Rap'd in a chariot drawn by fiery ſteeds. Milton.
Standing on earth, not rapt above the pole. Milton.
To RAP and rend. [more properly rap and ran ; naepan, Saxon,
to bind, and rana, Iſlandick, to plunder.] To ſeize by
violence.
Their huſbands robb'd, and made hard ſhifts
T. adminiſter unto their gifts
All they could rap and rend and pilfer,
To ſcraps and ends of gold and ſilver. Hudibras, p. ii.
RAP. m. ſ. [from the verb..] A quick ſmart blow.
How comeſt thou to go with thy arm tied up 2 has old
Hºwº given thee a rap over thy fingers ends : Arbuthnst.
RAPA’CIOUS. adj. [rºſace, Fr. rafax, Lat..] Given to plun-
der ; ſeizing by violence.
Well may thy Lord, appeas'd,
Redeem thee quite from death's ... claim. Milton.
- Shall this prize,
Soon heighten’d by the diamond's circling rays,
" that rapacious hand for ever blaze; " Pope.
RAPA’ciousl - -
Y. adv - - - - ..
robbery. v. [from rºſarious.] By rapine ; by violent
RAPA’ciousness.
R being rapacious.
APA'city. - - - -, *
Ad . "'ſ [. ºtai, Lat. rapacité, Fr. from rafax.]
* to plunder; exºrciſe of plunder ; ravenouſneſs.
”: ſ [from rapacious.] The quality of
Any of theſe, without regarding the pains of churchmen.
grudge them thoſe ſmall remains of ancient piety, which the
rapacity of ſome ages has ſcarce left to the church. Sprat.
RAFE. m. ſ. [rapt, Fr. raptus, Latin.]
1. Violent defloration of chaſtity.
You are both decypher'd
For villains mark'd with rape. Shakeſp. Titº. Andronicut.
Rape call you it, to ſeize my own,
My true betrothed love. Shakeſp. Titus Andronicus,
The parliament conceived, that the obtaining of women by
force into poſſeſſion, howſoever afterwards aflent might follow
by allurements, was but a rape drawn forth in length, becauſe
the firſt force drew on all the reſt. Bacon'; Henry VIA.
Witneſs that night
In Gibeah, when the hoſpitable door
Expos'd a matron, to avoid worſe rape. Milton.
The haughty fair, -
Who not the rape ev’n of a god could bear. Dryder.
Tell Thracian tyrant's alter'd ſhape,
And dire revenge of Philomela's rape. Roſcommon.
2. Privation ; act of taking away.
Pear grew after pear,
Fig after fig came 5 time made never rape
Of any dainty there. Chapman's Odyſſy.
3. Something ſnatched away.
Sad widows by thee rifled, weep in vain,
And ruin'd orphans of thy rapes complain. Sandy:.
Where now are all my hopes oh never more
Shall they revive nor death her rapes reſtore Sandys.
4. The juice of grapes is drawn as well from the rape, or
whole grapes pluck'd from the cluſter, and wine pour’d upon
them in a veſicl, as from a vat, where they are bruiſed. Ray,
5. A plant, from the ſect of which oil is expreſſed.
RA(PID. adj. [rapide, Fr. rapidus, Lat..] Quick; ſwift.
Part ſhun the goal with rapid wheels. Milton.
While you ſo ſmoothly turn and rowl our ſphere,
That rapid motion does but reſt appear. Dryden.
RAF1 pity. m. ſ. [rapidité, Fr. rapiditas, from rapidus, Lat. J
Cclerity ; velocity; ſwiftneſs.
Where the words are not monoſyllables, we make them ſo
by our rapidity of pronunciation. Addison's Speciatºr.
RAPIDLY. adv. [from rapid.] Swiftly ; with quick motion.
RAPI'ds ess. n.ſ.. [from rapid.] Celérity; ſwiftneſs.
RA(PIE.R. m. ſ. [rapiere, Fr. ſo called from the quickneſs of its
motion.] A ſmall ſword uſed only in thruſting.
1 will turn thy falſehood to thy heart,
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point. Shº?.
A ſoldier of far inferior ſtrength may manage a rººr or
fire-arms ſo expertly, as to be an overmatch for his adver-
ſary. Pºpe's Eſſay on Hºler's Batti:-
RAPIFR-fish. n.ſ.
The rapier-fiſh, called xiphias, grows ſometimes to the
length of five yards : the ſword, which grows level from the
ſnout of the fiſh, is here about a yard long, at the baſis four
inches over, two-cdged, and pointed exactly like a rapter:
he preys on fiſhes, having firſt ſtabbed them with this
ſword. Grew's Muſicºn.
RAF is E. m. ſ. [rapina, Lat. rapine, Fr.]
1. The act of plundering. -
If the poverty of Scotland might, yet the plenty of Eng-
land cannot, excuſe the envy and rapine of the church's
rights. King Charles-
The logick of a conquering ſword may ſilence, but con-
vince it cannot ; its efficacy rather breeds averſion and abhor-
rence of that rchgion, whoſe firſt addieſs is in blood and
rapine. Decay ºf Piety.
2. Violence; force.
Her leaſt ačtion overaw'd
His malice, and with rapine ſweet bereav'd
His fiercencſs of its fierce intent.
RAPPER. m. ſ. [from rap.] One who ſtrikes.
RAppoRT. n.ſ. [rappai, Fr.] Relation; reference; proPor:
tion. A word introduced by the innovator, Temple, but not
copied by others. -
'Tis obvious what rapport there is between the conceptions
and languages in every country, and how great a difference
this muſt make in the excellence of books. Temple.
To RAPT. v. n. [this word is uſed by Chapman for rap imprº,
perly, as appears from the participle, which from *P* woul
be not rapi, but rapted.] To raviſh ; to put in ecſtaſy.
You may ſafe approve,
How ſtrong in inſtigation to their love "...o.º.
Their rapting tunes are. Chapman's Odºſº.
RAPT. n.ſ.. [from rap.] A trance; an ecſtaſy.
RAPTURE. m.ſ.
1. Ecſtaſy; tranſport; violence of any pleaſing paſſion; en-
thuſiaſm; uncommon heat of imagination. .
Muſick, when thus applied, raiſes in the mind of the hearer
great conceptions; it ſtrengthens devotion, and §:
praiſe into rapture. Addison's Speciator, N° 49 º
You grow correół, that once with rapture writ. Pope.
Milton.
7 2. Rapidity i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">tº,
l
*
2. Rapidity ; haſte.
The wat'ry throng,
Wave rowling aſter wave, where way they ſound,
If ſleep, with torrent rapture; if through plain
Soft-cbbing; nor withſtood them rock or hill. Milton,
RA'pruſ, Ed. adj. [from rapture.] Raviſhed ; tranſported.
A bad word.
He drew
Such madning draughts of beauty to the ſoul,
As for a while cancell'd his raptur'd thought
With luxury to O daring. Thomſon's Summer.
RA'pturous ºff. [from rapture.] Ecſtatick; tranſporting.
Are the pleaſures of it ſo inviting and rapturous * is a man
bound to look out ſharp to plague himſelf? Collier.
RARE. adj. [rarus, Lat, rare, Fr. in all the ſenſes but the
laſt.]
I. Scarce ; uncommon,
Live to be t e ſhew, and gaze o' th' time;
We'll have you, as our rarer monſters are
&gt;
Painted upon a pole. Shakespeare.
2. Excellent; incomparable; valuable to a degree ſeldom found.
- This jealouſy
Is for a precious creature; as ſhe's rare,
Mult it be great , and as his perſon's mighty,
Muſt it be violent. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
On which was wrought the gods and giants ſight,
Rare work, all fill'd with terror and delight. Cowley.
Above the reſt I judge one beauty rare. Dryden.
3. Thinly ſcattered.
The cattle in the fields and meadows green
Thoſe rare and ſolitary, theſe in flocks
Paſturing at once, and in broad herds upſprung, Milton.
4. Thin; ſubtle; not denſe.
They are of ſo tenier and weak a nature, as they affect
only ſuch a rare and attenuate ſubſtance, as the ſpirit of living
CICaiuſ C.S. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
So eagerly the fiend
O'er bog or ſteep, through ſtrait, rough, denſe, or rare,
With head, hands, wing , or feet, purſues his way. Milt.
The denſe and bright lg.t of the circle will obſcure the
rer, and weak light of theſe dark colours round about it, and
re, ºr them alºof iſ ſº ſºle. . */ewtºn's Opticks.
Bodies are much nº rare and porous than is commonly
believed : water is nineteen tinnesighter, and by conſequence
nºteen times rarer than gºld, and gold is ſo rare, as very
re: , , and vi.hout the eaſ oppolition, to tranſmit the
nº gº tº via, and eºſi'y to admit quickſilver into its
Pºrºs, sº to let yºu pastºugh it. Newton's Opticks.
5. Raw, tº fully ſubdued by the fire. This is often pro-
nounced , car.
New laid eggs, with Baucis’ buſy care,
Turn'd by a gentle fire, and roaſted rare. Dryden.
RA/REEshow. n.ſ. [this word is ſomed in imitation of the
forcign way of pronouncing rare ſhow.] A ſhow carried in a
box.
The ſ flions of the town affect us juſt like a rare ſhow, we
have the cºis ſity to peep at them, and nothing more. Pºpe.
Of rare, hows he lung, and Punch's ſeats. Gay.
RAF EFA’c’ſ Ios. m. ſ. [rarjºr, Fr. from rareſy.] Exten-
fion of the parts of a body, that makes it tºke up more room
than it did before ; contrary to condenſation.
The water within being rarefied, and by rarefaction reſolved
into wind, will force up the moak. f. otion's Architecture.
When exhalations, ſhut up in the cavens of the earth by
rarefactiºn or compreſſiºn, come to be ſtraitened, they ſtrive
every way to ſet themſelves at liberty. Burnet.
RARE/FIABLE. adj. [from rarſ,.] Admitting rarefa&amp;tion.
To RAREFY. v. a. [rai ºffer, Fr. rarus and Jacio, Lat. rariſy
were more proper.] To make thin : contiary to condenſe.
To the hot equator crouding faſt, -
Where highly raiſed the yielding air
Admits their ſteam. - Thomſºn.
To RA'RE FY. v. n. To become thin.
Earth rarefies to dew ; expanded more
The ſubtil dew in air begins to ſoar.
RA'RELY. adv. [from rare.]
1. Seldom ; not often ; not frequently.
Rarely they riſe by virtue’s aid, who lie
Plung'd in the depth of helpleſs poverty. Dryden's juven.
Vaneſia in her bloom,
Advanc'd like Atalanta's ſtar,
But rarely ſeen, and ſeen from far.
2. Finely ; nicely ; accurately.
How rarely does it meet with this time's guiſe,
When man was will'd to love his enemies. Shakespeare,
RA’s ENess. n. ſ. [from rare.]
1. Uncommonneſs; ſtate of happening ſeldom ; inſrequency.
Tickling is moſt in the ſoles, arm-holes and ſides: the
cauſe is the thinneſs of the ſkin, joined with the rareneſs of
being touched there; for tickling is a light motion of the ſpi-
rits, which the thinneſs of the ſkin, the ſuddeneſs and rare-
mºſs of touch doth further. Bacon.
Dryden's Fables.
Swift's Miſcellanics.
R A S
- For the rareneſ, and rare effect of that petition, I’ll inſert
it as preſented.
Of my heart I now a preſent make;
Accept it as when early fruit we ſend,
And let the rarentſ; the ſmall gift commend. Dryden.
2. Value ariſing from ſcarcity.
Roſes ſet in a pool, ſupported with ſome ſtay, is matter of
raren'ſ and pleaſure, though of ſmall uſe.
Clarendon.
- - - Bacon.
- To worthieſt things,
Virtue, art, beauty, fortune, now I ſee
Rareneſ; or uſe, not nature, value brings. Donne.
RA'RITY. m. ſ. [rarité, Fr. raritas, Lat.]
1. Uncommonneſs; infrequency.
So far from being fond of any one for its rarity, if I meet
with any in a field which pleaſes me, I give it a place in my
garden. - - Speciator.
2. A thing valued for its ſcarciy.
Sorrow would be a rarity moſt belov’d,
If all could ſo become it. Shakeſp. King Lear.
It would be a rarity worth the ſeeing, could any one ſhew
us ſuch a thing as a perſeedy reconciled enemy. South.
I ſaw three rarities of different kinds, which pleaſed me
more than any other ſhows of the place. Addiſon.
3. Thinneſs ; ſubtlety: the contrary to denſity.
Bodies, under the ſame outward bulk, have a greater thin-
neſs and expanſion, or thickneſs and ſolidity, which terms, in
Engliſh, do not ſignify fully thoſe differences of quantity; there-
foſs I will do it under the names of rarity and denſity. Digby.
This I do, not to draw any argument againſt them from
the univerſal reſt or accurately equal diffuſion of matter, but
only that I may better demonſtrate the great rarity and tenuity
of their imaginary chaos. Bentley's Sermons.
RA'SCAL. m. ſ. Laycal, Saxon, a lean beaſt.] A mean fel-
low ; a ſcoundrel; a ſorry wretch.
For the raſcal commons, leſt he cared. Spenſer.
And when him liſt the raſcal routs appal,
Men into ſtones therewith he could tranſinew. Fa. Queen.
When Marcus Brutus grows ſo covetous
To lock ſuch ra/cal counters from his friends :
Be ready, gous, with all your thunder-bolts,
Daſh him to pieces. Shakeſp. julius Ceſar.
The raſcal people, thirſting after prey, t
Join with the traitor. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. ii.
But for our gentlemen,
The mouſe ne'er ſhund the cat, as they did budge
From raſcal, worſe than they. Shakespeare .
I am accuſt to rob in that thief's company; the raſcal hath
remov d my horſe. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
Scoundrels are inſolent to their ſuperiors; but it does not
become a man of honour to conteſt with mean raſcals. L'Eſi.
Did I not ſee you, raſcal, did I not
When you lay ſnug to ſnap young Damon's goat Dryden.
I have ſenſe, to ſerve my turn, in ſtore,
And he's a raſcal who pretends to more. Dryden's Perſius.
The poor girl provoked told him he lyed like a raſcal. Sw.
RAscA'Lion. m. ſ. [from raſcal.] One of the loweſt people.
That proud dame
Us'd him ſo like a baſe raſtallion,
That old pig-what d'ye call him—malion,
That cut his miſtreſs out of ſtone,
Had not ſo hard a hearted one. Hudibras, p. i.
RascA(lity. n. ſ. [from raſcal.] The low mean people.
Pretended philoſophers judge as ignorantly in their way,
as the raſcality in theirs. Glanvill's Scepſ.
Jeroboam having procured his people gods, the next thing
was to provide prieſts; hereupon, to the calves he adds a
commiſſion, for the approving, trying and admitting the raſ-
cality and loweſt of the people to miniſter in that ſervice. South.
RA'scALLY. adj. [from rajcal.] Mean; worthleſs.
Would'ſt thou not be glad to have the niggardly raſcally
ſheep-biter come by ſome notable ſhame. Shakeſp.
Our raftally porter is fallen faſt aſleep with the black cloth
and ſconces, or we might have been tacking up by this
time. Swift.
To Rase. v. a. [this word is written raſ or raze: I would
write roſe, when it ſignifies to ſtrike flightly, tºº/*ing”; and
raze, when it ſignifies to ruin, delere; rºſer, Fr. roſus, Lat.]
1. To ſkim ; to ſtrike on the ſurface. . . .
He certifies your lordſhip, that this night *
He dreamt the boar had raſed off his helin. Shakeſp.
Was he not in the neareſt neighbourhood to death and
might not the bullet, that raſad his cheek, have gone into
his head. South's Sermºns.
2. To overthrow ; to deſtroy; to root up. - -
- Her battering engines bent to rºſe ſome city. Miltºn.
3. To blot out by rature; to eraſe. •
Though of their names in heav'nly records now ---
Be no memorial, blotted out and rºyed. Miltºn.
RASH. adj. [roſch, Dutch..] Haſty : violent ; precipitate ;
acting without caution of reiſcètion. -
This is to be bold without ſhame, roſ' without ſkill, full of
words without wit. Aſhan's Schºoſinº/ºr.
21 E. $31.4:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A T
R A T
-
ride, O ye bleſt gods ! ſo will you wiſh on me,
...; mºod º. mº, Shakeſp.
I have ſcarce leiſure to ſalute you, - d
My matter is ſo raſ”. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
#. raſh with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be
haſty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven,
...thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few. Eccluſ.
Her raſh hand in evil hour, -
Forth reaching to the fruit, ſhe pluck'd, ſhe cat. Milton.
Rash. m. ſ. [raſcia, Italian.]
1. Sattin. Minſhew. . .
2. [Corrupted probably from ruſh.] An effloreſcence on the
ody; a breaking out. ". . . ~~
Rºº. m. ſ. §: lara'i, Lat..] A thin ſlice of bacon.
If we grow alſ to be pork eaters, we ſhall not ſhortly have
a raſher on the coals for money. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
White and black was all her homely cheer,
And raſhers of fing'd bacon on the coals. Dryden.
Quenches his thirſt with ale in nut-brown bowls, ...
And takes the haſty raſher from the coals. ... King.
RA'shly. adv. [from raſh..] Haſtily ; violently; without due
conſideration.
This expedition was by York and Talbot -
Too raſhly plotted. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. 1.
Men are not raſhly to take that for done, which is not
done. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
He that doth any thing raſhly, muſt do it willingly; for he
was free to deliberate or not. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Declare the ſecret villain,
The wretch ſo meanly baſe to injure Phaedra,
So raſhly brave to dare the ſword of Theſeus. Smith.
RA'shNess. m. ſ. [from raſh.J Fooliſh contempt of danger;
inconfiderate heat of temper; precipitation; temerity.
Who ſeeth not what ſentence it ſhall enforce us to give
againſt all churches in the world; in as much as there is not
one, but hath had many things eſtabliſhed in it, which though
the ſcripture did never command, yet for us to condemn were
raſhneſs. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 6.
Nature to youth hot raſhneſ, doth diſpence, ,
But with cold prudence age doth recompence. Denham.
In ſo ſpeaking, we offend indeed againſt truth; yet we
offend not properly by fathood, which is a ſpeaking againſt
our thoughts; but by ra/oneſs, which is an affirming or de-
nying, before we have ſufficiently informed ourſelves. South.
The vain Morat by his own raſhneſ, wrought,
Too ſoon diſcover'd his ambitious thought,
Believ'd me his, becauſe I ſpoke him fair. Dryden.
AsP. m. ſ. [rºſa, Italian.] A delicious berry that grows on
a ſpecies of the bramble; a raſpberry.
Sorrel ſet amongſt raſps, and the rafts will be the ſmaller.
Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
Now will the corinths, now the raſps ſupply
Delicious draughts, when preſt to wines. Philips.
To RASP. v. a. [raſpen, Dutch ; raſper, Fr. raſpare, Italian.]
To rub to powder with a very rough file.
Some authors have adviſed the raſping of theſe bones; but
in this caſe it is needleſs. - Wiſeman's Surgery.
Having prepared hard woods and ivory for the lathe with
rafting, they pitch it between the pikes. Moxon.
RASP; n.ſ. [from the verb.] A large rough file, commonly
uſed to wear away wood.
Caſe-hardening is uſed by file-cutters, when they make
coarſe files, and generally moſt raſps have formerly been made
of iron and caſe-hardened. 440xon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
Rºroºz. *ſ [rºſpatoir, Fr. from raft.] A chirurgednis
raſp.
I put into his mouth a raſatory, and pulled away the cor-
rupt fleſh, and with cauteries burnt it to a cruſt.
hºſeman's Surgery.
RA's BERRY, or Raſherry, n.ſ. A kind of berry.
Rºfférries are of three ſorts; the common ºld one, the
large red garden raffberry, which is one of the pleaſanteſt
of fruits, and the white, which is little inferior to the
red. Mortimer’s Huſbandry.
Raspberry-bush. n. J. A ſpecies of bramble.
RA's RE. m. ſ. [raſura, Lat.]
1. The aët of ſcraping or ſhaving.
2. Agº in a writing where ſomething has been rubbed out.
tºº “º wº
- Uſe 3 Parergon.
*::: f [rate, Dutch ; rat, Fr. ratta, sºft An sº
° mouſe kind that infeſts houſes and ſhips.
Our natures do purſue,
Like rats that ravindown their
proper bane. Shakespeare.
R Make you ready your ſtiff bats and clubs, eſ?
9* and her rats are at the point of battle. Shakeſp.
I have ſecn the time -
with my long ſword I l
º ..". tall fºllºws ſkip . rai. r WOu º
iron * horſes will knable at walls, and rats will gnaw
Brown'; Pulgar Errours.
If in deſpair he goes out
- it of the - --&gt;4 ---.
of arſenick, why he dies nobly. Way like a rat wº
4.
To ſmell a RAT. To be put on the watch by ſuſpicion as the
cat by the ſcent of a rat; to ſuſpect danger.
Quoth Hudibras, I ſmell a rat,
Ralpho, thou doſt prevaricate. Hudibras, p. i.
RATABLE. adj. [from rate.] Set at a certain value.
The Danes brought in a reckoning of money by ores, per
oras; I collect out of the abby-book of Burton, that twenty
orae were ratable to two marks of ſilver. Camden', Romain.
RA'TABLY. adv. Proportionably.
Many times there is no proportion of ſhot and powder al-
lowed ratably by that quantity of the great ordnance. Raleigh.
RATA'FIA. m. ſ. A fine liquor, prepared from the kernejº
apricots and ſpirits. Bailey.
RATA'N. m. ſ. An Indian cane. Dicſ.
RAtch. Un. ſ. In clockwork, a ſort of wheel, which ſerves
RASH. : to lift up the detents every hour, and thereby make
the clock ſtrike. Bailey.
RATE. m. ſ. [ratus, Lat. rate, old Fr.] -
1. Price fixed on any thing.
How many things do we value, becauſe they come at deat
rates from Japan and China, which if they were our own
manufacture, common to be had, and for a little money,
would be neglected Locke.
I'll not betray the glory of my name,
'Tis not for me, who have preſtry’d a ſtate,
To buy an empire at ſo baſe a rate. , Dryden.
The price of land has never changed, in the ſeveral changes
have been made in the rate of intereſt by law ; nor now that
the rate of intereſt is by law the ſame, is the price of land
every where the ſame. Locke.
2. Allowance ſettled.
His allowance was a continual allowance, a daily rate for
every day. 2 Kings xxv. 30.
They obliged themſelves to remit after the rat of twelve
hundred thouſand pounds ſterling per annum, divided into ſo
many monthly payments. Addison.
3. Degree ; comparative height or valour. -
I am a ſpirit of no common rate;
The ſummer ſtill doth tend upon my ſtate. Shakespeare.
I have diſabled mine eſtate, -
By ſhewing ſomething a more ſwelling port, -
Than my faint means would grant continuance;
Nor do I now make moan to be abridged
From ſuch a noble rate. Shakeſp. Merchant of P. nice.
In this did his holineſs and godlineſs appear above the rate
and pitch of other mens, in that he was ſo infinitely mer-
ciful. Calamy's Sermons.
To which relation whatſoever is done agreeably, is mo-
rally and clientially good; and whatſoever is done otherwiſe,
is at the ſame rate morally evil. South,
4. Quantity aſſignable. -
In goodly form comes on the cnemy;
And by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon or near the rate of thirty thouſand. Shakeſp.
5. That which ſets value.
Heretofore the rate and ſtandard of wit was very different
from what it is now-a-days: no man was then accounted a
wit for ſpeaking ſuch things, as deſerved to have the tongue
Cut Out. South’s Sermons.
A virtuous heathen is, at this rate, as happy as a virtuous
chriſtian. Atterbury.
6. Manner of doing any thing; degree to which any thing is
done.
Many of the horſe could not march at that rate, nor come
up ſoon enough. Clarendºn, b. viii.
Tom hinting his diſlike of ſome trifle his miſtreſs had ſaid,
ſhe aſked him how he would talk to her after marriage, if he
talked at this rate before ? Addison.
7. Tax impoſed by the pariſh. -
They paid the church and pariſh rate, -
And took, but read not the receipt. Prior.
To RATE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To value at a certain price.
I freely told you, all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins, I was a gentleman ;
And yet, º: lady, hi ſhall ſee
ting myſelf as nothing, you ſha -
fi. i. I was a braggart. Shakeſp. Merch. of W.nice.
We may there be inſtructed, how to name and rate all
goods, by thoſe that will concentre into felicity. Boyle.
* You ſeem not high enough your joys to rate,
You ſtand indebted a vaſt ſum to fate, 7
And ſhould large thanks for the great bleſfing pay. Dryden,
2. [Reita, Iſlandick.] To chide haſtily and vehemently.
Go rate thy minions, proud inſulting boy,
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms ---
Before thy ſovereign. Shakeſp. Henry VI, p. iii.
An old lord of the council rated me the other day in the
ſtreet about you, Sir. Shakeſp. Hºng IV. p. i.
What is all that a man enjoys, from a year's converſe,
comparable to what he feels for one hour, when his conſcience
ſhalſ take him aſide and rate him by himſelf. st;
RA<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">f
;
wº-
R A T
If words are ſometimes to be uſed, they ought to be grave,
f kind and ſober, repreſenting the ill or unbecomingneſs of the
faults, rather than a haſty rating of the child for it. Locke.
RATH. n.ſ. A hill. I know not whence derived.
There is a great uſe among the Iriſh, to make great aſ-
ſemblies together upon a rath or hill, there to parly about
matters and wrongs between townſhips or private perſons.
Spenſer on Ireland.
Rath. adv. Early.
Thus is my ſummer worn away and waſted,
Thus is my harveſt haſten’d all too rathe,
The ear, that budded fair, is burnt and blaſted,
And all my hoped gain is turn'd to ſcathe. Spenſer.
Strong Lagaean wines
Rath ripe and purple grapes there be. May's Virgil.
Rath ripe are ſome, and ſome of later kind,
Of golden ſome, and ſome of purple rind. May's Virgil.
RATH. adj. [naº, Saxon, quickly..] Early ; coming before
the time.
Bring the rath primroſe that forſaken dies,
The tufted crow-toe and pale jeſſamine. Milton,
RATHER. adv. [this is a comparative from rath; na’s, Saxon,
ſoon. Now out of uſe. One may ſtill ſay, by the ſame
form of ſpeaking, I will ſooner do this than that ; that is, I
like better to do this.]
1. More willingly ; with better liking.
Almighty God deſireth not the death of a ſinner, but ra-
ther that he ſhould turn from his wickedneſs and live.
Common Prayer.
2. Preferably to the other ; with better reaſon.
'Tis rather to be thought, that an heir had no ſuch right
by divine inſtitution, than that God ſhould give ſuch a right,
but yet leave it undeterminate who ſuch heir is. Locke.
3. In a greater degree than otherwiſe.
He ſought through the world, but ſought in vain,
And no where finding, rather fear'd her ſlain. Dryden.
. More properly.
4. properly This is an art,
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
The art itſelf is nature. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale,
5. Eſpecially:
You are come to me in a happy time,
The rather for I have ſome ſport in hand. Shakeſp.
6. To have RATHER... [this is, I think, a barbarous expreſſion
of late intruſion into our language, for which it is better to
ſay will rather.] To deſire in preference.
'Tis with reluétancy he is provoked by our impenitence to
apply the diſcipline of ſeverity and correótion; he had rather
mankind ſhould adore him as their patron and benefactor.
Rogers's Sermons.
RATIFICATIon. n.ſ. [ratification, Fr. from ratify.] The act
of ratifying; confirmation.
RA/TIFIER. n.ſ.. [from ratify.] The perſon or thing that
ratifies.
They cry, “chuſe we Laertes for our king:”
The ratifiers and props of every word,
Caps, hands and tongues applaud it to the clouds. Shakeſp.
To RATIFY. v. a. [ratum facio, Latin.] To confirm ; to
ſettle.
The church being a body which dieth not, hath always
power, as occaſion requireth, no leſs to ordain that which
never was, than to ratify what hath been before. Hooker.
By the help of theſe, with him above
To ratify the work, we may again
Give to our tables meat, ſleep to our nights. Shakeſp.
We have ratified unto them the borders of Judaea. 1 Mac.
God ratified their prayers by the judgment they brought
down upon the head of him, whom they prayed againſt.
South.
Tell me, my friend, from whence had'ſt thou the ſkill,
So nicely to diſtinguiſh good from ill?
And what thou art to follow, what to fly,
This to condemn, and that to ratify P
RA'TIO. n.ſ. [Latin.] Proportion.
Whatever inclinations the rays have to the plane of inci-
dence, the fine of the angle of incidence of every ray conſi-
dered apart, ſhall have to the fine of the angle of refraction
a conſtant ratio. Cheyne's Philoſophical Principles.
To RATIO'CINATE. v. n. [ratiocinor, Lat.] To reaſon;
to argue.
RAtiocin A^tion. n.ſ. [ratiocinatio, Lat.] - The aët of rea-
ſoning; the aët of deducing conſequences from premiſes.
In ſimple terms, expreſſing the open notions of things,
which the ſecond act of reaſon compoundeth into pro-
poſitions, and the laſt into ſyllogiſms and forms of ratioci-
flatton. Brown.
Can any kind of ratiocination allow Chriſt all the marks of
the Meſfiah, and yet deny him to be the Meſfiah South.
Such an inſcription would be ſelf-evident without any ra-
tiacination or ſtudy, and could not fail conſtantly to exert its
energy in their minds. Bentley.
Dryden.
RATIo'c{NATIve. adj. [from ratiocinate.
advancing by proceſs of diſcourſe.
Some conſecutions are ſo intimately and evidently connexed
to ºr found in the premiſes, that the concluſion is attained
quaſi per ſaltum, and without anything of ratiocinative pro-
ceſs, even as the eye ſees his obječ immediately, and without
any previous diſcourſe. Hale's Orioi -
RATIONAL. adj. [rationalis, Latj" rigin of Mankind.
I. Having the power of reaſoning.
2. Agreeable to reaſon.
What higher in her ſociety thou find'ſt
Attractive, humane, rational, love ſtill. Milton.
When the concluſion is deduced from the unerring dićtates
of our faculties, we ſay the inference is rational. ‘Gºil,
If your arguments be rational, offer them in as movin
J Argumentative i
3.
manner as the nature of the ſubjećt will admit; but i. -
of letting the pathetick part ſwallow up the rational. Swift.
3. Wiſe; judicious : as, a rational man.
RAtion A'Le. n.ſ.. [from ratio, Lat.] A detail with reaſons:
as, Dr. Sparrow's Rationale of the Common Prayer.
RATIONALIST. m. ſ. [ſtom rational.] One who proceeds in
his diſquiſitions and practice wholly upon reaſon. -
He often uſed this compariſon; the empirical philoſophers
are like to piſmires; they only lay up and uſe their ſtore :
the rationaliſts are like to ſpiders; they ſpin all out of their
own bowels: but give me a philoſopher, who, like the bee,
hath a middle faculty, gathering from abroad, but digeſting
that which is gathered by his own virtue. Baccn.
RATIONA‘lity... n. ſ. [from rational.]
1. The power of reaſoning.
When God has made rationality the common portion of
mankind, how came it to be thy incloſure ? Gov. of the Tong.
2. Reaſonableneſs.
In human occurrences, there have been many well dire&amp;ted
intentions, whoſe rationalities will never bear a rigid exami-
nation. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
RATIONALLY. adv. [from rational.] Reaſonably ; with
reaſon.
Upon the propoſal of an agreeable objećt, it may rationally
be conjećtured, that a man's choice will rather incline him to
accept than to refuſe it. South.
RATIONALNEss. m. ſ. [from rational.] The ſtate of being
rational.
RA’TsbANE. m. ſ. [rat and bane..] Poiſon for rats; arſenick.
Poor Tom 1 that hath laid knives under his pillow, and
halters in his pew, ſet ratſbane by his porridge. Shakeſp.
He would throw ratſbane up and down a houſe, where chil-
dren might come at it. L’Eſtrange.
When murder's out, what vice can we advance
Unleſs the new-found pois'ning trick of France;
And when their art of ratſbane we have got,
By way of thanks, we'll ſend 'em o'er our plot... Dryden.
I can hardly believe the relation of his being poiſoned, but
ſack might do it, though ratſbane would not. Swift to Pope.
RA^TTEEN. m. ſ. A kind of ſtuff.
We'll rig in Meath-ſtreet Egypt's haughty queen,
And Anthony ſhall court her in ratteen.
To RA’ttle. v. n. [ratelen, Dutch.]
1. To make a quick ſharp noiſe with frequent repetitions and
colliſions of bodies not very ſonorous ; when bodies are ſo-
norous, it is called jingling.
The quiver rattleth againſt him. job xxxix. 23.
The noiſe of a whip, of the rattling of the wheels, of
prancing horſes, and of the jumping chariots. . . Nah. iii. 2.
They had, to affright the enemies horſes, big rattles co-
vered with parchment, and ſmall ſtones within; but the
rattling of ſhot might have done better ſervice. Hayward.
He was too warm on picking work to dwell; }
Dryden.
Swift.
He fagoted his notions as they fell,
And if they rhym'd and rattled all was well.
There ſhe aſſembles all her blackeſt ſtorms,
And the rude hail in rattling tempeſt forms.
2. To ſpeak eagerly and noiſily.
With jealous eyes at diſtance ſhe had ſeen
Whiſp'ring with Jove the filver-footed queen;
Then, impotent of tongue, her filence broke,
Thus turbulent in rattling tone ſhe ſpoke. Dryden.
He is a man of pleaſure, and a free-thinker; he is an aſ:
fertor of liberty and property; he rattle; it out againſt
popery. Swift.
To RA’ttle. v. a. ſ k ttle or noiſe
I.. To move any thing ſo as to make a rattle. Of not!”
Her ãº º, and her whip ſhe Shakespeare Dryden,
2. To ſtun with a noiſe; to drive with a nºiſe.
sound but another, and another ſhall,
As loud as thine, rattle the welkin's ear,
And mock the deep-mouth'd thunder. ... Shakespeare .
He ſhould be well enough able to ſcatter the Iriſh as a flight
of birds, and rattle away this ſwarm of bees with their
king. - Bacon's Henry VII.
Addison,
4–––
3. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A V
R A V
-º-, + º-, - ail at with clamour. - -
3. "...º.º. been beforehand, he ſent for him in a
&lt;&gt;
rage, and rattled him with a thouſand traitors and º for
age, anº. - L’E/ºrange.
5 : ſ -
§bing his houſe. - - ..
rº. would ſometimes ratile off her ſervants pretty
- now if ſhe ſaw them drunk, never took any notice.
ſharply, Arbuthnot's Hyłory ºf Jºhn Bull.
RA’ttle. n.ſ.. [from the verb.j
1. A quick noiſe nimbly repeated.
I'll hold ten pound my dream is out ;
I'd tell it you but for the rattle
Of thoſe confounded drums.
2. Empty and loud talk. - - r
All this ado about the golden age, is but an empty rate
and frivolous conceit. Ha willon Povidence.
3. An inſtrument, which agitated makes a clattering noiſe.
The rattles of Iſis and the cynibals of Braſilea neal y ºugh
reſemble each other. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the J/orld.
They had, to affright the enemies horſes, big attles co-
vered with parchment and ſmall ſtones within. Hayward.
Opinions are the rattles of immature intellects, but the
advanced reaſons have outgrown them. Glanvill's Sceſ.
They want no rattles for their froward mood,
Nor nurſe to reconcile them to their food. Dryden.
Farewel then verſe, and love, and ev'ry toy,
The rhymes and rattles of the man or boy ;
What right, what true, what fit we juſtly call,
Let this be all my care; for this is all. Pope.
4. A plant. -
RA’ttle HEADED. adj [rattle and head..] Giddy; not ſteady.
RATTLESNAK F. n. ſ. A kind of erpent.
The rattleſnake is ſo called, from the rattle at the end of
his tail. Grew's Muſeum.
She loſes her being at the very fight of him, and drops
plump into his arms, like a charmed bird into the mouth of
a rattleſnake. Mººre's Foundling.
RATTLEsNAKE Root. n.ſ.
Rattleſna e roºt, called alſo ſeneka, belongs to a plant, a na-
tive of Virginia; the Indians uſe it as a certain remedy againſt
the bite of a rattleſnake : it has been recommended in all
caſes, in which the blood is known to be thick and ſizy. Hill.
RA't'roon. n.ſ.. A Weſt Indian fox, which has this peculiar
property, that if any thing be offered to it that has lain in
water, it will wipe and turn it about with its fore ſect, before
it will put it to its mouth. - Baily.
To RAVAGE. v. a. [ravager, Fr.] To lay waſte; to ſack;
to ranſack; to ſpoil; to pillage; to plundér.
Already Caeſar
Has ravaged more than half the globe, and ſees
Mankind grown thin by his deſtructive ſword. Addison.
His blaſts obey, and quit the howling hill,
The ſhatter'd foreſt, and the ravagla väle. Thomſºn.
RAVAGE. m. ſ. [ravage, Fr. from the verb..] Spoil; ruin ;
waſte.
Some cruel pleaſure will from thence ariſe,
Prizr.
To view the mighty ravage of your eyes. Dryden.
Would one think 'twere poſſible for love
To make ſuch ravage in a noble ſoul. - Addison.
Thoſe ſavages were not then, what civilized mankind is
now ; but without mutual ſociety, without arms of offence,
without houſes or fortifications, an obvious and expoſed prey
to the ravage of devouring beaſts. Bentley.
RA(VAGER. m. ſ. [from ravage.] Plunderer; ſpoiler.
When that mighty empire was overthrown by the northern
people, vaſt ſums of money were buried to eſcape the plun-
dering of the conquerors; and what remained was carried
off by thoſe ravagers. Swift's Miſtellanies.
RAU'city, n.ſ. [raucus, Lat.] Hoarſeneſs; loud rough noiſe.
Inequality not ſtayed upon, but paſſing, is rather an en-
creaſe of ſweetneſs; as in the purling of a wreathed ſtring,
and in the raucity of a trumpet. Bacon's Nat. Hj.
To Ray E. v. n. [reven, Dutch: réver, Fr.] -
I. To be delirious; to talk irrationally.
Men who thus * We, may conclude their brains are
turned, and one may as well read lesiºs at Bedlam as treat
with ſuch. Government of the Tongue.
It ſoon infecteth the whole member, and is accompa-
nied with watching and raving. //iſeman's Surgery.
Her grief has wrought her into frenzy,
The images her troubled fancy forms
Are incoherent, wild; her word. disjointed :
Sometimes ſhe raves for muſick, light and air;
2. º, º light nor muſick calm her pains. , Smith,
* furious exclamations as if mad.
Shall theſe wild diſtempers of thy mind,
No º ºf thy tongue, thus rave, and find
ur º". lai Sandy's Paraphraſ on jºb.
into the air, it Sºmplaints are but like arrows ſhot up
ºak, and ſo to no purpoſe. Temple.
onder at my patience,
* to rave, and beat my breaſt,
Have I not
º **nd my heart with grief, and run diſtracted. Addison.
Revenge, revenge, thus raving through the ſtreets,
I'll cry for vengeance. ocutºcº's ‘farian Dame,
He ſwore he could not leave me,
With ten thouſandraºgº. Pzzzz's Rºyal Cºrreſt.
3. To be unreaſonably foºd. With tiºn before the object of
fondneſs. A colloquial and improper ſeaſe.
Another partiality is a fantaſical and wild attributing all
knowledge to the ancients or the moderns: this raving ºn
antiquity, in matter of poetry, Horace has wittily expoſed in
one of his ſatires. . Lºcke.
To RAv FL. v. a. ſ.ravel n, Dutch, to entangle.]
1. To entangle ; to entwiſt one with another 3 to make intri-
cate ; to involve ; to perplex.
As you unwind her love from him,
Left it ſhould ravel, and be good to none,
You muſt provide to bottom it on me. Shaºgº.
If then ſuch praiſe the Macedonian got, -
For having rudely cut the Gordian knot;
What glory's due to him that cou’d divide
Such ravel'd int’reſts, has the knot unty'd,
And without ſtroke ſo ſmooth a paſſage made,
Where craft and malice ſuch obſtructions laid. //aſier.
2. To unweave; to unknit: as, to ravel out a twº or piece ºf
Anit work.
Let him for a pair of recchy kiſſes,
Or padling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Sleep that knits up the raveld ſleeve of care. Shakeſp.
3. To hurry over in confuſion. This ſeems to be the meaning
in Digly.
They but ravel it over looſely, and pitch upon diſputing
againſt Particular concluſions, that at the firſt encouji
them ſingle, ſeem harſh to them. Digby.
To RA’v El. v. n.
I. To fall into perplexity or confuſion.
Give the reins to wandering thought,
Regardleſs of his glory's diminution;
Till by their own perplexities involv’d,
They ravel more, ſtill leſs reſolv’d,
But never find ſelf-ſatisfying ſolution. Milton', Agoniſes.
2. To work in perplexity; to buſy himſelf with intrica.
It will be needleſs to ravel far into the records of ºlder
times; every man's memory will ſuggeſt many pertinent
inſtances. - Decay of Piety.
The humour of ravelling into all theſe myſtićaſ or iſ.
tangled matters, mingling with the intereſt and paſſions of
Princes and of parties, and thereby heightened and inflamed,
produced infinite diſputes. Temple.
A4%LIN. n.ſ. [French.] In fortification, a work that
conſiſts of two faces, that make a ſalient angle, com-
monly called half moon by the ſoldiers: it is raiſed before
the courtines or counterſcarps. Dić7.
RAVEN. m. ſ. ſhrapn, Saxon.] A large black fowl.
The raven himſelf is hoarſe
That crokes the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Shakespeare . Macbeth.
Come thou day in night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night,
Whiter than ſnow upon a raven's back. Shakeſp.
I have ſeen a perfectly white raven, as to bill as well as
feathers. Bºyle on Colours.
He made the greedy ravens to be Elias’ caterers, and bring
him food. - - King Charles.
On ſev'ral parts a ſev’ral praiſe beſtows,
The ruby lips, and well-proportion'd noſe,
The ſnowy ſkin, the raven gloſſy hair, 1 * . . ... •
The dimpled cheek. Dryden's Cymon and Iphigenºa.
The raven once in ſnowy plumes was dreſt,
White as the whiteſt dowe's º º hi it
His tongue, his prating tongue had chang'd him quite.
To #. º . the pureſ: white. Aidiºn.
To RA’v EN. v. a. [naepian, Saxon, to rob.] To devour with
great eagerneſs and rapacity. -
Thriftleſs ambition that will raven up
Thine own life's means.
Our natures do purſue,
Like rats that raven down their proper bane, a.
A thirſty evil; and when we drink we die. Shałºp.
The cloyed will
That ſatiate, yet unſatisfied defire, that tub
Both fill'd and running, ravening firſt the lamb, -
Longs after for the garbage. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
There is a conſpiracy of the prophets, like a roaring lion
ravening the prey. - - Ezek. xxii. 25.
To RA’ve N. v. n. To prey with rapacity. -
Benjamin ſhall raven as a wolf; in the morning he fhall
devour the prey, and at night he ſhall divide the ſpoil. Gen.
The Phariſees make clean the outſide of the cup; but
their inward part is full of ravening and wickedneſs. Luke XI.
They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a rººming and
a roaring lion. Pſalm xxii, 13.
2. The
Shake?.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R A V
R A W
º
The more they fed, they raven'd ſtill for more,
T.ey drain'd from Dan, and left Beerſheba poor;
But when ſome lay-preferment fell by chance,
''':e Gourmands made it their inheritance.
Convulſions rack man's nerves and cares his breaſt,
His flying life is chas'd by raw ming pains
Through all his doubles in the winding veins. Blackmore.
RA'v Exous, adj. [from raven.] Furiouſly voracious; hungry
to rage.
Dryden.
Thy deſires
Are wolfiſh, bloody, ſtarv'd and ravenous,
As when a flock
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
Againſt the day of battle, to a field --
Where armies lie encamp'd come flying, lur'd
With ſcent of living carcaſſes. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
What the kind Iſmena,
That nurs'd me, watch'd my ſickneſs oh ſhe watch'd me,
As rav'nous vultures watch the dying lion. Smith.
RA’ve Nously. adv. [from ravenots.] With raging voracity.
RA’venous NFss. n.ſ.. [from ravenous.] Rage for prey; fu-
rious voracity. -
The ravenouſneſs of a lion or bear are natural to them;
et their miſſion upon an extraordinary occaſion may be an
aćtus imperatus of divine providence. Hale.
RAught. the old pret, and part. paſſ of reach. Snatched;
reached; attained. -
His tail was ſtretched out in wond’rous length,
That to the houſe of heavenly gods it raught,
And with extorted power and borrow'd ſtrength,
The ever-burning lamps from thence it brought. Fa, Qu.
And that as ſoon as riper years he raught,
He might, for memory of that day's ruth,
Be called Ruddyman.
In like delights of bloody game,
He trained was till riper years he rºught,
And there abode whilſt any beaſt of name
Walk'd in that foreſt. , , , Fairy Queen.
This ſtaff of honour raught, there let it ſtand,
Where beſt it fits to be, in Henry's hand. Shakeſp.
The hand of death has raught him. Shakeſp.
Grittus furiouſly running in upon Schenden, violently raught
from his head his rich cap of ſables, and with his horſemen
took him. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
RA'vin. m. ſ. [from raven; this were better written raven.]
1. Prey; food gotten by violence.
The lion ſtrangled for his lioneſſes, and filled his holes
with prey, and his dens with ravin. Nah. ii. 2.
To me, who with eternal famine pine,
Alike is hell, or paradiſe, or heav'n ;
There beſt; where moſt with ravin I may meet. Milton.
2. Rapine ; rapaciouſneſs. -
They might not lie long in a condition expoſed to the ravin
of any vermin that may find them, being unable to eſcape.
Ray on the Creation.
RA'vincly. adv. [from rave..] With frenzy; with diſtrac-
tion.
In this depth of muſes and divers ſorts of diſcourſes, would
ſhe rºwingly have remained. Sidney, b. ii.
To RAV1SH. v. a. [ravir, Fr.]
1. To conſtuprate by force.
They raviſhed the women and maids. Lam. v. 11.
They cut thy ſiſter's tongue, and raviſh'd her. Shakeſp.
2. To take away by violence.
Theſe hairs, which thou doſt raviſh from my chin,
Will quicken and accuſe thee. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Their vow is made
To ranſack Troy, within whoſe ſtrong immures
The raviſh'd Helen ſleeps. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
I owe myſelf the care,
My fame and injur’d honour to repair;
From thy own tent, proud man, in thy deſpite,
This hand ſhall raviſh thy pretended right.
3. To delight to rapture; to tranſport.
Thou haſt raviſhed my heart.
Be thou raviſhed always with her love.
RA/visher. n.ſ. [raviſſºur, Fr. from raviſh.]
I. He that embraces a woman by violence.
They are cruel and bloody, common raviſhers of women,
and murtherers of children. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
A raviſher muſt repair the temporal detriment to the maid,
and give her a dowry, or marry her if ſhe deſire it. Taylor.
Turn hence thoſe pointed glories of your eyes |
For if more charms beneath thoſe circles riſe,
So weak my virtue, they ſo ſtrong appear,
I ſhall turn raviſher to keep you here.
2. One who takes any thing by violence.
Shall the raviſher diſplay your hair,
While the fops envy, and the ladies ſtare. Pope.
RAvi's HMENT, n.ſ. [raviſſement, Fr. from raviſh.]
I. Violation; forcible conſtupration.
Of his ſeveral raviſhments, betrayings and ſtealing away of
Shakeſp.
Fairy Queen.
Dryden.
Cant. iv. ix.
Prov. v. 19.
Dryden.
men's wives, came in all thoſe ancient fables of his transfor-
mations and all that rabble of Grecian forgeries. Raleigh:
- Tell them ancient ſtories of the raviſhment of chaſte
maidens. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy:
I told them I was one of their knight-errants that delivered
them from raviſhment. Dryden.
2. Tranſport; *Pture; ecſtaſy; pleaſing violence on the mind.
All things joy, with raviſhment
Attracted by thy beauty ſtill to gaze.
- Thee all things gaze on,
With raviſhment beheld i Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
Can any mortal mixture of earth's mould
Breathe ſuch divine enchanting raviſhment. Milton.
What a raviſhment was that, when having found out the
way to meaſure Hiero's crown, he leaped out of the bath,
and, as if he were ſuddenly poſſeſt, ran naked up and
down. - Wilkins's Daedalus.
RAW. adj: ſhneap, Saxon; raa, Daniſh; rºun, Dutch.]
I. Nº by the fire.
ull of great lumps of fleſh, and gobbets raw. Spenſºr.
2. Not ... the ... &gt; g penſ.
All aloud the wind doth blow,
And coughing drowns the parſon's ſaw;
And birds ſit brooding in the ſnow,
And Marian's noſe looks red and raw. Shakeſp.
If there be quick raw fleſh in the riſings, it is an old le-
proſy. Lev. xiii. Io.
3. Sore.
This her knight was feeble and too faint,
And all his finews waxen weak and raw
Through long impriſonment.
4. Immature ; unripe.
5. Unſeaſoned; unripe in ſkill.
Some people, very raw and ignorant, are very unworthily
and unfitly nominated to places, when men of deſert are held
back and unpreferred. Raleigh's Eſſays.
People, while young and raw, and ſoft-natured, are apt
to think it an eaſy thing to gain love, and reckon their own
friendſhip a ſure price of another man's ; but when experience
ſhall have once opened their eyes, they will find that a friend
is the gift of God. - South.
, Sails were ſpread to ev'ry wind that blew,
Raw were the ſailors, and the depths were new. Dryden.
Well I knew
What perils youthful ardour would purſue,
Milton.
Spenſer.
Young as thou wert in dangers, raw to war. Dryden.
6. New. This ſeems to be the meaning.
I have in m, mind
A thouſand raw tricks of theſe bragging jacks. Shakeſp.
7, Bleak; chill.
They carried always with them that weed, as their houſe,
their bed and their garment; and coming laſtly into Ireland,
they found there more ſpecial uſe thereof, by reaſon of the
raw cold climate. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Youthful ſtill in your doublet and hoſe, this raw rheuma-
tick day. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windſor.
Once upon a raw and guſty day,
The troubled Tyber chafing with his ſhores. Shakeſp.
God help thee, ſhallow man; God make -
Inciſion in thee, thou art raw. Shakeſp.
8. Not concocted,
Diſtilled waters will laſt longer than raw waters. Bacon.
RA’wbo Nep. adj. [raw and bone..] Having bones ſcarcely
covered with fleſh.
Lean rawbon'd raſcals who would e'er ſuppoſe
They had ſuch courage. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. i.
The wolf was content to barter away a rawboned carcaſe
for a ſmooth and fat one. L’Eſtrange.
RA^w HEAD. n.ſ. [raw and head..] The name of a ſpectre,
mentioned to fright children.
Hence draw thy theme, and to the ſtage permit
Rawhead and bloody bones, and hands and feet, -
Ragouſts for Tereus or Thyeſtes dreſt. Dryden.
Servants awe children, and keep them in ſubjećtion, by
telling them of rawhead and bloodybones, Locke,
RA^wly. adv. [from raw.]
1. In a raw manner.
2. Unſkilfully.
3. Newly. - - -
Some crying for a ſurgeon, ſome upon the debts they owº,
ſome upon their children rawly left. Shakeſp. Hºnry V.
RA^w Ness. n.ſ.. [from raw.]
I. State of being raw. -
Chalk helpeth conco&amp;tion, ſo it be out of a deep well; for
then it cureth the rawneſs of the water. Bacon.
2. Unſkilfulneſs. -
Charles V. conſidering the rawneſ of his ſeamen, eſtab-
liſhed a pilot major for their examination. H.kewill,
3. Haſty manner. This ſeems to be the meaning in this ob-
ſcure paſſage. - -
Why in that rawn'ſ left he wife and children,
Without leave taking, Shakeſp. Macbeth.
21 F RAY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E A
R E. A
Rax. n. ſ. [raie, rayon, Fr. radius, Lat.]
light. - -
1. A beam of #. eves that roll in vain -
To find thy piercing roy, and find no dawn. Milton.
+. leaſt ſight, or part of light, which may be ſtopt alone,
or do or ſuffer anything alone, which the reſt of the light
doth not or ſuffers not, I . º of light. Newton.
luſtre corporeal or intellectual. -
2. Ay; air ſharpen'd his viſual ray. - *:::
3. [Raye, Fr. raia, Lat..] A fiſh. Ainſworth.
'um. Lat. An herb. Ainſworth.
# ſº." '... J [rayer, Fr. from the noun..] To ſtreak ; to
mark in long lines. An old word.
Beſide a bubbling fountain low ſhe lay,
Which ſhe increaſed with her bleeding heart,
And the clean waves with purple gore did ray. Fa. Qu.
His horſe is raied with the yellows. Shakeſp.
Was ever man ſo beaten ? was ever men ſo raied ? was
ever man ſo weary Shakeſp. Taming of *::::
AY, for array. - pºiler.
#. m. ſ. º, a root, Spaniſh..] A root of ginger. This
is commonly written race, but leſs properly. -
I have a gammon of bacon and two razes of ginger to be
delivered. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. i.
To RAze. v. a. [raſer, Fr. raſus, Lat. See Rase.
1. To overthrow; to ruin; to ſubvert. -
will you ſuffer a temple, how poorly built ſoever, but yet
a temple of your deity, to be razed. Sidney, b. ii.
He yoaketh your rebellious necks,
Razeth your cities, and ſubverts your towns. Shakeſp.
It grieved the tyrant, that ſo baſe a town ſhould ſo long
hold out, ſo that he would threaten to raze it. Knolles.
Shed chriſtian blood, and populous cities raze;
Becauſe they're taught to uſe ſome diff'rent phraſe. Iłaller.
We touch'd with joy
The royal hand that raz'd unhappy Troy. Dryden.
The place would be razed to the ground, and its founda-
tions ſown with ſalt. Addiſon's Spediator, N° 189.
2. To efface.
Fatal this marriage ; cancelling your fame,
Razing the characters of your renown. Shakeſp.
Pluck from the memory a rooted ſorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain. Shakeſp.
f He in deriſion ſets
Upon their tongues a various ſpirit, to raze
Quite out their native language; and inſtead,
To ſow a jangling noiſe of words. 44ilton's Par. Lo/?.
3. To extirpate.
I'll find a day to maſſacre them all,
And raze their faction and their family. Shakespeare.
RAZOR. m. ſ. [roſor, Lat..] A knife with a thick blade aid
fine edge uſed in ſhaving. -
Zeal, except ordered aright, uſeth the razor with ſuch ea-
gerneſ, that the life of religion is thereby hazarded. Hº.
Theſe words are razors to my wounded heart. Shakeſp.
Thoſe thy boiſt'rous locks, not by the ſword
Of noble warrior, ſo to ſtain his honour,
But by the barber's razor beſt ſubdu'd. Milton', Agoniſies.
All our lords are by his wealth outvy'd,
Whoſe razor on my callow beard was try’d. Dryden.
Razor makers generally clap a ſmall bar of Veni. ſteel
between two ſmall bars of Flemiſh ſteel, and weld them to-
gether, to ſtrengthen the back of the razºr. Moxon.
RAzoºple, diff. [from razor.] Fit to be ſhaved. No in uſe.
New-born chins be rough and razºurai. Shakeſp.
RA'zoRFIsh. n.ſ.
The ſheath or razorffſh reſembleth in length and bigneſs a
man's finger. Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
RA’zuRE. m. ſ. [roſure, Fr. raſura, Latin.] A&amp;t of eraſing.
Oh, your deſert ſpeaks loud :
It well deſerves with characters ºf braſ,
A forted reſidence, gainſt the tooth of time
And razure of oblivion. Shakeſp. Meaſure fºr Meaſure.
RE. Is an inſeparable Particle uſed by the Latins, aſd from them
borrowed by us º, denote iteration or backward ačtion :
*}” to come back ; to revive, to live a ain : reter-
cuſſion, the aët of driving back. &gt; gain ; reper
REA'ccess. n.ſ. [re and acrºſs.] Viſit renewed.
Let paſs the quailing and withering of all things by the
receſs, and their reviving by the reacceſs of the ſun. Hakewill.
9 REACH. v. a. ancient Pieterite raight. [naecan, Saxon.]
'' To tºuch with the hand'extended.
What are riches, empire, pow'r,
But larger means to gratify the will;
!he ſteps by which we climb to riſe and reach
ºr wiſh, and that obtained, down with a ſcaffoldin
*P*S, crowns and thrones: they've ſerv'd their end,
2 º there like lumber to be left and ſcorn'd. Congreve.
• I O arrive at : - - - -
diſtance. *; to attain any thing diſtant : to ſtrike from a
Th . Round the tree
jºy longing good, but could not reach. AMilton.
P." Pow'r, thy preſent aid afford,
That I may reach the beaſt. Dryden
The coaſt ſo long deſir'd -
Thy troops ſhall reach, but having reach'd, repent. Dryºn
What remains beyond this, we have no Inore a poſitive nº
tion of, than a mariner has of the depth of the ſea; where
having let down his ſounding-line, he rººche, no bottom. Lº:
It muſt fall Perhaps before this letter reaches your hands. -
Pºpe.
He reached me a fuli cup. 2 Eſdr. xi
4. Tº bring forward from a diſtant place. Jºr. xiv. 39.
Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands
hither thy hand, and thruſt it into my ſide.
5. To hold out; to ſtretch forth.
Theſe kinds of goodneſs are ſo nearly united to the thi
which deſire them, that we ſcarcely perceive the jº.
ſtir in reaching forth her hand towards them. A looker
When thou ſitteſt *g many, reach not thine hand o:
firſt. - - - Pºliſ, xxxi. 18.
6. To attain ; to gain; to obtain.
The beſt accounts of the appearances of nature, which hu-
man Penetration can reach, comes ſhort of it. reality. Cheyne
7. To transfer. -
3. To fetch from ſome place diſtant, and give.
; and reach
ºn xx. 27.
Through ſuch hands
The knowledge of the gods is rºd to Inan.
8. To penetrate to.
Whatever alterations are made in the body, if they reach
nºt the mind, there is no perception. Locke
9. To be adequate to. -
The law reached the intention of the Promoters, and this
ačt fixed the natural price of money. Locke.
If theſe examples of grown men reach not the caſe of chill
dren, let them examine. +&amp;e on Education.
Io. To extend to. -
Thy deſire leads to no exceſ, that reaches blame. Milton.
Her imprecations reach not to the tomb,
They ſhut not out ſociety in death. Addiſon's Cato.
II. To extend ; to ſpread abroad.
Trees reach'd too far their Pamper'd boughs. Milton,
To ReAch. v. n.
I. To be extended.
We hold that the power which the church hath lawfully
to make laws doth extend unto fundry things of eccleſiaſtică
juriſdiction, and ſuch other matters where; their opinion is,
that the church's authority and power doth not reaft. ii. i.
The new world reache; Quite croſs the torrid zone in one
tropick to the other. - Boyle.
When men purſue their thoughts of ſpace, they are apt to
ſtop at the confines of body, as if ſpace were theſe at an end
too, and reached no farther. Locke.
If I do not aſk any thing improper, let me be buried by
Theodoſius ; my vow reach; no farthe; thin the grave. Addison
The influence of the ſtars reache, to many events, which
are not in the power of reaſon. Swift.
2. To be extended far.
Great men have reaching hands. Shakespeare . Henry VI.
3. To penetrate.
He hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have ſlain
them in a rage, that reacheth up into heaven. 2 Chr. xxviii.
We reach forward into futurity, and bring up to our thoughts
ºbjects hid in the remoteſt depths of time. Addiſon.
4. To make efforts to attain.
Could a ſailor always ſupply new line, and find the plum-
nºt ſink without ſtopping, he would be in the poſture cf the
Fowe.
mind, reaching after a poſitive idea of infinity. Locke.
5. To take in the hand.
Left he reach of the tree of life, and eat. Milton.
REACH. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
I. Act of reaching or bringing by extenſion of the hand.
2. Power of reaching or taking in the hand. - -
There may be in a man's reach a book containing pićtures
and diſcourſes, capable to delight and inſtruct him, which yet
he may never have the will to open. Locke.
3. Power of attainment or management.
In actions, within the reach of power in him, a man ſeems
** free as it is poſſible for freedom to make him. Locke.
4. Power; limit of faculties. - -
Our fight may be conſidered as a more diffuſive kind of
touch, that brings into our reach ſome of the moſt remote
parts of the univerſe. Addiſon.
Be ſure yourſelf and your own reach to know,
How far your genius, táſte and learning go. Pope.
5. Contrivance; artful ſcheme; deep thought.
Drawn by others, who had deeper reaches than themſelves
to matters which they leaſt intended. - Hayward.
Some, under types, have affected obſcurity to amuſe and
make themſelves admired for profound reaches. Howel,
6. A fetch ; an artifice to attain ſome diſtant advantage. -
The duke of Parma had particular reaches and ends of his
own underhand, to croſs the deſign. Bacon.
7. Tendency to diſtant conſequences.
Strain not my ſpeech
Tº groſſer iſſues, nor to larger reach,
Than to ſuſpición. -
A
Shakespeare. Othello.
% Extent."
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E A
8. Extent.
The confines met of empyrean heav'n,
And of this world : and, on the left-hand, hell
With long reach interpos'd, Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
To REA/CT. v. a. [re and acł.] To return the in pulſe or
impreſſion. - - - -
The lungs being the chief inſtrument of ſanguification,
and atting ſtrongly upon the chyle to bring it to an animal
fluid, muſt be reached upon as ſtrongly. A, buthnot.
Cut off your hand, and you may do
With t'other hand the work of two;
Becauſe the ſoul her power contračts,
And on the brother limb reacts. Swift's Miſellanies.
REA’ction. m. ſ. [reachion, Fr. from read? j The recipro-
cation of any impulſe or force impreſſed, made by the body
on which ſuch impreſſion is made: action and reaction are
equal.
*; not great bodies conſerve their heat the longeſt, their
parts heating one another ; and may not great, denſe and
fixed bodies, when heated beyond a certain degree, emit
light ſo copiouſly, as, by the emiſſion and reaction of its
light, and the reflexions and refractions of its rays within its
pores, to grow ſtill hotter till it comes to a certain period of
heat, ſuch as is that of the ſun ? Newton's Opticks.
Alimentary ſubſtances, of a mild nature, act with ſmall
force upon the ſolids, and as the action and reaction are equal,
the ſmalleſt degree of force in the ſolids digeſts them. Arb.
READ. m. ſ. ſnaco, Saxon; raed, Dutch..]
1. Counſel.
The man is bleſt that hath not lent
To wicked read his ear. Sternhold.
2. Saying; ſaw. This word is in both ſenſes obſolete.
This reade is rife that oftentime
Great cumbers fall unſoft,
In humble daics is footing faſt,
The trade is not ſo tickle. Spenſºr.
To READ. v. a. pret, read, part, paſſ. read. [na-6, Saxon.]
1. To peruſe any thing written.
I have ſeen her take forth paper, write upon't, read it,
and afterwards ſeal it. Shakeſp. Macheth,
The paſſage you muſt have read, though ſince ſlipt out of
your memory. Pope.
If we have not leiſure to read over the book itſelf regularly,
then by the titles of chapters we may be directed to peruſe
ſeveral ſcótions. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. To diſcover by charaćters or marks.
An armed corſe did lye,
In whoſe dead face he read great magnanimity. Spenſºr.
3. To learn by obſervation.
Thoſe about her
From her ſhall read the perfect ways of honour. Shakeſp.
4. To know fully.
O moſt delicate fiend |
Who is't can read a woman :
To READ. v. n. -
1. To perform the ačt of peruſing writing.
It ſhall be with him, and he ſhall read therein, that he may
learn to fear the Lord. Deut. xvii. 19.
2. To be ſtudious in books.
'Tis ſure that Fleury reads.
3. To know by reading.
I have read of an eaſtern king, who put a judge to death
for an iniquitous ſentence. Swift.
READ. particip. adj. [from read; the verb read is pronounced
reed; the preterite and participle red.] Skilful by reading.
Virgil's ſhepherds are too well read in the philoſophy of
Epicurus. - Dryden.
We have a poet among us, of a genius as exalted as his
ſtature, and who is very well read in Longinus his treatiſe
concerning the ſublime. Addiſon's Guardian, N° 108.
REA'DING.. n.ſ. [from read.]
1. Study in books ; peruſal of books. - -
Though reading and converſation may furniſh us with
many ideas of men and things, yet it is our own meditation
muſt form our judgment. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Leſs reading than makes felons 'ſcape,
Leſs human genius than God gives an ape,
Can make a Cibber. Pope.
2. A lećture; a prelečtion.
3. Publick recital. -
The Jews always had their weekly readings of the law.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 8.
Give attendance to reading, exhortation and doctrine.
I Tin. iv. 13.
Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Taylor.
4. Variation of copies. -
That learned prelate has reſtored ſome of the readings of
the authors with great ſagacity. Arbuthnot on Coins.
READE'ption. m. ſ. [re and adºptus, Latin.] Recovery ; act
of regaining. - - -
Will any ſay, that the readºption of Trevigi was matter of
ſcruple * - Bacon,
READER. m. ſ. [from read..] .
1. One that peruſes any thing written.
2
R E A
As we muſt take the care that our words and ſenſe be clear,
ſo if the obſcurity happen through the hearers or readers want
of underſtanding, I am not to anſwer for them. B. Johnſon.
2. One ſtudious in books.
Baſiris' altars and the dire decrees
Of hard Eureſtheus, ev'ry reader ſees.
3. One whoſe office is to read prayers in churches.
He got into orders, and became a reader in a pariſh church
at twenty pounds a year. Swift.
REA'DER ship. n.ſ. (from reader.] The office of reading /
prayers.
When they have taken a degree,
ſollicit a readerſhip.
READILY. adv. [from ready.] Expeditely
rance or delay. -
My tongue obey'd, and readily could name
Whate’er I ſaw. Milton.
Thoſe very things, which are declined as impoſſible, are
readily practicable in a caſe of extreme neceſſity. South.
I readily grant, that one truth cannot contradia another.
Locke.
Every one ſometime or other dreams that he is readiº
Papers, in which caſe the invention prompts ſo readily, that
the mind is impoſed upon. Addiſon's Speciator, N° 487.
REA'DINEss. n.ſ.. [from ready.]
1. Expediteneſs; promptitude.
. He would not forget the readingſ of their king, in aiding
him when the duke of Bretagne failed him. Bacon.
He opens himſelf to the man of buſineſs with reluctancy,
but offers himſelf to the viſits of a friend with facility and all
the meeting readineſs of deſire. South.
2. The ſtate of being ready or fit for any thing.
Have you an army ready ?
—The centurions and their charges already in the enter-
tainment to be on foot at an hour's warning.
-I am joyful to hear of their readinºſ. Shakespeare
They remained near a month, that tney might be in rea-
dineſs to attend the motion of the army. Clarendon,
3. Facility; freedom from hinderance of obſtruction.
Nature has provided for the readineſs and eaſineſs of
ſpeech. Holder's Elements of Speech.
4. State of being willing or prepared.
A pious and well-diſpoſed mind, attended with a readineſs
to obey the known will of God, is the ſureſt means to en-
lighten the underſtanding to a belief of chriſtianity. South.
Their convićtion grew ſo ſtrong, that they embraced the
ſame truths, and laid down their lives, or were always in a
readineſs to do it, rather than depart from them. Addiſon.
READMI'ssion. n.ſ. [re and admiſſion.] The act of admit-
ting again.
In an exhauſted receiver, animals, that ſeem as they were
dead, revive upon the readmiſſion of freſh air. Arbuthnot.
To READMIT.u. a. [re and admit.] To let in again.
Theſe evils I deſerve,
Yet deſpair not of his final pardon,
Whoſe ear is ever open, and his eye
Gracious to readmit the ſuppliant. Milton's Agoniſłes.
After twenty minutes I readmitted the air. Derham.
To READo'RN. v. a. [re and adorn.] To decorate again;
to deck a-new.
The ſtreams now change their languid blue,
Regain their glory, and their fame renew,
With ſcarlet honours readorn the tide. Blackmore.
REATY, adj. Inab, Saxon; redo, Swediſh; hnabe, nimble,
Saxon.]
1. Prompt; not delayed.
Theſe commodities yield the readieſ money of any in this
kingdom, becauſe they never fail of a price abroad. Temple.
He overlook'd his hinds; their pay was juſt
And ready: for he ſcorn'd to go on truſt.
2. Fit for a purpoſe; not to ſeek.
All things are ready, if our minds be ſo.
-Periſh the man whoſe mind is backward now ! Shakeſp.
Make you ready your ſtiff bats and clubs;
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle. Shakeſp.
Dryden.
Dryden.
they get into orders, and
Swift's A4iſcellanies.
; with little hinde-
Dryden.
One hand the ſword, and one the pen employs,
And in my lap the ready paper lies.
The ſacred prieſts with ready knives bereave
The beaſts of life, and in full bowls receive • -
The ſtreaming blood. Dryden's Aneis.
3. Prepared; accommodated to any deſign, ſo as that there can
be no delay. - - - -
Troublé and anguiſh ſhall prevail againſt him, as a king
ready to the battle. - job xy. 24.
Death ready ſtands to interpoſe his dart. Milton.
The word which I have giv'n, I'll not revoke;
If he be brave, he's ready for the ſtroke. ... Drydºn.
‘I he imagination is always reſtleſs, and the will, reaſon
being laid aſide, is ready for every extravagant project. Lºcke.
4. Willing; eager. -
Men, when their actions ſucceed not as they would, are
always ready to impute the blame thereof unto the heavens, ſo
as to excuſe their own follies. Speiſer’s State of Ireland.
5. Being
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">| R E A
R E A
not diſtant; near; about to do or bc.
; : * ~ int; -
5. *...'... day of darkneſs is ready at hand. job.
Satan ready now
ith weary'd wings and willing feet
. ;.. y hand &amp; Miltºn's Paradiſe Loſſ.
ino at hand ; next to hand.
6. Bººk ſapling time he wrench'd from out the ground,
The rºadiº weapon that his fury found. Dryden.
. Facil; eaſy ; opportune 5 near. -
7 sº j, way, which a wiſe man hath to
conquer, is to fly. Hooker's Preface.
The race eleēt,
Safe towards Canaan from the ſhore advance -
Through the wild deſert, not the readiºſ way. Milton.
Proud of their conqueſt, prouder of their prey,
They leave the camp, and take the readiºſ way. Dryden.
The ready way to be thought mad, is to contend that you
are not ſo. Speciator, N° 577.
8. Quick; not done with heſitation.
A ready conſent often ſubjects a woman to contempt:
Clariſſa.
9. Expedite; nimble; not embarraſſed; not ſlow.
Thoſe, who ſpeak in publick, are much better accepted,
when they can deliver their diſcourſe by the help of a lively
genius and a ready memory, than when they are forced to
read all. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
10. Tº make READy. To make preparations.
He will ſhew you a large upper room ; there make ready
for us. Mar. xiv. 15.
REA'DY. adv. Readily; ſo as not to need delay. -
We will go ready armed before the children of Iſrael. Num.
REA'DY. n.ſ. Ready money. A low word.
Lord Strutt was not fluſh in ready, either to go to law, or
clear old debts. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
Reaffi'RMANce. m. ſ. [re and affirmance..] Second confir-
mation.
Cauſes of deprivation are a convićtion before the ordinary
of a wilful maintaining any doćtrine contrary to the thirty-
nine articles, or a perſiſting therein without revocation of his
error, or a reaffirmance after ſuch revocation. Ayliffe.
RE/AL. adj. [reel, Fr. realis, Latin.]
1. Relating to things not perſons; not perſonal.
Many are perfeót in men's humours, that are not greatly
capable of the real part of buſineſs; which is the conſtitution
of one that hath ſtudied men more than books. Bacon.
2. Not fictitious ; not imaginary; true; genuine.
We do but deſcribe an imaginary world, that is but little
a-kin to the real one. Glanvill's Scepſ.
When I place an imaginary name at the head of a cha-
raēter, I examine every letter of it, that it may not bear any
reſemblance to one that is real. Addiſon.
3. In law, conſiſting of things immoveable, as land.
I am haſtening to convert my ſmall eſtate, that is perſonal,
into real. Child's Diſcourſe of Trade.
RE'ALGAR. m. ſ. A mineral.
Realgar or ſandaracha is red arſenick: Harris.
Put realgar hot into the midſt of the quickfilver, whereby
it may be condenſed as well from within as without. Bacon.
REALITY. m. ſ. [realité, Fr. from real.]
I. Truth; verity; what is, not what merely ſeems.
I would have them well verſed in the Greek and Latin
Poets, without which a man fancies that he underſtands
a critic, when in reality he does not comprehend his meaning.
Addiſon's Speciator, N° 29.
The beſt accounts of the appearances of nature in any
ſingle inſtance human penetration can reach, comes infinitely
ſhort of its reality and internal conſtitution; for who cań
ſearch out the Almighty's works to perfeótion : Cheyne.
2. iºning intrinſically important; not merely matter of
OW.
Of that ſkill the more thou know'ſt,
The more ſhe will acknowledge thee her head,
And to realities yield all her ſhows,
Made ſo adorn for thy delight the more. Milton.
To REALIZE. v. a. [realiſer, Fr. from real.]
I. To bring into being or act.
Thus we realize what Archimedes had only in hypotheſis,
weighing a ſingle grain againſt the globe of earth.”&amp;iº.
As a Dioceſan, you are like to exemplify and realize every
word of this diſcourſe. South
# To convert money into land. -
*ALLY. adv. [from real.]
* With adual exiſtence,
There cannot be a more important caſe of conſcience for
º to be reſolved in, than to know certainly how far God
.." . will for the deed, and how far he does not ; and
when º truly when men do really will a thing, and
willed. 7 * really no power to do, what they have
2. In ſºuth; truly; not ſeemingly. South.
The underſ and - - - - - - -
under the notion º to the will things º, .
04/E//,
Theſe orators inflame the people, whoſe anger is real, but
a ſhort fit of madneſs. Swift.
3. It is a ſlight corroboration of an opinion.
Why really ſixty-five is ſomewhat old. 2%ung.
REALM. n.ſ. [roiaulme, French.]
1. A kingdom ; a king's dominion.
Is there any part of that realm, or any nation therein, which
have not yet been ſubdued to the crown of England. Spenſer.
They had gather'd a wiſe council to them
Of ev'ry realm, that did debate this buſineſs. Shakespeare ,
A ſon whoſe worthy deeds
Raiſe him to be the ſecond in that realm. 44ilton,
2. Kingly government. This ſenſe is not frequent.
#. each ſmall people's genius, policies,
The ant's republick, and the realm of bees. Pope.
REA'Lty. n.ſ.. [a word peculiar, I believe, to Milton.]
Realty means not in this place reality in oppoſition to ſhow,
but loyalty; for the Italian Dictionary explains the adjective
reale by loyal. Pearce on Milton.
3 heaven, that ſuch reſemblance of the higheſt
Should yet remain, where faith and realty
Remain not. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vi.
REAM. m. ſ. [rame, Fr. riem, Dutch..] A bundle of paper
containing twenty quires.
All vain petitions mounting to the ſky,
With reams abundant this abode ſupply. Pºpe.
To REA'NIMATE. v. a. [re and animo, Lat.] To revive; to
reſtore to life.
We are our reanimated anceſtors, and antedate their re-
ſurreótion. Glanvill's Scepſ.
The young man left his own body breathleſs on the ground,
while that of the doe was reanimated. ... Speciator, Nº. 578.
To RE ANNE'x. v. a. [re and annex.] To annex again.
King Charles was not a little inflamed with an ambition to
repurchaſe and reannex that dutchy. Bacon's Henry VII.
To REAP. v. a. [nepan, Saxon.]
1. To cut corn at harveſt. *
From Ireland come I with my ſtrength,
And reap the harveſt which that raſcal ſow'd. Shakespeare
When ye reap the harveſt, thou ſhalt not wholly reap the
corners of thy field. Lev. xix. 9.
The hire of the labourers, which have reaped down your
fields, is kept back by fraud. ja, v. 5.
Is it fitting in this very field,
Where I ſo oft have reap'd, ſo oft have till'd,
That I ſhould die for a deſerter * Gay.
2. To gather; to obtain.
They that love the religion which they profeſs, may have
failed in choice, but yet they are ſure to reap what benefit the
ſame is able to afford. Hooker.
What ſudden anger's this how have I reap'd it Shakespeare
This is a thing,
Which you might from relation likewiſe reap, -
Being much ſpoke of. Shakeſp. Cºnkling.
Our fins being ripe, there was no preventing of God's
juſtice from reaping that glory in our calamitics, which we
robbed him of in our proſperity. King Charles.
To REAP. v. n. To harveſt. -
They that ſow in tears, ſhall reap in joy. Pſalm cºxvi. 5.
REA'PER. m. ſ. [from reap..] One that cuts corn at harvelt.
Your ſhips are not well mann'd,
Your mariners are muliteers, people
Ingroſt by ſwift impreſs. Shakespeare Ant. and Cºp.
From hungry reapers they their ſheaves withhold. Sand.
Here Ceres' gifts in waving proſpect ſtand,
And nodding tempt the joyful reaper's hand. Pope.
A thouſand forms he wears,
And firſt a reaper from the field appears, -
Sweating he walks, while loads of golden grain
O'ercharge the ſhoulders of the ſeeming ſwain. Pope.
REA'PINGHook. n.ſ. [reaping and hook.] A hook uſed to cut
corn in harveſt.
Some are brib'd to vow it looks
Moſt plainly done y thieves with reºpinghoº.
REAR. n.ſ.. [arrieare, French.] - -
1. The hinder troop of an army, or the hinder line of a fleet.
- !-- ---' -?
The rºar admiral, an arch pirate, was afterwards ſlain with
&gt; Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Dryden.
a great ſhot. -
Argive chiefs
Fled from his well-known face, with wonted fear,
As when his thund'ring ſword and pºinted ſpear
Drove headlong to their ſhips, and glean'd the rear. Dºyd.
Snowy headed winter leads,
Yellow ãºn brings the rear. JWaller.
2. The laſt claſs. -
Coins I place in the rear, becauſe made up of both the
other. Peachim.
REAR. adj. [hnene, Saxon.]
1. Raw ; half roaſted; half fodden.
2. Early. A provincial word.
O'er yonder hill does ſcant the dawn appear, G
ty why does Cuddy leave his cot ſo rear * To Riº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">º:
To REAR. v. a. [anaejian, Saxon.]
1. To raiſe up.
All the people ſhouted with a loud voice, for the rearing
up of the houſe of the Lord. 1. Eſdr. v. 62.
Who now ſhall rear you to the fun, or rank
Your tribes. Milton,
2. To lift up from a fall.
Down again ſhe fell unto the ground,
But he her quickly rear'd up again.
In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiſs : he rear'd me. Miltºn.
3. To move upwards.
Up to a hill anon his ſteps he rear'd,
From whoſe high top to ken the proſpect round. Milton.
4. To bring up to maturity.
No creature goeth to generate, whilſt the female is buſy in
ſitting or rearing her young. Bacon's Natural Hi/iory.
They were a very hardy breed, and reared their young ones
without any care. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
They flouriſh'd long in tender bliſs, and rear'd
A numerous offspring, lovely like themſelves. Thomſºn,
5. To educate ; to inſtruct. - -
He wants a father to protećt his youth,
And rear him up to virtue. Southern.
They have in every town publick nurſeries, where all pa-
rents, except cottagers and labourers, are obliged to ſend their
infants to be reared and educated. - Swift.
6. To exalt; to elevate.
Charity decent, modeſt, eaſy, kind, -
Softens the high, and rears the abject mind. Prior.
7. To rouſe; to ſtir up.
Into the naked woods he goes,
And ſeeks the tuſky boar to rear,
With well-mouth'd hounds and pointed ſpear. Dryden.
Rea'Rw ARD. m. ſ. [from rear.]
1. The laſt troop. -
He from the beginning began to be in the rearward, and
before they left fighting, was too far off. Sidney.
The ſtandard of Dan was the rearward of the camp. Num.
2. The end ; the tail; a train behind.
Why follow'd not, when ſhe ſaid Tybalt's dead,
Thy father or thy mother
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Romeo is baniſhed. Shakeſp. Romeo and Juliet.
3. The latter part. In contempt.
He was ever in the rearward of the faſhion. Shakeſp.
REA'RMoUs E. m. ſ. [more properly reremouſe; hſienemuſ, Sax.]
The leather-winged bat.
Some war with rearmice for their leathern wings
Fa. §ueen, b, i.
To make my ſmall elves coats. Shale?:
Of flying fiſhes, the wings are not feathers, but a thin kind
of ſkin, like the wings of a bat or rearmouſe. Abbot.
To Re Asce’ND. v. n. [re and aſcend..] To climb again.
When as the day the heaven doth adorn,
I wiſh that night the noyous day would end ;
And when as night hath us of light forlorn,
I wiſh that day would ſhortly reaſcend. Spenſºr.
Taught by the heav'nly muſe to venture down
The dark deſcent, and up to reaſcend. Milton.
Theſe puiſſant legions, whoſe exile
Hath empty'd heav'n, ſhall fail to reaſiend,
Self-rais'd, and repoſſeſs their native ſeat: Milton.
To REAsce/N D. v. a. To mount again.
When the god his fury had allay’d,
He mounts aloft, and reaſcends the ſkics. Addison.
REA'SON. m. ſ. [raiſon, Fr. ratio, Lat.]
1. The power by which man deduces one propoſition from an-
other, or proceeds from premiſes to conſequences; the ra-
tional faculty. - - - -
Reaſon is the direétor of man's will, diſcovering in action
what is good; for the laws of well-doing are the dictates of
right regſon. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 7.
Though brutiſh that conteſt and foul,
When reaſon hath to deal with force; yet ſo -
Moſt reaſon is that reaſon overcome. Miltºn,
Dim, as the borrow'd beams of moon and ſtars
To lonely, weary, wand'ring travellers,
Is reaſon to the ſoul: and as on high,
Thoſe rowling fires diſcover but the ſky,
Not light us here; ſo reaſon's glimmering ray
Was lent, not to aſſure our doubtful way,
But guide us upward to a better day. Drydºn.
It would be well, if people would not lay ſo much weight
on their own reaſºn in matters of religion, as to think eycry
thing impoſſible and abſurd, which they cannot conceive :
how often do we contradict the right rules of reaſon in the
whole courſe of our lives reaſon itſelf is true and juſt, but
the reaſºn of every particular man is weak and wavering,
perpetually ſwayed and turn'd by his intereſs, his pºſions
and his vices. Swift's 4//cellºnies.
2. Cauſe ; ground or principle.
Virtue and vice are not arbitrary things, but there is a na-
tural and eternal reaſon for that goodneſs and virtue, and
againſt vice and wickedneſs. - 2 iſlaſºn.
-------
3. Cauſe efficient.
*P*.* tº ſown of people, partly by reaſºn of the flºti:
- - y by reaſºn of the ſterſ:
lity of the ſoil, and partly their natives are £º by ſo
"º. in ſuch vaſt territories as thcy poſſeſs. Bac:
* * of the motion of the balance in a wheel watch,
is by the motion of the next wheel. Hale.
By reaſon of the fickneſs of a reverend prelate, I have been
overruled to approach this place. Sprat.
I have * obſerved equality of numbers in my verſe;
partly by reaſºn of my haſte, but more eſpecially becauſe i
would not have my ſenſe a ſlave to ſyllables. Dryden.
4. Final cauſe. ry
tº..." '. ſometimes is taken for
dućtions: Fº f ; ſometimes for clear and fair de-
&gt; º, the cauſe, particularly the final
cauſe: but here for a faculty in man. Locke,
5. Argument; ground of perſuaſion; motive. -
I maſk the buſineſs from the common eve
For fundry weighty reaſºns. opakeſp. Macbeth.
If it be natural, ought we not rather to conclude, that
there is ſome ground and reaſºn for theſe fears, and that na-
ture hath not Planted them in us to no purpoſe. Tillaſon.
6. Ratiocination; diſcurſive power.
When ſhe rates things, and moves from ground to ground,
The name of reaſºn ſhe obtains by this;
But when by reaſon ſhe the truth hath found,
And ſtandeth fixt, ſhe underſtanding is. Davies.
7. Clearneſs of faculties.
Lovers and madmen have their feething brains,
Such ſhaping fantaſies that apprehen
More than cool reaſºn ever comprehends. . Shakeſp.
When valour preys on regſºn,
It eats the ſword it fights with.
8. Right; juſtice.
I was promis'd on a time,
To have reaſºn for my rhyme:
From that time unto this ſeaſon,
I receiv'd nor rhyme nor reaſºn. Spºnſºr.
Are you in earneſt ?
Ay, and reſolvd withal
To do myſelf this rea on and this right. Shake?.
The Papiſts ought in reaſºn to allow them all the excuſs
they make uſe of for themſelves; ſuch as an invincible igno-
rance, oral tradition and authority. Stilliºt.
Let it drink deep in thy moſt vital part; -
Strike home, and do me reaſon in thy heart. Drydºn.
9. Reaſonable claim ; juſt practice.
God brings good out of evil; and therefore it were but
regſºn we ſhould truſt God to govern his own world, and wait
till the change cometh, or the reaſon be diſcovered. Taylor.
Conſcience, not acting by law, is a boundleſs preſumptuous
thing ; and, for any one by virtue thereof, to challenge him-
ſelf a privilege of doing what he will, and of being unaccount-
able, is in all reaſºn too much, eitherfor man or angel. South.
A ſevere reflection Montaigne has made on princes, that
we ought not in reaſon to have any expectatious of favour from
them. Dryden's Dedication to Aurengzebe.
We have as great aſſurance that there is a God, as the na-
ture of the thing to be proved is capable of, and as we could
in reaſºn expect to have. Tillºtſon's Preface.
When any thing is proved by as good arguments as a thing
of that kind is capable of, we ought not in reaſon to doubt of
its exiſtence. Tillotſºn.
Io. Rationale; juſt account.
To render a reaſon of an effect or phenomenon, is to de-
duce it from ſomething elſe more known than itſelf. Boyle.
11. Moderation; moderate demands,
The moſt probable way of bringing France to reaſºn, would
bc by the making an attempt upon the Spaniſh Weſt Indies,
and by that means to cut off all communication with this
great ſource of riches. - Addiſon,
To REA’sos. v. m. [raiſºnner, Fr.] a
I. To argue rationally; to deduce conſequences juſtly from
premiſes.
No man, in the ſtrength of the firſt grace, can merit the
ſecond ; for reaſºn they do not, who think ſo; unleſs a beg-
gar, by receiving one alms, can merit another. South.
Ideas, as ranked under names, are thoſe, that for the moſt
part men reaſon of within themſelves, and always thoſe which
they commune about with others. - Locke.
Every man's reaſºning and knowledge is only about the
ideas exiſting in his own mind; and our knowledge and rea-
ſºning about other things is only as they correſpond with thoſe
our particular ideas. Locke.
Love is not to be regſºn'd down, or loſt
In high ambition.
In the lonely grove, ,
'Twas there juſt and good he reºſºn'd ſtrong,
Clear'd ſome great truth. Tºrº.
2. To debate; to diſcourſe; to talk; to take or give an ac-
- ot in uſe.
count. N Reaſon with the fellow,
Before ": puniſh him, where he heard this. sº,
2 I
Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
A.ºldſºn.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E A
R E B
I reaſºn'd with a Fº yeſterday,
Who told me in the narrow ſeas,
There miſcarried a veſſel of our country. Shakespeare .
Sºni ſã], that I may reaſon with you of all the righteous
ads of the Lord. - - I Sam. xii. 7.
3. To raiſe diſquiſitions; to make º: | iſºn ye in
- ſus, perceiving their thoughts, ſaid, what reaſºn ye i
Jeſus, p c Luke v. 22.
Milton.
- carts :
you They reaſºn'd high
Of providence, foreknowledge, will and fate.
Already by thy reaſºning this I gueſs,
Who art to lead thy offspring; and ſuppoſeſt,
That bodies bright and greater ſhould not ſerve -
The leſs not bright. - Miltºn.
Down reaſon then, at leaſt vain reaſºning down. Milt.
To REA’so N. v. a. To examine rationally. This is a French
mode of ſpecch. ..
When they are clearly diſcovered, well digeſted, and well
reaſºned in every part, there is beauty in ſuch a theory. Burn.
REA son ABLE. adj. [raiſon, Fr.] -
1. Having the faculty of reaſon; endued with reaſon.
She perceived her only ſon lay hurt, and that his hurt was
ſo deadly, as that already his life had loſt uſe of the reaſºnable
and almoſt ſenſible part. - Sidney.
2. Aëting, ſpeaking or thinking rationally: " .
The parliament was diſlolved, and gentlemen furniſhed
with ſuch forces, as were held ſufficient to hold in bridle either
the malice or rage of reaſºnable people. Hayward.
3. Juſt ; rational; agreeable to reaſon.
A law may be reaſonable in itſelf, although a man does not
allow it, or does not know the reaſon of the lawgivers. Swift.
4. Not immoderate. r
Let all things be thought upon,
That may with reaſºnable ſwiftneſs add
More feathers to our wings.
5. Tolerable ; being in mediocrity.
I could with reaſºnable good manner receive the ſalutation
of her and of the princeſs Pamela, doing them yet no further
reverence than one princeſs oweth to another. Sidney.
A good way diſtant from the nigra rupes, there are four ſé-
veral lands of reaſonable quantity. Abbot’s Dºſir. of the //orld.
Notwithſtanding theſe defects, the Engliſh colonies main-
tained themſelves in a reaſºnable good eſtate, as long as they
retained their own ancient laws. Davies on Ireland.
REA’sonABLENEss. n.ſ.. [from reaſonable.]
1. The faculty of reaſon.
2. Agreeableneſs to reaſon.
They thought the work would be better done, if thoſe,
who had ſatisfied themſelves with the reaſºnablenºſ of what
they wiſh, would undertake the converting and diſpoſing of
other men. Clarendon.
The paſſive reaſon, which is more properly reaſonableneſs,
is that order and congruity which is impreſſed upon the thing
thus wrought ; as in a watch, the whole frame and COntex-
tº of it carries a reaſºnableneſ, in it, the paſſive impreſſion
*.* reaſon or intellectual idea that was iſ the artſ. Hale.
3. Moderation.
REA’son ABLY. adv. [from reaſºnable.]
1 Agreeably to reaſon.
Chaucer makes Arcite violent in his love, and unjuſt in the
Purſuit of it; yet when he came to die, he made him think
more reaſºnably. Dryden's Preface to Faber.
2. Moderately; in a degree reaching to mediocrity.
Some man reaſºnally ſtudied in the law, ſhould be perſuaded
to go thither as Chancellor. Bacon's Advice in Pilliers.
If we can by induſtry make our deaf and dumb perſons rea-
ſonally perfect in the language and pronunciation, he may be
alſo capable of the ſame privilege of underſtanding by the eye
what is ſpoken. Holder's Elemenis of Speech.
REA son E.R. m. ſ. [raiſºnneur, Fr. from reaſºn.] One who rea-
ſons; an arguer. -
Shakeſp. Henry V.
- Due reverence pay
To learn'd Epicurus; ſee the way
By which this reasºner of ſº, high renown
Moves through th’ ecliptick road the rolling ſun. Blackm.
1. he terms are looſe and undefined; and what leſs becomes
º ... * Fº Wºng and invidious names on ever
*Pg to colour a falſe wav - -
Thoſe reaſºners, sº ing. h of thei ºn.
| - y ſo much of their zeal for the
upholding the balance of Power in Chriſtendom, by their
Pryctices arc endeavouring to deſtroy it at home. Swift
REA’soxing. */ [from reaſºn.] Argument. -
- Thoſe who would make uſe of ſolid arguments and ſtrong
ſº to a reader of ſo delicate a turn, would be like that
*h people, who worſhiped a fly, and ſacrified an ox to it.
4 ſºn's Freeholder, Nº. 32.
Thi - [from reaſºn.] Void of reaſon. &gt; 3
lis proffer is º * rºomlºſs. Shaft. Hºn. VI.
S 16
Her true per*tion, or my falſe tranſgreſſion,
* makes me re. n!
- 2?!!:/s to re P *
hat they wholly ſ ſ aſon thus Shakesp.
for all thoſe wº ł * the reaſºnleſs mind, I am reſolved;
are left to i. ** Sreated mortal, as Éirds and beaſts,
*tural appetites, Raleigh's Hyl. of the //orld.
RFA’son less, adj.
Theſe reaſons in love's law have paſt for good,
Though fond and reaſºn'ſ to ſome. 4.ilton's Agoniſies.
To REA:s:"MBLE. v.a. [re and aſſemble.] To colled anew. .
There reaſſembling our afflicted pow'rs,
Conſult, how to offend our enemy. Milton.
To REAsse'RT, v. a. [re and a ºrt.] To aſſert anew ; to
maintain after ſuſpenſion or ceſiation.
His ſteps I followed, his doctrine I reaſºrted.
Young Oreſtes grown
To manly years ſhould red/ºrt the throne. Pote.
To REAssu'ME. v. a. [reaſino, Lat. re and a ume.] To
reſume ; to take again. -
To him the ſon return’d
Into his bliſsful boſom reaſſum’d,
4tterbury.
In glory as of old. Milton.
Nor only on the Trojans fell this doom,
Their hearts at laſt the vanquiſh’d reaſſume. Denham.
For this he reaſſumes the nod,
While Semele commands the god. Prior.
After Henry VIII. had reaſſumed the ſupremacy, a ſtatute
was made, by which all doctors of the civil law. might be
made chancellors. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To Re Assu’RE. (raſurer, Fr.] To free from ſár, to reſtore
from terrour.
They roſe with fear,
Till dauntleſs Pallas reaſur'd the reſt. Drydºn.
REATE. m. ſ. A kind of long ſmall graſs that grows in water,
and complicates itſelf together.
Let them lie dry fix months to kill the water-weeds; as
water-lilies, candocks, reate and bulruſhes. //alton.
To REAv E. v. a. pret. rºſt. [raerian, Saxon; whence to heravº.
I. To take away by ſtealth or violence. An obſolete word.
Diſmounting from his lofty ſteed,
He to him leapt, in mind to reave his life.
Some make his meaſhy bed, but reave his reſt.
Who can be bound by any ſolemn vow,
To do a murd’rous deed, to rob a man,
To force a ſpotleſs virgin's chaſſity,
To reave the orphan of his parimony,
And have no other reaſon for his wrong,
But that he was bound by a ſolemn oath. Shakſº. Hºn. VI.
2. It was uſed as well in a good as bad ſenſe.
They ſought my troubled ſenſe how to deceave
With talk, that might unquiet fancies reave. Hubberd.
Each ſucceeding time addeth or reaveth goods and evils,
according to the occaſions itſelf produceth. Carew.
To REBA/PTIZE. v. a. [rebaptiſºr, Fr. re and laptize.] To
baptize again.
Underſtanding that the rites of the church were obſerved,
he approved of their baptiſm, and would not ſuffer them to
be rebaptized. Aylºff's Parergon.
REBAPTIZATION. m. ſ. [rebaptiſation, Fr. from rebaptize.]
Renewal of baptiſm. -
In maintainance of rebaptization, their arguments are built
ypon this, that hereticks are not any part of the church of
Chriſt. * Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
To RK BATE. v. n. [relatre, Fr.] To blunt; to beat to ob-
tuſeneſs; to deprive of keenneſs.
He doth relate and blunt his natural edge *
With profits of the mind, ſtudy and faſt. Shakespeare .
The icy goat, the crab which ſquare the ſcales;
With thoſe of aries trine conſent to hate
The ſcales of libra, and her rays rebate. Creech.
He modifies his firſt ſevere decree;
The keener edge of battle to rebate,
The troops for honour fighting, not for hate.
My flagging ſoul flies under her own pitch,
My ſenſes too are dull and ſtupify'd, -
Their edge rebated. Dryden's Don Selaſian.
Their innocence unfeign'd long joys afford
To the honeſt nuptial bed, and, in the wane ---
Of life, rebate the miſeries of age. Philips.
REBEck. m. ſ. [rebec, Fr. ribecca, Italian.]. A three ſtringed
fiddle.
When the merry bells ring round,
And the jocund rebecks ſound,
To many a youth and many a maid, -
Dancing in the checker'd ſhade. Milton.
REBEL. n.ſ. [rebelle, Fr. rebellis, Lat..] One who oppoſes
lawful authority.
- The mercileſs Macdonel
Worthy to be a rebel ; for to that
The multiplying villanies of nature
Sºft.
Carew.
Dryden.
Do ſwarm upon him. Shakesp. Macbeth.
The rebels there are up,
And put the Engliſhmen unto the ſword. Shakeſp.
Shall man from nature's ſanction ſtray, Fenton
- a. -
A rebel to her rightful ſway. - inſt
To REBEL. v. n. [rebell, Lat..] To riſe in oppoſition again
lawful authority.
Boys, immature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their preſent pleaſure,
And ſo rebel to judgment. Shakeſp. Ant, and cºttº,
R;
l,
º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E B
ºr
If they perceive diſſention in our looks,
How will their grudging ſtomachs be provok'd
To wilful diſobedience, and rebel? Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe footh every paſion,
That in the nature of their lords rebels;
Bring oil to fire. Shakeſp. King Lear.
There was a time, when all the body's members
Rebell'd againſt the belly. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Arm'd with thy might, rid heav'n of theſe rebell’d. Milt.
How cou’d my hand rebel againſt my heart
How cou’d your heart rebel againſt your reaſon Dryden,
Part of the angels rebelled againſt God, and thereby loſt
their happy ſtate. Locke.
Rebe'll ER. m. ſ. [from rebel.J. One that rebels. Dić?.
Rebe'llion. m. ſ. [rebellion, Fr. rebellio, Lat. from rebel.]
Inſurrection againſt lawful authority.
He was victorious in rebellions and ſeditions of people. Bac.
Adam's ſin, or the curſe upon it, did not deprive him
of his rule, but left the creatures to a rebellion or reluctation.
Bacon's Holy War.
Raz'd by rebellion from the books of life. Milton.
Rebe'llious. adj. [from rebel.] Opponent to lawful autho-
rity.
£om the day that thou didſt depart out of Egypt, until ye
came unto this place, ye have been rebellious againſt the
Lord. Deutr. ix. 7.
This our ſon is ſtubborn and rebellious, he will not obey
our voice. Deutr. xxi. 20.
Rebe'lliously. adv. [from rebellious.] In oppoſition to law-
ful authority.
When one ſhewed him where a nobleman, that had rebel-
liouſly born arms againſt him, lay very honourably intombed,
and adviſed the king to deface the monument; he ſaid, no,
no, but I would all the reſt of mine enemies were as honour-
ably intombed. Camden's Remains.
REBE'lliousNess. m. ſ. [from rebellious.] The quality of
being rebellious.
To REBE'llow. v. n. [re and bellow.] To bellow in return ;
to echo back a loud noiſe.
He loudly bray'd with beaſtly yelling ſound,
That all the fields rebellowed again. Fairy Queen.
The reſiſting air the thunder broke,
The cave rebellow'd, and the temple ſhook. Dryden.
From whence were heard, rebellowing to the main,
The roars of lions. * Dryden's AFneis.
ReBoA'tion. n.ſ. [reboo, Lat.] The return of a loud bel-
lowing ſound.
To REBou'ND. v. n. [relandir, Fr. re and bound.] To ſpring
back; to be reverberated; to fly back, in conſequence of mo-
tion impreſſed and reſiſted by a greater power.
Whether it were a roaring voice of moſt ſavage wild beaſts,
or a rebounding echo from the hollow mountains. Wiſd. xvii.
It with rebounding ſurge the bars affail'd, Milton.
Life and death are in the power of the tongue, and that
not only directly with regard to the good or ill we may do to
others, but reflexively with regard to what may rebound to
ourſelves. Government of the Tongue.
Bodies which are abſolutely hard, or ſo ſoft as to be void
of elaſticity, will not rebound from one another: impenetra-
bility makes them only ſtop. Newton's Opticks.
She bounding from the ſhelfy ſhore, -
Round the deſcending nymph the waves rebounding roar. Po.
To REBou'ND. v. a. To reverberate ; to beat back.
All our invečtives, at their ſuppoſed errors, fall back with
a rebounded force upon our own real ones. Decay of Piety.
Silenus ſung, the vales his voice rebound,
And carry to the ſkies the ſacred ſound.
Flow’rs, by the ſoft South Weſt
Open'd, and gather'd by religious hands,
Rebound their ſweets from th’ odoriferous pavement. Prior.
REBou'N D. m. ſ. [from the verb.] The act of flying back in
conſequence of motion reſiſted ; reſilition.
I do feel,
By the rebound of yours, a grief that ſhoots
My very heart. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
If you ſtrike a ball fidelong, not full upon the ſurface, the
rebound will be as much the contrary way; whether there be
any ſuch reſilience in echoes may be tried. Bacon.
The weapon with unerring fury flew,
At his left ſhoulder aim'd : nor entrance found;
But back, as from a rock, with ſwift rebound,
Harmleſs return'd. Dryden.
REBU'FF. n.ſ. [rebuffade, Fr. rebuffo, Italian.] Repercuſſion;
quick and ſudden reſiſtance.
By ill chance
The ſtrong rebuff of ſome tumultuous cloud,
Inſtinét with fire and nitre, hurried him
As many miles aloft. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
To REBU'FF. v. a. [from the noun..] To beat back; to op-
poſe with ſudden violence.
o REBUI'ld. v. a. [re and build.] To reedify; ro reſtore
from demolition; to repair.
7
Dryden.
to repreſs by objurgation.
R E C
The fines impoſed there were the more queſtioned, and re-
pined againſt, becauſe they were aſſigned to the rebuilding
and repairing of St. Paul's church.
- - Clarendon.
Fine is the ſecret, delicate the art,
To raiſe the ſhades of heroes to our view,
Rebuild fall'n empires, and old time renew. Tickell.
REBU'KAble. adj. [from rebuke.] Worthy of reprehenſion.
Rebukable
And worthy ſhameful check it were, to ſland
On mere mechanick compliment. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleo
To REBU'KE. v. a. [reboucher, Fr.] To chide; to ºf 3.
I am aſham'd : does not the ſtone rebuke me,
For being more ſtone than it Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
He was rebuked for his iniquity; the dumb aſs, ſpeaking
with man's voice, forbad the madneſs of the prophét." 2 p.
My ſon, deſpiſe not thou the chaſtening of the Lord, nor
faint when thou art rebuked of him. Heb. xii. 15.
The proud he tam’d, the penitent he cheer'd,
Nor to rebuke the rich offender fear'd.
REBU'ke. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Reprehenſion; chiding expreſſion; objurgation.
Why bear you theſe rebukes, and anſwer not ? Shakeſp.
If he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
And they ſhall do their office. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
The channels of waters were ſeen ; at thy rebuke, O Lord,
at the blaſt of the breath of thy noſtrils. Pſalm xviii. 15.
Thy rebuke hath broken my heart; I am full of heavineſs.
Pſalm lxix. 21.
The rebukes and chiding to children, ſhould be in grave
and diſpaſſionate words. Locke.
Shall Cibber's ſon, without rebuke,
Swear like a lord Pope.
Should vice expe&amp;t to 'ſcape rebuke,
Becauſe its owner is a duke Swift's Miſcellanies.
2. In low language, it ſignifies any kind of check.
He gave him ſo terrible a rebuke upon the forehead with his
heel, that he laid him at his length. L’Eſtrange.
REBU’KER. n.ſ.. [from rebuke.] A chider; a reprehender.
The revolters are profound to make ſlaughter, though I
have been a rebuker of them all. Hºſea v. 2.
RE'BUs. n. ſ. [rebus, Latin.] A word repreſented by a pićture.
Some citizens, wanting arms, have coined themſelves cer-
tain devices alluding to their names, which we call rebus:
Maſter Jugge the printer, in many of his books, took, to ex-
preſs his name, a nightingale ſitting in a buſh with a ſcrole
in her mouth, wherein was written jugge, jugge, jugge. Peac.
To REBU't. v. n. [rebuter, Fr.] To retire back. Obſolete.
Themſelves too rudely rigorous,
Aſtonied with the ſtroke of their own hand,
Do back rebut, and each to other yielded land. Fa. Queen.
REBUTTER. n.ſ. An anſwer to a rejoinder.
To RecA'LL. v. a. [re and call.] To call back; to call again;
to revoke.
They who recal the church unto that which was at the firſt,
muſt ſet bounds unto their ſpeech.s. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 2.
If Henry were recall'd to life again,
Theſe news would cauſe him once more yield the ghoſt.
Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. i.
Neglected long, ſhe let the ſecret reſt,
Till lov’d recall"d it to her lab’ring breaſt. Dryden.
It is ſtrange the ſoul ſhould never once recal over any of its
pure native ideas, before it borrowed any thing from the body;
never any other ideas, but what derive their original from
that union. Locke.
To the churches, wherein they were ordained, they might
of right be recalled as to their proper church, under pain of
excommunication. Ayliffe's Parergon.
It is neceſſary to recall to the reader's mind, the deſire
Ulyſſes has to reach his own country. Broome's Notes on Odyſſ,
f princes, whoſe dominions lie contiguous, be forced tº
draw from thoſe armies which act againſt France, we muſt
hourly expect having thoſe troops recalled, which they, now
leave with us in the midſt of a ſiege. Swift's Miſcellanies.
RecA'll n.ſ. [from the verb..] Revocation; act or power
of calling back.
Dryden.
Other decrees -
Againſt thee are gone forth, without recall. Milton.
* I is done, and ſince 'tis done, ’tis paſt recal;
And ſince ’tis paſt recal, muſt be forgotten. Dryden.
To RECANT. v. a. [recanto, Lat.] To retract; to recall;
to contradićt what one has once ſaid or done.
He ſhall do this, or elſe I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced. Shakespeare . Mr. ºf Iºn.
Eaſe would recant vows made in Pain. . . . Milton,
If it be thought, that the praiſe of a tranſlation conſiſts in
adding new beauties, I ſhall be willing to recant. Dryden.
That the legiſlature ſhould have power to change the ſuc-
ceſſion, whenever the neceſſities of the kingdom require, is
ſo uſefál towards preſerving our religion and liberty, that I
know not how to recant. Swift.
RecANTA"T1 on. .
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E C
R E C
.
'TION. m. ſ. [from ...] Retradation; declara-
- er declaration.
adićtory to a º to join this recantation to the
Sidney, b. ii.
The poor man was impriſoned for this diſcovery, and
forced to make a publick recantatiºn. Stillingſleet.
Rºstº R. n.ſ. [from rºl One who recants.
The publick body, which doth ſeldom
Play the recanter, feeling in itſelf -
A ſack of Timon's aid, hath ſenſe withal
of its own fall, reſtraining aid to Tºmon, Shakespeare.
To RECAPITULATE. v. 4. [recapituler, Fr. re and capt-
rulum, Lat.] To repeat again diſtinctly; to detail again. .
Hylobares judiciouſly and reſentingly ſºftº: your main
reaſonings. Arc's Divine Dialºgue:
I have been forced to recapitulate theſe things, becauſe
mankind is not more liable to deceit, than it is willing to
continue in a pleaſing error. . . Dryden's Dufreſnºy.
Recapitulation. n.ſ.. [from recapitulate.] Detail repeated;
diſtinct repetition of the principal points.
He maketh a recapitulation of the chriſtian churches; among
Kaleigh.
the reſt he addeth the iſle of Eden by name. -
Inſtead of raiſing any particular uſes from the point that
has been delivered, let us make a brief recapitulation of the
whole. - - South.
Recapitulatory. ad. [from recapitulate.] Repeating again.
Recapitulatºry exerciſes. Garretſon.
To RecA'RRY. v. a. [re and carry..] To carry back.
When the Turks beſieged Malta or Rodes, pigeons car-
ried and recarried letters. //alton's Angler.
To Rece'DE. v. n. [recedo, Latin.]
1. To fall back; to retreat.
A deaf noiſe of ſounds that never ceaſe,
Confus'd and chiding, like the hollow roar
Of tides, receding from th’ inſulted ſhoar.
Ye doubts and fears
Scatter'd by winds recede, and wild in foreſts rove. Prior.
All bodies, moved circularly, have a perpetual endeavour
to recede from the center, and every moment would fly out in
right lines, if they were not violently reſtrained by contiguous
matter. Bentley.
2. To deſiſt.
I can be content to recede much ſtom my own intereſts and
perſonal rights. King Charles.
They hoped that their general aſſembly would be perſuaded
to depart from ſome of their demands ; but that, for the pre-
ſent, they had not authority to recede from any one propo-
lition. Clarendºn, b. viii.
REcei'ſ T. m. ſ. [receptum, Latin.]
1. The aët of receiving.
Villain, thou did'ſt deny the gold's receipt,
And told me of a miſtreſs. Shakeſp. Com. ºf Err.
It muſt be done upon the receit of the wound, before the
pationt's ſpirits be overheated. ///eman's Surgery.
The joy of a monarch for the news of a victory muſt not
be expreſſed like the ecſtaſy of a harlequin, on the receipt of
a letter from his miſtreſs. Dryden.
2. The place of receiving.
Jeſus ſaw Matthew fitting at the receipt of cuſtom. Matt.
3. [Kºſte, Fr.]. A note given, by which money is acknow.
ledged to have been received.
4. Reception ; admiſſion.
It is of things heavenly an univerſal declaration, work-
ing in them, whoſe hearts Č. inſpireth with the due conſi–
deration thereof, an habit or diſpoſition of mind, whereby
they are made fit veſſels, both for the receipt and delivery of
whatſoever ſpiritual perfection. Hººker, b. v. ſ. 37.
5. Reception ; welcome.
The ſame words in my lady Philoclea's mouth might have
- had a better grace, and perchance have found a gentler
recept. - Sidney.
6. º rom recipe.] Preſcription of ingredients for any compo-
It! O!].
REcANTA
tion contr
She could not ſee mean
former vow.
Dryden.
On’s bed of death
Many receipts he gave me, chiefly one
Qf his ºld experience th' only dailing. Shakespeare
That Medea could make old men young again, was no-
thing elſe, but that, from knowledge of imples, ſhe had
a receipt to make white hair black. Brºwn', '... Errours.
Wiſe leeches will not vain receipt, obtrude,
While growing pains pronounce the humours crude. Dryd.
Some dryly plain, without invention's aid,
Write dull rºccº's how poems may be made. Pope.
$cribonius found the reciº in a ſetter Wrote to Tiberius
and Yºº never able to procure the receipt during the º
R". º, E. adj. [recevalle, F dºng on Coins.
being received. j. [recevalle, Fr. from receive. J º:
ºf , ; * &gt; * &gt; 101.
ºſº º a. [recevoir, Fr. recipiº, Lat.]
If by this º º thing as due. - - -
Why, let the * he ows: the law his life,
***ive’t in valiant goie.
Sha{gſ. -
A certain nobleman went into a far country, to receive fºr
himſelf a kingdom, and return. Luče xiv. 12.
2. To take or obtain from another.
Ye ſhall receive of me gifts. Pan. ii. 6.
Though I ſhould receive a thouſand ſhekels of ſilver in mine
hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand againſt the king's
ſon. 2 Sam. xviii. i2.
What? ſhall we receive good at the hands of God, and
ſhall we not receive evil jºb ii. 10.
To them haſt thou poured a drink-offering ſhould I re-
ceive comfort in theſe ? 1ſ, lvii. 6.
He that doeth wrong, ſhall receive for the wrong done ;
and there is no reſpect of perſons. Col. iii. 25.
They lived with the friendſhip and equality of brethren &gt;
received no laws from one another, but lived ſeparately. Lººſe.
3. To take any thing communicated.
Put all in writing that thou giveſt out, and receiveſ? in.
- Eccluſ. xlii. 7.
Draw general concluſions from every particular they meet
with : theſe make little true benefit of hiſtory; nay, being
of forward and active ſpirits, receive more harm by it. Locſ.
The idea of ſolidity we receive by our touch. Locée.
The ſame inability will every one find, who ſhall go about
to faſhion in his underſtanding any ſimple idea, not received
in by his ſenſes or by reflection. Locke.
To conceive the ideas we receive from ſenſation, confider
them, in reference to the different ways, whereby they make
their approaches to our minds. Locke.
4. To embrace intelle&amp;tually. -
We have ſet it down as a law, to examine things to the
bottom, and not to receive upon credit, or reject upon impro-
babilitics. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
In an equal indifferency for all truth; I mean the receiving
it, in the love of it, as truth ; and in the examination of our
principles, and not receiving any for ſuch, till we are fully
convinced of their certainty, conſiſts the freedom of the un-
derſtanding. Locke.
5. To allow.
Long received cuſtom forbidding them to do as they did,
there was no excuſe to juſtify their act; unleſs, in the ſcrip-
ture, they could ſhew ſome law, that did licence them thus
to break a received cuſtom. Hocker, b. ii. ſ. 5.
Will it not be receiv'd,
When we have mark'd with blood thoſe ſleepy two,
And us’d their very daggers; that they have don't
—Who dares receive it other Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Left any ſhould think that any thing in this number eight
creates the diapaſon ; this computation of eight is rathcr a
thing received, than any true computation. Bacon.
6. To admit.
When they came to Jeruſalem, they were received of the
church. Acis xv. 4.
Thou ſhalt guide me with thy counſel, and afterward re-
ceive me to glory. Pſalm lxxiii. 24.
Let her be ſhut out from the camp ſeven days, and after
that received in again. Numb. xii. 14.
Free converſe with perſons of different ſects will enlarge
our charity towards others, and incline us to receive them
into all the degrees of unity and affection, which the word of
God requires. J/atts's Improvement ºf the Mind.
7. To take as into a veſſel. - -
He was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their
fight. 47; i. 9-
8. To take into a place or ſtate. - -
After the Lord had ſpoken, he was received up into hea-
ven, and ſat on the right hand of God. Mar. xvi. 19.
9. To conceive in the mind ; to take intellcétually.
To one of your receiving,
Enough is ſhewn. Shakeſp.
Io. To entertain as a gueſt. -
Abundance fit to honour, and receive -
Milion.
Our heav'nly ſtranger.
Rect I've DN Ess. n.ſ. Ifrom received.] General allowance.
Others will, upon account of the receivedº of the pro-
poſed opinion, think it rather worth to be examined, than
Bºyle.
acquicked in. :
Receive R. m. ſ. [receveur, Fr. from receive.]
1. Onc to whom any thing is communicated by another.
All the learnings that his time could ſnake him receiver of,
he took as we do air. - Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
She from whoſe influence all impreſſion came,
But by receivers impotencics lame.
hom any thing is given or paid.
2. oº: a º £r', who alone handleth the monies. Bacon.
In all works of liberality, ſomething more is to be confi-
der d, beſides the occaſion of the givers; and that is tle oc-
caſion of the receivers. Sprat,
Gratitude is a virtue, diſpoſing the mind to an inward
ſenſe, and an outward acknowledgement of a benefit received,
together with a readineſs to return the ſame, as the occaſiº
of the doer ſhall require, and the abilities of the *g.
tend to. * ſ:
Donne,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R. E. C
.
wº-
If one third of the money in trade were locked up, land-
holders muſt receive one third leſs for their goods; a leſs quan-
tity of money by one third being to be diſtributed amongſt
an equal number of receivers. Locke.
Wood's halfpence will be offered for ſix a penny, and the
neceſſary receivers will be loſers of two thirds in their pay. Sw.
. One who partakes of the bleſied ſacrament.
The ſignification and ſenſe of the ſacrament diſpoſe the ſpi-
rit of the receiver to admit the grace of the ſpirit of God there
conſigned. Taylor's I/orthy Communicant.
4. One who cooperates with a robber, by taking the goods
which he ſteals. -
This is a great cauſe of the maintenance of thieves, know-
ing their receivers always ready 3 for were there no receivers,
there would be no thieves. Spenſer’s State of Ireland.
5. The veſſel into which ſpirits are emitted from the ſtill.
Theſe liquors, which the wide receiver fill,
Prepar'd with labour, and refin'd with ſkill,
Another courſe to diſtant parts begin. Blackmore.
Alkaline ſpirits run in veins down the ſides of the receiver
in diſtillations, which will not take fire. Arbuthnot.
6. The veſſel of the air pump, out of which the air is drawn,
and which therefore receives any body on which experiments
are tried.
The air that in exhauſted receivers of air pumps is exhaled
from minerals, is as true as to elaſticity and denſity or rare-
fačtion, as that we reſpire in. Bentley.
To Recele'BRATE. v. a. [re and celebrate.] To celebrate anew.
French air and Engliſh verſe here wedded lie :
Who did this knot compoſe,
Again hath brought the lilly to the roſe;
And with their chained dance,
Recelebrates the joyful match. Benj. johnſon.
RE'cENcy. n. ſ [recens, Lat.] Newneſs; new ſtate.
A ſchirrhus in its recency, whilſt it is in its augment, re-
quireth milder applications than the confirmed one. J/ſeman.
Rece'Nsion. m. ſ. [recenſio, Lat.J Enumeration ; review.
In this recenſion of monthly flowers, it is to be underſtood
from its firſt appearing to its final withering. Evelyn's Kalen.
RECENT. adj. [recens, Latin.]
1. New ; not of long exiſtence.
The ancients were of opinion, that thoſe parts, where
Egypt now is, were formerly ſea, and that a conſiderable por-
tion of that country was recent, and formed out of the mud
diſcharged into the neighbouring ſea by the Nile. Iſoodward.
2. Late ; not antique.
Among all the great and worthy perſons, whereof the
memory remaineth, either ancient or recent, there is not one
that hath been tranſported to the mad degree of love. Bacon.
3. Freſh; not long diſmiſſed from.
Ulyſſes moves,
Urg'd on by want, and recent from the ſtorms,
The brackiſh ouze his manly grace deforms.
Reſcently. adv. [from recent.] Newly ; freſhly.
Thoſe tubes, which are moſt recently made of fluids, are
moſt flexible and moſt eaſily lengthened. Arbuthnot.
Rece’NTN Ess. n.ſ. [from recent. J. Newneſs; freſhneſs.
This inference of the recentneſs of mankind from the re-
centneſs of theſe apotheoſes of gentile deities, ſeems too weak
to bear up this ſuppoſition of the novitas humani generis. Hale.
Rece/ptacle. n.ſ. [receptaculum, Lat..] A veſſel or place
into which anything is received. -
When the ſharpneſs of death was overcome, he then
opened heaven, as well to believing gentiles as Jews: heaven
till then was no receptacle to the ſouls of either. Hooker.
The county of Tipperary, the only county palatine in
Ireland, is by abuſe of ſome bad ones made a receptacle to rob
the reſt of the counties about it. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where for theſe many hundred years, the bones
Of all my buried anceſtors are packt. . . Shakeſp.
‘I he eye of the ſoul, or receptacle of ſapience and divine
knowledge. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the IWorld.
Leſt paradiſe a receptacle prove . . -
To ſpirits foul, and all my trees their prey. Milton.
Their intelligence, put in at the top of the horn, ſhall
convey it into a little receptacle at the bottom. - Addison.
Theſe are conveniencies to private perſons; inſtead of being
receptacles for the truly poor, they tempt men to pretend po-
verty, in order to ſhare the advantages. Atterbury.
Though the ſupply from this great receptacle below be con-
tintial and alike to all the globe; yet when it arrives near the
ſurface, where the heat is not ſo uniform, it is ſubject to
viciſſitudes. 2 ... Hoodward.
Recept IB1'Lity. m. ſ. [receptus, Lat.] Poſſibility of receiving.
The peripatetick matter is a pure unactuated power; and
this conceited vacuum a mere receptibility. Glanvill.
RE'cEPTARY. n.ſ. [receptus, Lat.] Thing received. Not in uſe.
They, which behold the preſent ſtate of things, cannot
condemn our ſober enquiries in the doubtful appertenancies of
arts and receptaries of philoſophy. Brown.
RECE/ption, n. ſ. (receptus, Latin.]
1. The act of receiving.
Pope.
R E C
Both ſerve completely for the reception and communication
of learned knowledge. Holder's Elements of Speech.
In this *imal are found parts official unto nutrition, which
were its aliment the empty reception of air,W.; had
been ſuperfluous. B •
2. The ſtate of being received. rown's Wulgar Errours.
3. Admiſſion of anything communicated,
Cauſes, according ſtill
To the reception of their matter, ačt;
Not to th’ extent of their own ſphere.
In ſome animals, the avenues
reception of ſenſations, are few,
received with, obſcure and dull.
4. Readmiſſion.
All hope is loſt
Of my reception into grace.
5. The act of containing.
I cannot ſurvey this world of fluid matter, without think-
ing on the hand that firſt poured it out, and made a proper
channel for its reception. Addiſon.
6. Treatment at firſt coming; welcome 5 entertainment.
This ſucceſſion of ſo many powerful methods being farther
preſcribed by God, have found ſo diſcouraging a reception,
that nothing but the violence of ſtorming or battery can pre-
tend to prove ſucceſsful. Hammond's Fundamental.
Pretending to conſult
About the great reception of their king,
Thither to come.
7. Opinion generally admitted.
Philoſophers, who have quitted the popular doćtrines of
their countries, have fallen into as extravagant opinions, as
even common reception countenanced. Locke.
8. Recovery.
He was right glad of the French king's reception of thoſe
towns from Maximilian. Bacon's Henry VII.
Receptive. adj. [receptus, Lat.] Having the quality of ad-
mitting what is communicated.
The ſoul being, as it is active, perfeółed by love of that
infinite good, ſhall, as it is receptive, be alſo perfected with
th9ſº ſupernatural paſſions of joy, peace and delight. Hooker.
The pretended firſt matter is capable of all forms, and the
imaginary ſpace is receptive of all bodies. Glanvill.
Receptory, adj. [receptus, Lat..] Generally or popularly
admitted.
Although therein be contained many excellent things, and
verified upon his own experience, yet are there many alſo
receptory, and will not endure the teſt. Brown,
Rece'ss. n.ſ. [recºſus, Latin.]
1. Retirement; retreat; withdrawing; ſeceſſion.
What tumults could not do, an army muſt ; my receſ; hath
given them confidence that I may be conquered. K. Charles.
Fair Thames ſhe haunts, and ev'ry neighb'ring grove,
Sacred to ſoft receſ, and gentle love. rior.
2. Departure.
e come into the world, and know not how ; we live in
it in a ſelf-neſcience, and go hence again, and are as igno-
rant of our receſ. Glanvill's Scepſ.
3. Place of retirement; place of ſecrecy; private abode.
This happy place, our ſweet -
Receſs, and only conſolation left. Milton's Par. Lo/?.
The deep receſſes of the grove he gain'd. Dryden.
I wiſh that a crowd of bad writers do not ruſh into the
quict of your receſſes. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
4. [Recez, Fr.] Perhaps an abſtraćt of the proceedings of an
imperial diet.
In the imperial chamber, the proëtors have a florin taxed
Milton's Par. Loft.
• Provided by nature for the
and the perception, they are
Locke,
Milton's Par. Lºſt.
Milton.
and allowed them for every ſubſtantial receſ. Ayliffe.
5. Departure into privacy.
The great ſeraphick lords and cherubim, -
In cloſe receſs, and ſecret conclave ſat. Milton.
In the receſs of the jury, they are to conſider their evi-
dence. Hale.
6. Remiſſion or ſuſpenſion of any procedure.
On both ſides they made rather a kind of receſs, than a
breach of treaty, and concluded upon a truce. . . Bacon.
I conceived this parliament would find work, with conve-
nient receſſes, for the firſt three years. King Charles.
7. Removal to diſtance. - - -
Whatſoever ſign the ſun poſſeſſed, whoſe receſ; or vicinity
defineth the quarters of the year, thoſe of our ſeaſons were
aćtually exiſtent. Brown's Wulgar Brrours.
8. Privacy; ſecrecy of abode. -
Good verſe, receſ; and ſolitude requires ;
And eaſe from cares, and undiſturb’d deſires.
. Secret part.
9 In . myſteries, and moſt ſecret receſſºr, and adyta of
their religion, their heathen prieſts betrayed and led their vo:
taries into all the moſt horrid unnatural fins. . Hammºnd,
Every ſcholar ſhould acquaint himſelf with a ſuperficial
ſcheme of all the ſciences, yet there is no neceſſity for every
man of learning to enter into their difficulties and deep
-&gt; 11 atts's Improvement of the Mind.
EcE’s SIo N.
*
Dryden.
recº.
2 I H
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E C
R E C
off, Lat..] The aët of retreating.
r
f ... m. ſ. 7'éd
Recr'ssion. n.ſ. ( [rechanger, Fr. re and change.] To
To REcHA'NGE. v. 4.
e again. - ---
*.ed with forefight, work with facility; others are
perpetually changing and rechanging their work. har Dryden.
To RechA'RG E. v. 4. [recharger, Fr. re and charge.]
uſe in return.
I. Tº: fault, that we find with them, is, that they over-
much abridge the church of her power in theſe things: .
upon they recharge us, as if in theſe things we gave the #. n
a liberty, which hath no limits or bounds. Hooker.
2. To attack anew.
They charge, recharge, and all along the ſea
They drive, and ſquander the huge Belgian fleet; Dryden.
Recheaſt. n.ſ. Among hunters, a leſſon which the huntſ-
man winds on the horn, when the hounds have loſt their
game, to call them back from purſuing a counterſcent. Bail.
That a woman conceived me, I thank her; but that I will
have a recheat winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in
an inviſible baldrick, all women ſhall pardon me. Shakesp.
Recipivation. n.ſ. [recidivus, Lat.] Backſliding ; falling
gain. -
ag Our renewed obedience is ſtill moſt indiſpenſably required,
though mixed with much of weakneſs, frailties, recidivations,
to make us capable of pardon. Hammond's Praß. Cat.
Recipi'vous, adj. [recidivus, Lat..] Subject to fall again.
Recipe. n. ſ. [recipe, Lat, the term uſed by phyſicians, when
they direct ingredients.] A medical preſcription. -
I ſhould enjoin you travel; for abſence doth in a kind re-
move the cauſe, and anſwers the phyſicians firſt recipe, vo-
miting and purging , but this would be too harſh. Suckling.
Th' apothecary train is wholly blind,
From files a random recipe they take,
And many deaths of one preſcription make. Dryden.
Recipir N.T. n. ſ. [recipiens, Latin.]
1. The receiver; that to which any thing is communicated.
Though the images, or whatever elſe is the cauſe of ſenſe,
may be alike as from the object, yet may the repreſentations
be varied according to the nature of the recipient. Glanvill.
2. ſº Fr.] The veſſel into which ſpirits are driven by
the ſtill.
The form of ſound words, diſſolved by chymical prepara-
tion, ceaſes to be nutritive ; and after all the labours of the
alembeck, leaves in the recipient a fretting corrofive. D. of Pie.
RECIPROCAL. adj. [reciprocus, Lat. reciproque, Fr.]
1. Aćting in viciſſitude; alternate.
Corruption is reciprocal to generation; and they two are as
nature's two boundaries, and guides to life and death. Bacon.
What if that light,
To the terreſtial moon be as a ſtar,
Enlight'ning her by day, as ſhe by night,
This earth 2 reciprocal, if land be there,
Fields and inhabitants. Milton.
2. Mutual; done by each to each.
Where there's no hope of a reciprocal aid, there can be no
reaſon ſor the mutual obligation. L'E/trange.
In reciprocal duties, the failure on one ſide juſtifies not a
failure on the other. Clariſſa.
3. Mutually interchangeable.
Theſe two rules will render a definition reciprocal with the
thing defined; which, in the ſchools, ſignifies, that the de-
finition may be uſed in the place of the thing defined. IPatts.
4. In geometry, reciprocal proportion is, when, in four num-
bers, the fourth number is ſo much leſſer than the ſecond, as
the third is greater than the firſt, and vice verſa. Harris.
According to the laws of motion, if the bulk and aćtivity
of aliment and medicines are in reciprocal proportion, the ef-
fect will be the ſame. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
RECIPRocally. adv. [from reciprocal.] Mutually ; inter-
changeably.
- His mind and place
#. one another reciprºcally. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
ake the bodies appear enlightened by the ſhadows which
bound the fight, which cauſe it to repoſe for ſome ſpace of
time; and reciprocally the ſhadows may be made ſenſible by
enlightening your ground. Dryden.
If the diſtance be about the hundredth part of an inch,
the water will riſe to the height of about an inch; and if the
diſtance be greater or leſs in any proportion, the height will
be reciprocally proportional to the diſtance very nearly : for the
attractive force of the glaiſes is the ſame, whether the diſtance
between then be greater or leſs; and the weight of the wa-
ter drawn up is the fame, if the height of it be reciprocally
proportional to the height of the glaſſes. ſewton's Opticks.
Thoſe two particles do reciprocally affe&amp;t each other with
the ſame force and vigour, as they would do at the ſame di-
R *ice in any other ſituation. Bentley.
º "...ſ.. [from reciprocal.] Mutual return;
ſ The reciprocalneſs of the injury onght to allay the diſplea-
ure at 16. Dec Pi
ay of Piety.
* Kºrkocate. *.*. [reciprocus, Lat, reciprºpuer, Fr. J
o act interchangeably 5 to alternate.
One brawny ſmith the puffing belows plies,
And draws, and blows reciprocating air. Dryden.
From whence the quick reciprocating breath,
The lobe adheſive, and the ſweat of death. Sewel.
Reciprocation... n. f [rºfiprocatio, from reci, racus, Latin.]
Alternation ; ačtion interchanged.
Bodies may be altered by heat, and yet no ſuch ric proca-
tion of rarefaction, condenſation and ſeparation. Bacon.
That Ariſtotle drowned himſelf in Euripus, as deſpairing
to reſolve the cauſe of its reciprocation or ebb and ſlow ſeve.
times a day, is generally believed. Brown.
Where the bottom of the ſea is owze or ſand, it is b
the motion of the waters, ſo far as the reciprocation of the ſº,
extends to the bottom, brought to a level. Ray,
The ſyſtole reſembles the forcible bending of a ſpring, and
the diaſtole its flying out again to its natural ſite: what. the
principal efficient of this reciprocation * Ray.
Recisios. n.ſ. [reciſus, Lat..] The act of cutting off.
Reci TAL. m. ſ. [from recite.J
1. Repetition; rehearſal.
The laſt are repetitions and recital of the firſt. Denham.
This often ſets him on empty boaſts, and betrays him into
vain fantaſtick recitals of his own performances. 4da/in.
2. Enumeration. -
To make the rough recital aptly chime,
Or bring the ſum of Gallia's loſs to rhime,
Is mighty hard. Prior.
Recitation. m. ſ... [from recite.] Repetition; rehearſal.
If menaces of ſcripture fall upon men's perſons, if they are
but the recitations and deſcriptions of God's decreed with
and thoſe decrees and that wrath have no reſpect to the sº
tual ſins of men ; why ſhould terrors reſtrain me from fin
when preſent advantage invites me to it Homº.
He uſed philoſophical arguments and recitatiºns. Temple.
RE'cITATI ve. }*ſ [from recite. A kind of tuneful pro-
Recit ATI'vo. nunciation, more muſical than common
ſpeech, and leſs than ſong; chaunt.
He introduced the examples of moral virtue, writ in verſe,
and performed in recitative muſick. Dryden.
By ſinging peers upheld on either hand,
Then thus in quaint recitativo ſpoke. Dunciad, b. iv.
To RECITE. v. a. [recito, Lat., reciter, Fr.] To rehearſ. ;
to repeat; to enumerate ; to tell over.
While Telephus's youthful charms,
His roſy neck, and winding arms,
With endleſs rapture you recite,
And in the tender name delight. Addison.
The thoughts of gods let Granville's verſe recite,
And bring the ſcenes of op'ning fate to light. Poſe.
If we will recite nine hours in ten,
You loſe your patience. Pope's Epiftles of Horace.
REcITE. m. ſ. [recit, Fr. from the verb.] Recital. Not in uſe.
This added to all former recites or obſervations of long-
liv'd races, makes it eaſy to conclude, that health and long
life are the bleſſings of the poor as well as rich. Temple.
To RECK. v. n [necan, Saxon.] To care; to heed; to
mind; to rate at much ; to be in care. Out of uſe. Reck
is ſtill retained in Scotland.
Thou's but a lazy loorde,
And reck, much of thy ſwinke,
That with fond terms and witheſs words,
To bleer mine ºyes do'ſt think. Spºnſºr.
Good or bad,
What do I reck, fith that he dy'd entire. Fairy Queen.
I reck as little what betideth me, -
As much I wiſh all good befortune you. Shakeſp.
Of night or lonelineſs it recks me not;
I fear the dread events that dog them both,
Leſt ſome ill-greeting touch attempt the perſon -
Of our unowned ſiſter. Milton.
- With that care loſt
Went all his fear; of God, or hell or worſe
He reck’d not. Milton.
To REck. v. a. To heed ; to care for. -
This ſon of mine, not recking danger, and neglecting the
preſent good way he was in of doing himſelf good, came
hither to do this kind office to my unſpeakable grief. Sidhy.
If I do loſe thee, I do loſe a thing,
That none but fools would reck. Shakeſp.
Do not you as ungracious parſons do,
Who ſhew the ſteep and thorny way to heav'n 3
Yet like unthinking reckleſs libertines,
That in the ſoft path of dalliance treads,
Recks not his own rede. Shaft.
RE'ckless. adj. [from reck; reccelear, Saxon J Careles;
heedleſs ; mindleſs; untouched. See RECK.
It made the king as reckleſs, as them diligent. Sidney.
I'll after, more to be reveng'd of Eglamour /?
Than for the love of reckleſ; Silvia. Shakespeare .
He apprehends death no more dreadfully, but as a drunken
ſleep; careleſs, rec{kſ, and fearleſs of what's pait, preſent
or to coine; inſenſible of mortality and deſperately º
IN c.At
4.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E C
º:
-
*
º
º,
:
Next this was drawn the reckºſ, cities flame,
When a ſtrange hell pour’d down from heaven there came.
Cowley.
RE'ckles Ness. n.ſ.. [from reck. This word in the ſeventeenth
article is erroneouſly written wretchleſsneſs.] Careleſsneſs;
negligence.
Over many good fortunes began to breed a proud reckleſ:
neſ in them. Sidney.
To RECKON. v. a. [reccan, Saxon; reckenen, Dutch.]
1. To number; to count.
The prieſt ſhall reckon unto him the money according to
the years that remain, and it ſhall be abated. Lev. xxvii. 18.
Numb'ring of his virtues praiſe,
Death loſt the reckoning of his days. Craſhaw.
When are queſtions belonging to all finite exiſtences by us
reckoned from ſome known parts of this ſenſible world, and
from ſome certain epochs marked out by motions in it. Locke.
The freezing of water, or the blowing of a plant, return-
ing at equidiſtant periods, would as well ſerve men to reckon
their years by, as the motions of the ſun. Locke.
I reckoned above two hundred and fifty on the outfide of the
church, though I only told three ſides of it. Addiſon.
Would the Dutch be content with the military government
and revenues, and reckon it among what ſhall be thought ne-
ceſſary for their barrier * Swift's Miſcellanies.
A multitude of cities are reckoned up by the geographers,
particularly by Ptolemy. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. To eſteem ; to account.
Where we cannot be perſuaded that the will of God is,
we ſhould far rejećt the authority of men, as to reckon it
nothing. Hooker.
Varro's aviary is ſtill ſo famous, that it is reckoned for one
of thoſe notables, which men of foreign nations record. Wott.
For him I reckon not in high eſtate;
But thee, whoſe ſtrength, while virtue was her mate,
Might have ſubdu'd the earth. Milton's Agoniſłes.
People, young and raw, and ſoft-natured, are apt to think
it an eaſy thing to gain love, and reckon their own friendſhip
a ſure price of another man's: but when experience ſhall have
ſhewn them the hardneſs of moſt hearts, the hollowneſs of
others and the baſeneſs of all, they will find that a friend is
the gift of God, and that he only, who made hearts, can
unite them. South's Sermons.
3. To aſſign in an account.
To him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace,
but of debt. Roman; iv. 4.
To RE'ckon. v. n.
1. To compute; to calculate.
We may fairly reckon, that this firſt age of apoſtles, with
that ſecond generation of many who were their immediate
converts, extended to the middle of the ſecond century. Addison
2. To ſtate an account.
We ſhall not ſpend a large expence of time,
Before we reckon with your ſeveral loves,
And make us even with you. Shakeſp.
3. To charge to account.
I call poſterity
Into the debt, and reckon on her head.
4. To pay a penalty.
If they fail in their bounden duty, they ſhall reckon for it
one day. Sanderſon's judgment.
5. To call to puniſhment.
God ſuffers the moſt grievous ſins of particular perſons to
go unpuniſhed in this world, becauſe his juſtice will have an-
other opportunity to meet and reckon with them. Tillotſon.
6. (Compterſur, Fr.] To lay ſtreſs or dependance upon.
You reckon upon loſing your friends kindneſs, when you
have ſufficiently convinced them, they can never hope for
any of yours. Temple's Miſcellanies.
Reckon E.R. m. ſ. [from reckon.] One who computes; one
who calculates coſt. -
Reckoners without their hoſt muſt reckon twice. Camden.
Recko NING. a. ſ. [from reckon.]
1. Computation; calculation.
2. Account of time.
Can'ſt thou their reck’nings keep the time compute 2
When their ſwoln bellies ſhall enlarge their fruit. Sandys.
3. Accounts of debtor and creditor. -
They that know how their own reck'ning goes, -
Account not what they have, but what they loſe. Daniel.
It is with a man and his conſcience, as with one man and
another; even reckoning makes laſting friends; and the way
to make reckonings even, is to make them often. South.
4. Money charged by an hoſt.
His induſtry is up ſtairs and down; his eloquence the parcel
of a reckoning. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
When a man's verſes cannot be underſtood, it ſtrikes a
man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room. Shakespeare
A coin would have a nobler uſe than to pay a reckoning. Addison
5. Account taken.
There was no reckoning made with them of the money de-
livered into their hand. 2 Kings.
Benj. johnſon.
R. E. C
6. Eſteem; account; eſtimation.
Beauty, though in as great excellency in yourſelf as in any,
Yet you make no further reckoning of it, than of an outward
fading benefit nature beflowed. Sidney.
Y" they all of as great account as the beſt among them,
with us notwithſtanding they ought not to be of ſuch rººm.
*g, that their opinion ſhould cauſe the laws of the church to
Tš. º , - Hooker's Preface.
*M. v. a. [reclamo, Latin.]
I. To reform ; to correct.
He ſpared not the heads of any miſchievous pračtices, but
ſhewed ſharp judgment on them fºr enſample ſake, that iſ
the meaner ſort, which were infected with that evil might
by terror thereof, be reclaimed and ſaved. » Spen ºr.
- This errour whoſoever is able to reclaim, he ſhall ſave º
in one ſummer, than Themiſon deſtroy'd in any autumn.
- Brown's Pulgar Errouri.
Reclaim your wife from ſtrolling up and down
To all aſſizes. Dryden's juvenal.
'Tis the intention of providence, in all the variouſ expreſ-
fions of his goodneſs, to reclaim mankind, and to engage their
obedience. Rogers'; Sermons.
. The penal laws in being againſt papiſts have been found
ineffectual, and rather confirm than reclaim men from their
errors. Swift.
2. [Reclamer, Fr.] To reduce to the ſtate deſired.
It was for him to haſten to let his people ſee, that he meant
to gºvern by law, howſoever he came in by the ſword; and
fit alſo to reclaim them, to know him for their king, whom
they had ſo lately talked of as an enemy. Bacon.
Much labour is requir'd in trees, to tame
Their wild diſorder, and in ranks reclaim. Dryden.
Minds ſhe the dangers of the Lycian coaſt
Or is her tow'ring flight reclaim’d,
By ſeas from Icarus's downfal nam'd
Vain is the call, and uſeleſs the advice. Prior.
3. To recall; to cry out againſt.
The head-ſtrong horſes hurried O&amp;tavius, the trembling
charioteer, along, and were deaf to his reclaiming them. Dryd.
Oh tyrant love!
Wiſdom and wit in vain reclaim,
And arts but ſoften us to feel thy flame. Pope.
4. To tame.
Upon his fiſt he bore
An eagle well reclaim'd. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Are not hawks brought to the hand, and lions, tygers and
bears reclaimed by good uſage 7 L’Eſtrange's Fables.
To RecLi NE. v. a. [reclino, Lat. recliner, Fr.] To ſcan back;
to lean ſidewiſe.
The mother
Reclin'd her dying head upon his breaſt. Dryden.
While thus ſhe reſted, on her arm reclin'd,
The purling ſtreams that through the meadow ſtray'd,
In drowſy murmurs lull'd the gentle maid. Addison.
To RecLi'NE. v. n. To reſt; to repoſe; to lean.
Recli'N E. adj. [reclinis, Lat.] In a leaning poſture.
They ſat recline
On the ſoft downy bank, damaik'd with flow’rs. Milton.
To Reclo's E. v. a. [re and cloe.] To cloſe again.
The filver ring ſhe pull'd, the door reclos'd;
The bolt, obedient to the ſilken cord,
To the ſtrong ſtaples inmoſt depth reſtor'd,
Secur'd the valves.
To Reclu'd E. v. a. [recludo, Lat..] To open.
The ingredients abſorb the inteſtinal ſuperfluities, reclude
oppilations, and mundify the blood. Harvey.
RecLU's E. adj. [reclus, Fr. recluſus, Lat.] Shut up; retired.
This muſt be the inference of a mere contemplative; a
recluſe that converſes only with his own meditations. D. of P.
The nymphs
Meliſſan, ſacred and recluſe to Ceres,
Pour ſtreams ſelect, and purity of waters. Prior.
I all the live long day
Conſume in meditation deep, recluſe from human converſe.
- Philips.
RF coagulation. n.ſ. [re and coagulation ] Second coagu-
lation.
This ſalt, diſſolved in a convenient quantity of water, does
upon its recoagulation diſpoſe of the aqueous particles among
its own ſaline ones, and ſhoot into cryſtals. Boyle.
REco'GNISAN ce. n.ſ. [recogniſance, Fr.]
1. Acknowledgement of perſon or thing.
2. Badge. - - - -
Apparent it is, that all men are either chriſtians or not; if
by external profeſſion they be chriſtians, then are they of the
viſible church of Chriſt; and chriſtians by external profeſſion
they are all, whoſe mark of recognizance hath. in it thoſe
things mentioned, yet although they be impious idolators and
wicked hereticks. Hocker, b. iii. ſ. 1.
She did gratify his amorous works -
With that recognizance and pledge of love, -
Which I firſt gave her ; an handkerchief, Sha %
- ~ *
Pope's Odiſy.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E C
R E C
rd teſtifying the recogniſor to owe unto the
3. :**... ãº ; and is acknowledged in
; court of record ; and thoſe that are mere recogniſances
are not ſealed but enrolled : It is alſo uſed for the verdićt of
the twelve men empannelled upon an affize. Cowel.
The Engliſh ſhould not marry with any Iriſh, unleſs bound
by recogniſance with ſureties, to continue loyal. Lavies.
To Recogs I'se. v. a. [recognoſco, Lat.]
1. To acknowledge; to recover and avow knowledge of any
perſon or thing. -
The Britiſh cannon formidably roars,
While ſtarting from his oozy bed,
Th' aſſerted ocean rears his reverend head,
To view and recogniſe his ancient lord. Dryden.
Then firſt he recognis’d th’aethereal gueſt,
Wonder and joy alternate fire his breaſt. Pope.
2. To review 3 to reexamine. . . - - -
However their cauſes ſpeed in your tribunals, Chriſt will
cogniſe them at a greater. South.
rº... n.ſ. *. in whoſe favour the bond is drawn.
Recognisor. n.ſ.. He who gives the recogniſance.
Recognition. m. ſ. [recognitio, Latin.]
1. Review ; renovation of knowledge.
The virtues of ſome being thought expedient to be annually
had in remembrance, brought in a fourth kind of publick
reading, whereby the lives of ſuch ſaints had, at the time of
their yearly memorials, ſolemn recognition in the church of
God. Hooker, b. iii. ſ. 20.
2. Knowledge confeſſed. -
Every ſpecies of fancy hath three modes; recognition of a
thing, as preſent; memory of it, as paſt; and forefight of it,
2S to COIIle. Grew's Coſmol.
3. Acknowledgment.
If the recognition or acknowledgment of a final concord,
upon any writ of covenant finally, be taken by juſtice of aſ-
ſize, and the yearly value of thoſe lands be declared by affi-
davit made before the ſame juſtice; then is the recognition and
value ſigned with the hand-writing of that juſtice. Bacon.
To Recoi’l. v. n. [reculer, Fr.]
1. To ruſh back in conſequence of reſiſtance, which cannot be
overcome by the force impreſſed.
The very thought of my revenges that way
Becoil upon me; in himſelf too mighty. Shakeſp.
Revenge, at firſt though ſweet,
Bitter ere long, back on itſelf recoil. Milton.
Amazement ſeiz'd
All th’ hoſt of heav'n, back they recoil'd, afraid
At firſt. . A4ilton's Paradiſe Left, b. ii.
Evil on itſelf ſhall back recoil. Milton.
Who in deep mines for hidden knowledge toils,
Like guns o'ercharg’d, breaks, miſſes or recoil. Denham.
My hand's ſo ſoft, his heart ſo hard,
The blow recoil, and hurts me while Í ſtrike! Dryden.
Whatever violence may be offered to nature, by endea-
vouring to reaſon men into a contrary perſuaſion, nature will
ſtill recoil, and at laſt return to itſelf. Tillotſon.
2. To fall back.
Ye both forewearied be; therefore a while
I read you reſt, and to your bowers recoil. Fairy £ueen.
Ten paces huge
#: º: 5 i. tenth on bended knee,
is maily ſpear upſtay’d. Milton's Par. Loff, b. vi.
3. To fail; % }. y ºff, I
A good and virtuous nature may recoil
... In an imperial charge. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To Ricorn, v.a. [re and coin.] To coin over again.
Among the Romans, to Preſerve great events upon their
coins, when any particular piece of money grew very ſcarce,
it was often recoined by a ſucceeding emperor. Addiſon.
Reco. NAGE. "...ſ. [re and coinage.] The aa of coining anew.
The ''. #. upon the late ſtatute, by the recoinage of
£1.94% ºf half-groats, now twelvepences and IlCCS. Ajac.
To RECOLLECT. v. a. i. Lat.] fixpences. Bac
1. To recover to memory.
It did relieve my paſſion much ,
}\!or than light airs and recolº terms
Of theſe moſt briſk and giddy paced times. Shakeſp.
Recollect every day the things ſeen, heard, or read, which
ºde any addition to your underitanding. IPatty'ſ Logick.
* To recover reaſon or reſolution.
The Tyrian queen
Admir’d his fortunes, more admir'd the man :
Then recollected ſtood. Bººn', AEmeis.
3. To gather what is ſcattered 5 to gather again.
mº that God hath made his light radiate in his word,
with . º thoſe ſcattered divine beams, and kindling
holy . * “Picks proper to warm our affections, enflame
- Boyle.
REcolle:
ECTION. m f -
revival in the hiſ I rom recollect.] Recovery of notion;
Recºllegii, - -
with pain tº. an idea is ſought after by the mind, and
*Your found, and brought again in vicw.
Lotke.
Let us take care that we ſleep not without ſuch a real.
tion of the actions of the day as may repreſent any thing that
is remarkable, as matter of ſorrow or thankſgiving. Żaylor.
The laſt image of that troubled heap,
When ſenſe ſubſides, and fancy ſports in ſleep,
Though paſt the recallediion of the thought,
Becomes the ſtuff of which our dream is wrought. Pºpe.
To Reco'M Fort. v. a. [re and comfort.]
1. To comfort or conſole again.
What place is there left, we may hope our woes to re-
comfort. Sidney, b. i.
Ne'er through an arch ſo hurried the blown tides,
As the retºfºrted through th' gates. Salºft. Coºlanus.
As one from ſad diſmay
Recomforted, and, after thoughts diſturb’d,
Submitting to what ſeem’d remedileſs.
2. To give new ſtrength.
In ſtrawberries, it is uſual to help the ground with muck;
and likewiſe to recomfºrt it ſometimes with muck put to the
roots; but to water with muck water is not practiſed. Bacon.
To Recom M E'Ncs. v. a. [recommencer, Fr. ... and cºmmence.]
To begin anew.
To RECOMMEND. v. a. [recommender, Fr. re and commend]
I. To praiſe to another.
2. To make acceptable.
Mecenas recommended Virgil and Horace to Auguſtus,
whoſe praiſes helped to make him popular while alive, and
after his death have made him precious to poſterity. Dryden.
A decent boldneſs ever meets with friends,
Succeeds, and ev'n a ſtranger recommend. Pºpe.
3. To commit with prayers.
They had been recºmmended to the grace of God. Aft; xiv.
REcoMME'Ndable. adj. [recommendable, Fr. from recommend.]
Worthy of recommendation or praiſe. -
Though theſe purſuits ſhould make out no pretence to ad-
vantage, yet, upon the account of honour, they are recom-
mendable. Glanvill's Preface to Scºtſ.
Recoxºf NDA'tion. n.ſ. [recommendation, Fr. from ſº.
mend.]
1. The act of recommending.
2. That which ſecures to one a kind reception from another.
Poplicola's doors were opened on the outſide, to ſave the
people even the common civility of aſking entrance; where
misfortune was a powerful recommendation; and where want
itſelf was a powerful mediator. Dryden.
REcoMME'NdAtoRY. adj. [from recommend..] That which
commends to another.
Verſes recommendatory they have commanded me to prefix
before my book. Swift.
REcoMME'NDER. n.ſ.. [from recommend..] One who recon-
mends.
St. Chryſoſtom, as great a lover and recommender of the
ſolitary ſtate as he was, declares it to be no proper ſchool for
thoſe who are to be leaders of Chriſt's flock. Atterbury.
To Rfcom MIT. v. a. [re and commit.] To commit anew.
When they had bailed the twelve biſhops, who were in
the Tower, the houſe of commons expoſtulated with them,
and cauſed them to be recommitted. Clarendon.
To Recom PA'ct. [re and compati.] To join anew.
Repair
And recompači my ſcatter'd body. Donnc.
To Recom PE'sse. v.a. [recompenſºr, Fr. re and compenſ, Lat.]
1. To repay ; to requite.
Continue faithful, and we will recompenſe you. I Mac. x.
Hear from heaven, and requite the wicked, by recompenſing
his way upon his own head. 2 Chron. vi. 23.
2. To give in requital.
Thou waſ begot of them, and how canſ thou recompenſe
them the things they have done for thee! Eedu/, viii. 28.
Recompenſe to no man evil for evil. . . . Rom. xii. 17.
3. To compenſate; to make up by ſomething equivalent, ..
French wheat, which is bearded, requireth the beſt ſoil,
recompenſing the ſame with a profitable plenty. - Carew.
Solyman, willing them to be of good cheer, ſaid, that he
would in ſhort time find occaſion for them to recompenſe that
diſgrace, and again to ſhew their approved valour. . . Knolles.
He is long ripening, but then his maturity, and the com-
plement thereof, recompenſeth the flowneſs of his maturation.
Aale's Origin of Mankind.
Milton.
. To redeem; to pay for.
4 If the man hº no kinſman to recompenſe the treſpaſs unto,
let it be recompenſed unto the Lord. Num. v. 8.
Recompe Nse. n.ſ. [recompenſe, Fr. from the verb.]
Thou'rt ſo far before,
That ſwifteſt wing of recompenſe is ſlow
To overtake thee.
2. Equivalent ; compenſation. - -
Wiſe men thought the vaſt advantage from their learning
and integrity an ample recompenſe for any inconvenience from
their paſſion. - Clarendon.
Your mother's wrongs a recompenſe ſhall meet,
I lay my ſceptre at her daughtcr's foct. Dºn.
- R EcoMPI'ſ, E. M. ENT.
Shaº.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R. E. C
R. E. C.
Recompi'LEMENT. m. ſ. [re and compilement.] New com-
pilement.
Although I had a purpoſe to make a particular digeſt or re-
compilement of the laws, I laid it aſide. Bacon.
To Recompo's F. v. a. [recompoſer, Fr. re and compoſe.]
1. To ſettle or quiet anew.
Elijah was ſo tranſported, that he could not receive anſwer
from God, till by muſick he was recompoſed. Taylor.
2. To form or adjuſt anew.
We produced a lovely purple, which we can deſtroy or
recompoſe at pleaſure, by ſevering or reapproaching the edges
of the two iriſes. Boyle on Colours.
REcoMPosition. m. ſ. [re and compoſition.] Compoſition re-
newed.
To RECONCILE. v. a. [reconcilier, Fr. reconcilio, Lat.]
1. To make to like again.
This noble paſſion,
Child of integrity, hath from my ſoul
Wip'd the black ſcruples, reconcil'd my thoughts
To thy good truth and honour. Shakeſp.
Submit to Caeſar;
And reconcile thy mighty ſoul to life. Addiſon's Cato.
2. To make to be liked again. -
Many wiſe men, who knew the treaſurer's talent in re-
moving prejudice, and reconciling himſelf to wavering affec-
tions, believ'd the loſs of the duke was unſeaſonable. Claren.
He that has accuſtomed himſelf to take up with what eaſily
offers itſelf, has reaſon to fear he ſhall never reconcile himſelf
to the fatigue of turning things in his mind, to diſcover their
more retired ſecrets. Locke.
2. To make any thing conſiſtent.
The great men among the ancients underſtood how to re-
concile manual labour with affairs of ſtate. Locke.
Queſtions of right and wrong
Which though our conſciences have reconciled,
My learning cannot anſwer. Southern's Spartan Dame,
Some figures monſtrous and miſhap'd appear,
Conſider'd ſingly, or beheld too near ;
Which but proportion'd to their light or place,
Due diſtance reconciles to form and grace. Pope.
3. To reſtore to favour.
So thou ſhalt do for every one that erreth and is ſimple,
ſo ſhall ye reconcile the houſe. Ezek. xlv. 20.
Let him live before thee reconcil’d. Milton,
Reconci'l EABLE. adj. [reconciliable, Fr. from reconcile.]
1. Capable of renewed kindneſs.
2. Conſiſtent ; poſſible to be made conſiſtent.
What we did was againſt the dićtates of our own con-
ſcience; and conſequently never makes that act reconcileable
with a regenerate eſtate, which otherwiſe would not be
ſo. Hammond.
The different accounts of the numbers of ſhips are recon-
cileable, by ſuppoſing that ſome ſpoke of the men of war
only, and others added the tranſports. Arbuthnot.
The bones, to be the moſt convenient, ought to have been
as light, as was reconcileable with ſufficient ſtrength. Cheyne.
Reconci LEABLE N Ess. n.ſ.. [from reconcileable.]
1. Conſiſtence ; poſſibility to be reconciled.
The cylinder is an inanimate lifeleſs trunk, which hath no-
thing of choice or will in it; and therefore cannot be a fit
reſemblance to ſhew the reconcileableneſs of fate with choice.
Hammond.
Diſcerning how the ſeveral parts of ſcripture are fitted to
ſeveral times, perſons and occurrences, we ſhall diſcover not
only a reconcileableneſs, but a friendſhip and perfect harmony
betwixt texts, that here ſeem moſt at variance. Boyle.
2. Diſpoſition to renew love.
Reconcil EMENT. n.ſ.. [from reconcile.]
1. Reconciliation; renewal of kindneſs; favour reſtored.
No cloud
Of anger ſhall remain; but peace aſſur’d
And reconcilement. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iii,
Creature ſo fair his reconcilement ſeeking,
Whom ſhe had diſpleas'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. x.
2. Friendſhip renewed.
Injury went beyond all degree of reconcilement. Sidney.
On one ſide great reſerve, and very great reſentment on the
other, have enflamed animoſities, ſo as to make all reconcile-
ment impracticable. Swift.
Reconci'l ER. m. ſ. [from reconcile.]
1. One who renews friendſhip between others. -
2. One who diſcovers the conſiſtence between propoſitions.
Part of the world know how to accommodate St. James
and St. Paul, better than ſome late reconcilers. Norris.
Reconcilia’TION. m. ſ. [reconciliatio, from re and concilio,
Lat. reconciliation, Fr.]
1. Renewal of friendſhip.
2. Agreement of things ſeemingly oppoſite; ſolution of ſeem-
ing contrarieties. -
Theſe diſtinctions of the fear of God give us a clear and
eaſy reconciliation of thoſe ſeeming inconſiſtencies of ſcripture,
with reſpect to this affection. JKogers.
3. Attonement; expiation. s
He might be a merciful and faithful h
conciliation for ſin.
To Recon PE'sse. v. a. [re and canºnſ.
In the heads of ſtills and necks of e
quickly are by a very little cold recondenſed into water. Bºyle.
Reco'NDIT.E. adj. [re.onditus, Lat. Secret; profound ; abſtruſe.
A diſagreement between thought and expreſſion ſeldom
happens, but among men of more recondit, findies and deep
learning.
R r - Felton on the Clafficks.
To Recon DU'cT. v. a. [recºnduit, Fr. reconducius, Lat. re
and condud..] To condućt again.
Wander'ſt thou within this lucid orb,
And ſtray'd from thoſe fair fields of light above
Amid'ſt this new creation want’ſ a glide, &gt;
To reconduct thy ſteps ? Pryden's State of Innocence.
To Reconjoi'N. v. a. [re and conjoin..] To join anew.
Some liquors, although colourleſs themſelves, when ele-
vated into exhalations, exhibit a conſpicuous colour, which
they loſe again when reconjoined into a liquor. Boyle.
To Reco'NQUER. v. a. [reconquerir, Fr. Fe and conquer.] To
conquer again.
Chatterton undertook to reconquer Orier. Davies.
To Reconve'NE. v. n. [re and convene.] To aſſemble anew.
A worſe accident fell out about the time of the two houſes
reconvening, which made a wonderful impreſſion. Clarendon.
To Reco'Nsecrat E. v. a. [re and conſecrate.] To conſecrate
anew.
If a church ſhould be conſumed by fire, it ſhall, in ſuch a
caſe, be reconſecrated. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To REconve'Y. v., a [re and convey..] To convey again.
As rivers loſt in ſeas, ſome ſecret vein
Thence reconveys, there to be loſt again.
To RECORD. v. a. [recordor, Lat. recorder, Fr.]
1. To regiſter any thing ſo that its memory may not be loſt.
I made him my book, where my ſoul recorded
The hiſtory of all my ſecret thoughts. Shakeſp.
He ſhall record a gift
Here in the court, of all he dies poſſeſs'd,
Unto his ſon Lorenzo. - Shakeſp.
Thoſe things that are recorded of him and his impiety, are
written in the chronicles. 1 Eſdr. i. 42.
I call heaven and earth to record this day againſt you, that
I have ſet before you life and death. Deutr. xxx. 20.
They gave complex ideas names, that they might the more
eaſily record and diſcourſe of thoſe things they were daily con-
verſant in. Locke.
2. To celebrate; to cauſe to be remembered ſolemnly.
They long'd to ſee the day, to hear the lark,
Record her hymns, and chant her carrols bleſt. Fairfax.
So ev’n and morn recorded the third day. Milton.
Reco'RD. m. ſ. [record, Fr. from the verb. The accent of the
noun is indifferently on either ſyllable; of the verb always
on the laſt.] Regiſter; authentick memorial.
Is it upon record * or elſe reported
Succeſſively, from age to age
It cannot be
The Volſcians dare break with us.
—We have record that very well it can ;
And three examples of the like have been. Shakeſp.
The king made a record of theſe things, and Mardocheus
wrote thereof. E/h. xii. 4.
An ark, and in the ark his teſtimony,
The records of his covenant. Milton,
Of ſuch a goddeſs no time leaves record,
Who burn'd the temple where ſhe was ador'd. Dryden.
If he affirms ſuch a monarchy continued to the flood, I
would know what records he has it from. Locke.
Though the atteſted copy of a record be good proof, yet
the copy of a copy never ſo well atteſted will not be admitted
as a proof in judicature. Locke.
Thy elder look, great Janus' caſt
Into the long records of ages paſt; -
Review the years in fairefactionäreſt. Prior.
REcoRDA'tion. n.ſ. [recordatio, Lat.] Remembrance. Not
in uſe.
I never ſhall have length of life enough,
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,
That it may grow and ſpout as high as heav'n
For recordation to my noble huſband. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Make a recordation to my ſoul
Of every ſyllable that here was ſpoke. Shakeſp.
A man of the primitive temper, when the church by low-
lineſs did flouriſh in high examples, which I have inſerted
as a due reºrdatiºn of his virtues, having been much obliged
to him for many favours. Wotton.
REco'RDER. y [from record.]
1. One whoſe buſineſs is to regiſter any events.
I but your recorder an in this, .
Or mouth and ſpeaker of the univerſe,
A miniſterial notary ; for 'tis
Not I, but you and fame that make the verſe. Dºnne.
2 I I - 2. I he
igh prieſt to make re-
Heb. ii. 17.
J To condenſe anew.
olipiles, ſuch vapours
Denham,
Shakeſp. Rich. III.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E C
R E C
|
f the rolls in a city.
2. Tºº º: meant this wilful ...;
- the people were not us -
#. i. º. º by the recorder. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
#. ºffice of recorder to this city being vacant, five or ſix
perſons are folliciting to ſucceed him. Swift.
3. A kind of flute; a wind inſtrument. l
The ſhepherds went among them, and ſang an eclogue,
ſhepherds, º : ſº *:::::::
- orded their muſick to the others
º place of pipes, acc Sidney, b. ii.
in a recorder, the three uppermoſt holes yield one one,
which is a note lower than the tone of the firſt three, Batºn.
The figures of recorders, and flutes and pipes are ſtraight;
but the ºrder hath a leſs bore and a greater above and
below. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To Recouſch. v. n. [re and couch..] To lie down again.
Thou mak’ſ the night to overvail the day;
Then lions whelps lie roaring for their Prey.
And at thy powerful hand demand their food;
who whén at morn they all recouch again,
Then toiling man till eve purſues his pain.
while the other
JWotton.
To RECOVER. v. a. [recouvrer, Fr. recupero, Lat.]
1. To reſtore from ſickneſs or diſorder. -
Every of us, each for his ſelf, laboured how to recover him,
while he rather daily ſent us companions of our deceit, than
ever return'd in any ſound and faithful manner. Sidney.
would my Lord were with the prophet; for he would re-
cover him of his leproſy. 2 Kings v. 3.
The clouds diſpell'd, the ſky reſum’d her light,
And nature ſtood recover'd of her fright. Dryden.
2. To repair.
Should we apply this precept º to thoſe who are con-
cerned to recover time they have loſt, it would extend to the
whole race of mankind. Rogers.
Even good men have many failings and lapſes to lament
and recover. Rogers.
3. To regain.
Stay a while; and we'll debate,
By what ſafe means the crown may be recover'd Shakeſp.
The ſpirit of the Lord is upon me, to preach the goſpel to
the poor, and recovering of ſight to the blind. Luke iv. 18.
Once in forty years cometh a pope, that caſteth his eye
upon the kingdom of Naples, to recover it to the church. Bac.
Theſe †. in deſpight of what could be done, reco-
wered Tiliaventum. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
I who e'er while the happy garden ſung,
By one man's diſobedience loſt, now ſing
Recover'd Paradiſe to all mankind,
By one man's firm obedience. Milton's Paradiſ Regain'd.
Any other perſon may join with him that is injured, and
affiſt him in recovering from the offender ſo much, as may
make ſatisfaction. Locke.
4. To releaſe.
That they may recover themſelves out of the ſnare of the
devil, who are taken captive by him. 2 Tim. ii. 26.
5. To attain ; to reach ; to come up to.
The foreſt is not three leagues off;
If we recover that, we're ſure enough. Shakeſp.
To Reco'v ER. v. n. To grow well from a diſeaſe.
Adam, by this from the cold ſudden damp
Recovering, his ſcatter'd ſpirits return'd. Milton,
Recoſy ERABLE. adj. [recouvrable, Fr. from recover.]
1. Poſſible to be reſtored from ſickneſs.
2. Poſſible to be regained.
A prodigal's courſe
Islike the ſun's, but not like his, recoverable, I fear. Shakespeare
They promiſed the good people eaſe in the matter of pro-
tećtions, by which the debts from parliament men and their
followers were not recoverable. Clarendon.
Recoy ERY. n.ſ.. [from re over.]
1. Reſtoration from ſickneſs.
Your hopes are regular and reaſonable, though in tempo-
ral affairs; ſuch as are deliverance from enemies, and reco-
very from ſickneſs. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
The ſweat ſometimes acid, is a ſign of recovery after acute
diſtempers. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Power or act of regaining.
What ſhould move me to undertake the recovery of this,
being not ignorant of the impoſſibility ? Shakeſp.
Theſe counties were the keys of Normandy:
But wherefore weeps Warwick?
For grief that they are paſt recovery. Shakespeare . Henry VI.
Mario Sanudo lived about the fourteenth age, a man full of
zeal for the recovery of the Holy Land. Arbuthnot on Coins.
3. The act of cutting off an entail.
a.º. º of wantonneſs is ſure ſcared out of him; if the
ºn not in fee ſimple, with fine and recovery. Shakespeare
º 9. a. [reconter, Fr.] To relate in detail;
#" him recount the fore-recited raćtices. Shake
How I have thought of theſe i. ſº.
I ſhall recount hereafter. Shakeſp. julius Caſar:
Plato in Timaeo produces an Egyptian prieſt, who recounted
to Solon out of the holy books of Egypt the ſtory of the flood
univerſal, which happened *; the Grecian inunda-
tion. aleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
The talk of worldly affairs hindreth much, although re-
counted with a fair intention: we ſpeak willingly, but ſeldom
return to ſilence. Taylor's Guide to Devotion.
Say, from theſe glorious ſeeds what harveſt flows,
Recount our bleſſings, and compare our woes.
Recou'NTMENT. n.ſ.. [from recount..] Relation; recital.
When from the firſt to laſt, betwixt us two,
Tears our recountment; had moſt finely bath'd;
As how I came into that deſart place. Shakeſp.
REcou'RED, for RE cover ED. Spenſºr.
Recou'Rse. n.ſ. [recurſus, Lat, recours, Fr.]
1. Frequent paſſage. Obſolete.
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes o'ergalled with recourſe of tears. Shakeſp.
2. Return; new attack.
Preventive phyſick, by purging noxious humours and the
cauſes of diſeaſes, preventeth ſickneſs in the healthy, or the
recourſe thereof in the valetudinary. Brown's Pulg. Errour.
3. [Recours, Fr.] Application as for help or protection. This
is the common uſe.
Thus died this great peer, in a time of great recourſe unto
him and dependance upon him, the houſe and town full of
ſervants and ſuiters. //otton's Buckingham.
The council of Trent commends the making recourſe, not
only to the prayers of the ſaints, but to their aid and affiſ.
ſtance. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſ on Roman Idol.
Can any man think, that this privilege was at firſt con-
ferred upon the church of Rome, and that chriſtians in all
ages had conſtant recourſe to it for determining their diffe-
rences; and yet that that very church ſhould now be at a loſs
where to find it Tillotſon.
All other means have fail'd to wound her heart,
Our laſt recourſe is therefore to our art. Dryden.
4. Acceſs.
The doors be lockt,
That no man hath recourſe to her by night. Shakeſp;
RE'cRE ANT. adj. [recriant, Fr.]
1. Cowardly; meanſpirited ; ſubdued ; crying out for mercy 3
recanting out of fear.
Let be that lady debonaire,
Thou recreamt knight, and ſoon thyſelf prepare
To battle. Fairy Queen, b, ii.
Doſt
Thou wear a lion's hide doff it for ſhame,
And hang a calf's ſkin on thoſe recreant limbs, Shakeſ,
Here ſtandeth Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk,
On pain to be found falſe and recreant. Shakeſp.
Thou
Muſt, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles along our ſtreet. Shakeſp.
The knight, whom fate and happy chance ſhall grace
From out the bars to force his oppoſite,
Or kill, or make him recreant on the plain,
The prize of valour and of love ſhall gain. Dryden,
2. Apoſtate ; falſe.
Who for ſo many benefits receiv'd,
Turn’d recreant to God, ingrate and falſe,
And ſo of all true good himſelf deſpoil’d. Milton's Par, Rºg.
To RE/CREATE. v. a. [recreo, Lat recreer, Fr. J
1. To refreſh after toil; to amuſe or divert in wearineſs,
He hath left you all his walks,
And to your heirs for ever; common pleaſures,
To walk abroad and recreate yourſelves. Shalºff.
Neceſſity and the example of St. John, who recreated him-
ſelf with ſporting with a tame partridge, teach us, that it is
lawful to relax our bow, but not ſuffer it to be unſtrung. Tºyſ.
Painters, when they work on white grounds, place, before
them colours mixt with blue and green, to recreate their eyes,
white wearying and paining the ſight more than any. Dryden.
2. To delight; to gratify. - ...!
Theſe ripe fruits recreate the noſtrils with their aromatick
ſcent. More's Divine Dialogueſ.
3. To relieve ; to revive. - -
Take a walk to refreſh yourſelf with the open air, which
inſpired freſh doth exceedingly recreate the lung; heart and
vital ſpirits. Harvey on Conſumptionſ.
REck EA'tion. m. ſ. [from recreate.] -
1. Relief after toil or pain; amuſement in ſorrow or diſtreſs.
The chief recreation ſhe could find in her anguiſh, was
ſometime to viſit that place, where firſt ſhe was ſo happy tº
to ſee the cauſe of her unhap. Sidney, b. ii.
I’ll viſit
The chapel where they lie, and tears, ſhed thºre, ,
Shall be my recreation. Shakeſp. //inter's Tale.
The greatmen among the antients underſtood how tº *.
concile manual labour with affairs of ſtate; and thought it no
leſſening to their dignity to make the one the recreation to the
other. Locke on Education.
2. Refreſhment;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E C
,
ºw-
2. Refreſhment; amuſement; diverſion.
You may have the recreation of ſurprizing thoſe with ad-
miration, who ſhall hear the deaf perſon pronounce whatſo-
ever they ſhall deſire, without your ſeeming to guide him.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
Nor is that man leſs deceived, that thinks to maintain a
conſtant tenure of pleaſure, by a continual purſuit of ſports
and recreations; for all theſe things, as they refreſh a man
when weary, ſo they weary him when refreſhed. South.
RE'cREATIy E. adj. [from recreate.] Refreſhing; giving re-
lief after labour or pain; amuſing; diverting.
Let the muſick be recreative, and with ſome ſtrange
changes. Bacon.
Let not your recreations be laviſh ſpenders of your time;
but chuſe ſuch as are healthful, recreative and apt to refreſh
you: but at no hand dwell upon them. Taylor.
The acceſs theſe trifles gain to the cloſets of ladies,
ſeem to promiſe ſuch eaſy and recreative experiments, which
require but little time or charge. Boyle.
RE'cREATIVE Ness. n.J. [from recreative.] The quality of
being recreative. .
RECREMENT. n.ſ. [recrementum, Lat.] Droſs; ſpume ;
ſuperfluous or uſeleſs parts.
The vital fire in the heart requires an ambient body of a
yielding nature, to receive the ſuperfluous ſeroſities and other
recrements of the blood. Boyle.
RecREM E/NTAL. 24:
RecREMENT1'tious. (adj. [from recrement.] Droſy.
To RECRI/MINATE. v. n. [recriminer, Fr. re and crimi-
nor, Latin.] To return one accuſation with another.
It is not my buſineſs to recriminate, hoping ſufficiently to
clear myſelf in this matter. Stillingfleet.
How ſhall ſuch hypocrites reform the ſtate,
On whom the brothels can recriminate * Dryden.
To Recº I'MINATE. v. a. To accuſe in return. Unuſual.
Did not Joſeph lie under black infamy he ſcorned ſo much
as to clear himſelf, or to recriminate the ſtrumpet. South.
RecRIMINA’tion. n.ſ. [recrimination, Fr. from recriminate.]
Return of one accuſation with another.
Publick defamation will ſeem diſobliging enough to pro-
voke a return, which again begets a rejoinder, and ſo the
quarrel is carried on with mutual recriminations. Gov. of Tong.
RecRIMINA’tor. n.ſ.. [from recriminate.] He that returns
one charge with another. -
RecRUDE scent. adj. [recrudeſcens, Lat.] Growing painful
or violent again.
To RecRU1'T. v. a. [recruter, Fr.]
1. To repair anything waſted by new ſupplies.
He was longer in recruiting his fleſh than was uſual; but
by a milk diet he recovered it. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Increaſe thy care to ſave the ſinking kind;
With greens and flow’rs recruit their empty hives,
And ſeek freſh forage to ſuitain their lives. Dryden.
Her cheeks glow the brighter, recruiting their colour;
As flowers by ſprinkling revive with freſh odour. Granville.
This ſun is ſet; but ſee in bright array
What hoſts of heavenly lights recruit the day !
Love in a ſhining galaxy appears
Triumphant ſtill. Granville.
Seeing the variety of motion, which we find in the world
is always decreaſing, there is a neceſſity of conſerving and
recruiting it by active principles; ſuch as are the cauſe of
gravity, by which planets and comets keep their motions in
their orbs, and bodies acquire great motion in falling. Newt.
2. To ſupply an army with new men.
He truſted the earl of Holland with the command of that
army, with which he was to be recruited and aſſiſted. Clar.
To RecRU1'T. v. n. To raiſe new ſoldiers.
. The French have only Switzerland beſides their own coun-
try to recruit in ; and we know the difficulties they meet with
in getting thence a ſingle regiment. Addison.
RecRUIT. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Supply of any thing waſted.
Whatever nature has in worth deny'd,
She gives in large recruits of needful pride. Pope.
The endeavour to raiſe new men for the recruit of the
army found oppoſition. Clarendon.
2. New ſoldiers.
The pow'rs of Troy
With freſh recruits their youthful chief ſuſtain:
Not theirs a raw and unexperienc'd train,
But a firm body of embattel'd men. Dryden.
RECTA'NGLE. m. ſ. [rectangle, Fr. reëlangulus, Latin.] A
figure which has one angle or more of ninety degrees.
If all Athens ſhould decree, that in reciangle triangles the
ſquare, which is made of the ſide that ſubtendeth the right
angle, is equal to the ſquares which are made of the ſides
containing the right angle, geometricians would not receive
ſatisfaction without demonſtration. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The mathematician conſiders the truth and properties be-
longing to a rečiangle, only as it is in idea in his own mind.
Loºke,
R. E. C
RECTA'Ngutan. adj. [reciangulaire, Fr. reºlus and angulus,
Latin:l Right angled; having angles of ninety degrees.
Bricks moulded in their ordinary retiangular form, if they
ſhall be laid one by another in a level row between any ſup:
porters ſuſtaining the two ends, then all the pieces will ne-
ceſſarily ſink. JWotton's Architecture.
Rect A'NGULARLY. adv. [from reelangular.] With right
angles.
At the equator, the needle will ſtand reélangularly; but ap-
proaching northward toward the tropic, it will regard the
- ſtone obliquely. . - Brown's Vulgar Errours.
RecTIFIABLE., adj. [from restiff.] Capable to be ſet right.
The natural heat of the parts being inſufficient for a perfeót
and thorough digeſtion, the errors of one concoction are not
rečifiable by another. - Brown's Wulgar Errours.
RecTIFICATION. m. ſ. [rectification, Fr. from rečtify.]
1. The aët of ſetting right what is wrong.
It behoved the deity to renew that revelation from time to
time, and to reëtify abuſes with ſuch authority for the re-
newal and reëtification, as was ſufficient evidence of the truth
of what was revealed. Forbes.
2. In chymiſtry, rectification is drawing any thing over again
by diſtillation, to make it yet higher or finer. uincy.
At the firſt rectification of ſome ſpirit of ſalt in a retort, a
ſingle pound afforded no leſs than ſix ounces of phlegm. Boyle.
To RE'CTIFY. v. a. [rečifier, Fr. retius and facio, Lat.]
1. To make right; to reform; to redreſs.
That wherein unſounder times have done amiſs, the better
ages enſuing muſt reëlify as they may. Płooker.
It ſhall be bootleſs,
That longer you defer the court, as well
For your own quiet, as to redify
What is unſettled in the king. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
Where a long courſe of º has purged the heart, and
reétified the will, knowledge will break in upon ſuch a ſoul,
like the ſun ſhining in his full might. South.
The ſubſtance of this theory I mainly depend on, being
willing to ſuppoſe that many particularities may be reëlified
upon farther thoughts. Burnet.
If thoſe men of parts, who have been employed in vitiat-
ing the age, had endeavoured to reºtify and amend it, they
needed not have ſacrificed their good ſenſe to their fame. Addison
The falſe judgment he made of things are owned; and the
methods pointed out by which he rectified them. Atterbury.
2. To exalt and improve by repeated diſtillation.
The ſkin hath been kept white and ſmooth for above fif-
teen years, by being included with rectified ſpirit of wine in
a cylindrical glaſs. Grew's Muſeum.
RecTill N FAR. adj. [re?us and linea, Lat..] Conſiſting of
REct ILI NEOUS. t right lines.
There are only three refºilineous and ordinate figures, which
can ſerve to this purpoſe; and inordinate or unlike ones muſt
have been not only leſs elegant, but unequal. Ray.
This image was oblong and not oval, but terminated with
two rectilinear and parallel ſides and two ſemicircular ends.
Newton's Opticks.
The rays of light, whether they be very ſmall bodies pro-
jećted, or only motion and force propagated, are moved in
right lines; and whenever a ray of light is by any obſtacle
turned out of its rectilinear way, it will never return into the
ſame rectilinear way, unleſs perhaps by very great accident.
Newton's Opticks.
RecTITUDE. m. ſ. [rečitude, Fr. from reºus, Lat.]
I. Straitneſs; not curvity.
2. Rightneſs; uprightneſs; freedom from moral curvity or ob-
liquity.
ºi and repentance, together with the reëtitude of their
preſent engagement would fully prepare them for a better
life. King Charles.
Calm the diſorders of thy mind, by reflecting on the wiſ-
dom, equity and abſolute rºſtitude of all his proceedings. Att.
RECTOR. n.ſ. [recteur, Fr. rector, Latin.] -
1. Ruler; lord; governour.
God is the ſupreme recior of the world, and of all thoſe
ſubordinate parts thereof. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
When a refior of an univerſity of ſcholars is choſen by the
corporation or univerſity, the election ought tº be confirmed
by the ſuperior of ſuch univerſity, Ayliff's Parergon.
2. Parſon of an unimpropriated pariſh.
RE'ctorship. n.ſ. [rešloat, Fr. from reeler.] The rank or
office of rector.
Had your bodies
No heart among you ? or had you tongues to cy
Againſt the reeforſhip of ſº."
Rectory, n.ſ. [reclare, ie, Fr. from rector.] f
A rectory or parſonage is a ſpiritual living, compoſed o
land, tithe and other oblations of the people, ſeparate or de-
dedicate to God in any congregation for the ſervice of his
church there, and for the maintenance of the j Or
miniſter thereof, to whoſe charge the ſame is *.
Shakeſp.
Recubation.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R. E. D
Reevna'rios. a.ſ. (rºute, Latin.J. Tº “* lying or
leaning.
wºreas our tranſlation render; it fitting, it cannot have
... for the French and Italian tranſlations expreſs
º of ſeſſion or recubation. Brown.
REcu'le, for REconL. [reculer, Fr.] Spen.er.
REcu M B ; NCY. {{ ſº recumbent.]
of lying or leaning.
I . "...ºft. of Gimmicus, twelve elephants
danced unto the ſound of muſick, and after laid them down
in tricliniums, or places of feſtival recumbenty. Brown.
2. Reſt; repoſe. - -
when the mind has been once habituated to this lazy re-
cumbency and ſatisfaction on the obvious ſurface of things, it
is in danger to reſt ſatisfied there. - - Locke.
RECUMEENT, adj. [recumbens, Lat.] Lying; leaning.
The Roman recumbent, or more properly accumbent, Po-
ſture in eating was introduced after the firſt Punick war. Arb.
To Recu R. v. n. [recurro, Lat.] - - -
1. To come back to the thought ; to revive in the mind.
The idea, I have once had, will be unchangeably the ſame,
as long as it recurs the ſame in my memory. Locke.
in this life, the thoughts of God and a future ſtate often
offer themſelves to us; they often ſpring up in our minds,
and when expelled, recur again. Calamy.
A line of the golden verſes of the Pythagoreans recurring
on the memory, hath often guarded youth from a temptation
to vice. - - Watts.
when any word has been uſed to ſignify an idea, that old
idea will recur in the mind when the word is heard. Watts.
2. [Recourir, Fr.] To have recourſe to ; to take refuge in.
If to avoid ſucceſſion in eternal exiſtence, they recur to the
punétum ſtans of the ſchools, they will thereby very little
help us to a more poſitive idea of infinite duration. Locke.
The ſecond cauſe we know, but trouble not ourſelves to
recur to the firſt. JWake's Preparation for Death.
To Recu'R E. v. a. [re and cure.] To recover from ſickneſs
or labour. -
Through wiſe handling and fair governance,
I him recured to a better will,
Purged from drugs of foul intemperance. Fairy Queen.
Phoebus pure - -
In weſtern waves his weary wagon did recure. Fa. Queen.
With one look ſhe doth my life diſmay,
And with another doth it ſtraight recure. Spenſer.
The wanton *. was ſhortly well recur'd
Of that his malady. Spenſer,
Thy death's wound
He who comes thy Saviour ſhall recure,
Not by deſtroying Satan, but his works
In thee and in thy ſeed. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. xii.
Recu'R. n.ſ. Recovery ; remedy. º
Whatſoever fell into the enemies hands, was loſt without
recure; the old men were ſlain, the young men led away into
captivity. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Recu'RRENce. f R
REcu's RENcy. }n.ſ. [from recurrent.] Return.
Although the opinion at preſent be well ſuppreſſed, yet,
from ſome ſtrings of tradition and fruitful recurrence of error,
it may revive in the next generation. Brown's Walg. Errors.
RECU’RRENT. adj. [recurrent, Fr. recurrens, Lat.] Return-
ing from time to tiue.
Next to lingring durable pains, ſhort intermittent or ſwift
recurrent pains precipitate patients unto conſumptions. Harv.
Recu'Rsion, n. ſ. [recurſus, Lat.] Return.
One of the aſſiſtants told the recurſions of the other pen-
dulum hanging in the free air. Boyle.
REcuRVA’Tion.
Recu'Rv1ty. }n. f. [recurvo, Lat.] Flexure backwards.
Aſcending firſt into a caſpulary reception of the breaſ bone
by a ſerpentine recurvation, it aſcendeth again into the
neck. - - Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Recu Rvous, adj. [recurvus, Lat.] Bent backward. - -
I have not obſerved tails in all; but in others I have ob-
ſerved long recurvous tails, longer than their bodies. Derham.
Recu's ANT. n.ſ. [recuſans, Lat..] One that refuſes any terms
of communion or ſociety. -
They demand of the lords, that no recuſant lord might
have a vote in paſſing that ačt. Carniºn.
Were all corners ranſacked, what a multitude of recuſants
ſhould we find upon a far differing account from that of
T. [recuſer, F Decay of Piety.
**C. SE: v. n. [recuſer, Fr. recuſ, Lat. -
A juridicial word. &gt; * - ‘ſº, La J To refuſe
f *: humility, as well of underſtanding as manners of the
º . will not let them be troubled, when they are recuſed
es -
ºs-y- - - Digby.
nº3. may proceed notwithſtanding my appeal, unleſs I
RED. ad; [. a f ſpected judge. Ayliffe's Parergon.
town # H º the old Saxon, med; rhud, Welſh. As the
firſt was c i. Mr. Camden, in his Britannia, noteth,
* by the Saxons, Herudford, the ruá ford, or
5
the red ford or water ; high Putch, rot; from the Greek,
fºuščov; French, rouge ; Italian, rubro ; from the Latin,
ruber. Peacham.] Of the colour of blood, of one of the
primitive colours, which is ſubdivided into many ; as ſcarlet,
vermilion, crimſon.
Look I ſo pale.
—Ay, and no man in the preſence,
But his red colour hath forſook his cheeks. Shakeſp.
Bring me the faireſt creature northward born,
To prove whoſe blood is reddy?. Shakeſp. Merch. of Wen.
His eyes ſhall be red with wine, and his teeth white with
milk. Gen. xlix. 12.
Th' angelick ſquadron turn'd fiery red. Milton.
If red lead and white paper be placed in the red light of the
coloured ſpectrum, made in a dark chamber by the refraction
of a priſm, the paper will appear more lucid than the red
lead, and therefore reflects the red making rays more co-
piouſly than red lead doth. Newton's Opticks.
The ſixth red was at firſt of a very fair and lively ſtarlet,
and ſoon after of a brightet colour, being very pure and briſk,
and the beſt of all the reds. Newton's Opticks.
Why heavenly truth,
And moderation fair, were the red marks
Of ſuperſtition's ſcourge. Thomſon's Winter.
To Re DA'RGue. v. a. [redarguo, Lat.] To refute. Not in
uſe.
The laſt wittily redargues the pretended finding of coin,
graved with the image of Auguſtus Caeſar, in the American
mines. Hakewill on Providence.
REDBERRIED ſhrub caſia. n.ſ. A plant. It is male and female in
different plants: the male hath flowers conſiſting of many ſta-
mina or threads, without any petals; theſe are always .
the female plants, which have no conſpicuous power, produce
ſpherical berries, in which are included nuts of the ſame
form. Miller.
RE'DBR EAST. m. ſ. A ſmall bird, ſo named from the colour
of its breaſt.
No burial this pretty babe
Of any man receives,
But robin redbreaſt painfully
Did cover him with leaves. Children in the Wood,
The redbreaſt, ſacred to the houſhold gods,
Pays to truſted man his annual viſit. Thomſon.
RE'DcoAT. n.ſ. A name of contempt for a ſoldier.
The fearful paſſenger, who travels late,
Shakes at the moon-ſhine ſhadow of a ruſh,
And ſees a redcoat riſe from ev’ry buſh.
To Re"DD N. v. a. [from red J. To make red.
In a heav'n ſerene, refulgent arms appear
Red"ning the ſkies, and glitt'ring all around,
The temper'd metals claſh. Dryden's Aneir.
To REDD EN. v. n. To grow red.
With ſhame they redden'd, and with ſpight grew pale.
Dryden's juvenal.
Addison.
Addiſon.
Dryden,
Turn upon the ladies in the pit,
And if they redden, you are ſure 'tis wit.
The poor inhabitant beholds in vain
The red"ning orange and the ſwelling grain.
For me the balm ſhall bleed, and amber flow,
The coral redden, and the ruby glow. Pope.
Appius reddens at each word you ſpeak,
And ſtares, tremendous, with a threat'ning eye,
Like ſome fierce tyrant in old tapeſtry. Pope.
REDDISH. [from red.j Somewhat red.
A bright ſpot, white and ſomewhat reddiſh. Lev.
Re DDIsh Ness. n.ſ.. [from reddiſh.] Tendency to redneſs.
Two parts of copper and one of tin, by fuſion brought
into one maſs, the whiteneſs of the tin is more conſpicuous
than the reddiſhneſs of the copper. Boyle.
REDDI'tion. n.ſ.. [from reddo, Lat.] Reſtitution.
She is reduced to a perfect obedience, partly by voluntary
reddition and deſire of protection, and partly by conqueſt.
Höwel’s W.ocal Foreſt:
RE'dditive. adj. [redditivus, Lat..] Anſwering to an interro-
gative. A term of grammar.
REDDLE. m. ſ. A ſort of mineral.
Reddle is an earth of the metal kind, of a tolerably cloſe
and even texture: its ſurface is ſmooth and fomewhat gloſſy,
and it is ſoft and unctuous to the touch, ſtaining the fing.”
very much: it is remarkably heavy, and its colour of a fine
florid, though not very deep red : our American colonies
abound with it; and in England we have the fineſt in the
world: it has been uſed as an aſtringent. Hill's Mat: 44°4.
Rade. n.ſ. ſnab, Saxon.] Counſel; advice. Not uſed.
Do not as ſome ungracious paſtors do,
Shew me the ſteep and thorny way to heav'n,
Whilſt he a puft and reckleſs libertine,
Himſelf the primroſe path of dalliance treads,
And recks not his own rede. - Shakeſp. Hamlet.
To RED E. v. a. ſnæban, Saxon.] To adviſe.
I rede thee hence to remove,
Left thou the price of my diſpleaſure Prºf. REBÉ.
R<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E D
i.
º
ſº,
7-
To REDEEM. v. a. [redimo, Lat.]
1. To ranſom; to relieve from any thing by paying a price.
The kinſman ſaid, I &amp;annot redeem it for myſelf, leſt I
mar mine inheritance. Ruth iv. 6.
2. To reſcue ; to recover.
If, -when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Comes to redeem me, there's a fearful point.
Thy father
Levied an army, weening to redeem
And re-inſtal me in the diadem.
Th’ almighty from the grave
Hath me redeem'd; he will the humble ſave. Sandys.
Redeem Iſrael, O God, out of all his troubles. Pſ. xxv.
Redeem from this reproach my wand'ring ghoſt, ryden.
3. To recompenſe ; to compenſate; to make amends for.
Waywardly proud ; and therefore bold, becauſe extremely
faulty; and yet having no good thing to redeem theſe. Sidney.
This feather ſtirs, ſhe lives; if it be ſo,
It is a chance which does redeem all ſorrows
That ever I have felt. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Having committed a fault, he became the more obſequious
and pliant to redeem it. J/otton.
Think it not hard, if at ſo cheap a rate
You can ſecure the conſtancy of fate,
Whoſe kindneſs ſent what does your malice ſeem
By leſſer ills the greater to redeem.
4. To pay an atonement.
Thou haſt one daughter,
Who redeems nature from the general curſe,
Which twain have brought her to.
5. To ſave the world from the curſe of ſin.
Which of you will be mortal to redeem
Man's mortal crime. Milton.
REDEE/MABL F. m. ſ. [from redeem.] Capable of redemption.
REDEEMABLENESS. n.ſ.. [from redeemable.] The ſtate of
being redeemable.
RedEE MER. m. ſ. [from redeem.]
I. One who ranſoms or redeems.
She inflamed him ſo,
That he would algates with Pyrocles fight,
And his redeemer challeng'd for his foe,
Becauſe he had not well maintain'd his right.
2. The Saviour of the world.
I every day expect an embaſſage
From my redecmer to redeem me hence ;
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
Fa. Queen.
And now in peace my ſoul ſhall part to heav'n. Shakeſp.
Man's friend, his mediator, his deſign'd
Both ranſom and redeemer voluntary. Milton's Par. Loft.
When ſaw we thee any way diſtreſſed, and relieved thee
will be the queſtion of thoſe, to whom heaven itſelf will be
at the laſt day awarded, as having miniſtred to their re-
deemer. Boyle.
To REDELI've R. v. a. [re and deliver.] To deliver back.
I have remembrances of yours,
That I have longed long to redeliver. Shakespeare.
Inſtruments judicially exhibited, are not of the acts of
courts; and therefore may be redelivered on the demand of
the perſon that exhibited them. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Rºº. n.J. [from redeliver.] The act of delivering
back. -
To RF DEMAND. v. a. [redemander, Fr. re and demand.] To
demand back.
Threeſcore attacked the place where they were kept in
cuſtody, and reſcued them : the duke redemand; his priſoners,
but receiving only excuſes, he reſolved to do himſelf juſtice.
Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
REDEMPTION. m. ſ. [redemption, Fr. redemptio, Lat.]
1. Ranſome 5 releaſe.
Utter darkneſs his place
Ordain'd without redemption, without end. Milton,
2. Purchaſe of God's favour by the death of Chriſt.
I charge you, as you hope to have redemption,
That you depart, and lay no hands on me. Shakesp.
The Saviour ſon be glorify'd, -
Who for loſt man's redemption dy’d. Dryden.
RED E'MPToRY. adj. [from redemptus, Lat..] Paid for ranſome.
Omega ſings the exeguies,
And Hector's redemptory price. Chapman's Iliads.
RE'DHot, adj. [red and hot..] Heated to redneſs.
Iron redhot burneth and conſumeth not. Bacon.
Is not fire a body heated ſo hot as to emit light copiouſly
rfor what elſe is a redhot iron than fire * and what elſe is a
burning coal than redhot wood Newton's Opticks.
The redhot metal hiſſes in the lake. Pope.
REDINTEGRATE. adj. [redintegratus, Latin.] Reſtored;
renewed; made new.
Charles VIII. received the kingdom of France in flouriſh-
ing eſtate, being redintegrate in thoſe principal members,
which anciently had beca portions of the crown, and were
after diffevered : ſo as they remained only in homage, and
not in ſovereignty. Bacºn's Henry VII.
R E D
RF DINTEGRATION. n: ſ [from redintegrate.]
1. Renovation; reſtoration.
They kept the feaſt indeed but wi - -
- - » with the leven of malice
º º the redintegration of his nºi
: *tilating and dividing his myſtical. - **.
2. Redintegration chymiſts call *::::: myſtical. Dec. of Piety.
- toring any mixed body or
matter, whoſe form has be .* y
- - en deſtroyed, to it
and conſtitution. J --&gt; s former nature
- - 9uincy.
º: º * A bare chymical purification of #3.
what I teach as a philoſophical **dintegration of it Bowl
REDLEAD. m. ſ. [red and - yle.
- !ead..] Minium. See M
To draw with dry colours, make long paſtils º:
radlead with ſtrong wort, and ſo roll thin up into 1. ii.
like pencils, drying them in the ſun. P *... y
RED Ness. m. ſ. (from red.] The quality of being red £dc//q//t.
There was a pretty redneſs in his lips. Satº
In the red ſea, moſt apprehend a material redneſ; É.
whence they derive its common denomination. y
- - - - Brown
h T º glowing redneſs of the berries vies with the verdure º:
their leaves. Speciator, N° 477
RE'Dole Nce. 2 IN - 477.
RE'Doi ENcy. ; n: ſ [from redolent.J Sweet ſcent.
We have all the redolence of the perfumes we burn upon
his altars. }.
Their flowers attract ſpiders with their redolency. Aff.
RET20I.E.N.T. adj. [redºlens, Lat., Sweet of ſcent. -
Thy love excels the joys of wine;
Thy odours, O how redolent / Sandys’ Paraphroſ.
To Redouble. v. a. [redoubler, Fr. re and double.]
1. To repeat often.
So ended ſhe , and all the reſt around
To her redoubled that her underſong.
They were
As cannons overcharg’d with double cracks;
So they redoubled ſtrokes upon the foe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
2. To encreaſe by addition of the ſame quantity over and over.
Mimas and Parnaſſus ſweat,
And Ætna rages with redoubled heat.
To Redouble. v. n. To become twice as much.
If we conſider, that our whole eternity is to take its co-
lour from thoſe hours which we here employ in virtue or vice,
the argument redoubles upon us, for putting in practice this
method of paſſing away our time. Addiſon's Speciator.
Redoubt. n. ſ. [reduit, redoute, Fr. ridetta, Italian.] The
outwork of a fortification; a fortreſs. -
º great ſhip is as an impregnable fort, and our many
ſafe and commodious ports are as redoubts to ſecure them.
Bacon.
Redou'Btable, adj. [redoubtable, Fr.] Formidable; terrible
to foes.
The enterpriſing Mr. Lintot, the redoubtable rival of Mr.
Tonſon, overtook me. Pope.
REDou'BTED. adj. [redoubté, Fr.] Dread; awful; formi-
dable.
His kingdom's ſeat Cleopolis is red,
There to obtain ſome ſuch redoubted knight,
That parents dear from tyrant's power deliver might. F. Q.
So far be mine, my moſt redoubted lord,
As my true ſervice ſhall deſerve your love.
To Redou'ND. v. n. [redundo, Latin.]
1. To be ſent back by reaction.
he evil, ſoon
Driv'n back, redounded, as a flood, on thoſe
From whom it ſprung.
Nor hope to be myſelf leſs miſerable
By what I ſeek, but others to make ſuch
As I, though thereby worſe to me redound.
2. To conduce in the conſequence.
As the care of our national commerce redund; more to
the riches and proſperity of the publick, than any other act
of government, the ſtate of it ſhould be marked out in every
particular reign with greater diſtinction. Addiſon.
He had drawn many obſervations together, which very
much redound to the honour of this prince. Addiſon.
3. To fall in the conſequence.
As both theſe monſters will devour great quantities of paper,
there will no ſmall uſe redound from them to that manu-
facture.
The honour done to our religion ultimately red-unds to
God the author of it. Angers'; Sermons.
To REDRESS. v. a. [redreſſºr, Fr.]
1. To ſet right; to amend.
In yonder ſpring of roſes, -
Find what to redreſs till noon. - - AMilton.
2. To relieve; to remedy; to eaſe. It is ſometimes uſed of
perſons, but more properly of things. - - •
She felt with me, what I felt of my captivity, and ſtreight
laboured to redrºſ; my pain, which was her pain. Sidney.
'Tis thine, O king ' th' afflicted to redreſs. Dryden.
In countries of freedom, princes are bound to protect their
ſubjects in liberty, property and religion, to receive their pe-
titions, and redrºſ, their grievances. - Swift.
21 K - REDRE'ss.
Spenſºr,
Addiſon.
Shakeſp.
Milton:
Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii. -
Addiſon's Guardian, N° 1 14.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E D
R E. E.
REDRE'ss. n.f. [from the verb.]
. Reformation; amendment. . -
I To ſeek ºformation of evil laws is commendable, but for
us the more neceſſary is a ſpeedy redreſs of ourſelves. PHooker.
- ief; remedy.
2. Reig; i. ſuitors preſs to ſpeak for right; , r
No, not a man comes for redreſs to thee. Shakespeare .
such people, as break the law of nations, all nations are
intereſted to ſuppreſs, confidering that the particular ſtates,
being the delinquents, can give no redreſs. Bacon.
Grief, finding no redreſs, ferment and rage,
Nor leſs than wounds immedicable,
Rankle, and feſter, and gangrene -
To black mortification. g Milton.
3. One who gives relief. * - -
Fair majeſty, the refuge and redreſs
Of thoſe whom fate purſues, and wants oppreſs. Dryden.
REDRE'ssive. adj. [from redreſ...] Succouring; affording re-
medy. A word not authoriſed.
The generous band, *
who, touch'd with human woe, redreſſive ſearch'd
Into the horrors of the gloomy jail. Thomſon.
To Repse A'R. v. n. [red and ſear.] A term of workmen.
If iron be too cold, it will not feel the weight of the ham-
mer, when it will not batter under the hammer; and if it be
too hot, it will redſ ar, that is, break or crack under the
hammer. AMoxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
RE'psha Nk. n.ſ. [red and ſank.]
1. This ſeems to be a contemptuous appellation for ſome of the
people of Scotland.
He ſent over his brother Edward with a power of Scots
and redſhanks unto Ireland, where they got footing. Spenſer.
2. A bird. Ainſworth.
RE'dstreak. m. ſ. [red and ſtreak.]
1. An apple. **
The redſtreak, of all cyder fruit, hath obtained the prefe-
rence, being but a kind of wilding, and though kept long,
yet is never pleaſing to the palate ; there are ſeveral ſorts of
redſtreak: ſome forts of them have red veins running through
the whole fruit, which is eſteemed to give the cyder the
richeſt tinčture. AMortimer.
2. Cyder preſſed from the redſtreak.
Red/?reak he quaffs beneath the Chianti vine,
Gives Tuſcan yearly for thy Scudmore's wine. Smith.
To REDU/CE. v. a. [reduco, Lat. reduire, Fr.]
1. To bring back. Obſolete.
_Abate the edge of traitors, gracious lord?
That would reduce theſe bloody days again. Shakeſp.
2. To bring to the former ſtate.
It were but juſt
And equal to reduce me to my duſt,
Deſirous to reſign and render back
All I receiv'd. Milton.
3. To reform from any diſorder. .
That temper in the archbiſhop, who licenſed their moſt
pernicious writings, left his ſucceſſor a very difficult work to
do, to reform and reduce a church into order, that had been
ſo long neglected, and ſo ill filled. Clarendon.
4. To bring into any ſtate of diminution.
A diaphanous body, reduced to very minute parts, thereby
acquires many little ſurfaces in a narrow compaſs. Boyle.
His ire will quite conſume us, and reduce
To nothing this eſſential. Milton.
The ordinary ſmalleſt meaſure is looked on as an unit in
number, when the mind by diviſion would reduce them into
leſs fraćtions. Locke.
5. To degrade; to impair in dignity.
There is nothing ſo bad, but a man may lay hold of
ſomething about it, that will afford matter ºf excuſe; nor
nothing ſo excellent, but a man may faſten upon ſomething
belonging to it, whereby to reduce it. Tilºſº.
6. To bring into any ſtate of miſery or meanneſs.
The moſt prudent part was his moderation and indulgence,
not reducing them to deſperation. Arbuthnot on cºin.
7. To ſubdue.
Under thee, as head ſupreme,
Thrones, Princedoms, pow'rs, dominions I reduce. Milion.
8. Tº bring into any ſtate more within rejo. power.
To have this projećt reduced to practice, there ſeems to
want nothing.
9. To reclaim to order.
º left deſert utmoſt hell,
*4 in careful watch round their metropolis. -
Io. Tº ſubject to a rule; to bring into a ºpoli, Milton.
i. ****NT. n.ſ.. [from reduce.] The ad of bringing
ack, º reforming or diminiſhing.
*** **ived bleſfing from pope Sixtus, and wa ſ-
ſigned as a - sº pope Sixtus, an s at
º º, º the reducement of this
*ś. iſ [from reduce.] One that reduces.
ſo ſº º º . digeſt, that the man, which they
alk their o -
the reducer of them into order. Wn appetites, º: º
REDU/cible. adj. [from reduce.] Poſſible to be reduced.
All law that a man is obliged by, is reducible to the law of
nature, the poſitive law of God in his word, and the law of
man enacted by the civil power. South.
Aćtions, that promote ſociety and mutual fellowſhip, ſeem
reducible to a proneneſs to do good to others, and a ready
ſenſe of any good done by others. ... . South.
All the parts of painting are reducible into theſe mentioned
by our author. - - - - Pryden's Duffeſnoy.
If minerals are not convertible into another ſpecies, though
of the ſame genus, much leſs can they be ſurmiſed reducile
into a ſpecies of another genus. Harvey on Conſumptions.
Our damps in England are reducible to the ſuffocating Ot
the fulminating. Woodward.
Redu/cible NEss. m. ſ. [from reducible.] Quality of being
reducible. -
Spirit of wine, by its pungent taſte, and eſpecially by its
reducibleneſs, according to Helmont, into alcali and water,
ſeems to be as well of a ſaline as a ſulphureous nature. Boyle.
Reduction, n.ſ. [reduction, Fr. from reducius, Lat.]
1. The act of reducing.
Some will have theſe years to be but months; but we have
no certain evidence that they uſed to account a month a year;
and if we had, yet that reduction will not ſerve. Hale.
2. In arithmetick, reduction brings two or more numbers of
different denominations into one denomination. Cocker.
Reductive. adj. [reduétif, Fr. reducius, Latin.] Having
the power of reducing.
Thus far concerning theſe reductives by inundations and
conflagrations. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Reductively. adv. [from reductive..] By reduction; by
conſequence.
If they be our ſuperiors, then 'tis modeſty and reverence to
all ſuch in general, at leaſt reductively. Hammond.
Other niceties, though they are not matter of conſcience,
ſingly and apart, are yet ſo reductively; that is, though they
are not ſo in the abſtract, they become ſo by affinity and
connection. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
REDUNDANCE. Un. ſ. [redundantia, Lat. from redundant..] Su-
REDU'NDANCY. } perfluity; ſuperabundance.
The cauſe of generation ſeemeth to be fulneſs; for gene-
ration is from redundancy: this fulneſs ariſeth from the na-
ture of the creature, if it be hot, and moiſt and ſanguine;
or from plenty of food. Bacon.
It is a quality, that confines a man wholly within him-
ſelf, leaving him void of that principle, which alone ſhould
diſpoſe him to communicate and impart thoſe redundancies of
good, that he is poſſeſſed of. South-
I ſhall ſhow our poets redundance of wit, juſtneſs of com-
pariſons, and elegance of deſcriptions. Garth.
Labour ferments the humours, caſts them into their proper
channels, and throws off redundancies. Addiſon.
REDU’NDANT. adj. [redundans, Latin.]
1. Superabundant; exuberant; ſuperfluous.
His head,
With burniſh'd neck of verdant gold, erect
Amidſt his circling ſpires, that on the graſs -
Floated redundant. Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix-
Notwithſtanding the redundant oil in fiſhes, they do not
encreaſe fat ſo much as fleſh. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Uſing more words or images than are uſeful.
Where the author is redundant, mark thoſe paragraphs to be
retrenched; when he trifles, abandon thoſe paſſages. Wattſ-
REDU'NdANtly. adv. [from redundant..] Superfluouſly; ſu-
perabundantly. -
To Reduplicate. v. a. [re and duplicate.] To double.
Reduplication. n.ſ.. [from reduplicate.] The act of doubling-
This is evident, when the mark of excluſion is put ; as
when we ſpeak of a white thing, adding the reduplicatiºn
as white; which excludes all other conſiderations. Pº;
REDUPLIcATIve. adj. [reduplicatif, Fr. from reduplicate.]
Double.
Some logicians mention reduplicative propoſitions; as men,
confidered as men, are rational creatures; i.e. becauſe they
are men. J.Watts's Logick.
RE'Dw1NG. m. ſ. A bird. - Ainſworth.
To REE. v. a. TI know not the etymology.] To riddle; to fift.
After malt is well rubbed and winnowed, you muſt then
ree it over in a ſieve. Martimer's Huſbandry.
To Ree cho. v. n. [re and echo.] To echo back.
Around we ſtand, a melancholy train,
And a loud groan reechoes from the main. Pºpe.
REE'chy. adj. [from reach, corruptly formed from rºl
Smoky ; ſooty; tanned.
Let him, for a pair of recchy kiſſes, r !
Make you to ravel all this matter out. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The kitchen malkin pins
Her richeſt lockram 'bout her recchy neck. Shakespeare
REED. m. ſ. [neob, Saxon; ried, German; artºdº, Lat.]
1. An hollow knotted ſtalk, which grows in wet grounds.
A reed is diſtinguiſhed from the graſſes by its magnitude,
and by its having a firm ſtem: the ſpecies are, the largº".
nured.
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E E
nured cane or reed, the ſugar cane, the common reed, the
variegated reed, the Bambu cane, and dark red reed. Miller.
This Derceta, the mother of Semiramis, was ſometimes
a recluſe, and falling in love with a goodly young man, ſhe
was by him with child, which, for fear of extreme puniſh-
ment, ſhe conveyed away and cauſed the ſame to be hidden
among the high reeds which grew on the banks of the lake.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
The knotty bulruſh next in order ſtood,
And all within of reeds a trembling wood. Dryden.
Her lover Cimon lay concealed in the reeds. Broome.
2. A ſmall pipe.
I'll ſpeak between the change of man and boy
With a reed voice. Shakeſp.
Arcadian pipe, the paſtoral reed
Of Hermes. AMilton.
3. An arrow.
When the Parthian turn'd his ſteed,
And from the hoſtile camp withdrew;
With cruel ſkill the backward reed
He ſent; and as he fled, he ſlew.
Ree’DED. adj. [from reed.] Covered with reeds.
Where houſes be reeded,
Now pare of the moſs, and go beat in the reed. Tüſr.
REE/DEN. adj. [from reed.]. Conſiſting of reeds.
Honey in the ſickly hive infuſe
Through ceden pipes. Dryden's Virgil's Georgicks.
To RFE/DIFY. v. a. [reedifier, Fr. re and ediff.j To rebuild;
to build again.
The ruin’d walls he did recdiff. Fa. Queen.
This monument five hundred years hath ſtood,
Prior.
Which I have ſumptuouſly reedified. Shakeſp.
The AEolians, who repeopled, reedified Ilium. Sandys.
The houſe of God they firſt reediff. Milton.
Ree'DLess. adj. [from reed.] Being without reeds.
Youths tomb'd before their parents were,
Whom foul Cocytus' reedleſs banks encloſe. May.
REE/DY. adj. [from reed.]. Abounding with reeds.
The ſportive flood in two divides,
And forms with erring ſtreams the reedy iſles. Blackmore.
Around th’ adjoining brook,
Now fretting o'er a rock,
Now ſcarcely moving through a reedy pool. Thomſºn.
REEK, n, ſº [nec, Saxon: reuke, Dutch.]
1. Smoke; ſteam ; vapour.
'Tis as hateful to me as the reek of a lime kiln. Shakespeare
2. [Reke, German, any thing piled up..] A pile of corn or hay.
Nor barns at home, nor reeks are rear'd abroad. Dryden.
The covered reek, much in uſe weſtward, muſt needs
prove of great advantage in wet harveſts. Mortimer,
To REEK. v. n. [necan, Saxon.]
1. To ſmoke; to ſteam ; to emit vapour.
They redoubled ſtrokes upon the foe,
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
Or memoriſe another Golgotha. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
To the battle came he ; where he did
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
*Twere a perpetual ſpoil.
You remember
How under my oppreſſion I did rºck,
When I firſt mov’d you. Shakeſp.
Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
They ſhall be fam'd ; for there the ſun ſhall greet them,
And draw their honours reeking up to heav'n. Shakeſp.
I found me laid
In balmy ſweat; which with his beams the ſun
Soon dry'd, and on the reeking moiſture fed. Milton.
Love one deſcended from a race of tyrants,
Whoſe blood yet reeks on my avenging ſword. Smith.
Ree'KY. adj, [from reek.] Smoky ; tanned ; black.
Shut me in a charnel houſe,
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reely ſhanks and yellow chapleſs ſkulls. Shakeſp.
Reel. n.ſ.. [neol, Saxon.] A turning frame, upon which
yarn is wound into ſkeins from the ſpindle.
To Reel. v. a. [from the noun..] To gather yarn off the
ſpindle.
It may be uſeful for the reeling of yarn. Wilkins.
To Reel. v. n. [rollen, Dutch ; ragla, Swediſh.] To ſtagger;
to incline in walking, firſt to one ſide and then to the other.
Him when his miſtreſs proud perceiv'd to fall,
While yet his feeble feet for faintneſs reel'd,
She 'gan call, help Orgoglio ! Fairy Queen, b. i.
What news in this our tott'ring ſtate
—It is a reeling world,
And I believe will never ſtand upright,
Till Richard wear the garland.
It is amiſs to ſit
And keep the turn of tipling with a ſlave,
To reel the ſtreets at noon. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopatra.
They reel to and fro, and ſtagger like a drunken man. P/.
Grope in the dark, and to no ſeat confine
Their wandring feet; but reel as drunk with wine. Sandys,
Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Shakeſp. Rich. III.
- He with heavy fumes oppreſt,
Reel'd from the palace, and retird to reſt. Pope.
• , - Should he hide his face,
Th’extinguiſh’d ſtars would looſening reel
Wide from their ſpheres. Thomſon.
Reele'ction. n.f. [re and eleētion.] Repeated ele&amp;tion.
Several acts have been made, and rendered ineffectual, by
leaving the power of reelection open. Swift.
To REENA’ct. ** [re and enađ.] To enaa anew.
The Sonſtruštion of ſhips was forbidden to ºnators, by a
law made by Claudius the tribune, and remaid by the º
law of conceſſions. Arbuthnot on Coins
To REENyo'Rce. v. a. [re and enfºrce.] To ſtrengthen with
new aſſiſtance.
The French have reenforc'd their ſcatter'd men. Sh -
They uſed the ſtones to %. the pier. "...
The preſence of a friend raiſes fancy, and reenfºrces
reaſon. Collier.
ReeNFo'RcEMENT. n.ſ. [re and enforcement.] Freſh affiſ.
tance.
- Alone he enter'd
The mortal gate o' th' city, which he painted
With ſhunleſs deſtiny; aidleſs came off,
And with a ſudden reenforcement ſtruck
Corioli like a planet. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
They require a ſpecial reenfºrcement of ſound endo&amp;trinat-
ing to ſet them right. Milton.
What reenforcement we may gain from hope. Milton.
The words are a reiteration or reenfºrcement of a corol-
lary. Ward.
To REENJo'Y. v. a. [re and enjoy.] To enjoy anew or a ſe-
cond time.
The calmneſs of temper Achilles reenjoyed, is only an ef-
fečt of the revenge which ought to have preceded. Pope.
To Ree’NTER. v. a. [re and enter.] To enter again; to en-
ter anew. -
With opportune excurſion, we may chance
Reenter heav'n. Milton.
The fiery ſulphurous vapours ſeek the centre from whence
they proceed; that is, reenter again. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
To REENTHRo'Ne. v. a. To replace in a throne.
He diſpoſes in my hands the ſcheme
To reenthrone the king. Southerne.
REE'NTRANce, n.ſ. [re and entrance.] The ačt of entring
again.
their repentance, although not their firſt entrance, is not-
withſtanding the firſt ſtep of their reentrance into life. Hooker.
The pores of the brain, through the which the ſpirits be-
fore took their courſe, are more eaſily opened to the ſpirits
which demand reentrance. Glanvill's Scepſ.
Ree'RMouse. m. ſ. [hnenemur, Saxon.] A bat.
To REESTA’BLISH. v. a. ſ.re and eſtabliſh.] To eſtabliſh
anew.
To reſtabliſh the right of lineal ſucceſſion to paternal go-
vernment, is to put a man in poſſeſſion of that government,
which his fathers did enjoy. Locke.
Peace, which hath for many years been baniſhed the chriſ-
tian world, will be ſpeedily reeſtabliſhed. Smalridge.
REEsta‘blisher. n.ſ.. [from reſtabliſh..] One that reeſtab-
liſhes.
REEst A'Blis HMENT. n.ſ.. [from reeſtabliſh.] The ačt of re-
eſtabliſhing; the ſtate of being reeſtabliſhed; reſtauration.
The Jews made ſuch a powerful effort for their reſtabliſh-
ment under Barchocab, in the reign of Adrian, as ſhook the
whole Roman empire. Addiſon.
Reeve. m. ſ. [xenera, Saxon.] A ſteward. Obſolete.
The reeve, miller and cook are diſtinguiſhed. Dryden.
To Re exa’MINE. v. a. [re and examine.] To examine anew.
Spend the time in reexamining more duly your cauſe. Hook.
To REFECT. v. a. [refetius, Lat.] To refreſh ; to reſtore
after hunger or fatigue. Not in uſe.
A man in the morning is lighter in the ſcale, becauſe in
ſleep ſome pounds have perſpired ; and is alſo lighter unto
himſelf, becauſe he is refected. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
REFE'ction, n.ſ. [refection, Fr. from refectio, Lat..] Re-
freſhment after hunger or fatigue.
After a draught of wine, a man may ſeem lighter in him-
ſelf from ſudden refection, though he be heavier in the ba-
lance, from a ponderous addition. Brown.
Faſting is the diet of angels, the food and refection of ſouls,
and the richeſt aliment of grace. South.
- For ſweet refection due,
The genial viands let my train renew. Pope.
REFE'ctory. m. ſ. [ref:eiðire, Fr. from refect.] Room of
refreſhment; eating room.
He cells and reſºłories did prepare,
And large proviſions laid of winter fare. Dryden.
To REFe'l. v. a. [refello, Lat..] To refute 3 to repreſs.
Friends not to rºſelye,
Or any way quell ye,
Ye aim at a myſtery,
Worthy a hiſtory. Benj. johnſºn's cº
6 t
:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">-*
-*
R E Fº
It inſtrućas the ſcholar in the various methods of diſcoyºſing
and refelling the ſubtil tricks of ſophiſters: J/atts.
To REFE/R. v. 4. [reſtro, Lat., referer, Fr.]
- ** * - - - t
..To diſmiſs for information,9. Jºgº.
I T}; ...tºs the divine hiſtorian refers us to, and not to
any productions out of nothing, Burnet's Theory ºf the Earth.
2. "I'o'betake for deciſion.
The heir of his kingdom hath referred herſelf unto a poor,
but worthy gentleman. - Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
. To reduce to, as to the ultimate end. -
You profeſs and practiſe to refer all things to yourſelf. Bac.
4. To reduce, as to a claſs. . - - - -
The ſalts, predominant in quick lime, wº refer rather to
lixiviate, than acid. Boyle on Colours.
To Rºgº. v. n. To reſpect; to have relation. -
Of thoſe places, that refer to the ſhutting and opening the
abyſs, I take notice of that in Job. Burnet.
ReféR£E’. n.ſ. [from rºſer.] One to whom any thing is
referred.
Referees and arbitrators ſeldom forget themſelves. L'Eſtr.
Reſ; ERENCE. m. ſ. [from rºſer.]
1. Relation; reſpect; view towards; alluſion to. -
The knowledge of that which man is in reference unto him-
ſelf and other things in relation unto man, I may term the
mother of all thoſe principles, which are decrees in that law
of nature, whereby human actions are framed. Hooker.
Jupiter was the ſon of Æther and Dies; ſo called, becauſe
the one had reference to his celeſtial conditions, the other diſ-
covered his natural virtues. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
Chriſtian religion commands ſobriety, temperance and mo-
deration, in reference to our appetites and paſſions. Tillotſºn.
2. Diſmiſſion to another tribunal.
It paſſed in England without the leaſt reference hither. Sw.
REFERE'NDARY. n.ſ. ſº Lat.] One to whoſe deci-
ſion any thing is referred.
In ſuits, it is good to refer to ſome friend of truſt; but let
him chuſe well his referendaries. Bacon's Eſſays.
To REFER ME’NT, v. a. [re and ferment.] To ferment anew.
Th’ admitted nitre agitates the flood,
Revives its fire, and referments the blood. Blackmore.
REFE/RR1ble. adj. [from refer.] Capable of being conſidered,
as in relation to ſomething elſe.
Unto God all parts of time are alike, unto whom none are
referrible, and all things preſent, unto whom nothing is paſt
or to come, but who is the ſame yeſterday, to-day and to-
morrow. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
To REFINE. v. a. [raffner, Fr.]
I. To puriſy ; to clear from droſs and recrement.
I will refine them as ſilver is refined, and will try them as
gold is tried. Zech. xiii. 9.
Weigh ev'ry word, and ev'ry thought refine. Anon.
The red Dutch currant yields a rich juice, to be diluted
with a quantity of water boiled with refined ſugar. Mortimer.
2. To make elegant; to poliſh; to make accurate.
Queen Elizabeth's time was a golden age for a world of re-
fned wits, who honoured poeſy with their pens. Peacham.
Love rºſines the thoughts, and hath his ſeat
In reaſon. Milton.
The ſame traditional ſloth, which renders the bodies of
children, born from wealthy parents, weak, may perhaps
refine their ſpirits. Swift.
To REF1'NE. v. n.
I. Tº improve in point of accuracy or delicacy.
Chaucer refined on Boccace, and mended ſtories. Dryden.
Let a lord but own the happy lines;
How the wit brightens, how the ſenſe refines / Pºpe.
2. To grow pure.
wº j º ſtream, when foul with ſtains,
orks itſelf clear, and as it runs refines. -
3. To affect nicety. &gt; refines Addison.
He makes another paragraph about our refining in controver-
ſy, and coming nearer ſtill to the church of Rome. Altº, bury.
REF, NEDLY. alv. [from refine.] With affected elegance.
Will any dog
Rºfinedly leave his bitches and his bones,
To turn a wheel ? Dryden.
RE.NEMENT. n.ſ.. [from refine.]
* The act ºf purifying, by clearing anything from droſs and
TCCrementitious matter.
The more bodies are of kin to ſpirit in ſubtilty and refine-
inent, the more diffuſive are they. Norris.
2. Improvement in clegance or purity.
º the civil war to this time, I doubt whether the cor-
1OnS 11] Our languag * :* --
3. Aºi. º:º º have not equalled its refinements. Sw.
The rules religion preſcribes are more ſucceſsful in publick
and Pººle affairs,than the refinements of irregular cunning, Rºg.
4. Aºstation of elegant improvement. c §
wº º town had a deſign to leave us in the lurch,
RF 1 NF their late refinements. Addison's Guardian.
* NER. m. ſ. [from refine.]
I. º 9* who clears from droſ, or recrement.
crºfthers of iron obſerve, that that iron ſtone is hardeſt
I
R E. F.
to melt, which is fulleſt of metal; and that eaſieſt, which
hath moſt droſs. Bacon's Phyſical Remains.
2. Improver in elegance.
As they have been the great refiners of our language, ſo it
hath becn my chief ambition to imitate them. Swift.
3. Inventor of ſuperfluous ſubtilties.
No men ſee leſs of the truth of things, than theſe great
refiners upon incidents, who are ſo wonderfully ſubtle, and
over wiſe in their conceptions. Addiſon's Speciator, N- 170.
Some refiners pretend to argue for the uſefulneſs of parties
in ſuch a government as ours. Swift.
To Refl’r. v. a. [rºſait, Fr. re and fit..] To repair; to re-
ſtore after damage.
He will not allow that there are any ſuch ſigns of art in the
make of the preſent globe, or that there was ſo great care
taken in the refitting of it up again at the deluge. //oodw.
Permit our ſhips a ſhelter on your ſhoars,
Refitted from your woods with planks and oars. Dryden.
To REFLECT. v. a. [rºftechir, Fr. ºftecto, Lat..] To
throw back.
We, his gather'd beams
Refteård, may with matter ſere foment. Milton,
Bodies cloſe together reflect their own colour. Dryden.
To REFLE'cT. v. n.
1. To throw back light.
In dead men's ſculls, and in thoſe holes,
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As 'twere in ſcorn of eyes, reflecting gems. Shakespeare
2. To bend back.
Inanimate matter moves always in a ſtraight line, and never
refle&amp;s in an angle, nor bends in a circle, which is a conti-
nual reflection, unleſs either by ſome external impulſe, or by
an intrinſick principle of gravity. Bentley's Sermon.
3. To throw back the thoughts upon the paſt or on themſelves.
The imagination caſts thoughts in our way, and forces the
underſtanding to reflect upon them. Dupa.
In every action , ºftect upon the end; and in your under-
taking it, confider why you do it. Taylor.
Who faith, who could ſuch ill events expect
With ſhame on his own counſels doth refect. Denham.
When men are grown up, and reflect on their own minds,
they cannot find any thing more ancient there, than thoſe
opinions which were taught them before their memory began
to keep a regiſter of their actions. Locke.
It is hard, that any part of my land ſhould be ſettled upon
one who has uſed me ſo ill; and yet I could not ſee a ſprig
of any bough of this whole walk of trees, but I ſhould re-
flect upon her and her ſeverity. Addiſon's Speciator.
Let the king diſmiſs his woes,
Refteåing on her fair renown;
And take the cypreſs from his brows,
To put his wonted laurels on. Prior.
4. To conſider attentively. -
Into myſelf-my reaſon's eye I turn'd :
And as I much reflected, much I mourn'd. Prizr.
5. To throw reproach or cenſure.
Neither do I refied in the leaſt upon the memory of his
late majeſty, whom I entirely acquit of any imputation. Sw.
6. To bring reproach.
Errors of wives refle: on huſbands ſtill. Dryden.
REFLE/ct ENT, adj. [riftecſºns, Lat..] Bending back; flying
back. -
The ray deſcendent, and the ray reflectent, flying with ſº
great a ſpeed, that the air between them cannot take a formal
play any way, before the beams of the light be on both ſides
of it; it follows, that, according to the nature of humid
things, it muſt firſt only ſwell. Digby Gºt the Soul.
REFLEction. n.ſ. [from rºſe: ; thence I think rºſiºn lºº
proper: reflexion, Fr. reflexus, Lat.]
1. The act of throwing back.
The eye ſees not itſelf, -
But by reflection from other things. Shaºff. julius Cºſar.
If the ſun's light conſiſted but of one ſort of rays, there
would be but one colour, and it would be impoſible to pro-
duce any new by rºſections or refractions. Cheyne.
2. The act of bending back.
Inanimate matter moves alway
reflects in an angle or circle, which is a c
unleſs by ſome external impulſe.
3. That which is reflected. - -
She ſhines not upon fools, left the rºßion ſhºul" hurt
her. Shakesp. Cymbeline.
As the ſun in water we can bear,
Yet not the ſun, but his refectiºn there ;
So let us view her here, in what ſhe was,
And take her image in this watry glaſs.
4. Thought thrown back upon the paſt. -
The three firſt parts I'dedicate to my old friends, to take
off thoſe melancholy reflections, which the ſenſe of age, in-
s in a ſtraight line, nor ever
ontinual reflection,
Bentley's Sermony.
Dryden.
firmity and death may give then. - Denham.
This dreadful image ſo poſſeſs'd her mind,
She ceas'd all farther hope; and now began d
To make rºñºlion on th’ unhappy man. P;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E F
R E F
ſ:
º
ºr,
s
Job's reflºtions on his once flouriſhing eſtate, did at the
ſame time affiict and encourage him. Atterbury.
What wounding reproaches of ſoul muſt he feel, from the
reflºn; on his own ingratitude. Rogers's Sermons.
5. The action of the mind upon itſelf. -
Reft:tion is the perception of the operations of our own
minds within us, as it is employed about the ideas it has
got. Locke.
6. Attentive confideration.
This delight grows and improves, under thought and re-
ºcłion ; and while it exerciſes, does alſo endear itſelf to the
mind; at the ſame time employing and inflaming the medi-
tations. South's Sermons.
7. Cenſure.
He dy'd ; and oh! may no reflºtion ſhed
Its pois'nous venom on the royal dead.
REFLE'ctive. adj. [from reflect.]
1. Throwing back images.
When the weary king gave place to night,
His beams he to his royal brother lent,
And ſo ſhone ſtill in his reflective light.
In the reflective ſtream the fighing bride
Viewing her charms impair'd, abaſh'd ſhall hide
Her penſive head. - Prior.
2. Conſidering things paſt 5 conſidering the operations of the
mind.
- Forc’d by reflečive reaſon I confeſs,
That human ſcience is uncertain gueſs.
REFLE/ctor. n.ſ.. [from refle&amp;#.] Conſiderer.
There is ſcarce any thing that nature has made, or that
men do ſuffer, whence the devout refe: or cannot take an oc-
caſion of an aſpiring meditation. Boyle on Colours.
REFLE'x. adj. [ºftexts, Lat..] Direéted backward.
The motions of my mind are as obvious to the reflex act
of the ſoul, or the turning of the intelle&amp;tual eye inward upon
its own actions, as the paſſions of my ſenſe are obvious to my
ſenſe; I ſee the objest, and I perceive that I ſee it. Hale.
The order and beauty of the inanimate parts of the world,
the diſcernible ends of them do evince by a reflex argument,
that it is the workmanſhip, not of blind mechaniſm or blinder
chance, but of an intelligent and benign agent. Bentley.
REFLE'x. m. ſ. [rºfexus, Lat.]. Reflection.
There was no other way for angels to fin, but by reflex of:
Prior.
Prior.
their underſtandings upon themſelves. Hooker.
I'll ſay yon gray is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow. Shakeſp.
REFLExibi'LITY.. n.ſ. [from reflexible.] The quality of being
reflexible.
To REFORM. º. a. ſ.reſºrmo, Lat. rºſarmer, Fr.] To
change from worſe to better.
A ſect in England, following the very ſame rule of policy,
ſeeketh to reform even the French reformation, and purge out
from thence alſo dregs of popery. Hoker, i.iv. ſ. 8.
Seat worthier of Gods, was built &gt;
r
With ſecond thoughts, Iºſºning what was old. Milton.
May no ſuch ſtorm
Fall on our times, where ruin muſt refºrm. Denham.
Now low'ring looks preſage approaching ſtorms, -
And now prevailing love her fas: refºrms. Dryden.
h One cannot attempt the perfect ºfºrming the languages of
the world, without rendering himſelf ridiculous. Locke.
The example alone of a vicious prince will corrupt an age;
but that of a good one will not refºrm it. sº.
To REFo ** * *. To make a change from worſe to better.
Was his doctrine of the maſs ſtruck out in this con.
flić *, or did it give him occaſion of reforming in this
point : - Atterbury.
REFO'R.M. m. ſ. [French.] Reformation.
Dryden. REFor MATION. m. ſ. [reformation, Fr. from reform.]
1. Change from worſe to better.
Never came refºrmation in a flood
With ſuch a heady current, ſcow'ring faults;
Nor ever Hydra-headed wilfulneſs
So ſoon did loſe his ſeat, as in this king. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Satire laſhes vice into reformation. - Dryden.
The pagan converts mention this great reformation of thoſe
who had been the greateſt finners, with that ſudden and fur-
priſing change, which the chriſtian religion made in the lives
of the moſt profligate. Addiſon.
2. The change of religion from the corruptions of popery to
its primitive ſtate.
The burden of the reformation lay on Luther's ſhoulders.
Atterbury.
Refo'RMER. m. ſ. [from refºrm.]
1. One who makes a change for the better; an amender.
Publick reformers had need firſt practiſe that on their own
hearts, which they purpoſe to try on others. King Charles.
The complaint is more general, than the endeavours to
redreſs it: Abroad every man would be a reformer, how very
few at home. Sprat's Sermons.
It was honour enough, to behold the Engliſh churches
reformed; that is, delivered from the reformers. South.
2. Thoſe who changed religion from popiſh corruptions and in-
Ilovations.
Our firſt reformers were famous confeſſors and martyrs all
over the world. Bacon.
Reflexibility of rays is their diſpoſition to be reflected or To REFRACT. v. a. [refratius, Lat..] To break the na-
turned back into the ſame medium from any other medium,
upon whoſe ſurface they fall ; and rays are more or leſs re-
flexible, which are turned back more or leſs eaſily. Newton.
RFFLE'x1BLE. adj. [from reflexus, Lat.] Capable to be thrown
back.
Sir Iſaac Newton has demonſtrated, by convincing experi-
ments, that the light of the ſun conſiſts of rays differently
refrangible and reflexible; and that thoſe rays are differently
reflexible, that are differently refrangible. Cheyne.
REFLE'xrve. adj. [reflexus, Lat..] Having reſpect to ſomething
aft.
p That aſſurance reflexive cannot be a divine faith, but at the
moſt an human, yet ſuch as perhaps I may have no doubt-
ing mixed with. Hammond's Practical Catechiſm.
REFLE'x1v ELY. adv. [from reflexive..] In a backward direction.
Solomon tells us life and death are in the power of the
tongue, and that not only directly in regard of the good or ill
we may do to others, but reflexively alſo, in reſpect of what
may rebound to ourſelves. Government of the Tongue.
REFIoA^T. n.ſ. [re and float.] Ebb ; reflux.
The main float and refloat of the ſea, is by conſent of
the univerſe, as part of the diurnal motion. Bacon.
To REF Lou'R1s H. v. a. [re and flouriſh..] To flouriſh anew.
Virtue given for loſt
Revives, reſouriſhes, then vigorous moſt,
When moſt unačtive deem’d. Milton's Agoniſłes.
To RF Flow. v. n. [rºftuer, Fr. re and flow.]. To flow back.
REFLU'ENT. adj. [refuens, Lat..] Running back ; flowing
back.
The liver receives the refluent blood almoſt from all the
parts of the abdomen. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Tell, by what paths,
Back to the ſountain's head the ſea conveys
The refluent rivers, and the land repays. Blackmore.
REFLU'x. m. ſ. [rºflux, Fr. rºſiuxus, Lat..] Backward courſe
of water.
Beſides
Mine own that 'bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound. Milton.
The variety of the flux and reflux of Euripus, or whether
the ſame do ebb and flow ſeven times a day, is incontra-
vertible. Brown's /ulgar Errours.
REFocill A^rion. m. ſ. [rºſºcillo, Lat..] Reſtoration of ſtrength
by refreſhment.
*—
tural courſe of rays.
If its angle of incidence be large, and the refračtive power
of the medium not very ſtrong to throw it far from the per-
pendicular, it will be refračied. Cheyne's Phil. Princ.
Rays of light are urged by the refračing media. Cheyne.
Refracted from yon eaſtern cloud,
The grand ethereal bow ſhoots up.
REFRAction. m. ſ. [refraction, Fr.]
Refraction, in general, is the incurvation or change of de-
termination in the body moved, which happens to it whilſt
it enters or penetrates any medium : in dioptricks, it is the
variation of a ray of light from that right line, which it would
have paſſed on in, had not the denſity cf the medium turned
it aſide. Harris.
Refračion, out of the rarer medium into the denſer, is
made towards the perpendicular. Newton's Optiks.
REFRA’ctive. adj, [from refrac{..] Having the power of re-
fraćtion.
Thoſe ſuperficies of tranſparent bodies reflect the greateſt
quantity of light, which have the greateſt refracting power ;
that is, which intercede mediums that differ moſt in their
refractive denſities, Newton's Optick.
RE'FRAcroRINEss. n.ſ. ſſrom refrađory..] Sullen obſtinacy.
I did never allow any man's refracºrinºſ, againſt the pri-
vileges and orders of the houſes. King Charles.
Great complaint was made by the preſbyterian gang, of my
refrađoringſ to obey the parliament's order. Sainderſºn;
REFRA CTORY. adj. [rifragiaire, Fr. refia’arius, Lat. and
ſo ſhould be written refragiary. It is now accented on the
firſt ſyllable, but by Shakeſpeare on the ſecond.] Obſtinate ;
perverſe; contumacious. -
There is a law in each well-order'd nation,
To curb thoſe raging appetites that are 1, 2, 1-2
Moſt diſobedient and refracºry. - Shalºff.
A rough hewn ſeaman, being brought before a wiſe juſtice
for ſome miſdemeanor, was by him ordered to be ſent away
to priſon, and was refraciary after he heard his doom, info-
much as he would not fºr a foot from the place where he
flood; ſaying, it was better to ſtand where he was, than go to
a worſe place. - Bacon's 4 ºtherms.
vulgar compliance with any illegal and cºtravagant ways,
like violent motions in nature, ſoon grows weary of itſelf,
and ends in a rºf actºry full-lineſs. King Charleſ.
2 I L Rºf dºo'y
Thom 471.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R. E. F
R E F
1 if thou will not truſt thy friends, take
º: º.. aſſuredly, before next full moon, that
i. wilt be hung up in chains. Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of f. Bull.
t *. atoms of theirs may have it in them, but they are
refractory ind fullen; and therefore, like men of the ſame
tempers, muſt be banged and buffeted into reaſon. Bentley.
REFRAGABLE, adj. [rifragabilis, Lat..] Capable of confuta-
- d convićtion.
Tº. v.a. [refrener, Fr. re and fracnum, Lat.] To
hold back; to keep from ačtion. -
Hold not thy tongue, O God, keep not fill filence; re-
frain not thyſelf. Pſalm lxxxiii. 1.
My ſon, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy
foot from their path. Prov. i. I 5.
Nor from the holy one of heav'n
Refrain'd his tongue. - Milton.
Neptune aton'd, his wrath ſhall now refrain,
Or thwart the ſynod of the gods in vain: Pope.
To REFRA1'N. v. n. To forbear; to abſtain; to ſpare.
In what place, or upon what conſideration ſoever it be,
they do it, were it in their own opinion of no force being
doñe, they would undoubtedly refrain to do it. Hozier.
For my name's ſake will I defer mine anger, and ref ain
for thee, that I cut thee not off. • * ~ *
That they fed not on fleſh, at leaſt the faithful party be-
fore the flood, may become more probable, becauſe they re-
frained therefrom ſome time after. Brown's Wulg. Err.
R£FRANgibility. m. ſ. [from rºſrangible.]
Refangibility of the rays of light, is their diſpoſition to be
refračted or turned out of their way, in paſſing out of one
tranſparent body or medium into another. 'ewton.
REFRANGIBLE. adj. [re and frangº, Lat.]
As ſome rays are more refrangible than others; that is, are
more turned out of their courſe, in paſſing from one medium
to another; it follows, that after ſuch refraction, they will
be ſeparated, and their diſtinét colour obſerved. Locke.
REF RE's A'rios. m. ſ. [re and facno, Lat..] The act of re-
ſtraining. -
To REFRESH. v. a. [refraiſcher, Fr. refrigero, Lat.]
1. To recreate ; to relieve after pain, fatigue or want.
Service ſhall with ſteeled ſinews toil;
And labour ſhall refreſh itſelf with hope. Shakeſp.
Muſick was ordain'd to refreſh the mind of man,
After his ſtudies or his uſual pain. Shakeſp.
He was in no danger to be overtaken ; ſo that he was
content to refreſh his men. Clarendon, b. viii.
His meals are coarſe and ſhort, his employment warrantable,
his ſleep certain and refreſhing, neither interrupted with the
laſhes of a guilty mind, nor the aches of a crazy body. South.
If you would have trees to thrive, take care that no plants
be near them, which may deprive them of nouriſhnent, or
hinder refreſhings and helps that they might receive. Mortim.
2. To improve by new touches any thing impaired.
The reſt refreſh the ſcaly ſnakes, that ſold
The ſhield of Pallas, and renew their gold. Dryden.
A dew coming after heat refreſheth. Eccluſ. xliii. 22.
REFRE'sſ; ER. m. ſ. [from refreſh.] That which refreſhes.
The kind refreſher of the ſummer heats. Thomſºn.
REFRE's HMENT. m. ſ. [from refreſh.]
1. Relief after pain, want or fatigue.
2. That which gives relief, as food, reſt.
He was full of agony and horrour upon the approach of a
diſmal death, and ſo had moſt need of the refreſhments of ſo-
'3. To refrigerate; to cool.
ciety, and the friendly aſſiſtances of his diſciples. South.
- Such honeſt refreſhments and comforts of life, our chriſtian
liberty has made it lawful for us to uſe. Sprat.
REFR1'GERANT. adj. [refrigerant, Fr. from refrigerate.] Cool-
ing; mitigating heat.
In the cure of gangrenes, you muſt beware of dry heat,
and reſort to things that are refrigerant, with an inward
warmth and virtue of cheriſhing. Bacon.
If it ariſe º an external cauſe, apply refrigerants, with-
... out any preceding evacuation. J/iſeman’s Surgery.
To REFRIGERATE. v. a. [refriger, re ſº, ić
To cool.
The great breezes, which the motion of the air in great
circles, ſuch as the girdle of the world, produceth d5 7te-
figerate ; and therefore in thoſe parts noon is nothin. ſo hot
when the breezes are great, as about ten of the clock in th:
for noon, - Bacon's Natural Hiſłory.
Whether they be refrigerated inclinatorily or ſomewhat
ºxically, though in a leſſer degree, they diſcover ſome
Rºx. - B own’s ſugar Errours.
The act of * f [ºfrigeratio, Lat. refrigeration, Fr.]
ID: g; the ſtate of being cooled.
** "o ſtut; the cauſe may be the refrigeration of the
º whereby it is leſs apt to move. Bacon.
this º ºf geration of the air would fit it for breathing,
'ght be ſomewhat helped with bellows. J/ilkins.
REFR 16 Ek. - - - -- -
REF Rīg s sº - } *}. [ºfrigeratif, Fr. refrigeratorius, Lat.]
9RY. Cooling; having the power to cool.
I/. xlviii. 9.
REF RI"c ERATORY. {{
1. That part of a diſtilling veſſel that is placed about the head
of a ſtill, and filled with water to cool the condenſing va-
pours; but this is now generally done by a worm or fpiral
pipe, turning through a tub of cold water. &amp;ainty.
2. Anything internally cooling.
A delicate wine, and a durable refrigeratory. Mºrtimer.
REFRIGERIUM. m. ſ. [Latin.] Cool refreſhment; refri-
geration.
It muſt be acknowledged, the ancients have talked much
of annual refrigeriums, reſpites or intervals of puniſhment to
. ... the damned; as particularly on the feſtivals. South.
REFT. part. pret. of reave.
1. Deprived; taken away.
Thus we well left, he better rºſt,
In heaven to take his place,
That by like life and death, at laſt,
We may obtain like grace. Aſchaw's Schoolroſer.
I, in a deſperate bay of death,
Like a poor bark, of fails and tackling rºſt,
Ruſh all to pieces on thy rocky boſom. Shakespeare .
Another ſhip had ſeiz'd on us,
And would have reſt the fiſhers of their prey. Shakespeare .
Our dying hero, from the continent
Raviſh'd whole towns, and forts from Spaniards rºft,
As his laſt legacy to Britain left. J/aller.
2. Preterite of reave. Took away.
So 'twixt them both, they not a lamkin left,
And when lambs fail'd, the old ſheeps lives they reſ. Spºnſ.
About his ſhoulders broad he threw ~
An hairy hide of ſome wild beaſt, whom he
In favage foreſt by adventure ſlew,
And reſt the ſpoil his ornament to be. Sºſr.
RE/FUGE. m. ſ. [' efuge, Fr. refugium, Lat.]
1. Shelter from any danger or diſtreſs ; protection.
Rocks, dens and caves' but I in none of theſe
Find place or refge. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. ix.
The young ones, ſuppoſed to break through the belly of
the dam, will, upon any fright, for protection run into it;
for then the old one receives them in at her mouth, which
way, the fright being paſt, they will return again; which is
a peculiar way of reſige. Brown's /ulgar Errours.
Thoſe, who take refuge in a multitude, have an Aria:
council to anſwer for. Atterbury.
2. That which gives ſhelter or protection.
The Lord will be a rºſage for the oppreſſed; a refuge in
times of trouble. Pſalm ix. 9.
They ſhall be your refuge from the avenger of blood. jºſ.
Fair majeſty, the refuge and redreſs
Of thoſe whom fate purſues. Dryden.
3. Expedicnt in diſtreſs.
This laſt old man,
Whom with a crack'd heart I have ſent to Rome,
Lov'd me above the meaſure of a father :
Their lateſt refuge was to ſend him. Shakeſp. Coriolatus.
4. Expedient in general. z
Light muſt be ſupplied among graceful refuges, by terracing
any ſtory in danger of darkneſs. Iłºtion.
To REFUGE. v. a. [refugier, Fr. from the noun.] To ſhelter;
to protećt.
Silly beggars,
Who fitting in the ſtocks, refuge their ſhame,
That many have, and others muſt, fit there. Shakespeare .
Dreads the vengeance of her injur'd lord; 4.
Ev’n by thoſe gods, who refug'd her, abhorr'd. Dryden.
Refugeeſ. n.ſ. [refugit, Fr.] One who flies to ſhelter of
protećtion.
Poor refugees, at firſt they purchaſe here;
And ſoon as denizen'd, they domineer. Drydºn.
This is become more neceſſary in ſome of their gºſh-
ments, fince ſo many refugees ſettled among them. Addison.
REFU'LGENCE. n.f. [from reſulgent.] Splendour; brightneſs.
REFU'LGENT. adj. [refulgens, Latin.] Bright; ſhining ;
glittering ; ſplendid.
He neither might, nor wiſh'd to know -
A more refulgent light. ſºlº.
So conſpicuous and fulgent a truth is that of God’s being
the author of man’s felicity, that the diſpute is nºt ſo much
concerning the thing, as concerning the manner of *
Agamemnon's train, -
When his refugent arms flaſh'd through the ſhady plain,
Fled from his well-known face. Dryden's Aenei.
To REFu'ND. v. n. [refunda, Lat..] .
1. To pour back. -
Were the humours of the eye tinétured with any colour,
they would refund that colour upon. the object, and ſo it
would not be repreſented as in itſelf it is. Ray.
2. To repay what is received ; to reſtore. • -
A governor, that had pilled the people, was, for receiving
of bribes, ſentenced to refund what he had wrongfully
taken. &gt; f L'E/irange.
Such
Boyle.
R<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
|
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R. E. G.
11
ºl
º
..
il
iſ,
WT
Such wiſe men as himſelf account all that is paſt, to be
alſo gone; and know, that there can be no gain in refunding,
nor any profit in paying debts. South.
How to Icarius, in the bridal hour,
Shall I, by waſte undone, refund the dow'r, Pope.
3. Swift has ſomewhere the abſurd phraſe, to refund himſelf, for
to reimburſe. -
REFu's Al. n.ſ. [from refuſe.]
1. The act of refuſing ; denial of any thing demanded or ſoli-
cited.
God has born with all his weak and obſtinate refuſal of
grace, and has given him time day after day. Rogers.
2. The preemption; the right of having any thing before an-
other ; option.
When employments go a begging for want of hands, they
ſhall be ſure to have the reſuſal. Swift.
To REFU'SE. v. a. [refuſer, Fr.]
1. To deny what is ſolicited or required.
If he ſhould chuſe the right caſket, you ſhould refuſe to
perform his father's will, if you ſhould refuſe to accept him.
Shakeſp. 41erchant of Wenice.
Common experience has juſtly a mighty influence on the
minds of men, to make them give or refuſe credit to any
thing propoſed. Locée.
Women are made as they themſelves would chooſe;
Too proud to aſk, too humble to refuſe. Garth.
2. To reject; to diſmiſs without a grant.
I may neither chuſe whom I would, nor refuſe whom I
diſlike. Shakeſp. Merchant of Wenice.
To REFU's E. v. n. Not to accept. -
Wonder not then what God for you ſaw good
If I refuſe not, but convert, as you,
To proper ſubſtance. Miltºn.
RE'Fuse. adj. [from the verb. The noun has its accent on
the firſt ſyllable, the verb on the ſecond.] Unworthy of re-
ception; left when the reſt is taken. -
Every thing vile and refuſ, they deſtroyed. Sam. xv. 9.
Pleaſe to beſtow on him the refuſe letters; he hopes by
printing them to get a plentiful proviſion. Spectator.
RE'Fuse. m. ſ. That which remains diſregarded when the reſt
is taken.
We dare not diſgrace our worldly ſuperiours with offering
unto them ſuch refuſe, as we bring unto God himſelf. Hook.
Many kinds have much refuſe, which countervails that
which they have excellent. Bacon.
I know not whether it be more ſhame or wonder, to ſee
that men can ſo put off ingenuity, as to deſcend to ſo baſe a
vice; yet we daily ſee it done, and that not only by the ſcum
and refuſe of the people. Government of the Tongue.
Down with the falling ſtream the refuſe run,
To raiſe with joyful news his drooping ſon. Dryden.
This humouriſt keeps more than he wants, and gives a vaſt
refuſe of his ſuperfluities to purchaſe heaven. Addiſon.
REFu's ER. m. ſ. [from refuſe..] He who refuſes.
Some few others are the only refuſers and condemners of
this catholick practice. Taylor.
RFFU'TAL. m. ſ. [from refute.] Refutation. Dić7.
REFUTA'Tios. m. ſ. [refutatio, Lat, refutation, Fr. from re-
fute.] The act of refuting; the act of proving falſe or er-
roncous.
'Tis ſuch miſerable abſurd ſtuff, that we will not honour
it with eſpecial refutation. Bentley.
To REFU'TE. v. a. [refuta, Lat. refuter, Fr.] To prove
falſe or erroneous. Applied to perſons or things.
Self-deſtruction ſought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee. Milton's Par. Lºft.
He knew that there were ſo many witneſſes in theſe two
miracles, that it was impoſſible to refute ſuch multitudes. Addison
To REGAI'N. v. a. [regagner, Fr. re and gain..] To recover;
to gain anew. •
Hopeful to regain
Thy love, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breaſt are ris'n. Milton.
We’ve driven back
Theſe heathen Saxons, and regain'd our earth,
As earth recovers from an ebbing tide. Dryden.
As ſoon as the mind regains the power to ſtop or continue
any of theſe motions of the body or thoughts, we then con-
fider the man as a free agent. - Locke.
ReſoAL. adj. [regal, Fr. regalis, Lat..] Royal ; kingly.
Edward, duke of York,
Uſurps the regal title and the ſeat
Of England's true anointed lawful heir.
Why am I ſent for to a king,
Beforeſ have ſhook of the regal thoughts
Wherewith I reign'd. Shakeſp. Richard II.
With them comes a third of regal port,
But faded ſplendour wan, who by his gait
And fierce demeanour ſeems the prince of hell. Milton.
When was there ever a better prince on the throne than
the preſent queen I do not talk of her government, her
Jove of the people, or qualities that are purely regal; but her
piety, charity, temperance and conjugal love. Swift.
Shakeſp.
-- —- - ~
- ----- - - - - - - - -
R E G
*****, *ſ, ſºak, Fr.] A muſical inſtrument.
The ſounds, that produce tones, are ever from ſuch bodies
as are in their parts and ports cqual; and ſuch are in the
nightingale Pipes ºf regal, or organs. Bacon,
######, * / [Latin.] The prerogative of monarchy.
To REGALE. * 4. [regaler, Fr. regulare, Italian.] To re-
freſh ; to entertain; to gratify.
f I with warming puff regale chill'd fingers.
REGA'leMENT. n.ſ. [regalement, Fr. -
talliment.
Philips.
J Refreſhment; enter-
The muſes ſtill require
Humid regalement, nor will aught avail
Imploring Phoebus with unmoiſten’d lips.
REGA"LIA. m. ſ. [Latin.] Enſigns of royalty.
º# y m. ſ. [regali, Latin.] Royalty; ſovereignty;
Behold the image of mortality,
And feeble nature cloth'd with fleſhly 'tire,
When raging paſſion with fierce tyranny,
Robs reaſon of her due regality. Fairy Queen.
He neither could, nor would, yield to any diminution of
the grown of France, in territory or regality. Bacon.
He came partly in by the ſword, and hid high courage in
all points of regality. Bacon's Henry VII.
The majeſty of England might hang like Mahomet's tomb
by a magnetick charm, between the privileges of the two
houſes, in airy imagination of regality. King Charles.
To REGA/RD. v. a. [regarder, Fr.]
1. To value; to attend to as worthy of notice.
This aſpect of mine,
The beſt regarded virgins of our clime
Have lov’d. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
Philips.
He denies
To know their God, or meſſage to regard. Milton.
2. To obſerve ; to remark. -
If much you note him,
You offend him; feed and regard him not. Shakeſp:
3. To mind as an object of grief or terrour.
The king marvelled at the young man's courage, for that
he nothing regarded the pains. 2 Mac. vii. 12.
4. To obſerve religiouſly.
He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and
he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard
it. Rom. xiv. 6.
5. To pay attention to.
He that obſerveth the wind ſhall never ſow, and he that
regardeth the clouds ſhall never reap. Proverbs.
6. To reſpect ; to have relation to.
7. To look towards.
It is a peninſula, which regardeth the mainland. Sandys.
REGA/RD. m. ſ. [regard, Fr. from the verb.]
I. Attention as to a matter of importance.
The nature of the ſentence he is to pronounce, the rule of
judgment by which he will proceed, requires that a particular
regard be had to our obſervation of this precept. Atterbury.
2. Reſpect; reverence.
To him they had regard, becauſe long he had bewitched
them. A:is viii. I 1.
With ſome regard to what is juſt and right,
They'll lead their lives.
3. Note ; eminence.
Mac Ferlagh was a man of meaneſt regard amongſt them,
neither having wealth nor power. Spenſer on Ireland.
4. Reſpect ; account.
Change was thought neceſſary, in regard of the great hurt
which the church did receive by a number of things then in
uſe. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
5. Relation; reference.
How beſt we may
Compoſe our preſent evils, with regard
Of what we are and where. - Milton.
Their buſineſs is to addreſs all the ranks of mankind, and
perſuade them to purſue and perſevere in virtue, with regard
to themſelves ; in juſtice and goodneſs, with regard to their
Milton.
neighbours; and piety towards God. //atts.
6. [Regard, Fr.] Look; aſpect directed to another.
Soft words to his fierce paſſion ſhe aſlay'd ;
But her with ſtern regard be thus repell'd, Milton.
He, ſurpriz'd with humble joy, ſurvey d *
One ſweet regard, ſhot by the royal maid. . Dryden.
7. Proſpect; object of fight. Not proper, nor * uſe.
Throw out our eyes for brave. Othellº,
Even till we make the main and th’aerial º O
An indiſtinét regard. Shakeſp. Othells,
REGARDABLE, adj. [from regard.]
I. Obſervable.
I cannot diſcov
though the regardº
imputed unto the left.
of notice.
2. wº more famous for his antiquity, than regardell,
for his preſent eſtate, abutteth on the ſea. var, 10.
º ---- - - - -27-y- º ds.
ARDER. n. / [fron regard. One that regar
REG / [. EGA/RDFC L.
er this difference of the badger's legs, alsº
i. ſide be defined, and the brevity by moſt
rown's Wulgar Errours.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E G
R E G
REGA'Rdful adj. [regard and full.] Attentive; taking no-
*i. was ſo regardful of his charge, as he never diſpoſed
any º, but firſt he acquainted the general. Hayward.
Let a man be very tender and regardful of every pious .
tion made by the ſpirit of God to his heart. South.
RE.AZRDFulix. adu. Ifrom regardful.]
1. Attentively; heedfully.
. Reſpectfully.
2 º this th' Athenian minion, whom the world
Voic’d ſo regardfully. Shakespeare. Timon ºf Atheni.
RecArdless, adj. [from regard.] Heedleſs ; negligent; in-
attentive.
He likeſt is to fall into miſchance, -
That is regardleſs of his governance. Spenſer.
Regardiſ of the bliſs wherºin he ſat,
Second to thee, offer'd himſelf to die
For man's offence. Milton's Par. Lo/?, b. iii.
W. ji learn to be deaf and regard'ſ of other things,
beſides the preſent ſubject of our meditation. //atts.
R. div. [from regardleſ...] . Withºut heed.
Rºsness. n.ſ.. [from regard Jºl Heedleſsneſs; neg-
ligence ; inattention.
REGE'Ncy, n.ſ. [from regent.]
I. Authority ; government. - -
As Čº tº: manhood, that by it he might be capable of
death, whereunto he humbled himſelf; ſo becauſe manhood
is the proper ſubject of compaſſion and feeling pity, which
maketh the ſcepter of Chriſt's rºgeny even,” the kingdom of
heaven amiable. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 51.
Mºhave knowledge and ſtrength to fit them for action,
women affection, for their better compliance; and herewith
beauty to compenſate their ſubjection, by giving them an equi-
valent regency over men. Grew.
2. Wi-arious government.
This great miniſter, finding the rºy ſhaken by the ſac-
tion of ſo many great ones within, and awed by the terror of
the Spaniſh greatneſs without, durſt begin a war. Temple.
3. The diſtrict governed by a vicegerent. -
Regions they paſs'd, the mighty regencies
Of ſeraphim. Milton.
4. Thoſe to whom vicarious regality is intruſted.
‘ſo REGENERATE. v. a. [regenero, Lat.]
1. To reproduce; to produce anew.
Albéit the ſon of this earl of Deſmond, who loſt his head,
were reſtored to the earldom ; yet could not the king's grace
regenerate obedience in that degenerate houſe, but it grew ra-
ther more wild. Davies on Ireland.
Through all the ſoil a genial ferment ſpreads,
Rºgenerates the plants, and new adorns the meads.
Blackmore.
An alkali, poured to that which is mixed with an acid,
raiſeth an efferveſcence, at the ceſlation of which, the
ſalts, of which the acid is compoſed, will be regenerated.
- Arbuthnºt.
2. [Rºgererer, Fr.] To make to be born anew ; to renew by
change of carnai nature to a chriſtian life.
No ſooner was a convert initiated, but by an eaſy figure
he became a new man, and both acted and looked upon him-
ſelf as one regenerated and born a ſecond time into another
{tate of exiſtence. Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
REGE NERATE. adj. [regeneratus, Lat.]
1. Reproduced.
Thou ! the earthly author of my blood,
Whoſe youthful ſpirit, in me regenerate,
Doth with a twofold vigor lift me up
To reach at vićtory.
2. Born anew by grace to a chriſtian life.
For from the mercy-ſeat above,
Prevenient grace deſcending, had remov’d
The ſtony from their hearts, and made new fleſh
Rºgenerate grow inſtead. Milton.
- If you fulfil this reſolution, though you fall ſometimes by
infirmity; nay, though you ſhould fall into ſome greater act,
even of deliberate fin, which you preſently retract by con-
feſtion and amendment, you are nevertheleſs in a regenerate
eſtate, you live the life of a chriſtian here, and ſhall inherit
the reward that is promiſed to ſuch in a glorious immortality
hereafter. //ake's Preparation fºr Death.
REG | NERATION. m. ſ. [regeneration, Fr.] New birth; birth
by grace from carnal affections to a chriſtian life.
He ſaved us by the waſhing of regeneration, and renewing
of the Holy Ghoſt. - 7 it. iii. 5.
REGF's ERA+E Ness. n. ſ. [from regenerate.] The ſtate of
being regenerate.
REGENT, adj. [regent, Fr. regens, Lat.]
I. Governing; ruling. -
The operations of human life flow not from the corporeal
moles, but from ſome other active regent principle that reſides
". the body, or governs it, which we call the ſoul. Hale.
2. Exerciſing vicarious authority.
He together calls the reſ. »
T - gent pow'rs
Under him regent, Milton's Par. Lºft, b. iii.
Shakeſp. Richard II.
RE'GENT. m. ſ.
1. Governour; ruler.
Now for once beguil'd
Uriel, though regent of the fun, and held
The ſharpeſt-fighted ſpirit of all in heav'n. Miltºn.
Neither of theſe are any impediment, becauſe the regent
thereof is of an infinite immenſity. Hai.
Butlet a heifer with gilt horns be led
To Juno, regent of the marriage bed. Dryden.
2. One inveſted with vicarious royalty.
Lord regent, I do greet your excellence
With letters of commiſſion from the king. Shaſe?.
RE'GENtship. m. ſ. [from regent.] ~
1. Power of governing.
2. Deputed authority.
If York have ill demean'd himſelf in France,
Then let him be deny'd the regentſhip. Shake?.
Red ERMINATION. m. ſ. [re and germination.] The act of
fprouting again.
Regible. adj. Governable. Dić.
RE'G1cid E. m. ſ. [regicida, Lat.]
1. Murderer of his king.
I through the mazes of the bloody field,
Hunted your ſacred life; which that I miſs'd
Was the propitious error of my fate,
Not of my ſoul; my ſoul's a regicide. Drydºn.
2. [Regicidium, Lat.]. Murder of his king.
Were it not for this amulet, how were it poſſible for any
to think they may venture upon perjury, ſacrilege, murder,
regicide, without impeachment to their faintſhip. D. ºf Piety.
Did fate or we, when great Atrides dy'd,
Urge the bold traitor to the regicide. Pºpe's Od, ſy.
REGIMEN. m. ſ. [Latin.]. That care in diet and living,
that is ſuitable to every particular courſe of medicine.
Yet ſhould ſome neighbour feel a pain,
Juſt in the parts where I complain,
How many a meſſage would he ſend ?
What hearty prayers, that I ſhould mend ?
Enquire what regimen I kept,
What gave me caſe, and how I ſlept. - Swift.
REGIMENT. n.ſ. [regement, old Fr.]
1. Eſtabliſhed government; polity. Not in uſe.
We all make complaint of the iniquity of our times, not
unjuſtly, for the days are evil; "but compare them with thoſe
times wherein there were no civil ſocieties, with thoſe times
wherein there was as yet no manner of publick regiment citab-
liſhed, and we have ſurely good cauſe to think, that God
hath bleſſed us exceedingly. Hººker, b. i. ſ. I c.
The corruption of our nature being preſuppoſed, we may
not deny, but that the law of nature doth now require of nº-
ceſſity ſome kind of regiment. Hawker, b. i. ſ. 10.
2. Rule ; authority. Not in uſe.
The regiment of the ſoul over the body, is the regiment of
the more active part over the paſſive. Hale.
3. [Regiment, Fr.j A body of ſoldiers under one colonel.
Th’ adulterous Antony turns you off,
And gives his potent regiment to a trull. Shake?.
Higher to the plain we'll ſet forth,
In beſt appointment, all our regiments. Shake?.
The elder did whole regiments afford,
The younger brought his conduct and his ſword. J/aller.
The ſtanding regiments, the fort, the town,
All but this wicked ſiſter are our own. JWaller.
Now thy aid
Eugene, with regiments uncGual preſt, ---
Awaits. Philips.
REGIMENTAL. adj. [from regiment.j Belonging to * *ē"
ment ; military.
REGION. m. ſ. [region, Fr. regio, Lat.]
1. Tract of land; country; tract of ſpace.
All the regions
Do ſeemingly revolt; and, who reſiſt,
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance. Shakespeare.
Her eyes in heav'n -
Would through the airy region ſtream ſo bright,
That birds would ſing, and think it were nº night. S}{.
The upper regions of the air perceive the collection of the
matter of tempeſts before the air below. Bacºn.
They ragd the goddeſs, and with fury fraught,
The reitleſs regions of the ſtorms ſhe ſought. Dryden.
2. Part of the body.
The bow is bent and drawn, make from the ſhaft.
—Let it fall rather, though the fork invade -
The region of my heart. Shałºff. King Lear.
3. Place; rank. - -
The gentleman kept company with the wild Pºº and
Poins: he is of too high a region ; he knows too much. Sº:
REGISTER. m. ſ. [regiſtre, Fr. regiſlrum, Lat.] An account
of any thing regularly kept.
Joy may you have, and everlaſting fame,
Of late º hard atchievement by you done,
For which inrolled is your glorious name
In heavenly regiſters above the ſun. Fairy &amp;g:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E G
R # * ~
t
r
º,
Wºr
- -—-----.
Sir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you hear
them unfolded, turn another into the regiſter of your own. Sha.
This iſland, as appeareth by faithful regiſters of thoſe times,
had ſhips of great content. Bacon's New Atlantis.
Of theſe experiments, our friend, pointing at the regiſler
of this dialogue, will perhaps give you a more particular
account. Boyle.
For a conſpiracy againſt the emperor Claudius, it was or-
dered that Scribonianus's name and conſulate ſhould be ef-
faced out of all publick regiſters and inſcriptions. Addiſon.
2. [Regiſtrarius, law Lat.] The officer whoſe buſineſs is to
write and keep the regiſter.
To RE/G1st ER. v. a. [regiſłrer, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To record; to preſerve from oblivion by authentick accounts.
The Roman emperors regiſtered their moſt remarkable
buildings, as well as aétions. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
2. To enrol; to ſet down in a liſt.
Such follow him, as ſhall be regiſler'd;
Part good, part bad : of bad the longer ſcrowl. Miltºn.
RE'Gist RY. n.ſ.. [from regiſler.]
1. The act of inſerting in the regiſter.
A little fee was to be paid for the regiſlry. Graunt.
2. The place where the regiſter is kept.
3. A ſeries of fačis recorded.
I wonder why a regiºry has not been kept in the college of
phyſicians of things invented. Temple.
RÉ'GLEMENT. n.ſ. [French..] Regulation. Not uſed.
To ſpeak of the reformation and regement of uſury, by the
balance of commodities and diſcommodities thereof, two
things are to be reconciled. Bacon's Eſſays.
RE'glet. n. ſ. [reglette, from regle, Fr.] Ledge of wood
exactly planed, by which printers ſeparate their lines in pages
widely printed.
R+/GN ANT. adj. [French..] Reigning ; predominant; pre-
valent; having power.
Princes are ſhy of their ſucceſſors, and there may be rea-
ſonably ſuppoſed in queens regnant a little proportion of ten-
derneſs that way, more than in kings. //atton.
The law was regnant, and confin'd his thought,
Hell was not conquer'd, when the poet wrote. J/aller.
His guilt is clear, his proofs are pregnant,
A traytor to the vices regnant. Swift's Miſcellanies.
To REGo'RGE. v. a. [re and gorge.]
1. To vomit up; to throw back.
It was ſcoffingly ſaid, he had eaten the king's gooſe, and
did then regorge the feathers. Hayward.
2. To ſwallow eagerly.
Drunk with wine,
And fat regorg'd of bulls and goats.
3. [Regorger, Fr.] To ſwallow back.
As tides at higheſt mark regorge the flood,
So fate, that could no more improve their joy,
Took a malicious pleaſure to deſtroy. Dryden.
To REGRA'Ft. v. a. [regrºffer, Fr. re and graft.] To graft
293111.
Oft rºgrafting the ſame cions, may make fruit greater. Bac.
To REGRANT. v. a. [re and grant..] To grant back.
Milton's Agoniſłes.
He, by letters patents, incorporated them by the name of
the dean and chapter of Trinity-church in Norwich, and re-
granted their lands to them. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To REGRATE. v. a.
1. To offend ; to ſhock.
The cloathing of the tortoiſe and viper rather regrateth,
than pleaſeth the eye. Derham's Phyſico-Theology.
2. [Regratter, Fr.] To engroſs; to foreſtal.
Neither ſhould they buy any corn, unleſs it were to make
malt thereof; for by ſuch engroſſing and regrating, the dearth,
that commonly reigneth in England, hath been cauſed. Spenſ.
REGRATER. n.ſ. [regrattier, Fr. from regrate.] Foreſtaller;
engroſſer.
To REGREET. v. a. [re and greet.] To reſalute ; to grect a
ſecond time.
Hereford, on pain of death,
Till twice five ſummers have enrich'd our fields,
* Shall not regreet our fair dominions, -
But lead the ſtranger paths of baniſhment. Shakeſp.
RE GREET, n. ſ. [from the verb..] Return or exchange of fa-
lutation. Not in uſe.
And ſhall theſe hands, ſo newly join'd in love,
Unyoke this ſeizure, and this kind regreet P
Play faſt and looſe with ſaith ? Shakeſp. King john.
REGR ess. m. ſ. [regrès, Fr. regreſſiº, Latin.] Paſſage back;
power of paſſing back.
'Tis their natural place which they always tend to ; and
from which there is no progreſs nor regreſs. Burnet.
To REGRE'ss. v. n. [regreſſiº, Lat.] To go back; to return;
to paſs back to the former ſtate or place.
All being forced unto fluent conſiſtences, naturally regreſ;
unto their former ſolidities. Brown.
REGRE'ssion, n.ſ. [regreſſus, Lat.] The aët of returning or
going back.
To deſire there were no God, were plainly to unwiſh their
**g, which muſt needs be annihilated in the ſubtrac-
tion of that eſſence, which ſubſtantially ſupporteth them, and
reſtrains from *grefton into nothing. Brown:
REGRET. n.ſ. [regret, Fr. regretto, Italian. Prior has uſed it
in the plural; but, I believe, without authority.]
* Vºxation at ſomething paſt; bitternºr refle&amp;tion.
I never bare any touch of conſcience with greater regret.
King Charler.
eſs at its memory;
Decay of Piety.
pleaſing a dreſs, yet
ſoul, upon the com-
oſe faint gratifications
South's Sermons.
A paſſionate regret at fin, a grief and ſadn
enters us into God’s roll of mourners.
Though fin offers itſelf in never ſo
the remorſe and inward regrets of the
miſſion of it, infinitely overbalance th
it affords the ſenſes.
2. Grief; ſorrow.
Never any prince expreſſed a more lively regret for the loſs
of a ſervant, than his majeſty did for this great man; in all
offices of grace towards his ſervants, and in a wonderful ſoli.
citous care for the payment of his debts.
That freedom, which all ſorrows claims
She does for thy content reſign;
Her piety itſelf would blame,
If her regrets ſhould waken thine.
3. Diſlike; averſion. Not proper.
Is it a virtue to have ſome ineffećtive regrets to damnation,
and ſuch a virtue too, as ſhall ſerve to balance all our vices.
Decay of Piety.
To REGR 'T. v. a. [regretter, Fr. from the nj ºf Piety
1. To repent; to grieve at.
I ſhall not regret the trouble my experiments coſt me, if
they be found ſerviceable to the purpoſes of reſpiration. Boyle.
Calmly he look'd on either life, and here
Saw nothing to regret, or there to fear;
From nature's temp'rate feaſt roſe ſatisfy'd,
Thank'd heav'n that he had liv'd, and that he dy'd. Pope.
2. To be uneaſy at. Not proper.
Thoſe, the impiety of whoſe lives makes them regret a
deity, and ſecretly wiſh there were none, will greedily liſten
to atheiſtical notions. Glanville's Scepſ.
REGUER Don. n.ſ. (re and guerdon.] Reward; recompenſe.
Stoop, and ſet your knee againſt my foot;
And in reguerdon of that duty done,
I gird thee with the valiant ſword of York. Shakeſp.
To RE GUE'RDON. v. a. [from the noun..] To reward. The
verb and noun are both obſolete.
Long ſince we were reſolved of your truth,
Your faithful ſervice and your toil in war;
Yet never have you taſted your reward,
Or been reguerdon'd with ſo much as thanks.
REGULAR. adj. [regulier, Fr. regularis, Lat.]
1. Agreeable to rule; conſiſtent with the mode preſcribed.
The common cant of criticks is, that though the lines are
good, it is not a regular piece. Guardian.
The ways of heav'n are dark and intricate,
Puzzled in mazes, and perplex'd with errors;
Our underſtanding traces them in vain,
Loſt and bewilder'd in the fruitleſs ſearch ;
Nor ſecs with how much art the windings run,
Nor where the regular confuſion ends. Addiſon.
So when we view ſome well-proportion'd dome,
No monſtrous height or breadth or length appear;
The whole at once is bold and regular. Pope.
2. Governed by ſtrićt regulations.
So juſt thy ſkill, ſo regular my rage. Pope.
3. In geometry, regular body is a ſolid, whoſe ſurface is compoſed
of regular and equal figures, and whoſe ſolid angles are all equal,
and of which there are five ſorts, viz. 1. A pyramid compre-
hended under four equal and equilateral triangles. 2. A cube,
whoſe ſurface is compoſed of ſix equal ſquares. 3. That
which is bounded by eight equal and equilateral triangles.
4. That which is contained under twelve equal and equilate:
ral pentagons. 5. A body conſiſting of twenty equal and
equilateral triangles: and mathematicians demonſtrate, that
there can be no more regular bodies than theſe five. Muſchenbr.
There is no univerſal reaſon, not confined to human fancy?
that a figure, called regular, which hath equal ſides and
angles, is more beautiful than any irregular one. Bentley.
4. Inſtituted or initiated according to eſtabliſhed forms or diſci-
pline: as, a regular doctor; regular troops.
RE GULAR. m. ſ. [regulier, Fr.] -
In the Romiſh church, all perſons are ſaid to be regulars,
that do profeſs and follow a certain rule of life, in Latin
ſtiled regula; and do likewiſe obſerve the three approved WOW3
of poverty, chaſtity and obediense Ayliffe's Parergon.
Regula'RITY. m. ſ. [regularité, Fr. from regular.]
1. Agreeableneſs to rule.
2. Method; certain order. - - -
Regularity is certain, where it is not ſo apparent, as in all
fluids; for regularity is a ſimilitude continued. Grew.
He was a mighty lover of regularity and order ; and ma-
naged all his affairs with the utmoſt exactneſs. Atterbury.
Clarendon.
Prior.
Shakeſp,
2 I M REGULARLY.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E J
R E I
º
RE"G Uſ. A Rf Y adv. [from regular.] In a manner concordant
2 G * - - -
to rule. - - - d
, painters, who have left us ſuch fair platforms, ha
nº in their figures, they had indeed made
- things more regularly true, but withal very unpleaſing: Dryd.
-&gt; With one judicious ſtroke,
On the plain ground Apelles drew
A circle regularly true.
Strains that neither ebb nor flow,
Correctly cold and regularly low.
To REGULATE. v. a. [regula, Lat.]
1. To adjuſt by rule or method. - -
Nature, in the production of things, always deſigns them
to partake of certain, regulated, eſtabliſhed eſſences, which
are to be the models of all things, to be produced: this, in
that crude ſenſe, would need ſome better explication. Locke.
Prior.
Pope.
2. To direct. - - --
Regulate the patient in his manner of living. JPiſeman.
Ev’n goddeſſes are women ; and no wife
Has pow'r to regulate her huſband's life. Dryden.
Proglarios. n.ſ. (from regulate.]
1. The act of regulating. -
Being but ſtupid matter, they cannot continue any regular
and conſtant motion, without the guidance and regulation of
ſome intelligent being. Ray on the Creation.
2, Method; the effect of regulation.
Regulator. n.ſ.. [from regulate.]
1. One that regulates. - -
The regularity of corporeal principles ſheweth them to
come at firſt from a divine regulator. Grew's Coſmol.
2. That part of a machine which makes the motion equable.
REGULUS. n. ſ. [Lat. regule, Fr.]
Regulus is the finer and moſt weighty part of metals,
which ſettles at the bottom upon melting. &amp;uincy.
To REGU'RGITATE. v. n. [re and gurges, Lat. regorger,
Fr.] To throw back; to pour back.
The inhabitants of the city remove themſelves into the
country ſo long, until, for want of recept and encourage-
ment, it regurgitates and ſends them back. Graunt.
Arguments of divine wiſdom, in the frame of animate
bodies, are the artificial poſition of many valves, all ſo ſituate,
as to give a frce paſſage to the blood in their due channels,
but not permit them to regurgitate and diſturb the great cir-
culation. Bentley.
To R. Gu'Roit at E. v. n. To be poured back.
Nature was wont to evacuate its vicious blood out of theſe
veins, which paſſage being ſtopt, it regurgitates upwards to
the lungs. Harvey on Conſumptions.
REGURGITATIon. m. ſ. [from regugitate.] Reſorption;
the act of ſwallowing back.
Regurgitation of matter is the conſtant ſymptom. Sharp.
To REHEAR. v. a. [re and hear.] To hear again.
My deſign is to give all perſons a rehearing, who have
ſuffered under any unjuſt ſentence. Addiſon's Examiner.
REH F A'RSAL. m. ſ. [from rehearſe.]
1. Repetition; recital.
Twice we appoint, that the words which the miniſter pro-
nounceth, the whole congregation ſhall repeat after him; as
firſt in the publick confeſſion of fins, and again in rehearſal
of our Lord's prayer after the bleſſed ſacrament. Hooker.
What dream'd my lord tell me, and I'll requite it
With ſwect 'ehearſal of my morning's dream. Shakeſp.
what reſpected their actions as a rule or admonition, ap-
plied to yours, is only a rehearſal, whoſe zeal in aſſerting the
miniſterial cauſe is ſo generally known. Sºuth.
2. The recital of anything previous to publick exhibition.
- The chief of Rome,
With gaping mouths to theſe rehearſal come. Dryden.
To REHEARSE. v. a. [from rehear. Skinner.]
1. To repeat; to recite.
Rehearſe not unto another that which is told
Of modeſt poets be thou juſt, - Eccluſ.
To ſilent ſhades repeat thy verſe,
*Till ſame and echo almoſt burſt,
Yet hardly dare one line rehearſ. -
2. To relate; to tell. ſ: Swift.
Great maſter of the muſe ! inſpir'd
The pedigree of nature to rehearſe,
And ſound the maker's work in equal verſe. ------
3. To recite previouſly to publick exhibition. Dryden.
- All Rome is pleaſed, when Statius will rehearſe. Dryden.
*. v. a. [rºjicio, rejectus, Lat.
1. of º without compliance with propoſal or acceptance
Barbaroſſa was rejected into Syria, although he perceived
that it tended to his diſ x - r r-
2. To caſt off; to º,” * Hiſtory of the Turks.
Thou haſt rejecied the wººd of the Lord, and the Lord
º: thee from being king. I Sam. xv. 26
lve me wi - - -n-w - -v-
children. *om, and reject me not from § thy
He is deſpiſed and reječfed of men, a man of {{...}.
-
3. To refuſe ; not to accept.
Becauſe thou haſt rejected knowledge, I will reje: thee,
that thou ſhalt be no prieſt. Hºſea iv. 6.
Whether it be a divine revelation or no, reaſon muſt judge
which can never permit the mind to reject a greater evidence,
to embrace what is leſs evident. Loºke.
4. To throw aſide.
Rejection. m. ſ. [rºječio, Lat..] The ačt of caſting off or
throwing aſide. Sº
The rejection I uſe of experiments, is infinite; but if an ex-
periment be probable and of great uſe, I receive it. Bacon.
Medicines urinative do not work by reječiion and indigeſ-
tion, as ſolutive do. - Hºn.
Rei'Gle. n.ſ. [regle, Fr.] A hollow cut to guide anything.
A flood gate is drawn up and let down through the riº,
in the ſide poſts. Carew's Surve of Cornwall.
To REIGN. v. n. [regno, Lat. regner, Fr.]
1. To enjoy or exerciſe ſovereign authority.
This, done by them, gave them füch an authority, that
though he reigned, they in effect ruled, moſt men hoñouring
them, becauſe they only deſerved honour. Sidney, b. ii.
Tell me, ſhall Banquo's iſſue ever
Reign in this kingdom Shakeſp. Maclºth.
A king ſhall reign in righteouſneſs, and princes rule in
judgment. - 1ſ. xxxi. 1.
Did he not firſt ſev’n years a life-time reign. Cowley.
This right arm ſhall fix
Her ſeat of empire; and your ſon ſhall reign. A. Philips.
2. To be predominant; to prevail.
Now did the ſign reign, under which Perkin ſhould ap- -
pear. Bacon.
More are ſick in the ſummer, and more die in the winter,
except in peſtilent diſeaſes, which commonly reign in ſummer
Or autumn. Bacon.
Great ſecrecy reigns in their publick councils. Addison.
3. To obtain power or dominion.
That as ſin reigned unto death, even ſo might grace reign
through righteouſneſs unto eternal life by Jeſus Chriſt. Romani.
Reig N. ...} [regne, Fr. regnum, Lat.]
1. Royal authority; ſovereignty.
He who like a father held his reign,
So ſoon forgot, was juſt and wife in vain. Pºpe.
2. Time of a king's government.
Queer country puts extol queen Beſs's reign,
And of loſt hoſpitality complain. Bramſon.
Ruſſel’s blood
Stain'd the ſad annals of a giddy reign. Thomſºn."
3. Kingdom ; dominions.
Saturn's ſons receiv'd the threefold reign
Of heav'n, of ocean and deep hell beneath. Prior.
That wrath which hurl’d to Pluto's gloomy reign,
The ſouls of mighty chiefs untimely ſlain. Pope.
To REIMBo' dy. v. n. (re and imbody, which is more frequent-
ly, but not more properly, written embody.j To embody again.
Quickſilver, broken into little globes, the parts brought to
touch immediately reimbody. Bºyle.
To REIMBU'RSE. v. a. [re, in and lourſe, Fr; a purſe.] To
repay; to repair loſs or expence by an equivalent.
Hath he ſaved any kingdom at his own expence, to
give him a title of reimburſing himſelf by the deſtructiºn of
ours ? Swift's Miſcellanies.
Reimbu'Rs EMENT. n.ſ.. [from reimbu’ſ...] Reparation or
repayment.
If any perſon has been at expence about the funeral of a
ſcholar, he may retain his books for the reimburſtºnt. Ayliffe.
To ReimpreſcNATE. v. a. [re and impregnate.] To impreg-
nate anew. --- -
The vigor of the loadſtone is deſtroyed by fire, nor will it
be reimpregnated by any other magnet than the earth. Brown.
Rei MPR £ssion. n.ſ. [re and imprºftºn.] A ſecond or re-
peated jºr I
RE IN. m. ſ. ſreſnes, Fr.
1. The part |. bridie, which extends from the horſe's head
to the driver's or rider's hand. - -
Every horſe bears his commanding rein,
And may direét his courſe as pleaſe himſelf. Shake?:
Take you the reins, while I from cares remove,
And ſleep within the chariot which I drove. Drydºn.
with haſty hand the ruling reins he drew ;
He laſh'd the courſers, and the courſers flew. Pºpe.
2. Uſed as an inſtrument of government, or for government.
The hard rein, which both of them have borne
Againſt the old kind king. Shakeſp. King Lear.
3. To give the REINS. To give licenſe.
War to diſorder'd rage let looſe the reins. Milton.
When to his luſt AEgiſthus gave the rein,
Did fate or we th’ adulterous act conſtrain. Pope.
To Rein. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To govern by a bridle. -
#. ñº, proud ſteed rein'd, went haughty on. Milton.
His ſon retain'd - - d
His father's art, and warriour ſteeds he rº" d. Dry †.
2.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E J
º,
2. To reſtrain; to control.
And where you find a maid,
That, ere ſhe ſleep, hath thrice her pray'rs ſaid,
Rein up the organs of her fantaſy ;
Sleep ſhe as found as careleſs infancy. Shakeſp.
Being once chaft, he cannot
Be rein’d again to temperance ; then he ſpeaks
What's in his heart. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
REINs. n.ſ. [renes, Lat. rein, Fr.] The kidneys; the lower
part of the back.
Whom I ſhall ſee for myſelf, though my reins be con-
ſumed. job xix. 27.
To REINse'RT. v. a... [re and inſert.] To inſert a ſecond time.
To REINSPI'RE. v. a. [re and inſpire.] To inſpire anew.
Time will run
On ſmoother, till Favonius reinſpire
The frozen earth, and cloath in freſh attire
The lilly and roſe. Milton.
The mangled dame lay breathleſs on the ground,
When on a ſudden reinſpir’d with breath,
Again ſhe roſe. Dryden.
To Reinst Al. v. 4. [re and inſtal.]
1. To ſeat again.
That alone can truly reinſtall thee
In David's royal ſeat, his true ſucceſſor. Milton.
2. To put again in poſſeſſion. This example is not very proper.
Thy father
Levied an army, weening to redeem
And reinſtal me in the diadem. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
To REINSTATE. v. a. ſº e and inſtate.] To put again in poſ-
ſeſſion.
David, after that ſignal vićtory, which had preſerved his
life, reinſlated him in his throne, and reſtored him to the ark
and ſanctuary ; yet ſuffered the loſs of his rebellious ſon to
overwhelm the ſenſe of his deliverance. Gov. of the Tongue.
Modeſty reinſtates the widow in her virginity. Addiſon.
The reinſtating of this hero in the peaceable poſſeſſion of
his kingdom, was acknowledged. Pope.
To RE1'NTEGRATE. v. a. [reinteger, Fr. re and integer, Lat.
It ſhould perhaps be written redintegrate.] To renew with
regard to any ſtate or quality; to repair; to reſtore.
This league drove out all the Spaniards out of Germany,
and reintegrated that nation in their ancient liberty. Bacon.
The falling from a diſcord to a concord hath an agree-
ment with the affections, which are reintegrated to the better
after ſome diſlikes. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
To REINve'sT. v.a. [re and inveſ?..] To inveſt anew.
To REJOI/CE. v. m. [rejouir, Fr.] To be glad ; to joy ;
to exult; to receive pleaſure from ſomething paſt.
This is the rejoicing city that dwelt careleſly, that ſaid,
there is none beſide me. Zeph. ii. 15.
I will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their
ſorrow. jer. xxxi. 13.
Let them be brought to confuſion, that rejoice at mine
hurt. - Pſalm xxxv. 26.
Jethro rejoiced for all the goodneſs which the Lord had
done. Exodus xviii. 9.
They rejoice each with their kind. - AMilton.
To Rejoice. v. a. To exhilarate ; to gladden ; to make
joyful; to glad.
Thy teſtimonies are the rejoicings of my heart. Pſ. cxix.
Alone to thy renown 'tis giv'n, -
Unbounded through all worlds to go ;
While ſhe great ſaint rejoices heav'n,
And thou ſuſtain'ſt the orb below. Prior.
I ſhould give Cain the honour of the invention; were he
alive, it would rejoice his ſoul to ſee what miſchief it had
made. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Rejoicer. n.ſ.. [from rejoice..] One that rejoices.
Whatſoever faith entertains, produces love to God; but
he that believes God to be cruel or a rejoicer in the unavoid-
able damnation of the greateſt part of mankind, thinks evil
thoughts concerning God. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
To REJOI’N. v. a. [rejoindre, Fr.]
I. To join again.
The grand ſignior conveyeth his gallies down to Grand
Cairo, where they are taken in pieces, carried upon camels
backs, and rejoined together at Sues. Brown's Wulg. Err.
2. To meet one again. -
Thoughts, which at Hyde-park-corner I forgot,
Meet and rejoin me in the penſive grot. Pope.
To Re Joi'N. v. n. To anſwer to an anſwer.
It will be replied, that he receives advantage by this lop-
ping of his ſuperfluous branches; but I rejoin, that a tran-
ſlator has no ſuch right. Dryden's Preface to Ovid.
REJoi'NDER, n. ſ. [from rejoin.]
1. Reply to an anſwer. -
The quality of the perſon makes me judge myſelf obliged
to a rejoinder. Glanvill to Albius.
2. Reft ; anſwer.
njury of chance rudely beguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure, Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſide.
1
RF Jo'Lt. n.ſ. [rejºillir, Fr.] Shock; ſuccuſion.
The ſinner, at his higheſt pitch of enjoyment, is not pleaſed
with it ſo much, but he is afflicted moré ; and as long as theſe
inward rejolts and recoilings of the mind continue, the ſinner
will find his accounts of pleaſure very poor. South.
REIT. ºſ. Sedge or ſea weed. Bailey.
To REI TERATE. * * [re and itero, Lat, reiterer, Fr.] -
To repeat again and again. :
You never ſpoke what did become you leſs
Than this ; which to reiterate, were ſin. Shakeſp
With reiterated crimes he might - |
Heap on himſelf damnation. Milton.
Although Chriſt hath forbid us to uſe vain repetitions when
we pray, yet he hath taught us, that to reiterate the ſame re-
queſts will not be vain. Smalridge.
REITERATION. n.ſ. [reiteration, Fr. from reiterate.] Repetition.
It is uſeful to have new experiments tried over again; ſuch
reiterations commonly exhibiting new phenomena. Boyle.
The words are a reiteration or reinforcement of an applica-
tion, ariſing from the conſideration of the excellency of
Chriſt above Moſes. Ward of Infidelity.
To Re JU'DGE. v. a. [re and judge.] To reexamine; to re-
view ; to recal to a new trial.
The muſe attends thee to the ſilent ſhade;
'Tis hers the brave man's lateſt ſteps to trace,
Rejudge his acts, and dignify diſgrace. Pope.
To REK1 NBL.E. v. a. [re and kindle.] To ſet on fire again.
Theſe diſappearing, fixed ſtars were ačtually extinguiſhed,
and would for ever continue ſo, if not rekindled, and new re-
cruited with heat and light. Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
Rekindled at the royal charms,
Tumultuous love each beating boſom warms. Pope.
To Re LAP's E. v. n. [relapſus, Lat.]
1. To ſlip back; to ſlide or fall back.
2. To fall back into vice or errour.
The oftner he hath relapſed, the more ſignifications he
ought to give of the truth of his repentance. Taylor.
3. To fall back from a ſtate of recovery to ſickneſs.
He was not well cured, and would have relapſed. Wiſsm.
RELA'pse. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
I. Fall into vice or errour once forſaken.
This would but lead me to a worſe relapſe
And heavier fall. Milton. i
We ſee in too frequent inſtances the relapſes of thoſe, who,
under the preſent ſmart, or the near apprehenſion of the di-
vine pleaſure, have reſolved on a religious reformation. Rog.
2. Regreſſion from a ſtate of recovery to ſickneſs.
It was even as two phyſicians ſhould take one ſick body in
hand; of which, the former would purge and keep under the
body, the other pamper and ſtrengthen it ſuddenly; whereof
what is to be looked for, but a moſt dangerous relapſe. Spenſ.
3. Return to any ſtate. The ſenſe here is ſomewhat obſcure.
Mark a bounding valour in our Engliſh ;
That being dead like to the bullet's grazing,
Breaks out into a ſecond courſe of miſchief,
Killing in relapſe of mortality. Shakeſp. Henry V
To RELATE. v. a. [relatus, Lat.]
1. To tell; to recite.
Your wife and babes
Savagely ſlaughter'd ; to relate the manner,
Were to add the death of you. Shakeſp. Macbeth
Here I could frequent
With worſhip place by place, where he vouchſaf’d
Preſence divine ; and to my ſons relate. Milton.
The drama repreſents to view, what the poem only does
relate. Dryden.
A man were better relate himſelf to a ſtatue, than ſuffer
his thoughts to paſs in ſmother. Bacon.
2. To ally by kindred.
- Avails thee not,
To whom related, or by whom begot;
A heap of duſt alone remains. Pºpe.
3. To bring back; to refore. A Latiniſm. Spenſer.
To RELATE. v. n. To have reference; to have reſpect.
All negative or privative words relate to poſitive ideas, and
ſignify their abſence. Locke.
As other courts demanded the execution of Perſons dead
in law, this gave the laſt orders relating tº thoſe dead in
reaſon. Tatler, N° 1 Io.
RELATER. n.ſ.. [from relate.] Teller; narrator.
we ſhall rather perform good office; untº truth, than any
diſſervice unto their relaters. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Her huſband the relater ſhe prefer'd - ---
Before the angel. Millon's Paradiſe Loſt, b. viii.
The beſt Engliſh hiſtorian, when his ſtyle grows antiquated,
will be only conſidered as a tedious relater of facts. Swift.
RELA'tion. n.ſ. [relation, Fr. from relate.]
1. Manner of belonging to any perſon of thing.
Under this ſtone lies virtue, youth,
Unblemiſh’d probity and truth;
Juſt unto all relations known,
A worthy patriot, pious ſon. irº,
o<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R F. L
R E. L.
3. *o tºke leſs attentive or laborious.
So far as ſervice imports duty and ſubjećtion, all created
beings bear the neceſſary relation of ſervants to God. South.
Our neceſſary relations to a family, oblige all to uſe their
reaſoning powers upon a thouſand occaſions. //atts.
2. Reſpect; reference ; regard. - -
I have been importuned to make ſome obſervations on this
art, in relation to its agreement with poetry. Dryden.
Relation conſiſts in the conſideration and comparing one
idea with another. Locke.
3. Connexion between one thing and another.
Augurs, that underſtand relations, º: h
By magpies, choughs and rooks brought fort
#. jä man of blood. Shakespeare Macbeth.
4. Kindred ; alliance of kin. -
Relations dear, and all the charities : -
Of fathers, ſon and brother firſt were known. Milton.
Be kindred and relation laid aſide, »
And honour's cauſe by laws of honour try’d. Dryden.
Are we not to pity and ſupply the poor, though they have
no ºn to us; no relation # that cannot be : the goſpel
ſtiles them all our brethren; nay, they have a nearer relation
to us, our fellow-members ; and both theſe from their rela-
tiºn to our Saviour himſelf, who calls them his brethren. Sprat.
5. Perſon related by birth or marriage; kinſman; kinſwoman.
A ſhe-couſin, of a good family and ſmall fortune, paſſed
months among all her relations. - Swift.
Dependants, friends, relations, -
Savag'd by woe, forget the tender tie. Thomſºn.
6. Narrative; tale ; account : narration ; recital of facts.
In an hiſtorical relation, we uſe terms that are moſt
proper. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The author of a juſt fable, muſt pleaſe more than the
writer of an hiſtorical relatiºn. Dennis's Letters.
RE'LATIvr. adj. [relativus, Lat. relatif, Fr.]
1. Having relation; reſpecting.
Not only fimple ideas and ſubſtances, but modes are poſi-
tive beings; though the parts of which they conſiſt, are very
often elative one to another. Locke.
2. Conſidered not abſolutely, but as belonging to, or reſpecting
ſomething elſe.
The eccleſiaſtical, as well as the civil governour, has
cauſe to purſue the ſame methods of confirming himſelf; the
grounds of government being founded upon the ſame bottom
of nature in both, though the circumſtances and relative con-
ſiderations of the perſons may differ. South.
Every thing ſuſtains both an abſolute and a relative capa-
city: an abſolute, as it is ſuch a thing, endued with ſuch a
nature; and a relative, as it is a part of the univerſe, and ſo
ſtands in ſuch relation to the whole. South.
Wholeſome and unwholeſome are relative, not real qua-
lities. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
3. Particular ; poſitive; cloſe in connection. Not in uſe.
I'll have grounds
More relative than this.
RE'LATIVE. m. ſ.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
1. Relation ; kinſman. -
'Tis an evil dutifulneſs in friends and relatives, to ſuffer one
to periſh without reproof. Taylor.
2. Pronoun anſwering to an antecedent.
Learn the right joining of ſubſtantives with adjećtives, and
the relative with the antecedent. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
3. Somewhat reſpecting ſomething elſe.
When the mind ſo conſiders one thing, that it ſets it by
another, and carries its view from one to the other, this is
relation and reſpect; and the denominations given to poſitive
things, intimating that reſpect, are relatives. Locke.
RF Hariv ELY. adº. [from jelative..] As it reſpects ſomething
elſe; not abſolutely. -
All thoſe things, that ſeem ſo foul and diſagreeable in na-
"...are not really ſo in themſelves, but only relatively. More.
Theſe being the greateſt good or the greateſt evil, either
abſolutely ſo in themſelves, or relatively ſo to us; it is there-
* good to be zealouſly affected for the one againſt the
other. C Sprat.
Conſider the abſolute affections of any being as it is in it-
ſelf, before you confider it relatively, or ſurvey the various
relations in which it ſtands to other beings. //atts.
z - - - - -- - * - -
RE ***** FN ESS. m. ſ. [from relative. The ſtate of having
relation.
To RELAX. v. a. [relaxo, Lat.]
I. To ſlacken ; to make leſs tenſe.
| he finews, when the ſouthern wind bloweth, are more
7 tax. • -
2. To remi Bacºn's Natural Hiſtory.
- **mit 3 to make leſs ſevere or rigorous.
- +. - - -
th ſ he *tute of mortmain was at ſeveral times relaxed by
e legiſlature. - Swift
Nor praiſe rela, - - - --
4. To eaſe; to iſ.” nor difficulty fright, Panity of Jºſhes.
5. To open to loof.
*** not to relax their ſeried files. Milton.
o RF LAx, U. m. T - -
rigorous. To be mild ; to be remiſs 5 to be not
If in ſome regards ſhe choſe
To curb poor Paulo in too cloſe ;
In others ſhe relax'd again,
And govern'd with a looſer rein. Prior.
Rei. Ax A^rio N. m. ſ. [relaxation, Fr. relaxatio, Lat.]
1. Diminution of tenſion; the act of looſening.
Cold ſweats are many times mortal ; for that they come by
a relaxation or forſaking of the ſpirits. Bacon.
Many, who live healthy in a dry air, fall into all the diſ-
eaſes that depend upon relaxation in a moiſt one. Arbuthnot.
2. Ceſſation of reſtraint. -
The ſea is not higher than the land, as ſome imagined the
ſea ſtood upon heap higher than the ſhore; and at the deluge
a relaxation being made, it overflow'd the land. Burnet.
3. Remiſſion; abatement of rigour.
They childiſhly granted, by common conſent of their whole
ſenate, under their town ſeal, a relaxation to one Bertelier,
whom the elderſhip had excommunicated. Hooker.
The relaxation of the ſtatute of mortmain, is one of the
reaſons which gives the biſhop terrible apprehenſions of po-
pery coming on us. Swift.
4. Remiſfion of attention or application.
As God has not ſo devoted our bodies to toil, but that he
allows us ſome recreation: ſo doubtleſs he indulges the ſame
relaxation to our minds. Government of the Tongue.
There would be no buſineſs in ſolitude, nor proper relax-
ations in buſineſs. Addiſon's Freeholder.
RELA'Y. m. ſ. [relair, Fr.] Horſes on the road to relieve others.
To RELEA se. v. a. [relaſcher, relaxer, Fr. J
1. To ſet free from confinement or ſervitude.
Pilate ſaid, whom will ye that I releaſe unto you? Mat.
You releas'd his courage, and ſet free
A valour fatal to the enemy. Dryden.
Why ſhould a reaſonable man put it into the power of for-
tune to make him miſerable, when his anceſtors have taken
care to releaſe him from her ? Dryden.
2. To ſet free from pain.
3. To free from obligation.
Too ſecure, becauſe from death releas'd ſome days. Mill.
4. To quit; to let go.
He had been baſe, had he releas'd his right,
For ſuch an empire none but kings ſhould fight. Dryden.
5. To relax; to ſlacken. Not in uſe.
It may not ſeem hard, if in caſes of neceſſity certain pro-
fitable ordinances ſometimes be releaſed, rather than all men
always ſtrićtly bound to the general rigor thereof. Hooker.
Rele A's E. m. ſ. [rela che, Fr. from the verb.]
1. Diſmiſſion from confinement, ſervitude or pain.
O fatal ſearch 1 in which the lab’ring mind,
Still preſs'd with weight of woe, ſtill hopes to find
A ſhadow of delight, a dream of peace,
From years of pain, one moment of releaſe. Prior.
2. Relaxation of a penalty.
3. Remiſſion of a claim.
The king made a great feaſt, and made a releaſe to the
provinces, and gave gifts. Efth. ii. 18.
The king would not have one penny abated, of what had
been granted by parliament; becauſe it might encourage other
countries to pray the like releaſe or mitigation. Bacon.
4. Acquittance from a debt ſigned by the creditor. -
To Re"legate. v. a. [releguer, Fr. relego, Lat..] To baniſh;
to exile. -
Relegation. n.ſ. [relegation, Fr. relegatio, Lat.] Exile;
judicial baniſhment. -
According to the civil law, the extraordinary puniſhment
of adultery was deportation or relegation. Ayliffe.
To RELENT. v. n. [ralentir, Fr.]
1. To ſoften ; to grow leſs rigid or hard ; to give. -
In ſome houſes, ſweetmeats will relent more than in
others. Bacon.
In that ſoft ſeaſon, when deſcending ſhow'rs
Call forth the greens, and wake the riſing flow’rs;
When opening buds ſalute the welcome day,
And earth relenting feels the genial ray. Pope.
2. To melt; to grow moiſt.
Crows ſeem to call upon rain, which is but the conſort
they ſeem to receive in the relenting of the air. . . **
Salt of tartar, brought to fuſion, and placed in a cº-
will, in a few minutes, begin to relent, and have its ſº
ſoftened by the imbibed moiſture of the air, wherein if it be
left long, it will totally be diſſolved. Boyle.
All nature mourns, the ſkies relent in ſhow’rs, *
Huſh'd are the birds, and clos'd the drooping flow’rs;
If Delia ſmile, the flow’rs begin to ſpring,
The ſkies to brighten, and the birds to ſing: Pope.
3. To grow leſs intenſe. -
I have marked in you a relenting truly, ſt
the main career, you had ſo notably begun, and almo
performed. º:
The workmen let glaſs cool by degrees in ſuch relenting, 2
fire, as they call their nealing heats, left it ſhould ſhiver in
pieces by a violent ſucceeding of air. Digby on # -
and a ſlacking of
To
3
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E L
R E L
Wr
4. To ſoften in temper; to grow tender; to feel compaſſion.
Can you behold
My tears, and not once relent * Shakeſp. Henry VI.
'll not be made a ſoft and dull-ey'd fool,
To ſhake the head, relent, and figh, and yield
To chriſtian interceſſors. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn
From his diſpleaſure.
He ſung, and hell conſented
To hear the poet's pray’r;
Stern Proſperine relented,
And gave him back the fair. Pope.
To RELE/NT. v. a. -
1. To ſlacken; to remit. Obſolete.
Apace he ſhot, and yet he fled apace,
And oftentimes he would relent his pace,
That him his foe more fiercely ſhould purſue. Fa. Queen.
2. To ſoften ; to mollify. Obſolete.
Air hated earth, and water hated fire,
Till love relented their rebellious ire.
RELE Ntless. adj. [from relent.]
1. Uppitying; unmoved by kindneſs or tenderneſs.
For this th’ avenging pow'r employs his darts;
Thus will perſiſt, ſelentleſ, in his ire,
Till the fair ſlave be render'd to her fire.
Why ſhould the weeping hero now
Relentles to their wiſhes prove. Prior.
2. In Miltºn, it perhaps ſignifies unremitted; intenſely fixed upon
diſquieting objects.
Only in deſtroying, I find eaſe
To my relent'ſ thoughts. Milton's Par. Loft.
RELEVANT, adj. [French.] Relieving. Die?.
RE LEva’rios. m. ſ. [.. elevatio, Lat..] A raiſing or lifting up.
RELIANCE. m. ſ. [from rely..] Truſt; dependance; confi-
dence; repoſe of mind. With on before the obječt of truſt.
His days and times are paſt, - -
And my reliance on his fraćted dates
Has ſmit my credit. Shakeſp. Timon of Athent.
That pellucid gelatinous ſubſtance, which he pitches upon
with ſo great reliance and poſitiveneſs, is chiefly of animal
conſtitution. Woodward.
He ſecured and encreaſed his proſperity, by an humble be-
haviour towards God, and a dutiful reliance on his provi-
dence. Atterbury's Sermons.
They aſſorded a ſufficient convićtion of this truth, and a
firm º, ci, the promiſes contained in it. Rogers.
Reſignation in death, and reliance on the divine mercies,
give comfort to the friends of the dying. Cariſſa.
Misfortunes often reduce us to a better reliance, than that
we have been accuſtomed to fix upon. Clariſſa.
Milton.
Spenſer.
Dryden.
RELICK. r. ſ. [reliquiæ, I at reºrie, Fr.]
1. That which remains; that which is left after the loſs or de-
cay of the reſt. It is generally uſed in the plural.
Up drcary dame of darkneſs queen,
Go gather up the reliques of thy race,
Or elſe go them avenge. Fairy Queen, b. i.
Shall we go ſee the relicks of this town. Shakáſp.
The fragments, ſcraps, the bits and greaſy reliques
Of her o’ereaten faith are bound to Diomede. Shakeſp.
Nor death itſelf can wholly waſh their ſtains,
But long contracted filth ev’n in the ſoul remains;
The relicks of inveterate vice they wear,
And ſpots of ſin. Dryden's Aneis.
2. It is often taken for the body deſerted by the ſoul.
What needs my Shakeſpeare for his honour’d bones,
The labour of an age in piled ſtones ;
Or that his hallow'd reliques ſhould be kid
Under a ſtar-ypointed pyramid. Milton.
In pcace, ye ſhades of our great grandfires, reſt;
Eternal ſpring, and riſing flow’rs adorn
The relicks of each venerable urn. Dryden.
Shall our relicks ſecond birth receive -
Sleep we to wake, and only die to live Prior.
Thy relicks, Rowe, to this fair ſhrine we truſt,
And ſacred place by Dryden's awful duſt;
Beneath a rude and nameleſs ſtone he lies,
To which thy tomb ſhall guide enquiring eyes. Pope.
3 That which is kept in memory of another, with a kind of
religious veneration. -
Cowls flutter'd into rags, then reliques leaves -
The ſport of winds. Milton.
This church is very rich in relicks; among the reſt, they
ſhow a fragment of Thomas à Becket, as indeed there are
very few treaſuries of relicks in Italy, that have not a tooth or
a bone of this ſaint. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
E'Lickly. adv. [from relick.] In the manner of relicks.
Thrifty wench ſcrapes kitchen ſtuff,
And barreling the droppings and the ſnuff
Of waſting candles, which in thirty year
Relickly kept, perhaps buys wedding cheer. JDonne.
Relict. m. ſ. [relićte, old Fr. relicia, Lat..] A widow; a
wife deſolate by the death of her huſband.
If the fathers and huſbands were of the houſhold of faith,
then “."y their relicts and children cannot be ſtrangers in
this houſhold. Sprat's sºmei.
* Chaſte relić" /
Honour'd on earth, and worthy of the love
Of ſuch a ſpouſe, as now reſides above
RELIE/F. n. ſ. [relief, Fr.] -
I. The P” ºnce of a figure in ſtone or metal ; the ſeeming
rº of : picture. c
9 *gures of many ancient coins ri -
beautiful relief than º on the º p º: º:
by degrees in the ſeveral declenſions of the émºir: ill so
... ------~~ -: - - - pire, till about
ºniº 8 time, it lies almoſt even with the ſurface of the
Illedal. Addiſon a - 2/12/
Not with ſuch majeſty, ſuch bold º: Ancient Medals.
The forms augiſt of kings, or conqu'ring chief
Per ſwell'd on marble, as in verſe have ſhin'd y
In poliſh'd verſe, the manners and the mind.” Pope
2. The recommendation of anything, by the interpoſition of
ſomething different.
3. Alleviation of calamity; mitigation of pain or ſorrow.
Thoughts in my inquiet breaſt are riſen,
Tending to ſome relief of our extremes.
4. That which frees from pain or ſorrow.
So ſhould we make our death a glad relief
From future ſhame. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Nor dar'd I to preſume, that preſs'd with grief,
My flight ſhould urge you to this dire relief;
Stay, ſtay your ſteps. Dryden's AEnei;.
5. Diſmiſſion of a ſentinel from his poſt.
For this relief, much thanks; 'tis bitter cold,
And I am ſick at heart. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
6. [Relevium, law Lat.J Legal remedy of wrongs.
RELIEVABLE. adj. [from relieve..] Capable of relief.
Neither can they, as to reparation, hold plea of things,
wherein the party is relievable by common law. Hale.
To RELIEVE. [relevo, Lat. ràever, Fr.]
I. To recommend by the interpoſition of ſomething diſfimilar.
As the great lamp of day,
Through diff'rent regions, does his courſe purſue,
And leaves one world but to revive a new ;
While, by a pleaſing change, the queen of night
Relieves his luſtre with a milder light. Stepney.
Since the inculcating precept upon precept will prove tiré-
ſome, the poet muſt not encumber his poem with too much
buſineſs; but ſometimes relieve the ſubject with a moral re-
fle&amp;tion. Addiſon's Eſſay on the Georgicks.
2. To ſupport; to aſſiſt.
Parallels, or like relations, alternately relieve each other;
when neither will paſs aſunder, yet are they plauſible to:
gether. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
3. To eaſe pain or ſorrow.
4. To ſuccour by aſſiſtance.
From thy growing ſtore,
Now lend aſſiſtance, and relieve the poor; -
A pittance of thy land will ſet him free. Dryden.
5. To ſet a ſentinel at reſt, by placing another on his poſt.
Honeſt ſoldier, who hath relieved you ?
—Bernado has my place, give you good night. Shakespeare.
Relieve the centries that have watch'd all night. Dryden.
6. To right by law.
Relieve R. n.ſ. (from relieve..] One that relieves.
He is the protector of his weakneſs, and the reliever of his
Wants. Rogers's Sermons.
RELIE/PO. n.ſ. [Italian.] The prominence of a figure or
pićture.
A convex mirrour makes the objećts in the middle come
out from the ſuperficies: the painter muſt do ſo in reſpect of
the lights and ſhadows of his figures, to give them more re-
lievo and more ſtrength. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
To RELIGHT. v. a. [re and light.] To light anew.
His pow'r can heal me, and relight my eye. Pope.
RELIGION. m. ſ. [religion, Fr. religio, Lat.]
1. Virtue, as founded upon reverence of God, and expectation
of future rewards and puniſhments,
He that is void of fear, may ſoon be juſt,
Garth.
Milton.
And no religion binds men to be traitors. Benj. johnſºn.
One ſpake much of right and wrong,
Of juſtice, of religion, truth and peace -
Milton.
And judgment from above. - - -
If we conſider it as directed againſt God, it is a breach of
religion; if as to men, it is an offence againſt morality. South.
By her inform'd, we beſt religion learn,
Blackmºre.
Its glorious object by her aid diſcern.
.. Or . in a large ſenſe, includes duty to God
and our neighbour; but in a proper ſenſº, virtue ſignifies
duty towards men, and religion duty to God. Hatts.
2. A ſyſtem of diving faith and worſhip as oppoſite to others.
The image of a brute, adorn'd -
with gay religiºns, full of pomp and gold. Aſtºn,
The Chriſtian religion, rightly underſtood, is the deepeſt
and choiceſt piece of philoſophy that is, A for e.
21 N I he<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E L
2-
R E L
oſpel propoſes to men ſuch glorious
puniſhments as no º . did,
..". . greater aſſurance of their reality ºn, sº
iºn ever j. world had. - Tillotſon.
RELI'GIoM IST. m. ſ. [from religion.] A bigot to any religious
perſuaſion. - h
The lawfulneſs of taking oaths may be revealed to the
quakers, who then will ſtand upon as good a foot for preſer-
jit as any other ſubject ; under ſuch a motly adminiſtra-
tion, what pullings and hawlings, what a zeal and biaſs there
will be in each religioniſt to advance his own tribe, and de-
reſs the others. Swift.
RELIGIOUS. adj. [religieux, Fr. religioſus, Lat.]
1. Pious; diſpoſed to the duties of religion. -
It is a matter of ſound conſequence, that all duties are by
The doćtrine of the g
rewards and ſuch terrible
ſo much the better performed, by how much the men are
more religious, from whoſe habilities the ſame proceed. Hook.
when holy and devout religious chriſtians
Are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them from thence;
so ſweet is zealous contemplation Shakeſp.
Their lives -
Religious titled them the ſons of God. Milton.
2. Teaching religion.
He à. doth late and early pray,
More of his grace than gifts to lend ;
And entertains the harmleſs day
With a religious book or friend. J/atton.
3. Among the Romaniſts, bound by the vows of poverty, cha-
flity and obedience. -
Čertain fryars and religious men were moved with ſome zeal,
to draw the people to the chriſtian faith: Abbot.
France has vaſt numbers of eccleſiaſticks, ſecular and re-
ligiour: Addiſon's State of the War.
what the proteſtants would call a fanatick, is in the Ro-
man church a religious of ſuch an order; as an Engliſh mºr-
chant in Liſbon, after ſome great diſappointments in the
world, reſolved to turn capuchin. Addiſon.
4. Exačt; ſtričt.
Religiously. adv. [from religious.]
1. Piouſly; with obedience to the dićtates of religion.
2. According to the rites of religion.
Theſe are their brethren, whom you Goths behold
Alive and dead, and for their brethren ſlain
Religiouſly they aſk a ſacrifice. Shakeſp. Titus Andron.
3, Reverently ; with veneration.
Doſt thou in all thy addreſſes to him, come into his pre- .
ſence with reverence, kneeling and religiouſly bowing thyſelf
before him. Duppa's Rules to Devotion.
4. Exačtly; with ſtrićt obſervance.
The privileges, juſtly due to the members of the two houſes
and their attendants, are religiouſly to be maintained. Bacon.
Religiousness. n.f. [from religious.] The quality or ſtate
of being religious.
To RELI'NQUISH. v. a. [relinquo, Lat.]
1. To forſake; to abandon; to leave; to deſert.
The habitation there was utterly relinquiſhed. Abbot.
The Engliſh colonies grew poor and weak, though the
Engliſh lords grew rich and mighty; for they placed Iriſh
tenants upon the lands relinquiſhed by the Engliſh. Davies.
2. To quit; to releaſe; to give up. -
The ground of God's ſole property in any thing is,
the return of it made by man to God; by which act he re-
linquiſhes and delivers back to God all his right to the uſe of
that thing, which before had been freely granted him by
God. South's Sermons.
3. To forbear ; to depart from.
In caſe it may be proved, that amongſt the number of rites
and orders common unto both, there are particulars, the uſe
whereof is utterly unlawful, in regard of ſome ſpecial bad
and noiſom quality; there is no doubt but we ought to relin-
quiſh ſuch rites and orders, what freedom ſoever we have to
retain the other ſtill. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 1 1.
Rººst. m. ſ. [from relinquiſh.] The act of for-
aking.
Government or ceremonies, or whatſoever it be, which is
popiſh, away with it: this is the thing they require in us,
the utter relinquiſhment of all things popiſh. Hooker.
That natural tenderneſs of conſcience, which muſt firſt
$reate in the ſoul a ſenſe of fin, and from thence produce a
forrow for it, and at length cauſe a relinquiſhment of it, is
Riº away by a cuſtomary repeated courſe of finning. South.
- LISH. n. ſ. [from relecher, Fr. to lick again. Minſhew
Skinner.] &gt;
1. Taſle; the effe - . . . ;
uſed of a º à* thing on the palate; it is commonly
º ſharp, ſweet and ſour, are abundance of immediate
. sº reliſhes or taſtes, which experienced palates can eaſily
Thºre two bodies Boyle on Colours.
from ſaltpetr 9°ies, whoſe vapours are ſo pungent, ſpring
Fºº, which betrays upon the tongue no heat nor
corroſiveneſ - -
º but coldneſs mixed with a ſomewhat languid
* “talining to bitterneſs. Boyle
Much pleaſure we have loſt, while we abſtain’d
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now
True reliſh, taſting. . - Milton.
Could we ſuppoſe their reliſhes as different there as here,
et the manna in heaven ſuits every palate. Locke.
Sweet, bitter, ſour, harſh and ſalt are all the epithets we
have to denominate that numberleſs variety of reliſhes to be
found diſtinét in the different parts of the ſame plant. Locke.
2. Taſte; ſmall quantity juſt perceptible.
The king becoming graces;
As juſtice, verity, temp'rance, ſtableneſs,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude ;
I have no reliſh of them.
. Liking; delight in any thing.
We have ſuch a reliſh for faction, as to have loſt that of
wit. Addiſon's Freeholder.
Good men after death are diſtributed among theſe ſeveral
iſlands with pleaſures of different kinds, ſuitable to the reliſhes
and perfections of thoſe ſettled in them. Addiſon's Speciator.
4. Scnie; power of perceiving excellence; taſte.
A man, who has any reliſh for fine writing, diſcovers new
beauties, or receives ſtronger impreſſions from the maſterly
ſtrokes of a great author every time he peruſes him. Addiſon.
Some hidden ſeeds of goodneſs and knowledge give him a
reliſh of ſuch reflections, as improve the mind, and make
the heart better. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 262.
The pleaſure of the proprietor, to whom things become
familiar, depends, in a great meaſure, upon the reliſh of the
ſpectator. Seed's Sermons.
5. Delight given by any thing; the power by which pleaſure is
1Wen.
g Expectation whirls me round;
Th’ imaginary reliſh is ſo ſweet,
That it enchants my ſenſe. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
When liberty is gone,
Life grows inſipid, and has loſt its reliſh. Addiſon's Cato.
6. Caſt; manner.
It preſerves ſome reliſh of old writing. Pope.
To RE'lis H. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To give a taſte to anything.
On ſmoaking lard they dine;
A ſav'ry bit that ſerv'd to reliſh wine. Dryden,
2. To taſte; to have a liking.
I love the people;
Though it do well, I do not reliſh well
Their loud applauſe. Shakespeare .
How will diſſenting brethren reliſh it *
What will malignants ſay? Hudibras, p. i.
Men of nice palates would not reliſh Ariſtotle, as dreſt up
by the ſchoolmen. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
He knows how to prize his advantages, and reliſh the ho-
nours which he enjoys. Atterbury.
To RE'lish. v. n.
1. To have a pleaſing taſte.
The ivory feet of tables were carved into the ſhape of lions,
without which, their greateſt dainties would not reliſh to their
palates. Hakewill on Providence.
2. To give pleaſure.
Had I been the finder-out of this ſecret, it would not have
reliſhed among my other diſcredits. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale:
3. To have a flavour.
A theory, which how much ſoever it may reliſh of wit and
invention, hath no foundation in nature. JWoodward.
RELI'shable. adj. [from reliſh.] Guſtable; having a taſte.
To Relive. v. n. [re and live.] To revive; to live anew.
The thing on earth, which is of moſt avail,
Any virtue's branch and beauty's bud,
Reliven not for any good. Spenſºr-
To Rf love. v. a. [re and love.] To love in return:
To own for him ſo familiar and levelling an affection as
love, much more to expect to be relºved by him, were not
the leaſt ſaucy preſumption man could be guilty of did not
his own commandments make it a duty. Boyle.
RELu'cENT. adj. [reluceni, Latin.] Shining ; tranſparent ;
pellucid.
In brighter mazes, the relucent ſtream
Plays o'er the mead. Thomſºn's Summer.
To Reſu'cT. v. n. [relucior, Lat.] To ſtruggle again. ..
We, with ſtudied mixtures, force our relucing appet”
and with all the ſpells of epicuriſm, conjure them "P. that we
may lay them again. Decº ºf Piety.
RELU'cTANce. Un.ſ. [reluctor, Latin.] Unwillingneſs ; re-
RELU'cTANcy. } pugnance; ſtruggle in oppoſition;
A little more weight, added to the lower of the marbles,
is able to ſurmount their reluctancy to ſeparation, notwith-
ſtanding the ſuppoſed danger of thereby introducing a
WaCllll IIl. Bºyle.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
It ſavours
Relusiance againſt God, and his juſt yoke
Laid on our necks. Milton.
Bear witneſs, heav'n, with what reli čiaºy
Dryden.
Her hapleſ, innocence I doom to die.
AEneas,
:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E M
R. E. M.
*r-
AEneas, when forced in his own defence to kill Lauſus,
the poet ſhows compaſſionate, and tempering the ſeverity of
his looks with a reluctance to the aëtion ; he has pity on his
beauty and his youth ; and is loth to deſtroy ſuch a maſter-
piece of nature. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
How few would be at the pains of acquiring ſuch an habit,
and of conquering all the reluctancies and difficulties that lay
in the way towards virtue. Atterbury.
Many hard ſtages of diſcipline muſt he paſs through, before
he can ſubdue the reluctances of his corruption. Rogers.
With great reluctancy man is perſuaded to acknowledge
this neceſſity. - Rogers's Sermons.
Relu'ct ANT. adj. [reluctans, Lat.] Unwilling; ačting with
repugnance.
Reluctant; but in vain a greater pow'r
Now rul’d him. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x,
Some refuge in the muſe's art I found;
Reluđant now I touch'd the trembling ſtrin
Bereſt of him, who taught me how to fing. Tickell.
To **** v. n. [reluctor, Lat.] To reſiſt; to ſtruggle
againſt.
s: violation of God's patrimony, the firſt ſacrilege is looked
on with ſome horrour, and men deviſe colours to delude their
reluštating conſciences; but when they have once made the
breach, their ſcrupuloſity ſoon retires. Decay of Piety.
Relucta’tion. m. ſ. [reluctor, Latin.] Repugnance; reſiſ-
tance.
The king prevailed with the prince, though not without
ſome reludation. Bacon's Henry VII.
Adam's ſin, or the curſe upon it, did not deprive him of
his rule, but left the creatures to a rebellion or reluciation. Bac.
To RElu’M E. v. a. To light anew : to rekindle.
Relume her ancient light, nor kindle new. Pope.
To Relu'MINE. v. a. To light anew. -
- Once put out thy light;
I know not where is that Promethean heat,
That can thy light relumine. Shakeſp. Othello.
To RELY”. v. n. [re and lye.] To lean upon with confi-
dence; to put truſt in ; to reſt upon; to depend upon.
Go in thy native innocence rely
On what thou haſt of virtue; ſummon all !
For God tow’rds thee hath done his part, do thine. Milton.
Egypt does not on the clouds rely,
But to the Nile owes more than to the ſky. JWaller.
Thus Solon to Pifiſtratus reply'd,
Demanded, on what ſuccour he rely'd,
When with ſo few he boldly did engage;
He ſaid, he took his courage from his age. Denham.
Though reaſon is not to be relied upon, as univerſally
ſufficient to direct us what to do; yet it is generally to be
relied upon and obeyed, where it tells us what we are not
to do. South.
Fear relies upon a natural love of ourſelves, and is com-
plicated with a neceſſary deſire of our own preſervation. Till.
Such variety of arguments only diſtraćt the underſtanding
that relies on them. Locke.
The pope was become a party in the cauſe, and could not
be relied upon for a deciſion. Atterbury.
Do we find ſo much religion in the age, as to rely on the
general pračtice for the meaſures of our duty : Rogers.
No prince can ever rely on the fidelity of that man, who is
a rebel to his Creator. Rogers.
To REMAI'N. v. n. [remanco, Lat.]
1. To be left out of a greater quantity or number.
That that remains, ſhall be buried in death. job xxvii. 15.
Bake that which ye will bake to-day; and that which re-
maineth over, lay up until the morning. Ex. xvi. 23.
2. To continue; to endure ; to be left.
He for the time remain'd ſtupidly good. Milton.
If what you have heard, ſhall remain in you, ye ſhall con-
tinue in the ſon. I jo. ii. 24.
3. To be left after any event. -
Childleſs thou art, childleſs remain. Milton.
In the families of the world, there remains not to one
above another the leaſt pretence to inheritance. Locke.
4. Not to be loſt.
Now ſomewhat ſing, whoſe endleſs ſouvenance
Among the ſhepherds may for aye remain. Spenſºr.
I was increaſed more than all that were before me, alſo my
wiſdom remained with me. Eccluſ. ii. 9.
5. To be left as not compriſed. - -
That a father may have ſome power over his children, is
eaſily granted; but that an elder brother has ſo over his bre-
thren, remains to be proved. Locke.
To REM1A1 N. v. a. To await; to be left to.
Such end had the kid ; for he would weaned be
Of craft, coloured with ſimplicity;
And ſuch end, pardie, does all them remain
That of ſuch falſers friendſhip ſhall be fain.
With oaken ſtaff
I'll raiſe ſuch outcries on thy clatter'd iron,
Which long ſhall not withhold me from thy head,
That in a little time, while breath emains thee,
- I -
Spenſer.
Thou of ſhalt wiſh thyſelf at Gath to boaſt,
But never ſhalt ſee Gath. Aſºº’.
If thence he 'ſcape, what remains him leſs
Than unknown dangers. Miltors
- The eaſier conqueſt now
Remains thee, aided by this hoſt of friends,
Back on thy foes moré glorious to return. Milton.
ReMAIN. m. A [from the verb.j
1. Relick; that which is left. Generally uſed in the plural.
- I grieve with the old, fºr ſo many additional inconvenien-
cies, more than their ſmall remain of life ſeemed defined to
undergo.
2. The body left by the ſoul. Pope.
But fowls obſcene diſmember'd his remains,
And dogs had torn him. Pope's Odyſſey,
Oh would'ſt thou fing what heroes Windſor bore,
Or raiſe old warriors, whoſe ador'd remains,
In weeping vaults, her hallow'd earth contains. Pope.
3. Abode; habitation. Not in uſe.
A moſt miraculous work in this good king,
Which, often ſince my here remain in England,
I've ſeen him do. Shaº. Macbeth,
ReMAINDER. adj. [from remain..] Remaining; refuſe; left.
His brain
Is as dry as the remainder biſket
After a voyage. Shakeſp. As You Like it.
We turn not back the ſilks upon the merchant,
When we have ſpoil'd them; nor the remainder viands
We do not throw in unreſpective place,
Becauſe we now are full. Shakeſp. Tº oilus and Creſſida:
REMAI'NDER. n.ſ.
1. What is left.
The gods protećt you,
And bleſs the good remainders of the court! Shakeſp.
A fine is levied to grant a reverſion or remainder, expectant
upon a leaſe that yieldeth no rent. Bacon.
Mahomet's creſcent by our feuds encreaſt,
Blaſted the learn’d remainders of the Eaſt. Denham.
Could bare ingratitude have made any one ſo diabolical,
had not cruelty came in as a ſecond to its affiſtance, and
cleared the villain's breaſt of all remainders of humanity? South.
There are two reſtraints which God hath put upon hu-
man nature, ſhame and fear ; ſhame is the weaker, and hath
place only in thoſe in whom there are ſome remainders of
virtue. Tillotſon.
What madneſs moves you, matrons, to deſtroy
The laſt remainders of unhappy Troy Dryden,
If he, to whom ten talents were committed, has ſquan-
dered away five, he is concerned to make a double improve-
ment of the remainder. Rogers.
If theſe decoctions be repeated till the water comes off
clear, the remainder yields no ſalt. Arbuthnot.
Of ſix millions raiſed every year for the ſervice of the pub-
lick, one third is intercepted through the ſeveral ſubordina-
tions of artful men in office, before the remainder is applied
to the proper uſe, Swift.
2. The body when the ſoul is departed ; remains.
Shew us
The poor remainder of Andronicus.
To REMA'ke. v. a. [re and make.] To make anew.
That, which ſhe owns above her, muſt perfectly remake
us after the image of our maker. Glanvill's Apology.
To ReMA'ND. v.a. [re and mando, Latl To ſend back; to
call back.
The better ſort quitted their freeholds and fled into Eng-
land, and never returned, though many laws were made to
remand them back. Davies on Ireland.
Philoxenus, for deſpiſing ſome dull poetry of Dionyſius,
was condemned to dig in the quarries; from whence being
remanded, at his return Dionyſius produced ſome other of his
verſes, which as ſoon as Philoxenus had read, he made no
reply, but, calling to the waiters, ſaid, carry me again to
the quarries. Government of the ſongue.
RE'MANENT. n.ſ. [remanens, Lat. remanant, old Fr. It is
now contračted to remnant.] The part remaining.
Her majeſty bought of his executrix the remanent of the laſt
term of three years. Bacon.
REMA'RK. n.J. [remarque, Fr.] Obſervation; note ; notice
taken.
He cannot diſtinguiſh difficult and noble ſpeculations from
trifling and vulgar remarks. Xollier on Pride.
To REMARK. v. a. [remarquer, Fr.]
I. To note; to obſerve.
It is eaſy to cbſerve what has been remarked, that the
names of ſimple ideas are the leaſt liable to miſtakes. Locke.
The prisºner Samſon here I ſeek. -
—His manacles remark him, there º ſits. Milton.
... To diſtinguiſh ; to point out ; to maſk:
#..." ãº. ſºil, Fr.] Obſervable; worthy of
*. did Orpheus plainly teach, that the world had begin-
ning in time, from the will of the moſt high God, whoſe re-
zajall words are thus converted. Raleigh.
'Tis
Shakeſp.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E M
R E. M.
'Tis remarkable, that they
ſ!, who have the leaſt to ſay. . Priºr.
... obtain by converſation ſoon vaniſhes, unleſ. We
able, we have found. JJ'atts.
t - hat rema”
note down wha r -
REM A^r KABLE N ESS.. ". ſ: [from remarkable.] Obſervable-
worthineſs of obſervation.
º ſignify the remarkahlenºſ of this puniſhmº of the
Jews, as ſignal reyengº from the crucified Chriſt. Hammond.
REMARKABLY. adv. [from remarkable.] Obſervably ; in *
manner worthy of obſervation.
Chiefly aſſur’d,
Remarkably ſo late, of thy ſo true, -
So jº. y Miltºn.
Such parts of theſe writings, as may be remarkably ſtupid,
ſhould become ſubjećls of an occaſional criticiſm. Jſ atts.
REMARKER. m. ſ. [remarkur, Fr.] Obſerver; one that re-
marks.
If the remarker would but once try to outſhine the author .
by writing a better book on tº ſame ſubject, he would ſoon
be convinced of his own inſufficiency: //atts.
Remediable. ad. [from renºl Capable of remedy:
Rºeſbiate. adj. [from remedy.] Medicinal; affording a
remedy. Not in uſe:
All you, unpubliſh’d virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears; be aidant and remediate ...
In the good man's diſtreſs. Shakespeare. King Lear.
REME'pilºss. adj. [from remº.] Not admitting remedy 5
irreparable; cureleſs; incurable.
Sad AEſculapius
Impriſon'd was in chains remºdilſ. Fairy Queen.
The war, grounded upon this general remedilºſs neceſſity,
may be termed the general, the remedileſ, or the neceſſary
War. Raleigh's Eſſays.
we, by rightful doom remedileſ,
were loſt in death, till he that dwelt above
High-thron'd in ſecret bliſs, for us frail duſt
Emptied his glory. Milton.
Flatter him it may, as thoſe are good at flattering, who
are good for nothing elſe; but in the mean time, the poor
man is left under a remedileſ deluſion. South.
REME'dilessness. n.ſ.. [from remedilſ,.] Incurableneſs.
REME/DY. m. ſ [remedium, Lat. remede, Fr.]
1. A medicine by which any ilneſs is cured.
The difference between poiſons and remedies is eaſily known
by their effects; and common reaſon ſoon diſtinguiſhes bºr
, tween virtue and vice. Swift.
2. Cure of any uneaſineſs.
Here hope began to dawn; reſolv'd to try,
She fix’d on this her utmoſt remedy. Dryden.
O how ſhort my interval of woeſ
Our griefs how ſwift, our remedies how ſlow. Prior.
3. That which counteracts any evil.
- What may be remedy or cure
To evils, which our own miſdeeds have wrought. Milton.
Civil government is the proper remedy for the inconve-
niencies of the ſtate of nature. Locke.
Attempts have been made for ſome remedy againſt this
evil, Swift.
4. Reparation; means of repairing any hurt.
Things, without all remedy,
Should be without regard. Shakespeare Macheth.
In the death of a man there is no remedy. //ijd. ii. 1.
To REME'DY. v. a. [remedier, Fr.]
1. To cure; to heal.
Sorry we are, that any good and godly mind ſhould be
grieved with that which is done ; but to remedy their grief,
lieth not ſo much in us as in themſelves. Hjºr.
2. To repair or remove miſchief.
To REMEMBER. v. a. [remembrer, old Fr. remembrare, Ital.]
1. To bear in mind any thing ; not to forget.
Remember not againſt us former iniquities. Pſ. lxxix. 8.
2. To recollect; to call to mind.
He having once ſeen and remembered me, cven from the be-
ginning began to be in the rierward. Sidney.
We are ſaid to remember any thing, when the idea of it
ariſes in the mind with a conſciouſneſs that we have had this
idea before. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
3. To keep in mind; to have preſent to the attention.
Remember what I warn thee, ſhun to taſte;
And ſhun the bitter conſequence. Milton.
This is to be remembered, that it is not poſſible now to
keep a young gentleman from vice by a total ignorance of
it ; unleſs you will all his life mew him up. Locke.
4. To bear in mind, with intent of reward or puniſhment.
Cry unto God; for you ſhall be remembered of him. Bar.
- . He brings them back,
Remembºring mercy and his covenant ſworn. Milton.
5. To mention ; not to omit.
a" º º º be certain, in reſped of the perſon
- is inº,lid '. * certainty be therein omitted, ſuch citation
6. To “, as in many caſes hereafter to be remembered. Ayliffe.
Put in mind; to force to recollect ; to remind.
His hand and le 1:-----. -
nd leg commandi th h r -
ther remembering than *...* without threatning, ‘.
Joy, being altogether wanting,
It doth remember me the more of ſorrow. Shakespeare
Theſe petitions, and the anſwer of the common counciſ ºf
London, were ample materials for a conference with the
lords, who might be thereby remembered of their duty. Claren.
REME/M BER F R. m. ſ. [ſion remember.] One who remembers.
A brave maſter to ſervants, and a rememberer of the leaſt
good office ; for his flock he tranſplanted moſt of them into
plentiful ſoils. //otton
Rºn EMBA ANc E. m. ſ. [remembrance, Fr.] -
1. Retention in memory.
Though Cloten then but young, time has not wore him
From my remembrance. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Thee I have heard relating what was done,
Ere my remembrance. Milon.
Had memory been loſt with innocence,
We had not known the ſentence north' offence;
'Twas his chief puniſhment to keep in ſtore
The ſad remembrance what he was before. Denham.
Sharp remembrance on the Engliſh part,
And ſhame of being match'd by ſuch a foe,
Rouſe conſcious virtue up in every heart. Dryden.
This ever grateful in remembrance bear -
To me thou ow'ſt, to me the vital air.
2. Recollection; revival of any idea.
I hate thy beams,
That bring to my remembrance from what ſtate
I fell; how glorious once above thy ſphere. Milton.
Remembrance is when the ſame idea recurs, without the
operation of the like object on the external ſenſory. Locke.
3. Honourable memory. Out of uſe. -
Roſemary and rue keep
Seeming and favour all the winter long,
Grace and remembrance be unto you both. Shalºft.
4. Tranſmiſſion of a fact from one to another.
Titan,
Among the heavens, th’immortal fact diſplay'd,
Leſt the remembrance of his grief ſhould fail,
And in the conſtellations wrote his tale. Addison.
5. Account preſerved.
Thoſe proceedings and remembrances are in the Tower,
Pope's Odºſy.
beginning with the twentieth year of Edward I. Hale.
6. Memorial.
But in remembrance of ſo brave a deed,
A tomb and funeral honours I decreed. Dryden.
7. A token by which any one is kept in the memory.
I have remembrances of yours,
That I have longed to redeliver. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's ſake. Shake?.
8. Notice of ſomething abſent.
Let your remembrance ſtill apply to Banquo;
Preſent him eminence, both with eye and tongue. Shaºff.
REME'MBRANCER. m. ſ. [from remembranº.]
1. One that reminds; one that puts in mind.
Sweet remembrancer / Shakeſp. Macbeth.
A ſly knave, the agent for his maſter,
And the remembrancer of her, to hold
The hand faſt to her lord. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
God is preſent in the conſciences of good and bad; he is
there a rººmfrancer to call our actions to mind, and a wit-
neſs to bring them to judgment. Taylor.
Would ſ were in my grave;
For, living here, you're but my curs’d remembrancers:
I once was happy. Otwa,’s Penice Prºſerv'd.
2. An officer of the exchequer.
All are digeſted into books, and ſent to the remembrancer of
the exchequer, that he make proceſſes upon them. ... Bacon.
To ReMe'R&amp;ie. v.a. [remercier, Fr.] Tº thank. Obſolete.
Off'ring his ſervice and his deareſt life
For her defence, againſt that earle to fight;
She him remarried, as the patron of her liſt: Spenſºr.
To RE! MIGRATE. v. n. [remigro, Lat.] To remove back
again.
Some other ways he propoſes to diveſt ſome bodies of their
borrowed ſhapes, and make them remº” “” their firſt
ſimplicity. Boyle.
REMſgr A*ric N. n.ſ.. [from ramigrate.] Removal back again.
The Scots, tranſplanted hither, became acquainted with
our cuſtoms, which, by occaſional remigrat" became dif-
fuſed in Scotland. - Hale.
To Remind. v. a. [re and mind.] To put in mind; to force
to remember. -
When age itſelf, which will not be defied, ſhall begin to
arreſt, ſeize and remind us of our mortality by pain; and dul-
neſs of ſenſes; yet then the pleaſure of the mind ſhall be in
its full vigour. South's Sermº.
The brazen figure of the conſul, with the ring on his
finger, reminded me of Juvenal's majoris pondera gem".
Addison's Remark." Italy.
REMiniscence. n.ſ. [reminiſceni, Latin-l Recollection ;
recovery of ideas. - -
I aſ also fºr all circumſtances that may reviº
mory or reminiſcence. Hale's Origin ºf *:
2. Of
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E M
R E M
3.
º,
tº:
'ſ'
i.
it,
For the other part of memory, called reminiſtence, which
is the retrieving of a thing at preſent forgot, or but confuſedly
remembered, by ſetting the mind to ranſack every little cell
of the brain; while it is thus buſied, how accidentally does
the thing ſought for offer itſelf to the mind South.
REM.INI sce/NTIAL. adj. [from reminiſcence..] Relating to re-
miniſcence.
Would truth diſpenſe, we could be content with Plato,
that knowledge were but remembrance, that intelle&amp;tual ac-
quiſition were but reminiſcential evocation. Brown.
REMI'ss. adj. [remis, Fr. remiſus, Lat.]
1. Not vigorous ; ſlack. -
The water deſerts the ſaid corpuſcles, unleſs it flow forth
with a precipitate motion; for then it hurries them out along
with it, till its motion becomes more languid and remiſs.
J/oodward's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Not careful; ſlothful.
Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep,
That thus we die, while remiſ traitors ſleep. Shakeſp.
If when by God's grace we have conquered the firſt diff-
culties of religion, we grow careleſs and remiſ, and neglect
our guard, God's ſpirit will not always ſtrive with us. Tillotſ.
Your candour, in pardoning my errors, may make me more
remiſ in correcting them. Dryden.
3. Not intenſe. -
Theſe nervous, bold, thoſe languid and remiſs ;
Here cold ſalutes, but there a lover's kiſs. Roſcommon.
REMI'ssible. adj. [from remit..] Admitting forgiveneſs.
REMI'ssion. n.ſ.. [remiſſion, Fr. remiſſio, Lat.]
1. Abatement; relaxation; moderation.
Error, miſclaim and forgetfulneſs do now and then be-
come ſuitors for ſome remiſſion of extreme rigour. Bacon.
2. Ceſſation of intenſeneſs.
In September and October theſe diſeaſes do not abate and
remit in proportion to the remiſſion of the ſun's heat. Woodw.
This difference of intention and remiſſion of the mind in
thinking, every one has experimented in himſelf. Locke.
3. In phyſick, remiſſion is when a diſtemper abates, but does
not go quite off before it returns again.
4. Releaſe.
Not only an expedition, but the remiſſion of a duty or tax,
were tranſmitted to poſterity after this manner. Addiſon.
Another ground of the biſhop's fears is the remiſſion of the
firſt fruits and tenths. Swift.
5. Forgiveneſs; pardon. -
My pennance is to call Lucetta back,
And aſk remiſſion for my folly paſt. Shakeſp.
That plea
With God or man will gain thee no remiſſion. Milton.
Many believe the article of remiſſion of fins, but they be-
lieve it without the condition of repentance or the fruits of
holy life. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
REMi’ssLY. adv. [from remiſs.]
1. Careleſly ; negligently ; without cloſe attention.
How ſhould it then be in our power to do it coldy or remiſly?
ſo that our deſire being natural, is alſo in that degree of ear-
neſtneſs whereunto nothing can be added. Hocker.
2. Not vigorouſly ; not with ardour or eagerneſs; ſlackly.
. There was not an equal concurrence in the proſecution of
this matter among the biſhops; ſome of them proceeding
more remiſsly in it. Clarendon.
REMI'ssNESS. m. ſ. [from remiſ...] Careleſsneſs; negligence;
coldneſs ; want of ardour; inattention.
Future evils,
Or new, or by remiſineſs new conceiv'd,
Are now to have no ſucceſſive degrees. Shakeſp.
- &gt; -
No great offenders 'ſcape their dooms;
Small praiſe from lenity and remiſsneſs comes. Denham.
Jack, through the remiſsneſs of conſtables, has always
found means to eſcape. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of john Bull.
The great concern of God for our ſalvation, is ſo far from
an argument of remiſineſ; in us, that it ought to excite our
utmoſt care. Rogers's Sermons.
To REMI'T. v. a. [remitto, Lat.]
1. To relax; to make leſs intenſe.
So willingly doth God remit his ire. Milton.
Our ſupreme foe may much remit
His anger; and perhaps thus far remov’d,
Not mind us not offending, ſatisfy'd
With what is puniſh’d. Milton.
2. To forgive a puniſhment.
With ſuppliant pray'rs their pow'rs appeaſe ;
The ſoft Napaean race will ſoon repent
Their anger, and remit the puniſhment. Dryden.
The magiſtrate can often, where the publick good demands
not the execution of the law, remit the puniſhment of crimi-
nal offences by his own authority, but yet cannot remit the
ſatisfaction due to any private man. Locke.
3. [Remettre, Fr.] To pardon a fault.
At my lovely Tamora's intreats,
I do remit theſe young men's heinous faults, Shakeſp.
To REMI’t. v. m.
Whoſe ſoever fins ye remit, they are remitted unto them ;
and whoſe ſoever fins ye retain, they are retained. jo. xx. 2 3.
4. To give up ; to reſign.
In £"9ts and inhuman crimes, offenders ſhould be re-
*itted to their prince to be puniſhed in the place where they
have offended. Hayward.
Th” Ægyptian crown I to your hands remit 5
And, with it, take his heart who offers it. Dryden.
Heaven thinks fit
Thee to thy former fury to remit.
5. [Remetre, Fr.] To defer; to refer.
The biſhop had certain proud inſtruaions in the front,
though there were a pliant clauſe at the foot, that remitted all
to the biſhop's diſcretion. Bacon's Henry VII.
I remit me to themſelves, and challenge their natural inge-
nuity to ſay, whether they have not ſometimes ſuch ſhiverings
within them. Government of the Tongue.
6. To put again in cuſtody. ºf §
This bold return with ſeeming patience heard,
The pris'ner was remitted to the guard. Dryden.
7. To ſend money to a diſtant place.
They obliged themſelves to remit after the rate of twelve
hundred thouſand pounds fterling per annum, divided into ſo
many monthly payments. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
8. To reſtore. Not in uſe.
The archbiſhop was retained priſoner, but after a ſhort
time remitted to his liberty. Hayward.
Dryden's Tyran. Love.
I. To ſlacken; to grow leſs intenſe.
When our paſſions remit, the vehemence of our ſpeech
7'e??!! is too. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſ.
2. To abate by growing leſs eager.
As; by degrees, they remitted of their induſtry, loathed
their buſineſs, and gave way to their pleaſures, they let fall
thoſe generous principles, which had raiſed them to worthy
thoughts. South's Sermons.
3. In phyſick, to grow by intervals leſs violent, though not
wholly intermitting.
ReMITMENT. n.ſ. [from remit.] The aët of remitting to
cuſtody.
REMI’tt ANce. m. ſ. [from remit.]
I. The act of paying money at a diſtant place.
2. Sum ſent to a diſtant place.
A compačt among private perſons furniſhed out the ſeveral
remittances. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
REMI'TTER. m. ſ. [remettre, Fr.] In common law, a reſtitu-
tion of one that hath two titles to lands or tenements, and
is ſeized of them by his latter title, unto his title that is more
ancient, in caſe where the latter is defečtive. Cowel.
You ſaid, if I return’d next ſize in Lent,
I ſhould be in remitter of your grace;
In th’ interim my letters ſhould take place -
Of affidavits. Donne,
RE'MN ANT. n.ſ.. [corrupted from remanent.] Reſidue ; that
which is left; that which remains.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king !
Thou bloodleſs remnant of that royal blood,
Be’t lawful that I invocate thy ghoſt Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Bear me hence
From forth the noiſe and rumour of the field,
Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts. Shakespeare
About his ſhelves
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roſes
Were thinly ſcatter'd. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
I was entreated to get them ſome reſpite and breathing by
a ceſſation, without which they ſaw no probability to preſerve
the remnant that had yet eſcaped. King Charles.
Their Andes are far higher than thoſe with us; whereby it
ſeems that the remnants of the generation of men were in
ſuch a deluge ſaved. - Bacon.
The remnant of my tale is of a length
To tire your patience. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
A feeble army and an empty ſenate, -
Remnants of mighty battles fought in vain. Addison.
See the poor remnants of theſe ſlighted hairs
My hands ſhall rend what e'en thy rapine ſpares. Pope.
The frequent uſe of the latter was a remnant of po-
pery, which never admitted ſcripture in the vulgar º,
i01 ffa
RE/MNANT. adj. [corruptly formed from remanent.] Remain-
ing; yet left.
It bid her feel
No future pain for me; but inſtant wed
A lover more proportion'd to her bed;
And quiet dedicate her remnant life -
To the juſt duties of an humble wife. - - Prior.
ReMo LTEN. part. [from remelt.] Melted again.
It were good to try in glaſs works, whether the crude ma-
terials, mingled with glaſs already made and renalten, do not
facilitate the making of glaſs with leſs heat. Bacon.
21 O R.E.Mo'ssTRAN ce.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E M
R E M
Resto'ssrs Asce. n.ſ.. [remºranº, Fr. from remonſtrate.]
i. show; diſcovery. Not in uſe.
You may º y; I yº.
ake raſh remonſtrance of my 3.
}. let him be ſo loſt. Shakeſp. Meaſ fºr Meaſ.
o repreſentation.
2. sº É. God, which revealeth it to them, would alſo
give them power of confirming it unto others, either with
iraculous operation, or with ſtrong and invincible rººt
//rance of ſound reaſon. Hooker, b. % IO
A large family of daughters have drawn up a remº:
in which they ſet forth, that their father, having refuſed to
take in the Spectator, they offered to 'bate him the article of
bread and butter in the tea-table. Addiſon's Spºtatºr.
Importunate paſſions ſurround the man, and will not ſuffer
him to attend to the remonſtrances of juſtice. Rogers.
Tº REMONSTRATE. A. m. [remonſtro, Lat. remº/”
Fr.] To make a ſtrong repreſentation; to ſhow reaſons on
any ſide in ſtrong terms.
RETAMORA. iſ [Latin.]
bſtacle.
. A'. kind of worm that ſticks to ſhips, and retards
their paſſage through the water.
Of fiſhes you ſhall find in arms the whale, herring, roach
and remora. Peacham on Blazoning.
The rºora is about three quarters of a yard long; his
body before three inches and a half over, thence tapering to
the 'tail end; his mouth two inches and a half oyer; his
chops ending angularly ; the nether a little broader; and
produced forward near an inch; his lips rough with a great
number of little prickles. . Grew.
To Remorate. v. a. [remoror, Latin.] To hinder; to
delay. Die?.
Fºrse. n. ſ. [remorſus, Lat.]
1. Pain of guilt.
Not that he believed they could be reſtrained from that
impious act by any remorſe of conſcience, or that they had
not wickedneſs enough to deſign and execute it. Clarendon.
2. Tenderneſs; pity; ſympathetick ſorrow.
Many little eſteem of their own lives, yet, for remorſe of
their wives and children, would be withheld. Spenſer.
Shylock, thou lead'ſt this faſhion of thy malice
To the laſt hour of ačt; and then 'tis thought,
Thou'lt ſhew thy mercy and remorſe more ſtrange,
Than is thy ſtrange apparent cruelty. Shakeſp. Mr. of Wen.
The rogues ſlighted me into the river, with as little remorſe
as they would have drowned a bitch's blind puppies. Shakeſp.
urſe on th’ unpard’ning prince, whom tears can draw
To no remorſe; who rules by lion's law. Dryden.
REMo'Rseful. adj. [remorſe and full.j Tender; compaſſionate.
O Eglamour, think not I flatter,
Valiant and wiſe, remorſful, well accompliſh'd. Shakeſp.
Love, that comes too late,
Like a remorſful pardon ſlowly carried,
To the great ſender turns a ſowre offence. Shakeſp.
The gaudy, blabbing, and remorſful day
Is crept into the boſom of the ſea. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
REMo'RSELEss. adj. [from remorſe.] Unpitying; cruel; ſavage.
Where were the nymphs, when the remorſelſ, deep
Clos'd o'er the head of your lov’d Lycidas. Milton.
O the inexpreſſible horrour that will ſeize upon a finner,
when he ſtands arraigned at the bar of divine juſtice when
he ſhall ſee his accuſer, his judge, the ºff. all his re-
maſel'ſ adverſaries. South's Sermons.
REMOTE. adj. [remotus, Lat.]
1. Diſtant; not immediate.
In this narrow ſcantling of capacity, it is not all remote and
even apparent good that affects us. Locke.
2. Diſtant ; not at hand.
3. Removed far off; placed not near.
Wherever the mind places itſelf by any thought, either
amongſt, or remote from all bodies, it can, in this uniform
idea ºf ſpace, no where find any bounds. Locke.
In quiet ſhades, content with rural ſports,
Give me a life, remote from guilty courts. Granville.
4. Foreign.
5. Diſtant ; not cloſely connected. -
An unadviſed tranſiliency from the effect to the remoteſ?
º - - Glanvill.
... Syllogiſm ſerves not to furniſh the mind with intermediate
ideas, that ſhew the connection of remote ones. Locke.
6. Alien ; not agreeing.
ſ All thoſe propoſitions, how remote ſocver from reaſon, are
9 ſacred, that men will ſooner part with their lives, than
ſuffer themſelve to d *
- Åbº. ves to doubt of them. Locke.
E.M O't Ly J. -
i *Y. adv. [from remote.] Not nearly ; at a diſtance.
It is commonly on. -
- Y opinioned, that the earth was thinly inha-
*.. leaſt not remately planted before the flood. Brown.
lied to V." Mezentius and Lauſus are indeed remotely al-
"&amp;" "nº, but too like the tenderneſs of Ovid, Dry.
While the fainting Dutch remotely fire
In the firſt front amidſt a ſlaughter'd pile,
High on the mound he dy’d. Smith.
Remoºſeness. n.ſ. [from remate.] State of being remote;
diſtance; not nearneſs. -
The joys of heaven are like the ſtars, which by reaſon of
our remºtiºnſ; appear extremely little. Boyle.
Titian employed brown and earthly colours upon the fore-
art, and has reſerved his greater light for remoteneſſes and the
back part of his landſchapes. Dryden.
If the greateſt part of bodies eſcape our notice by their re-
moteneſs, others are no leſs concealed by their minuteneſs. Locke.
His obſcurities generally ariſe from the remoteneſs of the
cuſtoms, perſons and things he alludes to. Addison.
ReMoºtion. n.ſ. [from remotus, Lat.] The aët of remov-
ing ; the ſtate of being removed to diſtance.
All this ſafety were remotion, and thy defence abſence. Sha.
This act perſuades me,
'Tis the remotion of the duke and her. Shakespeare.
The conſequent ſtrictly taken, may be a fallacious iſla-
tion, in reference to antecedency or conſequence; as to con-
clude from the poſition of the antecedent unto the poſition of
the conſequent, or from the remotion of the conſequent to
the remotion of the antecedent. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
ReMo'v ABLE. adj. [from remove..] Such as may be removed.
The Iriſh biſhops have their clergy in ſuch ſubjećtion, that
they dare not complain of them ; for knowing their own in-
capacity, and that they are therefore removeable at their bi-
ſhop's will, yield what pleaſeth him. Spenſer.
In ſuch a chapel, ſuch curate is removeable at the pleaſure
of the rector of the mother church. Ayliffe's Parergon.
ReMo'y Al. n.ſ.. [from remove.]
1. The act of putting out of any place.
By which removal of one extremity with another, the
world, ſeeking to procure a remedy, hath purchaſed a mere
exchange of the evil before felt. Hooker.
2. The act of putting away.
The removal of ſuch a diſeaſe is not to be attempted by
aćtive remedies, no more than a thorn in the fleſh is to be
taken away by violence. Arbuthnot.
3. Diſmiſſion from a poſt.
If the removal of theſe perſons from their poſts has pro-
duced ſuch popular commotions, the continuance of them
might have produced ſomething more fatal. Addiſon.
Whether his removal was cauſed by his own fears or other
men's artifices, ſuppoſing the throne to be vacant, the body
of the people was left at liberty to chuſe what form of go-
vernment they pleaſed. Swift.
4. The ſtate of being removed.
The fitting ſtill of a paralytick, whilſt he prefers it to a
removal, is voluntary. Locke.
To REME)'VE. v. a. [removeo, Lat. remuer, Fr.]
1. To put from its place ; to take or put away.
Good God remove
The means that makes us ſtrangers' Shakeſp. Macbeth.
He removeth away the ſpeech of the truſty, and taketh
away the underſtanding of the aged. job xii. 20.
Remove thy ſtroke away from me; I am conſumed by the
blow. Pſalm xxxix. 13.
So would he have removed thee out of the ſtraight into a
broad place. job xxxvi. 16.
He longer in this paradiſe to dwell
Permits not ; to remove thee I am come,
And ſend thee from the garden forth to till -
The ground. Milton's Paradiſe Loſ’, b. X!.
Whether he will remove his contemplation from one idea
to another, is many times in his choice. Locke.
You, who fill the bliſsful ſeats above
Let kings no more with gentle mercy ſway,
But every monarch be the ſcourge of God,
If from your thoughts Ulyſſes you remºve, º
Who ruſ’d his ſubjects with a father's love. Pºpe' Odyſſey.
2. To place at a diſtance.
They are farther removed from a title to be innate, and the
doubt of their being native impreſſions on the mind, is
ſtronger againſt theſe moral principles than the other. Locke.
To R.E.Movie. v. n.
I. To change place.
2. To go from one place to another.
A ſhort exile muſt for ſhow precede;
The term expir'd, from Candia they remºve,
And happy each at home enjoys his love.
How oft from pomp and ſtate did I remºve -
To feed deſpair. Prizr.
ReMove. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Change of place.
2. Suſceptibility of being removed. Not in uſe. -
What is early received in any conſiderable ſtrength of im-
preſs, grows into our tender natures; and therefore is o gi:
cult remove. Glanvill's Scº.
7
Dryden.
3. Tranſlation
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E M
R E N
3. Tranſlation of one to the place of another,
Roſaline, this favour thou ſhalt wear; -
Hold, take you this, my ſweet, and give me thine,
So ſhall Biron take me for Roſaline:
And change your favours too , ſo ſhall your loves
Woo contrary deceiv'd by theſe removes.
4. State of being removed. -
This place ſhould be both ſchool and univerſity, not need-
ing a remove to any other houſe of ſcholarſhip. Milton.
He that conſiders how little our conſtitution can bear a
remove into parts of this air, not much higher than that we
breathe in, will be ſatisfied, that the allwiſe archite&amp;t has
ſuited our organs, and the bodies that are to effect them, one
Shakeſp.
to another. - Locke.
5. Act of moving a cheſman or draught
6. Departure; act of going away.
So look’d Aſtrea, her remove deſign'd,
On thoſe diſtreſſed friends ſhe left behind. Waller,
7. The act of changing place.
Let him, upon his removes from one place to another, pro-
cure recommendation to ſome perſon of quality reſiding in
the place whither he removeth. Bacon's Eſſays.
8. A ſtop in the ſcale of gradation.
In all the viſible corporeal world, quite down from us, the
deſcent is by eaſy ſteps, and a continued ſeries of things, that
in each remove differ very little one from the other. Locke.
A freeholder is but one remove from a legiſlator, and ought
to ſtand up in the defence of thoſe laws. Addiſon.
9. A ſmall diſtance.
The fierceſt contentions of men are between creatures equal
in nature, and capable, by the greateſt diſtinétion of circum-
ſtances, of but a very ſmall remove one from another. Rogers.
Io. Aćt of putting a horſe's ſhoes upon different feet.
His horſe wanted two removes, your horſe wanted nails. Sw.
REMove D. particip. adj. [from remove..] Remote ; ſeparate
from others.
Your accent is ſomething finer, than you could purchaſe in
ſo removed a dwelling. Shakeſp. As Yºu Like it.
ReMoved Ness. n.ſ.. [from removed.] The ſtate of being
removed; remoteneſs.
I have eyes under my ſervice, which look upon his re-
movedneſs. Shakeſp.
REMover. n.ſ.. [from remove..] One that removes.
The miſlayer of a merſtone is to blame; but the unjuſt
judge is the capital remover of landmarks, when he defineth
amiſs. Bacon.
Haſty fortune maketh an enterpriſer and remover, but the
exerciſed fortune maketh the able man. Bacon.
To ReMou NT. v. n. [remonter, Fr.] To mount again.
Stout Cymon ſoon remounts, and cleft in two
His rival's head. Dryden.
The reſt remounts with the aſcending vapours, or is waſhcd
down into rivers, and tranſmitted into the ſea. JWoodward.
REMU'NERABLE. adj. [from remunerate.] Rewardable.
To REMU'NERATE. v. a. [remunero, Lat. remunerer, Fr]
To reward; to repay; to requite ; to recompenſe.
Is ſhe not then beholden to the man,
That brought her for this high good turn ſo far?
Yes; and will nobly remunerate. Shakeſp. Titus Andron.
Money the king thought not fit to demand, becauſe he had
received ſatisfaction in matters of ſo great importance ; and
becauſe he could not remunerate them with any general par-
don, being prevented therein by the coronation pardon. Bacon.
In another parable, he repreſents the great condeſcenſions,
wherewith the Lord ſhall remunerate the faithful ſervant. Boyle.
ReMUNERATION. m. ſ. [remuneration, Fr. remuneratio, Lat.]
Reward; requital; recompenſe ; repayment.
Bear this fignificant to the country maid, Jaquenetta; there
is remuneration; for the beſt ward of mine honour is reward-
ing my dependants. . . Shakeſp. Love's Labour Lºft.
He begets a ſecurity of himſelf, and a careleſs eye on the
laſt remunerations. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
A collation is a doration of ſome vacant benefice in the
church, eſpecially when ſuch donation is freely beſtowed
without any proſpect of an evil remuneration. . . . Ayliffe.
REMU NERA'tive. adj. [from remunerate.] Exerciſed in giving
rewards. -
The knowledge of particular actions ſeems requiſite to the
attainment of that great end of God, in the manifeſtation of
his punitive and remunerative juſtice. Boyle.
To REMU'RMUR. v. a. [re and murmur.] To utter back in
murmurs; to repeat in low hoarſe founds.
Her fate is whiſper’d by the gentle breeze,
And told in fighs to all the trembling trees;
The trembling trees, in ev'ry plain and wood, *
Her fate remurmur to the ſilver flood. Pope.
To Re Mu'RMUR. v. n. [remurmuro, Lat J. To murmur back;
to echo a low hoarſe ſound. -
Her fellow nymphs the mountains tear
With loud laments, and break the yielding air;
The realms of Mars remurmur'd all around,
His untimely fate, th’ Angitian woods --
In fighs remurmur'd to the Fiji. floods. Dryden,
Rºº. "...ſ. [renard, a fox, Fr.] The name of a fox in
Before the break of day,
R Rºnard through the hedge had made his way. Dryden:
PNA's ENT: adj. [renaſeſ, Lat..] Produced again; riſing
again into being.
**** * [*ſºr, Lat] Poſſible to be produced
To Rena'vigate. [re and navigate.
RENcog'NTER. m. ſ. [rencontre, Fr.]
I. Claſh; colliſion.
You may as well expect two bowls ſhould
J To ſail again.
- row ſenſibl
rubbing, as that the rencounter of any .*.*.
them into perception. Collier
2. Perſonal oppoſition.
Virgil's friends thought fit to alter a line in Venus's ſpeech
that has a relation to the rencounter. Aiji.
So when the trumpet ſounding gives the ſign,
The juſtling chiefs in rude renºr join:
So meet, and ſo renew the dextrous fight;
Their clattering arms with the fierce fiock reſound. Gran.
3. Looſe or caſual engagement.
The confederates ſhould turn to their advantage their appa-
rent odds in men and horſe; and by that means out-number
the enemy in all rencounters and engagements. Addiſon,
4. Sudden combat without premeditation. J
To RENcQu'NTER. v. n.] reneontrer, Fr.]
I. To claſh; to collide.
2. To meet an enemy unexpectedly.
3. To ſkirmiſh with another.
4. To fight hand to hand.
To REND. v. a. pret, and pret. paſſ rent. [nentan, Saxon.j
To tear with violence ; to lacerate.
Will you hence
Before the tag return, whoſe rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters, and o'erbear
What they are uſed to bear. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
He rent a lion as he would have rent a kid, and he had no-
thing in his hand. jud. xiv. 4.
I will not rend away all the kingdom, but give one tribe to
thy ſon. I Kings xi. 13.
By the thund’rer's ſtroke it from th’ root is ren.
Soſure the blows, which from high heaven are ſent. Cowley.
What fº command me to relate,
Renews the ſad remembrance of our fate,
An empire from its old foundations rent. Dryden.
Look round to ſee
The lurking gold upon the fatal tree; -
Then rend it off. Dryden's Aeneis,
Is it not as much reaſon to ſay, when any monarchy was
ſhattered to pieces, and divided amongſt revolted ſubječts,
that God was careful to preſerve monarchical power, by
rending a ſettled empire into a multitude of little govern.
IncIntS. Locke.
When its way th’ impetuous paſſion found,
I rend my treſſes, and my breaſt I wound. Pope.
From cloud to cloud the rending lightnings rage. Thomſ.
RE'NDER. m. ſ. [from rend..] One that rends; a tearer.
To RE'NDER. v. a. [rendre, Fr.]
I. To return; to pay back. -
What ſhall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits. Pſ:
They that render evil for good are adverſaries. Pſ. xxxviii.
Will ye render me a recompenſe joeliii. 4.
Let him look into the future ſtate of bliſs or miſery, and
ſee there God, the righteous judge, ready to render every man
according to his deeds. - Locłe,
2. To reſtore; to give back.
Hither the ſeas at ſtated times reſort,
And ſhove the loaden veſſels into port;
Then with a gentle ebb retire again,
And render back their cargo to the main.
3. To give upon demand.
The ſluggard is wiſer in his own conceit, than ſeven men
that can render a reaſon. Proverbs xxvi. 16.
4. To inveſt with qualities; to make. - - -
Becauſe the nature of man carries him out to action, it is
no wonder if the ſame nature renders him ſolicitous about the
Addison.
iſſue. Sºuth's Sermon.
Love «77. - ... /.
Can anſwer love, and render bliſs ſecure. Thomſon.
5. To repreſent; to exhibit.
I heard him ſpeak of that ſame brother,
And he did render him the moſt unnatural * ,
That liv'd 'mongſt men. Shakespeare
6. To tranſlate. - *…*
Render it in the Engliſh a circle : but 'tis more truly ren-
dered a ſphere. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
He has a clearer idea of ſtrigil and fittrum, a curry-comb
and cymbal, which are the Engliſh names dictionaries render
And echoes to th’ Athenian ſhoars rebound. Dryden.
1…e.
them by. fic
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E N
R E N
He uſes only a º ; º * . al-
: ".2 ‘ender naſter of a great preſence of mind.
moſt literally re Bº Notes on the Odyſſey.
urrender; to yield ; to give up.
7. To º will call lº ſo ſtrićt account,
That he ſhall render every glory up,
Or I will tear the reck’ning from his heart. Shaft.
My rend'ring my perſon to them, may engage their affec-
tions to me. King Charles.
One, with whom he uſed to adviſe, propoſed to him to
render himſelf upon conditions to the earl of Eſſex. Clarendon.
Would he render up Hermione, ---
And keep Aſtyanax, I ſhould be bleſt! A. Philips.
8. To offer; to give to be uſed. - *
Logick renders its daily ſervice to wiſdom and virtue. Watts.
RENDER. n.ſ. [from the verb.] Surrender.
Newneſs -
Of Cloten's death, we being not known, nor muſter'd
Among the bands, may drive us to a render. Shakeſp.
Rendezvous. n.ſ. [rendez vouſ, Fr.]
. Aſſembly; meeting appointed. -
I ... of many ſhips ſhould rather keep his fleet
together, than have it ſevered far aſunder ; for the attendance
of meeting them again at the next rendezvous would conſume
time and vićtual. Raleigh's Apology.
2. A ſign that draws men together.
The philoſophers-ſtone and a holy war are but the rendez-
won of cracked brains, that wear their feather in their head
inſtead of their hat. Bacon.
3. Place appointed for aſſembly.
The king appointed his whole army to be drawn together
to a rendezvous at Marlborough. Clarendon.
This was the general rendezvous which they all got to,
and, mingling more and more with that oily liquor, they
ſucked it all up. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
To RENDE'zvous. v. n. [from the noun..] To meet at a place
appointed.
RENDI'tion. n.ſ.. [from render.] Surrendering; the act of
yielding.
§: }n. f. [renegade, Spaniſh; renegat, Fr.]
1. One that apoſtatiſes from the faith; an apoſtate.
There lived a French renegado in the ſame place, where
the Caſtilian and his wife were kept priſoners. Addiſon.
2. One who deſerts to the enemy; a revolter.
Some ſtraggling ſoldiers might prove renegadoes, but they
would not revolt in troops. Decay of Piety.
If the Roman government ſubſiſted now, they would have
had renegade ſeamen and ſhipwrights enough. Arbuthnot.
To RENE GE. v. a. [renego, Lat. renier, Fr.] To diſown.
- - His captain's heart,
Which, in the ſcuffles of great fights, hath burſt
The buckles on his breaſt, reneges all temper. Shakespeare.
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe ſooth every paſſion,
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their maſters. Shakeſp.
The deſign of this war is to make me renege my conſcience
and thy truth. King Charles.
To RENE/W. v. a. [re and new ; renova, Lat.]
1. To renovate; to reſtore the former ſtate.
In ſuch a night
Medea gather'd the enchanted herbs,
That did renew old AEſon. Shakeſp. Merch. of Penice.
It is impoſſible for thoſe that were once enlightened—if
they ſhall fall away to renew them again unto repentance.
Hebrews vi. 6.
Let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there. I Sam.
Renew'd to life, that ſhe might daily die,
I daily doom'd to follow. Dryden's Theo. and Honor.
2. To repeat; to put again in ačt.
Thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee; long may'ſt thou live,
To bear his image, and renew his glories Shakeſp.
The body percuſſed hath, by reaſon of the percuſſion,
a trepidation wrought in the minute parts, and ſo reneweth
the percuſſion of the air. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The bearded corn enſu'd
From earth unaſk'd, nor was that earth renewa. Dryden.
3. To begin again.
The laſt great age, foretold by ſacred rhymes,
Renews its niſh'd courſe, Saturnian times
Rowl round again. Dryden's Wirgil’s Paſłorals.
4. In theology, to make anew ; to transform to new life.
Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye
may prove what is that perfect will of God. Rom. xii. 2.
*º adj. [from renew.] Capable to be renewed.
liv he old cuſtom upon many eſtates is to let for leaſes of
º, renewable at pleaſure. Swift's Miſcellanies.
ENE! -
V .*. * f [from renew.] The act of renewing; reno-
It behoved the deit
mankind, to renew tº
rectify abuſes, with ſuch
perſiſting in the purpoſe of mercy to
revelation from time to time, and to
authority for the renewal and recti-
fication, as was ſufficient evidence of the truth of what was
revealed. - Forbes.
RENITENcy. m. ſ. [from renitent.] That reſiſtance in ſolid
bodies, when they preſs upon, or are impelled one againſt
another, or the reſiſtance that a body makes on account of
weight. .. - - - &amp;tincy.
RENí'TENT. adj. [renitens, Lat.] Aëting againſt any im-
pulſe by elaſtick power.
By an inflation of the muſcles, they become ſoft, and yet
remitºnt, like ſo many pillows, diffipating the force of the
preſſure, and ſo taking away the ſenſe of pain. Ray.
RENNET. n.ſ. See RUNNET.
A putredinous ferment coagulates all humours, as milk with
rennet is turned. Floyer on the Humours.
RE'NNET. n. ſ. [properly reinette, a little queen.] A kind
RENE"TING. } of apple.
A golden rennet is a very pleaſant and fair fruit, of a yel-
low fluſh, and the beſt of bearers for all ſorts of ſoil; of
which there are two ſorts, the large ſort and the ſmall. Mºrt.
Ripe pulpy apples, as pippins and rennetings, are of a
ſyrupy tenacious nature. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
To RENOVATE. v. a. [renovo, Lat.] To renew ; to re-
ſtore to the firſt ſtate.
All nature feels the renovating force
Of winter, only to the thoughtleſs eye
In ruin ſeen. Thomſºn's IWinter.
Re Nova tion. n.ſ. [renovation, Fr. renovatio, Lat...] Renewal;
the act of renewing; the ſtate of being renewed. &gt;
Sound continueth ſome ſmall time, which is a renovation,
and not a continuance; for the body percuſſed hath a trepi-
dation wrought in the minute parts, and ſo reneweth the per-
cuſſion of the air. Bacon's Natural Hijiºry.
The kings entered into ſpeech of renewing the treaty;
the king ſaying, that though king Philip's perſon were the
ſame, yet his fortunes were raiſed; in which caſe a renovatiºn
of treaty was uſed: Bacon's Henry VII,
To ſecond life,
Wak’d in the renovation of the juſt,
Reſigns him up, with heav'n and earth renew'd. Miliºn.
To RENOU’NCE. v. a. [renoncer, Fr. renuncio, Lat.]
1. To diſown ; to abnegate.
From Thebes my birth I own; and no diſgrace
Can force me to renounce the honour of my race. Dryden,
2. To quit upon oath.
This world I do renounce ; and in your fights
Shake patiently my great afflićtion off. Shakeſp. K, Lear.
To Re Nou'Nce. v. n. To declare renunciation. The fol-
lowing paſſage is a mere Galliciſm : renoncer a mon ſang.
On this firm principle I ever ſtood;
He of my ſons, who fails to make it good,
By one rebellious ačt renounces to my blood. Dryden.
ReNou’NcFMENT. n. ſ. [from renounce..] Act of renouncing ;
rtnunciation.
I hold you as a thing enſkied and ſainted;
By your renouncement, an immortal ſpirit. Shakespeare .
RENCYWN. n.ſ. [renommée, Fr.] Fame; celebrity; praiſe
widely ſpread.
She
Is daughter to this famous duke of Milan,
Of whom ſo often I have heard renown. Shakespeare,
'Tis of more renown
To make a river, than to build a town. J/aller.
Nor envy we
Thy great renown, nor grudge thy vićtory. Drydºn.
To RENowN. v. a. [renommer, Fr. from the noun..] To
make famous.
Let us ſatisfy our eyes
With the memorials and the things of fame, r" r ,
That do renown this city. Shakespeare . Twelfth Night.
Soft elocution does thy ſtyle renown,
Gentle or ſharp according to thy choice,
To laugh at follies, or to laſh at vice. Dryden.
In ſolemn ſilence ſtand
Stern tyrants, whom their cruelties renºw",
And emperors in Parian marble frown.
A bard, whom pilfer'd paſtorals renzº", *
Juſt writes to make his barrenneſs appear. Pºte.
RENöwned, particip. adj. [from renown.] Famous; cele-
brated; eminent; famed. - -
Theſe were the renowned of the congregation, Pºº of
the tribes, heads of thouſands. Num, i. 16.
That thrice renowned and learned French king, finding Pº-
trarch's tomb without any inſcription, wrote '9" lº
ſaying, ſhame it was, that he who ſung his miſtreſs's praiſe
ſeven years beſore her death, ſhould twelve years want an
epitaph. Patham on Pºetry.
The reſt were long to tell, though far remº” d. Miltºn.
Of all the cities in Romanian lands,
The chief and moſt renown'd Ravenna ſtands,
Addison.
Adorn'd in ancient times with arms and ** Dryder.
Ilva, - I)ryden
An iſle renown'd for ſteel and unexhauſted mines. º º
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E P
R E P
º
º
RENT. n.ſ.. [from rend..] A break; a laceration:
Thou viper
Haſt cancell'd kindred, made a rent in mature,
And through her holy bowels gnaw'd thy way,
Through thy own blood to empire. Dryden.
He who ſees this vaſt rent in ſo high a rock, how the con-
vex parts of one ſide exactly tally with the concave of the
other, muſt be ſatisfied, that it was the effect of an earth-
quake. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
To R. N. r. v. a. [rather to rend..] To tear; to lacerate.
A time to rent, and a time to few. Eccluſ. iii. 7.
To RENT. v. n. [now written rant.] To roar; to bluſter :
we ſtill ſay, a tearing fellow, for a noiſy bully.
He ventur'd to diſmiſs his fear,
That partings wont to rent and tear,
And give the deſperateſt attack
To danger ſtill behind its back.
RENT. m. ſ. [rente, Fr.]
1. Revenue; annual payment.
Idol ceremony,
What are thy rents * what are thy comings in
O ceremony ſhew me but thy worth Shakespeare . Hen. v.
I bought an annual rent or two,
And live juſt as you ſee I do. Pope's Epiff. of Horace.
2. Money paid for any thing held of another.
Such is the mould, that the bleſt tenant feeds
On precious fruits, and pays his rent in weeds.
Folks in mudwall tenement,
Preſent a peppercorn for rent. - Prior.
To RENT. v. a. [renter, Fr.]
1. To hold by paying rent.
When a ſervant is called before his maſter, it is often to
know, whether he paſſed by ſuch a ground, if the old man,
who rents it, is in good health. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. To ſet to a tenant.
RE/NtAble. adj. [from rent.] That may be rented.
RE/NTAL. m. ſ. [from rent.] Schedule or account of rents.
RE/NTER. m. ſ. from rent.] He that holds by paying rent.
The eſtate will not be let for one penny more or leſs to the
renter, amongſt whomſoever the rent he pays be divided. Locke.
R; Nve'Rs FD. adj. [renverſe, Fr.] Overturned. Spenſer.
RENUNCIA^TION. m. ſ. [renunciatio, from renuncio, Lat.] The
aćt of renouncing.
He that loves riches, can hardly believe the doćtrine of
poverty and renunciation of the world. Taylor.
To REORDAI'N. v. a... [reordiner, Fr. re and ordain.] To
ordain again, on ſuppoſition of ſome defeót in the commiſſion
of miniſtry.
Reor DINA'Tion, n.ſ.. [from reordain.] Repetition of ordi-
Ilation.
He proceeded in his miniſtry without expeding any new
miſfion, and never thought himſelf obliged to a reordination.
• Atterbury.
To REPA'ciFY. v. a. [re and pacify.] To pacify again.
Henry, who next commands the ſtate,
Hudibras, p. iii.
JWaller.
Seeks to repacify the people's hate. Daniel.
RePAI'D. part of repay.
To REPAI/R. v. a. [reparo, Lat. reparer, Fr.]
1. To reſtore after injury or dilapidation.
Let the prieſts repair the breaches of the houſe. 2 Kings.
The fines impoſed were the more repined againſt, becauſe
they were affigned to the rebuilding and repairing of St.
Paul's Church. - Clarendon.
Heav'n ſoon repair'd her mural breach. Milton.
2. To amend any injury by an equivalent. .
He juſtly hath driv'n out his rebel foes
To deepeſt hell; and to repair their loſs
Created this new happy race of men. Milton's Par. Loft.
3. To fill up anew, by ſomething put in the place of what is
loſt.
To be reveng’d,
And to repair his numbers thus impair’d. Milton.
REPAI/R. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Reparation; ſupply of loſs;
reſtoration after dilapidation.
Before the curing of a ſtrong diſeaſe,
Ev’n in the inſtant of repair and health,
The fit is ſtrongeſt. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Temperance, in all methods of curing the gout, is a re-
gular and ſimple diet, proportioning the daily repairs to the
daily decays of our waſting bodies. Temple's Miſcellanies.
All automata need a frequent repair of new ſtrength, the
cauſes whence their motion does proceed, being ſubjećt to
fail. JWilkins's Mathematical Magick.
To REPAI'R. v. n. [repairer, Fr.] To go to ; to betake him-
ſelf.
May all to Athens back again repair.
- Depart from hence in peace,
- Search the wide world, and where you pleaſe repair. Dryd.
'Tis fix’d ; th’ irrevocable doom of Jove:
Haſte then, Cyllenius, through the liquid air,
Go mount the winds, and to the ſhades repair. Pope.
Rep.A1'R. m. ſ. [repaire, Fr. from the verb.]
1. Reſort ; abode.
Shakeſp.
Sº 'ſcapes th’ inſulting fire his narrow jail,
And makes ſmall outlets into open air ;
There the fierce winds his tender force aſſail,
And beat him downward to his firſt repair.
2. Aćt of betaking himſelf any whither.
The king ſent a Proclamation for their repair to their
houſes, and for a preſervation of the peace. Clarendon.
REPAI RER. m. ſ. [from repair.] Amender; reſtorer.
. He that governs Wºll, leads the blind, but he that teaches,
º º: º: it i fºlious thing to have been the
repatrer of a decayed intellect. &gt; -
Ö ſacred reſt I South's Sermoni.
Q peace of mind! repairer of decay,
Whoſe balms renew the limbs to labours of the day. Dryd.
REPANDous. adj. [repandus, Lat.] Bent upwards.
Though they be drawn repandous or convexedly crooked in
one piece, yet the dolphin that carrieth Arion is concavouſly
inverted, and hath its ſpine depreſſed in another. Brown.
RETARABLE. adj. [reparable, Fr. reparabilis, Lat.] Capable
of being amended, retrieved, or ſupplied by ſomething
equivalent.
The parts in man's body eaſily reparable, as ſpirits, blood
and fleſh, die in the embracement of the parts hardly repa-
rable, as bones, nerves and membranes. Bacon.
When its ſpirit is drawn from wine, it will not, by the
re-union of its conſtituent liquors, be reduced to its pri-
ſtine nature; becauſe the workmanſhip of nature, in the diſ-
poſition of the parts, was too elaborate to be imitable, or re-
parable by the bare appoſition of thoſe divided parts to each
other. Boyle.
An adulterous perſon is tied to reſtitution of the injury, ſo
far as it is reparable, and can be made to the wronged perſon;
to make proviſion for the children begotten in unlawful em-
braces. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
Re'PARABLY. adv. [from reparable.] In a manner capable of
remedy by reſtoration, amendment or ſupply.
REPARATION. n.ſ. [reparation, Fr. reparatio, from reparo, Lat.]
1. The aët of repairing.
Antonius Philoſophus took care of the reparation of the
highways. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. Supply of what is waſted.
When the organs of ſenſe want their due repoſe and neceſ-
ſary reparations, the ſoul exerts herſelf in her ſeveral fa-
culties. - Addiſon.
In this moveable body, the fluid and ſolid parts muſt be
conſumed; and both demand a conſtant reparation. Arbuthnot.
. Recompenſe for any injury; amends.
The king ſhould be able, when he had cleared himſelf, to
make him reparation. Bacohº.
I am ſenſible of the ſcandal I have given by my looſe wri-
tings, and make what reparation I am able. Dryden.
REPA'RATIVE. m. ſ. [from repair.] Whatever makes amends
for loſs or injury. -
New preparatives were in hand, and partly reparatives of
the former beaten at ſea. Wotton's Buckingham.
REPARTEE'. n.ſ. [repartie, Fr.] Smart reply.
The fools overflowed with ſmart repartees, and were only
diſtinguiſhed from the intended wits, by being called cox-
combs. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Sullen was Jupiter juſt now :
And Cupid was as bad as he
Hear but the younſter's repartee. Prior.
To REPARTEE'. v. n. To make ſmart replies.
High flights ſhe had, and wit at will,
And ſo her tongue lay ſeldom ſtill ;
For in all viſits who but ſhe, -
To argue, or to repartee # ". . . . Prior.
To REPA'ss. v. a. [repaſſer, Fr.] To paſs again ; to paſs back,
Well we have paſs'd, and now repaſ'd the ſeas,
And brought deſir'd help. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
We ſhall find ſmall reaſon to think, that Abraham paſſed
and repaſſed thoſe ways more often than he was enforced ſo to
do, if we conſider that he had no other comforter in this
weariſom journey, than the ſtrength of his faith in God. Rak
If his ſoul hath wing'd the deſtin'd flight,
Homeward with pious ſpeed repaſ, the main, , , ,
To the pale ſhade funereal rites ordain. Pope's Odyſſey.
To REPA'ss. v. m. To go back in a road.
Five girdles bind the ſkies, the torrid zone
Glows with the paſſing and repoſing ſun.
Rep.A'st. n.ſ. [repas, Fr. re and poſius, Lat.]
1. A meal; ačt of taking food.
From dance to ſweet repo/f they turn
Deſi ; all in circles as the ſtood, -
#. .." C %. Paradiſe Lºſt, b. v.
What neat repaſ' ſhall feaſt us, light and choice, , ,
Of Attick taſte, with wine. Milton.
Sleep, that is thy beſt repºſł,
Yet of death it bears a taſte,
Dryden.
Bryden.
And both are the ſame thing at laſt. Denham.
The day
Had ſummon'd him to due repaſ' at noon. Pryden.
2 I P Keep<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E P
R. E. P
Keep regular hours for repaſ' and ſleep. Arbuthnot,
..d vićtuals.
2. Food 'ó. ". get me ſome retaff;
I care ... what, ſo it be wholſome food. Shakeſp.
To Rep.A'st. v. a. [repaiſire, Fr. from the noun..] To feed ;
to * his good friends I'll ope my arm,
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
Ripºſ, them with my blood. - Shakeſp.
Repas'rür E. m. ſ. [re and paſture.] Entertainment. Not in
uſe. --- - - -
He from forage will incline to play;
But if thou ſtrive, poor ſoul, what art thou then
Food for his rage, repaſture for his den. Shakeſp.
To REPA’Y. v. a. [repayer, Fr. re and pay.]
1. To pay back in return, in requital, or in revenge. -
Åºrding to their deeds he will repay recompenſe to his
enemies; to the iſlands he will repay recompenſe. Mſ. lix. 18.
The falſe honour, which he had ſo long enjoyed, was
plentifully repaid in contempt. Bacon.
ompenſe.
2. To recomp He clad
Their nakedneſs with ſkins of beaſts; or ſlain,
Or as the ſnake with youthful coat repaid. Milton.
3. To requite either good or ill. . . .
The pooreſt ſervice is repaid with thanks. Shakeſp.
Fav'ring heav'n repaid my glorious toils
with a ſack'd palace and barbarick ſpoils. Pope.
I have fought well for Perſia, and repaid
The benefit of birth with honeſt ſervice. Rowe.
4. To reimburſe with what is owed.
If you repay me not on ſuch a day,
Such ſums as are expreſs'd in the condition,
Let the forfeit be an equal pound of your fair fleſh. Shakespeare
REFA yMrNT. m. ſ. [from repay.]
1. The ačt of repaying.
2. The thing repaid.
The centeſima uſura it was not lawful to exceed; and what
was paid over it, was reckoned as a repaymºnt of part of the
principal. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To Repeal. v. a. [rappeller, Fr.]
1. To recall. Out of uſe.
I will repeal thee, or be well aſſur’d,
Adventure to be baniſhed myſelf.
I here forget all former griefs;
Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again.
2. To atrogate; to revoke.
Laws, that have been approved, may be again repealed,
and diſputed againſt by the authors themſelves. Looker's Prºf.
Adam ſoon repeal’d -
The doubts that in his heart aroſe. Milton's Par. Loft.
Statutes are filently repealed, when the reaſon ceaſes for
which they were enacted. Dryden's Preface to Fables.
REPEA/l. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Recall from exile. Not in uſe.
If the time thruſt forth
A cauſe for thy repeal, we ſhall not ſend
O'er the vaſt world to ſeek a ſingle man.
2. Revocation; abrogation.
The king being advertiſed, that the over large grants of
lands and liberties made the lords ſo inſolent, did abſolutely
reſume all ſuch grants; but the earl of Deſmond above all
found himſelf grieved with this reſumption or repeal of liber-
ties, and declared his diſlike. Davies on Ireland.
If the preſbyterians ſhould obtain their ends, I could not
be ſorry to find them miſtaken in the point which they have
moſt at heart, by the repeal of the teſt ; I mean the benefit
of employments. Swift's Preſbyterian Plca.
To REPEAT. v. a. [repeto, Lat, rºpeter, Fr.]
1. To iterate; to uſe again ; to do again.
Theſe evils thou repeat'ſ upon thyſelf,
Have baniſh'd me from Scotland.
He, though his power
Creation could repeat, yet would be loth
Us to aboliſh. Milton.
- Where ſudden alterations are not neceſſary, the ſame effect
may be obtained by the repeated force of diet with more ſafety
to the body. Arbuthnot on Aiments.
2. To ſpeak again.
The pſalms, for the excellency of their uſe, deſerve to be
oftner repeated; but that their multitude permitteth not any
oftner repetition.
Shakeſp. Henry VI.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
Shake?. Macbeth.
- Hooker.
3. To try again.
Neglecting for Creüſa’s life his own, -
*:::: the danger of the burning town. //aller.
- eyond this place you can have no retreat,
, Stay here, and I the danger will repeat. Dryden.
4. To site ; to rehearſe.
Th -
Nº. their natures know'ſt, and gav'ft them names,
- els to thee repeated. AMilton
He repeated ſome lines of Virgil, ſuitable to the occaſion.
JJ’aller's Li
R*PEATE DLY. adv. If er's Life.
• adv. Utrom repeated. O - -
than once. - [ p J Over and over ; more
3. Expreſſing forrow for fin.
And are not theſe vices, which lead into damnation, re-
peatedly, and moſt forcibly cautioned againſt Stephens.
REPEA’t e R. n.ſ.. [from repeat.]
1. One that repeats; one that recites.
2. A watch that ſtrikes the hours at will by compreſſion of a
ſpring.
Tºp L. v. a. [repello, Lat.]
1. To drive back any thing.
Neither doth Tertullian bewray this weakneſs in ſtriking
only, but alſo in repelling their ſtrokes with whom he con-
tendeth. Hocker, b. ii. ſ. 5.
With hills of ſlain on ev'ry ſide,
Hippomedon repell'd the hoſtile tide.
2. To drive back an affailant.
Stand faſt ; and all temptation to tranſgreſs repel. Mih.
Repel the Tuſcan foes, their city ſeize,
Protećt the Latians in luxurious eaſe. Dryden's AEmeis.
Your foes are ſuch, as they, not you, have made,
And virtue may repel, though not invade. Dryden.
To REPE'l. v. n.
1. To ad with force contrary to force impreſſed.
From the ſame repelling power it ſeems to be, that flies
walk upon the water without wetting their feet. Newton.
2. In phyſick, to repel in medicine, is to prevent ſuch an afflux
of a fluid to any particular part, as would raiſe it into a
tunnour. Quincy.
REPE'll ENT. m. ſ. [repellens, Lat..] An application that has
a repelling power.
In the cure of an eryſipelas, whilſt the body abounds with
bilious humours, there is no admitting of repellents, and by
diſcutients you will encreaſe the heat. Wiſeman.
Repe'll ER. m. ſ. [from repel J One that repels.
To REPE/NT. v. n. [repentir, Fr.]
1. To think on any thing paſt with ſorrow.
God led them not through the land of the Philiſtines, leſt
peradventure the people repent, when they ſee war and they
return. Exodus xiii. 17.
Nor had I any reſervations in my own ſoul, when I paſſed
that bill; nor repentings after. King Charles.
Upon any deviation from virtue, every rational creature ſo
deviating, ſhould condemn, renounce, and be ſorry for every
Pope.
ſuch deviation; that is, repent of it. South.
Firſt ſhe relents
With pity, of that pity then repents. Dryden.
Still you may prove the terror of your foes;
Teach traitors to repent of faithleſs leagues. A. Philips.
2. To expreſs ſorrow for ſomething paſt.
Poor Enobarbus did before thy face repent. Shakespeare
3. To have ſuch ſorrow for fin, as produces amendment of life.
Nineveh repented at the preaching of Jonas. Matt. xii. 41.
To REPE'NT. v. a.
1. To remember with ſorrow.
If Deſdemona will return me my jewels, I will give over
my ſuit, and repent my unlawful ſolicitation. Shakeſp.
2. To remember with pious ſorrow.
Thou, like a contrite penitent
Charitably warn'd of thy ſins, doſt repent
Theſe vanities and giddineſſes, lo
I ſhut my chamber-door; come, let us go. Donne.
His late follies he would late repent. Dryden.
3. [Se repentir, Fr.] It is uſed with the reciprocal pronoun:
I repent me, that the duke is ſlain. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
No man repented him of his wickedneſs; ſaying, what have
I done * jeremiah viii. 6.
Judas, when he ſaw that he was condemned, repented
himſelf. Matthew xxvii. 3.
My father has repented him ere now,
Or will repent him when he finds me dead.
Each age ſinn'd on ;
Till God aroſe, and great in anger ſaid,
Lo! it repenteth me, that man was made.
Dryden.
Prior.
REPE'NTAN.cf. n.ſ. [repentance, Fr. from repent.]
1. Sorrow for any thing paſt. - -
2. Sorrow for fin, ſuch as produces newneſs of life Penitº
Repentance ſo altereth a man through the mercy ºf God,
be he never ſo defiled, that it maketh him pure. I/7.itgifte.
Who by repentance is not ſatisfied,
Is nor of heav'n nor earth ; for theſe are pleaſed ; wº
By penitence th' eternal's wrath's appeas'd. Shakeſp.
Repºntance is a change of mind, or a converſion from into
God: not ſome one bare act of change, but a laſting durable
ſtate of new life, which is called regeneration. Hammond.
This is a confidence, of all the moſt irrational ; for "P"
what ground can a man promiſe himſelf a future reſentaneº
who cannot promiſe himſelf a futurity. South.
REPENTANT: adj. [repentant, Fr. from repent.]
1. Sorrowful for the paſt.
2. Sorrowful for fin.
- - M."), a
Thus they, in lowlieſt plight, repentant ſtood. Mºtº-
After I have interr'd this noble king,
And wet his grave with my repentant tears,
I will with alſ expedient duty ſee you. Shakespeare *:::,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E P
There is no malice in this burning coal;
The breath of heav'n hath blown its ſpirit out,
And ſtrew'd repentant aſhes on its head. Shakeſp. K. john.
Relentleſs walls whoſe darkſome round contains
Refertant fighs and voluntary pains. Pope.
To Refeo P.L.E. v. a. [re and people ; repeupler, Fr.] To ſtock
with people anew.
An occurrence of ſuch remark, as the univerſal flood and
the repeopling of the world, muſt be freſh in memory for about
eight hundred years; eſpecially conſidering, that the peo-
ling of the world was gradual. Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Tö REPERCU'SS. v. a... [repercutio, repercuffus, Lat.] To
beat back; to drive back; to rebound. Not in uſe.
Air in ovens, though it doth boil and dilate itſelf, and is
refercuſſed, yet it is without noiſe. Bacon.
REPER cussion, n. ſ. [from repercuſ; ; repercuſſio, Lat. reper-
cuſſion, Fr.] The act of driving back; rebound.
In echoes, there is no new eliſion, but a repercuſſion. Bacon.
They various ways recoil, and ſwiftly flow
By mutual reperc Ž. to and fro.
REPERcussive. adj. [repercuſſif, Fr.]
1. Having the power of driving back or cauſing a rebound.
2. Repellent.
Blood is ſtanched by aſtringent and repercuſſive medicines.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Defluxions, if you apply a ſtrong repercuſſive to the place
affected, and do not take away the cauſe, will ſhift to an-
other place.
Blackmore.
Bacon.
3. Driven back; rebounding. Not proper.
Amid Carnarvon's mountains rages loud
The repercuſſive roar: with mighty cruſh
Tumble the ſmitten cliffs. Thomſon.
REPERT1/Tious. adj. [repel tus, Fr.] Found; gained by
finding. Dić7.
REPE'RT or Y. n. ſ. [repertoire, Fr. repertorium, Lat.] A trea-
ſury; a magazine; a book in which any thing is to be found.
Repetition. m. ſ. [repetition, Fr. repetitio, Lat.]
1. Iteration of the ſame thing.
The frequent repetition of aliment is neceſſary for repair-
ing the fluids and ſolids. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Recital of the ſame words over again.
The pſalms, for the excellency of their uſe, deſerve to be
oftener repeated; but that the multitude of them permitteth
not any oftner repetition. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 30.
3. The act of reciting or rehearſing.
If you conquer Rome, the benefit,
Which you ſhall thereby reap, is ſuch a name,
Whoſe repetition will be dogg'd with curſes.
4. Recital from memory, as diſtinét from reading.
To REPI'NE. v. n. [re and pine.] To fret; to vex himſelf;
to be diſcontented. -
Of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repin'd. Shakeſp.
The fines impoſed were the more repined againſt, becauſe
they were aſſigned to the rebuilding of St. Paul's church. Clar.
If you think how many diſeaſes, and how much poverty
there is in the world, you will fall down upon your knees,
and inſtead of repining at one afflićtion, will admire ſo many
bleſfings received at the hand of God. Temple.
The ghoſts repine at violated night;
And curſe th’ invading ſun, and ſicken at the fight. Dryd.
Juſt in the gate
Dwell pale diſeaſes and repining age. Dryden.
RFPI'NER. m. ſ. [from repine.] One that frets or murmurs.
To REPLA'ce. v. a. [.. eplacer, Fr. re and place.]
1. To put again in the former place.
The earl being apprehended, upon examination cleared
himſelf ſo well, as he was replaced in his government. Bacon.
The bowls, remov’d for fear,
The youths replac'd; and ſoon reſtor'd the chear. Dryden.
2. To put in a new place.
His gods put themſelves under his protećlion, to be replaced
in their promiſed Italy. Dryden's Ded. to Virgil.
To REPLA(NT. v. a. [replanter, Fr. re and plant..] To
plant anew.
Small trees being yet unripe, covered in autumn with dung
until the ſpring, take up and replant in good ground. Bacon.
REPLANTATION. n.ſ. (from replant.] The aët of planting again.
To ReplA1(T. v. a. [re and plait..] To fold one part often
over another.
In Raphael's firſt works, are many ſmall foldings often
replaited, which look like ſo many whip-cords. Dryden.
To Reple'Nish. v. a. [repleo, from re and plenus, Lat. repleni,
old Fr.]
1. To ſtock ; to fill.
Multiply and repleniſh the earth.
The waters
With fiſh repleniſh'd, and the air with fowl.
2. To finiſh; to conſummate ; to complete.
in uſe.
Shalºft.
Gen. i. 28.
Milton.
Not proper, nor
We ſmother'd
The moſt repleniſhed ſweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation e'er ſhe fram'd. Shake?.
R E P
To Reple'Nish. v. n. To be ſtocked. Not in uſe.
The humours in men's bodies encreaſe and decreaſe as the
moon doth ; and therefore purge ſome day after the full ; for
then the humours will not repleniſh ſo ſoon. Bacon.
REPLETE. adj. [replet, Fr. repletus, Lat. -
filled; filled to exuberance. pletus, Lat] Full; completely
The world's large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks;
Full of compariſons and wounding flouts. &gt; Shakespeare.
This mordication, if in over high a degree, is little better
than the corroſion of poiſon; as ſometimes in antimony, if
given to bodies not replete with humours; for where humours
abound, the humours ſave the parts. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
His words, replete with guile,
Into her heart too eaſy entrance won. Milton.
In a dog, out of whoſe eye being wounded the aqueous
humour did copiouſly flow, yet in ſix hours the bulb of the
eye was again replete with its humour, without the applica-
tion of any medicines. Ray on the Creation.
Rºrios. n. ſ. [repletion, Fr.] The ſtate of being over-
Ulll.
The tree had too much repletion, and was oppreſſed with
its own ſap ; for repletion is an enemy to generation. Bacon.
All dreams
Are from repletion and complexion bred;
From riſing fumes of undigeſted food.
Thirſt and hunger may be ſatisfy'd;
But this repletion is to love deny'd. Dryden.
The action of the ſtomach is totally ſtopped by too great
repletion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
REPLE'v IABLE., adj. [replegiabilis, barbarous Latin.] What
may be replevined.
To REPLE'v IN. !” a. Spenſer. [replegio, low Lat. of re and
To Reple'vy. plevir or plagir, Fr. to give a pledge.] To
take back or ſet at liberty any thing ſeized upon ſecurity
1Ven.
g That you're a beaſt, and turn'd to graſs,
Is no ſtrange news, nor ever was ;
At leaſt to me, who once, you know,
Did from the pound replevin you.
Replication. m. ſ. [replico, Lat.]
1. Rebound ; repercuſſion. Not in uſe.
Tyber trembled underneath his banks,
To hear the replication of your ſounds,
Made in his concave ſhores. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
2. Reply; anſwer.
To be demanded of a ſpunge, what replication ſhould be
made by the ſon of a king Shakeſp. Hamlet.
This is a replication to what Menelaus had before offered,
concerning the tranſplantation of Ulyſſes to Sparta. Broome.
To REPLY”. v. n. [repliquer, Fr.] To anſwer; to make a
return to an anſwer.
O man who art thou that replieſ againſt God? Rom. ix.
Would we aſcend higher to the reſt of theſe lewd perſons,
we ſhould find what reaſon Caſtalio's painter had to reply upon
the cardinal, who blamed him for putting a little too much co-
lour into St. Peter and Paul's faces: that it was true in their
life time they were pale mortified men, but that ſince they
were grown ruddy, by bluſhing at the fins of their ſucceſ-
ſors. Atterbury's Sermons.
His trembling tongue invok'd his bride;
With his laſt voice Eurydice he cry’d:
Eurydice the rocks and river-banks reply'd,
To Reply. v. a. To return for an anſwer.
Perplex'd ,
The tempter ſtood, nor had what to reply.
Re'PLY. m. ſ. [replique, Fr.] Anſwer; return to an anſwer.
But now return,
And with their faint reply this anſwer join. Shakeſp.
If I ſent him word, it was not well cut; he would ſend
me word, he cut it to pleaſe himſelf: if again, it was not;"
well cut, this is called the reply churliſh. Shakeſp.
One riſes up to make replies to eſtabliſh or confute what has
Dryden.
Hudibras, p. iii.
Dryden.
been offered on each ſide of the queſtion. J/atts,
To whom with fighs, Ulyſſes gave reply;
Ah, why ill-ſuiting paſtime muſt I try : Pope.
Reply'ER. n.ſ. [from reply..] He that makes a return to an
anſwer.
At an act of the commencement, the anſwere gave for
his queſtion, that an ariſtocracy was better than a monarchy:
the replyer did tax him, that, being a private bred man, he
would give a queſtion of ſtate: the anſwerer ſaid, that the
replyer did much wrong the privilege of ſcholars, who would
be much ſtreightened if they ſhould give queſtions of nothing,
but ſuch things wherein they are practiſed; and added we
have heard yourſelf diſpute of virtue, which no man will ſay
you put much in practice. .. Bacon's Apopthegm.
Tô Rºllisii. v.a. [repolir, Fr. re and poliſh..] To poliſh
again. - - -
* A fundred clock is piecemeal laid
Not to be loſt, but by the maker's hand
Repoliſh'd, without error then to ſtand. Donne.
To REPORT.
* . .
- wº
º
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E P
R. E. P
To REPORT. v. a. [rapporter, Fr.]
iſe by popular rumour.
I. T; º ? or elſe reported ſucceſſively from age to
ore ? Shakeſp. Richara III.
age : It is reported, -
That good duke Humphry traiterouſly is murther'd. Shakespeare
Report, ſay they, and we will report it: , , jer. xx. 10.
There is a king in Judah; and now ſhall it be repºrted to
the king. Neh. vi. 7.
2. To give repute. -
2 *}. was well reported of by the brethren. 47: xvi.
A widow well reported of for good works. 1 Tim. v. 19.
3. To give an account of.
4. To return; to rebound ; to give back.
In Ticinum is a church with windows only from above,
that reporteth the voice thirteen times, if you ſtand by the
cloſe end wall over againſt the door. Bacon.
REPo'RT. n.ſ.. [from the noun.]
1. Rumour; popular fame.
2. Repute; publick character.
- My body's mark'd
With Roman ſwords; and my report was once
Firſt with the beſt of note. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
In all approving ourſelves as the miniſters of God, by ho-
nour and diſhonour, by evil report and good report. 2 Cor. iv.
3. Account returned.
We command our ambaſſadors to make report unto you.
1 Mac. xii. 13.
Sea nymphs enter with the ſwelling tide;
From Thetis ſent as ſpies to make report,
And tell the wonders of her ſov’reign's court. Waller.
4. Account given by lawyers of caſes.
After a man has ſtudied the general principles of the law,
reading the reports of adjudged caſes, will richly improve his
mind. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
5. Sound; loud noiſe; repercuſſion.
The ſtronger ſpecies drowneth the leſſer; the report of an
ordnance, the voice. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The laſhing billows make a long report,
And beat her ſides. Dryden's Ceyx and Alcyo.
REpo'RTER. m.ſ.. [from report.] Relater ; one that gives an
3CCOunt.
There ſhe appear'd ; or my reporter devis'd well for her.
- Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Rumours were raiſed of great diſcord among the nobility;
for this cauſe the lords aſſembled, gave order to apprehend
the reporters of theſe ſurmiſes. Hayward.
If I had known a thing they concealed, I ſhould never be
the reporter of it. . Pope.
Repo'RTINGly, adv. [from reporting.] By common fame.
Others ſay thou doſt deſerve; and I
Believe it better than reportingly. Shakeſp.
Reposal. n.f. [from repoſ...] The aa of repoſing.
Doſt thou think,
If I would ſtand againſt thee, would the repoſal
§ . virtue, or worth in thee,
ake thy words faith’d. Shakeſp. King Lear.
To REPOSE. v. a. [rºpons, Lat.] 'ſp. King Lear
1. To lay to reſt.
- Rome's readieſt champions, repoſ you here,
Secure from worldly chances and miſhaps;
Here lurks no treaſon, here no envy ſwells. Shakeſp.
. I will repºſe myſelf with her; to live with her hath no
ſorrow, but mirth. Jºſdom viii. 16.
Have ye chos'n this place,
After the toil of battle, to repoſe
Your wearied Vlrtue. AMilton’s Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
2. To place as in confidence or truń.
- I repoſe upon your management, what is deareſt to me,
my fame. - Pryden's Preface to Ann. Miraſ.
. That prince was conſcious of his own integrity in the ſer-
vice of God, and relied on this as a ſure foundation for that
truſt he repºſed in him, to deliver him out of all his diſtreſſes.
3. T; lodge; to lay up. Rogers's Sermons.
ebbles, repoſed in thoſe cliff, amongſt the . .
not ſo diſſoluble and likewiſe more . are iñº ng
J/?odw -
To REpo's E. v. n. [repoſer, Fr.] odward's Natural Hiſtory.
I. To ſleep; to be at reſt.
Within a thicket I repos'd; when round
º . * leaves in heap; and found,
et fall from heav •r, . -
2. To reſt in confidenc gº a ſleep interminate.
- And, for the wa
łº deſire thy wº, :* to paſs,
O - *
Rºß honour I repºſ. Shakeſp.
1. Sleep 5 reſt; diet. -
- - Merciful pow'rs |
Reſtrain in me the curſed thoughts, that nature
Gives way to in repºſe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Chapman.
Th’ hour
Of night, and of all things now retir'd to reſt,
Mind us of like repoſe. 44ton's Paradiſe Loft, b. iv.
Thoughtful of thy gain, I all the livelong day
Conſume in meditation deep, recluſe
From human converſe ; nor at ſhut of eve
Enjoy repoſe. Philips.
2. cº # : pſ
After great lights muſt be great ſhadows, which we call
repºſe: ; becauſe in reality the fight would be tired, if attraded
by a continuity of glittering objects. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Repose DNFss. n. ſ. [from repoſed. J State of being at reſt.
To REPOSITE. v. a. [repoſitiº, Lat.] To lay up; to lodge.
as in a place of ſafety.
Others repoſite their young in holes, and ſecure themſelves
alſo therein, becauſe ſuch ſecurity is wanting, their lives
being ſought. De ham’s Pºſico-Theolºgy.
Reposition. n.ſ.. [from repoſite.] The act of replacing. &amp;
Being ſatisfied in the repoſition of the bone, take cºe to
keep it ſo by deligation. %ſºnan's Surgery.
Repository; n.ſ. [repoſitoire, Fr. repoſitorium, Lat..] A place
where anything is ſafely laid up.
The mind of man, not being capable of having many ideas
under view at once, it was neceſſary to have a repoſitory to
lay up thoſe ideas. Locke.
He can take a body to pieces, and diſpoſe of them, to is
not without the appearance of irretrievable confuſion, but
with reſpect to his own knowledge into the moſt regular and
methodical repoſitories. Rogers'; Sermont.
To R.: Posse'ss. v. a. [re and pºſſ.]...To poſſeſs again.
How comes it now, that almoſt all that realm is repoſſed
of them * Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Her ſuit is now to repoſſ thoſe lands,
Which we in juſtice cannot well deny. Shakespeare .
Nor ſhall my father repoſſ; the land,
The father's fortune never to return. Pope's Odyſſey.
To REPREHEND. v. a. [reprehendo, Lat.]
1. To reprove ; to chide.
All as before his fight, whoſe preſence to offend with any
the leaſt unſeemlineſs, we would be ſurely as loth as they,
who moſt reprehend or deride that we do. Hºcker, b. v. J. 29.
Pardon me for reprehending thee,
For thou haſt done a charitable deed. Shakeſp.
They, like dumb ſtatues ſtar'd ;
Which, when I ſaw, I reprehended them;
And aſk'd the mayor, what meant this wilful filence? Sha,
2. To blame; to cenſure.
I nor adviſe, nor reprehend the choice
Of Marcley-hill. Philips.
Friends reprehend him, reprehend him there :
For what? for ſtealing Gaffer Gap's gray mare. Gay.
3. To detect of fallacy.
This colour will be reprehended or encountered, by impu-
ting to all excellencies in compoſitions a kind of poverty.
Bacon.
4. To charge with as a fault. With of before the crime.
Ariſtippus, being reprehended of luxury by one that was
not rich, for that he gave ſix crowns for a ſmall fiſh, an-
ſwered, why, what would you have given the other ſaid,
fone twelve pence: Ariſtippus ſaid again, and ſix crowns is
no more with me. Bacon's Apopthegms.
REPREHENDER. m. ſ. [from reprehend..] Blamer; cenſurer.
Theſe fervent reprehenders of things, eſtabliſhed by publick
authority, are always confident and bold-ſpirited men; but
their confidence for the moſt part riſeth from too much credit
given to their own wits, for which cauſe they are ſeldom free
from errours. Hooker's Dedication.
REPREHENSIBLE, adj. [reprehenſible, Fr. reprehenſus, Lat.]
Blameable; culpable; cenſurable.
REPREHE'NsibleNEss. n.ſ.. [from reprehenſible.] Blameable-
neſs.
REPREHE'Nsibly. adv.
culpably. -
REPREHE'Nsion. n.ſ. [reprehenſo, Latin.] Reproof; open
blame. - - - -
To a heart fully reſolute counſel is tedious, but reprehenſion
is loathſome. - - Bacon.
There is likewiſe due to the publick a civil reprehenſion of
advocates, where there appeareth cunning counſel, groſs neg-
lect, and ſlight information. Bacºn's Eſſays.
The admonitions, fraternal or paternal of his fellow chri-
ſtians, or the governors of the church, then more publick
reprehenſions and increpations. Hammond.
What effect can that man hope from his moſt zealous re-
prehenſions, who lays himſelf open to recrimination. Go. of I.
REPREHE/NSI v F. adj. [from reprehend] Given to reproof.
To REPRESEN F. v. a. [repraeſºnto, Lat. re; reſenter, Fr.]
1. To exhibit, as if the thing exhibited were preſent.
Before him burn
Seven lamps, as in a zodiac repreſenting . --
The heav'nly fires. Miſion's Paradiſe Lºſº, b. xii.
[from reprehenſible.] Blameably ;
2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">*T
R E P
2. To deſcribe; to ſhow in any particular character.
‘I his bank is thought the greateſt load on the Genoeſe,
and the managers of it have been repreſented as a ſecond kind
of ſenate. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
3. To fill the place of another by a vicarious character ; to
perſonate: as, the parliament repreſents the people.
4. To exhibit to ſhow. - - - - -
One of his cardinals admoniſhed him againſt that unſkilful
piece of ingenuity, by repreſenting to him, that no reforma-
tion could be.Inade, which would not notably diminiſh the
rents of the church. Decay of Piety.
REPRESENTA’rros. m. ſ. [repreſentation, Fr. from repreſent.]
1. Image; likeneſs. -
If images are worſhipped, it muſt be as gods, which Cel-
ſus denied, or as repreſentations of God; which cannot be,
becauſe God is inviſible and incorporeal. Stillingfleet,
2. Act of ſupporting a vicarious chara&amp;ter.
3. Reſpectful declaration.
kEPREse NTA'rive. adj. [repreſentatiſ, Fr. from repreſent.]
1. Exhibiting a ſimilitude.
They relieve themſelves with this diſtinétion, and yet own
the legal ſacrifices, though repreſentative, to be proper and
real. Atterbury.
2. Bearing the character or power of another.
This counſel of four hundred was choſen, one hundred
out of each tribe, and ſeems to have been a body re-reſenta-
tive of the people ; though the people collective reſerved a
ſhare of power. Swift.
REPRESE’NTATIVE. m. ſ.
1. One exhibiting the likeneſs of another.
A ſtatue of rumour whiſpering an idiot in the ear, who
was the repreſentative of credulity. Addison's Freeholder.
2. One exerciſing the vicarious power given by another.
I wiſh the weifare of my country; and my morals and
politicks teach me to leave all that to be adjuſted by our re-
preſentatives above, and to divine providence. Blount to Pope.
3. That by which any thing is ſhown.
Difficulty muſt cumber this doctrine, which ſuppoſes that
the perfeótions of God are the repreſentatives to us, of what-
ever we perceive in the creatures. Locke.
Represe/NTER. m. ſ. [from repreſent.]
1. One who ſhows or exhibits.
Where the real works of nature, or veritable ačts of ſtory,
are to be deſcribed, art, being but the imitator or ſecondary
repreſenter, muſt not vary from the verity. Brown.
2. One who bears a vicarious character; one who ačts for an-
other by deputation.
My muſe officious ventures
On the nation's repreſenters. Swift.
REPRESENTMENT. n.ſ.. [from repreſent.] Image or idea
propoſed, as exhibiting the likeneſs of ſomething.
When it is bleſſed, ſome believe it to be the natural body
of Chriſt; others, the bleſfings of Chriſt, his paſſion in re-
preſentment, and his grace in real exhibition. Taylor.
We have met with ſome, whoſe reals made good their
repreſentments. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
To REPRESS. v. a. [repreſis, Lat. reprimer, Fr.]
1. To cruſh ; to put down ; to ſubdue.
Diſcontents and ill blood having uſed º: to repreſ; and
appeaſe in perſon, he was loth they ſhould find him beyond
ſea. Bacon's Henry VII.
Some, taking dangers to be the only remedy againſt
dangers, endeavoured to ſet up the ſedition again, but they
were ſpeedily repreſſed, and thereby the ſedition ſuppreſſed
wholly. Hayward.
Such kings
Favour the innocent, retreſ the bold,
And, while they flouriſh, make an age of gold.
How can I
Repreſ; the horror of my thoughts, which fly
The ſad remembrance.
Thus long ſucceeding criticks juſtly reign'd,
Licence repreſs'd, and uſeful laws ordain'd :
Learning and Rome alike in empire grew.
Armies ſtretch, repreſſing here
The frantick Alexander of the North.
2. To compreſs. Not proper. -
REPRE'ss. n.ſ.. [from the verb..] Repreſſion; act of cruſhing.
Not in uſe.
Loud outcries of injury, when they tend nothing to the re-
preſs of it, is a liberty rather aſſumed by rage and impatience,
than authoriſed by juſtice. Government of the Tongue.
REPRE'ssion. m. ſ. [from repreſ;..] Aét of repreſſing.
No declaration from myſelf could take place, for the due
repreſſion of theſe tumults. King Charles.
REPRE'ssive. adj. [from repreſs.] Having power to repreſs ;
ačting to repreſs.
To REPRIE’v E. v. a. [reprendre, repº is, Fr.] To reſpite after
ſentence of death ; to give a reſpite.
Company, though it may rºprieve a man from his melan-
choly, yet cannot ſecure him from his conſcience. South.
Having been condemned for his part in the late rebellion,
JPaller.
Denham.
Pope.
Thomſºn.
----- " - *-
R. E. P
his majeſty had been Pleaſed to reprieve him, with ſeveral of
his friends, in order to give them their lives. Aft/en.
...?” the finner from time to time, and continues
and heaps on him the favours of his providence, in hopes
that, by an act of clemency ſo undeſerved, he may prevail
On his gratitude and repentañce. Rogers's Sermont.
REPR1E vs. n.f. [from the verb.] Reſpite after ſentence of
death.
In his reprieve he may be ſo fitted,
That his ſoul ſicken not. Shakespeare . Maſ fºr Maſ.
I hope it is ſome pardon or reprieve
For Claudio. */p. Meaſure ſºr Maſare,
He cannot thrive,
Unleſs her prayers, whom heavºn delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve from the wrath 2.
Of greateſt juſtice. Shakeſ?. All's well that end, well.
The morning Sir John Hotham was to die, a reprieve was
ſent to ſuſpend the execution for three days. Clarend:n.
All that I aſk, is but a ſhort reprieve, -
Till I forget to love, and learn to grieve. Denham.
o REPRIMA’s D. v. a. [reprimander, Fr. reprimo, Lat..] To
chide ; to check; to reprehend ; to reprove.
Germanicus was ſeverely reprimanded by Tiberius, for tra-
velling into Egypt without his permiſſion Arbuthnot.
RF PRIMAND. m. J. [reprimande, reprimende, Fr. from the verb.]
Reproof; reprehenſion.
He inquires how ſuch an one's wife or ſon do, whom he
does not ſee at church; which is underſtood as a ſecret re-
primand to the perſon abſent. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 112.
To REPR1'Nt. J. a. [re and print.]
I. To renew the impreſſion of any thing.
The buſineſs of redemption is to rušover the defaced copy
of creation, to reprint God's image upon the ſoul, and to
ſet forth nature in a ſecond and a failer edition. South.
2. To print a new edition.
My bookſeller is reprinting the eſſay on criticiſm. ºpe.
REPR1's AL. m. ſ. [repreſalia, low Lat. repreſaille, Fr.] Some-
thing ſeized by way of retaliation for robbery or injury.
The Engliſh had great advantage in value of rºprijal, as
being more ſtrong and active at ſea. Hayward.
Senſe muſt ſure thy ſafeſt plunder be,
Since no repriſals can be made on thee. Pºpe.
REPR1'se; n.ſ. [repriſe, Fr.] The act of taking ſomething in
retaliation of injury.
Your care about your banks infers a fear
Of threat'ning floods and inundations near;
If ſo, a juſt repriſe would only be
Of what the land uſurp’d upon the ſea.
To REPROA/CH. v. a. [reprocher, Fr.]
1. To cenſure in opprobrious terms, as a crime.
Mezentius, with his ardour warm'd
His fainting friends, reproach'd their ſhameful flight,
Repell'd the victors. Dryden's AFneis.
The French writers do not burden themſelves too much
with plot, which has been reproached to them as a fault. Dry.
2. To charge with a fault in ſevere language.
If ye be reproached for the name of Chriſt, happy are ye.
1 Peter iv. 14.
Bryden-
That ſhame
There fit not, and reproach us as unclean.
2. To upbraid in general.
Theſe things are grievous ; the upbraiding of houſe-room,
and reproaching of the lender. Eccluſ, xxix. 28.
The very regret of being ſurpaſſed in any valuable quality,
by a perſon of the ſame abilities with ourſelves, will reproach
our own lazineſs, and even ſhame us into imitation. Rogers.
REPROA'ch. n.ſ. [reproche, Fr. from the verb..] Cenſure; in-
famy ; ſhame. º
With his reproach and odious menace,
The knight emboiling in his haughty heart,
Knit all his forces.
If black ſcandal or foul-fac'd reproach
Attend the ſequel of your impoſition,
Milton.
Fairy Queeen.
Your mere enforcement ſhall acquittance me. Shakeſp.
Thou, for the teſtimony of truth, haft borne -
Univerſal reproach. Milton.
REPRoA'ch Ablf. adj. [reproachable, Fr.] Worthy of reproach.
REPR oach FUL. adj. [from reproach.j
1. Scurrilous; opprobrious.
O º ! what reproachful words are theſe. Shakeſ?.
I have º, ithal
My rapier in his boſom, and witha
*... repr ºil ſpeeches down his throat. Shaieff.
An advocate may be puniſhed for reproacºſul lang age, in
reſpect of the parties in ſuit. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Shameful; infamous; vile. -
To make religion a ſtratagem to undermine government,
is contrary to this ſuperſtructure, moſt ſcandalous and re-
proachſul to chriſtianity; Hammond's Fundamentals.
Thy º in the fleſh
endure conning in the
#. º; #. and * death. Miltºn's Par. Lºff.
21 Q. REPROA'ch: ULLY.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R. E. P
R. E. P
i
i
Reproachfully.” ſº º ſ
- briouſly; ignominiouſly ; , ſcurrilou").
I orrº º . us’d reproachfully? Shakespeare Hen. VI.
I will that the younger woº marry, and give none oc-
caſion to the adverſary 9 ſpeak reproachfully. I Tim. v. 14.
2. Shamefully infamouſly. -
RE/PROBATE. adj. [r probus, Lat.] Loſt to virtue; loſt to
grace ; abandoned. - - -
They profeſs to know God, but in works deny him, being
abominable, and to every good work reprobate. Tit. i. 10.
Strength and art are eaſily outdone -
By ſpirits reprºbate. Milton.
God forbid, that every fingle commiſſion of a ſin, though
great for its kind, and withi acted againſt conſciº” fºr
its aggravation, ſhould ſo far deprave the ſºul, and bring it
to ſuch a reprobate condition, * * take pleaſure, in other
men's fins. South’s Sermons.
RE'prob at E. m. ſ. A man loſt to virtue ; a wretch abandoned
to wickedneſs. -
What if we omit
This reºrolate, till he were wº inclin'd. . . Shakespeare.
I acknowledge myſelf for a reprobate, a villain, a trayto:
to the king, and the moſt unworthy mº" that ever lived. Ral.
All the ſaints have profited by tribulations; and they that
could not bear temptations, became reprobates. Taylor.
To fºr Rob At E. v. a. [reprº", Lat.]
I. To diſallow ; to reject. - -
Such an anſwer as this is reprolated and diſallowed of in
law; I do not believe it, unleſs the deed appeals. 4//*.
2. to abandon to wickedneſs and eternal deſtruction.
What ſhould make it neceſſary for him to repent and
amend, who either without reſpect to any degree of amend-
ment is ſuppoſed to be elected to eternal bliſs, or without re.
ſpect to fin, to be irreverſibly reprobated. Hammond.
A reprobated hardneſs of heat does them the office of phi-
loſophy towards a contempt of death. L’Eſtrange.
3. To abandon to his ſentence, without hope of pardon.
Drive him out
To reprobated exile round the world,
A caitive, vagabond, abhorr'd, accurs'd. Southerne.
RE'rººps ess. n.ſ. (from rºprºlate.] The ſtate of being
reprobate.
Rºopa’rios. m. ſ. [reprobation, Fr. from reprobate.]
... The ºr of abandóning or ſtate of being abandoned to eternal
deſtruction.
This fight would make him do a deſperate turn ;
Yea curſe his better angel from his ſide,
And fall to reprobation. Shakespeare . Othell.
Though ſome words may be accommodated to God’s pre-
deſlination, yet it is the ſcope of that text to ſeat of the re-
probation of any man to hell-fire. Bramhall againſt Hºbbs.
God, upon a true fepentance, is not ſo fatally tied to the
pindle of abſolute reprolation, as not to keep his promiſe,
and ſeal merciful pardons. Maine.
2. A condemnatory ſentence.
You are empówer'd to give the final deciſion of wit, to Put
your ſtamp on all that ought to paſs for current, and ſet a
brand of reprºbation on clipt poetry and falºe coin. Dryden.
To REPRODUCE. v. a. [re and produce; reproduire, Tr.]
To produce again ; to produce anew. -
If horſe dung re; roduceth oats, it will not be eaſily deter-
mined where the power of generation ceaſeth. Trown.
Thoſe colours are unchangeable, and whenever all thoſe
rays with thoſe their colours are mixed again, they reproduce
the ſame white light as before. Newton's Opticks.
Reproduction. n.ſ.. [from reproduce.] The act of pro-
ducing anew.
I am about to attempt a reprodućlion in vitriol, in which it
ſeems not unlikely to be performable. Boyle.
Reproo F. m. ſ. [from reprove.]
1. Blame to the face; reprehenſion.
Good Sir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, turn
another into the regiſter of your own, that I may paſs with
a repºf the eaſier. Shakeſp. Merry Iſives of I/indſºr.
T ...'. the . of the wiſ to raiſe ;
Thoſe beſt can bear reproof, who merit praiſe. -
2. Cenſure ; ſlander. of...". p Pºpe
Why, for thy ſake, have I ſuffer'd reproºf” ſhame hath
covered my face. Pſalm lxix. 7.
REPRov Abi E. adj. [ſrom reprove..] Culpable; blamable ;
worthy of reprehenſion.
If thou doſt find thy faith as dead after the reception of
i. º 2S º it may be thy faith was not only
ittle, but re; roveable. Taylor's J//orthy C -
To REPROVE. v. a. ſ. sprouver, j y Communicant.
1. To blame; to cenſure.
2. º thee º thy ſacrifices. Pºn 1.8.
rº. e face with a fault; to check; to chide ; to
at Yº º Can better be content with one that can wink
Th r faults, than with him that will prove them. J/hig.
thing º º ſº in an allow'd fool, though he do no-
tº hº dº º no railing in a known diſcreet man,
* othing but rep ove. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
What if thy ſon
Prove diſobedient and reprºv’d, retort,
wherefore didſt thou beget me ! A Milºff,
If a great perſonage undertakes an action paſſionately, let
it be acted with all the malice and impotency in the world,
he ſhall have enough to flatter him, but not enough to reprove
him. Taylºr's Rule of Living Holy.
3. To refute 3 to diſprove.
My lords,
Reprove my allegation if you can.
4. To blame for. With of. -
To reprove one ºf lazineſs, they will ſay, doſt thou make
Shakespeare. Henry VI,
id!, a coat ; that is a coat for idleneſs. Carew.
Reproºve R. n. J. [from rºº! A reprehender; one that
reproves.
Let the moſt potent finner ſpeak out, and tell us, whether
he can command down the clamours and reviſings of a guilty
conſcience, and impoſe filence upon that bold rep over. South.
This ſhall have from every one, even the reprovers of vice,
the title of living well. Locke on Education.
To REPRU's E. v. a. [re and priºr.] To prune a ſecond
time.
Reprune apricots and peaches, ſaving as many of the young
likeliºſt ſhoots as are well placed. Evelyn's Kalenda.
Reſpºrtſ. E. adj. [.. ºtil, lºt. Creeping upon many feet. In
the following lines reptile is confounded with ſerpent.
Cleanſ baits frºm filth, to give a tempting gloſs,
Cheriſh the fully'd reptile race with moſs. Gay.
REPTILE. r. ſ. An animal that creeps upon many feet.
Terreſtial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or reſ-
tiles, which have many fººt, and ſerpents which have no
feet. Ilocke's Elements ºf Natural Philºſºphy.
Hºly retreat fishence no female hither,
Conſcious of ſocial love and nature's rites,
Muſt dare approach, from the interior reptile,
To woman, form divine. Priºr.
RepublicAN. adj. [from republick.] Placing the government
in the people.
R.J. cA's. n.ſ. [from republic?..] One who thinks a com-
monwealth without monarchy the beſt government.
Theſe people are more happy in imagination than the reſt
of their neighbours, becauſe they think themſelves ſo; though
fuch a chimerical happineſs is not peculiar to republicans. Addison
REPUBLICK. m.ſ. (rºllica, Lat. repºſiº, Fr.] Common-
wealth; ſtate in whº, the power is lodged in more than one.
Thoſe that by their deeds will make it known,
Whoſe dignity they do ſuſtain ;
And life, ſtate, glory, all they gain,
Count the republick's, not their own. Benj. jºhnſºn.
They are indebted many million; more than their whole
repulſick is worth. Addiſon's State ºf the J/ar.
Rºpanie. adj. [from repudiate.J. Fit to be rejected.
ºr, REPUDIATE. v. a. Írepudio, Lat, repudiº” Fr.] To
divorce; to reject; to put away.
Here is a notorious inſtance of the folly of the atheiſts,
that while they reputate all title to the kingdom of heaven:
merely for the preſent pleaſure of body, and their boaſted
trangúility of mind, beſides th"extreme madneſs in running
ſuch a deſperate hazard after death, they unwittingly deprive
themſelves here of that very pleaſure and tranquility they
ſeek for. Bentley's Se: mºns.
Let not thoſe, that have repudi ted the mº" inviting fins,
ſhow themſelves philtred and i.ewitched by this. G. ºf H*, *.
Repudi Arios. m. ſ. [re, waiti” Fr. from repudiate.] Di-
vorce; rejection. -
It was allowed by the Athenians, only in caſe of repudia-
tion of a wife. - Arbuthnot ºn Coins.
REPU'GN ANCE.
REPU'GN ANCY }n. ſ. [repugnance, Fr. from rºpigrant.]
- i. -
1. Inconſiſtency ; contrariety.
But where difference is without refºº,
been can be no prejudice to that which is. Hooker.
It is no affront to omnipotence, iſ, by reaſon of the formal
incapacity and retagnancy of the thing, we aver that the world
could not have been made from all eternity. Bently.
2. Reluctance; unwillingneſs; ſtruggle of oppoſite paſſion.
Why do fond men expoſe themſelves to battle,
And let the foes quietly cut their throats, . *
Without repugnancy * Shakeſp. Timºn ºf Athen.
Thus did the paſſions at without any of their preſent Jarº,
combats or repugnances, all moving with the beauty of uni-
formity and the ſtilneſs of compoſure. Sºuth sermont.
That which cauſes us to loſe moſt of our time, is the re-
pugnance which we naturally have to labour. Dryden.
RÉPU-GNANT, adj. [repignant, Fr. ** Lat.J
1. Diſobedient ; not obſequious.
His antique ſword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command.
2. Contrary; oppoſite. - h
Why I reject the other conjećtures is ; becauſe they have
not due warrant from obſervatiº but are clearly º:
there unto. If…divard’s Natiº al Hiſtory.
REPU cn ANT+Y.
that which hath
Shakespeare Hamlet.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E Q_
R E Q_
ſo
k
º
So bent, the more ſhall ſhame him his repulz.
F-
Repu'GNANTLY. adv. [from refugnant..] Cohträdiäority.
They ſpeak not repugnantly thereto. Brown's Jºg. Err.
To REPULLULATE. v. n. [re and pullulº, Lat. repululer, Fr.]
To bud again. - - -
Though tares repullulate, there is wheat ſtill left in the
field. Howel's Pocal Foreſ.
REPULSE. m. ſ. [repulſe, Fr. refulſa, Latin.] The condition
of being driven off or put aſide from any attempt,
My repulſe at Hull ſeemed an act of ſo rude diſloyalty, that
my enemies had ſcarce confidence enough to abet it, K. Cha.
- Nor much expect
A foc ſo proud will firſt the weaker ſeek;
Milton.
- Denham.
To beat back ; to drive
By fate repell'd, and with repulſes tir’d.
To REPULSE. v. a. [repulſius, Lat.]
Ont.
The chriſtian defendants ſtill repulſed them with greater
courage than they were able to affail them. Knolles.
This fleet, attempting St. Minoes, were repulſed, and
without glory or gain, returned into England. Hayward.
Man complete to have diſcover'd and rºpul;’d
Whatever wiles of foe or ſeeming friend. Milton.
Repu'lsion. n.ſ. [repulſus, Lat..] The act or power of driv-
ing off from itſelf.
Air has ſome degree of tenacity, whereby the parts attract
one another; at the ſame time, by their elaſticity, the par-
ticles of air have a power of repulſion or flying off from one
another. Arbuthnot.
Repu'lsive. adj. [from repulſe.] Driving off; having the
power to beat back or drive off. -
The parts of the ſalt or vitriol recede from one another,
and endeavour to expand themſelves, and get as far aſunder
as the quantity of water, in which they float, will allow ;
and does not this endeavour imply, that they have a repulſive
force by which they fly from one another, or that they attract
the water more ſtrongly than one another Newton's Opticks.
To Repu'RcHase. v. a. [re and purchaſe.] To buy again.
Once more we fit on England's royal throne,
Repurchas'd with the blood of enemies;
What valiant foe-men, like to autumn's corn,
Have we mow’d down in top of all their pride Shakespeare .
If the ſon alien thoſe lands, and repurchaſe them again in
fee, the rules of deſcents are to be obſerved, as if he were
the original purchaſer. Hale's Law of England.
REPUTABLE. adj. [from refute.] Honourable ; not infamous.
If ever any vice ſhall become reputable, and be gloried in as
a mark of greatneſs, what can we then expect from the man
of honour, but to ſignalize himſelf. Rogers's Sermons.
In the article of danger, it is as reputable to elude an enemy
as defeat one. ... Broome.
Reputably. adv. [from reputable ] Without diſcredit.
To many ſuch worthy magiſtrates, who have thus reputably
filled the chief ſeats of power in this great city, I am now
addreſſing my diſcourſe. Atterbury's Sermºns.
REPut arrios. m. ſ. [reputation, Fr. from epute.] Credit;
honour; character of good. - - -
Refatation is an idle and moſt falſe impoſition; oft got
without merit, and loſt without deſerving : you have loſt no
refutation at all, unleſs you repute yourſelf ſuch a loſer. Shakespeare
Verſoy, upon the lake of Geneva, has the reputation of
being extremely poor and beggarly. Addison.
A third interprets motions, looks and eyes;
At ev'ry word a reputation dies. Pope's Rape of the Lock.
To REPU’ E. v. a. [reputo, Lat. reputer, Fr.] To hold;
to account; to think.
The king was reputed a prince moſt prudent. Shakespeare .
I do repute her grace
The rightful heir to England's royal ſeat. Shakeſp.
I do know of thoſe,
That therefore only are reputed wiſe,
For ſaying nothing. Shakeſp.
- Men, ſuch as chuſe
Law practice for mere gain, boldly repute
Worſe than embrothel'd ſtrumpets proſtitute. Donne.
If the grand vizier be ſo great, as he is reputed, in politicks
he will never conſent to an invaſion of Hungary. Temple.
Repu're, n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Character; reputation.
2. Eſtabliſhed opinion. -
He who reigns
Monarch in heav'n, till then as one ſecure, - - -
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute. - Milton.
Repu' reless. adj. [from rºute.] Diſreputable ; diſgraceful.
A word not inelegant, but out of uſe.
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had left me in refuteleſs baniſhment,
A fellow of no mark nor livelihood.
REQUEST. m. ſ. [regºſłe, Fr.]
1. Petition ; entreaty.
But aſk what you would have reform’d,
I will both hear and grant you your requeſts. Shakespeare.
Haman ſtood up to Inake reſty; for his life to Eſther. Afth.
Merchant of Penice.
Shakeſp. Hen. V.
All thy requeſ? for man, accepted ſon
Obtain; all thy requeſ was my decree. Milton's Par.
Aſk him to lend
To this, the laſt requeſ; that I ſhall ſend,
A gentle ear.
2. Demand; repute; credit;
- Tullus Aufidius will app
oppoſer Coriolanus being a
Loſí.
Denhan.
ſtate of being deſired.
car well in theſe wars, his great
ow in no requeſt of his country.
Shakeſp. Coriºlant.
men are obliged to
is in requeſ, many excellent
whilă this vanity of thinking, that
write either ſyſtems or nothing, i.
notions are ſuppreſſed. Boyle.
Knowledge and fame were in as great rººft as wealth
among us now. Temple.
To REQUE'st. v. a. [refuſer, Fr.] To aſk;
entreat.
Tonight we hold a ſolemn ſupper, Sir,
And I’ll requeſt your preſence. Sha'eſh. Mach, 1%.
It was to be requeſted of Almighty God by prayer, that
thoſe kings would ſeriouſly fulfil all that hope of peace. Kao les.
The virgin quire for her requgſ',
The god that fits at marriage feaſt;
He at their invoking came, -
But with a ſcarce well-lighted flame: Aſilion.
In things not unlawful, great perſons cannot be properly
ſaid, to requeſ, becauſe all things confidered, they muſt nºt
be denied. South's Se:nons.
Rºggest R. m. ſ. [from requeſ.] Petitioner; ſoliciter.
To REQUI'ck FN. v. a. [re and quicken..] To reanimate.
By and by the din of war 'gan pierce
His ready ſenſe, when ſtraight his doubled ſpirit
Requicken'd what in fleſh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he.
RE'90/EM. m. ſ. [Latin.]
1. A hymn in which they inplore for the dead requiem or reſt.
We ſhould profane the ſervice of the dead,
To fing a requiem and ſuch peace to her,
As to peace-parted ſouls.
2. Reſt : quiet ; peace. Not in uſe.
The midwife kneel'd at my mother's throes,
With pain produc’d, and nurs'd for future woes;
Elſe had I an eternal requiem kept,
And in the arms of peace for ever ſlept. Sandys.
REQUIRABLE. adj. [from require.] Fit to be required.
It contains the certain periods of times, and all circum-
flances requirable in a hiſtory to inform. Hale.
To REQUIRE. v. a. [requiro, Lat. requerir, Fr.]
I. To demand ; to aſk a thing as of right,
Ye me require
A thing without the compaſs of my wit;
For both the lineage and the certain ſire,
From which I ſprung, are from me hidden yet. Spenſºr.
We do require them of you, ſo to uſe them,
As we ſhall find their merits. Shakeſp. King Lear.
This, the very law of nature teacheth us to do, and thi.
to ſolicite; to
Shakeſp. Cricianus.
S haº.
the law of God requireth alſo at our hands. Spººnan.
This imply'd
Subjećtion, but requir’d with gentle ſway. Alºor.
Oft our alliance other lands deſir'd,
And what we ſeek of you, of us requir’d. Dryden.
God, when he gave the world in common to all mankind,
commanded men alſo to labour, and the penury of his con-
dition required it. Lºcłr.
2. To make neceſſary; to need.
The king's buſineſs equired haſte. 1 Sam. xxi. 8.
High from the ground the branches would rejuire
Thy utmoſt reach. Milton.
But why, alas ! do mortal men complain; -
God gives us what he knows our wants require,
And better things than thoſe which we deſire. Dryden.
RE’QUISITE. adj. [requiſitus, Lat.] Neceſſary; needful,
required by the nature of things. -
When God new modelled the world by the introduction
of a new religion, and that in the room of one ſet up by him-
ſelf, it was requiſite, that he ſhould recommend it to the rea-
ſons of men with the ſame authority and evidence that en-
forced the former. South's Semini.
Cold calleth the ſpirits to ſuccour, and therefore they can-
not ſo well cloſe and go together in the head, which is ever
requiſite to ſleep. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Prepare your ſoul with all thoſe neceſſary graces, tº are
more immediately requiſite to this performance. //ake.
RE'Quisit E. m. ſ. Anything neceſſary. ,
Res non parta labore, ſºd relicia, was thought by a poet to
be one of the requiſites to a happy life. . . Dryden.
For want of theſe requiſites, moſt of our ingenious young
men take up ſome cried up Engliſh poet, adore him, and imi-
tate him, without knowing wherein he is defective. Dryden.
This God on his part has declared for the requiſites on ours,
what we muſt do to obtain theſe bleſſings, is the great buſi-
neſs of us all to know. J/ake.
RE'Q' is ºf sly.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R E S
Rºogistrely, adv. [from requiſite.] Neceſſarily ; in a re-
iſite manner. - -
sº diſcern how requiſitely the ſeveral parts of ſcripture are
ſeveral times, perſons, and occurrences. Boyle.
sº n. ſ. º requiſite.] Neceſſity; the ſtate
ing requiſite.
*:::::::: how exquiſitely the ſeveral parts of ſcripture
are fitted to the ſeveral times, perſons and occurrences in-
tended, we ſhall diſcover not only the ſenſe of the obſcurer
paſſages, but the requiſiteneſs of their having been writtºº ſo
obſcurely. Boyle.
Requi'TAL. m. ſ. [from requite.] - - -
1. Return for any good or bad office; retaliation.
Should we take the quarrel of ſermons in hand, and re-
venge their cauſe by requital, thruſting prayer in a manner
out of doors under colour of long preaching Hooker.
Since you -
Wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold, you do ſo grow in my requital,
As i. Can º: you. Shakespeare All's well that ends well.
We hear
Such goodneſs of your juſtice, that our ſoul
Cannot but yield you forth to publick thanks,
Forerunning your requital. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Medſ.
I ſee you are obſequious in your love, and I profeſs requi-
tal. Shakeſpeare.
No merit their averſion can remove,
Nor ill requital can efface their love.
2. Reward; recompenſe.
He aſk'd me for a ſong,
And in requital op'd his leathern ſcrip,
And ſhew'd me ſimples of a thouſand names,
Telling their ſtrange and vigorous faculties.
I have ta'en a cordial,
Sent by the king or Haly, in requital
Of all my miſeries, to make me happy. Denham.
In all the light that the heavens beſtow upon this lower
world, though the lower world cannot equal their benefac-
tion, yet with a kind of grateful return it reflects thoſe rays,
that it cannot recompenſe; ſo that there is ſome return how-
ever, though there can be no requital. South's Sermons.
To REQUITE. v. a. [requiter, Fr.] To repay; to retaliate
good or ill; to recompenſe.
If he love me to madneſs, I ſhall never requite him. Shakespeare
He hath requited me evil for good. 1 Sam. xxv. 21.
Open not thine heart to every man, leſt he requite thee
with a ſhrewd turn. Ecºlºſ. viii. 19.
When Joſeph's brethren ſaw that their father was dead,
they ſaid, Joſeph will requite us all the evil we did. Geneſis 1.
An avenger againſt his enemies, and one that ſhall requite
kindneſs to his friends. Eccluſ. xxx. 6.
Him within protećt from harms;
He can requite thee, for he knows the charms
That call fame on ſuch gentle acts as theſe.
Great idol of mankind, we neither claim
The praiſe of merit, nor aſpire to fame !
'Tis all we beg thee to conceal from fight
Thoſe ačis of goodneſs which themſelves requite :
O let us ſtill the ſecret joy partake,
To follow virtue ev’n for virtue's ſake. Pºpe.
Unhappy Wallace,
Great patriot heroe ill requited chiefſ
RE’RE Mouse. n.ſ. ſh;cremur, Saxon.] A bat.
RE’REwARD. m.J. The rear or laſt troop.
Resa'LE. m. ſ. [re and ſale.] Sale at ſecond hand.
Monopolies and coemption of wares for reſale, where they
are not reſtrained, are great means to enrich. Bacon.
To Resalut E. v. a. [rºſalute, Lat. rºſauer, Fr.] To ſalute
or greet anew.
We drew her up to land,
Waller.
Milton.
Milton.
Thomſºn.
And trod ourſºme rºſaluted ſand. Chapman.
To reſºlute the world with ſacred light,
Leucothea wak'd. Milton.
To Resai'i. v. a. [re and ſail.] To ſail back.
From Pyle rºſailing, and the Spartan court,
Horrid to ſpeak in ambuſh is décreed Pope's Odyſſey.
To RFscIND. v. a. [reſcinda, Lat. reſcinder, Fr.] To cut off;
to abrogate a law.
It is the impoſing a ſacramental obligation upon him, which
being the condition, upon the performance whereof all the
Promiſes of endleſs bliſs are made over, it is not poſſible to
reſcind or diſclaim the ſtanding obliged by it. Hammond.
I ſpake againſt the teſt, but was not heard;
Theſe to reſcind, and peerage to reſtore. Dryden.
Resci'ssion, "...ſ. [rºſºfton, Fr. rºſeiſus, Lat.] The act of
cutting off ; abrogation.
If any infer Jºſion of their eſtate to have been for idola-
Whenever a prince on his being conſulted reſcribes or writes
back Toleramus, he diſpenſes with that act otherwiſe un-
lawful. - 47%’s Pa, egon.
2. To write over again.
Calling for more paper to reſcribe them, he ſhewed him
the difference betwixt the ink-box and the ſand-box. Howel.
RE'script. n.ſ. (rºſérit, Fr. rºſcriptum, Lat.J Edict of 2n
emperour.
One finding a great maſs of money digged under ground,
and being ſomewhat doubtful, ſignified it to the emperor,
who made a reſcript thus ; Uſe it. Bacºn's Apºphthegm.
The popes, in ſuch caſes, where canons were ſilent, did,
after the manner of the Roman emperors, write back their
determinations, which were ſtiled reſc, ipts or decretal epiſtles,
having the force of laws. Ayliffe's Paergon.
To RESCUE. v. a. [reſcorre, old Fr.] To ſet free from any
violence, confinement, or danger.
Sir Scudamore, after long ſorrow, in the end met with
Britomartis, who ſuccoured him and reſºewed his love. Spenſ.
My uncles both are ſlain in reſcuing me. Shakeſp.
We're beſet with thieves ;
Reſcue thy miſtreſs, if thou be a man. Shakeſp.
Dr. Bancroft underſtood the church excellently, and had
almoſt reſued it out of the hands of the Calvinian Party. Clar.
He that is ſo ſure of his particular election, as to reſolve
he can never fall, if he commit thoſe acts, againſt which
ſcripture is plain, that they that do them ſhall not inherit
eternal life, muſt neceſſarily reſolve, that nothing but the re-
moving his fundamental error can reſcue him from the ſuper-
ſtructive. Hammond's Fundamenial.
Who was that juſt man, whom had not heav'n
Reſcu'd, had in his righteouſneſs been loſt Miltºn.
Riches cannot reſcue from the grave,
Which claims alike the monarch and the ſlave. Dryden.
RE'scue. n.ſ.. [reſcouſe, reſ ºffe, old Fr. reſcuffus, low Lat.]
Deliverance from violence, danger, or confinement.
How comes it, you
Have holp to make this reſcue. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
RE'scu E.R. n.ſ. [from reſcue.] One that reſcues.
RESEARCH. m. ſ. [recherche, Fr.) Enquiry; ſearch.
By a ſkilful application of thoſe notices, may be gained in
ſuch reſearches the accelerating and bettering of fruits, empty-
ing mines and draining fens. Glanvill's Scepſ.
I ſubmit thoſe miſtakes, into which I may have fallen, to
the better conſideration of others, who ſhall have made re-
ſearch into this buſineſs with more felicity. Holder.
A felicity adapted to every rank, ſuch as the reſearches of
human wiſdom ſought for, but could not diſcover. Rogers.
To Research. v. a. [rechercher, Fr.] To examine; to
enquire. -
It is not eaſy to reſearch with due diſtinčion, in the aëtions
of eminent perſonages, both how much may have been ble-
miſhed by the envy of others, and what was corrupted by
their own felicity. J/otton's Buckingham.
To RESEA’r. v. a. [re and ſeat.] To ſeat again.
When he's produc'd, will you reſeat him
Upon his father's throne * Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
RESE Iz ER. m. ſ. One that ſeizes again.
RESE1 zu RE. n.ſ. [re and ſeizure.J. Repeated ſeizure; ſeizure
a ſecond time.
Here we have the charter of foundation; it is now the
more eaſy to judge of the forfeiture or reſizure: deface the
image, and you diveſt the right. Barºn.
Rese MBLANCE. n. ſ. [reſemblance, Fr.] Likeneſs; ſimilitude;
repreſentation.
Theſe ſenſible things, which religion hath allowed, are
reſemblances formed according to things ſpiritual, whereunto
they ſerve as a hand to lead, and a way to direct. Hooker.
Faireſt reſemblance of thy maker fair, -
Thee all things living gaze on. Milton.
One main end of poetry and painting is to pleaſe ; they
bear a great reſemblance to each other. Dryden's Dufrºftºy.
The quality produced hath commonly no reſºnblance with
the thing producing it; wherefore, we look on it as a bare
effect of power. Locke:
They are but weak reſemblances of our intentions, faint and
imperfect copies that may acquaint us with the general deſign,
but can never expreſs the life of the original. Addiſon.
So chymiſts boaſt they have a pow'r,
From the dead aſhes of a flow'r,
Some faint reſemblance to produce, - -
But not the virtue. - Swift's Miſellanie;
I cannot help remarking the reſemblance betwixt him and
our author in qualities, fame, and fortune. Pope.
To RESEMBLE. v. a. [reſembler, Fr.] -
I. To compare ; to repreſent as like º elſe.
Moſt ſafely may we reſemble curſelves to God, in reſpect of
that pure faculty, which is never ſeparate from the love of
God. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the hºld.
The torrid parts of Africk are reſembled to a libbard's ſkin,
the diſtance of whoſe ſpots repreſent the diſperſeneſs of ha-
try, that the §ºrnments of all idolatrous nations ſhould be
alſo diſſolved, it followeth not. Bacon.
z - - - - - - - • *- -
Resci'ssoRy. *i.[rºſciſſºire, Fr. reſ iſſus, Lat.] Having the
power to cut off.
To Rescribe. v.
- 6. Irºſcribo, Lat, reſºríre, Fr.
I. To write back. [rºſcribe, ſcrire, Fr.]
bitations. Brerewood on Laºguº.
8 2. To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R E S
º
ſ
º,
2. To be like; to have likeneſs to.
If we ſee a man of virtues, mixed with infirmities, fall
into misfortune, we are afraid that the like misfortunes may
happen to ourſelves, who reſemble the charaćter. Addiſon.
To Rese'ND. v. a. [re and ſend..] To ſend back; to ſend
again. Not in uſe. -
I ſent to her, by this ſame coxcomb,
Tokens and letters, which ſhe did reſend.
To RESENT. v. a. [reſentir, Fr.]
1. To take well or ill.
A ſerious conſideration of the mineral treaſures of his ter-
ritories, and the practical diſcoveries of them by way of my
philoſophical theory, he then ſo well reſented, that afterwards,
upon a mature digeſtion of my whole deſign, he commanded
me to let your lordſhips underſtand, how great an inclination
he hath to further ſo hopeful a work. Bacon.
2. To take ill ; to conſider as an injury or affront. This is
now the moſt uſual ſenſe.
Thou with ſcorn
And anger would'ſt reſent the offer'd wrong. Milton.
Rese'NTER. n.ſ. [from reſent.] One who feels injuries deeply.
The earl was the worſt philoſopher, being a great reſenter,
and a weak diſſembler of the leaſt diſgrace. J/otton.
ResE'NTFUL. adj. [reſent and full.] . Malignant; eaſily pro-
voked to anger, and long retaining it.
Rese'NTINGLY. adu. [from reſenting.] With deep ſenſe;
with ſtrong perception ; with anger.
Hylobares judiciouſly and reſentingly recapitulates your main
reaſonings. More's Divine Dialogues.
Rese'NTMeNT. n. ſ. [reſentiment, Fr.]
1. Strong perception of good or ill.
He retains vivid reſentments of the more ſolid morality.
- AMore's Divine Dialogues.
Some faces we admire and dote on ; others, in our impar-
tial apprehenſions, no leſs deſerving, we can behold without
reſentment; yea, with an invincible diſregard. Glanvill.
What he hath of ſenſible evidence, the very grand work
of his demonſtration, is but the knowledge of his own re-
Jentment; but how the ſame things appear to others, they
only know that are conſcious to them; and how they are in
themſelves, only he that made them. Glanvill's Scepſ,
2. Deep ſenſe of injury.
Can heav'nly minds ſuch high reſentment ſhow,
Or exerciſe their ſpight in human woe Dryden.
I cannot, without ſome envy, and a juſt reſentment againſt
the oppoſite conduct of others, reflect upon that generoſity,
wherewith the heads of a ſtruggling faction treat thoſe who
will undertake to hold a pen in their defence. Swift.
ResERVATIon. n.ſ. [reſervation, Fr.]
1. Reſerve; concealment of ſomething in the mind.
Nor had I any reſervations in my own ſoul, when I paſſed
that bill, nor repentings after. King Charles.
We ſwear with Jeſuitical equivocations and mental reſºr-
vations. Sanderſon againſ? the Covenant.
2. Something kept back; ſomething not given up.
Curſelf by monthly courſe,
With reſervation of an hundred knights,
By you to be ſuſtain'd, ſhall our abode
Make with you by due turns. Shakeſp. King Lear.
This is academical reſervation in matters of eaſy truth, or
rather ſceptical infidelity againſt the evidence of reaſon. Bro.
Theſe opinions Steele and his faction are endeavouring to
propagate among the people concerning the preſent miniſtry;
with what reſervation to the honour of the queen, I cannot
determine. Swift's Miſcellanies.
3. Cuſtody; ſtate of being treaſured up.
... He will'd me,
In heedful'ſt reſervation, to beſtow them
As notes, whoſe faculties incluſive were,
More than they of note. Shakeſp.
Rese'Rv AtoRY. m. ſ. [reſervoir, Fr.j Place in which any
thing is reſerved or kept.
How I got ſuch notice of that ſubterranean reſervatory as to
make a computation of the water now concealed therein,
peruſe the propoſitions concerning earthquakes. Wºodward.
To RESE/RVE. v. a. [reſerver, Fr. reſervo, Lat.]
1. To keep in ſtore; to ſave to ſome other purpoſe.
I could add many probabilities of the names of places;
but they ſhould be too long for this, and I reſerve them for
another. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
Haſt thou ſeen the treaſures of the hail, which I have re-
ſerved againſt the day of trouble : ob xxxviii. 23.
David houghed all the chariot horſes, but reſerved of them
for an hundred chariots. 2 Sam. viii. 4.
Flowers
Shakeſp.
Reſerv'd from night, and kept for thee in ſtore. Milton.
2. To retain; to keep ; to hold.
Reſerve thy ſtate, with better judgment check
This hideous raſhneſs. Shakeſp.
Will he reſerve his anger for ever ? will he keep it to the
end ? jer. iii. 5.
3. To lay up to a future time.
The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temp-
9
tºº-ºº-ºº:
The breach ſeems like the ſciſſures of an eariº,";
threatens to ſwallow all that attempt to cloſe it, and reſerver
its cure only for omnipotence. Decay of Piety.
/...º: º love in your own breaſt, and re-
Rese'Rve. m. ſ. [from i. ºrs for private hours. Swift.
I. Store kept untouched.
The aſſent may be withheld u n this ſuoroeſ!;
know not yet all that may be º º .." º ;
be beaten, it is not neceſſary I ſhould yield, not knowing
what forces there are in reſerve behind. L g
- - ocke.
2. Something kept for exigence.
The virgins, beſides the oil in their lamps, carried likewiſe
a reſerve in ſome other veſſel for a continual ſupply. Tillotſon
3. Something concealed in the mind. -
However any one may concur in the general ſcheme, it is
fill with certain reſerves and deviations, and with a favo to
his own private judgement. Addiſon's Freeholder.
4. Exception; prohibition.
Is knowledge ſo deſpisºd?
Or envy, or what reſerve forbids to taſte? Milton.
5. Exception in favour.
Each has ſome darling luſt, which pleads for a reſerve, and
º they would fain reconcile to the expectations of re-
1gion. Rogers's Sermons.
6. Modeſty; caution in perſonal behaviour. g 720717
Ere guardian thought cou’d bring its ſcatter'd aid,
My ſoul ſurpriz'd, and from herſelf disjoin'd,
Left all reſerve, and all the ſex behind.
ResERyed. adj.. [from reſerve.]
1. Modeſt ; not looſely free.
To all obliging, yet reſºrv'd to all,
None could himſelf the favour'd lover call.
2. Sullen ; not open; not frank.
Nothing reſerv'd or ſullen was to ſee,
But ſweet regards.
Rese'R've Dly. adv. [from reſerved.]
1. Not with frankneſs; not with openneſs; with reſerve.
I muſt give only ſhort hints, and write but obſcurely and
reſervedly, until I have opportunity to expreſs my ſentiments
with greater copiouſneſs and perſpicuity. J/oodward.
2. Scrupulouſly ; coldly.
He ſpeaks re erv'dly, but he ſpeaks with force;
Nor can a word be chang'd but for a worſe. Pope.
Rese'RVED.NEss. n. ſ. [from reſerved.] Cloſeneſs; want of
frankneſs; want of openneſs.
Obſerve their gravity
And their reſervedneſs, their many cautions
Fitting their perſons. Benj. johnſon's Cataline.
By formality, I mean ſomething more than ceremony and
complement, even a ſolemn reſervedneſs, which may well
conſiſt with honeſty. J7%tton.
There was great warineſs and reſervedneſ, and ſo great a
jealouſy of each other, that they had no mind to give or re-
ceive viſits. Clarendºn, b. viii.
Diſfimulation can but juſt guard a man within the compaſs
of his own perſonal concerns, which yet may be more effec-
tually done by that ſilence and reſervedneſs, that every man
may innocently practiſe. South's Sermons.
ResE/Rv ER. m. ſ. [from reſerve..] One that reſerves.
ResER voi'R. n. ſ. [re ervoir, Fr.] Place where any thing is
kept in ſtore.
There is not a ſpring or fountain, but are well provided
with huge ciſterns and reſervoirs of rain and ſnow-water. Addison
Who ſees pale Mammon pine amidſt his ſtore,
Sees but a backward ſteward for the poor;
This year a reſervoir, to keep and ſpare;
The next, a fountain ſpouting through his heir. Pope.
To RESETTLE. v. a... [re and ſettle.] To ſettle again,
Will the houſe of Auſtria yield the leaſt article, even of
uſurped prerogative, to reſettle the minds of thoſe princes in
the alliance, who are alarmed at the conſequences of the
emperor's death. Swift.
ResETTLEMENT. n.ſ. [from rºſettle.]
1. The act of ſettling again.
To the quieting of my paſſions, and the reſettlement of my
diſcompoſed ſoul, I conſider that grief is the moſt abſurd of
all the paſſions. Norris's Mºſcellanies.
2. The ſtate of ſettling again.
Some roll their calk to mix it with the lees, and, after a
reſettlement, they rack it. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Resi’AN.cf. m. ſ. [from reſant.] Reſidence; abode 5 dwel-
ling. Reſiance and reſant are now only uſed in law. - - -
The king forthwith baniſhed all Flemings out of his king-
dom, commanding his merchant adventurers, which had a
reſiance in Antwerp, to return. Bacon’s Henry VII.
REŠIANT. adj. [rºſant, Fr.] Reſident; preſent in a place.
Solyman was come as far as Sophia, where the Turks great
lieutenant in Europe is always reſtant, before that the Hunga-
Knolles's Hiſtory of the 7urks.
Benj. jºhnſ.
To RESIDE.
Prior.
JWalſh.
Dryden.
rians were aware. -
The Allobroges here reſtant in Rome,
2 I R
__<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R. E. S
r ... n. [reſide2, Lat. reſider, Fr.]
º: § ſº to dwell; to be preſent. -
How can God with ſuch reſide Milton.
iſ no fix’d place the happy ſouls reſide; 3. -
In groves we five, and lie on moſſy beds. Dryden's 4ºneii.
2. [Reſda, Lat.] To ſink; to ſubſide; to fall to the bottom.
‘CŞil of vitriol and petroleum, a drachm of each, turn into
a mouldy ſubſtance : there reſiding in the bottom a fair cloud
and a thick oil on the top. Boyle.
Residence. n.ſ. [reſidence, Fr.]
1. Act of dwelling in a place. .
Something holy lodges in that breaſt, -
And with theſe raptures moves the vocal air, -
To teſtify his hidden reſidence. Milton.
There was a great familiarity, between the confeſſor and
duke William ; for the confeſſor had often made conſiderable
reſidences in Normandy. Hale's Law of England.
2. Place of abode ; dwelling.
within the infant rind of this ſmall flower,
Poiſon hath reſidence and medicine power. Shakeſp.
Underſtand the ſame
Of fiſh within their wat'ry reſidence. Miltºn's Par. Lºſ’.
Caprea had been the retirement of Auguſtus for ſome time,
and the reſidence of Tiberius for ſeveral years. Addiſon.
3. [From riſdo, Lat..] That which ſettles at the bottom of
liquours. - - -
Separation is wrought by weight, as in the ordinary reſ-
dence or ſettlement of liquors. Bacon.
Our cleareſt waters, and ſuch as ſeem ſimple unto ſenſe,
are much compounded unto reaſon, as may be obſerved in
the evaporation of water, wherein, beſides a terreous rºſ-
dence, ſome ſalt is alſo found. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
RE'sident. adj. [reſidens, Lat. reſident, Fr.] Dwelling or
having abode in any place. -
I am not concerned in this obječtion ; not thinking it ne-
ceſſary, that Chriſt ſhould be perſonally preſent or reſident on
earth in the millenium. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
He is not ſaid to be reſident in a place, who comes thither
with a purpoſe of retiring immediately ; ſo alſo he is ſaid to
be abſent, who is abſent with his family. Ayliffe's Parergon.
Reside N.T. n.ſ.. [from the adj.] An agent, miniſter, or officer
reſiding in any diſtant place with the dignity of an ambaſſador.
The pope fears the Engliſh will ſuffer nothing like a
reſident or conſul in his kingdoms. Addison.
Reside'N TIARY. adj. [from reſident.] Holding reſidence.
Chriſt was the conductor of the Iſraclitcs into the land of
Canaan, and their reſidentiary guardian. More.
RF si'DUAL. U adj. [from reſiduum, Lat.] Relating to the
REsi"DUARY. } reſidue; relating to the part remaining.
'Tis enough to loſe the legacy, or the reſiduary advantage
of the eſtate left him by the deceaſed. Ayliffe.
RE'sidue. n.ſ. [reſidu, Fr. reſiduum, Lat..] The remaining
part; that which is left.
The cauſes are all ſuch as expel the moſt volatile parts of
the blood, and fix the reſidue. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To Resie G.E. v. a. [re and ſiege, Fr.] To ſeat again. Obſolete.
In wretched priſon long he did remain,
Till they outreigned had their utmoſt date,
And then therein reſeiged was again,
And ruled long with honourable ſtate. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
To RESIGN. v. a. [reſigner, Fr. reſigno, Lat.]
1. To give up a claim or poſſeſſion.
Reſign
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held. Shakeſp.
I'll to the king, and ſignify to him,
That thus I have reſign'd to you my charge. Shakeſp.
To her thou didſt reſign thy place. Milton.
Phoebus reſigns his darts, and Jove
His thunder, to the god of love. Denham.
Ev'ry Iſmena would reſign her breaſt;
And ev'ry dear Hippolytus be bleſt. Prior.
2. To yield up. -
Whoever ſhall rºſgn their reaſons, either from the root of
deceit in themſelves, or inability to reſiſt ſuch trivial ingana-
tions from others, although their condition may place them
above the multitude, yet are they ſtill within the line of
vulgarity. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Deſirous to reſign and render back
All I receiv'd. Milton.
Thoſe, who always reſign their judgment to the laſt man
they heard or read, truth never finks into thoſe men's minds 5
but, cameleon-like, they take the colour of what is laid be:
fore them, and as ſoon loſe and reſign it to the next that
cºmes in their way. Locke.
3. To give up in confidence. with up emphatical.
hat more reaſonable, than that we ſhould in all things
rºſgn ºf ourſelves to the will of God. Tillºn.
4. To ſubmit; Particularly to ſubmit to providence.
Hº the man, who ſtudies nature's laws,
is mind poſſeſſing in a quiet ſtate,
cadeſ, of ſortune, and reſign'd to fate. Dryden.
rm, yet cautious, mind,
Sinc
cre, though Prudent ; conſtant, yet reſign'd. Pope.
5. To ſºbmit without reſiſtance or murmur.
What thou art, reſign to death.
Resign Afrios. m. ſ. [reſignatiºn, Fr.]
1. The act of reſigning or giving up a claim or poſſeſſion.
Do that office of thine own good will ;
The reſignation of thy ſtate and crown. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
He intended to procure a reſignation of the rights of the
king's majeſty's ſiſters and others, entitled to the poſſeſſion of
the crown. Hayward.
2. Submiſſion; unreſiſting acquieſcence.
We cannot expect, that any one ſhould readily quit his own
opinion, and embrace ours, with a blind reſignation to an au-
thority, which the underſtanding acknowledges not. Locke.
There is a kind of ſluggiſh reſignation, as well as poorneſs
and degeneracy of ſpirit, in a ſtate of ſlavery, that very few
will recover themſelves out of it. Audſon.
3. Submiſſion without murmur to the will of God.
Resi'GNER. n.ſ. [from reſign.] One that reſigns.
RF si'GNMENT. n.ſ.. [from reſign.]. Act of reſigning.
Resilience. Un.J. [from reſilio, Lat..] The act of ſtarting
Resi'll ENCY. ; or leaping back.
If you ſtrike a ball ſidelong, the rebound will be as much
the contrary way; whether there be any ſuch reſilience in
echoes, that is, whether a man ſhall hear better if he ſtand
aſide the body repercuſſing, than if he ſtand where he ſpeaketh,
may be tried. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Resilient. adj. [rºſiliens, Lat...] Starting or ſpringing back.
REsiliºrios. m. ſ. ['eſilio, Lat...] The act of pringing back;
reſilience.
RESIN. m. ſ. [reſne, Fr. reſina, Lat.] The fat ſulphurous
parts of ſome vegetable, which is natural or procured by art,
and will incorporate with oil or ſpirit, not an aqueous men-
ſtruum. &amp;ºy.
RE sinous. adj, [from reſin ; rºſmeux, Fr.] Containing rein;
conſiſting of reſin.
Reſinous gums, diſſolved in ſpirit of wine, are let fall again,
if the ſpirit be copiouſly diluted. Boyle on Cºur.
RE's Nouss Ess. n. J. [from rºſinous.] The quality of being
reſinous.
RFsipisc Exce. n.ſ. [reſpiſence, Fr. rºſti čentia, low Lat.]
Wiſdom after the fact ; repentance.
To RESIST. v. a. ſ.rº//lo, Lat. reſiſter, Fr. J
1. To oppoſe ; to act againſt.
All the regions
Do ſeemingly revolt; and, who reſ?,
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
And periſh conſtant fools. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Submit to God; reſt the devil, and he will Hee. j. iv.
2. To not admit impreſſion or force.
Nor keen nor ſolid could reſiſt that edge. A.iiton.
Resi's TANCE. Uſreſſ/ance, Fr. This word, like many others,
REsist ENcE. } is differently written, as it is ſuppoſed to have
come from the Latin or the French.]
1. The act of reſiſting; oppoſition.
Demetrius, ſeeing that the land was quiet, and that no re-
ſ/lance was made againſt him, ſent away all his forces. I Allac.
2. The quality of not yielding to force or external impreſſion.
The reſiſtance of bone to cold is greater than of fleſh; for
that the fleſh ſhrinketh, but the bone , ºfteth, whereby the
Shałęſp. Henry VI.
cold becometh more eager. Bacºn.
Muſick ſo ſoftens and diſarms the mind,
That not an arrow does reſ/lance find. J//aller.
The idea of ſolidity we receive by our touch, and it ariſes
from the reſ/lance which we find in body to the entrance of
any other body into the place it policiſes. Lake.
But that part of the reſiſtence, which ariſes from the vis
inertie, is proportional to the denſity of the matter, and can-
not be diminiſhed by dividing the matter into ſmaller parts,
nor by any other means, than by decreaſing the denſity of
the medium. Newtºn's Opticks.
Resistibility. n.ſ.. [from reſ/fille.] Quality of refitting.
Whether the rºilility of Adam's reaſon did not equivº-
lence the facility of Eve's ſeduction, we refer unto ſchool-
Illen. Brown's ſalar Errours.
The name body, being the complex idea of extenſion and
rºſtibility, together, in the ſame ſubject, theſe two ideº "I"
not exactly one and the ſame. Locke.
REsi stable. adj. [from reſiſt.] That may be reſiſted.
That is irreſiſtible; this, though potent, yet is in its own nº-
ture reſiſtible by the will of man; though it many times Prº
vals by its efficacy. Hale's Origin of A ſankind.
Resi's riſess. adj. [from rººft.] Irreſiſtable ; that cannot be
oppoſed.
Our own eyes do every where behold the ſudden and re-
ſ/tlºſs aſſaults of death. Raleigh's Hiſtory ºf the ſºld.
All at once to force reſiſtleſs way. Milton.
Since you can love, and yet your error ſee,
The ſame reſiſtleſs power may plead for me. Dryden.
She chang'd her ſtate ;
Rºſſilſ in her love, as in her hate. Dryden.
Though thine eyes reſilſ; glances dart, -
A ſtronger charm is thine, a generous heart. Iogie.
RESOLY ABLE.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R E S
º
Reso'Lv ABLE. adj. [from reſolve.]
1. That may be analyſed or ſeparated.
Pride is of ſuch intimate connection with ingratitude, that
the actions of ingratitude ſeem directly reſolvable into pride,
as the principal reaſon of them. South.
As the ſerum of the blood is reſolvable by a ſmall heat, a
greater heat coagulates, ſo as to turn it horny like parch-
ment. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. Capable of ſolution or of being made leſs obſcure.
The effect is wonderful in all, and the cauſes beſt reſolvable
from obſervations made in the countries themſelves, the parts
through which they paſs. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Resoluble... adj. [reſoluble, Fr. re and ſolubilis, Lat.] That
may be melted or diſſolved.
Three is not preciſely the number of the diſtinét elements,
whereinto mixt bodies are reſoluble by fire. Boyle.
To RESO/LVE. v. a. [reſolvo, Lat. reſoudre, Fr.]
1. To inform; to free from a doubt or difficulty.
In all things then are our conſciences beſt reſºlved, and in
moſt agreeable ſort unto God and nature reſolved, when they
are ſo far perſuaded, as thoſe grounds of perſuaſion will
bear. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
Give me ſome breath, -
Before I poſitively ſpeak in this;
I will reſolve your grace immediately. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
I cannot brook delay, reſolve me now ;
And what your pleaſure is, ſhall ſatisfy me. Shakeſp.
Reſolve me, ſtrangers, whence and what you are: Dryd.
2. To ſolve; to clear.
Examine, fift, and reſolve their alleged proofs, till you
come to the very root whence they ſpring, and it ſhall clearly
appear, that the moſt which can be infered upon ſuch plenty
of divine teſtimonies, is only this, that ſome things, which
they maintain, do ſeem to have been out of ſcripture not ab-
ſurdly gathered. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
I reſolve the riddle of their loyalty, and give them oppor-
tunity to let the world ſee, they mean not what they do, but
what they ſay. King Charles.
He always bent himſelf rather judiciouſly to reſºlve, than
by doubts to perplex a buſineſs. Hayward.
The gravers, when they have attained to the knowledge
of theſe repoſes, will eaſily reſolve thoſe difficulties which per-
plex them. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
The man, who would reſºlve the work of fate,
May limit number. Prior.
Happineſs, it was preſently reſolved by all, muſt be ſome
one uniform end, proportioned to the capacities of human
nature, attainable by every man, independent on fortune.
Rogers's Sermons
3. To ſettle in an opinion.
Long ſince we were reſolved of your truth,
Your faithful ſervice, and your toil in war. Shakeſp.
4. To fix in a determination.
Good proof
This day affords, declaring thee reſolv’d
To undergo with me one guilt. Milton.
I run to meet th' alarms,
Reſolv’d on death, reſolv'd to die in arms. Dryden.
Reſºlv'd for ſea, the ſlaves thy baggage pack;
Nothing retards thy voyage, unleſs
Thy other lord forbids voluptuouſneſs. Dryden's Perſius.
5. To fix in conſtancy; to confirm.
Quit preſently the chapel, or reſºlve you
For more amazement:
I’ll make the ſtatue move. Shakeſp.
6. To melt ; to diſſolve.
Reſolving is bringing a fluid, which is new concreted, into
the ſtate of fluidity again. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Vegetable ſalts reſolve the coagulated humours of a human
bödy, and attenuate, by ſtimulating the ſolids, and diſſolving
the fluids. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
7. To analiſe.
Into what can we reſolve this ſtrong inclination of mankind
to this error it is altogether unimaginable, but that the rea-
ſon of ſo univerſal a conſent ſhould be conſtant. Tillotſon.
Ye immortal ſouls, who once were men,
And now reſolv'd to elements agen. Dryden.
The decretals turn upon this point, and reſºlve all into a
monarchical power at Rome. Baker's Reflections on Learning.
To Resolv E. v. n.
1. To determine; to decree within one's ſelf.
Confirm’d, then I reſolve
Adam ſhall ſhare with me. Milton.
Covetouſneſs is like the ſea, that receives the tribute of all
rivers, though far unlike it in lending any back; therefore
thoſe, who have reſolved upon the thriving ſort of piety,
have ſeldom embarked all their hopes in one bottom. D. of Pi.
2. To melt; to be diſſolved.
Have I not hideous death within my view
Retaining but a quantity of life,
Which bleeds away, ev’n as a form of wax
Reſolveth from its #. 'gainſt the fire. Shakeſp.
No man condemn me, who has never felt
A woman's power, or try'd the force of love;
All tempers yield and ſoften in thoſe fires,
ur honours, intereſts, reſolving down,
Run in the gentle current of our joys. Southern's Oroonoº.
When the blood, ſtagnates in any part, it firſt coagulates,
then reſolves and turns alkaline. A buthnot on Žinºiſ.
3. To be ſettled in opinion. -
Let men reſolve of that as they pleaſe: this every intelli-
gent being muſt grant, that there is ſomething that is himſelf,
that he would have happy. c Locke.
Reso'Lve. m.ſ.. [from the verb..] Reſolution; fixed determination.
I'm glad, you thus continue your reſolve,
To fuck the ſweets of ſweet philoſophy. Shakeſp.
When he ſees -
Himſelf by dogs, and dogs by men purſu’d,
He ſtraight revokes his bold reſºlve, and more ,
Repents his courage, than his fear before. Lenham.
Caeſar's approach has ſummon'd us together,
And Rome attends her fate from our reſºlves. Addison Cat.
Resolvedly, adv. [from reſolved.] With firmneſs and con-
ſtancy.
A man may be reſºlvedly patient unto death; ſo that it is
not the mediocrity of reſolution, which makes the virtue;
nor the extremity, which makes the vice. Grew's Coſmol.
REso'lved NEss. n.ſ.. [from reſolved.] Reſolution; comſtancy;
firmneſs.
This reſºlvedneſs, this high fortitude in fin, can with no
reaſon be imagined a preparative to its remiſſion. D. of Piety.
Reso'LVENT. m. ſ. [reſºlvens, Latin.] That which has tie
power of cauſing ſolution.
In the beginning of inflammation, they require repellents;
and in the increaſe, ſomewhat of reſolvents ought to be
mixed. - J/ijeman's Surgery.
Laëteſcent plants, as lettuce and endive, contain a moſt
wholeſome juice, reſolvent of the bile, anodyne and cooling.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Resolv ER. n.ſ.. [from reſºlve.]
1. One that forms a firm reſolution.
Thy reſolutions were not before ſincere; conſequently God
that ſaw that, cannot be thought to have juſtified that unfin-
cere reſºlver, that dead faith. Hammond's Praº. Catech.
2. One that diſſolves; one that ſeparates parts. - -
It may be doubted, whether or no the fire be the genuine
and univerſal reſolver of mixed bodies. Bºyle.
RE'SOLUTE. adj. [reſºlu, Fr.] Determined; fixed; con-
ſtant; ſteady : firm.
Be bloody, bold, and reſolute; laugh to ſcorn
The pow'r of man ; for none of woman born -
Shall harm Macbeth. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Edward is at hand
Ready to fight; therefore be reſºlute. Shakespeare. Hen. VI.
RE'solutely, adv. [from reſºlute.] Determinately; firmly ;
conſtantly; ſteadily.
We reſºlutely muſt,
To the few virtues that we have, be juſt. Roſcommon.
A man, who lives a virtuous life, deſpiſes the pleaſures of
fin, and notwithſtanding all the allurements of ſenſe perſiſts
reſolutely in his courſe. Tillotſon's Sermons.
Some of thoſe facts he examines, ſome he reſolutely denies;
others he endeavours to extenuate, and the reſt he diſtorts
with unnatural turns. Swift's Miſcellenics.
RE’solut EN Ess. m. ſ. [from reſºlute.] Determinateneſs; ſtate
of being fixed in reſolution.
All that my reſolutenes to make uſe of my ears, not tongue,
could do, was to make them acquieſce. Boyle.
Resoluºrio N. n.ſ...[reſolutio, Lat. reſolution, Fr.]
1. Aćt of clearing difficulties.
In matters of antiquity, if their originals eſcape due rela-
tion, they fall into great obſcurities, and ſuch as future ages
ſeldom reduce into a reſolution. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
The unravelling and reſolution of the difficulties, that are
met with in the execution of the deſign, are the end of an
aćtion. Dryden's Oedipus.
2. Analyſis; ačt of ſeparating anything into conſtituent parts:
To the preſent impulſes of ſenſe, memory and inſtinct, all
the ſagacities of brutes may be reduced; though witty me?,
by analytical reſolution, have chymically extracted an artifi-
cial logick out of all their actions. Hale's Orig. ºf 44 inkind.
3. Diſſolution. -
In the hot ſprings of extreme cold countries, the firſt heats
are unſufferable, which proceed out of the reſºlutiºn ºf hu-
midity congealed. - - - Digby on Bodies.
4. [From reſolute.] Fixed determination; ſcttled thought.
I” th’ progreſs of º buſineſs,
Ere a determinate reſolution,
The biſhop did . a reſpite. Shakespeare. Henry VIII.
O Lord, reſolutions of future reforming do not always ſa-
tisfy thy juſtice, nor prevent thy vengeance for former miſ-
carriages. - - King Charles.
We ſpend our days in deliberating, and we end them with-
out coming to any reſºlutiºn. *::::
OW
--
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R E S
_--
How much this is in every man's Power, by making.
latiºns to himſelf, is eaſy.” “Y. . . Locke.
The mode of the will, which anſwers to dubitation, may
be called ſuſpenſion; that which anſwers to invention, reſo-
lution: and that which, in the phantaſtick will, is obſ inacy,
is conſtancy in the intellectual. - Grew's Coſmol.
Conſtancy; firmneſs.; ſteadineſs in good or bad.
5. The reſt of the Helots, which were otherwiſe ſcattered,
bent thitherward, with a new life ºf reſºlution ; as if their
n had been a root, out of which their colº.
ngſ. - t ney.
º; ºuld unflate myſelf to be in a due reſºlution. Shakespeare.
They, who governed the parliament, had the reſolution to
aćt thoſe monſtrous things. Clarendon, b. viii.
what reinforcement we may gain from hope,
- If not what reſolutiºn from deſpair. . . .
6. Determination of a cauſe in courts of juſtice. - -
Nor have we all the acts of parliament or of judicial rºº-
lutions, which might occaſion ſuch alterations. - Hale.
Resolutive. adj. [reſolutus, Lat. reſºlutiſ, Fr.] Having the
power to diſſolve.
Rºſsos Anct. n.ſ. [from reſno, Lat.] Sound; reſound.
An ancient muſician informed me, that there were ſome
famous lutes that attained not their full ſeaſoning and beſt re-
Jonance, till they were about fourſcore years old. Bºyle.
RÉ'son ANT. adj. [reſennant, Fr. reſºnans, Lat..] Reſounding.
is volant touch
Fled and purſu'd tranſverſe the reſºnant fugue. Milton.
To Reso'RT. v. n. [reſortir, Fr.]
1. To have recourſe.
The king thought it time to reſort to other counſels, and
to provide force to chaſtiſe them, who had ſo much deſpiſed
all his gentler remedies. Clarendon, b. ii.
2. To go publickly.
Thither ſhall all the valiant youth reſºrt,
And from his memory inflame their breaſts
To matchleſs valour. Milton's Agoniſtes.
captai
Milton.
Hither the heroes and the nymphs reſort. Pope.
3. To repair to.
The ſons of light
Haſted, reſºrting to the ſummons high. Milton.
To Argos' realms the vićtor god reſorts,
And enters cold Crotopus' humble courts. Pope.
4. To fall back. In law.
The inheritance of the ſon never reſorted to the mother or
to any of her anceſtors, but both were totally excluded from
the ſucceſſion. Hale's Law of England.
REso'RT. n. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Frequency; aſſembly ; meeting.
Unknown, unqueſtion'd in that thick reſºrt.
2. Concourſe; confluence.
The like places of reſort are frequented by men out of
place. Swift's Mi cellanies.
3. Aćt of viſiting.
Join with me to forbid him her reſºrt.
4. [Reſort, Fr.] Movement; active power; ſpring.
Some know the reſorts and falls of buſineſs, that cannot
ſink into the main of it. Bacon's Eſſays.
In fortune's empire blindly thus we go,
We wander after pathleſs deſtiny,
Whoſe dark reſorts ſince prudence cannot know,
In vain it would provide for what ſhall be. Dryden.
To Resou'ND. v. a. [reſono, Lat. reſonner, Fr.]
1. To echo; to ſound back; to celebrate by ſound.
The ſweet ſinger of Iſrael with his pſaltery loudly reſºunded
the innumerable benefits of the Almighty Creator. Peacham.
The ſound of hymns, wherewith thy throne
Incompaſs'd ſhall reſound thee ever §.
2. To found; to tell ſo as to be heard far.
The man, for wiſdom's various arts renown'd
Long exercis'd in woes, oh muſe ! reſound.
3. To return ſounds; to ſound with any noiſe.
With other echo late I taught your ſhades,
To anſwer and reſound far other ſong. Milton.
To Resou'N D. v. n. To be echoed back.
What reſounds in fable or romance of Uther's ſons. Mill.
What is common fame, which ſounds from all quarters of
the world, and reſºund; back to them again, but generally a
loud, rattling, impudent lye South's Sermons.
Kºsºv'RCF., n.ſ.. [It is commonly written reſºurce, which ſee:
reſºurce, Fr. Skinner derives it from reſºudre, Fr. to ſpring up.]
one new or unexpected means that offer; reſort; expedient.
- Pallas view’d
His foºs purſuing, and his friends purſu'd ;
W. tººthings, mix'd with prayers, his laſt reſºurce;
ith theſe to move their minds, with thoſe to fire their
force. -
To REscºw. …... Dryden.
Dryden.
Shakeſp.
Milton.
»
Pope.
O [re and ſow.] To ſow anew.
... "“...at ſowing time breedeth much dearth, inſomuch
º are forced to rºſaw ſummer corn. Bacon.
O º * * [re and ſpeak.] To anſwer.
A he great Sannon to the clouds ſhall tell,
º * king's rowſe the heav'n'ſhai bruit again,
Jºaking carthly thunder. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
To RESPECT. v. a. [reſpecius, Lat.]
1. To regard; to have regard to.
Claudio, I quake,
Leſt thou ſhould'ſt ſeven winters more reſpe&amp;
Than a perpetual honour. Shakeſp. Meaſ for Moſ
In orchards and gardens we do not ſo much reſpec/ beauty,
as variety of ground for fruits, trees, and herbs. Bacon.
2. [Reſpecier, Fr.] To conſider with a lower degree of reverence.
There is nothing more terrible to a guilty heart, than the
eye of a reſpected friend. Sidney.
Whoever taſtes, let him with grateful heart
Reſpect that ancient loyal houſe. Philips.
I always loved and reſpected Sir William.
. To have relation to.
4. To look toward.
The needle doth vary, as it approacheth the pole; whereas,
were there ſuch direction from the rocks, upon a nearer ap-
proachment, it would more directly reſpect them. Brown.
Palladius adviſeth, the front of his houſe ſhould ſo reſpect
the South, that in the firſt angle it receive the riſing rays of
the winter ſun, and decline a little from the winter ſetting
thereof. Brown's /ulgar Errour.
Respect. n.ſ. [reſpeº, Fr. reſpec/us, Lat.]
1. Regard; attention. -
You have too much reſpec: upon the world;
They loſe it, that do buy it with much care.
- I love
My country's good with a reſped more tender
Than mine own life. Shakep. Coriolanut.
2. Reverence; honour. - -
You know me dutiful, therefore
Let me not ſhame reſpect ; but give me leave
To take that courſe by your content and voice. Shake?.
A neas muſt be drawn a ſuppliant to Dido, with reſpect in
his geſtures, and humility in his eyes. 19nyden's Dyrºſny.
I found the king abandon'd to neglect ;
Seen without awe, and ſerv'd without reſpect.
3. Awful kindneſs.
He, that will have his ſon have a reſpec: for him, muſt
Swift to Gay.
Shaleſ.
Prior.
have a great reverence for his ſon. Lake.
4. Goodwill.
Pembroke has got
A thouſand pounds a year, for pure reſpect;
No other obligation
That promiſes more thouſands. Shake p. Henry VIII.
The Lord had reſpeci unto Abel and his offering. Gen. iv.
5. Partial regard.
It is not good to have reſe: of perſons in judgment. Prov.
6. Reverend character.
Many of the beſt reſpeš in Rome,
Groaning under this age's yoke,
Have wiſh'd, that noble Brutus had his eyes. Shakespeare .
7. Manner of treating others.
You muſt uſe them with fit repe?s, according to the bonds of
nature; but you are of kin to their perſons, not errors. Bacon.
The duke's carriage was to the gentlemen of fair ºffº,
and bountiful to the ſoldier, according to any ſpecial value
which he ſpied in any. J/otton's Buckingham.
8. Conſideration; motive.
Whatſoever ſecret reſpesis were likely to move them, for
contenting of their minds, Calvin returned. Hºoker.
The love of him, and this reſpeºf beſide;
For that my grandfire was an Engliſhman,
Awakes my conſcience to confeſs all this. Shakespeare .
Since that reſpeºis of fortune are his love, --
I ſhall not be his wife. Shake p. King Lear.
9. Relation; regard.
In reſpeci of the ſuitors which attend you, do them what
right in juſtice, and with as much ſpeed as you may: Bacºn.
I have repreſented to you the excellency of the chriſtian
religion, in reſpeci of its clear diſcoveries ºf the nº of
God, and in rºffee? of the perfection of its laws. Tillºtſºn.
Every thing which is imperfect, as the world muſt be ac-
knowledged in many reſpecis, had ſome cauſe which pro-
duced it. - ſillotſºn,
They believed but one ſupreme deity, which, with rºſpect
to the various benefits men received from him, had ſeveral
titles. Tillotſon.
Respect ER. m. ſ. [from refect.] One that has partial regard.
Neither is any condition more honourable in the fight ot
God than another; otherwiſe he would be a refºr of per-
ſons: for he hath propoſed the ſame ſalvation to all. Sºft.
Respectful. adj. [rºſpect and full.) Ceremonious ; full of
outward civility.
Will you be only, and for ever mine }
From this dear boſom ſhall I ne'er be torn ? -
Or you grow cold, reſpecifid, or forſworn ? Prior.
With humble joy, and with reſpeciful fear, Priºr
The liſt’ning people ſhall his ſtory heat. f
REspectfully adj. [from reſpeciful..] With ſome degree o
Iew erence. . . -
To your glad genius ſacrifice this day, Dryd.
Let common meats reſ ecſ/ully give way. Rºº.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
ul
º
–-mm- ---
Respe’ctive. adj. [from reſpe&amp;#.]
1. Particular ; relating to particular perſons or things.
Moſes mentions the immediate cauſes, and St. Peter the
more remote and fundamental cauſes, that conſtitution of the
heavens, and that conſtitution of the earth, in reference to
their reſpective waters, which made that world obnoxious to
a deluge. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
When ſo many preſent themſelves before their reſpeciive
magiſtrates to take the oaths, it may not be improperto awaken
a due ſenſe of their engagements. Addiſon.
z. [Reſpecif, Fr.] Relative; not abſolute.
The medium intended is not an abſolute, but a reſe?ive
medium : the proportion recommended to all is the ſame ;
but the things to be deſired in this proportion will vary. Rog.
3- Worthy of reverence. Not in uſe.
What ſhould it be, that he reſpects in her,
But I can make reſpective in myſelf. Shakeſp.
. Accurate; nice; careful; cautious. Obſolete.
Reſpeciive and wary men had rather ſeek quietly their own,
and wiſh that the world may go well, ſo it be not long of
them, than with pain and hazard make themſelves adviſers
for the common good. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 1.
He was exceeding reſpećfive and preciſe. Raleigh.
REspe/ctively. adv. [from reſpeciive.]
1. Particularly ; as each belongs to each.
The interruption of trade between the Engliſh and Flemiſh
began to pinch the merchants of both nations, which moved
them by all means to diſpoſe their ſovereigns reſpectively to
open the intercourſe again. Bacon.
The impreſſions from the objećts of the ſenſes do mingle
reſpešlively every one with his kind. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Good and evil are in morality, as the Eaſt and Weſt are in
the frame of the world, founded in and divided by that fixed
and unalterable fituation, which they have reſpectively in the
whole body of the univerſe. South's Sermons.
The principles of thoſe governments are reſpeciively diſ-
claimed and abhorred by all the men of ſenſe and virtue in
both parties. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 54.
2. Relatively; not abſolutely.
If there had been no other choice, but that Adam had been
left to the univerſal, Moſes would not then have ſaid, eaſt-
ward in Eden, ſeeing the world hath not Eaſt nor Weſt, but
reſpectively. Raleigh's Hiſtory % the World.
3. Partially; with reſpečt to private views. Obſolete.
Among the miniſters themſelves, one being ſo far in eſti-
mation above the reſt, the voices of the reſt were likely to
be given for the moſt part reſpeciively with a kind of ſecret
dependency. Hºoker's Preface.
4. With great reverence. Not in uſe.
Honeſt Flaminius, you are very reſpectively welcome. Shakespeare
Respe/Rsion. m. ſ. [reſperſo, Lat..] The act of ſprinkling.
REspirA"rion, n. ſ. [reſpiration, Fr. reſpiratio, from reſpiro,
Lat.]
1. The act of breathing.
Apollonius of Tyana affirmed, that the ebbing and flow.
ing of the ſea was the reſpiration of the world, drawing in
water as breath, and putting it forth again. Bacon.
Syrups or other expectoratives do not advantage in coughs,
by ſlipping down between the epiglottis; for, as I inſtanced
before, that muſt neceſlarly occaſion a greater cough and
difficulty of reſpiration. Harvey on Conſumptions.
The author of nature foreknew the neceſſity of rains and
dews to the preſent ſtructure of plants, and the uſes of reſpi-
ration to animals; and therefore created thoſe correſpondent
properties in the atmoſphere. Bentley's Sermons.
2. Relief from toil.
Till the day
Appear of reſpiration to the juſt,
And vengeance to the wicked. Milton's Par. Loft, b. xii.
To Respi'R.E. v. n. [reſpiro, Lat. reſpirer, Fr.]
1. To breathe.
The ladies gaſp'd, and ſcarcely could reſpire;
The breath they drew, no longer air, but fire,
The fainty knights were ſcorch'd.
2. To catch breath.
Till breathleſs both themſelves aſide retire,
Where foaming wrath, their cruel tuſks they whet,
And trample th' earth the whiles they may reſpire. F. Q.
I, a pris’ner chain'd, ſcarce freely draw
The air impriſon'd alſo, cloſe and damp,
Unwholeſome draught; but here I feel amends,
The breath of heav'n freſh blowing, pure, and ſweet,
With day-ſpring born ; here leave me to reſpire. Milton.
3. To reſt; to take reſt from toil.
Hark! he ſtrikes the golden lyre;
And ſee the tortur'd ghoſts reſpire,
See ſhady forms advance
RESPITE. a. ſ. [reſpit, Fr.]
1. Reprieve ; ſūſpenſion of a capital ſentence.
I had hope to ſpend
Quiet, though ſad, the reſpite of that day,
That muſt be mortal to us both.
Dryden.
y
Pope's St. Cecilia.
R E S
Wiſdon and eloquence in vain would plead
One moment's refºre for the learned head;
Judges of writings and of inet, have dy'd.
2. Pauſe; interval -
The fºx then counſel'd th' ape, for to require
Rºſpite till morrow tº anſwer his deſire. Hubber!"; 7, 1,
This cuſtomary war, which troublei, all the world, giveth
little repite or breathing time of peace, doth uſually borrow
pretence from the neceſſ.
*ry, to make itſelf appéar more
honeſt. - R. Eſſays.
Some pauſe and reſpite only I require,
Till with my tears I ſhall have quelch. my fire. Denham.
To ResP1’t E. v. a. [from the noun.] -
1. To relieve by a pauſe.
In what bow'r or ſhade
Thou findſt him, from the heat of noon retird,
To reſpite his day-labour with repaſt,
Or with repoſe. 41iltºn's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
2. [Rºſpiter, old Fr.] To ſuſpend; to delay.
An act paſſed for the ſatisfaction of the officers of the king's
army, by which they were promiſed payment, upon the pub-
lick faith, in November following; till which time they were
to reſpite it, and be contented that the common ſoldiers and
inferior officers ſhould be ſatisfied upon their diſbanding.
Clarendon.
Resple’N DENce }". J.. [from reſplendent.] Luſtre; bright-
RESPLE'NDENCY. § neſs; ſplendour.
Son thou in whom my glory Ibehold
In full reſplendence, heir of all my might. Milton.
To neglect that ſupreme replendency, that ſhines in God,
for thoſe dim repreſentations of it in the creature, is as abſurd
as it were for a Perſian to offer his ſacrifice to a pathelion in-
ſtead of adoring the ſun. Boyle.
RESPLE'NDENT: adj. [reſplendens, Lat.] Bright; ſhining;
having a beautiful luſtre.
Rich in commodities, beautiful in ſituation, reſplendent in
all glory. Camden's Remains.
There all within full rich array'd he found,
With royal arras and reſplendent gold. Fairy Queen.
The ancient electrum had in it a fifth of filver to the gold,
and made a compound metal, as fit for moſt uſes as gold, and
more reſplendent. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Empreſs of this fair world, reſºlendent Eve Milton.
Every body looks moſt ſplendid and luminous in the light
of its own colour: cinnaber in the homogeneal light is moſt
reſplendent, in the green light it is manifeſtly leſs reſplendent,
in the blue light ſtill leſs. Newton's Opticks.
Reſplendent braſs, and more reſplendent dames. Pope.
Resple'NDENTLY. adv. [from reſplendent.] With luſtre;
brightly; ſplendidly.
To RESPO'ND. v. n. [reſpondeo, Lat. reſpondre, Fr.]
1. To anſwer. Little uſed.
2. To correſpond; to ſuit.
To ev'ry theme reſponds thy various lay;
Here rowls a torrent, there meanders play.
Respo'NDENT. n.ſ. [reſpondens, Lat.]
1. An anſwerer in a ſuit.
In giving an anſwer, the reſpondent ſhould be in court, and
perſonally admoniſhed by the judge to anſwer the judge's in-
terrogation. Ayliff's Parergon.
2. One whoſe province, in a ſet diſputation, is to refute ob-
jećtions. - - - - - -
How becomingly does Philopolis exerciſe his office, and
ſeaſonably commit the opponent with the reſpondent, like a
long pračtiſed moderator : More's Divine Dialogues.
The reſpondent may eaſily ſhew, that though wine may do
all this, yet it may be finally hurtful to the ſoul and body of
him. JWatts's Logick.
Respo’Nse. m. ſ. [reſponſum, Lat.]
I. An anſwer.
Mere natural piety has taught men to receive the reſºonſes
of the gods with all poſſible veneration. Gov. ºf the Tºngue.
The oracles, which had before flouriſhed, began to droops
and from giving reſpºnſes in verſe, deſcended to proſe, and
within a while were utterly ſilenced. - Hammºnd.
2. [Reſpons, Fr.] Anſwer made by the congregation, ſpeaking
alternately with the prieſt in publick worſhip. º
To make his pariſhioners kneel and join in the re?onſes, he
gave every one of them a hallock and common prayer book.
Addison's Spectator, N° 112.
3. Reply to an obječtion in a formal diſputation. . -
Let the reſpondent not turn opponent; except ºn retorting
the argument upon his adverſary after a direct reſponſe; and
even this is allowed only as a confirmation of his own re-
Jponſe. J/atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Répô'ssible. adj. [from rºſenſus, Lat.J
1. Anſwerable ; accountable. + 1-
He as much ſatisfics the itch of telling news ; he as much
perſuades his hearers; and all tºº while he has his retreat
fºcure, and ſtands not reſpºnſible for the truth of his re-
lations. Gºvernment of the Tongue.
P; , z,
Broome.
Milton.
21 S 2. Capable
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R. F. S
iſcharging an obligation.
†† of a º of money to trade depends
edge, which writing cannot ſupply the place
º: #. freceive from one man, will not be ac-
O ºted as ſecurity by another, he not knowing that the bill is
j or that the man bound is honeſt or reſpºnſible. Loºke.
Rººses. n. ſ. [from reſponſible.] State of being
ſized or qualified to anſwe. - -
Riº m. ſ. [reſponſº, Lat.] The aët of anſwering.
Respo'Nsive. adj. [ºffenſiſ, Fr. from reſponſus, Lat. J
Anſwering ; making anſwer.
I Å jiàº. is a reſponſive letter, or letter by way of an-
{wer Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Correſpondent; ſuited to ſomething elſe.
Sing of love and gay deſire,
2. Capab
Rºſive to the warbling lyſe. Fenton.
%. Demodocus the bard of fame,
Taught by the gods to pleaſe, when high he ſing:
The vocal lay ºffenſive to the ſtrings. Pope's Odyſſey.
Responsory, adj. [reſponſºriº Lat.] Containing anſwer.
REST. n.ſ. [rerº, Saxon; ruffe, Dutch.]
. Sleep; repoſe. - -
I “...i. ă. retir'd to rºſt, mind us of like repoſe. Milton.
Mytoſt limbs are wearied into reſt. Pope.
2. The final ſleep ; the quietneſs of death. .
Óſ, with hôly hymns he charm'd their ears;
For David left him, when he went to rºft,
His lyre. -
3. Stilneſs ; ceſſation of motion. - -
prefaion aſketh reſt; for the ſubtle motion, which pu-
trefaction requireth, is diſturbed by any agitation. Bacon.
what cauſe mov'd the Creator, in his holy reſ?, -
So late to build. Milton.
All things paſt are equally and perfeółly at reſt and to
this way of conſideration of them are all one, whether they
were béfore the world, or but yeſterday. Locke.
4. Quiet ; peace ; ceſſation from diſturbance.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye
ſhall find reſt unto your ſouls. Mat. xi. 29.
He giveth yourſ from all your enemies. Deut. xii. Io.
Though the righteous be prevented with death ; yet ſhall
he be in reſt. I/id, iv. 7.
'Scap'd from ſuch ſtorms of pow'r, holding it beſt
To be below herſelf to be at reſt. Daniel's Civil War.
The root cut off, from whence theſe tumults roſe,
He ſhould have reſt, the commonwealth repoſe. Daniel.
Thus fenc'd, but not at reſt or eaſe of mind. Milton.
with what a load of vengeance am I preſt,
Yet never, never, can I hope for reſt;
For when my heavy burden I remove,
The weight falls down, and cruſhes her I love. Dryden.
Like the ſun, it had light and agility; it knew no reſt but
in motion, no quiet but in activity. South's Sermons.
Where can a frail man hide him in what arms
Dryden's Parſon.
Shall a ſhort life enjoy a little reſt. Fanſhaw.
Thither, where ſinners may have reſt, I go. Pope.
The grave, where ev'n the great find rºſt. Pope.
The midnight murderer
Invades the ſacred hour of ſilent reſt. Anonym.
5. Ceſſation from bodily labour.
There the weary be at reſt. job iii. 17.
6. Support; that on which anything leans or reſts.
Forth prick'd Clorinda from the throng,
And gainſt Tancredie ſet her ſpear in reſt. Fairfax.
A man may think, that a muſket may be ſhot off as well
upon the arm, as upon a reſt 5 but when all is done, good
counſel ſetteth buſineſs ſtraight. Bacon.
Their vizors clos'd, their lances in the reſt,
Or at the helmet pointed, or the creſt;
They ſpeed the race. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Take the handle in your right hand, and claſping the blade
of it in your left, lean it ſteady upon the reſt, holding the
edge a little aſant over the work, ſo as a corner of the thin
ſide of the chiſel may bear upon the reſt, and the flat ſide
of the chiffel may make a ſmall angle with the reſt. Moxon.
7. Place of repoſe.
Suſtain’d by him with comforts, till we end
In duſt, our final rºſ; and native home. Milton.
8. Final hope.
He ſets up his reſt, to do more exploits with his mace, than
a maurice pike. Shakeſp. Com. of Err.
Sea fights have been final to the war, but this is, when
princes ſet up their reſt upon the battle. Bacon.
This anſwer would render their counſels of leſs reverence
to the people, if, upon thoſe reaſons, they ſhould recede from
what they had, with that confidence and diſdain of the houſe
of peers, demanded of the king; they therefore reſolved to
"t up their reſt upon that ſtake, and to go through with it, or
- pººl in the attempt. Clarendon.
() º Fr. quad reſtat, Latin.] Remainder ; what re-
* * * in S.
* . . ." - - -
*gºon gives part of its reward in hand, the preſent ccm-
fort of having done our duty; and for the rºſt, it offers us
the beſt ſecurity that heaven can gºve. Tillotſon.
The pow'r in glory ſhone,
By her bent bow and her keen arrows known
The reſt a huntreſs. Dryden's Knight's Tale.
REST. adj. [reſter, Fr. quod rºſtat, Lat..] Others; thoſe not
included in any propoſition.
By deſcription of their qualitics, many things may be
learned concerning the reſt of the inhabitants. Albºt.
They had no other conſideration of the publick, than that no
diſturbance might interrupt their quiet in their own days; and
that the reſt, who had larger hearts and more publick ſpirits,
would extend their labour, activity, and advice only to ſecure
the empire at home by all peaceable arts. Clarendºn.
Plato, and the reſt of the philoſophers, acknowledged the
unity, power, wiſdom, goodneſs, and providence of the ſu-
preme God. Stillingfieet.
Arm'd like the reſt, the Trojan prince appears,
And by his pious labour urges theirs. Dryden.
Upon ſo equal terms did they all ſtand, that no one had a
fairer pretence of right than the reſt. JWoodward.
To Resºr. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. To ſleep; to be aſleep; to ſlumber.
Fancy then retires
Into her private cell, when nature reſ';. Miltºn.
2. To ſleep the final ſleep; to die.
‘Itgºw Uzvá,
Kop. 2121' $vºazºv Fan atys rês 27-238;.
Glad I’d lay me down,
As in my mother's lap ; there I ſhould reſt
And ſleep ſecure. Milton.
3. To be at quiet; to be at peace ; to be without diſturbance.
Thither let us tend
From off the toſſing of theſe fiery waves,
There reſt, if any reſt can harbour there. Miltºn.
4. To be without motion; to be ſtill.
Over the tent a cloud ſhall reſt by day. Miltºn.
. To be fixed in any ſtate or opinion.
He will not reſt content, though thou giveſt many gifts.
Prov. vi. 35.
Every creature has a ſhare in the common bleſſings of pro-
vidence; and every creature ſhould reſt well ſatisfied with its
proportion in them. L'Eſtrange.
After ſuch a lord I reſt ſecure,
Thou wilt no foreign reins or Trojan load endure. Dryden.
There yet ſurvives the lawful heir
Of Sanchó's blood, whom, when I ſhall produce,
I ret aſſur'd to ſee you pale with fear. Dryden.
6. To ceaſe from labour.
Six days thou ſhalt do thy work, and on the ſeventh day
thou ſhalt reſt. Exodus xxiii. 12.
The ark went before, to ſearch out a reſting place for
them. Numb. x. 33.
From work reſting he bleſs'd the ſeventh day. . Milt";
When you enter into the regions of death, you reſt from all
your labours and your fears. Taylor's Rule of Living Hºly.
7. To be ſatisfied; to acquieſce.
To urge the foe to battle,
Prompted by blind revenge and wild deſpair,
Were to refuſe th’ awards of providence, - *-
And not to reſt in heaven's determination. Addison.
8. To lean; to be ſupported.
As the vex'd world, to find repoſe, at laſt
Itſelf into Auguſtus' arms did caſt;
So England now doth, with like toil oppreſt,
Her weary head upon your boſom rºſt. J/aller.
On him I reſted,
And, not without confid'ring, fix'd my fate. Dryden.
Sometimes it reſis upon teſtimony, when teſtimº of right
has nothing to do; becauſe it is eaſier to believe, than to be
ſcientifically inſtructed. - Locke.
The philoſophical uſe of words conveys the preciſe notions
of things, which the mind may reſt upon, and be ſatisfied
with, in its ſearch after knowledge. - Locke.
9. [Reſto, Lat., refler, Fr.] To be left; to remain.
Fall’n he is ; and now
What reſts, but that the mortal ſenterº paſs
On his tranſgreſſion. Milton's Par. Loſt, b. x.
There reſteth the comparative; that is, its being granted,
that it is either lawful or binding, yet whet” other things be
not prefered before it, as extirpation of hereſies. Bacon.
To REST. v. a.
1. To lay to reſt.
Your piety has paid
All needful rites, to reſt my wand'ring ſha”
2. To place as on a ſupport.
Rest A GN ANT. adj. [reſtagnanº, Lat.] Re
flow or motion. -
Upon the tops of high mountains: the air, which º:
againſt the reſtagnant quickſilver, is leſs preſſed by the º
ponderous incumbent air. Boyle.
Dryden.
maining without
To RE-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R. E. S
R E S
*-i-º-
º
1.
º
To RESTAGNATE. v. n. [re and ſtagnate.] To ſtand
without flow.
The blood returns thick, and is apt to reſtagnate. Iſºſºman.
RESTAGNA^T Ion. n.ſ.. [from reſagnate.] The ſtate of ſtand-
ing without flow, courſe, or motion.
Rest AU R A rion. m. ſ. [rºſauro, Lat..] The aët of recover-
ing to the former ſtate.
Adam is in us an original cauſe of our nature, and of that
corruption of nature which cauſeth death; Chriſt as the
cauſe original of reſtauration to life. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 50.
O my dear father reſtauration hang
Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiſs
Repair thoſe violent harms, that my two ſiſters
Have in thy reverence made. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Spermatical parts will not admit a regeneration, much leſs
will they receive an integral reſtauration. Brown.
To RESTEM. v. a. [re and/fem.] To force back againſt the
current.
How they reſem
Their backward courſe, bearing with frank appearance
Toward Cyprus. Shakeſp. Othel'o.
Re(stful. adj. [reſt and ful..] .. Quiet; being at reſt.
Is not my arm of length,
That reacheth from the reſtful Engliſh court,
As far as Calais to my uncle's head. Shakeſp. Rich, III.
Rest HA'RRow. m. ſ. A plant.
Reſharrow hath a papilionaceous flower, which is ſucceed-
ed by a ſwelling pod, and which is ſometimes long, and at
other times ſhort ; is bivalve, and filled with kidney-ſhaped
ſeeds. AZiller.
RESTIFF. adj. [reſtif, Fr. reſtivo, Ital.]
1. Unwilling to ſtir; reſolute againſt going forward; obſtinate;
ſtubborn. It is originally uſed of an horſe, that, though not
wearied, will not be driven forward.
All, who before him did afeend the throne,
Labour'd to draw three reſtive nations on. Roſcommon.
This reſtiff ſtubborneſs is never to be excuſed under any
pretence whatſoever. L’Eſtrange.
Some, with ſtudious care,
Their reſtiff ſteeds in ſandy plains prepare. Dryden.
The archangel, when diſcord was reſtive, and would not
be drawn from her beloved monaſtery with fair words, drags
her cut with many ſtripes. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
So James the drowſy genius wakes
Of Britain, long entranc'd in charms,
Reſtiff, and ſlumb'ring on its arms. Dryden.
The pamper'd colt will diſcipline diſdain,
Impatient of the laſh, and reſtiff to the rein. Dryden.
2. Being at reſt; being leſs in motion. Not uſed.
Paſſies ofteneſt happen upon the left ſide; the moſt vigo-
rous part protećting itſelf, and protruding the matter upon the
weaker and reſtive ſide. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Resti'FNess. n.ſ.. [from reſtiff.] Obſtinate reluctance.
Overt virtues bring forth praiſe; but ſecret virtues bring
forth fortune: certain deliveries of a man's ſelf, which the
Spaniſh name deſemboltura, partly expreſſeth, where there be
not ſtands nor reſtiveneſs in a man's nature; but the wheels
of his mind keep way with the wheels of his fortune. Bacon.
That it gave occaſion to ſome men's further reſtiveneſs, is
imputable to their own depraved tempers. King Charles.
Rºos. n. ſ. [reſtinčius, Lat..] The act of extin-
gullning.
Rºritºrion. n. ſ. [reſtitutio, Lat.]
1. The aët of reſtoring what is loſt or taken away.
To ſubdue an uſurper, ſhould be no unjuſt enterpriſe or
wrongful war, but a reſtitution of ancient rights unto the
crown of England, from whence they were moſt unjuſtly ex-
pelled and long kept out. Spenſer on Ireland.
He would pawn his fortunes
To hopeleſs reſtitution, ſo he might
Be call'd your vanquiſher. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Now is Č. a child of conſcience, he makes reſtitution.
Shakeſp. Merry Wives ºf //indſor.
He reſtitution to the value makes;
Nor joy in his extorted treaſure takes. Sandys.
Whoſoever is an effective real cauſe of doing a neighbour
wrong, by what inſtrument ſoever he does it, is bound to
make reſtitution. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
In caſe our offence againſt God hath been complicated
with injury to men, it is but reaſonable we ſhould make re-
ſtitution. Tillotſon's Sermons.
A great man, who has never been known willingly to pay
a juſt debt, ought not all of a ſudden to be introduced, mak-
ing reſtitution of thouſands he has cheated: let it ſuffice to
pay twenty pounds to a friend, who has loſt his note. Arbuth.
2. The act of recovering its former ſtate or poſture.
In the woody parts of plants, which are their bones, the
principles are ſo compounded, as to make them flexible with-
out joints, and alſo elaſtick; that ſo their roots may yield to
ſtones, and their trunks to the wind, with a power of reſti-
tution. Grew's Coſmol.
RE's T Less. adj. [from reſt.] -
-1. Being without ſleep.
Reftleſ, he paſs'd the remnants of the night,
Till the freſh air proclaim'd the morning high .
And burning ſhips, the martyrs of the fight,
with paler fires beheld the eaſtern ſky.
2. Unquiet; without peace.
* to the body ſome, none to the mind
jº reſtleſs thoughts, that like a deadly ſwarm
f hornets arm’d, no ſooner found alone,
But ruſh upon me thronging, and preſent . .
"...º.º.º innow. Mººn.
But to be re º ° from that lethargick dream,
We find oir º: tº: Denham.
quieted by paſſions º º º tº: toſſed and diſ-
of this world d' - :eking ºppºs in the enjoyments
ºil, and ever miſſing what they ſeek. Afterlay.
What tongue can ſpeak the ºftieſ; monarch's woes,
When God and Nathan were declard his foes."
3. Unconſtant; unſettled. -
He was ſtout of courage, ſtrong of hand,
Bold was his heart, and reſtle ; was his ſpright. Fai,fax.
He's proud, fantaſtick, apt to change,
Rºſt'ſ at home, and ever prone to range.
4. Not ſtill ; in continual motion.
- How could nature on their orbs impoſe
Such rºſłkſ; revolution, day by day
r Repeated. - Milton.
RE's tº sly, adv. [from reſtleſ...] Without reſt; unquietly.
When the mind caſts and turns itſelf reſtleſ, from one thing
to another, ſtrains this power of the ſoul to apprehend, that to
judge, another to divide, a fourth to remember: thus tracing
out the nice and ſcarce obſervable difference of ſome things,
and the real agreement of others; at length it brings all the
ends of a long hypotheſis together. South.
RestlessNº'ss. n.J. [from rºſiles.]
1. Want of ſleep.
Reſtleſneſs and intermiſſion from ſleep, grieved perſons are
moleſted with, whereby the blood is dried. Harvey.
2. Want of reſt; unquietneſs. -
, Let him keep the reſt,
But keep them with repining reſtleſn'ſ
Let him be rich and weary, that at leaſt,
If goodneſs lead him not, yet wearineſs
May toſs him to my breaſt.
3. Motion ; agitation.
The trembling reſtleſheſ of the needle, in any but the north
point of the compaſs, manifeſts its inclination to the pole;
which its wavering and its reſt bear equal witneſs to. Boyle.
Resto'Rable. adj. [from reſtore.] What may be reſtored.
By cutting turf without any regularity, great quantities of
reſtorable land are made utterly deſperate. Swift.
REstor ATIon. n.ſ.. [from reſtore; reſtauration, Fr.] The
aćt of replacing in a former ſtate. This is properly reſtauration.
Hail, royal Albion, hail to thee,
Thy longing people's expectation
Sent from the gods to ſet us free
From bondage and from uſurpation:
Behold the different climes agree,
Rejoicing in thy reſtoration. Dryden's Albion.
The Athenians, now deprived of the only perſon that was
able to recover their loſſes, repent of their raſhneſs, and en-
deavour in vain for his reſtoration. Swift.
2. Recovery.
The change is great in this reſtoration of the man, from a
ſtate of ſpiritual darkneſs, to a capacity of perceiving divine
truth. Rogers.
Resto'Rative. adj. [from reſtore.] That which has the
power to recruit life.
Their taſte no knowledge works at leaſt of evil;
But life preſerves, deſtroys life's enemy,
Hunger, with ſweet reſtorative delight. AMilton.
REsto'RATIVE. n.ſ.. [from reſtore.] A medicine that has the
power of recruiting life.
I will kiſs thy lips;
Haply ſome poiſon yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a reſtorative. Shakeſp. Rom, and juſ.
God ſaw it neceſſary by ſuch mortifications to quench the
boundleſs rage of an inſatiable intemperance, to make the
weakneſs of the fleſh, the phyſick and º, of the
ſpirit. 7ty tº J. Yeº. 7777??J.
P Aſſes milk is an excellent reſtorative in conſumptiors. AM/rt.
He preſcribes an Engliſh galion of aſſes milk, “..., .
a reſtorative. … 7 ºzºnºfa
To £ºe. v. a. [reſtaurer, Fr. reſtauro, Lat.]
1. To give back what has been loſt or taken away.
Reſtore the man his wife. . . Gen. xx. 7.
He ſhall reſtore in the principal, and add the * º
In OſC. fº/. W1. S.
She lands him on his native ſhores,
And to his father's longing arms "ſtºre. Dryden,
. To bring back.
2. l O #. baniſh'd virtue ſhall reſtore,
And crimes ſhall threat the guilty world no n ore. *:
US
Dr, a.m.
Prior.
Dryden.
Herbert.
*<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R E S
|
ils can, by one ſlight touch, reſºre
sº that wept before. d P.
3. To retrieve; to º back from degeneration, declenſion,
- • - " -- 1: atc.
oſ #ºment are but ſo many eſſays, whereby
attempt to reſtore themſelves from the firſt general curſe
j upon their labours. Iłilkin's Mathem. Magick.
in i. his odyſſes, Homer explains, that the hardeſt difficulties
may be overcome by labour, and our fortune rº/lored after the
ſevereſt afflićtions. - Prior.
4. To recover paſſages in books from corruption.
Resto'RER. n.ſ.. [from reſtore.] One that reſtores.
Next to º h
ſtin'd reſtorer of mankind, by whom -
§. ğ. and earth ſhall to the ages riſe. Milton.
I foretelyou, as the reſtorer of poetry. Dryden.
Here are ten thouſand perſons reduced to the neceſſity of a
low diet and moderate exerciſe, who are the only great re-
ſtorers of our breed, without which, the nation would in an
age become one great hoſpital. - Swift.
To § v. a. [reſtreindre, Fr. rºſtringo, Lat.]
1. To withold; to keep in.
If ſhe reſtrain'd the riots of your followers,
'Tis to ſuch wholſome end as clears her. Shakeſp.
The gods will plague thee, -
That thou reſtrainſt from me the duty, which -
To a mother's part belongs. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. To repreſs; to keep in awe. - - -
The law of nature would be in vain, if there were no
body that, in the ſtate of nature, had a power to execute
that law, and thereby preſerve the innocent and reſtrain
offenders. Locke.
That all men may be reſtrained from doing hurt to one an-
other, the execution of the law of nature is in that ſtate put
into every man's hand, whereby every one has a right to pu-
niſh the tranſgreſſors to ſuch a degree as may hinder its
violation. Locke.
3. To ſuppreſs; to hinder; to repreſs.
A heavy ſummons lies like lead upon me,
Merciful pow'rs
Rºſtrain in me the curſed thoughts, that nature
Gives way to in repoſe. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Compaſſion gave him up to tears
A ſpace, till firmer thoughts rºſtrain’d exceſs. Milton.
4. To abridge.
Me of my lawful pleaſure ſhe reſtrain'd,
And pray'd me oft forbearance. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Though they two were committed, at leaſt reſtrained of
their liberty, yet this diſcovered too much of the humour of
the court. Clarendon, b. ii.
5. To hold in.
His horſe, with a half checked bit, and a headſtall of
ſheep's leather, which being rºſtrainſ to keep him from
ſtumbling, hath been often burſt, and now repaired with
knots. Shakeſpeare.
6. To limit; to confine.
We reſtrain it to thoſe only duties, which all men, by
force of natural wit, underſtand to be ſuch duties as concern
all men. Hoºker, b. i. ſ. 8.
Upon what ground can a man promiſe himſelf a future re-
Pentance, who cannot promiſe himſelf a futurity ? whoſe life
depends upon his breath, and is ſo rºſtrained to the preſent,
that it cannot ſecure to itſelf the reverſion of the very next
In Inute. * South's Sermons.
Not only a metaphyſical or natural, but a moral univerſal
lity alſo is to be reſtrained by a part of the predicate; as all
the Italians are politicians; that is, thoſe among the Italians,
who are politicians, are ſubtle politicians; i. e. they are ge-
nerally ſo. Hatti's Logº.
RESTRAI’NABLE. adj. [from rºſtrain..] Capable to be re.
ſtrained. -
Therein we muſt not "eny a liberty; nor is the band of
the Painter more reſtrainable, than the Pen of the poet. Bro.
Rest RAI'NEDLY. dav. [from rºſtrained.] With reſtrait.
without latitude. 2
That Chriſt's dying for all is the expreſs doćtrine of the
ſcripture, is manifeſted by the world, which is a word of the
wideſt extent, and although it be ſometimes uſ. In Ore re-
Jirainedly, yet never doth ſignify a far ſmaller diſproportionable
part of the world. . . Hammond's Fundamental.
º: m. ſ. [from rºſtrain..] One that reſtrains; one
If nothing San relieve us, we muſt with patience ſubmit
unto that reſtraint, and expect the will of the reſtrainer.
w Brown's Pulgär Er
RFst RA1 NT. m. ſ. “a” . •: tºgar Errours.
* Abridgement f ſºft ain ; rºſłreint, Fr.]
She will well excuſe,
by at this time tº *ors are barr'd againſ you .
CPart in pati c you ;
Patience,
And about evening
Some yourſelf alone
o know the reafor y 3.
I
n of this ſtrange reſtraint.
Shakeſp.
I requeſt
Th' enfianchiſement of Arthur, whoſe rºſtraint
Doth move the murm'ring lips of diſcontent. Shakespeare
It is to no purpoſe to lay rºſtraints or give privileges to men,
in ſuch general terms, as the Particular perſons concerned
cannot be known by. Lºcłe.
I think it a manifeſt diſadvantage, and a great reſtraizi
upon us. Felton ºn the Cº.
2. Prohibition.
What mov’d our parents to tranſgreſs his will
For one reſtraint, lords of the world beºdes;
3. Limitation; reſtriction.
If all were granted, yet it muſt be maintained within any
bold reſtraints, far otherwiſe than it is received. Browi.
4. Repreſſion; hindrance of will ; ačt of withholding.
There is no reſtraint to the Lord to ſave, by many or by
few. I Sam. xiv. 6.
Thus it ſhall befal
Him who, to worth in women overtruſting,
Lets her will rule; reſtraint ſhe will not brook. AMilton.
Is there any thing, which reflects a greater luſtre upon a
man's perſon, than a ſevere temperance and a rºſtraint of
himſelf from vicious pleaſures 2 South.
To RESTRI'CT. v. a. [reſtricius, Lat.] To limit; to con-
fine. A word ſcarce Engliſh.
In the enumeration of conſtitutions in this chapter, there
is not one that can be limited and reſtričied by ſuch a diſtinc-
tion, nor can perhaps the ſame perſon, in different circum-
ſtances, be properly confined to one or the other. Arbuthnºt.
RESTRI crios. n.ſ. [reſtriction, Fr.] Confinement ; limita-
tion.
This is to have the ſame reſtriction with all other recrea-
tions, that it be made a divertiſement hot a trade. Go. of ſon.
Iron manufacture, of all others, ought the leaſt to be en-
couraged in Ireland; or, if it be, it requires the moſt reſtrictiºn
to certain places. Temple's Miſcellanies.
All duties are matter of conſcience; with this reſtriction,
that a ſuperior obligation ſuſpends the force of an inferior.
L'Eſtrange.
Each other gift, which God on man beſtows,
His proper bounds and due reſtriction knows,
A ſlion,
To one fix’d purpoſe dedicates its power. Prior.
Celſus's rule, with the proper reſtrictions, is good for people
in health. Arbuthnot.
Restrictive. adj. [from reſtrič.]
1. Expreſſing limitation.
They, who would make the reſtriºve particle belong to
the latter clauſe, and not to the 1ſt, do not attend to the
reaſon. Stillingfleet's Def of Diſ, on Roman Idol.
2. [Reſiriđiſ, Fr.] Styptick; aſtringent.
I applied a plaiſter over it, made up with my common re-
/trićlive powder. JWiſeman's Surgery.
Rest Ri'ctively. adv. [from reſtričfive..] With limitation.
All ſpeech, tending to the glory of God or the good of
man, is aright directed; which is not to be underſtood ſo re-
firićtively, as if nothing but divinity, or the neceſſary con-
cerns of human life, may lawfully be brought into diſcourſe.
Government of the Tongue.
To Restri'NGE. v. a. [reftringo, Lat.] To limit; to con-
fine.
Rest Ri'NGENT. n. ſ. [reſtringens, Lat. rºſtringent, Fr.] That
which hath the power of reſtraining. -
The two latter indicate phlebotomy for revulſion, reſtrin-
gents to ſtench, and incraſſàtives to thicken the blood. Harv.
REsty, adj. [reſtiff, Fr.] Obſtinate in ſtanding ſtill. See
RESTIFF.
Come, our ſtomachs
Will make what's homely ſavoury, wearineſs
Can ſhore upon the flint, when reſty ſloth -
Finds the down pillow hard. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
Men of diſcretion, whom people in power may with little
ceremony load as heavy as they pleaſe, find them neither rºſty
nor vicious. - Swift.
To Resubli’ME. v. a. [re and ſublime.] To ſublime another
time.
When mercury ſublimate is reſublimed with freſh mercury,
it becomes mercurius dulcis, which is a white taſteleſs earth
ſcarce diſſolvable in water, and mercuritis. dulcis reſuhimed
with ſpirit of ſalt returns into mercury ſublimate. Newton.
To Result. v. n. [reſulter, Fr. reſulto, Lat.]
I. To fly back.
With many a weary ſtep, and many a groan,
Up the high hill he heaves a huge round ſtone;
The huge round ſtone, reſulting with a bound, -
Thunders impetuous down, and ſmoaks along the ground.
Pope's Odyſſey.
2. [Reſulter, Fr.] To riſe as a conſequence; to be produced
as the effect of cauſes jointly concurring. - - -
Rue proſpers much, if ſet by a fig tree; which is cauſed.
not by reaſon of friendſhip, but by extraction of a contrary
juice; the one drawing juice fit to reſult ſweet, the other
bitter. Bacon's Natural *::::
- Suc
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E S
R. E. T
º
|
contrary.
Such huge extremes, when nature doth unite, -
Wonder from thence reſults, from thence delight. Denh.
Upon the diſſolution of the firſt earth, this very face of
things would immediately reſult. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
Pleaſure and peace do naturally reſult from a holy and good
life. Tillotſºn's Sermons.
The horror of an obječt may overbear the pleaſure reſulting
from its greatneſs. Addiſon.
Their effects are often very diſproportionable to the prin-
ciples and parts that reſult from the analyſis. Baker.
. To ariſe as a concluſion from premiſes.
Resu'LT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Reſilience; act of flying back.
Sound is produced between the ſtring and the air, by the
return or the reſult of the ſtring, which was ſtrained by the
touch to his former place. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Conſequence; effect produced by the concurrence of co-
operating cauſes.
Did my judgment tell me, that the propoſitions ſent to me
were the reſults of the major part of their votes, I ſhould then
not ſuſpect my own judgement for not ſpeedily concurring
with them. King Charles.
As in perfumes, compos'd with art and coſt,
'Tis hard to ſay what ſcent is uppermoſt,
Nor this part muſk or civet can we call,
Or amber, but a rich reſult of all :
So ſhe was all a ſweet, whoſe ev'ry part, -
In due proportion mix'd, proclaim'd the maker's art. Dry.
Buying of land is the reſult of a full and ſatiated gain:
men in trade ſeldom lay out money upon land, till their profit
has brought in more than trade can employ. Locke.
. Inference from premiſes.
Theſe things are a reſult or judgment upon fact. South.
4. Reſolve ; deciſion. Improper.
Rude, paſſionate, and miſtaken reſults have, at certain
times, fallen from great aſſemblies. Swift.
RESULTANce. n.ſ. [reſultance, Fr.] The aët of reſulting.
Resu'MABLE. adj. [from reſume ] What may be taken back.
This was but an indulgence, and therefore reſumable by
the vićtor, unleſs there intervened any capitulation to the
Hale.
To RESU’ME. v. a. [reſumo, Lat.]
1: To take back what has been given.
: The ſun, like this, from which our ſight we have, -
Gaz'd on too long, reſumes the light he gave. Denham.
Sees not my love, how time reſumes
The glory which he lent theſe flow’rs;
| Though none ſhou'd taſte of their perfumes,
Yet muſt they live but ſome few hours:
Time, what we forbear, devours.
2. To take back what has been taken away.
- That opportunity,
Which then they had to take from's, to reſume
We have again. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
3. To take again.
JWaller.
He'll enter into glory, and reſºme his ſeat. Milton.
At this, with look ſerene, he rais'd his head;
Reaſon reſum’d her place, and paſſion fled. Dryden.
4. Pryden uſes it with again, but improperly, unleſs the reſump-
tion be repeated.
To him our common grandfire of the main
Had giv'n to change his form, and chang'd, reſume again.
Dryden.
5. To begin again what was broken off : as, to reſume a
diſcourſe.
Resu'MPTION. m. ſ. [rºſºmption, Fr. reſumptus, Lat..] The
act of reſuming.
And if there be any fault in the laſt, it is the reſumption or
the dwelling too long upon his arguments Denham.
RE su'MPTIVE. adj. [reſumptus, Lat.] Taking back.
Resup INA^rion. n.ſ. [rſupino, Lat.] The aët of lying on
the back.
To Resu/Rv EY. v. a. [re and ſurvey..] To review ; to fur-
vey again. -
I have, with curſory eye, o'erglanc'd the articles;
Appoint ſome of your council preſently
To ſit with us, once more with better heed
To reſurvey them. Shakespeare. Henry V.
Resu R RE/cºlos. m. ſ. [reſurreóiºn, Fr. reſurrecturn, Lat:J
Revival from the dead; return from the grave.
The Sadduces were grieved, that they taught, and preached
through Jeſus the reſurrection from the dead. Acf. iv. 2.
Nor after reſurrection ſhall he ſtay
Longer on earth, than certain times tº appear
To his diſciples. A filton.
He triumphs in his agonies, whilſt the ſoul ſprings forward to
the great object which ſhe has always had in view, and leaves
the body with an expectation of being remitted to her in a
glorious and joyful reſurre&amp;ion. Addison's Speciaior.
Perhaps there was nothing ever done in all paſt ages, and
which was not a publick fact, ſo well atteſted as the ſur-
recion of Chriſt. //atts.
To RESU'SCITATF. v. a. [rºftſ ite, Latin.] To ſtir up
anew 3 to revive.
*—
we hºe beaſts and birds for diſſºtions, though divers
parts, which Yºu account vital, be periſhed and taken forth,
ºfºitating of ſome that ſeem dead in appearance. Bacon.
RFsuscitatios. m. ſ. [from reſuſcitate.] The act of ſtirring
*P** : the at of reviving, of ſtate ºf being revived.
Your yety obliging manner of enquiring after me, at your
rºtatiºn, ſhould have been ſoon: anſwered ; I ſincerely
rejºice at your recovery. Pope
To RE TAl(L. v. a. [retailler, Fr.] -
1. To divide into ſmall parcels.
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come.
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed. 2
To whom I will retail my conqūeſt won, &gt;
And ſhe ſhall be ſole vićtreſs, Caeſar's Caeſar. Shakespeare
2. To ſell in ſmall quantities. ... •
All encouragement ſhould be given to artificers ; and thoſe,
who make, ſhould alſo vend and retail their commodiº.
3. To ſell at ſecond hand.
The ſage dame,
By names of toaſts, retail; each batter'd jade. Pope.
4. To tell in broken parts.
He is furniſh'd with no certainties,
More than he haply may retail from me. Shakeſp.
RETAIL. m. ſ. [from the verb.] Sale by ſmall quantities.
The author, to prevent ſuch a monopoly of ſenſe, is re-
ſolved to deal in it himſelf by retail. Addiſon.
We force a wretched trade by beating down the ſale, .
And ſelling baſely by retail. Swift's Miſcellanies.
Retai LER. n: / [from retail.] One who ſells by ſmall
quantities.
From theſe particulars we may gueſs at the reſt, as retailers
do of the whole piece, by taking a view of its ends. Hašew.
To RETAIN. v. a... [retineo, Lat. retanir, Fr.] -
I. To keep ; not to loſe.
Where is the patience now,
That you ſo oft have boaſted to retain. Shakespeare. K. Lear.
Though th' offending part felt mortal pain,
Th’ immortal part its knowledge did retain. Denham.
The vigor of this arm was never vain;
And that my wonted proweſs I retain,
Witneſs theſe heaps of ſlaughter. Dryden.
A tomb and fun'ral honours I decreed ;
The place your armour and your name retains. Dryden.
Whatever ideas the mind can receive and contemplate
without the help of the body, it is reaſonable to conclude, it
can retain without the help of the body too. Locke.
2. To keep ; not to lay aſide. -
Let me retain
The name and all the addition to a king;
The ſway, beloved ſons, be yours. Shakeſp. King Lear.
As they did not like to retain God in their knowledge,
God gave them over to a reprobate mind. Rom. i. 22.
Although they retain the word mandrake in the text, yet
they retract it in the margin. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Be obedient and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire. Milton.
They, who have reſtored painting in Germany, not having
ſeen any of thoſe fair reliques of antiquity, have retained much
of that barbarous method. Dryden.
3. To keep ; not to diſmiſs.
Receive him that is mine own bowels; whom I would
have retained with me. Philem. xii. 13.
Hollow rocks retain the ſound of bluſt'ring winds. Milt.
4. To keep in pay; to hire.
A Benedićtine convent has now retained the moſt learned fa-
ther of their order to write in its defence. Addiſon.
To RETA I'N. v. m.
1. To belong to ; to depend on: -
Theſe betray upon the tongue no heat nor corroſiveneſs,
but coldneſs mixed with a ſomewhat languid reliſh retaining
to bitterneſs. Bºyle.
In animals many ačtions depend upon their living form, as
well as that of mixtion, and though they wholly ſeem to re-
tain to the body, depart upon diſunion. Brown.
2. To keep ; to continue. Not in uſe.
No more can impure man retain and move
In the pure region of that worthy love,
Than earthly ſubſtance can unforc'd aſpire,
And leave his nature to converſe with fire.
RETAI's ER. m. ſ. [from retain.]
I. An adherent ; a dependant: a º
You now are mounted,
Where pow'rs are your retainers. . Shałºff. Henry VIII.
One dailing inclination of mankind affects tº be a rºtatºr
to religion; the ſpirit of oppoſition. that lived long before
chriſtianity, and can eaſily ſubſiſt without it. Swift.
2. In common law, retainer ſignifieth a ſervant not menial nor
familiar, that is not dwelling in his houſe; but only uſing or
bearing his name or livery. - - - Cºwd.
3. The act of keeping dependants, or being in dependance.
By another law, the king's officers and farmers were to for-
feit their places and holds, in cate of unlawful retainer, or
partaking in unlawful aſſemblies. Bacon's Henry VII.
21 T - A com-
Donne.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E T
, R. E. T
A combination of honeſt men would endeavour to extir-
pate aſ the profigate immoral retainers to each ſide, that have
d them but an implicit ſubmiſſion to
nothing to recominch -
their iºdes. Addison's Speciator.
T. RerAZke. v. a. [re and take.] To take again.
A day ſhould be appointed, when the remonſtrance ſhould
be retaken into conſideration. Clar endon.
To RETA(LIATE. v. a. [re and talia, Lat..] To return by
giving like for like; to repay; to requite. - - - -
It is very unlucky, to be obliged to retaliate the injuries of
authors, whoſe works are ſo ſoon forgotten, that we are in
danger of appearing the firſt aggreſſors. Swift.
If a firſt miniſter of ſtate had uſed me as you have done,
retaliating would be thought a mark of courage. Swift.
RETALIA"rios. n.ſ.. [from retaliate.] Requital; return of
like for like.
They thought it no irreligion to proſecute the ſevereſt re-
taliation or revenge; ſo that at the ſame time their outward
man might be a faint, and their inward man a devil. Sºuth.
God, graciouſly becoming our debtor, takes what is done.
to others as done to himſelf, and by promiſe obliges himſelf
to full retaliation. Calamy's Sermons.
To RETARD. v. a. [retardº, Lat, retardºr, Fr.]
1. To hinder ; to obſtruct in ſwiftneſs of courſe.
How Iphitus with me, and Pelias
Slowly retire ; the one retarded was
By feeble age, the other by a wound. Denham,
2. To delay; to put off.
Nor kings nor nations
One moment can retard th’ appointed hour. Dryden.
It is as natural to delay a letter at ſuch a ſeaſon, as to re-
tard a melancholy viſit to a perſon one cannot relieve. Pope.
To RETARD. v. m. To ſtay back.
Some years it hath alſo retarded, and come far later, than
uſually it was expected. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
RETAR DATION. m. ſ. [retardation, Fr. from retard.] Hin-
drance; the act of delaying.
Out of this a man may deviſe the means of altering the
colour of birds, and the retardation of hoary hairs. Bacon.
RETARDER. m. ſ. [from retard.] Hinderer; obſtrućter.
This diſputing way of enquiry, is ſo far from advancing
ſcience, that it is no inconſiderable retarder. Glanvill.
To RETCH. v. n. [hyacan, Saxon.] To force up ſomething
from the ſtomach.
RETCHLESS. adj. [ſometimes written wretchlºſs, properly reck-
lºſs. See Reckless.] Careleſs.
He ſtruggles into breath, and crics for aid;
Then helpleſs in his mother's lap is laid:
He creeps, he walks, and iſſuing into man,
Grudges their life, from whence his own began;
Retchleſs of laws, affects to rule alone. Dryden.
RETE.cr.16s. m. ſ. [retectus, Lat.] The aâ of diſcovering
to the view.
This is rather a reſtoration of a body to its own colour,
or a retection of its native colour, than a change. Bºyle.
RETENTION. m. ſ. [retention, Fr. retentio, from retentus, Lat.]
1. The aët of retaining.
No woman's heart
So big to hold ſo much; they lack retention. Shałęſp.
A froward retention of cuſtom is as turbulent a thing, as
an innovation; and they, that reverence too much ok. things,
are but a ſcorn to the new. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Retention and retentive faculty is that ſtate of contračtion in
the ſolid parts, which makes them hold faſt their proper
Contents. -
3. Mcmory.
- The backward learner makes amends another way, ex-
Piating his want of docility with a deeper and a more rôoºd
retention. . . South's Sermons,
Retention is the keeping of thoſe ſimple ideas, which from
ſenſation or reflection the mind hath received. Locke.
&amp;inºy.
4. Limitation.
His life I gave him, and did thereto add
}} º without reſention or reſtraint;
1S. hakeſp. T;
5. Cuſtody; confinement; reſtraint. Shakeſp. Twelfth Night.
I ſent the old and miſerable king
To ſome retention and appointed guard. Shakeſp. K. Lear,
RRTE's rive. ad. [retentis, Lat. retentiſ, Fr.]
1. Having the power of retention.
It keepeth ſermons in memory, and doth in that reſpect
*hºugh not ſeed the ſoul of man, yet help the retentive forº
of that ſtomach of the mind. Hooker.
Have I been ever free, and muſt my houſe
Be my *nºe enemy, my goal Shakespeare .
W From retentivº Cage
When ſullen Philomei eſcapes, her notes
She varies, and of Pait impriſonment
Swietly cºmplains. Philips.
p'". ! ſº." flºº the brethren with amaze
Long c. º, and forget to graze;
Allie * y-lane retentive rolls the ſound,
** Sºurts return it round and foºd. Pote.
2. Having memory. -
To remember a ſong or tune, our ſouls muſt be an har.
mony continually running over in a filent whiſper thoſe mu-
fical accents, which our retentive faculty is preſerver of Glan.
RETE's rives ess. n.ſ. (froß retentive..] Having the quality of
retention.
R! ºr ic Exce. m. ſ. [rcticence, Fr. reticentia, from reticco, Lat.]
Concealment by ſilence. Dić.
RE"ricle. n.ſ. (reticulum, Lat..] A ſmall net. D:47.
RET1'cu LAſ. adj. [from reticulum, Lat...] Having thc form of
a ſmall net.
RET "cular ED. adj. [reticulatus, Lat.] Made of nctwork;
formed with interſtitial vacuities.
The intervals of the cavities, riſing a little, make a pretty
kind of reticulated work. //oodward on Foſſils.
RE/TIFoRM. a j. [retiformis, Lat.] Having the form of a net.
The uveous coat and inſide of the choroides are blackened,
that the rays may not be refle&amp;ted backwards to confound the
fight ; and if any be by the retiform coat reflected, they are
ſoon choaked in the black inſide of the uvea. Ray.
RET1'Nu E. m. ſ. [retenue, Fr.] A number attending upon .
principal perſon ; a train ; a meiny.
Not only this your all licens'd fool,
But other of your inſolent retinue,
Do hourly carp and quarrel. Shakeſp. King Lear.
What followers, what retinue can'ſt thou gain,
Or at thy heels the dizzy multitude,
Longer than thou can't feed them on thy coſt Miltºn.
There appears
The long retinue of a proſperous reign,
A ſeries of ſucceſsful years. Dryden.
Neither pomp nor retinue ſhall be able to divert the great,
nor ſhall the rich be relieved by the multitude of his trea-
ſurers. Rºgers's Sermons.
To RETIRE. v. n. [retirer, Fr.]
1. To retreat; to withdraw , to go to a place of privacy.
The mind contračts herſelf, and ſhrinketh in,
And to herſelf ſhe gladly doth retire. Davies.
The leſs I may be bleſt with her company, the more I will
retire to God and my own heart. King Charles.
Thou open'ſt wiſdom's way,
And giv'ſ acceſs, though ſecret ſhe retire. Miltºn.
The parliament diſſolved, and gentlemen charged to retire
to their country habitations. Hayward.
2. To retreat from danger.
Set up the ſtandard towards Zion, retire, ſtay not. jr.
Set Uriah in the fore front of the hotteſt battle, and retire
yc from him, that he may die. 2 Sam. xi. 15.
From cach hand with ſpeed retir’d,
Where erſt was thickeſt th' angelick throng. Miltºn.
3. To go from a publick ſtation.
He, that had driven many out of their country, periſhed
in a ſtrange land, retiring to the Lacedemonians. 2 Mac. v.
4. To go off from company.
The old fellow ſkuttled out of the room, and retired. Ary.
To RETIRE. v. a. To withdraw ; to take away.
He brake up his court, and retired himſelf, his wife, and
children into a foreſt thereby. - Sidney.
They, full of rage, retired themſelves into this caſtle. Sidn.
He, our hope, might have retir’d his power,
And driven into deſpair an enemy's hate. Shakeſp.
Thenoe retire me to my Milan. Shakeſp. Tºmºyº.
There may be as great a variety in retiring and withdrawing
men's conceits in the world, as in obtruding them. Bacºn.
As when the ſun is preſent all the year,
And never doth retire his golden ray,
Nccds muſt the ſpring be everlaſting there,
And every ſeaſon like the month of May. Davies.
Theſe actions in her cloſet, all alone, -
Retir’d within herſelf, ſhe doth fulfill. - Davies.
After ſome ſlight ſkirmiſhes, he retired himſelf into the
caſtle of Farnham. Clarendon.
Hydra-like, the fire
Lifts up his hundred heads to aim his way:
And ſcarce the wealthy can one half retire,
Before he ruſhes in to ſhare the prey.
RET1'RE. m. ſ. [from the verb ]
I. *i. receſſion.
heard his praiſes in purſuit,
But ne'er, º'. ..". of retire. Shakespeare .
Thou haſt talk’d
Of fallies and retires, of trenches, tents. Shałęſp.
The battle and the retire of the Engliſh ſuccours were the
cauſes of the loſs of that dutchy. Bacºn's Henry VII.
2. Retirement; place of privacy. Not in uſe.
Eve, who unſeen
Yet all had heard, with audible lancht
Diſcover'd ſoon the place of her retire. -
RETI RED. part, adj. [from retire.] Secret : private. . .
Language moſt ſhºws a man; ſpeak that I may ſcº thce : it
ſprings out of the moſt retired and inmoſt parts of us. B. Jºhſ.
You find the mind in ſleep retired from the ſenſes, and out
of theſe motions made on the organs of ſenſe. .º.º.
- - Som:
Dryden.
Milton.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E. T.
. Some, accuſtomed to retired ſpeculations, run-natural phi-
loſophy into metaphyſical rioticºs and the abſtract generalities
of logick. Locke.
He was admitted into the moſt ſecret and retired thoughts
- and counſels of his royal maſter king William. Addiſon.
RETI REDNEss. n.ſ...[from retired...] Solitude , privacy; ſecrecy,
Like one, who in her third widowhood doth profeſs
Herſelf a nun, ty'd to retiredºſ,
So affects my muſe now a chaite fallowneſs. Domne. {
How could he have the leiſure and etiredneſs of the cloiſter,
to perform all thoſe acts of devotion in, when the burthen of
the reformation lay upon his ſhoulders ? Atterbury.
RETIRE MENT. m. ſ. [from retire.]
1. Private abode; ſecret habitation.
My retirement there tempted me to divert thoſe melancholy
thoughts. Denham's Dedication.
Caprea had been the retirement of Auguſtus for ſome time,
and the reſidence of Tiberius for many years. Addiſon.
2. Private way of life.
An elegant ſufficiency, content,
Retirement, rural quiet, friendſhip, books,
Progreſſive virtue, and approving heaven. Thomſºn.
3. Act of withdrawing. Z,
Short retirement urges ſweet return. Milton.
In this retirement of the mind from the ſenſes, it retains a
yet more incoherent manner of thinking, which we call
dreaming. Locke.
RETo'LD. part paſſ of retell. Related or told again.
Whatever Harry Percy then had ſaid
At ſuch a time, with all the reſt retold, .
May reaſonably die. Shakespeare .
Upon his dead corpſe there was ſuch miſuſe
By thoſe Welchwomen done, as may not be
Without much ſhame retold or ſpoken of. Sha'eſh.
To RETO RT. v. a. [retorius, Lat.]
1. To throw back.
His virtues, ſhining upon others,
Heat them, and they retort that heat again
To the firſt giver. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
He paſs'd through hoſtile ſcorn;
And with retorted ſcorn his back he turn'd. Milton.
2. To return any argument, cenſure, or incivility.
His proof will eaſily be retorted, and the contrary proved,
by interrogating; ſhall the adulterer inherit the kingdom of
God? if he ſhall, what riced I, that am now exhorted to re-
form my life, reform it if he ſhall not, then certainly I,
that am ſuch, am none of the elect ; for all, that are elect,
ſhall certainly inherit the kingdom of God. Hammond.
What if toy ſon - f
Prove diſobedient, and reprov’d, retort,
Wherefore did'ſt thou beget me ! Milton.
The reſpondent may ſhew, how the opponent's argument
may be retorted againſt himſelf. //arts.
3. To curve back.
It would be tried how the voice will be carried in an horn,
which is a line arched; or in a trumpet, which is a line re-
torted; or in ſome pipe that were ſinuous. Bacon.
RETo'RT. n.ſ. [retorte, Fr. retortum, Lat.]
1. A cenſure or incivility returned.
I ſaid his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it
was ; this is called the retort courteous. Shakeſp.
2. A chymical glaſs veſſel with a bent neck to which the re-
ceiver is fittcd.
Recent urine diſtilled yields a limpid water; and what re-
mains at the bottom of the retort, is not acid nor alkaline. Arb.
RF To'RTER. m. ſ. [from retort.j One that retorts.
RETo'RTIon m. ſ. [from retort. The act of retorting.
To Reto'ss. v. a. [re and toſ...] To toſs back.
Toſt and retº/f the ball inceſſant flies. Pºpe's Odſey.
To RF Tou’cH. v. a. [retoucher, Fr.] To improve by new
touches.
He furniſhed me with all the paſſages in Ariſtotle and Ho-
race, uſed to explain the art of poetry by painting ; which,
if ever I retouch this eſſay, ſhall be inſerted. Dryden.
Lintot, dull rogue will think your price too much :
“ Not, Sir, if you reviſe it and retouch.” Pope.
To RETRA ce. v. a. [retracer, Fr.] To trace back.
Then if the line of Turnus you retrace,
- He ſprings from Inachus of Argive race. Dryden.
To RETRA/CT. v. a. [reiračius, Lat. retracter, Fr. J
1. To recall ; to recant. -
Were I alone to paſs the difficulties,
Paris ſhould ne'er retra? what he hath done,
Nor ſaint in the purſuit. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
Although they retain the word mandrake in the text, they
in effect retra? it in the margine. Brown's Pºulg. Errours.
If his ſubtilities could have ſatisfied me, I would as freely
have retracted this charge of idolatry, as I ever made it. Still.
She will, and ſhe will not, ſhe grants, denies,
Conſents, ret, adºs, advances, and then flies. Granville.
2. To take back; to reſume.
- A great part of that time, which the inhabitants of the
former earth had to ſpare, and whereof they made ſo ill uſe,
was employed in making proviſions for bread; and the exceſs
.." ~
&amp;f ſertility, which contributed ſo much to their miſcarriages,
was retra-fed and cut off. Vºivard's Natural Hºhory:
RETRAcration. n.ſ. [retraciation, Fr. rºtraciati, Lat. J Re-
cantation ; change of opinion.
Theſe words are David's retradiatiºn, or laying down of a
bloody and revengeful reſolution. South's Semons.
BTR Act. 9s. n.ſ.. [from retrađ.]
1. Aºf withdrawing ſomething advanced.
They make bold with the deity, when they make him do
and undo, go forward and backwärds by ſuch countermarches
-
and retractions, as we do not repute to the Almighty. Wºodw.
2. Rºcantation; declaration of change of opinion.
There came into her head certain verſes, which if ſhe had
had preſent commodity, ſhe would have adjoined as a retrac-
tion to the other. Sidney, b. ii.
3. Aćt of withdrawing a claim.
9ther men's inſatiable deſire of revenge hath wholly be-
guiled both church and ſtate, of the benefit of all my either
retrºſions or conceſſions. King Charles.
RETRAI cr. n.ſ. Sprºſer. [retraite Fr.]
1. Retreat. Obſolete. -
The carl of Lincoln, deceived of the country's concourſe
unto him, and ſeeing the buſineſs paſt retaisi, reſolved to
make on where the king was, and give him battle. Bacon.
2. [ Retrait, Fr. ritratto, Italian.] A caſt of the countenance.
Obſolete.
Upon her eyelids many graces ſat,
Under the ſhadow of her even brows,
Working bellgards and amorous retraite,
And every one her with a grace endows.
RETREA^T. m. ſ. [retraitte, Fr.
1. Place of privacy; retirement.
He built his ſon a houſe of pleaſure, and ſpared no coſt to
make a delicious retreat. L’Éirange.
2. Place of ſecurity. -
This place our dungeon, not our ſafe retreat,
Fairy Queen.
Beyond his potent arm. Milton.
That pleaſing ſhade they ſought, a ſoft retreat
From ſudden April ſhowers, a ſhelter from the beat. Dry.
There is no ſuch way to give defence to abſurd doctrines,
as to guard them round with legions of obſcure and undefined
words ; which yet make theſe retreats more like the dens of
robbers, than the fortreſſes of fair warriors. Lºcke.
3. Act of retiring before a ſuperiour force.
Honourable retreats are no ways inferior to brave charges;
as having leſs of fortune, more of diſcipline, and as much of
valour. Bacon.
To RETREAT. v. m. [from the noun.]
1. To go to a private abode.
Others more mild
Retreated in a ſilent valley, ſing
Their own heroick deeds. Milton.
2. To take ſhelter; to go to a place of ſecurity.
3. To retire from a ſuperiour enemy.
4. To go out of the former place.
The rapid currents drive
Towards the retreating ſea their furious tide. Milton.
My ſubject does not oblige me to look after the water, or
point forth the place whereunto it is now retreated. Hºodw.
Having taken her by the hand, he retreated with his eye
fixed upon her. Arbuthnot and Pope.
RETREATED. part. adj. [from retreat..] Retired; gone to privacy.
To RETRE/NCH. v. a. [retrancher, Fr.]
1. To cut off; to pare away.
The pruner's hand muſt quench
Thy heat, and thy exub'rant parts retrench. Denham.
Nothing can be added to the wit of Ovid's Metamorphoſes;
but many things ought to have been retrenched., Dryden.
We ought to retrench thoſe ſuperfluous expences to qualify
ourſelves for the exerciſe of charity. Atterbury.
2. To confine, Improper. - -
In ſome reigns, they are for a power and obedience that is
unlimited ; and in others, are for retrenching within the nar-
roweſt bounds, the authority of the princes, and the alº-
giance of the ſubječt. Aldºn's Freehºlder, N° 6.
To RETRE/Ncii. v. n. To live with leſs magnificence or
expence.
Can I retrench Pyes mighty well
Shrink back to my paternal cell,
A little houſe, with trces a-row, -
And like its ſhafter, very low. Pº, Epift. ºf Hºrace:
RETRE schMENT. n.ſ. [retranchement, Fr. from retrench.]
The act of lopping away. - - - - -
f I had ſtudiº Virgil's deſign, his judicious management of
the figures, the ſober retrenchments of his ſenſe, which always
leaves ſomewhat to gratify our in gºtº, on which it may
enlarge at pleaſure. - Dryden’s Dedication to Pirgil,
The want of vowels in our language has been the general
complaint of our politeſt authors, who nevertheleſs have made
theſe retrenchments, and conſequently encreaſed our fºrmer
ſcarcity. Addison.
I wºuld rather be an advocate for the retrenchment, than
- - - -, Atterbury.
the encreaſe of this charity. To RETEfstºß.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E T
R E T
TRIBUTE. v. a. [retribus, Lat. retitºr, Fr.]
to make repayment. of. - -
Bj, the will and power to lºº him are his upon ſo many
that we are unable to retribute, unleſs we do reſtore &gt;
... jduties we can pay our maker are leſs properly tº-
ii. than reſtitutions. :----- Boyle.
In the ſtate of nature, a man comes by no arbitrary P.
to uſe a criminal, but only to retribute to him, ſo far as º
reaſon and conſcience dićtate, what is pornº; º:
flion. - ^cºra’.
rº. n.ſ. [retribution, Fr. from retribute.] Re-
ayment ; return accommodated to the action. . . ſuf
The king thought he had not remunerated his rº, º:
ficiently with good laws, which evermore was his retributiº
- - - To
*To RE!
pay back ;
for treaſure. Bacºn's Henry VII.
All who have their reward on earth, the fruits
Of painful ſuperſtition, and blind t". find -
ſeeking but the praiſe of men,
Nº empty ..". deeds. Milton's Par. Lºft.
In good offices and due retributions, we may not be pinch-
ing and niggardly : it argues an ignoble mind, where we have
wronged to higgle and dodge in the amends. Hall.
There is no nation, though plunged into never ſuch groſs
idolatry, but has ſome awful ſenſe of d deity, and a perſua-
fion of a ſtate of retribution to men after this life. South.
It is a ſtrong argument for a ſtate of retribution hereafter,
that in this world virtuous perſons are very often unfortunate,
and vicious perſons proſperous. Addison's Speciator.
RETRI'butory. adj. [from retribute.] Repaying; making
RETRIBUTIVE. ; repayment. . . - -
Something ſtrangely retributive is working. Clariſ.
Retrievable, adj. [from retrieve..] That may be retrieved.
To RETRIE/VE. v.a. [retrouver, Fr.]
1. To recover; to reſtore.
By this conduct we may retrieve the publick credit of reli-
gion, reform the example of the age, and leſien the danger
we complain of. Rogers's Sermons.
2. To repair.
O reaſon' once again to thee I call;
Accept my ſorrow, and retrieve my fall. Prior.
3. To regain.
With late repentance now they would retrieve
The bodies they forſook, and wiſh to live. Dryden.
Philomela's liberty retriev'd,
Cheers her ſad ſoul. Philips.
4. To recall; to bring back.
If one, like the old Latin poets, came among them, it would
be a means to retrieve them from their cold trivial conceits,
to an imitation of their predeceſſors. Berkeley to Pope.
RETRocessios. m. ſ. [retrocºſum, Lat.] The act of going
back.
RErRocopu'lation. m. ſ. [retro and copulation.] Poſt-coition.
From the nature of this poſition, there enſueth a neceſſity
of retrocopulation. Brown's ſugar Lºrrours.
RETRog RADA^TIon. n.ſ. [retrogradation, Fr. from retrograde.]
The aët of going backward.
As for the revolutions, ſtations, and retrogadations of the
planets, obſerved conſtantly in moſt certain periods of time,
ſufficiently demonſtrates, that their motions are governed by
counſel. Ray on the Creation.
RETROGRADE. adj. [retrograde, Fr. retro and gradior, Lat.]
1. Going backward.
Princes, if they uſe ambitious men, ſhould handle it ſo,
as they be ſtill progreſſive, and not retrograde. Bacon.
2. Contrary ; oppoſite.
Your intent
In going back to ſchool to Wittenberg, -
It is moſt retrograde to our deſire. Shakespeare. Hamlet.
3. In aſtronomy, planets are retrograde, when by their proper
motion in the zodiack, they move backward, and con-
trary to the ſucceſſion of the ſigns; as from the ſecond de-
gree of Aries to the firſt: but this retrogradation is only ap-
Parent and occaſioned by the obſerver's eye being placed on
the earth; for to an eye at the ſun, the planet will appear al-
ways direct, and never either ſtationary or retrºgrade. Harris.
Their wand'ring courſe, now high, now low, then hid,
Progreſſive, retrºgrade, or ſtanding ſtill,
In ſix thou ſee'ſ. Shakespeare Paradiſ: Lºft.
Two geomantick figures were diſplay'd',
9ne when direct, and one when retrograd. Dryden.
*****968 A.D.E. v. n. Iretºgrader, Fr. retro and gradior,
Lat. To go backward.
nº raCe and period of all things here is to turn things
... . . Pºulhatical and rare, and not to retrograde from pneu-
*tical to that which is deaſe. o Bacon.
*TRogRE'ssion. m. ſ. - r
going tº." J. [retro and grºſſils, Lat.] The act of
The account, eſtabliſhed upon the riſe and deſcent of the
drS. c. **ſ, *. - -
reſſ, º ***tonable rule unto diſtant nations, and by
* their retrogreſſiºn, but temporary unto any one. Bro.
ETRöMi NGENcy m, i. - -
- * • *, ſ. 1 º'eiro an L. 'I' -
of ſaling tºº.” t d mingº, Lat..] The quality
The laſt foundation
- Was retromingency, or pºſſing back-
wards; for men obſervin geºty, piffing back
3 both ſexes to uſine backwards, or
averſy between their legs, they might conceive there were fe-
minine parts in both. Browf's /ulgar Errours.
RETRoM1'NG ENT. adj. [retro and mingens, Lat.] Staling
backward.
By reaſon of the backward poſition of the feminine parts
bf quadrupeds, they can hardly admit the ſubſtitution of maſ-
culine generations, except it be in retromingents. Brown.
RE'TROSPECT. m. ſ. [retro and ſpecio, Lat..] Look thrown
upon things behind or things paſt.
As you arraign his majeſty by retrºſhe%, ſo you condemn
his government by ſecond fight. Addiſon's Freeholder, No g.
RETRospection. m. ſ. [from retrºſpect.] A&amp;t or faculty of
looking backwards.
Can'ſt thou take delight in viewing
This poor iſle's approaching ruin,
When thy retroſpeciion vaſt
Sees the glorious ages paſt?
Happy nation were we blind;
Or had only eyes behind. - Swift.
RETRosPE'ctive. adj. [from retrºſhe%.] Looking backwards.
In vain the grave, with retroſpective eye,
Would from the apparent what conclude the why. Pope.
To RETU’ND. v. a. [retundº, Lat.] To blunt; to turn.
Covered with ſkin and hair keeps it warm, being naturally
a very cold part, and alſo to quench and diſſipate the force of
any i. that ſhall be dealt it, and retund the edge of arly
weapon Ray on the Creation.
To RETU’RN. v. m. [retourner, Fr.]
1. To come to the ſame place.
Return, my ſon David, for I will do thee no harm. I Sam:
Whoſo rolleth a ſtone, it will return upon him. Prov. xxvi.
Go, return on thy way to the wilderneſs. I Kings xix. 15.
2. To come back to the ſame ſtate.
The waters returned from off the earth continually. Gen.
Judgment ſhall return unto righteouſneſs. Pſalm xciv. 15.
In returning and reſt ſhall ye be ſaved. Iſaiah xxx. 15.
On their embattel'd ranks the waves return. Milton.
If they returned out of bondage, it muſt be into a ſtate of
freedom. Locke.
. To go back.
3 º I am in blood
Stept in ſo far, that ſhould I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o’er. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Hezekiah ſent to the king of Aſſyria, ſaying, I have of
fended, return from me, 2 Kings xviii. 14.
To return to the buſineſs in hand, the uſe of a little in-
ſight in thoſe parts of knowledge, is to accuſtom our minds
to all ſorts of ideas. Locke.
4. To make anſwer.
The thing of courage,
As rouz'd with rage, with rage doth ſympathize;
And with an accent tun’d in ſelf ſame key,
Returns to chiding fortune. Shakeſp. Troil, and Crºſſida.
He ſaid; and thus the queen of heaven return'd ;
Muſt I, oh Jove in bloody wars contend Pope.
5. To come back; to come again; to reviſit.
Thou to mankind
Be good, and friendly ſtill, and oft return. Milton.
6. After a periodical revolution, to begin the ſame again.
With the year
Seaſons return, but not to me returns
Day, or the ſweet approach of ev'n or morn.
7. To retort; to recriminate.
If you are a malicious reader, you return upon me, that I
affect to be thought more impartial than I am. Dryden.
To RETU’RN. v. a.
1. To repay; to give in requital. -
Return him a treſpaſs offering. 1 Sam. vi. 3.
Thy Lord ſhall return thy wickedneſs upon thine.”
head. 1 King; ii. 44.
Milton.
What peace can we return,
But to our power, hoſtility, and hate.
When anſwer none return'd, I ſet me down.
2. To give back. -
What counſel give ye to return anſwer to this people. 2 Chr.
3. To ſend back.
Rejećt not then what offer'd means, who knows
But God hath ſet before us, to return thee • r. -
Home to thy country and his ſacred houſe. Milton's Agºn.
4. To give account of.
Probably one fourth part more died of the plague than se
returned. Graunt's Bills of Mortality.
5. To tranſmit. h
Inſtead of a ſhip, he ſhould levy money, and return the
ſame to the treaſurer for his majeſty's uſe. Clarendºn.
RETU'R.N. m.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Act of coining back to the ſame place.
The king of France ſo ſuddenly gone back |
Something ſince his coming forth is thought of, * r
That his return was now moſt neceſſary. Shakespeare .
When forc’d from hence to view our parts he mºſ"?
Takes little journies, and makes quick returns. Dryden.
2. Retrogreſſion.
Milton.
Milton.
3. Aët
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E V
R E V
sſº
pºſt;
maſ.
!,
CWA
ºmn
º ºf
*-
3. Aćt of coming back to the ſame ſtate.
At the return of the year, the king of Syria will come up.
I Kings xx. 22.
4. Revolution ; viciſſitude. ,
Weapons hardly fall under rule; yet even they have returns
and viciſſitudes; for ordnance was known in the city of the
Oxidraces in India, and is what the Macedonians called
thunder and lightning. - Bacon's Eſſays.
5. Repayment of money laid out in commodities for ſale.
As for any merchandize you have bought, ye ſhall have
your return in merchandize or gold. Bacon.
As to roots accelerated in their ripening, there is the high
price that thoſe things bear, and the ſwiftneſs of their returns ;
for, in ſome grounds, a radiſh comes in a month, that in others
will not come in two, and ſo make double returns. Bacon.
6, Profit; advantage.
The fruit, from many days of recreation, is very little;
but from theſe few hours we ſpend in prayer, the return is
reat. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
7. Remittance; payment from a diſtant place.
Within theſe two months, I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond. Shakeſp.
Brokers cannot have leſs money by them, than one twen-
tieth part of their yearly returns. Locke.
8. Repayment; retribution; requital.
You made my liberty your late requeſt,
Is no return due from a grateful breaſt
I grow impatient, 'till I find ſome way,
Great offices, with greater to repay. Dryden.
Since theſe are ſome of the returns which we made to God
after obtaining our ſucceſſes, can we reaſonably preſume, that
we are in the favour of God Atterbury.
Nothing better becomes a perſon in a publick charaćter,
than ſuch a publick ſpirit; nor is there any thing likely to
procure him larger returns of eſteem. Atterbury.
Returns, like theſe, our miſtreſs bids us make,
When from a foreign prince a gift her Britons take. Prior.
- Ungrateful lord
Would'ſt thou invade my life, as a return
For proffer'd love :
9. Aćt of reſtoring or giving back; reſtitution.
The other ground of God's ſole property in any thing, is
the gift, or rather the return of it made by man to God. South.
10. Relapſe. -
This is breaking into a conſtitution to ſerve a preſent ex-
pedient; the remedy of an empirick, to ſtifle the preſent
pain, but with certain proſpect of ſudden returns. Swift.
II. [Retour, Fr.]
Either of the adjoining ſides of the front of an houſe, or
ground-plot, is called a return ſide. Moxon's Mech. Exerc.
Both theſe ſides are not only returns, but parts of the front,
and a ſtately tower in the midſt of the front. Bacon.
Retu'RNABLE. adj. Allowed to be reported back. A law
term.
It may be decided in that court, where the verdićt is re-
turnable. Hale.
He ſhall have an attachment againſt the ſheriff, directed to
the coroner, and returnable into the king's bench. Ayliffe.
RETU'RNER. n.ſ.. [from return..] One who pays or remits
money.
The chapmen, that give higheſt for this, can make moſt
profit by it, and thoſe are the returners of our money. Locke.
Rev E. m. ſ. The bailiff of a franchiſe or manour.
The reve, the miller, and the mincing lady prioreſs ſpeak
in charaćter. Dryden.
To REVEA/L. v. a. [revelo, Lat. reveler, Fr.]
1. To ſhow ; to diſcover ; to lay open ; to diſcloſe a ſecret.
Be aſhamed : ſpeaking again that which thou haſt heard,
and revealing of ſecrets. Eccluſ xli. 23.
I will cure them, and reveal unto them the abundance of
peace. jer. xxxiii. 6.
Light was the wound, the prince's care unknown,
She might not, would not yet reveal her own. Waller.
The anſwer to one who aſked what time was, ſº non ragas
intelligo ; that is, the more I think of time, the leſs I under-
ſtand it; might perſuade one, that time, which reveals all
other things, is itſelf not to be diſcovered. Locke.
2. To impart from heaven. -
The ſufferings of this life are not to be compared with the
glory which ſhall be revealed in us. Roman; viii. 18.
REve A LE R. n.ſ.. [from reveal.]
1. Diſcoverer; one that ſhows or makes known.
The habit of faith in divinity is an argument of things un-
ſeen, as a ſtable aſlent unto things inevident, upon authority
of the divine revealer. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
The lives of the revealers may be juſtly ſet over againſt the
Rowe.
revelation, to find whether they agree. Atterbury.
2. One that diſcovers to view.
He brought a taper; the revealer light
Expos'd both crime and criminal to fight. Dryden.
To REZVEL. v. n. [Skinner derives it from reveiller, Fr. to
awake; Mr. Lye from raveelen, Dutch, to rove looſely about,
which is much countenanced by the old phraſe, revel-rout.]
1. To feaſt with looſe and clamorous merriment.
** +. My honey love,
Will we return unto jº. houſe,
Andreuel it as bravely as the beſ. '... f*.
We'll keep no º: ado—a friend or two. Shakespeare .
Tybalt being ſlain ſo late,
It may be thought we held him careleſsly
Being our kinſman, if we,...} much. 3. Shakespeare
I Antony, that revel; long o' nights, -
S ud. -
W. ſhall have revelling to-night; Shakeſp. julius Cæſar.
I will aſſume thy part in ſome diſguiſe, Shakeſp;
He can report you more odd ti
Of our outlaw Robin Hood, CS
T. revell'd here in Sherewood,
hough he ne'er ſhot in his bow. Benj. ‘Fol
Were the doćtrine new, enj. johnſon.
That the earth mov’d, this day would make it true:
For every part to dance and revel goes, &gt;
They tread the air, and fall not where the roſ. D
Whene'er I revel'd in the women's i. s c 07:21es
For firſt I ſought her but at looſer hours:
The apples ſhe had gather'd ſmelt moſt ſweet. Prior.
Rº: n: ſ [from the verb.] A feaſt with looſe and noiſy
Joility.
Let them pinch th' unclean knight,
And aſk him, why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their ſo ſacred paths he dares to tréad Shakeſp.
They could do no leſs but, under your fair conduct,
Craveleave to view theſe ladies, and intreat
An hour of revels with them. Shakeſp.
To REVE L. v. a. [revello, Lat..] To retract; to draw back.
Thoſe, who miſcarry, eſcape by their flood, revelling the
humours from their lungs. Harvey.
REVEL-Rout. m. ſ. A mob ; an unlawful aſſembly of a
rabble. Ainſworth.
For this his minion, the revel rout is done.
—I have been told, that you
Are,frequent in your viſitation to her. Rowe's jane Shore.
Revel.A'tion. n.ſ.. [from revelation, Fr.] Diſcovery ; com-
munication ; communication of ſacred and myſterious truths
by a teacher from heaven.
When the divine revelations were committed to writing,
the Jews were ſuch ſcrupulous reverers of them, that they
numbered even the letters of the Old Teſtament. D. of Piá.
As the goſpel appears in reſpect of the law to be a clearer
revelation of the myſtical part, ſo it is a far more benign diſ-
penſation of the practical part. Sprat.
Revel. ER. m.ſ.. [from revel.] One who feaſts with noiſyjollity.
Fairies black, grey, green and white,
You moonſhine revellers attend your office. Shakeſp,
Unwelcome revellers, whoſe lawleſs joy -
Pains the ſage ear, and hurts the ſober eye. Pope.
Re've LRY. m. ſ... [from revel.] Looſe jollity; feſtive mirth.
Forget this new-fall'n dignity,
And fall into our ruſtick revelry. Shakespeare
There let Hymen oft appear
In ſaffron robe with taper clear,
And pomp, and feaſt, and revelry,
With maſk and antick pageantry.
To REVETNGE. v. a. [revencher, revancher, Fr.]
1. To return an injury.
2. To vindicate by puniſhment of an enemy.
If our hard fortune no compaſſion draws,
The gods are juſt, and will revenge our cauſe. Dryden.
3. To wreak one's wrongs on him that inflićted them. With
the reciprocal pronoun.
Come, Antony and young Oétavius, -
Revenge yourſelves alone on Caſſius. Shakeſp. jul. Ceſar.
It is a quarrel moſt unnatural,
To be reveng'd on him that loveth thee. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Northumberland ſlew thy father;
And thine, lord Clifford; and you vow'd revenge:
If I be not, heav'ns be reveng'd on me ! Shakeſp.
Edom hath revenged himſelf upón Judah. Ezek. xxv. 12.
O Lord, viſit me, and revenge me of my perſecutors. Žer.
Who ſhall come to ſtand againſt thee, to be revenged for
the unrighteous men JWiſdom xii. 12.
Your fury of a wife,
Not yet content to be reveng’d on you, -
Th’ agents of your paſſion will purſue. Dryden.
REve'NG E. m. ſ. [revenche, revanche, Fr.] Return of an injury.
Revenges burn in them : for their dear cauſes
Would, to the bleeding and the grim alarm,
Excite the mortified man. Shakespeare . Macbeth.
May we, with the witneſs of a goodsonſciºce, purſe him
with further revenge. Shakeſp. Merry Wives of Windor.
I will make mine arrows drunk with º, from the be-
inning of revenges upon the enemy. eutr. xxxii. 42.
*"... #: ... be enticed, and we ſhall prevail againſt
him, and take our revenge on him: - jer. xx. 10.
Deformed perſons are commonly even with nature; for as
nature has done ill by them, ſo they do by nature; being void
of natural affection, they have their revenge of nature. Bacon.
21 U. The
Milton,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E V
R E V
What will not ambition and revenge deſcend to. 44ilton.
The º .. bit
- 'neſs is to laugh and bite,
Fº: and dire . write. - - Dryden.
#. . the Athenian lawgiver, granted an impunity to any
ſ º that took revenge upon an adulterer..... rºof/le.
R §j. aff. [frem revenge.] Vindićtive; full of re-
venge 3 full of vengeance.
May my hands
* . Never brandiſh more revengeful ſteel
Over the glittering helmet of my foe:
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lof here I lend thee this ſharp-pointed ſword, ...
which hide in this true breaſt. Shakeſp. Richard III.
Into my borders now Jarbaş falls,
Shakeſp. Rich. II.
And my revengeful brother ſcales the walls. Denham.
Repénting England, this ſºngſtl day,
To Philip's manes did an off 'ring bring. Dryden.
Revengefully, adv. [from revengeful..] Vindićtively.
He ſmil’d revengefully, and leap'd -
Upon the floor; thence gazing at the ſkies,
His eye-balls fiery red, and glowing vengeance 3, -
Gods I accuſe you not. Dryden and Lee's Oedipus.
Reve'NGER. n.ſ.. [from revenge.] - •
1. One who revenges; one who wreaks his own or another's
ICS.
Injur Maybe, that better reaſon will aſwage
The raſh revenger's heat; words, well diſpos'd,
Have ſecret pow'r tº appeaſe enflamed rage. Fairy Queen.
I do not know,
Wherefore my father ſhould revengers want,
Having a ſon and friends. - Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
So ſhall the great revenger ruinate
Him and his iſſue, by a dreadful fate. Sandys's Paraphraſe.
- Morocco's monarch
Had come in perſon, to have ſeen and known
The injur'd world's revenger and his own.
2. One who puniſhes crimes. - - - -
What government can be imagined, without judicial pro-
ceedings and what methods of judicature, without a reli-
gious oath, which ſuppoſes an omniſcient being, as conſcious
to its falſehood or truth, and a revenger of perjury. Bentley.
Rev ENGEMENT. n.ſ.. [from revenge.] Vengeance; return of
an injury.
JJ’aller.
It may dwell
In her ſon's fleſh to mind revengement,
And be for all chaſte dames an endleſs monument. F. 9.
By the percloſe of the ſame verſe, vagabond is underſtood
for ſuch a one as travelleth in fear of revengement. Raleigh.
REY ENGINGLY. adv. [from revenging..] With vengeance;
vindićtively.
- I've bely’d a lady,
The princeſs of this country; and the air on't
Revengingly enfeebles me. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
REVENUE. m. ſ. [revenu, Fr. Its accent is uncertain..] In-
come ; annual profits received from lands or other funds.
They privily ſend over unto them the revenues, wherewith
they are there maintained. Spenſer's State of Ireland.
She bears a duke's revenues on her back,
And in her heart ſcorns our poverty. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Only I retain
The name and all th’ addition to a king;
The ſway, revenue, beloved ſons, be yours. Shakeſp.
Many offices are of ſo ſmall revenue, as not to furniſh a
man with what is ſufficient for the ſupport of his life. Temple.
If the woman could have been contented with golden eggs,
ſhe might have kept that revenue on ſtill. L'E/irange.
His vaſſals eaſy, and the owner bleſt, -
They pay a trifle, and enjoy the reſt:
Not ſo a nation's revenues are paid ;
The ſervant's faults are on the maſter laid. Swift.
To REye'RB. v. a. [reverbero, Lat.] To ſtrike againſt; to
reverberate. Not in uſe. c
Reſerve thy ſtate, with better judgment check
This hideous raſhneſs:
The youngeſt daughter does not love thee leaſt ;
Yor are thoſe empty hearted, whoſe loud ºn
Reverbs no hollowneſs. Shakeſp. King Lear.
REVERBERANT. adj. [reverberans, Lat.] Reſounding; beat-
ing back. The reading in the following paſſage ſhould be, I
think, reverberant.
Hollow your name to the reverberate hills,
And make the babbling goſſip of the air
out, Olivia Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
Cr
ºir. v. a. [reverbero, Lat. reverberer, Fr.]
- Start
An scho with the clamour of thy drum,
hd ev’n at hand a drum is ready brac'd,
That ſhall reverbera. all as well as thine. Shakespeare . K.john.
Til 9 doth he know them for aught,
ill he behold them formed in th’ applauſe
Where they're extended. ..." &gt;
The ſound again, ; which, like an arch, *:::::
As the fight of the eye is like a glaſs, ſo is the ear a
ſinuous cave, with a hard bone, to ſtop and reverberal, the
ſound. Bacon.
As we, to improve the nobler kinds of fruits, are at the ex-
pence of walls to receive and reverberate the faint r
- - ays of the
fun, ſo we, by the help of a good ſoil, equal the produćtion
of warmer countries. -- Swift.
2. To heat in an intenſe furnace, where the flame is re
rated upon the matter to be melted or cleaned.
Crocus martis, that is ſteel corroded with vinegar or ſul-
phur, and after reverlerated with fire, the loadſtone will Ilot
attract. Brown's Pulgar Brrours.
To Rev ER BERATE. v. n.
I. To be driven back; to bound back.
The rays of royal majeſty reverberated ſo ſtrongly upon
Villerio, that they diſpelled all clouds. Iławel.
2. To reſound.
REveRBERATION. m. ſ. [reverberation, Fr. from reverberate.]
The act of beating or driving back.
To the reflection of viſibles, ſmall glaſſes ſuffice; but to
the reverberation of audibles, are required greater ſpaces. Bac.
The firſt repetitions follow very thick; for two parallel
walls beat the ſound back on each other, like the ſty. fre-
verlºrations of the ſame image from two oppoſite lj.
glaſſes. 4iii.
Rev ERBER AT or Y. adj. [reverberatoire, Fr] Returning 5
beating back.
Good lime may be made of all kinds of flints, but they are
hard to burn, except in a reverberatory kiln. 41.3 on.
To REVERE. v. a. [.. everer, Fr. revereor, Lat.] To re.
rence; to honour; to venerate; to regard with awe.
An emperor often ſtamp'd on his coins the face or orna-
ments of his collegue, and we may ſuppoſe Lucius Vºls
would omit no opportunity of doing honour to Maj
Aurelius, whom he rather reve, ed as his father, than tº...]
as his partner in the empire. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
Jove ſhall again revere your pow'r,
Verbe-
And riſe a ſwan, or fall a ſhow’r. Prior.
Taught 'em how clemency made pow'r rever'd,
And that the prince belov'd was truly fear'd. Prior.
In my conqueſt be thy might declárd,
And for thy juſtice be thy name rever'd. Prior.
Rey ER ENCE. m.ſ.. [reverence, Fr. reverentia, Lat.]
1. Veneration; reſpect; awful regard.
God is greatly to be feared in the aſſembly of the ſaints;
and to be had in reverence of all about him. Pſ. lxxxix. 7.
When quarrels and factions are carried openly, it is a ſign
the reverence of government is loſt. Bacon's Eſſays.
Higher of the genial bed,
And with myſterious reverence I deem. Milton.
In your prayers, uſe reverent poſtures and the loweſt ge-
ſtures of humility, remembring that we ſpeak to God, in our
reverence to whom we cannot exceed. Taylor.
A poet cannot have too great a reverence for readers. Dryd.
The fear, acceptable to God, is a filial fear; an awful re-
&amp;erence of the divine nature, proceeding from a juſt eſteem
his perfections, which produces in us an inclination to his
ſervice, and an unwillingneſs tº offend him. Rºgers,
2. Act of obeiſance ; bow; courteſy.
Now lies he there,
And none ſo poor to do him reverence. Shakespeare Yul. Cºſ.
Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence. Ejib. iii. 2.
He led her eas'!y forth,
Where Godfrey ſat among his lords and peers,
She rev'rence did, then bluſh'd as one diſmay’d.
Had not men the hoary heads rever'd,
Or boys paid reverence, when a man appear'd,
Both muſt have dy’d. Dryden's Juvenal.
Upſtarts the bedlam,
And reverence made, accoſted thus the queen.
The monarch
Commands into the court the beauteous Emily:
So call’d, ſhe came ; the ſenate roſe and paid
Becoming rev'rence to the royal maid.
3. Title of the clergy.
Many now in health
Shall drop their blood, in approbation /.
Of what your reverence ſhall incite us to. Shaº. Hºn. V.
4. Poetical title of a father.
O my dear father let this kiſs
Repair thoſe violent harms, that my two fiflers ...
Have in thy reverence made. Shakeſp. King Lear.
To RE’v ERENCE. v. a. [from the noun..] To regard with re-
verence; to regard with awful reſpect. -
Thoſe that I rev'rence, thoſe I fear, the wiſe ; 7;
At fools I laugh, not fear them. Shakeſp. Cyrºcline.
While they pervert pure nature's healthful rules
To loathſome ſickneſs, worthily ſince they
Fairfax.
Dryden.
Dryden.
God’s image did not reverence in themſelves. Aſ lºn.
He ſlew Aetion, but deſpoil’d him not ;
Nor in his hate the funeral rites forgot;
Arm'd as he was, he ſent him whole below,
And reverenc'd thus the manes of his foe. Pº
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">-
R E V
As his goodneſs will forbid us to dread him as ſlaves, ſo his
majeſty will command us to reverence him as ſons. Rogers.
RE've RENcER. m. ſ. [from reverence..] One who regards with
reverence.
The Athenians quite ſunk in their affairs, had little com-
merce with the reſt of Greece, and were become great reve-
rencers of crowned heads. Swift.
RE’v EREND. adj. [reverend, Fr. reverendus, Lat.]
1. Venerable ; deſerving reverence ; expecting reſpect by his
appearance.
Let his lack of years be no impediment, to let him lack a
reverend eſtimation. - Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
Rever end and gracious ſenators. Shakeſp.
Onias, who had been high prieſt, reverend in converſation,
and gentle in condition, prayed for the Jews. 2 Mac. xv. 12.
Rev'rend old man lo here confeſt he ſtands. Pope.
2. The honorary epithet of the clergy. We ſtile a clergyman,
reverend; a biſhop, right reverend; an archbiſhop, moſt re-
verend.
A reverend fire among them came,
Who preach'd converſion and repentance. Milton.
REVERENT, adj. [reverens, Lat..] Humble; expreſſing ſub-
miſſion; teſtifying veneration.
They forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judg’d them, proſtrate fell
Before him reverent. Milton's Paradiſe Loft.
Meet then the ſenior, far renown'd for ſenſe,
With rev'rent awe, but decent confidence. Pope.
Rev E RE'NTIAL. adj. [reverentielle, Fr. from reverent.] Ex-
preſſing reverence ; proceeding from awe and veneration.
That oaths made in reverential fear
Of love and his wrath may any forſwear. Donne.
The leaſt degree of contempt weakens religion; it properly
conſiſting in a reverential eſteem of things ſacred. South.
The reaſon of the inſtitution being forgot, the after-ages
perverted it, ſuppoſing only a reverential gratitude paid to the
earth as the common parent. JWoodward's Nat. Hiſt.
All look up, with reverential awe,
At crimes that 'ſcape, or triumph o'er the law. Pope.
REveRE'N TIALLY. adv. [from reverential.] With ſhow of
reverence.
The Jews, reverentially declining the ſituation of their
temple, place their beds from North to South. Brown.
RE've RENTLY. adv. [from reverent.] Reſpectfully ; with
awe; with reverence.
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently. Shakeſp.
To neareſt ports their ſhatter'd ſhips repair,
Where by our dreadful cannon they lay aw'd :
So reverently men quit th'open air,
When thunder ſpeaks th’ angry gods abroad. Dryden.
Then down with all thy boaſted volumes, down ;
Only reſerve the ſacred one :
Low, reverently low, -
Make thy ſtubborn knowledge bow :
To look to heav'n be blind to all below. Prior.
Rev E'RER. m. ſ. [from revere.] One who venerates; one who
rev cres.
When the divine revelations were committed to writing,
the Jews were ſuch ſcrupulous reverers of them, that it was the
buſineſs of the Maſorites, to number not only the ſections
and lines, but even the words and letters of the Old Teſta-
ment. Government of the Tongue.
Rev E R SAL. m. ſ. [from reverſe.] Change of ſentence.
The king, in the reverſal of the attainders of his partakers,
had his will. Bacon's Henry VII.
To REVE/RSE. v. a. [reverſus, Lat.]
1. To turn upſide down.
A pyramid reverſed may ſtand upon his point, if balanced
by admirable ſkill. Temple's Miſcellanies.
2. To overturn ; to ſubvert.
Theſe now controul a wretched people's fate,
Theſe can divide, and theſe reverſe the ſtate. Pope.
3. To turn back.
Michael's ſword ſtay’d not;
But with ſwift wheel reverſe, deep entring ſhar'd
Satan's right ſide. Milton.
4. To contradićt ; to repeal.
Better it was in the eye of his underſtanding, that ſome-
time an erroneous ſentence definitive ſhould prevail, till the
ſame authority, perceiving ſuch overſight, might afterwards
correct or reverſe it, than that ſtriſes ſhould have reſpite to
grow, and not come ſpeedily unto ſome end. Hooker's Prºf.
A decree was made, that they had forfeited their liberties;
and albeit they made great moans, yet could they not pro-
cure this ſentence to be reverſed. Hayward.
Death, his doom which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverſe,
To better life ſhall yield him. Milton's Par. Loft.
Though grace may have reverſed the condemning ſentence,
and ſealed the finner's pardon before God, yet it may have
left no tranſcript of that pardon in the ſinner's breaſt. South.
Thoſe ſeem to do beſt, who, taking uſeful hints from
fačts, carry them in their minds to be judged of, by what
- YC
------_
R. E. V.
they ſhall find in hiſtory to confirm or reverſe theſe imperfeół
obſervations. Loci,
5. To turn to the contrary.
Theſe plain charašters we rarely find,
Though ſtrong the bent, yet quick the turns of mind;
Or Pºſing contraries confound the whole -
Or affectations quite reverſe the ſoul. &gt;
6. To Put each in the place of the other.
With what tyranny Cuſtom governs men; it makes that
*Pºtable in one age, which was a vice in anoth. ...
verſes even the diſtinctions of good and evil Rºº,
7. To recall; to renew. Obſolete. - 'gerſ.
Well knowing true all he did rehearſe
And to his freſh remembrance did revº -
The ugly view of his deformed crimes. Fairy Queeen.
To REve'Rs E. v. m. [revertere, reverſus, Lat..] To re-urn, spenſ.
REye’rse. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] -
I. Change; viciſſitude.
The ſtrange reverſe of fate you ſee;
I pity'd you, now you may pity me. Dryden's Aurengz.
By a ſtrange reverſe of things, Juſtinian's law, which for
many ages was neglected, does now obtain, and the Theo-
doſian code is in a manner antiquated. Baker.
2. A contrary; an oppoſite.
Count Tariff appeared the reverſe of Goodman fast. Addison
The performances, to which God has annexed the promiſes
of sternity, are juſt the reverſe of all the purſuits of ſenſe. Rog.
3. [Revers, Fr.] The fide of the coin on which the head is
not impreſſed.
As the Romans ſet down the image and inſcription of the
conſul, afterward of the emperor on the one ſide, ſo they
Pope.
changed the reverſe always upon new events. Camden.
Our guard upon the royal fide;
On the reverſe our beauty's pride. JWaller.
. Several reverſes are owned to be the repreſentations of an-
tique figures. Addiſon on Ancient Medals.
RF VERSIBLE, adj. [reverſible, Fr. from reverſe.] Capable of
being reverſed. -
REye'Rsion. n.ſ.. [reverſion, Fr. from reverſ..] -
1. The ſtate of being to be poſſeſſed after the death of the pre-
ſent poſſeſſor.
As were our England in reverſion his,
And he our ſubjects next degree in hope. Shakespeare Rich. II.
A life in reverſion is not half ſo valuable, as that which
may at preſent be entered on. Hammond's Fundamentals.
2. Succeſſion ; right of ſucceſſion.
He was very old, and had out-lived moſt of his friends;
many perſons of quality being dead, who had, for recom-
pence of ſervices, procured the reverſion of his office. Claren.
Upon what ground can a man promiſe himſelf a future re-
pentance, who cannot promiſe himſelf a futurity ? whoſe life
depends upon his breath, and is ſo reſtrained to the preſent,
that it cannot ſecure to itſelf the reverſion of the very next
minute. South's Sermons.
So many candidates there ſtand for wit,
A place at court is ſcarce ſo hard to get:
In vain they croud each other at the door ;
For e'en reverſions are all begg'd before. Dryden.
REve'Rsion ARY. adj. [from reverſion.] To be enjoyed in
ſucceſſion.
There are multitudes of reverſionary patents and reverſionary
promiſes of preferments. Arbuthnot.
To REVERT. v. a. [reverto, Lat.]
1. To change; to turn to the contrary.
Wretched her ſubjećts, gloomy ſits the queen,
Till happy chance revert the cruel ſcene; -
And apiſh folly, with her wild reſort
Of wit and jeſt, diſturbs the ſolemn court. Prior.
2. To reverberate.
The ſtream boils
Around the ſtone, or from the hollow'd bank
Reverted plays in undulating flow. Thomſºn.
To REve'RT. v. n. [revertir, old Fr.] To return ; to fall back.
My arrows,
Too ſlightly timbred for ſo loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again. Shakespeare . Hamlet.
If his tenant and patentee ſhall diſpoſe of his gift without
his kingly aſſent, the lands ſhall revent to the king.
Rev ERT. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Return; recurrence. A mu-
ſical term. - -
Hath not muſick her figures the ſame with rhetorick : what
is a revert but her antiſtrophe Peacham ºf Muſick.
Revertible. adj. [from revert.] Returnable.
REve'RY. n.ſ. [reſverie, Fr.] Looſe muſing ; irregular thought.
Revery is when ideas float in ºur mind, without any re-
flection or regard of the underſtanding. Locke.
If the minds of men were laid open, we ſhould ſee but
little difference between that of the wiſe man and that of the
fool; there are infinite reveries and numberleſs extravagancies
paſs through both. - Addison,
I am really ſo far gone, as to take pleaſure in reveries of
is kind. Poſe.
this * - To REve st.
Bacon. .<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E V
R E V
i
"To Rev E's T. v. 4. [reve/fir, revétir, Fr. revºſtic, Lat.]
1. To clothe *"Her, nathleſs, . .
» ter finding fit for his intents, ...
#. º jº with due habiliments. Spenſºr.
When thou of life reneweſt the ſeeds,
The withered fields revºſt their chearful weeds. Wotton.
2. To reinveſt; to veſt again in a poſſeſſion or office.
ſeve’s rary. m. ſ. [revºſtiaire, Fr. from reve/lio, Lat..] Place
dreſſes are repoſited.
wº. effectual power of words the Pythagoreans extºlled;
the impious Jews aſcribed all miracles to a namº, which was
ingraved in the revoſtiary of the temple. Camden's Remains.
Rºction. n.ſ. [revičium, Lat.) Return tº life.
If the Rabines prophecy, ſucceed, we ſhall conclude the
days of the phenix, not in its own, but in the laſt and gene-
raſ flames, without all hope of revićtiºn. Brown.
To Revºctual. v. a. [re and vićtual.] To ſtock with vic-
tuals again. -
It hath been objected, that I put into Ireland, and ſpent
much time there, taking care to revičiual myſelf and none
of the reſt. Raleigh's Apology.
To REVIE/W. v. a. [re and view.]
1. To look back. - - -
So ſwift he flies, that his reviewing eye
Has loſt the chaſers, and his ear the cry.
2. To ſee again.
I ſhall review Sicilia; for whoſe fight
I have a woman's longing. Shakeſp. Jºinter's Tale.
3. To conſider over again; to retrace; to reexamine.
Segrais ſays, that the AEneis is an imperfect work, and that
death prevented the divine poet from reviewing it; and, for
Denham.
that reaſon, he had condemned it to the fire. Dryden.
Shall I the long laborious ſcene review,
And open all the wounds of Greece anew. Pope.
4. To ſurvey; to overlook; to examine.
Review. n.ſ. [reveue, Fr. from the verb.] Survey ; re-
examination.
We make a general review of the whole work, and a ge-
neral review of nature , that, by comparing them, their full
correſpondency may appear. Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
The works of nature will bear a thouſand views and re-
views ; the more narrowly we look into them, the more oc-
caſion we ſhall have to admire. Atterbury's Sermons.
To REVILE. v. a. [re and vile.] To reproach; to vilify;
to treat with contumely.
Aſked for their paſs by every ſquib,
That liſt at will them to revile or ſnib. Spenſºr.
I read in's looks
Matter againſt me; and his eye revil'd
Me as his abjećt object. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Fear not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their
revilings. Iſaiah li. 7.
She ſtill beareth him an invincible hatred, reviſeth him to
his face, and raileth at him in all companies. Swift.
REVILE, n.ſ.. [from the verb..] Reproach; contumely; ex-
probration. Not uſed, but elegant.
I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
Afraid, being naked, hid myſelf,-to whom
The gracious judge, without revile, reply'd. Milton.
REvil ER. m. ſ. [from revile.] One who reviles; one who
treats another with contumelious terms.
The bittereſt revilers are often half-witted people. G. of T.
RF viºlin GLY. adv. [from revile.] In an opprobrious manner;
with contumely.
The love I bear to the civility of expreſſion will not ſuffer
me to be revilingly broad. Maine.
*Evºl. n.ſ. [from reviſe.] Review; reexamination.
The reviſal of theſe letters has been a kind of examination
of conſcience to me; ſo fairly and faithfully have I ſet down
in them the undiſguiſed ſtate of the mind. Pope.
To REVISE. W.a. [reviſus, Lat..] To review; to overloºk.
Lintot will think your price too much ;
Not, Sir, if you reviſe it, and retouch. Pope.
REV1's E. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Review ; reexamination.
The author is to be excuſed, who never, in regard to his
eyes and other impediments, gives himſelf the trouble of cor-
To REVI'VE. v. n. [revivre, Fr. revivo, Lat.]
I. To return to life.
The Lord heard Elijah, and the ſoul of the child came
unto him again, and he revived. I Kings xvii. 22.
So he dies;
But ſoon revives: death over him no power
Shall long uſurp. Milton,
2. To return to vigour or fame ; to riſe from languour, obli-
vion, or obſcurity.
I revive at this laſt fight, aſſur'd that man ſhall live. Aſh.
To Rev I'v E. v. a.
1. To bring to life again. -
Spot more delicious, than thoſe gardens feign'd
Of reviv'd Adonis. Milton,
2. To raiſe from languour, inſenſibility, or oblivion.
Noiſe of arms, or view of martial guiſe,
Might not revive deſire of knightly exerciſe. Fa. &amp;#een.
God lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving hio.
bondage. Ezra ix. 8.
3. To renew ; to recollečt; to bring back to the memory.
The memory is the power to revive again in our minds
thoſe ideas, which after imprinting have been laid aſide ...it
of fight. - Locke.
The mind has a power in many caſes to revive perceptions,
which it has once had. Locke,
4. To quicken; to rouſe.
j ſhould revive the ſoldiers hearts ;
Becauſe I ever found them as myſelf. Shakeſp.
What firſt AEneas in this place beheld,
Reviv'd his courage, and his fear expell’d. Dryden,
Old Egeus only could revive his ſon,
Who various changes of the world had known. Dryden.
Revi’v ER. m. ſ. [from revive.] That which invigorates or
reWIVcs.
To REVIVI'FICATE. v. a. [revivifier, Fr. re and viv; £92
Lat.] To recall to life.
Revivification. m. ſ. [from revivificate.] The ad of re-
recalling to life.
As long as an infant is in the womb of its parent, ſo long
are theſe medicines of revivification in preparing. Addison Speciatºr.
Rev Ivi'scency. n.ſ. [revivico, reviviſcentia, Lat.] Renewal
of life.
Scripture makes mention of a reſtitution and revivſºng of
all things at the end of the world. Burnet.
REU'NioN. m. ſ. [reunion, Fr. re and union.] Return to a ſtate
of juncture, coheſion, or concord.
She, that ſhould all parts to reunion bow,
She that had all magnetick force alone,
To draw and faſten fundred parts in one, Donne.
To ReUNITE. v. a. [re and uniie.]
I. To join again; to make one whole a ſecond time; to join
what is divided.
By this match the line of Charles the great
Was reunited to the crown of France. Shakeſp. Henry V.
2: To reconcile; to make thoſe at variance one.
To REUNITE. v. m. To cohere again.
REvgcABLE, adj. [revºcable, Fr. revoco, revocabilis, Lat.]
1. That may be recalled. -
Howſoever you ſhew bitterneſs, do not act any thing that
is not revocable. . Bacon's Eſſays.
2. That may be repealed.
RE'voca BLENEss. n. ſ. [from revocable.] The quality of being
revocable.
To RE'vocate. v. a. [revoco, Lat.] To recall; to call back.
His ſucceſſor, by order, nullifies
Many his patents, and did revocate
And re-aſſume his liberalities. Daniel's Civil //ar.
RE'yocation. m. ſ. [revocation, Fr. revocatio, Lat.]
1. Aćt of recalling. - -
One, that ſaw the people bent for the revocation of Calvin,
gave him notice of their affection. Hooker.
2. State of being recalled. -
Elaiana's king commanded Chenandra to tell him that he
had received advice of his revºcation. Hºwe's ſºcal Porºſ.
3. Repeal; reverſal. -
If a grievance be inflićled on a perſon, he may appeal, it
is not neceſſary to pray a revocation of ſuch a grievance. Aylºft.
To REVOKE. v. a. [revoquer, Fr. revocº, Lat. J
rections and reviſis. Boyle. 1. To repeal; to reverſe:
* Among printers, a ſecond proof of a ſheet correóted.
/ * -- Y - - -
REV1'ser. n. J. [reviſeur, Fr. from reviſe.] Examiner; ſuper- ſame after.
intendant.
*"...sos. n.ſ. [reviſion, Fr. from reviſe.] Review.
-
viſit again.
Thee I reviſit ſafe,
And feel thy ſov’reign vital lamp ; but thou
Reviſit'/? - -
To |% ".º eyes, that rowl in vain,
Let the pale fire. Thebes, and bear
heſe pleaſing order. the tyrant's ear. Pope's Statius.
‘l Recall from a ſtate of lan.
R 1 v v^. -
REVI'v AL. * / [from reviv.
Šuouſ, oblivion, or obſcurity
7
To Revi'sit. v. [reviſiter, Fr. reviſo, reviſito, Lat.] To
iercing º and find no dawn. Milton.
1t
That ſociety hath before conſented, without revoking the
Hooker, b. i. ſ. 10.
when we abrogate a law as being ill made, the whole
cauſe for which it was made ſtill remaining, do we not herºin
...toke our very own deed, and upbraid ourſelves with folly,
ea all that were makers of it with overſight and error. Hø.
What reaſon is there, but that thoſe grants and privileges
ſhould be revoked, or reduced to the firſt intention. Speyer.
Without my Aurengzebe I cannot live ;
- Revoke his doom, or elſe my ſentence give. . Dryden,
2. To check ; to repreſs.
She ſtrove their ſudden rages to evºke,
That at the laſt ſuppreſſing fury mad, :... Q --
They 'gan abſtain. Fair, ºr, b. ii.
3. To
R
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R E V
º
Yº-
3. To draw back. -
Shame were to revoke
The forward footing for an hidden ſhade. Fairy $2teen.
Seas are troubled, when they do revoke
Their flowing waves into themſelves again. Davies.
Revo'kEMENT. n.ſ.. [from revoke.]
recall. Little in uſe.
Let it be nois'd,
That through our interceſſion, this revokement
And pardon comes. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
To REVOLT. v. n. [revolter, Fr. revoltare, Italian.]
1. To fall off from one to another. It denotes ſomething of
pravity or rebellion.
All will revolt from me, and turn to him. Shakeſp.
Our diſcontented counties do revolt, -
Our people quarrel with obedience. Shakespeare. K. john.
Jaſon and his company revolted from the kingdom, 2 Mac.
This people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they
are revolted and gone. jer. v. 53.
2. To change. Not in uſe.
You are already love's firm votary,
And cannot ſoon revolt and change your mind.
Revolt. n.ſ. [revolte, Fr. from the verb.]
1. Deſertion ; change of ſides.
He was greatly ſtrengthened, and the enemy, as much en-
feebled by daily revolts. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
If all our levies are made in Scotland or Ireland, may not
thoſe two parts of the monarchy be too powerful for the reſt,
in caſe of a revolt. Addiſon's State of the War.
2. A revolter ; one who changes ſides. Not in uſe.
You ingrate revolts,
You bloody Nero's, ripping up the womb
Of your dear mother England. Shakeſp. King john.
3. Groſs departure from duty.
Your daughter hath made a groſs revolt;
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
To an extravagant and wheeling ſtranger. Shakeſp.
REvolted. part, adj. [from revolt.j Havingſwerved from duty.
Thou ſingle haſt maintain'd
Againſt revolted multitudes the cauſe of truth. Milton.
REvo/LTER. m. ſ. [from revolt..] One who changes ſides; a
deſerter; a renegade.
Fair honour that thou doſt thyGod, in truſting
He will accept thee to defend his cauſe,
A murderer, a evolter, and a robber. Milton's Agoniſłes.
He was not a revolter from the truth, which he had once
embraced. Atterbury's Sermons.
Thoſe, who are negligent or revolters, ſhall periſh. Swift.
To Revo'Lve. v. n. [revolva, Lat.]
1. To roll in a circle; to perform a revolution.
They do not revolve about any common center. Cheyne.
If the earth revolve thus, each houſe near the equator muſt
move a thouſand miles an hour. Watts's Impr. of the Mind.
Each revolving year,
The teeming ewes a triple offspring bear. Pope.
2. To fall in a regular courſe of changing poſſeſſors; to devolve.
On the deſertion of an appeal, the juriſdiction does ipſo
jure revolve to the judge a quo. Ayliffe's Parergon.
To RF volv E. v. a. [revolva, Lat.]
1. To roll anything round.
Then in the Eaſt her turn ſhe ſhines, -
Revocation; repeal;
Shakeſp.
Revolv'd on heav'n's great axis. Milton.
2. To conſider; to meditate on.
You may revolve what tales I told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks of war. Shakeſp.
Revolution. m. ſ. [revolution, Fr. revolutus, Lat.]
1. Courſe of any thing which returns to the point at which it
began to move.
On their orbs impoſe
Such reſtleis revolution, day by da -
Repeated. A4ilton's Paradiſ. Loft, b. viii.
They will be taught by the diurnal revolution of the hea-
veins. Watts's Improvement of the Mind.
2. Space meaſured by ſome revolution.
At certain revolutions are they brought,
And feel by turns the bitter change. Milton.
Meteors have no more time allowed them for their mount-
ing, than the ſhort revolution of a day. Dryden.
The Perſian wept over his army, that within the revolution
of a fingle age, not a man would be left alive. JWake.
3. Change in the ſtate of a government or country. It is uſed
among us x2' 30×ºv, for the change produced by the admiſ-
ſion of king William and queen Mary.
4. Rotation in general; returning motion.
Fear
Comes thund'ring back with dreadful revolution -
On my defenſeleſs head. Milton.
To Revo'M it. v. a. [revomir, Fr. re and vomit.] To vomit;
to vomit again.
They might caſt it up, and take more vomiting and revo-
miting what they drink. Hakewill on Providence.
Revu'lsion. n.ſ. [revulſion, Fr. revulſus, Lat..] The act of
revolving or drawing humours from a remote part of the body.
Derivation differs from revulſion only in the meaſure of the
R H E
...: and the force of the medicines uſed: if we draw it
**Yºy remote or contrary part, we call it revulſion;
if only to ſome neighbouring place, 'ani by gentle ..
we call it derivation. Wiſeman of Tumours.
* ** way of revulſion to let blood in an adverſe
- Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
I had heard of ſome trange cures of frenzies, by *:::
applications of fire to the lower Parts, which ſeems reaſonable
. ** violent revulſion it may make of humours
To REWA/RD. v. a. Temple's Miſcellanies.
- [re and award, to give in return.
Skinner.]
1. To give in return.
Tho, haſt rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded
thee evil. I Sam. xxiv. 17
They rewarded me evil for good. Pſalm xxv. #.
2. To repay; to recompenſe for ſomething good. -
To judge th' unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receive them into bliſs. Milton.
. The ſupreme being rewards the juſt, and puniſhes the un-
juſt. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
Rewa'Rd. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. Recompenſe given for good.
ºrward; and puniſhments do always preſuppoſe ſomething
willingly done well or ill; without which reſpect, though wº
may ſometimes receive good, yet then it is only a benefit and
not a reward. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 9.
They have a good reward for their labour. Eccluſ. iv. 9.
* ...To myſelf I owe this due regard,
Not to make love my gift, but my reward. Dryden.
Men have conſented to the immortality of the ſoul and the
recompenſes of another world, promiſing to themſelves ſome
rewards of virtue after this life. Tillotſon.
2. It is ſometimes uſed with a mixture of irony, for puniſhment
or recompenſe of evil.
RewARDABLE. adj. [from reward.] Worthy of reward.
Men's actions are judged, whether in their own nature re-
wardable or puniſhable. Hooker, b. i. ſ. 9.
The action that is but indifferent, and without reward, if
done only upon our own choice, is an act of religion, and
rewardable by God, if done in obedience to our ſuperiors.
Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
Rewa'RDER. m. ſ. [from reward.] One that rewards; one
that recompenſes.
A liberal rewarder of his friends. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
As the ſupreme Being is the only proper judge of our per-
fe&amp;tions, ſo is he the only fit rewarder of them. Addiſon.
Ill judges, as well as rewarders, have popular aſſemblies
been, of thoſe who beſt deſerved from them. Swift.
To Rewo'RD. v. a. [re and word.] To repeat in the ſame words.
Bring me to the teſt,
And I the matter will reword; which madneſs
Would gambol from. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
RHABARBARAte. adj. [from rhabarbara, Lat.] Impregnated .
or tinčtured with rhubarb.
The ſalt humours muſt be evacuated by the ſennate, rha-
barbarate, and ſweet manna purgers, with acids added, or the
purging waters. Floyer on the Humours.
RHA'Bdom ANcy. n.ſ. [#233G and uzºlsiz.] Divination by
a wand.
Of peculiar rhabdomancy is that which is uſed in mineral
diſcoveries, with a forked hazel, commonly called Moſes's
rod, which, freely held forth, will ſtir and play if any mine
be under it. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
RHA'psodist. n.ſ.. [from rhapſody..] One who writes without
regular dependence of one part upon another.
Aſk our rhapſodi/?, if you have nothing but the excellence
and lovelineſs of virtue to preach, and no future rewards or
puniſhments, how many vicious wretches will you ever re-
claim. Iłatts's Improvement of the Mind.
RHA/PSODY. m. ſ. [paya,3}x ; ;&amp;#12, to ſew, and 237, a
ſong..] Any number of parts joined together, without ne-
ceſſary dependence or natural connection.
Such a deed, as ſweet religion makes
A rhapſody of words. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
This confuſion and rhapſody of difficulties was not to be ſup:
poſed in each ſingle finner. Hammond.
He, that makes no reflexions on what he reads, only loads
his mind with a rhapſody of tales fit for the eneurº ;
others. ocre.
The words ſlide over the ears, and vaniſh like a rhapſody
of evening tales. //atts's Improvement of the Mind.
RHE/TORICK. n.ſ. [??oexi; rhetºrique, Fr.] -
1. The aa of ſpeaking not merely with propricty, but with art
nd elegance.
d We É. not allow him an orator, who had the beſt
thoughts, and who knew all the rules of rhetorique, if he had
not acquired the art of uſing them. Dryden's Duffney.
Of the paſſions, and how they are moved, Ariſtotle, in
his ſecond book of rhetoriº, hath admirably diſcourſed in a
little compaſs. Locke's Thoughts on Reading.
Grammar teacheth us to ſpeak properly, thetoriº inſtructs
to ſpeak elegantly. Baker’s Reflections on Learning.
21 X 2. The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R H O
R I B
* * * uaſion; oratory.
2. T ºf: rhetorick, º with eyes. Shakespeare .
- jips then did he ſoftly part, -
wº º rhetorick whole ſtreams outflow. Fairfax.
Enjoy your dear wit and gay rhetoriº, -
That hath ſo well been taught her dazling fence. Milton.
Rhetorical. adj. [rhetoricus, Lat. from rhetorick.] . Pertain-
ing to rhetorick; oratorial ; figurative. - -
The apprehenſion is ſo deeply riveted into my mind... that
rhetorical flouriſhes cannot at all looſen it. More.
Becauſe Brutus and Caſſius met a blackmore, and Pompey
had on a dark gatment at Pharſalia, theſe were preſages of
their overthrow, which notwithſtanding are ſcarce rhetorical
ſequels; concluding metaphors from realities, and from con-
ceptions metaphorical inferring realities again. . . Brown.
The ſubject moral, logical, or rhetorical, which does not
come under our ſenſes. // atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Rheto'Rically. adv. [from rhetorical.] Like an orator;
figuratively; with intent to move the paſſions. -
To Rhetoricate. v. n. [rhetoricor, low Lat. from rhetorick.]
To play the orator; to attack the paſſions. -
*Twill be much more ſeaſonable to reform, than apologize
or rhetºricate; not to ſuffer themſelves to periſh in the midſt
of ſuch ſolicitations to be ſaved. Decay of Piety.
RHETori'cſ AN. m. ſ. [rhetoricien, Fr. rhetor, Lat..] One who
teaches the ſcience of rhetorick.
‘I he ancient ſophiſts and rhetoricians, which ever had young
auditors, lived till they were an hundred years old. Bacon.
'Tis the buſineſs of rhetoricians to treat the charaćters of
the paſſions. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
A man may be a very good rhetorician, and yet at the ſame
time a mean orator. Baker’s Reflections on Learning.
RHETori'cIAN. adj. Suiting a maſter of rhetorick.
Boldly preſum'd with rhetorician pride,
To hold of any queſtion either ſide. Blackmore.
RHEUM. m. ſ. [Ésupo, ; rheume, Fr.]. A thin watery matter
oozing through the glands, chiefly about the mouth. Quincy.
Truſt not thoſe cunning waters of his eyes;
For villainy is not without ſuch a rheum;
And he long traded in it, makes it ſeem
Like rivers of remorſe. Shakespeare
You did void your rheum upon my beard. Shakºp.
Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds. Shakeſp.
Each changing ſeaſon does its poiſon bring,
Rheums chill the winter, agues blaſt the ſpring. Prior.
RHEU'Matick, adj. [Éivºlº, from rheim.J. Proceeding
from rheum or a peccant watry humour.
The moon, the governeſs of floods,
Pale in her anger, waſhes all the air,
That rheumatick diſeaſes do abound. Shakeſp.
The blood taken away looked very ſizy or rheumatics. Floy.
RHEU'MATISM. m. ſ. ſºlº; ; rheumatiſme, Fr. rheumá.
tiftuſ, Lat.] A painful dittemper ſuppoſed to proceed from
acrid humours. -
Rheumatiſm is a diſtemper affecting chiefly the membrana
communis muſculorum, which it makes rigid and unfit for
motion; and it ſeems to be occaſioned almoſt by the ſame
cauſes, as the mucilaginous glands in the joints are rendered
itiff and gritty in the gout. &amp;Minºy.
-- The throtling quinſey 'tis my ſtar appoints,
And rheumatiſm; I ſend to rack the joints. Dryden.
RHEU'MY. adj. [from rheum.] Full of ſharp moiſture.
Is Brutus ſick
And will he ſteal out of his wholſome bed,
To dare the vile contagion of the night :
And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air,
To add unto his ſickneſs. Shºſp. julius Cæſar.
The South he loos'd, who night and horror brings,
And fogs are ſhaken from his flaggy wings: t
From his divided beard two ſtreams he pours;
His head and rheumy eyes diſtil in ſhow’rs. Dryden.
RHINo'cERos. m. ſ. [Éſ, and *i;2; ; rhinocerot, Fr.] A vaſt
beaſt in the Eaſt Indies armed with a horn in his front.
Approach thou like the rugged Ruſſian bear,
The arm'd rhinoceros, or Hyrcanian tyger;
Take any ſhape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble. Shakeſp. Macbeth
If you draw your beaſt in an emblem, ſhew a landſcape of
the Country natural to the beaſt; as to the rhinoceros an Eaſt
Indian landſcape, the crocodile, an Egyptian. Peacham
RHOMB. m. J. [rhombe, Fr. rhombus, Lt. £3.6GP.] In geo:
ºtry, a parallelogram or quadrangular figure, having its four
ides equal, and conſiſting of parallel lines, with two oppoſite
angles *ute, and two obtuſe: it is formed by two equal and
right *joined together at their baſe. Irºn, and Harris
r Save the ſun his labour, and that ſwift -
i. and diurnal rhomb ſuppos'd
"...º.º. all ſtars, the wheel
~ night. Milt
See how in warlike muſter they a 1/1477.
º rhombs and Wedges, and half iº wings. Mill
º adj. [from rhomb.] Shaped like a rhomb. 977,
Many other ſorts of ſtones are regularly figured 3 -
in i. a Rar, and they are of ... º”.
RHOMBOID. m. ſ. [fºotº: , rhomboide, Fr.) A figure
approaching to a rhomb. b
Many other ſorts of ſtones are regularly figured; and the
are of a rhombick figure ; talk, of ſuch as are rhomboid. *.
RHom Poi'DAL. adj. [from rhomboid..] Approaching in .
to a rhomb. º pe
Another rhomboidal ſelenites of a compreſſed form, had
many others infixed round the middle of it. hº
RHU'BARB. m. ſ. [rhabarbara, Lat..] A medicinal root flightly
purgative, referred by botaniſts to the dock. y
What rhubarb, ſenna, or what purgative drug
Would ſcour theſe Engliſh hence. Shaº. Macbeth
Having fixed the fontanel, I purged him with an infuſion
of rhubarb in ſmall ale. Wiſeman's Surger
RHYME. n.ſ. (#9993; ; rhythm, Fr.] J.
I. A harmonical ſucceſſion of ſounds.
2. The conſonance of verſes; the correſpondence of the laſt
found of one verſe to the laſt ſound or ſyllable of another
The youth with ſongs and rhimes : -
Some dance, ſome hale the rope.
For rhyme the rudder is of º, Denham.
With which like ſhips they ſteer their courſes. Hadºra,
Such was the news, indeed, but ſongs and rhymes -
Prevail as much in theſe hard iron times;
As would a plump of trembling fowl, that riſe
Againſt an eagle ſouſing from the ſkies. Dryden
If Cupid throws a ſingle dart, -
We make him wound the lover's heart;
But if he takes his bow and quiver,
'Tis ſure he muſt transfix the liver;
For rhime with reaſon may diſpenſe,
And ſound has right to govern ſenſe. Prior,
3. Poetry; a poem.
All his manly power it did diſperſe,
As he were warmed with inchanted rhimes,
That oftentimes he quak'd. Fairy Queen, b, i.
Who would not ſing for Lycidas? he knew
Himſelf to ſing, and build the lofty rhyme. Milton.
Now ſportive youth,
Carol incondite rhythms with ſuiting notes,
And quaver inharmonious. Philips,
RHYME or reaſºn. Number or ſenſe.
I was promis'd on a time,
To have reaſon for my rhyme;
But from that time unto this ſeaſon,
I had neither rhyme nor reaſºn. Spenſºr.
The guiltineſs of my mind drove the groſsneſs of the fop-
pery into a received belief, in deſpight of the tecth of all
rhine and reaſºn, that they were fairies. Shakeſp.
To RHYME. v. n.
1. To agree in ſound.
He was too warm on picking work to dwell, -
But fagotted his notions as they fell, ;
And, if they rhim'd and rattled, all was well. Dryden. )
2. To make verſes. -
Theſe fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhime themſelves
into ladies favours, they do always reaſon themſelves out
again. Shakeſp. Henry V.
There march'd the bard and blockhead, fidé by ſide,
Who rhym'd for hire, and patroniz'd for pride. Dunciad.
RHYMER. n. ſ. [from rhyme..] . One who makes rhymes;
RHYMSTER. ; a verſifier; a poet in contempt.
Scall’d rhimers will ballad us out o' tune. Shakeſp.
It was made penal to the Engliſh, to permit the Iriſh to
graze upon their lands, to entertain any of their miniſtrels,
himers, or news-tellers. Davies on Ireland.
Rhymer come on, and do the worſt you can ;
I fear not you, nor yet a better man. Dryden.
His rhime is conſtrained at an age, when the paſſion of
love makes every man a rhimer, though not a poet. Dryden.
I ſpeak of thoſe who are only rhizº/ſers. Dennis.
So modern rhimers wiſely blaſt
The poetry of ages paſt,
And from its ruin build their own. Shakeſp.
RHYTHMICAL. adj. [ÉvSpaixò; ; rythnique, Fr. from rhyme
or rhythm..] Harmonical; having proportion of one ſound to
another.
RIB. n.ſ. ſnibbe, Saxon.] A bone in the body.
1. Of theſe there are twenty-four in number, viz. twelve on
each ſide the twelve vertebrae of the back; they are ſegments
of a circle; they grow flat and broad, as they approach the
ſternum; but the nearer they are to the vertebrae, the rounder
and thicker they are ; at which end they have a round head,
which, being covered with a cartilage, is received into the
ſinus in the bodies of the vertebrae : the ribs, thus articulated,
make an acute angle with the lower vertebrae : the ribs have
each a ſmall canal or ſinus, which runs along their under
ſides, in which lies a nerve, vein, and artery : their extre-
mities, which are faſtened to the ſternum, are cartilaginous,
and the cartilages make an obtuſe angle with the bony part
of the ribs; this angle reſpects the head : the cartilages are
harder
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">º
R I C
R I C
| harder in women than in men, that they may better bear the Hilberic *** - ----------
º weight of their breaſts: the ribs are of two ſorts; the ſeven % {". ban º adſº,
t upper are called true ribs, becauſe their cartilaginous ends are Hil’pric Bárbarians ! i. ſº. abet.
º received into the finus of the ſternum: the five lower are So Alfric is altogether ſtron "º. º bl -
º called falſe ribs, becauſe they are foſter and ſhorter, of which Powerful: to the ſame ſenſe *. Pol e T1C, º y ſtrong or
º only the firſt is joined to the extremity of the ſternum, the chus, Opimius. olycrates, Sato, Plutar-
º: cartilaginous extremities of the reſt being tied to one another, Rice. n. f ſoryza, Lat..] One of the eſcul Gibſon J Camden.
º and thereby leaving a greater ſpace for the dilatation of the its grains diſpoſed into a panicle wº ent gº. : it hath
º ſtomach and intrails: the laſt of theſe ſhort ribs is ſhorter oval figure, and are covered with a . .. º: ſt º
g than all the reſt : it is not tied to them, but ſometimes to the like barley : this grain is greatly alsº luik, º at
º muſculus obliquus deſcendens. - &amp;tiny. Eaſtern countries. ed in moſt of the
why do I yield to that ſuggeſtion? - Rice is the food of two thirds of mankind ; it is ºff.
º Whoſe horrid image doth upfix my hair, - human conſtitutions, Proper for the conſum tive d ; .
nº And make my feated heart knock at my ribs, ſubjećt to haemorrhages. ptive, . } Oic
ºr. Againſt the uſe of nature! Shakeſp. Macbeth. If the ſnuff get out of the ſnuffers, it may fall i.;
s” . s He open'd my left ſide, and took of rice milk. Swift's Directions to the Bull,
- From thence a rib, with cordial ſpirits warm RICH. adj. [riche, Fr. ricco, Italian ; nica, Saxon.] r
* } And life blood ſtreaming freſh. » 44ilton's Par. Loft, b, viii. 1. Wealthy; abounding in wealth; abounding i. mone
lº, He, who firſt the paſſage try'd, poſſeſſions; opulent. c y or
In harden'd oak his heart did hide, I am as rich in having ſuch a jewel
º | And ribs of ...à. . ſide, As twenty ſeas, if all their ſand were pearl. Shakeſp.
º, Who tempted firſt the briny flood. Dryden's Horace. The rich ſhall not give more, and the poor no leſs. Exod
2. Any piece of timber or other matter which ſtrengthens the A thief bent to unhoard the caſh - -
ºrii, a ſide. Of ſome rich burgh -
gner. Milton.
I ſhould not ſee the ſandy hour glaſs run, Several nations of the Americans are rich in land, and * º:
But I ſhould think of ſhallows and of flats; in all the comforts of life. &gt; A.
Dº And ſee my wealthy Andrew dock'd in ſand, He may look upon the rich as benefactors, who haye beau:
jº. Yº: º: . º lower º, / W. tified the proſpect all around him. Seed
o kiſs her burial. *** 44erchant of Penice. 2. Valuable; eſtimable; precious; ſplendid: *
Rºº. zº. { ſº Fr. ribaldo, Italian.] A looſe, rough, &gt; Earth, in #: ; º id; ſumptuous.
º mean, brutal wretch. Conſummate lovely ſmil’d. - Milt
That lewd ribbald, with vile luſt advanced . Having anvi dient lities i Zuuton.
Laid firſt his filthy hands on virgin clean, &gt; 3 gree. g any ingredients or qualities in a great quantity or de-
* To ſpoil her dainty corſe ſo fair and ſheen. Fairy Queen. So we th’Arabian coaſt do know
Your ribauld nag of Egypt,
The breeze upon her, like a cow in June,
At diſtance, when the ſpices blow,
By the rich odour taught to ſteer,
Hoiſts ſails, and flies. Shakep. Antony and Cleopatra. Though neither day nor ſtar appear. J//aller.
*, *, The buſy day, - If life be ſhort, it ſhall be glorious,
lf. Wak'd by the lark, has rous'd the ribald crows, Each minute ſhall be rich in ſome great ačtion. Rowe.
ºil And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer. Shakeſp. Sauces and rich ſpices are fetched from India. Baker.
Ne'er one ſprig of laurel grac'd theſe ribbalds, 4. Fertile; fruitful.
From ſlaſhing Bentley down to pidling Tibbalds, Pope. There are, who fondly ſtudious of increaſe,
* RIBALDRY. m. J. [from ribald; ribaudie, old Fr.] Mean, Rich foreign mold on their ill-natur'd land
lewd, brutal language. Induce. Philips.
Mr. Cowley aſſerts, that obſcenity has no place in wit; Riched. adj. [from rich..] enriched. Obſolete.
Buckingham ſays, 'tis an ill ſort of wit, which has nothing Of all theſe bounds,
more to ſupport it than bare-faced ribaldry. Dryden. With ſhadowy foreſts, and with champions rich'd,
º, The ribaldry of the low charaćters is different; the reeve, With plenteous rivers and wide ſkirted meads,
:: miller, and cook are diſtinguiſhed from each other. Dryden, We make thee lady. Shakeſp. King Lear.
di In the ſame antique loom theſe ſcenes were wrought, Ri'ches. n. ſ. [richeſſes, Fr.]
º Embelliſh'd with good morals and juſt thought, 1. Wealth ; money or poſſeſſion.
True nature in her nobleſt light you ſee, The inſtrumentalneſs of riches to charity has rendered it
E’er yet debauch'd by modern gallantry } neceſſary by laws to ſecure propriety. Hammond.
To trifling jeſts and fulſom ibaldry. Granville. Chemiſts ſeek riches by tranſmutation and the great
If the outward profeſſion of religion were once in practice elixir. - Sprat.
among men in office, the clergy would ſee their duty and Riches do not conſiſt in having more gold and ſilver, but
intereſt in qualifying themſelves for lay-converſation, when in having more in proportion than our neighbours, whereby
is once they were out of fear of being choaked by ribaldry or we are enabled to procure to ourſelves a greater plenty of the
* * prophaneneſs. Swift. conveniencies of life, than comes within their reach, who,
\, R1/BAND. m. ſ. [rulande, ruban, Fr.] A filet of ſilk; a nar- ſharing the gold and ſilver of the world in a leſs proportion,
| - row web of ſilk, which is worn for ornament. want the means of plenty and power, and ſo are poorer. Locke.
* Quaint in green, ſhe ſhall be looſe enrob'd, What riches give us, let us firſt enquire,
5, With ribbands pendent, flaring 'bout her head. Shakeſp. Meat, fire, and cloaths ; what more ? meat, cloaths, and
A ribband did the braided treſſes bind, fire. Pope.
% The reſt was looſe. Dryden's Knight's Tale. 2. Splendid ſumptuous appearance.
9 See in the liſts they wait the trumpets ſound; The riches of heav'ns pavement, trodden gold. Milton,
Some love device is wrought on ev'ry ſword, Ri'ch LY. adu. [from rich.]
! And ev'ry riband bears ſome myſtick word. Granville, 1. With riches; wealthily; ſplendidly; magnificently.
- R1/BBED. adj. [from rib.] In Belmont is a lady richly left,
!. 1. Furniſhed with ribs. And ſhe is fair, of wondrous virtues. Shakeſp.
f Was I by rocks engender'd : rib'd with ſteel? Women richly gay in gems. Milton,
Such tortures to reſiſt, or not to feel? Sandys. 2. Plenteouſly. - -
• Hung on each bough a ſingle leaf appears, In animals, ſome ſmells are found more richly than in
Which ſhrivell'd in its infancy remains, plants. Brown's Pulgar Errours.
Like a clos'd fan, nor ſtretches wide its veins, After a man has ſtudied the laws of England, the reading
. But as the ſeaſons in their circle run, the reports of adjudged caſes will richly improve him. *atti.
: Opes its ribb'd ſurface to the nearer ſun. Gay. 3. Truly ; abundantly. An ironical uſe.
º 2. Incloſed as the body by ribs. There is ſuch licentiouſneſs among the baſeſt of the people,
that one would not be ſorry to ſee them beſtºwing upº ºns
The nat'ral brav'ry of your iſle, which ſtands another a chaſtiſement, which they ſo richly deſerve. Addiſon.
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in, Ri'ch Ness. n.ſ.. [from rich.]
With rocks unſcaleable, and roaring waters. Shakeſp. 1. Opulence; wealth. rld :
R1/bbon. n.ſ. See RIBAND. Of virtue you have left proof to the Wºlº :
To R1'BRoast. v. n. [rib and rodſ?..] To beat ſoundly. A And virtue is grateful with beauty and richneſ, adorn'd. Sid.
burleſque word. 2. Finery; ſplendour.
That done, he riſes, humbly bows 3. Fertility; fecundity; fruitfulneſs. - :/.
And gives thinks for the princely tiºs ; This ºwn is famous for the richnºſ of the ſoil. Addison.
- £2.3 : - lity.
Departs not meanly proud, and boaſtin 4. Abundance or perfectiºn of any quality. . -
§. º: ribroaſting. 5 Butler. I amuſed myſelf with the richnſ; and variety of colours in
I have been pinched in fleſh, and well ribroaffed under my the weſtern parts of heaven. Spectator.
former maſters ; but I’m in now for ikin and all. L'E/irange. . Pampering qualities: - 1
Ri'Bwort. m. ſ. &gt; A plant. 2/trang 5 The lively tincture of whoſe guſhing blood
Ric. n.ſ. Ric denotes a powerful, rich, or valiant man; as Shou'd clearly prove the richneſs of his focq,
in theſe verſes of Fortunatus :
Remember
Dryden.
Rick.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 256</div><p class="Text">R I D
*
R I D
Rick. n.ſ. See REEK:
1. A pile of corn or hay regu
eltered from wet. -
and ſh An inundation
•erflowed a farmer's barn and ſtable;
§: ricks of hay and ſtacks of corn -
were down the ſudden current born. Swift.
Mice and rats do great injuries in the field, houſ;, barns,
and corn ricks. - Mortimer's Huſbandry.
2. A heap of corn or hay piled by the gatherer.
In the North they bind them up in ſmall bundles, and make
ſmall ricks of them in the field. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
RICKETs. n.ſ. [rachitis, Lat. A name given to the di-
ſtemper at its appearance by Gliſºn.] -
The rickets is a diſłemper in children, from an unequal di-
ſtribution of nouriſhment, whereby the joints grow knotty,
and the limbs uneven : its cure is performed by evacuation
and frićtion. - $2uincy.
In ſome years, liver-grown, ſpleen, and riºt. are put al-
together, by reaſon of their likeneſs. Grant s Bills of Mort.
O were my pupil fairly knock'd o'th head,
I ſhould poſſeſ; th' eſtate, if he were dead;
He's ſo far gone with the rickets and th’ evil, -
That one ſmall doſe will ſend him to the devil.
So when at ſchool we firſt declaim,
Old Buſby walks us in a theme, .
whoſe props ſupport our infant vein,
And help the rickets in the brain;
But when our ſouls their force dilate, -
Our thoughts grow up to wit’s eſtate. - Prior.
Rick ety. adj. [from rickets.]. Diſeaſed with the rickets.
In a young animal, when the ſolids are too lax, the caſe
of ricity children, the diet ſhould be gently aſtringent. Ark.
Ri'cklus. n.ſ. A plant. Ainſworth.
Ri'ctur E. m. ſ. [ričiura, Lat..] A gaping. Dić?.
RID. pret. of ride.
To RiD. v. a. [from hreoban, Saxon.]
1. To ſet free; to redeem.
It is he that delivereth me from my cruel enemies; thou
ſhalt rid me from the wicked man. - Pſalm xviii. 49.
Rid me, and deliver me out of great waters. Pſalm cxliv.
I will bring you out from under their burthens, and rid
you out of their bondage. Exodus vi. 6.
2. To clear; to diſencumber.
They were not before ſo willing to be rid of their learned
paſtor, as now importunate to obtain him again from them,
who had given him entertainment. Hooker.
. I muſt rid all the ſeas of pirates. . Shakeſp.
We'll uſe his countenance; which being done,
Let her, who :be rid of him, deviſe
His ſpeedy taking off. Shakespeare. King Lear.
P 't. É. word, ſtept forth ºff. King
Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care. B. Johnſºn.
I can put on
Thy terrors, as I put thy mildneſs on,
Image of thee in all things; and ſhall ſoon,
Arm'd with thy might, rid heav'n of theſe rebell’d. Milton.
Did ſaints for this bring in their plate;
For when they thought the cauſe had need on't,
larly heaped up in the open field,
Dryden.
Happy was he that could be rid on’t. Hudibras.
The god uneaſy till he ſlept again,
Reſolv’d at once to rid himſelf of pain. Dryden.
At any rate we deſire to be rid of the preſent evil, which
we are apt to think nothing abſent can equal. Locke.
. The greater viſible good does not always raiſe men's deſire,
in proportion to the greatneſs it appears to have; though
every little trouble moves us, and ſets on work to get rid of
1t. - Locke.
The ladies aſked, whether we believed that the men of any
town would, at the ſame conjuncture, have loaden themſelves
with their wives; or rather, whether they would not have been
glad of ſuch an opportunity to get rid of them : Addiſon.
The father, ſeeing himſelf entirely rid of Theodoſius, was
. . much concerned at the obſtinate refuſal of his
aughter. Addiſon' o
3. #.h. iſon's Speciator, N° 164.
Having the beſt at Barnet field,
We'll thither ſtraight; for willingneſs rid, away. Shakeſp.
4. To drive away; to preſs away; to deſtroy.
, Ah deathſmen! you have rid this ſweet young prince. Sha,
Ri'pDANce. n.ſ. [from rid.]
I. Deliverance. *-
Deliverance from ſudden death, riddance from all adverſity
and the extent of ſaving mercy towards all men. Hº.
2. Diſencumbrance; loſs of ſomething one is glad to loſe. -
I have too griev'd a heart
Tºtake lº. leave : thus loſers part.
-A gentle riddance. Shakeſp. Merchant of Venice.
* this, the cock had a good ...: of his º:
3. #, . away any encumbrances.
* P19ttoms, and thoſe dropping gu
That lie beſtrown, unſightly . &gt;
Aſk riddance, if we mean to tread with eaſe, Milton,
R1/DDEN, the participle of ride.
He could never have ridden out an eternal period, but it
muſt be by a more powerful being than himſelf. Hale.
RI’DDLE. n.ſ.. [naebelſ, Saxon, from naebe, counſel, perhaps
a trial of wit..]
1. An enigma; a puzzling queſtion; a dark problem.
How did you dare
To trade and traffick with Macbeth,
In riddles and in charms of death. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
The Theban monſter, that propos'd
Her riddle, and him, who ſolv’d it not, devour’d ;
That once found out and ſolv’d, for grief and ſpight
Caſt herſelf headlong from the Iſmenian ſteep. Milton.
Her mother was thinking of a riddle. Dryden.
2. Anything puzzling.
'Twas a ſtrange riddle of a lady;
Not love, if any lov'd her: heyday!
So cowards never uſe their might,
But againſt ſuch as will not fight.
3. [hnibble, Saxon.] . A coarſe or open fieve.
Horſe-beans and tares, ſown together, are eaſily parted
with a riddle. Mortimer's Huſſandy.
To Ri'DDL.E. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſolve; to unriddle. There is ſomething of whimſical
analogy between the two ſenſes of the word riddle: as, we
ſay, to fift a queſtion : but their derivations differ.
Riddle me this, and gueſs him if you can,
Who bears a nation in a ſingle man? Dryden's juvenal.
2. To ſeparate by a coarſe ſieve. -
The fineſt fifted mould muſt be riddled in. Mortimer.
To Riddle. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſpeak ambiguouſly
or obſcurely.
Be plain, good ſon, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confeſſion finds but riddling ſhrift.
Hudibras,
Shakespeare
R1/DDLINGly. adv. [from riddle..] In the manner of a riddle.”
Though like the peſtilence and old-faſhion'd love,
Riddlingly it catch men, and doth remove
Never, till it be ſtarv'd out, yet their ſtate
Is poor. Donne:
To RIDE. v. n. preter. rid or rode, part. rid or ridden. Iniban,
Saxon; rijden, Dutch.]
1. To travel on horſeback.
Brutus and Caſſius
Are rid, like madmen, through the gates of Rome. Shakespeare
Were you but riding forth to air yourſelf,
Such parting were too petty. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
Am not I thine aſs, upon which thou haſt ridden à Numb.
So ſtands a foreſt tall of mountain oaks
Advanc'd to mighty growth; the traveller
Hears from the humble valley, where he rider,
The hollow murmurs of the winds that blow
Amidſt the boughs. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Let your maſter ride on before, and do you gallop after
him. Swift's Directions to the Groom.
2. To travel in a vehicle; to be borne, not to walk.
Infected be the air whereon they ride. Shakespeare.
Upon this chaos rid the diſtreſſed ark, that bore the ſmall
remains of mankind. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
3. To be ſupported in motion.
As venerable Neſtor, hatch'd in ſilver,
Should with a bond of air, ſtrong as the axle-tree,
On which heav'n rides, knit all the Grecian ears
To his experienc'd tongue. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
4. To manage an horſe.
Skill to ride ſeems a ſcience,
Proper to gentle blood; ſome others feign,
To manage ſteeds, as did this vaunter; but in vain. F.&amp;
The horſes I ſaw well choſen, ridden, and furniſhed. Shaº.
Inſpir’d by love, whoſe buſineſs is to pleaſe,
He rode, he fenc'd, he mov’d with graceful caſe. Pryden.
5. To be on the water.
On the Weſtern coaſt -
Rideth a puiſſant army. Shakespeare . Rich. III.
The ſea was grown ſo rough, that the admiral was not
able longer to ride it out with his gallies; but was enforced to
ſlip his anchors, and run his gallies on ground. . . . Knoles.
. They were then in a place to be aided by their ſhip; which
rode near in Edinburgh Frith. Hayward.
Waiting him his royal fleet did ride,
And willing winds to their low'r'd ſails deny'd, Dryden.
Men once walk'd where ſhips at anchor ride. Dryden.
Now on their coaſts our conquering navy ride, 7
Way-lays their merchants, and their land beſets. Dryden.
6. To be ſupported by ſomething ſubſervient.
A credulous father, and a brother noble,
Whoſe nature is ſo far from doing harms,
That he ſuſpects none; on whoſe fooliſh honeſty.
My practices rid eaſy. Shakeſp. King Lear.
To RIDE. v. a. To manage inſolently at will.
Humility does not make us ſervile or inſenſible,
us to be ridden at the pleaſure of every coxcomb. Collier.
The nobility could no longer endure to be ridden by bakers,
coblers and brewers. Swift's Preſbyteriº Plea.
noſ oblige
RIDE R.
*:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 257</div><p class="Text">R I D
ſº
R1'DER. m. ſ. [from ride.]
1. One who is carried on a horſe or in a vehicle.
The ſtrong camel and the gen’rous horſe,
Reſtrain’d and aw’d by man's inferior force,
Do to the rider's will their rage ſubmit,
And anſwer to the ſpur, and own the bit.
2. One who manages or breaks horſes.
His horſes are bred better ; and to that end riders dearly
hired. Shakeſp. As rou Like it.
I would with jockies from Newmarket dine,
And to rough riders give my choiceſt wine.
3. An inſerted leaf.
RIDGE. m. ſ. [hnix5, Saxon ; rig, Daniſh; rugge, Dutch,
the back.]
1. The top of the back.
He thought it was no time to ſtay;
But in a trice advanc'd the knight
Upon the bare ridge bolt upright. Hudibras.
2. The rough top of anything, reſembling the vertebrae of the
back.
As when a vulture on Imaus bred, .
Whoſe ſnowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Prior.
Bramſton.
Diſlodges from a region ſcarce of prey. Milton.
His ſons
Shall dwell to Seir, on that long ridge of hills Milton.
The higheſt ridges of thoſe mountains ſerve for the main-
tenance of cattle for the inhabitants of the vallies. Ray.
3. A ſteep protuberance.
Part riſe in cryſtal wall, or ridge dire&amp;t,
For haſte. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. vii.
About her coaſts unruly waters roar,
And, riſing on a ridge, inſult the ſhore.
4. The ground thrown up by the plow.
Thou viſiteſt the earth; thou watereſt the ridges thereof
abundantly ; thou ſettleſt the furrows thereof. Pſalm lxv. 10.
The body is ſmooth on that end, and on this 'tis ſet with
ridges round the point. Woodward.
Wheat muſt be ſowed above furrow fourteen days before
Michaelmas, and laid up in round high warm ridges. Mort.
Land for graſs lay down when you ſow wheat or rye; but
then your corn ſhould be ſowed on broad ridges. Mortimer.
5. The top of the roof riſing to an acute angle.
Ridge tiles or roof tiles, being in length thirteen inches,
and made circular breadthways like an half cylinder, whoſe
diameter is about ten inches or more, and about half an inch
and half a quarter in thickneſs, are laid upon the upper part
or ridge of the roof, and alſo on the hips. 0x0/?.
6. Ridges of a horſe's mouth are wrinkles or riſings of the
fleſh in the roof of the mouth, running acroſs from one ſide
of the jaw to the other like fleſhy ridges, with interjacent
furrows or ſinking cavities. Farrier's Dić7.
To RIDGE. v. a. [from the noun..] To form a ridge.
Thou from heav'n
Feign'dſt at thy birth was given thee in thy hair,
Where ſtrength can leaſt abide, though all thy hairs
Were briſtles rang'd like thoſe that ridge the back
Of chaf’d wild boars, or ruffl'd porcupines. Milton.
R1'DGLING. }". ſ: [ovis rejicula, Lat. Ainſ.] A ram half
R1 DGIL. caſtrated.
Tend my herd, and ſee them fed;
To morning paſtures, evening waters led :
Dryden.
And 'ware the Libyan ridgil's butting head. Dryden.
Tend them well, and ſee them fed
In paſtures freſh, and to their watering led ;
And 'ware the ridgling with his butting head. Dryden.
Ri'Do Y. adj. [from ridge..] Riſing in a ridge.
Far in the ſea againſt the foaming ſhore,
There ſtands a rock, the raging billows roar
Above his head in ſtorms; but when 'tis clear,
Uncurl their ridgy backs, and at his feet appear. Dryden.
RI’DICULE. n.ſ. [ridicule, Fr. ridiculum, Lat.] Wit of that
ſpecies that provokes laughter.
Sacred to ridicule his whole life long,
And the ſad burthen of ſome merry ſong. Pope.
Touch'd and ſham'd by ridicule alone. Pope.
Thoſe, who aim at ridicule,
Should fix upon ſome certain rule,
Which fairly hints they are in jeſt. Swift's Miſcellanies.
To R1'Dicule. v. a. [from the noun...] To expoſe to laughter;
to treat with contemptuous merriment.
I wiſh the vein of ridiculing all that is ſerious and good
may have no worſe effect upon our ſtate, than knight errantry
had on theirs. Temple.
He often took a pleaſure to appear ignorant, that he might
the better turn to ridicule thoſe that valued themſelves on
their books. Addiſon on Medals.
RJD1'culous. adj. [ridicule, Fr. ridiculus, Lat.j Worthy of
laughter; exciting contemptuous merriment.
Thus was the building left
Ridiculous; and the work confuſion nam'd. Milton.
It was not in Titus's power not to be derided; but it was
in his power not to be ridiculous. South.
R H F
f - - - -
Ridi'culously. adv. [from ridcºlºus.] In a manner worthy
of É. Or COIntempt.
- *~ 1: - - - - -
ſ #. s diſcourſe Concerning the original of the world is
o ridiculouſly merry, that the deſign of his philoſophy was
pleaſure and not inſtruction. South
*º * * / [from ridiculºus...] The quality of being
- what ſport do Tertullian, Minucius and Arnobius make
with the images conſecrated to divine worſhip from the
meanneſs of the matter they are made, the jij fire,
and rottenneſs they are ſubject to, on purpoſe to repreſent the
ridiculouſneſs of worſhipping ſuch things. Stillingfleet.
Ri'DING.' particip: adj. Employed to travel on any occaſion.
It is provided by another provincial conſtitution, that no
ſuffragan biſhop ſhall have more than one riding Appº,
and that archdeacons ſhall not have ſo much as one riding aſ:
paritor, but only a foot meſſenger. Ayliff's Parergon.
R1'DING. m. ſ. [from ride..] A diſtrićt viſited by an office.
Ri'DINGcoat. n.ſ. ['iding and coat.] A coat made to keep
out weather.
When you carry your maſter's ridingcoat in a journey, wrap
your own in it. Swift's Directions to the Groom.
Riding Hood. n.ſ. [riding and hoºd.] A hood uſed by wo-
men, when they travel, to bear off the rain.
The palliolum was like our ridinghood, and ſerved both
for a tunick and a coat. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Good houſewives all the winter's rage deſpiſe, -
Defended by the ridinghood's diſguiſe. Gay.
RIF. m. ſ. An eſculent grain. The flowers have no leaves,
but conſiſt of ſeveral ſtamina, produced from the flower.
cup ; theſe flowers are collected into a ſmall ſpike, and
are diſpoſed almoſt ſingly: from the flower-cup ariſes the
pointal, afterward an oblong ſlender ſeed incloſed in an huſk,
which was before the flower-cup : this differs from wheat in
having a flatter ſpike, the corn larger and more naked. Miller.
Auguſt ſhall bear the form of a young man of a fierce
aſpect, upon his head a garland of wheat and rie. Peacham.
RIFE. adj. [nype, Saxon; riff, Dutch..] Prevalent; prevail-
ing; abounding. It is now only uſed of epidemical diſtempers.
While thoſe reſtleſs deſires, in great men riſe,
To viſit ſo low folks did much diſdain,
This while, though poor, they in themſelves did reign. Sid.
Guyon cloſely did await
Avantage; whilſt his foe did rage moſt rife;
Sometimes athwart, ſometimes he ſtrook him ſtraight,
And falſed oft his blows. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
The plague was then rife in Hungary. Knolles.
Bleſfings then are plentiful and rife,
More plentiful than hope. Herbert.
Space may produce new worlds; whereof ſo rife
There went a fame in heav'n, that he ere long
Intended to create. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. i.
This is the place,
Whence ev'n now the tumult of loud mirth
Was rife, and perfect in my liſt'ning ear. Milton.
That grounded maxim
So rife and celebrated in the mouths
Of wiſeſt men, that to the publick good
Private reſpects muſt yield. Milton.
Before the plague of London, inflammations of the lungs
were rife and mortal. Arbuthnot on Air.
R1/FELY. adv. [from rife.] Prevalently; abundantly.
It was riſely reported, that the Turks were coming in a
great fleet. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
RIF ENess. n.ſ.. [from rife.] Prevalence; abundance.
He aſcribes the great rifeneſ of carbuncles in the ſummer,
to the great heats. Arbuthnot on Air.
To Riff.E. v.a. [riffer, rifter, Fr. rifelen, Dutch..] To
rob ; to pillage; to plunder. -
Stand, Sir, and throw us what you have about you ; if
not, we'll make you, Sir, and rifle you. Shakeſp.
Men, by his ſuggeſtion taught,
Ranſack'd the centre, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother earth -
For treaſures better hid. Milton's Paradiſ, Loſº, b. i.
You have rifted my maſter, who ſhall maintain me? L’Eſt.
A commander in the parliament's rebel army rifted and de-
faced the cathedral at Litchfield. - South.
Mine is thy daughter, prieſt, and ſhall remain, .
And pray'rs, and tears, and bribes ſhall plead in vain,
Till time ſhall rifle every youthful grace; - Pope.
Ri'FLER. m. ſ. [from rifle.]. Robber ; plunderer; pillager.
RIFT. n.ſ. (from rive. A cleft; a breach; an opening:
Hépſuckt a bough, out of whoſe iſ there cºne -
Small drops of gory blood. Fairy Queen, b. i.
She did confine thee .
Into a cloven pine, within which ºft. 1. – a wº
Impriſon'd, thou didſt painfully remain. Shakespeare .
In 'St. James's fields is a conduit of brick, unto which
joineth a low vault; at the end of that is a round houſe, with
a ſmall ſlit or rift ; and in the conduit a window : if you cry
out in the rift, it makes a fearful roaring at the window. Bac.
21 Y They
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 258</div><p class="Text">R I G
R I G
r idle tradition -
They ... ºne ji, expelleth it whole ; which,
f a tree that hath ſome rift, putteth
Bacon.
upon a
fälling upon. bough o
the miſſeltoe: -
forth Either tropick
"Gan thunder, and both ** of heav'n; the clouds
From many a horrid rift abortive pour d -
Fierce rain, with lightning mºtº Milton.
Some pick out bullets from the veſſels ſides, .
Some drive old oakum through each ſeam and rift. Dryd.
To Riºr. v. a... [from the noun.] To cleave ; to ſplit.
To the dread rattling º: ſt k
Have I giv'n fire, and rifle ove’s ſtout oa
With º own bolt. ift Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
At fight of him the people with a ſhout... , -
Rifted the air. ks, the d late ab * Agoniſtes.
On rifted rocks, the dragon's late aboº, p.,
The º reed trembles. Pope's Mºffah.
To RIFT. v. n.
1. To burſt; to open.
I'd ſhriek, that even your cars
Should rift to hear me. y Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
Some trees are beſt for ſhip-timber, as oaks that grow in
moiſt grounds; for that maketh the timber tough, and In Ot
apt to rift with ordnance. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
when ice is congealed in a cup, it will ſwell inſtead of
contracting, and ſometimes ºft. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
2. [Raver, Daniſh.) To belch ; to break wind. - -
RIG. n.ſ. Rig, ridge, ſeem to ſignify the top of a hill falling
on each ſide; from the Saxon, hm35; and the Iſlandick,
hriggur, both ſignifying a back. Gilſon's Camden.
To Rio. v. a. [from rig or ridge, the back.]
1. To dreſs; to accoutre. Cloaths as proverbially ſaid to be
for the back, and vićtuals for the belly.
Jack was rigged out in his gold and ſilver lace, with a
feather in his cap; and a pretty figure he mº, in the
world. L’Eſtrange.
2. To fit with tackling. -
He, like a fooliſh pilot, hath ſhipwreck'ſ
My veſſel gloriouſly rigg'd. Milton's Agoniſłes.
The finneſſ ſhall ſet forth like a ſhip launched into the wide
ſea, not only well built and rigged; but alſo ; on with
full wind. South's Sermons.
He bids them rig the fleet. Denham.
He rigged out another ſmall fleet, and the Achaeans engaged
him with theirs. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Rigadoo'N. n.ſ. [rigadon, French.l. A dance.
Rigation. n.ſ. irigatio, Lat..] The aët of watering, Diä.
Ri'ccer. n.ſ. (from rig..] . One that rigs or dreſſes.
Rºº. #. J. [from rig..] The ſails or tackling of a
ip.
To plow the deep,
To make fit rigging, or to build a ſhip. Creech.
His batter'd rigging their whole war receives;
All bare, like ſome old oak with tempeſts beat,
He ſtands, and ſees below his ſcatter'd leaves. Dryden.
Ri'cois H. adj. [from rig, an old word for a whore.] Wanton;
whoriſh.
Vileſt things
Become themſelves in her, that the holy prieſts
Bleſs her, when ſhe is riggiſh. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop.
To R1'GGLE. v. a. [properly to wriggle.] To move backward
and forward, as ſhrinking from pain.
RIGHT., adj. [rigº, Saxon; recht, Dutch; ritto, Italian;
rečius, Latin.] -
1. Fit; proper; becoming; ſuitable ; true ; not erroneous;
not wrong.
How forcible are right words ! but what doth your ar-
guing reprove : job vi. 25.
The words of my mouth are plain to him that under-
ſtandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. Prov. viii.
The Lord God led me in the right way. Gen. xxiv. 48.
There being no law of nature, nor poſitive law of God,
that determines which is the right heir in all caſes, the right
of ſucceſſion could not have been certainly determined. Locke.
If there be no proſpect beyond the grave, the inference is
certainly right, let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.
Our calendar wants to be reformed, and the equinox #
tºº and being once reformed and ſet right, it may be
ept ſo, by omitting the additional day at the end of every
hundred and thirty-four years. Holder on Time
A time there will be, when all theſe unequal diſtribution.
of good and evil ſhall be ſet right, and the wiſdom of all his
...Sººº.º i. clear as the noon-day. Atterbury.
sº
ou are right. iuſti ~~! :-
Therefore flii ..".Ul *:::: . y 3. Sh
3. Jº honeſt; equitable. and the 1 WOICl. Shakeſp.
"...ºrish with him, with wººd.
7 Pſalm lxxviii. 37.
that a miſſel bird, feeding 4. Happy; convenient.
The lady has been diſappointed on the right ſide, and found
nothing more diſagreeable in the huſband, than ſhe diſcovered
in the lover. Addiſon's Speciator.
5. Not left.
It is not with that certainty to be received, what is believed
concerning the right and left hand, that men naturally make
uſe of the right, and that the uſe of the other is a digreſſion.
Brown's Pulgar Errours.
The left foot naked, when they march to fight,
But in a bull's raw hide they ſheathe the right. Dryden.
6. Strait; not crooked.
The idea of a right lined triangle neceſſarily carries with it
an equality of its angles to two right ones. Locke.
7. Perpendicular.
RIGHT. interjefi. An expreſſion of approbation.
Right, cries his lordſhip, for a rogue in need
To have a taſte, is inſolence indeed :
In me 'tis noble, ſuits my birth and ſtate. Pope,
RIGHT. adv. -
1. Properly; juſtly ; exactly; according to truth.
Then ſhall the right aiming thunder-bolts go abroad, and
from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, ſhall they fly to
the mark. JWiſdom v. 21.
With ſtrićt diſcipline inſtrućted right,
Have learn'd to uſe your arms before you fight. Roſcommon.
Take heed you ſteer your veſſel right, my ſon,
This calm of heaven, this mermaid’s melody,
Into an unſeen whirlpool draws you faſt,
And in a moment ſinks you. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
To underſtand political power right, and derive it from its
original, we muſt conſider what ſtate all men are naturally in,
and that is a ſtate of perfect freedom to order their actions,
and diſpoſe of their poſſeſſions and perſons. Locke.
2. In a direct line. r
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look
ſtraight before thee. Proverbs iv. 25.
Ye ſhall be driven out right forth, and none ſhall gather
up him that wandereth. er. xlix. 5.
The people paſſed over right againſt Jericho. jºſ. iii. 10.
Inſects have voluntary motion, and therefore imagination;
for ants go right forwards to their hills, and bees know the
way from a flowery heath to their hives. Bacon.
This way, right down to Paradiſe deſcend. Milton.
3. In a great degree; very. Now ºbſolete.
Igat me to my Lord right humbly.
Right noble princes,
I'll acquaint our duteous citizens.
Pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right chriſtian zeal, Shakeſp.
I cannot joy, until I be reſolv’d
where our right valiant is become. Sha&amp;#. Henry VI.
God ſhall help her right early. Palm xlvi. 5.
The ſenate will ſmart deep
For your upbraidings: I ſhould be right ſorry
To have the means ſo to be veng'd on you,
As I ſhall ſhortly on them. Benj. johnſºn.
Hudibras, p. i.
Right many a widow his keen blade,
And many fatherleſs, had made.
4. It is ſtill uſed in titles; as, right honourable; right reverend.
I mention the right honourable Thomas Howard lord high
marſhal. Peacham on Drawing.
RIGHT. n. ſ.
1. Juſtice; not wrong.
Perſons of noble blood are leſs envicd in their riſing; for
it ſeemeth but right done to their birth. - Bacon.
In the midſt of your invečtives, do the Turks this right,
as to remember that they are no idolaters. Bacºn.
One riſing, eminent
In wiſe deport, ſpake much of right and wrong,
Of juſtice, of religion, truth, and peace;
And judgement from above. Milton's Par. Lº?.
Long love to her has borne the faithful knight,
And well deſerv'd, had fortune done him right. Dryden.
He, that would do right to religion, canº?" take a more
effectual courſe, than by reconciling it with the happineſs of
Pſalm xxx. 8,
Shakeſ, Rich, III.
mankind. Tillaſon.
2. Freedom from errour.
Seldom your opinions err ; -
y p &gt; Prior.
Your eyes are always in the right.
3. Juſt claim.
The Roman citizens were, by the ſword, taught to ac-
knowledge the pope their lord, though *. knºw ºf
..what right. Raleigh's Eſſay.
The proud tyrant would many times ſay, that whatſoever
belonged unto the empire of Rome, was of right his, for.”
much as he was poſſeſſed of the imperialſº which his
great grandfather Mahomet had by law of arms won from
Conſtantine. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
Subdue by force, all who refuſe . .
Right reaſon for their law; and for their king il.
Meſfiah, who by right of merit reigns. Mi sº<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 259</div><p class="Text">R I G
R I G
My right to it appears,
By long poſſeſſion of eight hundred years. Dryden.
Might and right are inſeparable in the opinion of the
world. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
Deſcriptions, figures, and fables muſt be in all heroick
poems; every poet hath as much right to them, as every man
hath to air. Dryden.
Judah pronounced ſentence of death againſt Thamar: our
author thinks it is very good proof, that becauſe he did it,
therefore he had a right to do it. Locke.
Agrippa is generally ranged in ſets of medals among the
the emperors ; as ſome among the empreſſes have no other
right. Addiſon,
4. That which juſtly belongs to one.
To thee doth the right of her appertain, ſeeing thou only
art of her kindred. Tob. vi. II.
The cuſtom of employing theſe great perſons in all great
offices, paſſes for a right. Temple.
The prisºner freed himſelf by nature's laws,
Born free, he ſought his right. Dryden's Knight's Tale,
5. Property ; intereſt.
A ſubječt in his prince may claim a right,
Nor ſuffer him with ſtrength impair'd to fight.
6. Power; prerogative.
God hath a ſovereign right over us, as we are his creatures,
and by virtue of this right, he might, without injuſtice, have
impoſed difficult taſks : but in making laws, he hath not
Dryden.
made uſe of this right. Tillotſon.
7. Immunity; privilege.
The citizens,
Let them but have their rights, are ever forward
In celebration of this day with ſhews. Shakeſp.
Their only thoughts and hope was to defend their own
rights and liberties, due to them by the law. Clarendon.
8. The ſide not left.
On his right
The radiant image of his glory ſat,
His only ſon. Milton,
9. To Rights. In a direét line; ſtraight.
Theſe ſtrata failing, the whole tract ſinks down to rights
into the abyſs, and is ſwallowed up by it. Woodward.
10. To RIGHTs. Deliverance from errour. -
Several have gone about to inform them, and ſet them to
rights; but for want of that knowledge of the preſent ſyſtem
of nature, have not given the ſatisfaction expected. Woodw.
To RIGHT. v. a. To do juſtice to ; to eſtabliſh in poſſeſſions
juſtly claimed; to relieve from wrong.
How will this grieve you,
When you ſhall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have publiſh'd me gentle my lord,
You ſcarce can right me throughly. Shakeſp.
If the injured perſon be not righted, every one of them is
wholy guilty of the injuſtice, and bound to reſtitution. Taylor.
I cou’d not expedient ſee,
On this fide death, to right our family. J/aller.
Make my father known,
To right my honour, and redeem your own. Dryden.
RIGHTEOUS. adj. Inihºtre, Saxon ; whence rightwiſe in
old authours, and rightwiſely in biſhop Fiſher: ſo much are
words corrupted by pronunciation.]
1. Juſt ; honeſt; virtuous; uncorrupt.
That far be from thee, to ſlay the righteous with the
wicked ; and that the righteous ſhould be as the wicked. Gen.
2. Equitable.
Kill my rival too; for he no leſs
Deſerves; and I thy righteous doom will bleſs. Dryden.
R1/GHTEously. adv. [from righteous.] Honeſtly; virtuouſly.
Athens did righteouſly decide,
When Phocion and when Socrates were try’d;
As righteouſly they did thoſe dooms repent,
Still they were wiſe, whatever way they went. Dryden.
Ri'chteousness. n.ſ.. [from righteous.] Juſtice; honeſty;
virtue; goodneſs.
The ſcripture, aſcribing to the perſons of men righteouſheſ,
in regard of their manifold virtues, may not be conſtrued, as
though it did thereby clear them from all faults. Hocker.
Here wretched Phlegias warns the world with cries,
Cou’d warning make the world more juſt or wiſe; }
Learn righteouſneſs, and dread th’ avenging deities. Dry.
RI'GHTFUL. adj. [right and full.]
1. Having the right ; having the juſt claim.
As in this haughty great attempt,
They laboured to ſupplant the rightful heir ;
I loſt my liberty, and they their lives. Shakeſp. Hen. VI.
Some will mourn in aſhes, ſome coal black,
For the depoſing of a rightful king. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
2. Honeſt, juſt. -
- Nor would, for gold or fee,
Be won, their rightful cauſes down to tread. Fairy Queen.
Gather all the ſmiling hours;
Such as with friendly care have guarded
Patriots and kings in rightful wars. Prior.
*-* -–- -
Ri'chtfully. adv. [from rightful..] According to right;
according to juſtice.
- Henry, who claimed by ſucceſſion, was ſenſible that his
title was not ſound, but was rightfully in Mortimer, who had
married the heir of York. Dryden's Preface to Fables,
Right-HAND. m. ſ. Not the left.
The rank of ofiers, by the murmuring ſtream,
/ Left on your right-hand brings you to the place. Shakeſp,
RI *: *: º rightful..] Moral reaitude.
utitill although we fail of perfed rig,
Seek we to tame theſe ſº. rightfulneſs,
Nor wholly wink though void of pureſtſ -
Ri'chtLY. adv. [from ...; pureſt ſightfulneſs. Sid.
1. According to truth; properly; ſuitably; not erroneouſly.
Each of his reign allotted, rightii, calid
Pow’rs of fire, air, water, and earth beneath. Milton,
Deſcend from heav'n, Urania by that name -
Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. vii.
For glory done
If rightly thou art call’d.
Qf triumph, to be ſtyl'd great conquerors,
Patrons of mankind, gods, and ſons of gods;
Deſtroyers rightlier call’d, and plagues of men. Milton.
A man can never have ſo certain a knowledge, that a pro-
poſition, which contradićts the clear principles of his own
knowledge, was divinely revealed, or that he underſtands the
words rightly, wherein it is delivered; as he has, that the
contrary is true. Locke.
Is this a bridal or a friendly feaſt?
Qr from their deeds I rightlier may divine,
Unſeemly flown with inſolence or wine.
2. Honeſtly ; uprightly.
Let not my jealouſies be your diſhonour;
You may be rightly juſt, whatever I ſhall think.
3. Exactly,
Should I grant, thou didſt not rightly ſee :
Then thou wert firſt deceiv'd.
4. Straitly; directly.
We wiſh one end; but differ in order and way, that leadeth
rightly to that end. Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
Riſg HTNess. n.ſ.. [from right.]
1. Conformity to truth; exemption from being wrong; redi-
tude.
It is not neceſſary for a man to be aſſured of the rightneſ;
of his conſcience, by ſuch an infallible certainty of perſuaſion,
as amounts to the clearneſs of a demonſtration; but it is ſuf-
ficient if he knows it upon grounds of ſuch a probability, as
ſhall exclude all rational grounds of doubting. South.
Like brute beaſts we travel with the herd, and are never
ſo ſolicitous for the rightneſs of the way, as for the number or
figure of our company. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Straitneſs.
Sounds move ſtrongeſt in a right line, which nevertheleſs
is not cauſed by the rightneſs of the line, but by the ſhortneſs
of the diſtance. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
RI’GID. adj. [rigide, Fr. rigidus, Latin.]
1. Stiff; not to be bent; unpliant.
A body, that is hollow, may be demonſtrated to be more
rigid and inflexible, than a ſolid one of the ſame ſubſtance
and weight. Ray on the Creation.
2. Severe ; inflexible.
His ſevere judgment giving law,
His modeſt fancy kept in awe;
As rigid huſbands jealous are,
When they believe their wives too fair. --- Denham,
3. Sharp; cruel. It is uſed ſomewhat harſh by Philips.
Queen of this univerſe ! do not believe
Pope’s Odyſſey.
Shakeſ,
Dryden.
Thoſe rigid threats of death; ye ſhall not die. Mikat.
Creſſy plains
And Agincourt, deep ting'd with blood, confeſs
What the Silures vigour unwithſtood ---
Could do in rigid fight. Philips.
RI'GIDITY. m. ſ. [rigidité, Fr. from rigid.]
1. Stiffneſs. - -
Rigidity is ſaid of the ſolids of the body, when, being ſtiff
or impliable, they cannot readily perform their reſpective of
fices; but a fibre is ſaid to be rigid, when its parts ſo ſtrongly
cohere together, as not to yield to that action of the fluids,
which ought to overcome their reſiſtance in order to the pre-
ſervation of health: it is to be remedied by fomentations.
Rigidity of the organs is ſuch a ſtate as makes them reſiſt
that expanſion, which is neceſſary to carry 9, the vital func-
tions: rigidity of the veſſels and organs muſt neceſſarily fol-
low from the rigidity of the fibres. Arbuthnot on Aliment.
2. Stiffneſs of appearance ; want of eaſy or airy elegance.
This ſevere obſervation of nature, by the one in her com:
moneſ, and by the other in her abſoluteſ forms, muſt needs
produce in both a kind of rigidity, and conſequently more
naturalneſs than gracefulneſs. JWotton's Architeciare.
Ri'cidly. adv. [from rigid.]
1. Stifly; unpliantly.
2. Severely; inflexibly. . . - - -- ---
Ri'cids gºs. m. / [from rºid.] Severity; inflexibility,
- R1 GLE T.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 260</div><p class="Text">R I M
R I N
__--- -
dº, Fr.] A flat thin ſquare piece of wood.
Rºº. #: §: # intended to make the frames for
- are molded, are called riglets. Max.
sº º: Uſed in Shakeſpeare for a diadem.
This ſleep is ſound; this is a ſleep, *
That, from this golden rigol, hath divorc'd
So many Engliſh kings... Shakespeare . Henry IV.
RIGOUR. n.ſ. [rigºr, Latin.]
: ſtiffneſs.
1. Cold; The reſt his look -
Bound with Gorgonian rigour, not to move. Milton.
2. A convulſive ſhuddering with ſenſe of cold. - -
A right regimen, during the rigor or cold fit in the begin:
ning of a fever, is of great importance ; a long continued
rigor is a ſign of a ſtrong diſeaſe : during the rigor, the c1r .
culation is leſs quick, and the blood ačtually ſtagnates in the
extremities, and, preſſing upon the heart, may produce con-
cretions; therefore a rigor increaſeth an inflammation. Arb.
3. Severity; ſternneſs; want of condeſcenſion to others. -
Nature has got the victory over paſſion, all his rigºurºs
turned to grief and pity. - - - - Denham's Sophy.
Rigour makes it difficult for ſliding virtue to recover. Clariſ.
. Severity of condućt.
4 sº. looſeneſs of life, and a want of neceſſary ſobriety
in ſome, drive others into rigors that are unneceſſary? Sprat.
This prince lived in this convent, with all the rigor and
auſterity of a capuchin. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
5. Strictneſs; unabated exačtneſs. -
It may not ſeem hard, if in caſes of neceſſity certain pro-
fitable ordinances ſometimes be releaſed, rather than all men
always ſtrićtly bound to the general rigor thereof... Hºoker.
Héat and cold are not, according to philoſophical rigour,
the efficients; but are names expreſſing our paſſions. Glanvill.
The baſe degenerate age requires
Severity and juſtice in its rigour:
This awes an impious bold offending world. Addiſon.
6. Rage; cruelty; fury.
He at his foe with furious rigour ſmites,
That ſtrongeſt oak might ſeem to overthrow;
The ſtroke upon his ſhield ſo heavy lights,
That to the ground it doubleth him full low. Fairy Queen.
Driven by the neceſſities of the times and the temper of
the people, more than led by his own diſpoſition to any height
and rigour of a&amp;tions. King Charles.
7. Hardneſs; not flexibility; ſolidity; not ſoftneſs.
The ſtones the rigor of their kind expel,
And ſupple into ſoftneſs as they fell. Dryden.
R1'GoRous. adj. [from rigour.] Severe; allowing no abate-
Inent.
He ſhall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands; he hath reſiſted law,
And therefore law ſhall ſcorn him further trial,
Than the ſeverity of publick power. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Are theſe terms hard and rigorous, beyond our capacities to
perform Rogers's Sermons.
R1'GoRously. adv. [from rigorous.] Severely 5 without ten-
derneſs or mitigation.
Leſt they faint
At the ſad ſentence rigorouſly urg'd,
For I behold them ſoften'd, and with tears
Bewailing their exceſs, all terror hide. Milton.
The people would examine his works more rigorouſly than
himſelf, and would not forgive the leaſt miſtake. Dryden.
RILL. n.ſ. [rivulus, Lat..] A ſmall brook; a little ſtreamlet.
May thy brimmed waves from this
Their full tribute never miſs,
From a thouſand petty rills,
That tumble down the ſnowy hills. Milton.
To Rill...v. n. [from the noun..] To run in ſmall ſtreams.
Io Apollo, mighty king, let envy,
Ill-judging and verboſé, from Lethe's lake,
Draw tuns unmeaſurable; while thy favour
Adminiſters to my ambitious thirſt
The wholeſome draught from Aganippe's ſpring
Genuine, and with ſoft murmurs gently rilling
Adown the mountains where thy daughters haunt. Prior.
Ri'ilºt. n.ſ...[corrupted from rivulet.] A ſmall ſtream.
º creek : º between two hills, delivering a little freſh
RI º º, ..'s axon.] Carew's Survey of Cornwall.
- - - - - - &gt; -
1. A border; a margin.
It keeps of the ſame thickneſs near its centre; while its
figure is capable of variation towards the rim.
2. That which encircles ſomething elſe.
... We **) not affirm, that ruptures are confinable unto one
fide, as the Peritoneum or rim of the belly may be broke;
Ot jº in either. Brown's Wulgar Errºr.
***kºſ uſes it for rimbs. Mo, timer's Huſbandry.
RIME. m. ſ. ſhrim. S. y
I. Hoar º rim, Saxon.]
sº * glaſs giveth a dew; and in rime froſts
*95% of dew upon the infide of glaſs windows.
I Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Grew.
In a hoar froſt, a rime, is a multitude of quadrºnsular
priſms piled without any order one over another. Grew.
2. 'ſ Rima, Lat..] . A hole ; a chink.
Though birds have no epiglottis, yet can they contract the
rime or chink of their larinx, ſo as to prevent the admiſſion of
wet or dry indigeſted. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs.
To RIME. v. n. [from the noun.J. To freeze with hoar froſt.
To RIMPLE. v. a. To pucker ; to contract into corrugations.
See CRUM PL E and RU MPLE.
The ſkin was tenſe, alſo rimpled and bliſtered. Jºſeman.
R1/MY. adj. [from rime.] Steamy; foggy ; miſty.
The air is now cold, hot, dry, or moiſt ; and then thin,
thick, foggy, rimy, or poiſonous. Harvey.
RIND. m. ſ. [ninb, Saxon; rinde, Dutch..] Bark; huſk.
There with a piteous yelling voice was heard,
Crying, O ſpare with guilty hands to tear
My tender ſides in this rough rind embar'd. Fairy &amp;cen.
Within the infant rind of this ſmall flower
Poiſon hath reſidence, and medicine power. Shakeſp.
Theſe plants are neither red nor poliſhed, when drawn out
of the water, till their rind have been taken off. Boyle. -
Others whoſe fruit, burniſh'd with golden ind,
Hung amiable. Milton's Paradiſe Lºſt.
Thou can'ſt not touch the freedom of this mind
With all thy charms, although this corporal rind
Thou haſt immanacl’d. Milton.
This monument, thy maiden beauty's due,
High on a plane-tree ſhall be hung to view;
On the ſmooth rind the paſſenger ſhall ſee
Thy name engrav'd, and worſhip Helen's tree. Dryden,
To RINd. v. n. [from the noun..] To decorticate; to bark;
to huſk.
RING. m. ſ. [hning, Saxon.]
1. A circle; an orbicular line.
In this habit
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Their precious gems new loſt Shakeſ?.
Bubbles of water, before they began to exhibit their colours
to the naked eye, have appeared through a priſm girded about
with many parallel and horizontal rings. Newton.
2. A circle of gold or ſome other matter worn as an ornament.
A quarrel.
—About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring. Shakespeare
I have ſeen old Roman rings ſo very thick about, and with
ſuch large ſtones in them, that 'tis no wonder a fop ſhould
reckon them a little cumberſome in the ſummer. Addiſon.
3. A circle of metal to be held by.
The rings of iron, that on the doors were hung,
Sent out a jarring found, and harſhly rung. Dryden.
Some eagle got the ring of my box in his beak, with an
intent to let it fall, and devour it. Gulliver.
4. A circular courſe. -
Chaſte Diana,
Goddeſs preſiding o'er the rapid race,
Place me, O place me in the duſty ring, -
Where youthful charioteers contend for glory. Smith.
5. A circle made by perſons ſtanding round.
Make a ring about the corps of Caeſar,
And let me ſhew you him, that made the will. Shałºff.
The Italians, perceiving themſelves almoſt environed, caſt
themſelves into a ring, and retired back into the city. Hayw.
Round my arbour a new ring they made,
And footed it about the ſecret ſhade. Dryden.
6. A number of bells harmonically tuned.
A ſquirrel ſpends his little rage,
In jumping round a rowling cage;
The cage as either ſide turn'd up, -
Striking a ring of bells a-top. Prior.
7. The ſound of bells or any other ſonorous body. -
Stop the holes of a hawk's bell, it will make no ring, but
a flat noiſe or rattle. Baron.
Hawks bells, that have holes, give a greater ring.”
if the pellet did ſtrike upon braſs in the open air. Bacºn.
Sullen Moloch fled,
Hath left in ſhadows dread
His burning idol all of blackeſt hue;
In vain with cymbals ring,
They call the griſly king. Milton.
8. A ſound of any kind. - * * - - - -
The king, full of confidence, as he had been vićtorious in
battle, and had prevailed with his parliament, and had the
ring of acclamations freſh in his ears, thought the rººt of his
reign ſhould be but play. Bacon's Henry VII.
To KING. v. a. pret. and part. paſſ rung. [hrungan, Saxon.]
1. To ſtrike bells or any other ſonorous body, ſo as tº make it
ſound.
I 'gin to be aweary of the ſun ;
Ring the alarum bell.
2. [From ring.] To encircle.
Talbot, dverſ.
Who, ring’d about with bold adverſity,
Cries out i. noble York and Somerſet. Shakespeare ? #: Y.
Shakespeare. Macbeth.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 261</div><p class="Text">R I N
R I P
tº.
º,
º,
*i;
f
º,
* bells.
3. To fit with rings.
Death, death; oh amiable lovely death
Thou odoriferous ſtench, ſound rotteneſs,
Ariſe forth from thy couch of laſting night,
Thou hate and terrour to proſperity,
And I will kiſs thy deteſtable bones,
And put my eye-balls in thy vaulty brows,
And ring theſe fingers with thy houſhold worms.
4. To reſtrain a hog by a ring in his noſe.
To RING. v. n.
1. To ſound as a bell or ſonorous metal.
Ring out ye cryſtal ſpheres,
And let your ſilver chime
Move in melodious time; -
And let the baſe of heav'n's deep organ blow. Milton,
No funeral rites nor man in mournful weeds,
Nor mournful bell ſhall ring her burial. Shakeſp.
Eaſy it might be to ring otler changes upon the ſame
Norris's Miſcellanies.
At Latagus a weighty ſtone he flung;
His face was flatted, and his helmet rung.
2. To practiſe the art of making muſick with bells.
Signs for communication may be contrived at pleaſure: four
bells admit twenty-four changes in ringing; each change
may, by agreement, have a certain ſignification. Holder.
3. To ſound; to reſound.
Hercules, miffing his page, called him by his name aloud,
that all the ſhore rang of it. Bacon.
The particular ringing ſound in gold, diſtinét from the
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
ſound of other bodies, has no particular name. Locke.
With ſweeter notes each riſing temple rung,
A Raphael painted and a Vida ſung !
Immortal Vida! Pope,
4. To utter as a bell.
Ere to black Hecat's ſummons
The ſhard-born beetle, with his drowſy hums,
Hath rung night's yawning peal, there ſhall be done
A deed of dreadful note. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
5. To tinkle.
My ears ſtill ring with noiſe; I’m vext to death:
Tongue-kill'd, and have not yet recover'd breath. Dryden.
6. To be filled with a bruit or report.
That profane, atheiſtical, epicurean rabble, whom the
whole nation ſo rings of, are not indeed, what they vote
themſelves, the wiſeſt men in the world. South.
Ring-Bone. n.ſ.
Ring-bone is a hard callous ſubſtance growing in the hollow
circle of the little paſtern of a horſe, juſt above the coronet:
it ſometimes goes quite round like a ring, and thence it is
called the ring-bone. Farrier's Dictionary.
R1'NG|Dov E. m. ſ. [rhingelduyve, German.]
Pigeons are of ſeveral ſorts, wild and tame; as wood
pigeons, dovecote pigeons, and ringdoves. Mortimer.
Ri'No ER. n.ſ. [from ring.] He who rings.
RINGLEA'DER. m. ſ. [ring and leader.] The head of a riotous
body.
#. cauſed to be executed ſome of the ringleaders of the
Corniſh men, in ſacrifice to the citizens. Bacon's Henry VII.
The nobility eſcaped; the poor people, who had been de-
luded by theſe ringleaders, were executed. Addiſon.
Ri'NGLET. n.ſ. [ring, with a diminutive termination.]
1. A ſmall ring.
Silver the lintals, deep projećting o'er;
And gold the ringlets that command the door.
2. A circle.
Pope.
You demy puppets, that
By moon-ſhine do the green ringlets make,
Whereof the ewe not bites. Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Never met we,
Upon the beached margent of the ſea,
To dance our ringlets to the whiſtling wind,
But with thy brawls thou haſt diſturb’d our ſport. Shakeſp.
3. A curl. - -- -
With ringlets quaint, and wanton windings wove. Milt.
Her golden treſſes in wanton ringlets wav'd,
- As the vine curls her tendrils. Milton.
Theſe in two ſable ringlets taught to break,
Once gave new beauties to the ſnowy neck. Pope.
R1'NGst REAKED. adj. [ring and ſtreaked.] Circularly ſtreaked.
He removed the he goats that were ring/freaked and ſpotted,
and all the ſhe goats that were ſpeckled. Gen. xxx. 35.
R1/NGTAIL. m. ſ. [ring and tail.] A kind of kite with a
whitiſh tail. Bailey.
Ri'NGwor M. n.ſ. [ring and worm.] A circular tetter.
It began with a ſerpigo, making many round ſpots, ſuch
as is generally called ringworms. Wiſeman's Surgery.
To RINSE. v. a. [from rein, German, pure, clear.]
1. To waſh; to cleanſe by waſhing.
This laſt coſtly treaty
Swallow'd ſo much treaſure, and like a glaſs
Did break i' th' rinſing. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Whomſoever he toucheth, and hath not rinſed his hands in
water, he ſhall be unclean. Lev. xv. II.
2. To * the ſoap out of cloaths.
*y cannot boil, nor waſh, nor rinſ, they ſa
With water ſometimes ink and *:::::::: yº, y;
According as you meet with mud or clay, King,
Ri'NSER. n.ſ.. [from ”ſº.] One that waſhes or rinſes, a
waſher. &gt;
RIOT. n.ſ. [riotte, old Fr. ri -
I. Wild iſ º: ſº." riotto, Italian.]
When his headſtróng riot hath no curb
When rage and hot blood are his councilors
When means and laviſh manners me." tºgether
º ! . what wings ſhall his affection fly.”
ow'rd fronting peril and oppos'd decay. §
So j. of º: cay. Shakeſp. Hen. IV.
That he will neither know how to maintain it
Nor ceaſe his flow of riot. Shakeſp. Timºn ºf Athens
All now was turn'd to jollity and gaine, -
To luxury and riot, feaſt and dance. Milton.
2. A ſedition; an uproar.
Transform'd to ſerpents all, as acceſſories
To his bold riot. Milton.
3. Tº run Riot. To move or ačt without controll or reſtrain.
One man's head runs riot upon hawks and dice. L'E/fr.
You never can defend his breeding,
Who, in his ſatyre's running riot,
Could never leave the world in quiet. Swift's Miſtel.
To Riot. v. n. [riotter, old Fr.]
1. To revel; to be diffipated in luxurious enjoyments.
Let us walk honeſtly as in the day; not in ioting and
drunkenneſs. Romans xiii. 13.
Now he exacts of all, waſtes in delight,
Riots in pleaſure, and neglects the law.
2. To luxuriate ; to be tumultuous.
Thy life a long dead calm of fix’d repoſe;
No pulſe that riots, and no blood that glows.
3. To banquet luxuriouſly.
4. To raiſe a ſedition or uproar.
Ri'ot ER. m. ſ. [from riot.]
1. One who is diffipated in luxury.
2. One who raiſes an uproar or ſedition.
Ri'otise. n.ſ. (from riot..] Diſſoluteneſs; luxury.
From every work he challenged eſſoin
For contemplation ſake; yet otherwiſe
His life he led in lawleſs riotiſe.
Riſotous. adj. [riotteux, Fr. from riot.]
1. Luxurious ; wanton; licentiouſly feſtive.
What needs me tell their feaſt and goodly guiſe,
In which was nothing riotous nor vain. Fairy Queen.
When all our offices have been oppreſt
With riotous feeders,
I have retir'd me to a waſteful cock,
And ſet mine eyes at flow. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
John came neither eating nor drinking, that is far from
the diet of Jeruſalem and other riotous places, but fared
coarſely. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
With them no riotous pomp nor Aſian train,
T” infect a navy with their gaudy fears;
But war ſeverely like itſelf appears.
2. Seditious; turbulent.
RI'otously. adv. [from riotous.]
1. Luxuriouſly; with licentious luxury.
He that gathereth by defrauding his own ſoul, gathereth
for others that ſhall ſpend his goods riotouſly. Eccluſ. xiv. 4.
2. Seditiouſly; turbulently.
Ri'otous Ness. m. ſ. [from riotous.] The ſtate of being
riotous.
To RIP. v. a. [hnypan, Saxon.]
1. To tear; to lacerate; to cut aſunder by a continued ačt of
the knife. -
You bloody Nero's, ripping up the womb
Of your dear mother England, bluſh for ſhame. Shakeſp.
Wilt thou daſh their children, and rip up their women with
child 2 2 Kings viii. 12.
Daniel.
Pope.
Fairy Queen.
Dryden.
The beaſt prevents the blow,
And upward rips the groin of his audacious foe. Dryºen.
The ripping chiffel is a ſocket chiſel, about an inch broad,
and hath a blunt edge. Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
2. To take away by laceration or cutting.
Macduff was from his mother's womb
Untimely ripp'd. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Eſculapius, becauſe ripped from his mother's womb, was
feigned to be the ſon of Apollo. Hayward.
Rip this heart of mine
Out of my breaſt, and ſhew it for a coward's. Otway.
The conſcious huſband
Charges on her the guilt of their diſeaſe;
Affecting fury acts a madman's part, -
Granvill.
He'll rift the fatal ſecret from her heart.
3. To diſcloſe ; to ſearch out; to tear up; to bring to view.
Let it be lawful for me to rip up to the very bottom, how
and by whom your diſcipline was planted, at ſuch time as this
age we live in began to make firſt trial thereof. Płooker.
2 I Z. You<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 262</div><p class="Text">R I P
R I S
- * he original of Scotland. . Spenſºr on Ireland.
You rip up º: jº. is very pleaſing unto me, and in:
*... of ſome reading. Spenſer on Ireland.
* fººd up all that had been done from the beginning
of É. P - - Clarendon, b. viii.
The relations conſidering that a trial would rip up old fores,
and diſcover things not ſo much to the reputation of the
deceaſed, they dropt their deſign. Arbuthnot,
RIPE, adj. ſnipe, º rtſp, ºut.
ght to perfeótion in growth 3 -
1. Broug pe ... b
Is ripe for ſhaking, and the pow'rs above
Put à their iº. . Shakespeare
The time was the time of the firſt ripe grapes. Numb. xiii.
Their fruit is improfitable, not ripe to eat. ºd. iv. 5.
Somay'ſt thou live, till, like ripe fruit, thou drop
Into thy mother's lap, or be with eaſe
Gatherºd, not harſhly pluck'd, for death mature. Aſhton.
2. Reſembling the ripeneſs of fruit.
Thoſe happieſt ſmiles,
That play'd on her ripe lip, ſeem'd not to know
what gueſts were in her eyes, which parted thence,
As pearls from diamonds dropt. Shakeſp.
3. Complete; proper for uſe.
I by letters ſhall direct your courſe,
When time is ripe. - Shakeſp. Henry IV.
4. Advanced to the perfection of any quality.
There was a pretty redneſs in his lips,
A little riper and more luſty red
Than that mix’d in his cheeks. Shakeſp.
O early ripe 1 to thy abundant ſtore,
What could advancing age have added more. Dryden.
5. Finiſhed; conſummate.
Beaſts are in ſenſible capacity as ripe, even as men them-
ſelves, perhaps more ripe. Hºoker, b. i. ſ. 6.
6. Brought to the point of taking effect; fully matured.
He thence ſhall come,
When this world's diſſolution ſhall be ripe. Milton.
While things were juſt ripe for a war, the cantons, their
protectors, interpoſed as umpires in the quarrel. Addiſon.
7. Fully qualified by gradual improvement.
Ripe for heav'n, when fate AEneas calls,
Then ſhalt thou bear him up, ſublime, to me. Dryden.
To Rip E. v. n. [from the adj.] To ripen; to grow ripe; to
be matured.
From hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot. Shakeſp.
Slubber not buſineſs for my ſake, Baſſanio;
But ſtay the very riping of the time. Shakeſp.
Though no ſtone tell thee what I was, yet thou,
In my grave's inſide, ſee what thou art now;
Yet tho'rt not yet ſo good, till us death lay
To ipe and mellow there, w” are ſtubborn clay. Donne.
To RIPE. v. a. To mature ; to make ripe.
He is retir’d, to ripe his growing fortunes,
To Scotland. Shakespeare
R1'PELY. adv. [from ripe.] Maturely; at the fit time.
It fits us tº erefore ripely ;
Our chariots and our horſemen be in readineſs. Shakeſp.
To Ri'PEN. v. n. [from ripe.] To grow ripe.
This is the ſtate of man; to-day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow bloſſoms,
And bears his bluſhing honours thick upon him;
The third day comes a froſt, a killing froſt;
And when he thinks, good eaſy man, full ſurely
His greatneſs is a ripening, nips his root;
And then he falls as I do. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
Afore the ſour grape is ripening in the flower. Iſ. xviii. 5.
The pricking of a fruit, before it ripeneth, ripens the fruit
more ſuddenly. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Trees, that ripen lateſt, bloſſom ſooneſt; as peaches and
Soºnelians; and it is a work of providence that they bloſſom
ſo ſoon ; for otherwiſe they could not have the ſun long enough
to ripen. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Melons on beds of ice are taught to bear,
And ſtrangers to the ſun yet ripen here.
To Ri'PEN. v. a. To mature; to make ripe.
My father was no traitor;
And that I'll prove on better men than Somerſet,
Were growing time once ripen'd to my will. Shakeſp.
When to ripen'd manhood he ſhall grow,
The greedy ſailor ſhall the ſeas forego. Dryden.
r That I ſettled
Your father in his throne, was for your ſake,
| left th' acknowledgment for time to ripen. Dryden.
- The genial ſun
§as daily, fince his courſe begun,
Rejoiced the metal to refine,
And ripen'd the Peruvian mine. Addiſon.
* this the cauſe of more than mortal hate,
The reſt ſucceeding timeſhai ripen into fate. Pope.
Here elements have loſt their uſes :
Air ripens not, nor earth produces. 2. Swift.
Granville.
Before the ripen'd field the reapers ſtand. Thomſºn,
R1'PEN Ess. m. ſ. [from ripe.] -
1. The ſtate of being ripe ; maturity.
They have compared it to the ripenſ of fruits. Jºſeman, w
Little matter is depoſited in the abſceſs, before it arrives
towards its ripeneſs. Sharp's Surgery.
2. Full growth.
"I ime, which made them their fame out-live,
To Cowley ſcarce did ripeneſs give. Denham.
3. Perfection ; completion.
To this purpoſe were thoſe harmonious tunes of pſalms
deviſed for us, that they, which are either in years but young,
or touching perfection of virtue as yet not grown to ripeneſ,
might, when they think they ſing, learn. Hooker.
This royal infant promiſes
Upon this land a thouſand thouſand bleſfings,
Which time ſhall bring to ripeneſs. Shakeſp. Hen. VIII.
I to manhood am arriv'd ſo near,
And inward ripenſ; doth much leſs appear,
That ſome more timely happy ſpirits indu'th. Milton.
4. Fitneſs; qualification.
Men muſt endure
Their going hence, ev'n as their coming hither:
Ripeneſs is all. Shakeſp. King Lear.
R1/PPER. m. ſ. [from rip.] One who rips; one who tears; one
who lacerates.
To Ripple. v. n. To fret on the ſurface, as water ſwifty run-
ninº.
Riºrowell. n. ſ. A gratuity, or reward given to tenants,
after they had reaped their lord's corn. Bailey.
To RISE. v. m. pret. rºſe; part. iſen, [nºran, Saxon ; reſºn,
Dutch.]
1. To change a jacent or recumbent, to an erect poſture.
I have ſcen her riſe from her bed, and throw her night-
gown upon her. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
2. To get up from reſt.
Never a wife leads a better life than ſhe does; do what
ſhe will ; go to bed when ſhe liſt; riſe when ſhe liſt. Shakespeare
As wild afles in the deſert, go they forth to their work,
riſing betimes for a prey. Job xxiv. 5.
That is to live,
To reſt ſecure, and not riſe up to grieve. Daniel's Civ. War.
Thy manſion wants thee, Adam, riſe. Milton.
3. To get up from a fall.
True in our fall,
Falſe in our promis'd riſing.
4. To ſpring; to grow up.
- They imagine
For one forbidden tree a multitude,
Now ris'n to work them farther woe. Milton.
5. To gain elevation of rank or fortune.
Some riſe by fin, and ſome by virtue fall. ... Shakeſpeare.
If they riſe not with their ſervice, they will make their
Milton's Par. Loft, b. ix.
ſervice fall with them. Bacon.
To riſe i' th' world,
No wiſe man that's honeſt ſhould expect. Otway.
Thoſe, that have been raiſed by ſome great miniſter, trample
upon the ſteps by which they riſe, to rival him. South.
6. To ſwell.
If the bright ſpot ſtay in his place, it is a riſing of the
burning. Dev. xiii. 21.
7. To aſcend; to move upwards.
The ſap in old trees is not ſo frank as to riſe all to the
boughs, but tireth by the way, and putteth out moſs. Bacon.
If two plane poliſh'd plates of a poliſh'd looking-glaſs be
laid together, ſo that their fides be parallel, and at a very
ſmall diſtance from one another, and then their lower edges
be dipped into water,the water will riſe up between them. Nºw'.
8. To break out from below the horizon, as the ſun.
He maketh the ſun to riſe on the evil and the good. Matt v.
The ſun roſe upon him. Gen. xxxii. 31.
He affirméth, that Tunny is fat upon the riſing of the
Pleiades, and departs upon Arcturus. Brown's Wug. Errours.
Whether the ſun
Riſe on the earth, or earth rije on the ſun. - Milton.
9. To take beginning; to come into exiſtence, or notice.
Io. To begin to act.
High winds began to riſe. - Milton.
With Vulcan's rage the riſing winds conſpire,
And near our palace rolls the flood of fire. Dryden.
1 I. To appear in view. -
The poet muſt lay out all his ſtrength, that his wo". may
be glowing, and that every thing he deſcribes may immediately
preſent itſelf, and riſe up to the reader's view. Addiſon.
12. To change a ſtation; to quit a ſiege. -
He, riſing with fináll honour from Gunza, and ...
the power of the chriſtians, was gone. Knolles.
13. To be excited ; to be produced. .
Indeed you thank'd me; but a nobler gratitude -
Rºſe in her ſoul; for from that hour ſhe lov'd me. Otway.
A thought roſe in me, which often perplexes mºº of cofi-
templative natures. Speciator, S. #.
4. - 4.
i
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 263</div><p class="Text">R I S
§
ſſ,
º:
F-
-
ſº,
º,
t
14. To break into military commotions; to make inſurre&amp;tions.
At our heels all hell ſhould riſe,
With blackeſt inſurreótion. Milton.
Numidia's ſpacious kingdom lies
Ready to riſe at its young prince's call. Addiſon's Cato.
No more ſhall nation againſt nation riſe,
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes.
15. To be rouſed; to be excited to action.
Who will riſe up for me againſt evil-doers ? or who will
ſtand up for me againſt the workers of iniquity ? Pſ. xciv.
Gather together, come againſt, and riſe up to the battle. jer.
He ſhall riſe up at the voice of the bird, and all the
daughters of muſick ſhall be brought low. Eccl. xii. 4.
16. To make hoſtile attack.
If any man hate his neighbour, lie in wait, and riſe up
againſt him, and ſmite him mortally, and fleeth into one of
theſe cities, the elders of his city ſhall fetch him thence. Deut.
17. To grow more or greater in any reſpect.
A hideous gabble riſes loud
Among the builders. Milton.
The great duke riſes on them in his demands, and will
not be ſatisfied with leſs than a hundred thouſand crowns, and
a ſolemn embaſſy to beg pardon. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
18. To increaſe in price.
Bullion is riſen to ſix ſhillings and five pence the ounce;
i. e. that an ounce of uncoined filver will exchange for an
ounce and a quarter of coined ſilver. Locke.
19. To be improved.
From ſuch an untainted couple, we can hope to have our
family riſe to its ancient ſplendour of face, air, countenance,
and ſhape. Tatler, N° 75.
20. To elevate the ſtile.
Your author always will the beſt adviſe,
Fall when he falls, and when he riſes, riſe.
21. To be revived from death.
Pope.
Roſcommon.
After I am riſen again, I will go before you. Mat. xxvi.
The ſtars of morn ſhall ſee him riſe
Out of his grave. Milton.
22. To come by chance.
As they 'gan his library to view,
And antique regiſters for to aviſe,
There chanced to the prince's hand to riſe
An ancient book. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
23. To be elevated in ſituation.
He bar'd an ancient oak of all her boughs;
Then on a riſing ground the trunk he plac'd,
Which with the ſpoils of his dead foe he grac'd. Dryden.
A houſe we ſaw upon a riſing. Addiſon.
Aſh, on banks or riſing grounds near rivers, will thrive
exceedingly. Mortimer's Huſbandy.
Rise. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The aët of riſing.
2. The aët of mounting from the ground.
In leaping with weights, the arms are firſt caſt backwards
and then forwards, with ſo much the greater force; for the
hands go backward before they take their riſe. Bacon.
3. Eruption; aſcent.
Upon the candle's going out, there is a ſudden riſe of wa-
ter; for the flame filling no more place, the air and water
ſucceed. Bacon.
The hill ſubmits itſelf
In ſmall deſcents, which do its height beguile;
And ſometimes mounts, but ſo as billows play,
Whoſe riſe not hinders, but makes ſhort our way. Dryden.
4. Place that favours the act of mounting aloft.
Rais’d ſo high, from that convenient riſe
She took her flight, and quickly reach'd the ſkies. Creech.
Since the arguments againſt them riſe from common re-
ceived opinions, it happens, in controverſial diſcourſes, as it
does in the aſſaulting of towns, where, if the ground be but
firm, whereon the batteries are erected, there is no farther
inquiry of whom it is borrowed, ſo it affords but a fit riſe for
the preſent purpoſe. Locke.
5. Elevated place. - -
Such a riſe, as doth at once invite
A pleaſure, and a reverence from the fight.
6. Appearance of the ſun in the Eaſt.
- Phoebus ! ſtay ;
The world to which you fly ſo faſt,
From us to them can pay your haſte .
With no ſuch obječt, and ſalute your riſe
With no ſuch wonder, as De Mornay's eyes.
7. Encreaſe in any reſpect.
8. Encreaſe of price.
Upon a breach with Spain, muſt be conſidered the preſent
ſtate of the king's treaſure, the riſe or fall that may happen
in his conſtant revenue by a Spaniſh war. Temple.
The biſhops have had ſhare in the gradual riſe of lands. Sw.
9. Beginning; original. - - -
It has its riſe from the lazy admonitions of thoſe who give
rules, and propoſe examples, without joining practice with
their inſtructions. Locke on Education.
Denham.
JWaller.
His reputation quickly peopled it, and gave ri -
publick, which calls ...”. his iame gave riſe *};
10. Elevation; encreaſe of found. -
In the ordinary riſes and falls of the voice, there fall out to
R be two beenolls between the uniſon and the diapaſon. Bacon.
isks. *ſ.[from riſe.] One that riſes.
The iſle AEaca, where the palace ſtands
Qf th' early riſer, with the roſy hands,
Active Aurora; where ſhe loves to dance. Chapman
Risibility. m. ſ. [from riſible.] The quality of laughin -
How comes lowneſs of ſtile to be ſo much the ...; of
ſatyr, that without it a poet can be no more a ſatyriſt, than
without riſibility he can be a man. B, den
º: the Fº may talk of their ºft.
heighing is a more noble expreſſion than laughing, "
Rººs ºut.
I. Having the faculty or power of laughing.
We are in a merry world, laughing is our buſineſs; as if
becauſe it has been made the definition of man, that he is
riſible, his manhood conſiſted in nothing elſe. Gov. of Tongue.
2. Ridiculous ; exciting laughter.
Risk, n.ſ.. [riſque, Fr. rigg, Spaniſh.] Hazard; danger;
chance of harm.
Some run the riſk of an abſolute ruin for the gaining of a
preſent ſupply. L’Eſtrange's Fables.
When an inſolent deſpiſer of diſcipline, nurtured into con-
tempt of all order by a long riſk of licence, ſhall appear be-
fore a church governor, ſeverity and reſolution are that gover-
nor's virtues. South's Sermons.
By allowing himſelf in what is innocent, he would run the
riſk of being betrayed into what is not ſo. Atterbury.
An innocent man ought not to run an equal riſk with a
guilty one. - Clariſſa.
To Risk. v. a. [riſquer, Fr.] To hazard; to put to chance;
to endanger.
Who would hope new fame to raiſe,
Or riſk his well eſtabliſhed praiſe,
That, his high genius to approve,
Had drawn a George or carv'd a Jove. Addiſon.
R1's KER. m. ſ. [from riſk.] He who riſks. -
He thither came, t’obſerve and ſmoak
What courſes other riſkers took. Butler.
Riss, the obſolete preterite of riſe.
Riſs not the conſular men and left their places,
So ſoon as thou ſat'ſt down; and fled thy fide. Benj. johnſ.
RITE. n.ſ. [rit, Fr. ritus, Lat..] Solemn act of religion;
external obſervance.
The ceremonies, we have taken from ſuch as were before
us, are not things that belong to this or that ſect, but they
are the ancient rites and cuſtoms of the church. Hooker.
It is by God conſecrated into a ſacrament, a holy rite, a
means of conveying to the worthy receiver the benefits of the
body and blood of Chriſt. Hammond’s Fundamentals.
When the prince her fun'ral rites had paid,
He plow'd the Tyrrhene ſeas. Dryden.
Riºtu Al. adj. [rituel, Fr. J Solemnly ceremonious ; done ac-
cording to ſome religious inſtitution.
Inſtant Ibade the prieſts prepare
The ritual ſacrifice, and ſolemn pray’r. Prior.
If to tradition were added, certain conſtant ritual and em-
blematical obſervances, as the emblems were expreſſive, the
memory of the thing recorded would remain. Forbes.
RI'TU Al. n. ſ. [from the adj.] A book in which the rites and
obſervances of religion are ſet down.
An heathen ritual could not inſtruct a man better than theſe
ſeveral pieces of antiquity in the particular ceremonies, that
attended different ſacrifices. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
RITUALIST. n.ſ.. [from ritual.] One ſkilled in the ritual.
R1/AGE. m. ſ. [French J A bank ; a coaſt. Not in uſe.
Think
You ſtand upon the rivage, and behold
A city on th' inconſtant billows dancing;
For ſo appears this fleet.
RIVAL. m. ſ. [rivalis, Lat.]
1. One who is in purſuit of the ſame thing which another man
purſues; a competitour. -
Oh love thou ſternly doſt thy pow'r maintain,
And wilt not bear a rival in thy reign; }
Tyrants and thou all fellowſhip diſdain. Dryden.
2. A competitour in love.
She ſaw her father was grown her adverſe party, and yet
Shakeſp. Henry V.
her fortune ſuch as ſhe muſt favour her rival. Sidney.
France and Burgundy,
Great rival; in our younger daughter's love. Shakeſp.
Your rival's image in your worth I view ; -
And what I lov’d in him, eſteem in you. Granville.
RI’val. adj. Standing in competition ; making the ſame
claim ; emulous.
Had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I ſhould be fortunate. Shakeſp. Merchant ºf Penice.
Equal
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 264</div><p class="Text">R I V
R O A
se-
in wears, and rival in renown
wº. the youthful Phaeton,
- claims.
Like loº. bark to be employ'd,
while venus is by rival dogs enjoy'd. Dryden.
To R1'v AL. v. 4. [from the noun.]
1. To ſtand in competition with another; to oppoſe.
Thoſe, that have been raiſed by the intereſt of ſome great
miniſter, trample upon the ſteps by which they riſe, to rival
him in his greatneſs, and at length ſtep into his place. South.
2. To emulate; to endeavour to equal or excel.
- Ambitious fool! with horny hoofs to paſs
O'er hollow arches of reſounding braſs;
To rival thunder in its rapid courſe, -
And imitate inimitable force. - Dryden's AEmeis.
Pro Rival. v. n. To be competitours. Out of uſe.
Burgundy, -
we firſt addreſs'd tow'rd you, who with this king
Have rival’d for our daughter. - Shakºp. King Lear.
Rivatºry. A n.ſ. [rivalitas, Lat. from rival.] Competition ;
RI'v ALRY. } emulation. -
It is the privilege of poſterity to ſet matters right between
thoſe antagoniſts, who, by their rivalry for greatneſs, divided
a whole age. - Addiſon.
Rºsſip. n.ſ.. [from rival.] The ſtate or character of a
ival.
T. Five. v. a. part, riven. [rypt, broken Saxon; riven,
Dutch; river, Fr. to drive.) To ſplit ; to cleave , to divide
by a blunt inſtrument; to force in diſruption.
At his haughty helmet -
So hugely ſtruck, that it the ſteel did rive. . -
And cleft his head. Fairy Queen, b. i.
The varlet at his plaint was gricved fore,
That his deep wounded heart in two did rive. Fa. Queen.
Through riven clouds and molten firmament,
The fierce three-forked engine making way,
Both lofty towers and higheſt trees hath rent. Fa. &amp;cen.
- O Cicero !
I have ſeen tempeſts, when the ſcolding winds
Have riv'd the knotty oaks ; but ne'er till now
Dryden.
Did I go through a tempeſt dropping fire. Shakeſp.
As one he ſtood eſcap'd from cruel fight,
Sore toil'd, his riven arms to havock hewn. Milton.
The neighbouring foreſts, formerly ſhaken and riven with
the thunder-bolts of war, did envy the ſweet peace of
Druina. Howel's Vocal Foreſt.
- Had I not been blind, I might have ſeen
Yon riven oak, the faireſt of the green. Dryden.
Let it come ;
Let the fierce light'ning blaſt, the thunder rive me. Rowe.
To Rive. v. n. To be ſplit; to be divided by violence.
Freeſtone rives, ſplits, and breaks in any direction. JWoodw.
To Rive. for derive or direét.
Ten thouſand French have ta'en the ſacrament,
To rive their dangerous artillery
Upon no chriſtian ſoul but Engliſh Talbot. Shakeſp.
To R1 vel. v. a. [xeniplet, Saxon, corrugated, rumpled.] To
contract into wringles and corrugations.
Then droop'd the fading flow’rs, their beauty fled,
And clos'd their ſickly eyes and hung the head, }
And rivel’d up with heat, lay dying in their bed. Dryd.
And ſince that plenteous autumn now is paſt,
Whoſe grapes and peaches have indulg'd your taſte,
Take in good part, from our poor poet's board,
Such rivel'd fruits as winter can afford. Dryden.
Alum flipticks, with contračting pow'r,
Shrink his thin eſſence like a riveld flow’r. Pope.
RI’v EN. part. of rive.
River. m. ſ. [riviere, Fr. rivus, Lat.] A land current of
water bigger than a brook.
It is a moſt beautiful country, being ſtored throughout with
many goodly rivers, repleniſhed with all ſorts of fiſh. Spenſ.
The firſt of theſe rivers has been celebrated by the Latin
poets for the gentleneſs of its courſe, as the other for its ra-
pidity. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
River-DRAGON, n.ſ. A crocodile. A name given by Milton
to the king of Egypt.
Thus with ten wounds
The river-dragon tam’d at length, ſubmits
To let his ſojourners depart. Milton's Par. Lºft.
Rivºroop. n.ſ. Tutelary deity of a river.
His wig hung as ſtrait as the hair of a river-god riſing from
the water. Arbuthnot and Pope.
River-Horse. n.ſ. Hippopotamus.
Roſe,
As Plants ambiguous between ſea and land,
he iver-horſe and ſcaly crocodile. Milton.
Rºº. n. ſ. [iver, Fr. to break the point of a thing; to
*], A faſtening pin clenched at both ends.
* * *mourers accompliſhing the knights
With buſy hammers cloſing . up, gnts,
Give dreadful note of Preparation.
Shakeſp. Henry V.
Thy armour
I'll fruſh, and unlock the rivets all,
But I’ll be maſter of it. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida,
Though Valeria's fair, and though ſhe loves me too,
'Gainſt her my ſoul is arm'd on every part;
Yet there are ſecret rivets to my heart,
Where Berenice's charms have found the way,
Subtile as lightnings. Dryden's Tyrannick Love,
The verſe in faſhion is, when numbers flow
So ſmooth and equal, that no fight can find
The rivet, where the poliſh'd piece was join'd. Dryden.
The rivets of thoſe wings inclos'd
Fit not each other. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
This inſtrument ſhould move eaſy upon the rivet. Sharp,
To R1'v ET. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. To faſten with rivets.
This man
If all our fire were out, would fetch down new,
Out of the hand of Jove ; and ivet him
To Caucaſus, ſhould he but frown. Benj. Johnſon.
In rivetting, the pin you rivet in ſhould ſtand upright to the
plate you rivet it upon ; for if it do not ſtand upright, you
will be forced to ſet it upright, after it is rivetted. Mºon.
2. To faſten ſtrongly ; to make immoveable.
You were to blame to part with
A thing ſtuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And rivetted with faith ui to your fleſh. Shakeſp.
Why ſhould I write this down, that's rivetted,
Screw'd to my mem'ry Shakeſp. Cymbeline,
What one party thought to rivet to a ſettledneſs by the
ſtrength and influence of the Scots, that the other rejects.
King Charles.
Till fortune's fruitleſs ſpite had made it known,
Her blows not ſhook but rivetted his throne. Dryden.
Thus hath God not only rivetted the notion of himſelf into
our natures, but likewiſe made the beliei of his being neceſ-
ſary to the peace of our minds and happineſs of ſociety. Till.
f the eye fees thoſe things rivetted, which are looſe, where
will you begin to rectify the miſtake. Locke.
Where we uſe words of a looſe and wandering ſignifica-
tion, hence follows miſtake and error, which thoſe maxims,
brought as proofs to eſtabliſh propoſitions, wherein the terms
ſtand for undetermined ideas, do by their authority confirm
and rivet. Locke,
Rivet and nail me where I ſtand, ye pow'rs. Congrºve.
They provoke him to the rage
Of fangs and claws, and, ſtooping from your horſe,
Rivet the panting ſavage to the ground. Aldſºn's Cato.
A ſimilitude of nature and manners, in ſuch a degree as
we are capable of, muſt tie the holy knot, and rivet the
friendſhip between us. Atterbury.
RI'vulet. n.ſ. [rivulus, Lat..] A ſmall river; a brook; a
ſtreamlet.
By fountain or by ſhady rivulet,
He ſought them. Milton.
The veins, where innumerable little rivulets have their
confluence into the common channel of the blood. Bentley.
I ſaw the rivulet of Salforata, formerly called Albula, and
ſmelt the ſtench that ariſes from its water, which Martial
mentions. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
R1x Do'LLAR. m. ſ. A German coin, worth about four ſhil-
lings and fix-pence ſterling. Dić7.
RoAcH. n. ſ. [from rutilus, Lat. redhaired.]
A roach is a fiſh of no great reputation for his dainty taſte :
his ſpawn is accounted much better than any other part of
him: he is accounted the water ſheep, for his ſimplicity and
fooliſhneſs ; and it is noted, that roaches recover ſtrength, and
grow in a fortnight after ſpawning. //alton's Angler.
If a gudgeon meet a roach,
He dare not venture to approach ; -
Yet ſtill he leaps at flies. Swift.
RoAD. m. ſ. [rade, Fr.]
1. Large way; path. -
Would you not think him a madman, who, whilſt he
might eaſily ride on the beaten road way, ſhould trouble him-
ſelf with breaking up of gaps ? Suckling.
To God's eternal houſe direct the way, -
A broad and ample road. Milton.
To be indifferent whether we embrace falſehood or truth,
is the great road to error. Lºcke.
Could ſtupid atoms, with impetuous ſpecd,
By diff'rent roads and adverſe ways proceed,
That here they might rencounter, here unite. Blackmore.
There is but one road by which to climb up. Addiſon.
2. [Rade, Fr. J Ground where ſhips may anchor.
I ſhould be ſtill
Peering in maps for ports and roads ;
And every object that might make me fear -
Misfortune to my ventures. Shakeſp. Merch, of Penice.
About the iſland are many roads, but only one harbour.
Sandys’ journey.
3. Inrode ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 265</div><p class="Text">R O A
R O B
ºt,
i.
º
tº
º,
3. Inrode; incurſion.
The Volſcians ſtand
Ready, when time ſhall prompt them, to make road
Upon's again. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Caſon was deſirous of the ſpoil, for that he was, by the
former road into that country, become famous and rich.
Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
The king of Scotland, ſeeing none came into Perkin,
turned his enterprize into a road, and waſted Northumber-
land with fire and ſword. Bacon's Henry VII.
4. Journey. The word ſeems, in this ſenſe at leaſt, to be de-
rived from rode, the preterite of ride: as we ſay, a ſhort ride;
an eaſy ride.
With eaſy road, he came to Leiceſter,
And lodg'd in the abbey. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
He from the Eaſt his flaming road begins. Milton.
To ROAM. v. n. [romigare, Italian. See Room..] To wan-
der without any certain purpoſe ; to ramble; to rove; to play
the vagrant.
Five ſummers have I ſpent in fartheſt Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Aſia. Shakeſp.
Daphne roaming through a thorny wood. Shakeſp.
The lonely fox roams far abroad,
On ſecret rapin bent, and midnight fraud. Prior.
What were unenlighten’d man,
A ſavage roaming through the woods, and wild
In queſt of prey. Thomſon's Summer.
To RoA.M. v. a. To range; to wander over.
Now fowls in their clay neſts were couch'd,
And now wild beaſts came forth the woods to roam.
Milton.
RoA/MER. m. ſ. [from roam.] A rover; a rambler; a wan-
derer.
RoAN. adj. [rouen, Fr.]
Roan horſe is a horſe of a bay, ſorrel, or black colour,
with grey or white ſpots interſperſed very thick. Farr. Dići.
To RoAR. v. n. [rajan, Saxon.]
1. To cry as a lion or other wild beaſt.
Roaring bulls he would him make to tame. Spenſer.
Warwick and Montague,
That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion,
And made the foreſt tremble when they roard. Shakeſp.
Have I not in my time heard lions roar 2 Shakeſp.
The young lions roared upon him and yelled, jer. ii. 15.
The death of Daphnis woods and hills deplore,
They caſt the ſound to Libya's deſart ſhore; {
The Libyan lions hear, and hearing roar.
2. To cry in diſtreſs.
At his nurſe's tears
He whin’d and roar'd away your vićtory,
That pages bluſh'd at him. Shakeſp. Coriolanus:
Sole on the barren ſands the ſuff’ring chief
Roar'd out for anguiſh, and indulg’d his grief.
3. To ſound as the wind or ſea.
South, Eaſt, and Weſt, with mix’d confuſion roar,
Dryden.
Dryden.
And rowl the foaming billows to the ſhore. Dryden.
Loud as the wolves on Orcas’ ſtormy ſteep,
Howl to the roaring of the northern deep. Pope.
4. To make a loud noiſe.
The brazen throat of war had ceas'd to roar. Milton.
Conſider what fatigues I’ve known,
How oft I croſs'd where carts and coaches roar'd. Gay.
RoAR. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. The cry of the lion or other beaſt.
2. An outcry of diſtreſs.
3. A clamour of merriment.
Where be your gibes now your gambols your ſongs?
your flaſhes of merriment, that were wont to ſet the table
in a roa, 8 Shakeſp. Hamlet.
4. The ſound of the wind or ſea.
5. Any loud noiſe.
Deep throated engines belch'd, whoſe roar
Imbowel'd with outrageous noiſe the air.
Oft on a plat of riſing ground,
I hear the far-off curfew ſound,
Over ſome wide-water'd ſhoar,
Swinging ſlow with ſullen roar.
When cannons did diffuſe,
Preventing poſts, the terror, and the news;
Our neighbour princes trembled at their roar.
The waters, liſt’ning to the trumpet's roar,
Obey the ſummons, and forſake the ſhore.
RoA'RY. adj. [better rory; rares, Lat..] Dewy.
On Lebanon his foot he ſet,
And ſhook his wings with roary May dews wet. Fairfax.
To RoAst. v. a. [roſłir, rotir, Fr. rºſen, German; 32nortoğ,
Saxon, roaded ; from raſtrum, Lat a grate; to roaſt, being,
in its original ſenſe, to broil on a gridiron.]
1. To dreſs meat, by turning it rou:ld before the fire.
He reaſieth not that which he took in hunting. D. of Piety.
Roaſting and boiling are below the dignity of your office.
Swift's Directions to the Cook.
Milton.
Milton.
JValler.
Dryden.
2. To impart dry heat to fleſh.
Here elements have loſt their uſes,
Air ripens not, nor earth produces ;
Fire will not roaſt, nor water boil.
3. To dreſs at the fire without water.
In eggs boiled and royed, there is ſcarce difference to be
diſcerned. Bacon' ſ?....."
4. To heat anything violently. acon's Natural Hiſtory.
Roºſted in wrath and fire,
He thus o'erſized with coagulate gore,
Old Priam ſeeks. Shakeſpeare
Roast. for roafted. peare.
He loſt his rººft beef ſtomach, not being able to touch a
firloin. Addiſon's Speciat Q
And if Dan Congreve judges #. pediator, N° 517.
Rogſ beef and ale make Britons fight.
Swift's Miſtellanies.
Prior.
It warns the cook-maid, not to burn
The roaſt meat, which it cannot turn. Swift's Miſcel.
To rule the RoAst.
To govern; to manage; to preſide. It
was perhaps originally raiſi, which ſignified a tumult, to
direct the populace.
The new-made duke, that rules the rooft.
Where champions ruleth the roſt,
There dailie diſorder is moſt.
Alma ſlap-daſh, is all again
In ev'ry finew, nerve, and vein;
Runs here and there, like Hamlet's ghoſt,
While every where ſhe rules the roaft.
Rob. m. ſ. [I believe Arabick.] Inſpiffated juices.
The infuſion, being evaporated to a thicker conſiſtence,
paſſeth into a jelly, rob, extract, which contain all the virtues
of the infuſion. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To ROB. v. a. ſ.rober, old Fr. robbare, Italian.]
1. To deprive of any thing by unlawful force, or by ſecret
theft; to plunder. To be robbed, according to the preſent
uſe of the word, is to be injured by theft ſecret or violent;
to rob, is to take away by unlawful violence; and to ſteal, is
to take away privately.
Is’t not enough to break into my garden,
And, like a thief, to come to rob my grounds,
But thou wilt brave me with theſe ſawcy terms ? Shakeſp.
Our fins being ripe, there was no preventing of God's
juſtice from reaping that glory in our calamities, which we
robbed him of in our proſperity. King Charles.
I have not here deſigned to rob him of any part of that
commendation, which he has ſo juſtly acquired from the
whole author, whoſe fragments only fall to my portion. Dry.
The water nymphs lament their empty urns,
Shakeſp.
Tuſer's Huſbandry.
Prior.
Boeotia, robb'd of ſilver Dirce, mourns. Addiſon.
2. To ſet free; to deprive of ſomething bad. Ironical.
Our houſe is hell, and thou, a merry devil,
Did'ſt rob it of ſome taſte of tediouſneſs. Shakeſp.
3. To take away unlawfully.
Better be diſdained of all, than faſhion a carriage to rob
love from any. Shakeſp.
Procure, that the nouriſhment may not be robbed and
drawn away. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory,
Nor will I take from any man his due ;
But thus aſſuming all, he robs from you. Dryden.
Oh double ſacrilege on things divine,
To rob the relick, and deface the ſhrine ! Dryden.
Robber. n.ſ.. [from rob.]. A thief; one that robs by force,
or ſteals by ſecret means ; a plunderer.
Theſe hairs, which thou doſt raviſh from my chin,
Will quicken and accuſe thee; I'm your hoſt;
With robbers hands, my hoſpitable favour
You ſhould not ruffle thus. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Barabbas was a robber. St. John.
Had'ſt thou not committed
Notorious murder on thoſe thirty men
At Aſcalon; then, like a robber, ſtrip'd'ſt them -
Of their robes. Milton's Agoniſter.
The robber muſt run, ride, and uſe all the deſperate ways.
of eſcape; and probably, after all, his fin betrays him to the
goal, and from thence advances him to the gibbet. South.
Bold Prometheus did aſpire,
And ſtole from heav'n the ſeeds of fire ;
A train of ills, a ghaſtly crew,
The robber's blazing track purſue. -
Ro’BBERY. n.ſ. [roberie, old Fr. from rol.] Theft perpe-
trated by force or with privacy. -
Thieves for their robbery have authority,
When judges ſteal themſelves. Shakespeare Meaſ for Medſ.
A ſtorm or robbery -
Shook down my mellow hanging". Shakespeare . Cymbeline.
I hate robbery for burnt-offering. Iſaiah lxi. 8.
Some more effectual way might be found, for ſuppreſſing
common thefts and robberies. - Temple.
Robe. m. ſ. [roble, Fr. rºbº, Italian; rauba, low Lat.) A
gown of ſtate ; a dreſs of dignity, ,
Through tatter'd cloaths ſmall vices do appear #.
Robºj and furr'd gowns hide all. Shakeſp. King Lear.
22 A My
+ º
D, yden's Horace. ,
J .*
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 266</div><p class="Text">R O C
R O C
n ſhall be the queen of all fairies,
r", Nº. in a robe of white. Shakeſp.
The laſt good king, whom willing Rome obey'd,
Was the poor offspring of a captive maid ,
Yet he thoſe roles of empire juſtly bore,
Which Romulus, our ſacred founder, wore.
e fineſt art the native robe
How by the fin Thomſºn's Autumn.
To º wº. [from the noun.] To dreſs pompouſly; to
Dryden.
"ºil, chriſtian ſoldier will not be touched with a religious
ion, to ſee an order of Jeſus do ſuch ſervice for enlarg-
iº borders; and an order of St. George only to
rº, and feaſt, and perform rites and obſervances. Bacon.
There in long robes the royal magi fland 3.
The ſage Chaldaeans rol'd in white appear d,
And Brachmans. Pope's Temple of Fame.
Robed in looſe array ſhe came to bathe. *:::
/nn . ſ. An herb. 1/1/.
ſº ſ n./. In the old ſtatutes, a ſort of bold and
Rob E'RT SMA N. } #out robbers or night thieves, ſaid to be ſo
called from Robinhood, a famous robber. -
Ro’BIN. n.ſ. [rulecula, Lat..] A bird ſo named
RoBIN-RED-BREAST. } from his red breaſt.
Up a grove did ſpring, green as in May,
whén April had been moiſt; upon whoſe buſhes
The pretty robins, nightingales, and thruſhes
Warbled their notes. Suckling.
The robin-red-breaft, till of late had reſt,
And children ſacred held a martin's neſt. Pope.
Robo’REous. adj. [robur, Lat.] Made of oak. Dich.
§ious {a}. [robuſtus, Lat. robuſte, Fr.]
1. Strong; finewy ; vigorous ; forceful.
Theſe redundant 'i. d
Robuſtious to no purpoſe, cluſtring down, -
§:monument of º Milton's Agoniſłes.
2. Boiſterous; violent; unwieldy. -
The men ſympathize with the maſtiffs, in robuſtious and
rough coming on. Shakeſp. Henry V.
It offends me to hear a robuſtious periwig-pated fellow tear
a paſſion to tatters, to very rags, to ſplit the ears of the
groundlings. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
While I was managing this young robuſtious fellow, that
old ſpark, who was nothing but ſkin and bone, ſlipt through
my fingers. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian,
- Romp-loving miſs
Is haul’d about in gallantry robuſt.
3. Requiring ſtrength.
The tenderneſs of a ſprain remains a good while after, and
leaves a laſting caution in the man, not to put the part quickly
again to any robuſt employment. Locke.
4. Robuſtious is now only uſed in low language, and in a ſenſe
of contempt.
Robu'st’s Ess. m. ſ. [from robuſt.] Strength; vigour.
Beef may confer a rolylnſ; on my ſon's limbs, but will
hebetate his intelle&amp;tuals. Arbuthnot and Pope.
Thomſon's Autumn.
Roca MBole. n. ſ. See GARLIck.
Rocambole is a ſort of wild garlick, otherwiſe called Spaniſh
garlick; the ſeed is about the bigneſs of ordinary peaſe. Mort.
Garlick, rocambole, and onions abound with a pungent vo-
latile ſalt. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Rºº. E-ALUM. m. ſ. [roche, Fr. a rock.] A purer kind of
alum.
Roche-alum is alſo good. Mortimer’s Huſandry.
º m. ſ. [rºchet, Fr. rochetum, from roccus, low Lat. a
COat. -
I. A ſuſpice; the white upper garment of the prieſt officiating.
What zealous phrenzy did the ſenate ſeize,
That tare the rotºhet to ſuch rags as theſe ? Cleaveland.
2. [Rubellio, Lat.] A fiſh. Ainſ.
ROCK. m. ſ. [ros, roche, Fr. rocca, Italian.]
I. A vaſt maſs of ſtone.
The ſplitting roºks cow'r'd in the finking ſands,
And would not daſh me with their ragged ſides. Shakeſp.
There be rock herbs; but thoſe are where there is ſome
mould... - Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Diſtilling ſome of the tinaed liquor, all that came over
was as limpid and colourleſs as rock water, and the liquour
rºlining in the veſſel deeply ceruleous. Boyle.
..Theſe leſſer rocks, or great bulky ſtones, are they not ma-
nifeſt fragments : Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
9; amber a nodule, inveſted with a coat, called rock
amber. - Woodward on Foſſils.
Pigeons or doves are of ſeveral ſorts 3 as wood pigeons and
rock pigeons. - Mortimer's Huſbandry.
wº darkſome pines, that o'er yon rocks reclin'd,
P * high, and murmur to the hollow wind. Pope.
2. º: defence. A ſcriptural ſenſe.
that º *** of Egypt break under the hand of him
laſtin º * *m; yet the rock of Iſrael will be an ever.
g ſtay. Ring Charles,
... [Rock, Daniſh ; racca, Italian ; rºcca, Spaniſh; ſºia,
3 bº, A diſtaff held in the hand, ſon, which &amp;
was ſpun by twirling a ball below.
A learned and a manly ſoul
I purpos'd her; that ſhould with even powers,
The rock, the ſpindle, and the ſheers, controul
Of deſtiny, and ſpin her own free hours. Benj. j. 2
On the rock a ſcanty meaſure place J. Johnſºn,
Of vital flax, and turn'd the wheel apace. Dryden.
To Rock. v. a. [rocquer, Fr.] -
1. To ſhake ; to move backwards and forwards.
If, by a quicker roºking of the engine, the ſmoke were
more ſwiftly ſhaken, it would, like water, vibrate to and
fro. - - - Boyle.
The wind was laid; the whiſpring found
Was dumb ; a riſing earthquake rock'd the ground.
- - - - Dryden.
A living tortoiſe, being turned upon its back, could help
itſelf only by its neck and head, by puſhing againſt the ground
to rock itſelf as in a cradle, to find out the fide towards which
the inequality of the ground might more eaſily permit to roll
its ſhell. Ray on the Creation.
2. To move the cradle, in order to procure ſleep.
Come, take hand with me,
And rock the ground whereon theſe fleepers be. Shakespeare .
Leaning her head upon my breaſt,
My panting heart rock'd her aſleep. Suckling.
My bloody reſolutions,
Like ſick and froward children,
Were rock'd aſleep by reaſon. Denham.
While his ſecret ſoul on Flanders preys,
He rocks the cradle of the babe of Spain. Dryden.
High in his hall, rock'd in a chair of ſtate,
The king with his tempeſtuous council ſate. Dryden.
3. To lull; to quiet.
Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come miſchance between us twain Shakº.
To Rock. v. m. To be violently agitated; to reel to aid
fro.
The rocking town
Supplants their footſteps; to and fro they reel
Aſtoniſh’d. Philipſ.
I like this rocking of the battlements. 1%ung'; Revenge.
Rock-DoE. m. ſ. A ſpecies of deer.
The rock-dee breeds chiefly upon the Alps: a creature of
admirable ſwiftneſs; and may probably be that mentioned in
the book of Job; her horns grow ſometimes ſo far backward,
as to reach over her buttocks. Grew's Muſæum.
Rock-Ruby. m. ſ. A name given improperly by lapidaries and
jewellers to the garnet, when it is of a very ſtrong, but not
deep red, and has a fair caſt of the blue. Hill on Fºſſils.
Fock-ruby is of a deep red, and the hardeſt of all the kinds.
J/codward on Foſſils.
Rock-SALT. n.ſ. Mineral ſalt.
Two pieces of tranſparent rock-ſalt; one white, the other
red. //codward on Foſſili.
Ro'ck ER. m. ſ. [from rock.] One who rocks the cradle.
His fellow, who the narrow bed had kept,
Was weary, and without a rocker ſlept. Dryden.
Ro'cKET. m. ſ. [rocchetto, Italian.] An artificial firework,
being a cylindrical caſe of paper filled with nitre, charcoal,
and ſulphur, and which mounts in the air to a conſiderable
height, and there burſts.
Every rocket ended in a conſtellation, ſtrowing the air with
a ſhower of ſilver ſpangles. Addiſon.
When bonefires blaze, your vagrant works ſhall riſe
In rockets, till they reach the wond'ring ſkies. Garth.
Ro'cKET. n.ſ. A plant.
The flower of the rocłºt conſiſts of four leaves expanded
in form of a croſs; the pointal becomes a pod, divided into
two cells by an intermediate partition, to which the valves
adhere on both ſides: theſe cells are full of roundiſh ſeeds;
to which may be added, the whole plant hath a peculiar fetid
ſmell. - AMiller.
Rocket is one of the fallet furniture. M. timer's Huſbandry.
Rockless, adj. [from rock.] Being without rocks.
A cryſtal brook.
Is weedleſs all above, and rockleſ, all below.
Rock Rose. n.ſ. [rock and roſe..] A plant. -
Rockwork. ii. ſ. [rock and work.] Stones fixed in mortar,
in imitation of the aſperities of rocks. -
The garden is fenced on the lower end, by a natural
mound of rockwork. - Addison.
Rocky, adj. [from rock.]
I. Full of rocks. -
Val de Compare preſenteth her rocły mountains. Sanº.
Make the bold prince --
Through the cold North and rocky regions run. ſºalter-
The vallies he reſtrains
Dryden.
With rocky mountains. Pº.
Nature lodges her treaſures in rocky ground. at Att.
7 2. Reſembling
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 267</div><p class="Text">R O G
…
º
2. Reſembling a rock.
Such deſtruction to withſtand, he oppos'd the rocky orb
Of tenfold adamant, his ample ſhield. AMilton,
3. Hard; ſtony; obdurate.
I, like a poor bark, of ſails and tackling reſt,
Ruſh all to pieces on thy rocky boſom. Shakeſp. Rich. III.
Rop. n.ſ. [roede, Dutch.]
1. A long twig.
Some chuſe a hazel rod of the ſame year's ſhoot, and this
they bind on to another ſtraight ſtick of any wood, and walk-
ing ſoftly over thoſe places, where they ſuſpect the bowels of
the earth to be enriched with metals, the wand will, by bow-
ing towards it, diſcover it. Boyle.
2. A kind of ſcepter.
Sh’ had all the royal makings of a queen;
As holy oil, Edward confeſſor's crown,
The rod and bird of peace. Shakeſp. Henry VIII,
3. Anything long and ſlender.
The paſtºral reed of Hermes, or his opiate rod. Milton.
Let the fiſherman
Increaſe his tackle, and his rod retie. Gay.
Haſle, ye Cyclops, with your forked rods,
This rebel love braves all the gods,
And every hour by love is made,
Some heaven-defying Encelade.
4. An inſtrument for meaſuring.
Decempeda was a meaſuring rod for taking the dimenſions
of buildings, and ſignified the ſame thing as pertica, taken as
a meaſure of length. Arbuthnot on Coins.
5. An inſtrument of correótion, made of twigs tied together.
If he be but once ſo taken idly roguing, he may puniſh him
with ſtocks; but if he be found again ſo loitering, he ma
ſcourge him with whips or rods. Spenſer on Ireland.
I am whipt and ſcourg’d with rods,
Nettled, and ſtung with piſmires, when I hear
Of Bolingbroke. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
In this condition the rod of God hath a voice to be heard,
and he, whoſe office it is, ought now to expound to the fick
man the particular meaning of the voice. Hammond.
Grant me and my people the benefit of thy chaſtiſements;
that thy rod, as well as thy ſtaff, may comfort us. K. Charles."
They trembling learn to throw the fatal dart,
And under rods of rough centurions ſmart. Dryden.
As ſoon as that ſentence is executed, theſe rods, theſe in-
ſtruments of divine diſpleaſure, are thrown into the fire. Att.
A wit’s a feather, and a chief a rod;
Granville:
An honeſt man's the nobleſt work of God. Pope.
RoDE. pret. of ride.
He in paternal glory rode. Milton.
RoDomoNTA'DE. m. ſ. [from a boaſtful boiſterous hero of
Arioſto, called Rodomonte; rodomontade, Fr.] An empty noiſy
blufter or boaſt ; a rant.
He only ſerves to be ſport for his company; for in theſe
gameſome days men will give him hints, which may put him
upon his rodomontades. Government of the Tongue.
‘I he libertines of painting have no other model but a rodo-
montade genius, and very irregular, which violently hurries
them away. - Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
He talks extravagantly in his paſſion, but if I would quote
a hundred paſſages in Ben Johnſon's Cethegus, I could ſhew
that the rodomontades of Almanzor are neither ſo irrational
nor impoſſible, for Cethegus threatens to deſtroy nature. Dry.
To RodoMonTA'DE. v. n. [from the noun..] To brag thra-
ſonically ; to boaſt like Rodomonte.
Roe. m. ſ. [na, na-beon, Saxon.]
1. A ſpecies of deer.
He would him make
The roe bucks in flight to overtake. Fairy Queen.
They were as ſwift as the roes upon the mountains. I Chr.
Procure me a Troglodyte footman, who can catch a roe at
his full ſpeed Arbuthnot and Pope.
2. The female of the hart.
Thy greyhounds are fleeter than the roe.
Run like a roe or hart upon
The lofty hills of Bitheron. Sandys's Paraphraſe.
Roe. n.ſ. [properly roan or rone; rann, Daniſh: rogen, Ger-
man.] The eggs of fiſh.
Here comes Romeo
Without his roe, like a dried herring. Shakeſp.
Rog A"rion. m. ſ. [rogation, Fr. from rogo, Lat.] Litany;
ſupplication.
He perfecteth the rogations or litanies before in uſe, and ad-
deth unto them that which the preſent neceſſity required. Hook.
Supplications, with this ſolemnity for appeaſing of God's
wrath, were of the Greek church termed litanies, and ro-
gations of the Latin. Taylor.
Róg ATION-week. m. ſ. The week immediately preceeding
Whitſunday; thus called from three faſts obſerved therein,
the Monday, Tueſday, and Wedneſday, called rogation
days, becauſe of the extraordinary prayers and proceſſions
then made for the fruits of the earth, or as a preparation for
the devotion of boly Thurſday. IXict.
Shakeſp.
R O I
ROGUE. n.ſ.. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. A wandering beggar; a vagrant; a vagabond.
For fear left we, like ºgues, ſhould be reputed,
And for ** marked beaſts abroad be bruited. Hubbard
The ſheriff and the marſhal may do the more goed and
more terrify the idle rogue. Spenſer in Fº
The ſcum of people and wicked condemned men ſpoiletſ,
the plantation; for they will ever i. like rogues, and not
fall to work, but be lazy and do miſhief. Åº Eſſays
The troops are all *attered, and the commanders º;
poor rogues. . *a*ſp. All's well that end, wº
2. A knave; a diſhoneſt fellow; a villain; a thief * ---
Thou kill'ſt me like a rogue and a villain." Shakeſ,
A rºgue upon the highway may have as ſtrong all arm ºft
take off a man's head as cleverly as the executioner. but
then there is a vaſt diſparity, when one action is murther,
South.
and the other juſtice.
If he call rogue and raſcal from the garret,
He means you no more miſchief than a parrot. Dryden.
The rogue and fool by fits is fair and wiſe,
And ev'n the beſt, by fits, what they deſpiſe.
3. A name of ſlight tenderneſs and endearment.
Oh, what a rogue and pleaſant ſlave am II Shakeſp.
I never knew a woman love man ſo.
-Alas, poor rogue, I think indeed ſhe loves. Shakeſp:
4. A wag.
To Rogue. v. n. [from the noun.]
I. To wander; to play the vagabond.
If he be but once ſo taken idly roguing, he may puniſh him
with the ſtocks. Spenſer on Ireland.
He rogued away at laſt, and was loſt. Carew.
2. To play knaviſh tricks.
Rogue RY. m. ſ. [from rogue.]
1. The life of a vagabond.
To live in one land is captivity,
To run all countries a wild roguery. Donne.
2. Knaviſh tricks.
They will afterwards hardly be drawn to their wonted
lewd life in thievery and roguery. Spenſer on Ireland.
You rogue, here's lime in this ſack too; there is nothing
but roguery to be found in villainous man. Shakeſp.
Like the devil did tempt and ſway 'em
To ragueries, and then betray 'em.
The kid ſmelt out the roguery.
'Tis no ſcandal grown,
For debt and roguery to quit the town.
The roguery of alchymy,
And we, the bubbled fools,
Spend all our preſent ſtock in hopes of golden rules. Swift.
3. Waggery; arch tricks.
Ro'gueship. n.ſ.. [from rogue.] The qualities or perſonage
of a rogue. -
Say, in what naſty cellar under ground,
Or what church porch, your roguſhip may be found Dry.
Ro'guish. adj. [from rogue.]
1. Vagrant; vagabond.
Though the perſons, by whom it is uſed, be of better note
than the former roguiſh ſort; yet the fault is no leſs worthy of
a marſhal. Spenſer.
2. Knaviſh ; fraudulent.
He gets a thouſand thumps and kicks,
Yet cannot leave his roguiſh tricks. Swift's Miſcellanies.
3. Waggiſh; wanton; ſlightly miſchievous.
The moſt bewitching leer with, her eyes, the moſt roguiſh
caſt; her cheeks are dimpled when ſhe ſmiles, and her ſmiles
would tempt an hermit. Dryden's Spaniſh Fryar.
I am pleaſed to ſee my tenants paſs away a whole evening
in playing their innocent tricks; our friend Wimble is as
merry as any of them, and ſhews a thouſand roguiſh tricks on
theſe occaſions. Addiſon's Spectator, N° 269.
Timothy uſed to be playing roguiſh tricks; when his mi-
ſtreſs's back was turned, he would loll out his tongue. Arb.
Ro'guishly. adv. [from roguiſh..] Like a rogue; knaviſhly ,
wantonly. - -
Roguish Ness. n.ſ.. [from roguiſh.] The qualities of a rogue;
Roguy. adj. Iſröm rogue.] Knaviſh ; wanton. A bad
word. -
A ſhepherd's boy had gotten a roguy trick of crying: wolf,
and fooling the country with falſe alarms. L’E/ºrange.
To Ro1st. v. n. [of this word the moſt probable ety-
To Ro1's TER, ; mology is from rifter, Iſlandick, a violent
man.] - - - -
To behave turbulently; to act at diſcretion 3 ° be at frce
quarter; to bluſter.
I have a raiſing challenge ſent amongſt
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks,
will ſtrike amazement to their drowſy ſpirits.
Among a crew of raiſºriºg fºllºws: -
He'd fit whole ev’nings at the alehouſe. Swift.
Ro1's TER, or raiſierer. ". ſ: [from the verb.] A turbulent,
brutal, lawleſs, bluffering fellow.
Pope.
Hudibras, p. i.
L'E/ºrange's Fables,
Dryden,
Shakeſp.
To ROLL.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 268</div><p class="Text">R O M
R O L
To ROLL. v. a. [reuſe” Fr. rollen, Dutch ; from rotulº, of
roto, Lat.] - - ſucceſſ lication
g by volutation, or ſucceſſive applicatio
1. To move anything Fº ſº, to the ground.
of the different parts 9 f the ſe-
all ay the ſtone from the door of the ſe
Who ſhall roll us away Mark xvii. 3.
ulchre - -
- tS 2X1S.
move any thing round upon its * -
2. To Heav'n i. 2nd roll'd her motions. Milton.
in a circle. -
To #. and troll the tongue, and roll the eye. Milton.
To produce a periodical revolution,
To wrap round upon itſelf.
To enwrap; to involve in bandage. . .
By this rolling, parts are kept from joining together. Wiſem.
. To form by rolling into round maſſes. .
Gººd reá-lead, or any other colour with ſtrong wºrt, and
ſo roll them up into long rolls like pencils. - Peacham.
The pin ought to be as thick as a rolling pin. JWiſeman.
, To pour in a ſtream or waves. - -
8. To . ſmall Euphrates through the piece is roll'd,
And little eagles wave their wings in gold. Pope.
To Roll. v. n. -
º be moved by the ſucceſſive application of all parts of the
e to the ground.
*g. .# too great to be ruined by any but itſelf; and
if the number and weight of it roll one way upon the greateſt
changes that can happen, yet England will be ſafe. Temple.
Reports, like ſnow-balls, gather ſtill the farther they roll.
Government of the Tongue.
Fire muſt rend the ſky,
And wheel on th’ earth, devouring where it rolls. Milton.
A tortoiſe, by puſhing againſt the ground only with its
neck and head, rocks itſelf as in a cradle, to find out the ſide
towards which the inequality of the ground might more eaſily
permit it to roll its ſhell. Ray on the Creation.
2. To run on wheels.
He next eſſays to walk, but downward preſs'd,
On four feet imitates his brother beaſt;
By ſlow degrees he gathers from the ground
i
His legs, and to the rolling chair is bound. Dryden.
3. To perform a periodical revolution.
Thus the year rolls within itſelf again. Dryden.
When thirty rolling years have run their race. Dryden.
4. To move with appearance of circular direction.
Thou, light,
Reviſit'ſ not theſe eyes, which roll in vain,
To find the piercing ray, and find no dawn: Milton.
A boar is chaf’d, his noſtrils flames expire,
And his red eye-balls roll with living fire. Dryden.
5. To float in rough water.
Twice ten tempeſtuous nights I roll'd, reſign'd
To roaring billows and the warring wind. Pope.
6. To move as waves or volumes of water.
Wave rolling after wave in torrent rapture. Milton.
Till the huge ſurge roll'd off, then backward ſweep
The refluent tides, and plunge into the deep. Pope.
Tempt icy ſeas, where ſcarce the waters roll. Pope.
Storms beat, and roll; the main;
Oh beat thoſe ſtorms, and roll the ſeas in vain. Pope.
7. To fluctuate ; to move tumultuouſly.
Here tell me, if thou dar'ſt, my conſcious ſoul,
What diff'rent ſorrows did within thee roll. Prior.
The thoughts, which roll within my raviſh'd breaſt,
To me, no ſeer, th’ inſpiring gods ſuggeſt. Pope.
In her ſad breaſt the prince's fortunes roll,
And hope and doubt alternate ſeize her ſoul. Pope.
8. To revolve on its axis. -
He faſhion'd thoſe harmonious orbs, that roll
In reſtleſs gyres about the Artick pole. Sandy's Paraph.
9. To be moved tumultuouſly.
\ Down they fell
By thouſands, angel on archangel roll’d. Milton.
Roll. n.ſ. [from the verb.]
1. The act of rolling; the ſtate of being rolled.
2. The thing rolling.
Liſtening ſenates hang upon thy tongue,
Devolving through the maze of eloquence
A roll of periods, ſweeter than her ſong. T.
3. (Rouleau, Fr.] Maſs made round. § homſºn.
Large rºlls of fat about his ſhoulders clung,
And from his neck the double dewlap hung. Addison.
t I i. from trees, encompaſs the ſtem four fingers
ºth with a circle or roll of wool newly plucked. }
4. Writing rolled upon itſelf. y plucke AMort.
A H. º: all was hanged about with roll;
nd old records, from antient ti deriv'd.
5. ^ſº body rolled along. lill CS Clerly Fa. Sºueen.
ſoaks º º º º of rain comes that
§", uſe a roll to break the clots. Mortimer.
6. (Rotulus, Lat.] Publick writing. S Ortizmer
Cromwell is
- made maſter
O’ th rolls and the kin
arius made a decre
e, and ~ 1.- : -
of the roll, where the tº ſearch was made in the houſe
reaſures were laid up. Ezra vi. 1.
g's ſecretary. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
The rolls of parliament, the entry of the petitions, an-
fwers, and tranſactions in parliament are extant. Hale.
7. A regiſter 3, a catalogue.
Beaſts only cannot diſcern beauty; and let them be in the
roll of beaſts, that do not honour it. Sidney.
The roll and liſt of that army doth remain. Davies.
Of that ſhort roll of friends writ in my heart,
There's none, that ſometimes greet us not. Donne.
Theſe ſigns have mark'd me extraordinary,
And all the courſes of my life do ſhew,
I am not in the roll of common men. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
'Tis a mathematical demonſtration, that theſe twenty-four
letters admit of ſo many changes in their order, and make ſuch
along roll of differently ranged alphabets, not two of which are
alike; that they could not all be exhauſted, though a million
millions of writers ſhould each write above a thouſand alpha-
bets a-day, for the ſpace of a million millions of years. Bentl,
8. Chronicle.
Pleaſe thy pride, and ſearch the herald's roll,
Where thou ſhalt find thy famous pedigree. Dryden.
Buſy angels ſpread
The laſting roll, recording what we ſaid. Prior.
The eye of time beholds no name
So bleſt as thine, in all the rolls of fame. Pºe.
9. Warrant... Not in uſe.
We have, with ſpecial roll,
Elečted him our abſence to ſupply. Shakeſp. Maſ for Mſ.
1c. [Role, Fr. J. Part; office. Not in uſe.
In human ſociety, every man has his roll and ſtation aſ,
ſigned him. L’Eſtrange.
Roſile R. n.ſ. [rouleau, Fr. from roll.]
1. Anything turning on its own axis, as a heavy ſtone to level
walks.
When a man tumbles a roller down a hill, the man is the
violent enforcer of the firſt motion ; but when it is once
tumbling, the property of the thing itſelf continues it. Hamm.
The long ſlender worms, that breed between the ſkin and
fleſh in the iſle of Ormuz and in India, are generally twiſted
out upon ſticks or rollers. Ray on the Creation.
They make the ſtring of the pole horizontal towards the
lathe, conveying and guiding the ſtring from the pole to the
work, by throwing it over a roller. AMoxon's Mech. Exer.
Lady Charlotte, like a ſtroller,
Sits mounted on the garden roller.
2. Bandage ; fillet.
Faſten not your roller by tying a knot, leſt you hurt your
patient. //jcman's Surgery.
Bandage being chiefly to maintain the due ſituation of a
dreſfing, ſurgeons always turn a roller with that view. Sharp.
Rollis GPIN. m. ſ. [rolling and pin...] A round piece of wood
tapering at each end, with which paſte is moulded.
The pin ſhould be as thick as a rollingpin. It iſ man.
Rolly Pool Y. m. ſ. A ſort of game, in which, when a ball
rolls into a certain place, it wins. A corruption of rail buil
into the pool.
Let us begin ſome diverſion; what d'ye think of roulºuſy
or a country dance Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of Jºhn Bull.
Ro'MAGE. n.ſ. [ramage, Fr.] A tumult; a buſtle; an active
and tumultuous ſearch for any thing.
This is the main motive
Of this poſt haſte, and romage in the land. Shakespeare.
ROMANCE. m. ſ. [roman, Fr. romanza, Italian.]
1. A military fable of the middle ages; a tale of wild adven-
tures in war and love.
What reſounds
In fable or romance of Uther's ſon. Miliºn.
A brave romance who would exactly frame,
Firſt brings his knight from ſome immortal dame. Wºr:
Some romances entertain the genius; and ſtrengthen it by
the noble ideas which they give of things; but they corrupt
the truth of hiſtory. Dryden's Dufreſnº.
2. A lie; a fiction. In common ſpeech.
To Rom A Nce. v. n. [from the noun...] To lies to forge.
This is ſtrange romancing. Pamela.
Romancer. n.j [from rºmance.] Alier; a forgº of *.
The alluſion of the daw extends to all impoſtº, ""
pretenders, and romancers. L’Eſtrange.
Shall we, cries one, permit -
This leud romancer, and his bantering wit. Tate's juven.
To Ro'MAN1ze. v.a. (from roman, Fr.j Tolatinize; * *
with modes of the Roman ſpeech. -
He did too much romaniz, our tongue, leaving the words,
he tranſlated, almoſt as much Latin as he found them. Dryd.
RoMANTIck. adj. [from romance.]
1. Reſembling the tales of romances; wild.
Philoſophers have maintained opinions, more abſurd º
any of the moſt fabulous poets or romantick writes: Aft
Zeal for the good of one's country a party of ſnºº have re-
preſented, as chimerical and romantick. Aſad.º.º.
2. Improbable ; falſe.
3. Fanciful; full of wild ſcenery.
The dun umbrage, o'er the falling ſtream,
* -
Romantick hangs. 1 hº Sºng.
-&gt; Ro 11.
Swift's Miſcellanies.
!
To
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 269</div><p class="Text">R O O R O O
ºr-
Ro'Mish. adj. [from Rome.] Popiſh. - Roofy, ad;. from ; : . .
Bulls or letters of election only ſerve in the Romiſh coun- 5. [from *lºſing roofs. *- : -
tries. Ayliffe's Parergon. Whether to roofy houſes they repair
Romp. m. ſ. - - Or ſun themſelves abroad in Open air.
1. A rude, awkward, boiſterous, untaught girl. In all abodes of peſtilential º 2
She was in the due mean between one of your affected To ſheep. Dryden's Georgiº,
courteſying pieces of formality, and your romps that have no ROOK. m. ſ. [hnoc, Saxon.] ryaen's Georgickr,
regard to the common rules of civility. Arbuthnot.
2. Rough rude play,
Romp loving miſs
Is haul’d about in gallantry robuſt. Thomſon.
To Romp. v. n. To play rudely, noiſily, and boiſterouſly.
1. A bird reſembling a crow: it feeds not on
Augurs, that underſtood rela
By magpies, and by choughs,
The ſecret'ſt man of blood.
Huge flocks of riſing rooks forſake thei
- carrion, but grain.
tions, have,
and rooks, brought forth
Shakeſp. Macbeth,
- - food.
In the kitchen, as in your proper element, you can laugh And crying ſeek the ſhelter r &gt; -
ſquall, and romp in full ſecurity. Swift's kłº to . #; the rook, the .* wood. Dryden,
A ſtool is the firſt weapon taken up in a general romping or Aid the full concert. Thomſon's Spring.
ſkirmiſh. - Swift's Rule: to Servants. 2. [Rocco, Italian.] A mean man atcheſ, pring.
Men preſume greatly on the liberties taken in romping. So have I ſeen a king on cheſs,
- - Clariſſa. His rooks and knights withdrawn,
Ro'NDEAU. m. ſ. A kind of ancient poetry, commonly con- His queen and biſhops in diſtreſs,
fiſting of thirteen verſes; of which eight have one rhyme and Shifting about grow leſs and leſs,
five another: it is divided into three couplets, and at the end With here and there a pawn. &gt; Dryden's Songs
of the ſecond and third, the beginning of the rondeau is re- 3. A cheat; a trickiſh rapacious fellow. y 3.
peated in an equivocal ſenſe, if poſſible. Trevaux.
Ron T. n.ſ. An animal ſtinted in the growth.
My ragged ronts all ſhiver and ſhake,
As done high towers in an earthquake;
They wont in the wind, wag their wriggle tails,
. I am, like an old rook, who is ruined by gaming, forced to
live on the good fortune of the puſhing young men. Wycherly.
To Rook. v. n...[from the noun J. To rob; to cheat.
They rook'd upon us with deſign,
To out-reform and undermine.
Hudi ---
Peark as a peacock, but nought it avails. Spenſºr. How any one's being put into a mixed herd º, tº:
Ro'NDLEs. n.ſ.. [from round..] A round maſs. and there learning to rook at ſpan-farthing, fits him for cº
Certain rondles given in arms, have their names according verſation, I do not ſee. Locke on Education
to their ſeveral colours. Peacham on Blazoning. Rook ERY. n.ſ. [from rook.] A nurſery of rooks. -
Ro'Nion. n.ſ...[I know not the etymology, nor certainly the No lone houſe in Wales, with a mountain and a rookery,
meaning of this word..] A fat bulky woman. is more contemplative than this court. • Popes
- Give me, quoth I, Roo'KY', adj. [from rook.] Inhabited by rooks.
Aroint the witch the rump fed romyon cries. Shakeſp. Light thickens, and the crow
Rood. n.ſ.. [from rod.]
1. The fourth part of an acre in ſquare meaſure.
I’ve often wiſh'd that I had clear,
For life, ſix hundred pounds a year,
A terras-walk, and half a rood To all delight of human ſenſe expos'd
Of land, ſet out to plant a wood. Swift. In narrow room, nature's whole wealth. Milton,
2. A pole; a meaſure of ſixteen feet and a half in long mea- 2. Space or place unoccupied.
ſure. - If you will have a young man to put his travels into a little
Satan, room, and in ſhort time gather much, this he muſt do. Bac.
With head uplift 'bove the wave, his other parts The dry land is much too big for its inhabitants; and that
Prone on the flood, extended long and large, before they ſhall want room by encreaſing and multiplying,
Makes wing to th’ rooky wood. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
ROOM. m. ſ. ſnum, Saxon; rums, Gothick.]
1. Space; extent of place.
With new wonder, now he views,
Lay floating many a rood. Milton. there may be new heavens and a new earth. Bentley.
For ſtone fences in the North, they dig the ſtones for 3. Way unobſtructed.
eighteen-pence a rood, and make the walls for the ſame price, Make room, and let him ſtand before our face. Shakeſp.
reckoning twenty-one foot to the rood or pole. Mortimer. What train of ſervants, what extent of field,
3. [note, Saxon.] The croſs. Shall aid the birth, or give him room to build Creech.
By the holy rood, This paternal regal power, being by divine right, leaves
I do not like theſe ſeveral councils. Shakeſp. no room for human prudence to place it any where. Locke.
ROOF. n.ſ.. [hnop, Saxon.] - 4. Place of another ; ſtead.
1. The cover of a houſe. In evils, that cannot be removed without the manifeſt
Her ſhoulders be like two white doves, danger of greater to ſucceed in their rooms, wiſdom of neceſ-
Perching within ſquare royal rooves. Sidney. fity muſt give place to neceſſity. Hooker, b. v. ſ. 9.
Return to her, and fifty men diſmiſs'd
For better ends our kind redeemer dy'd,
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and chuſe
Or the fallen angels rooms will be but ill ſupply'd. Roſe.
To wage againſt the enmity o' th' air. Shakeſp. K. Lear. By contributing to the contentment of other men, and
2. The vault; the inſide of the arch that covers a building. rendering them as happy as lies in our power, we do God's
From the magnanimity of the Jews, in cauſes of moſt ex- work, are in his place and room. Calamy's Sermons.
treme hazard, thoſe ſtrange and unwonted reſolutions have 5. Unobſtructed opportunity.
grown, which, for all circumſtances, no people under the When this princeſs was in her father's court, ſhe was ſo
roof of heaven did ever match. Hooker. celebrated, that there was no prince in the empire, who had
The duſt room for ſuch an alliance, that was not ambitious of gaining
Should have aſcended to the roof of heav'n, her into his family. Addiſon's Freeholder, N° 2.
Rais'd by your populous troops. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleop. It puts us upon ſo eager a purſuit of the advantages of life,
In thy fame, the duſty ſpoils among, as leaves rºo room to reflect on the great author of them. Att.
High on the burniſh’d roof, my banner ſhall be hung. Will you not look with pity on me?
Dryden. Is there no hope is there no room for pardon A. Philips,
3. The palate; the upper part of the mouth. 6. An apartment in a houſe ; ſo much of a houſe as is incloſed
- Swearing till my very roof was dry within partitions.
With oaths of love. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice. I found the prince in the next room,
My very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the Waſhing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks. Shakeſ?.
roof of my mouth, ere I ſhould come by a fire to thaw me. If when ſhe appears in th’ room,
Shakeſp. Taming of the Shrew. Thou doſt not quake, and art ſtruck dumb 3
The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to Know this,
the roof of their mouth. job xxix. Io. Thou lov'ſt amiſs ;
Some fiſhes have rows of teeth in the roofs of their mouths; And to love true, - 1:
as pikes, ſalmons, and trouts. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory. Thou muſt begin again, and love anew. . Sutiling.
To Roof. v. a. [from the noun.] In a prince's court, the only queſtion a man is to aſk is,
1. To cover with a roof. whether it be the cuſtom of the court, or will of the prince,
He enter'd ſoon the ſhade to be uncovered in ſome rooms and not in others. Stillingfleet.
High rooft, and walks beneath, and alleys brown. Milton. It will afford me a few pleaſant rºom” for ſuch a friend as
Large foundations may be ſafely laid ; yourſelf, Pope.
Or houſes roof’d, if friendly planets aid. Creech. Roo MAGE. n.ſ.. [from room.] Space ; place. - -
I have not ſeen the remains of any Roman buildings, that Man, of all ſenſible creatures, has the fulleſt brain to his
have not been roofed with vaults or arches. Addiſon. proportion, for the lodging of the intellective facultics: it
2. To incloſe in a houſe. muſt be a ſilent character of hope, when there is good ſtore of
Here had we now our country's honour roof’d, roomage and receipt, where thoſe powers are ſtowed. //otton.
Were the grac'd perſon of our Banquo preſent. Shakeſp. Roo'MINEss. É. /.. [from roomy. Slace; quantity of [.
22 - -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 270</div><p class="Text">B O O
R O R
: rºom room. Spacious; wide; large.
t - Roº... la º of mighty ſtrength,
Deep in her draught, and warlike in her length. Dryden.
This ſort of number is more roomy; the thought can turn
* * itſelf with greater º: in * compaſs. Dryden.
: . m. ſ. ſhnorr, Saxon.
*#. ...ſ.º. bird ſits to ſleep.
- Sooner than the mattin-bell was rung,
He clap'd his wings upon his roºſ', and ſung. Dryden.
. The aët of ſleeping.
2 T; fox ſpied . #cock at rooft upon a tree. L’Eſtrange.
Large and ſtrong muſcles move the wings, and ſupport the
body at rooft. Derham's Phyſico. Theolºgy.
To Roost. v. n. [roften, Dutch; of the ſame etymology with
reſt.]
1. To ſleep as a bird.
The cock rooſted at night upon the boughs.
º 2. To lodge. In burleſque. -
- ROOT. n.ſ. [rät, Swediſh 5. roed, Daniſh.)
º 1. That part of the plant which reſts in the ground, and ſup-
plies the ſtems with nouriſhment. - -
The layers will in a month ſtrike root, being planted in a
light loamy earth, mixed with excellent rotten ſoil, and fifted.
Evelyn's Kalendar.
When you would have many new rºots of fruit trees, take
a low tree and bow it, and lay all his branches aflat upon the
ground, and caſt earth upon them, and every, twig will take
roof. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
A flow'r in meadow ground, amellus call’d ;
And from one root the riſing ſtem beſtows
A wood of leaves. Dryden's Virgil's Georgicks.
In O&amp;tober, the hops will ſettle and ſtrike root againſt
fpring. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
2. The bottom; the lower part.
Deep to the roots of hell the gather'd breach
They faſten’d. Milton.
Theſe ſubterraneous vaults would be found eſpecially about
the roots of the mountains. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
3. A plant of which the root is eſculent.
Thoſe plants, whoſe roots are eaten, are carrots, turnips,
and radiſhes. //atts.
4. The original; the firſt cauſe:
Why did my parents ſend me to the ſchools,
That I with knowledge might enrich my mind
Since the deſire to know firſt made men fools,
And did corrupt the root of all mankind.
Whence,
But from the author of all ill, could ſpring
So deep a malice, to confound the race.
Of mankind in one root. Milton's Paradiſe Loſº, b. ii.
The love of money is the root of all evil, is a truth uni-
verſally agreed in. Temple.
5. The firſt anceſtor.
It was ſaid,
That myſelf ſhould be the root, and father
Of many kings. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
They were the roots, out of which ſprang two diſtinct
L’Eſtrange.
Davies.
people, under two diſtinét governments. Locke.
6. Fixed reſidence.
- That love took deepeſt root, which firſt did grow. Dry.
7. Impreſſion; durable effect.
Haying this way eaſed the church, as they thought of ſu-
perfluity, they went on till they had plucked up even thoſe
things alſo, which had taken a great deal ſtronger and deeper
root. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 14.
To Root. v. m. [from the noun.
1. To fix the root; to ſtrike far into the earth.
Her fallow leas
5. darnel, hemlock and rank fumito
oth root upon. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Underneath the grove of ſycamour, 'ſp y V
That weſtward rooteth, did I ſee your ſon. Shakespeare.
The multiplying brood of the ungodly ſhall not take deep
rooting from baſtard ſlips, nor lay any faſt foundation. It’ſd.
| After a year's rooting, then ſhaking doth the tree good, by
looſening of the earth. Bacon.
. . The coulter muſt be proportioned to the ſoil, becauſe, in
deep grounds, the weeds root the deeper. Mortimer.
2. To turn up earth.
To Root. v. a. [from the noun.]
I. To fix deep in the earth.
- When ocean, air, and earth at once Cngage,
And rooted foreſts fly before their rage, c
At once the claſhing clouds to battle move.
here th' impetuous torrent ruſhing down
. ... and rooted trees had thrown,
2. To º *º Dryden's Żneis.
*** important end that God deſigns it for, the go-
º of mankind, ſufficiently ſhews the neceſſity .*.
º ..."; "“ply in the heart, aſ a put beyºnd. f
* being torn up by any ordi , and p yond the danger 9
t 8 Y ordinary violence. South.
*
Dryden.
They have ſo rooted themſelves in the opinions of their
party, that they cannot hear an objection with patience. Watts,
3. To turn up out of the ground ; to radicate; to extirpate.
He's a rank weed,
And we muſt root him out. Shakeſp. Henry VIII,
Soon ſhall we drive back Alcibiades,
Who, like a boar too ſavage, doth root up
His country's peace. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens,
The Egyptians think it fin to root up or to bite
Their leeks or onions, which they ſerve with holy rite.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the IP2, d.
Root up wild olives from thy labour'd lands. Dryden.
The royal huſbandman appeard,
And plough'd, and ſow'd, and till'd ;
The thorns he rooted out, the rubbiſh clear'd,
And bleſt th’ obedient field. Dryden.
4. To deſtroy; to baniſh.
Not to deſtroy, but root them out of heav'n. Milton.
In vain we plant, we build, our ſtores increaſe,
If conſcience roots up all our inward peace. Granville.
Roo'TED. adj. [from root.] Fixed ; deep ; radical.
Pluck from the memory a rooted ſorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain. Shakespeare .
The danger is great to them, who, on a weaker foun-
dation, do yet ſtand firmly rooted, and grounded in the love
of Chriſt. Hammond's Fundamental.
You always joined a violent deſire of perpetually changing
places with a rooted lazineſs. Swift to Gay.
Roo TEDLY. adv. [from rooted.] Deeply ; ſtrongly.
They all do hate him as rootedly as I. Shakespeare .
Roo'TY. adj. [from root..] Full of roots. Dić.
ROPE. m. ſ. ſnap, Saxon ; reep, roºp, Dutch.]
1. A cord; a ſtring; a halter.
Thou drunken ſlave, I ſent thee for a rope,
And told thee to what purpoſe. Shakeſp. Com. of Err.
An anchor, let down by a rope, maketh a ſound; and yet
the rope is no ſolid body, whereby the ſound can aſcend. Bac,
Who would not gueſs there might be hopes,
The fear of gallowſes and ropes
Before their eyes, might reconcile
Their animoſities a while. ** Hudibras.
I cannot but confeſs myſelf mightily ſurprized, that, in a
book, which was to provide chains for all mankind, I ſhould
find nothing but a rope of ſand. Locke.
Hang yourſelf up in a true rope, that there may appear no
trick in it. Arbuthnot's Hiſtory of John Bull.
2. Any row of things depending : as, a rope of onions.
To Rope. v. n. [from the noun..] To draw out into viſcoſities;
to concrete into glutinous filaments.
Such bodies partly follow the touch of another body, and
partly ſtick to themſelves: and therefore rope and draw them-
ſelves in threads; as pitch, glue and birdlime. Bacon.
In this cloſe veſſel place the earth accurs'd,
But fill'd brimful with wholeſome water firſt,
Then run it through, the drops will rope around. Dryden.
Ro PE DANCER. m. ſ. [rope and dancer.] An artiſt who dances
on a rope.
Salvian, amongſt other publick ſhews, mentions the Pe-
taminarii; probably derived from the Greek Terzº&amp;zi, which
. ſignifies to fly, and may refer to ſuch kind of ropedancerſ.
Wilkins's Mathemaical Magick.
Statius, poſted on the higheſt of the two ſummits, the
people regarded with the ſame terror, as they look upon ada-
ring ropedancer, whom they expect to fall every moment:
Addison's Guardian.
Nic bounced up with a ſpring equal to that of one of your
nimbleſt tumblers or ropedancers, and fell foul upon John Bull,
to ſnatch the cudgel he had in his hand. Arbuthnot.
Ro'PIN Ess. m. ſ. [from ropy.] Viſcoſity ; glutinouſneſs.
Ro'PEMAKER, or roper. m. ſ. [rope and maker.] One who
makes ropes to ſell.
The ropemaker bear me witneſs, r
That I was ſent for nothing but a rope. Shakeſpeare.
Roºp ERY. n.ſ.. [from rope.] Rogue's tricks. See Roºk-
TRICK.
What ſaucy merchant was this, that was ſo full ºf his
ropery. Shakeſp. Merchant of Penice.
Roºp ºf Rick. n.ſ. [rope and trick.] Probably rogue's tricks 3
tricks that deſerve the halter.
She may perhaps call him half a ſcore knaves, or ſo: an
he begin once, he’ll rail in his ropetricks. Shakeſpeare.
Ro'PY. adj. [from rºpe..] Viſcous; tenacious ; glutinous.
Aſk for what price thy venal tongue was ſold 3
Tough, wither'd truffles, ropy wine, a diſh •
Of ſhotten herrings, or ſtalé ſtinking fiſh. Dryden's juv.
Take care d d
Thy muddy bev'rage to ſerene, and drive ---
Fº baſer ropy lees. Philips.
R0.3L ELAURE. m. ſ. [French..] A cloak for men.
Within the requelaure's claſp thy hands are Pent. Gay.
RoRAºtion, n.ſ. [ºri, Latin.] A failing of dew, Pº
Ro'RID,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 271</div><p class="Text">::
R O T
R O S
º,
ºf
Ro'Rip. m. ſ. [roridus, Lat..] Dewy. -
A vehicle conveys it through leſs acceſſible cavities into the
liver, from thence into the veins, and ſo in a rorid ſubſtance
through the capillary cavities. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
RoRI'FERous. adj [ros and fero, Lat.] Producing dew. 1 ič.
RoR1'FLUENT. adj. [ros and fluo, Lat..] Flowing with dew. Dict.
Ro's ARY. m. ſ. [roſarium, Lat..] A bunch of beads, on which
the Romaniſts number their prayers.
No roſary this votreſs needs,
Her very ſyllables are beads. Cleaveland.
Every day propound to yourſelf a roſary or a chaplet of
good works, to preſent to God at night. Taylor.
RöscID. adj. [roſcidus, Lat.j Dewy 5 abounding with dew ;
conſiſting of dew.
Wine is to be forborn in conſumptions, for the ſpirits of
wine prey upon the roſcid juice of the body. Bacon.
The ends of rainbows fall more upon one kind of carth
than upon another; for that earth is moſt roſtid. Bacon.
ROSE. m. ſ. [roſe, Fr. roſa, Lat..] A flower.
The flower of the roſe is compoſed of ſeveral leaves, which
are placed circularly, and expand in a beautiful order, whoſe
leafy flower-cup afterward becomes a roundiſh or oblong fleſhy
fruit incloſing ſeveral angular hairy ſeeds; to which may be
added, it is a weak pithy ſhrub, for the moſt part beſet with
prickles, and hath pinnated leaves: the ſpecies are, 1. The
wild briar, dog roſe, or hep-tree. 2. Wild briar or dog roſe,
with large prickly heps. 3. The greater Engliſh apple-bear-
ing roſ. 4. The dwarf wild Burnet-leaved roſe. 5. The
dwarf wild Burnet-leaved roſe, with variegated leaves.
6. The ſtriped Scotch roſe. 7. The ſweet briar or eglantine.
8. Sweet briar, with a double flower. All the other forts of
roſes are originally of foreign growth, but are hardy enough
to endure the cold of our climate in the open air, and pro-
duce beautiful and fragrant flowers. Miller.
Make uſe of thy ſalt hours, ſeaſon the ſlaves
For tubs and baths, bring down the roſe cheek’d youth
To th’ tub faſt and the diet. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
Patience thou young and roſe lipp'd cherubin. Shakeſp.
Let us crown ourſelves with roſe buds, before they be wi-
thered. //iſdom ii. 8.
This way of procuring autumnal roſes will, in moſt roſe
buſhes, fail; but, in ſome good bearers, it will ſucceed.
Boyle.
Here without thorn the roſe. Milton.
For her th’ unfading roſe of Eden blooms. Pope.
7% ſpeak under the Rose...To ſpeak any thing with ſafety, ſo as
not afterwards to be diſcovered.
By deſiring a ſecrecy to words ſpoke under the roſe, we
mean, in ſociety and compotation, from the ancient cuſtom in
ſympoſiack meetings, to wear chaplets of roſes about their
heads. Brown's Wugar Errours.
Rose. pret. of riſe.
Eve roſe and went forth 'mong her flow’rs.
Rose At E. adj. [roſat, Fr. from roſe.]
1. Roſy ; full of roſes.
I come, ye ghoſts prepare your roſeate bow'rs,
Celeſtial palms and ever blooming flow’rs. Pope.
2. Blooming, fragrant, purple, as a roſe.
Ro's ED. adj. [from the noun..] crimſoned; fluſhed.
Can you blame her, being a maid retroſed over with the
virgin crimſon of modeſty, if ſhe deny the appearance of a
naked blind boy. Shakeſp. Henry V.
Rose-MAllow. n.ſ. Is in every reſpect larger than the com-
mon mallow ; the leaves are rougher, and the plant grows
almoſt ſhrubby. AMiller.
Ro's EMARY. m. ſ. [roſmarinus, Lat.] Is a verticillate plant,
with a labiated flower, conſiſting of one leaf, whoſe upper
lip or creſt is cut into two parts, and turns up backward with
crooked ſtamina or chives; but the under lip or beard is di-
vided into three parts, the middle ſegment being hollow like
a ſpoon; out of the two or three-teethed flower-cup riſes the
pointal, attended, as it were, by four embryoes, which after-
ward turn to ſo many ſeeds that are roundiſh, and are in-
cloſed in the flower-cup. - Miller.
Bedlam beggars, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numb’d and mortify'd bare arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, ſprigs of rºſemary 5
And with this horrible objećt, from low farms, ...
Inforce their charity. Shakeſp. King Lear.
Around their cell
Set rows of roſemary with flowering ſtem. Dryden.
Roſemary is ſmall, but a very odoriferous ſhrub ; the princi-
pal uſe of it is to perfume chambers, and in decoctions for
waſhing. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Milton.
The neighbours
Follow’d with wiſtful look the damſel bier,
Sprigg’d roſemary the lads and laſſes bore. Gay.
Rcs F-Noble. m. ſ. An Engliſh gold coin, in value anciently
ſixteen ſhillings. Dićf.
The ſucceeding kings coined roſe-nobles and double roſe-
nobles, the great ſovereigns with the ſame inſcription, Jeſus
auten tranſiens per medium corum ibat. Camden's Remainſ,
Rºxariº. *ſ. [rºft and water.] Water diſtilled from
Oics.
Attend him with a ſilver baſon
Full of roſewater.
- - - Shakespeare
His drink * be cooling; as fountain water with rºft-
water and ſugar of roſes. Jºſeman's Surgery.
Roset. n. ſ. [from *..] A red colour for painters.
Grind ceruſs with a weak water ºf gum-lake, roſet, and
Vermillion, which maketh it a fair carnation. 2 Pºiº
Roſsil R. n.ſ. [roſier, Fr.] A roſebuſh. ---
- Her yellow golden hair
Was trimly woven, and in treſſes wrought,
i. other tire ſhe on her head did wear,
ut crowned with a garland of ſweet, offer. Fair
ROSIN. n.ſ. [properly reſin ; reſne, Fr. º, iºn-
1. Inſpiſſated turpentine; a juice of the pine.
The billows from the kindling prow retire,
Pitch, ro/in, ſearwood on red wings aſpire. Garth.
2. Any inſpiſlated matter of vegetables that diſſolves in ſpirit.
Tea contains little of a volatile ſpirit; its roſin or fixed oil,
which is bitter and aſtringent, cannot be extracted but by
rectified ſpirit. . Arbuthnot on Aliments.
To Rosin. v. a. [from the noun..] To rub with roſin.
Bouzebeus who could ſweetly fing,
Or with the roſin’d bow torment the ſtring. Gay.
Roºisy, adj. [from roſin.] Reſembling roſin. The example
ſhould perhaps be roſely. See ROSSÉL. -
The beſt ſoil is that upon a ſandy gravel or roſiny ſand. Tºmb.
RO'SSEL. n.ſ. P y 9 ºſny p
A true reſel or light land, whether white or black, is what
they are uſually planted in. Mortimer's Huſbandry.
Ro'sselly, adj. [from roſel.]
In Eſſex, moory land is thought to be the moſt proper:
that which I have obſerved to be the beſt ſoil is a rafty top,
and a brick earthy bottom. AMortimer's Huſbandry.
Rºariº. adj. [rg/fratus, Lat.] Adorned with beaks of
Ips.
He brought to Italy an hundred and ten roſtrated gallies of
the fleet of Mithridates. º:
RO'STRUM. n.ſ. [Latin.]
1. The beak of a bird.
2. The beak of a ſhip.
3. The ſcaffold whence orators harangued.
Veſpaſian erected a column in Rome, upon whoſe top was
the prow of a ſhip, in Latin roſtrum, which gave name to
the common pleading place in Rome, where orations were
made, being built of the prows of thoſe ſhips of Antium,
which the Romans overthrew. Peacham on Drawing.
Myſelf ſhall mount the roſtrum in his favour,
And ſtrive to gain his pardon from the people. Addiſon.
4. The pipe which conveys the diſtilling liquor into its receiver
in the common alembicks; alſo a crooked ſciſſars, which the
ſurgeons uſe in ſome caſes for the dilatation of wounds. Quin.
Ro's Y. adj. [roſeus, Lat..] Reſembling a roſe in bloom, beau-
ty, colour, or fragrance.
When the roſy fing’red morning fair,
Weary of aged Tithon's ſaffron bed,
Had ſpred her purple robe through dewy air. Fa. Queen.
A ſmile that glow'd
Coeleſtial roſy red, love's proper hue.
Faireſt bloſſom I do not ſlight
That age, which you may know ſo ſoon;
The roſy morn reſigns her light,
And milder glory to the noon.
The roſy finger'd morn appears,
And from her mantle ſhakes her tears,
In promiſe of a glorious day.
As Theſſalian ſteeds the race adorn,
So roſy colour'd Helen is the pride
Of Lacedemon, and of Greece beſide.
While blooming youth and gay delight
Sit on thy roſy cheeks confeſt,
Thou haſt, my dear, undoubted right -
To triumph o'er this deſtin'd breaſt. Prior.
To ROT. v. n. [nocan, Saxon; rotten, Dutch..] To putrify;
to loſe the coheſion of its parts.
Milton.
JW llers
Dryden's Albion:
Dryden.
A man may rot even here. - Shakeſpi
From hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot. Shakeſp.
Being more nearly expoſed to the air and weather, the bo-
dies of the animals would ſuddenly corrupt and rºt; the bones
would likewiſe all rot in time, except thoſe which were ſe-
cured by the extraordinary ſtrength of their parts. Wººdward.
To Rot.’v. a. To make putrid; to bring to corruption.
No wood ſhone that was cut down alive, but ſuch as was
rotted in ſtock and root while it grew. Bacon,
Frowning Auſter ſeeks the ſouthern ſphere,
And rots, with endleſs º th' unwhollome year. Dryder,
... n. ſ. ſtrom the verb.
º ić: among ſheep, in which their lungs are waſted.
In an unlucky grange, the ſheep died of the rot, the ſwine
of the mange, and not a gooſe or duckling throve, B. 7%.
e<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 272</div><p class="Text">º R O T
R O U
". . . . uſ of rot and murrain die. Milton.
rº. ". ſuffers under no defect, the country
bein generally full ſtocked with ſheep, and the ſoil little %.
icćt É, other rots º º: hunger. Temple.
ion : putrid decay.
2. Pºiº kº º the ſudden rot ---
Of freezing noſe, and quick decaying feet. Philips.
Roºr ARY. adj, (rota, Lain.] Whirling as a wheel. Dict.
Ro'TATED. adj. [rotatus, Lat: whiled round.
Rotation. n.ſ. (rotation, Fr. rotatiº, Lat.] The aä of
whirling round like a wheel; the ſtate of being ſo whirled
round; whirl. - - -
of this kind is ſome diſpoſition of bodies to rotation from
Eaſt to Weſt; as the main float and refloat of the ſea, by
conſent of the univerſe as part of the diurnal motion. Bacon.
By a kind of circulation or ... i. . their i.
- - - erfeótion, and traduction from one people
sº p . Hale's Origin of Mankind.
The axle-trees of chariots take fire by the rapid rotatiºn of
the wheels. Newton's Opticks.
In the paſſions wild rotation toft,
Our ſpring of action to ourſelves is loſt. Pope.
In fond rotation ſpread the ſpotted wing,
And ſhiver every feather with deſire. Thomſºn.
ROTATOR. m. ſ. [Latin.] That which gives a circular mo-
On.
tl This articulation is ſtrengthened by ſtrong muſcles; on the
inſide by the triceps and the four little rotators. Wiſeman.
Rote. n.ſ. ſnoº, Saxon, merry.]
1. [Rote, old Fr.] A harp a lyre. Obſolete.
Wele couthe he fing, and player on a rote.
Worthy of great Phoebus' rote,
The triumphs of Phlegrean Jove he wrote,
That all the gods admir’d his lofty note. Spenſer.
2. [Routine, Fr.] Words uttered by mere memory without
meaning; memory of words without comprehenſion of the
ſenſe.
Firſt rehearſe this ſong by rote,
To each word a warbling note. Shakeſp.
Thy loved did read by rote, and could not ſpell. Shakeſp.
He rather faith it by rote to himſelf, than that he can
throughly believe it. Bacon's Eſſays.
All which he underſtood by rote,
And as occaſion ſerv'd would quote.
Learn Ariſtotle's rules by rote,
And at all hazard's boldly quote. Swift's Miſcel.
To Rote. v. a. [from the noun..] To fix in the memory,
without informing the underſtanding.
Speak to the people
Words rated in your tongue; baffards and ſyllables
Of no allowance to your boſom's truth.
Ro"TGUT. n.ſ. [rot and gut..] Bad beer.
They overwhelm their panch daily with a kind of flat ret-
gut, we with a bitter dreggiſh ſmall liquor. Harvey.
RoTHER-NAILs. n.ſ.. [a corruption of rudder.] Among ſhip-
wrights, nails with very full heads uſed for faſtening the rudder
irons of ſhips. Bailey.
Rotte N. adj. [from rot.]
1. Putrid ; carious; putreſcent.
Truſt rot to rotten planks. Shakespeare , Ant, and Cleopatra.
Proſperity begins to mellow,
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
. . . O bliſs-breeding ſun, draw from the earth
* Rotten humidity; below thy fiſter's orb
Infect the air. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
There is by invitation or excitation; as when a rotten apple
lieth cloſe to another apple that is ſound; or when dung,
which is already putrefied, is added to other bodies. Bacº.
Who braſs as rotten wood; and ſteel no more
Regards than reeds. Sandys's Paraphraſe.
It groweth by a dead ſtub of a tree, and about the roots of
"atten trees, and takes his juice from wood putrefied. Bacon,
They ſerewood from the rotten hedges took,
And ſeeds of latent fire from flints provoke.
2. Not firm ; not truſty.
. . Hence, rotten thing, or I ſhall ſhake thy bones
. . Out of thy garments. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
3. Not ſound; not hard.
You common cry of curs whoſe breath I hate,
As reek o' th' rotten fens. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
They were left moiled with dirt and mire, by reaſon of the
deepneſs of the rºtten way. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
********s, *.ſ.. [from rottºn.] State of being rotten;
cariouſneſs; putrefaction.
Diſeas'd ventures,
That Play with all infirmities for gold,
...tº endºre, Shaº. Cºlºn.
º matter ſtink and be oily, it is %. ſign of a
yrºki - %iſeman's Surgery.
* º º, º [rotonde, Fr. rotundus, Lat..] Round; &amp;
The croſs figure of the chriſtian temples is more prope
for ſpacious buildings than the rotund of *: heathen ; . º:
Chaucer.
Hudibras, p. i.
Shakeſp.
Shakeſp.
Dryden.
t
is much better filled at firſt entering the rotund, but ſuch as
are built in the form of a croſs gives us a greater variety. Addison
Rotu'NDIFolious. adj. [rotundus and folium, Lat.] Having
round leaves.
Rotu'NDITY. m. ſ. [rotunditas, Lat. rotondité, Fr. from rotund.]
Roundneſs; ſphericity ; circularity.
Thou all-ſhaking thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world. Shakeſp.
With the rotundity common to the atoms of all fluids, thºſe
is ſome difference in bulk, elſe all fluids would be alike in
weight. Grew.
Rotundity is an emblem of eternity, that has neither be-
ginning nor end. Addiſon on Ancient Medal.
Who would part with theſe ſolid bleſfings, for the little
fantaſtical pleaſantneſs of a ſmooth convexity and rotundity of
a globe. Bentley's Sermons.
Roru'ND.o. n.ſ. [rotonda, Italian.] A building formed round both
in the inſide and outſide ; ſuch as the pantheon at Rome. Trev.
To ROVE. v. n. [roffver, Daniſh, to range for plunder.] To
ramble; to range ; to wander.
Thou'ſt years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars ſurfeits, to go rove with one
That's yet unbruis’d. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
Faultleſs thou dropt from his unerring ſkill,
With the bare power to fin, ſince free of will;
Yet charge not with thy guilt his bounteous love,
For who has power to walk, has power to rove. Arbuth.
If we indulge the frequent riſe and roving of paſſions, we
thereby procure an unattentive habit. JWatts.
I view'd th’ effects of that diſaſtrous flame,
Which kindled by th’ imperious queen of love,
Conſtrain'd me from my native realm to rove. Pºpe.
To Rove. v. a. To wander over.
Roving the field, I chanc'd
A goodly tree far diſtant to behold,
Loaden with fruit of faireſt colours.
Cloacina as the town ſhe rov’d,
A mortal ſcavenger ſhe ſaw, ſhe lov’d.
Rover. n.ſ.. [from rove.]
1. A wanderer ; a ranger.
2. A fickle inconſtant man.
3. A robber; a pirate.
This is the caſe of rovers by land, as ſome cantons in
Arabia. Bacon's Holy War.
4. At Rovers. Without any particular aim.
Nature ſhoots not at rovers: even inanimates, though they
know not their perfection, yet are they not carried on by a
blind unguided impetus; but that, which directs them,
knows it. Glanvill's Scepſ.
Providence never ſhoots at rovers : there is an arrow that
flies by night as well as by day, and God is the perſon that
ſhoots it. South's Sermons.
Men of great reading ſhow their talents on the meaneſt
ſubjećts; this is a kind of ſhooting at rovers. Addison.
Roug E. m. ſ. [rouge, Fr. J Red paint.
ROUGH. adj. [hnuh, hy.uhje, Saxon; rouw, Dutch.]
1. Not ſmooth ; rugged ; having inequalities on the ſurface.
The fiend
O'er bog or ſteep, through ſtrait, rough, denſe, or rare,
Purſues his way. Milton.
Were the mountains taken all away, the remaining parts
would be more unequal than the roughºſt ſea; whereas the
face of the earth ſhould reſemble that of the calineſt ſea, if
ſtill in the form of its firſt maſs. Burnt's Theory of the Earth.
2. Auſtere to the taſte: as, rough wine.
3. Harſh to the ear.
Moſt by the numbers judge a poet's ſong,
And ſmooth or rough with them is right or wrong. Pope.
4. Rugged of temper; inelegant of manners ; not ſoft ;
coarſe ; not civil ; ſevere; not mild ; rude.
A fiend, a fury, pitileſs and rough,
Milton's Par. Lºft.
Gay.
A wolf; nay worſe, a fellow all in buff. Shakeſp.
Strait with a band of ſoldiers tall and rough - - -
On him he ſeizes. Cowley's Davideit.
5. Not gentle; not proceeding by eaſy operation. -
He gave not the king time to proſecute that gracious me-
thod, but forced him to a quicker and rougher remedy: Clar.
Hippocrates ſeldom mentions the doſes of his medicines,
which is ſomewhat ſurprizing, becauſe his purgatives are ge-
nerally very rough and ſtrong. Arbuthnot on Coins.
6. Harſh to the mind; ſevere.
Kind words prevent a good deal of that perverſeneſs,
which rough and imperious uſage often produces in generous
minds. Locke.
7. Hard featured ; not delicate,
A ropy chain of rheums, a viſage rough,
Deform’d, unfeatur'd, and a ſkin of buff. Dryden.
8. Not poliſhed; not finiſhed by art: as, a rough diamond,
9. Terrible; dreadful.
Before the cloudy van,
On the rough edge of battle ere it join'd, -
Satan advanc'd, Milton.
19, Rugged;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 273</div><p class="Text">R O U
:
:
Io. Rugged; diſordered in appearance ; coarſe.
Rough from the toffing ſurge Ulyſſes moves,
Urg'd on by want, and recent from the ſtorms,
The brackiſh ooze his manly grace deforms. Pope.
11. Tempeſtuous; ſtormy ; boiſterous.
Come what come may,
Time and the hour run through the roughºſt day. Shakespeare,
To Rou’d HCAst. v. a. [rough and ca/?..]
1. To mould without nicety or elegance; to form with aſperities
and inequalities.
Nor bodily, nor ghoſtly negro could
Roughcaſt thy figure in a ſadder mould.
2. To form anything in its firſt rudiments.
In merriment they were firſt practiſed, and this roughcaſt
unhewn poetry was inſtead of ſtage plays for one hundred and
twenty years. Dryden's Dedication to juvenal.
Rou'GHcAst. m. ſ. [rough and ca/.]
1. A rude model ; a form in its rudiments.
The whole piece ſeems rather a looſe model and roughcaſ,
of what I deſign to do, than a compleat work. Digby.
2. A kind of plaiſter mixed with pebbles, or by ſome other
cauſe very uneven on the ſurface.
Some man muſt preſent a wall; and let him have ſome
plaſter, lome, or roughcaſt about him to fignify wall. Shakeſp.
Rou'GHDR AUGHT. m. ſ. [rough and draught.] A draught in
its rudiments.
Cleaveland.
My elder brothers came -
Roughdraughts of nature, ill deſign'd and lame,
Blown off, like bloſſoms, never made to bear;
*Till I came finiſh'd, her laſt labour'd care. Dryden.
To Rough DRaw. v. a. (rough and draw.] To trace coarſely.
His vićtories we ſcarce could keep in view,
Or poliſh 'em ſo faſt, as he roughdrew.
To Rou'GHEN. v. a. [from rough..] To make rough.
Such difference there is in tongues, that the ſame figure,
which roughens one, gives majeſty to another; and that was
it which Virgil ſtudied in his verſes. Dryden's Dºd. to Æneis.
Ah! where muſt needy poet ſeek for aid,
When duſt and rain at once his coat invade 1
His only coat; when duſt confus'd with rain,
Dryden.
Roughens the nap, and leaves a mingled ſtain. Swift.
To Rou GHEN. u, n. To grow rough.
The broken landſkip
Aſcending roughens into rigid hills. Thomſºn's Spring.
To RoughHew'. v. a. [rough and hew.] To give to any
thing the firſt appearance of form. -
There's a divinity that ſhapes our ends,
Roughhew them how we will. Shakeſp. Hamlet.
The whole world, without art and dreſs,
Would be but one great wilderneſs,
And mankind but a ſavage herd,
For all that nature has conferr'd :
This does but roughhew and deſign,
Leaves art to poliſh and refine.
Rou"o HHEw N. pa ticip. adj.
1. Rugged ; unpoliſhed; uncivil ; unrefined.
A roughhewn ſeaman, being brought before a juſtice for
ſome miſdemeanour, was by him ordered away to priſon; and
would not ſtir; ſaying, it was better to ſtand where he was,
than go to a worſe place. Bacon's Apophthegms.
2. Not yet nicely finiſhed.
I hope to obtain a candid conſtrućtion of this roughhewn
ill-timber'd diſcourſe. Howel's Wocal Foreſt.
Hudibras, p. iii.
Rou'GH I. Y. adv. [from rough.]
1. With uneven ſurface; with aſperities on the ſurface.
2. Harſhly ; uncivilly ; rudely.
Nc Mammon would there let him long remain,
For terror of the torments manifold,
In which the damned ſouls he did behold,
But roughly him beſpake. Fairy Queen, b. ii.
Rebuk'd, and roughly ſent to priſon,
Th’ immediate heir of England I was this eaſy Shakeſø.
. Severely ; without tenderneſs.
Some friends of vice pretend,
That I the tricks of youth too roughly blame.
. Auſterely to the taſte.
. Boiſterouſly ; tempeſtuouſly.
6. Harſhly to the ear.
Rou’d HNess. m. ſ. [from rough.]
1. Superficial aſperity; unevenneſs of ſurface.
The little roughneſſes or other inequalities of the leather
againſt the cavity of the cylinder, now and then put a ſtop to
3
D ryden -
the deſcent or aſcent of the ſucker. Boyle.
While the ſteep horrid roughneſs of the wood
Strives with the gentic calmneſs of the flood. Denham.
When the diamond is not only found, but the roughneſ;
ſmoothed, cut into a form, and ſet in gold, then we cannot
but acknowledge, that it is the perfect work of art and
nature. Dryden.
Such a perſuaſion as this well fixed, will ſmooth all the
roughneſs of the way that leads to happineſs, and render all
the conflicts with our luſts pleaſing: Atterbury,
2. Aufleteneſs to the taſte.
Pº º contain a grateful ſharpneſs, as lemons; or
*.*.*re and inconcoëted roughneſ, as floes. -
3. Taſte of aſtringency. ghneſs, O Brown.
A tobacco-pipe broke in my mouth, and the ſpitting out
the pieces left ſuch a delicious roughneſs on my tongue: that
I champed up the remaining part. §ºr
4. Harſhneſs to the ear. -
In the roughn'ſ of the numbers and cadences of this play,
which was ſo deſigned, you will ſee ſomewhat more maſterly
than in any of my former tragedies. Dryden.
The Swedes, Danes, Germans, and Dutch attain to the
Pronunciation of our words with eaſe, becauſe our ſyllables
reſemble theirs in roughneſs and frequency of conſonants. Sw.
5. Ruggedneſs of temper; coarſeneſs of manners; tendency to
rudeneſs; coarſeneſs of behaviour and addreſs.
Roughneſs is a needleſs cauſe of diſcontent; ſeverity breedeth
fear; but roughneſs breedeth hate: even reproofs from autho-
rity ought to be grave and not taunting. Bacon.
When our minds eyes are diſengag’d,
They quicken ſloth, perplexities unty,
Makº rºughneſs ſnooth, and hardneſs mollify. Denham.
*% of temper is apt to diſcountenance the timorous
or modeſt. Addiſon.
6. Abſence of delicacy.
Should feaſting and balls once get among the cantons, their
military roughneſs would be quickly loſt, their tempers would
grow too ſoft for their climate. Addiſon.
7. Severity; violence of diſcipline.
8. Violence of operation in medicines.
9. Unpoliſhed or unfiniſhed ſtate.
Io. Inelegance of dreſs or appearance.
11. Tempeſtuouſneſs; ſtormineſs.
12. Coarſeneſs of features.
Rought, old pret. of reach. [commonly written by Spenſºr
raught.] Reached.
The moon was a month old, when Adam was no more,
And rought not to five weeks, when he came to fiveſcore.
Shakeſp. Love's Labour Loft.
To Rou'GH work. v. a. [rough and work.] To work coarſely
over without the leaſt nicety.
Thus you muſt continue, till you have rough wrought all.
your work from end to end. Mºxon's Mich. Exerciſes.
Rou'NcEval. n.ſ.. [from Rounceſval, a town at the foot of
the Pirenees.] See PEA, of which it is a ſpecies.
Dig garden,
And ſet as a daintiethy runeival peaſe. Tuſſºr.
ROUND. adj. [rond, French; rondo, Italian; rund, Dutch;
rotundus, Latin.] *
1. Cylindrical. -
Hollow engines long and round thick ram'd.
2. Circular.
His pond’rous ſhield large and round behind him. Milton.
3. Spherical; orbicular.
The outſide bare of this round world. Milton.
4. [Rotundo ore, Lat...] Smooth; without defect in ſound.
In his ſatyrs Horace is quick, round, and pleaſant, and as
nothing ſo bitter, ſo not ſo good as Juvenal. Peacham.
5. Not broken.
Pliny put a round number near the truth, rather than a
fraćtion. Arbuthnot on Coins.
6. Large; not inconſiderable.
Three thouſand ducats' 'tis a good round ſum. Shakeſp.
They ſet a round price upon your head. Addiſon.
It is not eaſy to foreſce what a round ſum of money may do
among a people, who have tamely ſuffered the Franche comptſ
to be ſeized on. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
She called for a round ſum out of the privy purſe. Hoof.
7. Plain ; clear; fair; candid; open.
Round dealing is the honour of man's nature; and a mix-
ture of falſehood is like allay in gold and ſilver, which may
make the metal work the better, but it embaſeth it. Bacon.
8. Quick ; briſk.
Painting is a long pilgrimage; if we do not ačtually begin
the journey, and travel at a round rate, we ſhall never arrive
at the end of it. Dryden's Dufreſnoy.
Sir Roger heard them upon a round trot ; and after pau-
ſing, told them, that much might be ſaid on both ſides. Addison
9. Plain; free without delicacy or reſerve; almoſt rough.
Let his queen mother all alone intreat him,
To ſhew his griefs; let her be round with him. Shakeſp.
The kings interpoſed in a round and princely manner; not
only by way of requeſt and perſuaſion, but alſo by way of
proteſtation and menace. Bacon.
Round, n.ſ.
1. A circle; a ſphere; an orb.
Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my ſpirits in thine ear,
• And chaſtiſe with the valour of thy tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
Which fate and metaphyſick aid doth ſeem
To have crown'd thee withal. Shakeſ?. Macbeth.
22 C I’ll
Milton.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 274</div><p class="Text">R O U
R O U
- = wº wº T
3. the air to give a found. . . -
wº your antick round. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Thrée of four we'll dreſs like º d
- od, of waxen tapers on thcar heads, -
Yºº in their hands. Shakeſp. AZer. J/ives ºf I/indſ.
What is this, .
That riſes like the iſſue of a king,
And wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of ſovereignty : Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Hirſute roots are a middle ſort, between the bulbous and
fibrous; that, beſides the putting forth ſap upwards and
downwards, putteth forth in round. Bacon.
What if the ſun
Be centre to the world; and other ſtars,
By his attractive virtue and their OW In ** 7
Incited, dance about him various rounds. Milton.
Knit your hands, and beat the ground . -
Milton.
In a light fantaſtick rºund. -
He did foretel and propheſy of him,
who to his realms that azure round bath join'd. Denham.
They mcct, they wheel, they throw their darts afar;
Then in a round the mingled bodies run,
Flying they follow, and purſuing ſhun. Dryden.
How ſhall I then begin, or where conclude,
To draw a fame ſo truly circular :
For, in a round, what order can be ſhew’d,
Where all the parts ſo equal perfect are Dryden.
The mouth of Veſuvio has four hundred yards in diame-
ter; for it ſeems a perfect round. Addiſon.
This image on the medal plac'd,
With its bright round of titles grac'd, -
And ſtampton Britiſh coins ſhall live. Addison.
2. Rundle; ſtep of a ladder.
When he once attains the upmoſt round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the clouds, ſcorning the baſe degrees
By which he did aſcend. Shakeſp. julius Caeſar.
Many are kick'd down ere they have climbed the two or
three firſt rounds of the ladder. Government of the Tongue.
All the rounds like Jacob's ladder riſe;
The loweſt hid in earth, the topmoſt in the ſkies. Dryden.
This is the laſt ſtage of human perfection, the utmoſt round
of the ladder whereby we aſcend to heaven. Norris.
3. The time in which any thing has paſſed through all hands,
and comes back to the firſt: hence applied to a carouſal.
A gentle round fill'd to the brink,
To this and t'other friend I drink.
Women to cards may be compar'd ; we play
A round or two, when us'd, we throw away.
The feaſt was ſerv’d ; the bowl was crown'd ; -
To the king's pleaſure went the mirthful round. Prior.
4. A revolution; a courſe ending at the point where it began.
We, that are of purcr fire,
Imitate the ſtarry quire,
Who, in their mighty watchful ſpheres,
Lead in ſwift rounds the months and years. Milton.
If nothing will pleaſe people, unleſs they be greater than
nature intended, what can they expect, but the aſs's round of
Suckling.
Granville.
vexatious changes. L'E/irange.
How then to drag a wretched life beneath
An endleſs round of ſtill returning woes,
And all the gnawing pangs of vain remorſe 2
What torment's this Smith.
Till by one countleſs ſum of woes oppreſt,
*: with cares, and ignorant of reſt,
We find the vital ſprings relax’d and worn;
Compell'd our common impotence to mourn,
Thus through the round of age, to childhood we return.
Prior.
5. [Randº, Fr.]. A walk performed by a guard or officer, to
ſurvey a certain diſtrict.
Roun D. adv.
1. Every way; on all ſides.
The terror of God was upon the cities round about. Gen.
All founds whatſoever move round; that is, on all fides,
upwards, downwards, forwards, and backwards. Bacon.
In darkneſs and with dangers compaſs'd round. Milton.
2. [En rond, a la ronde, Fr.] In a revolution.
At the beſt 'tis but cunning; and if he can in his own
fancy raiſe that to the opinion of true wiſdom, he comes
. . . wind to practiſe his deceits upon himſelf. Gov. of the Tong.
Some preachers, prepared only upon two or three points,
- ºn the ſame round from one end of the year to another. Addison
3. Circularly, - -
One foot he center'd, and the other turn'd
Åºund through the vaſt profundity obſ -
4. Not in a direct line. P y obſcure. Milton.
T . to come in, Sir, they go out;
Roº. they take is targely round about. Pope.
I. On every fide of
- To officiate light rºund this opacous earth. AMilton.
2. About ; circularly about.
He led the hero round
- The confines of the bleſt Elyſian ground. Dryden.
3. All over.
- Round the world we roam,
Forc’d from our pleaſing fields and native home.
To Rou N'D. v. a. [rotundo, Lat. from the noun.]
1. To ſurround ; to encircle.
Would that th' incluſive verge
Of golden metal, that muſt round my brow,
Were redhot ſteel to fear me to the brain.
We are ſuch ſtuff
As dreams are made on, and our little life
Is rounded with a ſleep.
This diſtemper'd meſſenger of wet,
The many coloured Iris, round; thine eyes.
The vileſt cockle gaping on the coaſt,
That rounds the ample ſea.
2. To make ſpherical or circular.
Worms with many feet, which round themſelves into balls
are bred chiefly under logs of timber. B.º.
When ſilver has been leſſened in any piece carrying the
publick ſtamp, by clipping, waſhing, or rounding, the laws
have declared it not to be lawful money. Locke.
With the cleaving-knife and mawl ſplit the ſtuff into a
ſquare piece near the ſize, and with the draw-knife round off
the edges to make it fit for the lathe. 44.xon.
Can any one tell, how the fun, planets, and ſatellites were
rounded into their particular ſpheroidical orbs.
3. To raiſe to a relief.
The figures on our modern medals are raiſed and round.d.
to a very great perfection. 4ddiſºn ºn Ancient Medal.
4. To move about anything.
To thoſe beyond the polar circle, day
Had unbenighted ſhone, while the low ſun,
To recompenſe his diſtance, in your ſight
Had rounded ſtill th’ horizon, and not known
Or Eaſt or Weſt. 4Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. x.
5. To mould into ſmoothneſs. *
Theſe accompliſhments, applied in the pulpit, appear by
a quaint, terſe, florid ſtile rounded into periods and cadencies,
without propriety or meaning. Swift's 44/cellanies.
To Roun D. v. n.
1. To grow round in form.
The queen, your mother, round; apace; we ſhall
Preſent our ſervices to a fine new prince. Shakeſ?.
2. [Runen, German ; whence Chaucer writes it better rain.]
To whiſper.
Being come to the ſupping place, one of Kalander's ſer-
Dryden.
Shakespeare
Shakeſp. Tempeſt.
Shakespeare
Prior.
Cheyne.
vants rounded in his ear ; at which he retired. Sidney.
France,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
As God's own ſoldier, rounded in the ear,
With that ſame purpoſe changes. Shaftºp.
They're here with me already ; whiſpering, ro, nding,
Sicilia is a ſo forth; 'tis far gone. Shakeſp.
Cicero was at dinner, where an ancient lady ſaid ſhe was
but forty : one that ſat by rounded him in the ear, ſhe is far
more out of the queſtion : Cicero anſwered, I muſt believe
her, for I heard her ſay ſo any time theſe ten years. Bacºn.
The fox ound, the new elect in the ear, with a piece of
ſecret ſervice that he could do him. L'E/irange.
3. To go rounds.
They keep watch, or nightly rounding walk. Milton.
Rou'NDA Bout. adj. [This word is uſed as an adjective, though
it is only an adverb united to a ſubſtantive by a colloquial
licenſe of language, which ought not to have been admitted
into books.]
I. Ample; extenſive.
Thoſe ſincerely follow reaſon, but for want of having large,
ſound, roundabout ſenſe, have not a full view of all that re-
lates to the queſtion. Locke on Underſtanding.
2. Indirect; looſe.
Paraphraſe is a roundabout way of tranſlating, invented to
help the barrenneſs, which tranſlators, overlooking in them-
ſelves, have apprehended in our tongue. Felton.
Rou'N DEL.
Rou’N DELAY. {n.ſ.
1. [Rondelet; French.] A kind of ancient poetry, which
commonly conſiſts of thirteen verſes, of which eight
are of one kind of rhyme and five of another: it is di-
vided into three couplets; and at the end of the ſecond and
third, the beginning of the roundel is repeated in an equivocal
ſenſe, if poſſible. ‘ſ evºux.
Siker, ſike a roundle never heard I none,
Little lacketh Perigot of the beſt,
And Willie is not greatly over-gone,
So weren his under-ſongs well addreſt. Senſºr's Pºſt.
_To hear thy rimes and roundelays, -
Which thou wert wont in waſtful hills to fing,
I more delight than lark in ſummer days,
Whoſe echo made the neighbºring groves to ring. %.
Q111C<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 275</div><p class="Text">R O U
R O W
Cºſº,
º
ſ:
º,
Some now a roundel and a fairy ſong. Shakespeare
They liſt’ning heard him, while he ſearch'd the grove,
And loudly ſung his roundelay of love,
But on the ſudden ſtop'd.
2. [Rondelle, Fr.] A round form or figure.
The Spaniards, caſting themſelves into roundels, and their
ſtrongeſt ſhips walling in the reſt, made a flying march to
Calais. - Bacon.
The muſes, and graces made feſtivals; the fawns, ſatyrs,
and nymphs did dance their roundelays. Howel.
Rou'NDER. m. ſ. [from round.] Circumference; incloſure.
If you fondly paſs our proffer'd offer,
'Tis not the rounder of your old fac’d walls -
Can hide you from our meſſengers of war. Shakeſp.
Rou'No! E. D. m. ſ. [round and head..] A puritan, ſo named
from the practice once prevalent among them of cropping
their hair round. -
Your petitioner always kept hoſpitality, and drank confu.
fion to the roundheads. Speciator, Nº. 629,
Rou'NDHouse. n.ſ. [round and houſe.] The conſtáble's pri-
ſon, in which diſorderly perſons, found in the ſtreet, are
confined.
They march'd to ſome fam'd roundhouſ. Pope.
Rou's DISH. adj. [from round..] Somewhat round; approach-
ing to roundneſs. -
It is not every ſmall crack that can make ſuch a receiver,
as is of a rºundſ' figure, uſeleſs to our experiment. Boyle.
Rou’NDI.Y. adv. [from round.]
1. In a round form ; in a round manner.
2. Openly ; plainly ; without reſerve,
Injon gainlayers, giving them roundly to underſtand,
that where our duty is ſubmiſſion, weak oppoſitions betoken
pride. Ho Ker, b. v. ſ. 8.
You'll prove a jolly ſurly groom,
That take it on you at the firſt ſo roundly. Shakeſp.
Mr. de Mortier roundly ſaid, that to cut off all contentions
of words, he would propoſe two means for peace. Hayward.
From a world of phoenomena, there is a principle that
aćts out of wiſdom and counſel, as was abundantly evidenced,
and as roundly acknowledged. Aore's Divine Dialogues.
He affirms every thing roundly, without any art, rheto.
rick, or circumlocution. Addiſon's Count Tariff.
3. Briſkly; with ſpeed.
When the mind has brought itſelf to attention, it will be
able to cope with difficulties, and maſter them, and then it
may go on roundly. - - Locke.
4. Completely ; to the purpoſe; vigorouſly; in earneſt. -
I was called any thing, and I would have done anything,
indeed too, and roundly too. Shakeſp. Henry IV.
This lord juſtice cauſed the earl of Kildare to be arreſted,
and cancelled ſuch charters as were lately reſumed, and pro-
ceeded every way ſo roundly and ſeverely, as the nobility did
much diſtaſte him. Davies on Ireland.
Rou NDN Ess. m. ſ. [from round.]
1. Circularity; ſphericity; cylindrical form.
The ſame reaſon is of the roundneſs of the bubble; for the
air within avoideth diſcontinuance, and therefore caſteth it-
ſelf into a round figure. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Bracelets of pearl gave roundneſs to her arm,
And ev'ry gem augmented ev'ry charm. Prior.
Roundhº is the primary eſſential mode or difference of a
bowl. //atts's Logicſ.
2. Smoothneſs.
The whole period and compaſs of this ſpeech was delight-
ſome for the roundneſs, and grave for the ſtrangeneſs. Spenſer.
3. Honeſty; openneſs; vigorous meaſures.
To ROUSE. v. a. [of the ſame claſs of words with raiſ, and
riſe.]
1. To wake from reſt.
At once the crowd aroſe, confus’d and high;
For Mars was early up, and rous’d the ſky. Dryden.
Rev'rent I touch thce 1 but with honeſt zeal,
To rouſe the watchmen of the publick weal,
To virtue's work provoke the tardy hall;
And goad the prelate ſlumb'ring in his ſtall. Pope.
2. To excite to thought or action.
The Dane and Swede, rouz'd up by fierce alarms,
Bleſs the wiſe conduct of her pious arms;
Soon as her fleets appear, their terrors ceaſe, -
And all the northern world lies huſh'd in peace. Addison.
I'll thunder in their ears their country's cauſe, -
And try to reuſe up all that's Roman in them. Alliſ. Cato.
The heat, with which Luther treated his adverſaries, though
ſtrained too far, was extremely well fitted by the providence
of God to rouſe up a people, the moſt phlegmatick of any
in Chriſtendom. Atterbury.
They would be very much rouſed and awakened by ſuch a
fight; but they would not however be convinced. Atterbury.
3. To put into action.
As an eagle, ſeeing prey appear,
His airy plumes doth rouſe full rudely dight;
So ſhaked he, that horror was to hear. Fairy Queen.
Dryden's Knight's Tale.
Bluff'ring winds had rouj'd - -
4. To drive a . from his laire. the ſea AMilton,
The blood more ſtirs,
To rouze a lion, or to ſtart a hare.
. He ſlooped ºwn, he couched as a
lion ; who ſhall roue him up ;
Th’ unexpected found
Of dogs * men his wakeful car does wound :
Kou'd with the noiſe, he ſcarce believes his ea;
Willing to think th’ illuſions of his fear &gt;
Had giv'n this falſe alarm.
Now Cancer glows with Phoebus' fiery car
The youth ruſh eager to the ſylvan war; &gt;
Swarm o'er the lawns, the foreſt-walks ſurround,
**ſe the fleet hart, and cheer the op'ning hound.
To Rouse. v. n.
1. To awake from ſlumber.
Men, ſleeping found by whom they dread,
**ſe and beſtir themſelves crewell awake. Milton.
Richard, who now was half aſleep,
Rous’d ; nor would longer ſilence keep. Prior.
Melancholy lifts her head;
Morpheus roles from his bed.
2. To be excited to thought or action.
Gºod things of day begin to droop and drowze,
While night's black “gents to their prey do rowze. Shakespeare
Rouse. n.ſ. [ruſh, German, half drunk.] A doſe of liquor
rather too large.
They have given me a rouſ already.
-Not paſt a pint as I am afoldier. Shakeſp. Othelle.
Nojocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,
But the great cannon to the clouds ſhall tell;
And the king's rouſe ſhall bruit it back again,
Reſpeaking earthly thunder. Shakeſp.
Rou's ER. n.ſ.. [from rouſe..] One who rouſes.
Rout... n.ſ. Trot, Dutch..]
1. A clamorous multitudé; a rabble; a tumultuous croud.
Beſides the endleſs routs of wretched thralls,
Which thither were aſſembled day by day
From all the world. - Fairy Queen, b. i.
A rout of people there aſſembled were,
Of every ſort and nation under ſky,
Which with great uproar preaſed to draw near
To th’ upper part. Spenſer.
If that rebellion
Came like itſelf in baſe and abjećt routs,
Led on by bloody youth, goaded with rage,
And countenanced by boys and beggary,
You, reverend father, then had not been there. Shakeſp.
Farmers were to forfeit their holds in caſe of unlawful re-
tainer, or partaking in routs and unlawful aſſemblies. B.º.
Such a tacit league is againſt ſuch routs and ſhowls, as have
utterly degenerated from the laws of nature. Bacon.
K. do I name of men the common rout,
That wandring looſe about,
Grow up and periſh, as the ſummer fly. Aſilton's Agoniſies.
The mad ungovernable rout,
Full of confuſion and the fumes of wine,
Lov’d ſuch variety and antick tricks.
Harley ſpies
The doćtor faſten’d by the eyes
At Charing-croſs among the rout,
Where painted monſters are hung out. Swift.
2. [Route, Fr.] Confuſion of an army defeated or diſperſed.
Thy army,
As if they could not ſtand when thou wer’t down,
Diſpers'd in rout, betook them all to fly. Daniel.
Their mightieſt quell'd, the battle ſwerv’d,
With many an inrode gor'd ; deformed rout
Enter'd, and foul diſorder. Milton's Par. Lºft, b. vi.
To Rºut. v. a. To diſſipate and put into confuſion by defeat-
The next way to end the wars with him, and to rout him
quite, ſhould be to keep him from invading of thoſe countries
adjoining. Spenſer on Ireland.
That party of the king's horſe, that charged the Scots,
ſo totally routed and defeated their whole army, that the
fled. Clarendon, b. viii.
To Rout. v. n. To aſſemble in clamorous and tumultuous
crouds. ---
The meaner ſort routed together, and ſuddenly affailing the
earl in his houſe, ſlew him. Bacon's Henry VII.
Rout E. m. ſ. [route, Fr.] Road; way.
Wide through the fuzzy field their route they take,
Their bleeding boſoms force the thorny brake. Gay.
Row. m. ſ. [reih, German.] A rank or file ; a number of
things ranged in a line.
º never part, but that they ſhow
Of precious pearl the double ow.
After them all dancing on a row,
The comely virgins came with garlands dight, -
As freſh as flow res. Fairy &amp;ren, b, i.
Shakeſp. Henry IV.
ion, and as an old
Geneſs xlix. 9.
Denham.
Pope.
Pope's St. Cecilia.
Rºſcommon.
Sidney, b. ii.
Where<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 276</div><p class="Text">R U B
Where any row
overwoody, reach'd too º: heck
- 'd boughs, and needed hands to chec
º 5**** Milton's Paradiſe Lºſ', b. v.
- ited row of pillars, laid -
cº" Milton's Paradiſe Lø/?, b. vi.
where the bright ſeraphim in burning row,
Of fruit trees,
Their loud uplified angel trumpets blow. Milton.
The viao; honour'd with a nobler veſt,
where gold and purple ſtrive in equal rows. • Dryden.
Why round our coaches crowd the white-glov’d beaux,
why bows the ſidebox from its inmoſt rows. Pope.
To Row. v. n. [noyan, Saxon.] To impel 4 veſſel in the
water by oars. - - -
H. ſaw them toiling in rowing ; for the wind was co.
trary. A1ark vi. 48.
Šme of theſe troughs or canoes were ſo great, that above
twenty men have been found rowing in one. Abbot.
The bold Britons then ſecurely rºº'ſ
Charles and his virtue was their ſacred load. JValler.
The watermen turned their barge, and rowed ſoftly, that
they might take the cool of the evening. Dryden.
The rowing crew,
To tempt a fare, clothe all their tilts in blue. Gay.
To Row. v.a. To drive or help forward by oars. -
The ſwan rows her ſtate with oary feet. Milton.
Rowel. n.ſ. [rouelle, Fr.] . -
1. The points of a ſpur turning on an axis.
He gave his able horſe the head,
And, bending forward, ſtruck his agile heels
Againſt the panting ſides of his poºr jade --
Up to the rowel head. Shakeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
A rider like myſelf, who ne'er wore rºce! -
Nor iron on his heel. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
A mullet is the rowel of a ſpur, and hath never but five
points; a ſtar hath ſix: Peacham on Blazoning.
He ſpurr'd his fiery ſteed
With goring rowels, to provoke his ſpeed. Dryden.
2. A ſeton; a roll of hair or ſilk put into a wound to binder
it from healing, and provoke a diſcharge.
To Roſwell. v. a. To pierce through the ſkin, and keep the
wound open by a rowel.
Rowel the horſe in the cheſt. Martimer's Huſbandry.
Roſw EN. n.ſ.
Rowen is a field kept up till after Michaelmas, that the
corn left on the ground may ſprout into green. Notes ºn Tuſſer.
Then ſpare it for rowen, til Michel be paſt,
To lengthen thy dairie, no better thou haſt. Tuſſer.
Turn your cows, that give milk, into your rowens, till
ſnow comes. Martimer's Huſbandry.
Rowe R. m. ſ. [from row.] . One that manages an oar.
Four gallies firſt, which equal rowers bear,
Advancing in the watry lifts, appear. Dryden.
The biſhop of Saliſbury ran down with the ſtream thirty
miles in an hour, by the help of but one rower. Addiſon.
RO'YAL. adi, [roial, Fr. }
1. Kingly; belonging to a king ; becoming a king; regal.
the royal ſtock of David. 44ilton.
Thrice happy they, who thus in woods and groves,
From courts retired, poſſeſs their peaceful loves :
e Of royal maids how wretched is the fate
2. Noble ; illuſtrious.
What news from Venice
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio Shakeſp.
Roy Alist. n.ſ.. [from oyal.] Adherent to a king.
Where Candiſh fought, the royaliſts prevail'd,
Neither his courage nor his judgment fail’d. J/aller.
The old church of England royaliſt, another name for a
man who prefers his concience before his intereſts, are the
moſt meritorious ſubjects in the world, as having paſſed all
thoſe terrible teſts, which domineering malice could put them
to, and carried their credit and their conſcience clear. South.
To Roy A Liz E. v. a. [from royal.] To make royal.
Ere you were queen, ay, or your huſband king,
To royalize his blood, I ſpilt mine own. Shakeſp.
Rø'YALLY. adv. [from royal..] In a kingly manner; regally ;
as becomes a king.
It ſhall be my care,
To have you royally appointed.
His body ſhall be royally interr'd,
And the laſt funeral pomps adorn his herſe. Dryden.
Royalty. n.ſ. [roialté, Fr.]
H. Kingſhip; character or office of a king,
Suppoſe, that you have ſeen
“The well appointed king at Hampton peer,
* his royalty. - Shakespeare. Henry V.
d º you raſcal ; you come with letters againſt the king,
º: * Vanity the puppet's part againſt the royalty of her
v . . . . Shakeſp. King Lear.
He will Joſe his head, ere give conſent,
§º ſon, as worſhipfully he terms it,
If tº: “rººtty of England's throne. Shakeſp.
* * held their royalties by this title, either thºſe
Granville.
- Shakeſp. Wint. Tale.
muſt have been but one ſovereign, or elſe every father of a
family had as good a claim to royalty as theſe. Locke.
2. State of a king.
I will, alas ! be wretched to be great,
And figh in royalty, and grieve in ſtate. Prior.
3. Emblems of royalty,
Wherefore do I aſſume
Theſe royalties, and not refuſe to reign. Milton.
To Roy N.E. v. a. [rogner, Fr.] To gnaw ; to bite. Spenſer.
Ro’y Nish. adj. [rogneux, Fr. mangy, paltry.] Paltry; ſorry;
mean ; rude.
The royniſh clown, at whom ſo oft
Your grace was wont to laugh, is alſo miſfing. Shakeſp.
To RUB. v. a. [rhubio, Welſh ; reiben, German, to wipe.]
1. To clean or ſmooth any thing by paſſing ſomething over it;
to ſcour; to wipe ; to perfricate.
2. To touch ſo as to have ſomething of that which touches
behind.
Their ſtraw-built citadel new rub'd with balm. Milton.
In narrow clefts, in the monument that ſtands over him,
catholicks rub their beads, and ſmell his bones, which they
ſay have in them a natural perfume, though very like apo-
ple&amp;lick balſom ; and what would make one ſuſpect, that they
rub the marble with it, it is obſerved, that the ſcent is ſtronger
in the morning than at night. Addison's Remarks on Italy.
3. To move one body upon another.
Look, how ſhe rubs her hands.
—It is an accuſtomed action with her, to ſeem thus waſh-
ing her hands. Shakeſp Macbeth.
The bare rubbing of two bodies violently produces heat,
and often fire. Locke.
Two bones, rubbed hard againſt one another, produce a
fetid ſmell. A buthnot on Aliments.
4. To obſtrušt by colliſion.
'Tis the duke's pleaſure,
Whoſe diſpoſition all the world well know,
Will not be rubb’d nor ſtop'd. Shakeſp. King Lear.
5. To poliſh ; to retouch.
The whole buſineſs of our redemption is, to rub over the
defaced copy of the creation, to reprint God's image upon
the ſoul. South.
6. To remove by friction.
A forcible object will rub out the freſheſt colours at a
ſtroke, and paint others. Collier of the Aſpect.
If their minds are well principled with inward civility, a
great part of the roughneſs, which ſticks to the outſide for
want of better teaching, time, and obſervation, will rub off;
but if ill, all the rules in the world will not poliſh them. Locke.
7. To touch hard.
He, who before he was eſpied, was afraid, after being per-
ceived, was aſhamed, now being hardly rubb.d upon, left
both fear and ſhame, and was moved to anger. Sidney.
8. To RuB down. To clean or curry a horſe.
When his fellow beaſts are weary grown,
He'll play the groom, give oats, and rub ein dºwn. Dryd.
9. To RUB up. To excite ; to awaken. -
You will find me not to have rubbed up the memory of
what ſome heretofore in the city did. South.
Io. To RUB up. To poliſh ; to retouch.
To RuB. v. m.
1. To fret; to make a frićtion.
This laſt alluſion gaul'd the panther more,
Becauſe indeed it rubb’d upon the ſore;
Yet ſeem'd ſhe not to winch, though ſhrewdly pain'd. Dry.
2. To get through difficulties.
Many a lawyer, when once hampered, rub off as well as
they can. L’Eſtrange.
'Tis as much as one can do, to rub through the world,
though perpetually a doing. L'Eſtrange.
RU B. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Colliſion; hindrance ; obſtruction.
The breath of what I mean to ſpeak
Shall blow each duſt, each ſtraw, each little rub
Out of the path, which ſhall directly lead -
Thy foot to England's throne. Shakespeare . King john.
Now every rub is ſmoothed in our way. Shakeſp.
Thoſe you make friends,
And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
The leaſt rub in your fortunes, fall away. Shakeſp.
Upon this rub, the Engliſh embaſſadors thought fit to dº
mur, and ſent to receive directions. Hayward.
He expounds the giddy wonder
Of my weary ſteps, and under
Spreads a path clear as the day,
Where no churliſh rub ſays nay. Craſhaw.
He that once fins, like him that ſlides on ice,
Goes ſwiftly down the ſlippery ways of vice; -
Though conſcience checks him, yet thoſe rubs gone oeſ,
He ſlides on ſmoothly, and looks back no more. Dryden.
An hereditary right is to be preferred before cleštion; be-
cauſe the goveråm at is ſo diſpoſed, that it almoſt executº
itſelf: and upon the death of a prince, the adminiſtratiº
- - - Sº, , ,
goes on without any rub or interruption. - Swift.
2. Frication ;
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 277</div><p class="Text">§ 1
º,
º,
|
! ſt;
als
º
in,
ſº
º-
§
ºt
º,
ºft,
º,
º,
ºt.
º,
- R U B
2. Frication; act of rubbing.
3. Inequality of ground, that hinders the motion of a bowl.
We'll play at bowls.
—"Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
And that my fortune-runs againſt the bias.
4. Difficulty; cauſe of uneaſineſs.
To ſleep ; perchance to dream ; ay, there's the rub. Sha.
RUB-stone. m. ſ. [rub and ſtone..] A ſtone to ſcour or ſharpen.
Shakeſp.
A cradle for barlie, with rub-ſione and ſand, Tuffer.
Ru'BBER. m. ſ. [from rub.]
1. One that rubs.
2. The inſtrument with which one rubs. -
Servants blow the fire with puffing cheeks, and la
The rubbers, and the bathing ſheets diſplay. Dryden.
Rub the dirty tables with the napkins, for it will ſave your
wearing out the common rubbers. Swift,
3. A coarſe file.
The rough or coarſe file, if large, is called a rubber, and
takes off the unevenneſs which the hammer made in the
forging. 4%xon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
4. A game : a conteſt ; two games out of three.
The aſs was to ſtand by, to ſee two boobies try their title
to him by a rubber of cuffs. L’Eſtrange.
If butchers had but the manners to go to ſharps, gentlemen
would be contented with a rubber at cuffs. Cºllier on Dueling.
5. A whetſtone. Ainſ.
Rubi'cAN. adj. [rubican, Fr.] Rubican colour of a horſe is
one that is bay, ſorrel, or black, with a light, grey, or white
upon the flanks, but ſo that this grey or white is nºt predomi-
nant there. Far. Die?.
RU’BBAG E. } n: ſ (from rub; as perhaps meaning, at firſt,
Ru'BB1s.H. duſt made by rubbing. Rºlage is not uſed.]
1. Ruins of building; fragments of matter uſed in building.
What traſh is Rome 3
What rubbiſh, and what offal 2 when it ſerves
For the baſe matter to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caeſar. Shakespeare. julius Caeſar.
Such conceits ſeem too fine among this rublagº. Jºſion.
A fabrick, though high and beautiful, if founded on rub-
biſh, is eaſily made the triumph of the winds. Glanv. Scotſ.
When the foundation of a ſtate is once looſened, the leaſt
commotion lays the whole in rubbiſh. L'A/irange.
Th' Almighty caſt a pitying eye,
He ſaw the town's one half in rubbiſ, lie. Dryden.
The enemy hath avoided a battle, and taken a ſurer way
to conſume us, by letting our courage evaporate againſt ſtones
and rubbiſh. Swift.
2. Confuſion; mingled maſs.
That noble art of political lying ought not to lie any longer
in rubbiſh and confuſion. Arbuthnºt's Hiſtory of john Bull.
3. Anything vile and worthleſs.
RUBBLE-ston E. m. ſ. -
Rubble-ſtones owe their name to their being rubbed and
worn by the water, at the latter end of the deluge, departing
in hurry and with great precipitation. J/oodward.
RU'Bicu ND. adj. [ruliconde, Fr. rubicundus, Lat.] Inclining to
redneſs. Dic?.
RU’BIFD, adj. [from ruby..] Red as a ruby.
Thrice upon thy fingers tip,
Thrice upon thy rubied lip. Milton.
Angels food, and rubied neétar flows
In pearl, in diamond, and in maſſy gold. Milton.
Rubi'Fick. adj. [ruher and facio, Lat.] Making red.
While the ſeveral ſpecies of rays, as the rubſ...}, are by
refračtion ſeparated one from another, they retain thoſe mo-
tions proper to each. Grew's Coſmol.
To RU’BIFY. v. a. To make red.
This topically applied, becomes a phaenigmus or ruhifting
medicine, and of ſuch fiery parts as to conceive fire of them-
ſelves, and burn a houſe. Brown's Pulgar Er, ours.
Ru(bious. adj. [ruheus, Lat..] Ruddy ; red. Not uſed.
Diana's lip
Is not more ſmooth and rubious. Shakespeare. Twelfth Night.
RU'BR1cATED. adj. [from rubrica, Lat.] Smeared with red.
RU'BRick. n.ſ. [rubrique, Fr. rubrica, Lat..] Dire&amp;tions printed
in books of law and in prayer books; ſo termed, becauſe
they were originally diſtinguiſhed by being in red ink.
No date prefix’d, -
Direáts me in the ſtarry rubrick ſet. Miltºn's Par. Reg.
They had their particular prayers according to the ſeveral
days and months; and their tables or rubricks to inſtrućt
them. Stillingfleet.
RU'BR1ck, adj. Red.
The light and rays, which appear red, or rather make ob-
jećts appear ſo, I call rubrick or red-making. Newton.
What though my name ſtood rubrick on the walls. Pope.
To Ru(BRick. v. a. [from the noun..] To adorn with red.
RU BIFor M. adj. [ruber, Lat. and form.] Having the form of
red.
Of thoſe rays, which paſs cloſe by the ſnow, the rulifºrn
will be the leaſt refracted; and ſo come to the eye in the di-
rečteſt lines. Newton's Opticks.
R U D
RU'BY. n.ſ. [from ruber, Lati
1. A precious ſtone of a red colour, next in hardneſs and value
to a diamond.
UP, up, fair bride and call
Thy ſtars from out their ſeveral boxes, take
Thy rubies, pearls, and diamonds forth, and make
Thyſelf a conſtellation of them all. Damme
Melpomene would be *Preſented like a manly lady upºn
her head a dreſfing of pearl, diamonds, and rubies. Faº.
Crowns were on their royal ſcutcheons plac'd,
2. Eººphie, diamonds, and with rubie; grac'd, Dryden.
You can behold ſuch fights,
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
When mine is blanch'd with fear. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
3. Anything red.
- Deſire of wine -
Thou could'ſt repreſs, nor did the dancing ruby
Sparkling, out-pour'd, the flavour, or the ſmell,
Or taſte, that cheers the hearts of gods and men,
Allure thee from the cool cryſtalline ſtream. Milton.
4. A blain; a blotch; a carbuncle. Ainſ.
KU'BY. adj. [from the noun ) Of a red colour.
Wounds, like dumb mouths, do ope their, uly lips. Shakespeare
Diana's lip
is not more ſmooth and ºnly than thy ſmall pipe
Is at the maiden's organ ſhrill and ſound. Shakeſp.
RUCTA'tion. m. ſ. [ricio, Lat.] A belching ariſing from
wind and indigeſtion. -
To RUD. v. a. ſnubu, Saxon, redneſs.] To make red.
Her cheeks, like apples, which the ſun had rudded. Spenſ.
RU'DDER. m. ſ. [roeder, Dutch..]
1. The inſtrument at the ſtern of a veſſel, by which its courſe
is governed.
My heart was to thy rudder ty'd by th’ ſtring,
And thou ſhould'ſt towe me after. Shakeſp.
They looſed the rudder bands, and hoiſed up the main-ſail,
and made toward ſhore. Acts xxvii. 40.
Thoſe, that attribute unto the faculty any firſt or ſole
power, have therein no other underſtanding, than ſuch a one
hath, who, looking into the ſtern of a ſhip, and finding it
guided by the helm and rudder, doth aſcribe ſome abſolute
virtue to the piece of wood, without all conſideration of the
hand that guides it. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the J/orld.
Fiſhes firſt to ſhipping did impart;
Their tail the rudder, and their head the prow. Dryden.
Thou held'ſt the rudder with a ſteady hand,
Till ſafely on the ſhore the bark did land. Dryden.
2. Anything that guides or governs the courſe.
Ruppiness. [from ruddy..] The quality of approaching to
redneſs. -
The ruddineſ; upon her lip is wet;
You'll marit, if you kiſs it. Shakeſp. Winter's Tale.
If the fleſh loſe its ruddineſ, and look pale and withered,
you may ſuſpect it corrupting. //iſeman's Sugery.
Ru’ddle. n. ſ. [' udul, Iſlandick.] Red earth.
Ruddle owes its colour to an admixture of iron; and as that
is in greater or leſs proportion, it is of a greater or leſs ſpeci-
fick gravity, conſiſtence, or hardneſs. Woodward.
Ruddock. n.ſ. [rubecula, Lat..] A kind of bird. -
Of finging birds, they have linnets, and ruddocks. Carew.
RU’DDY. adj. [rubu, Saxon.]
1. Approaching to redneſs; pale red.
We may ſee the old man in a morning,
Luſty as health, come ruddy to the field,
And there purſue the chaſe, as if he meant
To o’ertake time, and bring back youth again. Otway.
New leaves on ev'ry bough were ſeen;
Some ruddy colour'd, ſome of lighter green. Dryden.
Ten wildings have I gather'd for my dear;
How ruddy like your lips their ſtreaks appear ! Dryden.
- Ceres, in her prime, --
Seems fertile, and with ruddieſ freight bedeckt. Philips.
2. Yellow. Uſed, if to be uſed at all, only in poetry.
A crown of ruddy gold inclos'd her brow,
Plain without pomp.
RUDE. adj. [nebe, Saxon ; rudis, Lat.) -
1. Rough , ſavage; coarſe of manners; uncivil , brutal.
ſº. let go that rude uncivil touch;
Thou friend of an ill faſhion. Shaft.
Vane's bold anſwers, termed rude and ruffian-like, fur-
thered his condemnation. - Hayward.
You can with ſingle look inflame
The coldeſt breaft, the rud/f tame. JWaller.
It has been ſo uſual to write prefaces, that a man is thought
rude to his reader, who does not give him ſome account
beforehand. Waſh.
2. Violent; tumultuous ; boiſterous; turbulent. -
l dº puſh'd with winds rude in their ſhock. Milton.
The water appears white near the ſhore, and a ſhip; be-
cauſe the rude agitation breaks it into foam. Boyle.
22 D 3. Harſh ;
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 278</div><p class="Text">R U D
R U F
wº-_-
3. Harſh ; inclement.
ing does to flow'ry meadows bring, -
wº. º winter from them tore. I/aller.
t; raw ; untaught. -
4. lsº I be 'rui, in ſpeech, yet not in knowledge. 2 Cor.
He was yet but rude in the profeſſion of arms, though
reedy of honour. J7%tton's Buckingham.
g Šuch tools as art yet rude had form'd. Milton.
5. [Rude, Fr.] Rugged; uneven ; ſhapeleſs. -
it was the cuſtom to worſhip rude and unpoliſhed ſtones.
- Stillingfleet.
6, Artleſs; inelegant. -
I would . what ancient ground of authority he hath
for ſuch a ſenſeleſs fable; and if he have any of the rude
- Spenſer.
b ks. - - f
*::::... may ſerve, till you review the AEneis in the
original, unblemiſhed by my rude tranſlation. Dryden.
. Such as may be done with ſtrength without art.
7. Su To º, farm the fool confin'd ;
Rud, work well ſuited with a ruſtick mind. Dryden.
Ru’dely. adv. [from rude.]
. In a rude manner.
I whether to knock againſt the gates of Rome,
r rudely viſit them in parts remote,
% º them ere deſtroy. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
2. Without exactneſs; without nicety; coarſely:
I that am not ſhap'd for ſportive tricks,
I that am rudely ſtampt, and want love's majeſty
To ſtrut before a wanton ambling nymyh. Shakeſ?.
nſkilfully.
3. U My #º, though rudely, has reſign'd
Some faint reſemblance of his godlike mind. Dryden.
4. Violently; boiſterouſly.
With his truncheon he ſo rudely ſtroke
Cymocles twice, that twice him forced his foot revoke. Spen.
Ru/des ess. n. ſ. [rudºſe, Fr. from rude.]
1. Coarſeneſs of manners; incivility.
This rudeneſs is a ſauce to his good wit,
Which gives men ſtomach to digeſt his words
With better appetite. Shakeſp. julius Caſar.
The publick will in triumphs rudely ſhare,
And kings the rudenes of their joy muſt bear. Dryden.
The rudeneſ, tyranny, the oppreſſion, and ingratitude of
the late favourites towards their miſtreſs, were no longer to
be born. Swift's Miſcellanies.
2. Ignorance; unſkilfulneſs.
What he did amiſs, was rather through rudenſ, and want
of judgment, than any malicious meaning, Hayward.
3. Artleſsneſs; inelegance; coarſeneſs.
Let be thy bitter ſcorn,
And leave the rudeneſ of that antique age
To them, that liv'd therein in ſtate forlorn. Fairy Queen.
4. Violence; boiſterouſneſs.
The ram, that batters down the wall,
For the great ſwing and rudeneſ of his poize,
They place before his hand that made the engine. Shakespeare .
5. Stormineſs ; rigour.
You can hardly be too ſparing of water to your houſed
plants; the not obſerving of this, deſtroys more plants than
all the rudeneſſes of the ſeaſon. Evelyn's Kalendar.
RU’DENTURE n.ſ. [French.] In archite&amp;ture, the figure of
a rope or ſtaff, ſometimes plain and ſometimes carved, where-
with the flutings of columns are frequently filled up. Bailey.
RU'DERARY. adj. [rudera, Lat.] Belonging to rubbiſh. Dići.
RUDERATION. m. ſ. In architecture, the laying of a pave-
ment with pebbles or little ſtones. Bailey.
RU'DF spy. m. ſ. [from rude..] An uncivil turbulent fellow. A
low word, now little uſed. -
I muſt be forced * -
To give my hand, oppoſed againſt my heart,
Unto a mad-brain rudeſhy, full of ſpleen. Shakeſp.
Out of my fight, udeſby be gone. - Shakeſp.
RUDIMENT. n.ſ. [rudiment, Fr. rudimentum, Lat.]
1. The firſt principles; the firſt elements of a ſcience.
Such as were trained up in the rudiments, and were ſo
made fit to be by baptiſm received into the church, the fathers
º hearers. Hooker.
o learn the order of my fingering,
I muſt begin with rudiments of art. Shakeſp.
Thou ſoon ſhalt quit
Thoſe rudiments, and ſee before thine eyes
The monarchies of th' earth, their pomp, and ſtate,
Sufficient introdućtion to inform
Thee, of thyſelf ſo apt, in regal arts. Milton's Par. Rºg.
Could it be believed, that a child ſhould be forced to learn
the rudiments of a language, which he is never to uſe, and
neglect the writing a good hand, and caſting accounts. Locke.
2. The firſt part of education. c
...He was nurtured where he was born in his firſt rudiments,
till the years of ten, and then taught the principles of
muſick. - J/otton's Life of Williers
The ſkill and rndiments auſtere of war. ife of Philip.
3, The firſt, inaccurate, unſhapen beginning or original of any
thing,
Moſ is but the rudiment of a plant, and the mould of
earth or bark. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
The rudiments of nature are very unlike the groſſeſ ap-
pearances. Glanvill’; Scepſ.
So looks our monarch on this early fight,
Th’ eſſay and rudiments of great ſucceſs,
Which all-maturing time muſt bring to light. Dryden.
Shall that man pretend to religious attainments, who is del
fečtive and ſhort in moral which are but the rudiments, the
beginnings, and firſt draught of religion; as religion is the
perfection, refinement, and ſublimation of morality. South. .
God beholds the firſt imperfect rudiments of virtue in the
ſoul, and keeps a watchful eye over it, till it has received
every grace it is capable of. Addison's Speciator.
The ſappy boughs
Attire themſelves with blooms, ſweet rudiment;
Of future harveſt. Philips.
RUDIM E/NTAL. adj. [from rudiment..] Initial; relating to
firſt principles.
Your firſt rudimental eſſays in ſpectatorſhip were made in
my ſhop, where you often practiſed for hours. Spectator.
To RUE. v. a. [neoprian, Saxon.] To grieve for; to regret;
to lament.
Thou tempteſt me in vain;
To tempt the thing which daily yet I rue,
And the old cauſe of my continued pain,
With like attempts to like end to renew. Fairy &amp;een.
You'll rue the time,
That clogs me with this anſwer. Shakeſp.
France, thou ſhalt , ue this treaſon with thy tears,
If Talbot but ſurvive. Shakeſp. Henry VI.
There are two councils held;
And that may be determin’d at the one,
Which may make you and him to rue at th' other. Shał.
Oh! treacherous was that breaſt, to whom you
Did truſt our counſels, and we both may rue,
Having his falſhood found too late, 'twas he
That made me caſt you guilty, and you me. Donne.
I rue
That error now, which is become my crime. Milton.
Againſt this, thy will
Choſe freely what it now ſo juſtly rues. Milton.
RUE. n.ſ. [rue, Fr. ruta, Lat..] An herb called, herb of grace,
becauſe holy water was ſprinkled with it.
The flower of rue for the moſt part conſiſts of four hollow
leaves, which are placed orbicularly, and expand in form of
a roſe ; out of whoſe flower-cup riſes the pointal, which af-
terward becomes a roundiſh fruit, which is generally four
cornered, and compoſed of four cells fixed to an hard ſhell
of ſmall angular ſeeds. Miller.
What ſavor is better,
For places infected, than wormwood and rue. Tuſſºr,
Here did ſhe drop a tear; here, in this place,
I'll ſet a bank of rur, ſour herb of grace;
Rue, even for Ruth, here ſhortly ſhall be ſeen,
In the remembrance of a weeping queen. Shakeſp. Rich. II.
The weaſel, to encounter the ſerpent, arms herſelf with
eating of rue. More's Antidote againſt Atheiſm.
RUE FUL adj. [rue and fall.] Mournful; woful; ſorrowful.
When we have our armour buckled on,
The venom'd vengeance ride upon our ſwords,
Spur them to rueful work, rein them from ruth. Shakespeare .
Cocytus, nam'd of lamentation loud, -
Heard on the rueful ſtream. Alikon's Paradiſe Lø/?.
He figh'd, and caſt a ruful eye;
Our pity kindles, and our paſſions die. Dryden.
RUE Fully adv. [from rueful...] Mournfully; ſorrowfully.
Why ſhould an ape run away from a ſnail, and very ºut-
fully and frightfully look back, as being afraid : More.
RUF/FULNEss. n.ſ. (from rueful..] Sorrowfulneſs; mournfulneſs.
RUE LLE. m. ſ. [French..] A circle; an aſſembly at a pri-
vate houſe. -
The poet, who flouriſhed in the ſcene, is condemned in
the ruelle. Dryden's Preface to Ænei.
RUFF. n.ſ. A puckered linen ornament, formerly worn about
the neck. See RUF FLE. -
You a captain; for what? for tearing a whore's ruff in.”
bawdy houſe Shāeſp. Henry IV. p. ii.
We'll revel it, 1 - 7 - 2
With ruff, and cuffs, and fardingals. Shakeſp.
Like an uproar in the town,
Before them every thing went down, ;
Some tore a ruff, and ſome a gown. Drayton.
Sooner may a gulling weather ſpy, -
By drawing forth heav'n's ſcheme tell certainly,
What faſhion'd hats, or ruff, or ſuits next year,
Our giddy-headed antick youth will wear. Donne.
The ladies freed the neck from thoſe yokes, thoſe limite"
ruff; in which the fimplicity of their grandmothers had en-
cloſed it. Addison's Gua dian, s: ‘.
re:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 279</div><p class="Text">R U F
- I rear'd this flow'r,
Soft on the paper ruff its leaves I ſpread. Pope.
2. [From rough ſcales.] A ſmall river fiſh.
A ruff or pope is much like the pearch for ſhape, and
taken to be better, but will not grow bigger than a gudgeon :
he is an excellent fiſh and of a pleaſant taſte. J%alton.
3. A ſtate of roughneſs. Obſolete.
As fields ſet all their briſtles up; in ſuch a ruff wert
thou. Chapman's Iliads.
4. New ſtate. This ſeems to be the meaning of this cant
word.
How many princes that, in the ruff of all their glory,
have been taken down from the head of a conquering army
to the wheel of the vićtor's chariot. L'E/irange.
Ru'FF1AN. m. ſ. [ruffano, Italian ; ruffen, Fr. a bawd; roffver,
Daniſh, to pillage ; perhaps it may be beſt derived from
rough..] A brutal, boiſterous, miſchievous fellow ; a cut-
throat; a robber ; a murderer.
Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch,
Thou friend of an ill faſhion | Shakeſp. Two Gent. of Wer.
Have you a ruffan that will ſwear? drink dance?
Revel the night rob murder Shakeſp. Henry IV.
Sir Ralph Vane's bold anſwers termed rude and ruffan like,
falling into years apt to take offence, furthered his condem-
nation. Hayward.
The boaſted anceſtors of theſe great men,
Whoſe virtues you admire, were all ſuch ruffians,
This dread of nations, this almighty Rome,
That comprehends in her wide empire's bounds
All under heaven, was founded on a rape. Addiſon's Cato.
RU'FF1AN. adj. Brutal; ſavagely boiſterous.
Experienc'd age
May timely intercept the ruffan rage,
Convene the tribes. Pope's Odyſſey.
To Ruºff IAN. v. n. [from the noun.J. To rage; to raiſe
tumults; to play the ruffian. Not in uſe.
A fuller blaſt ne'er ſhook our battlements;
If it hath ruffan'd ſo upon the ſea,
What ribs of oak, when mountains mcle on them,
Can hold the mortiſe. Shakeſp. Othello.
To Ru'FFLE. v. a. [ uyffelen, Dutch, to wrinkle.]
1. To diſorder; to put out of form; to make leſs ſmooth.
Naughty lady,
Theſe hairs, which thou doſt raviſh from my chin,
Will quicken and accuſe thee; I'm your hoſt;
With robbers hands, my hoſpitable favour
You ſhould not ruffle thus. Shakeſp. King Lear.
In changeable taffeties, differing colours emerge and va-
niſh upon the ruffling of the ſame piece of ſilk. Boyle.
As you come here to ruffle vizard punk;
When ſober rail, and roar when you are drunk. Dryden.
As ſhe firſt began to riſe,
She ſmooth'd the ruffled ſeas, and clear'd the ſkies. Dryden.
Bear me, ſome god oh quickly bear me hence
To wholſome ſolitude, the nurſe of ſenſe;
Where contemplation prunes her ruffled wings,
And the free ſoul looks down to pity kings. Pope.
2. To diſcompoſe; to diſturb ; to put out of temper.
Were I Brutus,
And Brutus, Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your ſpirits, and put a tongue
In every wound of Caeſar, that ſhould move
The ſtones of Rome to riſe and mutiny. Shakeſp.
We are tranſported by paſſions, and our minds ruffled by
the diſorders of the body; nor yet can we tell, how the ſoul
ſhould be affected by ſuch kind of agitations. Glanvill.
3. To put out of order; to ſurpriſe.
The knight found out
Th’ advantage of the ground, where beſt
He might the ruff'd foe infeſt.
4. To throw diſorderly together.
Within a thicket I repos'd, when round
I ruff'd up fal’n leaves in heap, and found,
Let fall from heaven, a ſleep interminate. Chapman.
5. To contract into plaits.
A ſmall ſkirt of fine ruffled linnen, running along the upper
part of the ſtays before, is called the modeſty-piece. Addiſon.
To Ru'FFLE. v. n.
1. To grow rough or turbulent.
The night comes on ; and the high winds
Do forely ruffle, for many miles about
There's ſcarce a buſh. Shakeſp. King Lear.
The riſing winds a ruffling gale afford. Dryden.
2. To be in looſe motion ; to flutter.
The fiery courſer, when he hears from far
The ſprightly trumpets and the ſhouts of war,
On his right ſhoulder his thick mane reclin'd,
Ruffles at ſpeed, and dances in the wind. Dryden.
3. To be rough 5 to jar; to be in contention. Out of uſe.
A valiant ſon-in-law thou ſhalt enjoy ;
One fit to bandy with thy lawleſs ſons,
To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome. Shakespeare .
Hudibras, p. i.
R U I
with jurors, and inforce them to find as
Bacon's Henry VII.
They would ruff.
they ... ºf
RU'FFLE. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
I. Plaited linnen uſed as an Ornament.
The tucker is a ſlip of fine linnen,
of ruffle round the uppermoſt verge of run in a ſmall kind
the women's ſtays.
- - diſon.
2. Diſturbance; contention; tumult. Addiſon
Conceive the mind's
perception of - -
the conſequent ruffle or p of ſome obječt, and
ſpecial commotion of the biood.
RU'FTERHooD. m. ſ. In falconry, a hood to be wº".
hawk when ſhe is firſt drawn. E.
Rug. n.ſ.. [rugget, rough, Swediſh.j £y.
1. A coarſe, nappy, woollen cloath.
January muſt be expreſſed with a horrid and fearful aſped
clad in Iriſh rug or coarſe freeze. Peacham on Drawing
2. A coarſe nappy coverlet uſed for mean beds. -
A rug was o'er his ſhoulders thrown;
A rug; for night-gown he had none.
3. A rough woolly dog.
Mungrels, ſpaniels, curs,
Shoughes, water rugs, and demy wolves are cleped
All by the name of dogs. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
RUGGED. adj. [rugget, Swediſh.] ºp. 41acbeth.
1. Rough ; full of unevenneſs and aſperity.
Nature, like a weak and weary traveller,
• * 1 • -
Tir'd with a tedious and rugged way. Denham.
Since the earth revolves not upon a material and rugged,
but a geometrical plane, their proportions may be varied in
innumerable degrees. Bentley.
2. Not neat; not regular.
His hair is ſticking;
His well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged,
Like to the ſummer's corn by tempeſt lodg’d. Shakeſp.
3. Savage of temper; brutal; rough.
The greateſt favours to ſuch an one neither ſoften nor
win upon him; they neither melt nor endear him, but
leave him as hard, as rugged, and as unconcerned as ever.
Swift's Miſcel.
Sºuth's Sermons.
4. Stormy ; rude; tumultuous; turbulent; tempeſtuous.
Now bind my brows with iron, and approach
The rugged'ſ hour that time and ſpite dare bring,
To frown upon th’ enrag’d Northumberland. Shakeſp.
5. Rough or harſh to the ear.
A monoſyllable line turns verſe to proſe, and even that
proſe is rugged and unharmonious. Dryden's Dedic, to Æneis.
6. Sour; furly; diſcompoſed.
Sleek o'er your rugged looks, -
Be bright and jovial 'mong your gueſts to-night. Shakespeare
7. Violent; rude; boiſterous.
Fierce Talgol, gath'ring might,
With rugged truncheon charg’d the knight.
8. Rough ; ſhaggy.
Through foreſts wild, -
To chaſe the lion, boar, or rugged bear. Fairfax.
Ru'Go Edly. adv. [from rugged...] In a rugged manner.
RU'Goepness. [from rugged.]
1. The ſtate or quality of being rugged.
2. Roughneſs; aſperity. - -
Hardneſs and ruggedneſs is unpleaſant to the touch. Bacon.
Syrups immediately abate and demulce the hoarſeneſs and
violence of a cough, by mollifying the ruggedneſs of the in-
tern tunick of the gullet. Harvey.
This ſoftneſs of the foot, which yields and fits itſelf to the
ruggedneſ; and unevenneſs of the roads, does render it leſs
capable of being worn. Ray on the Creation.
RU'GIN. n.ſ. A nappy cloth.
The lips grew ſo painful, that ſhe could not endure the
wiping the ichor from it with a ſoft rugin with her own
hand. //iſeman's Surgery.
Ru’gine. n.ſ. [rugine, Fr.] A chirurgeon's raſp.
If new fleſh ſhould not generate, bore little orifices into
the bone, or raſp it with the rugine. Sharp.
Rugo'se. adj. [rugoſus, Lat.) Full of wrinkles.
It is a relaxation of the ſphinéter to ſuch a degree, that
the internal rugºſe coat of the inteſtine turneth out, and
beareth down. Jºſeman's Surgery.
RU'IN. n.ſ. [ruine, Fr. ruina, Lat.] .
1. The falſ or deſtruction of cities or edifices.
2. The remains of building demoliſhed:
The veian and the Gabian tow’rs ſhall fall,
And one promiſcuous ruin cover all;
Nor, after length of years, a ſtone betray
Hudibras.
The place where once the very ruins lay. Addiſon.
Judah ſhall fall, oppreſs'd by grief and ſhame, -
And men ſhall from her ruins know her fame. Prizr.
Such a fool was never found,
Who pull'd a palace to the ground,
Only to have the ruins made -
Materials for a houſe decay’d. Swift.
3. Deſtruštion;<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 280</div><p class="Text">R U L
R U M
ion, loſs of happineſs or fortune; overthrow.
3. Dºº, ..º. me, as if ruin
Leapt from his eyes. - Shºff. Henry VIII.
Thoſe whom God to ruin has deſign d,
He fits for fate, and firſt deſtroys their mind. Dryden.
4. Miſchief; bane.
The errors of young men are the ruin of buſineſs. Bacon.
Havock, and ſpoil, and ruin are my gain. Milton.
To RU'IN. v. a. [ruiner, Fr. from the noun.]
1. To ſubvert ; to demoliſh. -
A nation loving gold muſt rule this place,
Our temples ruin, and our rites deface. Dryden.
2. To deſtroy; to deprive of felicity or fortune. -
By thee rais'd I ruin all my foes. Milton.
Diſpoſe all honours of the ſword and gown,
Grace with a nod, and ruin with a frown. Dryden.
A confident dependence ill-grounded creates ſuch a negli-
gence, as will certainly ruin us in the end. //ake.
3. To impoveriſh. - -
She would ruin me in ſilks, were not the quantity that goes
to a large pincuſhion ſufficient to make her a gown and petti-
CO2t. A/ diſon.
To RU'IN. v. m.
1. To fall in ruins.
Hell heard th’ unſufferable noiſe, hell ſaw
Heav'n ruining from heav'n, and would have fled
Affrighted, but ſtrićt fate had fix’d too deep
Her dark foundations, and too faſt had bound.
2. To run to ruin.
Though he his houſe of poliſh'd marble build,
Yet ſhall it ruin like the moth's frail cell,
Or ſheds of reeds, which ſummer's heat repel.
3. To be brought to poverty or miſery.
If we are idle, and diſturb the induſtrious in their buſineſs,
we ſhall ruin the faſter. Locke.
To Ru'1NATE. v. a. [from ruin. This word is now obſolete.]
1. To ſubvert; to demoliſh.
I will not ruinate my father's houſe,
Who gave his blood to lime the ſtones together,
And ſet up Lancaſter. Shakeſp. Henry VI. p. iii.
We’ll order well the ſtate,
That like events may ne'er it ruinate.
2. To bring to meanneſs or miſery irrecoverable.
The Romans came to pull down kingdoms; Philip and
Nabis were already ruinated, and now was his turn to be
aſſailed. Bacon's War with Spain.
So ſhall the great revenger ruinate
Him and his iſſue by a dreadful fate. Sandyr.
RUINATION. m. ſ. [from ruinate.] Subverſion; demolition;
overthrow. Obſolete.
Roman coins were overcovered in the ground, in the ſud-
den ruination of towns by the Saxons. Camden's Remains.
RU'INotºs. adj. [ruinoſus, Ł. ruineux, Fr.]
I. Fallen to ruin; dilapidated; demoliſhed.
It is leſs dangerous, when divers parts of a tower are de-
cayed, and the foundation firm, than when the foundation is
ruinous. - Hayward.
2. Miſchievous ; pernicious ; baneful; deſtrućtive.
The birds,
After a night of ſtorm ſo ruinous,
Clear'd up their choiceſt notes in buſh and ſpray,
To gratulate the ſweet return of morn. Milion’, Par. Reg.
Thoſe ſucceſſes are more glorious, which bring benefit to
the world, than ſuch ruinous ones, as are dyed in human
blood. Glanvill's Preface to Scepſ.
A ſtop might be put to that ruinous practiſe of gaming. Sw.
RU'INously. adv. [from ruinous.]
1. In a ruinous manner.
2. Miſchievouſly; deſtructively.
- If real uneaſineſſes may be admitted to be as deterring as
ºne, his own decree will retort the moſt ruinouſly
on himſelf. Decay o ety.
RULE. m. ſ. [regula, Lat.] y of Piety
1. Government; empire; ſway; ſupreme command.
I am aſham’d, that women
Should ſeek for rule, ſupremacy, or ſway,
When they are bound to ſerve, love, and obey. Shakeſp.
May he live
Ever belov'd, and loving may his rule be Shakeſp.
A wiſe ſervant ſhall have rule over a ſon that cauſeth
ſhame. - Proverbs xvii. 2.
There being no law of nature nor poſitive law of God,
that determines which is the poſitive heir, the right of ſuc'
ceſſion; and conſequently of bearing rule, could not have
been determined. &gt; Locke
º * them apprehenſive of every tendency, to en-
count at form of rule eſtabliſhed by the law of their
}, . Addiſon's Freeholder, Ne 52.
Inſtruct me whence this uproar;
And wherefore Vanoe, the 'worn Hiend to Rome
i. ſpurn againſt our rule, and ſtir &gt;
e tributary PTOV inces to war.
4.
Milton.
Sandys.
Shakeſp.
A. Philips's Briton.
Sev’n years the traytor rich Mycenae ſway’d,
And his ſtern rule the groaning land obey'd, Pope.
2. An inſtrument by which lines are drawn.
If your influence be quite dam'd up
With black uſurping miſts, ſome gentle taper,
Though a ruſh-candle from the wicker hole
Of ſome clay habitation, viſit us
With thy long levell'd rule of ſtreaming light. A4ilton.
A judicious artiſt will uſe his eye, but he will truſt only to
his rule. South's Sermons.
3. Canon ; precept by which the thoughts or actions are
directed.
Adam's fin did not deprive him of his rule, but left the
creatures to a reluctation. Bacon.
This little treatiſe will furniſh you with infallible rule, of
judging truly. Dryden's Dufreſhov.
Judg Know'ſ with an equal hand to hold ãº, Afreſnoy
See'ſt where the reaſons pinch, and where they fail,
And where exceptions o'er the general rule prevail. Dry.
We profeſs to have embraced a religion, which contains
the moſt exact rules for the government of our lives. Tillotſ.
We owe to chriſtianity the diſcovery of the moſt certaſ,
and perfect rule of life. Tillotſon.
4. Regularity ; propriety of behaviour.
Some ſay he's mad; others, that leſſer hate him,
Do call it valiant fury; but for certain,
He cannot buckle his diſtemper'd cauſe
Within the belt of rule.
To Rule. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To govern ; to controll; to manage with power and au-
thority.
Shakeſp. Macbeth.
It is a purpos'd thing
To curb the will of the nobility;
Suffer’t, and live with ſuch as cannot rule,
Nor ever will be rul’d. Shakespeare . Coriolanuſ.
Marg’ret ſhall now be queen, and rule the king;
But I will rule both her, the king, and realm. Shakeſp.
A greater power now rul’d him. Milton.
Rome 'tis thine alone with awful ſway,
To rule mankind, and make the world obey, }
Diſpoſing peace and war thy own majeſtick way. Dryd.
2. To manage.
He ſought to take unto him the ruling of the affairs. 1 Mac.
3. To ſettle as by a rule.
Had he done it with the pope's licenſe, his adverſaries muſt
have been ſilent; for that's a ruled caſe with the ſchool-
men. Atterbury.
To Rule. v. n. To have power or command.
Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with the
ſaints. Hoſea xi. 12.
Thrice happy men whom God hath thus advanc'd
Created in his image, there to dwell,
And worſhip him ; and in reward to rule
Over his works. Milton's Paradiſe Loft. b. vii.
We ſubdue and rule over all other creatures; and uſe for
our own behoof thoſe qualities wherein they excel. Ray.
He can have no divine right to my obedience, who cannot
ſhew his divine right to the power of ruling over me. Lºcke.
RUL &amp; R. m. ſ. [from ule.]
1. Governour; one that has the ſupreme command.
Soon rulers grow proud, and in their pride fooliſh. Sidney.
God, by his eternal providence, has ordained kings ; and
the law of nature, leaders and rulers over others. Raleigh.
The pompous manſion was deſign'd
To pleaſe the mighty rulers of mankind; -
Inferior temples uſe on either hand. Addison.
2. An inſtrument, by the direction of which lines are drawn.
They know how to draw a ſtraight line between two points
by the ſide of a ruler, Moxon's Mechanical Exerciſes.
RUM. n.ſ.
I. A country parſon. A cant word.
I’m grown a mere mopus; no company comes,
But a rabble of tenants and ruſty dull rums.
2. A kind of ſpirits diſtilled from moloſſes.
To RU’MBLE. v. n. [rommeien, Dutch..] To make a hoarſe
low continued noiſe. - -
The trembling ſtreams, which wont in channels clear
To rumble gently down with murmur ſoft,
And were by them right tuneful taught to bear
A baſe's part amongſt their conſorts oft,
Now forc'd to overflow with brackiſh tears,
Swift.
With troublous noiſe did dull their dainty ears. Spenſºr.
Rumble thy belly full, ſpit fire, ſpout rain;
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters; º
I tax not you, you elements with unkindneſs. Shakeſp.
At the ruſhing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his
wheels, the fathers ſhall not look back to their children. for
feebleneſs. eremiah xlvii. 3.
Our courtier thinks that he's preferr'd, whom cvery
man envies;
When love ſo rumbles in his pate, no fleep comes in his
eyes. : - Suckling.
Apollo
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 281</div><p class="Text">R U M
R U N
º,
Apollo ſtarts, and all Parnaſſus ſhakes
At the rude rumbling Baralipton makes.
The fire ſhe fann'd, with greater fury burn'd,
Rumbling within. Dryden.
Th’ included vapours, that in caverns dwell,
Labºring with colick pangs, and cloſe confin'd,
In vain ſought iſſue from the rumbling wind. Dryden.
On a ſudden there was heard a moſt dreadful rumbling noiſe
within the entrails of the machine, after which the moun-
tain burſt. Addiſon.
Several monarchs have acquainted me, how often they
have been ſhook from their reſpective thrones, by the rum-
bling of a wheelbarrow. Speciator, N° 597.
Ru'MBLE R. n.ſ.. [from rumble.] The perſon or thing that
rumbles. -
RU'M IN ANT. º [ruminant, Fr. ruminans, Latin.] Having
the property of chewing the cud.
Ruminant creatures have a power of directing this peri-
ſtaltick motion upwards and downwards. Ray.
The deſcription, given of the muſcular part of the gullet,
is very exačt in ruminants, but not in men. Derham.
To RU’MINATE. v. n. [ruminer, Fr. rumino, Lat.]
1. To chew the cud.
Others fill'd with paſture gazing ſat,
Or bedward ruminating. Milton's Par. Loft, b. iv.
The neceſſity of ſpittle to diſſolve the aliment, appears
from the contrivance of nature in making the ſalivary dućts
of animals, which ruminate or chew the cud, extremel
open. - Arbuthnot on Aliments.
On graſſy banks herds ruminating lie. Thomſon.
2. To muſe; to think again and again.
Alone ſometimes ſhe walk’d in ſecret where,
To ruminate upon her diſcontent. Fairfax, b. iv.
Of ancient prudence here he ruminates,
Of riſing kingdoms, and of falling ſtates. J/aller.
I am at a ſolitude, an houſe between Hampſtead and
London, wherein Sir Charles Sedley died : this circumſtance
ſets me a thinking and rºminating upon the employments in
which men of wit exerciſe themſelves. Steele to Pope.
He practiſes a ſlow meditation, and ruminates on the ſub-
jećt; and perhaps in two nights and days rouſes thoſe ſeveral
ideas which are neceſſary. J/atts's Improv. of the Mind.
To RU'MINATE. v. a. [rumino, Lat.]
1. To chew over again. -
2. To muſe on ; to meditate over and over again.
'Tis a ſtudied, not a preſent thought,
By duty ruminated. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Knock at the ſtudy, where he keeps,
To ruminate ſtrange plots of dire revenge. Shakeſp.
The condemned Engliſh
Sit patiently, and inly ruminate
The morning's danger. -
Mad with deſire ſhe ruminates her ſin,
And wiſhes all her wiſhes o'er again;
Now ſhe deſpairs, and now reſolves to try;
Wou’d not, and wou'd again, ſhe knows not why. Dry.
RUMINATION. m. ſ. [ruminatio, Lat. from ruminate.]
1. The property or act of chewing the cud. '
Rumination is given to animals, to enable them at once to
lay up a great ſtore of food, and afterwards to chew it. Arb.
2. Meditation ; refle&amp;tion.
It is a melancholy of mine own, extračted from many ob-
jećts, in which my often rumination wraps me in a moſt hu-
morous ſadneſs. Shakeſp. As You like it.
Retiring, full of rumination ſad, -
He mourns the weakneſs of theſe latter times. Thomſºn.
To RU'MMAGE. v. a. [ranmen, German, to empty. Skinner.
rimari, Lat..] To ſearch ; to plunder; to evacuate.
Our greedy ſeamen rummage every hold,
Smile on the booty of each wealthier cheſt. Dryden.
To RU'MMAGE. v. n. To ſearch places.
A fox was rummaging among a great many carved figures,
Shakeſp.
there was one very extraordinary piece. L’Eſtrange.
Some on antiquated authors pore; -
Rummage for ſenſe. Dryden's Perſus.
I have often rummaged for old books in Little-Britain and
Duck-lane. Swift.
RU'MMER. m. ſ. [roemer, Dutch..] A glaſs; a drinking cup.
Imperial Rhine beſtow'd the generous rummer. Philips.
RU'MOUR. m. ſ. [rumeur, Fr. rumor, Lat.] Flying or popu-
lar report; bruit; fame. - -
We hold rumour from what we fear. Shakeſp.
- There ran a rumour -
Of many worthy fellows that were out. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
º, Great is the rumour of this dreadful knight,
And his atchievements of no leſs account. Shakeſp.
..This rumour of him went forth throughout all Judea. Like.
Rumour next and chance
And tumult and confuſion all embroil'd. Milton. ."
She heard an ancient rumour fly,
That times to come ſhould ſee the Trojan race
Her Carthage ruin. Dryden's AEmeis,
Rºſcommon.
* r - -
Fº * * * [from the noun..] To report abroad; to
fult.
Cateſby, rumour it abroad,
That Anne my wife is ſick, and like to die. Shakespeare .
All abroad was rumour'd, that this day
Samſon ſhould be brought forth.
AMilton's Agoni/?cs.
&gt; 'Twas rumour’d, goniſłes
RU' My father 'ſcap'd from out the citadel. Dryden.
*. n: / [from ”ur.] Reporter; ſpreader of
A ſlave
º: the Volſcians, with two ſeveral powers,
I &amp;º into the * territories.
-Go ſee this rumourer whipt: it c -
RUMP. n.ſ. [rumpff, Gº." annot be. Shakeſp.
I. The end of the backbone.
At her rump ſhe growing had behind
A fox's tail.
If his holineſs would thump
His reverend bum 'gainſt horſe's rump,
He might b’ equipt from his own ſtable. Prior.
Rumps of beef with virgin honey ſtrew'd. King.
Laſt trotted forth the gentle ſwine, &lt;&gt;
To eaſe her itch againſt the ſtump,
And diſmally was heard to whine,
All as ſhe ſcrubb'd her meazly rumſ.
2. The buttocks. - -
A ſailor's wife had cheſnuts in her lap,
And mouncht, give me quoth I -
Arºint the witch ſ—the rump fed ronyon crics. Shakespeare
He charg’d him firſt to bind
Crowdero's hands on rump behind. Hudibras, p. i.
To RUMPLE.v. a. [rompelen, Dutch..] To cruſh or contrači
into inequalities and corrugations; to cruſh together out of
ſhape. -
- Each vital ſpeck, in which remains
Th’ entire, but rumpled animal, contains
Organs perplex’d. Blackmore on the Creation.
I rumpled petticoats, or tumbled beds,
Fairy Queen, b. i.
Swift's Aſſel.
Or diſcompos'd the head-dreſs of a prude. Pope.
Never put on a clean apron, 'till you have made your lady's
bed, for fear of rumpling your apron. Swift.
RUMPLE. n.ſ. ſhrympelle, Saxon.] Pucker; rude plait.
Fair Virginia would her fate beſtow
On Rutila, and change her faultleſs make
For the foul rumple of her camel-back. Drydºn,
To RUN. v. m. pret, ran. [rinnan, Gothick; ynnan, Saxon ;
rennen, Dutch.]
1. To move ſwiftly ; to ply the legs in ſuch a manner, as that
both feet are at every ſtep off the ground at the ſame time;
to make haſte; to paſs with very quick pace.
Their feet run to evil, and make haſte to ſhed blood. Prov.
Laban ran out unto the man unto the well. Gen. xxiv. 29.
When ſhe knew Peter's voice, ſhe ran in, and told how
Peter ſtood before the gate. - Acts xii. 14.
Since death's near, and runs with ſo much force,
We muſt meet firſt, and intercept his courſe. Dryden.
He ran up the ridges of the rocks amain. Dryden.
Let a ſhoe-boy clean your ſhoes and run of errands. Swift.
2. To uſe the legs in motion. - -
Seldom there is need of this, till young children can run
about. Locke.
3. To move in a hurry.
The prieſt and people run about,
And at the ports all thronging out,
As if their ſafety were to quit
Their mother. -
4. To paſs on the ſurface, not through the air. -
The Lord ſent thunder, and the fire ran along upon the
ground. - - Exºdus is, 25.
5. To ruſh violently.
Let not thy voice be heard, leſt angry fellows ' un upon
thee, and thou loſe thy life. judges xviii. 25.
Now by the winds and raging waves I ſwear,
Your ſafety more than mine was thus my care ;
Leſt of the guide bereft, the rudder loſt,
Your ſhip ſhou'd un againſt the rocky coaſt. Dºydºn.
They have avoided that rock, but run upon another no leſs
dangerous. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
I diſcover thoſe ſhoals of life which are concealed in order
to keep the unwary from running upon them. Addison.
6. To take a courſe at ſea.
Running under the iſland Clauda, we had much work to
come by the boat. Acºs xxvii. 16,
7. To contend in a race.
A horſe-boy, being lighter than you, may be truſted to
run races with leſs damage to the horſes. Swift.
8. To fly; not to ſtand. It is often followed by away in this
Benj. johnſºn.
ſenſe. -
My conſcience will ſerve me to run from this Jew, my
maſter. Shakespeare ). Merchant ºf Penice.
... a * E The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 282</div><p class="Text">- R U N
R U N
The difference between the valour of
_ the Spaniards was, that the one ran away
charged, and the other ſtreight after.
p I do not ſee a face
at dares look up and ſtand
but downward all like beaſts
Benj. Johnſon.
the Iriſh rebels and
before they were
Bacon.
worthy a man ; tı
One thunder out ; flaſh
n ini ay at every flain. • fºr . . * *
*:::::::: º run, ſome diſguis'd,
To unknown coaſts : ſome to the ſhores do fly.
They, when they're out of hopes of flying,
will ràn away from death by dying:
Your child ſhrieks, and runs away at a frog.
9. To ſtream; to flow.
My ſtatues, ſ
Like a fountain, with a hundred ſpouts, -
Did un pure blood. Shakeſp. julius Cæſar,
j command, that the conduit run nothing but claret. Shakespeare
The precious ointment upon the head ran down upon
Aarón's beard. Pſalm cºxxiii. 2;
In ſome houſes, wainſcots will ſweat, ſo that they will
almoſt run with water. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Rivers run potable gold. . 44ilton.
Caiºus roll'd a crimſon flood,
And Thebes ran red with her own natives blood. Dryden.
The greateſt veſſel, when full, if you pour in ſtill, it muſt
run out ſome way, and the more it runs out at one ſide, the
leſs it runs out at the other. - Temple.
Innumerable iſlands were covered with flowers, and inter-
woven with ſhining ſeas that ran among them. Addiſon.
Her fields he cloath'd, and chear'd her blaſted face
with running fountains and with ſpringing graſs. Addiſon.
io. To be liquid; to be fluid.
.
Daniel.
Płudibras.
Locke.
In lead melted, when it beginneth to congeal, make a
little hole, in which put quickſilver wrapped in a piece of
linnen, and it will fix and run no more, and endure the
hammer. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Stiff with eternal ice, and hid in ſnow,
The mountain ſtands; nor can the riſing ſun
Unfix her froſts, and teach 'em how to run.
As wax diſſolves, as ice begins to run,
And trickle into drops before the ſun,
So melts the youth. Addison's Ovid's Metam.
11. To be fuſible; to melt.
Her form glides through me, and my heart gives way;
This iron heart, which no impreſſion took
From wars, melts down, and runs, if ſhe but look. Dryden.
Suſſex iron ores run freely in the fire. JWoodward.
Your iron muſt not burn in the fire; that is, run or melt;
for then it will be brittle. Moxon's Mech. Exerc.
12. To paſs; to proceed.
You, having run through ſo much publick buſineſs, have
found cut the ſecret ſo little known, that there is a time to give
it over. - Temple's Miſcellanies.
If there remains an eternity to us after the ſhort revolution
of time, we ſo ſwiftly run over here, ’tis clear, that all the
happineſs, that can be imagined in this fleeting ſtate, is not
valuable in reſpect of the future. Locke.
13. To go away; to vaniſh.
As faſt as our time runs, we ſhould be very glad in moſt
parts of our lives that it ran much faſter. Addiſon.
14. To have a legal courſe; to be pračtiſed. -
Cuſtoms run only upon our goods imported or exported,
and that but once for all ; whereas intereſt runs as well upon
our ſhips as goods, 2nd muſt be yearly paid. Child.
15. To have a courſe in any direction.
A hound runs counter, and yet draws dry foot well. Sha.
Little is the wiſdom, where the flight
So runs againſt all reaſon. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
That puniſhment follows not in this life the breach of this
rule, and conſequently has not the force of a law, in coun-
tries where, the generally allowed practice runs counter
to it, is evident. Locke.
Had the preſent war run againſt us, and all our attacks upon
the enemy been vain, it might look like a degree of frenzy
to be determined on ſo impracticable an undertaking. Addison
16. To paſs in thought or ſpeech. c
Cou'd you hear the annals of our fate;
Through ſuch a train of woes if I ſhould run,
The day wou'd ſooner than the tale be done. Dryden.
. By reading, a man antedates his life; and this way of run-
*ś up beyond one's nativity, is better than Plato's pre-
exiſtence. Collier.
Virgil, in his firſt Georgick, has run into a ſet of pre-
Sº foreign to his ſubject. Addison's Eſſay on the Georgicks.
Raw and injudicious writers propoſe one thing for their
º and run off to another. Felton.
17. To be mentioned curſorily or in few words.
vº he whole rith; on ſhort, like articles in an account,
** * * ºbject were fully explained, each of them.
is". º: up half a page. Arbuthnot on Coins.
º a continual tenour of any kind.
ſcourſes ran thus among the cleareſt obſervers; it was
Addiſon.
ſaid, that the prince, without any imaginable ſtain of his re-
ligion, had, by the fight of foreign courts, much corrobo-
rated his judgement. Wotton's Buckingham.
The king's ordinary ſtyle runneth, our ſovereign lord the
king. Saunderſon.
19. To be buſied upon.
His griſly beard his penſive boſom ſought, -
And all on Lauſus ran his reſtleſs thought. Dryden.
When we deſire any thing, our minds run wholly on the
good circumſtances of it; when 'tis obtained, our minds run
wholly on the bad ones. Swift.
20. To be popularly known.
Men gave them their own names, by which they run a
great while in Rome. Temple.
21. To have reception, ſucceſs, or continuance.
22. To go on by ſucceſſion of parts.
She ſaw with joy the line immortal run,
Each ſire impreſt, and glaring in his ſon. Pope.
23. To proceed in a train of conduct.
If you ſuſpend your indignation againſt my brother, till you
can derive from him better teſtimony of his intent, you ſhould
run a certain courſe. Shakeſp. King Lear.
24. To paſs into ſome change.
Is it really deſirable, that there ſhould be ſuch a being in
the world as takes care of the frame of it, that it do not run
into confuſion, and ruin mankind Tillotſon.
Wonder at my patience;
Have I not cauſe to rave, and beat my breaſt,
To rend my heart with grief, and run diſtracted. Addison.
25. To paſs.
We have many evils to prevent, and much danger to run
through. Taylor.
26. To proceed in a certain order.
Lay yet wants much of his race to run. Milton.
Thus in a circle runs the peaſant's pain,
And the year rolls within itſelf again. Dryden.
This church is very rich in relicks, which run up as high
as Daniel and Abraham. Addiſon's Remarks on Italy.
Milk by boiling will change to yellow, and run through all
the intermediate degrees, till it ſtops in an intenſe red. Arb.
27. To be in force.
The owner hath incurred the forfeiture of eight years pro-
fits of his lands, before he cometh to the knowledge of the
proceſs that runneth againſt him. Bacon.
The time of inſtance ſhall not commence or run till after
conteſtation of ſuit. Ayliffe's Parergon,
28. To be generally received.
Neither was he ignorant what report ran of himſelf, and
how he had loſt the hearts of his ſubjects. Knolles.
29. To be carried on in any manner.
Conceſſions, that run as high as any, the moſt charitable
proteſtants make. Atterbury.
In popiſh countries the power of the clergy runs higher,
and excommunication is more formidable. Ayliffe's Parergon.
30. To have a track or courſe.
Searching the ulcer with my probe, the finus run up above
the orifice. J/ſeman's Surgery.
One led me over thoſe parts of the mines, where metalline
veins run. Boyle.
31. To paſs progreſſively. -
The planets do not of themſelves move in curve lines,
but are kept in them by ſome attractive force, which, if once
ſuſpended, they would for ever run out in right lines. Cheyne.
32. To make a gradual progreſs.
The wing'd colonies
There ſettling, ſeize the ſweets the bloſſoms yield,
And a low murmur runs along the field. Pope.
33. To be predominant.
This run in the head of a late writer of natural hiſtory,
who is not wont to have the moſt lucky hits in the conduit
of his thoughts. Iłºodward on Fºſſilt.
34. To tend in growth,
A man's nature runs either to herbs or weeds; therefore
let him ſeaſonably water the one, and deſtroy the other. Bar.
35. To grow exuberantly.
Joſeph is a fruitful bough, whoſe branches run over the
wall. Geneſi, Xlix. 22.
Study your race, or the ſoil of your family will dwindle into
cits or run into wits. Tatler, N° 75.
If the richneſs of the ground cauſe turnips to run to leaves,
treading down the leaves will help their rooting. Mortimer.
In ſome, who have run up to men without a liberal educa-
tion, many great qualities are darkened. Felton.
Magnanimity may run up to profuſion or extravagance. Pope-
36. To excern pus or matter. - -
Whether his fleſh run with his iſſue, or be ſtopped, it is
his uncleanneſs. - ſ lſº Xiii. 3.
. To become irregular; to change to ſomething wild. . .
37 Many have . of their ". for women. 1 Eſdr. iv.
Our king return'd,
The muſe ran mad to ſee her exil'd lord;
On the crack'd ſtage the bedlam heroes roard. Gººf,
3 -
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 283</div><p class="Text">R U N
R U N
:
º
38. To get by artifice or fraud.
Hath publick faith, like a young heir,
For this tak'n up all ſorts of ware,
And run int' ev'ry tradeſman's book,
*Till both turn'd bankrupts. Hudibras, p. i.
Run in truſt, and pay for it out of your wages. Swift.
39. To fall by haſte, paſſion, or folly into fault or misfortune.
If thou rememb'reſt not the ſlighteſt folly,
That ever love did make thee run into ;
Thou haſt not lov’d. Shakeſp. As 1%u Like it.
Solyman himſelf, in puniſhing the perjury of another, ran
into wilful perjury himſelf, perverting the commendation of
juſtice, which he had ſo much deſired by his moſt bloody and
unjuſt ſentence. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
From not uſing it right, come all thoſe miſtakes we run
into in our endeavours after happineſs. Locke.
40. To fall; to paſs.
In the middle of a rainbow, the colours are ſufficiently di-
ſtinguiſhed ; but near the borders they run into one another,
ſo that you hardly know how to limit the colours. Watts.
41. To have a general tendency.
Temperate climates run into moderate governments, and
the extremes into deſpotick power. Swift.
42. To proceed as on a ground or principle.
It is a confederating with him, to whom the ſacrifice is
offered : for upon that the apoſtle's argument runs. Atterbury.
43. To go on with violence.
Tarquin, running into all the methods of tyranny, after a
cruel reign was expelled. Swift.
44. To RUN after. To ſearch for; to endeavour at, though
out of the way.
The mind, upon the ſuggeſtion of any new notion, runs
after ſimilies, to make it the clearer to itſelf; which, though
it may be uſeful in explaining our thoughts to others, is no
right method to ſettle true notions in ourſelves. Locke.
45. To RUN away with. To hurry without conſent.
Thoughts will not be directed what obječts to purſue, but
run away with a man in purſuit of thoſe ideas they have in
view. Locke.
46. To Run in with. To cloſe; to comply.
Though Ramus run in with the firſt reformers of learning,
in his oppoſition to Ariſtotle; yet he has given us a plauſible
ſyſtem. Baker.
47. To RUN on. To be continued.
If, through our too much ſecurity, the ſame ſhould run on,
ſoon might we feel our eſtate brought to thoſe lamentable
terms, whereof this hard and heavy ſentence was by one of
the ancients uttered. Haoker.
48. To RUN over. To be ſo full as to overflow.
He fills his famiſh'd maw, his mouth runs o'er
With unchew'd morſels, while he churns the gore. Dryd.
49. To be ſo much as to overflow.
Milk while it boils, or wine while it works, run over the
veſſels they are in, and poſſeſs more place than when they
were cool. Digby on Bodies.
50. To RUN out. To be at an end.
When a leaſe had run out, he ſtipulated with the tenant to
reſign up twenty acres, without leſſening his rent, and no
great abatement of the fine. Swift.
51. To RUN out. To ſpread exuberantly.
Inſectile animals, for want of blood, run all out into
legs. Hammond.
The zeal of love runs out into ſuckers, like a fruitful
trCC. Taylor's Rule of Living Holy.
Some papers are written with regularity; others run out
into the wildneſs of eſſays. Speciator.
52. To RUN out. To expatiate.
Nor is it ſufficient to run out into beautiful digreſſions, un-
leſs they are ſomething of a piece with the main deſign of
the Georgick. Addiſon's Eſſay on the Georgicks.
On all occaſions, ſhe run out extravagantly in praiſe of
|Hocus. Arbuthnot.
They keep to their text, and run out upon the power of
the pope, to the diminution of councils. Baker.
He ſhews his judgment, in not letting his fancy run out
into long deſcriptions. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
53. To Run out. To be waſted or exhauſted.
He hath run out himſelf, and led forth
His deſp'rate party with him; blown together
Aids of all kinds. Benj. johnſon's Catiline.
Th’ eſtate runs out, and mortgages are made,
Their fortune ruin'd, and their fame betray'd.
From growing riches with good cheer,
To running out by ſtarving here.
So little gets for what ſhe gives,
We really wonder how ſhe lives
And had her flock been leſs, no doubt,
She muſt have long ago run out.
To Run. v. a.
1. To pierce; to ſtab.
Poor Romeo is already dead, run through the ear with a
love ſong. Shakeſp. Romeo and juliet.
Dryden.
Swift.
Swift.
Hipparchus, going to marry, conſulted Philander upon the
occaſion; Philander repreſented his miſtreſs in ſuch ſtron,
i. º º: next morning he received a challenge, ani
efore twelve he was run t * - -
2. To force; to drive. hrough the body. Speciator.
, In, nature, it is not convenient to confider every difference
that is in things, and divide them into diſtinét élaïs, this
will run us into Particulars, and we ſhall be able to eſtabliſh
no general truth. Locke.
Though putting the mind unprepared upon an unuſual ſtreſs
may diſcourage it; yet this muſt not run it, by an over-great
º of difficulties, into a lazy ſauntring about ordinary
things.
3. To force into any way or form. Locke.
Some, uſed to mathematical figures, give a preference to
the methods of that ſcience in divinity or političk enquiries;
others, accuſtomed to retired ſpeculations, run-natural phſ.
loſophy into metaphyſical notions. Locke.
What is raiſed in the day, ſettles in the night; and it.
cold runs the thin juices into thick fizy ſubſtances. Cheyne.
The daily complaiſance of gentlemen runs them into".
riety of expreſſions; whereas your ſcholars are more cloſe,
, and frugal of their words. Felton on the Criticks.
4. To drive with violence.
They ran the ſhip aground. 4:7: xxvii. 41.
This proud Turk offered ſcornfully to paſs by without
vailing, which the Venetian captains not enduring, ſet upon
him with ſuch fury, that the Turks were enforced to run both
their gallies on ſhore. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
A talkative perſon 'uns himſelf upon great inconveniencies,
by blabbing out his own or others ſecrets. Ray.
5. To melt.
The pureſt gold muſt be run and waſhed. Felton.
6. To incur.
He runneth two dangers, that he ſhall not be faithfully
counſeled, and that he ſhall have hurtful counſel given. Bacon.
The tale I tell is only of a cock,
Who had not run the hazard of his life,
Had he believ'd his dream, and not his wife. Dryden.
Confider the hazard I have run to ſee you here. Dryden.
O that I could now prevail with any one to count up what
he hath got by his moſt beloved fins, what a dreadful danger
he runs. Calamy.
I ſhall run the danger of being ſuſpected to have forgot
what I am about. Locke.
7. To venture; to hazard.
He would himſelf be in the Highlands to receive them,
and run his fortune with them. Clarenaon.
Take here her reliques and her gods, to run
With them thy fate, with them new walls expect. Denh.
- A wretched exil'd crew
Reſolv’d, and willing under my command,
To run all hazards both of ſea and land.
8. To import or export without duty.
Heavy impoſitions leſſen the import, and are a ſtrong temp-
tation of running goods. Swift.
9. To proſecute in thought. - -
To run the world back to its firſt original, and view na-
ture in its cradle, to trace the outgoings of the ancient of days
in the firſt inſtance of his creative power, is a reſearch too
great for mortal enquiry. - South.
The world hath not ſtood ſo long, but we can ſtill run it
up to thoſe artleſs ages, when mortals lived by plain nature.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
I would gladly underſtand the formation of a ſoul, and run
it up to its punétum ſaliens. Collier.
I have choſen to preſent you with ſome peculiar thoughts,
rather than run a needleſs treatiſe upon the ſubject at length.
Felton.
Dryden.
10. To puſh.
Some Engliſh ſpeakers run their hands into their pockets,
others look with great attention on a piece of blank paper. Addison
11. To RUN down. To chaſe to wearineſs.
They ran down a ſtag, and the aſs divided the prey very
heneſtly. E’E/irange's Fables.
12. To Run down. To cruſh ; to overbear.
Though out-number'd, overthrown,
And by the fate of war run down; - ---
Their duty never was defeated. , Hudibra, p. iii.
Some corrupt affections in the ſoul urge him on with ſuch
impetuous fury, that, when we ſee a man overborn and run
down by them, we cannot but pity the perſon, while we ab-
hor the crime, South's Sermons.
It is no ſuch hard matter to convince or run * * drun-
kard, and to anſwer any pretences he can allege for his
ſin. South's Sermons.
The common cry
Then ran you down for your rank loyalty. - Dryden.
Religion is run down by the licenſe of theſe times. Berkley.
13. To Rus over. To recount curſorily. . . - -
I ſhall run them over ſlightly, remarking chiefly what is
obvious to the eye. I #:
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 284</div><p class="Text">R U N
R U S
that would ſhew
- rticulars,
all not run over all the Pat -
wº are uſed to corrupt children. Locke.
ar. To conſider curſorily.
14. º, &amp;c.; man ſhould run over, before he cenſure
ll view. //atton's Architecture.
*º: º: the other nations of Europe, we ſhall only
paſs through ſo many different ſcenes of poverty. Addiſon.
hrough.
I 5. !. .run over the whole circle of earthly pleaſures,
he would be forced to complain that pleaſure was not ſatis-
faction. South.
RUN. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. Act of running.
The aſs ſets up a hideous bray, and fetches a run at them
L’E/irange's Fables.
open-mouth.
2. Courſe ; motion. -
Want of motion, whereby the run of humours is ſtayed,
furthers putrefaction. Bacon.
3. Flow ; cadence.
He no where uſes any ſoftneſs, or any run of verſes to
pleaſe the ear. Broome's Notes on the Odyſſey.
4. Courſe ; proceſs. -
5. Way of management; uncontrolled courſe. . .
Talk of ſome other ſubject; the thoughts of it make me
mad; our family muſt have their run. Arluthnot.
6. Long reception; continued ſucceſs.
It is impoſſible for detached papers to have a general run
or long continuance, if not diverſified with humour. Addiſon.
r. Modiſh clamour. -
You cannet but have obſerved, what a violent run there is
anjong too many weak people againſt univerſity education. Sw.
8. At the long RUN. In fine; in concluſion; at the end.
They produce ill-conditioned ulcers, for the moſt part
mortal in the long run of the diſeaſe. //iſeman.
Wickedneſs may proſper for a while, but at the long run,
he that ſets all knaves at work, will pay them. L'E/irange.
Shuffling may ſerve for a time, but truth will moſt certainly
carry it at the long run. L'E/ºrange.
Hath falſhood proved at the long run more for the advance-
ment of his eſtate than truth 7illotſon.
Ru’NAGATE. m. ſ. [corrupted from renegat, Fr.] A fugitive;
rebel; apoſtate.
The wretch compel'd, a runagate became,
And learn'd what ill a miſer ſtate doth breed. Sidney.
God bringeth the priſoners out of captivity; but letteth
the rundgates continue in ſcarceneſs. Pſalm Ixviii. 6.
I dedicate myſelf to your ſweet pleaſure,
More noble than that rinagate to your bed. Shakeſp.
As Cain, after he had ſlain Abel, had no certain abiding;
ſo the Jews, after they had crucified the ſon of God, be-
came runagates. Raleigh's Hiſtory of the Iſºrld.
RU'NAw AY. n. f [run and away.] One that flies from dan-
ger ; a fugitive.
Come at once,
For the cloſe night doth play the runaway,
And we are ſtaid for. Shakespeare .
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled :
Speak in ſome buſh; where doſt thou hide thy head Shakespeare
RU'NDLE. n.ſ. [corrupted from roundle, of round.]
I. A round ; a ſtep of a ladder.
The angels did not fly, but mounted the ladder by degrees;
** to conſider the ſeveral ſteps and rund, we ar. aſ-
cºnd by. - Duppa.
2. A peritrochium; ſomething put round an axis.
The third mechanical faculty, ſtiled axis in peritrochio, con-
fifts of an axis or cylinder, having a rundle about it, wherein
are faſtened divers ſpokes, by which the whole may be
turned round. //ilkins's Mathematical AZagick.
RU'Nplet. n.ſ. [perhaps runkt or roundlet.] A ſmall barrel.
Set a rundlet of Verjuice overagainſt the ſun in ſummer, to
ſee whether it will ſweeten. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
RUNG. pret. and part, paſſ of ring.
... The heav'ns and all the confiellations rung. Milton.
RU ***, */ [from run..] . A rivulet; a ſmāīrook.
with murmur loud, down from the mountain's ſide
A little runnel tumbled neere the Place. Fºx
RU'NNER. m. ſ [from run.] -
I. One that runs.
2. A racer.
Fore ſpent with toil, as runner; with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe. Shakespeare .
Here thoſe that in the rapid courſe delight, -
*fival runners without order find Dryden.
3. A meſſenger. -
° Tonſon or Lintot his lodgings are better known th
to the runners of the poſt-office C * - ww. an
4. A ſhooting ſprig. p Swift to Pope.
* “Very root there will be one runner, which h h littl
uds on it, which may be cut 2 ath little
'Llt into. -
5. º, of . ſtones .*. mill. Mortimer.
* "" gºes much heavier by th ſt }
7 unner, bei y the ſtone they call the
ſ cing ſo large. A/ortimer.
II (1. 6 Ainſ,
RU'NNET. m. ſ. [3erunnen, Saxon, coagulated.]. A liquor
made by ſteeping the ſtomach of a calf in ho: Water, and
uſed to coagulate milk for curds and cheeſe. It is ſometimes
written rennet.
The milk of the fig hath the quality of runnet to gather
cheeſe. - Bacon's Natural Hiſtºry.
It coagulates the blood, as runnet turns milk. 4/ore.
The milk in the ſtomach of calves, Soagulated by the
runnet, is rendered fluid by the gall in the duodenum. Arb.
RU'NNION. m. ſ. [regnant, Fr. ſcrubbing. J A paltry ſcurvy
wretch. -
You witch' you poulcatſ you runnion 1 Shakespeare.
RUNT. n.ſ. [runtº, in the Teutonick dialects, ſignifies a bulſºr
cow, and is uſed in contempt by us for ſmall cattle ; as £effl,
the Welſh term for a horſe, is uſed for a worthleſs horſe.]
Any animal ſmall below the natural growth of the kind.
Reforming Tweed
Hath ſent us runts even of her church's breed. Cleaveland.
Of tame pigeons, are cropers, carriers, and , unts. J/alton.
This overgrown runt has ſtruck off his heels, lowered his
foretop, and contracted his figure. Addison.
Ru Prios. n.ſ. [ruptus, Lat.] Breach; ſolution of continuity.
The plenitude of veſſels or plethora cauſes an extravaſa-
tion of blood, by ruption or apertion. //ſºnan.
Rupture; n.ſ. [rupture, Fr. from ruptus, Lat.]
1. The act of breaking; ſtate of being broken; ſolution of
continuity.
Th’ egg,
Burſting with kindly rupire, forth diſclos'd
Their callow young. Milton,
A lute ſtring will bear a hundred weight without rupture,
but at the ſame time cannot exert its elaſticity. Arbuthnot.
The diets of infants ought to be extremely thin, ſuch as
lengthen the fibres without rupture. Arbuthnot.
2. A breach of peace; open hoſtility.
When the parties, that divide the commonwealth, come
to a rupture, it ſeems every man's duty to chute a fide. Swift.
3. Burſtenneſs; hernia; preternatural eruption of the gut.
The rupture of the groin or ſcrotum is the moſt COIn Inon.
ſpecies of hernia. - Sharp's Surgery.
To RU'PTURE. v. a. [from the noun..] To break; to burſt;
to ſuffer diſruption. -
The veſſels of the brain and membranes, if ruptured, ab-
ſorb the extravaſated blood. Sharp's Surgery.
RUPTURE wort. n.ſ.. [herniaria, Lat.] A plant.
The calyx of rupturewort is quadrifid, or, for the moſt
part, quinquefid, and expanded in form of a ſtar, having
five ſtamina in the centre: the fruit, which grows in the bot-
tom of the flower, becomes a membranaceous, ſurrowed,
round capſule, which is divided into eight cells, each of
which contains one ſmall pointed ſeed. Miller.
RURAL. adj. [rural, Fr. ruralis, from rura, Lat.] Country;
exiſting in the country, not in cities; ſuiting the country;
reſembling the country.
Lady, reſerved to do paſtor company honour,
Joining your ſweet voice to the rural muſick of déſert. Sid.
Here is a rural fellow,
That will not be deny'd your highneſs’ preſence;
He brings you figs. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
We turn
To where the ſilver Thames firſt rural grows. Thomſºn.
RURALITY. }". ſ: , [from rural.] The quality of being
RU’RALN Ess. rural. Dići.
RURicolist. m. ſ. [ruricola, Lat..] An inhabitant of the
country. • Dićf.
RU'Rio ÉNous, adj. [rura and gigno, Lat.] - Born in the
COuntry. 19.7.
RUS.E. n.ſ. [French.J Cunning; artifice; little ſtratagem;
trick; wile; fraud ; deceit. A French word neither clegant
nor neceſſary. . -
I might here add much concerning the wiles and rºſº,
which theſe timid creatures uſe to ſave themſelves. Aay.
RUSH. n.ſ. ſºlic, Saxon.]
I. A plant. - -
A ruſh hath a flower compoſed of many leaves, which are
placed orbicularly, and expand in form of a roſe ; from the
centre of which riſes the pointal, which afterward becomes 3.
fruit or huſk, which is generally three-cornered, opening into
three parts, and full of roundiſh ſeeds: they are planted
with great care on the banks of the ſea in Holland, in -
order to prevent the water from waſhing away the earth ;
for the roots of theſe ruſhes faſten themſelves very deep in
the ground, and mat themſelves near the ſurface, ſo as to
hold the earth cloſely together. .. . . . . Ailer.
He taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage
of ruſhes famſure you are not priſoner. Shaft/p.
Man but a ruſh againſt Othelio's breaſt,
And he retires. Shakesp. Othell.
Is ſupper ready, the houſe trimm'd. ºf Kºwº, cob-
webs ſwept Sha' , "a gy the ºw.
Your farm requites your pains;
- - - - - - - --&gt; X, tº
Though riſes overſpread the neight ling pleiº. Jºn.
2. Aºy
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 285</div><p class="Text">º
R U S
R U S
º,
º,
º:
tº:
º
2. Any thing proverbially worthleſs.
Not a ruſh matter, whether apes go on four legs or two.
L’Eſtrange.
What occaſion haſt thou to give up, John Bull's friend-
ſhip is not worth a ruſh. Arbuthnot's Hiſ. of john Bull.
Rush-cANDLE. m. ſ. . [ruſh and candle.] A ſmalſ blinking
taper, made by ſtripping a ruſh, except one ſmall ſtripe of the
bark which holds the pith together, and dipping it in tallow.
- Be it moon or ſun, or what you pleaſe;
And if you pleaſe to call it a ruſh-candle,
Henceforth it ſhall be ſo for me. Shakeſp.
If your influence be quite dam’d up
With black uſurping miſts, ſome gentle taper,
Though a ruſh-candle from the wicker hole
Of ſome clay habitation, viſit us. Milton.
To Rush. v. m. [hneoran, Saxon.] To move with violence;
to go on with tumultuous rapidity.
The liers in wait haſted and ruſhed upon Gibeah. judges.
Gorgias removed out of the camp by night, to the end he
might ruſh upon the camp of the Jews. I Mac. iv. 2.
É. one that was a warrior ruſhed out upon them. judith.
Armies ruſh to battle in the clouds. AMilton.
Why wilt thou ruſh to certain death, and rage
In raſh attempts beyond thy tender age,
Betray’d by pious love Dryden's Virgil.
Deſperate ſhould he ruſh, and loſe his life,
With odds oppreſs'd. Dryden's Aeneis.
They will always ſtrive to be good chriſtians, but never
think it to be a part of religion, to ruſh into the office of
princes or miniſters. Sprat.
You ſay, the ſea
Does with its waves fall backward to the Weſt,
And, thence repell'd, advances to the Eaſt;
While this revolving motion does indure,
The deep muſt reel, and ruſh from ſhoar to ſhoar. Blackm,
With a ruſhing ſound th'aſſembly bend
Diverſe their ſteps. Pope's Odyſſey.
Now ſunk the ſun from his aereal height,
And o'er the ſhaded billows ruſh'd the night. Pope.
At firſt an azure ſheet it ruſhes broad, T.
Then whit'ning by degrees, as prone it falls,
Daſh'd in a cloud of foam, it ſends aloft
A hoary miſt.
Rush. n.ſ.. [from the verb.] Violent courſe.
A gentleman of his train ſpurred up his horſe, and with a
violent ruſh ſevered him from the duke. - Wotton,
Him while freſh and fragant time
Cheriſht in his golden prime,
Ere Hebe's hand had overlaid
His ſmooth cheeks with a downy ſhade,
The ruſh of death's unruly wave
Swept him off into his grave.
Auſter ſpy'd him,
Cruel Auſter thither hy'd him,
And with the ruſh of one rude blaſt,
Sham'd not ſpitefully to caſt
All his leaves ſo freſh, ſo ſweet,
And laid them trenbling at his feet.
RU's HY. adj. [from ruſh.]
1. Abounding with ruſhes.
In ruſhy grounds, ſprings are found at the firſt ſpit. Mart.
The timid hare to ſome lone ſeat
Retir’d ; the ruſhy fen or rugged furze.
2. Made of ruſhes.
What knight like him could toſs the ruſhy lance. Tickel.
Rusk. n.ſ. Hard bread for ſtores.
The lady ſent me divers preſents of fruits, ſugar, and
ruſk. Raleigh.
Ru’s M.A. m. ſ. A brown and light iron ſubſtance, with half as
much quicklime ſleeped in water, the Turkiſh women make
their pilothron, to take off their hair. Grew.
RU'sset. adj. [rouſſet, Fr. ruffus, Lat.] -
1. Reddiſhly brown.
The morn, in ruffet mantle clad,
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eaſtward hill. Shakeſp.
Our ſummer ſuch a ruffet livery wears,
As in a garment often dy'd appears. Dryden.
2. Newton ſeems to uſe it for grey ; but, if the etymology be
regarded, improperly.
This white ſpot was immediately encompaſſed with a dark
grey or riffit, and that dark grey with the colours of the firſt
iris. Newton's Opticks.
3. Coarſe; homeſpun ; ruffick. It is much uſed in deſcriptions
of the manners and dreſſes of the country, I ſuppoſe, becauſe
it was formerly the colour of ruſtick dreſs: in ſome places,
the ruſticks ſtill die cloaths ſpun at home with bark, which
muſt make them ruffet.
Taffata 3. ſilken terms preciſe,
Figures pedantical: theſe ſummer flies
Have blown me full of maggot oſtentation :
Henceforth my wooing mind ſhall be expreſt
in ruſºt yeas, and honeſt kerſy nocs. Shałºff.
I
Thomſºn.
Craſhaw.
Craſhaw.
Thomſon.
*U's: T. n.ſ. Country dreſs. See Russer, ow.
T he Dorick dialect has a ſweetneſs in its clowniſhneſs, like
a fair ſhepherdeſs in her country ruſſet. Dryden.
Russer. }". f. A name given to ſeveral ſorts of pears of
RU'ssETING. § apples from their colour. -
The ruffet pearmain is a very pleaſant fruit, continuin
long on the tree, and in the conſervatory partakes both of the
ºuſting and pearmain in colour and taſte ; the one ſide
being generally rºſet, and the other ſtreaked like a pear-
Inalin. -
RUST. m. ſ. ſnurr, Saxon.] Mortimer.
I. The red deſquamation of old iron. -
This iron began at the length to gather ru/?. Hooker.
&amp;uſt eaten pikes and ſwords in time to come,
When crooked plows dig up earth's fertile womb,
The huſbandman ſhall oft diſcover.
But Pallas came in ſhape of ruſt,
And 'twixt the ſpring and hammer thruſt,
Her Gorgon ſhield, which made the cock
Stand ſtiff, as 'twere transform'd to ſtock.
My ſcymitar got ſome ruſt by the ſea water.
2. The tarniſhed or corroded ſurface of any metal.
By dint of ſword his crown he ſhali increaſe, .
And ſcour his armour from the ruſt of peace. Dryden.
3. Loſs of power by inactivity.
4. Matter bred by corruption or degeneration.
Let her ſee thy ſacred truths cleared from all roſ, and droſs
of human mixtures. Aing Charles.
To Rust, v. n. [from the noun.]
I. To gather ruſt; to have the ſurface tarniſhed or corroded.
Her fallow leas,
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory
Doth reſt upon, while that the culter ruffs,
That ſhould deracinate ſuch ſavagery. Shakeſp. Hºn. V.
Our armours now may ruſt, our idle ſcymiters
Hang by our fides for ornament, not uſe, Dryden.
2. To degenerate in idleneſs.
Muſt I ruſt in Egypt, never more
Appear in arms, and be the chief of Greece.
To Rust, v. a.
1. To make ruſty.
Keep up your bright ſwords, for the dew will ru/?them.
- Shakeſp. Othell.
2. To impair by time or inačtivity.
RUSTICAL, adj. [rufficus, Lat. ruffique, Fr.] Rough;
ſavage; boiſterous; brutal; rude.
On he brought me unto ſo bare a houſe, that it was the
pićture of miſerable happineſs and rich beggary, ſerved only
by a company of ruſhical villains, full of ſweat and duſt, not
one of them other than a labourer. Sidney.
This is by a ruſtical ſeverity to baniſh all urbanity, whoſe
. harmleſs and confined condition is conſiſtent with religion.
Brown's Wulgar Errours.
He confounds the ſinging and dancing of the ſatires with
the ruſtical entertainment of the firſt Romans. Dryden.
RU'stically. adv. [from ruſtical.] Savagely ; rudely; in-
elegantly.
My brother Jaques he keeps at ſchool,
And report ſpeaks goldenly of his profit;
For my part he keeps me ruſtically at home. Shakeſp.
Quintius here was born,
Whoſe ſhining plough-ſhare was in furrows worn,
Met by his trembling wife, returning home,
And ruſtically joy'd, as chief of Rome. Dryden.
RU'sticAlNess. n.ſ.. . [from rºſtical.] The quality of being
ruſtical; rudeneſs; ſavageneſs.
To RU'stic ATE. v. n. [ru/licor, Latin.] To reſide in the
country.
My lady Scudamore, from having ruſticated in your com-
pany too long, pretends to open her eyes for the ſake of ſee-
ing the fun, and to ſleep becauſe it is night. Pope.
To RU’ticATE. v. a. To baniſh into the country.
I was deeply in love with a milliner, upon which I was
ſent away, or, in the univerſity phraſe, ruſticated for ever. Spee’.
JRusti'city. m. ſ. [ru/licité, Fr. rufficitas, from rufficus, Lat.]
1. Qualities of one that lives in the country; ſimplicity; art-
leſsneſs; rudeneſs; ſavageneſs.
There preſented himſelf a tall, clowniſh, young man, who,
falling before the queen of the fairies, deſired that he might
have the atchievement of any adventure, which, during the
feaſt, might happen; that being granted, he reſted him on
the floor, unfit for a better place by his rifficity. Spenſer.
The ſweetneſs and ruſticity of a paſtoral cannot be ſo well
expreſt in any other tongue as in the Greek, when rightly
mixt with the Dorick dialect. - Addison.
This ſo general expence of their time would curtail the
ordinary means of knowledge, as 'twould ſhorten the oppor-
tunities of vice; and ſo accordingly an univerſal rufficity pre-
ſently took place, and ſtopped hot till it had over-run the
whoſe ſtock of mankind. }}ººd.card's Natural Hiſtory.
44ay's Georgiºs.
Hudibras.
Gulliver.
2. Rural appearance.
22 F-22 2. Ru'stick.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 286</div><p class="Text">R U T
R Y E
º
Rustick. adj. [ruſh", Lat.]
1. *.*...";ng miſſing was the odds of the Iberian ſide,
By Lelius willing the next by the excellent running of a
inued ſo in -
tº:". º ſo by the muſes, as many times the
&gt;
- le left both their delights and profits to harken
r .ſº c *- Sidney, b. ii.
2. Rude ; untaught ; inelegant.
An ignorant clown cannºt learn fine language or a courtly
behaviour, when his rºſtick airs have grown up with him till
the age of forty. JWatts's Logick.
l; ſavage. •
3. * i. fºoded I ſhould find the bow'r
Of ſome fell monſter, fierce with barbºrous pow'r,
Some ruſtick wretch, who liv'd in heav'n's deſpight,
Contemming laws, and trampling on the right. Pope.
4. Artleſs; honeſt; ſimple.
5. Plain; unadorned.
An altar ſtood, ruſtick, of graſſy ſord. Milton.
with unguents ſmooth the poliſh'd marble ſhone,
where ancient Neleus fat, a ruſtick throne. - Pope.
RU'stick. n.ſ. A clown ; a ſwain; an inhabitant of the
country.
As flothing is ſo rude and inſolent as a wealthy ruſtick, all
this his kindneſs is overlooked, and his perſon moſt unwor-
thily railed at. - South.
Ru's finess. n.ſ.. [from ruffy.] The ſtate of being ruſty.
To Ru’stle. v. n. [hnirºlan, Saxon.] To make a low con-
tinued rattle; to make a quick ſucceſſion of ſmall noiſes.
Let not the creaking of ſhoes, nor the ruſtling of ſilks, be-
tray thy poor heart to woman. Shakeſp. King Lear.
H. is coming; I hear the ſtraw ruffle. Shakeſp.
This life
Is nobler than attending for a check;
Richer, than doing nothing for a bauble ;
Prouder, than ruſtling in unpaid-for ſilk. Shakeſp.
Thick ſwarm’d, both on the ground, and in the air
Bruſh'd with the hiſs of ruſtling wings. Milton.
As when we ſee the winged winds engage,
Ruſtling from ev’ry quarter of the ſky,
North, Eaſt, and Weſt, in airy ſwiftneſs vy. Granville.
All begin the attack;
Fans clap, ſilks ru/ile, and tough whalebones crack. Pope.
Not leſs their number than the milk-white ſwans,
That o'er the winding of Cyaſter's ſprings,
Stretch their long necks, end clap their ruſtling wings. Po.
RU'sty. adj. [from ruff.]
1. Covered with ruſt; infected with ruſt.
After a long calm of peace, he was left engaged in a war
with a ruſty ſword and empty purſe. Howel.
Part ſcour the ruffy ſhields with ſeam, and part
New grind the blunted ax. Dryden's AFneis.
2. Impaired by inačtivity.
Hećtor, in his dull and long continued truce,
Is ruffy grown. Shakeſp. Troilus and Creſſida.
To Rut, v. n. [ruit, Fr.] To defire to come together. Uſed
of deer.
RUT, n.ſ. [rut, Fr.]
1. Copulation of deer.
The time of going to rut of deer is in September; for that
they need the whole ſummer's feed to make them fit for ge-
neration ; and if rain come about the guiddle of September,
they go to rut ſomewhat the ſooner. Bacon.
The ground hereof was the obſervation of this part in decr
after immoderate venery, and about the end of their rut. Br,
2. [Route, Fr.] The track of a cart wheel. Ainſ.
RUTH. n.ſ.. [from rue..] Mercy ; pity; tenderneſs; ſorrow
for the miſery of another.
The Britons, by Maximilian laid way
With wretched miſeries and woful ruth,
Were to thoſe Pagans made an open prey. Fa. Queen.
All ruth, compaſſion, mercy he forgot. Fairfax.
She fair, he full of baſhfulneſs and truth
Lov'd much, hop'd little, and deſired nought;
He durſt not ſpeak, by ſuit to purchaſe ruth.
The better part with Mary and with Ruth
Choſen thou haſt ; and they that overween,
And at thy growing virtues fret their ſpleen,
No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth. Milton.
Ru"thful. adj. [ruth and full.] Rueful; woful; ſorrowful.
The inhabitants ſeldom take a ruthful and reaving expe-
rience of thoſe harms, which infectious diſeaſes carry with
them. Carew'e Survey of Cornwall.
Ruthfully. adv. [from ruthful.]
1. Wofully; ſadly.
The flower of horſe and foot, loſt by the valour of the
enemy, ruthfully periſhed. Knolles's Hiſtory of the Turks.
2. Sorrowfully , mournfully. -
Help me, ye baneful birds, whoſe ſhrieking ſound
Is ſign of dreary death, my deadly cries
Moſt ruthfully to tune.
3. Wofully. In irony.
By this Minerva's friend bereft
Oileades of that rich bowl, and left his lips, noſe, eyes
Ruthfully ſmear'd. Chapman's Iliad.
Ruthless: adj. [from ruth.] Cruel; pitileſs; uncompaſ-
fionate; barbarous.
What is Edward but a ruthleſ, ſea
Fairfax.
Spenſer's Paſtoral.
What Clarence but a quickſand of deceit? Shakeſp.
The ruthlºſs flint doth cut my tender feet;
And when I ſtart, the cruel people laugh. Shakeſp.
His archers circle me; my reins they wound,
And ruthleſ; ſhed my gall upon the ground. Sandys.
Their rage the hoſtile powers reſtrain,
All but the ruthleſs monarch of the main. Pope.
To ruthleſs deeds, blind rage, and fell revenge,
Their ſervid ſpirits fires. *::: Summer.
Ruthlessness. n.ſ. (from ruthleſ...] Want of pity.
Ru"thlesix. adv. [from ruthleſ...] Without pity; cruelly;
barbarouſly.
RU’ttier. m. ſ. [routiere, Fr.] A direction of the road or
courſe at ſea.
Ru"rTish. adj. [from rut.J Wanton; libidinous; ſalacious;
luſtful; lecherous.
That is an advertiſement to one Diana, to take heed of
the allurement of count Rouſillon, a fooliſh idle boy; but for
all that very ruttiſh. Shakeſp. All's well that end, well.
Rye. n.ſ.. [nyże, Saxon.]
1. A coarſe kind of bread corn.
Between the acres of the rye,
Theſe pretty country folks would lye. Shakespeare.
Rye is more acrid, laxative, and leſs nouriſhing than
wheat. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
2. A diſeaſe in a hawk. - Ainſ.
RYE G R Ass. n.ſ. A kind of ſtrong graſs. -
Some ſow ryegraſ, with the corn at Michaelmas. Mortimer.
