</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 163</div><p class="Text">ºr ~~~~~ = ----------- : *==-
N A K.
A ſemivowel,has in Engliſh an invariable found;
as, no, name, net ; it is ſometimes after m al-
moſt loſt; as, condemn, contemn.
To NAB. v. a. [nappa, Swediſh.]
To catch unexpectedly; to ſeize without
warning. TA word ſeldom uſed but in low language.
NADIR. n.ſ. [Arabick.] The point under foot direétly op-
poſite to the zenith. - -
As far as four bright ſigns comprize,
The diſtant zenith from the nadir lies.
NAFF. n.ſ. A kind of tufted ſea-bird.
Nag. n.ſ. ſnagge, Dutch..] ~
1. A ſmall horſe. A horſe in familiar language.
Creech.
A hungry lion would fain have been dealing with good
horſe-fleſh; but the nag would be too fleet. L’Eſtrange.
Thy nags, the leaneſt things alive,
So very hard thou low'ſt to drive. Prior.
2. A paramour; in contempt.
Your ribauld nag of Egypt
Hoiſts ſails, and flies. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Cleopatra.
NAIL. n.ſ. ſnoegl, Saxon ; nagel, German.]
1. The hard cruſt or horny ſubſtance at the ends of the fingers
and toes.
My nail, can reach unto thine eyes.
The meaneſt ſculptor in th’AEmilian ſquare,
Can imitate in braſs, the nails and hair ;
Expert in trifles. Dryden.
The nails of our fingers give ſtrength to thoſe parts in the
various functions they are put to ; and defend the numerous
nerves and tendons that are under them.
2. The talons of birds and beaſts.
3. A ſpike of metal by which things are faſtened together.
As one nail by ſtrength drives out another;
So the remembrance of my former love
Is by a newer objećt ſoon forgotten. Shakeſ rare.
For the body of the ſhips, no nation doth equal England,
nor for the oaken timber to build them ; and we need not
borrow iron for ſpikes or nails, to faſten them together.
Bacon's Advice to Williers.
The load-ſtone mines in the ſhore of India, are ſo placed
in abundance and vigor, that it proves an adventure of ha-
zard to paſs thoſe coaſts in a ſhip with iron nails.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii. c. 3.
A beechen pail
Hung by the handle, on a driven nail. Drydºn.
An equivocal word uſed for the nail of the hand or foot,
and for an iron nail to faſten any thing. //atts.
4. A Stud; a boſs.
5. A kind of meaſure; two inches and a quarter.
6. On the nail. Readily; immediately ; without delay. I
ſuppoſe from a counter ſtudded with nails.
We want our money on the mail,
The banker's ruin’d if he pays.
To NAIL. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To faſten with nails.
To the croſs he mails thy enemies,
The law that is againſt thee, and the fins
Of all mankind, with him are crucify’d. Milton's P. Loft.
He claſp'd his hand upon the wounded part.
The ſecond ſhaft came ſwift and uneſpy'd,
And pierc'd his hand, and nail'd it to his ſide.
Ray.
Swift's Poems.
Dryden.
2. To ſtud with nails.
In golden armour glorious to behold,
The rivets of your arms were nail'd with gold. Dryden.
All ER. m. ſ. [from nail.] One whoſe trade is to forge nails;
a nail-maker.
NAKED. adj. ſnacos, Saxon.]
* Wanting cloaths; uncovered"; bare.
A philoſopher being aſked in what a wiſe man differed from
* fool? anſwered, ſend them both naked to thoſe who know
them not, and you ſhall perceive. Bacon, Apophth. 242.
He pitying how they ſtood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Shakeſpeare. -
* *
N A M
Muſt ſuffer change; -
As father of his family, he clad
Their nakedneſs with ſkins of beaſts.
Ungrateful men,
Behold my boſom naked to your ſwords,
And let the man that's injur’d ſtrike the blow.
2. Unarmed ; defenceleſs; unprovided.
Had I but ſerv'd my God with half the zeal
I ſerv'd my king, he would not in mine age
Have left we naked to mine enemies. Shakespeare Henry VIII.
3. Plain; evident; not hidden.
The truth appears ſo naked on my ſide;
That any purblind eye may find it out. Shakespeare Hºn. VI.
4. Mere; bare; wanting the neceſſary additions; ſimple; ab-
ſtraćted. -
Not that God doth require nothing unto happineſs at the
hands of men, ſaving only a naked belief, for hope and cha-
rity we may not exclude; but that without belief all other
things are as nothing, and it is the ground of thoſe other di-
vine virtues. Hooker, b. i. p. 37.
NA'ke DLY. adv.
1. Without covering.
2. Simply ; merely; barely; in the abſtraćt.
Though ſeveral ſingle letters nakedly conſidered, are found
to be articulations only of ſpirit or breath, and not of breath
vocalized ; yet there is that property in all letters of aptneſs,
to be conjoined in ſyllables. -
Milton, P. Loft.
Addiſon.
Holder.
3. Diſcoverably; evidently. -
So blinds the ſharpeſt counſels of the wiſe
This overſhadowing Providence on high, -
And dazzleth all their cleareſt fighted eyes,
That they ſee not how nakedly they lie. Daniel Civil War,
NA'KEDNESS. m. ſ. [from naked.]
1. Nudity; want of covering.
My face I'll grime with filth ;
And with preſented nakedneſs out-face
The winds and perſecutions of the ſky. Sha. K. Lear.
Nor he their outward only, with the ſkins
Of beaſts; but inward nakedneſs, much more
Opprobrious ! with his robe of rightcouſneſs
Arraying, cover'd from his father's fight. Milton.
I entreat my gentle readers to ſow on their tuckers again,
and not to imitate the nakedneſs, but the innocence of their
mother Eve. Addison's Guard. Nº. 100.
Thou to be ſtrong muſt put off every dreſs,
Thy only armour is thy nakedneſs. Prior.
2. Want of proviſion for defence.
Spies, to ſee the nakedneſs of the land are come. Gen. xlii. 9.
3. Plainneſs; evidence; want of concealment.
Why ſeek'ſt thou to cover with excuſe
That which appears in proper nakedneſs * Shakespeare
NALL. m. ſ. An awl, ſuch as collar-makers uſe. Tuffer.
Whole bridle and ſaddle, whitleather and mall,
With collars and harneſs. Tiſºr's Huff.
NAME. m. ſ. [nama, Saxon ; naem, Dutch ; an un, Erſe.]
1. The diſcriminative appellation of an individual.
What is thy name * -
Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.
No : though thou call it thyſelf a hotter name
Than any is in hell.
My name's Macbeth. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He called their name; after the marrie; his father had called
them. Gen. xxvi. 18.
I know thee by name. - - - - Ex. xxxiii. 17.
2. The term by which any kind or ſpecies is diſtinguiſhed.
What's in a name * That which we call a roſe,
By any other name would ſmell as fwect. Shakespeare
If every particular idea that we take in, ſhould have a
diſtinét name, 71.7///cj muſt be endleſs.
Locke.
3. Perſon.
They liſt with women each degen'rate name,
Who dates not hazard life for future faine. Dryden.
4. Reputation ; character.
13 A The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 164</div><p class="Text">N A M
N A P
was the laſt encmy the weſt had been
d had left no good name behind. ---
Clarendon, b. viii.
5. Renown; fame; celebrity; eminence; praiſe; remembrance;
memory; diſtinctiºn ; honour. -
what men of name reſort to him
Sir walter Herbert, a renowned ſoldier;
And Rice ap Thomas with a valiant crew,
And many others of great name and worth. Shakespeare
viſit eminent perſons of great name abroad; to tºll how
the life agreeth with the fame. Bacºn's Eſſays, Nº. 19.
Here reſt thy bones in rich Heſperia's plains,
The king's army
- acquainted with, an
Thy name, ’tis all a ghoſt can have, remains. Dryden.
A hundred knights d
Approv’d in fight, and men of mighty name. Dryden.
Theſe ſhall be towns of mighty fame,
Tho' now they lie obſcure, and lands without a name.
Dryden, Æn. vi.
Bartolus is of great name; whoſe authority is as much
valued amongſt the modern lawyers, as Papinian's was
among the ancients. Båker's Rºffect. on Learning.
º - -
6. Power delegated; imputed character.
In the name of the people, .
And in the power of us the tribunes, we -
Baniſh him. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
7. Fićtitious imputation. -
When Ulyſſes with fallacious arts,
Had forg’d a treaſon in my patron's name,
My kinſman fell.
8. Appearance; not reality; aſſumed character.
I'll to him again, in the name of Brook;
He'll tell me all his purpoſe. Sha. Mr. JP, of I/indſor.
There is a friend which is only a friend in name. --
Ecclus. xxxvii.
Dryden, AEn.
9. An opprobrious appellation.
Bids her confeſs; calls her ten thouſand names ;
In vain ſhe kneels. Granvil's Poems.
Like the watermen of Thames
I row by, and call them names.
To NAME. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To diſcriminate by a particular appellation.
I mention here a ſon of the king's whom Florizel
I now name to you; and with ſpeed ſo pace
To ſpeak of Perdita. Shakeſpeare's J/in. Tale.
Thou haſt had ſeven huſbands, neither waſt thou named
after any of them. Tob. iii. 8.
His name was called Jeſus, which was ſo named of the
angel before he was conceived. Luke ii. 21.
2. To mention by name.
Accuſtom not thy mouth to ſwearing: neither uſe thyſelf
to the naming of the Holy One. Ecclus. xxiii. 9.
3. To ſpecify; to nominate.
Did my father's godſon Rºck your life?
He whom my father nam'd your Edgar. Shakeſpeare.
Bring me him up whom I ſhall name. I Sam. xxviii. 8.
Let any one name that propoſition, whoſe terms or ideas
were either of them innate. - Locke.
4. To utter; to mention.
Let my name be named on them.
NAMELEss. adj. [from name.]
1. Not diſtinguiſhed by any diſcriminative appellation.
On the cold earth lies th’ unregarded king,
A headleſs carcaſs, and a nameleſ, thing.
The milky way,
Fram'd of many namelſ; ſtars. - JWaller.
Thy reliques, Rowe, to this fair ſhrine we truſt,
And ſacred, place by Dryden's awful duſt;
Beneath a rude and namelſ; ſtone he lies,
To which thy tomb ſhall guide enquiring eyes. Pope.
2. One of which the name is not known or mentioned.
Little credit is due to accuſations of this kind, when they
come from ſuſpected, that is, from namelſ; pens.
w Atterbury's Sermons.
NAMELY. adv. [from name.] Particularly; ſpecially; to men-
tion by name.
It can be to nature no injury, that of her we ſay the
ſame which diligent beholders of her works have obſerved ;
"amely, that ſhe provideth for all living ratures nouriſh.
ment which may ſuffice. - Hoºker, b. iii. ſ. 4.
Which of theſe ſorrows is he ſubject to ?
To none of theſe, except it be the laſt;
X*}, ſome love that drew him of from home. Sha.
* council making remonſtrances unto queen Elizabeth,
º: Continual ºnſpiracies againſt her life; and namely,
danger...'. taken, who ſtood ready in a very
to go leſs º º manner to do the deed; adviſed her
ſwered, ü, d º weakly attended. But the queen an-
• * the had rather be dead, than put in cuſtody.
Bacon, Apophth. 14.
namely, its power of di-
cral ſuch divinations have been
Addison's Spºlator,
Swift's Miſel.
Gen. xlviii. 16.
Denham.
For the Excellency of the ſoul
- - &gt;
vining in dreams; that few
made, none can queſtion.
Solomon's choice does not only inſtruct us in that point
of hiſtory, but furniſhes out a very fine moral to us; namely,
that he who applies his heart to wiſdom, does at the ſame
time take the moſt proper method for gaining long life,
riches, and reputation. Addison's Guardian.
NAMER. m. ſ. [name.] One who calls or knows any by name.
NAMESAKE. m. ſ. One that has the ſame name with another.
Nor does the dog fiſh at ſea, much more make out the
dog of land, than that his cognominal, or nameſake in the
heavens. Brown's Pºdgar Errours, b. iii.
One author is a mole to another: it is impoſſible for
them to diſcover beauties; they have eyes only for blemiſhes:
they can indeed ſee the light, as is ſaid of their nameſakes;
but immediately ſhut their eyes. Addiſon's Speciator.
NAP. m. ſ. [pnoeppan, Saxon, to ſleep.]
1. Slumber; a ſhort ſleep. -
Mopſa ſat ſwallowing of ſleep with open mouth making
ſuch a noiſe, as no body could lay the ſtealing of a nap to
her charge. Sidney, b. ii.
Let your bounty -
Take a nap, and I will awake it anon.
The ſun had long ſince in the lap
Of Thetis, taken out his nap. Judibras, p. ii.
So long as I'm at the forge you are ſtill taking your map.
L'A/ºrange, Fab.
2. [pnoppa, Saxon.] Down: villous ſubſtance.
Amongſt thoſe leaves ſhe made a butterfly
With excellent device and wondrous flight;
The velvet nap, which on his wings doth lie,
The filken down, with which his back is dight. Spenſer,
Jack Cade the clothier, means to dreſs the Common-
wealth, and ſet a new nap upon it. Shakespeare
Plants, though they have no prickles, have a kind of
downy or velvet rind upon their leaves; which down or map
cometh of a ſubtil ſpirit, in a ſoft or fat ſubſtance. Bacon.
Ah! where muſt needy poet ſeek for aid
When duſt and rain at once his coat invade;
His only coat! where duſt confus'd with rain -
Roughens the nap, and leaves a mingled ſtain. Swift.
To NAPP. v. a. [phoeppan, Saxon.] To ſleep; to be drowſy
or ſecure.
They took him natping in his bed. Hudibras, p. i.
A wolf took a dog napping at his maſter's door. L’E/iran.
What is ſeriouſly related by Helmont, that foul linen,
ſtopt in a veſſel that hath wheat in it, will in twenty-one
days time turn the wheat into mice; without conjuring,
one may gueſs to have been the philoſophy and information
of ſome houſewife, who had not ſo carefully covered her
wheat, but that the mice could come at it, and were there
taken mapping, juſt when they had made an end of their
good chear. Bentley's Sermons.
NAPTAKING. m. ſ. ſnap and take..] Surprize; ſeizure on a
ſudden; unexpected onſet, like that made on men aſleep.
Naptakings, aſſaults, ſpoilings, and firings, have in our fore-
father's days, between us and France, been very common.
Carew.
NAPE. m. ſ. [Of uncertain etymology. Skinner imagines it
to come from nap, the hair that grows on it ; Junius, with
his uſual Greek ſagacity, from vºwn, a hill; perhaps from
the ſame root with Knob.] The joint of the neck behind.
Turn your eyes towards the napes of your necks, and
make but an interiour ſurvey of your good ſelves. Shakespeare
Domitian dreamed, the night before he was ſlain, that a
golden head was growing out of the nape of his neck. Bacon.
NA'PERY. m. ſ. ſnaperia, Italian.] Table-linen. Dić7.
NA/PHEw. m. ſ. ſnapus, Lat..] An herb.
NA‘PH THA. m. ſ. [naphtha, Latin.]
Naphtha is a very pure, clear, and thin mineral fluid, of
a very pale yellow, with a caſt of brown in it. It is ſoft
and oily to the touch, of a ſharp and unpleaſing taſte, and
of a briſk and penetrating ſmell; of the bituminous kind. It
is extremely ready to take fire, and in places where it is
frequent, it exhales a vapour that takes fire at the approach
of any flame, and burns to a great diſtance, ſometimes ſpread-
ing in an inſtant over half a mile or more of ground, and
continuing alight a great while. It is found floating on the
waters of ſ rings. It is principally uſed externally in para-
lytick caſes, and in pains of the limbs. Hill's Mat. Med.
Strabo repreſents it as a liquation of bituinea. It ſwims
on the top of the water of wells and ſprings. That found
about Babylon is in ſome ſprings whitiſh, tho' it be gene-
rally black, and differs little from Petroleum. //codward.
NA'PPIN Ess. m. ſ. ſnappy..] The quality of having a nap.
NAPKIN. m. ſ. [from map; which etymology is oddly favoured
by Wirgil, Tanſſue ſerunt mantilia villis; naperia, Italian.]
1. Cloaths uſed at table to wipe the hands.
By art were weaved napkins, ſhirts, and coats, inconſump-
tible by fire. Brown's Wulgar Errours.
The ſame matter was woven into a napkin at Louvain,
which was cleanſed by being burnt in the fire. J//ºns.
Napkins, Heliogabalus had of cloth of gold, but they
were moſt commonly of linnen, or ſoft wool. A buthnot.
Shakeſpeare.
- 2. A
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 165</div><p class="Text">N. A R
N A R
2. A hankerchief. Obſolete. This ſenſe is retained in Scot-
d.
lan I am glad I have found this napkin ;
This was her firſt remembrance from the moor. Shakespeare
NA'pless. adj. [from map.] Wanting nap ; threadbare.
Were he to ſtand for conſul, ne'er would he
Appear in th’ market place, nor on him put -
The mapleſs veſture of humility. Shakespeare Coriolanus.
NA‘ppy. adj. [from nap. Mr. Lye derives it from nappe, Saxon,
a cup.] Frothy; , ſpumy; from map; whence apples and
ale are called lamb's wooll.
When I my threſher heard,
With nappy beer I to the barn repair’d. Gay's Paſº.
NARCI'SSU.S. m. ſ. [Latin; narciſe, Fr.] A daffodil.
or Narciſſus fair
As o'er the fabled mountain hanging ſtill. Thomſºn.
NAR coſtick, adj. [v2% ; narcotique, Fr.] Producing tor-
por, or ſtupefaction. *
Narcotic; includes all that part of the materia medica, which
any way produces ſleep, whether called by this name, or
hypnoticks, or opiates. 9ttincy.
The ancients eſteemed it narcotick or ſtupefactive, and it is
to be found in the liſt of poiſons by %;
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. vi.
NARD. m. ſ. ſnardus, Lat, vºCº, Gr.]
1. Spikenard; a kind of ointment.
2. An odorous ſhrub.
Smelt o'the bud o'the briar,
Or the nard in the fire.
- He now is come
Into the bliſsful field, thro' groves of myrrh,
And flow'ring odours, caſfia, nard and balm. Milton.
NARE. m. ſ. [naris, Latin.]. A noſtril not uſed, except as in
the following paſſage, in affectation.
There is a Machiavelian plot,
Though every nare olfact it not. Hudibras, p. i. cant. 1.
NA'Rwhale. n.ſ. A ſpecies of whale.
Thoſe long horns preſerved as precious beauties, are but
the teeth of narwhales. Brown's Vulg. Err. b. iii.
NARRABLE. adj. [from narro.] Capable to be told or re-
lated.
NA'RRATE. v. a. [narro, Latin.] To relate ; to tell ; a
word only uſed in Scotland.
NARRATION. n.ſ.. [narratio, Latin; narration, Fr.] Ac-
count ; relation; hiſtory.
He did doubt of the truth of that narration. Abbot.
They that deſire to look into the narrations of the ſtory,
for the variety of the matter we have been careful might
have profit. 2 Mac. ii. 24.
Homer introduces the beſt inſtructions, in the midſt of the
plaineſt narrations. Notes on the Odyſſy.
NARRATIVE. adj. [narratif-ve, Fr. from narro, Lat.]
1. Relating; giving an account.
The words of all judicial acts are written narratively, un-
leſs it be in ſentences diſpoſitive and enaëting; therefore cre-
dit ought to be given to theſe acts, though the words be
Marratt Ue. Ayliffe's Parergon.
2. Storytelling; apt to relate things paſt.
Age, as Davenant ſays, is always narrative.
The poor, the rich, the valiant and the ſage,
r And boaſting youth, and narrative old age.
NARRATIve. n.ſ. A relation; an account; a ſtory.
In the inſtructions I here give to others, concerning what
they ſhould do, take a narrative of what you have done.
South's Sermons.
f Cynthio was much taken with my narrative. Tatler, Nº. 58.
NARRATIVELY. adv. [from narrative..] By way of relation.
The words of all judicial acts are written narratively, un-
leſs it be in ſentences wherein diſpoſitive and enaëting terms
are made uſe of. Ayliffe's Parergon.
NARRA Tok. n.ſ. [narrateur, French; from narro, Latin.] A
teller; a relater.
Conſider whether the narrator be honeſt and faithful, as
well as ſkilful; whether he hath no peculiar gain or profit
by believing or reporting it. Watts's Logick.
• NARRIFY. v. 3. [from narro, Latin.] To relate; to give
account of ; not in uſe.
I ever marrify'd my friends,
º: . * is chief, with all the ſize that verity
... Would without lapſing ſuffer. Shakeſpeare.
NA'RROW. adj. ſneanu, Saxon, from nyn, near.] ºff,
I. sº or wide, having but a ſmall diſtance from ſide to
1Ge.
Ben. johnſon's Underwoods.
Dryden.
Pºpe.
Edward from Belgia,
Hath paſs'd in ſafety thro’ the narrow ſeas. Shakeſpeare.
he Angel ſtood in a narrow place, where was no way
to turn either to the right hand or to the left. Numb. ii. 26.
***arrºw-bottom'd ditch cattle cannot turn themſelves.
2, S Mortimer's Huſbandry.
- mall; of no great extent.
From this narrow time of geſtation may enſue a ſmallneſs
in the excluſion ; but this inferreth no informity. Brown,
4. Cºtrºsted, of cºnfined ſentiments; ungenerous.
5. Near; within a ſmall diſtance.
6. Cloſe; vigilant; attentive.
5. Avaritiouſly; ſparingly.
3. Covetous; avaritious.
To narrow breaſts he comes all wrapt in gain, - *
To ſwelling hearts he ſhines in honour's fire. Sidney,
Nothing more ſhakes any ſociety than mean diviſions be-
tween the ſeveral orders of its members, and their narrow-
hearted repining at each other's gain. Sprat's Serm.
... The greateſt underſtanding is narrow. How much of
God and nature is there, whereof we never had any idea ;
- Grew, Coſmol. b. ii. c. 8.
The hopes of receiving good from thoſe whom we gra-
tify, would produce but a very narrow and ſtinted charity.
Smallridge's Sermons.
A ſalamander grows familiar with a ſtranger at firſt fight,
and is not ſo narrow-ſpirited as to obſerve, whether the per!
ſon ſhe talks to, be in breeches or in petticoats. Addiſon.
It is with narrow-ſoul’d people as with narrow-neck’d
bottles; the leſs they have in them the more noiſe they make
in pouring it out. Swift's Miſcellanies.
Then Mneſtheus to the head his arrow drove,
But made a glancing ſhot, and miſs'd the dove;
Yet miſs'd ſo narrow, that he cut the cord
Which faſten’d by the foot the flitting bird. Dryden.
The orb he roam'd
With narrow ſearch; and with inſpection deep
Conſider'd ev'ry creature, which of all
Moſt opportune might ſerve his wiles. Milt. Par. Loft.
Many malicious ſpies are ſearching into the actions of a
great man, who is not always the beſt prepared for ſo nar-
row an inſpection. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 265.
To NA’RRow. v. a. [from the adjećtive.]
1. To diminiſh with reſpect to breadth or wideneſs.
In the wall he made narrowed reſts, that the beams ſhould
not be faſtened in the walls of the houſe. I Kings vi. 6.
By reaſon of the great Continent of Braſilia, the needle
deflecteth toward the land twelve degrees; but at the Straits
of Magellan, where the land is narrowed, and the ſea on
the other ſide, it varieth about five or ſix. Brown's W. Err.
A government, which by alienating the affections, loſing
the opinions, and crofling the intereſts of the people, leaves
out of its compaſs the greateſt part of their conſent, may
juſtly be ſaid, in the ſame degrees it loſes ground, to narrow
its bottom. Temple's Miſcel.
. To contračt; to impair in dignity of extent or influence.
One ſcience is incomparably above all the reſt, where it
is not by corruption narrowed into a trade, for mean or ill
ends, and ſecular intereſts; I mean, theology, which con-
tains the knowledge of God and his creatures. Locke's/Works.
. To contračt in ſentiment or capacity of knowledge.
Deſuetude does contračt and narrow our faculties, ſo that
we can apprehend only thoſe things in which we are con-
verſant. Government of the Tongue.
How hard it is to get the mind, narrowed by a ſcanty
collection of common ideas, to enlarge itſelf to a more co-
pious ſtock. Locke's J/orks.
Lo! ev'ry finiſh’d ſon returns to thee!
Bounded by nature, narrow'd ſtill by art,
A trifling head, and a contracted heart. Pope's Dunc. b. iv.
4. To confine; to limit.
By admitting too many things at once into one queſtion,
the mind is dazzled and bewildered; whereas by limiting
and narrowing the queſtion, you take a fuller ſurvey of the
whole. Watts's Logick.
Our knowledge is much more narrow'd, if we confine
ourſelves to our own ſolitary reaſonings, without much read-
ing. JWatts.
... [In farriery.] A horſe is ſaid to narrow, when he does not
take ground enough, and does not bear far enough out to
the one hand or to the other. Farr. Dićf.
NA'RRowly. adv. [from narrow.] . -
1. With little breadth or wideneſs; with ſmall diſtance between
the ſides.
2. Contractedly; without extent.
The church of England is not ſo narrowly calculated, that
it cannot fall in with any regular ſpecies of government.
Swift's Sentim, of the Church ºf England.
. Cloſely; vigilantly; attentively.
My fellow-ſchoolmaſter
Doth watch Bianca's ſteps ſo narrowly. Shakeſpeare,
If it be narrowly confidered, this colour will be repre-
hended or encountered, by imputing to all excellencies in
compoſitions a kind of poverty. - Bacon.
For a conſiderable treaſure hid in my vineyard, ſearch
narrowly when I am gone. - L'Eſtrange.
A man's reputation draws eyes upon him that will narrºwly
inſpect every part of him. Addiſon.
4. Nearly , within a little.
Some private veſſels took one of the Aquapulca ſhips, and
very narrowly miſſed of the other. Swift.
NA'RRow-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 166</div><p class="Text">N A T
N A T
NA’rrow Ness. m. ſ. ſº º
... Want of breadth or widents: -
I In our Gothic cathedrals, the narrownſ of the arch makes
it riſe in height, or run out in length. Addiſon on Italy.
2. want of extent; want of comprehenſion. -
That prince, who ſhould be ſo wife and godlike, as by
eſtabliſhed laws of liberty to ſecure protection and encourage-
ment to the honeſt induſtry of mankind, againſt the ºppreſ-
ſion of power, and narrowneſs of party, will quickly be too
hard for his neighbours. Locke's 17%, ki.
. Confined ſtate; contračtedneſs.
The moſt learned and ingenious ſociety in Europe, con-
feſs the narrowneſs of human attainments. Glanv. Scept.
Cheap vulgar arts, whoſe narrownſ affords
No flight for thoughts, but poorly ſticks at words. Denham.
The latin, a moſt ſevere and compendious language, oſ-
ten expreſſes that in one word, which either the barbarity
or the narrownſ of modern tongues cannot ſupply in more.
Dryden.
. Meanneſs ; poverty.
4. If God *i. ñº. for this paſſage, by taking off thy load,
and emptying thy bags, and ſo ſuit the narrowneſs of thy for-
tune to the narrowneſs of the way thou art to paſs, is there
any thing but mercy in all this? South's Sermons.
5. Want of capacity. - -
Another diſpoſition in men, which makes them improper
for philoſophical contemplations, is not ſo much from the
narrºwnſ of their ſpirit and underſtanding, as becauſethey
will not take time to extend them. Burn. Theo. of the Earth.
NAs. [from me has, or has not.]
For pity'd is miſhap that nas remedy,
But ſcorn'd been deeds of fond foolery. Spenſer.
NA's AL. adj. [noſus, Latin.] Belonging to the noſe.
To pronounce the naſals, and ſome of the vowels ſpiri-
tally, the throat is brought to labour, and it makes a gut-
tural pronunciation. Holder's Elements of Speech.
When the diſcharge leſſens, paſs a ſmall probe through
the naſal dućt into the noſe every time it is dreſt, in order
to dilate it a little. Sharp's Surgery.
NA's icor Nous, adj. [noſus and cornu.] Having the horn on
the noſe.
Some unicorns are among inſe&amp;ts; as thoſe four kinds of
maficornous beetles deſcribed by Muffetus. Brown's W. Err.
NASTY. adj. [na/l, mat, German, wet.]
1. Dirty ; filthy; ſordid; nauſeous; polluted.
Sir Thomas More, in his anſwer to Luther, has thrown
out the greateſt heap of naſty language that perhaps ever was
put together. Atterbury.
A nice man, is a man of naſty ideas. . Swift.
2. Obſcene ; leud.
NA's TILY. adv. [from naſty.]
1. Dirtily; filthily; nauſeouſly.
The moſt pernicious infection next the plague, is the ſmell
of the jail, when priſoners have been long and cloſe and
naſily kept. Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
2. Obſcenely; groſsly.
NA's TINESS. m. ſ. [from maſºy.
1. Dirt; filth. /.. [. !ſty.]
This cauſed the ſeditious to remain within their ſtation,
which by reaſon of the naftingſ of the beaſtly multitude,
might more fitly be termed a kennel than a camp. Hayward.
Haughty and huge, as high Dutch bride,
Such naffineſ and ſo much pride
Are oddly join'd by fate, Swift.
2. Obſcenity; groſsneſs of ideas.
Their naſtineſs, their dull obſcene talk and ribauldry,
cannot but be very nauſeous and offenſive to any who does
11Ot baulk his own reaſon, out of love to their vice. South.
A divine might have employed his pains to better pur-
poſe, than in the naffinſ of Plautus and Ariſtophanes. Dry.
NATAL. adj. Inatal, Fr. natalis, Latin.] Native, relating to
nativity.
Since the time of Henry III. princes children took names
from their natal places, as Edward of Carnarvon, Tij
of Brotherton. cº,
Propitious ſtar' whoſe ſacred pow'r -
º o'er the monarch's natal hour,
hy radiant voyages for ever run. -
NATA'tion. n.ſ. ſnaiatio, Latin.] The act of º
In progreſſive motion, the arms and legs move ſucceſſ
but in natation both together. Brown's Vulgar Errº.
***Ess, ad [na, that is, not the le J3 Saxon.] Never.
theleſs; formed thus, matheleſ, math’leſs. Obſolete
Nathlºft, my brother ſince we paſſed are -
Unto this Point, we will appeaſe our jar.
- The torrid clime
m fore beſides, vaulted with fire.
* endur'd, 'tiſ on the beach
med ſea he ſtood, and call’d
Spen er.
Smote on hi
Nathleſ, he
Of that infl
r is legions.
NATH MoR.E. adv. ſha the more.] Ne
Yet natºr, by histºl. the more.
ſpeech,
Milton's Paradſ: Lº/?.
Could his blood-frozen heart embolden'd be. Spenſ r.
NATION. m. ſ. ſnation, Fr. natio, Latin.]. A people diſtin-
guiſhed from another people ; generally by their language,
original, or government. - -
if Edward III. had proſpered in his French wars, and
peopled with Engliſh the towns which he won, as he began at
Calais driving out the French, his ſucceſſors holding the ſame
courſe, would have filled all France with our nation. ... Rºº.
A nation properly ſignifies a great number of families dºº-
rived from the ſame blood, born in the ſame country, ard
living under the ſame government. ºf emple.
NA’rron AL. adj. [natiºnal, Fr. from nation.]
1. Publick; general; not private ; not particular.
They in their earthly Canaan plac'd,
Long time ſhall dwell and proſper: but when ſins
National interrupt their public peace. Milton's P. Loft.
Such a national devotion inſpires men with ſentiments of
religious gratitude, and ſwells their hearts with joy and ex-
ultation. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 49.
The aſtoniſhing vićtories our armies have been crowned
with, were in ſome meaſure the bleſlings returned upon that
national charity which has been ſo conſpicuous. Addison.
God, in the execution of his judgments, never viſits a people
with public and general calamities, but where their fins are
public and natiºnal too. Rogers's Sermons.
2. Bigotted to one's own country.
NATIONALLY. adv. [from national.] With regard to the
nation.
The term adulterous chiefly relates to the Jews, who
being nationally eſpouſed to God by covenant, every fin of
theirs was in a peculiar manner ſpiritual adultery. South.
NATIONALN Ess. m. ſ. [from national. J Reference to the
eople in general.
NATIVE. adj. [nativus, Latin; natif-ve, Fr.] Produced by
nature; natural, not artificial.
She more ſweet than any bird on bough,
Would oftentimes amongſt them bear a part,
And ſtrive to paſs, as ſhe could well enough,
Their native muſick by her ſkilful art. Fairy Q. b. ii.
This doćtrine doth not enter by the ear,
But of itſelf is native in the breaſt.
2. Natural; ſuch as is according to nature.
The members retired to their homes, reaſſume the native
ſedateneſs of their temper. Swift.
3. Conferred by birth.
But ours is a privilege ancient and native,
Hangs not on an ordinance, or power legiſlative;
And firſt, 'tis to ſpeak whatever we pleaſe. Denham.
4. Relating to the birth; pertaining to the time or place of birth.
If theſe men have defeated the law, and outrun native
puniſhment; though they can outſtrip men they have no
wings to fly from God. Shakeſpeare's Henry V.
Many of our bodies ſhall, no doubt,
Find native graves.
5. Original; natural.
Have I now ſeen death is this the way
I muſt return to native duſt O fight
Of terror, foul, and ugly to behold.
NA"riv F. m. ſ.
1. One born in any place ; original inhabitant.
Th’ accuſation,
All cauſe unborn, could never be the native
Of our ſo frank donation. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Make no extirpation of the natives, under pretence of
planting religion, God ſurely will no way be pleaſed with
ſuch ſacrifices. Bacon's Advice to Williers.
Tully, the humble muſhroom ſcarcely known,
The lowly native of a country town. Dryden's juv.
There ſtood a monument to Tacitus the hiſtorian, to the
emperors Tacitus and Florianus, all natives of the place.
Addiſon on Italy.
t
Davies.
Shakespeare Hen. V.
Milt. Par. Loft.
2. Offspring.
NATIVEN Ess. n. ſ. [from native.J State of being produced
by nature.
NA'tivity. m. ſ. [nativité, French.]
I. Birth; iſſue into life.
Concluding cwer with a thankſgiving for the nativity of
our Saviour, in whoſe birth the births of all are only bleſſed.
Bacon.
2. Time, place, or manner of birth.
Miy huſband, and my children both,
And you the calenders of their nativity,
Go to a goſſip's feaſt. Shakespeare Com. of Errors.
They ſay there is divinity in odd numbers, either in na–
tivity, chance, or death. Shakespeare Merr. W. of Iſin.
When I vow, I weep ; and vows ſo born,
In their nativity all truth appears. Shafeſ...Mid. N. Dream.
Thy birth and thy nativity is of Canaan. Ezek. xvi. 3.
3. State or place of being produced.
Theſe, in their dark nativity, the deep
Shall yield us, pregnant with infernal flame.
NATURAL. adj. [naturel, French, from nature.]
Milton.
º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

1. Pro-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 167</div><p class="Text">N A T
—- -
1. Produced or effe&amp;ted by nature.
There is no natural motion of any particular heavy body,
which is perpetual, yet it is poſſible from them to contrive
ſuch an artificial revolution as ſhall conſtantly be the cauſe
of itſelf. Wilkins's Dedalus.
2. Illegitimate:
This would turn the vein of that we i. natural, to jº
agation; which has ever been encouraged as
of .. . disfavoured by all inſtitutions. Żmple.
owed by nature. -
If there be any difference in natural parts, it ſhould ſeem
that the advantage lies on the ſide of children born from
noble and wealthy parents. - Swift.
4. Not forced; not farfetched; dićtated by nature.
I will now deliver a few of the propereſt and naturalleſ?
confiderations that belong to this piece. JWotton’s Arch.
5. Conſonant to natural notions,
Such unnatural connections become, by.cuſtom, as na-
tural to the mind as ſun and light: fire and warmth go to-
gether, and ſo ſeem to carry with them as natural an evi-
àence as ſelf-evident truths themſelves. Locke.
6, Tender; affectionate by nature.
To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
He wants the nat'ral touch. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
7. Unaffected; according to truth and reality.
What can be more natural than the circumſtances in the
behaviour of thoſe women who had loſt their huſbands on
this fatal day. Addiſon.
8. Oppoſed to violent; as, a natural death.
NATURAL. n.f. [from nature.]
1. An idiot; one whom nature debars from underſtanding; a
fool.
That a monſter ſhould be ſuch a natural. Shakeſpeare.
Take the thoughts of one out of that narrow compaſs he
has been all his life confined to, you will find him no more
capable of reaſoning than a perfect natural. Locłe.
2. Native; original inhabitant.
The inhabitants and natural of the place, ſhould be in a
ſtate of freemen. Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
Oppreſſion, in many places, wears the robes of juſtice,
which domineering over the naturals may not ſpare ſtrangers,
and ſtrangers will not endure it. Raleigh's Eſſays.
3. Gift of nature; nature; quality.
The wretcheder are the contemners of all helps ; ſuch as
preſuming on their own naturals, deride diligence, and mock
atterms when they underſtand not things. Ben.johnſon.
To conſider them in their pure naturals, the earl's intel-
lectual faculties were his ſtronger part, and the duke, his prac-
tical. Wotton.
NATURALIST. n.ſ.. [from natural.] A ſtudent in phyſicks,
or natural philoſophy.
Admirable artifice where with Galen, tho' a mere na-
turaliſi, was ſo taken, that he could not but adjudge the
honour of a hymn to the wiſe creator. More.
It is not credible, that the natural/? could be deceived in
his account of a place that lay in the neighbourhood of
Rome. ddiſºn on Italy.
NATURA lization. m. ſ. [from naturalize.] The aët of
inveſting aliens with the privileges of native ſubječts.
The Spartans were nice in point of naturalization; where-
by, while they kept their compaſs, they ſtood firm; but
when they did ſpread, they became a windfal. Bacon's Eſ.
ncouragement may be given to any merchants that ſhall
come over and turn a certain ſtock of their own, as natura-
lization, and freedom from cuſtoms the two firſt years. Temple.
Enemies, by taking advantage of the general naturalization
at, invited over foreigners of all religions. Swift.
To NATURALIZE. v. A. (from natural.]
1. To adºpt into a community; to inveſt with the privileges of
native ſubjects.
The great lords informed the king, that the Iriſh might
not be naturalized without damage to themſelves or the crown.
Davies on Ireland.
2. To make natural; to make eaſy like things natural.
He riſes freſh to his hammer and anvil; cuſtom has na-
titralized his labour to him, South's Sermons.
*TURALLY. adv. [from natural.]
1. According to the power or impulſes of unaffiſted nature.
Our ſovercign good is defined naturally; God, the author
ºf that natural deſire, hath appointed natural means whereby
to fulfil it; but man having utterly diſabled his nature unto
theſe means, hath had other revealed, and hath received
from heaven a law to teach him, how that which is deſired
*rally, muſt now ſupernaturally be attained. Hooker.
If ſenſe be not certain in the ſeports it makes of things to
the mind, there can be naturally no ſuch thing as certainty
or knowledge. South's Sermon.
* According to nature; without affectation.
That part .
Was aptly fitted, and naturally perform'd. Shakeſpeare.
his anſwers fitly and naturally to the place of the abyſs
2
*ºr A --
before the deluge, inclos'd within the vault of the carth.
- Burnet's Theory ºf the Farth.
The thoughts are to be meaſured only by their propriety;
that is, as they flow more or leſs naturally from the perſons
and occaſions. Dryden.
3. Spontaneouſly.
NATURALNess. m. ſ. [from natural.]
I. The ſtate of being given or produced by nature.
The naturalneſs of a defire, is the cauſe that the ſatisfac-
tion of it is pleaſure, and pleaſure importunes the will; and
that which importunes the will, puts a difficulty on the will
refuſing or forbearing it. South"
2. Conformity to truth and reality; not affectation.
He muſt underſtand what is contained in the temperament
of the eyes, in the naturalneſs of the eyebrows. Dryden.
Horace ſpeaks of theſe parts in an ode that may be reckoned
among the fineſt for the naturalneſof the thought, and the
beauty of the expreſſion. Addiſon.
NATURE. m. ſ. [natura, Latin; nature, French.j
I. An imaginary being ſuppoſed to preſide over the material and
animal world.
Thou, nature, art my goddeſs; to thy law
My ſervices are bound. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
When it was ſaid to Anaxagoras, the Athenians have
condemned you to die ; he ſaid again, and nature them.
; Sermons.
Bacon.
Let the poſtilion nature mount, and let
The coachman art be ſet. Cowley.
Heav'n beſtows
At home all riches that wiſe nature needs. Cowley.
Simple nature to his hope has giv'n,
Beyond the cloud-topt hill an humbler heav'n, Pope.
2. The native ſtate or properties of any thing, by which it is
diſcriminated from others.
Between the animal and rational province, ſome animals
have a dark reſemblance of the influxes of reaſon: ſo be-
tween the corporeal and intellectual world, there is man
participating much of both natures. Hale's Orig. of Mankind.
3. The conſtitution of an animated body.
Nature, as it grows again tow'rd earth,
Is faſhion'd for the journey, dull and heavy. Shakespeare
We're not ourſelves,
When nature, being oppreſt, commands the mind
To ſuffer with the body. Shakeſpeare’s King Lear.
4. Diſpoſition of mind; temper. -
Nothing could have ſubdu'd nature
To ſuch a lowneſs but his unkind daughters. Shakespeare
A credulous father, and a brother noble,
Whoſe nature is ſo far from doing harms,
That he ſuſpects none; on whoſe fooliſh honeſty
My pračtices ride eaſy. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
5. The regular courſe of things.
My end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence. Shakespeare
6. The compaſs of natural exiſtence.
If their dam may be judge, the young apes are the moſt
beautiful things in nature. - Glanv.
7. Natural affection, or reverence; native ſenſations.
Have we not ſeen
The murd'ring ſon aſcend his parent's bed,
Thro’ violated nature force his way,
And ſtain the ſacred womb where once he lay Pope.
8. The ſtate or operation of the material world.
He binding nature faſt in fate,
Left conſcience free and will. Pope.
9. Sort; ſpecies.
A diſpute of this nature cauſed miſchief in abundance be-
twixt a king and an archbiſhop. Dryden.
10. Sentiments or images adapted to nature, or conformable
to truth and reality.
Only nature can pleaſe thoſe taſtes which are unprejudiced
and refined. Addison.
Nature and Homer were he found the ſame. Pope.
11. Phyſics; the ſcience which teaches the qualities of things.
Nature and nature's laws lay hid in night,
God ſaid, let Newton be, and all was light. Pope.
NATURITY. m. ſ. [from nature.] The ſtate of being pro-
duced by nature. A word not uſed. t
This cannot be allowed, except we impute that unto the
firſt cauſe which we impoſe not on the ſecond ; or what we
deny unto nature we impute unto naturity. Browne’s W. Err.
NA'v Āl. adj. [naval, Fr. navalis, Latin.]
1. Conſiſting of ſhips.
- Encamping on the main,
Our naval army had beſieged Spain ; y
They that the whole world's monarchy deſign d,
Are to their ports by our bold fleet confin'd.
As our high veſſels paſs their watry way,
Let all the naval world due homage pay. Prior.
2. Belonging to ſhips. -
Maſters of ſuch numbers of ſtrong and valiant men, as
18 B - well
JP aller.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 168</div><p class="Text">N A V
N A U
well as of all the naval ſtores that furniſh the world. Temple.
ſnar, Saxon.
Nºftſ; of the * in which the axle moves.
Out, out, thou ſtrumpet fortune ! all you gods
In general ſynod take away her pow'r;
Bråkall the ſpokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heav'n, -
As low as to the fiends. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
In the wheels of waggons the hollows of the naves, by
their ſwift rotations on the ends of the axle-trees, produce
a heat ſometimes ſo intenſe as to ſet them on fire. Ray.
2. [From navis, nave, old Fr.] The middle part of the church
diſtinét from the aiſles or wings.
It comprehends the nave or body of the churgh, together
N: the chancel. f la. S J Ayliffe's Par.
A’vel. m. ſ. ſnapela, navela, Saxon. -
I. The º: | É. middle of the belly, by which embryos
communicate with the parent. -
The uſe of the navel is to continue the infant unto the
mother, and by the veſſels thereof to convey its aliments.
Brown's Pagar Errours, b. v.
As children, while within the womb they live, -
. Feed by the navel: here they feed not ſo. Davies.
There is a ſuperintending Providence, that ſome animals
will hunt for the teat before they are quite gotten out of the
ſecundines and parted from the nave/tring. ' Derham.
2. The middle; the interiour part.
Being preſt to the war,
Even when the navel of the ſtate was touch'd,
They would not thread the gates. Shakespeare Cor.
Within the navel of this hideous wood,
Immur'd in cypreſs ſhades, a ſorcerer dwells. Milton.
NA'velo All. n.ſ.
Navegall is a bruiſe on the top of the chine of the back,
behind the ſaddle, right againſt the navel, occaſioned either
by the ſaddle being ſplit behind, or the ſtuffing being want-
ing, or by the crupper buckle fitting down in that place, or
ſome hard weight or knobs lying directly behind the ſaddle.
NA'velwort. n.ſ. -
It hath the appearance of houſebeck; from which it differs
only in having an oblong tubulous flower of one leaf, di-
vided at the top into five parts. This plant is uſed in me-
dicine, and grows wild upon old walls. Miller.
NA'vEw. n.ſ.. [napus, Lat. navet, naveau, Fr.]
It agrees in moſt reſpects with the turnep; but has a
leſſer root, and ſomewhat warmer in taſte. The ſpecies are
three. In the iſle of Ely the third ſpecies, which is wild,
is very much cultivated, it being the cole ſeed from which
they draw the oil. Miller.
NAUGHT. adj. Inape, nappipe, Saxon ; that is, ne atght,
not anything.] Bad; corrupt; worthleſs.
With them that are able to put a difference between things
naught and things indifferent in the church of Rome, we
are yet at controverſy about the manner of removing that
which is naught. Hooker, b. iv.
Thy ſiſter's naught : Oh Regan ſhe hath tied
Sharp-tooth’d unkindneſs like a vulture here. Shakespeare
Naught. m. ſ. Nothing. This is commonly, though impro-
perly, written nought. See AUGHT and Ought.
- Be you contented
To have a ſon ſet your decrees at naught,
r To pluck down juſtice from your awful bench. Shakespeare
NAuchtily. adv. [from naughty.] Wickedly; corruptly.
NAVGHTINESS. m. ſ. [from naughty.] Wickedneſs; bºdieſ.
Slight wickedneſs or parveſcuity, as of children.
No remembrance of naughtingſ; delights but mine own;
and methinks the accuſing his traps might in ſome manner
excuſe my fault, which certainly ſloth to do. Sidney, b. ii.
NA'UGHTY. adj. [See NAUGHT.]
I. Bad 3 wicked ; corrupt.
A prince of great courage and beauty, but foſtered up in
blood by his naughty father. Sidney, b. ii
&gt; * * * i.
Theſe naughty times
Put bars between the owners and their rights.
How far that little candle throws his beams
So ſhines a good deed in a naughty world.
2. It is now ſeldom uſed but in ludicrous cenſure.
If gentle ſlumbers on thy temples Creep,
But naughty man, thou doſt not mean to ſleep,
Betake thee to thy bed. Dryden
... ºutsk, dd, ſnavicularis, Lat. naviculaire, Fr.] In an.
**), the third bone in each foot that lies between the
IN *ślus and offa cuneiformia. Dić7.
AVIGABLE. adj. [navigable, Fr. navigabilis, Latin.] Ca-
pable of being paſſed by ſhips or boats.
**peopled cities were all founded upon theſe na-
** rivers, or their branches by whi -
- by which the one might
give ſuccour to the other. Aaleigh's Hiſt, of the ſºld.
Earth Almighty Jove ſurveys
** air, and ſhores, and navigable ſeas,
5
Shakespeare
Shakespeare
Dryden.
NA'vic ABLENFss. n. ſ. [from navigable.]
paſſed in veſſels. - - -
Tô Navigate. v. n. [navige, Lat. naviger, Fr.] To faii;
to paſs by water. - -
The Phoenicians navigated to the extremities of the weſ.
tern Ocean. Arbuthnot on Coins.
To NA’vro Ate. v. a. To paſs by ſhips or boats. -
Druſus, the father of the emperor Claudius, was the firſt
who navigated the northern ocean. Arbuthnot on Cºins.
NAvig A Tion. n.ſ.. [navigation, Fr. from navigate.] .
1. The act or practice of paſſing by water. - .
Our ſhipping for number, ſtrength, mariners, pilots, and
all things that appertain to navigation, is as great as *:::
- tº. 32.
The loadſtone is that great help to navigation, Aſare.
Rude as their ſhips, was navigation then,
No uſeful compaſs or meridian known ;
Coaſting, they kept the land within their ken, -
And knew no north but when the poleſtar ſhone. Drydºn.
When Pliny names the Poeni as inventors of navigatiºn,
it muſt be underſtood of the Phoenicians, from whom the
Carthaginians are deſcended. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. Veſſels of navigation.
Tho' you untie the winds, and let them fight
Againſt the churches, tho’ the yeſty waves
Confound and ſwallow navigation up. Shakespeare Mac.
NAVIGA tor. m. ſ. ſnavigateur, Fr. from navigate.] Sailor;
ſeaman; traveller by water.
By the founding of navigators, that ſea is not three hun-
dred and ſixty foot deep. Brerezo.
The rules of navigators muſt often fail. Brown’s P. Err.
The contrivance may ſeen difficult, becauſe theſe ſubma-
rine navigators will want winds, tides, and the fight of the
heavens, J/ilkin's Math. Aſagic.
This terreſtrial globe, which before was only a globe in
ſpeculation, has ſince been ſurrounded by the boldneſs of many
navigators. Tºple.
Nº. n. ſ. [naulum, Lat.] The freight of paſſengers in
a 1nip.
NAU'MACHY, n. ſ. [naumachie, Fr. naumachia, Latin.] A mock
ſea fight.
To NAU'SEATE. v. n. [from mauſºn, Latin.] To grow
ſqueamiſh; to turn away with diſguſt.
Don't over-fatigue the ſpirits, left the mind be ſeized with
a laſtitude, and natſcate, and grow tired of a particular ſub-
jećt before you have finiſhed it. Watt's Improv. of the Alind.
To NAU's EATE. v. a.
1. To loath; to reject with diſguſt.
While we ſingle out ſeveral diſhes, and rejećt others, the
ſelection ſeems arbitrary; for many are cryed up in one age,
which are decryed and nauſeated in another. Brown's P. Err.
Old age, with filent pace, comes creeping on,
Nauſeates the praiſe, which in her youth ſhe won,
And hates the muſe by which ſhe was undone. Drydºn.
Thoſe heads, as ſtomachs, are not ſure the beſt,
Which nauſeate all, and nothing can digeſt. Pope.
2. To ſtrike with diſguſt.
He let go his hold and turned from her, as if he were
nauſcated, then gave her a laſh with his tail. Swift.
NAU's Eous. adi, [from mauſºa, Latin ; nauſeé, Fr.] Loath-
ſome ; diſguſtful; regarded with abhorrence.
Thoſe trifles wherein children take delight,
Grow nauſeous to the young man's appetite.
And from thoſe gaieties our youth requires
To exerciſe their minds, our age retires. Denham.
Food of a wholeſom juice is pleaſant to the taſte and
agreeable to the ſtomach, 'till hunger and thirſt be well ap-
peaſed, and then it begins to be leſs pleaſant, and at laſt
even nauſeous and loathſome. Ray.
Old thread-bare phraſes, will often make you go out of
your way to find and apply them, and are mauſºils to ra-
tional hearers. Swift.
NAusEously. adv. [from nauſeous.] Loathſomely; diſguſtfully.
This, though cunningly concealed, as well knowing how nail-
Capacity to be
fouſly that drug would go down in a lawful monarchy, which
was preſcribed for a rebellious commonwealth, yet they al-
ways kept in reſerve. Drydºn.
Their ſatire's praiſe ;
So nauſeouſly and ſo unlike they paint. Garth's Diſp.
NAU's EousNEss. n.ſ.. [from nauſeous.] Loathſomeneſs; qua-
lity of raiſing diſguſt.
The nauſeouſneſs of ſuch company diſguſts a reaſonable
man, when he ſees he can hardly approach greatneſs but as
a moated caſtle; he muſt firſt paſs through the mud and filth
with which it is encompaſſed. Dryden's Aurengzebe.
NAUTIcAL.
NAU"Tick.
He elegantly ſhewed by whom he was drawn, which de-
ainted the nautical compaſs with aut magnes, aut magna. Cam.
NAUTILUS. m. ſ. [Latin; nautile, Fr.] A ſhellfiſh furniſhed
with ſomething analogous to oars and a fail.
łaj. [nauticus, Latin.] Pertaining to ſailors.
Learn<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 169</div><p class="Text">N E A
N E A
—- - * *-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Learn of the little nautilus to ſail, -
Spread the thin oar and catch the driving gale. - Pope.
Navy, n.ſ.. [from navis, Lat.] An aſſembly of ſhips, com-
monly ſhips of war; a fleet. - - -
On the weſtern coaſt rideth a puiſſant navy. Sha. Rich. III.
Levy money, and return the ſame to the treaſurer of the
navy for his majeſty's uſe. - Clarendon.
The narrow ſeas can ſcarce their navy bear,
Or crowded veſſels can their ſoldiers hold.
NAY. adv. [na, Saxon, or me aye.]
1. No; an adverb of negation. -
Diſputes in wrangling ſpend the day,
whilſt one ſays only yea, and t'other nay. .
2. Not only ſo but more. A word of amplification.
A good man always profits by his endeavour, yea, when
he is abſent; nay, when dead, by his example and memory;
ſo good authors in their ſtile. Ben. johnſon's Diſcov.
This is then the allay of Ovid's writings, which is ſuf-
ficiently recompenſed by his other excellencies; may, this very
fault is not without its beauties; for the moſt ſevere cenſor
cannot but be pleaſed. Dryden.
If a ſon ſhould ſtrike his father, not only the criminal but
his whole family would be rooted out, nay, the inhabitants
of the place where he lived, would be put to the ſword,
noy, the place itſelf would be razed. Addison Spect. Nº. 189.
3. Word of refuſal. -
They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Ro-
mans, and have caſt us into priſon; and now do they thruſt
us out privily nay verily ; but let them come themſelves
and fetch us out. Acis xvi. 37.
The fox made ſeveral excuſes, but the ſtork would not
be ſaid nay; ſo that at laſt he promiſed him to come.
L’Eſtrange, Fable 31.
Dryden,
Denham:
He that will not when he may,
When he would he ſhall have nay.
NA'yword. m. ſ. ſnay and word.]
1. The ſide of denial; the ſaying nay.
You would believe my ſaying,
Howe'er you lean to th’ mayword.
2. A proverbial reproach; a bye word.
If I do not gull him into a nayword, and make him a
common recreation, do not think I have wit enough to lie
ſtraight in my bcd. Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
. A watchword. Not in uſe.
I have ſpoke with her; and we have a mayword how to
know one another. I come to her in white, and cry mum;
ſhe cries budget; and by that we know one another. Sha.
NE. adv. [Saxon. This particle was formerly of very frequent
uſe, both ſingly and by contračtion in compound words; as,
mill for ne will or will not ; mas for me has or has not ; mis
for me is or is not..] Neither; and not.
His warlike ſhield all cover'd cloſely was,
Ne might of mortal eye be ever ſeen,
Not made of ſteel, nor of enduring braſs.
NEAF, n. ſ. [nºff, Iſlandick.] A fiſt.
land; and in the plural neaves.
Give me thy meaf, Monſieur Muſtardſeed. Shakeſpeare.
To Neal. v. a. [ondelan, Saxon; to kindle.] To temper
by a gradual and regulated heat.
The workmen let it cool by degrees in ſuch relentings of
fire, as they call their nealing heats; leſt it ſhould ſhiver in
pieces by a violent ſucceeding of air in the room of fire.
Digby on Bodies.
This did happen for want of the glaſſes being gradually
cooled or nealed. Boyle.
If you file, engrave, or punch upon your ſteel, neal it
firſt, becauſe it will make it ſofter, and conſequently work
eaſier. The common way is to give it a blood-red heat in
the fire, then let it cool of itſelf. Moxon's Mech. Exer.
To NEAL. v. m. To be tempered in fire.
Redućtion is chiefly effected by fire, wherein if they ſtand
and neal, the imperfeót metals vapour away. Bacon.
NEAP, adj. [neprics, Saxon; naertig, poor.] Low; decre-
ſcent. Uſed only of the tide, and therefore ſometimes uſed
ſubſtantively. -
The mother of waters, the great deep, hath loſt nothing
of her ancient bounds. Her motion of ebbing and flowing,
of high ſprings and dead neaps, are as conſtant as the changes
of the moon. Hałewill on Providence.
How doth the ſea conſtantly obſerve its ebbs and flows,
its ſprings and neop-tides, and ſtill retain its ſaltneſs, ſo con-
venient for the maintenance of its inhabitants. Ray.
NEAR. prºp. [ner, Saxon; naer, Dutch and Scottiſh.] At no
great diſtance from ; cloſe to ; nigh.
I have heard thee ſay,
No grief did ever come ſo near thy heart,
As when thy lady and thy true love died. Shakeſpeare.
Thou thoughtſ to help me, and ſuch thanks I give,
Prov.
Shakespeare JWin. Tale.
Fairy Qu.
It is retained in Scot-
As one near death to thoſe that wiſh him live. Shakespeare
With blood the dear alliance ſhall be bought,
And both the people near deſtruction brought. Dryden.
To the warlike ſteed thy ſtudies bend, - -
Near Piſa's flood the rapid wheels to guide. Dryden's Pºrg.
This child was very near being excluded out of the ſpecies
of man, barely by his ſhape. Locke.
NEAR. adv.
I. Almoſt.
2. At hand; not far off. Unleſs it be rather in this ſenſe an ad-
jećtive.
Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.
jer. xii. 2.
He ſerv'd great Hečtor, and was ever near,
Not with his trumpet only, but his ſpear. Dryden's Zn.
3. Within a little.
Self-pleaſing and humourous minds are ſo ſenſible of eve
reſtraint, as they will go near to think their girdles and
garters to be bonds and ſhackles. Bacon's Eſſays, No. 8.
This eagle ſhall go near, one time or other, to take you
for a hare. L’Eſtrange, Fable ſo-.
He that paid a buſhel of wheat per acre, would pay now
about twenty-five pounds per annum ; which would be near
about the yearly value of the land. Lockc.
The Caſtilian would rather have died in ſlavery himſelf,
than paid ſuch a ſum as he found would go near to ruin him.
Addiſon's Speciator.
NEAR. adj. - -
1. Not diſtant. [Sometimes it is doubtful whether near be an
adjećtive or adverb.]
This city is near to flee unto. Gen. xix. 20.
The will, free from the determination of ſuch deſires, is
left to the purſuit of nearer ſatisfactions. Locke.
After he has continued his doubling in his thoughts, and
enlarged his idea as much as he pleaſes, he is not one jot
nearer the end of ſuch addition than at firſt ſetting out. Loºke.
2. Advanced towards the end of an enterpriſe or diſquiſition.
Unleſs they add ſomewhat elſe to define more certainly
what ceremonies ſhall ſtand for beſt, in ſuch ſort that all
churches in the world ſhall know them to be the beſt, and
ſo know them that there may not remain any queſtion about
this point; we are not a whit the nearer for that they have
hitherto ſaid. Hooker, b. iv. ſ. 13.
3. Cloſe; not rambling; obſervant of ſtile or manner of the
thing copied.
Hannibal Caro's, in the Italian, is the neareſ?, the moſt
poetical, and the moſt ſonorous of any tranſlation of the
AEneid. Yet though he takes the advantage of blank verſe,
he commonly allows two lines for one in Virgil, and does
not always hit his ſenſe. Dryden.
4. Cloſely related.
If one ſhall approach to any that is near of kin to him.
Lev. xviii.6.
5. Intimate; familiar; admitted to confidence.
If I had a ſuit to maſter Shallow, I would humour his
men with the imputation of being near their maſter. Shakespeare
6. Touching; preſſing; affecting; dear.
Ev'ry minute of his being thruſts
Againſt my near'ſ of life. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
He could never judge that it was better to be deceived than
not, in a matter of ſo great and near concernment. Locke.
7, Parſimonious, inclining to covetouſneſs; as, a near man.
NEAR hand. Cloſely; without acting or waiting at a diſtance.
The entring near hand into the manner of performance
of that which is under deliberation, hath overturned the
opinion of the poſſibility or impoſſibility. Bacon's Hºly War.
NEA'RLY. adv. [from near.]
1. At no great diſtance; not remotely. -
Many are the enemies of the prieſthood: they are diligent
to obſerve whatever may nearly or remotely blemiſh it.
Atterbury.
2. Cloſely; preſſingly.
Nearly it now concerns us, to be ſure -
Of our omnipotence. Milton's Paradiſ? Lºft, b. v.
It concerneth them nearly, to preſerve that government
which they had truſted with their money. Swift's Miſcel.
3. In a niggardly manner.
NEA'RN Ess. n. ſ. [from near.]
1. Cloſeneſs; not remoteneſs; approach. - • 1
God, by reaſon of nearneſs, forbad them to be like the
Canaanites or Egyptian. Hºer, b. iv. ſ. 6.
Fine and delicate ſculptures be helped with nearmſ, and
roſs with diſtance; which was well ſeen in the controverſy
fº Phidias and Alcmenes about the ſtatue of Venus.
//ºtton’s Archite&amp;ure.
Thoſe bleſſed ſpirits that are in ſuch a nearlieſ to God,
may well be all fire and love, but you at ſuch a diſtance
cannot find the effects of it. Duppa.
The beſt rule is to be guided by the nearneſ, or diſtance
at which the repetitions are placed in the original. Pºpe.
2. Alliance of blood or affection.
Whether there be any ſecret paſſages of ſympathy be-
tween perſons of near blood; as, parents, children, brothers
and ſiſters. There be many reports in hiſtory, that upºn
tne
</p></div><p>
            End of Section.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section" id="Section"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 170</div><p class="Text">N E C
N E C
3.I.sºjº. d. See NIB.
NEBUL.A. n.ſ. [Lat.] It is r ce IN IB
ns of ſuch nearneſ, men have had an in-
*:::::: . º ſ Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
3. Tendency to avarice; caution of expence. • . . -
It ſhews in the king a nearneſs, but yet with a kind of
juſtneſs. So theſe little grains of gold and ſilver, helped
not a little to make up the great heap. Bacºn'; Hen. VII.
NEAT. m. ſ. ſneat nyren, Saxon; naut, Iſlandick and Scot.]
1. Black cattle ; oxen. It is commonly uſed collectively.
The ſteer, the heifer, and the calf,
Are all call'd meat. Shakeſpeare's I/in. Tak.
A preſent for any emperor that ever trod on meat; leather.
Shakeſpeare's 7 empy?.
Smoak preſerveth fleſh; as we ſee in bacon, meat, tongues,
and martlemas beef. Bacon's Natural Hi/lory.
His droves of aſſes, camels, herds of meat,
And flocks of ſheep, grew ſhortly twice as great. Sandy.
What care of neat, or ſheep is to be had, -
I ſing, Mecanas. May's Wirgi's Georgics.
Some kick'd until they can feel, whether
A ſhoe be Spaniſh or meats leather.
As great a drover, and as great -
A critick too, in hog or meat. Hud, p. i. cºnt. 2.
Set it in rich mould, with meats dung and lime mingled.
Martimer's Art of Huſbandry.
Huaidras, p. i.
2. A cow or ox. -
Who both by his calf and his lamb will be known,
May well kill a neat and a ſheep of his own. Hiſ Hºſ.
Go and get me ſome repaſt.—
What ſay you to a meat's foot ”
'Tis paſſing good; I prythee, let me have it. Shakespeare .
NEAT, adj. [net, French; nitidus, Latin.]
1. Elegant, but without dignity.
The thoughts are plain, yet admit a little quickneſs and
paſſion ; the expreſſion humble, yet as pure as the language
will afford; neat, but not florid; eaſy, and yet lively. Pºpe.
2. Cleanly.
Herbs and other country meſſes,
Which the meat-handed Phyllis dreſſes. Milt. Poems.
3. Pure ; unadulterated; unmingled; in the cant of trade.
Tuns of ſweet old wines, along the wall;
Nºat and divine drink, kept to chear withal
Ulyſſes’ old heart. Chapman's Odyſſy, b. ii.
NEATHERD. m. ſ. [neaºrb, Saxon.] A cowkeeper ; one
who has the care of black cattle. Bézºos, bubulcus.
There metherd with cur and his horn,
Be a fence to the meadow and corn. Tuſ Hºſ.
The ſwains and tardy neatherds came, and laſt
Menalcas, wet with beating winter maſt. Dryden.
NEATLY. adj. [from meat.]
1. Elegantly, but without dignity; ſprucely.
I will never truſt a man again for keeping his ſword clean;
nor believe he can have everything in him, by wearing his
apparel neatly. Shakeſpeare's All's well that end, wi.
To love an altar built,
Qf twelve vaſt French romances neatly gilt. Pope.
2. Cleanlily.
NEATNEss. n.ſ.. [from meat.]
1. Spruceneſs; elegance without dignity.
Pelagius carped at the curious neatneſs of men's apparel.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 20.
2. Cleanlineſs. Jø/ºr v. ſ. 29
NFB. m. ſ. [nebbe, Saxon.]
I. Noſe; beak; mouth. Retained in the north.
How ſhe holds P the nth ! the bill to him,
And arms her with the boldneſ of . wife. Shakespeare
Take a glaſs with a belly and a long neb. Bacon.
- *RPlied to appearances, like a
cloud in the human body; as alſo to films upon th: eyes.
NEpulous. adj. [nebuloſis, Latin.] Miſty; cloudy.
NE'cEssa R1Es. * ... [from neceſſary.j Things not only con-
venient but needful; things not to be left out of daily uſe.
&amp;uibus dolcat natura negatis.
The ſupernatural neceſſaries are,
and renewing grace of God, whic
tº annex to the revelation of his
that with obedient humb]
brace it.
The right a ſon has, to be main
the neceſſaries and Conveniencies o
ſtock, gives him a right to ſucce
or his own good.
Necessariº. dv. ſſ. -
I. Indiſpenſably. dal'U. [from neceſſary.]
the preventing, aſſiſting,
h we ſuppoſe God ready
- will, in the hearts of ail
• ſpirits receive and ſincerely em-
Hammond's Fundamántal.
tained and provided with
f life, out of his father's
ed to his father's property
Locke.
would know by ſome ſpecial ſ -
** * * . - Pºcial inſtance, what one article
of Chriſtian faith, or what duty required hº unto all
**n there is, which the Very reading of the word
is not apt to nºt; H.
- - - ook - W -
2. By inevitable cºnfº. ºr, b. v. ſ. 22.
They who recall the church unto that which Was at the
firſt, muſt neceſſari; ſet bounds and limits unto their ſºeches.
Hºoker, b. iv. ſ. 2.
They ſubjected God to the fital chain of cau e, whereas
they ſhould have reſolved the neceſſity of all thic flour events
into the free determination of God himſelf; who executes
neceſſarily, that which he firſt propoſed frº!y. South's Sººn,
Necess ARINEss. n. / [from neºſary.] The ſtate of being
ecefary.
Nº. #sºry. adj. ſnerºſarius, Latin.]
1. Needful; indiſpenſably requiſite.
All greatneſs is in virtue underſtood;
'Tis only neceſſary to be good. Dryden's *eng.
A certain kind of temper is neceſſary to the pleaſure and
quiet of our minds, conſequently to our happines; and that
is holineſs and goodneſs. - 77/2/2n.
The Dutch would go on to challenge the military go-
vernment and the revenues, and reckon them among what
ſhall be thought neceſſary for their barrier. Swift's Miſiel.
2. Not frce ; fatal; impelled by ſate.
3. Concluſive ; deciſive by inevitable conſequence.
No man can ſkew by any neceſſary argument, that it is
naturally impoſſible that all the relations concerning America
ſhould be falſe. Tillºtſon's Prºſace.
To NECE'ss. TAT E. v. a. [from neceſſitas, Latin.] To make
neceſſary; not to leave free; to exempt from choice.
Haft thou proudly aſcribed the good thou haſt done to thy
own ſtrength, or imputed thy fins and follies to the neceſſitating
and inevitable decrees of God. Dºg's Rules fºr Dev.
The marquis of Newcaſtle being preſſed on both ſides,
was neceſſitated to draw all his army into York. Clarend.
Man ſeduc’d,
And flatter'd out of all, believing lies
Againſt his maker: no decree of mine
Concurring to neceſſitate his fall.
Our voluntary ſervice he requires,
Not our neceſſitated. 44 ſton's Paradiſe Loft, b. v.
Neither the Divine Providence, or his determinations,
perſuaſions, or inflexions of the underſtanding or will of
rational creatures doth deceive the underſtanding, or pervert
the will, or neceſ ate or incline either to any moral evil.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
The politician never thought that he might fall danger-
*y tick, and that ſickneſs neceſſitate his removal from the
Court. South's Serm.
Th’ eternal, when he did the world create
And other agents did neceſſitate;
So what he order'd they by nature do;
Thus light things mount, and heavy downward go,
Man only boaſts an arbitrary ſtate. Dryden.
The perfections of any perſon may create our veneration;
his power, our fear; and his authority ariſing thence, a ſer-
vil; and neºſitated cbedience; but love can be produced
only by kindneſs. Rogers.
NEcEssitATION. m. ſ. [from neceſſitate.] The act of making
neceſſary; fatal compulſion. -
This neceſſity, grounded upon the neceſſitation of a man's
will without his will, is ſo far from leſſening thoſe difficulties
which flow from the fatal deſtiny of the Stoicks, that it in-
creaſeth them. Bramhall againſ; Hobbs.
Where the law makes a certain heir, there is a neceſſitation
to one ; where the law doth not name a certain heir, there
is no neceſſitation to one, and there they have power or liberty
to chooſe. Bramhall againſ? Hobbs.
NECE'ssified, adj. [from neceſſity.] In a ſtate of want. Not
uſed.
This ring was mine, and when I gave it Helen,
I bad her, if her fortunes ever ſtood
ºfted to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Shake ſpeare's All's well that ends well.
NEcº'ss rous. adj. [from ; Preſſed with poverty.
They who were envied, found no ſatisfación in what
they were envied for, being poor and neceſſitous. Clarend.
There are multitudes of neceſſitous heirs and penurious pa-
* Parlº in pinching circumſtances, with numerous 'ſa-
milies of children. Arbuthnot.
Necrºsiº ousness. n.ſ. [from neceſſitous.] Poverty; want;
need.
Univerſal Peace is demonſtration of univerſal plenty, for
where there is want and neceſſitouſneſs, there will be quar-
relling. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
NESE'ssiTUDE, n.ſ. [neceſtud, Latin.]
I. Want; need. -
The mutual neceſſitudes of human nature neceſſarily main-
tain mutual offices between them. Hale's Orig. of Man.
2. Friendſhip.
NEcE'ssiTY. m. ſ. [neceſſitas, Latin.]
1. Cogency; compulſion; fatality.
Neceſſity and chance
Approach not me; and what I will is fate. A/i" m.
2. State of being neceſſary; indiſpenſableneſs.
Urge the neceſſity, and ſtate of times. Shakespeare Ricº. 'II.
Milton's Par. Loft.
º
5.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
Racine
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 171</div><p class="Text">M Y O
M Y S
—- -
Murrorfi's r. n. ſ. [mutton and fift.] A hand large and
red. Will he who ſaw the ſoldiers muttonſ/?,
And ſaw thee maul'd appear within the liſt
To witneſs truth. Dryden's juvenal, ſat. 16.
MUTUAL. adj. [mutuel, French ; mutuus, Lat..] Recipro-
cal; each acting in return or correſpondence to the other.
Note a wild and wanton herd,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
If they perchance but hear a trumpet ſound,
You #. perceive them make a mutual ſtand,
By the ſweet power of muſick. Shakeſp. Merch. of Venice.
What ſhould moſt excite a mutual flame,
Your rural cares and pleaſures are the ſame. Pope.
Mu'tually. adv. [from mutual.] Reciprocally ; in return.
He never bore
Like labour with the reſt; where th' other inſtruments
Did ſee, and hear, deviſe, inſtruct, walk, feel,
And mutually participate. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Dear love I bear to fair Anne .
Who mutually hath anſwer'd my affection. Shakeſpeare.
The tongue and pen mutually affiſt one another, writing
what we ſpeak, and ſpeaking what we write. Holder.
Pellucid ſubſtances aét upon the rays of light at a diſtance,
in refracting, reflecting and inflecting them, and the rays mu-
tually agitate the parts of thoſe ſubſtances at a diſtance for
heating them. Newton's Opticks.
They mutually teach, and are taught, that leſſon of vain
confidence and ſecurity. Atterbury's Sermons.
May I the ſacred pleaſures know
Of ſtrióteſt amity, nor ever want
A friend with whom I mutually may ſhare
Gladneſs and anguiſh.
Mutuality. n.ſ.. [from mutual.] Reciprocation.
Villanous thoughts, Roderigo! when theſe mutualities ſo
marſhal the way, hard at hand comes the incorporate con-
Shakeſpeare's Othello.
Philips.
cluſion.
Mu'zzle. n.ſ.. [muſeau, French.]
1. The mouth of any thing; the mouth of a man in contempt.
t But ever and anon turning her muzzle toward me, ſhe
threw ſuch a proſpect upon me, as might well have given a
ſurfeit to any weak lover's ſtomach. Sidney, b. ii.
Huygens has proved, that a bullet continuing in the velocity
with which it leaves the muzzle of the cannon, would re-
quire twenty-five years to paſs from us to the ſun. Cheyne.
If the poker be out of the way, or broken, ſtir the fire
with the tongs; if the tongs be not at hand, uſe the muzzle
of the bellows. Swift's Rule, to Servants.
2. A faſtening for the mouth, which hinders to bite.
The Harry from curbed licence plucks
The muzzle of reſtraint; and the wild dog
Shall fleſh his tooth on ev'ry innocent. Shakeſp. Hºnry IV.
Greyhounds, ſnowy fair,
And tall as ſtags, ran looſe, and cours'd around his chair;
With golden muzzles all their mouths were bound. Dryden.
To Mu'zzle. v. n. To bring the mouth near.
The bear muzzles, and ſmells to him, puts his noſe to his
mouth and to his ears, and at laſt leaves him. L'E/irange.
To Mu'zzle. v. a.
1. To bind the mouth.
This butcher's cur is venom mouth'd, and I
Have not the pow'r to muzzle him; therefore beſt
Not wake him in his ſlumber. Shakeſp. Henry VIII.
My dagger muzzled,
Leſt it ſhould bite its maſter, and ſo prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous. Shakespeare JWinter's Tale.
The bear, the boar, and every ſavage name,
Wild in effect, though in appearance tame,
Lay waſte thy woods, deſtroy thy bliſsful bow'r,
And muzzled though they ſeem, the mutes devour. Dryden.
Through the town with ſlow and ſolemn air,
Led by the noſtril, walks the muzzled bear.
2. To fondle with the mouth cloſe. A low word.
The nurſe was then muzzling and coaxing of the child.
L'Eſtrange's Falles.
My. pronoun poſſeſſive. [See MINE.] Belonging to me. My
is uſed before a ſubſtantive, and mine anciently and properly
before a vowel. My is now commonly uſed indifferently be-
fore both. My is uſed when the ſubſtantive follows, and
*ine when it goes before: as, this is my book; this book is
mine.
Gay's Paſº.
Her feet ſhe in my neck doth place. Spenſer.
I conclude my reply with the words of a Chriſtian poet.
Bramhall.
If my ſoul had free election -
To diſpoſe of her affection. J/aller.
I ſhall preſent my reader with a journal. Addiſon.
Ynchen, n.ſ. [mynchen, Saxon.] A nun. Dić?.
ºarny. n. ſ. ſºvoypºſpíz.] A deſcription of the muſ-
Cles,
Yology, n.ſ. [myologie, French.] The deſcription and doc-
trine of the muſcles.
º”
To inſtance in all the particulars, were to write a whoſe
ſyſtem of myology. - Cheyne's Phil. Principles.
My'opy. m. ſ. Shortneſs of ſight.
MYRIAD. n. ſ. [º.ſpto...]
1. The number of ten thouſand.
2. Proverbially any great number.
Aſſemble thou,
Of all thoſe ºyriadi, which we lead, the chief. Milton.
Are there legions of devils who are continually deſigning
and working our ruin there are alſo myriads of good angels
who are more cheerful and officious to do us good. Tillotſon.
Safe ſits the goddeſs in her dark retreat;
Around her, myriads of ideas wait,
And endleſs ſhapes. Prior.
MYRMIpos: n.ſ. ſºvº.] Any rude rufian; ſo named
from the ſoldiers of Achilles.
The maſs of the people will not endure to be governed by
Clodius and Curio, at the head of their myrmidºns, though
theſe be ever ſo numerous, and compoſed of their own repre-
ſentatives. Swift.
My Robal AN. n.ſ. [myrobalanus, Latin.] A fruit.
The myrobalans are a dried fruit, of which we have five
kinds: they are fleſhy, generally with a ſtone and kernel,
having the pulpy part more or leſs of an auſtere acrid taſte:
they are the produćtion of five different trees growing in the
Eaſt Indies, where they are eaten preſerved: they ſerve alſo
for making and for dreſfing leather : they have been long in
great eſteem for their quality of opening the bowels in a
gentle manner, and afterwards ſtrengthening them by their
aſtringency; but the preſent pračtice reječts them all. Hill.
The myrobalan hath parts of contrary natures; for it is
ſweet, and yet aſtringent. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 644.
MYRo'Polist. n.ſ. [...ºpov and waxiw.] One who ſells un-
guents.
MYRRH. n.ſ.. [myrrha, Latin; myrrhe, Fr.] A gum.
Myrrh is a vegetable product of the gum reſin kind, ſent
to us in looſe granules from the ſize of a pepper corn to that
of a walnut, of a reddiſh brown colour, with more or leſs
of an admixture of yellow : its taſte is bitter and acrid, with ,
a peculiar aromatick flavour, but very nauſeous: its ſmell is
ſtrong, but not diſagreeable: it is brought from Ethiopia,
but the tree which produces it is wholly unknown. Our
myrrh is the very drug known by the ancients under the ſame
name: internally applied it is a powerful reſolvent, and ex-
ternally applied it is diſcutient and vulnerary. Hill's M. Med.
The myrrhe ſweet bleeding in the bitter wound. Spenſºr.
I dropt in a little honey of roſes, with a few drops of tinc-
ture of myrrh. - Wiſeman's Surgery.
MY'RRHINE. adj. [myrrhynus, Latin.] Made of the myrrhine
ſtone.
How they quaff in gold,
Cryſtal and myrrhine cups imboſs'd with gems
And ſtuds of pearl. Milton's Par. Reg. b. iv.
MY'RTIFor M. n.ſ.. [myrtus and form.] Having the ſhape of
myrtle.
Mº. m. ſ. [myrtus, Latin; myrte, Fr.] A fragrant tree
ſacred to Venus.
The flower of the myrtle conſiſts of ſeveral leaves diſpoſed
in a circular order, which expand in form of a roſe; upon
the top of the foot-ſtalk is the ovary, which has a ſhort ſtar-
like cup, divided at the top into five parts, and expanded;
the ovary becomes an oblong umbilicated fruit, diº into
three cells, which are full of kidney-ſhaped ſeeds. Miller.
There will I make thee beds of roſes,
With a thouſand fragrant poſies;
A cap of flowers, and a girdle
Imbroider'd all with leaves of myrtle. Shakeſpeare.
I was of late as petty to his ends,
As is the morn dew on the myrtle leaf
To his grand ſea. Shakeſp. Antony and Cleopatra.
Democritus would have Concord like a fair virgin, hold-
ing in one hand a pomegranate, in the other a bundle of
myrtle; for ſuch is the nature of theſe trees, that if they be
planted though a good ſpace one from the other, they will
mcet, and with twining one embrace the other. Peacham.
Nor can the muſe the gallant Sidney paſs
The plume of war ! with early lawrels crown'd,
The lover's myrtle and the poet's bay. Thomſon's Summer.
Myself. n. ſ. [my and ſelf.] - -
1. An emphatical wofa added to 1; as, I myſelf do it; that is,
not I by proxy ; not another.
As his hoſt,
I ſhould againſt his murth’rer ſhut the door,
Not bear the knife myſelf. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. The reciprocal of I. in the oblique caſe.
They have miſſed another pain, againſt which I ſhould
have been at a loſs to defend myſelf. Swift's Examiner.
Myst A Go"GUE. m. ſ. ſºvszywyð; ; myſłagogus, Latin.] One
who interprets divine myſteries; alſo one who keeps church
relicks, and ſhews them to ſtrangers. Bailey,
MystE’RIARCH. n.ſ. ſºvºgo, and ºx".) One Preſiding
over myſteries.
17 A–1.7 Z MystE’Rious,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 172</div><p class="Text">M Y T
M Y S
Myste'rious, adj. [myſterieux, French, from myſtery.]
1. Inacceſſible to the underſtanding; awfully obſcure.
God at laſt
To Satan, firſt in fin, his doom apply'd,
Though in myſterious 'terms. Milton's Par. Loft. b. K.
ºn the true Son of knowledge firſt appear'd,
And the old dark myſterious clouds were clear'd. Denham.
2. Artfully perplexed: - - - - -
Thoſe princes who were moſt diſtinguiſhed for their myſte-
rious ſkill in government, found, by the event, that they had
eſs of their people.
ill conſulted their own quiet, or the happin
Sºft, Thought on the State ºf Affairs.
Mysteriously. adv. [from myſleri”]
1. In a manner above underſtanding:
2. Obſcurely; enigmatically. - -
Our duty of preparation contained in this one word, tºy
or examiné, being after the man” of myſteries, myſleriouſly
and ſecretly deſcribed, there is reaſon to believe that there is
in it very much duty. Taylºr's I/orthy Communicant.
Each ſtair myſeriouſly was mºnº Milton.
Mysteriousness. n.ſ.. [from myſterious.]
1. Holy obſcurity.
§, ºi, to gather together into an union all thoſe
ſeveral portions of truth, and differing apprehenſions of my-
Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
feriouſneſs. -
2. Artful difficulty or perplexity.
To Mysterize. v. a. [from myſtery.] To explain as enigmas.
w Myſlerizing their enſigns; they make the particular ones of
the tºelve tribes accommodable unto th; twelve ſigns of the
zodiack. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. v.
MystERY. n.ſ. ſºvräftov; myſtere, Fr.] *
I. Something above human intelligence ; ſomething awfully
obſcure.
They can judge as fitly of his worth,
As I can of thoſe myſteries which heav'n
Will not have earth to know. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Upon holy days, let the matter of your meditations be ac-
cording to the myſtery of the day; and to your ordinary de-
votions of every day, add the prayer which is fitted to the
myſtery. Taylor.
iföod ſhould pleaſe to reveal unto us this great myſtery of
the trinity, or ſome other myſteries in our holy religion, we
ſhould not be ableto underſtand them, unleſs he would be-
ſlow on us ſome new faculties of the mind. Swift's Serm,
2. An enigma; any thing artfully made difficult.
To thy great comfort in this myſlery of ill opinions, here's
the twin brother of thy letter. Shakespeare Mer, Wives of Windſor,
Important truths ſtill let your fables hold,
And moral myſeries with art unfold. Granville.
. A trade; a calling: in this ſenſe it ſhould, according to
Izarburton, be written miſlery, from mºſtiero, French, a trade,
And that which is the nobleſt myſterie,
Brings to reproach and common infamy. Hubberd's Tale.
Inſtrućtion, manners, myſteries and trades,
Degrees, obſervances, cuſtoms and laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries.
*
§: łaj. [myſticus, Latin.]
1. Sacredly obſcure.
Let God himſelf that made me, let not man that knows
not himſelf, be my inſtructor concerning the myſtical way to
heaven. Hooker, b. i.
From ſalvation all fleſh being excluded this way, God hath
revealed a way myſtical and ſupernatural. Hooker, b. i.
2. Involving ſome ſecret meaning; emblematical.
Ye five other wand'ring fires' that move
In myſtick dance not without ſong, reſound
His praiſe, who out of darkneſs call’d up light. Milton.
It is Chriſt's body in the ſacrament and out of it; but in
the ſacrament not the natural truth, but the ſpiritual and my-
ical. Taylor's Worthy Communicant.
It is plain from the Apocalypſe, that myſtical Babylon is to
be conſumed by fire. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
3. Obſcure ; ſecret.
Leſt new fears diſturb the happy ſtate,
Know, I have ſearch'd the myſtick rolls of fate. Dryden.
Mystically. adv. [from myſtical.] In a manner, or by an
act, implying ſome ſecret meaning.
Theſe two in thy ſacred boſom hold,
Till myſtically join'd but one they be. Dunne.
Mystical Ness. n.ſ.. [from myſtical.] Involution of ſome ſe-
cret meaning.
Mythological. adj. [from mythology.] Relating to the ex-
plication of fabulous hiſtory.
The original of the conceit was probably hieroglyphical,
which after became mythological, and by tradition ſtole into a
total verity, which was but partially true in its covert ſenſe
and morality. Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Mythologically. adv. [from mythological.] In a manner
ſuitable to the ſyſtem of fables.
Mythologist. n. ſ. [from mythology.] A relator or expoſitor
of the ancient fables of the heathens.
The grammarians and mythologiſts ſeem to be altogether
unacquainted with his writings. Creech.
It was a celebrated problem among ancient mythologiſts,
What was the ſtrongeſt thing, what the wiſeſt, and what the
greateſt ? Norris's Miſcel.
To Mythologize. v. n. [from mythology.] To relate or ex-
plain the fabulous hiſtory of the heathens.
Mythology. n.ſ. [p.3G and AdyGº mytholºgie, French-l
Syſtem of fables; explication of the fabulous hiſtory of the
gods of the heathen work.
The modeſty of mythology deſerves to be commended : the
ſcenes there are laid at a diſtance; it is once upon a time, in
the days of yore, and in the land of Utopia. #intly,
Shakeſpeare.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 173</div><p class="Text">r-
N E E
Racine uſed the chorus in his Eſther, but not that he
found any neceſſity of it: it was only to give the ladies an
occaſion of entertaining the king with vocal muſick.
Dryden's Dufreſhoy.
we ſee the neceſſity of an augmentation, to bring the
enemy to reaſon. Addison.
3. Wall. need; poverty. . . . -
The art of our neceſſities is ſtrange,
That can make vile things precious. Shakespeare K. Lear.
The cauſe of all the diſtraćtions in his court or army,
roceeded from the extreme poverty, and neceſſity his ma-
jeſty was in. Clarendon, b. viii.
we are firſt to conſult our own neºſities, but then the
neceſſities of our neighbours have a chriſtian right to a part
of what we have to ſpare. .. L’Eſtrange, Fable 217.
4 Things neceſſary for human life. -
Theſe ſhould be hours for neceſſities,
Not for delights; times to repair our nature
with comforting repoſe, and not for us -
To waſte theſe times. Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
. Cogency of argument; inevitable conſequence. -
There never was a man of ſolid underſtanding, whoſe
apprehenſions are ſober, and by a penſive inſpection adviſed,
but that he hath found by an irreſiſtible neceſſity, one true
God and everlaſting being. Raleigh's Hiſtory.
Good nature or beneficence and candour, is the product
of right reaſon, which of neceſſity will give allowance to the
failings of others. Dryden.
NECK n.ſ. [pneca, Saxon; neº, Dutch.]
1. The part between the head and body.
He'll beat Bufidius' head below his knee,
And tread upon his neck. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
The length of the face twice exceedeth that of the neck.
Brown's Vulgar Errourr.
She clapp'd her leathern wing againſt your towr’s,
And thruſt out her long neck, ev'n to your doors. Dryd.
I look on the tucker to be the ornament and defence of
the female neck. Addiſon's Guardian, N°. Io9.
2. A long narrow part.
The acceſs of the town was only by a neck of land, be-
tween the ſea on the one part, and the harbour water on the
other. Bacon.
Thou walk'ſt as on a narrow mountain's neck,
A dreadful height, with ſcanty room to tread. Dryden.
3. On the neck; immediately after ; from one following an-
other cloſely.
He depos'd the king,
And, on the neck of that, taſk'd the whole ſtate. Shakespeare
Inſtantly on the neck of this came news, that Ferdinando
and Iſabella, had concluded a peace. Bacon.
4. To break the neck of an affair; to hinder any thing being
done; or, to do moue than half.
NE'ckbeef, n, ſ. [neck and beef.] The coarſe fleſh of the
neck of cattle, ſold to the poor at a very cheap rate.
They'll ſell (as cheap as neckbeef) for counters at cards.
Swift.
NE'ckcloatH. m. ſ. [neck and cloath..] That which men wear
on their neck.
Will ſhe with huſwife's hand provide thy meat,
And ev'ry ſunday morn thy neckcloath plait Gay.
Nºcerchief. Un. ſ. A gorget; handkerchief for a woman's
NE'ckAtee. } neck.
Nºcklace. n.ſ.. [neck and lace.] An ornamental ſtring of
beads or precious ſtones, worn by women on their neck.
Ladies, as well then as now, wore eſtates in their ears.
Both men and women wore torques, chains, or necklaces of
filver and gold ſet with precious ſtones. Arbuthnot on Coins.
Or loſe her heart, or necklace, at a ball. Pope.
NEckweed. m. ſ. [neck and weed.] Hemp.
Nº'ºromance R. n.ſ. [vizp?; and waſ 13. ] One who by
charms can converſe with the ghoſts of the dead; a con-
Jurer; an inchanter.
. I am employed like the general who was forced to kill
his enemies twice over, whom a necromancer had raiſed to
life. Swift's ºna.
NecroMANcy. n: ſ [vizp?; and ºli; ; necromance, Fr J
1. The art of revealing future events, by communication with
the dead. -
The reſurre&amp;tion of Samuel is nothing but deluſion in the
Practice of necromancy and popular conception of ghoſts.
Brown's Wugar Errours, b. i.
2. Enchantment; conjuration.
He did it partly by necromancy, wherein he was much
ſkilled. Abbot's Deſcription of the J/orld.
This palace ſtandeth in the air,
By necromancy placed there,
, That it no tempeſts needs to fear. Drayt. Nym.
***A*E.D. adj. [from mediar..] Tinged with nećtar; ming-
led with neétar; abounding with nectar.
He gave her to his daughters to imbathe
In mediar'd lavers ſtrew’d with aſphodil, Milton.
How charming is divine philoſophy
Not harſh and crabbed, as dull fools ſuppoſe,
But muſical as is Apollo's lute,
And a perpetual ſciſt of nºtarºd ſwects,
Where no crude ſurfeit reigns. A ſilton's Poems.
He with the Nais wont to dwell,
Leaving the nečiar'd feaſts of Jove. Fentom:
NECTA'Reous. adj. [neºlarcus, Latin.] Reſembling nectar;
ſweet as nećtar.
Annual for me, the grape, the roſe renew, -
The juice neéfareous and the balmy dew. . Pope.
NE"ct ARINE. adj. [from nectar.] Sweet as nećar.
To their ſupper-fruits they fell;
Nečiarine fruits. Milt. Par. Lºft.
Nºise. m. ſ. [mediarine, French.] A fruit of the plum
lil (1.
This fruit differs from a peach in having a ſmooth rind
and the fleſh firmer. Miller.
The only ne&amp;arines are the murry and the French; of
the laſt there are two ſorts, one, which is the beſt, very
round, and the other ſomething long; of the murry theſe
are ſeveral ſorts. Temple.
NEED. m. ſ. [neob, Saxon; nood, Dutch.]
1. Exigency; preſſing difficulty; neceſſity.
The very ſtream of his life, and the buſineſs he hath
helmed, muſt, upon a warranted need, give him a better
proclamation. Shakeſpeare's Meaſure for Meaſure.
That ſpirit that firſt ruſh'd on thee,
In the camp of Dan,
Be efficacious in thee now at need. A4ilton's Agoniſtes.
In thy native innocence proceed,
And ſummon all thy reaſon at thy need. Dryden.
2. Want; diſtreſsful poverty.
Famine is in thy cheeks;
Need and opprefion ſtare within thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hang upon thy back. Shakespeare
Defer not to give to him that is in need. Ecclus. iv. 3.
The diſtant heard, by fame, her pious deeds;
And laid her up for their extreameſt needs ;
A future cordial for a fainting mind. Dryden.
God ſometimes calls upon thee to relieve the needs of thy
brother, ſometimes the neceſſities of thy country, and ſome-
times the urgent wants of thy prince. South's Sermons.
3. Want; lack of any thing for uſe.
God grant we never may have need of you. Shakespeare
God who ſees all things intuitively, neither ſtands in need
of logic, nor uſes it. - Baker.
To NEED. v. a. [from the noun..] To want; to lack; to
be in want of ; to require.
Baſeſt beggars
Are in the pooreſt thing ſuperfluous;
Allow not nature more than nature needs.
Man's life is cheap as beaſts. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
The whole need not a phyſician, but the fick. Matt ix. 12.
Thou thy regal ſceptre ſhalt lay by,
For regal ſceptre then no more ſhall need. Milt. P. Loft.
To aſk whether the will has freedom f is to aſk, whether
one power has another A queſtion too abſurd to need an
anſwer. Locke.
To NEED. v. n.
1. To be wanted; to be neceſſary.
More ample ſpirit than hitherto was wont,
Here needs merie whiles the famous anceſtors
Of my moſt dreadful ſovereign I recount. Spenſer.
When we have done it, we have done all that is in our
power, and all that needs. Locke.
2. To have neceſſity of anything; to be in want of anything.
We have inſtances of perception whilſt we are aſleep :
but how incoherent and how little conformable to the per-
fečtion of a rational being, thoſe who are acquainted with
dreams need not be told. Locke.
He that would diſcourſe of things, as they agreed in the
complex idea of extenſion and ſolidity, needed but uſe the
word body. - Locke.
NEEDER. m. ſ. [from need.] One that wants any thing.
If the time thruſt forth
A cauſe for thy repeal, we ſhall not ſend
O'er the vaſt world, to ſeek a ſingle man;
And loſe advantage, which doth cwer cool -
In th’ abſence of the needer. Shakespeare eare's Criolanus.
NEEDFul. adj. [ need and full. J Neceſſary 5 indiſpenſably
requiſite.
Give us all things that be needſul, both for our ſouls and
bodies. Common Prayer.
Do you conſent we ſhall acquaint him with it,
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty 2 Sha. Ham.
All things needful for defence abound, -
Mneſtheus, and brave Sereſthus walk the round. Dryden.
To my preſent purpoſe it is not needful to uſe arguments,
to evince the world to be finite. Locke.
lv deſart and an empty land
A lone y º” pty » Shall
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 174</div><p class="Text">N F. G
Shall ſcarce afford, for needful hours of reſt,
. A ſingle houſe to their benighted gueſt. Addison on Italy.
SEEDFully. adv. [from needful.] Neceſſarily.
They who
º º: º poems, yet both aſk and read,
nd like them too; muſt needſall *
N Be of the beſt.`` eedſully, tho' few,
#Epfulness. ºf [from needful..] Neceſſity.
NEE'd 11.Y. adv. [from needy..] In º 5 *.
NEERIN Ess. n.ſ.. [from needy..] Want; poverty.
Wherea
all * men have many reaſons to perſuade; to uſe them
at once, weakneth them. For it argueth a needingſ; in
*Very of the reaſons, as if one did not tuft to any of them,
..but fled from one to another. Bacon.
NEEDLE. n: ſ [naeol, Saxon.]
* A ſmall inſtrument pointed at one end to pierce cloath, and
Perforated at the other to receive the thread, uſed in ſewing.
For him you waſte in tears your widow’d hours,
For him your curious nºde paints the flowers. Dryden.
2. The ſmall ſteel bar which in the mariners compaſs ſtands
regularly north and ſouth.
The uſe of the loadſtone, and the mariners needſ, was not
then known. Burne's Theory ºf the Earth.
Nºt prº-Fi's", n, ſ. (reºle and fiſh.) A kind of ſea-fiſh.
One rhomboidal bony ſcale of the needle-ſ/h. Iłºodicard.
NF = plk v L. m. ſ. ſº and full.] As much thread as is
generally put at one time in the needle.
N. L.L.R. n: / [from needle. J He who makes
N E E D LEMA KIR. } needles.
NEE(DLEwok K. m. ſ. [needle and wºrk.]
1. The buſineſs of a fempſtreſs.
2. Embroidery by the needle.
In nººdleworks and embroideries, it is more pleaſing to
have a lively work upon a lightſome ground, than a dark
and melancholy work upon a lightſome ground. Bacon.
In a curious brede of needlework, one colour falls away
by ſuch juſt degrees, and another riſes ſo inſenſibly, that we
ſce the variety without being able to diſtinguiſh the total va-
niſhing of the one from the firſt appearance of the other.
Addiſon's Eff. on the Georgicks.
NEE’BLESLY. adv. [ſrom needleſs.] Unneceſſarily ; without
nced.
We render languages more difficult to be learnt, and need-
lºſſy advance orthography into a troubleſome art. Holder.
NEEDLESSN Ess. m. ſ. [from needleſ...] Unneceſſarineſs.
To explain any of St. Paul's Epiſtles, after ſo great a
train of expoſitors, might ſeem cenſurable for its needleſſneſs,
did not the daily examples of pious and learned men juſtif
it. Locke's E/ on St. Paul's Epiſtles.
NEEDLEss. adj. [from need.]
1. Unneceſſary ; not requiſite.
Their exception againſt eaſineſs, as if that did nouriſh
ignorance, proceedeth altogether of a needleſs jealouſy. Hook.
This ſudden ſtab of rancour I miſdoubt;
Pray God, I ſay, I prove a needleſ, coward. Sha. R. III.
Would not theſe be great and needleſs abatements of their
happineſs, if it were confined within the compaſs of this
life only Atterbury.
2. Not wanting ; out of uſe.
For his weeping in the need'ſ ſtream,
Poor dear, quoth he, thou mak’ſt a teſtament,
As worldings do, giving thy ſum of more
To that which had too much. Sha. Aſ you Like it.
NEF'DMENT. n. ſ. [from need.] Something neceſſary.
Behind
His ſcrip did hang, in which his needments he did bind.
fairy Queen, b. i. cant. 6.
NEEDs, adv. [ neber, Saxon, unwilling. J Neceſſarily ; by
compulſion; indiſpenſably.
The general and perpetual voice of men is as the ſentence
of God himſelf; for that which all men have at all times
learned, nature herſelf muſt needs have taught. Hooker.
God muſt need, have done the thing which they imagine
was to be done. Hooker, b. iii.
I muſt nºet, after him, madam, with my letter. Sha.
Another being elected and his ambaſſadors returned, he
would herd, know the cauſe of his repulſe in that competition.
- Davies on Ireland.
Ben. Johnſon.
I perceive
Thy mortal ſight to fail : objects divine
Muſt need, impair, and weary human ſenſe. Milt. P. Lºft.
To ſay the principles of nature muſt needs be ſuch as our
philoſophy makes them, is to ſct bounds to omnipotence.
Glanville, Sceptſ, c. 25.
I have affairs below,
Which I muſt need, diſpatch before I go. Dryden.
NF Fox, aft. [from need. J Poor ; neceſſitous ; diſtreſſed by
poverty.
Their gates to all were open evermore,
And one ſat waiting ever them before, {
To call in coiners by, that needy were and poor. Fa. $2.
- In his mºdy ſhop a tortoiſe hung,
An alligator fluffd, and other ſkins
Of ill-ſhap'd fiſhes. Shakeſpeare's Rºº, and Yuji."
P - J/ - -
The poor and needy praiſe thy name. 1./. ixxiv. 21.
We bring into the world a poor need, uncertain life, ſhor
-&gt; | y • t
at the longeſt, and unquitt at the beſt. Temple.
Nuptials of form, of intº reſt, or of ſlate,
Thoſe ſeeds of pride are fruitful in debate :
Let happy men for gen'rous love declare,
And chuſe the needy virgin, chaſte and fair. Granv.
To relieve the needy, and conſort the afflicted, are duties
that fall in our way every day. 4.4/on's Spect. N°. 93.
NE’ER. [for never.] -
It appears I am no horſe,
That I can argue and diſcourſe; -
Have but two legs, and ne'er a tail. J/udibras.
To NEESE. v. n. [ºſe, Daniſh ; nigſen, Dutch..] To ſneeſe,
to diſcharge flatulencies by the noſe. Retained in Scotland.
He went up and firetched himſelf upon him ; and the
child nºſed ſeven times, and opened his cyes. 2 King, iv. 25.
By his neºſing: a light doth finine, and his eyes are like the
eye-lids of the morning. jºb xli. 18.
NEF. m. ſ. ſold French, from nave.] The body of a church.
The church of St. Juſtina, deſigned by Palladio, is the
moſt handſome, luminous, diſencumbered building in Italy.
The long nºf conſiſts of a row of five cupola's, the croſs
one has on each fide a ſingle cupola deeper than the others.
Adºllſºn's Remarks on Italy.
NEFA'Rious, adj. [nºfºrius, Latin.] Wicked ; abominable.
The moſt nefarious baſtards, are they whom the law ſtiles
inceſtuous baſtards, which are begotten between aſcendants
and deſcendants, and between collateral, as far as the di-
vine prohibition extends. Ayliffe's Parergon.
NEGATION. m. ſ. [negatio, Lat. negation, Fr.]
1. Denial; the contrary to affirmation.
Chance properly ſignifies, that all events called caſual,
among inanimate bodies, are mechanically and naturally pro-
duced according to the determinate figures, textures, and
motions of thoſe bodies, with this only negation, that thoſe
inanimate bodies are not conſcious of their own operations.
Bentley.
Our aſſertions and negations ſhould be yea and nay, for
whatſoever is more than theſe is fin. Rºgers, Serm, 9.
2. Deſcription by negative.
Negation is the abſence of that which does not naturally be-
long to the thing we are ſpeaking of, or which has no right, ob-
ligation, or neceſſity to be preſent with it; as when we ſay
a ſtone is inanimate, or blind, or deaf. //atts's Logick.
NE'GATIVE. adj. [negatif, Fr. negativus, Latin.]
1. Denying; contrary to affirmative.
2. Implying only the abſence of ſomething.
There is another way of denying Chriſt with our mouths,
which is negative, when we do not acknowledge and con-
feſs him. South's Sermons.
Conſider the neceſſary connection that is between the ne-
gative and poſitive part of our duty. Tillotſºn, Serm. 1.
3. Having the power to withhold, though not to compel.
Denying me any power of a negative voice as king, they
are not aſhamed to ſeek to deprive me of the liberty of uſing
my reaſon with a good conſcience. King Charles,
NE'GAtiv E. m. ſ. -
1. A propoſition by which ſomething is denied.
Of negatives we have far the leaſt certainty ; and they
are uſually hardeſt, and many times impoſſible to be proved.
Tillotſon, Sern. I.
2. A particle of denial ; as, not.
A purer ſubſtance is defin'd,
But by an heap of negatives combin'd;
Aſk what a ſpirit is, you’ll hear them cry,
It hath no matter, no mortality. Cleaveland's Poemſ.
NE/GATIVELY. adv. [from negative.]
1. With denial; in the form of denial; not affirmatively.
When I aſked him whether he had not drunk at all he
anſwered negatively. Bºyle.
2. In form of ſpeech implying the abſence of ſomething.
The fathers draw arguments from the Scripture negatively
in reproof of that which is evil ; Scriptures teach it not,
avoid it therefore. Hooker, b. ii.
I ſhall ſhew what this image of God in man is, negatively,
by ſhewing wherein it does not conſiſt; and poſitively, by
ſhewing wherein it does. South's Serm.
To NEGLECT. v. a. [negleefus, Latin.]
1. To omit by careleſſneſs.
If he neglecſ to hear them, tell it unto the church. --
Alſat. xviii. 17.
2. To treat with ſcornful heedleſſneſs.
3. To poſtpone.
I have been long a ſleeper; but I truſt
My abſence doth neglect no great deſign,
Which by my preſence might have been concluded. Ska.
NE'GLEcT. n. / [neglectus, Latin.] -
1. Inſtance of inattention. -
2. Careleſs treatment; ſcornful imattention.
3 I have<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 175</div><p class="Text">N E G
N E I
I have perceived a moſt faint negle: of late, which I have
rather blamed as my own jealous curioſity, than as a very
pretence or purpoſe of unkindneſs. Shakespeare King Lear.
3. Negligenºe; frequency of neglect. ...
Age breeds neglect in all, and aćtions
Remote in time, like objects -
Remote in place, are not beheld at half their greatneſs.
- Denham.
4. State of being unregarded. -
Reſcue my poor regains from vile negleći,
with virgin honours let my herſe be deck’t, •
And decent emblem. Prior.
seclecteR. n.ſ.. [from negle?..] One who neglects.
Nº. #. [neglect and full.]
FHeedleſs; careleſs ; inattentive.
Moral ideas not offering themſelves to the ſenſes, but be-
ing to be framed to the underſtanding, people are negle&amp;ful
of a faculty they are apt to think wants nothing, Locke.
Though the Romans had no great genius, for trade, yet
they were not entirely negleeful of it. Arbuth. on Coins.
. Treating with indifference.
If the father careſs them when they do well, ſhew a cold
and negle&amp;ſul countenance to them upon doing ill, it will
make them ſenſible of the difference. Locke on Education.
Nolf'ction. n. ſ. [from neglect.] The ſtate of being neg-
igent.
Nºvºx. adv. [from negle:ſul..] With heedleſs in-
attention; careleſs indifference.
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loſs
The conqueſts of our ſcarce cold conqueror. Shakespeare
NEGLE'ctive. adj. [from neglect.] Inattentive to, or regardleſs of.
I wanted not probabilities ſufficient to raiſe jealoufies in
any king's heart, not wholly ſtupid, and neglective of the
tº blick peace. King Charles.
NEGLIGENCE. n.f. [negligence, Fr. negligentia, Latin.]
1. Habit of omitting by heedleſſneſs, or of acting careleſly.
2. Inſtance of neglect.
- She let it drop by negligence,
And, to th'advantage, I being here, took’t up.
NE/GligENT. adj. [negligent, Fr. negligens, Latin.]
1. Careleſs; heedleſs; habitually inattentive.
My ſons, be not now negligent; for the Lord hath choſen
you to fland before him, 2 Chron. xxix. I 1.
2. Careleſs of any particular.
We have been negligent in not hearing his voice.
3. Scornfully regardleſs.
Let ſtubborn pride poſſeſs thee long,
And be thou negligent of fame;
With ev'ry muſe to grace thy ſong,
May'ſt thou deſpiſe a poet's name.
NE'GLIGENTLY. adv. [from negligent.]
1. Careleſsly; heedleſsly; without exactneſs.
Infects have voluntary motion, and therefore imagination;
and whereas ſome of the ancients have ſaid that their mo-
tion is indeterminate, and their imagination indefinite, it is
negligently obſerved; for ants go right forwards to their hills,
and bees know the way to their hives. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
Of all our elder plays,
This and Philaſter have the loudeſt fame;
Great are their faults, and glorious is their flame.
In both our Engliſh genius is expreſt,
Lofty and bold, but negligently dreſt.
In comely figure rang'd my jewels ſhone,
Or negligently plac'd for thee alone.
2. With ſcornful inattention.
To NEGo"TIATE. v. n. [negocier, French; from negotium, La-
tin.] To have intercourſe of buſineſs; to traffick; to treat.
Have you any commiſſion from your lord to negotiate with
my face Shakeſpeare's Twelfth Night.
She was a buſy negotiating woman, and in her withdraw-
ing chamber had the fortunate conſpiracy for the king againſt
king Richard been hatched. Bacon's Hen. VII.
It is a common error in negotiating ; whereas men have
many reaſons to perſuade, they ſtrive to uſe them all at once,
which weakeneth them. - Bacon.
A ſteward to embezzle thoſe goods he undertakes to ma-
nage; an embaſſador to betray his prince for whom he ſhould
negotiate ; are crimes that double their malignity from the
quality of the actors. Decay of Piety.
can diſcover none of theſe ficquent intercourſes and ne-
gotiations, unleſs that Luther negotiated with a black boar.
2
Shakespeare
Bar. i. 19.
Swift's Miſcel.
J/aller.
Prior.
A ſerbury.
Negºtiation. n.ſ. ſnºgo.jation, Fr. from negotiate.] Treaty
of buſineſs.
Oil is ſlow, ſmooth, and ſolid; ſo are Spaniards obſerved to
be in their motion : Though it be a queſtion yet unreſolved,
whether their affected gravity and flowneſs in their negotia-
s.tiºns have tended more to their prejudice or advantage. Hºw.
Fºotiator. m. ſ. [negºciateur, Fr. from negotiate. One em.
* to treat with others.
. Thoſe who have defended the proceedings of our nº-
*tors at Gertruydenburg, dwell much upon their zeal in
Nei
4. Intimate; confidant.
To NE1'GHBour. v. a. [from the noun.]
2. To acquaint with ; to make near to.
NE1'GHBour HooD. n. ſ. [from neighbour.]
2. State of being near each other.
3. Thoſe that live within reach of communication.
NE1'GHBou RLY. adj. [from neighbour.] Becoming a neigh-
endeavouring to work the French up to their demands, but
! ſay nothing to juſtify thoſe demands. Swiſł.
ºise. adj. [from negotiate.] Employed in negotia.
. Of 1.
Negºo, n: ſ [Spaniſh; negrº, Fr.] A blackmoore.
Negroes tranſplanted into cold and flegmatic habitations,
continue their hue in themſelves and their ºnerton. Brzºn.
NEIF. n. ſ. ſniff, Iſlandick; re. - Scottiſh. Fiſt.
Sweet knight, I kiſs thy meſ. Shakespeare Hen. IV. p. ii.
+ r w - -
To Neigh. * * [hnae;an, Saxon; negºn, Dutch..] To utter
the voice of a horſe or mare.
Note a wild and wanton herd,
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud. Ska.
They were as fed horſes, every one neighed. ~ jer. v. 8.
Run up the ridges of the rocks amain ;
And with ſhrill neighings fill the neighbouring plain.
The gen’rous horſe, that nobly wild,
Neighs on the hills, and dares the angry lion. Smith.
GH. n. ſ. [fiom the verb.] The voice of an horſe. -
It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like the bidding
of a monarch, and his countenance enforces homage. Sha.
Dry.
NEIGHBOUR. n.ſ.. [nehgebun, Saxon.]
1. One who lives near to another.
He ſent ſuch an addition of foot, as he could draw out
of Oxford and the neighbour garriſons. Clarendon.
2. One who lives in familiarity with another; a word of ci-
vility.
Maſters, my good friends, mine honeſt neighbours,
Will you undo yourſelves Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
3. Anything next or near.
This man ſhall ſet me packing ;
I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room. Shakeſpeare.
The deep revolving witty Buckingham
No more ſhall be the neighbour to my counſels. Shakespeare
5. [In divinity.] One partaking of the ſame nature, and there-
fore entitled to good offices.
The Goſpel allows no ſuch term as a ſtranger; makes
every man my neighbour.
Sprat's Sermons.
1. To adjoin to ; to confine on.
The ſtrawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholſome berries thrive and ripen beſt,
Neighbour’d by fruit of baſer quality. Shakespeare Hen. V.
Give me thy hand, -
Be pilot to me, and thy places ſhall
Still neighbour mine. Shakeſpeare's Winter’s Tale.
Theſe grow on the leiſurely aſcending hills that neighbour
the ſhore. Sandy's journey.
Things nigh equivalent and neighbouring value,
By lot are parted. Anon.
That being of ſo young days brought up with him,
And ſince ſo neighbour'd to his youth and 'haviour. Sha.
1. Place adjoining.
I could not bear
To leave thee in the neighbourhood of death, -
But flew in all the haſte of love to find thee. Addison Cato.
Conſider ſeveral ſtates in a neighbourhood; in order to pre-
ſerve peace between theſe ſtates, it is neceſſary they ſhould
be formed into a balance. Swift,
bour; kind ; civil.
The Scottiſh lord, hath a neighbourly charity in him ; for
he borrowed a box of the ear of the Engliſh man, and ſwore
he would pay when he was able. Sºakeſ Merch. of /en.
He ſteals away my cuſtomers ; twelve he has under bonds
never to return ; judge you if this be neighbourly dealing.
Arbuthnºt, H.A. of j. Bull.
NEI'd H bow R.I.Y. adv. [from neighbour.] With ſocial civility.
NEIT HF.R. cºrjanº. [naſte), Saxon, me ºther.]
1. Not either. A particle uſed in the firſt branch of a ne-
gºtive ſentence, and anſwered by nor. -
Fight neither with ſmall nor great, ſave only with the
king. 1 Kin s xxii. 31.
2. It is ſºmetimes the ſecond branch of a negºtive or prohibi-
tion to any entence. *
• - !, 1, ... ſlº - ?" --&gt; - *, *
Ye ſhaft nºt eat of it, neither ſhº!' yº tºuch it.
Gen. iii. 3.
3. Sometimes at the end of a 'catch ºf follows as a negative ;
~ * : * ~ **** * ~ * :
and often, though not very grammaticatº, yet emphatically,
... Fr. ºther ncrative. • *
after anºthe negati it is the greatneſs of diſt. h
If it be thought that it is the greatneſs ºf diſtance, where-
by the ſound cannot be heard ; we ſee that ſightning, and
córuſcations, near at hand, yield no found neither. Bacºn.
Men come not to the knowledge of whic's are thought
innate, 'til they corne to the uſe of reaſon, nor then neither.
Locke.
NE1'THE R.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 176</div><p class="Text">N E. R.
N F. T
Nº atº, brºwn. Not either; nor one nor other.
He neither loves,
Nor either cares for him. Shakeſpeare's Ant. and Clio.
Which of them ſhall I take
Both, one, or neither neither can be enjoy’d
If both remain alive. Shakeſpeare’s K. -
Suffice it that he's dead; all wrongs ... * ºr
Thus I abſolve myſelf, and excuſe him,
Who ſav'd my life and honour, but praiſe neither. Dryd.
Experience makes us ſenſible of both, though our narrow
underſtandings can comprehend neither, to Locke.
They lived with the friendſhip and equality of brethren,
neither lord, neither ſlave to his brother ; but independent of
each other. Locke.
Neo'PHYTE. "...ſ [neºphyte, Fr. vº; and puw.] One regene-
rated; a convert,
Neº Rick, adj. [neotericus, Latin.] Modern; novel; late.
We are not to be guided either by the miſreports of ſome
ancients, or the capricio's of one or two neotericks. Grew.
NEP. n.f. [nepeta, Lat.] An herb.
NeºENTHF. n.f. [yº and TáSG”.] A drug that drives away
all pains.
There where no paſſion, pride, or ſhame tranſport,
Lull'd with the ſweet nepenthe of a court;
There where no fathers, brothers, friends diſgrace,
Qnce break their reſt nor ſtir them from their place. Pope.
NEPHEW, n.ſ. [nºpos, Latin; neveu, French.]
I. The ſon of a brother or ſiſter.
Immortal offspring of my brother Jove;
My brighteſt nephew and whom beſt I love. Dryden.
I aſk, whether in the inheriting of this paternal power,
the grandſon by a daughter, hath a right before a nephew by
a brother Locke.
2. The grandſon. Out of uſe.
With what intent they were firſt publiſhed, thoſe words
of the nephew of Jeſus do plainly enough ſignify, after that
my grand-father Jeſus had given himſelf to the reading of
the law and the prophets, and other books of our fathers,
and had gotten therein ſufficient judgment, he propoſed al-
ſo to write ſomething pertaining to learning and wiſdom.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 21.
Her fire at length is kind,
Prepares his empire for his daughter's eaſe,
And for his hatching nephews ſmooths the ſeas.
3. Deſcendant, however diſtant. Out of uſe.
All the ſons of theſe five brethren reign'd
By due ſucceſs, and all their nephews late,
Even thrice eleven deſcents the crown retain'd. Fairy Q.
NERHRI'Tick, adj. [viºlizGP; nephretique, Fr.]
1. Belonging to the organs of urine.
2. Troubled with the ſtone.
The diet of nephritic perſons ought to be ſuch as is op-
poſite to the alkaleſcent nature of the ſalts in their blood.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Dryden.
3. Good againſt the ſtone.
The nephritic ſtone is commonly of an uniform duſky green;
but ſome ſamples I have ſeen of it that are variegated with
white, black, and ſometimes yellow. Woodw. Mett. Foſſ.
NE'potis M. m. ſ. ſnºpotiſme, French ; nepos, Latin.] Fond-
neſs for nephews.
To this humour of nepotiſm Rome owes its preſent ſplendor;
for it would have been impoſſible to have furniſhed out ſo
many glorious palaces with ſuch a profuſion of pictures and
ſtatues, had not the riches of the people fallen into different
families. Addiſon on Italy.
NERVE. m. / [nervus, Latin; nerſ, Fr.] The organs of ſen-
ſation paſſing from the brain to all parts of the body.
The nerves do ordinarily accompany the arteries through
all the body; they have alſo blood-veſſels, as the other parts
of the body. Wherever any nerve ſends out a branch, or
receives one from another, or where two nerves join toge-
ther, there is generally a ganglio or plexus. &amp;uincy.
- What man dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Ruſſian bear;
Take any ſhape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
2. It is uſed by the poets for ſinew or tendon.
Strong Tharyſmed diſcharged a ſpeeding blow
Full on his neck, and cut the nerves in two. Pope's Odyſſ.
NE’RVELEss. adj. [from nerve..] Without ſtrength.
There ſunk Thalia, nerveleſs, faint and dead,
Had not her ſiſter Satire held her head. Dunciad, b. iv.
NE’R vous. adj. [nervºſus, Latin.] Well ſtrung; ſtrong; vi-
gorous.
What nervous arms he boaſts, how firm his tread,
His limbs how turn'd. Pope's Odyſſey, b. viii.
2. Relating to the nerves; having the ſeat in the nerves.
3. [In medical cant..] Having weak or diſeaſed nerves.
Poor, weak, Plerº)0t's Creaturcs. Cheney.
NERVY. &amp;. [from nerve..] Strong; vigorous. Not in uſe.
Death, that dark ſpirit, in his nervy arm doth lie,
Which being advanc'd, declines, and then men dić. Sha.
NEscIENCE. m. ſ. [from meſcia, Latin.] Ignorance; the ſtate
of not knowing.
Many of the moſt accompliſhed wits of all ages, have
reſolved their knowledge into Socrates his ſum total, and
after all their pains in queſt of ſcience, have ſat down in a
profeſſed meſcience. Glanv. Scepſ. c. ii.
NESH. adj. [nerc, Saxon.] Soft; tender; eaſily hurt. Skin.
ESS.
I. A termination added to an adječtive to change it into a ſub-
ſtantive, denoting ſtate or quality; as, poiſºnous, poiſºnouſneſs;
turbid, turbidneſs ; lovely, lovelineſ; ; from nirre, Saxon.
2. The termination of many names of places where there is
a headland or promontory; from nere, Saxon; a nºſe of
land, or headland; as IN v ERN Ess.
NEST. m. ſ. ſnerº, Saxon.]
1. The bed formed by the bird for incubation and feeding her
young.
If a bird's meſ' chance to be before thee in the way, thou
ſhalt not take the dam with the young. Deut. xxii. 6.
2. Any place where animals are produced.
Redifound that all kinds of putrefaction did only afford a
nºff and aliment for the eggs and young of thoſe inſects he
admitted. Bentley.
3. An abode ; place of reſidence ; a receptacle. Generally in a
bad ſenſe: as, a neſt of rogues and thieves. -
Come from that ne/?
Of death, contagion, and unnatural ſleep. Shakespeare.
4. A warm cloſe habitation, generally in contempt.
Some of our miniſters having livings offered unto them,
will neither, for zeal of religion, nor winning ſouls to God,
be drawn forth from their warm neſts. Spenſer.
5. Boxes or drawers; little pockets or conveniences.
To NEST. v. n. [from the noun..] To build neſts.
The cedar ſtretched his branches as far as the moun-
tains of the moon, and the king of birds ne/ded within his
leaves. Howel's Pocal Forg/?.
NE'stEGG. m. ſ. ſneft and egg.] An egg left in the neſt to
keep the hen from forſaking it.
Books and money laid for ſhew,
Like neſteggs, to make clients lay. Hudibrar.
To NE'stle. v. n. [from ne/?..] To ſettle ; to harbour; to
lie cloſe and ſnug, as a bird in her neſt.
Their purpoſe was, to fortify in ſome ſtrong place of the
wild country, and there nº/ile ’till greater ſuccours came.
Bacon's War with Spain.
A cock got into a ſtable was neſtling in the ſtraw among the
horſes. L'Eſtrange.
The king's fiſher wonts commonly by the waterſide, and
neſtles in hollow banks. L'E/ºrange.
Flutt'ring there they neſtle near the throne,
And lodge in habitations not their own. Dryden.
The floor is ſtrowed with ſeveral plants, amongſt which
the ſnails ne/fle all the winter. Addiſon on Italy.
Mark where the ſhy directors creep,
Nor to the ſhore approach too high ,
The monſters neſtle in the deep,
To ſeize you in your paſſing by.
To Nestle. v. a.
1. To houſe, as in a neſt.
Poor heart!
That labour'ſt yet to neſtle thee,
Thou Jink'ſt by hov'ring here to get a part,
Swift's Miſel.
In a forbidden or forbidding tree. IXcnne.
Cupid found a downy bcd, -
And ne/fl'd in his little head. Prior.
2. To cheriſh, as a bird her young.
This Ithacus, ſo highly is endear'd
To this Minerva, that her hand is ever in his deeds :
She, like his mother, nº/iles him. Chapman's Iliads.
NE's TLING. m. ſ. [from weſtle..] A bird juſt taken out of the
neſt.
NET. n.ſ.. [nati, Gothick; ner, Saxon.] A texture woven
with large interſtices or meſhes, uſed commonly as a ſhare
for animals.
Poor bird ' thoud'ſt never fear the net, nor lime,
The pitfall nor the gin. Shakeſpeare's Aſacbeth.
He made nets of chequer-work for the chapiters, upon the
top of the pillars. - 1 Kings vii. 17.
Impatience intangles us like the fluttering of a bird in a
net, but cannot at all eaſe our trouble. Taylor's Holy Living.
The vegetative tribes, -
Wrapt in a filmy net, and clad with leaves. Thomſon.
NETHER. adj. [neoter, Saxon; meder, Dutch. It has the
form of a comparative, but is never uſed in expreſſed, but
only in implied compariſon; for we ſee the nether part, but
never ſay this part is mether than that, nor is any poſitive in
uſe, though it ſeems compriſed in the word beneath. Nether
is not now much in uſe.] -
1. Lower; not upper. *
No
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 177</div><p class="Text">N E V
N E U
--
No man ſhall take the nether or the upper millſtone to
ledge; for he taketh a man's life to pledge. Deut. xxiv. 6.
In his picture are two principal errors, the one in the com-
lexion and hair, the other in the mouth, which commonly
they draw with a full and nether great lip. Peacham.
This odious offspring,
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
Tore through my entrails; that with fear and pain
Diſtorted, all my mether ſhape thus grew
Transform'd. Milton's Paradiſe Loft, b. ii.
The upper part thereof was whey, -
The mether, orange mix’d with grey. Hudibras, p. i.
A beauteous maid above, but magic arts,
With barking dogs deform'd her mether parts. Roſcommon.
As if great Atlas from his height
Shou'd ſink beneath his heav'nly weight,
And with a mighty flaw, the flaming wall
Shou'd gape immenſe, and ruſhing down o'erwhelm this
nether ball. Dryden.
Two poles turn round the globe;
The firſt ſublime in heaven, the laſt is whirl’d
Below the regions of the nether world. Dryden.
2. Being in a lower place.
This ſhews you are above, -
You juſtices, that theſe our nether crimes, -
So ſpeedily can venge. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Numberleſs were thoſe bad angels, ſeen
Hov'ring on wing under the cope of hell,
*Twixt upper, nether, and ſurrounding fires.
3. Infernal; belonging to the regions below.
No leſs deſire
To found this nether empire, which might riſe,
In emulation, oppoſite to heav'n. Milton's Par. Loſt.
The gods with hate beheld the nether ſky,
The ghoſts repine. Dryden's AEm.
NETHERMost. n.ſ.. [ſuper. of nether.] Loweſt.
Great is thy mercy toward me, and thou haſt delivered
my ſoul from the nethermoſí hell. Pſalm lxxxvi. 13.
Undaunted to meet there whatever pow'r,
Or ſpirit, of the nethermoſt abyſs
Might in that noiſe reſide. Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, b, ii.
All that can be ſaid of a liar lodged in the very nethermg/?
hell, is this, that if the vengeance of God could prepare
any place worſe than hell for finners, hell itſelf would be
too good for him. South's Sermons.
Heraclitus tells us, that the eclipſe of the ſun was after
the manner of a boat, when the concave, as to our fight,
appears uppermoſt, and the convex nethermoſt. Keilaga. Bur.
NETTING.. n.ſ. A reticulated piece of work.
.NETTLE, n.ſ.. [nevel, Saxon.] A ſtinging herb well known.
It hath an apetalous flower, conſiſting of many ſtamina
included in an empalement; but theſe are barren ; for the
embryos are produced either on different plants, or on dif-
ferent parts of the ſame plant, without any viſible flower,
which becomes a bivalve ſeed-veſſel, ſometimes gathered in-
to round heads, and at other times ſmall and hairy, incloſing
ſeveral ſeeds. Miller.
The ſtrawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholſom berries thrive and ripen beſt,
Neighbour’d by fruit of baſer quality. Shakespeare Hen. V.
Some ſo like to thorns and nettles live,
That none for them can, when they periſh, grieve. J/aller.
To NETTLE. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſting; to irritate;
to provoke.
The princes were ſo nettled at the ſcandal of this affront,
that every man took it to himſelf. L’E/irange.
Although at every part of the Apoſtles diſcourſe ſome of
them might be uneaſy and nettled, yet a moderate ſilence and
attention was ſtill obſerved. Bentley.
SETwork. m. ſ. ſnet and work.] Any thing reticulated or
decºted, at equal diſtances, with interſtices between the in-
terſections.
Nor any ſkill'd in workmanſhip emboſs'd ;
Nor any ſkill'd in loops of fing ring fine;
Might in their diverſe cunning ever dare,
With this ſo curious network to compare. Spenſºr.
A large cavity in the ſinciput was filled with ribbons, lace,
and embroidery, wrought together in a curious piece of net-
- º, - Addiſon's Speciator.
NEVER. adº. [ne cºver, naerne, Saxon; me aerne, not ever.]
1. At no time.
* It is uſed in a form of ſpeech handed down by the leſt
Writers, but lately accuſed, I think, with juſtice, of ſole-
sºn; as, he is miſtaken though never ſo wiſe. It is now main-
tained, that propriety requires it to be expreſſed thus, he is
"Vlašen though ever ſo wiſe; that is, he is miſlaken how wiſe
ſever he be. The common mode can only be defended fiv
"PP'ying a very harſh and unprecedented ellipſis ; he is miſ-
taken though ſo wiſe, as never was any : ſuch however is ...e
“ommon uſe of the word among the beſt authors. -
By its own force deſtroy'd, fruition ceas'd,
And always weary'd, I was never pleas'd.
Milton.
-
Prior.
Never any thing was ſo unbred as that odious man.
- Congreve's Jºy ºf the Iſºrº,
Be it never ſo true which we teach the world to believe,
yet if onse their affections begin to be alienated, a ſmall
thing perſuadeth them to change their opinions. Hocker.
Aſk. me never, ſº much dowry and gift, and I will give
according as ye ſhall ſay. Gen. xxxiv. 12.
In a living creature, though never ſo great, the ſenſe and
the affects of any one part of the body, inſtantly make a
tranſcurſion throughout the whole body. Bacon's Nat. Hiff.
They deſtroyed all, were it never ſo pleaſant, within a
mile of the town. Knolles's Hiſł. of the Turks.
He that ſhuts his eyes againſt a ſmall light, would not be
brought to ſee that which he had no mind to ſee, let it be
placed in never ſo clear a light, and never ſo near him.
Atterbury’s Sermons.
That prince whom you eſpouſe, although never ſo vigor-
ouſly, is the principal in war, you but a ſecond. Swift.
3. In no degree.
Whoſoever has a faithful friend to guide him, may carry
his eyes in another man's head, and yet ſee never the worſe.
South's Sermons.
4. It ſeems in ſome phraſes to have the ſenſe of an adjective.
Not any.
He anſwered him to never a word, inſomuch that the go-
vernour marvelled. 4ſatt. xxvii. 14.
5. It is much uſed in compoſition; as, never-ending, having
no end; of which ſome examples are ſubjoined.
Nature aſſureth us by never-failing experience, and reaſon
by infallible demonſtration, that our times upon the earth
have neither certainty nor durability. Raleigh.
Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never fear,
I come to pluck your berries harſh and crude. Milton.
Your never-failing ſword made war to ceaſe,
And now you heal us with the aëts of peace. J/aller,
So corn in fields, and in the garden flow’rs,
Revive and raiſe themſelves with mod’rate ſhow’rs;
But over-charg’d with never-ceaſing rain,
Become too moiſt. JWaller.
Our heroes of the former days,
Deſerv'd and gain'd their never-fading bays. Roſcommon.
Not Thracian Orpheus ſhould tranſcend my lays,
Nor Linus crown'd with never-fading bays. Dryden.
Leucippus, with his never-erring dart. Dryd. Ovid.
Farewel, ye never-opening gates. Lryden.
He to quench his drought ſo much inclin'd,
May ſnowy fields and nitrous paſtures find ;
Meet ſtores of cold ſo greedily purſu’d,
And be refreſh'd with never-waſting food. Blackmore.
Norton hung down his never-bluſhing head,
And all was huſh'd, as folly's ſelf lay dead. Pope's Dunc.
What the weak head with ſtrongeſt biaſs rules,
Is pride, the never-failing vice of fools.
Thy buſy never-meaning face,
Thy ſcrew'd up front, thy ſtate grimace. Swift.
NE've Rt Heless. adv. [never the leſs.] Notwithſtanding that.
They plead that even ſuch ceremonies of the church of
Rome as contain in them nothing which is not of itſelf
agreeable to the word of God, ought nevertheleſs to be
aboliſhed. Hooker, b. iv.
Many of our men were gone to land, and our ſhips ready
to depart ; nevertheleſs the admiral, with ſuch ſhips only
as could ſuddenly be put in readineſs, made forth towards
them. Bacon.
Creation muſt needs infer providence; and God's making
the world, irrefragably proves that he governs it too; or
that a being of a dependent nature remains nevertheleſs in-
dependent upon him in that reſpect. South's Sermons.
NEU'Rology, n.ſ. ſysºpov and 2.472;..] A deſcription of the
nerves.
NEU'RotoMY. n.ſ. [ytºpov and two.] The anatomy of the
nerves.
NEU'TER. adj. [neuter, Latin; neutre, Fr.]
1. Indifferent ; not engaged on either ſide. -
The general diviſion of the Britiſh nation is into whigs
and tories; there being very few, if any, who ſtand neuter
in the diſpute, without ranging themſelves under one of theſe
denominations. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 54.
2. [In grammar.] A noun that implies no ſex.
The adjectives are neuter, and animal muſt be underſtood
to make it grammar. Dryden.
A verb neuter is that which ſignifics neither action nor
paſſion, but ſome ſtate or condition of being; as, fedeo, I
fit. Clarke's Latin Grammar.
Neu’t ER. n.ſ. One indifferent and unengaged.
The learned heathens may be looked upon as neuters in
the matter, when all theſe prophecies were new to them,
and their education had left the interpretation of them in-
different. Addison on the Chriſtian Religion.
Pope.
NFu"TRAI.
18 D
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 178</div><p class="Text">N E w
N E VV
NEu't RAI. adj. [neutral, French.)
1. Indifferent; not acting; not engaged on either ſide.
Who can be wiſe, amaz'd, temp'rate and furious,
Loyal and neutral, in a moment : 'No man. Shakeſpeare.
He no ſooner heard that king Henry was ſtººd by his
-
Victory, but forthwith he ſent ambaſſadors unto him, to pray
that he would ſtand neutral. Bacon's Hen. VII.
The allies may be ſupplied for money, from Denmark and
other neutral ſtates. Addison on the iPar.
2. Indifferent; neither good nor bad.
Some things good, and ſome things ill do ſeem,
- And neutral ſome, in her fantaſtic eve.
3. Neither acid nor alkaline. -
... Salts which are neither acid nor alkaline, are called neu-
tral. Arbuthnot.
Nº. TRAL. m. ſ. One who does not act nor engage on either
Aue.
The treacherous who have miſled others, and the neutral;
and the falſe-hearted friends and followers, who have ſtarted
aſide like a broken bow, are to be noted. Bacon.
EUTRA'lity, n. /.. [neutralité, French.]
1. A ſtate of indifference; of neither friendſhip nor hoſtility.
Men who poſſeſs a ſtate of neutrality in times of publick
danger, deſert the common intereſt of their fellow-ſubjects.
Addison.
Davies.
The king, late griefs revolving in his mind,
Theſe reaſons for neutrality aſſign'd. Garth's Ovid.
All pretences to neutrality are juſtly exploded, only in-
tending the ſafety and eaſe of a few individuals, while the
publick is embroiled. This was the opinion and practice of
the latter Cato. Swift.
2. A ſtate between good and evil.
There is no health: phyſicians ſay, that we
At beſt enjoy but a neutrality. Donne.
NEu’rrally, adv. [from neutral.] Indifferently; on neither
part.
NEW. adj. [newyd, Welſh; neop, Saxon ; neuf, Fr.]
1. Not old ; freſh ; lately produced, made or had 5 novel. It
is uſed of things: as, young of perſons.
What's the neweſt grief?
—That of an hour's age doth hiſs the ſpeaker;
Each minute teems a new one. Shakeſpeare's Macheth.
Do not all men complain how little we know, and how
much is ſtill unknown And can we ever know more, un-
leſs ſomething new be diſcovered Burnet.
2. Modern; of the preſent time. -
Whoever converſes much among old books, will be ſome-
thing hard to pleaſe among new. Temple's Miſcellanies.
3. Not antiquated; having the effect of novelty.
There names inſcrib'd unnumber'd ages paſt,
From time's firſt birth, with time itſelf ſhall laſt;
Theſe ever new, nor ſubject to decays,
Spread and grow brighter with the length of days. Pope.
4. Not habituated; not familiar.
Such aſſemblies, though had for religion's ſake, may ſerve
the turn of heretics, and ſuch as privily will inſtil their poi-
ſon into new minds. Hooker, b. v.
Seiz'd with wonder and delight,
Gaz'd all around me, new to the tranſporting fight. Dryd.
Twelve mules, a ſtrong laborious race,
New to the plough, unpractis'd in the trace. Pope.
5. Renovated ; repaired, ſo as to recover the firſt ſtate.
Men after long emaciating diets, wax plump, fat, and almoſt
7tatu. Bacon's Natural Hyłory.
6. Freſh after anything.
Nor dare we truſt ſo ſoft a meſſenger,
New from her ſickneſs to that northern air.
7. Not of ancient extraction.
A ſuperior capacity for buſineſs, and a more extenſive
knowledge, are ſteps by which a new man often mounts to
favour, and outſhines the reſt of his contemporaries. Addison
NEw. adv. This is, I think, only uſed in compoſition for
newly, which the following examples may explain.
As ſoon as ſhe had written them, a new ſwarm of thoughts
flinging her mind, ſhe was ready with her foot to give the
new-born letters both to death and burial. Sidney, b. ii.
God hath not then left this to chuſe that, neither would
reječt that to chuſe this, were it not for ſome new-grown
occaſion, making that which hath been better worſe. Hooker.
So dreadfully he towards him did paſs,
Forelifting up aloft his ſpeckled breaſt,
And often bounding on the bruiſed graſs,
As for great joyance of his new-come gueſt. Fairy Q,
Who are the violets now
That ſtrow the green lap of the new-come ſpring. Shakſ.
Your maſter's lincs
Are full of new-found oaths ; which he will break
As eaſily as I do tear this paper. Shakespeare.
Will you with thoſe infirmities ſhe owes,
Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,
Dower'd with our curſe, and ſtranger'd with our oath,
Dryden.
Take her or leave her?
Lºſt by a multitude
The new-heal’d wouñd of malice ſhould break out. Slak.
Bow, ſtubborn knees; and heart with ſtrings of fleel
Be foſt as finews of the new-born babe. Shakespeare. Hºm
Now hath my ſoil brought forth her prodigy, -
And I a gaſping, rew-deliver'd mother, c.
Haye woe to woe, ſorrow to ſorrow join'd.
I am in parliament pledge for his truth,
And laſting fealty to the nºw-made king. Sha. R. II
He ſaw heav'n bloſion with a new born light, -
On which, as on a glorious ſtranger gaz'd
The golden eyes of night; whoſe beams ma
The way to Beth'iem, and as boldly blaz'd;
Nor aſk'd leave of the ſun, by day as night.
I've ſeen the morning's lovely ray
Hover o'er the new-born day;
With roſy wings ſo richly bright,
As if he ſcorn'd to think of night,
When a ruddy ſtorm, whoſe coul
Made heaven's radiant face lock ſoul,
Call'd for an untimely night
To blot the newly bloſſom'd light. Crºſaw.
Some tree, whoſe broad ſmooth leaves together ſow'd,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Thoſe middle parts; that this new-comer ſhame,
There fit not, and reproach us as unclean. Milt. P. Lºft.
Their father's ſtate,
And new-entruſted ſceptre. Milton's Poems,
The new-created world, which fame in heav'n
Long had foretold. 44;tan's Paradiº Lºft.
* * -
Shakespare's King Izar,
Shakesp. R. II.
ºr?
de bright
Crºſław.
His cyil
Thou uſeſt, and from thence createſt more good,
Witneſs this new-made world, another heav'n.
All clad in livclieſt colours, freſh and fair
As the bright flowers that crown'd their brighter hair;
All in that new-blown age which does inſpire
Warmth in themſelves, in their beholders fire.
While from above adorn'd with radiant hght,
A new-born ſun ſurpriº'd the dazzled fight. Rºſſommºn.
If it could, yet that it ſhould always run them into ſuch
a machine as is already extant, and not often into ſome new-
faſhioned one, ſuch as was never ſeen before, no reaſon can
be aſſigned or imagined. Ray on the Creation.
This Engliſh edition is not ſo properly a tranſlation, as a
new compoſition, there being ſeveral additional chapters in
it, and ſeveral new-moulded. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
New-found lands accrue to the prince whoſe ſubject makes
the firſt diſcovery. Burmet's Theory of the Earth.
Let this be nature's frailty, or her fate,
Or Iſgrim's counſel, her new-choſen mate.
When the flood in its own depths was drown'd,
It left behind it falſe and ſlipp'ry ground;
And the more ſolemn pomp was ſtill deferr'd,
*Till new-born nature in freſh looks appear'd.
Shewn all at once you dazzled ſo our eyes,
As new-born Pallas did the Gods ſurpriſe ;
When ſpringing forth from Jove's new-cloſing wound,
Milton.
Cowley.
Dryd. W.
Dryden.
She ſtruck the warlike ſpear into the ground. Dryden.
A bird new-made, about the banks ſhe plics,
Not far from ſhore, and ſhort excurſions tries. Dryden.
Our houſe has ſent to-day
Tº inſure our mew-built veſſel, call'd a play. Dryden.
‘Twas eaſy now to gueſs from whence aroſe,
Her new-made union with her ancient focs. Dryden.
Then curds and cream,
And new-laid eggs, which Baucis' buſy care
Turn’d by a gentle fire, and roaſted rare. Dryd. Boccace.
When pleading Matho, born abroad for air,
With his fat paunch fills his new-faſhioned chair. Dryd.
A new-form'd faction does your power oppoſe,
The fight's confus'd, and all who met were foes. Dryden.
If thouken'ſł from far
Among the Pleiads a new-kindled ſtar;
If any ſparkles than the reſt more bright,
'Tis ſhe that ſhines in that propitious light. Dryden.
If we conſider new-born children, we ſhall have little rea-
ſon to think that they bring many ideas into the world with
them. Locke.
Drummers with vellom-thunder ſhake the pile, . .
To greet the new-made bride. Gay's Trivia.
An Blouzelind I love thee more by half,
Than does their fawns, or cows the new-fall'n calf.
Gay's Paſtoral.
The prodor exhibits his proxy from the dean and chapter,
and preſents the new-elected biſhop to the vicar-general.
A liffe's Parergon.
The new-fallen young here bleating for their dams,
The larger here, and there the leſſer lambs. Pope.
A new-married man and an aſs, are bride led ; an old-
married man and a pack-horſe, ſadd-led. Arbuth. “...
carn
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 179</div><p class="Text">N E W
N I B
* - I -
fearn all the new-faſhion words and oaths, - Swift.
Nºwºsoled, adj. In w and fangle. Formed with vain
or fooliſh love of novelty.
At Chriſtmas I no more defire a roſe,
Than wiſh a ſnow in May's newfangled ſhows; {
But like of each thing, that in ſeaſon grows. . Shakespeare .
Thoſe charities are not nr. fangled devices of yeſterday,
but are moſt of them as old as the reformation., 4tterbury;
NFwFA'NGLEDNESS. ; n: / [from newfangkd. J. Vain and
NewFAN'GLENESS. fooliſh love of novelty. -
$o to nºwfanglºngſ, both of manner, apparel, and each
thing elſe, by the cuſtom of ſelf-guilty evil, glad to change
though often for a worſe. - Sidney, b. ii.
S. he them in newfingleneſ, did paſs, , . Hºbberd's Tale.
The women would be loth to come behind the faſhion in
newfanglednºſ, of the manner, if not in coſtlineſs of the
matteſ. ſ. .. Carew.
“w EL. m. J.
Nº. mpaſs round which the ſtaircaſe is carried. . .
Let the ſtairs to the upper rooms be upon a fair open
rival, and finely railed in. Bacon, Eſſay 46.
2. Nºwel; novelty: Spenſer.
N. Wisc. n.ſ. (from new..] Yeſt or barm. Ainſ.
Nºy. adv. [from new.] Freſhly ; lately.
Such is the power of that ſweet paſſion,
That it all ordid baſeneſs doth repel,
And the refined mind doth newly faſhion
Into a fairer form. Spenſer's Hymn on Love.
Her breath indeed thoſe hands have newly ſtopp'd. Sha.
They newly learned by the king's example, that attainders
do not interrupt the conveying of title to the crown. Bacon.
Her lips were red, and one was thin,
Compar'd to that was next her chin ;
Some bee had ſtung it newly. Suckling.
Then rubb'd it o'er with newly º mint. Dryd.
NºwNess. n.f. [from new.] Freſhneſs; lateneſs; novelty;
recentneſs; ſtate of being new.
His device was to come without any device, all in white
like a new knight, but ſo new as his newneſs ſhamed moſt
of the others long exerciſe. Sidney, b. ii.
Away, my friends, new flight;
And happy newneſs that intends old right. Shakeſpeare.
Words borrowed of antiquity do lend majeſty to ſtile, they
have the authority of years, and out of their intermiſſion do
win to themſelves a kind of grace-like newneſs. B. john.
Their ſtories, if they had been preſerved, and what elſe
was then performed in that newneſs of the world, there
could nothing of more delight have been left to poſterity.
Raleigh's Hiſt. of the J/orld.
In theſe diſturbances,
And newneſ of a wav'ring government,
Tº avenge them of their former grievances. Dan. C. War.
Newneſs in great matters, was a worthy entertainment for
a ſearching mind; it was an high taſte, fit for the reliſh.
South's Sermons.
There are ſome newneſs of Engliſh, tranſlated from the
beauties of modern tongues, as well as from the elegances
of the latin; and here and there ſome old words are ſprinkled,
which for their ſignificance and ſound, deſerved not to be an-
tiquated. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
When Horace writ his ſatyrs, the monarchy of his Ceſar
was in its newneſ, and the government but juſt made eaſy
to his conquered people. Dryden's juvenal.
NEWS. n.ſ. without the fingular, [from new, notivelles, Fr.]
1. Freſh account of any thing; ſomething not heard before.
As he was ready to be greatly advanced for ſome noble
pieces of ſervice which he did, he heard news of me. Sidney.
When Rhea heard theſe news, ſhe fled from her huſband
to her brother Saturn. Raleigh's Hiſ of the ſºorld.
Evil news rides faſt, while good news baits. Milt. Agoniſł.
With ſuch amazement as weak mothers uſe,
And frantick geſture, he receives the news." JWaller.
Now the books, and now the bells,
And now our act the preacher tells,
To edify the people;
All our divinity is news,
And we have inade of equal uſe
- The pulpit and the ſteeple. Denham.
The amazing news of Charles at once was ſpread,
At once the general voice declared
tir gracious prince was dead. Dryden.
It is no news for the weak and poor to be a prey to the
ſtrong and rich. L’Eſtrange.
. They have news-gatherers and intelligencers diſtributed
intº their ſeveral walks, who bring in their reſpective quotas,
*nd make them acquainted with the diſcourſe of the whole
kingdom. Spedator, Nº. 439.
* Papers which give an account of the tranſactions of the
Preſent times.
Their papers, filled with a different party ſpirit, divide tha
People into different ſentiments, who generally conſider ra-
- ****—e---
ther the principles than the truth of the news-writer. Addison
Advertiſe both in every news-paper; and let it not be .
your fault or mine, if our country-men will not take warn-
ing. Swift's Drapiers Letters.
Wood is generally his own news-writer. I cannot but
obſerve from that paragraph, that this public enemy treats
this kingdom with contempt. Swift's Drapiers Letters.
, Pamphlets and news-papers have been full of me. Pope.
NE'ws-Mon GER. n.ſ.. [news and monger.] One that deals in
news; one whoſe employment it is to hear and to tell news."
Many tales devis'd,
Which of the ear of greatneſs needs muſt hear,
By ſmiling pick-thanks and baſe news-mangers. Shakespeare
This was come as a judgment upon him for laying aſide
his father's will, and turning ſtock-jobber, news-mºnger, and
buſy body, meddling with other peoples affairs. Arbuthnot.
Newt. n.ſ. ſerete, Saxon. Newt is ſuppoſed by Skinner to
be contracted from an evet.]. Eſt; ſmall lizard: they are
ſuppoſed to be appropriated ſome to the land, and ſome to
the water.
Oh thou! whoſe ſelf-ſame mettle,
Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puft,
Engenders the black toad, and adder blue,
The gilded newt, and eyeleſs venom'd worm.
Newts and blind worms do no wrong;
Come not near our fairy queen. Sha. M. Night's Dream.
Such humidity is obſerved in newts and water-lizards, eſpe-
cially if their ſkins be perforated or pricked. Brown's W. Err.
New-YEAR’s-GIFT. n.ſ.. [new, year, and gift.] Preſent made
on the firſt day of the year.
If I be ſerved ſuch a trick, I'll have my brains taken out
and buttered, and give them to a dog for a new-year's-gift.
Shakeſpeare's Merry Wives of I/indſºr.
When he ſat on the throne diſtributing new-year's-gifts,
he had his altar of incenſe by him, that before they received
gifts they might caſt a little incenſe into the fire; which all
good chriſtians refuſed to do. Stilling feet.
NEXT, adj. [next, Saxon, by a colloquial change from
neprz or nypre, the ſuperlative of nep or nyp ; neeſ, Scottiſh.]
1. Neareſt in place; immediately ſucceeding in order. -
Want ſupplieth itſelf of what is next, and many times the
next way. Bacon, Eſſay 14.
Shakespeare
The queen already ſat
High on a golden bed; her princely gueſt *
Was next her ſide, in order ſat the reſt. Dryd. Wirg. Æn.
The next in place and puniſhment were they,
' ' Who prodigally throw their ſouls away. Dryden, AEn, vi.
2. Neareſt in any gradation.
If the king himſelf had ſtayed at London, or, which had
been the next beſt, kept his court at York, and ſent the
army on their proper errand, his enemies had been ſpeedily
ſubdued. Clarendon.
O fortunate young man at leaſt your lays
Are next to his, and claim the ſecond praiſe. Dryden.
Finite and infinite, being by the mind looked on as mo-
difications of expanſion and duration, the next thing to be
conſidered, is, how the mind comes by them. Locke.
That's a difficulty next to impoſſible. Rowe.
Next. adv. At the time or turn immediately ſucceeding.
Th’ unwary nymph
Deſir'd of Jove, when next he ſought her bed,
To grant a certain gift. Addiſon's Ovid Metam; b. iii.
N1'As. n.ſ.. [niais, French..] Simple, ſilly, and fooliſh,
A mias hawk is one taken newly from the neſt, and not
able to help itſelf; and hence niſey, a ſilly perſon. Bailey.
NIB. m. ſ. ſneb, Saxon, the face; nebbe, Dutch, the bill.]
I. The bill or beck of a bird. See NEB.
2. The point of any thing, generally of a pen.
A tree called the bejuco, which twines about other trees,
with its end hanging downwards, travellers cut the nib off
it, and preſently a ſpout of water runs out from it as clear
as cryſtal. Derham.
NI’BBEd. adj. [from nib.] Having a nib.
To NIBRLE. v. a. [from nib, the beak or mouth.]
1. To bite by little at a time; to eat ſlowly.
Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling ſheep,
And flat méads thatch'd with ſtover them to keep. Sha,
It is the roſe that bleeds, when he -
Nibbles his nice phlebotomy. Claveland's Poems.
Had not he better have born wats nibbling of his plants and
roots now, than the huntſman's eating of him out of houſe
and home. L’E/ºrange, Fable 387.
Many there are who nibble without leave ;
But none, who are not born to taſte, ſurvive. Granvil.
2. To bite as a fiſh does the bait.
The roving trout.
Greedily ſucks in the twining bait,
And tugs and nibbles at the fallacious meat. Gay,
To Ni‘BBLE. v. n.
I. To bite at. - - - - -
As pidgeons bill, ſo wedlock would be ribbling. *f;
- hey
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 180</div><p class="Text">N I C
N I C
They gape at rich revenues which you hold,
And fain would nibble at your grandame gold. Dryden.
But if you would be nibbling, here is a hand to ſtay your
ſtomach. - - 12-yden's Don Señoftian.
Plunging himſelf in mud, and then lifting up his head a
little, he caſts out the ſaid ſtring; which "the little fiſhes
taking for a worm, and nibbling at it, he immediately plucks
them both in together. -
2. º º to find fault with.
* of Teturning a full anſwer to my b i-
feſtly falls a milling at one ſingle paſſage i . *...";
Nº ER... n.ſ. [from nibble.] One that bites by little at a time.
NIQE ad, ſnere, Saxon, ſoft.]
1. Accurate in judgment to minute exactneſs ; ſuperfluouſly
exact. It is often uſed to expreſs a culpable delicacy.
Such a man was Argalus, as hardly the nice/ eye can find
a ſpot in. Sidney.
He that ſtands upon a ſlipp'ry place,
Makes nice of no vile hold', ſtay him up. Sha, K. jºhn.
Nor be ſo nice in taſte myſelf to know,
If what I ſwallow be a thruſh or no. Dryd. Perſus.
Thus critics, of leſs judgment than caprice,
Curious, not knowing, not exact, but nice,
Form ſhort ideas, and offend in arts,
As moſt in manners, by a love to parts. Pope on Crit.
Qur, author, happy in a judge ſº.,
Produc’d his play, and beggid the knight's advice. Pope.
2. Delicate; ſcrupulouſly and minutely cautious.
The letter was not nice, but fift of charge
Of dear import. Shakeſp. Romeo and Juliet.
Dear love continue nice and chaſe
For if you yield, you do me wrong;
Let duller wits to love's end haſte,
I have enough to woo thee long. Donne.
honour men at firſt like women nice, -
Raiſe maiden ſcruples at unpračtis’d vice. E. Halifax.
Having been compiled by Gratian, in an ignorant age, we
ought not to be too nice in examining it. Baker
3. Faſtidious; ſqueamiſh.
God hath here
Varied his bounty ſo with new delights,
As may compare with heaven; and to taſte,
Think not I ſhall be nice. Milt. Par. Loft.
;
4. Eaſily injured; delicate.
With how much eaſe is a young muſe betray'd?
How nice the reputation of the maid? Roſcommon.
5. Formed with minute exactneſs.
Indulge me but in love, my other paſſions
Shall riſe and fall by virtue's nicº rules. Addison's Cato.
6. Requiring ſcrupulous exactneſs.
Suppoſing an injury done, it is a nice point to proportion
the reparation to the degree of the indignity. L'E/ºrange.
My progreſs in making this nice and troubleſome experi-
ment, I have ſet down more at large. Newton's Opt.
7. Refined.
A nice and ſubtile happineſs I ſee
Thou to thyſelf propoſeſt, in the choice
Of thy aſſociates, Adam; and wilt taſte
No pleaſure, tho' in pleaſure ſolitary. Milº. P. Lºft.
8. Having lucky hits. This ſignificatioſ is not in uſe.
When my hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ranſom lives
... Of me for jeſts. Shakespeare Ant, and Cleopatra.
NicELY. adv. [from nice.]
1. Accurately ; minutely; ſcrupulouſly.
Theſe kind of knaves in this plainneſs
Harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends,
Than twenty filky ducking obſervants
That ſtretch their duties nicely. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
What mean thoſe ladies which, as tho’
They were to take a clock to pieces, go
So nicely about the bride Donne.
He ought to ſtudy the grammar of his own tongue, that
he may underſtand his own country-ſpeech nicely, and ſpeak
it properly. Locke.
The next thing of which the doſes ought to be nicely de-
termined, are opiates. - Arbuthnot on Coins.
At nicely carving ſhew thy wit;
But ne'er preſume to eat a bit.
2. Delicately.
The inconveniences attending the beſt of governments,
We quickly feel, and are nicely ſenſible of the ſhare that we
bear in them. Atterbury.
Nic FNEss. n: ſ [from nice.]
1. Accuracy; minute exactneſs.
Where's now that labour'd niceneſ in thy dreſs,
And all thoſe arts that did the ſpark expreſs. Dryden.
2. Superfluous delicacy or exactneſs.
A ſtrange nizenſ were it in me to refrain that from the
cars of a perſon repreſenting ſo much worthineſs, which I
in glad even to rocks and woods to utter. Sidney.
Swift's Miſcell.
Grew's Muſæum.
Unlike the nicenºſ of our modern danies,
Affected ". with new affected names. Dryden.
or place them where
Roaſt crabs offend the niceny, of their noſe. Drydºn.
Niºry. m. ſ. [from mice.]
1. Minute accuracy of thºught.
No! was this nicety of his judgment confined only to litera-
tºre, but was the ſame in all other parts of art. Prior.
2. Accurate performance.
As for the workmanſhip of the old Roman pillars, the
ancients have not kept to the miraty of proportion and the
rules of art ſo much as the moderns. Addison on Italy.
3. Faſtidious delicacy; ſqueamiſhneſs.
He them with ſpeeches meet
Docs fair intreat; no courting nicety,
But ſimple true, and eke unfeigned ſweet. Fairy 9,
So love doth loath diſdainful nicety. Speºſer.
4. Minute obſervation; punctilious diſcrimination; ſubtilty.
If reputation attend theſe conqueſts, which depend on the
fineneſs and niceties of words, it is no wonder if the wit of
men ſº employed, ſhould perplex and ſublitize the ſignifica-
tion of ſounds. Locke.
His concluſions are not built upon any nicetics, or ſolitary
and uncommon appearances, but on the moſt ſimple and
obvious circumſtances of theſe terreſtrial bodies. J/oodw.
5. Pelicate management; cautious treatment.
Love ſuch nicety requires,
One blaſt will put out all his fires.
6. Effeminate ſoftneſs.
7. Niceties, in the plural, is generally applied to dainties or
delicacies in eating.
Swift's Poems.
NichAR. n.ſ.
The characters are: it hath a polypetalous or a monope-
talous flower, cut very deeply into ſeveral ſegments, but is
almoſt of an anomalous figure; from whoſe calyx ariſes the
pointal, which afterwards becomes a pod, beſet all over with
Prickles, in which are contained one or two round hard ſeeds.
AMiller.
NICHE. m. ſ. [French.] A hollow in which a ſtatue may
be placed.
Niches, containing figures of white ſtone or marble, ſhould
not be coloured in their concavity too black. //otton.
They not from temples, nor from gods refrain,
But the poorlares from the niches ſeize,
If they be little images that pleaſe. Dryden.
On the ſouth a long majeſtic race
Qf Ægypt's prieſts, the gilded niches grace. Pope.
The heirs to titles and large eſtates are well enough qua-
lified to read pamphlets againſt religion and high-flying;
whereby they fill their niches, and carry themſelves through
the world with that dignity which beſt becomes a ſenator
and a ſquire. Swift's Miſcellanies.
NICK. m. ſ. [nicke, Teutonick, the twinkling of an eye.]
1. Exact point of time at which there is neceſſity or convenience.
That great inſtrument of ſtate had foreknowledge of it,
but ſuffered the fatal thread to be ſpun out to that length
for ſome politick reſpects, and then to cut it off in the ve
nick. Howel's Pocal Foreſt.
What in our watches that in us is found,
So to the height and nick we up be wound, -
No matter by what hand or trick. Suckling.
That trick,
Had it come in the nick, }
Had touch'd us to the quick. Denham.
Though dame fortune ſeem to ſmile,
And leer upon him for a while;
She'll after ſhew him in the nick
Of all his glories a dog trick. Hudibras, p. i. cant, 3.
And ſome with ſymbols, ſigns, and tricks,
Engraved in planetary nicks,
With their own influences will fetch them
Down from their orbs, arreſt and catch them. Hºd.
This nick of time is the critical occaſion for the gaining
of a point. L'E/trange.
2. A notch cut in any thing. [Corrupted from mock or notch.]
3. A ſcore; a reckoning.
Launce his man told me, he lov’d her art of all nick. Shaft.
4. A winning throw. [niche, Fr. a ludicrous trick.]
Come, ſeven's the main,
Cries Ganymede ; the uſual trick -
Seven, ſlur a ſix, eleven a nick. Prior.
To Nick. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To hit; to touch luckily; to perform by ſome ſlight artifice
uſed at the lucky moment.
Is not the winding up of witneſs -
A nicking more than half the busineſs . Hudibras, p. ii.
The juſt ſeaſon of doing things muſt be nick'd, and aſ ac-
cidents improved. L'Eºrange, Fable 38.
Take away paſſion while it is predominant and afloat, and
juſtin the critical height of it, nick it with ſome luckyor unluck
word, and you may certainly over-rule it. South.
2. To cut in nicks or notches. -<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

2 His
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 181</div><p class="Text">N I G
N I G
His beard they have ſing'd off with brands of fire;
And ever as it blaz'd they threw on him -
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair.
My maſter preaches patience, and the while
His man with ſciſſars nicks him like a fool. Shakeſpeare.
Breaks watchmen's heads, and chairmen's glaſſes,
And thence proceeds to nicking faſhes. Prior.
3. To ſuit, as tallies cut in nicks. -
words nicking and reſembling one another, are applicable
to different ſignifications. .. ... Camden's Remains.
To defeat or cozen, as at dice ; to diſappoint by ſome trick
or unexpected turn.
Why ſhould he follow you ?
The itch of his affection ſhould not then
Have niºd his captainſhip, at ſuch a point. Shakeſpeare.
NickRAME. n.ſ.. [nom de nique, French..] A name given in
koff or contempt; a term of deriſion; an opprobious or con-
temptuous appellation. - - -
The time was when men were had in price for learning;
now letters only make men vile. He is upbraidingly called
a poet, as if it were a contemptible nickname. Ben.johnſºn.
My mortal enemy hath not only falſely ſurmiſed me to be
aſºned perſon, giving me nicknames, but alſo hath offered
large ſums of money to corrupt the princes with whom I
tº been retained. Bacon's Hen. VII.
So long as her tongue was at liberty, there was not a
word to be got from her, but the ſame nickname in deriſion.
L'E/irange.
To NickNA’ME. v. a. To call by an opprobrious appellation.
You nickname virtue vice;
For virtue's office never breaks men's troth. Shakespeare
Leſs ſeem theſe facts which treaſons nickname force,
Than ſuch a fear'd ability for more. Denham.
To Nyct. At E. v. a. ſničío, Latin.] To wink.
There are ſeveral parts peculiar to brutes, which are want-
ing in man; as the ſeventh or ſuſpenſory muſcle of the eye,
the ničating membrane, and the ſtrong aponeuroſes on the
ſides of the neck. R
NIDE. n.ſ. ſnidus, Lat..] A brood: as, a nide of pheaſants.
NIDGET. n.ſ. [corrupted from nithing or niding. The op-
probrious term with which the man was anciently branded
who refuſed to come to the royal ſtandard in times of exi-
gency..] A coward; a daſtard.
There was one true Engliſh word of greater force than
them all, now out of all uſe; it ſignifieth no more than ab-
jećt, baſeminded, falſe-hearted, coward, or nidget. Camden.
Nidific ATION. m. ſ. ſnidificatio, Latin.] The aët of build-
ing neſts.
That place, and that method of midification, doth abun-
dantly anſwer the creature's occaſions. Derham.
Ni'DING. adj. [from nº, Saxon, vileneſs.] -
Niding, an old Engliſh word ſignifying abjećt, baſe-minded,
falſe-hearted, coward, or nidget. Carew.
Nido Rous, adj., [nidoreux, from nidor.] Reſembling the ſmell
or taſte of roaſted fat.
Incenſe and nidorous ſmells, ſuch as of ſacrifices, were
thought to intoxicate the brain, and to diſpoſe men to de-
votion; which they may do by a kind of contriſtation of
the ſpirits, and partly alſo by heating and exalting them. Bac.
The ſigns of the functions of the ſtomach being depraved,
are erućtatious either with the taſte of the aliment, acid,
mid-rºſe, or foetid, reſembling the taſte of rotten eggs.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
N'DoRosity. n. ſ. [ from nidorous. J Eructation with the
taſte of undigeſted roaſt-meat.
The cure of this nidorºſity is, by vomiting and purging.
Floyer on the Humours.
NipUI.A'tion. m. ſ. ſnidular, Latin.] The time of remain-
ing in the neſt.
The ground of this popular practice might be the com-
mon opinion concerning the virtue prognoſtic of theſe birds,
the natural regard they have unto the winds, and they unto
them again, more eſpecially remarkable in the time of their
nidulation, and bringing forth their young. Brown's W. Err.
Nºce. n.ſ. [ niece, mºre, French ; nºtis, Latin. J . The
daughter of a brother or ſiſter.
My niece Plantagenet,
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloſter.
While he thus his niece beſtows,
About our iſle he builds a wall. JWaller.
NIGGARD. n.ſ. [ninggr, Iſlandick.] A miſer; a curmud-
Sººn a ſordid, avaricious, parcimonious fellow.
If thou do, then let thy bed be turned from fine gravel to
weeds or mud. If thou do, let ſome unjuſt niggards make
weres to ſpoil thy beauty. Sidney, b. ii.
Be not a niggard of your ſpeech. Shakespeare Macbeth.
Serve him as a grudging maſter,
As a penurious niggard of his wealth.
Be niggards of advice on no pretence;
For the worſt avarice is that of ſenſe.
Nico ARD. adj.
* Sordid; avaricious ; parcimonious.
Sha. R. III.
Milton's Poems.
Pope on Crit.
=-lºº-º-º-º-º-º-º-º-nºis -
- - One ſhe found
With all the gifts of bounteous nature crown'd,
Of gentle blood; but one whoſe niggard fate
Had ſet him far below her higheſt.
2. Sparing ; wary. sº
Moſt free of queſtion, but to our demands -
Niggard in his reply. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
To NIGGARD. v. a. [from the noun..] To ſtint.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk
And nature muſt obey neceſſity; »
Which we will niggard with a little reſt.
Ni'GGARDISH. adj. [from niggard.] Having ſom
to avarice.
Dryden.
Shakeſpeare.
e diſpoſition
NI'GGARDLINEss. n. ſ. [from niggardly..] Avarice; ſordid
partimony. -
Niggardlineſ is not good huſbandry, nor generoſity, pro-
fuſion. Addiſon's Spediator, Nº. 443.
NI'gg ARply. adj. [from niggard.]
I. Avaricious ; ſordidly parc;monious.
Where the owner of the houſe will be bountiful, it is not
for the ſteward to be niggardly. Hall.
Love is like a penurious god, very niggardly of his oppor-
tunities: he muſt be watched like a hard-hearted treaſurer.
- Dryden’s Spaniſh Friar.
Why are we ſo niggardly to ſtop at one fifth why do we
not raiſe it one full moiety, and thereby double our money?
Locke.
Here laviſhly beſtows, and there denies,
That by each other's virtues we may riſe. Granvil. }
Tiberius was noted for his niggardly temper; he uſed only
to give to his attendants their diet. Arbuthnot on Coins.
2. Sparing ; wary.
I know your mind, and I will ſatisfy it; neither will I do .
it like a niggardly anſwerer, going no farther than the bounds
of the queſtion. Sidney.
NI'GGARDLY. adv. Sparingly ; parcimoniouſly.
I have long loved her, followed her, ingroſs'd opportu-
nities to meet her; feed every ſlight occaſion that could but
niggardly give me fight of her. Shakespeare M. W. of I/indſor.
NI'GGARDN Ess. n.ſ.. [from niggard.] Avarice; ſordid par-
cimony.
All preparations, both for food and lodging, ſuch as would
make one deteſt niggardneſs, it is ſo ii. a vice. Sidney.
NIGH. prep. [nyp, Saxon.] At no great diſtance from.
They ſhone
Stars diſtant, but nigh hand ſeem'd other worlds.
Providence not niggardly but wiſe,
Milton.
Nigh this receſs, with terror they ſurvey,
Where death maintains his dread tyrannic ſway. Garth.
NIGH. adv. -
1. Not at a great diſtance.
The day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand, jo. ii. 1.
He was ſick nigh unto death. Phil. ii. 27.
2. To a place near.
He drew nigh, and to me held,
Ev’n to my mouth, of that ſame fruit held part
Which he had pluck'd. Milton's Paradiſe Lºft, b. v.
I will defer that anxious thought,
And death, by fear, ſhall not be nigher brought. Dryd.
NIGH. adj.
1. Near; not diſtant; not remote.
The loud tumult ſhews the battle nigh. Prior.
2. Allied cloſely by blood.
He committed the protećtion of his ſon Aſanes to two of
his nigh kinſmen and aſſured friends. Knolles.
His uncle or uncle's ſon, or any that is nigh of kin unto
him of his family, may redeem him. Lev. xxv. 49.
His ſiſter a virgin, that is nigh unto him. Lev. xxi. 3.
To NIGH. v. n. [from the particle.] To approach ; to ad-
vance; to draw near.
Now day is done, and night is nighing faſt. Hulherd.
Ni‘GHLY. adv. [from nigh the adjective.] Nearly; within a
little.
A man born blind, now adult, was taught by his touch
to diſtinguiſh between a cube and a ſphere of the ſame me-
tal, and nighly of the ſame bigneſs. - Locke.
Ni‘GHN Ess. n.ſ.. [from nigh..] Nearneſs; proximity.
NIGHT. n.ſ.. [nauts, Gothick; nipe, Saxon ; nuit; Fr.]
1. The time of darkneſs; the time from fun-ſet to ſun-riſe:
The duke of Cornwall, and Regan his dutcheſ, will be
here this night. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
In the morning he ſhall devour the prey, and at night di-
vide the ſpoil. Gen. xlix. 27.
Pharaoh roſe up in the night. . . Exodus xii. 30.
They did eat and drink, and tarried all might. Gen. xxiv. 54.
Let them ſleep, let them ſleep on,
*Till this ſtormy night be gone,
And th' eternal morrow dawn,
Then the curtains will be drawn;
And they waken with that light,
whoſe day ſhall never ſleep in night.
Craſhew.
18 E
Dire
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 182</div><p class="Text">N I G
Dire Tiſiphone there keeps the ward,
Girt in her ſanguine gown by night and day,
Obſervant of the ſouls that paſs the downward way. Dryd.
2. It is much uſed in compoſition.
To-NIGHT. adverbially. In this night; at this night.
There came men in hither to-night of the children of Iſ.
rael, to ſearch out the country. joſ. ii. 2.
NighthkAwler. n.ſ.. [night and brawler.] One who raiſes
diſturbances in the night.
You unlace your reputation,
And ſpend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler. Shakespeare Othel.
Nightcap. n, f, [night and cap.] A cap worn in bed, or
in undreſs.
The rabblementhouted, and clapt their chopt hands, and
threw up their ſweaty night-caps. Shakeſ ful. Caſar.
Great mountains have a perception of the diſpoſition of
the air to tempeſts ſooner than the vallies below; and there-
fore they ſay in Wales, when certain hills have their night-
caps on, they mean miſchief. Bacon's Nat. Hiſtory.
How did the humbled ſwain deteſt
His prickly beard, and hairy breaſt
His night-cap border'd round with lace,
Could give no ſoftneſs to his face. Swift's Poems.
TNightcrow. n. ſ. (night and crow.] A bird that cries in
the night.
The owl ſhriek'd at thy birth, an evil ſign;
The night-crow cry’d, a boding luckleſs time. Shakespeare
NightDEw. n.ſ. (night and dew.j Dew that wets the ground
in the night.
All things are huſh'd, as nature's ſelf lay dead,
The mountains ſeem to nod their drowſy head;
The little birds in dreams their ſongs repeat,
And ſleeping flowers beneath the night-dew ſweat; {
E’en luſt and envy ſleep. Dryden's Ind. Emperor.
Ni'GHT Dog. n.ſ. (night and dog..] A dog that hunts in the
night. Uſed by deer-ſtealers. -
When night-dogs run, all ſorts of deer are chaſed. Sha.
Night dress. n.ſ. ſnight and dreſs.] The dreſs worn at
night.
The fair ones feel ſuch maladies as theſe,
When each new night-dreſ, gives a new diſeaſe. Pope.
NI'GHTED. adj. [from night.j Darkened; clouded; black.
It was great ign'rance, Gloſter's eyes being out,
To let him live: Edmund, I think, is gone ;
In pity of his miſery to diſpatch
His nighted life. Shakeſpeare's King Lear.
Good Hamlet, caſt thy nighted colour off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Sha.
Nºise. m. ſ. [night and fare.] Travelling in the
night.
g Will-a-Wiſp miſleads night-faring clowns,
O'er hills, and ſinking bogs, and pathleſs downs. Gay.
NI'GHT FIRE. m. ſ. ſnight and fire.] Ignis futuus; Will-a-
Wiſp.
Fooliſh night-fires, womens and childrens wiſhes,
Chaſes in arras, gilded emptineſs:
Theſe are the pleaſures here. JHerbert.
Ni‘GHTFLY. m. ſ. ſnight and fly.] Moth that flies in the
night.
§ Why rather, ſleep, lieſt thou in ſmoaky cribs,
And huſh't with buzzing night-flies to thy ſlumber;
Than in the perfum’d chambers of the great,
And lull'd with ſounds of ſweeteſt melody ? Shakespeare.
Ni‘GHTFoundERED. m. ſ. [from night and fºunder.] Loſt
or diſtreſſed in the night.
Either ſome one like us night-foundered here,
Or elſe ſome neighbour woodman, or at worſt,
Some roving robber calling to his fellows. Miłow.
NI'GHTGowN. m. ſ. ſnight and gown.] A looſe gown uſed
for an undreſs.
Since his majeſty went into the field,
I have ſeen her riſe from her bed, throw
Her night-gown upon her. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
They have put me in a ſilk night-gown, and a gaudy fool's
cap. Addiſon's Guardian, N°. 1 13.
No meagre muſe-rid mope, aduſt and thin,
In a dun night-gown of his own looſe ſkin. Pope's Dunc.
Ni‘GHTHAG. n. / [might and hag.] Witch ſuppoſed to wan-
der in the night.
Nor uglier follows the night-hag, when called
In ſecret, riding through the air ſhe comes
Lur'd with the ſmell of infant-blood, to dance
With Lapland witches. Milton's Paradiſe Lo/?, b. ii.
Nighting Ale. n.ſ.. [from night and galan, Saxon, to ſing;
galm, Teutonick, is a ſound or echo.J
1. A ſmall bird that ſings in the night with remarkable me-
lody; Philomel. º
I think,
The nightingale, if ſhe ſhould fing by day,
When every gooſe is cackling, would be thought
No better a muſician than the wren. Shakespeare.
Although the wezon, throte, and tongue, be the inflru-
ments of voice, and by their agitations concur in thoſe de-
lightful modulations, yct cannot we aſſign the cauſe unto
any particular formation ; and I perceive the rightingale hath
ſome jiſadvantage lin the tongue. Brown's J. Err.
Thus the wiſe nightingate that leaves her home,
Purſuing conſtantly the chearful ſpring,
To foreign groves does her old muſick bring. J/.../er.
2. A word of endearment.
My nightingale"
We'll beat them to their beds. Shakespeare Alt. and Cleºpatra.
Nightly. adv. [from night.]
1. By night.
Thee, Sion and the flow'ry brooks hereath,
That waſh thy hallow'd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I viſit. Aſit…"; Paradjº Lºft, b. iii.
Soon as the evening ſhades prevail,
The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
And nightly to the liſtning earth
Repeats the ſtory of her birth. Addiſon's Speſſator.
2. Every night.
Let all things ſuffer,
Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and ſleep
In the afflićtion of thoſe terrible dreams
That ſhake us nightly. Shakespeare's Macbeth.
Nightly. adj. . [from night.] Done by night; acting by
night; happening by night.
May the ſtars and ſhining moon attend
Your nightly ſports, as you vouchſafe to tell
What nymphs they were who mortal forms excel. Dryd.
Soon as the flocks ſhook off the nightly dews,
Two ſwains, whom love kept wakeful and the muſe,
Pour'd o'er the whit'ning vale their fleecy care. Pope.
Ni‘cit MAN. m. ſ. ſnight and man.] One who carries away
ordure in the night.
NighTMARE. n.ſ. (night, and according to Temple, mara, a
ſpirit that, in the heathen mythology, was related to torment
or ſuffocate ſleepers. J A morbid oppreſſion in the night,
reſembling the preſſure of weight upon the breaſt.
Saint Withold footed thrice the would,
He met the nightmare, and her name he told ;
Bid her alight, and her troth plight. Shakespeare K. Lear.
The forerunners of an apoplexy are, dulneſs, drowſineſs,
vertigoes, tremblings, oppreſſions in ſleep, and night-mares.
Arbuthnot on Aliments.
Ni‘GHT PIE ce. n.ſ. ſnight and piece..] A pićture ſo coloured
as to be ſuppoſed ſeen by candle light; not by the light of the
day.
He hung a great part of the wall with night-pieces, that
ſeemed to ſhow themſelves by the candles which were lighted
up; and were ſo inflamed by the ſun-ſhine which fell upon
them, that I could ſcarce forbear crying out fire. Addison.
Ni‘GHTRAIL. m. ſ. [night and re;l, Saxon, a gown or robe.]
A looſe cover thrown over the dreſs at night.
An antiquary will ſcorn to mention a pinner or night-rail;
but will talk as gravely as a father of the church on the
vitta and peplus. Addison on ancient Medals.
NI'GHTRA v EN. m. ſ. ſnight and raven.] A bird ſuppoſed of
ill omen, that cries loud in the night.
The ill-fac’t owl, death's dreadful meſſenger,
The hoarſe night-raven, trump of doleful drere. Spenſer.
I pray his bad voice bode no miſchief:
I had as lief have heard the night-raven,
Come what plague would have come after it: Shakespeare
NIGHT Robber. m. ſ. [ might and robber.] One who ſteals
in the dark.
Highways ſhould be fenced on both ſides, whereby thieves
and night-robbers might be more eaſily purſued and encoun-
tered. Spenſºr's Ireland.
NI'GHTRULE. m. / [might and rule.] A tumult in the night.
ow now, mad ſprite,
What night-rule now about this haunted grove 2 Shakespeare
NI'GHTs HADE. m. ſ. ſnip2 rcaba, Saxon.]
1. A plant of two kinds, common and deadly night-ſhade.
The flower conſiſts of one leaf, which is divided into five
parts, and expands in form of a ſtar: from the flower-cup
riſes the pointal, which afterward becomes a round, oval,
ſoft, ſucculent fruit, containing many flat ſeeds in each. The
fpecies are nine. This the phyſicians have directed to be
uſed in medicine, under the title of ſºlanum hortenſe. Miller.
2. Deadly.
Deadly might-ſhade (belladona) a plant. The flower is
bell-ſhaped, of one leaf, divided into five acute ſegments
at the top, and ſucceeded by a globular ſoft fruit, divided
into two cells which contain the ſeeds. It is a very ſtrong
poiſon. Miller.
Nichts HINING. m. ſ. ſnight and /ºine.] Shewing brightneſs
in the night.
r
2 None
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 183</div><p class="Text">N I M
None of theſe noćtiluca, or night-ſhining bodies, have been
obſerved in any of the antient ſepulchres. Wilkin's Dardalus.
Nightshriek. m. ſ. ſnight and ſhriek.] A cry in the night.
I have almoſt forgot the taſte of fears:
The time has been, my ſenſes would have cool’d
To hear a night-ſhriek; and my fell of hair
Would at a diſmal treatiſe’rouſe and ſtir,
As life were in’t. *::::::: Macbeth.
Night TRIPPING. m. ſ. ſnight and trip.] Going lightly in
the night.
Could it be prov’d,
That ſome night-tripping fairy had exchang'd
In cradle cloaths, our children where they lay,
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine. Shakespeare
Nightwalk. n.ſ.. [night and walk..] Walk in the night.
If in his night-walk he met with irregular ſcholars, he took
their names, and a promiſe to appear, unſent for, next morn-
ing. J/alton's Life of Sanderſon.
Nightwalk ER. n.ſ.. [night and walk..] One who roves in
the night upon ill deſigns.
Men that hunt ſo, be either privy ſtealers, or night-walkers.
Aſcham's Schoolmaſter.
Nightwarblin G. [night and warble.] Singing in the night.
Now is the pleaſant time,
The cool, the filent, ſave where ſilence yields
To the night-warbling bird. Milton's Par. Loſº, b. v.
Nightward. adj. [night and ward.] Approaching towards
night.
* Their night-ward ſtudies, wherewith they cloſe the day's
work. Milton on Education.
NI'GHTwAtch. n. ſ. ſnight and watch..] A period of the
night as diſtinguiſhed by change of the watch.
remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in
the might-watches. Pſalms lxiii. 6.
Nigre'scENT. adj. [nigreſcens, Latin.] Growing black; ap-
proaching to blackneſs.
Nigrification. n.ſ. ſniger and facio..] The act of making
black.
NIHI'lity. n.ſ. ſnihilité, Fr. nihilum, Latin.] Nothingneſs;
the ſtate of being nothing.
Not being is conſidered as excluding all ſubſtance, and
then all modes are alſo neceſſarily excluded ; and this we call
pure nihility, or mere nothing. JWatts's Logick.
To Nill. v. a. [from ne will, nillan, Saxon.] Not to will;
to refuſe; to reječt.
Certes, ſaid he, I mill thine offer'd grace,
Ne to be made ſo happy do intend,
Another bliſs before mine eyes I place,
Another happineſs, another end. Spenſer's Fairy Q.
In all affections ſhe concurreth ſtill;
If now, with man and wife to will and mill
The ſelf-ſame things, a note of concord be,
I know no couple better can agree. Ben. johnſon.
Nill. n.ſ. The ſhining ſparks of braſs in trying and melting
the ore.
To NIM. v. a. [nemen, Dutch, to take.] To take. In cant,
to ſteal.
They'll queſtion Mars, and by his look
Detect who 'twas that nimm'd a cloak. Hudibras, p. i.
They could not keep themſelves honeſt of their fingers,
but would be nimming ſomething or other for the love of
thieving. L'Eſtrange, Fable 241.
N'MBLE, adj. [from nim, or numan, Saxon, tractable.] Quick;
active; ready; ſpeedy; lively; expeditious.
They being nimbler-jointed than the reſt,
And more induſtrious, gathered more ſtore. Spenſºr.
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her ſcornful eyes. Shakeſpeare's K. Lear.
You have dancing ſhoes
With nimble ſoles. Shakeſpeare's Romeo and juliet.
His off ring ſoon propitious fire from heaven,
Conſum'd with nimble glance and grateful ſteam;
The others not, for his was not fincere. Milt. P. Lºft.
Thro' the mid ſeas the nimble pinnace ſails,
, Aloof from Crete before the northern gales. Pope.
NºMELENEss. n.ſ. [from nimble.] Quickneſs; activity; ſpeed;
º readineſs; dexterity ; celerity; expedition; ſwift-
neſs. -
The hounds were ſtraight uncoupled, and ere long the
flag thought it better to truſt to the nimbleneſs of his feet,
than to the ſlender fortification of his lodging. Sidney.
Himſelf ſhewing at one inſtant both ſteadineſs and nimble-
nºſs. Sidney, b. ii.
All things are therefore partakers of God; they are his
offspring, his influence is in them, and the perſonal wiſdom
of God is for that very cauſe ſaid to excel in nimbleneſ; or
agility, to pierce into all intelle&amp;tual, pure and ſubtile ſpirits,
* go through all, and to reach unto every thing which is.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 5.
We, lying ſtill,
Are ſuil of reſt, defence and nimbleneſ. Shakespeare
Ovid ranged over all Parnaſſus with great mimºny; and
N I P
agility; but as he did not much care for the toil requiſite to
climb the upper part of the hill, he was generally roving
about the bottom. Addison's Guardion, Nº. 115.
Nºrwirrro. adj. [nimble and wit..] Quick; eager to
peak.
Sir Nicholas Bacon, when a certain nimble-witted coun-
fellor at the bar, who was forward to ſpeak, did interrupt
him often, ſaid unto him, There is a great difference be-
twixt You and me; a pain to me to ſpeak, and a pain to
you to hold your peace. Bacon, Apºphth. 124.
N1 MELY. adv. [from nimble.], Quickly; ſpeedily; actively.
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber,
To the laſcivious playing of a lute.
Sha. Rich. III.
The air
Nimºy and ſweetly recommends itſelf. Shakespeare
Moſt legs can nimbly run, tho’ ſome be lame. Davies.
The liquor we poured from the cryſtals, and ſet it in a
digeſting furnace to evaporate more nimbly. Boyle.
Ni‘MBLEss. n.ſ. Nimbleneſs. Spenſer.
NIMIETY; n.J. [..imitas, ſchool Latin.] The ſtate of being
too much.
Ni‘MMER. m. ſ. [from nim.] A thief; a pilferer.
NIN compoop. m. ſ. [A corruption of the Latin non compºs.]
A fool ; a trifler.
An old ninnyhammer, a dotard, a nincompoop, is the beſt
language ſhe can afford me. Addiſon.
NINE. n. ſ. ſnium, Gothick; nigon, Saxon.] One more than
eight; one leſs than ten.
The weyward ſiſters,
Thus do go about, about,
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine, -
And thrice again, to make up nine. Shakespeare Macbeth.
A thouſand ſcruples may ſtartle at firſt, and yet in conclu-
ſion prove but a nine-days wonder. L’Eſtrange.
The faults are nine in ten owing to affectation, and not to
the want of underſtanding. Swift's Miſcell.
NI’Nefold. n.ſ.. [nine and fold.] Nine times; any thing nine
times repeated.
This huge convex of fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round ninefºld. Milt.
NI'NEPEN ce. m. ſ. [nine and pence.] A ſilver coin valued at
nine-pence.
Three ſilver pennies, and a nine-pence bent. Gay's Paſº.
NI'NEPINs. n.ſ.. [nine and pin..] A play where nine pieces of
wood are ſet up on the ground to be thrown down by a bowl.
A painter made bloſſoms upon the trees in December,
and ſchool-boys playing at nine pins upon the ice in July.
Peacham on Drawing.
For as when merchants break, o'erthrown
Like nine-pins, they ſtrike others down. Hud. p. ii.
NI’Nescore. adj. [nine and ſcore.] Nine times twenty.
Eugenius has two hundred pounds a year; but never va-
lucs himſelf above nine-ſtore, as not thinking he has a right
to the tenth part, which he always appropriates to charitable
uſes. Addiſon's Speciator, N°. 177.
NI'NETEEN. adj. [nigonzyne, Saxon.] Nine and ten ; one
leſs than twenty. -
Nineteen in twenty of perplexing words might be changed
into eaſy ones, ſuch as occur to ordinary men. Swift.
Ni’NETEENTH. adj. [n,30nteoča, Saxon.] The ordinal of
nineteen; the ninth after the tenth.
In the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzer king of
Babylon, came Nebuzaradan. 2 Kings xxv. 8.
N1'NFTY, adj. [bunbnizontig, Saxon.] . Nine times ten.
Enos lived ninety years and begat Cainan. Gen. v. 9.
NINTH. adj. [ negotia, Saxon.) That which precedes the
tenth ; the firſt after the eighth ; the ordinal of nine.
Upon a ſtrict obſervation of many, I have not found any
that ſee the ninth day. Brown's Pulgar Erreurs.
Ni’NTIETH. adj. [punonizonteogota, Saxon.] The ordinal
of ninety; the tenth nine times told.
NINNY. n.ſ.. [ninno, a child, Spaniſh.] A fool; a ſimpleton:
What a pied ninny’s this Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
The dean was ſo ſhabby, and look'd like a ninny, -
That the captain ſuppos'd he was curate. Swift.
NI'NNYHAMMER. m. ſ. [from ninny..] ... A ſimpleton. -
Another vents her paſſion in ſcurrilous terms an old min-
ny-hammer, a dotard, a nincompoop, is the beſt lanºgº ſhe
can afford me. Addiſon's Guardian, N°. 199.
Have you no more manners º to ... º that
has ſaved that clod-pated, numſkull'd, ninny”.9 Yºu".
from ruin, and all º 5...] Arbuth. john Bull.
To NIP. v. a. ſnijpen, Dutch. - -
1. To pinch § .. the nails i.” . yº . giveth
In oranges and lemons, the ºppºg 9' ºngº I r
cº, . norè. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt, N°. 388.
F by any flight means.
2. "ß ‘. that extract the ſap of the moſt lejing
branches, muſt be mipt off. Mºrtimer's Huſb.
3. To blaſt 5 to deſtroy before full growth.
This is the ſtate of man; tº-day he puts forth
- The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 184</div><p class="Text">N I T
N I T
The tender leaves of hopes, to-morrow bloſſoms,
And bears his bluſhing honours thick upon him ;
The third day comes a froſt, a killing froſt;
And when he thinks, good eaſy º: full ſurely
His greatneſs is a ripening, nips his root;
... he falls º I . p Shakeſpeare's Henry VIII.
A flower doth ſpread and dye,
Thou would'ſt extend me to ſome good,
Before I were by froſt's extremity nipt in the bud. Herb.
His delivery now proves
Abortive, as the firſt-born bloom of ſpring, -
Nipt with the lagging rear of winter's froſt. Milton.
Had he not been nipped in the bud, he might have made a
formidable figure in his own works among poſterity. Addison
From ſuch encouragement it is eaſy to gueſs to what per-
fe&amp;tion I might have brought this great work, had It not bºn
mipt in the bud. Arbuthnot's john Bull.
4. To pinch as froſt. - -
The air bites ſhrewdly, it is very cold. —
—It is a nipping and an eager air: Shakespeare. Hamlet.
when ificies hang by the wall,
And Dick the ſhepherd blows his nail;
When blood is nipt, and ways be foul, - -
Then nighty fings the ſtaring owl. Sła. Lºve's L. Lºft.
5. To vex; to bite. - -
And ſharp remorſe his heart did prick and nº, , .
That drops of blood thence like a well did play. Fairy Q,
6. To ſatiriſe; to ridicule ; to taunt ſarcaſtically.
But the right gentle mind would bite his lip
To hear the javel ſo good men to nip. Hulherd's Tal.
Quick wits commonly be in deſire new-fangled; in pur-
poſe unconſtant; bold with any perſon; buſy in every mat-
ter; ſoothing ſuch as be preſent, nipping any that is abſent.
Aſham's Schoolmaſter.
º
Nip. n.ſ.. [from the verb.]
1. A pinch with the nails or tech. -
I am ſharply taunted, yea, ſometimes with pinches, nips,
and bobs. Aftham's Schoolmaſter.
2. A ſmall cut.
What this a ſleeve * 'tis like a demicannon;
What up and down carv'd like an apple-tart 2
Here's ſnip, and nip, and cut, and ſliſh, and ſlaſh,
Like to a cenſer in a barber's ſhop. Shakeſpeare.
3. A blaſt.
So haſty fruits and too ambitious flow’rs,
Scorning the midwifry of rip'ning ſhow’rs,
In ſpight of froſts, ſpring from th’ unwilling earth,
But find a nip untimely as their birth. Stepney.
4. A taunt ; a ſarcaſm.
N1'PPER. n.ſ.. [from nip.] A ſatiriſt. Out of uſe.
Ready backbiters, fore nippers, and ſpiteful reporters privily
of good men. Aſham.
N1(PPERS. m. ſ. [from mip.] Small pincers.
NI'PPINGLY. adv. [from nip.] With bitter ſarcaſm.
NIPPLE. m. ſ. ſnºpele, Saxon.]
1. The teat; the dug; that which the fucking young take in-
to their mouths.
Tho' tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me.—
I would, while it was ſmiling in my face,
Have pluckt my nipple from his boneleſs gums. Shałºff.
In creatures that nouriſh their young with milk, are adapt-
ed the nipples of the breaſt to the mouth and organs of ſuc-
tion. . Ray on the Creation.
2. The orifice at which any animal liquor is ſeparated.
. In moſt other birds there is only one gland, in which are
divers little cells ending in two or three larger cells, lying
under the nipple of the oil bag. Derham's Phyſico Thº.
NIPPLEwok r. n.ſ. [Lampſana.] A very common weed.
Nisi PR1us. n.ſ.
... [In law.] A judicial writ, which lieth in caſe where the
inqueſt is panelled, and returned before the juſtices of the
bank; the one party or the other making petition to have
this writ for the eaſe of the country. It is directed to the
ſheriff, commanding that he cauſe the men impanelled to
come before the juſtices in the ſame county, for the deter-
mining of the cauſe there, except it be ſo difficult that it
need great deliberation : in which caſe, it is ſent again to
the bank. It is ſo called from the firſt words of the writ
nift apud talem locum prius venerint; whereby it appeareth
that juſtices of aſſizes and juſtices of hiſ prius, differ. sº
*juſtices of hiſ prius, muſt be one of them befºre whº,
* cauſe is depending in the bench, with ſºme other good
N men of the county aſſociated to him. Cowel.
IT. ºf [pnitu, Saxon.] The egg of a louſe, or ſmall
animal.
The w - -
he whame, or burrel-fly, is vexatious to horſes in ſum-
nic • {l:... : -
º: .# them, but only by their bombylious
:--&gt; ickling them in ſticking their nits, or eggs, on the
alſ.
z -- - Derham’s Pſ, !
*::::::: *ſ. Initºtia, Latin.) º, Phyſ. Theºl.
1. Luſtre; clear brightneſs.
2. [From the Latin, mitor.] Endeavour; ſpring to expand it-
ſelf. - - -
The atoms of fire accelerate the motion of theſe particles;
from which acceleration their ſpring, or endeavour outward
will be augmented; that is, thoſe zones will have a ſtrong
nitency to By wider open. Boyle.
NI'THING. m. ſ. A coward, daffard, poltroon. 1.
Niſrip. adj. Initidus, Latin.J. Bright; ſhining ; luſtrous.
We reſtore old pieces of dirty gold to a clean and nitid yel-
low, by putting them into fire and aqua fortis, which take
off the adventitious filth. - Boyle on Colours.
NITRE. m. ſ. ſnitre, Fr. nitrum, Latin.]
The ſalt which we know at this time, under the name of
mitre or ſalt-petre, is a cryſtalline pellucid, but ſomewhat
whitiſh ſubſtance, of an acrid and bitteriſh taſte, impreſſing
a peculiar ſenſe of coldneſs upon the tongue. This ſak,
though it affords, by means of fire, an acid Ipirit capable of
diſſolving almoſt every thing, yet manifeſts no ſign of its
containing any acid at all in its crude ſtate. Nitre is of the
number of thoſe ſalts which are naturally blended in imper-
ceptible particles in earths, ſtones, and other foſſile ſub-
ſtances, as the particles of metals are in their ores : it is
ſometimes however found pure, in form of an effloreſcence,
either on its ores or on the ſurface of old walls; theſe ef-
floreſcences diſſolved in proper water, ſhooting into regular
and proper cryſtals of nitre. That this ſalt ſhould be found
on the ſurface of walls is not wonderful, ſince it is found
only on or near the ſurface of the earth where it is produced.
The earth from which nitre is made, both in Perſia and the
Eaſt-Indies, is a kind of yellowiſh marl found in the bare
cliffs of the fides of hills expoſed to the northern and caſtern
winds, and never in any other ſituation. From this marl
the ſalt is ſeparated by water; but the cryſtals into which it
ſhoots, as we receive them from the Eaſt-Indies, are ſmall,
imperfect, and impure. Earths of whatever kind, moiſtened
by the dung and excrement of animals, frequently afford ni-
tre in large quantities. The earths at the bottom of pigeon-
houſes, and thoſe of ſtables and cow-houſes, all afford nitre,
on being thrown into water and boiled. In France, where
very little nitre is imported, they make it from the rubbiſh
of old mortar and plaiſter of buildings; and the mortar of
old walls with us, if moiſtened with urine and expoſed to
the air in a proper ſituation that is open to the north eaſt,
and covered over to defend it from wet, never fails to afford
nitre in a few weeks, and that in proportion of one tenth of
the weight of the ingredients. There is no queſtion but a
manufactory of nitre might be eſtabliſhed in England to as
much advantage as that of France. The place where the
materials are expoſed, is to be carefully examined. It muſt
be moderate as to the great points of moiſture and dryneſs;
if there be too much moiſture the nitre which is already
formed will be waſhed away, and without ſome moiſture
the ſalts will hardly be ever formed. Heat and coldneſ,
unleſs exceſſive, can be of no conſequence. It is on account
of the requiſiteneſs of ſo certain a degree of moiſture to the
materials from which nitre is obtained, that the north eaſt
winds are of ſo much uſe in the production of it. In ſpring
and autumn, which are the ſeaſons when this ſalt is prin-
cipally made, theſe two winds are neither too moiſt nor too
dry, eſpecially in the night ; the ſouth and weſt winds are
deſtructive, becauſe they bring ſtorms and ſhowers. In me-
dicine, nitre is cooling and diuretick, and good in burning fe-
vers. The natrum or nitre of the ancients, is a genuine, na-
tive, and pure ſalt, extremely different from our nitre, and from
all other native ſalts; being a fixed alkali plainly of the na-
ture of thoſe made by fire from vegetables, yet being ca-
pable of a regular cryſtallization, which thoſe ſalts are not.
It is found on or very near the ſurface of the earth, in thin
flat cakes, ſpungy, light, and friable ; and when pure, of
a pale browniſh white colour. It is of an acrid taſte, like
pot-aſhes. About Smyrna and Epheſus, and through a great
part of Aſia Minor, this ſalt is extremely frequent on the
ſurface of the earth, and alſo in Sindy, a province of the
inner Aſia, where they ſweep it up and call it ſoap-earth,
uſing a ſolution or lye of it in waſhing. The natrum or ni-
tre of the ancients, has been by ſome ſuppoſed to be a loſt
ſubſtance, and by others to be the ſame with our nitre or
ſalt-petre ; but both theſe opinions are erroneous, this ſalt
being the true natrum of the ancients, anſwering perfectly
to its deſcription, and having all its uſes and virtues. In
ſcripture we find that the ſalt called nitre would ferment with
vinegar, and had an abſterfive quality, properties which per-
fectly agree with this ſalt but not with ſalt-petre, as do many
different qualities aſcribed to it by the ancients. Hill on F.ſ.
Some tumultuous cloud,
Inſtinét with fire and nitre, hurried him. Milton.
Some ſteep their ſeed, and ſome in cauldrons boil,
With vigorous nitre and with lees of oil. Dryden.
NITRous, adj. Initreux, Fr. from nitre.] Impregnated with
nitre ; conſiſting of nitre.
4. Eart
º
1.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 185</div><p class="Text">N O B
Earth and water, mingled by the heat of the ſun, gather
a nitrous fatneſs more than either of them have ſeverally.
Bacon's Natural Hi/lory.
The northern air being more fully charged with thoſe
particles ſuppoſed nitrous, which are the aliment of fire, is
fitteſt to maintain the vital heat in that activity which is ſuf-
ficient to move ſuch an unweildy bulk with due celerity. Ray.
He to quench his drought ſo much inclin'd,
May ſnowy fields and nitrous paſtures find,
Meet ſtores of cold ſo greedily purſu'd,
And be refreſh'd with never-waſting food. Blackmore.
Nºrry. adj. [from nitre.] Nitrous. - -
Winter my theme confines; whoſe nitry wind
Shall cruſt the flabby mire, and kennels bind. Gay.
Nºrrily. adv. [from nitty.] Louſly. -
One Bell was put to death at Tyburn for moving a new
rebellion; he was a man nittily needy, and therefore ad-
Ventroll.S. - Hayward.
Nºrty, adj. [from nit.] Abounding with the eggs of lice.
{,'val. adj. Inivais, Latin.] Abounding with ſnow. Dić.
Nºvgous. adj. [niveus, Latin.] Snowy : reſembling ſnow.
Cimabar becomes red by the acid exhalation of ſulphur,
which otherways preſents a pure and niveous white. Brown.
Nºzy, n.ſ. A dunce ; a fimpleton. A low word.
NO. adv. [na, Saxon.]
1. The word of refuſal. -
Our courteous Antony,
whom ne'er the word of no, woman heard ſpeak,
Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feaſt. Shakespeare
Henceforth my wooing mind ſhall be expreſt,
In ruſſet yeas and honeſt kerſy noes. Sha. L. Labours Loſt.
if you will not conſider theſe things now, the time will
ſhortly come when you ſhall conſider them whether you will
or 110. 'alamy’s Serm.
2. The word of denial oppoſite to conceſſion or affirmation.
I think it would not ſort amiſs, to handle the queſtion,
whether a war for the propagation of the Chriſtian faith,
without another cauſe of hoſtility, be lawful or no, and in
what caſes f Bacon.
3. It ſometimes confirms a foregoing negative.
My name's Macbeth: —
—The Devil himſelf could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear. —
—No, nor more fearful. Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
Never more
This hand ſhall combat oh the crooked ſhore:
No; let the Grecian pow'rs oppreſt in fight,
Unpity'd periſh in their tyrant's fight. Dryd. Homer.
4. It ſometimes ſtrengthensafollowing negative; no not, not even.
No not the bow which ſo adorns the ſkies,
So glorious is, or boaſts ſo many dies. J/aller.
No. adj.
I. Not any ; none.
Let their be no ſtrife between me and thee. Gen. xiii. 8.
, Woman and fool are two hard things to hit,
For true no meaning puzzles more than wit. Pope.
2. It ſeems an adjective in theſe phraſes, no longer, no more,
no where.
When we ſaw that they were no where, we came to Sa-
muel. - I Sam. x. 14.
In vain I reach my feeble hands to join
In ſweet embraces; ah! no longer thine. Dryden.
3. No one; none; not any one.
Nº one who doeth good to thoſe only from whom he ex-
pe&amp;ts to receive good, can ever be fully ſatisfied of his own
ſincerity. Smalridge's Serm.
To Nobi'Lit ATF. v. a. [nobilito, Latin.] To ennoble ; to
make noble.
Nobility. r. ſ. ſnºbilitas, Latin.]
I. Antiquity of family joined with ſplendour.
When I took up Boccace unawares, I fell on the ſame
argument of preferring virtue to mobility of blood, and titles,
in the ſtory of Sigiſmunda. Dryden, Fab. Prºf.
Long galleries of anceſtors,
Challenge, nor wonder, or eſteem from me,
“Wirtue alone is true nobility.” Dryden.
2. Rank or dignity of ſeveral degrees, conferred by ſovereigns.
Nºbility in England is extended to five ranks; duke, mar-
quis, earl, viſcount, baron.
3. The perſons of high rank ; the perſons who are exalted
above the commons.
It is a purpos'd thing,
To curb the will of the mobility. Shakſ. Coriºlenus.
4. Dignity; grandeur; greatneſs.
Though the hated Ampialus, yet the nobility of her cou-
rage prevailed over it; and ſhe deſired he might be pardoned
that youthful errour; conſidering the reputation he had to be
the beſt knight in the world; ſo as hereaſter he governed
himſelf, as one remembering his fault. Sidney, b. ii.
But ah, my muſe, I would thou hadſt facility
To work my goddeſs ſo by thy invention,
On me to caſt thoſe eyes where ſhine nºbility. Sidney.
Baſe men, being in love, have then a nobility in their na-
tures more than is native to them. Shakeſpeare's Othello.
A hey º it great their ſov’reign to controul,
nd nam'd their pride, mobility of ſoul. Dryden.
NO'BLE. aff. º nobilis, º y
1. Qf an ancient and ſplendid family.
2. Exalted to a rank above commonalty.
- From virtue firſt began,
The diff'rence that diſtinguiſh'd man from man:
He claim’d no title from deſcent of blood,
But that which made him noble, made him good. Dryd.
3. Great; worthy; illuſtrious. -
Thus this man died, leaving his death for an exam
a noble courage, and a memorial of virtue. 2 -
To vice induſtrious, but to nobler deeds
sle of
44ac. vi. 3 I-
Tim’rous. Miltºn.
A noble ſtroke he lifted high,
Which hung not, but with tempeſt fell. Milt.
Thoſe two great things that ſo engroſs the deſires and del
ſigns of both the nobler and ignobler ſort of mankind, are
to be found in religion; namely, wiſdom and pleaſure. South.
4. Exalted; elevated; ſublime.
My ſhare in pale Pyrene I reſign,
And claim no part in all the mighty nine:
Statues, with winding ivy crown'd belong
To nobler poets, for a nobler ſong. Dryd.
5. Magnificent; ſtately: as, a noble parade.
6. Free; generous; liberal.
7. Principal; capital: as, the heart is one of the noble parts of
the body.
Noble. n.ſ. -
1. One of high rank. - - -
Upon the nobles of the children of Iſrael he laid not his
hand. Ex. xxiv. II.
How many nobles then ſhould hold their places,
That muſt ſtrike ſail to ſpirits of vile ſort Shakeſp.
What the nobles once ſaid in parliament, Nolumus leges An-
gliae mutari, is imprinted in the hearts of all the people. Bacon.
The nobles amongſt the Romans took ſpecial care in their
laſt wills, that they might have a lamp in their monuments.
ſ?ilkin's Math. Magic.
See all our nobles begging to be ſlaves,
See all our fools aſpiring to be knaves. Pope, Dial. i.
It may be the diſpoſition of young nobles, that they ex-
pećt the accompliſhments of a good education without the
leaſt expence of time or ſtudy. Swift's Modern Education.
The ſecond natural diviſion of power, is of ſuch men
who have acquired large poſſeſſions, and conſequently de-
pendencies; or deſcend from anceſtors who have left them
great inheritances, together with an hereditary authority:
theſe eaſily unite in thoughts and opinions. Thus com-
mences a great council or ſenate of nobles, for the weighty
affairs of the nation. Swift.
2. A coin rated at ſix ſhillings and eight-pence; the ſum of
ſix and eight-pence.
Shortly after he coined nobles; of noble, fair, and fine gold.
Camden's Remains.
Many fair promotions
Are daily given, to enoble thoſe
That ſcárce, ſome two days ſince, were worth a noble. Sha.
Upon every writ procured for debt or damage, amounting
to forty pounds or more, a noble, that is ſix ſhillings and
eight-pence, is, and uſually hath been paid to fine. Bacon.
Noble liverwort. [Hepatica.] A plant. -
The charaćters are: the root is fibroſe and perennial:
the leaf conſiſts of three lobes on a pedicle, which ariſes
from the root; as does the pedicle of the flower, which is
naked and ſingle: the cup of the flower is, for the moſt
part, compoſed of one leaf ſometimes cut into three or
four deep diviſions: the flower conſiſts of many leaves, which
expand in form of a roſe: the fruit is globular, conſiſting of
one ſingle cell curvated. - Miller.
Noble MAN. n.ſ.. [noble and man.] One who is ennobled.
If I bluſh,
It is to ſee a nobleman want manners. Shakeſ ſºn. VIII.
The nºbleman is he, whoſe noble mind --
Is fill'd with inborn worth. Dryden's Iſiſ of Bath.
No BLEN Ess. m. ſ. [from nºble.] - -
1. Greatneſs; worth ; dignity; magnanimity.
The noblemſ of life
Is to do this ; when ſuch a mutual pair, , .
And ſuch a twain can do.'t. Shagſ. Ant; and Cleºpatra.
Any thing
That my ability may undergo, "…. .
And noblemſ impoſe. Shakespeare's Jºinter’s Yale.
‘īrue rolleneſs would -
Learn him forbearance from ſo foul a wrong. Shakeſp.
He that does as well in private between God and his own
ſoul, as in public, hath given himſelf a good teſtimony that
his purpoſes are full of honeſty, noblemſ, and integrity. .
Taylor’s Holy Living.
+
18 F Great-
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 186</div><p class="Text">N O C
N O D
Greatneſs of mind, and noblemſ, their ſeat
Build in her lovelicſt. Milton's Par. Lºft.
There is not only a congruity herein between the nº-
neſ; of the faculty and the object, but alſo the faculty is ºn-
riched and advanced by the worth of the object. Halº.
You have not only been careful of my fortune, which
was the effect of your nobleneſs, but you have been ſolicitous
of my reputation, which is that of your kindneſs. Dryden.
2. Splendour of deſcent; luſtre of pedigree.
No! Bless. m. ſ. [nzblºſſe, French.]
1. Nobility. This word is not now uſed in any ſenſe.
Fair branch of nollſ, flower of chivalry, -
That with your worth the world amazed make. Fairy Q.
2. Dignity; greatneſs. -
Thou whoſe nºbleſ, keeps one ſtature ſtill,
And one true poſture, tho' beſieg'd with ill. Ben. Johnſºn.
3. Noblemen collectively.
Let us haſte to hear it,
And call the mºhirſ to the audience. Shakeſp. Ham.
I know no reaſon we ſhould give that advantage tº the
commonalty of England to be foremoſt in brave actions,
which the hollſ of France would ſever ſuffer in their pea-
ſants. Dryden's Prºf. to Ann. Mirab.
No BLY. adv. [from noble.] -
1. Of ancient and ſplendid extraction.
Only a ſecond laurel did adorn
His Collegue Catulus, tho' mally born ;
He ſhar'd the pride of the triumphal bay,
But Marius won the glory of the day. Dryden.
2. Greatly; illuſtriouſly; magnanimouſly.
Did he not ſtraight the two delinquents tear,
That were the ſlaves of drink and thralls of ſleep
Was not that nably done Shakeſpeare's A ſacketh.
This fate he could have 'ſcap'd, but would not loſe
Honour for life; but rather nºbly choſe
Death from their fears, than ſafety from his own. Dºnham.
3. Grandly ; ſplendidly. -
There could not have been a more magnificent deſign than
that of Trajan's pillar. Where could an emperor's aſhes
have been ſo nobly lodged, as in the midſt of his metropolis,
and on the top of ſo exalted a monument. Addiſon on Italy.
No'Body. m. / [no and body..] No one ; not any one.
This is the tune of our catch plaid by the picture of no-
ody. Shakeſpeare's Temptſ?.
It fell to ſecretary Coke's turn, for whom nºbody cared,
to be made the ſacrifice ; and he was put out of his office.
Clarendon, b. ii.
If in company you offer ſomething for a jeſt, and nobody
ſeconds you on your own laughter, you may condemn their
taſte, and appeal to better judgments; but in the mean time
you make a very indifferent figure.
No'cENT. adj. [noceni, Latin.]
1. Guilty; criminal.
The earl of Devonſhire being intercfied in the blood of
York, that was rather feared than necent; yet as one, that
might be the object of others plots, remained priſoner in the
Tower during the king's life. Bacon's Henry VII.
2. Hurtful; miſchievous.
His head, well-ſtor'd with ſubtile wiles:
Not yet in horrid ſhade, or diſmal den,
Norºnt yet; but on the graffy herb,
Fearleſs unfear'd he ſlept. AZilton’s Paradiſe Lºſº, b. ix.
The warm limbec draws
Salubrious waters from the nocent brood. Philiºs.
They meditate whether the virtues of the one will exalt
or º the force of *; or correct any of its no-
cent qualitics. atts's Improvement of the Mind.
Nock. m. ſ. ſnocchia, Italian.] tºp ment ºf the Mind
I. A ſlit ; a nick ; a notch.
2. The fundament. Les fºſſes.
When the date of mºck was out,
T off dropt the ſympathetick ſnout. Hudibras.
Noct. A MBULO. m. ſ. [nox and ambul, Latin. J One who
walks in his ſleep.
Reſpiration being carried on in ſleep, is no argument
againſt its being voluntary. What ſhall we ſay of º
bulo's P There .* Voluntary motions carried on without
Nº. to avoid pain. - Arbuthnot on Air.
oc. DIAL. adi, [nociis and dies.] Compriſing a night and a day.
º nectidial day, the lunar periodic month, and the ſo-
Yº", * matural and univerſal; but incommºnſurate each
to another, and difficult to be reconciled. Holder.
º off... [nox and fro.] Bringing night. Dići.
night ****, adj. Inactivºgus, Latin.j Wandering in the
No'cru ARY - Die?.
"A"Y. m. ſ. [from #2, #; - -
paſſes by º [ • Latin.] An account of what
have got a
parcel of viſ, - - -
my no: iſions and other miſcellanics in
“” which I ſhall ſend you to enrich your paper.
Addison's Spectator, Nº. 586.
Swift's Aſſel.
Noºcre Rs. n.ſ. ſnºurne, Fr. mºurnu, Latin.] An office of
devotion performed in the night.
The reliques being conveniently placed before the church-
door, the vigils are to be celebrated that night before them,
and the nºurn and the mattins for the honour of the ſaints
whoſe the reliques are. - . . Stillingfleet.
NOCTU'RNAL. adj. [nocłurnº, Latin.] Nightly.
From gilded roots depending lamps diſplay
Nºurnal beams, that emulate the day. Dryden.
I beg leave to make you : preſent of a dream, which ma
ſerve to lull your readers 'till ſuch time as you yourſelf ſhall
gratify the public with any of your mºurnal diſcoveries. Addison
Noctuºs Ai. m. ſ. An inſtrument by which obſervations are
made in the night. - - -
That projection of the ſtars which includes all the ſtars
in our horizon, and therefore reaches to the thirty-eight de-
gree and a half of ſouthern latitude, though its centre is the
north pole, gives us a better view of the heavenly bodies as
they appear every night to us; and it may ſerve for a nor-
turnal, and ſhew the truc hour of the night. JWatts.
To NOD. v. n. (Of uncertain derivation: vºw, Gr. nuto, Lat.
amncidio, Welſh.]
1. To decline the head with a quick motion.
Let every feeble rumour ſhake your hearts;
Your enemies with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into deſpair. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
Cleopatra hath nodded him to her. Shakespeare A. and Cleop.
On the faith of Jove rely,
When nodding to thy ſuit he bows the ſky. Dryden.
2. To pay a ſlight bow.
Caſſius muſt bend his body,
If Caeſar careleſly but nod on him.
3. To bend downwards with quick motion.
When a pine is hewn on the plains,
And the laſt mortal ſtroke alone remains,
Labºring in pangs of death, and threatning all,
This way and that ſhe nods, conſidering where to fall.
Dryden's Ovid, b. x.
He climbs the mountain rocks,
Fir’d by the nodding verdure of its brow. Thomſ. Spring.
4. To be drowſy.
Your two predeceſſors were famous for their dreams and
viſions, and contrary to all other authors, never pleaſed their
readers more than when they were nodding. Addison Guard.
NoD. m. ſ. [from the verb.]
1. A quick declination of the head.
Children being to be reſtrained by the parents only in vi-
cious things; a look or nod only ought to correct them when
they do amiſs. Locke on Education.
A mighty king I am, an earthly God;
Nations obey my word, and wait my nod:
And life or death depend on my decree. Prior.
2. A quick declination.
Like a drunken ſailor on a maſt,
Ready with every nod to tumble down
Into the fatal bowcle of the deep.
3. The motion of the head in drowſneſs.
Every drowſy nod ſhakes their doctrine who teach, that
the ſoul is always thinking. Locke.
4. A ſlight obeiſance.
Will he give you the nod P Shakespeare. Troil, and Creſſida.
Since the wiſdom of their choice is rather to have my cap
than my heart, I will practiſe the inſinuating nod, and be
off to them moſt counterfeitly. Shakeſpeare's Coriolanus.
NoDATION. m. ſ. [from nod...] The ſtate of being knotted,
or ačt of making knots.
No'DDER. m. ſ. [from nod J One who makes nods.
A ſet of nodders, winkers, and whiſperers, whoſe buſineſs
is to ſtrangle all other offspring of wit in their birth. Pope.
No DDL E. m. ſ. [pnol, Saxon.] A head; in contempt.
- Her care ſhall be
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd ſtool. Shakespeare
Let our wines without mixture, or ſtain, be all fine,
Or call up the maſter and break his dull nodale. B. John.
My head's not made of braſs,
As friar Bacon's noddle was. Hudibras, p. ii. cant. I.
He would not have it ſaid before the people, that images
are to be worſhipped with Latria, but rather the contrary,
becauſe the diſtinctions neceſſary to defend it are too ſubtile
for their noddles. Stillingfleet.
Corne, maſter, I have a proječt in my noddle, that ſhall
bring my miſtreſs to you back again, with as good will as
ever ſhe went from you. L’E/ºrange.
Why ſhouldſt thou try to hide thyſelf in youth :
Impartial Proſerpine beholds the truth ;
And laughing at ſo fond and vain a taſk,
Shakespeare jul. Caeſar.
Shakeſp. R. III.
Will ſtrip thy hoary noddle of its maſk. Addison.
Thou that art ever half the city's grace,
And add'ſt to ſolemn noddles, ſolemn pace. Fenton.
No'DDY. m. ſ. [from naudin, French..] A ſimpleton; an idiot.
The
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 187</div><p class="Text">N O I
No M
The whole race of bawling, fluttering noddies, by what
title ſoever dignified, are a-kin to the aſs in this fable.
L’Eſtrange, Fable 150.
Nope. m. ſ. ſnºduſ, Latin.]
1. A knot; a knob.
2. A ſwelling on the bone. - - -
If nodes be the cauſe of the pain, foment with ſpirit of
wine wherein opium and ſaffron have been diſſolved.
- //ſeman's Surgery.
3. Interſection. - - -
All theſe variations are finiſhed in nineteen years, nearly
agreeing with the courſe of the nodes; i. e. the points in the
cºliptic where the moon croſieth that circle as ſhe paſſeth to
her northern or ſouthern latitude; which nodes are called the
head and tail of the dragon. - Holder.
Nodoſsity. n.ſ.. [from nºdºſus, Latin.] Complication; knot.
Theſe the midwife cutteth off, contriving them into a
knot cloſe unto the body of the infant; from whence en-
ſueth that tortuoſity, or complicated nodºſity we call the na-
vel. Brown’s Pulgar Errours, b. v.
No pous, adj. [nodºſius, Latin.] Knotty ; full of knots.
This is ſeldom affected with the gout, and when that be-
cometh nodous, men continue not long after. Brown's / Err.
Nopule. n.ſ. [modulus, Latin.] A ſmall lump.
Thoſe minerals in the ſtrata, are either found in grains,
or elſe they are amaſſed into balls, lumps, or nodules: which
nodules are either of an irregular figure, or of a figure ſome-
what more regular. JJ’oodward's Nat. Hiſ?.
Nocces. adj. Hard; rough 3 harſh.
He put on a hard, coarſe, nºggen ſhirt of pendrel.
- Eſcape of King Charles.
Noocin. m. ſ. ſnºſºl, German.] A ſmall mug.
All this while Frog laughed in his ſleeve, gave the eſquire
the other naggin of brandy, and clapped him on the back.
Arbuthnot's Hiſt. of J. Bull.
No1'Ance. n.ſ. [See ANNoLAN ce.] Miſchief; inconvenience.
To borrow to-day, and to-morrow to mis,
For lender and borrower noiance it is. Tuff. Huſø.
The ſingle and peculiar life is bound,
With all the ſtrength and armour of the mind,
To keep itſelf from noiance. Shakeſpeare's Hamlet.
To NOIE. v. a. To annoy. An old word diſuſed.
Let ſervant be ready with mattock in hand,
To ſtub out the buſhes that moieth the land. Tuff. Huſø.
No1'ER. m. ſ. [from moie..] One who annoys. An old word
in diſuſe.
The north is a moier to graſs of all ſuits,
The eaſt a deſtroyer to herbs and all fruits. Tuſ. Huſ,
Noi'ous. adj. [noioſo, Italian.] Hurtful; miſchievous ; trouble-
ſome ; inconvenient. Obſolete.
Being bred in a hot country, they found much hair on
their faces to be noious unto them. Spenſºr.
The falſe Dueſſa leaving noious night, -
Return'd to ſtately palace of dame Pride. Fairy Q.
But neither darkneſs foul, nor filthy bands,
Nor nciºus ſmell his purpoſe could withhold. Fairy 3,
NOISE. m. ſ. [noiſe, French.]
1. Any kind of ſound. -
Noiſes, as of waters falling down, ſounded about them,
and ſad viſions appeared unto them. I//d. xvii. 4.
Whether it were a whiſtling ſound, or a melodious moie
of birds among the ſpreading branches, theſe things made
them ſwoon. ///d. xvii. 18.
Great motions in nature paſs without ſound or noiſ. The
heavens turn about in a moſt rapid motion, without noiſe to
us perceived; though in ſome dreams they have been ſaid
to make an excellent muſick. Bacon's Nat. Hi/f.
Fear
Shakes your hearts, while thro’ the iſle they hear
A laſting noiſ, as horrid and as loud
As thunder makes, before it breaks the cloud.
2. Outcry; clamour; boaſting or importunate talk.
What noiſ, have we had about tranſplantation of diſeaſes,
and transfuſion of blood. Baker on Learning.
3. Occaſion of talk.
Socrates lived in Athens during the great plague, which
has made ſo much noiſe through all ages, and never caught
the leaſt infection. Addison's Speciator, N°. 195.
To Noise. v. n. [from the noun..] To ſound loud.
Harm
Thoſe terrors, which thou ſpeak'ſt of, did me none;
Tho' nºiſing loud and threatning nigh. Milt. P. Rºg.
To Noise. v. ... To ſpread by rumour, or report.
All theſe ſayings were noiſed abroad throughout all the
hill country. Luke i. 65.
I ſhall not necd to relate the affluence of young nobles
from hence into Spain, after the voice of our prince's being
there had been quickly noiſed. //otton.
. They might buz and whiſper it one to another; and ta-
ity withdrawing from the preſence of the apoſtle, they then
it up their voices and noiſed it about the city. Lently.
JWaller.
Norseful. adj. [nºſe and full.] Loud ; clamourous.
That cunuch, guardian of rich Holland's trade,
Whoſe nºiſful valour does no foe invade,
+ And weak aii ſtance will his friends deſtroy.
Nol'sºlºss ºff. [from nºiſ...] Silent, withoſt ſound.
On our quick’ſ decrees,
Th’ inaudible and nºiſeleſs foot of time
Dryden.
Steals, ere we can effect them. Shakeſpeare.
So nºiſeleſs would I live, ſuch death to find,
Like timely fruit, not ſhaken by the wind,
But ripcly dropping from the ſapleſs bough. Dryden.
No1's IN Ess. n. ſ. [from nºiſy..] Loudneſs of ſound ; impor-
tunity of clamour.
No1's EMAKER. m. ſ. ſnoiſ and maker.] Clamourer.
The iſſue of all this noiſe is, the making of the noiſe-
makers ſtill more ridiculous. L’Éiº.
NOISOME. adj. [noioſo, Italian.]
I. Noxons; miſchievous; unwholeſome.
In caſe it may be proved, that among the number of rites
and orders common unto both, there are particulars, the uſe
whereof is utterly unlawful in regard of ſome ſpecial bad
and noiſºme quality; there is no doubt but we ought to re-
linquiſh ſuch rites and orders, what freedom ſoever we have
to retain the other ſtill. Hooker, b. iv.
All my plants I ſave from nightly ill
Of noiſome winds, and blaſting vapours chill. Milton.
Graviſca noiſºme from the neighb'ring fen,
And his own Caere ſent three hundred men. Dryden,
The moiſome peſt’lence, that in open war
Terrible, marches thro’ the mid-day air,
And ſcatters death. Prior.
2. Offenſive ; diſguſting.
The ſeeing theſe effects, will be
Both noiſome and infectious. Shakespeare Cymbeline.
The brake and the cockle are noiſºme too much. Tuſſ.
Foul words are but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul
breath, and foul breath is no ſome. Shakeſpeare’s M. Ad. Ab.
The filthineſs of his ſmell was noiſome to all his army.
2 Mac. ix. 9.
An error in the judgment, is like an impoſtem in the head,
which is always noiſome, and frequently mortal. South.
No1'soMELY. adv. [from noiſome.] With a foetid ſtench ; with
an infectious ſteam.
No1'som EN Ess. n.ſ.. [from noiſome.] Aptneſs to diſguſt; of
fenſiveneſs.
If he muſt needs be ſeen, with all his filth and noiſºmneſ;
about him, he promiſes himſelf however, that it will be
ſome allay to his reproach, to be but one of many to march
in a troop. South's Serm.
Noisy, adj. [from noiſe.]
1. Sounding loud.
2. Clamorous ; turbulent. - -
O leave the noiſy town, O come and ſee
Our country cotts, and live content with me! Dryden.
To nºiſy fools a grave attention lend. Smith.
Although he employs his talents wholly in his cloſet, he
is ſure to raiſe the hatred of the noiſy crowd. Swift.
Noll. m. ſ. [pnol, Saxon.] A head; a noddle.
An aſs’s mol/I fixed on his head. Shakeſpeare.
NO'LI me tangere. [Latin.]
1. Kind of cancerous ſwelling, exaſperated by applications.
2. A plant.
Noli me tangere may be planted among your flowers, for
the rarity of it. Mortimer’s Huſb.
NoLI(Tros. m. ſ. [ nolitio, Latin. J Unwillingneſs ; oppoſed
to volition.
The proper acts of the will are, volition, molition, choice,
reſolution, and command, in relation to ſubordinate faculties.
Hale's Origin of Mankind.
Noºn: A N.cx. m. ſ. ſnomance, nomancie, Fr. nomen, Latin ; and
pºſsiz, Greek.] The art of divining the fates of perſons by
the letters that form thcir names. Dićf.
No'MBLEs. m. ſ. The entrails of a deer. -
NOMENCAA TOR. m. ſ. [Lat. momenclateur, Fr.] One who
calls things or perſons by their proper names.
There were a ſet of men in old Rome called nºmencla-
tors; that is, men who could call every man by his name.
Addiſon's Guardian, N°. I of.
Are envy, pride, avarice, and ambition, ſuch ill nomenclatºrs
that they cannot furniſh appellations for their owners ; Śiviſt.
NoMEN ci. A ruRE. m. ſ. ſnºmenclature, Fr. nºn-fatara, Lat.]
1. The act of naming. -
To ſay where notions cannot fitly be reconciled, that there
wanteth a term or nomenclature for it, is but a ſhift of igno-
ran CC. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. A vocabulary; a dictionary:
The watry plantations fall not under that momenclature of
Adam, which unto terreſtrious animals aſſigned a name ap-
propriate unto their natures: Brown's J/. Err.
Nó'MiNAL. adj. [nominalis, Latin.] Refering to names ra-
ther than to things; not real; titular.
Profound
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 188</div><p class="Text">N O N
N O N
-
º
*
Profound in º Hudibras, p. i.
And ...}. of gold is that complex idea the word
- º for ; as a body yellow, of a certain weight,
jº, fuſible and fixed. But the real effence º: .
ſtitution of º inſenſibie parts of that body on whic jº:
- - ild. -**'.
º: . people as anxious for the doctrines eſſential to
the church of England, as they are for the nominal diſtinc-
tion of adhering to its intereſts. Aliſon,
No'MINALLY. adv. [from nominal.] By name; with regard
to a name ; titularly.
To NOMINATE. v. a. [nomino, Latin.]
1. To name; to mention º
nly to nominate them all, ---
It . Shakespeare Inry VI. p. itſ.
One lady, I may civilly ſpare to nominate, for her ſex's
ſake, whom he termed the ſpider of the court. J/otton.
2. To entitle.
Aread, old father, why of late -
Didſt thou behight me born of Engliſh blood, -
Whom all a fairy's ſon º 710/minate. Fairy Q.
t down ; to appoint by name. -
3. To i. º rºy º º a day, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair fleſh to be cut off. Shakespeare.
Never having intended, never deſigned any heir in that
ſenſe, we cannot expect he ſhould nºminate or appoint any
perſon to it. - - - Locke.
NoMINATION. m. ſ. ſnomination, Fr. from nominate.]
1. The act mentioning by name.
The forty-one immediate cle&amp;ors of the duke, muſt be
all of ſeveral families, and of them twenty-five at leaſt con-
cur to this nºmination. J/otton's D. of Wenice.
2. The power of appointing. - -
The nomination of perſons to places, being ſo principal
and inſeparable a flower of his crown, he would reſerve to
himſelf. Clarendon.
In England the king has the nomination of an archbiſhop;
and after ſuch nomination, he ſends a congé d'elire to the
dean and chapter, to elect the perſon thus elected by him.
Ayliff's Parergon.
No'MINATIVE. [ in grammar, nºminatiſ, Fr. J The caſe that
primarily deſignates the name of any thing, and is called
right, in oppoſition to the other caſes called oblique.
NON. v. a. [Latin.] Not. It is never uſed ſeparately, but
ſometimes prefixed to words with a negative power.
Since you to non-regardance caſt my faith,
And I partly know the inſtrument
That ſcrews me from my true place in your favour;
Live you the marble-breaſted tyrant ſtill. Shakespeare
A mere inclination to matters of duty, men reckon a will-
ing of that thing; when they are juſtly charged with an ac-
tual non-performance of what the law requires 2 South.
For an account at large of biſhop Sanderſon’s laſt judg-
ment concerning God's concurrence, or non-concurrence with
the acticus of men, and the poſitive entity of ſins of com-
miſſion, I refer you to his letters. Pierce.
The third ſort of agreement or diſagreement in our ideas,
which the perception of the mind is employed about, is co-
exiſtence, or non-exiſtence in the ſame ſubject. Locke.
It is not a non-act, which introduces a cuſtom, a cuſtom
being a common uſage. 4:/º's Parergen.
In the imperial chamber this anſwer is not admitted, viz.
I do not believe it as the matter is alledged. And the ſea-
ion of this nºn-admiſſion is, becauſe of it. great uncertainty.
. Aliff's Parergon,
An apparitor came to the church, and informed the par-
{º} that he muſt pay the tenths to ſuch a man; and the
biſhop certified the eccleſiaſtical court under his ſeal on the
**:Payment of them, that he refuſed to pay them. Aylºft.
The non-appearance of Perſons to ſupport the united ſºft
of both houſes of Parliament, can never be conſtrucd as a
general diffidence of being able to ſupport the charge againſt
the patent and patentee. Swift.
This may be accounted for by the turbulence of paſſions
upon the various and ſurpriſing turns of good and evil for-
tºe, in a long evening at play; the mind being wholl
N tºken up, and the conſequence of non-attention ſo fati. Swift.
i. n. ſ. [non and *S*] Minority; time of life before
egal maturity.
In him there is a hope of government;
hich tº his nonage, counſeſ under him,
nd in his full and ripen'd years, himſelf
hall govern well Shakeſpeare', P,
- Sºakeſpeare's Richard III.
Belove but there, let poor fix .#
§ pos'd with the matureſt fears
º º ** we ſtraight ſhall find
.*.*.* no manage not the mind. Craſhaw.
e have a miſtaken a - -
t ſo ...l.: - - ..","PPrehenſion of antiquity, cajin
that ſo which in ºn * the world's nonage q % |g
c. * * kºvº.
Thoſe charters were not avoidable for the king's nonage;
and if there could have been any ſuch pretence, that alone
would not avoid them. - Hale.
After Chaucer there was a Spenſer, a Harrington, a Fair-
fax, before Waller and Denham were in being; and our
numbers were in their nonage 'till theſe laſt appeared. Dryd.
In their tender nonage, while they ſpread
Their ſpringing leaves, and lift their infant head,
Indulge their childhood, and the nurſing ſpare. Dryden.
NoNCE. m. ſ. [The original of this word is uncertain; Skinn,
imagines it to come from own or ºnce; or from natz, German,
need or uſe : junius derives it leſs probably from noiance, to
do for the nonce; being, according to him, to do it merely
fºr miſchief.] Purpoſe ; intent; deſign. Not now in uſe.
I ſaw a wolf
Nurſing two whelps; I ſaw her little ones
In wanton dalliance the teat to crave,
While ſhe her neck wreath'd from them for the nonce. Spen.
They uſed at firſt to fume the fiſh in a houſe built for the
24077te. Carew.
When in your motion you are hot,
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him
A chalice for the mance. Shafeſ. Hamlet.
Such a light and metall'd dance,
Saw you never;
And they lead men for the nonce,
That turn round like grindle-ſtones. Ben. Johnſºn.
A voider for the nonce,
I wrong the devil ſhould I pick their bones. Cleaveland.
Coming ten times for the nonce,
I never yet could ſee it flow but once. Cotton.
NoN con Fo'RMITY.. n.ſ.. [non and conformity.]
1. Refuſal of compliance.
The will of our maker, whether diſcovered by reaſon or
revelation, carries the higheſt authority with it; a confor-
mity or mºnºſºrmity to it, determines their actions to be
morally good or evil. //atts's Logick.
2. Refuſal to join in the eſtabliſhed religion.
Since the liturgy, rites, and ceremonies of our church, are
ſo much ſtruck at, and all upon a plea of conſcience, it will
concern us to examine the force of this plea, which our ad-
verſaries are ſtill ſetting up as the grand pillar and buttereſs
of nonconfºrmity. South's Sermons.
The lady will plead the toleration which allows her".
conformity in this particular. Addiſon's Speciator.
No Ncos Fo'RM1st. n.ſ.. [non and confºrmi/?..] One who re-
fuſes to join in the eſtabliſhed worſhip.
On his death-bed he declared himſelf a non-confºrmiſt, and
had a fanatic preacher to be his ſpiritual guide. Swift.
NoNE, adj. [ne one, nan, ne ane, Saxon. J
I. Not one.
Ye ſhall flee when none purſueth you. Lev. xxvi. 17.
That fowl which is none of the lighteſt, can eaſily move
itſelf up and down in the air without ſtirring its wings. J/i/É.
Another, which is none of the leaſt advantages of hope
is, its great efficacy in preſerving us from ſetting too high a
value on preſent enjoyments. Addiſon's Speciator.
2. Not any. *
Six days ſhall ye gather it, but on the ſabbath there ſhal!
be nºne. Exodus xvi. 26.
Thy life ſhall hang in doubt, and ſhalt have none aſſurance
of this life. Deutr. xxii. 66.
Before the deluge, the air was calm ; none of thoſe tu-
multuary motions of vapours, which the mountains and
winds cauſe in ours. Burnet's Theory of the Earth.
The moſt glaring and notorious Paſſages, are none of the
fineſt. Fenton on the Claſſicks.
3. Not other.
This is none other but the houſe of God, and the gate of
heaven. Gen. xxviii. 17.
4. Nºne of ſometimes ſignifies only emphatically not.
My people would not hearken to my voice: and Iſrael
would none of me. Pſ. lxxxi. 11.
NoNENTITY. m. ſ. [non and entity.]
1. Nonexiſtence.
When they ſay nothing from nothing, they muſt under-
ſtand it as excluding all cauſes. In which ſenſe it is moſt
evidently true ; being equivalent to this propoſition, that no-
thing can make iticiſ, or, nothing cannot bring its no-ſelf
out of nonentity into ſomething. Bcºtley's Serm.
2. A thing not exiſting.
There was no ſuch thing as rendering evil for evil, when
evil was truly a nºnentity, and no where to be found. South.
We have heard, and think it pity that your inquiſitive genius
ſhould not be better employed, than in looking after that
theological monentity. Arbut, and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
NoNEXI's TENCE. m. ſ. [ non and exiſtence, J Inexiſtence;
ſtate of not exiſting.
A method of many writers, which depreciates the eſteem
of miracles is, to faive not only real verities, but alſo non-
exiſłences. Brºwn's Pulgar Errours, h. iv,
6 NoNJU'RING,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><p>
            End of Section.
          Continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=ucm.5326809207#toc">go to Table of Contents</a></p></div><a name="Section" id="Section"></a><div class="Section"><h3 class="SectionHeading">Section</h3><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 189</div><p class="Text">N O R
Nexiu'RInc. adj. [non and juro, Latin.] Belonging to thoſe
who will not ſwear allegiance to the Hanoverian family.
This objection was offered me by a very pious, learned,
and worthy gentleman of the nonjuring party. . Swift.
Noryu'RoR. m. ſ. [from non and juror.] One who conceiving
James II. unjuſtly depoſed, refuſes to ſwear allegiance to
thoſe who have ſucceeded him.
NoNNA"t URALs. m. ſ. [non naturalia.] r
Phyſicians reckon theſe to be ſix, viz. air, meat and
drink, ſleep and watching, motion and reſt, retention and
excretion, and the paſſions of the mind.
The ſix nonnaturals are ſuch as neither naturally conſti-
tutive, nor merely deſtrućtive, do preſerve or deſtroy accord-
ing unto circumſtance. -
NoNPARE'il. n. ſ. [non and pareil, French.]
1. Excellence unequalled. *
My lord and maſter loves you : O ſuch love
Could be but recompens'd tho' you were crown'd , , ,
The nonpareil of beauty. Shakespeare Twelfth Night.
2. A kind of apple. , -
. Printers letter of a ſmall ſize, on which ſmall Bibles and
Common Prayers are printed. . . . . .
NONPLUS. r. ſ. [non and plus, Latin.] Puzzle ; inability
to ſay or do more. A low word.
Let it ſeem never ſo ſtrange and impoſſible, the nonplus of
my reaſon will yield a fairer opportunity to my faith. South.
One or two rules, on which their concluſions depend, in
moſt men have governed all their thoughts: take theſe from
them and they are at a loſs, and their underſtanding is per-
fečtly at a mºlus. Locke.
Sºch an artiſt did not begin the matter at a venture,
and when put to a nonplus, pauſe and heſitate which way he
"ſhould proceed; but he had firſt in his comprehenſive in-
tellect a compleat idea of the whole organical body. Bentley.
To No NPLUs. v. a. [from the noun..] To confound ; to
puzzle; to put to a ſtand; to ſtop. -
Nor is the compoſition of our own bodies the only won-
der; we are as much nonpluſ? by the moſt contemptible worm
and plant. Glanv. Scept. c. vii.
His parts were ſo accompliſht,
That right or wrong he ne'er was nonpluſ”. Hudibras.
Thatſin that is a pitch beyond all thoſe, muſt needs be ſuch an
one as muſt nonplus the devil himſelf to proceed farther. South.
What, you are confounded, and ſtand mute
Somewhat nonphy? to hear you deny your name, Dryden.
Tom has been eloquent for half an hour together, when
he has been nonpluyed by Mr. Dry's deſiring him to tell
what it was that he endeavoured to prove. Spect. 471.
Noss E's DEN.cf. n.ſ. (non and reſidence..] Failure of reſidence.
If the charaćter of perſons choſen into the church had
been regarded, there would be fewer complaints of non-
reſºlºr:e. - Swift.
NoNRE's DENT. m. ſ. ſnon and reſident.] One who neglects
to live at the prop, r place.
As to nonreſidence, there are not ten clergymen in the
kingdom who can be termed nonreſidents. Swift.
N N RESI's TANCE. m. ſ. [non and reſiſtance.] The principle of
not oppoſing the king ; ready obedience to a ſuperior.
NONSENSE. m. ſ. [non and ſenſe.]
1. Unmeaning or upgrammatical language.
'Till underſtood, all tales,
Iike monſºrſe, are not true nor falſe. Hud. p. iii.
Many copies diſperſed gathering new faults, I ſaw more
* than I could have crammed into it. Dryden.
his nonſenſe got into all the following editions by a miſ-
take of the ſtage editors. Pºpe's Notes on Shakesp.
2. Trifles; things of no importance,
What's the world to him, -
'Tis nonſenſe all. - Thºmſºn.
NossF Nsic AL. adj. [from nonſenſe..] Unmeaning; fooliſh.
They had produced many other inept combinations, or
aggregate forms of particular things, and nonſenſical ſyſtems
of the whole. Ray on the Creation.
SCNSE'Nº ALN Ess, n. ſ. [from noiſenſical.] Ungrammatical
jºrgon; fooliſh abſurdity. - -
Nºssolv ENT, n. ſ. [...on and ſºlve it..] One who cannot pay
his debts. -
Nossoluºrio N. m. ſ. [non and ſolution.] Failure of ſolution.
Athenæus inſtances a nigmatical propoſitions, and the for-
feitures and rewards upon their ſolution and nonſolution. Broone.
ONSPA RAN G. adj. [non and ſparing.] Mercileſs; all-deſtroying.
- Is’t I expoſe
Thoſe tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the nonparing war. Shakespeare Ali's well that Ends well.
To NoN sui'i. v. a. [non and ſuit.j To deprive of the be-
neſt of a legal proceſs for ſome failure in the management.
The addreſſes of both houſes of parliament, the council,
and the declarations of moſt counties and corporations, are
laid aſide as of no weight, and the whole kingdom of Ireland
nonſuited, in default of appearance. Swift.
Noodle. n.ſ. [from noddle or noddy..] A fool; a ſimpleton.
Nook. m. ſ. [from een hoeck, German.] A corner; a covert
made by an angle or interſe&amp;tion.
-
Brown's W. Err.
‘. . . Safely in harbour
#i. king ..!hip, in the deep nooſ, where once
i. call'dſt me up. - Shakeſpeare's Tempeſt.
ty a foggy and a dirty farm
hº nook ſhotten º of Albion. . . . Shakeſ Hºn. V.
e la Vages were drive -- - -
little nook of and near º out of the great Ards, into a
- river of Strangford: -
now poſſeſs a little territory. gford; where they
Unſphere: Davies.
The ſpirit of Plato to unfold,
What worlds or what vaſt regions hold
Th’ immortal mind that hath forſook
Her manſion in this fleſhly nook. Milton's Poems,
Ithuriel and Zephon,
Search thro’ this garden, leave unſearch'd no nook.
A third form'd within the ground
A various mold; and from the boiling cells, -
- By ſtrange conveyance, fill'd each hollow nook. Milton.
NOON. *J., [non, Saxon; nawn, Welſh; none, Erſe; ſup-
poſed to be derived from mona, Latin, the ninth hour, at which
their cana or chief meal was eaten ; whence the other nations
called the time of their dinner or chief meal, though earlier
in the day, by the ſame name.] - c
I. The middle hour of the day; twelve; the time when the
ſun is in the meridian. -
Fetch forth the ſtocks, there ſhall he ſit ’till noon.—
'Till noon / 'till night, my lord, Shakespeare K. Lear.
The day already half his race had run,
And ſummon'd him to due repaſt at noon. Drydºn.
If I turn my eyes at nºon towards the ſun, I cannot avoid
the ideas which the light or ſun produces in me. Locke.
2. It is taken for midnight. - -
Full before him at the noon of night,
He ſaw a quire of ladies. - Dryden.
Noo's DAY. m. ſ. Inzan and day.] Midday.
The bird of night did ſit,
Ev’n at noonday, upon the market-place,
Houting and ſhrieking. Shakespeare jul. Caeſar,
The dimneſs of our intellectual eyes, Ariſtotle fitly com-
pares to thoſe of an owl at noonday. • Boyle,
Noo'NDAY. adj. Meridional.
The ſcorching fun was mounted high,
In all its luſtre to the noonday ſky. Addison's Ovid,
Noo'NING. m. ſ. [from noon..] Repoſe at noon.
Noo NTIDE. m. ſ. ſnoon and tide..] Midday; time of noon.
Sorrow breaks ſeaſons and repoſing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noontide night. Sha.
Noo'NTIDE. adj. Meridional.
Phaeton hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noontide prick.
All things in beſt order to invite
Noonſide repaſt, or aſternoon’s repoſe.
We expect the morning red in vain;
'Tis hid in vapours, or obſcur'd in rain.
The moontide yellow we in vain require;
'Tis black in ſtorm, or red in light'ning fire. Prior,
NOOSE. n.ſ.. [nºſada, entangled; a word found in the gloſſes
of Lipſius. Mr. Lye.] A running knot which the more it
is drawn binds the cloſer.
Can'ſt thou with a weak angle ſtrike the whale?
Catch with a hook, or with a nooſe inthral Sandys.
Where the hangman does diſpoſe,
Milt.
Shakeſpeare.
Mill. Par. Lyl.
To ſpecial friend the knot of nooſe. Hud. p. i.
They run their necks into a nooſe,
They'd break 'em after, to break looſe. Hud, p. iii.
Falſely he falls into ſome dangerous noºſe,
And then as meanly labours to get looſe. Dryden.
A rope and a nºſe are no jeſting matters. j. Bull.
To Noose. v. a. [from the noun..] To tie in a nooſe ; to
catch ; to entrap.
The fin is woven with threads of different ſizes, the leaſt
of them ſtrong enough to mooſe and entrap us. Gºv. Tºngue.
Nope. n.ſ. A kind of bird called a bullfinch or redtail.
Nor. conjunct. [ne or..]
1. A particle marking the ſecond or ſubſequent branch of a
negative propoſition; correlative to neither or not;
I neither love, nor fear thee. Shakeſpeare.
Neither love will twine, nor hay. . . 2Marvel.
2. Two negatives are ſometimes joined, but ill.
Mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not ; -
Nor, I am ſure there is no force in eyes -
That can do hurt. Shakeſheare's A you like it.
3. Neither is ſometimes included in nor, but not elegantly.
Pow'r, diſgrace, nºr death could ought divert -
Thy glorious tongue thus to reveal thy heart. Daniel.
Sinois nºr Xanthus ſhall be wanting there;
A new Achilles ſhall in arms appear.
4. Nor is ſometimes uſed in the firſt branch for ncil her.
Idle nymph, I pray thee, be 2
Modeſt, and not follow me, C-
I rer love myſelf, nor thee. B.a. Jºhnſºn, )
18 G. - ... Y ~ *
D2.yºn.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 190</div><p class="Text">N O S
N O T
|
Nor did they not perceive their evil plight, Milton
Or the fierce pains not feel ? twº 277.
- Varice, nor plealu 3.
}º tº: ſlave to love. Iłalſh.
NORTH. n.ſ.. [nonº, Saxon.] The point oppoſite to the
fun in the meridian.
More unconſtant than the wind; who wooes
Ev’n now the frozen boſom of the north;
And being anger'd puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew dropping ſºuth. Shakespeare
The tyrannous breathing of the north,
Shakes all our buds from blowing: Shakespeare Cymb.
Fierce Boreas iſſues forth
Tº invade th' frozen waggon of the nºrth. Dryd.
North. adj. Northern ; being in the north.
This ſhall be your north border from the great ſea to mount
Hor. Num. xxxiv. 7.
NorthEA's r. n.ſ. ſnoordeaſ, Dutch. J The point between
the north and eaſt. -
The inferiouſ ſea towards the ſoutheaſt, the Ionian to-
wards the ſouth, and the Adriatick ºn the northeaſt ſide,
were commanded by three different nations. Arbuthnot.
No'ºrºad. [from north.] Being towards the north.
The northerſy and ſoutherly winds, commonly eſteemed
the cauſes of cold and warm weather, are really the effects
of the cold or warmth of the atmoſphere. Derham.
Northers. adj. [from north.J. Being in the north.
Proud northernlord, Clifford of Cumberland. Shakespeare
If we erect a red-hot wire until it cool, and then hang it
up with wax and untwiſted ſilk, where the lower end which
cooled next the earth doth reſt, that is the northern point.
Brown's Vulgar Errours.
Northsta'R. n.ſ.. [north and ſtar.] The poleſtar; the lode-
ſtar.
If her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there
were no living near her, ſhe would infect to the nºrth/ar.
Shakeſpeare's M. Ad. Ab.
NorthwARD. adj. [ north and pearb, Saxon. J Being to-
wards the north.
No'RTHw ARD. adv. [north and peanb, Saxon.] Towards
No'RTHw ARDs. } the north.
Miſlike me not for my complexion,
The ſhadow’d livery of the burniſh'd ſun.
Bring me the faireſt creature northward born,
Where Phoebus' fire ſcarce thaws the icicles,
And prove whoſe blood is reddeſt. Shakeſpeare.
Going northward aloof, as long as they had any doubt of
being purſued, at laſt they croſſed the ocean to Spain. Bacon.
Northward beyond the mountains we will go,
Where rocks lie cover'd with eternal ſnow. Dryden.
A cloſe priſoner in a room, twenty foot ſquare, being at
the north ſide of his chamber, is at liberty to walk twenty
foot ſouthward, not walk twenty foot northward. Locke.
NoRTH we'sT. m. ſ. [north and weſt.] The point between the
north and weſt.
The bathing places that they may remain under the ſun
until evening, he expoſeth unto the ſummer ſetting, that is
northweſt. Brown's Vulgar Errours, b. vi.
Northw1ND. n.ſ.. [north and wind.] The wind that blows
from the north. -
The clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen northwind.
When the fierce northwind, with his airy forces
Rears up the Baltick to a foaming fury.
NOSE. m. ſ. ſnoere, nora, Saxon.]
1. The prominence on the face, which is the organ of ſcent
and the emunétory of the brain. -
Down with the noſe,
Take the bridge quite away
Of him that, his particular to foreſend,
Smells from the gen'ral weal. Shakeſp. Timon of Athens.
Noſe of Turks and Tartars lips. Shakeſp. Macbeth.
Our decrees,
Dead to inflićtion, to themſelves are dead;
And liberty plucks juſtice by the noſe. Sha. M. of Wen.
There can be no reaſon given why a viſage ſomewhat
longer, or a noſe flatter, could not have conſiſted with ſuch
a ſoul. Locke.
Poetry takes me up ſo entirely, that I ſcarce ſee what
paſſes under my noſe. Pope's Letters.
2. The end of any thing.
the lº are as bellows, the aſpera arteria is the noſe of
*ws, or as a channel in the ſound board of an organ.
Holder's Elements of Speech.
Milton.
JWatts.
3. Scent; ſagacity.
mº are not offended with a dog for a better noſe than his
4. To ind by the Nose. T Collier on Envy.
. . S.E. - -
ring...To lead blindly. o drag by force: as, a bear by his
Yet ho' authority be a ſtubborn bear,
* is of led by the noſe with grid. Sha, IP. T.I.
In ſuits which a man doth not underſtand, it is good fo
refer them to ſome friend, but let him chuſe well his refe-
ºndaries, elſe he may be led by, the * Bacz't.
That ſome occult deſign doth lie
In bloody cynarétomachy,
Is plain enough to him that knows, -
Hºw faints lead brothers by the "ſº Hudºras, p. i.
This is the method of all popular ſhams, when the mul-
titude are to be led by the nºſes into a fool's paradiſe. L’E/2.
5. To thruſt one's Nose intº the affairs of others. To be med-
dling with other people's matters; to be a buſy body.
6. To put one's Nose out ºf joint. To put one out in the affec-
tions of another.
To Nose. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To ſcent; to ſmell. -
Nºſe him as you go up the ſtairs.
2. To face; to oppoſe.
To Nose. v. n. To look big; to bluſter.
Adult'rous Anthony
Gives his potent regiment to a trull
That noſes it againſt us. Shakespeare Ant. and Cleopatra.
Nose’bleed. n.ſ.. [noſe and bleed.] A kind of herb.
Noºsegay. n.ſ.. [noſe and gay.] A poſie ; a bunch of flowers.
She hath made me four and twenty noſegays for the ſhearers.
Shakeſpeare's J/inter's Tale.
Ariel ſought
The cloſe receſſes of the virgin's thought;
As on the noſegay in her breaſt reclin'd,
He watch'd th’ ideas riſing in her mind. Pope.
Get you gone in the country to dreſs up noſºgays for a holy-
day. Arbuthnot's Hiſ of j. Bull.
No'seless. adj. [from noſe..] Wanting a noſe ; deprived of
the noſe.
Shakſ. Hamlet.
Mangled Myrmidons,
Nºſºlſ, and handleſs, hackt and chipt, come to him. Sha.
Nose’s MART. m. ſ. [noſe and ſmart.] The herb creſſes.
No'sle. n.ſ.. [from noſe.] The extremity of a thing: as, the
noſle of a pair of bellows.
Noſsology, n.ſ. [véro; and x870s.] Dočtrine of diſeaſes.
Nosopoe/tick. adj. [város and roºid.] Producing diſeaſes.
The qualities of the air are noſopoetick; that is, have a
pow'r of producing diſeaſes. Arbuthnot on Air.
Nostril. n. ſ. [ noſe and Syril, a hole, Saxon. J. The ca-
vity in the noſe. -
Turn then my freſheſt reputation to
A favour that may ſtrike the dulleſt no/?ril. Shakeſp.
Stinks which the noſtrils ſtraight abhor, are not the moſt
pernicious. Bacon's Nat. Hjø.
He form'd thee, Adam, and in thy no/trils breath'd
The breath of life. Milton's P. Loft, b. vii.
The ſecondary action ſubſiſteth not alone, but in conco-
mitancy with the other ; ſo the nºſtrils are uſeful both
for reſpiration and ſmelling, but the principal uſe is ſmelling.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iii.
Theſe ripe fruits recreate the nº/tril; with their aromatick
ſcent. More's Divine Dialogues.
NOSTRUM. n.ſ. [Latin.] A medicine not yet made pub-
lick, but remaining in ſome ſingle hand.
Very extraordinary, and one of his moſłrums, let it be writ
upon his monument, Hic jacet auctor hujus argumenti; for no
body ever uſed it before. Stillingfleet.
What drop or noſtrum can this plague remove : Pope.
Not. adv. [ne aupt, Saxon ; niet, Dutch.]
1. The particle of negation, or refuſal.
If thou be the world's great parent,
How falls it then that with thy furious fervour
Thou doſt afflićt as well the not deſerver,
As him that doth thy lovely heſts deſpiſe Spenſºr.
His countenance likes me not. Shakeſp. K. Lear.
The man held his peace, to wit whether the Lord had
made his journey proſperous or not. Gen. xxiv. 21.
Let each man do as to his fancy ſeems;
I wait, not I, 'till you have better dreams. Dryden.
This objection hinders not but that the heroic action en-
terpriſed for the Chriſtian cauſe, and executed happily, may
be as well executed now as it was of old. Dryden.
Grammar being to teach men not to ſpeak, but to ſpeak
correctly: where rhetoric is not neceſſary, grammar may be
ſpared. Locke on Education.
This day, be bread and peace my lot;
All elſe beneath the ſun -
Thou know'ſt if beſt beſtow'd or not,
And let thy will be done. Pope's Univerſal Prayer.
2. It denotes cellation or extinction. No more.
Thine eyes are upon me, and I am not. job vii. 8.
NOTABLE. adi, [notable, Fr. notabils, Latin.] Remarkable;
memorable; obſervable,
The ſucceſs of thoſe wars was too notable to be unknown
to your ears; which, it ſeems, all worthy fame hath glory to
come unto, Sidney, b. ii.
The<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 191</div><p class="Text">N O T
N O T
- =- ºn F_i –º-º-º-º-º-º-º-º-º-º- ".
The ſame is notified in the nºtable places of the dioceſs.
Iſhitgifte.
In the parliament at Kilkenny, many notable laws were
enacted, which ſhew, for the law doth beſt diſcover enor-
mitics, how much the Engliſh colonies were corrupted.
Davies on Ireland.
Two young men appeared notable in ſtrength, excellent in
beauty, and comely in apparel. 2 Mac. iii. 26.
They bore two or three charges from the horſe with not-
able courage, and without being broken. Clarendon.
Both armies lay ſtill without any notable action, for the
ſpace of ten days. Clarendon, b. viii.
Varro's aviary is ſtill ſo famous, that it is reckoned for
one of thoſe notables which men of foreign nations record.
Addiſon.
Caeſar, whoſe great ſagacity and condućt put his ſucceſs
as much out of the power of chance as human reaſon could
well do, yet upon occaſion of a notable experiment, that
had like to have loſt him his whole army at Dyrrachium,
tells us the power of it in his commentaries. South's Serm.
It is impoſſible but a man muſt have firſt paſſed this notable
ſtage, and got his conſcience thoroughly debauched and
hardened, before he can arrive to the height of fin. South.
2. Careful; buſtling, in contempt and ironw.
This abſolute monarch was as notable a guardian of the
fortunes, as of the lives of his ſubjećts. When any man
grew rich, to keep him from being dangerous to the ſtate, he
ſent for all his goods. Addiſon's Freeholder, N°. 10.
Not ABLE Ness. n.ſ.. [from notable.] Appearance of buſineſs;
importance. In contempt.
Not ABLY. adv. [from notable.]
1. Memorably; remarkably.
This we ſee notably proved, in that the oft polling of
hedges conduces much to their laſting. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. With conſequence; with ſhew of importance; ironically.
Mention the king of Spain or Poland, and he talks very
notably; but if you go out of the gazette, you drop him.
Addiſon's Spectator, N°. 105.
No"TARIAL. adj. [from notary.] Taken by a notary.
It may be called an authentick writing, though not a pub-
lick inſtrument, through want of a notarial evidence. Alyliffe.
NotARY. m. ſ. [notaire, Fr. from notarius, Latin.] An officer
whoſe buſineſs it is to take notes of any thing which may
concern the publick.
There is a declaration made to have that very book, and
no other ſet abroad, wherein their preſent authoriſed notaries
do write thoſe things fully and only, which being written and
there read, are by their own open teſtimony acknowledged
to be their own. PHooker.
Go with me to a notary, ſeal me there
Your bond. Shakespeare M. of Venice.
One of thoſe with him, being a notary, made an entry of
this act. Bacon's New Atlantis.
So I but your recorder am in this,
Or mouth and ſpeaker of the univerſe,
A miniſterial notary; for 'tis
Not I, but you and fame that make this verſe. Donne.
They have in each province, intendants and notaries. Temp.
NoTA'tion. n.ſ.. [notatio, Latin.]
1. The act or practice of recording any thing by marks: as,
by figures or letters.
Notation teaches how to deſcribe any number by certain
notes and charaćters, and to declare the value thereof being
ſo deſcribed, and that is by degrees and periods. Cocker.
2. Meaning; ſignification.
A foundation being primarily of uſe in archite&amp;ture, hath
no other literal notation but what belongs to it in relation to
a building. Hammond.
Conſcience, according to the very notation of the word,
imports a double knowledge; one of a divine law, and the
other of a man's own action; and ſo is properly the applica-
tion of a general law, to a particular inſtance of practice.
South's Sermons.
NOTCH. n.ſ.. [nocchia, Italian.] A nick; a hollow cut in
any thing.
. The convex work is compoſed of black and citrin pieces
in the margin, of a pyramidal figure appoſitely ſet, and with
tranſverſe notches. Grew's Muſæum.
From his rug the ſkew'r he takes,
And on the ſtick ten equal notches makes:
There take my tally of ten thouſand pound. Swift.
He ſhew’d a comma ne'er could claim
A place in any Britiſh name; -
Yet making here a perfect botch,
Thruſts your poor vowel from his notch. Swift.
* Notch. v. a. [from the noun.J. To cut in ſmall hol-
OWs.
He was too hard for him direétly : before Corioli, he
ſcotcht him and notcht him like a carbonado. Shakespeare
The convex work is compoſed of black and citrin pieces,
cancellated and tranſverſely notched. Grew's Mij.eum.
* ,
From him whoſe quills ſtand quiver'd at his ear,
To him who notches ſticks at Weſtminſter. Pope.
Notchwee'D. m. ſ. [notch and weed.] An herb called orach.
Note. [for ne motº.] May not.
Ne let him then admire,
But yield his ſenſe to be too blunt and baſe,
That note without an hound fine footing trace.
NOTE. n.ſ.. [nota, Lat. notte, Fr.]
1. Mark; token.
Whoſoever appertain to the viſible body of the church,
they have alſo the notes of external profeſſion whereby the
world knoweth what they are. Hooker, b. iii.
2. Notice; heed. &gt;
Give order to my ſervants that they take
No note at all of our being abſent hence. Shakeſp.
I will beſtow ſome precepts on this virgin,
Worthy the note. Shakeſp. All's well that ends well.
3. Reputation; conſequence.
Divers men of note have been brought over into England.
Abbot's Deſcription of the World.
Andronicus, and Junia are of note among the apoſtles.
Fairy Q.
Rom. xvi. 7.
As for metals, authors of good note aſſure us, that even
they have been obſerved to grow. Boyle.
4. Reproach; ſtigma.
The more to aggravate the note,
With a foul traytor's name ſtuff Ithy throat. Shakeſp.
5. Account; information ; intelligence.
She that from §. -
Can have no note; unleſs the ſun were poſt,
The man i'th’ moon’s too ſlow. Shakeſp. Tempeſ?.
In ſuits of favour, the firſt coming ought to take little
place; ſo far forth conſideration may be had of his truſt,
that if intelligence of the matter could not otherwiſe have
been had but by him, advantage be not taken of the note,
but the party left to his other means, and in ſome ſort re-
compenſed for his diſcovery. Bacon, Eſſay 49.
6. Tune; voice. -
Theſe are the notes wherewith are drawn from the hearts
of the multitude ſo many fighs; with theſe turies their minds
are exaſperated againſt the lawful guides and governors of
their ſouls. Hooker, b. iv.
The wakeful bird tunes her noćturnal note. AMilton.
I now muſt change thoſe notes to tragick. Milton.
You that can tune your ſounding ſtrings ſo well,
Of ladies beauties and of love to tell;
Once change your note, and let your lute report
The juſteſt grief that ever touch'd the court.
One common note on either lyre did ſtrike,
And knaves and fools we both abhorr'd alike.
7. Single ſound in muſick.
From harmony, from heavenly harmony
This univerſal frame began:
From harmony to harmony, -
Thro' all the compaſs of the notes it ran,
The diapaſon cloſing full in man.
8. State of being obſerved.
Small matters come with great commendation, becauſe
they are continually in uſe and in note; whereas the occaſion
of any great virtue cometh but on feſtivals. Bacon.
9. Short hint ; ſmall paper.
He will'd me .
In heedfull'ſt reſervation to beſtow them,
As notes whoſe faculties incluſive were,
More than they were in note.
In the body's priſon ſo ſhe lies,
As through the body's windows ſhe muſt look,
Her divers pow'rs of ſenſe to exerciſe, - -
By gath'ring notes out of the world's great book. Davies.
10. Abbreviation; ſymbol. -
Contračt it into a narrow compaſs by ſhort notes and ab-
breviations. Baker on Learning.
II. A ſmall letter.
A hollow cane within her hand ſhe brought,
But in the concave had inclos'd a note. Dryden.
12. Written paper. - * - -
I cannot get over the prejudice of taking ſome little of.
fence at the clergy, for perpetually reading their ſermons ;
perhaps my frequent hearing of foreigneº, who never make
uſe of notes, may have i. to º * Swift.
I 2. A paper given in confeſſion of a debt. -
3 #. . will go farther than my bond. John Bull.
- atory annotation. - -
I4 *::::: º have been perplexed with notes, and ob-
ſcured with illuſtrations. Filton on the Cahºki.
Notebook. n.ſ. [note and *] A book in which notes
and memorandums are ſet down.
Caſius all his faults obſerv'd ;
Set in a mºtº, learn'd, and conti’d by Tote,
To caſt into my teeth. . F sº }. Caſar.
To Not E. v. a. [note, Latin ; nºtºr, French J 1. To
Waller.
Dryden.
Dryden,
Shakeſpeare,
I
*** * * * –--- º<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 192</div><p class="Text">N O T
N O T
To obſerve; to remark: * heed; to attend; to take no-
I. 2
tice of.
The fool hath much pined away. l
No more of that, I #. noted it well.
you note him
y Fº him. &gt; Shakeſpeare's Macbeth.
I began to nºte - -
The ſtormy Hyades, the rainy goat. Ali'ſ Ovid.
wandring from clime to clime, obſervant ſtray'd,
Their manners noted, and their ſtates ſurvey'd. Pºpe.
iver; to ſet down.
2. "... ſpeaking of devout men, not-th how they
daily frequented the church, how attentive eaſ they gave
untô the leſſons and chapters read. Hoºker, b. Y.
Nºte it in a book, that it may be for ever and ever. Iſ. xxx.8.
arge with a crime.
3. º Dianam, agrees better with Livia, who had the
fame of Chaffity, than with either of the Julia's, who were
both noted of incontinency. Dryden.
4. [In muſick.] To ſet down the notes of a tune.
No'ºrd. part, adj. [from note.] Remarkable; eminent ; ce-
lebrated. - -
A nºted chymiſt procured a privilege, that none but he
Shakeſ K. Lear.
ſhould vend a ſpirit. - Boyle.
Juſtinian's laws, if we may believe, a noted author, have
not the force of laws in France or Holland. Baker.
Not ER. n.ſ. [ſrom note.] He who takes notice:
Nothing. n.ſ. ſno and thing ; nathing, Scottiſh.]
1. Negation of being; nonentity; univerſal negation; oppoſed
to ſomething. -
It is moſt certain, that there never could be nothing. For,
if there could have been an inſant, wherein there was no-
thing, then either nothing made ſomething, or ſomething
made itſelf; and ſo was, and acted, before it was. But if
there never could be nothing; then there is, and was, a be-
ing of neceſſity, without any beginning. Grew's Cºſ.
We do not create the world from nothing and by nothing;
we aſſert an eternal God to have been the cfficient cauſe of
it. - Bentley's Serm.
This nothing is taken either in a vulgar or philoſophical
ſenſe; ſo we ſay there is nothing in the cup in a vulgar ſenſe,
when we mean there is no liquor in it; but we cannot ſay
there is nothing in the cup, in a ſtrict philoſophical ſenſe,
while there is air in it. J/atts's Logick.
2, Nonexiſtence.
Mighty ſtates characterleſs are grated
To duſty nothing. Shakeſp. Troilus and Crºſſida.
3. Not anything; no particular thing.
There ſhall nothing die.
Yet had his aſpect nothing of ſevere,
But ſuch a face as promis'd him ſincere. Dryden.
Philoſophy wholly ſpeculative, is barren and produces no-
thing but vain ideas. Dryden's Don Sebaſtian.
Nothing at all was done, while any thing remained un-
done. Addiſon on the J/ar.
+. No other thing.
Nothing but a ſteady reſolution brought to praćtice; God's
grace uſed, his commandments obeyed, and his pardon
begged; nothing but this will intitle you to God's acceptance.
- j/akes's Prep. fºr Death.
Words are made to declare ſomething; where they are,
by thoſe who pretend to inſtruct, otherwiſe uſed, they con-
ceal indeed ſomething; but that which they conceal, is no-
thing but the ignorance, error, or ſophiſtry of the talker,
tº there is, in truth, nothing elſe under them. Ilocke.
5. No quantity or degree.
The report which the troops of horſe make, would add
nºthing of courage to their fellows. Clarendon.
6. Nº importance; no uſe ; no value.
The outward ſhew of churches, draws the rude people to
the reverencing and frequenting thereof, whatever ſome of
our late too nice fools ſay, there is nothing in the ſeemly form
of the church. Spenſer's Ireland.
Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of naught.
" . Iſaiah xli. 24.
Ex. ix. 4.
7. No poſſeſſion or fortune.
. A moſt homely ſhepherd; a man that from very nothing
is grown into an unſpeakable eſtate. Shakespeare JP. Tale,
8. No difficulty; no trouble.
We are induſtrious to preſerve our bodies from ſlavery,
*; we make nºthing of ſuffering our ſouls to be flavºs tº
luſts. - Ray on the Creation.
9. A thing of no proportion. -*
*Sharge of making the ground, and otherwiſe is great,
but nºthing to the profit. Bacon’s Nat. Hiſt.
Io. Trifle; ſomething of no conſideration or importance.
w had rather have one ſcratch my head i'th’ ſun,
hen the alarum were ſtruck, than idly fit,
To hear my nºthings monſterd. Shakespeare's Cor.
My dear nothings, take your leave
° longer muſt you me deceive, 2 -
5
'Tis nºthing, ſays the fool; but ſays the friend,
This nothing, Sir, will bring you to your end.
Do I not ſee your dropſy-bclly ſwell ? Drydºn.
That period includes more than a hundred ſentences that
might be writ to expreſs multiplication of nºtºings, and all
the fatiguing perpetual buſineſs of having no buſineſs to do.
Pope's Letter.
11. Nothing has a kind of adverbial ſignification. In no de-
gree; not at all.
Who will make me a liar, and make my ſpeech nothing
worth job xxiv. 25.
Auria nothing diſmayed with the greatneſs of the Turks’
fleet, ſtill kept on his courſe. Knolles's Hiſt. of the Turks.
But Adam with ſº hºcºunſel nothing ſway’d. Milton.
Nothin GN Ess. n.ſ.. [from nothing.]
1. Nihility; nonexiſtence.
His art did expreſs
A quinteſſence even from nºthingneſs, }
From dull privations, and lean emptineſs. Domne.
2. Nothing; thing of no value.
I a nºthingneſ; in deed and name,
Did ſcorn to hurt his forfeit carcaſe. Hudibras, p. i.
Notice. n. ſ. [ nºtice, French; notitia, Latin. J
1. Remark ; heed ; obſervation; regard.
The thing to be regarded in taking notice of a child's miſ-
carriage is, what root it ſprings from. Locºe.
This is done with little notice : very quick the actions of
the mind are performed. Locke.
How ready is envy to mingle with the notices which we
take of other perſons ! J/atts.
2. Information; intelligence given or received. -
I have given him nºtice, that the duke of Cornwal and his
dutcheſs will be here. Shakespeare’s K. Lear.
Notificatios s. n.ſ. [ notification, F. from notify. J Act of
making known ; repreſentation by marks or ſymbols. ,
Four or five torches elevated or depreſſed out of their or-
der, either in breadth or longways, may, by agreement, give
great variety of notifications. Holder's Elements of Spºch.
To No"TIFY. v. a. [notifier, Fr. notifico, Latin. To declare;
to make known; to publiſh.
There are other kind of laws, which notify the will of
God. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 2.
The ſame is notified in the notableſt places of the whole
dioceſs. Jºhitgifte.
Good and evil operate upon the mind of man, by thoſe
reſpective appellations by which they are notified and conveyed
to the mind. South's Serm.
This ſolar month is by civil ſančtion notified in authentic
calendars the chief meaſure of the year: a kind of ſtandard
by which we meaſure time. Holder.
NOTION. n.ſ.. [notion, Fr. natio, Latin.]
1. Thought; repreſentation of any thing formed by the mind;
idea; image; conception.
Many actions are puniſhed by law, that are a&amp;ts of in-
gratitude ; but this is merely accidental to them, as they are
ſuch acts; for if they were puniſhed properly under that no-
tion, and upon that account, the puniſhment would equally
reach all actions of the ſame kind. South's Serm.
The fiction of ſome beings which are not in nature; ſe-
cond notions, as the logicians call them, has been founded
on the conjunction of two natures, which have a real ſepa-
rate being. Dryden's State of Innocence.
What hath been generally agreed on, I content myſelf to
aſſume under the nation of principles, in order to what I have
farther to write. Newt. Opt.
There is nothing made a more common ſubječt of diſcourſe
than nature and it's laws; and yet few agree in their notions
about theſe words. Cheyne's Phil. Prin.
That nºtion of hunger, cold, ſound, colour, thought,
wiſh, or fear, which is in the mind, is called the idea of
hunger, cold, ſound, wiſh, &amp;c. JWatts's Lºgick.
2. Sentiment; opinion.
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not moleſt us; unleſs we ourſelves
Seek them with wand'ring thoughts and notions vain. Milt.
It would be incredible to a man who has never been in
France, ſhould one relate the extravagant motion they enter-
tain of themſelves, and the mean opinion they have of their
neighbours. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 30.
Senſual wits they were, who, it is probable, took pleaſure
in ridiculing the notion of a life to come. Atterbury.
3. Senſe; underſtanding ; intellectual power. This ſenſe is
frequent in Shakeſpeare, but not in uſe.
His notion weakens, his diſcernings
Are lethargy'd Shakespeare’s K. Lear.
So told, as earthly notion can receive. ” A4iii. P. Lºft.
Notion Al. adj. [from notion.]
I. Imaginary; ideal ; intellectual ; ſubſiſting only in idea ;
viſionary; fantaſtical.
The general and indefinite contemplations and notions,
of the elements and their conjugations, of the influences of
heaven,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 193</div><p class="Text">N O T
N O Ú
heaven, are to be ſet aſide, being but notional and ill-limited ;
and definite axioms are to be drawn out of meaſured inſtances.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, N°. 835.
Happineſs, objećt of that waking dream
Which we call hie, miſtaking; fugitive theme
Of my purſuing verſe, ideal ſhade, -
National good, by fancy only made. Prior.
we muſt be wary, left we aſcribe any real ſubſiſtence or
perſonality to this nature or chance; for it is merely a no-
final and imaginary thing; an abſtract univerſal, which is
properly nothing; a conception of our own making, occa-
foied by our reflecting upon the ſettled courſe of things;
gºaoting only thus much, that all thoſe bodies move and act
according to their eſſential properties, without any conſci-
ouſneſs or intention of ſo doing. Bentley's Serm.
2. Dealing in ideas, not realities: -
The moſt forward notional dićtators ſit down in a content-
ed ignorance. - Glanv. Scepſ, c. xx.
Nºrrønality. m. ſ. [ from notional.] Empty, ungrounded
opinion. A word not in uſe. - - -
I aimed at the advance of ſcience, by diſcrediting empty
and talkative motionality. - ... Glanv, to Abius.
Nºtionally. adv. [from notional.] In idea ; mentally; in
our conception, though not in reality.
The whole rational nature of man conſiſts of two facul-
ties, underſtanding and will, whether really or notionally diſ-
tinë, I ſhall not diſpute. , - Norris's Miſtel.
Noroº’ety. n.ſ.. [notºrieté, Fr. from notorious.] Publick know-
ledge; publick expoſure. - - -
We ſee what a multitude of pagan teſtimonies may be
produced for all thoſe remarkable paſſages; and indeed of
feveral, that more than anſwer your expectation, as they
were not ſubjects in their own nature ſo expoſed to publick
notoriety. Addiſon on Chriſt. Relig.
NOTORIOUS..adj.[notorius, Lat.notoire,Fr.] Publickly known;
evident to the world; apparent ; not hidden. It is commonly
uſed of things known to their diſadvantage; whence by thoſe
who do not know the true ſignification of the word, an atro-
cious crime is called a notorious crime, whether publick or
ſecret.
What need you make ſuch ado in cloaking a matter too
notorious. - Whitgifte.
The goodneſs of your intercepted packets
You writ to the pope againſt the king ; your goodneſs,
Since you provoke me, ſhall be moſt notorious. Shakespeare
I ſhall have law in Epheſus,
To your notorious ſhame. Shakespeare Com. Err.
In the time of king Edward III. the impediments of the
conqueſt of Ireland are notorious. Davies.
What notorious vice is there that doth not blemiſh a man's
reputation ? Tillotſºn.
The inhabitants of Naples have been always very noto-
rious for leading a life of lazineſs and pleaſure, which ariſes
partly out of the plenty of their country, and partly out
of the temper of their climate. Addiſon on Italy.
The biſhops have procured ſome ſmall advancement of
rents; although it be notorious that they do not receive the
third penny of the real value. Swift's Miſcell.
Noto'Riously. adv. [from notorious.] Publickly; evidently;
openly.
The expoſing himſelf notoriouſly, did ſometimes change
the fortune of the day. Clarendon, b. viii.
This is notoriouſly diſcoverable in ſome differences of brake
or fern. Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. ii.
Ovid tells us, that the cauſe was notoriouſly known at Rome,
though it be left ſo obſcure to after ages. Dryden.
Should the genius of a nation be more fixed in govern-
ment, than in morals, learning, and complexion; which do
all nºtºriouſly vary in every age. Swift.
NoTo RiousNess. n.f. [from notorious.] Publick fame; no-
toriety.
To Nott. v. a. To ſhear.
No'Twheat. n. ſ. [not and wheat.]
Of wheat there are two ſorts ; French, which is bearded,
and requireth the beſt ſoil, and notwheat, ſo termed becauſe
it is unbearded, being contented with a meaner earth. Carew.
9TWITHSTA's DING. conj. [This word, though in confor-
mity to other writers called here a conjunction, is properly
* Participal adjective, as it is compounded of not and with-
Jºnding, and anſwers exactly to the Latin non ol/ante; it
moſt properly and analogically uſed in the ablative caſe
*ſolute with a noun ; as, he is rich notwithſtanding his
º; it is not ſo proper to ſay, he is rich notwithſtanding
he has lºſt much ; yet this mode of writing is too frequent,
*ſºn has uſed it: but when a ſentence follows, it is more
§ammatical to inſert that ; as, he is rich no withſtanding that
he has ſºft much. When notwitſ/ſanding is uſed abſolutely,
the expreſſion is elliptical, this or that being underſtood, as
tº the following paſſages of Hooker.]
I. Without hindrance or obſtruction from.
*hole on whvin Chriſt beſtowed miraculous cures, were
Ainſ.
ſo tranſported that their gratitude made them, notwith/land-
"g his prohibition, proclaim the wonders he had done for
them. Decay of Piety.
2. Although. This uſe is not proper.
A perſon languiſhing under an ill habit of body, may loſe
ſeveral *ºs of blood, notwithſtanding it will weaken him
for ** in order to put a new ferment into the remain-
ing maſs, and draw into it freſh ſupplies. Addison.
3. Nevertheleſs ; however.
They which honour the law as an image of the wiſdom of
God himſelf, are nºtwit!/anding to know that tº jº
end in Chriſt. Hooker, b. iv.
The knowledge is ſmall, which we have on earth Co.
cerning things that are done in heaven : notwith/landing this
much we know even of ſaints in heaven, that they pray.
- Hooker, b. v. J. 23.
He hath a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as day, for melting charity:
Yet notwithſtanding, being incens'd, he's flint;
As humourous as winter. Shakespeare . Henry IV.
NOTUS. m. ſ. [Latin.] The ſouthwind.
With adverſe blaſt upturns them from the ſouth,
Notus and Afer black, with thund’rous clouds
From Sierra Liona. Milton's Par. Loft, b. x.
NoyATION. n.ſ. [novatio, Latin.] The introduction of ſome-
thing new.
N9/.430R. m. ſ. [Latin.] The introducer of ſomething new.
NOVEL. adj. [novellus, Latin ; nouvelle, French.]
1. New ; not ancient; not uſed of old; unuſual.
The Preſbyterians are exacters of ſubmiſſion to their no-
vel injunctions, before they are ſtamped with the authority
of laws. King Charles.
It is no novel uſurpation, but though void of other title,
has the preſcription of many ages. Decay of Piety.
2. [In the civil law.] Appendant to the code, and of later enac-
tion.
By the novel conſtitutions, burial may not be denied to
any one. Ayliffe's Parergon.
No've L. m. ſ. ſnouvelle, French.]
I. A ſmall tale, generally of love.
Nothing of a foreign nature; like the trifling novel, which
Arioſto inſerted in his poems. Dryden.
Her mangl’d fame in barb’rous paſtime loſt,
The coxcomb's novel and the drunkard's toaſt. Prior.
2. A law annexed to the code.
By the civil law, no one was to be ordained a preſbyter
till he was thirty-five years of age : though by a later novel
it was ſufficient, if he was above thirty. Ayliffe's Par.
Novelist. n.ſ.. [from novel.]
I. Innovator; aſſertor of novelty. -
Teleſius, who hath renewed the philoſophy of Parmenides,
is the beſt of noveliſts. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt. Nº. 69.
Ariſtotle roſe, -
Who nature's ſecrets to the world did teach,
Yet that great ſoul our noveliſ's impeach. Denham.
The fooleries of ſome affected noveliſt have diſcredited new
diſcoveries. Glanv. Scepſ.
2. A writer of novels. -
Novelty. m. ſ. [nouveauté, French..] Newneſs; ſtate of be-
ing unknown to former times.
They which do nothing but that which men of account
did before them, are, although they do amiſs, yet the leſs
faulty, becauſe they are not the authors of harm ; and do-
ing well, their actions are freed from prejudice or novelty.
Hooker, b. v. ſ. 7.
Novelty is only in requeſt ; and it is dangerous to be
aged in any kind of courſe. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſure.
As religion entertains our ſpeculations with great obječts,
ſo it entertains them with new ; and novelty is the great pa-
rent of pleaſure; upon which account it is that men are ſo
much pleaſed with variety. South's Sermons.
NOVEMBER. m. ſ. [Latin.] The eleventh month of the
year, or the ninth reckoned from March, which was, when
the Romans named the months, accounted the firſt.
November is drawn in a garment of changeable green, and
black upon his head. Peacham on Drawing.
Nov ENARY. m. ſ. [ novenarius, Latin. J Number of nine ;
nine collectively. - -
Ptolomy by parts and numbers implieth climajerical
years; that is, ſeptenaries and novenaries. Brºwn's K. Brr;
Looking upon them as in their original differences and
combinations, and as ſelected out of a natural ſtock of nine
quaternions, or four nºvenaries, their nature and differences
lie moſt obvious to be underſtood. - Holder.
Nove RcAL. adj. [niverealis, from noverca, Latin...] Having
the manner of a ſtepmother; beſeeming a ſtepmother.
When the whole tribe of birds by incubation, produce
their young, it is a wonderful deviation, that ſome few fa-
milies ſhould do it in a more nºvº way: Derham.
Novgºr. m. ſ. ſhe aupt, not any thing, Saxon; as therefore
we write argº not ought for anything, we ſhould, according
18 H LQ<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 194</div><p class="Text">N O U
N O VV
- ht, for nothing ; but a cuſ-
analogy, write naught nºt *š". , c
: ..., prevailed of uſing naught for lad, and
nought for nothing.]
thing ; nothing. -
I. Nº. Rinaldo fºrce deſires he ſpy d,
ble heart, of reſt impatient, -
#. or ſovereign power he nought apply'd. Fairfax.
who cannot ſee this palpable device
Yet who ſo bold, but ſays he ſees it not?
Bad is the world, and it will come to nought,
when ſuch ill dealings muſt be ſeen in thought. Shakespeare .
Such ſmiling rogues as theſe ſooth ev'ry paſſion ;
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With ev'ry gale and vary of their maſters,
As knowing nought, like dogs, but following: Shakespeare
Ye are of nothing, and your werk of nought. Iſ xli. 24.
Be fruſtrate all ye ſtratagems of hell,
And deviliſh machinations come to nought. Par. Rºg.
2. To ſet at nought; not to value; to ſlight; to ſcorn; to diſ-
regard.
Ye have ſet at nought all my counſel, and would none of
my reproof. - - - Prov. i. 25.
Novice. n.ſ.. [novice, French ; nºvitius, Latin. J -
1. One not acquainted with any thing; a freſh-man; one in
the rudiments of any knowledge. -
Triple-twin'd whore 'tis thou
Haſt ſold me to this novice. Shakeſp. Ant. and Cleopat.
Brave plantagenet,
That princely novice was ſtruck dead by thee. Shakeſp.
Bring me to the ſight of Iſabella,
A novice of this place. Shakespeare Meaſure for Meaſ:
You are novices; 'tis a world to ſee
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curſteſt ſhrew. Shakespeare
We have novices and apprentices, that the ſucceſſion of
the former employed men do not fail. Bacon.
If any unexperienced young novice happens into the fatal
neighbourhood of ſuch peſts, preſently they are plying his
full purſe and his empty pate. South's Sermons.
I am young, a novice in the trade,
The fool of love, unpractis'd to perſuade;
And want the ſoothing arts that catch the fair,
But caught myſelf lie ſtruggling in the ſnare.
And ſhe I love, or laughs at all my pain,
Or knows her worth too well, and pays me with diſdain. Dry.
In theſe experiments I have ſet down ſuch circumſtances
by which either the phenomenon might be rendered more
conſpicuous, or a novice might more eaſily try them, or by
which I did try them only. Newt. Opt.
2. One who has entered a religious houſe, but not yet taken
the vow.
Novitiate. m. ſ. [noviciat, French.]
1. The ſtate of a novice; the time in which the rudiments are
learned.
This is ſo great a maſterpiece in ſin, that he muſt have
paſſed his tyrocinium or novitiate in finning, before he come
to this, be he never ſo quick a proficient. South's Sermons.
2. The time ſpent in a religious houſe, by way of trial, before
the vow is taken.
Novity. n.ſ.. [novitas, Latin.] Newneſs; novelty.
Some conceive ſhe might not yet be certain, that only
man was privileged with ſpeech, and being in the novity of
the creation and unexperience of all things, might not be
affrighted to hear a ſerpent ſpeak. Brown's W. Err.
Noui. The crown of the head. See Noll. Spenſer.
Nould. Ne would; would not. Spenſer.
Noun. m. ſ. [ nom, French ; nomen, Latin. ) The name of
any thing in grammar.
A noun is the name of a thing, whether ſubſtance, mode
or relation, which in ſpeech is uſed to ſignify the ſame when
there is occaſion to affirm or deny any thing about it, or to
expreſs any relation it has in diſcourſe to any other thing.
Clarke's Lat. Grammar.
Thou haſt men about thee, that uſually talk of a noun
and a verb, and ſuch abominable words as no chriſtian ear
can endure to hear. Shakeſpeare's Henry VI.
The boy, who ſcarce has paid his entrance down,
To his proud pedant, or declin’d a noun. Dryden.
To NOU/RISH. v. a. [nourrir, French; nutrio, Latin.]
1. To encreaſe or ſupport by food, or aliment of any kind.
He planteth an aſh, and the rain doth nouriſh it. lſ, xliv. 14.
Thro' her nouriſh’d powers enlarg’d by thee,
She ſprings aloft. Thomſon's Summer.
2. To ſupport; to maintain.
Whilſt I in Ireland nouriſh a mighty band,
I will ſtir up in England ſome black ſtorm. Shakeſpeare.
haraoh's daughter took him up, and nouriſhed him for her
own ſon. Acts vii. 21.
3: "ºncourage; to foment.
tent, * madneſs was it with ſuch proofs to neuriſh their con-
* When there were ſuch effectual means to end all
controverſy Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
- • * &gt; . . . -
In ſoothing them, we nouriſh 'gainſt our ſenate
The cockle of rebellion. - Shakespeare .
Gorgias hired ſoldiers, and nouriſhed war continually with
the Jews. 24/ac. x. 14.
4. To train, or educate. - - - - -
Thou ſhalt be a good miniſter of Jeſus Chriſt, nºuriſhed
up in the words of faith: 1 Tim. iv. 6.
I travel not, neither do Incariſh up young men, nor bring
up virgins. lſ. Xxiii. 4.
5. To promote growth or ſtrength, as food. - - -
In vegetables there is one part more nouriſhing than
another; as grains and roots nouriſh more than their leaves.
Bacon's Nat. Hi/i. N°. 45-
To Nou'Rish. v. n. To gain nouriſhment. Unuſual.
Fruit trees grow full of moſs, which is cauſed partly by
, the coldneſs of the ground, whereby the parts nouriſh leſs.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory, Nº. 544.
Nou'Rishable. adj. [from nouriſh. J Suſceptive of nouriſh-
ment.
The chyle is mixed herewith, partly for its better con-
verſion into blood, and partly for its more ready adheſion to
all the nouriſhable parts. Grew's Coſmol. b. i. e. 5.
Nou'Rish ER. m. ſ. [from nouriſh.J. The perſon or thing that
nouriſhes.
Sleep, chief nouriſher in life's feaſt. Shakespeare.
A reſtorer of thy life, and a nouriſher of thine old age.
Ruth iv. 15.
Milk warm from the cow is a great neuriſher, and a good
remedy in conſumptions. Bacon's Nat. Hiſlory.
Bran and ſwine's dung laid up together to rot, is a very
great nouriſher and comforter to a fruit tree. Bacon.
Pleaſe to taſte
Theſe bounties, which our nouriſher hath caus'd
The earth to yield. Milton's Paradiſ. Lºft, b. v.
Nou'Rish MENT. n.ſ.. [nouriſement, French.]
1. That which is given or received, in order to the ſupport or
encreaſe of growth or ſtrength ; food ; ſuſtenance; nutri-
Inent.
When the nouriſhment grows unfit to be aſſimilated, or the
central heat grows too feeble to aſſimilate it, the motion ends
in confuſion, putrefaction, and death. Newt. Opt.
2. Nutrition; ſupport of ſtrength.
By temperance taught,
In what thou eat'ſt and drink'ſt ; ſeeking from thence
Due nouriſhment, no gluttonous delight. Milt. Par. Loft.
3. Suſtentation; ſupply of things needful.
He inſtructeth them, that as in the one place they uſe to
refreſh their bodies, ſo they may in the other learn to ſeek
the nouriſhment of their ſouls. Hooker, b. v.
No'URsliNG. m. ſ. The nurſe; the nurſling. Spenſer.
Nou'Ritu RE. m. ſ. ſnourriture, French : this was afterwards
contracted to nurture.] Education; inſtitution.
Thither the great magician Merlin came,
As was his uſe, oftimes to viſit me ;
For he had charge my diſcipline to frame,
And tutors nouriture to overſee. Fairy Queen, b. i.
To NOU'SEL. v. a. [The ſame I believe with nuzzel, and
both, in their original import, corrupted from nurſle.] To
nurſe up.
Bald friars and knaviſh ſhavelings ſought to nouſl the com-
mon people in ignorance, left being once acquainted with
the truth of things, they would in time ſmell out the un-
truth of their packed pelf and maſſpenny religion. Spenſ.
To Nou'sel. v. a. ſ. muzzle, noozle, noºſe. J. To entrap; en-
ſnare ; as in a nooſe or trap. They nuzzle hogs to prevent
their digging.
NOW. adv. [nu, Sax. nun, Germ.]
1. At this time; at the time preſent.
Thy ſervants trade hath been about cattle, from our youth
even until now. Gen. xlvi. 34.
The Lord ſhall raiſe him up a king over Iſrael that day:
but what evennow. 1 Kings xiv. 14.
Refer all the actions of this ſhort and dying life to that
ſtate which will ſhortly begin, but never have an end; and
this will approve itſelf to be wiſdom at laſt, whatever the
world judge of it now. - Tillotſon.
'ow that languages abound with words ſtanding for ſuch
combinations, an uſual way of getting theſe complex ideas,
is by the explication of thoſe terms that ſtand for them. Locke.
. A little while ago.
Now the blood of twenty thouſand men
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled. Shakespeare
How frail our paſſions !
They that but now for honour and for plate,
Made the ſea bluſh, with blood reſign their hate. Waller.
. At one time or reſpect; at another time.
Now high, now low, now maſter up, now miſs. Pope.
. It is ſometimes a particle of connection, like the French or,
and Latin autºm; as, if this be true, he is guilty; now this
is true, therefore he is guilty.
Now whatſoever he did or ſuffered, the end thereof was
tº
2
3
4.
:
\:<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 195</div><p class="Text">N O W
N U L
to open the doors of the kingdom of heaven, which our ini-
quities had ſhut up. - Hooker, b. v. ſ. 44.
He ſeeks their hate with greater devotion than they can
render it him. Now to affect the malice of the people, is
as bad as that which he diſlikes, to flatter them. Shakespeare
Then cried they all again, ſaying, not this man but Ba-
rabbas; now Barabbas was a robber. .. - St. John.
Now by theſe numbers he implieth climaéterical years. Bro.
Pheaſants which are granivorous birds, the young live
moſtly upon ants eggs. Now birds, being of a hot nature,
are very voracious, therefore there had need be an infinite
number of inſects produced for their ſuſtenance. Ray.
The other great and undoing miſchief which befals men,
is by their being miſrepreſented. Now by calling evil good,
a mán is miſrepreſented to others in the way of ſlander and
detraćtion. South's Sermons.
Helim bethought himſelf, that the firſt day of the full
moon of the month Tizpa, was near at hand. Now it is a
received tradition among the Perſians, that the ſouls of the
royal family, who are in a ſtate of bliſs, do, on the firſt full
moon after their deceaſe, paſs through the eaſtern gate of
the black palace. - Addiſon's Guardian.
The praiſe of doing well
Is to the ear, as ointment to the ſmell.
Nºw if ſome flies, perchance, however ſmall
Into the alabaſter urn ſhould falls -
The odours die. Prior.
The only motives that can be imagined of obedience to
laws, are either the value and certainty of rewards, or an
apprehenſion of juſtice and ſeverity. Now neither of theſe,
excluſive of the other, is the true principle of our obedience
to God. - Rogers, Serm. 1.
A human body a forming in ſuch a fluid in any imaginable
poſture, will never be reconcilable to this hydroſtatical law.
*There will be always ſomething lighter beneath, and ſome-
thing heavier above. Now what can make the heavier particles
of bone aſcend above the lighter ones of fleſh, or depreſs
theſe below thoſe, againſt the tendency of their own nature.
r - Bentley's Sermons.
5. After this; ſince things are ſo, in familiar ſpeech,
How ſhall any man diſtinguiſh now betwixt a paraſite and
a man of honour, where hypocriſy and intereſt look ſo like
duty and affection? L’Eſtrange,
6. Now and then; at one time and another uncertainly. This
word means, with regard to time, what is meant by here
and there, with reſpect to place.
Now and then they ground themſelves on human authority,
even when they moſt pretend divine. Hooker, b. ii. ſ. 7.
Nºw and then ſomething of extraordinary, that is any
thing of your production, is requiſite to refreſh your cha-
raćter. Dryden.
A moſt effectual argument againſt ſpontaneous generation
is, that there are no new ſpecies produced, which would now
and then happen, were there any ſuch thing. Ray.
He who reſolves to walk by the goſpel rule of forbearing
all revenge, will have opportunities every now and then to
exerciſe his forgiving temper. Atterbury.
They now and then appear in the offices of religion, and
avoid ſome ſcandalous enormities. Rogers, Serm. 13.
Now. n.ſ. Preſent moment.
Nothing is there to come, and nothing paſt,
But an eternal now does ever laſt.
She vaniſh'd, we can ſcarcely ſay ſhe dy'd,
For but a now did heav'n and earth divide: -
This moment perfect health, the next was death. Dryden,
Not leſs ev’n in this deſpicable now,
Than when my name fill'd Africk with affrights. Dryden.
Nowadays, adv. TThis word, though common and uſed by
the beſt writers, is perhaps barbarous.] In the preſent age.
Not ſo great as it was wont of yore,
It's nowadays, ne half ſo ſtraight and ſore. Hubberd.
Reaſon and love keep little company together nowadays.
Shakeſpeare's Midſummer's N. Dream.
It was a veſtal and a virgin fire, and differed as much from
that which paſſes by this name nowadays, as the vital heat
from the burning of a fever. South's Sermons.
Such are thoſe principles, which by reaſon of the bold
cavils of perverſe and unreaſonable men, we are nowadays
put to defend. Tillotſon, Serm. 1.
What men of ſpirit nowadays,
Come to give ſober judgment of new plays. Garrick's Ep.
Nowed, adj. Inoue, French.] Knotted; inwreathed.
Reuben is conceived to bear three barres waved, Judah a
lion rampant, Dan a ſerpent nowed. Brown's W. Err.
Nºwes, n.ſ. (from nou, old IFrench..] The marriage knot.
Out of uſe.
Thou ſhalt look round about and ſee
Thouſands of crown'd ſouls throng to be
Themſelves thy crown, ſons of thy nowes;
The virgin births with which thy ſpouſe
Made fruitful thy fair ſoul.
Cowley,
Craſhaw.
º - 4-7 v_1
Now Her E. adv. [n, and where.] Not in any place.
Some men, of whom we think very reverendly, have in
their books and writings nowhere mentioned or taught that
ſuch things ſhould be in the church. Hooker, b. ii.
True pleaſure and perfect freedom are nowhere to be found
but in the practice of virtue. Tillotſon, Serm. 28.
Now is E. n.ſ.. [no and wife : this is commonly ſpoken and
written by ignorant barbarians, noways.] Not in any man-
ner or degree.
: power of º gravitation, without contact or im-
Pulſe, can in noviſe be attributed to mere matter. -
Nôºot."...º.º. r. Bentley
I . Hurtful ; harmful; baneful; miſchievous ; deſtructive ; per-
nicious ; unwholſome.
Preparation, and correótion, is not only by addition of
other bodies, but ſeparation of noxious parts from their own.
Brown's Pulgar Errours, b. iv.
Kill noxious creatures, where 'tis fin to ſave,
This only juſt prerogative we have.
See pale Orion ſheds unwholſome dews,
Ariſe, the pines a noxious ſhade diffuſe;
Sharp Boreas blows, and nature feels decay, -
Time conquers all, and we muſt time obey. Pope.
, Top frequent an appearance in places of much reſort,
is noxious to ſpiritual promotions. Swift's Miſcell.
2. Guilty; criminal.
Thoſe who are noxious in the eye of the law, are juſtly
puniſhed by them to whom the execution of the law is com-
mitted. Bramhall againſt Hobbs.
Noxiousness. n.ſ. [from noxious.] Hurtfulneſs; inſalubrity.
The writers of politicks have warned us of the noxiouſºſ,
of this doctrine to all civil governments, which the chriſtian
religion is very far from diſturbing. Hammond.
Noxiously. adv. [from noxious.] finally, perniciouſly.
No'zle. n.ſ.. [from noſe.] The noſe; the ſnout; the end.
It is nothing but a paultry old ſconce, with the nozle broke
off. -- - Arbuthnot and Pope's Mart. Scrib.
To NU'Eble. v. a. To bruiſe with handy cuffs. Ainſ:
Nu'BIFERous. adj. [nubifer, Latin.] Bringing clouds. Diſt.
To NU'BILATE. v. a. ſnubilo, Latin.] To cloud. Dić7.
Nu‘bile. adj. [nubile, Fr. nubilis, Latin.] Marriageable; fit
for marriage, -
The cowſlip ſmiles, in brighter yellow dreſt,
Than that which veils the nubile virgin's breaſt. Prior.
Nu'cIFERous. adj. [nuces and fero, Latin.] Nutbearing. Dići.
NUCLEUS. n.ſ. [Latin.] A kernel; any thing about which
matter is gathered or conglobated.
The cruſts are each in all, parts nearly of the ſame thick-
neſs, their figure ſuited to the nucleus, and the outer ſurface
of the ſtone exačtly of the ſame form with that of the nu-
cleus. - - - Woodward on Foſſils.
Nu'D'Ation, n. ſ. [nudation nudo, Latin.] The act of making
bare or naked. -
Nu‘DITY.. n.ſ. ſnudité, Fr. nudus, Latin.J. Naked parts.
'There are no ſuch licences permitted in poetry any more
than in painting, to deſign and colour obſcene nudities. Dryd.
NU'El. See Newel.
NUGA'city. n.ſ. ſnugacis, Latin.] Futility; trifling talk or
behaviour. -
Nug A'tion. m. ſ. [ nugor, Latin. J. The aët or practice of
trifling.
#. received opinion, that putrefaction is cauſed either by
cold, or peregrine and preternatural heat, is but nugation.
Bacon's Natural Hiſtory.
Nu'GAtoRY. adj. Inugatorius, Latin.] Trifling; futile; in-
ſignificant. -
Some great men of the laſt age, before the mechanical
philoſophy was revived, were too much addićted to this nu-
gatory art: when occult quality, and ſympathy and antipathy
were admitted for ſatisfactory explications of things. Bently,
NUI's ANCE. m. ſ. ſnuiſance, French.]
I. Something noxious or offenſive.
This is the liar's lot, he is accounted a peſt and a nuiſance;
a perſon marked out for infamy and ſcorn. South's Serm.
A wiſe man who does not aſſiſt with his counſels, a rich
man with his charity, and a poor man with his labour, are
perfect nuiſances in a commonwealth. Swift's Miſcell.
2. [In law.] Something that incommodes the neighbourhood-
To NULL. v. a. [nullus, Latin.] To annul; to annihilate;
to deprive of efficacy or exiſtence. -
Thy fair enchanted cup, and warbling charms, -
No more on me have power, their force is null'd. ... Milt.
Reaſon hath the power of nulling or governing all other
operations of bodies. Grew's Coſmºl. b. ii.
NULL. adj. [nullus, Latin.] Void; of no force ; ineffectual.
With what impatience muſt the muſe behold
The wife, by her procuring huſband ſold 2
For tho’ the law makes null th’ adulterer's deed
Of lands to her, the cuckold may ſucceed. Dryden.
The pope's confirmation of the church lands to thoſe who
hold them by king Henry's donation, was null and fraudulent.
Swift's Miſcell.
NULL.
Dryden.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 196</div><p class="Text">N U M
N U M
T, - . Something of no power, or nº meaning. Marks
*:::::... ` º for nothing, and are inſerted
* calle -
º º: be ſomewhat in the eleētion, you
* : , or ciphers in the privation or tran-
i. make them null p E. //ar with Spain.
Nºrty. m. ſ. [from nullibi, Latin.] The ſtate of being
C.
T. Sºx. v. a. [from nullus, Latin. J. To annul; to
make void.
Nu'llity. m. ſ. ſnullité, French.]
1. Want of force or efficacy. - - - - -
It can be no part of my buſineſs to overthrow this diſting-
tion, and to ſhew the nullity of it; which has been ſolidly
done by moſt of our polemick writers. - Sºuth's Sermºns.
The juriſdiction is opened by the party, in default of juſ-
tice from the ordinary, as by appeals or nullities. Ayliffe.
2. Want of exiſtence. --- -
A hard body ſtruck againſt another hard body, will yield
an exteriour ſound, in ſo much º: º percuſſion . over
ſoft, it may induce a nullity of ſound; but ºver anº
ſound. Bacon's Nat. Hiſł.
NUMB. adj. [benumen, benumbed, Saxon.]
1. Torpid; deprived in a great meaſure of the power of mo-
tion and ſenſation; chill ; motionleſs.
Like a ſtony ſtatue, cold and nurſ. . . Shakeſpeare.
Leaning long upon any part maketh it numb and aſleep;
for that the compreſſion of the part ſuffereth not the ſpirits
to have free acceſs; and therefore when we come out of it,
we feel a ſtinging or pricking, which is the re-entrance of
the ſpirits. Bacon's Nat. Hiſt.
2. Producing chillneſs ; benumbing, -
When we both lay in the field,
Frozen almoſt to death, how he did lap me
Ev’n in his garments, and did give himſelf
All thin and naked to the numb cold night. Shakespeare
To NUMB. v. a. To make torpid ; to make dull of motion
or ſenſation; to deaden; to ſtupify.
Bedlam beggars, with roaring voices
Strike in their numb’d and mortify’d bare arms,
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, ſprigs of roſemary;
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
Inforce their charity. Shakespeare K. Lear.
She can unlock
The claſping charm, and thaw the numbing ſpell. Milt.
Plough naked, ſwain, and naked fow the land,
For lazy winter numbs the lab’ring hand.
Nought ſhall avail
The pleaſing ſong, or well repeated tale,
When the quick ſpirits their warm march forbear,
And numbing coldneſs has unbrac'd the ear. Prior.
The fool numbs me like the torpor. Bolingb. to Swift.
Nu'MBFDNess. n.ſ. [from numbed.] Torpor; interruption of
ſenſation.
If the nerve be quite divided, the pain is little, only a
kind of ſtupor or numbedneſs. Jºſeman's Surgery.
To NUMBER. v. a. [nombrer, French ; numero, Latin.j
1. To count; to tell; to reckon how many.
If a man can number the duſt of the earth, then ſhall thy
ſeed alſo be numbered. Gen. xiii. 16.
Number them by their armies. Numbers i. 3.
I will number you to the ſword. Iſ, lxv. 12.
alſº ºff, the tripods number'd o'er,
theſe he jound. Pope's Odyſſey, b. 12.
2. To reckon as one of the ſame kind. p #ſºy, b. 13
He was numbered with the tranſgreſſors, and bare the fin
of many. Iſ, liii. 12.
Nu'MBER. n. ſ. ſnombre, French; numerus, Latin.]
1. The ſpecies of quantity by which it is computed how many.
Hye thee, from this ſlaughter-houſe,
Left thou increaſe the number of the dead. Sha. Rich. III.
The ſilver, the gold, and the veſſels, were weighed by
number and by weight. Ezra viii. 34.
º ſhalt take a few in number, and bind them in ây
irtS. Ezek. v. 2.
There is but one gate for ſtrangers to enter at, that it h;
be known what numbers of them are in the town. Addiſon.
2. Any particular aggregate of units, as even or odd.
This is the third time; I hope good luck lies in odd num-
hers : they ſay there is divinity in odd numbers, either in na-
tivity, chance, or death. Shakeſp. M. J/. of Wind.
3. Many more than one.
Much of that we are to ſpeak may ſeem to a number per-
haps tedious, perhaps obſcure, dark, and intricate. Hººker.
Water lily hath a root in the ground; and ſo have a nºn-
ber of other herbs that grow in ponds. Bacon.
Ladies are always of great uſe to the party they eſpouſe
and ºver fail to win over numbers. Mijºn.
4. Mºlitude that may be counted.
º ºne nations and tribes out of number. 2 Eſd. iii. 7.
** from numbers without number. Milton.
5. Comparative multitude.
- N7 - -
Number itſelf *Porteth not much in armies, where the
Dryden.
people are of weak courage : for, as Virgil ſays, it never
troubles a wolf how many the ſheep be. Bacon.
6. Aggregated multitude.
If you will, ſome few of you ſhall ſee the place; and then
you may ſend for your ſick, and the reſt of your number,
which ye will bring on land. Bacon's N. Milanti.
7. Harmony; proportions calculated by number.
They, as they move
Their ſtarry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, and jears, tow’rds his all-chearing lamp,
Turn ſwift. 44ilton.
8. Verſes; poetry.
Should the muſes bid my numbers roll
Strong as their charms. Pope.
9. [In grammar.] -
In the noun is the variation or change of termination to
ſignify a number more than one. When men firſt invented
names, their application was to fingle things; but ſoon find-
ing it neceſſary to ſpeak of ſeveral things of the ſame kind
together, they found it likewiſe neceſſary to vary or alter the
noun. Clark's Lat. Grammar.
How many numbers is in nouns : —
— Two. Shakeſp. Merry IV. of I/indſºr.
Nu'MBERER. m. ſ. [from number.] He who numbers.
Nu‘MBER lºss. adj. [from number.] Innumerable; more than
can be reckoned.
I forgive all;
There cannot be thoſe numberleſs offences
'Gainſt me.
About his chariot numberly, were pour’d
Cherub and feraph. Milton's Paradiſ. L9/?.
Deſerts ſo great,
Though numberleſ, I never ſhall forget. Denham.
The ſoul converſes with numberleſ beings of her own crea-
tion. Addison's spectator, Nº. 488.
He travels then a hundred leagues,
And ſuffers numberleſs fatigues. Swift's Mºſell.
Nu'Meles. n.ſ. (nombles, Fr.] The entrails of a deer. Baily.
Nu'MBNEss. n.ſ.. [from numb.J. Torpor; interruption of ac-
tion or ſenſation; deadneſs; ſtupefaction.
Stir, nay, come away;
Bequeath to death your numbneſs; for from him
Dear life redeems you. Shakespeare Winter's Tale.
*Till length of years -
Ard ſedentary numbneſs craze my limbs
To a contemptible old age obſcure.
Cold numbneſs ſtrait bereaves
Her corps of ſenſe, and th’ air her ſoul receives. Denham.
Silence is worſe than the fierceſt and loudeſt accuſations;
ſince it may proceed from a kind of numbneſs or ſtupidity of
conſcience, and an abſolute dominion obtained by fin over
the ſoul, ſo that it ſhall not ſo much as dare to complain, or
make a ſtir. South's Sermons.
Nu'MERABLE. adj. [numerabilis, Latin.] Capable to be num-
bered.
Nu'MERAL. adj. [numeral, Fr. from numerus, Latin.] Relating
to number ; conſiſting of number.
Some who cannot retain the ſeveral combinations of num-
bers in their diſtinct orders, and the dependance of ſo long
a train of numeral progreſſions, are not able all their life time
regularly to go over any moderate ſeries of numbers. Locke.
Nu'MERALLY. adv. [from numeral.] According to number.
The blaſts and undulary breaths thereof, maintain no cer-
tainty in their courſe; nor are they numerally fear'd by na-
vigators. Brown's Wugar Errours, b. vii.
Nu'MERARY. adj. [numerus, Lat.] Anything belonging to a
certain number.
A ſupernumerary canon, when he obtains a prebend, be-
comes a numerary canon. Ayliffe's Parergon.
NUMERA'TION. m. ſ. [numeration, Fr. numeratic, Latin.]
1. The art of numbering.
Numeration is but ſtill the adding of one unite more, and
giving to the whole a new name or ſign, whereby to know
it from thoſe before and after. Locke.
2. Number contained.
In the legs or organs of progreſſion in animals, we may ob-
ſerve an equality of length, and parity of numeration. Brown.
3. The rule of arithmetick which teaches the notation of num-
bers, and method of reading numbers regularly noted.
NUAMERA'ſ OR. m. ſ. [Latin.]
1. He that numbers.
2. [Numerateur, Fr.] That number which ſerves as the common
meaſure to others.
NUMERICAL. adj. [from numerus, Latin.]
1. Numeral; denoting number; pertaining to numbers.
The numerical characters are helps to the memory, to re-
cord and retain the ſeveral ideas about which the demonſtra-
tion is made. Locke.
2. The ſame not only in kind or ſpecies, but number.
Contemplate upon his aſtoniſhing works, particularly in
the reſurrection and reparation of the ſame numerical Body,
by a re-union of all the ſcattered parts. South.
7 NUMERICALLY.
Shakespeare.
Milt. Agon.
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 197</div><p class="Text">N U P.
Nume'Rically, adv. [from numerical. J Reſpecting ſame-
neſs in number. . . -
I muſt think it improbable, that the ſulphur of antimony
would be but numerically different from the diſtilled butter or
oil of roſes. - Boyle.
Nºerist. n.ſ. [from numerus, Latin.] One that deals in
mbers. - - - - -
º: e cannot aſſign a reſpective fatality unto each which is
concordant unto the doćtrine of the numeriſts. Brown.
Numero'sity: ". ſ. [from numeroſus, Latin.]
Number ; the ſtate of being numerous. -
1. of affºrtion if numerſity of aſſerters were a ſufficient de-
monſtration, we might fit down herein as an unqueſtion-
able truth. Brown's W. Errours.
: numerous flow.
2. Harmony; nº -
NUMEROUS. adj. [numeroſus, Latin.]
"...taining many; conſiſting of many; not few ; many.
I. º ãº was not %. º for ſº. 3.
as a wife council.
We reach our foes,
Who now appear ſo numerous and bold. JWaller.
2. Harmonious; conſiſting of parts rightly numbered; melo-
ious; muſical.
* heart, no ruder than the rugged ſtone,
I might, like Orpheus, with my num'rous moan
Melt to compaſſion. Waller.
His verſes are ſo numerous, ſo various, and ſo harmonious,
that only Virgil, whom he profeſſedly imitated, has ſurpaſſed
him. Dryden.
Nu'MERousness, n. ſ. [from numerous.]
1. The quality of being numerous.
2. Harmony 5 muſicalneſs. . - -
That which will diſtinguiſh his ſtyle is, the numerouſneſ;
of his verſe. There is nothing ſo delicately turned in all the
Roman language. - - Dryden.
NºMMARy. adj. [from nummus, Latin.] Relating to money:
The money drachma in proceſs of time decreaſed ; but all
the while the ponderal drachma continued the ſame, juſt as
our ponderal libra remains as it was, though the nummary
hath much decreaſed. Arbuthnot on Coins.
NUMMulAR. adj. [nummularius, Latin.] Relating to money.
Die?.
Nu'mskull. n.ſ. [Probably from numb, dull, torpid, inſen-
ſible, and ſkull.]
1. A dullard; a dunce; a dolt; a blockhead.
Or toes and fingers, in this caſe,
numerºuj, Bacon.
Of Numſkulls ſelf ſhould take the place. Prior.
2. The head. In burleſque. -
They have talked like numſkulls. Arb. and Pope.
Nu'mskulie D. adj. [from numſkull.] Dull; ſtupid ; doltiſh.
Hocus has ſaved that clod-pated, numſkulled, ninnyham-
mer of yours from ruin, and all his family. j. Bull.
Nun. n. j. A woman dedicated to the ſeverer duties of re-
ligion, ſecluded in a cloiſter from the world, and debarred
by a vow from the converſe of men.
My daughters -
Shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens. Shakeſp.
The moſt blooming toaſt in the iſland might have been a
???in. Addiſon's Freeholder, Nº. 4.
Ev'ry ſhepherd was undone,
To ſee her cloiſter'd like a nun. Swift's Miſell.
Nus. n.ſ. A kind of bird. Ainſworth.
Nu'NciaTURE. m. ſ. [from nuncio, Latin.] The office of a
nuncio.
NU'NCIO. m. ſ. [Italian, from nuncio, Latin.]
1. A meſſenger; one that brings tidings.
She will attend it better in thy youth
Than in a nuncio of more grave aſpect. Shakeſpeare.
They honoured the nuncios of the ſpring; and we find the
Rhodians had a ſolemn ſong to welcome in the ſwallow. Bro.
2. A kind of ſpiritual envoy from the pope.
This man was honoured with the charaćter of nuncio
to the Venetians. Atterbury.
Nu'Nchio N. n.ſ. A piece of vićtuals eaten between meals.
Laying by their ſwords and trunchions,
They took their breakfaſts or their nunchions.
Hud.
NuNcupA"tive. }
adj. [ nuncupatus, Lat. nuncupatif, Fr. J
NuNcupatory. Publickly or ſolemnly declaratory; ver-
bally pronounced.
Nu'NdINAL. U adj. [nundinal, Fr. from nundinae, Lat..] Be-
Nu'NDINARY. } longing to fairs. Dić7.
u'NNERY. n.ſ.. [from nun.] A houſe of nuns; of women
under a vow of chaſtity, dedicated to the ſeverer duties of
religion. -
I put your ſiſter into a nunnery, with a ſtrićt command not
to ſee you, for fear you ſhould have wrought upon her to
have taken the habit. Dryden's Spaniſh Friar.
NUPTIAL. adj. [ nuptial, French ; nuptialis, Latin.] Per-
taining to marriage; conſtituting marriage; uſed or done in
marri; ge.
Confirm that amity
--
N U R
With nuptial knot, if thou vouchſafe to grant
Bona to England's king.
Becauſe propagation of families proceedeth from the nip-
* “opulation, I deſired to know of him what laws and cº-
toms they had concerning marriage.
-
Shakeſp.
Bacon.
- Then all in heat
They light the nuptial torch. Milton's Paradiſ, Lºft.
Whoever will partake of God's ſec
rets, muſt firſt pare off
and not eat of this ſacrifice with a de-
filed head, nor come to this feaſt without a nuptial garment.
Taylor.
whatſoever is amiſs,
Fir'd with her love, and with ambition led,
The neighb'ring princes court her nuptial bed.
Let our eternal peace be ſeal’d by this,
With the firſt ardour of a nuptial kiſs. Dryd, Aurengzebe.
Nu'PTIALs, n.ſ. like the Latin withoutfingular [nuptia, Lat.]
Marriage.
Dryden.
This is the triumph of the nuptial day,
My better nuptials, which in ſpite of fate,
For ever join me to my dear Morat. Dryd. Aurengz.
2. It is in Shakeſpeare ſingular, but contrarily to uſe.
Lift up your countenance, as 'twere the day
Of celebration of that nuptial, which
We two have ſworn ſhall come. Shakespeare W. Tale.
NURSE. m. ſ. ſnourrice, French.]
I. A woman that has the care of another's child.
Unnatural curioſity has taught all women, but the beggar,
to find out nurſes, which neceſſity only ought te commend.
Raleigh's Hiſtory of the World.
2. A woman that has care of a ſick perſon.
Never maſter had,
A page ſo kind, ſo duteous, diligent, -
So feat, ſo nurſe-like. Shakeſp. Cymbeline.
One Mrs. Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurſe,
or his dry nurſe or his cook. Shakespeare M. W. of Wind.
3. One who breeds, educates, or protećts.
Rome, the nurſe of judgment,
Invited by your noble ſelf, hath ſent
One general tongue unto us. Shakespeare Henry VIII. .
We muſt loſe
The country, our dear nurſe, or elſe thy perſon,
Our comfort in the country. Shakeſp. Coriolanus.
4. An old woman in contempt.
Can tales more ſenſeleſs, ludicrous, and vain,
. . By winter-fires old nurſes entertain Blackmore.
5. The ſtate of being nurſed. -
Can wedlock know ſo great a curſe, -
As putting huſbands out to nurſe * Cleaveland.
6. In compoſition, any thing that ſupplies food.
Put into your breeding pond three melters for one ſpawner;
but if into a nurſe pond or feeding pond, then no care is to
be taken. JWalton's Angler.
To NURSE. v. a. [from the noun, or by contračtion from
nouriſh; nourrir, Fr.]
1. To bring up a child not one’s own.
Shall I call a nurſe of the Hebrew women, that ſhe may
nurſe the child? Ex. ii. 7.
2. To bring up any thing young.
I was nurſed in ſwaddling cloaths with cares. Wiſd. vii. 7.
Him in Egerian groves Aricia bore,
And nurs'd his youth along the marſhy ſhore. Dryden.
3. To feed; to keep 5 to maintain.
Thy daughters ſhall be nurſed at thy ſide. Iſ lx. 4.
The Niſeans in their dark abode,
Nurs'd ſecretly with milk the thriving God. Addison.
4. To tend the fick,
5. To pamper; to foment; to encourage; to ſoften ; to cheriſh.
And what is ſtrength, but an effect of youth, which if
time nurſe, how can it ever ceaſe ? Davier.
By what fate has vice ſo thriven amongſt us, and by what
hands been nurs'd up into ſo uncontrouled a dominion ?
Locke on Education.
Our monarchs were acknowledged here,
That they their churches nurſing fathers were. Denham.
Nu'RSER. n.ſ.. [from nurſe.]
I. One that nurſes.
See where he lies, inherſed in the arms
Of the moſt bloody nurſer of his harms. Shakeſp.
2. A promoter; a fomenter.
Nu'R's ERY. m. ſ. [from nurſe.] º
1. The aët or office of nurſing.
I lov'd her moſt, and thought to ſet my reſt -
On her kind nurſery. Shakeſpeare’s K. Lear.
2. That which is the objećt of a nurſe's care.
She went forth among her fruits and flow’rs,
To viſit how they proſper'd, bud and bloom
Her nurſery: they at her coming ſprung,
And touch'd by her fair tendance gladlier grew. Miltºn.
3. A plantation of young trees to be tranſplanted to other ground.
Your nurſery of ſtocks ought to be in a more barren ground
than the ground is whereunto you remove them. Bacon.
18 I My
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 198</div><p class="Text">N U T
N U T.
- ind of nurſery for authors, and ſome who
*.. º: ": #. '...i hereafter flouriſh under
their own names. - Addiſon's Guard.
4. Place where young children are nurſed and brought up.
I' th' ſwathing cloaths, the other from their nur ery ..
Were ſtol’n. Shakeſpeare's Cymbeline.
You ſee before you the ſpectacle of a lantagenet, who
hath been carried from the nurſery to the ſanctuary, from the
ſanétuary to the direful priſon, from the priſon to the hand
of the cruel tormentor, and from that hand to the wide wil-
derneſs; for ſo the world hath been to me. Bacon.
Forthwith the devil did appear,
Not in the ſhape in which he plies
At miſs's elbow when ſhe lies;
9r ſtands before the nurs'ry doors, - .
To take the naughty boy that roars. Prior.
They have public nurſeries, where all parents are obliged
to ſend their infants to be educated. Gull. Trav.
5. The place or ſtate where anything is foſtered or brought up,
from a nurſery of children, or whence any thing is to be ré!
ved from a nurſery of trees.
º, keeping &amp; tº. is of itſelf a very idle life, and a
fit nurſery for a thief. Spenſºr on Ireland.
To ſee fair Padua, nurſºry of arts,
I am arriv'd from fruitful Lombardy. Shakeſpeare.
A luxurious court is the nurſery of diſeaſes; it breeds them,
it encourages, nouriſhes, and entertains them. L'Eſtrange.
A nurſery erects its head,
Where queens are form'd and future heroes bred;
Where unfledg'd actors learn to laugh and cry. Dryden.
Nu'RSLING. m. ſ. [from nurſe.] One nurſed up ; a fondling.
Then was ſhe held in ſovereign dignity,
And made the nurſing of nobility. Spºnſºr.
. I was his nurſing once, and choice delight,
His deſtin'd from the womb. A4ilt. Agon://es.
In their tender nonage, while they ſpread
Their ſpringing leaves and liſt their infant head,
Indulge their childhood, and the nurſing ſpare. Dryden.
NURTURE. m. ſ. [contracted from nzurriture, French.j
1. Food ; diet.
For this did th’ angel twice deſcend ?
Ordain’d thy nurture holy, as of a plant .
Select and ſacred.
2. Education; inſtitution. Little uſed. -
She ſhould take order for bringing up of wards in good
”ture, not ſuffer them to come into had hands. Speºſer.
The thorny point
Qf bare diſtreſs, hath ta'en from me the ſhew
Of ſmooth civility; yet am I inland bred,
And know ſome nurture. Shakespeare A you like it,
To NU'RTURE. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. To educate; to train; to bring up.
Thou broughteſt it up with thy righteouſneſs, and nºr-
*% it in thy law, and reformed; it with thy judgment. .
2 Eſdr. viii. 12.
He was nurtured where he had been born in his firſt ru-
diments, till the years of ten. //otton.
When an inſolent deſpiſer of diſcipline, nurtured into im-
Pudºnce, ſhall appear before a church governour, ſeverity and
reſolution are that governour's virtues. South.
2. To nurture up, tº bring by care and food to maturity.
They ſuppoſe mother eith to be a great animal, and
to have nurtured up her Young offspring with a conſcious
tenderneſs. Bentley's Serm.
o NU'stle. v. a. To fondle; to cheriſh. Corrupted from
huſk. Ainſ.
NUT. n. / [hnut, Saxon ; nºot, Dutch ; noix, Fr.] -
+. The fruit of certain *: ; it conſiſts of a kernel covered by
a hard ſhell. If the ſhºji and kernel are in the center of d
pulpy fruit, *y then make not a nut but a ſtone.
he chanc'd to find a nut
In the end of which a hole was cut,
Which lay upon a hazel-root,
There ſcatteºd by a ſquirrel;
Which out the kºrº gotten had ;
When quoth this Fay, dear queen be glad,
Let Oberon be ne'er ſo mad, -
!!! ſet you ſafe from peril. Drayt. Nymp}}...
Nuts * hard of digeſtion, yet poſſeſ, ſome good medici-
mal qualities. Arbuthnot ou Aliments.
2. A ſmall body with teeth, which correſpond with the teeth
of wheels. -
b º force *f this faculty may be more conveniently uſed
i. ‘."ultiplication of ſeveraj Wheels, together with .
*"Sunto each, that jej ſº the roaſting of me.
- //ilkin's Mathem. Å7, ick.
Clocks and º though the ſcrews and teeth º:
•. .* never ſo ſmooth, yet if they be not of
Nº. *: º t and b &gt; y y % º 3.
- ...'..." brºwn.] Brown like a nutk £-
Young and old Come forth i. play, ept long
Milton's Agonſler.
Till the live-long daylight fail,
Then to the ſpicy nutbrºwn ale.
When this nutbrown ſword was out,
With ſtomach huge he laid about. Zºras, 2, i.
Two milk-white kids run friſking by her ſide,
For which the nutbrown laſs, Erithacié,
4 º' P.cº.
Full often offer'd many a favoury kiſs. - Dºlen.
King Hardicnute, midſt Danes and Saxons ſtout,
Carous'd in nutbrown ale, and din'd on grout. Ajº.
Nu'rcRAckers. m. ſ. ſnut and *]. An inſtrument uſed
to encloſe nuts and break them by preſſure.
He caſt every human feature out of his Sountenance, and
became a pair of nutcrackers. Addison's Speciator.
Nu'rg All. n.ſ. ſnut and gall.] Excreſcence of an oak.
In vegetable excretions, maggots terminate in flies of Con-
flant ſhapes, as in the nuſgaſk of the outlandiſh oak. Brown.
NU'THAT&amp;H. -
NU't job BER. } n. ſ. A bird. Ainſ.
NU'tp:Ecker. - - - .
Nu'THook. n.ſ. ſnut and *...] A ſtick with a hook at the
end tº pull down boughs that the nºt. may be gathered.
Muthook, Nuthº, you lie. Sºp. Henry IV.
Nu‘TMEG. m. ſ. ſnut and miguit, French.j
The nutmeg is a kernel of a large fruit not unlike the peach,
and ſeparated from that and from its inveſtient coat, the mace
before it is ſent over to * } except that the whole fruit is
ſometimes ſent over in preſerve, by Way of ſweet-meat or
** a curioſity. The nutmeg is of a roundiſh or oval figure,
of a compact or firm texture, and its ſurface furrowed: it
is of an extremely agreeable ſmell and an aromatick taſte.
There are two kinds of *g ; the male which is long and
cylindrical, but it has leſs of the fine aromatick flavour than
the female, which is of the ſhape of an olive. The Dutch
import the nutmegs and mace from the Eaſt-Indies, and ſup-
ply all Europe with them. Th: *** which produces them
is not unlike our Pear-tree in its manner of growth : its leaves,
whether green or dried, have, when bruiſed, a very fragrant
ſmell; and the trunk or branches, cut or broken off, yield
a red liquor like blood. This tree is carefully cultivated.
But that which produces the male *g grows wild in the
mountainous parts of the Moluccas. Nutmeg is much uſed
in ºr foods, and is of excellent Virtues as a medicine. Hill.
The ſecond a dry and floſculous cºat, commonly called
mace; the fourth a kernel included in the ſhell, which Heth
under the mace, is the ſame we call *g. Brown's W. Err,
I to my pleaſant gardens went,
Where nutmeg breathea fragrant ſcent. Sandys.
Nutshell. n.ſ. ſnu, and /*] The hard ſubſtance that in-
cloſes the kernel of the nut.
I could be bounded in a nuº/elſ, and count myſelf a king
of infinite ſpace. - Sºakeſpeare's Hanº.
A fox had me by the back, and a thouſand pound to a
nºel, I had never got off again. 4'Aºrange.
It ſeems as eaſy to me, to have the idea of ſpace empty of
body, as to think of the hollow of a */ºil without a ker.
nel. Locke.
NU/TTREE. n. / [nut and tree..] A tree that bears nuts; ahazle.
9f trees you ſhall have the nº. and the oak. Peach.
Like beating nuttrees, makes a larger crop. Dryden.
Nutrication, n.ſ. [*icatiº, Lat.] Mainer of feeding or
being fed.
Beſides the teeth, the *gue of this animal is a ſecond
argument to overthrow this airy nutrication. Brown.
NU/TRIMENT. n. J. [nutrimentum, Latin. J That which
feeds or nouriſhes ; food ; aliment.
This ſlave
Has my lord's meat in him,
Why ſhould it thrive and turn to nutriment 2 Shakespeare .
The ſtomach returns what it has received, in ſtrength and
nutriment, diffuſed into all the Parts of the body. South.
Does not the body thrive and grow,
By food of twenty years ago
And is not virtue in mankind,
The nutriment that feeds the mind Swift's Miſc/.
NUTRIME’NTAL. adj. [from nutriment.] Having the qualities
of food ; alimental.
By virtue of this oil vegetables are nutrimental, for this
oil is extracted by animal digeſtion as an emulſion. Arb.
NUTRI'tion. n. J. [from nutritio, "ſtriº, Lat. nutrition, Fr.]
The aët or quality of nouriſhing, ſupporting ſtrength, or en-
creaſing growth.
New parts are added to our ſubſtance to ſupply our con-.
tinual decayings; nor can we give a certain account how
the aliment is ſo prepared for nutrition, or by what mecha-
miſm it is ſo regularly diſtributed. Glanv Scepſ, c. iii.
The obſtruction of the glands of the meſentery is a great
impediment to nutrition ; for the lymph in thoſe glands is a
neceſſary conſtituent of the aliment before it mixeth with .
the blood. - Arbithnot on Aliment.
Fix'd like a plant on his peculiar ſpot, -
To draw nutrition, Propagate, and rot, Pope:
Nutri’ſ 100s,
</p></div><div class="Page"><div class="PageNum">
          Page 199</div><p class="Text">N U Z
N Y S
Nutri'Tious. adj. [from nutrio, Latin.] Having the quality
of nouriſhing.
O may'ſt thou often ſee
Thy ſurrows whiten’d by the woolly rain ---
Nutritious / ſecret nitre lurks within. - - Philips.
The heat equal to incubation is only nutritious ; and the
nutritious juice itſelf reſembles the white of an egg in all its
qualities. Arbuthnot on Aliments.
NU'TRitive. adj. [from nutrio, Latin.] Nouriſhing; nutri-
mental; alimental.
Nutriture. n.ſ. [ from nutrio, Latin. J The power of
nouriſhing.
Mever make a meal of fleſh alone, have ſome other meat
with it of leſs nutriture. Harvey on Conſump.
To NU'zzle. v.a. [This word, in its original ſignification,
ſeems corrupted from nurſe; but when its original meaning
was forgotten, writers ſuppoſed it to come from nozzle or nºſe,
and in that ſenſe uſed it.]
1. To nurſe; to foſter.
Old men long muzzled in corruption, ſcorning them that
would ſeek reformation. Sidney.
2. Tº go with the noſe down like a hog.
He charged through an army of lawyers, ſometimes with
ſword in hand, at other times nuzzling like an eel in the
mud. Arbuthnot's john º'.
Sir Roger ſhook his ears, and nuzzi.d along, wººl ſtified
that he was doing a charitable work. Arº. J. Baſſ.
The bleſſed benefit, not there confin'd,
Drops to the third, who ruzzles cloſe bchind. Pºe.
NYMPH. m. ſ. [vſ. pn ; nympha, Lat.] r
I. A goddeſs of the woods, meadows, or waters.
And as the moiſture which the thirſty earth
Sucks from the ſea, to fill her empty veins,
From out her womb at laſt doth take a birth,
And runs a nymph along the graſſy plains.
2. A lady. In poetry.
This reſolve no mortal dame,
None but thoſe eyes cou’d have o'erthrown ;
The nymph I dare not, need not name. J/allºr,
NYs. [A corruption of me is...] None is ; not is. Obſolete.
Thou findeſt fault, where ny; to be found,
Spenſºr.
Davies.
And buildeſt ſtrong work upon a weak ground.
